Thirty Years of Psychical Research (Charles Richet, 1923)
=========================================================
Charles Richet — The Nobel laureate's thirty-year survey — the man who coined 'metapsychics'. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (30YearsRichet) — 1923 first English edition.

THIRTY  YEARS  OF
PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

THE  MAC  MILL  AN  COMPANY

NEW  YORK  •  BOSTON  •  CHICAGO  •  DALLAS
ATLANTA  •  SAN  FRANCISCO

MACMILLAN  &  CO..  Limited

LONDON  •  BOMBAY  •  CALCUTTA
MELBOURNE

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA,  Ltd.

TORONTO

Thirty  Years  of  Psychical
Research

BEING

A  Treatise  on  Metapsychics

BY

CHARLES  RICHET,  Ph.D.

Translated  from  the  French
by

STANLEY  De  BRATH,  M.  Inst.  C.  E.

Formerly  Assistant  Secretary  to  the  Government  of
India,  Public  Works  Department

got*

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY
1923

All  rights  reserved

PRINTED  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  OF  AMERICA


Set  up  and  printed.    Published  March,  1923.

FERRIS  PRINTING  COMPANY
NEW  YORK  CITY

Omnia  jam  fient  fieri  quce  posse  negabam

This  book  is  dedicated  to  the  memory  of  my
illustrious  friends  and  masters

Sir  WILLIAM  CROOKES

and

FREDERIC  MYERS

who,  equally  distinguished  by  their  courage  and
by  their  insight,  were  the  first  to  trace  the
outlines  of  this  science.

PREFACE

Those  who  may  expect  to  find  in  this  book  nebulous  discussions
on  human  destiny,  on  magic,  or  on  theosophy  will  be  disappointed.
I  have  endeavoured  to  write  on  science,  not  on  dreams;  and  I
have  therefore  confined  myself  to  a  statement  of  facts  and  dis-
cussion of  their  actuality,  not  only  without  advancing  any  theory,
but  scarcely  mentioning  theories,  for  all  theories  as  yet  proposed
to  account  for  metapsychic  facts  seem  to  me  terribly  frail.

It  is  possible  or  even  probable  that  some  day  a  tenable  theory
will  be  formulated,  but  the  time  is  not  yet,  for  the  facts  on  which
any  theory  could  be  erected  are  still  in  dispute.  It  is  necessary,
first,  to  establish  the  facts  and  to  review  them  in  detail  and  as  a
whole,  in  order  to  verify  the  conditions  under  which  they  occur.
This  is  our  primary  duty,  and  our  only  duty.

The  task  is  a  hard  one ;  the  phenomena  being  unusual,  scientists
and  the  public  have  usually  rejected  them  without  examination.

Nevertheless  the  facts  are  facts ;  they  are  numerous,  authentic,
and  startling.  In  the  course  of  this  work  there  will  be  given
instances  of  these  facts  so  numerous,  so  precise,  and  so  evidential
that  I  do  not  see  how  any  unbiassed  man  of  science  can  cast  doubt
upon  all  of  them  if  he  consents  to  look  into  them.

The  three  fundamental  phenomena  of  this  new  science  can  be
summed  up  in  three  sentences.

1.  Cryptesthesia  (the  lucidity  of  former  writers)  is  a  faculty
of  cognition  that  differs  from  the  normal  sensorial  faculties.

2.  Telekinesis  is  a  mechanical  action  that  differs  from  all
known  mechanical  action,  being  exerted  at  a  distance  and  without
contact  on  persons  or  objects,  under  certain  determinate  condi-
tions.

3.  Ectoplasm  (the  materialization  of  former  writers)  is  the
formation  of  divers  objects,  which  in  most  cases  seem  to  emerge
from  a  human  body  and  take  on  the  semblance  of  material  reali-
ties— clothing,  veils,  and  living  bodies.

These  make  up  the  whole  of  metapsychics.  It  seems  to  me
that  to  admit  this  much  is  to  admit  a  great  deal.  To  go  further
is  to  go  beyond  the  present  limits  of  science.

vii

viii

PREFACE

I  do,  however,  claim  that  science,  strict  and  inflexible  science,
ought  to  admit  these  three  strange  phenomena  that  it  has  up  to
the  present  refused  to  recognize.

In  giving  to  this  book  the  usual  form  of  treatises  on  physics,
botany,  pathology,  and  other  sciences,  it  has  been  my  intention
to  remove  from  facts  called  "occult,"  many  of  which  are  indis-
putably true,  the  supernatural  and  mystical  implications  ascribed
to  them  by  those  who  do  not  deny  their  actuality.

ABSTRACT  OF  PREFACE  TO  SECOND
FRENCH  EDITION

Professor  Richet  notes  that  since  the  rapid  exhaustion  of  the
first  edition  many  fresh  experiments  have  been  made  by  him  and
by  others,  notably  those  with  M.  Stepan  Ossovietzki,  which  are
so  decisive  as  to  admit  of  no  uncertainty  whatever.
Referring  to  criticisms  on  the  first  edition,  he  remarks :
"Complaint  has  been  made,  and  I  admit  its  force,  that  the
numerous  experiments  and  observations  recorded  have  been
abbreviated  and  condensed  so  that  accounts  that  are  very  con-
vincing when  given  in  full  detail  lose  much  of  their  force  by
being  abridged.

"This  unquestionably  is  the  case.  I  had  to  choose  between
presenting  a  few  selected  facts  in  full  detail,  on  the  one  hand ;
or,  on  the  other,  giving  summaries  of  a  great  number,  interesting
alike  by  their  variety  and  their  multiplicity.  I  followed  the  latter
plan  because  those  who  desire  fuller  particulars  can  always  refer
to  the  original  sources,  which  I  have  been  careful  to  cite.

"Another  criticism  (which  I  take  as  laudatory)  is  that  by  giving
the  facts  without  committing  myself  to  any  theory  or  inferences,
I  have  been  led  into  strong  contradictions.  Such  contradictions
could  easily  have  been  avoided  if  I  had  framed  a  complete  theory
by  bludgeoning  every  inconvenient  fact,  magnifying  every  favour-
able one,  glossing  over  awkward  arguments,  and  making  full
proofs  out  of  half-proofs.  This  criticism  has  moved  me  the  less
that  I  had  already  made  it  on  myself,  perhaps  more  severely  than

Note. — For  the  bibliography,  which  has  no  pretensions  to  be  complete,  the
following  abbreviations  have  been  adopted :  A.  $.  P.  for  the  Annales  des
Sciences  Psychiques ;  P.  S.  P.  R.  for  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research;  J.  S.  P.  R.  for  the  Journal  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research;  and  Am.  S.  P.  R.  for  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  of
the  same  name.

PREFACE

ix

my  critics  could.  Metapsychic  science  is  in  its  very  earliest  stages,
and  any  theory  claiming  to  be  complete,  methodical,  and  unshak-
able is  foredoomed  to  error.

"I  pay  no  heed  to  such  criticisms  as  that  in  the  Mercure  de
France.  The  anonymous  critic  finds  the  F.  N.  T.  B.  T.  experi-
ment given  on  p.  170  very  bad;  but  he  suppresses  altogether  the
words  immediately  following  it.  'I  mention  this  experiment,
which,  in  comparison  with  the  good  ones  described  above,  is
terribly  poor,  not  to  draw  any  inference  from  it,  but  only  to  show
that  when  the  method  of  experiments  is  faultless,  the  calculus
of  probabilities  is  very  useful/

"T.  Bozzano  objects  strongly  to  the  separation  between  sub-
jective and  objective  metapsychics,  which,  according  to  him,  are
combined  in  actual  fact.  I  have  much  respect  for  Professor
Bozzano's  opinion,  but  I  cannot  share  it  in  this  case.  It  seems
to  me,  on  the  contrary,  that  this  separation  is  a  real  advance,
especially  from  the  didactic  point  of  view.  Also,  the  separation
is  marked  with  different  mediums;  Eusapia  and  Marthe  present
exclusively  physical  phenomena.  I  have  not  heard  that  Mrs.
Piper  has  ever  given  any  but  subjective  ones.  Some  mediums,
such  as  Home,  Kluski,  Stainton  Moses,  and  Mme.  d'Esperance,
have  shown  both  kinds  of  phenomena,  but  it  would  be  a  mistake
to  consider  them  as  necessarily  linked.  Many  hypnotizable  sub-
jects have  flashes  of  lucidity  (this  is  quite  commonly  met  with),
while  the  production  of  lights  and  ectoplasms  is  quite  rare.
Further,  the  methods  of  investigation  are  quite  different  for  the
two  kinds,  and  this  alone  justifies  the  classification.  I  am  even
inclined  to  think  this  necessary  distinction  a  leading  point  in
my  book.

"I  very  willingly  concede  to  Professor  Bozzano  that  as  meta-
psychic science  advances,  some  relations  will  perhaps  be  dis-
covered between  these  two  functions  that  now  seem  very  sharply
marked  off  from  each  other.  Nothing  is  less  intellectual  in
itself  than  an  ectoplasmic  phenomenon/'

TRANSLATOR'S  NOTE

In  rendering  this  admirable  Treatise  into  English,  it  has  been
my  aim  to  make  it  available  both  to  students  and  to  average
readers.  I  have  therefore  retained  the  French  references  in  the
foot-notes,  as  any  student  who  might  wish  to  look  up  these
references  must  obviously  ask  for  them  under  their  French  titles.
The  average  reader  will  probably  be  content  to  see  that  Pro-
fessor Richet  has  given  authorities  for  all  statements  that  he
quotes,  and  that  he  has  winnowed  out  all  statements  that  he
thinks  doubtful.

It  is  not  always  possible  to  render  in  English  the  delicate
shades  of  meaning  conveyed  by  some  French  expressions;  I
have,  however,  endeavoured  to  give  the  exact  sense  of  the
original  by  free  translation ;  and  knowing  that  Professor  Richet
emphatically  desires  to  keep  clear  of  spiritualist  or  any  other
theories,  I  have  been  particularly  careful,  when  a  choice  was
open,  not  to  employ  any  terms  that  could  possibly  imply  a  leaning
to  any  theory  soever.  I  have,  however,  in  my  translation  used
the  term  "spiritualist"  where  a  religious  implication  seems
intended,  and  "spiritist"  where  no  such  implication  exists.

The  author  having  communicated  the  typescript  of  additions
to  be  made  to  the  second  French  edition,  most  of  these  have  been
abstracted  and  added  as  foot-notes,  so  that  the  first  English
edition  may  be  taken  as  parallel  with  the  second  French  edition.

It  has  not  been  possible  in  all  cases  to  refer  to  originals  for
the  quotations  from  English  writers,  and  in  such  cases  they  have
been  retranslated  from  the  French,  without,  I  trust,  deviation
from  essential  meaning.  I  hope  thus  to  have  discharged  the
honour  of  having  been  entrusted  by  the  author  with  the  trans-
lation of  a  book  that  must  surely  have  a  powerful  and  far-
reaching  influence.

Stanley  De  Brath.

Weybridge,  July,  1922.

CONTENTS

PAGE

Preface   vii

BOOK  I

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL

1.  Definition  and  Classification   3

2.  Is  There  a  Science  of  Metapsychics  ?   6

3.  Historical  Summary   15

1.  The  Mythical  Stage   15

2.  The  "Magnetic"  Stage   21

3.  The  Spiritist  Stage   25

4.  The  Scientific  Stage   30

4.  Mediums   38

BOOK  II
SUBJECTIVE  METAPSYCHICS

Chapter  I.  On  Subjective  Metapsychics  in  General.  . .  49

1.  The  Limits  of  Psychic  and  Metapsychic  Science.  ...  49

2.  Chance  and  Mathematical  Probability  in  Metapsychic

Facts    55

3.  Concerning  Errors  of  Observation   59

Chapter  II.  On  Cryptesthesia  (Lucidity)  in  General.  .  64

1.  Definition  and  Classification   64

2.  Connection  of  Cryptesthesia  with  Lucidity  and  Te-

lepathy   65

3.  Phenomena  of  Normal  Psychology  Having  Only  the

Semblance  of  Cryptesthesia   69

4.  Classification  of  the  Modes  of  Cryptesthesia   82

Chapter  III.  Experimental  Cryptesthesia   85

1.  Cryptesthesia  in  Normal  Individuals   85

2.  Cryptesthesia  Under  Hypnotism  and  Magnetic  Treat-

ment   99

(a)  Magnetic  Emanations;   100

(b)  The  Development  of  Cryptesthesia  by  Hypnotism  107

xiii

xiv  CONTENTS

PAGE

3.  Cryptesthesia  Under  Hypnotism   114

(a)  Experiments  on  Hypnotized  Subjects   115

(b)  Conclusions   134

4.  Cryptesthesia  Under  Spiritist  Conditions   136

(a)  Summary  of  the  Facts   136

(b)  Investigation  with  a  Hidden  Alphabet   167

(c)  Cross-Correspondences    173

5.  Cryptesthesia  Among  Sensitives   176

(a)  Psychometry,  or  Pragmatic  Cryptesthesia   177

(b)  Transfer  of  Sensibility   185

(c)  Crystal  Vision   200

6.  Conclusions  on  Experimental  Cryptesthesia   203

7.  On  the  Identification  of  Spiritist  Personalities   208

8.  Xenoglossis    220

Chapter  IV.  The  Divining-Rod   228

1.  Historical    228

2.  Summary  of  the  Facts   230

3.  Concerning  Rhabdic  Force  235

4.  Deductions  from  the  Point  of  View  of  Cryptesthesia.  238

Chapter  V.  Metapsychism  in  Animals   240

Chapter  VI.  Sporadic  Cryptesthesia   245

A.  Monitions    245

I.  On  Monitions  in  General   245

1.  Classification  and  Definition   245

2.  Conditions  Necessary  that  Monitions  Should  Be  Re-

garded as  Such   248

(a)  The  Hypothesis  of  Chance  Coincidence   252

3.  Conditions  Under  Which  Monitions  Occur   256

4.  The  Symbolical  Form  Taken  by  Monitions   260

5.  Monitions  and  the  Telepathic  Hypothesis   265

6.  On  the  Frequency  of  Monitions   267

II.  On  Certain  Monitions  (Not  Collective)  Other

Than  Monitions  of  Death   270

III.  Monitions  of  Death   282

Conclusions    325

IV.  Collective  Monitions   328

(a)  Collective  Monitions,  Non-simultaneous  and

Non-identical    330

(b)  Simultaneous  and  Collective  Monitions....  334
Conclusions    342

CONTENTS  xv

PAGE

Chapter  VII.  Premonitions   344

1.  On  Premonitions  in  General  344

2.  Auto-Premonitions    348

(a)  Of  Sickness   348

(b)  Of  Accidental  Death   354

3.  Premonitions,  Properly  So-called   356

(a)  Under  Hypnotism   356

(b)  Spiritist  Premonitions   361

(c)  Accidental  Premonitions   366

(a)  Of  Sickness  and  Death  Due  to  Natural

Causes    367

(b)  Of  Accidental  Death   371

(c)  Of  Sundry  Events   376

4.  Conclusion    395

BOOK  III
OBJECTIVE  METAPSYCHICS

Chapter  I.  On  Objective  Metapsychics  in  General.  . . .  399

Chapter  II.  Movements  of  Objects — Telekinesis   401

(a)  Table-Movements   401

(b)  On  Some  Cases  of  Experimental  Telekinesis   405

(c)  Of  Noises  and  Raps   443

(d)  On  Direct  Writing   448

Chapter  III.  Ectoplasms  (Materializations)   454

(a)  On  Fraud  in  Ectoplasmic  Experiments  454

(b)  Leading  Ectoplasmic  Experiments   492

Chapter  IV.  Levitations   546

Chapter  V.  Bilocations   552

(a)  Objective  Bilocations   552

(b)  Monitions  of  Approach   559

Chapter  VI.  Hauntings   563

1.  On  Hauntings  in  General   563

2.  On  the  Hauntings  of  Houses  (Subjective)   571

3.  Telekinesis  in  Haunted  Houses   578

4.  Conclusions   591

BOOK  IV

Conclusion    595

Index   629

I

THIRTY  YEARS  OF
PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

THIRTY  YEARS  OF  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

BOOK  I

Concerning  Metapsychics  in  General

1.  Definition  and  Classification

In  all  ages  men  have  observed  that  sporadic,  irregular,  and  un-
predictable facts  occasionally  intermingle  with  the  ordinary  events
of  daily  life.  Unable  to  find  rational  explanations  for  these  they
have  accounted  for  them  by  the  intervention  of  supernatural
powers — gods  or  demons.

With  the  growth  of  knowledge,  faith  in  these  divine  or  demoni-
acal interferences  in  our  little  human  affairs  has  lost  ground.  In
an  aurora  borealis,  an  eclipse,  a  comet,  or  a  storm,  we  now  see
only  a  natural  occurrence,  some  of  whose  laws  we  have  been
able  to  formulate.  We  no  longer  refer  epilepsy  and  hysterical
outbreaks  to  spirit  possession  or  to  Satan.1

Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  the  great  advances  in  physics,  chem-
istry, and  physiology,  the  laws  of  these  sciences,  as  at  present
known,  do  not  account  for  certain  exceptional  phenomena,  and
these  phenomena  being  inexplicable  by  orthodox  science,  it  has
been  found  convenient  to  ignore  them.  But  these  strange  occur-
rences, whether  they  be  accepted  or  denied,  still  remain  facts;
their  actuality  is  unaffected  whether  we  find  a  place  for  them  in
recognized  science  or  not.

It  therefore  seems  desirable  to  present  the  mass  of  these  phe-
nomena methodically.  However  unusual  in  their  occurrence
they  must,  as  facts,  be  subject  to  laws  and  therefore  be  accessible
to  study,  i.e.,  to  science.  A  science,  or  at  any  rate  an  orderly  sur-
vey, of  the  supernatural  and  the  occult  is  at  least  possible.

The  terms  "supernatural"  and  "supernormal"  (the  latter  due  to
F.  W.  H.  Myers)  are,  however,  both  inadmissible,  for  there  can

JThe  bibliography  of  magical  science  is  enormous.  Those  who  desire  to
form  even  an  incomplete  idea  of  its  extent  may  consult  Graesse,  Biblica
magica  et  pneumatica,  Leipzig,  Engelmann,  1843,  175  pp.;  and  R.  Yves-
Plessis,  Essai  d'une  bibliographie  frangaise  de  la  Sorcellerie,  Paris,  Chacornac,
1900.

3

4

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

be  nothing  in  the  universe  but  the  natural  and  the  normal.  From
the  moment  that  a  fact  exists  it  is  necessarily  both  natural  and
normal.  The  terms  "supernatural"  and  "supernormal"  must
therefore  be  rejected  along  with  "the  occult."  This  latter  term
is  indeed  somewhat  naive,  for  "the  occult"  simply  means  that
which  is  involved  in  mystery  and  therefore  inaccessible  to  us.
In  1905, 1  proposed  the  term  Metapsychic,1  which  has  been  unani-
mously accepted.  It  has  on  its  side  no  less  an  authority  than
Aristotle.  Aristotle,  having  discussed  the  physical  forces,  went
on  to  write  on  those  great  laws  of  nature  that  transcend  physics.
He  took  the  title  Meta-physics  (ptera  ra  (pvsiua).
This  term  must  now  be  defined.

Metapsychic  facts  are  marked  off  from  the  physical  in  that
they  seem  due  to  an  unknown  intelligence,  whether  human  or
non-human.  In  nature  we  observe  intelligence  only  among  living
beings;  in  man  we  perceive  no  sources  of  cognition  otherwise
than  through  the  senses.  We  leave  to  normal  psychology  the
study  of  human  and  animal  intelligence.  Metapsychic  phenomena
are  quite  different;  they  seem  due  to  unknown  but  intelligent
forces,  including  among  these  unknown  intelligences  the  astonish-
ing intellectual  phenomena  of  our  subconsciousness.

Leaving  aside  the  sharply  demarcated  field  of  normal  psychol-
ogy, metapsychics  is  the  only  science  that  deals  with  intelligent
forces.  All  other  forces  as  yet  studied  by  men  of  science,  from
the  point  of  view  of  cause  and  effect,  are  blind  forces  devoid  of
self-consciousness  and  caprice — in  other  words,  without  person-
ality or  will.  We  cannot  suspect  the  least  intellectuality  in  the
combination  of  chlorine  and  sodium.  Mercury  expands  by  heat
without  its  being  able  to  understand  or  modify  its  expansion.  The
sun  projects  calorific,  electric,  and  luminous  rays  without  will  or
choice — it  has  neither  personality  nor  thought.  But  the  forces
that  govern  presentiments,  telepathy,  movements  of  objects  with-
out contact,  apparitions,  and  certain  mechanical  and  luminous
phenomena  do  not  seem  to  be  blind  and  unconscious  forces  like
those  of  chlorine,  mercury,  and  the  sun.  They  have  none  of  the
fatality  that  attaches  to  the  mechanical  and  chemical  reactions  of

'When,  in  1905,  I  presented  this  word  in  the  course  of  my  presidential
address  to  the  S.  P.  R.,  London,  Mr.  W.  Lutoslawski  pointed  out  to  me  that
in  a  Polish  publication  (Wyklady  Jagiellonskie,  Cracow,  1902),  he  had  already
suggested  this  word ;  but  this  was  for  somewhat  different  reasons.  E.  Boirac
has  suggested  the  term  Parapsychics,  which  has  not  found  acceptance,  while
the  term  Metapsychics  is  now  generally  adopted.

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  5

matter.  They  appear  to  have  intellectuality,  will,  and  intention,
which  may  not  be  human,  but  which  resemble  human  will  and
intention.  Intellectuality — the  power  of  choice,  intention,  and
decision  conformably  to  a  personal  will — characterizes  all  meta-
psychic  phenomena.

I  shall  divide  our  subject-matter  into  Objective  and  Subjective
Metapsychics.

Objective  metapsychics  deals  with  certain  mechanical,  physical,
or  chemical  effects  perceptible  to  our  senses,  not  proceeding
from  known  forces,  but  seemingly  directed  by  intelligence.  It
states,  classifies,  and  analyzes  these  material  phenomena.

Subjective  metapsychics  studies  those  phenomena  that  are
purely  intellectual.  These  are  characterized  by  an  indication  of
some  realities  that  are  not  revealed  by  our  senses.  Everything
takes  place  as  if  we  had  a  mysterious  faculty  of  cognition —
lucidity — which  the  classical  physiology  of  sensation  cannot  as
yet  explain.  I  propose  to  call  this  faculty  Cryptesthesia,  i.e.,  a
sensibility  whose  nature  escapes  us.

Metapsychic  science  therefore  treats  of  purely  mental  phe-
nomena that  can  be  admitted  without  reference  to  any  known
laws  of  living  or  inert  matter,  or  any  change  in  our  concepts  of
the  different  physical  energies — heat,  light,  electricity,  gravitation,
etc.,  which  we  are  accustomed  to  measure  and  specify.

Objective  metapsychics,  on  the  contrary,  deals  with  certain  ma-
terial phenomena  inexplicable  by  ordinary  mechanics — the  move-
ment of  objects  without  contact,  haunted  houses,  phantoms,  mate-
rializations that  can  be  photographed,  sounds,  and  lights — all  of
them  tangible  realities  affecting  our  senses.

In  other  words,  subjective  metapsychics  is  internal,  psychic,  and
non-material :  objective  metapsychics  is  material  and  external.

The  boundary  between  the  two  orders  of  phenomena  is  some-
times uncertain;  often,  however,  it  is  sharply  marked.  For  in-
stance, the  assassination  of  Queen  Draga  was  announced  in
Paris  on  the  11th  of  June,  1904,  at  the  very  minute  that  it  was
committed  in  Belgrade,  by  a  medium  who  could  have  had  no
normal  means  of  cognizance  of  this  crime.  This  is  a  fact  of
subjective  metapsychics.

Eusapia  Paladino  placed  her  hands  half  a  yard  above  a  heavy
table ;  her  hands,  her  feet,  her  knees,  her  waist,  her  head,  and  her
mouth  were  all  held ;  the  table  rose  off  its  four  legs  without  con-
tact.  This  is  a  fact  of  objective  metapsychics.

6

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Frequently  the  phenomena  pertain  to  both  kinds,  and  it  is  dif-
ficult or  impossible  to  distinguish  between  them.  A.  sees  the
apparition  of  his  dying  father,  B.  If  other  persons  present  see
nothing,  the  vision  is  obviously  subjective;  but  if  the  image  of  B.
is  seen  simultaneously  by  A.,  and  by  others,  still  more  if  the
apparition  has  been  photographed  leaving  its  impression  on  the
sensitive  plate,  this  is  not  only  a  subjective  but  also  an  objective
fact,  there  being  a  material  accompaniment,  and  A.'s  vision  can
no  longer  be  considered  merely  subjective.

Subjective  phenomena  are  much  more  frequent  than  the  ob-
jective; mediums  giving  the  latter  are  rare.  Moreover  when
material  phenomena  are  produced  they  are  nearly  always  accom-
panied by  noteworthy  subjective  facts.

Metapsychics  can  therefore  be  defined  as — a  science  dealing
with  mechanical  or  psychological  phenomena  due  to  forces  that
seem  to  be  intelligent,  or  to  unknown  powers  latent  in  human
intelligence.  This  science  is  therefore  profoundly  mysterious ;
indeed,  its  mysteries  are  such  that  extreme  scientific  caution  is
called  for  in  dealing  with  them.

2.  Is  There  a  Science  of  Metapsychics?

This  question  must  be  put,  for  to  many  men  of  science  none
of  the  alleged  facts  in  the  domain  of  "magnetism"  or  spiritualism
deserve  serious  consideration.  They  say,  "A  science  cannot  be
constructed  out  of  gossip;  and  the  accounts  you  bring  us  are
nothing  more.  The  hallucinations  with  all  their  wealth  of  detail
described  by  simple  people  are  matter  for  the  alienist,  and  the
performances  of  mediums  are  vulgar  frauds.  Mediums  who
claim  supernatural  powers  and  allege  that  they  are  intermediaries
between  the  dead  and  the  living  are  either  hallucinated  or  trick-
sters. As  soon  as  precautions  are  taken  against  credulity  and
fraud  the  error  or  the  imposture  is  always  manifest.  No  un-
deniable fact  of  lucidity  or  movement  of  objects  without  contact
has  ever  been  established  before  a  committee  of  enquiry  com-
posed of  men  of  scientific  standing.  If  chance,  mal-observation,
and  trickery  are  eliminated,  nothing  remains  of  the  so-called
metapsychics  but  a  vast  illusion.  The  stricter  the  conditions,  the
slighter  the  phenomena  become,  till  they  vanish  altogether.  A
science  that  claims  to  be  experimental  but  relies  on  experiments
that  cannot  be  reproduced  is  no  science  at  all.    You  affirm  ex-

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  7

traordinary  and  unbelievable  things  that  upset  all  that  science  has
hitherto  accepted  as  true,  but  you  cannot  prove  them,  for  up  to
the  present  such  proof  has  evaded  all  methodical  research.  It  is
not  for  us  to  prove  that  the  facts  you  affirm  are  false;  it  is  for
you  to  prove  that  they  are  true.

"Further,  even  if  we  were  to  see  these  strange  facts  we  should
think  ourselves  tricked  or  hallucinated,  for  your  work  lies  among
impostors,  and  the  things  you  affirm  are  too  absurd  to  be  true."

Such  is  the  kind  of  language  used  by  honourable  men  of  science
who  deny  the  reality  of  all  metapsychic  phenomena.  If  they
were  right  this  book  would  be  absolutely  useless,  even  ridiculous ;
and  might  be  entitled  "A  Treatise  on  an  Error."  But,  as  we  shall
endeavour  abundantly  to  prove,  these  facts  exist,  and  are  called
occult  only  because  they  are  not  understood.

We  have  read  and  re-read,  studied  and  analyzed  the  works
written  on  these  subjects,  and  we  declare  it  vastly  improbable,
and  even  impossible,  that  eminent  and  upright  men  such  as  Sir
William  Crookes,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  Reichenbach,  A.  Russel  Wal-
lace, Lombroso,  William  James,  Schiaparelli,  F.  W.  H.  Myers,
Zollner,  A.  de  Rochas,  Ochorowicz,  Morselli,  Sir  William  Barrett,
Ed.  Gurney,  C.  Flammarion,  and  many  others,  in  spite  of  their
close  attention  and  their  scientific  knowledge,  should  all  have  been
duped  over  and  over  again  a  hundred  times  by  tricksters  or  have
been  the  victims  of  an  astounding  credulity.  It  is  not  possible
that  they  should  all  and  always  have  been  so  blind  as  not  to  per-
ceive frauds  necessarily  gross ;  so  incautious  as  to  form  conclusions
where  no  conclusion  was  legitimately  possible;  and  so  unskilful
as  never  to  have  made  a  single  unexceptionable  experiment.  A
priori,  their  experiments  deserve  careful  consideration  and  not  to
be  contemptuously  rejected.1

The  history  of  all  sciences  warns  us  that  the  simplest  discoveries
have  been  rejected  a  priori,  as  being  incompatible  with  science.
Medical  anesthesia  was  denied  by  Majendie.  The  action  of  mi-
crobes was  contested  for  twenty  years  by  all  the  scientists  of  all
the  academies.    Galileo  was  imprisoned  for  saying  that  the  earth

JAn  eminent  English  scientist,  Lord  Kelvin,  quoted  by  Myers  (A.  S.  P.,
1904,  xiv,  365),  ventures  to  express  himself  as  follows:

I  hold  myself  bound  to  reject  everything  that  tends  to  the  acceptance  of
this  wretched  superstition  of  animal  magnetism,  turning  tables,  spiritualism,
clairvoyance,  and  rappings.  There  is  no  mystical  seventh  sense.  Clairvoyance
and  all  the  rest  are  but  the  results  of  mal-observation  combined  with  inten-
tional imposture  practised  on  simple  and  credulous  minds.

8

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

revolves.  Bouillaud  declared  that  the  telephone  was  but  ven-
triloquism. Lavoisier  said  that  stones  cannot  fall  from  the  sky,
for  there  are  no  stones  in  the  sky.  The  circulation  of  the  blood
was  only  admitted  after  forty  years  of  sterile  discussion.  In  a
lecture  in  1827  at  the  Academy  of  Sciences,  my  great-grandfather,
P.  S.  Girard,  considered  it  folly  to  suppose  that  water  could  be
led  to  the  upper  floors  of  houses  by  pipes.  In  1840,  J.  Miiller
declared  that  the  speed  of  nerve-impulses  could  never  be  meas-
ured. In  1699,  Papin  constructed  the  first  steamboat ;  a  hundred
years  later  Fulton  rediscovered  the  possibility  of  steam  naviga-
tion, but  it  was  not  applied  till  twenty  years  later.  When  in
1892,  under  the  guidance  of  my  distinguished  master,  Marey,  I
made  my  first  attempt  in  aviation,  I  met  with  only  incredulity,
contempt,  and  sarcasm.  A  volume  might  be  written  on  the
absurd  criticisms  with  which  every  great  discovery  has  been
received.

This  is  not  a  matter  of  the  opinions  of  the  crowd,  which  are
of  no  importance ;  they  are  the  opinions  of  scientists,  who  imagine
that  they  have  laid  down  boundaries  that  science  cannot  overpass.
These  boundaries  soon  become  milestones  on  the  road  of  progress,
as  Flammarion  remarks.  When  such  men  declare  that  such  and
such  a  phenomenon  is  impossible,  they  make  an  unfortunate  con-
fusion between  what  is  contradictory  of  known  laws  and  what
is  new.  This  must  be  emphasized,  for  it  is  the  cause  of  disastrous
misunderstandings.

Heat  expands  bodies;  and  if  any  one  tells  us  that  mercury,
copper,  lead,  or  hydrogen  under  the  usual  conditions  of  experi-
ment do  not  expand  when  heated  I  have  the  right  to  deny  the
statement,  for  it  is  in  flagrant  contradiction  with  observed  facts
frequently  verified.  But  if  a  new  metal  is  discovered  and  a
physicist  tells  me  that  it  contracts  instead  of  expanding  when
heated  I  cannot  deny  this  a  priori.  However  improbable  this
anomaly  in  the  laws  of  physics  may  be,  I  must,  if  not  guilty  of
presumption,  verify  the  exception,  since  it  applies  to  a  new
substance  that  may  be  different  from  all  others.

Every  new  truth  necessarily  appears  highly  improbable;  such,
however,  are  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  evolution  of  the
sciences,  and  as  soon  as  a  discoverer  enunciates  one  it  excites
opposition.  Instead  of  testing,  men  deny  it.  Claude  Bernard
states  that  the  animal  body  generates  sugar,  and  forthwith  objec-
tions are  made.   "To  admit  this  is  to  upset  scientific  conclusions.

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  9

Sugar  is  a  vegetable  product,  animals  consume  it.  The  sugar
that  has  been  found  in  animal  organisms  is  sugar  derived  from
food,  or  from  changes  in  a  dead  body.  In  short,  sugar  cannot
be  generated  by  an  animal  organism."  We  know  the  fate  of
these  statements.

Again,  let  us  suppose  magnetic  attraction  to  be  unknown,  and
the  magnet  a  very  rare  object.  A  traveller  who  has  seen  a  mag-
net but  cannot  find  another,  states  that  he  has  seen  a  body  that
attracts  iron.  His  statement  will  provoke  universal  opposition
and  denial.  Why  should  steel  have  a  property  not  possessed  by
copper,  lead,  or  any  other  known  body?  Nothing  like  it  has  ever
been  seen;  if  the  thing  were  true  it  would  have  been  known  long
since.1

Everything  of  which  we  are  ignorant  appears  improbable,  but
the  improbabilities  of  today  are  the  elementary  truths  of
tomorrow.

Among  the  discoveries  which  by  reason  of  my  advanced  age
I  have  seen  developed  under  my  own  eyes,  so  to  speak,  I  will
take  four  which  in  1875  would  have  seemed  absurdly  inadmis-
sible :

1.  The  voice  of  an  individual  speaking  in  Paris  can  be  heard
in  Rome.  (Telephone.)

2.  The  germs  of  all  diseases  can  be  bottled  and  cultivated  in  a
cupboard.    (  Bacteriology. )

3.  The  bones  of  a  living  person  can  be  photographed.  (X-rays.)

4.  Five  hundred  guns  can  be  taken  through  the  air  at  a  speed
of  180  miles  an  hour.  (Aeroplanes.)

Anyone  who  uttered  such  audacities  in  1875  would  have  been
thought  a  dangerous  lunatic.

Our  routine-keeping  intelligence  is  such  that  it  rejects  any-
thing to  which  it  is  unaccustomed,  and  from  a  careful  study  of
the  facts  around  us,  we  should  be  content  to  say,  There  are  some
that  are  usual  and  some  that  are  unusual.  We  ought  to  say  no
more  than  this,  and  above  all  we  should  be  careful  not  to  make
two  classes — facts  that  are  understood,  and  facts  that  are  not
understood.  For  in  truth  we  really  understand  nothing,  abso-
lutely nothing,  of  the  truths  of  science,  whether  great  or  small.

JWhen  tuberculosis  was  stated  to  be  contagious,  a  professor  of  the  Faculty
of  Paris  said,  "If  tubercles  were  contagious  that  would  be  known  already,"
and  in  1878  his  words  were  almost  unanimously  approved  by  the  Medical
Faculty.

10

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

What  is  matter?  Is  it  continuous  or  discontinuous?  What  is
electricity?  Is  the  hypothesis  of  the  ether  really  understood  by
those  who  accept  it?  We  see  a  stone  fall  back  when  thrown
upwards;  do  we  therefore  understand  gravitation?  Two  gases
combine  to  form  a  new  body  in  which  the  same  atoms  as  in  the
gases  are  found;  have  we  really  understood  what  has  taken  place?
Why  should  such  and  such  an  ovule  fertilized  by  a  certain  zoo-
sperm  produce  an  oak-tree,  a  bear-cub,  an  elephant,  or  a  Michel-
angelo, according  to  its  kind?  How  does  the  spider  make  its
web,  or  the  swallows  find  their  way  across  the  seas?  These
marvels  do  not  astonish  us  because  we  are  used  to  them.  But
we  ought  to  have  the  courage  to  admit  that  usual  as  they  are,
they  are  none  the  less  mysteries.

The  facts  of  metapsychics  are  neither  more  nor  less  mysterious
than  the  phenomena  of  electricity,  of  fertilization,  and  of  heat.
They  are  not  so  usual;  that  is  the  whole  difference.  But  it  is
absurd  to  decline  to  study  them  because  they  are  unusual.1

We  constantly  find  that  the  authors  and  observers  who  have
busied  themselves  with  metapsychics  show  a  very  regrettable
tendency  to  consider  only  their  own  observations  as  exact,  and
to  reject  all  others.  Thus  (with  certain  exceptions)  those  who
have  confined  their  studies  exclusively  to  telepathy  and  the  sub-
jective side  of  metapsychics  are  prone  to  attach  excessive  im-
portance to  that  aspect  of  the  facts  and  to  refuse  credence  to  phe-
nomena of  telekinesis  and  ectoplasm,  however  well  substantiated.

This  is  the  case  with  several  eminent  members  of  the  English
S.  P.  R.  They  are  easily  satisfied  in  cases  of  mental  transmission,
even  though  that  may  be  sometimes  explicable  by  coincidence;

*I  have  been  able  to  observe  a  curious  instance  of  the  folly  with  which
this  fear  of  the  unaccustomed  can  afflict  an  honourable  scientist.  During  the
Exhibition  of  1900  at  Paris,  I  presented  to  the  Psychological  Congress  a
Spanish  child,  Pepito  Arriola,  aged  three  years  and  three  months,  who  played
amazingly  on  the  piano.  He  composed  military  or  funeral  marches,  waltzes,
habaneras,  minuets,  and  played  some  twenty  difficult  pieces  from  memory.
A  hundred  members  of  the  Congress  heard  and  applauded  him.  This  tiny
marvel  of  precocity  came  to  my  house,  and  in  my  drawing-room,  on  my  piano,
twice  during  the  day  and  in  the  evening  before  a  number  of  persons,  he
played  at  a  distance  from  his  mother.  Then,  four  years  later,  comes  an
American  psychologist,  Mr.  Scripture,  who  announces  that  I  was  the  victim
of  an  illusion,  and  that  the  music  had  been  played  not  by  Pepito  Arriola,  who
was  too  little  to  play,  but  by  his  mother!

Incredulity  carried  to  such  a  point  of  aberration  matches  the  credulity
of  the  celebrated  geometer  Chasles,  who  showed  with  pride  an  autograph
letter,  in  French,  from  Vercingetorix  to  Julius  Caesar.  The  scepticism  of
Mr.  Scripture  is  of  the  same  stamp  as  the  credulity  of  Chasles.

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  11

but  as  soon  as  physical  phenomena  are  in  question  they  demand
impossible  proofs  even  when  such  proofs  are  useless  to  the
demonstration.

Conversely,  an  experimenter  who  considers  himself  to  have
seen  a  materialization  will  take  it  as  well  authenticated,  though  his
study  may  have  been  quite  superficial ;  and  will  put  forward
exaggerated  and  ridiculously  severe  criticisms  of  transmission  of
thought  or  of  materializations  described  by  other  observers  per-
haps quite  as  competent  as  himself.

When  a  phenomenon  is  unusual,  even  those  who  are  open  to
new  truths  do  not  admit  it  without  personal  verification.  It  seems,
however,  that  our  criticism,  severe  as  it  may  be  (and  should  be),
ought  to  be  exercised  as  much,  if  not  more,  upon  our  own  ob-
servations than  on  those  of  others.  If  I  permit  myself  to  criticize
the  mentality  of  scientists  towards  metapsychic  matters,  I  do  so
because  I  have  fallen  into  the  same  mistake  myself.  In  working
at  this  subject  I  did  not  follow  the  procedure  usual  in  the  study
of  other  sciences.  I  made  experiments  before  studying  books;
so  that  I  started  by  acquiring  personal  convictions,  which  were  not
in  the  least  bookish.  Only  subsequently  did  I  read  and  meditate
on  the  works  of  ancient  and  modern  experimentalists  who  have
devoted  themselves  to  such  researches.  I  was  then  astounded
at  the  volume  and  the  completeness  of  the  proofs.  My  own
experiments  and  those  of  others  finally  led  me  to  a  profound
conviction  that  metapsychics  is  a  real  science  to  be  treated  like
all  other  sciences — laboriously,  methodically,  and  with  respect.

These  unusual  phenomena  are  real:  (1)  There  is  a  faculty  of
cognition  other  than  our  usual  faculties;  (2)  there  are  move-
ments of  objects  other  than  those  to  which  we  are  accustomed.
And  it  is  irrational  to  refuse  to  study  these  unusual  phenomena
by  the  methods  of  observation  and  experiment  that  have  answered
so  well  in  all  other  sciences.  Claude  Bernard  has  differentiated
the  sciences  that  rest  on  observation  from  those  that  rest  on
experiment.  Metapsychics  belongs  to  both  classes.  It  is  often
experimental,  like  chemistry  and  physiology ;  but  it  is  often  akin
to  historical  science  and  rests  on  human  testimony.

Under  its  experimental  aspect  it  should  be  treated  as  an  ex-
perimental science,  by  technical  methods  of  research,  with  scales,
photography,  by  graphic  methods — all  the  devices  of  exact  meas-
urement employed  by  physiologists.  I  perceive  no  essential  dif-
ference between  the  proper  experimental  methods,  except  that  the

12

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

chemist  and  the  physiologist  are  dealing  with  easily  procurable
materials,  whereas  the  student  of  metapsychics  requires  a
medium,  a  human  subject  difficult  to  find,  easily  put  off  his  bal-
ance, and  highly  capricious,  who  must  at  all  times  be  handled
very  diplomatically.  But  once  an  experiment  has  begun  it  should
be  carried  out  as  rigorously  as  one  on  arterial  pressure  or  on  the
heat  generated  by  burning  acetylene.

In  no  kind  of  experiment  are  all  the  conditions  absolutely  within
control.  This  axiom  of  scientific  method  applies  more  strongly  in
metapsychics  than  in  any  other  science.  Darkness  may  be  neces-
sary, or  silence;  or  perhaps  noise?  Perhaps  some  ill-defined
psychological  conditions  may  be  essential  also?  After  all,  this
applies  to  all  infant  sciences ;  in  their  embryonic  stage  the  condi-
tions requisite  to  the  development  of  the  facts  to  be  proved  are
not  known.  The  experimenter  falls  into  gross  mistakes  and  the
experiment  fails  just  when  he  naively  imagines  that  he  has  pro-
vided all  the  elements  of  success.

In  so  far  as  it  is  an  observational  and  traditional  science,  meta-
psychics has  abundant  documentary  evidence.  This  is  profoundly
unequal  in  value,  and  it  is  necessary  to  know  how  to  choose  the
material  and  to  separate  the  wheat  from  the  tares  by  severe  criti-
cism. But  to  condemn  all  recorded  observation  would  be  irra-
tional ;  all  historical  science  is  derived  from  such  records.  Has
not  medicine  up  to  the  time  of  Claude  Bernard  and  Pasteur  been
a  science  of  observation?  Is  it  not  largely  so  today?  A  great
physiologist  has  said  that  a  well-observed  fact  is  as  valid  as  a
good  experiment.  This  is  perhaps  going  a  little  too  far,  for  the
certitude  given  by  an  observation  is  of  inferior  quality  to  that  re-
sulting from  a  good  experiment.  Nevertheless,  the  sciences  that
rest  on  observations  are  valid,  and  it  is  folly  to  wish  to  reject
records.

But  there  is  no  need  to  set  the  one  method  in  opposition  to  the
other.  .  When  observation  and  experiment  lead  to  the  same  re-
sults they  mutually  confirm  each  other.  In  this  book,  therefore,
will  be  found  two  chapters  on  each  variety  of  phenomena,  one
dealing  with  experiments  and  the  other  with  observations,  whether
the  matter  in  hand  concerns  lucidity  (cryptesthesia),  the  move-
ments of  objects  (telekinesis),  or  materializations  (ectoplasmic
forms).

Experimental  method  is  relatively  easy,  whereas  the  method
of  observation  is  extremely  difficult.   The  documentary  evidence

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  13

is  often  doubtful.  It  is  voluminous,  far  too  voluminous ;  meta-
psychic  science  is  hampered  by  imperfect  experiments  and  mal-
observation.  Those  who  have  cultivated  it,  instead  of  handling
it  with  scientific  exactitude,  have  treated  it  as  a  religion  for
adepts — an  error  that  has  had  disastrous  results.

Spiritualists  have  intermingled  religion  and  science  to  the  great
detriment  of  the  latter.

Not  that  I  would  blame  the  efforts  of  spiritualists ;  that  would
be  gross  ingratitude.  While  official  science,  followed  by  the  im-
mense majority  of  the  public,  rejected  disdainfully  without  ex-
amination, and  often  with  obvious  ill-will,  the  work  of  Crookes,
A.  R.  Wallace,  and  Zollner,  the  spiritualists  took  up  the  facts  and
set  to  work  upon  them.  But  instead  of  making  them  matters  of
science,  they  made  them  matters  of  religion.  They  carried  on
their  seances  in  a  mystical  atmosphere,  with  prayers;  speaking
of  moral  regeneration;  preoccupied  with  mysteries;  convinced
that  they  were  conversing  with  the  dead ;  and  losing  themselves
in  infantile  discursiveness.  They  refused  to  see  that  metapsychic
facts  are  of  the  present,  not  of  the  beyond,  for  perhaps  there  is
no  beyond.  "The  beyond"  has  been  their  ruin,  and  they  have  lost
themselves  in  puerile  theology  and  theosophy.

When  a  historian  studies  the  Capitularies  of  Charlemagne,  he
is  not  thinking  of  the  beyond ;  when  a  physiologist  is  measuring
the  muscular  contractions  of  a  frog  he  says  nothing  about  ultra-
terrestrial  spheres;  when  a  chemist  determines  the  amount  of
nitrogen  in  lecithin  he  says  nothing  about  human  survival.  Meta-
psychics  must  be  treated  after  the  same  manner,  without  dreams
about  ethereal  worlds  or  psychic  emanations ;  we  must  remain
on  the  earth,  take  all  theory  soberly,  and  only  consider  humbly
whether  the  phenomenon  studied  is  true,  without  seeking  to
deduce  the  mysteries  of  past  or  future  existences.

For  instance,  when  we  are  studying  cryptesthesia  and  seeking
to  discover  whether  a  sensitive  will  give  the  name  we  are  think-
ing of,  without  any  indication  on  our  part,  our  whole  attention
should  be  vigilantly  concentrated  on  giving  absolutely  no  sign
whatever,  and  on  comparing  the  letters  given  by  the  subject  with
those  in  the  name  thought  of  according  to  the  mathematical  prob-
ability of  1 :  25,  since  there  are  twenty-five  letters  in  the  alphabet.1
If  we  are  studying  telekinesis,  the  limbs  of  the  medium  must  be

xThe  French  alphabet  has  twenty-five  letters  only.

14

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

held  firmly  enough  to  make  sure  that  the  table  cannot  be  moved
by  her  hands,  her  feet,  or  by  any  trick  soever.

It  does  not  interest  me  to  go  beyond  this.  I  am  keenly  in-
terested in  these  humble  tasks  which  need  no  small  courage
to  undertake,  without  connecting  them  with  the  immortality  of
the  soul.

What  valuable  observations  and  marvellous  experiments  have
been  distorted  and  deformed  by  the  constant  and  dangerous  de-
sire of  laying  the  foundations  of  a  new  religion  !  Spiritist  religion
is  inimical  to  science.  I  might  borrow  from  the  Bible  the  motto
for  all  our  studies:  Omnia  in  numero  ct  ponder c,  says  the  preacher
— an  admirable  principle,  applicable  to  all  science  and  the  very
negation  of  religious  mysticism.

If  a  creed  be  needed,  it  is  the  creed  of  truth — naked  truth —
without  adornments  and  without  verbiage.  Let  us  verify  phe-
nomena, and  try  to  link  them  together  by  any  theory  that  has  as
much  verisimilitude  as  possible,  but  let  us  never  sacrifice  the  facts
which  are  certainly  true  to  the  theory,  which  is  probably  false.

No  doubt  metapsychic  phenomena  often  seem  to  impel  us  to
nebulous  inferences  as  to  human  immortality,  to  emanations  from
an  unknown  Will,  to  reincarnation,  and  to  fluidic  projections
from  the  living  or  the  dead.  I  have  endeavoured  to  set  aside  these
premature  theories,  though  I  have  not  been  able  to  do  this  en-
tirely. What  purpose  has  been  served  by  the  ponderous  volumes
on  alchemy  before  Lavoisier?  He  did  achieve  more  with  his
scales  than  did  all  the  dissertations  of  Goclenius,  Agrippa,  and
Paracelsus.  If  we  desire  that  metapsychics  should  take  rank  as
a  science,  let  us  first  establish  its  facts  on  a  solid  foundation.  Our
successors  will  go  further,  no  doubt,  but  our  duty  today  is  less
ambitious;  let  us  have  the  intellectual  modesty  that  befits  our
ignorance.

Nevertheless,  in  certain  respects  metapsychics  cannot  be  com-
pared with  any  other  science.  No  intelligence  is  apparent  in  the
various  modes  of  energy,  whereas  both  in  objective  and  subjective
metapsychics  the  phenomena  seem  due  to  some  kind  of  intelli-
gence. The  intelligence  that  pertains  to  metapsychic  things  may
be  purely  human ;  but  if  so  it  proceeds  from  a  region  of  human
intelligence  quite  unknown  to  us,  since  it  reveals  things  that  our
senses  cannot  reveal  and  acts  upon  matter  otherwise  than  by
muscular  contraction.  In  any  case  the  province  of  metapsychics
differs  from  that  of  all  other  forces,  these  latter  being  certainly

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  15

blind  and  unconscious.  Perhaps  it  may  eventually  be  proved
that  the  metapsychic  forces  producing  the  phenomena  are  as  un-
conscious as  electricity  and  heat.  Then  metapsychics  will  form
a  branch  of  physics  and  psychology.  This  would  be  a  great  ad-
vance, and  far  from  being  saddened  thereby  we  should  rather
be  glad ;  for  there  is  a  real  mental  intellectual  distress,  felt  by
none  more  than  myself,  in  the  supposition  that  unknown,  arbi-
trary, and  capricious  powers  are  the  only  ones  endowed  with
intelligence.

But  this  day  has  not  yet  dawned  and  we  must  conclude  pro-
visionally: (1)  That  the  metapsychic  facts  are  real;  (2)  that
they  are  to  be  studied  like  every  other  science  without  religious
preoccupations,  and  (3)  that  they  are  seemingly  directed  by
human  or  non-human  intelligences  whose  intentions  we  can  only
partially  perceive.

3.  Historical  Summary

Events  and  discoveries  are  so  intermingled  that  any  division
into  distinct  periods  is  necessarily  artificial.  Nevertheless,  this
division  must  be  made  in.  order  to  throw  some  light  on  this  obscure
and  tangled  subject.  I  suggest,  therefore,  the  following  four
periods :

1.  The  Mythical,  up  to  Mesmer  (1778).

2.  The  ''Magnetic/'  from  Mesmer  to  the  Fox  sisters  (1847).

3.  The  Spiritist,  from  the  Fox  sisters  to  William  Crookes

(1847-1872).

4.  The  Scientific,*  which  begins  with  William  Crookes  (1872).
May  I  venture  to  express  the  hope  that  this  book  will  help  to

inaugurate  a  fifth,  that  of  recognition  as  a  science?

1.  The  Mythical  Stage

It  is  for  historians  rather  than  for  men  of  science  to  seek  in
ancient  religions  and  popular  traditions  all  that  has  been  said  on
the  supernatural,  the  occult,  the  magical,  and  the  incomprehensible.
The  perusal  of  sacred  books,  cabalistic  and  magical  works  has
but  slight  scientific  interest.1

*An  able  and  very  detailed  summary  of  these  has  been  given  by  C.  de
Vesme,  Storia  dello  spiritismo ,  3  vols.,  Turin,  Roux  Frascati,  1896- 1898.
Translated  into  German,  Leipzig,  1904.  Its  bibliography  will  be  found  with
a  brief  analysis  in  a  fine  work  by  Albert  Caillat,  Manuel  bibliographique  des
sciences  psychiques  ou  occultes,  3  vols.,  Paris,  L.  Dorbon,  191 3.

16

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Miracles  and  prophecies  have  played  a  great  part  in  nearly
all  religions.  Real  metapsychic  phenomena,  putting  telekinesis
for  the  miracles  and  premonitions  for  the  prophecies,  are  perhaps
at  the  root  of  some  religious  beliefs;  but  what  can  we  build  on
stories  that  date  back  twenty  centuries,  transformed  by  ignorant
and  credulous  priests?  Dealing  with  a  fact  of  the  present  day
studied  in  a  laboratory  by  skilled  experimentalists  with  all  mod-
ern technical  instruments,  we  often  hesitate  to  form  any  conclu-
sions. How,  then,  can  we  affirm  anything  concerning  an  improb-
able event  said  to  have  taken  place  two  thousand  years  ago  before
three  fanatics  and  four  adepts  ?  Probably  it  is  not  entirely  false ;
but  we  cannot  discriminate  between  its  falsehood  and  its  truth.  We
shall,  therefore,  deliberately  set  aside  the  miracles  of  all  religions,
and  all  the  prodigies  connected  with  the  death  of  Caesar,  of  Jesus
Christ,  or  of  Mahomet.

Nevertheless  there  are,  in  this  immeasurable  period  of  credulity
and  ignorance,  some  facts  worthy  of  mention.

Firstly,  the  very  curious  story  of  the  daemon  of  Socrates.

The  two  illustrious  disciples  of  Socrates — Plato  and  Xenophon —
state  formally  that  Socrates  claimed  to  have  a  familiar  genius,  a
daemon,  who  foretold  events  and  sometimes  prescribed  his  con-
duct. Even  Socrates  believed  this  being  to  be  other  than  him-
self because  it  revealed  things  unknown.  This  daemon  was  what
spiritualists  call  "a  guide."

In  the  Theagetes,  Plato  makes  Socrates  say :  "By  the  favour
of  the  Gods,  I  have,  since  my  childhood,  been  attended  by  a  semi-
divine  being  whose  voice  from  time  to  time  dissuades  me  from
some  undertaking,  but  never  directs  me  what  I  am  to  do.  You
know  Charmides  the  son  of  Glaucon.  One  day  he  told  me  that
he  intended  to  compete  at  the  Nemean  games.  ...  I  tried
to  turn  Charmides  from  his  design,  telling  him,  'While  you  were
speaking,  I  heard  the  divine  voice.  ...  Go  not  to  Nemea.'
He  would  not  listen.   Well,  you  know  he  has  fallen."

In  the  Apology  for  Socrates,  Xenophon  attributes  to  him  the
words :  "This  prophetic  voice  has  been  heard  by  me  throughout
my  life:  it  is  certainly  more  trustworthy  than  omens  from  the
flight  or  the  entrails  of  birds :  I  call  it  a  God  or  a  daemon.  I  have
told  my  friends  the  warnings  I  have  received,  and  up  to  now  the
voice  has  never  been  wrong."  Socrates  frequently  insisted  that
the  predictions  of  his  familiar  genius  were  always  verified.

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  17

Throughout  antiquity  the  story  of  Socrates's  daemon  has  always
been  perfectly  well  known.

Plutarch  speaks  of  it:  "Socrates  having  a  pure  and  clear
faculty  of  hearing  could  easily  be  affected,  and  this  being  so  we
may  conjecture  that  what  reached  him  was  not  a  voice  or  a
sound  but  the  silent  voice  of  a  daemon  touching  the  intelligence
of  his  soul.  The  intelligence  of  daemons  having  its  own  light,
shines  upon  those  who  are  capable  of  receiving  it,  needing  neither
the  names  nor  the  words  which  men  use  in  speaking  to  one
another,  by  which  they  represent  their  ideas;  but  as  for  pure
intelligences  these  are  known  only  to  those  who  have  an  inner
and  divine  light."

Socrates,  on  hearing  these  voices,  would  break  off  his  con-
versation, or  stop  in  his  walk,  saying  in  explanation  that  he  had
heard  the  god.

Myers  has  written  ably  on  this  subject,  comparing  it  (with
good  reason,  as  I  think)  to  the  voices  heard  from  childhood  by
Jeanne  d'Arc.  He  finds,  however,  only  one  instance  of  clair-
voyance attributed  to  this  daemon:  As  the  philosopher  was  in
conversation  with  Eutyphron,  he  suddenly  stopped  and  warned
his  friends  to  turn  into  another  street.  They  would  not  listen;
but  misfortune  overtook  them — they  met  a  drove  of  swine  that
jostled  them  and  threw  them  down.

In  his  treatise  De  Divinatione  Cicero  speaks  without  reserve  of
predictions,  as  in  the  case  of  Socrates;  but,  strange  to  say,  he
expresses  no  astonishment.  Without  believing  in  it  he  does  not
reject  it.  He  says,  De  Legibus,  ii,  32,  33,  "I  think  there  veritably
is  a  divination,  that  which  the  Greeks  call  ^avTiKr/.  If  we  admit
that  there  are  gods  whose  spirit  governs  the  world  and  watches
over  mankind,  I  do  not  see  why  we  should  refuse  credence  to
divination."

Referring  to  his  brother  Quintus  he  gives  some  instances  of
premonition,  notably  a  dream  of  Quintus,  in  which  he  saw  his
brother  Tullius  fall  from  his  horse  (which  was  a  fact).  Tullius
replied,  "The  anxiety  you  felt  for  me  caused  you  to  dream
of  me.  The  coincidence  of  the  dream  and  the  accident  was
a  matter  of  chance";  and  this  answer  appears  to  have  satisfied
Cicero.

Cicero  gives  an  account  {De  Divinatione,  i,  27)  of  another
metapsychic  phenomenon  which  I  abridge  as  follows :

Two  friends  having  arrived  at  Megara  went  to  lodge,  one  in

18

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

an  inn  and  one  in  a  private  house.  The  latter  dreamed  that  his
comrade  called  him  to  save  him  from  an  assassin.  He  awoke,
thought  it  only  a  dream,  and  went  to  sleep  again.  But  his  friend
appeared  to  him  and  said:  "Since  thou  wouldest  not  save  my
life  at  least  avenge  me,  se  interfectum  in  plaustrum  a  caupone
esse  conjectum,  et  supra  stercus  injectum.  .  .  .  Hoc  somnio
commotus  mane  bulbulco  praesto  ad  portam  fuisse,  quaesisse  ex
eo  quid  esset  in  plaustro,  ilium  perterritum  fugisse,  mortuum
erutum  esse;  cauponem,  re  patefacta,  poenas  dedisse."  And
Cicero,  without  being  beyond  measure  astonished,  remarks,  "Quid
hoc  somnio  dici  divinius  potest  ?"  1

Further,  in  speaking  of  oracles,  in  which  he  nevertheless  is
inclined  to  believe,  he  says,  Multa  falsa,  imo  obscura,  idque
fortasse  .  .  .  nobis  facilius  evenit  appropinquante  morte,  ut
animi  futura  auguretur.2  Tacitus  (Annals,  xi,  21)  speaks  of  a
vision  that  appeared  to  Curtius  Rufus :  Oblata  ei  species  muliebris
ultra  modum  humanun  et  audita  est  vox.3

A  search  through  history  would  reveal  many  facts  of  a  meta-
psychic  nature;  but  no  serious  inferences  can  be  drawn  from
them.  Who  today  would  venture  to  speak  seriously  of  Simon
Magus,  or  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  even  of  Cardan  or  Cornelius
Agrippa?  Magi,  magicians,  and  mystics  have  no  place  in  the
science  of  today,  nor  in  sane  metapsychics  as  now  understood.

The  apparition  to  Brutus,  recounted  by  Plutarch,  deserves
mention:  "A  little  before  he  left  Asia  he  was  sitting  alone  in
his  tent,  by  a  dim  light,  and  at  a  late  hour.  The  whole  army  lay
in  sleep  and  silence,  while  the  general,  wrapped  in  meditation,
thought  he  perceived  something  enter  his  tent :  turning  towards  the

Translator's  Note — The  passages  quoted  may  be  rendered  as  follows :
^'That  he  had  been  killed  and  thrown  into  a  waggon  by  the  innkeeper  and
that  manure  had  been  thrown  over  his  body.  Alarmed  at  this  dream  in  the
morning  he  had  waited  for  the  waggoner  by  the  gate  (of  the  town)  and  had
asked  him  what  was  in  the  waggon ;  the  man  fled,  terrified,  and  the  corpse  had
been  uncovered.  The  innkeeper  on  the  case  being  proved  had  paid  the
penalty."

What  clearer  proof  of  the  intervention  of  Heaven  can  there  be  than
this  dream?

2Much  is  false,  I  should  rather  say  unintelligible,  and  this  (i.e.,  premoni-
tion) perhaps  happens  to  us  more  readily  on  the  approach  of  death,  that  the
future  of  the  soul  may  be  forecast.

'There  appeared  to  him  the  form  of  a  woman  of  more  than  human  size
and  a  voice  was  heard  .  .  .  The  context  runs,  Tu  es  Rufe,  qui  in  hanc
provinciam  proconsule  venies.  "You  are  the  man,  Rufus,  who  will  come  to
this  province  as  proconsul."

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  19

door,  he  saw  a  horrible  and  monstrous  spectre  standing  silently
by  his  side.  'What  art  thou?'  said  he  boldly.  'Art  thou  God  or
man,  and  what  is  thy  business  with  me?'  The  spectre  answered,
'I  am  thy  evil  genius,  Brutus!  Thou  wilt  see  me  at  Philippi.'
To  which  he  calmly  replied,  Til  meet  thee  there.'  When  the
apparition  was  gone  he  called  his  servants,  who  told  him  they
had  neither  heard  any  voice  nor  seen  any  vision."  (Plutarch's
Lives,  Brutus,  Langhorne's  translation.)

The  voices  and  visions  of  Jeanne  d'Arc  belong  also  without
doubt  to  the  class  of  metapsychic  phenomena.  These  voices  and
visions  were  perceived  by  herself  alone,  and  must  therefore  be
admitted  as  subjective.  The  explanation  that  they  were  hallucina-
tions is  much  too  easy,  for  they  were  followed  by  far  too  many
real  facts  and  by  too  frequent  verification  of  their  predictions  to
be  accounted  for  by  a  disordered  mind.  It  is  impossible  to  doubt
that  Jeanne  was  truly  inspired.

At  the  same  time,  as  for  the  phantom  seen  by  Brutus,  the
apparitions  at  Lourdes,  and  the  miracles  of  Apollonius  of  Tyana
and  Simon  Magus,  any  scientific  appreciation  of  these  ancient
testimonies  is  impossible,  and  it  is  better  to  admit  with  F.  W.  H.
Myers  that  it  is  probable  that  Jeanne  possessed  certain  meta-
psychic powers,  without  claiming  to  give  an  exact  definition  of
them.

There  might  be  some  profit  in  the  study  of  hagiographies,  for
saintly  persons  have  certainly  exhibited  very  real  metapsychic
phenomena.  Instances  of  aureoles  about  the  head,  bilocation,
the  "odour  of  sanctity/'  insensibility  to  fire,  levitation,  speaking
in  strange  tongues,  and  prophecy  are  to  be  found  in  the  lives  of
many  saints:  St.  Francis  d'Assisi,  St.  Theresa,  St.  Helena,  St.
Alphonso  of  Liguori,  and  St.  Joseph  of  Copertino  (1603-1663).

I  set  aside  the  stories  of  stigmata  and  all  such  organic  phe-
nomena, for  these  effects  of  mind — that  is  to  say,  of  the  central
nervous  system — on  the  circulation  and  nutrition  of  various  parts
of  the  body  (the  trophic  nerves)  do  not  fall  within  the  province
of  metapsychics.  It  will  suffice  to  refer  to  the  many  publications
by  medical  men  on  this  subject.1

*M.  Apte,  Les  stigmatises,  itude  historique  et  critique  sur  les  troubles
vaso-moteurs  chez  les  mystiques,  Th.  de  doctorat,  Paris,  1903-  Kohnstamm,
Hypnotische  Stigmatisierung  (Zeitschr.  f.d.  Ausbau  d.  Entwicklungslehre,
iqo8,  ii,  314-321).  Gorres,  La  mystique  divine,  naturelle  et  diabolique,  trad,
fr.,  Paris,  1854,  ii,  174-210.    Bourneville,  Science  et  miracles,  Louise  Lateau,

20

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

But  I  hesitate  to  deny  all  the  ancient  instances  of  levitation;
Gorres  cites  no  less  than  seventy-two  cases,  and  states,  moreover,
that  he  does  not  give  all  of  them.  But  it  is  impossible  to  deter-
mine how  much  truth  there  is  in  these  miracles.  The  saint
who  had  most  is  certainly  St.  Joseph  of  Copertino,  beatified  in
1753.  Of  him  Gorres  says,  "His  ecstasies  and  ascensions  were
witnessed  not  only  by  the  people  and  the  members  of  his  order,
but  Pope  Urban  VIII  saw  him  one  day  in  this  state  and  was
intensely  astonished.  Joseph  bethinking  himself  that  he  was  in
the  presence  of  the  Vicar  of  Christ  fell  into  an  ecstasy  and  was
raised  above  the  ground."

For  a  long  time,  and  even  today,  it  has  been  the  custom  to
scoff  at  these  superstitions — the  levitations  of  saints,  somnam-
bulistic predictions,  premonitions  of  death  by  dreams,  ecstatic
healings,  stigmata,  haunted  houses,  apparitions,  and  the  like —
lumping  them  together  with  unmeasured  contempt  as  unworthy
of  any  examination.

This  seems  to  me  a  grave  error.  Assuredly  everything  in
these  stories  is  not  true,  but  neither  are  they  entirely  false.  The
strange  stories  we  hear  provoke  an  incredulous  smile  and  one  is
apt  to  think  the  narrator  not  quite  sane.  But  that  is  not  so,
neither  is  he  lying.  The  stories  told  us  are  scarcely  ever  lies
and  very  rarely  complete  illusions.  People  exaggerate,  alter,
arrange  their  accounts,  forget  essential  details  and  add  imaginary
ones;  but  all  these  legends  contain  some  fragment  of  truth.
The  history  of  the  sciences  shows  that  it  has  often  been  necessary
to  return  to  notions  once  thought  to  be  puerile.  The  very  exist-
ence of  hypnotism  and  of  spiritualism  shows  that  mere  denials
without  examination,  instead  of  aiding,  tend  to  fossilize  science —
routine  rather  than  the  desire  of  progress  dominating  the  minds
of  those  who  claim  to  be  scientific.  But  for  detail  of  all  these
legends,  from  which  we  can  scarcely  hope  to  extract  the  truth
imbedded  therein,  I  refer  readers  to  the  work  of  Gorres.1  It
is  very  complete,  though  naturally  his  credulity  is  limitless.  It

ou  la  stigmatisee  beige,  Paris,  1875.  Carre  de  Montgeron,  La  veritS  des
miracles  opkrks  Par  V  inter  cession  du  diacre,  Paris,  ii,  Cologne,  1747.  Alfred
Maury,  La  tnagie  et  Vastrologie,  Paris,  1895.  P.  Janet,  Bulletin  de  VJnstitut
psychologique  international,  July,  1901.    A.  de  Rochas,  A.  S.  P.,  January,  1903.

*I  endeavoured  to  analyze  a  very  curious  old  instance  of  "possession"
at  Presburg  in  1641,  but  could  deduce  nothing.  (Phenomdnes  metapsychiques
d'autrefois,  A.  S.  P.,  1905,  pp.  197-217;  413-421.)

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  21

is,  however,  interesting  to  note  that  nearly  all  present  meta-
psychic  phenomena  are  to  be  found  in  it.

The  naive  imagination  of  the  Christians  of  those  days  does  not
refer  all  these  metapsychic  powers  to  God  and  good  angels:
the  devil  also  is  capable  of  many  marvels  when  he  takes  posses-
sion of  some  unlucky  woman:  he  is  nearly  as  powerful  as  God,
and  confers  wonderful  powers  on  his  victim:

1.  The  power  of  perceiving  the  thoughts  of  others,  even  when

not  expressed;

2.  Knowledge  of  languages  unknown  to  the  possessed  and  the

ability  to  speak  them;

3.  Knowledge  of  future  events;

4.  Knowledge  of  events  at  a  distance  beyond  the  limits  of  sight ;

5.  Suspension  in  the  air  (levitation).

All  these  are  real  metapsychic  phenomena;  it  is  therefore
credible  that  such  things  should  have  occurred  now  and  again,
alike  to  the  saintly  and  the  possessed,  in  all  times.

Even  divining  tables  are  mentioned  in  antiquity  (Mensae  divina-
toriae).  Tertullian  speaks  of  chains  and  tables  for  divination,
and  adds  that  this  is  a  common  fact  (Figuier,  Histoire  du  mer-
veilleux,  Paris,  1873,  i,  18).  According  to  Ammianus  Mar-
cellinus  a  table  was  made  and  on  it  was  placed  a  slab  engraved
with  the  twenty-four  letters  of  the  alphabet.  A  ring  suspended
by  a  thread  was  held  over  it  which  swung  to  certain  letters.
These  being  written  down  gave  an  oracular  message.

2.  The  "Magnetic"  Stage1

With  Mesmer  all  changes:  he  introduced  animal  magnetism,
which,  though  not  to  be  confounded  with  metapsychics,  is  closely
allied  to  it.2  In  1766  Anton  Frederic  Mesmer  (1723-1815)
produced,  as  his  thesis  for  a  medical  degree,  an  essay  on  the
physiological  influence  of  the  planets.   During  the  next  ten  years

*On  Mesmer's  work  and  the  origins  of  magnetism  see  the  remarkable
article  by  Ochorowicz,  Hypnotism,  in  the  Dictionnaire  de  Physiologie,  C.  Richet,
Paris,  1909,  viii,  pp.  709-777  ;  also  K.  Kiesewetter,  Geschichte  desneueren  Occul-
tismus;  geheimwissenschaftliche  Systeme  von  Agrippa  bis  Karl  du  Prel,  second
edition,  Leipzig,  1907.  The  bibliography  of  animal  magnetism  and  hypnotism
will  be  found  in  M.  Dessoir's  book.

*Cf.  Figuier,  Histoire  du  merveilleux,  Paris,  1873,  h  18.

22

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

he  studied,  endeavouring  to  harmonize  astronomy  and  medicine,
and  to  bring  himself  to  notice.  In  1778  he  came  to  Paris  and
published  his  first  didactic  work.  It  was  immediately  apparent
that  new  and  extraordinary  facts  were  involved.  He  rose  into
vogue.  The  Royal  Society  of  Medicine,  the  Academy  of  Sciences,
and  the  Faculty  took  the  matter  up  and  showed  that  Mesmer's
methods  gave  rise  to  a  certain  psycho-physiological  state  which
might  sometimes  be  efficacious  in  the  curing  of  disease.1

The  new  doctrine  obtained  numerous  adherents  among  doc-
tors, magistrates,  gentlemen,  and  scientists.  Animal  magnetism
was  commonly  practised.  Puysegur,  aided  by  d'Eslon  and  Deleuze,
the  librarian  of  the  Jardin  des  Plantes,  modified  the  methods  of
Mesmer  and  created  animal  magnetism  (induced  somnambulism),
such  as  we  know  it  today.  Mesmer,  by  adopting  the  word
"magnetism,"  only  meant  action  at  a  distance,  just  as  Paracelsus
and  Goclenius  treated  of  the  "magnetic"  action  of  planets  or  of
substances.  In  this  sense  Mesmer  was  nearer  to  metapsychics
than  his  immediate  successors.

With  Puysegur,  d'Eslon,  and  Deleuze  magnetization  became
a  therapeutic  method,  though  henceforth  metapsychic  facts —
action  at  a  distance,  vision  through  opaque  bodies,  clairvoyance
or  lucidity — were  observed  facts;  but  strangely  enough  nearly
all  the  efforts  of  the  magnetizers  were  concentrated  on  the  diag-
nosis and  cure  of  disease.  Petetin,  a  physician  of  Lyons,  cited
a  number  of  cases  of  cryptesthesia  which  he  attributes  naively
to  epigastric  sensibility:  one  of  his  cataleptic  patients  could
distinguish  and  name  a  card  placed  on  the  epigastric  region.
Petetin  is  one  of  the  old-time  magnetizers  who  studied  the  psycho-
logical, or  rather  metapsychic,  phenomena  that  so  often  accom-
pany hypnosis,  with  special  care.

Baron  du  Potet,  and  Husson,  a  physician  of  the  Paris  Hos-
pital and  a  member  of  the  Academy  of  Medicine,  made,  in  1825,
some  remarkable  experiments  on  somnambulism  induced  from  a
distance.  A  notable  report  was  presented  by  Husson  to  the
Paris  Academy  of  Medicine,  and  appeared  in  1833.2

1Memoire  sur  la  decouverte  du  magnetisme  animal,  Paris,  P.  F.  Didot,
1779.  Ochorowicz  has  done  full  justice  to  Mesmer  who  was  a  genuine  dis-
coverer and  forerunner.

2Maxime  de  Puysegur,  Rapport  des  cures  operees  a  Bayonne  par  le
magnetisme  animal,  Bayonne,  1784.  Memoires  pour  servir  a  I'ttablissement
du  magnetisme  animal,  Paris,  1820.    Deleuze,  Histoire  critique  de  magnetisme

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  23

Among  the  conclusions  adopted,  I  give  the  following,  which
will  seem  bold,  even  today:

"An  effort  of  will  or  a  fixed  gaze  has  sufficed  to  produce
magnetic  phenomena,  even  when  the  subject  was  unaware.

"A  somnambulic  state  may  give  rise  to  new  faculties,  designated
as  clairvoyance,  intuition,  or  interior  prevision.

"By  an  effort  of  will  it  is  possible  not  only  to  act  on  the  patient,
but  even  to  induce  complete  somnambulism  and  to  dispel  it,
unknown  to  and  out  of  sight  of  the  patient,  through  closed  doors.

"We  have  seen  two  somnambulists  with  closed  eyes  distinguish
objects  placed  before  them;  they  have  named  the  color  and  value
of  cards,  have  read  words  of  script  or  some  lines  in  books  selected
at  random,  and  this  when  the  eyelids  were  held  down  with  our
fingers. "

In  spite  of  these  declarations  the  scepticism  of  official  science
prevailed.  Husson's  report  was  disputed  and  then  forgotten,
and  the  metapsychic  phenomena  were  taken  up  by  novelists,  and
denied  or  disdained  by  men  of  science.

In  Germany  Justinus  Kerner,1  physician  and  poet,  studied
for  a  long  while  Federica  Hauff,  a  medium  whose  extraordinary
faculties  were  well  worthy  of  attention.  Federica  Hauff  was
undoubtedly  a  powerful  medium;  she  saw  spirits  and  produced
materializations.  "One  day,"  says  Kerner,  "I  was  conversing
with  her  brother,  when  he  said:  'Hush!  a  spirit  is  crossing  the
room  going  toward  my  sister/  Then  I  saw  a  vague  form  like
a  luminous  column  about  human  height  standing  at  the  foot  of
the  bed  of  the  seeress,  whispering  to  her."

Around  her  spontaneous  rappings  were  heard,  and  she  could
even  cause  them  on  neighbouring  objects,  on  tables,  and  on  the

animal,  1813.  Petetin,  Electricite  animale,  memoir  es  sur  la  catalepsie.
Foissac,  Rapport  et  discussions  sur  le  magnetisme  animal,  Paris,  1825.
Deleuze,  Instruction  pratique  sur  le  magnetisme  animal.  Final  edition,  Paris,
1853.

There  is,  however,  a  posthumous  work  by  Deleuze,  Memoire  sur  la  faculty
de  prevision,  with  notes  by  M.  Mielle,  Paris,  1834.

Rapports  et  discussions  de  VAcademie  royale  de  medecine  sur  le  mag-
netisme animal,  Paris,  1833.

xDie  Scherin  von  Prevorst,  Eroffnungen  iiber  das  innere  Leben  d.  Menschen
und  iiber  das  Hereinragen  einer  Geisterwelt  in  die  unsere,  Stuttgart,  1829,
fifth  edition,  Stuttgart,  1877.  Die  Seherin  von  Prevorst  und  ihre  Geschichte
in  der  Geisterwelt,  nach  Justinus  Kerner  von  einem  ihrer  Zeitgenossen,  Stuttgart,
1869.  A.  Reinhard,  Justinus  Kerner  und  das  Kernerhaus,  zu  Weinberg,  Tubin-
gen, 1886.  J.  Kerner,  Blatter  aus  Prevorst  Originalien  und  Lesefruchte  jui
Freunde  des  innern  Lebens,  Stuttgart,  183 1 -1839.

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

wood  of  her  bed.  Different  objects  moved  without  contact,  she
was  levitated,  and  seems  to  have  spoken  in  unknown  tongues.

It  was  only  during  the  years  from  1826  to  1829  that  these
remarkable  phenomena  were  observed ;  during  the  whole  of  this
time  she  was  very  ill  and  could  scarcely  leave  her  bed.  All
who  studied  Federica  Hauff  (such  as  the  Magistrate  Pfaffer
and  Strauss,  the  celebrated  author  of  the  Lcben  Jesu),  instead
of  ridiculing  her,  were  convinced  not  only  of  her  good  faith  but
of  the  metapsychic  phenomena — then  called  supernatural.

At  this  time  there  appeared,  also  in  Germany,  the  works  of
Reichenbach.  These  are  obscure  physiological  rather  than  meta-
psychic records,  for  the  action  of  steel  magnets  on  organic  bodies
must  not  be  confused  with  cryptesthesia  or  telekinesis.  Unfor-
tunately the  work  of  Reichenbach  has  been  more  disputed  over
than  studied.

Belonging  strictly  to  the  metapsychic  domain  were  the  observa-
tions made  in  France  on  lucid  somnambulists  such  as  Mme.
Pigeaire1  and  Alexis  Didier,  but  men  of  science,  with  the  rarest
exceptions,  concerned  themselves  with  somnambulism  only  to  try
to  disprove  it.  Their  attitude  is  easily  understandable :  somnam-
bulic consultants,  lucid  or  super-lucid,  appeared  in  every  town,
both  in  France  and  abroad,  exploiting  the  alleged  healing  virtues
of  magnetism.  They  were  to  be  found  at  every  fair,  plying  a
dubious  trade;  they  told  fortunes  by  cards,  they  saw  the  future
in  coffee-grounds,  and  practised  palmistry.

Credulous  people  visited  them  and  men  of  science  shrugged
their  shoulders.  In  such  a  medley,  the  clairvoyance  of  persons
like  Mme.  Lenormand,  Mme.  Pigeaire,  and  Alexis  Didier  was
lost,  though  some  serious  notices  were  published.2

\A.  de  Rochas  has  published  part  of  these  in  French  with  some  inter-
esting notes.

2Du  Potet,  Essai  sur  Venseignement  philosophique  du  magnetisme  animal,
Paris,  1845.  Lafontaine,  Vart  de  magnktiser  ou  le  magnetisme  vital  consi-
dire  sous  le  point  de  vue  theorique,  pratique  et  thkrapeutique,  Paris,  1847.
Fifth  edition,  1887.  A.  Bertrand,  Du  magnetisme  animal  en  France,  suivi  de
considerations  sur  Vapparition  de  Vexiase  dans  les  traitements  magnHiques,
Paris,  1826.  Teste,  Manuel  pratique  du  magnetisme  animal,  Paris,  1840.
Elliotson,  Animal  Magnetism,  Lancet,  1837,  1838,  pp.  122,  282,  377,  400,  441,
516,  546,  615,  634.  Esdaille,  Reports  of  the  magnetic  hospital,  Calcutta,  1848,
p.  761.  Passavant,  Untersuchungen  iiber  den  Lebenmagnetismus  und  das
Hellsehen,  second  edition,  Franckfurt  A.  M.,  1837.

Many  journals,  mostly  ephemeral,  appeared ;  others  survived  a  consider-
able time.   The  Journal  du  Magnetisme,  edited  by  Du  Potet,  1 845-1 885.  The

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  25

3.   The  Spiritist  Stage

In  1847  an  event  took  place,  apparently  insignificant,  but  really
of  considerable  import,  introducing  unforeseen  facts  and  equally
unforeseen  doctrines.

Animal  magnetism,  being  of  doubtful  therapeutic  value,  was
making  no  progress.  The  coming  of  spiritism  with  its  new
methods  and  new  theories  inaugurated  a  new  era.  This  is  the
third  period  in  the  development  of  metapsychic  science.  It  runs
from  1847  to  1872.

In  1846,  in  the  little  town  of  Hydesville  (Arcadia)  near  New
York,  one  Michael  Weakman  heard  an  unusual  noise  outside.
He  went  out  and  saw  nothing;  but  as  the  noises  continued  and
disturbed  him,  he  left  Hydesville.  His  house  was  taken  by  John
Fox  and  his  two  daughters,  Kate  and  Margaret,  aged  twelve
and  fourteen.  One  night  on  going  to  bed  the  two  girls  heard
noises  and  raps,  and  discovered  (December,  1847,  and  March,
1848),  that  these  showed  intelligence.

The  phenomena  soon  developed,  and  several  persons  verified
that  these  intelligent  rappings  bore  witness  to  certain  facts  that
had  been  kept  secret.  In  August,  1848,  the  Fox  family  left
Hydesville  for  Rochester.  Leah  Fish,  the  elder  sister  of  Kate
and  Margaret,  joined  them  for  spiritualist  manifestations.

Isaac  Post  suggested  the  use  of  an  alphabet  to  converse  with
these  unknown  powers  which  stated  that  they  were  spirits.

Many  gatherings,  sometimes  enthusiastic,  sometimes  hotly
inimical,  were  held  to  verify  the  facts  announced  by  the  Fox
sisters,  who  were  becoming  more  and  more  notorious.  The  first
scientific  enquiry  seems  to  have  taken  place  at  St.  Louis  (Mis-
souri), in  June,  1882;  it  appears  to  have  reported  favourably.
Nevertheless  the  Fox  family  were  certainly  not  disinterested;
public  seances  were  given  at  which  places  were  paid  for  as  at  a
circus.

All  these  early  stages  of  spiritualism,  arising  in  the  first  place
from  chance,  and  then  pushed  by  shameless  commercialism,  are
very  sordid.1

Zoist,  a  journal  of  cerebral  physiology  and  mesmerism  and  their  application  to
human  welfare,  London,  1 843-1 853.  Archiv  fur  den  thierischen  Magnet ismus,
Altenburg  and  Leipzig,  1817-1822.    Others  might  be  cited.

*It  is,  however,  to  be  noted  that  the  admirable  discovery  of  surgical  anes-
thetics, also  made  in  America,  offers  analogous  features.    It  arose  by  a

26

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

But  the  start  was  made.  First  in  America,  and  afterwards
in  Europe,  the  practice  of  table-turning  and  spiritualist  doctrines
made  extraordinary  progress  during  the  next  three  years.  As
for  animal  magnetism  in  1780,  so  for  table-turning  in  1850,  an
amazing  infatuation  set  in ;  but  it  is  simply  puerile  to  see  in  this
nothing  more  than  a  huge  and  collective  illusion.  Moreover,
some  reasoned  conclusions  were  blended  with  the  fanatical  cre-
dulity of  blind  and  ignorant  masses,  and  the  equally  blind  and
ignorant  denials  by  scorners.  It  was  soon  found  that  the  phe-
nomena of  raps  and  telekinesis  could  be  observed  with  other
mediums  than  the  Fox  sisters.1

Among  these  reasoned  conclusions  none  was  more  influential
than  those  of  Judge  Edmunds,  a  senator  respected  throughout  the
United  States  for  probity  and  sagacity.

The  mental  instability  of  mediums  is,  for  the  most  part,  such
that  their  affirmations,  whether  positive  or  negative,  have  but
small  value.  That  the  Fox  sisters,  after  the  enormous  develop-
ment of  spiritualism  that  followed  on  their  early  demonstrations,
should  have  tricked  is  possible  or  probable,  not  to  say  certain.

There  are  many  instances  of  very  strong  mediums  who  pre-
sented at  first  authentic  phenomena,  but  later  on,  urged  by
cupidity  or  vanity,  finding  their  powers  failing,  have  supple-
mented them  by  fraud.  It  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  the  phe-
nomena of  rapping,  which  is  certainly  true,  should  have  been

chance  and  immediately  Horace  Wells  and  Morton  took  out  a  patent  in  order
to  draw  profit  from  the  discovery ;  but  this  greed  of  gain  detracted  nothing
from  its  reality.  O.  and  W.  Wright  patented  their  aeroplane,  but  this  did
not  diminish  the  value  of  their  invention.

*A  singular  result  followed.  Margaret  Fox,  then  become  Mrs.  Kane,
avowed  in  1888  that  all  her  revelations  as  a  child  and  a  young  woman  were
impostures.  The  sitting  of  the  Musical  Academy  of  Boston  at  which  she  made
this  astonishing  declaration  provoked  great  indignation.  The  other  sister,
Kate,  then  Mrs.  Joncken,  afterwards  Mrs.  Sparr,  and  addicted  to  drink,  made
the  same  confession  in  November,  1888,  at  Rochester.  But  in  1892  both
Margaret  and  Kate  retracted  their  confessions.  These  unfortunate  facts
prove  nothing  but  the  mental  frailty  of  mediums.

In  fine,  when  a  fact  has  been  affirmed,  it  is  not  enough  merely  to  say  that
there  was  lying  and  trickery ;  it  must  also  be  shown  how  the  trick  was  carried
out.  A  Mr.  Blackman  has  told  (Confessions  of  a  Telepathist,  J.  S.  P.  R.,
October,  191 1,  p.  116)  how  he  in  collusion  with  G.  A.  Smith  deceived  Gurney,
Myers,  Podmore,  H.  Sidgwick,  and  Barrett.  But  in  this  so-called  exposure  he
certainly  told  some  lies.  I  believe,  too,  that  Marthe  Beraud  once  told  a  certain
lawyer  at  Algiers  that  she  had  tricked  at  the  Villa  Carmen ;  but  later  on  she
denied  this,  and  her  statements  have  no  value  either  way.  A  curious  chapter
might  be  written  on  the  pseudo-confessions  of  mediums.

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  27

invented  by  the  Fox  sisters  without  being  real.1  Before  1847
these  rappings  were  unknown ;  then  these  two  young  girls  come
on  the  scene  and  give  striking  examples  of  them.

Then  the  same  phenomenon  is  verified  far  and  wide,  and  after
many  such  instances  the  girls  say  they  were  lying!  It  is
probable  that  the  denial  is  the  lie,  and  that  seeing  public  favours
and  money  diminishing  they  thought  to  regain  notoriety  for
their  puny  personalities  by  a  recantation.

In  1847  Margaret  was  fifteen  and  Kate  twelve.  Can  we  sup-
pose that  these  two  children  organized  a  fraud  that  was  tested
thousands  of  times  during  seventy-five  years?  The  reality  of
rappings  does  not  depend  on  the  Fox  sisters.  In  1888  it  was  too
late  for  denial  and  their  recantation  proves  nothing.2

It  is  deplorable  that  from  1849  onward  the  Fox  family  should
have  given  theatrical  spiritist  performances  for  payment,  but  this
no  more  invalidates  the  facts  than  the  patents  taken  out  by  Wells
and  Morton  for  the  use  of  ether  contradict  the  facts  of  anesthesia.

The  rapid  development  of  spiritualism  cannot  be  traced
here.  A  petition  signed  by  fourteen  thousand  persons  was  pre-
sented to  the  Senate  of  the  United  States  in  1852,  asking  for  a
scientific  commission  of  enquiry.  It  had  become  a  new  religion ;
spiritualist  circles  and  journals  were  numerous.

Among  the  early  American  spiritualists,  besides  Edmunds,
must  be  placed  Professors  Britten,  David  Wells,  Bryant,  Bliss,
all  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  and  above  all  others  Dr.
Robert  Hare,3  professor  of  chemistry  at  Harvard,  convinced
after  having  been  sceptical.

In  Europe  spiritualism  spread  very  rapidly ;  not  without  stir-
ring up  lively  opposition.  Scientific  men,  especially,  refused  to
admit  the  actuality  of  the  phenomena,  and  to  explain  the  un-
deniable facts  of  raps  and  table-turning,  they  invented  compli-

\A.ccording  to  J.  Maxwell  (Les  Sciences  psychiques,  Revue  de  Paris,  March
i,  1 921)  the  bishop,  Adrien  de  Montalembert,  seems  to  have  verified  that
such  raps  took  place  with  a  nun  of  Lyons.

2The  experiments  by  Aksakoff  and  Boutleroff  with  Kate  Fox  (of  little
interest  now)  are  mentioned  further  on  (A.  S.  P.,  1901,  xi,  192).  For
further  details  in  the  history  of  spiritualism,  see  E.  Morselli,  who  gives
abundant  and  precise  details  (Psicologia  e  spiritismo,  Turin,  1908,  i,  12-27).

3Hare,  Experimental  investigations  of  the  spirit  manifestations  demon-
strating the  existence  of  spirits  and  their  communications  with  mortals,
Philadelphia,  1856.  Makan,  Modern  mysteries  explained  and  exposed,  Boston,
1855  (University).

28

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

cated  theories,  and  gave  explanations,  some  of  which  were  quite
correct,  and  others  subtly  erroneous.1

At  that  time,  about  1854,  the  phenomena  of  unconscious  mus-
cular action,  quite  established  today,  was  unknown.  The  credit
of  an  ingenious  and  rational  explanation  belongs  to  Chevreul.
He  was  supported  by  Babinet,  Faraday,  Carpenter,  and  by  nearly
all  physiologists  and  physicians.2

In  point  of  fact  the  study  of  table-turning  is  one  of  the  most
difficult  in  objective  metapsychics,  for  nothing  is  harder  than  to
determine  the  part  played  by  the  unconscious  in  the  oscillatory
movements  of  the  table.  Even  when  the  good  faith  of  the  experi-
menters is  not  in  doubt,  they  evidently  cannot  be  held  responsible
for  unconscious  and  involuntary  muscular  contractions.  There-
fore it  was  not  possible  at  that  time  to  prove  in  an  unimpeach-
able manner  that  movement  could  be  produced  without  muscular
contraction.

Similarly  for  the  raps.  An  eminent  physiologist,  M.  Schiff,
showed  in  his  own  person  that  a  crack,  comparable  to  the  raps
supposed  to  be  produced  by  spirits,  could  be  made  by  muscular
displacement  of  a  certain  tendon.  This  infantile  explanation
that  we  smile  at  today  was  well  received  by  scientists  who  prob-
ably had  never  heard  the  raps  which  cause  wood  to  vibrate  some-
times loudly,  sometimes  with  musical  rhythm,  and  have  nothing
in  common  with  the  snappings  of  a  tendon,  even  supposing  that
other  persons  than  the  illustrious  Florentine  physiologist  can
produce  them.    His  assertions  had  been  preceded  by  those  of

^ee  De  Mirville,  Pneumatologie  des  isprits  et  de  leurs  manifestations
diver ses  (fluidiques,  historiques,  etc.),  Paris,  first  edition,  1853,  fifth  edition,
5  vols.,  1 863- 1 864.  Gasparin,  Des  tables  tournantes,  du  surnaturel  en  giniral,
etc.,  Paris,  1854.  Thiery  (2)  Les  tables  tournantes  considkrees  an  point  de  vue
de  la  physique  generate,  Geneva,  Kessmann,  1855.  E.  Hornung,  Spiritualis-
tiche  Mittheilungen  aus  der  Geisterzvelt,  Berlin,  1859  and  1862.  C.  Kiesewetter,
Die  Entwickelungsgeschichte  des  Spiritismus  von  der  Urseit  bis  zur  Gegen-
wart,  Leipzig,  Spohr,  1893.  Leymarie,  Histoire  du  spiritisme,  compte  rendu  du
congres  spirite  de  1889,  Paris,  librarie  spirite,  1890,  pp.  3-45.  Malgras,
Les  pionniers  du  spiritisme,  Paris,  Lib.  des  sciences  psychologiques,  1906.

2Chevreul,  De  la  baguette  divinatoire,  du  pendule  explorateur,  et  des  tables
tournantes,  Paris,  1854.  Babinet,  Etudes  et  lectures  sur  les  sciences  d' obser-
vation, Paris,  1856.  Carpenter,  Principles  of  mental  physiology  and  psycho-
logical curiosities  of  spiritualism  (Pop.  Sci.  Monthly,  1877,  iii,  128).
Faraday,  The  table-turning  delusion,  Lancet,  1853.  Cumberland,  Fraudulent
aspects  of  spiritualism,  Journal  of  Mental  Science,  1881,  xxvii,  280-628.
Morin,  Le  magnktisme  et  les  sciences  occultes,  Paris,  1855.  See  also  on
Faraday's  work  the  recent  article  by  Fr.  Grunewald,  Faraday  iiber  d.  Tisch-
rucken,  Psych.  Stud.,  1920,  xlvii,  151,  295,  298.

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  29

Flint,1  another  distinguished  physiologist,  who,  after  observation
of  the  Fox  sisters,  attributed  the  raps  to  the  crackings  of  their
knee-joints.

Spiritualists  made  but  poor  replies  to  these  experimental  ob-
jections; they  ought,  as  was  done  later,  to  have  met  them  by
experiment.  Instead,  they  put  forward  theories  and  started  a
new  religion.

This  theorization  of  spiritism  was  mainly  due  to  L.  H.  D.
Rivail  (1803-1869),  a  doctor  of  medicine  scarcely  known  under
the  name  of  Rivail,  but  celebrated  under  the  pseudonym  of  Allan
Kardec.2

The  spiritist  theory  of  Allan  Kardec  is  simple  enough:  The
soul  does  not  die ;  after  death  it  becomes  a  spirit  and  seeks  to
manifest  through  certain  privileged  beings  (mediums),  capable
of  receiving  directions  and  impulses  from  spirits ;  the  spirit  seeks
reincarnation,  i.e.,  to  live  again  in  a  human  form,  of  which  it  is
the  soul;  all  human  beings  pass  through  successive  transmigra-
tory  phases,  as  Pythagoras  had  previously  taught;  their  "peri-
sprit"  can,  under  certain  exceptional  circumstances,  materialize;
they  know  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future.  Sometimes  they
materialize  and  can  act  on  matter ;  from  the  moral  point  of  view
we  should  let  ourselves  be  guided  by  good  spirits  who  lead  us
towards  right,  and  refuse  to  listen  to  bad  spirits  who  lead  us
into  error.

The  intellectual  energy  of  Allan  Kardec  deserves  unfeigned
admiration.  Despite  an  exaggerated  credulity  he  puts  his  faith
in  experiment,  and  rests  on  that,  so  that  his  work  is  not  only
a  far-reaching  theory  but  also  a  great  collection  of  facts.

This  theory  has,  however,  a  deplorably  weak  side.  The  whole
fabric  of  his  system  (which  is  that  of  spiritualism  in  general)
is  based  on  the  astonishing  hypothesis  that  mediums,  embodying
a  so-called  spirit,  are  never  mistaken,  and  that  automatic  writ-
ings, unless  prompted  by  evil  spirits,  reveal  verities  to  be  ac-

*A.  Flint,  On  the  discovery  of  the  source  of  the  Rochester  knockings,  and
on  sounds  produced  by  the  movements  of  joints  and  tendons,  Quart.  Journ.
Med.  Sci.,  New  York,  1869,  iii,  417-446.  Schiff,  Comptes  rendus  de  VAcad.
des  Sciences,  April  18,  1859.  Jobert,  Velpeau,  Cloquet,  discussion  on  the
same,  ibid.,  passim.

-Lirre  des  esprits,  Paris,  1857.  first  edition.  Livre  des  mediums,  Paris,
1 86 1 ,  first  edition.  More  than  thirty  editions  have  been  issued  of  these  cele-
brated books  which  have  been  translated  into  all  languages.  Allan  Kardec  was
«ilso  the  founder  of  the  Revue  Spirite,  now  in  its  thirtieth  year.

30

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

cepted.  If,  then,  we  were  to  follow  Kardec's  theory,  we  must
take  at  face-value  all  the  divagations  of  the  subconscious,  which,
with  some  exceptions,  show  a  very  primitive  and  puerile  intelli-
gence. To  build  a  doctrine  on  the  word  of  so-called  spirits  is  a
very  grave  error.  Nevertheless  no  influence  between  1847  and
1871  was  comparable  to  that  of  Allan  Kardec,  and  no  one  has
made  a  deeper  impress  on  metapsychic  science.

Spiritualism  was  defended  in  England  by  Robert  Dale  Owen
and  by  Alfred  Russel  Wallace.1  Wallace  was  the  man  whose
genius  anticipated  Darwin's  work;  his  books  bear  witness  to
his  courage,  for  indeed  much  courage  was  required  to  write
in  defence  of  a  science  that  had  so  little  scientific  character.

In  Germany  Zollner  stood  alone.  The  time  was  ripe  for  the
appearance  of  the  great  pioneer  of  metapsychic  science — Sir
William  Crookes.

4.  The  Scientific  Stage

Great  as  were  the  merits  and  the  courage  of  Crookes,  he  was
preceded  by  the  members  of  the  Dialectical  Society  of  London
who,  to  the  number  of  thirty-six,  met  at  the  suggestion  of  Ed-
munds, in  January,  1869,  to  study  mediumistic  phenomena  scien-
tifically. Among  them  was  the  engineer,  Cromwell  Varley,  the
distinguished  naturalist,  Russel  Wallace,  and  an  acute  lawyer,
Serjeant  Cox,  all  of  whom  seem  to  have  played  a  leading  part.
Well-known  scientists  such  as  Tyndall  and  Carpenter  declined
to  participate,  and  there  were  dissidents  among  the  commission
itself ;  notably  Lubbock  and  Huxley,  who  opposed  the  report  of
the  majority.2

The  facts  verified  by  the  Dialectical  Society  were  surprisingly
evidential:  they  did  not,  however,  secure  scientific  assent,  but
they  had  one  excellent  result — they  impelled  William  Crookes
to  study  the  question.  Fortunately  he  had  the  assistance  of  two
powerful  mediums  with  whom  to  experiment — Florence  Cook
and  D.  Dunglas  Home.

1R.  D.  Owen,  Footfalls  on  the  boundary  of  another  world,  Philadelphia.
1877;  The  debatable  land  between  this  world  and  the  next,  New  York  and
London,  1871.  A.  Russel  Wallace,  A  Defence  of  Modern  Spiritualism  (Fort-
nightly Review),  London,  1874,  xv,  630-657.  The  Scientific  Aspect  of  the
Supernatural,  London,  1866.  On  Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritualism,  London,
1873.

2Report  on  Spiritualism  by  the  Committee  of  the  London  Dialectical
Society,  together  with  the  evidence  oral  and  written,  and  a  selection  from  the
correspondence.    (Longmans,  London.  1871.)

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  31

Crookes  was  then  thirty-seven  years  old,  in  the  full  vigour  of
his  age  and  powers.  He  had  already  a  high  scientific  standing.
In  1863  he  had  discovered  a  new  metal — thallium — and  had  done
distinguished  work  in  spectroscopy,  astronomy,  and  meteorology.
He  was  editor  of  the  Chemical  News  and  of  the  Quarterly  Jour-
nal of  Science,  when  he  decided  to  study  Home's  remarkable
powers.

From  1869  to  1872  he  published  articles  contrasting  strongly
by  the  precision  of  their  language  and  severe  experimental
method  with  the  usual  style  of  spiritualist  publications.  It  was
the  beginning  of  the  scientific  period.  "I  do  not  say  that  these
things  are  possible.   I  say  that  they  exist,"  said  Crookes.1

The  idolatry  of  current  ideas  was  so  dominant  at  that  time
that  no  pains  were  taken  either  to  verify  or  to  refute  Crookes's
statements.  Men  were  content  to  ridicule  them,  and  I  avow
with  shame  that  I  was  among  the  wilfully  blind.  Instead  of
admiring  the  heroism  of  a  recognized  man  of  science  who  dared
then  in  1872  to  say  that  there  really  are  phantoms  that  can  be  pho-
tographed and  whose  heartbeats  can  be  heard,  I  laughed.

This  courage  had,  however,  no  immediate  or  considerable
effect;  it  is  only  today  that  Crooke's  work  is  really  understood.
It  is  still  the  foundation  of  objective  metapsychics,  a  block  of
granite  that  no  criticism  has  been  able  to  touch.  At  the  close  of
a  laborious  and  distinguished  life  he  said,  "I  have  nothing  to
withdraw  of  all  I  have  borne  witness  to."

Henceforward  spiritualists  will  know  that  experiment  is  the
path  of  progress,  rather  than  religious  or  mystical  speculation.
The  whole  subject  should  now  be  an  experimental  science,  scep-
tical of  theories  and  as  exact  on  its  own  lines  as  chemistry,
physics,  or  physiology.

Animal  magnetism  has  passed  through  a  similar  evolutionary
stage.  Since  Puysegur,  Deleuze,  and  Du  Potet  it  has  made  no
progress.  James  Braid  of  Manchester,  by  calling  it  hypnotism
did  not  change  its  mystical  aspect  nor  its  unfortunate  association
with  medicine.   The  result  was  that  the  doctors  and  physiologists

*Many  of  his  writings  are  polemical ;  I  will  only  cite  the  following :
Experimental  investigations  on  psychic  force,  London,  Gilman,  1871.  Re-
searches on  the  phenomena  of  spiritualism,  London,  Burns,  1894.  On
Psychical  Research,  Report  Smithsonian  Institution,  Washington,  1898-1899-
pp.  185-205.  Psychic  force  and  modern  spiritualism,  A  reply  to  the  Quarterly
Review  and  other  critics,  London,  1872.

32

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

of  1875  gave  little  more  credence  to  it  than  to  the  materializations
of  Katie  King.1

In  1875,  while  still  a  student,  I  was  able  to  prove  that  we  are
here  concerned  with  a  phenomenon  of  normal  physiology;  that
the  intelligence  in  this  induced  state  remains  intact  and  is  some-
times super-excited,  and  that  there  is  no  need  to  imagine  any
magical  or  magnetic  action.  Some  years  later  I  gave  the  first
examples  of  duplicated  personalities,  hinted  at  by  Philips  and
Azam.2  These  changes  of  personality  throw  much  light  on  so-
called  spiritualist  phenomena.

Nothing  that  I  said  in  my  article  of  1875  was  entirely  new;
the  old  magnetizers  had  seen  the  same  facts.  So  also  when
Crookes  established  the  reality  of  phantoms,  he  said  scarcely  any-
thing that  had  not  already  been  stated  by  spiritualists.  The
novelty  consisted  in  rigorous  application  of  experimental  method
to  phenomena  till  then  imperfectly  verified  and  only  partially
studied,  and  therefore  given  no  place  in  science.

Following  on  my  article  many  experiments  were  widely  made,
and  animal  magnetism  ceased  to  be  an  occult  science.3

The  efforts  of  those  who  study  metapsychics  should  now  be
directed  to  bringing  this  science  out  of  the  category  of  the  occult,
as  animal  magnetism  has  been  brought.

Another  noteworthy  event,  as  important  as  Crookes's  work,  was
also  of  British  origin.   The  Society  for  Psychical  Research4  was

XJ.  Braid,  Neurypnology,  or  the  rationale  of  nervous  sleep  considered  in
relation  with  animal  magnetism.  Illustrated  by  numerous  cases  of  its  suc-
cessful application  in  the  relief  and  cure  of  diseases,  London,  Churchill,  1843.
New  edition,  1899.  Power  of  the  mind  upon  the  body,  London,  1846.  Trans-
lated into  French  and  German.

2Ch.  Richet,  Du  somnambulisme  provoque.  Joum.  de  I'anat.  et  de  la
physiologie,  1875,  xi,  348-378.  Revue  philosophique,  1880,  x,  337-384-
A.  F.  pour  I'avancement  des  sciences,  Reims,  1881,  ix,  50-60.  Azam,  Le
dedoublement  de  la  personnalite.    Rev.  scientif.,  1890,  xlvi,  136-141.

8Heidenhain,  Zur  Kritik  hypnotischer  Untersuchungen.  Breslau  aertztl.
Zeitschrift,  1880,  52-55,  and  Revue  scient.,  1880,  xviii,  1187-1190.  Chambard,
art.  Somnambulisme  du  Diet,  encycl.  des  Sc.  Medicales.

I  need  not  here  mention  the  observations  of  Charcot  and  Bernheim,  both
subsequent  to  my  article  of  1875,  and  manifestly  prompted  by  it  (1878-1885).
The  very  interesting  history  of  suggestion  does  not  pertain  to  metapsychics.

The  complete  bibliography  up  to  1902  will  be  found  in  the  article  Hypno-
tism, in  the  Index  Catalogue  (2),  1902,  vii,  743-766.  (See  also  Morselli,
//  magnetismo  animale,  la  fascinazione,  gli  stati  hypnotici,  second  edition,
Turin,  1886.)

*The  presidents  of  this  society  have  been  Henry  Sidgwick,  1882-84-92;
Balfour  Stewart,   1885-87;   A.  J.  Balfour,   1893;  William  James,  1894-95;

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  33

founded  by  the  persevering  efforts  of  E.  Gurney  and  F.  W.  H.
Myers.  A  group  of  eminent  persons  drew  together  to  make
investigations  in  the  despised  region  of  occultism,  in  order  to
discover  by  rigorous  scientific  method  the  truths  underlying  these
strange  facts.  Thence  has  grown  a  colossal  assemblage  of  facts,
experiments,  and  theories  that  has  furnished  data  for  the  meta-
psychic  science  of  today.

This  scientific  reform  was  not  limited  to  England.  In  France
a  similar  effort  was  made,  following  the  example  of  Gurney  and
Myers,  though  with  lesser  resources  and  fewer  adherents.  With
the  help  of  Th.  Ribot  and  L.  Marillier  the  Socicte  de  psychologie
physiologique  was  founded.  Its  existence  was  brief,  for  it  aimed
at  arousing  interest  in  metapsychic  research  among  psychologists,
physiologists,  and  physicians.  They  declined  to  take  it  seriously.
I  then,  with  Dariex,  founded  the  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques
(1890-1920),  C.  de  Vesme  subsequently  becoming  the  zealous
editor.  This  is  now  replaced  by  the  Revue  Metapsychique  di-
rected by  Geley,  holding  a  just  mean  between  the  credulity  of
the  spiritualist  publications  and  the  blind  ignorance  of  the  jour-
nals of  official  psychology.

However,  important  as  are  the  psychical  societies,  and  useful
as  are  their  publications,  their  value  still  depends  on  experimental
research  by  single  individuals.  There  can  be  no  psychical  re-
search without  a  medium.  The  function  of  such  societies  is  to
prevent  the  powers  of  remarkable  mediums  being  lost  to  science
in  unmethodical  seances  held  without  rigorous  supervision.

Between  1885  and  1920  there  were  many  powerful  mediums:
Slade,  Eglinton,  Stainton  Moses,  Eusapia,  Mme.  d'Esperance,
Mrs.  Thomson,  Marthe  Beraud,  Stanislawa  Tomczyk,  Miss  Gol-
igher,  and  Mrs.  Leonard ;  but  if  I  had  to  cite  only  two  out  of
these,  I  should  take  Mrs.  Piper  for  subjective,  and  Eusapia  Pala-
dino  for  objective  phenomena.

William  Crookes,  1896-99;  F.  W.  H.  Myers,  1900;  Oliver  Lodge,  1901-03;  Sir
William  Barrett,  1904;  Charles  Richet,  1905;  G.  Balfour,  1906-07;  Mrs.  H.
Sidgwick,  1908-09;  A.  Arthur  Smith,  191 0;  Andrew  Lang,  191 1;  Carpenter,
1 91 2;  H.  Bergson,  1913;  Schiller,  19 14  J  Gilbert  Murray,  191 5;  Professor
Jacks,  191 7;  Lord  Rayleigh,  191 9;  W.  McDougall,  1921.

The  Proceedings  published  by  Triibner  &  Co.  form  twenty-eight  volumes,
to  which  must  be  added  the  Journal  (1884- 1920),  printed  for  private  circu-
lation. A  very  good  index  appeared  in  1904,  giving  the  chief  cases  referred
to  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  and  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American
S.  P.  R.   The  headquarters  of  the  S.  P.  R.  are  at  20  Hanover  Square.

34

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Mrs.  Piper,  of  Boston,  studied  with  extraordinary  patience  by
William  James,  and  afterwards  by  R.  Hodgson,  and  then  with
equal  perseverance  by  Hyslop,  and  also  by  F.  Myers,  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  and  Sir  William  Barrett,  has  powers  of  clairvoyance  and
cryptesthesia  probably  greater  than  any  before  observed.  She
tells  those  who  visit  her,  at  once,  and  almost  without  hesitation,
the  names  of  their  relatives,  with  episodes  in  their  lives,  unknown
to  her  visitor,  that  can  be  verified  only  after  long  and  painstaking
enquiry.

If  there  were  no  other  medium  in  the  world  but  Mrs.  Piper
that  would  be  sufficient  to  establish  scientifically  the  facts  of  crypt-
esthesia.

Eusapia  Paladino1  has  been  studied  hundreds  of  times  by  the
leading  scientific  men  of  Europe.  Schiaparelli,  Porro,  AksakofT,
G.  Finzi,  A.  and  F.  Myers,  O.  Lodge,  E.  Feilding,  Lombroso,  A.
de  Rochas,  Ochorowicz,  J.  Maxwell,  A.  de  Schrenck-Notzing,  C.
Flammarion,  Bottazzi,  Morselli,  Foa,  Sabatier,  A.  de  Watteville,
A.  de  Gramont,  Carrington,  and  many  more  have  all  verified  with
her  the  reality  of  movements  without  contact  and  materializations.

Even  if  there  were  no  other  medium  than  Eusapia  in  the  world,
her  manifestations  would  suffice  to  establish  scientifically  the
reality  of  telekinesis  and  ectoplasmic  forms.

Both  Mrs.  Piper  and  Eusapia  have  always  showed  complete
readiness  to  comply  with  scientific  tests,  accepting  all  control
without  taking  offence.  It  is  mainly  through  them  that  the
development  of  metapsychic  science  in  recent  years  has  been
possible.  Scientific  men  of  the  future  should  recognize  with
gratitude  the  debt  they  owe  to  them  and  to  their  predecessors,
D.  D.  Home  and  Florence  Cook.

More  recent  experiments  with  Marthe  Beraud,  Stanislawa
Tomczyk,  and  Miss  Goligher  have  opened  wide  possibilities  be-
fore objective  metapsychics.

Thus  metapsychics  has  acquired  the  right  to  be  held  a  separate
science  under  that  name,  differentiated  from  hypnotism  on  the
one  hand  and  from  spiritualism  on  the  other.  I  gave  it  this  name
and  made  this  claim  in  1905.  Hypnotism  is  a  nearly  normal
accompaniment  in  animal  magnetism;  it  is  an  induced  mental
state  such  that  normal  consciousness  is  modified  and  transformed,

1The  complete  bibliography  of  publications  relating  to  Eusapia  has  been
given  by  Morselli  under  the  suggestive  title  of  Bibliografia  Paladiniana,  in  a
remarkable  book,  Psicologia  e  spiritismo,  Turin,  Bona,  1908,  134-170.

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  35

and  new  phases  of  consciousness,  sometimes  multiple,  appear
while  the  normal  consciousness  is  asleep.  But  hypnotism  still
belongs  to  psychology,  so  that  somnambulism  only  pertains  to
metapsychics  on  the  emergence  of  faculties  of  cognition  which
do  not  exist  at  all  in  the  normal  state.  To  these  faculties  I  have
given  the  name  of  cryptesthesia.

It  is  in  no  way  doubtful  that  cryptesthesia  is  developed  by
means  of  hypnotism,  magnetism,  and  somnambulism,  but  meta-
psychics is  concerned  with  hypnotism  only  through  its  intensi-
fication of  cryptesthesia.

At  the  other  pole  of  the  so-called  occult  sciences  is  spiritualism ;
and  here  the  facts  must  be  dissociated  from  theories.  Spiritual-
ism, according  to  the  formula  of  Allan  Kardec  and  others,  is  a
theory  leading  to  a  religion;  but  this  takes  us  very  far  beyond
science.  Not  that  metapsychics  should  abjure  all  theory;  no
science,  however  young,  can  dispense  altogether  with  theories,
even  hypothetical  theories,  but  theory  must  always  be  subordinate
to  the  facts;  it  must  never  dominate  them  and  look  on  them  as
accessory  to  a  religion.  This  was  what  the  founders  of  meta-
psychic  science — Gurney,  Myers,  and  Crookes — endeavoured  to
achieve.

Neither  the  magnetizers  nor  the  spiritualists  should  be  con-
temned. That  would  be  a  grave  injustice.  They  carried  out
laborious  investigations  that  are  the  foundation  of  metapsychics,
disregarding  ridicule,  hostility,  and  the  rejection  of  their  work
by  official  science.

But  we  have  reached  a  new  stage.  It  is  no  longer  admissible
that  a  new  medium  should  be  developed  by  a  small  circle  without
the  methods  employed  in  all  sciences — scales,  photography,  cine-
matography, and  graphic  diagrams.  Similarly,  rigorous  and
exhaustive  enquiry,  such  as  is  carried  out  by  the  S.  P.  R.,  is
indispensable  for  all  subjective  phenomena.  Complete  certitude
is  required,  half-certitudes  will  not  do.

In  fine,  modern  metapsychics  should  be  limited  on  the  subjective
side  to  the  psychological  phenomena  that  conscious  human  intelli-
gence, however  keen,  is  incapable  of  producing;  and  on  the  objec-
tive side  to  material  facts  produced  apparently  by  intelligent  causes
that  the  known  and  classified  natural  forces  (light,  heat,  elec-
tricity, gravitation,  and  mechanical  power)  are  unable  to  explain.

In  this  brief  historical  summary  I  have  not  been  able  to  indi-
cate the  work  that  has  been  done.    Its  bibliography  is  already

36

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

enormous.  I  should  like,  however,  to  indicate,  to  those  who  wish
to  study  the  spiritualism,  the  occultisms,  and  the  metapsychics
of  the  half  century  that  has  now  elapsed,  the  chief  works  dealing
with  the  subject,  all  of  them  useful  and  some  indispensable.  Only
leading  works  are  here  mentioned:

Aksakoff,  Animismus  nnd  Spiritismus,  Versuch  einer  Kritischen
Priifung  der  mediumnistischen  Phaenomene,  Leipzig,  Mutze,
1890,  4th  ed.,  in  two  vols.,  1902,  trad,  fr.,  Libr.  des  sciences
psychologiques,  1895.  E.  Bozzano,  Ipotesi  spiritica  e  teorie  scion-
tifiche,  Genova,  Donath,  1903.  A.  Brofferio,  Per  lo  spiritismo,  1st
ed.,  Milano,  Briola,  1892,  3d  ed.,  Torino,  Bocca,  1903,  trad,  all.,
Berlin,  1894.  G.  Delanne,  Le  spiritisme  devant  la  science,  Paris,
Chanuel,  1895,  5th  ed.,  1897,  Les  apparitions  materialisees,
Paris,  Leymarie,  2  vols.,  8vo,  1911.  Recherches  sur  la  medi-
umnite,  Paris,  1896.  Fr.  Myers,  The  human  personality  and
its  survival  to  bodily  death,  London,  Longmans,  2  vols.,  8vo,
1902.  Oliver  Lodge,  La  survivancc  humaine.  A.  de  Rochas,
Lextcriorisation  de  la  motricitc,  Paris,  Chanuel,  1896,  4th  ed.,
1906.  Lextcriorisation  de  la  scnsibilitc,  Paris,  Chanuel,  1895,
5th  ed.,  Chacornac,  1905.  Les  etats  profonds  de  Vhypnose,  Paris,
Chacornac,  1892.  Les  etats  superacids  de  Vhypnose,  Paris,  Cha-
cornac, 1902.  J.  Maxwell,  Les  phenomenes  psychiques.  Re-
cherches, observations,  mcthodes,  Paris,  Alcan,  1905,  Metapsy-
chical  Phenomena,  London,  Duckworth,  1905.  E.  Boirac,
Lavenir  des  sciences  psychiques,  Paris,  Alcan,  1907.  La  psycho-
logic inconnue,  Paris,  Alcan,  1915.  Carmelo  Samona,  Psiche
misteriosa:  i  fenomeni  detti  spiriticci,  Palermo,  Reber,  1910.
E.  Flammarion,  Les  forces  naturelles  inconnues,  Flammarion,
Paris,  1907.  Linconnu  et  les  probllmes  psychiques,  Paris,  Flam-
marion, 1900.  La  mort  et  son  mystlre,  Paris,  1920.  Morton
Prince,  A  dissociation  of  personality,  Boston,  Turner,  1906.  Z611-
ner,  Wisscnschaff tliche  Abhandlungen,  part  iii,  Die  transcenden-
tale  Physik  und  die  sogenanntc  Philosophic,  Leipzig,  Stachmann,
1878-1879.  J.  H.  Hyslop,  Science  and  a  future  life,  Boston,
Turner,  1905.  Innocenzo  Calderone,  La  Rincamazione,  Milano,
edit.  Veritas,  1913.  Stainton  Moses  (Oxon),  The  higher  aspects
of  spiritualism,  London,  1880.  Spirit  identity,  London  (Spirit-
ualist alliance,  1902).  G.  Geley,  De  Vinconscient  au  conscient,
Paris,  Alcan,  1919.  Letre  subconscient,  4th  ed.,  Paris,  1919.
J.  Grasset,  Loccultisme  hier  et  aujourd'hui,  Montpellier,  Coulet,

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  37

1908.  Osty,  Lucidite  et  intuition,  Paris,  Alcan,  s.  d.  Florence
Marryat,  There  is  no  death,  Leipzig,  Heinemann,  1892.  Chev-
reul,  On  nc  meurt  pas,  Paris,  1914.  S.  Ottolenghi,  La  sugges-
tion a  le  facolta  psichiche  occult  e  in  rap  port  o  alia  pratica  legale
e  medico  forense,  Torinb,  Bocca,  1900.  Amiral  Usborne  Moore,
Glimpses  of  the  next  state,  London,  Watts  &  Co.,  1912.  Du  Prel,
Das  Rathsel  des  Menschen,  Leipzig,  Mutze,  1885,  trad,  it.,  Mi-
lano,  Galli,  1894.  Monistische  Seeleneehre;  ein  Beitrag  auf  Lo-
sung  des  Menschenrdthsels,  Leipzig,  Giinther,  1888.  L.  Denis,
Apres  la  mort,  expose  de  la  doctrine  des  esprits,  dern.  ed.,
1918,  Paris,  Leymarie,  trad,  ital.,  Milano,  1914.  Fr.  Podmore,
Modern  spiritualism ;  a  history  and  a  criticism,  London,  Methuen,
2  vols.,  1902.  Wahu,  Le  spiritisme  dans  lantiquitc,  et  dans  les
temps  modernes,  Paris,  Leymarie,  2  vols.,  1885.  Schrenck-Notz-
ing,  Physikalische  Phaenomenc  des  Mcdhimnismus,  Munich,  Rein-
hardt,  1920.

Some  idea  of  the  volume  of  metapsychic  literature  may  be
formed  by  adding  to  this  short  bibliography,  which  I  shall  have
occasion  to  supplement  in  the  course  of  the  present  work,  the
important  articles  published  in  Light  (London),  in  the  Banner
of  Light  (Boston),  The  Religio-philosophical  Journal  (New
York),  the  Harbinger  of  Light  (Melbourne),  the  Revue  Spirite,
Paris,  Revue  scientifique  et  morale  du  spiritisme  (Paris),  the
Luce  e  Ombra  (Milan,  a  noteworthy  record),  the  Zeitschrift  fiir
Spiritismus  (Leipzig),  and  Psychische  Studien  (Berlin).

I  cannot  mention  all  the  books  that  have  appeared  since  1920
on  metapsychics ;  it  will  suffice  to  quote  the  following :

C.  Flammarion,  Apres  la  mort,  Paris,  1922.  G.  Vourniquel,
Les  tcmoins  posthumes,  Paris,  Leymarie,  1921.  M.  Maeterlinck,
Le  Grand  Secret,  Paris,  Fasquelle,  1921.  Freud,  Introduction  to
Psycho-analysis.  Oesterreich,  Der  Occultismus  im  Modernen
Weltbild,  Sibyllen-Verlag,  Dresden,  1921.  P.  Heuze,  Les  Morts
Vivent  Us?  Renaissance,  Paris,  1922.  F.  Heslop,  Further  Mes-
sages Across  the  Borderline,  Taylor,  London,  1921.  L.  Farigoule,
La  vision  extra-retinienne  et  le  sens  paroptique,  Nouvelle  Revue,

1920.  Tischer,  Monismus  und  Occultismus,  Mutze,  Leipzig,

1921.  Tassacher,  Occultismus  und  Spiritismus,  Stuttgart,  1921.
Lewis  Baylis  Paton,  Spiritism  and  the  Cult  of  the  Dead  in  An-
tiquity, London,  Hodder  &  Stoughton,  1921.    Evelyn  Underhill,

38

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

The  Life  of  the  Spirit  and  the  Life  of  the  Day,  London,  Methuen,
1921.  Walter  F.  Prince,  Spiritualism  and  the  New  Psychology,
American  S.  P.  R.,  1922,  p.  72.  J.  Maxwell,  Magie,  Paris,  Flam-
marion,  1921.

In  most  of  these,  Flammarion's  fine  work  excepted,  there  is
much  more  nebulosity  than  precision.  Those  who  wish  to  be
informed  of  new  facts  will  find  them  in  the  numerous  reviews
that  devote  themselves  specially  to  this  subject.

4.  Mediums

This  term  "medium,"  which  signifies  an  intermediary  between
this  world  of  the  living  and  the  world  of  the  dead,  is  execrable,
but  too  firmly  fixed  to  be  abandoned.  In  the  course  of  this  book
many  details  will  be  found  which  have  not  found  a  place  in  this
chapter  which  is  necessarily  abbreviated  to  avoid  repetition  else-
where. The  history  of  mediums  covers  nearly  all  metapsychics.
There  is  a  great  difference  between  powerful  mediums  such  as
Home,  Eusapia,  Stainton  Moses,  and  Florence  Cook,  who  mani-
fest surprising  objective  and  energetic  phenomena,  and  those
who  show  only  subjective  phenomena.  It  is  therefore  necessary
to  place  physical  mediums  who  show  telekinesis  and  materializa-
tions in  a  class  by  themselves.

Such  mediums  are  very  rare;  even  those  who  can  give  raps
without  contact  are  not  common.

Their  psycho-physiology  does  not  tell  us  much;  it  is  not  pos-
sible to  say  whether  they  are  more  or  less  intelligent  than  average
persons.  Nothing  distinguishes  them  from  others,  except  their
strange  power  of  producing  materializations  (hands  and  shapes
of  persons),  and  movements  of  matter  (noises,  raps,  voices,  and
scents)  in  spiritist  seances.

The  extreme  rarity  of  telekinetic  powers  is  not  a  matter  for
suspicion;  we  must  perforce  admit  that  all  men  are  not  alike.
Some  children  show  at  a  very  early  age  astounding  powers  of
memory  and  calculation.  It  is  easy  to  admit  that  in  the  mass  of
humanity  there  must  be  exceptional  individuals.

Cryptesthetic  are  much  more  common  than  the  telekinetic  fac-
ulties. Cryptesthesia  of  all  degrees  is  so  widespread,  and  tele-
kinesis is  so  rare,  that  the  persons  showing  the  latter  powers
cannot  be  classed  along  with  those  showing  the  former.

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  39

We  shall  therefore  class  mediums  in  two  distinct  groups:

1.  Mediums  showing  physical  phenomena.

2.  Mediums  showing  psychical  phenomena.

Telekinesis  is  sharply  defined;  materialization  still  more  so,
but  the  elementary  form  of  telekinesis,  rapping,  which  is  a
sonorous  vibration  (without  contact)  in  the  wood  of  a  table  or,
a  chair,  without  the  power  of  raising  objects  or  producing  ma-
terializations, is  not  infrequent;  but  even  here  it  is  difficult  to
draw  a  precise  line  dividing  those  mediums  who  can  and  those
who  cannot  produce  raps,  for  very  slight  noises  are  often  heard
when  a  medium  is  scarcely  touching  the  table,  noises  so  slight
that  one  can  hardly  be  sure  of  them.

It  would  be  desirable  here  to  touch  on  the  biography  of  the
great  mediums  noted  for  materializations  and  telekinesis,  but
we  must  defer  this  to  the  chapter  on  materializations.

To  mention  Home,  Florence  Cook,  Stainton  Moses,  Eusapia,
Mme.  d'Esperance,  Eglinton,  Linda  Gazzera,  Slade,  Marthe  Be-
raud,  Miss  Goligher,  and  Stanislawa  Tomczyk  is  to  name  nearly
all;  it  is  obvious  that  they  are  but  few.  The  number  of  those
who  give  raps  is  very  much  larger,  but  I  have  no  statistics  regard-
ing them.

Unfortunately  physical  mediums  often  misuse  their  powers;
they  think  to  enrich  themselves  and  give  public  seances  for  profit.
The  Fox  sisters,  the  Davenport  brothers,  Eglinton,  and  Slade
all  did  this,  and  from  thence  to  fraud  is  but  a  step  that  has  often
been  taken,  so  that  professional  mediums  of  this  class  are  always
to  be  looked  upon  with  suspicion  and  the  most  rigid  precautions
must  always  be  taken  against  trickery.  Indeed  this  is  always
necessary,  even  when  there  is  no  possible  suspicion  of  conscious
fraud.

There  are,  however,  excellent  reasons  for  not  refusing  to
experiment  with  leading  professional  mediums.

1.  At  the  outset  of  their  careers  the  phenomena  produced  must
certainly  have  been  genuine.  Leah,  Margaret,  and  Kate  Fox
would  not  of  set  purpose  have  invented  the  Hydesville  rappings
had  they  not  originally  had  genuine  ones.

2.  Mediums  like  Mme.  d'Esperance,  Florence  Cook,  Linda,  Eu-
sapia, and  Marthe  Beraud  had  never  had  a  lesson  in  legerdemain
or  illusionism.  They  experienced  some  strange  phenomena  and
almost  in  spite  of  themselves  followed  the  path  opened  before
them.    Only  in  order  to  discredit  the  facts  has  extraordinary

40

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

skill  been  attributed  to  them,  a  skill  greater  than  that  of  expert
conjurers  like  Robert  Houdin,  Hamilton,  and  Maskelyne,  suffi-
cient to  deceive  the  most  alert  men  of  science  in  a  way  that
Houdin,  Hamilton,  or  Maskelyne  have  not  been  able  to  imitate.

As  to  mediums  producing  psychical  effects  only,  every  shade
between  them  and  normal  persons  is  observable.  It  would  even
seem  that  quite  normal  persons  once  in  their  lives  may  have
some  passing  lucidity;  but  not  to  depart  overmuch  from  usual
language  we  will  provisionally  apply  the  term  "medium"  only
to  those  persons  who  consider  themselves  to  be  in  relations  with
extraneous  personalities.

Conformably  to  this  we  have  defined  metapsychics  as  the  science
whose  subject-matter  is  phenomena  which  seem  to  arise  from
an  intelligence  other  than  the  human  intelligence.  Mediums  are
therefore  those  persons  who,  in  partial  or  total  unconsciousness,
speak  words,  perform  actions,  and  make  gestures  that  seem  not
to  be  under  control  of  their  will  and  to  be  independent  of  their
intelligence.  Nevertheless  these  unconscious  phenomena  show
intelligence  and  system,  and  are  sometimes  most  aptly  co-ordi-
nated. Therefore  the  first  thing  to  be  discovered  is  whether  they
are  due  to  a  human  or  to  a  super-human  intelligence.

To  take  a  well-known  and  concrete  example:  Helen  Smith
writes  automatically  long  messages  that  she  attributes  to  Marie
Antoinette.  Is  this  done  by  Helen  Smith's  own  intelligence,  or
by  another?  Is  it  Marie  Antoinette  or  some  other  that  governs
Helen  Smith's  words,  gestures,  and  writing?

We  shall  discuss  these  two  hypotheses  later  on.  For  the  pres-
ent we  shall  show  that  there  are  gradual,  almost  indescribable
gradations  between  these  so-called  mediums  and  normal  persons.
It  is  not  only  difficult,  but  impossible,  to  draw  a  line  of  demarca-
tion ;  whereas  between  physical  mediums  and  normal  persons  there
is  the  chasm  of  an  essential  difference.

The  grades  of  subjective  mediumship  may  be  classified  as
follows:

(A)  The  first  departure  from  the  normal  consists  in  slight,
almost  imperceptible,  muscular  movements,  sufficient,  however,
to  enable  an  experienced  person  to  recognize  unconscious  sensa-
tion and  will  in  the  subject  under  observation.  There  are  cer-
tainly more  than  fifty  per  cent,  of  normal  persons  who  reveal
their  thoughts  by  slight  muscular  tremors  of  which  they  are
unconscious,  as  in  the  "willing  game,"  which  sometimes  gives

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  41

surprising  results.  These  involuntary  movements  are  so  fre-
quently and  clearly  observable  that  they  belong  to  normal  physi-
ology and  not  to  metapsychics.

(B)  The  second  degree  consists  in  the  creation  of  a  new  per-
sonality by  hypnotism.  The  normal  personality  reappears  on
awaking,  but  under  hypnotism  and  hypnotic  suggestion  a  new
personality  appears  which  is  evidently  factitious,  since  the  mag-
netizer  imposes  it  at  will  and  can  maintain  it  by  verbal  suggestion.
This  artificial  and  transitory  personality  also  belongs  to  normal
official  psychology.

(C)  The  third  degree  is  a  mediumistic  state,  i.e.,  a  new  per-
sonality is  created  by  auto-suggestion.  Hypnotism  acts  through
hetero-suggestion ;  mediumship  by  auto-suggestion.  There  is
very  little  difference  between  the  personality  of  Marie  Antoinette
as  assumed  by  Helen  Smith  of  her  own  accord,  and  the  same
personality  as  aroused  by  suggestion  of  a  hypnotizer.

Automatic  writings  belong  to  this  group  and  there  is  no  ground
for  giving  this  important  psychological  manifestation  a  place  in
metapsychics,  at  least  in  regard  to  the  mere  fact  of  writing,  for
in  most  of  these  cases  the  need  for  the  hypothesis  of  an  extraneous
non-human  intelligence  does  not  arise.  Since  I  can  suggest  to
Alice  that  she  is  Marie  Antoinette  and  she  enacts  admirably  the
part  of  the  unhappy  queen,  why  should  I  suppose  that  the  Queen
of  France  is  incarnate  in  Helen  Smith  when  she  assumes  that
character  of  her  own  motion  and  plays  it  equally  well?  The
supposition  is  gratuitous  and  infantile.

(D)  The  fourth  step  is  when  the  new  personality  shows
cryptesthesia  and  really  seems  to  know  things  unknown  to  the
medium,  and  even  things  that  the  secondary  personality  alone
could  be  aware  of,  as  in  the  case  of  Mrs.  Piper  incarnating
Phinuit  or  George  Pelham.

The  "guide"  of  the  medium  (i.e.,  the  new  personality  that  ap-
pears) then  seems  to  be  a  genuinely  extraneous  intelligence.
These  phenomena  can  rightly  be  called  metapsychic  because,
taking  them  all  in  all,  the  normal  intelligence  of  the  sensitive  is
quite  insufficient  to  explain  the  strange  and  potent  cryptesthesia.
I  need  scarcely  remark  that  the  notion  that  an  extraneous  force
is  in  play  is  only  a  hypothesis.

(E)  Perhaps  it  would  be  as  well  to  reserve  the  name  "medium"
for  those  who  produce  mechanical  movement  without  contact  and
materializations.    This  is  the  fifth  degree;  in  which  levitations.

42

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

telekinesis,  hallucinations  pertaining  to  the  spiritist  trance  (akin
to  the  hypnotic  trance)  and  materializations  appear  side  by  side
with  cryptesthesia.

There  is  still  nothing  to  prove  that  the  secondary  personalities
may  not  be  exclusively  human  and  due  to  modalities  of  human
intelligence;  whereas  the  physical  phenomena  show  something
really  new  and  metapsychic,  transcending  normal  psychology,
and  by  no  means  explicable  without  the  intervention  of  unknown
powers  that  appear  to  be  intelligent.

As  this  book  claims  to  be  a  working  treatise,  I  shall,  in  order
to  give  clear  ideas,  instance  some  examples  of  transition  from  the
normal  to  the  mediumistic  state.

First  degree.  Antoinette  is  not  hypnotizable ;  but  if  I  take  her
hand  and  ask  her  to  think  of  some  object  that  she  has  hidden
in  a  corner  of  the  room,  she  is  much  astonished  when  I  discover
that  object,  guided  by  her  unconscious  movements.

Second  degree.  Alice  is  hypnotized.  If  I  suggest  that  she  is
an  old  general,  she  caricatures  an  old  general — coughs,  spits,
speaks  roughly,  swears,  calls  for  a  drink,  etc.  She  will  play  this
simple  farce  for  an  hour  at  a  time.

Third  degree.  Helen  Smith  has  become  Marie  Antoinette  by
auto-suggestion.  She  moves  with  dignity,  speaks  the  language,
and  reproduces  nearly  the  writing  and  spelling  of  the  queen.  In
perfect  good  faith  she  plays  this  role  for  weeks  or  months.

Mme.  Camus  puts  her  hand  on  the  table  and  feverishly  writes
long  phrases  automatically;  she  does  not  know  what  she  writes
and  talks  of  other  things  while  writing.  A  certain  Vincent  is
supposed  to  be  the  spirit-guide  of  these  commonplace  philosoph-
ical and  theosophical  dissertations.

Fourth  degree.  Mrs.  Piper  gradually  loses  her  normal  con-
sciousness ;  then  Phinuit,  or  George  Pelham,  Myers,  or  R.  Hodg-
son speak  through  her.  But  these  personalities,  though  probably
imaginary  and  arising  from  auto-suggestion,  have  astonishing
cryptesthetic  powers.  The  words  spoken  by  them  through  the
voice  of  Mrs.  Piper,  show  telepathy,  monitions,  premonitions,  and
all  kinds  of  lucidity,  so  that  rationalism  (which  is  itself  perhaps
an  error),  finds  the  greatest  difficulty  not  to  ascribe  the  almost
superhuman  intelligence  displayed  to  some  extraneous  source.

Mrs.  Leonard,  Mme.  Briffaut,  Stella,  and  the  Seeress  of  Pre-
vorst  are  all  mediums  of  this  kind.

Fifth  degree.    Eusapia  falls  into  a  trance  without  being  hyp-

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  43

notized.  Then  by  the  agency  of  John  King,  as  she  says,  she
moves  objects  without  touching  them ;  she  materializes  the  hands,
and  sometimes  the  head  of  John  King.  Other  phantoms  some-
times appear.  Home,  Mme.  d'Esperance,  Florence  Cook,  Stain-
ton  Moses,  Stanislawa  Tomczyk,  Miss  Goligher,  and  Marthe
Beraud  are  mediums  of  the  same  order.  Frequently  cryptesthesia
of  divers  kinds  appears  side  by  side  with  the  physical  and  me-
chanical results.  The  domination  by  an  extraneous  intelligence
seems  complete,  alike  by  the  cognition  of  things  unknown  to
the  medium  herself  and  by  the  abnormal  powers  over  matter.

Indeed  true  mediums  (of  the  physical  order)  are  often  sensi-
tives also ;  they  have  remarkable  cryptesthetic  faculties.  Stainton
Moses  and  Home  showed  this.  Eusapia  showed  only  mechanical
and  physical  phenomena,  Mrs.  Piper  only  psychological.

Without  drawing  any  inference,  it  must  be  admitted  as  a  fact
that  powerful  mediums  attribute  their  powers  to  a  "guide/'
whether  those  powers  be  mechanical,  objective,  or  subjective;  and
in  order  to  carry  out  successful  experiments,  it  is  necessary  to  act
as  though  this  guide  were  really  existent  and  incarnated  in  the
medium.  This  is  a  working  hypothesis  in  the  strictest  sense,
nearly  always  essential  to  the  production  of  the  phenomena.

Science,  it  has  been  said,  is  only  accuracy  of  language.  There-
fore we  ought  not  to  use  the  same  word  to  describe  persons  so
different  as  Eusapia  and  Mrs.  Piper.  We  might  call  those  who
give  physical  effects,  mediums;  those  who  show  cryptesthetic
effects  which  they  attribute  to  extraneous  forces,  sensitives ;  and
those  who  (without  cryptesthesia),  present,  by  automatic  writ-
ing, secondary  personalities  that  seem  spontaneous,  but  are  doubt-
less created  by  auto-suggestion,  automatists.

This  classification,  like  all  others,  is  arbitrary.  Sensitives  are
always  automatists  also,  though  the  converse  is  not  true.  Hun-
dreds of  cases  might  be  cited  of  automatic  writing  which  are  but
moderately  interesting  examples  of  released  subconsciousness,
destitute  of  cryptesthesia  and  lucidity,  and  in  no  way  noteworthy
except  for  the  extraordinary  powers  of  the  subconscious.

In  spite  of  my  strong  desire  to  refer  metapsychic  phenomena
as  far  as  possible  to  the  domain  of  normal  psychology,  I  do  not
wish  to  curtail  or  misrepresent  them  on  rationalist  grounds.  The
dominance  of  a  single  idea  and  the  state  of  automatism  induced
by  trance,  whether  hypnotic  or  spiritist,  creates  such  extraordi-
nary aptitudes  for  cryptesthesia  that  one  is  really  tempted  to

44

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

believe  in  an  extraneous  intelligence  in  such  cases  as  those  of
Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  Leonard,  and  Mrs.  Verrall.  This  question  will
not  be  discussed  here;  later  on  I  shall  treat  it  fearlessly.

Neither  sensitives,  nor  automatists,  nor  even  mediums  show
any  special  signs ;  they  are  like  other  people.  Age,  sex,  and  na-
tionality do  not  seem  to  influence  the  matter.

Hysteria  has  often  been  invoked;  but  unless  we  assign  an
unwarrantable  extension  to  this  morbid  state,  it  does  not  seem
favourable  to  the  phenomena.  Hysterics  are  often  hypnotizable,
but  so  are  most  people.  Mediums  are  more  or  less  neuropaths,
liable  to  headaches,  insomnia,  or  dyspepsia ;  but  this  signifies  very
little.  I  entirely  refuse  to  consider  them  morbid  persons  as  P.
Janet  is  too  disposed  to  do.  Certainly  they  show  some  dissocia-
tions of  consciousness ;  but  such  analogous  dissociations  with  par-
tial automatism  are  common  enough  among  artists,  men  of  sci-
ence, and  many  ordinary  individuals.

J.  Maxwell  has  insisted  on  a  certain  mark  in  the  iris  of  most
mediums,  and  it  might  be  worth  while  to  make  some  statistical
research  on  this ;  but  there  will  always  be  the  difficulty  of  know-
ing where  to  stop,  for  there  is  no  line  of  demarcation  possible
between  sensitives  and  automatists  on  the  one  hand  and  normal
persons  on  the  other.  One  automatist  does  nothing  but  trace
circles;  another  writes  incoherent  words;  a  third  will  write  con-
nected sentences;  a  fourth  composes  short  poems;  while  a  fifth
will  write  a  book  or  a  novel.  There  are  all  possible  degrees  in
automatism.  The  talents  of  the  unconscious  show  even  more
variety  than  those  of  consciousness.

Cryptesthesia  also  admits  of  many  gradations.  A  person  who
has  been  perfectly  normal  during  the  whole  of  a  long  life  may
one  day  see  a  veridical  apparition  or  hear  a  premonitory  voice.
He  cannot  be  called  "a  sensitive,"  though  he  has  been  such  for
a  few  minutes  or  seconds.  Persons  apparently  normal  look  into
the  crystal  and  after  a  short  time  perceive  dramatic  scenes  in  the
little  glass  sphere.  One  cannot  say  that  they  are  sensitives,  or
that  they  are  not;  but  here  also  there  is  no  need  to  invoke  an
external  agency,  even  to  explain  the  fact.

Even  great  sensitives  like  Mrs.  Piper  or  Stainton  Moses  have
no  distinguishing  physiological  characteristics.  These  privileged
persons  who,  according  to  spiritualist  ideas,  enter  into  communi-
cation with  the  dead,  do  not  show  any  other  physical  or  mental
superiority.   The  facility  with  which  their  consciousness  suffers

CONCERNING  METAPSYCHICS  IN  GENERAL  45

dissociation  indicates  a  certain  mental  instability,  and  their  re-
sponsibility while  in  a  state  of  trance  is  somewhat  diminished;
but  these  are  only  shades  of  character,  and  I  infer  that  apart
from  their  visions,  trances,  and  other  manifestations  they  are
much  as  other  people.

Their  sensitiveness  has  usually  been  discovered  by  chance.  It
would  be  very  interesting  to  work  out  the  details  of  the  origins
of  mediumship.  Every  prominent  case  would,  no  doubt,  show
very  different  points  of  departure,  but  never  that  they  have
become  mediums  of  set  purpose.  The  power  develops  spontane-
ously.

It  is  curious,  and  discouraging,  to  find  that  their  powers  do  not
increase.  They  arise  spontaneously,  no  one  knows  how  or  why.
If  the  fancy  takes  them,  so  to  speak,  they  simply  disappear ;  no
effort  can  retain  them.  "Katie  King"  left  Florence  Cook  and
Sir  William  Crookes,  merely  stating  that  she  must  leave  them.
My  regretted  and  learned  friend,  Dr.  Segard,  told  me  that  his
young  daughter  of  twelve  showed  remarkable  telekinetic  phe-
nomena (levitation  of  a  heavy  table,  raps,  movements  of  objects
without  contact)  for  three  days  only,  after  which  the  whole  power
vanished.  This  was  twenty-five  years  ago  and  the  lady  has  never
had  any  such  later  experiences.  Training  seems  inoperative;  I
am  even  inclined  to  think  that  our  efforts  to  regularize  the  phe-
nomena bring  more  disadvantages  than  advantages.  Hence  in
my  own  experiments  I  have  entirely  given  up  all  attempts  to
indicate  how  the  sensitive  or  the  medium  should  act.  A  medium
must  be  left  to  take  his  own  way;  our  influence,  if  we  have  any,
would  probably  be  unsatisfactory.  A  powerful  medium  is  a
very  delicate  instrument  of  whose  secret  springs  we  know  nothing,
and  clumsy  handling  may  easily  disorganize  its  working.  It  is
best  to  allow  the  phenomena  to  develop  in  their  own  way  without
any  attempts  at  guidance.  It  is  probably  a  great  mistake  to  try
to  educate  mediumship.

Why  is  this?  It  does  not  seem  to  me  that  we  can  necessarily
infer  the  intervention  of  an  external  intelligence.  Even  with
normal  children  and  youths  the  power  of  education  is,  perhaps
fortunately,  very  limited.

Mediums  have  not  hitherto  been  treated  with  justice;  they  have
been  slandered,  ridiculed,  and  vilified.  They  have  been  treated
as  animcu  viles  for  experiment.  When  their  faculties  faded  away
they  have  been  left  to  die  in  obscurity  and  want ;  when  rewarded

46  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

it  has  been  with  a  niggardly  hand,  giving  them  to  understand
that  they  are  only  instruments.  It  is  time  that  this  inhuman  treat-
ment should  cease.

If  by  any  chance  a  powerful  physical  medium  or  sensitive  were
discovered,  instead  of  leaving  such  a  one  to  the  curiosity  of  the
ignorant,  to  journalists,  and  to  ladies  who  consult  them  on  a
lost  dog  or  a  faithless  lover,  they  should  be  assured  of  liberal
board  and  lodging,  or  perhaps  more,  in  order  to  prevent  their
mediumship  being  degraded  by  base  necessities.  Mme.  Bisson
has  done  this  for  Marthe  Beraud ;  Lord  Dunraven  did  the  same
for  Home,  and  E.  Imoda  for  Linda.  In  short,  mediums  should
be  claimed  for  science — severe,  just,  and  generous  science — in-
stead of  allowing  their  wonderful  faculties  to  be  prostituted  by
childish  credulity  or  damaging  contempt.

At  the  same  time  there  should  be  no  relaxation  of  scientific
strictness,  without  demanding  astounding  experiments,  or  excur-
sions into  the  beyond.  We  must  resign  ourselves  to  earth-condi-
tions. Metapsychic  phenomena  should  be  treated  as  problems  of
pure  physiology.  Let  us  experiment  with  these  rare,  privileged,
and  wonderful  persons  and  remember  that  they  deserve  to  be
treated  with  all  respect,  but  also  that  they  must  never  be  trusted.

BOOK  II
Subjective  Metapsychics

CHAPTER  I

On  Subjective  Metapsychics  in  General

1.  The  Limits  of  Psychic  and  Metapsychic  Science

A  primary  difficulty  confronts  us,  for  as  soon  as  we  can  explain
any  phenomena  of  lucidity  by  extreme  acuteness  of  intelligence
or  by  systematic  treatment  of  the  subconscious,  it  is  clear  that
there  is  no  need  to  refer  it  to  metapsychics,  i.e.,  to  assume  un-
known faculties  or  the  intervention  of  external  intelligences.  It
will  suffice  to  say  that  it  is  only  the  effect  of  exceptional  human
acuteness.  We  are  therefore  bound  first  to  investigate  the  limits
to  human  intelligence.

This  is  exceedingly  difficult,  for  many  intellectual  phenomena
occur  quite  apart  from  consciousness;  and  these  have  belonged
to  normal  psychology  since  the  time  of  Leibnitz.  The  mind  can
work  without  the  assistance  of  consciousness ;  very  complex  intel-
lectual processes  take  place  unknown  to  us,  and  a  whole  world
of  ideas  vibrates  in  us  of  which  we  are  unconscious.  Probably
no  remembrance  of  the  past  is  completely  effaced;  consciously
we  forget  much,  but  memory  forgets  nothing;  the  mass  of  past
impressions  is  retained  almost  intact,  though  consciousness  of
them  has  vanished.  For  the  subconsciousness  wakes  and  works
side  by  side  with  sleeping  consciousness,  and  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  comparisons,  associations,  and  judgments  are  formed
in  which  the  conscious  self  takes  no  part.  The  importance  of
these  phenomena  of  the  subconscious  cannot  be  over-emphasized ;
but  as  everything  that  can  be  explained  by  normal  psychology
should  be  eliminated  from  metapsychics,  and  as  the  subconscious
work  of  the  mind  pertains  to  normal  psychology,  we  must  lay
down  and  always  remember  the  law — subconsciousness  is  compe-
tent to  do  everything  that  consciousness  can  do.

Our  senses  give  us  our  notions  of  things,  and  we  know  those
things  by  what  our  senses  bring  us — Nihil  est  in  intellectu  quod
non  prius  fuerit  in  sensu;  but  rearrangements  of  sensorial  data
may  make  our  notions  extremely  complex.    Thus  the  subcon-

49

50

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

scious  can  construct  poetry,  discourses,  drama,  and  mathematics—
everything  that  consciousness  can  construct.  Nevertheless  all
this  wealth  is  reconstructive;  intelligence,  whether  conscious  or
subconscious,  can  never  furnish  more  than  it  has  been  given  unless
we  suppose  some  new  faculty  of  cognition  to  exist.  Intelligence
can  only  work  on  material  supplied  by  normal  sensorial  channels.

To  quote  a  well-known  simile,  a  mill  is  excellent  for  grinding,
but  can  never  produce  anything  but  what  it  has  been  given  to
grind.

Let  us  suppose  that  Helen  Smith  has  never  heard  a  word  of
Sanscrit  nor  read  or  seen  any  Sanscrit  book.  Then  if  she  should
speak  or  write  in  Sanscrit — i.e.,  re-invent  that  language — I  should
consider  the  event  miraculous,  and  a  metapsychic  phenomenon;
for  no  human  intelligence  could  do  this.

Before  drawing  so  extreme  an  inference,  however,  my  reluc-
tance to  admit  the  supernormal  will  oblige  me  to  make  all  pos-
sible suppositions.  It  must  first  be  established  that  she  has  never
opened  a  Sanscrit  book,  and  such  proof  is  not  easy  to  get;  for
even  if  her  good  faith  is  assured  she  may  have  forgotten  that
one  day  in  some  public  or  private  library  she  turned  over  the
leaves  of  such  a  book.  Besides,  the  Sanscrit  phrase  must  not  be
a  mere  quotation,  but  have  reference  to  present  circumstances.
The  conditions  necessary  to  scientific  conviction  of  the  transcen-
dental nature  of  the  phenomenon  are  so  onerous  that  I  doubt  if
they  can  often  be  found  concurrent.

Similarly  A.,  an  unpoetical  person  who  has  never  written  any
verse,  composes  poems  showing  delicate  and  original  poetic
faculty  while  in  a  mediumistic  state.  She  thus  writes  several
volumes  of  verse,  dictating  so  rapidly  as  to  make  it  difficult  to
follow.  This  is  certainly  very  surprising;  but  before  supposing
that  some  external  intelligence  intervenes  I  shall  make  the  sim-
pler hypothesis  that  she  has  subconscious  poetic  faculty.  Her
verses,  however  good,  do  not  transcend  human  intelligence.

I  know  that  spiritualists  and  occultists  will  exclaim  against
this  as  they  did  against  my  learned  friend,  T.  Flournoy.  But
their  objections  are  not  justified,  for  it  lies  on  them  to  prove  the
intervention  of  extraneous  intelligence;  and  this  proof  can  be
given  only  by  establishing  the  absolute  incapacity  of  subcon-
scious intelligence  to  write  the  verse  or  to  remember  certain
scraps  of  Sanscrit.

Laplace  says  somewhere,  The  rigour  of  proof  must  be  pro-

SUBJECTIVE  METAPSYCHICS  51

portionate  to  the  gravity  of  the  conclusion.  Now  to  admit  that
an  extra-terrene  intelligence  moves  the  brain  of  Helen  Smith
to  inspire  her  with  Sanscrit,  or  the  brain  of  A.  to  dictate  French
verse,  is  an  inference  so  contrary  to  common-sense  and  logic
that  I  shall  admit  any  hypothesis  short  of  mathematical  or  physical
impossibility,  rather  than  that  of  an  extra-terrene  mind.  It  is
reasonable  to  suppose  that  Helen  Smith  has  retained  in  an  im-
peccable memory  some  phrases  of  Sanscrit  read  ten  years  before,
and  that  A.  may  subconsciously  construct  verses  as  rapidly  as
a  professional  poet.

Every  normal  hypothesis  must  be  exhausted,  and  also  the  sub-
conscious work  of  the  mind  and  the  resources  of  an  infallible
memory,  before  we  can  dare  to  affirm  the  intervention  of  another
intelligence.  In  the  course  of  succeeding  chapters  I  shall  give
examples  of  this  necessary  rigour.

Stella,  by  the  movements  of  a  table,  said  to  me  in  the  name  of
"Louise/'  "Give  Stella  the  statuette  that  is  in  your  drawing-
room."  Now  I  had  never  told  Stella  that  I  had  such  a  statuette ;
but  all  the  same,  though  it  is  extremely  unlikely  that  I  had  done
this,  I  cannot  be  absolutely  certain  that  I  had  not.  I  would  not
dare  to  condemn  a  man  to  death  on  such  a  belief,  and  the  evi-
dence for  a  scientific  conclusion  should  be  as  rigid  as  for  a  death-
sentence.  Moreover,  some  one  may  have  told  Stella  of  the  fact,
though  it  is  unlikely,  for  I  do  not  think  she  has  ever  spoken  to
anyone  who  knows  my  drawing-room ;  and,  lastly,  she  may  have
used  this  phrase  by  chance.  In  fine,  though  all  these  hypotheses
are  unlikely,  there  is  one  still  more  unlikely — that  an  extraneous
intelligence  revealed  to  her  the  existence  of  the  statuette  in  my
drawing-room.1

The  demand  for  rigorous  evidence  must,  of  course,  not  be
pushed  to  absurdity.  To  resume  the  case  of  Helen  Smith;  if
she,  being  a  woman  still  young,  has  not  frequented  libraries  nor
ever  been  in  the  East,  were  to  maintain  a  long  conversation  in
Sanscrit  instead  of  mangling  a  few  incoherent  Sanscrit  words
as  she  does ;  if  she  were  to  grasp  the  grammatical  intricacies  of
this  complex  language;  if,  in  other  words,  she  knew  Sanscrit

lIt  is  true  that  when  cryptesthesia  has  been  established  by  great  numbers  of
incontestable  proofs  it  will  be  possible  to  accept  as  fact  much  that  cannot  be
so  received  as  yet;  but  this  demonstration  has  to  be  made.  Hence  the  need
to  eliminate  pitilessly  everything  that  is  not  unquestionable  as  a  matter  of
demonstration.    Later  on  it  may  be  possible  to  be  less  exacting.

52

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

without  having  learned  it,  the  hypothesis  of  subconscious  mem-
ory would  be  untenable.  It  is  certain  that  she  has  never  studied
Sanscrit ;  if,  then,  she  were  to  speak  it  well,  I  do  not  see  how,
even  if  an  unconscious  and  impeccable1  memory  and  complex
subconscious  working  be  admitted,  a  complete  language  known
and  spoken  could  be  elaborated  from  a  few  data  of  the  subcon-
scious memory.  Such  a  development  would  be  a  metapsychic
phenomenon.

On  my  asking  Stella  for  the  name  of  one  of  the  women  who
tended  my  infancy,  she  replied,  "Melanie."  I  was  not  thinking
of  Melanie,  and  I  am  most  positively  sure  that  this  name,  which
disappeared  out  of  my  life  fifty  years  ago,  and  which  I  have  not
thought  of  for  those  fifty  years,  has  never  been  uttered  by  me.
In  this  case  I  am  obliged  to  infer  a  metapsychic  phenomenon,
for  neither  pantomnesia  nor  subconscious  mentation  working  up
old  remembrances  can  account  for  this  name  emerging.  I  put
chance  on  one  side.

It  will  then  be  no  matter  for  astonishment  if  we  refuse  to
admit,  as  metapsychic,  various  phenomena  that  present  a  meta-
psychic aspect  to  credulous  persons.2  By  the  joint  action  of
pantomnesia  and  the  subconscious  working  of  the  mind  some
persons  can  produce  poetical,  fanciful,  or  scientific  work  of  a
complex  and  very  wonderful  nature,  but  which  ought  not  to  sur-
prise us  more  than  if  they  were  consciously  produced.

Stella  in  her  normal  state  never  composes  poetry,  but  in  her
mediumistic  state  dictates,  through  the  table,  verses,  sometimes
of  high  merit,  on  a  subject  given  to  her  and  in  a  prescribed
number  of  words.  But  I  may  say,  without  vanity,  that  I  myself,
simultaneously,  by  a  kind  of  collaboration  with  Petrarch,  who
(according  to  the  table)  was  speaking  through  Stella,  was  able
to  compose  four  lines  on  a  given  subject  in  a  required  number
of  words;  and  this  poetry  to  order  was  neither  better  nor  worse
than  that  of  "Petrarch."  I  prefer  to  suppose  that  Stella  com-
posed unconsciously  what  I  was  able  to  compose  consciously;

1The  word  "impeccable"  is  unsatisfactory.  I  propose  pantomnesia  to  indi-
cate that  no  vestige  of  our  intellectual  past  is  entirely  effaced.  Probably  we
are  all  pantomnesic.  In  weighing  metapsychic  facts  it  should  be  taken  for
granted  that  we  do  not  absolutely  forget  anything  that  has  once  impressed
our  senses.

1  repeat  here  that  I  keep  to  the  definition :  a  metapsychic  phenomenon
presupposes  the  intervention  either  of  an  extraneous  power,  or  of  an  unknown
faculty  of  the  human  mind.

SUBJECTIVE  METAPSYCHICS  53

at  any  rate,  that  is  much  simpler  than  to  suppose  the  intervention
of  Petrarch.

I  shall  quote,  further  on,  the  beautiful  verse  that  Victor  Hugo
addressed  to  the  shades  of  Moliere.  "Moliere's"  answer  is  very
fine,  too,  but  quite  in  Victor  Hugo's  style ;  but  even  if  the  style
were  Moliere's,  it  is  more  rational  to  think  that  the  medium  by
unconscious  and  skilful  mimicry  composed  and  dictated  verses
after  Moliere's  manner,  than  to  suppose  the  actual  intervention
of  Moliere.  In  a  mediumistic  state  Victorien  Sardou  drew  a
curious  and  well-known  design  entitled  The  House  of  Mozart.
Nothing  could  be  more  strange,  but  I  shall  always  feel  it  simpler
to  admit  that  the  genius  of  Sardou  did  the  subconscious  work
than  to  imagine  that  the  soul  of  Mozart  moved  Sardou's  muscles.

Every  case  must  be  carefully  scrutinized  before  it  is  admitted
as  genuinely  metapsychic;  but  the  delicate  and  difficult  process
of  analyzing  such  cases  will  lead  us,  as  I  shall  show  hereafter,
to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  a  small  number  of  subjective  in-
tellectual facts  (much  less  numerous  than  spiritualists  suppose),
which  neither  pantomnesia  nor  the  subconscious  elaboration  of
remembrances  can  account  for.

Nevertheless,  even  the  facts  inexplicable  by  pantomnesia  do
not  necessarily  imply  the  presence  of  an  external  intelligence;
for  yet  another  hypothesis  is  possible — that  human  intelligence
has  a  greater  range  than  that  we  are  accustomed  to  attribute  to
it.  The  axiom  Nihil  est  in  intellectu  quod  non  prius  in  sensu  is
itself  a  hypothesis.  Some  philosophers  have  added  "nisi  intel-
lects ipse,"  and  the  addition  is  justifiable,  for  perhaps  the  intellect
is  much  deeper  than  we  imagine.

Moreover,  we  are  not  dealing  with  pure  intelligence,  but  with
sensations  perceived  by  the  intelligence.  There  may  be  other
senses  than  the  five  known  to  us.  Some  animals,  pigeons  for
instance,  have  a  sense  of  direction  that  escapes  our  analysis.
Why  should  there  be  no  cognitive  faculties  other  than  our
senses?  We  think  that  the  magnet,  though  it  acts  upon  iron,
does  not  act  on  our  nervous  centres;  but  if  it  were  discovered
that  it  does,  I  for  one  should  not  be  greatly  surprised.  Wireless
telegraphy  has  shown  us  that  messages  can  be  transmitted
through  space ;  it  is  therefore  possible  that  by  an  analogous  but
invisible  mechanism  to  which  our  instruments  and  our  senses  are
insensitive,  the  brain  may  be  affected  without  our  being  able  to
perceive  anything  either  of  the  transmitter  or  the  receiver.  It

54

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

is  our  ignorance  that  confines  all  possible  knowledge  of  the  ex-
ternal world  to  our  five  senses.

Accordingly,  before  inferring  the  existence  of  extraneous  in-
telligence, I  willingly  admit,  as  a  provisional  hypothesis,  that
there  are  in  us  cognitive  faculties  as  yet  undetermined,  neither
usual  nor  of  daily  occurrence,  but  irregular  in  their  appearance
and  mysterious  in  their  action.

That  is  metapsychics,  and  we  have  to  decide  between  two
hypotheses :

1.  Does  an  external  intelligence  act  on  ours?

2.  Is  our  intelligence  endowed  with  a  new  faculty  of  cogni-
tion?

Subjective  phenomena  alone  are  not  sufficient  for  a  decision
between  these  two  hypotheses ;  it  will  be  necessary  to  examine,  as
we  shall  do  later,  whether  the  aggregate  evidence  pointing  to
extra-terrene  intelligence  is  sufficient  to  prove  either  the  hypothe-
sis that  human  intelligence  is  endowed  with  faculties  new  to  us;
or,  that  extraneous  intelligences  incorporate  and  incarnate  them-
selves in  humanity.

From  the  point  of  view  of  method,  it  is  extremely  important
never  to  lose  sight  of  Laplace's  precept;  and  before  we  enter
upon  metapsychics,  all  merely  psychological  possibilities  must  be
exhausted.

We  learn  from  psychology  that  pantomnesia  exists,  and  also
that  the  subconscious,  perhaps  even  more  than  the  conscious,  is
capable  of  prolonged  and  skilful  elaboration  of  its  materials.

In  fine,  in  order  to  distinguish  between  the  psychological  and
the  metapsychic  we  shall  adopt  the  criterion:  Everything  that
the  human  intelligence  can  do,  even  when  it  is  most  profound
and  penetrating,  is  psychological.  Everything  of  ivhich  such
intelligence  is  incapable  belongs  to  metapsychics.

If  Helen  Smith,  without  having  read  or  heard  a  single  word
of  Sanscrit,  speaks  it  fluently  and  correctly,  that  would  be  meta-
psychic, for  no  human  intelligence  can  reconstruct  a  language.
A.,  thinking  herself  inspired  by  her  "guide,"  composes  verses
quickly  and  well;  this  is  psychological,  for  many  persons,  and
perhaps  A.,  among  them,  can  do  the  same.

Stella  tells  me  the  name  of  an  old  servant  of  my  parents  fifty
years  ago.  This  is  metapsychic,  for  she  has  certainly  never
heard  me  pronounce  that  name;  and  no  intelligence,  conscious
or  unconscious,  could  give  that  name  without  having  heard  it.

SUBJECTIVE  METAPSYCHICS  55

T.  leaves  his  friend  J.  in  good  health.  He  see  his  friend's
apparition,  notes  the  hour,  and  says,  "J-  died  at  nine  o'clock  in
the  evening."  This  is  metapsychic,  for  no  normal  psychological
process  could  have  revealed  it.

Thus  the  work  of  analysis,  demanding  most  scrupulous  care,
will  be  to  examine  whether  the  facts  under  consideration  are  ex-
plicable by  known  mental  laws,  or  whether  it  is  not  necessary,
as  I  hope  to  demonstrate  by  many  instances,  to  suppose  the
existence  of  a  special  sensitiveness  which  I  call  cryptesthesia — a
new  faculty  of  cognition,  called  lucidity  by  ancient  authors  and
telepathy  by  modern  ones.

2.  Chance  and  Mathematical  Probability  in  Metapsychic  Facts

In  experiments  on  lucidity  two  cases  arise :  sometimes  a  com-
bination having  a  probability  =  P,  that  appears  spontaneously ;
or  the  same  combination  having  the  same  probability,  but  arising
on  demand.  The  evidential  value  in  these  two  cases  is  not  the
same,  and  serious  errors  arise  if  this  distinction  is  not  observed.

I  ask  Andree:  "What  is  the  name  of  the  person  who  wrote
me  this  morning  the  letter  I  have  in  my  wallet?"  She  answers,
"It  is  the  name  of  a  flower — Marguerite."  Now  the  name  is  not
Marguerite,  but  Helen.  I  suddenly  remember  having  received
a  letter  which  I  left  at  home  that  was  signed  Marguerite  in  large
letters.  I  was  not  thinking  of  this  letter.  How  is  the  probability
to  be  calculated?

If  I  had  put  the  question  having  the  letter  from  Marguerite
in  my  wallet,  the  experiment  would  have  been  conclusive  and
the  theory  of  probabilities  would  have  had  free  play.  It  would
have  sufficed  to  know  that  there  are  about  fifty  very  usual  names,
and  the  probability  of  a  correct  answer  would  then  have  been
1 :  50,  about  the  same  as  for  a  card  drawn  from  a  pack.

But  if  I  did  not  want  the  name  Marguerite,  conditions  are
changed.  In  the  former  case  either  of  the  two  names  would
be  correct ;  which  reduces  the  probability  at  least  to  2  :  50.  But
it  is  necessary  to  go  much  further,  for  if  another  name  had  been
given— Louise,  Madeline,  or  Alice — might  I  not  claim  to  have
received  yesterday  a  letter  from  Louise,  one  from  Madeline  the
day  before,  and  one  from  Alice  three  days  ago  ?  I  am  therefore
hardly  justified  in  saying  that  the  experiment  has  been  suc-
cessful on  a  probability  of  2  :  50.  An  answer  which  is  not  a  direct

56

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

answer  to  the  question  put  is  always  of  low  evidential  value.
It  is  much  as  if  I  were  to  ask  a  candidate  at  an  examination,
What  gas  combines  with  hydrogen  to  form  water?  and  he  were
to  answer,  Chlorine  combines  with  sodium  to  form  sodium
chloride.  Although  perfectly  correct,  I  should  not  be  satisfied
with  the  reply.

The  mathematical  theory  of  probability  does  not  apply  unless
the  conditions  can  be  most  accurately  stated,  for  the  least  ex-
perimental defect  will  very  greatly  change  the  figures  obtained.
On  the  other  hand,  if  the  experiment  is  unexceptionable  (which,
by  the  way,  is  very  seldom  the  case)  the  mathematical  theory  of
probability  can  be  rigorously  applied.

Let  us  suppose  an  experiment  unexceptionable,  and  let  us  see
what  ratio  allows  us  to  exclude  chance  as  an  explanation.

Men  of  science  do  not  allow  for  chances  in  quantitative  analy-
sis. A  chemist  who  is  seeking  the  atomic  weight  of  silver  gets
108.42;  he  will  not  imagine  that  chance  had  anything  to  do  with
that  result.  He  will,  however,  repeat  the  experiment,  and  if  he
gets  108.34  he  will  still  not  accept  the  idea  of  chance,  but  will
take  the  mean,  108.38,  as  the  atomic  weight  of  silver.

It  is  not  immediately  obvious  why  metapsychics  should  not  be
permitted  to  draw  a  conclusion  from  two  experiments,  since  this
is  done  in  astronomy,  chemistry,  and  physiology.  Nevertheless,
it  is  easy  to  understand  why,  in  metapsychics,  the  possibility  of
chance  always  enters  in,  for  no  experiment  can  be  repeated  with
conditions  so  similar  that  a  mean  can  be  struck  as  in  chemistry  or
physiology.

If  after  finding  108.42  as  the  atomic  weight  of  silver,  the
chemist  were  to  get  22.87  on  the  following  day,  he  might  feel
the  former  result  due  to  chance;  but  as  a  matter  of  fact  his
second  and  third  experiments  will  give  results  very  near  the
first,  so  that  none  of  a  possible  three— 108.42,  108.34,  and  108.35
— can  be  put  down  to  chance ;  they  corroborate  one  another.

After  Andree  had  given  me  the  answer  "Marguerite,"  I  in-
quired for  another  name  on  the  following  day ;  she  gave  a  wrong
answer.  Again  on  the  next  day,  a  similar  failure.  I  must,  then,
take  these  failures  into  account,  and  I  might,  strictly  speaking,
put  down  the  correct  result  to  chance,  while  in  the  chemical
experiment  chance  can  have  no  place.

It  is  a  terrible  defect  in  metapsychic  experiments  that  they
can  never  be  repeated  with  certainty.    One  is  never  sure  that

SUBJECTIVE  METAPSYCHICS  57

today's  successes  can  be  repeated  tomorrow.  A  particular  me-
dium may  have  given  a  series  of  good  results  on  lucidity,  and  a
few  days  later  before  a  scientific  committee  every  attempt  to
repeat  a  single  one  of  these  experiments  may  be  a  lamentable
failure.

This  does  not  imply  that  we  must  give  up  experiment  nor
that  we  cannot  use  the  mathematical  theory  of  probability.  We
must  begin  experiment  afresh.  We  need  not  imitate  Don  Quixote,
who,  having  made  his  helmet,  tested  it  by  a  heavy  blow  with  his
sword  and  broke  it.  He  made  another,  but  forebore  to  test  it,
lest  it  also  should  give  way,  and  contented  himself  with  it  as  it
was.

When  a  successful  experiment  has  been  made,  we  should  not
fear  to  repeat  it,  whether  the  result  be  to  confirm  or  to  invalidate
it;  on  the  contrary,  we  should  apply  some  fresh  test.

As  the  number  of  successful  experiments  mounts  up,  the
greater  their  value  becomes.  To  take  this  instance  of  the  names ;
it  has  been  shown  that  the  probability  might  be  taken  as  1  :  50,
but  were  actually  2  :  50.  Let  us  admit,  for  the  reasons  given
above,  that  it  might  be  5  :  50  or  1  :  10.  These  odds  against  chance
success  are  considerable,  but  not  sufficient  for  a  reliable  conclu-
sion; but  if  on  ten  successive  days  I  obtain  successful  results,
each  having  the  probability  of  1  :  10,  this  amounts  to  odds  prob-
ability of  (to)10>  which  is  moral  certainty.

However,  though  we  never  get  an  uninterrupted  series  of  suc-
cesses, we  can  still  use  the  calculus  of  probabilities,  blending
successes  and  failures  by  the  classical  formula  for  compounded
probabilities:

S!

where  S  is  the  number  of  trials  in  which  there  have  been  a  suc-
cesses on  probability  p,  and  0  failures  on  probability  q.  Of  course
S=a+/3.

The  sign  !  indicates  successive  multiplication  oflX2X3X....XS.

E.g.,  from  an  urn  containing  six  balls,  five  black  and  'one  white,
twelve  drawings  are  taken,  the  ball  drawn  being  replaced  after
each  trial,  p  =  i  for  the  white  ball,  and  q  =  %  for  the  black.

Let  us  suppose  that  in  twelve  trials  we  get  five  white  and  seven

58

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

black,  that  is,  a  =  5,  and  0=7.  The  probability  of  five  white  on
twelve  trials  will  be

1X2X3X4X5X6X7X8X9X10X11X12

 X  (5)X  X  (7)K  =  about^

(1X2X3X4X5)  (1X2X3X4X5X6X7)

The  calculus  of  probabilities  gives  very  interesting  results,  but
it  must  be  used  with  extreme  caution,  for  the  smallest  experi-
mental error  vitiates  the  whole  result.

Mere  good  sense,  apart  from  all  arithmetic,  can  lead  us  to  con-
clusions. If  the  word  Kerveguen  is  given  by  spelling  over  the
letters  of  the  alphabet,  that  being  really  the  correct  word,  it  is
useless  to  work  out  the  probabilities  that  chance  has  had  no  part
in  the  matter,  for  the  odds  against  the  result  being  by  ^chance  is
(ts)9-    Cryptesthesia  in  this  case  is  a  moral  certainty.

It  should  not  be  objected  that  there  is  no  absolute  certainty,
since  even  with  a  probability  of  (^V)100  the  mathematical  cer-
tainty would  not  be  absolute.  In  fact  the  moral  certainty  is  much
the  same  with  (^V)9  or  (^V)100,  and  would  still  be  much  the  same
with  (2V)3  for  no  one  has  had  a  chance  success  with  any  single
experiment  when  the  real  probability  was  only  l5*m-

It  is  much  more  important  to  exact  the  utmost  scientific  rigour
in  the  experiment  itself.

To  show  how  fallacious  the  calculation  of  probabilities  may  be
when  the  experiment  is  defective,  I  may  instance  the  case  of  the
Misses  Creery  who  presented  a  long  series  of  results  in  mental
transmission  whose  probability  was  only  iootooo.ooo.ooo.ooo-

A  few  zeros  more  or  less  matter  but  little ;  what  is  important
is  that  the  experiments  should  be  faultless.  Now,  the  Creery
girls  admitted  in  the  end  that  their  answers  were  sometimes
tricky,  so  that  the  figures  proved  nothing  whatever.

Even  without  any  intentional  trickery  there  may  be  some  error
in  the  experiments,  very  slight  perhaps,  but  enough  to  vitiate
all  calculations  of  probability.  In  dealing  cards,  for  instance,
the  subconscious  attention  of  the  percipient,  which  is  always
awake,  may  very  well  note  certain  minute  points,  unperceived
by  most  people,  that  would  enable  him  to  recognize  some  par-
ticular cards.  And  who  can  say  when  the  experimenter  has  seen
a  card  and  called  for  it  to  be  guessed,  whether  his  facial  expres-
sion may  not,  in  despite  of  himself,  give  a  sharp-sighted  medium
some  clue  which  can  consciously  or  unconsciously  be  made  use  of?

SUBJECTIVE  METAPSYCHICS  59

At  roulette  all  the  niches  are  exactly  equal,  but  if  there  is  one
a  little  larger  than  others,  even  the  tenth  of  a  millimeter,  this
imperceptible  difference  makes  the  calculus  of  probabilities  inap-
plicable. On  360  trials,  for  instance,  the  number  that  is  a  little
wider  than  others  will  come  up  twenty  times  instead  of  sixteen,
as  it  should.

The  calculus  of  probabilities  should  be  applied  only  when  the
experiments  are  unexceptionable.

There  is  another  reason  for  caution;  some  facts  do  not  admit
of  calculation.  Mrs.  Green  sees  two  young  girls  drowning,  their
hats  floating  on  the  water.  At  that  moment  two  girls,  one  of
them  a  niece  that  Mrs.  Green  had  never  seen,  were  drowned  in
Australia  and  their  hats  were  seen  floating  on  the  water  some
hours  after.  The  improbability  could  not  possibly  be  put  into
figures.

When  Stella  is  asked  the  first  name  of  G.'s  son,  and  answers
"Jean,"  the  probability  may  be  considered  comparatively  easy  to
calculate.  Is  it?  Am  I  to  take  all  possible  masculine  names?
There  are  about  two  hundred,  about  one  hundred  that  are  com-
mon, and  perhaps  thirty  very  common.  According  to  the  data
chosen  the  probability  will  be  1  :  200,  or  1  :  100  or  1  :  30.  More-
over, I  must  presume  that  there  was  not  the  slightest  gesture
of  a  stop  at  the  letter  J  by  the  person  running  over  the  alphabet.

In  fine,  we  may  use  the  calculus  of  probabilities ;  but  with  cau-
tion, for  it  facilitates  over-bold  statements.

Further,  it  is  a  curious  fact  that  calculation  of  probabilities
seldom  produces  definite  conviction;  by  a  kind  of  half-justified
instinct  people  refuse  to  admit  inferences  that  are  not  evident
at  first  sight.

3.  Concerning  Errors  of  Observation

The  calculus  of  probabilities  is  very  easy  of  application,  and  any
schoolboy  could  solve  the  elementary  problems  in  arithmetic
that  arise  from  its  application  to  metapsychic  matters;  but  the
experimental  precautions  and  the  alert  and  sustained  attention
that  go  to  an  unexceptionable  experiment  are  as  complex  as
the  actual  calculation  is  simple.

I  will  here  endeavour  to  give  some  cautions,  for  rigorous  ex-
perimental conditions  are  of  the  very  first  importance.  To  avoid
illusions  is  the  crux  of  subjective  metapsychics.

60

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

1.  Mistakes  of  memory.  Memory,  whether  one's  own  or  that
of  others,  is  unreliable.  In  observing  subjective  phenomena  very
few  persons  will  deliberately  falsify ;  but  very  many  give  distorted
accounts  of  what  they  have  seen  and  heard;  they  modify  and
alter  phrases,  details,  dates,  and  hours,  and  change  words,  all
quite  involuntarily.  We  are  all  liable  to  this ;  and  in  such  matter
I  trust  no  one,  not  even  myself.  When  firmly  convinced  of  the
hypothesis  of  lucidity,  a  witness  will  relate  some  telling  fact,
passing  lightly  over  contradictory  details  and  omitting  awkward
ones,  while  insisting  overmuch  on  those  that  support  his  theory.
One  little  word  is  passed  over  in  silence,  another  is  added,  and
these  may  fundamentally  change  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn.

By  repeated  telling,  a  story  becomes  quite  unconsciously  dis-
torted and  gives  rise  to  inferences  that  are  wonderful  indeed,
but  fallacious.

No  accounts  can  be  relied  on  unless  written  down  immediately
after  the  event  to  which  they  refer.  If  after  several  repetitions
we  compare  the  verbal  account  with  that  written  down  at  the
time,  it  will  often  be  found  that  the  cumulative  effect  of  succes-
sive mental  changes  has  made  the  story  very  different  from  the
record.  We  should  constantly  remind  ourselves  that  memory
is  very  treacherous.  No  observer  soever  can  dispense  with  writing
down  all  the  details  of  an  experiment  immediately  it  is  finished.

And  full  details  are  never  put  down;  it  is  important  to  de-
scribe the  smallest  circumstances;  notes  must  never  be  scanty.
In  contrast  to  published  work,  notes  should  be  prolix  to  the
point  of  being  wearisome.  A  profusion  of  detail  in  notes  written
for  one's  own  use  is  never  a  mistake.  Everything  should  be
noted,  one  always  tends  to  be  too  concise.  It  is  well  that  when
several  persons  have  taken  part  in  an  experiment  that  all  should
write  records.  During  my  experiments  with  Eusapia  in  con-
junction with  Ochorowicz  I  dictated  notes  throughout  the  ex-
periments, to  a  secretary  placed  in  a  corner  of  the  room,  so
that  all  the  circumstances  of  every  phenomenon  should  be  de-
scribed without  alterations  of  any  kind.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that
this  cannot  always  be  done.

For  these  reasons  records  made  long  after  the  event  or  dealing
with  ancient  observations  never  written  down  at  all,  can  never
have  any  but  a  very  qualified  value.

The  best  evidence  is  the  conclusion  of  a  good  observer  on  the
facts,  drawn  at  the  time.    The  opinion  formed  during  the  ex-

SUBJECTIVE  METAPSYCHICS  61

periment  while  all  subsidiary  facts  exercised  their  influence  on
his  mind  will  carry  much  more  weight  than  any  account  given
ten  or  twenty  years  after.  During  the  continuance  of  an  ex-
periment a  rapid  synthesis  is  made  of  all  the  surrounding  con-
ditions so  that  we  reach  a  personal  conviction,  more  intuitive
than  definitely  reasoned  out  indeed,  but  very  valid.  Many  de-
tails may  escape  our  memory,  but  the  remembrance  of  the  con-
viction produced  remains.

For  my  own  part  I  give  great  weight  to  the  conviction  so
produced  (which  should  be  written  down  immediately  after  the
experiment  in  the  notes  taken),  for  we  find  ourselves  led  (often
wrongly)  by  defective  memory  to  modify  first  impressions  either
in  the  direction  of  credulity  or  of  scepticism,  both  of  which  are
equally  regrettable.

To  conclude:  much  error  is  due  to  scanty  records  and  to
lapses  of  memory.

2.  In  the  course  of  an  experiment  attention  must  be  paid  to
all  the  circumstances,  even  to  those  which  seem  irrelevant.  In
dealing  with  subjective  metapsychics,  every  word,  every  gesture
should  be  well  considered.  The  slightest  play  of  feature,  a  sigh
or  a  smile,  an  interjection,  a  slight  movement  of  the  hand,  any
sign,  however  unnoticeable,  of  satisfaction,  impatience,  surprise,
or  disappointment  may  possibly  put  the  medium  on  the  track  and
no  slightest  indications  of  the  kind  should  be  made.

All  this  is  very  difficult,  and  long  practice  is  needed  to  reach
absolute  impassiveness.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  reason
why  telepathic  experiments  seem  to  succeed  more  often  than
those  of  simple  lucidity  is,  that  as  in  the  former  the  answer  is
known  beforehand,  the  medium  is  helped  by  involuntary  trifles,
while  in  the  latter  case  no  such  assistance  can  be  given.  One
does  not  correct  one's  own  trifling  mistakes  and  signs  of  dis-
satisfaction. Unfortunately  it  seldom  happens,  when  we  know  the
word  that  ought  to  be  given,  that  we  are  so  sel f-cont rolled ;  we
are  often  so  unskilful  as  to  allow  it  to  be  seen  whether  the
answer  begins  well  or  ill.

Especially  with  table  experiments  extreme  precaution  is  re-
quired. Of  course,  the  movements  of  the  table  are  usually  due
to  the  medium  only,  but  if  any  other  hands  are  upon  it  the
assistants  may  mechanically  affect  its  jerks  or  levitations.  The
slightest  pressure  is  enough  to  reveal  the  thoughts  of  those  who
have  their  hands  on  the  table;  and  it  must  be  repeated  that

62

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

mediums,  whether  consciously  or  unconsciously,  have  their  at-
tention on  the  stretch ;  they  are  on  the  look-out  for  anything  that
may  reveal  the  word,  the  phrase,  or  the  idea  that  is  sought  for.
Nothing  escapes  them,  and  the  slightest  pressure  on  the  table
becomes  a  sign  that  they  know  how  to  interpret.  This  per-
spicacity has  nothing  to  do  with  fraud,  for  their  interpretations,
deductions,  observations,  and  conclusions  are  all  subconscious;
but  the  effect  in  falsifying  results  is  the  same  as  if  there  were
conscious  fraud.

Therefore,  in  order  to  make  any  serious  experiment  on  lucidity,
it  is  inadmissible  that  any  person  who  knows  the  answer  to  be
given  should  touch  the  movable  object  through  which  that  answer
is  to  come.  I  have  often  been  surprised  by  the  astounding
credulity  of  some  persons  who  exclaim  at  the  wonderful  answers
given  through  the  table.  Oh,  yes,  no  doubt  the  answers  were
correct  but  no  way  astonishing,  since  the  questioner  himself
furnished  them!  Many  experiments  in  subjective  metapsychics
are  thus  vitiated  for  want  of  the  precautions  necessary  to  deprive
the  medium  of  all  help  from  the  face,  the  gestures,  and  the  words
of  the  person  who  knows  the  answer.

Exquisite  tact  is  needed  if  we  are  not  to  be  misled  by  appear-
ances. Good  experiments  in  subjective  metapsychics  are  very
difficult  indeed ;  they  can  only  be  made  by  distrusting  everything
and  everybody,  one's  self  included.  A  desire  that  the  experiment
should  be  successful  must  never  lead  us  to  deceive  ourselves.

3.  Fraud  is  as  rare  in  subjective  phenomena  as  it  is  common
in  the  objective;  for  I  take  it  for  granted  that  no  one  will  ex-
periment with  persons  known  to  be  tricksters.  In  most  cases
the  good  faith  of  medium  and  assistants  is  above  reproach.

But  belief  in  the  good  faith  of  the  operators  should  in  no  way
reduce  the  precautions  to  be  taken.  The  experimenter  should  act
as  if  the  medium  were  persistently  fraudulent;  for  if  conscious
good  faith  is  the  rule,  unconscious  bad  faith  is  the  rule  also;
every  medium  makes  desperate  efforts  by  an  unwearied  subcon-
scious mind  to  find  the  answer  required  and  uses  all  possible
means  to  discover  it.

For  instance,  I  ask  for  the  name  of  Marguerite's  brother.  Now
it  is  possible  that  the  medium  has  at  some  time  or  other  heard
that  Marguerite  has  a  brother  who  is  one  of  my  friends.  Then
her  brain  will  work  to  find  out  who  among  my  friends  (whose
first  names  she,  perhaps,  knows) — Henry,  Louis,  Charles,  Gus-

SUBJECTIVE  METAPSYCHICS  63

tave,  Paul,  Lucien,  Gaston,  Robert — may  be  Marguerite's  brother.
By  means  of  some  details  subconsciously  retained  she  knows  that
Louis,  Henry,  and  Charles  have  no  sister.  Five  names  only  then
remain,  and  then  if  during  the  interrogation  through  the  table  all
the  letters  of  the  alphabet  are  passed  over  up  to  R  without  a
word  or  a  sign,  only  the  name  Robert  will  remain;  she  will  say
"Robert";  and  if  I  am  not  exacting  I  shall  find  this  reply  very
satisfactory.

Therefore,  that  lucidity  may  be  really  established  there  must
be  an  absolute  impossibility,  I  say  "Absolute,"  of  the  utmost  per-
spicacity putting  the  medium  on  the  track.

Only  at  this  price  can  observations  be  taken  as  conclusive.
When  we  are  dealing  with  objective  metapsychics  the  dispositions
to  be  made  to  guard  against  possible  bad  faith  will  be  equally
severe,  but  obviously  of  a  different  kind.

CHAPTER  II

On  Cryptesthesia  (Lucidity)  in  General

L  Definition  and  Classification

Nearly  the  whole  of  subjective  metapsychics  can  be  reduced  to
a  single  phenomenon  which  the  magnetizers  of  a  past  age  called
"lucidity"  or  "clairvoyance"  (hellsehen) ;  which  is  now  called
telepathy,  with  various  shades  of  meaning  attached  to  the  term.
I  propose  to  name  it  cryptesthesia.  Myers  has  already  used  the
term  "telesthesia."

The  Greek  etymology  of  the  word  signifies  "a  hidden  sensi-
bility"— a  perception  of  things  by  a  mechanism  unknown  to  us
of  which  we  are  cognizant  only  by  its  effects.

I  shall  endeavour  to  prove  that  human  intelligence  includes  a
special  and  mysterious  faculty  which  reveals  certain  facts,  past,
present,  or  future,  that  the  senses  are  unable  to  supply.

That  Stella  is  able  to  state  the  name  of  an  old  servant  Melanie
which  she  has  never  seen  or  heard,  indicates  (unless  this  be  by
chance)  that  some  vibration  has  reached  her  intelligence  and
revealed  this  name  to  her.  Therefore  she  possesses  some  cryptic
sensibility  which  acquaints  her  with  what  her  normal  senses
could  not  have  told  her.  We  do  not  know  how  or  by  what  means
this  happens,  and  shall  endeavour  to  discover  the  method;  but
even  though  we  do  not  succeed,  the  bare  fact  is  unquestionably
real.  There  is  cryptesthesia.

The  major  part  of  this  book  is  devoted  to  proving  the  existence
of  this  faculty;  but  before  proceeding  to  the  many  and  diverse
facts  which  constitute  the  history  of  cryptesthesia,  two  essential
points  must  be  examined :

1.  The  relation  of  cryptesthesia  to  lucidity  and  telepathy.

2.  The  psychic  phenomena  that  take  the  form  of  metapsychic
phenomena  and  might  pass  for  such  if  superficially  and  imper-
fectly analyzed.

64

CRYPTESTHESIA  IN  GENERAL  65

2.  Connection  of  Cryptesthesia  with  Lucidity  and  Telepathy

Mesmer,  Puysegur,  and  Du  Potet  verified  a  power  that  enabled
the  subjects  of  their  experiments  to  see  objects  in  a  closed  box,
to  read  in  closed  books,  to  travel  to  and  describe  places  unknown
to  them,  and  to  guess  the  thoughts  of  the  magnetizer  and  his
assistants.

Later  on,  Myers  invented  the  happy  term  "telepathy,"  which
has  been  extensively  adopted  to  signify  that  human  thought  can
act  upon  another  person  without  any  apparent  external  vibration.

But  synergetic  vibrations  in  two  brains  is  a  hypothesis  that
must  be  examined  somewhat  closely,  for  many  ideas  on  telepathy
are  current  which  I  believe  to  be  erroneous.

People  readily  imagine  that  to  refer  a  fact  to  telepathy  is  to
explain  it.  The  magic  of  words  leads  them  to  think  of  telepathy
as  a  simple  thing.

When,  as  previously  mentioned,  Andree  tells  me,  "You  have
received  a  letter  signed  by  a  woman  who  is  named  after  a
flower,  Marguerite/'  it  is  always  suggested  that  I  was  thinking
of  Marguerite  and  that  Andree  has  read  my  thought.

Two  hypotheses  then  present  themselves,  setting  aside  chance
and  mal-observation ;  either  that  Andree  said  "Marguerite"  be-
cause the  name  was  in  my  thoughts  or  that  by  a  special  faculty
of  lucidity  she  has  read  the  name  on  the  letter  in  my  room  a
mile  and  a  half  distant.

From  the  scientific  point  of  view  it  is  equally  impossible  to
understand  how  this  name  could  be  known,  whether  by  the
unconscious  remembrance  in  my  brain  of  a  letter  received  that
morning  or  by  the  fact  of  its  being  written  at  the  foot  of  that
letter.

The  problem  is  equally  mysterious  whether  I  have  or  have
not  read  the  letter.  Although  the  pole-star  is  many  millions
of  miles  beyond  Sirius,  both  are  equally  inaccessible.  To  read
my  thought  seems  as  difficult  as  to  read  a  letter  (open  or  closed)
on  my  desk  two  miles  or  two  thousand  miles  distant.

It  seems  to  me  slightly  less  difficult  to  admit  reading  a  signa-
ture at  a  distance  than  to  admit  reading  a  word  in  my  brain;
for,  as  we  are  dealing  with  the  inexplicable,  it  is  slightly  easier
to  imagine  that  piercing  vision  should  traverse  the  intervening
distance  and  penetrate  walls  and  papers  than  that  the  percipient
should  be  able  to  interpret  the  verbal  sense  carried  by  the  modes

66

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

of  vibration  of  cerebral  cells  in  my  skull.  Both  being  hypotheses,
I  prefer  to  imagine  an  amazing  retinal  vision  of  written  words
than  a  reading  of  my  brain  wherein  nothing  is  written,  but  in

which  there  are  so  many  impressions,  memories,  and  exceedingly
complex  and  evanescent  combinations  that  are  really  ultra-
microscopic  modifications  of  cellular  protoplasm,  none  of  which
have  any  relation,  apart  from  my  own  consciousness,  to  the
sound  or  to  the  phonetic  signs  of  the  name.  To  say  "telepathy"
explains  nothing.  Cerebral  vibration,  conscious  or  unconscious,
is  a  profound  mystery,  much  greater  than  a  signature,  which  is
positive,  real,  and  tangible,  and  would  be  visible  to  sight  if
sufficiently  penetrating;  whereas  the  reading  of  a  thought  cannot
be  explained  by  any  intensification  of  any  of  our  senses.

There  are  many  reasons,  none  very  sound,  why  the  telepathic
hypothesis  should  be  so  favourably  received  by  unscientific  (or
even  by  scientific)  persons  as  if  it  were  so  simple  that  there
should  be  no  need  to  press  it  further.

1.  The  first  is  that  it  agrees  perfectly  with  the  shortcomings
in  experiment.  It  is  obvious  that  if  I  do  not  know  the  word
"Marguerite"  in  an  unopened  letter  I  can  in  no  way  assist
Andree  to  say  the  word.  But  if  I  do  know  it  and  am  not  very
careful,  if  Andree  hesitates,  seeks,  and  guesses,  I  may  very
naively  furnish  indications  that  she  will  not  fail  to  use.  I  may  be
putting  her  straight  and  becoming  an  unconscious  accomplice.
There  will  not  be  the  absolute  inertia  that  must  prevail  if  I  do
not  know  the  word.  Having  made  very  many  experiments,  I
know  only  too  well  how  difficult  it  is  to  give  no  sign  whatever
of  approval  or  disapproval  when  one  knows  the  word  the  medium
has  to  discover.

2.  An  equally  bad  reason  is  that  spectacular  exhibitions  of  so-
called  thought-reading  are  given  to  the  public.  The  skill  shown
at  these  exhibitions  is  sometimes  marvellous.  A  young  woman,
A.,  with  bandaged  eyes,  is  seated  facing  the  audience.  Her
magnetizer,  B.,  stands  at  her  side,  and  calls  for  one  of  the
audience,  C,  who  is  certainly  not  an  accomplice.  C.  shows  his
visiting  card  without  speaking;  B.  looks  at  it,  and  almost  im-
mediately A.  spells  out  the  card,  sometimes  with  hesitation,
sometimes  very  quickly,  without  delay  or  mistake,  even  when
the  words  are  unusual.

The  experiment  is  an  amusing  one,  but  proves  nothing  except
the  extraordinary  skill  of  the  operators.    It  is  practically  certain

CRYPTESTHESIA  IN  GENERAL  67

that  there  is  a  code  of  signs,  words,  attitudes,  movements  of
the  right  or  left  hand  or  foot,  of  the  body  or  the  head  that  allow
A.,  whose  eyes  are  more  or  less  completely  bandaged,  to  per-
ceive signs  that  the  public  do  not  notice,  and  enable  her,  thanks
to  an  excellent  memory,  to  state  the  numbers  or  words  that  B.
transmits.  It  is  no  more  thought-reading  than  when  a  Morse
telegraph  operator  gets  the  sense  of  a  message  from  the  ticking
of  the  instrument.

Generally  these  exhibitions  are  so  quick  and  so  skilful  as  to
satisfy  a  public  that  loves  to  be  deceived;  people  leave  with  an
unreasoned  conviction  that  they  have  seen  "thought-reading,"  and
thenceforward  when  they  have  uttered  the  words  "thought-read-
ing," "mental  suggestion,"  or  "telepathy,"  they  fancy  that  they
have  understood  the  whole  thing  and  do  not  imagine  that  they
are  speaking  of  one  of  the  most  terrifying  mysteries  of  human
existence.

3.  Another  form  of  pseudo-thought-reading  is  also  spectacular.
An  individual,  A.,  sensitive,  or  claiming  to  be  sensitive,  but  cer-
tainly very  sharp,  declares  he  will  read  the  thought  of  anyone
who  will  hold  him  by  the  hand.  He  brings  on  the  scene  B.,
taken  from  the  audience.  The  unfortunate  B.,  shy  at  his  posi-
tion, hesitates,  takes  A.'s  hand,  and  A.  makes  him  walk  by  his
side  quickly  or  slowly,  and  by  skilful  guesses  reaches  the  place
that  B.  thought  of.  He  stops  before  some  member  of  the
audience,  searches  in  his  pocket,  and,  still  holding  B.'s  hand,
withdraws  a  handkerchief  which  he  takes  to  some  other  point
in  the  hall.  All  this  to  the  amazement  of  the  audience  and  espe-
cially of  B.,  who  has  willed  the  whole  performance,  and  imagines
that  A.  has  read  his  thought.  In  fact  A.  has  merely  interpreted
skilfully  the  unconscious  and  involuntary  muscular  movements  of
poor  B.,  who  does  not  know  that  he  has  by  such  movements
given  very  clear  indications;  and  the  public  leave  the  hall  more
than  ever  convinced  of  telepathy.  In  this  way  belief  in  telepathy
as  an  obvious  and  simple  fact  becomes  firmly  fixed  in  the  popular
mind;  though  in  all  this  there  is  no  more  telepathy  than  in  the
contraction  of  a  frog's  muscle  by  the  electric  battery.1

It  is  doubtless  for  such  reasons  that  telepathy  is  accepted  more

1There  is  a  whole  bibliography  on  unconscious  movements.  I  cannot  give
even  a  resume  of  it  here.  It  is  the  willing  game,  otherwise  called  Cumber-
landism,  from  Cumberland,  who  first  gave  these  exhibitions.  Grasset  explains
it  by  his  "polygon,"  which  is  simply  an  ingenious  diagram  of  the  subconscious.

68

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

readily  than  lucidity.  The  two  are,  however,  not  opposed;  both
are  probably  true  and  real  telepathy  should  be  considered  as  a
particular  and  common  mode  of  lucidity.  It  may  be  remarked
that  nearly,  if  not  quite  always,  when  a  percipient  is  asked  a
question  the  answer  is  known  to  the  questioner.  When  it  is
unknown  it  is  almost  certainly  known  to  someone  else,  and  the
telepathic  theory  might  be  pushed  so  far  as  to  say,  "If  the  per-
cipient has  read  'Marguerite'  in  a  letter  that  B.  has  not  opened,
she  could  certainly  not  read  in  B.'s  mind  a  word  it  did  not  con-
tain; but  there  is  another  person — Marguerite  herself — whose
thought  has  been  read,  and  not  the  word  written  in  the  letter."

Some  go  even  further.  As  there  are  facts  known  to  no  living
person,  but  known  to  B.,  now  dead,  this  can  still  be  explained  by
telepathy — the  thought  of  B.,  deceased,  has  been  transmitted  to
the  percipient.

These  wire-drawn  explanations  show  amply  that  we  know
absolutely  nothing  of  the  means  whereby  cryptesthetic  cognitions
reach  the  mind.

The  question  whether  there  is  telepathy  (transmission  of  hu-
man thought)  or  lucidity  (cognizance  of  an  external  fact)  is
specially  applicable  to  the  very  frequent  cases  of  monitions  at
the  moment  of  death.

I  will  take  an  instance  that  might  have  been  invented  for  illustra-
tion, though  it  is  real.  A.  sees  in  his  sleep  on  a  certain  night  the
apparition  of  his  friend  B.,  pale  as  a  corpse.  A.  writes  down  the
name  in  his  diary,  adding  "God  forbid."  At  that  very  moment  B.
was  killed  while  out  hunting  on  the  other  side  of  the  world.

Again  the  same  two  hypotheses  arise :  Did  A.  perceive  an  ex-
ternal event,  or  did  the  dying  thought  of  B.  traverse  the  inter-
vening space  and  impress  A.?

I  do  not  venture  to  decide  between  these  hypotheses,  both  of
which  seem  to  me  equally  mysterious,  but  I  infer  a  faculty  of
cognition  outside  the  order  of  normal  faculties.  I  think  it  best
to  keep  within  the  limits  of  rigid  science,  and  to  say — At  certain
times  the  mind  can  take  cognizance  of  realities  which  neither  our
senses,  our  insight,  nor  our  reasoning  permit  of  our  knowing.
This  is  not  an  explanation,  but  it  leaves  the  door  open  to  any
future  explanation.  Human  thought  is  one  among  the  realities
thus  made  known,  but  this  is  not  a  necessary  condition;  the
reality  alone  is  sufficient,  without  its  having  passed  through  a
human  mind.

CRYPTESTHESIA  IN  GENERAL  69

Let  us  go  no  further,  and  in  presence  of  these  unusual  facts
let  us  be  content  to  say  that  our  mental  mechanism,  even  more
complex  than  it  seems,  has  means  of  cognizance  that  escape
analysis  and  are  even  beyond  surmise.  This  dispenses  with  all
hypothesis ;  it  does  not  imply  that  cryptesthetic  knowledge  arises
from  transmitted  vibrations  of  human  thought;  it  merely  states
a  fact,  and  it  is  more  scientific  to  enunciate  a  fact  without  com-
ment than  to  enmesh  one's  self  in  theories,  such  as  telepathy,
which  are  entirely  unproven.

"Telepathy"  implies  a  hypothesis ;  "cryptesthesia"  has  the  great
merit  that  it  does  not.  If  A.  sees  his  dying  friend  at  the  moment
of  death  it  is  a  hypothesis  to  say  that  the  thought  of  B.  has  been
transmitted  to  A.  But  it  is  no  hypothesis  to  say  that  A.  has
some  special  sensibility  that  makes  him  aware  of  the  death  of  B.
Telepathy  is  not  contradictory  of  cryptesthesia.  As  "thought-
transference"  it  comes  into  play  in  certain  cases,  but  is  quite
insufficient  in  others.  In  such  obscure  matters  superfluous
hypotheses  should  be  avoided  as  far  as  possible.

As  there  are  few,  if  any,  facts  known  to  no  human  person
soever,  all  phenomena  of  lucidity,  with  scarcely  any  exceptions,
might  be  referred  to  telepathy.  Theoretically,  distance,  whether
two  yards  or  two  thousand  miles,  does  not  come  into  the  question.
But  it  is  vastly  improbable  that  when  Mrs.  Green,  in  London,
sees  a  niece  whom  she  does  not  know,  drowning  in  Australia,
the  thoughts  of  that  niece  should  have  sought  out  her  aunt.
Is  it  not  much  simpler  to  admit,  without  making  any  hypothesis,
that  Mrs.  Green  possesses  a  special  sensitiveness?

Therefore,  when  in  this  book  telepathy  is  spoken  of,  as  it  often
will  be,  it  must  be  understood  as  a  particular  form  of  lucidity
and  not  as  a  distinct  phenomenon.   Both  are  equally  mysterious.1

3.  Phenomena  of  Normal  Psychology  Having  Only  the  Semblance

of  Cryptesthesia

The  necessity  of  not  introducing  facts  explicable  by  normal
psychology  into  metapsychics  has  already  been  insisted  upon.

It  is  noteworthy  that  in  nearly  all  experiments  mediums  refer
the  thoughts  transmitted  through  a  table,  by  planchette,  or  by

ll  have  just  received  the  April  (1921)  number  of  the  Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  con-
taining an  excellent  article  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  (pp.  242-398),  An  Examina-
tion of  Book-tests.  She  reaches  a  similar  conclusion.  I  regret  that  I  cannot
here  analyze  this  valuable  notice.

70

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

writing,  to  personalities  other  than  themselves.  This  is  the
case  even  when  they  have  but  a  very  slight  acquaintance  with
spiritualist  literature,  or  even  at  the  commencement  of  their
mediumship  none  at  all.  It  has  seemed  advisable  to  me,  as  to
all  who  have  conducted  such  experiments,  to  admit  their  sup-
positions in  order  to  facilitate  success.  This  does  not  imply  a
belief  in  the  reality  of  such  notions ;  it  is  only  a  working  hypothe-
sis, as  Claude  Bernard  said.

"Personification"  characterizes  nearly  all  spiritist  experiments.
I  borrow  this  word  from  J.  Maxwell,  who  uses  it  to  describe  the
tendency  of  mediums  to  attribute  their  answers  to  separate  per-
sonalities. These  are  often  multiple,  but  there  is  usually  one
that  takes  precedence,  and  excludes  others.  This  personality  in
spiritualist  parlance  is  called  a  "guide"  or  "control."  The  re-
markable object  phenomena  presented  by  Eusapia  were  referred
by  her  to  John  King.  Similarly  Mrs.  Piper's  subjective  phenom-
ena were  attributed  by  her  to  Phinuit.  These  personifications
are  sufficiently  explained  by  the  unconscious,  which,  like  an  un-
known guest,  has  emotions,  ideas,  remembrances,  will,  and  feel-
ings quite  beyond  our  consciousness.  A  study  of  the  psychology
that  deals  with  duplication  of  personality  will  show  how  far  this
subconscious  personality  is  real  or  imaginary.

Physicians  have  observed  that  in  some  rare  cases  the  whole
mentality  of  the  patient  A.  is  changed.  He  takes  another  name,
B.,  loses  remembrance  of  his  former  life,  and  builds  up  a  new
set  of  associations  in  B.'s  name.  A.  and  B.  then  seem  to  be  two
separate  persons,  with  differing  tastes,  feelings,  and  acts.  Since
the  well-known  case  of  Azam,  Dr.  Prince  has  collected  some
remarkable  instances  in  America.

Magnetizers  have  declared,  vaguely,  that  they  could,  by  verbal
suggestion,  transform  a  patient  in  this  manner  while  in  the  hyp-
notic state ;  but  they  seem  never  to  have  realized  the  bearings  of
this  experiment,  and  everything  about  it  was  doubtful.  I  made
a  study  of  these  alternations  of  personality  in  1887,  and  since
then  they  have  taken  rank  among  the  admitted  phenomena  of
hypnotism.

This  singular  fact  may  be  thus  described :  I  tell  Alice,  a  young
girl  in  the  hypnotic  state,  "You  are  no  longer  Alice,  you  are  an
old  woman."  It  matters  little  whether  or  not  I  have  made  any
passes,  verbal  suggestion  is  sufficient.  At  once  Alice  takes  on  the
cough,  the  gestures,  and  the  weak  voice  of  an  old  woman,  and

CRYPTESTHESIA  IN  GENERAL  71

for  an  hour  or  two,  if  the  patience  of  the  observers  is  not  wearied,
she  acts  in  all  respects  like  an  old  woman.  It  is  acting,  but  in-
voluntary acting  proceeding  from  a  docile  mind  under  hypnotic
suggestion.  Nothing  can  be  more  extraordinary  and  indeed
amusing  than  this  complete  adaptation  to  the  new  personality.

The  question  of  simulation  does  not  arise.  It  is  universally
recognized  that  there  is  no  simulation ;  and  it  matters  little  to
know  whether  there  is  or  is  not  any  faint  remembrance  at  the
base  of  her  consciousness  that  she  is  Alice.  What  is  obvious  and
certain  is  that  she  assumes  the  character  assigned  to  her  without
the  ability  to  throw  it  off.  That  there  remains  some  residue  of
her  real  personality  is  more  than  possible,  it  must  be  so ;  but  her
personality  instantly  adapts  itself  to  the  suggested  personality
with  a  vigour  and  perfection  not  to  be  rivalled  by  the  most  accom-
plished actress.  The  conformity  to  the  new  personality  is  so
complete  that  even  the  handwriting  changes  its  character.

Any  character  can  be  imposed  at  will ;  she  becomes  a  general,
a  little  boy,  a  pastry  cook,  a  fine  lady,  or  a  market-woman,  and
we  get  whatever  comedy  we  may  desire.

The  experiment  may  be  pushed  still  further.  Some  subjects  will
take  on  animal  similitudes.  I  hypnotize  my  excellent  friend  H.
Ferrari  and  tell  him  that  he  is  a  parrot.  I  ask  him,  "Why  do
you  look  preoccupied  ?"  and  he  replies,  "How  can  I  eat  the  seed
in  my  cage?"  The  words  "my  cage"  are  typical  and  indicate  the
extent  of  the  transformation.

I  wish  to  make  it  clear  that  there  is  no  reason  for  surprise  if
spiritist  messages  seem  to  come  from  a  real  person.  The  human
mind  is  very  prone  to  create  a  personality.  The  phenomenon  is
the  same  whether  it  proceeds  from  external  suggestion,  from
some  exterior  event,  or  from  auto-suggestion.  It  is  not  meta-
psychic,  but  pertains  to  normal  psychology;  and  when  subcon-
scious actions  take  place  they  group  themselves  round  the  per-
sonality that  has  been  created.

I  compare  this  to  crystallization  from  a  saturated  solution —
the  crystals  form  round  a  centre.  Similarly  remembrances  and
emotions  concentrate  upon  the  personality  invented.

These  spiritoid  personalities  manifest  themselves  chiefly  in
automatic  writing  or  table  movements,  and  (more  rarely)  by
raps.  Sometimes  they  borrow  the  voice  of  the  medium.  The
conviction  is  so  thorough,  the  representation  so  perfect,  and  the
unconsciousness  so  complete  that  the  experimenters  are  won

72

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

over  and  cannot  suppose  that  all  these  psychological  phenomena
proceed  from  an  imaginary  being.

A  woman  takes  a  pencil  and  writes  pages  upon  pages  without
knowing  or  understanding  what  she  writes  in  feverish  haste ;  her
handwriting  is  quite  different  from  the  normal;  she  writes  and
writes  for  ten  minutes,  for  half  an  hour,  or  even  longer.  When
one  sheet  is  finished  she  takes  another  and  instantly  covers  it.
All  this  while  she  knows  nothing  of  what  she  is  doing,  and
she  can  at  the  same  time  keep  up  a  quite  sensible  conversa-
tion with  those  round  her.  Everything  happens  just  as  if  her
own  personality  were  replaced  by  another  that  borrows  her
hand.

In  all  good  faith  she  says,  "It  is  not  I  who  write,"  and  in  all
good  faith  those  who  see  her  agree  that  it  is  so.  If  only  the
writing  should  be  similar  from  day  to  day,  moderately  coherent
in  style  and  ideas,  if  the  imitation  of  the  manner  of  some  de-
ceased person  is  fairly  good,  all  are  convinced  that  a  spirit  has
intervened  and  made  his  wishes  known.

But  it  is  no  more  possible  to  admit  this  than  when  I  say  to
Alice,  "You  are  now  an  old  general" ;  and  she  speaks  like  an
old  soldier.  Whether  there  are  or  are  not  any  traces  of  the
normal  personality  remaining,  in  no  case  at  all  can  the  reality  of
an  external  personality  be  admitted.1

This  is  as  true  of  mediums  as  of  somnambulists,  only  in  the
latter  it  is  produced  by  external  suggestion,  and  in  the  former
it  is  entirely  due  to  auto-suggestion.  But  in  both  cases  the  new
personality  is  arbitrary  and  factitious,  and  has  no  more  external
reality  than  poetic  creations — than  Esmeralda,  Carmen,  Figaro,
or  Don  Juan.2

I  will  now  give  some  examples  of  these  automatic  writings  if
only  to  show  the  high  improbability  that  they  proceed  from
spirits.

1The  best  instance  of  these  alterations  of  personality  is  perhaps  that  of
Helen  Smith  becoming  Marie  Antoinette,  of  which  Flournoy  made  a  pro-
found study.

aMme.  Noggerath,  a  kindly  woman  who  lived  to  a  great  age  and  died  some
years  since,  held  many  seances  with  different  mediums,  and  devoted  her
whole  life  to  propagation  of  spiritualist  doctrines  which  she  most  profoundly
believed.  She  published  in  a  book,  La  Survie,  sa  realite,  sa  manifestation,  sa
philosophic.  Echos  de  VAu-dcla,  Paris,  Flammarion,  1897,  the  messages  claim-
ing to  be  from  the  spirits  of  the  dead.  Pythagoras,  Socrates,  Buddha,  Fenelon,
Bossuet,  Moliere,  Abelard,  Moses,  St.  John,  Robespierre,  Cuvier,  Diderot,  all
appear.    This  list  should  by  itself  be  enough  to  show  the  nullity  of  this  belief.

CRYPTESTHESIA  IN  GENERAL  73

You  neglect  me,  and  forget  me  in  the  petty  cares  of  your  world.  You
keep  me  waiting  when  I  beg  for  a  family  reunion.  You  make  a  vacuum
for  me,  as  it  were;  I  cannot  enter  on  an  unknown  void.

— MOLIEKE.

0  Venice,  of  whom  so  many  poets  have  sung.  Venice,  flower-like,  what
remains  of  her  glory  and  her  gorgeous  palaces?  The  glory  of  Venice  is
no  more;  the  vices  of  her  proud  rulers  have  killed  her.  Where  are  now
the  sublime  teachings  of  Jesus?  All  has  vanished.  The  cross  has  cast  a
deadly  shadow,  deadly  because  phantoms  intercepted  its  rays.

— Pythagoras.

Life  on  earth  (la  vie  planet  aire)  enables  the  resolutions  taken  in  the
wandering  state — that  is,  in  sidereal  life— to  be  reduced  to  practice.  In
the  latter  state,  there  being  no  bodily  needs  to  force  the  spirit  into  action,

life  can  only  be  contemplative.  T  T

—J.  J.  Rousseau.

What  melancholy  times !  What  sad  days !  How  veiled  is  my  soul !
How  have  I  fallen  so  low?  Why  can  I  not  forget?  Why  do  rays  of
light  fall  on  me,  followed  by  utter  darkness? — the  vague  remembrance
of  a  past  that  I  feel  to  be  cruel,  but  cannot  re-awaken!  Oh,  the  cries  of
terror,  the  flowing,  steaming  blood !  _  _

— FOUQUIER-TlNVILLE.

No  doubt  the  words  about  steaming  blood  aroused  the  memory
of  Mile,  de  Sombreuil  in  the  medium's  mind,  for  immediately
after  Fouquier-Tinville  Mile,  de  Sombreuil  comes  on  the  scene
and  says  some  astounding  things :

1  love  Fouquier-Tinville.    I  loved  him  from  the  moment  he  saved  my

life.    I  recognized  his  beauty  and  his  own  kind  of  greatness.   Yes,  I  love

him!    I  suffer  when  people  praise  my  virtue  and  call  him  whom  I  love  a

monster;  O  Love,  Love!  _

— Mlle.  de  Sombreuil.

Let  us  put  aside  these  divagations ;  they  would  only  be  matter
for  laughter  if  it  were  not  for  the  melancholy  fact  that  they  have
been  accepted  as  genuine  by  honourable  men.  In  fact  they  are  but
manifestations  of  the  subconsciousness  of  the  mediums,  which
is  often  below  mediocrity.

There  are  exceptions  to  this  poverty  of  language  in  spiritist
communications.  M.  Carmelo  Samona  having  asked  a  spirit  why
nothing  of  the  beyond  was  divulged,  received  by  raps  the  follow-
ing really  fine  symbolism:  Non  mangerai  pane  il  cui  seme  non
abbia  dormito  prima  nello  nuda  terra,  la  cui  bionda  spiga  non
si  sia  curvata  al  soffio  del  vento,  e  non  sia  caduta  poi  sotti
Tinexorabile  falca  del  mietitore  (Psiche  misteriosa,  Palermo,
1910,  p.  64).

74

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

In  a  few  minutes,  Laura  speaking  to  Petrarch  through  Stella,
who  in  her  normal  state  is  not  poetic,  says :

Si  j'etais  l'air  que  tu  respires,
Ami,  comme  je  serais  doux!
J'effeuillerais  sur  ton  sourire,
Des  baisers  exquisement  fous!

Among  the  most  remarkable  exceptions  are  the  verses  dictated
to  Victor  Hugo,  who  believed  in  spiritualism.1

Jules  Bois  gives,  in  Le  Mirage  Moderne  (Paris,  Ollendorff,
1907)  some  interesting  details  on  Victor  Hugo's  spiritualism.
He  was  converted  by  Mme.  Emile  de  Girardin  in  Jersey,  Septem-
ber 6,  1853.  At  the  first  seance  Vacquerie  asked,  What  word
am  I  thinking  of?  The  table  answered,  You  mean  "suffering."
The  word  in  Vacquerie's  mind  was  "Love."  The  answer  was
ingenious  and  unexpected.  In  later  seances  Victor  Hugo  was
not  at  the  table:  Charles  Hugo  was  the  medium.  He  knew  no
English.  An  Englishman  came  in  and  called  Lord  Byron,  who
replied  in  English:

Vex  not  the  bard,  his  lyre  is  broken,
His  last  song  sung,  his  last  word  spoken.

Strange  apocalyptic  answers  are  attributed  to  Ezekiel,  and —
to  the  lion  of  Androcles !  On  the  margin  of  the  MS.  Victor  Hugo
writes  the  stupefying  words,  "The  volumes  dictated  to  my  son
Charles  by  the  table  contain  an  answer  from  the  lion  of
Androcles."

Each  verse  given  is  good  in  itself,  but  the  development  of  the
poem  is  incoherent:  "^Eschylus"  expresses  himself  thus:

Non,  1'homme  ne  sera  jamais  libre  sur  terre :
Cest  le  triste  captif  du  bien,  du  mal,  du  beau,
II  ne  peut  devenir — c'est  la  loi  du  mystere —
Libre  qu'en  devenant  prisonnier  du  tombeau.

Fatalite,  lion  dont  Tame  est  devoree,
J'ai  voulu  te  dompter  d'un  bras  cyclopeen,
J'ai  voulu  sur  mon  dos  porter  ta  peau  tigree,
II  me  plaisait  qu'on  dit :  "Eschyle  nemeen."

a"The  moving  or  speaking  table  has  been  much  ridiculed.  Let  us  speak
out.  This  ridicule  is  pointless.  It  is  easier  to  mock  than  to  examine,  but  it
is  not  scientific.  .  .  .  Science  knows  very  little  and  has  no  right  to
dream.  A  scientist  who  ridicules  possibilities  is  near  to  being  a  fool.  The
unexpected  should  always  be  looked  for  in  science." — {Shakespeare  by  Victor
Hugo,  Lacroix,  Paris,  1864.)

CRYPTESTHESIA  IN  GENERAL  75

Je  n'ai  pas  reussi :  la  bete  f  auve  humaine
Dechire  encor  nos  chairs  de  son  ongle  eternel.
Le  cceur  de  l'homme  est  plein  encor  de  cris  de  haine,
Cette  fosse  aux  lions  n'a  pas  de  Daniel.

Apres  moi  vint  Shakspeare,  il  vit  les  trois  sorcieres,
O  Nemee,  arriver  du  fond  de  la  foret,
Et  jeter  dans  nos  cceur s  ses  troublantes  chaudieres,
Les  philtres  monstrueux  de  rimmense  secret.

II  vint  dans  ce  grand  bois,  la  limite  du  monde;
Apres  moi,  le  dompteur,  il  vint,  lui,  le  chasseur.
Et,  comme  il  regardait  dans  son  ame  profonde,
Macbeth  cria:  "Fuyons,"  et  Hamlet  dit:  "J'ai  peur."

II  se  sauva.    Moilere,  alors  sur  la  lisiere,
Parut,  et  dit:  "Voyez  si  mon  ame  faiblit.
Commandeur,  viens  souper."   Mais  au  festin  de  Pierre
Moliere  trembla  tant  que  Don  Juan  palit.

Mais  que  ce  soit  le  spectre,  ou  la  sorciere,  ou  l'ombre,
C'est  toujours  toi,  lion,  et  ta  griffe  de  fer.
Tu  remplis  tellement  la  grande  foret  sombre,
Que  Dante  te  rencontre  en  entrant  dans  l'enfer.

Tu  n'es  dompte  qu'a  l'heure  ou  la  mort,  belluaire,
T'arrache  de  la  dent  Tame  humaine  en  lambeau,
Te  prend,  dans  la  foret  profonde  et  seculaire,
Et  te  montre  du  doigt  ta  cage,  le  tombeau.

Sometimes  Victor  Hugo  interrogated  the  spirits,  of  course  in
admirable  poetry.   One  day  he  addressed  Moliere  :

Les  rois,  et  vous,  la-haut,  changez-vous  d'enveloppe?
Louis  quatorze  au  ciel  n'est-il  pas  ton  valet?
Francois  premier  est-il  le  fou  de  Triboulet?
Et  Cresus,  le  laquais  d'Esope?

But  Moliere  did  not  reply :  the  answer  came  from  the  Shadow
of  the  Tomb.

Le  Ciel  ne  punit  pas  par  de  telles  grimaces,
Et  ne  travestit  pas  en  fou  Francois  premier,
L'enfer  n'est  pas  un  bal  de  grotesques  paillasses,
Dont  le  noir  chatiment  serait  le  costumier.

Dissatisfied  with  the  response,  Hugo  repeats  his  invocation  to
Moliere :

Toi  qui  du  vieux  Shakspeare  as  ramasse  le  ceste,
Toi  qui  pres  d'Othello  sculptas  le  sombre  Alceste,
Astre  qui  resplendis  sur  un  double  horizon,
Poete  au  Louvre,  archange  au  ciel,  6  grand  Moliere  1
Ta  visite  splendide  honore  ma  maison.

76

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Me  tendras-tu  la  haut  ta  main  hospitaliere  ?
Que  la  fosse  pour  moi  s'ouvre  dans  le  gazon.
Je  vois  sans  peur  la  tombe  aux  ombres  eternelles ;
Car  je  sais  que  le  corps  y  trouve  une  prison,
Mais  que  Tame  y  trouve  des  ailes.

The  Shadow  of  the  Tomb  (probably  annoyed),  answers:

Esprit  qui  veux  savoir  le  secret  des  tenebres,
Et  qui,  tenant  en  main  le  celeste  flambeau,
Viens,  furtif,  a  tatons,  dans  nos  ombres  funebres,
Crocheter  l'immense  tombeau!

Rentre  dans  ton  silence,  et  souffle  tes  chandelles,
Rentre  dans  cette  nuit  dont  quelquefois  tu  sors,
L'ceil  humain  ne  voit  pas  les  choses  eternelles,
Par  dessus  l'epaule  des  morts.

Fine  verses,  but  not  due  to  Moliere  or  to  ^Eschylus,  any  more
than  to  the  lion  of  Androcles.

In  the  first  seances  given  by  Helen  Smith,  Victor  Hugo  is
supposed  to  be  the  inspiring  influence;  and  as  interpreted  by
Helen  Smith,  his  poetic  faculty  has  strangely  gone  off:

L'amour,  divine  essence,  insondale  mystere,
Ne  le  repousse  point.  C'est  le  ciel  sur  la  terre.
L'amour,  la  charite  seront  ta  vie  entiere;
Jouis  et  fais  jouir;  mais  n'en  sois  jamais  fiere.

(Flournoy,  loc.  cit.)

The  lion  of  Androcles  was  a  better  poet  than  Helen  Smith's
Victor  Hugo.

The  Shadow  of  the  Tomb  spoke  in  prose  as  finely  as  in  verse.
As  Victor  Hugo  complained  of  the  use  of  symbolical  expressions,
the  Shadow  replied:

"O  ill-advised!  You  say  the  Shadow  of  the  Tomb  speaks  in  human
language,  and  uses  biblical  figures  and  words,  metaphors,  and  falsehood  to
express  truth.  The  Shadow  of  the  Tomb  is  not  a  mask,  I  am  a  reality.  If
I  condescend  to  speak  your  jargon  in  which  the  sublime  is  so  tempestuous,
it  is  because  you  are  limited.  Words  are  a  fetter  to  the  spirit;  symbols
are  the  casket  of  thought;  your  ideals  are  restraints  on  the  soul;  the
sublime  to  you  is  a  low  blind-alley;  your  sky  is  the  roof  of  a  cave;  your
language  is  a  noise  bound  up  between  the  covers  of  a  dictionary.  My
language  is  immensity,  the  ocean,  the  tempest.  My  library  is  of  thousands
of  stars  and  millions  of  planets  and  constellations.  If  you  desire  that  I
should  speak  to  you  in  my  own  tongue,  ascend  Mount  Sinai,  you  will  hear
me  in  its  lightnings;  go  to  Calvary,  you  will  see  me  in  its  rays;  descend
into  the  tomb,  you  will  hear  me  in  its  mercy."

CRYPTESTHESIA  IN  GENERAL  77

If,  as  seems  probable,  the  subconscious  of  Charles  Hugo  dic-
tated both  prose  and  verse,  that  subconsciousness  emulated  the
genius  of  Victor  Hugo  himself.

There  are  other  interesting  cases  in  which  it  is  just  as  necessary
to  suppose  purely  human  intervention.

Hermance  Dufaux,  a  girl  of  fourteen,  has  given  a  Life  of
Jeanne  D'Arc,  dictated  by  Jeanne,  and  Confessions  of  Louis
XI.1  Allan  Kardec  guarantees  the  honesty  of  this  young  girl
in  her  claim  to  have  written  these  books  by  inspiration  without
reference  to  historical  records  and  documents.

Four  hypotheses  are  possible:

1.  Gross  fraud,  getting  the  needful  particulars  from  public
libraries,  or  from  easily  procurable  books;  just  as  Prosper  Meri-
mee  was  able  to  write  Le  Theatre  dc  Clara  Gazul,  without  any
spiritist  implication.  This  seems  likely ;  though  it  implies  a  clev-
erness, skill,  and  dishonesty  of  which  this  respectable  girl  was
perhaps  incapable  (?).

2.  An  infallible  memory,  partially  subconscious,  so  that  Her-
mance could  recall  at  the  moment  required  everything  that  she
had  read  and  heard.  Her  subconscious  intelligence,  more  able
than  her  normal  mind,  classifies,  condenses,  and  verifies  all  the
detail  she  has  read  and  heard,  and  attributes  these  to  Jeanne
and  to  Louis  XI.  What  could  we  not  say  and  write  if  we  could
thus  recover  all  the  details  of  all  our  reading !  Even  at  fourteen
years  old  a  great  deal  might  have  been  read!

Hermance  Dufaux,  speaking  as  Jeanne  d'Arc,  resembles  Helen
Smith  who  sincerely  thinks  herself  Marie  Antoinette  or  Caglios-
tro.  I  think  this  hypothesis  almost  as  likely  as  the  first,  although
a  third  might  possibly  be  taken.

3.  By  cryptesthesia,  Hermance,  being  a  sensitive,  knows  facts,
names,  dates,  and  events  that  have  not  come  to  her  through  her
normal  senses.  Then  these  metapsychic  cognitions  group  them-
selves around  the  personality  created  by  auto-suggestion.

Before  admitting  this  bold  hypothesis  in  such  a  case,  it  would
be  necessary  to  know  the  exact  limits  of  Hermance's  reading;
which  after  an  interval  of  half  a  century,  is  impossible.

4.  The  last  hypothesis  is  that  the  consciousnesses  of  Louis  XI
and  Jeanne  have  not  disappeared  from  the  world  and  write
through  Hermance.

lRevue  Spirite,  1858,  p.  73,  and  La  Verite,  May  29,  1864  (1  vol.,  E.  Dentu,
Paris.  1858).

78

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Here  we  have  a  terribly  incredible  hypothesis  that  cannot  even
be  considered  unless  the  radical  impossibility  of  the  three  former
hypotheses  has  been  demonstrated.

I  have  dealt  fully  with  the  case  of  Hermance  Dufaux  because
it  applies  equally  to  all  the  cases  of  automatic  writing  which  are
presumed  to  identify  dead  persons.

Bersot  (cited  by  Grasset,  ad  loc,  195)  states  that  there  was
printed  at  Guadaloupe  in  1853,  Juanita,  a  novel,  by  a  chair,  fol-
lowed by  a  proverb  and  some  other  ineptitudes  from  the  same
source.

The  story  of  Charles  Dickens  dictating  the  conclusion  of  his
novel,  The  Mystery  of  Edwin  Drood,  after  his  decease,  is  still
more  astonishing.1

In  1872  a  young  working  shoemaker  named  James,  who  had
received  but  little  school  education,  found  himself  able  to  write
automatically.  In  this  way  Dickens,  not  long  dead,  expressed  the
desire  to  complete  the  work  left  unfinished  at  his  decease.  James
set  to  work,  i.e.,  to  write  under  the  dictation  of  Dickens.  The
result  is  this  volume,  that  some  critics  consider  quite  worthy  of
Dickens.  On  this  I  am  not  competent  to  speak,  nor  to  appreciate
the  similarities  in  style,  the  use  of  the  London  dialect  in  place  of
the  American  idiom,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  topography  of
London;  but  it  is  well  known  that  parodies  are  easy  enough,

e.g.,  "a  la  Maniere  de   "  by  Muller  and  P.  Reboux.  Even

if  the  parody  were  more  perfect  I  should  not  infer  the  inter-
vention of  Dickens.  Even  if  James's  good  faith  were  established
and  the  incapacity  of  normal  intelligence  to  create  this  able  parody
were  also  proved,  I  should  still  not  infer  the  survival  of  Dickens.
Any  supposition  seems  to  me  preferable  to  the  naive  and  simple
but  terribly  improbable  hypothesis  that  Charles  Dickens  returned
from  the  other  world  to  move  the  brachial  muscles  of  James.

The  Martian  language  invented  by  the  ingenious  mind  of
Helen  Smith  shows  how  much  the  subconscious  is  capable  of.
No  one  can  suppose  that  the  idiom  is  real,  i.e.,  that  the  inhabitants
of  Mars,  if  they  exist,  speak  a  language  queerly  derived  from
the  French.  Flournoy  has  shown  in  his  incomparable  book  the
mental  mechanism  that  goes  to  the  creation  of  a  new  language.
Helen  Smith's  Martian  language  leads  us  to  suppose  that  the

xThe  Mystery  of  Edwin  Drood,  1873.     (Clark  Bryan,  Springfield,  Mass.,

U.  S.  A.,  The  Spiritualist,  1873,  322.)

CRYPTESTHESIA  IN  GENERAL  79

Sanscrit  she  spoke  is  derived  from  the  same  subconscious
source.1

Nevertheless  the  problem  presented  by  Helen  Smith's  Sanscrit
is  less  simple  than  that  of  her  Martian  language,  for  Sanscrit
is  a  real  tongue,  and  moreover  unusually  difficult.  Now  Sanscrit
books  are  not  common,  and  Helen  had  none  such  at  her  disposal ;
she  did  not  frequent  public  libraries,  but  what  she  said  was  San-
scrit— a  rudimentary,  defective,  and  ungrammatical  Sanscrit,
but  still  Sanscrit.2

M.  de  Saussure,  addressing  the  innumerable  readers  to  whom
Sanscrit  is  unknown,  and  wishing  to  put  them  in  a  position  to
appreciate  the  kind  of  Sanscrit  Helen  wrote,  drew  out  a  Latin
parallel  as  follows:  Meate  domina  mea  sorore  forinda  indi  deo
indesingodio  deo  primo  nomine  obera  mina  loca  suave  tibi  offisio
et  ogurio  et  olo  romano  sua  dinata  perano  die  nono  colo  desimo
ridere  pevere  nove.

It  is  barbarous  and  incomprehensible  Latin,  with  here  and  there
some  single  Latin  words.

However,  and  this  is  very  strange,  there  being  no  letter  f  in
Sanscrit,  there  is  none  in  Helen's  writing.  It  is  true  that  there  is
no  u  either,  but  ou,  and  Helen  has  written  ou  though  she  pro-
nounced it  as  u.

This  problem  of  Helen  Smith's  Sanscrit  is  a  delicate  one  and
should  not  be  lightly  treated.  I  am  inclined  to  admit,  not  the
incarnation  of  an  Indian  prince,  but  a  certain  cryptesthesia  which
allowed  of  the  use  of  some  scraps  of  Sanscrit.  This  is  the  mature
opinion  of  Myers,  with  which  I  concur  under  reservations.

Many  other  books  have  been  automatically  written.  But  it
would  need  a  sickly  and  almost  criminal  credulity  to  think  that
Thermotis,  the  daughter  of  an  Egyptian  king,  had  dictated  the
work  entitled  Pharaon  Menephtah*

Another  attempt  at  a  Martian  language  and  a  Martian  novel,  both  very
poor,  was  made  by  Mrs.  Smead,  studied  by  J.  Hyslop.  Not  much  is  inferable
from  them.  J.  Hyslop,  The  Mediumship  of  Mrs.  Smead,  A.  S.  P.,  1906,  vi,
461-502.

2In  his  Nouvelles  Observations  (pp.  212-213)  Flournoy  says  that  the  person
in  whose  house  Helen  gave  seances  had  a  Sanscrit  grammar  in  the  room
where  the  seances  were  given.  But  how  could  Helen  have  found  opportunity
in  the  course  of  her  seance  to  study  this  grammar  unknown  to  those  present
so  as  to  acquire  the  elements  of  the  language?  Could  she  have  taken  this
book  home  secretly,  perhaps  even  unconsciously?

3Pharaon  Menephtah,  2  vols.,  Paris,  Edit.  Ghio,  and  in  the  Libr.  des  sciences
psycholog.  Also  Episode  de  la  vie  de  Tibere,  by  the  same  author  (L'abbaye
des  Benedictins,  2  vols.).

80

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

The  spirit,  "Rochester,"  who  is  supposed  to  have  dictated,
conjointly  with  Thermotis,  these  strange  pages,  which  proceed
from  a  mental  automatism  as  human  as  it  is  mediocre  in  quality,
was,  it  appears,  once  upon  a  time  a  certain  Caius  Lucilius.  Such
fantasies  are  not  worth  comment.

There  is  a  whole  literature  of  this  kind :  for  instance  the  Letters
from  a  Living  Dead  Man,  by  X.  (London  and  New  York,  1914).
X.  was  an  American  magistrate  (probably  David  P.  Hatch  of
Los  Angeles,  California),  versed  in  philosophy.  Mr.  X.  also
published  the  War  Letters  from  a  Living  Dead  Man  (Rider,
London,  1918),  by  the  automatist  Elsa  Barker.  These  show  the
same  vague  and  well-meaning  idealism  as  most  other  writings
of  the  kind.  There  is  nothing,  absolutely  nothing,  to  show  the
presence  of  any  intelligence  other  than  that  of  the  automatist.
Quite  recently  a  book  (the  second  of  a  series),  entirely  auto-
matically written  has  appeared  in  New  York;  but  though  full
of  high  ideals,  it  contains  no  indication  of  anything  beyond  what
any  cultivated  mind  could  attain  without  difficulty.1

The  characteristics  of  the  literature  of  the  unconscious  are
distinctive  enough  to  be  recognized  without  difficulty.  There
is  in  the  first  place  a  marked  tendency  to  vague  and  mystical
phrases  on  the  destiny  of  the  soul  and  its  imperishable  powers.
These  divagations  of  the  subconscious  are  always  markedly  re-
ligious, as  if  their  purpose  were  to  lay  down  the  lines  for  the
rites  and  doctrines  of  a  new  religion.  They  are  pervaded  by  a
love  for  humanity  which  would  be  touching  if  it  were  not  ex-
pressed as  a  rhetorical  and  cloudy  philanthropy.  Automatic
writings  abhor  precision,  and  shun  precise  indications,  favouring
very  ordinary  commonplaces.  They  would  seem  to  be  the  work
of  poets  ignorant  of  prosody,  of  philosophers  who  know  no
philosophy,  of  priests  ignorant  of  theology;  all  of  whom  make
laudable  efforts  to  give  us  counsel  on  philosophy  and  precepts
on  religion  in  poetic  and  nebulous  language.

With  the  rarest  exceptions  and  despite  some  comical  puerilities,
these  emanations  from  the  subconscious  are,  as  Myers  points  out,
marked  by  undeniable  morality  and  tend  to  develop  all  that  is
best  in  human  nature.

An  interesting  little  book  on  automatic  writing  has  appeared,

1  'To  a  woman  from  Meslom,"  a  message  from  Meslom  in  the  life  beyond,
received  automatically  by  Mary  McEvilly  (New  York,  Brentano,  1920).  See
also  A  Record  of  Psychic  Experiments.

CRYPTESTHESIA  IN  GENERAL  81

by  Mrs.  Hester  Travers-Smith,  who  tells  the  story  of  her  own
mediumship.  She  worked  sometimes  by  writing,  sometimes  with
a  planchette.  She  had  four  guides — Peter,  Eyen,  Astor,  and
Shamar.  The  results  do  not  lead  to  any  very  clear  inferences
whether  as  to  pragmatic  cryptesthesia  (psychometry)  or  to  pre-
monitions; but  there  are  some  useful  rules  on  the  conduct  of
seances  for  writing  automatically  or  with  the  planchette.

There  is  automatic  drawing  as  well  as  automatic  writing,  which
sometimes  gives  interesting  results.  Helen  Smith  has  made  some
curious  spirit-drawings.1

She  had  a  hallucinatory  vision  and  reproduced  it  in  form  and
colour.  As  she  took  very  long  to  complete  these  drawings,  some-
times only  adding  a  few  strokes  of  the  brush  in  a  day,  their
execution  took  more  than  a  year.  They  were  ultimately  com-
pleted, however,  and  every  time  she  was  prompted  to  paint,  the
vision  reappeared.  Other  designs  have  been  reproduced  by  M.
Claparede.2

Commandant  Le  Goarant  de  Tromelin  has  often  sent  me
strange  spiritist  designs  made  by  himself  in  a  semi-somnambulic
state.  Every  letter  is  composed  of  human  or  animal  forms  in
juxtaposition.

A  lady  known  to  Dr.  Geley  has  shown  him  sheets  of  automatic
drawings  representing  abstract  qualities — anger,  gluttony,  avarice,
etc. — by  clever  caricatures.

I  have  recently  seen  a  number  of  drawings  by  Mme.  Blocus
when  in  the  mediumistic  state.  She  is  in  no  way  a  professional
medium,  though  her  mother  has  long  been  able  to  write  auto-
matically. Her  drawings,  which  are  sometimes  very  charming,
are  mostly  ornamental  designs,  and  are  very  rapidly  produced.

Jules  Bois  has  cited  very  many  cases  of  mediumistic  drawing;
such  as  that  by  Victorien  Sardou,  inspired  by  Bernard  de  Palissy,
entitled,  'The  House  of  Mozart."  (Sardou  had  written  a  play
under  that  title,  which  had  been  refused.)  He  drew  another,
called,  "The  House  of  Zoroaster,"  in  the  same  style.  Fernand
Desmoulin  and  Hugo  d'Alesi,  both  talented  painters  in  their
normal  state,  have  produced  curious  pictures  and  some  remark-
able designs  subconsciously.

The  mechanism  of  automatic  drawing  is  the  same  as  for  auto-

JA.  Lemaitre,  Une  etude  psychologique  sur  les  tableaux  medianimiques  de
Mile.  H.  Smith.    (Arch,  de  Psychologic  Geneva,  July,  1907.)

2Bull.  de  la  Soc.  Med.  de  Geneve,  June  3,  1918.   A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  147.

82

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

matic  writing.  The  hand  draws  and  paints  instead  of  writing.
The  impulse  is  irresistible,  involuntary,  and  independent  not  only
of  the  will  but  also  of  the  consciousness  of  the  medium.  Out-
lines are  drawn  the  meaning  of  which  is  not  understood  by  any
one,  neither  by  the  medium  himself  nor  by  other  persons,  but
such  outlines  are  curiously  connected  with  others  analogous  to
them,  which,  standing  alone,  appear  devoid  of  significance,  but
taken  together  acquire  a  very  definite  meaning.  Sometimes  per-
sons who  have  no  artistic  ability  produce  strange  and  complicated
designs,  which  are  always  of  a  symbolic  nature.  Such  phenomena
are  proper  to  somnambulism;  it  is  difficult  to  see  in  them  any
metapsychic  influence.

Spiritualist  literature  abounds  in  productions  of  this  kind,  but
only  credulity  can  see  in  them  anything  more  than  the  lucubra-
tions of  the  subconscious.  Nearly  all  are  characterized  by  vaguely
Oriental  symbolism  that  is  sometimes  not  without  a  strange
beauty.1

All  these  writings  and  paintings  might  have  been  done  by
human  faculty.  Nowhere  do  we  find  the  quid  divinum  that  would
lead  us  to  refer  them  to  some  intelligence  above  the  ordinary
human  level.  Therefore,  as  we  desire  to  exclude  from  meta-
psychics  everything  of  which  human  psychism  is  capable,  we
shall  not  take  them  into  account  here,  but  none  the  less  they  con-
stitute an  extremely  curious  chapter  in  normal  psychology  which
should  be  carefully  studied  by  psychologists.

4.  Classification  of  the  Modes  of  Cryptesthesia

These  phenomena  are  so  numerous,  varied,  and  mysterious
that  some  classification  must  be  attempted  to  reduce  this  chaos
to  some  sort  of  order.

Such  groupings  are  necessary  for  study  and  for  teaching,  but
there  should  be  no  illusion  as  to  their  value:  they  do  not  give
any  adequate  interpretation  of  these  complex  phenomena.  Real
facts  can  never  be  classified  in  our  arbitrary  schemes  with  the
precision  we  are  apt  to  assign  to  them.

In  the  first  place  we  shall  discriminate  between  experimental
cryptesthesia  deliberately  excited,  and  accidental  cryptesthesia  oc-

xSee  the  mediumistic  designs  by  Machner  (A.  S.  P.,  1908,  xv,  86)  and
by  Petit  Jean  (A.  S.  P.,  191 1,  xxi,  360).

CRYPTESTHESIA  IN  GENERAL  83

curring  unexpectedly.  This  latter  might  be  called  spontaneous,
but  this  term  would  not  be  quite  accurate,  for  accidental  crypt-
esthesia  is  induced  by  some  exterior  cause.

It  is  very  possible  that  there  is  no  essential  difference  between
the  two  kinds ;  but  the  mode  of  studying  them  must  be  different,
for  they  do  not  arise  in  the  same  way.

Experimental  cryptesthesia  can  be  more  easily  examined,  in
principle  at  any  rate,  because  it  is  voluntarily  aroused,  whereas
the  accidental  type  occurs  suddenly,  without  the  intervention  of
an  experimenter,  by  chance,  and  without  intention,  in  normal
persons  either  asleep,  awake,  or  half  awake,  who  are  themselves
surprised  by  the  occurrence.

The  division  shows  that  metapsychic  science  is  both  experi-
mental and  observational.  To  neglect  either  method  would  be
to  maim  the  science  disastrously.

Experimental  cryptesthesia  can  be  studied:

A.  In  normal  subjects,

B.  In  hypnotized  subjects,

C.  In  mediums,

D.  In  sensitives.

Hence  come  four  distinct  modes,  even  though  the  division  be-
tween them  is  not  very  well  defined :  for  on  the  one  hand  mediums
go  into  trances  strongly  resembling  the  hypnotic  state,  and  it
may  sometimes  even  be  necessary  to  hypnotize  them  in  order  to
bring  out  their  mediumship ;  and  on  the  other  hand  it  is  impos-
sible to  tell  how  near  persons  that  we  think  normal  may  be  to
mediumship  or  to  hypnotic  states.

There  is,  however,  this  difference,  that  in  most  cases,  if  not
in  all,  mediums  speak,  write,  or  move  the  table  or  the  planchette
as  if  under  the  influence  of  an  extraneous  personality;  whereas
hypnotized  subjects  invoke  no  guide.  But  this  distinction  is
more  apparent  than  real,  for  without  doubt  the  past  training  of
sensitives,  mediums,  and  hypnotized  subjects  has  played  a  pre-
ponderant part  in  the  maintenance  or  the  suppression  of  their
normal  personality.

Sensitives  are  apparently  normal  persons,  who,  without  being
mediums  or  somnambulists,  seem  capable  of  lucidity  and  clair-
voyance under  certain  conditions,  not  accidental  but  experimental,
such  as  crystal  vision  psychometry,  etc.

Accidental  cryptesthesia  is  that  which  supervenes  suddenly  in

84

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

quite  normal  persons  who  are  neither  in  the  mediumistic  nor  the
hypnotic  state.

All  accidental  cryptesthesia  may  be  called  "monition."

Monitions  are  the  revelation  of  some  past  or  present  event
by  other  than  the  normal  senses.  Premonitions  relate  to  an
event  in  the  future.

As  monitions  are  numerous  and  varied,  we  shall  distinguish
between  those  referring  to  trivial  events  and  serious  ones,  the
latter  including  all  monitions  of  death.  These  latter  indeed  repre-
sent a  group  of  fairly  homogeneous  facts  that  it  would  be  incon-
venient to  separate.

Collective  monitions  will  be  dealt  with  in  a  chapter  by  them-
selves; for  they  are  intermediate  between  the  subjective  and  the
objective  phenomena  of  metapsychics,  and  therefore  deserve
special  consideration.

Finally,  we  must  assign  the  phenomena  of  the  divining-rod
to  cryptesthesia,  and  perhaps  also  some  curious  manifestations
of  arithmetical  intelligence  apparent  in  certain  animals.1

*If  it  should  be  thought  that  I  am  too  severe  on  theories  I  will  answer  by
quoting  Claude  Bernard,  the  acknowledged  master  in  experimental  sciences:

"In  science  faith  is  an  error,  scepticism  is  a  progress.  All  the  systems
.  .  .  that  have  been  created  in  the  embryonic  stages  of  any  science  are
doomed  to  oblivion  and  vanish  away  as  transitory  methods,  as  the  science
takes  shape.  Progress,  therefore,  does  not  consist  in  reviving  past  systems,
but  in  forgetting  them  and  replacing  them  by  a  knowledge  of  the  law  of  the
phenomena"  (Lessons  in  experimental  pathology,  1872,  p.  399).

CHAPTER  III

Experimental  Cryptesthesia

1.  Cryptesthesia  in  Normal  Individuals

Many  experiments  have  been  made  on  normal  persons,  though
not  as  many  as  are  required.

These  give  widely  differing  results  according  to  the  person
under  experiment.  Nevertheless  if  lucidity  exists  in  certain  ex-
ceptional persons,  as  has  been  proved,  it  is  probable  that  some
traces  of  it  will  be  found  in  others.  It  is  highly  improbable
that  along  with  those  who  are  frequently  lucid  there  should
not  be  others  who  have  some  share  in  this  faculty,  however
slight  it  may  be.

It  is  therefore  necessary  to  investigate  whether  some  trace  of
lucidity  may  be  discoverable  in  normal  persons.  This  trace  of
cryptesthesia  may  be  determined  by  the  answer  to  the  question,
When  an  individual  indicates  at  random  a  fact,  a  number,  or  a
form  whose  probability  is  determinable,  is  the  ratio  of  probability
changed  by  the  occurrence  of  cryptesthesia?

Long  since  I  suggested  this  method  of  investigation,  and  made
numerous  experiments  of  the  kind,  which  have  been  repeated
and  confirmed  by  my  learned  colleagues  of  the  S.  P.  R.1

These  experiments  on  insensitive  or  barely  sensitive  persons
were  made  with  playing-cards,  drawings,  and  photographs.  I
have  sometimes  made  use  of  the  divining-rod,  showing  uncon-
scious muscular  movements  for  these  experiments.  In  all  cases
the  exact  probability  could  be  determined.

It  was  always  found  that  the  number  of  successes  was  slightly
in  excess  of  the  probable  number.  For  instance;  on  2,103  guesses
of  playing-cards  there  were  552  successes  as  against  a  probable
525.  But  for  a  sound  inference  it  is  well  to  eliminate  those  that
have  been  so  many  (say  over  100)  on  any  given  day,  as  to
produce  fatigue  and  confusion.    Reckoning  experiments  not

1C.  Richet,  La  suggestion  mentale  et  le  calcul  des  probabilites  {Revue
philosophique,  1884,  xviii,  609-671);  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  i,  31-70.

85

86

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

exceeding  100  on  any  day,  there  were  315  successes  against  a
probable  280,  the  number  of  guesses  being  1,132.  This  is  still
inconclusive.

By  experiments  made  in  England  by  the  same  method  with
17,653  guesses  there  were  4,760  successes,  exceeding  the  probable
number  by  347.  This  is  more  distinctive,  but  still  not  very  con-
vincing. It  seems  possible,  however,  to  distinguish  persons  pos-
sessed of  more  or  less  lucidity  by  this  means.

My  friends  G.  F.  and  H.  F.  were  certainly  slightly  sensitive.
Working  with  the  divining-rod  when  the  odds  were  1:8,  1:6,
and  1  : 48,  we  had  the  results  stated  below  on  five  trials :

i  :  8  i  :  6  i  :  48

1st  trial  Success.  Failure.  Failure.

2d  trial  Success.  Failure.  Failure.

3d  trial  Success.  Success.  Success.

4th  trial  Success.  Failure.  Failure.

5th  trial  Success.  Success.  Success.

Thus,  the  probability  being  1  to  8,  there  were  5  successes  on  5
trials.  The  probability  of  five  consecutive  successes  is  only  1  in
32,000.   Cryptesthesia  in  this  case  is  a  moral  certainty.

On  the  other  hand,  A.  P.  and  myself,  who  neither  of  us  have
any  lucidity,  operating  side  by  side  with  G.  F.  and  H.  F.,  obtained  :

1.  Success,  failure,  failure.

2.  Failure,  failure,  failure.

3.  Failure,  failure,  failure.

4.  Failure,  failure,  failure.

Showing  no  appreciable  difference  between  the  probable  number
and  that  actually  obtained,  quite  different  from  the  results  by
G.  F.  and  H.  F.

A  later  series  of  trials  made  simultaneously  by  B.,  by  S.,  and
by  myself  with  cards  seen  by  no  one,  B.  had  5  failures,  I  had
1  success,  and  S.,  who  has  mediumistic  powers,  had  2  successes.
The  compounded  probability  on  two  successes  (each  having  the
simple  probability  of  1 :  52)  is  1 :  250.

We  cannot  enter  into  all  the  details  given  in  Sir  William  Bar-
rett's report  (Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  Experimental  Telepathy,  Phantasms
of  the  Living,  i,  20-29;  i,  47-65);  but  the  importance  of  Sir
Oliver  Lodge's  experiment  with  young  girls  who  were  neither

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA

87

hypnotized  nor  mediums  demands  mention.1  Mr.  Malcolm  Guth-
rie made  the  arrangements  for  the  experiment,  which  was  on  the
reproduction  of  drawings.  In  one  instance  the  drawing  to  be
guessed  was  the  Union  Jack,  which  was  reproduced  without
hesitation.

The  conditions  were  perfect;  and  twenty  years  later  Sir
Oliver  writes:  "I  declare  positively  that  the  experiment  was
entirely  conclusive,  and  I  have  had  no  subsequent  doubt  of  its
validity.,,

218  trials  were  made  by  six  persons,  the  probability  being  1 : 6.
In  54  guesses  Mrs.  H.  and  Mrs.  B.,  both  of  whom  had  some
vague  mediumistic  power,  had  22  successes,  the  probable  number
being  10  on  chance  alone.  The  four  other  persons  in  162  trials
had  45  successes  against  a  probable  32;  the  ratio  of  the  actual
number  to  the  probable  one  being  220  for  Mrs.  H.  and  Mrs.  B.,
and  140  for  the  other  four  persons.

In  an  experiment  made  by  Mr.  Herdmann,  a  Cambridge  pro-
fessor, the  results  were:

Such  experiments  are  very  cogent.  So  likewise  are  those  given
by  Ochorowicz  in  his  excellent  book  on  Mental  Suggestion,
which  all  should  read  who  desire  to  take  note  of  the  many  pre-
cautions that  should  be  taken  to  eliminate  causes  of  error.

At  Brighton  in  1882,  with  G.  A.  Smith  as  percipient,  Ed.
Gurney  and  Myers  obtained  very  remarkable  results  which  the
strange  subsequent  denials  of  Mr.  Smith  do  not  invalidate  (Proc.
S.  P.  R.,  viii,  536). 2

*0.  Lodge,  Nature,  xxx,  145,  and  The  Survival  of  Man,  French  transla-
tion, 1912,  p.  26.

2Quoted  by  Delanne,  loc.  cit.,  p.  268.

Actual  drawing.

As  guessed.

Red.
Yellow.
R.
E.

Right-angled  triangle.

Tetrahedron.

Five  of  clubs.

Red.

Golden  color.

R.

E.

Isosceles  triangle.
Pyramids  of  Egypt.
Five  of  spades.

88

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Name  thought  of.

Barnard.

Bellairs.

Johnson.

Regent  Street.

Hobhouse.

Black.

Hanter.
Drack.
Quechy.
Wissie.

Harland.

Hamphreys.

Jobson.

Rembrandt  Street.

First  answer.

Second  answer.

Barnard.
Ben  Nevis.
Johnson.
Regent  Street.
Regent  Street.
Blacke.
Queen.
Wisenaft.

Queen  Anne.
Wissenschaft.

More  recently  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  experimenting  with  the  Misses
de  Lyro,  found  that  they  had  a  curious  joint  sensitiveness.  They
held  each  others  hands.  The  detail  is  given  in  The  Survival
of  Man,  pp.  44-45,  and  strictly  speaking  something  not  quite
amounting  to  cryptesthesia  might  be  admitted,  not  fraud,  but  a
transmission  by  contact,  a  transposition  of  sensibility — a  phenom-
enon very  much  akin  to  cryptesthesia.  And  "the  guesses  changed
from  'frequently  correct'  to  'quite  wild/  directly  the  knuckles
or  finger-tips  or  any  part  of  the  skin  of  the  two  hands  ceased  to
touch.    It  was  almost  like  the  breaking  of  an  electric  circuit"

It  is  to  be  noted  that  the  answers  were  given  very  quickly,
even  for  somewhat  complicated  figures.  The  number  thought
of,  "3, 145,"  was  given  very  rapidly  as  3,146.  The  number  being
715,  the  answer  was  "714;  no,  715."  Nevertheless,  and  notwith-
standing the  authority  of  Lodge,  I  think  these  very  interesting
experiments  fundamentally  different  from  those  in  which  there
is  no  contact.

In  some  good  experiments  by  F.  L.  Usher  and  Burt,  with
themselves  as  percipients  (they  not  being  sensitives  in  the  ordi-
nary acceptation  of  the  word),  they  verified  that  the  guessing
of  a  card  was  more  nearly  correct  than  chance  would  account
for  even  when  the  operators  were  very  far  apart — London  to
Bristol  (120  miles),  and  London  to  Prague  (960  miles).  On
60  trials  the  results  were:

(p.  45).

Actual
number.

Probable
number.

Complete  successes
Value  of  the  card .  ,
Colour  of  the  card

4
14

28

LI
4.5

30

At  a  smaller  distance,  in  the  same  room,  but  full  precautions

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  89

being  taken  that  no  indication  could  be  given  by  the  agent,  there
were,  on  36  trials :

The  totals  are  very  satisfactory,  for  in  96  trials  the  number
of  successes  was  13  against  a  probable  number  of  only  2;  while
for  the  value  of  the  card  chosen  the  successes  were  29  when
chance  alone  would  have  indicated  7.1

The  fact  that  in  the  case  of  the  colour  of  the  card  the  actual
successes  and  the  probable  successes  were  both  48  shows  that
the  experiments  were  very  well  conducted.  Other  experiments
have  been  made  with  drawings;  some  of  these  are  interesting
but  do  not  lend  themselves  to  a  calculation  by  probabilities.  We
shall  return  to  these  when  speaking  of  clairvoyance  by  sensitives.

An  important  paper  on  lucidity  was  presented  at  Konigsberg
in  1913  as  an  inaugural  address  by  Max.  Hoppe  (Ueber  Hell-
sehen,  Berlin,  Haussmann,  1916).  His  analysis  of  cases  of
lucidity  as  applied  to  guessing  of  cards  and  numbers  is  methodical
and  detailed.  He  establishes  that  even  when  operating  with
sensitive  subjects,  the  proof  is  not  rigorously  exact,  which  I
readily  grant ;  but  it  must  also  be  admitted  that  definite  proof  of
cryptesthesia  is  not  to  be  reached  by  this  kind  of  experiment.
Mediums  and  somnambulists  dislike  these  tests  which  do  not
move  their  sensitive  faculties  like  an  automobile  accident  or  a
fire.  Nevertheless  his  criticism  is  acute.  He  criticizes  my  own
experiments  on  Leonie  with  justice;  I  had,  however,  no  need
to  wait  for  this  criticism  to  admit  their  very  moderate  value.
Nor  does  he  admit  the  lucidity  of  Mr.  Reese.  On  this  point,
however,  his  objections  seem  to  me  valueless.  He  made  experi-
ments with  one  single  person  with  negative  results,  but  that
proves  nothing  whatever.  In  short  Mr.  Hoppe  confines  himself
to  criticism  (quite  legitimate  criticism)  of  my  old  experiments
in  1884.  I  think  he  would  find  it  difficult  to  maintain  his  position
in  view  of  my  later  experiments  and  those  of  the  large  number
of  men  of  science  who  have  made  a  study  of  lucidity.

1Quelgues  experiences  de  transmission  dc  la  pcnsce  a  grande  distance
(A.  S.  P.,  1910,  xx,  14-21  and  40-54).

Actual
number.

Probable
number.

Complete  successes
Value  of  the  card.  ,
Colour  of  the  card.

9
15
20

0.7
2.7
18

90

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Dr.  Blair  Thaw  of  New  York,  experimenting  with  Miss  Thaw,
has  obtained  very  clear  cases  of  cryptesthesia  applied  to  colours,
the  telepathic  mental  suggestion  being  very  evident  (Hyslop,
Science  and  a  Future  Life,  pp.  25-30).

Colour  thought  of.

Light  red.
Green.
Yellow.
Light  yellow.
Dark  red.
Dark  blue.
Orange.

First  answer.

Light  red.

Green.

Blue.

Light  yellow.
Blue.
Orange.
Green.

Second  answer.

Light  red.
Light  red.
Yellow.
Yellow.
Dark  red.
Dark  blue.
Heliotrope.

The  Misses  Wingfield,  who  certainly  have  remarkable  medium-
istic  powers,  made  a  series  of  400  experiments  which  would  be
equivalent  to  demonstration  if  there  be  no  defect  in  the  method —
a  point  on  which  I  am  not  able  to  judge.

In  400  trials  the  probable  number  of  successes  is  4 ;  the  number
obtained  by  thought-reading  was  27.  In  21  cases  the  digits
were  reversed.  The  odds  against  both  results  are  very  large,
and  the  number  of  successes  amounts  to  a  moral  certainty  that
a  cause  other  than  chance  was  in  play  (Ph.  of  the  L.,  ii,  653,
669).    But  were  the  experiments  unexceptionable?

Miss  Lindsay  and  Mr.  Shilton  also  had  a  number  of  successes
far  higher  than  the  probable  number  (A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  123 ).1

But  however  interesting  the  mathematical  evaluation  of  prob-
ability in  such  experiments,  it  must  always  be  remembered  that
the  value  to  be  attached  to  the  figures  depends  entirely  on  the
absence  of  defect  in  the  methods  pursued.  Absolute  experimental
rigour  is  the  essential  condition.

One  subject  experimented  on  by  Lombroso  had  his  eyes  and
ears  completely  sealed  and  words  were  written  behind  his  back

JThe  bibliography  is  a  very  large  one.  I  specially  cite  J.  Ochorowicz,  La
suggestion  mentale,  Paris,  1884.  Ch.  Richet,  La  suggestion  mentale  et  le
calcul  des  probabilites,  Rev.  Philosophique,  December,  1884.  Fr.  Myers,  On  a
telepathic  explanation  of  some  so-called  spiritualistic  phenomena  (P.  5.  P.  R.,
1883-1884,  217).  Automatic  writing,  ibid.,  1885,  p.  1,  May,  1887,  209;  June,
1889,  222.  Other  curious  cases  are  noted  in  the  second  edition  of  Phan-
tasms of  the  Living,  ii,  670-671.  The  experiments  by  the  Misses  Creery
reported  in  the  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  i,  25,  must  not  be  taken  into
account,  for  fraud  was  proved  (Note  relating  to  some  of  the  published
experiments  in  thought  transference,  P.  S.  P.  R.,  1884,  269-270).

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  91

for  him  to  read.  The  first  word  was  Margharita;  he  wrote
Maria  and  then  Margharita.  Amore  was  written;  he  wrote
Moirier,  then  Amore.   Andrea  was  written;  he  wrote  Andrea.

Dr.  J.  Ch.  Roux,  while  a  student,  made  some  unexceptionable
experiments  with  a  pack  of  32  cards,  definitely  evidential  of
cryptesthesia.  He  had  5  complete  successes,  the  compounded
probability  being  1 :  3000.

In  another  series  of  81  trials  he  had  54  successes,  as  against
20  if  due  to  chance  alone.  There  were  also  8  successes  when
chance  would  have  given  1  only  (A.  S.  P.,  iii,  1893,  295).

A  schoolmaster  whose  name  is  not  given  made  an  experiment
with  a  class,  not  with  cards,  but  with  six  letters.  In  7  experiments
of  30  trials  each  with  several  scholars  at  the  same  time,  the
probable  number  was  5  ** " ,  say  990;  the  number  of  vowels  indi-
cated by  the  percipients  was  1050,  slightly,  but  only  slightly,  in
excess  of  the  chances.  However,  in  all  7  experiments  there
was  some  excess.

Probable  result.  Actual  result.

The  probability  of  excess  over  the  single  probabilities  being  l/2,
it  follows  that  the  probability  that  there  would  be  an  excess  of
y2  in  7  trials  is,  say  1 :  128.

If  instead  of  taking  the  whole  of  the  39  trials,  we  take  only
the  first  12,  the  result  is  much  higher.

Probable  result.  Actual  result.

180
170
150
140
40
175
135

196
180
154
149
44
179
148

108
102
90
84
24
105
81

129
109
105
86
32
110
90

being  661  against  a  probable  594.

92

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

An  experiment  in  telepathy  with  cards  on  a  little  girl  of  thirteen
by  Oliver  Lodge  gave  some  interesting  results.  We  will  quote
only  those  in  which  the  father  of  the  child  did  not  see  the  card
(Report  on  a  case  of  telepathy ;  /.  S.  P.  R.,  May,  1913,  103).

Card  drawn.

Card  named.

Five  of  diamonds.

Five  of  clubs.

Four  of  hearts.

Two  of  hearts.

Four  of  hearts.

Three  of  hearts.

Four  of  hearts.

Four  of  hearts.

Ace  of  hearts.

Ace  of  hearts.

King  of  diamonds.

An  eight.

King  of  diamonds.

A  king.

King  of  diamonds.

King  of  clubs.

King  of  diamonds.

King  of  hearts.

Ten  of  diamonds.

Ten  of  diamonds.

Ace  of  diamonds.

Two  of  clubs.

Three  of  diamonds.

Four  of  spades.

Three  of  spades.

Two  of  hearts.

Three  of  spades.

Four  of  spades.

Three  of  spades.

Two  of  spades.

Three  of  spades.

Two  of  hearts.

Knave  of  clubs.

Picture  card.

Knave  of  clubs.

Knave  of  clubs.

Ten  of  clubs.

Picture  card.

Ten  of  clubs.

A  six.

Ten  of  clubs.

Nine  of  clubs.

Ten  of  hearts.

An  eight.

Ten  of  hearts.

Picture  card.

Ten  of  hearts.

A  seven.

Ten  of  hearts.

Heart.

Ten  of  hearts.

Ten  of  hearts.

It  is  very  instructive  that  the  child  succeeded  well  when  the
card  had  been  seen  by  Lodge,  and  failed  when  he  had  not  seen
it;  so  that  Lodge  is  inclined  to  think  (without  expressly  saying
so),  that  the  case  was  one  of  telepathy  and  not  of  lucidity,  in
other  words,  that  the  cryptesthesia  was  the  result  of  mental
transmission.

The  experiments  of  Mr.  Henry  Rawson  with  drawings  are
quite  conclusive  and  would  involve  absolute  certainty  of  tele-
pathic cryptesthesia  if  there  were  no  defect  in  the  experiment,

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  93

as  to  which  I  am  unable  to  express  an  opinion,  as  in  the  case  of
Miss  Wingfield.  In  the  first  experiments  Mr.  Rawson  only  was
in  the  room  with  the  percipient,  Mrs.  L.  and  the  agent,  Mrs.
B.  Mrs.  L.  and  Mrs.  B.  are  sisters.  Their  backs  were  turned
to  one  another  and  it  was  absolutely  impossible  for  Mrs.  B.
to  see  the  drawing  made  by  Mrs.  L.  (Myers,  Human  Per-
sonality, i,  614).

Analogous  facts  were  observed  by  Mr.  Kirk.  He  had  remark-
able success,  though  the  percipient  was  very  far  distant,  as
much  as  360  miles  (Myers,  ibid.,  p.  620).  There  were  some
very  striking  successes  under  these  conditions;  especially  in  one
case  a  hand  drawn  by  Mr.  Kirk  was  reproduced  by  Miss  G.
(p.  621);  in  another  a  little  dog.  Later  on  Mr.  Kirk,  having
tried  to  magnetize  Miss  G.,  unknown  to  her,  and  at  a  distance,
seems  to  have  failed.

Myers  quotes  from  Mr.  A.  Glardon  experiments  in  thought-
transmission  at  great  distances,  from  Tour  de  Peilz  in  Switzer-
land to  Ajaccio  in  Corsica,  or  Florence,  between  Mr.  Glardon
and  a  friend  of  his,  Mrs.  M.  The  results  were  sometimes  very
good;  there  were  failures,  but  the  successes  were  such  as  to  carry
conviction  of  real  cryptesthesia.

We  shall  see  in  the  sequel  that  cross-correspondences,  analo-
gous to  these  experiments,  have  also  given  good,  though  perhaps
less  decisive,  results.

M.  Max  Dessoir,  who  is  profoundly  experienced  in  hypnotic
phenomena,  endeavoured  to  ascertain  what  guessing  at  drawings
would  do  in  his  own  case.  The  results  were  barely  greater  than
would  be  due  to  chance  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  ii,  642).

Similar  experiments,  mentioned  above,  had  been  previously
made  by  Mr.  Guthrie  of  Liverpool,  with  Miss  Relph  and  Miss
Edwards,  in  October,  1883  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  i,  38).
About  150  trials  were  made,  the  successes  being  sometimes  very
complete;  three  of  these  are  given  in  the  figure  to  enable  the
reader  to  judge.  The  percipient  had  her  eyes  bandaged,  and  the
drawing,  instead  of  being  placed  in  an  opaque  envelope,  was
steadfastly  gazed  at  by  the  agent.

Mr.  J.  Edgar  Coover  has  written  a  voluminous  account  of  the
results  of  many  experiments  made  by  him  with  playing-cards,
which  are  not  entirely  negative  whatever  he  may  say ;  they  seem
to  indicate  that  average  persons  have  some  degree  of  crypt-
esthesia (lucidity)  though  extremely  slight.    In  5,135  experi-

94

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

ments  in  telepathy  the  numbers  indicated  by  probability  were
513  and  128  (complete  success)  ;  the  actual  numbers  obtained
being  538  and  153  (complete  success).  This  is  painfully  small
but  it  is  something.

In  4,865  experiments  on  lucidity  the  probable  numbers  were
486  and  122  (complete  success),  the  actual  numbers  obtained
being  488  and  141 ;  which  again  is  a  very  slight  excess  on  the
probability.

It  is  as  well  to  note  that  some  persons  are  better  endowed
with  the  faculty  than  others.  Choosing  fourteen  persons  who
seem  to  have  some  degree  of  lucidity  their  results  were  119  and
54  on  711  experiments,  the  probable  numbers  being  71  and  18.

The  excess  over  probability  is  considerable,  but  some  reserves
must  be  made  in  regard  to  this  plan  of  choosing  only  the  best
of  the  experiments.1

We  cannot  follow  out  the  very  lengthy  details  given  by  Mr.
Coover.  In  spite  of  all  his  efforts  his  own  results  actually  prove
a  slight,  though  very  slight,  degree  of  something  more  than
chance  in  guesses  at  a  card  drawn,  whether  it  be  due  to  telepathy
or  to  lucidity.

Pickmann,  who  gave  public  seances  in  thought-reading,  prob-
ably by  muscular  indications  from  the  person  whose  hand  he
held,  possibly  had  some  degree  of  cryptesthesia.  He  seems  to
have  given  a  very  successful  exhibition  of  mental  suggestion  to

Lombroso.2

He  came  to  visit  me  one  day,  and  I  tried  an  experiment  that
seems  unexceptionable.  While  Pickmann  was  in  another  room
I  spread  an  entire  pack  of  52  cards  on  the  table.  I  chose  one
of  these  cards  at  random,  looking  at  it  closely  but  without
touching  it,  and  endeavouring  to  visualize  it.  I  then  fetched
Pickmann  from  the  next  room,  and  placing  him  with  his  back  to
the  cards  asked  him  to  name  the  card  I  had  thought  of.  He
succeeded  at  the  first  trial,  1  :  52,  which  pleased  us  both.  But
three  further  trials  failed.

I  will  also  mention,  passim,  another  experiment,  though  it
stands  alone  and  chance  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  it.

Experiments  in  Psychical  Research,  Stanford  University  (Calif).  Analyse
in  P.  S.  P.  R.  par  F.  G.  S.  Schiller;  November,  1916,  xxx,  261-273.

2Cited  by  Delanne  (Gac.  lift.,  Turin,  1892),  but  being  unable  to  refer  to  the
original,  I  cannot  say  exactly  under  what  conditions  the  experiment  may
have  been  made.

Fig.  i. — Three  experiments  by  Mr.  Guthrie  and  Miss  Edwards.    The  drawings
on  the  right  are  the  reproductions  of  Mr.  Guthrie's  original  designs  on  the
left.    Miss  Edwards's  eyes  were  bandaged,  but  she  was  too  far  away  to  see
anything  even  had  this  not  been  done.

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

That  morning  I  had  bought  a  pack  of  tarot  cards  in  order  to
use  them  in  card-guessing  experiments.  During  the  day  Henry
Ferrari  came  to  see  me.  I  said,  "Let  us  try  an  experiment.
Look  carefully  at  one  of  these  tarots;  I  will  try  to  divine  which
you  have  looked  at."  After  a  few  moments,  I  said,  without
knowing  why,  "It  is  of  peasants  reaping  or  harvesting."  The
card  represented  a  skeleton  holding  a  scythe.  There  was  only
one  card  with  a  scythe  in  the  pack,  and  I  had  not  looked  through
the  pack.

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  studies  of  cryptesthesia  in  normal
persons  are  so  seldom  made,  both  because  the  calculation  of
probabilities  is  very  easy,  and  because  it  leads  to  the  discovery
of  those  who  possess  some  degree  of  lucidity.  But  it  must  not
be  supposed  that  it  is  very  easy  to  make  unexceptionable  experi-
ments. On  the  contrary,  the  experiments  are  exceedingly  deli-
cate and  certain  rules  must  be  observed :

1.  The  agent  must  be  absolutely  motionless,  be  silent,  and  have
his  back  turned  to  the  percipient.   This  is  fundamental.

2.  The  choice  of  the  number,  the  card,  or  the  drawing  must
be  made  by  pure  chance.

3.  No  result,  whether  success  or  failure,  should  be  told  to  the
percipient  before  the  end  of  the  sitting.

4.  Not  more  than  twenty  trials  should  be  made  on  any  one
day.

5.  All  results,  whatever  they  may  be,  should  be  stated  in  full.

6.  The  percipient  must  be  unable  to  see  anything,  directly
or  indirectly;  it  is  best  that  his  eyes  should  be  bandaged  and
his  back  turned.

An  important  question  then  arises,  which  we  shall  deal  with
later:  Is  the  lucidity  telephathic  or  non-telepathic?  Telepathic
lucidity  certainly  exists ;  it  has  been  proved  by  numerous  experi-
ments. Non-telepathic  lucidity  is  also  proven,  but  fresh  experi-
ments are  required.1

These  methods  are  not  emotional  or  dramatic  like  experiments
made  with  powerful  mediums,  or  records  of  monitions  of  death,
but  they  are  precise,  and,  when  the  experiment  is  well  designed,

xThe  difficult  but  essential  experimentation  to  clear  up  this  arduous  prob-
lem might  be  attempted  as  follows :  It  might  not  be  difficult  to  find  some
intelligent  and  trustworthy  teacher  in  a  primary  school  who  would  undertake  it.

To  a  class  of  30  the  teacher  would  show  36  pictures  in  six  groups,  each
group  being  composed  of  six  different  subjects  of  the  same  type  such  as  the
following,  which  I  suggest  as  suitable  :

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  97

Vegetable  kingdom.
Oak,
Rose,

Mushroom,

Potatoes,

Field  of  wheat,

Palm-tree.

2.  Animal  kingdom.
Fish,
Spider,
Horse,
Elephant,
Pigeon,

Flock  of  sheep.

3.  Celebrated  men.
jEsop,
Caesar,

Christopher  Columbus,
Napoleon,
Charlemagne,
President  Carnot.

4.  Manufactured  objects.

Key,
Book,
Lamp,

Ship,
Gun.

Carriage,

5.  Anatomical.
Ear,
Eye,

Skeleton,

Hand,

Heart,

Mouth  and  lips.

6.  Historical  pictures.

Millet's  "Angelus,"
.  The  Marriage  at  Cana.

The  Crucifixion,
Battle  of  Eylau,
Death  of  Caesar,
The  Pyramids,

The  designs  should  be  numbered  from  i  to  36,  and  would  be  printed  on  36
cards.  The  subjects  chosen  are  such  that  no  confusion  is  possible.  In  each
group  there  would  be  two  in  blue,  two  in  red,  and  two  in  yellow.  Probability
in  choice  would  then  be  1  :  6  for  the  group,  1  :  3  for  the  colour,  and  1  :  36  for
the  subject,  and  1  :  18  for  group  and  colour  combined.

Experiment  would  be  made  in  the  following  manner :

t.  For  telepathic  lucidity.  The  teacher  would  draw  one  of  the  36  cards,
look  at  it  attentively,  mentally  pronouncing  the  name.  He  would  then  ask
every  pupil  to  write  down  his  guess  at  the  card  without  any  communication
with  those  next  him.    This  would  be  the  first  answer.

2.  For  non-telepathic  lucidity.  One  or  two  minutes  after  the  first  experi-
ment, the  teacher  would  draw  one  of  the  36  cards,  but  would  not  look  at  it,
so  that  no  one  would  know  what  card  had  been  drawn.  The  children  would
then  write  a  second  answer.

By  repeating  this  experiment  with  30  pupils  for  ten  days,  we  should  have
600  replies,  which  would  be  enough  for  some  inference.

We  hold  such  packs  of  cards  at  the  Metapsychic  Institute,  Paris,  at  the
disposal  of  any  one  who  would  consent  to  undertake  this  experiment.

Of  course  every  answer  must  be  included  without  any  exception,  and  no
opportunity  must  be  given  to  the  pupils  to  see  the  face  of  the  teacher  during
the  experiment  for  telepathic  lucidity.  The  names  of  the  children  should  be
attached  to  their  answers  to  ascertain  those  who  may  have  exceptional  powers.

M.  Carre,  a  teacher  at  Oissery,  was  obliging  enough  to  make  this  experi-
ment. With  telepathy,  i.e.,  when  he  knew  the  card  chosen  (probability  1  :  36),
he  obtained  with  27  pupils,  giving  1,215  answers,  31  successes,  the  probable
number  being  33.    This  result  is  entirely  due  to  chance.

When  the  teacher  did  not  know  the  card,  the  number  of  answers  was
1,125,  with  25  pupils,  and  there  were  48  successes,  the  probable  number  being
only  31.  There  were  considerable  differences  between  different  pupils.
The  probable  number  on  90  answers  for  each  pupil  being  2,  there  was  one

98

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

undeniable.  The  results  are  clear.  Chance  is  not  a  factor  in
physical  and  chemical  experiments;  why  should  it  be  in  meta-
psychic  science?  If  an  event  takes  place  against  odds  of  1 : 100,000
I  shall  not  decide  that  it  has  come  about  by  chance,  and  two
or  three  equally  unlikely  events  occurring  give  a  certainty  that
there  is  some  cause  in  action.  The  whole  crux  is  that  the  experi-
mental method  should  have  been  perfect.  All  our  efforts  should
be  concentrated  on  this.

We  conclude,  therefore,  from  these  experiments  to  which  the
calculus  of  probabilities  can  be  applied,  that  lucidity  or  trans-
mission of  thought  is  a  reality  even  «among  normal  persons,
without  calling  in  hypnotism  or  spiritualism.  In  other  words,
there  is  a  faculty  of  cognition  other  than  the  usual  faculties;  it
exists  in  nearly  all  human  beings,  even  those  that  seem  least  sensi-
tive, but  in  these  latter  it  is  so  slight  as  to  be  almost  negligible.

This  faculty  is  more  readily  called  into  play  by  keen  emotion
or  by  some  violent  event  than  for  the  cognition  of  a  number  or  a
card,  though  by  these  means  it  may  be  made  apparent  to  some
small  extent.  In  most  non-sensitives  it  is  so  vague  and  so  indis-
tinct that  it  is  difficult  to  verify,  but  by  making  a  large  number
of  experiments  a  trace  of  its  existence  can  be  found.

It  is  probable  that  this  cryptesthesia  is  often  telepathic,  but
the  telepathy  is  but  one  of  its  forms,  perhaps  the  commonest.
Experiments  on  normal  persons  indicate  both  telepathy  and
lucidity,  and  both  are  probable,  however  feeble  and  imperfect
they  may  be.  It  follows  that  the  thought  of  one  man  is  mys-
teriously linked  to  that  of  others.  We  are  not  isolated,  but  are
in  some  obscure  connection  with  our  fellows ;  there  is  some  truth
in  the  idea  of  what  has  been  called  the  soul  of  the  crowd.  A
current  of  sympathy  or  anger,  of  indignation  or  enthusiasm,
powerful  though  undefinable,  may  lead  to  well-nigh  unanimous

who  was  right  7  times  and  two  who  were  right  6  times.  This  would  appear
to  provide  material  for  interesting  research.

M.  Warcollier  has  suggested  an  ingenious  proceeding — to  utilize  the  old
game  of  "meeting"  :  taking  the  13  diamonds  from  the  pack,  lay  them  down  back
upwards  without  the  face  having  been  seen.  The  player  who  has  not  seen
the  diamonds  takes  13  clubs  in  his  hand  and  places  one  on  each  diamond.
The  probability  of  success,  i.e.,  that  both  cards  will  be  of  the  same  value,  is
1  :  13.  Interest  may  be  given  if  the  banker  pays  13  pence  at  each  success
and  receives  a  penny  for  each  non-success.  The  play  is  fair  and  amusing.
Would  the  problem  be  different  according  as  the  banker  knows  the  diamond
(telepathy),  or  does  not  know  it  (lucidity)?  The  club  cards  are  seen  by  the
player,  the  diamonds  are  not.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  99

teeling  in  a  theatre,  in  a  court,  or  a  Parliament,  sweeping  away
all  barriers  in  its  course.  Is  it  permissible  to  compare  this  col-
lective emotion  to  the  mental  transmission  observable  in  the
experiments  detailed  above?

Unfortunately  mathematical  reasoning  does  not  carry  much
conviction.  "Chance"  is  constantly  put  forward,  and  possibly
with  reason,  for  the  divergence  between  the  probable  number  of
successes  and  those  due  to  cryptesthesia  is  insufficient  to  convince.
But  we  shall  see  in  subsequent  chapters  that  this  strange  faculty
is  very  greatly  developed  by  hypnotism  and  mediumship,  and
this  will  bring  complete  conviction  of  its  existence.

2.  Cryptesthesia  under  Hypnotism  and  Magnetic  Treatment

The  history  of  hypnotism  is  curious  and  a  striking  instance
of  a  quite  revolutionary  change  in  ideas;  for  from  1790  to  1875,
somnambulism  and  animal  magnetism  were  held  to  be  occult
sciences  unworthy  of  the  attention  of  scientific  men.  It  was
ill-omened  and  forbidden  ground.

Mesmer,  and  after  him  Puysegur,  Deleuze,  Husson,  Braid,  and
Liebeault,  had,  no  doubt,  made  some  remarkable  experiments,
but  these  were  not  sufficiently  exact  to  win  official  recognition
which  is  always  slow  and  tardy ;  they  were  not  such  as  to  detach
the  physiology  of  hypnotism  from  its  mystical  associations.

In  1875,  while  still  a  student,  I  was  able  to  show  that  hyp-
notism is  not  an  illusion  due  to  skilful  or  gross  fraud,  but  a  physio-
logical and  psychological  fact,  as  natural  and  experimentally
demonstrable  as  the  tetanus  produced  by  strychnine  or  sleep
induced  by  opium.

To  show  the  general  state  of  mind  in  1875  when,  two  years
before  Charcot  and  Heidenhain,  I  published  my  researches,  it  will
suffice  to  quote  the  opening  words:  "It  needs  some  courage  to
use  the  word  'somnambulism/  Perhaps  today  less  courage  is
needed  to  speak  of  materializations."

Somnambulism  is  now  a  recognized  and  unquestioned  fact
that  no  longer  pertains  to  metapsychics.

There  are,  however,  some  episodes  in  its  history  that  have  to
do  with  cryptesthesia.  It  may  well  be  asked:  (1)  Whether  the
so-called  magnetic  action  of  the  magnetizer  is  in  any  way  specific ;
in  other  words,  whether  there  are  magnetic  emanations  percep-
tible only  by  sensitives;  (2)  whether  the  hypnotic  state  generates
cryptesthesia.

100

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

(a)  Magnetic  Emanations

The  point  to  be  determined  is  whether,  when  the  old  method
of  passes,  used  by  Du  Potet,  Deleuze,  and  Lafontaine  (which  I
have  often  practised  and  which  is  still  frequently  used),  disen-
gages some  special  human  power — a  "magnetic  fluid" — which
acts  on  human  beings.  To  this  important  question  no  satis-
factory answer  can  yet  be  given.

The  simplest  hypothesis,  and  the  one  that  is  current  today,
is  that  when  a  subject  goes  to  sleep,  this  takes  place  by  sugges-
tion, verbal  or  otherwise,  and  consequently  that  the  so-called
magnetic  passes  are  merely  accessory  or  useless,  unless  as  rein-
forcing suggestion.  It  is  said  that  silence,  dim  light,  a  certain
tension  of  mind  caused  by  these  preparations,  and  a  series  of
tacit  or  spoken  suggestions  all  contribute  to  bring  about  the
hypnotic  state  without  calling  in  any  "magnetic  fluid."  The
somewhat  dramatic  emotion  caused  by  the  passes  contributes  to
the  effect.  Later  on,  when  semi-unconsciousness  has  been  ob-
tained, custom  and  habit  play  a  preponderant  part  in  later
sleeps.  Passes  are  always  symbolical ;  if  a  person  has  once  been
put  to  sleep  he  will  always  be  more  easily  put  to  sleep,  whether
by  the  same  magnetizer  or  by  another.  There  is  no  need  to  in-
voke a  magnetic  fluid  or  a  new  form  of  energy.  Such  is  the
opinion  current  among  medical  men  (Babinski).

They  state  further  that  imitative  suggestion  is  often  enough
to  explain  hypnotic  phenomena.  If  in  a  hospital  ward,  a  barracks,
a  school,  or  a  cloister,  one  sick  person,  soldier,  child,  or  nun
has  been  put  to  sleep  it  is  easy  to  do  the  like  with  most  of  the
others.  There  is  a  real  nervous  contagion,  as  may  be  seen  in
the  demoniacal  epidemics  of  the  Middle  Ages,  or  the  convul-
sionists  and  hysterics  of  more  recent  times.

A  kind  of  hypnotic  sleep  may  be  produced  in  animals  by  a  sta-
tionary and  brilliant  object.  Fr.  Kircher  showed  in  the  seven-
teenth century  that  a  hen  could  be  paralyzed  by  putting  the  fowl
on  its  back  and  drawing  a  chalk  line  on  the  ground  from  its
beak.  In  the  same  way  it  is  said  the  hypnotic  state  can  be  in-
duced in  certain  persons  by  fixed  gaze  at  a  crystal  ball  or  some
bright  object.

I  have  never  been  able  to  verify  anything  of  the  kind.  Mag-
netic sleep  can  certainly  be  induced  in  those  used  to  it  by  a
bright  object;  but  with  such  persons  anything  will  suffice.  The

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  101

eyes  soon  close  and  loss  of  sensation  supervenes,  at  first  slight,
but  increasing  as  consciousness  disappears.

Hypnotism  by  fascination  must  be  akin  to  that  produced  by  a
bright  object.  A  certain  Donato  had  remarkable  powers  (or
skill)  of  this  kind.  He  would  choose  from  a  large  audience
five,  six,  twelve,  or  even  twenty  persons,  who  were  certainly
neither  confederates  nor  accomplices,  would  take  them  on  the
stage,  look  fixedly  into  their  eyes,  and  after  half  a  minute  or
less  would  turn  them  into  automata  having  no  will  of  their  own.
If  after  half  a  minute  he  did  not  succeed  (which  happened  often
enough)  he  left  the  refractory  subject  and  went  to  another.  In
a  few  minutes  he  thus  collected  some  fifteen  persons,  often  quite
young  people,  who  obeyed  the  most  absurd  verbal  suggestions.

These  cases  have  been  compared  to  the  fascination  exerted  by
some  animals — a  snake,  or  a  pointer  dog — but  such  analogies  are
very  vague.

However,  hypnotic  sleep  can  be  induced  in  many  persons,
though  not  in  all,  by  some  means  or  other — by  passes,  by  a  bright
object,  by  a  fixed  gaze,  or  by  verbal  suggestion.  Imitation  and
repetition  greatly  favour  success.

But  is  this  the  whole  story?  Is  there  any  positive  proof  that
any  so-called  magnetic  vibration  proceeds  from  the  magnetizer
to  the  hypnotized  person?  If  one  were  as  little  exacting  and
as  little  precise  as  the  magnetizers  of  1840,  some  reasons  might
be  alleged  in  favour  of  the  hypothesis  of  a  human  magnetic
"fluid";  but  nowadays  we  are  less  credulous.

I  shall  therefore  set  aside  the  notions  of  Reichenbach  on  odic
force,  of  Baraduc  on  "effluvia,"  of  Charazain  on  human  polarity,
for  these  allegations,  mystical  rather  than  scientific,  are  founded
on  imperfect  data.  Nevertheless,  it  would  be  somewhat  rash  to
reject  off-hand  the  hypothesis  of  a  magnetic  fluid ;  and  we  shall
make  a  brief  study  of  it.1

In  the  first  place,  it  certainly  appears  that  some  magnetizers
have  more  power  than  others.  This  is  unquestionable,  however
little  observers  may  have  known  how  to  study  it.

If  I  may  be  permitted  to  quote  my  own  experience,  I  may  say

xBar£ty,  Le  magnitisme  animal  ktudie  sous  le  nom  de  force  neurique
rayonnante  et  circulante  dans  ses  propridtes  physiques,  physiologiques  et  thira-
peutiques,  Paris,  Doin,  1887.  H.  Baraduc,  Les  vibrations  de  la  vitaliti
humaine,  Paris,  J.  B.  Bailliere,  1904.  La  force  vitale,  notre  corps  vital,
fiuidique,  une  formule  barometrique,  1905.  M.  Benedikt,  Die  latenten  Emana-
tionen  der  Chemikalien  (C.  Konegen,  Wien,  19 1 5).

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

that  formerly,  when  I  certainly  operated  less  skilfully  than  I  do
now,  I  could  induce  the  sleep  quite  easily  even  in  insensitive
subjects,  whereas  at  the  present  time  I  can  scarcely  ever  produce
the  least  hypnosis  in  any  person.  Dr.  Maingot  and  Dr.  Emile
Magnan,  who  were  once  very  powerful  magnetizers,  have  ob-
served the  same  thing.  Formerly  "they  could  do  what  they
pleased,"  they  told  me ;  but  now,  though  not  old  men,  they  were
surprised  at  their  inability  to  induce  deep  hypnosis.

Under  different  circumstances  when  an  attempt  was  made  to
hypnotize  me,  I  seemed  to  perceive  that  some  persons,  such  as
J.  Ochorowicz,  the  magnetizer  Cannelle,  and  Dr.  Faivre,  acted
on  me  fairly  speedily  and  produced  a  somnolent  state,  whereas
the  efforts  of  others  were  fruitless.

Mr.  Sydney  Alrutz,1  a  professor  in  Upsala  University,  is  in-
clined to  think  (and  the  opinion  is  shared  by  Sir  William  Bar-
rett) that  a  certain  fluid  is  emitted  by  the  human  body  which
acts  directly  on  the  sensitive.  Magnetizing  a  finger  of  the  sub-
ject through  thick  glass,  the  eyes  of  the  subject  being  bandaged,
the  finger  becomes  absolutely  insensitive.  But  it  is  nearly  im-
possible to  avoid  all  suggestion  and  it  is  one  of  the  most  difficult
experiments  to  conduct  satisfactorily.

The  question  must  therefore  be  considered  still  open.  It
would  be  interesting  to  study  it  exhaustively.  Are  the  phenom-
ena produced  by  a  magnetic  fluid,  by  verbal  suggestion,  by  hyper-
sensibility  of  the  normal  senses,  or  by  telepathy?  All  these  hy-
potheses are  admissible,  and  in  despite  of  many  investigations  it  is
impossible  to  say.  Myers  says,  "It  is  probable  that  magnetic
passes  have  per  se  a  certain  specific  power."  2

I  go  a  little  further  in  doubting,  and  say — it  is  almost  probable.

No  great  confidence  can  be  placed  in  the  statements  of  mag-
netized persons  when  they  say  they  see  effluvia.  "Most  som-
nambules,,,  said  Deleuze  in  1813,  "see  a  bright  and  shining  light
round  their  magnetizer  emitted  strongly  from  his  head  and  his
hands."  But  this  has  not  been  repeated  and  is  certainly  a  case
of  suggestion.  A.  de  Rochas,  despite  his  undoubted  talents  and
persevering  efforts,  has  been  unable  to  demonstrate  the  exter-
nalization  of  sensibility  in  any  rigorously  scientific  manner.  I

Sydney  Alrutz,  Erscheinungen  in  der  Hypnose  (Zeitsch.  fur  Psychologie,
1909).  W.  F.  Barrett,  Some  recent  hypnotic  experiments  (/.  5.  P.  R.,  January,
1912,  179-186).

2Human  Personality,  i,  404.  See  also  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  A.  Johnson,
S.  P.  R.,  January,  19 12,  184.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  103

put  aside  the  perception  of  effluvia  from  a  steel  magnet,  for  this
radiation  is  not  within  the  province  of  metapsychics.

I  cannot  accept  the  ideas  of  A.  de  Rochas  on  exteriorization
of  sensibility  because  I  think  he  has  not  been  sufficiently  on  his
guard  against  suggestion.  Excepting  the  instance  in  which  he
worked  on  sick  people  in  the  hospital  at  Luys,  some  of  whom
certainly  were  fraudulent,  his  subjects  were  honest,  but  the  suc-
cesses he  obtained  seem  due  to  suggestion;  few  have  obtained
them  after  him.

According  to  J.  Maxwell,  it  is  possible,  after  sitting  for  a  con-
siderable time  in  complete  darkness,  to  see  luminous  radiations
from  the  fingers.  This  question  has  been  exhaustively  treated  by
De  Rochas.1  He  refers  also  to  observations  by  Dr.  Walter  Kilner
of  St.  Thomas's  Hospital,  London,  and  to  others  by  Dr.  O'Don-
nell  of  the  Mercy  Hospital,  Chicago.  It  would  seem  that  by
looking  at  the  nude  body  of  a  human  being  through  certain
screens  in  a  darkened  room  luminous  effluvia  can  be  seen  that
follow  the  outline  of  the  body;  but  as  these  two  doctors  do  not
state  the  exact  nature  of  these  screens,  they  do  not  really  tell
us  anything.2

On  this  subject  A.  de  Rochas  very  aptly  quotes  Reichenbach's
careful  experiments.  These  are  disputable,  but  ought  to  be  re-
sumed and  reconsidered.

As  for  the  aureoles  of  saints  and  luminous  hands,  these  cannot
be  allowed  any  scientific  value.

In  fine,  the  whole  of  this  question  needs  to  be  reopened  ab  ovo
with  the  rigorous  methods  of  investigation  that  we  have  at  our
disposal  today.

This  is  not  to  allege  that  the  problem  is  easy  to  solve.  The
curious  history  of  Blondlot's  N-rays  shows  how  difficult  it  is
to  avoid  illusion  and  hypothesis.

The  aura,  the  astral  body,  the  perisprit,  the  odic  effluvia  are
all  names  for  the  same  thing — a  human  or  animal  radiation.  It
may  be  that  this  radiation  is  a  fact,  anything  is  possible,  but
up  to  the  present  no  one  has  been  able  to  prove  it.  If,  or  when,
it  should  at  last  be  verified,  all  that  Reichenbach,  De  Rochas,  and
the  old  magnetizers  have  said  would  be  linked  up  with  it;  and

xLes  radiations  lumineuses  du  corps  humanin.  (A.  S.  P.,  September,  191 1,
xxi,  264.)

2Is  it  dicyanin?  See  G.  de  Fontenay,  L'aura  humaine  et  les  Scrans  du
Dr.  Walter  Kilner  (A.  S.  P.,  March,  191 2,  74)-

104

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

I  should  not  be  very  greatly  surprised  if  this  discovery  were
made;  but  this  is  not  the  case  as  yet;  there  is  not  even  the  be-
ginning of  a  sound  proof.

Dr.  Joire  has  made  some  experiments  of  exteriorization  of
sensibility  which  would  seem  to  support  the  idea;  but  there  are
no  grounds  for  supposing  that  this  sensitiveness  is  apparent  at
one,  two,  or  ten  centimeters,  distance  from  the  surface  of  the
skin.  Probably  it  is  but  a  special  variety  of  lucidity  or  crypt-
esthesia.  Its  mechanism  is  certainly  less  simple  than  De  Rochas
indicates  in  the  schematic  diagram  he  gives  (Fig.  A,  p.  57,  of
his  book)  showing  a  series  of  sensitive  layers  forming  an  imagi-
nary envelope  to  the  cutaneous  surface.1

The  magnetizers  gave  the  name  "rapport"  to  the  relation  that
they  supposed  to  exist  between  the  magnetizer  and  his  patient;
this  relation  being  such  that  the  sensations  of  the  former  were
perceived  by  the  latter,  who  could  also  divine  the  thought  of  the
magnetizer  without  the  utterance  of  any  word.  P.  Janet,  a  care-
ful and  sceptical  observer,  has  verified  that  Leonie  B.,  being  put
to  sleep  by  himself  or  his  brother  (from  whom  Leonie  in  her
sleep  was  unable  to  distinguish  him)  could  recognize  exactly  the
substance  that  he  placed  in  his  mouth — sugar,  salt,  or  pepper.
One  day  his  brother,  J.  Janet,  in  an  adjoining  room,  scorched
his  right  arm  above  the  wrist.  Leonie,  who  could  have  known
nothing  about  it  normally,  gave  signs  of  real  pain,  and  showed
to  P.  Janet  (who  knew  nothing  of  the  occurrence)  the  exact
place  of  the  burn.  Evidently  this  was  not  due  to  chance,  but
rather  than  admit  a  transfer  of  sensation  I  should  call  it  a  fact
of  cryptesthesia,  which  involves  no  hypothesis.

G.  Delanne  quotes  various  instances  in  which  sleep  has  been
induced  from  a  distance  without  any  possible  knowledge  by  the
subject  of  the  attempt  of  the  magnetizer  to  put  him  to  sleep.2
But  the  perspicacity  of  these  subjects,  both  conscious  and  sub-
conscious, is  so  acute  that  no  certain  conclusion  can  be  deduced.
In  the  celebrated  experiments  by  Dr.  Husson  with  Mme.  Sanson,
all  necessary  precautions  do  not  seem  to  have  been  taken.3

XA.  S.  P.,  1897,  see  the  discussion  raised  /.  5\  P.  R.,  December,  1906,  p.  535.
See  also :  Reichenbach,  Le  fluide  des  magnetiseurs,  precis  d' experiences  sur
ses  proprietes  physiques  et  physiologiques,  classees  et  anno  tees,  by  A.  de
Rochas,  d'Aiglun,  8vo,  Paris,  Carre,  1891.

2F.  Delanne,  Recherches  sur  la  mediumnite,  1902,  259-280.

8On  this  obscure  subject  see  F.  Myers,  Human  Personality,  i,  524-533.  There
are  also  some  observations  by  J.  Hericourt,  De  Dufay,  De  Wetterstrand,  and  De
Man.  de  Tolosa-Latour ;  but  I  repeat  I  am  unable  to  come  to  a  conclusion.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  105

The  existence,  then,  of  a  vital  fluid  or  magnetic  effluvium  is
not  demonstrated.  Nevertheless,  I  should  incline  to  the  opinion
that  if  hypnotizable  subjects  who  had  not  yet  undergone  the
experience  were  magnetized  successively  by  two  persons,  A.  and
B.,  the  former  known  to  have  strong  magnetic  power,  and  the
latter  devoid  of  it,  but  proceeding  apparently  in  precisely  the
same  fashion,  nearly  all  the  sensitives  would  be  put  into  the
sleep  by  A.  and  scarcely  any  by  B.  This  is  only  a  guess;  I
mention  it  as  it  would  seem  to  suggest  an  experiment  that  might
give  a  clear  result,  if  correctly  performed.

If  Donato  and  some  others  brought  about  this  quick  and
crude  fascination,  how  much  is  due  to  the  skill  acquired  by  long
experience,  and  how  much  to  personal  influence?  I  could  not
say ;  but  I  imagine  that  to  speak  of  Donato's  skill  scarcely  covers
the  facts  and  that  some  special  physiological  influence  emanat-
ing from  him  is  not  improbable.    But  all  this  is  very  vague.

Have  magnetic  passes  any  effect  upon  animals?  Rabbits  and
frogs  can  be  hypnotized,  or  reduced  to  a  state  of  torpor  and
passiveness  that  somewhat  resembles  the  hypnotic  state  in  human
subjects.  But  even  if  the  hypnosis  of  animals  (the  cataplexy  of
Preyer)  be  absolutely  true  and  easy  to  verify,  that  proves  noth-
ing as  to  the  alleged  human  effluvia.  If,  as  I  have  several  times
observed,  a  frog  after  having  been  gently  massaged  for  a  few
minutes  stands  quite  still  and  seems  paralyzed,  may  not  this  be
the  effect  of  slight  cutaneous  excitement  exhausting  its  nervous
centres?  Is  fear  a  possible  cause?  Certain  animals,  insects
especially,  feign  death  as  a  means  of  protection.

As  to  this  physiological  influence  of  magnetic  effluvia  we  are
wandering  in  absolutely  unexplored  regions.  I  do  not  even  see
how  good  experiments  could  be  made  to  establish  the  reality
of  such  emanations.

The  magnetizer  Lafontaine  declares  that  he  magnetized  a  lion.
The  story  is  amusing,  but  certainly  not  proof  against  criticism.

Has  human  magnetism  a  healing  power  on  the  sick?  Cer-
tainly it  often  has ;  if  the  magnetizer  places  his  hand  on  a  pain-
ful spot  the  pain  is  relieved.  But  what  is  the  part  played  by
suggestion,  since  we  know  from  Bernheim  and  other  physicians
that  certain  neuralgic  aflfections,  headaches,  and  rheumatic  pains
can  be  greatly  relieved  by  suggestion  alone?

Liebeault  was  able  to  produce  healing  effects  on  children
under  three  years  old ;  he  quotes  forty-six  cases  of  treatment  of

106  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

children  under  four;  which  excludes  suggestion.  Ochorowicz
has  told  me  definitely  that  he  has  been  able  to  relieve  pain  and
reduce  morbid  action  by  imposition  of  hands  on  children  under
two  years  old.  Healers  proceed  in  this  manner  and  perhaps  the
curative  action  is  not  imaginary.1

All  this  adds  up  to  very  little,  strictly  speaking  to  nothing.
There  is  as  yet  nothing  that  clearly  shows  that  a  special  fluid
is  released  by  an  act  of  will.2

The  only  demonstration  that  would  tend  to  prove  magnetic
action  would  be  to  prove  that  a  magnetizer  can  put  a  subject
to  sleep  from  a  distance.

Unfortunately,  the  experiment  is  not  at  all  easy  to  carry  out,
for  we  must  take  account  of  the  extraordinary  vigilance  dis-
played by  the  subjects  who,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  gather
the  faintest  indications  and  seek  with  quite  disconcerting  acute-
ness  (which  is  in  no  way  metapsychic)  to  guess  the  intentions
of  the  magnetizer.  The  slightest  noise,  the  least  glance  by
persons  round  them,  suffices  for  them  to  guess  the  presence  of
the  magnetizer  or  his  desires,  to  which  they  eagerly  conform.
In  a  celebrated  experiment,  Du  Potet  in  1827  succeeded  in  put-
ting Mme.  Sanson  to  sleep  without  her  being  aware  of  his  pres-
ence, as  he  states.  But  is  that  quite  certain?  Husson  and
Recamier  were  there;  may  not  their  presence  have  been  an
indication  to  Mme.  Sanson?

Many  experiments  have  been  made  to  verify  this  fluidic  action
at  a  distance.  I  quote  among  the  latest  those  by  Pierre  Janet,
Boirac,  J.  Ochorowicz,  J.  Hericourt,  Dr.  Dusart,  and  my  own,
and  I  must  say  none  carry  conviction.3

*I  cannot  here  touch  upon  the  history  of  curative  magnetism  which  begins
with  Paracelsus  and  Goclenius,  De  magnetica  vulneris  curatione  extra  ullam  et
super  slitionem  et  dolorem  et  remedii  applicationem,  Marburg,  1610.  Faith-
healing,  the  miracles  at  Lourdes,  stigmata  might  here  be  examined  ;  but  the
psychic  action  of  the  central  nervous  system  is  not  within  the  domain  of
metapsychics.  It  is  likely  that  healing  magnetism  is  not  wholly  suggestion,  but
the  part  played  by  suggestion  is  not  yet  determined.

*U  exteriorisation  de  la  sensibility.  Etude  experimental  el  historique,  by
A.  de  Rochas,  1  vol.,  8vo,  Paris,  Chacornac,  sixth  edition,  1909.

8P.  Janet  et  Gilbert,  Sur  quelques  phenomenes  de  somnambulisme,  Bull,  de
la  Soc.  de  psychologie  de  Paris.  Revue  philosophique,  1886  (1),  xxi,
190-198.  Ch.  Richet,  Un  fait  de  somnambulisme  a  distance,  ibid.,  199-200.
J.  Hericourt,  Un  cas  de  somnambulisme  a  distance,  ibid.,  200-204.  A.
Ruault,  Le  mecanisme  de  la  suggestion  mentale  hypnotique.  Revue  philoso-
phique, 1886,  (2),  691.  Boirac  (cite  par  Flammarion),  L'inconnu  et  les  prob-
lemes  psychiques,  310.    Dusart  (cite  par  Flammarion),  ibid.,  308.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  107

And  yet  if,  as  will  be  abundantly  demonstrated  in  the  sequel,
there  really  is  a  special  crypthesthetic  faculty  which  reveals  facts
that  our  normal  senses  cannot  supply,  it  is  easy  to  conceive  that
the  influence  of  the  magnetizer  may  be  more  or  less  clearly  per-
ceived by  a  sensitive  subject;  so  that  magnetization  from  a  dis-
tance becomes  but  a  mode  of  cryptesthesia.

Even  admitting  human  effluvia,  the  emission  of  a  special  fluid,
or  specific  vibrations,  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  this  is  com-
parable to  a  rhabdic  force — that  which  turns  the  divining-rod,
a  power  emanating  from  things  awaking  cryptesthesia.  The
emanations  from  things  are  probably  not  identical  with  those
from  magnetizers.  Will  has  nothing  to  say  to  them  since  they
proceed  from  inanimate  objects.

Distance  also  counts  for  nothing.  There  have  been  cases  of
lucidity  at  a  distance  of  more  than  six  hundred  miles  between
agent  and  percipient,  so  that  exteriorization  of  sensibility  by
spheres  surrounding  our  cutaneous  integument  to  a  distance  not
exceeding  a  few  yards,  is  not  even  a  plausible  explanation.

Indeed  the  impression  of  a  form,  a  name,  or  an  image  is  some-
times so  precise  that  it  is  not  sufficient  to  speak  of  an  "effluvium
that  causes  sleep."  The  cryptesthetic  cognitions  are  detailed,
minute,  and  complete.  In  other  words,  it  is  proved  that  certain
individuals  acquire  by  cryptesthesia  knowledge  that  their  ordi-
nary senses  do  not  give  them;  but  that  is  all  that  is  really
demonstrated.  No  one  has  yet  proved  that  there  are  human
effluvia  liberated  by  the  will  of  the  magnetizer,  which  have  the
power  to  induce  sleep.

As  for  the  influence  of  one  human  thought  on  another,  thought-
transference,  mental  suggestion,  and  telepathy  do  not  belong  to
hypnotism;  they  are  the  fundamental  phenomena  of  subjective
metapsychics,  and  will  be  studied  in  full  detail  later  on.  From
this  point  of  view  somnambulic  sleep  at  a  distance  and  the  action
of  magnetic  emanations  pertain  to  cryptesthesia.  But  this  latter
is  proved  whilst  the  former  are  not.

(b)  The  Development  of  Cryptesthesia  by  Hypnotism

In  certain  cases  lucidity  can  be  verified  quite  apart  from  any
hypnosis  or  any  kind  of  sleep;  and  most  of  the  monitions  we
shall  presently  speak  of  refer  to  normal  individuals.  Similarly
certain  very  remarkable  facts  of  experimental  lucidity  observed

108

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

in  spiritist  seances  have  been  manifested  by  mediums  that  no
one  had  hypnotized,  who  were  apparently  (perhaps  only  ap-
parently) in  a  quite  normal  state.

It  is  therefore  evident  that  cryptesthesia  can  exist  apart  from
the  hypnotic  state ;  but  it  is  not  less  well  established  that  hypnosis
increases  cryptesthesia.  Various  persons  quite  incapable  of  any
transcendental  manifestations  when  their  senses  are  awake,  be-
come lucid  when  hypnotized.  Instead  of  supposing  the  (very
doubtful)  existence  of  an  unknown  magnetic  fluid  arousing
cryptesthesia  it  is  better  to  admit  that  the  hypnotic  state  facili-
tates cryptesthesia  because  it  suppresses  or  reduces  normal  per-
ceptions.  This  is  a  hypothesis,  but  a  likely  one.

In  the  normal  state  we  are  conscious  of  our  existence,  and
of  many  sensations  that  our  senses  bring  to  us.  The  sensations
of  sight  and  hearing  continuously  reach  our  consciousness  and
keep  it  aroused.  These  sensations  are  so  numerous  and  so
strong  that  other  vague  and  confused  ideas  that  another  mys-
terious sense  might  give  us  find  no  place.  We  are  like  a  person
walking  in  the  sunlight  who  is  unable  to  see  the  dim  light  of  the
glow-worm  in  the  hedge  that  becomes  easily  visible  at  night.
This  is  but  an  analogy,  but  one  that  explains  why  both  hypnosis
and  normal  sleep,  suppressing  or  reducing  normal  sensibility,
should  favour  lucidity.

Under  profound  hypnosis  the  subjects  are  insensitive,  and
surgical  operations  can  be  performed  on  them  without  their
feeling  pain.  I  have  often  seen  a  young  woman,  in  deep  hyp-
notic sleep,  making  neither  movement  nor  gesture  when  flies  were
walking  on  her  lips  and  nostrils.  Sometimes  the  loudest  noises
are  unheard  and  do  not  awaken  the  person.  Good  subjects  when
hypnotized  are  insensible  to  ordinary  stimulation,  and  this  may
render  them  more  sensitive  to  the  stimulations  of  an  unknown
kind  that  awaken  cryptesthesia.

Similarly  many  monitions  have  been  recorded,  taking  place  in
normal  sleep.  M.  Warcollier  has  drawn  up  statistics  on  the
frequency  of  monitions  in  sleep  or  when  half  awake.  The  senses
are  then  benumbed  as  in  hypnotic  sleep ;  and  the  unknown  vibra-
tions, doubtless  very  feeble,  that  arouse  cryptesthesia  can  be
more  readily  perceived.  To  hear  a  slight  sound,  other  noises
that  mask  it  must  be  absent.  Hypnosis  and  sleep  bring  to  con-
sciousness the  darkness  and  the  silence  necessary  to  the  percep-
tion of  minute  forces.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  109

The  so-called  divinations  by  which  somnambules  diagnose  dis-
ease and  its  treatment  find  their  place  in  a  study  of  cryptesthesia.
I  shall  not  insist  on  the  therapeutic  side;  an  exact  estimate  of
its  efficacy,  even  in  normal  medicine,  is  such  a  delicate  matter
that  it  is  impossible  to  say  what  may  be  valid  in  the  treatment
advised  by  somnambules.  Moreover,  it  has  been  abundantly
proved  that  suggestion  acts  with  great  power  on  the  sick.  Every-
one knows  the  stories  of  miraculous  cures  at  Lourdes,  resembling
those  that  were  seen  two  centuries  since  at  the  tomb  of  Deacon
Paris.  Perhaps  it  would  be  well  to  bring  some  of  these  authenti-
cated cures  into  the  domain  of  metapsychic  science.  Without
drawing  any  conclusions,  I  will  mention  three  which  by  the  com-
plexity of  their  phenomena  touch  metapsychics  in  some  measure.

The  first  case  is  one  very  carefully  observed  by  M.  Mangin.1
It  was  a  case  of  paraplegia  in  Mile.  B.,  aged  twenty-eight;
duration  of  the  disease,  twenty-five  months ;  her  arms  only  were
capable  of  some  movement,  she  could  barely  turn  her  head;
there  was  double  curvature  of  the  spine,  wheeze  and  dull  spots
on  the  lungs.  Temperature  102.2  in  the  evening.  Three  doctors
in  succession  gave  the  diagnosis  following:

1.  Paraplegia;  prognosis  serious.

2.  Potts's  disease ;  compression  of  spinal  column  and  paraplegia.

3.  Paraplegia,  medullary  lesion ;  prognosis  very  serious.

When  M.  Mangin  saw  her  on  the  26th  of  February,  Mile.  B.
saw  at  his  side  the  form  of  a  beautiful  woman  who  told  Mile.  B.
that  she  would  get  well  and  that  on  the  8th  of  May  she  would
be  able  to  get  up.  From  the  26th  of  February  to  May  8th  M.
Mangin  magnetized  her,  and  during  her  magnetic  sleep  she
always  saw  the  beautiful  woman.  On  the  8th  of  May  she  was
completely  cured.  She  got  up,  put  her  feet  to  the  ground,  and
kissed  the  face  of  her  imaginary  friend,  and  by  the  15th  of  May
seemed  to  be  completely  cured;  the  thoracic  trouble  and  the
curvatures  had  disappeared.  The  cure  was  maintained;  she
married  and  has  had  two  children.2

This  case  is  most  remarkable ;  it  is  incredible  that  there  should
have  been  three  gross  mistakes  in  the  diagnosis  and  that  the
case  should  have  been  one  of  hysteria.

xDevant  le  mystbre  de  la  nevrose.  De  la  gutrxson  de  cas  riputds  incurables,
umo,  Paris,  Vuibert,  1920.

aM.  Mangin  reports  a  curious  instance  of  premonition  made  by  Mile.  B.

110

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

In  the  two  following  cases  also  hysteria  is  equally  insufficient
to  account  for  the  facts.

A  workman  named  Derudder  had  both  bones  of  his  leg  broken
in  February,  1867.  He  became  worse;  there  was  much  sup-
puration, and  no  disposition  of  the  bones  to  unite;  the  lower
part  of  the  leg  could  be  moved  in  all  directions.  Eight  years
later,  during  a  visit  for  prayer  at  the  sacred  grotto  of  Oostaker
near  Ghent  where  there  is  a  grotto  similar  to  that  at  Lourdes,
Derudder  felt  himself  cured,  held  himself  upright,  put  his  feet
to  the  ground  and  could  walk,  having  been  on  crutches  for
eight  years.

The  case  is  reported  by  two  doctors  and  depends  on  the  exacti-
tude of  their  observations.

The  second  case  is  equally  strange.  In  1897  Gargam  was  seri-
ously injured  in  a  railway  accident;  paraplegia  supervened  with
muscular  atrophy  and  the  beginnings  of  gangrene.  Two  medical
certificates  put  in  for  the  action  against  the  railway  company
(Paris-Orleans)  stated  the  case  as  incurable  and  likely  to  become
worse.  At  Lourdes  Gargam  was  cured  almost  immediately
when  he  entered  the  grotto ;  he  was  able  to  make  some  tottering
steps.  The  next  day  the  suppurating  wounds  in  the  feet  seemed
cured ;  he  was  able  to  walk  without  help,  in  spite  of  the  withered
muscles.  Three  weeks  later  his  weight  had  increased  by  twenty
pounds,  and  he  could  resume  his  work  (A.  S.  P.,  December,
1907).

Even  if  both  cases  have  been  correctly  reported  they  do  not
prove  the  existence  of  a  new  metapsychic  power ;  they  only  indi-
cate that  the  central  nervous  system  has  an  unusual  and  quite
extraordinary  power  on  organic  phenomena.

The  question  is  complicated  not  only  by  the  difficulty  of  esti-
mating the  curative  power,  but  it  has  been  further  obscured  by
considerations  of  another  kind.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  crowds
who  visit  Lourdes  today  and  formerly  went  to  the  cemetery  of
St.  Medard  testifies  that  religious  ideas  dominate  these  miracu-
lous cures.1

*Many  "faith  cures"  are  brought  forward  by  Christian  Science.  This
society  was  founded  about  t866  by  Mrs.  Mary  Glover  Eddy  (December,  1910).
See  Ramacharaka  (Yogi),  The  Science  of  Psychic  Healing,  Chicago,  Yogi
Publication  Society,  Masonic  Temple,  1909.  A  dissident  sect  arose  under
Bishop  Oliver  Sabin,  who  wrote  a  number  of  books  that  went  through  many
editions,  Christology,  Science  of  Health  and  Happiness,  etc.  Washington,
thirty-second  edition.    But  the  point  of  departure  of  all  these  books  is  the

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  111

The  cures  claimed  as  resulting  from  advice  by  somnambulists
constitute  a  regular  traffic,  increasing  in  all  countries,  though
everywhere  repressed  by  legislation  as  illegal  medical  practice.

The  misuse  of  professional  somnambulism  is  sufficient  reason
for  excluding  alleged  cures  after  such  advice  from  the  list  of
authentic  facts.  It  is,  however,  difficult  to  admit  that  the  in-
numerable consultations  of  somnambulists  in  all  countries  could
have  grown  to  such  an  extent  and  become  so  general  if  there
were  not  some  small  amount  of  medical  clairvoyance  in  their
advice.  In  default  of  this  they  would  soon  be  abandoned.  More-
over, these  persons  freely  pass  remarks  on  each  other,  such  as
"X.  has  great  power  of  lucidity.  Y.  used  to,  but  has  not  now.
Z.  has  it  but  seldom,  but  on  some  days  is  very  lucid."  It  would
perhaps  be  unwise  to  reject  with  contempt  the  record  of  healing
divination  by  somnambulists.

Still  greater  reserve  should  be  observed  in  denying  all  clair-
voyance in  diagnosis.  Somnambulists  seem  instinctively  dis-
posed to  speak  of  the  state  of  health  of  those  round  them.  Even
when  their  advice  is  not  asked  for  they  are  inclined  to  say  that
such  a  one  who  speaks  to  them  or  touches  them  is  suffering  in
the  heart,  the  head,  or  the  chest.  Everything  happens  as  though
they  felt  the  morbid  affections  of  those  near  them  by  a  kind  of
telepathy  which  is  organic  rather  than  psychic.

This  organic  telepathy  is  clearly  manifest  in  all  their  words.
Alice,  who  is  neither  a  somnambulist  nor  a  professional  medium,
exclaims,  "I  am  stifled ;  I  am  distressed ;  it  gives  me  spasms,
cramps,  or  a  lump  in  my  throat,"  when  a  lock  of  hair  from  a
sick  person  is  given  her.  But  all  this  is  still  too  uncertain  to
allow  of  any  affirmations  with  regard  to  lucidity  in  this  special

work  of  Mrs.  Mary  Eddy  which  in  1898  had  gone  through  one  hundred  and  forty
editions,  Science  and  Health,  with  Key  to  the  Scriptures,  Boston,  Armstrong,
1898.  For  a  history  of  the  movement  see  H.  W.  Dresser,  Health  and  the  Inner
Life,  New  York,  Putnam,  1906.  For  the  miracles  at  Lourdes  see  Diday's
Examen  medical  des  miracles  de  Lourdes,  Paris,  Masson,  1873.  Boissarie,
Histoire  medicate  de  Lourdes,  1858-1891,  Paris,  1891.  Baugher,  Lourdes  et
un  cas  de  tuberculose  aigue  generalisee  {A.  S.  P.,  1895,  156-158).
Berteaux,  Lourdes  et  la  science.  Revue  de  I'Hypn.  et  Psychol.  Physiologiques,
Paris,  1895,  ix,  210-216  and  275-278.  F.  de  Backer,  Lourdes  et  les  medecins,
Paris,  Maloine,  1905.  E.  Artus,  Les  miracles  de  Notre-Dame  de  Lourdes,  guiri-
son  de  Juliette  Fournier,  Paris,  Palme,  1872.  Histoire  complete  du  dtfi  a  la  libre
pensie  sur  les  miracles  de  Lourdes,  Paris,  Palme,  1877.  Noriagof,  Notre-Dame
de  Lourdes  et  la  science  de  V occult e,  Chanuel,  Paris,  1898,  and  above  all  the
works  of  H.  Lasserre  (one  of  the  first  who  were  cured  at  Lourdes),  Notre-Dame
de  Lourdes,  Paris,  Palme,  1885,  and  new  edition,  Paris,  Sanard,  2  vols.,  1898.

112

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

form  of  cryptesthesia.  If  it  were  studied  methodically  and  with-
out prejudice,  some  curious  results  might  appear.  In  fifty-three
experiments  of  diagnosis  of  disease  by  somnambulists  under-
taken by  me  with  every  care  to  avoid  all  suggestion  on  my  own
part  and  all  normal  perspicacity  by  them,  I  had  only  very  mod-
erate results.  Some  were  correct,  but  not  so  many  as  to  exclude
chance  coincidences.  In  a  case  of  strong  diarrhea  Eugenie  said,
"Inflammation  of  the  intestine."  On  a  child  with  measles,
Helena  said,  "It  is  measles,  I  saw  his  face  all  red."  The  best  of
the  experiments  was  number  thirteen.  Helena  said,  "Severe
pain,  choking,  pain  here  (pointing  to  the  epigastric  region).
There  seems  to  be  a  sac  that  ought  to  be  emptied ;  that  sac  under
my  heart  gives  me  great  pain."  The  case  was  one  of  tuberculosis,
with  an  abscess  full  of  pus,  at  the  base  of  the  left  lung,  accom-
panied by  suffocation,  dyspnea,  and  esophagitis.  In  all  these
cases  the  consultation  was  in  the  absence  of  the  sick  person ;  the
investigation  was  psychometric  (which  I  call  pragmatic  crypt-
esthesia) ;  I  gave  the  sensitive  some  object,  a  lock  of  hair,  or  a
letter  from  the  patient.

These  results  are  imperfect,  but  in  the  numerous  treatises  on
animal  magnetism  that  appeared  from  1825  to  1855  there  are
many  records  that  should  induce  students  of  metapsychics
(among  whom  there  are  numerous  physicians)  to  re-open  these
experiments  without  fear  of  ridicule.  The  history  of  somnam-
bulism and  spiritualism  shows  how  ill-advised  official  science
has  been  in  rejecting  a  priori,  without  examination,  facts  that
have  later  on  forced  this  acceptance.

There  is  a  peculiar  form  of  organic  cryptesthesia  which  de-
serves attention.  It  was  called  "autoscopy"  by  the  magnetizers
of  the  first  half  of  the  nineteenth  century;  somnambulists  seem
able  to  see  their  organs  and  to  give  remarkable  descriptions  of
them.  This  seems  to  belong  to  psychophysiology  rather  than  to
metapsychics.

In  a  normal  state  the  visceral  organs  do  not  awake  any  precise
sensations  in  our  consciousness.  The  functions  of  the  heart,
lungs,  liver,  intestines,  and  the  brain  are  inappreciable  by  con-
sciousness, though  physiology  proves  that  the  viscera  have  sen-
sory nerves  that  convey  to  the  nerve  centres  some  notion  of  the
state  of  these  organs.

These  impressions  are  indistinct.  They  certainly  reach  the
spinal  cord  and  the  brain,  but  they  seldom  touch  the  conscious-

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  113

ness.  Only  when  disordered  are  we  aware  of  the  stomach,  the
intestines,  or  the  liver.  It  is  not  for  want  of  sensory  nerves
that  this  is  so,  but  because  the  sensory  nerves  do  not  affect  the
consciousness.  It  may  therefore  be  admitted  as  probable  that
in  certain  special  psychophysiological  conditions  (e.g.,  hypnosis)
the  modified  and  amplified  consciousness  may  be  affected  by
visceral  sensations.

Although  autoscopy  was  currently  observed  from  the  begin-
ning of  magnetism,  it  was  Fere  who  first  used  the  word  (?),
though  he  applied  it  to  the  vision  of  his  double  by  the  patient
who  was  probably  hallucinated.1

This  kind  of  hallucination  (external  autoscopy),  though  so
interesting  from  the  medical  point  of  view,  has  no  metapsychic
significance.  Some  spiritualist  theorists  have  endeavoured  to
ascribe  to  it  an  importance  which  it  does  not  seem  to  me  to
possess.

Internal  autoscopy,  mentioned  by  Du  Potet,  was  carefully
studied  by  Dr.  Comar2  and,  later,  by  Dr.  Sollier,  who  wrote  an
interesting  monograph  upon  it.3

There  is  no  need  to  examine  here  the  detail  in  the  modalities  of
autoscopy,  for  we  are  on  the  borderland  between  the  psychic
and  the  metapsychic ;  nor  is  there  any  need  to  imagine  some  new
faculty  of  the  mind  or  the  nervous  system  to  account  for  the
representation  of  the  viscera  to  visual  consciousness.  All  the
same,  this  leads  to  a  curious  inference.

If  it  is  true  that  some  persons,  when  hypnotized,  hysterical,
or  otherwise  abnormal,  have  a  visual  perception  of  their  organs
(and  this  fact,  however  unusual,  must  be  considered  proven),
it  must  be  admitted  that  in  certain  cases  the  hypnotized  or  hys-
terical patient  can  be  aware  of  an  organic  lesion  and  diagnose
its  site  by  seeing  that  lesion.  In  fact  magnetized  patients  often
show  a  willingness  to  describe  the  extent  and  locality  of  their
malady  and  to  suggest  remedies.

1Note  sur  les  hallucinations  autoscopiques  ou  spiculaires,  et  sur  les  halluci-
nations altruistes  (Bull,  de  la  Soc.  de  Biol,  de  Paris,  1891,  45 0-

2L'  autoreprtsentation  de  I'organisme  chez  quelques  hystcriques,  Revue
neurologique,  1901,  491.

*Les  phenomenes  d'autoscopie,  Paris,  Alcan,  1903.  To  avoid  confusion,  a
distinction  must  be  observed  between  external  and  internal  autoscopy.  It
is  external  when  the  hallucinated  subject  sees  his  double  outside  himself.
It  is  internal  when  the  somnambulist  perceives  his  own  organs — heart,  liver,
intestines,  etc.,  and  describes  them,  whether  pathologically  or  not.

114

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

It  is  even  possible  that  the  numerous  and  authenticated  cases
of  auto-premonition  may  be  due  to  this  internal  autoscopy.  These
auto-premonitions  are  not  premonitions  in  the  true  sense  of  the
word  as  employed  in  this  book.  Autoscopy  enables  a  somnambulist
to  foresee  the  malady  or  death  just  in  the  same  way  as  an
experienced  physician  can  foresee  them.

3.  Cryptesthesia  tinder  Hypnotism

Experimental  cryptesthesia  can  be  studied  in  hypnotized  per-
sons and  in  mediums.  The  medium,  during  a  seance,  is  usually
in  trance ;  but  this  spontaneous  trance  is  singularly  allied  to  the
hypnotic  state  properly  so  called,  as  if  the  medium  were  self-
hypnotized,  without  the  aid  of  a  magnetizer.

There  is,  however,  no  essential  difference.  The  chief  difference
is  that  the  medium  thinks  himself  to  be  in  relations  with  real
personalities  distinct  from  himself — his  guides — who  speak  by
his  voice  or  write  by  his  hand.  However,  with  the  hypnotized
patient,  as  with  the  medium,  there  are  different  degrees  in  the
dulling  of  the  senses  and  diminution  of  consciousness.

Nevertheless  the  consciousness  of  many  mediums  seems  to
remain  intact;  they  continue  to  converse  with  the  persons  who
may  be  present  while  their  subconsciousness  elaborates  other
conversations  and  other  acts  manifest  by  muscular  movements
they  are  aware  of  but  can  scarcely  control,  as  in  automatic  or
planchette  writing.  I  call  this  semi-somnambulism.  Sometimes
the  dissociation  between  the  normal  conscious  personality  and  the
new  personalities  that  appear  is  still  more  complex ;  for  in  some
cases  the  medium  will  write  coherent  phrases  answering  to  a
personality,  D.,  with  the  right  hand;  while  with  the  left,  he  will
write  other  coherent  phrases  from  a  personality,  G.  And  during
the  whole  time  he  appears  normal,  laughs,  talks,  sings,  and  dis-
cusses with  the  various  people  present  in  the  circle.

Again,  this  dissociation  of  personality,  whether  in  somnam-
bulism or  in  semi-somnambulism,  is  not  metapsychical ;  it  belongs
to  psychology.  It  can  be  accounted  for  by  a  doubling,  or  more
rarely,  by  a  tripling  of  the  personality — a  fact  that  has  often  been
verified.  We  are  here  considering  the  manifestation  of  lucidity
(i.e.,  of  cryptesthesia),  rather  than  these  variations  in  the  per-
sonality; and  the  proofs  of  this  astounding  cryptesthesia  are  so

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  115

numerous  and  so  certain,  that  a  selection  must  be  made  from
among  them  and  only  the  chief  ones  quoted.1

(a)  Experiments  on  Hypnotized  Subjects

In  the  early  days  of  animal  magnetism  the  old  magnetizers
insisted  on  the  existence  of  clairvoyance  or  lucidity.  I  will  cite
a  few  cases  only.2

General  Noizet  (quoted  by  Flammarion,  loc.  tit.,  339),  states,
in  1842,  that  a  somnambulist  told  him  accurately  what  he  had
done  during  the  day,  his  acts  not  being  at  all  usual.  He  had  been
at  the  Tuileries  in  the  apartments  of  the  Duke  de  Montpensier,
the  king's  son;  and  thence  in  a  carriage  with  the  duke  to  the
Invalides  to  study  certain  models  of  fortifications.  All  was  very
exactly  detailed,  but  too  much  at  length  to  be  reproduced  here.

According  to  a  letter  from  Dr.  Despine3  to  M.  Charpignon,
Mme.  Schmitz  being  ill,  at  Geneva,  asked  Dr.  Julliard  to  write
out  an  opinion  for  her.  Dr.  Julliard,  in  complete  darkness,
placed  the  paper  beneath  her  feet.  She  said,  "My  light  is  there !"
and  read  what  Dr.  Julliard  had  written.  Charpignon  cites  other
cases  of  clairvoyance  or  transposition  of  the  senses.  But  the
precautions  then  taken  were  not  so  stringent  as  they  now  are,
and  doubt  is  permissible  or  even  obligatory.

It  is  necessary  to  be  very  cautious  in  drawing  conclusions.  I
will  here  recall  an  instance  of  cryptesthesia  that  probably  involves
an  error;  it  will  serve  to  indicate  the  precautions  necessary  for
a  good  experiment.

In  the  presence  of  M.  Legludic,  director  of  the  School  of  Medi-
cine at  Angers,  Dr.  Binet  Sangle  made  some  experiments  on
cryptesthesia.   Two  subjects,  O.  and  M.,  were  present.    M.  was

*I  may  be  permitted  a  certain  preference  for  my  own  experiments ;  and
must  apologize  for  the  large  space  here  given  to  them,  but  some  are  unpub-
lished, and  I  think,  deserve  to  be  remembered.

2In  old  journals  of  magnetism  (German,  English,  French,  and  Italian)
numerous  cases  of  lucidity  are  reported ;  but  it  is  not  certain  that  the
blindfolding  was  such  as  always  to  obscure  the  sight  completely.  Even  when
a  wad  of  cotton-wool  was  placed  on  each  side  of  the  nose,  the  wad  might
be  displaced  enough  to  permit  some  little  vision.  However  little,  it  would  be
too  much.  It  is  probable  that  the  clairvoyance  of  Pigeaire's  little  girl  was
authentic,  but  the  proof  is  insufficient.  See  Journal  du  magnetisme  animal,  by
J.  J.  A.  Ricard,  Paris,  Bourgogne  &  Martinet,  1840,  and  Toulouse,  1839,  vol.
t,  p.  624.

^Physiologic,  mcdecine  et  mStaphysique  du  magnetisme.  Paris,  J.  Bailliere,
1848,  114.

116

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

put  to  sleep  facing  the  wall,  and  her  eyes  bandaged.  Dr.  Legludic
then  opened  a  book  at  random  and  underlined  the  word  "vulture/'
Without  saying  anything  Dr.  Binet  Sangle  drew  the  head  of  a
vulture,  and  M.  said,  "It  is  a  curious  bird,  it  has  no  wings,  it  is
a  vulture."  In  another  experiment,  again  opening  the  book  at
random,  M.  J.  underlined  "slug."  M.  said,  "It  is  a  slug."  In
a  still  more  remarkable  experiment  M.  J.  underlined  the  verse,
"Souffle  bise,  tombe  a  flots,  pluie!"  O,  said  "S. .  .SS. .  .S. . ."
and  at  last,  "Souffle  bise.

Finally  in  the  same  book,  opened  as  before  at  random,  M.  J.
underlined,  "Le  Dieu  ne  viendra  pas.  L'Eglise  est  renversee."
M.  then  said,  "Le  Dieu  ne  viendra  pas."  1

This  experiment  would  be  decisive  if  there  were  not  possible
or  probable  complicity  between  O.  and  M.,  both  of  whom  were
present.  Neither  can  the  experiments  with  the  Misses  Creery
be  admitted  as  valid :  wilful  or  unconscious  complicity  must  al-
ways be  allowed  for  in  such  experiments  on  cryptesthesia.

William  Gregory,2  professor  of  chemistry  at  the  University
of  Edinburgh,  verified  that  Major  Buckley  was  able  to  develop
lucidity  in  several  hypnotizable  subjects  sufficiently  to  enable  them
to  read  correctly  mottoes,  letters,  addresses,  and  postmarks,  en-
closed in  envelopes  or  in  shut  boxes  of  wood  or  cardboard.  In
one  case  Sir  T.  Wiltshire  had  written  "concert"  intending  to
write  "correct."  The  seer  read  it  as  "concert."  Sir  T.  Wilt-
shire said  this  was  an  error,  but  on  opening  the  box  the  word
was  seen  to  be  "concert."  The  statistics  given  by  Major  Buckley
would  be  decisive  if  there  were  no  possibility  of  error  in  the
methods  employed.  Mottoes  in  4,680  nut-shells,  totalling  about
36,000  words,  were  read.

Herbert  Mayo,  an  eminent  English  doctor  and  physiologist,
sent  to  an  American  friend  in  Paris  a  lock  of  hair  from  one  of
his  patients,  Colonel  C.  A  somnambulist  in  Paris  stated  that
C.  was  suffering  from  partial  paralysis  of  the  hips  and  legs
and  was  in  the  habit  of  using  a  surgical  instrument  for  another
ailment.

If  I  cite  this  case  of  lucidity,  it  is  not  that  it  is  more  remarkable
than  many  others,  but  because  it  is  attested  by  an  experienced

xExper.  sur  la  transmission  directe  de  la  pensee,  A.  S.  P.,  1902,  xii,  131-
143.

2LetUrs  to  a  candid  inquirer  on  animal  magnetism  (1851)  cite  par  E.
Boirac,  in  A.  S.  P.,  1893,  i".  242-

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  117

physiologist,  Dr.  Mayo,  and  convinced  him  that  lucidity  is  a
fact.1

Dr.  Dufay  of  Blois  had  some  good  examples  of  cryptesthesia
with  a  non-professional  somnambulist,  named  Marie.2

He  received  one  morning  a  letter  from  an  officer  friend  who
was  laid  up  in  his  tent  from  dysentery.  He  enclosed  the  letter
in  two  blank  envelopes  and  put  it,  the  same  evening,  into  the
hands  of  Marie.  She  said  that  it  concerned  a  soldier  suffering
from  dysentery;  and  going  to  find  him,  she  imagined  herself
going  on  board  ship,  was  sea-sick,  saw  some  "women  in  white
garments,,,  with  beards  (Arabs,  no  doubt).  She  saw  the  officer,
very  thin  and  pale,  on  a  bed  made  of  three  planks  on  stumps
above  the  moist  sand.

The  other  instance  reported  by  Dr.  Dufay  is  yet  more  remark-
able: A  prisoner  in  Blois  jail  had  just  committed  suicide  by
strangling  himself  with  his  necktie.  Dr.  Dufay  cut  off  a  piece
of  this  necktie,  put  it  in  several  folds  of  paper,  and  gave  it  to
Marie.  She  declared  that  it  was  something  that  had  killed  a
man,  a  cord — no,  a  cravat;  it  belongs  to  a  prisoner  who  hanged
himself  because  he  had  assassinated  a  man.  She  said  that  he
had  killed  his  victim  with  a  hatchet,  and  indicated  the  place  where
the  hatchet  had  been  thrown  away.  The  hatchet  was  found  in
the  place  described.

Bozzano  (A.  S.  P.,  1910,  120),  quotes  Dr.  Vidigal  of  Sao
Paulo,  Brazil,  who  brought  to  his  house  a  young  servant  aged
twelve,  who  had  just  arrived  as  an  emigrant  from  Spain.  The
evening  of  her  arrival  she  was  put  to  sleep  by  a  friend  of  Dr.
Vidigal  and  saw  an  old  woman  whose  description  tallied  with
Dr.  Vidigal's  mother,  three  months  dead.  The  girl  added  that
in  this  woman's  room  there  was  a  silk  dress  and  in  a  pocket  sewn
into  it,  seventy-five  milreis.  On  entering  this  room,  which  no
one  had  entered  for  a  long  while,  the  silk  dress  and  the  seventy-
five  milreis  were  found.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  Dr.  Vidigal  had
barely  been  able  to  meet  the  expenses  of  his  mother's  funeral.

In  1837,  at  New  York,  Loraine  Brackett  of  Dudley,  a  young
woman,  who  was  completely  blinded  by  an  injury,  when  hypno-
tized made  mental  journeys  that  showed  her  lucidity.  She  was
able  to  describe  exactly  a  picture  seen  by  Mr.  Stone  in  another
town  representing  three  Indians  round  an  enormous  tree-trunk

Quoted  by  Boirac,  La  Metagnomie  {A.  S.  P.,  November,  1916,  159-162).
*C.  Wallace,  he.  ext.,  tr.  fr.,  92.

118

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

with  hieroglyphs  upon  it.  Loraine  said :  "Three  Indians  sitting  in
a  hollow  tree  which  looks  as  if  it  had  been  dug  out  on  purpose ;  and
the  tree  filled  with  marks."    Only  Mr.  Stone  knew  this  picture.1

Mrs.  E.  H.  Sidgwick  mentions  several  cases  of  magnetic  lu-
cidity given  by  Jane  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  i,  280).  They  are  very
interesting,  and  the  article  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  may  be  referred
to  for  the  full  detail.  Dr.  F.  who  magnetized  Jane  warned  one
of  his  patients,  Mr.  Eglinton,  that  he  would  ask  Jane  what  Mr.
E.  was  doing  between  eight  and  ten  o'clock  that  evening.  Jane
said,  "I  see  a  very  fat  man  with  a  wooden  leg,  he  has  no  brain.
He  is  called  Eglinton.  He  is  sitting  before  a  table  where  there
is  brandy,  but  he  is  not  drinking."  A  very  curious  result:  for
Mr.  E.  who  is  very  thin,  had  made  a  corpulent  dummy  and
placed  it  before  a  table  with  a  bottle  of  brandy.

Alexis,  in  a  series  of  fourteen  seances  at  Brighton,  played  at
cards,  naming  the  cards  of  his  opponents  as  well  as  his  own,
though  his  eyes  were  blindfolded,  gave  lines  out  of  a  closed  book,
and  described  the  contents  of  shut  boxes.

Robert  Houdin,  the  celebrated  conjurer,  had  an  interview  with
Alexis.  Houdin  drew  a  book  from  his  pocket,  and,  opening  it,
required  Alexis  to  read  a  line  eight  pages  back  at  a  certain  level,
which  he  marked  by  inserting  a  pin.  This  was  done  and  Houdin
found  the  feat  stupefying.  He  signed  the  declaration,  "I  affirm
that  the  above  facts  are  scrupulously  accurate."

Houdin,  after  verifying  that  the  phenomena  of  clairvoyance
displayed  by  Alexis  could  not  be  imitated  by  any  conjurer,  says
that  Dr.  Chomel,  having  shown  Alexis  a  certain  medal,  Alexis
told  him,  "That  medal  was  given  to  you  under  peculiar  circum-
stances. You  were  then  a  student  in  a  garret  at  Lyons.  A
workman  whom  you  had  done  a  service  offered  you  the  medal
which  he  had  found  in  some  ruins."  This  was  exactly  true
(Delanne,  Recheches  sur  la  mediumnite,  1902,  236).

Alexis  gave  President  Seguier  a  proof  of  lucidity  (not  telep-
athy) of  a  very  curious  kind.  Alexis,  mentally  travelling  to  the
President's  room,  saw  a  handbell  on  the  table.  "No,"  said  M.
Seguier,  "there  is  no  handbell."  But  on  returning  home  that
afternoon  he  found  that  a  handbell  had  been  placed  on  his  table.
The  President  had  not  given  his  name  (Delaage,  Les  my  stives
du  magnetisms).

Animal  magnetism.  Letter  of  Mr.  Stone  to  Dr.  Bigham,  P.  A.  S.  P.  R.,
1907,  106.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  119

Many  other  proofs  of  the  extraordinary  powers  of  lucidity
possessed  by  Alexis  are  reported  by  Flammarion;  and  Dr.  Ber-
trand,  the  magnetizers  Petetin  and  Lafontaine,  and  especially
Dr.  Frapart  have  noted  so  many  varied  and  striking  instances
that  it  is  impossible  to  doubt  the  wonderful  metapsychic  faculties
of  Alexis  Didier.

Robert  Houdin,  who  was  certainly  one  of  the  most  expert
conjurers  of  any  day,  verified  and  attested  the  clairvoyance  of
Alexis,  who  not  only  told  the  cards  that  Houdin  held  in  his
hand,  but  those  he  was  about  to  draw  from  a  new  pack.1

Alphonse  Karr  and  Victor  Hugo  obtained  decisive  proofs  of
cryptesthesia  with  Alexis,  hypnotized  by  Marillat.  The  testimony
of  Alphonse  Karr  and  Victor  Hugo  would  be  insufficient  if  it
referred  only  to  a  game  at  cards  played  with  Alexis,  for  clever
prestidigitation  can  do  anything  of  the  kind,  but  there  is  much
more;  Alexis  told  Alphonse  Karr  that  he  (Karr)  had  placed  a
branch  of  white  azalea  in  an  empty  bottle  before  leaving  his
house ;  which  was  the  fact.  Victor  Hugo  had  prepared  a  packet
tied  up  with  string  in  which  he  had  written  the  word  "politique" ;
this  was  read  by  Alexis.  Alexandre  Dumas  also  tells  of  a  me-
morable seance,  but  his  testimony  is  less  precise.

Alexis,2  when  M.  Vivant  came  to  consult  him,  said  that  he
had  come  concerning  some  lost  object — four  banknotes  of  one
thousand  francs — which  was  correct,  and  he  added,  "Do  not
complain  to  the  police,  no  one  has  stolen  them,  they  have  fallen
behind  a  drawer  in  your  desk."  M.  Vivant,  on  returning  home,
found  them  there.

I  cannot  at  all  understand  why  Hyslop  declines  to  admit  Alexis*
cryptesthesia  since  he  attests  such  complete  and  perfect  crypt-
esthesia in  Mrs.  Piper  (Enigmas  of  Psychical  Research,  Boston,
1906,  274).  M.  Osty  has  given  much  evidence  of  the  con-
ditions of  hypnosis  and  lucidity  of  Mme.  M.  (Lucidite  et  intuition,
Etude  experimental ,  Paris,  Alcan)  ;  he  is  also  about  to  publish  a
work  in  which  the  fine  cases  of  lucidity  by  Mme.  M.  will  be
completely  described.  I  know  of  some  that  are  striking.  But
in  the  book  already  published  representing  so  much  patient  work,

^Confidences  d'un  prestidigitateur,  une  vie  d'artiste,  Paris,  libr.  Nouvelle,
1859,  2  vols.  If  the  journals  of  the  time  are  inaccessible,  the  study  by  Camille
Flammarion,  La  mort  et  son  mystere,  1920,  i,  209-233,  may  be  read  with  profit.

2Cited  by  Delaage,  Le  sommeil  magnetique.  After  Bozzano,  Dei  fenomeni
di  telestesia,  Luce  e  Ombra,  1920,  xx,  124.

120

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

there  is  not  a  single  case  that  can  be  quoted  as  evidence  of  lucidity.
It  is  probable,  according  to  what  he  says,  that  Mme.  M.  Freya
and  M.  Flouriere  gave  him  many,  but  we  have  to  take  his  word
for  them.  However,  on  p.  304,  he  cites  a  case  that  seems  positive,
but  omits  to  tell  us  how  far  the  statements  of  the  sensitive  were
correct.

Dr.  Souza  Couta  of  Lisbon,  in  a  seance  at  which  Dr.  O.,  also
of  Lisbon,  was  present,  asked  the  entranced  medium  to  visit
Dr.  O.'s  house.  The  medium  said  that  he  (or  she)  saw  two
ladies,  one  of  whom  was  a  girl,  reading  a  book — Le  Diable  a  la
cour.  He  described  the  room,  a  dining-room  containing  two
vases,  which  he  described,  and  a  piano  {A.  S.  P.,  1905,  xv,
707).

M.  Melvil  Roux,  an  architect,  relates  that  he  had  the  oppor-
tunity of  seeing  a  woman  of  about  sixty,  a  servant,  magnetized
by  M.  Salles,  a  bookseller  of  Nimes.  Three  years  before  M.
Roux  had  been  charged  with  some  repairs  to  the  funeral  crypt
of  the  college  at  Alais.  The  subject  described  this  crypt,  and
looked  in,  despite  her  fear;  she  said  at  once,  "There  is  snow"
(it  was  chalk)  and  then,  that  there  were  some  sacerdotal  vest-
ments.   She  also  read  some  words  (Flammarion,  loc.  cit.,  329).

Dariex  cites  the  lucidity  of  a  woman  named  Marie.  The
magnetizer  gave  her  various  orders  which  were  carried  out.  One
day  a  watch  was  hidden  in  a  bookcase.  She  went  to  the  book-
case, found  the  watch  and  returned,  showing  her  pleasure.  The
order  had  been  given  mentally.  Another  time,  also  in  obedience
to  a  mental  order,  she  fetched  a  glass,  and  filled  it  with  water,
adding  a  few  drops  of  eau-de-Cologne.

In  1850  eleven  fishing  boats  left  Peterhead  for  whaling;  a
person  in  the  magnetic  sleep  said  that  the  first  boat  back  would
be  the  Hamilton  Ross,  and  that  the  second  mate,  Mr.  Cardno,
had  lost  some  fingers  by  an  accident;  both  of  which  statements
proved  correct  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  i,  270).  One  of  my  relatives,
a  distinguished  magistrate,  told  me  that  in  his  youth  he  had
heard  the  old  nurse  of  one  of  his  friends,  in  a  somnambulic
state,  announce  that  the  brother  of  that  friend,  an  officer  of  engi-
neers, then  before  Sebastopol,  had  been  seriously  wounded  in  the
right  arm;  it  was  so.

The  wife  of  a  major  in  the  artillery  at  Colaba,  two  miles  from
Bombay,  magnetized  a  Creole  girl — Ruth — who  sazv  in  a  glass  of
water,  and  gave  many  proofs  of  lucidity.    Before  a  great  polo

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  121

tournament  Ruth  described  one  of  the  officers  who  would  take
part  in  it,  and  finally  named  Captain  X.,  saying  that  he  would
be  bitten  on  the  leg  by  a  horse;  which  came  to  pass.  Another
time,  before  the  judge  of  a  neighbouring  district,  Ruth  described
his  room,  the  coffer  that  was  in  it,  and  said  that  certain  papers
had  been  stolen  by  a  person  whom  she  described,  whom  the
judge  recognized,  and  who  was  afterwards  convicted.

Dr.  Ferroul,  the  mayor  of  Narbonne  and  deputy  for  the  Aube,
made  some  noteworthy  experiments  on  the  lucidity  of  Anna  B.,
a  young  woman  whom  he  put  into  the  somnambulic  state.  An
amusing  incident  is  related  by  him.  Being  editor  of  the  Repub-
lique  Sociale,  a  socialist  paper  of  Narbonne,  and  having  a  crow
to  pluck  with  the  prefect  of  the  Aude,  he  obtained  through  Anna
some  confidential  details  which  he  published  in  his  paper.  The
prefect,  supposing  the  revelations  to  have  been  made  by  two
agents  of  the  secret  police,  dismissed  them.  They  were  proved
innocent.  It  was  solely  by  the  lucidity  of  Anna  that  the  knowl-
edge of  the  facts  had  come  to  Dr.  Ferroul.

Some  further  interesting  experiments  were  made  with  Anna,
which  at  first  seemed  to  establish  the  fact  of  her  vision  through
opaque  paper.  A  line  was  written,  "Your  party  is  certainly
killing  itself  by  subservience.,,  This  was  folded,  put  into  an  outer
green  envelope,  enclosing  another  envelope,  and  the  whole
wrapped  in  two  pieces  of  squared  paper.  The  writing  was  read
by  Anna.  Grasset,  the  eminent  professor  of  the  Medical  Faculty
of  Montpellier,  subsequently  gave  Dr.  Ferroul  another  opaque
envelope  containing  two  verses  that  were  immediately  read  by
Anna  {A.  S.  P.,  1896,  vi,  145).

This  experiment,  which  appeared  decisive  to  Grasset,  was  fol-
lowed by  a  failure.  A  commission  was  named,  and  no  result
secured.  It  is  well  known  that  for  various  reasons  scientific
commissions  rarely  reach  a  definite  conclusion,  but  nevertheless
there  is  reason  to  doubt  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Ferroul  with
Anna.

Covers  may  be  still  more  opaque  without  intercepting  vision.
My  learned  friend,  Abelous,  professor  of  physiology  in  the  Fac-
ulty of  Montpellier,  placed  a  white  envelope  sealed  with  a  red  seal
and  two  unexposed  photographic  plates  in  a  box  of  thick  wood.
By  the  pressure  of  the  seal  the  wax  had  extended  into  blisters
round  the  impression.  A  young  sensitive,  hypnotized  by  Dr.
Marques,  saw  "something  round,  red,  which  seems  to  have  rays

122

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

round  it."  In  another  box  Abelous  had  placed  a  casket  contain-
ing a  medal  of  Professor  Grasset.  The  seer  said,  "It  is  a  medal
representing  a  man  with  a  beard  and  tangled  hair."  This  was
characteristic  of  Grasset's  appearance.  This  is  more  probably
due  to  a  new  and  unknown  faculty  than  to  hyperacuity  of  retinal
vision.1

The  Rev.  Mr.  Lefroy,  who  disbelieved  in  lucidity,  made  an
experiment  with  Miss  X.  at  Zermatt.  He  wrote  the  word  Heau-
tontimoroumenos  on  a  piece  of  paper  that  Miss  X.  could  not
see.  She  said,  "It  is  a  very  long  word,  there  are  two  m's,  and
it  begins  with  an  H."  He  then  tried  easier  words;  he  wrote
Ink,  and  Miss  X.  said,  "Ink."  He  wrote  Toy,  and  Miss  X.  said
"Yot"  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  1885,  ii,  655).

Dr.  Terrien,  president  of  the  Society  of  Medicine,  at  Nantes,
went  to  visit  a  patient  at  Chauche,  about  five  miles  from  the
town  where  he  lived.  At  Chauche  he  was  detained  by  various
cases,  among  them  that  of  a  child  that  had  hurt  its  knee  by  a
fall  from  a  ladder.  This  was  related  to  Mme.  Terrien  by  a
young  sewing  maid  working  with  her,  who  had  occasional  fits
of  somnambulism.2

Mr.  Adamson,  who  occupied  a  high  position  in  the  administra-
tion of  South  Australia,  having  lost  a  pencil-case  that  he  greatly
valued,  asked  a  young  girl  presumed  to  be  clairvoyant,  who  told
him  that  it  had  been  found  on  the  high-road,  and  placed  in  a  box.
She  described  the  house  and  the  appearance  of  the  finder.  It
was  returned  to  the  owner  next  clay;  all  the  details  related
being  found  perfectly  correct.

Dr.  Osty  has  studied  in  full  detail  one  of  the  best  cases
of  cryptesthesia  on  record.  For  various  reasons  the  names
cannot  be  given;  I  therefore  use  pseudonyms,  and  change  dates
and  places.

On  the  23d  of  September,  1919,  M.  Nicholas  Cordier,  a  mu-
nicipal councillor,  a  well-to-do  bachelor,  and  given  to  botanical
research,  went  for  a  botanical  excursion  in  the  Vosges  Moun-
tains. He  failed  to  return  in  the  evening.  His  mother  and  the
relations  who  lived  with  him  became  anxious,  and  during  the

*Sur  une  observation  de  vision  extrd-sensorielle,  Melanges  biologiques  pour
le  jubitt  de  Ch.  Richet,  Paris,  Mean,  1913,  PP-  »-S«

2Essai  d 'interpretation  d'un  cas  curieux  de  vision  et  d'audition  a  grande  dis-
tance chez  une  hystSrique  de  quatorze  ans  durant  Vitat  de  somnambulisme
(A.  S.  P.,  July,  1914.  *xiv,  198-203).

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  123

night  of  the  23d-24th  they  sought  to  discover  where  he  had
gone.  He  did  not  reappear  on  the  following  morning,  and  all
they  could  learn  was  that  two  wayfarers  had  seen  him  at  three
o'clock  in  a  precipitous  and  somewhat  dangerous  part  of  the
mountains.  An  active  search  was  set  on  foot ;  not  only  the  police,
but  soldiers  from  a  regiment  near  explored  the  district  without
result.  The  local  papers  and  also  those  of  Paris  mentioned  the
disappearance  of  M.  Cordier,  and  the  family  offered  a  reward
of  5,000  francs  for  the  discovery  of  the  body.  Assiduous  and
persistent  search  was  made  from  the  23d  of  September  to  the
7th  of  October.  On  that  day  the  brother  of  M.  Cordier  wrote
to  Dr.  Osty,  asking  him  to  submit  the  case  to  some  somnam-
bulist. Dr.  Osty  knew  only  by  telegram  the  conditions  under
which  M.  Cordier  had  disappeared.  The  clothes  usually  worn
by  M.  Cordier  were  sent  him,  and  of  these  he  took  only  a  stock-
ing-suspender, and  without  giving  the  least  indication  of  the
person  and  his  disappearance,  placed  it  in  the  hands  of  Mme.  M.,
she  being  in  (magnetic)  sleep.  Mme.  M.  said  at  once  that
this  person,  whom  she  described  fairly  correctly,  had  been  in
the  mountains,  that  he  had  in  his  hand  some  tufts  of  grass,  that
he  had  fallen  into  a  ravine  that  she  described,  mentioning  a  lake
and  giving  some  other  indications.

Further  and  more  precise  indications  were  given  on  the  8th,
and  on  the  9th,  thanks  to  the  descriptions  given  by  Mme.  M.
to  Dr.  Osty,  and  sent  by  him  to  M.  Cordier's  brother,  the  body
of  M.  Nicholas  Cordier  was  found.  Other  very  precise  details
were  given  that  I  cannot  mention  here.  It  is  sufficient  to  say
that  it  is  absolutely  impossible  that  Mme.  M.  should  have  become
aware  by  any  normal  means:  (1)  that  M.  Cordier  was  in  ques-
tion; (2)  that  he  had  been  in  the  mountains,  and  (3)  of  the
exact  place  in  which  he  had  fallen.

The  reward  of  5,000  francs  was  not  considered  due,  since  the
actual  finding  of  the  body  was  by  the  family.  I  do  not  know
if  Mme.  M.,  who  would  seem  to  have  had  some  right  to  it,
received  the  money.

M.  Suhr  quotes  the  case  of  a  Mr.  Balle,  magnetized  by  Hansen,
a  barrister  of  Copenhagen,  who  travelled  (in  imagination)  to
find  the  mother  of  M.  Suhr  at  Roeskilde.  Balle  saw  her  slightly
indisposed  in  bed,  in  a  street  named  Skromerstrade.  M.  Suhr
considered  this  a  double  error,  but  it  was  proved  that  his  mother,
against  all  anticipation,  was  actually  ill  in  the  street  designated.

124

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Balle  had  never  been  to  Roeskilde.  Two  other  instances  of
clairvoyance  were  given  by  M.  Balle  (P.  S.  P.  R.,  1892,  vii,  366).

A  fine  example  of  somnambulic  cryptesthesia  is  reported  to  me
by  Mme.  D.,  a  lady  of  high  character  and  great  intelligence.
For  the  first  time  in  her  life,  she  went  with  her  daughter,  Mme.
R.,  to  consult  a  somnambulist  (who  did  not  know  her  name),
on  a  theft  made  from  her.  The  somnambulist  said  to  her :  'The
person  who  entered  your  house  used  the  name  of  a  dead  man;
and  what  a  man! — a  true  hero,  extraordinarily  brave,  who  did
more  than  his  duty;  he  sacrificed  himself  for  another."  This
was  perfectly  correct,  far  beyond  any  chance :  the  son  of  Mme.
D.  had  been  mortally  wounded  at  the  Bois  de  Caillette  in  going,
under  a  fierce  bombardment,  to  the  help  of  one  of  his  wounded
men.  In  1919,  on  the  anniversary  of  this  deed,  a  certain  person
calling  himself  the  friend  of  Marcel  D.,  Mme.  D.'s  son,  had
introduced  himself,  and  while  waiting  for  the  lady  had  robbed
her  of  a  picture,  a  Corot,  which  she  valued  highly.  Curiously
enough  the  thief  had  given  his  real  name,  and  brought  back  the
stolen  picture  on  the  following  day.

During  incidents  of  the  "major  spontaneous  hypnotism"  de-
scribed by  Charcot  as  showing  the  advent  of  an  attack  of  hys-
teria, cryptesthesia  and  lucidity  sometimes  occur.  The  visions
alleged  in  the  lives  of  saints  are  mostly  connected  with  their
times  of  crisis  or  ecstasy  whether  the  form  these  take  is  cata-
lepsy, lethargy,  or  convulsions.  The  cases  of  demoniacs  who
speak  in  unknown  tongues  (  ?)  and  divine  the  thoughts  of  their
interlocutors  (?)  would  give  us  many  instances;  but  the  credulity
of  the  witnesses  deprives  them  of  any  scientific  value.

In  this  connection  a  more  recent  observation  is  furnished  by
Dr.  Fanton  (A.  S.  P.,  December,  1910).  While  at  Marseilles,  he
received  a  letter  from  Mr.  X.,  announcing  his  return  to  Geneva,
where  he  lived.  At  the  same  time  Dr.  Fanton  was  called  in  by
Mme.  X.,  living  at  Marseilles,  for  a  violent  hystero-cataleptic  at-
tack. As  soon  as  he  entered  Mme.  X.  said,  "You  were  eating
an  omelet,  and  you  said  'Not  at  home !'  "  which  was  true.  She
added,  "My  husband  has  sent  you  a  telegram  saying  he  is  coming,
but  he  will  not  arrive,  for  he  has  gone  to  sleep  in  the  train."

Mme.  X.,  however,  could  not  have  known  anything  (normally)
about  the  omelet,  nor  the  telegram,  nor  the  singular  fact  (a  premo-
nition) that  Mr.  X.  would  be  asleep  in  the  train  at  Culoz.

I  have  reported  a  remarkable  instance  of  lucidity  in  my  own

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  125

experience  that  occurred  long  ago  and  impressed  me  very  strongly
at  the  time.  While  a  young  student  at  the  Hotel-Dieu  Hospital
I  was  in  the  habit  of  magnetizing  a  convalescent  girl  who  was
still  an  inmate.  One  day  I  took  with  me  an  American  fellow-
student  who  had  never  before  been  to  the  hospital,  and  I  said
to  T.,  in  her  sleep,  "Do  you  know  my  friend's  name?"  She  began
to  laugh.  Then  I  said,  "Look,  what  is  the  first  letter  of  his
name?"  She  said,  "There  are  five  letters;  the  first  is  H,  then  E,
I  do  not  see  the  third,  the  fourth  is  R,  and  the  fifth  is  N."  My
friend's  name  was  Hearn  (Phant.  of  the  Living,  1886,  ii,  665).
I  made  experiments  in  sending  some  hypnotized  subjects  "travel-
ling" as  the  old  magnetizers  did,  and  had  some  astonishing
successes,  especially  with  Alice.

She  went  to  visit  the  house  of  a  Mr.  C.  at  Mans,  a  house  not
known  to  me,  but  very  well  known  to  Mr.  P.  Renouard,  then  pres-
ent. She  saw  a  walled  garden  and  a  swing  (correct,  but  unknown
to  Mr.  Renouard,  for  the  swing  had  been  placed  there  since  he
was  last  at  Mans).  She  saw  a  clock  with  pillars  which  she  de-
scribed closely  enough  for  me  to  make  the  rough  sketch  annexed,
which  may  be  compared  with  Fig.  3  of  the  actual  clock  in  Mr.
C.'s  drawing-room.

On  another  day  Alice  described  the  house  of  Dr.  P.  Rondeau,
then  present.  "Draperies  over  the  mantelpiece,  a  clock,  and,
leaning  on  the  wood,  someone  looking  at  the  clock  whose  shoulder
is  visible.  A  large  painting  of  a  landscape;  between  the  town
and  the  sea  something  pointed,  a  tower,  or  the  roof  of  a
church.  .  .  In  fact,  in  M.  Rondeau's  country  house  which
Alice  could  never  have  seen,  there  is  a  statue  of  Penelope  whose
shoulder  is  prominent,  looking  at  the  clock  towards  which  her
head  is  turned.  The  picture  is  a  copy  of  one  by  Canaletti  and
represents  Venice,  the  canal  in  the  foreground,  and  behind  it
the  church  of  San  Giorgio  Maggiore.

Some  instances  of  lucidity  came  to  me  from  Leonie  B.,  though
these  were  very  few  in  the  course  of  a  large  number  of  experi-
ments.

One  day  Pierre  Janet  set  her  "travelling."  In  her  hypnotic
sleep  she  went  to  Paris  to  see  me  and  M.  Gibert  who  had  left
for  Paris.  On  a  sudden  she  said,  "It  is  burning."  P.  Janet
tried  to  calm  her,  she  returned  to  sleep,  but  soon  woke  again,
saying,  "But,  M.  Janet,  I  assure  you  that  it  is  burning."

126

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

In  fact  my  laboratory  in  the  Rue  Vauquelin  caught  fire  at  six
that  morning,  November  15th,  and  was  burnt  out.1

Fig.  2. — Rough  sketch  made  from  the  description  by  Alice.

Leonie  gave  me  one  day  a  splendid  example  of  lucidity,  though
it  was  accidental  rather  than  experimental,  and  the  details  referred

Fig.  3. — The  clock  in  Mr.  C.'s  house  as  sketched  by  P.  Renouard.

xThere  were  two  premonitions  (or  monitions,  for  the  hour  at  which  the
dreams  took  place  is  not  recorded).  That  night,  between  the  i4th-i5th  of
November,  two  of  my  most  intimate  friends,  M.  Ferrari  and  J.  Hericourt,
both  dreamed,  independently  of  each  other,  of  flames  and  fire.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  127

to  quite  unimportant  facts.  Experimenting  with  her  one  even-
ing, without  success,  with  cards  and  numbers,  I  spoke  to  her  of
my  friend  J.  P.  Langlois  and  said,  "What  has  happened  to  him?"
She  at  once  said  somewhat  disrespectfully,  "He  has  burnt  his  paw.
Why  is  he  not  more  careful  in  pouring  out?"  "Pouring  out
what?"  "A  red  liquor  in  a  little  bottle  ...  his  skin  has
blistered  at  once."  Nothing  could  have  been  more  correct.  Two
hours  before,  J.  P.  Langlois,  who  was  my  chief  laboratory  as-
sistant, in  preparing  some  hypobromide  of  soda  had  poured  out
the  bromine  (the  red  liquor),  too  fast  and  some  had  gone  on
his  hand  and  arm,  making  an  extensive  blister.  Leonie  could
not  have  gone  to  the  laboratory  and  no  one  had  come  from  it
to  my  house.  I  was  then  alone  in  Paris  and  had  said  nothing
to  any  one  about  the  accident  that  had  happened  two  hours
previously.

Dr.  Backmann,  of  Kalmar,  Sweden,  observed  a  young  girl,
Alma  L.,  who  gave  him  many  instances  of  lucidity  in  hypnotic
sleep.  One  seems  to  indicate  something  more  than  lucidity.  She
was  asked  to  go  to  the  director-general  of  the  pilot  service  at
Stockholm,  where  she  had  never  been.  She  saw  the  director
sitting  at  his  table,  and  described  the  room  exactly.  The  order
was  then  given  her  to  take  the  bunch  of  keys  that  she  had  seen
on  the  table  and  to  place  her  hand  on  his  shoulder  to  draw  his
attention.  Alma  declared  that  the  director  noticed  her.  After-
wards, the  director,  who  had  not  the  least  suspicion  that  any
experiment  was  being  tried  upon  him,  said  that  he  was  conscious
of  a  strange  feeling  on  the  day  and  hour  in  question.  He  was
busy  at  his  table,  when,  without  any  kind  of  reason,  his  eyes
fell  on  the  bunch  of  keys  near  him  on  the  table,  which  he  was
not  accustomed  to  put  there.  He  thought  he  saw  a  woman's  form.
Thinking  it  to  be  the  housemaid,  he  took  no  notice.  But,  on
the  fact  being  repeated,  he  called  (to  her)  and  got  up  to  see  what
was  the  matter.  Neither  the  servant  nor  any  other  had  been  in
his  room.  He  heard  no  noise  nor  perceived  any  movement  of
the  keys  (A.  S.  P.,  1892,  ii,  68).

A  man  having  been  arrested  for  murder,  one  of  Dr.  Back-
mann's  subjects,  Agda  Olsen,  described  very  exactly  the  house
where  the  crime  had  been  committed,  and  though  she  had  never
seen  the  murderer,  said  that  he  had  a  cicatrice  on  his  right  hand.
The  constable  of  Kalmar,  Ljung,  who  had  examined  the  accused,
had  not  observed  the  cicatrice,  and  only  after  Dr.  Backmann  had
told  him  did  he  verify  the  fact,  resulting  from  an  old  abscess.

128

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Alma  having  given  notable  proofs  of  lucidity  I  resolved  to  go
to  Kalmar  with  F.  and  A.  Myers  to  make  some  experiments  with
her.  The  following  is  F.  Myers'  account;  his  acuteness  and
insight  are  well  known  (Notes  on  a  visit  to  Kalmar,  A.  S.  P.,
1892,  ii,  160) :

"M.  Richet  gave  me  a  letter  that  he  had  just  received  of  which
I  knew  nothing,  and  went  out  of  the  room  where  Alma  (hyp-
notized) was  interrogated  by  Dr.  Backmann.  Alma  said,  The
writer  of  this  letter  expresses  a  desire.  It  concerns  something
in  metal;  the  thing  can  open  and  shut.  There  is  some  question
of  time  and  opportunity.  It  is  some  scientific  matter  that  will
be  proved/  This  was  a  letter  from  M.  Tatin  with  whom  I  was
then  (April,  1891)  experimenting  on  aeroplanes.  The  letter
said,  'We  tried  the  little  machine,  it  kept  turning  to  the  same
side.   We  had  a  satisfactory  trial ;  the  blades  worked  perfectly/  "

It  goes  without  saying  that  I  had  never  spoken  of  my  attempts
in  aviation  which  (in  1871)  I  kept  very  secret.

Alma's  answer  is  only  a  partial  success,  but  it  would  be  difficult
to  see  in  it  mere  coincidence.  Alma,  however,  by  reason  of  our
presence  was  emotionally  excited  ;  when  alone  with  Dr.  Backmann
she  was  perhaps  more  lucid.  She  once  read  the  first  letter  of
a  word  written  by  Dr.  Kjelmann  in  the  next  room;  another  time,
the  word  written  being  "Land,"  she  said,  "The  first  letter  is  M,
the  second  A,  the  third  R  or  N,  and  the  word  suggests  the  idea
of  springtime."  This  counts  for  very  little,  but  in  studying  the
fine  examples  of  cryptesthesia  by  Mrs.  Piper,  it  will  be  obvious
that  lucidity  can  carry  much  farther.

The  proofs  of  lucidity  given  by  reproduction  or  description  of
drawings  enclosed  in  opaque  envelopes  are  of  profound  interest;
they  have  often  led  to  remarkable  results.  But  in  such  experi-
ments more  perhaps  than  in  any  others  it  is  necessary  to  guard
against  two  possible  causes  of  error :

A.  Unconscious  assistance  given  to  the  lucid  subject.

B.  The  possibility  of  chance  coincidence.

A.  When  the  hidden  drawing  is  known,  no  sign  whatever  of
approval  or  impatience  must  be  given.  This  is  very  difficult.
When  the  subject  feels  about,  questions,  and  hesitates  painfully
for  an  hour,  for  two  hours,  or  sometimes  longer,  one  is  tempted
out  of  sheer  pity  to  give  some  help  in  order  that  the  experiment
may  succeed.    It  is,  however,  necessary  to  maintain  rigid  silence

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  129

and  impassiveness.  It  is  difficult  to  be  absolutely  mute  and  im-
mobile. A  disapproving  silence  may  be  maintained  when  the
subject  is  off  the  track,  or  he  may  be  encouraged  to  go  on  when
he  is  not.  I  speak  from  long  experience  in  saying  that  much
care  is  needed  to  reach  the  glacial  impassiveness  that  is  required ;
thinking  that  those  less  habituated  to  experiment  than  myself
may  not  all  of  them  and  always  be  able  to  maintain  the  impartial
silence  that  is  so  necessary.

The  best  way  to  obtain  unexceptionable  results  in  experiments
on  lucidity  is  that  the  contents  of  the  envelope  should  be  un-
known. Mental  transmission  is  thus  excluded  and  non-telepathic
cryptesthesia  is  then  the  only  explanation  of  a  successful  experi-
ment. But  as  I  have  already  said,  mental  transmission  is  only
a  particular  case  of  lucidity  and  if  success  is  more  frequent  with
it  than  without  it,  that  will  often  be  because,  knowing  the  answer
to  be  given,  the  experimenter  works  less  strictly.

B.  Even  when  there  is  perfect  agreement  between  the  original
and  the  reproduction  the  element  of  chance  coincidence  is  not
to  be  neglected.

For  instance:  I  tried  about  180  drawings  on  different  persons
with  whom  I  was  experimenting,  and  had  in  all  about  20  successes,
some  of  which  were  very  striking.1  Then,  following  out  a  series
of  mathematical  combinations,  I  carried  out  5,408  trials,  in
which  chance  alone  was  responsible  for  the  association  of  any
two  drawings.  The  number  of  successes  was  192,  among  which
10  were  remarkable  for  identity  between  original  and  reproduc-
tion. Chance  would  give  3.5  successes  per  cent.;  lucidity  gave
12  per  cent.  The  difference  is  noteworthy,  but  smaller  than  it
would  have  appeared  a  priori.

It  should  also  be  observed  that  the  calculus  of  probabilities  is
difficult  to  apply  to  the  more  or  less  exact  reproduction  of  a
drawing,  for  the  criteria  to  be  used  must  be  decidedly  arbitrary,
whereas  with  cards  or  numbers,  probabilities  are  easily  estimated.
I  cannot,  of  course,  reproduce  here  all  the  drawings,  though
that  is  almost  necessary  to  a  just  appreciation  of  how  difficult  it  is
to  estimate  the  element  of  chance  in  successes.

Alice,  who  is  not  a  professional  medium  and  has  never  been

lI  do  not  give  here  the  details  of  these,  which  will  be  found  in  the  article
published  in  the  P.  S.  P.  R.,  1888,  xii,  18-168.  Relation  de  diver ses  experiences
sur  la  transmission  tnentale,  la  lucidite,  et  autres  phenomenes  non  explicables
par  les  donnees  scientifiques  actuelles.

130

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

hypnotized  except  by  myself,  has  given  me  very  good  examples
of  lucidity.

One  day  at  the  house  of  M.  Hericourt,  having  made  the  sketch
of  a  photograph  frame  chosen  by  him  (shown  in  Fig.  4),  to
be  submitted  to  Alice  by  me  she  said:  "It  is  a  locket  (medaillon) ,
an  oval  in  a  frame,  the  head  of
a  man.  He  has  braid  on  his
chest,  it  is  high-necked;  it  can
be  closed.  There  are  six  or  seven
lines  of  braid.  He  is  not  bare-
headed, but  wears  a  military  cap
which  has  three  stripes.  There
are  four  stripes  on  the  lower  part
of  the  sleeve,  round  it.  It  is  the
picture  of  some  one  who  is  thin,
perhaps  seated.  I  recognize  him,
but  I  cannot  say  who  he  is."

□ — □

Fig.  4-

Representing  the  sketch  of  the  frame  containing  the  second  (Fig.  5).
Fig.  4  was  placed  in  a  thick  sealed  envelope.  Alice  saw  Fig.  5,  though
this  was  not  in  the  envelope,  but  was  in  the  frame  itself  at  M.  Hericourt's
house.    There  were  therefore  two  distinct  phases  in  the  cryptesthesia.

The  description  accords  with  the  photograph  of  which  only
the  frame  had  been  sketched  and  placed  in  the  sealed  envelope
submitted  to  Alice.  This  photograph  which  Hericourt  had  under
his  eyes  when  sketching  the  frame  is  of  himself  in  uniform.
Alice  had  never  seen  him  in  this  attire,  and  did  not  know  he
had  been  an  officer.   If  an  inference  can  be  drawn  it  would  favour

Fig.  5.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  131

telepathy  rather  than  lucidity.  Alice  seeing  the  former,  thought
in  Hericourt's  mind,  but  not  the  sketch  in  the  envelope.

My  eminent  friend,  Th.  Ribot,  editor  of  the  Revue  Philoso-
pliiquc,  was  present  at  another  experiment  with  Alice.  He
brought  a  photograph  in  a  thick  envelope.    I  told  Alice  that  it

Fig.  6.  Fig.  7-

Sketch  by  Ferrari  (Fig.  6)  and  reproduction  by  Alice  (Fig.  7)-

rest.  To  get  to  the  house  one  has  to  go  upwards  and  turn  round
to  the  left."  The  photograph  (of  Toledo)  agrees  closely  with
the  description.

The  sketch  above  (Fig.  6)  was  given  me  by  H.  Ferrari  who
was  not  present.  I  did  not  know  what  was  in  the  envelope,
which  was  taken  at  random  from  among  twenty  others.  The
experiment  is  faultless  and  the  reproduction  very  good  (Fig.  7).
Comment  is  needless,  except  that  the  conditions  being  unexcep-
tionable the  result  must  be  due  to  cryptesthesia  or  to  chance.

132

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

M.  Hanriot  handed  me  a  lightly  made  sketch  on  triple  folded
paper  in  a  closed  envelope.  I  was  absolutely  ignorant  of  the
nature  of  the  drawing.  Alice  gave  a  confused  description,  but
her  words  aroused  the  idea  of  a  serpent.  She  said,  "Interlaced
curves  along  a  stem,  like  an  anchor."  I  then  thought  of  the
imprint  on  the  books  published  by  d'A.  A.  Renouard,  my  great-
grandfather, and  drew  it.    Hanriot's  sketch  was  of  a  serpent.

Fig.  8.

Drawing  (a  bunch  of  grapes)  placed  in  an  opaque  envelope,  the  contents  of

which  I  am  ignorant  of.
Drawing  made  by  Alice.    She  made  five  drawings  in  succession  (which  I  do
not  give  here,  brevitatis  causa),  each  approaching  nearer  the  final  result.

On  January  24,  1888,  I  gave  Alice  three  sketches  unseen  by
myself :

(A)  A  sword;  she  drew  two  fencing  foils,  together.

(B)  A  drum;  she  said,  "A  hat."

(C)  A  hat;  she  did  not  reply.

Fig.  8  was  presented  to  Alice  in  a  thick  envelope  (contents
unknown  to  me).  She  made  five  attempts,  getting  a  little  nearer
each  time,  the  last  being  Fig.  9.

Eugenie,  a  professional  somnambulist  who  sometimes  gave
good  instances  of  lucidity,  said  of  another  drawing,  "It  is  a

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  133

horse's  head,  the  small  head  of  a  sheep  or  an  ox.n  The  original
was  the  head  of  a  gazelle  in  outline.1

Further  details  would  take  up  more  space  than  this  aspect  of
metapsychic  phenomena  warrants.

These  experiments  with  Eugenie  and  Alice  are  of  special  in-
terest, for  in  them  there  is  no  question  of  telepathy  or  mental
transmission  ;  it  is  a  matter  of  cryptesthesia.  Even  if  one  could
imagine  that  the  luminous  rays  could  filter  through  opaque  bodies,

Fig.  9.

Last  drawing  given  by  Alice  for  the  bunch  of  grapes.

such  retinal  hyperesthesia  would  be  a  modality  of  cryptesthesia.
I  will  close  this  part  of  the  subject  with  six  examples:

Sketch  in  closed  envelope.

A  table.
An  anchor.
A  bottle.
Knave  of  hearts.
A  sword.
A  hat  and  drum.

Description.

An  oval  and  a  stick  (Eugenie).
A  sword  with  cross  handle  (Eugenie).
A  bird  with  head  and  neck  (Eugenie).
A  Maltese  cross  (Alice).
Foils  (Alice).
A  hat  (Alice).

^Experiments  in  Thought  Transference,  P.  S.  P.  R.,  1888,  xii,  169-216.

134

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Messrs.  Schmoll  and  Mabire  made  one  hundred  and  twenty-
one  trials  with  drawings,  apparently  under  less  exacting  condi-
tions, since  the  guesser  was  surrounded  by  persons  who  all  knew
the  design  to  be  reproduced  by  mental  vision.  Moreover,  the
sketch  was  not  in  a  closed  envelope,  the  paper  being  open,  though
the  back  of  the  subject  was  turned  to  it  and  the  eyes  closed.
The  results  were  occasionally  very  good ;  there  were  six  very
striking  successes  in  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-one  trials.  This
is  beyond  the  limits  of  chance,  though  not  very  greatly.

(b)  Conclusions

A  close  study  of  these  instances  of  cryptesthesia,  of  which  I
could  quote  many  more,  no  doubt  will  discover  some  that  are
not  very  conclusive.  Some  may  be  due  to  chance,  and  others
to  defective  experiment;  but  there  are  so  many  that  have  been
so  carefully  observed  and  with  such  scrupulous  exactitude  that
doubt  is  impossible.

Looking  at  the  whole  evidence,  no  one  can  imagine  a  great
error  lasting  through  a  whole  century,  accepted  by  distinguished
scientific  men,  admitted  by  sceptics,  and  passing  a  multitude  of
tests.  Chances  of  1  :  1000  or  1  :  10,000  do  not  continually  recur
in  experimental  work;  and  we  are  working  against  far  more
remote  probabilities.  The  event  against  which  there  are  real  odds
of  1  :  1000  does  not  come  to  pass.

It  has  not  been  sufficiently  considered  that  in  daily  life  im-
probable events  rarely  happen.  We  evolve  in  a  connected  series
of  small  and  very  likely  events.  The  visits  I  receive,  the  letters
I  write,  the  persons  I  meet,  and  the  news  given  to  me  are  very
rarely  improbable.  Probable  and  likely  events  rule  our  lives.
It  is  a  simple  truism  to  say  so,  nevertheless  it  must  be  said.

An  inference  must  be  drawn  from  this — we  do  not  foresee
the  unlikely.  Therefore  when  some  unlikely  event  is  indicated
by  monitory  or  premonitory  cryptesthesia  there  must  be  a  cause
for  it,  and  this  cause  is  some  unknown  vibration  received
subconsciously.

To  take  a  concrete  instance  among  hundreds,  Mr.  Fraser
Harris  sees  mentally  his  wife  talking  to  a  beggar  who  is  hold-
ing a  broom.  This  is  an  unlikely  event  of  which  he  would  not
have  thought  unless  something  had  conveyed  this  image  to  his
brain.    It  is  absurd  to  refer  it  to  chance.    The  case  is  analogous

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  135

to  a  cord  stretched  across  a  road.  If  a  bicyclist  falls  at  that
place  no  one  would  say  that  the  fall  was  due  to  chance ;  it  would,
of  course,  be  ascribed  to  the  cord.  There  are  no  uncaused  effects.
When  an  unlikely  event  is  foretold  and  duly  comes  to  pass,  that
can  only  be  due  to  cryptesthesia,  for  in  the  course  of  our  lives,
with  but  few  exceptions,  we  do  not  foresee  the  improbable,  and
the  improbable  does  not  happen.

If  I  make  an  experiment  on  the  atomic  weight  of  silver  and
get  108.4  I  do  not  attribute  the  result  to  chance.  Why  should
I  do  so  when,  on  asking  Stella  for  the  name  of  Mr.  N.'s  son,  she
answers,  "Jean"?

Certainly  it  might  be  preferable  to  operate  with  cards  and
numbers  only  instead  of  drawings,  travels,  names,  and  sundry
events,  inasmuch  as  the  former  allow  of  exact  calculation  of
probabilities;  but  we  must  take  account  of  the  fact  that  som-
nambulists do  not  readily  lend  themselves  to  this  kind  of  experi-
ment. M.  Osty  says  that  to  do  this  is  to  require  from  lucidity
what  it  cannot  give.

When  I  try  to  get  correct  guesses  of  cards  or  numbers  from
Leonie  I  get  only  lamentable  failures,  perhaps  because  her  will
masks  the  indications  of  her  cryptesthesia;  whilst  a  fire  in  my
laboratory  or  the  accident  to  M.  Langlois  causes  her  to  relate
the  fact  very  accurately  (though  I  did  not  ask  for  either),  with
a  precision  whose  probability  is  extremely  small  and  cannot  be
expressed  in  figures.

The  facts  of  lucidity  are  usually  as  unpredictable  as  the  fall
of  an  aerolite.  With  few  exceptions  one  cannot  count  on  suc-
cess in  a  given  experiment  any  more  than  one  can  foresee  the
fall  of  a  meteor.  Actual  facts  inaccessible  to  our  normal  senses
are  indicated,  but  unfortunately  they  are  often  not  exact  answers
to  exact  questions.  Somnambules  and  mediums  do  not  give  pre-
cise answers,  though  they  state  kindred  facts  that  they  could
not  have  known  by  their  normal  senses.

It  may  be  regrettable  that  one  cannot  use  a  hypnotized  subject
whose  moral  sensitiveness  is  very  acute,  like  a  calculating  ma-
chine. To  set  them  "travelling"  interests  them  much  more  than
the  perception  of  an  eight  of  spades.  They  are  more  interested
in  seeing  a  burning  house,  or  a  boat  coming  in,  than  in  counting
the  number  of  black  dots  on  a  card.  It  may  be  unfortunate,  but
one  must  accept  the  conditions.  The  experiments  are  decisive ;
and  taken  by  themselves  are  sufficient  to  establish  that  higher

136

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

and  mysterious  faculty  of  cognition  that  I  have  called  crypt-
esthesia.  Experiments  with  mediums  confirm  this  much  more
strongly.

4.  Cryptesthesia  Under  Spiritist  Conditions
(a)  Summary  of  the  Facts

I  call  the  form  of  experimental  cryptesthesia  manifested  in
spiritist  circles,  "spiritist  cryptesthesia."

Spiritualism  is  a  theory  according  to  which  the  dead  have  not
lost  consciousness;  the  mind  continues  to  exist  as  a  spirit,  and
these  spirits  can  enter  into  communication  with  mortals  through
mediums.  As  a  definition,  it  may  be  said  that  the  spiritist  state
is  a  psychological  state  such  that  the  person  experimented  with,
called  a  medium,  and  retaining  (or  not  retaining)  consciousness
of  his  normal  personality,  makes  movements  (speech,  writing,
movements,  or  noises  in  a  table,  or  motion  of  a  planchette)  which
are  not  acts  of  his  will.  He  claims  that  a  personality  other  than
himself  acts  on  him  and  influences  him.

This  definition  must  not  be  taken  to  imply  anything  as  to  the
reality  of  this  extraneous  personality.  This  will  be  examined
later  on  in  full  detail.  In  the  present  chapter  we  shall  only  in-
dicate its  results  from  the  point  of  view  of  cryptesthesia,  with-
out discussing  their  mechanism.

In  other  words,  we  shall  seek  to  discover  whether,  in  experi-
ments to  that  end,  mediums  are  able  by  any  procedure  to  reveal
or  indicate  facts  that  normal  human  intelligence  could  not  be
acquainted  with ;  that  is,  cryptesthesia.

It  is  a  minor  matter  whether  the  fact  of  supernormal  cogni-
tion is  manifested  by  raps,  automatically  written  messages,  by
direct  writing,  by  voices  heard,  or  by  words  spoken,  provided
that  the  bare  fact  itself  be  duly  proved.  Now  this  fact  has  been
established  by  so  many  unquestionable  proofs  that  it  is  surpris-
ing that  it  should  have  been  disputed  or  denied.  Indeed,  those
who  deny  it  are  those  who  have  neither  experimented,  nor  read,
nor  studied,  nor  thought.  Cryptesthesia  which  has  been  shown
to  be  probable,  by  experiments  on  normal  persons,  and  extremely
probable,  by  experiments  on  hypnotized  persons,  becomes  daz-
zlingly  evident  when  it  is  studied  under  its  spiritist  modalities.

Richard  Hodgson,  summing  up  his  experiences  with  Mrs.
Piper,  says  that  he  brought  at  least  fifty  persons  that  he  knew

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  137

to  be  strangers  to  her  and  took  every  possible  precaution  to  pre-
vent her  obtaining  any  particulars  about  them.  In  most  cases
facts  were  alleged  that  could  not  have  been  known  to  Mrs.  Piper ;
and  he  even  employed  detectives  to  make  sure.1

In  studying  the  accounts  of  her  innumerable  seances,  we  find
that  over  two  hundred  names  have  been  given  correctly;  they
cannot,  obviously,  be  given  even  in  summary.  Unless  we  imag-
ine the  monstrous  absurdity  of  bad  faith  or  imbecility  on  the
part  of  Mr.  Hodgson  and  Professor  Hyslop,  the  cryptesthesia
of  Mrs.  Piper  must  be  considered  to  have  been  demonstrated
two  hundred  times.

A  whole  volume  would  be  required  to  sum  up  Hodgson's  ac-
counts, and  after  reading  them  it  is  impossible  to  doubt  the  fact
of  cryptesthesia,  and  even  if  this  is  generally  of  the  telepathic
type  (for  the  answers  to  the  questions  put  were  known  to  the
questioner),  this  is  not  always  the  case,  as  for  instance  when  Mr.
Thaw  took  her  some  hair  in  a  paper  and  Mrs.  Piper  stated  it
to  be  a  religious  object;  which  was  true,  Mr.  Thaw  having  made
a  mistake  in  the  thing  chosen.

If  Florence  Cook,  D.  D.  Home,  and  Eusapia  are  the  most
remarkable  mediums  for  objective  phenomena,  Mrs.  Piper  is
certainly  first  among  all  those  who  have  shown  subjective  ones.
R.  Hodgson,  William  James,  J.  Hyslop,  P.  Bourget,  F.  Myers,
Mrs.  Verrall,  and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  after  many  seances,  formally
testified  to  her  telepathic  powers.

Myers  says:  "Facts  personal  to  myself  and  accessible  by
printed  records,  collusion,  or  enquiry  (though  I  do  not  think
any  of  these  methods  were  used),  were  not  stated  more  fre-
quently than  others;  messages  were  given  me  as  coming  from
a  friend  many  years  deceased,  and  certain  circumstances  were
indicated  that  Mrs.  Piper  could  not  have  known.  I  know  some
facts  that  were  suppressed  as  being  of  too  intimate  a  nature,  and
the  statement  of  one  or  two  such  facts  is  more  convincing  of
supernormal  cognition  than  giving  dozens  of  names  that  the
consultant  could  have  no  motive  to  suppress.  All  observers  will
agree  that  many  of  the  facts  stated  could  not  have  been  dis-

*My  personal  evidence  does  not  count  among  such  very  numerous  testi-
monies, but  I  may  be  permitted  to  say  that  in  the  only  experiment  that  I
made  with  Mrs.  Piper,  whom  I  saw  but  once,  she  named  a  little  dog  "Dick"
that  I  had  in  my  childhood ;  a  name  that  could  not  have  reached  her  by  normal
channels.    She  made  several  errors  before  hitting  on  the  name.

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

covered  even  by  a  practiced  detective  and  others  could  have
become  known  only  by  great  outlay  of  time  and  money."

"I  am  as  absolutely  certain,"  says  William  James,  "as  I  am
of  any  personal  fact,  that  Mrs.  Piper  knows  in  trance  things  she
could  not  have  known  in  her  waking  state."

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  says:  "In  introducing  anonymous  strangers
and  questioning  her  myself  in  various  ways,  I  am  certain  that
many  particulars  that  she  gives  in  trance  are  not  acquired  by
ordinary  means.  She  can  diagnose  disease,  and  describe  the
present  or  former  possessors  of  small  objects  under  conditions
that  exclude  the  use  of  the  normal  senses."

The  following  instances  are  given  by  Sir  Oliver :

Professor  Gonner  was  introduced  by  him  under  an  assumed
name;  she  spoke  of  his  Uncle  William  as  having  died  through
a  wound  in  the  head.  This  uncle  had  been  killed  in  an  electoral
riot  by  a  stone  striking  him  on  the  head,  before  Professor  Gon-
ner was  born.

"My  wife's  father,"  says  Lodge,  "died  in  a  dramatic  and
affecting  manner  when  she  was  fifteen  clays  old.  Phinuit  gave
a  thrilling  account  of  the  circumstances  of  this  death.  The  state-
ment of  the  death  of  her  father-in-law  by  a  fall  into  the  hold
of  his  ship  was  also  correct."

A  Liverpool  doctor  slightly  known  to  Sir  Oliver  and  Lady
Lodge  was  presented  under  the  name  of  Dr.  Jones.  Mrs.  Piper
spoke  to  him  of  one  of  his  daughters,  whom  she  named  as  Daisy,
as  being  pretty  but  ailing;  and  added,  "There  is  a  woman  named
Kate  by  her,  whom  you  call  Kitty."  Daisy  is  pretty,  but  deaf,
and  the  children's  nurse  is  named  Kate.

A  stenographer  brought  to  the  seance  to  take  down  Mrs.  Piper's
words  was  called  apart  by  Phinuit  and  told  that  he  had  a  cousin
called  Charley ;  he  added,  "There  are  six  children  in  your  family,
four  boys  and  two  girls ;  you  have  a  sister  Minnie ;  and  you  are
called  Ed."   All  which  was  correct.

Mrs.  Piper  recalls  events  long  past,  referring  to  the  parents
and  grandparents  of  her  questioners,  events  often  needing  long
enquiries  for  their  verification.  One  of  the  brothers  of  Lodge's
father  had  a  twin  brother  whose  name  was  given  by  Mrs.  Piper
as  Jerry  (Jeremiah);  she  also  named  the  other  twin,  Robert;
she  said  that  he  was  blind  (correct),  and  that  when  a  child  he
had  a  serpent's  skin  in  his  possession,  a  fact  that  happened  sixty-
six  years  before,  and  of  which  Sir  Oliver  was  ignorant,  but  which

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  139

he  found  to  be  true.  She  spoke  also  of  Jerry  having  swum  a
creek ;  this  also  was  true.

In  one  of  the  earlier  seances  Mrs.  Piper  had  sat  down  on  a
certain  sofa.  Phinuit,  touching  this  sofa,  said  that  it  had  been
a  gift  from  Aunt  Annie,  who  had  a  son,  Charley.  Annie,  speak-
ing by  Phinuit,  said,  "I  am  sorry  that  Charley  should  have  eaten
that  bird;  it  made  him  ill."  All  the  above  was  correct,  and  at
that  very  time  Charley,  being  in  Canada,  had  shot  a  water-hen,
had  eaten  it,  and  been  ill  some  days  after.

The  first  communications  of  George  Pelham  through  Mrs.
Piper  are  important,  alike  as  evidence  of  cryptesthesia  and  for
the  possibility  of  identifying  him.    I  will  summarize  them.

In  the  presence  of  R.  Hodgson,  Mr.  Hart,  a  friend  of  George
Pelham,  deceased,  received  circumstantial  details  on  the  acts  and
words  of  G.  P.  George  Pelham  (a  pseudonym  for  Robinson)
told  Hart,  by  the  voice  of  Mrs.  Piper,  that  Hart's  sleeve-links
had  belonged  to  G.  P.  He  gave  the  names  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Howard,  friends  of  G.  P.,  and  the  name  of  their  daughter  Kale-
rine,  and  added,  "Tell  her,  so  that  she  may  recognize  me,  that
I  will  solve  the  Kalerine  problems."  Mr.  Hart,  not  understand-
ing these  words,  went  to  the  Howard  family  (which  Mrs.  Piper
did  not  know),  and  from  them  he  learned  that  on  the  last  occa-
sion that  G.  P.  saw  Kalerine,  a  young  girl  of  fifteen,  he  had
spoken  to  her  of  God,  eternity,  time,  and  space;  and  said  that
one  day  he  would  tell  her  more.

After  this  seance  the  Howards  had  other  meetings  with  Mrs.
Piper.  "The  matters  treated  of,"  says  Hodgson,  "were  charac-
teristic, highly  intimate,  and  personal.  Mutual  friends  were
named.  The  Howards,  who  took  no  interest  in  psychical  re-
search, became  convinced  that  they  had  really  spoken  with  the
personality  of  the  friend  they  had  known  for  so  many  years."

After  Hodgson's  death  another  able  and  conscientious  Ameri-
can psychologist,  James  Hyslop,  the  general  secretary  of  the
American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  who  died  in  June,
1920,  studied  Mrs.  Piper.  Her  "guide"  was  then  Hodgson  him-
self, and  the  evidences  of  cryptesthesia  were  startling.

Hyslop,  having  asked  her  concerning  his  own  father,  received
from  Mrs.  Piper  many  correct  particulars.  She  stated  where  he
had  left  his  spectacles  when  he  died;  she  spoke  of  his  books,
of  a  cap  knitted  for  him,  and  of  a  pocket-knife  with  a  brown
handle  with  which  he  used  to  pare  his  nails.    She  mentioned

140

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

divers  walking-sticks  that  he  had  possessed,  naming  one  with
a  ring,  another  with  a  gilt  scarab,  and  one  with  a  bent  handle
that  had  been  broken;  details  of  which  all  were  correct  and  of
which  Hyslop  had  no  knowledge,  not  consciously  at  any  rate.

Mrs.  X.  introduced  herself  as  Margaret  Brown,  and  brought
with  her  three  locks  of  hair,  x,  b,  and  s,  knowing  only  the  origin
of  s.  Of  the  lock  x  Mrs.  Piper  said,  "It  is  from  Fred  .  .  .
Imogen?  Who  is  Imogen ?"  This  lock  was  in  fact  from  Imogen
Garnay,  which  Mr.  Fred  Day  had  cut  to  give  to  Margaret  Brown.
Of  the  lock  b  Mrs.  Piper  said,  "This  belongs  to  some  one  who
is  very  ill."  In  fact  the  owner  of  the  lock  died  within  the  year.
Of  the  lock  j  she  said,  "She  is  niggardly  of  her  hair;  she  is
your  mother,  she  has  four  children,  two  boys  and  two  girls."
This  was  correct,  and  Margaret  had  cut  off  the  lock  of  hair
by  a  trick  (Bozzano,  A.  S.  P.,  1906,  xvi,  546).

Hodgson,  in  a  seance  with  Mrs.  Piper,  received  a  message  from
Eliza  who  claimed  to  have  helped  Mr.  F.  at  his  death.  Mr.  F.
had  died  the  day  before,  and  his  death  had  been  announced  in
the  Boston  papers.  Two  or  three  days  later  Hodgson  learned
that  at  the  time  of  his  death,  Mr.  F.  had  said  that  he  saw  Eliza
who  was  calling  him.  Mrs.  Piper  did  not  know  Eliza  (A.  S.  P.,
1909,  xix,  107).

A  curious  fact  is  the  admixture  of  personalities.  It  would
seem  (though  this  is  doubtless  a  symbolization),  that  when  any
person — Phinuit,  Hyslop  senior,  or  George  Pelham — cannot  give
certain  particulars,  he  appeals  to  some  person  better  informed.
Professor  Newbold  gives  a  Greek  phrase.  Mrs.  Piper  knows
no  Greek,  but  George  Pelham  says,  "I  will  ask  Stainton  Moses,
who  is  a  Hellenist,"  and  shortly  after  the  translation  is  given.
Another  time  Rector  and  Hodgson,  speaking  by  Mrs.  Piper,
cannot  give  the  name  of  Robert  Hyslop's  mother-in-law.  They
"leave  the  machine,"  according  to  Mrs.  Piper's  picturesque
phrase;  that  is,  there  is  a  short  silence,  then  George  Pelham  re-
turns and  says,  "She  was  called  Margaret."  But  it  is  difficult
to  believe  in  the  reality  of  these  personifications  in  the  spirit
world  who  seek  each  other  out  and  give  information.

The  curious  case  of  Hannah  Wild,  analyzed  by  Mr.  Sage,  is
a  good  example  of  telepathy  coincident  with  complete  absenc
of  knowledge  of  facts  known  only  to  the  deceased  person.  Mrs.
Blodgett  interrogates  Mrs.  Piper  and  gets  an  answer  from  her
sister  (Hannah  Wild),  two  years  deceased.    Now  Hannah  Wild

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  141

had  written  a  letter  in  which  were  some  words  that  no  one  could
understand.  Mrs.  Piper  could  say  nothing  about  this  letter,
though  the  thoughts  and  secret  acts  of  Mrs.  Blodgett  were  cor-
rectly stated;  so  that  this  experiment,  so  unsatisfactory  as  to
personal  survival,  was  excellent  for  telepathy  and  cryptesthesia.1

Mrs.  Verrall,  an  acute  observer,  obtained  some  good  results.
Mrs.  Piper  said  to  her,  "Your  grandfather  was  paralyzed;  he
had  a  sister  called  Suzanne,  and  a  son,  Henry.  This  uncle  mar-
ried a  relation,  a  lady  named  Keley."  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  was
not  familiar  with  that  branch  of  her  family,  made  careful  enquiries
and  found  the  facts  to  be  as  stated  (Hyslop,  Science  and  a  Future
Life,  Boston,  1905,  157).

Paul  Bourget,  enquiring  of  Mrs.  Piper  (in  the  character  of
Phinuit),  showed  her  a  small  travelling  clock.  Mrs.  Piper  was
able  to  say  to  whom  the  clock  had  belonged,  his  way  of  life,
and  the  mode  of  his  death  (suicide  by  poison).  "She  described
with  remarkable  accuracy  the  flat  I  occupied  in  Paris,  mentioning
the  storey  and  an  inner  staircase.  She  saw  on  the  wall  an  object
that  she  described,  and  on  the  mantelpiece  a  portrait  that  she
thought  to  be  that  of  a  young  man ;  it  is  of  a  girl  whose  hair
has  been  cut  short"  (A.  S.  P.,  1895,  v,  72).

Mr.  Hyslop,  speaking  to  his  father  through  Mrs.  Piper,  asked
for  news  of  Mr.  H.  C.  The  reply  was  that  "H.  C.  is  preoccupied
about  the  church  and  its  organ."  Hyslop  was  unaware  that  H.  C.
had  ceased  to  attend  the  church  because  an  organ  had  been  placed
therein,  of  which  he  disapproved  (Hyslop,  loc.  cit.,  222).

Mr.  Vernon  Briggs,  who  had  been  in  Honolulu,  enquiring  of
Mrs.  Piper  concerning  a  little  native  boy,  Kalua,  that  he  had
brought  to  America,  received  from  her  two  words  in  the  native
language — lei  (a  garland  of  flowers),  and  aloka  (salutations).
When  Mr.  Briggs  asked  which  island  Kalua  lived  on  she  said
Tawai,  but  her  hand  wrote  Kawa'i.  Now  the  name  is  correctly
written  as  Kawai,  but  is  pronounced  Tawai  by  the  natives.

For  Mrs.  M.,  a  widow,  Mrs.  Piper  wrote  the  names  Brown
and  Parker,  these  being  the  names  of  the  doctor  and  nurse  who
attended  Mr.  M.  in  his  last  illness.   "I  was  then  addressed,"  says

xIf  the  original  text  contained  in  the  bulky  volumes  of  the  S.  P.  R.  and
the  Am.  S.  P.  R.  in  which  Hodgson  and  Hyslop  have  recorded  their  studies
of  Mrs.  Piper  are  not  available,  sufficient  information  can  be  obtained  from
M.  Sage's  book,  Madame  Piper,  fourth  edition,  Paris,  Leymarie,  1902.  It  is
very  readable.

142

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Mrs.  M.,  "as  only  my  husband  could  have  addressed  me,  men-
tioning matters  that  concerned  him  and  that  I  alone  knew.  An
intimate  friend  of  his  was  also  named.  He  alluded  to  our  last
walk  in  the  park  at  T.,  and  answered  the  question  I  put  to  him
when  he  was  dying,  and  too  feeble  to  speak.  This  answer  was
made  in  a  way  that  Mr.  Hodgson  or  any  stranger  would  not  have
understood,  but  it  was  quite  clear  to  me"  (Science  and  a  Future.
Life,  1905,  179).

Mrs.  William  James  and  her  brother  were  told  by  Phinuit  at
a  seance  with  Mrs.  Piper,  that  their  Aunt  Kate  had  died  at
two  or  two-thirty  a.m.  that  morning,  and  that  they  would  re-
ceive a  letter  or  telegram  to  that  effect.  During  the  morning  a
telegram  arrived  to  say  that  Kate  had  died  a  few  minutes  after
midnight.

I  could  multiply  such  instances  related  by  skilful  observers
with  minute  care.  The  fact  of  cryptesthesia  is  undeniable.  Mrs.
Piper's  gift  is  amply  sufficient  to  prove  the  existence  of  this  mys-
terious power  of  the  mind.  We  can  now  go  forward,  and  from
hundreds  of  examples  given  by  other  mediums,  select  some  in
corroboration.

Those  who  wish  to  make  a  detailed  study  of  these  highly
instructive  phenomena  are  referred  to  the  Proceedings  of  the
American  and  the  English  Societies  for  Psychical  Research,  but  a
good  notion  of  them  can  be  obtained  from  the  works  of  Myers,
Lodge,  and  Hyslop.

Hyslop  divides  the  lucidity  of  Mrs.  Piper  into  three  stages:
(1)  First  report  of  Hodgson;  (2)  second  report  of  Hodgson;
(3)  report  of  Hyslop.  Already,  after  Hodgson's  first  report,
when  George  Pelham  had  not  yet  appeared  but  only  Phinuit,
Hodgson  said,  "The  very  complex  and  suggestive  results  estab-
lish that  names  and  incidents  unknown  to  those  present  are  indi-
cated. This  excludes  telepathy  as  the  sole  cause  of  these
phenomena."  After  the  second  report  most  of  those  who  assisted
at  these  seances  had  acquired  "indubitable  evidence"  of  super-
normal action.  Hyslop  and  Lodge  appear  to  have  come  to  the
same  conclusion.

It  is  true  that  some  scientists  who  had  only  a  few  seances —
Weir  Mitchell,  James  Mark  Baldwin,  Professor  Trowbridge,  and
Professor  Eliot  Norton — were  not  convinced.  I  shall  venture
to  remind  them  that  in  so  difficult  a  matter  no  conclusion  can
be  drawn,  one  way  or  the  other,  unless  after  a  long  series  of

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  143

experiments.  They  did  not  continue  their  studies  of  Mrs.  Piper,
which  was  a  mistake  on  their  part.

Hyslop,  replying  to  Podmore,  made  a  minute  calculation  of
probabilities  as  applied  to  Mrs.  Piper's  cryptesthesia.1  He  was
easily  able  to  show  that  the  probability  of  success  due  to  chance
alone  is  exceedingly  small,  denoted  by  some  such  number  as
(tV)47-  Now  it  has  already  been  stated  more  than  once  that
the  calculus  of  probabilities,  correctly  used,  is  an  admirable  check
provided  that  the  experiments  are  well  performed;  and  the  ex-
periments by  Hyslop  seem  to  have  been  unexceptionable.

To  supply  data  for  the  calculation  Hyslop  conceived  the  in-
genious idea  of  asking  a  large  number  of  persons  the  same
questions  that  he  put  to  Mrs.  Piper,  comparing  these  answers
of  non-sensitives  with  those  given  by  her.  He  selected  one  hun-
dred and  five  questions  which  Mrs.  Piper  had  answered  correctly,
and  rightly  concluding  that  the  answers  by  non-sensitives  were
due  to  chance  alone,  he  reached  the  enormous  figure  of  a  prob-
ability of  (tV)147.

To  give  an  example  of  his  method,  I  quote  question  46:

Has  your  father  travelled  in  the  West?

(a)  Was  he  then  in  a  railway  accident?

(b)  Was  he  injured  by  it?

(c)  Was  your  mother-in-law  with  him?

(d)  Did  the  accident  take  place  on  a  bridge?

(e)  Is  it  some  time  since  the  accident  took  place?
(/)  Was  he  ill  in  consequence  of  the  accident?

Out  of  420  persons,  105  answered  the  general  question  affirma-
tively, 10  had  been  in  a  railway  accident,  one  of  these  only,
on  a  bridge.  None  of  the  420  answered  "Yes"  to  all  the  ques-
tions, so  that  the  probability  is  certainly  less  than  1  : 420 ;  but
on  the  separate  probability  of  each  question,  compounded  for
the  whole,  the  figures  come  out  as  odds  of  1  to  2,500,000,000;
which  amounts  to  moral  certainty  that  chance  could  not  have
produced  Mrs.  Piper's  results.  The  method  that  I  employed
with  Stella  is  simpler,  but  leads  to  the  same  conclusion — the
results  cannot  be  explained  by  chance  if  the  conditions  of  experi-
ment are  strict,  as  I  believe  both  mine  and  Hyslop's  to  have  been.

William  James  relates  (Am.  S.  P.  R.,  1909,  iii,  470)  some
experiments  made  with  Mrs.  Piper  that  seem  to  him  to  be

1Chance  coincidence  and  guessing  in  a  mediumistic  experiment  (Proc.
Am.  S.  P.  R.t  August,  1919.  xiii,  1-89)-

144

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

proofs  not  only  of  lucidity  but  of  survival,  these  having  to  do
with  R.  Hodgson  deceased  speaking  through  Mrs.  Piper.  He
cites  the  following  fact:  "There  is  a  person  named  Child,  who
has  suddenly  come,  and  sends  his  love  to  William  (William
James),  and  to  his  own  wife  who  is  living.  He  says  L  .  .
Such  were  the  words  of  Mrs.  Piper  to  Miss  Robbins.  Now
neither  Mrs.  Piper  nor  Miss  Robbins  knew  Child  (deceased),
who  had  been  a  most  intimate  friend  of  William  James.  Mrs.
Child's  Christian  name  begins  with  L.  And  William  James
concludes  that  the  facts  are  "unquestionably  supernormal. "

Even  the  most  sceptical  must  be  moved  by  the  consensus  of
such  men  as  Myers,  Oliver  Lodge,  William  James,  R.  Hodgson,
and  J.  Hyslop,  who  have  all,  after  enquiries  lasting  over  twenty
years,  agreed  in  recognizing  the  lucidity  of  Mrs.  Piper.

Although  these  experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  demonstrate  crypt-
esthesia  quite  conclusively  they  do  not  really  demonstrate  survival.

No  doubt  the  personalities  that  present  themselves — Hodgson,
Hyslop  (senior),  Phinuit,  George  Pelham,  Stainton  Moses,  and
F.  Myers — showed  impressive  traits  of  psychological  individuality,
and  kept  them  distinctly  in  writing,  voice,  style,  and  thought.
But  can  this  be  considered  sufficient  proof?  The  factitious  per-
sonalities like  the  Marie  Antoinette  of  Helen  Smith  show  the
same.

And  another  conclusion  follows:  Since  survival  is  not  estab-
lished with  so  powerful  a  medium  as  Mrs.  Piper,  so  superior
to  other  mediums,  still  less  can  it  be  established  by  other  mediums.
But  there  is  no  need  to  be  disturbed;  each  period  has  its  own
tasks.  Ours  today  is  to  establish  the  real  existence  of  a  faculty
of  supernormal  cognition — cryptesthesia ;  and  Mrs.  Piper  is  un-
questionably the  one  among  all  others  who  has  given  the  most
numerous,  striking,  and  decisive  proofs  of  it.

Not  only  do  the  experiments  with  her  prove  the  supernormal
faculty,  but  they  show  that  telepathy  is  not  a  satisfactory  explana-
tion. It  is  clairvoyance — lucidity — the  knowledge  of  facts  that
no  living  person  knows.

Although  D.  D.  Home  was  chiefly  known  by  his  objective
mediumship,  he  gave  striking  proofs  of  lucidity.  At  Hartford,
to  visitors  whom  he  saw  for  the  first  time,  he  spoke  of  a  little
woman  dressed  in  grey  silk  that  he  had  half  seen  who  seemed
to  be  a  phantom,  since  she  disappeared.  Home  then  heard  a
voice  saying  to  him,  "It  displeases  me  that  another  coffin  has

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  145

been  placed  over  mine.  I  will  not  allow  this."  He  did  not  under-
stand this  enigmatic  sentence,  but  next  day  when  a  visit  was
made  to  the  tomb  of  the  lady  in  grey  the  guardian  of  the  ceme-
tery, on  putting  the  key  into  the  lock  of  the  vault,  said,  "Forgive
me,  but  as  there  was  a  little  space  over  the  lady's  coffin,  we  put
that  of  the  child  of  L.  there;  we  had  no  time  to  notify  you."

Miss  Andrews,  a  non-professional,  but  very  lucid,  received  in
Home's  presence  a  visit  from  Mr.  Colley  Grattam,  a  distinguished
author  and  consul  at  Antwerp  and  Boston.  He  was  disposed  to
laugh  at  spiritualism.  "Do  not  laugh,"  said  Miss  Andrews,  "you
have  a  spirit  who  calls  herself  Emma,  standing  at  your  side."
"What  do  you  know  of  her?"  said  Mr.  Colley  Grattam,  visibly
disturbed.  "She  watches  over  you  to  protect  you,  for  you  were
good  to  her.  On  a  stormy  night  you  took  her  in  and  gave  her
hot  wine;  you  reproached  her  husband  for  his  cowardly  and
inhuman  conduct."  "Yes,"  said  Grattam,  "the  brute  deserved  to
be  hanged,  though  he  was  a  member  of  Parliament.  Adieu,  I
can  hear  no  more,  but  I  will  never  laugh  at  this  again"  (Home,
Light  and  Darkness,  1883).

Mr.  Britton,  a  well-known  writer,  relates  an  experience  with
Home  at  Greenfield :  Unusually  loud  raps  were  made  on  the  table
for  Mr.  Britton,  giving  the  message,  "You  are  wanted  at  home ;
your  child  is  very  ill.  Go  at  once,  or  you  will  be  too  late."
"Then,"  said  Mr.  Britton,  "I  took  my  handbag  and  went.  In  the
street  I  heard  the  whistle  of  the  engine  of  the  last  train.  Run-
ning as  hard  as  I  could,  I  just  caught  it,  gripping  the  last  carriage
as  it  moved,  and  on  arriving  at  home  I  found  the  facts  as  stated."

Hyslop  made  some  experiments,  interesting  though  less  bril-
liant than  those  with  Mrs.  Piper,  with  Mrs.  X.,  who  is  not  a
professional  medium.  He  gave  his  name  as  Robert  Brown.  On
seeing  him  Mrs.  X.  called  him  James  H.,  saying  that  Robert  was
not  his  real  name  but  that  of  his  brother.  She  also  gave  "Mary"
as  the  name  of  Hyslop's  wife,  then  deceased  (Hyslop,  Science
and  a  Future  Life,  Boston,  1905,  255).

Prince  Wittgenstein  learned  through  a  medium's  message  that
the  will  of  his  friend  General  v.  Korff,  some  months  dead,  would
be  found  in  a  particular  cupboard  of  the  house  where  he  died.
This  will  had  been  sought  in  vain,  but  on  the  arrival  of  Prince
Wittgenstein's  letter  it  had  just  been  found  where  stated  (A.  S.
P.,  1910,  xx,  120).

Mr.  Hereward  Carrington  tells  the  following:    The  father  of

146

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

an  English  soldier,  killed  at  Beaumont,  after  reading  Sir  Oliver
Lodge's  Raymond,  decided  to  visit  a  medium — Mr.  Vout  Peters
— to  whom  he  did  not  give  his  name.  Peters  gave  him  at  once
four  names — John,  Elisabeth,  William,  and  Edward.  These  were
the  names  of  his  father,  his  mother,  his  brother,  and  a  nephew
long  dead.  He  told  him  that  his  dead  son  was  called  Po.  .  r.  The
son's  name  was  Roger,  but  the  curious  fact  is  that  he  was  famil-
iarly called  called  Poger  and  not  Roger  (Psychical  Phenomena
and  the  War,  New  York,  1919,  272).

Mrs.  X.  thought  she  had  seen  the  phantom  of  her  son  one
morning  in  full  daylight;  she  went  the  same  day  to  consult
Mrs.  Annie  Brittain  who  said,  "Your  son  tells  me  to  say  that  if
you  saw  him,  it  was  himself  and  not  a  dream,  and  that  Jeanne
saw  him  too."  This  girl  Jeanne,  who  did  not  know  Mrs.  Brit-
tain, had  also  seen  the  apparition.

Captain  James  Burton,  writing  automatically  to  communicate
with  his  deceased  father,  said,  "I  did  not  know  that  my  mother,
who  lived  about  sixty  miles  away,  had  lost  the  dog  that  my
father  had  given  her.  That  same  night  I  received  a  communica-
tion from  him  telling  me  of  my  mother's  trouble.  An  intimate
secret  known  only  to  him  and  to  my  mother  concerning  a  matter
that  occurred  some  months  before  my  birth  was  revealed  to  me,
with  the  instruction,  Tell  this  to  your  mother  and  she  will  know
that  it  is  I,  your  father,  who  is  writing/  When  I  told  her  this
she,  who  till  then  was  sceptical,  fainted"  (The  New  Revelation,
by  Conan  Doyle).

It  is  to  be  noted  that  Captain  Burton's  automatic  writing  is
so  small  as  to  need  a  lens  to  read  it.

De  Vesme  relates  the  following  incident  which  acted  on  him
so  strongly  as  to  decide  him  to  devote  himself  to  occult  science.
The  narrator  was  Albert  de  N.,  who  saw  it  at  Rome.

One  night,  in  1871,  his  mother  began  to  shriek  aloud.  Young
Albert  and  his  father  hurried  to  her,  and  found  her  on  the
ground  terror-stricken :  she  said  that  "spirits"  had  taken  her  out
of  her  bed.  The  next  morning  at  7  o'clock  there  was  a  ring  at
the  door.  Colonel  Baron  Daviso,  who  was  entirely  unknown  to
Mr.  and  Mrs.  de  N.,  came  to  ask  what  had  occurred,  saying  that
at  a  spiritualist  seance  he  had  been  told  that  the  spirits  would
play  a  trick  on  a  lady  in  that  house,  and  he  had  come  to  ascertain
the  facts"  (A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  109).

An  incident  of  spiritist  cryptesthesia  obtained  by  table-tipping

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  147

was  observed  at  Cambridge  by  Helen  Verrall  (7.  S.  P.  R.,  March,
1907,  36).  On  the  29th  of  January,  at  6  P.M.,  the  following
words  were  dictated:  "Fellow  of  Royal  Society  Potter,  dead  this
afternoon,  4:30,  Editor  of  Physiological  Review  London  43  Bel-
size  Gardens  Kensington,  married,  five  children. "

The  message  applied  well  enough  to  the  eminent  physiologist,
Foster  (not  Potter)  an  F.  R.  S.,  married,  the  father  of  five  chil-
dren, who  lived  in  London  (the  address  is  incorrect),  who  died
in  the  night  of  the  28th,  not  at  4:30  on  the  29th.  The  news
only  reached  Cambridge  late  in  the  evening  of  the  29th  by  the
London  evening  papers  of  that  day ;  and  Helen  Verrall  and  Mr.
Bayfield,  who  was  at  the  table  with  her,  had  seen  no  one  or
looked  at  any  paper.  It  is  also  to  be  noted  that  Mr.  Michael
Foster  had  been  professor  of  physiology  at  Cambridge  and,  like
Helen  Verrall's  father,  belonged  to  that  university.

I  had  several  very  clear  experiments  with  Stella,  a  young  lady
who  is  not  a  professional  medium  and  only  took  up  spiritualism
by  chance.  One  day  she  found  that  on  putting  her  hand  on  a
table  or  planchette  she  obtained  curious  answers.  She  gave  me
striking  examples  of  lucidity ;  I  could  not,  however,  decide  whether
this  was  telepathic  or  otherwise.

I  made  my  experiments  as  strict  as  possible.  In  these  experi-
ments three  persons  were  present — Stella,  myself,  and  G.,  a
B.Sc,  and  a  skilful  physician  who  had  never  seen  Stella.  I
myself  knew  nothing  at  all  of  G.'s  family.  During  these  experi-
ments not  only  did  G.  not  touch  the  table,  but  he  had  his  back
turned  to  it,  said  no  word,  and  made  no  sign.  In  the  eight
seances  held,  Stella  gave  the  first  names  of  G.'s  wife,  brothers,
son,  father,  and  father-in-law,  names  of  which  both  Stella  and  I
were  entirely  ignorant.  Taking  a  probability  of  1  : 40  based  on
there  being  about  40  usual  Christian  names  of  men  and  the  same
number  for  women,  the  odds  against  successful  results  by  chance
are  (TV)6;  that  is,  1  to  25,000,000,000,  which  is  moral,  if  not
mathematical,  certainty.

The  calculus  of  probabilities  must  be  handled  with  caution,
for  it  is  not  quite  accurate  to  say  that  there  were  no  failures,
so  that  compounding  failures  with  successes,  the  probability  cannot
be  placed  so  high  as  (TV)6-  Exaggerating  the  failures,  we  will
admit  six  hesitations  equivalent  to  failures.  Then  according
SI

to  the  formula   paqP,    (see   p.   57   ante),   admitting  six

a!/3!

148

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

failures  and  six  successes,  the  compounded  probability  comes
out  as  26.6uo.ooo,  wnich  is  just  as  much  moral  certainty  as  if
one  thousand  times  greater.  Some  of  these  failures  are  them-
selves instructive:  Thus,  the  name  of  G.'s  child  was  asked  for.
The  answer  was  "Georgette/'  which  is  wrong,  for  the  child
is  a  boy  and  is  called  Jean.  Then  G.  told  us  that  had  the  child
been  a  girl,  his  wife  and  he  had  intended  to  call  her  Georgette,
a  fact  that  Stella  and  I  of  course  did  not  know.  G.  asked  the
name  of  a  brother,  deceased.  The  answer  was  "Andre,  but  he
is  living."  Now  the  name  of  the  dead  brother  is  not  Andre,
but  there  was  a  living  brother  Andre.  This  check  is  almost  more
interesting  than  a  success.

Stella  and  I  both  knew  that  G.  was  born  in  Brittany,  but  nothing
more.  We  asked  the  name  of  the  town  where  he  was  born;
the  answer  was  Loria.  We  at  once  thought  of  Lorient;  but  in
fact  G.  was  born  at  Morlaix.  As  there  is  possible  error  between
adjoining  letters  (by  table-tipping  to  an  alphabet),  L  may  very
well  have  been  taken  for  M,  and  I  for  L.  Although  Stella  and
I  were  both  convinced  that  the  coming  word  should  be  Lorient,
the  fifth  letter  came  as  A  in  despite  of  us.

Stella  was  also  able  to  give,  through  the  table,  the  name  of
a  childhood  friend  of  G.,  and  the  word  Kerveguen — the  name
of  the  house  G.  lived  in  at  Morlaix.  G.  had  just  received  a  letter
about  his  little  son  who  was  feverish.  It  was  asked  what  the
letter  contained,  these  contents  being  unknown  to  us.  The  an-
swer was  "Jean,  fever,"  and  there  was  added,  "laughs,  carriage.,,
Now  G.  had  recently  given  to  his  son  a  little  carriage  with  which
the  child  had  been  greatly  and  unusually  amused.

Various  other  proofs  of  lucidity  were  given  me  by  Stella  that
I  do  not  reproduce  here,  although  they  seem  to  me  to  carry
proof,  for  I  have  only  named  those  in  which  it  was  strictly
impossible  that  she  should,  consciously  or  unconsciously,  have
been  able  to  acquire  her  information  by  any  normal  means.

I  will  only  cite  two  more  facts :

1.  I  had  taken  a  letter  to  my  friend,  Professor  W.  Stirling  of
Manchester,  who  had  just  come  to  Paris,  and  was  at  the  Boule-
vard Saint-Michel.  I  had  never  mentioned  Mr.  Stirling  before
Stella.  On  the  following  day  I  said  to  her,  "To  whom  have  I
been  taking  a  letter  at  the  Boulevard  Saint-Michel?"  She  an-
swered at  once,  "To  your  London  friend."  Nothing  could  have
been  more  unlikely,  for  how  could  she  suspect  that  among  the

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  149

many  letters  I  might  have  taken  to  that  place  this  would  be  to
an  English  friend  of  whose  existence  she  knew  nothing?

The  following  instance  is  even  more  extraordinary.  I  saw
Stella  on  the  2d  of  December,  during  the  day,  and  on  leaving
I  said,  "I  am  going  to  give  a  lecture  on  snake-poison."  She
at  once  replied,  "I  dreamt  last  night  of  snakes,  or  rather  of  eels/'
Then,  without  of  course  giving  any  reason,  I  asked  her  to  tell
me  her  dream,  and  her  exact  words  were:  "It  was  about  eels
more  than  snakes,  two  eels,  for  I  could  see  their  white  shining
bellies  and  their  sticky  skin;  and  I  said  to  myself,  T  do  not  like
these  creatures,  but  it  pains  me  when  they  are  hurt/  99  This
dream  was  strangely  conformable  to  what  I  had  done  the  day
before,  December  1st.  On  that  day  I  had,  for  the  first  time
in  twenty  years,  experimented  with  eels.  Desiring  to  draw  from
them  a  little  blood,  I  had  put  two  eels  on  the  table  and  their
white,  shining,  iridescent,  viscous  bellies  had  particularly  struck
me.  They  had  been  fixed  on  the  table  for  the  removal  of  their
hearts.  I  had  certainly  not  spoken  of  this  to  Stella,  whom  I
had  not  seen  for  some  time,  and  she  is  not  familiar  with  any
one  of  the  persons  who  frequent  my  laboratory.

I  will  here  note,  as  characteristic  of  Stella's  mediumship,  and
doubtless  of  that  of  many  other  sensitives,  that  she  rarely  gives
a  precise  answer  to  a  precise  question.  I  had  not  asked  her  any-
thing about  what  I  had  been  doing  on  the  previous  day,  and  she
had  no  idea  that  her  dream  had  any  reference  to  me.  She  only
saw  two  eels.  It  is  none  the  less  a  remarkable  instance  of  crypt-
esthesia,  for  her  words  corresponded  so  well  with  the  impression
strongly  made  on  my  mind,  that  chance  can  have  had  nothing  to
do  with  the  matter.

Lady  Mabel  Howard,  writing  automatically,  was  interrogated
by  one  of  her  friends  who  had  lost  some  jewelry.  She  wrote
that  it  would  be  found  under  the  bridge  of  Tebay,  which  seemed
altogether  unlikely.  A  month  later  it  was  discovered  there  (P.
S.  P.  R.,  ix,  44).

Miss  A.,  a  writing  medium,  gave  to  Lady  Radnor  the  name
of  Anna  Chambers.  This  name  was  entirely  unknown  to  the
family.  After  minute  research,  it  was  found,  through  the  Her-
ald's office,  that  a  certain  Lady  Exeter,  an  ancestress  of  Lady
Radnor,  had  been  Anna  Chambers  prior  to  her  marriage.

Mr.  Gordigiani,  a  student  at  the  military  school  at  Florence,
showed  spontaneous  mediumship  from  the  age  of  fifteen.  One

ISO

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

day  in  1883,  he  being  then  seventeen  years  of  age,  an  American
lady,  a  widow  named  Mrs.  B.  M.,  was  having  her  portrait  painted
by  Signor  Gordigiani,  the  young  man's  father,  and  expressed
a  desire  to  have  a  seance  with  the  son.  He  wrote,  "There  is
enmity  that  I  do  not  understand  between  the  lady  and  her  de-
ceased husband."  When  this,  written  in  French,  was  translated
to  Mrs.  B.  M.  she  turned  pale,  stood  up,  and  said,  "What!  Still?"
Then  as  a  more  conciliatory  reply  was  asked  for,  the  inexorable
writing  answered,  "Impossible,  he  is  in  Nigritie  (?  Nigeria).
His  mission  is  to  influence  the  abolition  of  slavery.  He  is  a
negro."

Mrs.  B.  M.  withdrew,  very  much  moved,  and  the  next  day
she  said  that  her  husband  had  been  a  coloured  man,  which  had
brought  about  a  long  estrangement  between  them  (A.  S.  P.,  1898,
viii,  261).

On  Friday,  October  3,  1906,  at  Naples,  Zingaropoli,  at  8  p.m.
was  in  spiritualist  seance  with  a  young  medium  and  Signor  Mar-
zorati,  the  editor  of  the  excellent  review,  Luce  e  Ombra.  During
this  seance  the  medium  announced  that  a  sub-lieutenant  of  in-
fantry in  the  barracks  at  Piedigrotta,  Guglielmo  Paternostro,  had
been  killed  by  a  revolver  shot.  This  was  the  fact,  reported  in
the  Mattino  of  Naples,  October  4,  1906  (A.  S.  P.,  1906,  xvi,
718).

Professor  Feijao  of  Lisbon,  in  spiritist  seances  with  Mme.
Frondoni-Lacombe,  received  the  name  of  his  father  by  raps.  He
withdrew  his  hands  from  the  table  but  continued  to  obtain  clear
and  entirely  correct  replies  to  questions  to  which  none  of  the
persons  present  could  have  given  answers.1

Dr.  Moutin  had  attended  Mme.  Joubert  in  cholera.  A  few
moments  before  her  death,  she  cried  out,  "The  mirror,  the  mir-
ror!" pointing  at  a  mirror  on  the  mantelpiece.  Her  husband,  a
sailor,  was  absent.  Dr.  Moutin  wrote  the  facts  to  him,  and  he
knowing  that  the  deceased  often  hid  money,  sought  for  it  every-
where without  success.  Fifteen  months  later  the  spirit  of  Mme.
Joubert  stated  at  a  seance  to  Dr.  Moutin  that  a  bond  of  the
Fraissinet  Company  was  hidden  behind  a  mirror  that  M.  Joubert
had  not  examined,  indicating  its  position.  Dr.  Moutin  thereupon
wrote  to  M.  Joubert  and  the  bond  in  question  was  found  (Boz-
zano,  A.  S.  P.,  1910,  xx,  1222).

Experiments  with  Mme.  Frondoni  are  almost  all  concerned  with  objective
metapsychics.    They  will  be  discussed  more  in  detail  later  on.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  151

Lady  Mabel  Howard  gave  Myers  some  good  instances  of
clairvoyance.  Myers  had  been  invited  to  a  certain  lunch,  con-
cerning which  Lady  Mabel  knew  nothing,  not  even  that  it  had
taken  place,  but  she  said  that  six  persons  were  then  present

and  that  the  gentleman  who  sat  next  to  Myers  was  called  Mo

There  had  been  in  fact  six  persons  and  Myers's  neighbor  was
named  Moultrie.

In  another  experiment  it  was  asked,  "Where  is  Don?"  The
pencil  wrote,  "Don  is  dead,"  which  was  true  and  unknown  to
anyone.  Again,  "Who  is  the  best  friend  of  a  little  girl  who  is
there?"  The  answer  was,  "Mary,"  which  was  true.  A  book
was  found  which  had  long  been  sought  in  vain.

The  Tausch  case,  observed  by  Hyslop,  proves  surprising  crypt-
esthesia.  Mrs.  Chenoweth  (the  pseudonym  of  Hyslop's  medium),
was  interrogated  on  the  subject  of  a  certain  German  whose
widow  had  written  to  Hyslop  to  get  some  communication  from
her  deceased  husband.  Hyslop,  without  saying  anything  to  Mrs.
Chenoweth,  obtained  the  name  Taussh,  Tauch,  Taush ;  it  was  said
that  Taush  knew  William  James,  that  he  was  a  philosopher,  that
he  was  not  in  his  home  when  he  died,  that  he  had  a  mania  for
putting  watches  to  the  correct  time,  that  he  had  a  bag  in  which
he  kept  his  spectacles  and  his  manuscripts;  minute  details  not
accountable  for  by  telepathy,  but  only  by  clairvoyance.

Mr.  Isaac  Funk,  the  well-known  New  York  editor,  experi-
menting with  Mrs.  Pepper,  gave  her  a  sealed  letter  in  which  he
had  written  the  word  "Mother."  Mrs.  Pepper  took  the  letter,
gave  the  Christian  name  of  Mr.  Funk's  mother,  and  said  that  she
walked  on  one  leg,  adding,  "Do  you  not  remember  that  needle?"
Mrs.  Funk  had  run  a  needle  into  her  foot.  Mrs.  Pepper  also
saw  at  the  side  of  Mrs.  Funk  her  grandson,  "Chester."  At  the
moment  Mr.  Funk  could  not  remember  the  name,  but,  on  en-
quiry, found  that  his  mother  had  a  little  grandson  of  that  name
who  had  died  twenty  years  before  in  a  Western  State  (A.  S.  P.,
1905,  xv,  246).

Yza  Trisk,  in  a  spiritist  seance  at  Stockholm,  received  the
following  communication:  "I  left  the  earth  twenty-four  hours
since,  and  I  am  come  to  thank  you."  There  was  also  a  medium-
istic  drawing  which  was  recognized  as  the  portrait  of  a  Finnish
poet  whom  all  thought  to  be  living.  This  poet,  whom  Yza  Trisk
knew  slightly,  the  author  of  the  Finnish  national  hymn,  had  just
died  in  Italy.    Is  it  established  that  at  the  time  of  this  seance

152

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

no  announcement  had  appeared  in  any  Stockholm  paper?  (Boz-
zano,  A.  S.  P.,  1910,  264).

Commandant  Darget,  accompanied  by  his  wife  and  daughter,
visited  Mme.  Bonnard,  a  professional  medium,  who  spoke  on  that
occasion  as  if  she  were  Mme.  Darget's  mother.  A  proof  of  iden-
tity being  asked  for,  it  was  said,  "I  am  very  glad  to  see  that
white  flowers  have  been  put  on  my  grave."  Now  a  cousin  visit-
ing Poitiers,  where  Mme.  Darget's  mother  was  interred,  had
placed  white  flowers  on  her  tomb  (Bozzano,  A.  S.  P.,  1909,
xix,  322).

W.  Stead,  in  presence  of  Mrs.  R.,  wrote  automatically  (nomi-
nally from  Julia),  that  Mrs.  R.  had  had  a  fall  and  injured  her
spine.  Mrs.  R.  denied  this,  but  Julia  (by  the  hand  of  Stead)
wrote,  "She  has  forgotten;  it  was  seven  years  ago  at  Streaton
in  Illinois;  there  was  snow.  On  reaching  Mrs.  Buell's  house,
Mrs.  R.  slipped  on  the  edge  of  the  pavement,  fell,  and  hurt  her
back."  Then  Mrs.  R.  remembered  the  incident,  which  she  had
completely  forgotten  (A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  110).

In  1874,  Stainton  Moses,  having  been  magnetized  by  Du  Potet,
wrote  automatically,  "I  killed  myself  today."  The  writing  was
accompanied  by  a  very  rough  drawing,  with  the  words,  "Under
the  steam-roller  in  Baker  Street  where  the  medium  passed  by."
The  next  day,  after  enquiry,  Stainton  Moses  learned  that  a  man
had  been  crushed  in  Baker  Street  by  the  steam-roller  (Delanne,
loc.  ext.,  34).

Mr.  Mackenzie,  though  unaccustomed  to  shooting,  spent  a  day
in  the  shooting  fields ;  in  the  evening  playing  two  games  of  bil-
liards with  his  father,  winning  both.  On  the  same  day  Mr.
Nicholson,  who  lived  one  hundred  and  twenty  miles  distant,  and
hardly  knew  Mr.  Mackenzie,  obtained  through  the  table  the  name
Mackenzie.  "He  plays  billiards  with  his  father  and  wins  both
games;  he  has  been  out  shooting',  {A.  S.  P.,  1919,  xxix,  No.  30).

Mrs.  Eflfia  Bathes  was  converted  to  metapsychism  by  the  fol-
lowing entirely  demonstrative  fact:  She  went  one  day  to  a
professional  clairvoyant  whom  she  did  not  know  and  who  did
not  know  her.  The  medium  described  to  her  a  deceased  brother,
and  he,  speaking  through  the  medium,  said  that  he  had  been
to  his  old  home  and  was  sad  to  find  that  his  collection  of  fossils
was  no  longer  in  his  room.  This  brother,  a  student  at  Cambridge,
had  made  a  fine  collection  of  fossils.  After  his  death  part  of  this
collection  had  been  given  to  the  Cambridge  museum;  the  rest

ined  in  his  room.  Some  time  later  Mrs.  Bathes  learned
that  their  mother  had  presented  these  to  the  museum  at  Bristol.

At  Vilna,  January  15,  1887,  at  the  house  of  the  engineer  Kaigo-
doroff,  Miss  Emma  Stramtn,  acting  as  the  medium,  said  that
Augustus  Duvanel  had  died  of  a  congestion  of  the  blood.  Then
another  communication  was  received  announcing  that  this  was
not  true,  but  that  he  had  committed  suicide  at  Zurich  on  the  15th
of  January,  1887.  It  appears  that  the  father  of  Emma  Stramm
and  also  the  guide  who  gave  the  table-messages  both  desired
to  spare  Emma  the  pain  of  learning  that  the  young  man  had  com-
mitted suicide  (by  reason  of  disappointed  love  for  Emma).  This
romantic  story  signifies  nothing ;  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  any
serious  work  should  take  note  of  such  tales.

An  eminent  physician,  Dr.  Santo-Liquido,  director  of  the
Office  of  Hygiene  at  Rome,  has  analyzed  very  ably  the  phenomena
of  cryptesthesia  that  he  observed  in  a  member  of  his  own  family
— a  distinguished  lady — who  without  having  desired  them,  pre-
sented the  phenomena  of  raps  and  automatic  writing.  Signor
Santo-Liquido,  like  all  of  us,  was  absolutely  sceptical  of  so-
called  spiritist  phenomena ;  but  he  had  to  give  in  to  the  evidence
that  mediums  occasionally  acquire  knowledge  that  transcends  the
normal.  One  day,  Louise  (the  medium),  said  to  him  in  trance,
"Instead  of  criticizing  my  experiments  you  would  do  better  to
occupy  yourself  with  your  report  which  is  not  completed. "  Santo-
Liquido  was  absolutely  convinced  that  this  important  report  had
been  sent  to  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  fifteen  days  before;  but
the  following  day  he  ascertained  that  through  an  incredible  act
of  negligence  by  a  subordinate,  it  had  been  left  in  the  portfolio
containing  the  case.

Many  times  Louise  has  correctly  indicated  unforeseen  facts,
and  has  also  given  many  instances  of  cryptesthesia.  Once  she
said  to  Signor  Santo-Liquido,  "You  will  be  called  to  Genoa,  but
Signor  Giolitti  will  not  let  you  go.',  Both  were  unlikely,  but
the  next  day  he  was  urgently  called  to  Genoa  by  a  member  of
his  family,  and  at  the  same  time  received  a  telegram  from  the
Premier  that  he  must  on  no  account  leave  Rome,  as  Signor
Giolitti  needed  him.1

M.  Tola  Dorian,  during  a  spiritist  seance,  learned  that  his
friend  H.  de  Lacretelle  had  just  died  in  Paris,  the  phrasing  being

Communicated  to  the  International  Metapsychic  Institute  of  Paris,  and
published  in  their  bulletin  No.  i  of  1920.

154

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

that  he  was  discarnate.  He  had  in  fact  died  that  night,  February
16,  1899,  at  Paris,  and  not,  as  M.  Dorian  thought,  at  Macon
(A  S.  P.,  xxix,  242).

Some  instances  of  spiritist  cryptesthesia  are  mentioned  in  M
Cornillier's  book.1  Unfortunately  they  are  but  few,  and  this
book  being  devoted  less  to  the  demonstration  of  clairvoyance
than  to  presenting  the  ideas  of  the  subconscious  on  spiritualist
theories,  it  is  difficult  to  cite  much  from  it  with  reference  to  lu-
cidity. It  is  the  story  of  a  young  girl,  Reine  X.,  aged  fifteen,
who,  in  a  first  spiritist  experience,  obtained  raps  without  contact.
She  was  then  magnetized  by  M.  Cornillier,  and  the  subsequent
phenomena  (all  subjective)  occurred  in  a  state  of  somnambulism.
They  must  be  classed  as  spiritist,  for  she  had  a  "guide"  (Vet-
tellini?)  who  dictated  her  answers.  It  is,  however,  a  small  matter
whether  the  classification  is  spiritist  or  somnambulist,  for  these
two  modalities  are  often  admixed.

The  first  time  that  M.  Cornillier  magnetized  Reine  she  went
(in  imagination)  to  M.  Cornillier's  room,  which  was  separate
from  his  studio,  and  into  which  she  had  never  been,  and  described
various  details — some  ivory  brushes,  an  oval  mirror,  and  two
small  portraits  on  the  mantelpiece.

Another  time  she  went  to  see  M.  S.  O.,  a  friend  of  M.  Cor-
nillier, whom  she  saw  sitting  at  his  desk  writing  a  business  letter ;
with  a  lady  beside  him  in  an  armchair  to  the  right  of  the  desk.
All  this  was  correct;  but  what  does  it  prove?

Reine,  sent  to  see  the  house  of  M.  X.  at  B.  (he  had  died  six
years  before),  said  that  there  was  a  very  old  tower  (correct),
and  speaking  of  M.  X.,  she  said,  "He  likes  to  take  long  walks
and  to  paint,"  both  being  characteristic  of  M.  X.

She  seems  also  to  have  had  a  premonition  (p.  417).  On
the  26th  of  August,  1913,  she  "saw"  M.  Cornillier  taking  a  train,
dressed  in  black  and  looking  sad,  and  this  vision  was  repeated  on
the  night  of  the  28th.  On  the  30th  she  "saw"  M.  C.  packing  his
valise.  On  the  1st  of  September  M.  C.  received  news  of  the  death
of  a  cousin,  and  he  took  the  train  to  be  present  at  the  funeral,
wearing  mourning.  Unfortunately  M.  C.  does  not  mention
whether  Reine  might  not  have  learned  of  the  cousin's  illness  by
normal  means.

*P.  E.  Cornillier,  La  survivance  de  I'dtne,  et  son  evolution  apres  la  mort,
Comptes  rendus  d' experiences,  Paris,  Alcan,  1920,  570  pp.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  155

Reine  was  also  able  to  give  the  name  of  a  lady,  Jeanne  B.,
speaking  through  her  (p.  504)  who  gave  many  correct  particu-
lars concerning  her  son,  Marcel,  a  cavalry  soldier,  and  of  her
husband,  who  had  caused  her  much  sorrow,  and  whom  she  had
divorced.  All  these  details  were  found  true,  but  it  is  impossible
to  admit  the  certainty,  or  even  the  likelihood,  of  cryptesthesia,
for  we  are  not  told  that  Reine  could  not  have  known  Mme.  B.,
who  was  a  modiste.

All  these  facts  have  therefore  very  little  weight;  and  despite
the  pains  taken  by  M.  Cornillier  there  is  so  much  lacking  in  his
book  that  we  cannot  build  much  upon  it.  The  opinions  of  Vet-
tellini  (i.e.,  the  subconsciousness  of  Reine),  on  this  world  and  the
other  leave  us  very  cold;  the  exact  demonstration  of  the  smallest
fact  of  cryptesthesia  or  premonition  would  have  a  higher  value.
The  valuable  reports  of  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  R.  Hodgson,  and  J.
Hyslop  are  unexceptionable  in  this  respect;  and  the  admirable
report  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  of  his  seances  with  Mrs.  Piper  are
models  of  what  such  reports  should  be.

M.  Mamtchitch  was  present  for  the  first  time  at  a  spiritist
seance  at  Kieff  in  1875.  Returning  home,  he  placed  himself
at  the  table  and  put  questions  by  the  alphabet.  He  got  the  name
Palladia,  and  the  words,  "Put  the  angel  back  in  its  place,  or  it
will  fall."  On  the  following  morning  he  visited  the  cemetery,
where  he  had  never  previously  been,  and  found  the  tomb,  buried
in  snow.  The  marble  statue  of  an  angel  bearing  a  cross  was
leaning  much  to  one  side  (Bozzano,  A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  324).

Mr.  Massey,  interviewing  Miss  Lottie  Fowler,  a  medium,  gave
her  the  glove  of  one  of  his  friends,  named  Pigott,  entirely  un-
known to  Miss  Fowler;  she  said,  "It  is  very  funny,  I  can  get
nothing  but  Pig,  Pig"  (Myers,  Human  Personality,  ii,  562).

Sir  William  Barrett,  quoted  by  Miss  Dallas  (A.  S.  P.f  July,
1916,  xxvi,  112),  gives  a  fact  of  cryptesthesia  by  the  wife  of
an  eminent  Irish  doctor  who  had  the  faculty  of  automatic
writing.  She  wrote  the  name  of  a  cousin  of  hers  killed  in  action
and  that  he  was  betrothed  to  a  lady  whose  full  name  and  address
were  given.  The  engagement  had  been  kept  entirely  secret  even
from  the  family  of  the  deceased  officer.

Dr.  Speakman,  experimenting  with  two  young  English  ladies
at  Pau  with  a  planchette,  mentioned  a  Mrs.  Sarah  Lamy,  who
had  died  a  few  days  previously.  Sarah  stated  that  her  daughter's
name  was  Rose  (correct),  and  that  she,  Sarah,  would  manifest

156

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

her  presence  to  her  husband  by  rapping  on  the  foot  of  the  bed.
That  very  evening  Mr.  Lamy  heard  raps  on  his  bed.  She  added
that  there  would  be  difficulties  with  the  lawyers;  and  in  fact
unforeseen  difficulties,  which  had  nothing  to  do  with  Mrs.  Lamy's
death,  did  actually  arise.  There  were  other  veridical  announce-
ments (A.S.  P.,  xix,  330).

Mrs.  Leonard,  who  has  given  such  admirable  proofs  of  clair-
voyance to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  gave  also  very  good  proofs  of  crypt-
esthesia  to  Miss  Radclyffe  Hall  and  Lady  Troubridge.1

The  memorandum  is  divided  into  five  chapters.

1.  A  description  of  the  communicator;  i.e.,  of  the  person  sup-
posed to  be  speaking — a  Mrs.  A.  V.  B. — a  friend  of  Miss  R.  H.
and  Lady  T.,  who  died  aged  fifty-seven  years  and  was  quite  un-
known to  Mrs.  Leonard.  She  was  exactly  described  by  Feda,
Mrs.  Leonard's  guide.  Sometimes  Miss  R.  H.  touched  the  table
lightly,  but  the  answers  were  mostly  given  verbally.  Feda  said
that  Mrs.  A.  V.  B.  was  paralyzed  on  the  right  side  of  her  mouth
(correct),  and  the  description  of  the  lady  was  very  exact.

2.  Complete  descriptions  of  places  entirely  unknown  to  Mrs
Leonard  which  had  been  visited  by  Miss  R.  H.  and  Mrs.  A.  V.  B.
during  life;  more  especially  Teneriffe  and  the  Canary  Islands.
She  spoke  of  two  little  monkeys,  of  a  climate  neither  too  hot  nor
too  cold,  of  a  path  over  cinders,  and  of  a  place  named  Cruth,
Vera.  Vera  Cruth,  Teneriffe,  Mazagal.  (Mrs.  A.  V.  B.  and
Miss  R.  H.  had  visited  Teneriffe,  Santa  Cruz,  and  Mazagra,  in
Morocco,  together.)

3.  Other  proofs  of  strong  lucidity  were  given,  as  to  which  the
ladies  can  give  no  details,  these  being  of  too  intimate  a  nature
for  publication.  The  house  of  Lady  T.,  her  dining-room,  and
her  blue  dressing-gown  were  exactly  described.

4.  Abundant  details  were  given  of  "Daisy"  (pseudonym)  whom
A.  V.  B.  had  known,  details  of  which  neither  Miss  R.  H.  nor
Lady  T.  could  be  aware  of.

Without  entering  into  further  circumstantial  detail  it  is  clear
that  Mrs.  Leonard's  cryptesthesia  is  very  powerful,  and,  like  Mrs.
Piper,  she  has  cognizance  of  facts  that  no  mental  transmission

lOn  a  series  of  sittings  with  Mrs.  Osborne  Leonard,  by  Miss  Radclyffe  Hall
and  Lady  Troubridge,  P.  P.  R.,  December,  191 9,  xxx,  339-547-  Although
confident  of  the  medium's  good  faith,  Miss  R.  H.  and  Lady  T.,  who  had  never
frequented  spiritualist  circles,  employed  detectives  to  make  sure  that  no
enquiries  had  been  made  by  Mrs.  Leonard.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  157

can  account  for.  These  remarkable  experiments  prove  once  more
that  cryptesthesia  is  a  real  faculty  that  cannot  be  explained  by
invoking  telepathy.

Mrs.  Thompson  gave  some  good  instances  of  cryptesthesia
to  Myers  and  to  some  other  persons.  This  manifests  itself  in  a
somnambulic  state  that  comes  on  spontaneously  when  she  wishes
to  make  an  experiment.  Then  Nelly,  a  little  daughter  that  she
has  lost,  speaks  through  her  and  talks  in  a  baby  language,  as  Feda
does  with  Mrs.  Leonard.  The  phenomena  presented  are  inter-
mediate between  hypnotic  and  spiritist  cryptesthesia.1

Mrs.  Thompson  gave  me  an  excellent  proof  of  lucidity.  Myers
had  brought  her  to  me  for  experiment.  That  evening  my  son
Georges  handed  his  watch  to  her,  asking  if  she  could  say  any-
thing about  it.  She  replied  after  some  hesitation,  'Three  genera-
tions mixed. "  It  would  have  been  hard  to  say  anything  more
descriptive,  for  the  watch  had  been  given  by  his  grandfather,  Felix
Aubry,  to  his  son  Georges  Aubry.  After  the  death  of  the  latter
at  the  battle  of  Vendome  in  1870,  M.  Felix  Aubry  had  had  the
watch  back,  and  on  his  death  he  had  left  it  to  my  son  Georges.

Mrs.  Thompson,  being  on  the  terrace  at  Monaco,  saw  an  old
gentleman  and  an  old  lady  playing  with  a  dog.  She  walked
towards  them  and,  without  apparent  reason,  spoke  to  them,  say-
ing, soon  after,  that  she  had  seen  the  word  Carqueiranne  over
their  heads.  Now  M.  and  Mme.  Moutonnier  were  due  to  go  to
Carqueiranne  with  Myers  to  meet  Mrs.  Thompson  herself.  She
had  never  heard  M.  and  Mme.  Moutonnier  spoken  of.

Dr.  Frederic  van  Eeden,  a  Dutch  physician  living  at  Bussum,
was  introduced  to  Mrs.  Thompson  by  F.  Myers,  but  with  great
care  to  conceal  his  name  and  nationality  from  her.  In  the  course
of  the  seance  Mrs.  Thompson  called  him  Mr.  Bussum,  said
that  he  had  a  relation  named  Frederic  and  was  a  gardener  in
Eden.  Dr.  van  Eeden  had  brought  a  piece  from  the  clothes  of
a  young  man  who  had  committed  suicide,  without,  however,  tell-
ing any  one  of  the  fact.  Mrs.  Thompson  gave  his  Christian  name
and  described  his  character.  She  said  that  he  had  blood  on  his
throat,  which  agreed  with  the  manner  of  the  suicide.  When  Dr.
van  Eeden  spoke  in  Dutch,  Mrs.  Thompson  understood  him  quite

^ee  also  Dr.  Fr.  van  Eeden,  Quelques  observations  sur  les  phSnotnenes  dits
spirites,  Congr.  Univ.  de  psychologie  de  Paris,  1900  et  A.  S.  P.,  1901,  xi,
240-52.

158

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

well,  though  she  did  not  speak  that  language.1  She  recalled  to
Dr.  van  Eeden  the  conversation  he  had  had  with  the  deceased,
and  Dr.  van  Eeden  in  the  end  was  absolutely  convinced  that  there
had  been  real  communication  with  the  departed.  This  personal
conviction  of  an  experienced  psychologist  like  Dr.  van  Eeden  has
much  weight.

James  Hyslop  has  studied  with  extreme  care  a  case  of  crypt-
esthesia  which  seems  to  him  a  proof  of  personal  identity:  Mr.
Thomson,  goldsmith  and  photographer,  had  known  slightly  a
distinguished  painter — Robert  Swain  Gifford — whom  he  had  met
once  or  twice  on  the  marshes  of  North  Bedford.  He  had  also
visited  him  once.

Gifford  died  in  January,  1905,  and  Thomson  that  summer  felt
a  first  impulse  to  sketch  and  paint.  At  an  exhibition  of  Gifford's
works  he  seemed  to  hear  a  voice  telling  him,  "Finish  what  I  have
begun."  Thomson  then  began  to  make  pictures  in  Gifford's  style,
some  of  them  strikingly  so.  If  it  were  rigorously  proved  that
Thomson  had  neither  seen,  nor  could  have  seen,  Gifford's  un-
finished sketches,  the  demonstration  of  cryptesthesia  would  be
astounding.  But  Thomson,  whatever  his  honesty,  cannot  answer
for  his  subconscious  recollections,  so  that  the  case  does  not  prove
very  much.  It  would  be  needful  to  prove  that  these  unfinished
sketches  were  absolutely  unknown  to  Thomson.  Flournoy  was
much  more  exacting  with  Helen  Smith,  and  very  properly  so.2
It  seems  to  us  impossible  to  admit  the  possession  of  Thomson  by
Gifford's  spirit.

Similarly  the  case  cited  by  Aksakoff  cannot  be  considered
demonstrative.  A  nurse,  Anastasia  Perelyguine,  poisoned  her-
self and  died  in  the  little  town  of  Tamboff  on  the  16th  of  Novem-
ber. On  the  18th  the  name  Anastasia  was  given  at  a  seance,  with
details  of  her  suicide.  It  does  not  affect  the  case  that  the  medium
and  sitters  state  that  they  knew  nothing  of  the  matter;  it  would
be  quite  enough  that  they  had  heard  (and  forgotten)  between
the  16th  and  18th  some  talk  of  it,  for  the  incident  to  be  referable
to  subconscious  memory.  These  are  very  doubtful  cases  that  can-
not be  taken  into  account;  for  in  metapsychics  as  in  all  other
sciences  doubtful  demonstrations  do  more  harm  than  good.

Grasset,  in  his  book  published  in  1908,  would  seem  to  have
deliberately  omitted  cases  that  prove  telepathy;  and  as  he  only

sCf.,  p.  224.

2Amer.  S.  P.  R.,  1910  and  A.  S.  P.,  1910,  xx,  193-264.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  159

mentions  poor  and  uncertain  ones  he  has  no  difficulty  in  deducing
the  nullity  of  telepathy  (cryptesthesia).  But  this  is  not  fair  dis-
cussion. The  stories  in  L'Echo  du  merveilleux,  and  likewise  the
accounts  given  by  Aksakoff,  are  often  very  questionable  both  as
observations  and  in  their  interpretation.1

Mrs.  C,  who  is  in  no  way  a  professional  medium,  gave  a
seance  to  Messrs.  Venzano  and  Bozzano  in  the  Minerva  circle
at  Genoa.  At  the  outset  the  raps  indicated  to  Mrs.  C.  that  her
infant  Robert,  whom  she  had  left  at  home  quite  well,  was  in
high  fever.  She  at  once  left  and  found  that  the  child  was  very
feverish,  the  servant  being  very  anxious  about  him.  The  inci-
dent is  not  demonstrative,  for  various  reasons.

Mr.  Venzano,  experimenting  with  the  Misses  G.  (non-profes-
sional), whose  hands  were  the  only  ones  on  the  table  (rappings).
was  thinking  of  a  friend  some  years  dead.  This  name  was  given
and  also  that  of  a  fellow-student  of  himself  and  his  dead  friend.
Near  the  close  of  the  seance  the  name  Cipriani  was  given.
Searching  his  memory,  Venzano  recollected  that  this  was  the
familiar  name  of  an  octogenarian  relation  several  years  dead.
Then,  unrequested,  the  table  gave  the  name  Teresa  Bartolini,  who
was  the  wife  of  Cipriani  {A.  S.  P.,  1905,  xv,  694).

At  a  private  seance  in  the  house  of  Mme.  J.  H.  at  Paris,  Rue
Saint-Charles  (xv  arr.)  near  the  fortifications,  on  July  31,  1914,
the  Count  Ugo  Baschieri  exclaimed  suddenly,  "An  important
person  is  about  to  be  assassinated.  What  quantities  of  blood!
What  is  the  time?"  The  clock  showed  9:40  p.m.  "Well,  some-
thing has  happened  near  the  Boulevard  des  Italiens."  On  that
date,  between  9:35  and  9:40,  about  three  hundred  yards  from
the  Boulevard  des  Italiens,  M.  Jaures  was  the  victim  of  a  cowardly
assassination.

This  cannot  be  classed  as  a  premonition,  for  the  event  took
place  simultaneously  with  the  announcement.  Of  course  chance
may  be  invoked  as  usual  by  persons  who  are  resolved  to  deny
everything,  but  that  is  a  very  poor  explanation.

This  case  much  resembles  that  of  the  assassination  of  Queen
Draga  mentioned  later  on,  and  also  the  well-known  case  cited
by  De  Vesme,  of  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  who  during  a  lecture  at

^rasset,  he.  ext.,  316.  The  chapter  on  the  detail  of  facts  is  but  13  pages,
of  which  two  are  devoted  to  Mme.  Couesdon,  the  seeress  of  the  Rue  Saint-
Denis,  and  two  to  Mr.  Dace,  the  well-known  (?)  young  occultist.  Is  such
criticism  worthy  of  M.  Grasset?

160

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Ephesus,  suddenly  broke  off,  saying  that  the  tyrant  Domitian  had
been  killed  at  Rome.  The  story  is  given  by  Philostratus  and
Dio  Cassius  in  his  history ;  but  can  we  believe  it  ?

M.  Lemaire,  a  professor  at  Geneva,  experimenting  with  H.
Smith,  says  that  the  medium,  at  the  outset  of  the  seance,  "smelt
stones" ;  she  said  that  one  Jean  had  come  for  Mrs.  N.,  who  had
attended  some  previous  seances.  Mrs.  N.,  searching  her  memory,
remembered  that  when  a  child  this  man  Jean,  a  working  quarry-
man,  had  a  great  affection  for  her.  His  work  used  to  be  tc
prepare  and  light  the  fuses  for  blasting  (A.  S.  P.,  1897,  vii.
74).   It  is  an  unimportant  matter.

Mr.  Arthur  Hill  reports  some  very  conclusive  experiments.
One  of  his  friends,  a  Mr.  Frank  Knight,  went  (absolutely  incog-
nito), to  Miss  MacDonald,  a  professional  medium,  who  told  his
name  (Frank),  the  name  of  his  mother  (Freda  Katherine),
the  names  of  his  sister  and  brother  (Janet  and  Herbert),  and
of  Benjamin,  his  uncle.

Another  medium,  Mr.  Watson,  gave  Mr.  Knight  the  name  of
his  mother  (Mary  Katherine),  of  his  great-grandfather  (Oliver
Upton),  and  of  two  of  his  relations  (Kathleen  Thornes  and  Ben-
jamin Thornes),  to  which  names  Watson  added  the  name  "Carter"
which  is  a  family  name  of  Mr.  Knight,  but  disused  for  more  than
a  century.

Other  very  numerous  investigations  with  Watson  were  made,
which  seem  to  have  resulted  in  convincing  even  a  person  so
little  inclined  to  credulity  as  Mr.  Arthur  Hill  of  the  reality  of
cryptesthesia.  Even  if  we  make  the  rather  absurd  supposition
that  Watson  made  enquiry  at  the  cemeteries  so  as  to  get  informa-
tion by  the  names  on  all  tombs  relating  to  the  numerous  family
of  the  Knights,  that  would  not  explain  the  whole.  These  investi-
gations were  very  carefully  studied  in  full  detail  by  Mr.  Arthur
Hill1  (pp.  113-116).    I  think  therefore  he  is  justified  in  saying:

1.  That  frauds  due  to  extensive,  difficult,  and  almost  impossible
researches,  very  prolonged  and  numerous,  made  by  mediums,  the
better  to  deceive  those  who  consult  them,  are  extremely  unlikely.
The  detectives  employed  to  watch  Mrs.  Piper  discovered  nothing.
It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  any  mediums  making  such  enquiries
would  always  be  risking  discovery  in  flagrante  delicto  of  prepared
imposture,  which  would  ruin  their  reputation.

xNew  Evidence  in  Psychical  Research,  with  an  introduction  by  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  London,  W.  Ridder,  191 1.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  161

2.  The  observers  are  not  hallucinated.

3.  The  probability  of  some  successes  in  research  on  cryptes-
thesia  is  so  small  that  chance  cannot  be  invoked  with  decency.

4.  In  fine,  everything  depends  on  rigorous  methods  and  con-
ditions of  experiment.  If  the  experimenter  remains  absolutely
silent,  refraining  from  the  slightest  signs  of  approval  or  negation;
if  he  is  quite  impassive  and  takes  full  notes  on  all  that  is  said,
then  the  experiment  is  valuable.  Such  impassiveness  and  com-
plete record  of  all  the  medium's  speeches  is,  however,  very
difficult.

Mme.  Briffaut,  of  Paris,  has  given  many  and  certain  proofs  of
lucidity.  Among  these,  out  of  many  others,  I  will  quote  the  fol-
lowing :  Mme.  G.  de  Montebello,  visiting  her,  and  quite  sure  that
Mme.  Briffaut  could  not  know  her  name  or  anything  about  her,
received  a  convincing  proof  of  cryptesthesia :  "I  see  someone  who
calls  himself  L.  Louis,  is  it  not?"  Mme.  de  M.  inclines  her  head
affirmatively.  "He  is  your  son?"  Yes.  "He  was  killed  in  the
war?"  No.  "Nevertheless,"  said  Mme.  Briffaut,  "he  signs  to
me  that  he  died  suddenly  and  violently  all  at  once."  Now  in  fact
Louis  de  Montebello  was  struck  by  lightning  before  the  war.  If
Mme.  Briffaut  made  a  mistake  it  was  only  in  the  interpretation ;
she  had  been  made  aware  of  sudden  and  violent  death  and  con-
cluded (wrongly  but  reasonably)  that  this  took  place  in  the  war.
Other  exact  and  valuable  details  were  given.  By  the  side  of  Mme.
de  Montebello  Mme.  Briffaut  saw  an  old  lady  steadily  writing.
This  referred  very  clearly  to  the  grandmother  of  Mme.  de  M.,
who  spent  the  last  fifteen  years  of  her  life  in  writing  her  memoirs.

This  experiment  with  Mme.  de  M.  is  a  very  satisfactory  one,
but  with  some  other  persons  Mme.  Briffaut's  results  were  nil.
Such  cases  of  clairvoyance  seem  to  depend  almost  as  much  on  the
percipient  as  on  the  agent.  Mme.  de  Montebello  usually  gets
extraordinarily  detailed  and  precise  answers  when  she  consults
a  medium,  a  sensitive,  or  a  somnambulist,  so  that  I  am  inclined
to  think  that  a  medium's  lucidity  does  not  work  indifferently  for
everyone.  There  are  some  who  "inspire"  them,  and  some  who
do  not.

My  daughter,  Mme.  A.  G.  Le  Ber,  whose  name  was  known  to
Mme.  Briffaut,  received  a  number  of  particulars  the  value  of
which  is  scarcely  diminished  by  the  name  being  known.  Indeed
to  learn  all  that  was  said,  Mme.  Briffaut  would  have  had  to  enter
on  long  and  difficult  enquiries,  and  in  any  case  she  indicated

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

verbatim  a  very  private  conversation  that  Mme.  Le  Ber  had  with
her  brother  Albert,  killed  in  the  war,  and  this  private  conversation
was  known  to  no  living  person,  except  to  Mme.  Le  Ber  herself.

Arnaud  de  Gramont,  under  the  pseudonym  of  Dr.  X.,  went  to
see  Mme.  Briffaut  and  told  her  that  he  had  lost  a  son  in  the  war.
Mme.  B.  said,  "He  was  killed  by  a  wound  in  the  head,  he  fell
from  a  great  height;  he  was  in  the  Flying  Corps"  (correct).  She
saw  the  name  S...mont.  The  first  name  of  M.  de  Gramont's
son  was  Sanche.

The  Bulletins  Nos.  1  and  2  of  the  International  Metapsychics
Institute  (Paris),  1920,  contain  many  interesting  details  on  Mme.
Briffaut's  cryptesthesia.  To  Mr.  Jean  Lefebvre,  who  was  quite
unknown  to  her,  she  gave  the  names  of  his  brothers  Pierre  and
Joseph.  She  said  that  the  wife  of  the  latter  had  died  less  than  a
year  before  from  an  operation  on  the  liver  (correct).  To  Mr.
Lemerle,  a  cautious  and  trained  observer,  whom  she  could  not
have  known,  she  said  at  once,  "I  see  Jacques !  a  young  man  who
died  tragically.  I  hear  him  call:  he  writes  Jean,  Henri  ..."
Both  the  sons  of  Mr.  Lemerle  had  been  victims  of  a  serious  ac-
cident to  an  automobile.  Henri  was  killed,  but  Jacques  escaped
death.  The  Revue  Spirite  of  May,  1921  (p.  144),  contains  a
notable  case  of  Mme.  Briffaut's  clairvoyance.

Analogous  facts  to  those  given  by  Mme.  Briffaut  in  Paris  and
by  Mrs.  Leonard  in  London  were  obtained  by  a  sensitive  named
Ludwig  Aub,  of  Munich.1

A  medical  student  went  to  see  Aub,  giving  neither  his  name
nor  his  profession.  Aub  told  him,  "You  are  a  medical  student,
you  are  fond  of  music,  especially  Mozart.  Your  father  was  a
physician,  also  your  grandfather,  at  Stettin."  To  Dr.  O.  Aut
said,  "Your  father  was  a  philosopher,  your  mother  is  of  English
birth  but  lived  in  Austria.  You  have  recently  been  married"
(all  details  correct).  To  Dr.  S.  he  said,  "It  is  characteristic  of
you  that  you  have  in  your  house  a  large  picture  of  the  time  of
Albert  Diirer;  it  is  valuable,  and  you  take  great  pride  in  it"
(correct).  To  Dr.  G.  he  said,  "You  have  a  predilection  for
Gustave  Flaubert."  That  very  morning  Dr.  G.  had  written  a
preface  to  the  works  of  Flaubert.

Mr.  Hayward  has  methodically  analyzed  the  answers  given  by

aVon  R.  Tischner,  Eine  physiologisch-okkultistische  Studie  (Psychische
Studien,  xlvii,  1920,  598-612).  Tischner  cites  various  publications  on  Aub  that
appeared  at  Munich,  by  Dr.  Dingfelder,  G.  W.  de  Surga,  and  others.

1

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  163

Mrs.  K.  near  Montreal;  but  they  do  not  show  any  very  high
degree  of  lucidity  (Fortune-telling,  Am.  P.  S.  P.  R.f  1921,  185).

To  sum  up :  From  all  these  experiences  of  cryptesthesia  whether
with  sensitives,  mediums,  or  somnambules,  one  very  clear  con-
clusion emerges — that  there  is  a  faculty  of  cognition  by  other
means  than  by  the  ordinary  sensorial  channels.

At  the  present  time  it  cannot  be  doubted  it  has  become
almost  a  commonplace  and  will  soon  be  generally  admitted ;  people
will  then  marvel  that  it  should  have  been  so  long  misunderstood,
ridiculed,  and  denied  by  official  science.

I  may  be  allowed  to  recall  with  some  pride  that  in  1888  (P.  S.
P.  R.,  v)  I  clearly  affirmed  this  strange  fact  that  now  dom-
inates all  subjective  metapsychics :  "In  certain  persons,  at  certain
times,  there  exists  a  faculty  of  cognition  which  has  no  relation
to  our  normal  means  of  knowledge."

I  have  nothing  to  alter  in  what  I  then  said;  unless  that  this
proposition,  which  then  seemed  so  rash,  is  now  on  the  point  of
being  universally  accepted,  it  is  accepted  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick
and  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  Very  soon  it  will  seem  so  simple  that
no  one  will  think  that  there  was  any  rashness  in  putting  it
forward.

The  phenomenon  of  cryptesthesia  is  as  certain  as  any  other
scientific  fact;  to  deny  it  is  to  rebel  against  all  scientific  demon-
stration.

All  these  experiments  with  Mme.  BrifTaut,  Mrs.  Leonard,  and
Mrs.  Piper  seem  to  give  some  support  to  the  spiritualistic  theory ;
and  I  make  this  avowal  against  the  grain.  The  lucidity  of  these
seeresses  appears  to  occur  only  because  a  spirit  seems  to  intervene
to  reveal  such  and  such  a  fact  to  them.  I  am  careful  not  to  infer
that  this  is  so,  but  everything  happens  as  if  the  spirit  of  the  de-
ceased intervened  to  tell  the  medium  his  name,  his  relations,  the
facts  he  knows,  and  to  converse  with  the  "guide"  of  the  medium.

This  is  no  doubt  only  a  semblance;  the  means  of  cognition
remain  mysterious.  The  hypothesis  that  the  facts  are  communi-
cated to  us  by  a  being  seemingly  human  is  a  very  anthropomorphic
hypothesis.  We  may  allow  it  a  place,  strictly  provisionally,  and
on  this  delicate  matter  it  is  advisable  to  take  the  scientific  ground
here  adopted.  I  consider  cryptesthesia  absolutely  demonstrated,
but  I  reject  all  hypotheses  on  the  origin  of  these  revelations  and
divinations,  considering  the  proofs  insufficient.

There  are  many  other  interesting  facts  mentioned  by  Myers,

164

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Bozzano,  and  others  which  I  do  not  give  here ;  because  they  can
be  explained  by  forgotten,  subconscious,  but  normal  ideas,  even
when  this  explanation  seems  improbable.  To  warrant  the  in-
ference of  cryptesthesia  at  all  there  must  be  absolute  impossibility
that  the  information  given  should  have  come  through  any  normal
channel.  M.  Heintzer,  for  instance,  sees  the  apparition  of  his
father  with  a  white  beard  and  in  a  dress  coat.  He  knew  that  his
father  was  dead  and  had  never  seen  him  when  his  beard  was
white.  While  Mr.  Heintzer  was  abroad  his  father  had  been
buried  in  a  dress  coat  and  during  his  last  illness  the  beard  had
turned  white.  Is  it  not  possible  that  the  son  had  heard  of  these
circumstances  and  forgotten  them,  though  he  might  in  perfect
good  faith  deny  this?

Flournoy  may  be  right  in  supposing  that  the  name  Burnier1
did  not  come  to  his  medium  by  any  process  of  metapsychics  or
cryptesthesia.  Although  the  explanation  by  normal  means  is  ter-
ribly involved  and  improbable,  it  must  be  admitted  to  be  just
possible.

The  extraordinary  powers  of  the  latent  memory  are  such  as  to
make  any  illusion  possible.  Stainton  Moses  writes  automatically,
by  the  dictation  of  Rector,  "Go  to  the  bookcase  and  take  the  last
book  but  one  on  the  second  shelf,  look  at  the  last  paragraph  on
page  94,  and  you  will  find  this  sentence  ..."  A  long  sentence
follows.  Stainton  Moses  gets  up,  takes  the  book,  and  verifies
that  the  quotation  is  correct  and  is  on  p.  94.  But  it  is  reasonable
to  suppose  that  this  may  be  a  very  complete  and  perfect  subcon-
scious reminiscence  rather  than  a  fact  of  cryptesthesia.  Shortly
after,  Rector  writes,  "Pope  is  the  last  great  writer,  etc.,  .  .  .
Take  the  eleventh  volume  on  the  same  shelf,  open  it,  and  you
will  find  this  sentence.  .  .  "  Stainton  Moses  does  as  instructed
and  finds  the  quotation  on  p.  145.  The  thing  is  very  strange:
why  did  the  book  open  at  the  very  page  quoted  ?  Was  this  for-
tuitous? Chance  explains  nothing.  Could  it  be  that  Stainton
Moses  had  previously  opened  the  book  in  a  state  of  semi-som-
nambulism?

Mme.  R.  has  given  me  wonderful  instances  of  cryptesthesia
that  cannot  be  explained  by  telepathy.  Mme.  R.  is  a  lady  forty
years  of  age,  a  non-professional  medium,  married,  and  the  mother
of  a  family.   She  is  interested  in  spiritualism  because  while  very

JSee  p.  773  (French  edition).

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  165

young  she  says  that  she  had  a  vision  that  preserved  her  from  a
great  danger.  (Helen  Smith  had  a  similar  experience  early  in
life.)

Mme.  R.'s  communications  are  usually  by  automatic  writing,
sometimes  verbal,  and  (rarely)  by  raps.  I  will  quote  three  that
are  very  clearly  demonstrative:

1.  This  concerned  one  of  my  dear  friends  lately  deceased,
whom  she  had  not  known,  and  whose  name  I  believe  I  never
mentioned  before  her.  She  told  me  that  his  name  was  Antoine,
that  I  entered  the  room  a  few  moments  after  his  death  and  kissed
his  forehead;  she  added  that  he  used  to  call  me  Carlos.  The
name,  the  detail  of  the  kiss,  and  the  fact  that  he  alone  of  all  my
friends  called  me  Carlos  are  all  characteristic.

Antoine,  speaking  by  Mme.  R.,  said  that  he  had  been  at  Fon-
tainebleau  with  his  wife  Lucie,  saying,  "We  were  sadly  happy
there."  His  widow  assured  me  that  this  fitted  the  facts.  I  did
not  know  of  the  visit  to  Fontainebleau.  The  name  "Lucie"  was
not  quite  wrong,  for  the  lady  told  me  that  Antoine  used  often
to  say  to  her,  "It  is  a  pity  that  your  name  is  not  Lucie!  That
is  the  name  I  like  best!"

2.  The  next  case  is  still  more  striking.  A  near  relation  of
mine,  a  young  man  of  one-and-twenty,  poisoned  himself  with
strychnine.  The  cause  of  death  was  kept  secret  from  everyone,
except  from  his  father,  his  uncle,  and  myself.  It  was  never  men-
tioned in  any  newspaper.  Three  weeks  later  I  asked  Mme.  R.
for  the  name  of  a  near  relation  lately  deceased;  she  said,  "He
was  called  George;  you  were  at  his  death-bed,  there  was  a  red
foam  on  his  lips."  This  was  absolutely  true.  Then  she  said,
"Lulu,  Lulu."  In  his  family  he  was  called  "Lolo."  I  set  aside
numerous  and  serious  mistakes,  but  there  is  one  characteristic
detail:  George,  speaking  by  Mme.  R.,  said,  "Stephen,  Stephen!1
Oh,  that  writing!  I  thought  I  could  never  finish  it!"  This  re-
ferred to  an  incident  quite  unknown  to  anybody,  and  was  most
astonishingly  precise.  Before  killing  himself,  the  unhappy  boy
had  written  a  long  letter  to  a  friend,  Etienne,  which  he  had  left
open  on  the  table.  No  one  but  his  father,  his  uncle,  and  I  had
seen  this  letter.  Now  Mme.  R.,  who  lived  a  retired  life,  could
know  nothing  of  all  these  facts  which  we  had  all  three  kept
strictly  secret.    I  knew  nothing  of  Etienne,  George's  friend.

xThe  name  Stephen  in  English  corresponds  exactly  to  the  French  name
Etienne.

166

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

3.  The  third  fact,  which  on  thinking  it  over,  appears  to  me
one  of  the  most  striking  examples  of  cryptesthesia  yet  obtained,
is  the  following:  I  give  the  details,  for  it  shows  astonishing
lucidity  acting  at  a  distance  of  1,200  miles,  and  exact  notes  were
taken.  In  June,  1906,  at  10.30  p.m.,  in  presence  of  my  friend
Octave  Houdaille,  Mme.  S.,  Mme.  R.,  and  her  twelve-year-old
daughter,  after  some  incoherent  phrases,  we  got  the  following
sentence  by  raps,  more  distinct  than  ever  before.  (In  the  whole
course  of  my  experiments  with  Mme.  R.  the  raps  were  unintel-
ligible only  twice  or  three  times.)  "Bancalamo" ;  I  could  not
refrain  from  saying,  "Oh,  it  is  Latin,  calamo !"  But  the  dictation
continued  imperturbably,  "Banca  la  mort  guette  famille.,,  Thence
onwards  the  answers  were  incoherent.  I  thought  at  first  that  the
first  word  must  be  in  Italian — Bianca=Blanche ;  but  no  one
present  could  interpret  the  words.

The  next  day,  Thursday,  at  2  p.m.  the  news  of  the  assassination
of  Queen  Draga  of  Serbia  was  received  at  Paris.  Some  Serbian
officers,  having  bought  over  the  palace  servants,  entered  at  mid-
night and  assassinated  King  Alexander,  his  wife,  and  her  two
brothers;  her  two  sisters  escaping  by  a  miracle.  Not  for  a
moment  did  I  connect  this  tragedy  with  the  previous  evening's
seance.

On  Friday,  reading  in  the  paper  some  details  relative  to  the
crime,  I  learned  that  Draga's  father  was  named  Panka,  and  this
came  as  a  ray  of  light.

1.  The  word  Banca  is  very  near  Panka.  (I  will  return  to
this  later.)

2.  The  time  at  which  the  message  was  given,  10.30  p.m.,  is,
to  a  minute,  the  time  at  which  the  assassins  left  the  Hotel  de  la
Couronne  de  Serbie;  correcting  for  Belgrade  time  which  is  one
and  one-half  hours  in  advance  of  Paris  time.

3.  The  words  apply  with  startling  exactitude  to  the  peril  men-
acing the  whole  family  of  Panka ;  the  words  "Death  lies  in  wait
family"  could  hardly  be  more  appositely  chosen  in  view  of  the
situation  at  midnight  in  Belgrade.

Now  to  consider  how  far  the  five  letters  of  the  word  Banca
are  applicable  to  Draga's  father.  Of  these  five  letters,  each
carrying  a  probability  of  1  to  25,  three  only  are  correct.  The
compounded  probability  is  therefore  in  round  figures  1  to  1500.
But  analyzing  the  entire  word  the  probability  is  much  less.  That
the  word  should  have  five  letters,  neither  more  nor  less,  works

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  167

out  to  1  to  7.  For  a  chance  name  there  might  have  been  4,  5,
6,  7,  8,  9,  or  10  letters  (Jean,  Marie,  Robert,  Etienne,  Julienne,
Eleonore,  Marguerite).  The  compounded  probability  is  then  1
to  10,500.  But  more  than  this,  B  for  P  is  not  totally  wrong  if
the  communication  were  by  sound:  Germans  interchange  them
and  say  brophet  for  "prophet"  and  petter  for  "better."

The  error  in  the  fourth  letter  is  curious,  for  in  the  Serbian
alphabet  the  fourth  letter  in  the  name  of  Draga's  father  is  a
single  letter  pronounced  dj  or  dz,  or  tz  that  the  French  alphabet
(which  we  were  using)  does  not  contain  and  it  would  seem  that
C  comes  nearest  to  it  in  sound.  Even  if  we  allow  that  B  is  quite
wrong,  we  must  admit  that  C  is  not  and  the  total  compounded
probability  then  becomes  1  to  500,000,  which  is  a  moral  certainty.

Only  three  hypotheses  are  possible  in  subjective  metapsychics :

(A)  Mal-observation,  collusion  or  illusion;  (B)  chance;  (C)
cryptesthesia.  In  the  experience  narrated  above,  collusion  or  il-
lusion must  be  ruled  out,  for  the  message  was  given  before  the
event  was  known.  No  one  in  Paris  knew  at  10  p.m.  on  the  10th
of  June  that  there  was  a  plot  against  Draga;  and  of  the  five
persons  present,  who  had  no  relations  at  all  with  any  Balkan
State,  probably  none  even  knew  of  Draga.  The  only  hypotheses
remaining  are  chance  and  cryptesthesia.

Chance,  however,  is  inadmissible:  for  not  only  was  a  name
given  against  odds  of  1  to  500,000;  but  the  fateful  phrase  "Mort
guette  famille"  probably  applies  only  to  the  family  of  Panka
whose  three  children  were  in  a  few  minutes  to  perish ;  out  of  the
fifty  millions  of  families  existing  that  evening  in  Europe.  Gras-
set,  however,  has  not  hesitated  to  affirm  that  chance  gave  Banca
for  Panca  and  that  the  words  "Mort  guette  famille"  might  apply
to  a  thousand  other  families.    The  objection  is  really  absurd.

In  fact,  if  an  intelligent  force  inspired  this  sentence — and  ap-
pearances favour  this  bold  hypothesis — it  would  seem  that  this
intelligence  wished  to  make  a  declaration  whose  authenticity  could
be  verified.  If  Panka  had  been  some  old  working  baker  of  Bel-
grade I  could  never  have  ascertained  whether  the  monition  were
veridical  or  fanciful.  No  one  can  investigate  fifty  million  families,
a  hundred  at  most  would  be  the  limit.

(b)   Investigation  with  a  Hidden  Alphabet

Here  I  would  indicate  a  new  method  which  I  devised  for  veri-
fying cryptesthesia.    It  succeeded  with  me  because  I  was  ex-

168

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

perimenting  with  a  medium  endowed  with  the  special  sensitive-
ness required;  but  Sir  William  Barrett  has  shown  that  it  may
succeed  with  others.  In  any  case  this  method  with  a  hidden
alphabet  has  great  advantages  and  deserves  trial,  though  I  would
not  insist  upon  it,  as  mediums  are  best  left  to  act  according  to
their  intuitions  in  choosing  the  method  by  which  answers  are
obtainable.1

These  experiments  were  carried  out  with  Gustave  Ollendorff,
Henri  Ferrari,  Louis  Olivier,  Albert  Pere,  and  Gaston  Fournier
— nearly  all  deceased,  alas,  my  faithful  and  beloved  comrades!
The  medium  was  my  deeply  regretted  friend,  Gaston  Fournier,
then  aged  thirty-two,  a  kindly  man,  clear-sighted  and  reliable.

The  experiments  were  made  in  the  following  manner:  G.,  the
medium,  placed  his  hands  on  the  table,  every  tilt  setting  in

Fig.  io. — Arrangements  for  experiment  with  a  hidden  alphabet.    E.  D.  C.  are
at  the  tilting  table  with  their  backs  to  A.  and  B.,  who  have  the  alphabet  before
them.    The  bell  is  so  fixed  as  to  ring  if  the  table  tilts.

motion  an  electric  bell.  C.  and  D.  also  had  their  hands  on  the
table  but  did  not  influence  it.

At  three  or  four  yards'  distance  on  another  table,  and  behind  a
sheet  of  cardboard,  the  alphabet  was  placed  so  that  G.,  who  had
his  back  turned  to  it,  could  not  see  it.  A.  and  B.  sit  at  this  table.
A.  runs  over  the  alphabet  with  a  pencil,  B.  writes  down  the
letter  at  which  the  table  tilts,  he  being  made  aware  ol  th:s  by  the
sound  of  the  bell.

1See  Ch.  Richet,  La  suggestion  mentale  et  le  calcul  des  probabilites,  Rev.
Philosophique,  October,  1883,  609.  Des  mouvements  inconscients  (Hotnmage  a
M.  Chevreul),  Paris,  Alcan,  aout  1886  et  Revue  de  I'hypnotisme,  1886,  170  and
209.  An  excellent  analysis  has  been  given  in  P.  S.  P.  R.,  1884,  fasc.  vii,  239.
Relation  of  diverse  experiences,  etc.,  P.  S.  P.  R.,  June,  1888,  138.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  169

The  letters  indicated  by  this  method  give  intelligible  sentences ;
therefore,  the  tilts  being  due  to  unconscious  muscular  pressure
by  G.,  these  pressures,  indicating  the  letter  required,  must  be  due
to  lucidity.  Everything  happens  as  if  G.,  wanting  to  send  a
message,  could  see  the  alphabet  to  which  his  back  is  turned  and
which  is  hidden  by  the  cardboard  sheet.  The  movement  of  the
pencil  over  the  letters  is  both  silent  and  irregular,  and  during
these  experiments  we  intentionally  talk,  sing,  recite  verses,  and
in  fact  make  such  a  noise  that  B.,  who  writes  down  the  letters,
can  hardly  hear  the  stroke  of  the  bell.

One  day  by  excess  of  precaution  I  used  a  circular  instead  of  a
rectilinear  alphabet,  and  beginning,  not  at  A  but  with  some  other
letter,  and  moving  the  pencil  at  very  different  rates,  we  got  Fa
zol  do.  These  are  not  chance  letters  but  indicate  intelligence,  and
therefore  cryptesthesia.

All  answers  that  have  a  meaning  at  all,  even  if  uninteresting,
indicate  cryptesthesia,  and  that  of  a  peculiar  kind — the  perception
by  the  medium  of  a  hidden  letter — such  perception  being  un-
related to  normal  sight  or  hearing.

Complete  sentences  were  given,  transposed  verses,  such  as

"Tombe  aux  pieds  de  ce  sexe  a  qui  tu  dois  ta  mere."

Or  Latin  lines:

"Infandum,  regina,  jubes  renovare  dolorem."

Or  phrases  in  old  French  as  when  the  soi-distant  Villon  "Ou  sont
les  neiges  d'antan?   Louys  le  Cruel.   Essai  sur  daemoniomanie."

The  sentences  are  meaningless  in  themselves,  but  show  cryptes-
thesia, for  it  was  quite  impossible  for  Gaston,  whose  muscles
were  moving  the  table,  to  know  the  letters  pointed  to  by  the
pencil  which  I  was  moving  irregularly  and  silently  over  the
hidden  alphabet.

Sir  William  Crookes  came  one  day  to  be  present  at  one  of  these
experiments.  He  put  the  mental  question,  "What  is  the  name
of  my  eldest  son  ?"  By  the  hidden  alphabet  we  had  the  answer,
"I  know  only  the  slang."  The  alphabet  was  not  only  hidden  as
before  described,  but  it  was  lit  by  a  small  lamp  that  barely  allowed
us  to  see  the  letters.  The  answer  might  be  to  any  question,  but
the  point  is  that  the  table-tilts  corresponded  with  the  movements
of  the  pencil  that  could  not  be  perceived  by  Gaston  by  any  normal
means.

170

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

These  experiments  also  demonstrate  the  power  of  the  sub-
conscious, for  Gaston,  like  the  rest  of  us,  sang,  laughed,  and  talked
during  the  whole  of  these  experiments,  some  of  which  were  com-
plicated— such  as  the  dictation  backwards  of  a  Latin  verse.  The
whole  of  his  conscious  personality  was  in  full  activity,  while  the
subconscious  part  was  no  less  active  in  quite  another  manner  in-
dependently of  the  consciousness.

Is  this  alphabetical  cryptesthesia  telepathic?  It  is  possible,
there  is  no  evidence  one  way  or  the  other ;  but  in  one  case  there
was  certainly  no  telepathy  from  those  present,  though  the  result
calculated  according  to  probabilities  was  not  at  all  striking.  I
said  to  a  Mr.  D.  who  was  very  sceptical,  he  not  being  present  at
the  experiment,  "Think  of  some  name,  either  that  of  an  historical
person  or  any  unknown  name,  we  will  get  it  by  the  table  and  I
will  tell  it  you  tomorrow."  The  answer  obtained  was  F.N.T.B.T.
If  we  take  each  preceding  letter,  as  is  quite  permissible,  we  get
E  M  S  A  S.

The  name  thought  of  by  Mr.  D.  was  Cesar  or  Caesar.  On  five
letters  with  a  probability  of  1  to  25,  two  being  correct,  the  com-
pounded probability  is  1  to  42;  but  this  is  not  all,  for  that  the
answer  should  be  a  word  of  five  letters  corresponding  to  a  word
of  five  letters  thought  of,  gives  a  probability  of  1  to  7.  The
total  then  becomes  1  to  294;  and  if  the  table  lagged  behind  the
movement  of  the  pencil,  the  word  comes  out  as  D  M  S  A  R,
which  passably  approaches  Csesar.

I  mention  this  experiment,  which  in  comparison  with  the  good
ones  described  above,  is  terribly  poor,  not  to  draw  any  inference
from  it,  but  only  to  show  that  when  the  methods  of  experiment
are  faultless,  the  calculus  of  probabilities  is  very  useful.  For
my  own  part  I  prefer  an  unexceptionable  experiment  where  the
odds  against  chance  success  are  small,  to  one  against  which  the
odds  are  very  high,  but  where  the  experiment  itself  is  vitiated  by
a  slight  error  which  makes  the  calculus  inapplicable.

I  will  mention  one  more  experiment.  Paul,  the  brother  of
Gaston,  in  no  way  mediumistic  and  very  sceptical,  was  present
at  a  seance  without  touching  the  table.  We  asked  him  to  think
of  a  name.  The  name  thought  of  was  indicated  by  C  H  E  V  A  L.
The  name  thought  of  was  Chevalon.  Mile.  Chevalon,  some  time
deceased,  was  a  friend  of  the  family  to  which  Gaston  and  Paul
belonged.  We  then  asked  the  spirit  "Chevalon"  to  give  us  some-
thing characteristic,  and  by  means  of  the  table  and  the  hidden

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  171

alphabet  we  got  "How  is  your  mother ?"  On  which  (it  must  be
acknowledged)  Gaston  was  frightened;  and  neither  that  evening
nor  afterwards  would  he  act  as  medium.  I  could  never  persuade
him  to  try  again.

Experiments  with  a  hidden  alphabet  are,  I  think,  very  valuable
as  giving  decisive  proofs  of  cryptesthesia.  They  have  been  re-
cently repeated  by  Sir  William  Barrett  very  successfully.1

The  mediums,  who  were  personal  friends  of  Sir  William,  were
completely  blindfolded  by  a  mask  covering  the  whole  face;  the
letters  of  the  alphabet,  placed  before  them,  could  not  be  seen
at  all  by  them  and  moreover  these  letters  were  placed  at  random
and  covered  with  a  sheet  of  glass  and  screened  by  a  table-cloth.
Under  these  conditions  coherent  messages  were  received.  The
actual  sense  of  these  is  of  no  importance;  it  is  sufficient  to  know
that  the  letters  indicated  by  very  rapid  and  vigorous  movements
of  the  planchette  were  not  chance  combinations  but  had  very
distinct  meanings.

In  one  case,  very  carefully  observed  by  Sir  William,  the  medi-
ums, Mrs.  Travers-Smith  and  Mr.  Lennox  Robinson,  were  blind-
folded and  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  were  placed  (anyhow),
under  a  sheet  of  glass.  One  evening  a  few  hours  after  the  tor-
pedoing of  the  Lusitania,  it  was  indicated  by  this  means  that  Sir
Hugh  Lane,  a  friend  of  the  two  mediums,  had  been  drowned.
While  the  seance  was  in  progress  and  after  this  announcement
had  been  made,  one  of  the  evening  papers  gave  the  name  of  Sir
Hugh  Lane  as  one  of  the  victims.

This  case  cannot  be  held  to  carry  much  weight,  as  the  mediums
knew  that  the  Lusitania  had  been  torpedoed  and  that  Sir  Hugh
Lane  had  left  America  some  days  before.  It  would  have  been
easy  for  subconsciousness  to  conclude  that  he  might  be  one  of
those  drowned.  The  full  account  of  this  experience  is  given  by
Mrs.  Hester  Travers-Smith  (Voices  from  the  Void,  London,
Rider  &  Co.,  1919,  35).

A  better  experience,  analogous  to  the  above,  is  also  reported  by
Mrs.  Travers-Smith.  One  evening  after  a  fruitless  seance,  there
came  through  the  table,  "Ship  sinking,  all  hands  lost,  William
East  overboard.  Women  and  children  weeping  and  wailing;
sorrow,  sorrow,  sorrow !"  At  that  moment  a  newsboy  in  the
street  cried  the  news.    Mrs.  Smith  went  to  get  the  paper  which

lAccount  by  Miss  Dallas.  Experiences  avec  VOui-ja,  les  mediums  ope-
rant les  yeux  bandes  (A.  S.  P.,  March,  191 6,  xxvi,  45).

172

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

contained  the  shipwreck  of  the  Titanic.  "William  East"  might
well  stand  for  William  Stead.

Although  the  case  of  Sir  Hugh  Lane  does  not  prove  the
monition,  it  stands  as  evidence  for  the  production  of  messages
by  a  hidden  alphabet,  and  therefore  is  a  good  case  of  cryptesthesia.
Mrs.  Travers-Smith  has  given  several  other  decisive  proofs.

A  professor  of  the  University  of  Groningen,  Mr.  Heymans,
undertook  some  experiments  in  a  manner  different  from  that
described  above  which  gave  very  interesting  results.  His  medium
was  a  non-professional,  a  student.  He  has  not  as  yet  published
anything,  but  he  wrote  me  the  letter  given  below :  "Our  experi-
ments in  telepathy  were  carried  out  in  two  rooms  at  my  laboratory,
one  over  the  other.  The  blindfolded  subject  was  placed  in  the
lower  room  behind  a  screen  enclosing  him  on  three  sides,  and
with  an  opening  in  front  through  which  his  hand  could  pass.
This  hand  can  move  over  a  board  divided  like  a  chess-board  into
forty-two  squares.  In  the  ceiling  of  this  room,  made  of  rein-
forced concrete,  there  is  an  opening  about  thirteen  inches  by
twenty-one  inches,  closed  top  and  bottom  by  sheets  of  glass.
Looking  through  this  window  one  of  us  in  the  upper  room  can
see  the  board  and  the  hand  of  the  subject,  and  he  tries  mentally
to  direct  the  hand  to  a  given  square  determined  by  lot.  The
upper  room  being  kept  dark,  the  subject  can  see  nothing  even  if
he  were  not  blindfolded.  No  sound  can  penetrate  the  ceiling;
even  by  shouting  one  cannot  make  oneself  understood.  Never-
theless the  correct  square  (probability  1:48)  was  indicated  32
times  in  80  trials.  The  mathematical  probability  of  32  successes
on  80  trials  is  (TV)21"

There  may  be  telepathy  in  this  case,  but  there  certainly  is
cryptesthesia,  for  there  are  two  factors  involved,  (1)  the  carry-
ing out  of  the  agent's  thought  by  telepathy,  which  is  one  of  the
modalities  of  cryptesthesia;  and  (2)  after  the  square  has  been
thought  of,  the  movement  to  that  square;  which  can  only  be
cryptesthesia.

The  care  with  which  this  eminent  psychologist  has  made  these
experiments  renders  them  very  valuable.

It  would  be  very  interesting  to  resume  experiments  (using  the
hidden  alphabet)  with  powerful  mediums,  who  might  doubtless
be  trained  to  correspond  in  this  manner.  In  any  case  it  is  obvious
that  cryptesthesia  admits  of  great  varieties  in  experimentation
and  conceals  unforeseen  possibilities.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  173

( c )  Cross-Correspondences

This  is  an  ingenious  proceeding  to  verify  lucidity.  It  has  been
much  used  of  late  in  England  and  America.

The  principle  is  as  follows:  Two  persons,  A.  and  P.,  agree
to  write  each  other  letters  simultaneously  to  see  if  their  thoughts
coincide.  The  letters  are  dated  and  carry  the  post-mark.  The
experiment  is  unexceptionable,  especially  if  the  thought  of  the
agent,  A.,  is  determined  by  chance.  But  even  if  this  is  not  so
chosen  it  is  highly  unlikely  that  two  persons  acting  in  good
faith  should  hit  upon  the  same  idea.

Miss  Ramsden  and  Miss  Miles  have  had  some  results  worthy
of  note.1  Miss  Miles  was  in  London,  and  Miss  Ramsden  at  Bul-
strode,  eighteen  miles  distant.  Miss  M.  was  the  agent,  and  Miss
R.  the  percipient.

October  27th,  Miss  M.,  spectacles;  Miss  R.,  spectacles.

October  30th,  Miss  M.,  a  watch;  Miss  R.,  a  medal  on  a  chain.

October  31st,  Miss  M.,  while  combing  her  hair,  sees  the  sunset
on  the  Brompton  Oratory,  with  the  cross  standing  out  against
the  sky.  She  desires  to  transmit  this.  Miss  R.  thinks  that  Miss
M.  has  wished  to  transmit  a  crucifixion ;  she  is  surprised  to  see
only  the  cross  without  the  holy  women  at  its  foot.

November  4th,  Miss  Ramsden  describes:  Gothic  arches  like  a
cloister ;  long-necked  herons  and  water-birds ;  a  row  of  guns  fired ;
a  woman  with  a  shepherd's  plaid;  a  long-haired  dog,  a  grey-
hound, and  a  fine  retriever.

November  4th,  Miss  Miles  went  to  the  church  at  Malmesbury
where  there  were  Gothic  arches  resembling  a  cloister.  There
was  some  talk  of  rabbit-shooting ;  swans  and  a  heron  were  seen ;
there  were  greyhounds  and  retrievers.  Mrs.  de  Beaufort,  a
friend  of  Miss  Miles,  was  wearing  a  shepherd's  plaid.

Other  proofs  of  cryptesthesia  have  been  given  by  cross-cor-
respondence. I  quote  only  one,  given  by  Miss  Johnson,  who
is  a  research  officer  of  the  S.  P.  R.  (Survival  of  Man,  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  p.  226).  "Mrs.  Forbes's  script,  purporting  to  come  from
her  son  Talbot,  stated  that  he  must  now  leave  her,  since  he  was
looking  for  a  sensitive  who  wrote  automatically,  in  order  that  he
might  obtain  corroboration  of  her  own  writing.  Mrs.  Verrall
on  the  same  day  wrote  of  a  fir-tree  planted  in  a  garden,  and
the  script  was  signed  with  a  sword  and  suspended  bugle.  The

XP.  5.  P.  R.,  October,  1907.

174

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

latter  was  part  of  the  badge  of  the  regiment  to  which  Talbot
Forbes  had  belonged,  and  Mrs.  Forbes  had  in  her  garden  some
fir-trees  grown  from  seed  sent  to  her  by  her  son.  These  facts
were  unknown  to  Mrs.  Verrall.  In  another  case  (Proc.  S.  P.  R.t
xviii,  269-271),  on  October  16,  1904,  Mrs.  Verrall's  script
gave  details,  afterwards  verified,  of  what  Mrs.  Forbes  was  doing;
and  immediately  afterwards  Mrs.  Verrall  had  a  mental  impres-
sion of  Mrs.  Forbes  sitting  in  her  drawing-room,  with  the  figure
of  her  son  standing  looking  at  her.  Mrs.  Forbes's  script  of  the
same  day,  purporting  to  come  from  her  son,  stated  that  he  was
present  and  wished  she  could  see  him,  and  that  a  test  was  being
given  for  her  at  Cambridge."

The  laborious  studies  by  Mr.  Hubert  Wales  must  be  considered
under  this  head.1  He  received  notes  sent  to  him  almost  daily
from  Miss  Samuel,  and  he  himself  took  daily  notes  at  Hind-
head  (about  forty  miles  from  London).  The  intention  was  to
see  if  there  were  correspondence  in  these  notes  relative  to  Mr.
Wales's  thoughts  and  occupations.  The  method  is  excellent;  but
the  results  do  not  seem  very  demonstrative  of  cryptesthesia.  Mr.
Wales  classed  the  notes  in  three  groups  :

(1)  Veridical,  hardly  attributable  to  coincidence,  16;  (2)  Par-
tially and  confusedly  veridical,  200;  (3)  No  connection,  159.

The  whole  observations,  375,  extended  over  eight  months.  It
is  not  easy  to  draw  a  definite  inference,  even  on  the  16  cases  con-
sidered veridical;  they  are  about  4  per  cent,  of  the  whole.  But
there  were  some  very  encouraging  results,  especially  of  apparent
premonitory  impressions.

The  study  of  cross-correspondences  has  been  pushed  very  far.
With  inexhaustible  patience,  Mrs.  Verrall,  Miss  Helen  Verrall,
Mrs.  Holland,  Miss  Alice  Johnson,  Mr.  Piddington,  Dr.  Verrall,
and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  have  elaborated  a  long  and  remarkable  series
that  could  be  brought  to  a  satisfactory  conclusion  only  by  persons
who,  like  Mrs.  Verrall,  unite  scientific  insight  with  a  profound
knowledge  of  classical  literature  and  exceptional  powers  of  me-
diumship.  Any  analysis  of  them,  however,  would  be  lengthy
and  if  not  minute  would  be  unenlightening.

The  personality  of  Myers  certainly  seems  traceable  in  some
words  of  Mrs.  Piper's,  and  also  in  some  writings  of  Mrs.  Verrall's.

M  Report  on  a  series  of  cases  of  apparent  thought  transference  without

conscious  agency,  P.  S.  P.  R.,  1920,  xxxi,  218-924.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  175

Mrs.  Piper  knows  neither  Latin  nor  Greek,  nevertheless  she
makes  quotations  and  allusions  that  are  so  numerous,  so  skilful,
and  so  complex  that  no  trickery  so  perverse  can  be  supposed.
It  has  thence  been  inferred  that  it  was  Myers,  then  recently
deceased  and  during  his  lifetime  well  versed  in  classical  literature,
who  was  the  inspirer  of  these  writings.  Numerous  attempts  were
made  to  establish  a  relation  between  the  writings  of  Mrs.  Verrall
(V.  Myers)  and  the  speeches  of  Mrs.  Piper  (P.  Myers).  Coin-
cidence in  these  would  not  have  been  a  proof  of  personal  sur-
vival, but  might  have  been  a  beginning  of  such  proof  (S.  P.  R.
Proc,  1910-1914).  It  is  not  possible  here  to  enter  into  further
detail.  It  will  suffice  to  cite  the  diametrically  opposite  conclu-
sions arrived  at  by  J.  Maxwell  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick.1

Maxwell  thinks  that  exaggerated  weight  has  been  given  to
symbolism  and  that  the  interpretations  of  that  symbolism  are
sometimes  fanciful,  sometimes  wire-drawn.  He  is  inclined  to
think  that  placing  so  much  confidence  in  automatic  scripts  and
seeking  to  find  in  them  far-fetched  and  complicated  symbolism
would  end  in  finding  transcendental  relations  everywhere.

He  therefore  declines  to  admit  the  inferences  drawn  by  Mrs.
Verrall  and  Mr.  Piddington.  "It  is  impossible,"  he  says,  "to
admit  the  intervention  of  a  spirit.  We  want  proof  of  facts;
and  the  system  of  cross-correspondences  is  founded  on  negative
facts  and  is  an  unstable  foundation.  Only  positive  facts  have  an
intrinsic  value,  which  cross-correspondences  cannot  show;  not
at  present,  at  any  rate."

Mrs.  Sidgwick  differs  from  Mr.  Maxwell.2  According  to
her  the  probability  of  personal  survival  is  strengthened  by  the
general  character  of  the  communications  which  show  in  both
ideas  and  wording  more  similarity  to  the  ideas  of  the  supposed
communicators  than  with  those  of  the  mediums.  This  argument
of  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  is  not  very  strong,  for  the  subtlety  of  the
subconscious  in  mediums  is  sufficient  to  reconstitute  the  person-
ality of  Myers  or  of  any  other  person  in  a  most  striking  manner.
Mrs.  Sidgwick  adds,  with  very  good  reason,  that  more  positive
proofs  are  required.

\J.  Maxwell,  Les  correspondences  croisees  et  la  methode  expkrimentale,  P.
S.  P.  R.,  part  lxv,  1912,  54-144.

M  reply  to  Dr.  Joseph  Maxwell's  Paper  on  cross-correspondences  and  the
experimental  method,  P.  S.  P.  R.,  July,  19 13,  part  lxvii,  375-40 1.

176

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Mr.  Gerald  Balfour1  concludes  that  this  long  and  laborious
investigation  leads  slowly  but  surely  towards  the  inference  that
many  facts  appearing  in  this  cross-correspondence  can  be  satis-
factorily explained  only  by  the  spiritist  hypothesis.

Mr.  Balfour  states  his  conclusions  on  these  long  automatic
scripts  simultaneously  received,  to  the  following  effect:  "All
three  mediums  mention  Euripides ;  they  all  indicate  more  or  less
clearly  that  Euripides  is  the  subject  of  the  cross-correspondences.
Two  of  them  connect  Euripides  with  the  Hercules  Furens!'

In  another  case  which  Mr.  Balfour  considers  good,  Mrs.  Piper
says :  Light  in  the  West,  and  Mrs.  Verrall  says,  "The  words  are
from  Maud  (Tennyson),  'Rosy  is  the  East.'"  The  true  quota-
tion is  "Rosy  is  the  West"  {Maud,  xvii).

These  are  certainly  well-marked  cases  of  cryptesthesia ;  but
whether  there  is  cryptesthesia,  or  lucidity,  or  telepathy,  these  do
not  in  any  way  imply  survival  of  a  conscious  personality.

On  the  other  hand  Mr.  Hereward  Carrington  concludes  (and  I
quote  his  words  as  agreeing  with  my  own  conclusions)  the
total  facts  "are  all  fully  explicable  upon  purely  psychological  and
naturalistic  lines.  They  almost  invariably  resolve  themselves
into  simple  subconscious  memory  associations.  Chance  has  played
a  larger  part  than  is  allowed  for.  All  these  communications,
despite  the  great  labour  that  they  represent,  carry  less  proof
of  survival  than  the  seances  of  Mrs.  Piper  speaking  as  George
Pelham"  {A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  294).  It  seems  that  this  judg-
ment of  Mr.  Carrington's  is  justified:  but  we  agree  writh  him  in
recognizing  that  many  of  the  phenomena  of  cross-correspondence
abundantly  establish  telepathy  and  cryptesthesia,  even  if  they  do
not  prove  survival.

5.  Cryptesthesia  Among  Sensitives

If  we  define  as  "spiritist"  those  phenomena  in  which  an  ex-
traneous personality  seems  to  intervene  (maintaining  all  reserve
as  to  the  reality  of  such  personality),  we  see  that  cryptesthesia
appears  with  increasing  intensity  (l).in  normal  persons,  (2)  in
hypnotized  subjects,  and  (3)  in  mediums.

But  there  are  some  of  its  manifestations  in  persons  that  cannot
be  referred  to  any  of  these  three  classes.  We  will  call  these
persons  sensitives.    As  the  facts  defy  classification,  such  distinc-

xSome  recent  scripts  affording  evidence  of  personal  survival,  P.  S.  P.  R.,
1914,  xxvii,  221-243.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  177

tions  must  be  arbitrary;  for  mediums,  even  when  not  in  trance,
are  sensitives;  hypnotizable  persons,  even  when  not  hypnotized,
very  often  are  sensitives;  and  certain  persons  who  are  not  hyp-
notizable and  are  not  mediums,  show  powers  of  cryptesthesia
sufficient  to  prevent  their  being  classed  as  normal.  They,  too,
are  sensitives.

Moreover,  the  passage  from  the  normal  state  to  a  state  of
trance,  and  from  the  hypnotic  to  the  waking  state  is  always
gradual,  often  undefinable,  and  all  transitional  states  are  gone
through.  Nothing  is  more  artificial  than  to  make  sharp  divisions
between  the  normal  state,  the  hypnotic,  mediumistic  trance,  and
a  state  of  sensitiveness.  These  distinctions  are  only  conveniences
for  study.  In  order  that  experimental  lucidity  may  be  exercised,
certain  exterior  aids  are  sometimes  necessary — psychometry  and
crystal  vision.

(a)  Psychometry,  or  Pragmatic  Cryptesthesia

The  term  "psychometry"  (soul-measurement)  is  so  detestable
that  we  cannot  retain  it  in  scientific  language.  It  was  invented
by  Buchanan.1

Buchanan's  "psychometry"  is  really  nothing  more  than  a
method  of  developing  cryptesthesia,  and  we  shall  therefore  call
it  pragmatic  cryptesthesia  (i.e.,  cryptesthesia  by  means  of  material
objects).

Pragmatic  cryptesthesia  must  be  understood  in  a  different  sense
than  that  understood  by  Buchanan  at  its  inception.  That  incep-
tion was  very  strange.  Elizabeth  Denton  (Mrs.  Buchanan)  on
seeing  and  touching  some  fragment  from  a  geologic  stratum,
reconstructed  a  Silurian  or  Jurassic  landscape !  Only  a  simpleton
would  take  this  at  face-value :  it  is  nothing  but  the  result  of  bril-
liant imagination  on  the  part  of  the  wife  of  an  expert  geologist,
and  all  these  accounts  by  E.  Denton  have  only  a  literary  interest.

1On  this,  see  Buchanan,  Manual  of  Psychometry,  Boston.  W.  Denton  and
Elizabeth  Denton,  Nature's  Secret  or  psychometric  research,  London,  Houlston
Wright,  1863.  W.  Denton,  The  Soul  of  Things.  L.  Deinhard,  Psychometrie,
Sphinx,  x.  Jos.  Peter,  Psychometrie  {Die  U ebersinnliche)  Welt,  trad,  in
A.  S.  P.,  1910,  xx,  231-240,  276-280.  Thaneg  (pseudonyme  de  DescormiersV
Mkthode  de  clairvoyance  psychomitrique,  Libr.  des  Sc.  Psych.,  Paris,  1902.
James  Coates,  Seeing  the  invisible:  Practical  studies  in  psychometry,  thought
transference,  telepathy,  and  allied  phenomena,  London  and  New  York,  Fowler
&  Wells,  1909,  8vo.  Edmond  Duchatel,  Enquete  sur  des  cas  de  psychometrie.
La  vue  a  distance  dans  le  temps  et  dans  Vespace  (preface  by  J.  Maxwell),
Paris,  Leyraarie,  1910,  8vo.

178

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Since  then  psychometry  has  been  much  extended.  On  any  ob-
ject being  given  to  a  sensitive,  many  curious  details  are  furnished
concerning  the  persons  to  whom  it  belonged;  and  under  these
conditions  fine  examples  of  lucidity  are  observable.  The  mag-
netizers  of  1820  to  1850  experimented  in  this  manner,  and  their
superiority  to  Buchanan  lies  in  the  fact  that  they  did  not  use  the
word  "psychometry/'

Despite  the  lucidity  so  often  observed  it  is  not  proved  that  the
presence  of  the  object  is  indispensable.  Just  as  it  is  not  at  all
certain  that  the  so-called  transmission  of  thought  is  anything
but  cognizance  of  a  real  fact,  knoum  because  it  is  real,  so  also
it  is  not  certain  that  contact  with  a  given  object  is  necessary  to
the  metapsychic  cognizance  of  that  object.  Cryptesthesia  (the
reality  of  which  cannot  be  denied),  is  almost  as  readily  exercised
without  material  contact,  as  with  it.

Nevertheless  it  is  possible  that  things,  despite  their  apparent
inertia,  may  emit  some  (unknown)  vibrations  that  arouse  crypt-
esthesia (though  to  imagine  such  is  scarcely  a  presentable  hy-
pothesis), and  we  are  reduced  to  somewhat  pitiful  conjectures
as  to  what  the  forces  that  awaken  the  faculty  can  possibly  be.

"The  seas  are  still  disturbed  by  the  track  of  Pompey's  vessels."
Certainly,  but  how  many  others  have  disturbed  them !  Whenever
we  speak  of  cryptesthesia  we  can  only  speak  of  the  fact  itself.
It  is  a  fact,  but  we  can  define  neither  its  modalities,  its  condi-
tions, nor  its  limits.

"Clairvoyance,"  says  Delanne,  "is  a  faculty  that  certainly  exists,
but  to  seek  to  explain  everything  by  it  is  to  transgress  logic  and
scientific  method,"  and  he  adds,  "It  obeys  laws  and  is  manifested
under  determinate  conditions."

That  is  so,  but  we  are  entirely  ignorant  what  these  laws  may
be.  They  are  not,  alas !  determined  as  yet — whatever  M.  Delanne
may  claim.  We  know  that  some  persons  are  more  endowed
in  this  respect  than  others,  and  perhaps  the  faculty  to  some
minute  extent  is  not  entirely  lacking  in  anyone.  We  know  that
some  subjects  are  slightly  sensitive,  and  others  very  much  more
so.  We  know  that  cryptesthesia  is  developed  by  hypnotism,  that
mediums  in  spiritist  seances  show  it  much  more  strongly  still,
and  that  with  powerful  mediums  it  becomes  wonderfully  intense;
but  that  is  about  all  that  we  do  know.

How  did  Gallet  foresee  the  number  of  votes  that  Casimir-Perier
would  obtain  four  hours  later?    How  did  Thoulet  read  the  tele-

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  179

gram  that  would  be  sent  to  his  friend  two  days  later?  It  is
just  as  hard  to  understand,  neither  more  nor  less  obscure  as
how  Mrs.  Piper  could  know  so  well  everything  relating  to  George
Pelham.  When  we  speak  of  lucidity,  clairvoyance,  premonition,
and  cryptesthesia  we  are  dealing  with  a  faculty  that  is  quite
unknown  to  us,  and  we  can  only  see  its  results;  its  conditions
escape  us  entirely.

Mrs.  Green,  in  London,  sees  two  girls  drowning  in  Australia,
and  their  hats  floating  on  the  water.  Mrs.  R.,  in  Paris,  alludes
to  the  deaths  of  Panca's  children — the  family  that  the  Serbian
officers  are  just  about  to  assassinate  in  Belgrade.  We  can  for-
mulate no  sort  of  explanation,  and  similarly  we  do  not  see  what
possible  mechanism  can  awaken  cryptesthetic  sensitiveness.  Ap-
pearances point  very  strongly  to  the  inference  that  mediums  in
some  trance  conditions  are  inspired  by  a  guide  temporarily  in-
carnate in  them  (I  use  the  language  of  spiritualism  without  im-
plying the  least  concurrence  in  its  doctrines),  and  phenomena
of  cryptesthesia  sometimes  become  extremely  marked.

With  reference  to  psychometry  it  is  impossible  to  state  ac-
curately what  part  the  object  held  by  the  sensitive  plays  in  the
result  or  in  the  sensation  produced  in  her.  Mrs.  Thompson,  in
the  experiment  given  ante,  taking  my  son's  watch  into  her  hands,
says,  "Three  generations  mixed,"  but  this  in  no  way  proves  that
this  cognizance  of  the  past  is  due  to  vibrations  stored  up  in  the
watch.  Mr.  Dufay  has  described  how  Maria  B.  in  hypnotic
trance,  on  being  given  an  object  that  had  belonged  to  a  murderer,
described  the  murder.    But  was  the  object  indispensable?

Miss  X.  related  to  the  P.  R.  (General  Meeting,  May,  1895,
/.  5\  P.  R.,  v,  247),  that  some  papers  were  shown  her  that  seemed
of  no  special  significance,  but  that  she  felt  an  intense  reaction
of  blood  and  horror.  The  papers  had  been  taken  on  the  battle-
field of  Sedan.  Mrs.  Piper  on  many  occasions  after  handling
locks  of  hair  or  other  objects  has  given  precise  particulars  of
the  persons  to  whom  they  belonged.

I  now  select  from  among  many  others  an  excellent  example
of  pragmatic  cryptesthesia  given  by  Mrs.  Piper  to  Sir  Oliver
Lodge.  "A  chain  was  handed  to  Thinuit'  by  me,  the  package
having  been  delivered  by  hand  to  me  the  previous  evening.  I
had  just  opened  the  package,  glanced  at  the  contents,  and  hastily
read  a  letter  inside,  then  wrapped  it  all  up  again.  The  chain  had
been  sent  by  Mrs.  John  Watson  from  Sefton  Drive.,,

180

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Mrs.  Piper  said,  "This  belongs  to  an  old  gentleman  passed  out
of  the  body — a  nice  old  man.  I  see  something  the  matter  with
the  heart.  .   .  .  Give  me  the  wrappers,  all  of  them."

The  papers  (wrappers)  were  given  her,  the  letter  among
them.  Medium  held  them  to  the  top  of  her  head,  gradually  flick-
ing away  the  blank  ones.  She  did  not  inspect  them.  "Is  there
J.  N.  W.  here?  Poole.  Then  there's  Sefton,  s-e-f-t-o-n,  Pool,
hair.  Yours  truly,  J.  N.  W.  That's  it,  'I  send  you  some  hair.'
Poole  J.  N.  W.  Do  you  understand  that?"  Sir  Oliver  says,  "I
found  afterwards  that  the  letter  .  .  .  contained  the  words
'Sefton  Drive/  and  'Cook'  so  written  as  to  look  like  Poole.  It
also  said,  'I  send  you  some  hair*  and  finished  'yours  sincerely  J.
B.  W./  the  B.  being  not  unlike  an  N."  (quoted  verbatim  from
The  Survival  of  Man,  p.  178).

E.  Bozzano  has  studied  the  possible  part  of  psychometry  in
the  experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper1  and  he  thinks,  with  good  rea-
son as  it  seems  to  me,  that  neither  telepathy  nor  cryptesthesia
accounts  for  everything  in  those  experiments.  He  concludes  that
the  spiritualist  theory  alone  covers  all  the  facts.  But  why  go
so  far?  Would  it  not  be  wiser  to  say  with  me  that  an  unusual
faculty  of  cognition  exists?  It  is  incautious  to  go  beyond  that  by
referring  to  its  cause  and  mechanism.

A  commission  of  enquiry  of  the  Society  of  Psychic  Sciences
(of  Paris),  examined  four  psychometrists,  of  whom  M.  Phaneg2
was  one;  the  report  drawn  up  by  M.  Warcollier  states  that  the
results  were  poor.

I  am  not  aware  of  any  systematic  studies  on  individuals  who
are  neither  mediums  nor  hypnotizable.

The  handling  of  objects  in  this  manner  has  been  commonly
practised  by  all  professed  somnambulists,  and  appears  to  be  one
of  the  conditions  of  their  lucidity.  The  whole  question  is  to  know,
what  purpose  is  served  by  the  thing  handled  and  on  this  we  know
nothing  at  all.  It  is  not  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  object  emits
vibrations  that  can  put  the  faculty  in  motion.  This  special  form
of  cryptesthesia  is  possibly  connected  with  another  singular  prop-
erty of  some  bodies  to  emit  vibrations  which  affect  the  nervous
system  and  produce  strong  reactions  without  any  known  chemical
or  physical  cause.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  some  apparently  inert

xTiUpathie  et  psychomitrie  en  rapport  avec  la  mkdiwmnitk  de  Mrs.  Piper,
A.  S.  P.,  November,  191 1,  xxi,  January,  191 2,  xxii,  9-15.

2Enqu2te  sur  la  Psychomitrie,  A.  S.  P.,  191 1,  xxi,  203-210.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  181

substances  are  capable  of  moving  some  human  sensibilities.  The
fact  of  the  divining-rod  establishes  that.  It  will  be  seen  later
that  it  is  now  demonstrated  that  there  is  a  rhabdic  force  that  acts
indirectly  by  provoking  subconscious  muscular  contractions  and
causes  the  bending  of  the  rod.  It  can  be  explained  only  by  the
radiation  of  some  unknown  power — a  rhabdic  force.  Since  this
power  exists  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  its  manifestation
may  not  be  confined  to  acting  upon  "dowsers"  with  the  rod  actually
in  hand.

The  influence  of  chemical  and  other  bodies  has  often  been
studied  ever  since  Reichenbach  and  the  metallo-therapists ;  but
we  will  set  aside  those  experiments  to  account  for  which  electric
or  magnetic  forces  may  be  alleged.

Drs.  Bourru  and  Burot  have  studied  the  action  of  chemical
substances  enclosed  in  well-stoppered  flasks;  but  in  spite  of  the
care  with  which  these  distinguished  physicians  have  conducted
their  experiments,  it  does  not  appear  certain  that  the  very  dis-
tinct effects  produced  may  not  have  been  due  to  verbal  suggestion
and  expectant  attention.1

Messrs.  Bourru  and  Burot  experimented  with  hypnotizable
subjects  showing  all  the  phenomena  of  the  major  hypnotism.
Such  subjects  are  extremely  amenable  to  suggestion.  If  a  her-
metically sealed  tube  of  laudanum  is  placed  in  their  hands  with
the  injunction  "Attend  now"  they  will  show  strong  physiological
reactions,  without,  however,  justifying  the  hypothesis  that  vibra-
tions from  the  drug  have  traversed  the  glass.  The  hypothesis  of
suggestion  can  be  eliminated  only  by  proving  that  the  effects
are  specific,  such  as  sleep  from  morphia,  vomiting  from  an  emetic,
convulsions  from  strychnine,  intoxication  from  alcohol;  then,
when  the  physiological  effects  are  so  sharply  defined,  the  experi-
menter, if  himself  ignorant  at  the  time  of  the  experiment  of
the  contents  of  the  tubes,  may  refer  the  action  to  the  drug.

This  diagnosis,  necessary  to  the  inference  of  specific  action
apart  from  all  verbal  suggestion,  has  not  been  made  with  suffi-
cient precision.  In  a  few  cases  I  have  tried  this  experiment  with
vague  semblances  of  success,  but  am  unable  to  draw  any  con-
clusions.   In  fine,  Bourru  and  Burot  have  observed  some  very

xLa  suggestion  mentale  et  I'action  a  distance  des  substances  toxiques  et
mHicamenteuses,  i  vol.,  izmo,  Paris,  J.  B.  Bailliere,  1887.  See  also  Revue
philosophique,  March,  1886.   E.  Alliot,  same  subject,  Paris,  J.  B.  Bailliere,  1886.

182

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

strong  and  singular  physiological  effects,  but  these  are  possibly
to  be  explained  by  suggestion.

M.  Wasielewski  tried  the  same  on  Mile,  de  B.,  and  the  experi-
ments were  quite  successful  when  odoriferous  substances  like
peppermint  and  brandy  were  used;  so  that  I  am  quite  satisfied
that  the  success  was  due  to  hyperesthesia  of  the  sense  of  smell.
Whatever  care  be  taken  in  closing  a  bottle  with  cork  it  is  im-
possible that  there  should  be  no  trace  of  scent  perceptible  to  a
super-acute  sense.  With  four  inodorous  substances — quinine,  dis-
tilled water,  citric  acid,  and  saccharin — the  two  former  gave
failures,  the  two  latter  successes  (A.  S.  P.,  July,  1914,  xxiv,  193).

Miss  Edith  Hawthorne  has  reported  a  good  case  of  pragmatic
cryptesthesia.  Mr.  Samuel  Jones  sent  her  a  fossil  found  by  a
miner  in  a  coal-pit.  The  father  of  this  miner  had  been  killed
in  a  mining  accident.  Miss  Hawthorne  says  she  had  a  horrible
vision  of  a  dead  man  prone  on  the  ground  with  blood  issuing
from  his  mouth  and  nose.  Other  interesting,  but  vague,  indica-
tions were  given  on  the  numerous  objects  sent  by  Mr.  Jones.

M.  Pagenstecher  (of  Mexico)  undertook  some  researches  on
Mrs.  Z.  that  seemed  to  him  to  indicate  hyperesthesia  so  strong
as  nearly  to  be  cryptesthesia.1  But  before  pronouncing  definitely,
further  details  must  be  awaited.  The  case  seems  to  be  con-
firmatory of  cryptesthesia  under  hypnotism.

These  sundry  results  are  not  very  satisfactory,  though  they
may  well  induce  those  who  have  good  hypnotic  subjects  or  me-
diums at  their  disposal  to  make  further  experiments.  The  matter
is  not  exactly  metapsychic,  but  it  is  possible  that  the  action  of
substances  at  a  distance  may  throw  some  light  on  the  meta-
psychic phenomenon  of  cryptesthesia.  The  action  of  metals,
magnets,  and  toxic  substances  exerted  at  a  distance  seems  well
worthy  of  re-examinations.2

Is  it  necessary  to  mention  under  pragmatic  cryptesthesia  the
superstitions  on  amulets,  mascots,  and  the  like  which  savages
and  even  some  civilized  men  regard  as  protective?    The  old

%A  Notable  Psychometric  Test,  Am.  S.  P.  R.,  1920,  xiv,  386-418.

2Loc.  cit.,  p.  240. — On  the  origin  of  metallo-therapy  and  on  the  action  of
metals  from  a  distance  which  do  not  belong  to  metapsychic  science,  see  V.
Burco.  Etude  experimental  sur  la  metallotherapic  et  la  metalloscopie,  Rapports
faits  a  la  Societe  de  Biologie,  1877-1878,  8vo,  Paris,  1876.  J.  Moricourt,  Manuel
de  metallothirapie  et  de  mitalloscopie,  appliquees  an  traitement  des  maladies
nerveuses,  etc.,  i2mo,  Paris,  1888.  Dumontpallier,  Metalloscopie  et  metallo-
therapic   Union  medicate,  Paris,  1879,  xxviii,  333,  381,  421,  457,  473,  567.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  183

magnetizers  believed  firmly  that  water  and  other  things  might  be
magnetized  to  give  peculiar  virtues;  but  they  did  not  eliminate
suggestion.  I  can  quote  a  personal  experience  which  is  a  very
good  instance.  One  of  my  pupils,  Dr.  Mar  ...  a  very  trust-
worthy young  man,  simple-minded,  honest,  and  very  sensitive
in  his  feelings,  some  weeks  after  taking  his  degree  came  to  me
saying  that  he  was  haunted  by  ideas  of  suicide  that  gave  him
great  distress.  He  said,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  "I  am  sure  I
shall  end  by  suicide  ;  can  you  not  save  me?"  There  was  no  reason
of  love,  money,  or  health  that  would  justify  these  gloomy  antici-
pations. A  happy  idea  struck  me:  I  had  on  my  table  a  little
bronze  figure  of  the  Knight  of  Death,  with  the  raised  visor  show-
ing the  face  of  the  skull.  I  said,  "Take  this  statuette,  it  has
magic  powers  and  will  protect  you."  He  thanked  me  effusively
and  came  to  see  me  six  months  later  completely  cured,  happy
and  smiling  and  quite  free  from  suicidal  thoughts.  He  died  a
natural  death  some  years  later.

Was  this  coincidence?  Is  it  not  rather  suggestion?  In  any
case  I  am  not  so  childish  as  to  impute  some  actual  influence  to
the  Knight  of  Death.  It  seems  to  me  that  amulets,  mascots,
bits  of  coral,  etc.,  act  by  suggestion  alone.  But  suggestion  is
not  to  be  neglected,  and,  after  all,  who  knows?  It  is  well  to  be
as  cautious  in  our  denials  as  in  our  affirmations.

If  there  were  even  a  shadow  of  proof  of  the  efficacy  of  charms
and  casting  of  lots,  these  would  be  connected  with  influences
proceeding  from  things.  Of  all  popular  superstitions  these  are
the  most  universal;  there  are  still  many  countries  in  which  sor-
cerers and  witches,  maleficent  objects,  unlucky  stones,  the  evil  eye,
and  other  trash  are  believed  in.  If,  however,  inert  objects  are
inert  only  in  seeming  it  is  possible  that  some  may  be  favourable
and  some  the  reverse ;  but  in  this  domain  there  is  nothing,  up
to  the  present,  worthy  of  attention,  and  we  must  leave  belief
in  black  masses  and  wax  figures  for  wizardry  to  the  contem-
poraries of  Catherine  de  Medici  and  Mme.  de  Montespan.  The
witty  and  erudite  writings  of  A.  de  Rochas  on  charms  may  be
consulted  in  his  book,  De  I  Exterior sation  de  la  sensibilite.

But,  I  repeat,  even  in  dealing  with  absurd  superstitions,  it  is
well  to  be  cautious  in  our  negations.  If  we  admit  (as  seems
proved),  that  there  is  sometimes  an  emanation  from  things  that
acts  on  the  faculty  of  cryptesthesia,  it  is  not  absurd  to  think
that  there  may  be  some  vibration  proceeding  from  them  that  may

184

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

act  on  our  own  mentality  or  that  of  others.  Events  are  so  closely
linked  that  anything  is  possible.

But  we  must  not  give  ourselves  up  to  such  dreams;  even  if
we  admit  possible  connection  between  such  and  such  an  object
and  such  and  such  an  event,  we  are  absolutely  ignorant  what  that
connection  may  be,  and  the  mystery  remains  as  inaccessible  as
if  there  were  no  connection.

Cryptesthesia  in  sensitives  is  helped  by  external  conditions.
Professional  somnambulists,  who  are  occasionally  lucid,  for  if
they  did  not  now  and  then  show  real  lucidity,  they  could  not
succeed  in  their  curious  trade,  frequently  make  use  of  cards
to  fix  their  lucidity.  It  would  be  madness  to  fancy  any  relation
other  than  chance  coincidence  between  the  card  and  the  fact;
but  it  is  not  insane  to  suppose  that  "laying  the  cards"  is  a  prepara-
tion for  lucidity.  A  well-known  fortune-teller  admitted  as  much
to  Dr.  Osty.

Cheiromancy  is  a  little  nearer  to  sane  physiology,  for  no  one
denies  that  hands  are  quite  different  in  different  persons,  and
that  hands,  like  faces,  betray  something  of  the  psycho-physio-
logical constitution,  vaguely  indeed  but  quite  certainly.  It  is  a
long  step  from  past  to  future  events ;  the  hand  of  a  duchess  may
easily  be  distinguished  from  that  of  a  cook,  but  that  is  very
commonplace.  Nevertheless  palmists  claim  to  read  the  lines  of
the  hand.1  If  there  are  sometimes  remarkable  forecasts,  these
must  be  put  down  to  chance,  or  to  lucidity  stimulated  by  an
external  fact;  the  external  fact  in  this  case  being  the  scrutiny
of  the  hand  by  a  sensitive.

Graphology  resembles  cheiromancy  in  some  respects ;  but  it  has
an  unassailable  physiological  basis  that  has  nothing  to  do  with
metapsychics.    Our  gestures,  and  therefore  our  handwritings,

Woyez  Desbarolles,  Les  mysteres  de  la  main,  Paris.  Gamier  d'Arpentigny,
La  science  de  la  main,  Paris,  1857.  E.  Magnin,  Journal  du  magnitisme  et  du
Psychisme  experimental,  December,  191 1.  I  will  cite  also  a  book  which  is
curious  if  only  for  its  title  :  Hoping,  Institutiones  chiromanticae,  oder  Kurtze
Unterweissung  Wie  man  aus  denen  Linien  Bergen,  und  N'dgeln  deren  Hande,
auch  das  Jahr,  Monat,  Wochen  und  Tage  in  welchen  einem  was  Gliick  oder
ungliickliches  bevorsteht,  muthmaslich  judiciren  kann,  sampt  einer  gantz  neun
und  ausfiihrlichen  Harmonia  oder  Uebereinstimmung  aller  Linien  auch  aus-
fiihrlichen  Abmessung  der  Saturninae,  des  Berges  Lunae,  und  anderer  Berge,
mit  Fleiss  verfestiget,  3d  edit.,  8vo,  Iena,  1681.  See  especially  N.  Vaschide,  La
psychologie  de  la  main,  Paris,  1909.  Cheiro's  Language  of  the  hand:  Complete
practical  work  on  cheirognomony  and  cheiromancy  containing  the  system,
rules,  and  experience  of  Cheiro  (Comte  de  Hamond),  New  York,  Tennyson;
London,  Nichols  &  Co.,  1897,  xv,  162  pages,  with  32  plates.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  185

correspond  to  feelings  and  characters.  A  drunken  man  will
show  his  intoxication  by  his  writing,  and  it  will  be  different
again  according  as  he  is  excited  or  quiet.  A  very  stupid  person  must
inevitably  show  some  trace  of  stupidity.  Dull  and  intelligent
persons  cannot  have  the  same  handwriting:  Quid  mens  ima  ferat
scripto  tua  dextra  notabit.  But  all  this  has  nothing  to  do  with
metapsychics,  and  if  sensitives  such  as  Mme.  Freya  use  graph-
ology, that  is  doubtless  to  aid  their  lucidity.  A  letter  sent  to  a
graphologist  will  show  him  many  psychological  traits  of  the
writer,  if  he  has  studied  a  great  many  handwritings,  but  lucidity
does  not  come  into  the  matter.1

To  cover  the  whole  ground  astrology  should  be  mentioned.  It
was  in  great  honour  in  former  times,  but  has  no  serious  meaning
although  some  enigmatical  journals  (Nouveaux  Horizons)  still
advance  obscure  arguments  in  its  defence.

We  are,  when  all  is  said,  still  entirely  ignorant  what  are  the
conditions  that  determine  cryptesthesia.  We  cannot  even  say  any-
thing that  would  be  a  beginning  of  scientific  treatment,  e.g.,  that
external  objects  have  some  motive  power  to  produce  a  cryptic
sensation  which  by  association  of  ideas  awakens  remembrances,
just  as  a  scent  may  recall  memory  of  the  person  who  used  it.
We  must  resign  ourselves  to  ignorance  of  the  means  whereby
the  faculty  of  cryptesthesia  is  stimulated  to  action.

(b)  Transfer  of  Sensibility

There  are  cases  in  which  tactile  sensibility,  greatly  enhanced,
seems  to  play  a  part.

A  physician  of  Lyons,  Petetin2  (1774-1808),  more  than  a
century  ago  observed  the  phenomenon  of  transposition  of  the
senses  (the  phrase  is  used  here  without  implying  any  hypothesis).

'On  graphology  see  Crepieux-Jamin's  L'Eriture  et  le  caractere.  There
is  in  France  a  good  journal  on  graphology,  issued  by  a  society  which  has  the
good  sense  not  to  mix  up  metapsychics  with  this  fragment  of  normal
psychophysiology.  My  experiment  with  H.  Ferrari  and  J.  Hericourt  {Revue
philosophique,  1886)  has  remained  classical.  With  two  hypnotizable  persons
both  entirely  ignorant  of  graphology,  we  obtained  complete  transformation  of
the  handwriting  and  its  adaptation  to  that  of  the  new  personality  created  by
hypnotic  suggestion.

2Pet6tin,  pere,  Electricite  animate.  Catalepsie  hystSrique  ancestrale,
Dicouverte  du  transport  des  sens,  dans  Vkpigastre  a  Vextrfmite*  des  doigts  et
des  orteils. — Rapports  du  fiuide  nerveux,  principe  de  ce  phknomene,  avec  le
fiuide  ilectrique.   Experiences  qui  les  confirtnent  (Lyons,  1808).

186

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

He  verified  facts  of  hyperesthesia,  or  rather  of  cryptesthesia,
in  serious  cases  of  hysteria,  and  gives  full  details  in  the  curious
phraseology  of  his  day.  The  observations  seem  to  have  been
taken  with  precision.

The  supposed  auditory  anesthesia  must  be  put  aside,  for  the
deafness  was  only  apparent;  the  patients  heard  nothing  when
spoken  to  at  their  ears  but  heard  whispers  at  their  finger-tips
or  at  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  This  insensibility  to  words  at  the
ear  is  one  of  those  negative  hallucinations  that  have  been  verified
by  modern  investigations  on  somnambulists.

It  is  not  the  same  with  regard  to  visual  sensibility ;  the  trans-
position of  the  sense  is  obvious.  Petetin  thus  expresses  himself
(p.  44).  His  patient  was  a  Mine.  A.,  aged  nineteen,  in  a  cata-
leptic, i.e.,  in  a  somnambulic  state :

"I  slid  under  the  bedclothes  a  card  that  I  kept  covered  by  my
hand  and  placed  it  on  her  stomach.  .  .  .  Her  expression
changed,  showing  attention,  surprise,  and  pain.  'What  illness  has
come  to  me?  I  see  the  queen  of  spades.'  I  withdrew  the  card
and  showed  it  to  the  spectators;  they  turned  pale  on  seeing  *he
queen  of  spades.  I  placed  a  second  card  with  the  same  precau-
tions. The  ten  of  hearts,'  she  said.  A  third  card  was  met  with
'Hail  to  the  king  of  clubs.'  I  was  quite  upset  and  hardly  re-
marked the  consternation  on  all  the  faces  round  me."

Like  the  hysteric  of  Tamboff,  the  hysteric  of  Lyons  distin-
guished by  her  fingers  the  taste  of  a  cake,  apricots,  roast  mutton,
bread-and-milk,  and  boiled  beef.  But  were  all  the  conditions
fully  noted?

On  the  other  hand,  Mme.  A.  seems  to  have  shown  phenomena
of  cryptesthesia  and  premonition  that  transference  of  sensibility
does  not  account  for.  She  recognized  objects  in  closed  boxes.
"If  a  thought  were  unexpressed  in  words,  she  knew  it  forthwith
and  proceeded  to  act  as  had  been  intended  she  should."

On  another  hystero-cataleptic  patient,  Mme.  de  Saint  P.,  aged
twenty-four,  the  results  were  less  decisive;  and,  moreover,  Pete-
tin  did  not  take  the  precautions  that  we  now  know  to  be  necessary.
There  were  some  interesting  phenomena,  but  they  are  not  reported
with  sufficient  accuracy.

The  first  observation  is  remarkable,  the  phenomena  being  strik-
ingly identical  with  the  TambofT  case ;  but  we  are  now  less  easy
to  satisfy  on  the  metapsychic  nature  of  phenomena  than  they
were  in  1830.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA       •  187

Perhaps  Mile.  Pigeaire,  a  very  lucid  somnambulist,  had  sensi-
tiveness of  this  kind.  She  read  a  sealed  letter  placed  on  her
forehead.

Experimenting  with  the  Misses  L.,  on  mental  suggestion  from
the  one  sister  to  the  other,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  remarked  that
the  phenomena  (reproduction  of  a  drawing)  were  much  more
distinct  when  contact  was  maintained,  even  when  the  fifth  fingers
were  barely  touching,  than  when  contact  was  broken.

Boirac1  has  given  a  notable  case  of  reading  by  tactile  hyper-
esthesia. Mme.  V.,  a  somnambule,  had  her  eyes  well  bandaged
and  in  addition  paper  was  gummed  over  her  eyes.  She  read
small  print  without  hesitation,  and  told  the  time  from  a  watch
wrapped  in  a  handkerchief.  This  was  reported  by  Dr.  D.  G.
to  Boirac,  who  determined  to  experiment  with  another  subject
supervised  by  himself.  This  subject,  Ludovic  S.,  succeeded  in
reading  with  his  finger-ends  as  if  there  were  exteriorization  of
sensation.  One  reading  was  given  in  complete  darkness,  all  light
being  excluded  from  the  room,  Ludovic's  eyes  being  bandaged
as  well.  "It  seemed  to  me  impossible  to  doubt,"  says  Boirac,  "that
this  phenomenon  must  be  referred  to  touch  alone,  sight  having
nothing  to  do  with  it."

E.  Boirac  made  another  experiment  with  still  stranger  results.
He  seated  Ludovic  near  him  but  with  his  back  turned  and  his
eyes  bandaged,  and  himself  sitting  close  by,  he  asked  Ludovic
to  hold  his  elbow.  Then  Boirac,  passing  his  finger-tips  along  the
lines  of  a  newspaper,  Ludovic  read  the  words.  The  result  was
the  same  when  Boirac  closed  his  eyes  and  could  no  longer  see  the
words  that  were  under  his  fingers.

Further  research  should  be  made  on  this  tactile  hyperesthesia
which  might  permit  of  the  conclusion  that  the  sense  of
touch  sometimes  becomes  so  acute  as  almost  to  become  crypt-
esthesia.

We  cannot  here  take  into  consideration  the  surprising  re-
searches, as  yet  incomplete,  by  Louis  Farigoule.  La  vision  extra-
retinienne  et  le  sens  paroptique  {Nouvelle  Revue  francaise,  1920,
104).

Very  notable  cases  of  cryptesthesia,  possibly  explicable  by
extraordinary  acuity  of  sight  and  touch,  have  been  noticed  by

1E.  Boirac,  La  psychologie  inconnue,  Paris,  Mean,  1908,  p.  245.  Un  cas
d'apparente  transposition  des  sens.

188

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Dr.  A.  N.  C.  Chowrin,  director  of  the  lunatic  asylum  at
Tamboff.1

The  subject  was  a  woman  of  thirty-two,  cultivated  and  intelli-
gent, unmarried  and  suffering  from  hystero-epilepsy.  Dr.  Chow-
rin was  led  to  examine  into  her  case  because  one  day  having
received  a  letter  in  his  presence  she  kept  turning  it  over  in  her
hands  without  opening  it,  and  began  to  weep,  saying  that  there
was  bad  news  in  it.   The  letter  announced  the  death  of  a  niece.

Several  ingenious  experiments  were  then  devised.  Dr.  Chow-
rin, fully  acquainted  with  the  tricks  of  hysterical  patients,  took
strict  precautions,  assisted  by  his  colleagues  of  the  Medical  Society
of  Tamboff.  Sealed  letters  written  in  characters  so  small  as  to
need  a  lens,  and  covered  with  aniline  black,  sometimes  enclosed
in  photographically  sensitized  paper,  were  read  about  forty  times,
and  Dr.  Chowrin  adds,  "If  M.  can  open  these  letters  and  re-
seal  them  so  as  to  leave  no  external  trace  on  the  envelopes  and
the  unexposed  sensitive  paper,  that  is  as  extraordinary  as  being
able  to  read  unopened  letters."

In  another  set  of  experiments  the  same  subject,  M.,  read
hermetically  sealed  letters  in  the  presence  of  several  persons.
Sometimes  the  contents  of  the  letter  were  given  textually,  some-
times by  figures  of  speech  giving  the  sense.  For  instance,  in
a  letter  written  by  Dr.  Andreoff,  the  words  actually  written  were,
"In  the  sands  of  Arabia  stand  three  palm-trees  between  which
there  flowed  a  murmuring  stream."  M.  said,  "An  open  space;
it  is  sand,  white  like  snow  but  it  is  not  snow;  three  tall  trees;
I  never  saw  any  like  them;  few  leaves  but  large  ones,  and  a
spring  of  water  whose  murmur  I  hear  distinctly,"

In  another  experiment,  Dr.  Troitzki  wrote  on  a  piece  of  paper,
"Sophie  Alexandrovna  is  in  bed  and  looks  at  the  wall,"  and
folded  it  sixteen  times.  That  day  Sophie  Alexandrovna  (Mme.
M.)  was  in  bed  with  a  toothache.  She  took  the  paper,  held  it  in  one
hand,  and  said,  "I  see  a  bed,  it  is  I  who  am  in  bed,  with  a  bandage
on  my  chin,"  and  she  looked  fixedly  at  the  wall.  Troitzki  and
Speranski,both  present,  never  lost  sight  of  the  paper  for  a  moment.

Other  facts  were  very  significant;  Mme.  M.  could  distinguish
colours  by  touch.    Before  the  Medical  Society  of  Tamboff  she

^These  were  published  in  Russian,  in  1898.  I  know  them  only  in  the
German  translation  by  A.  de  Schrenck-Notzing,  Experimentelle  Untersuch-

ungen  auf  dem  Gebiete  des  raiimlichen  Hellsehens,  der  Kryptoscopie  und  in-
adaequaten  Sinneserregung,  E.  Reinhardt,  Munchen,  1919,  80.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  189

was  able  to  tell  the  colours  of  thirty  flasks,  all  different,  wrapped
in  paper  and  placed  under  a  thick  cloth.  She  could  taste  by  the
sense  of  touch.  Small  pieces  of  paper  were  soaked  in  solutions
of  soda,  common  salt,  hydrochloride  of  quinine,  sulphate  of  zinc,
placed  under  her  armpit,  and  she  at  once  perceived  the  salt,  acid,
astringent,  or  bitter  taste.  As  the  experimenters  did  not  know
which  solution  was  used,  all  mental  transmission  and  experimental
error  are  eliminated.

The  experiments  of  Gilbert  Murray  on  telepathy  which  seem
wonderful,  but  are  only  apparently  so,  must  be  explained  by
extreme  auditory  hyperesthesia.1

Mr.  Murray  left  the  sitting-room  and  went  into  an  adjoining
one.  Then  someone  in  the  sitting-room,  usually  Mr.  Murray's
eldest  daughter,  spoke  some  words  that  were  at  once  written
down,  indicating  a  picture,  a  gesture,  a  scene,  or  an  event.  Mr.
Murray  then  returned  and  said  what  had  come  into  his  mind;
his  words  being  compared  with  those  spoken  by  Miss  Murray.
The  agreements  are  striking,  and  it  is  needless  to  give  instances
of  unquestionable  facts.  Nevertheless,  as  Mrs.  Verrall  has  said,
it  is  possible  to  explain  all,  or  nearly  all,  by  auditive  hyperesthesia.
Mr.  Murray  was  in  no  way  conscious  of  having  heard  anything ;
so  that  we  are  here  dealing  with  subconscious  auditive  hyper-
esthesia, a  very  curious  phenomenon  that  ought  to  be  thoroughly
studied.  In  any  case,  hyperesthesia  pushed  to  such  lengths  is
very  surprising  and  little  removed  from  cryptesthesia.  Some-
times, moreover,  the  words  pronounced  by  Mr.  Murray,  when
compared  with  the  thing  spoken  of,  went  much  further  than  the
words  spoken  aloud  by  Miss  Murray.

These  facts  are  insufficient  to  make  the  case  one  of  crypt-
esthesia, but  there  are  so  many  other  instances  of  metapsychic
cryptesthesia  that  it  is  not  impossible  that  this  may  have  come
into  play  here,  though  I  prefer  the  hypothesis  of  extreme  acuity
of  hearing.

Visual  hyperesthesia,  no  doubt,  is  in  play  in  the  case  of  M.,
a  hysterical  patient  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Frigerio2  in  the  asylum

*See  the  address  by  G.  Murray  a  la  S.  P.  R.,  July,  19 15,  and  Mme.  Verrall,
P.  S\  P.  R.,  xxix.  See  also  S.  M.  Kingsford :  Psychical  Research  for  the  Plain
Man,  London,  Kegan  Paul,  1920.

2Rari  fenomeni  osservati  in  una  ipnotizzata  ed  in  particulare  della  sugges-
tione  reciproca  e  della  lettura  ai  occhi  chiusi  da  essa  presentati.  (Arch,  di  psi~
chiatria,  etc.,  Torino,  xv,  1894,  ■•*)■

190

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

at  Alexandria.  When  her  eyes  were  closed  by  fingers  pressing
on  her  eyelids,  she  read  at  once  the  titles  of  books ;  and  in  a  dull
light  with  her  eyelids  closed  as  before,  she  read  the  handwriting
on  a  post-card.  With  a  book  held  so  high  that  it  would  have
been  impossible  for  her  to  read  it  even  had  her  eyes  been  open,
the  same  results  were  obtained.  But  this  case  of  retinal  hyper-
esthesia was  not  studied  with  the  same  precision  as  Chowrin's
cases.

Dr.  Naum  Kotik1  secured  some  good  instances  of  cryptesthesia
with  Sophie  B.,  a  young  girl  of  fourteen.  Her  father  was
an  inebriate  who  finally  committed  suicide  in  an  asylum.
When  this  man  was  present,  though  no  one  could  detect  a
word  or  gesture  to  indicate  anything,  Sophie  could  guess  her
father's  thought  in  a  surprising  manner;  but  these  experiments
cannot  be  taken  into  serious  consideration,  for  deception  is  too
easy;  though  occasionally,  in  her  father's  absence,  Sophie
was  able  to  tell  the  thought  of  Dr.  Kotik.  Here  are  some
examples :

Dr.  Kotik's  thought.  Sophie's  answer.

Spitschka.  Spitschka.
Noshik.  Noshik.
Plessimeter.  Instrument  like  that  used  by

(The  Russian  words  signify  matches,  a  knife,  scissors,  gum,
a  ring,  etc.)

The  experiment  succeeded  even  when  Sophie,  the  percipient,
was  separated  from  the  agent  (her  father  or  M.  Kotik)  by  a
closed  door.

Dr.  Kotik  concludes  absolutely  for  mental  transmission ;  he  even
goes  so  far  as  to  indicate  its  laws,  saying  that  it  is  mainly  trans-
mitted in  a  phonetic  form  and  loses  some  of  its  energy  in  passing
through  a  wall.

He  made  some  further  experiments  with  Lydia  W.,  a  girl  of

lDie  Emanation  der  psycho-physischen  Energie,  Wiesbaden,  1908.

A  coin.
Patron.
Bulewka.
Noshnizy.

glass  makers.
A  button,  a  coin.
A  Pa.  .  .da. . .
Bulawka.

Noshik.  .  .Noshiry.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  191

eighteen,  well  educated,  and  an  automatic  writer.  The  proofs
of  spiritist  cryptesthesia  were  many.   To  cite  one  only :

There  was  always  a  phonetic  resemblance  between  the  thought
and  the  word  indicated,  even  when  Lydia  was  making  a  mistake.

This  transmission,  however,  might  be  visual,  for  in  another
series  of  experiments,  Dr.  Kotik  looked  at  a  post-card  that  Lydia
could  not  see,  and  she  wrote  automatically  a  description,  some-
times very  accurate,  of  what  the  card  contained.  It  would  seem
that  this  mental  transmission  was  improved  when  agent  and
percipient  were  linked  by  a  wire.

Finally  Dr.  Kotik  tried  fixing  his  thought  (of  an  object,  a
landscape,  or  a  sentiment)  on  blank  paper,  giving  the  blank  sheet
to  Lydia  to  guess  what  his  thought  had  been.  The  results  were
astonishing.    I  will  give  one  instance  only.

Dr.  Bernstein  thought  of  a  landscape — the  seashore,  a  boat
with  people  in  it;  on  the  shore  a  building  surrounded  with  ver-
dure. Lydia  saw — "A  sheet  of  water  like  a  mirror ;  on  the  shore
some  houses  surrounded  by  trees ;  a  boat  on  the  water."  Chance
cannot  account  for  this,  though  there  was  some  sameness  in  the
pictures  to  be  guessed,  the  similitude  between  the  image  mentally
impressed  on  the  paper  and  that  seen  by  Lydia  is  too  marked.

Dr.  Kotik  draws  the  following  inferences :  Thought  is  a  radiant
energy.  This  energy  has  physical  and  psychic  properties.  It
may  be  called  psycho-physical.  Originating  in  the  brain,  it  passes
to  the  extremities  of  the  body.  It  is  transmitted  through  air
with  some  difficulty,  more  easily  through  a  metallic  conductor,
and  can  be  fixed  on  paper.

According  to  him  there  are  two  conditions  to  be  considered:
the  sensitiveness  of  the  subject,  and  the  vibratory  energy  that
sets  the  sensitiveness  into  action.  This  vibratory  energy  was
specially  studied  by  Dr.  Kotik,  but  it  does  not  seem  distinctive
of  human  thought;  it  is  possible  that  all  things  radiate  certain
vibratory  energies,  since  sensitives  indicate  not  only  the  things

Dr.  Kotik' s  thought.

Lydia' s  answer.

Lumiere.
?

?

D'apres.

Cheval.

Journal.

Lumiere,

Baiser.

Neige.

Daprer.

Cheval.

Journal.

192

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

of  which  someone  has  thought,  but  also  inert  objects  apart  from
any  thought.  It  seems  more  cautious  to  adopt  no  hypothesis
other  than  that  of  a  special  sensibility  that  enables  hypnotized
persons  and  mediums  to  know  that  which  exists,  whether  a
thought  or  an  object.  This  may  possibly  be  due  to  their  very
strong  subconsciousness.

Dr.  Rudolph  Tischener1  has  recently  published  an  important
work  on  lucidity.  I  shall  not  enter  upon  his  theoretical  disquisi-
tions, the  time  is  not  ripe  for  them,  and  all  such  are  distressingly
frail,  but  will  keep  to  the  facts  recorded.  Dr.  Tischener  cites
some  very  remarkable  ones.

After  having  experimented  with  Mme.  de  B.,  who  gave  some
good  instances  of  cryptesthesia  to  Wasielewski,  Dr.  Tischener
tried  a  man  of  thirty-two,  named  Re.,  the  son  of  a  postal  employee,
and  himself  in  business.  Several  words  were  written  out  of
Re.'s  sight,  folded,  and  put  into  a  sealed  and  opaque  (lichtdicht)
envelope.  (What  was  the  degree  of  opacity?)

The  results  of  many  experiments  were  remarkable.  There
could  not  be  transmission  of  thought,  for  several  of  these  sealed
envelopes  were  shuffled  together,  and  Dr.  Tischener  did  not  know
the  contents  of  those  handed  to  Re.  Out  of  68  trials  24  gave
negative  results ;  but  this  is  of  no  import,  for  in  the  44  that  suc-
ceeded coincidence  is  quite  impossible  as  an  explanation.  Athen
for  Athen,  Barbara  for  Baelbara,  Eberhard  for  Ebarhard,  Mada-
lene  for  Madelene,  and  Pater  for  Dater.

Albert  Hofmann  (of  Mehlen)2  made  some  curious  experiments
in  telepathy  with  a  Dr.  Freudenberg.  M.  Hofmann  had  been
the  percipient  in  some  of  Tischener's  experiments;  in  this  case
he  acted  as  agent,  living  in  a  house  thirty  yards  distant.  Ex-
periment 1 :  Hofmann  suggested  Alaof  Koln  and  Freuden-
berg said  Koln.  Experiment  2  failed.  Experiment  3,  Hofmann
suggested  Groenendael,  and  Freudenberg  saw  a  pretty  wood
with  ponds  which  agrees  with  the  wood  of  Groenendael  near
Brussels.  In  a  later  series  of  experiments  the  agent  and  per-
cipient were  in  separate  houses  800  metres  apart;  the  transmis-
sion of  colours  and  visions  were  both  very  distinct.  The  word
"encrier"  (inkstand)  was  transmitted  and  among  others  a  very
strange  one:  Freudenberg  suggested  Julius  Caesar;  Hofmann
thought  of  the  bridge  at  Bonn  where  there  is  a  statue  of  Julius

xUber  Telepathie  und  Hellsehen,  Munchen,  Bergmann,  1920.
tVersuche  iiber  Telepathie  (Psych.  Stud.,  January,  1921,  1-12).

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  193

Caesar.  Unfortunately  after  these  successful  trials  there  was
a  series  of  failures.

It  is  useless  to  multiply  instances.  It  is  not  chance;  it  is  not
telepathy.  Is  it  retinal  super-acuity  pushed  to  the  point  of  crypt-
esthesia?  Or  was  there  some  experimental  error  by  which  Re.
might  have  seen  what  Tischener  wrote?  I  do  not  suppose  this
to  be  the  case,  for  Dr.  Tischener  is  well  acquainted  with  possible
sources  of  fraud  described  by  American  psychologists.

Dr.  Waldemar  de  Wasielewski1  has  reported  some  cases  of
pragmatic  cryptesthesia  which  are  akin  to  dowsing  experiments.
Mile,  von  B.,  observed  by  him  under  conditions  excluding  fraud,
was  often  able  to  state  the  nature  of  objects  enclosed  in  boxes
well  tied  with  string,  to  say  whether  they  were  of  wood  or  of
what  kind  of  metal.  In  the  very  imperfect  statistics  that  he  gives
there  were  6  failures  in  50  experiments.  But  we  ought  to  know
what  was  the  mathematical  probability  of  success.  He  also  made
some  experiments  on  drawings  and  words  enclosed  in  boxes.
The  details  must  be  read  in  the  original.  Dr.  de  W.  wrote  in
reversed  order  and  Mile,  de  B.  read  as  though  not  reversed;
the  writing  in  this  instance  being  in  an  envelope  and  not  in  a  box.
Dr.  de  W.  thinks,  with  good  reason,  that  an  influence  proceeding
from  the  things,  rather  than  telepathy,  is  in  play — that  mysterious
rhabdic  force  which,  proceeding  from  subterranean  water  or
metals,  causes  the  muscles  of  the  dowser  to  bend  his  hazel  rod.

M.  Warcollier,  a  chemical  engineer,  has  made  numerous  and
very  methodical  experiments  on  telepathy,  not  yet  published.
He  has  kindly  permitted  me  to  see  his  manuscript.  Some  of
these  are  on  drawings,  with  himself  as  percipient,  and  are  very
interesting.  Among  ten  experiments,  one  (the  fourth  of  the
series)  was  extraordinarily  successful;  the  drawing  was  of  a
dirigible  balloon  with  a  screw;  the  reproduction  was  also  a
dirigible  balloon  with  a  screw.  Other  trials  were  half  successful ;
the  drawing  being  a  tricolour  flag,  nine  successive  sketches  were
made,  a  tricolour  flag  being  one  of  them.  Experiment  No.  8  was
on  a  drawing  of  a  curved  hunting-horn;  among  5  sketches  one
was  of  a  snail  shell  resembling  a  hunting-horn.  The  tenth  was
a  parrot ;  the  percipient  among  his  12  sketches  drew  a  wounded
bird  falling  to  earth.  Summing  up  his  experiments,  M.  War-
collier  states  that  out  of  35  trials,  13  were  negative,  5  must  be

1Un  cas  de  lucidite  spontanee,  A.  S.  P.,  June,  1914,  xxiv,  165.

194

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

eliminated  by  reason  of  coincidence  that  seems  really  due  to
chance,  10  were  half  successful,  and  7  were  complete  successes.
The  mathematical  probabilities  are,  however,  difficult  to  estimate.

Comparing  the  different  modalities  of  telepathy  that  M.  War-
collier  has  studied  by  methods  that  would  take  too  much  space
to  detail  here,  he  classifies  the  comparative  facility  of  transmission

as  under:

Colours   70  per  cent.

Attitudes   55  per  cent.

Drawings    45  per  cent.

Objects   38  per  cent.

Ideas    37  per  cent.

Mental  images   10  per  cent.

Words  and  figures   10  per  cent.

This  is  an  interesting  attempt  at  classification  which  requires
the  fuller  confirmation  that  can  only  be  given  by  numerous  ex-
periments ;  and  it  is  not  easy  to  find  those  who,  like  M.  Warcollier,
are  at  the  same  time  both  sensitives  and  also  competent  to  make
exact  calculations  and  analyses.

That  M.  Warcollier  is  a  sensitive  is  shown  by  an  instance  of
cryptesthesia  happening  to  himself.  Late  one  evening  he  went
to  the  house  of  a  friend  in  the  country.  He  went  to  bed,  fell
asleep,  and,  partially  waking  up,  he  saw  by  the  light  of  the  night-
lamp  a  large  quadrangular  corded  package  in  yellow  packing
paper.  He  cried  out,  "What  is  that  package  ?"  Mme.  War-
collier, waking  up,  was  astonished,  for  there  was  no  such  package
in  the  room ;  her  husband  then  described  the  thing,  which  had  in
fact  been  taken  to  that  room  by  mistake  and  had  been  left  there
some  time  before  M.  Warcollier's  arrival,  and  then  taken  away.

M.  Abronowski,  quoted  by  M.  Warcollier,  out  of  324  trials,
the  odds  in  each  separate  case  being  1  to  3,  had  157  successes,
say  50  per  cent.,  a  total  that  greatly  exceeds  the  probable  number.
In  these  experiments  there  was  hand-contact,  which  takes  away
a  good  deal  of  their  value.  However,  with  one  percipient  more
sensitive  than  the  other,  Jeanne  Hirschberg,  62  per  cent,  of  suc-
cesses were  obtained  without  hand-contact.  Both  M.  Warcollier
and  M.  Abronowski  have  advanced  some  timid  hypotheses  to
explain  telepathy.  There  is  good  reason  for  timidity ;  the  hypothe-
sis that  brain  A  vibrates  by  transmission  of  the  vibration  of  brain
B  is  no  adequate  general  explanation,  for  very  often  there  is

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  195

lucidity  without  any  vibration  of  brain  B.  Spiritualists  have  a
simpler  explanation — that  the  spirits  are  omniscient  and  omnipo-
tent; but  this  is  childish.  I  prefer  to  avow  absolute  ignorance
what  the  mechanism  and  the  cause  may  be.

Lombroso,  quoted  by  Flammarion  (La  Mort  et  son  Mystere,
1920,  p.  255),  reports  the  case  of  a  young  hysterical  girl  who
sometimes  lost  the  power  of  seeing  with  her  eyes,  but  saw  with
her  ears;  she  could  read  printed  lines  placed  at  her  ears  when
her  eyes  were  bandaged.  On  this  transposition  of  senses  Flam-
marion says  that  the  subjects  wrongly  imagine  that  they  see  by
their  forehead,  ears,  or  stomach.  I  should  rather  be  inclined
to  think  that,  in  certain  cases  at  least,  there  is  a  real  sensory
impression  on  the  skin  which  is  perhaps  tactile  in  character.

These  instances  of  hyperesthesia  or  paresthesia  are  as  unques-
tionable as  the  case  of  Ludovic  S.,  reported  by  Boirac;  but  the
manifold  phenomena  of  cryptesthesia  cannot  be  referred  to  super-
acuity  of  the  senses;  this  explanation  or  by  transposition  of  the
senses  is  applicable  only  to  a  very  limited  number  of  cases;  and
even  in  them  we  cannot  be  sure  that  the  explanation  is  correct.
A  retina  capable  of  perceiving  luminous  rays  that  have  passed
through  three  sheets  of  thick  cardboard  is  so  different  from  the
normal  retina  that  the  study  of  it  belongs  more  to  metapsychics
than  to  physiology.

However,  it  is  perhaps  a  step  in  advance  to  be  able,  even  in
some  exceptional  cases,  to  attribute  some  phenomena  that  seemed
inexplicable  to  extreme  acuity  of  the  senses ;  and  it  will  be  very
interesting  to  study  this  with  sensitives.  One  never  knows  on
beginning  an  experimental  investigation  to  what  unexpected  and
unhoped-for  results  it  may  lead.

C.  Lombroso  has  stated  some  clear  cases  of  cryptesthesia.  He
discovered  a  young  commercial  clerk  called  Regis,  twenty-one
years  of  age,  and  in  experiments  in  which  he  was  assisted  by
Drs.  Ottolenghi,  Sartoris,  and  Roncarini,  he  found  that  Regis
could  reproduce  some  of  the  experiments  of  Pickmann,  but  with-
out contact.  Lombroso  wrote  the  word  Pitckcrel  on  a  slate.
Regis,  ten  yards  distant,  having  his  eyes  and  ears  bandaged,
wrote  Pitche  on  another  slate.  He  was  given  a  drawing  in  an
envelope,  and  he  then  (with  bandaged  eyes)  made  an  astonish-
ingly correct  facsimile.  There  were  some  failures.  Regis  had
on  that  day  drunk  a  pint  of  rum  and  was  very  drunk,  which  is
not  a  good  condition  in  which  to  work  a  fraud.    M.  B.  (of

196

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Nocera),  aged  twenty,  gave  Dr.  Grimaldi,  with  Lombroso  pres-
ent, some  interesting  instances  of  cryptesthesia.1

Other  experiments  on  telepathy  have  recently  been  undertaken
by  Drs.  F.  H.  Van  Loon  and  A.  Weinberg.2

As  their  memorandum  has  not  yet  been  published  in  its  en-
tirety, no  definite  opinion  can  be  expressed.  Seemingly  it  favours
telepathy,  and  emotional  feelings  seem  to  have  been  more  readily
perceptible  than  names,  numbers,  and  figures.  With  cards  there
were  failures.  When  one  of  the  agents  tasted  sweets  or  hydro-
chloric acid  the  result  was  a  success.  (But  were  full  precautions
taken?)  It  is  difficult  to  draw  any  conclusions  from  this  laborious
series  of  experiments  initiated  under  some  very  doubtful  notions
drawn  from  "thought-transference"  and  the  "willing  game."
The  good  faith  of  the  percipients  is  unquestionable;  but  there
may  have  been  slight  subconscious  sensorial  stimuli  awaking
vague  perceptions,  without  any  metapsychic  influence.  However
honest  the  percipients  may  be,  conditions  must  always  be  as
severe  as  if  they  were  under  suspicion,  for  the  subconsciousness
is  always  on  the  alert,  and  grasps  at  the  very  slightest  indications
that  may  put  it  on  the  track.  If  the  agent  raises  a  weight  and
the  percipient  says  that  he  feels  fatigue,  extreme  precautions
must  be  taken  that  the  percipient,  whose  senses  are  hyper-acute,
should  have  no  means  of  knowing  that  a  weight  is  being  lifted
behind  him.  All  movement  on  the  part  of  the  agent  must  be
absolutely  eliminated  before  we  can  conclude  that  cryptesthesia  is
present.

The  phenomena  presented  by  Mr.  Reese3  must  be  referred  to
pragmatic  cryptesthesia.

The  facts  which  we  shall  now  summarize  have  been  recorded
by  very  well-informed  observers — Carrington,  Schrenck-Notzing,
and  J.  Maxwell — who  experimented  separately  with  Reese.  Mr.
Carrington  has  made  a  special  study  of  prestidigitation,  and  is
an  experienced  psychologist.

Mr.  Reese  was  sixty-two  years  of  age  in  1913.  He  was  a
native  of  Posen  in  Prussian  Poland,  and  then  went  to  America,

xMon  enquite  sur  la  transmission  de  la  pensee,  A.  S.  P.,  1904,  xiv,  264-273.
*A  Method  of  investigation  into  thought  transference  (J.  S.  P.  R.,  January,
1921,  3-23.

8A.  Schrenck-Notzinff,  Un  clairvoyant,  A.  S.  P.,  1913.  xxiii,  65.  J.  Maxwell,
Mime  sujet,  ibid.,  67.  Carrington,  Compte  rendu  d'une  stance  avec  Bert  Reese
(ibid.,  357).

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  197

where  he  lived  for  many  years.  He  tells  of  many  interviews
with  prominent  men,  especially  with  leading  American  financiers,
for  one  of  his  gifts  was  the  ability  to  discover  springs  of  water
and  also  oil  wells.    He  gave  many  striking  instances  of  lucidity.

Edison  reports  experiences  with  Reese  that  seemed  decisive  to
him.  He  went  into  a  room  far  from  that  in  which  Reese  was
sitting  and  wrote,  "Is  there  anything  better  than  hydroxide  of
nickel  for  an  alkaline  electric  battery  ?"  He  then  returned  to
Reese,  who  at  once  said,  "No,  there  is  nothing  better  than
hydroxide  of  nickel  for  an  alkaline  battery."  Two  years  later
Edison  received  an  unexpected  visit  from  Reese.  Edison  then
wrote  the  word  "Keno"  in  microscopic  characters,  and  put  the
paper  in  his  pocket.  He  asked  Reese,  "What  have  I  written  ?"
and  Reese  answered  "Keno,"  without  hesitation.

Dr.  James  Hanna  Thompson,  an  alienist  and  an  avowed  sceptic,
was  absolutely  convinced  after  a  seance  with  Reese  (A.  S.  P.,
August,  1913).

Schrenck-Notzing  declares  that  Reese  is  one  of  the  most  ex-
traordinary men  of  the  time.  Schrenck  wrote  on  five  pieces  of
paper  the  questions  :  (1)  What  is  my  mother's  name?  (2)  When
will  you  go  to  Germany?  (3)  Will  my  book  be  a  success?  (4)
An  intimate  question  not  detailed,  and  (5)  What  is  the  name  of
my  eldest  son?  Reese,  without  touching,  or  barely  touching,  the
papers  answered  four  of  the  questions  in  as  many  minutes,  and
all  idea  of  thought-reading  can  be  eliminated,  for  Schrenck-
Notzing,  having  mixed  the  papers,  did  not  know  the  contents  of
the  one  presented.

With  J.  Maxwell  equally  surprising  results  were  obtained.
Reese  did  not  touch  the  seven  papers  which  Maxwell  had  written,
but  answered  each  though  Maxwell  did  not  know  what  each  as
given  to  Reese  contained.  The  first  name  of  Maxwell's  mother
(an  uncommon  one)  was  given  with  a  slight  error,  Marie  Ange-
line  for  Marie  Angelie.

H.  Carrington  describes  in  great  detail  a  similar  experience;
he  notes  carefully  that  the  regular  tricks  of  legerdemain  could
not  be  used,  and  after  a  very  methodical  investigation  concludes
the  case  to  be  one  of  genuine  clairvoyance.

Mr.  F.  Hollaender  gives  another  very  interesting  account  of
a  seance  that  he  had  with  Reese.  According  to  him,  Reese  was
able  to  indicate  to  a  commercial  firm  the  page  on  which  there  was
a  fraudulent  entry.    He  was  given  5  per  cent,  of  the  amount  of

198

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

the  fraud,  this  payment  amounting  to  2500  marks.  He  gave
Mr.  Hollaender  accurate  answers  to  personal,  intimate,  and  spe-
cial questions  that  Mr.  H.  had  written  in  Reese's  absence,  and
had  kept  in  his  pockets.1  According  to  Miss  Scatcherd,  the  same
facts  are  confirmed  by  M.  Drakoules.2  The  same  experiment  was
made  with  the  same  success :  M.  Drakoules  wrote  various  phrases
on  eighteen  papers  which  he  folded  and  placed  in  different  draw-
ers. Reese  read  them  all  while  still  in  the  drawers,  and  gave
correctly  the  names  of  Mme.  Drakoules's  three  daughters — Penel-
ope, Anastasia,  and  Giuletta.

In  1916  Reese  was  convicted,  in  New  York,  of  "disorderly
conduct."  On  appeal  he  convinced  the  judge,  Rosalsky,  not  only
of  his  innocence,  but  also  of  his  lucidity  (A.  S.  P.,  May,  1916).

The  testimony  of  the  able,  sagacious,  and  cautious  men  above
named  leaves  no  doubt  at  all  of  the  pragmatic  cryptesthesia  ex-
hibited by  Reese.  It  is  a  misfortune  that  he  declines  to  submit
to  fresh  tests.3

Another  remarkable  case  of  lucidity  is  given  by  Professor
Schottelius,  of  Stuttgart ;  Ludovic  H.,  a  Jew,  aged  forty,  gave
similar  tests.  Schottelius,  alone  in  his  room,  wrote  on  three  papers
what  then  came  into  his  mind.  He  took  one  in  his  right  and
one  in  his  left  hand,  clenched,  and  Ludovic  read  both.  A  judge
of  first  instance,  an  alienist  doctor,  the  medical  councillor  of  the
district,  and  a  legal  authority,  all  persons  not  to  be  suspected  of
credulity,  made  similar  experiments  with  Ludovic  (A.  S.  P.,
March,  1914,  xxiv,  65).  I  have  very  recently  verified  crypt-
esthesia in  full  force  with  Mr.  O.,  a  Polish  engineer.  At  Warsaw,
in  April,  1921,  Geley,  Lange,  and  I  had  the  opportunity  of
observing  him  with  care,  and  we  found  that  the  marvellous
accounts  given  of  his  powers  were  in  no  way  exaggerated.  After
dinner  one  day  Lange,  remote  from  Mr.  O.,  wrote  some  words
on  a  scrap  of  paper  and  put  it  in  an  envelope,  which  he  closed.
Mr.  O.,  crumpling  the  paper  in  his  hand  without  opening  the
envelope,  said,  "It  is  written  in  English.  I  see  one  separate
letter,  then  'cons'  and  then  'vendredi.'  "  Mr.  Lange  had  written,
"I  consider  you  are  wonderful."   This  is  particularly  interesting

Encore  le  voyant  Reese,  le  juif  eternel,  A.  S.  P.,  September,  19 13,  xxiii,
257-261.

^International  Psychic  Gazette,  March,  191 6.

8Max  Hoppe  (Ueber  Hcllsehen,  Diss,  in.,  Berlin,  1916)  has  criticized
these  experiments  with  Reese,  but  his  hypothesis  that  they  are  due  half  to
chance  and  half  to  sagacity  seems  to  me  very  feeble.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  199

as  it  seems  to  indicate  a  visual  perception  rather  than  a  reading
of  the  thought.

The  next  morning,  at  the  Hotel  d'Europe,  Mr.  O.  came  to
visit  me.  I  wrote  a  pkrase  that  came  into  my  mind  without  there
having  been  any  conversation  to  arouse  it,  "The  sea  never  appears
so  great  as  when  it  is  calm.  Its  fury  lessens  it."  Mr.  O.,  stand-
ing in  the  middle  of  the  room,  could  see  nothing  of  what  I  was
writing,  and  in  any  case  could  only  have  observed  from  afar  and
upside  down.  I  folded  the  paper,  put  it  in  an  envelope,  and
closed  it.  Mr.  O.  kneaded  it  in  his  hands  feverishly  without
opening  it,  and  after  ten  minutes  said,  "I  see  much  water !  much
water !  You  want  to  attach  some  idea  to  the  sea.  The  sea  is  so
great  that  beside  its  motion  ...  I  can  see  no  more."  An
admirable  result,  although  extreme  criticism  might  say  that  he
might  subsconsciously  have  partly  seen  what  I  was  writing.

Such  objections  could  not  apply  in  the  next  experiment,  which
is  more  demonstrative  despite  some  marked  mistakes.  I  took
two  letters  received  the  day  before,  and  when  alone  in  my  room
placed  them  in  envelopes  that  I  carefully  closed.  Taking  one
of  them  at  random,  whether  it  were  A  or  B,  I  gave  it  to  Mr.  O.
on  his  arrival.  He  then  said,  "It  is  a  letter  in  French  that  does
not  come  from  Paris ;  it  is  an  answer  to  a  letter  of  yours.  A  man
of  fifty  speaks  of  a  lady  whose  name  is  German  rather  than
French;  he  invites  you  to  come  where  he  is,  at  the  sea-side;  it
is  in  his  mind  to  go  to  Paris,,,  and  he  added  other  details,  some
not  characteristic,  and  some  erroneous.  He  then  said,  "Keep
that  letter.  M.  Geley  can  give  it  to  me  tomorrow  and  I  will
finish  reading  it."  The  next  day  Geley,  to  whom  I  had  given  the
envelope,  still  closed  and  without  saying  anything  of  the  contents
of  the  letter,  got  an  immediate  answer  from  Mr.  O.,  "It  speaks
of  a  Mme.  Berger.  The  letter  is  written  by  a  man  of  fifty;  it
is  an  invitation;  it  comes  from  the  sea-side."  Now  this  letter,
of  which  neither  Mr.  O.  nor  Dr.  Geley  knew  anything,  and  of
which  nothing  could  be  seen  by  normal  senses,  was  from  a
German  professor,  R.  Berger,  at  Berlin,  in  answer  to  a  letter  of
mine,  asking  me  to  see  him  on  my  return  (from  Warsaw).  He
is  about  fifty.

Geley's  experience  was  perhaps  even  better.  He  wrote  on  a
visiting  card,  holding  it  on  his  knee  under  the  table,  "Nothing  is
more  moving  than  the  call  to  prayer  by  the  muezzins."  The  card,
still  kept  under  the  table,  was  put  into  a  thick  envelope,  and  closed.

200

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Mr.  O.  said,  'There  is  a  feeling  of  prayer,  a  call,  from  men  who
are  being  killed  or  wounded.  .  .  .  No,  it  is  not  that.  .  .  .
Nothing  gives  rise  to  more  emotion  than  the  call  to  prayer,  it  is
like  a  call  to  prayer,  to  whom?  A  certain  caste  of  men,  Mazzi —
madz.  ...  A  card.  I  can  see  no  more/'

There  were  some  other  experiments  equally  astonishing,  which
I  shall  not  detail,  as  we  shall  shortly  have  the  opportunity  of
observing  this  cryptesthesia  at  the  Metapsychic  Institute  with  all
necessary  minuteness.

In  short,  cryptesthesia  in  these  exceptionally  gifted  beings —
clairvoyants — cannot  be  called  in  question.

(c)  Crystal  Vision

Vision  by  the  crystal  seems  to  be  favourable  to  the  development
of  cryptesthesia  in  sensitives.  This  method  seems  to  have  been
used  by  magicians  in  all  ages  (the  magic  mirror).

Grasset  (loc.  cit.,  135-143)  mentions  the  ancient  methods  of
divination  by  the  water  of  a  spring  (hydromancy)  or  by  vessels
filled  with  oil  (lecanomancy)  by  which  Ulysses  enquired  of
Tiresias;  or  by  mirrors,  or  crystal  spheres.  Sometimes  a  finger-
nail covered  with  oil  was  used.  In  the  sixteenth  century  Dr.
John  Dee  showed  a  small  crystal  in  which  the  future  could  be
read.  Saint-Simon  tells  in  his  memoirs  how  a  rogue  showed  the
Duke  of  Orleans  all  that  he  wanted  to  know  in  a  glass  of  water.1

When  a  sensitive  looks  into  the  crystal,  objects,  moving  pic-
tures, and  persons  are  often  seen.  Mrs.  Verrall  says,  "The  visions
obtained  by  looking  fixedly  into  a  glass  of  water  or  a  crystal  ball
differ  from  visual  impressions;  a  certain  amount  of  darkness

*A  very  detailed  summary  has  been  given  by  Miss  X.,  Recent  experiments
in  crystal  vision,  P.  S.  P.  R.,  May,  1889,  v,  486-504.  See  also  Adeline  Fr.  von
May,  Visionen  itn  Wasserglasse,  1876.  Hyslop,  Experiments  in  crystal  vision,
P.  S.  P.  R.,  xii,  259.  F.  Myers,  Experiments  in  crystal  vision,  P.  S.  P.  R.,  viii,
459-  P-  Janet,  On  experiment  in  crystal  vision,  ibid.,  xv,  385.  A.  Lang,  On
crystal  vision,  ibid.,  xv,  48-50.  Fr.  Myers,  De  la  conscience  subliminale,
A.  S.  P.,  1897,  No-  5  ;  1898,  Nos.  2,  3,  and  4;  1899,  Nos.  3,  4,  and  5  ;  1900,  Nos.
1  and  2.

The  Seeress  of  Prevorst  sometimes  saw  whole  scenes  in  soap  bubbles  blown
before  her.

Besides  the  writings  of  Fr.  Myers,  Subliminal  Consciousness,  consult
P.  Janet,  Automatisme  psychologique,  and  Andrew  Lang,  The  Making  of  Re-
ligion, 1897,  trad,  et  anal,  par  E.  Lefebvre,  A.  S.  P.,  1898,  viii,  129-148.
Andrew  Lang,  Dreams  and  Ghosts,  1897.  W.  Stead,  Real  ghosts,  1897,  65-66.
P.  Joire,  Methode  d' experimentation,  etc.,  A.  S.  P.,  1901,  xi,  329.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  201

favours  the  appearance  of  the  images.  These  images  seem  to  be
made  with  the  bright  points  in  the  crystal,  and,  once  produced,
they  have  a  reality  that  no  imagination  can  invent.  Sometimes
there  is  movement;  sometimes  I  know  that  there  is  such  and
such  a  colour,  though  I  cannot  see  it  optically."

Miss  A.,  who  is  not  a  professional  medium,  and  whose  name
has  not  been  published,  thus  describes  her  impressions :  "I  knew
nothing  about  crystal  vision,  when  one  day,  being  at  lunch
with  some  friends,  the  conversation  turned  on  this  subject.  They
declared  that  visions  could  be  seen  in  a  glass  of  clear  water.  I
looked  and  seemed  to  see  a  small  golden  key  at  the  bottom  of  my
glass.  It  was  so  distinct  that  I  looked  on  the  table-cloth,  think-
ing it  was  really  there."  Subsequently  Miss  A.,  having  made
other  experiments  with  a  crystal  ball,  thus  describes  her  sensa-
tions: The  crystal  is  wrapped  in  black  material  leaving  only  a
part  open  to  the  sight.  The  darkness  does  not  matter.  After  one
or  two  minutes  a  bright  light  appears  which  fades,  becomes  a  fog
in  which  landscapes  appear,  or  letters,  sometimes  written  re-
versed. The  scenes  are  very  interesting,  sometimes  having  no
connection  with  any  real  event.

According  to  Miss  X.,  the  things  seen  in  the  crystal  have  true
colours ;  they  are  like  remembered  scenes  but  more  distinct.

Mr.  Hyslop  has  given  some  instances  of  crystal  vision  (P.  S.
P.  R.,  1898,  xii,  pp.  259-276).  These  were  obtained  by  Mrs.  D.
and  were  very  distinct.  He  verifies  frequent  coincidence  of  the
vision  with  real  events,  but  does  not  think  that  chance  coincidence
can  be  disregarded.  The  instances  are,  however,  so  numerous
and  striking  that  they  would  seem  to  show  true  lucidity.  In
one  case  Mrs.  D.  saw,  near  her  sister,  a  person  unknown  to  her
in  a  coffin,  a  friend  unknown  to  Mrs.  D.  being  then  extremely
ill  in  the  sister's  house.  The  patient  was  recognized  among  seven
photographs  brought  by  Mr.  Hyslop  (in  this  particular  case  the
vision  was  in  a  dream,  not  in  the  crystal).  In  another  case,  by
the  crystal,  Mrs.  D.  saw  the  cemetery,  but  different  from  what
she  thought  it  to  be.  The  new  arrangement  of  the  tombs  was
really  as  she  saw  it,  as  she  found  on  visiting  the  cemetery  to
verify  the  facts.  This  is  possibly  a  case  of  paramnesia  (believing
that  one  remembers  things  not  seen).

In  fine,  Mr.  Hyslop  concludes  that  crystal  vision,  in  Mrs.  D.'s
case  at  least,  does  not  give  the  certitude  of  supernormal  cogni-
zance that  strict  science  demands.

202

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

The  Rev.  P.  Lescoeur  (quoted  by  Grasset,  loc.  tit.,  140)  states
that  he  knew  a  woman  who,  on  looking  into  a  glass  of  water,  saw
to  her  great  surprise  an  apparition  of  the  head  of  Christ,  expres-
sive of  great  pain.  "I  drew  back,  with  an  exclamation  of  amaze-
ment; but  on  looking  again  the  Ecce  Homo  face  appeared  in
profile,  then  grew  less  distinct  and  vanished.  It  had  lasted  about
a  minute.,,  This  is  a  hallucination  brought  about  by  crystal
vision,  but  has  no  connection  with  cryptesthesia.

Myers  made  a  careful  study  of  crystal  vision,  especially  with
Miss  Freer.  The  subject  is  requested  to  look  attentively,  but  not
so  as  to  produce  fatigue,  in  a  mirror  or  some  transparent  object,
arranged  so  as  to  reflect  surrounding  objects  or  the  face  of  the
observer  as  little  as  possible.  If  a  crystal  ball  is  used  it  is  sur-
rounded with  black  material.  It  is  best  that  the  subject  should  be
alone  in  the  room  and  should  be  mentally  passive.  After  ten
minutes  or  so  he  sometimes  sees  that  the  glass  or  the  crystal
becomes  dim  and  some  object  seems  to  appear  in  it  or  on  it.
About  one  person  in  twenty  may  succeed  in  this  experiment,  and
among  twenty  seers,  perhaps  one  only  is  capable  of  developing
this  faculty  of  internal  vision  sufficiently  to  receive  veridical
impressions  that  could  not  be  obtained  by  normal  means.

Crystal  vision  does  not  produce  the  major  hypnotic  sleep  as
has  sometimes  been  affirmed.  It  seems  to  have  no  effect  on
health  other  than  fatigue  if  the  experiment  is  prolonged.

Few  phenomena,  Myers  states,  are  so  fantastical  and  improbable.
The  visions  do  not  seem  to  follow  any  law ;  they  are  a  mixture
of  remembrances,  dreams,  telepathic  or  telesthetic  recognitions
and  precognitions.  In  short,  crystal-gazing  is  an  empirical
method  of  arousing  cryptesthesia;  the  mechanism  by  which  this
comes  to  pass  is  unknown.

Mrs.  Leeds,  whose  husband  is  on  night  duty  on  the  railway,
wakes  up  suddenly  in  the  night;  she  raises  a  glass  of  water  from
the  night-table  to  her  lips,  and  sees  in  the  water  the  moving
image  of  a  railway  train  with  a  guard's  look-out  van  at  one  end.
She  then  sees  the  trucks  hurled  on  one  another,  and  the  guard's
van  damaged.  Two  hours  later,  Mr.  Leeds  comes  in  and  tells
his  wife  that  there  has  been  an  accident,  the  brakeman  being
badly  hurt  (/.  S\  P.  R.,  December,  1903).

Myers  quotes  (A.  S.  P.,  1901,  xi,  297)  the  case  of  Miss  A.,
looking  into  the  crystal  in  presence  of  Sir  Joseph  Burnby;  she
describes  a  tall  dark  lady  in  the  room  of  a  hotel;  the  door  is

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  203

open  and  she  is  about  to  wash  her  hands.  Sir  Joseph  thinks  of
his  wife.  Miss  A.  adds,  "She  is  wearing  a  serge  dress  with  a
great  deal  of  braid  on  the  bodice  and  a  band  of  braid  on  one
side  of  the  skirt."  Sir  Joseph  thinks  that  the  figure  cannot  be
that  of  his  wife;  but  on  returning  to  Eastbourne  some  days  later
he  found  that  Lady  Burnby  had  bought  such  a  dress  and  that
the  description  of  her  washing  her  hands  in  the  hotel  room  with
an  open  door  was  accurate.  Miss  A.  did  not  know  Lady  Burnby,
but  some  months  later  on  seeing  her  entering  a  theatre  said,
"That  is  the  lady  in  a  serge  dress  that  I  saw  in  the  crystal."

In  certain  cases,  instead  of  looking  into  the  crystal,  a  large
shell  is  held  to  the  ear,  as  children  do  "to  hear  the  sound  of  the
sea."  This  is  another  empirical  method  of  arousing  cryptesthesia.
When  Miss  X.  listens  thus  she  hears  confused  noises,  sometimes
musical  notes,  or  human  voices  speaking  distinct  words.  One  day
she  suddenly  hears  "Endsleigh  Street,"  a  name  she  does  not  know.
A  few  minutes  later  she  is  told  that  Mr.  H.  has  come  to  London
from  Oxford.  "Is  he  living  here  as  usual?"  She  was  told  no,
he  has  taken  a  room  in  Endsleigh  Street.

Another  time  Miss  X.  hears  the  words,  "Are  you  a  vegetarian?"
as  if  pronounced  by  Mr.  Smith  whom  she  has  just  left;  the  fact
being  that  Mr.  Smith  a  few  minutes  later  asked  Mr.  M.,  whom
he  had  met  by  chance,  "Are  you  a  vegetarian?"  The  letter  of
enquiry  addressed  by  Miss  X.  to  Mr.  Smith  was  written  before
she  had  learned  that  these  words  had  really  been  spoken.

Vision  in  the  crystal  or  hearing  by  a  shell  seems  to  be  restricted
to  sensitives;  it  therefore  does  not  pertain  to  cryptesthesia  in
normal  persons,  but  only  to  sensitives.  The  phenomena  are  slight
in  comparison  with  those  obtained  at  spiritist  seances.

6.  Conclusions  on  Experimental  Cryptesthesia

Alike  in  normal  persons,  sensitives,  somnambulists,  and  me-
diums, the  fact  of  cryptesthesia  is  beyond  question.

Even  if  we  were  to  make  the  absurd  admission  that  three-
fourths  of  the  reported  facts  are  erroneous,  there  would  still
remain  a  series  of  verified  facts  that  defy  criticism  and  render
it  certain  that  there  is  a  strange  faculty  of  cognition  in  human
beings  that  brings  information  which  could  not  possibly  be  ac-
quired by  the  normal  senses.

It  seems  to  me  quite  unscientific  to  attempt  to  fix  limits  to  this

204

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

power,  and  to  say  that  it  will  come  into  play  on  a  given  day  or
hour  and  under  given  conditions.  Since  this  faculty  of  higher
cognition  exists  (called  "supernormal"  by  Myers),  why  not  say,
Nihil  a  me  alienum  puto?  It  has  been  shown  that  this  faculty
of  cryptesthesia  is  not  limited  by  time  or  space.  Let  us  then
use  this  discovery  to  denote  the  phenomena  of  monition,  premoni-
tion, and  clairvoyance  that  are  so  numerous  and  undeniable.  It
covers  nearly  all  that  seems  so  marvellous.  As  soon  as  it  is
certain  that  by  any  means  soever  human  consciousness  can  be
aware  of  the  contents  of  a  closed  envelope,  or  of  that  which
moves  the  emotion  of  a  person  near  us,  or  of  a  distant  friend
who  is  thinking  of  us,  I  do  not  see  what  limits  can  be  assigned
to  this  power.  In  presence  of  any  fact  of  subjective  metapsy chics,
however  marvellous,  I  dare  not  say,  "This  is  beyond  the  power  of
lucidity."

Certainly  cryptesthesia  is  very  strange  and  we  do  not  in  any
way  understand  it,  but  that  is  no  reason  for  introducing  gods,
angels,  demons,  or  spirits  after  the  fashion  of  savages  who  ascribe
natural  forces  to  a  fantastic  divinity  rewarding  or  tormenting
poor  mortals.  It  is  hardly  rational  to  call  in  the  spirits  of  the
dead.  We  recognize  in  cryptesthesia  a  higher  human  faculty  as
yet  unknown  by  our  intellect;  we  must  stop  there,  provisionally
at  any  rate.

We  will,  however,  go  a  little  further.  In  order  that  crypt-
esthesia should  come  into  action,  something  in  us  must  be  moved,
for  every  effect  has  its  cause.  There  must  therefore  be  some
mysterious  external  vibration  that  acts  on  our  organism.  It  is
in  this  sense  that  cryptesthesia  is  necessarily  pragmatic,  for  if
there  were  nothing  external  to  set  it  in  motion,  the  mind  could
perceive  nothing.  But  we  are  in  absolute  ignorance  as  to  what
that  vibration  may  be;  and  in  the  present  embryonic  stage  of
metapsychics  we  shall  not  seek  to  discover  it.

The  important  thing  is  the  proven  fact :  that  certain  individuals
at  certain  times  are  aware  of  facts,  and  receive  impressions  that
cannot  be  referred  to  normal  senses  but  which  nevertheless  agree
with  real  external  events.  This  affirmation  is  based  on  various
proofs,  which  we  will  sum  up  at  this  point.

1.  In  making  experiments  of  thought-transference  or  telepathy
(which  is  only  a  particular  form  of  cryptesthesia)  it  is  found,
even  when  experimenting  with  normal  persons,  that  there  is
always  a  small  excess  of  correct  results  over  the  number  that

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  205

chance  alone  would  give  according  to  the  calculus  of  probability ;
though  this  excess  is  not  large  enough  for  definite  conclusions.

2.  With  hypnotized  and  hypnotizable  subjects  the  divergence
between  the  probable  and  the  real  number  of  successes  is  so
large  that  the  excess  cannot  possibly  be  referred  to  chance.  Cer-
tain somnambulists  give  answers  so  precise,  reproduce  words,
writings,  and  drawings  with  such  exactitude  and  so  abundantly,
that  the  cryptesthesia,  indicated  by  experiment  with  normal  per-
sons, becomes  undeniable.

3.  In  spiritist  seances,  in  which  an  external  personality  seems
to  dictate  the  answers,  and  especially  with  powerful  mediums
such  as  Mrs.  Piper,  the  proof  of  cryptesthesia  is  overwhelming;
though  it  is  not  possible  to  conclude,  in  any  way  satisfactory
to  strict  science,  that  an  intelligent  external  personality  intervenes.

4.  Experimenting  with  sensitives  gives  many  instances  of  crypt-
esthesia, sometimes  as  striking  as  those  with  hypnotized  persons
and  mediums.

5.  Cryptesthesia  is  most  frequently  manifested  in  the  shape  of
telepathy  (thought-reading)  but  it  also  gives  facts  unknown  to
any  person  present.  And  now,  as  the  mass  of  facts  proves  the
existence  of  the  faculty,  we  may  make  some  attempt  to  under-
stand it.

Let  us  suppose  that  no  individual  of  the  human  race  had  the
sense  of  smell.  No  one  could  have  the  least  idea  what  a  scent
could  be.  Passing  by  a  dung-heap  or  a  field  of  violets  we  should
be  unaware  of  either  if  they  were  out  of  sight,  they  being  neither
visible  nor  making  any  sound.  If,  then,  some  exceptional  indi-
vidual should  be  gifted  with  the  sense  of  smell,  we  should  be
enormously  surprised,  if  when  passing  the  unseen  dung-heap  or
violets  he  could  tell  us,  There  is  manure  here,  or  violets  there.

This  exceptional  individual  could  also,  by  his  sense  of  smell,
be  aware  of  facts  long  past.  If  a  grain  of  iodoform  had  been
placed  in  a  cupboard  ten  years  ago,  the  scent  of  iodoform  would
still  be  perceptible;  and  if  our  exceptional  individual  endowed
with  transitory  olfactory  sense  then  said,  There  has  been  iodo-
form in  this  cupboard,  what  extraordinary  lucidity  we  should
consider  it  to  be.

As  it  is,  we  find  it  difficult  to  understand  the  extreme  acuity  of
smell  with  which  some  animals  are  endowed ;  for  instance,  how  the
males  of  certain  moths  are  attracted  from  considerable  distances
by  the  odour  of  the  female  moth,  and  how  a  dog  can  track  a  hare

206

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

that  has  passed  an  hour  ago.  We  are  surprised,  but  we  under-
stand more  or  less  that  these  cases  are  the  hyper-sensitiveness
of  a  faculty  which  we  possess  in  a  rudimentary  state.  If  we
were  entirely  destitute  of  this  faculty  we  should  understand
nothing  at  all  of  the  facts.

To  return  to  the  exceptional  man  who  from  time  to  time  has
some  vague  olfactory  sense;  if  he  cannot  analyze  his  imperfect,
rudimentary,  and  fugitive  perceptions,  he  will  find  it  very  diffi-
cult to  explain  how  he  was  able  to  say,  There  were  violets  on
the  right,  and  a  dung-heap  on  the  left.  As  his  sensation  is
transitory,  he  will  try  to  recall  it,  but  in  vain ;  he  has  said,  "There
are  violets,"  but  the  scent  has  vanished,  and  he  does  not  even
know  why  he  made  the  statement.  This  knowledge  that  he  can-
not account  for  has  crossed  his  mind  in  a  flash,  and  he  has  now
become  like  to  other  men,  having  no  olfactory  sense.  He  does
not  even  know  what  "a  scent"  may  be.  He  only  knows  that  he
had  the  idea  of  violets.  The  more  he  tries  the  less  he  is  able
*o  say  what  made  him  exclaim,  "There  are  violets  near."

This,  of  course,  is  an  analogy  and  nothing  more ;  but  it  enables
us  to  conceive  how  some  vibrations  from  the  external  world
may  reach  us  and,  by  awaking  confused  and  transitory  ideas,
may  give  us  cognitions  whose  origins  are  unknown  and  perhaps
unknowable.  These  ideas  and  cognitions  are  in  the  realm  of
the  subconscious;  the  conscious  self  is  hardly  touched  by  them.
Lodge  ingeniously  compares  the  conscious  and  the  unconscious
parts  of  the  mind  to  a  man  who  is  swimming — his  head  alone
is  out  of  the  water,  but  the  rest  of  him  is  there,  unseen  all  the
while.  It  is  probable  that  cryptesthesia  is  more  especially  mani-
fested by  those  individuals  whose  conscious  self  is  somewhat  in-
active. The  subconscious  movements  of  writing,  with  or  without
the  planchette,  are  mostly  produced  when  the  conscious  self  is
in  a  state  of  semi-somnolence.  Unconscious  sensations  have  then
more  hold  and  determine  more  precise  movements  than  when
the  crowd  of  reasoned,  voluntary,  and  purposeful  ideas  dominate
the  consciousness.  Lucidity  is  more  common  in  the  hypnotic
sleep  that  in  the  normal  state,  and  monitions  occur  oftener  in
sleep  than  in  waking  hours  because  during  waking  life  the  ex-
terior influences  of  our  environment  impinge  strongly  on  our
normal  senses  and  prevent  our  perception  of  the  unknown  ener-
gies (probably  much  feebler)  that  move  our  cryptesthesia.

But  whatever  theory  we  adopt,  cryptesthesia  exists;  in  other

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  207

words,  the  human  intelligence  has  modes  of  cognition  that  are
unknown  to  us.

There  is  no  ground  for  surprise,  for  the  smallest  reflection  on
the  immense  fertility  of  nature  will  reveal  that  there  are  forces
unknown  to  us.  No  man  of  sense  and  intelligence  can  imagine
that  there  are  no  forces  in  the  cosmos  but  those  analyzed  in  our
text-books  of  physics.  Since,  then,  there  are  unknown  forces
in  the  universe,  jt^is  possible  that  these  may  influence  us;  the
whole  crux  of  the  matter  is  whether  our  being  is  now  moved
by  them.  To  affirm  that  unknown  forces  exist  is  not  to  prove
that  cryptesthesia  exists,  but  simply  to  demonstrate  that  crypt-
esthesia  is  possible.

It  may  be  otherwise  stated:  There  are  forces  that  our  normal
consciousness  does  not  perceive,  but  that  are  occasionally  per-
ceived by  our  subconsciousness.  If  it  were  proved  that  there
are  no  forces  in  nature  but  heat,  light,  electricity,  and  gravitation
we  should  be  almost  justified  in  denying  cryptesthesia,  but  as
soon  as  it  is  admitted  that  there  are  other  forces — and  that  can-
not be  denied,  whether  they  have  or  have  not  been  described  or
discovered — then  cryptesthesia  becomes  not  merely  possible  but
likely.1

Does  this  imply  that  the  fact  of  cryptesthesia  will  revolutionize
science  and  establish  a  new  era  in  psychology,  physiology,  and
physics?  From  the  theoretic  point  of  view  this  may  be  so,  but
practically,  however  interesting,  it  will  only  very  slightly  modify
social  life.  It  seems  to  occur  so  rarely  and  to  need  such  special
artifices  in  experimentation,  that  perhaps  it  plays  but  a  minor
part  in  the  daily  life  of  each  of  us.

Nevertheless  it  is  probable  that  the  external  world  that  lies
outside  our  normal  perceptions — and  in  this  I  include  the  thoughts
of  other  men — may  influence  our  acts,  our  wills,  and  our  feelings,
because  it  acts  continuously  upon  us  without  our  being  aware  of  it.
Though  always  weak  and  vague,  and  often  ineffective,  the  human
thoughts  and  the  unknown  vibrations  of  things  must  yet  exert
some  influence.  In  any  case,  the  fact  that  they  are  still  pro-
foundly mysterious  is  no  reason  for  refusing  to  study  them.

These  unknown  vibrations  certainly  exist.  They  can  at  rare
moments  touch  the  subconscious  elements  of  our  mind  and  thence

xIn  this  connection  see  the  admirable  note  by  Sir  William  Crookes  on  the
probable  continuity  of  vibratory  phenomena,  and  the  gaps  in  our  physical
organization  for  the  perception  of  the  greater  part  of  these  vibrations.

208

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

come  into  consciousness.  It  is  much  to  be  able  to  make  so  precise
a  statement  in  despite  of  the  scornful  denials  of  official  science
and  the  mocking  incredulity  of  the  crowd.1

7.  On  the  Identification  of  Spiritist  Personalities

When  dealing  with  automatic  writing  we  made  allusion  to  the
hypothesis  that  spiritualists  advance  almost  as  an  article  of  faith
that  a  vanished  human  personality  intervenes;  that  there  is  an
"incarnation"  of  a  dead  person  whose  intelligence  animates  the
body  of  mediums  and  writes  or  speaks  through  them.  This  iden-
tification of  spiritist  personalities  with  the  dead  is  a  serious  ques-
tion that  demands  profound  consideration;  for  the  personalities
that  appear  seem  real,  and  a  great  effort  of  rationalism  is  required
to  withstand  the  simple  and  alluring  hypothesis  that  the  dead
return.

Helen  Smith,  the  celebrated  medium,  studied  by  Flournoy,  took
on  the  personality  of  Marie  Antoinette,  and  played  that  part  for
many  months  with  a  perfection  that  the  cleverest  actresses  might
envy.  But  it  is  difficult  to  see  in  this  anything  more  than  a  pro-
longed and  marvellous  auto-suggestion.  In  the  absence  of  very
weighty  proofs  (which  Helen  Smith  did  not  give),  I  agree  with
my  learned  friend  T.  Flournoy  in  refusing  to  admit  that  the
unfortunate  queen  animated  the  humble  personality  of  Helen
Smith.

Mrs.  Piper  presented  a  first  "incarnation" — that  of  a  certain
French  doctor  of  Metz,  of  the  very  curious  name  Phinuit — as
her  guide,  who  spoke  by  her  voice.  But  the  name  has  never
been  discovered  in  the  archives  of  Metz,  and  Phinuit  could  not
speak  French.  When  asked  how  it  came  about  that  he  had  forgot-

1Many  new  facts  of  cryptesthesia  have  been  reported  which  establish
conclusively  the  existence  of  the  faculty  without  throwing  much  light  on  its
mechanism.

The  best  experiments  are  those  with  Stepan  Ossovietzki.  They  are  most
exact  (Revue  Metapsychique,  1921,  i,  420-431).  All  precautions  were  taken;
the  sealed  letter  was  never  lost  sight  of  by  the  experimenters,  and  Ossovietzki
does  not  seek  to  read  the  contents.  He  kneads  it  in  his  hands,  rubs  it,  and
after  having  stated  its  contents,  hands  it  back  to  the  experimenters  who
verify  the  seal  and  open  it  themselves.  The  envelope  was  thick  enough  to
preclude  vision  even  by  retinal  hyperesthesia.

Therefore  hypotheses  of  defective  experiment  or  retinal  hyperesthesia  must
be  finally  dismissed.  No  complicity  was  possible,  for  none  of  the  experimenters
knew  the  contents  of  the  envelopes.  Since  there  could  be  neither  trickery  nor
illusion,  there  is  absolute  certainty,  and  the  only  alternatives  are  cryptesthesia
or  chance  (second  French  edition).

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  209

ten  his  French,  he  answered  in  all  seriousness  that  he  had  had  so
many  English  patients  at  Metz  that  he  had  forgotten  his  maternal
tongue.

Between  the  first  hypothesis,  that  Marie  Antoinette  was  in-
carnate in  Helen  Smith,  Phinuit  in  Mrs.  Piper,  Dickens  in  the
medium  James;  and  the  second  hypothesis,  that  these  three  me-
diums had  a  subconscious  intelligence  acute  enough  to  take  on
the  roles  of  Marie  Antoinette,  Phinuit,  and  Dickens,  I  do  not
hesitate  a  moment  in  preferring  the  second.  Human  intelligence
is  so  wonderfully  and  mysteriously  endowed  that  it  may  doubt-
less be  able  to  enact  perfectly  the  most  complex  parts.  That  is
assuredly  very  strange ;  but  this  strangeness  is  not  the  enormous
absurdity  that,  despite  the  guillotine  and  the  worms  of  the  tomb,
Marie  Antoinette  and  Dickens  should  return  to  visit  us  and  that
their  souls  should  intervene  in  our  lives.

And,  in  addition,  as  many  experiments  show,  the  discarnate
souls  (to  use  the  spiritist  phrase),  are  manifestly  very  different
from  that  which  they  were  in  earth-life.  Such  extraordinary
cases  as  Marie  Antoinette  and  Dickens  are  the  rarest  exceptions.
Nearly  always  the  discarnates  show  very  moderate  intelligence
indeed,  and  give  utterance  to  commonplaces  of  a  special  kind
with  a  "spiritoid"  complexion — to  use  the  picturesque  barbarism
adopted  by  Flournoy  and  Lombroso.  They  hardly  remember
what  they  were;  they  give  poor  answers  to  the  most  elementary
questions.  In  a  seance  with  Eusapia  Paladino  (who,  by  the  way,
never  produced  any  subjective  phenomena  worthy  of  interest),
a  hand  touched  me,  alleged  by  John  King  to  be  that  of  my
father.  As  a  preliminary  sign  of  identity  I  asked  for  his  first
name;  but  this,  so  very  easy  to  supply,  was  not  given.

In  another  experiment  with  a  professional  medium,  to  whom
I  was  absolutely  unknown,  I  obtained  by  automatic  writing  a
long,  verbose,  and  insignificant  message  ending  in  a  pun.  "Je

fais  une  ;  je  dis,  nous;  j'admire  Tart;  reunis  ces  trois  mots

et  tu  auras  le  nom  de  ta  mere."  Her  name  was  Renouard ;  (Raie.
nous,  art).  This  cannot  be  fortuitous,  but  I  absolutely  refuse  to
imagine  that  the  soul  of  my  mother  had  nothing  to  say  to  me
but  this  idiotic  play  on  words.

The  idea  that  Aristotle  should  return  to  us  to  tell  us  in  French,
English,  or  Italian  that  the  future  of  humanity  is  bound  up  with
the  belief  in  spirits,  will  always  fill  me  with  strong  repugnance
to  the  hypothesis  that  Aristotle  is  speaking.   These  dictated  mes-

210

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

sages  are  so  remote  from  Aristotle's  writings  that  they  are  cer-
tainly not  from  him.  The  body  and  the  mind  make  the  per-
sonality. Not  to  speak  of  the  body  which  has  been  dust  these
two  thousand  years,  the  mind  of  a  human  being  is  known  by
its  imaginations,  its  hopes,  its  will,  its  feelings,  its  language,  and
above  all  its  remembrances.  If  nothing  remains  of  all  these,
bound  together  by  the  consciousness  that  was  himself,  I  have  the
right  to  say  that  the  mind,  like  the  body,  has  disappeared.

Nevertheless  I  shall  not  allow  myself  to  be  blinded  by  ration-
alism. I  admit  that  there  are  some  very  puzzling  cases  that  tend
to  make  one  admit  the  survival  of  human  personality — the  cases  of
Mrs.  Piper's  George  Pelham,  of  Raymond  Lodge,  and  some
others,  and  in  view  of  the  importance  of  the  question,  fuller  details
must  be  touched  upon.

Mrs.  Piper's  case  is  the  most  interesting  of  all;  in  the  whole
record  of  subjective  metapsychics  her  mediumship  is  the  most
remarkable.  Her  clairvoyance  has  been  studied  with  more  pa-
tience and  care  than  has  ever  previously  been  given  to  the  matter.
Three  thick  volumes  have  resulted  from  that  study  by  the  Ameri-
can S.  P.  R.,  of  which  only  an  abstract  is  possible  in  a  work
like  the  present  which  covers  the  whole  ground  of  metapsychics.1

Mrs.  Piper  had  the  good  luck  to  be  carefully  observed  for  sev-
eral years;  first  by  Richard  Hodgson  and  then  by  J.  Hyslop  of
Boston.  Hodgson  was  anything  but  credulous.  He  had  been
to  India  to  study  the  strange  phenomena  attributed  to  Mme.
Blavatsky,  and  had  decided  that  they  were  frauds.  He  also,  too
hastily,  inferred  fraud  in  the  Cambridge  seances  with  Eusapia.
But  Mrs.  Piper  convinced  him  of  the  reality  of  her  metapsychic
phenomena.  The  distinguished  psychologist,  William  James,  also
convinced  of  Mrs.  Piper's  genuine  powers,  introduced  her  to  his
notice.

Those  powers  are  not  in  doubt ;  we  have  given  in  Chapter  III,
ante  some  precise  instances  of  them ;  but  in  the  present  chapter,
which  deals  with  personifications  only,  and  not  with  the  proof
of  cryptesthesia,  we  shall  speak  only  of  the  personification  of
George  Pelham  in  Mrs.  Piper.

Was  there  really  an  "incarnation"  of  George  Pelham?  That

*A  partial  analysis  has  been  given  by  Marcel  Mangin  in  the  A.  S.  P.,  1898,
I.  xviii.  228-254,  268-294.  The  work  by  Sage  may  also  be  referred  to.  Sir
Oliver  Lodge  has  given  an  excellent  analysis  which  is  a  model  of  scientific
investigation.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  211

is  the  question  to  be  answered;  not  whether  cryptesthesia  was
manifested,  of  which  full  proof  has  already  been  given.

For  a  long  while  Mrs.  Piper's  guide  was  Phinuit,  that  astonish-
ing French  doctor  from  Metz  who  could  speak  no  French.  One
day  Phinuit  announced  his  approaching  departure,  and  that  he
would  be  replaced  by  another  personality.  That  personality  was
George  Pelham  (a  pseudonym  for  Robinson),  whose  name  was
barely  known  to  Mrs.  Piper.  Robinson,  on  the  7th  of  March,
1888,  had  been  present  at  one  of  Mrs.  Pipers  seances,  but  was
unconvinced.    He  died  in  February,  1892.

Phinuit,  in  one  of  his  last  seances,  named  George  .  .  .  John
Hart's  uncle,  and  suddenly  said,  "There  is  another  George  who
wishes  to  speak  to  you.,,  Forthwith  the  other  George  (George
Pelham)  comes  on  the  scene,  gives  his  name,  his  Christian  name,
the  names  of  his  intimate  friends,  and  insists  that  his  father  and
mother  should  come  to  converse  with  him.  He  asks  for  the  pres-
ence of  others  also;  and  on  following  days  not  only  his  father
and  mother  but  several  of  his  friends  obtained  numerous  and
precise  details  on  various  conversations  that  George  Pelham
had  had  with  them  during  his  lifetime.  He  said  to  Mrs.  Howard,
"Do  you  still  play  the  violin  as  badly  as  ever?',  He  spoke  to
Evelyn  of  a  book  given  to  her  in  which  he  had  written  certain
words.  To  Mr.  H.,  a  friend  of  George  Pelham's,  Mrs.  Piper
(acting  as  G.  P.),  wrote  a  long  letter  dealing  with  very  intimate
matters,  and  when  Mr.  H.  had  read  it,  she  took  it  and  tore
it  up.

In  thus  transmitting  the  ideas  and  remembrances  of  George  P.,
Mrs.  Piper  both  spoke  and  wrote  in  his  personality.  The  methods
of  communication  are  not  now  in  question ;  the  point  is  to  decide
whether  it  is  more  rational  to  infer  the  survival  of  George  Pelham
than  to  adopt  the  hypothesis  of  an  extremely  developed  crypt-
esthesia. For  my  own  part  I  consider  the  latter  hypothesis  some-
what less  improbable  than  the  former;  for  with  Phinuit  as  her
guide,  Mrs.  Piper  had  already  given  decisive  proofs  of  lucidity,
though  Phinuit  had  never  been  a  living  person.

Since  therefore  Mrs.  Piper  had  such  powers,  there  is  no  reason
to  suppose  them  absent  when  George  Pelham  speaks  through  her.
Why  should  we  believe  any  other  intelligence  present  than  that
of  Mrs.  Piper  in  a  highly  lucid  state?  Why  not  admit  that  this
lucidity  crystallizes,  as  it  were,  round  the  personality  of  Pelham  ?

We  shall  later  on  examine  what  objective  metapsychics  can

212

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

teach  us  on  the  question  of  personification  and  survival ;  but  for
the  present  some  conclusions  can  be  drawn  from  subjective  data
alone.

However  surprising  the  answers  of  George  Pelham  may  be,
the  hypothesis  of  his  survival  is  very  frail;  for  if  apart  from  any
hypothesis  of  survival,  we  admit,  as  we  are  driven  to  do,  that
there  are  faculties  of  cognition  that  outrange  our  usual  senses,
then  it  is  possible  that  Mrs.  Piper  should  acquire  knowledge  of
things  known  to  George  Pelham  and  even  to  him  alone.  It  is
easy  to  admit  cryptesthesia,  even  very  far-reaching  cryptesthesia :
this  faculty  of  the  mind  is  much  simpler  than  survival,  for  survival
implies  a  number  of  unlikely  and  unheard-of  facts  that  clash
with  admitted  physiological  truths  and  are  contrary  to  the  logic
that  warns  us  that  whatever  has  a  beginning  must  have  an  end.

The  tendency  of  the  human  mind  to  group  its  remembrances
and  its  notions  (whether  metapsychic  and  transcendental  or  not),
around  a  real  or  imaginary  person,  is  not  a  hypothesis;  it  is  a
fact.  This  makes  the  simple-minded  idea  that  the  consciousness
of  Marie  Antoinette  or  Charles  Dickens  has  returned  quite  inad-
missible in  view  of  the  other  hypothesis  (of  cryptesthesia),  for
this  latter  rests  on  two  proved  propositions :

A.  The  human  mind  has  mysterious  faculties  of  cognition.

B.  These  mysterious  cognitions  have  an  invincible  tendency  to
group  themselves  round  a  new  personality.

It  might  perhaps  be  more  pleasant  (I  say  perhaps,  for  it  is  not
certain)  to  suppose  that  there  is  no  death,  that  we  are  destined
to  survive,  and  that  those  who  have  passed  away  are  near  us,
listen  to  us,  and  protect  us ;  but  it  is  not  for  us  to  seek  what  we
may  desire  as  pleasant  or  convenient.  In  matters  of  science,
hypothesis  for  hypothesis,  the  more  simple,  the  more  likely,  and
the  more  rational  has  most  claim  on  our  acceptance.  The  doc-
trine of  survival  seems  to  me  to  involve  so  many  impossibilities,
while  that  of  an  intensive  cryptesthesia  is  (relatively)  so  easy  to
admit  that  I  do  not  hesitate  at  all.

I  go  so  far  as  to  claim — at  the  risk  of  being  confounded  by
some  new  and  unforeseen  discovery — that  subjective  metapsychics
will  always  be  radically  incapable  of  proving  survival.  Even
if  a  new  case  even  more  astounding  than  that  of  George  Pelham
were  to  appear,  I  should  prefer  to  suppose  an  extreme  perfection
of  transcendental  cognitions  giving  a  great  multiplicity  of  no-
tions grouping  themselves  round  the  imaginary  centre  of  a  fac-

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  213

litious  personality,  than  to  suppose  that  this  centre  is  a  real  per-
sonality— the  surviving  soul,  the  will  and  consciousness  of  a
self  that  has  disappeared,  a  self  which  depended  on  a  brain  now
reduced  to  dust.

We  are,  moreover,  at  the  very  beginnings  of  a  science  that
is  extremely  obscure,  so  obscure  that  all  affirmations  and  nega-
tions are  rash ;  but  the  greater  the  uncertainties  the  more  cautious
should  be  our  doctrinal  pronouncements,  and  the  bolder  our  ex-
periments.  In  experimentation  it  is  impossible  to  be  too  bold.

The  principal  proof  of  survival,  indeed  the  only  proof,  is  the
affirmation  of  the  medium,  "I  am  George  Pelham"  (after  being
Phinuit),  "and  I  prove  that  I  am  George  Pelham  because  I  know
all  that  George  Pelham  knew."  But  granting  that  this  is  so,
the  proof  is  insufficient,  for  it  would  be  necessary  to  show  that
Mrs.  Piper's  transcendental  faculty  cannot  know  what  George
Pelham  knew  in  his  earth-life.  This  essential  proof  cannot  be
given,  and  that  is  why  I  say,  provisionally,  that  subjective  meta-
psychics  cannot  demonstrate  survival.

Spiritualists,  when  confronted  with  the  poverty  of  the  messages,
their  use  of  a  language  unknown  in  earth-life,  their  indifference
to,  and  astonishing  ignorance  of,  matters  in  which  the  writers
were  once  passionately  interested,  say  that  the  defect  is  in  the
instrument.  "The  medium,"  they  say,  "is  only  the  instrument
that  the  spirit  can  but  imperfectly  control.  He  finds  it  difficult
to  make  himself  understood  and  to  communicate  his  thought."

But  except  in  a  few  rare  cases,  the  inconsistency  between  the
past  and  the  present  mentality  is  so  great  that  in  the  immense
majority  of  spiritist  experiences  it  is  impossible  to  admit  survival,
even  as  a  very  tentative  hypothesis.  I  could  more  easily  admit
a  non-human  intelligence,  distinct  from  both  medium  and  dis-
carnate,  than  the  mental  survival  of  the  latter.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  has  published  a  remarkable  book  on  survival,
which  merits  special  notice  both  from  the  interest  of  the  facts
themselves  and  the  high  scientific  authority  of  the  author,1  who
has  carefully  examined  those  facts.  He  will  pardon  me  if,  while
accepting  the  authenticity  of  the  facts  so  well  observed  and  ana-
lyzed, I  come  to  a  different  conclusion  upon  them.

Those  facts  are  as  follows:  Raymond  Lodge  was  a  second

Raymond,  or  Life  and  Death,  by  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  Methuen,  W.  London,
1918.

214

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

lieutenant  in  the  South  Lancashire  Regiment,  and  fell  near  St.
Eloi  in  Flanders,  September  14,  1915.  The  news  of  his  death
reached  London  September  17,  1915.   On  the  25th  of  September,

his  mother,  Lady  Lodge,  in  a  seance  with  Mrs.  Leonard,  obtained
the  name  of  Raymond  and  the  words,  "Tell  father  I  have  met
some  friends  of  his."  The  question  was  put,  "Can  you  give  any
name?"  and  the  answer  was,  "Yes,  Myers"  (Raymond,  p.  98).

On  the  27th  of  September  Sir  Oliver  had  a  seance  with  Mrs.
Leonard.  The  guide  of  Mrs.  Leonard  is  a  little  girl  of  the  name
of  Feda.  Many  seances  followed,  some  with  Mrs.  Leonard,  some
with  Mr.  Vout  Peters,  some  with  other  mediums,  those  who
took  part  in  them  being  sometimes  Sir  Oliver,  sometimes  Lady
Lodge,  sometimes  Raymond's  brothers  and  sisters.

A  characteristic  fact  announced  by  the  mediums  was  that  there
was  in  existence  a  photographic  group  of  officers  in  which  Ray-
mond appeared.  No  one  in  London  suspected  the  existence  of
this  photograph.  Many  precise  details  were  given  before  its
arrival  in  England,  more  especially  the  very  unusual  fact  in  such
groups  that  one  of  the  officers  behind  Raymond  has  his  hand  on
Raymond's  shoulder,  Raymond  being  seated  on  the  ground.  This
episode  of  the  photograph  is  one  of  the  best  instances  of  crypt-
esthesia  ever  recorded.   The  succession  of  the  facts  is  as  follows :

July  20,  1915,  expiry  of  Raymond's  last  leave.

August  24,  1915,  the  photograph  taken  at  the  front.  Ray-
mond's diary  mentions  this,  but  he  did  not  write  about  it  to  hi«
parents.

September  14th,  Raymond's  death.

September  27th,  Vout  Peters  announces  that  there  is  a  photo-
graph.

October  15,  1915,  Captain  B.  sends  the  negative  to  Aldershot
to  be  developed.

November  25,  1915,  Mrs.  Cheves  (a  stranger  to  the  Lodge
family)  writes  to  say  that  she  has  a  photograph  of  the  officers
of  the  South  Lancashire  Regiment  and  offers  to  send  it.

December  3,  1915,  Mrs.  Leonard  in  seance  gives  a  complete
description  of  this  photograph.

December  6,  1915,  Lady  Lodge  finds  in  Raymond's  diary  a
note  stating  that  the  photograph  was  taken  August  24th.

December  7th  (morning)  Sir  Oliver  writes  to  Mr.  Hill  his  idea
of  what  the  photograph  should  show.  This  letter  was  prior  to
the  arrival  of  the  group.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  215

December  7th,  the  photograph  reaches  Mariemont  (Sir  Oliver's
residence).  In  other  seances,  Raymond,  speaking  through  Mrs.
Leonard  and  conversing  with  Feda,  gives  a  number  of  small
but  very  significant  facts  that  Mrs.  Leonard  could  not  know :  the
name  of  one  of  his  comrades,  Mitchell,  an  officer  of  the  Flying
Corps ;  the  names  of  Raymond's  two  sisters;  the  song  My  Orange
Girl  that  Raymond  liked  to  sing;  and  a  vague  indication  on  the
death  of  an  old  servant  of  the  family.  The  episode  of  "Mr.  Jack-
son" is  curious.  Feda  says  that  Raymond  speaks  often  of  Mr.
Jackson,  and  mixes  up  his  name  with  a  bird  and  a  pedestal ;  and
Raymond  seems  much  amused  and  makes  jokes  on  Jackson,  the
bird,  and  the  pedestal.

Now  "Mr.  Jackson"  was  the  name  that  Raymond  and  the
other  children  gave  to  a  peacock.  It  had  died  some  time  pre-
viously, had  been  stuffed,  and  put  on  a  pedestal.

In  some  cross-correspondences  simultaneous  at  Edgbaston  and
London,  the  word  "Honolulu"  was  specifically  mentioned  at  both
places.  To  estimate  the  value  of  the  whole  mass  of  proofs  it  is
obviously  necessary  to  refer  to  the  book  itself,  of  which  only  these
very  scant  indications  can  be  given  here.  From  the  whole  of  the
evidence  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  concludes  that  Raymond  survives.
This  inference  has  been  fully  discussed  and  rejected  on  considera-
tion of  equally  valid  facts  in  the  case  of  George  Pelham.

Many  examples  have  now  been  adduced  that  establish  incontest-
ably  that  lucidity,  cryptesthesia,  and  telepathy  exist ;  that  is,  that  by
some  channel  which  we  do  not  understand,  real  facts  are  made
known ;  but  that  does  not  prove  that  the  big  consciousness  of  Ray-
mond has  survived.

If  we  accept  the  two  facts — that  some  mediums  are  aware  of
things  that  normal  channels  cannot  convey — and  that  they  tend
to  group  both  normal  and  supernormal  knowledge  round  real  or
imaginary  personalities,  tTiat  amply  suffices  to  explain  everything.

Mrs.  Leonard  and  Mr.  Vout  Peters  have  perceived  certain  de-
tails relating  to  Raymond;  forthwith  their  subconsciousness  has
invented  the  personality  of  Raymond — imaginary  in  the  sense
that  Raymond  no  longer  exists,  real  in  the  sense  that  round  this
auto-suggestion  they  have  grouped  many  actual  facts  that  their
normal  senses  could  not  have  supplied.

For,  finally,  if  Raymond  were  really  speaking  by  the  inter-
mediary of  Feda,  why  should  he  be  so  reticent  of  proofs?  Why,
in  such  messages,  are  there  so  many  obscure  and  symbolical  allu-

216

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

sions  (like  those  relating  to  Faunus  and  Myers)  and  why  so
many  words?  Why  so  few  names,  dates,  and  precise  remem-
brances? Cryptesthesia  is  always  partial,  defective,  symbolical,
and  so  mixed  with  errors  and  puerilities  that  it  is  difficult  to
believe  that  the  consciousness  of  a  deceased  person  can  be  limited
to  such  a  degree,  when  more  cogent  witness  would  be  required
to  enable  us  to  affirm  scientifically  a  belief  in  immortality.

Mrs.  Leonard  says  that  Raymond  has  the  hand  of  a  comrade
on  his  shoulder.  No  one  in  London  knows  this — it  is  incontest-
able lucidity,  but  I  cannot  conclude  that  Raymond  himself  gives
this  detail.  It  is  simpler  to  refer  it  to  lucidity  only,  the  rather  as  she
has  given  proofs  of  lucidity  in  cases  where  the  intervention  of  a
deceased  person  cannot  be  invoked.  Very  probably  if  the  gallant
Raymond  had  not  been  killed,  Mrs.  Leonard  could  have  equally
well  received  knowledge  of  the  photograph,  for  she  has  on  several
occasions  shown  that  she  knows  things  by  supernormal  means.

Alas,  no!  survival  is  not  to  be  proved  thus;  and  despite  the
genius  of  its  author,  and  his  noble  faith  in  the  future  life,  this
able  book  has  not  supplied  the  decisive  data.  If  it  were  incumbent
on  me  to  formulate  a  conclusion,  the  very  fragmentary,  symbolical,
and  uncertain  nature  of  these  messages  that  claim  to  be  from  sur-
viving minds,  and  their  astonishing  lack  of  precise  detail,  would
lead  me  to  infer  that  there  is  no  survival  of  consciousness.  This
inference  is  made  with  deep  regret,  for  it  costs  me  much  to
separate  myself  from  Myers  and  Lodge  who  have  my  entire  con-
fidence and  admiration.

Moreover,  in  the  very  midst  of  my  negation,  I  feel  it  incumbent
to  make  full  reservations;  we  are  only  at  the  dawn  of  meta-
psychic  science  and  all  absolute  negation  should  be  ruled  out.

In  fine,  there  are  three  possible  hypotheses:  (a)  Everything
comes  from  the  mind  of  the  medium ;  (b)  the  mind  of  a  deceased
person  intervenes;  (c)  a  non-human  intelligence  is  concerned,
an  angel,  a  demon,  or  some  other  power.

On  subjective  data  alone,  the  first  hypothesis  is  certainly  the
most  likely,  since  the  admission  that  the  human  mind  has  mys-
terious powers  of  cognition  covers  the  ground ;  the  second  seems
hardly  admissible  because  it  is  in  complete  disaccord  with  all
physiology  and  implies  innumerable  psychological  improbabilities ;
and  the  third  is  absolutely  useless  from  the  point  of  view  of  sub-
jective metapsychics  taken  alone,  and  there  is  no  real  reason  for
putting  it  forward.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  217

Later  on  we  shall  see  whether  the  study  of  objective  meta-
psychics  leads  to  a  modification  of  this  preliminary  opinion.

A  large  number  of  so-called  spirit  identifications  have  been
published  in  spiritualist  journals,  notably  in  the  Banner  of  Light.
Mr.  J.  Burns,  editor  of  The  Medium  and  Daybreak,  has  collected
many  from  J.  Morse's  mediumship.

Unfortunately  these  cannot  be  used  to  any  effect,  either  for
identification  or  to  prove  cryptesthesia,  for  the  good  faith  of  the
medium,  which  I  should  be  disposed  to  accept,  proves  absolutely
nothing.

Pantomnesia1  accounts  for  Mr.  Morse  being  able  to  write,  "I
am  Thomas  Waller,  I  lived  at  Chirfton  Road,  Manchester.  I  died
in  May  of  this  year  aged  over  sixty."  For  this  to  be  evidential,
rigorous  proof  is  needed  that  neither  consciously  nor  subcon-
sciously could  the  medium  possibly  have  known  the  facts  alleged.
Even  if  this  difficult  and  almost  impossible  proof  could  be  given,
the  inference  might  be  that  cryptesthesia  and  not  the  surviving
consciousness  of  Thomas  Waller  was  the  origin  of  the  message.

The  case  of  Abraham  Florentine  has  been  cited  as  a  proof  of
survival  (Barrett,  loc.  cit.,  p.  208).  It  proves  cryptesthesia  but
not  survival.  In  August,  1874,  Stainton  Moses  received  a  mes-
sage from  one  Abraham  Florentine,  an  old  soldier  of  1812,  who
had  died  at  Brooklyn,  aged  83  years,  1  month,  and  17  days.  After
much  research  it  was  discovered  that  an  old  soldier  of  1812  had
actually  died  at  Brooklyn  at  that  precise  age.  No  American  or
English  newspaper  had  mentioned  the  fact,  so  that  it  could  only
have  reached  Stainton  Moses  by  supernormal  means.

It  seems  to  me  rash  and  unscientific  to  assume  that  survival  is
the  one  and  only  explanation  of  facts  that  had  reached  Stainton
Moses  by  cryptesthesia.  Several  other  hypotheses  are  possible,
improbable  indeed,  but  less  wildly  improbable  than  the  return  of
Abraham  Florentine  to  animate  the  hand  of  Stainton  Moses.

If  we  allow  to  cryptesthesia  its  full  force,  it  will  be  seen  to
extend  to  all  facts,  however  distant,  and  however  trivial  they
may  seem.  The  facts  are  there  to  establish  that  cryptesthesia
exists,  even  when  no  death  is  in  question.  It  is  therefore  unnec-
essary to  suppose  survival  of  the  dead  since  other  instances  are
known  in  which  such  facts  are  revealed  by  this  faculty  without
any  corresponding  death.   As  in  the  cases  of  George  Pelham  and

degression  of  memory :  the  imagination  that  a  thing  experienced  has  been
"seen  before." — Translator's  note.

218

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Raymond  Lodge,  the  case  of  Abraham  Florentine  gives  no  ground
for  the  inference  of  survival.  It  is  excellent  clairvoyance,  but
there  is  no  need  to  go  further.

Another  inconclusive  case  is  reported  by  Bozzano.  In  a  spiritist
circle  at  Nancy,  the  spirit  of  Cauchy,  who  died  in  1855,  dictates
the  Latin  phrase  which  appears,  so  it  seems,  on  his  tomb  in  the
cemetery  at  Sceaux :  Beatus  qui  intelligit  super  egenum  et  pau-
perem.  It  is  proved  that  the  inscription  is  really  there,  and  that
it  was  covered  with  lichens  that  had  to  be  removed  before  the
letters  could  be  read.  But  what  a  number  of  things  need  to  be
proved:  (1)  That  no  word  or  writing  could  have  acquainted
the  medium  with  the  fact,  consciously  or  otherwise;  (2)  that  the
inscription  was  absolutely  illegible  one,  two,  or  ten  years  pre-
viously; (3)  that  no  book  or  biography  of  Cauchy ■  mentioned  the
epitaph.

I  do  not  fear  once  more  to  emphasize  that  cryptesthesia  should
not  be  admitted  for  any  fact  until  every  other  possible  normal
explanation  has  been  exhausted.

A  certain  number  of  cases  have  been  collected  by  Bozzano  (A.
S.  P.,  1910,  xx,  267-268).

It  is  probable  that  most  of  these  give  some  evidence  of  crypt-
esthetic  power,  but  they  are  often  only  pantomnesic  illusions.  In
any  case  they  prove  nothing  as  to  survival  of  human  conscious-
ness; and  notwithstanding  their  interest  it  is  unnecessary  to
mention  them  here.  Perhaps  the  day  will  come  when  they  will
find  that  explanation,  but  provisionally  we  shall  not  adopt  the
hypothesis  of  survival,  as  yet  quite  undemonstrated  and  perhaps
undemonstrable.  I  will,  however,  cite  the  following  very  moving
incident  which  has  only  recently  been  published,  though  it  oc-
curred in  1904.

The  guide  of  the  medium  was  his  father,  Luigi.  On  that  day
Luigi  seemed  terrified  and  declared  that  bad  spirits  were  near
the  medium.  Suddenly  L.  D.,  the  medium,  glaring  round,  rushed
upon  a  certain  X.,  who  was  present.  He  foamed  with  rage,  and
tried  to  throttle  X.,  crying  out,  "I  have  found  you  at  last,
wretch !  I  was  a  soldier  of  the  royal  marines.  Do  you  remember
Oporto  .  .  .  you  murdered  me,  and  I  will  avenge  myself  and
strangle  you.,,  His  violence  was  such  that  the  unfortunate  X.
was  nearly  suffocated,  and  was  hardly  liberated  by  the  united
efforts  of  four  of  the  onlookers.

X.  had  been  an  officer  in  the  navy  and  had  long  since  retired.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  219

He  left  the  navy  under  tragic  circumstances.  (It  would  be  in-
teresting to  know  whether,  as  seems  probable,  the  facts  were
known  to  those  present ;  as  to  which  Bozzano  does  not  enlighten
us.)  Some  years  previously  X.  was  with  his  ship  at  Oporto.
Passing  along  a  side  street  he  heard  some  rowdy  Italians  singing
in  a  pothouse.  He  entered  and  found  some  half-drunken  sailors,
one  of  whom  abused  him.  He  drew  his  sword  and  killed  the
aggressor.  For  this  he  was  condemned  to  six  years'  detention
in  a  fortress  and  invited  to  send  in  his  resignation.  Did  the  me-
dium know  this  terrible  story?  Even  if  he  did  not,  cryptesthesia
might  have  revealed  it,  and  then  the  reconstruction  of  the  scene
is  explicable  by  that  alone,  more  easily  than  by  the  return  of  the
soldier  murdered  at  Oporto.

Myers  took  the  greatest  possible  interest  in  the  problem  of
survival;  he  believed  and  hoped  it  to  be  true.  He  proposed  to
certain  of  his  friends  of  the  S.  P.  R.  to  write  certain  facts  known
to  them  only,  in  a  sealed  letter,  to  be  opened  when  a  medium  sup-
posed to  be  in  communication  with  his  spirit  should  have  claimed
to  have  read  the  contents  of  the  sealed  letter.  The  result  of  this
experiment  was  negative,  as  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  has  testified.  The
alleged  promise  of  R.  Hodgson  to  return  also  came  to  nothing
(A.  S.  P.,  1906,  124  and  392).

Montaigne,  in  his  Essays  (II,  vi,  edit.  Amsterdam,  1659,  571),
recalls  the  promise  of  Canius  Julius,  going  to  execution :  "I  holde
myselfe  readdie  to  percyve  if  in  this  briefe  moment  of  dethe  I
may  knowe  somewhat  of  ye  departure  of  ye  Soule  and  if  shee
shd  feele  wrathe  at  her  separation,  for  that  if  I  learne  aught
thereon  I  may  warne  my  frends  if  it  be  so  permytted."  But
Canius  Julius  did  not  return.  (I  transcribe  the  old  French  into
old  English. — Translator.)

Is  it  necessary  to  speak  of  Gaston  Cremieux,  shot  at  Marseilles
in  1871  ?  In  prison  before  his  execution  he  declared  himself  a
believer  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  and  promised  his  friends,
of  whom  Clovis  Hugues  was  one,  to  return.  At  the  moment
when  he  was  shot,  Clovis  Hugues,  who  knew  nothing  of  the
death  of  his  friend,  heard  in  his  cell  distinct  raps  that  seemed
directed  intelligently.

Mr.  Happerfield  had  promised  his  old  friend,  John  Harford,
when  the  latter  was  on  his  death-bed,  to  look  after  his  widow ;
and  he  took  measures  to  place  her  beyond  want,  confiding  her
interests  to  one  of  his  nephews.   Long  after,  one  morning  towards

220

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

dawn  Mr.  Happerfield  saw  the  apparition  of  his  friend,  who  said,
"You  have  not  kept  your  promise,  my  wife  is  unhappy."  Mr.
Happerfield,  though  not  alarmed,  woke  his  wife  and  instituted
enquiries.   Mrs.  Harford  was  living  in  great  indigence.

It  seems  unnecessary  to  see  in  this  incident  anything  but
the  vague  remorse  of  Mr.  Happerfield  taking  a  symbolical
form.

Many  times  two  friends  or  married  couples  have  promised  that
the  first  to  die  would  manifest  to  the  survivor ;  but  the  rare  cases
in  which  the  promise  has  been  kept  belong  to  the  well-attested
instances  of  cryptesthetic  monitions.

Finally,  I  will  make  a  remark,  perhaps  hitherto  not  put  for-
ward, against  the  identification  of  metapsychic  forces  with  the
defunct:  Those  who  return  are  mostly  well-known  and  dis-
tinguished persons.  Why  do  not  mediums  present  everyday  and
obscure  persons?  If  consciousness  persists  it  must  persist  equally
for  the  many  as  for  the  few;  and  the  obscure  are  a  hundred
thousand  times  more  numerous  than  the  distinguished;  but  the
incarnations  are  of  fanciful  personalities  like  Rector,  Imperator,
John  King,  Phinuit,  Katie  King,  or  of  notabilities.

In  conclusion,  it  would  be  rash  to  deny  survival,  but  a  thousand
times  more  rash  to  affirm  it.  This  negation  of  survival  in  no
way  implies  the  negation  of  cryptesthesia ;  the  two  propositions
must  be  entirely  dissociated.  The  extraordinary,  supernormal
faculty  of  cognition  is  a  fact;  the  survival  of  human  conscious-
ness is  a  hypothesis.1

8.  Xenoglossis

The  speaking  of  strange  tongues  must  be  included  among  the
phenomena  of  cryptesthesia.  It  is  the  understanding,  reading,
writing,  and  pronunciation  of  a  language  that  has  not  been
learned.  I  call  it  "xenoglossis. "  There  are  cases  of  this,  which,
though  not  admitting  of  a  definite  inference,  are  disturbing.  Such
cases  are  cited  by  C.  de  Vesme  (A.  S.  P.,  1885,  xv,  319).

In  the  first  place  we  cannot  apply  this  name  to  the  imaginary
languages  created  by  mediums.

1Even  Aksakoff,  in  despite  of  his  robust  faith  in  a  future  life,  says :
"Absolute  proof  of  spirit-identity  is  impossible  to  obtain;  we  must  be  con-
tented with  relative  proof."    In  plain  French,  a  relative  proof  means  a  hypoth-

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  221

The  most  celebrated  case  of  the  kind  is  the  Martian  language
of  Helen  Smith,  so  carefully  analyzed  by  Flournoy.  He  demon-
strated rigorously  that  this  new  language  was  modified  French.
This  new  tongue  shows  an  astounding  memory  and  stupefying
powers  of  invention.  Helen  Smith  in  six  months  was  able  to
speak  fluently  in  a  tongue  of  her  own  invention.  Flournoy  having
advanced  some  objection  she  changed  her  Martian  language  and
made  it  ultra-Martian.  Wonderful!

Inspired  by  Helen  Smith's  Martian  novel,  Mrs.  Smead  in
America  invented  yet  another  Martian  tongue  (Hyslop,  A.  S.  P.,

1906,  461).  These  creations  illustrate  the  fertility  of  the  sub-
conscious. They  have  nothing  to  do  with  cryptesthesia.  True
xenoglossis  consists  in  speaking  in  an  existing  language  which
is  unknown  to  the  medium.

The  most  striking  instance  is  that  of  Laura  Edmunds,  the
daughter  of  Judge  Edmunds,  president  of  the  Senate  and  judge
of  the  Supreme  Court  of  New  York,  a  man  of  high  intelli-
gence and  unimpeachable  rectitude.  Laura,  a  fervent  Catholic
and  very  pious,  spoke  only  English.  She  had  learned  at  school
some  words  of  French,  but  that  was  all  she  knew  of  foreign
tongues.  One  day,  in  1859,  Mr.  Edmunds  received  a  visit  from
Mr.  Evangelides,  who  conversed  in  modern  Greek  with  Laura
Edmunds.

In  the  course  of  this  conversation,  at  which  several  persons
were  present,  Mr.  Evangelides  was  moved  to  tears,  for  Laura
informed  him  of  the  death  of  his  son  in  Greece.  She  incarnated,
it  would  seem,  an  intimate  friend  of  his,  Mr.  Botzaris,  who  had
died  in  Greece.  If  Edmunds  is  to  be  believed,  Laura  spoke  in
modern  Greek  and  knew  of  the  death  of  Evangelides's  son  by  the
intermediary  of  Botzaris.  The  announcement  of  death  was  correct.

Judge  Edmunds  adds,  "To  deny  the  fact  is  impossible,  it  was
too  well  known ;  I  could  as  well  deny  the  light  of  the  sun.  Nor
could  I  think  it  an  illusion,  for  it  is  in  no  way  different  from  any
other  reality.  It  took  place  before  eight  or  ten  educated  and  in-
telligent persons.  We  had  never  seen  Mr.  Evangelides ;  he  was
introduced  by  a  friend  that  same  evening.  How  could  Laura  tell
him  of  the  death  of  his  son?  How  could  she  understand  and
speak  Greek,  which  she  had  never  previously  heard  ?"  1

1De  Vesme,  Xenoglossie,  L'tcriture  automatique  en  langues  itrangeres,
A.  S.  P.,  1 90s,  xv,  317-353.    La  xenoglossie  de  Miss  Laura  Edmunds,  A.  S.  P.,

1907,  xvii,  603.

222

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Judge  Edmunds  also  records  the  xenoglossis  of  Mrs.  Young  of
Chicago  who,  under  control  of  German  spirits,  spoke  and
sang  in  German  to  a  circle  in  which  no  one  knew  that  language.
Says  Mr.  Young,  "I  begged  Mr.  Euler,  a  German  medium,  to
come.  He  came  twice,  and  conversed  with  the  medium  for  over
an  hour  at  each  visit.  On  other  occasions  Mrs.  Young  spoke
in  Spanish  and  Italian.  She  was  a  working  woman  who  had  only
been  to  a  primary  school."

I  have  myself  observed  a  curious  case,  difficult  to  interpret,
nearly  related  to  xenoglossis.    Briefly  it  is  as  follows :

Mrs.  X.,  a  young  woman  of  about  thirty,  had  never  learned
Greek,  and  it  is  absolutely  certain  that  she  did  not  know  it.
Nevertheless  in  my  presence  she  wrote  long  sentences  in  Greek,
with  some  errors  that  clearly  show  mental  vision  of  one  or  more
Greek  books.  After  much  research,  aided  by  chance  more  than
by  my  own  penetration,  and  thanks  to  my  friends,  M.  Courtier
and  Dr.  Vlavianos,  of  Athens,  I  was  able  to  discover  the  book
from  which  Mrs.  X.  had  drawn  most  of  the  long  Greek  sentences
that  she  had  written  in  my  presence.  The  book  is  not  to  be  found
in  Paris  except  in  the  National  Library — the  Greco-French  and
Franco-Greek  dictionary  by  Byzantios  and  Coromelas.  As  it  is
a  dictionary  of  modern  Greek,  it  is  not  in  use  in  any  school.

Mrs.  X.  wrote  before  me  some  twenty  lines  of  Greek  with
about  eight  per  cent,  of  small  errors  such  as  would  be  made  in
transcribing  Greek  without  understanding  it.  Thus  instead  of
gtoXtjkt/uovs,  Mrs.  X.  writes  gtoXicf^oS?;  instead  of  opiiXovs,
d/xi\ovS;  instead  of  kvnapodcpj  evnap  Sep;  instead  of  tuupdv,
fjnupov}  all  of  them  mistakes  that  indicate  a  visual  copy  by  some
one  who  does  not  know  Greek  and  makes  the  errors  consequent  on
imperfect  visualization.  I  am  absolutely  certain  that  in  writing  those
lines  Mrs.  X.  had  no  text  before  her  eyes ;  she  was  looking  into
space  as  if  she  were  copying  from  the  text  of  a  language  unknown
to  her  of  which  she  saw  the  characters  without  knowing  their
meaning.  Although  she  certainly  did  not  understand  the  phrases
it  is  remarkable  that  they  fitted  the  circumstances  well  enough.
One  evening  at  sunset,  she  wrote  a  Greek  phrase  from  the  dic-
tionary above-mentioned:  AvareWovroS  Koti  dvovros  rov  tjXiov
rf  OKia  eKteivarai  /uaicpav.  When  the  sun  is  at  its  rising  or
setting  shadows  are  thrown  far.  There  is  a  slight  error;
eKteivarai  for  eKteiverai.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  223

There  are  but  two  solutions — either  fraud,  aided  by  an  unheard-
of  visual  memory,  or  the  hypothesis  of  extraordinary  cryptesthesia.
Possible  fraud  must  always  be  reckoned  with.  Let  us  suppose
this  in  despite  of  the  psychological  improbabilities;  let  us  admit
(1)  that  Mrs.  X.  bought  secretly  Byzantios's  dictionary,  the  Apol-
ogy of  Socrates,  Plato's  Phcedra,  and  the  Gospel  of  St.  John,
the  four  books  from  which  the  extracts  came;  (2)  that  she  medi-
tated over  these  to  fix  in  her  mind  the  visual  image  of  letters
whose  sense  she  did  not  understand.

Both  hypotheses  are  admissible  if  we  suppose  long  and
elaborate  preparation,  which  is,  after  all,  possible.  But  it  is
singular  that  Mrs.  X.,  who  knows  no  Greek  at  all  and  could  not
understand  the  sentences,  should  have  retained  so  clear  a  visual
image  as  to  be  able  to  reproduce  from  memory  six  hundred
and  twenty-two  letters  with  six  per  cent,  of  errors.  It  is  not
exactly  a  case  of  xenoglossis,  for  she  neither  spoke  nor  under-
stood Greek.  She  wrote  long  sentences  from  mental  vision ;  how
did  she  get  this  vision?  This  is  very  different  from  speaking  in
a  strange  tongue,  and  to  explain  this  strange  case  we  must  admit
either  cryptesthesia  or  a  prodigious  visual  memory  that  can  no-
where be  paralleled.

Here  and  there  other  instances  of  xenoglossis  are  to  be  found :

The  young  daughter  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Brown  of  Melbourne,
aged  eleven,  wrote  automatically  some  Chinese  characters,  holding
her  pen  in  the  Chinese  manner.  It  appears  that  this  message  is
badly  written  but  is  partly  legible.  Now  Chinese  writing  is
extremely  difficult  as  everyone  knows.  But  even  if  the  fact  were
correctly  observed,  what  is  to  be  inferred  from  it?1

A  very  striking  case  is  adduced  by  M.  Chedo  Miyatovitch,  a
Serbian  diplomat.  He  went  with  a  Croatian  friend,  a  M.  Hinko-
vitch,  a  lawyer  of  Agram,  to  consult  Mrs.  Wriedt,  an  American
medium  (professional),  in  London.  An  old  Croat  doctor  con-
trolled her,  spoke  in  Croat  to  M.  Hinkovitch,  and  conversed  for
some  time  in  that  language.  Another  time  Mrs.  Wriedt  spoke
in  Serbian  in  the  name  of  M.  Miyatovitch's  mother.   On  another

1A  discussion  on  this  was  held  by  the  S.  P.  R.  (/.  5*.  P.  R.,  June,  1906,  276).
Sir  William  Crookes  who  presided  thought  that  the  writing  was  done  "in  a
visionary  manner,  copied  from  their  visionary  prototypes."  There  are  some
interesting  remarks  by  Mrs.  Verrall,  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  Mr.  Piddington,  and
Mr.  F.  C.  Constable  on  the  subject,  and  the  very  fair  criticisms  of  M.  Dessoir,
Vom  Jenseits  der  Seele,  4th  edit.,  Enfle,  1920,  97"Ioo»  should  also  be  read.

224

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

occasion,  Mme.  Selenka,  a  German,  being  present,  her  deceased
husband,  through  Mrs.  Wriedt,  sang  a  German  song.

Some  aspersions  have  been  cast  on  the  authenticity  of  Mrs.
Wriedt's  mediumship  to  which  Sir  William  Barrett  has  replied
emphatically.  In  any  case  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  she  can
normally  speak  fluent  Serbian  and  Croat.

Eglinton,  who  knew  no  German,  has  given  messages  in  German
by  direct  writing.  In  a  seance  in  which  Mr.  Gladstone,  the  illus-
trious statesman,  took  part,  there  were  answers  by  direct  writing
in  Spanish,  in  French,  and  in  Greek.  Eglinton  knew  not  one
word  of  Spanish  or  Greek,  and  very  little  French ;  but  Eglinton's
sincerity  is  doubtful  (Erny,  loc.  ext.,  57).  Mrs.  Thompson  was
able,  in  hypno-spiritist  trance,  to  speak  in  Dutch  to  Dr.  van  Eeden,
though  absolutely  ignorant  of  that  language.  Mr.  Damiani,  in
a  report  to  the  Dialectical  Society  of  London,  states  that  he  re-
ceived in  Sicily  many  communications  in  German,  French,  Latin,
and  English  through  an  uneducated  medium  of  the  working  class.

Mr.  Burns,  in  a  report  to  the  same  society,  states  that  he  has
seen  his  sister-in-law,  Mary  Burns,  write  messages  in  languages
that  she  had  no  knowledge  of.

In  the  Revue  Spirite  (January  15,  1886),  M.  Didelot,  a  school-
master, gives  an  account  of  an  experiment  by  the  canon  of  the
cathedral  at  Nancy,  assisted  by  some  venerable  priests  of  the  dio-
cese, on  a  young  boy  who  was  the  medium  observed  by  M.  Dide-
lot. An  answer  was  given  in  Latin  to  questions  put  by  the  priests
enclosed  in  a  sealed  envelope  placed  on  the  table.

Some  facts  of  very  transitory  xenoglossis  have  been  observed
by  Dr.  Cadello  of  Palermo.1

Minfa  Filituto,  a  young  girl  of  Palermo,  aged  sixteen,  fell
into  spontaneous  somnambulism  in  1849.  In  one  of  these  attacks
she  claimed  to  be  a  Greek,  and  wrote  Italian  sentences  with
Greek  letters.  She  did  not  know  Greek,  but  a  Greek  grammar
had  been  lent  to  her.  On  the  next  day  she  spoke  fluent  French,
a  language  of  which  she  knew  scarcely  anything.  On  the  third
day,  though  she  had  never  learned  a  word  of  English  and  no  one
had  ever  spoken  English  in  her  presence  (  ?)  Dr.  Cadello  testifies
that  she  conducted  a  long  conversation  with  two  English  gentle-
men in  their  own  tongue.  On  these  three  days  she  seemed  to
have  completely  forgotten  her  mother  tongue.   On  the  fourth  day

xStoria  di  un  caso  d'isterimo  con  segnasione  spontina,  Palermo,  1853,
Analysis  by  Hahn,  in  A.  S.  P.,  1901,  149-159.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  225

she  spoke  Italian,  which,  being  a  Sicilian,  she  knows  but  imper-
fectly and  never  speaks.  On  the  fifth  day,  the  attack  having  come
to  an  end,  she  resumed  her  Sicilian  speech  and  completely  forgot
the  episodes  of  her  xenoglossis.

What  are  we  to  think  of  the  story  related  by  Dr.  Grand  Bou-
logne? A  lady  who  knew  no  Latin  wrote  automatically  with
unexampled  speed,  "Sacerdos  a  deo  dilecte,  cur  manifesta  negas?
Cur  concedens  omnia  potenti  Deo  non  fateris  veritatem,  oculorum
aciem  perstringentem.  Sacrae  litterae  memento,  crebrae  sunt
manifestationes  angelis.  Vide  et  crede."  The  style  is  surpris-
ingly bad  ecclesiastical  Latin,  which  is  all  the  more  curious.  But
to  carry  conviction,  more  must  be  known  of  the  conditions  of
the  case,  and  above  all  the  incident  should  have  been  repeated.
Dr.  Grand  Boulogne  remarks  that  during  this  writing,  blows
were  struck  on  the  table  and  the  ceiling  (cited  by  Delanne,  Re-
cherches  sur  la  mediumnite,  p.  420).

Dr.  Bohm1  observed  a  person  who  wrote  with  chalk  on  a  black-
board answers  to  questions  put  to  her.  She  wrote  in  Greek,  Latin,
and  Hebrew,  being  ignorant  of  all  three ;  but  the  account  of  the
experiments  is  too  imperfect  to  allow  of  any  inferences.

Aksakoff  (Animisme  et  Spiritisme,  p.  618,  French  version)
quotes  the  case  of  the  Rev.  Shirman,  who  had  lived  in  certain
islands  in  the  Pacific  and  in  some  seances  with  Mrs.  Allams,  a
professional  medium  of  Providence  (Rhode  Island),  saw  the  form
of  a  native  woman  of  the  Marquesas  Islands  who  spoke  in  her
mother  tongue.  But  this  case  was  very  probably  fraudulent,
for  the  phenomenon  only  occurred  after  Mrs.  Allams  had  known
Mr.  Shirman  for  six  months.

Mme.  d'Esperance  knew  no  Greek,  but  when  she  gave  a  ma-
terialization, there  appeared  the  form  of  a  woman  of  rare  beauty
who  called  herself  Nepenthes.  Nepenthes  wrote  in  classic  Greek
in  Professor  L.'s  notebook:  "I  am  Nepenthes,  thy  friend.  When
thy  soul  is  oppressed  by  overmuch  pain,  call  on  me,  Nepenthes,
and  I  will  speedily  come  to  assuage  thy  trouble/' 2

Certain  cases  of  pseudo-xenoglossis  must  be  severely  criticized.
Gibier  (Delanne,  Apparitions  materiaUsees,  ii,  505)  cites  the
case  of  Mme.  Salmon  who  spoke  no  French,  but  said  without

xVber  wissenchaftlich  durchfiihrte  Versuche  und  Gedankenlesen  (Psych.
Studien,  1917,  xliv,  575).

2Cited  by  Bozzano,  A.  S.  P.,  19 10,  9.  The  case  of  Nepenthes  is  interesting,
but  experiences  with  Mme.  d'Esperance  must  be  taken  with  great  reserve.

226

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

any  foreign  accent,  "Ma  tante,  ma  tante,  je  suis  si  heureuse  de
vous  voir."  It  would  be  easy  to  learn  these  words  and  to  repeat
them  with  a  pure  pronunciation.  Mrs.  Salmon  is  a  professional
medium  of  questionable  honesty.

I  note  passim  the  stories  of  the  exorcists  of  the  sixteenth  and
seventeenth  centuries  with  cases  of  "possession"  at  Loudun  and
elsewhere.  The  "devils"  who  deceived  these  poor  hysterics  an-
swered the  exorcists  in  fluent  Latin ;  but  how  much  are  we  to  put
down  to  error  and  illusion?  Cases  in  which  children  who  did
not  know  their  letters  have  written  messages,  must  be  classed
under  xenoglossis.  They  are  rare,  but  Bozzano  reports  several
and  quotes  others  from  Aksakoff  (A.  S.  P.,  1910,  xx,  10).

Myers  and  Hodgson  saw  the  words  "Your  Aunt  Emma"  which
had  been  written  by  a  little  girl  of  four  who  did  not  know  a
single  letter  of  the  alphabet.  Drs.  Dusart  and  Ch.  Broquet  gave
pencil  and  paper  to  a  child  of  three  and  a  half,  Celina,  who  though
quite  ignorant  of  letters,  wrote,  "I  am  glad  to  manifest  through  a
charming  little  medium  of  three-and-a-half  who  promises  well.
Promise  me  not  to  neglect  her."  But  one  can  deduce  nothing
from  these  isolated  facts.  Dr.  Quintard  stated  to  the  Medical
Society  of  Angers  in  1894  the  curious  case  of  a  child  of  seven,
who  not  only  made  intricate  arithmetical  calculations,  but  also
guessed  his  mother's  thoughts.  Perhaps  sufficient  care  was  not
taken  to  avoid  all  collusion,  conscious  or  unconscious,  between
mother  and  child.  The  precocity  of  the  child  is  remarkable,  but
other  similar  cases  are  known  (Delanne,  Recherches  qu.  supra,
Paris,  1902,  206).

I  cannot  consider  as  metapsychic  the  cases  of  musical  precocity
reported  by  Mr.  Gower  and  attributed  by  him  to  some  mysterious
power,  for  the  child  in  question  was  eleven  years  old  (Eric  Rorn-
gold).  Mr.  Gower  cites  also  the  case  of  Blanche  Cobacker,  aged
twelve,  who  plays  and  composes  marvellously.  At  eleven  and
twelve  everything  is  explicable  by  abnormally  rapid  development.1

Dr.  Urysz  reports  the  case  of  a  peasant  girl  of  fourteen  who
could  hardly  read,  who  wrote  for  him  as  if  she  were  one  of
the  patients  he  had  attended  at  Lemberg  six  years  before,  "Thank

V.  S.  P.  R.,  igi 3,  56.  Pepito  Arriola  was  a  skilful  musician  at  the  age  of
three  years  and  three  months,  but  neither  I  nor  anyone  else  imagined  the
intervention  of  a  spirit  to  explain  this  marvellous  precocity.  I  note  here,
without  drawing  any  inference,  that  Mr.  Gower  saw  Pepito  in  1911,  the  same
Pepito  who  in  1900  was  already  a  real  artist,  and  that  Mr.  Gower  found  to
Pepito's  great  surprise  that  the  boy  had  the  gift  of  automatic  writing.

EXPERIMENTAL  CRYPTESTHESIA  227

you  for  the  injection  made  on  my  death-bed,  November  18,  1900.
Caroline  C."

It  is  possible,  though  unlikely,  that  the  child,  then  eight  years
old,  may  have  known  Caroline  C.  (  ?).  Caroline  lived  at  Lemberg,
and  the  child  at  Bralyhanen.  The  child's  writing  in  her  normal
state  was  rude  and  infantile,  but  the  message  was  absolutely  in
the  handwriting  of  Caroline  C. ;  it  was,  moreover,  by  direct  writ-
ing (?)<   This  singular  story  is  questionable  at  all  points.

To  sum  up :  None  of  these  facts,  whether  of  xenoglossis  or  of
automatic  writing  by  children  and  unlettered  persons,  carries
sufficient  weight  of  proof.  We  cannot,  therefore,  grant  them  full
rights  of  citizenship  in  the  extensive  kingdom  of  subjective  meta-
psychics.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  some  day,  perhaps  soon,
some  may  be  admitted  as  authentic.  Meanwhile,  however,  better
instances  must  be  sought  and  they  must  be  presented  in  a  less
fragmentary  and  imperfect  manner  than  those  known  hitherto.
For  the  present  we  must  limit  ourselves  to  the  facts  which  are
proved  and  established  by  thousands  of  cases,  considering  the  rare
and  curious  phenomena  of  xenoglossis  as  milestones  on  the  road
of  progress  to  that  fuller  metapsychic  science  which  cannot  as
yet  be  written.

CHAPTER  IV

The  Divining-Rod

The  curious  facts  relating  to  the  divining-rod  seem  at  the  first
glance  to  have  no  connection  with  metapsychics ;  but  it  will  soon
be  apparent  that  these  phenomena,  long  known  and  now  well
proven,  suggest  some  interesting  hypotheses  on  cryptesthesia,
warrant  certain  analogies,  and  throw  some  light  on  the  unknown
forces  that  actuate  the  subconsciousness.

1.  Historical

The  use  of  the  divining-rod1  is  of  high  antiquity.

When  certain  sensitives  hold  in  their  fingers  a  flexible  hazel
rod  without  moving  it  intentionally,  it  seems  that  under  certain
conditions  the  rod  bends,  of  itself  as  it  were.  It  turns  very
strongly  in  the  hands  of  the  holder,  and,  as  it  would  seem,  inde-
pendently of  the  will  of  the  operator.

When  such  persons  walk  over  ground  that  covers  unknown
water-springs  the  rod  turns  abruptly  and  with  great  force.  This
fact  has  long  been  used  to  discover  sources  of  water,  and  the
diviners  have  hence  been  called  sourciers  in  French.  M.  Mager
proposed  the  name  baguettisants  (1908).  In  English  they  are
called  "dowsers."

In  1854,  after  M.  Riondel's  monograph  on  the  discovery  of
springs,  the  Paris  Academy  of  Sciences  appointed  a  commis-
sion to  examine  the  subject.    The  celebrated  chemist  Chevreul

important  monographs  have  been  published  on  the  subject;  there  is
even  one  devoted  to  its  bibliography  alone.  There  is  much  useful  matter
in  Henri  Mager's  Les  Baguettes  des  Sourciers  et  les  forces  de  la  Nature,
Paris,  Dunod,  1920.  Special  mention  should  be  made  of  the  first  work  of  a
scientific  nature  on  the  subject,  La  Physique  occulte  ou  trait i  de  la  baguette
divinatoire  by  the  Abbe  de  Vallemont,  Paris,  1693.  See  also  the  work  of
Chevreul,  1854,  and  J.  Maxwell  on  the  same  {A.  S.  P.,  1904,  xiv,  276-290,
and  337-358)  ;  and  especially  the  excellent  work  of  Sir  William  Barrett,
On  the  so-called  divining-rod,  P.  S.  P.  R.,  xiii  and  xiv.  The  bibliography
of  C.  v.  Kling  Kowstroem,  Bibliographic  der  Wunschelruthe  (Shonhuth,
Munich,  191 1).

228

G-ROD

229

was  entrusted  with  the  report  of  the  commission.  This  report
was  not  presented  to  the  Academy,  but  was  published  as  an
independent  book.  It  only  averred  that  the  movement  of  the
rod  is  not  produced  by  physical  forces  but  by  the  hands  and
muscles  of  the  dowser.

M.  Chevreul,  in  fact,  returned  to  the  ideas  that  he  had
enunciated  in  1833  on  subconscious  movements  as  causing  the
movements  of  the  "magic  pendulum. "

This  is  an  instrument  long  used  for  divination,  consisting  of
a  weight  hung  from  a  thread.  The  upper  end  of  the  thread  is
held  in  the  hand,  and  the  movements  of  the  weight  (often  a
ring)  give  the  indications.  Sometimes  it  is  suspended  at  the
centre  of  a  circle  on  which  are  inscribed  the  letters  of  the  alpha-
bet ;  the  ring  then  moves  to  the  letters,  thus  spelling  out  a  word
or  a  phrase.  There  is  no  need  to  insist  on  the  fact  that  the
answers  are  due  to  the  subconscious  movements  of  the  person
holding  the  thread.  These  are  involuntary,  but  are,  nevertheless,
actuated  by  intelligence.  The  phenomenon  is  essentially  the
same  as  automatic  writing,  conversations  by  planchette,  the
"willing  game,"  and  other  analogous  facts  well  known  today;
that  is,  involuntary  and  unconscious  muscular  movements  organ-
izing themselves  by  some  kind  of  synthesis.  This  subconscious
synthesis  is  sometimes  so  coherent  as  to  lead  to  the  hypothesis
of  the  intervention  of  a  new  personality.

It  is  easy  to  make  the  following  very  instructive  experiment
with  a  young,  simple-minded  boy :  The  pendulum  is  put  into  his
hand  and  he  is  told  that  it  will  indicate  his  age.  Supposing  this
to  be  twelve  years,  the  pendulum  will  strike  twelve  times  on  a
screen  placed  near  it;  and  the  boy  will  be  amazed,  and  will  say,
"I  stayed  quite  still."  Now,  he  did  not  stay  quite  still,  and  it
was  really  himself  that  struck  the  twelve  strokes,  but  he  did  not
will  to  do  this  and  was  not  aware  of  his  own  movements.  He
could  equally  well  have  dictated  a  sentence  by  movements  of
the  ring  to  an  alphabet;  his  subconsciousness  after  having  thought
of  the  phrase  would  have  translated  it  by  almost  imperceptible
muscular  movements  towards  the  letters.

These  facts  are  now  undisputed.  To  Chevreul  belongs  the
merit  of  being  the  first  to  indicate  their  principle.1  According
to  him,  and  to  Babinet,  and  to  Barrett,  and  to  most  of  the  authors

JH.  Mager,  loc.  cit.,  Paul  Lemoine,  Quelques  observations  sur  la  baguette
divinatoire  {Bull,  de  la  Soc.  Philomathique  de  Paris),  191 3,  v,  10,  17.

230

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

who  have  studied  the  question,  the  movements  of  the  divining-
rod  are  determined  solely  by  involuntary  muscular  contractions
of  the  dowser.

Thus  regarded  the  question  seems  very  simple,  but  this  sim-

The  bending  of  the  rod  over  water-springs  or  metals  is  incon-
testably  true.  It  has  recently  been  fully  verified,  with  all  possible
care,  and  the  phenomenon  can  no  more  be  denied  than  any  fact
of  chemistry  or  physiology.  I  will  quote  only  the  more  recent
experiments,  those  of  M.  Paul  Lemoine  made  at  Toulouse  in  the
chemical  laboratory  of  the  Catholic  Institute.  The  Abbe  Caubin,
a  very  experienced  dowser,  was  able  to  reveal  the  presence  of
divers  metallic  masses.  The  kind  of  rod  used  has  some  influence
on  the  result.  With  a  wooden  rod  there  were  eight  successes
out  of  eight  trials;  with  a  copper  rod  four  successes  in  seven
trials ;  iron  gave  two  in  four ;  and  glass  none  in  five  trials.

The  following  experiments  are  very  interesting:  different
weights  of  gold  induced  movements  of  the  rod  at  distances
greater  or  less  according  to  the  greater  or  less  weight  of  the
metal.  The  Abbe  Caubin  knew  the  amount  of  metal  placed  for
trial,  but  M.  Lemoine  convinced  himself  that  voluntary  move-
ments by  the  operator  did  not  enter  into  the  matter.  Further
trials  resulted  in  the  figures  below:

There  was  a  series  of  trials,  published  in  1913  by  H.  Mager,
at  the  Forest  of  Vincennes  at  which  it  was  clearly  proved  that
masses  of  metals  buried  in  the  ground  could  be  discovered
equally  well  as  moving  water.  The  discovery  of  moving  under-
ground water  has  almost  become  a  trade  and  cannot  be  doubted :
the  government  engineers  in  different  lands  use  the  faculty  of
dowsers  to  discover  water;  this  is  done  in  various  districts  of

plicity  is  only  in  seeming.

2.  Summary  of  the  Facts

Mass  of  gold  (grams  t).

Distance  at  which  the
rod  began  to  turn  (metres).

3

16
32
48
64
90

1.70
2.20
2.70
3.30
4.00
4.60

THE  DIVINING-ROD

231

France,  in  Tunisia,  Algiers,  the  United  States,  and  in  German
Africa.  Differences  of  skill  in  dowsers  are  not  due  to  the  rod  not
turning  in  their  hands,  but  to  unequal  ability  in  interpreting  its
movements  as  to  the  extent,  depth,  and  direction  of  the  flow.

Although  the  history  of  the  divining-rod  is  only  indirectly  con-
nected with  metapsychics,  the  fact  itself  is  of  such  import  that
the  recent  works  proving  it  must  be  mentioned  here.1

To  A.  Martel,  who  was  quite  sceptical,  Vire  indicated  exactly
(underlined  by  Martel)  on  the  surface  of  the  ground,  for  more
than  a  thousand  yards,  the  course  of  a  subterranean  stream.  It
matters  little  that  he  knew  the  country,  for  the  surface  gives  no
indication  of  an  underground  flow.  Martel  also  gives  the  suc-
cesses obtained  in  German  Africa.

Summing  up  his  results,  M.  Vire  has  sent  me  an  unpublished
note  in  which  he  gives  the  figures  below  from  fully  verified  trials
since  1913  by  Messrs.  Pelaprat,  Probst,  Jouff  reau,  A.  Vire,  Colonel
Vallantin,  and  the  Abbe  Mermet :

Number  of

Percentage  of

Experiments.

Successes.

19

89

Subterranean  cavities

23

87

11

80

9

55

Calculation  by  percentages  underrates  the  successes,  for  a
remarkable  positive  result  greatly  outweighs  many  failures.  The
probability  is  not  1  to  2,  but  very  much  less.

For  instance,  M.  Pelaprat  and  M.  Vire  (in  an  unpublished
experiment)  showed  Mr.  A.  C,  councillor  of  state,  where  to
sink  a  well  on  his  property  at  Juillac  (Depart.  Lot).  Several
borings  had  been  made  without  results.  Messrs.  Pelaprat  and
Vire  indicated  a  thin  stream  of  water  thirteen  metres  below  the

*I  give  prominence  to  the  work  of  M.  Armand  Vire,  D.  es-Sc.,  president
of  Archaeological  Society,  who  is  a  skilful  dowser,  Bulletin  d'histoire  naturelle,
and  Oomptes  rendus  de  VAcademie  des  Sciences,  December  22,  19 13,  clvii,
1460.  See  also  E.  A.  Martel,  Traite  des  Eaux  souterraines,  Paris,  Doin,
1921,  740-752,  and  P.  Landesque,  Hydrologie  et  Hydroscopic,  Paris,  Dunod,
1920.

1.  See  Verband  zur  Klarung  der  Wiinschelruthfrage,  Stuttgart,  1912.

2.  Besides  the  monograph  by  Barrett,  see  Sanitary  Record,  May  2,  191 3.

3.  The  analysis  of  the  work  of  the  Congress  of  Halle  has  been  given  by
E.  Noel  in  the  journal  VEau  (November  15,  191 3)-  V.  Das  Wasser  (Leipzig,
1913).  M.  Argner  is  the  editor  of  a  review  devoted  solely  to  this  subject,
Die  Wiinschelruthe,  Leipzig  (1 909-1921).

232

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

surface:  a  well  was  sunk,  and  the  water  was  found  in  sufficient
quantity  for  the  purposes  required.

English  results  agree  with  those  of  French  and  German  dowsers.

M.  Landesque,  of  the  French  Government  Engineering  School
(Ponts  et  Chaussees)  gives  an  account  of  his  experiences  in
Tunisia,  in  a  very  interesting  book  from  which  I  will  cite  only
the  following  characteristic  incident :  The  military  post  at  Ramsa
had  a  well  outside  the  camp.  M.  Landesque  indicated  a  spring
within  the  camp  at  a  depth  of  six  metres.  The  boring  was  made
but  no  water  found.  M.  Landesque  advised  to  go  a  little  deeper
and  one  metre  farther  down  the  spring  was  discovered.

These  facts  are  very  important,  and  M.  Martel  on  an  impartial
summary  of  all  opinions  concludes  in  favour  of  a  rhabdic  force,
and  adds  that  additional  experiments  are  desirable ;  in  which  I  con-
cur, not  to  establish  the  undeniable  facts,  but  to  throw  light  on  the
conditions  under  which  they  occur.  The  interesting  fact,  verified
by  many  experiments,  is  that  the  rod  turns  in  the  hands  of  the
dowser  when  over  subterranean  water ;  and  this  fact  is  pregnant
with  many  important  theoretical  inferences.

In  one  experiment  (Mager,  loc.  cit.,  24),  two  dowsers,  Falcoz
and  Probst,  recognized  metal  plates  wrapped  in  paper.  Five
different  metals  were  used.  Both  dowsers  agreed  in  naming  the
metals  correctly.  Therefore  on  ten  experiments  each  having  a
probability  of  1  :  5  there  were  ten  successes,  which  gives  the  certi-
tude of  (%)10.  But  since  the  fact  is  established  there  is  no  more
need  to  calculate  chances  than  to  do  so  to  establish  the  deflection
of  the  magnetic  needle  by  an  electric  current.

That  some  persons  still  hesitate  over  the  matter  is  due  to  a  wish
to  use  the  divining-rod  as  a  measuring  instrument.  It  is  desired
to  use  it  for  industrial  purposes,  and  then  the  depth  and  direction
of  flow  are  important  matters.  This  knowledge  varies  with  the
skill  of  the  dowser ;  but  we  are  not  here  concerned  with  the  exacti-
tude of  the  revelations  by  the  rod,  but  only  whether  there  is  an
emanation,  or  as  I  propose  to  call  it,  "a  rhabdic  force"  acting  on
the  nervo-muscular  system  of  the  man  and  through  him  on  the  rod.

It  seems  to  me  that  this  cannot  be  in  doubt  (Marage,  Revue
Scientifique,  February  14,  1920)  ;  but  is  the  problem  one  of
physics  or  of  metapsychics  ?

By  our  definition  of  metapsychics  the  movement  of  the  rod
would  seem  to  be  excluded  from  that  science,  since  there  can-
not be  any  question  here  of  intelligent  forces  setting  human

THE  DIVINING-ROD

233

sensitiveness  into  action.  Nevertheless,  the  history  of  the  divining-
rod  is  pertinent  to  our  subject.  For,  if  natural  forces  (under-
ground water  and  metals)  exercise  an  unknown  action  upon  the
subconscious  mind,  there  must  be  unknown  vibrations  that  awaken
cryptesthetic  sensibility;  and  we  are  brought  back  to  the  meta-
psychic  that  deals  with  the  unknown  vibrations  of  things.

Is  the  bending  of  the  rod  due  to  unconscious  muscular  action
of  the  dowser,  or  is  it  a  direct  action  of  some  physical  force  upon
the  rod?

The  hypotheses  of  trickery,  chance,  and  conscious  muscular
action  can  be  at  once  dismissed.  Dowsers  discover  water-springs
neither  by  chance  nor  by  fraud;  the  rod  turns  strongly  in  their
hands  in  spite  of  themselves,  so  to  say,  giving  indications  by  the
direction  and  strength  of  the  movement  as  to  the  direction  and
depth  of  the  subterranean  stream ;  though  the  indications  are  very
difficult  to  interpret  correctly.  There  are  therefore  but  two
hypotheses :

A.  The  movement  of  the  rod  is  due  to  unconscious  muscular
contractions.

B.  They  are  independent  of  these  muscular  contractions.
The  first  of  these  is  very  simple,  and  doubtless  the  only  one  to

be  generally  accepted,  as  it  is  by  Chevreul  and  Barrett.  The
unknown  physical  force  (rhabdic  force)  influences  the  subcon-
sciousness of  the  dowser  and  induces  muscular  contractions.
But  certain  difficulties  are  involved.

The  movements  of  the  hazel  rod  are  sometimes  strong  enough
to  break  it,  the  parts  of  the  rod  held  in  the  hands  of  the  dowser
not  moving  at  all  when  the  middle  part  bends.  P.  Lemoine  placed
each  end  in  a  sheath  held  in  the  hands.  The  rod  turns  in  the
sheath,  as  shown  in  Paul  Lemoine's  woodcut.

Despite  the  exactitude  of  this  observation  we  cannot  admit  that
there  is  no  muscular  action.  How  can  we  suppose  that  the  rod
is  influenced  physically  and  directly  by  water,  metals,  or  metallic
salts  ?  Is  it  possible  that  it  should  move  by  itself  whilst  the  mus-
cles of  the  hands  are  inert?  If  this  were  so  the  dowser  would  not
be  required,  a  mere  physical  instrument  to  show  the  angular  dis-
placement would  suffice.  But  under  such  conditions  the  rods  do
not  move  at  all.  The  presence  of  the  dowser  is  required  and  his
personality  is  the  necessary  and  preponderant  condition.

H.  Mager  is  inclined  to  think  that  using  proper  means  everyone
might  be  a  dowser ;  but  he  gives  no  proof  of  this.   The  positive

234

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

and  undeniable  fact  is  that  in  the  hands  of  some  persons  the  rod
turns  very  forcibly,  while  with  others  it  does  not  turn  at  all.
Mager  constructed  a  galvanometric  instrument  for  the  same  pur-
pose which  has  not  as  yet  succeeded,  but  would  seem  to  be  actu-
ated by  the  potential  of  electric  forces  that  accompany  moving
subterranean  water,  without  the  presence  of  a  dowser.  But  these
small  variations  of  the  magnetic  needle  are  not  to  be  compared
with  the  powerful  bending  of  the  hazel  rods.  The  action  of  a
stream  of  water  on  a  galvanometer  is  a  matter  of  pure  physics
on  which  it  is  needless  to  insist.  If  there  is  any  such  action  it  is
extremely  feeble,  and  it  seems  impossible  to  attribute  the  powerful
flexion  of  the  hazel  rod  to  these  minute  electrical  reactions.

There  is  much  more  also  that  is  very  obscure.  Rods  of
different  kinds  are  not  equally  suitable,  which  would  seem  to
indicate  some  physical  action  on  the  rod  itself ;  for  if  subconscious
muscular  action  were  alone  concerned  it  is  not  apparent  why  a
copper  rod  should  function  worse  than  one  of  hazel  and  better
than  one  of  iron.

We  must,  however,  conclude  with  Chevreul  and  Barrett  that
there  is  no  movement  proper  to  the  rod  independently  of  human
muscles;  and  we  still  ascribe  the  phenomenon  to  unconscious
muscular  contraction.  The  dowser  often  opposes,  or  seems  to
oppose,  the  movement  of  the  rod.  Mr.  Lemoine  says  that  it
turns  despite  the  will  of  the  operator,  sometimes  so  strongly  that
he  can  hold  it  only  with  difficulty ;  he  may  even  find  it  impossible
to  hold  it  at  all.

This  fact  is  analogous  to  the  occasional  violent  movement  of
a  table  when  a  powerful  medium  barely  touches  it.

Lemoine  records  that  at  the  end  of  the  experiments  the  hands
of  the  Abbe  Caubin  were  covered  with  callosities,  not  on  the
palms  only  but  at  the  articulations  of  the  fingers  also.

Some  dowsers  are  convinced  that  the  rod  turns  of  itself
without  muscular  contractions,  and  it  is  to  be  noted  that  a  silken
or  woollen  glove  stops  the  action.  But  the  opinion  of  these  pro-
fessional dowsers,  though  not  to  be  disregarded,  is  not  to  be
taken  on  faith;  they  are  evidently  sincere,  but  they  cannot  be
aware  of  their  subconscious  movements.  The  matter  is  as  difficult
to  settle  as  whether  the  movements  of  a  table  are  due  to  muscular
contractions  when  the  medium  is  hardly  touching  the  table.

It  will  be  seen  further  on  that  some  (exceptional)  mediums
produce  raps  and  movements  at  a  distance.    If  the  force  acting

THE  DIVINING-ROD

235

on  the  rod  is  not  due  to  muscular  contractions,  might  it  not  be
due  to  a  special  kind  of  telekinesis?  Evidently  the  forces  acting
on  the  rod  only  act  through  a  human  intermediary.  It  would  be
interesting  to  carry  out  a  methodical  investigation  whether
dowsers  could  act  as  table-mediums  and  conversely;  that  would
be  a  new  experiment  worth  trying.  It  would  seem  not  impos-
sible. According  to  J.  de  Tristan  and  H.  Mager,  about  20  per
cent,  or  more  of  ordinary  persons  can  act  as  dowsers.  Experi-
ments in  this  direction  would  certainly  give  useful  data.

If  it  were  proved  that  the  rod  is  not  actuated  by  human  muscles
then  it  would  be  a  true  case  of  telekinesis.  H.  Mager  has
attempted  to  show  that  forces  capable  of  turning  the  rods  emanate
from  matter.  He  has  even  tried  to  indicate  the  direction  and
potential  of  these  forces.  This  would  be  a  physical  phenomenon
absolutely  new  and  unknown;  but  his  argument  is  feeble,  or
even  futile.  A  human  agent  has  always  been  necessary,  there
is  no  bending  of  the  rod  without  the  dowser.  Therefore,  as  a
rod  which  can  turn  does  not  turn  when  put  into  a  machine,  and
as  the  hand  of  the  dowser  is  indispensable,  we  must  perforce
admit  either  that  the  action  is  muscular  or  that  it  is  a  human
telekinesis.

Between  these  two  hypotheses  I  do  not  hesitate.  Although  I
have  no  personal  experience,  I  put  the  opinion  of  the  scientists
above  that  of  the  dowsers;  these  think  that  the  rod  moves  of
itself,  those  that  it  turns  because  the  muscles  of  the  dowser
turn  it.1

3.  Concerning  Rhabdic  Force

The  movements  of  the  rod,  then,  are  due  to  the  unconscious
muscular  contractions  of  the  individual  holding  it.  It  is  therefore
averred  that  subterranean  waters  and  metals  deep  in  the  earth
or  hidden  in  boxes  exert  an  action  on  our  subconsciousness,  and
that  this  mysterious  action  is  an  unknown  physical  force,  for
it  is  neither  humidity,  heat,  nor  electricity.

Such  a  force  emanating  from  objects  is  entirely  unknown;  its
existence  is  hypothetical,  but  the  hypothesis  is  necessary,  for
without  it,  if  there  were  not  some  determinate  energizing  influ-

^ee  Chapter  XVI  (very  obscure)  of  H.  Mager  and  J.  de  Tristan,
Recherche s  sur  quelques  effluves  terrestres  (1826),  et  les  Comptes  rendus  du
lie  congres  international  de  psychologie  experimental  de  191 3-

234

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

and  undeniable  fact  is  that  in  the  hands  of  some  persons  the  rod
turns  very  forcibly,  while  with  others  it  does  not  turn  at  all.
Mager  constructed  a  galvanometric  instrument  for  the  same  pur-
pose which  has  not  as  yet  succeeded,  but  would  seem  to  be  actu-
ated by  the  potential  of  electric  forces  that  accompany  moving
subterranean  water,  without  the  presence  of  a  dowser.  But  these
small  variations  of  the  magnetic  needle  are  not  to  be  compared
with  the  powerful  bending  of  the  hazel  rods.  The  action  of  a
stream  of  water  on  a  galvanometer  is  a  matter  of  pure  physics
on  which  it  is  needless  to  insist.  If  there  is  any  such  action  it  is
extremely  feeble,  and  it  seems  impossible  to  attribute  the  powerful
flexion  of  the  hazel  rod  to  these  minute  electrical  reactions.

There  is  much  more  also  that  is  very  obscure.  Rods  of
different  kinds  are  not  equally  suitable,  which  would  seem  to
indicate  some  physical  action  on  the  rod  itself ;  for  if  subconscious
muscular  action  were  alone  concerned  it  is  not  apparent  why  a
copper  rod  should  function  worse  than  one  of  hazel  and  better
than  one  of  iron.

We  must,  however,  conclude  with  Chevreul  and  Barrett  that
there  is  no  movement  proper  to  the  rod  independently  of  human
muscles;  and  we  still  ascribe  the  phenomenon  to  unconscious
muscular  contraction.  The  dowser  often  opposes,  or  seems  to
oppose,  the  movement  of  the  rod.  Mr.  Lemoine  says  that  it
turns  despite  the  will  of  the  operator,  sometimes  so  strongly  that
he  can  hold  it  only  with  difficulty ;  he  may  even  find  it  impossible
to  hold  it  at  all.

This  fact  is  analogous  to  the  occasional  violent  movement  of
a  table  when  a  powerful  medium  barely  touches  it.

Lemoine  records  that  at  the  end  of  the  experiments  the  hands
of  the  Abbe  Caubin  were  covered  with  callosities,  not  on  the
palms  only  but  at  the  articulations  of  the  fingers  also.

Some  dowsers  are  convinced  that  the  rod  turns  of  itself
without  muscular  contractions,  and  it  is  to  be  noted  that  a  silken
or  woollen  glove  stops  the  action.  But  the  opinion  of  these  pro-
fessional dowsers,  though  not  to  be  disregarded,  is  not  to  be
taken  on  faith;  they  are  evidently  sincere,  but  they  cannot  be
aware  of  their  subconscious  movements.  The  matter  is  as  difficult
to  settle  as  whether  the  movements  of  a  table  are  due  to  muscular
contractions  when  the  medium  is  hardly  touching  the  table.

It  will  be  seen  further  on  that  some  (exceptional)  mediums
produce  raps  and  movements  at  a  distance.    If  the  force  acting

THE  DIVINING-ROD

235

on  the  rod  is  not  due  to  muscular  contractions,  might  it  not  be
due  to  a  special  kind  of  telekinesis?  Evidently  the  forces  acting
on  the  rod  only  act  through  a  human  intermediary.  It  would  be
interesting  to  carry  out  a  methodical  investigation  whether
dowsers  could  act  as  table-mediums  and  conversely;  that  would
be  a  new  experiment  worth  trying.  It  would  seem  not  impos-
sible. According  to  J.  de  Tristan  and  H.  Mager,  about  20  per
cent,  or  more  of  ordinary  persons  can  act  as  dowsers.  Experi-
ments in  this  direction  would  certainly  give  useful  data.

If  it  were  proved  that  the  rod  is  not  actuated  by  human  muscles
then  it  would  be  a  true  case  of  telekinesis.  H.  Mager  has
attempted  to  show  that  forces  capable  of  turning  the  rods  emanate
from  matter.  He  has  even  tried  to  indicate  the  direction  and
potential  of  these  forces.  This  would  be  a  physical  phenomenon
absolutely  new  and  unknown;  but  his  argument  is  feeble,  or
even  futile.  A  human  agent  has  always  been  necessary,  there
is  no  bending  of  the  rod  without  the  dowser.  Therefore,  as  a
rod  which  can  turn  does  not  turn  when  put  into  a  machine,  and
as  the  hand  of  the  dowser  is  indispensable,  we  must  perforce
admit  either  that  the  action  is  muscular  or  that  it  is  a  human
telekinesis.

Between  these  two  hypotheses  I  do  not  hesitate.  Although  I
have  no  personal  experience,  I  put  the  opinion  of  the  scientists
above  that  of  the  dowsers;  these  think  that  the  rod  moves  of
itself,  those  that  it  turns  because  the  muscles  of  the  dowser
turn  it.1

3.  Concerning  Rhabdic  Force

The  movements  of  the  rod,  then,  are  due  to  the  unconscious
muscular  contractions  of  the  individual  holding  it.  It  is  therefore
averred  that  subterranean  waters  and  metals  deep  in  the  earth
or  hidden  in  boxes  exert  an  action  on  our  subconsciousness,  and
that  this  mysterious  action  is  an  unknown  physical  force,  for
it  is  neither  humidity,  heat,  nor  electricity.

Such  a  force  emanating  from  objects  is  entirely  unknown;  its
existence  is  hypothetical,  but  the  hypothesis  is  necessary,  for
without  it,  if  there  were  not  some  determinate  energizing  influ-

^ee  Chapter  XVI  (very  obscure)  of  H.  Mager  and  J.  de  Tristan.
Recherches  sur  quelques  effluves  terrestres  (1826),  et  les  Comptes  rendus  du
He  congres  international  de  psychologie  experimental  de  1913-

236

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

ence,  we  could  not  connect  muscular  movements  with  a  real
external  fact  with  which  they  are  obviously  in  close  relation.

This  rhabdic  force  has  been  studied  sufficiently  for  some  indica-
tion of  its  laws  to  be  even  now  possible.

Everything  takes  place  as  if  there  were  conduction  of  this
force  from  the  ground  through  the  human  body;  and  as  if  this
force,  like  electricity  and  heat,  could  be  stopped  by  gloves  of
silk  or  wool,  or  by  india-rubber  soles  to  the  shoes.

This  force  does  not  emanate  only  from  water.  The  old  trials
were  almost  invariably  to  find  water,  but  recent  experiments
have  shown  that  metals  also  have  definite  reactions.

These  reactions  differ  according  to  the  metal  used.    This  has
been  proved  by  J.  de  Tristan,  H.  Mager,1  and  Paul  Lemoine.

The  results  obtained  independently  of  each  other  by  H.  Mager
and  P.  Lemoine,  aided  by  the  Abbe  Caubin,  agree  closely.  Tak-
ing one  gram  of  gold  as  sufficient  to  act  on  the  rod,  the  quantities
of  other  metals  necessary  to  produce  the  same  results  are  as
follows :

Silver   1.2  grams

Nickel    6  grams

Aluminum    15  grams

Zinc    40  grams

Lead    75  grams

Copper   125  grams

These  figures  must  not  be  taken  as  exact,  like  magnetic  measure-
ments, but  they  are  sufficient  to  show  that  rhabdic  force  is  amen-
able to  physical  measurement.

This  establishes  a  fact  of  the  first  importance — that  a  certain
force  emanates  from  metals,  sheets  of  water,  and  metallic  salts,
and  this  force  acts  with  sufficient  energy  on  the  organism  of
certain  persons  to  induce  strong  unconscious  muscular  contrac-
tions.

There  is  no  effect  without  its  cause.  If  subterranean  water
induces  deflections  of  the  rod,  it  must  act  as  a  cause — that  is,  as
a  force — on  the  rod.  Evidently  the  action  is  by  the  intermediary
of  the  muscles,  but  that  does  not  make  it  the  less  true  that  there
is  a  new  physical  force  whose  direction  and  conduction  can  be
measured.

^ee  H.  Mager,  Les  moyens  de  dicouvrir  les  eaux  souterraines  et  de  les  uti-
liser,  Paris,  Dunod,  1912.

THE  DIVINING-ROD

237

This  rhabdic  force  certainly  does  not  act  directly  on  the  muscles,
but  on  the  nervous  system  that  moves  them;  the  muscles  are
the  passive  agents  of  the  nervous  system,  and  we  are  thus
brought  to  an  inference  whose  importance  no  one  can  fail  to
grasp — that  there  emanates  from  metals,  water,  and  metallic  salts
a  force  that  acts  on  the  nervous  system.  This  we  will  call
rhabdic  force.

To  study  the  phenomenon  somewhat  further :  Is  this  a  direct
action  on  the  unintelligent  nervous  system?  Or  is  it  an  action
upon  the  subconscious  intelligence  which  then  elaborates  the
notion  received?

These  are  not  the  same.  A  signal  light  only  shows  us  the
way  because  we  understand  its  meaning:  its  feeble  light  would
not,  of  itself,  determine  any  motion;  and  if  the  sight  of  it  causes
us  to  quicken  our  pace  that  is  because  by  a  complicated  psychic
reflex  the  intelligence  has  answered  to  the  signal.  It  seems
probable  that  the  inflection  of  the  rod  is  of  this  kind,  and  if
the  muscles  bend  it  energetically  that  is  not  because  the  nervous
system  is  directly  influenced  but  because  the  subconscious  intelli-
gence has  been  awakened  by  the  rhabdic  force.  A  notion  has
been  received  by  the  subconsciousness,  elaborated  there,  and  trans-
formed into  muscular  contraction;  it  is  certainly  not  a  crude
stimulus  to  the  nervous  centres.  The  subconscious  intelligence
intervenes  to  transform  a  feeble  stimulus  into  a  powerful  one.

The  pendulum  can  be  employed  instead  of  the  divining-rod
with  similar  results.  In  the  hands  of  a  sensitive,  while  seemingly
inert,  it  suddenly  begins  to  vibrate  on  passing  certain  places;
sometimes  this  vibration  is  so  powerful  as  to  whirl  it  about.  The
movements  are  due  to  unconscious  muscular  action,  so  absolutely
unconscious  that  the  operator  is  himself  much  surprised.  The
pendulum,  like  the  rod,  is  only  the  indicator  of  a  kind  of  nervous
excitement.

This  excitement  is  sometimes  so  violent  that  certain  sensitives,
as  M.  Vire  tells  me,  are  taken  with  a  kind  of  convulsion  on
passing  over  a  subterranean  spring  whose  location  is  unknown
to  them.  Such  hyperesthesia  is  very  rare;  but  a  considerable
number  of  sensitives  feel  a  shudder  or  tremor.

Thus  the  perturbation  of  the  nervous  system  produced  by
rhabdic  force  approaches  cryptesthesia :  instead  of  remaining  a
simple  sensation  it  is  a  sensation  accompanied  by  a  cognition  of
actualities,  this  cognition  being  always  subconscious.    This  is

238

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

proved  by  the  fact  that  if  a  metal  (e.g.,  iron,  gold,  or  copper)  is
placed  in  the  hand  holding  the  pendulum  and  causing  it  to  oscil-
late, the  pendulum  will  only  move  on  the  sensitive  passing  over  a
mass  of  the  same  metal.  If  water  is  sought  it  will  suffice  to  hold
a  bottle  of  water;  if  seeking  a  cavern  or  grotto  the  sensitive  will
take  a  small  empty  tube  in  his  hand,  which  is  comic  enough.  The
fact  of  the  ability  to  discern  more  or  less  accurately  the  presence
of  bones,  grottos,  pieces  of  cast  iron,  ingots  of  gold,  and  water-
springs  is  more  than  nervous  excitation ;  it  is  a  knowledge  of
actual  things — in  a  word,  it  is  cryptesthesia.  Therefore  the
studies  that  have  been  made  on  the  divining-rod  are  a  most  valu-
able contribution  towards  a  theory  of  cryptesthesia.  Divination
by  the  rod  is  a  form  of  pragmatic  cryptesthesia.

No  one  can  deny  the  existence  of  forces  in  being  which  have
been  called  telluric1  but  which  I  prefer  to  call  rhabdic  (Gr.  tdfido<;
=  a  rod),  which  move  the  cryptesthesia  of  the  dowser,  just  as  the
contact  with  a  given  object  enables  a  sensitive  to  acquire  cogni-
tions that  his  normal  senses  could  not  reveal.

4.  Deductions  from  the  Point  of  View  of  Cryptesthesia

At  first  sight  the  study  of  the  divining-rod  would  have  seemed
outside  metapsychics,  but  the  existence  of  rhabdic  force  brings  us
back  into  its  full  current.

In  the  chapter  on  pragmatic  cryptesthesia  (psychometry)  I  have
indicated  that  things  certainly  exert  some  action  on  intelligence.
If  a  medium  or  somnambule  is  given  some  object  that  has  belonged
to  a  person,  A.,  they  will  give  characteristics  of  A.  that  could  not
have  been  reached  by  normal  means.  I  call  this  "pragmatic  crypt-
esthesia" (Gr.  Tleay^a  =  a  fact,  a  thing  done),  because  it  seems
connected  with  an  unknown  emanation  from  actual  things.  Prag-
matic cryptesthesia  is  far  f/om  explaining  all  lucidity ;  in  fact,  it
explains  very  little ;  but  it  incontestably  exists.

I  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  divining-rod  is  an  instrument
that  can  arouse  pragmatic  cryptesthesia:  i.e.,  it  can  reveal  facts
about  things  that  our  normal  senses  cannot  reveal.  The  study
of  the  modes  of  transmission,  the  resistances  and  obstacles  to  this
flow  of  force  show  that  careful  analysis  may  give  us  precise  data
on  the  unknown  forces  emanating  from  things,  which,  if  they

H'his  is  the  word  used  by  Professor  M.  Benedikt,  Rutcn  und  Pendellehre,
1  vol.,  i2mo,  Hartleben,  191 7.

THE  DIVINING-ROD

239

cannot  touch  our  consciousness,  can  at  least  react  upon  our
organs.

The  analogy  is  remote  between  the  force  that  proceeds  from  a
subterranean  spring  and  causes  the  muscles  of  a  dowser  to  con-
tract, and  the  mysterious  emanation  from  a  lock  of  hair,  a  watch
or  a  ring  which  tells  a  medium  that  the  article  in  question  has
belonged  to  Marguerite,  George,  or  Robert,  and  gives  some  indi-
cations on  these  personalities.  But  both  phenomena  are  of  the
same  order  of  magnitude.

I  do  not  say  that  they  are  the  same.  I  say  that  the  movements
of  the  rod  are  pragmatic  cryptesthesia,  not  that  they  explain  the
movements  of  a  table ;  but  two  laws  emerge  which,  if  well  under-
stood, give  a  definite  point  of  departure  for  metapsychics :

A.  Unknown  forces  emanate  from  things,  and  these  forces  are
amenable  to  measure  and  comparison  by  physical  means.

B.  These  unknown  forces  do  not  affect  our  conscious  senses
nor  our  physical  instruments;  nevertheless  they  act  (according
to  unknown  laws)  very  energetically  on  the  subconscious  organ-
ism so  as  to  produce  cognitions  that  the  normal  senses  cannot  give.

Dowsers  may  be  compared  to  table-mediums,  for  there  is  con-
siderable similarity  between  them.  The  rhabdic  force  that  acts
on  a  human  organism  and  produces  muscular  contractions  reveals
to  consciousness  facts  that  consciousness  alone  could  not  reach;
and  similarly  a  medium  gets,  through  a  table,  answers  that  amaze
himself.

Therefore,  alike  for  the  divining-rod  and  the  moving  table,  the
unconscious  muscular  action  is  a  revealer  of  vibrations  which
the  emanations  from  actual  things  arouse  in  our  subconscious
intelligence.

This  chapter  on  the  divining-rod  is  much  abridged ;  this  impor-
tant question  should  have  been  developed  at  much  greater  length ;
but  my  book  is  already  so  long  that  I  could  not  give  more  space
to  the  subject.

CHAPTER  V

Metapsychism  in  Animals

It  may  be  questioned  whether  there  is  an  animal  metapsychism
distinct  from  the  human.  The  question  deserves  consideration
because  the  strange  phenomena  presented  by  the  Elberfeld  horses
and  the  Mannheim  dogs  have  been  referred  to  mediumistic  causes.
We  think  that  this  problem — as  interesting  as  it  is  obscure — does
not  belong  to  metapsychics.  Nevertheless,  mention  of  the  facts
must  be  made,  if  only  to  decide  whether  to  retain  them  or  to
dismiss  them.

About  1892,  at  Berlin,  William  von  Osten  made  known  some
strange  facts;  he  had  taught  a  horse  (der  kluge  Hans)  to  reckon.
A  scientific  commission  was  appointed,  which  settled  nothing.
The  matter  would  have  rested  there  had  not  an  ingenious  and
enthusiastic  merchant  of  Elberfeld,  one  Karl  Krall,  resumed  Von
Osten's  experiments  and  devoted  much  skill  and  energy  to  devel-
oping the  arithmetical  powers  of  certain  horses.1

The  facts  relative  to  the  power  of  horses  to  calculate  are  given
very  briefly,  as  follows :

Four  horses  were  trained  by  Mr.  Krall,  named  Muhamad,  Zarif,
a  pony  H'dnschen,  and  an  old  blind  horse  Barto.

These  were  able  to  solve  simple  arithmetical  problems,  and
even  some  very  complicated  ones.  They  gave  their  answers  by
striking  blows  with  their  hoofs:  thus  to  give  "54"  they  would
strike  5  times  with  the  left  and  4  times  with  the  right  hoof.

They  could  add,  subtract,  and  multiply,  and  also  extract  square
roots,  which  latter  is  perhaps  only  seemingly  more  extraordinary.

1The  bibliography  is  already  extensive.  See  Krall's  Denkende  Thiere.
The  numerous  polemical  articles  aroused  by  this  work  cannot  be  cited,  but
O.  Pfungst's  book  deserves  special  mention.  Maeterlinck,  who  went  to  see
the  horses,  wrote  on  them  in  The  Unknown  Guest;  and  C.  de  Vesme  has
summed  up  the  questions  raised  (A.  S.  P.,  191 2,  352-363,  and  A.  S.  P.,
i9i3>  1 17-128).  There  are  two  admirable  articles  by  E.  Claparede  in  the
Arch,  de  Psychol,  de  Geneve,  191 2,  xii,  263  and  19 13,  xiii,  244-284.  See
also  E.  Duchatel  on  Les  animaux  savants  de  Mannheim  (A.  S.  P.,  191 3,
289-303).  There  are  also  several  works  in  Italian.  These  references,
however,  give  only  a  slight  idea  of  the  volume  of  comment  on  the  subject.

240

METAPSYCHISM  IN  ANIMALS  241

Mr.  Assagioli,  alone  with  the  pony  Hanschen,  wrote  on  the
blackboard  33+44  and  Hanschen  answered  77.  Then  he  wrote
12+33+33  and  the  animal  replied  87,  the  digits  8  and  7  being
interchanged  (which  is  often  the  case),  87  for  78.

In  the  absence  of  Mr.  Krall  and  the  groom,  Muhamad  gave
M.  Claparede  the  fourth  root  (!!)  of  456,776,  and  the  cube  root
of  15,376.

Maeterlinck  wittily  describes  how  he  named  a  chance  number
for  Muhamad  to  give  its  square  root,  but  the  horse  did  not  reply,
the  number  having  no  exact  square  root ;  a  fact  that  vastly  aston-
ished M.  Maeterlinck.

But  there  is  more  yet.  The  Elberfeld  horses,  by  choosing  cards
with  letters  on  them,  could  carry  on  conversations ;  they  spoke,  by
the  alphabet,  phonetically  without  vowels.

Their  conversations  are  curious,  as  one  may  well  imagine.  One
day  Muhamad  denounced  the  groom  for  having  struck  Hanschen.
Sometimes  they  say  they  are  tired  and  will  not  answer.  They
knew  one  person  present  to  be  a  lady  because  "she  had  long  hair."

All  this  is  very  odd;  but  before  going  further  we  must  enquire
whether  there  is  trickery  or  illusion.

Trickery  by  Mr.  Krall  may  be  ruled  out.  All  observers  of
the  horses,  even  the  sceptical  ones,  agree  in  this.  His  honesty
is  unquestioned;  he  often  left  the  horse  and  the  observer  alone
together.  This  was  the  case  in  many  experiments.  The  presence
of  Krall  or  the  grooms  was  not  needed  for  correct  replies.
Sometimes  the  horse  was  left  quite  alone  in  the  stable  and  was
watched  through  a  glazed  chink  in  the  wall.

The  solution  reached  is  often  too  quick  even  for  a  good  arithme-
tician. Mr.  Krall  wrote  on  the  blackboard  ^91 125,  the  num-
ber given  him  by  M.  Assagioli,  and  in  a  few  seconds  Muhamad
gave  the  correct  answer.

In  presence  of  these  astonishing  and  improbable  facts,  the
official  German  scientists  drew  up  an  equally  astonishing  protest.
Twenty-four  professors  signed  this  ridiculous  document  and
among  these  there  were  only  two  who  had  seen  the  horses.  Those
two  had  the  right  to  say  that  Krall's  observations  were  illusory,
the  others  had  no  right  to  say  anything.

Their  protest  brings  nothing  new  towards  a  solution;  they
say  that  to  allow  that  horses  can  calculate  like  men  is  subversive
of  the  evolutionary  theory.  This  curious  manifesto  is  reprinted
by  Claparede  (loc.  cit.,  p.  265).

242

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

We  may  lay  down  the  following  provisional  conclusions:

1.  The  hypothesis  that  the  horses  are  trained  to  answer  by  a
system  of  signs  can  be  completely  put  aside.

2.  Neither  is  Pfungst's  hypothesis,  that  they  respond  to  uncon-
scious signs  by  the  experimenters,  any  more  useful.

The  horses  have  often  answered  when  no  witness  at  all  was
with  them  and  therefore  no  sign  at  all  could  have  been  made.

A  methodical  analysis  of  the  conditions  under  which  replies
were  given  has  led  Claparede  to  the  following  statements  that
bear  on  a  possible  theory :

t.  After  four  to  six  months  of  schooling  the  horses  make
no  further  progress.  Krall  considers  his  pupils  as  having  the
mind  of  intelligent  but  ignorant  children,  from  six  to  eight  years
old.

2.  They  can  invent  nothing  and  can  only  do  what  they  have
been  taught.  However  complicated  the  process  of  extracting  cube
roots,  it  is  not  beyond  the  powers  of  any  moderately  intelligent
child  of  ten,  after  some  months  of  teaching.

3.  They  are  often  unable  to  solve  very  simple  questions;  such
as  to  say  how  many  persons  are  present  in  the  stable,  though
this  is  much  easier  (to  our  anthropomorphic  notions)  than  the
extraction  of  the  fourth  root  of  456,776.

4.  They  do  not  seem  to  work  out  anything;  they  hardly  look
at  the  figures  on  the  blackboard.  Ferrari  and  Probli  have  em-
phasized this  inattention  on  the  part  of  the  horse  Tripoli  whom
they  endeavoured  to  train  in  Italy  after  the  Elberfeld  manner.
Tripoli  replied  after  a  careless  look  at  the  blackboard.

5.  The  errors  made  are  often  transpositions  of  figures,  as  if
they  were  errors  in  reading.  When  the  animal  is  not  sure  of  the
result  it  strikes  a  timid  blow,  but  strikes  strongly  when  sure
of  the  answer.

In  view  of  these  incoherent  results,  we  must  remain  uncertain
as  to  the  mechanism  of  the  facts,  as  we  have  so  often  had  to  do
in  other  metapsychic  questions.

Nevertheless,  on  the  positive  evidence  of  such  good  observers
as  Claparede,  Ferrari,  Edinger,  Ziegler,  Assagioli,  Hartkopf,  and
others,  I  incline  to  think  that  the  horses  really  calculate  and  that
the  arithmetical  operations  are  manifestations  of  their  intelligence.

Moreover,  it  is  not  only  horses  that  are  capable  of  such  calcula-
tions. Krall  thought  that  the  elephant,  which  shows  such  remark-
able intelligence,  might  give  better  results.    He  got  a  young

METAPSYCHISM  IN  ANIMALS  243

elephant,  Kana;  but  the  youngster  was  very  lazy  and  gave  only
blunders!  The  dog  Rolf,  of  Mannheim,  and  the  cat  Daisy  pre-
sented some  curious  facts  of  the  same  kind.  Rolf  would  appear
to  have  made  it  known  of  his  own  accord  that  he  could  reckon,
and  had  learned  to  do  so  by  hearing  the  lessons  given  to  a  child
(Buchstabierende  Hunde,  Psych.  Studien,  1918,  xlv,  142).

We  cannot  suppose  that  Muhamad,  Rolf,  Hanschen,  and  Barto
were  exceptional  beings;  if  they  gave  proof  of  intelligence  it  is
fairly  certain  that  other  animals  could  do  the  like.  Then  why
are  not  these  feats  repeated?  Why  are  they  isolated  facts,  both
in  science  and  legend?

If  this  arithmetical  aptitude  were  a  real  phenomenon  and  no
illusion,  it  should  be  possible  to  make  hundreds  of  calculating
horses.  But  this  is  not  done,  no  others  have  followed.  Why,  if
it  is  not  an  illusion?

This  seems  to  me  the  most  serious  objection  that  can  be  put
forward  against  the  facts  alleged  by  Krall,  an  objection  so  grave
that  it  almost  negatives  them.

The  uncertainty  of  the  facts  makes  any  theoretical  treatment
necessarily  brief.

The  opinion  has  been  expressed  that  the  phenomenon  is  tele-
pathic. This  is  quite  inadmissible :  Grabow  obtained  exact  answers
on  numbers  presented  to  the  animal  that  he  himself  did  not
know ;  and  in  certain  instances  the  horse  gave  them  when  alone
in  the  stable.  There  is  no  valid  reason  for  seeking  to  apply
telepathy ;  the  obscure  is  not  explained  by  the  more  obscure.

C.  de  Vesme  has  advanced  the  ingenious  hypothesis  that  the
process  is  mediumistic.  After  all,  since  there  are  intelligent  raps
producible  from  a  table,  why  should  not  this  power  put  the
brain  and  muscles  of  a  horse  into  action  much  as  it  causes  the
vibration  in  the  wood  of  the  table?  In  this  connection  De  Vesme
quotes  the  instance  of  a  young  man  of  nineteen  belonging  to  an
honourable  family,  who  could  readily  obtain  through  the  planchette
in  three  or  four  seconds  the  total  of  several  numbers  each  of
six  or  seven  figures  that  would  have  taken  several  minutes  to
add  up  on  paper.  The  subconscious  automatism  worked  more
quickly  than  the  conscious  mind  could  do.  De  Vesme  therefore
thinks  that  the  Elberfeld  horses  show  a  mental  automatism
similar  to  that  of  a  medium,  and  this  seems  to  me  worthy  of
acceptance ;  though,  truth  to  tell,  it  is  not  an  explanation.

In  any  case  the  automatic  arithmetical  intelligence  of  the  animals

244

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

does  not  imply  a  metapsychical  phenomenon — i.e.,  the  action  of
an  intelligent  force  differing  from  known  forces.

We  know  little  or  nothing  about  animal  intelligence ;  its  limits
are  undetermined,  and  if  a  horse  or  a  dog  can  do  what  a  child
of  ten  can  do,  when  duly  trained,  that  only  indicates  a  great
extension  of  animal  intellectuality.

I  should  therefore  say  that  the  arithmetical  intelligence  of  the
Elberfeld  horses  (if  it  exists,  as  it  is  possible  that  it  does)  proves
that  horses  are  capable  of  calculation  and  reasoning,  but  that  this
does  not  exceed  the  capacity  of  young  children.  It  is  extraor-
dinary, and  seems  unlikely,  but  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
metapsychic  science  that  opens  on  unknown  worlds.

CHAPTER  VI

Sporadic  Cryptesthesia
A.  MONITIONS1  (I  ON  MONITIONS  IN  GENERAL)

1.  Classification  and  Definition

A  study  of  cryptesthesia  that  failed  to  take  account  of  that
form  of  it  which  occurs  in  normal  individuals  apart  from  any
experimental  intention,  would  be  very  imperfect  both  with  regard
to  the  fact  itself  and  to  the  various  forms  under  which  it  is
manifested.

We  shall  apply  the  term  "monitions"  to  these  phenomena  of
sporadic  cryptesthesia,  without  implying  the  hypothesis  of  an
external  monitory  will ;  and  shall  treat  them  in  three  sections :

1.  Monitions  on  trivial  or  serious  matters  other  than  death.

2.  Monitions  of  death.

3.  Monitions  that  probably  have  material  objectivity,  since  they
are  collective — i.e.,  observed  by  several  persons  at  once.

I  intentionally  do  not  use  the  word  "hallucination,"  even  quali-
fied by  the  epithets  "veridical,"  "telepathic,"  or  "symbolical."  It
seems  to  me  that  the  term  "hallucination"  should  be  reserved  to
describe  a  morbid  state  when  a  mental  image  is  exteriorized  with-
out any  exterior  reality.

In  so-called  veridical  or  telepathic  hallucinations  the  fact  of  their
correspondence  with  some  near  or  distant  external  event  shows
that  there  is  some  objective  external  reality  that  conditions  the
hallucination.  It  is  of  no  consequence  whether  we  know  the
nature  of  the  force  or  vibration  that  transmits  the  knowledge
or  not.

In  hallucinations  produced  by  absinthe,  or  alcohol,  in  those  of
general  paralysis,  acute  mania,  somnambulic  suggestion  or
dreams,  there  is  no  external  cause;  the  cause  and  effect  are

According  to  the  Latin  etymology,  the  word  "monition"  means  no  more
than  "warning."  This  does  not  necessarily  imply  an  external  intervention.  ^  It
is  applicable  to  a  warning  proceeding  from  the  subconscious  intelligence  which
acquires,  by  cryptesthesia,  the  cognizance  of  an  external  event  and  presents
it  by  a  symbol.

245

246

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

anterior  to  the  brain.  Hallucination  is  one  of  the  most  distinctive
symptoms  of  insanity,  and  occurs  in  nearly  all  forms  of  delirium.
It  occurs  after  some  forms  of  intoxication;  under  hashish  the
illusions  are  so  powerful  that  they  become  real  hallucinations;
belladonna  and  atropine,  in  strong  but  not  fatal  doses,  produce
passing  hallucinations ;  long  and  persistent  hallucinations  can  be
provoked  in  somnambulists,  causing  them  to  live  in  a  dream,  and
dreams  much  resemble  hallucinations.  To  dream  when  awake
and  not  to  know  one  is  dreaming  is  to  have  a  hallucination.

But  all  these  have  no  objective  reality.  When  a  dipsomaniac
sees  rats,  hears  their  squeaks  and  feels  their  bites,  there  are  no
rats.  When  a  hypnotized  subject  is  told  to  go  up  the  steps  into
a  house  and  take  a  seat  on  the  sofa,  there  is  neither  house  nor
steps  nor  sofa.   When  a  lunatic  hears  voices,  there  are  no  voices.

It  is  extremely  rare  that  a  person  who  is  neither  ill,  nor  drunk,
nor  hypnotized  should  in  the  waking  state  have  an  auditory,
visual,  or  tactile  illusion  of  things  that  in  no  way  exist.  The
opinion  of  alienists  that  hallucination  is  the  chief  sign  of  mental
derangement,  and  the  infallible  characteristic  of  insanity,  seems
to  me  well  grounded.  With  certain  exceptions  (for  to  every  rule
there  are  exceptions)  a  normal,  healthy  individual  when  fully
awake  does  not  have  hallucinations.  If  he  sees  apparitions  these
correspond  to  some  external  reality  or  other.  In  the  absence  of
any  external  reality  there  are  no  hallucinations  but  those  of  the
insane  and  of  alcoholics.

But  we  must  be  clear  what  we  mean  by  objective  reality.  To
take  a  concrete  instance,  when  Mrs.  Bagot  at  Mentone  sees  her
little  dog  Judy  cross  the  room  at  the  very  time  that  Judy  has  died
in  England,  that  is  not  a  hallucination  in  the  proper  sense  of  the
word,  for  it  corresponds  to  a  real  event.  But  we  are  not  going  to
imagine  that  there  was  a  phantom  Judy  in  the  dining-room  at
Mentone  emitting  the  mechanical  and  luminous  vibrations  that
correspond  to  sight.  The  nature  of  the  external  fact  that  caused
Mrs.  Bagot  to  see  Judy  is  quite  unknown  and  is  probably  quite
different  to  the  genesis  of  a  phantom.  Nor  shall  I  assert,  like
some  out-and-out  spiritualists,  that  Judys  astral  body  has  appeared
in  Mentone.  All  the  same  there  is  some  relation  between  the  death
of  Judy  and  Mrs.  Bagot's  vision.  It  is  a  monition  which,  by  some
mysterious  and  unknown  means,  has  touched  Mrs.  Bagot's  mind
and  has  presented  itself  under  a  form  adapted  to  human  intelli-
gence, i.e.,  by  a  visual  phenomenon.

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  247

The  vision  cannot  be  compared  to  that  of  a  lunatic,  for  there
was  an  objective  reality  {Judy's  death)  which  was  causative  of  a
vision  at  once  veridical  and  symbolical.

We  shall  therefore  employ  the  word  "monition,"  not  "halluci-
nation,"  to  all  these  cases  of  veridical  and  symbolical  hallucina-
tion. Thus  regarded  monitions  can  be  considered  as  cases  of
lucidity ;  but  they  differ  from  lucidity  as  previously  studied  in  two
important  respects:

1.  They  are  not  experimental  but  accidental.  The  data  that  we
have  on  them  depend  on  sporadic  observations  and  not  on  method-
ical experiment.  We  shall  therefore  define  monitions  as  phe-
nomena of  sporadic  and  non-experimental  lucidity.

2.  To  move  the  mind  of  the  percipient  there  must  be  an  objective
phenomenon  of  some  kind,  but  this  (in  most  cases)  has  no  re-
semblance to  usual  objective  phenomena.

When  Mrs.  Hutchins  sees  her  husband  and  hears  him  call
"Mary,  Mary"  at  the  very  time  that  he  has  suddenly  died,  it  must
be  admitted  that  this  is  not  the  ordinary  mechanical  and  physico-
chemical  fact  of  a  bodily  presence  that  speaks.  It  is  some  force  in
action  near  Mrs.  Hutchins,  inducing  the  image  by  cryptesthetic
emotions  whose  bearing  we  cannot  fathom.  This  unknown  vi-
bration has  reached  the  mind  of  Mrs.  Hutchins,  but  would  doubt-
less not  have  reached  another  person.

In  certain  analogous  cases  the  exterior  fact  resembles  ordinary
objectifications,  and  in  such  cases  the  effect  is  produced  on  other
persons  collectively.  Such  is  the  case  of  Mme.  Telechoff,  whose
five  children  and  dog  perceive  the  apparition  of  a  little  boy,
Andre,  floating  high  in  the  room,  the  child  having  died  in  a  house
near  by.  In  this  case  there  certainly  was  a  real  phantom  with  real
outlines  like  a  living  person,  which  might  probably  have  im-
pressed a  photographic  plate.

It  is  therefore  not  possible  to  draw  an  exact  line  of  demarcation
between  the  subjective  and  the  objective;  some  monitions  have  a
close  relation  to  both.

1.  Monitions  are  all  objective  in  a  certain  sense,  but  it  is  a
special  kind  of  objectivity,  having  no  relation  to  what  we  call
ordinary  objectivity.

2.  If  we  use  ordinary  language  and  limit  the  term  objective  to
those  physical  vibrations  that  ordinarily  affect  our  senses,  we
should  then  say  that  nearly  all  monitions  are  subjective.

While  admitting,  then,  that  all  classification  is  artificial,  we  shall

248

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

class  as  subjective  all  the  non-collective  monitions  in  which  a
visual,  auditory,  or  tactile  image  has  not  been  excited  by  an
external  force  similar  to  the  mechanical,  physico-chemical  forces
of  the  usual  known  kinds.

But  these  sporadic  monitions  have  certain  characteristics  too
closely  analogous  to  collective  monitions  and  to  experimental  ma-
terializations for  us  to  be  justified  in  eliminating  the  hypothesis
of  a  materialization,  or  something  like  it  in  many  monitions,  sim-
ply because  it  may  be  convenient  to  do  so.  This  will  be  discussed
later  on ;  in  this  present  chapter  we  shall  class  monitions  among
subjective  phenomena,  setting  theory  aside  for  the  present,  but
taking  note  of  the  two  double  characteristics  (1)  that  they  are
accidental  and  not  experimental,  and  (2)  that  they  are  connected
with  some  real  fact  inaccessible  to  the  percipient  by  normal  means.

2.  Conditions  Necessary  that  Monitions  Should  Be  Regarded

as  Such

The  first  condition  is  the  honesty  of  the  witnesses.  With  the
rarest  exceptions  it  is  not  possible  to  suppose  that  the  stories  have
been  invented.  It  is  possible,  though  unlikely,  that  among  the
thousands  of  cases  reported,  perhaps  ten  may  be  due  to  practical
jokes,  but  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  there  has  scarcely  ever  been
intentional  invention.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  inaccuracy  is  as  certain  as  honesty;  and
this  is  a  source  of  grave  error.

A  story  that  comes  to  us  at  secondhand,  having  passed  through
two  or  three  persons'  imagination  and  memory,  the  one  inventive
and  the  other  treacherous,  is  sure  to  be  distorted.  In  spite  of
oneself,  there  is  a  tendency  to  make  it  more  effective  by  adding
details  and  suppressing  others.  In  the  great  majority  of  cases
the  honesty  is  indubitable,  but  so  is  the  inaccuracy.  Wilful  deceit
there  is  none,  but  self-deception  is  almost  always  present.

I  will  instance  the  log  of  the  three-master  Jacques  Gabriel.
The  log  contains  the  following  annotation,  but  written  with
different  ink,  "On  arriving  at  the  Mauritius,  we  learn  the  death
of  the  wife  of  the  second  officer,  M.  Penaud,  deceased  on  the
same  day  and  hour  at  which  the  noise  was  heard. "  In  the  log
under  date  of  July  17th  the  entry  states  that  while  at  sea  the
voice  of  a  woman  had  been  heard  on  board.  Now  the  register
of  deaths  at  Paimbceuf  indicates  that  Mme.  Penaud  died  on

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  249

the  16th  of  Jane.  So  that  Captain  Mangot,  commanding  the
vessel,  no  doubt  in  good  faith,  but  disregarding  the  necessity  of
being  absolutely  accurate  in  all  matters  of  science,  mentions  the
events  as  simultaneous,  though  there  was  a  month's  difference
between  them.

There  are  certainly  a  number  of  cases  analogous  to  the  fore-
going which,  as  no  written  evidence  was  taken  at  the  time,  must
be  accepted  with  considerable  reserve ;  but  these  reservations
have  less  to  do  with  the  fact  itself  than  with  the  moment  of  its
occurrence,  which,  if  coincident  with  the  event,  would  show  a
connection  in  time  with  the  objective  reality.  It  would  therefore
be  injudicious  to  reject  all  the  cases  in  which  written  documents
are  wanting;  for  memory,  which  is  unreliable  as  to  precise  dates,
is  trustworthy  for  many  other  details.

It  is  also  remarkable  that  monitions,  whether  because  of  their
somewhat  dramatic  character,  or  because  they  have  been  spoken
of  several  times,  or  for  some  deeper  reason,  are  deeply  graven
in  the  minds  of  the  percipients,  so  that  they  are  still  vividly
and  accurately  remembered  after  the  lapse  of  even  as  much  as
thirty  years.  There  will  be  some  distortion,  but  the  fundamental
facts  are  correctly  retained;  the  narrator  may  forget  whether
the  lamp  was  alight  or  not;  whether  the  weather  was  bright
or  rainy ;  whether  he  spoke  aloud  or  kept  silence ;  but  the  essen-
tial facts  remain.  No  doubt  illusions  arise  on  the  exact  corre-
spondence of  hours,  or  even  of  days,  but  these  variations  from
accuracy,  though  they  are  not  unimportant,  do  not  change  the
essential  character  of  the  fact  itself.

Another  point,  which  is  perhaps  more  difficult  to  clear  up,  is
whether  in  any  given  case  it  was  actually  impossible  that  the
event  in  question  should  have  reached  the  mind  by  any  ordinary
channel.  The  following  case,  for  instance,  seems  one  in  which  a
subconscious  rememberance  seems  sufficient  to  account  for  the
facts :

Mr.  Newnham  during  a  walk  at  Haughton  had  gathered  some
violets  for  his  sick  wife.  Twelve  years  later  as  he  was  walking
in  the  same  place,  and  thinking  of  the  violets  once  gathered  there,
his  wife  said  to  him,  "I  smell  violets  in  the  hedgerow/'  This  was
no  doubt  a  subconscious  remembrance  by  Mrs.  Newnham  (or  pos-
sibly a  coincidence).  She  said,  no  doubt  quite  sincerely,  I  had  com-
pletely forgotten  the  fact,"  but  the  subconscious  memory  forgets
nothing.    Each  case  should  be  considered  on  its  own  merits.

250

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Very  often  the  facts  relate  to  a  person  who  is  very  ill  or
near  death,  and  then  a  real  hallucination  is  possible;  but  this
possibility  must  not  be  exaggerated.

In  the  first  place,  people  in  a  normal  state  do  not  have  hallucina-
tions ;  and  further  the  correspondence  between  the  hour  of  death
and  that  of  the  monition  is  sometimes  so  exact  that  it  could  not
be  due  to  so-called  hallucination.  Mr.  Williams  knew  that  his
brother-in-law,  George,  was  very  ill,  nearly  dying.  One  morning
he  sees  George  standing  at  his  bedside,  and  says  to  his  wife,  "I
have  seen  George,  he  came  for  a  minute  at  sunrise. "  Far  away
George  had  died  in  the  arms  of  his  father,  who  wrote,  "The  sun
was  rising  when  my  dear  son  left  us  for  the  heavenly  country."
The  event  and  the  monition  were  so  exactly  simultaneous  that
Mr.  Williams's  knowledge  of  the  imminence  of  death  detracts
very  little  from  the  authenticity  of  the  monition.

O.  Houdaille,  called  to  the  bedside  of  his  grandfather  who  was
very  ill,  while  in  the  train  taking  him  to  Mirecourt,  hears  a
deep  sigh,  gets  up,  looks  at  the  time,  and  says  to  his  brother,  "It  is
one  o'clock;  grandfather  must  be  dead  or  dying."  Mr.  B.,
the  grandfather,  entered  into  the  death-throes  at  one  o'clock
precisely.

Even  if  we  eliminate  the  cases  in  which  a  death  is  expected  (and
there  is  no  real  reason  to  eliminate  these),  there  remains  a
large  number  in  which  the  recipient  of  the  monition  believed  the
person  in  question  to  be  in  good  health  or  very  slightly  indis-
posed. Thus  when  Mr.  Z.  left  his  young  friend,  B.,  B.  was  in
perfect  health.  They  had  talked  of  trivial  matters;  but  two
hours  later  Z.  had  a  terrible  dream  at  the  very  moment  that  B.
committed  suicide.1

Monitions  might  be  divided  into  the  foreseen  and  the  unfore-
seen; the  former  being  those  in  which  death  was  expected,  and
the  latter  those  referring  to  a  person  in  good  health;  but  the
resemblance,  not  to  say  the  identity,  of  the  modality  of  monitions
in  both  cases  is  such  that  the  phenomenon  is  the  same  in  both,  and
it  would  be  irrational  to  reject  monitions  of  likely  facts  merely
because  they  are  likely.  Is  the  knowledge  that  a  brother  is  very
ill  or  dying  sufficient  to  evoke  his  wraith?   "Expectant  attention,"

*I  have  an  impression,  which  should  be  supported  by  statistics,  that
monitions  are  more  frequent  in  cases  of  suicide.  This  might  be  better
known  if  families  in  such  cases  were  not  careful  to  conceal  the  fact  and  the
circumstances  that  led  to  it.

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  251

to  which  so  many  marvels  are  attributed,  really  cannot  cause  a
normal  person  to  see  a  phantom  or  hear  a  voice.  We  must  admit
monitions  into  the  realm  of  metapsychics  even  when  they  refer
to  probable  facts.

Nevertheless,  whenever  a  simple  and  non-metapsychic  explana-
tion of  a  so-called  monition  can  be  given,  it  should  be  adopted.
In  other  words,  the  criticism  of  such  facts  must  be  stringent.

Mr.  Barwell  and  Mr.  Earle  see  their  friend  W.  at  the  carriage-
door  of  a  train  just  as  it  is  starting:  W.  waves  his  hand  to  them
and  the  train  is  soon  out  of  sight.  At  that  very  moment  W.
falls  into  syncope  at  his  own  house.  But  this  is  not  enough  to
establish  that  W.'s  double  was  in  the  departing  train.  It  is
possible  that  some  stranger  who  resembled  W.,  seeing  signs  made
to  him,  answered  them  by  a  wave  of  the  hand.  This  is  much
more  likely  than  an  apparition ;  and  this  story  must  be  rejected.

The  very  interesting  case  of  M.  Noell,  a  young  student  of
pharmacy  at  Montpellier,  who  saw  one  night  his  dying  sister
and  heard  her  call  to  him,  has  a  defective  side.  Telegrams  had
been  sent  him  announcing  his  sister's  serious  illness,  but  the
servant  who  should  have  given  him  the  telegrams  had  stupidly
put  them  into  a  drawer.  One  cannot  be  certain  that  M.  Noell
had  not  half  unconsciously  opened  the  drawer  and  read  the  tele-
grams. This  is  improbable  but  not  impossible,  and  is  sufficient  to
make  the  case  a  doubtful  one.

Even  if  the  non-metapsychical  explanations  are  far-fetched  and
unlikely,  provided  they  have  some  remote  possibility,  they  should
be  accepted  in  preference  to  calling  in  mysterious  faculty.

Thus  the  Rev.  Mr.  Killick  thinks  he  hears  a  voice  telling  him
that  his  daughter  Etta  is  drowning.  Some  months  later  he  learns
that  at  that  very  time  his  daughter  had  been  in  imminent  danger
of  being  drowned.  May  not  this  be  a  fact  of  paramnesia — an
illusion  of  memory?  May  not  the  extent  of  the  danger  to  Etta
have  been  exaggerated  ?

Dr.  J.  Smith  hears  a  voice  that  repeats  three  times,  "Send  some
bread  to  James  Candy.''  He  then  sends  the  bread  to  Gandy,  whose
existence  he  barely  knew  of,  and  finds  him  in  a  state  of  destitution
with  his  children  crying  for  bread.  But  it  is  possible  that  Dr.
Smith  may  have  known  that  Gandy  was  in  want,  and  the  auditory
admonition  does  not  necessitate  cryptesthesia.

Each  particular  case  of  sporadic  cryptesthesia  needs  special
critical  treatment.    This  has  been  done  by  the  authors  of  Phan-

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

tasms  of  the  Living,  by  Camille  Flammarion,  by  the  editors  of
the  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  and  by  the  members  of  the
S.  P.  R.,  before  making  public  the  facts  recorded  by  them.  This
criticism,  however,  has  not  prevented  .the  publication  of  some
weakly  authenticated  facts  that  seem  to  support  others  that  are
quite  well  evidenced.  I  have  endeavoured  in  this  book  to  give
only  those  against  which  little  can  be  alleged ;  but  among  them
are  still  too  many  which,  if  they  stood  alone,  would  have  little
weight.

As  our  chief  aim  is  to  prove  the  reality  of  cryptesthesia,  we
shall  not  take  into  account  vague  and  indefinite  cases.  Thus,
Mrs.  Martyn  has  an  intense  feeling  of  horror  and  fear.  She
cannot  assign  any  precise  bearing  to  this;  but  next  day  she
learns  that  someone  that  she  had  not  seen  for  two  years  has
died.  This  cannot  be  called  a  monition;  it  may  have  been  one,
but  there  is  no  evidence  for  it.

The  same  must  be  said  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Wilson,  who  had  a
vague  but  strong  sensation  of  illness  at  the  moment  of  death  of
a  twin  brother.  He  says,  "It  was  a  panic  fear;  I  shuddered  as
at  the  approach  of  death.  My  brother  died  fours  hours  before
this  painful  terror  seized  me."  That  this  may  have  been  a
monition  is  probable,  seeing  that  the  brothers  were  twins;  but
Mr.  Wilson  did  not  connect  his  sensations  with  his  brother,  and
it  is  best  to  infer  simple  coincidence.

Vague  monitions  which  do  not  connect  with  a  real  and  definite
fact  totally  unknown  to  the  percipient  do  not  amount  to  lucidity.
We  shall  not  call  them  monitions,  for  that  word  is  reserved  to
the  cognizance  of  a  real  external  fact.  Cases  in  which  the  per-
cipient has  no  intimation  of  the  external  fact  itself  cannot  be  taken
as  monitions.

(a)  The  Hypothesis  of  Chance  Coincidence

It  is  frequently  objected  that  monitions  may  be  due  to  chance.
It  is  desirable  to  give  this  objection  its  full  weight:

"In  France,  as  in  England,  there  are  about  1,500,000  deaths
annually  and  a  thousand  times  as  many  falls,  wounds,  serious
accidents  followed  by  fainting,  loss  of  blood,  and  delirium,  with-
out counting  the  minor  incidents  to  which  many  monitions  refer.
This  amounts  to  some  1,500  million  cases.  As  the  enquiry  extends
over  about  sixty  years,  there  are  about  a  hundred  thousand

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  253

millions  of  casual  events  that  might  be  the  subject  of  monitions.
Now  it  has  only  been  possible  to  ascertain  (with  difficulty)  about
500  cases;  therefore,  the  ratio  of  actual  to  possible  cases  is  500
to  100,000,000,000,  or  1  :  200  millions  or  less.  Therefore,  alike
in  France  and  in  England  only  one  two-hundredth-millionth,  or
at  most,  one  hundred-millionth,  of  possible  cases  has  eventuated.
This  is  a  very  small  number;  so  small  as  to  be  negligible,  and  if
all  the  inaccurate  observations,  exaggerations,  and  defects  of
memory  were  eliminated,  the  number  would  be  much  smaller
still."

This  objection  somewhat  resembles  the  remark  of  the  sceptic
who,  seeing  the  votive  offerings  of  sailors  saved  from  shipwreck
to  their  patron,  St.  Peter,  asked  to  see  the  names  of  those  who
were  drowned  in  spite  of  their  prayers.

N.  Vaschide  has  been  unable  to  obtain  any  positive  evidence,
and  his  criticism  is  not  very  logical.  Against  all  common-sense
he  begins  by  denying  probabilities,  and  then  he  invokes  the  calcu-
lus of  probabilities  to  support  his  denial.  Then  having  found  on
enquiry  that  the  hallucinations  he  has  brought  forward  were  not
veridical,  he  concludes  that  the  enquiry  conducted  by  the  S.  P.  R.
is  illusory.  But  in  such  a  case  science  cannot  prove  a  negative
and  I  can  only  compare  his  negation  to  that  of  the  Venetian  doctor
who  replied  to  Harvey  that  the  heart  might  be  heard  to  contract
in  London,  but  that  in  Venice  nothing  of  the  sort  could  be
perceived.

We  may  reply  to  Vaschide :

(1)  The  number  of  persons  who  for  one  reason  or  another,
by  indifference,  laziness,  inattention,  or  fear,  do  not  give  their
testimony  is  very  great;  but  the  number  who  have  never  heard
of  the  enquiry  is  enormous.  Among  the  persons  passing  through
Trafalgar  Square  in  London  or  the  Place  de  l'Opera  in  Paris,
what  is  the  ratio  between  those  who  have  heard  of  an  enquiry
on  veridical  hallucinations,  to  those  who  have  not  heard  of  it?
And  how  many  among  those  who  have  heard  would  think  of
writing  a  letter  detailing  personal  matters?  Add  to  this  the
country-side  and  the  small  towns.  It  may  be  boldly  averred,  not
one  in  a  hundred  thousand.  The  ratio  stated  by  M.  Vaschide
then  falls  from  one  hundred-millionth  to  one  ten-thousandth,
which  is  very  different.

(2)  If,  instead  of  taking  cases  of  telepathy  and  monition  bear-
ing on  various  matters,  we  take  only  the  premonitions  of  death,

254

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

accepting  only  those  that  are  well  supported  by  documentary
evidence,  we  have  about  250  cases.  In  sixty  years  there  are  said  to
be  750  million  deaths.  If,  then,  only  one  in  ten  thousand  persons
have  been  moved  to  action  by  the  enquiry,  the  ratio  is  250  :  75,000,
say,  1  : 300.  Such  would  seem  to  be  near  the  proportion  of
those  who  have  had  a  monition  among  those  who  might  be
expected  to  reply.  One  in  three  hundred  is  a  small  proportion,
but  it  is  no  longer  a  negligible  quantity.

(3)  The  hypothesis  of  chance  coincidence  becomes  quite  unten-
able when  the  time  of  the  monition  coincides  exactly  with  the
event.  J.  has  left  his  friend  F.,  when  F.  was  very  slightly
indisposed.  Soon  after  J.  in  his  own  home  sees  the  apparition
of  F.,  and  asks  his  wife,  "What  is  the  time?"  Twelve  minutes
to  nine."  "Then,"  says  J.,  "F.  has  died  at  8.48.  I  have  just  seen
him."  In  fact,  F.  has  died  between  8.35  and  9  o'clock,  or,  taking
the  mean,  at  8.45.    The  times  are  exactly  concordant.

The  probability  that  J.  should  have  one,  and  only  one,  hallucina-
tion in  his  whole  life  and  that  it  should  agree  exactly  with  the
time  of  F.'s  death  can  be  calculated  fairly  closely.  There  are
96  quarter-hours  in  the  day,  and  365  days  in  the  year.  Tak-
ing twenty  years  of  J.'s  experience  that  gives  a  probability  of
1  :  700,000  against  a  chance  coincidence.  C.  Flammarion  (Rcvuc
Spirite,  February,  1921),  by  another  method  of  calculation
reaches  a  probability  of  1  :  800,000,000  on  the  same  data ;  but
whether  1  :  700,000  or  1  :  800,000,000,  the  moral  improbability  of
chance  coincidence  is  the  same.

Is  it  not  much  more  rational  to  suppose  that  J.,  who  is  neither
a  mystic  nor  subject  to  hallucinations,  had  at  that  precise  minute
a  monition,  the  only  one  in  his  whole  life,  because  some  actual
vibration  awakened  his  dormant  cryptesthesia  ?

(4)  But  the  chief  reason  for  dismissing  the  hypothesis  of
chance  is  that  the  details  furnished  by  the  monition  are  often  so
exact  and  so  abundant  that  fortuitous  coincidence  is  out  of  the
question.  Mme.  Escourru  at  Paris,  looking  at  the  portrait  of  her
son,  sees  the  left  eye  bleeding  and  the  eyeball  out  of  its  socket;
and  on  the  same  day  her  son,  a  captain  of  Zouaves,  is  wounded
in  this  very  manner  at  the  assault  on  La  Puebla  in  Mexico.

Mrs.  Green  dreams  of  two  young  girls  driving  in  a  one-horse
carriage  drowned  in  a  lake,  their  two  hats  floating  on  the  water ;
and  at  that  very  time,  the  girls,  one  of  whom  is  her  niece,  having
gone  for  a  drive  with  a  friend,  are  drowned  in  Australia  on  the

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  255

other  side  of  the  world,  the  two  bodies  being  located  by  the  hats
floating  on  the  water.  The  probability  against  chance  is  so  great
that  it  amounts  to  moral  certainty.

We  never  get  mathematical  certainty;  it  is  not  certain  that  a
bag  of  type  emptied  on  a  table  will  not  fall  into  the  first  line  of
the  Iliad.  This  combination  exists  among  those  that  are  possible,
but  if  it  should  occur  no  one  would  believe  it  due  to  chance.

(5)  In  a  small  number  of  cases  some  objective  phenomena  have
accompanied  the  monitions;  a  fact  which  makes  the  hypothesis
of  chance  quite  untenable.

Mrs.  Bettany  sees  an  old  woman  in  a  long  cloak  crouching
on  the  floor.  Mr.  Bettany  sees  the  same,  and  both  recognize
Mrs.  X.  Is  it  possible  that  there  was  no  external  phenomenon?
Is  it  likely  that  this  was  unconnected  with  the  death  of  Mrs.  X.  at
the  same  hour?

(6)  The  calculus  of  probabilities  has  been  alluded  to  above.
This  method  of  reasoning,  which  may  be  misleading  even  on
mathematical  and  abstract  data,  becomes  entirely  illusory  when
the  complex  and  intricate  factors  of  a  monition  enter  into  the
problem.  In  such  cases  common-sense  rather  than  calculation
will  give  the  solution.  Mr.  Wingfield  Baker  writes  in  his  diary
the  initials  of  his  brother,  and  adds  "God  forbid" ;  at  the  same
hour  his  brother  is  killed  in  the  hunting-field.  The  most  ele-
mentary good  sense  will  see  a  connection  between  the  two  events,
and  that  the  apparition  of  his  brother  was  not  due  to  chance.

If  this  were  an  isolated  case  it  might,  at  a  stretch,  be  supposed
that  chance  might  have  induced  an  hallucination  in  a  normal
person  (however  rare  such  may  be)  and  that  this  hallucination
might  have  occurred  at  the  moment  of  the  brother's  death.  It
is  vastly  unlikely,  however.  If  the  case  were  unique  we  might
hesitate  to  draw  a  definite  conclusion;  but  there  are  some  hun-
dreds of  such  cases  and  the  repetition  of  similar  coincidences
excludes  all  idea  of  chance.

That  at  roulette  the  red  should  come  up  80  times  out  of  100
on  a  particular  day  is  enormously  improbable,  but  no  inference
could  be  drawn;  but  if  this,  or  something  like  it,  occurred  for
a  month,  we  should  be  quite  sure  that  the  wheel  had  been
tampered  with.  In  the  case  of  the  wheel  the  probability  is
calculable;  in  that  of  monitions  it  is  not,  but  the  inference  is
the  same.

The  study  of  experimental  lucidity  showed  that  the  human

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

soul  has  a  mysterious  faculty  in  virtue,  of  which  cognitions  other
than  those  due  to  normal  senses  and  sensations  reach  the  mind.
The  study  of  accidental  lucidity  leads  to  the  same  conclusion  and
corroborates  it  with  irresistible  force.

There  are  other  channels  of  cognition  than  the  habitual  ones.

That  is  a  conclusion  as  well  established  as  the  most  certain
facts  of  physics,  chemistry,  and  mathematics.

3.  Conditions  Under  Which  Monitions  Occur

Monitions  occur  under  the  most  varied  conditions,  nevertheless
there  are  some  points  of  similarity  that  will  appear  from  the
accounts  here  following:

(1)  Visual  monitions  are  usually  in  the  shape  of  a  nebulous
form  which  allows  of  the  background  being  seen  through  it,
though  in  some  cases  the  form  is  opaque  enough  to  hide  objects
behind  it.

(2)  The  details  of  the  face  are  often  very  clear;  the  eyes,  nose,
wrinkles,  the  colour  of  the  hair,  and  a  happy  or  sad  expression
are  readily  distinguishable.  Everything  occurs  as  if  the  vision
were  of  a  living  person  in  the  material  world.

(3)  Sometimes  the  apparition  speaks;  sometimes  a  voice  is
heard.  Sometimes,  though  more  rarely,  there  is  a  tactile  phenome-
non, so  that  the  impression  of  reality  is  complete,  all  the  senses
contributing  to  the  perception.  Often  what  the  vision  has  wished
to  say  is  clearly  understood  without  any  spoken  words  having
been  definitely  heard;  just  as  in  a  dream  one  knows  what  is  said
without  any  remembrance  of  particular  words.

(4)  Very  often  the  monition  takes  the  form  of  a  dream;  and
then  the  dreamer  remembers  the  exact  circumstances  of  the
dream.  Often  the  dream  awakes  the  sleeper,  without  immediate
disappearance  of  the  apparition.  Sometimes  (rarely)  as  in
Dr.  Orsi's  case,  the  monitory  dream  is  repeated  several  nights
in  succession.  It  often  takes  place  between  sleeping  and  waking
{Borderland,  Maury's  hallucinations).

(5)  Recognition  is  variable;  often  the  form  seen  is  ill-defined,
so  that  the  percipient  does  not  at  first  connect  it  with  any  par-
ticular person,  but  experiences  vague  disquiet  and  pain.  Little
by  little  the  notion  becomes  more  precise,  and  the  visual
phenomenon  is  linked  to  some  person  without  that  person  having
been  actually  recognized.    He  knows  and  understands  that  the

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  257

apparition  refers  to  that  person  without  being  able  to  say  how
he  knows  it.

This  difficulty  in  recognition  is  interesting,  for  it  seems  to
prove  two  successive  intellectual  processes.  In  the  first,  the
mind  is  influenced  by  some  vibration  that  has  a  meaning,  though
the  meaning  is  obscure.  Then  the  sensation  becomes  more  precise,
but  in  order  to  become  so — that  is,  in  order  to  be  transferred
from  subconsciousness  to  consciousness — it  must  be  manifested
under  some  form  fitted  to  our  mental  constitution — a  vision  or
an  audition.  Till  then  it  will  not  be  understood.  Recognition
has  been  secured  because  the  subconscious  has  adopted  the  means
of  a  symbolical  hallucination  to  reveal  a  fact  to  the  conscious  self.

When  recognition  is  doubtful  cryptesthesia  must  not  be  invoked ;
it  is  therefore  of  primary  import  that  the  percipient  should  have
formally  related  the  monition  to  a  witness,  or  better  still,  should
have  written  it  down,  before  the  actual  fact  referred  to  has
come  to  him  by  normal  means.

Without  clear  recognition  lucidity  cannot  be  admitted.  For
instance,  Mrs.  Woodham  sees -a  figure  before  her  so  distinctly
that  she  wakes  up  and  says  aloud,  so  as  to  be  heard  by  her
sister  sleeping  with  her,  "Who  are  you?  What  do  you  want?"
The  next  morning  she  hears  of  the  death  of  an  old  servant  of
whom  she  was  fond,  and  then  she  says,  "It  was  she  whom  I
saw  last  night";  but  as  she  did  not  recognize  the  apparition  at
the  time,  the  case  is  not  evidential.  Paramnesia  is  relatively
common,  and  no  good  faith  in  the  narrator  can  bring  this  to
his  knowledge,  for  the  genuineness  of  the  mistake  constitutes
paramnesia.

(6)  Monitions  usually  refer  to  death,  often  to  illness  or  serious
accidents,  and  sometimes  to  trivial  matters.  But  these  latter
also  are  monitions ;  and  the  monition  of  a  trivial  fact  is  as  inter-
esting per  se  as  the  monition  of  a  death  or  a  disaster,  for  monitions
of  trifling  facts  are  often  accompanied  by  precise  details  which
certainly  show  cryptesthesia.  For  instance,  M.  sees  his  wife
talking  with  a  beggar  who  is  holding  a  broom.  The  monition
is  in  itself  quite  meaningless,  but  interesting  from  the  abundance
and  accuracy  of  its  detail.

(7)  There  is  no  essential  connection  between  the  vividness
of  the  hallucination  or  the  dream  and  the  definiteness  of  the
monition.  There  may  be  scarcely  any,  just  as  a  very  slight  and
passing  internal  perception  may  reveal  an  important  fact,  whereas

258

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

sometimes  a  vision  may  be  very  clear  and  perceived  very  vividly
without  being  certainly  referable  to  cryptesthesia.  This  contrast
is  very  apparent  in  dreams;  some  are  very  vivid,  having  all  the
semblance  of  reality,  but  mean  nothing  at  all,  while  other  very
transitory  dreams  may  convey  monitions.

(8)  The  period  of  latency  between  the  event  and  the  monition
is  variable.  F.  Myers  thinks  (while  admitting  it  to  be  merely  a
hypothesis),  that  the  telepathic  impression  is  immediate,  but  that
this  impression  remains  latent  in  the  mind  of  its  subject,  only
emerging  to  consciousness  after  a  certain  interval  either  as  a
waking  vision,  or  as  a  dream,  or  in  some  other  manner.  In
nearly  all  cases,  he  says,  in  which  a  veridical  phantom  has  pre-
ceded death,  it  has  been  a  case  of  illness  but  not  a  case  of  accident;
and  then  the  process  of  dying,  with  its  coma  and  convulsions,  may
originate  the  telepathic  impression  and  so  precede  the  stoppage  of
the  heart  that  constitutes  actual  death.

In  cases  of  accident  the  vision  is  almost  always  subsequent  to
death.  Myers  cites  two  cases  (p.  273)  that  seem  exceptions;
but  one  of  these  may  have  been  -a  premonition  and  in  the  other
(suicide)  Myers  thinks  that  the  mental  agitation  of  the  unhappy
man  may  have  been  sufficient  to  cause  the  telepathic  phenomenon.

If  the  time-curve  of  post-mortem  apparitions  were  drawn,  it
would  show  a  very  rapid  fall  within  the  first  few  days  after
death,  becoming  almost  nil  for  longer  periods.

Possibly  when  the  casual  fact  is  near,  the  lapse  of  time  is  less
than  when  it  is  distant.

M.  Warcollier,  analyzing  the  data  of  telepathic  monitions
given  in  sundry  enquiries,  draws  up  the  statistics  given  below :

He  has  also  compared  cases  occurring  in  the  waking  and
sleeping  states,  including  in  the  latter,  fainting,  coma,  and  dying.

Agents  |

194  64  per  cent.

106  36  per  cent.

161  54  per  cent.

139  46  per  cent.

Percipients  Women

Agent.

Percipient.

No.  of  cases.

Waking.
Waking.
Sleeping.
Sleeping.

Waking
Sleeping.
Waking.
Sleeping.

7
13
19
59

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  259

He  concludes,  borne  out  by  many  personal  investigations,  that
sleep  or  the  borderland  between  sleeping  and  waking  is  favour-
able to  telepathy  or  clairvoyance.

(9)  Visual  apparitions  are  of  short  duration;  they  usually
last  but  a  few  seconds.  Prolonged  apparitions  are  very  rare;
such  as  the  case  of  the  sailor  Spring,  who  saw  on  his  ship,  during
a  storm,  the  apparition  of  his  father  (who  had  just  died  on  shore)
which  remained  beside  him  on  the  bridge  for  two  hours.

(10)  Some  monitions  are  certainly  objective,  and  are  seen  by
several  persons.  It  is  then  very  difficult,  almost  impossible,  not
to  admit  some  external  phenomenon  similar  to  those  ordinary
phenomena  that  affect  our  physical  senses.

M.  Lemonnier,  a  chemist  of  Rennes,  hears  a  loud  noise  at  his
door,  repeated  thrice.  He  gets  up  and  see  nothing.  In  another
house,  one  of  his  friends,  M.  Nivot,  at  the  same  moment  hears
a  similar  noise  that  wakes  him  up ;  and  both  think  of  the  death
of  one  of  their  mutual  friends  who  was  dying  at  that  time.
Must  we  suppose  that  both,  at  different  places  in  the  town,  were
similarly  hallucinated?  Is  it  not  likely  that  if  other  persons
had  been  there  they,  too,  would  have  heard  the  noises?

The  son  of  Lady  X.,  aged  twelve  years,  sees  a  form  passing
across  the  room,  and  says,  "Mother,  it  is  the  major.''  Lady  X.
also  sees  the  form.  I  have  already  quoted  the  case  of  Mme.
Telechoff  with  her  five  children  and  her  dog  Moustache.  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Bettany  both  saw  the  old  woman  in  their  room.  Mrs.
Paget  and  her  two  daughters  heard  the  steps  of  Arthur  in  the
passageway.  Colonel  Wynyard  and  Mr.  Sherbrooke  both  saw
Mr.  Wynyard.  Mr.  Weld  and  his  daughter  both  saw  Philip
Weld,  who  had  just  died,  walking  in  the  avenue.  The  mother
and  sisters  of  Colonel  Aylesbury  heard  his  voice.  Mr.  and  Mrs.
L.  both  heard  the  voice  of  their  son.  Mr.  Done  and  Rosie
both  heard  Mrs.  Eustance  call  them  successively  by  name;  but
it  does  not  appear  that  Mr.  Done  heard  Rosie  called,  nor  that
Rosie  heard  the  words,  "Uncle,  uncle."

All  the  same,  in  spite  of  appearances,  the  existence  of  an
exterior  fact  of  the  same  order  as  ordinary  exterior  facts  cannot
be  admitted  in  all  these  cases  of  collective  perception,  for  the
hallucination  was  different.

(11)  Monitions  are  certainly  nearly  always  entirely  subjective.
Mr.  K.  of  the  Royal  Military  College  sees  a  woman  being  carried
along,  but  his  companion  sees  nothing.    Mrs.  Taunton  sees  her

260

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

uncle  in  the  theatre  between  her  and  the  orchestra.  Mr.  Taun-
ton, sitting  beside  her,  sees  nothing  and  asks,  "What  is  the
matter  with  you?"  Mr.  B.,  taking  tea  with  his  son  and  daughter-
in-law,  sees  a  face  at  the  window,  but  they  see  nothing.  Miss
Stella  sees  a  boy  enter ;  she  speaks  to  him  and  offers  him  a  cloak.
Dr.  G.,  coming  in  at  the  moment,  is  astonished  and  says,  "To
whom  are  you  speaking?"  Kate  Sherman  sees  the  apparition
of  her  brother,  and  speaks  of  it  to  her  sister  resting  by  her  side,
but  Elisabeth  Sherman  sees  nothing.

Very  often  the  percipient  asks  the  people  of  the  house  if  they
have  seen  anyone  entering  or  leaving,  but  almost  without  ex-
ception nothing  has  been  remarked,  though  in  all  these  different
cases  the  apparition  presented  all  the  semblance  of  reality.

The  cases  of  veridical  and  purely  subjective  apparitions  are
so  many  that  if  we  had  not  to  take  into  account  experimental
materializations,  we  might  conclude  that  all  monitions  are  sub-
jective. But  this  term  also  must  be  cleared  up,  and  this  I  shall
endeavour  to  do  in  the  section  that  follows.

4.  The  Symbolical  Form  Taken  by  Monitions

That  a  percipient  should  have  cognizance  of  a  fact  that  the
normal  senses  cannot  reveal,  it  is  obvious  that  there  must  be
some  exterior  vibration  that  has  influenced  his  mind.  It  is
therefore  possible  that  these  vibrations  should  affect  others,  and
therefore  that  the  monition  should  be  perceived  by  more  than
one  person.  Certain  collective  monitions,  but  not  all,  can  be
thus  explained.  Mr.  Done  heard  the  voice  calling,  "Uncle,  uncle,"
and  at  the  same  moment  Rosie  hears,  "Rosie,  Rosie."  It  would
seem  that  the  call  heard  by  two  persons  at  the  same  time  used
a  different  symbolism  for  each.

The  tendency  to  symbolism  dominates  all  monitions.  Even  in
our  normal  state,  as  a  great  poet  has  said,  we  move  in  a  forest
of  symbols.  Cryptesthesia  has  to  express  itself  symbolically  to
touch  our  consciousness:  everything  happens  as  though  moni-
tions, assuredly  of  mental  origin,  had  to  be  adapted  to  our  modes
of  understanding  by  being  dramatized ;  and  the  fertility  of  inven-
tion displayed  (for  it  is  invention),  which  eventuates  in  a  moni-
tion, must  move  our  wonder.

E.  Bozzano,  to  whom  are  due  so  many  acute  studies  on  differ-
ent points  of  metapsychics,  has  emphasized  their  symbolical

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  261

forms;  for  instance  Mrs.  Thompson,  whose  faculty  of  crypt-
esthesia  is  strong,  instead  of  giving  the  name  "Merryfield"  says
Merry,  .man,  Merry  thought,  Happy  field  (A.  S.  P.,  1907,  638).

I  have  mentioned  the  curious  story  of  Mrs.  X.,  who,  being
alone  in  her  home,  endeavoured  while  in  a  lucid  state  to  discover
the  name  of  the  person  who  had  been  speaking  to  me.  She  saw
a  well-defined  human  form  which  gave  the  name  "Henry";  but
at  the  same  time  she  saw  a  herald-at-arms  with  a  halberd,  dressed
in  mediaeval  style,  stopping  other  spirits  anxious  to  come  in  from
entering  the  room  so  that  there  might  be  no  confusion  with
"Henry."  1

Mme.  A.  one  night  dreamed  that  there  was  a  ring  at  the  door,
and  that  the  housemaid  entered  looking  frightened,  and  said,
"Madame,  it  is  Death."  Mme.  A.  felt  that  Death  must  not  be
kept  waiting,  and  forthwith  sees  a  coffin,  and  in  it  Mme.  Gaston
Tissandier,  of  whose  recent  decease  she  was  ignorant.

Jean  Jules  Bigard  dreams  that  he  has  died  and  that  a  clerk
at  the  town-hall  showed  him  the  certificate,  causing  him  to  laugh.
That  same  night  his  uncle  Jean  Jules  Bigard  was  mortally  wounded
in  the  war.

The  Rev.  Mark  Hill  sees  a  man  advancing  on  him  so  threaten-
ingly that  he  seizes  a  glass  from  the  table  and  throws  it  at  the
head  of  the  phantom.

Emma  Burger  sees  her  fiance  enter  her  room,  the  door  opening
and  shutting.

Longet,  professor  of  physiology  in  the  Paris  Faculty  of  Medi-
cine, sees  in  a  dream  his  friend  Cloquet  (whose  decease  was
unknown  to  him)  entering  the  room,  throwing  his  books  on  the
floor,  and  saying,  "Now  I  need  nothing  more."

Mr.  Weld  sees  his  son  Philip  walking  on  the  road  with  two
imaginary  persons.

Miss  Barr  sees  a  hand  drawing  her  bed-curtain  and  on  this
hand  a  ring  which  she  recognizes  as  belonging  to  her  cousin,
Captain  X.,  who  was  dying  in  Canada  from  an  accident  (Phant.
of  the  Living,  416).

Mr.  Brighton  in  his  cabin  on  shipboard  has  a  very  complicated
dream  in  which  he  sees  two  forms  descending  on  the  ropes  that
held  the  hawsers  of  the  boat.    They  eniit  musical  sounds  that

,C.  Richet,  Presidential  discourse  to  the  S.  P.  R.,  February  6,  1905,  Proc.
S.  P.  R.,  iv.  The  name  Henry  was  quite  correctly  given  against  (calculated)
odds  of  1  '.20.

262

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

change  into  cries  of  triumph  when  they  have  cast  the  boat  loose.
The  boat  then  drifts  away  and  is  caught  by  a  gust  of  wind.  Mr.
Brighton  wakes  up,  jumps  from  his  berth,  and  goes  on  deck.
The  night  was  calm,  but  the  moorings  were  frayed.  With  much
trouble  Mr.  Brighton  and  his  friend  found  other  ropes  and
secured  the  boat,  thus  avoiding  a  great  danger.  This  is  a  good
example  of  a  symbolical  dream,  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  in  it  any
cryptesthesia ;  probably  a  subconscious  idea  of  the  peril  reached
Mr.  Brighton's  consciousness  under  this  dramatic  form  (P.  S.
P.  R.,  viii,  401).

Symbolical,  too,  is  Mrs.  B.'s  dream  of  a  dinner  at  which  all
the  guests  were  talking  except  her  uncle,  A.,  who  remained
dumb.  The  same  night  her  uncle  died ;  she  knew  this  only  by
his  silence  at  the  dinner  (A.  S.  P.,  xvii,  728).

Mrs.  J.  Adam  sees  the  form  of  her  grandmother,  who  shows
empty  eye-sockets  to  indicate  that  she  has  died  (Bozzano,  A.  S.  P.,
1907,  xvii,  716).

The  excellent  examples  of  symbolism  collected  by  Bozzano
show  the  fertility  of  the  subconscious  mind  for  imaginative  detail ;
a  fertility  much  greater  than  that  of  the  conscious  mind.  This
is  well  seen  in  the  infinite  variety  of  dreams.

Mrs.  Johnson,  whenever  she  is  perturbed  by  anxiety,  sees  a
swarm  of  flies  that  fly  up  to  her  face.  The  illusion  is  so  com-
plete that  she  does  not  distinguish  them  from  actualities.

Mrs.  Wilve,  wife  of  Dr.  Wilve,  sees  a  white  and  a  black  horse
galloping  across  country  with  a  carriage  in  which  is  seated  a
person  about  to  have  a  serious  accident.

Very  often  the  idea  of  death  is  presented  by  coffins.

Mrs.  A.  sees  in  a  dream  her  mother  with  three  bouquets.  She
reaches  out  to  take  the  second,  but  it  falls  to  the  ground.  Mrs.
A.,  who  has  three  brothers,  thinks  of  the  second.  He  died
shortly  after.

An  unlikely  case  of  symbolism  is  reported  by  Flammarion  (La
Mort  ct  son  Mystcrc,  p.  95).  Mme.  Marechal  at  Paris,  in  a  night-
mare between  sleeping  and  waking,  sees  a  spectre  that  takes  her
by  the  arm  and  says,  "Either  your  husband  or  your  daughter
must  die.  Choose!"  After  a  terrible  struggle  she  mentally
decides  to  sacrifice  her  husband  to  save  her  child.  Five  days
later,  M.  Marechal,  till  then  apparently  in  good  health,  dies.
Flammarion  says,  "I  questioned  Mme.  Marechal  and  her  daughter
separately  and  I  have  no  doubt  of  the  authenticity  of  the  story."

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  263

Mrs.  Wickham  while  undressing  feels  a  hand  on  her  head  and
neck ;  cold  lips  are  lightly  pressed  to  hers  and  a  voice  says,  "Adieu,
adieu !"

M.  Bard  sees  Mme.  Freville  walking  in  the  cemetery.  Mr.
Tones  sees  a  coffin  and  in  it  the  form  of  his  sister.  Mme.  Beau-
grand  hears  the  sound  of  a  terrible  storm  at  the  time  when  her
husband  perished  by  shipwreck.  Mr.  T.  sees  a  tomb  on  which  is
inscribed  the  name  of  his  friend.  Lieutenant  V.  dreams  that
his  friend,  Lieutenant  L.,  has  fallen  into  a  shell-hole,  is  sur-
rounded by  enemies,  and  is  calling  for  help.  Mrs.  Paget  hears
the  heavy  step  of  her  servant  in  the  corridor  stopping  at  the  place
where  a  gas-jet  ought  to  be  shut  off.  Mrs.  Matthews  sees  Suzanne
raise  the  bedclothes  and  lie  down  by  her.  The  wraith  of  Spring's
father  comes  on  the  bridge  of  the  ship,  touches  his  son  on  the
shoulder,  and  says,  "Look  to  your  helm,  Joe."  Mr.  Noell  hears  his
sister  call  to  him  in  a  plaintive  voice,  "Come,  Louis,  do  come."

All  these  appearances  were  monitions,  for  they  corresponded
with  deaths  and  actual  events  which  the  percipients  could  not
have  known  by  any  normal  means.

It  is  probable,  or  even  certain,  that  in  all  these  cases  there  was
no  external  physical  fact  that  would  have  affected  a  photographic
plate,  a  microphone,  or  balances.  A  phonograph  would  have
shown  no  record.  The  monition,  whose  mode  of  genesis  is  quite
unknown,  was  conveyed  to  the  percipient  by  a  symbol;  and  a
symbol  is  the  converse  of  reality.  It  corresponds  to  a  reality,
but  it  is  not  the  reality  itself.

One  fact  that  seems  to  prove  that  hallucinations  are  symbolical,
in  most  cases,  is  that  visual  hallucinations  are  clothed ;  they  wear
a  usual  (or  an  unusual)  garb.  They  open  and  close  a  door.  They
raise  the  bedclothes.  If  there  were  a  materialization  we  should
have  to  admit  a  simultaneous  materialization  of  clothes  and  divers
objects,  appearing  at  the  same  time  as  the  phantom.  That  may
indeed  be  possible,  as  is  shown  by  experimental  materializations,
but  it  is  certainly  simpler  to  consider  that  this  is  not  the  case,
but  that  all  takes  place  in  the  mind  of  the  percipient.  It  seems
obvious  that  most  monitions  are  entirely  subjective,  though  I
should  not  venture  to  say  that  all  are ;  but  those  that  are  clearly
objective  are  rare,  or  at  least  the  objectification  does  not  present
the  ordinary  luminous,  mechanical,  and  thermal  phenomena.  Even
when  the  objectification  is  seemingly  complete  its  objectivity  must
nevertheless  be  held  doubtful.

264

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Some  minutes  after  the  death  of  Mrs.  L.,  three  persons  who
were  in  the  death-chamber — Eliza  W.,  Charlotte,  and  Dr.  G.,  who
had  attended  the  dying  woman — heard  for  several  seconds  three
women's  voices  singing  softly,  like  the  sounds  of  an  seolian  harp.
Eliza  W.  even  believed  that  she  heard  the  words,  "The  strife  is
o'er,  the  battle  done."  Two  of  those  who  had  left  the  room  re-
entered to  hear  the  music.  The  night  was  still,  and  there  was  no
one  outside.  Nevertheless,  the  phenomena  were  certainly  sub-
jective, firstly  because  Mr.  L.,  who  was  present,  heard  nothing;
and  secondly,  because  each  of  the  persons  who  did  hear  the  sing-
ing heard  it  in  a  different  manner  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  i,
446).

This  case  is  particularly  interesting,  for  it  shows  that  there  may
be  hallucinations  which  are  very  definitely  subjective  though  per-
ceived collectively.

We  have  not  distinguished  monitions  received  during  sleep
from  waking  monitions,  for  the  borderland  between  sleeping  and
waking  renders  any  hard-and-fast  classification  impossible.  Very
often  they  begin  during  sleep  and  are  completed  on  waking;  and
sometimes  conversely,  though  this  is  rare.  Sometimes  the  per-
cipient is  startled  into  a  kind  of  stupor  which  curiously  resembles
sleep.

Even  when  the  percipient  remains  awake  the  vision  resembles
a  dream ;  the  same  state  of  "credulity"  (as  De  Rochas  felicitously
says)  supervenes — an  absence  of  astonishment  which  accepts  the
most  unlikely  things.  The  only  difference  between  the  mental
state  when  dreaming  and  when  awake  is  that  in  the  former  state
the  sleeper  cannot  fix  his  attention  on  the  real  objects  around
him ;  he  is  carried  into  an  imaginary  world  and  cannot  correct  the
divagations  of  his  thoughts  by  actual  sensations.  This  absence  of
control  is  the  essential  feature  of  dream-states.  The  dreamer
does  not  know  where  he  is ;  he  is  not  reminded  of  concrete  reali-
ties by  the  mechanical  and  physical  energies  of  the  world  about
him.  He  cannot  fix  his  attention  and  has  no  directing  will.  The
mental  state  of  those  who  receive  a  monition  is  very  similar.

It  would  be  absurd  not  to  regard  most  monitions  as  subjective
in  the  same  way  as  dream-images  are  subjective.  If  in  a  dream
we  were  to  see  a  funeral,  a  coffin,  and  a  brother  in  that  coffin,  it
would  be  outrageously  absurd  to  suppose  any  objectivity  in  these
things.  Why,  then,  should  it  be  otherwise  with  a  veridical
hallucination?    It  is  just  a  waking  dream:   and  to  say,  "But

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  265

I  was  wide  awake"  is  not  a  sufficient  reason  for  thinking  the
phenomenon  objective;  as  if  it  were  impossible  to  build  up  a
dream  because  one  thinks  oneself  awake.

Whether  produced  in  sleep,  when  awake,  or  in  an  intermediate
state,  monitions  are  always  symbolical.  The  details  of  the  vision
have  no  more  importance  in  themselves  than  the  strange  and
fanciful  details  of  dreams.  Nevertheless,  the  narrator  is  per-
fectly right  to  insist  on  detail,  for  along  with  the  essential  monition
there  are  often  very  precise  accessory  facts  that  define  the  mean-
ing. In  this  singular  admixture  of  reality  and  fancy,  lucidity
seizes  not  only  on  the  central  fact,  but  also  shows  a  curious
predilection  for  the  accessory  circumstances.  Therefore  the
narrator  should  omit  nothing,  lest  the  most  interesting  point  might
perhaps  be  passed  over  in  silence.  And  this  applies  to  dreams  also.

The  symbolic  character  of  monitions  should  therefore  excite
no  surprise ;  nor  should  too  much  importance  be  attached  to  the
form  of  the  symbolism.  The  important  thing  is  the  lucidity,
the  cryptesthetic  perception  of  a  real  phenomenon — a  reality  which
imagination  dresses  up  with  details  that  are  sometimes  true  to
fact,  and  sometimes  fanciful.  I  think  that  no  better  description
can  be  found  for  monitions  that  take  a  hallucinatory  form  than
to  call  them  "waking  dreams."

5.  Monitions  and  the  Telepathic  Hypothesis

Although  the  authors  of  that  admirable  work,  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  consider  monitions  as  cases  of  telepathy  and  incline  to
think  that  there  has  often  (if  not  always)  been  some  effort  on
the  part  of  the  agent  to  transmit  his  thought  to  the  percipient,  I
am  far  from  holding  this  to  be  the  most  rational  hypothesis.

Obviously  it  can  be  only  a  hypothesis.  It  is  very  easy  to  say
A.'s  thought  is  transmitted  to  B. ;  but  as  I  have  already  indicated
more  than  once,  this  proposition  is  by  no  means  simple.  There-
fore, in  our  present  state  of  ignorance  of  laws  and  causes,  I  adopt
a  hypothesis  that  prejudges  nothing,  and  am  content  to  keep
within  the  limits  that  circumscribe  our  imperfect  knowledge  by
saying  B.,  by  some  unknown  means,  knows  what  A.  has  thought
of,  but  he  also  knows  much  more :  he  knows  what  A.  has  thought
of  because  that  thought  was  itself  a  fact;  and  he  can  know  that
which  no  one  has  thought  of :  he  knows  that  which  IS.

I  say  to  Stella,  "Tell  me  the  names  of  two  servants  who  were

266

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

about  me  in  my  childhood."  She  answers  (but  only  next  day),
"Melanie."  I  was  not  thinking  of  Melanie;  for  fifty-five  years
the  name  has  never  recurred  to  my  memory.  Is  it  not  simpler
to  suppose  that  Stella  has  perceived  the  reality — the  fact — than
to  think  that  she  has  read  a  subconscious  thought  in  the  deepest
recesses  of  my  mind  ?  As  a  matter  of  fact  I  had  two  other  names
in  mind — Dorothy  and  Louise.  I  did  not  think  of  the  third
woman,  "Melanie/'  at  all.

When  Mrs.  Green  perceives  the  death  of  two  girls  in  Australia,
is  it  likely  that  these  two  girls  who  had  never  been  to  England
and  did  not  know  Mrs.  Green  (who  was  the  aunt  of  one  of  them),
should  have  thought  of  Mrs.  Green  with  such  vigour  that  this
vibration  travelled  twelve  thousand  miles  to  her  instead  of  affect-
ing their  parents  quite  close  at  hand?

Mme.  Freville  barely  knew  M.  Bard.  Mr.  Phibbs  sees  his  dog
Fox  mortally  hurt  at  the  foot  of  a  wall.  It  is  much  more  reason-
able to  suppose  that  the  notion  of  the  fact  reached  his  mind  than
that  the  soul  of  the  dog  went  and  acted  on  the  brain  of  the  man.

In  fine,  accidental  lucidity,  shown  by  monitions,  leads  us  to  the
same  conclusion  as  experimental  lucidity — that  human  intelli-
gence has  methods  of  cognition  different  from  those  we  habitually
use.

It  is  possible  that  in  some  families  there  is  a  hereditary  apti-
tude for  lucidity:  Dr.  Ludwig1  cites  an  interesting  case  of  the
kind — two  sisters  and  two  brothers  who  all  four  show  unmistak-
able cryptesthesia.

M.  Emile  Laurent  (A.  S.  P.,  1907,  xvii,  161-176)  has  very
properly  emphasized  certain  general  characteristics  of  monitions,
especially  that  they  seem  to  cease  as  soon  as  the  monition  has
been  understood.  It  seems  that  the  mode  selected  by  the  mani-
festing power  is  just  that  which  is  most  certain  to  arouse  atten-
tion and  least  likely  to  pass  unperceived.  One  is  tempted  to  admit
that  among  all  possible  forms  of  manifestations  a  kind  of  choice
has  been  made  of  the  one  that  could  not  have  arisen  from  usual
causes.  M.  Laurent  concludes  that  there  is  intelligence  at  the
back  of  monitions.  This  conclusion  seems  inevitable,  but  it  does
not  follow  that  the  intelligence  producing  the  monition  is  not  that
of  the  percipient  himself.  Still,  it  must  be  admitted,  provisionally
at  least,  that  monitions  are  in  most  cases  selected,  and  well  selected,
whatever  hypothesis  we  may  adopt  to  account  for  them.

xTelepathische  Veranlagung  (Psychische  Studien,  xlvii,  1920,  456)-

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  267

Let  us  add:  (1)  They  are  symbolical;  (2)  they  impress  the
mind  of  the  percipient  so  powerfully  that  all  details  are  long
remembered,  and  (3)  that  they  do  not  cause  the  fear  that  might
have  been  expected.

Space  does  not  allow  of  mention  of  the  legends  that  tell  of
monitory  dreams  in  antiquity.

Sophocles,  it  seems,  had  such  a  dream :  Hercules  appeared  to  him
and  indicated  where  a  golden  crown  that  had  been  stolen  would
be  found.    Sophocles  obtained  the  reward  promised  to  the  finder.

A  celebrated  monition  to  Swedenborg  claimed  the  attention  of
Kant:  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  (Survival  of  Man)  mentions  this  case:
Mme.  Martiville,  widow  of  the  Dutch  ambassador  in  Stockholm,
was  summoned  by  a  goldsmith  to  pay  for  a  purchase  made  by
her  dead  husband.  Mme.  Martiville,  convinced  that  the  money
had  already  been  paid,  has  the  impulse  to  write  to  Swedenborg
enquiring  if  by  conversation  with  her  deceased  husband  he  could
get  at  the  truth  of  the  matter.  Three  days  later,  Swedenborg
went  to  Mme.  Martiville,  told  her  that  the  money  had  been  paid,
and  that  the  receipt  would  be  found  in  a  certain  drawer  of  a
specified  bureau  in  a  certain  room.  The  room,  desk,  and  drawer
were  all  correctly  indicated.

From  all  these  facts  we  conclude  yet  again :  There  are  un-
known vibrations  in  nature  which  set  human  intelligence  in
motion  and  reveal  facts  that  the  senses  cannot  convey.

If  telepathy  be  admitted  there  is  only  one  word  to  be  changed
in  this  sentence;  we  need  merely  say  "vibrations  of  human
thought"  instead  of  "unknown  vibrations."  But  to  limit  crypt-
esthesia  to  the  perception  of  human  thought-vibrations  is  to
narrow  its  applications  and  change  its  entire  nature.

6.  On  the  Frequency  of  Monitions

Monitions  are  much  more  frequent  than  is  commonly  thought.
When  speaking  to  a  sceptic  on  this  point,  he  often  replies,  "I
could  tell  you  a  very  singular  fact  of  this  kind  that  happened  to
me  personally" :  and  this  "singular  fact"  which  seems  to  him
evidential  he  will  accept  and  recount  with  simple-minded  satis-
faction, while  rejecting  with  infantile  inconsequence  other  facts
perhaps  more  evidential  because  they  did  not  happen  to  himself.

I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  some  instances  of  telepathy,  more
or  less  evidential,  could  be  gathered  from  nearly  all  families.  If

268

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

they  are  not  made  public  it  is  from  a  praiseworthy  feeling  they
are  not  sufficiently  evidential,  or  from  fear  of  ridicule,  but  chiefly
from  reluctance  to  make  the  effort  to  confirm  them  by  exact  dates,
official  certificates,  and  other  data  without  which  a  mere  story
has  no  great  value.  They  seem  nearly  independent  of  age  and
sex;  they  occur  in  the  daytime  rather  less  frequently  than  at  night
on  going  to  sleep  or  in  dreams.

We  may  be  confident  that  this  psychological  phenomenon  is
much  more  common  than  is  supposed,  and  when  a  person  who
has  received  a  monition  is  no  longer  branded  as  a  visionary,  in-
stances will  be  multiplied.  It  is  sheer  idiocy  to  refer  them  to  a
colossal  fraud  repeated  for  fifty  years  in  all  lands,  or  to  a  series
of  gross  illusions.  It  is  equally  unreasonable  to  think  them  due
to  chance ;  the  mass  of  precise  and  unlikely  details  given  precludes
this  supposition.

We  are,  then,  in  presence  of  a  known  but  unexplained  phenome-
non :  and  is  not  this  the  character  of  most  of  the  facts  with  which
science  is  concerned?  When  a  new  case  of  monition  is  reported
it  is  almost  always  possible  to  find  analogous  cases,  just  as  a
botanist  can  always  refer  a  new  plant  to  known  species.  This  is
characteristic  of  scientific  knowledge.  Experiment  has  given  in-
dubitable proofs  of  cryptesthesia.  Observation  has  confirmed  this
proof  by  different  but  equally  sure  methods.

To  show  how  interesting  these  monitions  are,  I  have  collected
in  the  following  pages  a  considerable  number.  They  may  be
monotonous  reading,  but  in  a  scientific  work  it  is  necessary  to
present  a  large  number  of  duly  attested  facts.  Their  value  ap-
pears by  their  quantity  as  well  as  by  their  quality.  It  is  not
possible,  and  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose,  that  all  these  facts
authenticated  by  laborious  cross-examination  and  investigation
should  be  false  or  erroneous.  Every  unbiassed  person  who  reads
the  evidence  will  acquire  the  certainty  that  neither  lying  nor
exaggeration  nor  chance  can  account  for  all  these  monitions.

The  facts  are  derived  from  various  sources.  The  chief  of  these
sources,  the  most  abundant  and  the  most  strictly  tested,  is  the
investigation  carried  on  by  the  Society  of  Psychical  Research.
The  scientific  and  conscientious  authors  of  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  Messrs.  Gurney,  Myers,  and  Podmore,  have  collected  in
that  book  the  results  of  their  observations.  They  were,  with
good  reason,  very  exacting  on  the  evidence,  and  have  admitted,
with  few  exceptions,  only  the  accounts  of  the  percipients  them-

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  269

selves;  and  in  cases  of  monitions  of  death  they  have  taken  the
trouble  to  verify  them  by  the  certificates  of  death.

The  investigation  of  the  S.  P.  R.  is  a  model  of  perseverance,
courage,  and  scientific  accuracy  that  other  investigations  can
scarcely  hope  to  rival.  These  enquiries  are  still  in  progress.  Each
number  of  the  Proceedings  contains  data  of  extreme  interest  and
no  author  can  hope  to  produce  even  passable  work  without  con-
sulting these  documents  and  those  of  the  American  S.  P.  R.

Another  valuable,  courageous,  and  scientific  work  was  under-
taken by  Camille  Flammarion  through  the  Annalcs  politiques  et
litteraires,  the  Petit  Marseillais,  and  the  Revue  des  Revues.  He
obtained  4,280  answers;  2,456  negative  and  1,824  positive.  Many
imperfect  answers  had  to  be  rejected,  and  out  of  the  remaining
786,  only  about  fifty  deserve  to  be  permanently  retained,  for,  imi-
tating the  procedure  of  the  S.  P.  R.,  it  was  resolved  to  eliminate
nearly  all  that  were  not  first-hand  evidence.  These  are  detailed
in  Flammarion's  excellent  book,  L'Inconnu  et  les  Problcmcs
Psychiques  (Paris,  1900),  which  abounds  in  facts  and  details,
though  occasionally  admitting  some  of  doubtful  authenticity.

The  English  enquiry  elicited  5,705  answers,  out  of  which  there
were  590  subjective  hallucinations  and  423  in  which  the  halluci-
nation would  seem  to  have  been  exteriorized.  But  statistics  of
this  kind  are  inconclusive,  for  most  persons,  if  they  have  no  inter-
esting information  to  give,  do  not  reply  at  all.

The  little  investigation  that  I  conducted  through  the  Bulletin
des  Armees  during  the  war,  brought  me  about  a  hundred  replies,
of  which  some  thirty  are  worth  preserving,  and  among  these  there
are  seven  or  eight  of  very  great  interest  that  I  shall  quote
further  on.

To  the  above  must  be  added  the  facts  indicated  in  special  publi-
cations— the  Annates  des  Sciences  Psychiques,  the  Psychische
Studien,  Light,  the  Religio-philosophical  Journal,  Luce  e  Ombra,
the  Banner  of  Light,  and  others.

The  aggregate  is  a  weighty  mass  of  documentary  evidence.
Considering  each  case  separately,  we  find  some  imperfect  and
only  vaguely  demonstrative ;  but  that  is  inseparable  from  all  obser-
vational science.  Observations  can  never  give  the  same  certitude
as  experiment,  and  to  warrant  any  conclusion  a  very  large  number
must  be  compared.

If,  after  carefully  reading  the  instances  here  adduced,  the
reader  cannot  decide  that  monitions  exist,  i.e.,  that  there  is  a  rela-

270

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

tion,  the  working  of  which  remains  a  mystery,  between  an  external
event  and  its  cognition  which  neither  our  senses  nor  our  reason
can  account  for,  if,  I  say,  this  conclusion  is  not  accepted,  then  all
observational  and  historical  science  must  equally  be  rejected,  and
we  must  doubt  the  existence  of  aerolites  or  that  Charlemagne
ever  lived.  Monitions  (sporadic  lucidity)  confirm  experimental
lucidity,  and  the  latter  corroborates  the  former.

II.  ON  CERTAIN  MONITIONS  (NOT  COLLECTIVE)
OTHER  THAN  MONITIONS  OF  DEATH

William  James  cites  and  analyzes  a  most  telling  example  of
cryptesthesia.  A  certain  young  girl,  "Bertha,"  disappeared  from
Enfield  (New  Hampshire)  October  31,  1898.  The  search  for  her
was  keen,  more  than  a  hundred  persons  explored  the  woods  and
the  shores  of  the  lake.  She  had  been  seen  to  go  to  the  Shaker
Bridge,  but  had  not  been  seen  beyond.  A  diver  searched  the  lake,
especially  near  the  bridge,  but  found  nothing.  In  the  night
between  the  2d  and  3d  of  November  Mrs.  Titus,  at  Lebanon,
five  miles  from  Enfield,  dreamed  that  she  saw  the  body  in  a  certain
place.  The  next  morning  she  went  to  the  Shaker  Bridge,  and
indicated  to  the  diver  "within  an  inch"  where  the  body  should  be
found,  head  downwards  and  so  that  only  the  india-rubber  sole  of
one  of  her  shoes  could  be  seen.  The  diver,  following  Mrs.  Titus's
directions,  discovered  the  body,  caught  in  the  branches  six  yards
under  the  water,  which  was  very  turbid.  "I  was  much  impressed,"
said  the  man;  "corpses  in  the  water  do  not  frighten  me,  but  I
feared  the  woman  on  the  bridge.  How  can  a  woman  come  five
miles  and  tell  me  where  the  body  was?  It  was  in  a  deep  hole
head  downwards,  and  in  the  dark  I  could  hardly  see  it."

The  Rev.  Mr.  Drake  went  one  day  to  see  a  friend,  Mr.  Wilson,
whose  daughter  Jessie  had  gone  to  India  a  short  time  previously,
and  said,  "Your  daughter  has  reached  India  today,  June  5th."
Mr.  Wilson  replied  that  that  was  impossible,  the  ship  not  being
due  till  the  15th,  at  soonest.

"You  disbelieve  me?"  said  Mr.  Drake.  "Well,  take  your  diary
and  note  the  date."  Mr.  Wilson  then  wrote  in  his  diary,  "Rev.
J.  Drake  and  Jessie,  June  5,  1860."  It  has  never  been  known
how  Mr.  Drake  could  have  had  this  dream  or  vision,  or,  as  he  used
to  say,  this  clairvoyance,  that  had  made  him  so  sure.

M.  Bachelot,  of  Angers,  receives  from  Sergeant  Morin  a  little

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  271

ring  of  aluminum  such  as  soldiers  in  the  trenches  used  to  make
to  beguile  the  hours.  On  the  night  of  the  7th  of  March,  M.  Bache-
lot  is  awakened  by  a  sharp  pain  in  the  ring-finger  as  if  it  were
held  in  a  vice.  Half  asleep,  he  drew  off  the  ring  and  next  morn-
ing thought  he  had  lost  it.  He  felt  that  something  had  happened
to  his  friend  Morin  and  spoke  of  his  fears  to  three  persons,  Mr.
G.,  Mr.  S.,  and  Mrs.  S.,  who  certify  these  details.  On  the  follow-
ing day  he  heard  that  Morin  had  been  wounded  (not  severely)
at  4  a.m.  on  the  8th  of  March  (Bulletin  des  Armccs).  The  story
is  curious  but  may  have  been  a  coincidence.

In  the  night  of  September  23d-24th,  Mrs.  K.  writes  to  her
mother:  "What  are  you  all  three  doing?  I  hope  you  are  well,
though  I  have  dreamed  these  days  that  mother  had  broken  her  leg.
Think  of  that!"  Now  on  Saturday,  September  23d,  Mrs.  K.'s
little  girl  who  was  on  a  visit  to  her  grandmother  (Mrs.  K.'s
mother)  had  broken  her  arm.  In  the  dream,  among  various  dis-
turbing incidents,  Mrs.  K.  clearly  distinguished  her  mother's
house  and  felt  that  some  accident  had  befallen  one  of  her  own
people.  This  also  is  not  very  evidential,  since  there  are  two
marked  errors,  the  broken  arm  of  the  child  instead  of  the  broken
leg  of  the  mother.

Mrs.  Claughton  has  given  a  good  instance  of  lucidity,  checked
with  great  care  by  Myers.  This  interesting  story  must  here  be
much  abridged.  It  is  even  more  remarkable  as  a  premonition  than
as  a  monition.

Mrs.  C.  lived  at  No.  6  Blake  Street,  in  a  house  that  belonged
to  Mrs.  Appleby.  This  house,  it  would  seem,  was  haunted  by  Mrs.
Appleby's  mother,  Mrs.  Blackburn,  who  had  died  there.  Mrs.  C.
had  been  there  five  days  when  she  saw  a  form  resembling  Mrs.
Blackburn.  "If  you  doubt  that  it  is  myself,"  said  the  phantom,
"here  is  the  date  of  my  marriage  in  India."  The  phantom  then
indicated  to  Mrs.  C.  that  she  should  go  to  Maresby  to  see  the
tomb  of  Mr.  George  Howard,  whose  name,  dates  of  marriage,
and  decease  were  given ;  that  in  the  church  register  would  be
found  the  entry  of  the  death  of  Robert  Hart ;  that  on  arrival  at
Maresby  Mrs.  C.  would  not  be  asked  for  her  railway  ticket ;  that
she  would  lodge  at  the  house  of  a  dark  man,  Mr.  Wright ;  that  the
wife  of  this  Mr.  Wright  had  a  child  buried  in  the  cemetery ;  and
that  there  would  be  white  roses  on  the  graves.  Everything  fell
out  as  predicted.  It  will  be  observed  that  Mrs.  Claughton  had
never  heard  of  Maresby  nor  of  any  of  the  persons  mentioned.

272

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Mr.  Frederic  Marks,  at  Newhaven,  sleeping  on  his  bed  during
the  day,  saw  his  brother,  on  a  small  sailing  vessel  about  to  founder
in  a  storm.  He  saw  his  brother  and  another  man  in  the  boat,  the
one  baling  out  water  and  the  other  trying  to  reef  the  sail.  The
vessel  righted  herself  and  seemed  to  come  to  shore.  On  the  same
day,  200  miles  away  on  Oneida  Lake,  Charles  Marks  and  a
friend  narrowly  escaped  drowning  in  a  terrible  storm  on  the  lake.

Dr.  Marcel  Baudouin,  whom  I  know  to  be  a  careful  and  scru-
pulous observer,  had  the  rare  opportunity  of  observing  a  case  of
monition.  Being  on  a  visit  to  Mrs.  X.,  he  sees  her  burst  into  tears
during  a  casual  conversation  at  half-past  eleven  in  the  morning.
An  hour  later  news  is  brought  that  her  sister  is  seriously  ill.  She
had  been  taken  with  a  fatal  attack  of  angina  pectoris  at  the  very
moment  that  Mrs.  X.,  in  the  presence  of  Dr.  Baudouin,  had  this
paroxysm  of  weeping,  which  was  the  more  surprising  as  Mrs.  X.
very  rarely  gives  way  to  tears.  Dr.  Baudouin  certifies  that  he  had
never  before  or  since  seen  her  weep  in  this  manner  (A.  S.  P.,
1900,  x,  129).

Captain  M.  was  wounded  August  27,  1914,  by  a  bullet  in  the
chest  about  11.30  p.m.,  and  left  for  dead.  The  same  night  at
that  same  hour,  his  daughter,  aged  fifteen,  who  was  sleeping
soundly,  woke  up  and  told  her  mother,  "Mother,  father  is
wounded  but  is  not  killed.,>

Mr.  Fryer  hears  his  brother's  voice  call  him  "Rod"  so  clearly
that  he  searches  all  over  the  house.  Some  days  later  his  brother
tells  him  that  on  leaving  the  train  he  had  a  bad  fall  at  the  same
hour  when  the  voice  was  heard  and  called  "Rod."

Mrs.  X.,  who  is  not  mystical  and  has  no  tendency  towards
occultism,  goes  to  sleep  for  a  few  moments  during  a  journey  by
train,  and  sees  a  friend  riding,  putting  his  horse  to  clear  a  low
wall,  and  having  a  fall  which  had  no  serious  consequences.  This
was  true,  but  could  not  have  been  foreseen  by  any  ordinary
means.

Mrs.  West,  travelling  in  Norway  with  her  father  and  mother,
dreams  that  she  sees  them  in  a  sledge  come  into  collision  with
another  sledge  going  in  the  opposite  direction.  She  sees  her
father  causing  the  horse  to  rear.  She  wakes  up,  crying,  "Father,
father!"  In  the  morning  on  her  father's  arrival  she  tells  her
dream,  saying,  "Then  you  are  not  hurt?  I  saw  the  horse  rear,
but  I  could  not  see  if  you  were  hurt  or  not."  In  fact,  Mr.  Cowes
(Mrs.  West's  father)  in  descending  a  hill  crossed  another  carriole,

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  273

and  to  avoid  a  collision  made  his  horse  rear  so  that  it  fell  back-
wards. Mr.  Cowes's  son,  who  was  following,  was  much  disturbed
and  only  reassured  when  he  saw  his  father  unhurt.

In  the  hospital  at  Munich,  a  soldier  of  the  Aviation  Corps  under
treatment  for  a  pulmonary  affection  wakes  up  in  the  middle  of
the  night  and  finds  himself  in  the  yard ;  he  has  been  walking  in
his  sleep  and  dreamed  that  he  had  flown  to  Schleisheim  and  there
saw  his  friend  N.  on  sentry  duty  who  showed  fear.  A.  then
said  in  his  dream,  "Do  you  not  know  me?"  to  which  N.  replied,
"Oh,  it  is  you;  what  are  you  doing  here?"  Next  morning  A.,
convinced  that  there  must  be  some  reality  at  the  back  of  his
dream,  writes  an  account  of  it  to  N.,  and  at  the  same  time  (as
proved  by  the  post-mark),  N.  writes  to  say  that  being  on  sentry
that  night,  he  saw  A.  and  said,  "Is  it  you,  Joseph?"  adding
that  he  heard  his  voice  distinctly.  The  two  letters  crossed  in
the  post.1

Miss  May  Lichfield,  reading  one  night  in  her  room,  suddenly
feels  that  some  one  has  entered.  She  sees  nobody,  but  feels  a
long  and  tender  kiss  on  her  forehead;  and  raising  her  head  per-
ceives her  betrothed  standing  behind  her  chair,  bending  forward
to  kiss  her  again.  The  figure  then  disappeared,  but  she  had  been
able  to  see  his  features,  his  tall  stature,  and  broad  shoulders  quite
distinctly.  That  day  he  had  a  fall  from  his  horse,  was  insensible
for  some  time  and  ill  afterwards.  At  the  time  of  the  accident
he  thought,  "My  little  May,  let  me  not  die  without  seeing  you
again."

Mrs.  Paget  goes  down  into  her  kitchen  at  10  p.m.  and  suddenly
sees  her  sailor  brother  coming  towards  her  and  about  to  sit
down,  the  water  shining  on  his  oilskin  and  cap.  She  thought  he
had  been  wetted  by  rain  and  said,  "Miles,  where  have  you  come
from?"  Then  in  his  usual  voice  he  said,  "For  the  love  of  God
do  not  say  that  I  am  here,"  and  vanished.  "I  was  very  frightened,"
says  Mrs.  Paget,  "and  wrote  down  the  date,  without  telling  any-
one." Three  months  later,  Miles  returned,  and  told  his  sister
that  he  had  been  almost  drowned  in  the  harbour  at  Melbourne,
having  been  taken  out  of  the  water  insensible.  The  date  was
correct,  but  allowing  for  difference  in  longitude  there  was  an
interval  of  ten  hours  between  the  accident  and  the  apparition.

Mme.  A.  Dudlay  of  the  Comedie  Franchise  has  reported  various

xZwex  deutsche  Professoren  gegen  die  Telepathic,  par  S.  Clericus,  Psychische
Studien,  xliv,  191 7,  35<>.

274

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

cases  of  monitions  relating  to  the  war,  but  the  details  are  too  few
and  not  sufficiently  precise  (A.  S.  P.,  1919,  xxix,  13-16).

Major  Kobbe  one  day  felt  impelled  to  visit  the  cemetery  of
Greenwood,  six  miles  from  New  York.  Neither  he  nor  any  one
of  his  family  was  in  the  habit  of  going  there;  but  on  reaching
the  place  he  found  his  father  who  had  come  for  the  disinterment
of  a  member  of  the  family.  The  letter  sent  by  his  father  asking
him  to  be  present  had  not  reached  him.  He  arrived  just  at  the
right  time.

A  case  of  monition  at  a  seance  by  Mme.  d'Esperance  is  reported
in  Light  (1905,  p.  43)  ;  it  is  very  complex,  being  accompanied  by  a
materialization.

On  April  3,  1890,  Mme.  d'Esperance  wrote  automatically,
without  knowing  why,  <fSvens  Strombcrg" ;  neither  she  nor  any-
one present  knew  the  name.  Two  months  later,  at  a  seance  at
which  Aksakoff  and  BoutlerofT  were  present,  it  was  said  that
Stromberg,  a  native  of  Jemtland,  had  died  on  March  13th  at
Wisconsin.  At  the  same  time  there  appeared  (?)  on  a  photo-
graph (spiritist?)  a  face  which  Mme.  d'Esperance's  guide  de-
clared to  be  Stromberg's,  and  stated  that  he  had  not  died  on
the  13th,  but  on  the  31st  of  March.  After  long  and  laborious
enquiry  it  was  found  that  a  certain  Svens  Ersson,  born  in  Jemt-
land, had  emigrated  to  Canada  and  had  died  on  the  night  of
March  31st.  The  photograph  was  identified,  and  it  was  proved
that  the  news  of  his  death  could  not  have  reached  Gothenburg,
even  by  telegraph  from  New  Stockholm,  the  town  in  Canada
where  he  died,  at  the  time  that  the  name  was  given  at  the
seance.

Bozzano  considers  this  case  one  of  the  best  substantiated,  but
this  seems  an  exaggerated  view.

The  following  case  is  specially  interesting,  for  it  presents  the
very  rare  feature  of  several  successive  apparitions  expressing  a
single  monition :

Miss  Minnie  Wilson,  aged  17,  educated  in  a  Catholic  convent
in  Belgium,  when  about  to  kneel  at  her  prayers,  saw  her  Uncle
Oldham  coming  towards  her.  She  was  extremely  surprised.  Her
uncle  asked  her  to  pray  for  him  as  he  had  shot  himself  by  reason
of  a  disappointment  in  love.  The  next  day,  and  the  day  following,
the  vision  was  repeated ;  she  felt  the  touch  of  his  hand,  but  did
not  hear  his  step  nor  hear  the  bench  creak.  He  disappeared,  not
suddenly,  but  by  becoming  slowly  indistinct.    She  learned  later

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  275

that  he  had  killed  himself  with  a  pistol-shot  for  a  love-trouble
(A.  S.  P.,  1908,  xvii,  266).

Monitions  sometimes  come  as  formal  warnings.  Hyslop  (Am,
S.  P.  R.,  1907,  487)  has  authenticated  the  curious  story  of  Mr.
McCready,  editor  of  the  Daily  Telegraph,  who  had  a  very  strong
impression  one  Sunday  while  at  the  church  of  St.  John  (N.  B.),
of  a  voice  saying  to  him,  "Go  back  to  the  office."  The  order  was
so  peremptory  that  he  ran  from  the  church  to  the  office,  arriving
to  the  great  astonishment  of  his  sub-editors.  He  there  found
a  petroleum  lamp  blazing  in  his  room  and  throwing  out  such
clouds  of  smoke  that  everything  was  covered  with  soot.

With  reference  to  this  and  other  similar  monitions  Bozzano
discusses  whether  such  occurrences  involve  the  intervention  of  an
external  intelligence.

Mme.  Tonelli,  at  San  Marino,  when  trying  to  sleep  one  night,
saw  her  son  thrown  down  by  a  passing  carriage  and  much  injured.
She  rose,  went  nearly  four  miles  along  the  road  to  Costa  di  Borgo,
and  found  her  son  at  the  foot  of  a  declivity  dowrn  which  he  had
rolled.  Thus,  despite  the  darkness  and  the  storm  and  notwith-
standing her  age,  and  without  having  any  normal  reason  for  dis-
quiet, she  got  up  in  the  middle  of  the  night  to  go  to  his  assistance
(A.  S.  P.,  1905,  v,  170).

Mr.  Searle,  a  lawyer,  saw  in  his  rooms  at  the  Temple,  as  clearly
as  in  a  mirror,  the  figure  of  his  wife ;  her  head  thrown  back  and
her  face  pale  as  death.  At  that  same  hour,  in  consequence  of  a
great  fright,  Mrs.  Searle  had  fainted.  She  had  never  fainted
before.

At  Syracuse  (N.  Y.)  Mr.  Lee  suddenly  woke  up  from  sleep,
having  seen  his  father  fall  downstairs  with  a  great  noise.  His
father  was  bishop  at  Iowa.  He  got  up,  waked  his  wife,  asking
her  if  she  had  heard  any  noise,  and  noted  the  time  by  his  watch,
2.45.  At  that  hour  Bishop  Lee  at  Iowa  fell  on  the  stairs  and  died
soon  after.

Mr.  Hunter  Watt  dreamt  that  a  cast  of  the  Venus  de  Milo,
relegated  to  a  corner  of  his  garden,  had  fallen,  the  head  being
broken  off  by  the  fall;  which  was  found  to  be  true  (Myers,
Human  Personality,  i,  379).

Mrs.  Severn  woke  at  7  a.m.  feeling  a  sharp  blow  on  her
mouth  as  if  her  upper  lip  had  been  cut  and  was  bleeding.  Putting
her  handkerchief  to  her  mouth  she  was  surprised  to  find  no  blood.
At  the  same  moment  her  husband  who  had  gone  for  a  sail  on  the

276

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

lake  was  caught  by  a  gust  of  wind  causing  the  handle  of  the  rudder
to  strike  him  on  the  mouth,  cutting  his  lip  and  causing  much  loss
of  blood  (Chevreul,  loc.  cit.,  53).

Mrs.  Swithinbank  saw  her  young  son,  aged  ten,  standing  on  a
high  wall  facing  her  window.  She  jumped  up  to  ask  him  why
he  had  left  school.  The  boy  looked  at  her  with  fear  in  his  eyes
and  vanished.  Search  was  made  without  result.  A  few  minutes
later  one  of  his  classmates  brought  him  in  a  cab  in  a  fainting  con-
dition. It  seems  that  in  class  he  fell  back  insensible,  saying,
"Mother  will  know."

Mrs.  Richardson,  in  India,  dreams  that  her  husband,  150  miles
distant  at  the  siege  of  Multan  (1848),  has  been  severely  wounded
and  she  hears  his  voice  saying,  "Take  the  ring  from  my  finger  and
send  it  to  my  wife."  About  the  same  time  (9  p.m.)  the  general
fell  severely  wounded  and  said  those  precise  words  to  Major
Lloyd.    General  Richardson  recovered  from  his  wound.

M.  Gignon,  military  commissary  at  Aurignac,  was  playing  a
game  at  cards  with  friends  at  a  cafe.  Suddenly  he  got  up  much
disturbed  and  wrote  to  his  wife,  "I  have  heard  an  anguished  cry.
Oh,  tell  me  what  you  want!  Is  there  trouble?  Is  there  danger?"
At  that  hour,  9  p.m.,  December  22,  1878,  M.  Gignon's  little  grand-
daughter had  been  severely  scalded  by  a  bottle  of  over-hot  water
placed  in  the  cradle.

Mrs.  R.  writes  in  her  diary  on  March  15th,  "Last  night,  March,
1874."  She  had  seen  the  head  and  shoulders  of  a  man  in  a  cloudy
form  close  to  her.  She  cried  out,  "It  is  Captain  W."  The  cap-
tain, who  was  a  friend  of  hers,  was  then  in  New  Zealand,  and  had
promised  that  if  he  were  to  die  he  would  appear  to  her.  The
time  of  the  vision  agreed  exactly  with  a  carriage  accident  which
injured  Captain  W.  so  severely  that  he  remained  a  long  time
insensible  and  made  but  a  slow  recovery  (Tel.  Halluc.,  p.  184).

Mr.  Phibbs,  at  Ilfracombe,  dreamt  between  10  and  10.30  p.m.
that  he  saw  his  dog  Fox  stretched  out,  hurt  and  dying,  at  the  foot
of  a  wall.  He  told  his  wife  of  this.  At  that  time  his  dog  had
been  worried  by  two  bulldogs  and  fell  dying  at  the  foot  of  a  wall
(A.  S.  P.,  1905,  xv,  428).

M.  J.  P.  was  walking  and  reading,  in  the  daytime,  and  suddenly
saw  a  comrade  (Louis)  falling  backwards  with  his  hand  on  his
heart  with  the  usual  gesture  of  a  wounded  soldier.  He  told  this
vision  to  his  family.  Some  days  later  he  learned  that  Louis,
having  accidentally  wounded  his  brother  when  out  shooting,  had

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  277

fainted  with  emotion,  saying,  "If  Charles  dies  I  shall  kill  myself"
(Flammarion,  155).

M.  Martial  Lagrange  dreams  that  he  has  a  cancer  of  the
stomach  and  is  operated  on  by  Dr.  Guinard.  The  same  night,  Dr.
Guinard  (a  hospital  surgeon)  could  not  sleep  on  account  of  severe
toothache  and  passed  the  night  working  at  a  treatise  on  the
surgical  treatment  of  cancer  of  the  stomach.  He  naturally  thought
of  visiting  M.  Lagrange,  who  was  not,  however,  his  usual  dentist.
As  soon  as  he  entered  M.  Lagrange's  consulting-room,  the  latter
said  to  him,  "I  dreamt  of  you  last  night;  I  had  cancer  of  the
stomach  and  you  were  going  to  operate  on  me"  (A.  S.  P.,  1893,
iii,  140).

Mr.  Haggard  had  a  very  painful  dream,  feeling  suffocated  as  if
drowning.  Gradually  the  dream  took  more  definite  form.  "I
saw,"  he  says,  "my  dear  old  dog  Bob  stretched  out  among  the
reeds  of  a  pond.  Bob  was  trying  to  call  me,  but  failing  to  reach
me  by  his  voice,  sent  me  the  idea  that  he  was  about  to  die."  In  the
morning  he  thought  little  of  the  matter,  Bob  having  been  quite
well  the  day  before;  but  the  dog  did  not  reappear,  and  some
days  after  it  was  found  that  he  had  been  struck  by  a  passing  train
and  that  the  shock  had  thrown  him  into  a  pond  close  by.  The
accident  took  place  on  the  night  of  the  dream  (A.  S.  P.,  1905,
xv,  424).

Count  Nicholas  Gomanys,  a  medical  officer  in  the  Greek  Army,
was  sent  to  the  garrison  of  Zante.  As  he  drew  near  to  the  island
he  heard  a  voice  saying  in  Italian,  "Go  and  see  Volterra."  He
says,  "This  phrase  was  repeated  so  often  that  I  turned  dizzy  and
was  alarmed,  thinking  it  an  auditory  hallucination.  There  was
nothing  to  make  me  think  of  Volterra  who  lived  in  Zante,  whom
I  had  not  seen  for  ten  years,  and  to  whom  I  had  never  spoken.
At  the  hotel,  while  unpacking  my  bag,  the  voice  continued  to
harass  me.  Just  then  they  sent  to  tell  me  that  M.  Volterra  had
come.  He  begged  me  to  go  with  him  at  once  to  see  his  son  who
had  been  taken  very  ill"  (A.  S.  P.,  1905,  xv,  424).

Commandant  Grima  went  with  his  wife  to  a  conversazione  at
the  Sorbonne  and  Chatelet,  on  the  14th  of  July,  1915,  in  Paris.
On  returning  to  St.  Denis,  Mme.  Grima  perceived  that  she  had
lost  a  diamond  while  in  Paris.  Next  morning  her  young  son  said,
"I  dreamt  last  night  that  a  little  girl  had  found  the  ring  and
brought  it  to  you.  Did  you  lose  it,  mother?"  The  children  had
been  asleep  when  their  parents  came  home.    That,  however,  is

278

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

not  the  strange  part  of  the  story,  for  possibly  the  children  when
half  asleep  had  heard  their  parents  speaking  of  the  lost  ring.  Three
months  later,  by  a  great  chance,  a  girl  of  twelve  belonging  to  a
good  family  in  Paris  found  the  ring  by  the  steps  of  the  Sorbonne.
This  is  an  extraordinary  premonition  (A.  S.  P.,  1895,  xv,  434).

Mrs.  Bagot,  at  table  d'hote  (Mentone)  sees  her  little  dog  Judy
that  she  had  left  in  England  crossing  the  room.  Without  thinking
she  exclaimed,  "What !  Judy  here  !"  She  told  this  to  her  husband,
her  two  daughters,  and  her  mother,  and  there  were  jokes  on
Judy's  ghost.  She  also  noted  the  fact  in  her  diary.  It  was  ascer-
tained that  there  was  no  dog  in  the  hotel.  At  the  same  time
(there  is  some  doubt  about  the  date)  the  dog  had  died  suddenly
in  England  (Bozzano,  A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  322).

Mr.  G.,  of  Boston,  sees  the  living  image  of  his  dead  sister,
and  notices  a  scratch  on  her  right  cheek.  He  speaks  of  this  to
his  mother  who  nearly  fainted  on  hearing  it,  for  it  seems  that
Mr.  G.'s  mother,  preparing  her  daughter's  body  for  burial,  had
made  a  scratch  on  the  face,  and  no  one  but  herself  knew  of  the
accident  (A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  322).

Mr.  G.  Parent,  mayor  of  Wiege,  dreams  that  the  farm  at
Chevennes  is  on  fire ;  he  makes  futile  efforts  to  run  there,  and
sees  the  farm  burnt  down.  Awaking,  shaken  and  trembling,  he
tells  the  dream  to  his  wife.  Next  day  a  part  of  the  farm  was
destroyed  by  fire.

The  next  story  (from  the  unpublished  enquiry  through  the
Bulletin  des  Armees)  is  so  evidential  that  I  give  in  extenso  the
letter  received  from  Captain  V.,  January  14,  1917:

"On  September  3,  1916,  during  the  attack  on  the  Chemin-Creux,
between  Maulpas  and  Clery,  Second  Lieutenant  D.,  of  the  13th
battalion  of  the  Alpine  chasseurs,  was  wounded  by  a  bullet  in
both  arms,  and  left  the  line  to  have  his  wounds  dressed.  That
evening  and  for  fifteen  days  he  was  missing  at  roll-call,  and  was
sought  in  vain  in  the  dressing-stations.  On  September  18th  the
13th  battalion  returned  to  the  same  sector,  the  front  line  having
been  advanced  three  kilometres.  During  the  night  of  September
18th-19th  Second  Lieutenant  V.,  an  intimate  friend  of  D.'s,  saw
in  a  dream  his  friend  D.  dying  in  a  shell-hole  at  the  edge  of
the  Chemin-Creux,  under  a  willow  tree,  reproaching  him  vehe-
mently for  letting  his  best  friend  die  unassisted.

"V.,  a  cool-headed  and  sceptical  officer,  was  nevertheless
obsessed  by  his  dream,  and  went  to  his  commandant,  S.,  who

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  279

at  first  did  not  take  the  matter  seriously,  but  in  the  end,  in  kind-
ness, and  to  finish  with  the  affair,  gave  V.  a  short  leave  to  search
the  place.  V.  came  to  the  Chemin-Creux  and  there  found  the
surroundings  as  seen  in  his  dream.  At  the  foot  of  a  willow
was  a  stick  with  the  label,  'Here  lie  two  French  soldiers/  There
was  nothing  to  connect  this  with  D.,  but  on  opening  the  grave,
D.'s  body  was  found,  which  had  been  buried  about  fifteen  days
before.  This  strange  fact  could  be  attested  by  the  officers  of
the  13th,  but  they  have  other  things  to  do."

Dr.  Ollivier,  at  Huelgoat  (Finistere)  went  on  horseback  at
8  p.m.  on  a  dark  night  to  visit  a  patient  in  the  country,  and  was
thrown  from  his  horse,  breaking  his  collar-bone.  At  nine  o'clock,
his  wife  on  retiring  to  rest  was  seized  with  violent  trembling,
called  the  servant,  and  said,  "My  husband  has  met  with  an  acci-
dent and  is  killed  or  hurt."  It  may  have  been  a  monition,  but
chance  coincidence  is  possible,  or  even  likely,  in  this  case.

A  soldier,  a  peasant  of  La  Creuse,  told  M.  Raymond  Mialaret,
in  very  simple  words,  that  one  morning  his  little  girl  of  seven
had  seen  him  in  a  dream  lying  on  the  ground  bleeding  from  the
left  arm.  She  told  the  dream  to  her  mother,  who  said  it  was  a
nightmare.  That  same  night  the  soldier  was  wounded  in  the
left  arm  (Enquiry  through  the  Ball,  des  Armees).

Mr.  Fraser  Harris,  who  had  gone  from  London  to  lecture  at
St.  Andrews,  went  on  Sunday  to  a  small  family  hotel,  and  sud-
denly saw  the  front  of  his  house  in  London.  His  wife  was  on
the  doorstep  speaking  to  a  workman  who  was  holding  a  large
broom.  She  seemed  troubled,  and  Mr.  Harris  made  out  that
this  poor  man  was  asking  for  help.  At  that  very  time  Mrs.
Harris  was  speaking  to  a  poor  man  seeking  work,  who  offered
to  sweep  the  snow  from  the  steps  and  said  he  had  nothing  for
himself  or  his  children  to  eat.  On  returning  to  London,  Mr.
Harris  found  the  man  just  as  he  had  seen  him  in  vision  (Chev-
reul,  45).

Lieutenant  G.,  at  the  front  near  Reims,  had  not  heard  from
his  wife  for  three  days.  One  night  he  dreamed  that  he  saw  her
pale  as  death  on  her  bed.  He  woke  up  sobbing  and  waited  impa-
tiently for  news.  Three  days  later  he  learned  that  on  the  night
of  his  dream  she  had  a  narrow  escape  from  suffocation  by  fire
in  her  room,  which  scorched  all  the  bedding.  Mme.  G.  felt  the
result  of  the  semi-suffocation  for  a  long  while  (Enquiry  through
the  Bull,  des  Armees).

280

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

A  little  girl  of  ten,  in  a  dream,  sees  her  father,  Lieutenant  D.,
coming  home  on  leave  from  the  front,  and  added  that  he  had
a  rubber  cape,  which  no  one  knew  of  his  having.  Next  day  the
lieutenant  arrived,  a  month  before  he  was  expected,  wearing  a
waterproof  that  he  had  bought  on  his  way  home  (Enquiry  through
the  Bull,  des  Armees).

Professor  S.  Venturi,  in  charge  of  the  lunatic  asylum  at  Garo-
falo,  left  home  for  Pozzuoli,  but  under  a  strong  presentiment,
determined,  in  spite  of  difficulties,  to  return  to  his  house  at
Nocera.  He  found  his  wife  in  great  agitation.  Their  little  girl
had  a  dangerous  attack  of  croup,  and  Mme.  Venturi  had  cried
out  for  her  husband  in  her  distress  (Tamburini,  A.  S.  P.,  1893,
iii,  292).

M.  Keulemans,  a  well-known  artist  of  bird-life,  narrates  some
interesting  instances  of  cryptesthesia.  Without  exactly  going
into  trance,  he  visualizes  very  clearly  the  head  or  eyes  of  a
bird  when  drawing.  But  the  cases  of  telaesthesia  quoted  by  M.
Keulemans  are  not  precise  enough  to  carry  conviction,  though
interesting  by  their  symbolical  form  (A.  S.  P.,  1893,  xii,  217).

In  closing  the  foregoing  very  incomplete  record  of  monitions
not  followed  by  a  death,  I  may  be  permitted  to  mention  one
personal  to  myself.  It  is  not  a  case  of  cryptesthesia,  for  the
dates  do  not  correspond  and  there  was  no  recognition;  but  the
psychological  phenomena  resemble  those  accompanying  lucid
monitions  too  closely  to  omit  them  here.

I  was  in  Italy  during  the  second  month  of  the  war,  where  I  felt
the  duty  of  carrying  on  an  active  propaganda  for  our  holy  national
cause  from  the  beginning  of  the  war.  I  was  living  on  the  first
floor  of  the  Quirinal  Hotel ;  it  was  almost  deserted  and  I  was,  I
believe,  the  only  guest  on  that  floor.  On  the  night  of  September
22-23,  1914,  I  was  awakened  from  sound  sleep  by  three  knocks,
very  clear  but  not  very  loud,  on  the  door  of  my  room.  I  sat  up
in  bed  and  switched  on  the  light.  Again  the  three  knocks  were
heard.  I  called  out,  "Come  in."  Then,  behind  the  door  but
seemingly  close  to  me,  I  heard  a  woman's  voice  speaking  low
and  plaintively,  "Doctor,  doctor,"  drawling  the  last  syllable.  Then
thoroughly  awake,  I  said  aloud,  "Very  well,  I  am  coming."  My
answer  was  almost  automatic ;  for  my  first  passing  thought  was
that  someone  wanted  medical  help.  But  nothing  followed.  I
opened  the  door  (but  of  that  I  am  not  quite  sure),  and  seeing  no
one,  I  scribbled  down  the  exact  time,  1.20  a.m.  (for  I  had  just

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  281

thought  it  might  be  an  hallucination)  and  being  in  no  way  alarmed,
was  able  in  about  half  an  hour  to  go  to  sleep  again,  though  my  five
sons  were  then  at  the  front  exposed  to  the  gravest  dangers.  As
the  voice  had  been  a  woman's,  and  my  daughter-in-law  was
expecting  her  confinement,  I  thought  it  might  be  a  monition  of
that  event.    I  even  wrote  down  this  in  my  note-book.

It  was  not  any  such  monition,  and  it  cannot  be  referred  to  any
specific  event.  Six  days  before,  on  the  afternoon  of  the  17th  of
September,  my  son  Jacques  had  been  seriously  wounded  and
taken  prisoner,  though  the  news  had  not  then  reached  me.

By  this  experience  I  became  aware  of  the  character  of  an
auditory  monition.  (It  matters  little  from  the  psychological  point
of  view  whether  it  were  lucid  or  not.)  If  I  can  judge  from  my
own  case,  it  is  as  clear  as  any  phenomenon  of  normal  life.  When
I  first  woke  up,  being  between  waking  and  sleeping,  there  was
some  uncertainty ;  but  in  a  few  seconds  the  exteriorization  was
precise,  and  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  all  the  details  were  firmly
fixed  in  my  mind.  They  doubtless  may  have  become  slightly
twisted,  but  the  general  facts  remain  unchangeable.

It  is  absolutely  impossible  to  prove  that  this  was  a  monition  of
the  wounding  and  capture  of  my  son ;  nevertheless,  I  am  convinced
(without  asking  anyone  to  share  my  conviction)  that  the  moni-
tion was  real.  The  analogy  with  innumerable  observed  cases  is
close.  It  is  the  only  hallucinatory  monition  that  I  have  ever
received.  I  have,  however,  in  the  course  of  my  life  had  two
flashes  of  cryptesthesia,  one  when  awake,  the  other  in  dream.

One  winter  evening  in  1899  I  was  working  in  my  library  in  the
Rue  de  l'Universite.  My  wife  was  at  the  opera  that  evening
with  my  daughter  Louise.  Suddenly,  about  10.30,  I  thought  for
the  first  time  in  my  life,  and  without  there  being  any  smoke  at  all
in  the  room  to  suggest  the  idea,  that  there  was  a  fire  at  the  opera.
The  impression  was  so  strong  that  I  wrote  down  "Fire!  Fire!"
and  a  few  minutes  later,  thinking  this  not  enough,  I  wrote  "Att,"
meaning  "attention."  Not  much  disturbed  I  returned  to  my
work.  Towards  midnight,  when  my  wife  and  daughter  returned,
I  at  once  asked  them,  to  their  great  surprise,  "Was  there  a  fire?"
My  wife  answered,  "No,  there  was  no  conflagration,  but  we  were
much  frightened.  Between  the  acts  some  smoke  rose  from  the
orchestra ;  there  was  a  rumour  of  fire ;  I  left  the  box  quickly  to
learn  what  was  the  matter,  telling  my  daughter,  When  I  come
back  leave  at  once  without  waiting  for  anything/  They  reassured
me  and  the  performance  went  on  without  incident."

282

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

This  is  not  all.  At  the  moment  when  I  wrote  "Fire"  in  my
notes,  my  sister,  Mme.  Ch.  Buloz,  whose  room  opens  off  mine,
fancied  that  mine  was  on  fire.  She  went  to  the  door,  but  feeling
that  her  fears  were  groundless,  stopped,  saying  to  herself,  "No,  I
will  not  disturb  my  brother  for  such  a  silly  fancy."

Therefore  my  sister  and  I  had  an  impression  of  fire  at  the  same
moment;  that  is  how  I  can  best  describe  the  vague  notion  that
came  to  me  while  my  wife  and  daughter  were  at  the  opera  nearly
a  mile  distant  at  which  a  real  danger  from  fire  arose.  Is  this  a
coincidence  ?  Was  there  at  my  house  an  odour  of  smoke  too  faint
to  be  consciously  perceived  ?

Now  for  the  dream:  About  8  a.m.  in  1907  I  was  still  asleep
and  was  dreaming  that  I  was  with  Mme.  Charcot.  (Why  Mme.
Charcot,  to  whom  I  have  never  spoken  and  whom  I  do  not  know?)
We  were  in  a  motor-car  driving  in  an  avenue  of  plane-trees.  The
car  was  going  so  fast  that  I  feared  an  accident :  the  accident  hap-
pened and  I  woke.

The  accident  was  simply  that  the  postman  had  brought  a  regis-
tered letter,  and  in  taking  this  letter  I  fancied  (though  I  have  no
idea  why)  that  there  was  some  connection  between  my  dream  and
the  letter.  To  signify  this,  and  by  way  of  memorandum,  I  made  a
little  cross  on  the  receipt.  The  letter  came  from  the  Azores,  and
was  from  my  friend,  Colonel  Chaves,  asking  for  an  introduction
to  Jean  Charcot,  whom  I  did  not  know,  who  was  due  to  reach
the  Azores  a  few  weeks  later  in  his  yacht.

I  think  that  these  three  personal  cases  were  not  mere  coinci-
dences but  were  due  to  cryptesthesia ;  but  I  think  so  only  because
there  are  many  other  more  evidential  cases.  In  themselves  these
cases  prove  nothing,  but  they  reinforce  the  large  number  of  proofs
collected  by  more  favoured  observers.1

III.  MONITIONS  OF  DEATH

Monitions  of  death  often  occur.  I  give  a  large  number  of
instances  because  I  hope  to  carry  conviction  to  the  mind  of  the
reader  by  their  variety  and  complexity,  and  especially  by  the  very
great  number  of  the  witnesses.

4It  has  been  necessary  to  abridge  greatly  the  records  of  monitions  and  pre-
monitions given  above.  This  is  to  be  regretted,  for  to  appreciate  their  full
force  ample  details  are  necessary ;  the  skeleton  of  facts  does  not  carry  the
weight  of  conviction  given  by  circumstantial  details.  I  sincerely  hope  that
those  persons  who  are  interested  in  these  perplexing  problems  will  not  remain
content  with  these  brief  summaries,  but  will  refer  to  the  original  documents.

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  283

Monitions  of  death  do  not  differ  essentially  from  other  moni-
tions, but  deserve  separate  mention  because  of  their  frequency.
The  cases  reproduced  here  might  have  been  much  more  numerous
had  I  not  exercised  a  somewhat  severe  criticism.  This  criticism
might  have  been  still  more  rigid,  and  I  willingly  admit  that  half
of  the  cases  cited  have  not  any  absolute  evidential  value ;  but  even
allowing  for  this,  there  remain  a  notable  number  of  authentic
and  indisputable  facts  that  defy  sceptical  analysis.

If  only  from  a  historic  point  of  view,  it  is  interesting  to  cite  the
very  clear  monition  received  by  the  eminent  chemist,  Chevreul.

It  was  in  1814,  a  little  before  the  entry  of  the  Allies  into  Paris.
In  his  room,  between  the  two  windows  of  his  study,  he  saw  a  pale
white  stationary  form  like  an  elongated  cone  surmounted  by  a
sphere.  Shuddering  slightly,  he  turned  away  his  eyes  and  ceased
to  see  the  phantom.  Looking  back  at  the  same  place,  he  saw  it
again ;  and  this  he  did  three  times.  He  then  decided  to  withdraw
into  his  bedroom ;  and  to  do  this  had  to  pass  in  front  of  the
phantom,  which  vanished.

The  vision  was  probably  not  recognized,  but  at  the  same  moment
at  a  distance  from  Paris  an  old  friend  of  his  was  dying,  who
bequeathed  his  library  to  him.  Chevreul  adds,  "If  I  had  been
superstitious  I  might  have  thought  the  apparition  real/'

Chevreul  also  narrates  the  story  of  a  well-known  anatomist  of
the  eighteenth  century,  who  said  to  the  barber  who  was  attending
him,  "Why  do  you  grasp  my  arm?"  The  barber  was  amazed  at
the  question.  At  that  very  instant  one  of  Chevreul's  friends  had
drowned  himself.  The  scientist  was  so  struck  with  the  occurrence
that  he  never  afterwards  would  enter  the  room  alone.

Brierre  de  Boismont,  in  his  book  on  hallucinations,  tells  the
story  of  a  young  girl  who  in  a  dream  saw  her  dying  mother,  heard
her  call,  and  described  the  whole  scene  in  the  death-chamber.  The
details  were  correct,  and  her  mother  was  dying  at  the  time.  He
adds,  "If  we  were  to  cite  all  the  names  of  persons  of  sound  judg-
ment and  extended  knowledge,  high  in  the  ranks  of  science,  who
have  had  such  warnings,  they  would  furnish  much  matter  for
thought."

This  book  has  been  written  for  precisely  that  reason.  There  is
much  matter  for  thought.

Mme.  Juliette  Adam,  the  distinguished  writer,  was  in  her
room  nursing  her  child  at  10  p.m.  Roused  by  the  child's  crying,
she  saw  her  grandmother  at  the  foot  of  her  bed.   She  said,  "Dear

284

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

granny,  I  am  so  glad  to  see  you" ;  but  the  shade  did  not  reply,  and
raised  a  hand  to  her  eyes.  "I  saw,"  says  Mme.  Adam,  "two
empty  sockets.  I  jumped  out  of  bed  and  ran  towards  her,  but
as  I  was  about  to  clasp  her  in  my  arms,  the  phantom  vanished."
The  grandmother  had  died  about  two  hours  previously  (Flam-
marion,  p.  187).

Mrs.  Allom,  being  then  a  young  girl  of  seventeen,  was  at
school  in  Alsace.  One  day,  when  reading  in  the  sitting-room,
she  saw  her  mother  dressed  in  her  night-gown,  lying  down  as  if
in  bed;  she  was  smiling  and  raised  one  arm,  pointing  upwards.
The  apparition  moved  slowly  across  the  room,  and  rising  higher,
disappeared.  Two  days  later  the  mistress  called  the  girl  to  the
study,  who  said,  "You  can  tell  me  nothing,  I  know  that  my
mother  has  died."  Mrs.  Carrick,  her  mother,  had  in  fact  died  on
that  day  and  at  the  same  hour.

Alexis  ArbonsofT,  of  Pskoff  (Russia)  dreamed  in  bed  one  morn-
ing that  his  mother  came,  embraced  him,  and  said,  "Adieu,  I  am
dying."  He  woke,  shuddering,  and  looked  at  the  time,  7.30.
Ten  minutes  later  the  whole  house  was  aroused.  His  mother  had
risen  at  7  o'clock,  had  gone  to  kiss  her  little  granddaughter,  and
then  as  she  said  her  prayers  before  the  icons,  she  had  died  sud-
denly at  7.30  (Flammarion,  435).

Mme.  Van  B.,  at  Ypres,  waked  up  with  a  start  at  4.45  a.m.,
feeling  that  her  father  was  ill  or  dying.  She  awoke  her  husband,
who  tried  to  calm  her,  thinking  it  a  nightmare.  Her  father  died
at  the  same  hour  (A.  S.  P.,  1899,  ix,  71).

The  Rev.  Mr.  Ball  of  Cambridge  dreamt  that  he  was  with  his
friend  Dombrain  in  beautiful  country.  A  bright  light  appeared
before  him ;  he  woke  up,  and  saw  his  friend  Dombrain  smiling  in
the  beam  of  light.  Mr.  Ball  rose  at  once,  calling  "Robert,
Robert,"  and  the  vision  disappeared.  It  so  happened  that  a  young
house  servant  was  named  Robert,  thought  he  was  called,  and
came.  Mr.  Ball  then  realized  as  clearly  as  if  he  had  been  at  the
bedside  that  his  friend  Dombrain  had  died.  He  noted  the  time —
three  minutes  past  five.  At  that  very  moment  Robert  Dombrain
died.

The  following  fact,  narrated  by  M.  Pyrrhus  Bessi  {Revue  des
Etudes  Psychiques,  1901,  21-23;  97-168),  is  a  case  of  monition  of
death  by  accidental  crystal  vision.  M.  Bessi,  at  Panicola  (in  Italy,
near  Perusia),  working  alone  in  his  room  one  night,  broke  off  to
rest  for  a  moment.   His  lamp  nearly  went  out,  he  tried  to  re-light

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  285

it,  and  it  went  out  completely.  Nevertheless,  the  room  was  filled
with  a  dim  light ;  and  in  an  old  mirror  he  saw,  as  if  through  an
opening  in  the  wall,  another  room  differently  furnished,  and  in
it  an  old  lady  whom  he  recognized,  sitting  at  a  table.  She  took
some  paper  from  a  drawer  and  began  to  write  slowly,  put  the
paper  in  an  envelope,  rested  her  head  on  the  back  of  the  chair,
and  went  to  sleep.  Next  day  M.  Bessi  learned  that  this  lady  had
died  in  the  night ;  her  will,  written  in  her  own  hand,  was  found
in  the  drawer  of  the  table.

The  next  account  has  just  been  given  to  me  by  an  eminent  mem-
ber of  the  Paris  bar,  whom  I  will  call  A.,  as  I  have  no  right  to
give  his  name.  The  fact  is  of  ancient  date,  since  it  concerns  his
grandmother.

Mme.  A.,  who  had  been  early  widowed,  had  one  evening  been
too  eagerly  courted  by  a  near  relation,  B.,  and  had  been  somewhat
offended.  Some  months  later,  in  the  winter,  being  in  the  country
nursing  a  sick  child,  she  found  the  room  very  cold  on  a  particular
night,  and  not  wishing  to  call  up  the  servant,  went  herself  to  the
wood-store  to  get  some  logs.  On  opening  the  door  of  the  wood-
store  she  saw  B.  before  her.  He  knelt  down,  took  her  hands,  and
said,  "Forgive  me."  She  was  speechless  with  astonishment,  the
vision  being  as  clear  as  fact ;  but  in  a  few  moments  it  vanished.
Next  morning  a  telegram  arrived  announcing  B.'s  death.

The  Rev.  Mr.  Barker,  being  in  bed  at  11  p.m.,  before  going  to
sleep  perceived  the  smiling  face  of  an  aunt  then  in  Madeira.  He
shuddered  and  told  the  vision  to  his  wife  and  to  several  other
persons.  The  aunt  had  died  at  the  same  hour,  allowing  for  dif-
ference of  longitude.1

Mr.  Baeschly,  of  Saverne,  aged  twenty,  was  alone  with  his
father  in  the  house,  when  towards  midnight  they  were  awakened
by  great  noises.  They  got  up,  but  could  find  no  cause.  They
returned  to  bed  and  the  noises  recommenced ;  they  then  found  the
front  door  opened.  This  occurred  a  third  time,  and  they  then
fastened  the  door  with  rope.  Some  time  later  they  received  a
letter  from  America  announcing  the  death  of  M.  Baeschly's
brother.    It  appears  that  shortly  before  death,  on  awaking  from  a

^his  case  is  referred  to  by  Grasset  as  proving  nothing;  but  this  criticism
is  baseless :  he  speaks  of  a  commonplace  dream  "such  as  had  probably  occurred
to  Mr.  Barker  some  hundreds  or  thousands  of  times."  But  this  is  assuredly
not  the  case;  the  hallucination  is  so  clear  that  he  tells  it  to  his  wife  and  his
friends  as  a  singular  thing,  perhaps  unique  in  his  life.  Does  the  coincidence
of  time  count  for  nothing?

286

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

long  coma,  he  had  said,  "I  have  made  a  long  journey,  I  have  been
to  my  brother  at  Brunatte"  (Chevreul,  334).

Miss  Beale,  then  aged  fourteen,  sees  a  man  in  a  loose  dressing-
gown  in  her  room  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  He  seemed  to  be
feeling  his  way,  and  vanished.  Miss  B.,  much  frightened,  called
to  another  girl  sleeping  in  the  same  room.  The  latter  said,  "It
is  doubtless  my  brother  C."  The  next  morning  at  breakfast  C.
declared  that  he  had  not  entered  the  room,  but  that  he  also  had
seen  a  form  enter  his  room  whom  he  knew  as  that  of  a  friend  (in
poor  health,  but  not  thought  to  be  in  danger)  who  had  agreed
with  him  that  the  first  to  die  should  appear  to  the  other.  He  had
died  that  same  night  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  i,  13).

M.  Beaugrand,  a  journalist  of  Havre,  known  to  me  personally,
told  me  and  produced  documents  confirming  his  story,  that  his
mother  at  Havre  on  the  2d  of  November,  1856,  before  going  to
bed,  heard  what  seemed  a  terrible  storm  and  saw  the  chimney
shaken  as  if  by  a  high  wind.  There  was  no  storm  nor  wind,  but
the  same  day  at  11  p.m.  her  husband  perished  in  a  cyclone  some
miles  from  New  York  on  his  passage  to  Havre.  This  old  story
would  not  by  itself  be  very  evidential,  for  memories  become
twisted  out  of  shape  as  time  goes  on ;  but  it  is  probable  that  these
old  cases,  so  closely  parallel  with  recent  ones,  are  correct  in  the
main.  Many  good  instances,  too  long  to  be  reproduced  here,  will
be  found  in  C.  Flammarion's  paper,  "Les  apparitions  au  moment
de  la  mort"  (Revue  Spirite,  February,  1921,  33).

Elsa  Barker,  the  author  of  sundry  novels  (The  Son  of  Mary
Bethel,  etc.),  being  in  Paris  at  the  time,  was  suddenly  moved  to
write  automatically,  "I  am  here,  I  can  see  you;  I  found  myself
before  the  inevitable,"  etc.  The  signature  was  X.,  a  person  whom
she  hardly  knew,  an  American  author  and  magistrate  aged  about
seventy.  She  asked  her  friends  for  details  of  X.,  whom  she
had  only  seen  at  distant  intervals,  and  learned  that  he  had  died  a
few  days  before  the  message  had  come  to  her.  She  thinks  that
she  was  the  first  person  in  Europe  to  learn  the  news.  This
writing  was  followed  by  numerous  others,  published  as  Letters
from  a  Living  Dead  Man  (Rider,  1917).  The  book  has  but  slight
scientific  interest,  but  should  be  read  carefully  as  showing  the
powers  of  the  subconscious  in  a  distinguished  writer.

On  May  4th  Lord  Beresford,  steaming  between  Gibraltar  and
Marseilles,  saw  a  coffin  containing  his  father  in  his  cabin  as  dis-
tinctly as  if  it  were  real.   He  spoke  of  it  to  his  shipmates  and  on

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  287

arriving  at  Marseilles  learned  that  his  father  had  died  April  29th
and  was  buried  on  May  4th  (A.  S.  P.,  1907,  xvii,  727).

M.  Berget,  professor  of  physics  at  the  Sorbonne,  narrates  that
his  mother  when  a  young  girl  suddenly  heard  the  voice  of  a  friend
living  far  from  Paris,  and  fainted  with  fear.  On  recovering  she
said,  "How  horrible!  Amelia  is  dead;  I  heard  her  sing  as  only
the  dead  can."  Amelia  died  at  that  time,  3  p.m.,  at  Strasburg,  in
the  convent  of  which  she  was  a  member  (Flammarion,  78).

The  Rev.  P.  Beck,  of  Southbank,  Yorkshire,  felt  an  inexplicable
sadness  one  evening  after  dinner.  At  ten  minutes  to  eight  exactly
he  saw  a  form  descending  the  stairs.  His  wife  who  was  with  him
saw  nothing.  The  apparition  agreed  in  height  and  dress  with
Mr.  Beck's  mother,  but  Mr.  Beck  did  not  recognize  it.  Mrs.  Beck
died  some  hundred  miles  away  at  the  same  hour  {A.  S.  P.,  1891,
i,  367).

M.  Belbeder,  of  the  Sixth  Colonial  Regiment,  went  on  leave  to
some  friends  at  Riberac  in  the  Dordogne.  When  going  to  sleep
he  saw  a  white  transparent  shade  move  from  the  chimney-piece,
come  towards  him,  and  bend  over  the  bed.  He  says,  "I  fully
understood  that  she  said,  'Always  remain  my  son's  friend.'  The
form  slowly  rose  and  I  recognized  the  mother  of  one  of  my  best
friends  whom  I  had  left  in  good  health.  I  got  up,  lest  I  should
be  under  an  illusion;  the  night  was  very  dark  and  there  was  no
moon."  The  person  whose  shape  was  recognized  had  died  some
two  hours  before  (Enquiry  through  the  Bulletin  des  Armces).

M.  Binet,  aged  fifteen,  was  unable  to  sleep.  About  12.30  he
seemed  to  see  a  ray  of  moonlight,  and  this  luminous  shadow  took
the  form  of  a  person  and  moved  towards  his  bed.  He  cried  out,
"Leontine !"  He  spoke  of  this  apparition  before  knowing  that
Leontine  had  died  at  that  very  hour  (Flammarion,  84).

The  following  monition  is  not  more  remarkable  than  others ;  but
I  give  it  because  I  was  to  some  extent  a  witness  of  certain  details
(October,  1919).    It  takes  the  usual  form  of  such  monitions.

In  the  night  of  October  22-23,  1919,  Adele  Bureau,  a  widow,
forty-one  years  of  age,  in  the  service  of  my  daughter-in-law,
Mme.  Albert  Richet,  at  Carqueiranne  (Var),  heard  in  sleep,  at
about  3  a.m.,  a  knock  at  her  door.  She  tried  to  say  "Come  in,"
but  seemed  paralyzed,  "as  if  her  night-dress  were  glued  to  the
bed,"  so  that  she  could  say  or  do  nothing.  Then  she  saw  the  form
of  a  woman  dressed  in  white  standing  on  the  threshold  as  if  the
door  were  open.   She  could  not  distinguish  the  face,  for  the  shape

288

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

turned  its  back  and  vanished  as  she  looked.  It  disappeared  as  if
through  the  door,  which,  however,  had  neither  been  opened  nor
shut.  Adele  went  to  sleep  again,  though  with  difficulty.  She
did  not  recognize  the  shape,  but  thought  of  a  niece  whom  she
loved,  who  was  seriously  ill.  On  the  next  day,  and  after  relating
"the  nightmare/'  as  she  called  it,  to  my  daughter-in-law,  she
received  a  telegram  announcing  the  death  of  her  niece.

Adele  told  me  that  she  did  not  recognize  her  niece,  not  having
seen  the  face,  but  had  thought  of  her.  The  costume  was  like  a
white  bridal  dress,  and  she  thought  that  her  niece  (only  a  year
married)  must  have  been  so  buried.  The  emotion  caused  was  so
strong  that  Adele  was  quite  ill  with  tears  and  headache.1

The  next  instance  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  a  monition  of  death,
but  presents  a  remarkable  monitory  character  (Jour.  S.  P.  R.,
July,  1919).  Father  Brompton  (a  pseudonym)  was  due  to  go  next
day  to  administer  the  last  sacraments  to  a  sick  woman.  He  gave
his  telephone  number  to  the  nurse  in  case  the  patient  were  worse.
At  dawn  he  was  awaked  and  saw  a  human  form,  which  said,
"There  is  a  telephone  message  for  you."  It  was  4.15  a.m.  He
dressed  hurriedly  and  arrived  just  in  time  to  administer  the  sacra-
ments. It  was  proved  that  the  telephone  had  not  been  used  and
that  no  one  had  called  him.

Should  we  consider  this  a  visual  and  auditory  hallucination  of
Father  Brompton,  preoccupied  with  his  duty  to  the  dying  woman?
Given  the  many  authentic  monitions  that  are  known,  it  is  legitimate
to  suppose  that  this  was  a  true  monition  involving  lucidity,  and
not  a  morbid  non-veridical  hallucination  such  as  occurs  to  alco-
holics and  insanes.

Mrs.  Bishop,  travelling  in  the  Rocky  Mountains,  made  the
acquaintance  of  a  Creole  known  as  Mountain  Jim.  He  said  to
her,  "I  will  see  you  again  when  I  die.,,  Mrs.  Bishop  states,  "In
1874,  ten  years  later,  being  at  Interlaken,  at  about  6  a.m.,  I  was
sitting  up  in  bed,  writing,  when  I  saw  Mountain  Jim  before
me.  His  eyes  were  fixed  on  me,  and  when  I  looked  up  he  said,
very  low  but  very  clearly,  T  am  come  as  I  promised/  made  a  sign

1The  telegram  was  "Mme.  Bureau,  Carqueiranne,  October  23d,  Chissey  en
Morvan  (Saone  et  Loire.  Jeanne,  deceased  this  morning,  funeral  Friday
eleven.  Berthelon.")  Adele  had  never  before  seen  any  apparition.  Some  years
ago,  after  the  death  of  one  of  her  aunts,  she  had  nightmares  in  which  she
thought  herself  pursued  and  suffocated  by  this  aunt.  She  had  masses  said
and  the  dreams  ceased.  Adele  Bureau  is  intelligent  and  responsible.  The  dead
girl  was  not  interred  in  her  bridal  dress.

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  289

with  his  hand,  and  said,  'Adieu/  Mrs.  Ker,  who  was  with  me
in  the  hotel,  and  I  both  took  a  note  of  the  date  and  hour.  The
news  of  the  death  reached  us  later,  and  the  time,  allowing  for
difference  of  longitude,  agreed  with  that  of  the  apparition."

The  certificate  of  death  of  Mountain  Jim  shows  that  he  died
at  Fort  Collins  (Colorado)  on  September  7,  1874,  at  3  p.m.,
which  corresponds  to  10  a.m.  at  Interlaken.  Mrs.  Bishop  does
not  say  whether  the  vision  was  on  the  7th  or  the  8th  of  Septem-
ber; if  the  former  the  vision  preceded  death  by  four  hours;  if
the  latter,  twenty  hours  elapsed  between  the  two  events.

Mme.  Stella,  then  aged  seventeen,  sees  a  young  and  some-
what intimate  friend  of  hers  coming  into  her  room.  She  writes:
"The  door  opens  and  I  see  him  come  in.  I  get  up  to  push  an
armchair  for  him  near  the  fire  for  it  was  snowing,  and  he  seemed
cold,  having  no  cloak.  I  began  to  scold  him  for  coming  without
one.  Instead  of  answering,  he  placed  his  hand  on  his  breast
and  then  on  his  head.  I  was  still  speaking  when  Dr.  G.  entered
and  asked  to  whom  I  was  speaking.  I  said,  'Here  is  this  tire-
some boy  come  out  without  a  cloak,  and  he  with  such  a  cold
that  he  can't  speak.  Lend  him  your  cloak  and  send  him  home.'
I  shall  never  forget  the  horror  and  stupefaction  of  the  doctor;
for  Bertie  had  died  about  twenty  minutes  before.  I  had  heard
the  handle  turned  and  the  door  opened.  The  figure  walked  in
the  room  and  sat  down  while  I  lit  the  candles.  The  apparition
lasted  nearly  five  minutes"  (A.  S.  P.,  1892,  ii,  173).

The  Rev.  Mr.  Field,  in  New  Zealand,  while  asleep,  hears  him-
self called,  "Harry,  Harry,"  and  clearly  recognized  his  mother's
voice.  She  usually  called  him  Henry,  not  Harry.  It  was  the
28th  of  November,  1873.  At  the  same  time,  given  the  difference
of  longitude,  his  mother  died  in  London,  saying  "Harry,  Harry"
(A.  S.  P.,  1892,  ii,  175).

The  following  account  is  by  a  celebrated  painter,  A.  Besnard.
It  is  at  third-hand,  and  therefore  must  be  accepted  with  great
reserve.  On  the  13th  of  July,  1842,  Mme.  B.,  ill  and  dying,  woke
with  a  start  and  cried,  "What  a  misfortune,  the  Duke  of  Orleans
is  dead."  When  Dr.  Vidal  came  to  see  the  dying  woman  he
said,  "Have  you  heard  the  news?  The  Duke  of  Orleans  has
been  killed  at  Neuilly  in  a  carriage  accident."  M.  Bremon  said,
"I  knew,  she  told  us."1

better  from  A.  Besnard  to  Jules  Bois,  L'Au-Deld  et  les  forces  inconnues,
Paris,  1903,  127.

290

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Mme.  Bloch,  at  Rome,  was  dressing  at  7  a.m.  when  she  saw
her  nephew,  Rene  Kraemer,  who  said  to  her,  "Yes,  I  am  dead."
Much  frightened,  she  went  to  call  her  son,  who  tried  to  reassure
her.  Rene  Kraemer,  aged  fourteen,  had  died  of  acute  peritonitis
the  same  morning;  death  setting  in  at  7  a.m.  and  the  end  coming
at  noon  (Flammarion,  L'Inconnit  et  les  Problemes  Psychiques,
70).

Mme.  Boniface,  a  schoolmistress  at  Etampes,  when  a  child  of
seven  at  Niort,  dreamt  that  she  was  in  a  dark  room  where  there
was  a  coffin,  that  she  rushed  out,  and  in  the  next  room  felt  a
hand  on  her  shoulder.  She  recognized  her  father,  whom  she  had
not  seen  for  two  years,  who  said  to  her,  "Do  not  be  afraid,  little
one,  kiss  me."  Her  father  had  died  at  Paris  that  evening  (Flam-
marion, 407).

Lord  Brougham  tells  in  his  memoirs  (Life  and  Times  of  Lord
Brougham,  1871,  201-203)  that  being  at  Gothenburg  in  Sweden,
in  1799,  he  was  taking  a  bath  and  saw  on  the  chair  where  he  had
put  his  clothes  an  intimate  friend,  G.,  who  had  gone  to  India  and
to  whom  he  had  not  written  for  years,  looking  at  him  calmly.  It
was  the  19th  of  December,  on  which  date  G.  had  died.

Dr.  Rowland  Bowstear,  running  after  a  ball  at  cricket,  suddenly
sees  his  brother-in-law  by  the  hedge,  in  shooting  clothes  with  his
gun  on  his  arm.  A  friend  with  him  saw  nothing,  though  Dr.  B.
pointed  out  the  apparition,  which  disappeared.  It  was  1.10  p.m.
The  day  and  hour  coincided  with  the  sudden  death  of  his  brother-
in-law,  who  was  out  shooting  and  was  carrying  his  gun.

Dr.  Bock  went  with  his  brother  to  a  music-hall  in  Munich.
They  were  enjoying  the  entertainment,  when  between  the  acts  he
heard  a  loud  knock,  and  saw  the  figure  of  his  mother  stretched
corpse-like  on  the  bed  with  a  cross  in  her  hands.  Sure  that  his
mother  had  died,  he  left  the  hall,  despite  the  protest  of  his
brother,  who  did  not  understand  his  fear,  knowing  that  their
mother  seemed  well.  But  Dr.  Bock  said,  "My  mother  is  dead,  I
could  swear  it."  He  made  arrangements  for  a  substitute  at  his
duties,  ordered  his  mourning,  and  next  day  received  a  telegram
announcing  that  she  had  died  at  the  hour  of  the  vision  (A.  S.  P.,
July,  1913,  195).

Emma  Burger,  lady's  maid  to  the  Countess  of  Ussel,  was  sleep-
ing on  the  night  of  August  15-16,  in  the  room  opening  off  that
of  her  mistress,  the  door  being  open.  Suddenly  she  saw  clearly
her  fiance,  Charles  B.,  standing  at  the  half-opened  door  into  the

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  291

passage.  "He  was  in  travelling  dress  and  I  saw  his  features  and
the  details  of  his  clothes  quite  clearly.  He  smiled  but  said
nothing.  I  said,  'Oh,  go  away/  Madame,  who  was  in  the  next
room,  heard  me,  and  said,  'Emma,  what  is  the  matter?  Are  you
dreaming?'  I  then  said  in  a  low  voice  to  Charles,  'Oh,  do  go
away.'  He  disappeared,  not  suddenly  but  slowly,  as  if  closing
the  door  and  leaving.  Next  day  I  asked  if  anyone  had  been  sent
to  my  room."  1  On  the  18th  Emma  received  news  that  Charles
had  died  of  heart  seizure  on  the  night  of  the  15th- 16th  of  August
(Phantasms  of  the  Living,  ii,  1886,  696).

M.  Basserole,  a  schoolmaster  in  Brittany,  received  a  letter  sum-
moning him  to  his  sick  father.  At  the  station  of  Redon  at  4.40
p.m.  he  fainted,  and  when  he  came  to  himself,  before  seeing
anyone  in  the  waiting-room,  he  saw  the  figure  of  his  father,  which
disappeared  at  once.  Mr.  Basserole  died  at  6  p.m.  (Flamma-
rion,  128).

M.  Jacques  C,  at  Grenoble,  had  gone  to  bed,  when  he  saw  the
door  of  his  room  open  nearly  noiselessly,  and  a  girl,  Martha,  to
whom  he  had  been  engaged,  entered.  She  was  dressed  in  white,
her  hair  down  on  her  shoulders.  M.  C.  is  sure  he  was  not  sleep-
ing. She  came  to  the  bedside  and  bent  over  him.  C.  took  her
hand.  It  was  quite  cold.  He  cried  out  and  the  phantom  van-
ished, and  C.  found  that  he  had  a  glass  of  water  in  his  hand.
Martha  had  died  at  Toulouse  at  the  same  hour  (Flammarion,
164).

Miss  Bibby,  aged  nineteen,  woke  up  with  the  feeling  of  some-
one in  her  room.  She  saw  the  figure  of  her  grandfather,  whom
she  recognized.  He  called  to  her,  "Miss  Nellie,  ma'am,"  as  he
was  accustomed  to  do  in  jest.  She  spoke  of  the  apparition  next
day.   Some  time  after  she  heard  that  he  had  died  at  that  moment.

M.  Bertrand,  aged  nineteen,  dreamt  that  a  cousin,  a  sub-lieu-
tenant in  the  infantry  at  Tonquin,  was  surrounded  by  enemies,
defending  himself.  He  vanished  in  a  cloud.  He  told  the  dream
to  his  mother  and  sister  and  thought  no  more  of  it.  Three
weeks  later  they  heard  of  the  cousin's  death  on  April  30,  1888,
at  Yon  Luong,  on  the  date  of  the  dream  (Enquiry  through  the
Bulletin  des  Armies).

On  the  night  of  July  13-14,  1916,  Sergeant  Jean  Jules  Bigard
of  the  124th  Regiment  of  infantry,  while  on  leave,  dreamt  that

1Emma  Burger  was  in  my  service  for  fifteen  years,  and  her  good  faith
is  not  to  be  doubted.     (Ch.  Richet.)

292

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

he  had  lost  both  legs  in  action  and  that  the  registrar's  clerk  gave
the  death-certificate  to  his  parents.  He  laughed  at  the  grisly
tale  and  told  his  dream  to  his  father  and  mother,  who  thought
nothing  of  it.  A  short  time  later  he  learned  that  his  uncle,  also
named  Jean  Jules  Bigard,  had  been  killed  at  Biache,  both  legs
having  been  blown  off  by  a  shell  (Enquiry  through  the  Bulletin
des  Armies).

Mr.  Beresford  Christman  heard  the  following  rather  startling
story  told  by  his  uncle,  J.,  to  his  father,  G.  The  two  brothers,
J.  and  G.,  were  in  their  cabin  on  the  way  to  St.  Thomas.  The
night  was  calm  and  the  moon  bright,  almost  like  daylight.  They
were  awaked.  (By  what?)  Both  then  saw  for  a  short  time  (that
seemed  long  to  them),  the  figure  of  their  father,  which  they  recog-
nized. The  form  raised  a  hand  and  showed  the  sons  that  its
eyes  were  shut.  They  noted  the  facts  in  the  log-book.  It  seems
that  the  vision  coincided  to  a  minute  with  the  death  of  the  father
of  J.  and  G.  Christman  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  ii,  17).

A  very  interesting  fact  was  related  to  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  by  Lieu-
tenant Larkin  of  the  Flying  Corps  (Jour.  S.  P.  R.,  July,  1919,
76).  On  the  17th  of  December,  1918,  Lieutenant  D.  M.  Connell
came  to  Lieutenant  Larkin's  room  and  said  that  he  had  to  take  an
aeroplane  to  Tadcaster,  but  would  be  back  at  tea-time.  About
three  hours  later,  Larkin  being  in  his  room  sitting  at  the  fireside,
the  door  opened  and  Connell  appeared,  saying  gaily,  "Hello,
boy!"  Larkin  turned,  saw  Connell  in  aviator's  dress,  and  said,
"Back  already?"  Connell  replied,  "It  is  all  right,  I  made  a  good
trip."  He  shut  the  door  and  was  gone ;  it  was  then  3.30.  Larkin
went  to  the  mess-room  and  was  surprised  not  to  see  Connell.
During  the  evening  they  learned  that  Connell  had  crashed  near
Tadcaster  at  3.25.  It  cannot  be  supposed  that  Larkin  had  spoken
to  some  other  officer,  mistaking  him  for  his  friend  Connell ;  the
room  was  small  and  well  lit.

Mr.  Vicary  Boyle  at  Simla  saw  in  a  dream  his  father-in-law,
who  lived  at  Brighton,  stretched  pale  on  the  bed  tended  by  his
wife.  The  vision  soon  disappeared.  Mr.  Boyle  went  on  sleeping,
but  on  waking  was  firmly  persuaded  that  his  father-in-law  had
died,  though  he  was  unaware  of  any  illness  and  had  not  been
thinking  of  him.  Mr.  Boyle's  father-in-law  had  died  nine  hours
before  the  dream  (Myers,  Human  Personality,  i,  138).

Mrs.  Collyer,  of  New  Jersey,  on  January  3,  1856,  feeling  poorly,
went  to  bed  early.   She  sat  down  on  her  bed  and  saw  her  brother

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  293

Joseph  standing  near  the  door.  She  said,  "He  looked  at  me
gravely  and  sadly,  his  head  was  bandaged  and  he  was  wearing
a  white  garment,  like  a  surplice,  but  very  soiled."  At  that  very
moment  there  had  been  a  collision  between  two  vessels  on  the
Mississippi  1,080  miles  away.  Mrs.  Collyer's  brother  Joseph,  who
commanded  the  steamboat  Alice,  was  killed  by  the  fall  of  the
mainmast  on  his  head.  He  was  in  his  nightgown,  having  gone  to
sleep  in  his  cabin  before  the  accident  (Telepathic  Hallucinations,
Ft.  Tr.,  117).

Mme.  Couesnon,  of  Jassy,  when  half  asleep,  sees  a  friend  of
hers,  A.,  sitting  on  his  bed  in  night  attire,  saying,  "Oh !  I  am  in
pain."  It  was  then  2  a.m.  That  night  A.  died  at  2.20  in  the
Tyrol  (Flammarion,  419).

In  1913  P.  Cotte,  a  student  of  horticulture  at  Villepreux,  was
in  bed  and  just  going  to  sleep  when  he  saw  a  dim  form  leaning
on  the  cross-rail  of  his  bed.  As  it  became  clearer  he  recognized
his  foster-brother,  A.,  aged  thirty-five  and  a  long  sufferer  from
an  incurable  malady.  He  recognized  the  voice,  which  said,  "How
are  you,  Pierre?  Adieu.  I  am  going."  C.  then  sat  up  in  bed
and  called  to  his  friend  but  the  form  had  disappeared.  The  appa-
rition coincided  exactly  with  the  time  of  death  (Enquiry  through
the  Bulletin  des  Arniees).

Lieutenant  R.  Martin,  being  convalescent,  was  anxious  about
his  best  friend  from  whom  he  had  not  heard  for  eight  days.  He
says :  "I  had  a  dream ;  my  friend  appeared  to  me.  He  seemed  in
a  hurry  and  said,  'Why  don't  you  come  with  me?  Are  you
dotty?'  I  was  struck  by  the  new  decoration  he  was  wearing.
I  told  this  dream  to  two  friends  next  morning.  I  afterwards
learned  that  my  friend  had  been  killed  by  a  shell  at  Verdun  at
5  p.m.  some  hours  before  my  dream.  I  am  a  mathematical  stu-
dent at  the  Sorbonne;  I  never  believed  a  word  about  occult
sciences"  (Enquiry  through  the  Bulletin  des  Armces).

M.  Conil,  then  a  child  of  eleven,  saw  in  a  dream  his  dying  uncle,
and  heard  his  words  as  if  he  were  in  the  room.  The  uncle  died
at  2  a.m.,  just  when  young  Conil  woke  up.  He  says,  "I  heard
his  words  distinctly  and  could  repeat  them,  for  the  vision  made
such  an  impression  on  me  that  it  seems  like  yesterday."  All  was
exactly  as  seen  and  heard  (Flammarion,  454).

Mrs.  Cox  relates  the  following:  "On  the  21st  of  August,
1869,  about  9  p.m.,  I  was  in  my  bedroom  when  my  little  nephew,
aged  seven,  ran  in  and  said,  'Oh,  aunt,  I  have  just  seen  my

294

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

father  walk  round  my  bed/  He  was  so  frightened  that  he  would
not  go  back  to  his  room  and  I  had  to  take  him  into  my  bed.
Towards  midnight,  I  was  not  asleep,  and  saw  my  brother,  who
was  at  Hongkong,  quite  clearly  near  the  chimney-piece  and
mortally  pale.  I  was  so  frightened  that  I  hid  under  the  bed-
clothes. A  little  later  I  heard  his  voice  call  me  by  name  three
times.  When  I  looked  up  he  had  gone.  I  noted  down  the  facts."
Mrs.  Cox's  brother  died  suddenly  the  same  day  at  Hongkong
of  sunstroke  (Telepathic  Hallucinations,  372).

The  wife  of  Colonel  Craigie,  in  India,  at  10  p.m.,  was  about  to
undress  when  her  daughter,  who  was  with  her,  said,  "Oh,
mother,  there  is  Mr.  B. !  Yes,  don't  you  see  him?  He  is  saying,
'Good-bye,  sissy,  good-bye.'  Now  he  is  going.  He  is  gone."
The  house  was  searched,  Mr.  B.  was  not  there ;  he  had  killed  him-
self the  same  day  at  8  p.m.  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  ii,  581).

On  the  13th  of  November,  1914,  at  Fez,  Lieutenant  C.  of  the
Foreign  Legion  woke  up,  sobbing,  and  said  to  his  comrade,  M.,
sleeping  in  the  same  room,  "I  have  had  a  horrible  dream ;  some
disaster  has  befallen  one  of  my  brothers,  I  don't  know  which,
but  I  am  sure."  M.  wrote  this  to  his  colonel,  from  whom  I  have
this  account:  Commandant  C,  the  brother  of  Lieutenant  C,  was
killed  in  action  at  Elhenni  (Morocco)  on  the  same  day,  probably
a  few  hours  before  the  dream.

Mrs.  H.  D.  dreamt  that  she  saw  a  friend  of  hers,  Maria,  play-
ing chess  with  Dr.  D.,  but  wearing  a  thick  black  veil.  Mrs.  D.
said,  "You  will  lose  if  you  keep  on  that  veil."  Maria  answered,
"It  is  because  I  am  dead.  Look !"  She  raised  her  veil  and  Mrs.
D.  saw  a  death's-head  with  empty  eye-sockets.  In  the  morning
she  received  a  telegram,  "Come  quickly.  Maria  has  died  in  the
night."  Maria  was  apparently  in  perfect  health  (Flammarion,
430).

Mr.  D.,  a  barrister  in  whom  Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  full  confidence,
had  thirty  years  ago  a  friend,  X.  Y.,  whom  he  often  saw.  He
says,  "I  knew  he  might  die  suddenly,  but  he  seemed  in  his  usual
health.  On  the  7th  I  was  in  his  room  a  long  time  chatting  on
various  matters.  He  was  in  good  spirits,  and  I  went  home  at
bedtime.  On  the  morning  of  the  8th  I  woke,  distressed.  Day
had  dawned  and  in  my  dream  I  saw  X.  Y.  lying  on  the  floor,
his  knees  drawn  up,  his  hands  thrown  back  and  his  jaw  fallen.
I  woke  my  wife,  saying,  'I  have  seen  X.  Y.  dead  on  the  floor.'
She  replied,  'Oh,  you  are  dreaming.'   I  went  to  sleep  again.  But

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  295

at  eleven  o'clock,  X.  Y.  not  having  come  to  the  office,  and  his
housekeeper  having  had  no  answer  to  her  knock  on  his  door,
I  got  a  ladder  to  enter  by  the  window.  X.  Y.  was  dead  on  the
floor  exactly  as  I  had  seen  him  in  my  dream.  From  that  day  to
this  I  have  been  certain  that  it  was  no  dream.  I  was  not  uncon-
scious from  the  moment  I  opened  my  eyes  and  saw  the  appari-
tion. I  had  an  indescribable  feeling  of  distress,  just  as  one  might
on  waking  startled  and  seeing  a  terrible  sight.  This  happened
thirty-three  years  ago  and  every  detail  is  as  clear  in  my  memory
as  if  it  were  yesterday/'

Another,  Mr.  D.,  dreamt  that  he  saw  one  of  his  work-people,
R.  Mackenzie,  who  said,  "I  have  not  done  what  I  am  accused
of ;  I  am  innocent,  you  will  soon  know.,,  The  dream  was  hardly
ended  when  Mrs.  D.  came  into  her  husband's  room  to  tell  him  that
a  tragedy  had  taken  place,  Mr.  Mackenzie  had  committed  sui-
cide. "No,"  said  her  husband,  "he  has  just  told  me  that  he  is
innocent."  Mackenzie,  in  fact,  had  swallowed  aqua-fortis  in
mistake  for  whisky  (A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  324).

Mme.  Deupes,  at  Nice,  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  heard  dis-
tinctly a  voice  calling  her  by  name,  "Marie,  Marie."  She  got  up
and  awoke  her  husband,  who  was  sleeping  in  the  next  room,
asking  if  he  had  called  her.  On  his  denial  she  went  to  sleep
again.  Once  more  the  voice  called  her,  and  she  said  to  her
husband,  "I  am  frightened;  light  the  candle."  She  passed  the
rest  of  the  night  with  her  husband.  She  said  to  him,  "Remember,
we  shall  hear  of  the  death  of  M.  Gautier  at  Marseilles,  I  think
I  recognized  the  tone  of  his  voice."

M.  Gautier  had  died  at  the  time  that  Mme.  Deupes  heard  him
(Flammarion,  132).

The  Abbe  Dontaz,  priest  of  Domdidier,  near  Fribourg,
Switzerland,  then  a  young  man  of  eighteen,  dreamt  twice  running
that  he  saw  his  sister  dying.  His  father  appeared  to  him,  say-
ing, "Your  sister  Josephine  is  dying;  but  your  mother  does  not
know."  Next  morning  on  going  to  college  he  received  a  letter
from  his  father  containing  the  same  words  (Flammarion,  132).

A  most  remarkable  monition  is  given  (Flammarion,  La  Mort  et
son  Mystbre,  p.  172).  To  understand  it  fully  the  original  must
be  referred  to.  On  Saturday,  January  3d,  Mr.  Dickinson,  a
Newcastle  photographer,  received,  at  8  a.m.,  a  visit  from  a  Mr.
Thompson,  whose  portrait  he  had  taken.  He  referred  to  his
book  for  the  name  and  address,  and  said  to  Mr.  Thompson,  "If

296

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

you  will  call  again  in  a  few  days  you  shall  have  the  proofs."
Mr.  Thompson  then  left.  The  assistant,  on  being  spoken  to,
was  surprised,  Mr.  Thompson's  father  having  called  the  previous
day  to  press  for  the  proofs.

It  was  proved  (1)  that  on  January  3d  Mr.  Thompson  was
seriously  ill  of  typhoid  fever  and  likely  to  die  during  the  day ;
(2)  that  in  his  delirium  he  continually  spoke  of  the  photographs
and  that  was  why  his  father  had  enquired;  and  (3)  that  the
person  seen  by  Mr.  Dickinson  could  only  be  Mr.  Thompson's
double  (A.  S.  P.,  ii,  310).  This  mysterious  case  is  very  well
supported  by  proofs  that  define  it  as  an  objective  phenomenon.

Mr.  Charles  Demay,  a  professor  at  Dijon,  saw  one  of  his  col-
leagues, G.,  at  Paris  on  July  10th,  who  made  an  urgent  request
that  Mr.  Demay  could  not  consent  to.  G.,  despairing,  left  him
at  11.30  p.m.,  near  the  St.  Louis  bridge.  In  the  night  of  the
12th-13th  July,  Mr.  Demay  being  at  Soulancourt,  210  miles  from
Paris,  dreamt  that  he  was  in  a  boat  on  the  Seine  at  the  St.  Louis
bridge,  and  that  he  was  trailing  his  hand  in  the  water ;  that  it  was
bitten  by  a  fish ;  on  raising  his  hand  the  fish's  head  became  that
of  G.  Mr.  Demay  woke  up  and  looked  at  the  time,  2.20  a.m.
He  told  the  dream  to  G.'s  sister,  and  a  few  days  later  learned  that
G.  had  thrown  himself  into  the  river  on  the  night  of  July  12th-13th
and  had  been  taken  from  the  water  at  2.30  a.m.  (Boirac,
A.  S.  P.,  xxii,  1912,  178).  This  is  a  striking  case  of  symbolical
cryptesthesia.

Justinus  Kerner  relates  that  Angelica  Hauffe  had  a  waking
vision  of  a  coffin  and  pall  on  three  successive  days  preceding  the
death  of  her  father  whom  she  did  not  know  to  be  ill,  but  with
whom  she  connected  the  vision  (Secrcss  of  Prevorst,  tr.  fr.,
p.  61).

Kerner  also  relates  the  story  of  a  Mr.  Hubschmann,  of  Stutt-
gart. One  morning  at  dawn  his  children  woke  him,  saying,
"Grandfather  has  come."  This  was  not  the  case,  but  a  few  days
later  his  brother  wrote  from  Strasburg  expressing  much  anxiety
about  their  father,  as  he  thought  he  had  seen  and  recognized  him
on  the  same  day  as  the  children  thought  they  had  seen  their
grandfather  at  Stuttgart.  Mr.  Hubschmann  senior  had  died  in
Bothnia  on  the  same  day  as  the  apparitions  at  Stuttgart  and  at
Strasburg.

Mrs.  Duck,  at  10  a.m.,  picking  up  sticks  in  a  wood,  saw  her
husband,  David  Duck,  and  called  to  him,  "Oh,  David,  what  brings

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  297

you  here?"  She  went  home  and  evinced  no  surprise  when  told
that  he  had  been  run  over  by  a  carriage  and  killed.  She  said,
"I  knew  it;  there  was  no  need  to  tell  me.  I  saw  his  ghost"
(Tel.  Halluc,  257).

The  sister-in-law  of  Mr.  Dyne,  of  London,  saw  during  the  day
of  December  16,  1875,  a  dead  man,  with  open  eyes,  lying  on  a
narrow  bed.  The  room  was  bare,  without  carpet  or  furniture.
She  thought  of  Mr.  X.,  who  had  done  her  some  kindnesses,  and
had  gone  abroad  about  a  year  previously.  On  the  same  day,  ten
hours  earlier,  Mr.  X.  had  died  in  a  little  village  hospital,  in  a
room  exactly  as  seen  by  Mrs.  Dyne  (Tel.  Halluc.,  84).

M.  E.,  a  sub-lieutenant  of  engineers,  returning  from  leave,
while  driving  from  the  train  to  meet  the  regimental  train,  saw
clearly  a  grave  and  cross  bearing  the  words,  "X.,  adjudant  in  the

 company  of  engineers,  killed  on  the  field  of  honour,  June  14,

1917."  This  was  unlikely,  for  X.,  the  senior  section  commander,
being  thirty-seven  years  of  age  and  father  of  a  family,  had  been
given  a  post  of  less  danger  than  others.  He  had  been  killed  June
7,  1917  (Enquiry  through  the  Bulletin  des  Armees).

Mme.  Galichon,  at  Paris,  dreamt  on  the  night  of  November  8-9,
1916,  that  her  grandson,  a  cadet  in  the  Sixth  Battalion  of  the
Chasseurs  Alpins,  entered  her  drawing-room  like  a  whirlwind
and  went  out  again  as  quickly.  The  impression  being  very  clear,
she  told  her  servant  of  the  dream.  She  soon  received  the  official
notification  that  her  grandson  had  been  killed  by  a  shell  at  St.
Pierre-vast  on  the  evening  of  November  8th  (Enquiry  through
the  Bulletin  des  Armees).

Mme.  Escourru,  looking  at  the  portrait  of  her  son,  an  officer
of  Zouaves,  then  in  Mexico,  saw  one  of  the  eyes  injured  and
the  face  streaming  with  blood.  The  portrait  seemed  as  if  alive,
one  eye  being  gouged  out.  It  was  probably  about  1  p.m.,  being
after  lunch.  On  the  same  day,  Palm  Sunday,  March  29,  1863,
Captain  Escourru  had  been  struck  by  a  bullet  in  the  left  eye,  at
5  p.m.  This  gives  a  difference  of  six  hours,  for  1  p.m.  at  Paris
corresponds  to  7  a.m.  in  Mexico.  This  case  has  been  investigated
with  great  care  by  Dr.  Dariex,  who  visited  M.  and  Mme.  Escourru
several  times  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  152).

C.  Flammarion,  in  the  Revue  Spirite,  lxiv.  2d  of  January,
1921,  reports  a  remarkably  similar  case,  the  authenticity  of  which
seems  to  me  weak,  for  no  documents  are  available  and  the  date
is  wrong,  March  17th  for  the  assault  of  La  Puebla  which  took

298

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

place  on  March  29th.  The  story  is,  that  in  1863,  the  Baroness  de
Boisleve  received  many  guests  to  dinner,  among  others  General
Fleury  and  President  Devienne.  Suddenly  on  entering  the
drawing-room,  Mme.  de  Boisleve  saw  her  son  standing  before
her  with  his  left  eye  bleeding.  Her  son  was  a  lieutenant  of  hus-
sars in  Mexico.  She  fell  on  the  floor  in  a  faint.  Eight  days
later  she  learned  that  her  son  had  been  killed  in  the  assault  on
La  Puebla  by  a  bullet  in  the  left  eye.

The  similarity  in  the  two  cases  is  so  great  that  I  suspect  that
the  story  refers  to  one  and  the  same  person,  though  Flammarion
adds:  "Dr.  Nelaton  gave  a  written  account  (proces-verbal)  of  the
event  in  the  handwriting  of  President  Devienne,  and  counter-
signed by  all  the  guests."  It  would  be  necessary  that  this  docu-
ment should  be  produced  before  we  could  be  sure  that  this  is  not
a  version  of  the  Escourru  case.

This  case  shows  how  necessary  it  is  to  demand  documents,
and  to  check  every  statement.  The  S.  P.  R.  is  perfectly  right  to
insist  on  proofs  and  attestations ;  there  are  never  too  many,  nor
even  enough.

Mrs.  Eustance,  on  her  death-bed,  spoke  insistently  of  a  father-
in-law  whom  she  called  "Uncle  Done."  While  she  was  dying,
Mr.  Done,  who  knew  her  to  be  very  ill,  heard  a  voice  calling
him,  "Uncle,  uncle" ;  and  at  the  same  time  his  young  niece,  who
lived  with  him,  heard  herself  called,  "Rosie,  Rosie."  She  left
her  room  in  the  middle  of  the  night,  thinking  that  her  uncle  had
called  her,  and  met  her  uncle  who  also  thought  that  he  had  been
called  (Tel.  Halluc.,  345).

Mr.  Everitt  was  suddenly  awaked  in  the  middle  of  the  night.
He  heard  a  noise  in  the  room  but  could  see  nothing.  Then  his
mother's  voice  spoke  softly,  saying  "Tommy"  three  times,  and
added  "Your  mother  has  died."  Mr.  Everitt  told  this  before
hearing  of  his  mother's  death,  which  took  place  at  the  time.

Archdeacon  Farber,  awaking  in  the  night,  saw  a  friend  sitting
at  the  foot  of  his  bed,  dripping  with  water.  The  apparition  shook
its  head  without  speaking.  It  returned  twice  that  night.  Soon
after  the  news  came  that  a  short  time  before  the  apparition  to
Mr.  Farber,  his  friend  had  been  drowned  while  bathing  (Tel.
Halluc.,  130).

Mme.  Ulric  de  Fonvielle,  the  wife  of  the  author  of  that  name,
had  been  a  few  minutes  in  bed,  but  was  still  awake  when  she
saw  the  bed-curtain  drawn  aside,  and  a  friend  of  her  childhood

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  299

with  whom  she  had  had  a  quarrel  three  years  before  appeared
to  her  as  clearly  as  in  life,  wearing  a  dressing-gown,  and  with
her  dark  hair  down  on  her  shoulders.  She  looked  fixedly  at  Mme.
de  Fonvielle,  held  out  a  hand,  saying,  "I  am  going.  Can  you
forgive  me?"  Mme.  de  Fonvielle  held  out  her  hand  but  the
vision  disappeared.  The  clock  struck  twelve.  Next  morning
while  she  was  telling  the  story  a  telegram  was  received  at  La
Haye,  "Marie  died  last  night  at  11.45"  (Flammarion,  80).

The  following  fact  is  reported  by  my  friend,  Gaston  Fournier,
who  has  several  times  shown  me  strong  mediumistic  powers.
It  is  possible  that  his  presence  conduced  to  the  result.

Dining  with  his  friends  M.  and  Mme.  B.,  Gaston  was  sur-
prised that  a  mutual  friend,  d'E.,  had  not  appeared  as  expected.
The  dinner  went  off  merrily.  Gaston  and  his  hosts  were  to  go
to  the  theatre  together ;  and  madame  went  to  her  room  to  put  on
her  hat.  She  gave  a  cry  of  fear ;  and  said  that  standing  before
the  mirror  she  had  seen  d'E.  at  the  door  reflected  in  the  glass.
He  appeared  pale  and  sad,  and  was  wearing  his  hat.  Mme.  B.,
without  turning  round,  said,  "Oh,  d'E.,  so  you  have  come  at
last;  sit  down."  As  he  did  not  reply,  she  turned  round,  and
seeing  nothing,  cried  out  in  fear.  She  insisted  on  knowing  what
had  become  of  him.  They  went  to  his  house;  he  had  not  gone
out.  No  one  answering  the  bell,  they  forced  the  door  and  found
him  dead  by  a  pistol-shot.  He  had  probably  shot  himself  about
10  a.m.  (A.S.P.,  1921,  i,  22).

M.  Louis  Noell,  a  chemist  at  Cette,  states  that  when  he  was
a  student  at  Montpellier,  on  the  night  of  November  23-24,  he
saw  about  4  a.m.,  while  half  asleep,  his  sister,  pale,  bleeding,  and
inanimate,  and  heard  her  plaintive  call,  "Louis,  my  Louis,  come
to  me  1"  He  was  oppressed  by  the  vision  and  told  his  comrades.
In  the  evening  his  elder  sister  came  in  deep  mourning,  and  told
him  that  their  sister  Helena  had  died  of  acute  diphtheria  at
Perpignan,  November  23d,  at  4  a.m.  Telegrams  had  been  sent
him  which  he  had  not  received.  (It  may  be  supposed,  though
it  is  unlikely,  that  Louis  Noell  had  an  access  of  somnambulism
during  the  night,  and  had  then  read  the  telegrams  which  the
servant  had  placed  in  a  drawer.)

My  friend,  Manuel  Tolosa  Latour,  a  very  distinguished  physi-
cian of  Madrid,  when  a  child  was  awakened  in  the  middle  of  the
night  by  his  mother  weeping  and  saying  to  him,  "Pray  for  your
grandfather,  who  is  dead."   She  had  waked  with  a  start,  having

300

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

seen  her  father  dead,  in  a  dream.  The  news  was  true ;  M.  Tolosa
Latour  states  that  event  preceded  the  dream  by  a  few  hours
(A.S.  P.,  1891,i,  35).

Mrs.  G.,  having  gone  to  bed  early  but  not  yet  asleep,  saw  by
the  light  of  a  night-lamp  the  figure  of  Major  G.  pass  across  the
end  of  the  room.  He  wore  his  usual  dress.  She  says,  "It  was
neither  a  dream  nor  delirium  nor  fevered  imagination" ;  the  time
was  a  little  before  11  p.m.  The  major  had  died  at  10.45;  Mrs.  G.
knew  him  to  be  very  ill,  but  had  no  close  acquaintance  with  him
and  was  not  thinking  of  him  (Tel.  Halluc,  140).

Lady  G.,  who  had  left  her  mother  in  good  health,  woke  in  the
middle  of  the  night  and  said  to  her  husband,  "My  mother  is  ill ;
have  the  horses  put  to  for  me  to  go  to  her."  When  nearing  her
mother's  house  she  met  her  sister's  carriage.  She  also  having
been  disquieted,  had  come.  They  arrived  in  time  for  the  last
moments  of  their  mother  who  had  been  taken  suddenly  ill
(Chevreul,  On  fie  meurt  pas,  40).  Perhaps  the  two  daughters
on  the  last  occasion  that  they  had  seen  their  mother  had  sub-
consciously observed  some  signs  of  impending  illness.

Mrs.  Gay,  at  Saint-Jean-de-Luz,  had  two  monitory  dreams,
interesting  as  showing  a  gradual  transformation  from  one  per-
sonality to  another.  The  first  dream  was  of  a  Mr.  X.,  about
eighteen  months  dead.  Little  by  little  the  lineaments  changed
to  those  of  her  father.  The  change  took  place  several  times  in
the  course  of  the  dream.  In  the  morning  a  letter  arrived  intimat-
ing the  death  of  her  father.

On  the  24th  of  March  Mrs.  Gay  saw  her  father,  then  dead,
accompanied  by  a  Mr.  L.,  whom  Mrs.  Gay  knew  very  slightly.
This  dream  made  a  profound  impression  on  her,  and  she  con-
cluded that  Mr.  L.  must  have  died.  He  had  not  died;  but  some
days  later  she  received  a  letter  from  him  telling  her  that  her
brother,  Captain  Edmund,  had  died.

On  April  5th,  when  they  were  still  without  news  of  Captain
Edmund,  and  very  anxious,  Mrs.  Gay's  little  girl,  aged  one  year
and  four  months,  said  that  she  had  seen  Uncle  Edmund  in  her
bye-bye,  with  a  red  stain  on  his  head.  Mr.  L.'s  letter  reached
her  a  few  hours  later,  telling  her  that  her  brother,  a  captain  in
the  artillery,  had  been  killed  by  a  fragment  of  shell  that  had  struck
him  on  the  head  March  23d.

Mr.  Goodall  woke  up  with  the  impression  that  he  had  said
aloud,  "I  have  lost  my  dear  little  May."   Another  voice  that  he

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  301

did  not  recognize,  said,  "No,  not  May,  but  your  youngest  boy."
A  short  time  later  this  was  confirmed  (Human  Personality,  ii,
213).

Miss  Gollin,  on  January  25,  1896,  at  12.30,  working  at  the
office  of  the  Evening  Post  (New  York)  felt  that  there  was  some
one  behind  her  chair.  She  turned  and  saw  her  fiancee  dressed
in  black.  The  vision  disappeared  after  a  short  time.  She  asked
a  companion,  "Miss  Burrows,  did  you  see  anyone  behind  my
chair  ?"  Miss  Burrows  saw  no  one.  The  young  man  died  at  that
hour.  He  had  been  ill  some  days  but  Miss  Gollin  thought  him
only  slightly  indisposed  (/.  S.  P.  R.f  May,  1908,  234).  The
testimony  of  Miss  Burrows  shows  that  the  vision  was  entirely
subjective.

Mrs.  Green,  in  England,  dreamt  that  she  saw  two  women  in
a  small  carriage,  that  the  horse  fell  into  the  water,  and  that  both
women  were  drowned.  She  did  not  recognize  either,  but  saw
the  hats  floating  on  the  water.  This  case  has  been  already
described  (p.  254).  At  the  same  hour  both  women,  one  of  whom
was  a  niece  of  Mrs.  Green's,  were  drowned  in  Australia.  The
horse  was  drowned  also.  The  bodies  were  located  by  the  hats
floating  in  the  water.  Mrs.  Green  had  never  seen  her  niece  and
therefore  could  not  recognize  her  (A.  S.  P.,  i,  49).  The  abun-
dance of  detail  makes  this  one  of  the  most  telling  monitory  dreams
on  record.

General  Fitch,  in  Burma,  on  getting  up  one  morning,  saw  a
friend  whom  he  thought  far  away  enter  his  room  in  broad  day-
light, and  then  vanish.  No  one  in  the  house  had  seen  him  enter
or  leave.  He  learned  that  his  friend  had  died  suddenly  about
the  same  time,  six  hundred  miles  away  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  i,  362).

Marian  Griffiths  left  the  family  breakfast  table  one  Sunday
morning,  went  into  the  garden,  and  without  ostensible  reason
looked  long  into  a  fountain  there.  Her  sister  came  to  look  for  her,
and  she  said,  "Something  terrible  has  happened ;  oh,  my  poor
dear  H."  Her  brother  H.  was  drowned  while  bathing  in  a  shal-
low river.  There  was  no  reason  that  Marian  should  be  anxious
about  him  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  i,  364).

Colonel  H.,  in  London,  woke  at  dawn  and  saw  in  his  room  his
brother  officer,  Major  Poole,  in  khaki  uniform  and  wearing  a
thick  black  beard,  as  Colonel  H.  had  never  seen  him.  The  appari-
tion was  so  clear  that  H.  thought  it  real ;  he  saw  all  the  details  of
the  uniform.    He  spoke  and  P.  replied,  "I  am  shot,"  raising  a

302

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

hand  to  his  breast.  "The  general  sent  me  forward."  Colonel
H.  told  the  facts  to  some  comrades,  and  the  following  morning
came  the  news  of  the  action  in  the  Transvaal  at  which  Major
Poole  had  been  killed  by  a  shot  through  the  right  lung.  The  time
coincided  with  the  vision.

Mr.  Marius  S.  Griffin,  in  Jamaica,  saw  in  a  dream  an  old  lady
for  whom  he  had  a  great  affection,  dressed  in  white.  The  dream
ended  in  a  vision  very  sharply  defined  at  the  foot  of  his  bed.  He
remarks,  however,  that  the  night  being  very  dark  he  could  not
have  seen  a  living  person  there.  He  noted  the  dream  in  his
diary,  and  learned  that  his  friend  had  died  at  the  time  he  saw
the  apparition.  She  had  said,  shortly  before  her  death,  "Tell
Marius  that  I  thought  of  him"  (Tel.  Halluc,  160).

General  H.,  in  his  tent  at  Bombay,  saw  his  sister  in  night-attire
at  two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  He  wrote  at  once  for  news  of
her,  and  learned  that  she  had  died  at  the  hour  of  the  apparition.
He  says,  "I  am  as  sure  of  the  fact  as  of  my  own  existence"
{Tel  Halluc.}  246).

Mr.  H.,  who  was  then  at  school  in  Geneva,  relates  that  one
morning  one  of  his  schoolfellows  said  aloud,  before  several  per-
sons, that  he  had  seen  the  brother  of  one  of  the  masters  (that
master  being  then  absent  from  the  school  for  a  few  days)
stretched  on  the  grass  with  a  dark  hole  in  his  forehead.  The  dream
made  a  great  impression  on  the  boys.  On  the  next  day  they  heard
that  Mr.  X.  had  been  killed  by  his  gun  going  off  as  he  was  crossing
a  ditch,  the  charge  entering  his  head.  Mr.  H.  cannot  state  identity
of  time  between  the  dream  and  the  accident.

Suzanne  H.,  an  old  servant  of  Mrs.  A.,  married  and  went  to
live  at  a  farm  a  long  way  from  the  town  where  Mrs.  A.  lived.
One  night  she  waked  up  and  said  to  her  husband,  "Listen  !  Mrs.
A.  is  calling  me."  The  husband  heard  nothing  and  Suzanne  was
reassured;  but  Mrs.  A.  had  been  taken  with  sudden  illness  and
died  at  the  hour  when  Suzanne  had  heard  her  voice  (Flammarion,
L'Inconnu,  140).

Clovis  Hugues,  a  distinguished  poet,  was  imprisoned  at  Mar-
seilles after  the  events  of  the  Commune.  His  friend,  Gaston
Cremieux,  condemned  to  death,  was  with  him,  and  said,  "When
they  shoot  me  I  will  come  and  prove  to  you  the  immortality  of  the
soul  by  manifesting  in  your  cell."  "At  dawn  of  day  on  November
30,  1871,"  says  Clovis  Hugues,  "I  was  awakened  by  sharp  little
knocks  on  my  table.  The  noise  ceased  and  I  went  to  sleep  again.

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  303

A  few  moments  later  they  began  again.  I  jumped  out  of  bed,  and
broad  awake  stood  at  the  table.  The  knocks  continued ;  this  was
repeated  once  or  twice.  At  that  moment  Cremieux  had  just  been
shot"  (L'Inconnu,  76).

M.  Martin  Halle,  of  Cette,  dreamed  that  he  saw  a  girl  fall  from
a  window.  He  told  this  "horrible  dream"  to  his  family.  In  the
morning  the  cabman  who  usually  came  to  fetch  him  failed  to  come,
and  another  came  in  his  stead,  very  late.  That  morning  at  5
a.m..  the  daughter  of  the  cabman  had  fallen  from  a  window  and
been  killed  (L'Inconnu,  460).

Mme.  Hers,  entering  her  room  at  2.30  p.m.,  saw  her  mother  on
the  bed  in  a  frilled  cap,  dead.  She  sobbed  and  nearly  fainted.
A  few  minutes  later  a  telegram  was  brought  her  from  Strasburg
telling  her  that  her  mother  was  very  ill.  She  said,  "She  is  dead,
I  have  seen  her."  The  elder  lady  had  died  at  3.30,  Strasburg
time.    She  had  a  frilled  cap  (L'Inconnu,  104).

The  celebrated  medium,  D.  D.  Home,  who  gave  the  finest  ex-
amples known  of  ectoplasmic  forms,  showed  occasional  lucidity.
He  states  that  at  the  exact  time  of  the  death  of  Allan  Kardec,  one
of  the  first  promulgators  of  the  spiritist  doctrine,  he  received  the
communication,  "I  regret  having  taught  the  spiritist  doctrine,
Allan  Kardec."  The  message  was  received  in  the  presence  of
Lord  Dunraven  (Lights  and  Shadow's  of  Spiritualism,  by  D.  D.
Home).  All  the  same,  it  would  be  interesting  to  know  the  pre-
cise conditions  under  which  this  message  was  transmitted.

M.  Octave  Houdaille  was  called  to  Mirecourt  (Vosges)  by
the  serious  illness  of  his  grandfather,  left  Paris  with  his  brother
George  at  10  p.m.,  and  went  to  sleep  in  the  train.  At  1  a.m.
he  awoke  suddenly,  hearing  a  deep  sigh.  He  got  up  and  called  his
brother,  saying,  "It  is  1  o'clock,  grandfather  must  be  dead  or
dying.  I  have  just  heard  his  last  sigh."  In  fact  the  death  took
place  at  1.30  a.m.  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  99).

Mrs.  Hosmer,  the  sculptress,  at  Rome,  waked  at  the  moment
that  the  clock  struck  three  and  saw  inside  her  bed-curtains  the
form  of  a  young  Italian  woman,  Rosa,  who  had  been  her  servant
and  whom  she  knew  to  be  slightly  ill.  It  seemed  to  her  that  Rosa
said,  "Adesso  son  felice,  son  contenta."  Next  morning  she  told
her  dream  while  at  breakfast  with  Miss  Lydia  Child,  who  did
not  believe  it.  They  sent,  however,  to  get  news  of  Rosa  and
found  that  she  had  died  at  5  a.m.  (Tel.  Halluc,  146).

Mr.  Hutchins  died  suddenly  at  Cardiff,  forty-eight  miles  from

304

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

the  house  where  his  wife  was  living.  His  son  left  in  a  carriage
to  take  her  the  sad  news.  She  met  him  at  the  door,  saying,
"Daniel,  your  father  is  dead."  "How  do  you  know  that?"  he
asked.  "He  called  me,"  she  replied,  "about  9  o'clock,  and  dis-
appeared immediately,  I  have  not  slept  since;  he  called  me  by
name,  'Mary,  Mary'"  (Tel.  Halluc,  297).

Dr.  Jean,  at  Cogolin  (Var),  was  called  to  attend  a  little  boy
aged  about  seven,  delirious  with  fever.  At  10  a.m.  the  child
woke  up,  terrified,  seeing  water  everywhere  and  crying,  "Help,"
and  saying  that  his  father  was  drowning.  In  fact  his  father,
going  to  Nice,  was  drowned  at  that  same  hour  (Enquiry  through
the  Bulletin  des  Armees).

Two  employees  at  the  same  office,  J.  and  F.,  were  close  friends.
One  day,  F.,  having  an  attack  of  indigestion,  did  not  go  to  the
office,  the  doctor  having  ordered  a  few  days'  rest.  In  the  evening
J.,  on  returning  home,  and  sitting  with  his  wife,  saw  distinctly
his  friend  F.,  dressed  as  usual  and  with  a  stick  in  his  hand,
looking  at  him  fixedly.  The  words  of  Job  came  to  his  mind,  "A
spirit  passed  before  my  face  and  the  hair  of  my  flesh  stood  up."
He  asked  his  wife  the  time.  "Twelve  minutes  to  nine,"  she  re-
plied. "Then  it  is  at  8.48  that  F.  has  died;  I  have  just  seen  him."
In  fact  F.  died  by  the  rupture  of  an  aneurism  between  8.35  and
9  p.m.  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  i,  301).  This  monition  is  one  of  the  most
remarkable  by  reason  of  the  exactness  of  the  details  and  unfore-
seeable nature  of  the  event.

Mr.  Jukes  heard  in  a  dream  one  of  his  comrades  say  to  him,
"Your  father,  Mark,  and  Harriet  have  both  gone."  He  waked
and  his  feeling  was  so  strong  that  he  wrote  down  the  words.  He
was  so  moved  that  he  did  not  go  down  to  breakfast  in  the  morn-
ing. At  that  time  his  father  was  dying  of  cholera  in  America,  and
his  sister-in-law,  Harriet,  died  two  days  later  (Tel.  Halluc. ,  126).

Mr.  Grant  woke  up  in  the  night  feeling  a  presence  in  his  room,
but  seeing  nothing.  He  had  the  conviction  that  the  father  of  his
friend  Bruce  had  died.  He  looked  at  the  time — 12.14  a.m.  In
the  morning  he  spoke  of  it  to  several  persons,  and  in  the  evening
noted  in  his  diary  that  he  had  so  spoken.  It  was  not  Mr.  Bruce's
father,  but  his  own  brother,  who  had  died  in  China  some  hours
before  (Tel.  Halluc,  93).

Mrs.  L.,  at  Farnborough,  at  3  p.m.,  saw  an  old  gentleman,
dressed  in  a  former  fashion  and  carrying  a  cane,  come  into  her
room.   In  spite  of  the  rain  his  clothes  were  not  wet.    She  recog-

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  305

nized  her  uncle  and  spoke  to  him  as  if  he  were  a  real  person ;  but
he,  without  answering,  went  out  by  the  half-open  door.  The  ser-
vants when  questioned  said  they  had  seen  no  one.  At  that  very
time  her  old  uncle,  whom  she  did  not  know  to  be  ill,  died  in
Leicestershire  {Tel.  Halluc,  93).

Captain  Lagarrue,  at  St.  Louis  (Senegal),  was  going  to  sleep
when  he  felt  a  strong  pressure  on  his  chest.  He  raised  himself  on
his  elbow,  rubbed  his  eyes,  and  saw  his  grandmother  looking  at
him  with  dim  eyes.  He  heard  her  say  in  a  weak  voice,  "I  come  to
bid  you  good-bye,  dear  boy,  you  will  see  me  no  more."  He  then
said  aloud,  "Come,  this  is  not  a  dream,"  and  got  up.  The  appara-
tion  had  lasted  some  seconds  only.  The  time  agrees  with  that  of
the  death  of  the  captain's  grandmother.  She  was  of  an  advanced
age,  but  her  health  gave  no  reason  for  disquiet  (L'Inconnu,  182).

Jules  Lermina  reports  the  following  case,  not  very  evidential,
told  him  by  a  person  whom  he  knows  well  {A.  S.  P.,  1895,  202).

"I  had  gone  to  fetch  a  dish  from  the  kitchen,  when  I  heard
the  voice  of  one  of  my  cousins  at  the  window.  I  raised  my  eyes
and  saw  him  nodding  to  me,  and  saying  'Good  morning,  Louie/
I  answered,  'Good  morning,  Wenand/  and  went  to  open  the  door
to  him.  My  father,  surprised  that  the  door  should  be  opened
when  no  one  had  rung,  came  to  see.  When  I  told  him  that  I  had
seen  Wenand,  he  said,  That  is  impossible/  and  told  me  that
Wenand  was  dead,  but  that  he,  my  father,  had  not  wished  to  tell
me  before.,,

In  despite  of  Mr.  Carrington's  authority  I  cannot  place  much
reliance  on  the  story  he  tells  of  Mrs.  H.,  who  would  seem  to  be  a
woman  of  the  working  class.  She  saw  her  son,  who  was  at  the
front,  at  her  door,  and  was  surprised  not  to  see  him  that  evening.
She  left  the  door  open  but  he  did  not  return.  The  next  day  he
again  appeared  and  was  not  seen  again  that  day.  On  the  next
day  he  came  for  the  third  time.  This  time  she  said,  "Now  do
not  leave  me,  my  son,  sit  down  and  take  tea  with  me."  Her  son
went  up  to  the  room,  his  mother  following.  He  threw  himself
on  the  bed  and  disappeared,  leaving  the  bed  covered  with  blood.
The  first  apparition  coincided  with  the  day  of  death.  This  story
is  so  highly  improbable  from  a  psychological  point  of  view  that  it
cannot  be  accepted.  At  the  very  least  some  documentary  evi-
dence of  Mrs.  H/s  state  of  mind  is  required.

In  March,  1890,  Countess  Kapnist,  on  leaving  the  theatre  with
her  sister,  and  being  about  to  enter  her  carriage,  stopped,  seeing

306

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

a  diaphanous  figure  with  indistinct  outlines.  The  vision  lasted
a  moment  only,  nevertheless  the  smallest  details  were  distinguish-
able^— a  large  nose,  hair  parted  at  the  side,  blond  beard  somewhat
scanty,  no  hat,  and  a  brown  overcoat.  The  sister  of  the  countess
saw  nothing,  though  the  latter  had  said  to  her,  "Did  you  see
nothing  in  front  of  you?"  Some  time  later  Countess  Kapnist
learned  that  a  certain  Mr.  P.,  answering  to  the  description,  had
died  after  a  long  illness,  two  days  after  the  vision.  Mr.  P.  had,
in  March,  1889,  promised  I.  K.,  Countess  Kapnist's  sister,  to
appear  before  her,  but  not  so  as  to  frighten  her  (Human  Per-
sonality, ii,  49).

Dr.  Liebeault  reports  the  case  of  Mrs.  B.,  of  New  Orleans,  who
when  magnetized  by  him  soon  gave  proofs  of  lucidity  by  automatic
writing.  One  morning  she  felt  an  impulse  to  write.  The  message
purported  to  come  from  a  certain  Marguerite,  who  announced  her
death  while  at  school  in  Coblentz.  The  death  was  verified  as
having  taken  place  the  same  day  (Phant.  of  the  Living,  i,  293).

One  of  my  colleagues,  a  distinguished  physician,  in  no  way  cred-
ulous, writes  to  me  that  one  night  he  dreamed  of  a  young  friend  of
his,  Mme.  L.,  in  tears  and  wearing  a  mourning  veil.  Next  morning
he  told  his  dream  and  expressed  his  surprise  that  the  young  lady,
who  was  usually  gay  and  light-hearted,  should  have  appeared  in
mourning.  "Towards  8  a.m.  my  sister  telephoned  to  us  that  her
sister-in-law,  Mme.  L.,  had  lost  her  husband  after  an  operation
for  peritonitis.  He  adds  that  he  had  not  seen  M.  and  Mme.  L.
for  a  fortnight,  and  that  his  sister  (their  only  relation  in  com-
mon), did  not  know  that  M.  L.  was  ill.  This  monition  is  interest-
ing as  being  symbolical.  The  image  of  the  dead  man  himself  was
not  presented;  it  was  an  information,  and  this  is  important  as
regards  theory,  for  it  seems  to  prove  that  so-called  apparitions  are
not  phantoms  of  the  dead,  but  only  monitions.

Mrs.  Frances  Lightfoot  was  awakened  by  a  loud  noise.  It
seemed  to  her  that  her  door,  which  was  locked,  was  violently
opened  and  that  someone  or  something  entered  her  room.  A
figure  appeared,  lying  over  her  bed,  and  an  imperious  voice  said,
'Trances,  I  want  you.  Come  with  me  at  once."  She  then
thought  of  Mrs.  Reed,  a  dear  friend  in  India,  and  imagined  she
must  be  dead.  She  noted  down  the  dream  in  her  diary.  Next  day
she  told  her  sister  that  Mrs.  Reed  was  dead.  The  vision  took
place  eight  to  nine  hours  after  Mrs.  Reed's  death  (Tel.  Halluc,
154).

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  307

At  Holywood,  Mrs.  Kerr  dreamed  that  one  of  her  sons,  a  loco-
motive driver,  had  fallen  from  his  engine,  had  his  head  and  leg
crushed  against  the  parapet  of  a  bridge,  and  that  the  train  had
passed  over  his  body.  The  time  was  about  10.50  p.m.  A  few  min-
utes earlier,  at  Paisley,  Edward  Kerr  had  fallen  from  his  tender
at  a  bridge,  his  head  and  leg  were  crushed,  and  he  died  the  fol-
lowing day.

This  case  was  gone  into  by  Sir  James  Crichton  Browne  and
Dr.  Clarke,  in  the  Am.  S.  P.  R.  (November,  1905,  145);  and
though  the  incident  dates  back  ten  years,  the  details  are  so  pre-
cise, and  Mrs.  Kerr's  good  faith  so  evident,  that  it  is  difficult
to  dispute  its  authenticity.

Mme.  de  Langenest  one  morning  at  eight  o'clock  saw  her
uncle,  M.  Bonnamy,  whom  she  thought  to  be  in  good  health,
standing  before  her  in  her  room.  She  went  to  the  other  side  of
her  bed  and  the  phantom  moved  to  the  place  where  she  had  been
standing.  She  went  to  find  her  husband  on  the  ground  floor,  and
again  the  phantom  moved  in  front  of  her.  She  said,  "Uncle,
why  have  you  come?  Have  you  died?"  The  apparition  vanished.
Soon  after  there  was  a  ring  at  the  door,  and  Mrs.  L.  said  to  the
servant,  "Go  and  get  the  telegram,  my  uncle  is  dead."  He  had
died  at  1.15  that  night  (A.  S.  P.,  1900,  x,  65).

Mrs.  Macklin  saw  on  March  27-28,  1918,  in  a  very  vivid
dream,  her  son  David,  a  lieutenant  of  infantry,  in  the  uniform
of  a  private,  which  much  surprised  her.  He  was  wearing  a  hel-
met, and  she  said,  "Oh,  David,  why  are  you  no  longer  an  officer,
why  this  Tommy's  uniform?"  She  told  her  dream  to  two  per-
sons who  witness  to  it.  On  April  3d  she  received  the  news  of  her
son's  death  on  the  night  of  March  27-28.  His  body  was  not
found:  in  night-attacks  the  officers  often  wore  the  uniform  of
private  soldiers  (/.      P.  R.,  January,  1919,  3-7).

Mr.  Marchant,  of  Redhill,  saw  someone  come  into  his  room  at
2  a.m.  The  name  of  Robinson  Kesley  came  to  his  mind,  though
he  had  seen  him  but  once  in  twenty  years,  and  never  thought  of
him.  He  knew  him  by  his  long,  tangled  hair.  The  apparition
looked  at  himself  in  the  mirror;  and  as  soon  as  Mr.  Marchant
spoke  he  slowly  sank  into  the  floor.  Mr.  Marchant  told  his
dream  to  several  persons,  before  he  learned  that  Kesley  had  died
at  2  a.m.  the  same  night  {Tel.  Hallac,  12).

Moritz  quotes  the  story  of  a  woman  who  had  received  a  letter
from  her  husband  telling  her  that  all  was  well;  nevertheless  she

308

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

dreamed  that  night  that  she  saw  him  dying  with  a  large  wound
in  his  side,  with  an  officer  beside  him.  This  was  true.  Four
months  later  she  saw  an  officer  at  church  and  recognized  him  as
the  one  who  had  been  with  her  husband  in  his  last  moments
(quoted  by  J.  C.  Passavant  from  Unters,  iiber  den  Lebensmag-
netismusj  2d  edit.,  Frankfurt,  1837,  132).

These  old  stories  are  probably  true  in  the  main,  for  they  agree
well  with  more  recent  ones ;  but  taken  by  themselves,  they  do  not
carry  conviction,  for  in  those  days  the  same  care  was  not  taken
as  now  in  attestation  and  scrutiny.

Dr.  Weir  Mitchell  states  a  case  that  he  had  from  his  father,  the
doctor  of  a  lunatic  asylum.  The  wife  of  one  of  the  patients  had
died,  and  the  doctor  went  to  tell  the  husband,  who  said,  "You
need  not  tell  me ;  my  wife  has  died.  I  know  it ;  she  came  to  me
last  night  and  spoke  to  me."  On  enquiry  Dr.  Mitchell  found
that  the  patient  had  been  speaking  aloud  during  the  night.  The
warder  came  to  silence  him,  and  was  rebuked  by  the  patient  for
driving  away  the  wife  who  had  come  to  see  him  and  tell  him  of
her  death  (Hyslop,  Science  and  a  Future  Life,  51).

In  James  Hyslop's  book  many  interesting  examples  will  be
found ;  these  are  worthy  of  mention,  both  because  he  has  chosen
cases  in  which  the  intelligence  and  good  faith  of  the  percipients
are  above  reproach,  and  because  his  acute  and  clear-sighted
criticism  deserves  to  be  taken  as  conclusive.

Mr.  Andrew  Lang  states  in  his  article  on  Apparitions  in  the
Encyclopaedia  Britannica  (10th  Ed.)  that  he  saw  an  eminent
member  of  an  English  university  at  the  moment  that  this  person
was  dying  one  hundred  miles  away(?)  (N.  B.  This  does  not
appear  in  the  article  as  given  in  the  eleventh  edition. — Transl.).

M.  Keulemans,  the  artist,  heard  when  half  awake  in  Paris  one
morning  the  voice  of  his  son  Isidore,  and  saw  him  smile,  both
seeming  more  real  than  in  an  ordinary  dream.  During  the  day
he  again  heard  the  voice,  and  told  his  wife  that  the  child  must
have  died.  The  child  had  really  died  in  London  at  the  hour
of  the  apparition.

James  Cotter  Morrison  and  Professor  Estlin  Carpenter  give
parallel  experiences  of  their  own.

Mr.  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  brother-in-law  to  Mr.  Darwin,  re-
ports a  veridical  vision  with  very  precise  details  that  occurred  to
his  sister-in-law.

The  Marquis  of  Bute  and  Dr.  Ferrier  have  described  the

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  309

phantom  of  a  dead  person  whom  they  did  not  know.  Their  de-
scription is  quite  sufficient  to  warrant  the  assertion  that  the  hallu-
cination was  veridical.

The  Rev.  Mark  Hill,  one  evening  when  sitting  down  to  supper
saw  a  tall  man  about  to  attack  him.  He  jumped  up,  went  to  the
other  side  of  the  table,  and  threw  a  glass  at  the  figure,  which  van-
ished. He  then  thought  of  one  of  his  uncles,  who  had,  in  fact,
died  that  day,  April  5,  1864  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  ii,  1886).

Dr.  F.  de  M.,  a  student  of  medicine  at  Paris,  dreamed  that  his
uncle  in  Havana,  who  stood  to  him  in  the  place  of  a  father,  was
about  to  die.  When  the  servant  entered  his  room  in  the  morning,
he  found  Mr.  F.  in  deep  distress,  and  was  told  of  the  dream.
The  coincidence  of  the  day  is  exact,  if  not  the  hour  (Flam-
marion,  413).

Sergeant  Negre  heard  his  wife  sobbing  in  her  sleep  by  his  side
on  the  night  of  November  8,  1912.  He  waked  her,  and  she  said,
"My  brother  Alexis  is  dead."  This  was  true.  A  month  later,  at
11  p.mv  she  was  again  weeping  and  when  her  husband  asked
what  was  the  matter,  she  said,  "Mother  is  dead,  I  am  sure  of  it."
This  also  was  the  fact.  The  brother  died  on  November  8th  and
the  mother  on  December  8,  1912.

Mme.  A.  Eugenie,  of  Lavadina  (Italy)  on  June  8,  1916,
thought  in  her  sleep  that  she  heard  the  step  of  her  son  Alphonse,
a  soldier  in  the  Fifty-fifth  Regiment.  She  got  up,  saying,  "At
last,  dear  son,  I  can  kiss  you."  She  seemed  to  feel  her  son  sigh-
ing in  her  arms,  but  it  was  only  a  shade.  Convinced  that  he  was
dead,  she  had  the  prayers  for  the  dead  offered.  Alphonse,  un-
known to  his  mother,  had  embarked  on  the  Principe  Umberto,
which  was  sunk  June  8th  between  8  and  10  p.m.  (Enquiry
through  the  Bulletin  des  Armees).

Mrs.  Palliser,  a  widow,  saw  in  a  dream  her  only  son,
Matthew,  dead  by  drowning.  Much  distressed,  she  sought  out
Mr.  Clarke,  a  merchant  of  Hull,  among  other  persons.  He  tried
to  calm  her  and  promised  to  write  to  New  York  to  get  news;
and  for  a  month  Mrs.  Palliser  came  to  see  him  daily.  At  last
news  came  that  her  son  had  been  drowned  on  the  day  of  the
dream  (Tel.  Halluc.,  150).

At  Chicago,  Mrs.  Paquet,  about  to  pour  out  tea,  saw  her
brother,  a  stoker  on  a  small  steamboat,  caught  in  the  bight  of  a
rope,  thrown  overboard,  and  drowned.  His  trousers  were  turned
up  so  that  the  white  lining  could  be  seen.    He  was  wearing  no

310

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

coat,  only  a  sailors  jumper.  All  these  details  were  exact.  When
Mr.  Paquet  heard  the  news  he  broke  it  to  his  wife  by  saying,
"Edmund  is  ill  in  hospital."  She  replied,  "No,  he  is  drowned,
I  saw  him  fall  into  the  water"  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  i,  208).

M.  George  Parent,  mayor  of  Wiege  (Aisne)  travelling  in  a
carriage  by  night,  heard  his  name  pronounced  in  a  stifled  voice.
He  stopped  the  carriage  and  got  out  but  could  see  nothing.
When  about  to  get  in  again  he  heard  his  name  as  if  spoken  by
some  one  in  the  carriage,  and  recognized  the  voice  of  an  old
nurse  who  was  very  fond  of  him.  As  soon  as  he  got  in  he  again
heard  the  voice  speaking  low.  About  a  hundred  yards  further
on  he  went  into  an  inn  to  write  this  down  in  his  pocket-book.  On
returning  home  he  found  that  old  Sophia  had  died  ( Flammarion,
100).

An  eminent  psychologist,  M.  Pieron,  relates  a  remarkable  moni-
tion, with  full  details  {A.  S.  P.,  xii,  303-309).  On  June  25,  1902,
a  young  woman,  X.,  was  working  in  his  psychological  laboratory
at  the  asylum  of  Ville-juif.  She  seemed  very  depressed,  and
could  not  be  consoled,  having  heard,  at  seven  minutes  past  three,
the  voice  of  Jeanne,  one  of  her  friends,  whom  she  knew  to  be
very  ill.  On  that  day  at  three  o'clock,  Jeanne  had  cried  out  for
her  friend,  X.,  and  in  dying  she  had  asked  for  silence  that  she
might  hear  her  friend  come  to  her.    At  4.06  she  felt  herself

flying,  and  said,  "If  it  were  to  go  and  see  " ;  she  could  not

finish,  but  gasped  and  died.  X.  knew  that  death  was  near,  but
thought  Jeanne  might  yet  live  for  some  time.  M.  Pieron's  very
circumstantial  account  mentions  other  facts  that  might  be  ex-
plained by  Jeanne's  cryptesthesia ;  but  they  may  be  coincidences.
Still,  the  fact  remains  that  X.  showed  decided  cryptesthesia,  along
with  a  very  clear  auditory  monition.

Mr.  Rawlinson  (Cheltenham),  in  his  dressing-room  one  morn-
ing, saw  distinctly  his  friend  X.  to  whom  he  had  not  written  for
a  long  time.  At  that  same  moment  X.  was  dying  ( Tel.  Halluc,
231).

At  the  beginning  of  August,  1878,  my  grandfather,  M.  Charles
Renouard,  aged  eighty-four,  was  slightly  ill,  but  the  indisposition
did  not  prevent  his  remaining  up  and  going  about  as  usual.  He
was  then  living  at  a  country  house  at  Stors  (Seine-et-Oise)
with  Mme.  Cheuvreaux,  his  sister-in-law.  On  Sunday,  August
11th,  I  went  to  Stors  and  found  him  well.  It  was  settled  that
we  were  to  go  from  Meudon  near  Paris  where  we  were  living

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  311

to  visit  him  for  a  few  days  the  following  week.  On  the  morning
of  Saturday,  August  17th,  at  7  a.m.,  as  I  was  dressing,  my  wife
woke  up  weeping  and  said,  "It  is  terrible,  I  have  just  seen  your
grandfather  very  ill  in  bed  and  your  mother  standing  by  him"
(Proc.  S.  P.  R.,  1888,  162).  I  took  no  heed  of  the  dream ;  at  that
time  I  did  not  believe  at  all  in  veridical  dreams.  I  easily  reassured
my  wife  and  we  left  in  a  carriage  for  Paris.  I  remember  we  were
quite  in  good  spirits.  On  reaching  Paris  we  found  a  telegram
telling  us  that  on  the  previous  night  my  grandfather  had  died
suddenly  of  heart  disease  about  3  a.m.  We  did  not  know  that  my
mother  was  at  Stors ;  it  was  a  chance  visit.  The  dream  was  about
four  hours  after  the  death.

M.  R.,  a  clerk  in  the  postal  administration,  when  about  to  enter
an  omnibus  to  return  home  on  March  16th,  suddenly  saw  his
mother  lying  back  in  her  bed,  very  ill.  He  seemed  to  himself  to
say,  "Wait,  mother,  I  am  coming."  It  was  about  five  minutes  past
six.  On  reaching  home  he  found  a  telegram  announcing  his
mother's  sudden  and  serious  illness.  He  then  told  L.,  who  was
with  him,  of  the  vision,  and  L.  said  that  M.  R.  looked  very  strange.
Mme.  R.  was  taken  ill  on  the  morning  of  March  16th  and  died
at  10  p.m.  {A.  S.  P.,  1899,  ix,  77).

M.  Riondel,  barrister  at  Montelimar,  on  the  night  of  April  1-2,
1894,  heard  a  loud  and  unusual  noise  that  woke  him  and  his
mother  also  at  1.45  a.m.,  with  a  feeling  of  fear.  At  the  same
hour  his  brother,  who  had  just  written  that  he  was  in  good  health,
had  died  suddenly  at  Marseilles  (A.  S.  P.,  1895,  v,  200-202).

Mr.  Runciman  gives  precise  details  of  a  monition  (Phantasms
of  the  Living,  i,  433).  It  began  by  a  dream  in  which  he  saw  Mr.
J.  H.  Haggit  lying  in  bed.  He  awoke,  asking  himself,  "Am  I
awake  or  dreaming?"  There  was  a  little  light  in  the  room  from
the  gas-jet.  He  writes,  "I  was  as  much  awake  as  I  am  now
while  writing,  when  the  apparition  vanished.  I  was  about  to
speak  to  him  when  all  disappeared.  I  spoke  of  it  to  several  per-
sons." Mr.  Haggit,  whom  he  thought  he  saw,  had  died  the  same
day  at  the  same  hour;  he  had  been  ill,  but  not  seriously.

In  November,  1904,  there  were  riots  at  Rio  de  Janeiro  with
much  bloodshed.  Among  the  students  at  the  military  college
was  young  Sylvestre  Cavalcante  who  was  killed  by  a  bullet  in
the  head  on  the  night  of  November  14-15  at  11  p.m.  exactly.  On
that  night,  about  2  a.m.,  Mme.  Rieken,  whose  daughter  Maria
Luiza  was  betrothed  to  Cavalcante,  saw  him  enter  her  room  at

312

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Copacabana  (Brazil)  wearing  a  khaki  uniform,  different  from
his  usual  uniform,  with  a  red  handkerchief  round  his  neck.  He
said,  "Guarda  Mimi"  (take  care  of  Mimi),  that  being  the  name
by  which  he  called  his  betrothed.  He  then  vanished.  Next  morn-
ing Mme.  Rieken  told  the  vision  to  her  husband  and  her  son.  At
that  time  no  one  at  Copacabana  knew  of  the  rising  at  Rio,  nor,
a  fortiori,  of  the  death  of  Cavalcante  (/.  S.  P.  R.,  April,
1905,  59).

M.  Anatole  France  tells  in  his  vivid  style  a  monition  related  to
him  by  his  grandmother  (Le  Livre  de  mon  ami,  98).

"On  the  night  of  the  9th  to  the  10th  Thermidor  of  the  year
III  (July  27,  1794)  we  had  heard  of  stirring  events — the  arrest
of  Robespierre  and  the  tumults  in  the  Convention  and  in  the
city,  but  nothing  more.  My  grandmother,"  says  Anatole  France,
"kept  her  room  with  my  father,  Mme.  de  Laville  and  young
Amelie,  her  sister.  At  half-past  one  in  the  morning,  Amelie,
leaning  over  a  mirror,  seemed  to  be  looking  on  a  tragic  scene  and
cried  out,  'I  see  him !  I  see  him  !  How  pale  he  is !  The  blood  is
flowing  from  his  mouth !  His  teeth  and  jaws  are  shattered!  God
be  praised !  The  bloodthirsty  wretch  will  drink  no  more  blood  but
his  own';  then  she  cried  out  with  horror  and  fainted.  At  the
same  hour  Robespierre's  jaw  was  shattered  by  a  pistol-shot  at
the  Hotel-de-Ville."

Of  course  this  story,  narrated  a  century  after  the  events,  must
be  accepted  with  all  reserve.

Mme.  S.,  of  Luxeuil,  when  half  asleep,  saw  her  brother  in  a
stone  sarcophagus  like  those  in  the  museum  of  Roman  remains.
It  seemed  to  be  closing  in  upon  him,  while  he  looked  at  her  at
first  imploringly  and  then  resignedly.  Mme.  S.  then  woke  up,  at
3.30  a.m.  At  that  hour  her  brother  died.  He  had  been  ill  for
some  time  (Flammarion,  408).

Miss  Sanders  when  awake  one  morning  heard  herself  re-
peatedly called  by  her  Christian  name.  She  recognized  the  voice
of  a  friend  of  whom  she  had  not  thought  for  a  long  while.  She
noted  the  date  (October  27,  1879)  in  her  diary.  He  had  died  of
cholera  in  India  on  that  day  {Tel.  Halluc,  296).

M.  Marcel  Serizolles,  a  magistrate  and  man  of  letters,  cites
some  cases  of  monitions.  During  an  excursion  in  the  mountains
he  felt  a  blow  on  his  neck.  He  stopped  and  said  aloud,  "There
is  a  message  for  me  in  the  town ;  some  misfortune  has  befallen

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  313

me."  His  father,  seemingly  in  good  health,  had  died  suddenly,
about  three  hundred  and  sixty  miles  away.  The  telegram  had
reached  the  town  of  L.,  where  M.  Serizolles  was  staying,  at  the
time  of  the  monition  (A.  S.  P.,  1895,  v,  277).

The  wife  of  M.  Serizolles  also  had  a  monition.  Travelling  to
Granada,  she  dreamt,  and  told  her  husband,  that  she  had  seen
Mme.  de  B.  ill  and  dying.  Mme.  de  B.,  though  near  her  confine-
ment, was  otherwise  in  good  health,  but  had  died  at  that  time
(exact  dates  are  wanting).

M.  Serizolles  relates  another  interesting  monitory  dream.  His
father  was  a  magistrate  at  Montauban,  and  among  his  relations
was  a  young  barrister  named  L.  In  1883,  after  the  death  of  M.
Serizolles  senior,  M.  L.  was  appointed  judge  at  N.  (Dordogne).
Two  or  three  years  later  M.  Serizolles  dreamt  that  he  saw  his
father  as  if  floating  in  a  cloud,  from  which  a  form  resembling
M.  L.  emerged,  and  the  sleeper  clearly  heard  his  father  say,  "So
it  is  your  turn,  L.,"  who  answered,  "Yes,  it  is  I";  and  they
shook  hands.  Some  days  after,  M.  Serizolles  learned  that  M.  L.,
though  still  young,  had  died  that  day.

The  wife  of  Marshal  Serrano,  Duke  of  La  Torre,  relates  that
her  husband,  being  very  ill,  and  awaking  from  sleep  induced  by
morphia,  rose  up,  calling  out  loudly  in  the  silence  of  the  night,
"Quick,  let  some  one  take  my  horse,  and  hurry  to  the  Prado,  the
King  is  dead."  He  fell  back,  but  repeated  in  a  weaker  voice,
"My  uniform,  my  sword!  the  King  is  dead."  At  that  time  Al-
phonso  XII  was  dying  on  the  Prado,  at  some  distance  from  the
part  of  Madrid  where  Serrano  was.  This  fact  is  cited  with  all
necessary  reservations  (Flammarion,  439).

Kate  Sherman  felt  a  hand  on  her  shoulder  as  she  lay  in  bed;
she  looked  up  and  saw  her  brother  Stewart.  She  woke  her
sister,  who  saw  nothing  and  laughed  at  her  fears.  She  went  to
sleep  again  with  her  head  under  the  coverlet,  and  again  saw  her
brother,  whose  image  persisted  for  a  time  and  gradually  disap-
peared. She  awoke  her  sister  again.  Stewart  died  the  same
night,  July  4-5,  at  1  a.m.

The  following  is  from  Victor  Hugo's  Chose s  Vnes.  It  is  repro-
duced textually.  The  case  is  doubly  interesting,  for  besides  the
fact  of  the  monition  it  was  addressed  to  a  person  who  (though
only  slightly  ill)  was  about  to  die,  and  was  asked,  "Are  you
coming?"

314

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

"On  the  27th  of  November  last,  an  old  woman  named  Mme.
Guerin,  sixty-six  years  of  age,  living  at  No.  34  (fourth  storey)  in
the  street  Fosses-du-Temple,  was  slightly  ill  with  an  attack  which
her  doctor  thought  to  be  indigestion.  It  was  five  o'clock  in  the
morning;  her  daughter,  a  widow  named  Mme.  Guerard,  had
risen  early,  lit  her  lamp,  and  was  working  by  the  fire  at  her
mother's  bedside.  While  working,  the  daughter  said  to  her
mother,  'Why,  Mme.  Lanne  must  have  come  back  from  the
country.'  (This  Mme.  Lanne,  a  good-natured  stout  woman  of
sixty,  had  retired  from  a  grocery  business  at  the  corner  of  the
streets  St.  Louis  and  St.  Claude,  with  an  income  of  40,000  francs
and  lived  on  the  first  floor  in  the  Boulevard  Beaumarchais,  in
a  new  house.)  Mme.  Guerard  added,  T  must  go  and  see  her
today.'  'No  use  to  do  that,'  said  her  mother.  'Why,  mother?'
'She  died  an  hour  ago.'  'Why,  mother,  what  do  you  mean?  Are
you  dreaming?'  'No,  I  am  quite  awake,  I  have  not  slept,  but  as
four  o'clock  struck  I  saw  Mme.  Lanne  pass,  and  she  said  to  me,
"  'I  am  going,  are  you  coming?"  '  The  daughter  thought  that  her
mother  had  dreamed  it;  and  later  in  the  day  went  to  see  Mme.
Lanne,  only  to  find  that  she  had  died  at  4  a.m.  The  same  evening
Mme.  Guerin  vomited  blood,  and  the  doctor  said,  'She  will  not
last  twenty-four  hours.'  The  next  day  at  noon  she  had  a  second
attack  and  died.

"I  knew  Mme.  Guerin,  and  the  story  was  told  me  by  Mme.
Guerard,  a  pious,  good  woman  who  never  told  a  lie  in  her  life"
(Victor  Hugo).

Mr.  J.  Addington  Symonds,  while  still  at  Harrow  School,  woke
in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  felt  he  must  look  round.  He  then
saw  between  him  and  the  door  Dr.  Macleane,  dressed  as  a  clergy-
man, who  said  to  him,  "I  am  going  on  a  long  journey;  look  after
my  son."  Then  he  vanished.  Dr.  Macleane  died  the  same  night
at  Clifton.  Young  Symonds  knew  of  his  chronic  illness,  but  did
not  think  him  more  ill  than  usual  (Hyslop,  Science  and  a  Future
Life,  50).

Mr.  Sings,  a  sailor  of  little  education,  left  his  father,  also  a
sailor,  one  Good  Friday,  to  embark  on  a  large  sailing-ship.  After
some  very  stormy  days,  in  heavy  weather,  he  saw  his  father  on
the  bridge  near  him,  saying,  as  usual  with  him,  "Look  to  your
helm,  Joe."  He  continued  to  see  his  father  walking  to  and  fro
on  the  bridge  for  three  hours.  His  father  several  times  clapped

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  315

him  on  the  shoulder,  and  told  him  to  be  careful  at  the  wheel.  Joe
felt  that  his  father  must  have  been  drowned  to  appear  thus  to  him,
and  would  no  longer  remain  at  the  helm.  The  date  and  hour
agree  with  the  time  of  the  father's  death  (Tel.  Halluc,  318).

Mr.  Shirving,  master  mason  at  Winchester  Cathedral,  felt  him-
self irresistibly  impelled  to  leave  his  work,  which  was  pressing;
went  home  at  10  a.m.  and  found  that  his  wife  had  been  run  over
by  a  carriage  and  was  calling  him  (Chevreul,  On  ne  meurt  pas,
31).

Mme.  de  Thiriat,  the  aunt  of  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville,  who
tells  the  story,  was  dying  and  seemed,  four  or  five  hours  before  her
death,  to  become  composed.  She  said,  "I  am  calling  Midon  to  my
funeral."  Two  hours  later,  Midon,  an  old  servant  who  lived  some
six  miles  away,  arrived  dressed  in  black,  saying  that  she  had
heard  Mme.  de  T.  calling  her  to  her  death-bed  (Flammarion,
L'Inconnu).

Mme.  Storia  gives  a  very  circumstantial  dream  (too  long  to  be
detailed  here),  in  which  she  saw  her  brother,  William,  lying  on
the  ground  with  the  smokestack  of  a  locomotive  near  his  head.
Her  brother's  death  in  a  railway  accident  took  place  the  same  day
at  9.55  on  July  18,  1874  {Tel.  Halluc,  112).

Colonel  Swiney,  at  Shorncliffe  Camp,  saw  in  the  daytime  his
brother  (who  was  in  India),  approach  him,  and  then  vanish.  He
told  his  comrades.  Taking  account  of  the  longitude,  the  hour  of
the  death  and  of  the  apparition  coincide  {Tel  Halluc,  253).

M.  Tamburini,  professor  at  the  University  of  Rome,  reports
several  cases  {A.  S.  P.,  1893,  iii,  292)  :  Mme.  V.  Guicciardi,  the
wife  of  the  principal  doctor  of  the  asylum  at  Rome,  while  sleeping
at  home,  heard  herself  called  loudly  by  name.  She  went  into  the
adjoining  room  to  find  her  husband,  and  returned  to  sleep.  She
then  dreamt  that  her  friend  G.,  who  was  ill,  but  had  written  two
days  before  that  she  was  slightly  better,  had  died.  It  was  6
a.m.  At  eight  o'clock  a  telegram  arrived  announcing  the  death.

The  next  case  is  probably  not  a  coincidence,  though  coincidence
is  quite  possible.  A  female  patient  in  the  lunatic  asylum  at
Reggio  died  on  May  21,  1892,  at  11  a.m.  Her  husband  had  not
asked  for  news  of  her  since  December  20,  1890;  but  on  the  23d  of
May  a  letter  arrived  from  Mantua  from  the  husband  saying  that
on  the  21st  he  had  felt  a  disturbance  presaging  some  misfortune.

Dr.  Giacchi,  when  a  student,  aged  eighteen,  at  Pisa,  saw  his

316  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

father,  pale  and  dying,  who  said  to  him,  "Kiss  me  for  the  last
time,  I  am  about  to  leave  you  forever."  He  felt  cold  lips  on  his
mouth.  With  no  other  reason  for  apprehension,  he  left  for
Florence  next  morning,  and  found  that  his  father  had  died  at  the
time  of  the  vision.  This  took  place  in  1853  when  telegraphic
communication  was  imperfect.  However,  Dr.  Giacchi's  story
refers  to  an  event  so  long  past  that  it  must  be  taken  with  some
caution.

Dr.  G.  Orsi  saw  in  a  dream  (July  2,  1858)  the  Adria  Doria,  on
which  his  brother  had  embarked,  caught  in  a  storm.  The  dream
was  repeated  on  the  two  following  nights.  He  saw  the  wreck,
but  felt  that  his  brother  was  among  the  saved.  On  July  8th  he
received  a  telegram  from  Gibraltar  announcing  the  loss  of  the
ship  in  the  storm  of  the  2d  and  3d  of  July,  but  that  his  brother
Alexander  was  safe.

Dr.  Cornis,  of  Parma,  relates  that  his  sister,  being  then  very
ill,  was  visited  by  her  brother  Henry,  a  lieutenant  in  the  Ber-
saglieri,  who  was  leaving  for  the  war,  but  of  this  she  was  not
told.  Some  time  later,  before  her  death,  she  awoke  from  a  half-
sleep  saying,  "Henry  is  killed."  He  had  fallen  at  Custozza,
June  24,  1866.

Mrs.  Teale,  whose  son  Walter  was  returning  from  the  Soudan
on  sick  leave  to  England,  saw  him  bend  over  to  embrace  her
and  disappear.  Walter  had  died  on  that  day  some  five  or  six
hours  before  {Tel  Halluc,  280).

A  medical  lady,  Marie  de  Thilo,  at  Lausanne,  heard  knocks  at
her  door  at  6  a.m.  The  door  opened  of  itself  and  a  form  ap-
peared covered  with  vaporous  white  stuff,  like  a  veil  over  a  black
ground.  "The  cat  in  my  room  growled  and  hissed  with  all  its
hair  on  end/'  Some  time  after  Mme.  de  Thilo  learned  that  one  of
her  best  friends,  of  whom  she  had  not  thought  at  the  time  of  the
apparition,  had  died  of  acute  peritonitis  in  India  on  the  night
following  the  dream  (Flammarion,  156).  As  there  was  no
recognition  no  great  importance  can  be  attached  to  the  dream  as
a  monition;  but  the  episode  of  the  cat  seems  to  show  that  the
apparition  was  not  perhaps  entirely  subjective;  this  episode  was
perhaps  misinterpreted  or  exaggerated,  and  is  insufficient  to
establish  objectivity.

The  soldier  S.  went  to  see  one  of  his  comrades  in  the  am-
bulance, who,  as  S.  was  leaving,  said  to  him,  "Good-bye,  and

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA

317

think  of  me."  In  the  night  of  March  27th  S.  had  a  dream  which
he  noted  in  his  route-book:  "March  28th,  I  saw  G.  dying,  a
bright  light  shone  round  him  ...  his  face  was  terribly
thin  and  disfigured  ...  I  shall  see  him  no  more  ...  I
am  afraid."  On  April  18th,  "It  is  true  then,  he  died  thirteen  days
ago  ...  no  one  near  him  to  console  his  last  moments,  I
saw  him  in  his  coffin,  and  choirboys  in  red  tickling  each  other's
necks  and  laughing."  It  would  appear  from  S.'s  letter  that  his
friend  died  on  March  28th  (Enquiry  through  the  Bulletin  des
Armies).

The  soldier  D.,  schoolmaster  of  Lieuron  (Ille-et-Vilaine),
wrote  from  the  front  to  his  wife,  "Perhaps  you  will  say  I  am
mad,  but  I  think  my  mother  has  died  .  .  .  Tell  me  the
truth."  With  the  letter  Mrs.  D.  received  a  telegram  announcing
the  mother's  death,  though  she  had  not  been  ill,  but  had  resumed
her  work  after  a  short  indisposition  (Enquiry  through  the  Bulle-
tin des  Armees).

The  son  of  M.  Viaud,  professor  in  a  school  at  Bordeaux,  had
left  with  his  regiment  August  6,  1914,  and  news  of  him  had  come
regularly.  "On  the  22d  of  August  at  9.15  p.m.,  having  been  im-
pelled (by  an  external  influence)  to  go  to  my  bedroom,  I  had
hardly  laid  my  head  on  the  pillow  and  switched  off  the  light,  when
I  saw  clearly  at  the  foot  of  the  bed  the  image  of  my  son  with  a
large  black  patch  covering  his  left  eye  ...  I  was  convinced
that  he  had  been  mortally  wounded  during  the  day.  The  vision
still  persisting  I  mentally  exclaimed  'Enough/  and  the  luminous
appearance  vanished.  It  was  not  a  dream"  (A.  S.  P.,  March,
1916,  60).

On  August  24th  there  arrived  a  letter  written  on  the  20th.
Young  Viaud  was  missing  after  the  battle  of  August  22d  in
Belgium.  No  news  has  been  since  received,  and  the  manner  of
his  death  is  not  known.

Corporal  Lebrun  had  a  dream  or  nightmare  which  moved  him
most  profoundly.  He  noted  the  fact  in  his  pocket-book,  which
has  been  lost.  He  dreamt  that  he  was  at  a  funeral,  many  persons
in  mourning,  weeping,  and  he  thought  of  a  cousin  to  whom  he
was  greatly  attached.  She  had  just  died  suddenly  (Enquiry
through  the  Bulletin  des  Armees).

M.  Uranenko  was  asleep,  and  was  waked  by  someone  touching
his  back.    He  opened  his  eyes  and  saw  his  sister,  aged  fifteen,

318

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

sitting  on  his  bed;  she  said,  "Good-bye,  Nadia,"  and  vanished.
She  had  died  at  that  hour,  5  a.m.  (Flammarion,  436).

Mme.  d'Ulric  (the  pseudonym  of  a  distinguished  writer),  heard
repeated  knocks  on  her  table  during  the  night  of  July  1,  1919,
about  11.30.  She  sat  up  to  hear  better.  The  rhythm  was  that
with  which  her  son  when  a  tiny  boy  was  used  to  say,  "Maman,
Maman,"  then  the  knocking,  becoming  stronger,  displaced  two
small  glass  vases.  She  tried  to  persuade  herself  that  it  meant  no
bad  news,  but  that  night,  her  son,  then  a  sergeant  of  infantry,
had  been  killed  (A.  S.  P.,  xxix,  24-29).

On  November  8,  1864,  in  the  morning,  Sarah  Wight  heard
herself  called  by  name  from  outside.  Mr.  Hazhatt,  who  was  with
her,  also  heard  it  distinctly,  but  no  one  was  there.  The  date  of
her  mother's  death  agreed  with  the  time  (Chevreul,  49).

L.  V.,  at  Bordeaux,  working  at  his  table,  had  the  feeling  that
the  door  had  opened.  He  turned,  and  saw  for  a  moment  the  form
of  his  uncle,  G.  A  quarter  of  an  hour  later  he  had  a  telegram
telling  him  that  his  uncle  had  committed  suicide.  The  monition
was  at  9.30,  the  suicide  at  5  a.m.  The  telegram  reached  Bordeaux
at  eight  o'clock  (A.  S.  P.,  1897,  vii,  114).

Valentine  C.  had  in  her  room  a  photograph  of  her  friend
Helena.  One  day  having  retired  to  her  room  after  dinner,  she
was  studying  a  problem  of  geometry,  but  felt  constrained  to  look
at  the  photograph.  The  eyelids  seemed  to  move  and  the  mouth
to  open  as  if  about  to  speak.  The  clock  struck  eight.  Thinking
she  must  be  dreaming,  she  rubbed  her  eyes  and  looked  again.
She  distinctly  saw  the  lips  move,  the  eyes  open  widely,  and  then
slowly  close  with  a  sigh.  Much  frightened,  she  dared  look  no
more,  went  to  bed,  but  could  not  sleep.  A  telegram  telling  her  of
Helena's  death  soon  reached  her.  Helena,  the  day  before  her
death,  had  repeatedly  said,  "Perhaps  Valentine  is  looking  at  my
photograph"  (Flammarion,  165).

The  next  instance  deserves  note,  though  it  is  not  told  by  the
percipient,  Dr.  Vogler,  but  by  a  friend  who  had  it  from  him.
M.  Yogler,  travelling  in  Germany,  heard  the  door  at  the  foot  of
the  stairs  open  and  shut.  Then  dragging  footsteps  came  along
to  the  door  of  his  room  which  opened,  though  there  was  no  one
to  be  seen,  but  the  steps  were  still  heard  and  seemed  to  approach
the  bed.  At  the  same  time  he  heard  a  deep  sigh  and  recognized
the  voice  of  his  grandmother,  whom  he  had  left  quite  well  in

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  319

Denmark.  He  still  saw  nothing,  but  noted  the  time.  It  was
proved  that  his  grandmother  had  died  at  the  same  hour.  The  case
is  interesting,  not  only  because  of  the  recognition,  but  by  the
percipient's  clear  dissociation  of  the  sensorial  phenomena  (Flam-
marion,  72).

Mr.  W.  dreamt,  early  in  the  night,  that  he  saw  an  old  lady
with  white  hair  but  black  eyebrows  looking  fixedly  at  him  and
nervously  fingering  the  ribbons  of  her  cap.  He  did  not  recognize
her,  but,  still  in  the  dream,  his  aunt  came,  and  said,  "What,  John,
don't  you  know  your  grandmother?"  On  waking  he  noted  down
the  fact;  and  soon  after  learned  that  his  grandmother  had  died,
far  away  in  the  Isle  of  Wight.  She  had  white  hair,  which  her
grandson,  who  had  not  seen  her  for  a  long  time,  did  not  know
{Tel  Halluc,  329).

The  Rev.  Mr.  Wanley  dreamt  that  he  saw  a  friend,  a  professor
of  mathematics  in  Guernsey.  In  the  morning  he  told  his  wife
that  he  believed  Mr.  B.  to  be  dead.  The  day,  and  probably  the
hour  of  death,  were  correct.

Mrs.  Wheatcroft,  whose  husband  was  a  captain  in  the  Dragoon
Guards,  and  had  left  for  India,  saw  on  the  night  of  November
14-15,  1857,  the  form  of  her  husband  bending  over  her  and  trying
to  speak.  This  occurred  twice.  In  the  morning  she  told  her
mother,  being  sure  that  he  was  dead.  A  month  later  she  received
official  notice  of  his  death  on  November  15th.  She  insisted  that
the  death  must  have  been  on  the  14th,  and  after  minute  enquiry,
this  was  confirmed.  The  case  is  extremely  striking  and  deserves
to  be  considered  highly  evidential,  the  metapsychic  monition
having  actually  led  to  a  change  in  the  date  of  the  registry  of
deaths  by  the  War  Office  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  i,  51).

Mr.  Williams  was  sleeping,  his  hands  outside  the  coverlet,  when
he  was  waked  by  the  sensation  that  his  hands  were  held  and
pressed.  He  sat  up  and  saw  his  young  brother-in-law,  aged  nine-
teen, whom  he  knew  to  be  extremely  ill.  He  looked  at  him  with
affection  and  felt  in  no  way  frightened.  The  room  was  lit  by  the
rising  sun.  He  rose  and  told  his  wife,  "I  have  seen  George,  he
came  for  a  minute  at  sunrise."  In  another  part  of  London  George
expired  in  the  arms  of  his  father  and  mother,  the  former  of  whom
said,  "The  sun  rose  just  as  our  dear  boy  rose  to  the  heavenly
kingdom"  (Tel  Halluc,  142).

Mrs.  Williams  (another  case)  heard  the  voice  of  her  son  cry

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

out,  "Mother,  Mother";  she  felt  a  hand  on  her  breast  and  saw
the  form  of  her  son  looking  very  ill.  Mr.  Williams,  to  whom  she
told  her  vision,  advised  her  to  put  no  faith  in  it.  Her  son  died
at  sea  of  yellow  fever  at  the  same  hour  {Phantasms  of  the  Living,
i,  440).

Mr.  Wingfield  Baker  saw  in  a  dream,  on  the  night  of  March
25-26,  his  brother  Richard  Wingfield  Baker.  The  impression
was  so  strong  that  he  rose  and  went  to  see  if  his  brother  were  not
really  there.  He  felt  sure  that  some  disaster  had  happened,  and
wrote  in  his  note-book,  "Apparition,  night  of  Thursday,  March
25,  1880,  R.  B.  W.  B.  God  forbid!"  On  that  day  his  brother
was  killed  in  the  hunting-field.

This  monition  is  one  of  the  most  reliable  on  record,  on  account
of  the  unforeseen  nature  of  the  event  and  the  note  taken  at  the
time  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  i,  45).

Mrs.  Wright  left  her  little  girl,  aged  four  and  a  half,  playing
in  the  street.  Crossing  the  yard  a  few  minutes  later,  she  saw  the
child  pass  before  her  like  a  luminous  shadow.  She  stopped,  failed
to  recognize  the  child,  looking  attentively  at  the  form  for  half  a
minute.  A  moment  later  they  came  to  tell  her  that  the  child  had
been  run  over  and  killed  by  a  passing  carriage.  Although  there
was  no  recognition,  the  case  is  interesting  by  the  precision  of  the
details  (Tel.  Halluc,  268).

Dr.  Woolcote,  doctor  on  board  the  ship  Plantagenet,  going
from  India  to  England,  saw  his  dying  mother  in  a  dream,  and  by
her  side,  a  cousin,  a  surgeon  in  the  Royal  Artillery,  whom  he
thought  to  be  in  China.  The  dream  was  so  distinct  that  he  went
to  wake  one  of  his  friends.  On  reaching  the  docks,  he  saw  his
father  who  was  not  in  mourning,  and  thought,  "All  is  well,  my
dream  deceived  me."  Nevertheless  the  dream  was  true,  his
mother  was  dead  and  his  cousin  had  been  present.  The  coinci-
dence of  time  is  somewhat  uncertain  (Tel.  Halluc,  108).

Mrs.  Wickham,  at  Malta,  was  anxious  about  the  health  of  a
friend  at  Brighton.  She  went  out  to  dine,  but  was  still  disquieted.
As  she  was  undoing  her  hair  that  evening  she  felt  the  pressure
of  a  hand  on  her  head  and  neck ;  and  shortly  after  cold  lips  were
pressed  to  her  cheek  and  she  heard  her  friend's  voice  saying,
"Good-bye,  good-bye."  Nevertheless  she  went  to  sleep,  and  saw
her  friend  enter.   He  was  very  pale,  kissed  her,  and  disappeared.

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  321

She  noted  down  the  dream.  Some  days  later  she  had  news  of
his  death  on  the  day  and  at  the  hour  of  her  first  monition,  10  a.m.
on  March  13th.

Captain  Calt,  suddenly  waking  up,  saw  his  brother,  then  an
officer  in  the  Crimea  (1854)  looking  at  him  affectionately.  He
walked  through  the  apparition,  which  then  appeared  behind  him
with  blood  on  the  temple.  Much  disturbed,  he  went  to  a  friend's
room.  Next  day  his  father  forbade  him  to  speak  of  the  apparition.
It  took  place  a  few  hours  after  the  death  of  Oliver  Calt  who  had
been  struck  by  a  bullet  in  the  temple  in  the  assault  on  the  Redan
(A.  S.  P.,  1891,  i,  166).

Mr.  Bard,  living  at  Hingston,  passed  by  the  cemetery  on  his
way  home  and  saw  there  Mme.  Freville  who  lived  in  the  same
town,  a  rather  eccentric  person  who  interested  herself  in  the
graves.  She  seemed  dressed  as  usual,  but  her  face  was  very
white.  She  looked  fixedly  at  Mr.  Bard,  and  soon  disappeared
mysteriously.  Mr.  Bard  ascertained  that  there  was  no  open  grave
into  which  she  might  have  fallen.  In  point  of  fact,  this  lady,  of
whose  illness  Mr.  Bard  knew  nothing,  was  dying  at  that  mo-
ment. The  vision  was  so  clear  that  Mr.  Bard  was  certain  of  the
identity  (A.  S.  P.f  1891,  i,  171).

Mr.  Jones,  an  English  officer  in  Burma,  while  chatting  with
his  friends,  suddenly  saw  a  coffin  and  in  it  one  of  his  sisters.  He
stopped  in  the  middle  of  his  talk,  and  being  very  sceptical  on
such  matters,  laughed  at  what  he  had  seen.  His  sister  had  died
in  England  on  that  day  (A.  5.  P.,  1891,  i,  173).

Signor  Sebastian  Fenzi,  at  the  sea-side  (Fortoula)  about  sixty
miles  from  Florence,  under  great  disturbance  of  mind,  saw  his
brother,  Senator  Carlo  Fenzi,  whom  he  recognized  by  his  large
white  moustaches,  walking  quietly  from  rock  to  rock  in  spite  of
the  torrential  rain  and  storm.  He  waved  his  hand  and  shouted
to  the  apparition,  but  it  disappeared  among  the  rocks.  At  this
moment  a  young  cousin,  black-bearded  and  quite  different  in  ap-
pearance from  Carlo  Fenzi,  emerged  from  the  woods,  not  having
passed  by  way  of  the  rocks.  On  returning  home  Signor  Fenzi
learned  that  his  brother  was  dying.  He  left  for  Florence  at
once,  but  his  brother  had  already  expired.  Some  months  before
his  death,  Carlo  Fenzi  had  said  to  his  brother  Sebastian,  "Which-
ever of  us  dies  first  will  come  to  warn  the  other,  but  I  am  sure
that  I  shall  die  before  you ;  in  three  months  I  shall  be  no  more.,,

322

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

This  conversation  took  place  in  June,  and  Carlo  Fenzi  died  Sep-
tember 2,  1881  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  i,  174).

On  December  28,  1906,  at  11  p.m.,  Mme.  X.  saw  at  her  bedside
the  form  of  a  woman  whose  features  and  dress  she  could  clearly
distinguish.  The  apparition  spoke  in  a  muffled  voice,  saying,  "I
am  Helen  Ram,  I  will  come  for  you ;  we  shall  be  together  in  the
other  world."  Helen  Ram  died  at  Hyeres,  on  December  28th,  at
4  a.m.  There  was  therefore  a  difference  of  twenty  hours  be-
tween the  time  of  death  and  the  time  of  the  apparition.  The
details  of  the  dress  were  correct.  Mme.  Ram  had  not  been
ailing,  and  Mme.  X.  did  not  know  her  well  (A.  S.  P.,  1907,
xvii,  607).

General  X.,  very  highly  placed  in  the  French  Army,  wrote  to
M.  de  Rochas :  "In  1832  I  was  five  years  old,  and  was  sent  to  my
maternal  grandmother,  where  I  slept  with  a  cousin  of  my  own
age.  We  were  prattling  in  bed,  and  when  the  light  was  put  out
I  saw  the  figure  of  my  grandmother  on  the  father's  side  at  the
foot  of  my  bed.  I  had  just  left  her  and  she  was  very  fond  of  me.
She  died  at  the  very  hour  she  appeared  to  me"  (A.  S.  P.,
1891,  i,  260).

Mr.  S.  saw,  in  the  daytime,  in  a  corridor  of  his  house,  a  kind  of
mist  which  thickened  and  gradually  took  the  form  of  a  man
whose  head  and  shoulders  became  more  and  more  distinct.  The
rest  of  the  body  seemed  wrapped  in  a  sort  of  gauze,  like  a  mantle
covering  the  feet.  The  apparition  was  grey.  The  head  turned
towards  him  with  a  gentle,  peaceful  expression  and  disappeared
like  a  jet  of  steam  condensing.  S.  then  remembered  a  friend
whom  he  had  not  seen  for  some  weeks  and  had  not  thought  of
that  day.  This  friend  had  died  suddenly  at  the  same  hour  ( Tel.
Halluc,  182).

M.  A.  Z.,  after  a  friendly  chat  on  trivial  matters  with  his  young
friend,  B.,  went  home  and  began  to  read.  He  heard  the  outside
door  noisily  opened,  followed  by  hurried  steps  clearly  heard  along
the  road.  Mr.  Z.  felt  that  there  was  something  near  him  out-
side the  glass  of  the  window.  He  heard  short  panting  breaths
like  someone  getting  breath  before  speaking.  Then  suddenly,  like
a  gunshot,  a  loud  cry,  followed  by  a  moaning,  and  sobs  of  great
pain.  His  wife  heard  nothing,  but,  seeing  her  husband's  alarm,
said,  "What  is  the  matter?"  M.  Z.  replied,  "There  is  someone
outside,  but  it  is  so  strange  and  horrible  that  I  dare  not  go  out."
At  that  very  moment,  but  too  far  away  for  any  sound  to  reach  the

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  323

house,  B.  had  poisoned  himself  with  prussic  acid  and  had  fallen
with  a  loud  cry  (Tel.  Hallnc,  302).

Mrs.  Meneer,  wife  of  the  principal  of  Torre  School  (Torquay),
dreamt  one  night  that  she  saw  her  father's  head  in  a  coffin  at  the
foot  of  the  bed.  Her  father,  Mr.  Wellington,  was  in  the  Indian
Army,  and  had  been  taken  prisoner  by  the  Chinese,  and  had  been
beheaded,  his  head  being  carried  in  triumph  to  their  camp
(Human  Personality,  i,  424).

The  following  case,  though  not  strictly  a  monition  of  death,
is  so  similar  that  it  should  be  placed  among  these :

Dr.  Bruce,  of  Micanopy  (U.  S.  A.)  on  the  night  of  December
27,  1883,  dreamt  that  he  saw  a  brawl  in  which  a  man  was  seriously
hurt,  his  throat  being  cut.  He  did  not  recognize  the  man,  whose
hands  were  before  his  face,  but  Dr.  Bruce  saw  his  own  wife  by
the  side  of  the  wounded  man,  saying  she  would  not  leave  him  till
he  were  helped.  That  same  night  his  brother-in-law  had  been
wounded  in  the  course  of  a  quarrel  by  a  dagger-stroke  through
his  neck.  It  seems  that  on  the  same  night,  another  sister  of  the
wounded  man  had  dreamt  of  a  man  whose  throat  was  cut,  with-
out, however,  recognizing  him   (Myers,  Human  Personality,

i,  413).

Mme.  Suzanne  Bonnefoy,  whom  I  knew  as  an  intelligent  and
large-hearted  woman,  relates  that  at  Cherbourg  in  1902,  she
received  a  telegram  telling  her  of  the  death  of  her  husband's
mother,  Mme.  Bonnefoy,  at  Marseilles.  Dr.  Bonnefoy  had  then
been  twenty-four  hours  in  hospital,  and  when  he  heard  the
sad  news,  he  said,  "My  mother  must  have  died  about  ten  o'clock
last  evening,  for  when  half  awake  in  my  bed  here,  it  seemed
to  me  that  someone  kissed  me;  I  even  said  aloud,  Ts  it  you,
Suzanne?'  Although  entirely  sceptical  on  metapsychic  matters
Dr.  Bonnefoy  was  convinced  that  there  was  some  relation  be-
tween his  very  definite  feeling  and  the  death  of  his  mother.  The
exact  agreement  in  time  was  verified  (La  Mort  et  son  Mystere,

ii,  p.  333).

Dr.  Auguste  Manceau,  of  Paris,  saw  in  a  dream  the  form  of
an  aunt  who  was  very  dear  to  him.  She  was  very  old  but  in  quite
good  health.  The  shape  was  not  very  clear,  but  he  says  no  doubt
was  possible,  the  vision  was  not  like  a  picture  but — "an  image
formed  by  light."  He  sent  a  telegram  and  found  she  had  died  at
the  hour  of  the  dream  (Flammarion,  loc.  cit.,  ii,  408).

324

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

The  husband  of  Mme.  Belot,  of  Montpellier,  was  in  Algeria.
One  day  at  4  p.m.  she  was  dozing  and  it  seemed  to  her  that  she
saw  her  husband,  looking  pale  and  thin,  who  said,  "Good-bye,  I
am  going."  The  next  day  she  learned  by  telegram  that  he  had
passed  away  at  that  hour  (Flammarion,  loc.  cit.,  ii,  355).

In  1893,  Captain  Moureau  was  at  sea  off  the  Antilles,  and  went
to  his  cabin  about  11  p.m.  Just  as  he  was  going  to  sleep  he  felt
distinctly  a  weight  on  his  chest  like  a  child's  body,  felt  the  two
arms  round  his  neck  and  a  kiss  on  his  lips.  He  pushed  the  body
away  and  lit  a  match,  but  saw  no  one.  He  told  his  experience  to
a  friend  next  morning  and  on  arriving  at  Gibraltar  learned  that
his  little  child,  aged  two,  had  died  that  night  of  diphtheria  (A.  S.
P.,  1919,  71).

M.  X.,  of  Moutiers  (Vendee),  dreamt  that  he  went  to  his
parents,  and  saw  in  their  room  an  improvised  bed  on  trestles,  with
a  number  of  persons  standing  round,  that  he  passed  through
them  and  saw  his  father's  body  on  the  mattress.  He  woke  sob-
bing and  told  his  wife.  The  vision  corresponded  exactly  with  the
facts  (Flammarion,  340).

M.  Contamine,  at  Commentry,  while  dressing,  saw  in  the  mirror
his  door  open  and  one  of  his  friends  enter  in  evening  dress.  He
turned  round,  much  surprised,  and  saw  nothing.  He  asked  the
servant  who  was  on  the  stairs,  but  she  had  seen  no  one.  This
friend  had  killed  himself  that  same  hour,  being  in  evening  dress
(Flammarion,  loc.  cit.,  340).

The  naval  captain  E.  P.  N.  writes:  "On  the  9th  of  January,
1892,  sleeping  at  Toulon,  I  was  waked  by  someone,  and  saw  Ad-
miral Peyron  standing  by  my  bed  with  his  hands  in  his  pockets.
He  pushed  his  body  against  me  and  said,  'Good-bye,  P.,  I  come
to  bid  you  good-bye.'  I  got  up  and  lit  a  candle  but  the  appari-
tion was  no  longer  there;  but  I  had  hardly  begun  to  go  to  sleep
again  when  the  same  thing  recurred ;  only  then  the  form  became
veiled  in  cloud  and  disappeared  like  a  vapor."

Captain  N.  was  serving  under  Admiral  Peyron,  who  was  very
ill  and  died  that  night.  Fleet  Engineer  G.  had  the  same  vision  in
a  dream  that  same  night.  Admiral  Peyron  appeared  to  him,
saying,  "My  dear  G.,  the  time  has  come  to  part ;  we  all  have  to
go  that  way.  Good-bye."  The  cryptesthetic  character  of  this
double  monition  is  not  nullified  by  the  fact  that  both  Captain  N.
and  the  chief  engineer  knew  the  admiral  to  be  very  ill  (Flam-
marion, 273).

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  325

Mme.  Suzanne  Ollendorff,  the  wife  of  my  excellent  friend,  Paul
Ollendorff,  relates  that  one  morning  she  suddenly  thought  of  an
aunt  of  hers,  and  said  to  herself,  "She  is  dead  and  the  priest  of
her  parish  is  coming  to  tell  me  so."  Paul  Ollendorff,  who  was  not
then  married  to  Suzanne  L.,  went  to  see  her  that  day  and  she  told
him  the  dream  saying,  "If  the  parish  priest  of  X.  were  at  the  door
now,  I  should  not  be  surprised."  Paul  continued  sceptical,  but
during  the  day  (he  was  then  editor  of  the  journal  Gil  Bias)  he
received  a  visit  from  the  priest  who  told  him  of  the  lady's  death
by  cerebral  congestion  (Flammarion,  273).

Mr.  Leadbater  says  that  his  friend,  Mr.  X.,  in  whom  he  has
entire  confidence,  had  a  very  clear  hallucination,  repeated  three
times  the  same  night :  he  saw  his  father's  form  by  the  light  of  a
bright  fire  burning  in  his  room,  first  at  10.30,  then  again  at  mid-
night, and  once  more  at  1.50  a.m.  He  tried  to  touch  the  appari-
tion but  his  hands  met  empty  air,  and  the  vision  gradually  dis-
appeared. His  father  died  that  night,  the  death-spasms  begin-
ning at  10.30  and  ending  at  midnight  (Flammarion,  330).

Conclusions

We  have  now  reached  the  end  of  this  long  list  of  facts.  It  is
decisive,  for  all  these  monitions,  apparitions,  and  powerful  sensa-
tions cannot  be  explained  by  mental  hallucination  of  the  perfectly
normal  persons  who  relate  them.  It  would  also  be  equally  inept
to  refer  them  to  a  long  series  of  chance  coincidences.

It  is  therefore  well  established  that  at  the  moment  of  death
some  vibration  takes  place,  moving  something  in  nature,  which
occasionally  gives  information  of  the  death  to  those  who  are
sensitive.  That  is  cryptesthesia,  an  unusual  and  supernormal
faculty  peculiar  to  sensitives.

It  generally  takes  an  auditory  or  visual  form,  but  most  prob-
ably the  vision  itself  is  a  hallucinatory  symbol.  A.  dies  and  the
notion  of  his  death  reaches  B.'s  subconsciousness.  But  in  order
that  B.  may  understand,  the  creative  power  of  subconscious
imagination  elaborates  a  phantom  resembling  A.  more  or  less  and
surrounds  the  vision,  which  is  really  internal  though  seemingly
external,  with  detail  which  may  be  symbolical  or  veridical,  just
as  occurs  in  delirium  and  in  dreams.

We  may  provisionally  suppose  that  death  being  a  more  moving
event  than  the  facts  of  daily  life,  it  sets  in  motion  a  stronger
vibration  than  the  latter.    Let  us,  therefore,  admit  the  fact  of

326

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

cryptesthesia,  but  go  no  further;  let  us  simply  say:  A.'s  death  is
a  reality,  B.,  by  his  cryptesthetic  faculty,  perceives  that  fact  and
represents  it  under  the  symbolical  forms  to  which  alone  our  in-
telligence is  open.

This  involves  no  theory,  and  proposes  no  hypothesis ;  it  merely
states  the  adaptation  of  B.'s  cryptesthesia  power  to  the  external
fact  of  A.'s  death.

It  is  obvious  that  the  veridical  monitions  of  death  strongly
confirm  all  that  has  been  said  above  on  experimental  cryptes-
thesia. If  those  experiments  left  any  doubt  on  the  mind,  the
mass  of  observed  fact  should  dispel  it.  Human  cognition  is  not
limited  to  the  mechanism  of  the  ordinary  senses;  there  is  a
cryptesthetic  sense — a  mysterious  faculty  of  cognition.

Let  us,  however,  attempt  a  preliminary  analysis.  Does  the  will
of  the  dying  play  any  part  ?

If  so,  the  thought  of  A.,  dying,  would  be  directed  to  his  friend,
B.,  to  whom  he  has  perhaps  promised  to  appear ;  and  this  thought,
moving  in  space,  would  influence  B.'s  thought.

The  simple  explanation  that  first  occurs  to  everyone  is  that  A.
has  himself  appeared  in  his  "astral  body."  This  hypothesis  is
difficult  to  sustain,  for  in  many  cases  the  monition  is  not  given
by  the  apparition  of  the  deceased,  but  by  a  third  person  who  has
been  present  at  the  death.1

Sometimes  details  are  apparent  that  the  dying  person  could  not
know,  so  that  the  inference  seems  to  be  that  there  is  cognition
of  a  fact,  whether  by  a  symbol,  or  by  a  phantom,  the  phantom
itself  being  symbolical.

It  would,  therefore,  seem  most  probable  that  the  human  soul —
the  intelligence  of  the  percipient — is  moved  by  some  power  that
reveals  the  truth  or  a  fragment  of  the  truth;  but  it  is  very  hard
to  know  whether  this  truth  is  announced  by  an  intelligence  that
wills  to  convey  it,  or  whether  it  results  only  from  vibrations  set
in  motion  by  the  events.

If,  instead  of  confining  oneself  to  the  study  of  instances,  we
analyze  them  as  a  whole,  we  are  often  led  to  think  that  there
seems  to  be  an  intention  in  them,  an  effort  to  make  the  facts
understood,  and  therefore,  that  they  present  themselves  under
symbolical  forms.    But  to  attribute  such  an  intention  to  things

lVoy.  Mme.  A.  Sidgwick,  /.  S.  P.  R.,  November,  1906,  321.  Case  L.  1153
et  Phantasms  of  the  Liv.,  i,  357  et  P.  S.  P.  R.,  x,  261.

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  327

is  perhaps  an  anthropomorphic  mode  of  reasoning;  as  when  a
peasant  whose  crops  are  perishing  from  drought  sees  the  act  of
a  compassionate  Deity  in  the  welcome  rain.

Nevertheless  it  is  difficult  to  explain  some  collective  monitions,
some  premonitions,  and  some  phenomena  of  haunting,  without
seeing  in  them  an  effort  by  an  exterior  power  to  reveal  a  frag-
ment of  truth  only  realizable  to  our  defective  intelligence  by
some  representation  symbolical  of  the  fact  itself.

Frequently  there  is  actually  a  vague  intention  on  the  part  of
A.  that  is  perceived  by  B.  Jeanne  when  dying  calls  on  Mile.  X.
and  dies,  saying,  "If  it  were  to  go  and  see  .  .  "  and  X.
hears  herself  called.

Mr.  Dickinson  is  preoccupied  about  his  portrait  while  seri-
ously ill,  and  his  double  visits  the  photographer.  Mr.  Noell's
sister,  when  dying,  calls  vehemently  on  her  brother.  Jim  had
promised  to  visit  Mrs.  Bishop  at  his  death.  The  Rev.  Field  hears
his  mother  call,  "Harry,  Harry,"  from  her  death-bed.  Mr.  D.'s
workman  is  concerned  to  justify  his  conduct.

On  the  other  hand,  there  are  very  many  cases  in  which  the
phantom  (cryptesthetic  symbol)  has  appeared  to  uninterested
persons.  Mrs.  Green  was  not  interested  in  the  Australian  niece
whom  she  had  never  seen.  When  the  Duke  of  Orleans  died  he
was  certainly  not  thinking  of  Mine.  Bremon ;  nor  Robespierre  of
Mme.  X.  When  M.  Halle  saw  the  cabman's  little  girl  fall  from
the  window  the  child  certainly  did  not  wish  to  communicate  with
him,  any  more  than  Mr.  Phibb's  dog  with  his  master.

We  are  wandering  in  the  darkness,  and  it  seems  wise  to  reserve
judgment.  Let  us  say  only  that  in  most  cases  the  monition  does
not  seem  to  be  intentional  on  the  part  of  A.,  and  that  the  notion
of  A.'s  death  reaches  B.  because  it  is  a  reality;  his  cryptesthesia
perceiving  that  reality.

To  decline  to  admit  the  intention  of  the  dying  and  the  in-
tervention of  the  astral  body  is  not  to  maim  the  facts;  it  is
only  a  refusal  to  go  beyond  them.  It  is  quite  possible  that  some
day,  when  metapsychics  is  more  advanced,  we  may  come  to
admit  telepathy  from  the  dying  to  the  living;  no  one  can  foresee
what  future  science  may  reveal  to  our  grandchildren,  but  as  yet
no  one  is  justified  in  making  gratuitous  assumptions  or  frail
theories.

Let  us  remain  within  the  boundary  of  indisputable  facts —

328

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

that  the  death  of  a  human  being  is  often  known  to  other  human
beings  by  means  outside  the  action  of  the  normal  senses;  that
this  monition  of  death  is  shown  by  a  great  variety  of  symbolism,
and  that  monitions  are  nearly  always  entirely  subjective,  al-
though in  exceptional  cases  they  seem  really  to  have  objective
reality.

Such  are  the  inferences  that  flow  from  monitions  of  death;
but,  as  Geley,  Bozzano,  and  Lodge  rightly  point  out,  explana-
tions that  cover  a  series  of  facts  are  insufficient,  if  they  apply  to
that  series  only.  All  must  be  coherent.  No  theory  can  be  built
on  monitions  of  death,  or  on  cryptesthesia,  or  on  ectoplasmic
forms,  each  taken  by  itself.  Any  satisfactory  theory  must  be
applicable  to  all  the  facts,  at  least  in  some  degree.  Any  general
conclusion  must  therefore  be  deferred  till  all  the  facts  have  been
examined.

IV.  COLLECTIVE  MONITIONS
Collective  monitions  seldom  take  place.

Before  studying  these  we  shall  show  that  some  non-collective
monitions  perceived  by  one  person  only  have  occurred  under
conditions  such  that  if  there  had  been  any  external  physical
phenomenon  it  must  have  been  perceived  by  others  present.  Such
monitions  are  therefore  indisputably  subjective.  And  as  it  is
most  important  that  the  exact  meaning  of  the  terms  "objective"
and  "subjective"  in  metapsychic  science  should  be  clearly  under-
stood, I  return  to  this  matter.

The  light  of  a  rocket  and  the  sound  of  a  gunshot  are  objective ;.
they  can  be  mechanically  recorded.

That  a  monition  should  be  produced  at  all  there  must  neces-
sarily be  some  vibration  of  surrounding  forces,  and  some  ex-
terior fact  to  produce  it.  But  this  objective  phenomenon  that
starts  sensation  in  a  sensitive  is  not  objective  in  the  same  way
as  the  vibration  of  the  air  that  produces  sound,  or  that  of  the
ether  that  produces  light;  it  is  a  special  kind  of  objectivity  whose
nature  is  quite  unknown,  and  it  has  the  peculiar  property  of
acting  only  on  certain  individuals  and  not  on  any  physical
apparatus.

When  Mrs.  Thompson,  taking  my  son's  watch,  says,  "Three
generations  mingled,"  there  is  doubtless  some  vibration  that  has

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  329

given  her  this  knowledge,  but  no  other  person  could  have  per-
ceived it.

The  sensibility  of  individuals  to  cryptesthesia  may  vary  as
1  :  100,000,  whereas  their  sensibilities  to  sounds,  colours,  lights,
and  odours  may  be  as  10,000  to  10,001.

This  is  not  all.  When  a  vision  appears  to  B.,  and  he  thinks
he  sees  A.,  it  is  not  proved  that  the  form  A.  that  B.  thinks  he
sees  is  A.,  in  the  ordinary  meaning  of  seeing.  All  we  can  say  is
that  he  has  the  notion  of  A.,  and  that  he  interprets  this  ob-
jectively as  A.  Something  that  calls  up  A.  in  his  mind  reaches
him;  but  what  is  it  precisely?  The  transformation  of  the  vague
notion  of  A.  into  a  visual  image  of  A.  is  an  entirely  subjective
phenomenon.

There  is  no  hypothesis  here;  it  is  mere  fact.  In  some  well-
authenticated  cases  B.  has  been  surrounded  by  persons  who  see
nothing  where  B.  sees  something  distinctly.  Therefore  B.'s  per-
ception has  been  subjective  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word.

I  give  below  some  instances  which  should  have  been  collective
if  the  phenomenon  had  not  been  entirely  subjective.

Mrs.  Taunton  at  a  concert  saw  the  apparition  of  her  Uncle
W.  between  her  and  the  orchestra.  She  did  not  know  of  his
illness,  but  he  seemed  to  be  lying  in  bed  and  calling  her  as  if
dying.  The  apparition  was  not  vaporous,  but  yet  she  could  see
the  orchestra  through  it.  Her  husband  asked  her  why  she  was
" fascinated"  in  that  way.  The  vision  disappeared,  and  after  the
concert  Mrs.  T.  narrated  what  she  had  seen.  Mr.  W.  died  at
the  exact  hour  of  the  vision.

Mrs.  Purton  hears  a  terrible  cry  and  anguished  moanings  that
filled  the  house.  She  wakes  up,  terrified,  goes  over  the  whole
house,  but  finds  all  quiet  and  everyone  sleeping.  In  the  morning
she  asks  if  anyone  has  heard  an  unusual  noise,  but  no  one  has.
A  few  days  later  comes  the  news  of  the  drowning  of  her  son
Frank  coming  from  Australia  in  the  Royal  Charter,  lost  with  all
passengers  at  the  hour  of  the  monition.

Mr.  King,  of  the  Royal  Military  College,  returning  home  with
his  friends  through  the  country  at  10  p.m.,  says  suddenly,  "Look
there,  look  there,,,  pointing  to  a  part  of  the  wood.  His  friend
M.  could  see  nothing.  King  fell  to  the  ground  groaning  and
got  up  as  if  he  were  intoxicated.  Then  he  cried  out,  "Where
are  they  carrying  her  ?  I  say  they  are  carrying  her."  The  next
morning  he  could  remember  nothing  of  all  this;  but  he  found

330

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

that  an  old  lady  of  whom  he  was  very  fond  had  died  of  heart
disease  at  10  p.m.  precisely  (Tel.  Halluc,  247).

Bertha  Hurly  frequently  went  to  visit  Mrs.  Evans,  an  old
woman  who  was  ill  but  in  no  immediate  danger.  One  evening
at  table  she  saw  a  form  dressed  like  Mrs.  Evans  cross  the  room
and  disappear.  "I  said,  'Who  is  that?'  and  my  mother  replied,
What  is  the  matter  with  you?'  I  said,  That  woman  who  went
from  one  door  to  the  other  was  Mrs.  Evans/  They  all  laughed
at  me."  At  that  hour  Mrs.  Evans  was  in  delirium  and  died  the
next  morning  at  eight  o'clock.

Mr.  B.,  taking  tea  with  his  son  and  his  son's  wife,  said  sud-
denly, "Who  is  looking  in  at  the  window  ?"  No  one  could  have
got  up  to  that  particular  window,  but  Mr.  B.  insisted  that  he
had  seen  the  face  of  a  pale  woman  with  dark  hair.  He  was
quieted  only  when  they  had  gone  round  the  house  and  found
no  one.  The  time  was  5:45  p.m.,  and  Mrs.  B.'s  mother  died  in
Guernsey  at  that  same  hour  (  Tel.  Halluc.,  180).

Mr.  Mouat,  on  reaching  his  office,  saw  an  employee  speaking
to  the  porter  and  also  the  Rev.  Mr.  H.  standing  at  the  door.
The  clergyman,  who  worked  at  the  same  office,  did  not  usually
arrive  so  early.  Another  clerk  coming  down  the  stairs  also  saw
Mr.  H.,  and  went  out  without  getting  any  answer  from  him  to  a
jesting  remark.  Mr.  Mouat,  being  left  alone  with  Mr.  H.,  looked
straight  at  him,  was  surprised  at  his  melancholy  expression,  and
remarked  that  he  was  wearing  no  cravat.  "What  is  the  matter?"
he  said,  "You  seem  troubled."  H.  made  no  reply  but  continued
to  look  steadily.  At  this  moment  the  clerk  returned,  but  saw
nothing,  and  H.  disappeared.  On  the  one  hand  it  is  averred
that  neither  the  clerk  nor  the  porter  saw  H.,  and  on  the  other,
that  H.  was  out  of  London  on  that  day  (Tel.  Halluc.,  358).

This  case  is  more  perplexing  than  the  others,  for  two  persons
out  of  four  saw  Mr.  H.  and  spoke  to  him,  while  two  others  saw
nothing.  The  materialization  (to  adopt  this  word  provisionally)
only  seemed  to  be  such  to  two  persons.  It  was  therefore  not  an
objective  fact,  or  rather  it  belonged  to  both  categories.

(a)  Collective  Monitions,  Non-simultaneous  and  Non-identical

The  metaphor  of  a  human  race  devoid  of  the  sense  of  smell
will  enable  us  to  understand  somewhat  better  the  significance  of
these  mysterious  phenomena.

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  331

Let  us  suppose  that  a  gust  of  wind  brings  a  whiff  of  violets  to
twenty  of  these  persons  in  a  room.  None  of  them  will  perceive
anything.  But  if  one  among  them  has  the  sense  of  smell  for  a
few  seconds,  he  will  get  the  notion  of  violets.

If  now  the  same  odoriferous  breeze  brings  the  same  scent  to
another  exceptionally  sensitive  person  near  by,  that  person  will
also  have  the  notion  of  violets,  alone  among  others  there  present.
This  would  be  a  collective  but  non-simultaneous  monition;  and
we  may  compare  individuals  endowed  with  permanent  or  transient
cryptesthesia  to  persons  endowed  with  the  sense  of  smell  among
those  devoid  of  it.

Mrs.  Hunter,  awake,  and  in  the  daytime,  sees  a  large  coffin  on
the  bed,  and  an  old  woman,  tall  and  stout,  at  the  foot  of  the  bed,
looking  at  the  coffin.  The  vision  was  so  clear  that  she  could
describe  the  clothing.

The  figure  vanished  and  Mrs.  Hunter  related  the  fact  to  those
who  visited  her.  That  evening  the  governess  came  in  very
frightened,  saying  that  she  had  seen  an  old  woman  in  the  sitting-
room  who  seemed  to  dissolve  as  she  looked  at  her ;  and  described
the  dress  just  as  Mrs.  Hunter  had  seen  it.  Mrs.  Hunter's  little
girl  of  five,  pointing  at  a  part  of  the  room  where  her  nurse  saw
nothing,  cried  out,  "Go  away,  go  away!  Naughty  ugly  old
woman"  (Bozzano,  A.  S.  P.,  1907,  xvii,  631).

The  Rev.  Mr.  Jupp,  director  of  an  orphanage,  waking  in  the
middle  of  the  night,  saw  a  light  in  the  dormitory.  A  small
luminous  cloud  floated  over  the  bed  of  one  of  the  children.  He
sat  up  and  looked  at  his  watch,  it  was  12.55,  and  was  about  to
get  up  to  touch  this  strange  light,  when  he  "felt  rather  than
heard"  the  injunction,  "Remain  in  bed,  you  will  suffer  no  hurt."
He  went  to  sleep  again.  In  the  morning  the  child  over  whose
bed  the  light  had  been,  said  to  him,  "My  mother  came  to  me  last
night;  did  you  see  her?"  The  child  was  four  years  old;  his
mother  had  been  dead  six  months.

Three  brothers  Swithinbank,  though  living  apart  from  each
other,  had  the  same  dream  on  the  same  night,  that  their  mother  was
dying;  she  not  being  ill  at  the  time  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,
ii,  382).

Miss  Beale  sees  a  man  in  a  flowing  dressing-gown  enter  her
room;  and  the  same  night,  C,  in  an  adjoining  room,  also  sees
an  apparition,  which  he  recognized.

332

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Mrs.  Treloar,  entering  her  room  at  8  p.m.,  sees  on  the  further
side  of  the  bed  a  woman's  figure,  very  pale  and  with  an  expres-
sion of  suffering,  wearing  a  hat  and  light  cloak.  The  lamp-
light on  the  face  showed  even  the  freckles  on  the  nose.  Mrs.  T.
recognized  her  sister  who  gradually  disappeared.  Just  then  Mrs.
TVs  little  niece  ran  in,  saying,  "I  have  seen  Aunt  Annie,  I  have
seen  Aunt  Annie."  This  apparition  does  not  coincide  with  the
hour  of  death,  but  with  an  attack  of  acute  diphtheria  that  carried
her  off  in  twenty-four  hours  (Tel.  Halluc,  290).

Popular  superstitions  and  beliefs  or  religious  legends  carry
little  or  no  weight  with  me;  but  perhaps  they  should  not  all  be  dis-
missed without  consideration.  The  extraordinary  facts  related
in  the  lives  of  the  saints  are  neither  complete  falsehoods  nor
absolute  errors,  as,  for  instance,  levitations.  There  is  probably
some  amount  of  truth  imbedded  in  all  such  tales.  But  it  is
better  to  try  new  experiments  and  make  fresh  observations  than
to  search  for  whatever  small  amount  of  truth  these  legends  may
contain  or  than  to  deny  them  altogether.

Many  popular  superstitions  exist  relative  to  movements  and
noises  relating  to  deaths.  There  are  many  tales  resembling
monitions,  but  the  events  chronicled — breakage  of  mirrors,  fall-
ing of  pictures,  blows  on  the  doors,  etc.,  presaging  death  or
disaster — are  rarely  such  as  to  carry  recognition.  I  will  merely
mention  a  few  of  these  monitions ;  for  even  though  there  be  no
recognition,  one  can,  and  even  ought,  to  give  weight  to  the
coincidences.

M.  Jaffe,  at  Berlin,  in  bed  about  midnight,  but  perfectly  awake,
hears  the  ticking  of  the  "death-watch."  He  got  up,  and  heard
the  raps  follow  him  to  different  parts  of  the  room.  The  next
morning  his  wife  said  to  him,  "I  saw  your  mother  in  a  dream
with  a  handkerchief  tied  under  her  chin;  her  mouth  was  much
contorted."  Soon  after,  M.  Jaffe  heard  of  his  mother's  death,
accompanied  by  such  strong  contortions  of  the  face  that  it  became
necessary  to  tie  up  the  jaw  by  a  handkerchief  passing  round  the
chin.

M.  Lemonnier,  chemist  at  Rennes,  had  two  intimate  friends,
M.  Escolan  and  M.  Nivot,  a  surgeon-dentist.  M.  Escolan,  who
was  in  feeble  health,  was  attacked  by  acute  tuberculosis  and  was
taken  to  the  hospital.  One  morning  in  September,  1891,  at  5.45
a.m.,  M.  Lemonnier  was  awaked  by  violent  blows  on  the  shut-

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  333

ters  of  his  pharmacy.  He  writes:  "I  thought,  'Who  can  it  be
who  knocks  like  this  instead  of  using  the  night-bell?'  for  he  was
drumming  on  the  shutters  for  one  or  two  minutes.  I  dressed  in
haste  and  went  to  open.  There  were  only  a  few  women  sweeping
in  the  street,  who  said  they  had  seen  no  one.,,

About  an  hour  later  his  friend  M.  Nivot  came  at  seven  o'clock,
who  said,  "A  singular  thing  has  occurred ;  at  5.45  I  was  awakened
by  knocking  on  the  door  of  my  room,  and  I  called  out,  'Who  is
there?  Don't  knock  so  hard,  I  am  not  deaf.'  The  noise  con-
tinued, I  opened  the  door.  There  was  no  one,  and  the  house
was  asleep;  the  porter  also  said  that  no  one  had  entered  the
house."

M.  Lemonnier  and  M.  Nivot  then  thought  that  their  friend
had  died  in  the  hospital.  They  went  there  and  found  that  he
had  passed  away  at  5.45  exactly.

Miss  Matthews  woke  in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  saw,  to
her  great  alarm,  a  young  girl,  Suzanne,  a  housemaid  like  herself,
who  had  left  the  house  some  months  previously.  "She  was  in
night-attire,  came  straight  to  my  bed,  lifted  the  clothes,  and  lay
down  by  my  side.  I  felt  a  cold  shiver,  and  I  think  I  fainted.
When  I  came  to  myself  the  apparition  had  gone ;  but  I  am  sure
it  was  no  dream."  The  same  night  the  son  of  Mr.  Matthews
who  lived  with  his  mother  felt  a  great  terror.  He  looked,  but
could  see  nothing,  hid  his  head  under  the  bedclothes  and  could
not  sleep.  Suzanne,  who  was  in  hospital  for  liver  trouble  that
did  not  seem  very  serious,  died  that  night  (Tel.  Halluc.,  350).

Mrs.  Beilby  relates  that  she  and  her  husband  heard  one  day
the  voice  of  one  of  their  young  friends  calling,  "Jonnny>  Johnny."
This  young  friend,  Miss  Snell,  who  was  living  in  their  house  in
Victoria  (Australia)  had  gone  for  a  ride,  and  had  met  with  a
serious  accident  about  seven  miles  away.  She  had  called  out
to  Johnny  for  help,  the  boy  who  usually  rode  with  her.  The
impression  was  so  clear  that  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Beilby  called  the
servants  (Tel.  Halluc.,  363).

The  Rev.  Mr.  Tweedale,  of  the  Astronomical  Society  of  Lon-
don, on  January  10,  1879,  saw  his  grandmother  in  the  middle  of
the  night.  The  apparition  lasted  several  seconds.  She  was  wear-
ing a  cap  of  antiquated  make.  His  father,  Mr.  Tweedale,  also
saw  the  same  apparition  at  his  bedside.  The  sister  of  Mr.  Twee-
dale senior,  eighteen  miles  away,  saw  the  same  apparition  at  2

334

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

A.M.,  the  hour  being  exactly  noted.  The  vision  of  the  Rev.  Mr.
Tweedale  was  at  2.10  a.m.  The  grandmother  had  died  at  12.15
(A.  S.  P.,  1906,  610).

During  the  night  in  which  X.,  a  cousin  of  my  children,  poi-
soned himself  with  strychnine,  my  son  George,  aged  twenty,  and
my  daughter  Louise,  aged  eighteen,  told  their  impressions  at
breakfast.  Said  George,  "I  had  a  dismal  dream.  I  dreamed  that
one  of  my  friends  had  died.  I  hope  it  is  not  X.  or  Y.  But  it
can't  be  either."  "I,  too,"  said  Louise,  "dreamed  that  our  cousin
P.  A.  was  dead,  and  that  I  said  to  my  brother  Jacques,  'He  cannot
possibly  be  dead,  you  went  with  him  to  the  opera/  "  Now  P.  A.
holds  the  same  degree  of  relationship  to  my  children  as  does
X. ;  and  X.  had  been  to  the  theatre  with  Jacques  on  the  previous
evening.

Mrs.  Young,  taking  tea  with  her  husband  and  children,  heard
a  violent  noise  on  the  floor  above.  She  also  seemed  to  feel  a
strong  wind.  Her  husband  heard  and  felt  nothing.  Far  away,
Mrs.  Young's  brother,  Captain  Adams,  then  at  sea,  heard  him-
self called,  "John,  John,"  and  knew  his  father's  voice.  He  went
on  deck,  but  no  one  had  called  him.  At  that  time  Mr.  Adams,
their  father,  perished  in  a  shipwreck  {Phantasms  of  the  Living,
ii,  632).

(b)  Simultaneous  and  Collective  Monitions

Monitions  of  this  group  are  of  fundamental  importance;  first,
because  they  strongly  confirm  the  hypothesis  of  cryptesthesia,  and
secondly  because  they  seem  to  show  that  in  certain  cases  the
monition  assumes  a  normal  objectivity,  like  a  real  materialization.

The  following  is  an  old  story  which  may  be  considered  exact
in  the  main,  despite  the  deformations  that  time  often  brings  when
the  full  details  are  not  written  down:

In  the  island  of  Cape  Breton  (Nova  Scotia)  Colonel  Wynyard
and  Sir  John  Sherbrooke  were  dining  in  barracks,  when  a  form,
simply  dressed,  passed  before  them.  "God  bless  my  soul,"  said
Sherbrooke,  "who  is  that?"  "It  is  my  father,  I  am  sure  he  is
dead,"  Colonel  Wynyard  replied.  The  two  officers  verified  that
no  one  could  have  come  in,  and  the  occurrence  was  noted  down
in  the  regimental  archives.  Shortly  after  news  came  that  Colonel
Wynyard's  father  had  been  killed  in  the  hunting-field.

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  335

Sir  John  Sherbrooke  had  never  seen  John  Wynyard,  but  one
day  in  London  he  met  a  man  who  strongly  resembled  him  and
was  often  mistaken  for  him.  Sherbrooke  said,  "That  is  the  man
I  saw"  (Tel.  Halluc,  383).

Mrs.  E.  Wickham  went  daily  to  the  hospital  in  Malta  to  visit
an  officer,  Mr.  B.,  wounded  at  Tel-el-Kebir.  The  wound  became
gangrenous  and  death  was  imminent ;  though  not  being  expected
that  night,  Mrs.  Wickham  consented  to  go  home.  About  3  a.m.
her  young  son,  aged  nine,  called  her,  crying  out,  "Mother,  mother,
here  is  Mr.  B."  Mrs.  Wickham  writes:  "I  got  up  in  a  hurry;
the  form  of  Mr.  B.  was  floating  in  the  room  about  six  inches
above  the  floor,  and  disappeared  through  the  window,  smiling
at  me.  He  was  in  night-attire,  but  the  gangrened  foot  seemed
to  me  like  the  other ;  both  my  boy  and  I  remarked  this.  Half  an
hour  later  they  came  to  tell  me  that  B.  had  died  (Phantasms
of  the  living;  quoted  by  Flammarion).  This  case  is  one  of  the
most  remarkable  on  record.

Several  years  ago,  Mme.  de  Barreau,  a  lady  of  high  character
and  serene  disposition,  told  me  a  similar  fact  witnessed  by  her-
self. I  unfortunately  did  not  note  it  down  at  the  time,  but  the
story  struck  me  so  powerfully  that  the  main  facts  can  be  relied  on.

Mme.  de  Barreau  was  tending  a  girl  friend  who  was  very  ill.
The  house  was  in  the  country  and  somewhat  lonely,  facing  a
meadow  through  which  there  ran  a  brook  bordered  by  willows.
The  girl  was  dying  and  her  mother  and  a  professional  nurse  were
with  her.  The  sick-room  was  on  the  ground  floor,  that  of  Mme.
de  Barreau  on  the  first  story.  One  night,  after  watching  some
time,  Mme.  de  Barreau  and  the  nurse  went  upstairs  to  take  some
rest,  and  some  time  later  both  of  them,  looking  out  of  the  window,
saw  a  white  form  float  among  the  trees  and  vanish  into  the  dark-
ness.   Just  then  the  death  took  place.

Mrs.  Pearson  and  her  sister,  Mrs.  Coppinger,  were  watching
at  the  bedside  of  their  dying  aunt,  Mrs.  Harriet.  Suddenly  Mrs.
Coppinger  said,  "Look,  Emma,  there  is  Aunt  Anna."  The  two
sisters  than  saw  a  little  old  woman  wearing  a  shawl  and  an  old-
fashioned  hat  entering  the  sick-room.  This  Aunt  Anna  was  a
deceased  sister ;  before  her  death  Mrs.  Harriet  said  that  she  had
seen  this  sister  who  came  to  call  her  (Bozzano,  A.  S.  P.,  1906,
164).

Commander  Aylesbury,  being  then  a  boy  of  thirteen,  narrowly

336

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

escaped  drowning  and  in  his  distress  called  loudly  on  his  mother.
On  the  same  day  at  a  distance  of  some  6,000  miles  (Batavia  to
London)  his  mother  and  three  sisters  were  working  in  their
room.  All  heard  a  faint  cry,  "Mother!"  The  girls  said,  "Did
you  hear  ?  Some  one  cried  'Mother !'  "  The  voice  called  twice
more,  quickly  and  as  if  in  distress.  They  got  up  and  ran  out
into  the  street.  All  was  quiet  and  the  weather  very  calm.  Mrs.
Aylesbury  noted  the  date  in  her  diary.  The  time  corresponded,
so  far  as  can  be  judged  after  thirty  years  and  in  the  absence  of
other  written  confirmation  (Tel.  Halluc,  365).

In  October,  1916,  Mme.  R.,  of  Montlugon,  heard  a  cry  of  dis-
tress, "Mother."  She  hurried  to  her  boy's  room  and  found  that
he  also  had  been  startled  by  the  same  cry  very  clearly  heard.
Two  days  later  they  learned  that  another  son  had  been  wounded
that  night  (Unpublished,  M.  Mialaret).

Mrs.  P.,  before  going  to  bed,  saw  a  man  in  a  naval  uniform,
with  his  elbow  on  the  foot-rail  of  the  bed,  looking  at  her  hus-
band who  was  sleeping.  Mrs.  P.  woke  her  husband,  who  saw
the  apparition,  and  cried  out  in  astonishment,  "Sir,  what  are  you
doing  here?"  The  form  stood  up  and  said,  ''Willy,  Willy,"  in
an  imperious  voice.  This  was  Mr.  P.'s  Christian  name.  He  got
up  to  eject  the  stranger,  but  the  form  moved  impassively  across
the  room,  throwing  a  shadow  on  the  wall  (there  being  light  in
the  room),  and  disappeared  through  the  partition.  The  door  was
bolted.  Mr.  P.  recognized  his  father  who  had  been  a  naval  officer
in  his  youth,  whom  Mrs.  P.  did  not  know.  Mr.  P.  died  shortly
after  (Bozzano,  A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  326).

Mrs.  Bettany  dreamt  that  one  of  her  neighbors,  Mrs.  J.,  whom
she  knew  by  name  only,  and  who  was  not  ill,  had  died.  The
dream  was  so  clear  that  she  sent  next  morning  to  enquire  for
Mrs.  J.,  and  found  that  she  had  really  died  during  the  night.
One  of  Mrs.  Bettany's  servants  also  had  a  terrible  dream  that
night  in  which  some  one  told  her  that  Mrs.  J.  was  dead.

The  following  case  is  interesting  from  several  points  of  view.
M.  Sully-Prudhomme  and  I  were  able  to  gather  all  the  authenticat-
ing documents.  Captain  Mangot,  commanding  the  three-master
Jacques  Gabriel,  outward  bound,  Bordeaux  to  Mauritius,  notes
in  the  ship's  log,  July  17,  1852,  that  he  and  his  second  officer,
M.  Penaud,  walking  on  the  poop,  heard  a  woman's  voice.  The
steersman  also  heard  it.    He  says,  "On  arriving  at  Mauritius

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  337

we  heard  of  the  death  of  M.  Penaud's  wife,  who  died  on  the  same
day  and  hour  at  which  the  voice  was  heard.  M.  Penaud  told  me
that  he  had  had  a  presentiment  of  misfortune,  adding  that  each
time  he  had  lost  one  of  his  family  a  similar  warning  had  oc-
curred." Later  on  the  captain  added  that  the  cry  he  had  heard
was  heart-rending,  and  the  fact  impressed  him  so  much  that  he
often  spoke  of  it.

The  ship  left  Bordeaux  on  April  16th,  and  the  death  of  Mme.
Penaud  took  place,  not  on  the  17th  of  July,  but  on  the  16th  of
June,  according  to  the  register  of  deaths  at  Paimbceuf.  There  is,
therefore,  a  manifest  error  in  the  statement  of  dates  in  the  log-
book. The  voice  was  not  heard  on  the  day  of  the  death,  but  a
month  later.  Still,  the  fact  remains  that  a  woman's  voice,  strong
and  clear,  was  heard  by  three  persons  on  a  ship  at  sea.

Mr.  Falkinburg,  returning  home  at  7  p.m.,  was  playing  with
his  little  boy  aged  five,  when  suddenly  the  child  exclaimed,  "Papa,
here  is  grandpapa."  Mr.  Falkinburg  came  and  saw  the  very
lifelike  figure  of  his  father.  Mrs.  Falkinburg,  however,  could
see  nothing,  and  tried  to  persuade  her  husband  that  it  must  be  an
illusion.  At  ten  o'clock,  the  child,  then  in  his  bed,  called  again,
"Papa,  grandpapa  is  here."  Mr.  Falkinburg  had  died  at  7.14
exactly.

This  monition  though  collective  cannot  be  objective,  since  it
was  invisible  to  the  third  person  present.  It  is  open  to  question
whether  collective  monitions  seen  by  several  persons  have  really
the  objectivity  that  they  would  seem  to  have,  using  the  word
"objectivity"  in  its  usual  sense.

Mme.  Focke  at  Diisseldorf,  was  taking  tea  with  her  daughters,
when  she  heard  a  cry,  "Mother,  Mother!"  Her  daughters  and
Mme.  Haskel,  who  was  with  her,  heard  the  same  cry,  and  the
voice  was  recognized  as  that  of  Anna  Focke,  another  daughter.
They  went  to  the  window  but  could  see  no  one.  Anna  Focke
had  embarked  for  the  Indies  on  a  Dutch  boat  which  was  lost
that  night  with  all  hands  (Phantasms  of  the  Living).

Professor  Knes  and  Dr.  Obersteiner,  well-known  physicians  of
Vienna,  were  together  at  the  house  of  the  latter,  and  heard  a
knock  at  the  door.  They  cried,  "Come  in,"  but  no  one  entered.
A  few  moments  later  they  heard  the  door  of  the  antechamber
open,  and  some  footsteps,  light,  but  distinct.  Obersteiner  opened
the  door  but  saw  no  one.   A  third  time  they  heard  the  further

338

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

door  opening,  the  light  footsteps  and  the  knock  on  their  door,
and  Dr.  Obersteiner  exclaimed,  "This  is  really  too  much  I"  At
that  time  Mme.  S.,  the  sick  lady  whom  they  were  going  to  see  in
consultation,  was  dying.  She  had  died  when  they  reached  the
house  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  i,  162).

Mme.  B.,  at  the  bedside  of  her  dying  mother,  saw  the  phantom
of  her  godmother,  an  old  governess  long  since  dead,  sitting  by  the
fire  in  her  mother's  usual  place.  She  gave  a  cry,  her  sister  came,
she  and  three  other  persons  saw  the  phantom  (Bozzano,  A.  S.  P.,
1906,  166).

One  night,  Mrs.  L.,  sleeping  at  her  husband's  side,  heard
clearly  the  voice  of  their  son.  Both  woke  up  completely.  The
voice  said,  "As  I  cannot  come  home  to  England,  mother,  I  am
come  to  see  you."  They  took  note  of  the  incident  and  some
days  later  learned  of  their  son's  death  (Tel.  Halluc,  364).

Maria  Strieffert,  schoolmistress,  heard  distinctly  the  word
"Fraulein."  Two  pupils  with  her  also  heard  it.  She  knew  it
for  the  voice  of  a  person  who  had  behaved  badly  to  her.  Having
noted  the  time,  it  was  verified  that  this  person  had  died  at  that
moment.    The  case  is  not  very  evidential  (Flammarion,  323).

Mme.  Telechoff  was  in  her  sitting-room  in  Petersburg  with
her  five  children  and  her  dog  Moustache.  The  dog  suddenly  be-
gan to  bark,  and  all  present  then  saw  a  small  boy  about  six  years
old,  dressed  in  a  shirt,  whom  they  recognized  as  the  child  of  the
milkwoman.  They  knew  this  child  to  be  ill.  The  apparition  left
the  stove,  passed  over  the  heads  of  the  persons  present,  and  dis-
appeared by  the  open  window  after  lasting  about  fifteen  seconds.
The  dog  followed  its  movements,  barking  all  the  while.  The
child  died  at  the  same  hour  (A.  S.  P.,  1905,  xv,  439).

Philip  Weld,  a  boy  of  fifteen,  was  accidentally  drowned  on
April  16,  1845.  Mr.  Cox,  the  master  of  his  school,  went  to  the
boy's  father  to  give  the  sad  news  personally ;  but  as  soon  as  he
entered,  Mr.  Weld  said,  "You  need  not  tell  me,  I  know  that
Philip  is  dead.  My  daughter  Catherine  and  I  saw  him  on  the
road,  and  by  him  a  young  man  dressed  in  black.  I  could  see,
through  their  forms,  a  peasant  working  in  the  fields.  I  have
said  nothing  about  it  so  as  not  to  alarm  my  wife"  (Tel.  Halluc.,
376).

Mme.  Obalecheff ,  at  Odessa,  was  lying  in  bed  with  her  infant ;
her  servant  Claudine  was  sleeping  on  a  mattress  beside  her  on

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  339

the  floor.  Raising  her  eyes  she  saw  her  father-in-law  slowly
enter,  wearing  bedroom  slippers  and  a  plaid  pattern  dressing-
gown  that  Mme.  Obalecheff  had  never  seen.  He  stepped  over
the  feet  of  the  servant  and  sat  down  in  an  armchair.  The  clock
struck  eleven.  "Being  quite  sure  that  I  was  looking  at  my
father-in-law,  I  said  to  the  servant,  'Look,  Claudine,  I  do  not
know  him/  Claudine,  trembling  with  fright,  said,  'I  see  Nicolas
Nilovitch'  (my  father-in-law's  name).  He  then  got  up,  again
stepped  over  the  servant's  feet,  and  vanished."  The  lady  went
to  call  her  husband ;  they  went  through  the  flat  but  found  no  one.
Mr.  Nilovitch  died  at  Yver  at  that  time  (Flammarion,  194).

Mrs.  Paget  was  at  prayers  with  her  daughters  one  evening
about  11  p.m.  when  the  three  of  them  heard  the  heavy  steps  of
a  man  in  the  passage.  The  steps  stopped  at  the  end  of  the
corridor  where  there  was  a  gas-jet,  and  then  went  away.  Mrs.
Paget  opened  the  door,  and  said,  "He  has  not  put  out  the  gas;
how  his  step  resembled  that  of  poor  Arthur!"  This  Arthur  was
an  old  and  faithful  servant  whom  Mrs.  Paget  had  sent  to  Ventnor
for  a  rest.  She  knew  him  to  be  ill,  but  thought  him  in  no  im-
mediate danger.  Before  hearing  the  steps,  Mrs.  Paget  had  re-
marked, "Since  poor  Arthur  has  left  us  no  one  has  put  out  the
gas  punctually."  The  incident  was  noted  in  a  diary,  and  it  was
proved  that  no  one  had  entered  the  passage.  Arthur  died  at
Ventnor  at  the  precise  time,  carefully  verified.  Just  prior  to
death  he  asked  the  time,  and  one  witness  affirms  that  he  said,
"It  is  time  to  put  out  the  gas";  but  this  is  not  perfectly  certain.

Mme.  Weyer  and  her  husband  both  heard  one  night  three  dis-
tinct sobs,  like  those  of  a  dying  person.  He  got  up,  lit  a  candle,  and
sought  for  the  cause  of  the  sound.  They  went  to  bed  again  and  the
sobbing  was  repeated.  The  time  was  noted  as  10.30.  There  was
no  recognition,  but  Mme.  Weyer's  brother  died  at  the  same  hour.

Mrs.  Elgee,  staying  in  Cairo,  slept  in  a  large  room  of  the
hotel,  having  carefully  barricaded  her  door.  One  night  she
woke  suddenly,  as  if  she  had  been  called,  and  saw  the  form  of
an  old  friend  whom  she  knew  to  be  in  England.  "How  did  you
come  here?"  she  asked  in  astonishment.  The  form  was  so  dis-
tinct that  she  could  see  all  details  of  the  dress  down  to  three
onyx  shirt-studs.  He  came  forward  and  pointed  to  Mrs.  Dennys,
who  was  sleeping  in  the  same  room.  She  woke  up  and  looked
at  the  apparition  in  great  terror.   The  form  then  vanished.  Mrs.

340

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Dennys  was  able  to  describe  the  vision  exactly,  but  did  not  recog-
nize it.  The  person  seen  by  both  ladies  with  all  the  appearance
of  life  was  a  Mr.  X.,  who  was  neither  ill  nor  in  danger.  Mrs.
Elgee  met  him  four  years  later.

Mrs.  Lett  entered  one  of  the  rooms  of  her  father's  house,  ac-
companied by  a  young  girl,  Miss  Berthon.  The  gas  was  alight,
and  both  saw  the  figure  of  Mrs.  Lett's  father,  Captain  Towns,
reflected  on  the  polished  surface  of  a  wardrobe.  It  looked  like  a
life-size  portrait.  The  face  was  pale  and  thin,  and  he  seemed
to  be  wearing  the  grey  flannel  jacket  in  which  he  used  habitually
to  sleep.  There  was  no  portrait  on  the  walls.  While  they  con-
tinued to  look  stupefied  at  this  image,  another  daughter  of  Cap-
tain Towns  entered  and  said,  "Why,  good  God,  it  is  father!"
A  housemaid  also  came  and  said,  "It  is  the  master."  Graham,
the  captain's  orderly,  came,  and  said,  "Lord  save  us,  Mrs.  Lett,
it  is  the  captain !"  They  called  the  steward  and  Mrs.  Crane,  and
both  said  that  they  saw  the  captain.  Then  Mrs.  Towns,  the
captain's  widow,  was  called,  who,  seeing  the  apparition,  put  out
her  hand  to  touch  it ;  as  she  passed  her  hand  over  the  panel  the
image  gradually  disappeared.

Dr.  Isnard,  the  son  of  the  well-known  military  surgeon,  who
was  professor  at  the  Val-de-Grace,  while  still  a  medical  student,
had  a  vision  of  a  phantom,  perceived  also  by  his  sister  and  a
friend  at  the  same  time.  His  mother,  Mme.  Isnard,  being  then  a
widow,  was  seriously  ill  and  had  been  bedridden  for  four  months
in  her  house  in  the  Rue  Jacob  at  Paris,  in  1878.  Her  bedroom
was  next  to  the  dining-room.  Suddenly  the  door  into  the  passage
opened  wide.  A  gust  of  wind  was  felt  though  all  the  windows
were  shut.  In  the  doorway  there  appeared  the  shade  of  a  woman
of  small  stature,  bent,  with  bowed  head  and  arms  crossed  on  her
breast.  She  seemed  to  be  wearing  a  grey  and  dusty  veil.  She
advanced  gently  into  the  room,  gliding  over  the  floor  and  her
face  could  not  be  seen.  She  passed  close  to  us,  turned  by  the
door  and  disappeared  in  the  darkness  of  the  passage-way.  Mile.
Isnard  and  M.  Menou  Cornuet  saw  exactly  the  same  phantom.
Mme.  Isnard  died  a  few  days  later  (A.  S.  P.,  1891,  193-203).

The  very  circumstantial  evidence  given  by  the  three  witnesses,
none  of  them  at  all  superstitious,  makes  it  clear  that  no  illusion
was  possible.  This  is  one  of  the  best  cases  of  collective  vision ;
and  its  full  force  can  scarcely  be  realized  without  reading  the

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  341

whole  evidence  and  the  judicious  notes  that  Dariex  has  added
upon  them.

To  establish  the  objectivity  of  a  phantom  perhaps  the  best
proof,  apart  from  photography,  would  be  the  effect  on  animals.
On  this  there  are  valuable  evidences,  collected  with  much  care
by  Bozzano,  who  has  brought  together  sixty-nine  cases,  mostly
gathered  from  the  Proceedings  and  Journals  of  the  S.  P.  R.
After  eliminating  the  stories  of  phantasmal  animals  and  haunted
localities  (a  very  doubtful  matter  pertaining  to  haunted  houses),
there  remain  thirty-five  cases  of  cryptesthetic  perceptions  by
animals,  though  the  evidential  weight  to  be  attached  to  them  is
not  very  great.1

Mme.  T.,  visiting  M.  and  Mme.  Yver,  was  conversing  with
them  on  the  subject  of  one  of  Mme.  T.'s  relations  who  had  com-
mitted suicide.  A  little  terrier  at  Mme.  T.'s  feet  began  to  whine
and  tried  to  rush  to  the  door ;  his  hair  stood  up  and  he  tried  to
escape  from  his  master's  hands  as  if  to  attack  some  one.  Mme.
T.,  but  only  she,  saw  a  phantom  before  the  door  which  she  al-
leged that  she  recognized  as  the  form  of  the  suicide.

Miss  H.  E.  S.,  aged  eighteen,  having  risen  one  summer  morning
at  five  o'clock,  was  lighting  the  fire  to  prepare  tea,  when  a  big  dog
with  her  began  to  growl  and  look  towards  the  door.  Miss  S.  then
saw  a  tall,  dark  figure  with  shining  eyes,  that  soon  disappeared.

Miss  K.  was  petting  her  kitten  on  her  knees  when  the  animal
suddenly  showed  disquiet,  hissed,  arched  its  back,  giving  all  the
signs  of  terror.  Miss  K.  then  saw  in  a  chair  near  her  an  old
hag,  ugly  and  wrinkled,  looking  maliciously  at  her.  The  cat
rushed  against  the  door,  and  Miss  K.,  terrified,  called  for  help.
Her  mother  came,  but  the  phantom  had  vanished.  It  had  been
visible  to  Miss  K.  for  about  five  minutes.  As  soon  as  the  door
was  opened  the  cat  had  fled  through.  It  seems  that  formerly
an  old  woman  had  hanged  herself  in  that  room.

1To  these  facts  of  telekinesis  should  be  added  some  that  may  be  considered
as  monitions.  Professor  Bozzano  has  published  a  most  interesting  article,
Dei  fenomcni  di  telekinasia  in  rapporto  con  eventi  di  Morte  (Luce  e  Ombra,
1922,  37s;  1922,  13).  Twenty-five  cases  are  reported  of  which  some  are  very
striking.  Myers  has  mentioned  some  of  these  in  his  Human  Personality.  They
resemble  some  cases  on  which  Flammarion  has  dwelt — apparitions  of  the  dead
to  the  dying.  These  monitory  and  premonitory  telekineses  and  hallucinations
should  be  noted.  They  do  not  simplify  the  problems,  but  demonstrate  once
more  the  mysteries  that  surround  our  psychological  and  physiological  life.
(Second  French  edition.)

342

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

If  it  is  difficult  to  admit  that  collective  hallucinations,  perceived
in  common  by  several  persons,  are  purely  objective,  it  is  much
more  difficult  to  admit  this  when  animals  show  perception  of  an
external  reality  of  some  kind  or  other.  As  Bozzano  well  says,
the  signs  of  fear  or  anger  shown  by  cats  and  dogs  do  not  prove
that  they  see  the  same  phantom  that  is  seen  by  human  beings.
All  the  same,  they  do  see  something,  and  this  unusual  something
frightens  them.

It  is  not  unlikely  that  if  in  such  cases  a  photograph  could  be
taken  there  might  be  an  image  on  the  plate.  This  proof  would
be  much  more  evidential  for  the  objectivity  of  the  phenomenon
than  the  terror  of  a  dog,  cat,  or  horse,  which  is  difficult  to  verify,
still  more  difficult  to  analyze,  and  almost  impossible  to  interpret.

Conclusions

It  cannot  be  supposed  that  these  forms,  noises,  and  phantoms
that  several  persons  can  see  have  no  mechanical  objectivity;  and
yet  rigid  and  unquestionable  proof  is  lacking.  As  in  all  the
sciences  that  depend  on  observation,  the  accuracy  of  the  observa-
tions is  open  to  question.

Given  the  strange  nature  of  the  phenomena  and  the  conse-
quent need  for  rigorous  demonstration,  if  we  had  to  depend
solely  upon  collective  hallucinations  to  determine  the  reality  of
materialized  phantoms  we  could  not  venture  on  a  conclusion.
But  the  experiments  on  materializations  are  so  evidential  that
they  reinforce  the  observations.  On  the  basis  of  experimental
fact  given  by  materializations  (to  be  studied  in  detail  later  on),
it  may  be  positively  asserted  that  some  collective  hallucinations
are  objective  phenomena  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word.

Observational  methods  are  not  as  precise  as  experimental
methods.  Cameras,  microphones,  balances,  and  galvanometers
are  not  available.  The  only  proof  that  can  be  given  of  a  true
materialization  with  mechanical  and  visible  reality,  is  that  the
phenomenon  has  been  perceived  at  the  same  time  and  with  the
same  details  by  several  persons.  It  is  highly  improbable  that
two  persons  should  have  the  same  hallucination  at  the  same
moment,  their  good  faith  and  intellectual  honesty  being  admitted,
and  in  the  absence  of  any  external  suggestion.

A  photograph  would,  of  course,  carry  scientific  certainty;  but
when  two  reasonable  and  normal  persons  describe  the  same  form,

SPORADIC  CRYPTESTHESIA  343

exclaim  at  the  same  moment,  and  utter  their  impressions  even
while  the  apparition  is  still  there  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose
an  identical  wholly  subjective  hallucination.

When  Mr.  Weld  and  his  daughter  both  see  Philip  Weld  walk-
ing on  the  road  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  no  phantom  was
there.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Beilby  both  hear  Miss  Snell  call  "Johnny,
Johnny,"  and  the  servants  also  hear  the  same  voice ;  it  is  almost
self-evident  that  there  were  sonorous  vibrations  of  the  air  that
could  have  been  recorded  by  a  phonograph.  When  Mrs.  Ayles-
bury and  her  three  daughters  hear  the  cry,  "Mother,  Mother!"
how  can  this  be  understood  unless  the  air  really  conveyed  those
sounds?  The  two  sons  see  the  form  of  their  father  in  their
cabin,  and  both  their  accounts  tally,  even  though  at  second-hand.
How  can  this  concurrent  testimony  be  explained  unless  there
were  some  single  objectifkation?

These  collective  hallucinations  are  often  monitory,  and  might
be  so  classified.  But  certain  cases  show  no  lucidity  in  the  per-
cipients, and  no  recognition;  it  is  just  a  phantom  that  some
persons  have  seen  and  described  without  connecting  it  with  any
external  event.    The  meaning,  if  any,  has  not  been  understood.

Such  occurrences  can  hardly  be  called  monitions ;  they  convey
no  warning  and  involve  no  recognition.  Such  collective  visions
belong  rather  to  the  chapter  on  the  uncertain  and  imperfectly
studied  phenomena  of  haunted  houses.

They  constitute  a  transitional  class  between  metapsychic  sub-
jectivity and  objectivity.

Collective  hallucinations  confirm  what  has  already  been  so
often  reiterated — that  there  is  a  special  sensibility  perhaps  com-
mon to  all  men  but  certainly  existing  in  some  individuals,  which
conveys  notions  by  other  means  than  the  normal  senses.

But  for  this  sensibility  to  come  into  play  there  must  necessarily
be  some  external  radiation;  some  power  hidden  in  things  or  in
the  human  soul  which  finds  out  the  percipient  and  sets  some
tracts  of  his  subconsciousness  in  motion.

We  can  state  nothing  as  yet  either  on  the  nature  of  such
forces  or  on  the  modes  of  the  sensibility  by  which  they  act,  and
therefore  we  must  abstain  from  theorizing.

Nor  does  this  greatly  matter!  We  have  no  warrant  to  deny
a  phenomenon  because  we  do  not  know  its  laws.  If  that  were
the  case  we  should  have  to  close  all  scientific  books.

CHAPTER  VII

Premonitions

1.  On  Premonitions  in  General

We  now  approach  the  thorny  problem  of  premonitory  crypt-
esthesia.  We  may  be  just  able  to  conceive  of  extremely  piercing
sight,  or  super-acuity  of  hearing,  a  sensitiveness  to  vibrations
hidden  in  things,  or  the  influence  of  one  brain  on  another,  but
what  are  we  to  say  on  a  knowledge  of  what  is  yet  to  come?
Nevertheless,  it  seems  to  me  that  there  are  numerous  and  indis-
putable cases  of  lucidity  that  involve  a  knowledge  of  future  events.
Bozzano,  who  has  published  an  excellent  book  on  premonitions,
says,  with  good  reason,  that  among  all  the  phenomena  of  lucidity,
premonition  is  the  one  that  has  been  most  effectively  proved.

If  the  long-continued  belief  of  men  in  all  lands  and  in  all  times
had  any  scientific  value,  divination  of  the  future  might  be  reck-
oned as  one  of  the  most  positive  facts  in  metapsychics.

But  we  can  definitely  affirm  the  reality  of  premonitions,  not
because  all  ancient  writers,  whether  credulous  or  not,  believed  in
it,  but  because  many  testimonies  to  it  have  been  obtained  in  our
own  day.  Oracles  were  given  by  the  augurs,  the  sibyls,  and  the
priestesses  of  Cumse  and  Delphi ;  Socrates  had  a  daemon  who
warned  him  of  dangers  by  a  voice  that  he  distinctly  heard.  Cicero
has  written  a  whole  book  on  divination,  but  does  not  discuss
whether  it  exists  or  not ;  he  descants  on  its  advantages  and  errors,
and  he  seems  to  conclude  on  a  fatalistic  note,  saying  it  is  better
to  be  ignorant  of  coming  evils:  ignoratio  futurorum  malornm
utUiorquam  scientia  est.

We  shall  not  discuss  whether  a  knowledge  of  the  future  is  or
is  not  desirable,  but  shall  only  examine  whether  it  is  possible.

At  the  outset  it  may  be  shown  that  prevision  of  the  future  is
not  so  absurd  as  to  warrant  rejection  a  priori.

Let  us  imagine  a  man  on  a  high  mountain  with  a  first-rate  astro-

344

PREMONITIONS

345

nomical  telescope  which  shows  every  detail  on  the  plains.  He  sees
a  railway,  and  at  the  exit  of  a  tunnel  some  villains  placing  a  huge
stone  on  the  rails.  It  is  10  a.m.,  and  the  train  is  due  there  at
noon.  He  knows  that  B.  will  travel  first  class  in  that  train,
and  he  sees  the  train  in  the  station,  and  B.  entering  a  first-class
carriage  in  the  forepart  of  the  train.  He  foresees  the  accident
as  a  result  of  his  momentary  vision,  and  notes  down,  "In  two
hours  B.  will  be  in  a  terrible  railway  accident.,,  Suppose  the
means  whereby  this  knowledge  came  to  him  is  then  effaced  from
his  memory ;  he  will  then  have  a  premonition  of  the  future  with-
out knowing  how  he  came  to  have  it.

If  we  knew  the  totality  of  things  in  the  present  we  should
know  the  totality  of  things  to  come.  Our  ignorance  of  the  future
is  the  result  of  our  ignorance  of  the  present.

Laplace,  in  his  Analytical  Essay  on  Probabilities,  has  said  this
in  precise  terms :  "An  intelligence  knowing  all  the  forces  of
Nature  and  the  respective  positions  of  all  beings  in  it,  having  also
the  power  of  analyzing  all  the  data,  would  comprehend  under  one
formula  the  movements  of  vast  masses  and  of  the  smallest  atoms.
Nothing  would  be  uncertain,  and  the  future  would  be  as  open  to
it  as  the  present."

Every  future  event  of  whatever  kind  is  the  consequence,  perhaps
the  inevitable  consequence,  of  the  actual  state  of  things.  The
present  is  pregnant  of  the  future,  for  the  future  is  dependent  upon
the  present.  Now,  cryptesthesia  gives  cognitions  of  realities,  even
of  far-distant  realities.  We  are  subconsciously  moved  by  com-
plex vibrations  that  bring  to  us  complex  notions  to  which  our
normal  psychological  life  is  closed  ;  so  that  the  subconscious  knowl-
edge of  the  present  may  permit  of  a  rapid  perception  of  its  con-
sequences ;  that  is,  of  things  to  come.

There  is  a  curious,  though  very  rare,  medical  fact  which  enables
us  to  form  an  idea  of  what  a  premonition  may  be.  A  photograph
taken  of  a  person  suffering  from  a  slight  attack  of  fever  may
show  signs  of  a  rash  or  eruption  on  the  face  quite  invisible  to
ordinary  sight.    The  eruption  may  then  be  foreseen.

These  are  but  analogies,  and  scarcely  lessen  the  enormous  dif-
ficulties of  our  inability  to  comprehend  the  facts.  Whatever
sketchy  theories  we  may  make  to  explain  premonition,  they  will
always  be  fragile  and  imperfect;  and  I  shall  not  dwell  on  this
mystery  but  shall  content  myself  with  showing  that  premonition
is  an  existing  fact.   That  is  all  that  present  science  can  do.

346

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

To  permit  of  our  speaking  of  premonition  in  the  metapsychic
sense  of  the  word,  three  conditions  must  prevail :

(1)  The  fact  announced  must  be  absolutely  independent  of  the
person  to  whom  the  premonition  has  come.

For  instance,  many  cases  are  known  in  which  A.,  in  a  somnam-
bulistic state,  announces  that  he  will  have  some  illness,  say  a  syn-
cope, after  ten  days,  a  month,  or  even  a  year.  This  is  not  a
metapsychic  premonition,  for  A.'s  subconsciousness  is  fully  awake,
and  is  quite  able  to  act  on  the  internal  organs  and  so  to  bring
about  the  crisis  at  the  predicted  time.  Such  cases  belong  to  hyp-
notic auto-suggestion.

(2)  The  announcement  must  be  such  that  it  cannot  be  ascribed
to  chance  nor  to  sagacity.

The  range  of  the  latter  is  difficult  to  determine.  An  acute  mind
in  possession  of  the  exact  facts  can  to  some  degree  foresee  the
future  event.  In  an  academical  election,  for  instance,  he  may  say.
"X.  will  be  elected,  and  not  Y.,  for  M.  and  N.  will  both  vote  for
him.  O.  will  not  vote,  and  though  Y.  counts  on  M.,  N.,  and  O.,
he  will  have  three  votes  less  than  he  counts  on.  X.  will  have  21
votes  and  Y.  only  17."  This  is  only  shrewdness.  So  if  a  young
man  is  seen  to  enter  a  gambling  house  with  two  hundred-franc
notes  it  might  be  said,  "In  an  hour  that  young  man  will  be  cleaned
out."

But  the  predictions  of  shrewdness,  however  acute,  are  not  neces-
sarily correct.  Y.  may  be  elected  in  spite  of  A.'s  correct  calcula-
tions ;  the  young  man  may  possibly  win.  Genuine  premonitions
are  not  due  to  shrewdness ;  they  are  often  concerned  with  minute
details  that  no  sagacity  could  foresee  and  no  chance  could
account  for.

Before  we  can  admit  a  metapsychic  premonition,  chance  must
be  completely  eliminated.

A.  goes  to  Monte  Carlo  and,  looking  at  the  roulette-table,
says,  "Red  will  come  up."  The  probability  is  1:2,  and  if  he
is  right  the  result  is,  of  course,  one  of  two  probabilities.  If  he
says,  "7  will  come  up,"  and  again  is  right,  the  probability  is  1  :  37.
But  gamesters  often  have  such  anticipations  which  prove  correct
and  they  are  blind  enough  to  forget  the  thirty-six  cases  in  which
the  anticipation  failed.

Every  alleged  premonition  is  a  special  case  to  be  studied  and
analyzed  in  full  detail  to  eliminate  auto-suggestion,  perspicacity,
and  chance.

PREMONITIONS

347

To  show  how  chance  may  intervene  I  will  quote  the  following
personal  fact  which  I  do  not  in  the  least  imagine  to  be  a  pre-
monition, but  consider  entirely  fortuitous :  On  the  20th  of  May,
1918,  I  was  in  Paris,  and  being  about  to  start  for  the  ambulances
at  the  front,  I  wrote  in  my  pocket  diary  under  the  dates  May  20th
and  September  24th,  "Finis  belli."

On  the  20th  of  May  no  perspicacity  could  foresee  the  end  of
the  war.  To  all  appearances,  and  my  own  opinion  was  in
agreement,  the  war  would  last  another  year  ;  but  on  the  24th
of  September  the  Bulgarian  armistice  was  signed,  and  that  date
is  nearly  as  important  with  regard  to  the  end  of  the  war  as  No-
vember 11,  1918,  when  the  general  armistice  took  effect.

If  the  calculus  of  probabilities  be  applied  to  the  above,  from
the  20th  of  May,  1918,  to  the  same  date  a  year  later,  there  are
360  days,  and  since  two  dates  are  specified  we  may  put  the  odds
against  one  of  them  being  right  as  2  :  360  or  1  :  180,  a  probability
fairly  comparable  to  that  of  predicting  that  first  the  ace  of  hearts
and  then  a  club  would  be  drawn  from  a  pack  of  cards,  1/52  x  ^4,
say,  1/208.  I  have  no  notion  why  I  wrote  "Finis  belli"  under
September  24th.  I  never  but  once  made  any  similar  forecast,
and  that  turned  out  wrong.  It  would  be  absurd  to  consider  this
a  premonition;  it  is  a  mere  coincidence,  curious  enough  but
fortuitous.

I  think  that  Dr.  Conan  Doyle's  Piavc,  to  which  I  shall  allude
further  on,  is  similarly  fortuitous.

(3)  The  conditions  under  which  the  alleged  fact  has  been
received  and  noted  down  must  be  examined  with  the  greatest
care.  Paramnesia — false  memory — that  leads  a  person  to  imagine
in  all  good  faith  that  the  event  or  the  landscape  that  he  sees
is  not  new  to  his  eyes,  plays  strange  parts  and  is  sometimes  so
strong  as  to  lead  a  person  to  affirm  a  premonition  when  there  has
been  none.

The  only  answer  to  this  serious  objection  is  that  before  the
alleged  prediction  is  realized  it  should  have  been  written  down.,
or  circumstantially  told  to  two  or  three  persons.  If  an  exact
register  were  kept  of  dreams  supposed  to  be  premonitory,  it
would  be  possible  to  compare  the  number  of  those  that  were
verified  with  those  that  were  not.  Several  investigators  have
suggested  classifications  for  premonitions — e.g.,  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
F.  W.  H.  Myers,  and  Bozzano.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  classes  them  according  to  subjective  modalities;

348

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Myers  on  an  ascending  scale  of  theoretical  import.    I  shall  here
follow  the  classification  adopted  in  previous  chapters  for  moni-
tions ;  giving,  however,  one  separate  section  to  auto-premonitions,
which  are  subject  to  some  reserves,  inasmuch  as  they  may  some-
times be  explained  as  being  due  to  auto-suggestion.
The  classification  to  be  followed  will  then  be :
Auto-premonition,  (a)  of  sickness,  (b)  of  accidental  death:
Real  premonitions,  (a)  under  hypnotism,  (b)  under  spiritist
conditions,  (c)  casual  premonitions  of  various  kinds.

2.  Auto-Premonitions
(a)  Of  Sickness

Of  all  kinds  of  premonitions  these  are  the  most  questionable,
for  there  is  nothing  to  prove  that  an  act  of  will — I  may  even  say
of  unconscious  will  (paradoxical  though  the  words  may  be) — does
not  bring  about  the  event.  For  instance,  the  case  in  which  a
magnetizer  suggested  a  crisis  to  supervene  after  6,666  minutes.
The  subject,  on  waking  up,  had  no  remembrance  of  the  sugges-
tion, but  the  crisis  occurred  as  suggested.

The  following  case  is  taken  from  Dr.  Teste's  Manuel  pratique
de  magnetisme  animal,  p.  140.  Mme.  M.,  being  pregnant,  an-
nounced on  May  8th  that  she  would  have  a  fright  on  the  12th,
and  a  fall  that  would  have  serious  though  not  fatal  results.  On
the  12th,  in  magnetic  sleep,  she  repeated  the  prediction,  which
was  completely  forgotten  on  waking,  and  she  was  astonished
when  her  husband,  fearing  the  consequences,  forbade  her  going
out.  She  went  to  her  room  and  gave  a  cry  of  fright.  A  rat
ran  across  the  room  and  the  fright  caused  her  to  fall,  bringing
on  a  miscarriage.

The  fact  is  thoroughly  authenticated,  but  no  deduction  can
be  made,  for  it  may  be  supposed  that  if  the  rat  had  not  been
there,  some  other  cause  would  have  produced  the  result.

Denise  Blanche,  aged  eighteen,  in  blooming  health,  and  belong-
ing to  a  very  honourable  family  at  Aramon  (Gard)  pressed  her
parents  to  have  her  portrait  taken,  saying  that  she  had  not  long
to  live.  There  was  no  reason  for  the  apprehension.  One  day
while  she  was  in  the  house,  there  was  an  alarm  of  fire.  Alongside
of  the  house,  separated  by  a  small  yard,  there  was  a  basket
factory  which  had  caught  fire,  though  the  damage  done  was
unimportant.    Denise  was  much  frightened,  felt  a  vague  illness,

PREMONITIONS

349

and  died  in  two  months,  the  actual  nature  of  the  disease  being
indeterminate  (communicated  by  Mr.  F.  of  Aramon).

I  cite  this  case  of  auto-premonition  (which  is  not  evidential),
to  show  that  such  cases  might  well  be  called  pseudo-premonitions.

Mme.  Clary,  very  ill  (of  tuberculosis,  doubtless),  on  being  put
to  sleep  by  Dr.  Teste  on  the  15th  of  May,  said  that  she  would  have
high  fever  on  the  2d  and  3d  of  June.  Asked,  "And  on  the  4th  ?"
she  replied,  "I  see  no  more."  She  died  on  the  4th  of  June.  There
is  no  need  to  insist  further ;  such  facts  prove  nothing.

The  artist  Giovanni  Segantini  was  painting  an  allegorical  picture
representing  death — a  cottage  on  a  snow-covered  plain,  and  a
coffin  in  front  of  the  cottage.  One  day  he  dreamed  that  he  saw
himself  in  the  coffin  and  told  this  dream  to  his  wife.  Some  days
later  he  had  acute  peritonitis  and  died  thirteen  days  after  the
vision.  The  circumstances  at  the  funeral  at  the  cottage  of
Maloja  reproduced  precisely  those  of  the  vision.  This  also  is
a  pseudo-premonition,  for  he  may  have  vaguely  felt  some  morbid
symptoms  that  no  doctor  could  foresee.

Similarly  the  gruesome  dream  of  Earl  Hartington,  who,  while
in  good  health,  dreamed  of  a  skeleton  looking  at  him  which
raised  the  coverlet  and  slipped  between  him  and  his  wife.  He
died  fifteen  days  after.

The  cases  next  following  are  taken  from  Bozzano's  book,  unless
otherwise  signified;  the  roman  numbers  being  Bozzano's.

The  reservations  applicable  to  all  auto-premonitions  should  be
maintained  for  that  of  Mrs.  X.,  carefully  analyzed  by  R.  Hodgson.
She  saw  in  a  dream  on  March  5th  her  father,  who  had  been
dead  eleven  years :  he  showed  her  a  calendar  displaying  the
date,  March  22d.  Mrs.  X.  was  near  her  confinement,  and  thought
that  the  dream  meant  that  she  would  be  delivered  on  that  date.
The  confinement  took  place  on  the  12th,  and  her  family  jested
on  her  simplicity  in  believing  prophetic  dreams.  The  confine-
ment was  normal,  but  she  died  of  meningitis  on  the  22d  of  March.

Auto-premonitions  of  organic  phenomena  are  pseudo-premoni-
tions, and  may  be  referred  to  autoscopic  cognitions,  non-
metapsychic,  produced  by  the  subconsciousness.

Mrs.  S.,  married  two  years  and  a  half,  was  distressed  at  having
no  child.  The  planchette  gave  her,  "In  six  months  your  hopes  will
be  realized.  Happiness  to  all  three. "  At  the  end  of  six  months
she  found  herself  enceinte.  It  must  be  added  that  Mrs.  S.  had
had  several  interesting  premonitory  dreams.

350

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Without  minimizing  the  interest  of  this  story,  there  may  have
been  subconscious  organic  perceptions  reaching  the  subliminal
consciousness.  This  explanation  is  not  very  satisfying,  but  neither
is  the  hypothesis  of  chance,  and  the  spiritist  explanation  is  still
less  so.

Bozzano's  sixth  case  may  perhaps  be  explained  by  subcon-
scious organic  sensations.  Mrs.  Norris  was  in  good  health.  One
night  she  had  a  terrifying  dream,  which  she  told  to  her  daughter
and  to  Dr.  Lyon,  her  son-in-law.  She  dreamed  that  a  friend  long
dead,  Mrs.  Carleton,  said  to  her,  "Your  end  is  near;  you  will
die  tomorrow  morning  at  the  same  hour  that  you  have  seen
me  tonight."  Mrs.  Norris  ordered  a  bath  to  be  prepared  so  that
her  corpse  need  not  be  washed,  and  died  at  the  hour  indicated.

Flammarion,  in  his  book  Death  and  Its  Mystery,  reports  several
significant  cases  of  auto-premonitions  that  I  cannot  reproduce
here.

M.  Feron,  a  lawyer  of  Cherbourg,  dreamed  that  he  would  not
see  the  end  of  January.  He  told  this  and  repeated  it.  He  was
quite  well  to  all  appearance,  but  died  suddenly  on  January  18th.

Edward  Reed,  director  of  the  Natural  History  Museum  at
Conception  (Chile),  dreamed  that  he  saw  a  grave  and  cross,  with
the  inscription,  "Reed,  Nov.  7,  1910,"  and  he  told  the  dream
jestingly  to  several  persons.    He  died  on  the  date  mentioned.

Preferring  rationalist  explanations,  1  refer  all  these  cases  to  sub-
conscious sensations  which  give  vague  warnings  to  the  nervous
centres  of  a  defective  state  in  one  or  other  of  the  vital  organs.

The  following  case  of  auto-premonition  of  sickness  and  death
is  remarkable  for  the  precision  of  its  details.  The  story  is  so
dramatic  that  it  would  be  open  to  some  suspicion  had  the  details
not  been  minutely  checked  by  Dr.  Geley  (A.  S.  P.,  1916,  xxvi,
125-129).

The  case  is  that  of  M.  Dencausse,  the  father  of  Mme.  Freya.
whose  lucidity  has  already  been  alluded  to.  In  May,  1916,  M.
Dencausse,  then  aged  seventy-six,  and  in  fairly  good  health,
announced  that  he  would  die  before  winter.  He  was  getting
thinner  and  his  nutrition  was  defective.  Towards  October  24th
he  declared  that  he  would  die  on  All  Saints'  Day.  On  October
28th,  Dr.  Geley,  who  was  called,  found  no  organic  lesion,  no
fever,  and  very  slight  bronchitis.  M.  Dencausse  then  declared
that  he  would  die  on  the  stroke  of  midnight  on  All  Saints'  Day
without  suffering.

PREMONITIONS

351

On  Monday  the  30th  he  was  going  on  well,  but  on  Tuesday
pneumonia  set  in  with  some  fever.  On  November  1st  he  was
weaker,  but  could  speak  and  give  his  last  instructions.  About
11.30  p.m.  he  asked  his  wife,  "What  is  the  time?"  Mrs.  D.,  to
mislead  him,  said,  "Two  o'clock  in  the  morning."  The  sick  man
replied,  "No,  it  is  not  yet  midnight.  I  shall  die  at  midnight."
Close  on  the  hour  he  turned  to  the  wall.  They  came  to  him  and
the  clock  struck;  without  speaking  he  raised  his  hand,  pointed
to  the  clock,  and  expired.

Dr.  Geley  has  noted  that  Mme.  Freya  told  him  her  father's
predictions  from  day  to  day.

A  very  distinct  auto-premonition  of  death  has  been  related  by
Dr.  W.  de  Sermyn.1

Jean  Vitalis,  aged  thirty-nine,  a  strong  and  vigorous  man,
was  seized  by  acute  rheumatic  arthritis.  On  the  sixteenth  day
of  his  illness,  Dr.  de  Sermyn  who  was  attending  him  found  him
sitting  up  in  bed,  smiling  and  half-way  to  recovery.  Nevertheless,
Vitalis  said  to  him,  "I  have  had  a  vision ;  my  father,  who  died
some  years  ago,  has  been  to  visit  me  saying  that  I  ought  to  receive
extreme  unction ;  for  no  doubt  he  wants  me  and  will  come  to  take
me  at  nine  this  evening."  All  day  he  was  well,  pain  had  dis-
appeared, his  temperature  was  normal,  and  he  ate  with  appetite.
He  received  the  unction  for  the  dying,  to  the  great  astonishment
of  the  priest.  Dr.  de  Sermyn  saw  him  at  8  p.m.,  he  was  in  good
spirits,  laughing  and  talking  with  those  about  him.  At  one
minute  to  nine  he  got  up  from  the  sofa  where  he  was  sitting ;  said,
"The  hour  is  come,"  jumped  on  to  his  bed,  arranged  the  pillows,
bent  his  head,  saying,  "Good-bye,  good-bye,"  stretched  himself
out  and  ceased  to  move,  dying  without  a  gasp  or  a  sigh.

These  organic  subconsciousnesses  sometimes  assume  the  form
of  an  exterior  hallucination.  Dr.  Minot  Savage  tells  the  story
(Flammarion,  loc.  cit.,  99)  of  a  student  in  New  York  who  saw  a
spirit  appear  and  walk  beside  him  in  the  street.  He  thought
he  would  die  soon,  and  told  his  mother  who  tried  to  reassure  him.
Three  days  later  he  had  appendicitis,  was  operated  on,  and  died.

It  is,  however,  impossible  to  suppose  organic  subconsciousness
when  the  premonition  takes  place  seventy  years  before  the  event.
Mr.  Banister,  then  a  schoolboy,  dreamed  about  the  year  1813
that  he  saw  on  a  gravestone  his  own  name  with  date  of  his

^Contribution  a  V etude  de  certaines  facultes  cerebrates  meconnues,  Lau-
sanne, Payot,  191 1,  13-16.

352

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

birth  and  death,  the  latter  being  Jun.  9th.  Was  it,  however  Jun.,
which  is  an  unusual  abbreviation  for  June,  or  was  it  Jan.,  for
January?  On  the  9th  of  June,  1835,  his  eldest  son  died.  He
was  then  persuaded  that  the  inscription  must  have  read  June
9th ;  but  in  fact  Mr.  Banister  died  on  the  9th  of  January,  1883.

This  is  a  strange  fact  among  many  strange  facts,  and  it  seems
even  fantastic,  but  it  is  well  authenticated.  I  cannot,  however,
advance  any  explanation  that  would  not  be  absurd.

x\gain,  I  shall  now  quote  two  more  facts  still  more  strange.
They  would  be  curious  and  remarkable  if  each  stood  alone.  But
they  do  not  stand  alone,  and  the  resemblance  between  them,  or
rather  their  identity  in  essentials,  makes  chance  or  fantastical
imagination  alike  untenable  as  an  explanation.

The  first  of  these  (Bozzano's  No.  vii),  refers  to  a  child  of  two
years  and  seven  months  (1883),  named  Ray.  A  baby  brother
of  Ray's  had  lately  died.  Little  Ray  had  repeated  visions ;  he
constantly  saw  his  brother  sitting  on  a  chair  and  calling  him.
"Mother,"  he  said,  "the  little  brother  calls  Ray;  he  wants  him
with  him."  Another  day  he  said,  "Don't  cry,  the  little  brother
smiles  at  Ray.  Ray  is  going  to  him."  The  child's  intelligence
was  much  above  that  usual  to  his  age.  He  died  two  months  and
seven  days  after  the  death  of  his  brother.  No  one  can  doubt
that  he  had  some  kind  of  premonitory  vision;  and  this  is  the
more  extraordinary  as  that  at  his  age  he  could  not  have  understood
the  meaning  of  death.  The  second  case  (unpublished)  seems
almost  modelled  on  Ray's  case.

Louise  F.,  aged  forty-eight,  died  after  an  abdominal  operation
in  January,  1896.  During  her  illness  she  frequently  asked  that,
when  cured,  she  might  take  her  little  niece  Lily,  aged  three  years
and  three  months,  of  whom  she  was  very  fond,  to  live  with  her
in  the  country.  About  a  month  after  the  death  of  her  aunt,  little
Lily  who  was  intelligent  and  precocious  and  in  quite  good  health,
often  stopped  in  her  play  to  look  fixedly  out  of  the  window.  Her
mother  asked  her  what  she  was  looking  at,  and  she  answered,
"It  is  Aunt  Louise,  who  holds  out  her  arms  to  me  and  calls  me."
Her  mother,  much  frightened,  tried  to  distract  her  attention,  but
the  child  drew  her  chair  to  the  window  and  continued  to  look  for
several  minutes.  Her  brother,  M.  F.,  who  gave  me  these  details,
said,  "I  was  then  eleven  years  old  and  my  little  sister  said,  'What !
Don't  you  see  Tata?'  as  she  called  her  aunt.  Of  course  I  could
see  nothing."    For  some  months  nothing  further  was  seen  by

PREMONITIONS

353

the  child,  the  visions  ceased.  Towards  May  20th,  little  Lily  fell
ill,  and  when  in  bed  she  looked  up  to  the  ceiling  saying  that  she
saw  her  aunt  calling  her,  surrounded  by  little  angels.  "Mother,
how  pretty!"  she  said.  From  day  to  day  her  illness  increased,
but  she  always  repeated,  "My  aunt  has  come  to  fetch  me;  she
is  holding  out  her  arms  to  me,"  and  as  her  mother  wept,  she  said,
"Don't  cry,  mother,  it  is  very  beautiful,  there  are  angels  round
me."

She  died  on  the  9th  of  June  of  tubercular  meningitis  four  and  a
half  months  after  the  death  of  Louise  F.

Such  is  the  story  told  me  by  M.  F.,  her  brother,  confirmed  by  his
sister  G.  F.,  and  her  mother.  The  family  lived  very  quietly  in
a  country  town.  None  of  them  know  any  English  or  anything
of  psychic  science.

I  give  the  story  as  it  came  to  me,  without  attempting  any
explanation.  A  somewhat  similar  fact  is  given  by  Stainton  Moses
(Luce  e  Ombra,  xx,  1920,  19).  Miss  H.,  the  daughter  of  an
English  clergyman,  was  tending  a  dying  child.  His  little  brother,
aged  three  to  four  years,  was  in  a  little  bed  in  the  same  room.
As  the  former  was  dying,  the  child  woke  up,  and,  pointing  to  the
ceiling  with  every  expression  of  joy,  said,  "Mother,  look  at  the
beautiful  ladies  round  my  brother!  How  lovely  they  are,  they
want  to  take  him."    The  child  died  at  that  moment.

Another  instance  is  reported  by  M.  Pelusi,  librarian  at  the
Victor  Emmanuel  Library  at  Rome  (Luce  e  Ombra,  1920,  20).
A  little  girl  of  three,  Hippolyte  Notari,  partly  paralyzed,  was  in
the  same  room  with  her  little  brother  of  four  months,  who  was
dying.  The  father,  the  mother,  and  the  grandmother  of  the
two  children  were  present.  About  fifteen  minutes  before  the
death  of  the  infant,  little  Hippolyte  stretched  out  her  arms,  saying,
"Look,  mother,  Aunt  Olga."  This  Aunt  Olga  was  a  younger
sister  of  Mme.  Notari  who  had  killed  herself  a  year  previously
owing  to  a  disappointment  in  love.  The  parents  asked,  "Where  do
you  see  Aunt  Olga?"  The  child  said,  "There,  there,"  and  tried
insistently  to  get  out  of  bed  to  go  to  her  aunt.  They  let  her  get
up,  she  ran  to  an  empty  chair,  and  was  much  discountenanced,
because  the  vision  had  moved  to  another  part  of  the  room.  The
child  turned  round  and  said,  pointing  to  a  corner,  "Aunt  Olga
is  there."    Then  she  became  quiet  and  the  baby  died.

Facts  of  this  kind  are  very  important.  They  are  much  more
explicable  on  the  spiritist  theory  than  by  the  hypothesis  of  mere

354

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

cryptesthesia.  Among  all  the  facts  adduced  to  prove  survival,
these  even  seem  to  me  to  be  the  most  disquieting.  I  have  there-
fore thought  it  a  duty  to  be  scrupulous  in  mentioning  them.  But
in  despite  of  their  spiritoid  nature,  they  are  insufficient  to  make
me  believe  that  the  consciousness  of  the  deceased  persons  is  present
as  a  phantom  at  the  death  of  their  relatives.  (!!!)

Bozzano's  cases,  ix  and  x,  do  not  seem  to  me  worth  record;
for  an  announcement  of  death  to  occur  five  years  later  is  too
vague  to  have  much  value.

(b)   Auto-Premonitions  of  Accidental  Death

No  effect  of  organic  subconsciousness  can  be  invoked  in  such
cases :  they  are  clearly  metapsychic  premonitions.

There  are  a  dozen  or  so  of  these  that  are  too  ancient  for  criticism
or  for  any  inferences  from  them  (A.  S.  P.,  1898,  vii,  316).

Mr.  D.  (Bozzano's  case  xiii),  dreamed  that  he  was  in  an  inn
where  he  met  several  friends,  all  of  them  being  deceased  persons.
They  made  him  promise  to  return  in  six  weeks.  When  he  woke
up,  Mr.  D.  told  the  dream,  joking  over  it.  Exactly  six  weeks
later  he  was  riding  and  met  his  death  in  an  accident.

If  this  case  stood  alone  it  would  be  reasonable  to  refer  it  to
chance,  and  this  may  always  be  done;  but  there  are  too  many
such  cases  for  the  inference  that  chance  plays  so  great  a  part
in  our  lives.   Chance  is  the  god  of  the  ignorant.

Armand  Carrel  saw  in  a  dream  his  mother  clad  in  mourning,
and  weeping.  "I  weep  for  you,  my  son,"  she  said.  On  the  day
following  this  dream  Armand  Carrel  wrote  for  the  National  the
famous  article  that  resulted  in  the  duel  with  Emile  de  Girardin
in  which  he  was  killed.  No  premonitory  value  can  be  attached
to  this  dream,  for  Armand  Carrel  must  have  known  that  the
article  he  had  under  contemplation  would  involve  peril.

The  following  case,  though  not  quite  an  auto-premonition,  is
akin  thereto,  for  it  is  of  a  doctor  who  foresaw  the  death  of  his  child.
Possibly  certain  signs  reaching  his  subconsciousness  led  to  the
prognosis  (?).

Dr.  de  Sermyn  saw,  in  a  dream,  his  child  of  four  fall  into  a
stove  and  burn  to  death.  He  woke  up,  went  to  his  child's  room,
and  found  him  sleeping  peacefully.  "Thank  God/'  he  said,  "it
is  only  a  dream."  In  the  morning  the  child  was  still  in  good
health,  but  at  noon  he  was  very  feverish.  Haunted  by  the  dream,
Dr.  de  S.  knew  that  his  child  was  lost  to  him.   A  colleague  called

PREMONITIONS

355

in  by  him  thought  the  illness  not  serious ;  but  it  grew  worse  from
hour  to  hour,  developed  into  broncho-pneumonia,  and  the  child
died  on  the  fourth  day.

In  this,  as  in  many  cases  of  monition,  I  am  inclined  to  think,
with  Myers  and  Bozzano,  that  the  phenomena  are  of  a  meta-
psychic  order ;  but  rigorous  proof  is  impossible.

Dr.  von  Gudden  (case  xv),  before  leaving  for  the  castle  of
Hochenswangen,  dreamed  that  he  was  drowning  and  struggling
with  someone  in  the  water.  He  told  the  dream  to  his  wife.  Some
days  later  his  body  was  found  in  the  lake,  drowned  along  with
King  Louis  of  Bavaria.   The  premonition  here  is  obvious.

It  is  still  more  so  in  case  xviii,  one  of  the  most  striking.

In  1895  M.  Lukawski,  of  Petersburg,  who  was  an  official  at
the  Ministry  of  the  Marine  (which  does  not  at  all  imply  his  going
to  sea),  dreamed  that  he  was  on  board  a  ship,  that  there  was  a
collision,  that  he  fell  into  the  water  with  another  passenger  and
was  drowned.  From  that  moment  he  was  convinced  that  he
would  die  by  shipwreck,  and  put  his  affairs  in  order.  However,
after  some  months,  when  the  remembrance  of  the  dream  had
faded,  he  received  the  order  to  leave  for  a  port  on  the  Black  Sea.
This  recalled  his  dream,  and  before  leaving  he  said  to  his  wife,
"You  will  see  me  no  more ;  when  you  hear  of  my  death  put  on
mourning,  but  not  that  black  veil  which  I  dislike  so  much."
Two  weeks  later  the  Vladimir,  on  which  he  was  travelling,  col-
lided with  another  vessel  and  M.  Lukawski  was  drowned.  An-
other passenger,  M.  Henicke,  who  escaped,  says  that  he  and  M.
Lukawski  were  for  a  short  time  holding  on  to  the  same  life-buoy.

Mme.  Dudlay,  of  the  Comedie  Franchise,  tells  of  a  spiritualist
seance  in  which  Irene  Muza  was  the  medium.  Irene,  in  1908,  be-
gan to  weep  when  asked  what  would  happen  in  1909,  saying,  "It  is
horrible,"  but  nothing  more.  She  perished  in  the  fire  of  February
23,  1909.    This  premonition  is  too  vague  to  carry  weight.

The  little  daughter  of  M.  Domenico  Fleres,  barrister  in  the
Appeal  Court  of  Palermo,  leaving  for  Messina  when  she  was
eight  years  old,  said,  "Good-bye,  grandma,  we  shall  never  see  each
other  again."  Some  hours  before  the  Messina  earthquake,  when
her  mother  was  putting  on  her  night-socks,  the  child  said,  "Why
do  you  put  on  these  death-socks?"  and  repeated,  "My  death-
socks."   She  perished  in  the  earthquake  (case  xviii).

Case  xix,  a  boy  of  twelve,  saw  himself  in  a  coffin,  and  told  the
story  in  a  semi-hypnotic  state.    Eight  days  later  he  was  drowned

356

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

in  the  lake.  The  case  is  not  very  evidential,  for  the  child  was
sickly  and  the  case  is  possibly  one  of  suicide.

Auto-premonitions  are  always  a  little  doubtful,  for  a  non-
metapsychic  explanation  can  often  be  found;  nevertheless,  in
some,  as  in  the  Banister  and  Von  Gudden  cases,  the  cryptesthetic
premonition  is  obvious.

3.  Premonitions,  Properly  So-called

True  premonitions  are  those  in  which  neither  subconscious
organic  sensation,  nor  will,  nor  auto-suggestion  can  be  supposed
to  intervene.

Instead  of  following  Bozzano's  classification,  I  shall  deal  with
them  in  three  groups  according  as  they  occur,  (1)  under  hypno-
tism, (2)  under  spiritist  conditions,  where  an  external  personality,
a  spirit,  or  guide  ostensibly  dictates  the  premonition,  and
(3)  as  casual  or  accidental  premonitions  to  normal  persons,
l"V  either  awake  or  dreaming.    Premonitions  that  fall  within  the  two

former  classes  are  less  frequent  and  less  interesting  than  those  of
the  third  class;  it  is  also  difficult  to  draw  a  line  of  demarcation
between  them,  for  mediums  are  often  in  a  semi-hypnotic  state,
and,  moreover,  even  when  not  in  seance,  their  predictions  seem
sometimes  to  be  guided  by  a  spirit.  Also,  normal  persons  fall
into  a  kind  of  auto-hypnosis  at  the  moment  of  premonition.

(a)  Premonitions  Under  Hypnotism

The  Seeress  of  Prevorst,  whose  psychological  state  was  that
of  a  medium  rather  than  of  a  somnambulist,  gave  many  prophecies
reported  by  J.  Kerner  (Bozzano's  case  xxv).

Bozzano  cites  five  of  these  prophecies,  the  most  striking  of
which  is  the  following:

She  dreamed  that  Mme.  L.,  whom  she  had  never  seen,  came  to
her  weeping  with  a  dead  child  in  her  arms.  Six  weeks  later  Mme.
L.  was  confined  and  lost  her  child.

In  another  instance  (case  cv)  she  saw  in  a  dream  a  person
known  to  her  who  had  died ;  he  was  anxious  to  speak  of  his
daughter,  who  was  menaced  by  misfortune.  Some  weeks  later
a  tile  fell  on  the  head  of  this  daughter  and  nearly  killed  her.

Dr.  Rostan  (case  xxviii)  relates  that  a  somnambulist  in  her
sleep  predicted  that  a  friend  of  hers,  then  not  very  ill,  would  die
of  hemorrhage  in  six  days  exactly.  The  prediction  was  fulfilled
both  as  to  fact  and  time.

PREMONITIONS

357

Dr.  Liebeault  (xxix)  cites  a  prediction  by  a  young  girl  named
Julia,  who  in  November,  1883,  said  that  a  certain  lady,  then  in  no
way  ill,  would  die  before  the  1st  of  January.  She  died  on  Decem-
ber 31st.

Liebeault  also  gives  the  following  often-quoted  fact :  In  1879  a
somnambulist  predicted  to  M.  L.  that  he  would  lose  his  father
after  a  year ;  that  he  would  be  a  soldier,  would  marry,  and  have
two  children ;  and  that  he  would  die  at  twenty-six.  All  this  was
exactly  fulfilled,  only  the  death  prophecy  was  left.  Then  as  the
approach  of  the  twenty-sixth  birthday  threw  L.  into  a  state  of
melancholy  hypochondria,  Liebeault  prescribed  a  counter-sitting
and  prediction  arranged  beforehand,  which  completely  reassured
L.  "But,"  says  Liebeault,  "no  man  can  escape  his  destiny"  and  L.
died  at  twenty-six.

Mme.  G.  de  Montebello  told  me  the  following  fact:  In  April
or  May,  1884,  she  chanced  to  meet  at  the  house  of  a  friend  of  hers
a  certain  somnambulist  who  predicted  that  someone  dear  to  her
would  perish  in  a  terrible  accident.  Mme.  de  M.,  much  moved,
asked,  "Is  it  my  grandmother?"  "No,"  said  the  somnambulist,
"it  is  not  your  grandmother,  but  someone  very  near  you,  who  will
die  by  the  falling  of  a  wall."

Some  weeks  later  my  dear  mother,  who  was  an  aunt  of  Mme.
de  Montebello,  perished  by  the  bursting  of  a  dam-wall  and  was
buried  under  its  ruins.

Dr.  Osty  received,  in  1912,  the  following  details  from  a  som-
nambulist whom  he  then  saw  for  the  first  time :

"You  live  in  a  little  town  in  the  middle  of  France ;  your  room
looks  out  on  a  small  square.  From  thence  you  go  to  your  office ;
men  come  and  go ;  it  is  a  constant  coming  and  going.  What  a
mass  of  papers !  You  look,  you  write,  and  you  give  the  papers
back."

In  1914  Dr.  Osty  was  appointed  chief  medical  officer  at  Vierzon ;
he  lodged  in  a  house  answering  to  the  description  given ;  he  had
administrative  work  during  the  war  which  involved  the  signing
of  many  papers.  In  1912  he  could  not  possibly  have  foreseen
these  duties.

A  clairvoyant  somnambulist  (lxxvi)  predicted  in  1887  that
"Marie  Thierault  will  live  a  life  of  pleasure,  which  will  end  in  a
terrible  way,  before  three  moons  after  January  14,  1907.  It  is  not
given  to  me  to  see  the  dreadful  date,  but  January  14th  rises
before  me  and  I  see  the  full  moon  shining."

358

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

On  the  18th  of  January,  1907,  Marie  Thierault,  who  led  more
or  less  the  life  of  a  light  woman,  was  murdered  by  her  friend,
Lucette  Joquelet.  Lucette  was  charged  at  the  Assizes,  and  the
defending  counsel  produced  the  prediction  given  in  1887.

This  is  an  amazing  and  quite  unforeseeable  premonition.  Of
course,  it  may  be  maintained  that  the  somnambulistic  prediction
of  1887  was  fabricated  for  the  defence.  The  evidence  as  given  in
the  trial  is  perfectly  authenticated.

Lady  A.  (case  lxxvii)  went  to  consult  Mme.  de'E.,  a  somnam-
bulist and  seeress,  about  a  theft.  Mme.  de'E.,  without  the  lady
having  indicated  anything  about  the  purpose  of  the  consultation,
said  that  the  affair  related  to  a  theft  of  banknotes,  and  that  within
two  years  the  thief  would  suffer  capital  punishment.  She  could
give  only  the  vaguest  indications  of  his  person.  Not  till  very
long  after  did  it  appear  that  the  thief  was  the  too  famous  Marchan-
don,  who  was  executed  two  years  later  for  murder.

The  entire  account  of  this  surprising  prediction  should  be  read,
for  it  contains  many  extremely  xurious  details.

Lady  Burton  (case  xciv)  tells  that  when  she  was  a  young  girl,
Isabel  Arundell,  she  met  a  gipsy  woman  who  gave  her  a  written
prediction:  "You  will  cross  the  sea,  and  reach  the  town  where
your  destiny  is  awaiting  you.  You  will  marry  a  man  of  the  name
of  our  tribe  (Burton)  and  you  will  be  proud  of  the  name."  An
astonishing  prediction,  especially  as  to  the  name.

Metapsychic  stories  told  by  novelists  must  be  accepted  with
reserve,  but  it  is  difficult  not  to  attach  some  credit  to  the  story
given  by  Arsene  Houssaye  in  his  Confessions  (p.  425).  An
Italian  seeress  told  his  sister  Cecile,  at  Toulon,  that  the  sea  would
be  adverse  to  her.  In  1870  Cecile  for  this  reason  would  not  cross
into  England.  On  October  10,  1870,  she  went  for  a  walk  to  the
Point  de  Penmarch  in  Brittany  to  see  the  waves  breaking  on  the
rocks.  A  huge  wave  washed  across  the  promontory  and  swept
Cecile  and  three  other  girls  into  the  sea.

Dr.  A.  Wallace  (case  cviii)  received  Mrs.  Paulet  at  his  house.
This  clairvoyant  said  to  his  son,  young  Mr.  Wallace,  then  twenty
years  of  age,  who  was  a  student  of  chemistry,  "There  will  be  an
explosion  in  your  laboratory  in  February  or  March  and  someone
will  be  injured."  Another  clairvoyant  repeated  the  same  predic-
tion on  the  20th  of  January.  On  the  9th  of  March  a  terrible
explosion  took  place  and  severely  injured  one  of  the  students.

Mr.  R.  dreamed,  on  May  25th,  that  a  somnambulist  told  him,

PREMONITIONS

359

"Your  father  will  die  on  the  2d  of  June  (1900)."  Next  day  he
told  the  dream  to  his  parents  who  laughed  over  it,  for  Mr.  R.
(senior)  was  in  good  health.  On  June  1st  this  gentleman  went
to  a  funeral,  and  jestingly  said,  "If  I  am  to  die  tomorrow  I  have
not  much  time  to  lose."  He  went  to  bed  that  night  in  his  usual
health  at  11  p.m.,  was  taken  in  the  night  with  sudden  illness  and
died  on  June  2d,  twenty  minutes  after  midnight.

Dr.  Charles  Roux  reports  three  astonishing  premonitions  made
by  three  different  somnambulists  to  the  same  person.

The  wife  of  Dr.  A.  met  by  chance  a  somnambulist,  who  said  to
her,  "In  a  short  time  there  will  be  a  catastrophe  in  your  family
that  will  cause  you  much  grief."  Somewhat  affected  by  this  she
went  to  another  clairvoyant,  who  said,  "Your  children  (your
daughter)  will  be  ill  very  shortly;  abdominal  pains;  she  will  have
an  operation,  but  will  recover."  The  third,  to  whom  Mme.  A.
gave  her  glove,  said,  "This  glove  has  been  touched  by  a  person
who  is  very  ill ;  she  has  acute  pain  in  the  abdomen,  diffused  pain.
There  is  pus  from  peritonitis,  but  she  will  recover."

Ten  days  after  the  latter  prediction  Mile.  A.,  aged  fifteen,  till
then  seemingly  in  perfect  health,  was  attacked  by  acute  peritonitis,
was  operated  on  and  pus  was  withdrawn,  but,  contrary  to  the  pre-
dictions, the  poor  child  died.

This  triple  premonition  from  three  different  persons  is  most
noteworthy ;  not  only  because  of  the  high  scientific  authority  of
Dr.  Roux,  who  is  very  well  informed  on  scientific  matters  and  in
no  way  credulous,  and  verified  the  facts  with  the  greatest  care,
but  because  of  the  agreement  of  the  three  sensitives.  This  leads
to  the  inference  not  that  the  clairvoyants  were  exceptionally  sensi-
tive, but  that  there  must  have  been  some  powerful  exterior  cause
(what?)  that  enabled  them  to  foresee  Mile.  A.'s  illness.

The  sensitive  Alexis  (case  cxi)  gave  a  wonderful  instance  of
lucidity  and  premonition.  In  1847  he  went,  in  hypnotic  sleep,  to
Rome  and  passing  before  the  Pantheon,  said,  "This  monument  is
destined  to  a  more  solemn  and  wholly  Italian  purpose."  Bozzano
rightly  insists  on  the  remarkable  character  of  this  prediction,  made
in  1847  and  printed  in  1867,  at  a  time  when  no  one  could  foresee
that  the  Pantheon  would  be  reserved  as  a  mausoleum  for  the
kings  of  United  Italy.

Alice  gave  me  two  good  premonitions  in  hypnotic  sleep.  On  the
10th  of  December,  1886,  she  spoke  of  someone  who  would  shortly
be  seriously  ill.    "Is  it  one  of  my  children,  one  of  my  relations,

360

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

or  one  of  my  friends?"  The  answer  was,  "No,  no,  but  do  not
take  this  lightly,  it  will  cause  you  much  trouble.  It  is  not  one  of
your  friends,  nor  a  relation,  nor  a  woman,  nor  a  child,"  and  she
added  these  words,  which  I  wrote  down  on  returning  home,  "He
will  have  shivers,  high  fever,  trembling,  suffocation,  shudderings
of  fever,  like  colic.  The  fever  will  come  on  without  much  pain,
there  will  be  prostration  and  great  lassitude;  the  head  will  be
affected,,  (P.  S.  P.  R.,  1888,  181).  Eight  days  later,  about
December  18th,  my  colleague,  Eugene  Yung,  whom  Alice  did  not
know  at  all,  editor  of  the  Revue  Bleue,  connected  with  the  Revue
Scientifique,  and  seemingly  in  quite  good  health,  was  taken  with
shivering,  fever,  and  renal  colic  due  to  abscess.  The  illness  made
rapid  progress,  the  urinary  system  became  affected,  coma  set  in
(Alice  had  said  that  the  head  would  be  affected)  and  he  died.

The  death  of  my  eminent  colleague  involved  me  in  much  trouble
and  my  position  as  editor  of  the  Revue  Scientifique  was  near  being
compromised.

I  ought,  moreover,  to  say  that  I  had  completely  forgotten
Alice's  prediction,  although  I  had  noted  it  down,  till  she  in
hypnotic  sleep  recalled  it  to  my  mind.  She  had  seen  in  the  news-
papers an  account  of  the  death  and  the  consequent  troubles.

The  other  prediction  is  yet  more  extraordinary.  As  it  is  unpub-
lished, I  give  all  needful  details.

It  was  my  custom  to  leave  her  for  some  hours  in  hypnotic
sleep ;  she  would  then  remain  quite  motionless  and  on  my  return
two  or  three  hours  later  the  clairvoyance  seemed  to  me  more
acute.  On  my  return  that  day  she  said  that  something  serious
would  happen.  "You  will  be  very  angry,  very  angry  indeed.
There  are  people  there,  and  there,',  pointing  with  her  hand  as
though  there  were  three  or  four  persons  near  me.  This  did  not
affect  me,  for  I  am  seldom  moved  to  anger ;  but  she  insisted  and
seemed  so  troubled  that  I  had  to  wake  her.  It  was  2  p.m.  on  a
Wednesday.

At  six  o'clock  the  same  day  I  went  to  the  office  of  the  Revue
Scientifique  to  correct  proofs  along  with  the  secretary,  Dr.  Heri-
court.  Henri  Ferrari,  editor  of  the  Revue  Bleue,  was  there  also
correcting  his  proofs.  All  three  of  us  were  absorbed  in  our  work,
when  one  of  the  contributors  entered  (I  may  note  passim  that  he
afterwards  became  a  colleague  of  mine).  He  looked  at  us  with
some  surprise,  and  I  said,  "Excuse  us  a  few  minutes,  we  shall
soon  have  finished."   He  walked  up  and  down  while  we  went  on

PREMONITIONS

361

with  our  proof-reading.  Then  some  extraordinary  whim  took  him,
he  sat  himself  down  before  Ferrari  and  said,  "You  are  just  like

a   wren,  I  don't  care  a          for  you."    I  saw  Ferrari  turn

pale,  dumb  with  astonishment,  and  striking  the  table  I  said  to  X.,
"You  are  an  out-and-out  cad ;  get  out  V9  and  I  went  to  the  door
and  opened  it.

That  evening  X.  sent  me  a  challenge  to  a  duel.  It  is  the  only
one  I  ever  received.  Of  course,  I  left  it  unanswered,  and  some
years  later  we  resumed  our  good  relations.

The  important  fact  is  not  this  absurd  and  trivial  incident,  but
the  prediction  of  a  most  unlikely  event  which  provoked  in  me
violent  and  justified  anger;  this  being  one  of  the  very  few  times
that  I  have  been  carried  away  by  anger  in  the  course  of  a  long
life.  Alice  had  predicted  this  four  hours  earlier,  pointing  to  three
or  four  persons  round  me.

(b)   Spiritist  Premonitions

The  premonitions  to  which  I  give  this  name  are  not  always
markedly  different  from  others.  They  are  characterized  by  this —
that  the  subject  is  making  an  attempt  to  know  the  future  by  the
planchette,  by  automatic  writing,  by  psychometry,  by  crystal  vision,
or  by  some  other  means,  instead  of  remaining  passive  during  his
normal  life,  whether  sleeping  or  waking,  and  being  dominated  by
the  metapsychic  fact.  He  is  not  suffering  an  accident,  but  is
making  an  experiment.

Mrs.  Piper  (or  Phinuit)  has  often  made  prophecies  of  deaths
or  minor  events  which  have  been  verified  (Bozzano's  cases  xxi  to
xxiv).

On  May  10,  1892,  Phinuit  said  that  the  brother  of  Mr.  T.,
whom  Mrs.  Piper  did  not  know,  had  kidney  trouble,  that  his  heart
would  stop,  and  that  he  would  enter  the  spirit-world.  Soon  after
it  was  established  that  he  had  kidney  disease  and  he  died  of
syncope  in  his  sleep,  September  3,  1892.

Dr.  Louis  Cohen,  of  St.  Louis  (U.  S.  A.),  visited  Mrs.  Leonard,
who  described  his  father  quite  accurately  and  told  him  that  his
father  had  died  and  that  he  himself  would  soon  be  summoned
back  to  America  by  cable.  This  was  on  April  20th  ;  on  the  23d
the  prediction  was  exactly  fulfilled.

Mr.  S.  Shaw  (case  xli)  saw  a  professional  medium  in  London,
who  said,  "Your  mother  is  dead,"  which  was  untrue.  She  cor-
rected herself  and  said,  "She  will  die  in  three  months.   She  is  well

i

362

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

at  present  but  work  tires  her  and  she  needs  to  lie  down  in
the  daytime.  Her  death  will  be  sudden/'  Two  months  later  Mr.
S.  received  a  letter  from  his  mother,  saying  that  she  was  in  good
health  but  needed  a  sleep  during  the  day.  She  died  suddenly
two  and  a  half  months  after  the  premonition.

Mr.  William  Stead's  secretary,  E.  M.,  was  in  weak  health  and
irritable.  Stead  thought  of  closing  the  connection ;  but  "Julia,"
writing  by  the  hand  of  Stead,  gave  the  message:  "Be  patient,
she  will  come  to  join  us  before  the  end  of  the  year."  This  predic-
tion was  repeated  several  times.  In  July  E.  M.  was  very  ill.
Julia  wrote,  "She  will  get  well,  but  will  not  outlive  the  year."
In  December  E.  M.  had  influenza,  and  Julia  wrote,  "She  will  not
come  over  naturally,  and  it  will  be  before  the  end  of  the  year/'
On  January  10th  E.  M.  was  extremely  ill  and  Julia  wrote,  "I
may  be  mistaken  by  a  few  days,  but  all  that  I  have  told  you  is
true.  Bid  her  good-bye."  On  January  12th  E.  M.  threw  herself
out  of  the  window  in  her  delirium  and  died.

A  friend  of  Mr.  Stead  had  come  from  India  to  England,  and
intending  to  make  a  long  stay  had  arranged  for  a  series  of  lec-
tures on  free  trade  and  other  subjects,  at  Manchester  and  else-
where. Julia,  through  the  intermediary  of  Stead,  told  him  that  he
would  return  to  India  before  the  end  of  the  year.  This  was
repeated  on  the  14th  and  the  16th  of  August,  and  on  the  11th
of  September  Mr.  Tracy  refused  to  believe  it,  but  a  month  later
he  was  recalled  to  India  by  the  serious  illness  of  a  relation  and
left  before  the  end  of  the  year  (Stead,  in  Borderland,  1894,  ii,  43).

A  non-professional  medium,  the  granddaughter  of  the  celebrated
physiologist,  Tiedemann,  of  Heidelberg,  predicted  to  a  young
man,  Mr.  S.,  that  he  would  become  a  senator  for  Missouri  in  the
United  States.  This  seemed  so  improbable  that  he  laughed  at  the
prediction,  but  two  years  later  he  moved  from  Wisconsin,  where
he  lived,  to  Missouri  and  was  nominated  senator  some  time  after.

A  distinguished  physician  of  Palermo,  M.  Carmelo  Samona,
well  acquainted  with  metapsychic  science,  lost  his  little  daughter
Alexandrina,  aged  five,  in  1910.  Mme.  Samona  was  wild  with
grief.  Three  days  after  she  saw  the  child  in  a  dream,  who  said
to  her,  "I  have  not  left  you ;  I  have  become  tiny  like  that/'  desig-
nating some  very  small  object.  A  fresh  pregnancy  was  the  more
unlikely  in  that  Mme.  Samona  had  undergone  a  serious  ovarian
operation  a  year  previously.  On  April  10th,  however,  she  became
aware  that  she  was  pregnant.    On  May  4th  it  was  predicted  by

PREMONITIONS

363

Alexandrina,  communicating  by  means  of  the  table,  that  Mme.
Samona  would  be  delivered  of  twin  girls,  one  of  whom  would
entirely  resemble  Alexandrina.  This  came  to  pass.  One  of  the
twins  had  a  mark  on  the  left  eye  and  another  mark  on  the  right
ear  with  asymmetry  of  the  face,  precisely  like  the  deceased  child
(Duchatel  and  Warcollier,  Les  miracles  de  la  volonte,  p.  239).

This  premonition  would  seem  to  imply  the  phenomenon  that
spiritists  call  "reincarnation."  But  the  data  on  this  perplexing
problem — the  most  obscure  in  the  whole  of  all  metapsychics — are
so  fragmentary  that  they  amount  to  nothing  from  the  point  of
view  of  strict  science.

Dr.  E.  Waller  relates  a  fact  that  seems  to  show  cryptesthesia.
He  saw  in  the  crystal  a  lady,  Mrs.  D.,  well  known  to  him,  and  with
her  another  person  whom  he  did  not  know.  A  few  days  later  he
met  Mrs.  D.  with  this  other  person  in  the  place  that  he  had  seen
in  the  crystal  under  tragical  circumstances  which  ended  in  a  real
drama  (A.  S.  P.,  1905,  xv,  133-141).

In  February,  1890,  impelled  by  a  power  that  she  could  not
resist,  Mrs.  R.  V.  went  to  consult  Zuleika,  a  professional  seeress.
Zuleika  told  the  lady  that  her  husband  would  leave  for  South
Africa,  would  die  there  in  November  of  the  same  year,  and  that
he  ought  to  set  his  affairs  and  his  insurances  in  order  so  as  to
avoid  heavy  expenses  and  much  trouble  for  all  concerned.  Mr.
V/s  departure,  which  was  uncertain,  duly  took  place,  and  in
November,  1890,  he  died  in  Africa,  in  despite  of  his  robust  health.
The  precautions  indicated  had  not  been  taken,  whence  much
expense  and  trouble  resulted;  "disastrous  consequences"  Mrs.  V.
calls  them  (Bozzano,  liv).

Zuleika' s  premonition  was  noted  down  by  Mrs.  V.  in  her  diary
in  February,  1890.

Bozzano's  cases  (lvi  and  lvii)  are  authenticated  by  numerous
witnesses.  They  are  as  follows :  On  the  22d  of  April,  1877,  the
eldest  daughter  of  Mr.  Maxfield,  a  very  well-known  hotel  manager
in  New  York,  said  to  Dr.  Anthony  (who  made  a  written  note  of
the  prophecy),  "I  have  just  heard  a  voice  speaking  very  clearly
at  my  ear :  you  will  die  first,  then  Harry,  then  your  father ;  and
Dr.  Anthony  will  be  present  on  each  occasion."  The  three  per-
sons referred  to  were  all  in  perfect  health,  but  the  daughter  died
on  November  9,  1879;  Harry  on  June  22,  1884,  and  Mr.  Maxfield
on  July  2,  1884.   Dr.  Anthony  was  present  at  the  three  deaths.

A  similar  prediction  was  made  by  a  medium  to  the  eldest

364

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

daughter  of  Westland  Marston.  "You  will  die  first,  then  Nelly,
then  Philip,  and  your  mother  last."   All  came  to  pass  exactly.

Mr.  Paige  went  to  a  medium  without  giving  his  name ;  she  told
him  the  name  of  his  wife,  Eliza  Anne,  and  of  her  sister  Maria.
She  described  accurately  the  very  serious  illness  of  the  former,
and  predicted  that  in  three  days  Eliza  Anne  would  see  her
deceased  mother  at  her  bedside ;  which  came  true.

A  lady  known  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick  (case  lxvii)  went  to  consult  a
medium,  who  told  her,  "You  are  wearing  a  photograph  of  your
children,"  which  was  correct.  Indicating  two,  she  said,  "Those
two  are  dead,"  which  was  so,  and  pointing  to  another,  "This  one
will  soon  be  with  us,  and  his  transition  will  be  sudden."  Some
weeks  later  the  elder  son  of  this  lady  was  killed  in  a  football
accident.

J.  Maxwell  has  published  (case  lxxiii)  the  remarkable  premo-
nition given  to  me  by  Mme.  X.  The  personality  speaking  through
her  mediumship  purported  to  be  my  friend,  Antoine  B.,  long  since
deceased.  Mme.  X.  predicted  to  me  the  death  of  Antoine  B.'s
widow,  who  had  become  Mme.  L.  by  a  second  marriage.  This
lady  was  in  very  good  health,  but  Mme.  X.,  on  looking  at  a  few
words  of  her  handwriting,  said  to  me,  "I  see  the  figure  7,  which
means  that  Mme.  L.  will  soon  die."  Mme.  L.,  who  was  quite
unknown  to  Mme.  X.,  died  just  seven  weeks  later.

The  premonition  went  further.  On  the  8th  of  July,  1903,  Mme.
X.  wrote  to  me,  "Someone  tells  me  (?)  that  one  of  the  sons  of
Mme.  L.  will  die  before  two  years  are  past.  I  suppose  it  must  be
Jacques  B.,  but  this  was  not  told  me."

On  the  night  of  December  23d  Louis  B.  and  Oliver  L.  (stepson
to  Mme.  L.)  were  in  a  disastrous  railway  accident  on  the  Northern
of  France.  The  former  escaped  by  a  miracle,  the  latter  was  killed
on  the  spot.  The  premonition  was,  however,  still  more  exactly
fulfilled  than  by  the  death  of  this  stepson.  Fate  is  inexorable.
Mme.  L.  had  a  son,  Gilbert  L.,  who  died  suddenly  a  short  time
later  of  cardiac  failure  after  a  slight  attack  of  diphtheria  that
seemed  nearly  cured.

Some  instances  of  premonition  are  given  by  Remy  which  are
the  more  interesting  in  that  Remy  sets  himself  the  task  of  proving
that  nearly  all  so-called  spiritist  phenomena  are  due  to  tricks
played  on  simple  people.  Mile.  X.,  the  daughter  of  a  school
inspector  of  Lot-et-Garonne,  was  amusing  herself  and  some
friends  by  "making  a  table  speak."   "Ask  it  when  I  shall  retire,"

PREMONITIONS

365

said  her  father,  as  a  jest.  "In  eight  days/'  the  table  replied,  and
everyone  laughed,  for  Mr.  X.,  then  forty-five  years  of  age  and
in  excellent  health,  had  no  thought  of  retiring.

Mr.  X.  died  suddenly  forty-five  days  later.  I  may  observe  that
M.  Remy,  who  is  so  severe  on  the  experiences  of  others,  is  very
lenient  to  this  premonition,  which  proves  absolutely  nothing.

An  eminent  writer,  Paul  Adam  (Bozzano's  case  xci),  could
write  automatically  messages  which  purported  to  come  from
VEtrangere.  One  evening  VEtranghre  said  to  one  of  the  friends
of  Paul  Adam,  who  was  a  hardened  bachelor,  "In  four  years  you
will  marry  a  lady  living  at  No.  so  and  so,  Avenue  Marceau."  At
that  time  the  house  designated  by  this  number  was  being  pulled
down.  Four  years  later  this  gentleman  met  the  lady  in  the  house
built  on  this  site  and  married  her.

Case  cxii  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  in  metapsychic  litera-
ture. On  December  11,  1901,  Mrs.  Verrall  wrote  automatically,
"Nothing  should  be  neglected,  the  most  trifling  facts  may  be  use-
ful ;  be  trustful.  .  .  .  The  cold  was  intense  and  a  single  candle
gave  a  poor  light.  He  was  lying  on  the  sofa  or  on  a  bed,  and  was
reading  Marmontel  by  the  light  of  a  single  candle.  She  will
remember"  (referring  probably  to  Mrs.  Sidgwick).  "The  book
was  lent  him,  it  did  not  belong  to  him."

On  December  17th  Mrs.  Verrall  had  a  second  message:  "The
name  Marmontel  is  correct  ...  a  French  book,  I  think  his
memoirs.  The  name  Passy  may  help  him  to  remember  Passy  or
Fleury.  The  book  was  bound  in  two  volumes,  the  binding  was  old,
and  the  book  was  lent  him.  The  name  Marmontel  is  not  on  the
cover."

On  March  1st  Mr.  Marsh,  a  friend  of  Mrs.  Verrall,  related  at
table  in  her  house  that  he  had  read  the  memoirs  of  Marmontel  one
bitterly  cold  night  in  Paris,  the  20th  of  February,  by  the  light  of
a  candle,  once  when  in  bed  and  again  reclining  on  two  chairs,
that  he  had  spoken  of  its  contents  to  friends  in  Paris,  that  the
book  was  in  three  volumes,  of  which  he  had  borrowed  two  from
the  London  Library  and  that  on  February  21st  he  had  read  the
chapter  in  which  Marmontel  describes  the  finding  of  a  picture
painted  at  Passy,  and  that  the  discovery  was  associated  with  M.
Fleury.

We  have  here  a  prediction  of  a  series  of  unimportant  events  in
minute  detail.  These  events  could  not  possibly  be  anticipated
(nobody  reads  Marmontel),  even  the  single  light  being  specified.

366

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

The  prediction  was  on  December  11,  1901,  and  the  events  did  not
take  place  till  February  21,  1902.

Miss  Freer  (Bozzano's  case  c),  looking  in  the  crystal,  sees  a
man's  head  wrapped  in  some  undefinable  thing,  looking  in  at  the
small  window  of  her  room.  Three  days  later  there  was  a  fire  and
a  fireman  came  to  that  little  window,  with  his  head  wrapped  in
a  wet  cloth,  presenting  exactly  the  image  she  had  seen.

J.  Maxwell  cites  an  interesting  case.  A.,  looking  in  the  crystal,
sees  a  large  steamer  with  black,  white,  and  red  bands  on  the  funnel,
bearing  the  name  Leutschland,  enveloped  in  smoke  and  sinking,
passengers  and  people  in  uniform  running  about  the  decks.  Eight
days  later  the  newspapers  announced  the  bursting  of  a  boiler  on
board  the  Dentschland.  A.  was  in  no  way  concerned  with  mari-
time affairs.

With  the  exception  of  the  Saurel  prediction,  which  will  be  de-
scribed later,  all  the  spiritist  predictions  relative  to  the  Great  War
are  too  vague  for  notice.  Mrs.  Chenoweth's  premonitions,  despite
the  care  with  which  Hyslop  has  collected  them,  are  uncertain,
being  little,  if  at  all,  beyond  the  reach  of  normal  intelligence.

As  for  premonitions  announcing  serious  events,  generally
deaths,  by  noises  and  knocks,  there  are  many,  but  few  are  evi-
dential. It  will  suffice  to  mention  that  of  the  Rev.  T.  B.  Wood,
who  heard  on  the  eve  of  his  father's  death  three  distinct  knocks
on  the  andirons.  He,  and  also  his  servant  Cyril,  heard  loud
knocks  on  October  20,  1919,  and  said,  "It  is  the  Wood  knockings ;
someone  is  going  to  die."  Three  days  later  a  cousin,  till  then  in
good  health,  died  suddenly.1

(c)  Accidental  Premonitions

I  refer  to  this  class  all  premonitions  which  occur  unexpectedly
to  normal  persons,  without  experiment,  without  crystal  vision,
planchette,  automatic  writing,  or  any  other  all-voluntary  action.
The  premonition  comes  to  them  unsought.  These  may  be  classed
(with  Bozzano)  as  follows:
Premonitions —

Of  sickness  and  death  due  to  natural  causes.

Of  accidental  deaths.

Of  sundry  events.

*P.  Myers,  S.  P.  R.,  xi  and  Kingsford,  loc.  cit.,  161.

PREMONITIONS

367

(a)  Premonitions  of  Sickness  and  Death  Due  to  Natural

Causes

Miss  B.  was  exceedingly  anxious  about  her  father's  health,
though  medical  opinion  was  that  his  indisposition  was  very  slight.
She  hurried  back,  whenever  obliged  to  leave  the  house,  fearing  to
hear  of  misfortune.  This  lasted  for  some  days.  One  day  her
father  fell  in  an  apoplectic  fit.

This  case  is  not  evidential,  for  the  daughter  might  well  guess
her  father's  danger  from  various  symptoms.  I  only  mention  this
case  (Bozzano's  xxvii)  as  a  caution  that  none  such  should  ever
be  brought  forward  as  having  any  value.

M.  Salvatore  Balsamo  (xxxi),  watching  at  the  bedside  of  his
brother-in-law,  hears  a  noise  of  breaking  glass  and  china  in  the
next  room  a  short  time  before  the  death.  Several  persons  in  the
sick-room  heard  the  same  and  state  that  there  were  loud  knocks
on  the  terrace,  for  which  no  natural  cause  could  be  found.

Here,  again,  the  premonition  is  too  vague  and  the  brother-in-
law's  death  too  likely  to  make  the  account  worth  consideration.
Only  methodical  study  of  a  large  number  of  such  cases  will
enable  inferences  to  be  drawn.

Mrs.  Baker's  sister  sees  a  coffin  before  the  piano  in  the  drawing-
room  (case  xxxiii).  She  nearly  faints  when  telling  her  vision.
Three  weeks  later  another  sister  died  and  her  coffin  was  placed  in
front  of  the  piano,  just  where  it  had  been  seen.

Moritz  gives  the  story  of  the  pastor  Ulrici,  who  saw  in  a  dream
one  of  his  clerical  friends  dead.  He  told  the  dream  to  his  wife,
went  to  the  church  and  preached,  but  was  still  obsessed  by  his
dream.  Later  in  the  day  a  servant  came  from  the  village  of  R.,
of  which  his  friend  was  the  minister,  with  the  request  that  he
would  come  and  baptize  a  child.  He  asked  why  their  own  pastor
did  not  perform  the  office.  The  answer  was,  "Because  he  is
unable  to  do  so."  M.  Ulrici  said,  "It  is  because  he  has  died."
M.  Ulrici,  therefore,  saw  the  death  of  X.  eleven  hours  before  it
occurred,  with  all  the  attendant  circumstances.1

The  Rev.  Mr.  Dulley  relates  that  Mrs.  Jones,  watching  by  her
sick  child  in  the  early  days  of  September,  saw  three  little  coffins
put  into  a  hearse,  two  white  and  one  pale  blue.  Her  little  boy
Peter  died  on  October  2d,  and  also  a  neighbor's  little  son.  Both

1Cite  par  Passavant,  Unters.  iiber  den  Lebentnagnetismus,  2d  edit.,  p.  135,
Frankfort,  1837.

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

funerals  were  on  the  same  day,  and  at  the  last  moment  a  third
coffin,  a  pale-blue  one,  was  brought.  It  was  that  of  a  child  in  the
same  parish  whom  Mrs.  Jones  did  not  know.  When  this  last
coffin  appeared,  Mrs.  Jones  cried  out,  "That  was  my  dream/'
She  had  already  told  her  husband  on  the  morning  following  the
dream.

M.  Adrien  Dufilhol  relates  that  his  grandfather  heard  a  voice
saying,  "A  death  in  the  family."  The  grandfather  thought  in
silence,  "I  am  the  eldest ;  is  it  I  ?"  The  voice  answered  "No,  it  is
Adolphe  Planes."  Adolphe  was  Mme.  Dufilhors  brother  and  was
not  ill ;  two  months  later  he  died  unexpectedly.1

The  next  case  may  possibly  be  attributed  to  coincidence,  though
this  is  unlikely.  Mr.  Lauritzen  never  made  a  memorandum  of
any  dream  except  this  one  of  which  he  wrote  in  his  diary :  "Three
days  ago  I  dreamed  that  F.  F.  would  be  free  in  four  years."  The
phrase  "to  be  free"  was  used  to  signify  death.  Mr.  F.  F.  was
then  in  perfect  health.  He  died  four  years  and  four  days  after
Mr.  Lauritzen's  dream.2

The  following  premonition  is  somewhat  vague,  but  the  sym-
bolism is  very  interesting.  Mrs.  Munro  dreamed  of  her  son,  an
officer  of  the  Flying  Corps  in  Palestine.  She  saw  him  with  a
serious  wound  in  the  forehead  and  heard  a  voice  saying,  "He  has
eaten  an  ice ;  it  has  given  him  a  headache."  Then  she  saw  her  son
as  he  had  been  at  eleven  or  twelve  years  old.  At  that  age  he  could
not  eat  ices,  they  gave  him  headache.  Mrs.  Munro  was  so  dis-
turbed by  this  vision  that  she  sent  for  the  doctor,  who  found  her
ill  from  the  emotion.  Her  son  was  killed  on  November  2,  1917,
by  a  bullet  in  the  head  (/.  S.  P.  R.,  December,  1920,  272).

Mrs.  Morrison,  at  Wellesley,  in  India,  heard  a  voice  saying,
"When  the  darkness  thickens  at  the  eleventh  hour  death  will  pass."
Mrs.  Morrison,  who  was  in  bed,  got  up  in  a  fright;  the  words
were  repeated  again  by  the  same  voice,  slowly  and  deliberately.
Two  days  later  Mrs.  Morrison's  little  daughter  fell  grievously  ill.
For  eight  days  there  was  no  cloud  in  the  sky,  but  on  the  eighth
day  a  terrible  storm  arose  and  a  few  minutes  before  eleven  the
house  was  quite  dark.  The  child  died  at  1  p.m.  (A.  S.  P.,  1907,
xviii,  xxxv,  712).

Bozzano's  case  xxxviii  shows  a  strange  symbolism.  Mrs.  Z.,
paying  a  visit  on  June  15th,  saw  (in  imagination)  an  unknown

xCite  par  Flammarion,  loc.  cit.,  538.

2Case  of  Dream,  Journ.  S.  P.  R.,  December,  191 1,  173.

PREMONITIONS

369

man  by  her  hostess,  who  plunged  a  knife  into  her  side.  She  told
Professor  Andrew  Lang,  who  laughed  at  her  and  said,  "FU  bet  a
hundred  pounds  that  this  vision  will  not  be  realized/'

Mrs.  Z.,  again  visiting  her  friend,  met  the  man  of  her  dream
on  the  stairs,  to  her  great  amazement.  Her  friend  was  dying  and
the  man  in  question  was  the  surgeon  who  had  operated  on  the  left
side  of  her  chest.

Mme.  Buscarlet  writes  to  Mme.  Moratief,  on  December  11th,
a  letter  that  has  been  preserved :  "I  have  had  a  queer  dream.  You
and  I  were  in  the  country  when  a  carriage  passed  us,  and  from  it
there  came  a  voice  that  called  us.  It  was  Olga  Popoff,  who  said,
'I  have  called  you  to  tell  you  that  Mme.  Mitchinoff  will  leave  the
Institute  on  the  17th/  "  Two  weeks  later  Mme.  Mitchinoff  died
of  acute  diphtheria  on  the  16th  of  the  month,  and  on  the  morning
of  the  17th  the  body  was  taken  to  an  adjoining  chapel  for  fear  of
contagion.1

This  is  a  well-marked  case  of  premonition,  rigorously  authenti-
cated, and  so  precise  that  no  accidental  coincidence  can  be  alleged.

Mme.  L.  knew  that  a  friend  of  hers,  Mr.  C,  was  ill.  On  a
Monday  night  she  dreamed  that  the  doctor  in  attendance  came  and
said  gravely  and  sadly,  "Mr.  C.  will  die  on  Thursday  at  four
o'clock/'  She  woke  up,  repeating  "Thursday  at  four."  Her  hus-
band said  to  her,  "What  do  you  mean?"  On  Thursday  Mr.  C.
was  better  and  seemed  to  be  recovering,  but  had  a  relapse  and
died  on  the  following  Thursday  at  four  o'clock  (/.  5*.  P.  R.,
December,  1906,  340).

Mrs.  Campbell  (xlvi)  dreamed  that  she  was  attending  a  funeral
in  a  snow-storm.  She  could  not  read  the  name  on  the  coffin,  but
saw  an  abundance  of  flowers  and  in  the  middle  a  large  bouquet  of
roses.  She  told  the  dream  and  it  was  considered  prophetic  of  bad
news.  Twenty  minutes  later  she  had  a  telegram  recalling  her  to
Montreal,  where  her  sister  was  taken  ill.  Some  months  later  this
sister  died,  and  during  the  funeral  a  heavy  snow-storm  came  on.
The  coffin  was  covered  with  flowers  with  a  bouquet  of  bright
colored  roses  in  the  midst.

Alexandra  S.,  aged  nine,  at  Trieste,  saw  a  hearse  and  dead
body  just  as  she  was  about  to  go  out  for  a  walk.  She  threw  her-
self into  her  mother's  arms,  crying  and  saying,  "Someone  is

^his  case  is  reported  by  Flournoy  in  the  Arch,  de  Psychologie  of  Geneva.
He  adds  also  some  critical  remarks  that  I  cannot  endorse ;  they  seem  to  me
insufficient.    See  also  A.  S.  P.,  1907,  xvii,  710.

370

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

dead."  All  those  about  her  were  in  perfect  health,  but  three  days
later  her  father  was  taken  ill  in  the  night.  He  looked  at  the  child,
who  said,  "Mother,  how  do  people  look  when  they  are  going  to
die?"  Her  father  died  a  few  minutes  later  (A.  S.  P.,  1899,  ix,
196).

The  next  case  is  very  evidential,  by  reason  of  the  number  oi
unlikely  details  exactly  foreseen.

The  Duchess  of  Hamilton  had  a  kind  of  vision  of  Lord  L.,
whom  she  only  knew  by  sight,  and  did  not  know  to  be  ill,
stretched  on  a  sofa  as  if  insensible,  and  a  man  with  a  sandy  beard
bending  over  him.  There  was  also  a  bathroom  with  a  red  light.
This  was  told  by  the  Duchess  of  Hamilton  to  Dr.  Cooper,  who  was
attending  Lord  L.

Lord  L.  recovered  from  his  indisposition,  but  fifteen  days  later
a  more  serious  illness  supervened ;  and  Dr.  Cooper  saw  the  scene
described — the  patient  nearly  insensible,  the  bathroom,  the  red
lamp,  and  an  attendant  with  a  sandy  beard.

The  good  faith  of  the  duchess  and  Dr.  Cooper  being  unques-
tionable, the  premonition  must  be  of  a  metapsychic  nature,  for
accidental  coincidence  is  not  to  be  thought  of.

Bozzano  places  premonitions  made  long  before  the  event  in  a
special  class  by  themselves.   A  very  remarkable  one  is  as  follows :

Mr.  Edisburg  was  a  medical  student,  who,  in  1859,  had  a
dream  of  which  he  could  only  recall  the  date  "June  9,  1864."  He
spoke  of  it  to  the  assistant  surgeon,  saying,  "It  is  the  date  of  my
death  or  of  some  great  misfortune,"  and  he  wrote  on  the  hat-
rack  of  the  antechamber  in  the  hospital,  "June  9,  1864,  J.  F.  E."

Five  years  passed.  Mr.  Edisburg  married,  and  his  wife  died  on
the  9th  of  June,  1864.  Returning  to  the  hospital  he  and  two  of
his  friends  verified  the  date  written  on  the  rack.

If  the  calculus  of  probabilities  be  applied  to  this  wonderful  pre-
monition, we  might  set  the  odds  at  1  :  365  x  5,  or  say  1  :  1,800  (as
if  the  red  came  up  eleven  times  running  at  roulette).  This,  how-
ever, would  be  grossly  against  good  sense,  for  it  would  omit  all
consideration  of  the  cause  whereby  this  date  was  presented  to  the
mind  of  the  dreamer.  To  return  to  the  analogy  of  the  roulette-
wheel,  it  is  one  thing  to  say,  "I  know  that  the  red  will  not  come
up  eleven  times  running"  and  quite  another  to  say  that  this  has
happened  in  the  course  of  a  long  series  of  trials.  The  premoni-
tion consists  in  the  fact  that  the  date  was  indicated  only  once,  and
correctly.   If  eighteen  students  were  each  to  indicate  some  fateful

PREMONITIONS

371

date  in  the  ensuing  five  years  there  might  well  be  coincidences,
but  in  this  case  there  was  but  one  who  had  that  prevision  and  the
prevision  was  verified.   Chance  cannot  be  invoked.

(b)  Premonitions  of  Accidental  Death

Premonitions  of  natural  death,  at  any  rate  when  not  long  before
the  event,  can  be  referred  to  some  kind  of  cognition  of  the  organic
condition  of  the  person  whose  death  or  illness  is  foreseen.  This,
however,  in  no  way  applies  to  accidental  deaths ;  hence  the  meta-
psychic  importance  of  premonitions  of  sudden,  tragic,  and  unlikely
deaths  that  no  mere  perspicuity  could  foresee.

Captain  de  Montluc,  in  his  commentaries,  tells  how  he  foresaw
by  a  dream  the  mortal  wound  of  Henry  II  of  France  in  a  tourna-
ment. "The  night  before  the  tourney  in  my  first  sleep  I  dreamed
that  I  saw  the  King  seated  in  a  chair,  his  face  all  covered  with
drops  of  blood,  and  I  could  neither  discern  what  ailed  him  nor
see  anything  but  the  blood  on  his  face.  I  seemed  to  hear  others
say,  'He  is  dead'  and  others  'He  is  not  dead  yet/  I  saw  the  doctors
and  surgeons  coming  and  going  .  .  .  and  on  awaking  the
tears  were  on  my  face,  nor  for  some  time  could  I  refrain  from
weeping.  My  wife  tried  to  console  me,  but  I  could  not  be  per-
suaded. Several  persons  living  know  that  this  is  not  a  tale,  for
I  told  it  as  soon  as  I  was  awake.  Four  days  afterwards  a  mes-
senger arrived  at  Nerac,  bringing  the  letter  from  the  Constable
of  France  to  the  King  of  Navarre,  telling  him  of  the  wound  and
the  small  hope  of  life"  (Flammarion,  La  Mort  et  son  Mvstkre,
536).

Another  historical  document  is  quoted  by  Flammarion :
Nicolas  Pasquier  writes  to  his  brother,  "Last  year,  on  August
30th,  about  five  in  the  morning,  I  dreamed  that  I  was  with  our
father,  who  was  in  bed,  whence  he  rose  to  pray  to  God,  which
he  did  devoutly  with  both  hands  raised.  When  his  prayer  was
ended  he  changed  colour  and  fell  dead  into  my  arms.  I  awoke,
trembling,  told  the  dream  to  my  wife,  and  to  keep  the  memory  of
it  unfaded  I  wrote  it  down.  Thus  I  saw  our  father's  death  one
year  exactly  to  a  day  before  it  happened  (Etienne  Pasquier  died
August  30,  1615).  On  the  actual  date  of  his  death  I  came  across
the  paper  of  which  I  had  not  thought  again.  The  news  only
reached  me  on  September  3d.  If  you  dissect  this  dream  you  will
see  that  all  the  circumstances  were  foreseen — that  he  would  not

372

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

be  long  ill  (he  was  only  ill  ten  hours),  that  he  would  die  a  good
Christian  and  in  full  possession  of  his  senses."  Certainly  the
approaching  death  of  Etienne  Pasquier,  then  aged  eighty-six,  was
not  unlikely,  but  even  so  the  coincidence  of  dates  is  noteworthy.

Baron  L.  Hellembach  (Bozzano,  lviii)  intended  to  consult  the
celebrated  Hauer,  his  colleague,  on  a  matter  of  science.  During
the  preceding  night  he  dreamed  that  he  saw  a  man  (unrecognized)
pale  and  helpless,  held  up  by  two  men.  In  the  morning  he  went
to  the  geological  institution  that  Hauer  directed,  and  finding  the
door  shut,  looked  through  the  window,  where  he  saw  the  exact
repetition  of  his  dream.  Hauer  had  poisoned  himself  with
potassium  cyanide.

Recognition  is  wanting  here ;  possibly,  too,  Baron  Hellembach
did  not  tell  his  dream  to  anyone  before  verification,  so  that
paramnesia  may  account  for  much ;  or  telepathy  may  be  admitted.
Hauers  mental  agitation  before  suicide  may  have  caused  the
vision.

Recognition  is  also  wanting  in  the  next  case :

Miss  Bale  heard  a  ticking  in  her  room  like  that  of  a  clock  during
all  the  month  of  June,  but  this  ceased  as  soon  as  anyone  else  came
in.  After  a  month  and  a  half  she  had  become  used  to  the  sound.
On  July  12th  she  saw  a  human  form  standing  with  outstretched
arms.  It  soon  vanished.  On  September  23d  she  heard  of  her
brother's  death  by  drowning  (on  July  12th),  after  which  the
ticking  ceased  (A.  S.  P.,  1907,  xvii,  724).

Myers  reports  a  good  example  of  symbolical  premonition :
Field  Marshal  Lord  S.  dreamed  two  days  before  his  daughter  fell
ill  that  he  urged  her  to  read  the  Life  of  Charles  James  Fox,  but
that  she  replied,  "Oh,  I  do  not  need  to  read  it;  it  is  the  end,"
and  that  she  showed  the  last  page  on  which  "The  End"  was
written  in  large  black  characters  all  across  the  page  (P.  S.  P.  R.,
1895,  xi,442).

The  death  of  Miss  S.  was  also  the  subject  of  a  premonition.
Her  sister  saw  her  standing  before  her,  saying,  "Remember,  I
have  called  you,  it  is  five  o'clock,  and  now  I  am  going  away ;  I  am
going  away,  remember."

Premonition  of  death  in  which  a  "double"  seems  to  appear  are
not  infrequent ;  e.g.,  the  remarkable  case  of  Dr.  Isnard  mentioned
above,  p.  340.

M.  Boisnard  dreamed  very  clearly  of  a  child's  funeral,  coming
away  from  a  neighbouring  house.    The  dream  haunted  him  all

PREMONITIONS

373

day.  In  the  evening  one  of  the  children  from  that  house,  aged
four,  fell  into  a  ditch  and  was  drowned  (Bozzano,  lix).

The  brother  of  M.  Zipelius,  a  painter  of  Mulhouse,  aged  twenty-
five,  said  to  his  porter,  "If  I  do  not  return  this  evening  seek  me
at  the  mortuary.  I  dreamt  that  I  was  at  the  bottom  of  the  water
with  my  eyes  open.,,  His  mother  had  foreseen  this  misfortune
(how?)  and  when  the  bad  news  was  brought  her  she  said,  "No
need  to  say  more ;  I  know  that  my  son  is  drowned."  Zipelius  had
at  first  refused  to  bathe  in  the  Moselle  because  of  his  dream,  but
in  the  evening  he  resisted  no  more  and  perished  (lx).

M.  A.  Lavaut  recognized  during  the  war  a  place  that  he  had
seen  clearly  in  a  dream  in  1911.  He  then  saw  himself  in  an  officer's
uniform  (though  he  had  never  been  in  the  army)  surrounded  by
soldiers  in  blue.  In  1918  his  dream  came  true.  It  is  certainly
not  a  coincidence,  as  he  quite  rightly  says ;  but  it  may  possibly  be
a  case  of  paramnesia.  The  testimony  of  those  to  whom  the  dream
was  told  in  1911  is  required  (Revue  Spirite,  lxvii,  1919,  267).

On  Sunday,  August  14th  (case  lxi)  Mme.  Thomas  saw  in  a
dream  the  funeral  of  a  child  coming  from  the  orphanage  of
Treforest  down  the  left-hand  slope  of  the  hill.  The  coffin  was
borne  by  the  other  children.  She  went  to  the  orphanage  and  was
told  that  none  of  the  inmates  had  died.  On  the  17th  (Wednes-
day) a  child  of  three,  not  belonging  to  the  orphanage,  was
drowned;  and  the  mother  asked  that  the  orphanage  children
should  come  to  the  funeral.  This  was  permitted,  the  procession
passing  on  the  left  side  of  the  hill  as  seen  by  Mme.  Thomas  in  her
dream.  Bozzano  remarks  that  premonitions  dealing  with  funerals
are  frequent.

Miss  Gwendoline  Janesson  (pseudonym,  /.  S.  P.  R.f  February,
1920,  161)  dreamed,  on  the  night  of  August  2d,  that  she  saw  a
funeral  and  heard  a  voice  saying  to  her,  "It  is  Leonard."  She
saw  Mr.  V.  and  Mr.  L.,  the  two  best  friends  of  her  fiance.
Leonard.  She  then  found  herself  alone  at  the  tomb,  and  Mr.  L.
came  and  took  her  by  the  arm.  She  told  this  dream  to  her
mother.  She  spent  the  5th  of  August  with  her  fiance,  who
seemed  in  good  health,  but  next  day  collapsed  in  his  chair  and  died
of  heart  failure.  There  was  nothing  to  cause  any  anticipation  of
his  death.

I  have  myself  had  only  one  premonitory  dream,  and  that  a  vague
one.  Though  I  never  dream  of  music  (for  good  reasons),  I
dreamed  that  I  heard  Chopin's  "Funeral  March."   The  impression

374

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

was  clear  and  I  wondered  what  eminent  person  might  be  dead.
Three  or  four  days  later  I  was  invited  to  an  important  funeral
and  I  imagined  that  the  dream  might  be  an  interesting  premoni-
tion. I  went,  perhaps  for  that  reason,  expecting  to  hear  Chopin's
march.  I  was  much  disappointed  when  nothing  of  the  kind  took
place.  But  returning  home  I  came  across  a  military  funeral  and
the  band  was  playing  Chopin's  march.  This  may  have  been  a  coin-
cidence, but  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  there  was  a  premonition.

Dr.  Haye,  at  Norwalk,  dreamed  that  three  of  the  boys  at
his  school  were  drowned,  and  he  told  the  masters  to  take  every
care.  The  next  day,  as  the  boys  were  going  for  a  walk,  he  re-
newed his  caution;  but  the  accident  took  place,  and  three  were
drowned  (lix).

Mme.  Mastro  Pietro,  an  aged  peasant  woman  of  Castel  di
Guido,  a  lonely  village  near  Rome,  had  terrifying  dreams  night
after  night.  She  heard  moans  and  distinguished  the  cries  of
her  married  daughter  Caroline,  living  in  Rome.  One  morning
she  made  up  her  mind  to  go  to  Rome,  and  reached  her  daughter's
house  only  to  find  that  she  had  been  burned  and  had  just  died
(case  lxv).

M.  Nolte  sees  his  niece  Helene,  a  little  girl  (of  six)  run  over
by  a  tram-car  (5.30  p.m.).  He  told  his  dream  and  advised  close
care  of  the  child;  but  as  if  destiny  were  inevitable,  the  child  was
run  over  and  killed  by  the  tram  when  crossing  the  street  at  that
hour.

Bozzano's  case,  lxviii,  carefully  studied  by  Hyslop,  is  of  ex-
traordinary interest  and  lends  itself  to  much  comment.

In  July,  1897,  Mrs.  D.,  whose  little  girl  Betty  was  aged  two
years,  heard  a  voice  saying,  "She  will  not  need  it,"  every  time
that  she  thought  of  the  child's  future.  When  she  went  to  buy
shoes  for  the  child,  the  voice  said  to  her,  "She  will  not  need
them."  Several  times,  both  when  awake  and  in  dream,  she  had
visions  of  the  little  one's  cradle  in  flames.  Eight  days  before  the
accident  she  smelt  burning,  though  there  was  no  fire  in  the  house.
An  hour  before  the  catastrophe  she  had  the  idea  of  destroying
the  matches  in  the  room,  but  thought,  "I  will  do  it  after  my  son
comes  in."  At  ten  o'clock  she  put  Betty  into  her  cot,  and  while
doing  so  heard  a  voice  saying,  "Turn  the  mattress."  As  she  was
in  a  hurry,  she  said  jokingly  to  Betty,  "I  will  turn  the  mattress
when  you  have  gone  bye-bye."  A  few  minutes  later  the  cot  was

PREMONITIONS

375

in  flames  and  little  Betty  mortally  burned.  It  is  supposed  that
the  child  had  found  a  match,  had  lit  it,  and  so  started  the  fire.

The  following  striking  occurrence  has  been  given  me  by  my
learned  colleague,  Professor  Thoulet,  of  the  Faculty  of  Sciences
at  Nancy,  who  has  confirmed  it  orally  several  times.

Thoulet,  then  a  student,  had  gone  to  Italy  to  Rivazzano,  to
assist  a  young  French  engineer,  M.  F.,  whose  wife  lived  at
Toulon.  Thoulet  and  M.  F.  slept  in  adjoining  rooms.  In  the
middle  of  the  night  Thoulet  got  up,  went  into  M.  F.'s  room,  and
said,  "You  have  a  little  girl:  the  telegram  says  .  .  ."  and  he
began  to  read  an  imaginary  telegram  whose  meaning  he  could
clearly  perceive  though  the  words  disappeared  by  degrees.  Some
time  later  {How  long?  C.  R.)  Mr.  F.  received  exactly  the
same  telegram,  the  words  and  intention  being  the  same  as  per-
ceived by  Thoulet  in  his  momentary  access  of  lucidity.  "I  have
no  material  proof  to  give,"  he  now  says,  and  "if  anyone  told  me
the  story  I  could  not  believe  it,  but  I  can  only  say  that  I  must
admit  to  myself  that  it  is  true."

Etienne  de  Grillet,  a  member  of  the  Society  of  Friends
(Quakers),  relates  that  the  Countess  Toutschkoff,  the  wife  of  a
Russian  general,  dreamed  before  the  French  invasion  of  1812,
that  her  father  (living)  came  to  her,  holding  her  eldest  son  by  the
hand,  and  said,  "Thy  happy  days  are  past;  thy  husband  has
fallen  at  Borodino."  This  dream  was  repeated  three  times.  She
told  the  general,  and  asked,  "Where  is  Borodino?"  The  general
did  not  know  of  this  obscure  village  and  they  could  not  find  it
on  the  map.  Some  months  after,  her  father  came  into  her  room
with  her  eldest  son  as  in  the  dream  and  said,  "Thy  husband  is
dead,  he  has  fallen  at  Borodino!"  (lxx).

Mr.  Ivey,  of  Forney  (Texas),  waked  one  morning,  December
19th,  in  a  state  of  the  utmost  distress  about  his  son,  aged  nine-
teen, who  had  taken  up  his  abode  on  a  neighbouring  estate  and
was,  as  far  as  known,  in  no  danger  whatever.  Mrs.  Ivey  also
dreamed  at  the  same  time  that  she  went  on  a  journey  in  a  car-
riage, that  she  was  in  a  room  in  a  house  she  did  not  know,  sur-
rounded by  a  large  family,  with  a  girl  unknown  to  her  and  chil-
dren about  to  leave  for  school.

In  this  dream  there  was  both  a  monition  and  a  premonition.
The  son  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Ivey  had  met  with  a  serious  carriage
accident  on  December  17th,  so  that  his  parents'  distress  was

376

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

monitory  and  not  premonitory.  The  premonitory  features  were
the  arrival  of  Mrs.  Ivey  in  a  carriage,  she  having  missed  the
train,  among  the  unknown  family,  at  the  bedside  of  her  son,
who  died  on  December  19th  at  1  a.m.  All  the  details  of  her  dream
were  actually  reproduced  (Bozzano's  case,  lxix).

Some  reservations  may  properly  be  made  as  to  the  metapsychic
bearing  of  the  premonition,  for  the  likelihood  of  the  sequel  to  the
monition  itself  might  possibly  explain  it.

Three  times  in  the  course  of  the  year  1909,  Mme.  Brot,  of
Alais,  wrote  to  the  Count  de  Tromelin  to  tell  him  of  her  presenti-
ment that  she  would  be  widowed  through  a  railway  accident
before  the  year's  end.  On  December  10,  1909,  her  husband,  em-
ployed at  the  station  of  Alais,  had  his  head  crushed  by  the  buffer
of  a  wagon  (lxxxi).

Mme.  Lolla,  in  Russia,  dreamed  that  her  mother  came  into  her
room  saying,  "Lolla,  don't  be  frightened,  but  the  barn  is  on
fire."  Next  day  the  dream  came  true;  her  mother  using  the
same  words.    (Is  there  a  possibility  of  paramnesia  here?)

Lolla,  who  afterwards  married  M.  de  R.,  went  to  a  family
chapel  in  the  cemetery.  While  on  her  knees,  praying,  she  heard
a  voice  telling  her,  "You  will  be  widowed,  but  you  will  not  have
the  consolation  of  praying  at  my  son's  grave."  She  fainted  with
emotion.  Her  husband,  Colonel  R.,  some  months  later  was  mor-
tally wounded  in  the  battle  at  Moukden.  His  body  was  not
recovered.

(c)  Premonitions  of  Sundry  Events

The  first  case  adduced  here  is  an  excellent  instance,  because  the
evidence  is  conclusive,  verified  before  the  event,  and  the  proba-
bility can  be  fairly  well  calculated.

M.  Gallet,  student  of  medicine  at  Lyons,  was  preparing  some
examination  work  in  his  room  about  11  a.m.  He  was  obsessed  by
a  thought  that  distracted  his  work,  and  he  wrote  down  in  his
note-book,  "M.  Casimir-Perier  has  been  elected  President  of  the
Republic  by  451  votes."  Gallet  cared  nothing  for  politics,  and
the  phrase  dumbfounded  him.  He  showed  it  to  his  comrade
Varay,  with  whom  he  was  working.  After  lunch  Gallet  went  to
his  lectures,  and  meeting  two  fellow-students,  Boucher  and
Delorme,  he  told  them  the  premonition,  at  which  they  only
laughed.    After  lecture,  the  four  students  went  to  a  cafe  and

PREMONITIONS

377

shortly  after  the  Paris  newspapers  arrived,  announcing  the
election  of  Casimir-Perier  by  451  votes.1

Gallet  is  now  a  physician  at  Annecy,  and  a  senator  of  Savoy;
Varay  is  a  physician  also,  at  Annecy;  Delorme  is  a  pharmacist
at  Thonon;  Boucher,  a  physician  at  Cruseilles.  All  four
certify  to  the  strict  truth  of  the  fact,  which  they  remember  quite
clearly.

The  candidature  of  Casimir-Perier  was  very  doubtful,  and
unlikely:  the  betting  was  on  Brisson  or  Dupuy.  The  probability
of  his  election  was  very  slight,  but  even  admitting  an  equal
chance  for  the  first  three  candidates  the  probability  that  one  of
them  would  get  451  votes  out  of  845  is  1  :  845.  But  the  basis  of
calculation  is  very  defective.  Chance  may  always  be  invoked,  it  is
a  convenient  way  of  avoiding  thought.  What  was  the  cause  that
impelled  Gallet  to  write  on  the  margin  of  his  anatomical  notes,
"Casimir-Perier  has  been  elected  by  451  votes"?  This  case  is,  to
my  thinking,  one  of  the  most  decisive  proofs  of  premonition  on
record.

Several  cases  of  premonition  on  games  of  chance,  lotteries,
and  races  have  been  noted.

A  cousin  of  my  own,  living  in  the  country,  who  never  bet  on
races,  heard  one  evening,  on  putting  out  her  lamp,  loud  plaudits
and  shouts  of  Clamart,  Clamart.  She  re-lit  the  lamp  and  all
was  silent.  On  her  putting  out  the  light  the  plaudits  began  again.
She  thought  at  first  that  it  must  be  the  name  of  the  station  on  the
Paris-Versailles  line  shouted  by  the  porters;  but  suddenly  re-
membered that  a  horse  of  that  name  was  running.  She  staked  on
Clamart,  without  knowing  exactly  what  this  bound  her  to.
Clamart  was  the  winner.

Charles  Cascel,  two  months  before  the  ballot  for  military  ser-
vice, saw  something  undefined  in  his  room  on  which  there  ap-
peared the  number  90  in  large  figures.  He  shut  his  eyes  and
re-opening  them  still  saw  the  figures  90.    Frightened  by  this,  he

lThe  results  of  the  voting  were :

Voters:  845.  Votes

Casimir-Perier   45 1

A.  Brisson    195

Dupuy    97

General  Fevrier    33

Arago    27

Divers    22

378

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

began  to  pray  (sic)*  On  the  day  of  the  drawing  he  announced
that  he  would  draw  number  90,  which  he  did,  to  the  amazement  of
those  present.

Several  analogous  cases  have  been  collected  by  Professor  Hulin
of  the  University  of  Ghent.

To  estimate  justly  the  value  of  such  divinations  we  ought  to
know  how  many  have  failed,  for  too  often  the  successes  are  noted
and  the  failures  are  forgotten.  The  calculus  of  probabilities  is
only  applicable  if  strict  records  be  kept  of  all  trials,  and  if
failures  are  taken  into  account  as  well  as  successes,  which  is  very
seldom  done.

Some  interesting  facts  relative  to  roulette  at  Monte  Carlo  were
collected  by  a  friend  of  mine,  an  experienced  physicist  and
mathematician,  who  communicated  to  me  the  results  of  his
methodical  enquiries  and  calculations  of  probability.  His  wife,
Lydia,  aged  thirty,  and  the  mother  of  a  family,  had  some  occa-
sional premonitions,  of  which  only  the  following  have  been
accurately  noted :

On  the  2d  of  May,  after  seven  or  eight  days  on  which  Marcel
had  steadily  lost,  she  said,  I  dreamed  that  we  should  win  on  14.
Marcel  then  staked  eighteen  consecutive  times  on  twelve  num-
bers :  the  14  won.  On  these  twelve  numbers  of  his  system,  four
only  succeeded,  among  which  was  the  14.  The  odds  were  there-
fore 4  :  12  or  1  :  3,  which  counts  for  nothing.  But  the  14  was
repeated  twice,  it  came  up  a  second  time  immediately  after  win-
ning a  first  time.  Gamesters  make  a  practice  of  leaving  their
stake  on  a  winning  number,  and  the  probability  of  its  coming  up
again  is  1  :  37;  so  that  the  probability  of  the  14  turning  up  a
second  time  was  1/3X1/37,  or  1/111 ;  so  that  its  turning  up  is  not
very  marvellous.  But  on  May  3d  Lydia  dreamed  again  that  she
would  win  on  the  31.  The  event  of  the  previous  day  with  the
14  was  repeated  in  exactly  the  same  sequence;  so  that  the  two  suc-
cesses took  place  against  odds  of  1  :  12,000.

It  was  observed  that  in  the  course  of  numerous  trials  Marcel
never  had  a  repetition  after  winning  on  one  number;  the  only
repetitions  he  had  were  of  the  14  and  the  31.

To  realize  how  faint  was  the  chance  of  correct  prediction,  it  will
be  found  to  work  out  that  only  once  in  thirty-two  years  of  daily
trials  would  two  named  numbers  come  up  in  succession.

On  the  two  following  days  Lydia  named  two  other  numbers
that  did  not  come  up  at  all.

PREMONITIONS

379

On  the  fifth  day  she  said  32  and  35,  without  knowing  why.  On
124  trials  the  winning  numbers  that  day  were  as  follows :

Other  numbers,  less  than  6  times.

The  32  and  the  35  therefore  came  up  nearly  twice  as  often  as
was  to  be  looked  for.  It  will  be  remarked  that  34  is  intermediate
between  32  and  35.

The  probability  can  be  roughly  calculated  as  follows :  Supposing
that  the  32  and  the  35  came  up  14  times  when  they  should  have
come  up  6,  8,  or  say  7  times,  that  would  mean  that  they  had  come
up  7  times  more  than  was  probable.  This  is  a  probability  of
(z^)7,  say  1  :  128.  To  simplify  matters  we  will  suppose  that
the  compounded  probability  on  the  five  days'  play  (with  two
failures)  is  1  :  110  instead  of  1  :  111.  Then,  according  to  the
recognized  formula,  the  total  probability  in  round  numbers  is
1 :  130,000.

The  sixth  day  Lydia  dreamed  that  she  would  win  on  the  16.
At  a  given  moment  she  staked  on  the  16,  which  won,  the  proba-
bility being  1  :  37.  So  that  on  the  six  compounded  trials  the  odds
against  correct  prediction  by  chance  alone  would  be  1  :  5,000,000.

It  is  true  that  this  calculation  cannot  be  considered  strictly
accurate,  for  the  repetition  is  taken  into  account  for  the  first  two
days,  the  most  frequent  numbers  on  the  fifth  day  and  a  single
number  turning  up  on  one  trial  only  on  the  sixth  day ;  all  different
facts  not  strictly  comparable.

It  should  be  added  that  later  on  Lydia  had  only  failures.  Still,
taking  into  account  the  compound  event  when  odds  were  so  great,
the  fact  that  the  numbers  were  indicated  before  the  event  cdnfirms
the  conclusion  that  premonition  may  sometimes  occur  with
reference  to  games  of  chance.  The  problem  is,  however,  too
obscure  for  anything  more  than  a  mere  mention  of  the  facts.
M.  E.  Desbeaux  has  published  an  interesting  note  on  this  sub-
ject (A.S.  P.f  1909,  xix,  127).

Lombroso  mentions  the  case  of  Rosa  Tirone,  quoted  by  Boz-
zano  (lxxxviii).  In  November,  1908,  she  dreamed  that  her
fiance,  who  had  died  not  long  before,  said  to  her,  "I  do  not  wish
you  to  be  a  servant  any  longer ;  play  the  numbers  4,  53,  25,  and
30,"  and  he  added,  "I  am  thirsty,  get  some  water  in  a  bucket  and
give  me  to  drink."   The  four  numbers  named  were  winners,  and

34 —  8  times.

35 —  7  times.
32 — 7  times.

30 — 6  times.
19 — 6  times.
3 — 6  times.

380

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

if  Rosa  had  played  the  fifth  number  which  corresponds,  ac-
cording to  popular  opinion,  to  giving  drink  to  the  thirsty,  she
would  have  won  on  this  also.

The  previsions  mentioned  by  E.  Carreras  regarding  lotteries
(La  Previsione  dei  Numeri.  Luce  e  Ombra,  1919,  xix,  127)  can-
not be  considered  evidential,  for  if  R.  could  guess  winning  num-
bers more  often  than  chance  would  account  for,  he  ought  to  have
realized  considerable  sums  of  money.  It  may  therefore  be  inferred
that  the  list  given  by  him  to  M.  Carreras  is  not  complete,  as
indeed  M.  Carreras  indicates  (da  veri  indizi  debbo  credere  che  ve
ne  furono  alcune  oltre  che  anderono  perdute).  On  150  drawings
of  numbers  with  two  figures,  five  such  numbers  at  each  drawing,
the  probability  is  1  :  20.  R.  chose  106  times.  The  probable  num-
ber of  successes  was  5.3,  say  6,  but  he  had  19  successes.  The
excess  is  notable,  but  not  more  than  might  be  referable  to  chance,
especially  if  all  the  numbers  played  (probably  losing  numbers)
have  not  been  given.

It  has  been  remarked,  not  without  reason,  that  if  there  were
any  power  of  divination,  even  subconscious,  with  regard  to  games
of  chance,  lotteries,  races,  etc.,  fortunes  might  be  won,  whereas
nothing  of  the  kind  takes  place.  But  it  may  be  answered  that
verified  premonitions  are  extremely  rare,  sporadic,  and  very  excep-
tional. The  spirit  breathes  where  it  will  (spirat  ubi  vult),  and  the
fateful  number  will  not  be  discovered  by  poring  over  a  series
of  figures  with  set  purpose.

Not  only  is  prophecy  rare  in  those  who  have  the  power,  but
those  who  have  it  are  very  few ;  so  that  if  sometimes  there  really
are  divinations,  these  are  so  infinitesimally  few  by  comparison
with  normal  anticipations  as  to  be  practically  negligible.

Charles  Linnaeus  relates  in  his  autobiography  ( 1823)  that  when  he
was  at  college,  where  his  intelligence  was  not  highly  rated,  a  seer-
ess  told  him,  "You  will  be  a  professor,  you  will  travel  to  distant
lands,  and  will  be  the  most  celebrated  man  in  the  kingdom"  (xcv).

The  following  case  is  interesting,  having  been  observed  by  the
great  Schopenhauer  (Flammarion,  133)  :

"One  morning,"  says  Schopenhauer,  "having  written  a  letter,  I
laid  my  hand  on  the  inkpot  instead  of  the  sand-box  to  dry  the  writ-
ing. The  ink  was  spilt  on  the  floor.  I  called  the  servant  to  wash
the  floor.  While  she  did  so  she  told  me  that  she  had  dreamed  the
previous  night  of  doing  this  and  had  told  her  dream  to  the  other
servant,  who  confirmed  the  statement.

PREMONITIONS

381

'This  story,  whose  truth  I  guarantee,"  says  Schopenhauer,
"puts  the  reality  of  such  dreams  beyond  question.  Therefore  all
that  happens  is  fated  .  .  We  may  accept  his  evidence
without  drawing  his  conclusion.

From  the  historical  point  of  view  we  may  quote  a  premonition
occurring  to  Charles  Dickens,  reported  by  Walter  F.  Prince
(Am.  S.  P.  R.,  xiv,  1920).  He  dreamed  of  a  lady  in  a  red  shawl,
who  said,  "I  am  Miss  Napier."  He  wrote,  "Why  Miss  Napier?
I  know  no  Miss  Napier/'  Some  hours  later  two  persons  came  to
visit  him  to  introduce  a  lady  in  a  red  shawl  named  Miss  Napier
whom  Dickens  did  not  know  at  all.

Bozzano's  case  xcviii  is  extremely  curious ;  it  is  well  attested.
One  John  Lee  was  condemned  to  be  hanged  for  murder  at  Babbi-
combe  in  February,  1889.  The  night  before  his  execution  he
dreamed  that  the  trap-door  would  not  work,  whatever  efforts
were  made  to  open  it.  He  told  this  dream  to  the  warder.  In  fact,
the  trap  would  not  open,  though  it  had  previously  been  tried.
When  Lee  was  upon  it  he  was  half  unconscious,  and  did  not
remember  his  dream.

M.  Henri  Buisson,  on  June  8,  1887,  dreamed  that  he  saw  his
grandmother  dead  on  her  bed  and  above  her  a  sun  bearing  the
words,  June  8,  1888.  The  dream  was  told  and  noted  down.  One
year  later,  on  June  8,  1888,  the  grandmother  died  in  a  quarter  of
an  hour.

He  also  had  a  premonitory  dream  with  some  strange  details
which  he  narrated  before  the  event.  On  the  night  of  April  9th  he
dreamed  that  he  saw  M.  Lepine,  the  prefect  of  police,  in  the  street
wearing  one  shoe  and  one  slipper.  At  this  moment  in  the  dream
a  fire  broke  out  at  which  M.  Buisson  in  his  dream  performed  won-
ders of  courage.  On  the  evening  of  the  same  day,  twelve  hours
after  the  premonitory  dream,  a  real  fire  broke  out  in  the  Rue
Jacquemont,  and  M.  Buisson  actually  saw  M.  Lepine  wearing  one
shoe  and  one  slipper.  The  dream  had  been  told  on  the  morning
of  April  10th  to  M.  Buisson's  mother  and  uncle.

Mme.  S.  dreamed  that  she  saw  in  her  drawing-room  a  lady  in
deep  mourning  by  the  side  of  her  child's  nurse ;  and  immediately
after,  in  her  dream,  found  herself  in  a  taxi-cab,  which  stopped
near  the  Place  Pigalle.  On  the  same  day  she  received  the  unex-
pected visit  of  a  friend,  Mme.  P.,  in  deep  mourning,  who  also
quite  unexpectedly  invited  her  to  dine.  Mme.  S.  went  to  her  room
to  dress,  and  on  returning  to  the  drawing-room  saw  Mme.  P.,  the

382

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

nurse,  and  the  child  in  precisely  the  same  positions  as  seen  in  her
dream.  A  few  minutes  later  Mme.  P.  said,  "It  is  late,  we  will  take
a  taxi."  The  cab  took  them  to  the  Rue  Douai,  quite  near  to  the
Place  Pigalle.

Mme.  Ohmus  had  a  horrible  dream  (xcix),  which  she  told  to
her  husband.  She  saw  herself  stretched  on  the  ground,  both  arms
crushed  and  bleeding.  In  the  evening  her  little  dog  Nello  was  run
over  by  a  train.  Mme.  O.  then  felt  the  same  sensations  as  in  her
dream.  It  would  seem  that  in  this  case  the  premonition  was  of
the  emotions  produced  by  the  accident  and  not  of  the  accident
itself.

Sir  A.  Conan  Doyle  reports  a  personal  experience,  extremely
vague  and  non-evidential.  "Upon  April  4,  1917,  I  awoke  with  a
feeling  that  some  communication  had  been  made  to  me  of  which
I  had  only  carried  back  one  word,  which  was  ringing  in  my  head.
That  word  was  Piave.  To  the  best  of  my  belief  I  had  never  heard
that  word  before.  As  it  sounded  like  the  name  of  a  place  .  .  .
I  looked  up  the  index  of  my  atlas  ...  a  river  in  Italy  some
forty  miles  behind  the  front  line  which  at  that  time  was  victo-
riously advancing.  ...  I  could  not  think  how  any  military
event  of  consequence  could  arise  there,  but  none  the  less  I  was
so  impressed  that  I  drew  up  a  statement  that  some  such  event
would  occur  there  and  had  it  signed  by  my  secretary  and  wit-
nessed by  my  wife,  with  the  date  April  4th  attached"  {The  Nezv
Revelation,  p.  112).

Six  months  later  this  river  became  the  front  line  between  the
Italian  and  the  Austro-Hungarian  armies.

As  to  this  case  it  is  impossible  to  prove  that  there  was  no  sub-
conscious remembrance  of  this  geographical  name,  which  must
certainly  have  fallen  under  Sir  Arthur  Conan  Doyle's  eyes  some
time  in  1915  or  1916.  There  may  be  a  premonition  involved,  and
perhaps  the  time  will  come  when  such  facts  can  be  classed  as
authentic  premonitions ;  but  as  yet  they  can  only  be  recorded
without  drawing  any  inference  from  them.

A  friend  of  Miss  Violet  Lloyd,  a  well-known  English  actress,
dreamed  that  Miss  Lloyd's  face  was  burned  above  her  eyes.  She
told  this  to  another  friend,  who  did  not  dare  tell  Miss  Lloyd.  The
next  day  Miss  Lloyd,  playing  Flora  in  The  Topsy  Turvy  Hotel,
had  her  face  burned,  with  two  wounds  above  the  eyes  (case  ci).

Mrs.  Carleton  (Bozzano's  case  ciii)  wrote  to  Colonel  Coghill,
to  whom  she  had  not  written  for  a  very  long  while,  to  say  that  she

PREMONITIONS

383

had  had  a  vision  in  which  she  had  seen  him  thrown  from  his
horse  and  in  a  dangerous  situation  from  which  several  strangers
were  endeavouring  to  extricate  him.  The  vision  was  on  March
26th,  the  letter  on  the  28th.  On  the  latter  date  the  colonel
answered,  "Do  not  be  anxious,  there  is  nothing  the  matter,  dreams
are  vain."  On  the  30th,  however,  he  had  a  terrible  fall  from  his
horse  which  fell  into  a  ditch  and  was  extricated  with  difficulty
from  his  dangerous  position  by  some  friends.

Mr.  O.  dreamed,  though  he  says  it  was  a  vision  rather  than  a
dream,  that  his  little  nephew,  aged  six,  fell  under  the  wheel  of  a
carriage  and  was  seriously  though  not  mortally  hurt.  As  the
dream  was  much  on  his  mind,  he  recommended  three  different
persons  to  take  great  care  of  the  child.  Two  weeks  later,  during
a  carriage  drive,  the  boy  fell  under  a  wheel  and  had  his  leg
broken.

Sir  Oliver  Lodge  received  from  an  eminent  English  minister
the  following  account  (Bozzano,  loc.  ext.,  343):  In  bright  sun-
shine and  with  a  cloudless  sky,  Mr.  X.  directed  his  wife  to  put
forward  the  luncheon  hour ;  for  he  had  dreamed  that  there  would
be  a  terrible  storm ;  that  globular  lightning  would  enter  the  dining-
room  and  would  destroy  the  chimneys  of  the  roof  opposite.
Everyone  jested  at  the  dream,  for  the  sky  was  quite  clear.
Nevertheless  a  storm  rapidly  came  up,  a  fiery  globe  entered  the
dining-room  and  the  chimneys  of  the  neighbouring  roof  were
thrown  to  the  ground.

The  celebrated  sculptor,  Jean  Dupre  (Bozzano,  356)  tells  how,
driving  at  Londa,  on  the  precipitous  road  to  Rufina,  he  heard  a
voice  saying,  "Stop !"  He  could  see  no  one.  Mme.  Dupre,  who
was  with  him,  saw  no  one,  but  heard  the  voice.  Twice  running  he
whipped  up  the  horse  and  the  voice  came  again,  "Stop !  Stop !"
He  got  down  and  found  that  the  axle  had  nearly  left  the  wheel
next  the  precipice.    They  had  to  finish  the  journey  on  foot.

This  may  be  supposed  to  have  resulted  from  a  subconscious
observation  producing  this  kind  of  warning,  but  how  can  the  fact
that  two  persons  heard  the  voice  in  this  lonely  place  be  explained  ?

Mr.  Young  dreamed  that  a  slater  working  on  the  roof  of  an
adjoining  house  would  fall  into  the  street,  and  in  his  dream  he
was  advised  to  tell  this  to  Mrs.  Young.  He  did  so,  and  then
attended  to  his  business  without  thinking  any  more  of  the  matter.
At  4  p.m.,  by  a  kind  of  instinctive  impulse,  he  went  into  the  street
to  the  place  he  had  dreamed  of  and  found  that  the  accident  had

384

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

taken  place  two  minutes  earlier  and  that  the  unfortunate  workman
was  nearly  dead  (xvi).

Lady  Z.  was  awakened  one  night  by  a  heavy  thud,  as  if  a
human  body  had  fallen  from  the  kitchen  roof.  She  heard  moan-
ing, and  woke  her  husband,  Lord  Z.,  who  heard  nothing.  She
went  to  sleep  again  but  again  was  waked  up  by  the  same  sounds.
Her  husband,  then,  at  her  desire,  went  out,  but  could  find
nothing.  The  next  morning  a  workman  fell  in  the  same  place
and  suffered  much  injury.

Miss  A.  MacLellen,  of  Bridgeport  (Connecticut),  had  various
interesting  premonitions,  most  of  which,  however,  do  not  depart
sufficiently  from  normal  probabilities  to  be  evidential  of  a  meta-
psychic  cause.  There  is  one  that  deserves  mention  (/.  5*.  P.  R.f
March,  1920).  On  the  night  of  July  8th,  at  Boston,  she  dreamed
of  a  terrible  railway  accident,  and  dead  and  wounded  being  car-
ried to  the  Galen  Hospital.  In  the  morning  she  looked  in  the
newspapers  to  see  if  such  an  accident  had  occurred.  On  the  11th
of  July  this  accident  happened  near  Bridgeport,  12  persons  being
killed  and  48  injured,  and  these  latter  were  taken  to  the  Galen
Hospital — a  small  private  hospital  in  Boston.

The  next  case  (Bozzano's  cx)  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable
extant.  It  cannot  be  explained  by  paramnesia ;  most  of  its  detail
was  told  before  the  event  to  Mme.  de  Figueroa,  though  it  was
not  written  down.

Giovanni  de  Figueroa,  one  of  the  most  brilliant  fencing  masters
of  Palermo,  had  a  most  vivid  dream  and  told  his  wife  all  that  he
had  seen :  a  road  white  with  dust ;  a  large  cultivated  field,  a  rustic
shed  with  a  cart  and  harness  ;  a  peasant  wearing  dark-coloured
trousers  and  a  black  hat,  who  invites  M.  de  Figueroa  to  come  in.
They  enter  a  small  stable  full  of  mud  and  dung.  At  the  other
end  of  the  stable  some  winding  stone  stairs.  A  mule  tethered
to  a  movable  manger  obstructs  the  passage-way.  M.  de  F.  causes
the  mule  to  be  pushed  aside  and  mounts  the  stairs.  At  the  top
of  the  staircase  is  a  room  with  a  wooden  floor  and  bundles  of
maize,  tomatoes,  melons,  and  onions  hanging  from  the  ceiling.
In  this  room,  two  women,  one  old,  the  other  young,  also  a  little
girl,  whose  features  were  clearly  seen  and  remembered.  In  the
next  room  a  double  bed,  very  high  off  the  ground,  higher  than
M.  de  F.  had  ever  seen.

M.  de  F.  and  his  wife  thought  much  over  this  very  clear  and
intricate  dream,  but  could  find  no  meaning  in  it  (August,  1910).

PREMONITIONS

385

On  the  12th  of  October  of  the  same  year  M.  de  F.  was  asked  to
assist  a  fellow-townsman  in  a  duel.

They  left,  with  the  two  seconds,  in  an  automobile  for  Marano,
a  little  place  of  whose  very  existence  M.  de  F.  did  not  know.  As
they  were  going  through  the  country,  M.  de  F.  recognized  the
white  road  seen  in  his  dream,  and  said  to  his  companions,  "I
have  seen  this  before,  we  shall  come  to  a  wooden  house  and  shed."
Then  all  the  details  of  the  dream  were  met  with  in  reality — the
peasant  in  dark  trousers  and  black  hat,  the  mule  tethered  to  the
manger  that  had  to  be  displaced  to  allow  them  to  reach  the  stairs,
the  upper  room  with  the  melons,  onions,  and  maize,  the  three
women,  the  high  bed  in  the  next  room,  etc.  The  sensation  made
on  M.  de  F.'s  mind  was  so  strong  that  he  says  he  completely  for-
got the  duel  about  which  he  had  come.

If  some  few  of  the  minor  details  may  be  referable  to  param-
nesia, there  is  none  the  less  a  mass  of  facts  which  have  a  strongly
metapsychic  character.  I  have  had  to  condense  and  summarize
the  account  and  no  adequate  idea  can  be  formed  of  the  events
unless  the  narrative  is  read  in  the  original  version.

The  case  of  the  Abbe  Gamier  {La  Mort  et  son  Mystere,  277)
is  analogous  to  the  Figueroa  case.  Gamier,  in  1846,  while  at  the
seminary,  saw  the  whole  of  an  unknown  landscape  with  many
details — sheep,  men  with  pointed  hats,  a  foal,  a  pug-dog,  children
playing,  etc.  Three  years  after,  in  1849,  when  travelling  in  Italy,
he  found  the  whole  of  these  details  reproduced  in  actuality.  His
good  faith  is  not  in  doubt,  but  can  he  be  certain  of  details  enu-
merated four  years  later?  We  must  consider  some  paramnesia
possible  or  even  probable,  some  illusion  of  having  "seen  before."
A  premonition  when  not  written  down  or  told  before  the  event
can  never  be  taken  as  evidential.

Some  other  premonitions  narrated  by  Flammarion  (Princess
Carolath,  p.  274;  Mme.  Lebas,  p.  283;  and  Aimee  Roger,  p.  284)
are  open  to  the  same  objection.

M.  Saurel,  in  1911,  dreamed  that  he  saw  a  field  and  stream
beside  a  large  building,  in  a  part  of  the  country  unknown  to
him.  Soldiers  were  drawing  water,  camping,  and  lighting  fires.
They  were  wearing  a  pale-blue  uniform  and  a  curious  kind  of
helmet.  He  himself  was  in  officer's  uniform.  On  awaking  he
told  the  dream  to  several  friends.  In  1918  this  dream  was  com-
pletely realized.  This  premonition,  attested  by  M.  Saurel's  father
and  mother  as  having  been  told  them  in  1911,  should  be  read  in

386

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

the  original;  it  is  most  interesting  (Flammarion,  Death  and  its
Mystery).

Another  most  interesting  premonition,  for  which  perhaps  fresh
documentary  proofs  are  needed,  refers  to  one  of  the  greatest
events  of  contemporary,  indeed  of  all  history.  It  is  a  premoni-
tion relative  to  the  assassination  of  the  Archduke  Ferdinand  at
Sarajevo,  June  28,  1914,  for  this  crime  initiated  the  greater  crime
of  the  war,  1914-1918.

Mgr.  Joseph  de  Lanyi,  Bishop  of  Grosswarden,  dreamed  on  the
morning  of  June  28th,  at  4  a.m.,  that  he  saw  on  his  study  table
a  black-edged  letter  bearing  the  arms  of  the  Archduke.  M.  de
Lanyi  had  been  professor  of  the  Hungarian  language  to  the
Archduke.  In  his  dream  he  opened  the  letter  and  at  its  head  saw
a  street  into  which  an  alley  opened.  The  Archduke  was  seated
in  a  motor-car  with  his  wife;  facing  him  was  a  general,  and
another  officer  by  the  side  of  the  chauffeur.  There  was  a  crowd
about  the  car  and  from  the  crowd  two  young  men  stepped  for-
ward and  fired  on  the  royal  couple.  The  text  of  the  letter  ran,
"Your  Eminence,  dear  Dr.  Lanyi,  my  wife  and  I  have  been  vic-
tims of  a  political  crime  at  Sarajevo.  We  commend  ourselves  to
your  prayers.    Sarajevo,  June  28,  1914,  4  a.m."

"Then,"  says  Mgr.  de  Lanyi,  "I  woke  up  trembling;  I  saw  that
the  time  was  4.30  a.m.,  and  /  wrote  down  my  dream,  reproducing
the  characters  that  had  appeared  to  me  in  the  Archduke's  letter.
At  six,  when  my  servant  came,  he  found  me  seated  at  my  table,
much  shaken  and  telling  my  rosary.  I  said  at  once  to  him,  'Call
my  mother  and  my  host,  that  I  may  tell  them  the  dreadful  dream
I  have  had/  "

During  the  day  a  telegram  arrived  giving  the  terrible  news.

Such  is  the  letter  that  Edouard  Lanyi,  S.  J.,  a  professor  at
Laufkirchen,  received  from  his  brother,  Mgr.  Lanyi.  Hearing  of
this  letter,  M.  Grabinsky  made  certain  enquiries  which  confirmed
all  these  facts.  The  results  of  this  enquiry  are  given  in
Psychische  Studien,  1918,  xliv,  324  and  465.

In  this  premonition  all  the  details  are  very  full  and  correct,
except  as  to  the  shots  fired.  Bombs  were  really  used,  and  thrown
twice.

It  may,  however,  be  asked  why  this  extraordinary  premonition
was  not  published  till  1918.  It  may  be  surmised  also  that  Mgr.
de  Lanyi  knew  that  the  Archduke  would  go  to  Sarajevo  and  that
some  danger  to  him  might  be  apprehended.

PREMONITIONS

387

Granting  that  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  an  imposture  on
the  part  of  Mgr.  de  Lanyi  and  his  brother,  these  objections  do  not
seem  to  me  sufficient  to  warrant  a  refusal  to  consider  this  fine
instance  of  premonition  as  authentic.

I  shall  now  give  in  fairly  full  detail  one  of  the  most  remarkable
cases  recorded  in  psychic  science.  It  may  be  divided  into  two
parts,  the  first  part  having  reference  to  facts  which  came  to  pass
after  the  prediction,  but  were  published  or  told  to  us  after  they
came  to  pass ;  and  the  second,  snorter  and  more  vague,  concerning
facts  that  were  told  me  and  published  before  they  came  to  pass.

In  November,  1913,  I  had  a  visit  from  Dr.  Tardieu,  a  former
house-surgeon  and  then  consultant  at  the  Mont  Dore  Hospital,
who  had  been  a  pupil  of  my  father's,  and  said  to  me,  "I  have  some
very  important  things  to  tell  you.  According  to  certain  indications
and  revelations  personal  to  myself,  the  time  seems  come  to  speak
of  these  things,  and  I  think  it  necessary  to  tell  you  of  them  now."
He  then  gave  me  the  narrative  that  here  follows  in  an  abridged
form;  as  he  gave  it,  the  detail  was  lengthy:

"In  1868  I  left  the  Medical  School,  as  a  young  doctor.  I  had
a  close  friend  named  Sonrel,  a  brilliant  mathematician  and  physi-
cist, an  astronomical  student  at  the  Paris  Observatory.  One  day
in  July,  about  5  p.m.,  we  were  conversing  as  we  walked  in  the
Luxemburg  Gardens,  when  Sonrel  suddenly  stopped,  as  if  in  a
trance.  He  spoke,  and  spoke  without  heeding  anything  that  I
said  to  him,  and  without  seeing  anything  round  him.   He  said :

"How  strange !  I  see  you  in  uniform !  Yes,  you  have  a  military
cap  and  in  it  you  are  counting  money,  and  you  are  on  a  railway !
Where  are  you  going?  To  Hirson?  To  Sedan?  Oh,  my  poor
country!  My  country!  ...  I,  too,  am  in  uniform,  a  superior
officer.  Is  it  possible?  I  am  mortally  ill.  ...  I  shall  die  in
three  days,  but  you  are  there,  you  come  in  time  to  see  me  before  I
die,  to  watch  over  my  children !  Wait  now,  wait.  .  .  .  Years
pass.  It  is  a  vast  war!  What  bloodshed!  God!  What  blood-
shed! Oh,  France!  Oh,  my  country!  Thou  art  saved!  Thou
art  on  the  Rhine!  Oh,  France,  thou  art  ever  the  queen  among
nations !  All  admire  thee  \n

I  give  these  words  of  Dr.  Tardieu's  from  memory ;  he  published
them  in  April,  1914,  in  the  A.  S.  P.  I  have  asked  him  to  correct
anything  that  is  inexact,  but  the  version  above  is  that  which  he
gave  me  in  November,  1913.    Dr.  Tardieu  added:

"The  whole  of  this  astonishing  prediction  was  realized.   At  the

388

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

end  of  August,  1870,  I  was  appointed  by  Nelaton  to  the  charge  of
a  military  hospital.  I  had  a  military  uniform,  and  having  collected
money  for  the  wounded  at  the  head  of  my  detachment  on  the  way
to  the  station,  I  was  counting  the  amount  received,  in  my  cap.

"Not  till  then  did  I  remember  my  friend's  prediction,  so  that
when  my  comrades  asked  where  we  were  going  I  said,  'I  know,
to  Hirson  and  Sedan.'

"In  September,  1870,  Sonrel  was  appointed  commandant  of
engineers;  but  in  the  early  days  of  the  siege  he  fell  a  victim  to
hemorrhagic  smallpox.  I  arrived  just  in  time  for  his  last  mo-
ments. He  was  awaiting  me  and  kept  on  saying,  'Tardieu  will
come ;  I  see  him  coming/

"He  had  married  in  1869,  had  one  child,  and  in  September,
1870,  his  wife  was  enceinte."

Dr.  Tardieu  added  also :  "The  personal  predictions  that  Sonrel
made  to  me  are  on  the  point  of  being  realized,  and  I  presume  that
the  second  part  of  his  prediction  will  come  to  pass  like  the  first.
That  is  why  I  come  to  tell  you."

At  my  repeated  request,  not  without  some  reluctance,  he  con-
sented to  write  out  what  he  had  told  me  verbally,  and  all  these
premonitions  were  published  in  the  A.  S.  P.  for  June,  1914.

The  critical  study  of  this  now  celebrated  prophecy  falls  naturally
into  two  parts:  For  the  events  of  1870,  which  constitute  the  first
part,  we  have  only  the  testimony  of  Dr.  Tardieu ;  but  his  good
faith  and  sincerity  are  as  unquestionable  as  my  own,  or  that  of
Oliver  Lodge,  or  William  James.  I  would  willingly  admit  that
defective  memory  may  cause  some  small  details  to  be  inaccurately
reported ;  but  the  essential  facts,  the  prediction  of  the  war  of
1870,  and  SonreFs  speedy  death,  were  certainly  spoken  of  in  the
Luxemburg  Gardens  in  July,  1868.  Moreover,  there  is  another
certain  fact — Dr.  Tardieu  has  repeatedly  told  the  story  in  the
same  way.  Therefore  we  are  dealing  with  an  authentic  premoni-
tion, very  full  of  detail,  and  nearly  unique  in  science  by  reason  of
this  abundance  of  detail  which  certainly  did  not  originate  in  Dr.
Tardieu's  well-controlled  and  scientific  mind.

The  criticism  of  the  second  part  of  the  prediction  referring  to
1914-1918  is  of  a  different  kind.  There  are  much  fewer  details —
to  speak  accurately,  there  are  none.  War,  bloodshed,  the  Rhine,
victory  are  not  details  of  events ;  but  the  premonition  was  written
and  printed  before  the  event,  so  that  there  can  be  no  uncertainty
whatsoever  about  its  authenticity.

PREMONITIONS

389

Certainly  the  political  situation  in  Europe  in  1913  was  not  reas-
suring ;  but  in  November  of  that  year  it  was  perhaps  less  strained
than  in  1910,  and  Dr.  Tardieu  was  induced  to  come  and  speak  to
me,  not  by  the  European  situation,  but  by  the  fulfilment  of  per-
sonal prophecies  that  Sonrel  had  made  to  him  and  of  which  he
gave  me  only  a  very  partial  and  vague  summary.  Certainly  some
of  the  wording  of  the  prediction  is  very  applicable :  "What  blood-
shed! What  slaughter!  But  France  reaches  the  Rhine.  Oh,
France,  queen  of  nations,  all  admire  thee !"

Another  premonition  printed  before  the  event  in  the  journal
La  Vie  Nouvelle,  of  Beauvais  (Nos.  324,  325),  appeared  in  Febru-
ary and  March,  1914;  communicated  to  the  paper  by  the  Abbe
J.  A.  Petit,  being  utterances  in  trance  by  a  simple  peasant  girl,  who
during  her  trance  spoke  as  if  she  were  Jeanne  d'Arc,  the  guide
of  France,  There  is  much  irrelevant  matter  proceeding  normally
from  the  single  supposition  of  approaching  war,  already  appre-
hended in  February,  1914.   I  quote  only  the  interesting  parts :

"In  a  very  short  time  France  will  be  invaded  by  enemy  masses
on  the  northwest  (with  respect  to  Domremy).  Their  entry  will
be  victorious  by  reason  of  their  number  and  the  ignorance  of
their  designs  that  still  prevails  in  France.  When  this  invasion
begins  our  armies  will  not  be  expecting  it.  The  invasion  will
come  by  the  northwest  frontier  of  two  departments,  and  the
invading  forces  will  be  so  great  that  they  will  reach  several  towns
of  a  third  department.  It  will  be  necessary  to  give  up  these  towns.
The  north  and  the  east  will  suffer  much.  The  enemy  will  advance
in  a  straight  line  parallel  to  the  frontier."

Here  comes  in  the  account  of  a  sanguinary  battle  or  series  of
battles  round  a  fortress  (Verdun?).  "The  enemy  will  find  that
place  three  times  as  strong  as  he  expected."

"But  France  is  not  alone.  The  violation  of  neutral  territory  has
displeased  other  powers  who  unite  with  the  French,  for  it  is  clear
that  this  violation  has  been  made  to  take  possession  of  that  land
and  to  have  a  direct  passage  to  the  French  frontier!*

I  underline  the  more  characteristic  phrases  of  this  confused  but
curious  prediction.

"The  allied  powers  will  make  themselves  heard;  the  enemy  will
not  heed  them  .  .  .  but  will  persist  in  behaving  on  neutral
territory  as  in  a  conquered  country.  The  struggle  will  continue  in
this  small  nation  and  it  will  be  bloody."

After  various  obscurely  worded  divagations,  there  comes :

390

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

"The  enemy  wavers  despite  the  objurgations  of  the  leaders ;
discouragement  is  followed  by  consternation  and  rout.  They
scarcely  defend  themselves;  they  let  themselves  be  killed.  It  is
the  end.  The  French  and  their  allies  unite  in  laying  down  the
basis  for  an  equitable  treaty  of  peace,  desiring  to  unite  all  nations
in  justice  and  fraternity."

Does  this  refer  to  the  League  of  Nations?

The  above  is  an  abridged,  and  therefore  mutilated,  summary
of  this  interesting  premonition.  There  is  not  sufficient  detail  of
actual  events  to  produce  sure  conviction  that  it  may  not  be  due  to
normal  penetration  and  chance  combined ;  nevertheless,  in  certain
respects  there  is  sufficient  accuracy  and  prevision  to  give  much
food  for  thought.  To  form  a  thoroughly  well-grounded  opinion
the  original  should  be  referred  to.  It  seems  weak,  however,  in
comparison  with  the  Sonrel  predictions.

Lady  Hester  Stanhope  received  some  prophetic  communications
from  a  certain  French  gentleman  named  Lusteneau,  who  an-
nounced that  Aleppo  and  Antioch  would  be  destroyed  by  earth-
quake. In  1822  Mr.  Wolff  was  at  Aleppo,  and  dining  one  day
with  Mr.  Barker,  M.  de  Lesseps,  and  M.  Maseyk,  the  Danish  con-
sul, a  letter  from  Lady  Stanhope  to  Mr.  Barker  was  commented
on  with  much  amusement  as  she  warned  Mr.  Barker  not  to  go  to
Aleppo,  as  the  destruction  of  the  city  was  impending.  Some  days
after  there  was  a  terrible  earthquake  that  destroyed  Aleppo  and
Antioch,  and  caused  60,000  deaths.  Mr.  Barker  had  a  very
narrow  escape.1

Premonitions  of  earthquakes  are  frequent  but  are  generally  too
vague  to  count.2

Dr.  Santi  states  that  a  lady  of  the  Roman  aristocracy  said,  on
December  2,  1909,  that  she  had  seen  in  a  dream  the  town  of
Messina  destroyed  by  an  earthquake  and  a  tidal  wave,  and  that
this  catastrophe  would  take  place  on  the  8th,  the  18th,  or  the
28th  of  that  same  month.  She  wrote  to  the  King  of  Italy  to  the
above  effect  a  letter  which  Dr.  Santi  saw  and  kept.  Messina  was
destroyed  by  an  earthquake  and  a  tidal  wave  on  December  28,
1909  (Bozzano,  335).

At  Nice,  during  the  night  of  March  5,  1921,  Mme.  F.  dreamed
that  she  was  taken  into  a  distant  country,  arid,  deserted,  and  quite
unknown  to  her,  where  she  could  see  nothing  like  what  she  was

bozzano,  334,  after  William  Howitt,  History  of  the  supernatural,  ii,  26.
"See  also  the  references  to  the  Martinique  earthquake  in  the  A.  S.  P.

PREMONITIONS

391

accustomed  to.  In  her  dream  her  (deceased)  father  told  her  she
was  in  Brazil.  While  looking  at  the  strange  landscape  she  saw
people  running  away  in  terror,  for  the  earth  was  torn  up  on  all
sides.   She  told  this  dream  to  her  husband  and  to  her  brother.

On  the  morning  of  March  6th  the  newspapers  of  Paris  and  Nice
announced  (for  the  first  time)  that  a  terrible  earthquake  in  China
had  caused  the  deaths  of  250,000  persons.  Mme.  F.  could  not
possibly  have  had  any  knowledge  of  this  event  on  March  5th.
Conversation  on  that  day  had  turned  on  Brazil,  but  not  on
earthquakes.

Is  this  a  case  of  cryptesthesia  or  mere  coincidence?  It  is  to  be
noted  (1)  that  Mme.  F.  never  dreamed  of  seismic  convulsions,
and  (2)  that  the  Chinese  earthquake  is  one  of  the  most  serious
on  record.

The  following  premonitions  are  of  quite  trivial  events;  their
interest  lies  in  the  precise  details  given.

M.  Mittelmayer  (Bozzano's  xxvi),  a  schoolmaster  at  Dingolfing
(Bavaria),  dreams  that  a  peasant  returning  from  early  mass
comes  to  tell  him  that  M.  F.  wishes  to  take  him  to  Fosthart  to  a
small  meeting  of  ecclesiastics  and  schoolmasters,  and  that  at  the
inn  there  he  sees  a  gentleman  take  the  Milnchcner  Post  out  of  his
pocket.  Mr.  Mittelmayer  told  the  dream  to  his  wife.  On  the
following  day  the  dream  was  fulfilled  in  every  detail.  When
M.  F.  came,  M.  M.  told  him  the  dream,  but  no  satisfactory  expla-
nation could  be  found.  At  Fosthart  there  was  a  man  reading
the  Milnchener  Post.

Mr.  S.  H.  (case  cxiv),  on  awaking,  saw  close  to  his  table  a  grey-
headed man,  with  his  back  to  the  door ;  he  was  in  his  shirt-sleeves,
and  Mr.  H.  felt  that  he  knew  the  man  but  could  not  place  him.
He  told  the  fact  to  his  wife  and  three  employees.  He  then  went
to  his  office,  and  seeing  from  a  distance  someone  coming  towards
them  he  said  to  the  employees,  "Here  is  my  man  coming  along."
This  man  having  entered  the  office  found  it  very  hot ;  he  took  off
his  coat  and  appeared  in  his  shirt-sleeves  as  Mr.  H.  had  seen  him
in  the  dream.

Mme.  A.,  in  a  high  fever  and  half  delirious,  sees  a  woman
bending  over  her.  She  sees  only  down  to  the  waist  and  is  aware
of  the  Christian  name  Marie ;  the  surname  she  is  unable  to  read,
but  ends  in  "et."  Two  days  later  she  was  looking  for  quarters  in
the  country  to  rent,  and  in  the  little  village  of  Crosnes,  which  she
did  not  know,  she  found  what  she  desired,  and  in  the  same  house

392

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

another  lodger,  whom  she  recognized.  "I  am  sure,"  she  said,
''that  your  name  is  Marie/'  Her  name  was  Marie  Gallichet  (Boz-
zano,  cxvii).

Mrs.  Z.  had  a  very  vivid  dream  that  she  saw  herself  with  her
sister  in  Richmond  Park,  and  that  she  found  on  a  chair  a  hatpin
with  a  head  like  a  medal,  which  she  gave  to  her  housemaid.  She
told  the  dream,  which  doubtless  led  her  to  go  to  Richmond,  where
she  found  the  hatpin  and  duly  gave  it  to  her  housemaid.

This  case  is  curious ;  there  is  the  one  most  unlikely  premonition
— the  finding  of  the  hatpin.  The  rest  seems  to  have  been  deter-
mined by  the  dream  itself.  The  interest  of  such  events  does  not
consist  in  the  importance  of  the  matter  referred  to.  Trivial  inci-
dents are  often  the  most  curious,  by  reason  of  their  unlikelihood
and  the  amount  of  details.

Mme.  Albert  Richet,  my  daughter-in-law,  tells  me  the  follow-
ing story:  "On  Sunday,  December  28,  1919,  at  about  5  p.m.,  I
was  in  the  Paris  Metropolitan  Railway,  going  from  the  'Pasteur'
station  to  Pigalle.  The  compartment  was  full  of  people,  and  I
was  quite  normal.  At  the  Solferino  station,  the  train  had  nearly
stopped,  when  I  heard  loud  cries  of  distress  from  a  woman  and  a
child  in  the  next  compartment  behind  us,  and  at  the  same  time,
a  hubbub  as  of  many  people  rushing  to  the  place.  I  got  up  to
look  out  on  the  platform  for  the  cause  of  this  tumult,  but  could
see  nothing  unusual.  I  asked  a  lady  (unknown)  who  was  in  the
compartment  with  me,  'Do  you  not  hear  it?'  She  looked  aston-
ished and  said,  'No,  I  hear  nothing/  I  then  realized  that  the
whole  had  taken  place  in  my  imagination.  It  seemed  to  me,  how-
ever (though  I  cannot  be  sure),  that  the  train  was  slower  than
usual  in  starting.

"A  few  moments  later  we  reached  the  next  station  (Chambrc
des  Deputes),  and  when  the  train  stopped,  I  heard  exactly  re-
peated all  that  I  had  previously  heard — the  screams,  the  noise  of
the  crowd,  etc.  They  said  that  a  woman  whose  child  was  nearly
suffocated  by  the  crowd  had  screamed.  I  could  see  nothing  be-
cause the  people  in  my  compartment  all  crowded  at  the  door  to
see  what  was  occurring.  This  time  the  train  stopped  for  a
considerable  time.

"A  singular  fact  is  that  the  unknown  lady  to  whom  I  had
spoken  said  only,  Tt  is  a  premonition/  without  further  remark.
She  got  out  at  the  next  station,  Concorde.  This  is  the  first  time
that  anything  of  the  kind  has  happened  to  me;  and  though  I

PREMONITIONS

393

often  travel  by  the  Metro  this  is  the  only  time  that  there  has  been
any  such  accident.  I  was  much  affected  by  it  and  the  whole  de-
tails are  strongly  impressed  on  my  mind."

This  case  is  very  clear.  There  cannot  be  paramnesia,  because
the  auditory  hallucination  was  spoken  of  before  the  event.  It  can
hardly  be  referred  to  chance ;  and  finally,  the  hallucination  is  quite
decidedly  subjective.

Two  facts  of  the  same  kind,  but  not  very  evidential,  are  as  fol-
lows :  A  schoolmaster,  M.  Savelli,  of  Costa  in  Corsica,  on  return-
ing home  with  a  friend,  heard  cries  and  lamentations  from  a
house  near  by.  M.  Savelli  and  his  friend  ascertained  that
nothing  was  wrong.  On  the  following  day  passing  the  same
place  they  heard  the  same  cries,  but  this  time  they  were  real ;  a
child  had  been  taken  with  croup  and  had  died.

The  other  story  is  told  by  M.  Napoleoni,  a  retired  sergeant-
major:  Passing  at  midnight  with  a  friend  before  two  detached
houses,  they  heard  hammering.  Two  days  later  they  were  passing
again,  and  heard  the  same  sound,  but  real.  The  village  car-
penter was  making  a  coffin  for  a  shepherd  who  had  died  the
day  before.

Mr.  Bowring  (Bozzano,  cxx)  dreamed  that  he  saw  his  favourite
canary  dead  in  its  bath,  with  extended  wings.  He  told  his  wife,
who  at  once  went  to  look  at  the  cage,  and  found  nothing  wrong.
Next  morning  the  bird  was  found  dead  in  its  bath  with  its  wings
spread  out.  Some  other  birds  had  occasionally  been  found  dead,
but  always  with  their  wings  closed.

Mrs.  Johnson  (cxxi),  who  is  accustomed  to  note  down  her
dreams  and  visions  (it  would  be  well  if  all  sensitives  would  do
this),  saw  herself  leaving  an  empty  shop  in  a  strange  country,  and
in  the  shop  a  very  large  red  tam-o'-shanter  cap  such  as  a  buffoon
might  wear.  Some  time  later  she  went  unexpectedly  to  the
Riviera,  and  there  going  into  an  empty  florist's  shop  she  recalled
her  vision.  Before  her  was  a  man  in  the  huge  red  cap — it  was
carnival  time — making  her  extravagant  bows.

The  story  told  by  Mr.  Tweedale,  the  astronomer,  is  very  note-
worthy. One  morning  at  4  a.m.  he  dreamed  that  he  saw  a  comet
in  the  east  just  before  sunrise.  The  impression  was  so  strong
that  he  went  at  once  to  his  observatory,  and  found  the  comet,
which  was  invisible  to  the  naked  eye.  He  then  went  to  the  tele-
graph office  before  it  had  opened,  to  make  his  discovery  known.
Shortly  after  the  post  brought  him  news  that  the  comet  had  been

394  PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

discovered  by  Barnard  and  Hartwig  (/.  S\  P.  R.f  November,
1906,  328).   Was  this  a  premonition  or  cryptesthesia  ?

The  next  case  was  communicated  to  me  by  Dr.  Z.,  a  Fellow
of  the  Medical  Faculty.  One  evening  he  went  to  see  one  of  his
friends.  The  friend  was  out,  but  his  sister,  Mme.  E.,  was  at
home.  My  colleague  was  starting  on  his  holiday  two  days  later,
and  the  idea  came  to  him  to  invite  the  lady  to  the  Faculty  of
Medicine  to  hear  a  paper  read.  Then,  being  alone  in  Paris,  he
said  to  Mme.  E.,  "I  will  take  you  to  the  cinema  this  evening."
They  found,  however,  that  the  cinema  was  closed;  and  walking
on,  came  to  the  Grand  Guignol,  where  they  went  in  just  as  the
curtain  was  going  up.  Soon  Mme.  E.,  much  disturbed,  grasped
the  hand  of  the  doctor,  saying,  "It  is  my  dream."  She  had
dreamed  that  a  man  in  hideous  mask,  and  his  cap  drawn  down
over  his  eyes  and  with  a  bottle  in  his  hand,  was  pursuing  her
with  hostile  intent.  The  piece  (The  Mask)  represented  an  un-
fortunate man  whose  face  had  been  so  mutilated  by  an  accident
that  he  had  to  wear  a  mask  and  to  pull  his  cap  down  over  his
eyes,  as  in  Mme.  E.'s  dream.  Between  the  acts,  Dr.  Z.,  to  calm
the  lady,  asked  her  if  she  had  had  any  other  dream.  "Yes,"  she
said,  "I  saw  you  coming  towards  me  in  a  palace,  with  statues  all
round."  "Just  so,"  said  Dr.  Z.,  "that,  no  doubt,  is  because  you
sang  the  other  day  that  song  of  Mignon  about  marble  statues."

On  the  following  day,  in  the  Salle  des  Pas  Perdus  of  the
Faculty,  Dr.  Z.,  going  forward  towards  Mme.  E.,  saw  her  again
much  disturbed.  "This  was  what  I  dreamed  of,"  she  said.  "I
saw  all  this — the  statues,  the  railing,  and  you  were  coming  towards
me,  just  as  you  have  now  done."

One  interesting  element  has  been  omitted  from  our  present
classification — the  purpose  that  might  be  called  tutelary  shown
by  some  premonitions.  Bozzano  has  a  special  chapter  on  pre-
monitions that  save  from  dangers.  These  are  relatively  few,  and
to  be  fair,  we  ought  also  to  speak  of  those  which  do  not  save,
which  are  much  more  frequent.  In  some  cases,  however,  the
premonitory  warning  has  been  so  unquestionable  that  one  might
almost  be  warranted  in  the  strange  inference  that  an  external
protecting  will  had  given  the  caution.  This  would  only  be  in
cases  where  no  subconscious  notion  can  have  conveyed  any  sort  of
anticipation.  In  order  that  any  premonition  may  be  recognized
as  tutelary,  the  danger  against  which  a  warning  is  given  must  be
quite  unforeseeable.

PREMONITIONS

395

A  few  cases  are  given  below :

Mr.  Wiltshire  was  awakened  very  early  one  morning  by  a  voice
calling  him  loudly  and  repeatedly.  His  son  heard  nothing.  The
voice  was  not  recognized  by  him,  but  seemed  agitated ;  and  the
impression  given  was  that  some  misfortune  was  impending,  and
that  he  would  be  urgently  wanted.  As  he  was  a  cattle-breeder  he
went  out  to  inspect  his  stables.  There  was  no  one  in  the  settlement
but  a  young  female  servant  who  showed  much  mental  distress ;
she  was  walking  very  fast  and  Mr.  W.  soon  lost  sight  of  her ;  but
he  heard  cries  of  distress  and  was  just  in  time  to  save  her  from
drowning  in  a  deep  well  into  which  she  had  thrown  herself.  In
this  instance  the  distinct  hearing  of  the  voice  excludes  the  notion
of  coincidence  (Bozzano,  381).

The  next  case  was  communicated  by  C.  de  Vesme  to  Flam-
marion,  and  is  remarkable  for  several  reasons.  It  concerns  a  pre-
monition publicly  given  long  in  advance  to  several  persons.  A
certain  Vincent  Sassaroli,  the  conductor  of  a  musical  band  at
Sartano,  announced  that  the  building  in  which  the  musicians  were
to  play  would  collapse.  The  house  belonged  to  a  Canon  Bacherini.
Sassaroli  insisted  on  a  careful  survey  by  a  skilful  architect.
Nothing  unusual  was  found  and  Sassaroli  was  ridiculed  for  his
folly  and  timidity.  On  the  date  fixed  for  the  performance  he
repeated  his  prediction;  they  all  left  the  house  laughing  and
mocking  the  visionary,  but  they  had  hardly  gone  out  when  the
house  crumbled  down.  This  memorable  event  was  the  subject  of
a  report,  certified  by  all  the  inmates  of  the  house  (Flammarion,
338).

Mrs.  X.  had  a  very  clear  dream  that  she  was  driving  in  Pic-
cadilly, near  Down  Street,  that  her  coachman  fell  from  the  box,
and  that  his  tall  hat  was  crushed.  On  the  following  day  she  went
driving  and  in  Piccadilly  at  the  corner  of  Down  Street  noticed
that  her  coachman  was  falling  backwards,  half  fainting.  She
stopped  the  carriage  and  the  man  fell,  so  that  her  dream  was  half
realized.  Half  only,  for  the  hat  was  not  crushed.  A  serious
accident  was  avoided,  writes  Lady  Z.,  by  the  prompt  action  caused
by  my  recollection  of  the  dream.

4.  Conclusion

A  definite  inference  arises  from  these  facts,  whether  they  be
important  or  trivial ;  an  inference  that  no  criticism  of  details  can
invalidate.    It  is  that  premonition  is  a  demonstrated  fact.

396

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

In  certain  circumstances  not  as  yet  definable,  certain  individuals
(mostly,  though  not  exclusively,  hypnotizable  persons  or  me-
diums) can  announce  events  to  come,  and  give  precise  details  on
these  events  that  are  not  as  yet  existent ;  details  so  exact  that  no
perspicuity,  no  coincidence,  and  no  chance  can  account  for  the
prediction.

We  are  therefore  driven  to  infer  that  the  special,  mysterious
faculty  that  we  have  called  cryptesthesia,  whose  nature  and  modes
of  action  are  unknown,  is  not  only  manifested  for  past  and  present
facts,  but  also  for  future  ones.

After  all,  the  metapsychic  cognition  of  existing  distant  facts  is
so  marvellous  that  cognition  of  the  future  is  not  so  very  much
more  extraordinary.  A.  knows  that  B.,  six  hundred  miles  away,
is  drowned.  How  can  A.  know  this  ?  We  have  not  the  least  idea.
A.  announces  that  B.  will  be  drowned  tomorrow.  It  is  only  a
little  more  marvellous.  In  the  whole  domain  of  metapsychic  lucid-
ity, so  profound  is  the  mystery  and  so  impenetrable  the  obscurity
that  a  little  more  or  less  mystery  should  not  appal  us.

Are  we  then  to  conclude  that  time  is  only  a  notion  of  our  de-
fective mental  constitution,  that  the  future  is  irrevocably  fated,
that  free  will  is  an  illusion,  and  that  there  is  no  moral  responsibil-
ity? Long  discussions  might  be  raised  on  that  text.  I  shall  not
enter  on  arguments  that  pertain  more  to  metaphysics  than  to
metapsychics,  nor  allow  myself  to  be  led  into  vain  speculation.  I
shall  abide  in  the  domain  of  strict  facts.  There  are  indisputable
and  verified  facts  of  premonition.  Their  explanation  may  or  may
not  come  later ;  meanwhile  the  facts  are  there — authenticated  and
undeniable.    There  are  premonitions.

Are  these  due  solely  to  human  intelligence,  or  to  other  intelligent
forces  acting  on  our  minds?  It  is  impossible  to  decide.  We  must
be  content  with  exact  observation  of  the  facts.

And  it  would  be  inexcusably  rash  to  affirm,  as  I  have  boldly
done,  that  there  are  premonitions,  if  abundant  and  formal  proof
had  not  been  advanced.  This  abundant  and  formal  proof  has.  I
think,  been  given.

BOOK  III
Objective  Me tapsy chics

CHAPTER  I

On  Objective  Metapsychics  in  General

The  study  of  collective  hallucinations  bridges  the  gap  between
the  subjective  and  the  objective  facts.

When  two  persons  see  a  phantasm  and  describe  it  in  the  same
manner,  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  they  have  been  simultaneously
and  identically  hallucinated.

Thus  the  fact  that  there  are  monitions  that  are  completely  and
simultaneously  perceived  by  several  persons  leads  us  to  suppose
that  there  must  be  some  kind  of  materialization  ;  for  it  is  impossible
to  understand  how  several  persons  can  have  the  same  impression
if  there  is  no  exterior  image  of  any  kind.  But  instances  of  this
are  neither  sufficiently  numerous  nor  recorded  with  sufficient  care
as  to  make  the  demonstration  complete  and  rigorous.  Experi-
mental methods,  however,  supplement  the  inherent  defects  of  the
observational  method.  The  large  number  of  experiments  con-
ducted with  extreme  precision  which  we  shall  presently  describe
give  decisive  proofs  of  materialization.

Objective  metapsychics  may  be  treated  under  three  heads:

1.  Telekinesis — movements  of  objects  at  a  distance  and  with-
out contact.  Sounds  and  knocks  without  any  visible  materialized
form.

2.  Ectoplasmic  forms — materializations  of  objects,  of  living
figures,  and  of  persons.

3.  Haunted  houses.

Objective  phenomena  of  a  material  nature  are  much  more  rare
than  subjective  phenomena.  Only  a  very  small  number  of
mediums  can  produce  them.  Even  with  these  physical  mediums
the  phenomena  are  often  limited  to  knockings  and  rappings  and
do  not  extend  to  movements  of  objects  without  contact,  still  less
to  materializations.

Physical  mediums,  being  exceptional  beings,  usually  become  pro-
fessionals as  did  the  Fox  sisters,  the  Davenports,  Home,  Eglinton,
Mme.  d'Esperance,  Eusapia,  and  Marthe  Beraud.  Some,  as  Stain-

399

400

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

ton  Moses,  Linda  Gazzera,  Stanislawa  Tomczyk,  and  Miss  Gol-
igher  have  developed  their  faculties  in  private  circles  without
accepting  any  emolument.

But  in  experimenting  with  either  class,  the  same  precautions
against  fraud  must  invariably  be  taken.  If  I  myself  had  any
mediumistic  power  I  should  exact  the  most  rigid  precautions  of
the  kind;  for  it  is  nearly  certain  that  mediums  in  trance,  and
especially  if  the  trance  is  deep,  lose  all  control  over  their  move-
ments, and  despite  the  utmost  good  faith  in  their  normal  state,
become  liable  to  deception  of  the  worst  kind.  Only  when  control
of  the  medium  has  been  sustained  and  rigid,  can  the  results  of
any  experiment  be  held  to  be  valid,  whoever  the  medium  may  be.

This  severity  of  precaution  has  a  corollary.  If  an  experiment
with  a  given  medium  has  presented  seeming  fraud,  that  is  not  a
final  reason  for  irremediably  discrediting  that  medium.  The  con-
ditions must  be  made  such  that  all  fraud  is  impossible,  even  if
the  medium  is  suspected.  When  Mme.  Roberts  enters  a  cage  of
which  I  alone  possess  the  key,  and  if  I  am  certain,  mechanically
assured,  of  the  solid  construction  of  the  cage,  and  that  no  one  can
enter  the  room,  once  I  have  assured  myself  that  Mme.  Roberts
is  inside,  no  devices  of  hers  can  have  any  effect.  But  if  these  pre-
cautions have  not  been  taken,  if  some  forty  persons  are  in  the
hall,  if  the  cage  has  not  been  made  under  my  supervision  but  has
only  been  superficially  examined  by  me,  and  is  placed  on  a  stage
at  a  distance,  I  cannot  draw  any  inference ;  and  my  distrust  will
be  enormously  increased  if  the  exhibition  is  paid  for.  That  is
quite  sufficient  to  give  me  the  feeling  of  certainty  that  Mme.
Roberts  operates  by  some  clever  trick  even  though  I  may  not  be
able  to  discover  in  what  the  trick  consists.

The  numerous  occurrences  we  shall  now  examine  are  those  in
which  all  trickery  has  been  made  impossible.

CHAPTER  II

Movements  of  Objects — Telekinesis

The  movement  of  objects  without  contact,  if  not  the  most  im-
portant or  the  most  extraordinary,  is  the  most  common  phenom-
enon of  objective  metapsychics.  The  reactions  having  a  supposedly
metapsychic  origin  are  most  frequently  manifested  by  the  move-
ments of  a  table  or  of  a  needle  moving  over  an  alphabet.

(a)  Table-Movements

As  far  back  as  the  time  of  Tertullian  it  was  observed  that  tables
with  (or  without)  contact  of  the  hands  would  give  intelligent
answers.

The  essential  point  is  to  know  up  to  what  point  the  movements
are  due  to  the  muscular  contractions,  conscious  or  unconscious,  of
the  person  placing  his  hands  on  the  table.  The  problem  seems
quite  simple.    It  is  really  very  difficult.

Assuredly  in  most  cases  there  is  no  doubt  that  movement  must
be  referred  to  unconscious  muscular  action.  So  also,  just  as  a
subject,  hypnotized  or  not,  whether  in  trance  or  awake,  writes
pages  automatically  without  knowing  what  he  writes,  the  written
matter  having,  however,  a  definite  sense,  he  may,  by  placing  his
hands  on  a  table,  cause  it  to  move  at  certain  letters  of  the  alphabet
and  thus  sustain  consistent  and  methodical  conversations  that
seem  to  come  from  an  external  personality.  Nearly  always  auto-
matic writing  and  table-answers  claim  to  express  the  thought  of
a  personality  other  than  that  of  the  subject  making  the  experiment.

It  is,  however,  not  open  to  doubt  that  in  most  of  these  cases,
though  not  in  all,  these  movements  are  to  be  explained  by  the
unconscious  movements  of  the  subject.  His  muscles  can  be  seen
to  contract,  and  as  the  least  pressure  will  cause  a  table  in  unstable
equilibrium  to  move,  no  other  cause  can  reasonably  be  assigned
either  for  table-movements  or  automatic  writing.

The  disturbing  fact  that  sometimes  leads  one  to  hesitate  in
drawing  this  necessary  inference  is  that  the  table  answers  as  if  it
was  alive;  the  emotions  of  the  subconscious  are  faithfully  trans-

401

402

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

lated  by  the  kind  of  movements  made  by  the  inert  object.  This
lifeless  table  seems  to  have  a  mind  :  it  hesitates,  it  shows  irritation ;
it  affirms  energetically;  or  it  sways  solemnly.  No  one  who  has
not  witnessed  such  seances  can  imagine  how  well  diverse  senti-
ments can  be  expressed  by  the  frequency  or  the  forcefulness,  the
slow,  hesitating,  vigorous,  or  gentle  movements.  It  is  an  actual
language,  sometimes  eloquent  and  always  interesting,  and  the
simple-minded  are  easily  led  to  conclude  that  some  external  in-
telligence is  moving  the  table.

But  this  would  be  a  foolish  inference.  The  emotions  that  one
is  tempted  to  attribute  to  the  table  are  the  emotions  that  agitate
the  subconsciousness  of  the  medium ;  and  its  movements  are  those
which  the  medium's  muscles  communicate  to  it.  The  phenomenon
is  one  of  normal  psychophysiology  which  can  be  defined  as  follows :

There  are  subconscious  movements,  occasionally  very  energetic,
which  may  be  systematic  and  claim  to  belong  to  a  special  person-
ality that  seems  different  to  that  of  the  medium.

The  problem  is  very  far  from  being  an  elementary  one;  and  it
is  a  grave  mistake  to  think  that  everything  is  explicable  by  un-
conscious muscular  action.  Great  movements  of  a  heavy  table,
when  the  muscular  contractions  are  almost  imperceptible,  can
hardly  be  explained  in  this  way;  so  that  in  some  cases  the  dis-
placements of  the  table  cannot  be  referred  to  muscular  contrac-
tions alone.  Very  many  times  I  have  seen  heavy  tables  displaced
strongly  and  quickly,  when  the  medium  was  hardly  touching  them  :
they  turned,  jumped,  and  went  from  one  end  of  the  room  to  the
other  so  quickly  that  it  was  difficult  to  follow  them,  while  the  me-
dium was  only  lightly  placing  one  finger  on  the  middle  of  the  table.

Among  other  experiments  of  this  kind  I  will  quote  the  following,
which  is  typical:  For  the  experiments  I  was  making  at  Ribaud
Island  with  Eusapia  Paladino  I  had  a  square  table  made  measuring
one  metre  each  way  and  one  metre  high.  The  legs  were  pointed
so  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  raise  it  with  the  foot.  When
Ochorowicz  and  I  saw  the  table  brought  by  the  joiner,  we  thought
it  much  too  heavy  (forty-four  pounds),  but  we  tried  it  the  same
evening.  As  soon  as  Eusapia  touched  this  heavy  table  with  the
tips  of  her  fingers,  it  tilted,  swaying  about,  and  without  the  legs
being  touched  at  all,  it  rose  up  completely  with  all  four  feet  off
the  ground.  All  hypotheses  that  attempt  to  explain  this  by  normal
mechanics  are  absurd.  There  were  no  hooks  or  cords.  The  thing
took  place  in  half-light  and  we  held  Eusapia's  hands  and  head.

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  403

I  shall  not,  however,  base  any  conclusions  on  these  mysterious
experiences  in  which  there  is  even  a  light  contact  by  the  medium ;
for  it  is  too  difficult  to  differentiate  between  effects  that  are  due
to  normal  muscular  force  and  those  which  proceed  from  meta-
psychic  causes.  The  principle  adopted  in  these  studies  is  that
the  normal  explanation  of  every  phenomenon  is  to  be  adopted
unless  radically  impossible  ;  therefore  at  the  risk  of  an  exaggerated
scepticism  I  shall  assume  that  in  all  cases  when  the  hands  of  the
medium  or  sitters  touch  the  table  at  all,  however  lightly,  the
movements  are  due  to  unconscious  muscular  movements.

It  is  nevertheless  probable  that  in  many  cases  these  movements
are  mainly  due  to  metapsychic  forces  ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  differ-
entiate accurately  between  the  one  cause  and  the  other.  If  there
is  any  contact  between  hands  and  table,  any  other  cause  than  the
muscular  movements  of  the  medium  must  be  set  aside ;  but  when
there  is  movement  without  any  contact  at  all,  then  we  have  true
telekinesis.  Not  tables  only,  but  many  other  objects  are  displaced,
and  sometimes  moved  from  one  place  to  another.  I  shall  give
many  instances  of  this,  but  before  entering  on  such  cases,  I  wish
to  indicate  briefly  the  conditions  under  which  alone  experimenta-
tion gives  valid  results.

Nearly  always  these  movements  take  place  in  darkness,  and
precautions  against  fraud  must  be  specially  severe.  There  is  the
more  reason  to  apprehend  fraud  that  the  movement  of  objects
without  contact  is  a  comparatively  rare  phenomenon  and  almost
entirely  confined  to  professional  mediums.

Subjective  phenomena  often  occur  among  persons  who  do  not
use  their  powers  as  a  trade,  and  therefore  it  is  likely  that  they  do
not  deceive ;  but  as  soon  as  a  medium  is  sufficiently  powerful  to
obtain  movements  without  contact,  he  is  naturally  tempted  to
make  a  profession  of  his  mediumship,  and  then  the  temptation  to
fraud  is  often  well-nigh  irresistible.  This  is  the  more  likely  be-
cause, as  has  already  been  explained,  the  medium  in  trance  is  often
unable  to  distinguish  between  muscular  movements  and  meta-
psychic phenomena.  The  mental  state  is  abnormal;  and  in  the
course  of  an  experiment  mediums  lose  a  part  of  their  moral  re-
sponsibility, their  moral  consciousness  is  attenuated,  even  when,
as  in  Eusapia's  case,  their  good  faith  in  the  normal  state  is  obvious.

Hence,  in  complete  darkness,  surrounded  by  credulous  and  often
igriorant  persons,  partly  unconscious  of  the  position  of  her  limbs,
the  medium  is  led  to  trick,  to  move  things  with  her  hands,  while

404

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

claiming,  possibly  without  intention  to  deceive,  that  she  has  not
touched  them.

There  must,  therefore,  be  absolute  certainty  that  the  hands,  feet,
and  head  of  the  medium  have  been  so  held  as  to  make  any  super-
fluous movement  impossible.  Tireless  vigilance  and  long  practice
are  necessary  to  this  certainty,  for  some  mediums  are  in  continual
movement;  their  hands  are  never  still.  Eusapia,  the  typica1
medium  for  telekinesis,  was  never  still  for  a  moment,  and  it  was
necessary  to  watch  that  her  hands  were  never  free ;  for  as  soon  as
one  hand  escaped  from  control  she  made  forbidden  movements
and  attributed  to  "fluidic  hands"  effects  that  were  only  due  to
normal  muscular  movements.

Sometimes,  instead  of  the  medium's  hands  being  held,  her  hands
and  feet  are  strongly  tied.  Sometimes  she  is  placed  in  sewn-up
garments ;  sometimes  a  thread  is  fastened  to  the  finger-nails,  or
the  knots  of  thread  with  which  the  hands  are  tied  are  sealed  with
wax.  All  these  are  useful  precautions  to  be  adopted  according  to
the  nature  of  the  experiment  and  the  psychology  of  the  medium.

It  must  not,  however,  be  forgotten  that  although  these  pre-
cautions are  indispensable,  they  tend  to  reduce  the  phenomena.
Certitude  is  increased  but  results  are  diminished.  If  very  effective
seances  are  wanted,  the  medium  must  be  left  comparatively  free.
Just  as  in  subjective  experiments  credulity  and  blind  confidence
on  the  part  of  the  sitters  increase  the  phenomena,  so  in  objective
experiments,  if  the  medium  is  straightly  tied  up  and  rigid  control
exercised,  very  often  the  results  are  slight.

This  fact,  which  I  have  often  observed,  will  cause  sceptics  to
smile ;  but  yet  I  think  that  in  this  case  the  sceptics  are  wrong,
and  that  it  is  often  well  to  leave  the  medium  comparatively  free.
But,  of  course,  in  such  cases  unwearied  vigilance  must  be  exer-
cised on  all  that  takes  place ;  everything  must  be  closely  observed,
nothing  taken  for  granted,  and  the  inferences  finally  drawn  must
be  as  rigorous  as  the  conditions  of  the  experiment  are  lenient.

The  best  method  seems  to  be :  first  to  leave  the  medium  entirely
free  so  that  there  may  be  plenty  of  facts  to  judge  by,  then  at  the
next  sitting  to  impose  such  checks  as  seem  necessary,  and  at  each
successive  trial  to  make  the  restrictions  more  and  more  severe  so
that  in  the  end  it  becomes  impossible  to  attribute  the  movements
to  normal  muscular  action.  Above  all,  experiments  must  be  re-
peated and  varied.

A  most  valuable  method  of  check  is  by  flashlight  photography,

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  405

the  camera  being  f ocussed  in  advance ;  the  exact  position  of  the
medium  and  the  displaced  object  are  then  clearly  revealed.

The  medium  should,  I  think,  be  always  warned  that  a  photo-
graph may  be  taken  and  even  that  it  will  be  taken.  There  is  a  risk
of  injury  to  the  health  or  the  faculties  of  the  medium  by  the  sud-
den and  unexpected  glare  of  the  magnesium  light,  during  trance.

I  have  scruples  (perhaps  exaggerated)  about  surprising  or
deceiving  the  mediums.  No  doubt,  in  certain  cases,  when  there
is  strong  proof  of  the  likelihood  of  fraud  prepared  in  advance,  it
is  allowable  to  use  the  flashlight  for  detection ;  but  as  a  general
principle  I  think  that  mediums  should  be  treated  with  humanity,
and  that  the  same  good  faith  should  be  observed  towards  them
that  we  expect  from  them.

Sceptics  often  put  forward  an  objection  that  the  average  man
considers  final:  "Why  darkness?  If  you  get  nothing  in  the  light
it  is  because  the  medium  uses  the  darkness  for  trickery.  When
you  can  produce  the  phenomena  in  full  daylight  or  in  good  light
I  will  believe  them;  till  then  I  shall  think  everything  to  be
trickery."

This  objection  is  valueless,  for  two  reasons:

1.  It  seems  proved  that  many  phenomena  of  telekinesis,  if
not  all,  do  not  take  place  in  full  light.  Everything  happens  as
though  darkness  were  one  of  the  necessary  conditions  for  the
manifestation  of  the  power.  This  is  not  absurd ;  there  are  many
physical  phenomena  that  do  not  take  place  in  the  light,  as  there
are  others  that  do  not  take  place  in  the  dark.  If  a  sceptic  On
photography  were  to  object  to  the  feeble  red  light  by  which
plates  are  developed,  the  photographer  could  reply  that  light  inter-
feres with  the  development.  So  likewise  the  experimentalist  has
the  right  to  reply  that  light  interferes  with  telekinesis.

2.  The  second  reason  why  the  objection  is  not  valid,  is  that
with  some  mediums,  notably  with  D.  D.  Home,  the  movements
have  been  observed  in  full  light,  and  in  very  many  other  cases  the
darkness  has  not  been  so  great  as  to  prevent  quite  satisfactory
visual  control.

(b)  On  Some  Cases  of  Experimental  Telekinesis

The  phenomena  here  following  are  extremely  interesting  not
only  in  themselves,  but  because  they  are  of  old  standing :
John  W.  Edmunds,  a  lawyer  of  reputation  and  a  Supreme  Court

406

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Judge,  began  his  enquiries  in  January,  1851.  Not  till  April,  1853,
was  he  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  phenomena.  He  says,  "I
had  recourse  to  every  expedient  I  could  think  of  to  discover  im-
posture and  to  guard  against  trickery.  ...  I  have  seen  a
mahogany  table,  with  a  central  pillar  and  carrying  a  lighted  lamp,
rise  at  least  a  foot  above  the  floor  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  those
present  to  prevent  it.  ...  I  have  seen  a  mahogany  chair  turn
on  its  side  and  move  backwards  and  forwards  along  the  floor
without  being  touched  by  anyone,  in  a  room  where  at  least  a  dozen
persons  were  sitting,  without  any  of  them  being  touched  by  it.
It  often  stopped  a  few  inches  from  me,  having  been  moved  so
quickly  that  had  it  not  stopped,  my  leg  would  have  been  much
bruised"  (A.  R.  Wallace,  Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritualism).

We  will  now  consider  a  few  experiments  with  certain  persons
that  prove  movement  without  contact.1

In  1854  A.  de  Gasparin  published  a  book,  Des  Tables  Tour-
mvitcs,  in  which  exact  experiments  on  the  movement  of  objects
and  especially  of  tables,  without  contact,  are  reported.  "As  soon
as  a  vigorous  rotation  of  the  table  was  set  up,"  says  De  Gasparin,
"we  raised  our  fingers  while  keeping  our  hands  linked  so  as  to
form  a  chain  an  inch  or  so  above  the  table,  which  still  continued
to  make  two  or  three  turns.  On  the  following  day  we  were  able
to  induce  rotation  from  a  state  of  rest.  Sometimes  the  movement
stopped  after  a  half  revolution,  sometimes  it  continued  for  two,
three,  or  even  four  turns.  .  .  .  On  another  day,  on  the  hands
being  removed  from  the  surface,  all  contact  being  broken,  the
small  table  moved  seven  times  to  order.,,

This  book  made  a  stir,  and  Professor  Thury,  of  the  University
of  Geneva,  who  had  taken  part  in  De  Gasparin's  experiments,  pub-
lished in  1855  a  pamphlet  on  the  relation  of  these  to  general
physics.  He  cites  the  following  decisive  experiment :  "Two  per-
sons by  themselves,  Mme.  de  Gasparin  and  Mme.  Dorat,  drew
along  a  small  table  without  touching  it.  The  table  turned  and
swayed  under  their  hands,  held  about  an  inch  above  its  surface.
I  saw  the  space  between  the  hands  and  the  table  during  the  whole
time  and  I  am  certain  that  during  the  four  or  five  revolutions
made  there  was  no  contact  whatever.  .  .  .  No  doubt  was  possible."

The  experiments  were  confirmed  by  similar  ones  made  by  F.  de

aOn  this  subject  the  excellent  book,  L'exteriorisation  de  la  motricite  (Paris.
Chanuel,  1896),  by  A.  de  Rochas  should  be  consulted.

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  407

Rougemont  in  Switzerland,  and  by  Hare,  professor  of  chemistry
in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  (Experimental  Investigations,
New  York,  1855).

In  1868,  Daniel  D.  Home,  perhaps  the  most  powerful  medium
known,  made  some  experiments  before  Mr.  Varley,  chief  engineer
of  the  Atlantic  Cable  Company,  and  afterwards  before  the  mem-
bers of  the  London  Dialectical  Society  then  under  the  presidency
of  Sir  John  Lubbock;  and  later,  before  Sir  William  Crookes.
Mr.  Varley  says:

"In  my  house,  where  Mr.  Home  had  never  before  been,  seven
feet  behind  him  there  was  a  small  table.  Mr.  Home  asked  me  to
hold  his  hands,  and  placed  his  two  legs  over  my  left  knee.  After
a  few  moments  the  table  began  to  move,  and  was  pushed  towards
me  by  an  invisible  power,  no  person  being  near  it,  and  while  I  was
firmly  holding  Mr.  Home's  hands  and  feet.  A  large  couch  capable
of  seating  eight  persons  was  pushed  right  across  the  room,  and
obliged  us  to  move  aside.  .  .  He  adds,  "Deception  was
impossible/'

The  members  of  the  Dialectical  Society  held  fifty  seances  at
which  thirty  persons  were  present,  and  their  conclusions  were  as
follows  (I  give  only  those  which  have  reference  to  telekinesis)  :

1.  Sounds  appear  to  come  from  pieces  of  furniture,  from  the
floor,  and  from  the  walls,  often  accompanied  by  vibrations  per-
ceptible to  the  touch,  produced  without  any  muscular  or  mechan-
ical cause.

2.  Movements  of  heavy  bodies  took  place  without  any  kind  of
mechanical  action,  often  without  contact  or  connection  with  any
person.

3.  Thirteen  persons  depose  to  having  heard  well-executed  pieces
of  music  from  instruments  not  manipulated  by  any  ascertainable
agency.

In  one  experiment  which  they  declared  decisive,  eleven  members
of  the  society  turned  the  backs  of  their  chairs  to  the  table  and
knelt  on  them,  feet  behind  and  away  from  the  table,  hands  resting
on  the  chair-backs.  The  gas  was  alight  above  the  table.  Under
these  circumstances  the  table  moved  four  times,  and  then,  when
the  chairs  had  been  placed  a  foot  distant  from  the  table,  it  again
moved  thirteen  times  in  different  directions  and  in  obedience  to
verbal  demands.

Fourteen  witnesses  depose  to  having  seen  hands  or  faces  not
belonging  to  human  beings,  but  which  nevertheless  seemed  alive

408

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

and  mobile.  These  were  sometimes  touched  or  held  so  that  the
witnesses  are  certain  they  were  not  duped  or  illusionized.  Five
witnesses  certify  that  they  were  touched  by  some  invisible  being
on  different  parts  of  the  body  whilst  the  hands  of  all  persons
present  were  fully  visible.

The  members  of  the  Committee  (who  were  for  the  most  part
wholly  sceptical  before  carrying  out  the  experiments)  declare
that  they  are  convinced  that  "there  is  a  force  capable  of  moving
heavy  bodies  without  material  contact,  which  force  is  in  some
unknown  manner  dependent  upon  the  presence  of  human  beings"
(Report  Dial  Soc,  p.  12).

Crookes  made  very  exact  experiments  with  Home,  which  should
be  read  in  the  original  on  account  of  their  leading  importance.

He  arranged  a  board  on  a  wooden  knife-edge  like  that  of  a
balance,  the  board  being  maintained  in  position  by  a  spring  pro-
vided with  a  scale  and  indicator.  The  movements  of  the  indicator
could  be  mechanically  registered  so  as  to  form  a  graph.  Under
these  circumstances  Home  placed  his  hands  four  inches  above  the
board,  an  assistant  holding  his  hands  and  placing  one  foot  over
his  feet.  A  graph  was  obtained,  and  in  a  subsequent  experiment,
Home  being  a  yard  distant,  movement  with  the  accompanying
graph  was  again  obtained.1

Mme.  X.,  observed  by  Crookes,  also  produced  movements  of
the  indicator.  On  her  placing  her  hands  on  a  piece  of  parchment,
repeated  crepitations  were  heard  in  it.

Boutleroff,  an  eminent  professor  of  chemistry,  at  Petersburg,
made  some  experiments  with  Home  in  1871.  The  normal  tension
of  his  dynamometer  being  50  kg.  it  rose  to  75  kg.,  the  hands  of
Home  being  placed  on  the  instrument  in  such  a  manner  that  any
effort  on  his  part  would  have  diminished  the  tension  instead  of
increasing  it.

Crookes  relates  other  striking  experiences.  "My  own  chair
twisted  round,  my  feet  not  touching  the  floor.  Under  the  eyes
of  all  present  a  chair  moved  slowly  from  a  distant  corner  of  the
room.    In  another  case  an  armchair  came  nearly  up  to  where

Researches  in  the  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,  William  Crookes  (F.  R.  S.,
1874).  The  genuineness  of  Home's  experiences  has  been  impugned,  but  in
point  of  fact,  no  slightest  proof  of  fraud  has  ever  been  advanced.  (See
P.  Petrovo  Solovovo,  On  the  Alleged  Exposure  of  D.  D.  Home  in  France,
S.  P.  R.,  xv,  1912,  274.)  Moreover,  no  trickery  could  account  for  the  results
obtained  by  Crookes,  Varley,  and  Lord  Dunraven.

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  409

we  were  sitting  and  at  my  request  moved  back  about  three  feet.
On  five  different  occasions,  a  heavy  dining-room  table  rose  from
a  few  inches  to  a  foot  and  a  half  off  the  floor  while  I  held  the
hands  and  feet  of  the  medium."

There  were  also  experiments  with  an  accordion  which  Home
held  by  the  finger-ends  of  one  hand  in  a  cage  made  of  wood  and
copper  wire.  The  instrument  swayed  about  and  played  different
airs.  Home  then  let  go  the  instrument  and  placed  his  hand  on
that  of  a  spectator.  The  accordion  floated  about  in  the  cage  anrl
continued  to  play.

M.  C,  prefect  of  the  Loire,  speaking  of  Home,  said:  "Home
appals  me  and  I  can  find  no  explanation,  but  I  have  seen.  He
ordered  a  handbell  to  climb  up  my  leg,  and  when  I  tried  to  seize
it,  it  eluded  my  fingers.  He  ordered  a  table  to  answer  by  raps,
which  was  done ;  and,  more  extraordinary  still,  the  raps  also
came  under  the  soles  of  my  feet.  .  .  .  Another  time  he  ordered
the  table  to  rise  off  the  floor ;  it  then  rose  towards  the  ceiling ;  he
told  Mme.  B.'s  little  girl  to  pull  the  table  down,  but  each  time  she
let  go  the  table  again  moved  upwards.  .  .  .  Then  he  said,
'Hold  fast/  and  the  efforts  of  three  men  could  not  bring  it  down"
(De  Viel-Castel,  quot.  by  Erny,  A.  S.  P.,  1902,  xii,  147).

"One  of  the  most  amazing  things  I  have  seen,"  says  Crookes,
"was  the  levitation  of  a  glass  water-bottle  and  tumbler.  The  room
was  well  lit  by  two  strong  alcohol-soda  flames,  and  Home's  hands
were  far  distant.  The  two  objects  remained  suspended  above  the
table,  and  by  tapping  against  each  other  answered  'yes7  to  ques-
tions. They  remained  suspended  about  six  to  eight  inches  above
the  table  for  about  five  minutes,  moving  in  front  of  each  person
and  answering  questions.  We  verified  that  Home  was  entirely
passive  during  the  whole  time  and  that  no  wires  nor  cords  were
employed.    Home  had  not  entered  the  room  before  the  seance."

"On  another  occasion,"  Crookes  says,  "I  was  in  a  dark  seance.
I  was  holding  both  hands  of  the  medium  in  one  of  mine,  his  feet
resting  on  mine.  I  had  a  pencil  in  my  other  hand.  A  luminous
hand  descended  from  above,  and,  having  hovered  for  a  few  sec-
onds, took  the  pencil  from  my  hand,  wrote  rapidly  on  a  sheet  of
paper,  dropped  the  pencil,  rose  above  our  heads,  and  was  lost  in
the  darkness.

"Another  time,  in  the  light,  Mr.  Home  was  present  with  some
friends,  and  some  sheets  of  paper  and  a  pencil  were  placed  in  the
middle  of  the  table.    The  pencil  rose  on  its  point,  and  after  ad-

410

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

vancing  by  hesitating:  jerks  to  the  paper,  fell  down.  It  then  rose
and  again  fell.  A  third  time  it  tried  with  no  better  result.  After
three  unsuccessful  attempts,  a  small  wooden  lath,  which  was  lying
near  on  the  table,  slid  towards  the  pencil,  and  rose  a  few  inches
from  the  table ;  the  pencil  rose  again  and,  propping  itself  against
the  lath,  the  two  together  made  an  effort  to  mark  the  paper.  It
fell,  and  then  a  joint  effort  was  again  made.  After  a  third  trial
the  lath  gave  it  up  and  moved  back  to  its  place',  (Researches,
Edn.,  1874,  p.  94).

Another  day  "the  small  lath  before  mentioned  moved  across  the
table  to  me,  in  the  light,  and  delivered  a  message  to  me  by  tapping
my  hand ;  I  repeating  the  alphabet,  and  the  lath  taping  me  at  the
right  letters.  The  other  end  of  the  lath  was  resting  on  the  table,
some  distance  from  Mr.  Home's  hands"  (p.  95).

"To  attribute  these  results  to  fraud,"  says  Crookes,  "is  absurd.
What  I  have  reported  took  place  in  my  own  house,  where  nothing
could  be  prepared  in  advance.  A  medium  sitting  in  another  part
of  the  room  with  several  persons  observing  him  attentively,  could
not  by  any  fraud  cause  an  accordion  held  in  my  hand,  keys  down-
ward, to  play,  or  make  it  float  about  in  the  room  playing  all  the
time.  .  .  .  He  could  not  bring  an  instrument  to  move  the
window-curtains,  tie  a  knot  in  a  handkerchief,  put  it  in  a  distant
corner  of  the  room,  cause  the  notes  of  a  distant  piano  to  sound,
raise  a  water-bottle  and  tumbler  off  the  table,  cause  a  coral  neck-
lace to  stand  up  on  one  end,  move  a  fan  and  fan  the  company,  or
set  in  motion  a  clock  shut  in  a  glass  case  firmly  cemented  to  the
wall."

These  experiments,  made  by  a  renowned  experimentalist,  are
so  striking  and  so  exact  that  it  is  amazing  that  they  should  not
have  been  universally  accepted.  But  I  will  make  my  confession  :
Until  I  had  seen  Eusapia  at  Milan  I  was  absolutely  sure  that
Crookes  must  have  fallen  into  some  terrible  error.  And  so  was
Ochorowicz;  but  he  repented,  and  said,  as  I  do,  smiting  my
breast,  "Pater,  peccavi!"

Mr.  R.  Dale  Owen  narrates  an  experience  (quoted  by  Russel
Wallace,  p.  191)  in  which  the  medium  was  probably  Home:  "In
the  dining-room  of  a  French  gentleman,  the  Count  d'Ourches,
living  near  Paris,  I  saw  on  October  1,  1858,  in  full  daylight,
towards  the  end  of  lunch,  a  table  laden  with  fruit  and  wine  at
which  seven  persons  had  been  seated  rise  off  the  floor,  all  the
guests  standing  round  it  without  touching  it."

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  411

The  experiments  with  Home  were  made  under  unexceptionable
conditions  and  this  gives  them  considerable  value.  Mr.  E.  W.
Cox,  a  serjeant-at-law,  holding  a  high  social  position  and  a  man
of  strong  good  sense,  wrote  to  Home  in  1876  as  follows:

"My  dear  Home,  in  the  experiments  to  which  you  submitted
yourself  before  me,  there  was  nothing  of  the  nature  of  precaution
or  mystery.  You  sat  down  near  me,  anywhere,  at  any  time  in  my
garden,  in  my  house,  day  or  night,  always,  with  one  memorable
exception,  in  daytime  and  in  full  light.  You  never  refused  to
submit  to  any  desired  control.  .  .  .  You  sat  alone  with  me
and  there  came  to  pass  things  that  the  united  efforts  of  four  men
could  not  have  obtained.  Sometimes  the  phenomena  took  place,
sometimes  they  did  not.  The  results  were  of  such  a  nature  that
no  human  hand  could  have  produced,  in  my  drawing-room,  my
library,  and  my  garden,  where  all  mechanism  was  impossible."

Henry  Slade,  a  very  powerful  American  medium,  has  also  given
many  proofs  of  movement  of  objects  without  contact.

Zollner,  professor  of  physical  astronomy  at  Leipzig,  relates
(Wissenschaftliche  Abhandlungen)  that  without  any  visible  con-
tact with  Slade,  a  wooden  screen,  half  an  inch  thick,  was  violently
broken.  Direct  writing  was  obtained  on  several  occasions.  A
metal  ball  hung  by  a  silk  cord  inside  a  glass  globe,  placed  on  the
table  and  well  lit  by  the  candles,  began  to  swing  and  to  strike  at
regular  intervals  against  the  interior  of  the  globe  (evidently  with-
out contact  with  Slade's  hands).

P.  Gibier  also  experimented  with  Slade  (Le  Spiritisme,  Paris,
1882.  Le  Fakirisme  Occidental).

Gibier  first  verified  the  force  and  frequency  of  the  raps.  On
one  occasion,  so  strong  a  knock  was  delivered  on  the  middle  of
the  table  as  to  lead  him  to  think  it  must  be  broken.  During  this
time  the  feet  and  hands  of  the  medium  were  well  in  sight.  In  a
daylight  seance  a  chair  placed  forty  inches  away  made  a  half  turn
and  moved  against  the  table.

"Subsequently  in  full  daylight,  a  chest  placed  twenty-five  inches
away  from  his  chair  began  to  move,  leaving  the  wall  so  slowly
that  we  could  verify  that  there  was  no  contact  between  it  and
any  other  object;  it  then  came  and  violently  struck  the  table  at
which  we  were  sitting.

"At  ten  different  trials  the  slate  held  by  Slade  under  the  table
was  broken  into  several  pieces.  These  slates  were  framed  in
very  hard  wood.   We  endeavoured  to  break  them  in  the  same  way

412

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

by  striking  them  against  the  table,  but  never  succeeded  in  even
cracking  them.

"Several  times  we  have  seen  a  framed  slate  leave  Slade's  hand,
pass  right  under  the  table  to  the  other  side,  and,  when  taken  hold
of,  give  the  sensation  of  resistance  as  if  another  hand  were  holding
the  slate.  We  kept  the  hands  of  the  medium  in  sight,  and  could
see  his  two  knees  outside  the  table."  1

Mr.  D.  MacNab  relates  some  experiments  he  made  with  a
medium,  quoted  by  A.  de  Rochas.  These  were  mostly  in  darkness,
which  makes  control  very  difficult  and  necessitates  special  pre-
cautions :  but  by  the  light  of  a  red  lamp  he  saw  a  small  table  rise
from  the  floor,  touch  the  hands  held  sixteen  inches  above  it,
descend  again  slowly,  and  touch  the  floor  without  noise.

I  now  come  to  experiments  with  Eusapia  Paladino.  These  are
very  numerous,  and  I  shall  describe  a  few  of  them  in  some  detail
of  which  I  was  an  attentive  observer,  having  attended  over  a
hundred  of  her  seances,  at  Milan,  Rome,  Carqueiranne,  Ribaud
Island,  and  Paris.

As  to  Eusapia  herself :  she  was  a  very  simple-minded  woman,
but  her  simplicity  did  not  exclude  a  certain  shrewdness.  She  was
quite  uneducated,  could  not  read,  and  at  the  beginning  of  the
scientific  experimentation  she  could  only  speak  the  Neapolitan
dialect  and  a  little  Italian.  Being  very  intelligent  she  learned  to
understand  French  and  to  speak  it  a  little.  She  was  rather  below
the  usual  stature,  plump,  and  had  very  small  hands.

She  had  an  unhappy  life.  Her  father,  a  Neapolitan  peasant,
was  murdered  by  brigands :  her  husband  bullied  her  and  made  a
profit  out  of  her.  Generous  by  nature,  she  gave  much  to  the  poor
and  spent  recklessly  all  that  she  earned,  and  so  died  in  poverty
and  neglect.

This  excellent  woman  was  a  remarkable  medium,  extremely
good-natured,  lending  herself  to  the  most  diverse  experiments,
and  was  studied  by  most  contemporaneous  men  of  science  who
cared  for  such  matters ;  first  by  E.  Chiaia,  and  then  by  Aksakoff,
Schiaparelli,  Lombroso,  Gerosa,  G.  Finzi,  Morselli,  Brofferio,

*I  saw  Slade  once  with  Gibier.  Slade  handed  me  a  slate  and  put  a  small
fragment  of  slate-pencil  on  it.  I  held  one  end  and  Slade  the  other,  and
we  put  the  slate  under  the  table.  In  a  few  moments  we  heard  a  noise  as  of
writing.  There  was  some  writing  and  the  bit  of  slate-pencil  was  worn.  But
I  give  this  experiment  (my  only  one  of  the  kind)  under  all  reserves;  (i)  it
was  long  ago;  (2)  I  cannot  find  the  notes  I  took;  (3)  Slade's  honesty  is  open
to  question,  and  (4)  experiments  with  slates  lend  themselves  to  trickery.

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  413

Bozzano,  Venzano,  Carlo  Foa,  Bottazzi,  A.  de  Gramont,  A.  de
Rochas,  J.  Maxwell,  Segard,  Camille  Flammarion,  Ochorowicz,
Schrenck-Notzing,  P.  Curie,  Mme.  Curie,  d'Arsonval,  Courtier,
Siemiradzki,  Dariex,  Watteville,  Sabatier,  F.  Myers,  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Feilding,  Carrington,  Herlitzka,
Porro,  and  several  others.  The  bibliography  of  experiments  made
with  her  is  large,  and  is  given  in  Morselli's  admirable  work,  to
which  I  refer  readers.

Her  seances  were  at  first  conducted  in  full  light,  then  by  degrees
(so  that  the  phenomena  should  be  more  powerful)  she  asked  that
the  light  might  be  reduced,  "mow  luce."  Latterly,  the  seances
were  almost  in  complete  darkness,  but  as  control  was  difficult
under  these  conditions,  we  used  to  place  a  lamp  at  some  distance
so  that  the  light  should  come  through  a  half-opened  door  or
shutters.

Eusapia  claimed  to  be  directed  by  a  guide,  John  King,  said  to
be  the  brother  of  Katie  King,  and  the  father  of  Eusapia  herself
in  a  previous  existence  (  ?).  The  objective  reality  of  this  medium-
istic  personality  is  very  probably  null ;  it  dates  from  the  first  ex-
periments with  M.  Damiani  at  Naples  when  he  first  began  to  direct
her,  and  especially  with  Ercole  Chiaia,  her  brave  and  persevering
protector  who  first  made  her  known  to  the  scientific  world  by  a
letter  to  C.  Lombroso,  August  9,  1888.

The  experiments  with  Eusapia  have  not  been  without  their
use.  All  the  men  of  science,  without  exception,  who  experimented
with  her  were  in  the  end  convinced  that  she  produced  genuine
phenomena.  It  is  true  that  at  Cambridge  she  gave  a  series  of
semifraudulent  seances,  because  the  Cambridge  experimenters,  R.
Hodgson  more  especially,  adopted  methods  of  procedure  that  made
fraud  possible  and  easy,  i.e.,  almost  encouraged  fraud.1

At  the  moment  in  an  experiment  when  a  movement  without
contact  was  about  to  take  place,  Eusapia  gave  warning  that  a
phenomenon  was  coming,  so  that  these  did  not  occur  unexpectedly.
The  full  attention  of  the  observers  was  awakened  and  all  possible
precautions  could  be  taken  at  the  fateful  moment  that  no  trickery
should  be  possible.  Professors  of  legerdemain  do  the  exact  op-
posite, and  endeavour  to  distract  attention  at  the  crucial  moment
of  their  tricks.

1Ochorowicz  has  called  attention  to  this  unconscious  fraud  in  a  remarkable
memorandum  in  which  he  shows  how  greatly  Hodgson's  method  was  defective
in  intentionally  leaving  one  of  Eusapia's  hands  free.

414

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Every  movement  of  an  object  at  a  distance  seems  induced  by
Eusapia's  energetic  muscular  movements ;  her  arms,  her  legs,  and
her  body  twitch,  and  everything  happens  as  though  the  muscular
contractions  were  intended  to  act  at  a  distance.  She  is  not  in
trance  at  the  start,  but  in  the  course  of  the  seance  trance  gradually
supervenes.

She  is  not  easily  hypnotizable.  Ochorowicz  used  to  magnetize
her  after  the  seances,  to  induce  restorative  sleep ;  for  after  each
seance,  often  lasting  two  or  three  hours,  she  was  much  exhausted.
The  metapsychic  phenomena  produced  by  her  were  very  various.
There  was  little  or  no  lucidity,  but  always  objective  phenomena,
especially  movements  of  objects  without  contact  and  materializa-
tions.  In  this  chapter  I  shall  speak  only  of  the  former.

In  this  case  the  essential  point,  indeed  the  only  point,  is  to  be
certain  that  the  movement  of  the  object  could  not  be  brought  about
by  the  hands,  the  feet,  the  head,  or  the  body  of  Eusapia.  The
hypothesis  that  the  experimenters  were  hallucinated  is  as  grossly
absurd  as  to  suppose  that  one  of  them  was  playing  a  practical
joke.  There  was  neither  apparatus,  nor  preparation,  nor  instru-
ments. Eusapia  was  dressed  in  a  close-fitting  black  garment
without  pockets,  nor  was  any  object,  any  cord,  or  any  wire  within
her  reach.  If  she  played  any  trick  it  could  only  be  with  her  bare
hands.

All  those  who  experimented  with  her  know  this,  and  therefore
their  one  and  only  care  was  to  hold  her  hands  effectively.

In  this  connection  I  replied  to  Hodgson :  "To  say  that  the  hand
is  held  signifies  in  the  first  place  that  one  has  no  doubt  of  its  being
the  right  or  the  left.  If,  when  my  duty  was  to  hold  the  right  hand,
I  was  not  absolutely  sure  that  I  had  the  right  hand  during  the
production  of  the  phenomenon,  I  at  once  stopped  the  whole  by
saying  'I  have  let  go  the  hand/  and  the  other  experimenters  did
the  same.  We  arranged  to  hold  the  hands  well,  all  the  fingers  in
our  palms,  or  the  wrist  and  part  of  the  fingers.  At  each  phenom-
enon we  reminded  each  other  of  this  necessary  exactitude,  saying
ad  nauseam  a  hundred  times  in  each  seance,  'I  hold  the  right  hand'
or  'I  hold  the  left  hand/  Our  only  business  was  not  to  let  the
hands  escape.  Well,  without  making  extravagant  claims  to  per-
spicacity or  skill,  it  seems  to  me  that  after  three  months  of  practice
one  can  be  certain  of  holding  fast  a  human  hand."

In  a  very  successful  experiment  in  my  house  at  Carqueiranne,
Mrs.  Sidgwick  held  Eusapia's  left  hand,  and  my  lamented  friend,

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  415

Fleet-surgeon  Segard,  held  the  right.  At  the  moment  that  the
piano,  placed  fourteen  inches  from  Eusapia,  sounded,  I  asked  him,
"Are  you  sure  that  you  have  hold  of  the  hand,  the  same  hand?"
and  on  his  affirmation,  I  said,  "Take  care,  if  you  are  mistaken,  it
is  complicity/'  In  this  experiment,  Lodge  (I  think)  held  the  feet.
H.  Sidgwick  then  declared  the  experiment  unexceptionable,  but
that  an  object  held  in  Eusapia's  teeth  might  strike  the  keys.  I  then
put  my  hand  over  her  mouth,  all  other  conditions  remaining  the
same.   The  notes  sounded  again.

Instances  of  the  movement  of  objects,  the  table  and  other  things,
were  innumerable.

The  first  detailed  account  (Naples,  1891)  was  given  by  Lom-
broso:  "Eusapia's  feet  and  hands  were  held  by  Professor  Tam-
burini  and  by  Lombroso.  A  handbell  placed  on  a  small  table
more  than  a  yard  distant  from  Eusapia  sounded  in  the  air  above
the  heads  of  the  sitters  and  then  descended  on  the  table,  thence
going  two  yards  to  a  bed.  While  the  bell  was  ringing  we  struck
a  match  and  saw  the  bell  up  in  the  air.

"A  large  piece  of  furniture  approached  us  slowly  from  about
two  yards'  distance;  like  the  creeping  of  a  huge  lizard."

At  Milan  in  1892  in  an  ingenious  series  of  successful  experi-
ments devised  by  G.  Finzi  many  instances  of  movements  and  levi-
tation  of  a  table  were  verified.  In  one  case,  confirmed  by  photog-
raphy, the  table  was  maintained  in  the  air  for  several  seconds.
This  photograph  is  reproduced  in  De  Rochas's  book  (p.  48),  and
it  shows  that  I  was  holding  Eusapia's  left  hand  and  her  two  knees,
while  Lombroso  held  the  right  hand.  In  one  case  of  complete
levitation  AksakofT  notes  that  Eusapia's  hands  were  not  in  contact
with  the  table  at  all.

A  heavier  chair,  weighing  twenty  pounds,  a  yard  distant  from
the  table  and  behind  the  medium,  approached  Schiaparelli.

In  darkness  the  phenomena  were  much  more  marked :  the
knocks  in  the  substance  of  the  table  and  under  it,  which  were
heard  in  full  light,  became  much  stronger — a  noise  like  a  heavy
blow  with  the  fist  on  the  table ;  knocks  on  the  chairs,  hard  enough
to  cause  the  chair  with  the  person  sitting  on  it  to  be  twisted
round:  transport  of  objects,  some  from  several  yards'  distance
and  weighing  several  pounds;  and  flight  of  different  things
through  the  air — all  these  were  observed.

Eusapia's  feet  were  on  my  knees  and  I  held  both  her  hands
when  a  tambourine  was  raised  above  our  heads,  and  its  surface

416

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

struck  as  though  by  a  hand.  Another  time,  when  Eusapia's
hands  were  tied,  a  handbell  was  placed  on  a  chair  at  her  right.
The  light  was  extinguished  with  the  request  that  the  bell  should
sound  immediately.  At  once  the  chair  was  upset,  the  bell  sounded,
and  was  moved  on  to  the  table.  Light  was  restored,  and  the
knots  were  found  perfect.  Another  time  I  held  both  of  Eusapia's
feet,  Schiaparelli  and  Finzi  held  her  hands  while  the  table  was
entirely  levitated.

The  experiments  at  Rome  (1893  and  1894)  by  Siemiradzki  and
Ochorowicz  were  equally  evidential.  While  Eusapia's  hands  were
held,  a  hand-organ  floated  over  the  table,  sounding  all  the  while
as  if  the  handle  were  being  turned.  Once  the  piano  behind  the
medium  was  displaced,  and  its  cover  was  raised.  As  Siemiradzki
had  asked  that  high  notes  in  the  treble  and  low  notes  in  the  bass
should  be  struck  at  the  same  time,  this  was  done,  proving,  as  he
said,  the  action  of  two  distinct  hands.  A  glass  half  full  of  water
on  the  sideboard  out  of  reach  of  our  hands  was  carried  to  the  lips
of  Ochorowicz,  of  Eusapia,  and  of  another  person  present,  who
all  drank  of  it.  This  took  place  in  darkness  with  marvellous  pre-
cision. At  the  same  time  cracking  noises  were  heard  in  the  wood
of  the  table  varying  from  slight  knocks  to  heavy  blows  such  as
might  be  given  by  a  powerful  fist.

At  Warsaw,  Ochorowicz,  holding  Eusapia's  hands  and  feet,  was
careful  that  not  even  her  clothes  should  touch  the  table.  In  light,
dimmed,  but  still  quite  sufficient  to  enable  the  experimenters  to
distinguish  forms,  the  table  rose  horizontally  three  times  into  the
air,  without  previous  oscillations.  Then  Eusapia,  pushing  forward
one  knee,  said,  "I  will  raise  the  table  with  my  knee/'  though  the
table  was  separated  from  the  knee  by  an  interval  of  eight  inches.
The  knee  was  raised  six  inches  and  the  table  eight  inches.  The
same  effect  was  produced  when  both  legs  were  raised  at  a  distance
from  the  table — the  table  rose  at  the  same  time  as  the  medium's
legs.

A  dynamometer  marked  a  force  three  times  as  great  as  Eusapia's
and  in  excess  of  that  of  the  strongest  man  present.

The  following  experiments  were  made  in  my  house  at  Ribaud
Island  and  at  Carqueiranne.

Ribaud  Island,  where  I  have  a  little  villa,  is  a  small  island  in  the
Mediterranean  inhabited  only  by  the  lighthouse-keeper  and  his
wife.  I  brought  Eusapia  there,  and  asked  Ochorowicz  to  come
for  experimentation.    For  three  months  we  experimented  three

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  417

times  a  week,  and  continually  verified,  fully,  movements  of  objects
without  contact  and  other  phenomena  to  which  I  shall  recur.1

After  having  recounted  the  success  of  our  experiments,  I  in-
vited my  friends,  F.  Myers,  O.  Lodge,  Schrenck-Notzing,  and
Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  to  come  to  Ribaud  and  judge  de  visu.
I  will  give  extracts  from  Oliver  Lodge  only:

"A  chair  placed  near  the  window,  several  feet  distant  from
the  medium,  slid  along,  rose  up,  and  struck  the  floor.  The
medium  was  held  and  no  person  was  near  the  chair.  I  heard
some  notes  on  an  accordion  placed  not  far  from  us.  A  musical
box  was  floated  through  the  air  and  carried  above  our  heads.
The  key  was  turned  in  the  lock  of  the  door,  laid  on  the  table,
and  again  replaced  in  the  lock;  a  heavy  table  (forty-eight  pounds)
was  raised  eight  inches  oflf  the  floor,  the  medium  standing  up  and
placing  her  hands  lightly  on  one  corner  of  the  table."

Other  seances  took  place  at  Agnelas,  in  1895,  in  the  house
of  M.  de  Rochas,  in  presence  of  M.  Sabatier,  dean  of  the  Faculty
of  Sciences  (Montpellier)  ;  of  J.  Maxwell,  Attorney-General  at
Bordeaux;  of  A.  de  Gramont,  member  of  the  Institute  of  France,
and  of  M.  A.-C.  de  Watteville,  licentiate  of  sciences.

The  results  were  the  same,  more  clear,  if  that  were  possible,
than  those  obtained  at  Milan,  Rome,  and  Ribaud.

"The  table  was  raised  twelve  inches  from  the  floor,  Eusapia's
hands  hardly  touching  it  and  sometimes  not  touching  it  at  all;
her  knees  and  feet  were  held  by  Dariex,  the  legs  of  the  table
being  quite  free  of  all  contact  with  the  medium.  A  little  pianola
weighing  nearly  two  pounds  (nine  hundred  grams),  played  a
few  notes,  then  rose  into  the  air  while  Eusapia's  hands,  feet,
knees,  and  head  were  firmly  held.

"We  heard  the  key  of  a  chest  creak  in  the  lock  while  Eusapia
was  held  as  above.  A  last  experiment  was  very  decisive — a  letter-
balance  was  displaced  and  was  lowered  and  raised  without  con-
tact. The  light  was  strong;  there  was  certainly  neither  a  hair
nor  a  wire  there."

1  have  not  published,  and  shall  not  publish,  these  notes;  they  are  weari-
some in  their  monotony  :/  "the  hands  are  held — I  am  touched  on  the  right — I
am  touched  on  the  left."  To  have  an  exact  record  I  dictated  to  my  secretary,
Bellier,  who  wrote  in  the  adjoining  room,  all  details  as  the  experiments  went
on,  and  he  noted  the  exact  times.  The  investigation  was  long  and  minute,
perhaps  unnecessarily  minute,  but  apart  from  systematic  error  that  I  cannot
imagine,  it  established  completely  the  fact  of  movements  without  contact.

418

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

In  fine,  the  experimenters  in  their  summing  up  say,  Eusapia
can  act  on  material  bodies  at  a  distance  without  contact.  The
control  has  been  as  perfect  as  any  control  resulting  from  clear
and  direct  sight  of  an  experimental  fact  can  be.

Experiments  at  Genoa,  1901.  Professor  Morselli,  who  was  at
first  very  sceptical,  but  like  all  who  have  experimented  with
Eusapia,  was  afterwards  completely  convinced,  gives  the  details
of  the  facts  he  observed  in  a  book  which  is  a  model  of  erudition
(Psicologia  e  spiritismo,  2  vols.,  Turin,  1908).

I  quote  here  only  what  concerns  telekinesis,  extensive  quota-
tion being  impossible  (p.  361)  :  "In  the  first  two  hours  of  the
seance,  movements  and  oscillations  of  the  table:  loud  noises  in
the  dark  or  in  weak  light  .  .  .  raps  corresponding  with  muscular
contractions  or  gestures,  displacements  of  objects,  sounds  from
musical  instruments,  passage  through  the  air  of  a  ruler  from
the  cabinet  which  touched  the  arms  and  shoulders  of  the  sitters —
all  repeated  to  satiety.  A  small  table  placed  a  yard  away  from
Eusapia  was  drawn  to  her,  while  I  held  her  right  hand  and  her
legs.  Mme.  Ferrero  held  her  left  hand.  The  table  was  twice
raised  six  to  twelve  inches  from  the  floor.1

"This  experiment, "  says  Morselli,  "was  controlled  with  the
utmost  rigour;  everything  was  visible  by  red  light,  and  I  am
certain  that  the  phenomenon  is  genuine/'

In  another  experiment  ( 1901 )  Eusapia  was  held  on  the  left  by
Porro,  on  the  right  by  Morselli;  the  latter  said  aloud,  "I  am
thirsty."  Then  a  water-bottle  and  glass  were  moved  on  to  the
table  and  a  glass  full  of  water  was  put  to  the  lips  of  each  sitter
in  succession.2

Three  eminent  physiologists,  doctors  of  the  University  of
Turin,  Carlo  Foa,  Herlitzka,  and  E.  Aggazotti,  who  studied  under
the  celebrated  physiologist,  Angelo  Mosso,  held  a  series  of  ex-
perimental seances  in  the  Laboratory  of  Psychiatry  at  Turin

*A  very  good  photograph  (vol.  ii,  p.  363)  was  taken  of  this;  both  feet,
both  hands,  and  the  knees  can  be  seen  clear  of  the  table,  which  is  completely
levitated.

aThose  who  wish  to  see  all  that  has  been  written  on  Eusapia  may  consult
the  Bibliografia  Paladiana  by  Morselli  (vol.  i,  pp.  134-170).  It  will  be  seen  that
all  the  experimenters  from  1889  to  1907,  with  the  exception  of  Mr.  E.  Feilding
and  Alice  Johnson,  were  completely  convinced.  I  do  not  know  what  Alice
Johnson  now  thinks,  but  Feilding  has  recanted  his  negations  founded  on
the  defective  Cambridge  experiments.  D'Arsonval  said  he  could  not  form  an
opinion  and  remained  doubtful.    I  think  his  uncertainty  has  now  disappeared.

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  419

University,  and  were  absolutely  convinced  of  the  genuineness  of
the  objective  phenomena  produced  by  Eusapia.  Objects  beyond
her  reach  were  several  times  brought  on  to  the  table;  graphic
recorders  placed  out  of  reach  of  her  hands  and  feet  gave  records ;
a  heavy  and  solid  table  was  broken  without  being  touched  by
anyone;  and  a  photographic  plate  wrapped  in  black  paper  gave
the  impress  of  fingers.

Messrs.  Foa,  Herlitzka,  and  Aggazotti  say  with  reason  (as  I
have  often  said,  and  as  seems  obvious)  :  "If  these  phenomena
appear  strange,  it  is  because  of  their  relative  infrequency;  they
are  not  more  marvellous  than  the  biological  phenomena  that  we
daily  observe"  (A.  S.  P.,  1907,  xvii,  294).

Another  experiment  was  made  in  1907  by  Professor  Lombroso,
Drs.  Audenino  and  Norlenzki,  the  editor,  Bocca,  and  other  well-
known  persons.  The  results  were  always  the  same.  Register-
ing apparatus  placed  too  far  away  for  the  hands  of  Eusapia  to
reach  them  gave  records;  a  mandolin  played  by  itself.  The  form
of  a  head  was  seen  (A.  S.  P.,  1907,  xvii,  212-218).  It  would
seem  that  under  these  conditions  doubt  should  be  impossible.

Messrs.  Berisso  and  Bozzano  relate  that  in  May,  1900,  in  a
fully  lighted  seance  at  Genoa  when  everyone  could  see  Eusapia
sitting  with  her  hands  on  the  table  under  control,  objects  were
transported,  notably  a  trumpet  which  was  seen  suspended  in  the
air.  Sounds  came  from  it  and  it  was  at  a  greater  height  than
the  hands  of  any  person  could  have  taken  it.  Similarly  at  the
next  seance,  when  a  guitar  rose  three  yards  above  the  floor  (A.  S.
P.,  1907,  xvii,  473-528).

M.  Venzano  saw  a  fluidic  hand  take  shape  and  emerge  from
the  right  shoulder  of  the  medium  to  get  a  glass  full  of  water  and
carry  it  to  the  medium's  mouth.  Professors  Morselli  and  Porro
were  present  at  these  experiments.

At  the  Psychological  Institute,  which  devoted  forty-three
seances  in  1905,  1906,  and  1907  to  the  study  of  Eusapia,  the  re-
port of  Courtier  (in  spite  of  his  hesitations,  reticences,  and  con-
tradictions) ends  by  admitting  that  movements  seem  to  be  pro-
duced by  simple  contact  with  the  medium's  hands,  or  even  with-
out contact;  and  that  molecular  vibrations  (knocks)  in  external
objects  at  a  distance  can  be  positively  asserted.  The  whole  of
telekinesis  is  contained  in  these  two  basic  admissions  (Ball,  de
I'lnst.  Gen.  de  Psychol,  1909).

420

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

In  the  debate  on  this  matter,  Courtier  adds  the  interesting
testimony  that  the  objects  moved  do  not  follow  straight  lines,  but
seem  to  move  in  curves  as  though  directed  by  an  intelligent  me-
chanical force.

The  Cambridge  experiments  and  the  doubts  they  raised  in  the
S.  P.  R.  may  be  considered  as  ineffective.  Myers,  at  a  seance
held  in  my  house,  formally  admitted  the  phenomena  as  genuine :
later  in  1909  Everard  Feilding,  Mr.  Carrington,  and  Mr.
Baggally,  an  expert  in  legerdemain,  made  some  decisive  experi-
ments at  Naples.  Mr.  Feilding,  while  holding  and  seeing  Eusa-
pia's  two  hands,  was  touched  behind  the  curtain  by  a  living  hand,
three  fingers  below  and  the  thumb  above,  and  grasped  so  that  he
felt  the  finger-nails  in  his  flesh.  These  hands  occasionally  became
visible.  Mr.  Baggally,  while  seeing  and  holding  the  hands  of
the  medium,  was  touched  on  the  back  of  his  own  hand  by  a
hand  stroking  it  and  proceeding  up  his  arm  (Report  of  the  Com-
mission of  the  S.  P.  R.  charged  with  experiments  with  Eusapia
Paladino).

I  cannot  do  better  than  report  textually  the  remarks  upon
this  medium  prompted  by  the  good  sense  of  Mr.  Hereward
Carrington.

"In  November  and  December,  1908,  Mr.  Everard  Feilding  and
Mr.  W.  Baggally  and  myself  held  ten  seances  in  our  rooms  at  the
hotel  under  perfect  conditions  of  control,  and  we  were  convinced
that  authentic  metapsychic  phenomena  were  produced  that  no
trickery  could  account  for.  The  conviction  produced  was  quite
contrary  to  my  expectations.  .  .  .  If  there  were  doubtful
phenomena  obtained  in  America  the  reason  was  that  they  did
not  know  how  to  conduct  their  experiments  with  Eusapia,  and
that  she  was  tired,  exhausted,  and  disturbed.  ...  It  is  my
belief  that  among  American  mediums  for  physical  effects,  80  per
cent,  practise  trickery ;  but  Eusapia  produces  genuine  phenomena.
.  .  .  Every  one  that  studies  these  problems  with  her,  giving
sufficient  time  and  patience,  will  be  convinced  that  among  the
phenomena  that  she  presents  there  are  some  that  no  known  laws
can  explain.    These  facts  are  beyond  question."

Is  it  necessary  to  speak  of  bets  on  the  reality  of  telekinesis  such
as  that  made  by  M.  Le  Bon,  who  passes  for  an  intelligent  man?
These  establish  nothing,  and  science  is  not  advanced  whether
M.  Le  Bon  wins  or  loses  his  wager.  Who  is  going  to  bet  that
he  will  make  an  aerolite  fall  in  his  garden?

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  421

I  have  insisted  on  the  phenomena  of  telekinesis  produced  by
Eusapia  because  there  have  perhaps  never  been  so  many  different,
sceptical,  and  scrupulous  investigators  into  the  work  of  any
medium  or  more  minute  investigations.  During  twenty  years,
from  1888  to  1908,  she  submitted,  at  the  hands  of  the  most  skilled
European  and  American  experimentalists,  to  tests  of  the  most
rigorous  and  decisive  kind,  and  during  all  this  time  men  of  science,
resolved  not  to  be  deceived,  have  verified  that  even  very  large  and
massive  objects  were  displaced  without  contact.

To  report  the  many  experiments  mentioned  in  the  spiritist  jour-
nals on  objective  phenomena  would  extend  this  chapter  beyond
measure ;  I  merely  refer  readers  to  them,  only  remarking  that  the
conditions  of  control  in  such  cases  are  obviously  less  complete
than  in  those  reported  above.

Movements  of  objects  without  contact  have  some  connection
with  the  phenomena  observed  in  so-called  haunted  houses.  Dr.
Dariex  has  published  interesting  observations  to  this  effect  {A.  S.
P.,  1892,  ii,  189-208).

He  heard  during  the  night  curious  and  inexplicable  noises  in
his  study  (No.  6,  Rue  du  Bellay,  Paris),  and  found  in  the  morning
that  chairs  had  been  upset  and  displaced.  Wishing  to  deal  with
this  scientifically  and  judicially,  he  and  four  friends,  of  whom  two
were  medical  men,  sealed  up  the  door  with  six  seals.  Despite
this  the  chairs  were  noisily  displaced  in  the  room  though  no  one
could  enter  either  by  the  window  or  by  the  chimney,  nor  could
any  wire  be  introduced  under  the  door.

Dariex  was  able  to  observe  table-movements  without  contact,
working  with  Mme.  B.,  a  non-professional  medium.  In  the  light
of  a  gas-fire  turned  full  on,  a  table  weighing  thirteen  pounds  slid
sixteen  inches  along  the  floor,  the  hands  of  the  medium  being  on
her  knees,  and  twenty-four  inches  distant  from  the  table.  Dr.
Mercier  adds  that  the  table  started  of  itself  and  that  he  could  not
detect  the  least  movement  by  the  medium.

Victorien  Joncieres,  a  well-known  musician,  relates  that  he  went
one  evening  to  visit  a  friend,  a  highly  placed  government  official,
whose  young  niece  had  remarkable  mediumistic  powers.  They
saw  a  chair  rise  above  the  table;  the  girl  placed  her  two  little
fingers  on  the  edge  of  a  very  heavy  table,  "which  then  rose  well
above  our  heads,  so  that  we  had  to  stand  up  to  follow  its  upward
course.  It  remained  poised  in  the  air  for  a  few  moments  and
then  descended  noiselessly  to  the  floor"  (Chevreul,  p.  343).

422

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Very  marked  movements  of  objects  without  contact  were  ob-
tained with  Stainton  Moses,  who  was  a  remarkable  medium.  He
took  a  good  degree  at  Oxford,  was  ordained  priest,  and  took  a
parish  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  and  then  became  a  master  in  University
College  School.  His  sermons  were  highly  thought  of,  and  his
loyalty  and  honourable  conduct  won  general  respect.  He  had
great  mediumistic  powers,  and  in  his  book,  Experiences  in  Spirit-
ualism, he  gave  the  results  of  his  experiences  which  were  remark-
able both  from  the  objective  and  the  subjective  point  of  view.
Dr.  and  Mrs.  Stanhope  Speer,  who  were  his  intimate  friends,
have  published  careful  and  valuable  notes  on  all  the  phenomena.

"The  movements  of  the  table  begin  at  once  when  it  is  barely
touched:  it  is  then  best  to  take  the  hands  away  and  leave  it  to
itself.  The  tipping  has  been  more  marked  when  all  present  were
at  some  distance.  It  went  backwards  and  forwards  on  the  floor
and  came  back  to  its  usual  position  when  no  one  was  touching  it.
.  .  .  Sometimes  the  knocks  on  it  were  like  hammer-strokes,
heard  in  the  room  below  and  enough  to  make  one  think  that  the
table  would  be  smashed.  Sometimes  the  whole  room  was  shaken
by  the  blows"  {A.  S.  P.,  1895,  211).

Stainton  Moses  cites  the  experiment  that  I  give  below
(abridged)  as  being  conclusive:

"At  6  p.m.,  in  full  daylight,  as  I  was  with  a  friend  who  had
come  to  see  me,  my  dining-room  table  which  was  an  old  and  very
heavy  one,  placed  on  a  carpet,  was  shaken  by  strong  blows.  It
moved  and  shivered  as  if  it  were  coming  to  pieces,  though  we  were
not  touching  it.  We  then  got  up  and  placed  our  hands  eight
inches  above  the  table,  which  rose  to  touch  the  hands."

Another  experiment  is  given  on  page  219:

"The  room  that  had  been  illuminated  by  luminous  psychic  rays
suddenly  became  dark.  The  table,  touched  by  no  human  hand,  re-
sounded to  a  series  of  knocks  of  varying  force,  some  like  blows  of
a  sledge-hammer,  indicating  an  intelligence  that  showed  itself  im-
patient or  serious  according  to  the  nature  of  the  communication.
The  room  was  in  complete  darkness  except  that  from  time  to
time  a  luminous  vapour  came  and  went  round  one  of  the  legs
of  the  table."

"Often,"  says  Dr.  Speer,  "we  heard  knocks  on  the  door,  the
sideboard,  and  the  walls,  at  a  distance  from  the  table  where  we
were  sitting.  They  could  not  be  produced  by  any  human  means ;
I  satisfied  myself  of  this  by  every  possible  method.

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  423

"We  got  direct  writing,  and  the  movement  of  heavy  objects
such  as  tables  and  chairs  was  not  infrequent ;  the  table  being
sometimes  drawn  from  a  considerable  distance  off.  The  table  (of
solid  mahogany)  was  moved  more  easily  than  by  our  united
efforts :  we  often  attempted  in  vain  to  arrest  its  movements."

Dr.  Elliott  Cowes  and  Mrs.  Cowes  relate  (A.  S.  P.,  1893,  ii,
372):

Round  a  heavy  table  under  a  chandelier  with  two,  three,  or
four  lighted  gas-jets  (the  light  being  strong  enough  to  read  by)
all  present  stood  two  feet  away.  There  was  no  contact  of  person
or  clothing  with  the  table,  nothing  nearer  than  twelve  to  eighteen
inches.  Then  the  table  raised  one  of  its  legs  and  let  it  fall  to  the
floor  so  heavily  that  the  whole  room  shook  and  the  gas-globes
rang.  "If  this  is  not  telekinesis,"  says  Dr.  Cowes,  "we  cannot
trust  our  senses."

M.  C.  de  Vesme  has  seen  very  clearly  marked  phenomena  of
telekinesis  with  Count  Ugo  Baschieri  (A.  S.  P.,  November,  1915,
xxv,  261-263).

"I  have  never,"  he  says,  "verified  the  displacement  or  levitation
of  a  small  table  under  such  good  conditions  for  observation.
Everybody  was  a  yard  distant  from  the  table,  which  moved
towards  the  medium,  but  the  movements  of  the  table  and  those
of  the  medium  were  not  simultaneous."  Another  day,  in  a  quite
private  seance,  at  his  own  house,  M.  de  Vesme  saw  a  carnation
placed  in  a  vase  of  flowers,  bend,  twist  (and  in  one  case),  break
under  the  influence  of  magnetic  passes,  and  M.  de  Vesme  veri-
fied that  there  was  no  thread."  1

M.  Fremery,  an  artillery  officer,  and  editor  of  the  fortnightly
review,  Tackoustig  Leben,  had  some  evidential  experiences  at
Mme.  Huygens's  house  in  presence  of  Dr.  Floris  Jansen,  director
of  the  laboratory  of  psycho-physics  of  Amsterdam,  and  Dr.  van

*I  saw  some  cryptesthetic  phenomena  with  Maxwell,  De  Vesme,  and  Count
Baschieri  at  my  own  house,  during  the  war.  No  premonition  worth  remem-
bering was  given,  but  a  curious  thing  happened  which  Count  Baschieri  con-
sidered metapsychic.  He  placed  his  handkerchief  to  his  eyes  and  withdrew
it  stained  with  blood,  perhaps  five  grams  of  blood,  undiluted.  His  eyes  had
sweated  blood.  I  could  not  discover  any  conjunctival  ecchymosis.  I  do  not
make  any  comments,  but  only  mention  the  fact,  which,  physiologically,  is
quite  abnormal,  and  hardly  resembles  stigmatizations.  I  could  not  affirm  the
phenomenon  to  be  authentic  and  not  simulated,  for,  however  unlikely,  it  is
possible  that  the  handkerchief  was  already  blood-stained.  The  movement  was
too  sudden  and  unlooked  for  to  enable  me  to  observe  closely. — C.  Richet.

424

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Branen.  There  was  enough  light  to  see  the  hands  of  the  medium,
which  were  held  by  the  experimenters.  A  sofa  approached  the
table  and  moved  away  again ;  a  guitar  placed  five  feet  above  the
floor  sounded;  a  palm-leaf  moved  all  ways  and  floated  up  to
the  ceiling,  lit  by  a  red  lamp;  it  brushed  against  the  ceiling
(twelve  feet  high)  in  wide  sweeps,  then  came  down  again  and
touched  each  of  the  sitters.  All  the  while  a  musical  box  played,
and  gave  answers  by  raps  to  questions  put  (A.  S.  P.,  1908,  xviii,
251).

At  Gratz  a  non-professional  medium,  Mme.  S.,  in  private
seances  had  very  clear  tipping  and  levitations  of  tables.  A  very
heavy  table  in  massive  oak  was  often  displaced,  and  once  while
the  sitters  joined  hands,  it  rose  into  the  air  about  a  yard,  swayed
a  little,  and  dropped  back.1

Erny  states  that  from  1865  to  1869  he  observed  conclusive
proofs  of  telekinesis  with  the  talented  composer,  F.  P.  "A  table
remained  poised  with  one  leg  resting  on  a  sofa  and  three  legs  in
the  air.  All  our  experiments  took  place  by  daylight  or  in  the
evening  in  full  light.  There  was  no  need  to  join  hands;  it  was
sufficient  for  P.  to  place  a  finger  on  the  middle  of  the  table  for  it
to  rise,  very  often  at  once,  sometimes  turning  over  on  him"  (A.
Erny,  loc.  cit.,  204).

The  celebrated  Russian  chemist  BoutlerofT  experimenting
through  Kate  Fox  in  his  own  rooms  along  with  Aksakoff  and
Mme.  BoutlerofT,  observed  movements  without  contact.  Bout-
lerofT was  very  sceptical  and  Kate  much  open  to  suspicion,  but  a
musical  box  seemed  to  wind  itself  up  and  started  to  play.  Kate's
legs  were  held  by  Mme.  BoutlerofT  and  her  hands  were  visible  on
a  plate  of  luminous  glass.

J.  Ochorowicz  has  studied  telekinesis  with  great  care  through
the  powerful  mediumship  of  a  young  Polish  girl,  Stanislawa
Tomczyk.  I  have  myself  been  present  at  several  experiments
with  her  that  seemed  quite  conclusive.  The  illustrations  (Figs.
11-13)  show  some  of  the  photographs  taken.  Small  objects — a
ball,  a  handbell,  a  needle — are  drawn  towards  the  medium  and
maintained  in  the  air  long  enough  for  a  photograph  to  be  taken
even  in  a  moderate  light.

It  cannot  be  supposed  that  these  objects  are  held  up  by  a

lNordberg,  Geisterglaube,  Spiritismus,  und  vierte  Dimension  (Psychische
Studien,  October,  191 8,  415).

426

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

thread,  for  a  ball  cannot  be  balanced  on  a  thread,  which  would,
moreover,  appear  in  the  photograph.  Stanislawa  turns  up  her
sleeves  to  the  elbow,  washes  her  hands  in  soap  and  warm  water,
after  which  her  hands  remain  always  in  full  view.  A  commis-
sion at  Warsaw  composed  of  physicians,  physiologists,  and  en-
gineers carefully  verified  these  facts  and  despite  the  furious
opposition  of  Professor  Cybulski,  who  denied  the  facts  while
declining  to  examine  them,  certified  to  their  entire  authenticity.

Fig.  12. — Telekinesis  by  Stanislawa  Tomczyk  (After
Schrenck-Notzing)  .

The  rising  of  a  ball.  The  fluidic  thread,  by  enlarging  (Fig.  13)  becomes
visible,  starting  from  the  nail  and  showing  swellings  in  its  path.

In  telekinesis  with  small  objects  even  in  full  light,  fraud  is
always  possible  if  the  observers  are  not  fully  vigilant;  for  such
small  objects  may  be  displaced  by  a  thread.  Ochorowicz  has
worked  out  this  question  in  his  experiments  with  Miss  Tomczyk.
There  are  cases  in  which  the  object  is  moved  without  any  thread,
and  others  in  which  a  thread  does  appear;  but  this  thread  is

428

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

not  the  hair  or  fine  wire  of  a  conjuring  trick,  it  is  a  fluidic
thread.  "I  have  felt,"  says  Ochorowicz,  "this  thread  on  my  hand,
on  my  face,  on  my  hair.  When  the  medium  separates  her  hands
the  thread  gets  thinner  and  disappears ;  it  gives  the  same  sensa-
tion as  a  spider's  web.  If  it  is  cut  with  scissors  its  continuity  is
immediately  restored  (p.  262).  It  seems  to  be  formed  of  points;
it  can  be  photographed  and  is  then  seen  to  be  much  thinner  than
an  ordinary  thread.  It  starts  from  the  fingers.  Needless  to  re-
mark that  the  hands  of  the  medium  were  very  carefully  examined
before  every  experiment,,  (A.  S.  P.,  1910,  xx,  208).

Ochorowicz  cites  a  curious  observation  made  by  the  Chevalier
Peretti  with  Eusapia  at  Genoa.  A  glass  having  been  raised  by
Eusapia  without  contact,  she  cried  out,  "The  thread,  look  at  the
thread."  Peretti  took  the  thread  and  pulled  it ;  it  broke  and  sad-
denly  disappeared.

This  "fluidic  thread"  should  be  compared  with  the  fluidic
emanations  from  Marthe  Beraud.  The  minute  details  given  by
Ochorowicz  should  be  carefully  studied.

Instead  of  quoting  the  experiments  by  Ochorowicz,  I  will  cite
those  by  the  Warsaw  Committee  (A.  S.  P.,  1910,  xx,  37)  :

A  celluloid  ball,  6  cm.  in  diameter,  was  placed  in  full  light  on  a
dynamometer.  S.  placed  her  hands  two  or  three  centimetres
from  it  and  the  ball  began  to  roll  off  the  dynamometer  on  to  the
table.  S.  ordered  it  to  return,  which  it  did.  There  was  then
another  movement.  In  a  second  experiment  the  ball  was  screened
by  a  large  celluloid  funnel,  but  the  movement  was  still  produced.

The  committee  state  that  the  facts  are  certain,  but  incompre-
hensible. Incomprehensible  ?  So  be  it !  But  is  the  attraction  by
the  earth  or  by  a  magnet  any  more  comprehensible?  We  see  a
leaden  ball  fall  to  the  earth  and  a  piece  of  iron  attracted  by  a
magnet  and  we  are  neither  astonished  nor  disturbed.  These  are
usual,  and  we  give  ourselves  up  to  the  illusion  that  we  have
understood  them.

Ochorowicz  has  verified  a  case  of  telekinesis  in  full  light  with
Miss  Tomczyk  (A.  S.  P.,  1910,  xx,  369)  :  "A  chair  behind  me
suddenly  moved.  It  was  a  garden  chair,  light,  painted  red,  and
quite  open  in  make.  In  full  light  it  made  little  forward  move-
ments. /  interrogated  it.  It  raised  itself  on  one  side  and  gave
one  knock,  then  advanced  a  few  centimetres.  I  placed  my  hand
against  the  chair  and  felt  a  slight  force  pushing  it.  .  .  .  All
took  place  in  full  light."

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  429

Such  facts  can  be  explained  only  by  telekinesis,  short  of  the
great  absurdity  of  supposing  Ochorowicz  the  victim  of  a  halluci-
nation.

Dr.  Dariex,  a  careful  and  experienced  observer,  experimenting
under  good  conditions  with  Mme.  B.,  she  remaining  absolutely
still,  saw  a  table  weighing  some  forty  pounds  give  sudden,  strong
movements,  slide  along,  and  upset.  Some  objects  were  also  pro-
jected from  a  shelf  fixed  to  the  wall  about  eight  feet  from  the
floor  (A.  S.  P.,  1893,  iii,  36).

Dr.  Pierre  Corneille  has  reported  some  extraordinary  effects  of
telekinesis  at  the  house  of  Mr.  X.,  of  Fontenay-le-Comte  (Ven-
dee). The  sitters  were  Captain  L.  and  his  wife,  Professor  V.
and  his  two  children  of  twelve  and  fifteen.  These  are  bad  condi-
tions for  experiment,  for  children  of  twelve  and  fifteen  are  quite
capable  of  fraud.  These  experiments  need  not  be  further  noticed
(Nouvelle  Revue,  December,  1907).

It  is  not  sufficient  that  experiments  should  probably  be  genuine ;
we  demand  more  than  that,  and  when  dealing  with  experimenta-
tion and  not  accidental  phenomena,  we  demand  repetition.  Ex-
pcricntia  una,  expert  cntia  nulla,  The  first  time  that  I  saw  the
surprising  performances  of  Anna  Roth,  the  "Blumenmedium,"  I
was  dazzled;  at  a  second  sitting  I  was  perplexed;  at  the  third
I  was  convinced  that  the  thing  was  a  fraud.  I  asked  Anna  Roth
to  allow  a  more  complete  control  which  would  have  settled  the
question.   She  refused.

Mary  Graham,  aged  about  seventeen,  was  making  some  table-
turning  experiments  with  her  mother  and  younger  brother  of
fifteen.  "One  evening  when  we  had  finished  lights  were  brought
and  we  sat  down  to  read.  There  was  a  scratching  on  the  carpet ;
my  mother  and  I  looked  up.  Could  it  be  our  table  moving  of
itself?  We  began  to  read  again,  but  the  noise  was  heard  again
and  I  distinctly  saw  the  little  table  move  towards  us.  My  mother
also  saw  that  it  was  displaced ;  all  three  of  us  felt  uncanny  and
took  the  table  out  of  the  room.

'This  movement  took  place  a  second  time.  I  wished  to  see
what  the  table  would  do  if  I  were  rude  to  it;  so  I  took  a  little
terrier  lying  on  the  carpet  and  went  to  put  the  dog  on  the  table.
I  was  astounded  to  see  the  table  jump  at  me  right  off  the  floor!
The  dog  was  terrified  and  ran  away.  The  table  had  moved  about
six  inches  and  risen  off  the  floor  by  about  as  much"  (A.  S.  P.,
1892,  ii,  307).

430

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Mr.  W.  J.  Crawford,  D.Sc,  lecturer  in  engineering  at  the
Municipal  Technical  Institute,  Belfast,  has  published  an  epoch-
making  book  on  Telekinesis,  Experiments  in  Psychical  Science
(Watkins,  1919).  His  lamented  death  is  a  great  loss  to  science.
In  1916-1917  he  experimented  in  a  private  circle  with  a  non-

1

I

1
i

,  to  (m

{IOcm

Figs.  14,  15,  16. — Diagrams  to  Explain  the  Theory  of  an  Ectoplasmic
Cantilever  (After  Crawford).

The  dotted  lines  indicate  the  cantilever.  Miss  Goligher  is  supposed
to  be  sitting  on  the  chair,  which  is  upon  the  platform  of  a  weighing
machine.  The  extruded  substance  acts  on  the  table  at  P,  sometimes  taking
a  purchase  on  the  ground,  as  in  Fig.  15,  sometimes  acting  as  a  cantilever
(Fig.  14).

In  Fig.  16,  the  ectoplasm  is  represented  as  it  generally  occurs,  enlarged
wherert  proceeds  from  the  medium  and  where  it  acts  on  the  table.  It
is  invisible,  though  it  has  weight,  gives  a  sensation  on  contact,  and  can
make  an  imprint  on  plastic  or  coloured  substances.

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  431

professional  medium,  Miss  Kathleen  Goligher.  Table-movements
were  produced  without  contact  of  any  kind.  "I  have  seen/'  says
Mr.  Crawford,  "hundreds  of  these  levitations.  Sometimes  a  chair
would  rise  off  its  four  feet  and  remain  in  the  air  for  several
minutes."

By  different  instruments  that  cannot  be  here  described,  Craw-
ford measured  the  forces  proceeding  from  the  medium.  When
she  was  placed  on  a  weighing  machine  he  found  that  during  the
levitation  of  light  objects  their  weight  was  added  to  that  of  the
medium.  In  other  words,  the  effect  as  regards  weight  was  as  if
the  medium  were  herself  lifting  the  objects.  Conversely  when
the  table  is  pressed  downwards  as  if  fixed  to  the  floor,  so  that  a
strong  man  can  only  lift  it  with  much  effort,  the  weight  of  the
medium  on  the  weighing  machine  is  diminished,  in  one  case  by
thirty-seven  pounds,  in  another  case  by  fifty-nine  pounds.

Crawford  drew  the  inference  that  a  rigid  rod  proceeds  from
the  body  of  the  medium.  This  is  quite  conformable  to  our  experi-
ments with  Eusapia.  By  this  means  heavy  bodies  can  be  psychic-
ally raised.  According  to  him  there  are  two  modes  of  procedure
according  to  the  weight  of  the  object  to  be  raised.  "The  cantilever
method  is  made  use  of  for  light  bodies  or  when  the  applied  forces
are  small,  and  the  strut  method  for  heavy  bodies  or  when  the
applied  forces  are  large"  (p.  108).  It  would  seem  also  (as  discov-
ered by  Ochorowicz  and  some  others)  that  other  sitters  also  lose
weight  slightly  during  the  levitation  experiments.

No  photographs  were  taken,1  and  precautions  such  as  were  used
with  Eusapia  were  not  taken.  But  Crawford  decided,  with  good
reason,  that  he  would  not  exhaust  his  medium ;  he  found  that  the
flashlight  greatly  disturbed  her  (p.  147).  This  prudent  conduct
cannot  be  blamed,  for  he  was  able  to  observe  the  phenomena  bv
good  (red)  light,  and  to  verify  again  and  again  that  there  was
no  contact.  He  says,  "All  the  phenomena  can  be  demonstrated
with  the  greatest  ease  to  be  genuine  to  the  last  details/'

Decisive  value  must  be  given  to  Crawford's  experiments.  Next
to  those  with  Eusapia  and  Home,  they  are  the  most  complete  on
record.    Professor  Sir  William  Barrett,  who  was  present  at  one

1In  his  subsequent  work,  Psychic  Structures  at  the  Goligher  Circle,  photo-
graphs were  taken,  and  are  here  reproduced.  Mr.  Crawford  personally  told
me  that  the  effects  of  the  flashlight  seemed  to  be  upon  the  medium  herself
rather  than  on  the  ectoplasm.  It  was  possible  to  take  flashlight  photographs  if
the  medium  were  sheltered  from  the  light  by  a  black  cape. — Translator's
Note.

432

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

of  these  seances,  verified  that  the  table  moved  without  contact
and  that  there  were  raps  inexplicable  by  usual  mechanical  causes
(P.  S.  P.  R.,  1919,  lxxvii,  335).

We  shall  refer  again  later  to  Crawford's  admirable  essay,
which  throws  a  strong  light  on  the  causes  and  mechanism  of
telekinesis.1

Mr.  G.  Arnsburg  has  seen  a  fairly  heavy  walnut  pillar  table
rise  from  the  floor  (A.  S.  P.,  1892,  ii,  352).  "Our  fingers  were
held  several  inches  above  it.  I  succeeded  in  raising  the  table
without  contact  just  as  an  iron  bar  is  raised  by  an  electro-magnet.
The  table  swayed  slowly  in  the  air  for  several  seconds,  before
falling  heavily  back  to  the  ground."

I  will  here  mention  some  unpublished  experiments  of  my  own
with  three  other  mediums  who  gave  me  fairly  good  instances  of
telekinesis.  Linda  Gazzera,  brought  by  my  lamented  friend,
E.  Imoda,  was  in  a  room  in  my  house  with  three  other  persons.
Her  hands  and  feet  were  firmly  held,  in  complete  darkness.  A
heavy  chest  weighing  some  eighty  kilogrammes,  which  was  about
ten  inches  from  her,  began  to  oscillate  and  crack,  being  displaced
so  violently  that  I  feared  it  would  fall,  and  I  had  to  stop  the
experiment.

I  copy  textually  from  my  notes:  "I  hold  Linda's  two  hands,
her  head  and  knees.  A  hand  seemingly  from  behind  me  strikes
me  heavily.  I  think  I  can  distinguish  its  fingers,  and  this  is
repeated  a  second  time.  I  hold  the  left  hand  firmly,  Imoda  hold-
ing the  right  which  I  frequently  verified  by  touch.  The  objects
were  taken  from  the  cupboard  behind,  a  thimble  was  put  on  the
first  finger  of  my  left  hand,  a  sheath  (etui)  was  put  on  my  nose,
and  I  felt  fingers  touching  my  nose  and  face.

"In  the  last  experiment,  the  best  of  any,  no  one  was  present  but

Crawford's  skilful  studies  lead  to  a  beginning  of  exact  knowledge  on  the
nature  of  the  ectoplasm.  His  leading  facts  will  be  found  in  his  last  work,
posthumously  published,  Psychic  Structures  at  the  Goligher  Circle  (Watkins,
London),  of  which  Mr.  S.  de  Brath  has  given  a  very  good  summary  {Revue
Metapsychique,  1921,  i,  191).  It  cannot  be  said  that  the  posthumous  work
contains  anything  that  had  not  already  been  established  in  his  previous  books,
though  the  photographs  in  it  are  new.  But  in  so  important  a  matter  fresh
verification  is  always  useful,  and  as  the  book  is  posthumous,  Crawford  cannot
be  held  entirely  responsible  for  its  contents  and  it  is  wise  to  maintain  some
reserve.

It  may  now  be  definitely  stated  that  we  have  abundant  demonstration
(by  Schrenck-Notzing,  Mme.  Bisson,  Dr.  Geley,  and  my  own)  of  ectoplasm  as
a  half-living  emanation  from  the  body.    (Second  French  edition.)

&-dc  Fonfenat/.

Fig.  17.— Ectoplasm  of  Linda  Gazzera  (After  Charles  Richet  and
George  de  Fontenay)
Experience  of  April  19,  1905.

De  Fontenay  at  the  right,  Argentine  on  the  left.  I  was  holding  my  right  hand
continuously  without  interruption.  The  hand  which  appeared  high  above  behind  the
curtain  was  released  by  a  fluidic  thread  from  the  head  of  Linda.  One  could  see
the  nails  and  all  the  phalanges.    Experienced  at  home  in  my  library.

434

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

myself,  Mme.  Charles  Richet,  and  Mme.  F.  I  held  Linda's  hands
the  whole  time  (underlined  in  my  notes),  so  that  I  can  be  ab-
solutely certain  that  she  did  nothing  with  her  hands.  Mme.  F.'s
chair  was  taken  from  her  and  removed  to  the  middle  of  the
room,  then  given  back  to  her;  I  received  a  flower  that  I  had
placed  on  a  shelf  as  high  as  the  cupboard  hardly  to  be  reached
by  the  hand,  and  higher  than  the  head.  I  was  touched  by  some-
thing from  behind  the  curtain,  though  I  could  not  affirm  that  it
was  a  hand.

"Telekinetic  experiments  succeed  well  with  Linda  and  she  is
more  easily  controlled  than  Eusapia,  for  she  scarcely  moves  at  all,
while  Eusapia  is  in  continual  jerky  movement.  In  the  first  ex-
periments the  ectoplasmic  hand  that  I  felt  was  cold  and  stiff ;  in
the  fourth  experiment  it  was  warm,  articulated,  and  supple."

J.  Maxwell  observed  occasional  movements  of  objects  without
contact  in  the  case  of  a  certain  medium,  A.  These  were  infre-
quent, but  as  they  took  place  in  full  daylight,  even  when  Maxwell
only  was  present,  and  without  the  usual  procedure  of  spiritist
seances,  they  could  be  verified  under  excellent  conditions,  leaving
no  room  for  doubt.

The  one  phenomenon  shown  by  A.,  devoid  of  all  mysticism,
was  as  clear  and  simple  as  an  elementary  phenomenon  of  phys-
iological physics.  A.  placed  her  hands  near  some  object  and
tried  to  draw  it  towards  her;  and  sometimes  the  object  moved
a  few  centimetres.  When  alone  with  A.  I  have  seen  her  thus
move  a  fan.  This  was  in  full  sunlight  on  a  very  warm  day.  The
movement  was  not  strong,  but  the  essential  fact  is  that  there
was  movement.

With  A.,  raps  were  very  distinct;  when  she  placed  her  hands
on  a  table,  a  walking-stick,  or  any  bit  of  wood,  crepitations  and
raps  were  heard  and  vibrations  were  felt.

With  S.  Tomczyk  I  have  seen  good  instances  of  movement
without  contact;  she  could  move  and  raise  up  a  light  ball  from
a  distance.

These  experiments  made  with  three  different  mediums  might
have  been  insufficient  to  convince  me  of  movement  without  con-
tact, had  I  not  already  formed  my  opinion  after  my  long  experi-
mentation with  Eusapia.  The  clear  instances  of  telekinesis  pre-
sented by  A.,  by  S.  T.,  and  by  Linda  in  no  way  surprised  me  and
strongly  confirmed  my  convictions.

I  am  even  inclined  to  think  that  phenomena  of  telekinesis  are

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  435

not  extremely  rare,  and  have  been  verified  fairly  often  in  spiritist
seances,  but  unfortunately  under  unreliable  conditions.  Spiritual-
ists publish  nothing  that  has  not  a  doctrinal  bearing  or  is  not
dramatic.  They  make  the  mistake  of  attaching  slight  importance
to  other  facts.

Telekinesis  is  really  one  of  the  most  important  facts  in  meta-
psychic  science.  It  is  not  to  be  despised  because  it  is  elementary,
any  more  than  a  chemist  should  despise  the  law  of  combination  of
oxygen  with  hydrogen  because  it  is  an  elementary  phenomenon.
In  any  case  we  may  claim  to  have  established  the  proofs  of  the
reality  of  telekinesis.

However  extraordinary  it  may  seem,  the  many  instances  above
given  establish  it  as  securely  as  any  facts  of  physics  or  physiology.
It  may  be  defined  as  follows :

Under  certain  conditions,  movements  of  objects,  even  of
massive  and  heavy  objects,  may  take  place  without  contact  and
without  the  intervention  of  any  known  mechanical  force.

Various  explanations  may  be  attempted.  I  will  mention  in
the  first  place  an  experiment  which  physicists  have  unfortunately
not  studied  at  all — the  magnetometer  of  Abbe  Fortin.  If  a  piece
of  paper  cut  to  the  shape  of  a  compass  needle  is  suspended  by  a
silk  fibre  inside  a  glass  cylinder,  it  will  turn  either  towards  or
away  from  a  hand  approaching  the  glass.  Is  this  phenomenon
electric  or  thermal?   I  leave  this  for  physicists  to  decide.1

It  is  surprising  and  regrettable  that  physicists  should  not  have
consented  to  examine  carefully  this  so-called  vital  action  in
producing  movement.2

M.  Joire  has  constructed  a  very  simple  instrument  that  he  calls
a  sthenometer  (Gr.  cr &e vo s  =  strength) .

This  is  a  needle  turning  freely  on  a  pivot  over  a  graduated
circle,  the  whole  enclosed  in  a  glass  cylinder,  hermetically  closed,
and  placed  on  a  base  which  is  made  truly  level.    If  the  hand  is

burbled,  Spiritualisme  et  spirit isme  (Bibl.  des  sciences  psychiques),  2d
edit.,  1898,  160.  Stenson  Hooker,  Sur  les  radiations  humaines,  A.  S.  P.,  1906,
315.  J.  Regnault,  Phinomenes  odiques  et  radiations  nouvelles,  A.  S.  P.,  1905,
174.  In  the  journal  of  Gaston  Mery  (Echo  du  merveilleux)  numerous
articles  have  been  devoted  to  this  question  which  is  quite  in  the  embryonic
stage,  and  as  uncertain  as  the  theories  of  the  astral  body,  odic  effluvia,  human
radiations,  and  magnetization  at  a  distance.

*H.  Baraduc  has  imagined  that  each  person  has  a  special  attractive  or
repulsive  power;  and  has  written  a  thick  book  on  the  subject,  quite  sincere
and  honest,  but  lamentably  deficient  in  critical  science  (La  Force  vitale,  L'dme
humaine.   Ses  mouvements)*

436

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

brought  near  the  needle  it  turns  on  its  axis  through  a  certain
angle  marked  on  the  dial.  M.  Joire  has  been  able  to  eliminate
every  exterior  mechanical  cause,  the  shaking  of  the  floor,  any
thermal,  electric,  or  luminous  influence ;  and  still  the  movement  of
the  needle  takes  place.1

Unfortunately,  instead  of  establishing  the  physica  of  the  prob-
lem, M.  Joire  has  studied  the  effect  of  different  states  of  health
as  shown  by  the  deflections.  This  is  premature ;  the  physiology
of  the  reaction  should  come  first.  If  that  is  established  the  patho-
logical applications  will  follow.  It  is  very  desirable  that  the
curious  experiments,  confused  and  even  ridiculous  as  some  of
them  are,  which  Baraduc  accepts  with  such  simple  faith  should
be  taken  in  hand  and  pursued  methodically  and  systematically.

Even  if  they  were  successful  and  it  were  proved  that  a  certain
force  is  exerted  by  the  body,  it  would  not  be  at  all  certain  that
there  is  any  relation  between  this  infinitesimal  involuntary  force
and  the  large  displacements  of  heavy  objects  voluntarily  produced
by  mediums.  It  is  possible,  of  course,  but  the  causes  of  move-
ment in  the  two  cases  are  probably  totally  different.

Since,  moreover,  interorganic  combustion  disengages  electricity
which  can  be  detected  by  a  galvanometer  through  the  tissues  of
the  hands,  there  is  nothing  absurd  in  supposing  that  the  phenom-
enon may  be  electrical.  Dr.  Waller  has  shown  at  the  Paris
Physiological  Congress  (1920)  that  emotions  produce  changes
in  the  electrical  conductivity  of  the  tissues  of  the  hand.  It  is
therefore  possible,  or  even  probable,  that  the  phenomena  of
movement  without  contact  produced  by  approach  of  the  hand  to
a  narrow  strip  of  tissue-paper  or  a  slip  of  elderpith  may  be  an
electric  reaction  as  in  Coulomb's  balance.

This  physical  experiment  throws  no  light  at  all  on  the  move-
ment of  a  heavy  table,  or  a  large  melon,  a  handbell,  a  piano,  or  a
bottle ;  for  these  are  certainly  not  electric  phenomena,  and  have
no  relation  to  any  known  electric  phenomena.  Although  it  is
imprudent  to  advance  negative  conclusions,  I  cannot  think  that
any  solution  of  this  problem  of  normal  physiology  will  solve  the
metapsychic  problem  of  telekinesis.

Still  we  ought  not  to  neglect  the  important  fact  that  in  full  light
movements  of  very  light  electrifiable  objects  are  produced  by  indi-
viduals who  have  no  mediumistic  powers.

tEtude  d'une  force  exteriorisce  por  Vorganisme  vivant,  et  observations  faitcs
au  tnoyen  du  sthenometre  (A.  S.  P.,  1904,  xiv,  242-253  et  1906,  752).

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  437

Let  us  leave  these  small  movements  and  return  to  the  displace-
ments of  heavy  objects,  massive  tables,  etc.

If  the  telekinetic  phenomena  produced  by  Slade,  Home,  and
Eusapia  Paladino  are  carefully  studied,  it  will  be  found  that  they
run  parallel  with  materializations,  the  mediums  that  give  the  one
give  the  other  also ;  and  already  we  can  deduce  from  this  that  there
is  some  relation  between  these  two  modalities  of  strong  medium-
ship.

On  going  deeper  into  the  matter  we  find  in  all  three  cases  that
these  movements  are  produced  through  a  human  being  and  do  not
exceed  the  limits  of  average  human  muscular  power.  They  are
produced  easily  when  the  object  is  light,  with  more  difficulty
when  it  is  heavy,  and  are  not  produced  at  all  when  it  is  very  heavy.
To  say  that  the  force  that  displaces  objects  is  limited,  and  ap-
proximates to  human  muscular  power,  advances  the  enquiry  some-
what, for  if  a  transcendental  force  were  essentially  different  in  its
nature  from  known  mechanical  forces  there  would  seem  no  reason
that  a  weight  of  a  ton  should  not  be  raised  as  easily  as  a  weight  of
an  ounce.

With  Eusapia  there  are  all  the  gradations  between  movement
produced  by  a  materialized  hand  and  movement  produced  at  a
distance  without  the  hand  being  seen.  When  in  half-light  a  heavy
blow  is  heard  on  the  table  it  is  almost  impossible  not  to  think  it  a
blow  from  a  fist.  But  usually  the  fist  is  invisible,  and  in  the  same
seance  one  experiences  touches  without  being  able  to  see  anything.
And  when  a  water-bottle  is  taken,  water  poured  into  a  glass,  and
the  glass  carried  to  the  lips  of  the  sitters,  how  can  we  understand
these  movements  otherwise  than  as  performed  by  a  hand  ?

Let  us,  then,  advance  a  hypothesis — permissible  in  face  of  these
strange  facts — that  materialization  takes  place  in  two  phases:  a
first  phase  in  which  the  materialization  is  invisible  (paradoxical
as  that  seems),  but  accompanied  by  mechanical  action,  and  a
second  phase  with  visibility  and  mechanical  action.  Everything
is  then  coherent,  and  we  may  resume  the  comparison  between  the
projection  of  mechanical  energy  and  projection  of  luminous  energy
hinted  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter.

We  place  a  hand  before  a  mirror ;  its  image  appears.  We  place
a  hand  above  a  balance ;  if  the  scale  is  depressed  that  is  the  first
phase  of  materialization ;  mechanization,  not  yet  made  visible.  If
the  projection  of  the  hand  should  be  more  intense  the  hand  will
appear  to  sight,  at  first  unshapen  and  surrounded  by  draperies,

438

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

but  becoming  by  degrees  more  distinctively  a  hand  than  it  was  at
first.

We  shall  return  to  this  hypothesis  when  treating  of  materiali-
zations. But  whatever  hypothesis  may  be  advanced  to  account
for  them,  the  fact  of  movement  without  contact  is  undeniable,  and
it  would  be  puerile  to  deny  it  because  it  is  not  understood.

However,  although  the  fact  is  proven  as  far  as  we  are  con-
cerned, it  is  highly  desirable  that  a  thorough  study  of  the  facts
should  be  made  anew,  separating  the  phenomena  from  all  con-
siderations but  those  of  cold  mechanical  physics — a  delicate  task
in  view  of  the  mental  state  of  the  mediums.  Unfortunately  these
phenomena,  very  rare  when  intense,  are  exceedingly  undocile  to
deal  with.  A  medium  seems  necessary  and  results  vary  from  day
to  day.  Darkness,  or  at  least  deep  shadow,  is  usually  indispen-
sable.   These  conditions  make  experiment  enormously  difficult.

But  in  spite  of  these  difficulties,  the  excellent  experiments  made
by  Ochorowicz  with  Stanislawa  Tomczyk,  and  by  Mme.  Bisson
and  Von  Schrenck-Notzing  with  Marthe  Beraud,  and  by  Crawford
with  Miss  Goligher,  confirming  what  had  been  suspected  by
Crookes  with  Home  and  by  ourselves  with  Eusapia,  have  estab-
lished that  movement  without  contact — telekinesis — constitutes
the  first  stage  in  materialization.  This  is  a  fact  of  primary  im-
portance ;  Schrenck-Notzing  has  summed  up  the  evidence  that  can
be  adduced  in  support  of  this  proposition  in  an  excellent  book
that  has  just  appeared.1

In  that  work  theory  has  no  place — which  is  not  less  an
encomium  than  a  criticism — the  facts  are  set  forth  in  good  order,
and  so  well  marshalled  that  they  bring  conviction.

As  to  simple  telekinesis,  the  examples  already  given  are  suffi-
cient; Schrenck-Notzing  adds  his  own  personal  observations.

1.  Stanislawa  Tomczyk  gave  with  him  as  good  results  as  she
did  with  Ochorowicz.  The  experiments  took  place  at  his  own
house  and  he  was  assisted  by  Colonel  J.  Peter,  and  Drs.  Durig,
Specht,  France,  and  sometimes  other  men  of  science.  The  red
light  was  sufficient  to  allow  all  movements  by  the  medium  to  be
well  seen.  The  light  was  behind  her  and  her  hands  were  examined
with  a  lens.   Her  arms  were  bare.

Under  these  conditions  a  celluloid  ball  (like  a  billiard  ball)
was  moved  by  her  hands  being  brought  near  it,  a  letter-weighing

xPhysikalische  Phaenomene  des  Mediumismus,  Miinchen,  E.  Reinhardt,  1920.

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  439

scale  was  depressed,  indicating  a  pressure  of  50  grams ;  one  scale
of  a  pair  was  lowered  five  centimetres,  celluloid  balls  in  a  glass
were  moved  about,  and  a  teaspoon  in  a  glass  was  flung  out  of  the
glass  without  being  touched.  All  these  were  repeated  several
times.  The  hypothesis  of  fraud  is  absolutely  impossible,  for  the
whole  attention  of  the  observers  was  concentrated  on  the  hands,
which  remained  motionless  during  the  movement  of  the  objects.

2.  Eusapia  Paladino  gave  some  fine  instances  of  telekinesis.
At  Munich,  in  the  presence  of  Professor  Dessoir,  who  was  pro-
foundly sceptical,  when  no  contact  could  possibly  take  place  be-
tween Eusapia  and  the  curtain,  it  moved,  and  various  objects
placed  behind  it  moved  also.  Schrenck-Notzing  mentions  also
the  experiment  made  at  my  house  at  Carqueiranne,  where  a
billiard  ball  was  brought  on  to  the  table.  A  lamp  placed  behind
a  folding  screen  allowed  of  all  movements  by  the  medium  being
clearly  distinguished :  her  feet  were  controlled  by  Dr.  Beretta ;
Oliver  Lodge  and  I  controlled  the  right  side ;  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and
Schrenck  the  left  side.  In  this  fine  experiment  a  large  melon  was
transported  from  one  place  to  another;  a  musical  box  played;
and  a  decanter  full  of  water  was  brought  on  to  the  table.  Another
time,  still  at  Carqueiranne,  Eusapia  put  her  two  hands  on  Ochoro-
wicz's  shoulder,  and  the  table  rose  off  all  four  feet  about  twelve
inches  for  four  seconds.  Flournoy  describes  an  experiment  that
he  made  with  Schrenck  at  Munich,  Eusapia  being  the  medium,
and  says  that  an  invisible  force  maintained  the  table  in  the  air
and  caused  it  to  oscillate  without  its  being  touched  by  Eusapia's
hands  or  feet.

3.  Mme.  K.,  the  wife  of  a  painter,  and  a  non-professional
medium,  placed  her  hand  lightly  on  a  piano  weighing  thirteen
hundred  pounds;  the  piano  was  displaced  and  one  leg  rose  six
inches ;  Mme.  K.  not  touching  the  piano  with  her  feet  or  knees.
The  light  was  sufficient  to  see  clearly.  Mme.  K.  only  touched  the
lid  of  this  heavy  instrument,  the  lid  opened  and  shut  noisily.

4.  Willy  S.,  a  young  student  dentist,  aged  sixteen,  a  non-pro-
fessional medium,  gave  numerous  examples  of  telekinesis,  and
these,  as  in  the  case  of  Marthe  Beraud,  were  nearly  always  pro-
duced by  ectoplasms.

I  have  mentioned  these  cases  of  Schrenck-Notzing's  not  only
because  they  are  independent  affirmations  of  the  reality  of  the
phenomenon,  but  because  I  wished  to  specify,  as  Schrenck  has
done,  the  relation  between  telekinesis  and  ectoplasms.

440

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

As  early  as  1895,  in  the  course  of  my  experiments  with  Eusapia,
I  had  verified  that  simultaneously  with  telekinetic  movements  of
objects  there  appeared  barely  visible  and  half-formed  stumps,  like
adventitious  limbs,  so  to  say,  or  efflorescences,  for  which  I  pro-
posed the  name  of  ectoplasms,  a  name  now  universally  adopted.
In  numerous  cases  what  look  like  rigid  rods  have  been  seen  pro-
ceeding from  Eusapia's  body.  I  have  often  felt  on  touching  her
dress  a  resistant  and  mobile  but  formless  object,  while  her  hands
and  feet  were  being  held  unmistakably.  H.  Sidgwick  has  verified
the  same  thing,  as  also  Dessoir  and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge.  Never-
theless these  observers  were  extremely  sceptical,  almost  deter-
mined to  dispute  the  phenomena.  The  American  experimentalists,
perhaps  more  sceptical  still  than  Dessoir  and  Sidgwick,  say  that
on  three  occasions  they  have  seen  strange  protuberances  seeming
to  proceed  from  Eusapia's  body  (in  one  case  from  the  middle  of
her  back),  which  subsequently  were  reabsorbed  into  her  body.
These  ectoplasmic  pseudopods  were  screened  by  the  curtain ;
their  form  therefore  could  not  be  ascertained.  On  one  occasion  a
rod  seemingly  about  thirteen  inches  long  proceeded  from
Eusapia's  foot,  approached  the  table,  touched  its  top,  and  upset
the  objects  upon  it.  The  members  of  the  Psychological  Institute
of  Paris — Courtier,  d'Arsonval,  and  Yourjevitch — came  to  a
similar  conclusion.

Therefore  coincident  with  telekinesis  there  are  ectoplasms —
formation  of  rudimentary  limbs,  rods,  and  more  or  less  visible
material  forces  proceeding  from  the  body  of  the  medium.

The  excellent  observations  by  Ochorowicz  reinforce  these  facts.
He  was  able  to  see  and  to  photograph  a  kind  of  fluidic  thread  by
means  of  which  the  telekinetic  phenomena  connected  with  Stan-
islawa  were  effected.  These  forces,  which  he  calls  "rigid  rays,"
can  bend  and  displace  and  can  be  directed  (according  to  the  will
of  the  medium  ?)  to  produce  mechanical  effects.  This  fluidic  thread
cannot  always  be  seen  or  photographed;  but  quite  probably  is  in
a  first  phase  of  its  formation  when  it  can  move  objects,  though
itself  invisible.

These  rigid  rays  seem  to  proceed  from  the  hands  or  the  finger-
nails of  Stanislawa.  Close  to  her  hand  they  appear  like  a  bundle.
They  cannot  be  compared  to  an  ordinary  thread,  a  hair,  a  silk
fibre,  or  sewing  cotton,  for  along  them  there  are  swellings  and
nodes  like  the  waves  in  a  vibrating  cord.  Their  photographic
image  is  discontinuous.   This  last  is  a  phenomenon  of  the  greatest

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  441

importance ;  for  it  absolutely  excludes  the  absurd  theory  of  fraud
in  these  carefully  observed  cases.

To  move  a  round  object  such  as  a  celluloid  ball,  a  whole  number
of  filaments  surround  the  object  like  a  net,  as  if  one  single  thread
were  insufficient  for  the  purpose  (Schrenck-Notzing).

Schrenck-Notzing  gives  (pi.  V p.  547)  an  enlargement  of  the
photograph  of  this  fluidic  thread.  He  inclines  to  the  opinion  that
it  is  a  bundle  of  fibres,  while  Ochorowicz  thinks  that  the  fluidic
thread  acts  mechanically  by  a  kind  of  adhesion.  Schrenck's
observations  with  Willy  agree  with  those  we  made  with  Stanislawa
and  Eusapia.  Using  rigorous  control,  Willy  being  dressed  in  a
knitted  woollen  garment  provided  by  Schrenck-Notzing  and  laced
up  the  back,  the  phenomena  were  similar  to  those  produced  by
Eusapia  and  by  Marthe  Beraud.  All  the  sitters  felt  a  hand
which  displaced  objects  near  by,  while  Willy's  hands  were  care-
fully controlled.  This  hand  was  felt  before  it  was  seen.  It  had
all  the  appearance  of  a  living  hand.  It  seemed  cold  and  damp,
the  skin  rather  rough,  and  was  obviously  larger  than  Willy's
hand.  Sometimes  the  fingers  were  mere  stumps.  In  one  case
the  effect  of  sudden  light  was  tried ;  then  the  white  tissue  which
had  formed  round  the  medium's  neck  rapidly  disappeared  with  a
crawling  vermicular  movement  into  the  black  garment  with  which
he  was  clothed.  The  care  with  which  the  medium  had  been
searched  renders  the  notion  that  the  tissue  had  been  fraudulently
introduced  into  Schrenck's  house  quite  inadmissible,  and,  more-
over, this  ectoplasmic  tissue  had  the  singular  property  of  spon-
taneous movement.  ( !  !)  In  one  instance  they  were  able  to  get  a
fragment  of  this  tissue  into  a  tube;  it  moved  actively  for  some
time  and  then  suddenly  disappeared  (Am  10  jamiar,  1920,  hatte
Kap.  K.  einen  Teil  der  Substanz  bereits  in  einem  Rbhrchen  aufge-
fangen.  Dasselbe  bezvegte  sich  itmerhalb  des  Glases  lebhaft  und
verschivand  blitzartig  schnell,  als  der  Beobachter  die  Rohre  zu
schliessen  versuchte).

The  experiments  of  Crawford  show  the  close  relation  between
telekinesis  and  ectoplasms  better  than  anything  hitherto  recorded.
All  his  experiments  were  made  with  Miss  Kathleen  Goligher,  a
young  lady  twenty-one  years  of  age,  non-professional.  The  light
was  from  a  gas-jet  covered  with  red  paper,  and  was  sufficient
for  all  movements  to  be  seen.

At  the  beginning  of  the  seances  raps  were  heard,  light  at  first,
then  like  hammer-blows,  sometimes  rhythmic.   In  some  cases  the

442

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

table  was  raised  forty  inches  above  the  floor  and,  without  being
touched  by  anything,  swayed  about  in  the  air.

The  new  feature  in  Crawford's  experiments  was  that  he  placed
his  medium  on  a  weighing  machine  and  observed  the  alterations  in
weight  during  levitation.  The  weight  of  the  medium  and  chair
before  the  levitation  was  136.7  pounds.  During  levitation  the
weight  increased  by  3.05  pounds,  the  weight  of  the  table  raised
being  2.64  pounds.  With  other  and  heavier  tables  he  obtained
similar  results ;  the  weight  of  the  medium  and  chair  was  increased
by  the  weight  of  the  table.

"Even-thing  takes  place,"  said  Crawford,  "as  if  there  were  a
mechanical  link"  (invisible?)  "between  the  medium  and  the
table."  It  is  impossible  not  to  connect  these  important  observa-
tions with  those  verified  in  connection  with  Home,  Eusapia,  and
Stanislawa  Tomczyk.

The  substance  that  produces  these  telekinetic  movements  is  a
kind  of  lever,  cantilever,  or  rod  which  emerges  from  the  body  of
the  medium  and  is  reabsorbed  into  it  (see  diagrams,  p.  430).  It
can  bend,  turn,  and  direct  itself,  but  cannot  act  at  a  greater  dis-
tance than  about  a  yard  and  a  half.  It  can  change  its  texture,
becoming  hard  enough  to  give  strong  blows,  and  can  lay  hold  of
objects.  Its  dimensions  are  variable.  It  can  pass  through  gar-
ments and  woven  materials  if  they  are  close  to  the  body,  but
cloths,  paper,  and  woven  materials  at  a  certain  distance  from  the
body  prevent  the  action  of  the  force.  Its  end  can  adhere  to  objects
to  be  lifted  as  though  sticking  to  them.  The  composition  of  the
ectoplasm  could  not  be  determined,  and  although  it  certainly  pro-
ceeds from  the  body  of  the  medium,  no  pressure  is  felt  and  no
reaction  is  perceived.

The  importance  of  these  extraordinary  facts  cannot  be  exag-
gerated. They  have  been  observed  methodically  and  measured  in
a  rigorously  scientific  temper.  The  reality  of  ectoplasms,  in
accordance  with  the  phenomena  presented  by  Eusapia,  Marthe
Beraud,  and  Stanislawa  Tomczyk,  has  been  rigorously  proved  by
these  experiments  of  Crawford's.

He  gives  in  his  last  work — Psychic  Structures  at  the  Goligher
Circle  (Watkins,  London,  1921) — posthumously  published,  some
excellent  photographs,  following  up  his  earlier  work.1

'See  also  Schrenck-Notzing's  remarks  on  this,  Das  Materialisations  probleme
(Psych.  Studien,  May,  1921).

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  443

The  theory  that  ectoplasms  cause  telekinesis  is  probably  correct,
but  in  any  case,  for  the  phenomena  themselves,  the  proof  is
irrefutable  and  ought  to  carry  conviction.

The  results  given  by  the  different  mediums  are  concordant ;
each  has  special  personal  modes,  but  the  same  general  scientific
inference  is  to  be  drawn  from  the  observations  as  a  whole.

It  seems  fairly  well  established  today  that  movements  without
contact  must  be  referred  to  fluidic  projections,  at  first  invisible,
that  emerge  from  the  body  of  the  medium.  The  ectoplasms
emanating  from  Marthe,  Eusapia,  Willy,  Stanislawa,  and  Kathleen
Goligher  are  doubtless  analogous  to  the  phantoms  that  came  from
Florence  Cook,  Home,  Eglinton,  and  Mme.  d'Esperance.  Tele-
kinesis is  the  first  phase  of  materialisation.

Scientific  investigation  should  now  be  concentrated  upon  investi-
gation of  this  strange  and  subtle  substance  which  is  capable  of
purposeful  movements  and  such  extraordinary  changes.  It  is  a
whole  new  world,  still  profoundly  mysterious,  and  this  world  is
opened  up  by  metapsychic  science  to  physiology  and  physics.

We  shall  enter  into  some  further  detail  when  discussing  ecto-
plasmic  forms.

(c)  Of  Noises  and  Raps

Displacements  of  objects  do  not  usually  show  any  intelligence
at  work.  It  would  seem  that  the  whole  effort  of  the  force  in
action  is  expended  in  producing  mechanical  effects,  as  strong  and
astonishing  as  may  be  possible.  But  it  is  quite  otherwise  with  the
slight  noises  produced  in  table  or  in  other  objects  near  at  hand.
These  noises  were  first  heard  by  the  Fox  sisters,  and  were  the
point  of  departure  for  modern  metapsychic  science.  These  noises,
produced  by  intelligent  forces,  have  received  the  name  of  "raps."

This  phenomenon,  at  once  simple  and  important,  occurs  when
persons  are  sitting  round  a  table  with  a  powerful  medium.  There
are  shocks  in  the  wood  of  the  table,  manifest  by  knocks,  some-
times faint,  but  sometimes  loud  enough  to  be  heard  at  consider-
able distances.

To  avoid  admitting  the  telekinetic  power  that  produces  raps,
a  number  of  ridiculous  hypotheses  have  been  advanced,  of  which
nothing  now  remains.  M.  SchifT  explained  the  raps  by  a  move-
ment of  a  lateral  muscle  attached  to  the  fibula,  possible  in  his  own
absolutely  exceptional  case.    It  would  be  senseless  to  think  this

444

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

general.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  (P.  S.  P.  R.,  xiii,  145)  says  that  abnor-
mal crackings  can  be  produced  by  the  knee-joint.  This  also  is  a
most  rare  exception.

It  is,  of  course,  evident  that  if  the  medium  can  touch  the  table
with  head,  hands,  or  feet,  he  can  get  all  the  raps  he  wants.  But  it
is  impossible  to  be  certain  that  the  medium  is  motionless  when
he  is  not  touching  the  table!

The  raps  are  produced  on  contact,  but  in  certain  rare  cases
they  are  produced  without  contact,  and  this  is  a  most  essential
and  basic  phenomenon  that  should  be  studied  with  more  care  than
spiritualists,  blinded  by  their  wish  for  miraculous  and  fantastic
phenomena,  have  given  to  it.  The  phenomenon  of  raps,  when
unquestionable,  is  the  signal  proof  that  there  are  forces  acting
mechanically  on  things,  independently  of  human  muscular  con-
tractions. For  my  own  part  I  consider  that  this  phenomenon,  in
spite  of  its  simplicity,  or  rather  because  of  its  simplicity,  is  the
most  striking  phenomenon  of  metapsychics.

Most  frequently,  it  is  true,  the  raps  are  produced  when  the
medium  is  touching  the  table  and  they  may  then  be  attributed  to
various  causes,  but  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  at  the  moment
of  hearing  a  rap  the  table  vibrates,  and  a  shock  in  the  wood  can  be
distinctly  felt.  If  the  ear  be  placed  to  the  table  and  the  sitters  are
silent,  faint  repeated  raps  can  be  heard  like  a  drumming.  In
some  cases  they  become  rhythmic,  like  a  march  or  other  music,
though  the  medium's  hand  is  quite  still  and  sometimes  does  not
touch  the  table  at  all.

J.  Maxwell  was  fortunate  enough  to  be  able  to  observe  a
medium  who  gave  raps  in  full  light,  and  he  studied  her  very
carefully.  "I  had  the  raps  so  often  in  strong  light  that  I
doubted  whether  darkness  favours  their  production  as  much  as  it
does  other  phenomena.  Contact  between  the  hands  and  the  table
is  not  necessary  in  order  to  obtain  raps.  I  have  obtained  them
very  easily  without  contact.  When  they  have  come  with  contact,
one  of  the  most  certain  ways  of  getting  them  without  contact  is  to
keep  the  hands  on  the  table  for  a  while,  and  then  to  raise  them
very  slowly  palms  downward."

Maxwell  obtained  raps  in  restaurants  and  in  railway  refresh-
ment rooms  loud  enough  to  attract  public  attention.  "In  one
house,  celebrated  by  reason  of  the  man  of  genius  who  lived  in  it,
the  raps  aroused  the  suspicions  of  the  caretaker.  The  tonality  of
the  raps  is  very  variable ;  they  may  resemble  the  noise  made  by  a

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  445

mouse,  by  sawing  wood,  by  rapping  on  wood  with  the  finger-
nails, or  scratching  on  woven  stuffs."  Each  of  the  personalities
who  claim  to  intervene  has  his  own  special  mode  of  rapping.

These  raps  cannot  be  due  to  crepitation  of  the  wood  in  process
of  drying,  for  they  are  intelligent.  The  singular  and  marvellous
thing  is  that  a  table  untouched  by  any  person  emits  sonorous
vibrations  that  are  not  due  to  chance  but  mean  something.  A
kind  of  conversation  can  be  kept  up  by  this  means.  If  the  alphabet
is  repeated,  a  rap  will  be  given  at  certain  letters  and  the  sequence
of  such  letters  will  be  found  to  make  a  word  having  a  definite
meaning.  A  phrase  is  thus  built  up.  No  matter,  for  the  moment,
what  is  said;  it  is  enough  to  verify  (1)  that  the  raps  are  not  due
to  muscular  contractions  or  any  other  movement  of  the  medium,
since  the  medium  is  perfectly  still,  or  is  not  touching  the  table  at
all;  (2)  that  the  raps  proceed  from  an  intelligence  that  has  some-
thing to  say.

Mr.  W.  J.  Crawford  thus  expresses  himself  on  the  subject  of
the  raps  obtained  by  Miss  Kathleen  Goligher  (Experiments  in
Psychical  Science,  Watkins,  1919).  "As  soon  as  the  seance  be-
gins we  hear  noises — rap,  rap,  rap — on  the  floor  near  the  me-
dium. They  become  louder  and  louder,  on  the  table,  on  the  chairs
of  the  sitters.  Sometimes  they  are  like  hammer-blows,  so  loud
that  they  can  be  heard  outside,  and  they  shake  the  floor  and  the
chairs.  They  can  imitate  different  sounds — the  step  of  a  man,  the
trot  of  a  horse,  the  rubbing  of  a  match,  or  the  bouncing  of  a
ball."

The  facts  noted  by  Hyslop  (Am.  S.  P.  R.  Journal,  xiv,  252-257,
1920)  are  the  more  likely  to  carry  conviction  in  that  he  is  not  to
be  suspected  of  tenderness  in  handling  objective  metapsychics.  Dr.
Crcery  corroborates  the  facts.  An  old,  ignorant,  and  blind  negro
obtained  strong  raps  by  placing  his  hand  without  the  slightest
movement  on  the  table,  on  a  violin,  or  the  door.  These  occurred
also  when  his  hands  were  not  in  contact  with  anything  and  in
full  light.  The  raps  could  be  heard  five  or  six  feet  away.  Hyslop
says:  "We  had  fair  evidence  for  the  existence  of  raps  under
unusual  circumstances."  Mr.  Clawson  had  even  better  results
with  the  same  man.

The  reality  of  these  raps  is  of  primary  importance,  and  this
phenomenon  carries  the  implication  of  the  whole  of  metapsychics.
If  it  is  established  that  mechanical  vibrations  can  be  produced  in
matter,  at  a  distance  and  without  contact,  and  that  these  vibrations

446

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

are  intelligent,  we  have  the  truly  far-reaching  fact  that  there  are
in  the  universe  human  or  non-human  intelligences  that  can  act
directly  on  matter.  For  this  reason,  I  repeat,  it  is  a  mistake  not
to  study  these  rappings  more  closely;  the  rather  that  the
phenomenon  is  not  an  exceptional  one.  No  doubt  very  powerful
mediums  are  required  to  obtain,  without  contact,  loud  knocks  that
convey  a  precise  meaning,  but  even  with  relatively  weak  and
untrained  mediums  raps  can  be  heard.  If  the  ear  be  placed  to  the
table  crepitations  are  perceptible,  rhythmic  or  not  rhythmic,  which
have  no  connected  sense,  i.e.,  not  conveying  coherent  phrases,
nor  even  words  when  the  alphabet  is  repeated,  but  quite  sufficient
to  establish  the  fact  of  mechanical  vibrations  in  the  wood.  I  have
obtained  these  vibrations  with  many  different  mediums — with  my
friend  G.  F.,  with  Stella,  with  A.,  and  with  L.  With  Eusapia,
the  raps  were  not  very  frequent,  but  occasionally  (though  rarely),
they  were  strong  enough  to  shake  the  table.  With  A.  they  oc-
curred not  only  on  the  table  but  on  any  object  she  might  be  hold-
ing. It  is  true  that  these  were  mostly  incoherent — an  irregular
and  disordered  drumming,  preventing  any  connected  conversa-
tion. To  obtain  coherent  answers  an  exceptionally  powerful
medium  is  required.

With  weak  mediums  the  phenomena  are  sometimes  limited  to
such  knocks,  and  if  the  connection  with  the  medium  is  ignored,
one  may  be  tempted  to  fancy  the  house  haunted.  Mr.  Hyalmer
Wijk,  of  Gothenburg  (Sweden),  has  made  a  careful  study  of  a
case  of  this  kind.  Mme.  N.  Karin,  a  hysterical  patient,  but  well
educated,  heard  resounding  knockings  in  the  house  where  she  was
living,  for  nearly  three  months ;  Dr.  Briere  and  Mr.  Wijk  heard
them  also.  Then  they  ceased  entirely  (A.  S.  P.,  1905,  xv,
517-551).  J.  Hyslop,  experimenting  with  Anna  Burton,1  heard
raps  and  is  inclined  to  think  them  supernormal  because  they  were
produced  in  very  varied  ways  and  in  very  different  places,  some-
times spontaneously,  sometimes  on  demand  by  the  experimenters.
In  one  case  they  could  be  heard  at  a  distance  of  two  yards,  while
Miss  Burton  made  no  movement  either  with  hands  or  feet.  The
only  possible  hypothesis  alternative  to  telekinetic  raps  is  the
verv  unlikely  one  of  collective  sensorial  illusion  of  all  the  sitters
(Journal,  S.  P.  R.,  xv,  1912,  190).

Selene  de  C.  Verrall,  The  case  of  Anna  Burton,  Journ.  S.  P.  R.,  xv,
1912,  141.

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  447

The  following  occurrence  is  very  extraordinary  and  does  not
fall  within  the  category  of  other  known  facts,  so  that,  standing
alone,  some  uncertainty  is  permissible.  Mrs.  Davies  received  a
letter  from  India  which  she  was  directed  to  transmit  to  Mrs.  W.
The  letter  was  placed  on  the  mantelpiece.  Some  time  after  Mrs.
Davies  heard  clear  and  loud  raps  from  the  chimney-piece.  She
then  placed  the  letter  on  another  article  of  furniture.  The  raps
followed  the  letter.  Mrs.  Davies's  father  came  and  verified  this,
soon  after  deciding  that  the  raps  came  from  the  letter  or  from  a
point  so  near  that  they  seemed  to  come  from  it.  This  letter
announced  the  death  of  Mrs.  W.'s  husband  (P.  S\  P.  R.,  1907,
xvii,  726).

Sir  William  Barrett  adduces  a  case  of  rapping1  which  carries
complete  conviction  to  any  careful  reader.

Florrie  C,  the  ten-year-old  daughter  of  a  distinguished  Irish
barrister,  having  on  different  occasions  produced  raps,  Sir  William
tried  experiments  with  her.  In  some  instances  the  sounds  and
vibrations  were  produced  from  a  distance  in  tables  remote  from
the  child.  After  several  weeks  of  investigation  Sir  William  con-
cluded that  all  notions  of  fraud,  illusion,  or  defective  observation
must  be  given  up.  The  raps  were  intelligent,  but  the  intelligence
was  childish.  Florrie  also  displayed  strong  telekinesis ;  a  dining-
room  table  to  seat  twelve  persons  was  raised  to  a  considerable
height,  one  leg  only  remaining  on  the  floor.

Under  equally  good  conditions  with  Miss  L.,  Barrett  had  raps
and  extensive  movements  of  the  table  when  no  one  was  touching
it.  One  day  the  table  pursued  him,  as  it  were,  and  imprisoned
him  in  his  chair  without  being  touched  at  all.  These  phenomena
were  fully  reproduced  in  his  own  house.

The  opinion  of  F.  W.  H.  Myers  carries  great  weight.  This  is
what  he  says  on  the  subject:

"Spiritualists  affirm  that  this  is  a  very  common  phenomenon.
I  can  only  say  that  having  taken  part  in  some  hundreds  of  seances,
and  prepared  to  note  raps,  I  have  often  heard  them  with  paid
mediums.  Experimenting  with  friends  I  have  often  heard  crepita-
tions in  the  table;  but  only  with  four  or  five  non-professional
mediums,  worthy  of  full  confidence,  have  I  heard  unquestionable
raps  answering  questions  sufficiently  well  to  bring  to  me  the  con-
viction that  they  were  produced  by  some  unknown  power"
{Human  Personality,  ii,  454).

1On  the  Threshold  of  the  Unseen,  third  edition,  Kegan  Paul,  1920.

448

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

I  can  entirely  confirm  Myers's  opinion.  Unintelligent  crepita-
tions are  frequent ;  intelligent  rappings  are  very  rare ;  but  the  point
is  to  know  that  the  phenomenon,  though  exceptional,  is  real ;  and
this  cannot  be  doubted.

It  seems  to  me  obvious  that  progress  in  metapsychic  science  is
not  to  be  sought  in  the  pursuit  of  extraordinary  phenomena  that
appeal  to  the  imagination,  but  in  the  more  modest  and  less  per-
plexing study  of  vibrations,  intelligent  or  not,  in  a  table  which  is
hardly  touched,  or,  better  still,  not  touched  at  all,  by  the  medium.

It  would  suffice  to  attach  to  the  board  a  moderately  sensitive
microphone  with  an  arrangement  for  a  graphic  record.  But
unfortunately  experimenters,  and  mediums  more  especially,  have
no  inclination  for  these  arduous  and  technical  experiments.
Spiritualists  who  in  their  frequent  seances  have  often  seen  very
striking  phenomena  are  more  concerned  to  converse  with  the
dead  in  rhetorical  and  sterile  phrases  than  to  register  the  vibra-
tions of  a  board  under  conditions  of  unquestionable  precision.

(d)  On  Direct  Writing

Among  the  different  kinds  of  movements  of  objects  without
contact  a  separate  place  must  be  given  to  a  group  of  phenomena
so  rare  that  they  may  be  considered  doubtful.  I  refer  to  direct
writing.  This  has  no  relation  to  automatic  writing.  In  this
latter  the  medium  writes  unconsciously,  but  as  his  hand  holds  the
pen  or  pencil  it  is  unnecessary  to  suppose  the  intervention  of  an
extraneous  and  superhuman  power,  since  he  writes  with  the
muscles  of  the  hand  like  any  other  person.

But  in  "direct  writing"  a  small  piece  of  pencil  is  placed  on  a
slate,  and  after  a  few  minutes  the  slate,  blank  when  placed  in  a
box  or  otherwise  closed  up,  is  found  to  have  writing  upon  it;
e.g.,  an  answer  to  a  question.  Nevertheless,  the  hands  of  the
medium  have  been  in  sight,  and  there  was  no  darkness  except  in
the  box  containing  the  slate  and  the  pencil.

The  striking  case  of  direct  writing  observed  by  Sir  William
Crookes  with  Home  has  already  been  quoted ;  but  cases  of  spon-
taneous movements  of  the  pencil  are  most  extremely  rare.  Home's
case  is  nearly  unique.  The  experiment  is  usually  performed  in
quite  another  way,  as  was  done  by  Slade  and  Eglinton.  In  their
case  a  small  fragment  of  chalk  or  slate-pencil  was  placed  between
two  slates  locked  together,  or  on  a  slate  shut  in  between  two  small

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  449

boards.  The  whole  apparatus  was  held  in  the  hand  and  placed
under  the  table.  A  scratching  noise  was  heard,  and  on  with-
drawing the  box  it  was  verified  that  the  bit  of  pencil  was  worn  and
that  there  was  writing  on  the  slate.

If  the  slate  has  not  been  lost  to  sight  and  the  observer  is  skilful
enough  to  make  legerdemain  impossible,  the  experiment  is  deci-
sive; but  detestable  trickery  is  possible.

In  a  very  interesting  memorandum,  Mr.  Davey  gives  the  story
of  a  seance  in  which  he  deliberately  simulated  direct  writing  on  a
slate  without  warning  the  sitters  of  his  intention  to  do  this  trick.
The  sitters  in  all  simplicity  signed  a  declaration  attesting  the
authenticity  of  the  phenomenon.  Mr.  Davey  had  no  difficulty  in
proving  want  of  vigilance  and  defective  observation  at  several
moments  during  the  course  of  the  proceedings.

It  cannot  be  affirmed  that  all  the  cases  of  direct  writing  pre-
sented by  Slade  and  Eglinton  were  fraudulent,  but  Mr.  Davey's
experiment  warrants  great  reserve  in  accepting  any,  and  the
tricks  of  American  conjurers  described  in  detail  by  Mr.  David
Abbott  justify  the  utmost  distrust  of  alleged  slate-writing.1

If  the  medium  (usually  a  paid  medium)  is  allowed  to  use  his
own  slates,  however  blank  they  may  seem,  or  if  he  is  allowed  to
hold  or  even  to  touch  those  that  have  been  brought,  nothing  can
be  guaranteed,  for  anything  is  possible  by  clever  substitution.  It
is  very  difficult  to  certify  absolutely  and  incontrovertibly  that  the
medium  has  not  touched  the  slates,  for  a  single  moment  of  inat-
tention (and  who  can  be  certain  that  attention  has  not  been  relaxed
for  a  moment?)  suffices  for  substitutions  to  be  made.  As  Mr.
Abbott  remarks,  if  the  experimenter  brings  his  own  slate  and  the
putative  medium  does  not  touch  it  at  all,  no  trickery  is  possible.
But  how  often  has  this  been  done  ?

Stainton  Moses's  intense  mediumistic  power  was  occasionally
manifested  by  direct  writing.2  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Speer,  who  assisted
Stainton  Moses  in  most  of  his  experiments,  placed  paper  and
pencil  in  a  certain  room,  and  locked  the  door,  Stainton  Moses
being  in  trance  in  a  different  storey  of  the  house.  At  the  end  of
half  an  hour  they  came  back  to  the  locked  room  and  found  writing
on  the  paper.

spirit  Slate-writing  and  Billet  tests,  Am.  P.  S.  P.  R.,  i,  1907,  148-160,
244-254,  413-427,  513-522.

aF.  Myers,  The  Experiences  of  Stainton  Moses,  P.  S.  P.  R.,  1894,  ix,  265-
275.

450

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

In  another  experiment  (loc.  ext.,  347)  some  letters  were  written
on  a  sheet  of  white  paper  placed  in  the  table  (in  a  drawer?

— Transl.).  On  that  day  the  guide  of  Stainton  Moses,  irritated  at
a  proposal  to  admit  some  other  person  to*  the  restricted  circle  of
sitters,  struck  blows  of  such  power,  says  Stainton  Moses,  that
"we  had  the  uncomfortable  feeling  that  he  could  break  our  heads
if  he  wished."  During  the  following  days  several  lines  of  writing
were  found  on  blank  paper  put  under  the  table  while  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Speer  held  the  hands  of  Stainton  Moses  (pp.  302,  303,  304).

Mr.  Charlton  Speer  sums  up  the  various  experiences  as  fol-
lows :  "We  have  often  had  direct  writing,  sometimes  on  a  sheet
of  paper  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  table  at  equal  distance  from
all  the  sitters :  one  of  us  sometimes  wrote  his  name  on  a  sheet  of
blank  paper  previously  marked,  and  we  usually  found  at  the  end
of  a  seance  that  a  message  had  been  written.  Sometimes  we
placed  a  pencil  near  the  paper,  sometimes  some  black-lead;  in
either  case  the  results  were  the  same.  Usually  the  message  was
an  answer  to  questions ;  but  sometimes  there  were  short  communi-
cations independent  of  the  questions,  or  a  few  words  of
sympathy."

The  spiritualist  publications  mention  many  cases  of  direct
writing,  but  in  view  of  the  ease  with  which  frauds  can  be  perpe-
trated, some  doubts  may  be  felt,  especially  in  the  case  of  pro-
fessional mediums.1

M.  de  Guldenstubbe,  with  his  sister  as  medium,  on  August  13,
1856,  put  blank  paper  and  pencil  in  a  box,  and,  after  half  an  hour,
he  verified  that  letters  were  written  on  the  paper.  He  repeated
this  experiment  more  than  ten  times.  Later  on,  he  was  able  to  see
the  letters  being  formed  on  the  paper  in  the  box  when  its  lid  was
left  open.  The  Count  d'Ourche,  who  was  present  at  some  of  these
experiments,  confirms  them.

General  de  Brewern  and  the  Marquis  de  Planty  witnessed  the
same  phenomenon  of  direct  writing  on  new  packets  of  note-paper,
sealed  up  by  the  stationer  who  sold  them.

The  written  words  were  in  Greek,  signed  by  Plato;  in  Latin,

*I  mention  them,  however,  with  all  proper  reservations.  Delanne,  Recherches
sur  la  midianimite,  Paris,  Libr.  des  sciences  psychiques,  1902.  Aksakoff,
Animisme  et  spiritisme,  p.  547.  P-  438-455-  Stainton  Moses  (M.  A.  Oxon),
Psychography.  Guldenstubbe,  La  realite  des  esprits  et  le  phenomene  mer-
veilleux  de  leur  ecriture  directe.

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  451

signed  by  Cicero.  We  are  not  to  imagine  that  Plato  and  Cicero
had  come ;  the  interest  of  the  experiment  does  not  consist  in  that,
but  in  the  production  of  direct  writing.  M.  Guldenstubbe  s  sister,
who  was  the  medium,  in  any  case  knew  neither  Latin  nor  Greek.
I  mention  these  cases  only  to  put  them  on  record.

I  made  with  Eusapia  one  experiment,  which  was  very  clear,  but
which  I  could  never  succeed  in  repeating.  At  Ribaud  Island  one
evening,  in  presence  of  Ochorowicz,  F.  Myers,  and  Sir  Oliver
Lodge,  Eusapia  gave  us  the  following  phenomenon.  I  think  no
one  will  question  the  competence  of  the  observers:

Eusapia  took  my  right  hand  and  grasped  the  first  finger  so
that  it  projected  considerably  beyond  her  small  hand.  She  then
moved  my  finger  over  some  white  paper  as  if  writing  and  the
trace  of  my  finger  appeared  in  blue  chalk.  Eusapia  held  a  blue
crayon  in  her  left  hand  raised  high  in  air.  The  phenomenon  took
place  by  the  light  of  a  candle  placed  close  to  the  paper.  I  can
still  see,  as  it  were,  Myers  bending  over  the  paper  with  his  eye-
glass and  closely  following  all  that  took  place.  The  same  thing
occurred  four  or  five  times,  the  writing  being  on  white  envelopes.
I  am  absolutely  sure  that  Eusapia's  hand  did  not  touch  the  paper,
but  only  my  first  finger,  on  which  there  was  not  the  smallest  trace
of  blue.  The  experiment  went  on  for  about  ten  minutes  by  the
light  of  the  candle,  the  writing  being  produced  both  on  paper  and
on  our  white  shirt-fronts.  I  have  not  the  very  slightest  doubt  of
the  reality  of  the  phenomenon:  (1)  The  paper  was  blank;  (2)
Eusapia  could  not  have  touched  it ;  (3)  the  blue  marks  were  made
under  my  very  eyes ;  (4)  this  took  place  within  sixteen  inches  of  a
lighted  candle;  and  (5)  Myers,  Ochorowicz,  and  Lodge  were
joint  observers.

A.  de  Rochas  has  testified  to  an  analogous  fact  with  Eusapia,
confirmed  to  me  orally  by  A.  de  Gramont  {U  Exteriorization  de  la
Motricite,  pp.  140  and  162).

In  many  experiments  on  direct  writing,  phenomena  of  cryptes-
thesia  take  place  along  with  the  writing  itself,  as  in  the  case  of
Guldenstubbe.  But  the  distinction  between  the  two  must  be  ob-
served even  though  both  are  associated  in  the  fact.

Dr.  Paul  Gibier,  an  experienced  physiologist  and  a  careful
observer,  testifies :

"We  have  seen  more  than  a  hundred  times  letters,  drawings,
lines,  and  even  whole  phrases  produced  by  a  slight  touch  on
slates  held  by  Slade,  and  even  between  two  slates  with  which  he

452

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

had  no  contact.  We  had  ourselves  bought  these  slates  in  a  shop
in  Paris  and  marked  them  with  our  signature.  When  the  writ-
ing was  produced  on  one  slate  only,  this  was  usually  done  under
that  corner  of  the  table  at  which  we  happened  to  be.  We  kept
both  the  slate  and  Slade's  fingers  well  in  view;  we  ourselves
placed  the  pencil  on  the  slate,  but  we  were  never  able  to  get  a
sight  of  the  moving  pencil.  The  slate  oscillated  slightly  as  if  by
the  pressure  of  the  invisible  writer"  (Le  Spiritismc,  Paris,  Doin,
1887).

The  experiment  that  Dr.  Gibier  regards  as  perhaps  the  best  is
the  following:

"I  had  brought  several  slates,  among  others  two  screwed  to-
gether, tied  with  string,  sealed,  and  wrapped  in  paper  ...  I
proposed  that  I  should  get  an  answer  on  two  new  slates  that  I
had  brought  in  a  napkin.  I  received  permission,  after  having  put
the  traditional  little  pointer  between  the  two,  to  sit  on  my  slates.
Having  then  placed  them  on  my  chair  I  sat  down  and  did  not
let  go  of  the  slates  till  the  whole  weight  of  my  body  bore  on
them.  I  then  put  my  hands  on  the  table  along  with  Slade's  hands,
and  I  felt  and  heard  very  clearly  that  writing  was  taking  place
on  the  slates  with  which  I  was  in  contact.  When  this  ended  I
myself  withdrew  my  two  slates,  and  read  the  following  words,
'Slates  are  difficult  to  influence;  we  will  do  what  we  can/  The
writing  was  bad,  but  it  was  writing,  and  legible  writing.  Slade
had  not  touched  these  slates."

M.  Moutonnier  has  mentioned  a  writing  given  him  by  Miss
Bangs  of  Chicago,  which  is  manifestly  fraudulent.

Elliot  Cowes  and  E.  Coleman,  experimenting  with  Mrs.
Francis  of  San  Francisco  as  medium,  saw  the  telekinetic  move-
ment  of  the  pencil  on  the  slate.  In  certain  cases  the  slate  was
partially  under  the  table  and  partially  open  to  sight;  in  other
cases,  it  was  not  put  under  the  table  but  only  covered  with  a
handkerchief,  and  a  whole  sentence  was  written  under  these  con-
ditions. It  should  be  noted  that  Mr.  Emmet  Coleman  is  well
acquainted  with  legerdemain.

G.  Encausse  says  that  in  a  seance  given  by  the  magnetizer
Robert,  he  has  seen  in  full  light  and  before  twenty  persons  a  girl
of  seventeen  cause  letters  to  appear  on  sheets  of  paper — verses
with  the  signature  of  P.  Corneille.  It  seems  that  on  microscopic
examination,  the  writing  was  seen  to  be  formed  by  globules  of
blood.    This  is,  therefore,  not  direct  writing  in  the  usual  sense

MOVEMENTS  OF  OBJECTS— TELEKINESIS  453

of  the  words.  P.  Gibier  was  present  at  these  experiments,  but  I
am  not  aware  that  he  has  said  anything  about  them.  The  evidence
of  Dr.  Encausse  can  only  be  accepted  with  great  reserve.  Why
has  this  experiment  not  been  repeated  ?

Dr.  Mysz  has  had  examples  of  direct  writing  with  an  ignorant
little  peasant  girl  of  fourteen,  who  hardly  knew  how  to  write.  He
describes  this  experiment  as  follows — it  seems  to  me  very
defective :

A  wooden  box  about  twelve  inches  wide,  open  on  one  side  only,
had  this  side  closed  by  a  conical  bag  of  black  silk  ending  in  a
point.  Into  a  small  hole  in  this  point  a  pencil  was  introduced  so
as  to  leave  only  the  end  of  the  pencil  outside.  The  child  only
placed  her  hands  on  the  outside  of  the  box,  and  a  few  minutes
later  the  bag  swelled  out  and  the  pencil  began  to  write.  There
is  no  need  to  say  more ;  it  counts  for  nothing.

Dr.  Nichols  obtained  at  his  own  house  good  proofs  of  direct
writing  with  the  medium  Eglinton.  He  put  a  marked  sheet  of
paper  in  a  locked  box  between  two  slates,  in  full  light,  and  writ-
ing was  produced  while  he  held  the  box.  This  was  one  of  Eglin-
ton's  usual  phenomena.

I  made  the  following  experiment  with  Eglinton  a  long  time
ago,  so  that  the  details  are  not  clear  in  my  memory,  and  I  men-
tion it,  though  not  attaching  any  importance  to  it.  I  drew  a
design  on  the  slate  so  that  Eglinton  could  not  see  the  drawing.
The  slate  was  reversed  and  a  small  piece  of  chalk  placed  on  it.  I
took  the  slate  in  my  hand,  and  without  letting  it  go  held  it  under
the  table,  Eglinton  holding  the  other  end  of  the  slate.  After  two
or  three  minutes  a  curious  facsimile  of  my  sketch  was  reproduced,
but  I  think  that  a  skilful  illusionist  could  have  done  as  much.

Eglinton  gave  a  celebrated  seance  with  Mr.  Gladstone  in  full
light  with  very  positive  results.

But  all  these  slate-writings  are  open  to  suspicion;  it  is  a  form
of  metapsychism  very  difficult  to  control.

In  conclusion,  phenomena  of  direct  writing  are  very  rare.
Some,  those  by  Home  and  Eusapia,  seem  authentic;  but  there
has  been  so  much  trickery  and  illusion  that  direct  writing  must  be
considered  still  very  uncertain.

In  any  case,  whether  it  is  true  or  not,  it  does  not  affect  the
reality  of  telekinesis  and  rapping.

CHAPTER  III

Ectoplasms  (Materializations)

(a)  On  Fraud  in  Ectoplasmic  Experiments

In  metapsychic  experiments  the  possibility  of  fraud  must
never  be  lost  sight  of.  Other  sciences  do  not  suffer  from  this
evil;  they  evolve  peaceably,  having  only  material  difficulties  to
face,  whereas  scientists  who  experiment  with  mediums  are  always
liable  to  be  basely  deceived.  This  makes  their  task  one  of  great
difficulty,  demanding  careful  and  vigilant  attention.

The  difficulties  that  confront  research  into  objective  metapsy-
chics  and  subjective  metapsychics  are  not  of  the  same  kind.  We
have  already  noted  what  precautions  must  be  taken  against  the
trickeries,  whether  conscious  or  unconscious,  that  render  the
study  of  cryptesthesia  so  complex — errors  of  memory,  defects
in  testimony,  and  paramnesia.  We  have  shown  the  risk  that  the
experimenter  himself,  in  spite  of  all  good  faith,  may  involuntarily
assist  the  medium.  When  studying  objective  metapsychics  the
precautions  to  be  taken  are  different,  though  they  must  be
equally  stringent.

Soon  after  the  Fox  sisters  had  started  spiritualism,  and  had
begun  to  make  their  mediumistic  faculties  a  source  of  profit,
there  arose  everywhere,  but  especially  in  America,  persons  who
began  to  traffic  in  it.  Everywhere  the  credulity  of  the  public
aroused  the  cupidity  of  swindlers.  Public  seances  were  held  and
money  taken  for  entrance  at  which  "spiritualist"  exhibitions  were
given,  like  performances  at  a  circus  or  by  a  conjurer.  Phantoms
appeared  on  the  stage,  and,  profiting  by  the  simplicity  of  the
sitters,  came  down  from  the  platform  to  be  recognized  by  some
unhappy  mother  who  had  lost  a  child.

Shops  were  opened  by  "spirit-photographers,"  who  presented
to  their  clients  vague  faces  on  the  negative  which  the  credulous
sitter  always  ended  by  recognizing.  The  medium  who  organized
these  exhibitions  would  also  take  engagements  to  give  seances  at
people's  houses  for  high  fees.

454

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  455

The  better  to  attract  the  favour  and  money  of  the  public,  these
mediums  and  photographers  pretended  to  be  genuinely  scientific
researchers,  and  craftily  invested  their  exhibitions  with  some
vague  kind  of  religion,  so  that  the  whole  thing  became  an  actual
trade — the  trade  of  mediumship,  sometimes  lucrative,  but  always
dangerous  and  in  any  case  dishonourable.

This  ugly  trade  and  the  consequent  development  of  spiritualism
was  made  possible  by  the  fact  that  very  frequently  these  profes-
sionals had  at  first  some  real  powers,  and  vestiges  of  genuine
phenomena  were  admixed  with  their  fraudulent  practices.

The  number  of  adherents  to  spiritualist  doctrines  steadily  in-
creased;  journals  sprang  into  being  to  celebrate  the  exploits  of
professional  mediums.

These  insanities,  encouraged  by  the  blindness  of  the  public  and
by  the  credulity  of  some  honourable  scientific  men,  brought  about
an  inevitable  reaction.  In  England,  and  especially  in  America,  a
whole  literature  strained  every  nerve1  to  unmask  the  strange  sim-
plicity of  spiritualists  and  the  perverse  ingenuity  of  professional
mediums.2

Disgusted  by  these  sham  prodigies,  and  fully  informed  as
to  the  machinery  of  fraud  employed  by  these  pseudo-mediums,
scientific  men  in  America  and  England  obstinately  refused  to
accept  the  facts  of  telekinesis  and  materialization.  It  became  al-
most an  article  of  faith  among  them — a  faith  perhaps  as  blind  as
that  of  the  spiritists — that  there  are  no  material  phenomena.

The  affirmations  of  honourable  men,  highly  placed  in  public
esteem,  such  as  Judge  Edmunds,  Dale  Owen,  and  even  so  great
a  man  as  Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  were  insufficient  to  outweigh
the  nauseous  impressions  produced  by  the  American  trade  in
mediumship.

Even  the  admirable  work  of  William  Crookes  (1872)  brought
no  conviction;  he,  like  Zollner,  remained  isolated.  No  one
would  believe  what  these  two  eminent  men  of  science  asserted;

*I  will  cite  only  a  few:  Abbott,  Behind  the  scenes  with  mediums,  Chicago,
1907.  Fr.  Podmore,  Modern  spiritualism,  a  History  and  a  criticism,  London,
Methuen,  1902,  2  vols.  Schakleton,  Spookland,  a  record  of  Research  in  the
much  talked  realm  of  mystery.  Carrington,  The  physical  phenomena  of  spirit-
ualism, Boston,  Turner,  1907.  Rainaly,  Procbs  d'un  escamoteur,  Paris,  1894.
Remy,  Spirites  et  illusionnistes,  Paris,  Leclercq,  191 1.

2Morselli  quotes  the  writings  of  professional  conjurers  who  have  unmasked
the  tricks  of  spirit-mediums  (A.  S.  P.,  1908,  xviii,  157,  Hopkins,  Keller,  Snaw,
Williams,  and  others).

456

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

it  was  said  that  they  had  been  deceived,  illusionized,  that  they
knew  nothing  of  legerdemain  and  had  been  humbugged.

The  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  together  with  E.  Gurney,
Myers,  H.  Sidgwick,  and  Podmore,  started  with  the  axiom  and
fundamental  principle  that  there  are  no  material  phenomena,  that
everything  is  subjective.  But  in  the  forty  years  from  1880  to
1920  ideas  have  evolved.  Sidgwick  died  without  admitting  either
telekinesis  or  ectoplasms.  Myers,  at  first  hostile,  ended  by  fully
accepting  and  resolutely  maintaining  their  objectivity.  F.  Pod-
more,  it  would  seem,  could  never  resign  himself  to  believe  in
them,  while  Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  who  at  first  only  recognized  the
full  reality  of  subjective  phenomena,  accepts  now  the  objectivity
of  material  phenomena.

By  a  singular  evolutionary  process,  R.  Hodgson,  after  having
cleverly  unmasked  in  India  the  frauds  of  Mme.  Blavatsky,  was
completely  converted  to  subjective  spiritualism  by  his  experiments
with  Mrs.  Piper;  but  if  Hodgson  admitted  the  incarnations  of
George  Pelham,  he  would  not  admit  the  telekinesis  shown  by
Eusapia.  He  it  was  who,  at  Cambridge,  claimed  to  have  exposed
Eusapia,  while  in  fact  his  experiments  were  deplorably  defective,
assisting,  facilitating,  and  even  provoking  the  clumsy,  unconscious
frauds  of  that  unfortunate  medium.  Hyslop,  who  succeeded
Hodgson  at  the  American  S.  P.  R.,  refused,  like  Hodgson,  to  ad-
mit materializations.

This  scepticism  is  comprehensible  when  one  reads  the  descrip-
tions of  the  extraordinary  seances  given  by  some  mediums.  Miller,
Bailey!  Mrs.  Williams,  Eldred,  Sambor,  and  A.  Roth  have  all
been  exposed.  Eldred  had  an  armchair  in  which  he  had  collected
a  whole  arsenal  of  trick  ''properties."  The  photographer  Bours-
nell,  although  he  had  the  support  of  W.  T.  Stead,  was  convicted
of  cheating.  So  likewise  was  the  French  photographer  Buguet,
though  simple-minded  persons,  even  after  his  trickeries  had  been
exposed,  persisted  in  believing  in  the  genuineness  of  these  phan-
toms. Mrs.  Williams  was  unmasked  at  a  seance  in  Paris;  there
were  found  on  her  various  things  used  to  simulate  phantoms,  as
in  Eldred's  case.  Sambor's  case  is  very  strange ;  one  of  the  friends
of  Petrovo  Solovovo  was  actually  his  accomplice,  though  seem-
ingly an  honourable  man.  According  to  Grasset,  Ebstein  made  up
a  phantom  with  a  painted  doll.1

*See  Paul  Mathiex,  Lex  faux  mediums.    Echo  du  Mcrveilleux,  1906,  249.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  457

Bailey,  who  claimed  to  make  "apports"  of  living  birds,  was
caught  at  Grenoble  buying  the  flame-coloured  birds  that  he  was
supposed  to  bring  from  India  by  magical  means.  Maddock  was
condemned  for  cheating.  I  was  able  to  show  up  Anna  Roth  who
brought  concealed  flowers.  Before  the  seance  she  weighed  one
hundred  and  sixteen  pounds,  but  only  one  hundred  and  fourteen
afterwards  ;  the  weight  of  the  flowers  she  brought  was  two  pounds.
Maxwell1  cites  the  very  suspicious  cases  of  Mrs.  Wood  and  Lemb.

Haxby  cheated  impudently.  I  could  heap  up  cases  if  need  were  ;
and  indeed  honest  spiritualists  recognize  that  these  scoundrels
are  the  worst  enemies  of  spiritualism,  and  all  of  us  who  believe  in
ectoplasms  and  telekinesis  are  equally  interested  in  getting  rid  of
these  wretches.

But  the  question  is  not  as  simple  as  it  seems :  indeed  no  question
is  simple  when  people  will  condescend  to  go  into  it  deeply.  Along
with  fraudulent  mediums  having  an  outfit  prepared  in  advance,
there  are  true,  genuine,  and  powerful  mediums  who  have  recourse
to  fraud  when  their  powers  diminish  or  they  find  an  experiment
fail.

This  probably  came  to  pass  in  some  degree  even  with  Florence
Cook,  with  Slade,  Eglinton,  Eusapia,  Linda  Gazzera,  Marthe
Beraud,  and  Mme.  d'Esperance.  It  is  necessary,  however,  to  un-
derstand clearly  what  is  meant  by  the  "exposure"  of  a  medium  (in
French,  demasquer;  in  German,  entlarven).

In  the  first  place,  simple  rustics  like  Eusapia  do  not  understand
that  simulation  of  a  phenomenon  is  a  serious  crime ;  they  do  not
recognize  the  enormity  of  the  fraud.  They  say,  "People  want
phenomena;  well,  we'll  give  them  what  they  want."  A  lengthy
education  is  needed  before  they  can  be  made  to  understand  how
odious  and  unpardonable  is  a  lie  that  brings  wilful  error  into  our
poor  efforts  at  truth,  where  there  are  so  many  involuntary  errors.

In  the  second  place,  mediums  are  in  a  state  of  semi-unconscious-
ness which  takes  away  much  of  their  moral  responsibility.  Trance
turns  them  into  automata  that  have  but  a  very  slight  control  over
their  muscular  movements.  When  a  medium  is  nearly  or  quite  in-
sensible, his  eyes  shut,  sweating  and  making  convulsive  move-
ments, unable  to  answer  questions  put  to  him,  I  do  not  think  he
ought  to  be  reproached  for  anything  he  may  do.  He  is  not  him-
self ;  he  has  not  that  poised  and  quiet  consciousness  which  can  de-

xLes  phenomcnes  psychiques,  1903,  p.  263.

458

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

cide  between  right  and  wrong.  He  has  forgotten  who  he  is  and
what  he  ought  to  do.

Completely  criminal  are  such  acts  as  those  of  Eldred  or  Mrs.
Williams  preparing  paraphernalia  for  deliberate  fraud,  hidden  in  a
chair  or  upon  their  person;  this  is  radically  different  from  the
suspicious  movements  of  an  entranced  medium.

Not  only  are  mediums  irresponsible,  but  telekinetic  or  ectoplas-
mic  movements  are  generally  beyond  their  control.  Little  Stasia —
the  guide  of  Stanislawa  Tomczyk — often  amused  herself  by  play-
ing tricks  on  Stanislawa  herself  to  mystify  Ochorowicz.  Similarly
in  the  case  of  duplicated  personality  so  well  studied  by  Dr.  Morton
Prince,  the  personality  A.,  dissevered  from  the  normal  personality
B.,  was  actively  hostile  to  B.,  causing  her  pain  and  distress.  The
ectoplasmic  arms  and  hands  that  emerge  from  the  body  of  Eusapia
do  only  what  they  wish,  and  though  Eusapia  knows  what  they  do,
they  are  not  directed  by  Eusapia's  will ;  or  rather  there  is  for  the
moment  no  Eusapia.

It  is  also  quite  easy  to  understand  that  when  exhausted  by  a
long  and  fruitless  seance,  and  surrounded  by  a  number  of  sitters
eager  to  see  something,  a  medium  whose  consciousness  is  still
partly  in  abeyance  may  give  the  push  that  he  hopes  will  start  the
phenomena.

At  one  of  the  conversaziones  at  the  Paris  Psychological  Insti-
tute, d'Arsonval  told  an  amusing  story  of  the  celebrated  electrician
Ampere.  A  new  electrical  demonstration  was  being  given  before
a  scientific  committee,  and  as  the  galvanometer  needle  failed  to
move  at  the  critical  moment,  he  gave  it  a  touch  with  his  finger.
Repeating  the  experiment,  successfully  this  time,  he  said  trium-
phantly, pointing  to  the  needle,  "This  time  it  goes  of  itself!"

There  is  a  quasi-identity  between  the  medium  and  the  ectoplasm,
so  that  when  an  attempt  is  made  to  seize  the  latter  a  limb  of  the
medium  may  be  grasped ;  though  I  make  a  definite  and  formal  pro-
test against  this  frequent  defence  of  doubtful  phenomena  by
spiritualists.  More  frequently  the  ectoplasm  is  independent  of  the
medium,  indeed  perhaps  it  is  always  so;  though  I  do  not  mean
to  imply  that  the  severance  or  capture  of  the  ectoplasm  can  be
effected  without  danger  to  the  medium  (?).  The  case  of  Mme.
d'Esperance  (though  she  was  open  to  suspicion)  is  on  record  to
show  that  a  medium  may  incur  a  long  illness  by  reason  of  such
an  attempt.

In  view  of  the  known  cases  of  fraud,  the  question  is  to  decide

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  459

what  confidence  can  be  placed  in  the  more  or  less  marvellous  ac-
counts that  are  given  us.

To  sum  up  the  conditions  which  seem  necessary:  they  apply
equally  to  fraudulent  and  to  honest  mediums,  if  there  are  any  who
can  always  be  depended  upon.  The  precautions  must  be  as  strict
in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other,  and  if  these  precautions  have  not
been  taken  no  scientific  inference  can  be  drawn.

Although  Boursnell  and  Buguet  found  many  disciples,  and  al-
though there  have  been  many  frauds  that  have  been  accepted  as
genuine  phenomena,  it  is  consoling  to  know  that  fraud  always
fails  in  the  long  run ;  it  cannot  defeat  prolonged  and  careful  ex-
periment. Fraudulent  mediums,  as  soon  as  they  leave  the  narrow
circle  of  the  credulous,  soon  find  careful  observers  that  unmask
them.  If  they  refuse  just  and  reasonable  conditions  of  experiment,
that  is  in  itself  a  just  ground  for  suspicion,  and  a  reason  for  re-
fusing to  make  experiments  under  bad  conditions.  But  even  so,
under  bad  conditions,  fraud  always  ends  in  detection.  It  is  not  as
difficult  as  may  be  supposed  to  detect  trickery ;  and  I  do  not  think
that  any  instance  can  be  quoted  of  a  medium  behaving  fraudu-
lently for  two  years  without  being  detected  in  flagrante  delicto.

1.  The  sitters  must  be  few — three,  four,  or  five  at  most.  Even
five  seems  to  me  too  many.  Very  good  observations  can  be  made
by  one  person  only ;  for  the  hypothesis  that  the  observer  is  hallu-
cinated is  absurd.  If  six  are  present,  there  will  certainly  be  among
them  some  who  are  inattentive,  unskilful,  or  practical  jokers.  Each
one  will  have  his  own  fancies  and  will  exact  compliances  which
will  disturb  the  even  course  of  the  phenomena.

The  good  faith  of  all  persons  present  must  be  absolutely  un-
questionable. Petrovo  Solovovo  was  betrayed  by  one  of  his
friends,  and  no  one  should  be  admitted  to  an  experiment  of  whose
honesty  and  good  sense  one  cannot  be  as  assured  as  of  one's  own.

Further,  a  certain  competence  is  essential :  it  is  not  by  any  means
every  one  who  is  capable  of  observing  well ;  that  is,  of  observing
everything  that  takes  place.  To  hold  the  right  hand  of  a  medium
for  a  whole  hour  so  as  to  be  quite  certain  that  the  hand  has  not
been  released  for  a  single  second  is  not  so  very  easy,  especially  if
the  hand  twists  about  and  struggles.  The  sitters  must  be  such
persons  as  are  not  liable  to  fear,  nor  to  weariness,  nor  (which  is
rare)  to  inattention,  and  who  will  also  leave  the  experimenter  to
follow  his  own  line,  merely  giving  their  assistance  without  pre-
tence of  directing  the  experiment.

460

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

2.  Photographs,  impressions  on  blackened  paper,  on  clay,  on
plaster,  or  on  paraffin  wax  have  no  value  in  themselves:  every-
thing depends  on  the  conditions.  There  are  photographs  so  skil-
fully counterfeited  that  I  should  make  no  conclusions  at  all  on  any
such  shown  to  me  unless  the  circumstances  under  which  they  were
produced  were  given  with  such  precise  detail  as  to  make  all  trick-
ery impossible.

If  the  conditions  are  unsatisfactory,  the  very  best  photographs
are  valueless  as  evidence,  and  I  do  not  care  to  see  them.  But  if
the  conditions  are  unexceptionable,  even  poor  photographs  are
decisive;  they  reveal  details  that  may  escape  the  sight.  Stereo-
scopic photographs  are  more  instructive  than  those  which  do  not
show  the  relief  they  show  relative  distances.  After  the  admirable
photographs  by  Schrenck-Notzing,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  G.  de  Fon-
tenay,  it  is  not  allowable  to  study  materializations  without  the  help
of  one  or  two  cameras ;  but  it  must  always  be  remembered  that
the  value  of  photographs  is  strictly  dependent  on  the  conditions
of  the  experiment.

3.  The  experiments  should  not  be  made  in  a  very  large  room;
the  smaller  the  room,  the  greater  the  facility  of  close  observation.
All  the  furnishings  should  be  most  carefully  examined,  turned
over,  and  searched ;  the  doors  must  be  locked  so  that  no  stranger
can  come  in.  No  appurtenances  or  objects  of  any  kind  soever
must  be  brought  by  the  medium  :  a  conjurer  can  do  anything  he
likes  with  his  table,  his  pack  of  cards,  his  chair,  or  his  stick;
but  if  he  is  given  my  table,  my  chair,  and  my  pack  of  cards,  and
has  no  other  at  his  disposal  and  can  make  no  interchange,  he  is
powerless.

4.  Hence  arises  the  absolute  necessity  that  the  medium  be
scrupulously  searched,  dressed  only  in  garments  provided,  and
never  let  out  of  sight  from  that  moment.  His  every  movement
should  be  followed  till  he  is  seated.  He  should  then  be  tied  (or
not,  if  he  declines  this).  Then  only  can  darkness  be  allowed.  It
matters  little  that  he  should  be  behind  a  curtain,  since  he  has  no
mask,  no  appliance,  and  no  stuff  of  any  kind.  If  under  such  con-
ditions a  form  enveloped  in  a  white  veil  comes  out  from  the  cur-
tain, I  shall  conclude  with  certainty  that  there  has  been  a  materiali-
zation of  a  white  veil,  presuming,  of  course,  that  the  search  has
been  so  thorough  that  it  has  been  impossible  for  the  medium  to
conceal  any  such  veil.

The  whole  point,  then,  is  to  know  whether  one  can  be  certain

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  461

whether  anyone,  medium  or  no  medium,  has  concealed  a  large
white  veil.   It  seems  to  me  not  impossible  to  ascertain  this.

If  all  the  prescribed  conditions  are  fulfilled, — and  they  can  be
and  have  been  fulfilled — the  experiment  is  valid.

In  some  cases  all  the  precautions  enumerated  are  not  indispen-
sable. If,  for  instance  in  a  locked  room  which  has  previously  been
thoroughly  searched,  a  living  form  is  seen  moving  by  the  side  of
the  medium,  there  is  no  ground  for  doubt,  since  no  one  could  have
entered.  Obviously,  then,  we  have  to  be  sure  that  the  form  is  not
a  dummy,  and  that  the  entranced  medium  is  not  a  dummy.  When
Crookes  saw  Katie  King  by  the  side  of  Florence  Cook,  two  living
beings  were  both  present.

Again,  if  I  hold  the  two  hands  of  Eusapia  in  my  two  hands,  and
I  feel  a  hand  stroke  my  face,  pull  my  hair,  and  strike  my  shoulder,
I  can  be  certain  that  it  is  not  the  hand  of  Eusapia ;  and  I  am  not
going  to  suppose  that  Myers,  Sir  Oliver,  or  Ochorowicz  played
such  a  criminal  practical  joke  on  me.

There  is,  however,  a  point  that  seems  to  me  highly  important,
and  I  therefore  insist  upon  it.  Even  if  all  the  precautions  above
named  have  not  been  taken,  that  is  not  a  reason  for  refusing  to
experiment;  it  is,  however,  a  reason  for  making  special  observa-
tions in  each  special  case  and  looking  very  closely  into  everything
before  drawing  any  conclusions.  It  is  necessary  to  repeat  ex-
periments again  and  yet  again.  One  seance  counts  for  nothing,
two  count  for  very  little.  To  carry  conviction  I  could  not  be  satis-
fied with  less  than  five  or  six,  or  more.  At  each,  one  learns  some-
thing fresh  and  corrects  some  defect  in  the  preceding  ones.  No
doubt  this  is  troublesome,  difficult,  and  tedious,  but  science  is  not
served  by  single  observations ;  they  must  be  repeated.  It  may  be
said  that  the  first  time  one  sees  nothing ;  the  second  time  one  sees
imperfectly;  in  a  third,  one  sees  fairly  well;  the  fourth  time  one
sees  accurately.

For  telekinesis  the  matter  is  simpler;  there  is  no  need  of  so
many  precautions  to  be  sure  that  an  object  is  moved  without  con-
tact. A  good  light  is  sufficient,  for  in  the  dark  the  affair  becomes
much  more  complicated.  If,  however,  there  is  a  distinct  move-
ment of  the  object  in  the  light  that  is  in  itself  sufficient,  and
enough  instances  have  been  given  to  make  it  unnecessary  to  refer
to  them  again.

But  for  materializations  which,  with  some  exceptions,  are  only

462

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

produced  in  the  dark,  it  is  necessary  to  be  very  exacting  as  to
the  conditions.

Among  the  numerous  accounts  published,  which  are  those  that
are  worthy  of  acceptance  ?

A  primary  distinction,  which  is  fundamental,  must  be  made  be-
tween professional  and  non-professional  mediums  ;  that  is,  between
those  who  give  paid  seances  to  which  the  public  are  admitted,  and
those  who  do  not.

1.  It  is  quite  obvious  that  no  seances  to  which  all  and  any  per-
sons are  admitted  on  payment  count  for  anything.  However  as-
tonishing the  cabinet  of  the  Davenport  brothers  may  be  it  is  very
certain  that  this  cabinet  does  not  differ  from  the  trunk  of  metal
or  even  of  glass  in  which  Robert  Houdin  or  any  other  conjurer
places  a  person  who  has  been  tied  up  by  the  audience.  The  trunk
is  covered  with  a  rug,  and  after  a  little  patter  to  pass  the  few
minutes  required  for  the  trick,  the  rug  is  removed,  the  trunk
opened,  and  the  bound  man  is  no  longer  there  but  is  found  untied
in  another  box  that  was  previously  empty.  This  is  an  amusing
trick,  like  the  cabinet  of  the  Davenports,  the  thought-reading  by
the  Zancigs,  by  Lully,  and  others,  but  is  no  more  scientific  than
the  witches'  dance  in  Faust.

Maskelyne  and  other  clever  conjurers  have  taken  much  pains
to  show  so-called  spiritist  phenomena  on  the  stage.  It  is  easy  for
the  operators  and  amusing  for  the  public.  By  a  system  of  skil-
fully disposed  glasses  the  magician  causes  phantoms  to  appear —
he  pierces  them  with  a  sword  and  finds  empty  air :  the  illusion  is
complete.  But  these  scenes  in  no  way  resemble  our  experiments :
within  the  four  walls  of  a  chamber  that  has  been  duly  searched  a
medium  who  has  been  undressed  and  clothed  in  a  black  smock  can
do  nothing  like  that.

Professor  Grasset  has  written  a  book  on  occultism,1  very  full
of  detail.  Though  he  does  not  believe  in  any  metapsychic  phe-
nomena, whether  subjective  or  objective,  he  makes  a  great  effort
to  be  impartial,  and  his  impartiality  compares  favourably  with  the
scepticism  of  the  official  scientists  who  refuse  even  to  examine  the
facts.  Neverthless  Grasset  is  certainly  unjust;  he  omits  the  ex-
periments by  Gibier,  by  Home,  and  by  Florence  Cook.   He  thinks,

^Uoccultisme  hier  et  aujourd'hui.  Le  merveilleux  prescientifique,  Mont-
pellier,  Contet,  1908.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  463

like  the  ignorant  public,  that  at  the  Villa  Carmen,  the  coachman
Aresky  got  into  the  room,  that  the  experiments  with  Eusapia  were
nearly  always  fraudulent  if  not  invariably  so ;  he  thinks  Maskelyne
right  against  Archdeacon  Colley,  though  Maskelyne  lost  his.  case
in  a  court  of  law.  It  is  true  that  the  second  edition  of  Grasset's
book  dates  from  1908,  and  great  progress  has  been  made  in  the
last  fourteen  years  and  the  experiments  of  the  present  day  in  no
way  resemble  conjuring  tricks.  In  some  recent  cases  there  seems
to  me  no  room  at  all  for  fraud.

2.  Professional  mediums  who  give  private  seances,  for  re-
muneration, more  or  less  accessible  to  the  public,  are  not  to  be
trusted  much  more  than  those  who  give  public  seances.  Even  if
the  circle  is  a  limited  one,  and  composed  of  sincere  and  honourable
persons,  it  is  possible  that  some  of  these  persons  may  be  child-
ishly credulous.  The  medium  can  then  do  as  he  likes ;  the  circle
believes  in  him  and  indeed  no  one  who  does  not  believe  in  him  is
allowed  to  be  present.  Under  plea  that  the  health  of  the  medium
must  not  be  imperilled  nor  the  brilliancy  of  the  phenomena  im-
paired, no  investigation  is  permitted.  These  private  seances  are  not,
of  course,  absolutely  of  no  account,  but  their  results  amount  to
very  little,  precise  conditions  being  wanting.  The  best  that  can  be
said  is  that  when  a  paid  medium  like  Mme.  Salmon  with  P.  Gibier
gives  a  series  of  seances  before  a  small  number  of  experimenters,
in  a  room  that  does  not  belong  to  her,  and  submitting  to  rigorous
conditions,  safe  conclusions  may  be  drawn,  though  still  under  dis-
tinct reservations.  When  Miller  came  to  Paris  he  would  not
accept  the  conditions  imposed ;  nor  would  Bailey,  nor  Anna
Roth.

For  my  own  part  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  notable  pro-
fessional mediums  have  some  real  powers,  for  if  they  had  not,  they
would  never  have  chosen  this  singular  profession.  They  are  gen-
erally very  ordinary  men  and  women  who  have  discovered  in  them-
selves strange  capabilities  which  surprise  them  at  first,  and  then
are  turned  to  a  source  of  profit  and  made  into  a  trade.  The  Fox
sisters  did  this  from  the  very  beginning  of  their  surprising  mani-
festations.

It  is  therefore  a  mistake  to  neglect  professional  and  paid
mediums  under  the  pretext  that  they  make  a  trade  of  mediumship.
They  have  to  live,  and  it  would  be  very  unjust  to  reproach  a
medium  for  not  giving  time  and  health  gratis.  A  medium  has  a
right  not  only  to  considerate  treatment  but  to  payment,  and  this

464

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

payment  is  no  more  to  be  condemned  than  that  accepted  by  a
physician  who  cures  us  or  by  a  musician  who  teaches  us  music.

Powerful  professional  mediums  are  exceedingly  few,  though
there  are  many  who  have  some  moderate  powers.  In  all  countries
there  are  now  private  spiritist  seances,  to  some  of  which  it  is  ex-
ceedingly difficult  to  gain  access,  at  which  some  man  or  woman  en-
dowed with  certain  powers  gives  regular  seances  to  a  small  group
of  initiates.  The  number  of  such  spiritualist  circles  is  difficult  to
estimate ;  there  are  probably  many  more  than  is  usually  supposed.

The  phenomena  are  sometimes  very  striking,  but  the  credulity
of  the  circle  is  such  and  the  imprecision  of  observation  so  great,
that  these  phenomena  are  lost  to  science.  They  are  talked  of  here
and  there  inaccurately,  imperfectly,  and  without  the  needful  de-
tail. In  order  to  judge  of  them  fairly  we  must  go  to  such  in-
complete accounts  as  are  published,  and  these  ought  to  be  very
strictly  criticized.  If  all  that  is  printed  were  accepted,  to  what
illusions  and  follies  should  we  not  be  committed ;  if  all  is  re-
jected we  may  be  neglecting  important  essential  facts,  useful  to
the  advance  of  metapsychic  science.

Fortunately  when  a  medium  is  very  powerful  he  soon  gets  a
reputation,  perhaps  in  spite  of  his  own  desires  and  those  of  his
own  circle:  really  striking  and  dazzling  mediumship  cannot  re-
main secret.  It  is  then  the  duty  of  experimentalists  and  men  of
science  to  make  researches.  Then  experiments  can  be  carried  out
scientifically  like  those  conducted  by  Imoda,  Schrenck-Notzing,
and  Mme.  Bisson,  by  Crookes  and  Varley,  by  General  and  Mme.
Noel,  and  numerous  other  observers  such  as  A.  de  Rochas,  Lom-
broso,  Finzi,  Morselli,  Foa,  Oliver  Lodge,  Dariex,  Maxwell,
Schiaparelli,  Ochorowicz,  Bottazzi,  who  experimented  with  Eusa-
pia,  and  Ochorowicz,  with  Stanislawa  Tomczyk.

A  true  account  of  materializations  is  specially  difficult  because
of  all  experiments  it  is  these  that  most  lend  themselves  to  fraud.
Thinking  that  they  have  a  spirit  before  them,  credulous  persons
lose  their  presence  of  mind ;  they  are  inclined  to  accept  everything
and  to  be  indignant  at  precautions  to  avoid  trickery.  For  my  own
part,  having  seen  many  materializations,  I  can  declare  that  I  have
never  felt  the  very  slightest  awe.  My  only  preoccupation,  and
one  that  filled  my  whole  being,  was  always  not  to  be  duped ;  and
I  found  it  hard  to  understand  the  emotion  of  some  sitters  when
they  have  witnessed  a  good  materialization.

Since  fraud  is  the  great  danger  in  all  such  experiments,  every

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  465

ssible  precaution  must  be  taken  against  it ;  the  medium  must  be
der  the  closest  observation  from  which  nothing  distracts  the
watchers,  all  his  clothes  must  be  searched  minutely,  as  also  every
object  within  his  reach ;  no  medium  who  has  once  been  detected
in  gross  fraud  should  ever  be  experimented  with;  photography
should  be  used  to  show  the  exact  conditions  under  which  the  ap-
parition has  occurred;  the  experiment  must  be  often  repeated;
the  control  must  never  be  relaxed ;  and  the  idea  that  the  medium
may  be  making  efforts  to  deceive  never  be  lost  sight  of  and
should  dominate  the  mind  of  the  observers.

The  only  decisive  proof  is  to  be  able,  after  making  quite  certain
that  no  stranger  can  have  entered  the  seance  room,  to  see,  to  touch,
and  especially  to  photograph  the  medium  and  the  apparition  on  the
same  plate.  Experiments  of  this  kind  are  very  few ;  it  is  there-
fore desirable  that  there  should  be  more  of  them.  Unfortunately,
materialization  is  a  phenomenon  that  few  mediums  can  present
with  such  perfection  that  both  medium  and  apparition  can  be
photographed  on  the  same  plate.

However,  even  when  for  various  reasons  it  is  impracticable
to  have  the  photographic  confirmation  which  gives  certainty,  very
good  proofs  can  be  obtained ;  and  among  these  I  will  cite  the  fol-
lowing, which,  after  mature  consideration,  seems  to  me  perfectly
valid.

At  Ribaud  Island,  experimenting  with  Eusapia  in  company  with
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  Frederic  Myers,  and  J.  Ochorowicz — three  ob-
servers whose  competence  and  honesty  cannot  be  called  in  ques-
tion— I  held  one  of  Eusapia's  hands  firmly  in  each  of  mine.  I  then
felt  a  third  hand  touch  my  shoulder,  my  head,  and  my  face.  This
was  not  in  darkness ;  there  was  a  lighted  candle  in  the  room.

All  kinds  of  absurd  hypotheses  must  here  be  eliminated :  first
that  I  was  hallucinated — that  is,  disposed  of  by  the  fact  that  the
slap  on  the  shoulder  given  by  "Jonn  King"  was  heard  by  all  pres-
ent; then  that  Myers,  Lodge,  or  Ochorowicz  should  have  per-
petrated this  bad  joke;  then  that  I  had  let  go  one  of  Eusapia's
hands,  which  could  not  be,  for  my  friends  could  all  see  her  hands
held  far  apart,  one  in  each  of  mine.  Further,  the  same  phenome-
non of  the  materialization  of  a  hand  while  Eusapia's  hands  were
held  separate  by  one  person  has  been  observed  by  Oliver  Lodge,
by  Myers,  and  by  Ochorowicz.

I  will  cite,  later,  other  cases  of  materialization  equally  decisive ;
I  mention  here  only  this  one  which  seems  to  me  to  defy  criticism.

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

It  is  interesting  to  study  the  conditions  under  which  materiali-
zations are  produced :

Firstly  the  need  of  darkness.  For  one  reason  or  another,  none,
or  scarcely  any,  are  produced  in  full  light.  This  does  not  apply
to  Home  who  gave  astonishing  materializations  in  the  light;  but
in  most  cases  darkness  is  essential.  Sometimes  red  light,  such  as  is
used  by  photographers,  can  be  used,  and  when  the  medium  is  very
powerful  flashlight  photographs  can  be  taken.  Nevertheless,
darkness  is  usually  so  necessary  that  the  medium  must  be  pro-
tected by  a  curtain,  notably  at  the  beginnings  of  the  phenomena.
Only  behind  this  curtain,  even  when  the  room  is  darkened,  can  the
preliminary  changes  take  place.  This  will  cause  sceptics  to  smile ;
but  in  point  of  fact  what  does  darkness  matter?  Can  darkness
create  a  living  face  and  produce  a  white  veil?

As  for  the  necessary  physiological  conditions,  these  are  so  in-
constant, irregular,  and  fugitive  that  they  cannot  be  indicated  with
any  precision.  Before  the  seance  it  is  impossible  to  know  whether
the  medium  is  in  a  satisfactory  state  to  produce  the  phenomena  or
not.  On  one  day  the  results  will  be  excellent,  and  on  the  next,
under  the  same  conditions,  nothing  may  occur.

Further,  a  considerable  time,  often  a  long  time,  is  needed  before
anything  appears;  it  may  be  necessary  to  wait  for  an  hour,  two
hours,  or  even  three  hours  before  there  is  any  manifestation.
Sometimes,  though  seldom,  the  appearances  begin  as  soon  as  the
curtain  is  drawn.  The  materialized  object  is  nearly  always  a  shape
of  something  human — a  phantom.  Sometimes,  as  with  Eusapia,
only  a  hand;  sometimes,  as  with  Florence  Cook  and  Marthe
Beraud,  they  are  entire  figures.  Although  the  appearance  of  a
whole  figure  is  more  dramatic  than  that  of  a  stump  taking  shape
behind  a  curtain,  both  phenomena  are  essentially  the  same.  A
warm,  supple,  resisting,  articulated,  and  apparently  living  hand
identical  with  a  human  hand  in  all  points  is  not  more  extraordi-
nary than  a  human  personality  that  looks,  walks,  and  speaks.  The
difficulty  is  the  same :  the  abyss  between  normal  and  metapsychic
science  is  as  great  whether  there  be  the  big,  half-formed  hand  of
John  King  behind  the  curtain  or  Bien  Boa  rising  from  the  floor
in  front  of  it.

I  shall  not  waste  time  in  stating  the  absurdities,  almost  the  im-
possibilities, from  a  psycho-physiological  point  of  view,  of  this
phenomenon.  A  living  being,  or  living  matter,  formed  under  our
eyes,  which  has  its  proper  warmth,  apparently  a  circulation  of

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  467

blood,  and  a  physiological  respiration  (as  I  proved  by  causing  the
form  of  Bien  Boa  to  breathe  into  a  flask  containing  baryta  water),
which  has  also  a  kind  of  psychic  personality  having  a  will  distinct
from  the  will  of  the  medium,  in  a  word,  a  new  human  being!
This  is  surely  the  climax  of  marvels !  Nevertheless  it  is  a  fact.

The  criticisms  that  have  been  directed  against  my  experiments
and  those  of  Crookes  and  of  Stainton  Moses  are  entirely  ineffec-
tive. All  that  can  be  seriously  alleged  against  them  is  that  the  phe-
nomena are  so  exceptional  that  if  they  have  been  thought  to  be
substantiated  the  experimenters  must  have  been  the  dupes  of  an
illusion.

I  do  not  think  this  objection  well  founded.  Crookes  observed
Katie  King  for  a  long  time;  Eusapia  lent  herself  with  admirable
goodwill  for  twenty-five  years  to  scientific  investigation,  even
when  it  took  absurd  forms.  More  than  thirty  very  sceptical  scien-
tific men  were  convinced,  after  long  testing,  that  there  proceeded
from  her  body  material  forms  having  the  appearances  of  life,
which  I  shall  describe  farther  on  under  the  name  of  ectoplasms.
Marthe  Beraud,  as  good-natured  as  Eusapia,  has  been  experi-
mented with  by  General  Noel,  by  G.  Delanne,  and  myself  at  Al-
giers, by  Schrenck-Notzing,  J.  Maxwell,  Mme.  Bisson,  Dr.  Geley,
Dr.  Bourbon,  and  many  others.  Home  gave  extraordinary  phe-
nomena of  materializations  for  twenty  years,  verified  by  most  il-
lustrious personages,  without  ever  having  been  detected  in  trickery.

The  alternative,  then,  is  that  the  phenomena  are  genuine  or  that
they  are  due  to  fraud.  I  am  very  well  aware  that  they  are  ex-
traordinary, even  so  monstrously  extraordinary  that  at  first  sight
the  hypothesis  of  immeasurable,  repeated,  and  continual  fraud
seems  the  more  probable  explanation.  But  is  such  fraud  possible?
I  cannot  think  so.  When  I  recall  the  precautions  that  all  of  us
have  taken,  not  once,  but  twenty,  a  hundred,  or  even  a  thousand
times,  it  is  inconceivable  that  we  should  have  been  deceived  on  all
these  occasions.

It  is  true  that  some  scientists  say,  "I  do  not  want  to  see  or  to
study  these  things,  for  I  know  beforehand  that  they  are  not
possible,  therefore  a  priori,  you  have  all  been  taken  in  by  im-
postors."

This,  however,  involves  two  inadmissible  assumptions.  In  the
first  place,  it  is  not  sufficient  to  say,  "You  have  been  deceived";
it  is  necessary  to  show  how  we  have  been  deceived.  When  I  hold
both  of  Eusapia's  hands  and  a  third  hand  touches  my  forehead

468

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

and  my  shoulder,  how  can  this  miracle  have  taken  place?  Tell
me  that,  and  I  may  revise  my  opinion ;  till  then  it  is  unshakable.

In  the  second  place  no  one  can  rightly  say  a  priori  "It  is  impos-
sible." Human  knowledge  is  so  uncertain,  so  limited  that  the  word
"impossible"  should  never  be  used.

I  say  that  under  certain  exceptional  conditions — and  I  admit
that  these  conditions  are  extremely  exceptional — the  semblance  of
a  living  hand  is  formed  which  has  all  the  properties  of  a  living
hand  and  seems  to  belong  to  a  being  similar  to  a  human  be-
ing (!!).  The  new  data  contradict  absolutely  nothing  that  is
taught  us  by  science.  It  is  a  strange  and  astounding  fact ;  but  it  is
not  absurd,  it  is  only  unusual.

Assuredly  it  is  possible  that  I  may  be  mistaken,  even  grossly
mistaken,  along  with  Crookes,  De  Rochas,  AksakofT.  Myers,
William  James,  Schiaparelli,  Zollner,  Fechner,  and  Oliver  Lodge.
It  is  possible  that  all  of  us  have  been  deceived.  It  is  possible  that
some  day  an  unexpected  experiment  may  explain  our  prolonged
deception  quite  simply.  So  be  it!  but  till  it  has  been  explained
how  we  have  all  been  duped  by  an  illusion,  I  claim  that  the  reality
of  these  materializations  must  be  conceded.

After  all,  on  careful  consideration,  the  absurdity  does  not  seem
so  portentous  as  it  appears  at  first  sight.  When  I  place  my  hand
before  a  mirror,  its  image  appears — reflection  of  light :  the  ther-
mometer shows  a  reflection  of  heat ;  and  a  galvanometer,  reflec-
tion of  electricity.  It  is  true  that  no  efTect  is  produced  on  a  bal-
ance: but  is  it  so  very  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  projection
of  light,  heat,  and  electricity  might  be  associated  with  a  projection
of  mechanical  power?  For  the  problem  essentially  and  definitely
works  down  to  that.  If  the  hand  can  act  at  a  distance  on  a  bal-
ance as  it  does  on  a  thermometer,  a  mirror,  or  a  galvanometer,  it
may  give  the  sensation  of  contact  to  another  person  close  by.
Materialization  is  a  mechanical  projection :  we  already  know  the
projection  of  light,  of  heat,  and  of  electricity ;  it  is  not  a  very  long
step  to  think  that  a  projection  of  mechanical  energy  may  be  pos-
sible. The  remarkable  demonstrations  of  Einstein  show  how
close  mechanical  and  luminous  energy  are  to  one  another.

Many  curious  facts  on  the  genesis  of  the  materializations
are  observable,  for  only  very  rarely  do  materializations  appear
abruptly.  They  form  by  a  concentration  of  matter  round  a
central  nucleus ;  much  as  a  planet  forms  in  a  nebula,  or  cells  by
concentration  of  protoplasmic  material.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  469

It  is  probable,  or  rather  it  is  certain,  that  the  genesis  differs
with  different  mediums  and  according  to  conditions  as  yet  ill-
understood.  I  will  endeavour  to  give  an  analytical  summary,
based  on  the  materializations  given  by  Miss  Goligher,  Marthe
Beraud,  and  especially  by  Eusapia  in  whose  case  I  have  frequently
and  for  a  long  time  studied  the  process.

There  first  appears  a  more  or  less  formless  mass,  which  may  not
be  even  visible,  but  which  can  be  felt  and  seems  capable  of
mechanical  action.  One  can  hardly  help  imagining  that  move-
ments of  the  table  are  due  to  this  mechanical  energy,  this  half-
invisible  hand  which  presses  out  the  curtain  and  whose  resistance
can  be  felt,  while  it  persists  in  remaining  in  shadow.  When  the
table  is  raised  off  all  four  legs,  there  is  always  one  leg  that  remains
in  the  shadow.  These  are  the  formations  that  I  call  ectoplasms,
for  they  seem  to  emanate  from  Eusapia's  actual  body.1

This  observation,  which  is  a  fact  and  not  a  hypothesis,  has  been
confirmed  at  all  points  by  Crawford's  excellent  work.

Sometimes  these  ectoplasms  can  be  seen  in  process  of  organi-
zation ;  I  have  seen  an  almost  rectilinear  prolongation  emerge  from
Eusapia's  body,  its  termination  acting  like  a  living  hand.  Simi-
larly in  the  formation  of  Bien  Boa,  at  first  the  limbs  appeared  thin
and  stiff,  like  narrow  stalks ;  little  by  little  they  thickened,  taking
the  form  of  more  or  less  solid  limbs  similar  to  normal  limbs.

I  have  also,  like  Geley,  Schrenck-Notzing,  and  Mme.  Bisson,
been  able  to  see  the  first  lineaments  of  materializations  as  they
were  formed.  A  kind  of  liquid  or  pasty  jelly  emerges  from  the
mouth  or  the  breast  of  Marthe  which  organizes  itself  by  degrees,
acquiring  the  shape  of  a  face  or  a  limb.  Under  very  good  con-
ditions of  visibility,  I  have  seen  this  paste  spread  on  my  knee,  and
slowly  take  form  so  as  to  show  the  rudiment  of  the  radius,  the
cubitus,  or  metacarpal  bone  whose  increasing  pressure  I  could  feel
on  my  knee.

These  materializations  are  usually  gradual,  beginning  by  a  rudi-
mentary shape,  complete  forms  and  human  faces  only  appearing
later  on.  At  first  these  formations  are  often  very  imperfect.
Sometimes  they  show  no  relief,  looking  more  like  flat  images  than
bodies,  so  that  in  spite  of  oneself  one  is  inclined  to  imagine  some
fraud,  since  what  appears  seems  to  be  the  materialization  of  a
semblance,  and  not  of  a  being.   But  in  some  cases  the  materiali-

*Sir  Oliver  Lodge  published  in  Light  (April  27,  1921)  a  very  interesting
observation  formerly  made  on  this  fact.

470

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

zation  is  perfect.  At  the  Villa  Carmen  I  saw  a  fully  organized
form  rise  from  the  floor.  At  first  it  was  only  a  white,  opaque  spot
like  a  handkerchief  lying  on  the  ground  before  the  curtain,  then
this  handkerchief  quickly  assumed  the  form  of  a  human  head  level
with  the  floor,  and  a  few  moments  later  it  rose  up  in  a  straight  line
and  became  a  small  man  enveloped  in  a  kind  of  white  burnous,
who  took  two  or  three  halting  steps  in  front  of  the  curtain  and
then  sank  to  the  floor  and  disappeared  as  if  through  a  trap-door.
But  there  was  no  trap-door.1

And  now  to  conclude,  and  having  indicated  the  conditions
necessary  to  a  reliable  experiment,  to  decide  formally  on  an  answer
to  the  urgent  and  disturbing  question :

Is  there  such  a  thing  as  objective  metapsychics  ? 2
Strong  arguments  can  be  adduced  for  the  reply,  "No,  there  are
no  objective  metapsychics";  no  physical  phenomena  unknown  to
normal  physics  are  ever  produced.    The  arguments  advanced  to
maintain  this  opinion  may  be  stated  as  follows:

*I  claim  here  to  refute  an  absurd  legend.  I  was  in  no  way  tricked  as
some  little  newspapers  of  Algiers  maintained.  In  the  memorandum  in  which  I
gave  the  facts  I  made  some  formal  reservations,  showing  some  of  the  more  seri-
ous objections  that  I  myself  made.  But  no  notice  was  taken  either  of  what  I
affirmed  or  of  my  objections,  so  that  the  criticisms  that  I  myself  put  forward
remain.  They  do  not,  however,  seem  decisive  to  me.  As  for  the  objections
made  by  others,  they  count  for  nothing.

I  conclude,  as  did  my  illustrious  precursor,  Sir  William  Crookes,  I  have
nothing  to  withdraw  from  what  I  said  in  1904;  but  on  the  contrary,  the  ex-
cellent experiments  subsequently  made  with  the  same  medium,  Marthe,  by
Mme.  Bisson,  Schrenck-Notzing,  and  Geley  strikingly  confirm  our  experiences
at  the  Villa  Carmen.

As  to  Eusapia,  who  has  often  been  suspected  of  fraud,  nothing  was  ever
proved  against  her.  On  the  contrary,  after  some  doubtful  experiments  at
Cambridge,  I  asked  Myers  to  come  back  to  see  her.  He  came  to  my  house,
and  there  was  then  a  memorable  sitting  at  which  the  phenomena  were  so  dis-
tinct that  I  solemnly  adjured  Myers  to  declare  that  there  was  no  trickery,  and
that  the  movement  of  objects  at  a  distance  without  contact  was  authentic  and
undeniable.  My  lamented  friends,  Professors  Boirac  and  Flournoy,  both  of
them  experienced  men  of  science,  were  present  at  that  seance  and  were  com-
pletely convinced  of  the  reality  of  movements  without  contact,  i.e.,  of  a  ma-
terialization, since  according  to  all  likelihood,  raps  and  movements  of  objects
are  the  first  stages  of  materializations  in  their  invisible  aspect.

2See  the  remarkable  study  by  Petrovo  Solovovo,  Les  phinomenes  physiques
dtt  spiritisme,  quelques  difficultis,  P.  S.  P.  R.,  191 1,  413-447,  with  a  reply  by
Oliver  Lodge,  "A  priori  arguments  against  physical  phenomena,"  ibid.,  447-
454.  But  it  is  permissible  to  think  that  Petrovo  Solovovo  was  strongly  in-
fluenced by  the  deception  he  had  resented  when,  in  his  experiments  with  Sam-
bor,  it  was  proved  that  one  of  his  own  personal  friends  had  deceived  him;  a
thing  that  is  both  unpleasant  and  infrequent.  In  most  cases  there  are  no
confederates.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  471

1.  As  Laplace  said,  the  more  extraordinary  the  fact,  the  more
rigorous  should  be  the  demonstration.  In  this  case  the  stricter
the  conditions  the  fewer  the  phenomena  become.

2.  The  more  latitude  there  is  for  fraud  (liberated  hands,  dark-
ness, absence  of  scrutiny)  the  more  apparent  are  the  phenomena.

3.  All  mediums  have  tricked,  perhaps  even  Home.  In  any  case,
if  they  have  not  consciously  deceived,  they  have  done  so  uncon-
sciously during  their  trances.   Therefore  fraud  is  always  possible.

4.  Conjurers,  even  those  of  quite  moderate  ability,  can  produce
much  more  remarkable  illusions  than  the  most  powerful  mediums.
Unless  very  well  versed  in  legerdemain  no  one  can  imagine  how
completely  an  ordinary  trick  conjurer  can  illusionize.

None  of  the  experiments  in  direct  writing  carried  out  with  me-
diums are  of  value  by  reason  of  the  many  very  easy  tricks  worked
every  day,  which  have  grossly  deceived  even  distrustful  persons.

5.  No  observers  can  maintain  continuous  attention  and  observa-
tion for  two  or  three  hours.

6.  All  the  wonders  attributed  to  the  Fox  sisters,  to  Mme.
d'Esperance,  Florence  Cook,  Eglinton,  Slade,  Bailey,  Eldred,
Miller,  and  A.  Roth  must  be  eliminated,  for  with  them  there  was
evident  fraud.  There  then  remain  only  the  experiments  with
Home,  Stainton  Moses,  and  Eusapia.  Now  these  with  Eusapia
were  vehemently  contested  at  Cambridge  and  in  America.  The
facts  recorded  of  Home  were  observed  by  Crookes  only ;  and  those
alleged  of  Stainton  Moses  are  derived  entirely  from  himself  and
from  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Speer,  who  were  his  intimate  friends  and  much
prepossessed  in  his  favour.

In  the  final  analysis,  nothing  at  all  remains  where  everything
is  so  strange  and  unlikely  that  multiplied  and  superabundant
proofs  are  necessary.  In  proportion  as  the  control  increases  in
severity  the  phenomena  diminish.

Conclusion.  In  the  matter  of  objective  metapsychics,  the  un-
likely phenomena  of  telekinesis,  ectoplasms,  and  apports  have  so
far  never  been  proved.  If  anything  is  proved,  it  is  that  there  are
no  such  things.

Such  are  the  objections  that  can  be  alleged  against  objective
metapsychics;  and  it  will  be  granted  that  I  have  not  minimized
them.  These  doubts  have  occurred  to  me  hundreds  of  times,  and
I  know,  better  than  anyone  else,  the  full  force  of  these  arguments.
Nevertheless,  I  do  not  think  them  well  founded,  and  I  am  firmly
convinced  that  there  are  real  physical  metapsychic  phenomena.

472

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

(1)  Negative  evidence  can  establish  nothing.  Certain  and  posi-
tive facts,  if  substantiated,  carry  formal  proof.  When  Crookes
saw,  in  full  light,  a  pencil  rise  and  write ;  when  Ochorowicz,  also
in  full  light,  saw  a  chair  come  towards  him ;  when  a  third  hand
stroked  my  face  while  I  held  both  of  Eusapia's  hands;  no  doubt  is
possible,  and  the  demonstrations  are  valid  per  se.  I  quote  only
these  three  facts ;  there  are  hundreds  of  others,  some  of  which  I
shall  mention  later  on.

(2)  Mediums  are  not,  unless  by  some  rare  exception,  skilled  in
legerdemain.  Movements  of  objects  and  raps  have  been  verified
under  unexceptionable  conditions  so  often  that  even  Petrovo  Solo-
vovo,  despite  his  scepticism,  says  (p.  415)  "a  truly  impartial  in-
vestigator cannot  reject  them."  And  if  telekinesis  and  raps  are
admitted,  other  physical  phenomena  are  possible.

(3)  Even  if  Home  and  Eusapia  were  the  only  mediums,  tele-
kinesis would  have  to  be  admitted.  Thanks  to  these  two  excellent
mediums,  we  have  such  an  assemblage  of  documents,  proofs,  and
rigorous  experiments,  conducted  by  so  many  different  men  of
science,  that  no  doubt  can  outweigh  them.  Myers,  Feilding,  and
Carrington,  all  sceptical,  have  accepted  them  after  careful  ex-
amination. In  the  whole  of  physics  and  physiology,  there  is  no
phenomenon  that  has  been  more  rigidly  and  repeatedly  tested.

There  are  many  other  incontestable  instances  of  telekinesis :  for
instance,  if  all  that  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Speer  have  written  concerning
Stainton  Moses  is  to  be  rejected,  we  must  suppose  that  they  were
not  merely  illusionized  but  were  impostors ;  which  is  absurd.

(4)  There  are  so  many  records  of  collective  "hallucinations,"
collected  with  such  care  and  attested  with  such  exactitude  by
persons  of  unquestionable  good  faith,  that  it  is  not  possible  to
reject  them,  any  more  than  the  non-collective  hallucinations.  Now
from  the  moment  that  there  is  collective  perception,  there  is  some
degree  of  objectivity.

(5)  The  facts  of  experimental  (ectoplasmic)  materializations
have  been  observed  too  often  and  with  too  much  precision  to  re-
ject them  all.

The  question  is  not  properly  framed ;  it  is  said,  "It  is  for  you  to
prove  that  a  materialization  has  taken  place."  I  reply,  "It  is  for
you  to  prove  in  any  given  case  that  there  was  fraud."  It  is  not
sufficient  to  say,  "Fraud  was  possible,  therefore  there  was  fraud."
The  fraud  must  be  proved,  and  this  has  hardly  ever  been  done.
The  onus  probandi  lies  on  those  who  discredit  a  given  experiment.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  473

(6)  It  is  absurd,  because  the  physical  phenomenon  occurring  in
a  direct  experiment  is  not  understood,  to  aver  that  all  physical
phenomena  are  false.  Taking  the  example  of  the  attraction  of  the
magnet  for  iron,  Cicero  had  already  said,  "Fiat,  necne  fiat  id
quaeritur  ...  si  rationem  cur  id  fiat  afferre  nequeam,  fieri  om-
nino  neges.,,  Must  a  phenomenon  be  denied  because  we  do  not
understand  its  mechanism?  This  seems  to  me  contrary  to  all
sound  scientific  method.

(7)  That  there  are  doubtful  and  even  fictitious  phenomena  is
no  reason  for  rejecting  all.  There  might  be  telekinesis  without
ectoplasms.  There  may  be  ectoplasms  without  apports.  There
is  no  need  to  consider  these  phenomena  indissolubly  connected :
doubt  with  regard  to  one  of  them  does  not  invalidate  others.
Proofs  of  telekinesis  that  seem  to  me  sufficient  and  even  super-
abundant, exist.  Ectoplasms  seem  to  me  to  be  demonstrated  with
equal  rigor,  though  these  phenomena  are  more  dramatic  and  ex-
traordinary. On  the  other  hand,  apports,  levitations,  and  biloca-
tions  are  doubtful.  Slate-writing  is  almost  always  produced  by
skilful  legerdemain.  Photographs  of  phantoms  and  moulded  im-
pressions in  paraffin  still  call  for  more  thorough  study.

In  fine,  there  are  incontestable  physical  phenomena  in  metapsy-
chic  science.

To  deny  them  at  the  present  time  is  to  ignore  phenomena  funda-
mentally new  that  open  up  a  promising  avenue  to  new  discoveries
in  science;  and  to  remain  in  the  old  ruts  with  which  blind  official
"science"  has  so  long  been  satisfied.

And  a  definite  conclusion  follows.  Since  the  proofs  for  some
phenomena  of  objective  metapsychics  (though  not  for  all)  are  in-
sufficient, experimentation  must  be  started  ab  ovo,  from  the  very
beginning.

Following  the  example  of  Descartes,  we  ought  to  make  a  clean
sweep  of  all  that  has  been  said  and  written  on  the  subject.  The
facts  of  ectoplasms  and  telekinesis  are  certain ;  but  their  mechan-
ism is  profoundly  mysterious ;  therefore  let  us  experiment  again
and  again.   We  shall  certainly  reap  the  reward.

One  of  the  most  characteristic  phenomena,  which,  when  well
observed  by  a  cool-headed  experimenter,  brings  absolute  convic-
tion is  that  the  materialized  hand  melts  in  the  hand  of  the  observer
(Delanne,  chapter  on  phantasmal  hands  that  melt,  ii,  695).

Damiani,  holding  the  hands  of  Eusapia,  has  felt  the  fluidic

474

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

hands  of  John  melt  and  dissolve  (Delanne,  Apparitions  material-
isees,  ii,  163).

"Once,"  says  Crookes,  "I  held  one  of  Katie's  hands  in  mine,  re-
solved not  to  let  it  go.  No  attempt  or  effort  was  made  to  release
it,  but  little  by  little  the  hand  seemed  to  dissolve  into  vapour,  and
it  thus  disengaged  itself  from  my  grasp"  (Delanne,  ibid.,  167).

I  have  unfortunately  never  been  able  to  verify  this  decisive
phenomenon.  With  Marthe  Beraud  and  with  Eusapia  I  have
several  times  endeavoured  to  obtain  it,  but  always  in  vain;  but
that  is  no  reason  for  denying  the  fact  verified  by  Crookes,  Damiani,
and  others.

Morselli,  experimenting  with  Eusapia,  says,  "If  one  grasps  the
(fluidic)  hands  one  feels  the  skin,  the  warmth,  the  mobile  fingers
and  then  the  hand  seems  to  dissolve."

Venzano  (also  with  Eusapia)  says  that  the  members  are  in  all
respects  similar  to  human  members,  but  vanish  from  the  grasp
without  leaving  a  trace.

F.  Bottazzi,  a  learned  physiologist  whose  testimony  is  that  of  an
observer  well  used  to  delicate  analysis  of  all  experimental  condi-
tions, says  that  a  hand  (from  Eusapia)  melted  and  dissolved  in
his  grasp.  A  little  later,  another  hand  placed  on  his  head  van-
ished from  his  hold.  Again  with  Eusapia,  M.  Barzini,  the  dis-
tinguished journalist  of  the  Corriere  della  Sera,  says,  "The  hands
did  not  escape  me,  they  seemed  to  melt ;  they  failed  from  between
my  fingers,  and  collapsed,  like  hands  that  softened  and  vanished."
M.  Falcomer,  observing  a  medium  named  Rostagno,  seized  a
fluidic  hand  which  collapsed.  In  an  experiment  that  Crookes  was
making  with  Florence  Cook,  Mr.  Tapp  took  hold  of  Katie's  wrist.
He  says,  "Her  wrist  gave  way  under  my  grasp  like  a  piece  of  thin
card  or  paper,  and  my  fingers  met  through  her  arm  as  if  it  were
fluid."

In  a  seance  described  by  De  Rochas  {A.  S.  P.,  1908,  xviii,  280)
the  circle  joined  hands  round  the  medium,  F.  M.  Montorgueil,
taking  hold  of  a  hand  that  was  touching  his  face  with  some  fabric,
called  for  light.  The  hand  melted  in  his,  and  all  of  us,  says  De
Rochas,  "thought  we  saw  a  luminous  trail  from  his  hand  to  F.'s
body."  If  one  could  be  rigorously  certain  of  M.  Montorgueil's
observation,  that  would  be  first-rate  evidence.

These  phenomena  are  very  remarkable,  not  only  from  the  theo-
retical point  of  view  with  respect  to  ectoplasms,  but  because  they
furnish  decisive  proof  of  their  objectivity.   No  legerdemain  can

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  475

produce  a  living  hand  that  melts  in  the  hand  that  holds  it.  I  have
seen  the  form  of  Bien  Boa  disappear  into  the  floor  under  my  eyes,
but  a  visual  sensation  is  not  nearly  so  certain  as  a  tactile  one.

Many  other  observers  have  seen  dematerializations ;  the  best
known  and  best  verified  is  still  that  of  Katie  King.

Mr.  Oxley,  experimenting  with  a  medium  named  Mrs.  Firmin
claims  to  have  seen  the  apparition  of  the  materialized  "Betty"
which  seemed  to  dissolve :  first  the  feet,  then  gradually  the  whole
body  and  the  head  disappeared  leaving  only  a  small  white  spot
which  soon  vanished  (Delanne,  loc.  ext.,  ii,  268).

In  a  remarkable  series  of  experiments,  Dr.  P.  Gibier  saw  the
form  of  Lucie,  which  had  grown  under  his  eyes,  subside  at  his
feet  like  a  house  of  cards,  disappearing  exactly  as  Bien  Boa  dis-
appeared before  my  own  eyes.  "Lucie  disappeared  by  degrees
in  two  seconds  at  most  as  she  had  come,  but  this  time  some  twenty
inches  in  front  of  the  curtains  beside  which  I  was  standing.  The
curtains  did  not  move.  .  .  .  Just  as  the  last  white  spot  was
disappearing  from  the  carpet  where  the  figure  had  been,  I  stooped
down  and  put  my  hand  upon  it,  but  could  feel  nothing."

It  is  absurd  to  imagine  a  hallucination ;  and  the  only  possible
normal  explanation  would  be  that  the  figure  was  an  image  re-
flected by  a  mirror.  But  this  will  not  hold,  for  this  phantasm  of
Lucie  breathed  and  spoke ;  she  even  caused  the  light  veil  that  en-
veloped her  like  a  cloud  to  touch  Dr.  Gibier  and  Dr.  L.

Materialized  phantoms  therefore  disappear  just  like  the  sub-
jective visions  that  so  often  accompany  monitions  of  death.  Are
they  both  constituted  of  similar  substance? — if  we  may  speak  of
"substance"  which  vanished  without  leaving  a  trace.

But  the  fundamental  (not  invariable)  difference  between  ac-
cidental and  experimental  ectoplasms  is  that  in  these  latter  there
is  real  matter,  capable  of  exerting  mechanical  force,  whereas  in
the  former  (accompanying  monitions  of  death)  it  would  seem
that  in  the  vast  majority  of  cases  there  is  nothing  but  a  "shade"  in
the  popular  sense  of  the  word,  a  reflection,  or  simulacrum.  The
experimental  ectoplasms  are  in  no  sense  shadows.

It  has  been  asked  how  there  can  be  materializations  of  clothes?
This  objection  is  somewhat  naive,  for  the  materialization  of  a
hand  is  no  easier  to  understand  than  of  the  glove  that  covers  it.
It  is,  however,  clear  that  materialization  may  be  of  inanimate  ob-
jects and  not  of  the  human  body  only.  The  garments  are  usually
veils  or  draperies,  usually  white,  like  muslin,  produced  by  the

476

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

gradual  transformation  of  the  whitish  and  more  or  less  luminous
cloud  with  which  the  apparition  begins.  The  striking  experiments
of  Mme.  Bisson  and  Schrenck-Notzing  give  us  valuable  informa-
tion on  these  ectoplasmic  forms :  there  seems  to  be  a  genesis  from
an  embryo.

It  would  seem  that  the  materialization  of  garments  discredits
somewhat  the  hypothesis  that  a  deceased  human  being  should
materialize.  Prima  facie  it  was  unlikely  that  a  body  dissolved  by
putrefaction  or  disintegrated  by  cremation  should  be  recon-
structed, though  the  wild  hypothesis  of  an  astral  body  (  !)  might
be  advanced.  But  what  about  the  astral  presentment  of  a  garment,
a  hat,  an  eye-glass,  or  a  walking-stick?  This  is  the  height  of  folly.
It  seems  to  me  much  wiser  to  verify  without  pretending  to  under-
stand, and  to  admit  that  any  explanation  we  can  give  can  hardly
escape  being  ridiculous.

Instead  of  claiming  that  unknown  powers  pertaining  to  deceased
humanity  are  capable  of  producing  these  phenomena,  it  is  better
to  admit  that  we  are  dealing  with  facts  as  yet  inexplicable,  and
await  further  elucidation.1  But  there  is  no  reason  to  deny  a  fact
because  it  is  inexplicable.  Can  anyone  have  the  unpardonable  pre-
sumption to  claim  to  give  an  adequate  explanation  of  all  natural
phenomena  ?  In  metapsychics  we  come  up  against  the  inexplicable
at  every  turn.  True,  but  is  it  not  much  the  same  in  physics,  in
chemistry,  and  in  physiology?  Why,  then,  always  try  to  put
forward  a  theory  which  is  foredoomed  to  futility?  We  must
wait  till  new  facts  and  fresh  observations  enable  us  to  adopt  some
new  interpretation,  which  will  doubtless  be  an  unexpected  one.

As  regards  the  substance  of  materializations  our  ignorance  is
painful.  Some  facts  (too  infrequent  to  allow  of  definite  con-
clusions) would  seem  to  imply  that  this  substance  can  outlast  a
materialization.  Katie  gave  Crookes  a  lock  of  her  hair.  I  kept
the  hair  that  Phygia  permitted  me  to  cut  from  her  head.  Mme.
d'Esperance  allowed  sitters  to  cut  off  pieces  of  the  drapery  sur-
rounding her.

Equally  obscure  is  the  question  of  apports.  Either  matter  can
pass  through  matter,  or  matter  can  be  created ;  and  both  of  these
two  statements  are  equally  extraordinary.

As  to  the  passage  of  matter  through  matter  the  most  striking

*In  the  childhood  of  the  race  lunar  eclipses  were  ascribed  to  a  dragon  de-
vouring the  moon.  Our  notion  that  materializations  are  produced  by  super-
natural beings  is  not  much  more  reasonable.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  477

experiment  is  that  made  by  P.  Gibier,  who  having  shut  Mme.
Salmon  in  a  cage  constructed  by  himself,  saw  her  come  out  from
it.  Sundry  alleged  facts  of  the  same  kind  are  given  in  the  spirit-
ualist journals  and  in  Mme.  Frondoni-Lacombe's  book.  They  are
all  very  doubtful;  possible,  perhaps,  but  as  yet  unproven;  the
accounts  by  Stainton  Moses  notwithstanding.

The  same  or  greater  uncertainty  pertains  to  apports.  Up  to  the
present  there  is  not  a  single  case  whose  genuineness  has  been  es-
tablished. On  the  contrary,  as  soon  as  close  analysis  is  brought
to  bear,  fraud  is  disclosed,  as  in  the  cases  of  Bailey  and  Anna
Roth.

I  do  not  deny  apports.  It  would  be  rash  to  deny  anything  in
metapsychics :  I  only  say  they  are  unproven.

The  materialization  of  hands  is  absolutely  certain,  and  likewise
that  of  faces  and  whole  bodies,  though  hands  alone  have  been  seen
much  more  often;  but  no  satisfactory  proof  of  apports  or  of  the
passage  of  matter  through  matter  has  been  brought  forward  and
it  is  wise  to  reserve  judgment.

What  does  seem  to  be  proved  (and  it  is  a  relief  to  find  a  positive
fact  in  the  midst  of  so  much  uncertainty),  is  that  the  ectoplasms
in  most  cases  emerge  from  the  body  of  the  medium  ;  hence  the
word  "tfcfo-plasm."  The  experiments  of  Mme.  Bisson  and  Dr.
Schrenck-Notzing  establish  this  important  fact.  Gelatinous  pro-
jections come  from  the  mouth  or  the  shoulders  of  Marthe.  I  saw
the  arm  of  Bien  Boa  formed  in  this  way.  At  first  it  resembled  a
thin,  rigid  rod  covered  with  drapery.  Little  by  little  this  rod
thickened  under  the  drapery  and  became  a  stretched-out  arm.
The  same  phenomenon  was  very  clearly  observable  with  Eusapia.
A  kind  of  supplementary  arm  seemed  to  come  from  her  body.
Once  I  saw  a  long,  stiff  rod  proceed  from  her  side,  which  after
great  extension  had  a  hand  at  its  extremity — a  living  hand  warm
and  jointed,  absolutely  like  a  human  hand.

The  ectoplasmic  formations  with  other  mediums  were  doubtless
of  the  same  nature.

Russel  Wallace,  experimenting  with  Dr.  Monck,  saw  a  light,
whitish  vapour  appear  on  the  left  side  of  Moneys  coat.  Its  density
increased.  White  flakes,  like  snowflakes,  moved  in  the  air  extend-
ing from  the  floor  to  the  height  of  his  shoulder.  Then  this  cloud
separated  from  the  medium  sufficiently  to  take  on  the  semblance
of  a  woman  in  flowing  white  draperies.  Then  all  returned  into
the  body  of  the  medium  (Delanne,  loc.  cit.,  644).

478

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Mr.  Mitchiner  observed  a  white  vapour  emerge  from  Eglin  ton's
side,  wreathe  itself  round  his  feet,  then  gradually  form  a  column
which  took  on  the  aspect  of  a  tall,  fine-looking  man  with  a  black
beard.  Eglinton  was  perfectly  visible  during  the  whole  time,  and
a  kind  of  umbilical  cord  connected  him  with  the  nebulous  form.
After  a  short  time,  Eglinton  being  seated,  the  form  seemed  to  dis-
solve into  his  body  at  the  level  of  the  chest.  A.  de  Rochas,  ex-
perimenting with  Mme.  d'Esperance,  saw  a  luminous  vapour,  like
the  Milky  Way,  emerge  from  her  breast.

It  is  not  necessary  that  the  sequence  of  materializations  should
always  be  the  same ;  there  may  be  differences  of  power  in  various
mediums.  With  the  exceptionally  powerful,  such  as  Home  and
Florence  Cook,  the  materialization  is  rapid  and  complete,  and  the
ectoplasm  is  separate  from  the  first;  with  others,  also  very  power-
ful, like  Eglinton,  Mme.  d'Esperance,  and  Marthe  Beraud,  sepa-
ration from  the  ectoplasm  does  not  take  place  at  once  and  the
reality  of  the  phantom  is  very  transitory.  With  Eusapia  and
Stainton  Moses  the  forms  are  much  less  defined ;  only  very  rarely
can  an  independent  apparition,  autonomous  and  separate  from  the
medium,  be  seen.

Provisionally,  the  sequence  of  materialization  phenomena,  as  ob-
served with  Eusapia,  may  be  stated  as  follows:  At  first,  touches
and  raps  produced  both  easily  and  frequently;  this  is  the  first
stage,  in  which  nothing  is  visible,  for  the  material  energy  disen-
gaged from  her  body  is  formless.  In  the  second  stage  the  hand  is
formed,  but  still  cannot  be  seen,  though  it  can  execute  well-defined
mechanical  actions,  can  take  hold  of  a  bell  or  a  book,  and  can
touch  one's  head  with  fingers  that  are  felt  to  be  warm  and  jointed.
Finally  in  the  third  stage,  which  was  rarely  reached  in  my  ex-
periments with  Eusapia,  the  hand  becomes  visible  and  can  be
photographed.

In  a  still  rarer,  fourth  stage,  not  only  a  hand  but  a  whole  body
is  formed  and  detached.  Vassallo,  Porro,  Morselli,  and  Bottazzi
have  been  able  to  witness  these  complete  materializations.

Luminous  phenomena  are  relatively  frequent.  I  know  that  these
lend  themselves  to  simulation,  at  least  when  they  take  the  form  of
wandering  lights  which  move  like  sparks  before  the  sitters  and
disappear.  I  know  that  these  can  be  imitated  with  little  phos-
phorescent projections,  but  no  one  has  perceived  any  odour  of
phosphorus  after  these  lights,  and  the  trick  is  not  easy  when  both
hands  of  the  medium  are  held  as  Eusapia's  were,  and  she  con-

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  479

tinues  to  talk.  This  excludes  the  hypothesis  of  little  particles
of  phosphorus  held  in  her  mouth,  which  has  actually  been
advanced  ( ??).

Such  a  use  of  phosphorus  is,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  impossible
when  the  medium  has  been  searched,  undressed,  her  hands  held,
and  when,  as  with  Eusapia  at  Ribaud  Island,  there  was  no  phos-
phorus at  her  disposal.  On  some  occasions  (though  not  very
often)  Ochorowicz  and  I  have  seen  small  green  lights,  like  eyes,
oblique  in  shape,  floating  about  in  the  air.  In  Paris,  in  Milan,  in
Rome,  and  Montfort-rAmaury,  other  observers  have  verified  the
same.  I  have  myself  recently  seen  it  at  Warsaw  with  several
mediums  under  unexceptionable  conditions.

Nearly  all  noted  mediums — Eglinton,  Mme.  d'Esperance,  and
Florence  Cook — have  produced  luminous  phenomena.

Mr.  Livermore,  experimenting  with  Kate  Fox  (a  medium  open
to  suspicion),  thus  describes  the  phenomenon  :x

"A  spherical  ovoid  of  light  rises  from  the  floor  as  high  as  our
foreheads  and  places  itself  on  the  table  in  front  of  us.  At  my  re-
quest the  light  immediately  became  so  bright  as  to  light  up  that
part  of  the  room.  We  saw  perfectly  the  form  of  a  woman  hold-
ing the  light  in  her  outstretched  hand."  Livermore  does  not  say
if  Kate  Fox  was  herself  also  seen  at  this  moment.

With  Home,  luminous  phenomena  were  very  frequently  ob-
served.2 Sometimes  it  was  a  small  luminous  ball  floating  in  the
air ;  sometimes  small  phosphorescent  lights,  occasionally  much
brighter  effects — "a  bright  beam  of  sunshine  flooding  us  with
light,  and  a  beautiful  rainbow  appeared  in  the  heavens,,,  sometimes
wandering  lights  touched  the  sitters  and  gave  the  impression  of

*At  this  point  there  occurred  a  singular  instance  of  cryptesthesia.  I  had
broken  off  my  writing  at  the  word  "phenomenon"  above,  on  Monday,  Febru-
ary 9th,  at  4.30  p.m.  Leaving  the  paper  on  my  desk,  I  went  out  to  make  an
experiment  with  Stella,  who  had  never  been  into  my  house.  She  knew  in  a
general  way  that  I  was  engaged  on  a  treatise  on  metapsychics,  but  had,  of
course,  never  seen  a  line  of  it.  That  day  I  interrogated  her  with  the  plan-
chette  on  a  lost  will  (result  absolutely  nil),  and  instead  of  an  answer  on  this
subject  I  received  "Helios  I  make  by  radiation,"  a  phrase  which  applies  curi-
ously to  the  last  sentence  I  was  writing  at  my  own  house.

This  may  be  a  coincidence,  though  I  do  not  think  so,  but  even  so  it  is  worth
noting.  My  hands  were  not  on  the  table  and  the  word  "Helios"  surprised  me
greatly.  Stella  knows  no  Greek,  but  knows  the  meaning  of  "Helios."  The
phrase  given  by  the  planchette  seems  to  be  the  logical  sequel  to  the  interrupted
sentence  in  my  MS.

^Experiments  on  spiritualism  by  Viscount  Adare,  s.  1.  n.  d.  (London,  1869),
pp.  13,  38,  52,  6o,  65,  76,  83,  88,  89,  114,  "4.

480

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

contact  with  a  foreign  body.  In  one  remarkable  case  Lindsay  and
Charlie  saw,  as  it  were,  tongues  of  fire  on  Home's  head.

With  Stainton  Moses  the  lights  were  frequent,  sometimes  very
bright,1  appearing  like  reflected  lights  (from  what  source?)  col-
umns of  phosphorescent  vapour  or  diffused  light  like  that  of  a
comet,  or  like  stars;  in  short,  most  varied  forms.  These  lights
were  observed  sometimes  by  S.  Moses  himself,  sometimes  by  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Speer.  The  good  faith  of  these  observers  is  not  to  be  im-
pugned ;  though  we  may  suppose  that  Stainton  Moses,  when  alone,
may  have  been  liable  to  visual  hallucinations.

Hyslop  {Am.  J.  S.  P.  R„  1912,  190)  has  reported  that  Anna
Burton  produced  lights  when  in  a  state  of  trance.  Such  lights
could  not  have  appeared  four  feet  away  from  her  even  if  she  had
had  lucifer  matches  of  phosphorized  oil,  for  she  had  been  carefully
undressed  and  clothed  in  special  garments  before  the  experiment.
It  was,  however,  noticed  that  in  one  case  her  saliva  was  phosphor-
escent, which  detracts  somewhat  from  the  authenticity  of  the
phenomenon,  though  in  view  of  the  very  poisonous  nature  of
phosphorus,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  that  she  could  keep  phos-
phorous matches  in  her  mouth.  Besides,  even  if  this  were  ad-
mitted, it  is  not  easy  to  see  how  lights  of  the  kind  described  could
appear.

E.  Bozzano  {A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  82)  has  observed  thin  whitish
fluidic  filaments  proceeding  from  each  of  the  joints  of  Eusapia's
fingers.

J.  Ochorowicz  has  insisted  on  the  luminous  flashes  that  pro-
ceeded from  Stanislawa  Tomczyk,  with  whom  he  made  some  very
good  experiments.  He  reminds  us  that  MacNab  had  obtained
them  also.  Wandering  lights  are  often  seen  with  Eusapia,  small
green  lights  which  I  have  seen  sometimes,  but  rarely.  It  is  im-
probable that  these  lights  are  akin  to  the  luminous  aureole  more
or  less  like  that  of  the  saints,  which  emanates  from  the  body  of
some  mediums.  Commandant  Darget  has  studied  these  lights  and
tried  to  photograph  them,  but,  as  G.  de  Fontenay  has  shown,  it  is
likely  that  there  are  photographic  errors.  The  same  holds  good
for  H.  Baraduc's  negatives.

Photographic  studies  of  luminous  emanations  from  mediums,
resembling  clouds,  flashes,  or  bright  vapour,  are  still  too  uncertain

Consult  especially  The  experiences  of  W.  Stainton  Moses,  P.  S.  P.  R.,  xi,
189s.  24-114.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  481

to  allow  of  any  definite  conclusions.  It  seems,  however,  especially
since  Ochorowicz's  able  work,  that  a  series  of  valuable  researches
might  be  undertaken  on  this;  but  there  are  two  necessary  con-
ditions, both  difficult  to  secure — a  powerful  medium  (for  it  is
averred  that  only  mediums  have  this  power)  and  an  experimenter
who  is  at  once  a  good  psychologist  and  a  skilled  photographer.1
In  certain  cases,  loud  and  extraordinary  sounds,  which  are  as-
suredly objective,  are  heard.  Near  Stainton  Moses  very  loud
sounds  are  described  by  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Speer.  The  sounds  that
Grocyn  (the  so-called  guide  of  Stainton  Moses)  drew  from  his
invisible  instrument  were  so  powerful  as  to  resemble  those  that  a
giant  might  draw  from  a  huge  violoncello  .  .  .  they  were  some-
times such  as  to  produce  terror  .  .  .  they  were  like  a  double
bass  played  on  a  big  drum  and  plucked  like  a  guitar.  Dr.
Speer  says,  "Up  to  then  we  had  not  heard  the  sound  of  wind-in-
struments, when  there  resounded  a  loud  trumpet-call  between
Stainton  and  myself.  This  sound  was  repeated  several  times.
.  .  .  One  evening  we  heard  the  sound  of  bells  in  the  garden
following  us  about  ...  in  the  room,  where  there  were  no

*To  show  the  extreme  difficulty  of  good  photographic  experiments,  it
is  sufficient  to  recall  the  fruitless  and  laborious  endeavours  of  G.  Le  Bon,
an  experienced  photographer,  with  what  he  calls  "dark  light."  So  also  the
N-rays,  which  have  not  been  demonstrated,  though  studied  and  described  by
eminent  physicists.  In  such  matters  experientia  fallax,  judicium  difficile  I
shall  therefore  not  consider  the  photographs  received  by  A.  de  Rochas  from
one  of  his  relations,  a  very  sincere  person,  M.  de  B.  {A.  S.  P.,  1905,  xv,  582).
Is  it  certain  that  M.  de  B.'s  brother-in-law  has  not  imagined  a  spirit-photo-
graph? which  is  so  easy  to  make.  Regarding  faked  photographs,  consult  A.
de  Rochas  {A.  S.  P.,  1908,  viii,  9-15);  Darget  {A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  20-26);
Julia  Rosenkrantz  (A.  S.  P.,  1909,  xix,  361-365).  E.  Morselli  has  published  an
erudite  and  witty  article  on  this  subject,  with  some  amusing  photographs  (A.
S.  P.,  1908,  xviii,  icq).

The  genuineness  of  so-called  psychic  photographs  is  still  a  matter  of
dispute,  for  there  have  been  lamentable  trickeries.  Mr.  Allerton  S.  Cushman
obtained  "An  Evidential  Case  of  Spirit  Photography"  (published  under  that
title  in  the  /.  S.  P.  R.,  April,  1922,  pp.  132-147).  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Cushman  of
Washington  came  to  England  quite  unexpectedly  without  making  their  inten-
tion known  to  anyone.  They  went  to  the  British  College  of  Psychic  Science
at  59  Holland  Park,  London,  and  not  finding  Mr.  Hope  of  Crewe,  they  had  an
interview  with  Mrs.  Deane,  another  psychic  photographer.  On  one  of  the
negatives  taken  there  appears  a  face  very  like  that  of  a  young  daughter  of  Mr.
and  Mrs.  Cushman  who  had  died  eighteen  months  before.  "It  cannot  be  sup-
posed that  this  portrait  is  a  reproduction  of  any  existing  portrait  for  none
such  was  taken  to  the  College,  and  the  attitudes  are  different,  especially  the
direction  of  the  eyes.  The  whole  question  is  the  degree  of  resemblance  be-
tween the  psychic  image  and  the  dead  girl.  It  must  be  admitted  that  the  re-
semblance to  the  normal  portrait  is  so  close  as  to  be  almost  identical"  (Second
edition).

482

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

musical  instruments,  the  carillon  continued,  giving  the  effect  of  a
brilliant  concerto  on  the  piano."  1

Stainton  Moses  showed  many  other  objective  phenomena  which
must  be  considered  genuine  unless  we  admit  the  absurd  hypothesis
of  wilful  deceit  on  the  part  of  three  honourable  persons  who
risked  persecution,  ridicule,  and  hostility  by  publishing  them  and
could  get  nothing  by  doing  so  but  abuse  and  calumnies.

Sometimes  perfumes  exuded  from  his  head,  and  the  more  they
were  wiped  away  the  more  abundant  they  became.

Direct  writing  was  obtained.  Dr.  Speer,  being  alone  in  the
room,  took  a  sheet  of  music  paper,  placed  it  on  a  bureau  with  a
pencil,  and  left  the  room,  locking  the  door  after  him.  He  never
lost  sight  of  the  door,  and  no  one  could  enter  the  room ;  but  on  his
return  the  paper  was  covered  with  writing.  "This  instance  of  di-
rect writing,"  he  says,  "is  one  of  the  most  satisfying  proofs  we
have  ever  received. "

There  were  also  lights,  weak  at  first,  but  gradually  becoming
very  bright,  like  torches.  Mrs.  Speer  says  that  one  of  these
luminous  nuclei  came  on  to  the  table,  skimmed  round  the  heads
of  the  sitters,  struck  against  the  ceiling,  and  went  to  the  top  of
the  door,  giving  out  a  sound  whenever  it  touched  anything.  Some-
times a  hand  could  be  seen  holding  the  light,  a  hand  quite  different
from  that  of  Stainton  Moses.  One  day  one  of  these  lights  rose
from  the  floor  through  the  table  as  if  it  were  no  obstacle.  Once
such  a  light  remained  visible  for  half  an  hour.

Mr.  Podmore,  convinced  that  there  are  no  objective  phenomena
and  that  there  cannot  be  any,  has  tried,  without  adducing  the  sem-
blance of  proof,  to  maintain  that  Stainton  Moses  was  a  great
neuropath,  a  hysteric,  deceiving  for  the  sake  of  deceiving,  moved
by  a  kind  of  half-morbid,  half-unconscious  knavery.  These  in-
sinuations against  the  good  faith  and  honesty  of  Stainton  Moses
will  not  hold.  F.  Myers  had  a  great  admiration  for  him.  Dr.
Johnson,  his  medical  attendant,  states  that  he  was  a  man  of  great
intellectual  capacity,  methodical,  well  balanced,  and  a  steady
worker.  It  would  be  necessary  also  to  incriminate  Dr.  and  Mrs.
Speer  and  other  honourable  witnesses.

In  fine,  it  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  these  luminous  phenomena
are  explicable  as  hallucination  or  as  fraud.  Hallucination  is  one
of  those  ridiculous  hypotheses  which  are  as  inadmissible  in  meta-

xBozzano,  Pour  la  defense  de  Stainton  Moses,  A.  S.  P.,  1905,  xv,  76-129.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  483

psychics  as  in  any  other  science.  An  observer  is  never  hallu-
cinated. When  he  reads  38.55  on  a  thermometer  it  is  because  that
is  the  temperature  indicated.  If  he  sees  a  light  or  hears  a  sound,
or  perceives  an  odour,  it  is  because  there  is  an  objective  fact  that
produces  these  sensations.

Fraud,  of  course,  is  always  possible;  but  phosphorescent  balls
which  give  no  odour  of  phosphorus,  luminous  appearances  round
the  head,  or  luminous  hands  are  phenomena  that  no  medium  can
produce  by  trickery  after  he  has  been  carefully  searched.

Neverthless,  luminosity  is  so  strange  a  fact  that  further  proofs
must  be  required ;  methodical  research  is  necessary.  We  must
wait  till  we  have  mediums  capable  of  producing  luminous  phe-
nomena, like  Home,  Eusapia,  Stainton  Moses,  and  Eglinton,  and
then  endeavour  to  scrutinize  the  conditions  yet  more  closely  than
our  illustrious  predecessors  did.

The  production  of  sounds  and  scents  belongs  to  the  same  group
of  physical  phenomena  as  ectoplasms.  Again  it  is  from  Home  and
Moses  that  most  of  the  data  are  drawn,  and  again  new  experi-
ments to  verify  and  intensify  the  effects  produced  by  these  cele-
brated and  powerful  mediums  are  desirable.

It  would  have  been  valuable  that  these  luminosities  should  have
been  established  by  photography,  but  up  to  the  present,  apart  from
the  experiments  by  Crookes,  Mme.  Bisson,  Schrenck-Notzing,
Imoda,  and  Ochorowicz,  the  results  in  this  direction  are  but  poor.

The  painful  imperfection  of  the  old  spiritist  photographs  may
be  seen  from  the  book  published  by  Dr.  Foveau  de  Courmelles  at
the  instigation  of  M.  Emmanuel  Vauchez.1  Despite  all  my  good-
will I  cannot  consider  most  of  these  faces  as  authentic.

Only  very  simple-minded  persons  could  accept  the  photographs
by  Dr.  Th.  Haumann  of  Washington.  Almost  all  the  photographs
which  show  doubles  result  either  from  photographic  errors  or  from
a  very  easy  trick.  Double  exposure,  easily  done  by  the  least  skil-
ful, gives  a  very  good  imitation  of  a  phantom  or  a  materialized
face.

Photographs  of  a  form  that  is  visible  to  the  experimenters  is
totally  different  from  these.  Unless  there  is  gross  trickery  Cas  in
the  case  of  Ofelia  Corrales  at  Costa  Rica),  photography  has  the
great  merit  that  it  defines  the  phenomenon  and  registers  details
that  a  rapid  glance  may  have  passed  over.    However,  in  certain

xLa  Photographic  transcendentale,  i  vol.,  8vo,  Paris,  Libr.  nationale.

484

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

cases,  methodical,  prolonged,  and  conscientious  observation  is
nearly  as  valid  as  photography.  The  shock  of  the  flashlight  often
arrests  the  phenomena  and  then  the  successive  stages  of  their
production  cannot  be  followed,  as  I  was  able  to  do  with  Marthe
Beraud.

But  as  to  doubles,  effluvia,  portraits  of  the  deceased,  of  phan-
toms invisible  to  the  sitters  and  perceptible  only  on  the  photo-
graphic plate,  I  do  not  think  that  anything  decisive  has  yet  been
produced.  What  the  eye  does  not  see  the  plate  rarely  registers.
The  whole  question  of  human  effluvia,  thought  forms  (as  Com-
mandant Darget  has  endeavoured  to  demonstrate  them)  must  be
studied  anew  from  the  very  beginning.  Whatever  Sir  A.  Conan
Doyle  may  claim,  it  must  be  stated  that,  despite  many  attempts,
nothing  reliable  has  been  proved.1

Photographic  evidence  of  this  kind  is  always  to  be  received  with
caution,  unless  the  exact  conditions  under  which  the  negative  was
taken  are  known.  Mr.  Arthur  Hill,  in  the  Occult  Review  of
March,  1910,  gives  a  remarkable  case,  though  he  raises  some
doubts  and  with  some  reason.  A  photographer  at  S  in  Lincoln-
shire, named  Binns,  not  a  spiritualist  and  making  no  pretensions
to  anything  of  the  kind,  when  developing  the  photograph  of  a
client — a  farmer  named  Warren — saw  the  superimposed  face  of  a
certain  Mr.  Ground,  a  cousin  of  Warren's,  of  whose  existence
Binns  did  not  know.  This  man  Ground  was  dying  in  a  hospital
about  fifteen  miles  away.  The  plate  was  taken  from  a  fresh
packet.  Mr.  Ground  had  never  been  photographed  since  his  child-
hood. Everything  seems  to  point  to  an  authentic  fact.  But  we
can  scarcely  draw  this  conclusion  without  further  proof.

After  a  detailed  study  which  is  a  model  of  methodical  argument,
Mr.  Walter  F.  Prince  concludes  that  the  number  of  so-called
spirit  photographs  representing  Mr.  Bocock  are  due  to  fraud:
and  he  adds,  very  justly,  that  there  is  not  as  yet  any  completely
satisfactory  proof  of  "spirit  photography"  (Am,  S.  P.  R.,  March,
1920,  585).

It  is  difficult  to  contest  that  pronouncement,  but  it  applies  only
to  the  cases  when  the  head  or  the  form  is  invisible  to  the  sitters ;
in  these  latter  cases  criticism  should  be  directed  to  the  control
of  the  medium  and  not  to  the  photographic  process.

*To  judge  of  the  extreme  difficulty  of  transcendental  photography,  the  book
by  G.  de  Fontenay,  La  Photographie  et  V etude  des  phenomenes  psychiques,
Paris  (Gauthier  Villars,  191 2),  may  profitably  be  read.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  485

After  treating  of  ectoplasms,  some  other  peculiar  facts  should
be  mentioned  that  find  no  place  among  ordinary  ectoplasmic
phenomena.   These  are  mostly  due  to  Home.

The  most  astounding  experiments  with  Home,  prior  to  those
by  Crookes,  are  described  in  a  very  rare  book1  of  which  only  fifty
copies  were  printed.   I  owe  my  knowledge  of  it  to  J.  Maxwell.

It  deals  with  private  experiments  made  by  Viscount  Adare  in
1867  and  1868,  when  Home  was  at  his  house.  Viscount  Adare
did  not  intend  these  reports,  which  were  letters  addressed  to  his
father,  for  general  circulation.  In  his  introduction  he  says,  "I
have  omitted  mention  of  the  precautions  taken  against  trickery,
collusion,  and  other  fraudulent  acts;  for  I  have  been  convinced
that  precautions  were  needless,  having  invariably  found  that  the
phenomena  were  such  as  could  only  be  produced  by  an  intelligence
invisible  indeed  but  active  and  acting  from  reason. "

The  absence  of  such  indications  of  the  precautions  taken  against
conscious  or  unconscious  fraud  by  Home  causes  some  misgivings,
but  as  all  the  details  have  been  very  carefully  noted  by  Viscount
Adare  these  wonderful  seances  can  be  reconstructed  and  we  can
suppose  that  deceptions  difficult,  and  by  the  nature  of  the  phenom-
ena, almost  impossible,  were  not  practised.  We  may  admit  that
Viscount  Adare,  Lord  Dunraven,  Mr.  Jencken,  Major  Blackburn,
and  the  other  honourable  and  educated  sitters  would  have  needed
to  be  terribly  blinded  by  credulity  to  have  failed  in  unmasking
gross  and  palpable  frauds  continued  for  two  years.  And  it  must
be  remembered  that  when  Crookes  took  many  and  rigorous  pre-
cautions nearly  the  same  phenomena  were  produced.

To  adhere  strictly  to  the  plan  of  the  present  book  as  a  treatise  on
metapsychics,  the  telekinesis,  raps,  levitations,  and  other  singular
phenomena  reported  by  Viscount  Adare  should  be  treated  in
separate  chapters ;  but  it  is  perhaps  better,  at  the  risk  of  depart-
ing from  the  logical  order,  to  summarize  in  one  place  the  ex-
traordinary facts  that  he  narrates.

Movements  without  contact  were  frequent;  an  accordion,  of
which  Home  only  held  one  side,  played  a  melody  singularly  well.
This  was  in  the  light.  Raps  were  heard  over  the  whole  room  at
the  same  time  (pp.  2-4).

In  a  room  completely  darkened  (p.  13)  Home  sat  at  the  piano,

^Experiences  in  spiritualism  with  Mr.  D.  D.  Home,  by  Viscount  Adare,  with
introductory  remarks  by  the  Earl  of  Dunraven.  London,  Thomas  Scott,
1869  (?).

486

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

and  this  piano  rose  from  the  ground,  first  about  an  inch,  and  then
about  fifteen  inches.  That  day  Home's  body  was  elongated  (  ??).
Viscount  Adare  says  that  no  error  was  possible.  His  ordinary
height  is  five  feet  eight  inches ;  he  elongated  to  six  feet  five  and
one-half  inches.

The  table  rose  into  the  air  seventeen  times,  as  stated  in  the
index  to  the  chief  phenomena  at  the  beginning  of  the  book  (xxiv-
xxv ).  Once  it  rose  seventeen  inches  and  remained  at  that  height
for  a  considerable  time  (p.  109).  In  the  experiment  of  March
12,  1869,  a  table  with  four  legs  placed  twenty-one  inches  from
Home's  chair  rose  in  the  air  while  no  one  was  touching  it  and
settled  gently  on  another  table  on  which  were  a  number  of  ob-
jects, without  touching  any  of  them.  During  all  that  time  strange
noises  were  heard,  like  voices,  and  the  table  was  shaken  by  strong
vibrations.  On  the  29th  of  March,  in  the  light,  the  table  rose  to  a
height  of  twenty-three  inches,  swaying  in  the  air,  and  after  re-
maining at  that  height  for  a  few  seconds  rose  farther  to  at  least
five  feet  and  then  came  down  with  a  noise  like  a  railway  train.

Levitations  were  frequent,  and  still  more  frequent  the  elon-
gations, this  latter  a  singular  phenomenon  very  susceptible  of
mistake,  for  which  we  have  no  parallel.  Home  was  placed  against
the  wall,  Adare  being  in  front  of  him ;  then  his  arms  seemed  to
lengthen  and  his  breast  to  swell.  "Home  said  to  me,  'Adare,  you
see  the  extension  is  from  the  chest.'  He  again  placed  himself
against  the  wall  and  extended  his  arms  to  their  ordinary  stretch.
I  made  a  pencil  mark  on  the  wall  at  the  ends  of  his  fingers.  He
then  lengthened  his  left  arm  and  I  made  a  fresh  mark;  then  his
right  arm,  which  I  also  marked.  The  total  elongation,  measured
in  this  way,  was  nine  and  one-half  inches."

This  experiment  is  much  less  conclusive  than  would  appear  at
first  sight;  for  the  voluntary  power  of  extension  of  the  arms  is
variable  so  that  this  elongation  is  far  from  being  an  authentic
fact,  and  it  is  better  not  to  make  much  of  it.

Apparitions  of  hands,  touches,  and  lights  round  the  head  were
frequent.

I  will  give  only  a  few  details  of  a  levitation  and  a  fire  test,  from
Adare's  book,  slightly  abridged.

On  the  16th  of  December,  at  Buckingham  Gate  (p.  82)  in
presence  of  Viscount  Adare,  Captain  Charlie  Wynne,  and  the
Master  of  Lindsay,  Home  elongated  and  rose  into  the  air.  Then
he  said,  "Do  not  be  frightened,  and  on  no  account  leave  your

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  487

chairs."  Then  Lindsay  said,  "It  is  too  horrible.  He  has  passed
through  the  window  to  the  next  room,  and  is  coming  in  at  that
window. "  Then,  says  Viscount  Adare,  we  heard  Home  in  the  next
room;  he  came  back  through  the  window,  sat  down,  and  began
to  laugh.  "I  laugh,"  said  he,  "to  think  that  if  a  policeman  had
seen  me  how  surprised  he  would  have  been  to  see  a  man  come
through  the  window  and  float  along  the  wall.  Adare.  come  with
me."  We  went  into  the  adjoining  room.  I  opened  the  window
which  he  went  through  headfirst,  his  body  being  nearly  horizontal
and  apparently  rigid.  Then  he  returned  and  we  went  into  the  next
room.    The  rooms  were  on  the  third  floor.

Other  strange  things  were  seen — a  form  like  a  bird  flying  and
whistling  in  the  room,  tongues  and  jets  of  fire  from  Home's  head ;
then  as  it  were  the  blast  of  a  strong  wind,  "the  most  weird  thing
I  ever  heard."

The  fire  test  is  more  astonishing  still.  At  Norwood  in  the  house
of  Mrs.  Hennings  (p.  68),  Home  first  gave  Adare  the  power  to
raise  a  book  by  placing  his  hand  flat  above  it :  at  one  moment  there
was  an  interval  of  more  than  two  inches  between  the  hand  and  the
book.  Then  he  went  to  the  fireplace,  took  out  a  burning  coal
twice  as  large  as  an  orange,  put  it  on  his  hand  and  walked  about
the  room  showing  it.  He  then  gave  us  his  hands  to  smell,  which
instead  of  having  any  odour  of  burning  were  scented ;  he  replaced
the  coal  in  the  fire,  and  kneeling  down  "placed  his  face  right
among  the  burning  coals,  moving  it  about  as  though  bathing  it  in
water ! !"  Then  he  held  his  hands  some  time  over  the  flame  of  a
candle.  He  took  the  lighted  coal  again  into  his  hands  and  blew
on  it  to  quicken  it.  "He  asked  me  to  touch  it :  I  did  so  and  took
it  into  my  two  hands,  he  put  his  hands  over  it,  and  we  held  the
lighted  coal  in  our  four  hands ;  I  hardly  felt  any  heat."

The  same  astounding  experiment  was  repeated  on  April  3d  at
Astley  House  (p.  147).  This  seance  was  remarkable;  it  is  cor-
roborated by  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall.  A  lighted  coal  was  placed  on  Mr.
Hall's  head,  and  his  white  hair  was  combed  over  the  coal,  and  left
four  or  five  minutes  (p.  178)  :  the  hair  was  not  burned:  a  few
moments  later  this  coal  was  so  hot  that  one  could  not  bear  one's
face  near  it.

We  must  hold  in  suspense  belief  in  these  unheard-of  facts  till
new  proofs  have  been  given;  but  there  have  been  so  many  rash
denials  already  in  metapsychic  matters  that  we  ought  to  be  cau-
tious in  our  negations.   These  experiences  are  not  comparable  to

488

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

the  celebrated  ordeal  by  fire  that  certain  fakirs1  provide  for  the
delectation  of  the  public,  for  to  them  all  verification  is  wanting,
and  the  precise  conditions  are  not  revealed.  Possibly  abundant
perspiration  after  quick  walking  might  suffice  to  prevent  burn-
ing (??).

In  any  case,  if  the  narrative  of  Lord  Adare,  corroborated  by
Mrs.  Hennings,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Jencken,  Mr.  Saal  and  Mr.  Hart,  is
correct,  no  natural  explanation  seems  possible

It  is  beyond  doubt  powerful  mediums  produce  peculiar  and
nearly  unique  phenomena  which  can  hardly  be  classified.  For  in-
stance :  In  a  seance  at  Paris  in  the  house  of  C.  Flammarion,  I  was
holding  Eusapia's  right  hand,  and  Flammarion  her  left.  I  re-
peatedly felt  with  my  right  hand  John's  large  hand  through  the
curtain.  I  said  to  Eusapia,  ''I  am  going  to  prick  that  hand  to  see
whether  it  is  really  a  living  hand."  The  room  was  in  half-light,
and  a  pin  was  given  me.  Taking  the  pin  in  my  right  hand  I
pricked  John's  hand  through  the  curtain.  I  then  felt  a  prick  on  my
left  shoulder  through  my  clothes,  as  if  a  pin  were  thrust  in,  with-
out hurting  me  much,  but  enough  to  stop  me,  and  I  ceased  to
prick  the  hypothetical  fluidic  hand.  The  prick  I  felt  on  my  shoulder
was  no  hypothesis.    Obviously  no  explanation  can  be  attempted.

Another  strange  phenomenon,  unique  up  to  the  present,  is  the
case  of  the  letter  announcing  a  serious  event,  which  when  placed  on
the  mantelpiece  gave  raps  loud  enough  to  call  attention  (p.  447).

The  verification  of  such  unique  and  isolated  phenomena  must
depend  on  a  knowledge  in  minute  detail  of  the  lives  of  powerful
mediums.  All  hagiographies  are  certainly  not  illusions  or  im-
postures ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish  what  is  true  from  what
is  false.  It  would  be  folly  to  accept  all  that  is  said  in  the  lives  of
the  saints;  but  it  would  be  equally  rash  to  deny  everything.  As
there  really  are  rare  and  well-nigh  unique  phenomena  of  which
verification  is  always  more  or  less  defective,  it  is  well  to  wait  be-
fore forming  a  decided  opinion.  There  are  more  surprises  in  re-
serve in  metapsychics  than  in  any  other  science.

Meanwhile  we  must  base  our  conclusions,  not  on  exceptional
phenomena,  but  on  the  ectoplasmic  facts  that  are,  so  to  say,  com-
monplaces of  metapsychics.

the  Aissaouas.    See  J.  Davane,  Les  Aissaouas  chartneurs  de  serpgnt,
Paris,  Dentu,  1862,  2d  ed.,  et  Davyl,  Paris,  1882.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)

Telekinesis  and  ectoplasms  are  degrees  of  the  same  thing — the
objectification  or  projection  of  an  intelligent  mechanical  energy.
This  mechanical  energy  is  sometimes  invisible,  as  when  an  ac-
cordion moves  without  apparently  being  touched :  sometimes
visible  when  the  energy  takes  the  form  of  a  living  moving  hand.
But  both  are  exteriorizations  of  motive  power — extcriorisations
de  la  motricite — to  borrow  the  excellent  term  devised  by  De
Rochas.

The  tact  that  intelligent  forces  are  projected  from  an  organism,
that  can  act  mechanically,  can  move  objects  and  make  sounds,  is  a
phenomenon  as  certainly  established  as  any  fact  in  physics.  The
only  difference  between  this  telekinesis  (revealed  by  movements
and  raps)  and  ordinary  commonplace  mechanical  effects  is  that
the  former  is  exceptional,  only  producible  by  a  very  small  numbei
of  persons,  and  even  by  them  only  occasionally  and  with  difficulty

All  the  same  it  is  an  assured  fact — the  experiments  with  Home
Eusapia,  Stainton  Moses,  and  Miss  Goligher  prove  it  definitely
It  is  doubtless  grievous  to  a  scientific  man  to  have  to  admit  that
there  are  exceptional  phenomena ;  yet  the  magnet  attracts  iron !
That  is  exceptional,  but  no  one  denies  it.

The  materialization  of  a  hand,  of  a  body  having  all  the  sem-
blance of  life,  of  a  face,  or  of  a  phantom,  is  a  fact  as  assured  as
telekinesis ;  and  this  makes  it  all  the  more  difficult  to  understand,
for  these  forms  seem  to  have  all  the  attributes  of  life.  Material-
ized forms  are  intelligent,  and  have,  at  any  rate  in  appearance,  a
personality :  the  hand  is  warm  and  living,  the  eyes  move  in  their
orbits  and  look,  the  voice  speaks,  the  respiration  disengages  car-
bon dioxide,  the  legs  move,  and  the  hands  take  hold  of  objects.

The  genesis  of  seemingly  living  forms  has  been  observed ;  they
begin  like  a  nebula,  they  consolidate  in  the  same  way  as  a  nebula
condenses  into  a  planet.  Garments,  veils,  and  accessories  are
formed  simultaneously,  and  all  have  usually  but  a  transitory  exist-
ence, vanishing  as  they  came — cea  fumus  in  auras.

To  affirm  all  this  is  to  affirm  a  great  deal.  Is  it  possible  to
go  farther?  It  may  be  possible  in  the  future,  but  today  it  would
be  imprudent  to  go  beyond.   Let  us  pause  before  the  Beyond!

Photographs,  direct  writing,  apports,  the  production  of  musical
sounds  and  of  lights  cannot  be  held  to  be  established,  fraud  being
easy  and  frequent.  Metapsychics  presents  so  many  strange  facts,
that  these  also  may  be  possible,  and  even  for  the  most  part  ad-
missible.  No  one  would  have  thought  of  simulating  them  if  they

490

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

had  never  really  occurred.  I  do  not  hesitate  to  think  them  fairly
probable,  but  they  are  not  proven.  We  must  stop  short,  being  in
the  domain  of  strict  science,  and  on  the  threshold  of  a  mystery,
and  we  can  affirm  telekinesis  and  materializations,  but  nothing
more.

In  speaking  of  lucidity  it  was  said  that  experiences  of  lucidity
were  of  themselves  insufficient  to  prove  survival  scientifically ;  for
cognition  of  things  inaccessible  to  our  senses  is  a  simpler  hypothe-
sis than  the  survival  of  a  dead  person.  We  will  now  consider
whether  materializations  give  the  proof  of  survival  that  lucidity
alone  cannot  give.

In  the  first  place  the  affirmation  of  a  phantom  that  he  is  such
and  such  a  person  counts  for  little  or  nothing.  When  the  phan-
tom of  Bien  Boa  appears  and  claims  to  be  an  Indian  prince,  al-
though the  objective  reality  of  the  apparition  is  certain  in  the  given
conditions,  there  is  nothing  to  prove  that  this  phantom  is  animated
by  the  mind  of  a  deceased  Indian  prince  who  remembers  all  his
past.  Helen  Smith  says  she  is  Marie  Antoinette,  but  that  does
not  convince  me  that  Marie  Antoinette  has  returned  to  earth  and
speaks  by  Helen's  vocal  organs:  the  affirmations  of  Bien  Boa  and
John  King  have  no  more  value.  Up  to  the  present  the  ideas,
gestures,  and  words  of  materialized  forms  do  not  entitle  us  to  say
that  their  personality  differs  from  that  of  the  medium  more  than
the  personalities  evoked  by  Alice,  when  hypnotized,  differ  from
Alice  in  her  normal  state.  It  is  therefore  very  rash  to  assume
that  the  consciousness  of  Bien  Boa,  Marie  Antoinette,  or  John
King  returns  to  us.

Unfortunately  for  the  spiritualist  doctrine  no  proof  can  be
given,  or  at  any  rate  it  has  not  yet  been  given.  The  case  of
George  Pelham,  though  there  was  no  materialization,  is  vastly
more  evidential  for  survival  than  all  the  materializations  yet
known.  I  do  not  even  see  how  decisive  proof  could  be  given.
Even  if  (which  is  not  the  case)  a  form  identical  with  that  of  a
deceased  person  could  be  photographed,  I  should  not  understand
how  an  individual  two  hundred  years  dead,  whose  body  has  be-
come a  skeleton,  could  live  again  with  this  vanished  body  any  more
than  with  any  other  material  form.

Materializations,  however  perfect,  cannot  prove  survival;  the
evidence  that  they  sometimes  seem  to  give  is  much  less  striking
than  that  given  by  subjective  metapsychics.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  491

We  must  not  be  appalled  at  the  idea  of  the  materialization  of
complete  form.  The  problem  is  the  same  in  the  case  of  a  hand  or
of  a  whole  body;  it  is  as  difficult  to  understand  the  materiali-
zation of  a  living  hand,  warm,  articulated,  and  mobile,  or  even  of  a
single  finger,  as  to  understand  the  materialization  of  an  entire  per-
sonality which  comes  and  goes,  speaks,  and  moves  the  veil  that
covers  him.   The  improbability  is  the  same.

Have  these  forms  a  personal  psychological  existence?  If  we
had  only  experimental  materializations  on  which  to  answer  this
question,  we  should  be  inclined  to  reply  in  the  negative;  for  the
personalities  that  appear  in  the  course  of  experiment  do  not  seem
more  conscious  of  themselves  than  those  which  manifest  by  auto-
matic writing.  They  seem  to  pertain  more  or  less  to  the  conscious
or  unconscious  fancy  of  the  medium.

But  experimental  materializations  cannot  be  separated  from  ac-
cidental materializations.  There  are  "haunted  houses"  in  which
a  form  appears  that  seems  independent  of  the  will  or  imagination
of  persons  there  present.  There  are  monitions  that  are  not  en-
tirely subjective,  since  they  are  perceived  collectively,  so  that  if
the  existence  of  beings  independently  of  human  beings  cannot  be
proved,  neither  can  it  be  disproved.

It  is  extremely  disappointing  to  find  that  our  reasoning  always
ends  in  uncertainty.  But  at  least  the  uncertainty  extends  only  to
the  explanation  and  not  to  the  facts  of  telekinesis  and  materiali-
zation.

In  any  case  we  can,  thanks  to  the  experiments  of  Crawford,
Ochorowicz,  Mme.  Bisson,  and  Schrenck-Notzing,  form  some  idea
on  the  genesis  of  these  phenomena,  and  sketch  out  a  kind  of  em-
bryology. This  embryogenesis  may  not  be  identical  in  all  cases,
but  in  some  that  have  been  very  exactly  observed  and  illustrated
by  photography,  a  kind  of  nebulous,  gelatinous  substance  exudes
from  the  medium's  body  and  gradually  is  organized  into  a  living,
moving  form.  The  ectoplasmic  cloud  would  seem  to  become  liv-
ing substance  while  at  the  same  time  veils  develop  around  it  that
conceal  the  mechanism  of  its  condensation  into  living  tissues.

M.  P.  Lecour  has  compared  the  process  to  the  condensation  of
a  nebula  (A.  S.  P.,  June,  1913,  162).  There  is  at  first  a  conden-
sation of  cosmic  matter  into  a  more  or  less  compact  mass,  in
spirals,  sometimes  in  rings ;  it  then  condenses  further  into  suns,  or,
in  the  larger  nebulae  and  under  central  forces,  into  planets.  Ecto-
plasmic formations  are  very  similar  to  this;  and  M.  Lecour  re-

492

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

produces  photographs  by  Ochorowicz  and  Aksakoff.  Similar
clouds  appeared  at  the  Villa  Carmen,  and  condensed ;  and  likewise
with  Linda,  Eusapia,  Mme.  d'Esperance,  and  at  experiments  by
Florence  Marryat,  Dr.  Gibier,  and  Stainton  Moses.  The  identity
of  process  in  the  condensation  of  whitish  clouds  and  luminous
vapours  is  striking.  Venzano  describes  a  mass  of  vapour  at  the
side  of  Eusapia,  in  rapid  swirling  movement.  One  of  the  observers
at  Algiers  saw  white  flakes  of  vapour  of  differing  brightness  that
gradually  condensed.  Imoda  describes  a  white  cloud  floating
round  Linda.  Courtier  at  the  Psychological  Institute  saw  phos-
phorescent lights  moving  in  the  cabinet  round  Eusapia,  which
came  to  the  opening  between  the  curtains  and  seemed  to  rise  ver-
tically as  they  condensed.  M.  Lecour  observed  round  an  unnamed
medium,  luminous  masses  which  gradually  assumed  ill-defined
corporeal  forms,  appearing  and  disappearing.

Further  scientific  knowledge  will  take  us  farther,  and  doubtless
metapsychic  science  has  great  surprises  in  store.

(b)  Leading  Ectoplasmic  Experiments

Under  this  head  we  shall  consider  various  cases  of  materiali-
zation.1

Experimenting  with  Home,  Crookes  saw  materializations.  Mere
touches  were  frequent,  but  visible  materializations  were  rarer.
His  experiments  are  most  decisive  and  it  seems  impossible  to
doubt  them.  In  a  fair  number  of  cases  hands  were  seen  in  full
light.  Home  wished  that  all  phenomena  should  take  place  in  the
light.  "His  powers  were  sufficient,"  says  Crookes,  "to  overcome
this  adverse  influence.  With  two  exceptions,  everything  that  I
witnessed  with  him  took  place  in  the  light.

"A  little  hand,  very  beautifully  formed,  rose  from  the  table  in
the  dining-room  and  gave  me  a  flower.  It  appeared  and  disap-
peared three  times,  giving  me  every  opportunity  to  convince  my-
self that  it  was  as  real  as  my  own ;  this  took  place  in  the  light,  in
my  own  room,  while  I  was  holding  the  medium's  hands  and  feet.

"Many  times  I  and  other  persons  have  seen  a  hand  pressing  the

^hen  an  experiment  is  described  with  too  few  details  to  allow  anyone  who
did  not  see  it  to  form  a  decided  opinion,  I  am  careful  to  say  so ;  and  a  for-
tiori,  when  an  experiment  seems  to  me  defective  I  do  not  hesitate  to  indicate
this.  If,  on  the  contrary,  the  experiment  seems  to  me  evidential,  I  make  this
clear;  but  I  shall  usually  cite  the  facts  with  their  bibliographical  references
and  leave  the  reader  to  judge  of  them.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  493

keys  of  an  accordion  while  we  could  see  the  hands  of  the  medium,
or  when  they  were  held.

"A  finger  and  a  form  were  seen  plucking  the  petals  from  a
flower  in  Mr.  Home's  button-hole.

"The  hands  and  fingers  did  not  always  seem  solid  and  as  though
alive.  Sometimes  they  rather  resembled  a  condensed  vapour;  a
luminous  cloud  seemed  to  form  round  an  object ;  it  then  condensed
and  took  the  form  of  a  beautifully  shaped  hand,  the  flesh  of  which
seemed  as  human  as  that  of  any  person  present.  At  the  wrist  or
the  arms  it  became  vaporous  and  ended  in  a  luminous  cloud.1

"I  have  held  one  of  these  hands  in  mine,  resolved  not  to  let  it
go;  no  effort  or  attempt  was  made  to  make  me  release  it;  but  the
hand  seemed  to  dissolve  into  vapour  and  so  disengaged  itself  from
my  grasp.2

"Another  time  in  my  own  house  I  saw  the  window  curtains  some
eight  feet  distant  from  Home  shaking,  and  a  semi-transparent
dark  shape  resembling  a  human  form  was  seen  by  all  the  sitters
standing  up  by  the  casement  holding  the  curtain  in  its  hand.  While
we  were  looking  at  it,  it  vanished  and  the  curtains  ceased  to  move.

"On  another  occasion  a  phantom  form  advanced  from  one
corner  of  the  room,  and,  taking  an  accordion,  moved  forward  into
the  room  playing  the  instrument.  This  form  was  visible  for
several  minutes  by  all  present.  We  could  see  Mr.  Home  also.  The
phantom  approached  a  lady  who  was  sitting  near ;  she  gave  a  little
cry  and  the  shade  vanished."

In  a  memorable  letter  (March,  1874)  Crookes  says:  "I  have  at
last  obtained  the  absolute  proof  I  have  been  seeking.  On  March
2d  during  a  seance  at  my  house,  Katie  (the  apparition),  having
moved  among  us,  retired  behind  the  curtain  and  a  moment  later
called  me,  saying,  Come  into  the  cabinet  and  raise  my  medium  s
head.  Katie  stood  before  me  in  her  usual  white  robe  and  wear-
ing her  turban.  I  went  towards  the  bookcase  to  raise  Miss  Cook,
and  Katie  moved  aside  to  let  me  pass.    Miss  Cook  had  slipped

^his  is  exactly  what  I  observed  in  the  materializations  at  the  Villa  Carmen
— a  luminous  cloud  whose  outlines  became  more  defined  and  took  on  human
substance  and  form.  In  certain  photographs  taken  by  Aksakoff  (perhaps  the
only  ones  which  have  some  value  among  the  old  spiritist  photographs),  a
luminous  cloud  is  seen  which  finally  organizes  itself  and  develops  into  a  nude
human  shape.

2This  truly  crucial  experiment  did  not  succeed  with  me.  Contrary  to  what
Crookes  found  with  Home,  the  fluidic  hands  from  Eusapia  and  Marthe  made
great  efforts  to  release  themselves.

494

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

down,  and  I  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  that  she  was  not  dressed
like  Katie  but  was  wearing  her  usual  dress  of  black  velvet  .  .  .
Not  more  than  three  seconds  had  elapsed  between  the  time  when  I
saw  Katie  before  me  till  I  raised  Miss  Cook  again  on  the  sofa.
.  .  .  The  gas  was  then  turned  out,  and  Katie  asked  for  the  phos-
phorus lamp;  and  after  having  shown  herself  by  its  light  for
several  seconds,  she  put  it  back  in  my  hands,  saying,  Nozv  come  in
and  see  my  medium.   I  went  in  and  saw  Miss  Cook  on  the  sofa.

Fig.  18. — Photograph  of  William  Crookes[  and  Katie  King
(Taken  probably  in  1872.)

Another  day  Katie  said  that  she  would  show  herself  at  the  same
time  as  Miss  Cook.  ...  I  saw  Miss  Cook,  dressed  in  black
velvet,  apparently  asleep ;  she  did  not  move  when  I  took  her  hand.
Raising  the  lamp  I  looked  round  and  saw  Katie  standing  close  be-
hind Miss  Cook.  She  was  clothed  in  flowing  white  draperies.
Holding  one  of  Miss  Cook's  hands  and  kneeling  down  by  her  I
raised  and  lowered  the  lamp  so  as  to  see  Katie's  whole  figure  and
to  convince  myself  that  it  was  really  Katie.    She  did  not  speak

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  495

but  moved  her  head.  Three  times  I  examined  Miss  Cook  carefully
to  be  sure  that  the  hand  I  was  holding  was  really  the  hand  of  a
living  woman,  and  three  times  I  turned  the  light  on  Katie  and
regarded  her  attentively.  At  last  Katie  signed  to  me  to  leave.  I
went  to  another  part  of  the  cabinet  and  ceased  to  see  her,  but  did
not  leave  the  room  till  Miss  Cook  had  waked  up  and  two  of  the
sitters  had  brought  in  a  light.

"Katie  is  six  inches  taller  than  Miss  Cook ;  yesterday,  with  bare
feet,  she  was  four  and  one-half  inches  taller.  Her  neck  was  bare
and  did  not  show  the  cicatrice  that  is  on  Miss  Cook's  neck.  Her
ears  are  not  pierced,  her  complexion  is  very  fair,  and  her  fingers
much  longer  than  those  of  Miss  Cook/'

Later,  Crookes  says  (p.  193)  :  "I  have  often  raised  one  side  of
the  curtain  and  then  the  seven  or  eight  persons  in  the  laboratory
could  see  both  Katie  and  Miss  Cook  in  the  full  light  of  the  electric
lamps.  We  could  not  see  the  medium's  face  because  of  the  shawl
covering  it,  but  we  could  see  her  feet  and  her  hands:  we  could
see  her  moving  as  if  in  pain  and  could  hear  her  moans. "

Katie  King  had  long  before  announced  that  she  would  be  able
to  remain  with  her  medium  only  for  a  short  time,  and  that  she
must  soon  bid  her  farewell.  The  last  seance  was  on  May  21,  1874.
There  was  then  a  dramatic  scene  at  which  Sir  William  Crookes
was  present.  Katie  gave  her  last  instructions,  and  went  to  Miss
Cook  who  was  lying  insensible  on  the  floor.  Katie  touched  her
and  said,  Wake  up,  Florence,  I  must  now  leave  you.  Miss  Cook
awoke  and  with  tears  besought  Katie  to  remain  with  her,  but  in
vain;  Katie  of  the  white  robe  disappeared.  Crookes  held  up  the
fainting  medium  and  Katie  was  seen  no  more.

Other  interesting  experiments  were  made  with  Miss  Cook  by
various  persons.  Florence  Marryat  (quoted  by  Erny,  p.  145)
says :  "Katie  King  stood  by  the  wall  of  the  room,  with  both  arms
extended  as  if  crucified.  Three  gas-jets  threw  a  bright  light  upon
her.  The  effect  was  stupefying.  She  remained  so  for  about  one
second,  then  began  to  disintegrate ;  her  features  became  nebulous,
the  eyes  retreated  into  their  orbits,  the  nose  disappeared,  and  then
the  brows,  then  the  limbs  seemed  to  drop  apart  to  the  floor;  at
last  only  part  of  the  head  and  some  white  garments  remained,  then
all  vanished."

In  a  seance  at  Mr.  Luxmore's  house,  a  Mr.  Volkmann  seized
Katie  by  the  waist,  crying,  "It  is  the  medium."  Henry  Dunphy  re-
marked that  Katie  lost  her  arms  and  legs;  she  escaped  from  Mr.

496

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Volkmann,  slipping  from  his  grasp  and  leaving  no  trace.  Im-
mediately after,  Miss  Cook  was  found,  tied,  with  the  knots  intact.

Mr.  Varley  attached  a  galvanometer  to  Miss  Cook,  so  that  any
movement  made  by  her  would  be  shown  by  a  deflection  of  the  in-
strument ;  but  there  was  no  indication  when  Katie  appeared,  show-
ing only  the  upper  part  of  her  body,  though  Mr.  Varley  was  able
to  grasp  her  hand.

Eusapia's  materializations  have  been  fully  observed  by  many
competent  experimentalists.  I  will  speak  of  them  at  some  length,
for  I  have  been  present  at  close  on  two  hundred  seances  with
Eusapia.

Visible  materializations  are  rare  with  her  and  in  all  my  long  ex-
perience I  have  seen  none ;  I  cannot  remember  having  ever  seen
in  these  seances  any  human  form,  in  whole  or  in  part.  Once  I
saw  a  kind  of  prolongation  from  her  body,  a  kind  of  rod  that
touched  my  side,  but  this  was  in  half-light  and  very  fugitive.  Per
contra,  I  have  been  touched  more  than  two  hundred  times  when
the  control  was  excellent,  by  a  seemingly  human  hand  on  my
hands,  my  face,  forehead,  neck,  and  shoulders.

One  such  case,  which  seems  to  me  perfect  at  all  points,  is  the
following — it  took  place  at  the  Psychological  Institute  at  Paris.
There  were  present  only  Mme.  Curie,  Mme.  X.,  a  Polish  friend
of  hers,  and  P.  Courtier,  the  secretary  of  the  Institute.  Mme.
Curie  was  on  Eusapia's  left,  myself  on  her  right,  Mme.  X.  a  little
farther  off,  taking  notes,  and  M.  Courtier  still  farther,  at  the
end  of  the  table.  Courtier  had  arranged  a  double  curtain  behind
Eusapia;  the  light  was  weak  but  sufficient.  On  the  table  Mme.
Curie's  hand  holding  Eusapia's  could  be  distinctly  seen,  likewise
mine  also  holding  the  right  hand.  Long  practice  had  taught  me  to
hold  the  hand  firmly,  and  I  could  also  see  both  of  Eusapia's  white
cuffs.

We  saw  the  curtain  swell  out  as  if  pushed  by  some  large  object
behind  it.  It  was  said  to  be  John's  hand.  I  asked  to  touch  it,  and
with  my  right  hand,  which  was  free,  I  touched  this  hand  project-
ing through  the  curtain,  high  above  Eusapia's  head.  I  felt  the
resistance  and  seized  a  real  hand  which  I  took  in  mine.  Even
through  the  curtain  I  could  feel  the  fingers,  which  seemed  to  me
(though  I  cannot  positively  say  so)  much  larger  than  Eusapia's
little  hand.  I  held  it  firmly  and  counted  twenty-nine  seconds,  dur-
ing all  which  time  I  had  leisure  to  observe  both  of  Eusapia's  hands

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  497

on  the  table,  to  ask  Mme.  Curie  if  she  was  sure  of  her  control,  to
call  Courtier's  attention,  and  also  to  feel,  press,  and  identify  a
real  hand  through  the  curtain.  After  the  twenty-nine  seconds  I
said,  "I  want  something  more,  I  want  uno  anello  (a  ring)  on  this
hand."  At  once  the  hand  made  me  feel  a  ring:  I  said  "adesso  uno
braceletto,"  and  on  the  wrist  I  felt  the  two  ends  as  of  a  woman's
bracelet  that  closes  by  a  hinge.  I  then  asked  that  this  hand  should
melt  in  mine,  but  the  hand  disengaged  itself  by  a  strong  effort,  and
I  felt  nothing  further  (the  above  is  a  combination  of  two  separate
experiments).

It  seems  hard  to  imagine  a  more  convincing  experiment,  for  in
twenty-nine  seconds  the  element  of  surprise  is  eliminated.  In  this
case  there  was  not  only  the  materialization  of  a  hand,  but  also  of
a  ring.  As  all  experiments  demonstrate,  materializations  of  ob-
jects, garments,  and  woven  stuffs  are  simultaneous  with  human
forms,  these  latter  never  appearing  naked,  but  covered  by  veils
which  are  at  first  white  semi-luminous  clouds  which  end  by  taking
the  consistence  of  real  woven  fabrics.

Having  already  described  at  full  length  the  movements  of  ob-
jects without  contact,  there  is  no  need  to  return  to  them,  but  it
should  be  noted  that  the  movements  and  materializations  occur  to-
gether. Everything  takes  place  as  though  these  movements  were
due  to  invisible  materializations,  paradoxical  as  that  term  seems.
In  the  course  of  a  seance  one  is  touched  ten  or  twenty  times
without  being  able  to  see  anything,  even  though  darkness  is  not
total.

At  Milan,  two  hands  were  heard  in  the  air,  clapping  against  one
another.  Raising  one's  hand  very  high  one  could  feel  what  seemed
to  be  a  human  figure,  and  on  three  different  occasions  one  of  the
observers  stated  that  he  could  see  its  hair  and  beard ;  the  hair  be-
ing stiff  and  short,  the  beard  delicate,  and  the  skin  like  that  of  a
man.  A  piece  of  smoked  paper  was  laid  on  the  table,  and  on  re-
storing the  light,  finger-marks  were  found  on  the  paper,  Eusapia's
hands  being  quite  clean.  This  was  repeated  three  times,  the  third
impression  being  that  of  a  whole  left  hand.

The  notes  of  one  of  my  experiments  at  Milan  read :  "Eusapia
says,  'Hold  me  firmly' ;  Schiaparelli  on  the  right  and  Finzi  on  the
left  grip  her  hands  well.  I  say  to  Finzi,  'You  have  hold  of  the
left  hand?'  'Yes.'  To  Schiaparelli,  'You  have  the  right?'  'Yes.'
To  Finzi,  'You  have  hold  of  both  feet?'  'Yes.'  Then  turning  my

498

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

head  slightly  to  the  left  I  see  the  curtain  swell,  and  am  touched
on  the  shoulder  by  a  hand  that  seems  to  be  a  right  hand,  presum-
ing that  it  came  from  the  medium.  Nearly  at  the  same  moment
two  fingers  pulled  my  hair  at  the  back  of  my  neck,  without  hurting
me,  so  that  I  am  certain  that  a  hand  touched  me  on  the  shoulder
and  the  neck."

At  Agnelas,  J.  Maxwell  saw  a  silhouette  like  that  of  a  head  with
curly  hair  outlined  against  the  wall  of  the  room ;  and  also,  in  the
same  manner,  a  hand  and  arm  above  the  head  of  M.  Sabatier,  who
felt  himself  touched  at  the  same  moment.  The  fore-arm  was  long
and  thin,  coming  out  of  the  dark.

At  the  seances  on  Ribaud  Island  and  in  Paris,  visible  phenomena
were  few,  the  attention  of  the  observers  being  devoted  to  observa-
tions on  movements  of  objects.   They  were  frequent  at  Genoa.

Morselli  says  (vol.  i,  255),  "I  sat  in  a  small  armchair  about  two
yards  away  on  Eusapia's  right.  'The  invisible'  arrived!  Twice
I  was  touched  and  clearly  felt  a  hand  in  all  respects  like  a  living
hand.  My  senses  were  fully  awake.  I  can  affirm  that  the  thing
that  touched  me  was  solid,  resisting,  impenetrable,  and,  in  short,
material!*

In  the  eighteenth  seance  at  Genoa,  the  best  of  them  all,  in  pres-
ence of  Morselli,  Porro,  L.  Ramorino,  L.  Vassallo,  and  Dr.  Ven-
zano,  of  the  Minerva  Circle,  on  December  23,  1901,  in  the  dark,
two  invisible  forms  manifested  which  were  afterwards  seen  by
weak  light.  The  first  was  a  little  deceased  daughter  of  Porro  who
felt  a  child  under  a  veil.  We  heard  the  child  speak  in  a  baby  voice ;
she  kissed  Porro.  This  form  could  not  be  seen.  Then  another
came,  the  son  of  Vassallo  who  died  aged  sixteen.  This  entity  be-
came visible;  an  almost  phosphorescent  ovoid  appeared  on  Eusa-
pia's  right,  moved  slowly  to  the  left  about  twelve  inches  and  van-
ished. By  red  light  an  arm  and  hand  were  seen  to  proceed  from
the  cabinet  towards  Vassallo.  A  third  and  a  fourth  entity  ap-
peared. The  third  was  distinctly  seen,  but  identification  was
doubtful.  "In  a  room  lit  by  five  candles  we  all  saw  the  two  black
curtains  of  the  window  near  Eusapia  stretch  and  swell  out,  "e
avanzarsi  verso  me  e  verso  Porro  come  se  dietro  vi  fossero  due
persone  vive  agcnti  con  intclligenza  e  con  volonta  propria  e  dist-
inta."  These  two  forms  did  not  come  beyond  the  curtains,  but
only  showed  hands  and  well-formed  limbs.  Morselli  distinguished
a  right  hand  visible  as  far  as  the  second  finger :  it  was  short,  fat,
and  grey  in  colour,  opening  and  shutting.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  499

In  another  seance,  the  twenty-third,  which  was  also  a  very  im-
portant one,  held  in  M.  Avellino's  house,  Eusapia  was  fastened
down  on  a  bed  placed  behind  the  curtain.  Then  an  apparition
was  seen  of  a  young  girl ;  the  head,  shoulders,  and  part  of  the
bust  being  visible  and  perhaps  slightly  phosphorescent.  A  turban
hid  her  ears,  chin,  and  hair;  she  remained  still  for  some  twenty
seconds.  A  second  apparition  then  showed  a  tall  man,  with  an
abundant  short  beard,  large  head  with  prominent  bones,  and  a
thick  neck.  Four  more  appeared,  first  the  head  of  a  young  woman
in  an  oriental  garb ;  the  fourth  was  not  completely  formed,  it
seemed  imperfect  on  the  right  side.  Says  Morselli,  "I  saw  the
eyes  looking  at  me;  although  bright  enough  for  me  to  see  the
reflection  of  the  lights  on  the  cornea,  they  seemed  veiled.  When
I  approached  her,  she  made  no  attempt  to  retreat,  but  made  a
salutation  with  her  arm  and  went.  The  fifth  and  sixth  were
of  a  woman  of  about  fifty  and  a  young  child ;  these  appeared
together."

Previous  experiments  made  with  Eusapia  at  the  house  of  Mme.
Peretti  should  be  mentioned,  but  these  showed  only  imperfect
forms,  dark  silhouettes,  with  heads  hardly  formed.

Although  these  experiments  were  under  perfect  control  by  very
well-informed  observers,  they  would  be  insufficient  if  they  stood
alone,  but  the  innumerable  instances  of  movements  of  objects  with-
out contact  can  be  explained  in  no  other  way  than  by  invisible
materializations,  and  thus,  following  the  scheme  already  outlined,
we  can  assign  three  phases  to  these  exteriorized  phenomena,  a
first  stage  in  which  they  are  invisible,  a  second  in  which  they  be-
gin to  be  visible  but  are  still  more  or  less  amorphous,  and  a  third
stage  in  which  they  take  on  the  semblances  of  a  living  organism
surrounded  by  veils  which  at  first  mask  the  imperfections  of  form,
but  become  thinner  as  the  underlying  form  becomes  more  dense.

The  experiments  of  F.  Bottazzi,  professor  of  physiology  in  the
University  of  Naples,  are  most  evidential,  and  would  give,  if  they
were  wanting,  decisive  proofs  of  materializations  and  movements
without  contact.1  These  took  place  in  the  presence  of  Professors
de  Amicis,  Scarpa,  Pansini,  and  Bottazzi  himself,  provided  with
all  modern  instruments  as  for  an  experiment  in  physiology.
"There  were  seen  (p.  684)  splendid  levitations  of  the  table  to  a

*Dans  les  regions  inexplorees  de  la  biologie  humaine,  A.  S.  P.,  1907,  xvii,
645-664,  681-705,  749-771.  Fenomeni  medianici,  1  vol.,  121110,  Napoli,  Perella,
1909.

500

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

height  of  two  feet  from  the  floor,  swaying  in  the  air,  untouched  by
Eusapia."  Unknown  to  all  present,  Bottazzi  had  provided  an
electric  button,  which  if  touched  would  light  a  lamp.  Eusapia,
with  her  hands  well  held,  repeatedly  pressed  the  button  with  a
fluidic  hand  and  lit  the  lamp.  Similar  electric  pushes  placed  in  a
cabinet  behind  the  curtain  were  put  into  action  while  Eusapia
struck  blows  with  her  hand  on  the  table.

In  another  seance,  Eusapia's  hands  and  arms  were  tied  with
strong  cords  fastened  to  iron  rings  in  the  floor  and  secured  with
leaden  seals.  The  fluidic  hand  then  gave  various  objects — a  trum-
pet and  a  vase  of  flowers — to  Bottazzi.

In  these  seances  numerous  and  striking  materializations  took
place.  While  Eusapia  was  bound  with  strong  cords  M.  Galotti
saw  two  left  arms  (one  natural  and  one  fluidic)  proceeding  from
her  shoulder.  Bottazzi  experienced  the  crucial  test  of  an  ecto-
plasmic  hand  melting  away  in  his  grasp.  He  says,  "I  saw  and
felt  at  one  and  the  same  time  a  human  hand  natural  in  colour,  I
felt  with  mine  the  fingers  and  the  back  of  a  strong,  warm,  rough
hand.  I  gripped  it  and  it  vanished  from  my  grasp,  not  becoming
smaller  but  melting,  dematerializing  and  dissolving."

Under  unexceptionable  test  conditions  not  only  were  there  nu-
merous touches,  but  fingers  and  hands,  some  frail  and  diaphanous,
some  thick  and  strong,  and  diverse  figures  and  shades  outlined  be-
hind the  curtain.1

Bottazzi,  who  entered  on  these  experiments  with  a  sceptical
mind,  concludes :  "The  certitude  we  have  acquired  is  of  the  same
order  as  that  which  we  attain  from  the  study  of  chemical,  physical,
or  physiological  facts."  That  the  professor  of  physiology  in  the
University  of  Naples  should  express  himself  so  strongly  means
that  he  must  be  absolutely  certain.

Mme.  Bloch  also  describes  fluidic  hands  proceeding  from  Eu-
sapia (A.  S.  P.,  vii,  1897,  2-6).  She  says  Eusapia's  hands  were
held  and  were  also  in  full  view,  and  we  saw  a  hand  emerge  from
the  white  cloth  behind  her;  an  arm  without  a  shoulder  touched
her  head.  Then  the  phenomenon  increased,  the  hand  came  from
below  and  threw  on  the  table  some  pieces  of  music  taken  from  the
piano.  The  hand  was  not  luminous,  but  was  a  hand  of  flesh  simi-
lar to  our  own.   There  would  have  been  plenty  of  time  to  photo-

1  "I  saw  the  apparition,"  says  Bottazzi  (p.  691),  "and  shuddered."  For  my
own  part,  though  I  have  very  often  experimented  with  Eusapia,  I  have  never
seen  a  distinct  form.    C.  R.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  501

graph  it.  The  fore-arm  was  in  a  close-fitting  sleeve  of  grey  stuff:
Eusapia  had  wide  sleeves.  This  hand  came  from  her  skirt  and
not  from  her  shoulder.  Her  hands  were  both  seen  and  held  the
whole  time.

M.  Venzano  thus  describes  the  formation  of  these  phantoms
(A.  S.  P.,  1907,  xvii,  514)  :  "Some  eight  inches  from  my  face
there  formed  a  vaporous,  globular,  whitish  mass  which  condensed
into  an  oval  and  gradually  took  definite  shape  as  a  head.  The  nose,
the  eyes,  the  moustache,  and  a  pointed  beard  could  be  clearly  seen.
It  came  nearer  to  my  face,  I  felt  a  warm  and  living  forehead
against  mine ;  the  pressure  of  a  caress,  and  a  kiss ;  then  the  whole
dissolved  in  vapour  towards  the  curtain.  The  other  sitters  saw
only  a  vague,  luminous  appearance,  but  heard  the  sound  of  the
kiss."

A.  de  Rochas  narrates  the  experiments  at  Choisy,  in  presence  of
General  Thomassin,  J.  Maxwell,  De  Watteville,  and  A.  de  Gra-
mont.  M.  de  Gramont  saw  a  dark  shadow  like  a  hand  outlined
against  the  window ;  and  the  holding  of  the  medium's  hands  was
then  verified.  A  moment  later  he  felt  his  hand  stroked  by  warm
fingers  that  he  could  not  take  hold  of.

These  fluidic  hands  have  been  photographed  under  satisfactory
conditions.  G.  de  Fontenay,  a  skilful  photographer  and  experi-
enced man  of  science,  was  able  to  obtain  striking  photographs,  one
of  which  is  reproduced  here.  The  two  hands  are  seen  above
Eusapia's  head,  her  own  hands  being  firmly  held  at  the  time.  M.
Cartier,  one  of  the  experimenters,  says,  "1  did  not  for  a  single
moment  let  go  Eusapia's  right  hand."  The  other,  M.  Drubay,
says,  "I  can  affirm  in  the  most  positive  fashion  that  during  the
whole  of  the  sitting  I  never  let  go  the  left  hand."  It  is  therefore
quite  impossible  that  Eusapia  should  have  been  able  to  free  both
her  hands  just  at  the  moment  when  control  was  necessarily  strict-
est. An  attentive  study  of  the  photograph  shows  that  the  hands
are  notably  larger  than  Eusapia's  hands.

Besides  these  photographs  of  hands  there  are  others  of  the
luminous  mass  usually  seen  in  metapsychic  photographs.  Without
insisting  on  the  impossibility  of  Eusapia's  contriving  to  put  a
handkerchief  on  her  head  and  to  take  it  away  again  while  her
hands  were  held,  it  may  be  remarked  that  the  contours  of  this
luminous  hand  are  soft  and  indeterminate,  while  its  brightness
is  much  greater,  as  De  Fontenay  observes,  than  could  be  given  by
the  handkerchief  that  it  resembles.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  503

Eusapia's  materializations  have  been  demonstrated  not  only  by
photography,  but  also  by  metapsychic  moulds.1

Morselli  reports  one  case  of  a  mould  of  the  face  (very  faint)
under  test  conditions  ;2  and  he  gives  a  reproduction  of  a  much
clearer  impression  of  hands,3  though  in  this  latter  case  he  thinks
there  may  have  been  unconscious  fraud.

Per  contra,  the  plaster  impressions  obtained  by  De  Fontenay  are
excellent.  In  an  experiment  during  which  Flammarion  continu-
ously controlled  Eusapia's  head  and  bust,  the  impression  of  a  face
was  taken  on  plaster.    It  is  manifestly  Eusapia's  face.

At  Naples,  E.  Chiaja  obtained  numerous  impressions  on  clay.
Nevertheless  these  experiments  are  still  open  to  discussion :  those
made  at  the  Metapsychic  Institute  with  Franek  Kluski  seem  more
conclusive,  and  we  shall  return  to  them  later.

Traces  of  light  gauze  tissue  protecting  the  face  or  the  fingers
from  direct  contact  with  the  plaster  or  the  clay  may  often  be  ob-
served. This  does  not  detract  from  the  genuineness  of  the  im-
press, for  materialization  of  inert  tissues  always  accompanies
the  materialization  of  living  tissue.  Moreover,  how  could  actual
gauze  be  handled  and  caused  to  disappear  under  the  rigorous  con-
trol that  is  exercised  ?

The  materializations  given  by  Marthe  Beraud  are  of  the  highest
importance.  They  have  presented  numerous  facts  illustrating  the
general  processus  of  materializations  and  have  supplied  meta-
psychic science  with  entirely  new  and  unforeseen  data.4

After  these  strange  facts  had  been  verified  by  General  and  Mme.
Noel  in  a  series  of  experiments  lasting  nearly  two  years,  M.
Delanne,  the  editor  of  the  Revue  du  Spiritismc,  and  myself  were
invited  to  Algiers  by  him.  The  first  experiments5  at  which  I  was
present  impressed  me  greatly,  but  I  always  distrust  first  impres-

xVoy.  A.  de  Rochas,  A  propos  d'Eusapia  Paladino,  Les  seances  de  Montfort-
VAmaury,  A.  S.  P.,  1898,  viii,  148.  G.  de  Fontenay,  Les  seances  de  Mont-
fort-VAmaury,  Soc.  des  edit,  scicntifiques,  Paris,  1897.

-Loc.  ext.,  i,  430.

zLoc.  ext.,  ii,  348-349.

4Their  bibliography  is  already  voluminous,  for  they  have  provoked  much
controversy.  The  pros  and  cons  will  be  found  in  Grasset's  Voccxdtisme  hier
ct  aujourd'hui,  2d  edit.,  Montpellier,  370-374-  After  sixteen  years  the  objec-
tions put  forward  seem  very  poor,  and  deserve  only  disdain.

6A  naval  officer,  Captain  Demadrille,  and  a  physician,  Dr.  Dccrequy,  wit-
nessed these  experiments  and  corroborated  them.  Their  narratives  have  been
published  in  part  in  the  A.  S.  P.  These  notes  and  sketches  confirm  our  later
experiments  in  a  very  interesting  manner.

504

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

sions.  In  the  following  year  I  returned  to  Algiers  resolved  to
repeat  the  experiments  under  more  rigorous  conditions.

The  medium  was  Marthe  Beraud,  the  daughter  of  an  officer,  be-
trothed to  General  Noel's  son,  who  died  in  the  Congo  before  the
marriage.  She  is  a  very  intelligent  and  lively  young  lady,  wears
her  hair  short,  and  is  a  bright-eyed  brunette.  Subsequently  to
the  Algiers  experiments  she  has  given  proofs  of  strong  medium-
istic  powers.  She  was  the  subject  observed  by  Mme.  Bisson  and
Dr.  Schrenck-Notzing  under  the  pseudonym  of  Eva.

The  experiments  at  Algiers  were  held  in  a  small,  isolated  build-
ing over  a  stable.  The  window  was  blocked  up  and  remained
shut  at  all  times.   The  only  door  was  locked  at  the  beginning  of

A  B,  the  curtains,  opening  at  M,  N.  M,  Marthe's  chair;  N,  that  of  Aischa.
We  were  before  the  curtain.  X,  place  of  origin  of  the  materialization  that
moved  to  O.

every  seance.  It  is  the  only  room  in  the  building,  and  before
every  seance  everything  was  minutely  inspected  by  Delanne  and
myself.  Two  curtains  were  stretched  across  one  corner  of  the
room  as  shown  in  Fig.  20,  the  curtain  being  about  two  and  a  half
yards  long,  so  as  to  make  a  kind  of  dark  cabinet.  We  sat  about
half  a  yard,  or  even  sometimes  nearer,  in  front  of  these  curtains.
Those  present  were  General  and  Mme.  Noel,  Mile.  X.,  Delanne,
and  myself,  also  Marthe  Beraud's  two  younger  sisters,  Marie  and
Paule,  who  sat  far  from  the  curtain.  Light  was  given  by  a  pho-
tographer's red  lamp.  Within  the  curtains  were  two  chairs,  mi-
nutely inspected,  one  for  Marthe  and  one  for  a  negress,  Aischa.
The  part  played  by  Aischa  seems  absolutely  nil.  Mme.  Noel  made
a  point  of  her  being  present,  but  our  best  results  occurred  in
Aischa's  absence.

Everything  that  took  place  in  the  room  could  be  seen  perfectly

Fig.  20. — Diagram  of  the  cabinet  at  the  Villa  Carmen.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  505

well,  and  I  am  absolutely  certain  that  no  stranger  could  enter
during  the  seances.1

As  Marthe  was  not  tied,  nor  her  hands  held,  the  conditions  of
control  were  less  severe  than  in  Eusapia's  case;  they  were,  how-
ever, strict  enough  to  allow  of  a  definite  opinion.

After  a  variable  period,  sometimes  immediately,  sometimes  after
an  hour,  or  even  two  hours,  the  curtains  drew  apart,  and  we  could
see  Marthe  and  Aischa  each  sitting  on  her  chair  seemingly  asleep.
It  is  needless  to  add  that  after  each  seance  everything  was  minutely
examined.  Marthe  was  not  undressed,  but  in  that  very  hot  cli-
mate she  wore  only  a  thin  dress,  and  as  I  made  magnetic  passes
over  her  to  awake  her  from  trance,  I  could  be  sure,  by  passing  my
hand  all  over  her  body,  that  she  had  nothing  on  her  but  this  thin
garment.

It  is  useless  to  incriminate  Aischa,  an  unintelligent  creature
sitting  passively  beside  Marthe,  to  the  great  annoyance  of  the
latter;  for  in  the  tropical  heat  the  odour  of  the  negress  was  un-
bearable: and  in  the  more  effective  experiments  Aischa  was  not
present.

It  is  therefore  established  that  there  was  no  instrumentation  and
no  theatrical  accessories  that  the  medium  could  use,  and  that  no
stranger  could  enter  the  room.

The  materializations  produced  were  very  complete.  The  phan-
tom of  Bien  Boa  appeared  five  or  six  times  under  satisfactory
conditions  in  the  sense  that  he  could  not  be  Marthe  masquerading
in  a  helmet  and  sheet.  Marthe  would  have  had  not  only  to  bring,
but  also  to  conceal  afterwards,  the  helmet,  the  sheet,  and  the
burnous.  Also  Marthe  and  the  phantom  were  both  seen  at  the
same  time.  To  pretend  that  Bien  Boa  was  a  doll  is  more  absurd
still ;  he  walked  and  moved,  his  eyes  could  be  seen  looking  round,
and  when  he  tried  to  speak  his  lips  moved.

*I  make  a  point  of  this  because  of  the  assertions  of  Areski,  an  Arab  coach-
man dismissed  by  General  Noel  for  theft,  who  said  that  he  "played  the  ghost."
A  certain  starvelling  practitioner  of  Algiers,  Dr.  R.,  was  ill-advised  enough  to
entertain  this  man  and  to  exhibit  him  in  public  at  Algiers  in  a  white  mantle  to
play  the  ghost  before  spectators.  That  is  the  most  that  has  been  said  against
the  experiments  at  the  Villa  Carmen.  The  general  public,  blinded  by  ignoble
newspaper  tales,  imagined  that  the  fraud  had  been  exposed.  All  that  was
really  proved  was :  that  an  Arab  thief  could  lie  impudently,  that  he  could  put
on  a  sheet,  could  appear  thus  on  a  stage,  and  could  get  a  doctor  to  endorse
his  lies.  It  is  averred  also  that  Marthe  confessed  fraud  to  an  Algerian  lawyer
who  took  a  pseudonym.  But  even  if  this  anonymous  allegation  were  true,  we
know  the  value  to  be  placed  on  such  revelations,  which  only  show  the  mental
instability  of  mediums.

506

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

He  seemed  so  much  alive  that,  as  we  could  hear  his  breathing,
I  took  a  flask  of  baryta  water  to  see  if  his  breath  would  show
carbon  dioxide.  The  experiment  succeeded.  I  did  not  lose  sight
of  the  flask  from  the  moment  when  I  put  it  into  the  hands  of  Bien
Boa  who  seemed  to  float  in  the  air  on  the  left  of  the  curtain  at  a
height  greater  than  Marthe  could  have  been  even  if  standing  up.
While  he  blew  into  the  tube  the  bubbling  could  be  heard  and  I
asked  Delanne,  "Do  you  see  Marthe?"  He  said,  "I  see  Marthe
completely."  Aischa  was  far  off  and  could  be  seen  clearly,  asleep
in  the  other  corner  of  the  cabinet.  I  could  myself  see  the  form  of
Marthe  sitting  in  her  chair,  though  I  could  not  see  her  head  and
her  right  shoulder.1

However  striking  this  was,  another  experiment  seems  to  me
even  more  evidential:  Everything  being  arranged  as  usual  (except
that  Mile.  X.,  being  indisposed,  was  absent),  after  a  long  wait  I
saw  close  to  me,  in  front  of  the  curtain  which  had  not  moved,  a
white  vapour,  hardly  sixteen  inches  distant.  It  was  like  a  white
veil  or  handkerchief  on  the  floor.  This  rose  and  became  spherical.
Soon  it  was  a  head  just  above  the  floor;  it  rose  up  still  more,  en-
larged, and  grew  into  a  human  form,  a  short  bearded  man  dressed
in  a  turban  and  white  mantle,  who  moved,  limping  slightly,  from
right  to  left  before  the  curtain.  On  coming  close  to  General  Noel,
he  sank  down  abruptly  to  the  floor  with  a  clicking  noise  like  a
falling  skeleton,  flattening  out  in  front  of  the  curtain.  Three  or
four  minutes  later,  close  to  the  general,  not  to  me,  he  reappeared,
rising  in  a  straight  line  from  the  floor,  born  from  the  floor,  so  to
say,  and  falling  back  to  it  with  the  same  clicking  noise.

The  only  un-metapsychic  explanation  possible  seemed  to  be  a
trap-door  opening  and  shutting :  but  there  was  no  trap-door,  as  I
verified  next  morning  and  as  attested  by  the  architect.

Delanne  saw  the  same  phenomenon,  but  as  he  was  a  little  farther
off  than  myself,  he  could  not  see  the  emergence  of  the  phantom
from  the  floor  as  well  as  I  could.

It  seems  to  me  impossible,  however  slight  and  supple  Marthe
may  be,  that  she  should  creep  under  the  curtain  without  disturb-
ing it  and  give  the  illusion  of  a  person  rising  straight  from  the
floor;  and  how  can  the  head,  standing  as  if  decapitated,  be  ex-

*A  comical  incident  occurred  at  this  point.  When  we  saw  the  baryta  show
white  (which  incidentally  shows  that  the  light  was  good),  we  cried  "Bravo."
Bien  Boa  then  vanished,  but  reappeared  three  times,  opening  and  closing  the
curtain  and  bowing  like  an  actor  who  receives  applause.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  507

plained,  and  the  sinking  into  the  floor  afterwards?  when  very
shortly  after  we  saw  Marthe  sitting  quietly  in  her  chair,  asleep.
Several  photographs  were  taken  by  Delanne  and  myself,  stereo-

Fig.  21.  —  Photograph  of  Bien  Boa.  Marthe  is  seen  seated.  Note  the  helmet
covered  with  drapery,  the  height  of  the  figure  which  is  in  front  of  Marthe,  not
apparently  supported  by  lower  limbs.  Her  stereoscopic  photograph  is  much
better  than  this  one.

scopic  and  other.  They  show  some  interesting  details  on  which
Sir  Oliver  Lodge  has  made  acute  criticisms,  saying  that  they  were
the  best  metapsychic  photographs  that  he  had  seen.

508

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

The  softness  and  semi-vaporous  outline  of  the  hands  are  curi-
ous ;  likewise  the  veil  surrounding  the  phantom  has  indeterminate
outlines  contrasting  strongly  with  the  sharp  outline  of  Aischa's
shoulder.  A  thick,  black,  artificial-looking  beard  covers  the  mouth
and  chin.  A  whitish  fluidic  mass  is  noticeable  in  front  of  the
curtain.  This  cannot  be  a  photographic  error,  though  we  only
noticed  it  on  the  plate ;  it  appears  on  both  photographs  taken  with
different  cameras.  The  plane  of  the  phantom  is  in  front  of
Marthe.  Bien  Boa  would  seem  to  be  a  bust  only  floating  in  space
in  front  of  Marthe,  whose  bodice  can  be  seen.  Low  down,  be-
tween the  curtain  and  Marthe's  black  skirt,  there  seem  to  be  two
small  whitish  rods  like  supports  to  the  phantom  form.

The  only  defective  side  to  the  experiment  as  evidenced  by  the
photograph  is  that  Marthe's  left  arm  which  seems  resting  on
Aischa's  chair  appears  empty,  though  the  vacuity  is  not  complete ;
but  Marthe's  bodice,  knees,  and  body  are  so  clearly  discernible  that
this  apparent  emptiness  of  the  left  sleeve  does  not  seem  to  be  a
serious  objection,  though  I  am  careful  to  draw  attention  to  this
point.

It  is  absolutely  impossible  that  this  phantom  should  be  a  stranger
invading  the  cabinet ;  and  it  is  impossible  that  Marthe  could  have
invested  herself  with  a  helmet  and  sheet,  and  induce  at  the  same
time  the  white  cloud  in  front  of  the  curtain.  Everything  happens
as  though  fluidic  vapour  emerged  from  her  head  and  her  right  side,
masking  both,  and  rising  into  the  air  without  any  means  of  sup-
port but  her  head  and  body.

At  the  Villa  Carmen  I  saw  another  very  well-defined  materiali-
zation, now  published  for  the  first  time.

On  the  day  preceding  my  departure,  after  a  long  stay  at  Al-
giers, Bien  Boa,  speaking  by  the  voice  of  Marthe,1  said,  in  order  to
detain  me,  "Stay!  You  will  see  her  whom  you  desire."  It  will
easily  be  understood  that  I  stayed.

On  the  next  day  almost  as  soon  as  the  curtains  were  drawn,
they  were  re-opened,  and  between  them  appeared  the  face  of  a
young  and  beautiful  woman  with  a  kind  of  gilt  ribbon  or  diadem
covering  her  fair  hair  and  the  crown  of  her  head.  She  was  laugh-
ing heartily  and  seemed  greatly  amused ;  I  can  still  vividly  recall
her  laugh  and  her  pearly  teeth.    She  appeared  two  or  three  times

iHer  voice  was  halting  and  wooden  and  guttural,  a  sort  of  Punchinello's
voice.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  509

showing  her  head  and  then  hiding  it,  like  a  child  playing  bo-peep.
Then  she  refused  to  return.  The  general  said  to  me,  "Put  your
hand  behind  the  curtain  and  you  can  touch  her  hair/'  which  I  did ;
and  he  added,  "It  is  soft  like  silk,  is  it  not?"  I  replied,  "Excuse
me,  it  is  more  like  horse-hair,"  and  in  fact  this  was  the  sensation
produced.  I  then  received  a  light  tap  on  the  back  of  the  hand ;
the  hair  was  felt  no  more  and  a  voice  from  behind  the  curtain  said,
"Bring  scissors  tomorrow."  I  brought  the  scissors  next  day.
The  Egyptian  queen  returned,  but  only  showed  the  crown  of  her
head  with  very  fair  and  very  abundant  hair;  she  was  anxious  to
know  if  I  had  brought  the  scissors.  I  then  took  a  handful  of  her
long  hair,  but  I  could  scarcely  distinguish  the  face  that  she  kept
concealed  behind  the  curtain.  As  I  was  about  to  cut  a  lock  high
up,  a  firm  hand  behind  the  curtain  lowered  mine,  so  that  I  cut  only
about  six  inches  from  the  end.  As  I  was  rather  slow  about  doing
this,  she  said  in  a  low  voice,  "Quick!  Quick!"  and  disappeared.  I
have  kept  this  lock :  it  is  very  fine,  silky,  and  undyed.  Microscopi-
cal examination  shows  it  to  be  real  hair;  and  I  am  informed  that  a
wig  of  the  same  would  cost  a  thousand  francs.  Marthe's  hair  is
very  dark  and  she  wears  her  hair  rather  short.

It  would  seem  that  the  purpose  that  this  Egyptian  princess  had
in  view  was  that  I  should  cut  off  a  lock  of  her  hair  ( ?),  for  I  saw
her  no  more.  Next  day,  on  visiting  Mme.  Noel  who  was  ill,  I
half  saw,  very  vaguely,  a  fugitive  form  in  the  dressing-room
which  vanished  as  I  approached.  But  my  recollection  of  this  is
very  undefined.1

With  other  powerful  mediums  and  before  1905,  General  Noel
had  notable  spiritist  manifestations.  Both  he  and  Mme.  Noel  and
M.  Demadrille,  now  a  captain  in  the  navy,  clearly  saw  the  phantom
of  Bien  Boa  and  by  his  side  the  medium  Vincente,  at  the  same
moment.  Dr.  Decrequy,  also  present,  certifies  the  same.  Sketches
were  made  that  were  reproduced  in  the  Annates.  Captain
Demadrille  says :  "The  curtain  opened  and  Vincente  came  out :  I
could  see  his  whole  figure;  then  B.  B.  came  out  of  the  cabinet,
seeming  to  hold  it  up  with  his  right  arm.  The  curtain  fell  to  be-
hind him  and  both  remained  standing.  I  took  B.  B.'s  hand ;  the
skin  felt  stiff  and  cold,  the  arm  was  very  cold,  stiff  and  cold  like
that  of  a  corpse."

lSee  in  the  Psychische  Studien  for  1906,  various  criticisms  relating  to  these
experiments.  L.  Deinhard,  Die  Materialisationssitzungcn  in  Alger,  pp.  74  and
137.    Bormann,  Bien  Boa  und  der  Wascheposantz,  p.  200,  col.  9.

510

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

M.  C,  a  cavalry  officer,  with  other  mediums  than  Marthe,  and
by  strong  red  light,  saw  clearly  the  features  of  a  living  form  only
a  few  inches  from  his  eyes.  The  form  was  that  of  M.  de  Quillac
whose  widow  was  present.  Both  mediums  could  be  seen  seated
asleep  in  their  chairs  at  the  same  moment  as  the  apparition.1

Our  study  of  materializations  has  lately  had  the  benefit  of  many
valuable  observations  very  effectively  made  by  Schrenck-Notzing
and  Mme.  Bisson.2

Very  numerous  photographs,  more  numerous  and  more  in-
structive than  have  before  appeared,  accompany  the  text  and  en-
able the  sequence  of  phenomena  to  be  intelligently  followed.3

In  these  experiments,  which  lasted  over  four  years  and  were
conducted  with  admirable  care  and  patience,  minute  precautions
were  taken  against  fraud.  At  each  seance  the  cabinet  was  closely
searched,  Eva  was  completely  undressed  and  in  presence  of  the
experimenters  clothed  in  a  close-fitting  garment  covering  her  from
head  to  foot.  Her  head  was  covered  by  a  veil  of  tulle  sewn  to  the
other  garment.  Her  hair,  armpits,  nose,  mouth,  and  knees  were
examined ;  in  some  cases  even  examination  per  rectum  et  vaginam
was  resorted  to.  As  the  materialized  substance  frequently  comes
from  her  mouth,  syrup  of  bilberries  was  administered,  whose  deep
colouring  powers  are  well  known,  but  notwithstanding  this  the  ex-
truded forms  were  absolutely  white.  Experimental  rigour  was
even  pushed  to  the  point  of  giving  her  an  emetic  before  a  seance.

The  light  in  front  of  the  curtain  was  sufficient  to  allow  large
print  to  be  read.  Behind  the  curtain  were  a  red  and  a  white  light
that  could  be  put  on  at  will.  Three  cameras,  one  being  stereo-
scopic, were  focussed  on  the  cabinet  ready  to  be  worked  at  a
signal ;  sometimes  there  were  as  many  as  nine.  Eva,  having  been
undressed  in  full  light  and  clothed  as  described  above,  was  brought
into  the  cabinet  and  the  curtains  were  drawn,  the  light  reduced,
and  the  experiments  began.

Under  these  circumstances  it  seems  physically  impossible  that

XA.  S.  P.,  1906,  255.    Les  dernicres  seances  de  la  villa  Carmen.

'Les  phenomcnes  dits  de  materialisation,  by  Juliette  Alexandre  Bisson,  with
preface  by  J.  Maxwell,  8vo,  1  vol.,  Paris,  Alcan,  1914.  Schrenck-Notzing,
Matcrialisationsphaenomene,  E.  Reinhardt,  Munchen,  19 14.  This  work  was
translated  into  English  in  1919.

3Grasset,  in  his  book  published  in  1908,  accepts  (without  advancing  any
proofs)  the  idea  that  Areski  intruded  into  the  cabinet  at  Algiers,  absurd
as  that  notion  is.  He  could  not  anticipate  that  Marthe  would  give  fine  in-
stances of  materialization  five  years  later,  confirming  the  results  at  the  Villa
Carmen,  although  her  mediumship  there  and  at  Paris  took  very  different  forms.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  511

any  fraud  could  occur.  The  notion  that  an  accomplice  could  enter
is  absurd;  the  hypothesis  that  Eva  might  bring  various  objects
with  her  is  equally  ridiculous.  Moreover  Eva  lives  with  Mme.
Bisson,  who  rarely  leaves  her ;  the  two  ladies  take  their  meals  to-
gether and  sleep  in  the  same  room.  Even  making  the  monstrous
supposition  that  Mme.  Bisson  is  capable  of  bad  faith,  she  could
not  have  deceived  Schrenck-Notzing,  Dr.  Geley,  J.  Maxwell,  Dr.
Bourbon,  M.  Chevreul,  C.  de  Vesme,  G.  de  Fontenay,  and  myself
for  three  years,  and  also  others  who  assisted  at  the  experiments.
Add  to  this  that  there  were  seances  at  Paris,  Biarritz,  and  Munich
extending  over  four  years.

The  phenomena  of  materialization  produced  were  most  striking.

Essentially  they  consist  in  a  luminous  and  plastic  emanation
proceeding  usually  from  her  mouth,  sometimes  from  her  navel
(when  alone  with  Mme.  Bisson  she  was  completely  nude)  ;  some-
times from  her  breast;  sometimes  from  her  armpits.  It  is  a
whitish  substance  that  creeps  as  if  alive,  with  damp,  cold,  proto-
plasmic extensions  that  are  transformed  under  the  eyes  of  the  ex-
perimenters into  a  hand,  fingers,  a  head,  or  even  into  an  entire
figure.

It  is  impossible  to  give  all  particulars.  I  therefore  quote  the
seance  of  April  15,  1912,  in  the  presence  of  C.  de  Vesme  and  P.
Bisson.

"The  manifestations  began  at  once.  White  substance  appeared
on  the  neck  of  the  medium ;  then  a  head  was  formed  which  moved
from  left  to  right  and  placed  itself  on  the  medium's  head.  A
photograph  was  taken  (Figs.  73,  74,  pp.  108,  109).  After  the
flashlight,  the  head  reappeared  by  the  side  of  Eva's  head,  about
sixteen  inches  from  it,  connected  by  a  long  bunch  of  white  sub-
stance. It  looked  like  the  head  of  a  man,  and  made  movements
like  bows.  Some  twenty  appearances  and  reappearances  of  this
head  were  counted;  it  appeared,  retreated  into  the  cabinet,  and
emerged  again.  A  woman's  head  then  appeared  on  the  right,
showed  itself  near  the  curtains,  and  went  back  into  the  cabinet,  re-
turned several  times  and  disappeared."

On  the  30th  of  August,  1912,  another  experiment  was  made  at
Munich  by  Dr.  and  Mme.  Schrenck-Notzing  and  Dr.  Klapka,
which  is  specially  interesting  because  a  rough  attempt  was  made
to  detect  fraud  (Schrenck-Notzing,  p.  329).

The  white  substance  was  seen  on  the  medium's  left  shoulder,
then  on  her  abdomen.   Dr.  Klapka  verified  that  Eva's  hands  were

Fig.  22. — Ectoplasm  of  Marthe-Eva  (After  Mme.  Bisson  and  Schrenck-
Notzing).

Enlargement  of  the  negative.  On  the  right  the  head  of  Marthe,  whose  neck
and  chin  are  clearly  visible.  Fluidic  extended  matter  that  seems  to  proceed
from  her  hair  and  neck  hangs  down  like  bonnet-ribbons.

On  the  left  the  beginning  of  a  materialized  face,  still  imperfect  and  covered
by  a  veil.  The  nostrils  are  barely  found  (experiment  of  December  30,  191 1).

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  513

in  sight  holding  the  curtain  during  the  whole  time.  A  white  and
brownish  mass  was  visible  on  Eva's  knees.  On  a  sign  Schrenck
entered  the  cabinet  suddenly,  put  on  the  light,  and  took  Eva's
hands,  while  Klapka  tried  to  seize  the  white  substance,  but  could
grasp  nothing,  for  it  disappeared  at  once.  The  experiment  was
resumed,  in  spite  of  the  terror  evinced  by  Eva  of  this  attempt,  and
the  face  of  a  man  appeared,  which  vanished  after  a  few  seconds.

At  the  seance  of  June  13,  1913,  in  presence  of  Dr.  Bourbon  and
Mme.  Bisson  (see  p.  208),  the  substance  emerged  from  the
medium's  mouth ;  at  its  end  was  a  materialized  finger.  M.  Bourbon
took  hold  of  this  as  it  came  from  Eva's  mouth,  and  verified  the
bone  in  it,  and  also  that  it  was  flexible.  This  finger  came  right
through  the  tulle  with  which  the  medium's  head  was  covered,  the
tulle  showing  no  sign  of  being  torn  (Schrenck-Notzing,  PL  xxi).
The  apparition  (the  form  of  a  man,  much  larger  than  Eva,  with
long  moustaches)  came  out  of  the  cabinet,  began  to  speak,  and
went  to  Mme.  Bisson,  who  kissed  him  on  his  cheek.  The  sound
was  quite  audible.

The  experiment  of  November  30,  1912  (Schrenck-Notzing,  p.
379  and  Fig.  107,  PL  xi),  is  particularly  interesting.  Both  of  Eva's
hands  can  be  seen  holding  the  curtain.  The  white  substance  then
exuded  from  the  left  shoulder,  falling  over  the  chest.  This  sub-
stance became  more  and  more  dense  and  finally  took  the  shape  of
a  human  face ;  Schrenck,  who  up  to  that  time  had  kept  Eva's  hands
in  sight  or  had  held  them,  let  go  his  hold  at  Eva's  request,  and  the
form  then  became  clearer.

It  is  to  be  noted  that  these  faces  (and  many  others),  as  shown
by  the  photographs,  are  not  in  relief.  They  are  like  drawings;
and,  more  strange  still,  something  like  folds  in  the  paper  of  a
drawing  are  visible ;  as  if  a  drawing  had  been  folded  three  or
four  times  and  unfolded  to  be  photographed,  so  that  the  materiali-
zations are  in  these  cases  flat,  or  materialized  drawings.

These  folds  in  flat  images  gave  immense  suspicion  of  fraud.
But  that  presumes  extreme  stupidity  in  Eva,  since  she  knew  that
photographs  would  be  taken.  How  should  she  have  been  so  unskil-
ful as  to  present  such  things  to  the  camera  along  with  the  other
evidences  of  extraordinary  faculty?

It  must,  moreover,  be  supposed  that  she  had  brought  these
drawings  and  made  them  vanish  again.  This  hypothesis  of  draw-
ings brought  and  hidden  cannot  be  sustained  ;  for,  in  the  first  place,
the  flat  images  appeared  in  cases  when  her  hands  were  never  out

514

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

of  sight;  and,  secondly,  the  extreme  rigour  of  the  conditions,  and
the  minute  examination  of  her  person  before  and  after  the  seances,
makes  it  impossible  to  understand  how  she  could  have  secreted
large  drawings ;  thirdly,  these  appeared  outside  the  veil  of  tulle
that  covered  her;  and  fourthly  there  were  very  evident  move-
ments, quite  life-like,  in  these  images  that  succeeded  one  another
rapidly  and  seemed  to  be  living  things.

The  fact  of  the  appearance  of  flat  images  rather  than  of  forms
in  relief  is  no  evidence  of  trickery.  It  is  imagined,  quite  mis-
takenly, that  a  materialization  must  be  analogous  to  a  human  body
and  must  be  three-dimensional.  This  is  not  so.  There  is  noth-
ing to  prove  that  the  process  of  materialization  is  other  than  a
development  of  a  completed  form  after  a  first  stage  of  coarse  and
rudimentary  lineaments  formed  from  the  cloudy  substance.

The  moist,  gelatinous,  and  semi-luminous  extensions  that  pro-
ceed from  the  mouth  of  Marthe-Eva  are  embryonic  formations
which  tend  towards  organization  without  immediately  attaining  it.
Perhaps  with  other  mediums  such  as  Home  and  Florence  Cook  the
organization  into  living  form  takes  place  more  rapidly;  but  in
Eva's  case  it  is  slow,  progressive,  and  difficult.

Schrenck  has  examined  microscopically  residues  of  the  amor-
phous substance,  and  has  found  vestiges  of  epithelium,  bacterial
forms,  and  a  notable  amount  of  fat.  In  certain  cases  it  looked
like  vegetable  tissue ;  in  others  like  a  filament  of  cotton  surrounded
by  a  granular  substance  whose  nature  could  not  be  determined.

These  remarkable  experiments  by  Schrenck-Notzing  and  Mme.
Bisson  confirm  yet  once  again  the  phenomenon  of  ectoplasm.
After  the  experiments  by  Crookes,  Mme.  d'Esperance,  P.  Gibier,
and  those  at  the  Villa  Carmen,  it  would  seem  impossible  to  cast
doubt  upon  this  extraordinary  and  extremely  rare  but  real  phe-
nomenon.1

'Acrimonious  (and  ineffective)  criticisms  have  appeared  in  Germany;  notably
that  of  Mme.  Dr.  Mathilde  von  Kemnitz.  Schrenck-Notzing  replied  to  her
vigorously,  and  also  to  Dr.  von  Gulat-Wellenburg,  Der  Kampf  und  die  Materia-
lisationsphaenomoic,  V crtcidigungsschrift  (Miinchcn,  Reinhardt,  1914)-

See  also  La  querelle  des  phenomenes  de  materialisation,  by  A.  von  Schrenck-
Notzing,  A.  S.  P.,  May,  1914.  xxiv,  129-149.  Schrenck  has  demonstrated  that
a  careful  examination  of  the  photographs  shows  that  they  are  not  reproduc-
tions of  those  that  appeared  in  the  Miroir.  Mrs.  Barclay,  who  in  the  Psychic
Magazine  thought  to  prove  fraud,  merely  proved  that  she  had  neither  read  the
detailed  accounts  of  the  experiments  nor  carefully  examined  the  photographs.

Schrenck  had,  moreover,  employed  detectives  for  several  months,  who
sought  by  every  possible  means  to  discover  or  even  to  provoke  fraud.  They
got  nothing.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  515

The  phenomena  that  Schrenck-Notzing  and  Mme.  Bisson  have
verified  with  Eva  bring  fresh  evidence  on  the  formation  of  ecto-
plasms, evidence  that  is  of  high  theoretical  importance.  The  word
"ectoplasm,"  which  I  invented  for  the  experiments  with  Eusapia,
seems  entirely  justified.  The  ectoplasm  is  a  kind  of  gelatinous
protoplasm,  formless  at  first,  that  exudes  from  the  body  of  the
medium,  and  takes  form  later.  This  embryo-genesis  of  materiali-
zation shows  clearly  on  nearly  all  the  photographs.  In  the  early
stages  there  are  always  white  veils  and  milky  patches  and  the  faces,
fingers,  and  drawings  are  formed  little  by  little  in  the  midst  of  this
kind  of  gelatinous  paste  that  resembles  moist  and  sticky  muslin.

To  establish  the  truth  of  these  phenomena  of  materialization  and
their  embryo-genesis  by  formal  proof  I  will  here  give,  almost  un-
abbreviated, the  first  notes  of  the  experiments  made  by  me  with
Marthe  at  the  house  of  Mme.  de  S.,  under  conditions  that  rendered
fraud  impossible,  in  September,  October,  and  November,  1906.

I  did  not  publish  them  at  the  time  because  they  seemed  to  me
so  extraordinary  that  I  wished  to  confirm  them  further  by  fresh
experiment,  but  Marthe  was  then  engaged  on  other  studies  with
Mme.  Bisson.

In  some  respects  my  experiments  give  more  detail  than  those  of
Schrenck  and  Mme.  Bisson ;  for  I  could  follow  the  whole  sequence
of  the  embryo-genesis.  I  took  no  photographs ;  a  serious  omission
doubtless,  but  one  that  is  fairly  compensated  for  by  the  fact  that
I  could  follow  with  the  eye  the  detail  of  organization  without
those  intermissions  of  observation  while  the  curtain  is  drawn ;  this
continuous  observation  is  not  permitted  by  the  medium  when
waiting  for  the  photograph,  and  herself  giving  the  signal  to  the
photographer.  Moreover,  mediums  are  always  more  or  less  in
fear  of  the  flashlight,  and  I  have  reasons  to  think  that  this  terror
of  the  flash  involves  some  check  to  the  phenomena.

It  is  probable,  too,  that  Marthe's  mediumistic  powers  have  al-
tered and  that  their  modalities  have  varied.  At  Mme.  de  S.'s
house  the  phenomena  were  different  from  those  at  Algiers,  more
like  those  presented  with  Mme.  Bisson  and  Schrenck-Notzing
some  years  later.

I  quote  textually  my  notes  of  1906.1

^hese  notes,  which  I  intended  one  day  to  publish,  seemed  to  me  so  im-
portant that  I  confided  them  to  my  friend  Georges  Lyon,  to  be  published  after
my  death.    He  returns  them  to  me  at  my  request.

516

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

"In  the  quite  small  room  which  I  search  thoroughly,  a  corner,
curtains  that  can  be  closed  and  opened  before  the  corner.  A  cane
chair  in  the  middle  on  which  Marthe  sits.  Mme.  de  S.,  whom  I
will  call  A.,  is  alone  with  Marthe  and  myself.  We  both  sit  close
to  Marthe,  so  close  that  I  can  touch  her  hands  without  getting  up.
The  light  is  an  electric  lamp  covered  with  red  stuff,  and  gives  light
enough  to  show  all  the  white  in  Marthe's  garments  and  the  white
ribbons  in  her  hair.  After  about  half  an  hour,  I  open  the  curtains
and  see  a  faint  luminosity  on  the  floor,  so  feeble  that  I  doubt  its
reality.  By  degrees  this  light  increases ;  it  is  like  a  small,  luminous
handkerchief  lying  on  the  floor.  Marthe's  whole  body  is  motion-
less. The  luminous  spot  grows ;  its  outlines  are  milky,  undefined
and  cloudy,  less  defined  and  softer  than  would  be  those  of  a
woven  stuff.  It  approaches  the  chair,  increases  in  size,  and  takes
a  serpentine  form  which  tends  to  rise  towards  the  left  arm  of  A.'s
chair.  Its  outlines  become  sharper ;  it  is  like  a  mass  of  half-empty
fabric.  Then  follows  an  extraordinary  sight:  a  point  detaches
itself  from  the  mass,  mounts  up,  bends  and  directs  itself  to  Mar-
the's breast,  her  hands  being  held  the  whole  time.  The  point  con-
tinues to  advance  in  a  terrifying  way  like  an  animal  pointing  its
beak;  and  as  it  advances,  on  the  rigid  stalk  there  appears  a  thin
gauzy  structure  like  a  bat's  wing,  so  thin  and  transparent  that
Marthe's  garments  can  be  seen  through  it.  The  stem  is  easily  dis-
tinguishable from  the  membrane  round  it.  Marthe  is  motionless
and  speaks  at  intervals.

"I  can  approach  and  look  very  closely,  only  an  inch  away.  I
see  what  looks  like  a  swollen  substance,  moving  as  if  alive,  and
changing  its  form.  For  five  or  six  minutes  I  examine  it  atten-
tively. I  see  extensions  like  the  horns  of  a  snail,  which  start  up
to  right  and  left;  these  horns  are  like  transparent  gelatine,  they
project  from  and  sink  back  into  the  more  defined  central  mass.

"Marthe  gets  up.  I  take  her  hands.  By  raising  and  lowering
her  hands  I  seem  to  attract  the  point  of  the  mass  of  substance.
There  seems  now  only  a  sort  of  veil  suspended  from  my  hand
which  holds  both  of  Marthe's  hands;  but  I  can  feel  nothing.  I
made  a  slight  movement  with  my  little  finger,  the  mass  shortened
by  a  few  inches  and  mounted  once  more."

This  amazing  experiment,  the  first,  was  followed  by  yet  another,
the  third,  still  more  strange,  on  October  20th,  which  took  place
during  the  day  with  quite  enough  light  to  see  by.  For  the  sake
of  brevity  I  pass  over  experiment  number  two  of  the  18th,  at

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  517

which  the  phenomena  above  described  recurred  There  was  light
enough,  even  in  the  cabinet,  to  read  the  title  of  a  book.

"After  half  an  hour's  wait,  the  curtains  open  of  themselves.  On
the  floor  is  a  small  white  tract  that  grows  into  an  ovoid,  puts  out
an  extension,  and  mounts  on  the  arm  of  the  chair.    At  this

moment  there  are  two  horns  like  snail's  horns  that  seem  to  direct
the  movements  of  a  part,  B,  that  climbs  over  the  arm  of  the  chair,
united  to  a  mass,  X,  that  lies  on  the  floor.   I  can  look  at  this  very

520

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

closely :  the  stem  is  a  greyish  white,  less  white  than  the  trimming
of  Marthe's  bodice  and  softer  in  outline.  There  are  swellings  in
it  like  an  empty  snake-skin  whilst  the  two  masses,  B  and  X,  seem

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  521

to  swell  and  get  fuller.  Slowly  the  mass  X  mounts  up  and  the
mass  B  descends,  so  that  X  is  on  Marthe's  knees  and  B  below  it,
the  latter  becoming  the  base  on  which  the  whole  formation  rests,
for  it  spreads  out  like  an  amoeba  on  the  floor,  and  takes  the  form
of  a  split  base  (two  feet?).  While  these  two  parts  continued  to
flatten  out  on  the  floor  I  had  plenty  of  time  to  look  very  closely
into  the  greyish,  gelatinous,  and  barely  visible  mass  X.  I  was  not
permitted  to  touch  it.  It  was  then  on  Marthe's  knees.  It  then
slowly  divided  into  clefts  at  its  extremity,  resembling  a  hand,  in
embryo,  but  sufficiently  clear  for  me  to  say  that  it  is  a  left  hand
seen  from  the  back.  Vide  Fig.  23:  Nos.  1,  2,  3,  4,  and  5  are
rough  sketches  of  the  successive  phases  of  the  ectoplasm  on  the
floor:  6  shows  the  development  of  the  'snail's  horn'  formation:  7,
8,  and  9  are  the  series  of  forms  taken  by  the  ectoplasm  mounting
on  to  Marthe's  knees :  9a  shows  the  portion  on  the  ground  and  the
disposition  on  Marthe's  figure:  10  to  13  show  the  growth  of  the
hand.  Nos.  14  to  17  are  from  another  experiment  analogous  to
the  preceding.  The  final  result  was  a  stump  ill-formed  but  suffi-
cient to  show  the  embryo  of  a  hand.

"Another  change  sets  in:  the  little  finger  separates  from  the
rest,  and  in  the  grey,  cloudy  mass  a  hand  can  be  clearly  seen  from
the  back,  the  fingers  closed,  the  little  finger  extended,  and  a  swell-
ing resembling  the  carpal  bones  appeared,  like  a  Rontgen-ray
radiograph  of  these  bones.  Soon  the  cloudy  mass  disappears  and  I
see  an  ill-formed  hand  like  a  cast  in  plaster.  I  think  I  see  the  folds
and  creases  in  the  skin  slowly  form.  I  am  holding  both  Marthe's
hands,  and  can  see  them.

"The  ectoplasmic  hand  seems  solid,  larger  than  a  woman's  hand.
I  am  able  to  look  at  it  very  closely  for  ten  minutes  in  quite  good
light.    Then  Marthe  gets  up  and  everything  vanishes."

The  most  extraordinary  of  all  the  experiments  is  certainly  the
fourth  (October  20th)  :

"Fairly  good  light.  The  curtain  remains  closed  for  about  an
hour.  I  open  it;  a  white  spot  on  the  floor  grows  rapidly,  and
two  horns  protrude  from  the  mass  X,  from  which  other  horns  ap-
pear, very  mobile,  pointing  in  every  direction.  The  mass,  then
much  larger,  disaggregates  into  particles,  taking  on  the  semblance
of  a  hand;  it  does  not  look  like  the  cast  of  the  previous  day,  it  is
a  greyish  hand  with  ill-defined  outlines.

"This  hand  moves,  looking  like  the  hand  of  a  mummy  emerging
from  some  stuff ;  it  raises  and  lowers  itself  like  a  hand.  Marthe's

522

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

hands  are  firmly  held  by  me  and  are  quite  motionless.  The  fingers
of  the  ectoplasm,  thin  and  spindly,  seem  to  end  in  cloudy  masses.
I  can  examine  them  very  closely.  I  touch  one  of  these  spindles ;
it  feels  like  a  cold  liquid.  I  can  press  it  and  it  feels  like  the  bone
of  a  finger  covered  with  skin.  The  hand  rests  on  my  knee  and  I
feel  the  slight  friction  of  a  body  of  little  resistance.  The  hand
then  rises  of  itself,  swaying  on  a  long  stem  that  connects  it  with
the  floor;  it  falls  back  on  to  the  floor  with  a  slight  noise;  it  re-
mains there  and  I  think  I  see  the  two  bones  of  the  fore-arm  as
though  wrapped  in  cloudy  muslin.

'The  hand  then  rises,  bends,  and  moves  towards  me.  The  wrist
is  lowered  and  the  fingers  pendant ;  they  move  and  there  seems  a
torsional  movement  of  this  strange  fore-arm.  I  still  think  I  see
the  carpal  bones  in  the  muslin-like  cloud.

"The  hand  rests  on  my  knee  again.  I  feel  its  weight  (very
light),  it  makes  little  movements  at  my  request  that  I  can  feel  quite
well.  Then  Marthe  says  to  me,  That  is  the  muscles  beginning  to
form/  and  I  see,  or  I  think  I  see,  something  dark  in  the  space  be-
tween the  two  bones.  The  hand  rises  and  moves  very  close  to
me,  having  no  connection  with  the  ground  but  a  slight  white  trail.
It  then  falls  to  the  ground  with  a  slight  noise,  rises  from  it  and
suddenly  disappears  at  the  moment  that  Marthe  gets  up."

The  final  experiment  is  less  striking.  There  would  seem  to
have  been  an  endeavour  to  present  a  different  phenomenon  which
could  not  reach  its  full  development :

"After  a  long  wait  (an  hour)  Marthe  opens  the  curtains.  She
can  be  seen  sitting  quite  still.  On  her  left  shoulder  is  a  whitish
mass  perhaps  slightly  luminous,  though  I  could  not  state  that  it
was  markedly  so.  This  gleam,  at  first  indistinct,  gradually  takes
the  shape  of  drapery  and  disappears  into  Marthe's  body.  Then
there  appears  a  kind  of  cloud  that  seems  to  me  weightless  (  ?)  as  if
thrown  across  Marthe's  neck  and  bust,  but  this  is  very  fugitive.

"Then  a  phenomenon  of  great  importance  takes  place,  unfor-
tunately much  more  rapid  than  those  previously  verified.  About
half  a  yard  from  Marthe  there  appears  a  kind  of  doll  without  a
face,  quite  indistinct  and  barely  a  yard  high.  A  very  small  head,
two  long  sleeves,  and  scarcely  any  legs,  the  whole  under  a  kind  of
drapery  or  shimmering  light.  This  lasts  about  half  a  minute ;  the
whole  form  then  sinks  to  the  ground,  and  nothing  remains  but  the
globular  form  of  the  head,  which  lasts  about  half  a  minute  and
disappears."

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  523

The  last  of  the  phenomena  was  very  distinct  and  fully  visible
( I  copy  my  notes  verbatim )  :

"Luminous  prolongation  seeming  to  proceed  from  the  junction
of  the  neck  with  the  back,  seen  from  behind.  Marthe's  two
hands  are  visible  and  have  hold  of  the  drapery.  This  prolongation
is  white  and  very  luminous;  it  seems  to  me  self-luminous,  but  I
cannot  be  sure  of  that.  It  is  straight,  very  narrow,  only  about
one-sixteenth  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  at  its  end  a  mass,  not
rounded  but  rather  triangular.  The  external  part  of  this  mass  is
frizzy,  or  rather  its  outlines  are  vague.  At  first  it  is  quite  still,
then  it  moves  jerkily,  as  if  the  stem  was  being  re-absorbed  in  the
body.  It  seemed  to  me  that  the  luminous  mass,  in  shape  some-
thing like  an  African  native  club,  changed  size,  becoming  now
larger  and  now  smaller.  In  the  end  it  returned  into  Marthe's
neck  and  back,  her  hand  remaining  in  sight  the  whole  time."

Such  are  the  experiments  I  made  with  Marthe  in  1906.  Being
corroborated  by  the  subsequent  admirable  photographs  taken  by
Mme.  Bisson  and  Schrenck-Notzing,  they  seem  to  me  of  the  high-
est importance.

In  the  first  place  no  trickery  was  possible.  The  light  was  ample
for  perfect  visibility ;  the  proximity  very  close  indeed ;  the  time
often  very  long,  enabling  me  to  observe  closely  every  detail.  These
conditions  entirely  preclude  fraud.  Even  if,  for  the  sake  of  argu-
ment, we  adopt  the  absurd  supposition  that  Mme.  de  S.,  in  whose
house  the  experiments  took  place,  was  an  accomplice,  it  would
have  been  impossible  to  generate  under  my  eyes  these  clouds
which  developed  into  bony  and  mobile  masses  just  in  front  of  me.

Marthe  was  examined  and  searched  before  and  after  the  ex-
periments. I  never  lost  sight  of  her  for  a  moment  and  her  hands
were  always  held  and  visible.

The  phenomena  were  therefore  authentic.

The  outcome  of  these  surprising  observations  is  that  we  can
state  the  stages  in  the  formation  of  ectoplasms — a  whitish  steam,
perhaps  luminous,  taking  the  shape  of  gauze  or  muslin,  in  which
there  develops  a  hand  or  an  arm  that  gradually  gains  consistency.
This  ectoplasm  makes  personal  movements.  It  creeps,  rises  from
the  ground,  and  puts  forth  tentacles  like  an  amoeba.  It  is  not
always  connected  with  the  body  of  the  medium  but  usually  em-
anates from  her,  and  is  connected  with  her.

Two  phases  can  be  distinguished:  a  rudimentary  phase,  a  sort
of  rough  draft,  and  a  phase  of  building  up.   With  other  mediums

524

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

the  organized  form  may  probably  appear  immediately  without  be-
ing preceded  by  the  indistinct  cloudy  phase.

To  confirm  the  authenticity  of  the  phenomena,  I  cannot  do  bet-
ter than  reproduce  side  by  side  the  notes  taken  by  me  in  1906  and
those  published  by  Geley  in  1920.    I  have  changed  nothing  in

C.  Richet's  Notes  (1906).

On  the  ground  a  small  white
tract  which  grows,  makes  an
ovoid  mass,  and  puts  forth  a
prolongation.  This  mounts  on  the
arm  of  the  chair.  At  this  mo-
ment there  are  visible  two  horns
like  those  of  a  snail  which  seem
to  direct  the  movements.  A  lower
mass,  X,  on  the  ground;  and  an
upper  mass,  B,  united  to  the
former,  which  has  climbed  over
the  arm  of  the  chair.  I  can  look
at  this  formation  from  a  very
short  distance.  The  stem  is  grey-
ish white,  with  swellings  like  an
empty  snake-skin.  The  mass  X
is  on  Marthe's  knees,  while  the
mass  B  spreads  itself  on  the  floor
like  an  amoeba.  The  mass  X  is
greyish,  gelatinous,  and  barely
visible.  It  is  then  on  Marthe's
knees.  Little  by  little  it  seems  to
split  into  digits  at  its  end.  It  is
like  the  embryo  of  a  hand,  ill-
formed  but  clear  enough  to  en-
able me  to  say  that  it  is  a  left
hand  seen  from  the  back.  Fresh
progress:  the  little  finger  sepa-
rates almost  completely:  then  the
following  changes,  very  quick
but  very  clear :  a  hand  with  closed
fingers,  seen  from  the  back,  with
a  little  finger  extended,  an  ill-
formed  thumb,  and  higher  up  a
swelling  that  resembles  the  car-
pal bones.  I  think  I  see  the
creases  in  the  skin.

Geley's    Notes.     "From  the
Unconscious  to  the  Con-
scious/' 1919.

"From  the  mouth  of  Eva  there
descends  to  her  knees  a  cord  of
white  substance  of  the  thickness
of  two  fingers;  this  ribbon  takes
under  our  eyes  varying  forms,
that  of  a  large  perforated  mem-
brane, with  swellings  and  vacant
spaces;  it  gathers  itself  together,
retracts,  swells,  and  narrows
again.  Here  and  there  from  the
mass  appear  temporary  protru-
sions, and  these  for  a  few  seconds
assume  the  form  of  fingers,  the
outline  of  hands,  and  then  re-
enter the  mass.  Finally  the  cord
retracts  on  itself,  lengthens  to
the  knees,  its  end  rises,  detaches
itself  from  the  medium  and  moves
towards  me.  I  then  see  the  ex-
tremity thicken  like  a  swelling,
and  this  terminal  swelling  ex-
pands into  a  perfectly  modelled
hand.  I  touch  it ;  it  gives  a  nor-
mal sensation;  I  feel  the  bones,
and  the  fingers  with  their  nails.
Then  the  hand  contracts,  dimin-
ishes, and  disappears  in  the  end
of  the  cord."  (Page  57,  English
translation.)

either.  We  experimented  quite  separately  with  Marthe,  I  in  1906
and  Geley  in  1910.   We  did  not  communicate  our  notes  to  each

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  525

other  nor  publish  anything.  They  are  therefore  quite  independent
results.

It  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  Geley  (whom  I  hardly  knew  in
1910)  and  myself  were  similarly  hallucinated  five  years  apart  by
the  same  illusion.

Geley,  after  describing  very  precisely  the  variations  in  the
gelatinous  embryo-plastic  mass,  adds,  "I  do  not  say  merely  There
was  no  trickery/  I  say,  'There  was  no  possibility  of  trickery.
Nearly  all  the  materializations  took  place  under  my  own  eyes,  and
I  have  observed  the  whole  of  their  genesis  and  development.,  "

I  can  say  exactly  the  same.

Other  observations  similar  to  those  on  Marthe-Eva  are  men-
tioned by  Schrenck  in  his  fine  work.  These  were  with  a  young
Polish  girl,  Stanislawa  P.,  who  chanced  to  discover  her  medium-
istic  powers  by  suddenly  seeing  (when  eighteen  years  old)  the
apparition  of  her  friend  Sophie,  who,  unknown  to  her,  had  just
died.

At  Schrenck's  house  in  Munich  Stainslawa  produced  ectoplasm
from  her  mouth,  like  Eva.  She  had  been  searched,  dressed  in
black  tights,  and  her  head  covered  with  a  veil  of  very  fine  mesh.
The  ectoplasm  emerged  through  the  veil  and  formed  three  fingers.
Cinematograph  photographs  of  these  experiments  were  taken.

With  Linda  Gazzera  many  instances  of  telekinesis  and  ecto-
plasmic  forms  have  been  observed.  My  learned  and  generous
friend,  Dr.  E.  Imoda  of  Turin,  has  published  a  valuable  book  nar-
rating his  interesting  and  methodical  experiments,  made  at  Turin
in  the  house  of  the  Marquise  de  Ruspoli.

Linda  is  a  young  girl  of  twenty-two,  pleasant,  well-educated,
lively,  and  gay.  Her  guide  is  a  certain  Vincenzo,  who,  it  seems,
had  been  a  cavalry  officer,  who  died  some  years  back,  and  concern-
ing whom  I  have  no  precise  particulars.  Sometimes  it  was  Car-
lotta,  a  child  who  died  at  the  age  of  four.  For  all  the  experiments
Linda  was  carefully  searched,  undressed,  and  re-clothed,  and  the
cabinet  where  she  sat  was  minutely  searched.  Her  hands  were
always  held,  and  she  made  no  attempts  to  free  them.

The  only  omission  in  the  experiments  was  that  her  feet  and
knees  were  not  as  closely  controlled  as  her  hands.  But  it  is  im-
possible that  the  phenomena  observed  should  have  been  due  to
movements  of  the  feet,  however  skilful;  such  as  winding  up  a
musical  box,  and  putting  a  pipe  in  my  mouth  (  !!).

Linda's  mediumship  is  characterized  by  very  rapid  production

526

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

of  the  phenomena.  The  light  is  hardly  extinguished  when  ob-
jects are  displaced,  musical  instruments  are  played,  and  various
white  forms  appear.  At  the  same  time  the  sitters  feel  touches  of  a
warm,  moist,  mobile,  living  member,  though  it  cannot  always  be
identified  as  a  hand.

Imoda  was  mainly  concerned  to  photograph  the  ectoplasms;
this  is  quite  laudable,  but  perhaps  the  desire  to  concentrate  on  get-
ting good  photographs  prevents  minute  observations  by  the  naked
eye.

Imoda's  photographs  show  very  different  faces  always  sur-
rounded by  a  white  veil.  When  Linda  visited  me  at  Paris,  G.  de
Fontenay  took  some  excellent  photographs  (pp.  175-179) — a  hand
and  a  face,  the  latter  seeming  to  be  that  of  the  face  of  a  "pos-
sessed" man  in  one  of  Rubens's  pictures  in  the  Louvre.

As  in  Schrenck-Notzing's  photographs,  those  taken  by  De  Fon-
tenay are  flat,  wanting  in  relief.  The  hands  look  more  like  gloves
than  real  hands.1

The  photographs  taken  by  Caranzini  are  similar,  the  faces  are
just  like  dolls'  faces  and  they  and  the  hands  are  always  veiled."

It  cannot  be  supposed  that  Linda,  unable  to  use  her  hands,  and
after  being  carefully  searched  and  re-dressed,  could  manipulate
cards,  dolls,  and  drawings  quickly  and  skilfully  enough  to  risk
being  photographed :  and  more  than  once  she  was  searched  again
as  soon  as  a  photograph  had  been  taken,  and  nothing  was  found.
How  could  she  hide  an  extraneous  object?

In  my  preface  to  Imoda's  book  I  said:  "The  fact  that  the
ectoplasms  are  not  living  faces  is  no  objection;  for  there  is  noth-
ing to  prevent  the  ectoplasm  being  an  image  and  not  a  living  be-
ing. The  materialization  of  a  plaster  bust  is  not  easier  to  under-
stand than  that  of  a  lithographic  drawing;  and  the  formation  of
an  image  is  not  less  extraordinary  than  that  of  a  living  human
head."

Another  evidential  and,  to  my  thinking,  decisive  experiment
took  place  at  my  house  in  Paris.  There  were  present  M.  de  Fon-
tenay and  myself,  also  Mme.  C.  Richet  and  Argentina  (the  Italian
nurse  of  one  of  my  small  children),  whom  I  had  desired  to  be
present  so  that  Linda  might  have  one  of  her  own  countrywomen

iFotografic  di  fantasmi,  8vo,  Torino.  F.  Bocca,  1912,  preface  by  Charles
Richet.

*A.  S.  P.,  1912,  xii,  135-

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  527

near  her.  I  was  on  her  right,  and  De  Fontenay  on  her  left.  The
seance  lasted  only  thirty-five  minutes.

During  the  whole  time  I  kept  firm  hold  of  Linda's  right  hand
without  any  intermission,  and  some  thirty  or  forty  times  I  satis-
fied myself  by  touch  that  De  Fontenay  was  firmly  holding  her  left
hand.

Even  before  Linda  went  into  trance  there  were  movements  of
objects — the  musical  box  started,  and  in  complete  darkness,  a
pipe  placed  behind  Linda  was  placed  in  my  mouth.  A  little  later
still  in  total  darkness  this  pipe  was  seized  and  forcibly  thrown  into
the  middle  of  the  room.  Some  heavy  object  dealt  strong  blows  on
the  back  of  my  hand;  some  large  object  struck  heavy  blows  on
the  table;  it  also  struck  De  Fontenay.  A  photograph  was  taken
on  which  a  well-materialized  hand  appears,  the  nails  and  all  the
fingers  being  visible.  Round  it  there  is  a  ribbon  or  some  kind
of  stuff.  A  thin  thread  connects  it  with  Linda's  head  (see  p.  434).

This  experiment,  together  with  very  many  more  by  E.  Imoda
and  the  Marquise  de  Ruspoli,  place  the  reality  of  the  phenomena
beyond  doubt.

Dr.  Paul  Gibier,  an  eminent  physiologist  and  a  director  of  the
Pasteur  Institute  in  New  York,  had  a  decisive  experience  with
Mrs.  Salmon  (loc.  cit.,  p.  1733,  April  21,  1909).

He  experimented  in  his  own  laboratory,  using  an  iron  cage
specially  made  to  his  instructions,  with  a  door  closing  by  a  lock.
Mrs.  Salmon  was  placed  in  the  cage,  the  door  locked,  and  stamp
paper  gummed  over  the  lock.  He  put  the  key  in  his  pocket.  A
very  short  time  after  the  lights  had  been  extinguished,  hands,
arms,  and  living  forms  came  out  of  the  cage — a  man,  a  woman,
and  more  often  a  gay,  lively  little  girl.  Suddenly  Mrs.  Salmon
emerged  from  the  cage  and  fell  half  fainting  on  the  floor.  The
seals  were  found  intact  and  the  door  had  not  been  opened.

In  a  second  experiment,  still  more  demonstrative,  the  cage  was
replaced  by  a  wooden  cabinet,  specially  constructed  and  hermeti-
cally closed.  Mrs.  Salmon  was  tied  firmly  by  ribbon  round  her
neck  sealed  to  the  walls  of  the  cabinet.  The  lights  were  scarcely
extinguished  before  a  bare  fore-arm  and  hand  appeared  outside  the
cabinet,  just  twenty-four  seconds  after  darkness  was  made.  Then
another  form  moved  outside.

After  a  few  minutes  of  waiting,  a  white  object  about  the  size
of  an  egg  appeared  and  grew  in  height.  (This  mode  of  develop-
ment of  the  ectoplasm  should  be  compared  with  what  was  seen

528

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

at  the  Villa  Carmen.)  Then  a  woman,  seemingly  alive,  came  out
of  the  cabinet  and  was  recognized  by  Mme.  D.  and  Mme.  B.
This  phantasmal  personage  spoke  French  very  well  (Mrs.  Salmon
can  only  speak  a  few  words  of  French,  but  this  difference  signifies
nothing).  The  apparition  remained  for  about  two  minutes,  and  P.
Gibier  could  distinguish  the  features.  She  was  slight  in  build,
seemed  about  twenty-five,  though  Mrs.  Salmon  is  corpulent  and
aged  about  fifty.  Little  Mandy  came  later,  about  a  yard  in  height.
Then  a  tall  man  whose  muscular,  vigorous,  and  completely  mas-
culine hand  P.  Gibier  was  able  to  clasp.  After  a  short  time  this
last  form  dissolved  and  seemed  to  sink  into  the  ground.1

After  this  stirring  seance,  everything  was  found  intact.  Mrs.
Salmon  was  still  bound;  the  silk  ribbon  round  her  neck  just  as
placed  prior  to  the  seance.

Several  facts  of  great  importance  stand  out  from  these  notable
experiences.  In  the  first  place  they  were  conducted  by  a  scientific
man  permeated  by  an  enlightened  scepticism,  and  were  managed
so  that  even  if  we  do  not  admit  the  honesty  of  Mrs.  Salmon,  fraud
would  have  been  possible  only  by  the  introduction  of  several  ac-
complices, a  supposition  that  is  manifestly  absurd.  Secondly  the
rapidity  and  multiplicity  of  the  materializations  would  have  to  be
accounted  for.

Thus  Dr.  Gibier's  experiments  strikingly  confirm  the  other
materializations  of  which  details  have  already  been  given.  What
more  is  required  to  produce  conviction?

There  is  an  extensive  bibliography  dealing  with  the  experiments
of  Baron  L.  von  Erhardt  and  the  S.  P.  R.  of  Rome  with  the  med-
ium Carancini.2  This  medium  was  studied  not  at  Rome  only,  but
at  Paris  by  De  Vesme,  Lemerle,  M.  Mangin,  and  at  Geneva  by
Claparede,  Flournoy,  and  Batelli.  There  are  several  doubtful
points,  not  as  to  his  mediumship,  which  seems  tolerably  definitely
proven,  but  as  to  his  frauds  (sometimes  even  conscious  in  despite
of  minute  precautions),  which  detract  from  experiments  that
were  apparently  genuinely  successful.    Many  photographs  were

'These  details  were  to  have  been  read  at  the  International  Congress  of
Psychology  held  at  Paris  in  1900  ;  but  Dr.  Gibier's  premature  accidental  death
intervened.  This  paper  is  therefore  posthumous,  and  is  entitled  Recherches
sur  les  materialisations  de  fantdmes,  la  penetration  de  la  matidre  et  autres
phe'nomenes  psychiques  (A.  S.  P.,  xi,  3-16,  65-92).

■See  especially  Erhardt,  Etude  sur  la  m&diumnitc  de  Carancini,  A.  S.  P.,
April,  1912,  and  Luce  e  Ombra,  1908-1913.  A.  S.  P.,  1911-1913,  passim.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  529

taken,  but  the  flash  was  made  only  when  Carancini  gave  the  word
— Fuoco.

Carancini  was  very  tightly  bound,  and  was  found  at  the  end  of
the  seances  tied  exactly  as  at  their  commencement,  but  many  con-
jurers seem  to  find  it  easy  to  do  this  trick.

The  phenomena  of  telekinesis  came  about  very  soon  after  he
had  been  tied.  Materializations  were  few ;  but  one  photograph
shows  a  hand  which  seems  flat,  as  if  cut  out  of  paper.  The  most
remarkable  experience  was  one  in  which  a  dinner-plate  covered
with  soot  (from  a  smoky  flame)  out  of  the  medium's  reach,  was
placed  in  a  padlocked  wooden  box  held  in  the  hand  of  one  of  the
sitters.    (Did  he  hold  it  in  his  hand  during  the  whole  time?)

Carancini  showed  levitations  and  movements  of  objects,  but  al-
ways in  darkness.

In  short,  the  authenticity  of  the  phenomena  is  not  yet  certain.
After  careful  perusal  of  the  notes  taken,  I  am  inclined  to  think
the  results  genuine,  but  only  because  they  resemble  the  unques-
tionably authentic  observations  on  Eusapia,  for  in  themselves  those
on  Carancini  are  to  be  taken  with  reserve.  To  be  accurate,  there
were  never  any  proofs  of  fraud,  but  only  suspicions,  and  as  M.
Erhardt  remarks,  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  implies  that  the  experi-
menters were  absolute  imbeciles.

Dr.  Feijao,  a  professor  of  surgery  in  the  Lisbon  Faculty  of
Medicine,  assisted  at  a  number  of  seances,  which  have  been  de-
scribed by  Mme.  Frondoni-Lacombc.1

The  medium  was  a  non-professional  one,  Mme.  d'Andrade.  Dr.
Feijao  thus  expresses  himself  (and  the  opinion  of  an  eminent  and
previously  sceptical  professor  has  great  weight)  :  "Formerly  I
believed  nothing  of  these  things.  Now  I  have  seen  and  observed,
and  I  repent  my  incredulity.,,

In  these  experiments  which  were  made  in  his  own  house,  all  the
sitters  joined  hands:  the  table  rose  six  inches  from  "the  ground,
and  there  were  lights,  touches,  and  movements  of  objects.

Two  very  striking  phenomena  are  stated  by  Dr.  Feijao:  first
an  apport,  or  rather,  a  tratisport.  The  door  being  locked,  a  rose
from  a  bouquet  in  the  room  was  taken  into  the  adjoining  room.
But  this  must  be  taken  with  reserve,  for  the  professor  does  not
seem  to  have  verified  that  the  rose  taken  was  actually  from  the

iUne  sirie  de  seances  de  materialisations  a  Lisbonne,  A.  S.  P.,  December,
191 8  and  191 9,  xxix,  5-12,  26-29.  Oliveira  Feijao,  Lettre  6  M.  Camille  Flom-
tnarion,  loc.  ext.,  pp.  27-29.

530

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

bouquet.  Even  after  his  affirmation,  I  must  agree  with  Sir  Oliver
Lodge  that  no  case  of  apport  can  be  considered  fully  proved.

The  other  phenomenon  was  the  apparition  of  a  phantom.  All
the  doors  were  shut,  a  photograph  was  taken,  and  the  plate  showed
a  French  ( ?)  officer.  It  was  then  ascertained,  through  the  table,
that  this  figure  purported  to  be  that  of  a  Lieutenant  Catherin,
killed  at  Vitry-le-Frangois,  September  27,  1914.  The  photograph,
when  shown  to  the  widow  of  Lieutenant  Catherin,  did  not  re-
semble her  deceased  husband,  and  the  uniform  does  not  agree  with
that  worn  by  French  officers.

What  gives  importance  to  the  experiment  is  not  the  photograph,
in  taking  which  sufficient  precautions  were  not  observed,  but  the
sight  of  a  phantom  in  a  locked  room  before  persons  who  were
certainly  incapable  of  a  skilful,  conscious,  and  prearranged  fraud
that  would  have  necessitated  the  presence  of  an  accomplice.

These  observations  of  telekinesis  and  ectoplasms  are  described
in  a  book  by  Mme.  Madeleine  Frondoni-Lacombe  of  Lisbon.  I
have  the  honour  of  knowing  Mme.  Lacombe,  and  hold  her  inca-
pable of  fraud.  What  object  would  there  be  in  a  fraud  carried  on
for  five  years  against  all  hostile  criticism,  and  resulting  only  in  sar-
casms and  abuse  ?  The  facts  narrated  are  supported  by  numerous
attestations,  notably  those  of  Dr.  Feijao,  at  first  sceptical  but  over-
come by  the  evidence  of  other  doctors,  Dr.  Souza  Conto  and  an-
other, by  Captain  d'Abren  of  the  Engineers,  Captain  Silva  Pinto,
and  other  distinguished  persons  in  Lisbon.

The  medium  who  gave  these  remarkable  metapsychic  results  is
not  a  professional  medium ;  she  is  the  Countess  Castelvitch,  who
gave  these  seances  unknown  to  her  husband.

Her  mediumship  was  discovered  as  follows :  "On  January  10,
1913,"  says  Mme.  Lacombe,  "when  visiting  my  friend  Countess
Castelvitch  I  proposed  table-turning.  There  were  three  of  us —
the  countess,  Mme.  Ponsa,  and  myself.  These  ladies  had  never
tried  before.  .   .   .  That  day  the  table  rose  up,  and  a  person

Abstract  of  Note  to  the  Second  French  Edition.  Mme.  Lacombe  has
sent  me  a  letter  referring  to  my  previous  remarks  on  her  book.  She  points  out
that  the  seances  lasted  only  half  an  hour  and  that  all  precautions  were  observed
that  all  the  sitters  (three  or  four  at  most)  should  hold  hands.  A  very  incredu-
lous Portuguese  journalist  (M.  Rocha,  jr.)  was  convinced  and  wrote  an  article
entitled  The  Initiation  of  a  Sceptic.  She  insists  strongly  on  the  authenticity  of
the  apports,  which  she  says  were  frequent  and  undeniable.  Even  after  her
letter  I  cannot  consider  the  passage  of  matter  through  matter  as  being  demon-
strated ;  though  it  is  possible  that  my  opinion  may  be  modified  by  fresh

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  531

calling  himself  Lemos  manifested  by  rapping/'  From  that  day
forward  Mme.  Lacombe  and  the  countess  made  many  trials  and
finally  obtained  a  series  of  extraordinary  phenomena  that  I  can-
not give  here  in  detail,  for  it  would  be  necessary  to  quote  the  whole
volume,  which  I  commend  to  the  reader.

I  will  only  summarize  the  principal  facts,  especially  those  that
were  observed  in  presence  of  Dr.  Feijao.

Touches  were  very  frequent  and  sitters  felt  hands  touching
them  though  the  "chain"  was  unbroken :  a  heavy  table  weighing
one  hundred  and  sixty  pounds  was  raised  on  two  legs  when  barely
touched:  the  movements  of  a  small  table  were  so  violent  that  it
became  necessary  to  replace  it  by  one  strengthened  with  sheet-
iron  :  when  this  second  table  was  used  it  was  rent  into  two  hundred
(the  exact  number)  small  pieces  which  were  piled  telekinetically,
i.e.,  without  anyone  touching  them,  in  a  corner  of  the  room.  Dr.
Feijao  thought  at  first  that  there  must  be  secret  doors  to  the  room
by  which  some  person  had  entered  and  done  this.  In  other  seances
a  chair  weighing  thirty  pounds  moved  by  itself  about  four  yards.
Strong  blows  were  struck  rhythmically  at  different  places  in  the
room.

Dr.  Feijao  writes:  "Blows  were  struck,  the  loudest  being
on  the  glass  of  the  bookcase.  Articles  of  furniture  sometimes
moved.  Heavy  chairs  moved  about  the  room ;  efforts  were  made
on  the  locked  doors  of  the  bookcase,  which  were  opened;  large
and  heavy  books  were  flung  on  the  floor  (our  hands  being  linked
all  the  time)  ;  an  office-bell  and  a  handbell,  the  half-open  piano,  and
a  guitar  in  its  case  all  sounded  loudly  ...  the  table  rose  as
much  as  twenty-four  inches  ...  At  our  request,  and  when
we  had  all  removed  our  hands,  the  table  still  moved."

There  were  also,  as  Dr.  Feijao  thinks,  and  Mme.  Lacombe  af-
firms she  has  often  seen,  transport  of  objects  through  closed
doors :  "In  one  seance  we  desired  that  a  rose  should  be  taken  into
the  adjoining  room.  We  found  this  flower  under  a  table,  though
all  the  doors  were  locked  as  usual."

Despite  these  attestations,  reserve  must  be  maintained  regarding
this  latter  phenomenon,  which  lends  itself  to  illusion,  not  only  by
reason  of  the  unconsciousness  of  the  medium  but  perhaps  of  some
of  the  sitters  also.  It  is  possible  that  the  Countess  Castelvitch  or
Mme.  Lacombe  may  more  or  less  unconsciously  effect  these  dis-
placements. A  rigorous  and  authentic  verification  is  required  of
the  statement  that,  the  doors  being  absolutely  closed,  a  rose  has

532

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

passed  through  them  and  been  conveyed  into  another  closed
room.

I  make  these  reservations  because  these  cases  are  quite  excep-
tional in  metapsychic  science,  if  indeed  they  have  ever  been  veri-
fied. But  telekinesis  is  evident  especially  in  the  seance  of  April
24,  1917,  at  which  Dr.  Feijao  was  present  and  also  one  of  his
students,  M.  Bianco,  who  was  entirely  sceptical.  The  hands  of
all  present  were  fastened  together  so  that  they  could  not  be  de-
tached :  and  under  these  conditions  blows  were  struck  every-
where, a  hand  was  felt  by  several  persons ;  one  string  of  the  guitar
sounded  loudly,  the  bookcase  was  opened,  and  a  book  on  a  distant
table  was  thrown  about.  Cases  of  telekinesis  in  Mme.  Lacombe's
book  are  too  many  for  quotation.

It  will  suffice  to  cite  the  following,  inasmuch  as  it  took  place  in
full  light.  A  table  weighing  one  hundred  and  sixty  pounds  rose
on  two  legs  and  struck  a  blow  when  the  countess  was  a  yard  dis-
tant from  it  and  standing  up.

There  were  some  ectoplasms :  a  phantom  representing  a  French
officer,  but  wearing  a  uniform  quite  out  of  date,  was  photo-
graphed j  but  the  story  is  too  long  to  be  given  here.  Another
time  there  was  a  nun ;  very  often  there  were  whitish  lights  more
or  less  shapeless;  another  time,  a  phantom  with  a  death's-head;
yet  another  time,  an  Arab  soldier.  All  these  were  photographed.

As  all  the  cases  of  ectoplasm  cannot  be  quoted  I  select  the  fol-
lowing. On  December  18,  1914,  Countess  Castelvitch,  Mme.  Ponsa,
Mme.  Furtado,  M.  and  Mme.  Lacombe  were  present  in  the  house
of  the  Countess  Castelvitch.  Through  the  table  Mme.  Furtado's
husband  was  alleged  to  be  present,  but  that  he  would  not  allow
himself  to  be  photographed  because  he  had  forgotten  zuliat  his
face  MLS  like,  but  he  said  that  his  companion  would  come  in  his
place.  This  companion  was  his  mistress,  he  having  been  separated
from  his  wife;  and  in  fact  a  veiled  woman  was  photographed,
causing  great  fear  in  Mme.  Furtado,  who  declared  she  would
never  be  present  at  any  more  seances.  At  the  next  seance  (De-
cember 27,  1914),  M  Furtado  announced  his  presence  again  and
said,  "I  have  no  face,  but  I  will  make  one/'  and  the  phantom
photographed  is  a  tall  person  clothed  in  white,  but  the  face  is  that
of  a  death's-head  (Fig.  24).

It  is  difficult  or  impossible  to  imagine  that  these  are  frauds  or
illusions.  Fraud  was  not  easy.  In  order  to  show  a  French
officer,  a  nun,  a  phantom  with  a  death's-head,  and  an  Arab  soldier

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  533

a  whole  series  of  costumes  would  be  needed,  to  be  bought  at  a
shop  and  to  be  used  at  the  seances  where  hands  were  held,  if  not
rigorously,  yet  sufficiently  well.  And  why  should  this  be  done?
If  Mme.  Lacombe  wished  to  deceive  she  might  have  given  stranger
things.    There  is  no  reason  to  suspect  the  good  faith  of  Mme.

Fig.  24.  —  Materialization  of  M.  Furtado,  with  a
death's-head  (after  Mme.  Frondoni-Lacombe).

Furtado,  who  was  very  sceptical,  nor  of  Mme.  Ponsa,  who  was
Mme.  Lacombe's  intimate  friend.

Although  it  is  probable  that  Countess  Castelvitch  was  the  prin-
cipal medium,  Madeleine  Frondoni-Lacombe  also  had  remarkable
phenomena  in  full  light  when  alone  with  her  friend,  Mme.  d'An-
drade  (p.  208),  who  also  had  some  manifestations  that  seem
genuine.  Holding  both  of  Mme.  d'Andrade's  hands,  Mme.  La-
combe saw  in  full  sunlight  a  parasol  rise  up,  lower  itself,  and  ad-

534

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

vance,  rolling  round  with  a  waving  motion.  Raps  were  made  at
a  distance  at  request.  It  is  therefore  permissible  to  think  that
Mme.  Lacombe  also  is  a  medium.

I  infer  that  the  ectoplasms  observed  by  her  are  genuine.  If  they
stood  alone  in  metapsychic  science  they  would  certainly  not  suffice
to  produce  conviction,  for  Madeleine  Lacombe  has  not  the  scien-
tific standing  to  warrant  our  basing  our  conclusions  on  hers ;  but
all  that  she  has  seen  agrees  too  well  with  all  we  have  learned  from
the  experiments  with  Home,  Eusapia,  Marthe  Beraud,  Stanislawa,
and  Miss  Goligher  for  the  Lisbon  experiments  to  be  rejected.
Though  there  may  be  exaggerations  and  inexactitudes  here  and
there,  the  facts  can  be  taken  as  true  in  the  main.  Countess  Castel-
vitch  was  a  very  powerful  medium ;  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  she
should  not  have  been  studied  under  conditions  rather  more  strin-
gent than  those  imposed  by  her  friend,  Mme.  Lacombe.

These  experiments  are  probably  at  an  end.  After  a  seance  on
July  14,  1920,  in  which  an  apport  (an  owl's  head  sculptured  in
stone)  is  alleged  (a  phenomenon  that  must  be  strongly  contested),
a  seance  was  held  on  August  3d  at  which  the  spirit  declared  that
he  was  about  to  leave  .  .  .  Hoja  ultimo  dia  que  posso  mom
festar  mc  (today  is  the  last  day  on  which  I  can  manifest).  In  the
same  way  Katie  King  took  leave  of  Crookes,  we  do  not  know  why.

There  were  also  some  subjective  phenomena,  to  which  I  do  not
refer,  as  they  are  poor  in  comparison  with  the  cryptesthesia  al-
ready described,  and  the  Lisbon  seances  are  mainly  objective.

In  the  house  of  M.  Corrales,  an  honourable  merchant  of  San
Jose,  Costa  Rica,  some  seemingly  fine  materializations  took  place.
His  daughter  Ofelia  claimed  great  mediumistic  powers.  Several
seances  were  held  at  which  various  notables  of  San  Jose  were
present.  Various  materializations  appeared  (Don  Constantino
and  Mary  Brown,  who  spoke  very  correct  English).

Ofelia  was  seen  sometimes  in  full  light  at  the  same  time  as
Mary  Brown  who  was  touched,  heard,  and  photographed  {A,  S.
P.,  1910,  xx,  324).  The  phantom  Mary  seemed  to  merge  into
Ofelia  from  whom  she  emanated,  and  to  inspire  her.

All  this  reads  very  well,  but  despite  the  imposing  list  of  per-
sons who  attest  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena,  all  scientific
value  must  be  denied  to  these  experiences.  M.  Corrales,  Ofelia's
father,  says  in  so  many  words :  "It  is  proved  that  Mary  introduced
an  unknown  girl  into  the  room.',  This  enigmatical  statement  leaves

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  535

open  all  kinds  of  possibilities.  It  would  be  an  injury  to  science
to  give  any  place  at  all  to  these  fraudulent  experiences.1

Experiments  made  with  Lucia  Sordi,  which  at  first  satisfied  M.
Marzorati,  did  not  stand  Schrenck-Notzing's  severer  test.  Lucia
was  enclosed  in  a  wooden  cage,  and  (in  the  dark)  when  in  trance,
she  emerged  from  it,  but  Schrenck  had  a  wooden  ball  made  of
the  same  size  as  her  head  and  showed  that  it  could  easily  be  pushed
between  the  bars  by  bending  them  (Luce  c  Ombra,  x,  November,
1910,  and  A.  S.  P.,  xxi,  January,  1911,  225-230). »

Colonel  and  Mme.  Peters  at  the  Lodge  Psyche  in  Berlin  saw  a
striking  materialized  form.  The  seance  took  place  in  a  small  room
sufficiently  lit  by  a  red  light.  The  medium  (a  masked  woman)
was  asleep  in  a  chair.  First  a  masculine  figure,  whose  body  was
not  visible  below  the  knees,  appeared  beside  her;  then  another
form,  the  so-called  nun  Cordula,  taller  by  a  head  than  the  medium,
wearing  the  Dominician  habit.  Her  face  was  entirely  human,  with
shining  eyes.  She  swayed  in  the  air,  floated  high  in  the  room
for  three  minutes  at  a  height  of  nearly  three  yards,  making  ges-
tures and  saying,  "Look  how  my  eyes  shine!"  She  then  vanished
by  degrees,  the  medium  being  all  the  time  in  the  same  place  about
a  yard  and  a  half  from  the  apparition  (A.  S.  P.,  1907,  xxvii,  25-
35).

Eglinton  was  a  very  powerful  medium,  and  though  he  has  been
suspected  of  fraud,  he  was  able  finally  to  prove  that  the  allega-
tions of  his  enemies  were  calumnies.  Moreover,  the  question  is
not  to  establish  that  he  was  never  guilty  of  trickery  (which  is  not
easy  in  the  case  of  a  professional  medium)  but  whether  in  certain
definite  instances  striking  metapyschic  phenomena  have  been  pro-
duced (Erny,  loc.  cit.,  159).

'Mr.  Willy  Reichel  (Psychische  Studien,  October,  iqio,  and  A.  S.  P.,  191 1,
xxi,  140)  considers  these  as  manifest  frauds.  C.  de  Vesme  has  defended  them.
But  things  being  as  they  are,  no  account  should  be  taken  of  these  alleged  phe-
nomena even  by  the  best  natured  persons  (A.  S.  P.,  191 1,  xxi,  214).

*The  authoritativeness  of  seances  that  give  materializations  should  always
be  compared  with  those  at  which  Eusapia's  phenomena  were  observed.  For
twenty  years,  at  Milan,  Genoa,  Rome,  Naples,  Turin,  Paris,  Ribaud  Island,
Carqueiranne,  TAgnelas,  Cambridge,  Montfort  l'Amaury,  and  Washington,
Eusapia  was  scrutinized,  analyzed,  and  thoroughly  studied  by  such  men  of
science  as  Schiaparelli,  Oliver  Lodge,  Lombroso,  Myers,  Aksakoff,  De  Rochas,
A.  de  Gramont,  P.  Curie,  Morselli,  Bozzano,  Ochorowicz,  Foa,  Bottazzi,  Vas-
sallo,  Feilding,  Carrington,  Maxwell,  Dariex,  and  others.  It  will  probably  be
long  before  an  equally  imposing  list  of  unexceptionable  witnesses  can  be  pro-
duced in  any  other  case.

536

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Miss  Glyn,  who  did  not  believe  in  materializations,  saw  Eglin-
ton  at  her  own  house,  at  a  seance  at  which  her  father,  her  brother,
and  a  friend  were  present.  Eglinton  was  in  the  middle  of  this
little  circle,  and  his  hands  were  held.  Two  forms  appeared  that
could  move  and  speak.  Miss  Glyn  recognized  them  for  her
mother  and  her  younger  brother.  The  forms  slowly  disappeared.
Phantoms  are  often  too  readily  recognized,  and  the  desire  to
secure  this  recognition  detracts  much  from  the  value  of  the
attestation.

Dr.  Carter  Blake,  with  five  persons  well  known  in  English  in-
tellectual society,  narrates  that  he  saw  by  the  side  of  Eglinton,
who  was  sitting  in  an  armchair,  a  tall  brown  form  that  melted
into  the  medium's  body.

The  distinguished  naturalist,  Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  in  a  letter
to  Erny,  states  that  he  saw  Eglinton  at  a  seance  in  a  private
house.  By  his  side  there  appeared  Abdullah,  a  materialized  Ori-
ental wearing  sandals,  a  turban,  and  burnous;  Eglinton  being
visible  at  the  same  time  sitting  in  an  armchair  in  evening  dress.
After  the  seance  Eglinton  was  undressed  and  most  carefully
searched  but  neither  sandals,  turban,  nor  burnous  were  found.

Important  seances  were  held  at  the  house  of  the  artist,  J.  Tissot,
who  has  represented  one  result  in  a  very  beautiful  picture.  Eglin-
ton sat  in  an  armchair,  close  to  Tissot,  and  stayed  there  the  whole
time.  The  doors  were  locked.  After  a  brief  space  two  forms  ap-
peared by  Tissot's  side.  At  first  they  were  nebulous,  but  gradu-
ally became  clear  so  that  all  their  features  could  be  seen.  The
male  form  had  in  his  hand  a  kind  of  light  with  which  he  lit  up  the
feminine  form.  M.  Tissot  recognized  the  latter,  and,  much  moved,
asked  her  to  kiss  him ;  she  did  so  several  times  and  her  lips  were
seen  to  move.

Dr.  Nichols  experimented  with  Eglinton,  putting  him  in  a  cage
with  a  net  over  it.  The  doors  of  the  cage  were  closed  with  sealed
knots  and  the  approaches  to  the  cage  were  dusted  with  flour.  The
forms  appeared  outside  the  cage.  Another  time,  at  Dr.  Nichols's
house,  in  daylight,  but  behind  closed  curtains,  there  was  a  mate-
rialization in  human  form,  which,  in  order  to  be  recognized,  raised
the  curtain  to  show  itself  in  the  daylight.  It  then  slowly  de-
materialized  till  there  remained  nothing  but  the  lower  part  of  the
body  which  vanished  abruptly.

Florence  Marryat  and  her  husband  assisted  at  a  remarkable
private  seance  in  which  they  saw  a  whitish,  cloudy  substance

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  537

emerge  from  the  left  hip  of  the  medium ;  this  cloud  increased  in
size,  condensed,  and  became  a  materialized  form  that  stood  before
Eglinton.  She  also  studied  the  materializations  given  by  Mr.
Arthur  Coleman  who  was  not  a  professional  medium.  He  was
tied  with  cotton  threads  that  would  break  at  the  least  movement.
Before  the  five  sitters  six  forms  appeared  and  were  seen  by  the
light  of  a  gas-burner.  During  this  time  Coleman  was  entranced
in  the  next  room.

Mr.  Stainton  Moses  often  saw  living  forms  about  him.  His
friend,  Mr.  Charlton  Speer,  reports,  among  many  other  facts,  as
follows :  "I  had  my  hand  on  the  paper,  writing,  when  Mr.  Moses,
sitting  just  opposite  me,  said,  There  is  a  column  of  light  in  front
of  you.'  Shortly  after  he  said  that  the  column  had  grown  into  a
spirit,  whose  head  and  shape  he  described."  It  is  very  doubtful  if
this  figure  was  objective;  apparently  it  was  seen  by  Stainton
Moses  only.

Heavy  blows  were  heard  in  full  daylight  by  Mr.  Speer  and
Stainton  Moses  out  of  doors  on  the  rails  of  the  line  to  Southend.
These  knocks  (which  were  intelligent)  could  be  heard  fifty  yards
away.  Mr.  Moses  notes  also  vague,  luminous  forms  near  the  table
and  simultaneous  knockings.  Reference  has  already  been  made  to
telekinesis  in  his  presence,  but  materializations  were  exceptional.

In  1905  the  Rev.  Mr.  Colley,  archdeacon  of  Canterbury,  made
some  astonishing  experiments  with  the  Rev.  Monck,  the  medium
studied  by  Reiners  and  Oxley,  quoted  by  Delanne  (p.  521).  The
gas-jet  was  fully  lit  and  Colley  was  at  the  side  of  the  entranced
medium,  holding  him  up.  A  vapour  emerged  from  the  medium's
black  clothes,  and  became  a  cloud  which  gradually  condensed  into
white  draperies  surrounding  the  apparitions.  A  child  appeared
who  moved  in  the  room  just  like  a  living  child,  and  was  kissed
by  those  present,  then  returned  to  the  medium  and  was  gradually
absorbed  by  him  and  disappeared,  melting  into  his  body.  On  the
same  day  a  beautiful  woman  appeared,  born  from  a  fluidic  filament
emanating  from  Monck  and  re-absorbed  by  him.  In  another
seance  an  Oriental  form  calling  itself  the  Mahdi  was  seen  two
yards  distant  from  Monck:  "The  Mahdi  wore  a  metallic  helmet
that  I  could  touch ;  it  seemed  to  melt  like  snow  at  my  touch,  re-
suming its  form  a  moment  later."  This  phantom  was  strong:  Mr.
Colley  one  day  seized  it  in  his  arms,  and  then,  "an  irresistible  force
flung  me  about  six  yards  to  the  place  where  the  medium  was
standing;  and  I  found  myself  clasping  the  medium,  with  white

538

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

muslin  over  his  black  coat.  I  was  holding  him  in  my  arms  as  I
had  thought  to  hold  the  Mahdi."

This  statement  led  to  the  supposition  that  Mr.  Colley  was  the
victim  of  a  fraud ;  but  he  had  seen  the  vapour  becoming  a  cloud
and  materializing  into  garments  covering  a  body.

One  materialized  form  called  itself  Samuel,  and  the  medium
was  seen  to  clasp  Samuel's  hand  fraternally  and  walk  with  him
round  the  room.  The  archdeacon  wrote :  "I  publish  these  things
for  the  first  time,  having  meditated  over  them  in  silence  for
twenty-eight  years,  giving  my  word  as  a  clergyman  for  things
which  imperil  my  ecclesiastical  position  and  my  future  advance-
ment."

There  was  a  celebrated  lawsuit  on  this.  The  conjurer  Mas-
kelyne  undertook  to  repeat  the  phenomena  by  trick.  He  wagered
£1,000  and  lost  his  suit.  The  illustrious  A.  R.  Wallace  gave  evi-
dence in  support  of  Mr.  Colley.

Dr.  Hirschmann,  President  of  the  Anthropological  Society  of
Liverpool,  obtained  most  interesting  results  with  a  non-profes-
sional medium,  Mr.  B.  Many  photographs  were  taken  of  appari-
tions, their  height  was  measured,  their  weight  taken,  and  their
pulse  observed,  just  as  if  they  were  living  bodies.  These  appari-
tions, he  says,  seemed  to  organize  themselves  from  a  nebulous
mass,  and  they  disappeared  suddenly.  In  one  photograph  a  nebu-
lous connection  is  seen  between  the  chest  of  the  medium  and  that
of  the  phantom.

At  the  house  of  Professor  E.,  of  Christiania,  in  1893,  M.  de
Bergen  arranged  a  series  or  seances  with  Mme.  d'Esperance,  in
which  many  distinguished  persons  belonging  to  the  university,  the
magistrature,  and  the  clergy  took  part.

In  one  of  these  seances  an  extremely  beautiful  female  form  ap-
peared calling  herself  Nepenthes.  "She  showed  herself  in  the
light  at  the  same  time  as  the  medium,  who  was  sitting  with  other
persons  outside  the  cabinet,  and  materialized  in  the  midst  of  the
circle.  She  plunged  her  hand  into  liquid  paraffin  wax,  leaving  a
mould  of  rare  beauty.  The  modeller  who  made  the  plaster  cast
could  not  believe  his  eyes  and  spoke  of  sorcery,  because  he  could
not  imagine  how  the  hand  could  have  been  extricated  from  the
wax  glove.

"Nepenthes  dematerialized  in  the  midst  of  the  circle.  She
lowered  her  head  on  which  her  usual  diadem  shone,  and  little  by
little  became  a  luminous  cloud  like  a  human  head  (on  which  the
diadem  still  faintly  showed)  gradually  fading  away."

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  539

Professor  Aksakoff  published  a  memorandum  of  Mine.  d'Es-
perance1  to  which  it  would  seem  too  much  importance  has  been
ascribed.

Mr.  Carrington  has  shown  that  if  there  was  no  fraud,  fraud
was  quite  possible.  Professor  Aksakoff  very  loyally  gives  the
evidence  of  several  persons  present  at  this  alleged  dematerializa-
tion  who  did  not  accept  it  as  genuine,  for  example,  the  engineer,
Schonelz  (p.  92).  The  honesty  of  Mme.  d'Esperance  may  very
well  be  admitted  while  supposing  that  by  an  unconscious  backward
movement  of  her  legs  she  may  have  given  rise  to  the  notion  or  may
have  herself  thought  that  her  lower  limbs  were  dematerialized  for
a  time.

A  medium  named  Sambor,  a  former  telegraphist,  gave  a  series
of  seances  from  1896  to  1902,  which  are  recorded  in  the  Russian
spiritist  journal,  Rebus.  Petrovo  Solovovo,  a  skilful  experimental-
ist and  scientifically  sceptical,  had  given  an  analysis  of  these
seances,  especially  of  those  at  which  he  was  present.  But  he  has
since  raised  some  justifiable  doubts  even  on  the  latter.2

In  1899,  in  the  house  of  Mme.  de  A.,  the  materialized  form  of  a
little  girl  appeared  between  the  curtains,  Sambor  being  in  the
chain  formed  by  the  linked  hands  of  the  sitters.  A  white  column
seemed  to  rise  from  the  floor  and  move  towards  Sambor.  This
materialized  form  (Olia)  raised  a  table  into  the  air,  and  a  small
(child's)  hand  touched  the  sitters.  On  another  occasion,  only  Mr.
S.  and  Mr.  Bonjunski  being  present,  a  form,  Friedrich,  appeared,
quite  different  from  Sambor  both  in  stature  and  gestures;  this
materialization  and  Sambor  were  seen  together,  walking  about  the
room.  The  light  was  good,  and  all  took  place  in  Mr.  Bonjuntki'a
small  room  in  Petersburg  on  June  20,  1899,  at  which  time  of  year
there  is  practically  no  night.  Among  other  phenomena,  Fried-
rich  wrote  something  on  the  inside  of  the  glass  of  Mr.  S.'s  watch.

Mr.  Erfurt,  the  director  of  a  printing  works  at  Petersburg,
prepared  a  cone  of  sheet-iron,  with  a  piece  of  paper  and  a  pencil
inside  it.  M.  Zabasky  and  M.  Eichwald,  engineers,  closed  the
cone  with  an  iron  cover  fixed  on  with  special  rivets.  This  cone
was  left  for  several  days  in  a  room  that  Sambor  had  never  entered.
In  the  seance  of  March  8,  1902,  Sambor  declared  that  something
had  been  written ;  the  cone  was  opened,  not  without  difficulty,  and

*A.  Aksakoff,  Vn  cos  de  materialisation  particlle  du  corps  d'un  me'dtum.
Enqudtes  et  commentaires,  Paris,  Libr.  de  I'Art  independant,  1896.

%A.  S.  P.,  November  and  December,  1899,  ix,  105  and  109,  xi,  243-256;  1902,
xii,  257-302.

540

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

after  having  verified  that  everything  was  intact  some  words  were
found  written  in  pencil  on  the  paper.

Mme.  Youdenitch  has  communicated  to  A.  S.  P.  (1904,  xiv,
193)  details  on  the  seances  that  took  place  in  the  house  of  M.  Ol-
chowski.  There  was  almost  complete  darkness.  Hands  were
joined,  so  that  the  hands  of  the  medium  were  never  free.  The
little  girl  Olia  appeared  at  Sambor's  side.  She  could  be  seen  and
touched  and  she  was  heard  to  speak.  She  was  luminous  and
bluish  white  in  colour,  and  seemed  to  tremble  the  whole  time.  Her
features  were  ill-defined,  and  she  disappeared  by  degrees,  vanish-
ing "like  a  tremulous  ribbon/'  In  an  adjoining  room,  where  there
was  certainly  no  one,  a  mandolin  had  been  placed,  which  began  to
play  of  itself.  This  white  mandolin,  visible  in  the  faint  light,  was
tea)  to  come  from  the  room  where  it  was  and  settle  on  the  table
in  the  seance  room.

The  hypothesis  of  an  accomplice  will  explain  some  of  these
phenomena,  but  not  all.  This  hypothesis  that  seems  so  unlikely
at  first  sight  was  actually  proved.  Petrovo  Solovovo  learned,  later,
that  one  of  the  sitters  intentionally  released  Sambor's  hand  that
he  was  supposed  to  be  holding.  There  is  therefore  nothing  to  be
said  on  the  so-called  phenomenon  of  the  chair.  But  this  does  not
explain  the  phantom  seen  by  all  at  Sambor's  side;  for  the  com-
plicity seems  to  have  been  limited  to  the  release  of  one  hand.  All
the  same,  legitimate  doubts  may  be  cast  upon  all  Sambor's  me-
diumship,  for  there  is  no  certainty  of  his  probity  nor  that  of  the
circle.

It  is  scarcely  worth  while  to  mention  the  very  old  experiments
by  Dale  Owen  in  New  York  in  1860,  and  as  the  phenomena  were
given  by  one  of  the  Fox  sisters,  then  Mrs.  Underhill,  they  cannot
be  trusted.  Still,  it  is  probable,  as  in  so  many  cases  with  Leah
Fox,  that  there  was  an  admixture  of  genuine  phenomena.  Dr.
Gray  cut  off  a  piece  of  the  garment  of  the  materialized  form,
which  melted  little  by  little  in  his  hands  (Erny,  loc.  cit.,  133).
This  must  be  accepted  as  genuine  unless  Dr.  Gray  were  a  low  im-
postor. A  New  York  banker,  Mr.  Livermore,  had  about  a  hun-
dred seances  at  his  own  house  with  Leah  Fox  and  many  times
recognized  his  deceased  wife  whom  he  ardently  desired  to  see.

At  a  private  seance  in  Australia,  Mr.  Brown,  experimenting
with  one  of  his  friends  who  was  a  medium,  hung  a  curtain  across
one  corner  of  his  room.  The  medium  retired  behind  this  curtain,
and  twelve  materialized  forms  appeared  in  succession  among

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  541

whom  Mr.  Brown  believed  that  he  recognized  two  deceased  sons
of  his.

M.  Stiegler  narrates  (A.  S.  P.,  1905,  xv,  641)  a  spiritist  seance
at  Aries  directed  by  J.  Bayol,  an  eminent  surgeon  of  the  French
Navy,  subsequently  Governor  of  Upper  Nigeria.  The  medium
was  a  young  employee  of  the  Paris-Lyons  Railway.  Lights  ap-
peared on  the  ceiling  and  a  greenish-blue  ring  appeared  over  the
heads  of  the  sitters.   Details  given  are  few.

Baron  Hillenbach  of  Vienna  had  some  seances  there  with  Mme.
Toeffer  at  his  own  house,  Dr.  Tieber  assisting.  Mme.  Toeffer,
sitting  on  a  sofa,  was  covered  by  a  net  nailed  to  the  floor  all  round.
A  form  appeared  which  raised  the  curtain,  and  while  so  holding
it,  Mme.  Toeffer  could  be  seen  in  a  state  of  trance,  with  her
arms  hanging  down.

Lucy  Stout  witnessed  a  materialization  in  a  wooden  house  in
Kansas  City  (Missouri).  She  specially  observed  its  demateriali-
zation.  The  form  approached  the  medium's  cabinet,  became
cloudy  and  transparent,  and  was  transformed  into  a  luminous
mass  which  finally  disappeared.

M.  Fremery,  at  La  Haye,  in  the  house  of  Mme.  Huygens,  saw
a  tall  white  form  surmounted  by  a  luminous  sphere,  the  medium
being  motionless  behind  the  curtains.  By  degrees  this  condensed
into  a  hand  which  rose  to  the  ceiling,  holding  a  palm-branch.  The
luminous  hand  then  descended  to  the  table.  Only  the  hand  and
arm  were  materialized  and  seemed  to  be  those  of  a  child  of  four-
teen (A.  S.  P.,  1908,  xvii,  256).

Another  experience  was  very  interesting:  "A  phosphorescent
cloud  developed,  moving  quickly  towards  us,  rose  up,  condensed,
flowed  to  the  ground,  and  disappeared  behind  the  curtain.  Then
a  luminous  arm  of  abnormal  length  emerged  from  the  curtain,  a
luminous  disk  in  a  phosphorescent  cloud  moved  quickly  towards
a  chair  which  was  displaced,  whilst  the  medium  remained  visible
to  all  of  us  sitting  in  the  cabinet"  (A.  S.  P.,  1908,  xvii,  309).

An  American  sculptor,  Mr.  Brackett,  experimenting  with  Mrs.
F.,  of  Boston,  thus  describes  the  disappearance  of  the  phantom
of  his  wife:  'This  form  did  not  resemble  her;  but  told  me  inti-
mate things  that  she  alone  could  know.  Suddenly  the  form  sank
down  and  disappeared  through  the  floor  which  was  covered  with
a  thick  carpet;  the  head  and  shoulders  remained  visible  to  the
last."  The  similarity  to  the  Villa  Carmen  phenomena  will  be
noted.

542

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Mr.  Brackett  saw  two  materialized  forms  together  with  the
medium,  and  verified  that  they  underwent  transformation.  "I  saw
a  tall  young  man  who  called  himself  the  brother  of  Mrs.  X.,  who
was  with  me,  and  as  Mrs.  X.  said  she  could  not  recognize  him
(having  only  known  him  as  a  child),  the  form  shrank  little  by
little  till  it  assumed  the  form  of  the  little  boy  that  Mrs.  X.  had
known/'  "Sometimes,"  says  Mr.  Brackett,  "the  form  dematerial-
ized  before  me  and  I  at  once  verified  that  the  medium  was
sleeping/'

These  diverse  experiments,  which  have  not  been  repeated,  and
which  are  testified  to  only  by  certain  observers  possibly  devoid  of
the  necessary  scepticism,  do  not  seem  to  me  such  as  to  shake  the
negative  convictions  of  scientists.  But  this  is  not  the  case  with
the  phenomena  recorded  of  Home,  Florence  Cook,  Eusapia,  and
Miss  Goligher  which  are  unassailable.  Those  of  Marthe-Eva,  of
Linda  Gazzera,  Mrs.  Salmon,  Eglinton,  and  Mme.  Lacombe  ac-
quire full  value  from  the  others,  and  this  value  is  considerable;
nor  do  I  see  reason  to  dismiss  entirely  those  of  M.  Corrales,  Sam-
bor,  and  perhaps  those  of  Mme.  d'Esperance.

I  think  I  have  mentioned  all  the  cases  of  experimental  materiali-
zation that  seem  worthy  of  notice;  but  one  can  never  be  sure
of  giving  a  complete  list,  and  I  apologize  in  advance  for  any

omissions.1

Nothing  in  the  history  of  materializations  would  give  more  posi-
tive proof  than  the  production  of  moulds  obtained  under  unexcep-
tionable experimental  conditions,  from  materialized  forms  de-
materializing  themselves.

Aksakoff  (./.  .V.  /'.,  1S97,  vii,  28)  cites  various  cases  of  moulds
obtained  by  fluidic  hands  making  impressions  on  flour,  plaster,  or
paraffin  wax.  According  to  him  the  first  experiments  of  this  kind
go  back  to  1855  (Banner  of  Light,  April  1,  1855,  and  August  10,
1867).*

The  facts  narrated  by  Aksakoff  did  not  convince  me ;  even  the
putty  cast  of  Eusapia's  head  did  not  seem  to  me  certain,  and  I  was

!I  prefer  not  to  allude  to  the  unpublished  experiments  which  were  told  me
at  Warsaw  or  described  to  me  by  letter,  by  persons  of  good  standing.  They
arc  so  stupefying  and  hugely  improbable  that  I  unfortunately  cannot  bring  my-
self to  believe  them.    And  yet  .  .  .

•See  also  Zollner  and  Wagner  (Psychische  Studicn,  1877,  401;  1878,  492;
1879.  249);  and  Spiritualist,  1878,  134.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  543

sure  that  we  had  nothing  really  evidential  in  the  way  of  moulds,
when  in  1921  we  were  able  to  study  these  phenomena  with  a
Polish  medium — Kluski — at  the  Metapsychic  Institute.

Geley  and  I  took  the  precaution  of  introducing,  unknown  to
any  other  person,  a  small  quantity  of  cholesterin  in  the  bath  of
melted  paraffin  wax  placed  before  the  medium  during  the  seance.
This  substance  is  soluble  in  paraffin  without  discolouring  it,  but  on
adding  sulphuric  acid  it  takes  a  deep  violet-red  tint ;  so  that  we
could  be  absolutely  certain  that  any  moulds  obtained  should  be
from  the  paraffin  provided  by  ourselves.  We  therefore  had  cer-
tain proof  that  the  moulds  obtained  could  not  have  been  prepared
in  advance  but  must  have  been  produced  during  the  seance  itself.
Absolute  certainty  was  thus  secured.

During  the  seance  the  medium's  hands  were  held  firmly  by  Geley
and  myself  on  the  right  and  on  the  left,  so  that  he  could  not  liber-
ate either  hand.  A  first  mould  was  obtained  of  a  child's  hand,
then  a  second  of  both  hands,  right  and  left;  a  third  time  of  a
child's  foot.  The  creases  in  the  skin  and  the  veins  were  visible
on  the  plaster  casts  made  from  the  moulds.

By  reason  of  the  narrowness  at  the  wrist  these  moulds  could  not
be  obtained  from  living  hands,  for  the  whole  hand  would  have  to
be  withdrawn  through  the  narrow  opening  at  the  wrist.  Profes-
sional modellers  secure  their  results  by  threads  attached  to  the
hand,  which  are  pulled  through  the  plaster.  In  the  moulds  here
considered  there  was  nothing  of  the  sort ;  they  were  produced  by  a
materialization  followed  by  dematerialization,  for  this  latter  was
necessary  to  disengage  the  hand  from  the  paraffin  "glove."

These  experiments,  which  we  intend  to  resume  on  account  of
their  importance,  afford  an  absolute  proof  of  a  materialization  fol-
lowed by  dematerialization,  for  even  if  the  medium  had  the
means  to  produce  the  results  by  a  normal  process,  he  could  not
have  made  use  of  them.  We  defy  the  most  skilful  modellers  to  ob-
tain such  moulds  without  using  the  plan  of  two  segments  sepa-
rated by  thread  and  afterwards  reunited.

We  therefore  affirm  that  there  was  a  materialization  and  de-
materialization  of  an  ectoplasmic  or  fluidic  hand,  and  we  think
that  this  is  the  first  time  that  such  rigorous  conditions  of  experi-
ment have  been  imposed.

There  is  ample  proof  that  experimental  materialization  (ecto-
plasmic) should  take  definite  rank  as  a  scientific  fact.  Assuredly

544

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

we  do  not  understand  it.    It  is  very  absurd,  if  a  truth  can  be

absurd.

Spiritualists  have  blamed  me  for  using  this  word  "absurd";
and  have  not  been  able  to  understand  that  to  admit  the  reality  of
these  phenomena  was  to  me  an  actual  pain ;  but  to  ask  a  physi-
ologist, a  physicist,  or  a  chemist  to  admit  that  a  form  that  has  a
circulation  of  blood,  warmth,  and  muscles,  that  exhales  carbonic
arid,  has  weight,  speaks,  and  thinks,  can  issue  from  a  human
body  is  to  ask  of  him  an  intellectual  effort  that  is  really  painful.

Yes,  it  is  absurd  ;  but  no  matter — it  is  true.

Further,  materializations  must  not  be  considered  as  isolated
phenomena.  They  must  be  considered  along  with  telekinesis  and
collective  hallucinations.  Taken  together  they  carry  indisputable
proofs  before  which  the  imperfect  science  of  today  must  bow.  The
function  of  science  is  first  of  all  to  verify;  and  then,  if  possible,  to
understand.1

'At  the  Copenhagen  Congress  (vide  Revue  Metapsychique,  p.  364)
Mme.  Bisson  read  a  report  of  some  astounding  facts  that  must  be  admitted
in  despite  of  their  wild  improbability,  because  of  the  known  exactitude  of  Mme.
Bisson's  experimental  methods.  The  events  narrated  took  place  on  May  25,
1 92 1,  before  six  persons  in  full  daylight.  The  ectoplasm,  called  "the  sub-
stance" by  Mme.  Bisson,  was  transformed  into  a  tiny  nude  woman,  beauti-
fully famed,  apparently  alive  and  who  moved  her  limbs.  Her  size  changed
rapidly.  Eva  took  her  and  placed  her  on  the  hands  of  Mme.  Bisson  where
she  remained  about  ten  seconds,  long  enough  for  those  present  to  verify  that
she  seemed  alive.    Comment  is  needless.

I  cannot  forbear  to  mention  here  the  observations  on  Eva  made  by  certain
members  of  the  S.  P.  R.  in  January,  1922 — Messrs.  Dingwall,  Baggalay,
Fournit-r  d'Albe,  Woolley,  Feilding,  and  Whately-Smith ;  Mrs.  Salter  and  Miss
Newton.

Elaborate  precautions,  quite  justifiably  minute,  were  taken  against  the  possi-
bility of  trickery.

The  official  reports  of  the  seances  lead  to  very  distinct  inferences ;  it  seems
that  though  the  external  conditions  were  unfavourable  to  success,  some  re-
sults were  very  clear  and  that  it  is  impossible  to  refer  the  phenomena  to
fraud.

Ncvertheleti  our  learned  colleagues  of  the  S.  P.  R.  come  to  no  conclusion.
They  admit  that  the  only  possible  trickery  is  regurgitation.  But  what  is  meant
by  that?  How  can  masses  of  mobile  substance,  organized  as  hands,  faces,  and
drawings,  be  made  to  emerge  from  the  oesophagus  or  the  stomach  ?  No  physiol-
ogist would  admit  such  power  to  contract  those  organs  at  will  in  this  manner.
How,  when  the  medium's  hands  are  tied  and  held,  could  papers  be  unfolded,  put
away,  and  made  to  pass  through  a  veil  ?

The  members  of  the  S.  P.  R.,  when  they  fail  to  understand,  say,  "It  is  diffi-
cult to  understand  how  this  is  produced."  Mr.  Dingwall,  who  is  an  expert  in
legerdemain,  having  seen  the  ectoplasm  emerge  as  a  miniature  hand,  making
signs  before  disappearing,  says,  "I  attach  no  importance  to  this."  We  may  be
permitted  to  remark  that  very  great  importance  attaches  to  Mr.  Dingwall's  tes-
timony. The  general  conclusion  is  that  there  was  probably  no  trickery,  but
the  phenomena  were  not  sufficient  to  warrant  acceptance.

ECTOPLASMS  (MATERIALIZATIONS)  545

Certainly  every  experimenter  has  the  right  to  be  very  exacting  as  to  proof,
but  it  is  impossible  not  to  be  astonished  at  the  glaring  contradiction  between
the  reports  of  these  seances  and  the  inferences  drawn  from  them.  However,
we  willingly  concede  to  the  London  experimentalists  that  for  such  surprising
phenomena  it  is  adv  isable  not  to  rest  on  past  experiments,  but  to  repeat  them  ;
there  is  all  to  gain  and  nothing  to  lose  by  increased  rigour  and  frequency  of
experiment

M.  Guy  du  Bourg  de  Bozas  reports  (Revue  Mctafsychtijue,  No.  i,  1921)  an
interesting  variation  in  ectoplasmic  experiments.  With  three  different  me-
diums, in  Paris,  Copenhagen,  and  Warsaw,  he  has  found  that  electric  con-
nection could  be  established  between  two  electrodes.  Electrical  resistance  be-
ing easily  measured,  the  new  method  may  be  expected  to  be  very  useful  (second
French  edition).

There  is  in  Warsaw  a  professional  medium  called  Burgik.  He  is  a  man
of  about  forty-five,  thin,  undersized,  and  seems  in  indifferent  health.  He  gives
many  seances  and  seems  not  to  be  at  all  interested  in  the  phenomena,  which
appear  to  be  quite  independent  of  his  will.  I  had  eight  to  ten  seances  with
him.  He  is  quite  motionless  during  the  experiments,  and  his  left  hand  was
held  by  me,  the  right  being  held  by  some  other  person.  Lights,  sometimes
very  bright,  appear  and  move  about  like  will-o'-the-wisps,  close  to  our  faces
and  moving  about  the  room  up  to  the  ceiling.

In  (he  last  seance  that  I  had  with  him  the  phenomena  were  very  marked.  I
held  his  left  hand  and  M.  de  Gielski  his  right.  He  was  quite  motionless,  and
none  of  the  experimenters  moved  at  all.  My  trouser  leg  was  strongly  pulled
and  a  strange,  ill-defined  form  that  seemed  to  have  paws  like  those  of  a  dog
or  small  monkey  climbed  on  my  knee.  I  could  feel  its  weight,  very  light,
and  something  like  the  muzzle  of  an  animal  (?)  touched  my  cheek.  It  was
moist  and  made  a  grunting  noise  like  a  thirsty  dog.  Later  on  two  strong
hands  seized  my  two  shoulders;  and  very  bright  lights  came  round  a  face.
No  trickery  seems  possible,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  we  were  dealing
with  a  professional  medium.

This  medium  ought  not  to  be  left  to  develop  in  unscientific,  mystical,  and
credulous  circles.  All  such  half-experiments  are  valueless  from  a  scientific
point  of  view.

Further  experiments  were  made  with  Kluski,  resulting  in  fresh  paraffin
moulds  which  prove  conclusively  that  the  "gloves"  of  paraffin  wax  were  ob-
tained during  the  seance,  that  these  were  of  a  living  hand  showing  the  tex-
ture of  the  skin,  the  veins,  and  the  creases  of  the  skin,  and  that  a  normal
hand  could  not  have  released  itself  from  the  glove.

These  were  the  conclusions  of  practised  moulders,  called  in  as  experts,
They  say,  "We  cannot  understand  how  these  paraffin  moulds  could  have  been
obtained  ;  it  is  an  absolute  mystery  to  us."  This  mystery  is  dematerialization,
a  correlative  of  the  materialization.  The  whole  of  this  investigation  made  by
Gclcy  with  minute  care  is  of  the  highest  importance,  for  it  gives  irrefragable
scientific  demonstration  of  ectoplasmic  materialization  (second  French  edition).

CHAPTER  IV

Levitations

Ectoplasms  and  telekinesis  are  proven  phenomena,  and  with
these  must  be  linked  the  still  uncertain  facts  of  levitation.

This  is  an  exceptional  occurrence,  even  with  powerful  mediums.
The  word  is  not  defined  in  Littre's  dictionary ;  it  is  a  partial  or
total  raising  of  the  body  without  any  apparent  mechanical  muscu-
lar action,  whether  the  body  remains  for  some  time  suspended
in  the  air,  or  whether  it  merely  rises  for  a  moment  to  a  certain
height.

Many  such  levitations  are  mentioned  in  the  Lives  of  the  Saints;
and  I  do  not  know  that  this  phenomenon,  so  frequently  related  in
legend,  can  always  be  controverted.

Many  cases  are  related  in  ( iorre's  Mystique  Divine1  (transl.
Paris,  1894,  ii,  291).  He  cites  St.  Peter  of  Alcantara,  the  admir-
able Christine.  Agnes  of  Bohemia,  Bernard  de  Courleon,  Dalma-
Ctttl  ol  GtfOQOe,  St.  Frauds  of  Assisi,  and  more  especially  St.
Joseph  de  Copertina  AbW  Kil>et  also  cites  numerous  cases — St.
Paul  de  la  Croix,  St.  Theresa,  St.  Philip  de  Neri,  Dominique  San
Diego  (whose  levitation  is  shown  in  a  picture  by  Murillo  at  the
Louvre),  Salvator  de  Horta,  and  others.

More  recently,  religious  books  affirm  the  same  of  A.  H.  Four-
m  (1752-1834),  of  Claude  Dhiere  (1757-1820),  and  of  the
Cure  d'Ars,  Jean  B.  \  ianney  (1786-1859).  Reproductions  of  pic-
tures representing  these  will  be  found  in  De  Rochas's  book  and
.  /.  V  PH  1901,  xi,  17-47.

I  will  allude,  and  that  but  briefly,  only  to  the  levitations  of
Joseph  of  Copertino.  It  cannot  be  supposed  that  all  that  has  been
Hid  of  him  is  entirely  false  ;  for  there  is  plenty  of  documentary
tfifttifflOOy,  and  not  of  remote  date,  for  he  was  born  in  1603  and
died  in  1663.  Fifteen  years  after  his  death  Father  Nuti  of  Assisi
wrote  his  life,  employing  the  testimony  of  many  witnesses.  Three

*Lo  Mystique  Divine,  Paris,  Poussielgue,  i88j;  quoted  by  De  Rochas  in
an  admirable  little  book,  wise  and  erudite  :  Recueils  de  documents  relatifs  a  la
IH  itation  du  corps  humam.  Paris,  Lcymarie,  1897.

546

LEVITATIONS

547

successive  investigations,  in  1711.  1722,  and  1753,  were  made  by
successive  popes  prior  to  his  beatification,  and  a  life  of  St.  Joseph
was  published  in  1753,  only  a  century  and  a  half  ago,  and  in
this  book  alone  the  facts  are  attested  by  a  sufficient  number  of
witnesses.

From  all  these  documents  it  appears  that  he  was  often  lifted
from  the  earth,  sometimes  remaining  suspended  in  the  air  in
presence  of  all  the  brothers  of  his  order.  The  monks  round
him,  doubting  what  they  saw,  passed  their  hands  under  his  feet  to
be  sure  that  they  were  not  touching  the  ground.  Pope  Urban
VIII  witnessed  this  levitation,  as  also  Duke  Frederic  of  Bruns-
wick in  1650.  It  would  seem  that  in  some  exceptional  cases  St.
Joseph  could  raise  into  the  air  those  who  had  come  to  see  him.

Gorres  gives  no  less  than  twelve  pages  to  these  levitations  of  St.
Joseph,  and  says  that  each  was  preceded  by  a  kind  of  ecstasy  which
began  by  a  cry,  I  )h  !  Oh !  repeated  several  times,  and  that  the  holy
man  was  seized  with  trembling  followed  by  a  period  of  stupor.

In  the  official  report  of  proceedings  "to  deliver  a  girl  possessed
by  the  evil  spirit"  at  Louviers  in  1591,  Franchise  Fontaine,  a  young
servant  of  Louviers,  being  on  her  knees,  was  "fearsomely  raised,"
and  another  time  was  raised  from  the  earth  higher  than  the  altar.
A  third  time  she  was  raised  over  a  bench  in  front  of  the  altar  and
carried  through  the  air,  head  downwards.  The  priest  Fillet  who
was  exorcising  Franchise  showed  much  discernment !  He  con-
sidered that  she  was  raised  by  her  hair,  and  had  her  head  shaved,
which  forthwith  put  an  end  to  the  levitations  (  ??)

No  account  can  be  taken  of  this  old  document,  nor  of  those  re-
ferring to  the  possessed  persons  of  Langres  (1734).  The  credu-
lity of  exorcists  is  sometimes  unimaginable,  and  we  must  assume
provisionally  that  all  these  formal  attestations  are  only  illusions.
Therefore  though  we  cannot  absolutely  deny  all  these  stories,  they
cannot  convince.

A.  de  Rochas  mentions  some  instances  of  levitations  observed  in
the  nineteenth  century  by  various  experimenters  who  were  cer-
tainly credulous  but  also  men  of  good  faith — the  magnetizer  La-
fontaine.  Dr.  Cyriax  of  Berlin,  Mr.  B.,  a  friend  of  De  Rochas,  a
student  at  the  Polytechnic;  M.  Paluzzi  of  Naples;  Monseigneur
d'Hulst;  Dr.  Schmidt  of  Vienna ;  and  Justinus  Kerner,  with  the
Scctm  ol  Prevorst.  He  says  with  justice,  "The  history  of  science
is  there  to  remind  us  that  each  generation  has  seen  crumble  down

548

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

the  greater  part  of  the  scaffolding  of  knowledge  of  which  the
previous  generation  was  assured/'

Although  levitations  cannot  be  placed  among  demonstrated
facts,  they  certainly  merit  attentive  examination.  In  fact,  levi-
tation  is  only  a  special  case  of  telekinesis — an  unknown  mechanical
action  on  matter.  Only  if  it  is  mechanical,  the  fulcrum  of  the
power  is  not  apparent.

Semi-levitations  must  be  distinguished  from  total  levitations.
In  the  former  the  body  of  the  medium  loses  weight,  or,  almost
without  muscular  help,  it  is  placed  on  a  table.  It  is  difficult  to
verify  the  conditions,  especially  if  the  phenomenon  takes  place  in
the  dark:  in  that  case  even  testimony  proves  little;  for  a  medium,
even  if  not  acrobatic,  could  quite  well  persuade  credulous  sitters
that  it  had  taken  place  by  supernatural  powers.  There  is  no  need  to
make  much  of  such  semi-levitations  as  were  given  by  Carancini.

According  to  Kerner,  when  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst  was  put  into
a  bath  during  her  trances  she  floated  on  the  top  of  the  water  like
a  cork.  It  is  a  pity  that  such  stuff  should  be  mingled  with  serious
enquiries;  they  detract  from  them.

Eglinton  at  a  memorable  seance  in  presence  of  the  Emperor  and
Empress  of  Russia,  the  Grand  Duke  of  Oldenburg,  the  Grand
Duke  Vladimir,  and  other  members  of  the  Imperial  family,  rose
into  the  air.  "My  neighbours,"  says  Eglinton,  "had  to  stand  on
their  chairs  to  follow  me.  I  continued  to  rise  till  my  feet  touched
two  shoulders  on  which  I  leaned ;  they  were  those  of  the  Czar."

Florence  Cook  relates  that  when  fourteen  years  old  she  was
raised  up  to  the  ceiling,  to  her  great  alarm.  This  was  at  one  of
her  first  spiritualist  seances.  She  was  carried  above  the  heads  of
the  sitters  and  deposited  on  a  table.

Abbe  Petit,  writing  to  De  Rochas,  said  that  he  was  once  lifted
in  a  church;  he  resisted  and  his  terror  was  such  that  he  was  ill
afterwards.  But  he  brings  forward  no  witness,  so  the  thing  was
doubtless  an  illusion.

Dr.  Nicolas  Santangelo,  of  Yenosa,  on  giving  his  hand  to  two
mediums.  Ruggieri  and  Cecchini,  was  lifted  into  the  air  by  Rug-
gieri.  "Feeling  the  ground  fail  under  my  feet,  I  clung  to  the  arm
of  Ruggieri,  and  was  raised  to  a  height  of  about  three  yards;  so
that  I  distinctly  tVIt  the  chandelier  with  my  feet.  On  descending,
and  light  being  restored,  I  found  myself  kneeling  on  the  table."

All  dtafl  Itaffa  are  highly  doubtful.  Some  others,  here  follow-
ing, seem  to  deserve  more  credence.

LEVITATIONS

549

Dr.  L.  Luciani,  professor  of  physiology  in  the  University  of
Rome,  relates  that  at  a  seance  with  Eusapia,  he  holding  one  hand,
and  M.  E.  Nathan,  Mayor  of  Rome,  holding  the  other,  she  said
that  she  was  rising  into  the  air.  "We  felt  a  movement  of  ascent
that  we  followed  without  aiding  it.  Light  was  restored  and  Eu-
sapia  was  sitting  in  her  chair,  both  of  its  front  feet  being  on  the
table"  (A.  S.  P.,  1906,  xvi,  653).

Dr.  L.  Patrizi,  also  a  professor  of  physiology,  studied  the  levi-
tations  of  the  medium,  A.  Zuccarino,  and  gave  some  interesting
photographs  (A.  S.  P.,  1907,  xvii,  528-549).  Zuccarino  is  a  young
man  of  about  twenty-two,  a  government  employee,  and  therefore
not  a  professional  medium.  The  phenomenon  peculiar  to  him  is
a  very  distinct  levitation  that  lasts  for  about  ten  seconds.  He  holds
the  hands  of  the  sitters  who  link  hands  round  him,  but  in  place  of
leaning  on  their  hands  he  tends  to  take  them  higher.  During  the
trance  necessary  for  levitation  he  claims  to  be  helped  by  his  guides.
He  produces  also  some  luminous  phenomena.

Despite  the  authority  of  Professors  Luciani  and  Patrizi,  the  levi-
tations  of  Eusapia  and  Zuccarino  have  been  questioned ;  but  I  am
not  prepared  decidedly  to  deny  what  two  distinguished  physiol-
ogists attest.

Stainton  Moses  had  levitations,  which  he  describes  as  follows:
"On  August  30,  1872,  I  felt  my  chair  twist  round  from  the  table
to  be  raised  from  the  floor  to  a  height  that  I  estimate  as  twelve
to  fourteen  inches.  My  feet  were  about  twelve  inches  from  the
floor.  The  chair  remained  suspended  for  a  few  moments  and  I
then  felt  myself  lifted  higher  and  higher  by  a  slow,  steady  move-
ment. I  felt  no  fear  or  uneasiness.  I  was  perfectly  conscious  of
what  was  happening  and  described  the  phenomena  to  those  who
were  seated  round  the  table.  The  movement  lasted  a  considerable
time.  I  was  facing  the  wall  and  marked  it  at  the  level  of  my
chest  with  a  pencil.  This  mark  was  about  six  feet  above  the  floor.
I  was  not  troubled,  I  seemed  to  be  in  a  lift  and  the  things  round
me  to  be  lowered  below  me."  1

Stainton  Moses  describes  other  particulars  as  to  his  levitations.
Sometimes  he  was  transported  from  his  chair  to  a  sofa  at  a  con-
siderable distance,  and  very  quickly.  Once  he  was  raised  so  high
that  his  feet  touched  the  head  of  one  of  the  sitters,  he  then  being
in  a  recumbent  posture.   On  that  day,  after  the  levitation,  a  stool

^Researches  on  spiritualism  during  the  years  1872-3.  by  M.  A.  Oxon  (pseudo-
nym of  Stainton  Moses)  cited  by  Fr.  Myers,  P.  S.  P.  /?.,  xi,  1894.

550

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

was  taken  from  one  corner  of  the  room  and  knocked  against  a
chair  near  the  door.

But  Stainton  Moses  disliked  physical  phenomena  ;  why,  is  not
very  clear  ("I  discouraged  them  as  much  as  possible,  from  a  dis-
like to  violent  physical  manifestations" ),  so  that  they  occurred  no
more.

Eusapia  showed  only  partial  levitations.  Morselli  says,  "Rarls-
sinto  fenomcno,  certamcntc  sitteero  net  suo  initio,  forsc  illusorio
p0f  nostra  nclla  sua  continuazione  acrca  al  di  sopra  del  tavolo
tncdiummco."

At  Milan  I  saw  a  weighing  machine  on  which  Eusapia  was
seated  lose  weight  slowly  by  about  sixteen  pounds  from  one  hun-
dred and  sixteen  pounds  to  one  hundred  pounds  ;  but  I  do  not
think  this  very  evidential,  for  it  is  difficult  to  read  a  Roman
balance  correal;. ,  lad  in  the-  dim  Bgbfl  perhaps  full  precautions
hfld  not  been  taken  to  ensure  that  one  of  Eusapia's  feet  was  not
touching  the  ground.

Morselli  gives  one  instance  in  detail  from  which  it  would  cer-
tainly appear  that  Eusapia  was  raised  in  her  chair  to  a  height  of
thirty-two  inches  as  if  by  an  external  power.  Porro,  Morselli,  and
De  Albertis  were  iritMSM  to  this.  They  passed  their  hands  be-
tween the  table  and  Eusapia's  feet,  which  were  over  the  table.  The
movement  took  place  rapidly  and  smoothly  in  a  few  seconds,  and
the  descent  was  gradual.  Xevertlu  U >s  as  it  took  place  in  almost
total  darkness,  it  is  difficult  to  be  sure.

Homo's  levitations  are  the  most  extraordinary  of  any  ;  they
have  often  been  described.

"Mr.  Home  announced  to  us  that  he  was  about  to  be  lifted  into
the  air.  A  moment  later  he  passed  over  the  table  above  the  heads
of  those  present.  I  begged  him  to  make  a  mark  on  the  ceiling
with  a  pencil.  As  he  had  none,  I  got  up  to  lend  him  mine  and  only
at  my  utmost  reach  could  I  come  at  his  hand  which  was  quite
Nmn  feet  from  the  ground.  I  put  the  pencil  into  his  hand  which
kept  hold  of  mine,  I  accommodating  myself  to  his  aerial  peregrin-
ations" (Some  hu  uloits  m  My  Life,  by  D.  D.  Home.  Account
by  Mr.  James  Watson,  solicitor,  of  Liverpool).

The  following  account,  by  the  editor  of  the  CornhUl  Magazine,  i>
Granger  still:  "By  the  faint  light  in  the  room  I  saw  Home's  head
indistinctly  ;  some  minutes  later  his  voice  seemed  to  come  from
above:  he  then  said  that  he  would  pass  before  the  window  and
against  its  pale  light  we  could  see  the  opaque  form  of  his  body  sil-

LEVITATK  )\  S

551

houetted.  We  saw  him  right  across  the  window  in  a  horizontal
posture,  feet  first.  He  floated  in  the  air  for  several  minutes  and  I
felt  his  feet  touch  my  hair.  He  went  as  high  as  the  ceiling  on
which  he  made  a  slight  mark;  after  which  he  descended  and  re-
sumed his  place  among  us"  (loc.  cit..  p.  224).

These  strange  facts,  whether  related  of  St.  Joseph,  Stainton
Moses,  or  Home  deserve  to  be  borne  in  mind;  but  despite  the
number  and  the  authority  of  the  witnesses,  it  seems  to  me  that
rigid  science  cannot  yet  consider  levitation  as  a  proven  fact.

To  admit  a  fact  as  scientifically  demonstrated,  no  less  positive
proof  should  be  required  as  would  justify  a  death-sentence  on
a  man.

The  future  will  perhaps  remove  our  doubts.

This  hesitation,  which  will  perhaps  appear  overcautious  to  some
persons,  should  give  weight  to  our  absolute  affirmation  of  tele-
kinesis and  ectoplasms  as  genuine  metapsychic  phenomena.  Tele-
kinesis is  a  proven  fact.  Ectoplasms  are  demonstrated.  It  would,
however,  be  illogical  to  regard  these  various  phenomena,  despite
their  obvious  kinship,  as  so  intimately  connected  that  affirmation  or
denial  of  any  should  involve  the  affirmation  or  denial  of  others.

CHAPTER  V

BlLOCATIONS

(a)  Objective  Bilocations

Just  as  lcvitation  is  connected  with  telekinesis,  so  bilocation
ers  on  ectoplasmic  appearances.  It  is  vaguely  admitted  by
popular  opinion,  but  is  very  far  from  being  a  demonstrated  fact.
It  will  even  be  seen  that  there  are  grave  reasons  for  doubting  it
and  not  even  one  sound  proof  in  its  support.

Bilocation  signifies  the  simultaneous  presence  of  an  individual
in  two  different  places,  near  together  or  far  apart.  Those  who
believe  in  it  say  that  the  "double"  of  the  person  is  seen,  so  that  the
study  of  bilocations  is  also  the  study  of  "doubles."

So  for  other  phenomena,  a  distinction  must  be  made  here  also
between  the  subjective  and  the  objective.

Bilocation  would  be  objective  if  there  were  really  a  duplicated
living  bodv  showing  material  reality  simultaneously  in  two  differ-
ent places.  Such  objective  bilocations  are  as  yet  only  fantastical
legends.

Bilocation  is  subjective  when  the  form  of  an  individual  appears
with  all  the  attributes  of  life  to  some  sensitive  at  a  distance  from
where  the  person  actually  is.  This  will  readily  be  perceived  to  be
one  of  the  modalities  of  CIJ  ] te-thesia,  and  stories  of  objective  bi-
locations cannot  be  given  a  place  in  objective  metapsychies.  The
reality  of  the  subjective  bilocations  in  no  way  implies  the  reality
of  objective  bilocations.

In  the  Lives  of  the  Saints  there  are  many  instances  of  objective
bilocations,  all  very  questionable;  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
give  them  any  scientific  weight.

The  best  known  case  is  that  of  Alphonse  de  Liguori  who,  on  the
17th  of  September,  1774,  remained  quiet  and  dumb  in  his  cell
at  Arezzo,  taking  no  nourishment  and  speaking  to  no  one.  On  the
morning  of  the  22d  he  awoke,  and  said  that  he  had  been  at  the
bedside  of  the  dying  Pope.  It  seems  that  on  the  night  of  the
21st  of  September  Pope  Clement  XIV  died  at  Rome  attended  by
Alphonse  de  Liguori.

It  is  narrated  also  of  St.  Francis  Xavier  that  in  a  shipwreck

55»

BILOCATIONS

553

in  the  China  seas  he  was  seen  simultaneously  on  board  and  in  a
boat  with  several  sailors.  Similar  stories  are  told  of  St.  Joseph  of
Copertino,  St.  Marie  d'Agreda,  and  others.

Contemporaneous  facts  are  no  more  definite  than  these  legend-
ary histories.  Here  is  one  that  seems  to  me  painfully  inconclusive,
despite  the  authority  of  W.  T.  Stead.1

In  1895,  in  a  London  church,  William  Stead  saw  one  of  his
friends,  Mrs.  A.  Now,  Stead  knew  the  lady,  who  lived  in  Bays-
water,  to  be  very  ill,  and  was  alarmed  at  her  imprudence.  Stead
recognized  her  clearly ;  he  had  time  to  look  in  her  face  and  to  see
all  her  features.  His  two  sons  and  Mrs.  Stead  also  recognized
Mrs.  A.   In  reality  Mrs.  A.  had  not  left  Rayswater.

This  observation  is  completely  nullified  by  the  fact  that  a  lady  in
black  with  a  large  hat,  seen  in  church,  might  very  well  be  a  living
person  quite  different  from  Mrs.  A.  A  mistake  by  Stead  and  his
two  sons  is  a  thousand  times  more  probable  than  the  presence  of
Mrs.  A.'s  phantom  moving  and  acting  for  over  an  hour  before  a
hundred  persons.

Among  the  stories  of  doubles,  one  of  the  most  astonishing
(though  unproven),  is  that  told  by  R.  Dale  Owen  about  a  cen-
tury ago.  R.  Bruce,  a  Scotsman,  second  officer  on  a  ship  going  to
Newfoundland,  was  uncertain  of  his  course.  He  went  to  the
captain's  cabin  and  there  saw  an  unknown  man.  writing.  Bruce
returned  to  the  bridge  where  he  found  the  captain,  and  they  both
returned  to  the  cabin.  No  one  was  there,  but  they  found  a  paper
with  the  words,  "Steer  north-west."  The  counsel  so  strangely
given  was  followed,  and  after  some  hours  they  fell  in  with  a
el  in  distress  on  board  of  which  was  a  man  identified  by  the
second  officer  as  the  man  he  had  seen  in  the  captain's  cabin
(Footfalls  on  the  Boundary  of  Another  World,  p.  242).

However  curious  this  instance  of  wireless  telegraphy  so
strangely  supplemented,  it  is  Axibtfld  whether  this  story  of  Bruce
can  be  transferred  from  the  realm  of  romance  to  that  of  science.

The  next  case  is  considered  important  by  Aksakoff,  though  it
rests  on  a  single  witness.  Mme.  de  Guldenstubh£.  It  also  dates
from  far  back,  so  that  the  phenomenon  at  least  is  very  question-
able, to  say  no  more.

iDelanne,  Les  apparitions  moterialisies,  i,  266.  Sec  also  Stead,  The  ex-
perience of  a  double,  Borderland,  1894.  i.  7-**-

554

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

The  story  is  of  a  Mile.  Sagee,  a  French  schoolmistress  in  Liv-
onia. Mine,  df  Guldenstubbe  was  then  thirteen  years  old  and  was
one  of  the  pupils  at  the  school.  It  seems  that  the  pupils  sometimes
saw  two  Mile.  Sagees  side  by  side  exactly  resembling  each  other
and  making  the  same  gestures.

Other  stories  are  told  of  Mile.  Sagee's  bilocations,  on  which  I
shall  not  dilate,  for  I  do  not  believe  them.  The  phenomena  are
said  to  have  lasted  about  eighteen  months,  but  their  duration  is  of
no  importance  and  it  seems  to  me  impossible  to  take  them  seriously.

No  better  instance  of  the  subjective  nature  of  bilocations  can
be  given  than  the  narrative  of  F.  Hartmann,  cited  by  Bozzano
(Luce  e  Ombra,  xi,  1911,  180).  This,  like  all  Bozzano's  writing,
deserves  to  be  thought  over,  even  though  objective  bilocations
seem  to  me  quite  unsupported  by  reliable  evidence.

The  story  is  of  a  German  lieutenant  who  was  about  to  get  into
his  bed,  when  he  suddenly  saw  himself  there.  He  walked  about
in  the  room,  took  a  book  and  tried  to  read,  but  could  not  turn  over
the  pages;  he  wished  to  go  into  the  next  room,  and  suddenly
found  himself  there,  where  he  saw  one  of  his  comrades.  He  tried
to  speak  to  this  man,  to  shake  him  and  to  breathe  on  him,  but  to
his  astonishment  this  man  did  not  answer.  He  then  wished  to  go
to  the  railway  station,  found  himself  in  a  tunnel  that  he  did  not
know,  and  finally  returned  to  his  room  where  he  saw  his  body
shaken  by  the  servant  w  ho  had  found  his  master  nearly  lifeless.1
The  evidence  would  show  that  the  whole  thing  was  a  dream.

In  the  chapter  on  Monition^  there  are  various  cases  of  the  ap-
pearing of  doubles.  These  are  interesting  as  monitions  but  not  as
doubles,  for  there  is  no  proof  of  any  objectification  of  the  person
appearing.  It  is  most  frequently  an  objectification  of  an  idea,  in
Plato's  sense  of  the  word,  some  knowledge  of  an  external  fact
having  reached  the  percipient  b\  crvptesthesia,  and  being  then  pre-
sented under  the  symbolic  form  of  an  idea  (image)  in  Plato's
sense  of  the  word.  There  is,  in  fine,  only  an  impression  made  on
the  percipient  which  he  objectifies  as  an  internal  phantom.  Unless
in  the  case  of  collective  perception  of  a  double,  the  only  phenom-
enon that  can  be  admitted  as  genuine  is  the  impres>ion  perceived
by  the  sensitive  ;  and  this  is  no  true  or  material  bilocation.

'In  Chapter  III  ante  (p.  iij)  the  term  "external  autoscopy"  has  been  ap-
plied to  vition  of  oneself  or  of  the  double  as  in  the  classical  case  of  Goethe ;
but  the  word  is  also  used  for  the  vision  that  certain  somnambulists  have  of
their  internal  organs.

BILOCATIONS

555

The  monitions  of  approaching  death  announced  hy  bilocations
are  not  premonitions,  there  being  no  announcement  of  the  impend-
ing event.  A  hallucinaton  vision  occurs  without  any  concomitant
announcement.  What  are  we  to  infer  from  a  hallucinatory  vision
that  reveals  nothing?  Probably  there  is  some  relation  of  cause
and  effect,  since  the  individual  has  had  an  hallucination  doubtless
for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  and  that  this  is  an  indication  of  ap-
proaching death  even  though  death  is  not  announced.

The  following  case  is  one  of  this  type,  interesting  because  it
Ml  the  personal  observation  on  himself  by  a  distinguished  man
of  science,  the  zoologist  Romanes.

Mr.  Romanes,  at  the  moment  of  waking,  the  night  being  ended,
saw  a  veiled  form  pass  in  front  of  his  bed.  It  raised  its  hands
to  show  its  face  and  Romanes  recognized  his  sister,  whom  he
knew  to  be  slightly  ill.  Very  shortly  after  this  vision  the  trial ldj
developed  quickly,  became  very  serious,  and  she  died  not  long
after.

Numerous  facts  of  this  kind  have  been  collected  by  Bozzano.1

Usually  the  phantom  more  or  less  resembles  a  double  of  the  per-
son whose  death  is  near;  but  such  facts  always  leave  room  for
doubt  as  to  their  objecti\  it  v.  except  in  cases  when  the  hallucination
is  collective,  as  in  the  case  of  Mine.  Isnard  of  the  Rue  Jacob.

Mine.  Chaproniere  had  a  maid.  Mine.  Gregory,  in  her  service
forty  OM  years.  One  night  as  Gregory  was  undressing  Mme.
Chaproniere,  her  double  appeared.  "What!"  said  Mme.  Chap
roniere,  "I  see  your  double!"  Mine.  Gregory  was  in  no  way  dis-
turbed. Three  days  later  she  had  a  slight  indisposition  which  soon
became  serious  and  she  died  just  eight  days  after  her  double  had
been  seen,  at  the  same  hour  (P.  S.  P.  /?.,  xi,  448).

Myers  cites  some  similar  cases.

There  are  a  certain  number  of  such  cases  which  it  is  difficult  to
classify;  they  are  not  premonitions,  since  the  phantom  makes  no
announcement,  and  when  entirely  subjective  they  may  be  con-
sidered mere  hallucinations  without  connection  with  any  external
event,  so  that  they  are  neither  veridical  nor  symbolical.

To  all  seeming,  these  visions  of  doubles  are  only  cases  of  pre-
monitory cryptesthe-ia  The  cloudy  forms  sometimes  seen  at
death-beds  as  if  an  astral  body  were  emerging  from  the  material

^Considerations  sur  les  phtnomhies  de  Mocation,  A.  S.  P.,  101 1,  xxi.  65-71,
109-116,  U3  >5»

556

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

body  arc  probably  not  mere  hallux

In  point  of  fact:

(1)  Pathological,  non-veridical  hallucinations  are  extremely  rare
with  normal  persons  who  are  neither  alcoholics  nor  insane;  (2)
in  not  a  few  cases  such  visions  are  collective,  excluding  the  notion
of  mere  hallucination;  and  (3)  veridical  hallucinations  whose
reality  as  monitions  has  been  fully  established,  are  in  all  respects
similar  to  these  apparitions  of  doubles.

These,  however,  are  but  inferences.  We  shall  not,  therefore,
class  premonitions  of  death  by  the  apparition  of  a  double,  with-
out any  intimation  of  date  or  place,  among  the  well-established
facts  of  metapsychics.

Mrs.  Shagren  was  arranging  her  hair  before  the  glass  at  ten
o'clock  In  the  morning,  when  a  form  resembling  Mr.  Hendrickson
approached  her  as  if  to  put  a  hand  on  her  shoulder.  She  turned,
and  said,  "Is  that  you?"  but  the  phantom  vanished.  She  saw  it
again  in  her  room  on  the  same  day.  Mr.  Hendrickson,  whom
Mrs.  Shagren  knew  to  be  very  ill,  died  some  days  later.  On  the
day  that  Mrs.  Shagren  thought  she  saw  him,  he  had  dreamed  that
he  visited  her.

There  are  still  more  complex  and  disturbing  cases  which  must
not  be  rejected  on  the  fallacious  pretext  that  they  do  not  happen
to  fit  some  particular  theory.

The  phantom  of  Mrs.  Hawkins  was  seen  by  four  persons — her
two  cousins,  her  nurse,  and  her  son,  at  intervals  more  or  less
considerable;  in  the  first  case  by  two  persons  at  the  same  time,
whose  version  is  identically  the  same  (Myers,  Human  Personality,

Two  sisters  playing  the  organ  in  a  church  both  see  the  phantom
of  a  third  sister  who  had  intended  to  come  but  had  not  done  so.
She  appeared  in  the  dress  she  was  wearing  and  holding  a  roll  of
paper  which  in  fact  she  had  in  her  hand  at  the  time.

In  Mrs.  Hall's  case  her  own  phantom  appeared  to  her,  to  her
husband,  and  two  of  her  relations  as  they  sat  at  table.

Frances  Reddell,  sitting  by  the  bedside  of  a  friend  who  was
seriously  ill,  saw  the  phantom  of  the  mother  of  the  sick  woman
(whom  she  did  not  know),  but  whom  she  described  so  exactly
that  when  this  lady  arrived  somewhat  later  she  was  recognized  by
those  to  whom  Frances  had  spoken.  Miss  Reddell  even  de-
scribed the  night-dress  and  candlestick ;  confirmed  by  the  parents
of  the  sick  girl.

In  some  cases  the  bilocation  would  seem  to  have  been  volun-

p.  230).

BILOCATIONS

557

tary,  an  effort  having  been  made  by  A  to  appear  to  B.  Facts  of
this  kind  are  few  and  they  are  difficult  to  interpret.  In  some  cases
this  apparition  of  the  double  is  seen  by  several  person's  at  once
so  that  the  bilocation  is  not  entirely  subjective.

Mr.  A.  B.  manifested  to  the  two  Misses  Verity,  iged  twenty-
five  and  eleven.  The  evidence,  verified  with  extreme  care  by
Myers  and  Gurney,  seems  to  establish  this  case  as  genuine  (De-
lanne,  i,  25).

Aksakoff  (Animismc  el  Spiritisme,  p.  316)  quotes  the  case  of
Mr.  Benning,  a  clergyman  and  a  member  of  a  circle  at  Troy
(U.  S.  A.).  Mr.  Benning,  being  unable  to  come  to  a  stance,
wrote  a  letter  excusing  himself ;  but  taring  that  his  letter  would
not  arrive  in  time,  he  had  the  curious  notion  of  manifesting  (as-
trally)  to  the  members  of  the  circle.  He  was  seen  by  several.
Two  persons  not  only  saw  and  recognized  him — (this  is  the  doubt-
ful point,  for  there  is  probably  a  mistaken  identity) — but  even
touched  him,  and  the  phantom  seems  to  have  shown  sufficient
vigour  to  put  one  aside  and  to  push  the  other  so  strongly  as  nearly
to  cause  him  to  fall  on  the  stairs.  This  extraordinary  narrative
is  lacking  in  the  needful  attestations,  and  must  therefore  be  held
very  doubtful,  to  say  the  least.

The  case  of  the  Rev.  C.  Godfrey  is  rather  better  authenticated.

On  November  15th,  Mr.  Godfrey  wished  to  verify  personally
the  fact  stated  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  that  in  certain  excep-
tional cases  a  living  person  could  appear  to  a  sensitive.  He  ac-
cordingly sought  to  appear  to  Mrs.  X.  His  watch  showed  3.40
a.m.  Mrs.  X.  wrote  to  him  on  the  morning  of  the  16th  of  No-
vember, 1886:  "A  little  after  half-past  three  I  awoke  suddenly,
feeling  uneasy.  .  .  .  I  lit  a  candle  and  went  downstairs,  then
returned  to  my  room,  where  I  saw  Mr.  Godfrey  standing  before
the  window.  He  wore  his  usual  dress.  I  raised  the  candle,  looked
at  him  for  three  or  four  seconds,  and  he  disappeared."

Mr.  Kirk,  having  made  several  attempts  to  appear  to  Miss  G.,
succeeded  on  one  occasion.  The  apparition  was  so  distinct  that
Miss  G.  could  distinguish  every  detail  of  his  dress.  Mr.  Kirk,
however,  was  seen  in  miniature,  a  fact  which  shows  that  the  vision
was  entirelv  subjective  (Delanne.  Apparitions  materialist  es,  p.
206).

A.  de  Rochas  quotes  the  case  of  Alma  Haemmerle,  who  saw  the
phantoms  of  two  of  her  friends,  Stankevitch  and  Serboff,  who  had
tried  to  appear  to  herself  and  her  father :  both  she  and  her  father

558

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

saw  the  doubles  of  the  two  men.  This  collective  vision  makes  the
hypothesis  of  the  purely  subjective  nature  of  the  phenomenon
rather  difficult  to  accept.

Moreover,  as  has  previously  been  said,  the  transition  between
objective  and  subjective  is  gradual;  in  a  certain  sense  all  are  ob-
jective, for  in  order  to  produce  a  veridical  hallucination  there  must
be  some  kind  of  exterior  cause  or  molecular  vibration  that  starts
the  cryptesthetic  emotion.  We  must,  however,  conclude  that  the
phenomenon  is  subjective  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  for
the  unknown  mechanical  vibrations  that  produce  the  hallucination
do  not  resemble  ordinary  mechanical  molecular  vibrations.

It  would  be  very  useful  to  be  able  to  discriminate  more  or  less
accurately  between  what  is  objective  and  what  is  not.  A  visual
phenomenon  might  be  termed  subjective  when  it  does  not  or
would  not  affect  a  photographic  plate.  But  as  this  test  can  very
seldom  be  applied,  a  more  practical  criterion  must  be  found  j  and
we  shall  call  a  phenomenon  objective  only  when  all  the  persons
present  receive  the  same  sensorial  impression.

And  yet  there  are  grades  of  objectivity ;  for  when  two  sensi-
tives think  that  they  see  the  same  phantom  there  must  be  some
kind  of  objectivity,  even  though  the  phantom  might  not  impress
a  photographic  plate.

If,  however,  several  persons  see  the  same  apparition  at  the
same  time;  if  cats  and  dogs  show  fear;  if,  above  all,  objects
are  displaced,  it  is  then  impossible  to  deny  objectivity  in  the  usual
sense  of  the  word.  Several  cases  have  been  given  in  the  chapter
on  collective  hallucinations.

In  support  of  the  reality  of  bilocation,  photographs  showing  two
images,  one  sharp  and  distinct,  the  other  nebulous,  have  often  been
appealed  to  ;  but  trickery  in  photographs  is  so  childishly  easy  that
no  importance  can  be  attached  to  them.  Even  if  the  good  faith  of
the  photographer  is  certain,  a  slip  of  the  camera  or  a  momentary
inattention  is  enough  to  give  two  images  on  the  plate.  As  a  novice
in  photography  I  often  find  doubles  on  my  negatives,  but  this
does  not  cause  me  any  emotion ;  they  are  only  photographic
blunders.  To  infer  a  materialized  apparition,  just  because  of  a
second  image  on  a  negative,  is  to  show  complete  absence  of  criti-
cal faculty.

The  photographs  of  doubles  as  given  in  the  works  of  Delanne,
A.  dc  Rochas.  of  Commandant  Darget  and  Aksakoff  seem  to  me
anything  but  conclusive.    I  would  not  even  accept  that  observed

BILOCATIONS

550

by  my  eminent  colleague  and  friend,  Istrati  ( Delanne,  407).  In
1893  he  made  an  effort  to  appear  through  the  camera  of  Mr.
Hasden,  director  of  instruction  at  Bucharest,  and  in  fact,  at  a
distance  of  180  miles,  a  small  figure  did  appear  on  a  fresh  plate
developed  by  Mr.  Hasden.1  The  doubtful  point  is  that  the  little
figure  is  too  indistinct  to  permit  of  sure  recognition.

It  is  hard  to  find  any  experimental  defect  in  the  photograph
taken  by  Ochorowicz,  though  it  occasioned  a  controversy  with
G.  de  Fontenay.    That  taken  by  Captain  Vbtpi  i>  not  evidential.

We  must  finally  conclude  that  there  are  not  as  yet  any  authentic
and  unexceptionable  instances  of  objective  bilocation  and  that
entirely  fresh  investigations  are  required.

(6)  Monitions  of  Approach

There  are  certain  very  common  cases  of  monitions  or  premoni-
tions accompanied  by  subjective  bilocations  that  are  difficult  to
classify.  They  are  connected  with  that  common  occurrence  al-
luded to  in  the  proverbs  of  all  nations — Quand  on  parte  du  loup,
on  en  voit  la  queue — speak  of  the  devil  and  he  will  appear —
Quando  si  parla  del  sole,  il  sole  spunta.  Probably  all  the  persons
who  read  these  lines  have  had  some  sort  of  warning  of  this  nature.
The  facts  arc  numerous  enough  to  require  a  special  name.  Myers
calls  them  Monitions  of  Approach  and  the  name  seems  worth
retention.1

On  this  subject  I  will  first  adduce  a  fact  personally  experienced.
It  is  not  more  evidential  than  many  others,  but  was  minutely
scrutinized  by  myself,  my  attention  having  been  long  given  to
facts  of  the  kind.

In  188 —  I  was  in  the  habit  of  going  to  No.  Ill  boulevard  St.
Germain  to  the  office  of  the  Reive  ScientiHque,  of  which  I  was
the  editor,  every  Wednesday  morning.  One  day,  about  9  a.m.
while  on  the  right  sidewalk,  I  saw  on  the  left  sidewalk  Profes-
sor Lacassagne  of  Lyons,  who  had  written  an  article  for  the
Revue  three  months  before,  and  I  thought — M.  Lacassagne  has
come  to  Paris  and  he  will  come  to  see  me.    I  knew  hirn  only

•This  photograph  may  be  seen  in  Baraduc's  book,  //dmr  Humome,  Pari*,
1806.    Fig.  xxiva.

•See  also  G.  C  Ferrari,  Provision  ou  premonition  6  tappet  (A.  S.  P.,  1005,
xv,  385).  and  Dr.  Roch,  Note  sur  les  previsions  de  rencontre,  Arch,  de  Psychol.,
Geneva.  1905.  v,  149.  Dr.  Roch  five*  statistics,  but  on  tan  cases  only,  and
draws  no  positive  conclusion.

560

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

slightly  and  our  relations  were  distant.  At  10  o'clock,  after  I  had
interviewed  several  persons,  his  card  was  brought  to  me  at  which  I
was  not  surprised,  having  seen  him  as  above  mentioned.  But  as
soon  as  I  saw  him  at  the  door,  1  was  aware  that  it  was  not  he

whom  I  had  seen,  and  I  asked  him,  "Were  you  on  the  boulevard  St.
Germain  at  9  this  morning?"  he  replied,  "Certainly  not.  I  was
there  at  7,  and  1  came  here  direct  from  the  Val-de-Grace."  So  I
had  thought  (1 )  that  I  had  clearly  seen  him  ;  (2)  I  had  no  reason
to  think  that  he  was  in  Paris,  and  (3)  it  was  not  he  that  I  saw.

However  curious  this  fact  of  lucidity,  no  scientific  inference  can
be  drawn  from  it,  for  it  may  well  have  chanced  that  some  person
vaguely  resembling  him  had  passed  at  that  time  and  thus  aroused
a  reminiscence  of  him  in  my  mind.

But  I  do  not  think  it  was  chance ;  I  would  rather  attribute  it  to
a  vague  and  passing  cryptesthesia.  If  so,  does  the  cryptesthesia
refer  to  the  past  or  to  the  future?  Was  it  because  he  had  passed
that  way  or  because  he  was  going  to  do  so  two  hours  later?

Such  cases  are  innumerable,  and  if  I  quote  this  one  it  is  because
I  have  thought  long  over  it  and  can  find  no  reasonable  solution.

Among  the  facts  of  this  kind  narrated  by  Myers,  I  will  quote
some  that  seem  to  me  important.

Mr.  Carroll  sees  in  his  room  at  Towcester  the  image  of  his
brother  who  lived  in  London.  He  was  frightened,  but  before  he
could  recover  himself,  he  heard  a  knock  at  his  door.  This  time
it  was  really  his  brother  who  had  come  unannounced  from  London
to  see  him.  It  should  be  added  that  his  brother  was  not  sure  of
the  house  and  had  knocked  on  the  chance  of  being  right.

Mr.  Stevenson  was  sitting  at  home,  by  his  wife,  at  seven  in  the
evening.  All  was  quiet  when  he  suddenly  heard  the  words,  "David
has  come.,,  He  thought  his  wife  had  spoken  and  asked  her,  but
she  denied  having  said  anything.  Now  David,  his  brother,  usually
MM  in  at  10  p.m.  Three  minutes  after  having  heard  this  voice
quite  clearly,  the  door  opened  and  David  came  in.

Mrs.  A.  was  waiting  for  her  husband  who  had  been  out  to  an
Indian  village,  and  being  uneasy,  went  with  her  younger  sister  to
meet  him.  At  6  p.m.  they  saw  him  driving  up  in  a  carriage  drawn
by  his  grey  horse.  Suddenly  nothing  was  visible,  but  an  hour  and
a  half  later  he  drove  up  with  his  grey  horse.

In  Human  Personality,  Myers  gives  (p.  229)  the  instance  of
Colonel  Bigge  who  saw  one  of  his  colleagues  in  fishing  costume

BILOCATIONS

561

and  with  an  outfit  of  which  Colonel  Bigge  bad  no  knowledge
whatever,  ten  minutes  before  this  colleague  appeared  at  the  place,
This  is  simply  a  case  of  cryptotl  possibly  premonitory  ;  it
would  be  absurd  to  imagine  bilocation.

Mrs.  Munro  had  invited  Dr.  Jackson  for  a  visit  j  but  ho  bad  re-
fused. At  2  a.m.  one  morning  she  awoke,  hearing  Dr.  Jackson
calling  at  the  wicket  gate  three  hundred  yards  distant.  Under
ordinary  conditions  no  call  would  be  heard,  there  being  be  .  t
tervening.  Hut  Mr>.  Munro  beard,  and  railed  her  bu-band.  who
at  first  thought  the  matter  an  illusion.  Hut  Dr.  Jackson  arrived  a
few  minutes  later.  It  is  unlikely  that  this  was  a  monition  of  ap-
proach, and  a  double  is  more  unlikely  still ;  it  was  probably  a  case
of  auditive  hyperesthesia  during  sleep.

The  monitions  of  approach  rarely  take  an  auditive  form  as  in  the
case  of  Mr.  Saunders,  an  old  and  very  deaf  man  of  84,  who,  on
January  8th,  at  7.30,  heard  a  voice  saying,  'Tom  will  arrive  to-
day." Tom  was  a  soldier  in  France  during  the  war,  and  the  day
before  a  letter  had  been  received  from  him  saying  he  would  write
again.  Some  hours  after  this  auditive  monition  Tom  arrived
(/.  5.  P.  /?.,  1919,  xix,  30-32).

The  following  is  an  unpublished  monition  of  approach,  very  in-
teresting, for  it  was  accurately  observed  by  Stella  in  her  own  case.

In  the  little  town  of  S.,  she  was  going  with  her  brother  for  a
run  in  an  automobile,  and  being  late  they  hurried  to  the  place
where  it  was  to  be  waiting.  Suddenly  Stella  saw,  in  front  and  ap-
proaching them,  their  friend  ( )livier  who  was  to  meet  them  at  the
same  place.  Stella  said  to  her  brother,  "Here  is  Olivier,"  and  made
a  gesture  of  recognition  with  the  cane  she  had  in  her  hand  j  but
her  brother  could  see  nothing.  At  the  very  moment  that  the
vision  disappeared,  Olivier  himself  came  up  behind  them  and
touched  Stella's  brother  on  the  shoulder.  Stella  and  her  brother
were  vastly  surprised;  for  they  had  not  suspected  his  presence,
and  as  they  were  late  they  thought  to  find  him  already  at  the
meeting-place.  They  had  not  looked  behind  them  once  when  com-
ing up  the  street,  as  Olivier  immediately  asked  them ;  and  he  also
is  quite  sure  that  they  did  not  turn  h>und  once.  Therefore  they
could  not  have  seen  him  directly.

But  even  if  Stella  by  indirect  vision  could  have  seen  Olivier  ap-
proaching (though  this  is  unlikely)  such  vision  must  have  been
subconscious.    In  such  an  event  this  subconscious  vision  would

562

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

have  been  symbolized  by  a  veridical  hallucination,  which  would  be
instructive  on  the  theory  of  symbolization ;  for  Stella  had  seen
I  )hvier  in  front  of  her.  just  as  if  alive;  so  much  so  that  she  had
saluted  him  with  her  cane.

I  think,  however,  that  she  had  caught  no  indirect  glimpse  of  him
and  that  this  is  an  excellent  instance  of  monition  of  approach ;  the
cryptesthetic  notion  being  interpreted  by  a  visual  hallucination,
which,  moreover,  was  entirely  subjective,  since  her  brother  saw
nothing  when  she  said,  "Here  is  Olivier."

Cases  of  auditive  or  visual  hallucination  announcing  the  ap-
proach are  rare,  but  illusion  of  the  approach  is  quite  common.  It
would  be  valuable  for  metapsychic  science  if  someone  would  take
the  trouble  to  collect  some  kind  of  statistics  of  these  happenings,
but  this  would  not  be  an  easy  matter;  on  the  contrary,  it  would
need  a  real  scientific  training  and  scrupulous  exactitude.  Cases
in  which  the  meeting  with  a  particular  person  had  been  foreseen
should  be  entered  in  a  note-book,  and  only  the  cases  so  noted
taken  account  of.

The  difficulty,  one  not  easily  avoided,  would  be  that  unfor-
tunately one  is  tempted  to  take  into  account  only  the  cases  in  which
the  anticipation  has  been  verified  and  to  neglect  the  others.

These  approaches  are  usually  manifested  as  illusions.  Some
j>erson  is  seen,  and  we  say,  "Here  comes  A.,"  A.  not  having  been
seen  for  a  long  while  and  his  presence  being  unlikely.  But  soon
one  perceives  that  it  is  not  A.  who  has  been  seen,  but  some  one
who  is  like  him  (or  even  who  is  not  like  him,  which  is  strange
enough) ;  and  a  few  steps  farther  on  A.  is  seen  in  flesh  and  blood.
Statistics  on  monitions  of  approach,  both  those  with  positive  and
those  with  negative  results,  would  certainly  lead  to  curious  con-
clusions; but  the  records  we  have  on  the  subject  are  imperfect
and  sparse.

Whatever  the  cause  may  be,  instances  such  as  those  named
above  show  the  reality  of  cryptesthetic  monitions  of  approach ;  but
every  reservation  must  be  maintained  on  the  objectivity  of  bi-
locations,  and  though  the  mystery  is  profound  we  shall  hold  them
as  non-objective.

Various  theories  might  be  evolved,  but  with  our  present  data  it
is  better  to  abstain.  All  that  has  been  said  al>out  odic  perceptions,
astral  radiation,  human  effluvia,  and  the  like  are  so  vague  and  un-
satisfactory that  it  is  much  wiser  to  avow  our  total  ignorance.

CHAPTER  VI
Hauntings

1.  On  Hauntings  in  General

If  traditions  and  superstitions  could  be  appealed  to,  the  haunt-
ing of  certain  dwellings  would  be  one  of  the  most  certain  facts  of
metapsychics ;  for  in  all  countries  and  in  all  times,  without  ex-
ception, these  phenomena  have  been  recognized  by  popular
opinion.1

Without  attaching  any  weight  to  this  popular  unanimity,  it  can
hardly  be  supposed  that  at  the  hack  of  all  these  stories  there  is
not  some  vestige,  however  slight  and  obscure,  of  truth.  It  would
therefore  be  almost  as  absurd  to  reject  without  examination  all

'The  bibliography  of  ancient  cases  is  enormous.  Joseph  Glanvil  (Saducts-
mus  Trtumphatus,  1700)  considered,  even  then,  that  poltergeist  phenomena —
otherwise  "haunted  houses"— could  not  be  accounted  for  by  fraud  or  hal-
lucination. Petrus  Thyraeus:  De  mfestis  ob  molcstantcs  dtrmoniorum  et
defunctorum  spirit  us  locis.  Cologne,  1508.  Dale  Osrcn.  Footfalls  on  the
Boundary  of  Another  World,  London,  i860.  Zingaropoli :  Gesta  di  uno  spinto
ncl  monastcro  dei  PP.  Gerolommi  in  Sopot*.  Cronaca  del  secolo  xvii,  with
preface  by  E.  Passaro;  Suite  manifestasioni  spontant  misteriose,  Napoli,
Detken,  1904.

More  modern  works  will  be  indicated  in  the  course  of  this  chapter.  I  men-
tion  below,  just  by  way  of  curiosity,  the  towns  in  which  there  have  been  ap-
paritions and  alleged  hauntings,  according  to  Passaro :

Great  Britain:  Woodstock  (1640);  Tedworth  (1661):  Epworth  (1716);  Les-
singhall  (1679);  Liverpool  (1868)  ;  B.  (Eosa)  (1862);  Manchester  Oooa);
Beverley  (1903);  Guernsey  (1903)

France:  Lyons  (1528);  Cideville  (1850);  Paris  (1846);  Saint-Qucntin
(1849);  Algiers  (187O;  Valence-en- Brie  (1897)  ;  Brussels  (1890);  Grivegnce
(Belgium)  (1900);  Bordeaux  (1867);  Nice  (1858).

Italy:  Naples  (1696);  Lanzo  (1762);  Florence  (1867);  Bologna  (1591);
Vicenza  (1875);  Malta  (1700);  Genoa  (1865);  Pavia,  Modena  (1875);  Rome
O876  and  1881);  Trieste  (1881);  Turin  (1903);  Catania  (1879).

Germany:  Hudemuhlen  (1584);  Dibbelsdorff  (176a);  Orlach  (1831);
Wnnsberg  (1835);  Brrgzabern  O85*);  Munchoff  <  1818)  ;  Groeben  O718);
Schildbach  '1533);  Berlin  (1890);  Mulldorff  (1749);  Cologne  (1865);  Resau
(1809);  Billingheim  (r8fi7>;  Mohthingen  (1841V

Other  countries:  Lipzy  (Russia,  1852);  Zurich  (i860);  Mustaja  (Russia,
1K70):  Silin  (Russia.  1888);  Riga  (Russia.  Iffe);  Constantinople  (1746):
Philadelphia  (1866);  Guayaquil  (1871)  :  Rota  (Spain,  1870);  Petersburg
(1002);  Budapest  (1902);  Nienadowka  (1898);  San  Francisco  (1899)  ;  Slatea-
borougb  (Georgia,  1891);  Ceylon  (1902).

563

564

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

that  has  been  said  on  haunted  houses,  as  to  accept  it  all  without
criticism.

Some  men  of  science  who  are  interested  in  occult  psychics  have
endeavoured  to  study  the  question ;  but  it  has  been  found  that  all
researches  conducted  in  a  scientific  manner  on  haunted  houses
have  given  very  poor  results.  The  facts  evaporate  under  severe  and
rigorous  investigation.  This  is  a  reason  for  doubt,  but  not  for
denial.  It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  there  should  be  any  incom-
patibility between  the  phenomena  of  haunting  and  scientific  veri-
fication; so  that  the  lack  of  scientific  evidence  is  in  itself  a  strong
presumption  against  the  reality  of  the  phenomena.

But  this  is  only  a  presumption,  not  a  certainty.  It  remains  to  be
seen  if  the  mass  of  testimony  contains  sufficient  evidence  to
warrant  some  of  the  phenomena  being  accepted  as  true.  We  must
limit  ourselves  to  a  critical  study  of  the  evidence,  since  unfor-
tunately no  experimental  analysis  of  the  phenomena  is  possible.
The  history  of  haunted  houses  contains  very  little  that  can  prop-
erly Ik:  called  experimental ;  there  are  only  observations.

Moreover  it  is  difficult  to  dtatiogPUh  hatintings  from  other  meta-
psychic  phenomena  S<»M  might  be  classed  as  hallucinations  or
collective  monitions,  some  under  cryptcsthesia,  more  often,  as
telekinesis.  All  classification  is  artificial,  and  as  already  often
said,  facts,  when  they  occur.  do  not  trouble  themselves  about  fit-
ting into  any  particular  section  of  a  scientific  treatise.

Therefore  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  lay  down  definitions  and
delimitations  of  haunting;  though  the  dominant  idea  seems  to  be
spatial.  The  phenomena,  whether  subjective  or  objective,  are  of
a  mixed  nature,  but  they  occur  in  a  particular  locality  and  not
elsewhere:  everything  htppeoi  as  though  this  localization  in  space
were  one  of  the  conditions  of  the  phenomena.

This  is  obviously  an  essential  fact  to  be  seriously  considered.  I  f
the  haunting*  are  genuine,  they  are  localized  in  some  old  castle
or  in  some  particular  room  of  a  house  so  that  we  might  almost
emu-hide  that  there  is  some  emanation  proceeding  from  inert
things  in  that  place;  for  it  would  be  absurd  to  think  that  spirits
are  chained  by  terrestrial  material  links  to  the  places  where  they
apj>ear.  I  f  they  come  in  "the  blue  room"  of  a  certain  house,  there
must  be  something  in  the  blue  r<  iom  that  retains  them  or  produces
them.

This  is  what  Bozzano  calls  the  psychometric  hypothesis  of  in-
fe stations.    I  should  prefer  to  call  it  the  pragmatic  hypothesis;

HAUNTINGS

565

but  the  Italian  word  infestaziont  seems  to  mc  preferable  to
haunting.

It  seems  impossible  not  to  admit  this  hypothesis,  partially,  at
any  rate  ;  for  we  cannot  gratuitously  attribute  to  spirits  a  fancy
never  to  leave  a  particular  place  when  they  might  wander  else-
where.

A  provisional  definition  of  haunting  or  infestation  may  be
given  as:  Metapsychic  phenomena,  objective  or  subjective,  pro-
duced repeatedly  in  a  given  place.

This  definition  is,  however,  somewhat  defective,  as  it  does  not
apply  to  every  case.  There  arc  hauntings  that  seem  to  attach  to
persons  rather  than  to  places :  and  movements  of  objects  produced
in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  haunted  or  "infested"  person  can
scarcely  be  classed  as  hauntings.  They  are  phenomena  of  tele-
kinesis involuntary  and  non-experimental,  and  thus  differentiated
from  the  experimental  telekinesis  previously  studied  in  this  book.
They  are  not  true  hauntings  under  the  somewhat  arbitrary  defini-
tion that  limits  haunting  to  places.

We  shall  therefore  consider  hauntings  under  two  heads;  speak-
ing first  of  houses  haunted  by  phantoms,  and  then  of  material  phe-
nomena attaching  to  persons  rather  than  to  houses.  There  would
therefore  seem  to  be  not  only  haunted  houses  but  haunted  persons ;
indeed  it  is  probable  that  many  instances  of  haunted  houses  really
are  cases  of  haunted  persons.

Phenomena  of  haunting  which  consist  of  an  apparition  having
well-defined  specific  characteristics,  but  seen  by  one  person  only
at  a  time  and  without  any  movement  of  objects,  are  classed  as
subjective.  Objective  phenomena  are  those  in  which  movements
of  objects  and  external  mechanical  action  take  place.

Even  this  division  is  a  convention,  for  the  objective  and  the
subjective  are  frequently  intermingled,  so  that  we  must  follow
Bozzano  and  speak  of  hauntings  that  are  mainly  objective,  or
mainly  subjective."

Having  no  personal  experience  to  quote.  I  must  rely  on  those  authors  who  have
seriously  studied  the  facts:  C.  Lombroso,  Ricercke  tui  fenomeni  ipnotici  #
ifirittct.  Chapter  XII,  Case  faniomaticke,  Turin,  1909.  F.  Zingaropoli.  Case
in f estate  dagli  spiriti,  Naples,  Soc  Partonopea,  1907.  P.  S.  P.  R.  and  /.  5.
P.  R.  passim.  The  sdrairable  itudy  by  Borrano,  Det  fenomeni  fmfestaixone.
Rome,  Ed.  Luce  e  Ombra,  1919.  should  be  specially  coniultrd  I  shall  borrow
much  from  this  striking  synthesis,  as  I  have  done  in  the  chapter  on  Pre-

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

In  certain  very  rare  cases  the  phenomena  are  entirely  subjective,
though  there  is  cryptesthesia,  and  recognition  too  clear  for  the  fact
to  be  referred  to  pathological  hallucination.

Mrs.  O'Donnell  (/.  S.  P.  R.,  viii,  326)  goes  to  Brighton  and
hires  furnished  rooms.  She  docs  not  sleep  in  the  same  room  with
her  daughter.  At  one  o'clock  in  the  morning  she  hears  steps  on  the
floor  above  so  loud  that  they  seem  due  to  a  number  of  people,
lasting  the  whole  night.  In  the  morning  she  says  to  the  landlady,
I  lie  people  on  the  upper  floor  have  no  consideration  for  others,"
and  is  answered  with  some  surprise  that  the  upper  floor  is  un-
occupied. The  following  day  after  the  same  noisy  tramplings
Mrs.  O'Donnell  sees  a  horrible  spectre  pointing  to  the  next  room.
She  even  feels  a  cold  hand  touch  her  and  almost  faints  with
fright.  The  phantom  was  that  of  a  small,  dark  man.  Her  daugh-
ter saw  and  heard  nothing.  On  the  night  following  the  same
spectre  reappeared  though  the  door  was  locked.

After  enquiry,  it  was  ascertained  that  some  weeks  before,  the
room  had  been  inhabited  by  a  small,  dark  man  who  had  thrown
himself  from  the  window  of  the  next  room  ( Bozzano,  p.  77).

1  his  is  a  good  instance  of  subjective  cryptesthesia,  for  the  facts
were  perceived  by  Mrs.  O'Donnell  only,  ami  not  by  her  daughter.

Bozzano  describes  auditive  and  visual  phenomena  as  follows  (1
give  a  very  free  translation,  greatly  abridged)  :

"Auditory  phenomena  consist  of  noises  without  any  apparent
cause,  varying  from  knocks  of  differing  strength  to  crashes  of
broken  glass  and  crockery,  falling  of  chairs,  doors  and  windows
opening  and  shutting  violently,  rolling  of  heavy  bodies  and  move-
ments of  chairs.  Often  there  are  footsteps,  seemingly  human,  in
the  passages  and  on  the  stairs,  rustling  of  clothes,  despairing
cries,  sighs,  sobs  or  religious  psalmody,  songs,  and  musical  sounds.

"It  is  highly  probable  that  these  phenomena,  though  mingled
with  objective  facts,  are  mainly  subjective;  they  are,  however,
often  heard  by  several  persons,  so  that  in  many  well-authenticated
cases  they  are  frankly  objective.

"Under  their  visual  shape  these  phenomena  appear  as  luminous
manifestations  or  phantoms.  The  luminous  manifestations  may  be
of  undefined  shape,  or  lights  by  which  the  phantom  is  seen.  In
some  very  few  cases  the  light  is  in  the  hands  of  the  phantom.

"Except  for  some  very  exceptional  apparitions  of  animals,  phan-
toms are  human,  and  clothed  in  the  garments  of  the  period  of  their
terrestrial  life.  Sometimes  they  seem  solid  as  in  life,  in  other  cases

HAUNTINGS

567

they  arc  transparent  and  nebulous  like  shades;  usually  they  seem
to  enter  by  a  door,  proceed  to  another  room,  and  vanish.  They
often  arise  unexpectedly,  dissolving  into  vapour  and  pa
through  walls  and  closed  doors.  Sometimes  they  appear  to  walk,
sometimes  to  be  suspended  in  the  air.  Usually  the  period  of  in-
festation only  lasts  for  a  few  years,  a  few  months,  or  even  a  few
days ;  hut  the  haunting  is  often  prolonged  over  many  years,  with
long  intervals.

"The  arrival  of  phantoms  is  nearly  always  heralded  l»y  a  vague
sensation  of  horror,  the  feeling  of  a  presence,  coinciding  with  i
cold  breath.  They  seem  nearly  always  wholly  indifferent  to  the
living  persons  present.  Sometimes  they  enact  some  domestic
function,  or  make  despairing  gestures.  Great  differences  are  ob-
servable in  their  behaviour  '

Do  these  phenomena  correspond  to  an  objective  reality,  or  arc
they  merely  hallucinations?

The  hypothesis  of  trickery  and  fraud  must  first  be  eliminate!
Out  of  the  374  cases  that  BoOMO  o  n  iders  worthy  of  mention
there  is  perhaps  not  a  single  one  which  is  attributable  to  fraud
and  lying.'

To  make  our  ideas  clear,  we  will  imagine  I  typical  case  as
follows:

A,  arriving  for  the  first  time  at  a  certain  locality,  M,  sees  a
phantom,  which  he  docs  not  recognize,  and  which  he  describes.
Some  days  later  another  person,  R,  coming  to  the  same  place,  sees
a  phantom  similar  to  that  seen  by  A.  Further  enquiry  shows  that
two  or  three  years  previously  some  individual  disappeared  under
tragic  circumstances  at  M,  and  his  description  agrees  with  what
A  and  B  have  seen.  A  and  B  are  l>oth  ignorant  of  the  tragic  as-
sociations of  the  I  :  «  M.  though  they  may  have  heard  vaguely
that  it  is  haunted.  At  no  time  in  their  lives  have  A  or  B  had  hal-
lucinations, they  are  little  disposed  to  mysticism,  and  they  are  per-
sons of  well-balanced  intelligence.

Such  are  the  usual  conditions  of  subjective  hauntings.

It  seems  improbable  that  the  hallucinations  of  A  and  B  are  de-
void of  some  veridical  foundations ;  for  ( 1 )  pathological  hallucina-
tions in  normal  persons  are  extremely  rare;  (2)  the  agreement  in
the  hallucinations  is  strong  evidence;  (3)  there  is  a  correspondence

'It  ii  different  in  the  case  of  objective  haunting!  when  object*  are  thrown
about,  for  gross  frauds  often  occur  in  these  cases,  perhaps  in  most  of  them.

568

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

between  the  identical  hallucinations  and  the  tragic  event,  and  (4)
monitions  by  veridical  hallucinations  are  so  frequent  that  they
must  be  considered  scientifically  established,  and  can  be  applied
with  slight  variations  to  hallucinations  of  hatintings ;  the  sequence
in  both  cases  being  analogous.

If  the  evidence  for  the  existence  of  phantoms  rested  only  on  the
evidence  for  hauntings,  we  would  certainly  be  unable  to  come  to
any  conclusion ;  for  despite  the  unquestionable  veracity  of  the  wit-
nesses, they  are  neither  sufficiently  numerous  nor  is  their  standing
such  as  to  warrant  acceptance  of  the  extraordinary  and  unlikely
phenomenon  of  a  materialization.  But  materializations  are  abun-
dantly proved  from  experimental  data,  and  the  notion  may  be  ap-
plied to  phenomena  of  haunting;  for  all  explanations  of  these
latter,  except  as  a  partial  or  complete  materialization,  are  wire-
drawn and  scarcely  defensible.

Since  several  persons  see  practically  the  same  phantom  it  can-
not be  considered  entirely  subjective.  In  order  that  Af  B,  and  C
should  see  the  same  figure.  D,  there  must  be  some  vibration  ex-
terior to  them  that  arouses  the  image  D  in  their  brains.  Conse-
quently the  image  originates  in  an  exterior  phenomenon  and  is  to
that  degree  objective,  though  that  not  objectivity  as  we  gener-
ally understand  it.  When  a  phantom  is  seen  by  three  persons
only,  n  n  others  present  seeing  and  hearing  nothing,  ancj  the  photo-
graphic plate  shows  nothing,  the  pliantom  is  not  objective  in  the
ordinary  sense.

In  daily  life  if  there  is  a  palm-tree  and  twenty  persons  round  it
they  will  all  see  it ;  and  if  there  were  ten  thousand  they  would  all
sec  it.  for  it  is  frankly  objective;  it  could  be  photographed,  drawn,
described,  the  wind  could  he  heard  in  its  leaves  and  the  trunk
could  he  touched.  But  a  phenomenon  of  cryptcsthesia  is  of  a  dif-
ferent kin  !,  for  whether  it  concerns  monitions  or  hauntings,  the
faculty  of  cryptesthesia  varies  enormously  in  different  persons,
dealing  with  cognitions  of  another  order  which  do  not  reach  the
intelligence  by  the  usual  channels,  and  can  be  perceived  only  by  a
sensitive.

An  absolutely  deaf  man  would  not  hear  a  loud  whistle  beside
him  and  might  deny  its  objectivity.  His  negation  would  not  prove
that  there  was  no  whistle;  and  similarly  the  absence  «»f  sensation
among  non-sensitives  docs  not  prove  that  there  is  no  external
vibration.

HA  I  "XI  I  \'<  iS

What  arc  the  external  objective  phenomena  that  arouse  a  ver-
idical hallucination?

The  uncertainty  here  is  so  absolute  that  all  hypotheses  can  claim
consideration.

A.  Is  it  an  impression  left  on  things,  an  emanation  from  them?

B.  Is  it  the  astral  body  of  a  deceased  human  being?

C.  Is  it  an  intelligent  but  non-human  force  that  comes  to  notify
its  presence?

These  three  hypotheses  will  now  be  briefly  discussed.

A.  It  is  possible  that  an  effluvium  that  we  do  not  know  proceeds
from  things.  The  magnet  seems  an  inert  object  till  a  piece  of  ktm
is  brought  near  it;  but  it  reveals  great  energy  in  presence  of  the
iron.  Similarly  apparently  inert  objects  might  reveal  hidden  ener-
gies. The  ring  long  worn  by  an  individual  might  accumulate
properties  characteristic  of  the  wearer  which  it  had  not  when  it
left  the  jeweller's  hands.  A  dog  recognizes  his  master's  glove,
for  the  glove  has  taken  the  scent  of  the  hand,  imperceptible  to  our
imperfect  sense  but  perceptible  to  that  of  the  dog.  Could  there
not  be  mysterious  energies  stored  up  in  things  that  may  awaken
precise  images  in  sensitives?  If  it  were  so,  the  principal  cases  of
haunting  might  be  thus  explained ;  though  this  is  not  an  explana-
tion, but  a  verbal  expression  given  to  a  phenomenon  that  is  not
understood.

Bozzano  has  discussed  this  "psychometric  hypothesis"  (which  I
prefer  to  call  pragmatic)  and  decides  that  it  is  insufficient,  giving
his  reasons  for  this  conclusion.  I  shall  here  mention  two  only,
which  seem  very  serious :

Firstly,  there  are  phenomena  of  infestation  in  places  that  have
no  relation  (as  far  as  can  be  known)  with  the  suicide,  murder,  or
other  tragical  fact  that  seems  to  have  originated  the  haunting.

Secondly,  and  more  especially,  because  these  apparitions  seem
to  show  an  intention,  a  purpose,  a  monition,  sometimes  a  pre-
monition and  occasionally  have  a  periodicity  characterized  by  a
certain  rhythm  and  in  any  case  show  the  action  of  a  personality
which  does  not  seem  to  be  that  of  the  sensitive,  and  still  less  the
property  of  an  inert  object.

It  seems  to  me  puerile  to  endeavour  to  penetrate  farther,  and  in
short  the  pragmatic  hypothesis  is  plainly  insufficient.  Moreover
its  weakness  is  apparent  in  that  it  is  applicable  only  to  subjective
facts  of  haunting,  and  in  no  way  to  the  objective  facts.

570

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Do  the  other  hypotheses  show  more  likelihood  ?

B.  The  phantoms  are  those  of  deceased  persons :  ghosts,  rcven>
ants,  in  the  textual  sense  of  the  word.  And  at  first  sight  this
explanation  seems  simple.

But  what  absurdities  it  involves!

Why  those  persons  only  and  not  others?  For  millions  of  tragic
events  occur  continually,  everywhere,  without  causing  any  haunt-
ing whatsoever.  Often  insignificant  causes  would  seem  to  have
decided  the  ghost  to  return.  And  this  ghost  seems  to  have  a  very
curious  mentality  ;  he  throws  stones,  breaks  bottles,  and  opens
doors  with  violence.  He  is  frankly  inept,  and  shows  an  ineptitude
that  belongs  to  the  animal  rather  than  to  the  man.  Since  intelli-
gence has  vanished  with  the  brain,  and  the  body  has  undergone
putrefaction,  how  can  the  dead  man  live  again,  even  under  a
nebulous  phantasmal  form  ?

We  have  already  seen  that  the  identity  of  spirits  with  such  and
such  a  deceased  person  (which  implies  human  survival)  is  very
difficult  to  accept,  even  with  such  seemingly  strong  proofs  as  those
in  connection  with  Raymond  Lodge  and  George  Pclham.  How
much  weaker  and  tenuous  arc  the  few  proofs  of  indentity  given
by  ghosts!

C.  There  remains  the  third  hypothesis  that  there  are  spirits
(angels  or  demons)  who  are  intelligent  |>owers.  entirely  different
from  humanity,  able  to  do  anything  objectively  or  subjectively.

This  hypothesis  is  convenient,  even  much  too  convenient,  for  to
admit  all-powerful  and  omniscient  beings  is  much  the  same  as  to
admit  our  entire  ignorance.  I  prefer  to  suppose  a  human  energy
similar  to  the  ectoplasm  coinciding  with  a  certain  degree  of  lucid-
ity, causing  such  and  such  forms  to  appear.  But  this,  too,  is  un-
satisfactory and  wire-drawn;  even  ridiculous.  Nevertheless,  be-
ing unable  to  see  any  cause.  I  would  accept  this  opinion  provision-
ally as  a  working  hypothesis  such  as  one  is  obliged  to  use  in  a
dawning  science.

As  to  the  character  of  these  forces,  if  they  exist  (which  is  not
at  all  certain  ).  I  will  not  allow  myself  any  hypothesis  at  all.  Most
religions  admit  the  existence  of  evil  spirits.  The  hypothesis  of
the  devil  explains  everything  to  some  minds.  Haunted  houses  are
exorcised.  The  devil  becomes  the  Deus  ex  mochina.

HAUNTINGS

571

Even  spiritualists,  followers  of  Allan  Kardcc.  believe  that  there
are  evil  spirits,  a  notion  that  disposes  of  all  psychological  diffi-
culties and  contradictions  with  a  word.  The  discords  of  the  sub-
conscious, the  trivialities,  the  coarse  jests,  deceiving  tor  the  sake
of  deceiving,  are,  according  to  spiritualists,  the  work  of  evil
Spirits.  Alt  the  disturbances  in  haunted  houses,  according  to  them,
are  made  by  bad  spirits.  According  to  certain  ecclesiastics  it  is
the  devil  who  makes  all  the  noise.

But  all  this  hypothesis  of  the  devil  and  evil  spirits  is  really
very  primitive  anthropomorphism.

Even  if  I  were  to  admit  (which  I  cannot  bring  myself  to  do)
that  there  is  any  intervention  by  non-human  intelligent  powers,  I
should  refuse  to  believe  that  these  share  our  imperfect  notions  on
good  and  evil.

I  will  say  no  more  on  these  theories,  for  they  are  all  so  feeble,
so  essentially  and  necessarily  feeble,  that  we  must  await  new  facts
and  fresh  evidence  before  building  on  the  old.  I  shall  therefore
relate  as  briefly  as  possible  some  of  the  facts  of  haunting,  but  I
shall  not  criticize  each  in  detail,  preferring  to  leave  them  to  the
reader's  own  judgment.  I  shall,  however,  permit  myself  a  i  timid  )
expression  of  personal  opinion  by  drawing  the  inferences  that  may
be  deduced  from  them.

2.  On  the  H  Huntings  of  Houses  (Subjective)

Hauntings,  properly  so  called,  are  those  in  which  an  apparition
manifests  itself  in  a  house  said  to  be  infested.

Up  to  what  point  is  the  phenomenon  entirely  subjective?  This
is  an  obscure  question  to  which  the  facts,  poor  in  quality  and  few
in  number,  do  not  permit  a  decided  answer.

An  English  ecclesiastic1  went  with  his  wife  to  take  up  his  duties
in  a  new  parish,  and  entered  their  vicarage,  a  comfortable  house  at
some  distance  from  the  village.  They  had  no  servants,  a  woman
came  in  to  do  the  housework ;  and  in  the  evening  they  locked  the
house  up.

During  the  night  they  heard  great  crashes  like  cannon-shot  roll-
ing on  the  floors,  which  woke  them  up  and  lasted  for  part  of  the

•Caae  of  Bottmoo.  Report  of  the  commit!**  on  Haunted  Homes.  P.  S.  P  R  .
March,  1884.  p.  144*  The  members  of  the  committee  were:  Rev.  Butbrll,
Hufhet,  A.  P.  Perceval  Keep,  P.  Podmore.  Hentleifh  Wedfewood.  and  Ed.  R.

572

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

rmal.  The  woman

who  came  to  do  their  work  would  not  stay  a  night  in  the  house.

The  next  evening  at  8  p.m.  the  noises  began  again;  this  time
human  footsteps  "walking  slowly  but  firmly."  Then,  for  two
weeks,  there  was  nothing.  Then  the  noises  began  again  j  knocks,
sometimes  very  loud  and  quick,  sometimes  feeble  and  hesitating.

lie  bodies.  This  went  on  for  a  year,  and  in  the  end  the  vicar  and
his  wife  left  the  village.

A  friend  who  came  to  the  house  also  heard  the  noises,  and  as
they  were  perceived  both  by  the  vicar  and  his  wife,  they  must  be
admitted  as  objective.  Possibly  complicity  of  the  servant  is  not
absolutely  disproved.

The  noises  heard  by  Dr.  Kinnaman  cannot  be  considered  as
proving  anything.  It  is  the  queer  story  of  a  young  student  named
Adams  who  bequeathed  his  skeleton  to  his  friend  Dr.  Kinnaman,
on  condition  that  the  latter  would  keep  it  for  his  anatomical
studies.  Some  years  later,  as  the  skeleton  was  in  the  way,  it  was
relegated  to  a  shed ;  and  then  such  noises  and  crashes  were  heard
that  a  better  place  had  to  be  found  for  Adams's  bones.  Adams
would  then  seem  to  have  been  satisfied,  and  kept  quiet.

This  improbable  and  amusing  tale  is  more  like  a  comic  novel
than  a  real  fact.

Miss  R.  Morton.'  a  medical  student,  came  in  1882  to  live  in  a
house  at  Gifton.  In  this  house  there  had  been  a  domestic  drama
twenty  years  before.  One  evening.  Miss  Morton  hearing  noises
at  her  door  went  into  the  passage  and  saw  a  tall  lady  in  a  widow's
cap  and  a  black  woollen  dress,  holding  a  handkerchief  to  her  face.

Between  1882  and  1884  Miss  Morton  saw  this  shape  five  or  six
times.  Her  sister,  her  brother,  the  housemaid,  and  a  child  saw  it
too.  "Sometimes."  says  Miss  Morton,  "she  tried  to  speak  to  me,
but  only  gave  a  slight  si^h ."  The  subjectivity  of  the  phantom,  al-
though it  was  seen  by  the  brother  and  sister,  is  proved  by  the  fact
that  sometimes  Miss  Morton  could  see  it  distinctly  when  other
persons  present  saw  nothing.  Nevertheless — and  this  is  highly
important  as  proving  that  Miss  Morton  s  hallucination  was  not
entirely  subjective—one  evening  in  August  at  8  P.M.  foot  per-
mit saw  the  phantom  at  the  same  moment.    From  1884  to  1885

n  the  morning  the
and  fall  of  mctal-

'Ifyrra.  P.  S.  P.  R  .  viii.  311.    Bomaoo's  caw  11.

HAUNTINGS

573

the  apparition  showed  itself  most  frequently.  From  1886  it  be-
came  mem  nebulous  and  indistinct ;  in  1889  nothing  couM  he  seen
though  steps  were  still  heard  as  late  as  1892.

This  case  is  instructive,  for  it  shows  that  objectivity  may  be  in-
complete. The  phantom  was  subjective,  for  it  was  not  seen  hv
all  the  persons  present,  but  yet  was  sometimes  seen  by  several
persons  as  a  collective  visualization.  The  persistence  in  one  lo-
cality will  also  be  noted.

There  is  a  very  curious  and  ancient  case  of  haunting  reported
by  Pliny  the  Younger  (Letters,  vii,  27  ).

"Erat  Atkenis  spatiosa  et  capax  domus,  scd  infamis  et  pestilens.
Per  silentium  noctis  sonus  ferri,  et,  si  attendcres  acrius,  strepitus
vinculorum  longius  primo,  deinde  e  proximo  reddebatur:  mox
apparebat  idolon,  senex  macie  et  squalore  confectus,  promissa
barbo,  horrenti  capillo;  cruribus  compedes,  manibus  catenas  gere-
bat  et  quatiebatr

It  secm<  that  the  house  was  abandoned;  no  one  would  buy  it  or
live  in  it.  The  philosopher  Athenodorus,  however,  did  not  hesi-
tate to  brave  the  phantom.  He  installed  himself  in  the  house  with
his  tablets  and  a  light  and  started  writing.  At  midnight  the  phan-
tom came.  "Stabat  effigies  innuebatque  digito,  similis  vocanti
hie  contra  ut  paulum  ex  spec  tar  et  manu  significat,  rursusque  ceru
et  stilo  incumbit.  (If  the  story  is  true,  Athenodorus  showed  re-
markable coolness.)  Ilia  scribentis  capiti  catenis  insonabat.  Res-
fiat  rursus  idem  quod  prius  innucntem,  nec  moratus  tollit  lumen
et  sequitur.  Ibat  Mo  lento  gradu  quasi  grains  tinculis.
In  short  the  phantom  disappeared,  leaving  Athenodorus  in  a  lonely
place,  which  the  philosopher  marked  so  as  to  know  it  again.  Next
morning  the  magistrates  made  excavations  and  a  skeleton  was
found,  which  was  publicly  buried.  From  that  time  the  haunting
ceased.

No  verification  can  be  had  for  an  event  two  thousand  years  old,
but  the  similarity,  or  rather  the  identity,  of  the  ancient  hauntings
with  those  of  today  should  make  even  the  most  sceptical  think
over  them.

At  St.  Boswell  a  phantom  appeared  to  several  persons — to  Miss
Scott  and  to  her  sister  Louise  Scott,  and  to  Miss  I  rvirte.  Al>out
ten  other  persons  also  saw  it  between  1893  and  1901.  The  form
was  that  of  a  man  dressed  in  black,  with  a  long  black  cloak  of
ancient  fashion,  a  white  cravat,  and  a  broad-brimmed  hat.  He
was  thin  and  pale,  and  appeared  in  the  open  street.   Miss  Scott

574

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

having  tried  to  overtake  him  he  moved  before  her,  too  quickly  to
be  overtaken.  It  seems  that  two  boys  of  the  village  once  saw  him
appear  with  a  threatening  gesture ;  they  fled  and  the  phantom  van-
ished. The  people  of  St.  Boswell  are  not  inclined  to  risk  them-
selves in  that  street  at  night.1

Miss  Bedford  (/.  5\  P.  R.,  xii,  18;  Bozzano's  case  8)  saw  at
W.,  on  the  road  near  a  river,  the  form  of  a  man  looking  despair-
ingly at  the  water.  Her  friend  Miss  Locke  had  also  seen  him
some  time  previously.  It  seems  that  at  that  very  place  a  man  had
thrown  himself  into  the  river  through  a  disappointment  in  love.
Mrs.  Locke  (Miss  Locke's  mother)  saw  the  same  phantom  several
times.

Mrs.  Vatas  Simpson  relates  that  when  a  child,  playing  with  her
brothers  and  sisters,  she  saw  an  old  woman  slowly  mounting  the
stairs  at  the  top  of  which  she  disappeared  without  opening  the
door  facing  the  staircase.  She  then  saw  her  on  the  other  side  of
the  door.  Though  all  happened  long  ago  she  remembers  quite  well
that  her  brothers  also  saw  the  same  form  and  not  on  that  day  only,
but  on  following  days.  Her  mother  noted  the  fact  in  her  diary,
adding  that  in  this  house,  which  had  the  reputation  of  being
haunted,  she  had  seen  not  only  the  old  lady,  but  others.  There
were  sounds  of  footsteps  and  the  wailing  of  an  infant.  One  day
Mr.  Vatas  Simpson  was  annoyed  by  footsteps  in  his  room,  though
the  servants  had  allowed  no  one  to  enter.  He  went  in  and  saw  an
old  woman,  small,  thin,  and  very  pale,  wearing  a  large  hat  whose
ribbons  were  tied  under  her  chin.  Her  hands  were  clasped.  He
thought  her  a  real  person,  but  she  vanished  in  front  of  him.

When  a  child,  Mrs.  Louise  du  Cane,  and  also  her  brothers  and
a  sister,  saw  the  reflection  of  a  phantom  in  a  mirror,  but  this  case
is  not  very  evidential  (communicated  by  Dr.  Kingston,  /.  S.  P.
R.,  v,  223;  Bozzano's  case  10).

Bozzano  cites  the  case  of  a  phantom  seen  by  several  persons  in
full  daylight  for  some  minutes  and  on  several  occasions.  It  was
a  woman  dressed  in  black  that  Mr.  W.-D.  G.  saw  sitting  before
the  toilet-glass.  It  is  curious  that  the  mirror  did  not  reflect  the
phantom.

If  this  case  was  well  observed,  which  is  problematical,  it  is  in-
teresting as  showing  that  the  image  was  subjective,  produced  by
auto-suggestion.    If  the  phantom  had  been  objective  it  would

i/.  5".  P.  R.,  vi,  146  and  ix,  298,  case  V.  de  Bozzano,  47.

HAUNTINGS

575

have  been  seen  in  the  mirror.  Its  objectivity  was  therefore  not  of
the  same  order  as  that  of  normal  objects.

Miss  Lucy  Brown  and  Mary  Brown  (pseudonyms)  were  re-
siding in  a  house  where  tragic  events  had  taken  place,  a  woman
having  hanged  herself.  Besides  this  a  part  of  the  house  had  been
destroyed  by  a  fire,  and  a  woman  had  perished  in  the  flames.  Ac-
cording to  the  summary  of  the  depositions  of  the  Misses  Brown
given  by  Myers  the  phantom  of  the  woman  who  had  been  burned
was  seen  by  Mary  and  Lucy  Brown  simultaneously  three  times,
and  once  by  each  of  them  singly.  The  servants  had  seen  it  also,
but  their  testimony  was  not  available.  Mrs.  Jones,  whose  phantom
was  seen,  was  unknown  to  the  Brown  sisters,  but  their  description
corresponds  well  with  that  of  Mrs.  Jones  by  those  who  knew  her.
The  phantom  seemed  to  repeat  the  despairing  gestures  which  Mrs.
Jones  had  been  seen  to  make  in  the  burning  room  (Myers,  /.  S\  P.
R.,  iv,  1899,  27-30;  Bozzano's  case  13).

The  fact  that  a  person  long  dead  may  manifest  to  several  per-
sons in  the  place  he  had  lived  in  is  borne  out  by  the  following
story  told  by  two  sisters,  Mrs.  Judd  and  Mrs.  Dear  (Caroline  and
Mary),  both  very  trustworthy  (Delanne,  Les  apparitions  material-
isees,  1911,  ii,  81):

Three  weeks  after  her  grandmother's  death,  Caroline,  on  wak-
ing one  morning  in  October,  1866,  saw  distinctly  the  form  of  her
grandmother,  as  she  well  remembered  it,  tall,  calm  in  aspect,  with
her  large  dark  eyes  fixed  on  the  face  of  the  old  clock.  Caroline
closed  her  eyes  for  a  few  seconds,  then  slowly  reopened  them.  The
form  was  still  there,  then  quickly  vanished.  Mary  had  the  same
vision  in  the  same  room  at  the  same  hour.  She  only  spoke  of  it
in  the  evening,  having  kept  silence  all  day  from  fear  of  ridicule.

Ten  or  twelve  officers  were  dining  in  their  mess  at  Aldershot.
Suddenly  all  saw  a  young  woman  in  bridal  dress,  soiled  and  worn,
who  passed  slowly  before  the  window.  No  one  could  have  passed
there,  for  the  window  is  thirty  feet  above  the  ground  (Telepathic
hallucinations,  356).

L.  Tyre  saw  in  her  room  about  6  p.m.  an  old  woman  lying  down
fully  dressed  on  the  bed,  her  face  being  turned  towards  the  win-
dow. Mrs.  Tyre's  two  sisters  who  came  in  saw  nothing,  the  bed
was  empty  and  the  coverlet  undisturbed ;  Mrs.  Tyre,  however,  still
continued  to  see  the  old  woman  and  described  her.  She  again  saw
the  phantom  two  days  later,  she  alone  perceiving  it.  She  saw  it
very  often,  so  often  that  they  became  used  to  it  and  called  it  "L.'s

576

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

old  woman."  But  it  was  never  seen  but  by  her  (Delanne,  Appar.
materialisees,  ii,  26).  We  are  therefore  compelled  to  think  that  it
was  a  hallucination ;  but  possibly  it  was  veridical,  for  it  seems  that
the  description  given  corresponds  exactly  with  an  old  woman  who
died  in  the  house  some  years  previously.  These  recognitions  are,
however,  so  uncertain  that  they  have  no  value,  and  one  must  sup-
pose that  this  was  a  mere  hallucination  without  any  objective
reality.1

Miss  A.  sees  in  her  room  a  cousin,  Mrs.  X.,  six  months  dead,
sitting  in  a  white  dress,  with  a  pleated  neck-tie.  Fifteen  days
later  the  same  phantom  returned,  walked  to  the  bed  where  Miss
A.  was  lying,  and  threw  the  bedclothes  to  the  ground.  Miss  A.,
terrified,  lit  the  gas  and  saw  nothing  (Delanne,  ii,  102).

Some  time  later,  in  a  neighbouring  house,  Mr.  X.,  the  husband
of  the  deceased  woman,  twice  saw  the  form  of  a  woman  whose  fea-
tures he  could  not  distinguish.  There  was  a  loud  crash  in  the
room,  waking  Mr.  X.'s  young  son.

Mrs.  X.'s  sister  saw  the  same  phantom  which  tried  to  lift  the
bedclothes  as  in  Miss  A.'s  case.  The  phantom  reappeared  three
times,  at  intervals  of  several  days.  Doors  opened,  and  footsteps
were  heard  on  the  stairs.

Thus,  says  Delanne,  an  apparition  was  seen  seven  times  by  four
different  persons.  Most  of  the  appearances  were  too  long  after
the  death  for  them  to  be  ascribed  to  the  emotions  of  a  recent  loss.
All  the  same,  the  authenticity  of  these  phenomena  is  very  doubt-
ful; for  the  scientific  standing  of  the  witnesses  is  insufficient  to
warrant  the  acceptance  of  such  extraordinary  facts.

Miss  H.,  at  Malta,  aged  eight  years,  saw,  eight  days  after  her
mother's  death,  the  phantom  of  her  mother  standing  by  her  bed,
weeping  and  wringing  her  hands.  The  child  cried  out,  and  her
Maltese  nurse  came,  who  felt  something  terrible  but  undefinable,
and  fell  on  her  knees  to  pray.  The  father  of  Miss  H.  also  saw
the  same  apparition  (Delanne,  ii,  84).

Mrs.  R.  of  Philadelphia,  widow  of  Dr.  R.,  being  in  the  central
hall  of  her  house  with  her  eldest  daughter  aged  nineteen,  saw
(and  her  daughter  also)  a  woman  dressed  in  black  with  a  white
neckerchief  over  her  head  enter  the  hall,  carrying  a  white  silk

^Although  such  are  very  rare,  there  may  be  hallucinations  among  normal
persons.  Mr.  Marillier  has  described  a  personal  experience :  for  a  whole
month  he  had  the  hallucination  of  a  woman  entering  his  room  and  standing

by  him  {Revue  philosophique).

HAUNTINGS

577

purse.  A  younger  daughter  also  saw  the  apparition,  but  less  dis-
tinctly. The  form  stopped  a  moment  before  the  portrait  of  Dr.
R.,  and  seemed  to  be  looking  at  it  for  about  half  a  minute,  then
disappeared  without  the  door  having  been  opened.  The  form
was  recognized  as  that  of  the  grandmother  of  the  girls,  who  had
died  ten  years  previously.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  she  had  not  lived
in  the  house  where  she  appeared  (R.  Dale  Owen,  The  Debatable
Land,  319).

In  his  valuable  study,  Dei  fenomeni  dJinfestazionc,  Bozzano
gives  different  cases  in  which  the  ghost  seems  to  indicate  his
wishes,  or  to  show  regret  for  an  act  done  in  life.  But  as  these  cases
are  not  of  collective  visions,  it  is  more  rational  to  suppose  that
they  are  hallucinations,  illusions,  and  imaginings.  Provisionally
at  any  rate  they  must  be  excluded  from  metapsychic  science.  All
the  intentions  attributed  to  phantoms  are  too  fanciful  and  too
simply  anthropomorphic  to  be  insisted  upon.

The  lights  that  appear  in  certain  places  pertain  also  to  phe-
nomena of  haunting.  M.  Duchatel  has  collected  numerous  state-
ments regarding  a  light  that  appeared  at  Busso,  in  Corsica,  near
Bocognano.  Was  this  a  natural  phenomenon  ?  A  priori  this  seems
highly  probable.  It  seems  that  the  light  vanished  as  soon  as  any-
one approached  the  place  where  it  seemed  to  be.  All  this  is  very
vague,  and  cannot  be  taken  seriously  {A.  S.  P.,  February,  1913,
34-40).

Similar  facts  which  rest  on  the  slight  foundation  of  popular
legend  have  been  alleged  at  Berbenno  (Valteline)  ;  at  Vo;  in
Italy  at  Padua;  at  Saint-Julien  (Soissons)  ;  in  Cardiganshire;  at
Quargento  (Piedmont)  and  Grand-Fougeray  ( Ille-et-Vilaine).
Nothing  can  be  founded  on  these  tales,  but  it  seems  well  to  men-
tion them,  in  the  event  of  similar  phenomena  being  made  the  sub-
ject of  careful  scientific  investigation.

The  following  is  a  fact  equally  difficult  to  accept  or  to  reject —
it  is  reported  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  (P.  S.  P.  R.,  iii,  76,  1885)  :

Two  ladies,  Mrs.  F.  and  her  sister,  saw  in  the  street  during  a
thick  fog  numerous  human  forms  passing  by.  Some  were  tall
persons  which  seemed  to  enter  the  body  of  one  of  the  two  sisters.
The  servant  who  was  with  the  two  ladies  cried  out  in  terror.  In
this  crowd  of  phantoms  there  were  men,  women,  and  dogs.  The
women  wore  high  bonnets  and  large  shawls  of  old  fashion.  Their
faces  were  livid  and  cadaverous.  The  whole  phantasmal  troop  ac-
companied Mrs.  F.  and  her  sister  about  three  hundred  yards.

578

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Sometimes  they  seemed  to  be  lit  up  by  a  kind  of  yellow  light.
When  Mrs.  F.,  her  sister,  and  the  servant  reached  their  house
only  one  single  individual  of  the  crowd,  taller  than  the  others  and
hideous  in  appearance,  remained.  He  then  disappeared  also.
This  hallucination  is  unique  of  its  kind,  and  therefore  cannot  be
used,  though  it  was  collective  and  simultaneous.  It  seems  difficult
to  refer  so  precise  a  description  to  an  effect  of  fog.

To  this  singular  story  may  be  added  another,  also  insufficiently
supported — that  of  a  somewhat  similar  hallucination  of  two  ladies
who,  at  the  Trianon  (Versailles)  thought  they  saw  a  reunion  of
personages  dressed  in  the  fashion  of  1785  in  the  time  of  Marie
Antoinette  (Bozzano,  143).  It  is  difficult  not  to  suppose  this  a
prolonged  hallucination ;  somnambules  under  hypnotism  could  tell
many  such  stories.

Occurrences  of  this  kind  must  not  be  admitted  into  the  annals
of  metapsychics.  In  every  isolated  exceptional  case,  we  ought  to
wait,  without  trying  to  explain  or  to  understand,  and  provision-
ally, to  take  these  cases  as  not  having  occurred.

3.  Telekinesis  in  Haunted  Houses

The  causes  of  error  (which  should  always  be  considered  first)
are  not  the  same  for  objective  as  for  subjective  infestations.  The
subjective  phenomena  depend  on  the  good  faith,  never  doubtful,
of  the  observers,  but  good  faith  is  not  enough;  an  aberration,  a
hallucination,  or  an  illusion  is  always  to  be  suspected.  It  concerns
us,  then,  to  know  whether  everything  can  be  explained  by  illusion.
This  hypothesis  must  be  admitted  when  the  observer  is  only  one
person,  but  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  four  or  five  normal  persons
having  the  same  hallucination  again  and  again  for  several  months.

But  with  objective  phenomena  the  difficulty  is  quite  otherwise.
In  such  cases  all  kinds  of  frauds  are  possible,  and  experience
shows  that  such  frauds  are  very  frequent.  When  in  a  house  said
to  be  haunted  crashes  are  heard,  the  opening  and  shutting  of  doors,
rolling  furniture,  breakage  of  crockery,  and  all  the  train  of  ridicu-
lous manifestations  common  to  such  cases,  the  idea  naturally  oc-
curs of  a  practical  joke  made  by  ill-disposed  persons,  by  dismissed
servants,  or  by  those  interested  in  getting  rid  of  some  of  the  in-
mates. Very  usually  the  cause  of  such  infestations  must  be  attrib-
uted to  very  young  persons  of  either  sex,  half  idiots  and  half
vicious,  who  throw  stones,  and  break  windows  without  fully  under-

HAUNTINGS

579

standing  what  they  are  doing,  who  hide  their  actions  and  let  people
think  that  they  have  not  moved,  without  any  other  motive  than  a
wish  to  deceive.

Therefore  all  hauntings  accompanied  with  a  displacement  of
things  must  be  subjected  to  the  severest  criticism,  the  rather  that
when  such  strict  scrutiny  has  been  made,  the  miracles,  with  some
few  exceptions,  have  evaporated.

Nevertheless,  despite  our  scepticism,  which  is  considerable,
there  remain  some  facts,  infrequent,  but  too  clear  to  make  it  pos-
sible to  deny  them  real  objectivity.

I  will  give  in  the  first  place  a  somewhat  detailed  account  of  the
events  that  came  to  pass  at  the  chateau  of  T.,  in  Normandy,  near
Caen.  M.  de  X.  noted  down  day  by  day  all  that  happened,  and  his
diary  was  communicated  to  M.  J.  Morice,  doctor  of  laws,  who
published  it  in  the  Annalcs  de  Sciences  Psychiques,  1892,  212-213,
and  1893,  65-90.

M.  de  X.  inherited,  in  1867,  a  house  that  passed  as  being
haunted.  In  1868  there  were  abnormal  noises,  which  ceased,  but
were  resumed  more  vigorously  in  1875.  From  the  13th  of  October,
1875,  to  the  30th  of  January,  1876 — that  is,  for  over  three  months
— abnormal  noises,  sometimes  very  loud,  continued  to  be  heard.
M.  de  X.  took  every  precaution  not  to  be  tricked.  He  always  kept
his  revolver  handy  and  it  was  well  known  that  he  would  not  hesi-
tate to  use  it.  On  one  occasion  a  friend  of  M.  de  X.,  hearing  in
the  night  noises  in  his  room,  fired  several  times  by  guess;  the
bullets  were  found  in  the  wall.  The  cellars  and  the  walls  were
carefully  searched ;  two  formidable  watch-dogs  were  loosed  every
night.  There  was  no  possible  doubt  of  the  objectivity  of  the
noises,  heard  sometimes  by  twelve  persons  who  composed  the  en-
tire personnel  of  the  chateau.  There  was  certainly  no  imposture
on  the  part  of  the  servants,  for  they  were  all  terrified  and  gathered
together ;  and  when  all  were  thus  assembled,  the  phenomena  were
sometimes  loudest.

Moreover,  in  certain  cases,  the  fraud  of  one  servant  would  not
have  produced  the  results.  Extremely  violent  knocks  were  heard
in  one  part  of  the  house,  and  one  second  later,  in  another  part.

One  day  Mme.  de  X.,  hearing  a  noise,  came  out  to  investigate.
Before  she  touched  the  door,  she  saw  the  key  turn  quickly  in  the
lock,  come  away,  and  strike  her  left  hand.  The  Abbe  Z.,  tutor
to  her  young  son,  witnessed  this.  I  copy  from  the  diary  of  M.  de
X.  relative  to  the  events  of  the  25-26th  of  January  (p.  75) :

580

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

"One  o'clock.  Twelve  blows  followed  by  a  long  drumming,  then
thirty  rapid  single  knocks,  one  would  have  thought  that  the  house
was  shaken;  we  were  rocked  in  our  beds  on  every  story  .  .  .
then  a  long  rush  of  feet ;  the  whole  lasting  only  five  minutes.  A
minute  later  the  whole  house  was  shaken  again  from  top  to  bot-
tom; ten  tremendous  blows  on  the  door  of  the  green  room.
Twelve  cries  outside,  three  bellowings,  followed  by  furious  out-
cries. Very  loud  drumming  in  the  vestibule,  rhythmical,  up  to
fifty  knocks.  1.30  a.m.  The  house  shaken  twenty  times;  strokes
so  quick  that  they  could  not  be  counted.  Walls  and  furniture  alike
quivered;  nine  heavy  blows  on  the  door  of  the  green  room,  a
drumming  accompanied  by  heavy  blows.  At  this  moment  bellow-
ings like  those  of  a  bull  were  heard,  followed  by  wild  non-human
cries  in  the  corridor.  We  rang  up  all  the  servants  and  when  all
were  up  we  again  heard  two  bellowings  and  one  cry."

Several  priests  were  then  called  upon  for  ritual  exorcism.  The
phenomena  diminished  but  did  not  entirely  cease.

I  do  not  know  what  became  of  the  chateau  T.  in  the  sequel.  The
story  is  disturbing;  a  prolonged  and  violent  mystification  by  the
servants  of  M.  de  X.,  by  his  young  son,  or  by  the  tutor  would
seem  nearly  impossible  as  an  explanation  of  all  that  took  place.

C.  Lombroso  (Riccrche  sui  fenomeni  spiritici,  Turin,  1909,  247)
tells  the  story  of  a  certain  hostelry  of  Turin  where  very  violent
noises  occurred,  especially  breakages  of  bottles  and  crockery.
Chairs  were  broken  noisily;  objects  suspended  from  the  walls  fell
to  the  ground.  Lombroso  himself,  by  the  light  of  a  candle,  saw
bottles  roll  on  the  ground  before  him  and  finally  smash.  He  made
sure  that  there  were  no  strings  to  move  them.  One  day  when
glasses  and  plates  had  been  set  on  the  table  for  dinner,  the  whole
were  broken  and  dinner  had  to  be  served  in  another  room.  In
full  light  at  8  a.m.  objects  flew  through  the  air,  going  into  the
next  room  and  breaking  at  the  feet  of  two  travellers  who  had  come
to  the  hostelry.  A  bottle  of  soda-water,  in  full  daylight  and  under
the  eyes  of  several  persons,  moved  through  the  air  four  to  five
yards,  slowly  as  if  held  by  a  hand;  finally  it  fell  to  the  ground
and  burst.

It  seems  that  these  phenomena  were  connected  with  the  pres-
ence of  a  boy  of  thirteen ;  for  when  he  had  been  sent  away  all  the
phenomena  ceased.

This,  however,  in  no  way  implies  that  there  was  trickery.  It
is  extremely  probable  that  there  are  mediums  who  do  not  know

HAUNTINGS

581

themselves  to  be  such,  and  produce  telekinetic  phenomena  by  the
mere  fact  of  their  presence,  quite  apart  from  any  experimental  in-
tention. Many  so-called  haunted  nouses  are  not  haunted  at  all ;
they  are  inhabited  by  mediums  unconscious  of  their  powers.

A  very  singular  case  has  been  narrated  by  Major  B.  Moor  of
the  Royal  Society  of  London  (I  have  not  been  able  to  consult  his
book,  Bealings  Bells)  and  give  the  details  from  Bozzano  (p.  164)  :
On  the  2d  of  February,  1834,  the  bells  of  his  house  in  Ipswich
began  to  ring  loudly  during  the  day  without  any  apparent  cause.
This  continued  for  fifty-three  clays.  They  were  not  electric  bells.
Sometimes  the  whole  twelve  bells  of  the  house  rang  together,  even
those  whose  bell-pulls  were  completely  visible  except  where  the
wires  entered  the  walls.  Mr.  Moor  often  tried  to  ring  the  bells
equally  loudly  by  pulling  the  cord  as  strongly  as  possible  but  could
never  equal  the  extraordinary  violence  in  the  other  case.  "When
we  pulled  the  bell,"  says  Mr.  Moor,  "its  movement  was  slow  and
quite  visible ;  but  when  moved  by  an  occult  power  the  movement
was  so  rapid  that  nothing  could  be  seen."  This  was  verified  by
more  than  twelve  persons,  so  that  the  hypothesis  of  hallucination
will  not  hold.  Sometimes  the  bells  rang  when  there  was  no  one
in  the  house.  Major  Moor  concludes  definitely  that  the  move-
ment was  due  to  no  human  cause.

He  wrote  to  various  persons  to  ascertain  whether  similar  phe-
nomena had  been  observed  before,  and  obtained  many  answers.
He  collected  fourteen  similar  cases,  of  which  Bozzano  quotes  only
that  of  Mrs.  Milnes,  who,  at  4.30  p.m.,  in  her  house  at  West-
minster, found  all  her  family  alarmed.  The  bells  rang  with  such
energy  that  the  servants  and  children  were  terrified.  Mr.  Milnes,
on  arriving  at  the  house,  examined  everything  minutely  and
watched  all  the  wires.  The  ringing  continued  furiously  for  two
hours  and  a  half.

In  connection  with  bells,  the  still  more  doubtful  case  given  be-
low may  be  mentioned  :

The  two  women,  Mme.  Martillet  and  Mme.  Claudet,  who  nursed
Alfred  de  Musset  in  his  last  illness,  say  that  as  he  lay  in  his  arm-
chair they  saw  by  the  light  of  the  lamp  that  he  was  looking  at  the
bell  near  the  mantelpiece.  But  he  was  so  feeble  that  he  could  not
rise.  "At  that  moment,"  says  Mme.  Martillet,  "we  were  surprised
and  frightened ;  the  bell-pull  that  the  sick  man  had  not  reached,
moved,  as  if  by  an  invisible  hand,  and  my  sister  and  I  took  each
other's  hands  saying,  'Did  you  hear?   Did  you  see?   He  did  not

582

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

leave  his  chair.  .  .  The  servant  came,  having  heard  the  bell"
(Lefevre,  Musset  sensitif,  A.  S.  P.,  1899,  106).

Should  the  singular  phenomena  mentioned  in  all  ages  as  ac-
companying a  death  or  serious  event  be  considered  as  akin  to
hauntings?  There  are  legends  of  clocks  stopping,  pictures  falling,
some  object  noisily  breaking,  etc.,  but  it  is  difficult  to  determine
the  part  played  by  chance  coincidence.

Cheiro  (Count  Hamon)  says  that  on  Monday,  June  5,  1915,  as
he  was  sitting  chatting  with  two  friends  in  his  country  house  at  8
o'clock  in  the  evening,  some  heavy  object  fell  with  a  crash  in  the
adjoining  room;  it  was  a  large  oaken  shield  bearing  the  arms  of
Great  Britain  that  had  been  broken  by  the  fall.  The  fracture  was
in  the  part  representing  England  and  Ireland;  and  Cheiro  said,
"there  has  doubtless  been  some  naval  disaster  in  which  Ireland  is
concerned."  At  that  very  time  Lord  Kitchener,  an  Irishman,
perished  in  the  Hampshire  (A.  S.  P.,  July,  1916,  122).  It  is  need-
less to  criticize ;  this  is  mere  coincidence,  and  not  very  cogent.

Aksakoff  (Animisme  et  Spiritisme,  1895,  286)  cites  various
cases  of  persecution  much  resembling  hauntings ;  but  his  observa-
tions must  be  taken  with  some  reserve;  his  credulity  is  no  more
to  be  doubted  than  his  honesty.

The  case  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Shelp  related  by  Mr.  Capron  (Modem
Spiritualism)  is  very  open  to  suspicion;  for  it  does  not  seem  cer-
tain that  Mr.  Shelp  took  all  the  necessary  measures  to  ensure  that
his  son,  aged  eleven,  was  not  the  voluntary  agent  in  the  phenom-
ena. Chairs  rose  in  the  air  and  fell  with  crashes,  a  chandelier  was
taken  from  the  mantelpiece,  knocked  against  the  ceiling  several
times,  and  broke;  a  brush  was  thrown  through  the  window;  a
glass  left  the  worktable  and  broke  the  last  pane  left  intact ;  gar-
ments moved  about  the  room,  inflated  as  if  to  resemble  human  fig-
ures ( ! !).  As  Dr.  Shelp  and  his  son  Harry  were  out  driving  six-
teen stones  as  large  as  eggs  were  thrown  into  the  carriage.

AksakofFs  other  story  of  persecution  is  more  interesting,  and
seems  to  have  been  carefully  observed  by  M.  Schtcharoff  (against
whom  the  persecution  seems  to  have  been  directed)  and  by  M.
Akoutine,  chemical  engineer  of  Orenburg.  The  medium  was
probably  M.  Schtcharoff's  wife,  unknown  to  herself.  Akoutine
tried  to  divide  the  phenomena  into  those  of  attraction  and  repul-
sion, but  no  law  could  be  discovered.   Sometimes  things  flew  from

HAUNTINGS

583

the  table  at  which  people  were  sitting;  at  other  times,  when  a  cup-
board was  opened,  the  things  would  fall  on  Mme.  S.,  moving  to  a
greater  distance  afterwards.  These  improbable  facts  were  re-
peated during  several  months,  sometimes  very  energetically.  A
sofa  weighing  one  hundred  and  eighty  to  two  hundred  pounds  on
which  Mme.  S.'s  mother  was  reclining  began  to  dance,  raising  it-
self into  space  with  the  lady  (  !).  Garments  often  took  fire  in  a
way  that  could  not  be  explained  and  some  very  strange  facts  are
related  by  M.  S.,  who  discusses  very  coolly  whether  there  can  be
hallucination  on  his  own  part  or  trickery  by  his  wife;  and  con-
cludes in  the  negative  in  both  cases.  We  shall  be  still  more  pru-
dent, and  conclude  (always  provisionally)  with  a  large  note  of
interrogation.

We  can  draw  no  other  conclusion  from  the  case  of  Lillian  F.
(Carrington,  The  Problems  of  Psychical  Science,  London,  1914,
p.  341.)  In  the  various  houses  in  which  she  lived,  she  had  to  en-
dure real  hauntings  from  her  childhood  onwards.  In  an  old  house
at  Memphis  (Tenn.)  doors  opened;  there  were  knockings  on  the
windows,  on  the  mirrors,  and  on  the  beds.  Heavy  steps  were
heard  in  the  hall.  Lillian  and  her  mother  both  heard  these  noises
and  were  terrified  by  them.  In  Maryland  similar  phenomena  tes-
tified to  by  other  persons  than  Lillian  F.,  as  also  at  Lafayette
Street  (Baltimore),  Memphis,  Maryland,  and  New  York.

Miss  Mary  Savage,  on  retiring  to  rest,  heard  knocks  on  the  bed,
soon  becoming  very  loud  and  seeming  to  move  round  her  in  cir-
cles. Her  friend,  Miss  Sarah  Soothywoode,  who  was  in  the  next
room,  heard  "a  tremendous  noise" ;  so  hallucination  cannot  be  ac-
cepted as  an  explanation  (Carrington,  p.  288).

Ada  Sinclair  reported  phenomena  of  telekinesis  and  haunting
the  details  of  which  are  of  interest.  They  are  not  to  be  classed  as
entirely  accidental  since  they  occurred  in  connection  with  experi-
ments in  spiritist  rapping-messages.  Mrs.  L.,  a  friend  of  Ada  Sin-
clair, was  present.  Objects  were  plucked  off  the  wall  and  pro-
jected violently.  A  porcelain  vase  was  thrown  to  the  ground  and
broken.  On  other  occasions,  in  presence  of  several  persons,  small
articles  such  as  pins  and  matches  were  moved;  the  pins  being
stuck  into  walls  and  clothes.  The  phenomena  were  strongest
when  Mrs.  L.  was  present,  but  they  did  not  cease  when  she  had
gone  into  the  next  room  (Carrington,  p.  306).

The  Count  de  Larmandie  has  published  an  account  of  haunting
in  his  chateau  at  Sudrie.  A  piece  of  wood  lying  in  the  corner  of  a

584

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

room  struck  the  ceiling  and  fell  at  the  feet  of  the  count  and  his
sister.  It  bounded  about  several  times,  striking  the  door,  the
floor,  and  the  walls.  All  this  in  full  daylight.  When  the  count
or  his  sisters  entered  the  haunted  rooms,  there  was  a  hail  of  little
stones  (A.  Erny,  Le  Psychisme  experimental).

The  following  fact  was  not  told  till  forty  years  after  its  oc-
currence, but  is  quite  clear  in  the  memory  of  the  narrator,  M.
Kouprejanoff,  on  the  superior  staff  of  the  Ministry  of  Public  In-
struction in  Russia.  When  a  young  boy,  he  and  his  mother  and
sisters  heard  logs  falling  in  the  shed  where  they  had  been  placed.
They  all  went  to  see,  taking  a  lantern  and  three  candles.  Twelve
persons  in  succession  came  to  look  in  the  locked  shed  and  saw  the
logs  thrown  against  the  wall,  then  fall  to  the  ground  one  after
another  at  short  intervals.  This  lasted  close  on  forty  minutes ;  and
the  logs  came  from  the  middle  of  the  stack,  though  even  a  strong
man  could  not  have  taken  them  from  the  lower  part  of  the  pile
(A.  S.  P.,  1899,  ix,  174).  But  what  conclusions  can  be  based  on  a
story  written  forty  years  after  the  event?

Mr.  Bristow  was  working  with  two  comrades  in  a  carpenter's
shop.  One  of  the  two  then  accused  him  of  throwing  a  bit  of  wood
at  him,  which  Mr.  Bristow  denied.  Other  pieces  were  thrown,
striking  all  those  present.  Nothing  could  come  from  outside,  for
the  shutters  were  not  moved  and  were  thickly  covered  with  dust.
More  than  this,  Mr.  Bristow  saw  a  piece  of  wood,  two  fingers
wide,  come  jumping  towards  him,  make  a  bound  of  two  feet  and
hit  his  ear.  "A  piece  of  wood  lying  on  the  ground  jumped  into
the  air,  and  began  to  dance  among  our  tools,  but  when  we  tried
to  catch  them  they  evaded  our  hands.  Sometimes  they  moved
about  in  the  air  with  a  waving  movement. "

These  phenomena  went  on  for  six  weeks  and  were  testified  to
by  several  persons ;  the  bits  of  wood  seemed  living  and  intelligent :
they  arranged  themselves  in  a  pile  in  one  corner  of  the  workshop.
They  moved  most  when  not  looked  at ;  and  despite  the  speed  with
which  they  were  projected  into  the  air,  describing  complicated
circles  and  spirals,  they  fell  without  noise  (P.  S.  P.  R.,  vii,  383;
Bozzano,  186).

Mrs.  H.  E.  Sidgwick  and  F.  Myers  analyzed  this  case  with  the
greatest  care  and  obtained  detailed  explanations  from  Mr.  Bris-
tow:  they  connect  this  haunting  with  a  certain  John  Gray,  a
nephew  of  the  proprietor  of  the  workshop,  who  had  not  paid  his
creditors.    His  uncle,  also  named  John  Gray,  had  not  paid  them

HAUNTINGS

585

either.  As  soon  as  he  had  paid  his  nephew's  debts  the  manifes-
tations ceased.

This  case  is  complex  and  hard  to  interpret;  and  though  very
difficult  to  accept,  it  is  almost  as  difficult  to  reject  the  formal
depositions  of  Mr.  Bristow  and  his  companions.

At  Absie  (Deux-Sevres)  in  1867,  according  to  the  police  reports
(A.  S.  P.,  1905,  86),  there  was  a  hail  of  stones  in  an  unoccupied
house.  The  reports  referred  to  would  seem  to  have  been  des-
troyed. No  fraud  could  be  discovered.  Constable  Mousset  testi-
fied: (1)  that  the  stones  fell  without  doing  any  harm;  (2)  that
a  glass  lamp  was  knocked  from  the  table  to  the  floor  by  a  large
stone  without  being  broken;  (3)  that  the  stones  fell  in  all  direc-
tions and  were  only  seen  when  they  rolled  on  the  ground;  (4),
that  the  stones  continued  to  be  heaped  up  in  the  room  even  when
some  one  was  standing  at  the  chimney-piece  to  observe  and  there
was  not  the  smallest  hole  in  the  walls  or  the  windows.

But  Mousset's  evidence  is  quite  insufficient.

Similarly  with  the  case  of  Oels  (Pomerania).  The  lights,  noises,
and  phantasmal  appearance  are  testified  to  by  various  persons
(1916),  but  after  enquiry,  a  magistrate  concluded  that  they  were
natural  facts  due  to  the  conscious  or  unconscious  trickery  of  chil-
dren in  the  house  (Psych.  Studien,  xlvi,  1919,  84;  140).  The  as-
sertions of  Bohn  were,  however,  vigorously  combated  by  Derter
(Das  Geheimnis  des  Spukhausen  in  Oels  im  Lichte  des  Uebers-
innlichen  (A.  S.  P.,  1895,  v,  94).

At  Niedelsdorf  in  Switzerland,  M.  Joller,  a  national  councillor,
relates  that  for  twelve  days  from  the  15th  to  the  27th  of  August,
1862,  mysterious  happenings  took  place  at  his  house.  Tables  and
chairs  were  upset;  heavy  hammer-strokes  shook  the  house;  objects
were  taken  from  the  walls,  latches  were  broken  off,  pictures  were
reversed  on  the  walls  "under  our  very  eyes" ;  stones  were  thrown
from  all  sides  despite  locks  and  bolts.  These  strange  things  went
on  for  six  weeks  in  full  daylight.  There  were  also  inarticulate
noises,  melodies,  singing,  noises  of  splitting  wood,  of  counting
money,  and  winding  a  watch.  All  these  facts  are  described  by  M.
Perty,  a  professor  in  the  University  of  Berne  (Die  mystischen
Erscheinungen  der  menschlichen  Natur) .

The  facts  observed  by  Hector  Durville  with  Raymond  Charrier,
aged  fourteen,  at  Saint-Sauveur,  Yonne,  are  parallel  with  the
phenomena  of  hauntings.  The  usual  phenomena  are  all  there —
objects  projected  in  the  room,  mattress  and  bedclothes  thrown  on

586

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

the  ground,  shoes  thrown  about.  One  day  at  breakfast  things
were  thrown  at  sitters  from  all  parts  of  the  room.  M.  Durville
took  Raymond  to  his  own  house  at  Montmorency.  Pamphlets,
books,  kitchen  utensils,  and  all  kinds  of  objects  were  projected
from  all  sides.  Raymond  went  out  of  the  room  and  was  already
in  the  passage,  when  Mr.  Durville's  walking-stick  came  off  the
peg  where  it  was  hanging,  and  was  flung  after  Raymond  and  fell
behind  him  (A.  S.  P.,  1910,  xxi,  116-124).

That  such  things  should  happen  without  Raymond  having  been
caught  in  the  act  implies  either  that  they  are  true  or  that  M.  Dur-
ville was  blind.  Nevertheless,  he  adds  the  serious  remark,  "I  have
never  seen  any  phenomena  produced  in  entirety  under  my  eyes."
The  whole  responsibility  for  the  assertions  rests  with  M.  Durville,
for  there  is  no  other  witness  to  them.

Mr.  J.  Proctor  noted  in  his  diary  all  the  phenomena  that  oc-
curred in  a  certain  house  abandoned  because  of  the  strange  and
disagreeable  facts  that  took  place  there.  As  soon  as  Mr.  Proctor
took  up  his  abode  there,  noises,  cries,  and  footsteps  were  heard
which  other  lodgers  could  perceive.  Two  months  later,  a  figure
appeared  at  a  window ;  on  another  evening  the  caretaker,  his  wife,
and  his  daughter  saw  a  priest  wearing  a  stole,  who  appeared  for
ten  minutes.  Knocks  were  then  heard,  and  were  continued  for  six
months  at  intervals.  One  night  a  friend  of  Mr.  Proctor's  got  up,
being  frightened  by  the  sight  of  a  phantom  and  by  terrific  noises.
Invisible  beings  called  lodgers  by  name.  New  tenants  suffered  in
the  same  manner  by  noises  and  phantoms  and  the  owners  had  to
give  up  letting  the  house  (A.  S.  P.,  December,  1892,  and  Lom-
broso,  259).

Phenomena  of  haunting  would  seem  to  have  occurred  in  the
military  school  at  Ypanema  (Brazil)  in  May,  1914.  Plates,  cups,
and  saucers  were  flung  about  as  by  an  invisible  hand.  This  was
verified,  says  the  Diario  de  Sorocaba,  by  all  the  officers  and  the
colonel  commanding  the  school.  The  phenomena  were,  however,
of  brief  duration ;  a  scientific  committee  saw  nothing  and  could
verify  nothing;  the  facts  therefore  remain  very  doubtful  (A.  S.
P.,  April,  1916,  70-72).

A  question  arises,  interesting  from  a  practical  point  of  view.  It
is  discussed  with  documentary  evidences  by  Zingaropoli  {Case  in-
f estate  dagli  Spiriti,  Naples,  1917)  :  "Does  haunting  confer  a  right
to  the  cancellation  of  a  lease?"

The  Parliament  of  Bordeaux  formally  decided  that  it  does.  In

HAUNTINGS

587

our  own  day  there  have  been  several  lawsuits  over  this — in  1915
at  Altavilla  (Italy)  ;  in  1907  at  Naples;  in  1896  also  at  Naples;  in
1907  at  Egham  (England).  In  the  latter  case  the  house  had  been
hired  by  Mr.  Stephen  Philips,  a  well-known  dramatic  author  and
poet.  He  complained  that  during  the  night  heavy  knocks  shook
the  walls  and  doors,  and  figures  appeared  on  the  stairs  and  in  the
passages.  The  house  had  already  been  said  to  be  haunted.  The
Daily  Mail  and  Light  which  had  spoken  of  these  facts  were  sued
and  fined  for  depreciating  the  value  of  the  house ;  though  the  sen-
tence was  reversed  on  appeal,  the  newspapers  proving  that  the
hauntings  were  matter  of  public  notoriety.

At  Ancona  in  1903  the  public  prosecutor,  M.  Marracino,  states
that  he  and  his  two  sons  who  are  barristers,  witnessed  singular
facts  connected  with  jets  of  liquid.  During  the  night  hats  were
filled  with  water ;  during  the  day  water  was  thrown  on  the  beds.
The  walls  were  examined  by  engineers  who  discovered  nothing
unusual.  Milk,  wine,  and  coffee  were  spilt  on  the  floors.  In  a
locked  buffet  objects  were  displaced.  It  seems  that  the  phenomena
were  due  to  the  young  daughter  of  M.  Marracino  who  was  a
medium  unknown  to  herself.  One  day  a  book  rose  up  and  touched
her  on  the  shoulder.  (Si  sollevo  e  ando  a  batter e  sulla  spalla  di  lei,
quindi,  cadde  a  terra  e  cominci  a  saltarellare  ( !!)  comme  tnosso
da  una  forza  impulsiva,  percorse  sei  o  sette  volte  la  camera  e,  alz-
andozi  di  nuovo,  ando  ad  applicicarsi  al  muro.)

In  such  cases  when  the  phenomenon  is  due  to  a  medium  who  is
not  aware  of  the  fact  (usually  a  very  young  child)  fraud  is  often
mingled  with  the  phenomena.  Maxwell  says,  with  good  reason
(Bull,  de  I'lnst.  Psych.,  1905,  376),  that  at  first  there  are  doubt-
less genuine  phenomena  that  lead  the  child  to  simulate  them  later
on.  The  unstable  mentality  of  mediums  explains  this  fraud,  the
more  readily  that  they  scarcely  know  how  to  distinguish  volun-
tary from  involuntary  acts :  the  uncertain  state  of  their  conscious-
ness deprives  them  to  a  considerable  degree  of  their  sense  of
responsibility.

Kerner  observed  with  the  Seeress  of  Prevorst  many  mediumistic
phenomena  that  entirely  resemble  those  in  haunted  houses  from
which  it  is  difficult  to  dissociate  them.  They  constitute  an  ab-
normal whole  that  borders  on  the  pathological;  hypnotism,  leth-
argy, cryptesthesia,  premonitions,  experimental  telekinesis,  and
such  telekinesis  as  occurs  in  haunted  houses.  Kerner  says,  "There
were  knocks  and  noises  like  stones  thrown,  once  a  table  moved

588

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

jerkily  across  the  room  without  any  visible  contact,  tin  plates  were
thrown  across  the  kitchen.  These  stories  would  have  provoked  in
me  a  pitiful  smile  had  I  not  been  an  ocular  witness  to  the  facts."
However  improbable  they  may  seem,  I  think  it  rash  to  deny  them ;
we  do  not  understand  them  and  cannot  explain  them,  we  can  only
take  note  of  them.

Dr.  Hart  Raines  (quoted  by  Barrett,  P.  S.  P.  R.}  1911,  xxv,
404)  mentions  a  very  curious  case.  In  January,  1911,  three  young
men  were  sent  to  a  small  telegraphic  station  at  Dale  in  Georgia,
and  took  possession  of  their  new  domicile.  Shortly  afterwards  they
found  that  they  could  not  keep  the  door  shut;  it  opened  despite  all
their  efforts,  nails  and  iron  bars  were  of  no  use.  Stones  and  other
things  were  thrown  into  the  room ;  a  box  of  condensed  milk  rose
into  the  air  and  passed  into  the  room  untouched  by  anyone;  a
lantern  also  rose  up  and  was  broken  against  the  wall ;  a  chair  was
thrown  from  before  the  window  with  such  force  that  it  was
broken.  The  three  young  men  were  panic-stricken.  "One  of  them
walked  several  miles  to  the  nearest  town  to  resign  his  position,
and  he  assured  Dr.  Raines  nothing  would  induce  him  again  to  go
through  the  experience  he  had  suffered."

Mr.  Murphy,  hearing  that  a  house  at  Enniscorthy  (Ireland)
was  said  to  be  haunted  went  with  Mr.  Owen  Devereux  to  pass  a
night  there  in  the  same  room  with  the  two  young  men  who  lived
in  the  house.  It  seems  that  one  of  them,  Mr.  Randall,  was  the
agent,  for  most  of  the  movements  of  objects  and  noises  took  place
round  him.  During  the  night  that  Mr.  Murphy  passed  there,  re-
peated noises,  becoming  more  and  more  rapid,  took  place,  and  then
Randall's  clothes  were  taken  off  him.  He  cried  out,  "Hold  them,
hold  them,  they  are  taken  off  me!"  and  added,  "I  cannot  hold
them ;  they  are  going,  and  I  am  going  with  them,  there  is  some-
thing pushing  me  from  inside,  I  am  going,  I  am  going,  I'm  gone !"
A  light  was  struck  and  Randall  was  seen  to  be  in  great  terror  and
bathed  in  sweat.  Randall,  in  the  absence  of  Murphy,  had  felt
strange  phenomena,  and  likewise  his  room-mate,  Mr.  Sinnett.
After  having  heard  all  night  the  sound  of  hurried  footsteps,  they
lit  the  lamp,  and  then-  "what  added  to  our  fright,"  he  says,  "was
a  chair  dancing  (!)  in  the  middle  of  the  floor  without  a  thing  near
it."  His  bed  and  Sinnett's  were  raised  into  the  air!  (P.  S.  P.  R.,
xxv,  1911,  380).

After  Randall  had  left  the  house,  nothing  further  occurred  to
him.    It  seems  therefore  that  the  phenomena  could  only  be

HAUNTINGS

589

duced  in  a  given  locality  and  with  a  certain  person.  It  would  be
important  to  know  what  degree  of  confidence  can  be  placed  in
Randall,  and  up  to  what  point  he  was  normal

In  the  same  issue  (P.  S.  P.  R.,  p.  397)  Sir  William  Barrett  giveu
a  methodical  investigation  of  some  other  phenomena,  which,
though  of  but  moderate  intensity,  derive  interest  from  his  testi-
mony. He  passed  several  nights  in  a  haunted  house  at  Derry-
gonnelly  in  Ireland  about  nine  miles  from  Enniskillen.  The  phe-
nomena seem  to  have  been  associated  with  Maggie,  a  girl  of
twenty,  the  daughter  of  Jack  Flanigan,  the  owner  of  the  house.
When  everybody  was  still,  loud  noises  were  heard  on  the  walls,  on
the  bedsteads,  and  on  the  doors.  A  large  shovel  fell  on  the  bed
and  Sir  William  heard  hammer-blows.  He  verified  that  these
were  intelligent ;  four  times  he  got  an  exact  answer  to  a  number
(between  1  and  10)  which  he  mentally  asked  (probability  1  to
10,000).

The  following  case  is  remarkable  from  several  points  of  view.
The  phenomena  took  place  at  Portland  (Oregon)  at  the  house
of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Savoyer,  living  at  546  Marshall  Street  with  their
grandson  Elwin  March,  aged  eleven.  Two  medical  men  and  many
other  persons  saw  with  their  own  eyes  movements  of  heavy  ob-
jects without  contact.  Chairs  and  telephones  were  displaced  in
open  day,  no  one  being  near  them.  Nevertheless  there  is  no  doubt
that  the  boy  lent  himself  to  these  games.  Dr.  Gilbert  of  Portland
got  him  to  avow  that  he  had  played  many  tricks.  A  severe  inves-
tigation seems  to  have  proved  that  the  trickery  only  began  later
and  that  some  of  the  movements  took  place  when  March  was  not
in  the  room.  There  is  no  incongruity  in  admitting  the  genuine-
ness of  the  earlier  phenomena  and  also  young  March's  trickery,
made  possible  when  his  movements  were  not  watched.  But  how-
ever that  may  be,  the  fact  of  fraud,  even  subsequent  fraud,  makes
the  whole  doubtful.  Maxwell,  who  has  studied  deeply  some  of
these  phenomena,  considers,  I  think  correctly,  that  at  the  outset
the  telekinesis  is  real,  but  that  the  medium  who  at  first  produced
them  spontaneously  simulates  them  afterwards.  The  story  is
given  in  Am.  J.  S.  P.  R.,  November,  1910.

Grasset  (p.  396)  verified,  with  Dr.  Calmette,  that  the  extraor-
dinary displacements  observed  in  a  so-called  haunted  house  ceased
completely  when  the  medium,  a  hysterical  girl  of  fifteen,  was  sent
for  treatment  to  the  hospital  at  Saint-Eloi  (Montpellier).

In  the  A.  S.  P.  (1919,  xxix,  p.  96)  there  is  a  story  of  extraor-

590

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

dinary  facts  testified  to  by  a  Mr.  X.  and  his  nephew,  two  artists
whose  honour  and  good  faith  are  not  in  doubt.  Objects  moved  by
themselves,  metal  boxes  knocked  together,  furniture  moved,  nails
drew  out  from  the  walls,  pincers  were  heard  mounting  the  stairs.
This  was  in  the  department,  Maine-et  Loire  and  Sarthe.  At
Cannes  a  still  more  astounding  thing  came  to  pass:  "A  little  man,
formed  like  a  key,  a  head  of  hair  taking  the  place  of  the  key-ring,
appeared  in  the  room  ...  he  came  on  the  marble  top  of  our
night-table  and  seemed  to  sit  down  on  it ;  when  we  tried  to  catch
him  he  dodged  as  quickly  as  a  mouse.  On  the  next  day  this
little  sprite  wore  a  blue  costume  with  white  spots.  He  always
came  to  visit  us,  appearing  from  the  radiator"  (  ! !).

It  is  impossible  to  put  any  faith  in  these  stories  that  Mr.  X.
and  his  nephew  have  illustrated  with  sketches  more  extravagant
than  anything  in  the  Thousand  and  One  Nights.  Still,  in  mat-
ters metapsychic,  so  many  strange  phenomena  have  been  denied
and  afterwards  found  to  be  true,  that  though  I  greatly  desire
formally  to  deny  these  insanities,  I  feel  constrained  to  make  some
timid  reserves  in  my  bold  denial.

The  following  incident  took  place  in  the  jungle  of  Sumatra
(/.  S.  P.  /?.,  May,  1906,  xii,  261).  Mr.  Grottendieck,  alone  with
his  native  boy  in  a  tent,  was  awakened  by  noises  of  stones  falling
round  him.  He  lit  his  lamp  and  waked  his  boy  who  was  sound
asleep,  and  told  him  to  find  out  the  trickster  or  enemy.  While
the  boy  was  outside,  the  stones  continued  to  fall.  He  saw  them
slowly  follow  a  parabolic  course.  He  tried  in  vain  to  stop  them ;
they  avoided  his  hand.  The  boy  came  back  saying  there  was  no
one,  but  the  stones  continued  to  fall.  Mr.  Grottendieck  then  fired
five  shots  from  his  carbine  from  the  window,  but  the  stones  still
came.  The  servant  was  so  frightened  that  he  ran  away  into  the
jungle.

In  a  later  letter  Mr.  Grottendieck  says  he  is  absolutely  sure  that
his  boy  did  not  throw  the  stones ;  but  is  inclined  to  think  that  the
slowness  of  their  fall  was  an  illusion,  a  mere  semblance ;  for  he
says  while  the  phenomenon  took  place,  time  seemed  to  be  slowed
down.  "I  feel  now  inclined  to  suggest  that  there  might  have  been
something  abnormal  in  my  own  condition  at  the  time."

This  is  highly  probable,  sufficiently  so  to  deprive  his  testimony
of  all  value.

HAUNTINGS

591

I  might  multiply  these  poltergeist  cases  by  citing  many  facts
new  and  old,  from  many  authors;  but  those  I  have  given  will
suffice  to  show  how  obscure  the  matter  still  is.  Before  giving  my
personal  opinion  I  will  state  in  an  abridged  form  the  conclusions
arrived  at  by  Professor  Barrett  in  his  excellent  article  on  haunted
houses  and  poltergeists  (P.  S.  P.  R.,  xxv,  1911,  377)  :

1.  Fraud  and  hallucination  are  not  sufficient  explanations  of
all  the  phenomena.

2.  The  noises,  movements  of  objects,  and  other  physical  effects
seem  to  be  connected  with  an  invisible  intelligence,  which,  for  all
its  imperfection,  has  some  resemblance  to  human  intelligence.

3.  The  phenomena  are  usually  associated  with  a  place  or  a
person,  so  that  some  kind  of  fulcrum  seems  necessary  to  their
production.

4.  The  phenomena  are  sporadic  and  temporary,  lasting  from  a
few  days  to  a  few  months,  beginning  and  ceasing  without  any
known  cause.

4.  Conclusions

Before  all  things  it  is  necessary  to  know  if  the  facts  are  genu-
ine; in  presence  of  such  extravagant  phenomena  theoretical  dis-
cussions are  of  minor  importance.

The  testimonies  are  too  precise  for  it  to  be  possible  to  deny
everything.  Many  of  these  cases,  even  when  severely  examined,
establish  that  there  have  been  movements  of  objects  without  con-
tact, and  more  especially  noises  that  no  ordinary  mechanical  cause
can  explain.  Is  it  not  absurd  to  suppose  that  for  weeks  and
months  cool-headed  and  responsible  persons,  closely  watching  the
so-called  haunted  house,  have  seen  things  that  did  not  exist  and
heard  loud  and  terrifying  noises  produced  by  no  living  being?  If
there  were  but  one  such  case,  and  one  such  person,  illusion  or
hallucination  might  be  invoked ;  but  that  is  a  childish  explanation.
People  say  "hallucination"  to  dismiss  a  disquieting  fact  by  a
convenient  word ;  this  is  much  too  simple.

Collective  hallucination  is  next  advanced.  But  in  this  sense
there  are  no  collective  hallucinations.  Alienists  do  not  know  of
any  such  phenomena.

I  am  aware  that  hysterics  in  a  convent  have  often  told  wonder-
ful stories  of  what  one  and  another  claim  to  have  seen ;  I  know,
too,  that  the  inventions  of  myth-making  hysterics  have  a  large

592

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

place  in  their  psychology,  but  these  witnesses  are  neither  nuns
nor  hysterics.

It  may  be  best  to  limit  the  recognized  facts  of  haunting  to  acci-
dental telekinesis.

Experimental  telekinesis  has  been  amply  proved :  then  why  not
admit  that  the  phenomena  in  haunted  houses  are  of  the  same  order,
and  that  they  are  accidental  phenomena  of  the  same  kind?  That
makes  them  neither  more  nor  less  mysterious.

The  striking  similarity  of  the  facts  verified  in  Normandy,  in
Ireland,  in  Scotland,  in  Georgia,  in  Russia,  in  Italy,  and  in  Sicily
shows  that  even  these  unusual  facts  show  definite  sequences.  If
they  were  purely  fanciful  the  accounts  would  not  be  thus  con-
cordant.

In  fact,  all  these  matters  belong  to  metapsychics.  Formerly,
from  1885  to  1895,  the  members  of  the  S.  P.  R.  were  inclined  to
accept  only  telepathy  as  demonstrated  and  to  deny  clairvoyance
(non-telepathic  cryptesthesia)  and  also  all  physical  phenomena.
Podrr.ore  in  particular  reached  the  conclusion  that  there  was  noth-
ing genuine  but  telepathy.  But  little  by  little  our  learned  colleagues
of  the  S.  P.  R.  have  had  to  admit  clairvoyance  and  physical  phe-
nomena. Short  of  wilful  blindness,  how  can  the  facts  produced
by  Home  and  Eusapia  be  denied  ?

Therefore,  as  experimental  telekinesis  is  proved,  accidental  tele-
kinesis must  be  admitted  as  being  at  least  possible.

The  principal  objection  advanced  against  accidental  telekinesis
is  not  hallucination  but  trickery.  It  is  said  that  when  there  are
strange  noises  and  displacements  of  objects,  these  are  due  to  the
pranks  of  some  vicious  and  malicious  child  who  amuses  himself
by  practising  on  the  curiosity  of  observers.  But  only  in  excep-
tional cases  can  this  hypothesis  hold,  for  in  most  cases  distrust  was
intense  and  progressive.1

I  remember  once  being  asked  the  naive  question,  "Have  you
thought  that  you  may  have  been  hoaxed?"  This  fear  has  been  my
chief,  or  even  my  only,  anxiety  throughout  my  experiments ;  and
I  cannot  imagine  that  in  a  haunted  house,  when  strident  noises  and
cries  are  heard,  when  doors  open  and  shut,  that  the  sole  concern
of  straightforward  and  sensible  persons  should  not  be  to  find  out
whether  they  are  being  hoaxed  by  some  practical  joker  or  some

*The  justifiable  severity  shown  in  investigation  can  be  seen  by  reading  F.
Podmore's  criticism  (P.  S.  P.  R.t  xv,  98)  of  the  book,  The  Alleged  Haunting
of  B.  house,  Redway,  1899,  by  Miss  Goodrich  Freer  and  the  Marquis  of  Bute.

HAUNTINGS

593

rogue  who  wants  to  rob  them.  Hallucination  and  trickery  are  two
hypotheses  that  are  the  refuge  of  those  who  do  not  wish  to  admit
the  facts;  for  no  one  zvishes  to  admit  them,  and  we  naturally  re-
fuse to  accept  an  unusual  phenomenon.  Nevertheless  the  unusual
does  occur.  Once  the  facts  are  admitted,  the  next  thing  is  to  ex-
plain them ;  but  their  very  strangeness  defeats  our  endeavours.

When  a  phantom  appears  it  seems  natural  to  connect  the  fact
with  some  old  tragedy,  or  even  with  an  apprehension  of  death  that
has  survived  its  event.  One  is  tempted  to  suppose  an  intention  of
the  deceased  to  prove  his  presence.  This,  however,  is  probably  a
narrowly  anthropomorphic  notion ;  and  rather  than  suppose  the
problematical  survival  of  a  human  consciousness  and  vague  sym-
bolism of  human  intentions,  I  prefer  to  say  without  false  shame
that  /  do  not  understand.  I  therefore  prefer  to  remain  undecided,
remarking  that  my  indecision  is  not  directed  to  the  facts,  but  only
to  their  explanation.

The  stone-throwing,  broken  crockery,  banging  doors,  and  terri-
fying cries  are  all  so  absurd,  from  the  human  point  of  view,  that
the  hypothesis  of  intention  in  the  forces  that  produce  this  upset
of  domestic  objects  is  ridiculous  and  deserves  no  further  con-
sideration.

All  hypotheses  apart,  the  facts  that  emerge  from  a  study  of
hauntings  may  be  summed  up  as  follows  :

1.  In  some  places  phantoms  appear,  sometimes  to  several  per-
sons in  succession,  sometimes  collectively,  keeping  the  same  form
for  weeks,  or  even  months  together.  This  affirmation  is  not  yet
fully  established  and  some  scientific  doubt  is  necessary.

2.  In  certain  houses,  usually  without  any  phantom  being  per-
ceptible, there  are  noises  and  movements  of  objects  that  cannot
be  explained  rationally.  Most  frequently  these  phenomena  are
dependent  upon  some  person  who,  perhaps  without  knowing  or
willing  it,  plays  the  part  of  medium.  Just  as  a  medium  in  a  spirit-
ist seance  causes  displacements  of  chairs  and  musical  boxes,  so
mediums  (who  do  not  know  themselves  to  be  such)  cause  stones
to  fall  and  violent  blows  to  be  struck  on  the  walls.

This  second  statement  seems  to  me  impossible  to  dispute.

In  other  words  most  phenomena  of  haunting  are  due  to  spon-
taneous telekinesis;  but  just  because  experimental  telekinesis  rests
on  indisputable  proofs,  for  the  same  reason  should  spontaneous
telekinesis,  which  rests  on  relatively  infrequent  and  frail  testi-

594

PYSCHICAL  RESEARCH

mony,  be  subject  to  rigid  criticism.  The  phenomena  of  haunting
cannot  be  denied ;  we  must  even  admit  that  they  are  very  probably
true.  But  to  say  that  they  are  probably  true  is  to  say  that  they  are
not  certain.  Of  all  metapsychic  phenomena  these  are  the  most
questionable.

We  might  even  feel  constrained  to  deny  them  resolutely  were
it  not  that  they  are  buttressed  by  the  absolutely  certain  facts  of
ectoplasms,  premonitions,  telekinesis,  and  monitions.

BOOK  IV

Conclusion
I

I  have  now  reached  the  end  of  this  long  investigation.  I  have
endeavoured,  while  giving  a  place,  possibly  too  large  a  place,  to  my
own  researches,  to  collect  the  documentary  evidence  very  widely
scattered  in  many  records,  and  to  put  some  order  into  a  matter
which  up  to  the  present  has  never  been  synthetically  studied.  I
have  tried  to  extricate  the  sciences  anathematized  as  occult  from
the  chaos  in  which  they  were  involved,  and  to  put  in  a  clear  light
knowledge  that  official  science,  in  the  pride  of  its  reputation,  has
refused  to  consider.  It  has  seemed  to  me  that  the  time  has  come
to  claim  for  metapsychics  a  place  among  recognized  sciences  by
making  it  conform  to  the  rigour  and  the  logical  treatment  which
have  given  them  their  authority

Scientific  men  will  be  surprised,  and  perhaps  indignant.  But  if
they  have  the  wisdom — the  elementary  wisdom,  as  it  seems  to  me
— to  consent  to  read  this  long  and  laborious  study,  they  will  be
obliged  to  give  way  before  the  evidence.

My  intention  will  be  evident  from  the  contents  of  the  book.  I
have  desired,  while  eliminating  as  far  as  possible  everything
notoriously  uncertain,  and  expressly  stating  my  doubts  as  to  cer-
tain experiments,  to  present  facts  and  observations,  for  these
are  the  foundation  of  every  science.

Finally,  it  has  appeared  to  me,  as  it  will  doubtless  appear  to
every  impartial  reader,  that  there  are  too  many  well-verified  facts
and  rigorously  conducted  experiments  that  chance,  illusion,  or
fraud  should  always  be  attributed  to  all  these  facts  and  experi-
ments without  exception.

But  as  the  facts  are  very  strange  and  the  experiments  seem  to
clash  so  often  with  current  scientific  dogmas,  the  affirmations  made
will  give  rise  to  strongly  adverse  criticism  and  to  mocking  in-
credulity.  This  is  the  lot  of  all  new  ideas,  and  it  moves  me  not  at

595

596

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

all.  I  only  hope,  and  surely  this  is  not  asking  too  much,  that  I
shall  not  be  condemned  unread.  No  one  can  form  a  serious  and
considered  opinion  worthy  of  respect  by  casually  turning  over  the
leaves  of  a  book  that  sums  up  the  labours  of  two  hundred  honest
and  skilful  workers.  I  would  like  to  say  to  my  critics,  as  did
Themistocles,  "Strike,  but  listen."

It  troubles  me  more  than  in  the  camp  of  those  who  are  not
sceptical  I  shall  meet  with  very  strong  opposition.  On  the  one
hand  I  have  been  willing  to  narrate  many  surprising  facts  admitted
by  spiritualists,  and  on  the  other  hand  I  have  not  felt  able  to  adopt
their  theories;  for  I  have  always  sought  to  plant  my  feet  firmly
on  the  earth  and  have  preferred  a  rationalist  explanation  even
when  it  seems  improbable.  And,  frankly,  my  position  causes  me
some  pain.

In  very  many  cases  the  spiritist  hypothesis  is  obviously  absurd
— absurd  because  it  is  superfluous — and  again  absurd  because  it
assumes  that  human  beings  of  very  moderate  intelligence  survive
the  destruction  of  the  brain.  All  the  same,  in  certain  cases — rare
indeed,  but  whose  significance  I  do  not  disguise — there  are,  ap-
parently at  least,  intelligent  and  reasoned  intentions,  forces,  and
wills  in  the  phenomena  produced ;  and  the  power  has  all  the  char-
acter of  extraneous  energy  (see  p.  352,  children's  death-beds).

In  these  cases  the  spiritualist  explanation  is  much  the  simplest ;
or,  if  some  will  not  hear  of  that,  the  hypothesis  that  there  are  in-
telligent beings  that  interpose  in  our  lives  and  can  exercise  some
power  over  matter.

I  do  not  seek  to  attenuate  the  bearing  of  these  facts ;  but  I  can-
not adopt  the  inference  that  there  are  spirits — intelligences  out-
side human  intelligence.  My  inference  is  a  different  one;  it  is
that  the  human  personality  has  both  material  and  psychological
ponrrs  that  we  do  not  know.

And  as  this  hypothesis  by  no  means  satisfies  me,  I  will  add,  as  a
final  remark,  that  in  our  present  state  of  knowledge  we  are  not  in
a  position  to  understand.

II

Our  evolution  takes  place  in  the  midst  of  the  unknown;  but
nevertheless  two  leading  facts  have  been  placed  beyond  doubt:

I,  The  human  mind  has  other  sources  of  cognition  than  the
normal  senses — cryptesthesia.

CONCLUSION

597

2.  There  are  materializations— powers  that,  emerging  from  the
body,  can  take  form  and  act  as  if  they  were  material  bodies-
ectoplasms.

It  seems  to  me  that  we  can  go  no  farther  than  cryptesthesia  and
ectoplasms  without  being  lost  in  mists.

What  amazing  stories  I  have  heard,  told  me  by  witnesses  of  un-
questionable good  faith!  But  they  had  observed  with  greater
enthusiasm  than  critical  accuracy,  and  when  the  matter  concerns
highly  improbable  facts  we  cannot  be  satisfied  with  half  proofs,
with  experiments  that  are  almost  conclusive,  or  inferences  that
are  nearly  certain.  I  have  not  included  these  allegations  in  my
book,  even  when  I  have  reason  to  think  them  not  unfounded.  I
have  not  busied  myself  with  problematical  narratives,  so  that  while
some  may  think  me  too  credulous,  many  will  think  me  too  severely
critical.

Movement  without  contact,  clairvoyance,  phantoms,  and  pre-
monitions are  so  very  unusual  that  when  wre  first  hear  of  them  we
are  inclined  to  laugh  at  them.  Till  we  have  studied  them  we  laugh
and  deny.  This  was  my  state  of  mind  for  a  very  long  time  as  it
was  that  of  Crookes,  Lombroso,  Russel  Wallace,  Zollner,  Oliver
Lodge,  Morselli,  and  Bottazzi,  and  I  shall  therefore  be  in  no  way
surprised  should  my  account  of  parallel  facts  provoke  incredulity
and  mockery.  The  less  attention  is  given  to  reading,  the  greater
will  be  the  disposition  to  ridicule.

Moreover,  it  is  not  argument  that  will  bring  conviction.  Even
severe  mathematical  demonstration  does  not  always  convince.  We
must  be  accustomed  to  a  phenomenon  before  zve  can  accept  it.1

Ill

Perhaps — and  I  admit  it — the  innumerable  experiments  pub-
lished by  eminent  men  of  science  would  not  have  convinced  me,
had  I  not  been  a  witness  of  the  four  fundamental  facts  of  meta-
psychics.  I  was  an  unwilling  witness,  in  no  way  enthusiastic,  very
critical,  extremely  distrustful  of  the  facts  that  forced  themselves
upon  me.   I  was  able  to  verify,  under  unexceptionable  conditions

*M.  Thiers,  ex-president  of  the  French  Parliament,  having  determined  to
acquire  a  knowledge  of  mathematics  in  his  old  age,  rebelled  when  his  teacher
showed  him  that  the  section  of  any  cone  at  any  angle  with  the  axis  showed  a
regular  ellipse.  "Not  possible,"  he  said.  "When  a  sugar-loaf  is  cut  obliquely,
there  must  be  a  big  and  a  little  end."  Not  till  an  actual  sugar-loaf  had  been
brought  and  cut  would  he  admit  conviction.

598

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

and  despite  my  desire  to  disprove  them,  the  four  essential  facts  of
metapsychics.

These  four  personal  experiences,  all  four  of  which  carry  ob-
vious proof,  determined  my  belief,  and  that  not  at  once,  but  after
long  consideration,  meditation,  and  repetition :

A.  Cryptesthesia.  Stella,  in  presence  of  G.,  whose  family  she
does  not  and  cannot  have  known,  gave  the  first  names  of  his  son,
of  his  wife,  of  a  deceased  brother,  of  a  living  brother,  of  his
father-in-law,  and  of  the  locality  where  he  lived  as  a  child.

B.  Telekinesis.  While  Eusapia's  head  and  hands  were  held,  a
large  melon  weighing  six  pounds  was  moved  from  the  sideboard
to  the  table,  the  distance  between  them  being  over  a  yard.

C.  Ectoplasms.  Eusapia  was  in  half  light,  her  left  hand  in  my
right  and  her  right  in  my  left  tightly  held,  and  before  Lodge,
Myers,  and  Ochorowicz,  a  third  hand  stroked  my  face,  pinched  my
nose,  pulled  my  hair,  and  gave  a  smack  on  my  shoulder  heard  by
Ochorowicz,  Myers,  and  Lodge.

D.  Premonitions.  Alice,  at  2  p.m.  told  me,  for  the  first  and
only  time,  that  I  should  soon  give  way  to  violent  anger  before
one,  two,  three  persons  whom  she  designated  with  her  hand  as  if
she  saw  them.  At  6  p.m.  the  unlikely  and  unforeseeable  imperti-
nence of  a  person  absolutely  unknown  to  Alice  provoked  me  to  one
of  the  strongest  and  most  justifiable  fits  of  anger  of  my  whole  life
before  two  other  persons,  an  anger  that  led  to  my  receiving  a  chal-
lenge to  a  duel,  the  only  one  I  have  ever  received.

These  four  experiences,  by  their  precision  and  faultlessness,
sufficed,  if  not  to  produce  conviction,  at  least  the  beginnings  of
conviction.  As  will  be  obvious,  from  reading  the  book,  I  have  had
many  other  proofs,  but  in  this  summary  I  mention  only  one  of
the  most  characteristic  of  each  kind.

IV

These  four  personal  experiences  amount  to  nothing,  just  noth-
ing, compared  with  the  multiple  proofs  that  other  men  of  science
have  brought  forward.  An  edifice  cannot  be  built  on  four  little
stones,  however  solid  they  may  be;  and  the  reader  who  has  not,
like  me,  had  the  happy  opportunity  of  similar  experiences  will  re-
quire proofs,  if  not  stronger,  at  any  rate  more  numerous,  and  will
need  other  testimony  than  mine.

Testimony  is  abundant  and  proofs  innumerable.  Decisive

CONCLUSIONS

599

proofs  are  repeated  daily.  In  this  book,  which  is  a  collection  of
facts  rather  than  an  exposition  of  doctrine,  I  have  intentionally
multiplied  instances  at  the  risk  of  producing  weariness  and  bore-
dom. The  authority  of  the  witnesses  and  the  mass  of  repeated
proofs  are  such  that  doubt  is  not  warranted.  Cryptesthesia,  tele-
kinesis, ectoplasms,  and  premonition  seem  to  me  founded  on
granite;  that  is  to  say,  on  hundreds  of  exact  observations  and
hundreds  of  rigorous  experiments.  The  thing  is  a  certainty ;  and
even  though  among  these  thousands  of  observations  there  may  be
defects,  gaps,  errors,  and  illusions,  sometimes  mistakes  of  testi-
mony, occasionally  trickeries,  more  often  casual  coincidence,  still
more  often  ill-considered  assertions,  still  the  thing  is  certain.  It
is  not  possible  that  all  these  observers  should  never  have  made
mistakes,  but  the  whole  constitutes  a  sheaf  of  testimony  so  large
and  homogeneous,  that  no  criticism  of  details,  however  acute,  will
be  able  to  disintegrate  and  disperse.
Therefore:

1.  There  is  in  us  a  faculty  of  cognition  that  differs  radically
from  the  usual  sensorial  faculties  (Cryptesthesia).

2.  There  are,  even  in  full  light,  movements  of  objects  without
contact  (Telekinesis).

3.  Hands,  bodies,  and  objects  seem  to  take  shape  in  their  en-
tirety from  a  cloud  and  take  all  the  semblance  of  life  (Ecto-
plasms).

4.  There  occur  premonitions  that  can  be  explained  neither  by
chance  nor  perspicacity,  and  are  sometimes  verified  in  minute
detail.  Such  are  my  firm  and  explicit  conclusions.  I  cannot  go
beyond  them.

V

Thus  it  seems  to  me  that  the  general  conclusions  of  meta-
psychics  are  rigorously  true.  I  even  go  so  far  as  to  think  that
many  phenomena  indicated  in  this  book  as  still  doubtful  (for  when
proof  has  seemed  to  me  less  than  rigorous  I  have  suspected  and
gone  near  to  denying  them)  may  soon  be  recognized  as  authentic.
Metapsychic  science  will  go  much  farther  than  I  have  ventured  to
think.  I  have  wished  to  err  on  the  side  of  prudence,  accepting
only  that  which  has  been  proved,  and  well  proved,  twenty  times
or  more.  Official  scientists  will  certainly  find  me  too  credulous;
still  more  certainly  spiritualists  and  occultists  will  find  me  terribly
sceptical.

600

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

To  imagine  that  all  metapsychics  are  but  illusion  is  to  suppose
that  William  Crookes,  A.  R.  Wallace,  Lombroso,  Zollner,  F.  W.
H.  Myers,  Oliver  Lodge,  Aksakoff,  J.  Ochorowicz,  J.  Maxwell,
Boutleroff,  Du  Prel,  William  James,  Morselli,  Bottazzi,  Bozzano,
Flammarion,  A.  de  Rochas,  A.  de  Gramont,  Schrenck-Notzing,
and  William  Barrett  were  all,  without  exception,  liars  or  im-
beciles ;  it  is  to  suppose  that  two  hundred  distinguished  observers
less  eminent,  perhaps,  but  persons  of  high  and  acute  intelligence,
were  also  liars  or  imbeciles.

VI

Why  should  men  of  science,  whether  mathematicians,  chemists,
or  physiologists,  oppose  cryptesthesia  and  ectoplasms  ?  Are  these
new  facts  in  contradiction  with  the  old  facts?

I  lay  stress  on  this,  because  men  do  not  distinguish  sufficiently
between  a  contradiction  and  a  new  affirmation.

Nothing  in  metapsychics  is  in  contradiction  with  official  science ;
but  there  are  new  affirmations.

Psycho-physiology  teaches  that  cognizance  of  things  reaches
us  through  our  senses ;  that  if  the  retina  is  excited  there  is  a  visual
sensation;  if  Corti's  membrane,  an  auditive  one.  But  psycho-
physiology  has  never  attempted  to  demonstrate,  and  could  never
demonstrate,  that  no  other  (unusual)  channels  of  cognition  can
exist.  It  would  be  a  contradiction  to  say  that  excitation  of  the
retina  does  not  produce  a  visual  image,  but  it  is  not  a  contradic-
tion to  maintain  that  there  may  be  a  visual  image  without  retinal
excitation.

In  other  words,  Science  establishes  positive  facts,  and  there  she
is  all-powerful.  She  is  not,  however,  justified  in  formulating  one
single  negation,  for  at  every  moment  she  is  confronted  by  pro-
found mysteries.  Therefore  when  new  facts  supported  by  many
irrefragable  proofs  are  brought  forward,  the  new  facts  being  posi-
tive facts  that  do  not  contradict  the  old  positive  facts,  lovers  of
truth  ought  to  bow  before  them  and  receive  them  joyfully.

Taken  for  all  in  all  nothing  is  simpler  than  cryptesthesia;  no
more  need  be  accepted  than  that  the  human  mind  has  means  of
cognition  other  than  our  five  poor  senses.  This  is  not  an  extraor-
dinarily bold  assertion,  and  cannot  be  rejected  a  priori.  To  deny
this  a  priori  is  to  dare  to  assert  that  those  five  poor  senses  delimit
the  knowable.

CONCLUSION

601

The  case  for  ectoplasms  and  telekinesis  is  the  same.  No  more
need  be  accepted  than  that  in  the  immensity  of  the  Cosmos  there
may  be  intelligent  energies  (human  or  non-human)  that  can  act
on  matter.  This  also  is  not  a  very  rash  hypothesis.  What  is  rash
is  not  to  suppose  that  such  forces  exist,  but  to  affirm  that  they
do  not.

What  man  of  science  worthy  of  the  name  could  affirm  that
science  has  classified,  analyzed,  and  penetrated  all  the  energies  of
immeasurable  nature,  or  could  make  the  strange  and  pretentious
claim  that  we  know  all  the  dynamic  manifestations  in  the  world!
A  mere  glance  over  the  list  of  possible  vibrations  of  the  Ether,
itself  a  hypothesis  and  a  mystery,  shows  many  of  which  we  know
nothing;  and  is  it  not  foolish  to  aver  that  all  the  phenomena  in
the  universe  can  be  only  vibrations  of  Ether?

To  admit  telekinesis  and  ectoplasms  is  not  to  destroy  even  the
smallest  fragment  of  science ;  it  is  but  to  admit  new  data,  and  that
there  are  unknown  energies.  Then  why  be  indignant,  when,  on
the  basis  of  thousands  of  observations  and  experiments,  we  affirm
one  of  those  unknown  energies  ?

Everything  that  is  not  in  formal  contradiction  with  known
facts  is  possible.  Well,  materializations  and  telekinesis  do  not
contradict  one  single  established  scientific  fact.  That  a  hand
having  all  the  attributes  of  a  living  hand  should  be  formed  from
a  whitish  cloud  in  no  way  nullifies  the  laws  of  circulation,  nutri-
tion, and  structure  of  a  normal  hand.  It  is  new  fact  but  not  a
contradictory  one.

VII

It  is  true  that  in  this  terrifying  science  of  metapsychics  there
is  one  fact  more  terrible  than  others — Premonition.  This  is  estab-
lished by  sure  proofs,  but  it  is  incomprehensible  by  us.  Our
psychological  constitution  forbids  the  concept  that  future  events
are  as  determinate  as  past  events,  and  that  inexorable  fatality
regulates  human  and  non-human  affairs  shown  to  the  smallest  de-
tail. We  shall  not  seek  to  explore  farther  into  this  abyss.  Un-
questionably premonition  is  not  in  contradiction  with  scientific
data;  but  (and  this  is  perhaps  more  formidable)  it  clashes  strongly
with  our  consciousness,  for  that  consciousness  refuses  to  admit
the  inevitability  of  that  which  is  yet  to  come.

We  shall  therefore  attempt  neither  explanation  nor  justification
of  premonitions.    We  shall  keep  within  the  boundary  of  positive

602

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

facts;  establishing  these  without  concerning  ourselves  with  the
inferences  they  involve  and  without  deducing  nebulous  theories.
Our  function  is  to  know  what  actually  is,  not  what  is  possible.
Sir  William  Crookes  so  stated  the  problem,  and  we  shall  follow
his  lead.

VIII

We  have  demonstrated  the  reality  of  the  facts,  but  this  is  only
a  first  step.  A  fact  by  itself  is  a  small  thing  unless  it  be  linked
logically  with  homologous  facts,  so  that  a  coherent  relation  with
seemingly  disparate  phenomena  emerges  to  view  with  an  outline
at  least  of  a  tenable  theory.  We  are  therefore  constrained,  the
facts  being  demonstrated,  to  discuss  theories  if  only  to  discover
the  profound  significance  of  the  facts.

We  shall  be  brief,  though  innumerable  ponderous  volumes  have
been  written  on  metapsychic  theories.

At  the  outset  it  must  be  laid  down  that  in  order  to  construct  a
complete  theory  of  metapsychics  it  is  not  sufficient  to  establish
one  that  satisfies  cryptesthesia,  another  for  telekinesis,  and  a  third
for  ectoplasms.  Any  tenable  theory  must  give  some  sort  of  syn-
thetic explanation  of  all  three.  The  more  we  study  the  complex
details  of  these  phenomena,  the  closer  their  connection  is  seen  to
be.

Many  scientific  men,  notably  the  distinguished  members  of  the
S.  P.  R.  (especially  F,  Podmore  and  H.  Sidgwick)  thought  at
first  that  everything  could  be  reduced  to  telepathy ;  that  is,  in  final
analysis,  to  a  cerebral  vibration  in  an  individual  A,  corresponding
to  a  cerebral  vibration  in  another  individual,  B.  According  to  them
telepathy  explained  everything.  But  today  Sir  William  Barrett
and  Sir  Oliver  Lodge  think  quite  otherwise.

Telepathy  is  a  phenomenon  whose  extent  may  be  fantastically
exaggerated.  Distance  counts  for  nothing,  and  an  emotion  in  A
may  be  transmitted  to  B,  even  if  there  is  a  thousand  miles  between
them.  And  moreover  for  this  transmission  to  occur  it  is  not
necessary  that  either  A  or  B  should  be  conscious  of  the  vibrations
that  move  their  minds.  Will  and  consciousness  have  no  part  in  the
phenomena;  it  suffices  that  an  ancient  memory  of  which  it  is
entirely  ignorant  should  be  buried  in  A's  consciousness  for  it  to
be  transmitted  to  B.   The  consciousness  of  both  may  equally  be

CONCLUSION

603

unaware  of  the  whole  proceeding.  This  clearing-house  is  in  the
subconsciousness.

If  all  that  is  claimed  for  telepathy  is  to  be  accepted,  the  full
implications  of  this  ambitious  but  frail  theory  must  be  realized.
Since  a  human  thought,  however  unconscious,  however  distant,
or  however  ancient,  can  react  upon  another  human  thought,  it
suffices  that  as  soon  as  B  experiences  an  emotion  or  a  cognition,
there  should  be  anywhere  on  this  planet  another  person,  A,  having
the  same  emotion  or  cognition,  to  explain  that  of  B.  It  follows
that  telepathy  can  always,  or  nearly  always,  be  invoked,  and  that  A,
however  indifferent,  however  distant,  or  however  unconscious
he  may  be,  has  transmitted  this  emotion  to  B.  The  facts  that
are  or  have  been  unknown  to  any  living  person  are  few  indeed.

This  theory  seems  to  me  dangerously  exclusive.  In  several  of
the  preceding  chapters,  instances  of  super-normal  consciousness
(cryptesthesia)  have  been  given  that  cannot  be  explained  by
telepathy.

In  the  first  place,  premonitions,  without  exception.  In  these
there  is  no  room  for  telepathy,  since  neither  A  nor  B  can  know
the  future  by  ordinary  means.

But  even  outside  premonitions  there  are  sometimes  astonishing
divinations,  reproductions  of  drawings  taken  at  random  from
among  many  others,  and  cognitions  of  words  that  no  one  knows
of.  Drawings  in  an  envelope  have  been  presented  to  a  sensitive
for  reproduction,  and  occasionally  (the  experiment  being  then
still  more  rigorous)  the  experimenter  has  been  unaware  of  the
contents  of  the  envelope,  so  that  no  person  living  or  dead  knows
the  particular  design  to  be  guessed  by  B.  Second-sight,  lucidity,
clairvoyance  (hellsehcn),  cryptesthesia,  as  I  prefer  to  call  it,  are
therefore  actualities  that  telepathy  cannot  explain.  In  the  numer-
ous experiments  with  Mrs.  Piper  many  curious  and  very  pre-
cise details  were  given  on  distant  families,  details  that  were  un-
known to  the  persons  questioning  Mrs.  Piper.

To  read  the  many  accounts  of  monitions  given  above  is  to  per-
ceive that  in  at  least  one-third  of  the  cases,  telepathy  (even  allow-
ing it  an  extreme  and  almost  absurd  extension)  does  not  suffice
to  explain  the  cognition  sometimes  shown  by  a  sensitive  of  things
that  no  normal  intelligence  could  be  aware  of.

Far  from  denying  telepathy  we  strongly  affirm  that  it  exists,
and  even  that  it  is  one  of  the  most  incontestable  facts  of  meta-
psychology.    An  emotion,  a  thought,  and  (more  extraordinary

604

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

still)  a  name,  a  number,  or  a  drawing  can  be  transmitted  from
A  to  B.  If,  as  it  seems  to  me,  cryptesthesia  is  the  cognition  of
the  actual,  then  human  thought,  being  itself  an  actuality,  can  pro-
voke cryptesthesia.

Telepathy  is  therefore  only  a  particular  case  of  cryptesthesia.
I  even  think  that  among  the  unknown  vibrations  that  bring  crypt-
esthesia into  action,  human  thought  is  one  of  those  that  can  most
easily  be  transmitted.

If  the  word  telepathy  is  held  to  mean  that  there  is  synchronous
and  synergetic  vibrations  of  two  human  thoughts,  it  is  a  hypothe-
sis. Cryptesthesia,  on  the  contrary,  is  not  a  hypothesis.  It  is  a
word  indicating  a  fact.  Truth  to  tell,  it  is  nothing  but  a  word,
since  it  signifies  a  means  of  cognition  unknown  to  us.  But  till  the
true  theory  comes,  the  fact  must  suffice.

In  any  case,  telepathy  presupposes  cryptesthesia,  since  the
faculty  that  enables  it  to  receive  the  vibrations  of  another's
thought  implies  a  new  and  incomprehensible  function.  That  a
drawing  known  to  A,  enclosed  in  an  opaque  envelope,  should  be
reproduced  by  B  is  entirely  mysterious,  and  the  mystery  is  no
deeper  if  A  holding  the  drawing  has  no  idea  what  it  may  be;  per-
haps, indeed,  the  mental  vibration  of  A  in  visualizing  a  drawing
is  actually,  in  itself,  more  obscure  than  the  clear  outlines  of  a
drawing  locked  away  in  a  box.

After  all,  it  does  not  signify  whether  one  or  the  other  difficulty
is  the  greater — the  facts  are  there,  the  brutal  facts,  ordering  us
to  accept  botli  cryptesthesia  and  telepathy.  All  that  can  be  con-
ceded is  that  telepathy  is  a  special  and  frequent  case  of  cryptes-
thesia.

IX

When  we  speak  of  a  mysterious  faculty  of  cognition,  saying
no  more,  we  do  but  state  our  ignorance:  and  this  ignorance  is
coextensive  with  cryptesthesia;  we  cannot  assign  limits  to  it.

Mrs.  Piper  speaks  to  Mrs.  Verrall  of  an  Aunt  Susan,  born  in
1791,  who  had  in  her  house  a  portrait  of  her  son  painted  in  oils.
This  was  a  fact  that  Mrs.  Verrall  did  not  know  and  never  had
known.  How  did  this  precise  and  insignificant  fact  reach  Mrs.
Piper's  mind?  A  hypothesis  has  been  put  forward  that  so-called
inert  things  emit  special  vibrations,  emanations  of  some  kind,
which  excite  cryptesthesia  in  sensitives,  though  they  do  not  affect
the  normal  senses.

CONCLUSION

605

The  emanations  from  subterranean  springs  or  metals  moving
the  dowser's  rod  are  good  examples  of  this.  Since  there  is  one
rhabdic  force  some  of  whose  laws  are  known,  why  should  there
not  be  others  ?

A  ring  worn  by  Martin's  grandmother  has  retained  some  ef-
fluvia of  this  woman  so  that  the  sensitive  to  whom  this  ring  is
given  will  say  something  about  her — a  name,  a  detail  of  her  dress,
a  long-forgotten  accident,  a  trait  of  character.  This  has  been
called  psychometry,  a  very  incorrect  term,  to  which  I  prefer  "prag-
matic cryptesthesia,"  meaning  a  sensibility  to  emanations  from
things.

It  is  quite  possible  that  there  may  be  emanations  from  things;
but  in  many  cases  lucidity  comes  into  play  without  (apparently)
any  material  object  to  awaken  it.  If,  for  some  few  cases  of  haunt-
ing, it  may  be  supposed  that  the  objects  in  a  house  have  retained,
as  it  were,  a  vapour  emanating  from  those  who  have  dwelt  in  it,
this  supposition  is  very  far  from  accounting  for  all  the  phenomena,
and  the  hypothesis  applies  only  to  a  very  few  particular  cases.

The  hypothesis  of  emanations  is  perhaps  partially  applicable,
but  is  nearly  always  inadequate  ;  it  may  help  to  explain  some  cases,
but  for  most  of  the  phenomena  of  cryptesthesia  it  is  inoperative.

X

As  a  second  hypothesis,  it  may  be  supposed  that  sometimes  the
normal  human  senses  may  attain  a  prodigious  acuity;  so  that
visual  sensibility  may  become  so  sharp  as  to  distinguish  clearly  a
drawing  in  an  opaque  envelope,  or  auditory  sensibility  may  be-
come so  keen  as  to  hear  the  ticking  of  a  watch  600  miles  away.

This  hyperesthesia  is  not  altogether  absurd;  it  would  only
be  an  extraordinary  extension  of  a  normal  faculty,  and  there  are
some  very  rare  cases  of  cryptesthesia  that  seem  of  a  kind  best  to
be  explained  by  superacuity  of  the  senses,  or  perhaps  of  their
transposition.  But  in  most  cases  no  sensorial  hyperesthesia,  how-
ever great,  would  cover  the  facts,  for  there  is  very  much  more
than  vision  and  audition  at  a  distance.

XI

A  third  and  very  simple  hypothesis  now  presents  itself.  It  has
been  adopted  from  the  first  with  unreflecting  enthusiasm.  It  is  that
the  mind  of  the  sensitive  is  invaded,  possessed,  and  replaced  by

606

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

another  mind — that  of  a  deceased  person  whose  intelligence  and
consciousness  are  not  dead.  George  Pelham  after  his  death  con-
tinues to  exist  as  a  spirit,  which  then  speaks  by  the  brain,  the
larynx,  and  the  lips  of  Mrs.  Piper,  who  is  the  intermediary  (med-
ium) between  the  world  of  the  living  and  the  world  of  the  dead.

We  have  now  come  to  the  spiritist  hypothesis.

It  is  neither  to  be  desired  nor  feared.  When  we  devote  our-
selves to  the  high  task  of  seeking  pure  truth,  we  ought  not  to  be
intimidated  by  the  opinion  of  the  crowd,  nor  allured  by  any  ob-
scure desire  for  personal  immortality.

The  spiritist  theory,  disencumbered  from  superstitions  that
weaken  it,  may  be  expressed  in  a  few  words.

"The  human  mind  is  not  annihilated  at  the  moment  of  death.
It  continues  to  evolve  in  a  world  that  is  not  conditioned  by  space
and  time.  This  mind,  retaining  some  of  the  characteristics  that  it
had  during  life — its  individuality,  its  consciousness,  and  its  per-
sonality— can  manifest  itself  through  certain  privileged  living  per-
sons, by  taking  possession  of  their  body  (brain,  muscles,  and
nerves)  ;  it  then  writes,  sees,  thinks,  and  speaks  as  in  the  time
when  it  was  incarnate  in  flesh.  The  minds  of  the  dead  know  things
near  and  far,  past,  present,  or  even  future.  They  can  speak
languages  unknown  to  their  medium,  can  compose  verses,  solve
problems,  and  discuss  questions,  when  the  medium,  left  to  him-
self, would  be  incapable  of  composing  those  verses,  solving  those
problems,  or  discussing  those  questions.  The  consciousness  of
the  Self  has  not  disappeared ;  for  there  is  no  true  survival  without
consciousness  of  the  Self.

"Thus,  when  the  consciousness  of  George  Pelham  is  substituted
for  that  of  Mrs.  Piper,  Mrs.  Piper  knows  all  that  the  discarnate
knew.  When  George  Pelham  takes  possession  there  is  no  more
Mrs.  Piper;  there  is  only  George  Pelham.

"To  account  for  all  that  George  Pelham  does  by  'lucidity'  is  to
give  lucidity  an  enormous  and  improbable  extension ;  it  is  simpler
to  make  one  single  hypothesis — the  survival  of  George  Pelham,
and  his  incarnation  in  Mrs.  Piper.

"Since  man  does  not  die,  he  cannot  be  born.  It  follows  that
there  is  no  birth  for  minds  (Allan  Kardec).  Discarnate  minds
are  incorporate  in  children  who  have  just  been  born.  Till  then
they  wander  in  the  world,  in  the  Beyond,  painfully  seeking  to
manifest,  sometimes  incarnating  in  young  children  about  to  be
born,  sometimes  acting  through  mediums."

CONCLUSION

607

"There  is  no  death,"  said  Florence  Marryat.  "On  ne  meurt
pas/'  wrote  Chevreul.

The  hypothesis  is  frank  and  clear.  By  conferring  omniscience
on  spirits  it  explains  most  of  the  facts,  but  it  involves  so  many
improbabilities  that,  despite  its  seeming  simplicity,  I  find  myself
unable  to  adopt  it.  Nevertheless  I  oppose  it  half-heartedly,  for  I
am  quite  unable  to  bring  forward  any  wholly  satisfactory  counter-
theory.

1.  Everything  seems  to  prove  that  the  intelligence  is  a  function
of  the  brain,  that  it  depends  on  the  integrity  of  the  cerebral
mechanism,  and  on  the  volume  and  quality  of  the  blood  that
irrigates  it.

It  is  possible,  it  is  even  probable,  that  there  may  exist  in  nature
other  intelligences  under  other  conditions  than  the  physical  con-
ditions of  terrestrial  life;  but  they  would  no  longer  be  human  in-
telligences. Consequently,  should  they  desire  to  enter  into  rela-
tions with  us,  they  would  pity  our  coarse  but  inevitable  anthro-
pomorphism, and,  in  order  to  be  understood,  would  have  to  clothe
themselves  in  human  names  and  human  sentiments.  But  they
would  not  belong  to  humanity,  since  the  mind,  whether  human  or
animal,  can  possess  the  human  psychological  characteristics  of
consciousness,  memory,  sensibility,  reason,  and  will  only  if  the
brain  exists.  Thousands  and  thousands  .of  experiments  establish
so  close  a  relation  between  the  brain  as  organ  and  intelligence  as
function,  that  it  is  as  impossible  to  admit  the  persistence  of  the
function  (mind)  without  the  organ  (brain)  as  the  renal  secretion
without  the  kidney.

2.  The  word  "survival"  means  survival  of  consciousness;  for
in  the  absence  of  consciousness  and  memory,  survival  has  no  in-
terest for  us.  We  are  well  aware  that  the  atoms  of  carbon,  phos-
phorus, hydrogen,  oxygen,  nitrogen,  and  sulphur  that  make  up
our  bodies  are  immortal,  but  what  is  that  to  us?  The  animistic
survival  of  some  hypothetical  vital  force  or  soul,  if  the  memory
of  my  Self  has  vanished,  concerns  me  no  more  than  the  survival
of  the  phosphorus  in  my  brain.  Now  innumerable  facts  have
proved  that  memory  is  a  function  that  very  soon  disappears,  that
asphyxia,  anaemia,  and  poisons  impair  it  immediately;  it  is  ex-
tremely frail ;  it  diminishes  rapidly  with  advancing  age.  To  sur-
vive without  remembrance  of  the  old  Self  is  not  to  survive  at  all.

And  what  is  it  that  is  to  survive?  Will  the  old  man  who  has
fallen  into  second  childhood  have  the  Self  of  his  intellectual  prime

608

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

or  the  Self  of  his  decrepitude?  Will  the  Self  of  a  person  who
stammered  continue  to  stammer  in  the  Beyond  ?   What  puerility !

Materlinck  has  expressed  this  in  admirable  words,  "This  1/  so
uncertain,  so  fugitive,  and  so  precarious,  evading  all  definition,  is
so  entirely  the  centre  of  our  being,  and  interests  us  so  exclusively,
that  all  the  realities  of  life  fade  when  confronted  with  that
phantasm.  If  remembrance  of  certain  facts,  nearly  always  in-
significant, does  not  accompany  us  ...  it  is  nothing  to  me  that  the
highest,  freest,  and  noblest  parts  of  my  mind  should  shine,  living
and  eternal,  in  supreme  bliss;  they  are  not  Me;  I  do  not  know
them.  Death  has  cut  the  links  of  nerves,  or  the  memories  that
bound  them  to  that  unknown  central  point  at  which  I  feel  myself
complete."

This  does  not  signify  negation  of  any  intelligent  energies  apart
from  a  brain ;  but  such  hypothetical  intelligent  forces,  independent
of  a  material  substratum,  have  nothing  in  common  with  human
minds.

3.  There  are  all  degrees  between  the  almost  perfect  re-consti-
tution of  a  vanished  human  personality  such  as  George  Pelham
(though  this  is  very  rare  and  G.  P.'s  case  nearly  unique)  and  the
creation  of  obviously  factitious  personalities,  which  is  very  com-
mon and  frequently  observed.

I  suggest  to  A.  that  she  is  a  little  girl  named  Madelon  Martin,
neither  the  name  nor  personality  having  any  reality  except  in  my
fancy,  and  forthwith  she  becomes  Madelon  Martin.  If  by  chance
a  Madelon  Martin  has  existed,  or  still  exists,  and  A.  has  known
her,  she  will  at  once  reproduce  her  characteristics  with  marvel-
lous fidelity.  What  is,  then,  the  cause  for  surprise  if,  by  some
unforeseen  auto-suggestion,  Mrs.  Piper  has  thought  herself  to
be  George  Pelham,  and  then,  by  her  wonderful  powers  of  crypt-
esthesia,  she  should  reproduce  the  tastes,  the  intonations,  the  pas-
sions, and  the  remembrances  of  George  Pelham?

Assuredly  if  George  Pelham  was  never  known  to  A.,  and  she
faithfully  reproduces  his  thought,  we  must  ascribe  to  A.  intense
and  amazing  powers  of  cryptesthesia.  (This  is  permissible,  for
its  limits  are  unknown.)  Then  the  personality  of  George  Pelham
will  seem  to  be  reconstituted  integrally,  and  yet  this  personality,
in  spite  of  his  reiterated  affirmations,  may  be  as  factitious  as  the
others.  Perhaps  this  personification  of  George  Pelham  is  due  only
to  a  splendid  and  far-reaching  lucidity.

As  all  degrees  of  personification  are  observed,  the  manifesting

CONCLUSION

609

personalities  rarely  or  never  show  such  strong  individuality  as  did
George  Pelham,  so  conformable  to  the  actual  person  who  lived.
Sometimes,  as  in  the  case  of  Phinuit,  G.  P.'s  predecessor,  the  per-
sonalities produced  are  imaginary.  John  King  is  probably  a  fanci-
ful creation  of  Eusapia ;  and  Rector,  Imperator,  and  Mentor  are
fanciful  creations  of  Stainton  Moses.  The  queerest  personalities
can  easily  be  evoked  by  hypnotic  suggestions.  The  only  difference
between  the  somnambule  and  the  medium  is  that  while  the  actions

-ptnUPCLCqtuO

3*.

Lm  Syndic  ,

Fig.  25. — Comparison  of  the  authentic  signatures  of  the  Syndic  Chaumontet  and
the  Cure  Burnier  with  those  written  by  Helen  Smith.    The  top  and
bottom  lines  are  from  Helen's  hand.

(After  Flournoy,  he.  cit.,  p.  409.)

of  the  former  are  due  to  the  verbal  suggestion  of  the  magnetizer,
those  of  the  latter  are  due  to  an  auto-suggestion  whose  origin  is
unknown.  Since  it  is  impossible  to  accept  as  authentic  the  child-
ish personifications  of  common  hypnotism,  why  should  we  accept
those  that  are  a  little  more  perfect?  The  transition  from  the  one
to  the  other  is  gradual;  where  are  we  to  stop?  What  criterion
have  we  for  saying  "This  one  is  true,  that  is  imaginary  ?"  We  see
so  many  that  are  obviously  imaginary  that  we  can  scarcely  avoid
the  inference  that  all  are.

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

The  ease  and  frequency  with  which  factitious  personalities  are
produced  renders  the  production  of  real  personifications  very
doubtful.

We  may  hesitate  a  moment  when  Helen  accurately  reproduces
Burnier's  signature,  for  she  signs  like  Burnier,  whose  writing  she
has  doubtless  never  seen ;  but  she  also  incarnates  Cagliostro  and
Marie  Antoinette!  Why,  then,  should  the  personification  of  Bur-
nier be  more  real  than  that  of  Marie  Antoinette,  of  Cagliostro,  of
an  Indian  prince,  or  any  other  of  the  manifestly  imaginary  crea-
tions ?  The  similitude  of  writing  need  not  trouble  us ;  for  there
is  nothing  to  show  that  cryptesthesia  may  not  extend  even  to  that :
Helen  Smith  sees  before  her  the  signature  of  Burnier  by  her
cryptesthesia  and  then  she  imagines  herself  to  be  Burnier  in  virtue
of  the  natural  tendency  of  mediums  to  impersonate.

T.  Flournoy,  to  whom  we  owe  an  admirable  study  of  Helen
Smith,  does  not  even  go  so  far  as  to  admit  cryptesthesia.  He
supposes  that  there  is  a  revival  of  an  old  remembrance,  and  thinks
(without,  however,  advancing  any  proof)  that  Helen  Smith  must
have  seen  a  signature  of  Burnier  at  some  time  or  other.  In  order
to  reach  this  point  he  is  obliged  to  make  a  long  series  of  unlikely
suppositions.  It  seems  to  me  more  reasonable  to  admit  cryptes-
thesia, proved  by  thousands  of  observations  and  experiments,  and
extremely  probable  in  an  excellent  medium  like  Helen  Smith.

Therefore  though  I  hold  the  opinion  of  Flournoy  in  much  re-
spect, I  cannot  agree  that  the  name  and  the  signature  of  Burnier
are  to  be  accounted  for  by  accumulated  and  forgotten  impressions.
It  seems  to  me  a  phenomenon  of  lucidity.  But  I  shall  not  infer
incarnation  because  there  is  lucidity.

Highly  also  as  I  esteem  the  opinions  of  my  distinguished  friend,
Sir  Oliver  Lodge,  I  cannot  think  survival  the  most  probable  ex-
planation in  Raymond's  case.  It  seems,  on  the  contrary,  that  if
flashes  of  lucidity  are  admitted  (and  the  reality  of  lucidity  is  not
disputed)  and  also  symbolization ;  if  it  is  recognized  that  mediums
have  an  invincible  tendency  to  reconstitute  former  personalities,  we
come  in  the  end  to  less  improbable  hypotheses  than  that  of  survival.

4.  Cryptesthesia  comes  into  play  without  any  necessity  for  sup-
posing that  a  discarnate  human  being  is  speaking  by  the  voice  or
writing  by  the  hand  of  the  medium.  Details  about  living  persons
have  been  furnished  which  in  no  way  imply  the  existence  of  a
vanished  entity.  When  Mrs.  Thompson  sees  the  word  Carquei-
ranne  on  the  forehead  of  M.  Moutonnier  it  is  unnecessary  to

CONCLUSION

611

suppose  that  Nelly  showed  her  this.  The  hypothesis  that  Nelly
has  survived  serves  no  purpose.  Nelly  is  an  imaginary  being
who  greatly  facilitates  experiment,  but  is  not  necessary  to  it;  it
is  scarcely  a  working  hypothesis,  since  this  complication  is  not
required.  Mrs.  Thompson  on  taking  my  son's  watch  says,  "Three
generations  mingled."  Nelly  is  speaking,  but  Nelly  is  only  a  sym-
bol;  the  reality  is  Mrs.  Thompson  speaking  and  using  her  fine
faculty  of  cryptesthesia ;  there  is  no  need  to  bring  in  the  person-
ality of  her  granddaughter.

Phinuit,  speaking  by  the  voice  of  Mrs.  Piper,  has  given  extraor-
dinary instances  of  cryptesthesia,  as  good  as,  if  not  better  than,
those  of  George  Pelham,  but  Phinuit  is  obviously  a  creation  of
Mrs.  Piper's  mind.  There  was  never  any  French  doctor  at  Metz
by  the  name  of  Phinuit.  Phinuit  never  existed ;  he  is  Mrs.  Piper.
George  Pelham,  who  is  neither  more  nor  less  lucid  than  Phinuit,
is  Mrs.  Piper  in  a  lucid  state.  Then  everything  that  she  knows
by  cryptesthesia  about  George  Pelham,  who  once  existed  but
whose  consciousness  vanished  when  his  heart  ceased  to  beat,  crys-
tallizes round  this  personality  of  George  Pelham.

5.  When  these  entities  manifest  they  make  mistakes,  trifle  so
childishly,  forget  so  much,  and  show  such  reticences,  that  it  is  im-
possible to  suppose  that  the  spirit  of  a  deceased  person  has
returned.

It  is  true  that  there  is  nothing  that  obliges  us  to  attribute  to
the  personalities  of  the  departed  the  same  feelings,  the  same
modes  of  reasoning,  and  the  same  judgments  that  they  had  on
earth.  But  then  the  resemblance  of  sentiments  and  reasonings
verified  in  certain  cases  must  not  be  brought  into  the  argument,
since  in  the  majority  of  instances  this  resemblance  is  outrageously
wanting.  These  personages  take  pleasure  in  absurd  jokes  and
childish  plays  on  words,  and  make  up  sentences  that  resemble
puns.  I  do  not  know  who  it  was  that  said,  "If  survival  involves
having  the  mentality  of  a  discarnate,  I  prefer  not  to  survive."
These  are  rags  and  tatters  of  intelligence,  and,  with  few  excep-
tions, of  a  low-grade  intelligence.  These  discarnates  have
forgotten  essential  things  and  busy  themselves  with  minutiae  to
which  they  would  not  have  given  a  moment  during  life.  That
one  should  come  back  to  earth  to  speak  of  a  sleeve-link  is  not
merely  feeble ;  it  has  no  likelihood  at  all.  This  is  a  strong  argu-
ment against  the  spiritist  doctrine.

This  poor  spiritist  personality  is  not  in  any  way  incoherent;  it

612

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

is  simply  low  grade  and  very  low  grade,  being,  with  few  ex-
ceptions, much  below  average  intelligence ;  but  it  remains  consist-
ently the  same  for  many  months — infantile  like  Feda  and  Nelly ;
facetious  like  Vincenzo ;  erudite  and  mystical  like  Myers  P. ;  jovial
like  Phinuit.

The  rejoinder  is  made  that  the  relation  of  spirits  to  a  human
brain  is  probably  not  very  easy;  that  the  brain  of  the  medium  is
an  imperfect  instrument,  and  the  incoherences  are  due  to  want  of
co-ordination  between  the  instrument  and  he  who  plays  on  it.
But  what  a  mass  of  hypotheses  and  symbolical  interpretations,
bristling  with  obscurities  and  fancies,  in  order  to  evade  the  evi-
dence that  the  psychological  personality  of  the  discarnate  is  quite
different  from  that  of  the  person  during  his  life-time.

Not  only  is  this  psychological  personality  different  from  what
it  was  in  life,  but  it  is  nearly  always  notoriously  inferior  at  any
rate  from  our  anthropomorphic  point  of  view.

Everything  can  be  very  simply  explained  if  we  admit  that  there
is  never  anything  whatever  at  work  but  the  thoughts  of  the
medium,  a  being  very  human  indeed  and  exclusively  human,
whose  subconscious  mental  operations  are  rudimentary,  and,  so  to
say,  amorphous.  In  our  simplicity  we  think  we  hear  the  words  of
a  discarnate,  when  in  fact  we  are  witnessing  the  waves  of  subcon-
sciousness grouping  themselves  round  a  fictitious  personality.

6.  Another  characteristic  of  spiritist  personalities  is  that  they
shroud  themselves  in  mystery ;  as  if  the  mystery  of  their  presence
were  not  enough.  There  are  reticences,  implications,  and  veiled
allusions  that  need  much  sagacity  to  understand.  At  certain
times  they  seem  to  know  a  great  deal,  and  then  when  becoming
most  interesting,  they  suddenly  stop  and  go  wandering.  It  may
legitimately  be  inferred  that  if  they  do  not  tell  more  it  is  because
they  do  not  know  more.  They  rarely  give  a  plain  answer  to  a  plain
question.  If  they  were  before  a  board  of  examiners  they  would
not  pass,  for  they  answer  badly  and  not  to  the  point.

That  is  doubtless  the  reason — disastrous  to  the  spiritist  hypoth-
esis— why  nothing  has  been  revealed  by  deceased  personalities
that  was  not  already  known  to  the  generality  of  mankind.  They
have  not  helped  us  to  a  single  step  forward  in  geometry,  in  physics,
in  physiology,  or  even  in  metaphysics.  They  have  never  been  able
to  prove  that  they  know  more  than  the  ordinary  man  on  any  sub-
ject soever.  No  unexpected  discovery  has  been  indicated;  no
revelation  has  been  made.    The  answers,  with  the  rarest  excep-

CONCLUSION

613

tions,  are  desperately  commonplace.  Not  the  smallest  atom  of
scientific  knowledge  has  been  anticipated.

There  are  wonderful  imitations  of  style,  such  as  Dickens's  ro-
mance, and  the  verses  of  Moliere  dictated  to  Victor  Hugo.  But  a
parody  is  not  authorship.  It  is  clever  literary  work,  but  it  does
not  come  from  a  Beyond.  The  human  intelligence  that  composes
this  prose  and  verse  is  in  no  way  beyond  human  powers.  It  is  not
the  semi-divine  inspiration  that  we  might  expect  from  spirits.

The  lucidity  of  some  mediums  is  amazing,  but  lucidity  is  not
survival.  Survival  implies  the  continuance  of  personal  conscious-
ness. F.  Myers  lived  on  the  earth ;  he  was  himself  and  no  other,
with  intentions,  habits,  tastes,  thoughts,  remembrances,  hopes,  and
an  intelligence  which  made  him  a  definite  personality  very  differ-
ent from  all  others.  But  when  Mrs.  Verrall's  hand  writes,  "I  am
Myers,"  or  Mrs.  Piper's  voice  says,  "I  am  Myers,"  it  is  useless
to  try  to  find  vague  or  even  exact  analogies  between  Myers  V.,
or  Myers  P.,  with  the  real  Myers ;  even  if  such  analogies  are  dis-
coverable, they  are  not  enough  to  prove  that,  independently  of
Mrs.  Verrall  or  Mrs.  Piper  or  any  other  lucid  medium,  there  is
somewhere  in  space  a  human  consciousness  that  says  "1"  identical
with  the  consciousness  of  our  greatly  regretted  friend,  and  retain-
ing his  primordial  intellectual  character  and  coherent  remem-
brances as  we  knew  him  at  Leckhampton  House.

All  the  indications  transmitted  by  discarnates  on  their  actual,
material,  or  psychological  state  inspire  me  with  very  limited  con-
fidence, for  it  is  needful  first  of  all  to  prove  that  there  are  any
discarnates.  I  do  not  share  the  robust  faith  of  one  of  Sir  A.  Conan
Doyle's  correspondents,  Mr.  Hubert  Wales,  who  writes  with
simple  anthropomorphism,  that  spirits  "have  bodies,  which,  though
imperceptible  by  our  senses,  are  as  solid  to  them  as  ours  are  to
us  .  .  .  that  they  have  no  age,  no  pain,  no  rich  and  poor;  that
they  wear  clothes  and  take  nourishment;  that  they  do  not  sleep,
though  they  spoke  of  passing  occasionally  into  a  semi-conscious
state  .  .  .  that  people  of  similar  thoughts,  tastes,  and  feelings
gravitate  together;  that  married  couples  do  not  necessarily  re-
unite ..."  (The  New  Revelation,  Conan  Doyle,  p.  148).

I  cannot,  alas!  share  the  deep  convictions  of  my  large-minded
friend,  W.  Stead,  who,  when  I  went  to  see  him  after  he  had  lost
his  son,  said  to  me,  "Why  should  I  be  sad  ?  I  wrote  to  him  this
morning  and  he  will  answer  me  this  evening.  He  is  quite  happy
and  we  are  in  daily  relations  as  formerly."

614

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

In  my  humble  opinion  proof  of  survival  has  not  been  given  by
subjective  metapsychics,  but  I  hasten  to  add  that  a  near  approach
to  that  proof  has  been  made.  If  proof  of  surviving  consciousness
could  have  been  given  it  would  have  been  given.

Can  such  proof  be  given  ?  I  really  do  not  see  what  better  argu-
ments can  be  furnished  than  the  cases  of  George  Pelham  and
Raymond  Lodge;  and  I  cannot  imagine  any  experiments  that
would  be  more  decisive,  or  any  observations  that  would  carry  more
weight.

Truth  to  tell — and  one  must  be  as  cautious  in  denial  as  in  as-
sertion— some  facts  tend  to  make  us  believe  strongly  in  the  sur-
vival of  vanished  personalities.  Why  should  mediums,  even  when
they  have  read  no  spiritualist  books,  and  are  unacquainted  with
spiritualist  doctrines,  proceed  at  once  to  personify  some  deceased
person  or  other?  Why  does  the  new  personality  affirm  itself  so
persistently,  so  energetically,  and  sometimes  with  so  much  verisi-
militude? Why  does  it  separate  itself  so  sharply  from  the  per-
sonality of  the  medium?  All  the  words  of  powerful  mediums  are
pregnant,  so  to  say,  with  the  theory  of  survival.  These  are  sem-
blances, perhaps,  but  why  should  the  semblances  be  there  ?

These  hesitations  must  be  forgiven  me.  On  the  threshold  of  a
mystery  we  may  well  be  troubled  and  decline  to  use  trenchant
words  and  peremptory  phrases  in  ludicrous  contrast  with  our  inner
painful  uncertainty.

If  we  had  nothing  to  go  upon  but  subjective  metapsychics  we
might  stop  at  cryptesthesia  as  a  simple  and  necessary  hypothesis
covering  everything.  Let  us  therefore  admit,  as  the  only  fully
demonstrated  proposition,  that  there  actually  is  an  intense  form
of  cryptesthesia,  defined  by  unmeasured  powers  of  cognition,  and
a  sensibility  of  the  soul  to  subtle  vibrations  that  none  of  our  physi-
cal instruments  can  reveal.

There  is,  then,  no  need  to  call  in  the  intervention  of  external
energies  and  my  inference  will  be — the  human  mind  is  much  more
powerful  and  more  sensitive  than  we  know  or  think.

XII

The  hypothesis  involved  is  very  simple ;  to  admit  an  extension  of
our  intellectual  powers  is  scarcely  a  hypothesis  at  all.  But  we  can
go  no  farther,  for  the  more  we  try  to  analyze  this  inaccessible
faculty  of  cryptesthesia,  the  less  we  understand  it.  Telepathy,

CONCLUSION

615

superacuity  of  the  senses,  actual  emanations — if  these  explain
some  of  the  phenomena  they  do  not  account  for  anywhere  near
all  of  them ;  and  we  must  recognize  that  we  know  only  the  effects,
and  not  the  cause  of  cryptesthesia :  its  modalities  and  its  mechan-
ism escape  us  entirely.

The  transition  from  subjective  to  objective  phenomena  is  not
so  abrupt  as  might  be  thought ;  for  to  produce  a  cryptesthetic  sen-
sation there  must  be  some  external  phenomenon,  probably  a  vi-
bration, since  energy  is  transmitted  by  vibrations.  (Of  the
Ether?)  If,  then,  a  notion  arises  due  to  cryptesthesia  some  ex-
ternal power  must  have  been  in  action.

Monitions,  of  death  or  any  other,  can  be  accounted  for  only  by
a  vibration  of  some  unknown  kind  impinging  upon  our  subcon-
sciousness. There  must  therefore  be  some  external  thing  that  has
acted  upon  us.  This  external  thing  which  moves  the  subconscious
Self  is  objective;  our  instruments  register  nothing,  but  it  is  ob-
jective all  the  same.

Then  we  have  to  consider  that  strange  power  of  symbolization,
which  is  one  of  the  corner-stones  in  metapsychic  science.

In  order  that  any  notion  may  be  understood  by  us,  it  must  take
a  form  comprehensible  by  our  conscious  mind.  For  instance  an
announcement  of  the  death  of  A  will  only  be  understood  by  the
consciousness  of  B  if  conveyed  by  some  intelligible  representa-
tion. Then  the  truncated  and  barely  outlined  notion  that  A  is
dead  is  visualized  as  a  phantom,  or  externalized  as  a  voice,  and
many  details  are  added,  sometimes  incoherent,  but  sometimes  very
synthetic,  that  complete  the  embryonic  idea.  These  symbols  that
one  is  tempted  to  take  for  realities  have  no  reality  in  themselves;
they  are  but  the  translation  by  a  symbol  of  the  particular  notion
that  arouses  the  cryptesthesia.

Even  when,  as  in  a  haunted  house,  the  same  personage  appears
to  different  persons  successively  under  the  same  form,  this  does
not  prove  that  there  is  a  real  external  phantom.  It  is  possibly  be-
cause the  symbolization  has  been  exercised  in  the  same  way  by  two
different  percipients.   In  all  this  we  are  only  talking  in  hypotheses.

I  do  not  allow  myself  to  be  deceived  by  the  mirage  presented  by
words.  Cryptesthesia  is  a  word  that  does  not  even  hide  our  igno-
rance. To  say  that  cryptesthesia  exists  does  not  in  any  way  solve
the  very  troubling  questions  that  we  cannot  answer.  These  may
perhaps  be  answered  by  future  metapsychic  science,  provided  that
it  remain  strictly  experimental.

616

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

1.  Have  all  persons  some  rudimentary  cryptesthesia  ?

2.  Why  is  it  so  developed  in  certain  mediums?  Why  does
hypnotism  favour  its  appearance?

3.  In  spiritist  seances  why  does  the  medium  show  from  the
outset  an  invincible  tendency  to  assume  the  existence  of  a  guide
that  seems  to  have  an  intelligence  distinct  from  that  of  the
medium?

4.  Why,  in  the  case  of  powerful  mediums,  are  objective  phe-
nomena (materializations  and  telekinesis)  nearly  always  associated
with  subjective  phenomena  (cryptesthesia)?

5.  By  what  channel  does  cognition  of  things  beyond  sensorial
perception  reach  the  human  mind?  Is  it  the  vibration  of  human
intelligence  that  travels?  Or  do  the  vibrations  of  things  present
themselves  to  our  intelligence?

6.  Must  we  suppose  that  only  living  human  minds  are  in  play
and  that  no  others  intervene — those  of  the  dead,  or  of  angels,
demons,  or  gods?

In  the  actual  state  of  our  embryonic  science  these  are  insoluble
problems.  I  call  a  halt  at  the  facts,  and  decline  to  be  led  beyond
them.  I  do  not  condemn  the  spiritist  theory.  It  is  certainly
premature,  and  probably  erroneous.  But  it  has  the  immense
merit  of  having  stimulated  experiment.  It  is  one  of  those  work-
ing hypotheses  that  Claude  Bernard  considered  so  fruitful.  In
any  case,  theory  is  by  no  means  proved,  since  it  is  frail,  incon-
sistent, and  incoherent;  we  will,  provisionally  at  least,  content
ourselves  with  saying  that  transcendental  modes  of  cognition  ac-
tually exist  whose  extent  we  cannot  define,  and  therefore  that  all
the  powers  that  spiritualists  ascribe  to  spirits  should  be  attributed
to  that  superior  knowledge  with  which  the  human  brain  sometimes
appears  to  be  endowed.

We  shall  presently  consider  whether  materializations  and  tele-
kinesis may  give  some  support  to  the  spiritist  theory;  but  from
this  time  forth  we  can  say  that,  taking  subjective  facts  alone,  it  is
not  demonstrated;  and  the  trying  thing  is  that  one  does  not  see
how  it  could  be  demonstrated — how  it  could  be  proved  that  human
consciousness  with  its  remembrances  and  its  personality  could
survive  the  death  of  the  brain.

Still,  an  immense  step  forward  has  been  made;  it  has  been
proved  that  a  whole  world  of  powers,  sometimes  accessible,  vi-
brates around  us.  We  cannot  even  suspect  the  nature  of  those
powers ;  we  only  see  their  effects.   These  effects  are,  however,  so

CONCLUSION

617

clear  that  we  can  assert  the  reality  of  the  forces;  if  some  mediums
and  some  somnambulists  can  know  things  that  their  senses  have
not  shown  them  it  is  that  unknown  forces  have  reached  and  acted
upon  their  sensitiveness.   That  is  all  that  we  can  say  today.

XIII

Consequently  the  phenomena  that  we  call  subjective  are  only
apparently  so.  Every  phenomenon  of  cryptesthesia  must  be  pre-
ceded by  an  exterior  energy  that  has  started  it,  some  unknown
vibration  that  has  set  in  motion  the  latent  energies  of  our  human
mind,  unaware  of  all  its  powers.

XIV

There  is  something  more  than  subjective  metapsychics ;  some-
thing more  than  great  superacuity  of  the  senses  and  mysterious
depths  of  mind  :  there  is  the  action  of  intelligence  on  matter.  And
the  appalling  obscurity  of  the  whole  question,  when  we  extend
cryptesthesia  without  limits,  becomes  more  appalling  still.

There  are  the  facts:  they  compel  us  to  admit  movements  at  a
distance;  and  strange  as  this  phenomenon  may  be  it  is  not  the
strangest.  It  is  even  the  most  elementary  fact  in  this  embryonic
and  terrifying  science.

That  a  mechanical  energy  of  an  unknown  kind  should  emanate
from  the  human  body  and  move  a  table,  and  shake  a  piece  of
board  with  knocking,  is  not  entirely  incomprehensible.  But  that
this  force  should  produce  word-making  sound,  lights,  and  living
human  forms — this  indeed  goes  beyond  all  our  concepts  of  the
possible.  A  warm  and  living  hand,  a  mouth  that  speaks,  eyes  that
see,  and  thought  that  thrills,  like  the  hand,  the  mouth,  the  eyes,
and  the  thought  of  a  human  being — these  are  phenomena  that
put  us  to  utter  confusion.

We  are  in  thick  darkness.  It  was  already  impossible  to  under-
stand how  Banca,  at  the  very  moment  that  his  family  was  about  to
perish  a  couple  of  thousand  miles  away,  could  speak  of  death
lying  in  wait  for  his  family;  or  how  Figueroa  could  see,  six
months  before  the  event,  a  peasant  dressed  in  black  strike  a  mule
aside  to  let  him  pass  up  a  spiral  stair.  But  objective  metapsychic
is  more  puzzling  still;  it  is  an  unmitigated  mystery,  and  all  at-
tempts at  explanation  seem  puerile.

618

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

Nevertheless  no  one  has  the  right  to  withdraw  these  facts
from  scientific  investigation.

Metapsychic  science  will  certainly  pass  through  many  phases.
It  is  at  present  in  travail  of  greater  things ;  but  it  is  much  that
the  facts  have  been  well  proved  and  are  too  plain  to  be  denied.
Unfortunately  they  cannot  yet  be  built  into  a  consistent  and  ten-
able theory ;  it  beseems  us  to  examine  what  may  be  inferred  from
all  these  astounding  observations  and  amazing  experiments  with-
out fear,  but  also  without  arrogance  that  our  human  limitations
would  render  laughable.

As  to  materializations  and  telekinesis  our  opinion  may  be
summed  up  by  saying,  These  phenomena  may  be  attributed  to
energies  of  human  origin.

XV

Thanks  to  Ochorowicz,  Schrenck-Notzing,  Mme.  Bisson,  and
Crawford,  who  carried  on  Crookes's  work,  it  seems  now  fairly
proved  that  materializations  are  ectoplasms;  that  is,  sarcodic  ex-
tensions emanating  from  the  body  of  a  medium,  precisely  as  a
pseudopod  is  projected  from  an  amoeboid  cell.  All  zoologists  are
aware  that  an  amoeba  can  project  a  sarcode  to  seize  upon  ali-
mentary matter  and  infest  it.  In  a  similar  fashion  fluidic  filaments
or  extensions  like  clouds,  veils,  or  stems  may  proceed  from  the
body  of  the  entranced  medium,  can  then  become  organic,  and  take
on  the  semblance  of  human  limbs  and  occasionally  of  whole  bodies.

In  their  first  stage  these  ectoplasms  are  invisible,  but  can  move
objects  and  can  give  raps  on  a  table.  Later  on  they  become  visible
though  nebulous  and  sketchy.  Still  later  they  take  human  form,
for  they  have  the  extraordinary  property  that  they  change  their
forms  and  their  consistence  and  evolve  under  our  eyes.  In  a  few
seconds  the  nebulous  embryo  that  exudes  from  the  body  of  the
medium  becomes  an  actual  being;  though  the  human  ovum  re-
quires thirty  years  to  evolve  into  the  adult  form.

Sometimes  the  phantom  appears  suddenly,  without  passing
through  the  phase  of  luminous  cloud;  but  this  phenomenon  is
probably  of  the  same  order  as  the  slower  development.

This  ectoplasmic  formation  at  the  expense  of  the  physiological
organism  of  the  medium  is  now  beyond  all  dispute.  It  is  prodig-
iously strange,  prodigiously  unusual,  and  it  would  seem  so  unlikely
as  to  be  incredible ;  but  we  must  give  in  to  the  facts.   I  am  confi-

CONCLUSION

619

dent  that  twenty-five  years  hence  orthodox  science  will  admit  tele-
kinesis and  ectoplasms  as  undisputed  phenomena.  The  profound
changes  in  ideas  on  this  subject  that  have  taken  place  the  last
twenty-five  years  warrant  this  assurance.

XVI

To  state  facts  is  not  enough;  we  must  summon  up  courage  to
outline  some  kind  of  theory,  imperfect  though  it  will  necessarily
be.

It  has  been  shown  that  as  regards  subjective  metapsychics  the
simplest  and  most  rational  explanation  is  to  suppose  the  existence
of  a  faculty  of  supernormal  cognition  that  we  have  called  cryptes-
thesia,  setting  in  motion  the  human  intelligence  by  certain  vibra-
tions that  do  not  move  the  normal  senses.

Similarly  in  objective  metapsychics  the  simplest  and  most
rational  explanation  is  analogous — to  suppose  that  the  human  or-
ganism has  a  faculty  of  external  projection,  of  "ectoplasmisation,"
the  emission  of  a  material  substance  that  can  become  organic.

It  follows  that  the  most  reasonable  hypothesis  is  that  there  are
in  the  human  body  energies  capable  of  being  exteriorized.

But  though  this  hypothesis  is  the  most  simple  that  can  be  ad-
vanced it  is  not  really  simple  at  all.  It  implies  a  new  physiology,
a  new  chemistry,  and  a  new  physics.

Beings  with  a  human  shape,  that  begin  and  end  in  white  veils,
that  come  and  go  like  clouds,  are  not  human  beings.

Man  is  so  close  to  the  animal  that  everything  proper  to  a  human
being  must  be  allowed  to  animals  also,  in  part  at  any  rate.  We
have  no  essential  function  that  is  not  possessed  by  any  other
mammal,  nay  even  by  any  vertebrate  or  invertebrate.  The  gen-
erative, circulatory,  nutritive,  and  digestive  processes  are  prac-
tically the  same  in  all.  The  difference  between  the  animal  and
man  is  that  man  has  a  slightly  more  penetrating  intelligence,  of
larger  scope,  and  capable  of  remembering,  analyzing,  and  ab-
stracting. But  this  difference  is  not  essential:  man  merely  pos-
sesses a  higher  degree  of  intelligence.  That  is  all ;  he  is  a  highly
intelligent  animal,  but  he  is  an  animal.  Now,  to  transform  matter,
to  become  a  living  ephemeral  being,  and  to  create  ephemeral  living
matter,  is  to  open  a  new  world.  We  are  evolving  in  another
dimension.  Man  is  no  longer  man.  He  no  longer  belongs  to  the
animal  kingdom.    He  even  transcends  the  mechanical  world  in

620

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

which  we  move  where  chemistry,  physics,  and  mathematics  reign
supreme.

Anything  is  possible.  Perhaps  human  powers,  whether  moral
or  material,  go  far  beyond  what  habitual  and  daily  experience
would  lead  us  to  think.  It  is  demonstrated  that  fluidic  emanations
can  proceed  from  the  body  and  develop  into  human  forms.  It  is
demonstrated  that  this  exteriorization  is  one  of  the  properties  of
living  matter.

Geley,  in  an  able  book,  maintains  the  subconscious  to  be  a  kind
of  creative  energy  determining  the  histological  mutations  whereby
the  larva  is  transformed  into  a  chrysalis  and  the  chrysalis  into  the
perfect  insect.  The  subconscious  produces  stigmata  and  miracu-
lous cures.   It  is  the  subconscious  that  directs  materializations.

Certainly  to  connect  metapsychic  phenomena  with  the  most
positive  data  of  embryology  and  zoology  is  bold  and  deep  think-
ing. But  this  does  not  seem  to  me  to  bring  explanation.  This
powerful  subconscious,  so  omnipresent  and  efficient,  is  an  undem-
onstrated  energy,  it  is  always  the  quid  ignotum.

Even  for  Geley  the  subconscious  is  insufficient,  and  he  is  inclined
to  admit — without  definitely  affirming  this — that  the  high  and
complex  phenomena  of  mediumship  seem  to  show  external  direc-
tion and  intention  that  cannot  be  referred  to  the  medium  or  the
experimenters.

Such  is  Geley's  opinion ;  it  is  not  altogether  mine.  I  shall  say,
with  Lodge,  that  we  must  select  the  least  extravagant  among  all
the  possible  explanations.  None  of  them,  he  says,  fits  all  the  facts.
To  frame  theories  is  as  premature  as  it  would  have  been  for  Gal-
vani  to  attempt  to  explain  the  nature  of  electricity.

In  his  fine  work  on  human  personality,  F.  Myers  sketched  out  a
theory  that  in  some  points  resembles  Geley's,  for  elementary
metapsychic  phenomena  at  any  rate.  According  to  Myers  there
are  many  personalities,  subliminal  centres,  co-existing,  working,
thinking,  comparing,  and  analyzing  side  by  side  with  the  principal
centre  (consciousness)  which  scarcely  knows  of  their  existence.
These  secondary  centres  are  more  open  to  influence  by  cryptes-
thetic  vibrations  than  the  central  consciousness.

Certainly.  But  immediately  afterwards,  in  order  to  explain  the
higher  phenomena,  Myers  finds  himself  obliged  formally  to  admit
survival,  and  to  infer  that  in  many  cases  of  automatic  writing  or
speaking,  these  secondary  centres  are  invaded  by  discarnate  spirits.

CONCLUSION

621

The  more  these  complex  phenomena  of  monitions,  premonitions,
and  collective  veridical  hallucinations  are  studied  in  detail,  the
more  one  is  inclined  to  favour  the  hypothesis  of  an  unknown  ecto-
plasmic  energy  pertaining  to  human  beings;  and  this  hypothesis
is  so  strange  that  all  other  possible  hypotheses  must  first  be
exhausted.

And  in  the  first  place  we  can  well  suppose  that  other  beings  than
man  may  move  around  us  and  influence  our  movements  although
they  may  not  be  subject  to  the  mechanical,  physical,  chemical,  and
anatomical  conditions  that  limit  us.

Why  should  there  not  be  intelligent  and  puissant  beings  dis-
tinct from  those  perceptible  by  our  senses?  By  what  right  should
we  dare  to  affirm,  on  the  basis  of  our  limited  senses,  our  defective
intellect,  and  our  scientific  past  as  yet  hardly  three  centuries  old,
that  in  the  vast  Cosmos  man  is  the  sole  intelligent  being,  and  that
all  mental  reality  always  depends  upon  nerve-cells  irrigated  with
oxygenated  blood  ?

That  there  should  be  intellectual  powers  other  than  those  of
mankind  and  constructed  on  a  wholly  different  plan  is  not  only
possible  but  highly  probable.  It  might  even  be  said  to  be  certain.
It  is  absurd  to  suppose  that  ours  is  the  only  mind  in  nature ;  and
that  inevitably  every  intelligent  power  is  organized  on  the  human
or  animal  model  with  a  brain  as  its  organ.

It  is  obvious  how  deep  is  the  mystery.  For  when  we  speak  of
mind,  we  implicitly  (by  our  necessarily  anthropomorphic  way  of
looking  at  things)  take  it  to  connote  memory,  logic,  verbal  ter-
minology, and  emotion;  but  mind  (in  the  human  connotation)  is
so  imperfect,  so  special  to  humanity  that  we  cannot  be  fully  cog-
nizant of  intelligent  powers  except  by  assimilating  them  more  or
less  to  mankind.  This  is  probably  a  serious  error,  and  to  say  "an
angel  is  intelligent,,  (in  the  human  sense)  is  about  as  logical  as
if  a  piece  of  red  cloth  were  to  say,  An  angel  is  red.  Our  notions
of  spirits,  whether  as  to  their  form  or  their  thoughts,  are  neces-
sarily grossly  anthropomorphic.

As  we  are  now  in  the  realm  of  hypotheses,  we  need  not  fear  to
push  our  thought  to  its  logical  extreme.  The  basis  of  animal
intelligence  is  the  nerve-cell;  but  this  by  no  means  proves  that
nerve-cells,  or  even  the  chemical  elements  that  we  call  "material,"
are  necessary  to  all  phenomena  of  mind.  Very  different  beings  in
very  different  worlds  are  conceivable  where  mind  would  exist
without  nerve-cells  or  any  material  substratum.   The  proof  that

622

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

such  beings  exist  has  not  been  given,  but  their  possibility  is
clear.

It  is  said:  "Man  only  shows  his  mind  by  his  brain;  therefore
there  can  be  no  mind  without  a  brain."  Such  is  the  amazing  logic
of  those  who  accuse  us  of  working  against  science.

If  it  be  admitted  that  in  the  universe,  under  conditions  of  space
and  time  of  which  our  rudimentary  psychology  is  unaware,  there
are  intelligent  beings,  interfering  at  certain  moments  in  our  lives,
we  have  then  a  convenient  hypothesis  explanatory  of  many  of  the
facts  detailed  in  this  book.

Mysterious  beings,  angels  or  demons,  existences  devoid  of  form,
or  spirits,  which  nozc  and  then  seek  to  intervene  in  our  lives,  who
can  by  means  entirely  unknown  mould  matter  at  will,  who  direct
some  of  our  thoughts  and  participate  in  some  of  our  destinies,  and
who,  to  make  themselves  knoivn  (which  they  could  not  otherwise
do)  assume  the  bodily  and  psychological  aspect  of  vanished  human
personalities — all  this  is  a  simple  manner  of  expressing  and  un-
derstanding the  greater  part  of  the  metapsychic  phenomena.

This  is  the  more  plausible,  seeing  that  under  a  close  analysis  of
monitions  and  premonitions  there  seem  to  be  vague  intentions  be-
yond and  outside  us,  which  transcend  human  concepts,  as  if  the  in-
telligent forces  chose  to  stop  on  the  threshold  of  the  mystery,  un-
willing to  tell  everything,  speaking  in  symbols  and  enigmas,  out-
lining misty  affirmations  when  they  might  be  more  explicit ;  mov-
ing plates,  tables,  and  wooden  logs,  when  they  might  (at  least
according  to  our  normal  thinking)  operate  in  a  chemical  or  physi-
cal laboratory,  or  at  least  tell  us  something  of  the  mysteries  of  life
continued  after  the  death  of  the  body.  But  they  deal  in  a  verbose
theosophy ;  they  tell  us  nothing  useful,  and  do  not  even  indicate
with  any  precision  favourable  conditions  for  experiment.

That  such  spirits  should  be  the  consciousness  of  defunct  human
beings  is,  strictly  speaking,  possible;  but  I  venture  to  say,  with
all  the  caution  that  should  guard  every  negation,  it  is  not  at  all
probable.  These  discarnate  souls  are  too  fundamentally  different
from  those  of  living  men  that  they  should  be  the  same ;  and  as  for
the  material,  how  should  the  disintegrated  body  after  three  years
in  a  coffin  be  more  able  to  find  the  clothes  that  it  wore  when  living
than  to  reconstitute  its  heart,  its  liver,  and  its  eyes,  which  have  all
become  formless  matter?

If  then  (as  I  cannot  believe)  there  are  spirits,  and  they  are  en-
dowed with  mysterious  powers  (that  I  do  not  understand)  and

CONCLUSION

623

have  mysterious  intentions  (which  I  understand  no  better),  in  any
case  they  cannot  be  the  consciousnesses  of  deceased  persons.
They  belong  to  other  worlds,  different  from  our  material  world
and  from  our  moral  world,  and  if  they  put  on  human  semblances
it  must  be  to  make  themselves  partially  known  to  us.1
To  sum  up:  There  are  three  hypotheses  in  the  field.

1.  The  phenomena  are  due  to  the  dead,  whose  consciousness
still  persists  without  any  material  substratum.  This  is  the  spiritist
theory  which  seems  to  me  the  least  likely  of  any.

2.  There  are  angels,  spirits  (dai}xoves)  who  can  act  on  matter
and  on  human  minds,  and  intervene  in  human  affairs.

3.  The  human  intelligence  (body  and  soul)  is  sufficiently  power-
ful to  produce  both  material  manifestations  (ectoplasms)  and  the
subjective  manifestations  (cryptesthesia)  that  amaze  us.

If  I  admit  this  third  hypothesis  as  obviously  superior  to  the
others,  it  is  not  that  I  believe  in  it  very  strongly.  Far  otherwise.
I  am  well  aware  how  frail  it  is,  how  incredible,  almost  as  incredible
as  the  two  former.   But  can  anything  better  be  put  forward?

Perhaps;  and  I  adopt  without  reserve  a  fourth  proposition
which  has  every  chance  of  being  true — we  have  as  yet  no  satisfac-
tory hypothesis  to  put  forward.

In  fine,  I  believe  that  future  hypothesis  that  I  cannot  formulate
because  I  do  not  know  it.

XVII

Bewildering  powers  vibrate  around  us.  The  facts  seem
strangely  inconsistent  with  ascertained  truths.  They  are  not.
Since  the  facts  are  facts,  the  disharmony  must  be  only  seeming —
the  necessary  consequence  of  our  ignorance.   This  ignorance  will

*In  order  to  make  this  seemingly  monstrous  hypothesis  in  some  degree
acceptable,  let  us  suppose  that  men  do  not  know  much  more  about  the
universe  than  a  colony  of  ants  knows  about  the  earth-planet.  They  do  not
know  that  there  are  beings  far  superior  to  them  in  powers  and  intelligence;
they  are  unaware  of  seas,  ships,  libraries,  telephones,  theatres,  armies,  courts
of  justice,  and  stars.  They  live  as  though  there  were  nothing  in  the  world
but  little  bits  of  wood,  moss,  old  tree-trunks,  the  insects  that  they  feed  upon,
and  the  streamlets  that  inundate  their  nests.  And  if  some  ant  wiser  than  its
fellows  were  to  tell  them  that  there  is  more,  in  the  world  than  this  he  would
doubtless  be  thought  mad,  and  his  fellows  would  have  no  difficulty  in  certi-
fying him  as  insane.  And  being  myself  convinced  that,  when  all  is  said,  we
know  less  of  the  Cosmos  than  a  nest  of  ants  knows  of  this  planet,  I  am  in-
clined, though  without  tangible  proof,  to  think  that  other  worlds  may  exist  be-
sides our  little  physico-chemical  world.  The  notion  is  surprising  but  not
unlikely.

624

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

not  last  for  ever :  the  day  will  come,  perhaps  it  is  not  far  distant,
when  some  unexpected  discovery  will  open  a  new  horizon  to  our
eyes.  A  man  of  genius,  a  powerful  medium,  a  happy  chance — any
one  of  these  would  suffice  to  reveal  a  whole  series  of  new  truths,
whence  will  emerge  not  only  new  solutions,  but  further  problems
of  which  we  now  have  no  notion.

XVIII

The  final  outcome  will  be  much  more  surprising  and  unexpected
than  our  limited  imagination  can  dream.  Science,  we  must  admit,
will  be  transformed  from  top  to  bottom  beyond  our  boldest
anticipations.

We  must  advance  resolutely,  using  exact  scientific  methods,
being  neither  credulous  nor  timid,  but  trusting  the  marvellous
power  of  science.  Let  us  endeavour  to  recall  the  state  of  human
mentality  in  the  time  of  Paracelsus  and  Gutenberg,  only  four
hundred  years  ago.  Twelve  generations — a  very  short  time  for
the  transformation  of  the  world !

Chemistry  is  a  marvellous  science  that  reveals  the  most  secret
motions  of  the  atoms,  and  indicates  the  places  that  these  imponder-
able entities  will  take  up  in  space  by  their  combinations,  by  creat-
ing new  substances.  Nevertheless  Chemistry  began  as  Alchemy —
own  sister  to  Astrology.

If  I  had  lived  in  the  fifteenth  century,  I  might  have  believed  in
Alchemy  and  Astrology ;  and  I  should  have  done  wisely,  for  they
have  become  our  sciences  of  today.  Now,  I  have  complete  con-
fidence in  metapsychics,  and  I  do  not  think  it  will  require  four
hundred  years  to  grow  into  as  exact  a  science  as  Chemistry  now  is.

Metapsychics  has,  however,  to  encounter  a  very  grave  diffi-
culty special  to  itself  that  does  not  beset  other  sciences:  its  subject
matter  is  not  the  blind  forces  of  chemistry  and  physics  but  intelli-
gent forces,  capable  of  freakish,  and  possibly  hostile,  intentions.
How,  then,  are  the  problems  presented  to  be  attacked  ?  Everything
seems  to  turn  on  the  fall  of  the  dice.

Fortunately  it  is  most  improbable  that  these  intelligent  forces
should  not  be  subject  to  definite  laws,  and  therefore  accessible  to
our  researches.

Our  aim  must  be  to  discover  these  laws;  and  who  knows  but
that  instead  of  being  hindered  by  these  intelligences  themselves

CONCLUSION

625

from  getting  to  know  them,  as  has  hitherto  seemed  to  be  the  case,
we  may  not  be  aided  by  them?

However  this  may  be,  the  numerous  scattered  facts  that  have
now  been  collected  show  plainly  that  a  new  mentality  will  per-
vade human  society  as  metapsychics  gains  influence.  Not  long
since  we  were  disposed  to  think  that  there  could  be  nothing  beyond
the  material  facts  verified  and  studied  by  men  of  science,  and
there  was  a  disposition  to  assign  limits,  and  not  very  remote  limits,
beyond  which  we  held  that  science  could  not  pass.  More  power-
ful microscopes  and  telescopes,  more  sensitive  galvanometers  and
thermometers — such  things  bounded  our  limited  view.  Our  hopes
are  now  vastly  greater ;  we  have  a  glimpse  of  a  whole  unexplored
world  full  of  mysteries  before  which  we  stand  as  dumb  and  dense
as  a  Hottentot  might  before  Poincare's  vortices,  Herz's  waves,
Pasteur's  microbes,  or  Einstein's  relativity.

This  new  world  is  the  unknown,  the  future,  and  our  hope.1
As  Frederic  Myers  and  Oliver  Lodge  have  well  pointed  out,
perhaps  a  new  view  of  human  duty  will  emerge  from  these  studies,
which  are  as  yet  in  a  most  elementary  stage.  We  can  scarcely
foresee  the  subversive  effects  that  metapsychics  will  have  upon  our
ideas  of  the  final  purposes  of  human  existence.  The  sciences
that  deal  with  atoms  and  physical  forces,  gravitation,  heat,  elec-
tricity, and  chemical  affinity  will  not  be  upset,  for  they  rest  on
unshakable  foundations.  But  many  and  great  things  will  be  added
to  them.

And  perhaps  the  goal  of  humanity  will  be  better  understood.  If
we  have  been  able  to  bring  some  of  the  more  coherent  facts  of  this
new  knowledge  within  the  domain  of  positive  science,  that  goal
will  be  hidden  in  less  impenetrable  darkness.

At  the  present  hour,  while  all  is  yet  quite  dark,  our  duty  is  plain.
Let  us  be  sober  in  speculation ;  let  us  study  and  analyze  facts ;  let
us  be  as  bold  in  hypothesis  as  we  are  rigorous  in  experimentation.

Metapsychics  will  then  emerge  from  Occultism,  as  Chemistry
emerged  from  Alchemy :  and  none  can  foresee  its  amazing  career.

But  we  must  keep  clear  of  illusions:  the  fragments  of  uncom-

1Pascal  said  as  much  in  deeply  significant  words:  "The  secrets  of  Nature
are  hidden ;  although  ever  in  action,  the  effects  she  produces  are  not  always
seen  ;  time  reveals  them  from  age  to  age.  ...  We  may  affirm  the  opposite
to  what  the  ancients  have  said  without  therefore  contradicting  them ;  and  what-
ever authority  their  antiquity  may  have,  that  of  truth  is  always  greater,  even
when  newly  discovered,  for  truth  is  always  more  ancient  than  any  opinion
soever''    (Fragment  of  a  Treatise  on  vacua,  Ed.  Ha  vet,  ii,  273).

626

PSYCHICAL  RESEARCH

prehended  truth  that  the  science  of  the  occult  offers  to  us  reveal
the  poverty  of  the  human  understanding.  The  study  of  the
heavens  soon  convinces  an  astronomer  that  man  is  an  infinitesi-
mally  small  object  in  the  universe.  Similarly  in  metapsychic
science,  when  pale  and  fugitive  gleams  reveal  intellectual  worlds
circling  around  us  and  in  us,  we  feel  that  these  worlds  may  perhaps
ever  remain  as  distant  and  incomprehensible  as  the  far,  incompre-
hensible stars  in  the  depths  of  space.

But  that  is  no  reason  for  refraining  from  increased  efforts  and
labour.  There  are  great  depths  to  be  sounded.  The  task  is  so  noble
that,  even  should  it  fail  of  success,  the  honour  of  having  attempted
it  gives  fresh  value  to  life.

INDEX

i

INDEX

Abbott,  D.,  449,  455.
Abdullah,  536.
Abelard,  72.
Abelous,  121,  122.
Abren,  Captain,  d',  530.
Abronowski,  194.
Adam,  J.,  262,  283,  284.
Adam,  P.,  365.
Adams,  334,  572.
Adamson,  122.
Adare,  Viscount,  485-488.
^schylus,  74,  76.
Aggazotti,  418,  419.
Agnes  of  Bohemia,  545.
Agrippa,  14,  19.
Aischa,  503,  508.
Akoutine,  581.

Aksakoff,  27,  34,  36,  158,  159,  220,
225,  226,  274,  412,  415,  424,  450,
468,  492,  493,  535,  539,  542,  553,
557,  558,  582,  600.

Albe,  d\  544.

Albertis.  d',  549.

Alesi,  d\  81.

Alexander,  315.

Alexandra,  369.

Alexandrina,  362.

Alexandrovna,  S.,  188.

Alexis  Didier  (see  Didier).

Alice,  41,  42,  70,  71,  111,  125,  126,
129-133.  359-361,  490,  598.

Allams,  225.

Alliot,  181.

Allom,  284.

Alma,  L.,  127,  128.

Alphonso  XII,  313.

Alrutz,  S.,  102.

Amicis,  d\  499.

Ammianus  Marcellinus,  21.

Ampere,  A.,  457.

Andrade,  d',  529,  533.

Andreoff,  188.

Andree,  55,  56,  65,  66.

Andrews,  145.

Anna,  121.

Annie,  Aunt,  138.

Anthony,  Dr.,  363.

Antoinette,  42.

Apollonius,  18,  19,  159.

Appleby,  271.

Apte,  20.

Arago,  377.

Arbonsoff,  284.

Aresky,  463,  505,  508.

Argentina,  526.

Argner,  231.

Aristotle,  4,  209,  210.

Arnsburg,  432.

Arpentigny,  d',  184.

Arriola,  Pepito,  10,  226.

Arsonval,  d\  413,  418,  440,  458.

Artus,  111.

Assagioli,  241,  242.

Athenodorus,  573.

Aub,  162.

Aubry,  F.  and  G.,  157.
Audenino,  419.
Avellino,  499.
Aylesbury,  259,  335,  343.
Azam,  32,  70.

Babinet,  28,  229.

Babinski,  100.

Bachelot,  270,  271.

Bacherini,  395.

Backer,  F.  de,  111.

Backmann,  Dr.,  127,  128.

Baeschly,  285.

Baggally,  420,  544.

Bagot,  Mme.,  246,  278.

Bailey,  456,  457,  463,  471,  477.

Baker,  R.,  255,  320.

629

630

INDEX

Baker,  Mme.,  367.

Baldwin,  143.

Bale,  372.

Balfour,  A.  J.,  33.

Balfour,  G.,  33,  176.

Ball,  284.

Balle,  123,  124.

Balsamo,  S.,  367.

Banca,  617.

Bangs,  451.

Banister,  350,  356.

Baraduc,  101,  435,  436,  480,  559.

Bard,  263,  266,  321.

Barety,  101.

Barker,  285,  390.

Barker,  E.,  80,  286.

Barclay,  Mme.,  514.

Barnard,  394.

Barr,  261.

Barreau,  Mme.  de,  335.

Barrett,  Sir  W.,  7,  26,  33,  34,  86,
102,  155,  168,  171,  217,  224,  227,
229,  231,  233,  234,  431,  447,  588,
589,  591,  600,  602.

Bartolini,  T.,  158.

Barwell,  251.

Barzini,  473.

Baschieri,  U.,  159,  423.

Basserole,  291.

Batelli,  528.

Bathes,  E.,  152,  153.

Baudouin,  M.,  272.

Baugher,  111.

Bayfield,  147.

Bayol,  541.

Beale,  286,  331.

Beaufort,  Mme.,  173.

Beaugrand,  263,  286.

Beck,  287.

Bedford,  574.

Beilby,  333,  343.

Belbeder,  287.

Bellier,  417.

Belot,  Mme.,  323.

Benedikt,  238.

Benning,  557.

Beraud,  Marthe,  26,  33,  34,  39,  43,
46,  399,  428,  438,  439,  441-443,  457,
466,  467,  469,  470,  474,  477,  478,
484,  503-517,520-525,  534,  542,  544.

Beresford,  Lord,  286.
Beretta,  439.
Bergen,  de,  538.
Berger,  199.
Berget,  287.
Bergson,  33.
Berisso,  419.

Bernard,  Claude,  8,  11,  12,  70,  84,

616.

Bernard  de  Courleon,  546.

Bernheim,  32,  105.

Bernstein,  191.

Bersot,  78.

Berteaux,  111.

Bertha,  270.

Berthelon,  288.

Berthon,  340.

Bertie,  289.

Bertrand,  24,  119,  291.
Besnard,  289.
Bessi,  284,  285.
Bettany,  255,  259,  336.
Betty,  475.
Bianco,  532.
Bibby,  291.

Bien  Boa,  466,  467,  469,  475,  477,

490,  505-509.
Bigard,  J.,  261,  291,  292.
Bigge,  560.
Binet,  287.
Binns,  484.

Bishop,  288,  289,  326.

Bisson,  D.,  46,  432,  438,  460,  464,
467,  469,  470,  476,  477,  483,  491,
504,  510-515,  523,  544,  618.

Blackburn,  271,  485.

Blackman,  26.

Blake,  C,  536.

Blanche,  347.

Blavatsky,  Mme.,  211,  450.
Bliss,  27.

Bloch,  Mme.,  290,  500.
Blocus,  Mme.,  81.
Blodgett,  140,  141.
Blondlot,  103.
Bocca,  419.
Boch,  290.
Bocock,  484.
Bohn,  584.

INDEX

Bohm,  225.

Boirac,  E.,  4,  36,  106,  116,  117,  187,

195,  470.
Bois,  J.,  74,  81,  289.
Boisleve,  Baroness  de,  298.
Boismont,  de,  283.
Boisnard,  372.
Boissarie,  111.
Boniface,  Mme.,  290.
Bonjunski,  539.
Bonnamy,  307.
Bonnard,  152.
Bonnefoy,  S.,  323.
Bormann,  509.
Bossuet,  72.

Bottazzi,  R,  34,  413,  464,  474,  478,

499,  500,  535,  597,  600.
Botzaris,  221.
Boucher,  Dr.,  376,  377.
Bouillaud,  8.

Bourbon,  Dr.,  466,  511,  512.

Bourget,  P.,  137,  141.

Bourneville,  Dr.,  20.

Boursnell,  456,  459.

Bourru,  Dr.,  181.

Boutleroff,  27,  274,  408,  424,  600.

Bowring,  393.

Bowstear,  Dr.,  290.

Boyle,  292.

Bozas,  de,  545.

Bozzano,  E.,  36,  117,  140,  150,  152,
155,  159,  164,  180,  218,  219,  226,
260,  262,  274,  278,  328,  331,  335,
336,  338,  341,  342,  347,  349,  350,
352,  354-356,  359,  361,  363,  365-
368,  370-376,  379,  381-384,  390-395,
413,  419,  480,  482,  535,  554,  555,
564-567,  569,  571,  574,  575,  577,
578,  580,  584,  600.

Brackett,  L.,  117,  541,  542.

Braid,  J.,  31,  99.

Branen,  van,  424.

Brath,  de,  432.

Bremon,  289,  327.

Brewern,  de,  450.

Briere,  Dr.,  446.

Briffaut,  Mme.,  42,  161-163.

Briggs,  V.,  141.

Brighton,  261,  262.

Brisson,  H.,  377.

Bristow,  584,  585.

Brittain,  A.,  146.

Britten,  27.

Britton,  145.

Brofferio,  36,  412.

B  roquet,  226.

Brompton,  P.,  288.

Brot,  Mme.,  376.

Brougham,  Lord,  290.

Brown,  540,  541.

Brown,  M.,  140,  534,  575.

Browne,  J.,  307.

Bruce,  Dr.,  323.

Bruce,  R.,  553.

Brutus,  19.

Bryant,  27.

Buchanan,  177.

Buckley,  116.

Buddha,  72.

Buell,  Mme,  152.

Buguet,  456,  459.

Buisson,  381.

Buloz,  282.

Burco,  183.

Bureau,  A.,  287,  288.

Burger,  E.,  261,  290,  291.

Burgik,  545.

Burnby,  Lady,  202,  203.

Burnier,  164.

Burnier,  Cure,  609,  610.

Burns,  217,  224.

Burot,  181.

Burrows,  300.

Burt,  88.

Burton,  A,  446,  480.
Burton,  J.,  146.
Burton,  Lady,  358.
Buscarlet,  Mme,  369.
Bushell,  571.
Bute,  Marquis  de,  308.
Byron,  Lord,  74.
Byzantios,  222,  223.

Cadello,  Dr.,  224.

Caesar,  10,  16,  170,  192,  193.

Cagliostro,  77,  610.

Caillat,  A,  16.

Calderone,  I,  36.

Calmette,  Dr.,  589.

Calt,  Captain,  321.

632

INDEX

Campbell,  Mme.,  369.
Camus,  Mme.,  42.
Canaletti,  125.
Cane,  du,  573.
Canius  Julius,  219.
Cannelle,  102.
Capron,  582.

Carancini,  526,  528,  529,  548.
Cardan,  J.,  18.
Cardno,  120.

Carleton,  Mme.,  350,  382.
Carlotta,  525.
Carolath,  Princess,  385.
Carpenter,  28,  30,  33.
Carpenter,  E.,  308.
Carre,  97.

Carre  de  Montgeron,  20.

Carrell,  A.,  354.

Carreras,  E.,  380.

Carrick,  Mme.,  284.

Carrington,  H.,  34,  145,  176,  197,

305,  413,  420,  455,  472,  535,  539,

583.
Carroll,  560.
Cartier,  501.
Cascel,  C,  377.
Casimir-Perier,  178,  376,  377.
Castelvitch,  Countess,  530-534.
Catherine  de  Medici,  183.
Catherin,  530.
Caubin,  230,  232,  236.
Cauchy,  218.
Cavalcante,  S.,  311,  312.
Cecchini,  548.
Celina,  226.
Chambard,  32.
Chambers,  A.,  149.
Chanuel,  36,  111.
Chaproniere,  555.
Charazain,  101.
Charcot,  32,  99,  124,  282.
Charmides,  16.
Charpignon,  115.
Charrier,  R.,  585,  586.
Chasles,  10.
Chaumontet,  609.
Chaves,  Colonel,  282.
Cheiro,  184,  582.
Chenoweth,  Mme.,  151,  366.
Cheuvreaux,  Mme.,  310.

Chevalon,  Mile.,  170.

Cheves,  Mme.,  214.

Chevreul,  28,  37,  227,  229,  233,  234,

276,  279,  283,  300,  315,  318,  421,

511,  607.
Chiaia,  E.,  412,  413,  503.
Child,  L.,  144,  303.
Chomel,  Dr.,  118.
Chopin,  373,  374.
Chowrin,  Dr.,  188,  190.
Christine,  546.
Christman,  B.,  292.
Christmas,  292.
Cicero,  17,  18,  344,  451,  473.
Cipriani,  159.

Claparede,  81,  240-242,  528.

Clarke,  309.

Clarke,  Dr.,  307.

Clary,  Mme.,  349.

Claudet,  Mme.,  581.

Claudine,  338,  339.

Claughton,  Mme.,  271.

Clawson,  445.

Clement  XIV,  552.

Clericus,  273.

Cloquet,  29,  261.

Coates,  J.,  177.

Cobacker,  B.,  226.

Coghill,  Colonel,  382.

Cohen,  Dr.,  361.

Coleman,  E.,  452.

Coleman,  A.,  537.

Colley,  Archdeacon,  463,  537,  538.

Collyer,  Mme.,  292,  293.

Commar,  Dr.,  113.

Conil,  293.

Connell,  Lieutenant,  292.
Constable,  F.,  223.
Contamine,  324.
Conto,  Dr.,  530.

Cook,  F.,  31,  34,  38.  39,  43,  45,  137,
443,  457,  461,  462,  466,  471,  474,
478,  479,  493-495,  496,  514,  542,
548.

Cooper,  Dr.,  370.
Coover,  E.,  93,  94.
Coppinger,  Mme.,  335.
Cordier,  N.,  122,  123.
Cordula,  535.
Corneille,  Dr.,  429,  452.

INDEX

633

Cornillier,  P.,  154,  155.

Cornis,  Dr.,  316.

Coromelas,  222.

Corrales,  O.,  483,  534,  542.

Cotte,  P.,  293.

Couesdon,  Mme.,  159.

Couesnon,  Mme.,  293.

Coulomb,  436.

Courmelles,  Dr.  de,  483.

Courtier,  222,  413,  419,  420,  440,  492,
496,  497.

Couta,  Dr.  Souza,  120.

Cowes,  272,  273,  423,  452.

Cox,  338,  411.

Cox,  Mme.,  293,  294.

Cox,   Serjeant,  30.

Craigie,  Colonel,  294.

Crawford,  W.,  430-432,  438,  441,
442,  445,  469,  491,  618.

Creery,  58,  90,  116,  445.

Cremieux,  G.,  219,  302,  303.

Crepieux-Jamin,  185.

Crookes,  Sir  W.,  7,  13,  15,  30-33,  35,
44,  169,  207,  223,  407-410,  438,  448,
455,  461,  464,  467,  468,  470-472,
474,  476,  483,  485,  492-495,  514,
534,  597,  600,  602,  618.

Cumberland,  28.

Curie,  M.,  413,  496,  497.

Curie,  P.,  413,  535.

Curtius,  Rufus,  18.

Cushman,  A.,  481.

Cuvier,  72.

Cybulski,  426.

Cyriax,  Dr.,  547.

Dace,  159.

Dallas,  Mme.,  155,  171.
Dalmacius  of  Gironne,  545.
Damiani,  224,  413,  473,  474.
Darget,  152,  480,  481,  484,  558.
Dariex,  33,  120,  297,  413,  417,  421,

429,  464,  535.
Darwin,  30,  308.
Davane,  J.,  487.
Davenport,  39,  399,  462.
Davey,  449.
Davies,  Mme.,  447.
Daviso,  Colonel,  146.
Day,  R,  140.

Deane,  Mme.,  480.
Dear,  Mme.,  575.
Decrequy,  504,  509.
Dee,  Dr.  J.,  200.
Deinhard,  L.,  177,  509.
Delaage,  118,  119.

Delanne,  G,  36,  87,  94,  104,  118,
152,  178,  225,  226,  450,  467,  473-
475,  477,  504,  506,  507,  537,  553,
557-559,  575,  576.

Deleuze,  22,  23,  31,  99,  100,  102.

Delorme,  376,  377.

Demadrille,  504,  509.

Demay,  C,  296.

Dencausse,  350.

Denis,  L.,  37.

Dennys,  Mme.,  339,  340.

Denton,  E.,  177.

Denton,  W.,  177.

Derter,  585.

Derudder,  110.

Desbarolles,  184.

Desbeaux,  M.,  379,  384.

Descartes,  473.

Descormiers,  177.

Desmoulin,  F.,  81.

Despine,  Dr.,  115.

Dessoir,  M.,  21,  93,  223,  439,  440.

Detken,  M.,  563.

Deupes,  Mme.,  295.

Devereux,  O.,  588.

Devienne,  298.

Dhiere,  Claude,  545.

Dickens,  C,  78,  209,  212,  381,  613.

Dickinson,  295,  296,  327.

Diday,  111.

Didelot,  224.

Diderot,  72.

Didier,  A.,  24,  118-120,  359.
Dingfeldcr,  Dr.,  162.
Dingwall,  544.
Dio  Cassius,  160.
Divers,  377.
Dombrain,  R.,  284.
Dominique  San  Diego,  546.
Domitian,  160.
Donato,  101,  105.
Don  Constantino,  534.
Done,  259,  260.
Dontaz,  Abbe,  295.

634

INDEX

Dorat,  Mme.,  406.

Dorian,  T.,  153,  154.

Doyle,  Conan,  146,  347,  382,  484,  613.

Draga,  Queen,  5,  159,  166,  167.

Drake,  270.

Drakoules,  198.

Dresser,  H.,  111.

Drubay,  501.

Duchatel,  E.,  177,  240,  363,  577.
Duck,  Mme.,  296.
Dudlay,  Mme.,  273,  355.
Dufaux,  H.,  77,  78.
Dufay,  de,  105,  117,  179.
Dufilhol,  Dr.,  368.
Dulley,  367.
Dumas,  A.,  119.
Dumontpallier,  183.
Dunphy,  495.

Dunraven,  Lord,  46,  303,  405,  485.

Dupre,  J.,  383.

Du  Prel,  37,  600.

Dupuy,  377.

Diirer,  A.,  162.

Durig,  Dr.,  438.

Durville,  H.,  585,  586.

Dusart,  Dr.,  106,  226.

Duvanel,  A.,  153.

Dyne,  297.

Earle,  251.

Ebstein,  456.

Eddy,  M.,  110,  111.

Edinger,  242.

Edisburg,  370.

Edison,  197.

Edmund,  Captain,  300.

Edmunds,  Judge,  26,  27,  30,  221,  222,
405,  455.

Edmunds,  L.,  221.

Edwards,  93.

Eeden,  van,  157,  158,  224.

Eglinton,  33,  39,  118,  224,  340,  443,
448,  449,  452,  453,  457,  471,  478,
479,  483,  535-537,  542,  548.

Eichwald,  539.

Einstein,  468,  625.

Eldred,  456,  458,  471.

Elgee,  Mme.,  339.

Eliza,  140.

Elliotson,  24.

Encausse,  Dr.,  452,  453.
Erfurt,  539.

Erhardt,  Baron,  528,  529.

Erny,  224,  409,  424,  495,  535,  536,

540,  584.
Escolan,  332.

Escourru,  Mme.,  254,  297,  298.
Esdaile,  25.
Eslon,  22.

Esperance,  Mme.  d',  33,  39,  43,  226,
274,  399,  443,  457,  458,  471,  476,
478,  479,  492,  514,  538,  539,  542.

Eugenie,  112,  132,  133.

Eugenie,  Mme.,  309.

Euler,  222.

Euripides,  176.

Eusapia  Paladino,  5,  33,  34,  38,  39,
42,  60,  70,  137,  209,  210,  399,  402-
404,  410,  412-421,  428,  431,  433,
437-443,  446,  451,  453,  456-458,
461,  463-467,  469-474,  477-480,  483,
488,  489,  492,  496-500,  502,  503,
505,  515,  529,  534,  535,  542,  549,
550,  592,  598,  609.

Eustance,  Mme.,  259,  298.

Eutyphron,  17.

Eva  (see  Marthe  Beraud).

Evangelides,  221.

Evans,  Mme.,  330.

Everitt,  298.

Ezekiel,  74.

Faivre,  Dr.,  102.
Falcomer,  474.
Falcoz,  232.
Falkinburg,  337.
Fanton,  Dr.,  121,  122,  124.
Faraday,  28.

Farber,  Archdeacon,  298.
Farigoule,  L.,  37,  187.
Fechner,  468.

Feda  (see  Mrs.  Leonard).
Feijao,  O.,  150,  529-532.
Fenelon,  72.

Fenzi,  Sebastian  and  C,  321.
Ferdinand,  Archduke,  386.
Fere,  113.
Feron,  350.
Ferrari,  G.,  558.

INDEX

635

Ferrari,  H.,  71,  96,  126,  131,  132,

168,  185,  242,  260,  361.
Ferrero,  Mme.,  418.
Ferrier,  308.
Ferroul,  Dr.,  121,  122.
Fevrier,  General,  377.
Field,  289,  327.

Fielding,  E.,  34,  413,  418,  420,  472,

535,  544.
Figueroa,  G.  de,  384,  385,  617.
Figuier,  22.
Filituto,  M.,  224.

Finzi,  G.,  34,  413,  416,  417,  464,  497.

Firmin,  Mme.,  475.

Fish,  L.,  25.

Fitch,  General,  301.

Flammarion,  C.,  7,  8,  34,  36-38,  106,
115,  120,  195,  252,  254,  262,  269.
277,  284,  286,  290,  291,  294,  295,
297-299,  302,  310,  312,  313,  315,
316,  318,  319,  323-325,  335,  338,
339,  341,  350,  368,  371,  380,  385,
386,  395,  413,  488,  503,  600.

Flanigan,  589.

Flaubert,  162.

Fleres,  D.,  355.

Fleury,  365.

Fleury,  General,  298.

Flint,  29.

Florentine,  A.,  217,  218.
Florrie,  C.,  447.

Flournoy,  T.,  50,  78,  79,  158,  164,
209,  221,  369,  439,  470,  528,  609,
610.

Flouriere,  120.

Foa,  34,  413,  418.  419,  464,  535.
Focke,  Mme.,  337.
Foissac,  23.
Fontaine,  F.,  546.

Fontenay,  G.  de,  103,  434,  460,  480,
484,  501-503,  511,  526,  527,  559.
Fonvielle,  Mme.  de,  298,  299.
Forbes,  Mme.,  173,  174.
Fortin,  Abbe,  435.
Foster,  147.
Fouquier-Tinville,  73.
Fournat,  A.,  545.
Fournier,  G.,  168-170.
Fowler,  L.,  155.

Fox  Sisters,  15,  25-27,  29,  39,  399,
424,  443,  454,  463,  471,  479,  540.
France,  A.,  312.
France,  Dr.,  438.
Francis,  Mme.,  452.
Frapart,  Dr.,  119.
Frederic,  Duke,  546.
Freer,  Mile.,  201,  366,  592.
Fremery,  423,  541.
Freud,  37.

Freudenberg,  Dr.,  192.
Freville,  Mme.,  263,  266,  321.
Freya,  Mme.,  120,  185,  350,  351.
Frigerio,  Dr.,  189.
Frondoni-Lacombe,  Mme.,  150,  477,

529-534,  542.
Fryer,  R.,  272.
Fulton,  8.
Funk,  I.,  151.
Furtado,  532,  533.

Galichon,  Mme.,  297.
Galileo,  8.

Gallet,  178,  376,  377.
Gallichet,  M.,  392.
Galotti,  500.
Galvani,  620.
Gandy,  J.,  251.
Gargain,  110.
Garnay,  I.,  140.
Gamier,  Abbe,  385.
Gasparin,  28,  406.
Gaston,  B.,  299.
Gautier,  295.
Gay,  Mme.,  300.

Gazzera,  L.,  39,  46,  400,  432-434,

457,  492,  525-527,  542.
Geley,  G.,  33,  36,  81,  198,  199,  327,

349,  350,  432,  467,  469,  470,  511,

524,  525,  543,  545,  620.
Gerosa,  412.
Giacchi,  Dr.,  315,  316.
Gibier,  225,  411,  412,  451-453,  462,

463,  475,  477,  492,  514,  527,  528.
Gielski,  de,  545.
Gifford,  R.,  158.
Gignon,  276.
Gilbert,  106,  125.
Gilbert,  Dr.,  589.
Giolitti,  153.

636

INDEX

Girard,  P.,  8.
Girardin,  E.  de,  354.
Girardin,  Mme.  de,  74.
Gladstone,  224,  453.
Glanvil,  J.,  563.
Glardon,  A.,  93.
Glaucon,  16.
Glyn,  536.

Goclenius,  14,  22,  106.
Godfrey,  557.
Goethe,  554.

Goligher,  Mile.,  33,  34,  39,  43,  400,
430,  431,  438,  441,  443,  445,  469,
489,  534,  542.

Gollin,  301.

Gomanys,  Count,  277.

Gonner,  138.

Goodall,  300.

Gordigiani,  149,  150.

Gorres,  20,  21,  546,  547.

Gower,  226.

Grabinski,  386.

Grabow,  243.

Graesse,  3.

Graham,  M.,  429.

Gramont,  A.  de,  34,  162,  413,  417,

451,  501,  535,  600.
Grand-Boulogne,  Dr.,  225.
Grant,  304.

Grasset,  J.,  37,  67,  78,  121,  122,  159,
167,  200,  202,  285,  456,  462,  463,
504,  510,  589.

Grattam,  C.,  145.

Gray,  Dr.,  540.

Gray,  J.,  583.

Green,  Mme,  59,  69,  179,  254,  266,

301,  327.
Gregory,  Mme.,  555.
Gregory,  W.,  116.
Griffin,  M.,  302.
Griffiths,  301.
Grillet,  E.  de,  375.
Grima,  Commandant,  277.
Grimaldi,  Dr.,  196.
Grocyn,  481.
Grottendieck,  590.
Ground,  484.
Grunewald,  F.,  28.
Gudden,  von,  355,  356.
Guerard,  Mme.,  314.

Guerin,  Mme.,  314.
Guicciardi,  Mme,  315.
Guinard,  Dr.,  277.
Gulat-Wellenburg,  Dr,  514.
Guldenstubbe,  de,  450,  451,  553,  554.
Gurney,  E,  7,  26,  33,  35,  87,  268,

456,  557.
Gutenberg,  624.
Guthrie,  M,  87,  93.

Haemmerle,  A,  557.
Haggard,  277.
Haggit,  311.
Hahn,  224.
Hall,  S,  487,  556.
Halle,  M,  303,  372.
Hamilton,  39,  40.
Hanriot,  132.
Hansen,  124.
Happerfield,  219,  220.
Hare,  R,  27,  407.
Harford,  J,  220.
Harriet,  Mme,  335.
Harris,  F,  134,  279.
Hart,  138,  271,  488.
Hartington,  349.
Hartkopf,  242.
Hartmann,  F,  554.
Hartwig,  394.
Harvey,  253.
Hasden,  557.
Haskel,  Mme,  337.
Hatch,  D,  80.
Hauer,  372.
Hauff,  F,  23,  24.
Hauffe,  A,  296.
Haumann,  T,  483.
Hawkins,  Mme,  556.
Hawthorne,  E,  182.
Haxby,  457.
Haye,  Dr,  374.
Hayward,  162.
Hazhatt,  318.
Heidenhain,  32,  99.
Heintzer,  164.
Helena,  112.
Helene,  374.
Hellembach,  Baron,  372.
Hendrickson,  556.
Henicke,  355.

INDEX

637

Hennings,  Mme,  487,  488.
Henry  II,  371.
Herdmann,  87.

Hericourt,  J.,  105,  106,  126,  130,  131,

185,  360.
Herlitzka,  413,  418,  419.
Hers,  Mme.,  303.
Herz,  624.
Heslop,  F.,  37.
Heuze,  P.,  37.
Heymans,  172.
Hill,  A.,  160,  484.
Hill,  M.,  261,  309.
Hillenbach/  541.
Hinkovitch,  224.
Hirschberg,  J.,  194.
Hirschmann,  538.

Hodgson,  R.,  34,  42,  136,  137-144,
155,  210,  219,  226,  349,  413,  414,
456.

Hofman,  A.,  192.
Hollaender,  F.,  197,  198.

Holland,  Mme.  174.
Home,  D.  D.,  31,  34,  38,  39,  43,  46,
137,  144,  145,  303,  399,  405,  407-
411,  431,  436,  437,  442,  443,  448,
453,  462,  466,  467,  471,  472,  478-
480,  483,  485-487,  489,  492,  493,
514,  534,  542,  550,  551,  592.

Hooker,  S.,  435.

Hoping,  184.

Hopkins,  454.

Hoppe,  M.,  89,  198.

Hornung,  E.,  28.

Hosmer,  Mme.,  303.

Houdaille,  O.,  166,  250,  303.

Houdin,  R.,  39,  40,  118,  119,  421.

Houssave,  AM  358.  •

Howard,  139,  211.

Howard,  G.,  271.

Howard,  Lady,  149,  151.

Howitt,  W.,  390.

Hubschmann,  296.

Hugo,  C,  74,  77.

Hugo,  V.,  53,  74-77,  119,  313,  613.

Hugues,  Clovis,  219,  302,  571.

Hulin,  378.

Hulst,  d\  546.

Hunter,  Mme.,  331.

Hurley,  B.,  330.

Husson,  Dr.,  22,  23,  99,  104.
Hutchins,  247,  304.
Huxley,  30.

Huygens,  Mme.,  423,  541.

Hyslop,  J.,  34,  36,  79,  90,  119,  137
139-145,  151,  155,  158,  200,  201
210,  221,  275,  308,  314,  366,  374'
445,  446,  455,  480.

Hyslop,  R.,  140.

Imoda,  E.,  46,  432,  464,  483,  492,

525-527.
Irvine,  573.
Isnard,  340,  372,  555.
Istrati,  559.
Ivey,  375,  376.

Jacks,  53.
Jackson,  Dr.,  561.
Jafre,  332.
James,  78,  209.

James,  W.,  7,  33,  34,  137,  138,  142,
143,  144,  151,  270,  388,  468,  600.
Janesson,  G.,  373.
Janet,  J.,  104.

Janet,  P.,  20,  44,  104,  106,  125,  200.

Jansen,  Dr.,  423.

Jaures,  159.

Jean,  Dr.,  304.

Jeanne,  310,  327.

Jeanne  d'Arc,  17,  19,  77,  389.

Jencken,  485,  488.

Jerry,  J.,  138.

Jim,  Mountain,  288,  289.

Jobert,  29.

Johnson,  A.,  102,  173,  174,  262,  393,
418.

Johnson,  Dr.,  482.
Joire,  Dr.,  104,  200,  435,  436.
Joller,  585.
Joncieres,  V.,  421.
Joncken,  Mme.  (see  Fox).
Jones,  321.
Jones,  Dr.,  137.
Jones,  Mme.  367,  368.
Jones,  S.,  182,  263.
Joquelet,  L.,  358.
Joubert,  Mme.,  150.
Jouffreau,  231.
Jubainville,  d'Ade,  315.

638

INDEX

Judd,  Mme.,  575.
Jukes,  304.
Julia,  357,  362.
Julliard,  Dr.,  115.
Jupp,  331.

Kaigodoroff,  153.
Kalerine,  138.
Kalua,  141.
Kane,  Mme.,  26.
Kant,  267.

Kapnist,  Countess,  305,  306.
Kardec,  Allan,  29,  30,  35,  77,  303,

571,  606.
Karin,  N.,  446.
Karr,  A.,  119.
Keep,  A.,  571.
Keisewetter,  C,  21,  28.
Keley,  141.
Keller,  455.
Kelvin,  Lord,  7.
Kemnitz,  Dr.  von,  514.
Kerner,  J.,  23,  296,  346,  547,  548,

587.

Kerr,  Mme.,  289,  307.
Kesley,  R.,  307.
Keulemans,  280,  308.
Killick,  251.
Kilner,  Dr.,  103.

King,  J.,  42,  43,  70,  209,  220,  329,
413,  465,  466,  474, 488,  490, 496,  609.

King,  K.,  32,  45,  220,  413,  461,  467,
474-476,  493-495,  496,  534.

Kingsford,  S.,  189.

Kingston,  Dr.,  574.

Kinnaman,  Dr.,  572.

Kircher,  F.,  100.

Kirk,  93,  557.

Kitchener,  Lord,  582.

Kjelmann,  Dr.,  128.

Klapke,  Dr.,  511,  512.

Kling-Klowstroem,  C.  von,  227.

Kluski,  R,  503,  542,  545.

Knes,  337.

Knight,  R,  160.

Kobbe,  Major,  274.

Kohnstamm,  20.

Korff,  General  von,  145.

Kotik,  Dr.,  190,  191.

Kouprejanoff,  584.

Kraemer,  R.,  290.
Krai,  K.,  240,  241,  243.

Lacassagne,  559.

Lacombe  (see  Frondoni-Lacombe).
Lacretelle,  H.  de,  153.
Lafontaine,  24,  100,  105,  119,  547.
Lagarrue,  Captain,  305.
Lagrange,  M.,  277.
Lamy,  Mme.,  155,  156.
Lane,  Sir  H.,  171,  172.
Landesque,  P.,  231,  232.
Lang,  A.,  33,  200,  308,  369.
Lange,  198.

Langenest,  Mme.,  307.

Langlois,  J.,  127,  135.

Lanne,  Mme.,  314.

Lanyi,  J.  de,  386,  387.

Laplace,  50,  54,  345,  471.

Larkin,  Lieutenant,  292.

Larmandie,  de,  582.

Lasserre,  H.,  111.

Laurent,  E.,  266.

Lauritzen,  368.

Lavaut,  373.

Laville,  Mme.  de,  312.

Lavoisier,  8,  14.

Leadbater,  325.

Lebas,  Mme.,  385.

Le  Ber,  Mme.,  162.

Le  Bon,  G.,  420,  481.

Lebrun,  Corporal,  317.

Lecour,  P.,  491,  492.

Lee,  280,  381.

Leeds,  Mme.,  202.

Lefebvre,  J.,  162,  582.

Lefroy,  122.

Legludic,  115.

Leibnitz,  49.

Lemaire,  160.

Lemaitre,  A.,  81.

Lemb,  457.

Lemerle,  162,  528.

Lemoine,  P.,  229,  230,  233,  234,  236.

Lemonnier,  259,  332,  333.

Lenormand,  Mme.,  24.

Leonard,  Mme.,  33,  42,  44,  156,  157,

162,  163,  214-216,  361,  612.
Leonie,  89,  104,  125,  126,  127,  135.
Lepine,  381.

INDEX

639

Lermina,  J.,  305.
Lescoeur,  P.,  202.
Lesseps,  de,  390.
Lett,  Mme.,  340.
Leymarie,  28.
Lichfield,  M.,  273.
Liebeault,  99,  105,  306,  357.
Lightfoot,  Mme.,  305.
Lillian,  F.,  583.
Lily,  352.

Linda  (see  Gazzera).
Lindsay,  90,  480.
Lindsay,  Lord,  485,  487.
Linnaeus,  C,  380.
Littre,  545.
Livermore,  479,  540.
Ljung,  127.
Lloyd,  Major,  276.
Lloyd,  V.,  382.
Locke,  573.

Lodge,  Sir  O.,  7,  33,  34,  36,  86-88,
92,  138,  142-144,  146,  155,  156,  161,
163,  173,  180,  187,  206,  210,  214-
216,  219,  223,  267,  292,  328,  383,
388,  413,  415,  417,  439,  440,  451,
456,  461,  464,  465,  468-470,  505,
530,  535,  597,  598,  600,  602,  610,
620,  625.

Lodge,  R.,  210,  214-216,  218,  570,  610,
614.

Lolla,  Mme.,  376.

Lombroso,  7,  34,  90,  195,  196,  209,
379,  412,  413,  415,  419,  464,  535,
565,  580,  597,  600.

Longet,  261.

Louis  XI,  77.

Louise,  51,  153,  352.

Lubbock,  30,  407.

Luciani,  Dr.,  549.

Lucie,  475.

Lucilius,  C,  80.

Ludovic,  H.,  198.

Ludovic,  S.,  187,  195.

Ludwig,  Dr.,  266.

Luigi,  218.

Lukawski,  355.

Lully,  462.

Lusteneau,  390.

Lutoslawski,  W.,  4.

Luxmore,  495.

Lydia,  378,  379.
Lydia,  W.,  190,  191.
Lyon,  Dr.,  350.
Lyon,  G.,  515.
Lyro,  de,  88.

McCready,  275.
McDougall,  W.,  33.
MacDonald,  160.
MacLellan,  384.
MacNab,  412,  480.
Mabire,  134.
Machner,  82.
Mackenzie,  152,  295.
Macklin,  Mme.,  307.
Maclean,  Dr.,  314.
Maddock,  457.

Maeterlinck,  M.,  37,  240,  241,  608.

Mager,  H.,  228-230,  232-236.

Magnan,  Dr.,  102.

Maingot,  Dr.,  102.

Majendie,  7.

Makan,  27.

Malgras,  28.

Mamtchitch,  155.

Manceaux,  Dr.,  323.

Mangin,  M.,  109,  110,  184,  210,  528.

Mangot,  249,  336.

Mar...,  Dr.,  183.

Marage,  232.

Marcel,  378.

March,  589.

Marchandon,  358.

Marchant,  307.

Marechal,  Mme.,  262.

Marey,  8.

Marguerite,  55,  56,  62,  65,  66,  68,  306.
Marie,  117,  120.

Marie  Antoinette,  40,  41,  72,  77,  144,

209,  212,  490,  578,  610.
Marillat,  119.
Marillier,  L.,  33,  576.
Marks,  R,  272.
Marmontel,  365.
Marque,  Dr.,  121.
Marracino,  586.

Marryat,  R,  37,  492,  495,  536,  607.
Marston,  W.,  364.
Marston,  W.,  364.
Martel,  A.,  231,  232.

INDEX

Martillet,  Mme,  580.
Martin,  R.,  293,  605.
Martiville,  Mme.,  267.
Martyn,  Mme.,  252.
Marzorati,  150,  535.
Maseyk,  390.

Maskelyne,  39,  40,  462,  463,  537.
Massey,  155.

Mastro-Pietro,  Mme.,  374.
Mathiex,  P.,  445.
Matthews,  263,  333.
Maury,  20,  256.
Maxfield,  363.

Maxwell,  J.,  27,  34,  36,  38,  44,  70,
103,  175-177,  197,  227,  364,  366,
413,  417,  423,  433,  444,  457,  464,
467,  485,  498,  501,  510,  511,  535,
587,  589,  600.

May,  A.  von,  200.

Mayo,  H.,  116.

Melanie,  52,  64,  266.

Meneer,  Mme.,  323.

Menou-Cornuet,  340.

Mercier,  Dr.,  421.

Merimee,  P.,  77.

Mermet,  231.

Mery,  G.,  435.

Mesmer,  15,  21,  22,  65,  99.

Mialaret,  R.,  279,  336.

Mielle,  23.

Mignon,  394.

Miles,  173.

Miller,  456,  463,  471.

Milnes,  Mme.,  580.

Mirville,  de,  28.

Mitchell,  W.,  142,  308.

Mitchiner,  478.

Mitchinoff,  369.

Mittelmayer,  391.

Miyatovitch,  C,  223.

Moliere,  53,  72,  73,  75,  76,  613.

Monck,  Dr.,  477,  537.

Montaigne,  219.

Montalembert,  A.  de,  27.

Montebello,  Mme.  de,  161,  357.

Montespan,  de,  183.

Montluc,  de,  371.

Montorgueil,  474.

Montpensier,  de,  115.

Moor,  Major,  581.

Moore,  U.,  37.
Moratief,  Mme.,  369.
Morice,  M.,  579.
Moricourt,  J.,  183.
Morin,  28,  270,  271.
Moritz,  307,  367.
Morrison,  Mme.,  368.
Morrison,  J.,  308.
Morse,  J.,  217.

Morselli,  7,  27,  32,  34,  412,  413,  418,
419,  455,  464,  474,  478,  481,  498,
499,  503.  535,  550,  597,  600.

Morton,  26,  27.

Morton,  R.,  572.

Moses,  72.

Moses,  Stainton,  33,  36,  38,  39,  43,  44,
140,  144,  152,  164,  217,  353,  400,
422,  449,  450,  467,  471,  472,  477,
480-483,  489,  492,  537,  549-551,  609.

Mosso,  A.,  418.

Mouat.  330.

Moultrie,  151.

Moureau,  Captain,  324.

Mousset,  485.

Moutin,  Dr.,  150.

Moutonnier,  157,  452,  611.

Mozart,  53,  81,  162.

Miiller,  J.,  8,  78.

Munro,  Mme.,  368,  561.

Murillo,  545.

Murphy,  588.

Murray,  G.,  33,  189.

Musset,  A.  de,  581.

Muza,  I.,  355.

Myers,  A.,  34,  128.

Myers,  F.  W.  H.,  3,  7,  17,  19,  26,  33-
36,  42,  64,  65,  80,  87,  90,  93,  102,
105,  128,  137,  142,  144,  151,  155-
157,  163,  174,  175,  200-204,  214,
216,  219,  226,  258,  268,  271,  275,
292,  323,  347,  348,  355,  372,  413,
417,  420,  447-449,  451,  456,  461,
465,  468,  470,  472,  482,  535,  555,
556,  559,  560,  572,  575,  584,  598,
600,  613,  620,  625.

Myers,  P.,  366,  612,  613.

Mysz,  Dr.,  453.

Napier,  381.
Napoleoni,  393.

INDEX

641

Nathan,  M.,  548.
Negre,  309.

Nelaton,  Dr.,  298,  386.
Nelly  (see  Mrs.  Thompson).
Nepenthes  (see  Mme.  d'Esperance).
Newbold,  140.
Newnham,  249.
Newton,  544.

Nichols,  Dr.,  453,  454,  536.
Nicholson,  152.
Nilovitch,  339.
Nivot,  259,  332,  333.
Noel,  E.,  231,  464,  467,  504-506,  508,
509.

Noell,  L.,  251,  263,  299,  327.
Noggerath,  Mme.,  72.
Noizet,  General,  115.
Nolte,  374.
Nordberg,  424.
Noriagof,  111.
Norlenzki,  419.
Norris,  Mme.,  350.
Norton,  E.,  142.
Notari,  H.,  353.
Nuti,  F.,  546.

O'Donnell,  Dr.,  103.

O'Donnell,  Mme.,  566.

Obalecheff,  Mme.,  338,  339.

Obersteiner,  Dr.,  337,  338.

Ochorowicz,  7,  21,  22,  34,  60,  87,  90,
102,  106,  402,  410,  413,  414,  416,
424,  426,  428,  429,  431,  438-441,
451,  458,  461,  464,  465,  472,  479-
481,  483,  491,  492,  535,  559,  598,
600,  618.

Oesterreich,  37.

Ohmus,  Mme.,  382.

Olchowski,  540.

Olivier,  561,  562.

Olivier,  L.,  168.

Ollendorff,  G.,  168.

Ollendorff,  P.,  324,  325.

Ollivier,  Dr.,  279.

Olsen,  A.,  127.

Oporto,  218,  219.

Orleans,  Due  d\  200,  289,  326.

Orsi,  Dr.,  256,  316.

Ossovietzki,  S.,  208.

Osten,  W.  von,  240.

Osty,  Dr.,  119,  122,  123,  135,  184,
357.

Ottolenghi,  S.,  37,  195.

Ourches,  d\  410,  450.

Owen,  R.  D.,  30,  410,  455,  540,  553,

563,  577.
Oxley,  475,  537.

Pagenstecher,  182.
Paget,  259,  263,  273,  340.
Paige,  364.

Paladino  (see  Eusapia).
Palissi,  B.  de,  81.
Palladia,  155.
Palliser,  Mme.,  309.
Paluzzi,  547.
Pansini,  499.
Papin,  8.
Paquet,  309,  310.
Paracelsus,  14,  22,  106,  624.
Parent,  G.,  278,  310.
Parker,  141.
Pascal,  624.
Pasquier,  N.,  371,  372.
Passaro,  E.,  563.
Passavant,  25,  308,  367.
Pasteur,  12,  625.
Paternostro,  G.,  150.
Paton,  L.,  37.
Patrizi,  Dr.,  549.
Paulet,  Mme.,  358.
Pearson,  Mme.,  335.
Pease,  E.,  571.
Pelaprat,  231.

Pelham,  G.,  41,  42,  139-142,  144,  176,
179,  210-213,  215,  217,  456,  490,
570,  606,  608,  609,  611,  614.

Pelusi,  353.

Penaud,  248,  336,  337.

Pepper,  Mme.,  151.

Pere,  A.,  168.

Perelyguine,  A.,  158.

Peretti,  428,  499.

Perier,  C.  (see  Casimir-Perier).

Perty,  584.

Peter,  J.,  177,  438.

Peters,  V.,  146,  214,  215,  535.

Petetin,  22,  23,  119,  185,  186.

Petit,  Abbe,  389,  548.

Petit- Jean,  82.

642

INDEX

Petrarch,  52,  53,  74.
Peyron,  Admiral,  324.
Pfaffer,  24.
Pfungst,  O.,  240,  242.
Phaneg,  180.
Phibbs,  266,  276,  327.
Philips,  32,  587.
Philostratus,  160.

Phinuit,  41,  42,  70,  138-142,  144,  179,
209,  211,  213,  220,  361,  609,  611,
612.

Phygia,  476.

Pickmann,  94,  195.

Piddington,  174,  175,  223.

Pieron,  310.

Pigeaire,  Mile.,  115,  187.
Pigeaire,  Mme.,  24.
Pigott,  155.
Pillet,  546.
Pineau,  336,  337.
Pinto,  S.,  530.

Piper,  Mme.,  34,  41-44,  70,  119,  128,
137-145,  155,  156,  160,  163,  174-
176,  179,  180,  205,  209-213,  361,
456,  602,  604,  606,  608,  611,  613.

Planes,  A.,  368.

Planty,  de,  450.

Plato,  16,  450,  551.

Pliny,  572.

Plutarch,  17,  19.

Podmore,  R,  26,  37,  143,  268,  455,

456,  482,  571,  592,  602.
Poincare,  625.
Pompey,  178.

Ponsa,  Mme.,  530,  532,  533.
Poole,  Major,  301,  302.
Popoff,  O.,  369.

Porro,  34,  413,  418,  419,  478,  498,

550.
Post,  25.

Potet,  Baron  du,  22,  24,  25,  31,  65,

100,  106,  113,  152.
Prel,  Du  (see  Du  Prel).
Preyer,  105.
Prince,  Dr.,  36,  70,  458.
Prince,  W.,  38,  381,  484.
Probli,  241.
Probst,  231,  232.
Proctor,  J.,  585.
Purton,  Mme.,  329.

Puysegur,  de,  22,  23,  31,  65,  99.
Pythagoras,  29,  72,  73.

Quillac,  de,  510.
Quintard,  226.

R.,  Mme.,  152,  164-166.
RadclirTe  Hall,  156.
Radnor,  Lady,  149.
Rainaly,  455.
Raines,  Dr.,  588.
Ram,  H.,  321.
Ramacharaka,  110.
Ramorino,  L.,  498.
Ramsden,  173.
Randall,  588.
Rawlinson,  310.
Rawson,  H.,  92,  93.
Ray,  352.

Rayleigh,  Lord,  33.

Reboux,  P.,  78.

Recamier,  106.

Rector,  140,  164,  220,  609.

Reddell,  R,  556.

Reed,  E.,  350.

Reed,  Mme.,  306.

Reese,  89,  196-198.

Regis,  195.

Regnault,  J.,  435.

Reichel,  W.,  535.

Reichenbach,  7,  24,  101,  103,  104,
181.

Reine,  154,  155.
Reiners,  537.
Reinhard,  23.
Relph,  93.

Remy,  364,  365,  455.

Renouard,  d'A.,  132.

Renouard,  C,  310.

Renouard,  P.,  125,  126.

Ribet,  Abbe,  546.

Ribot,  T.,  33,  131.

Ricard,  J.,  115.

Richardson,  Mme.,  276.

Richet,  Mme.  A.,  287,  392,  525.

Richet,  C,  21,  32,  33,  85,  90,  106,

128,  168,  261,  291,  423,  433,  524,

526.

Rieken,  311,  312.
Riondel,  227,  311.

INDEX

643

Rivail,  L.,  29.
Robbins,  144.
Robert,  138,  158,  452.
Roberts,  Mme.,  400.
Robespierre,  72,  312,  327.
Robinson,  L.,  171.
Roch,  Dr.,  558.

Rochas,  A.  de,  7,  20,  24,  34,  36,  102,
103,  104,  106,  183,  264,  322,  406,
412,  413,  415,  417,  451,  464,  468,
474,  478,  481,  489,  501,  503,  535,
546-548,  557,  558,  600.

Rochester,  80.

Roger,  A.,  385.

Romanes,  555.

Roncarini,  Dr.,  195.

Rondeau,  P.,  125.

Rorngold,  E.,  226.

Rosalsky,  Judge,  198.

Rosenkrantz,  J.,  481.

Rostagno,  474.

Rostan,  Dr.,  356.

Roth,  A.,  429,  456,  457,  463,  471,
477.

Rougemont,  F.  de,  407.
Rousseau,  J.,  73.
Roux,  Dr.,  91,  359.
Roux,  M.,  120.
Ruault,  A.,  106.
Rubens,  526.
Ruggieri,  548.
Runciman,  311.
Ruspoli,  de,  525,  527.
Ruth,  120.

St.  Alphonso  de  Liguori,  19,  551.
St.  Francis  d'Assisi,  19,  546.
St.  Francis  Xavier,  552.
St.  Helena,  19.
St.  John,  72.

St.  Joseph  de  Copertino,  19,  20,  546,
547.

St.  Marie  d'Agreda,  553.
St.  Paul  de  la  Croix,  546.
St.  Peter  of  Alcantara,  546.
St.  Philip  de  Neri,  546.
St.  Theresa,  19,  546.
Saal,  487.

Sabatier,  34,  413,  417,  498.
Sabin,  O.,  110.

Sage,  141,  210.
Sagee,  553.
Saint-Simon,  200.
Salles,  120.

Salmon,  Mme.,  226,  463,  477,  527,

528,  542.
Salter,  Mme.,  544.
Salvator  de  Horta,  546.
Sambor,  155,  539,  540,  542.
Samona,  C,  36,  73,  362.
Samuel,  174.
Sanders,  312.
Sangle,  Dr.,  115.
Sanson,  Mme.,  104,  106.
Santangelo,  Dr.,  546.
Santi,  Dr.,  390.
Santo-Liquido,  Dr.,  153.
Sardou,  V.,  53,  81.
Sartoris,  Dr.,  195.
Sassaroli,  V.,  395.
Saunders,  561.
Saurel,  385.
Saussure,  de,  79.
Savage,  M.,  351,  583.
Savelli,  393.
Savoyer,  589.
Scarpa,  499.
Scatcherd,  198.
Schakleton,  455.

Schiaparelli,  7,  34,  412,  415,  416,  464,

468,  497,  534.
Schiff,  28,  29,  443.
Schiller,  F.,  33,  94.
Schmidt,  Dr.,  547.
Schmitz,  Mme.,  115.
Schmoll,  134.
Schonelz,  539.
Schopenhauer,  380,  381.
Schotelius,  198.

Schrenck-Notzing,  A.  de,  34,  37,
188,  197,  413,  417,  426,  432,  438-
442,  460,  464,  467,  469,  470,  476,
477,  491,  504,  510-515,  523,  525,
526,  535,  600,  613.

Schtcharoff,  582.

Scott,  573.

Scripture,  10.

Searle,  275.

Seeress  of  Prevorst,  42,  200,  296,
I     356,  547,  548,  587.

644

INDEX

Segantini,  G.,  349.
Segard,  Dr.,  45,  413,  415.
Seguier,  Dr.,  118.
Selenka,  Mme.,  224.
Serboff,  557.
Serizolles,  M.,  312,  313.
Sermyn,  de,  351,  354.
Serrano,  M.,  313.
Severn,  Mme.,  275.
Shagren,  Mme.,  556.
Shakespeare,  74,  75.
Shaw,  361.
Shelp,  581.

Sherbrooke,  259,  334,  335.

Sherman,  260,  313.

Shilton,  90.

Shirman,  225.

Shirving,  315.

Sidgwick,  Mme.  A.,  326.

Sidgwick,  H.,  26,  33,  413,  415,  417,

440,  456,  602.
Sidgwick,  Mme.  H.,  33,  69,  102,  118,

155,  163,  174,  175,  294,  347,  364,

365,  413,  414,  417,  439,  444,  577,

584.

Siemiradzki,  413,  416.
Simon  Magus,  18,  19.
Simpson,  V.,  574.
Sinclair,  A.,  583.
Sings,  314,  315.
Sinnett,  587.

Slade,  33,  39,  411,  412,  437,  448,  449,

451,  452,  457,  471.
Smead,  Mme.,  79,  221.
Smith,  A.,  33.
Smith,  G.,  26,  87.
Smith,  Mme.  H.,  81.
Smith,  Helen,  40-42,  50,  51,  54,  72,

76-79,  81,  144,  145,  158,  160,  165,

209,  221,  490,  609,  610.
Smith,  J.,  251.
Snaw,  454.
Snell,  333,  343.
Socrates,  16,  17,  72,  344.
Sollier,  Dr.,  113.

Solovovo,  P.,  408,  456,  459,  470,  472,

539,  540.
Sombreuil,  de,  73.
Sonrel,  387-390.
Soothywoode,  583.

Sophie  B.,  190.
Sordi,  L.,  535.
Sparr,  Mme.,  26.
Speakman,  Dr.,  155.
Specht,  Dr.,  438.

Spear,  M.  and  Mme.,  422,  449,  450

471,  472,  480-482,  537.
Speranski,  188.
Stanhope,  Lady,  390.
Stanislawa,  P.,  525,  534.
Stankevitch,  556.

Stead,  W.,  152,  172,  361,  456,  553,
613.

Stella,  42,  51,  52,  54,  59,  64,  74,  135,
143,  147-149,  266,  446,  476,  561,

562,  598.
Stella,  Mme.,  289.
Stevenson,  560.
Stewart,  B.,  33.
Stiegler,  541.
Stirling,  W.,  148.
Stone,  117.
Storia,  Mme.,  315.
Stout,  541.
Stramm,  E.,  153.
Strauss,  24.
Strieffert,  M.,  338.
Stromberg,  274.
Suhr,  123.

Sully-Prudhomme,  336.
Surbled,  435.
Surga,  G.  de,  162.
Swedenborg,  267.
Swiney,  Colonel,  315.
Swithinbank,  276,  331.
Symonds,  J.,  314.

Tacitus,  18.

Tamburini,  280,  315,  415.
Tapp,  474.

Tardieu,  Dr.,  387-389.
Tassacher,  37.
Tatin,  128.

Taunton,  Mme.,  259,  260,  329.

Tausch,  151.

Teale,  Mme.,  316.

TelechofT,  Mme.,  247,  259,  338.

Terrien,  Dr.,  122.

Tertullian,  21,  401.

Teste,  24,  348,  349.

INDEX

645

Thaw,  Dr.,  90,  137.
Themistocles,  596.
Thermotis,  80.
Thierault,  357,  358.
Thiers,  597.
Thiery,  28.
Thilo,  M.  de,  316.
Thiriat,  Mme.  de,  315.
Thomas,  Mme.,  373.
Thomassin,  501.

Thompson,  Dr.  J.,  197,  295,  296.
Thomson,  Mme.,  33,  157,  179,  224,

261,  328,  610,  611.
Thomson,  158.
Thoulet,  178,  375,  379.
Thury,  406.
Thyraeus,  Petrus,  563.
Tieber,  Dr.,  541.
Tiedmann,  362.
Tiresias,  200.
Tirone,  R.,  379,  380.
Tischer,  37.

Tischner,  von  R.,  162,  192,  193.
Tissandier,  Mme.  G.,  261.
Tissot,  J.,  536.
Titus,  Mme.,  270.
Toeffer,  Mme.,  541.
Tolosa-Latour,  105,  299.
Tomczyk,  Stanislawa,  33,  34,  39,  43,

400,  424,  426,  428,  433,  438-443,

458,  464,  480.
Tonelli,  Mme.,  275.
Toutschkoff,  Countess,  375.
Towns,  340.
Tracy,  362.

Travers-Smith,  Mme.,  171,  172.
Treloar,  Mme.,  332.
Trisk,  Yza,  150.
Tristan,  J.  de,  235,  236.
Troitzki,  Dr.,  188.
Tromelin,  L.  de,  81,  376.
Troubridge,  Lady,  156.
Trowbridge,  142.
Tweedale,  333,  334,  393.
Tyndall,  30.
Tyre,  L.,  575.

Ulric,  d\  318.
Ulrici,  367.

Ulysses,  200.
Underhill,  E.,  37,  540.
Uranenko,  317.
Urban  VIII,  20,  547.
Urysz,  Dr.,  226.
Usher,  F,  88.

Vacquerie,  74.
Valentine,  C,  318.
Vallantin,  231.
Vallemont,  227.
Van  Loon,  Dr.,  196.
Varay,  377.

Varley,  C,  30,  407,  408,  464,  496.
Vaschide,  N.,  184,  253.
Vassalo,  478,  498,  535.
Vauchez,  E.,  483.
Velpeau,  29.
Venturi,  S.,  280.

Venzano,   159,  413,  419,  474,  492,

498,  501.
Verity,  556.
Verrall,  Dr.,  174.
Verrall,  H.,  147,  174,  447.
Verrall,  Mme.,  44,   137,   141,  174-

176,  189,  200,  223,  365,  604,  613.
Vesme,  C.  de,  33,  146,  159,  220,  221,

240,  241,  395,  423,  511,  528,  535.
Vettelini,  154,  155.
Vianney,  Cure  d'Ars,  546.
Viaud,  317.
Vidal,  289.
Vidigal,  Dr.,  117.
Viel  Castel,  de,  409.
Vincente,  42,  509.
Vincenzo,  525,  611.
Vire,  A.,  231,  237.
Vitalis,  J.,  351.
Vivant,  119.
Vlavianos,  Dr.,  222.
Vogler,  Dr.,  318.
Volkmann,  495,  496.
Volpi,  559.
Volterra,  277.
Vourniquel,  G.,  37.

Wagner,  542.
Wahu,  37.

Wales,  H.,  174,  613.

646

INDEX

Wallace,  A.  Russel,  7,  13,  30,  358,
406,  410,  455,  477,  536,  538,  597,
600.

Wallace,  C,  117,  358.
Waller,  Dr.,  363,  436.
Waller,  T.,  217.
Wanley,  319.

Warcollier,  98,  108,  180,  193,  194,

258,  363.
Warren,  483.

Wasielewski,  182,  192,  193.
Watson,  160,  550.
Watson,  Mme.,  179.
Watt,  H.,  275.

Watteville,  A.  de,  34,  413,  417,  501.

Weak  man,  M.,  25.

Wedgwood,  H.,  570.

Weinberg,  Dr.,  196.

Weld,  259,  261,  338,  343.

Wellington,  323.

Wells,  D.,  27.

Wells,  H.,  26,  27.

Wenaud,  305.

West,  Mme,  272.

Wetterstrand,  de,  105.

Weyer,  Mme.,  339.

Whately-Smith,  544.

Wheatcroft,  Mme.,  319.

Wickham,  Mme.,  263,  320,  335.

Wight,  318.

Wijk,  446.

Wild,  H.,  140.

Williams,  250,  319.

Williams,  Mme.,  319,  320,  456,  458.

Willy,  S.,  439,  441,  443.

Wilson,  270.

Wilson,  M,  274.
Wilson,  Rev.,  252.
Wiltshire,  116,  395.
Wilve,  262.
Wingfield,  90,  93.
Wittgenstein,  Prince,  145.
Wolff,  390.
Wood,  T.,  366.
Wood,  Mme,  457.
Woodham,  Mme,  257.
Woolcote,  Dr.,  320.
Woolley,  544.
Wriedt,  Mme,  224,  225.
Wright,  271,  320.
Wynne,  C,  486.

Wynyard,  Colonel,  259,  335,  336.

Xenophon,  16.

Youdenitch,  Mme,  540.
Young,  Mme,  222,  334,  383.
Yourgevitch,  440.
Yung,  E,  360.
Yver,  341.
Yves-Plessis,  R,  3.

Zabaski,  539.
Zancigs,  462.
Ziegler,  242.

Zingaropoli,  150,  562,  565,  586.
Zipelius,  373.

Zollner,  7,  13,  30,  36,  411,  455,  468,

542,  597,  600.
Zoroaster,  81.
Zuccarino,  549.
Zuleika,  363.
