On the Hypotheses which lie at the Bases of Geometry (Bernhard Riemann (W. K. Clifford, trans.), 1873)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: W. K. Clifford's English translation, Nature vol. 8 (1873), Parts I-II, extracted from the Internet Archive volume scan (https://archive.org/details/nature0008unse). Bernhard Riemann (1826-1866), Clifford 1873 - the Habilitation lecture: curved space, the mathematics Einstein would need.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ON  THE  HYPOTHESES  WHICH  LIE  . 
THE  BASES  OF  GEOMETRY * 

Plan  of  the  Investigation 

T  is  known  that  geometry  assumes,  as  things  given,  botl 
notion  of  space  and  the  first  principles  of  constructioi 
space.  She  gives  definitions  of  them  which  are  merely  nom 
while  the  true  determinations  appear  in  the  form  of  axi 
The  relation  of  these  assumptions  remains  consequently  in  c 
ness  ;  we  neither  perceive  whether  and  how  far  their  conne 
is  necessary,  nor,  a  priori,  whether  it  is  possible. 

From  Euclid  to  Legendre  (to  name  the  most  famous  of  mo 
reforming  geometers)  this  darkness  was  cleared  up  neither  by 
thematicians  nor  by  such  philosophers  as  concerned  thems 
with  it.  The  reason  of  this  is  doubtless  that  the  general  noth 
multiply  extended  magnitudes  (in  which  space-magnitude; 
included)  remained  entirely  unworked.  I  have  in  the  first  p 
therefore,  set  myself  the  task  of  constructing  the  notion 
multiply  extended  magnitude  out  of  general  notions  of  m; 
tude.  It  will  follow  from  this  that  a  multiply  extended  m; 
tude  is  capable  of  different  measure-relations,  and  consequi 
that  space  is  only  a  particular  case  of  a  triply  extended  m; 
tude.  But  hence  flows  as  a  necessary  consequence  that  the 
positions  of  geometry  cannot  be  derived  from  general  notio 
magnitude,  but  that  the  properties  which  distinguish  space 
other  conceivable  triply  extended  magnitudes  are  only  tt 

*  By  Bernhard  Riemann.  (Translated  by  Prof.W.  K.  Clifford,  fron 
xiii.  of  the  Gottingen  Abhandlungen.) 


y  h  1873 J 


NA  TURE 


15 


ced  from  experience.  Thus  arises  the  problem,  to  discover 
implest  matters  of  fact  from  which  the  measure-relations  of 
:  may  be  determined  ;  a  problem  which  from  the  nature 
e  case  is  not  completely  determinate,  since  there  may  be 
al  systems  of  matters  of  fact  which  suffice  to  determine  the 
ure-relations  of  space — the  most  important  system  for  our 
nt  purpose  being  that  which  Euclid  has  laid  down  as  a 
lation.  These  matters  of  fact  are — like  all  matters  of  (act — 
ecessary,  but  only  of  empirical  certainty  ;  they  are  hypo- 
3.  We  may  therefore  investigate  their  probability,  which 
n  the  limits  of  observation  is  of  course  very  great,  and 
re  about  the  justice  of  their  extension  beyond  the  limits  of 
■vation,  on  the  side  both  of  the  infinitely  great  and  of  the 
tely  small. 

I. — Notion  of  an  n -ply  extended  magnitude 

proceeding  to  attempt  the  solution  of  the  first  of  these  pro- 
s,  the  development  of  the  notion  of  a  multiply  extended 
liiude,  I  think  I  may  the  more  claim  indulgent  criticism  in 
[  am  not  practised  in  such  undertakings  of  a  philosophical 
e  where  the  difficulty  lies  more  in  the  notions  themselves 
in  the  construction  ;  and  that  besides  some  very  short  hints 
,e  matter  given  by  Privy  Councillor  Gauss  in  his  second 
oir  on  Biquadratic  Residues,  in  the  “Gottingen  Gelelirte 
ige,”  and  in  his  Jubilee-book,  and  some  philosophical  re¬ 
lies  of  Herbart,  I  could  make  use  of  no  previous  labours. 

. — Magnitude-notions  are  only  possible  where  there  is  an 
:edent  general  notion  which  admits  of  different  specialisa- 
.  According  as  there  exists  among  these  specialisations  a 
nuous  path  from  one  to  another  or  not,  they  form  a  con¬ 
us  or  discrete  manifoldness  :  the  individual  specialisations 
ailed  in  the  first  case  points,  in  the  second  case  elements,  of 
ranifoldness.  Notions  whose  specialisations  form  a  discrete 
foldness  are  so  common  that  at  least  in  the  cultivated 
tages  any  things  being  given  it  is  always  possible  to  find  a 
n  in  which  they  are  included.  (Idence  mathematicians  might 
sitatingly  found  the  theory  of  discrete  magnitudes  upon  the 
date  that,  certain  given  things  are  to  be  regarded  as  equiva- 
1  On  the  other  hand,  so  few  and  far  between  are  the  occa- 
for  forming  notions  whose  specialisations  make  up  a  con¬ 
us  manifoldness,  that  the  only  simple  notions  whose 
alisations  form  a  multiply  extended  manifoldness  are  the 
ions  of  perceived  objects  and  colours.  More  frequent  ccca- 
for  the  creation  and  development  of  these  notions  occur 
in  the  higher  mathematic. 

:finite  portions  of  a  manifoldness,  distinguished  by  a  mark 
r  a  boundary,  are  called  Quanta.  Their  comparison  with 
d  to  quantity  is  accomplished  in  the  case  of  discrete  mag- 
les  by  counting,  in  the  case  of  continuous  magnitudes  by 
uring.  Measure  consists  in  the  superposition  of  the  magni- 
;  to  be  compared  ;  it  therefore  requires  a  means  of  using 
nagnitude  as  the  standard  for  another.  In  the  absence  of 
:wo  magnitudes  can  only  be  compared  when  one  is  a  part 
e  other  ;  in  which  case  also  we  can  only  determine  the  more 
-s  and  not  the  how  much.  The  researches  which  can  in 
case  be  instituted  about  them  form  a  general  division  of  the 
ce  of  magnitude  in  which  magnitudes  are  regarded  not  as 
ing  independently  of  position  and  not  as  expressible  in 
;  of  a  unit,  but  as  regions  in  a  manifoldness.  Such  re- 
hes  have  become  a  necessity  for  many  parts  of  mathematics, 
for  the  treatment  of  many-valued  analytical  functions  ;  and 
rant  of  them  is  no  doubt  a  chief  cause  why  the  celebrated 
'em  of  Abel  and  the  achievements  of  Lagrange,  Pfaff, 
ai  for  the  general  theory  of  differential  equations,  have  so 
remained  unfruitful.  Out  of  this  general  part  of  the  science 
tended  magnitude  in  which  nothing  is  assumed  but  what  is 
fined  in  the  notion  of  it,  it  will  suffice  for  the  present  pur- 
to  bring  into  prominence  two  points  ;  the  first  of  which 
ss  to  the  construction  of  the  notion  of  a  multiply  extended 
foldness,  the  second  relates  to  the  reduction  of  determina- 
of  place  in  a  given  manifoldness  to  determinations  of 
tity,  and  will  make  clear  the  true  character  of  an  w-fold 
it. 

!  —  If  in  the  case  of  a  notion  whose  specialisations  form  a  con- 
ms  manifoldness,  one  passes  from  a  certain  specialisation  in 
inite  way  to  another,  the  specialisations  passed  over  form  a 
ly  extended  maniioldness,  whose  true  character  is  that  in  it 
itinuous  progress  from  a  point  is  possible  only  on  two  sides, 
ards  or  backwards.  If  one  now  supposes  that  this  mani- 
ess  in  its  turn  passes  over  into  another  entirely  different, 
igain  in  a  definite  way,  namely  so  that  each  point  passes 


over  into  a  definite  point  of  the  other,  then  all  the  specialisa¬ 
tions  so  obtained  form  a  doubly  extended  manifoldness.  In  a 
similar  manner  one  obtains  a  triply  extended  manifoldness,  if 
one  imagines  a  doubly  extended  one  passing  over  in  a  definite 
way  to  another  entirely  different ;  and  it  is  easy  to  see  how  this 
construction  may  be  continued.  If  one  regards  the  variable 
object  instead  of  the  determinable  notion  of  it,  this  construction 
may  be  described  as  a  composition  of  a  variability  of  n  -f  1 
dimensions  out  of  a  variability  of  n  dimensions  and  a  variability 
of  one  dimension. 

§  3. — I  shall  now  show  how  conversely  one  may  resolve  a 
variability  whose  region  is  given  into  a  variability  of  one  dimen¬ 
sion  and  a  variability  of  fewer  dimensions.  To  this  end  let  us 
suppose  a  variable  piece  of  a  manifoldness  of  one  dimension- 
reckoned  from  a  fixed  origin,  that  the  values  of  it  may  be  com¬ 
parable  with  one  another — which  has  for  every  point  of  the 
given  manifoldness  a  definite  vaEw,  varying  continuously  with 
the  point ;  or,  in  other  words,  let  us  take  a  continuous  function 
of  position  within  the  given  mani  oldness,  which,  moreover,  is 
not  constant  throughout  any  part  o  that  manifoldness.  Every 
system  of  points  where  the  function  11s  a  constant  value,  forms 
then  a  continuous  manifoldness  of  lewer  dimensions  than  the 
given  one.  These  manifoldnesses  pass  over  continuously  into 
one  another  as  the  function  changes  ;  we  may  therefore  assume 
that  out  of  one  of  them  the  others  proceed,  and  speaking  gene¬ 
rally  this  may  occur  in  such  a  way  that  each  point  passes  over 
into  a  definite  point  of  the  other  ;  the  cases  of  exception  (the 
study  of  which  is  important)  may  here  be  left  unconsidered. 
Hereby  the  determination  of  position  in  the  given  manifoldness 
is  reduced  to  a  determination  of  quantity  and  to  a  determination 
of  position  in  a  manifoldness  of  less  dimensions.  It  is  now  easy 
to  show  that  this  manifoldness  has  n—  1  dimensi  >ns  when 
the  given  maniioldness  is  w-ply  extended.  By  repeating  then 
this  operation  n  times,  the  determination  of  position  in  an 
«-ply  extended  manifoldness  is  reduced  to  n  determinations 
of  quantity,  and  therefore  the  determination  of  position  in  a 
given  manifoldness  is  reduced  to  a  finite  number  of  deter¬ 
minations  of  quantity  when  this  is  possible.  There  are  mani¬ 
foldnesses  in  which  the  determination  of  position  requires 
not  a  finite  number,  but  either  an  endless  series  or  a  continuous 
manifoldness  of  determinations  of  quantity.  Such  manifoldnesses 
are,  for  example,  the  possible  determinations  of  a  function  for  a 
given  region,  the  possible  shapes  of  a  solid  figure,  & c. 

II. — Measure-relations  of  which  a  manifoldness  of  n  dimensions 

is  capable  on  the  assumption  that  lines  have  a  length  independent 

of  position,  and  consequently  that  every  line  may  be  measured  by 

every  other. 

Having  constructed  the  notion  of  a  manifoldness  of  n  dimen¬ 
sions,  and  found  that  its  true  character  consists  in  the  property 
that  the  determination  of  position  in  it  may  be  reduced  to  n 
determinations  of  magnitude,  we  come  to  the  second  of  the 
problems  proposed  above,  viz.,  the  study  of  the  measure-relations 
of  which  such  a  manifoldness  is  capable,  and  of  the  conditions 
which  suffice  to  determine  them.  These  measure-relations  can 
only  be  studied  in  abstract  notions  of  quantity,  and  their  depen¬ 
dence  on  one  another  can  only  be  represented  by  formulte.  On 
certain  assumptions,  however,  they  are  decomposable  into  rela¬ 
tions  which,  taken  separately,  are  capable  of  geometric  re¬ 
presentation  ;  and  thus  it  becomes  possible  to  express  geome¬ 
trically  the  calculated  results.  In  this  way,  to  come  to  solid 
ground,  we  cannot,  it  is  true,  avoid  abstract  considerations  in 
our  formulas,  but  at  least  the  results  of  calculation  may  subse¬ 
quently  be  presented  in  a  geometric  form.  The  foundations  of 
these  two  parts  of  the  question  are  established  in  the  celebrated 
memoir  of  Gauss — “  Disquisitiones  generales  circa  superficies 
curvas.” 

§  i. — Measure-determinations  require  that  quantity  should  be 
independent  of  position,  'which  may  happen  in  various  ways. 
The  hypothesis  which  first  presents  itself,  and  which  I  shall  here 
develop,  is  that  according  to  which  the  length  of  lines  is  in  le- 
pendent  of  their  position,  and  consequently  every  line  is  measur¬ 
able  by  means  of  every  other.  Position-fixing  being  reduced  to 
quan  tity- fixings,  and  the  position  of  a  point  in  the  ^-dimensioned 
maniioldness  being  consequei  tly  expressed  by  means  of  n 
variables  xt,  x2,  w3,  .  .  .  xn,  the  determination  ot  a  line  comes 
to  the  giving  of  these  quantities  as  functions  of  one  variable. 
The  problem  consists  then  in  establishing  a  mathematical  ex¬ 
pression  for  the  length  of  a  line,  and  to  this  end  we  must  con¬ 
sider  the  quantities  x  as  expressible  in  terms  of  certain  units.  I 


1 6 


NA  TURE 


\_May  i,  i £ 


shall  treat  this  problem  only  under  certain  restrictions,  and  I  shall 
confine  myself  in  the  first  place  to  lines  in  which  the  ratios  of 
the  increments  dx  of  the  respective  variables  vary  continu¬ 
ously.  We  may  then  conceive  these  lines  broken  up  into 
elements,  within  which  the  ratios  of  the  quantities  dx  may 
be  regarded  as  constant  ;  and  the  problem  is  then  reduced 
to  establishing  for  each  point  a  general  expression  for  the 
linear*  element  ds  starting  from  that  point,  an  expression 
which  will  thus  contain  the  quantities  x  and  the  quantities 
dx.  I  shall  suppose,  secondly,  that  the  length  of  the 
inear  element,  to  the  first  order,  is  unaltered  when  all  the 
points  of  this  element  undergo  the  same  infinitesimal  dis¬ 
placement,  which  implies  at  the  same  time  that  if  all  the  quan¬ 
tities  dx  are  increased  in  the  same  ratio,  the  linear  element  will 
vary  also  in  the  same  ratio.  On  these  suppositions,  the  linear 
element  may  be  any  homogeneous  function  of  the  first  degree  of 
the  quantities  dx,  which  is  unchanged  when  we  change  the  signs 
of  all  the  dx,  and  in  which  the  arbitrary  constants  are  continuous 
functions  of  the  quantities  x.  To  find  the  simplest  cases,  I  shall 
seek  first  an  expression  for  manifoldnesses  of  n—  i  dimensions 
which  are  everywhere  equidistant  from  the  origin  of  the  linear 
element ;  that  is,  I  shall  seek  a  continuous  function  of  position 
whose  values  distinguish  them  from  one  another.  In  going 
outwards  from  the  origin,  this  must  either  increase  in  all  direc¬ 
tions  or  decrease  in  all  directions  ;  I  assume  that  it  increases  in 
all  directions,  and  therefore  has  a  minimum  at  that  point.  If, 
then,  the  first  and  second  differential  coefficients  of  this  function 
are  finite,  its  first  differential  must  vanish,  and  the  second  diffe¬ 
rential  cannot  become  negative  ;  I  assume  that  it  is  always  posi¬ 
tive.  This  differential  expression,  then,  of  the  second  order 
remains  constant  when  ds  remains  constant,  and  increases  in  the 
duplicate  ratio  when  the  dx,  and  therefore  also  ds,  increase  in 
the  same  ratio  ;  it  must  therefore  be  ds~  multiplied  by  a  con¬ 
stant,  and  consequently  ds  is  the  square  root  of  an  always  posi¬ 
tive  integral  homogeneous  function  of  the  second  order  of  the 
quantities  dx,  in  which  the  coefficients  are  continuous  functions 
of  the  quantities  x.  For  Space,  when  the  position  of  points  is 
expressed  by  rectilinear  co-ordinates,  ds=  \j2,(dx)'2 ;  Space  is 
therefore  included  in  this  simplest  case.  The  next  case  in  sim- 
p'icity  includes  those  manifoldnesses  in  which  the  1  ne-  element 
may  be  expressed  as  the  fourth  root  of  a  quartic  differential  ex¬ 
pression.  The  investigation  of  this  more  general  kind  would 
require  no  really  different  principles,  but  would  take  considerable 
time  and  throw  little  new  light  on  the  theory  of  space,  especially 
as  the  results  cannot  be  geometrically  expressed  ;  I  restrict  my¬ 
self,  therefore,  to  those  manifoldnesses  in  which  the  line-element 
is  expressed  as  the  square  root  of  a  quadric  differential  expres¬ 
sion.  Such  an  expression  we  can  transform  into  another  similar 
one  if  we  substitute  for  the  n  independent  variables  functions  of 
n  new  independent  variables.  In  this  way,  however,  we  cannot 
transform  any  expression  into  any  other  ;  since  the  expression 


fl  ±.  \ 

contains  n  coefficients  which  are  arbitrary  functions  of 

the  independent  variables  ;  now  by  the  introduction  of  new 
variables  we  can  only  satisfy  n  conditions,  and  therefore  make 
no  more  than  n  of  the  coefficients  equal  to  given  quantities. 

••  71  \ 

The  remaining  «  — - —  are  then  entirely  determined  by  the 

nature  of  the  continuum  to  be  represented,  and  consequently 

n  n - -  functions  of  positions  are  required  for  the  determina¬ 


tion  of  its  measure-relations.  Manifoldnesses  in  which,  as  in 
the  Plane  and  in  Space,  the  line-element  may  be  reduced 
to  the  form  \ftd. r2,  are  therefore  only  a  particular  case  of  the 
manifoldnesses  to  be  here  investigated  ;  they  require  a  special 
rame,  and  therefore  these  manifoldnesses  in  which  the  square  of 
the  line-element  may  be  expressed  as  the  sum  of  the  squares  of 
complete  differentials  I  will  call  flat.  In  order  now  to  review 
the  true  varieties  of  all  the  continua  which  may  be  represented 
in  the  assumed  form,  it  is  necessary  to  get  rid  of  difficulties 
arising  from  the  mode  of  representation,  which  is  accomplished 
by  choosing  the  variables  in  accordance  with  a  certain  principle. 

§.  2. — For  this  purpose  let  us  imagine  that  from  any  given 
point  the  system  of  shortest  lines  going  out  from  it  is  constructed  ; 
the  position  of  an  arbitrary  point  may  then  be  determined  by  the 
initial  direction  of  the  geodesic  in  which  it  lies,  and  by  its  dis¬ 
tance  measured  along  that  line  from  the  origin.  It  can  therefore 
be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  ratios  dxn  of  the  quantities  d x  in 
this  geodesic,  and  of  the  length  s  of  this  line.  Let  us  intro¬ 


duce  now  instead  of  the  dx0  linear  functions  d x  of  them,  : 
that  the  initial  value  of  the  square  of  the  line-element  s 
equal  the  sum  of  the  squares  of  these  expressions,  so  that 
independent  variables  are  now  the  length  s  and  the  ratio 
the  quantities  dx.  Lastly,  take  instead  of  the  d  x  quant 
x,x^xz...x  proportional  to  them,  but  such  that  the  sum  of  1 
squares  =  A  When  we  introduce  these  quantities,  the  sq 
of  the  line-element  is  2  dx"1  for  infinitesimal  values  of  the  x, 
the  term  of  next  order  in  it  is  equal  to  a  homogeneous  func 

of  the  second  order  of  the  n  11  1  quantities  (xt  dx.2-x.2d 

(x,  dx3  -  x3  dx,)...  an  infinitesimal,  therefore,  of  the  fo 
order ;  so  that  we  obtain  a  finite  quantity  on  dividing  this  b) 
square  of  the  infinitesimal  triangle,  whose  vertices  are  (o,  o,  o, 
(.rIx'g2’g...),  (dx„  d x2,  dx3,...).  This  quantity  retains 
same  value  so  long  as  the  .r  and  the  dx  are  included  in  the  s 
binary  linear  form,  or  so  long  as  the  two  geodesics  from  o 
and  from  o  to  dx  remain  in  the  same  surface-element  ;  it  dep 
therefore  only  on  place  and  direction.  It  is  obviously  zero  v 
the  manifold  represented  is  fiat,  i.e.  when  the  squared 
element  is  reducible  to  2  dx~,  and  may  therefore  be  regarde 
the  measure  of  the  deviation  of  the  manifoldness  from  flatne 
the  given  point  in  the  given  surface-direction.  Multiplied 
— -J  it  becomes  equal  to  the  quantity  which  Privy-counc 
Gauss  has  called  the  total  curvature  of  a  surface.  For 
determination  of  the  measure-relations  of  a  manifoldness  cap 

°f  representation  in  the  assumed  form  we  found  that  n  - 
place-functions  were  necessary  ;  if,  therefore,  the  curvatur 
each  point  in  n~ — 1  surface-directions  is  given,  the  mea 

relations  of  the  continuum  may  be  determined  from  the 
provided  there  be  no  identical  relations  among  these  val 
which  in  fact,  to  speak  generally,  is  not  the  case.  In  this 
the  measure-relations  of  a  manifoldness  in  which  the  line-elei 
is  the  square  root  of  a  quadric  differential  may  be  expresse 
a  manner  wholly  independent  of  the  choice  of  independent 
ables.  A  method  entirely  similar  may  for  this  purpose  be 
plied  also  to  the  manifoldness  in  which  the  line  element  h 
less  simple  expression,  e.g.,  the  fourth  root  of  a  qu 
differential.  In  this  case  the  line-element,  generally  speal 
is  no  longer  reducible  to  the  form  of  the  square  root  of  a  su 
squares,  and  therefore  the  deviation  from  flatness  in  the  squ 
line-element  is  an  infinitesimal  of  the  second  order,  whil 
those  manifoldnesses  it  was  of  the  fourth  order.  This  pro) 
of  the  last-named  continua  may  thus  be  called  flatness  of 
smallest  parts.  The  most  important  property  of  these  cont 
for  our  present  purpose,  for  whose  sake  alone  they  are  her< 
vestigated,  is  that  the  relations  of  the  twofold  ones  may  be 
metrically  represented  by  surfaces,  and  of  the  morefold  ones 
be  reduced  to  those  of  the  surfaces  included  in  them  ;  which 
requires  a  short  further  discussion. 

§  3. — In  the  idea  of  surfaces,  together  with  the  intrinsic  i 
sure-relations  in  which  only  the  length  of  lines  on  the  surfac 
considered,  there  is  always  mixed  up  the  position  of  points  1 
out  of  the  surface.  We  may,  however,  abstract  from  exte 
relations  if  we  consider  such  deformations  as  leave  unaltered 
length  of  lines — i.e.  if  we  regard  the  surface  as  bent  in  any 
without  stretching,  and  treat  ail  surfaces  so  related  to  each  c 
as  equivalent.  Thus,  for  example,  any  cylindric  or  conical 
face  counts  as  equivalent  to  a  plane,  since  it  may  be  made  oi 
one  by  mere  bending,  in  which  the  intrinsic  measure-relal 
remain,  and  all  theorems  about  a  plane — therefore  the  who 
planimetry — retain  their  validity.  On  the  other  hand 
count  as  essentially  different  from  the  sphere,  which 
not  be  changed  into  a  plane  without  stretching.  Accor 
to  our  previous  investigation  the  intrinsic  measure-relations 
twofold  extent  in  which  the  line-element  may  be  expresse 
the  square  root  of  a  quadric  differential,  which  is  the  case  ' 
surfaces,  are  characterised  by  the  total  curvature.  No.v 
quantity  in  the  case  of  surfaces  is  capable  of  a  visible  inter 
tation,  viz.,  it  is  the  product  of  the  two  curvatures  of  the  surl 
or  multiplied  by  the  area  of  a  small  geodesic  tiiingle,  it  is  e 
to  the  spherical  excess  of  the  same.  The  first  definition  assn 
the  proposition  that  the  product  of  the  two  radii  of  curvatu 
unaltered  by  mere  bending ;  the  second,  that  in  the  s 
place  the  area  of  a  small  triangle  is  proportional  to  its  sphe: 
excess.  To  give  an  intelligible  meaning  to  the  curvature  o 
«-fold  extent  at  a  given  point  and  in  a  given  surface-direc 
through  it,  we  must  start  from  the  fact  that  a  geodesic  procee< 


ty  I,  1873] 


NA  TURE 


*7 


1  a  point  is  entirely  determined  when  its  initial  direction  is 
n.  According  to  this  we  obtain  a  determinate  surface  if  we 
ong  all  the  geodesics  proceeding  from  the  given  point  and 
g  initially  in  the  given  surface-direction  ;  this  surface  has  at 
given  point  a  definite  curvature,  which  is  also  the  curvature 
he  ra-fold  continuum  at  the  given  point  in  the  given  surface- 
ction. 

4.  — Before  we  make  the  application  to  space,  some  con- 
rations  about  flat  manifoldnesses  in  general  are  necessary;  i.e. 
at  those  in  which  the  square  of  the  line-element  is  expressible 

sum  of  squares  of  complete  differentials. 

1  a  flat  «-fold  extent  the  total  curvature  is  zero  at  all  points 
:very  direction  ;  it  is  sufficient,  however  (according  to  the 
eding  investigation),  for  the  determination  of  measure- 
dons,  to  know  that  at  each  point  the  curvature  is  zero  in 

independent  surface  directions.  Manifoldnesses  whose 

mature  is  constantly  zero  may  be  treated  as  a  special  case 
hose  whose  curvature  is  constant.  The  common  character 
hese  continua  whose  curvature  is  constant  may  be  also  ex- 
sed  thus,  that  figures  may  be  moved  in  them  without  stretch- 
For  clearly  figures  could  not  be  arbitrarily  shifted  and 
ed  round  in  them  if  the  curvature  at  each  point  were  not 
same  in  all  directions.  On  the  other  hand,  however,  the  mea- 
:-relations  of  the  manifoldness  are  entirely  determined  by  the 
rature  ;  they  are  therefore  exactly  the  same  in  all  directions  at 
point  as  at  another,  and  consequently  the  same  constructions 
be  made  from  it  :  whence  it  follows  that  in  aggregates  with 
itant  curvature  figures  may  have  any  arbitrary  position  given 
n.  The  measure-relations  of  these  manifoldnesses  depend  only 
the  value  of  the  curvature,  and  in  relation  to  the  analytic 
ression  it  may  be  remarked  that  if  this  value  is  denoted  by  a, 
expression  for  the  line-element  may  be  written 
1 

I  +?2F> 

4 

5.  — The  theory  of  surfaces  of  constant  curvature  will  serve 
1  geometric  illustration.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  surfaces  whose 
rature  is  positive  may  always  be  rolled  on  a  sphere  whose 
us  is  unity  divided  by  the  square  root  of  the  curvature  ;  but 
;view  the  entire  manifoldness  of  these  surfaces,  let  one  of 
1  have  the  form  of  a  sphere  and  the  rest  the  form  of  surfaces 
evolution  touching  it  at  the  equator.  The  surfaces  with 
ter  curvature  than  this  sphere  will  then  touch  the  sphere  in- 
ally,  and  take  a  form  like  the  outer  portion  (from  the  axis) 
he  surface  of  a  ring ;  they  may  be  rolled  upon  zones  of 
ires  having  less  radii,  but  will  go  round  more  than  once. 

surfaces  with  less  positive  curvature  are  obtained  from 
ires  of  larger  radii,  by  cutting  out  the  lune  bounded  by  two 
t  half-circles  and  bringing  the  section-lines  together.  The 
ice  with  curvature  zero  will  be  a  cylinder  standing  on  the 
itor  ;  the  surfaces  with  negative  curvature  will  touch  the 
ider  externally  and  be  formed  like  the  inner  portion  (towards 
axis)  of  the  surface  of  a  ring.  If  we  regard  these  surfaces  as 
■  in  quo  for  surface-regions  moving  in  them,  as  Space  is 
in  quo  for  bodies,  the  surface  regions  can  be  moved  in  all 
;  surfaces  without  stretching.  The  surfaces  with  positive 
ature  can  always  be  so  formed  that  surface  regions  may  also 
loved  arbitrarily  about  upon  them  without  bending,  namely 
f  may  be  formed)  into  sphere-surfaces  ;  but  not  those  with 
.tive  curvature.  Besides  this  independence  of  surface  regions 
.  position  there  is  in  surfaces  of  zero  curvature  also  an  inde- 
lence  of  direction  from  position,  which  in  the  former  surfaces 
not  exist. 

( To  be  continued. ) 


[Part II]

ON  THE  HYPOTHESES  WHICH  LIE  AT 
THE  BASES  OP  GEOMETRY * 

III. — Application  to  Space. 

§  I- — By  means  of  these  inquiries  into  the  determination  of 
the  measure  relations  of  an  «-fold  extent  the  conditions  may  be 
declared  which  are  necessary  and  sufficient  to  determine  the 
metric  properties  of  space,  if  we  assume  the  independence  of 
line-length  from  position  and  expressibility  of  the  line-element  as 
the  square  root  of  a  quadric  differential,  that  is  to  say,  flatness  in 
the  smallest  parts. 

First,  they  may  be  expressed  thus  :  that  the  curvature  at  each 
point  is  zero  in  three  surface-directions  ;  and  thence  the  metric 
properties  of  space  are  determined  if  the  sum  of  the  angles  of  a 
triangle  is  always  equal  to  two  right  angles. 

Secondly,  if  we  assume  with  Euclid  not  merely  an  existence  of 
lines  independent  of  position,  but  of  bodies  also,  it  follows  that 
the  curvature  is  everywhere  constant  ;  and  then  the  sum  of  the 
angles  is  determined  in  all  triangles  when  it  is  known  in  one. 

Thirdly,  one  might,  instead  of  taking  the  length  of  lines  to  be 
independent  of  position  and  direction,  Itssume  also  an  independ¬ 
ence  of  their  length  and  direction  from  position.  According  to 
this  conception  changes  or  differences  of  position  are  complex 
magnitudes  expressible  in  three  independent  units. 

§2. — In  the  course  of  our  previous  inquiries,  we  first  dis¬ 
tinguished  between  the  relations  of  extension  or  partition  and 
the  relations  of  measure,  and  found  that  with  the  same  extensive 
properties,  different  measure-relations  were  conceivable ;  we 
then  investigated  the  system  of  sinple  size-fixings  by  which  the 
measure-relations  of  space  are  completely  determined,  and  of 
which  all  propositions  about  them  are  a  necessary  consequence  ; 
it  remains  to  discuss  the  question  how,  in  what  degree,  and  to 
what  extent  these  assumptions  are  borne  out  by  experience.  In 
this  respect  there  is  a  real  distinction  between  mere  extensive 
relations,  and  measure  relations  ;  in  so  far  as  in  the  former, 
whei  e  the  possible  cases  form  a  discrete  manifoldness,  the  declara¬ 
tions  of  experience .  are  indeed  not  quite  certain,  but  still  not 
inaccurate  ;  while  in  the  latter,  where  the  possible  cases  form  a 
continuous  manifoldness,  every  determination  from  experience 
remains,  always  inaccurate  -  be  the  probability  ever  so  great 
that  it  is  nearly  exact.  1  his  consideration  becomes  important 
in  the  extensions  of  these  emoirical  determinations  beyond  the 
limits  of  observation  to  the  infinitely  great  and  infinitely  small  ; 
since  the  latter  may  clearly  become  more  inaccurate  beyond  the 
limits  of  observation,  but  not  the  former. 

In  the  extension  of  space-construction  to  the  infinitely  great, 
we  must  distinguish  between  unboundedness  and  infinite  extent, 
the  former  belongs  to  the  extent  relations,  the  latter  to  the  mea¬ 
sure-relations.  1  hat  space  is  an  unbounded  three-fold  manifold¬ 
ness,  is  an  assumption  which  is  developed  by  every  conception 
of  the  outer  world  ;  according  to  which  every  instant  the  region 
of  real  perception  is  completed  and  the  possible  positions  of  a 
sought  object  are  constructed,  and  which  by  these  applications  is 
for  ever  confirming  itself.  I  he  unboundedness  of  space  possesses 
m  this  way  a  greater  empirical  certainty  than  any  external 
experience.  But  its  infinite  extent  by  no  means  follows  from 
tins  ;  on  the  other  hand  if  we  assume  independence  of  bodies 
from  position,  and  therefore  ascribe  to  space  constant  curvature, 
it  must  necessarily  be  finite  provided  this  curvature  has  ever  so 
small  a  positive  value.  If  we  prolong  all  the  geodesics  starting 
in  a  given  surface-element,  we  should  obtain  an  unbounded 
surface  of  constant  curvature,  i.e.,  a  surface  which  in  a  flat  mani¬ 
foldness  of  three  dimensions  would  take  the  form  of  a  sphere, 
and  consequently  be  finite. 

§  3-  The  questions  about  the  infinitely  great  are  for  the  inter¬ 
pretation  of  nature  useless  questions.  But  this  is  not  the  case 
with  the  questions  about  the  infinitely  small.  It  is  upon  the 
exactness  with  which  we  follow  phenomena  into  the  infinitely 
small  that  our  knowledge  of  their  causal  relations  essentially 
depends.  The  progress  of  recent  centuries  in  the  knowledge  of 
mechanics  depends  almost  entirely  on  the  exactness  of  the  con¬ 
struction  which  has  become  possible  through  the  invention  of 
the  infinitesimal  calculus,  and  through  the  simple  principles  dis¬ 
covered  by  Archimedes,  Galileo,  and  Newton,  and  used  by 
modern  physic.  But  in  the  natural  sciences  which  are  still  in 
want  of  simple  principles  for  such  constructions,  we  seek  to 
discover  the  causal  relations  by  following  the  phenomena  into 
great  minuteness,  so  far  as  the  microscope  permits.  Questions 

(Continued  from  page  17.) 


May  8,  1873] 


NATURE 


37 


about  the  measure-relations  of  space  in  the  infinitely  small  are 
not  therefore  superfluous  questions. 

If  we  suppose  that  bodies  exist  independently  of  position,  the 
curvature  is  everywhere  constant,  and  it  then  results  from 
astronomical  measurements  that  it  cannot  be  different  from  zero  ; 
or  at  any  rate  its  reciprocal  must  be  an  area  in  comparison  with 
which  the  range  of  our  telescopes  may  be  neglected.  But  if 
this  independence  of  bodies  from  position  does  not  exist,  we 
cannot  draw  conclusions  from  metric  relations  of  the  great,  to 
those  of  the  infinitely  small ;  in  that  case  the  curvature  at  each 
point  may  have  an  arbitrary  value  in  three  directions,  provided 
that  the  total  curvature  of  every  measurable  portion  of  space 
does  not  differ  sensibly  from  zero.  Still  more  complicated 
relations  may  exist  if  we  no  longer  suppose  the  linear  element 
expressible  as  the  square  root  of  a  quadric  differential.  Now  it 
seems  that  the  empirical  notions  on  which  the  metrical  determi¬ 
nations  of  space  are  founded,  the  notion  of  a  solid  body  and  of  a 
ray  of  light,  cease  to  be  valid  for  the  infinitely  small.  We  are 
therefore  quite  at  liberty  to  suppose  that  the  metric  relations  of 
space  in  the  infinitely  small  do  not  conform  to  the  hypotheses 
of  geometry ;  and  we  ought  in  fact  to  suppose  it,  if  we  can 
thereby  obtain  a  simpler  explanation  of  phenomena. 

The  question  of  the  validity  of  the  hypotheses  of  geometry  in 
the  infinitely  small  is  bound  up  with  the  question  of  the  ground 
of  the  metric  relations  of  space.  In  this  last  question,  which  we 
may  still  regard  as  belonging  to  the  doctrine  of  space,  is  found 
the  application  of  the  remark  made  above  ;  that  in  a  discrete 
manifoldness,  the  ground  of  its  metric  relations  is  given  in  the 
notion  of  it,  while  in  a  continuous  manifoldness,  this  ground 
must  come  from  outside.  Either  therefore  the  reality  which 
underlies  space  must  form  a  discrete  manifoldness,  or  we  must 
seek  the  ground  of  its  metric  relations  outside  it,  in  binding 
forces  which  act  upon  it. 

The  answer  to  these  questions  can  only  be  got  by  starting  from 
the  conception  of  phenomena  which  has  hitherto  been  justified 
by  experience,  and  which  Newton  assumed  as  a  foundation,  and 
by  making  in  this  conception  the  successive  changes  required  by 
facts  which  it  cannot  explain.  Researches  starting  from  general 
notions,  like  the  investigation  we  have  just  made,  can  only  be 
useful  in  preventing  this  work  from  being  hampered  by  too 
narrow  views,  and  progress  in  knowledge  of  the  interdependence 
of  things  from  being  checked  by  traditional  prejudices. 

This  leads  us  into  the  domain  of  another  science,  of  physic, 
into  which  the  object  of  this  work  does  not  allow  us  to  go  to¬ 
day. 

Synopsis 

Plan  of  the  Inquiry  : 

I.  Notion  of  an  //  ply  extended  magnitude. 

§  1.  Continuous  and  discrete  manifoldnesses.  Defined  parts 
of  a  manifoldness  are  called  Quanta.  Division  of  the 
theory  of  continuous  magnitude  into  the  theories 

•  (1)  Of  mere  region-relations,  in  which  an  independence 
of  magnitudes  from  position  is  not  assumed  ; 

(2)  Of  size-relations,  in  which  such  an  independence 
must  be  assumed. 

§  2.  Construction  of  the  notion  of  a  one-fold,  two-fold, 
//-fold  extended  magnitude. 

§  3.  Reduction  of  place-fixing  in  a  given  manifoldness  to 
quantity-fixings.  True  character  of  an  n- fold  extended 
magnitude. 

II.  Measure-relations  of  which  a  manifoldness  of  n  dimensions 

is  capable  on  the  assumption  that  lines  have  a  length  inde¬ 
pendent  of  position,  and  consequently  that  every  line 
may  be  measured  by  every  other. 

§  1.  Expression  for  the  line-element.  Manifoldnesses  to  be 
called  Flat  in  which  the  line-element  is  expressible  as  the 
square-root  of  a  sum  of  squares  of  complete  differentials. 

§  2.  Investigation  of  the  manifoldness  of  //-dimensions  in 
which  the  line-element  may  be  represented  as  the  square 
root  of  a  quadric  differential.  Measure  of  its  deviation 
from  flatness  (curvature)  at  a  given  point  in  a  given  sur¬ 
face-direction.  For  the  determination  of  its  measure- 
relations  it  is  allowable  and  sufficient  that  the  curvature 

n  —  1  , 

be  arbitrarily  given  at  every  point  in  //  — — —  surface 
directions. 

§  3.  Geometric  illustration. 

§  4.  Flat  manifoldnesses  (in  which  the  curvature  is  every¬ 
where  =  o)  may  be  treated  as  a  special  case  of  manifold¬ 
nesses  with  constant  curvature.  These  can  also  be  defined 


as  admitting  an  independence  of  //-fold  extents  in  them 
from  position  (possibility  of  motion  without  stretching). 

§  5.  Surfaces  with  constant  curvature. 

III.  Application  to  Space. 

§  1.  System  of  facts  which  suffice  to  determine  the  measure- 
relations  of  space  assumed  in  geometry. 

§  2.  How  far  is  the  validity  of  these  empirical  determina¬ 
tions  probable  beyond  the  limits  of  observation  towards 
the  infinitely  great  ? 

§  3.  How  far  towards  the  infinitely  small  ?  Connection 
of  this  question  with  the  interpretation  of  nature. 


THE  DE  VEL  OP  ME  NT  THEORY  IN  GERMANY * 

III. 

Chorology :  or,  the  Geographical  Distribution  of  Living  Beings 

'THE  importance  of  the  theory  of  Evolution  does  not  consist 
•*-  in  its  accounting  for  this  or  that  particular  fact,  but  in  its 
explaining  all  biological  facts  collectively.  It  is  found  to  be 
confirmed  in  every  detail  by  the  mode  of  distribution  of  the 
various  organisms  on  the  surface  of  the  earth.  This  distribution 
had  already  been  studied  by  Alexander  von  Humboldt  and 
Fr.  Schouw  for  plants,  by  Berghaus  and  Schmarda  for  animals. 
But  previous  to  Darwin  and  Wallace,  this  study  had  produced 
only  a  collection  of  unsystematised  facts  ;  Haeckel  has  attempted 
to  create  out  of  it  a  special  science  under  the  name  of  Chorology. 

With  the  exception  of  the  monocellular  protozoa,  which,  on 
account  of  their  simplicity,  have  been  able  to  appear  at  the 
same  time  or  at  several  times  in  diffenmt  places  ;  with  the  ex¬ 
ception  also  of  species  which  owe  their  origin  to  a  hybrid  or 
bastard  generation,  and  which  it  has  been  possible  to  reproduce 
in  different  circumstances  wherever  the  parent  species  have  pre¬ 
viously  spread,  it  must  be  admitted  that  each  of  the  other  species 
has  only  been  originated  a  single  time  and  in  a  single  place. 
But,  once  produced,  they  must,  as  a  consequence  of  the  struggle 
for  existence,  and  in  virtue  of  the  laws  of  population,  or  rather 
of  excess  of  population,  tend  to  spread  to  the  widest  possible 
extent.  Animals  and  plants  migrate  as  well  as  man,  both 
actively  and  passively. 

In  the  case  of  animals,  which  have,  more  than  plants,  freedom 
of  movement,  active  migration  plays  the  principal  part.  The 
more  easy  locomotion  is  in  the  case  of  any  species,  the  more  rapidly 
is  the  species  bound  to  spread.  This  is  why  birds  and  insects, 
furnished  with  wings,  although  referable  to  a  less  number  of 
orders  or  natural  groups  than  other  animals,  yet  present  a  very 
great  diversity  of  species  slightly  distinguishable  from  one  an¬ 
other  ;  this  is  to  be  ascribed  to  the  fact  that  the  facility  with 
which  they  can  move  from  place  to  place  has  subjected  them  to 
the  modifying  influences  of  the  most  varied  localities.  After 
birds  and  insects  the  swiftest  runners  among  the  denizens 
of  the  land,  the  best  swimmers  among  the  inhabitants  of  the 
water  have  been  subject  to  the  widest  extension.  With  regard 
to  animals  which  are  fixed  or  immovable  while  being  developed, 
corals,  tubicolse,  tunicata,  crinoids,  &c_,  they  usually  enjoy 
during  their  youth  so  much  of  the  power  of  movement  as  admits 
of  their  displacement.  A  great  number  of  floating  plants  are 
also  transported  to  great  distances  by  water. 

But  the  spread  of  a  large  number  of  plants  and  of  certain 
animals  can  be  explained  only  by  a  passive  migration.  The 
wind  sweeps  to  great  distances,  sometimes  over  seas,  eggs  of 
small  animals,  seeds,  and  sometimes  even  minute  organisms  ; 
this  explains  the  well-known  phenomena  of  showers  of  frogs. 
These  eggs,  these  seeds,  these  small  organisms,  sometimes 
fall  into  the  water,  which  transports  them  to  still  greater 
distances.  Trunks  of  trees,  which  traverse  the  ocean  under 
the  direction  of  the  currents,  and  those  which  the  tempest 
hurls  from  the  mountain  tops,  can  carry  with  them,  hidden  in 
their  interstices,  in  the  moss  or  the  parasitical  plants  with  which 
they  are  covered,  in  the  earth  which  adheres  to  their  roots,  in¬ 
numerable  germs  to  be  developed  in  new  regions.  The  icebergs 
of  the  polar  sea  have  landed  foxes  and  bears  even  on  the  shores 
of  Iceland  and  Britain.  Birds,  insects,  mammals  which  are 
removed,  carry  with  them  thousands  of  parasites,  microscopic 
beings,  eggs  or  germs.  Man  himself  carries  them  about  more 
abundantly  still  along  with  the  varied  materials  he  employs  for 
his  works  and  his  industry. 

The  fact  of  the  distribution  of  certain  species  which  cannot 
be  explained  by  migration,  either  active  or  passive,  may  be 
accounted  for  by  geological  facts.  In  consequence  of  the  im- 
*  Continued  from  vol.  vii.  p.  434. 


NA  TURE 


\_May  8,  1873 


8 


perceptible  but  unceasing  change  of  the  level  of  the  seas,  in  con¬ 
sequence  of  the  phenomena  of  subsidence  and  elevation  of  the 
land,  lands  at  one  time  united  have  been  divided,  watercourses 
which  communicated  have  been  separated,  thus  accounting  for 
the  fact  that  fishes  of  the  same  species  are  found  in  different 
rivers,  that  islands  are  tenanted  by  the  same  mammals  as 
the  continents.  England  has  been  united  to  Europe  at  two 
different  times  ;  at  a  certain  epoch  our  continent  must  have  been 
united  by  land  to  N.  America.  The  South-sea  Islands  are  the 
remains  of  what  was  at  one  time  a  single  land;  so  in  the  Indian 
Ocean  land  has  at  one  time  stretched  along  the  South  of  Asia 
from  Sunda  to  Africa  ;  this  great  continent  which  Sclater  has 
called  Lemurta ,  on  account  of  the  apes  which  were  peculiar  to 
it,  is  probably  the  cradle  where  the  human  race  was  developed 
from  the  anthropoid  apes.  Mr.  Wallace  has  proved  that  the 
Malay  Archipelago  consisted  of  two  entirely  different  parts  :  one, 
comprehending  Borneo,  Java,  and  Sumatra,  was  united  to  Asia 
by  the  peninsula  of  Malacca,  while  the  other,  comprehending 
the  Celebes,  the  Moluccas,  New  Guinea, ^the  Salomon  Isles,  &c., 
was  immediately  attached  to  Australia. 

Another  cause  which  has  favoured  the  dispersion  of  species 
all  over  the  globe,  was  the  uniformity  of  temperature  which  pre¬ 
vailed  up  to  the  tertiary  geological  period.  Previous  to  the 
freezing  of  the  polar  regions,  species  found  everywhere  a  climate 
equally  warm  and  agreeable,  favourable  to  migrations  in  all 
directions  ;  since  that  period,  on  the  contrary,  a  new  difficulty  of 
existence  has  arisen, — organisms  have  to  undergo  acclimatisation  ; 
those  which  have  the  power  of  adapting  themselves  to  the  lower 
temperature  of  regions  at  a  distance  from  the  equator,  have  been 
transformed  by  selection  into  new  species  ;  while  those  which 
have  found  such  adaptation  impossible,  have  been  compelled, 
under  pain  of  extinction,  to  remove  to  more  favourable  climates. 
When,  at  a  later  period,  occurred  that  strange  phenomenon — of 
which,  as  yet,  no  satisfactory  explanation  has  been  given — 
known  as  the  Glacial  Period,  animals  and  plants  were  compelled 
to  migrate  anew  ;  the  living  population  of  the  earth,  condensing 
itself  between  the  tropics,  a  terrible  struggle  for  existence  took 
place  between  the  old  inhabitants  of  these  regions  and  those  that 
lied  thither  lor  refuge  ;  many  species  were  bound  to  disappear, 
while  many  new  ones  were  originated.  There  is  still  another  choro- 
logical  phenomenon  which  is  to  be  accounted  lor  by  the  glacial 
peiiod,  viz.,  the  resemblance  of  many  of  the  inhabitants  of  moun¬ 
tains  to  those  of  the  Polar  regions  ;  as  those  animals  and  those 
plants  are  not  found  in  the  intermediate  countries,  it  is  absolutely 
necessary  to  suppose  a  migration  which,  considering  the  habits 
of  these  creatures,  could  only  have  taken  place  at"  the  glacial 
epoch.  It  is  probable  that  at  this  period  the  gentians,  the  saxi- 
fiages,  the  I  olar  hare  and  fox,  inhabited  the  central  part  of 
Europe  ;  but  as  the  temperature  rose,  some  of  these  creatures 
retired  towards  the  north,  while  the  remainder  found  a  refuge 
upon  the  summi  s  of  the  European  mountains. 

When  plants  or  animals  migrate  to  new  regions,  they  are  sub¬ 
jected  to  new  conditions  of  existence  to  which  they  must  adapt 
themselves,  d  he  new  climate,  new  food,  relations  with  new 
organisms,  all  this  obliges  the  emigrants  to  submit  to 
difications  under  pain  of  annihilation,  and,  as  a 
to  form  new  varieties  or  new  species  ;  it  is  in 
circumstances,  in  fact,  that  natural  selection 


mo- 
consequence, 
these 

acts 


with 

indi- 

who 

have 


the  greatest  intensity.  In  ordinary  circumstances, 
viduals  which  have  changed  breed  with  indiv  duals 
have  not  changed,  and  the  products  of  such  crossings 
a  tendency  to  revert  to  the  primitive  type  ;  but  when  a  migra¬ 
tion  has  taken  place,  when  modified  individuals  are  separated 
from  the  others  by  mountains  or  by  seas,  they  can  no  longer 
interbreed,  and  this  isolation  insures  the  preservation  of  the 
newly  acquired  forms.  It  is  of  course  evident  that  these  con¬ 
siderations  apply  only  to  species  in  which  the  sexes  are  separate. 

There  still  remain  three  uther  chorological  phenomena  which 
furnish  an  important  proof  of  the  truth  of  the  evolution  theory. 

J  here  is  first  the  likeness  of  form,  the  family  resemblance  which 
exists  among  the  local  species  characteristic  of  each  region,  and 
the  extinct  and  fossil  species  of  the  same  region  ;  in  the  second 
the  no  less  striking  family  resemblance  which  exists  among  the 
inhabitants  of  certain  groups  of  those  of  the  neighbouring  con¬ 
tinents,  whence  the  population  of  these  islands  must  have  come  • 
and  lastly,  the  special  character  presented  by  the  collective  fauna 
ur  11  °ra*  °f  ls^ands-  All  the  facts  adduced  by  Darwin, 
Wallace,  and  Moritz  Wagner,  +  as  well  as  all  those  other  facts 
*  “  Malay  Archipelago." 

Leipzig, ‘iS68)Win‘an  The°ryand  the  Law  of  Migration  of  Organisms” 


which  geographical  and  topographical  dispersion  of  organisms 
present  to  us  are  simply  and  completely  explained  .by  the  theory 
of  selection  and  migration,  while  it  would  be  impossible  to 
explain  them  without  it. 


Paleontology 


Thanks  to  the  theory  of  evolution,  the  natural  classification  of 
animals  and  plants,  which  was  previously  only  a  record  of  names 
for  arranging  the  different  forms  in  an  artificial  order,  or  a  record 
of  facts  expressing  summarily  the  degree  of  resemblance  among 
them,  tends  to  become  the  genealogical  tree  of  organisms. 
In  order  to  construct  it  the  student  has  only  to  combine  the 
data  furnished  by  the  three  parallel  developments  referred  to 
above— the  palaeontological  development,  the  embryological  de¬ 
velopment,  and  the  systematic  development  In  the  order  of  per¬ 
fection  or  of  comparative  anatomy.  The  writer  [in  the  Revue 
Scientifique  here  gives  a  table  presenting  a  view  of  the  geological 
and  palaeontological  doctrines  of  Haeckel.  Between  the  stages 
generally  admitted  by  geologists,  Haeckel  intercalates  others 
which  he  calls  inferior  or  intermediate  stages  in  relation  to  the 
superior  stages.  Haeckel  accepts  completely  the  system  of  gra¬ 
dual  and  continuous  evolution  as'spropounded  by  Lyell,  and  re¬ 
jects  the  system  of  sudden  catastrophes  which  has  been  advocated 
by  Cuvier  and  his  disciples.  He  places  the  probable  appearance 
of  man  in  the  Miocene,  and  his  certain  existence  in  the  Pliocene. 
Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  determine  approximately  how 
many  thousand  years  each  geological  period  has  lasted  ;  these 
conjectures  are  principally  framed  on  the  relative  thickness  of 
the  different  beds.  The  total  thickness  of  the  Archaeolithic  or 
Primordial  beds,  in  which  Haeckel  includes  the  Laurentian,  Cam¬ 
brian,  and  Silurian,  is  70,000  ft.  ;  that  of  the  Primary,  from  the 
Devonian  to  the  Permian,  42,000  ft.  ;  that  of  the  Secondary, 
15,000  ft.  ;  that  of  the  Tertiary,  3,000  ft.  ;  while  the  thickness 
of  the  beds  of  the  tl  AnthroDolithic  ”  or  Quaternary  age  is  only 
from  500  to  700  ft.  From  these  figures,  the  following  relative 
duration  of  the  successive  ages  may  be  deduced  : — 


Primordial  Age 
Primary  ,, 
Secondary  ,, 
Tertiary  ,, 
Quaternary  ,, 


53'6 
32-1 
11 '5 

23 

°'5 


Thus  the  I  rimordial  age  has  existed  longer  than  the  other  four 
put  together.  As  to  the  number  of  centuries  or  of  millenniums 
necessary  for  the  deposition  of  one  bed  only  one  foot  thick,  that 
depends  on  circumstances  so  variable  that  it  is  impossible  to  give 
any  measure  :  it  is  longer  in  the  depths  of  mid-ocean,  in  the 
beds  of  very  long  rivers,  in  lakes  which  receive  no  affluents ;  it  is 
shorter  on  the  sea-margins,  at  the  mouths  of  great  rivers  whose 
course  is  long  and  straight,  in  lakes  which  receive  many  tributary 
streams.  It  results  from  such  considerations  that  every  estimate 
of  the  duration  of  a  geological  epoch  must  be  relative. 

It  will  be  necessary,  moreover,  to  take  into  consideration, 
elevations  and  depressions  of  the  ground,  which,  according  to 
Haeckel,  will  be  alternative,  and  will  correspond  to  the  mmera- 
logical  and  palaeontological  differences  which  exist  between 
wu  SyStemS  ke<H  and  between  two  formations  of  these  systems 
W  hen  a  certain  region,  after  having  remained  for  many  thousand 
centuries  beneath  the  water,  emerges  for  a  certain  tim  •,  and  is 
again  submerged,  it  will  be  readily  admitted  that  the  bed  which  is 
deposited  after  such  an  interval  ought  to  present  characteristics 
different  from  those  of  the  lower  bed  :  for  time  is  bound  to 
accomplish  change  of  all  organic  and  inorganic  conditions.  This 
theory  has  been  disputed  by  Huxley,  who  finis  it  inconsistent 
with  the  extstence  of  a  large  number  of  beds,  in  which  are  found 
united  organic  forms,  holding  a  middle  place  between  those  of 
adjacent  formations  ;  the  English  naturalist  adduces,  for  example, 
the  beds  of  Saint  Cassian,  in  which  are  found  mingled  the  forms 
of-the  primary  and  secondary  formations. 

It  is  certain  that  even  yet  our  knowledge  of  palaeontology  is 
very  imperfect,  and  far  from  enabling  us  to  write,  with  anything 
like  exactness,  the  history  of  the  production  of  organic  species. 
H  e  know  with  what  difficulties  this  study  is  surrounded.  The 
fossil  remains  of  the  most  remote  ages  appear  to  have  been 
destroyed  by  the  great  heat  of  the  lower  beds  in  which  they  were 
deposited.  Eozoon  Canadense  is  the  only  fossil  which  has  hitherto 
been  found  in  the  formations  of  the  Laurentian  period  ;  while 
the  beds  of  carbon  and  of  crystallised  lime  (graphite  and  marble) 
give  us  the  assurance  that  in  them  have  existed  animal  and 
vegetable  petrifactions.  Another  difficulty  lies  in  the  fact  that 
hitherto  the  field  of  geological  exploration  has  been  very  re- 


NA  TURE 


39 


May  8,  1873] 


stricted.  Outside  of  England,  Germany,  and  France,  very  few 
formations  have  been  seriously  studied  ;  almost  the  only  success¬ 
ful  explorations  have  been  in  rail  way- cuttings.  One  indication 
of  what  maybe  discovered  elsewhere  is  furnished  by  the  remarkable 
petrifactions  which  have  resulted  from  some  researches  prosecuted 
in  Africa  and  Asia,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Cape,  and  on 
the  Himalayas  :  forms  have  been  discovered  which  fill  up  im¬ 
portant  gaps  in  palaeontological  classification.  It  must  be  remem¬ 
bered  also  that  only  the  hard  and  solid  parts  of  organisms  have 
been  preserved,  that  entire  forms,  such  as  the  Medusae,  shell-less 
molluscs,  many  articulata,  nearly  all  worms,  could  leave  no  trace 
behind.  The  most  important  parts  of  plants,  the  flowers,  have 
completely  disappeared.  Moreover,  terrestrial  organisms  have 
been  petrified  only  in  accidental  instances,  where  they  have  fallen 
into  the  water  and  been  covered  with  mud  ;  it  is  not  to  be  won¬ 
dered  at  then  if  the  number  of  fossils  of  this  kind  is  relatively 
much  less  considerable  than  that  of  those  kinds  which  have  in¬ 
habited  the  sea  or  fresh  water.  This  explains  also  the  appa¬ 
rently  strange  fact  that  of  many  fossil  mammals,  especially  those 
of  the  secondary,  we  recognise  only  the  lower  jaw.  This  arises 
from  the  fact  that  that  bone  is  easily  separated  from  the  dead 
body  ;  while  the  rest  swims  on  the  surface  of  the  water  and  is 
carried  to  the  bank,  the  jaw  falls  to  the  bottom,  and  is  buried  in 
the  mud,  where  it  is  petrified.  The  traces  of  those  which  have 
been  found  in  different  beds  of  sandstone,  and  especially  in  the 
red  sandstone  of  Connecticut,  belong  to  organisms  whose  bodies 
are  entirely  unknown  to  us,  and  prove  that  we  are  far  from  pos¬ 
sessing  remains  of  all  actual  forms.  What  gives  us  reason  to 
think  that  an  immense  number  must  remain  unknown  is  the  fact 
that  of  those  whose  fossil  remains  we  possess,  only  one  or  two 
examples  have  come  to  light.  It  is  only  ten  years  since  a  bird 
of  the  highest  importance  was  discovered  in  the  Jura  ;  till  then 
no  intermediate  form  was  known  between  the  birds  proper  and 
reptiles,  which  are,  nevertheless,  the  class  most  closely  related 
to  the  former.  Now  this  fossil  bird,  which  possesses  the  tail, 
not  of  an  ordinary  bird,  but  of  a  lizard,  confirms  the  hypothesis 
that  birds  are  descended  from  the  saurians.  A  couple  of  small 
teeth  which  have  been  found  in  the  Keuper  of  the  Trias  are,  up 
to  the  present,  the  only  proof  that  mammals  have  existed  from 
the  Triassic  period,  and  that  they  did  not  appear  only  in  the 

Jurassic  period,  as  was  previously  believed. 

Fortunately  we  are  able  to  supplement  the  insufficient  data  of 
palaeontology  by  those  of  embryology,  since  individual  develop¬ 
ment  is,  as  it  were,  a  reproduction  or  recapitulation  brief  and 
rapid,  by  means  of  heredity  and  adaptation  of  the  development 
of  species.  Embryology  is  especially  valuable  for  the  light 
which  it  throws  on  the  more  ancient  forms  of  the  primordial 
period  ;  by  it  alone  do  we  learn  that  these  primitive  forms  must 
have  been  simple  cells,  similar  to  eggs;  that  these  cells,  by  their 
segmentation,  their  conformation,  and  their  division  of  labour, 
have  given  birth  to  the  infinite  variety  of  the  most  complicated 
organisms. 

To  the  valuable  da+a  respecting  the  relations  of  organisms 
furnished  by  palaeontology  and  embryology  must  be  added  those 
derived  from  comparative  anatomy.  When  organisms, _  whose 
exterior  is  very  different,  resemble  each  other  in  their  interior 
construction,  we  may  conclude  with  certainty  that  this  resem¬ 
blance  is  due  to  heredity,  while  the  differences  are  a  result  of 
adaptation.  If,  for  example,  we  compare  the  limbs  or  extremi; 
ties  of  different  mammifers,  the  arm  of  man,  the  wing  of  the  bat, 
the  anterior  members  of  the  mole  adapted  for  digging,  those  of 
other  mammilers  made  for  leaping,  climbing,  or  running  ;  if  we 
consider,  besides,  that  in  all  these  members  variously  formed,  the 
same  bones  are  found,  equal  in  number,  in  the  same  place,  dis¬ 
posed  in  the  same  manner,  are  we  not  forced  to  admit  the  close 
relationship  of  organisms?  This  homology  can  be  explained 
only  by  heredity,  by  descent  from  common  ancestors.  And  to 
go  still  further,  if  we  find  in  the  wing  _  of  the  bird,  in  the 
anterior  members  of  reptiles  and  amphibia,  the  same  bones  as 
in  the  arms  of  man,  or  in  the  anterior  limbs  of  other  mammifers, 
can  we  not  affirm  with  certainty  the  common  descent  of  all 
these  vertebrate  animals  ?
