The Works of William Robertson, Vol. 3 (William Robertson, 1759)
==========================================================
Robertson's Works (1824, 9 vols.) - History of Scotland, Charles V, America, and the Historical Disquisition on India; Enlightenment historiography's great practitioner entire. Vol. 3 of 9.

WILLIAM  ROBERTSON,  D.D

WITH  AN  ACCOUNT  OF

HIS  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS.

IN  NINE  VOLUMES.
VOL.  III.

LONDON:

PRINTED  FOR  WHITMORE  AND  FENN,  CHARING  CROSS ;  J.  HEARWE,  STRAND

SMITH  AND  ELDER,  FENCHURCH  STREET;  H.  MOZLEf,  DERBY;

AND  M.  KEENE,  DUBLIN.

MDCCCXXIV.

THE

STANDARD  EDITION  OF  THE  HISTORIANS.

ROBERTSON'S  WORKS :

IN  SINE  VOLUMES.  —  VOL.  ni.

CHARLES  V.

THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR  CHARLES  V.

A  VIEW  OF  THE  PROGRESS OF  SOCIETY  IN EUROPE,

FROM

THE  SUBVERSION  OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE

TO THE
BEGINNINO  OF  THE  SIXTEENTH  CENTURA.

VOL. III.

TO THE KING.

SIR,

1  PRESUME  to  lay  before  your  Majesty  the  history  of  a
period,  which,  if  the  abilities  of  the  writer  were  equal
to  the  dignity  of  the  subject,  would  not  be  unworthy
the  attention  of  a  monarch,  who  is  no  less  a  judge  than
a  patron  of  literary  merit.

History  claims  it  as  her  prerogative  to  offer  instruc-
tion to  kings,  as  well  as  to  their  people.  What  reflec-
tions the  Reign  of  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  may  sug-
gest to  your  Majesty,  it  becomes  not  me  to  conjecture.
But  your  subjects  cannot  observe  the  various  calamities,
which  that  monarch's  ambition  to  be  distinguished  as
a  conqueror,  brought  upon  his  dominions,  without  re-
collecting the  felicity  of  their  own  times,  and  looking
up  with  gratitude  to  their  Sovereign,  who,  during  the
fervour  of  youth,  and  amidst  the  career  of  victory,
possessed  such  self-command,  and  maturity  of  judg-
ment, as  to  set  bounds  to  his  own  triumphs,  and  prefer
the  blessings  of  peace  to  the  splendour  of  military
glory.

Posterity  will  not  only  celebrate  the  wisdom  of  your
Majesty's  choice,  but  will  enumerate  the  many  virtues
which  render  your  reign  conspicuous  for  a  sacred
regard  to  all  the  duties  incumbent  on  the  Sovereign  of
a  free  people.

B  2

4  DEDICATION.

It  is  our  happiness  to  feel  the  influence  of  these
virtues ;  and  to  live  under  the  dominion  of  a  Prince,
who  delights  more  in  promoting  the  public  welfare,
than  in  receiving  the  just  praise  of  his  royal  benefi-
cence. I  am,

Sir,
Your  Majesty's

Most  faithful  Subject,

And  most  dutiful  Servant,

WILLIAM  ROBERTSON.

PREFACE.

JN  o  period  in  the  history  of  one's  own  country  can  be
considered  as  altogether  uninteresting.  Such  trans-
actions as  tend  to  illustrate  the  progress  of  its  consti-
tution, laws,  or  manners,  merit  the  utmost  attention.
Even  remote  and  minute  events  are  objects  of  a  cu-
riosity, which,  being  natural  to  the  human  mind,  the
gratification  of  it  is  attended  with  pleasure.

But,  with  respect  to  the  history  of  foreign  states,  we
must  set  other  bounds  to  our  desire  of  information.
The  universal  progress  of  science,  during  the  two  last
centuries,  the  art  of  printing,  and  other  obvious  causes,
have  filled  Europe  with  such  a  multiplicity  of  histories,
.and  with  such  vast  collections  of  historical  materials,
that  the  term  of  human  life  is  too  short  for  the  study
or  even  the  perusal  of  them.  It  is  necessary,  then,  not
only  for  those  who  are  called  to  conduct  the  affairs  of
nations,  but  for  such  as  inquire  and  reason  concerning
them,  to  remain  satisfied  with  a  general  knowledge  of
distant  events,  and  to  confine  their  study  of  history  in
detail  chiefly  to  that  period,  in  which  the  several  states
of  Europe  having  become  intimately  connected,  the
operations  of  one  power  are  so  felt  by  all,  as  to  influ-
ence their  counsels,  and  to  regulate  their  measures.

Some  boundary,  then,  ought  to  be  fixed  in  order  to
separate  these  periods.  An  era  should  be  pointed  out,
prior  to  which,  each  country,  little  connected  with
those  around  it,  may  trace  its  own  history  apart ;  after
which  the  transactions  of  every  considerable  nation  in
Europe  become  interesting  and  instructive  to  all.  With
this  intention  I  undertook  to  write  the  History  of  the

6  PREFACE.

Emperor  Charles  V.  It  was  during  his  administra-
tion that  the  powers  of  Europe  were  formed  into  one
great  political  system,  in  which  each  took  a  station,
wherein  it  has  since  remained  with  less  variation  than
could  have  been  expected  after  the  shocks  occasioned
by  so  many  internal  revolutions,  and  so  many  foreign
wars.  The  great  events  which  happened  then  have
not  hitherto  spent  their  force.  The  political  principles
and  maxims,  then  established,  still  continue  to  operate.
The  ideas  concerning  the  balance  of  power,  then  intro-
duced or  rendered  general,  still  influence  the  counsels
of  nations.

The  age  of  Charles  V.  may  therefore  be  considered
as  the  period  at  which  the  political  state  of  Europe
began  to  assume  a  new  form.  I  have  endeavoured  to
render  my  account  of  it,  an  introduction  to  the  history
of  Europe  subsequent  to  his  reign.  While  his  nume-
rous biographers  describe  his  personal  qualities  and
actions ;  while  the  historians  of  different  countries  re-
late occurrences  the  consequences  of  which  were  local
or  transient,  it  hath  been  my  purpose  to  record  only
those  great  transactions  in  his  reign,  the  effects  of
which  were  universal,  or  continue  to  be  permanent.

As  my  readers  could  derive  little  instruction  from
such  a  history  of  the  reign  of  Charles  V.  without  some
information  concerning  the  state  of  Europe  previous  to
the  sixteenth  century,  my  desire  of  supplying  this  has
produced  a  preliminary  volume,  in  which  I  have  at-
tempted to  point  out  and  to  explain  the  great  causes
and  events,  to  whose  operation  all  the  improvements
in  the  political  state  of  Europe,  from  the  subversion  of
the  Roman  empire  to  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth
century,  must  be  ascribed.  I  have  exhibited  a  view
of  the  progress  of  society  in  Europe,  not  only  with
respect  to  interior  government,  laws,  and  manners,  but
with  respect  to  the  command  of  the  national  force  re-
quisite in  foreign  operations  ;  and  I  have  described  the

PREFACE.  7

political  constitution  of  the  principal  states  in  Europe
at  the  time  when  Charles  V.  began  his  reign.

In  this  part  of  my  work  I  have  been  led  into  seve-
ral critical  disquisitions,  which  belong  more  properly
to  the  province  of  the  lawyer  or  antiquary,  than  to
that  of  the  historian.  These  I  have  placed  in  the
first  volume,  under  the  title  of  Proofs  and  Illustra-
tions. Many  of  my  readers  will,  probably,  give  little
attention  to  such  researches.  To  some  they  may,
perhaps,  appear  the  most  curious  and  interesting  part
of  the  work.  I  have  carefully  pointed  out  the  sources
from  which  I  have  derived  information,  and  have  cited
the  writers  on  whose  authority  I  rely  with  a  minute
exactness,  which  might  appear  to  border  upon  osten-
tation, if  it  were  possible  to  be  vain  of  having  read
books,  many  of  which  nothing  but  the  duty  of  examin-
ing with  accuracy  whatever  I  laid  before  the  public,
would  have  induced  me  to  open.  As  my  inquiries
conducted  me  often  into  paths  which  were  obscure  or
little  frequented,  such  constant  references  to  the  authors
who  have  been  my  guides,  were  not  only  necessary  for
authenticating  the  facts  which  are  the  foundations  of
my  reasonings,  but  may  be  useful  in  pointing  out  the
way  to  such  as  shall  hereafter  hold  the  same  course,
and  in  enabling  them  to  carry  on  their  researches  with
greater  facility  and  success.

Every  intelligent  reader  will  observe  one  omission
in  my  work,  the  reason  of  which  it  is  necessary  to  ex-
plain. I  have  given  no  account  of  the  conquests  of
Mexico  and  Peru,  or  of  the  establishment  of  the  Spa-
nish colonies  in  the  continent  and  islands  of  America.
The  history  of  these  events  I  originally  intended  to
have  related  at  considerable  length.  But  upon  a  nearer
and  more  attentive  consideration  of  this  part  of  my
plan,  I  found  that  the  discovery  of  the  New  World ;  the
state  of  society  among  its  ancient  inhabitants ;  their
character,  manners,  and  arts ;  the  genius  of  the  Euro-

8  PREFACE.

li

pean  settlements  in  its  various  provinces,  together  with
the  influence  of  these  upon  the  systems  of  policy  or
commerce  in  Europe,  were  subjects  so  splendid  and
important,  that  a  superficial  view  of  them  could  afford
little  satisfaction ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  treat  of
them  as  extensively  as  they  merited,  must  produce  an
episode,  disproportionate  to  the  principal  work.  I  have
therefore  reserved  these  for  a  separate  history ;  which,
if  the  performance  now  offered  to  the  public  shall  re-
ceive its  approbation,  I  purpose  to  undertake.

Though,  by  omitting  such  considerable  but  detached
articles  in  the  reign  of  Charles  V.,  I  have  circumscribed
my  narration  within  more  narrow  limits,  I  am  yet  per-
suaded, from  this  view  of  the  intention  and  nature  of
the  work  which  I  thought  it  necessary  to  lay  before  my
readers,  that  the  plan  must  still  appear  to  them  too
extensive,  and  the  undertaking  too  arduous.  I  have
often  felt  them  to  be  so.  But  my  conviction  of  the
utility  of  such  a  history  prompted  me  to  persevere.
With  what  success  I  have  executed  it,  the  public  must
now  judge.  I  wait,  not  without  solicitude,  for  its
decision ;  to  which  I  shall  submit  with  a  respectful
silence.

A

VIEW

OF

THE  PROGRESS  OF  SOCIETY

IN

EUROPE,

FROM

THE  SUBVERSION  OF  THE  ROMAN EMPIRE

TO THE

BEGINNING  OF  THE  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY,

SECT.  I.

View  of  the  Progress  of  Society  in  Europe,  with  respect
to  interior  government,  laws,  and  manners.

The  effects •»- wo  great  revolutions  have  happened  in  the
of  the  RO-  political  state  and  in  the  manners  of  the  Eu-

man  power *

on  the  state  ropean  nations.  The  first  was  occasioned  by
the  progress  of  the  Roman  power ;  the  second
by  the  subversion  of  it.  When  the  spirit  of  conquest
led  the  armies  of  Rome  beyond  the  Alps',  they  found  all
the  countries  which  they  invaded  inhabited  by  people
whom  they  denominated  barbarians,  but  who  were
nevertheless  brave  and  independent.  These  defended
their  ancient  possessions  with  obstinate  valour.  It  was
by  the  superiority  of  their  discipline,  rather  than  that
of  their  courage,  that  the  Romans  gained  any  advantage
over  them.  A  single  battle  did  not,  as  among  the  effemi-
nate inhabitants  of  Asia,  decide  the  fate  of  a  state.  The
vanquished  people  resumed  their  arms  with  fresh  spirit,
and  their  undisciplined  valour,  animated  by  the  love  of

I

10  STATE OF  EUROPE.

The  de- liberty,  supplied  the  want  of  conduct  as  well  as
soiation Of  uniori .  During  those  long  and  fierce  struggles

which  it  ill  i*

occasioned,  for  dominion  or  independence,  the  countries  ot
Europe  were  successively  laid  waste,  a  great  part  of
their  inhabitants  perished  in  the  field,  many  were  carried
into  slavery,  and  a  feeble  remnant,  incapable  of  farther
resistance,  submitted  to  the  Roman  power.
The  im-  The  Romans  having  thus  desolated  Europe,
whiST*  set  themselves  to  civilize  it.  The  form  of  go-
introduced,  yernment  which  they  established  in  the  con-
quered provinces,  though  severe,  was  regular,  and
preserved  public  tranquillity.  As  a  consolation  for  the
loss  of  liberty,  they  communicated  their  arts,  sciences,
language,  and  manners,  to  their  new  subjects.  Europe
began  to  breathe,  and  to  recover  strength  after  the  cala-
mities which  it  had  undergone ;  agriculture  was  en-
couraged ;  population  increased ;  the  ruined  cities  were
rebuilt ;  new  towns  were  founded ;  an  appearance  of
prosperity  succeeded,  and  repaired,  in  some  degree,
the  havoc  of  war.

The  bad  This  state,  however,  was  far  from  being
fences  kaPPv  or  favourable  to  the  improvement  of  the
of  their  human  mind.  The  vanquished  nations  were
"'  disarmed  by  their  conquerors,  and  overawed  by
soldiers  kept  in  pay  to  restrain  them.  They  were  given
up  as  a  prey  to  rapacious  governors,  who  plundered
them  with  impunity ;  and  were  drained  of  their  wealth
by  exorbitant  taxes,  levied  with  so  little  attention  to
the  situation  of  the  provinces,  that  the  impositions  were
often  increased  in  proportion  to  their  inability  to  sup-
port them.  They  were  deprived  of  their  most  enter-
prising citizens,  who  resorted  to  a  distant  capital  in
quest  of  preferment,  or  of  riches;  and  were  accus-
tomed in  all  their  actions  to  look  up  to  a  superior,  and
tamely  to  receive  his  commands.  Under  so  many  de-
pressing circumstances,  it  was  hardly  possible  that  they
could  retain  vigour  or  generosity  of  mind.  The  mar-

SECT.  I.  11

tial  and  independent  spirit  which  had  distinguished
their  ancestors,  became,  in  a  great  measure,  extinct
among  all  the  people  subjected  to  the  Roman  yoke ;
they  lost  not  only  the  habit  but  even  the  capacity  of
deciding  for  themselves,  or  of  acting  from  the  impulse
of  their  own  minds  ;  and  the  dominion  of  the  Romans
like  that  of  all  great  empires,  degraded  and  debased
the  human  species.a

Theirrup-  A  society  in  such  a  state  could  not  subsist
baJbarVu^  long-  There  were  defects  in  the  Roman  go-
nations,  vernment,  even  in  its  most  perfect  form,  which
threatened  its  dissolution.  Time  ripened  these  original
seeds  of  corruption,  and  gave  birth  to  many  new  dis-
orders. A  constitution,  unsound,  and  worn  out,  must
have  fallen  to  pieces  of  itself,  without  any  external
shock.  The  violent  irruption  of  the  Goths,  Vandals,
Huns,  and  other  barbarians,  hastened  this  event,  and
precipitated  the  downfall  of  the  empire.  New  nations
seemed  to  arise,  and  to  rush  from  unknown  regions,  in
order  to  take  vengeance  on  the  Romans  for  the  cala-
mities which  they  had  inflicted  on  mankind.  These
fierce  tribes  either  inhabited  the  various  provinces  in
Germany  which  had  never  been  subdued  by  the  Ro-
mans, or  were  scattered  over  those  vast  countries  in
the  north  of  Europe,  and  north-west  of  Asia,  which
are  now  occupied  by  the  Danes,  the  Swedes,  the
Poles,  the  subjects  of  the  Russian  empire,  and  the
Tartars.  Their  condition  and  transactions,  previous
to  their  invasion  of  the  empire,  are  but  little  known.
Almost  all  our  information  with  respect  to  these  is  de-
rived from  the  Romans ;  and  as  they  did  not  penetrate
far  into  countries  which  were  at  that  time  uncultivated
and  uninviting,  the  accounts  of  their  original  state  given
by  the  Roman  historians,  are  extremely  imperfect.  The
rude  inhabitants  themselves,  destitute  of  science,  as
well  as  of  records,  and  without  leisure,  or  curiosity,  to

*  See  Note  I.

12  STATE OF  EUROPE.

inquire  into  remote  events,  retained,  perhaps,  some
indistinct  memory  of  recent  occurrences,  but  beyond
these,  all  was  buried  in  oblivion,  or  involved  in  dark-
ness and  in  fable.5

state  of  The  prodigious  swarms  which  poured  in
uLCfrom  uPon  tne  empire  fr°m  tne  beginning  of  the
which  they  fourth  century  to  the  final  extinction  of  the

issued. _.  ,  . .

Roman  power,  have  given  rise  to  an  opinion
that  the  countries  whence  they  issued  were  crowded
with  inhabitants ;  and  various  theories  have  been  formed
to  account  for  such  an  extraordinary  degree  of  popu-
lation as  hath  produced  these  countries  the  appellation
of  the  Storehouse  of  Nations.  But  if  we  consider,
that  the  countries  possessed  by  the  people  who  invaded
the  empire  were  of  vast  extent ;  that  a  great  part  of
these  was  covered  with  woods  and  marshes ;  that  some
of  the  most  considerable  of  the  barbarous  nations  sub-
sisted entirely  by  hunting  or  pasturage,  in  both  which
states  of  society  large  tracts  of  land  are  required  for
maintaining  a  few  inhabitants ;  and  that  all  of  them
were  strangers  to  the  arts  and  industry,  without  which
population  cannot  increase  to  any  great  degree,  we  must
conclude,  that  these  countries  could  not  be  so  populous
in  ancient  times  as  they  are  in  the  present,  when  they
still  continue  to  be  less  peopled  than  any  other  part  of
Europe  or  of  Asia.

The  peo-  But  the  same  circumstances  that  prevented
during™- tne  barbarous  nations  from  becoming  populous,
terprises.  contributed  to  inspire,  or  to  strengthen,  the
martial  spirit  by  which  they  were  distinguished.  Inured
by  the  rigour  of  their  climate,  or  the  poverty  of  their
soil,  to  hardships  which  rendered  their  bodies  firm  and
their  minds  vigorous;  accustomed  to  a  course  of  life
which  was  a  continual  preparation  for  action ;  and  dis-
daining every  occupation  but  that  of  war  or  of  hunting;
they  undertook  and  prosecuted  their  military  enter-

b  See  Note  II.

SECT.  I.  13

prises  with  an  ardour  and  impetuosity,  of  which  men
softened  by  the  refinements  of  more  polished  times  can
scarcely  form  any  idea.0

The  mo-  Their  first  inroads  into  the  empire  proceeded
their  first  ratner  fr°m  tne  l°ve  °f  plunder,  than  from  the
excursions,  desire  of  new  settlements.  Roused  to  arms  by
some  enterprising  or  popular  leader,  they  sallied  out  of
their  forests  ;  broke  in  upon  the  frontier  provinces  with
irresistible  violence;  put  all  who  opposed  them  to  the
sword  ;  carried  off  the  most  valuable  effects  of  the  in-
habitants; dragged  along  multitudes  of  captives  in
chains  ;  wasted  all  before  them  with  fire  or  sword  ;
and  returned  in  triumph  to  their  wilds  and  fastnesses.
Their  success,  together  with  the  accounts  which  they
gave  of  the  unknown  conveniences  and  luxuries  that
abounded  in  countries  better  cultivated,  or  blessed  with
a  milder  climate  than  their  own,  excited  new  adven-
turers, and  exposed  the  frontier  to  new  devastations.
Their  rea-  When  nothing  was  left  to  plunder  in  the
sons  for  adjacent  provinces,  ravaged  by  frequent  incur-

settlingm .  J  *  r IP i  r  1  i

thecoun- sions,  they  marched  iarther  trom  home,  and
they  con-h  finding  it  difficult,  or  dangerous  to  return,  they

began  to  settle  in  the  countries  which  they  had
subdued.  The  sudden  and  short  excursions  in  quest
of  booty,  which  had  alarmed  and  disquieted  the  em-
pire, ceased;  a  more  dreadful  calamity  impended.
Great  bodies  of  armed  men,  with  their  wives  and  chil-
dren, and  slaves  and  flocks,  issued  forth,  like  regular
colonies,  in  quest  of  new  settlements.  People  who
had  no  cities,  and  seldom  any  fixed  habitation,  were  so
little  attached  to  their  native  soil,  that  they  migrated
without  reluctance  from  one  place  to  another.  New
adventurers  followed  them.  The  lands  which  they
The  ex-  deserted  were  occupied  by  more  remote  tribes
Sr^et-  °f  barbarians.  These,  in  their  turn,  pushed
tiements.  forward  into  more  fertile  countries,^and,  like  a

«  See  Note  III.

14  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

torrent  continually  increasing,  rolled  on,  and  swept
every  thing  before  them.  In  less  than  two  centuries
from  their  first  irruption,  barbarians  of  various  names
and  lineage  plundered  and  took  possession  of  Thrace,
Pannonia,  Gaul,  Spain,  Africa,  and  at  last  of  Italy,  and
Rome  itself.  The  vast  fabric  of  the  Roman  power,
which  it  had  been  the  work  of  ages  to  perfect,  was  in
that  short  period  overturned  from  the  foundation.
The  eir  Many  concurring  causes  prepared  the  way  for
cumstancesthis  great  revolution,  and  ensured  success  to  the
Taskmed  nations  which  invaded  the  empire.  The  Roman
fail  of  the"  commonwealth  had  conquered  the  world  by  the
Roman  wisdom  of  its  civil  maxims,  and  the  rigour  of  its

empire.

military  discipline.  But,  under  the  emperors,
the  former  were  forgotten  or  despised,  and  the  latter
was  gradually  relaxed.  The  armies  of  the  empire  in
the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries  bore  scarcely  any  resem-
blance to  those  invincible  legions  which  had  been  vic-
torious wherever  they  marched.  Instead  of  freemen
who  voluntarily  took  arms  from  the  love  of  glory,  or  of
their  country,  provincials  and  barbarians  were  bribed
or  forced  into  service.  These  were  too  feeble,  or  too
proud  to  submit  to  the  fatigue  of  military  duty.  They
even  complained  of  the  weight  of  their  defensive  ar-
mour as  intolerable,  and  laid  it  "aside.  Infantry,  from
which  the  armies  of  ancient  Rome  derived  their  vigour
and  stability,  fell  into  contempt;  the  effeminate  and
undisciplined  soldiers  of  later  times  could  hardly  be
brought  to  venture  into  the  field  but  on  horseback.
These  wretched  troops,  however,  were  the  only  guar-
dians of  the  empire.  The  jealousy  of  despotism  had
deprived  the  people  of  the  use  of  arms ;  and  subjects
oppressed  and  rendered  incapable  of  defending  them-
selves, had  neither  spirit  nor  inclination  to  resist  their
invaders,  from  whom  they  had  little  to  fear,  because
their  condition  could  hardly  be  rendered  more  unhappy.
At  the  same  time  that  the  martial  spirit  became  extinct,

SECT.  I.

15

the  revenues  of  the  empire  gradually  diminished.  The
taste  for  the  luxuries  of  the  east  increased  to  such  a
pitch  in  the  imperial  court,  that  great  sums  were  carried
into  India,  from  which,  in  the  channel  of  commerce,
money  never  returns.  By  the  large  subsidies  paid  to
the  barbarous  nations,  a  still  greater  quantity  of  specie
was  withdrawn  from  circulation.  The  frontier  provinces,
wasted  by  frequent  incursions,  became  unable  to  pay
the  customary  tribute  ;  and  the  wealth  of  the  world,
which  had  long  centered  in  the  capital  of  the  empire,
ceased  to  flow  thither  in  the  same  abundance,  or  was
diverted  into  other  channels.  The  limits  of  the  empire
continued  to  be  as  extensive  as  ever,  while  the  spirit
requisite  for  its  defence  declined,  and  its  resources  were
exhausted.  A  vast  body,  languid,  and  almost  unani-
mated,  became  incapable  of  any  effort  to  save  itself,  and
was  easily  overpowered.  The  emperors,  who  had  the
absolute  direction  of  this  disordered  system,  sunk  in
the  softness  of  eastern  luxury,  shut  up  within  the  walls
of  a  palace,  ignorant  of  war,  unacquainted  with  affairs,
and  governed  entirely  by  women  and  eunuchs,  or  by
ministers  equally  effeminate,  trembled  at  the  approach
of  danger,  and,  under  circumstances  which  called  for
the  utmost  vigour  in  counsel  as  well  as  in  action,  disco-
vered all  the  impotent  irresolution  of  fear,  and  of  folly.
In  every  respect  the  condition  of  the  barbar-
nations  was  the  reverse  of  that  of  the  Ro-

mans.  Among  the  former,  the  martial  spirit  was
Sni!e  b^-  *n  fo^  vig°ur  >  tneir  leaders  were  hardy  and  en-
barous  na-  terprishig;  the  arts  which  had  enervated  the  Ro-

mans were  unknown  ;  and  such  was  the  nature  of
their  military  institutions,  that  they  brought  forces  into
the  field  without  any  trouble,  and  supported  them  at
little  expense.  The  mercenary  and  effeminate  troops
stationed  on  the  frontier,  astonished  at  their  fierceness,
either  fled  at  their  approach,  or  were  routed  on  the  first
onset.  The  feeble  expedient  to  which  the  emperors

The  .

I

16  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

had  recourse,  of  taking  large  bodies  of  the  barbarians
into  pay,  and  of  employing  them  to  repel  new  invaders,
instead  of  retarding,  hastened  the  destruction  of  the
empire.  These  mercenaries  soon  turned  their  arms
against  their  masters,  and  with  greater  advantage  than
ever ;  for,  by  serving  in  the  Roman  armies,  they  had
acquired  all  the  discipline,  or  skill  in  war,  which  the
Romans  still  retained  ;  and,  upon  adding  these  to  their
native  ferocity,  they  became  altogether  irresistible.

The  s  hit  ^ut  t^lou^>  fr°m  tnese>  and  many  other
with  which  causes,  the  progress  and  conquests  of  the  nations
riedyonr  which  overran  the  empire,  became  so  extremely
rapid,  they  were  accompanied  with  horrible  de-
vastations, and  an  incredible  destruction  of  the  human
species.  Civilized  nations,  which  take  arms  upon  cool
reflection,  from  motives  of  policy  or  prudence,  with  a
view  to  guard  against  some  distant  danger,  or  to  pre-
vent some  remote  contingency,  carry  on  their  hostilities
with  so  little  rancour  or  animosity,  that  war  among
them  is  disarmed  of  half  its  terrors.  Barbarians  are
strangers  to  such  refinements.  They  rush  into  war
with  impetuosity,  and  prosecute  it  with  violence.  Their
sole  object  is  to  make  their  enemies  feel  the  weight  of
their  vengeance ;  nor  does  their  rage  subside  until  it  be
satiated  with  inflicting  on  them  every  possible  calamity.
It  is  with  such  a  spirit  that  the  savage  tribes  in  Ame-
rica carry  on  their  petty  wars.  It  was  with  the  same
spirit  that  the  more  powerful  and  no  less  fierce  barba-
rians in  the  north  of  Europe,  and  of  Asia,  fell  upon  the
Roman  empire.

iatfon690"  Wherever  tnev  marched,  their  route  was
which  they  marked  with  blood.  They  ravaged  or  destroyed
upon8Eu.  a11  around  them.  They  made  no  distinction"be-
r«pe-  tween  what  was  sacred  and  what  was  profane.
They  respected  no  age,  or  sex,  or  rank.  What  escaped
the  fury  of  the  first  inundation,  perished  in  those  which
followed  it.  The  most  fertile  and  populous  provinces

SECT.  I.  17

were  converted  into  deserts,  in  which  were  scattered
the  ruins  of  villages  and  cities,  that  afforded  shelter  to
a  few  miserable  inhabitants,  whom  chance  had  pre-
served, or  the  sword  of  the  enemy,  wearied  with  de-
stroying, had  spared.  The  conquerors  who  first  set-
tled in  the  countries  which  they  had  wasted,  were  ex-
pelled or  exterminated  by  new  invaders,  who,  coming
from  regions  farther  removed  from  the  civilized  parts
of  the  world,  were  still  more  fierce  and  rapacious.  This
brought  fresh  calamities  upon  mankind,  which  did  not
cease,  until  the  north,  by  pouring  forth  successive
swarms,  was  drained  of  people,  and  could  no  longer
furnish  instruments  of  destruction.  Famine  and  pesti-
lence, which  always  march  in  the  train  of  war,  when  it
ravages  with  such  inconsiderate  cruelty,  raged  in  every
part  of  Europe,  and  completed  its  sufferings.  If  a  man
were  called  to  fix  upon  the  period  in  the  history  of  the
world,  during  which  the  condition  of  the  human  race
was  most  calamitous  and  afflicted,  he  would,  without
hesitation,  name  that  which  elapsed  from  the  death  of
Theodosius  the  Great,d  to  the  establishment  of  the  Lom-
bards in  Italy.  The  contemporary  authors,  who  be-
held that  scene  of  desolation,  labour  and  are  at  a  loss
for  expressions  to  describe  the  horror  of  it.  The  scourge
of  God,  the  destroyer  of  nations,  are  the  dreadful  epi-
thets by  which  they  distinguish  the  most  noted  of  the
barbarous  leaders ;  and  they  compare  the  ruin  which
they  had  brought  on  the  world,  to  the  havoc  occa-
sioned by  earthquakes,  conflagrations,  or  deluges,  the
most  formidable  and  fatal  calamities  which  the  imagi-
nation of  man  can  conceive.

Theuni-  But  no  expressions  can  convey  so  perfect  an
change  idea  of  the  destructive  progress  of  the  barba-
oSo'ued  r*ansJ  as  tnat  which  must  strike  an  attentive  ob-
in  the  server  when  he  contemplates  the  total  change

d  Theodosius  died  A.  D.  395  ;  the  reign  of  Alboinus  in  Lombardy  began  A.  D.
571 ;  so  that  this  period  was  176  years.

VOL,  III.  C

!8  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

state  of which  he  will  discover  in  the  state  of  Europe,
after  it  began  to  recover  some  degree  of  tran-
quillity, towards  the  close  of  the  sixth  century. The
Saxons  were,  by  that  time  masters  of  the  southern  and
more  fertile  provinces  of  Britain  ;  the  Franks  of  Gaul  ;
the  Huns  of  Pannonia  ;  the  Goths  of  Spain  ;  the  Goths
and  Lombards  of  Italy  and  the  adjacent  provinces.
Very  faint  vestiges  of  the  Roman  policy,  jurisprudence,
arts,  or  literature  remained.  New  forms  of  government,
new  laws,  new  manners,  new  dresses,  new  languages,
and  new  names  of  men  and  countries,  were  every  where
introduced. To  make  a  great  or  sudden  alteration,
with  respect  to  any  of  these,  unless  where  the  ancient
inhabitants  of  a  country  have  been  almost  totally  exter-
minated, has  proved  an  undertaking  beyond  the  power
of the greatest conquerors.6 The great change
which  the  settlement  of  the  barbarous  nations  occasion-
ed in  the  state  of  Europe,  may,  therefore,  be  consi-
dered as  a  more  decisive  proof  than  even  the  testimony
of  contemporary  historians,  of  the  destructive  violence
with  which  these  invaders  carried  on  their  conquest,
and  of  the  havoc  which  they  had  made  from  one  ex-
tremity of  this  quarter  of  the  globe  to  the  other/
From  this In  the  obscurity  of  the  chaos  occasioned  by
general  wreck  of  nations,  we  must  search

laws  of  go-  for  the  seeds  of  order,  and  endeavour  to  dis-
now  esta-  cover  the  first  rudiments  of  the  policy  and  laws
murtbe  now  established  in  Europe.  To  this  source
the  historians  of  its  different  kingdoms  have
attempted,  though  with  less  attention  and  industry  than
the  importance  of  the  inquiry  merits,  to  trace  back  the
institutions  and  customs  peculiar  to  their  countrymen.
It  is  not  my  province  to  give  a  minute  detail  of  the
progress  of  government  and  manners  in  each  particular
nation,  whose  transactions  are  the  object  of  the  follow-
ing history.  But,  in  order  to  exhibit,  a  just  view  of  the

e  See  Note  V.  *  See  Note  V.

SECT.  I.  19

state  of  Europe  at  the  opening  of  the  sixteenth  century,
it  is  necessary  to  look  back  and  to  contemplate  the
condition  of  the  northern  nations  upon  their  first  set-
tlement in  those  countries  which  they  occupied.  It  is
necessary  to  mark  the  great  steps  by  which  they  ad-
vanced from  barbarism  to  refinement,  and  to  point  out
those  general  principles  and  events  which,  by  their
uniform  as  well  as  extensive  operation,  conducted  all
of  them  to  that  degree  of  improvement  in  policy  and
in  manners  which  they  had  attained  at  the  period  when
Charles  V.  began  his  reign.

When  nations  subject  to  despotic  govern-

The  prin-  J

cipies  on  ment  make  conquests,  these  serve  only  to  extend
northern6  the  dominion  and  the  power  of  their  master.
made^heir  ^ut  armies  composed  of  freemen  conquer  for
settlements  themselves,  not  for  their  leaders.  The  people

in  Europe. 1  IIT^  •  111

who  overturned  the  Roman  empire,  and  settled
in  its  various  provinces,  were  of  the  latter  class.  Not
only  the  different  nations  that  issued  from  the  north  of
Europe,  which  has  always  been  considered  as  the  seat
of  liberty,  but  the  Huns  and  Alans  who  inhabited  part
of  those  countries,  which  have  been  marked  out  as  the
peculiar  region  of  servitude,8  enjoyed  freedom  and  in-
dependence in  such  a  high  degree  as  seems  to  be
scarcely  compatible  with  a  state  of  social  union,  or  with
the  subordination  necessary  to  maintain  it.  They  fol-
lowed the  chieftain  who  led  them  forth  in  quest  of  new
settlements,  not  by  constraint,  but  from  choice  ;  not  as
soldiers  whom  he  could  order  to  march,  but  as  volun-
teers who  offered  to  accompany  him.h  They  con-
sidered their  conquests  as  a  common  property,  in  which
all  had  a  title  to  share,  as  all  had  contributed  to  ac-
quire them.1  In  what  manner,  or  by  what  princi-
ples, they  divided  among  them  the  lands  which  they
seized,  we  cannot  now  determine  with  any  certainty.

e  De  1'Esprit  des  Loix,  !iv.  xvii.  ch.  3.
h  See  Note  VI.  *  See  Note  VII.

c  2

20  STATE  OF EUROPE.

There  is  no  nation  in  Europe  whose  records  reach  back
to  this  remote  period  ;  and  there  is  little  information
to  be  got  from  the  uninstructive  and  meagre  chronicles,
compiled  by  writers  ignorant  of  the  true  end,  and  un-
acquainted with  the  proper  objects,  of  history.
The  feudal  This  new  division  of  property,  however,  to-
gether  with  the  maxims  and  manners  to  which

dually8  es-  it  gave  rise,  gradually  introduced  a  species  of

tablished  '<?  T J ,  rpi • •  i

among  government  formerly  unknown,  l  his  singular
institution  is  now  distinguished  by  the  name
of  the  Feudal  System  :  and  though  the  barbarous  nations
which  framed  it,  settled  in  their  new  territories  at  dif-
ferent times,  came  from  different  countries,  spoke  vari-
ous languages,  and  were  under  the  command  of  sepa-
rate leaders,  the  feudal  policy  and  laws  were  established,
with  little  variation,  in  every  kingdom  of  Europe.  This
amazing  uniformity  had  induced  some  authorsk  to  be-
lieve that  all  these  nations,  notwithstanding  so  many
apparent  circumstances  of  distinction,  were  originally
the  same  people.  But  it  may  be  ascribed,  with  great
probability,  to  the  similar  state  of  society  and  of  man-
ners to  which  they  were  accustomed  in  their  native
countries,  arid  to  the  similar  situation  in  which  they
found  themselves  on  taking  .  possession  of  their  new
domains.

As  the  conquerors  of  Europe  had  their  acquisitions
to  maintain,  not  only  against  such  of  the  ancient  inha-
bitants as  they  had  spared,  but  against  the  more  formi-
Nationai  dable  inroads  of  new  invaders,  self-defence  was
thereat  their  chief  care,  and  seems  to  have  been  the
feudal  °f  chief  object  of  their  first  institutions  and  policy.
policy.  Instead  of  those  loose  associations,which,  though
they  scarcely  diminished  their  personal  independence,
had  been  sufficient  for  their  security  while  they  re-
mained in  their  original  countries,  they  saw  the  neces-
sity of  uniting  in  more  close  confederacy,  and  of  relin-

k  Procop.  de  bello  Vandal,  ap.  Script.  Byz.  edit.  Ven.  v.ol.  i.  p.  345.

SECT.  I.  21

quishing  some  of  their  private  rights  in  order  to  attain
public  safety.  Every  freeman,  upon  receiving  a  portion
of  the  lands  which  were  divided,  bound  himself  to  ap-
pear in  arms  against  the  enemies  of  the  community.
This  military  service  was  the  condition  upon  which  he
received  and  held  his  lands  :  and  as  they  were  exempted
from  every  other  burden,  that  tenure,  among  a  warlike
people,  was  deemed  both  easy  and  honourable.  The
king  or  general,  who  led  them  to  conquest,  continuing
still  to  be  the  head  of  the  colony,  had,  of  course,  the
largest  portion  allotted  to  him.  Having  thus  acquired
the  means  of  rewarding  past  services,  as  well  as  of
gaining  new  adherents,  he  parcelled  out  his  lands  with
this  view,  binding  those  on  whom  they  were  bestowed,
to  resort  to  his  standard  with  a  number  of  men  in  pro-
portion to  the  extent  of  the  territory  which  they  receiv-
ed, and  to  bear  arms  in  his  defence.  His  chief  officers
imitated  the  example  of  their  sovereign,  and,  in  distri-
buting portions  of  their  lands  among  their  dependants,
annexed  the  same  condition  to  the  grant.  Thus  a
feudal  kingdom  resembled  a  military  establishment,
rather  than  a  civil  institution.  The  victorious  army,
cantoned  out  in  the  country  which  it  had  seized,  con-
tinued ranged  under  its  proper  officers,  and  subordinate
to  military  command.  The  names  of  a  soldier  and  of
freeman  were  synonymous.1  Every  proprietor  of  land,
girt  with  a  sword,  was  ready  to  march  at  the  summons
of  his  superior,  and  to  take  the  field  against  the  com-
mon enemy.

The  feudal  But  though  the  feudal  policy  seems  to  be  so
mentde-  adfnirably  calculated  for  defence  against  the
fective  in  assaults  of  any  foreign  power,  its  provisions  for
lions  for  the  interior  order  and  tranquillity  of  society  were
oJdeTin  extremely  defective.  The  principles  of  disorder
society.  an(j  corruption  are  discernible  in  that  consti-
tution under  its  best  and  most  perfect  form.  They

1  Du  Cange  Glossar.  voc.  Miles.

22  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

soon  unfolded  themselves,  and,  spreading  with  rapidity
through  every  part  of  the  system,  produced  the  most
fatal  effects.  The  bond  of  political  union  was  ex-
tremely feeble ;  the  sources  of  anarchy  were  innume-
rable. The  monarchical  and  aristocratical  parts  of  the
constitution,  having  no  intermediate  power  to  balance
them,  were  perpetually  at  variance,  and  justling  with
each  other.  The  powerful  vassals  of  the  crown  soon
extorted  a  confirmation  for  life  of  those  grants  of  land,
which  being  at  first  purely  gratuitous,  had  been  bestowed
only  during  pleasure.  Not  satisfied  with  this  they  pre-
vailed to  have  them  converted  into  hereditary  posses-
sions. One  step  more  completed  their  usurpations,  and
rendered  them  unalienable.m  With  an  ambition  no
less  enterprising,  and  more  preposterous,  they  ap-
propriated to  themselves  titles  of  honour,  as  well  as
offices  of  power  or  trust.  These  personal  marks  of
distinction,  which  the  public  admiration  bestows  on
illustrious  merit,  or  which  the  public  confidence  con-
fers on  extraordinary  abilities,  were  annexed  to  certain
families,  and  transmitted  like  fiefs,  from  father  to  son,
by  hereditary  right.  The  crown  vassals  having  thus
secured  the  possession  of  their  lands  and  dignities,  the
nature  of  the  feudal  institutions,  which  though  founded
on  subordination  verged  to  independence,  led  them  to
new,  and  still  more  dangerous  encroachments  on  the
prerogatives  of  the  sovereign.  They  obtained  the
power  of  supreme  jurisdiction,  both  civil  and  criminal,
within  their  own  territories ;  the  right  of  coining  mo-
ney ;  together  with  the  privilege  of  carrying  on  war
against  their  private  enemies,  in  their  own  name,  and  by
their  own  authority.  The  ideas  of  political  subjection
were  almost  entirely  lost,  and  frequently  scarce  any
appearance  of  feudal  subordination  remained.  Nobles,
who  had  acquired  such  enormous  power,  scorned  to
consider  themselves  as  subjects.  They  aspired  openly

m  See  Note  VIII.

SECT. I.  23

at  being  independent :  the  bonds  which  connected  the
principal  members  of  the  constitution  with  the  crown,
were  dissolved.  A  kingdom,  considerable  in  name
and  extent,  was  broken  into  as  many  separate  princi-
palities as  it  contained  powerful  barons.  A  thousand
causes  of  jealousy  and  discord  subsisted  among  them,
and  gave  rise  to  as  many  wars.  Every  country  in  Europe,
wasted  or  kept  in  continual  alarm  during  these  endless
contests,  was  filled  with  castles  and  places  of  strength
erected  for  the  security  of  the  inhabitants ;  not  against
foreign  force,  but  against  internal  hostilities.  A  uni-
versal anarchy,  destructive,  in  a  great  measure,  of  all
the  advantages  which  men  expect  to  derive  from  society,
prevailed.  The  people,  the  most  numerous  as  well  as
the  most  useful  part  of  the  community,  were  either  re-
duced to  a  state  of  actual  servitude,  or  treated  with  the
same  insolence  and  rigour  as  if  they  had  been  degraded
into  that  wretched  condition."  The  king,  stripped
of  almost  every  prerogative,  and  without  authority  to
enact  or  to  execute  salutary  laws,  could  neither  protect
the  innocent,  nor  punish  the  guilty.  The  nobles,  su-
perior to  all  restraint,  harassed  each  other  with  perpe-
tual wars,  oppressed  their  fellow-subjects,  and  humbled
or  insulted  their  sovereign.  To  crown  all,  time  gra-
dually fixed,  and  rendered  venerable,  this  pernicious
system,  which  violence  had  established.
it  prevent-  Such  was  the  state  of  Europe  with  respect  to
the  interior  administration  of  government  from
the  seventh  to  the  eleventh  century.  All  the
vigour  in  external  operations  of  its  various  states,  during:

their  ex-  . *j  i P i

temai  this  period,  were,  of  course,  extremely  feeble.
as'A  kingdom  dismembered,  and  torn  with  dis-
sension, without  any  common  interest  to  rouse,  or  any
common  head  to  conduct  its  force,  was  incapable  of
acting  with  vigour.  Almost  all  the  wars  in  Europe,
during  the  ages  which  I  have  mentioned,  were  trifling,

»  See  Note  IX.

24  STATE  OF  EUROPE,

indecisive,  and  productive  of  no  considerable  event,
They  resembled  the  short  incursions  of  pirates  or  ban-
ditti, rather  than  the  steady  operations  of  a  regular  army.
Every  baron,  at  the  head  of  his  vassals,  carried  on  some
petty  enterprise,  to  which  he  was  prompted  by  his  own
ambition,  or  revenge.  The  state  itself,  destitute  of
union,  either  remained  altogether  inactive,  or  if  it  at-
tempted to  make  any  effort,  that  served  only  to  dis-
cover its  impotence.  The  superior  genius  of  Charle-
magne, it  is  true,  united  all  these  disjointed  and  dis-
cordant members,  and  forming  them  again  into  one
body,  restored  to  government  that  degree  of  activity
which  distinguishes  his  reign,  and  renders  the  trans-
actions of  it,  objects  not  only  of  attention  but  of  admi-
ration to  more  enlightened  times.  But  this  'State  of
union  and  vigour,  not  being  natural  to  the  feudal  go-
vernment, was  of  short  duration.  Immediately  upon
his  death,  the  spirit  which  animated  and  sustained  the
vast  system  which  he  had  established,  being  withdrawn,
it  broke  into  pieces.  All  the  calamities  which  flow  from
anarchy  and  discord,  returning  with  additional  force,
afflicted  the  different  kingdoms,  into  which  his  empire
was  split.  From  that  time  to  the  eleventh  century,  a
succession  of  uninteresting  events,  a  series  of  wars,  the
motives  as  well  as  the  consequences  of  which  were  un-
important, fill  and  deform  the  annals  of  all  the  nations
in  Europe.

The  fatal Tothese  pernicious  effects  of  the  feudal  anar-
thisCstate  chy  may  be  added  its  fatal  influence  on  the

character  and  improvement  of  the  human  mind.
and  arts;  If  men  do  not  enjoy  the  protection  of  regular
government,  together  with  the  expectation  of  personal
security,  which  naturally  flows  from  it,  they  never  at-
tempt to  make  progress  in  science,  nor  aim  at  attaining
refinement  in  taste,  or  in  manners.  That  period  of
turbulence,  oppression,  and  rapine,  which  I  have  de-
scribed, was  ill  suited  to  favour  improvement  in  any  of

SECT. I.  25

these. In  less  than  a  century  after  the  barbarous  na-
tions settled  in  their  new  conquests,  almost  all  the
effects  of  the  knowledge  and  civility,  which  the  Romans
had  spread  through  Europe,  disappeared. Not  only  the
arts  of  elegance,  which  minister  to  luxury,  and  are  sup-
ported by  it,  but  many  of  the  useful  arts,  without  which
life  can  scarcely  be  considered  as  comfortable,  were
neglected  or  lost.  Literature,  science,  taste,  were  words
little  in  use  during  the  ages  which  we  are  contemplat-
ing ;  or,  if  they  occur  at  any  time,  eminence  in  them
is  ascribed  to  persons  and  productions  so  contemptible,
that  it  appears  their  true  import  was  little  understood.
Persons  of  the  highest  rank,  and  in  the  most  eminent
stations,  could  not  read  or  write. Many  of  the  clergy
did  not  understand  the  breviary  which  they  were  obliged
daily  to  recite ;  some  of  them  could  scarcely  read  it.0
The  memory  of  past  transactions  was,  in  a  great
degree,  lost,  or  preserved  in  annals  filled  with  trifling
events,  or  legendary  tales. Even  the  codes  of  laws
published  by  the  several  nations which established
themselves  in  the  different  countries  of  Europe,  fell
into  disuse,  while,  in  their  place,  customs,  vague  and
capricious,  were  substituted. The  human  mind,  neg-
lected, uncultivated,  and  depressed,  continued  in  the
most  profound  ignorance. Europe,  during  four  centu-
ries, produced  few  authors  who  merit  to  be  read,  either
on  account  of  the  elegance  of  their  composition,  or  the
justness  and  novelty  of  their  sentiments.  There  are  few
inventions,  useful  or  ornamental  to  society,  of  which
that  long  period  can  boast.

Upon  re-  Even  the  Christian  religion,  though  its  pre-
iigion ;  cepts  are  delivered,  and  its  institutions  are  fixed
in  Scripture,  with  a  precision  which  should  have  ex-
empted them  from  being  misinterpreted  or  corrupted,
degenerated,  during  those  ages  of  darkness,  into  an
illiberal  superstition.  The  barbarous  nations,  when

0  See  Note  X.

26  STATE OF  EUROPE.

converted  to  Christianity,  changed  the  object,  not  the
spirit,  of  their  religious  worship.  They  endeavoured
to  conciliate  the  favour  of  the  true  God  by  means  not
unlike  to  those  which  they  had  employed  in  order  to
appease  their  false  deities.  Instead  of  aspiring  to  sanc-
tity and  virtue,  which  alone  can  render  men  acceptable
to  the  great  Author  of  order  and  of  excellence,  they
imagined  that  they  satisfied  every  obligation  of  duty
by  a  scrupulous  observance  of  external  ceremonies/
Religion,  according  to  their  conceptions  of  it,  compre-
hended nothing  else ;  and  the  rites,  by  which  they  per-
suaded themselves  that  they  should  gain  the  favour  of
Heaven,  were  of  such  a  nature  as  might  have  been  ex-
pected from  the  rude  ideas  of  the  ages  which  devised
and  introduced  them.  They  were  either  so  unmean-
ing as  to  be  altogether  unworthy  of  the  Being  to  whose
honour  they  were  consecrated  ;  or  so  absurd  as  to  be  a
disgrace  to  reason  and  humanity .q  Charlemagne
in  France,  and  Alfred  the  Great  in  England,  endea-
voured to  dispel  this  darkness,  and  gave  their  subjects
a  short  glimpse  of  light  and  knowledge.  But  the
ignorance  of  the  age  was  too  powerful  for  their
efforts  and  institutions.  The  darkness  returned,  and
settled  over  Europe  more  thick  and  heavy  than
before.

As  the  inhabitants  of  Europe,  durino*  these

Upon  the  .  r  °

character  centuries,  were  strangers  to  the  arts  which  em-
rf'toSu?8  hellish  a  polished  age,  they  were  destitute  of
man  mind,  fae  virtues  which  abound  among  people  who
continue  in  a  simple  state.  Force  of  mind,  a  sense  of
personal  dignity,  gallantry  in  enterprise,  invincible  per-
severance in  execution,  contempt  of  danger  and  of  death,
are  the  characteristic  virtues  of  uncivilized  nations.
But  these  are  all  the  offspring  of  equality  and  indepen-
dence, both  which  the  feudal  institutions  had  destroyed.
The  spirit  of  domination  corrupted  the  nobles ;  the  yoke

P  See  Note  XL  q  See  Note  XII.

SECT. I.  27

of  servitude  depressed  the  people ;  the  generous  senti-
ments inspired  by  a  sense  of  equality  were  extinguished,
and  hardly  any  thing  remained  to  be  a  check  on  fero-
city and  violence.  Human  society  is  in  its  most  cor-
rupted state,  at  that  period  when  men  have  lost  their
original  independence  and  simplicity  of  manners,  but
have  not  attained  that  degree  of  refinement  which  in-
troduces a  sense  of  decorum  and  of  propriety  in  con-
duct, as  a  restraint  on  those  passions  which  lead  to  hein-
ous crimes.  Accordingly,  a  greater  number  of  those
atrocious  actions,  which  fill  the  mind  of  man  with  as-
tonishment and  horror,  occur  in  the  history  of  the  centu-
ries under  review,  than  in  that  of  any  period  of  the  same
extent  in  the  annals  of  Europe.  If  we  open  the  history
of  Gregory  of  Tours,  or  of  any  contemporary  author,
we  meet  with  a  series  of  deeds  of  cruelty,  perfidy,  and
revenge,  so  wild  and  enormous,  as  almost  to  exceed
belief.

From  the  But,  according  to  the  observation  of  an  ele-
oftte  eie8  ^^  ^u^  Pro^oun^  historian/  there  is  an  ulti-
venthcen-  mate  point  of  depression,  as  well  as  of  exaltation,
vera'ment  from  which  human  affairs  naturally  return  in  a
new  begin  contrary  progress,  and  beyond  which  they  never
to  improve.  pass  either  in  their  advancement  or  decline.
When  defects,  either  in  the  form  or  in  the  administra-
tion of  government,  occasion  such  disorders  in  society
as  are  excessive  and  intolerable,  it  becomes  the  common
interest  to  discover  and  to  apply  such  remedies  as  will
most  effectually  remove  them.  Slight  inconveniences
may  be  long  overlooked  or  endured ;  but  when  abuses
grow  to  a  certain  pitch,  the  society  must  go  to  ruin,  or
must  attempt  to  reform  them.  The  disorders  in  the
feudal  system,  together  with  the  corruption  of  taste  and
manners  consequent  upon  these,  which  had  gone  on  in-
creasing during  a  long  course  of  years,  seemed  to  have
attained  their  utmost  point  of  excess  towards  the  close

r  Hume's  History  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  441.

28  STATE OF EUROPE.

of  the  eleventh  century.  From  that  era,  we  may  date
the  return  of  government  and  manners  in  a  contrary
direction,  and  can  trace  a  succession  of  causes  and
events  which  contributed,  some  with  a  nearer  and  more
conspicuous,  others  with  a  more  remote  and  less
perceptible  influence,  to  abolish  confusion  and  bar-
barism, and  to  introduce  order,  regularity,  and  refine-
ment.

Necessary In  pointing  out  and  explaining  these  causes
an(^  events>  ^  *s  not  necessary  to  observe  the

and  events  order  of  time  with  a  chronological  accuracy  ;  it

which  con-  .  ,  . .  , .

tribute  to- is  of  more  importance  to  keep  in  view  their  mu-

tual  connexion  and  dependence,  and  to  shew
^ow  the  operation  of  one  event,  or  one  cause,
prepared  the  way  for  another,  and  augmented  its  in-
fluence. We  have  hitherto  been  contemplating  the  pro-
gress of  that  darkness,  which  spread  over  Europe,  from
its  first  approach,  to  the  period  of  greatest  obscuration  ;
a  more  pleasant  exercise  begins  here  ;  to  observe  the
first  dawnings  of  returning  light,  to  mark  the  various
accessions  by  which  it  gradually  increased  and  ad-
vanced towards  the  full  splendour  of  day.
The  ten-  I-  The  crusades,  or  expeditions  in  order  to
the  cru°f  rescue  ^e  Holy  Land  out  of  the  hands  of  infi-
sadesto  dels,  seemed  to  be  the  first  event  that  roused
a  change  Europe  from  the  lethargy  in  which  it  had  been
menTand"  ^on^  sunk>  and  that  tended  to  introduce  any
manners,  considerable  change  in  government  or  in  man-
The  more  ners<  ^  *s  natural  to  the  human  mind  to  view
remote  those  places  which  have  been  distinguished  by

causes  of  r  J

these  ex- being  the  residence  of  any  illustrious  personage,

peditions.  ^  «  /:  x.  .Al & '

or  the  scene  ot  any  great  transaction,  with  some
degree  of  delight  and  veneration.  To  this  principle
must  be  ascribed  the  superstitious  devotion  with  which
Christians,  from  the  earliest  ages  of  the  church,  were
accustomed  to  visit  that  country  which  the  Almighty
had  selected  as  the  inheritance  of  his  favourite  people,

SECT.  I.  29

and  in  which  the  Son  of  God  had  accomplished  the  re-
demption of  mankind.  As  this  distant  pilgrimage  could
not  be  performed  without  considerable  expense,  fatigue,
and  danger,  it  appeared  the  more  meritorious,  and  came
to  be  considered  as  an  expiation  for  almost  every  crime.
An  opinion  which  spread  with  rapidity  over  Europe
about  the  close  of  the  tenth,  and  beginning  of  the  ele-
venth century,  and  which  gained  universal  credit,  won-
derfully augmented  the  number  of  credulous  pilgrims,
and  increased  the  ardour  with  which  they  undertook
this  useless  voyage.  The  thousand  years,  mentioned
by  St.  John/  were  supposed  to  be  accomplished,  and
the  end  of  the  world  to  be  at  hand.  A  general  conster-
nation seized  mankind ;  many  relinquished  their  pos-
sessions ;  and,  abandoning  their  friends  and  families,
hurried  with  precipitation  to  the  Holy  Land,  where
they  imagined  that  Christ  would  quickly  appear  to
judge  the  world.3  While  Palestine  continued  subject
to  the  caliphs,  they  had  encouraged  the  resort  of  pil-
grims to  Jerusalem  ;  and  considered  this  as  a  beneficial
species  of  commerce,  which  brought  into  their  domi-
nions gold  and  silver,  and  carried  nothing  out  of  them
but  relics  and  consecrated  trinkets.  But  the  Turks  hav-
ing conquered  Syria  about  the  middle  of  the  eleventh
century,  pilgrims  were  exposed  to  outrages  of  every
kind  from  these  fierce  barbarians.*  This  change  hap-
pening precisely  at  the  juncture  when  the  panic  terror,
which  I  have  mentioned,  rendered  pilgrimages  most
frequent,  filled  Europe  with*  alarm  and  indignation.
Every  person  who  returned  from  Palestine  related  the
dangers  which  he  had  encountered,  in  visiting  the  Holy
City,  and  described  with  exaggeration  the  cruelty  and
vexations  of  the  Turks.

r  Revel,  xx.  2—4.

•  Chronic.  Will.  Godelli  ap.  Bouquet  Recueil  des  Historiens  de  France,  torn.  x.  p.
262. Vita  Abbonis,  ibid.  p.  332. Chronic. S.  Pantaleonis  ap.  Eccard.  Corp.
Scrip.  Medii  ^Eyi,  vol.  i.  p.  909. Annalista  Saxo,  ibid.  576.

*  Jo.  Dan.  Schoepflini  de  sacris  Gallorum  in  Orientem  Expeditionibus,  p.  4. Ar-
gent. 1726.  4to.

30  STATE  OF EUROPE.

The  im-  When  the  minds  of  men  were  thus  prepared,
™cctlk>n  tne  zea^  °f  a  fanatical  rnonk,  who  conceived  the
of  them.  idea  Of  leading  all  the  forces  of  Christendom
against  the  infidels,  and  of  driving  them  out  of  the  Holy
Land  by  violence,  was  sufficient  to  give  a  beginning  to
that  wild  enterprise.  Peter  the  Hermit,  for  that  was  the
name  of  this  martial  apostle,  ran  from  province  to  pro-
vince with  a  crucifix  in  his  hand,  exciting  princes  and
people  to  this  holy  war,  and  wherever  he  came  kindled
the  same  enthusiastic  ardour  for  it  with  which  he  him-
self was  animated.  The  council  of  Placentia,  where
upwards  of  thirty  thousand  persons  were  assembled,
pronounced  the  scheme  to  have  been  suggested  by  the
immediate  inspiration  of  Heaven.  In  the  council  of
Clermont,  still  more  numerous,  as  soon  as  the  measure
was  proposed,  all  cried  out  with  one  voice,  "  It  is  the
will  of  God."  Persons  of  all  ranks  catched  the  conta-
gion ;  not  only  the  gallant  nobles  of  that  age,  with  their
martial  followers,  whom  we  may  suppose  apt  to  be
allured  by  the  boldness  of  a  romantic  enterprise,  but
men  in  the  more  humble  and  pacific  stations  of  life;
ecclesiastics  of  every  order,  and  even  women  and  chil-
dren, engaged  with  emulation  in  an  undertaking  which
was  deemed  sacred  and  meritorious.  If  we  may  believe
the  concurring  testimony  of  contemporary  authors,  six
millions  of  persons  assumed  the  cross,"  which  was  the
badge  that  distinguished  such  as  devoted  themselves  to
this  holy  warfare.  All  Europe,  says  the  princess  Anna
Comnena,  torn  up  from  trie  foundation,  seemed  ready  to
precipitate  itself  in  one  united  body  upon  Asia. x  Nor  did
the  fumes  of  this  enthusiastic  zeal  evaporate  at  once ;  the
frenzy  was  as  lasting  as  it  was  extravagant.  During  two
centuries,  Europe  seems  to  have  had  no  object  but  to  re-
cover, or  keep  possession  of,  the  Holy  Land ;  and  through
that  period  vast  armies  continued  to  march  thither/

•  Fulcherius  Carnotensis  ap.  Bongarsii  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos,  vol.  i.  387.  edit.
Han.  1611.  *  Alexias,  lib.  x.  ap.  Byz.  script,  vol.  xi.  p.  224.

y  See  Note  XIII.

SECT. I.  31

The  first  efforts  of  valour,  animated  by  en-

The  sue-  '  PIT

cess  of  the  thusiasm,  were  irresistible ;  part  of  the  Lesser
Asia,  all  Syria  and  Palestine,  were  wrested  from
the  infidels  ;  the  banner  of  the  cross  was  displayed  on
Mount  Sion ;  Constantinople,  the  capital  of  the  Chris-
tian empire  in  the  east,  was  afterward  seized  by  a  body
of  those  adventurers,  who  had  taken  arms  against  the
Mahometans,  and  an  earl  of  Flanders,  and  his  descend-
ants, kept  possession  of  the  imperial  throne  during  half
a  century.  But  though  the  first  impression  of  the  cru-
saders was  so  unexpected  that  they  made  their  conquests
with  great  ease,  they  found  infinite  difficulty  in  preserv-
ing them.  Establishments  so  distant  from  Europe,  sur-
rounded by  warlike  nations,  animated  with  fanatical  zeal
scarcely  inferior  to  that  of  the  crusaders  themselves,
were  perpetually  in  danger  of  being  overturned.  Be-
fore the  expiration  of  the  thirteenth  century,
the  Christians  were  driven  out  of  all  their  Asia-
tic possessions,  in  acquiring  of  which  incredible  num-
bers of  men  had  perished,  and  immense  sums  of  money
had  been  wasted.  The  only  common  enterprise  in  which
the  European  nations  ever  engaged,  and  which  they  all
undertook  with  equal  ardour,  remains  a  singular  monu-
ment of  human  folly.

The  benefi- But  fr°m  these  expeditions,  extravagant  as
rial  effects  they  were,  beneficial  consequences  followed,

of  the  cru-  *  '

sades  on  which  had  neither  been  foreseen  nor  expected.
In  their  progress  towards  the  Holy  Land,  the
followers  of  the  cross  marched  through  countries  better
cultivated  and  more  civilized  than  their  own.  Their
first  rendezvous  was  commonly  in  Italy,  in  which  Ve-
nice, Genoa,  Pisa,  and  other  cities,  had  begun  to  apply
themselves  to  commerce,  and  had  made  considerable
advances  towards  wealth  as  well  as  refinement.  They
embarked  there,  and  landing  in  Dalmatia,  pursued  their
route  by  land  to  Constantinople.  Though  the  military

I
32  STATE OF EUROPE.

spirit  had  been  long  extinct  in  the  Eastern  empire,  and
a  despotism  of  the  worst  species  had  annihilated  almost
every  public  virtue,  yet  Constantinople,  having  never
felt  the  destructive  rage  of  the  barbarous  nations,  was
the  greatest,  as  well  as  the  most  beautiful  city  in  Europe,
and  the  only  one  in  which  there  remained  any  image  of
the  ancient  elegance  in  manners  and  arts. The  naval
power  of  the  Eastern  empire  was  considerable. Manu-
factures of  the  most  curious  fabric  were  carried  on  in
its  dominions. Constantinople  was  the  chief  mart  in
Europe  for  the  commodities  of  the  East  Indies. Al-
though the  Saracens  and  Turks  had  torn  from  the  em-
pire many  of  its  richest  provinces,  and  had  reduced  it
within  very  narrow  bounds,  yet  great  wealth  flowed
into  the  capital  from  these  various  sources,  which  not
only  cherished  such  a  taste  for  magnificence,  but  kept
alive  such  a  relish  for  the  sciences,  as  appears  consi-
derable, when  compared  with  what  was  known  in  other
parts  of  Europe. Even  in  Asia,  the  Europeans,  who
had  assumed  the  cross,  found  the  remains  of  the  know-
ledge and  arts  which  the  example  and  encouragement
of  the  caliphs  had  diffused  through  their  empire. Al-
though the  attention  of  the  historians  of  the  crusades
was  fixed  on  other  objects  than  the  state  of  society  and
manners  among  the  nations  which  they  invaded,  al-
though most  of  them  had  neither  taste  nor  discernment
enough  to  describe  these,  they  relate,  however,  such
signal  acts  of  humanity  and  generosity  in  the  conduct
of  Saladin,  as  well  as  some  other  leaders  of  the  Maho-
metans, as  give  us  a  very  high  idea  of  their  manners.
It  was  not  possible  for  the  crusaders  to  travel  through
so  many  countries,  and  to  behold  their  various  customs
and  institutions,  without  acquiring  information  and  im-
provement. Their  views enlarged; their  prejudices
wore  off;  new  ideas  crowded  into  their  minds;  and
they  must  have  been  sensible,  on  many  occasions,  of  the

SECT.  I.  33

rusticity  of  their  own  manners,  when  compared  with
those  of  a  more  polished  people.  These  impressions
were  not  so  slight  as  to  be  effaced  upon  their  return  to
their  native  countries.  A  close  intercourse  subsisted
between  the  east  and  the  west  during  two  centuries ;
new  armies  were  continually  marching  from  Europe  to
Asia,  while  former  adventurers  returned  home  and  im-
ported many  of  the  customs  to  which  they  had  been
familiarized  by  a  long  residence  abroad.  Accordingly,
we  discover,  soon  after  the  commencement  of  the  cru-
sades, greater  splendour  in  the  courts  of  princes,
greater  pomp  in  the  public  ceremonies,  a  more  refined
taste  in  pleasure  and  amusements,  together  with  a  more
romantic  spirit  of  enterprise  spreading  gradually  over
Europe;  and  to  those  wild  expeditions,  the  effect  of
superstition  or  folly,  we  owe  the  first  gleams  of  light
which  tended  to  dispel  barbarism  and  ignorance.
Their  in-  But  these  beneficial  consequences  of  the
tbestrteofcrusades  took  place  slowly;  their  influence
property.  UpOn  tne  state  of  property,  and  consequently  of
power,  in  the  different  kingdoms  of  Europe,  was  more
immediate  as  well  as  discernible.  The  nobles  who  as-
sumed the  cross,  and  bound  themselves  to  march  to
the  Holy  Land,  soon  perceived  that  great  sums  were
necessary  towards  defraying  the  expenses  of  such  a
distant  expedition,  and  enabling  them  to  appear  with
suitable  dignity  at  the  head  of  their  vassals.  But  the
genius  of  the  feudal  system  was  averse  to  the  imposi-
tion of  extraordinary  taxes ;  and  subjects  in  that  age
were  unaccustomed  to  pay  them.  No  expedient  re-
mained for  levying  the  sums  requisite,  but  the  sale  of
their  possessions.  As  men  were  inflamed  with  roman-
tic expectations  of  the  splendid  conquests  which  they
hoped  to  make  in  Asia,  and  possessed  with  such  zeal
for  recovering  the  Holy  Land  as  swallowed  up  every
other  passion,  they  relinquished  their  ancient  inheri-
tances without  any  reluctance,  and  for  prices  far  below
VOL.  in.  D

;34  STATE OF EUROPE,

their  value,  that  they  might  sally  forth  as  adventurers
in  quest  of  new  settlements  in  unknown  countries.  The
monarchs  of  the  great  kingdoms  in  the  west,  none  of
whom  had  engaged  in  the  first  crusade,  eagerly  seized
this  opportunity  of  annexing  considerable  territories  to
their  crowns  at  small  expense.1" Besides  this,  several
great  barons,  who  perished  in  the  holy  war,  having  left
no  heirs,  their  fiefs  reverted  of  course  to  their  respective
sovereigns  ;  and  by  these  accessions  of  property  as  well
as  power,  taken  from  the  one  scale  and  thrown  into  the
other,  the  regal  authority  rose  in  proportion  as  that  of
the  aristocracy  declined. The  absence,  too,  of  many
potent  vassals,  accustomed  to  control  and  give  law  to
their  sovereigns,  afforded  them  an  opportunity  of  ex-
tending their  prerogative,  and  of  acquiring  a  degree  of
weight  in  the  constitution  which  they  did  not  formerly
possess.  To  these  circumstances,  we  may  add,  that  as  all
who  assumed  the  cross,  were  taken  under  the  immediate
protection  of  the  church,  and  its  heaviest  anathemas
were  denounced  against  such  as  should  disquiet  or
annoy  those  who  had  devoted  themselves  to  this  ser-
vice ;  the  private  quarrels  and  hostilities  which  banish-
ed tranquillity  from  a  feudal  kingdom,  were  suspended
or  extinguished ;  a  more  general  and  steady  admini-
stration of  justice  began  to  be  introduced,1  and  some
advances  were made  towards the establishment  of
regular  government  in  the  several  kingdoms  of  Eu-
rope.™

Their  com-  The  commercial  effects  of  the  crusades  were
not  ^ess  considerable  than  those  which  I  have
already  mentioned.  The  first  armies  under  the
standard  of  the  cross,  which  Peter  the  Hermit  and  God-
frey of  Bouillon  led  through  Germany  and  Hungary  to
Constantinople,  suffered  so  much  by  the  length  of  the
march,  as  well  as  by  the  fierceness  of  the  barbarous

k  Willelm.  Malmsbur.  Guibert.  Abbas  ap.  Bongars.  vol.  i.  481.
Da.  Cange  Glossar. voc.  Cruoe  signatus. Guil.  Abbas  ap.  Bongars,  vol.  i.
460.  482.  m  See  Note  XIV.

SECT.  I.  35

people  who  inhabited  those  countries,  that  it  deterred
others  from  taking  the  same  route ;  and  rather  than  en-
counter so  many  dangers,  they  chose  to  go  by  sea.
Venice,  Genoa,  and  Pisa,  furnished  the  transports  on
which  they  embarked.  The  sum  which  these  cities  re-
ceived merely  for  freight  from  such  numerous  armies
was  immense.11  This,  however,  was  but  a  small  part
of  what  they  gained  by  the  expeditions  to  the  Holy
Land ;  the  crusaders  contracted  with  them  for  military
stores  and  provisions  ;  their  fleets  kept  on  the  coast  as
the  armies  advanced  by  land ;  and  supplying  them
with  whatever  was  wanting,  engrossed  all  the  profits
of  a  branch  of  commerce,  which,  in  every  age,  has  been
extremely  lucrative.  The  success  which  attended  the
arms  of  the  crusaders  was  productive  of  advantages
still  more  permanent.  There  are  charters  yet  extant,
containing  grants  to  the  Venetians,  Pisans,  and  Ge-
noese, of  the  most  extensive  immunities  in  the  several
settlements  which  the  Christians  made  in  Asia.  All
the  commodities  which  they  imported  or  exported  are
thereby  exempted  from  every  imposition;  the  property
of  entire  suburbs  in  some  of  the  maritime  towns,  and
of  large  streets  in  others,  is  vested  in  them ;  and  all
questions,  arising  among  persons  settled  within  their
precincts,  or  who  traded  under  their  protection,  are
appointed  to  be  tried  by  their  own  laws,  and  by  judges
of  their  own  appointment.0  When  the  crusaders  seized
Constantinople,  and  placed  one  of  their  own  leaders
on  the  imperial  throne,  the  Italian  states  were  likewise
gainers  by  that  event.  The  Venetians,  who  had  planned
the  enterprise,  and  took  a  considerable  part  in  carrying
it  into  execution,  did  not  neglect  to  secure  to  themselves
the  chief  advantages  redounding  from  its  success.  They
made  themselves  masters  of  part  of  the  ancient  Pelo-
ponnesus in  Greece,  together  with  some  of  the  most

n  Muratori  Antiquit.  Italic.  Medii  uEvi,  vol.  ii.  905.
°  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  906,  &c.

D2

36  STATE OF EUROPE.

fertile  islands  in  the  Archipelago.  Many  valuable
branches  of  the  commerce,  which  formerly  centered  in
Constantinople,  were  transferred  to  Venice,  Genoa,  or
Pisa.  Thus  a  succession  of  events,  occasioned  by  the
holy  war,  opened  various  sources,  from  which  wealth
flowed  in  such  abundance  into  these  cities,p  as  enabled
them,  in  concurrence  with  another  institution,  which
shall  be  immediately  mentioned,  to  secure  their  own
liberty  and  independence.

The  esta-  II.  The  institution  to  which  I  alluded  was
ofcommu-  the  forming  of  cities  into  communities,  corpo-
rations,  or  bodies  politic,  and  granting  them

to  govern-  the  privilege  of  municipal  jurisdiction,  which

raentand  r.,  .  .J

order.  contributed  more,  perhaps,  than  any  other  cause,
to  introduce  regular  government,  police,  and  arts,  and
to  diffuse  them  over  Europe.  The  feudal  government
had  degenerated  into  a  system  of  oppression.  The
usurpations  of  the  nobles  were  become  unbounded  and
intolerable  :  they  had  reduced  the  great  body  of  the
people  into  a  state  of  actual  servitude  :  the  condition
of  those  dignified  with  the  name  of  freemen,  was  often
little  preferable  to  that  of  the  other.  Nor  was  such
oppression  the  portion  of  those  alone  who  dwelt  in  the
country,  and  were  employed  in  cultivating  the  estate  of
The  an  ^e^r  master.  Cities  and  villages  found  it  ne-
cient  state  cessary  to  hold  of  some  great  lord,  on  whom
they  might  depend  for  protection,  and  became
no  less  subject  to  his  arbitrary  jurisdiction.  The  inha-
bitants were  deprived  of  those  rights,  which,  in  social
life,  are  deemed  most  natural  and  unalienable.  They
could  not  dispose  of  the  effects  which  their  own  in-
dustry had  acquired,  either  by  a  latter  will,  or  by  any
deed  executed  during  their  life.q  They  had  no  right
to  appoint  guardians  for  their  children  during  their
minority.  They  were  not  permitted  to  marry  without

P  Villehardouin  Hist,  de  Constant,  sous  1'Empereurs  Francois,  105,  &c.
1  Dacherii.  Spiceleg.  torn.  xi.  374,  375.  edit,  in  4to.  Ordonances  des  Rois  de
France,  torn.  Hi.  244.  No.  2.  6.

SECT.  I.  37

purchasing  the  consent  of  the  lord  on  whom  they  de-
pended/ If  once  they  had  commenced  a  lawsuit,  they
durst  not  terminate  it  by  an  accommodation,  because
that  would  have  deprived  the  lord,  in  whose  court  they
pleaded,  of  the  perquisites  due  to  him  on  passing  sen-
tence.8 Services  of  various  kinds,  no  less  disgraceful
than  oppressive,  were  exacted  from  them  without  mercy
or  moderation.  The  spirit  of  industry  was  checked  in
some  cities  by  absurd  regulations,  and  in  others  by  un-
reasonable exactions  ;  nor  would  the  narrow  and  op-
pressive maxims  of  a  military  aristocracy  have  permitted
it  ever  to  rise  to  any  degree  of  height  or  vigour.*
The  free-  ^u^  as  soon  as  the  c^es  °f  Italy  began  to

dom  of turn  their  attention  towards  commerce,  and  to

cities  first  .  .  .

established  conceive  some  idea  01  the  advantages  which
ta  y'  they  might  derive  from  it,  they  became  impa-
tient to  shake  off  the  yoke  of  their  insolent  lords,  and
to  establish  among  themselves  such  a  free  and  equal
government,  as  would  render  property  secure,  and  in-
dustry flourishing.  The  German  emperors,  especially
those  of  the  Franconian  and  Suabian  lines,  as  the  seat
of  their  government  was  far  distant  from  Italy,  pos-
sessed a  feeble  and  imperfect  jurisdiction  in  that  coun-
try. Their  perpetual^  quarrels,  either  with  the  popes
or  with  their  own  turbulent  vassals,  diverted  their  at-
tention from  the  interior  police  of  Italy,  and  gave  con-
stant employment  to  their  arms.  These  circumstances
encouraged  the  inhabitants  of  some  of  the  Italian  cities,
towards  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  century,  to  as-
sume new  privileges,  to  unite  together  more  closely,  and
to  form  themselves  into  bodies  politic  under  tne  govern-
ment of  laws  established  by  common  consent."  The
rights,  which  many  cities  acquired  by  bold  or  fortunate

r  Ordonances  des  Hois  de  France,  torn.  i.  p.  22.  torn  iii.  203. No.  1. Murat,
Antiq.  Ital.  vol.  iv.  p.  20. Dacher.  Spicel.  vol.  xi.  325.  341.

•  Dacher.  Spicel.  vol.  ix.  182.

1  M.  I'AbbS  Mably  Observat.  sur  I'Hist.  de  France,  torn,  ii.  p.  2.  96*
u  Murat.  Antiquit.  Ital.  vol.  iv.  p.  5.

38  STATE OF EUROPE,

usurpations,  others  purchased  from  the  emperors,  who
deemed  themselves  gainers  when  they  received  large
sums  for  immunities  which  they  were  no  longer  able  to
withhold ;  and  some  cities  obtained  them  gratuitously,
from  the  generosity  or  facility  of  the  princes  on  whom
they  depended.  The  great  increase  of  wealth,  which
the  crusades  brought  into  Italy,  occasioned  a  new  kind
of  fermentation  and  activity  in  the  minds  of  the  people,,
and  excited  such  a  general  passion  for  liberty  and  inde-
pendence, that,  before  the  conclusion  of  the  last  cru-
sade, all  the  considerable  cities  in  that  country  had
either  purchased  or  had  extorted  large  immunities  from
the  emperors.p

This  innovation  was  not  long  known  in  Italy
duced°into  before  it  made  its  way  into  France.  Louis  le
huoDothe?d  Gros,  in  order  to  create  some  power  that  might
countries  counterbalance  those  potent  vassals  who  con-

of  Europe.  r

A.  D; JUGS  trolled,  or  gave  law  to  the  crown,  first  adopted
the  plan  of  conferring  new  privileges  on  the
towns  situated  within  its  own  domain.  These  privileges
were  called  charters  of  community,  by  which  he  en-
franchised the  inhabitants,  abolished  all  marks  of  ser-
vitude, and  formed  them  into  corporations  or  bodies
politic,  to  be  governed  by  a  council  and  magistrates  of
their  own  nomination.  These  magistrates  had  the  right
of  administering  justice  within  their  own  precincts,  of
levying  taxes,  of  embodying  and  training  to  arms  the
militia  of  the  town,  which  took  the  field  when  required
by  the  sovereign,  under  the  command  of  officers  ap-
pointed by  the  community.  The  great  barons  imitated
the  example  of  their  monarch,  and  granted  like  immu-
nities to  the  towns  within  their  territories.  They  had
wasted  such  great  sums  in  their  expeditions  to  the  Holy
Land,  that  they  were  eager  to  lay  hold  on  this  new  ex-
pedient for  raising  money,  by  the  sale  of  those  charters
of  liberty.  Though  the  institution  of  communities  was

P  See  Note  XV.

SECT.  I.  39

as  repugnant  to  their  maxims  of  policy,  as  it  was  ad-
verse to  their  power,  they  disregarded  remote  conse-
quences, in  order  to  obtain  present  relief.  In  less  than
two  centuries,  servitude  was  abolished  in  most  of  the
towns  in  France,  and  they  became  free  corporations,  in-
stead of  dependant  villages,  without  jurisdiction  or  pri-
vileges.41 Much  about  the  same  period,  the  great
cities  in  Germany  began  to  acquire  like  immunities,  and
laid  the  fpundation  of  their  present  liberty  and  inde-
pendence/ The  practice  spread  quickly  over  Eu-
rope, and  was  adopted  in  Spain,  England,  Scotland,
and  all  the  other  feudal  kingdoms.3
its  happy  The  good  effects  of  this  new  institution  were
j.  immediately  felt,  and  its  influence  on  govern-
ment as  well  as  manners  was  no  less  extensive
tants ;  than  salutary .  A  great  body  of  the  people  was
released  from  servitude,  and  from  all  the  arbitrary  and
grievous  impositions  to  which  that  wretched  condition
had  subjected  them.  Towns,  upon  acquiring  the  right
of  community,  became  so  many  little  republics,  go-
verned by  known  and  equal  laws.  Liberty  was  deemed
such  an  essential  and  characteristic  part  in  their  consti-
tution, that  if  any  slave  took  refuge  in  one  of  them,  and
resided  there  during  a  year  without  being  claimed,  he
was  instantly  declared  a  freeman,  and  admitted  as  a
member  of  the  community/

Upon  the  As  one  part  of  the  people  owed  their  liberty
SiTnobi-  to  tne  erection  of  communities,  another  was  in-
ht^;  debted  to  them  for  their  security.  Such  had
been  the  state  of  Europe  during  several  centuries,  that
self-preservation  obliged  every  man  to  court  the  patron-
age of  some  powerful  baron,  and  in  times  of  danger
his  castle  was  the  place  to  which  all  resorted  for  safety.
But  towns  surrounded  with  walls,  whose  inhabitants
were  regularly  trained  to  arms,  and  bound  by  interest,

i  See  Note  XVI.  '  See  Note  XVII.  •  See  Note  XVIII.

*  Statut.  Humbert!  Bellojoci  Dacher.  Spied,  vol,  ix.  182.  185. Charta  Corait.
Forens.  ibid.  193.

40  STATE OF EUROPE,

as  well  as  by  the  most  solemn  engagements,  recipro-
cally to  defend  each  other,  afforded  a  more  commodious
and  secure  retreat*  The  nobles  began  to  be  considered
as  of  less  importance  when  they  ceased  to  be  the  sole
guardians  to  whom  the  people  could  look  up  for  pro-
tection against  violence.

u  on  the  ^  *ke  n°bility  suffered  some  diminution  of
power  of  their  credit  and  power  by  the  privileges  granted

the  crown  j  A  . ,  .  £

to  the  cities,  the  crown  acquired  an  increase  ot
both.  As  there  were  no  regular  troops  kept  on  foot  in
any  of  the  feudal  kingdoms,  the  monarch  could  bring
no  army  into  the  field,  but  what  was  composed  of  sol-
diers furnished  by  the  crown  vassals,  always  jealous  of
the  regal  authority ;  nor  had  he  any  funds  for  carrying
on  the  public  service  but  such  as  they  granted  him  with
a  very  sparing  hand.  But  when  the  members  of  com-
munities were  permitted  to  bear  arms,  and  were  trained
to  the  use  of  them,  this  in  some  degree  supplied  the  first
defect,  and  gave  the  crown  the  command  of  a  body  of
men,  independent  of  its  great  vassals.  The  attachment
of  the  cities  to  their  sovereigns,  whom  they  respected
as  the  first  authors  of  their  liberties,  and  whom  they
were  obliged  to  court  as  the  protectors  of  their  immu-
nities against  the  domineering  spirit  of  the  nobles,  con-
tributed somewhat  towards  removing  the  second  evil,
as,  on  many  occasions,  it  procured  the  crown  supplies
of  money,  which  added  new  force  to  government/
Upon  the  The  acquisition  of  liberty  made  such  a  happy
increase  of  change  in  the  condition  of  all  the  members  of

industry.

communities,  as  roused  them  from  that  inaction
into  which  they  had  been  sunk  by  the  wretchedness  of
their  former  state.  The  spirit  of  industry  revived.  Com-
merce became  an  object  of  attention,  and  began  to  flou-
rish. Population  increased.  Independence  was  esta-
blished; and  wealth  flowed  into  cities  which  had  long
been  the  seat  of  poverty  and  oppression.  Wealth  was

*  Ordon.  des  Rois  de  France,  torn.  i.  602.  785 ;  torn.  ii.  318.  422.

SECT.  I.  41

accompanied  by  its  usual  attendants,  ostentation  and
luxury;  and  though  the  former  was  formal  and  cumber-
some, and  the  latter  inelegant,  they  led  gradually  to
greater  refinement  in  manners,  and  in  the  habits  of  life.
Together  with  this  improvement  in  manners,  a  more  re-
gular species  of  government  and  police  was  introduced.
As  cities  grew  to  be  more  populous,  and  the  occasions
of  intercourse  among  men  increased,  statutes  and  regu-
lations multiplied  of  course,  and  all  became  sensible
that  their  common  safety  depended  on  observing  them
with  exactness,  and  on  punishing  such  as  violated  them,
with  promptitude  and  rigour.  Laws  and  subordination,
as  well  as  polished  manners,  taking  their  rise  in  cities,
diffused  themselves  insensibly  through  the  rest  of  the
society.

III.  The  inhabitants  of  cities  having;  obtain-

Theinha-  ..,.?,..

bitants  of  ed  personal  freedom  and  municipal  jurisdiction,
quire  poM-  soon  acquired  civil  liberty  and  political  power.
was  a  fundamental  principle  in  the  feudal

of  the  con-  system  of  policy,  that  no  freeman  could  be  sub-
stitutions .J  I

jected  to  new  laws  or  taxes  unless  by  his  own

consent.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  vassals  of  every
baron  were  called  to  his  court,  in  which  they  established,
by  mutual  consent,  such  regulations  as  they  deemed
most  beneficial  to  their  small  society,  and  granted  their
superior  such  supplies  of  money,  as  were  proportioned
to  their  abilities,  or  to  his  wants.  The  barons  them-
selves, conformably  to  the  same  maxim,  were  admitted
into  the  supreme  assembly  of  the  nation,  and  .concurred
with  the  sovereign  in  enacting  laws,  or  in  imposing
taxes.  As  the  superior  lord,  according  to  the  original
plan  of  feudal  policy,  retained  the  direct  property  of
those  lands  which  he  granted,  in  temporary  possession,
to  his  vassals;  the  law,  even  after  fiefs  became  here-
ditary, still  supposed  this  original  practice  to  subsist.
The  great  council  of  each  nation,  whether  distinguished
by  the  name  of  a  parliament,  a  diet,  the  cortes,  or  the

I
42  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

states-general,  was  composed  entirely  of  such  barons,
and  dignified  ecclesiastics,  as  held  immediately  of  the
crown.  Towns,  whether  situated  within  the  royal
domain  or  on  the  lands  of  a  subject,  depended  originally
for  protection  on  the  lord  of  whom  they  held.  They
had  no  legal  name,  no  political  existence,  which  could
entitle  them  to  be  admitted  into  the  legislative  assembly,
or  could  give  them  any  authority  there.  But  as  soon  as
they  were  enfranchised,  and  formed  into  bodies  cor-
porate, they  became  legal  and  independent  members
of  the  constitution,  and  acquired  all  the  rights  essential
to  freemen.  Amongst  these,  the  most  valuable  was,
the  privilege  of  a  decisive  voice  in  enacting  public  laws
and  granting  national  subsidies.  It  was  natural  for
cities,  accustomed  to  a  form  of  municipal  government,
according  to  which  no  regulation  could  be  established
within  the  community,  and  no  money  could  be  raised
but  by  their  own  consent,  to  claim  this  privilege.  The
wealth,  the  power,  and  consideration,  which  they  ac-
quired on  recovering  their  liberty,  added  weight  to  their
claim;  and  favourable  events  happened,  or  fortunate
conjunctures  occurred,  in  the  different  kingdoms  of
Europe,  which  facilitated  their  obtaining  possession  of
this  important  right.  In  England,  one  of  the  first  coun-
tries in  which  the  representatives  of  boroughs  were  ad-
mitted into  the  great  council  of  the  nation,  the  barons

A.D  1265  w^°  to°k  arms  against  Henry  III.  summoned
them  to  attend  parliament,  in  order  to  add
greater  popularity  to  their  party,  and  to  strengthen  the
barrier  against  the  encroachment  of  regal  power.  In
France,  Philip  the  Fair,  a  monarch  no  less  sagacious
than  enterprising,  considered  them  as  instruments  which
might  be  employed  with  equal  advantage  to  extend  the
royal  prerogative,  to  counterbalance  the  exorbitant
power  of  the  nobles,  and  to  facilitate  the  imposition  of
new  taxes.  With  these  views,  he  introduced  the  de-
puties of  such  towns  as  were  formed  into  communities,

SECT.  I.  43

into  the  states-general  of  the  nation.*  In  the  empire,
the  wealth  and  immunities  of  the  imperial  cities  placed
them  on  a  level  with  the  most  considerable  members  of
the  Germanic  body.  Conscious  of  their  own  power
and  dignity,  they  pretended  to  the  privilege  of  forming
a  separate  bench  in  the  diet :  and  made  good

A.  D.  1293.

their  pretensions.

The  happy But  *u  wna^  way  soever  the  representatives
effects  of  Of  cities  first  gained  a  place  in  the  legislature,

this  upon  f  i ?  i

govern-  that  event  had  great  influence  on  the  torm  and
genius  of  government.  It  tempered  the  rigour
of  aristocratical  oppression  with  a  proper  mixture  of
popular  liberty :  it  secured  to  the  great  body  of  the
people,  who  had  formerly  no  representatives,  active  and
powerful  guardians  of  their  rights  and  privileges :  it
established  an  intermediate  power  between  the  king
and  the  nobles,  to  which  each  had  recourse  alternately,
and  which  at  some  times  opposed  the  usurpations  of
the  former,  on  other  occasions  checked  the  encroach-
ments of  the  latter.  As  soon  as  the  representatives  of
communities  gained  any  degree  of  credit  and  influence
in  the  legislature,  the  spirit  of  laws  became  different  from
what  it  had  formerly  been;  it  flowed  from  new  prin-
ciples ;  it  was  directed  towards  new  objects  ;  equality,
order,  the  public  good,  and  the  redress  of  grievances,
were  phrases  and  ideas  brought  into  use,  and  which
grew  to  be  familiar  in  the  statutes  and  jurisprudence  of
the  European  nations.  Almost  all  the  efforts  in  favour
of  liberty  in  every  country  of  Europe,  have  been  made
by  this  new  power  in  the  legislature.  In  proportion
as  it  rose  to  consideration  and  influence,  the  severity
of  the  aristocratical  spirit  decreased ;  and  the  privileges
of  the  people  became  gradually  more  extensive,  as  the
ancient  and  exorbitant  jurisdiction  of  the  nobles  was
abridged.3

y  Pasquier  Recherches  de  la  France,  p.  81.  edit.  Par.  1633.

z  Pfeffel  Abrege  de  1'Histoire  et  Droit  d'Allemagne,  p.  408.  451.

»  See  Note  XIX.

I
44  STATE OF  EUROPE.

The  eo-  IV.  The  inhabitants  of  towns  having  been
pie  acquire  declared  free  by  the  charters  of  communities,
enfranchise-  that  part  of  the  people  which  resided  in  the

country,  and  was  employed  in  agriculture,
began  to  recover  liberty  by  enfranchisement.  During
the  rigour  of  feudal  government,  as  hath  been  already
observed,  the  great  body  of  the  lower  people  was
reduced  to  servitude.  They  were  slaves  fixed  to  the
soil  which  they  cultivated,  and  together  with  it  were
transferred  from  one  proprietor  to  another,  by  sale  or
by  conveyance.  The  spirit  of  feudal  policy  did  not
favour  the  enfranchisement  of  that  order  of  men.  It
was  an  established  maxim,  that  no  vassal  could  legally
diminish  the  value  of  a  fief,  to  the  detriment  of  the  lord
from  whom  he  had  received  it.  In  consequence  of  this,
manumission  by  the  authority  of  the  immediate  master
was  not  valid;  and  unless  it  was  confirmed  by  the
superior  lord  of  whom  he  held,  slaves  belonging  to  the
fief  did  not  acquire  a  complete  right  to  their  liberty.
Thus  it  became  necessary  to  ascend  through  all  the
gradations  of  feudal-holding  to  the  king,  the  lord  para-
mount.* A  form  of  procedure  so  tedious  and  trouble-
some, discouraged  the  practice  of  manumission.  Do-
mestic or  personal  slaves  often  obtained  liberty  from
the  humanity  or  beneficence  of  their  masters,  to  whom
they  belonged  in  absolute  property.  The  condition  of
slaves  fixed  to  the  soil  was  much  more  unalterable.
The  mo-  But  the  freedom  and  independence  which  one
progress"1  Part  of  the  people  had  obtained  by  the  institu-
of  this.  tion  of  communities,  inspired  the  other  with  the
most  ardent  desire  of  acquiring  the  same  privileges ;
and  their  superiors,  sensible  of  the  various  advantages
which  they  had  derived  from  their  former  concessions
to  their  dependants,  were  less  unwilling  to  gratify  them
A  D.  1315  by  the  grant  of  new  immunities.  The  enfran-

chisement  of  slaves  became  more  frequent;

*  Etablissemeris  de  St.  Louis,  liv.  ii.  ch.  34.  Ordon.  torn.  i.  283.  note  (a).

SECT.  I.

45

and  the  monarchs  of  France,  prompted  by  necessity  no
less  than  by  their  inclination  to  reduce  the  power  of  the
nobles,  endeavoured  to  render  it  general.  Louis  X.
and  Philip  the  Long,  issued  ordinances,  declaring,
"  That  as  all  men  were  by  nature  free-born,  and  as
their  kingdom  was  called  the  kingdom  of  Franks,  they
determined  that  it  should  be  so  in  reality  as  well  as  in
name ;  therefore  they  appointed  that  enfranchisements
should  be  granted  throughout  the  whole  kingdom,  upon
just  and  reasonable  conditions. "b  These  edicts  were
carried  into  immediate  execution  within  the  royal  do-
main. The  example  of  their  sovereigns,  together  with
the  expectation  of  considerable  sums  which  they  might
raise  by  this  expedient,  led  many  of  the  nobles  to  set
their  dependants  at  liberty;  and  servitude  was  gradually
abolished  in  almost  every  province  of  the  kingdom.0
In  Italy,  the  establishment  of  republican  government
in  their  great  cities,  the  genius  and  maxims  of  which
were  extremely  different  from  those  of  the  feudal  policy,
together  with  the  ideas  of  equality,  which  the  progress
of  commerce  had  rendered  familiar,  gradually  intro-
duced the  practice  of  enfranchising  the  ancient  predial
slaves.  In  some  provinces  of  Germany,  the  persons
who  had  been  subject  to  this  species  of  bondage,  were
released;  in  others,  the  rigour  of  their  state  was  miti-
gated. In  England,  as  the  spirit  of  liberty  gained
ground,  the  very  name  and  idea  of  personal  servitude,
without  any  formal  interposition  of  the  legislature  to
prohibit  it,  was  totally  banished.

The  effects  of  such  a  remarkable  change  in
condition  of  so  great  a  part  of  the  people,
upon  the cou\^  not  fail  of  being  considerable  and  exten-

iraprove-  c

raent  of sive. The  husbandman,  master  of  his  own  m-

16  y* dustry,  and  secure  of  reaping  for  himself  the

fruits  of  his  labour,  became  the  farmer  of  the  same  fields

where  he  had  formerly  been  compelled  to  toil  for  the

*»  Ordon.  torn.  i.p.  583,  653.

See  Note  XX.

46  STATE OF EUROPE.

benefit  of  another.  The  odious  names  of  master  and
of  slave,  the  most  mortifying  and  depressing  of  all  dis-
tinctions to  human  nature,  were  abolished.  New  pros-
pects opened,  and  new  incitements  to  ingenuity  and
enterprise  presented  themselves  to  those  who  were
emancipated.  The  expectation  of  bettering  their  for-
tune, as  well  as  that  of  raising  themselves  to  a  more
honourable  condition,  concurred  in  calling  forth  their
activity  and  genius ;  and  a  numerous  class  of  men,  who
formerly  had  no  political  existence,  and  were  employed
merely  as  instruments  of  labour,  became  useful  citizens,
and  contributed  towards  augmenting  the  force  or  riches
of  the  society  which  adopted  them  as  members.
Thejntro-  V.  The  various  expedients  which  were  em-
a  morTre-  ployed  in  order  to  introduce  a  more  regular,
Snbtra"  eclua^  anc^  vigorous  administration  of  justice,
tion  of  jus-  contributed  greatly  towards  the  improvement  of

ticecontri- .  f?  . r

butes  to  society.  W  hat  were  the  particular  modes  of
^rovment  Dispensing  justice,  in  their  several  countries,
of  society.  among  the  various  barbarous  nations  which  over-
ran the  Roman  empire,  and  took  possession  of  its  differ-
ent provinces,  cannot  now  be  determined  with  certainty.
We  may  conclude,  from  the  form  of  government  esta-
blished among  them,  as  well  as  from  their  ideas  concern-
ing the  nature  of  society,  that  the  authority  of  the  ma-
gistrate was  extremely  limited,  and  the  independence  of
individuals  proportionally  great.  History  and  records,
as  far  as  these  reach  back,  justify  this  conclusion,  and
represent  the  ideas  and  exercise  of  justice  in  all  the
countries  of  Europe,  as  little  different  from  those  which
must  take  place  in  the  most  simple  state  of  civil  life.
To  maintain  the  order  and  tranquillity  of  society  by  the
regular  execution  of  known  laws  ;  to  inflict  vengeance
on  crimes  destructive  of  the  peace  and  safety  of  indivi-
duals, by  a  prosecution  carried  on  in  the  name,  and  by
the  authority,  of  the  community ;  to  consider  the  pu-
nishment of  criminals  as  a  public  example  to  deter

SECT, I.  47

others  from  violating  the  laws;  were  objects  of  go-
vernment little  understood  in  theory,  and  less  regarded
in  practice.  The  magistrate  could  hardly  be  said  to
hold  the  sword  of  justice ;  it  was  left  in  the  hands  of
private  persons.  Resentment  was  almost  the  sole  mo-
tive for  prosecuting  crimes ;  and  to  gratify  that  passion,
was  considered  as  the  chief  end  in  punishing  them.
He  who  suffered  the  wrong,  was  the  only  person  who
had  a  right  to  pursue  the  aggressor,  and  to  exact  or  to
remit  the  punishment.  From  a  system  of  judicial  pro-
cedure, so  crude  and  defective,  that  it  seems  to  be
scarcely  compatible  with  the  subsistence  of  civil  society,
disorder  and  anarchy  flowed.  Superstition  concurred
with  this  ignorance  concerning  the  nature  of  govern-
ment, in  obstructing  the  administration  of  justice,  or  in
rendering  it  capricious  and  unequal.  To  provide  re-
medies for  these  evils,  so  as  to  give  a  more  regular
course  to  justice,  was,  during  several  centuries,  one
great  object  of  political  wisdom.  The  regulations  for
this  purpose  may  be  reduced  to  three  general  heads.
To  explain  these,  and  to  point  out  the  manner  in  which
they  operated,  is  an  important  article  in  the  history  of
society  among  the  nations  of  Europe.

1.  The  first  considerable  step  towards  esta-
blishing  an  equal  administration  of  justice,  was
tteePofapri- tlie  aD°lishment  of  the  right  which  individuals
vatewar.  claimed  of  waging  war  with  each  other,  in  their
own  name,  and  by  their  own  authority.  To  repel  in-
juries, and  to  revenge  wrongs,  is  no  less  natural  to  man,
Original  t^ian  to  cu^ivate  friendship  ;  and  while  society
ideas  of  remains  in  its  most  simple  state,  the  former  is
ceming  considered  as  a  personal  right  no  less  unalien-
lce*  able  than  the  latter.  Nor  do  men  in  this  situa-
tion deem  that  they  have  a  title  to  redress  their  own
wrongs  alone ;  they  are  touched  with  the  injuries  done
to  those  with  whom  they  are  connected,  or  in  whose  ho-
nour they  are  interested,  and  are  no  less  prompt  to  avenge

48  STATE  OF EUROPE.

them.  The  savage,  how  imperfectly  soever  he  may
comprehend  the  principles  of  political  union,  feels
warmly  the  sentiments  of  social  affection,  and  the  obli-
gations arising  from  the  ties  of  blood.  On  the  appear-
ance of  an  injury  or  aifront  offered  to  his  family  or
tribe,  he  kindles  into  rage,  and  pursues  the  authors  of
it  with  the  keenest  resentment.  He  considers  it  as
cowardly  to  expect  redress  from  any  arm  but  his  own,
and  as  infamous  to  give  up  to  another  the  right  of  de-
termining what  reparation  he  should  accept,  or  with
what  vengeance  he  should  rest  satisfied.

The  maxims  and  practice  of  all  uncivilized

These  lead  .  ,  -  .  ,

to  the  nations,  with  respect  to  the  prosecution  and
punishment  of  offenders,  particularly  those  of
the  ancient  Germans,  and  other  barbarians  who
invaded  the  Roman  empire,  are  perfectly  conformable
to  those  ideas.0  While  they  retained  their  native  sim-
plicity of  manners,  and  continued  to  be 'divided  into
small  tribes  or  societies,  the  defects  in  this  imperfect
system  of  criminal  jurisprudence  (if  it  merits  that  name)
were  less  sensibly  felt.  When  they  came  to  settle  in
the  extensive  provinces  which  they  had  conquered,  and
to  form  themselves  into  great  monarchies ;  when  new
objects  of  ambition  presenting  themselves,  increased
both  the  number  and  the  violence  of  their  dissensions,
they  ought  to  have  adopted  new  maxims  concerning
the  redress  of  injuries,  and  to  have  regulated,  by  gene-
ral and  equal  laws,  that  which  they  formerly  left  to  be
directed  by  the  caprice  of  private  passion.  But  fierce
and  haughty  chieftains,  accustomed  to  avenge  them-
selves on  such  as  had  injured  them,  did  not  think  of
relinquishing  a  right  which  they  considered  as  a  pri-
vilege of  their  order,  and  a  mark  of  their  independence.
Laws  enforced  by  the  authority  of  princes  and  magis-
trates, who  possessed  little  power,  commanded  no  great
degree  of  reverence.  The  administration  of  justice

c  Tacit,  de  Mor,  German,  cap.  21. Veil.  Paterc.  lib.  ii.  c.  118.

SECT.  I.  49

among  rude  illiterate  people,  was  not  so  accurate,
or  decisive,  or  uniform,  as  to  induce  men  to  submit  im-
plicitly to  its  determinations.  Every  offended  baron
buckled  on  his  armour,  and  sought  redress  at  the  head
of  his  vassals.  His  adversary  met  him  in  like  hostile
array.  Neither  of  them  appealed  to  impotent  laws,
which  could  afford  them  no  protection.  Neither  of
them  would  submit  points,  in  which  their  honour  and
their  passions  were  warmly  interested,  to  the  slow  de-
termination of  a  judicial  inquiry.  Both  trusted  to  their
swords  for  the  decision  of  the  contest.  The  kindred
and  dependants  of  the  aggressor,  as  well  as  of  the  de-
fender, were  involved  in  the  quarrel.  They  had  not
even  the  liberty  of  remaining  neutral.  Such  as  refused
to  act  in  concert  with  the  party  to  which  they  belonged,
were  not  only  exposed  to  infamy,  but  subjected  to  legal
penalties.

The  different  kingdoms  of  Europe  were  torn

The  perni- .. m .  ,  \ , .

ciousef-  and  afflicted,  during  several  centuries,  by  intes-
flt'  tine  wars,  excited  by  private  animosities,  and
carried  on  with  all  the  rage  natural  to  men  of  fierce
manners,  and  of  violent  passions.  The  estate  of  every
baron  was  a  kind  of  independent  territory,  disjoined
from  those  around  it,  and  the  hostilities  between  them
seldom  ceased.  The  evil  became  so  inveterate  and
deep-rooted,  that  the  form  and  laws  of  private  war  were
ascertained,  and  regulations  concerning  it  made  a  part
in  the  system  of  jurisprudence/  in  the  same  manner  as
if  the  practice  had  been  founded  in  some  natural  right
of  humanity,  or  in  the  original  constitution  of  civil
society.

Various  So  great  was  the  disorder,  and  such  the  ca-
e^pioyed  lamities,  which  these  perpetual  hostilities  occa-
t"  abotuh  si°ned?  timt  various  efforts  were  made  to  wrest
it.  from  the  nobles  this  pernicious  privilege.  It

d  Beaumanoir  Cousturaes  de  Beauvoisis,  ch.59.  et  les  notes  de  Thaumassiere,
p. 447.

VOL.  III.  E

50  STATE OF EUROPE.

was  the  interest  of  every  sovereign  to  abolish  a  practice
which  almost  annihilated  his  authority. Charlemagne
prohibited  it  by  an  express  law,  as  an  invention  of  the
devil  to  destroy  the  order  and  happiness  of  society  ;e
but  the  reign  of  one  monarch,  however  vigorous  and
active,  was  too  short  to  extirpate  a  custom  so  firmly
established. Instead  of  enforcing  this  prohibition,  his
feeble  successors  durst  venture  on  nothing  more  than
to  apply  palliatives. They  declared  it  unlawful  for
any  person  to  commence  war,  until  he  had  sent  a  formal
defiance  to  the  kindred  and  dependants  of  his  adver-
sary ;  they  ordained  that,  after  the  commission  of  the
trespass  or  crime  which  gave  rise  to  a  private  war,  forty
days  must  elapse  before  the  person  injured  should  at-
tack the  vassals  of  his  adversary ;  they  enjoined  all
persons  to  suspend  their  private  animosities,  and  to
cease from hostilities,  when  the  king  was  engaged
in  any  war  against  the  enemies  of  the  nation. The
church  co-operated  with  the  civil  magistrate,  and  in-
terposed its  authority  in  order  to  extirpate  a  practice
so  repugnant  to  the  spirit  of  Christianity. Various
councils  issued  decrees,  prohibiting  all  private  wars ;
and  denounced  the  heaviest  anathemas  against  such  as
should  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  society,  by  claiming
or  exercising  that  barbarous  right.  The  aid  of  religion
was  called  in  to  combat  and  subdue  the  ferocity  of  the
times. The  Almighty  was  said  to  have  manifested,  by
visions  and  revelations  to  different  persons,  his  disap-
probation of  that  spirit  of  revenge  which  armed  one
part  of  his  creatures  against  the  other. Men  were  re-
quired, in  the  name  of  God,  to  sheath  their  swords,  and
to  remember  the  sacred  ties  which  united  them  as
Christians,  and  as  members  of  the  same  society. But
this  junction  of  civil  and  ecclesiastic  authority,  though
strengthened  by  every  thing  most  apt  to  alarm  and  to
overawe  the  credulous  spirit  of  those  ages,  produced  no

e  Capitul.  A,  D.  801.  Edit.  Baluz.  vol.  i.  p.  371.

SECT.  I.  51

other  effect  than  some  temporary  suspensions  of  hosti-
lities, and  a  cessation  from  war  on  certain  days  and
seasons  consecrated  to  the  more  solemn  acts  of  devo-
tion. The  nobles  continued  to  assert  this  dangerous
privilege ;  they  refused  to  obey  some  of  the  laws  cal-
culated to  annul  or  circumscribe  it;  they  eluded  others ;
they  petitioned  ;  they  remonstrated ;  they  struggled  for
the  right  of  private  war,  as  the  highest  and  most  ho-
nourable distinction  of  their  order.  Even  so  late  as
the  fourteenth  century,  we  find  the  nobles,  in  several
provinces  of  France,  contending  for  their  ancient  me-
thod of  terminating  their  differences  by  the  sword,  in
preference  to  that  of  submitting  them  to  the  decision  of
any  judge.  The  final  abolition  of  this  practice  in  that
kingdom,  and  the  other  countries  in  which  it  prevailed,
is  not  to  be  ascribed  so  much  to  the  force  of  statutes
and  decrees,  as  to  the  gradual  increase  of  the  royal
authority,  and  to  the  imperceptible  progress  of  juster
sentiments  concerning  government,  order,  and  public
security/

Theprohi-  2.  The  prohibition  of  the  form  of  trial  by  ju-
triai°byf  dicial  combat,  was  another  considerable  step
judicial  towards  the  introduction  of  such  regular  go-

combat,  •,-,-,  -,  t

another  im-  vemment,  as  secured  public  order  and  private
tranquillity.  As  the  right  of  private  war  left
many  °f  the  quarrels  among  individuals  to  be
justice.  decided,  like  those  between  nations,  by  arms ;
the  form  of  trial  by  judicial  combat,  which,  was  esta-
blished in  every  country  of  Europe,  banished  equity
from  courts  of  justice,  and  rendered  chance  or  force  the
arbiter  of  their  determinations.  In  civilized  nations,  all
transactions  of  any  importance  are  concluded  in  writing.
Defects  in  The  exhibition  of  the  deed  or  instrument  is  full
the  judicial  evidence  of  the  fact,  and  ascertains  with  pre-

proceedings

of  the  raid-  cision  what  each  party  has  stipulated  to  per-
form. But  among  a  rude  people,  when  the

f  See  Note  XXI.
E  2

52  STATE OF  EUROPE,

arts  of  reading  and  writing  were  such  uncommon  at-
tainments, that  to  be  master  of  either  entitled  a  person
to  the  appellation  of  a  clerk  or  learned  man,  scarcely
anything  was  committed  to  writing  but  treaties  between
princes,  their  grants  and  charters  to  their  subjects,  or
such  transactions  between  private  parties  as  were  of
extraordinary  consequence,  or  had  an  extensive  effect.
The  greater  part  of  affairs  in  common  life  and  business
was  carried  on  by  verbal  contracts  or  promises.  This,
in  many  civil  questions,  not  only  made  it  difficult  to
bring  proof  sufficient  to  establish  any  claim,  but  encou-
raged falsehood  and  fraud,  by  rendering  them  extremely
easy.  Even  in  criminal  cases,  where  a  particular  fact
must  be  ascertained,  or  an  accusation  must  be  disproved,
the  nature  and  effect  of  legal  evidence  were  little  un-
derstood by  barbarous  nations.  To  define  with  accu-
racy that  species  of  evidence  which  a  court  had  reason
to  expect;  to  determine  when  it  ought  to  insist  on  posi-
tive proof,  and  when  it  should  be  satisfied  with  a  proof
from  circumstances ;  to  compare  the  testimony  of  dis-
cordant witnesses,  and  to  fix  the  degree  of  credit  due
to  each ;  were  discussions  too  intricate  and  subtile  for
the  jurisprudence  of  ignorant  ages.  In  order  to  avoid
encumbering  themselves  with  these,  a  more  simple  form
of  procedure  was  introduced  into  courts  as  well  civil  as
criminal.  In  all  cases  where  the  notoriety  of  the  fact
did  not  furnish  the  clearest  and  most  direct  evidence,
the  person  accused,  or  he  against  whom  an  action  was
brought,  was  called  legally,  or  offered  voluntarily,  to
purge  himself  by  oath ;  and  upon  his  declaring  his
innocence,  he  was  instantly  acquitted/  This  absurd
practice  effectually  screened  guilt  and  fraud  from  de-
tection and  punishment,  by  rendering  the  temptation
to  perjury  so  powerful,  that  it  was  not  easy  to  resist  it.
The  pernicious  effects  of  it  were  sensibly  felt;  and  in

f?Le|-  Burgund.  tit.  8.  &  45. Leg.  Aleman.  tit.  89. Leg.  Baiwar.  tit.  8.

SECT.  I.  53

order  to  guard  against  them,  the  laws  ordained,  that
oaths  should  be  administered  with  great  solemnity,  and
accompanied  with  every  circumstance  which  could  in-
spire religious  reverence  or  superstitious  terror.8  This,
however,  proved  a  feeble  remedy  :  these  ceremonious
rites  became  familiar,  and  their  impression  on  the  ima-
gination gradually  diminished ;  men  who  could  ven-
ture to  disregard  truth,  were  not  apt  to  startle  at  the
solemnities  of  an  oath.  Their  observation  of  this,  put
legislators  upon  devising  a  new  expedient  for  rendering
the  purgation  by  oath  more  certain  and  satisfactory.
They  required  the  person  accused  to  appear  with  a
certain  number  of  freemen,  his  neighbours  or  relations,
who  corroborated  the  oath  which  he  took,  by  swearing
that  they  believed  all  that  he  had  uttered  to  be  true.
These  were  called  compurgators,  and  their  number  va-
ried according  to  the  importance  of  the  subject  in  dis-
pute, or  the  nature  of  the  crime  with  which  a  person
was  charged.11  In  some  cases,  the  concurrence  of  no
less  than  three  hundred  of  these  auxiliary  witnesses  was
requisite  to  acquit  the  person  accused.1  But  even  this
device  was  found  to  be  ineffectual.  It  was  a  point  of
honour  with  every  man  in  Europe,  during  several  ages,
not  to  desert  the  chief  on  whom  he  depended,  and  to
stand  by  those  with  whom  the  ties  of  blood  connected
him.  Whoever  then  was  bold  enough  to  violate  the
laws,  was  sure  of  devoted  adherents,  willing  to  abet,  and
eager  to  serve  him  in  whatever  manner  he  required.
The  formality  of  calling  compurgators  proved  an  appa-
rent, not  a  real,  security  against  falsehood  and  perjury ;
and  the  sentences  of  courts,  while  they  continued  to
refer  every  point  in  question  to  the  oath  of  the  defend-
ant, became  so  flagrantly  iniquitous,  as  excited  univer-
sal indignation  against  this  method  of  procedure.1"

£  Du  Cange  Glossar.  voc.  Jnramentum,  vol.  Hi.  p.  1607. Edict.  Benedict.

h  Du  Cange,  ibid.  vol.  iii.  p.  1599.

1  Spelraan  Glossar.  voc.  Assath.  Gregor.  Turon.  Hist.  lib.  viii.  c.  9.
k  Leg,  Langobard.  lib.  ii.  tit.  55.  §  34.

54  STATE OF  EUROPE.

These  in-  Sensible  of  these  defects,  but  strangers  to  the

th°edprac-  manner  of  correcting  them,  or  of  introducing  a

tice  of  ap-  more  proper  form,  our  ancestors,  as  an  infallible

pealing  to  .  .  ••  IP

Heaven ;  method  of  discovering  truth,  and  01  guarding
against  deception,  appealed  to  Heaven,  and  referred
every  point  in  dispute  to  be  determined,  as  they  ima-
gined, by  the  decisions  of  unerring  wisdom  and  impar-
tial justice.  The  person  accused,  in  order  to  prove  his
innocence,  submitted  to  trial,  in  certain  cases,  either  by
plunging  his  arm  in  boiling  water ;  or  by  lifting  a  red-
hot  iron  with  his  naked  hand  ;  or  by  walking  bare-foot
over  burning  ploughshares;  or  by  other  experiments
Particu-  equally  perilous  and  formidable.  On  other
Siby^u~  occasions,  he  challenged  his  accuser  to  fight
combat.  him  m  smgle  combat.  All  these  various  forms
of  trial  were  conducted  with  many  devout  ceremonies ;
the  ministers  of  religion  were  employed,  the  Almighty
was  called  upon  to  interpose  for  the  manifestation  of
guilt,  and  for  the  protection  of  innocence ;  and  whoever
escaped  unhurt,  or  came  off  victorious,  was  pronounced
to  be  acquitted  by  the  Judgment  of  God.1

Among  all  the  whimsical  and  absurd  insti-

Theintro-  .  °  .

ductbn  of  tutions  which  owe  their  existence  to  the  weak-
tice  favour-  ness  °f  human  reason,  this,  which  submitted
superstition  q1168^0118  tnat  affected  the  property,  the  repu-
Of  the  mid-  tation,  and  the  lives  of  men,  to  the  determina-
tion of  chance,  or  of  bodily  strength  and  ad-
dress, appears  to  be  the  most  extravagant  and  prepos-
terous. There  were  circumstances,  however,  which  led
the  nations  of  Europe  to  consider  this  equivocal  mode
of  deciding  any  point  in  contest,  as  a  direct  appeal  to
Heaven,  and  a  certain  method  of  discovering  its  will.
As  men  are  unable  to  comprehend  the  manner  in  which
the  Almighty  carries  on  the  government  of  the  universe,
by  equal,  fixed,  and  general  laws,  they  are  apt  to  ima-

1  Murat.  Dissertatio  de  JudiciisDei.  Antiquit.  Ital.  vol.  iii.  p.  612.

SECT. I.  55

gine,  that  in  every  case  which  their  passions  or  interest
render  important  in  their  own  eyes,  the  Supreme  Ruler
of  all  ought  visibly  to  display  his  power  in  vindicating
innocence  and  punishing  guilt. It  requires  no  incon-
siderable degree  of  science  and  philosophy  to  correct
this  popular  error. But  the  sentiments  prevalent  in
Europe  during  the  dark  ages,  instead  of  correcting,
strengthened  it. Religion,  for  several  centuries,  con-
sisted chiefly  in  believing  the  legendary  history  of  those
saints  whose  names  crowd  and  disgrace  the  Romish
calendar. The  fabulous  tales  concerning  their  mira-
cles, had  been  declared  authentic  by  the  bulls  of  popes,
and  the  decrees  of  councils ;  they  made  the  great  sub-
ject of  the  instructions  which  the  clergy  offered  to  the
people,  and  were  received  by  them  with  implicit  cre-
dulity and  admiration. By  ^attending  to  these,  men
were  accustomed  to  believe  that  the  established  laws  of
nature  might  be  violated  on  the  most  frivolous  occa-
sions, and  were  taught  to  look  rather  for  particular  and
extraordinary  acts  of  power  under  the  divine  adminis-
tration, than  to  contemplate  the  regular  progress  and
execution  of  a  general  plan. One  superstition  prepared
the  way  for  another ;  and  whoever  believed  that  the
Supreme  Being  had  interposed  miraculously  on  those
trivial  occasions  mentioned  in  legends,  could  not  but
expect  his  intervention  in  matters  of  greater  impor-
tance, when  solemnly  referred  to  his  decision.
And  like- With  this  superstitious  opinion,  the  martial
their  mar-  spirit  of  Europe,  during  the  middle  ages,  con-
tiai  spirit.  curre^  in  establishing^the  mode  of  trial  by  judi-
cial combat. To  be  ready  to  maintain  with  his  sword
whatever  his  lips  had  uttered,  was  the  first  maxim  of
honour  with every  gentleman. To  assert  their  own
rights  by  force  of  arms,  to  inflict  vengeance  on  those
who  had  injured  or  affronted  them,  were  the  distinction
and  pride  of  high-spirited  nobles.  The  form  of  trial  by
combat  coinciding  with  this  maxim,  flattered  and  gra-

56  STATE OF EUROPE.

tified  these  passions.  Every  man  was  the  guardian  of
his  own  honour,  and  of  his  own  life;  the  justice  of  his
cause,  as  well  as  his  future  reputation,  depended  on  his
own  courage  and  prowess.  This  mode  of  decision
was  considered,  accordingly,  as  one  of  the  happiest
effects  of  wise  policy ;  and  as  soon  as  it  was  introduced,
all  the  forms  of  trial  by  fire  or  water,  and  other  super-
stitious experiments,  fell  into  disuse,  or  were  employed
only  in  controversies  between  persons  of  inferior  rank.
As  it  was  the  privilege  of  a  gentleman  to  claim  the
trial  by  combat,  it  was  quickly  authorized  over  all  Eu-
rope, and  received  in  every  country  with  equal  satisfac-
tion. Not  only  questions  concerning  uncertain  or  con-
tested facts,  but  generaland  abstract  points  in  law,
were  determined  by  the  issue  of  a  combat;  and  the
latter  was  deemed  a  method  of  discovering  truth  more
liberal,  as  well  as  more  satisfactory,  than  that  by  inves-
tigation and  argument.  Not  only  might  parties,  whose
minds  were  exasperated  by  the  eagerness  and  the  hos-
tility of  opposition,  defy  their  antagonist,  and  require
him  to  make  good  his  charge,  or  to  prove  his  inno-
cence, with  his  sword ;  but  witnesses/  who  had  no  in-
terest in  the  issue  of  the  question,  though  called  to  de-
clare the  truth  by  laws  which  ought  to  have  afforded
them  protection,  were  equally  exposed  to  the  danger
of  a  challenge,  and  equally  bound  to  assert  the  veracity
of  their  evidence  by  dint  of  arms.  To  complete  the
absurdities  of  this  military  jurisprudence,  even  the  cha-
racter of  a  judge  was  not  sacred  from  its  violence.  Any
one  of  the  parties  might  interrupt  a  judge  when  about
to  deliver  his  opinion;  might  accuse  him  of  iniquity
and  corruption  in  the  most  reproachful  terms,  and
throwing  down  his  gauntlet,  might  challenge  him  to
defend  his  integrity  in  the  field;  nor  could  he,  without
infamy,  .refuse  to  accept  the  defiance,  or  decline  to
enter  the  lists  against  such  an  adversary.

Thus  the  form  of  trial  by  combat,  like  other  abuses

SECT.  I.  57

it  becomes  spread  gradually,  and  extended  to  all  persons,
sal'  and  almost  to  all  cases.  Ecclesiastics,  women,
minors,  superannuated  and  infirm  persons,  who  could
not  with  decency  or  justice  be  compelled  to  take  arms,
or  to  maintain  their  own  cause,  were  obliged  to  pro-
duce champions,  who  offered  from  affection,  or  were
engaged  by  rewards,  to  fight  their  battles.  The  so-
lemnities of  a  judicial  combat  were  such  as  were  na-
tural in  an  action,  which  was  considered  both  as  a
formal  appeal  to  God,  and  as  the  final  decision  of
questions  of  the  highest  moment.  Every  circumstance
relating  to  them  was  regulated  by  the  edicts  of  princes,
and  explained  in  the  comments  of  lawyers,  with  a  mi-
nute and  even  superstitious  accuracy.  Skill  in  these
laws  and  rights  was  frequently  the  only  science  of
which  warlike  nobles  boasted,  or  which  they  were  am-
bitious to  attain.™

The  per-  ^7  this  barbarous  custom,  the  natural  course
fecte "f It"  °^ Proceeding,  both  in  civil  and  criminal  ques-
tions, was  entirely  perverted.  Force  usurped
the  place  of  equity  in  courts  of  judicature,  and  justice
was  banished  from  her  proper  mansion.  Discernment,
learning,  integrity,  were  qualities  less  necessary  to  a
judge,  than  bodily  strength  and  dexterity  in  the  use  of
arms.  Daring  courage,  and  superior  vigour  or  address,
were  of  more  moment  towards  securing  the  favourable
issue  of  a  suit,  than  the  equity  of  a  cause,  or  the  clear-
ness of  the  evidence.  Men,  of  course,  applied  them-
selves to  cultivate  the  talents  which  they  found  to  be  of
greatest  utility.  As  strength  of  body  and  address  in
arms  were  no  less  requisite  in  those  lists  which  they
were  obliged  to  enter  in  defence  of  their  private  rights,
than  in  the  field  of  battle,  where  they  met  the  enemies
of  their  country,  it  became  the  great  object  of  educa-
tion, as  well  as  the  chief  employment  of  life,  to  acquire

m  See  a  curious  discourse  concerning  the  laws  of  judicial  combat,  by  Thomas  of
Woodstock,  duke  of  Gloucester,  uncle  to  Richard  II.,  in  Spelmau's  Glossar.  voc.
Campus.

58  STATE OF EUROPE.

these  martial  accomplishments.  The  administration  of
justice,  instead  of  accustoming  men  to  listen  to  the
voice  of  equity,  or  to  reverence  the  decisions  of  law,
added  to  the  ferocity  of  their  manners,  and  taught  them
to  consider  force  as  the  great  arbiter  of  right  and  wrong.
Various  These  pernicious  eifects  of  the  trial  by  com-
cxpediems  foat  were  so  obvious,  that  they  did  not  altoge-

for  abolish-  .  J  &.

ing  this  ther  escape  the  view  ot  the  unobservmg  age  in
which  it  was  introduced.  The  clergy,  from  the
beginning,  remonstrated  against  it  as  repugnant  to  the
spirit  of  Christianity,  and  subversive  of  justice  and  or-
der.11 But  the  maxims  and  passions  which  favoured  it,
had  taken  such  hold  of  the  minds  of  men,  that  they
disregarded  admonitions  and  censures,  which,  on  other
occasions,  would  have  struck  them  with  terror.  The
evil  was  too  great  and  inveterate  to  yield  to  that  remedy,
and  continuing  to  increase,  the  civil  power  at  length
found  it  necessary  to  interpose.  Conscious,  however,
of  their  own  limited  authority,  monarchs  proceeded
with  caution,  and  their  first  attempts  to  restrain,  or  to
set  any  bounds  to  this  practice,  were  extremely  feeble.
One  of  the  earliest  restrictions  of  this  practice  which
occurs  in  the  history  of  Europe,  is  that  of  Henry  I.  of
England.  It  extended  no  farther  than  to  prohibit  the
trial  by  combat  in  questions  concerning  property  of
small  value.0  Louis  VII.  of  France  imitated  his  exam-
ple, and  issued  an  edict  to  the  same  effect.p  St.  Louis,
whose  ideas  as  a  legislator  were  far  superior  to  those  of
his  age,  endeavoured  to  introduce  a  more  perfect  juris-
prudence, and  to  substitute  the  trial  by  evidence,  in
place  of  that  by  combat.  But  his  regulations,  with  re-
spect to  this,  were  confined  to  his  own  domains ;  for
the  great  vassals  of  the  crown  possessed  such  indepen-
dent authority,  and  were  so  fondly  attached  to  the  an-
cient practice,  that  he  had  not  power  to  venture  to  ex-

11  Du  Cange  Glossar.  voc.  Duellum,  vol.  ii  p,  1675.
0  Brussel  Usage  des  Fiefs,  vol.  ii.  p.  962.  P  Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  16.

SECT. I.  59

tend  it  to  the  whole  kingdom.  Some  barons  voluntarily
adopted  his  regulations.  The  spirit  of  courts  of  justice
became  averse  to  the  mode  of  decision  by  combat,  and
discouraged  it  on  every  occasion.  The  nobles,  never-
theless, thought  it  so  honourable  to  depend  for  the
security  of  their  lives  and  fortunes  on  their  own  courage
alone,  and  contended  with  so  much  vehemence  for  the
preservation  of  this  favourite  privilege  of  their  order,
that  the  successors  of  St.  Louis,  unable  to  oppose,  and
afraid  of  offending  such  powerful  subjects,  were  obliged
not  only  to  tolerate,  but  to  authorize  the  practice  which
he  had  attempted  to  abolish.q  In  other  countries  of
Europe,  efforts  equally  zealous  were  employed  to  main-
tain the  established  custom;  and  similar  concessions
were  extorted  from  their  respective  sovereigns.  It  con-
tinued, however,  to  be  an  object  of  policy  with  every
monarch  of  abilities  or  vigour,  to  explode  the  trial  by
combat;  and  various  edicts  were  issued  for  this  pur-
pose. But  the  observation  which  was  made  concern-
ing the  right  of  private  war,  is  equally  applicable  to
the  mode  of  trial  under  review.  No  custom,  how  ab-
surd soever  it  may  be,  if  it  has  subsisted  long,  or  derives
its  source  from  the  manners  and  prejudices  of  the  age
in  which  it  prevails,  was  ever  abolished  by  the  bare
promulgation  of  laws  and  statutes.  The  sentiments  of
the  people  must  change,  or  some  new  power,  sufficient
to  counteract  the  prevalent  custom,  must  be  introduced.
Such  a  change  accordingly  took  place  in  Europe,  as
science  gradually  increased,  and  society  advanced  to-
wards more  perfect  order.  In  proportion  as  the  pre-
rogative of  princes  extended,  and  came  to  acquire  new
force,  a  power,  interested  in  suppressing  every  practice
favourable  to  the  independence  of  the  nobles,  was  in-
troduced. The  struggle,  nevertheless,  subsisted  for
several  centuries;  sometimes  the  new  regulations  and
ideas  seemed  to  gain  ground;  sometimes  ancient  habits

i  Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  328.  390.  435.

fiO  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

recurred:  and  though,  upon  the  whole,  the  trial  by
combat  went  more  and  more  into  disuse,  yet  instances
of  it  occur,  as  late  as  the  sixteenth  century,  in  the  his-
tory both  of  France  and  of  England.  In  proportion  as
it  declined,  the  regular  administration  of  justice  was
restored,  the  proceedings  of  courts  were  directed  by
known  laws,  the  study  of  these  became  an  object  of
attention  to  judges,  and  the  people  of  Europe  advanced
fast  towards  civility,  when  this  great  cause  of  the  fero-
city of  their  manners  were  removed.8
Theprivi-  3.  By  authorizing  the  right  of  appeal  from
lege  of  the  courts  of  the  baron  to  those  of  the  king,  and

appealing ...

from  the  subjecting  the  decisions  of  the  former  to  the  re-
thebarons,  view  of  the  latter,  a  new  step,  not  less  consider-
greathn-  a^e  ^an  tnose  which  I  have  already  mentioned,
KeTcT  was  ta^en  towards  establishing  the  regular,  con-
ministration  sistent,  and  vigorous  administration  of  justice.
Among  all  the  encroachments  of  the  feudal  nobles
on  the  prerogative  of  their  monarchs,  their  usurping  the
administration  of  justice  with  supreme  authority,  both  in
civil  and  criminal  causes,  within  the  precincts  of  their
own  estates,  was  the  most  singular.  In  other  nations,
subjects  have  contended  with  their  sovereigns,  and  have
endeavoured  to  extend  their  own  power  and  privileges ;
but  in  the  history  of  their  struggles  and  pretensions
Origin  of  we  discover  nothing  similar  to  this  right  which
premeandthe  feudal  barons  claimed,  and  obtained.  It
ris- must  nave  been  something  peculiar  in  their  ge-
°f  n*us  an(^  manners  tnat  suggested  this  idea,  and
prompted  them  to  insist  on  such  a  claim.  Among
the  rude  people  who  conquered  the  various  provinces
of  the  Roman  empire,  and  established  new  kingdoms
there,  the  passion  of  resentment,  too  impetuous  to  bear
control,  was  permitted  to  remain  almost  unrestrained
by  the  authority  of  laws.  The  person  offended,  as  has
been  observed,  retained  not  only  the  right  of  prose-

8  See  Note  XXII.

SECT. T.  61

cuting,  but  of  punishing  his  adversary.  To  him  it
belonged  to  inflict  such  vengeance  as  satiated  his  rage,
or  to  accept  of  such  satisfaction  as  appeased  it.  But
while  fierce  barbarians  continued  to  be  the  sole  judges
in  their  own  cause,  their  enmities  were  implacable  and
immortal ;  they  set  no  bounds  either  to  the  degree  of
their  vengeance,  or  to  the  duration  of  their  resentment.
The  excesses  which  this  occasioned,  proved  so  destruc-
tive of  peace  and  order  in  society,  as  to  render  it  ne-
cessary to  devise  some  remedy.  At  first,  recourse  was
had  to  arbitrators,  who  by  persuasion  or  entreaty  pre-
vailed on  the  party  offended  to  accept  of  a  fine  or  com-
position from  the  aggressor,  and  to  drop  all  farther
prosecution.  But  as  submission  to  persons  who  had
no  legal  or  magisterial  authority  was  altogether  volun-
tary, it  became  necessary  to  establish  judges,  with
power  sufficient  to  enforce  their  own  decisions.  The
leader  whom  they  were  accustomed  to  follow  and  to
obey,  whose  courage  they  respected,  and  in  whose
integrity  they  placed  confidence,  was  the  person  to
whom  a  martial  people  naturally  committed  this  impor-
tant prerogative.  Every  chieftain  was  the  commander
of  his  tribe  in  war,  and  their  judge  in  peace.  Every
baron  led  his  vassals  to  the  field,  and  administered
justice  to  them  in  his  hall.  The  high-spirited  depen-
dants would  not  have  recognis.ed  any  other  authority,
or  have  submitted  to  any  other  jurisdiction.  But  in
times  of  turbulence  and  violence,  the  exercise  of  this
new  function  was  attended  not  only  with  trouble,  but
with  danger.  No  person  could  assume  the  character
of  a  judge,  if  he  did  not  possess  power  sufficient  to
protect  the  one  party  from  the  violence  of  private  re-
venge, and  to  compel  the  other  to  accept  of  such  repa-
ration as  he  enjoined.  In  consideration  of  the  extra-
ordinary efforts  which  this  office  required,  judges,  be-
sides the  fine  which  they  appointed  to  be  paid  as  a
compensation  to  the  person  or  family  who  had  been
injured,  levied  an  additional  sum  as  a  recompense  for

(>2  STATE OF EUROPE,

their  own  labour ;  and  in  all  the  feudal  kingdoms  the
latter  was  not  only  as  precisely  ascertained,  but  as
regularly  enacted,  as  the  former.

The  extent  Thus,  by  the  natural  operation  of  circum-
and  bad  stances  peculiar  to  the  manners  or  political  state

effects  of  £

this  pri-  of  the  feudal  nations,  separate  and  territorial
jurisdictions  came  not  only  to  be  established  in
every  kingdom,  but  were  established  in  such  a  way,
that  the  interest  of  the  barons  concurred  with  their  am-
bition in  maintaining  and  extending  them.  It  was  not
merely  a  point  of  honour  with  the  feudal  nobles  to  dis-
pense justice  to  their  vassals ;  but  from  the  exercise  of
that  power  arose  one  capital  branch  of  their  revenue  ;
and  the  emoluments  of  their  courts  were  frequently  the
main  support  of  their  dignity.  It  was  with  infinite  zeal
that  they  asserted  and  defended  this  high  privilege  of
their  order.  By  this  institution,  however,  every  king-
dom in  Europe  was  split  into  as  many  separate  princi-
palities as  it  contained  powerful  barons.  Their  vas-
sals, whether  in  peace  or  in  war,  were  hardly  sensible
of  any  authority,  but  that  of  their  immediate  superior
lord.  They  felt  themselves  subject  to  no  other  com-
mand. They  were  amenable  to  no  other  jurisdiction.
The  ties  which  linked  together  these  smaller  confede-
racies became  close  and  firm ;  the  bonds  of  public  union
relaxed,  or  were  dissolved.  The  nobles  strained  their
invention  in  devising  regulations  which  tended  to
ascertain  and  perpetuate  this  distinction.  In  order  to
guard  against  any  appearance  of  subordination  in  their
courts  to  those  of  the  crown,  they  frequently  constrained
their  monarchs  to  prohibit  the  royal  judges  from  en-
tering their  territories,  or  from  claiming  any  jurisdiction
there ;  and  if,  either  through  mistake,  or  from  the  spirit
of  encroachment,  any  royal  judge  ventured  to  extend
his  authority  to  the  vassals  of  a  baron,  they  might  plead
their  right  of  exemption,  and  the  lord  of  whom  they
held  could  not  only  rescue  them  out  of  his  hands,  but
was  entitled  to  legal  reparation  for  the  injury  and  affront

SECT. T.  0.3

offered  to  him.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  royal  judges
scarcely  reached  beyond  the  narrow  limits  of  the  king's
demesnes.  Instead  of  a  regular  gradation  of  courts,
all  acknowledging  the  authority  of  the  same  general
laws,  and  looking  up  to  these  as  the  guides  of  their
decisions,  there  were  in  every  feudal  kingdom  a  num-
ber of  independent  tribunals,  the  proceedings  of  which
were  directed  by  local  customs  and  contradictory  forms.
The  collision  of  jurisdiction  among  these  different  courts
often  retarded  the  execution  of  justice.  The  variety
and  caprice  of  their  modes  of  procedure  must  have  for
ever  kept  the  administration  of  it  from  attaining  any
degree  of  uniformity  or  perfection.
Expedients  -All  the  monarchs  of  Europe  perceived  these
encroacnments  on  their  jurisdiction,  and  bore

to  limit  or  them  with  impatience. But  the  usurpations  of

abolish  it.  ,  ..  _  11-11  11

nobles  were  so  firmly  established,  and  the
danger  of  endeavouring  to  overturn  them  by  open  force
was  so  manifest,  that  kings  were  obliged  to  remain
satisfied  with  attempts  to  undermine  them.  Various
expedients  were  employed  for  this  purpose  ;  each  of
which  merit  attention,  as  they  mark  the  progress  of  law
and  equity  in  the  several  kingdoms  of  Europe.  At
first,  princes  endeavoured  to  circumscribe  the  jurisdic-
tion of  the  barons,  by  contending  that  they  ought  to
take  cognizance  only  of  smaller  offences,  reserving
those  of  greater  moment,  under  the  appellation  of  Pleas
of  the  Crown,  and  Royal  Causes,  to  be  tried  in  the
king's  courts.  This,  however,  -affected  only  the  barons
of  inferior  note;  the  more  powerful  nobles  scorned
such  a  distinction,  and  not  only  claimed  unlimited
jurisdiction,  but  obliged  their  sovereigns  to  grant  them
charters,  conveying  or  recognising  this  privilege  in  the
most  ample  form.  The  attempt,  nevertheless,  was  pro-
ductive of  some  good  consequences,  and  paved  the
way  for  more.  It  turned  the  attention  of  men  towards
a  jurisdiction  distinct  from  that  of  the  baron  whose

I

64  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

vassals  they  were ;  it  accustomed  them  to  the  preten-
sions of  superiority  which  the  crown  claimed  over  ter-
ritorial judges ;  and  taught  them,  when  oppressed  by
their  own  superior  lord,  to  look  up  to  their  sovereign
as  their  protector.  This  facilitated  the  introduction  of
appeals,  by  which  princes  brought  the  decisions  of  the
barons'  courts  under  the  review  of  the  royal  judges.
While  the  trial  by  combat  subsisted  in  full  vigour,  no
point  decided  according  to  that  mode  could  be  brought
under  the  review  of  another  court.  It  had  been  refer-
red to  the  judgment  of  God ;  the  issue  of  the  battle
had  declared  his  will ;  and  it  would  have  been  impious
to  have  called  in  question  the  equity  of  the  divine  de-
cision. But  as  soon  as  that  barbarous  custom  began
to  fall  into  disuse,  princes  encouraged  the  vassals  of
the  barons  to  sue  for  redress,  by  appealing  to  the  royal
courts.  The  progress  of  this  practice,  however,  was
slow  and  gradual.  The  first  instances  of  appeal  were
on  account  of  the  delay  or  the  refusal  of  justice  in  the
baron's  court ;  and  as  these  were  countenanced  by  the
ideas  of  subordination  in  the  feudal  constitution,  the
nobles  allowed  them  to  be  introduced  without  much
opposition.  But  when  these  were  followed  by  appeals
on  account  of  the  injustice  or  iniquity  of  the  sentence,  the
nobles  then  began  to  be  sensible,  that,  if  this  innovation
became  general,  the  shadow  of  power  alone  would  re-
main in  their  hands,  and  all  real  authority  and  juris-
diction would  centre  in  those  courts  which  possessed
the  right  of  review.  They  instantly  took  the  alarm,
remonstrated  against  the  encroachment,  and  contended
boldly  for  their  ancient  privileges.  But  the  monarchs
in  the  different  kingdoms  of  Europe  pursued  their  plan
with  steadiness  and  prudence.  Though  forced  to  sus-
pend their  operations  on  some  occasions,  and  seemingly
to  yield  when  any  formidable  confederacy  of  their  vas-
sals united  against  them,  they  resumed  their  measures
as  soon  as  they  observed  the  nobles  to  be  remiss  or'

SECT.  I.  65

feeble,  and  pushed  them  with  vigour. They  appointed
the  royal  courts,  which  originally  were  ambulatory,  and
irregular  with  respect  to  their  times  of  meeting,  to  be
held  in  a  fixed  place,  and  at  stated  seasons. They
were  solicitous  to  name  judges  of  more  distinguished
abilities  than  such  as  usually  presided  in  the  courts  of
the  barons. They  added dignity  to  their  character,
and  splendour  to  their  assemblies. They  laboured  to
render  their  forms  regular,  and  their  decrees  consistent.
Such  judicatories  became,  of  course,  the  objects of
public  confidence  as  well  as  veneration. The  people,
relinquishing  the  tribunals  of  their  lords,  were  eager
to  bring  every  subject  of  contest  under  the  more  equal
and  discerning  eye  of  those  whom  their  sovereign  had
chosen  to  give  judgment  in  his  name. Thus  kings
became  once  more  the  heads  of  the  community,  and
the  dispensers  of  justice  to  their  subjects. The  barons,
in  some  kingdoms,  ceased  to  exercise  the  right  of  juris-
diction, because  it  sunk  into  contempt;  in  others,  it
was  circumscribed  by  such  regulations  as  rendered  it
innocent,  or  it  was  entirely  abolished  by  express  sta-
tutes. Thus  the  administration  of  justice,  taking  its
rise  from  one  source,  and  following  one  direction,  held
its  course,  in  every  state,  with  more  uniformity,  and
with  greater  force.a

The  regu-  VI.  The  forms  and  maxims  of  the  canon  law,
which  were  become  universally  respectable,  from
their  authority  in  the  spiritual  courts,  eontri-
more  per-  buted  not  a  little  towards  those  improvements  in

feet  adrai- .

mstration.  jurisprudence  which  I  have  enumerated,  If  we
consider  the  canon  law  politically,  and  view  it  either
as  a  system  framed  on  purpose  to  assist  the  clergy  in
usurping  powers  and  jurisdiction  no  less  repugnant  to
the  nature  of  their  function,  than  inconsistent  with  the
order  of  government ;  or,  as  the  chief  instrument  in
establishing  the  dominion  of  the  popes,  which  shook

»  See  Note  XXIII.
VOL. III.  F

66  STATE OF EUROPE.

the  throne,  and  endangered  the  liberties  of  every  king-
dom in  Europe,  we  must  pronounce  it  one  of  the  most
formidable  engines  ever  formed  against  the  happiness
of  civil  society.  But  if  we  contemplate  it  merely  as  a
code  of  laws  respecting  the  rights  and  property  of  in-
dividuals, and  attend  only  to  the  civil  effects  of  its  de-
cisions concerning  these,  it  will  appear  in  a  different
an,d  a  much  more  favourable  light.  In  ages  of  igno-
rance and  credulity,  the  ministers  of  religion  are  the
The  pro-  objects  of  superstitious  veneration.  When
ciesTasticai  the  barbarians  who  overran  the  Roman  em-
usurpation.  ^Te^  firgt  embraced  the  Christian  faith,  they
found  the  clergy  in  possession  of  considerable  power;
and  they  naturally  transferred  to  those  new  guides  the
profound  submission  and  reverence  which  they  were
accustomed  to  yield  to  the  priests  of  that  religion  which
they  had  forsaken.  They  deemed  their  persons  to  be
equally  sacred  with  their  function;  and  would  have
considered  it  as  impious  to  subject  them  to  the  profane
jurisdiction  of  the  laity.  The  clergy  were  not  blind  to
these  advantages  which  the  weakness  of  mankind  af-
forded them.  They  established  courts,  in  which  every
question  relating  to  their  own  character,  their  function,
or  their  property,  was  tried.  They  pleaded  and  ob-
tained an  almost  total  exemption  from  the  authority  of
civil  judges.  Upon  different  pretexts,  and  by  a  mul-
tiplicity of  artifices,  they  communicated  this  privilege
to  so  many  persons,  and  extended  their  jurisdiction  to
such  a  variety  of  cases,  that  the  greater  part  of  those
affairs  which  gave  rise  to  contest  and  litigation,  was
drawn  under  the  cognizance  of  the  spiritual  courts.
The  plan  of  But,  m  order  to  dispose  the  laity  to  suffer
ca?*uri8Sti~  these  usurpations  without  murmur  or  opposi-
prudence  tion,  it  was  necessary  to  convince  them,  that
feet  than  the  administration  of  justice  would  be  rendered
theVitii  more  perfect  by  the  establishment  of  this  new
courts.  jurisdiction.  This  was  not  a  difficult  undertak-

.SECT. I.  67

ing  at  that  period,  when  ecclesiastics  carried  on  their
encroachments  with  the  greatest  success.  That  scanty
portion  of  science  which  served  to  guide  men  in  the  ages
of  darkness,  was  almost  entirely  engrossed  by  the  clergy.
They  alone  were  accustomed  to  read,  to  inquire,  and
to  reason.  Whatever  knowledge  of  ancient  jurispru-
dence had  been  preserved,  either  by  tradition,  or  in
such  books  as  had  escaped  the  destructive  rage  of  bar-
barians, was  possessed  by  them.  Upon  the  maxims  of
that  excellent  system,  they  founded  a  code  of  laws  con-
sonant to  the  great  principles  of  equity.  Being  directed
by  fixed  and  known  rules,  the  forms  of  their  courts  were
ascertained,  and  their  decisions  became  uniform  and
consistent.  Nor  did  they  want  authority  sufficient  to
enforce  their  sentences.  Excommunication,  and  other
ecclesiastical  censures,  were  punishments  more  formid-
able than  any  that  civil  judges  could  inflict  in  support
of  their  decrees.

The  good  I*  *s  not  surprising,  then,  that  ecclesiastical
effects  of  jurisprudence  should  become  such  an  object  of

imitating J r  J

and  adopt-  admiration  and  respect,  that  exemption  from
civil  jurisdiction  was  courted  as  a  privilege,  and
conferred  as  a  reward.  It  is  not  surprising,  that,  even
to  a  rude  people,  the  maxims  of  the  canon  law  should
appear  more  equal  and  just  than  those  of  the  ill-
digested  jurisprudence  which  directed  all  proceedings  .
in  civil  courts.  According  to  the  latter,  the  differences
between  contending  barons  were  terminated,  as  in  a
state  of  nature,  by  the  sword ;  according  to  the  former,
every  matter  was  subjected  to  the  decision  of  laws.
The  one,  by  permitting  judicial  combats,  left  chance
and  force  to  be  arbiters  of  right  or  wrong,  of  truth  or
falsehood  ;  the  other  passed  judgment  with  respect  to
these  by  the  maxims  of  equity,  and  the  testimony  of
witnesses.  Any  error  or  iniquity  in  a  sentence  pro-
nounced by  a  baron  to  whom  feudal  jurisdiction  be-
longed, was  irremediable,  because  originally  it  was  sub-

F2

68  STATE OF EUROi'E.

ject  to  the  review  of  no  superior  tribunal ;  the  ecclesi-
astical law  established  a  regular  gradation  of  courts,
through  all  which  a  caus^,  might  be  carried  by  appeal,
until  it  was  determined  by  that  authority  which  was
held  to  be  supreme  in  the  church.  Thus  the  genius
and  principles  of  the  canon  law  prepared  men  for  ap-
proving those  three  great  alterations  in  the  feudal  ju-
risprudence which  I  have  mentioned.  But  it  was  not
with  respect  to  these  points  alone  that  the  canon  law
suggested  improvements  beneficial  to  society.  Many
of  the  regulations,  now  deemed  the  barriers  of  personal
security,  or  the  safeguards  of  private  property,  are  con-
trary to  the  spirit,  and  repugnant  to  the  maxims  of  the
civil  jurisprudence  known  in  Europe  during  several
centuries,  and  were  borrowed  from  the  rules  and  prac-
tice of  the  ecclesiastical  courts.  By  observing  the
wisdom  and  equity  of  the  decisions  in  these  courts,
men  began  to  perceive  the  necessity  either  of  deserting
the  martial  tribunals  of  the  barons,  or  of  attempting  to
reform  them.b

The  revi-  VII.  The  revival  of  the  knowledge  and  study
Romanhe  °^  ^6  R°man  law  co-operated  with  the  causes
law  con-  which  I  have  mentioned,  in  introducing  more

tributes .  •  .  .

towards  just  and  liberal  ideas  concerning  the  nature  ot
government,  and  the  administration  of  justice.
Among  ^  calamities  which  the  devastations
order.  of  the  barbarians  who  broke  in  upon  the  em-
pire brought  upon  mankind,  one  of  the  greatest  was
their  overturning  the  system  of  Roman  jurisprudence,
the  noblest  monument  of  the  wisdom  of  that  great
people,  formed  to  subdue  and  to  govern  the  world.
The  dr-  The  laws  and  regulations  of  a  civilized  commu-

cumstan-

ees  from  nity  were  repugnant  to  the  manners  and  ideas
of  these  fierce  invaders.  They  had  no  respect
*°  °kJects  °f  which  a  rude  people  had  no  con-
ception ;  and  were  adapted  to  a  state  of  society

b  See  Note  XXIV.

SECT.  I.  69

with  which  they  were  entirely  unacquainted.  For  this
reason,  wherever  they  settled,  the  Roman  jurisprudence
soon  sunk  into  oblivion,  and  lay  buried  for  some  cen-
turies under  the  load  of  those  institutions  which  the
inhabitants  of  Europe  dignified  with  the  name  of  laws.
But  towards  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century,  a  copy
of  Justinian's  Pandects  was  accidentally  discovered  in
Italy.  By  that  time,  the  state  of  society  was  so  far  ad-
vanced, and  the  ideas  of  men  so  much  enlarged  and
improved  by  the  occurrences  of  several  centuries,  during
which  they  had  continued  in  political  union,  that  they
circum-  were  struck  with  admiration  of  a  system  which
whichSfa-  their  ancestors  could  not  comprehend.  Though
re™a?5c  they  had  not  hitherto  attained  such  a  degree  of
il-  refinement,  as  to  acquire  from  the  ancients  a

relish  for  true  philosophy  or  speculative  science ;  though
they  were  still  insensible,  in  a  great  degree,  to  the  beauty
and  elegance  of  classical  composition  ;  they  were  suf-
ficiently qualified  to  judge  with  respect  to  the  merit  of
their  system  of  laws,  in  which  the  many  points  most
interesting  to  mankind  were  settled  with  discernment,
precision,  and  equity.  All  men  of  letters  studied  this
new  science  with  eagerness ;  and  within  a  few  years
after  the  discovery  of  the  Pandects,  professors  of  civil
law  were  appointed,  who  taught  it  publicly  in  most
countries  of  Europe.

The  effects  of  having;  such  an  excellent  model

The  effects  &

of  this  up-  to  study  and  to  imitate  were  immediately  per-
ccived.  Men,  as  soon  as  they  were  acquainted
w^  fixed  and  general  laws,  perceived  the  ad-
of  vantage  of  them,  and  became  impatient  to  ascer-
tain the  principles  and  forms  by  which  judges
should  regulate  their  decisions.  Such  was  the  ardour
with  which  they  carried  on  an  undertaking  of  so  great
importance  to  society,  that,  before  the  close  of  the  twelfth
century,  the  feudal  law  was  reduced  into  a  regular  system ;
the  code  of  canon  law  was  enlarged  and  methodized;

70  STATE  OF EUROPE,

and  the  loose  uncertain  customs  of  different  provinces
or  kingdoms  were  collected  and  arranged  with  an  order
and  accuracy  acquired  from  the  knowledge  of  Roman
jurisprudence.  In  some  countries  of  Europe  the  Roman
law  was  adopted  as  subsidiary  to  their  own  municipal
law;  and  all  cases  to  which  the  latter  did  not  extend,
were  decided  according  to  the  principles  of  the  former.
In  others,  the  maxims  as  well  as  forms  of  Roman  juris-
prudence, mingled  imperceptibly  with  the  laws  of  the
country,  and  had  a  powerful,  though  less  sensible  in-
fluence, in  improving  and  perfecting  them.c
From  ail  These  various  improvements  in  the  system
•hdie«n°8e  °^  jurisPrudence,  and  administration  of  jus-
tion  in  tice,  occasioned  a  change  in  manners,  of  great
Sons.8"  importance,  and  of  extensive  effect.  They
gave  rise  to  a  distinction  of  professions ;  they  obliged
men  to  cultivate  different  talents,  and  to  aim  at  different
accomplishments,  in  order  to  qualify  themselves  for
the  various  departments  and  functions  which  became
necessary  in  society.6  Among  uncivilized  nations  there
is  but  one  profession  honourable,  that  of  arms.  All  the
ingenuity  and  vigour  of  the  human  mind  are  exerted  in
acquiring  military  skill  or  address.  The  functions  of
peace  are  few  and  simple;  and  require  no  particular
course  of  education  or  of  study,  as  a  preparation  for
discharging  them.  This  was  the  state  of  Europe  dur-
ing several  centuries.  Every  gentleman,  born  a  soldier,
scorned  any  other  occupation ;  he  was  taught  no  science
but  that  of  war ;  even  his  exercises  and  pastimes  were
feats  of  martial  prowess.  Nor  did  the  judicial  charac-
ter, which  persons  of  noble  birth  were  alone  entitled  to
assume,  demand  any  degree  of  knowledge  beyond  that
which  such  untutored  soldiers  possessed.  To  recol-
lect a  few  traditionary  customs  which  time  had  con-
firmed, and  rendered  respectable ;  to  mark  out  the  lists

c  See  Note  XXV.
d  Dr.  Ferguson's  Essay  on  tbe  History  of  Civil  Society,  part  iv.  sect.  L

SECT. I.  71

of  battle  with  due  formality ;  to  observe  the  issue  of
the  combat;  and  to  pronounce  whether  it  had  been
conducted  according  to  the  laws  of  arms  ;  included
every  thing  that  a  baron,  who  acted  as  a  judge,  found
it  necessary  to  understand.

The  effect  But  wnen  tne  forms  of  legal  proceedings
of  this  on  Were  fixed,  when  the  rules  of  decision  were
committed  to  writing,  and  collected  into  a  body,
law  became  a  science,  the  knowledge  of  which  required
a  regular  course  of  study,  together  with  long  attention
to  the  practice  of  courts.  Martial  and  illiterate  nobles
had  neither  leisure  nor  inclination  to  undertake  a  task
so  laborious,  as  well  as  so  foreign  from  all  the  occupa-
tions which  they  deemed  entertaining,  or  suitable  to
their  rank.  They  gradually  relinquished  their  places
in  courts  of  justice,  where  their  ignorance  exposed  them
to  contempt.  They  became  weary  of  attending  to  the
discussion  of  cases,  which  grew  too  intricate  for  them
to  comprehend.  Not  only  the  judicial  determination  of
points  which  were  the  subject  of  controversy,  but  the
conduct  of  all  legal  business  and  transactions,  was  com-
mitted to  persons  trained  by  previous  study  and  appli-
cation to  the  knowledge  of  law.  An  order  of  men,  to
whom  their  fellow-citizens  had  daily  recourse  for  advice,
and  to  whom  they  looked  up  for  decision  in  their  most
important  concerns,  naturally  acquired  consideration
and  influence  in  society.  They  were  advanced  to  ho-
nours which  had  been  considered  hitherto  as  the  pecu-
liar rewards  of  military  virtue.  They  were  intrusted
with  offices  of  the  highest  dignity  and  most  extensive
power.  Thus,  another  profession  than  that  of  arms
came  to  be  introduced  among  the  laity,  and  was  re-
puted honourable.  The  functions  of  civil  life  were  at-
tended to.  The  talents  requisite  for  discharging  them
were  cultivated.  A  new  road  was  opened  to  wealth  and
eminence.  The  arts  and  virtues  of  peace  were  placed  in
their  proper  rank,  and  received  their  due  recompense/

«  See  Note  XXVI.

72  STATE OF EUROPE.

The  spirit VIII.  While  improvements,  so  important  with
of  chivalry  respect  to  the  state  of  society  and  the  adminis-

introduces r

more  libe-  tration  of  justice,  gradually  made  progress  in
"  and  Europe,  sentiments  more  liberal  and  generous

-  had  begun  to  animate  the  nobles.  These  were
ners.  inspired  by  the  spirit  of  chivalry,  which,  though
considered,  commonly,  as  a  wild  institution,  the  effect  of
caprice,  and  the  source  of  extravagance,  arose  naturally
from  the  state  of  society  at  that  period,  and  had  a  very
serious  influence  in  refining  the  manners  of  the  Euro-
pean nations.  The  feudal  state  was  a  state  of
almost  perpetual  war,  rapine,  and  anarchy  ;  dur-
ing which  the  weak  and  unarmed  were  ex-
posed to  insults  or  injuries.  The  power  of  the  sove-
reign was  too  limited  to  prevent  these  wrongs  ;  and  the
administration  of  justice  too  feeble  to  redress  them.
The  most  effectual  protection  against  violence  and  op-
pression, was  often  found  to  be  that  which  the  valour
and  generosity  of  private  persons  afforded.  The  same
spirit  of  enterprise  which  had  prompted  so  many  gentle-
men to  take  arms  in  defence  of  the  oppressed  pilgrims
in  Palestine,  incited  others  to  declare  themselves  the
patrons  and  avengers  of  injured  innocence  at  home.
When  the  final  reduction  of  the  Holy  Land  under  the
dominion  of  infidels  put  an  end  to  these  foreign  expedi-
tions, the  latter  was  the  only  employment  left  for  the
activity  and  courage  of  adventurers.  To  check  the  in-
solence of  overgrown  oppressors  ;  to  rescue  the  help-
less from  captivity  ;  to  protect,  or  to  avenge  women,
orphans,  and  ecclesiastics,  who  could  not  bear  arms  in
their  own  defence  ;  to  redress  wrongs,  and  to  remove
grievances;  were  deemed  acts  of  the  highest  prowess
and  merit.  Valour,  humanity,  courtesy,  justice,  honour,
were  the  characteristic  qualities  of  chivalry.  To  these
were  added  religion,  which  mingled  itself  with  every
passion  and  institution  during  the  middle  ages,  and  by
infusing  a  large  proportion  of  enthusiastic  zeal,  gave
them  such  force  as  carried  them  to  romantic  excess.

SECT.  I.  73

Men  were  trained  to  knighthood  by  a  long  previous  dis-
cipline; they  were  admitted  into  the  order  by  solemni-
ties no  less  devout  than  pompous ;  every  person  of
noble  birth  courted  that  honour ;  it  was  deemed  a  dis-
tinction superior  to  royalty ;  and  monarchs  were  proud
to  receive  it  from  the  hands  of  private  gentlemen.
itsbenefi-  This  singular  institution,  in  which  valour,
ciai  effects,  gallantry,  and  religion,  were  so  strangely  blend-
ed, was  wonderfully  adapted  to  the  taste  and  genius  of
martial  nobles  ;  and  its  effects  were  soon  visible  in  their
manners.  War  was  carried  on  with  less  ferocity,  when
humanity  came  to  be  deemed  the  ornament  of  knight-
hood no  less  than  courage.  More  gentle  and  polished
manners  were  introduced,  when  courtesy  was  recom-
mended as  the  most  amiable  of  knightly  virtues.  Vio-
lence and  oppression  decreased,  when  it  was  reckoned
meritorious  to  check  and  to  punish  them,  A  scrupu-
lous adherence  to  truth,  with  the  most  religious  atten-
tion to  fulfil  every  engagement,  became  the  distinguish
ing  characteristic  of  a  gentleman,  because  chivalry  was
regarded  as  the  school  of  honour,  and  inculcated  the
most  delicate  sensibility  with  respect  to  those  points.
The  admiration  of  these  qualities,  together  with  the  high
distinctions  and  prerogatives  conferred  on  knighthood
in  every  part  of  Europe,  inspired  persons  of  noble  birth
on  some  occasions  with  a  species  of  military  fanaticism,
and  led  them  to  extravagant  enterprises.  But  they
deeply  imprinted  on  their  minds  the  principles  of  gene-
rosity and  honour.  These  were  strengthened  by  every
thing  that  can  affect  the  senses  or  touch  the  heart.  The
wild  exploits  of  those  romantic  knights  who  sallied
forth  in  quest  of  adventures,  are  well  known,  and  have
been  treated  with  proper  ridicule.  The  political  and
permanent  effects  of  the  spirit  of  chivalry  have  been  less
observed.  Perhaps,  the  humanity  which  accompanies
•all  the  operations  of  war,  the  refinements  of  gallantry,
and  the  point  of  honour,  the  three  chief  circumstances

74  STATE OF EUROPE.

which  distinguish  modern  from  ancient  manners,  may
be  ascribed  in  a  great  measure  to  this  institution,  which
has  appeared  whimsical  to  superficial  observers,  but  by
its  effects  has  proved  of  great  benefit  to  mankind.  The
sentiments  which  chivalry  inspired,  had  a  wonderful  in-
fluence on  manners  and  conduct  during  the  twelfth,
thirteenth,  fourteenth,  and  fifteenth  centuries.  They
were  so  deeply  rooted,  that  they  continued  to  operate
after  the  vigour  and  reputation  of  the  institution  itself
began  to  decline.  Some  considerable  transactions,  re-
corded in  the  following  history,  resemble  the  adventur-
ous exploits  of  chivalry,  rather  than  the  well-regulated
operations  of  sound  policy.  Some  of  the  most  eminent
personages,  whose  characters  will  be  delineated  were
strongly  tinctured  with  this  romantic  spirit.  Francis  I.
was  ambitious  to  distinguish  himself  by  all  the  quali-
ties of  an  accomplished  knight,  and  endeavoured  to  imi-
tate the  enterprising  genius  of  chivalry  in  war,  as  well
as  its  pomp  and  courtesy  during  peace.  The  fame
which  the  French  monarch  acquired  by  these  splendid
actions,  so  far  dazzled  his  more  temperate  rival,  that  he
departed  on  some  occasions  from  his  usual  prudence
and  moderation,  and  emulated  Francis  in  deeds  of
prowess,  or  of  gallantry/

The  pro-  IX.  The  progress  of  science,  and  the  culti-
vation  of  literature,  had  considerable  effect  in
Caging  the  manners  of  the  European  nations,
manners  and  introducing  that  civility  and  refinement  bv

and  cba-  i  • i ,1  T..,-,

racter  of  which  they  are  now  distinguished.  At  the  time
when  their  empire  was  overturned,  the  Romans,
though  they  had  lost  that  correct  taste  which  has  ren-
dered the  productions  of  their  ancestors  standards  of
excellence,  and  models  of  imitation  for  succeeding  ages,
still  preserved  their  love  of  letters,  and  cultivated  the
ignorance  arts  with  great  ardour.  But  rude  barbarians
were  s°  far  from  being  struck  with  any  admira-

f  See  Note  XXVII.

SECT. I.  75

tion  of  these unknown accomplishments,  that they
despised  them. They  were  not  arrived  at  that  state
of  society,  when  those  faculties  of  the  human  mind,
which  have  beauty  and  elegance  for  their  objects,  be-
gin to  unfold  themselves. They  were  strangers  to  most
of  those  wants  and  desires  which  are  the  parents  of  in-
genious invention ;  and  as  they  did  not  comprehend
either  the  merit  or  utility  of  the  Roman  arts,  they  de-
stroyed the  monuments  of  them  with  an  industry  not
inferior  to  that  with  which  their  posterity  have  since
studied  to  preserve  or  to  recover  them. The  convul-
sions occasioned  by  the  settlement  of  so  many  unpo-
lished tribes  in  the  empire ;  the  frequent  as  well  as  vio-
lent revolutions in  every  kingdom  which  they  esta-
blished, together  with  the  interior  defects  in  the  form  of
government  which  they  introduced,  banished  security
and  leisure ;  prevented  the  growth  of  taste,  or  the  cul-
ture of  science  ;  and  kept  Europe,  during  several  cen-
turies, in  that  state  of  ignorance  which  has  been  already
described. But  the  events  and  institutions  which  I  have
enumerated,  produced  great  alterations  in  society. As
soon  as  their  operation,  in  restoring  liberty  and  inde-
pendence to  one  part  of  the  community,  began  to  be
felt ;  as  soon  as  they  began  to  communicate  to  all  the
members  of  society  some  taste  of  the  advantages  arising
from  commerce,  from  public  order,  and  from  personal
security,  the  human  mind  became  conscious  of  powers
which  it  did  not  formerly  perceive,  and  fond  of  occupa-
tions or  pursuits  of  which  it  was  formerly  incapable.
Towards  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth  century,  we  discern
the  first  symptoms  of  its  awakening  from  that  lethargy  in
which  it  had  been  long  sunk,  and  observe  it  turning
with  curiosity  and  attention  towards  new  objects.
The  first The  first  literary  efforts,  however,  of  the  Eu-
-di-  ropean  nations  in  the  middle  ages,  were  ex-
^1  tremely  ill-directed. Among  nations,  as  well
of  this. as  individuals,  the  powers  of  imagination  at-

76  STATE OF EUROPE.

tain  some  degree  of  vigour  before  the  intellectual  facul-
ties are  much  exercised  in  speculative  or  abstract  disqui-
sition. Men  are  poets  before  they  are  philosophers.
They  feel  with  sensibility,  and  describe  with  force,  when
they  have  made  but  little  progress  in  investigation
or  reasoning.  The  age  of  Homer  and  of  Hesiod
long  preceded  that  of  Thales  or  of  Socrates.  But,  un-
happily for  literature,  our  ancestors,  deviating  from  this
course  which  nature  points  out,  plunged  at  once  into
the  depth  of  abstruse  and  metaphysical  inquiry.  They
had  been  converted  to  the  Christian  faith,  soon  after
they  settled  in  their  new  conquests.  But  they  did  not
receive  it  pure.  The  presumption  of  men  had  added
to  the  simple  and  instructive  doctrines  of  Christianity
the  theories  of  a  vain  philosophy,  that  attempted  to
penetrate  into  mysteries,  and  to  decide  questions  which
the  limited  faculties  of  the  human  mind  are  unable  to
comprehend  or  to  resolve.  These  over-curious  specu-
lations were  incorporated  with  the  system  of  religion,
and  came  to  be  considered  as  the  most  essential  part  of
it.  As  soon,  then,  as  curiosity  prompted  men  to  inquire
and  to  reason,  these  were  the  subjects  which  first  pre-
sented themselves,  and  engaged  their  attention.  The
scholastic  theology,  with  its  infinite  train  of  bold  disqui-
sitions, and  subtle  distinctions  concerning  points  which
are  not  the  object  of  human  reason,  was  the  first  pro-
duction of  the  spirit  of  inquiry  after  it  began  to  resume
some  degree  of  activity  and  vigour  in  Europe.  It  was
not,  however,  this  circumstance  alone,  that  gave  such  a
wrong  turn  to  the  minds  of  men,  when  they  began  again
to  exercise  talents  which  they  had  so  long  neglected.
Most  of  the  persons  who  attempted  to  revive  literature
in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,  had  received  in-
struction, or  derived  their  principles  of  science  from  the
Greeks  in  the  eastern  empire,  or  from  the  Arabians  in
Spain  and  Africa.  Both  these  people,  acute  and  in-
quisitive to  excess,  had  corrupted  those  sciences  which

SECT.  I.  77

they  cultivated.  The  former  rendered  theology  a  sys-
tem of  speculative  refinement,  or  of  endless  controversy.
The  latter  communicated  to  philosophy  a  spirit  of  meta-
physical and  frivolous  subtlety.  Misled  by  these  guides,
the  persons  who  first  applied  to  science  were  involved
in  a  maze  of  intricate  inquiries.  Instead  of  allowing
their  fancy  to  take  its  natural  range,  and  to  produce
such  works  of  invention  as  might  have  improved  their
taste,  and  refined  their  sentiments  ;  instead  of  cultivat-
ing those  arts  which  embellish  human  life,  and  render
it  comfortable ;  they  were  fettered  by  authority,  they
were  led  astray  by  example,  and  wasted  the  whole  force
of  their  genius  in  speculations  as  unavailing  as  they
were  difficult.

They  had,  But  fruitless  and  ill-directed  as  these  specu-
co^sldera-  lations  were,  their  novelty  roused,  and  their
bie  effects.  boldness  interested  the  human  mind.  The  ar-
dour with  which  men  pursued  those  uninviting  studies
was  astonishing.  Genuine  philosophy  was  never  culti-
vated, in  any  enlightened  age,  with  more  zeal.  Schools,
upon  the  model  of  those  instituted  by  Charlemagne,
were  opened  in  every  cathedral,  and  almost  in  every
monastery  of  note.  Colleges  and  universities  were
erected  and  formed  into  communities  or  corporations,
governed  by  their  own  laws,  and  invested  with  separate
and  extensive  jurisdiction  over  their  own  members.  A
regular  course  of  studies  was  planned.  Privileges  of
great  value  were  conferred  on  masters  and  scholars.
Academical  titles  and  honours  of  various  kinds  were
invented  as  a  recompense  for  both.  Nor  was  it  in  the
schools  alone  that  superiority  in  science  led  to  reputa-
tion and  authority ;  it  became  an  object  of  respect  in
life,  and  advanced  such  as  acquired  it  to  a  rank  of  no
inconsiderable  eminence.  Allured  by  all  these  advan-
tages, an  incredible  number  of  students  resorted  to  those
new  seats  of  learning,  and  crowded  with  eagerness  into
that  new  path  which  was  opened  to  fame  and  distinction.

78  STATE OF EUROPE.

But  how  considerable  soever  these  first  ef-

A.  circuni~

sta  nee forts  may  appear,  there  was  one  circumstance
vented1"* which  prevented  the  effects  of  them  from  being

as  extensive  as  they  naturally  ought  to  have
ca  sive.  been.  All  the  languages  in  Europe,  during  the
period  under  review,  were  barbarous.  They  were  desti-
tute of  elegance,  of  force,  and  even  of  perspicuity.  No
attempt  had  been  hitherto  made  to  improve  or  to  polish
them.  The  Latin  tongue  was  consecrated  by  the  church
to  religion.  Custom,  with  authority  scarcely  less  sacred,
had  appropriated  it  to  literature.  All  the  sciences
cultivated  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries  were
taught  in  Latin.  All  books  with  re  spect  to  them  were
written  in  that  language.  It  would  have  been  deemed
a  degradation  of  any  important  subject,  to  have  treated
of  it  in  a  modern  language.  This  confined  science
within  a  very  narrow  circle.  The  learned  alone  were
admitted  into  the  temple  of  knowledge  ;  the  gate  was
shut  against  all  others,  who  were  suffered  to  remain  in-
volved in  their  former  darkness  and  ignorance.
its  influ-  But  tnough  science  was  thus  prevented  dur-
ence  on  jnpr  several  ages.  from  diffusing  itself  through

manners  6.  _  &. '  . _

merits  at-  society,  and  its  influence  was  much  circum-
scribed; the  progress  which  it  made  may  be
mentioned,  nevertheless,  among  the  great  causes  which
contributed  to  introduce  a  change  of  manners  into
Europe.  The  ardent,  though  ill-judged  spirit  of  in-
quiry which  I  have  described,  occasioned  a  fermenta-
tion of  mind  that  put  ingenuity  and  invention  in  motion,
and  gave  them  vigour.  It  led  men  to  a  new  employ-
ment of  their  faculties,  ^vhich  they  found  to  be  agree-
able, as  well  as  interesting.  It  accustomed  them  to
exercises  and  occupations  which  tended  to  soften  their
manners,  and  to  give  them  some  relish  for  the  gentle
virtues,  peculiar  to  people  among  whom  science  has
been  cultivated  with  success.8

e  See  Note  XXVIII.

SECT. I.  79

X.  The  progress  of  commerce  had  consider-

The  pro-  ,  . ,  . ,,  r  t1

of able  influence  in  polishing  the  manners  oi  the

European  nations,  and  in  establishing  among
olf  manners  t^iem  order,  equal  laws,  and  humanity.  The
and  govern-  wants  of  men,  in  the  original  and  most  simple

state  of  society,  are  so  few,  and  their  desires  so
limited,  that  they  rest  contented  with  the  natural  pro-
ductions of  their  climate  and  soil,  or  with  what  they
can  add  to  these  by  their  own  rude  industry.  They
have  no  superfluities  to  dispose  of,  and  few  necessities
that  demand  a  supply.  Every  little  community  sub-
sisting on  its  own  domestic  stock,  and  satisfied  with  it,
is  either  little  acquainted  with  the  states  around  it,  or
LOW  state  a*  variance  with  them.  Society  and  manners
of  com-  must  be  considerably  improved,  and  many  pro-
the  middle  visions  must  be  made  for  public  order  and  per-

sonal security,  before  a  liberal  intercourse  can
take  place  between  different  nations.  We  find,  accord-
ingly, that  the  first  effect  of  the  settlement  of  the  bar-
barians in  the  empire  was  to  divide  those  nations  which
the  Roman  power  had  united.  Europe  was  broken
into  many  separate  communities.  The  intercourse  be-
tween these  divided  states  ceased  almost  entirely  during
several  centuries.  Navigation  was  dangerous  in  seas
infested  by  pirates;  nor  could  strangers  trust  to  a
friendly  reception  in  the  ports  of  uncivilized  nations.
Even  between  distant  parts  of  the  same  kingdom,  the
communication  was  rare  and  difficult.  The  lawless
rapine  of  banditti,  together  with  the  avowed  exactions
of  the  nobles,  scarcely  less  formidable  and  oppressive,
rendered  a  journey  of  any  length  a  perilous  enterprise.
Fixed  to  the  spot  in  which  they  resided,  the  greater
part  of  the  inhabitants  of  Europe  lost,  in  a  great  mea-
sure, the  knowledge  of  remote  regions,  and  were  un-
acquainted with  their  names,  their  situations,  their
climates,  and  their  commodities.11

h  See  Note  XXIX.

80  STATE OF5  EUROPE.

Causes  of  Various  causes,  however,  contributed  to  re-
its  revival.  ^^  fae  spirit  of  commerce,  and  to  renew,  in
some  degree,  the  intercourse  between  different  nations.
The  Italians,  by  their  connexion  with  Constantinople,
and  other  cities  of  the  Greek  empire,  had  preserved  in
their  own  country  considerable  relish  for  the  precious
commodities  and  curious  manufactures  of  the  East.
They  communicated  some  knowledge  of  these  to  the
countries  contiguous  to  Italy.  But  this  commerce
being  extremely  limited,  the  intercourse  which  it  occa-
sioned between  different  nations  was  not  considerable.
The  crusades,  by  leading  multitudes  from  every  corner
of  Europe  into  Asia,  opened  a  more  extensive  commu-
nication between  the  East  and  West,  which  subsisted
for  two  centuries ;  and  though  the  object  of  these  ex-
peditions was  conquest  and  not  commerce;  though  the
issue  of  them  proved  as  unfortunate  as  the  motives  for
undertaking  them  were  wild  and  enthusiastic;  their
commercial  effects,  as  hath  been  shewn,  were  both
beneficial  and  permanent.  During  the  continuance  of
the  crusades,  the  great  cities  in  Italy,  and  in  other
countries  of  Europe,  acquired  liberty,  and  together  with
it  such  privileges  as  rendered  them  respectable  and  in-
dependent communities.  Thus,  in  every  state,  there
was  formed  a  new  order  of  citizens,  to  whom  commerce
presented  itself  as  their  proper  object,  and  opened  to
them  a  certain  path  to  wealth  and  consideration.  Soon
after  the  close  of  the  holy  war,  the  mariner's  compass
was  invented,  which,  by  rendering  navigation  more
secure,  encouraged  it  to  become  more  adventurous,
facilitated  the  communication  between  remote  nations,
and  brought  them  nearer  to  each  other.
FJr8t  The  Italian  states,  during  the  same  period,

among  the  established  a  regular  commerce with  the  East
in  the  ports  of  Egypt,  and  drew  from  thence  all
the  rich  products  of  the  Indies. They  introduced  into
their  own territories  manufactures  of  various  kinds,

SECT. I,  81

and  carried  them  on  with  great  ingenuity  and  vigour.
They  attempted new arts ; and transplanted from
warmer climates,  to which they  had  been  hitherto
deemed peculiar,  several natural  productions  which
now  furnish  the  materials  of  a  lucrative  and  extended
commerce. All  these  commodities,  whether  imported
from  Asia,  or  produced  by  their  own  skill,  they  dis-r
posed  of  to  great  advantage  among  the  other  people  of
Europe,  who  began  to  acquire  some  taste  for  an  ele-
gance in  living  unknown  to  their  ancestors,  or  despised
by  them. During  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,
the  commerce  of  Europe  was  almost  entirely  in  the  hands
of  the  Italians,  more  commonly  known  in  those  ages
by  the  name  of  Lombards. Companies  or  societies  of
Lombard  merchants  settled  in  every  different  kingdom.
They  were  taken  under  the  immediate  protection  of  the
several  governments.  They  enjoyed  extensive  privileges
and  immunities.  The  operation  of  the  ancient  barbarous
laws  concerning  strangers,  was  suspended  with  respect
to  them. They  became  the  carriers,  the  manufacturers,
and  the  bankers  of  all  Europe.

Then  by While  the  Italians,  in  the  South  of  Europe,
the  means were  cultivating  trade  with  such  industry  and

of  the  Han-  V

seatic  success,  the  commercial  spirit  awakened  in  the
North  towards  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  cen-
tury. As  the  nations  around  the  Baltic  were,  at  that
time,  extremely  barbarous,  and  infested  that  sea  with  their
piracies,  the  cities  of  Lubec  and  Hamburgh,  soon  after
they  began  to  open  some  trade  with  these  people,  found
it  necessary  to  enter  into  a  league  of  mutual  defence;
They  derived  such  advantages  from  this  union,  that
other  towns  acceded  to  their  confederacy,  and,  in  a
short  time,  eighty  of  the  most  considerable  cities  scat-
tered through  those  extensive  countries  which  stretch
from  the  bottom  of  the  Baltic  to  Cologne  on  the  Rhine,
joined  in  the  famous  Hanseatic  league,  which  became
so  formidable,  that  its  alliance  was  courted,  an(J  its,

VOL. III.  G

82  STATE OF EUROPE.

enmity  was  dreaded  by  the  greatest  monarchs.  The
members  of  this  powerful  association  formed  the  first
systematic  plan  of  commerce  known  in  the  middle  ages,
and  conducted  it  by  common  laws  enacted  in  their
general  assemblies.  They  supplied  the  rest  of  Europe
with  naval  stores,  and  pitched  on  different  towns,  the
most  eminent  of  which  was  Bruges  in  Flanders,  where
they  established  staples  in  which  their  commerce  was
regularly  carried  on.  Thither  the  Lombards  brought
the  productions  of  India,  together  with  the  manufactures
of  Italy,  and  exchanged  them  for  the  more  bulky,  but
not  less  useful  commodities  of  the  North.  The  Han-
seatic  merchants  disposed  of  the  cargoes  which  they
received  from  the  Lombards,  in  the  ports  of  the  Baltic,
or  carried  them  up  the  great  rivers  into  the  interior
parts  of  Germany.

Commerce  This  regu^ar  intercourse  opened  between  the
makes  pro-  nations  in  the  North  and  South  of  Europe,  made

gress  in  the

Nether-  them  sensible  of  their  mutual  wants,  and  created
such  new  and  increasing  demands  for  commodi-
ties of  every  kind,  that  it  excited  among  the  inhabitants
of  the  Netherlands  a  more  vigorous  spirit  in  carrying  on
the  two  great  manufactures  of  wool  and  flax,  which  seem
to  have  been  considerable  in  that  country  as  early  as
the  age  of  Charlemagne.  As  Bruges  became  the  centre
of  communication  between  the  Lombard  and  Han-
seatic  merchants,  the  Flemings  traded  with  both  in  that
city  to  such  extent  as  well  as  advantage,  as  spread  among
them  a  general  habit  of  industry,  which  long  rendered
Flanders  and  the  adjacent  provinces  the  most  opulent,  the
most  populous,  and  best  cultivated  countries  in  Europe.
And  in  Struck  with  the  flourishing  state  of  these  pro-
vinces, of  which  he  discerned  the  true  cause,
Edward  III.  of  England  endeavoured  to  excite  a  spirit
of  industry  among  his  own  subjects,  who,  blind  to  the
advantages  of  their  situation,  and  ignorant  of  the  source
from  which  opulence  was  destined  to  flow  into  their

SECT. I.  83

country,  were  so  little  attentive  to  their  commercial  in-
terests, as  hardly  to  attempt  those  manufactures,  the
materials  of  which  they  furnished  to  foreigners.  By
alluring  Flemish  artisans  to  settle  in  his  dominions,  as
well  as  by  many  wise  laws  for  the  encouragement  and
regulation  of  trade,  Edward  gave  a  beginning  to  the
woollen  manufactures  of  England,  and  first  turned  the
active  and  enterprising  genius  of  his  people  towards
those  arts  which  have  raised  the  English  to  the  highest
rank  among  commercial  nations.

This  increase  of  commerce,  and  of  inter-

The  benefi-  .  '  .  .

ciai  effects  course between  nations, how  inconsiderable

of  this.  .,  .  P  ,1 •  •  i

soever  it  may  appear  in  respect  ot  their  rapid
and  extensive  progress  during  the  last  and  present  age,
seems  wonderfully  great,  when  we  compare  it  with  the
state  of  both  in  Europe  previous  to  the  twelfth  century,
It  did  not  fail  of  producing  great  effects. Commerce
tends  to  wear  off  those  prejudices  which  maintain  dis-
tinction and  animosity  between  nations. It  softens  and
polishes  the  manners  of  men. It  unites  them  by  one  of
the  strongest  of  all  ties,  the  desire  of  supplying  their
mutual  wants. It  disposes  them  to  peace,  by  establish-
ing in  every  state  an  order  of  citizens  bound  by  their
interest  to  be  the  guardians  of  public  tranquillity. As
soon  as  the  commercial  spirit  acquires  vigour,  and  be-
gins to  gain  an  ascendant  in  any  society,  we  discover
a  new  genius  in  its  policy,  its  alliances,  its  wars,  and
its  negotiations. Conspicuous  proofs  of  this  occur  in
the  history  of  the  Italian  states,  of  the  Hanseatic  league,
and  the  cities  of  the  Netherlands,  during  the  period
under  review. In  proportion  as  commerce  made  its
way  into  the  different  countries  of  Europe,  they  suc-
cessively turned  their  attention  to  those  objects,  and
adopted  those  manners,  which  occupy  and  distinguish
polished  nations. g

s  See  Note  XXX.
G  2

A

VIEW

OF

THE  PROGRESS  OF  SOCIETY

IN

EUROPE,

FROM

THE  SUBVERSION  OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE

TO THE

BEGINNING  OF  THE  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY.

SECT.  II.

View  of  the  Progress  of  Society  in  Europe,  with  respect
to  the  command  of  the  national  force  requisite  in  fo-
reign operations.

state  of  OUCH  are  the  events  and  institutions,  which,
greatly  im-  by  their  powerful  operation,  contributed  gra-
the  begin*  dually  to  introduce  regular  government  and
fifSenth116  P°^sne(i  manners  in  the  various  nations  of
century.  Europe.  When  we  survey  the  state  of  society,
or  the  character  of  individuals,  at  the  opening  of  the
fifteenth  century,  and  then  turn  back  to  view  the  con-
dition of  both  at  the  time  when  the  barbarous  tribes,
which  overturned  the  Roman  power,  completed  their
settlement  in  their  new  conquests,  the  progress  which
mankind  had  made  towards  order  and  refinement  will
appear  immense.

still  defec- Government,  however,  was still  far from
Caving  attained  that  state,  in  which  extensive

the  com- monarchies  act  with  the  united  vigour  of  the

mandof  , ,  .  ,

the  nation-  whole  community,  or  carry  on  great  under-
ai  force, takings  with  perseverance  and  success. Small

SECT.  II.  85

tribes  or  communities,  even  in  their  rudest  state,  may
operate  in  concert,  and  exert  their  utmost  force.  They
are  excited  to  act  not  by  the  distant  objects,  or  the
refined  speculations,  which  interest  or  affect  men  in
polished  societies,  but  by  their  present  feelings.  The
insults  of  an  enemy  kindle  resentment ;  the  success  of
a  rival  tribe  awakens  emulation :  these  passions  com-
municate from  breast  to  breast,  and  all  the  members  of
the  community,  with  united  ardour,  rush  into  the  field
in  order  to  gratify  their  revenge,  or  to  acquire  distinc-
tion. But  in  widely- extended  states,  such  as  the  great
kingdoms  of  Europe,  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth
century,  where  there  is  little  intercourse  between  the
distant  members  of  the  community,  and  where  every
great  enterprise  requires  previous  concert  and  long  pre-
paration, nothing  can  rouse  and  call  forth  their  united
strength,  but  the  absolute  command  of  a  despot,  or  the
powerful  influence  of  regular  policy.  Of  the  former,
the  vast  empires  in  the  East  are  an  example ;  the  irre-
sistible mandate  of  the  sovereign  reaches  the  most  re-
mote provinces  of  his  dominions,  and  compels  whatever
number  of  his  subjects  he  is  pleased  to  summon,  to  fol-
low his  standard.  The  kingdoms  of  Europe,  in  the
present  age,  are  an  instance  of  the  latter ;  the  prince,
by  the  less  violent,  but  no  less  effectual  operation  of
laws  and  a  well-regulated  government,  is  enabled  to
avail  himself  of  the  whole  force  of  his  state,  and  to
employ  it  in  enterprises  which  require  strenuous  and
persevering  efforts.

The  power  But,  at  the  opening  of  the  fifteenth  century,
the  political  constitution  in  all  the  kingdoms
of  Europe  was  very  different  from  either  of
these  states  of  government.  The  several  monarchs,
though  they  had  somewhat  enlarged  the  boundaries  of
prerogative  by  successful  encroachments  on  the  immu-
nities and  privileges  of  the  nobility,  were  possessed  of
an  authority  extremely  limited.  The  laws  and  interior

86  STATE OF EUROPE.

police  of  kingdoms,  though  much  improved  by  the  va-
rious events  and  regulations  which  I  have  enumerated,
were  still  feeble  and  imperfect.  In  every  county,  a
numerous  body  of  nobles,  who  continued  to  be  formi-
dable notwithstanding  the  various  expedients  employed
to  depress  them,  watched  all  the  motions  of  their  sove-
reign with  a  jealous  attention,  which  set  bounds  to  his
ambition,  and  either  prevented  his  forming  schemes  of
extensive  enterprise,  or  obstructed  the  execution  of
them.

Their  reve-  ^ne  ordinary  revenues  of  every  prince  were
nues  small.  so  extremely  small  as  to  be  inadequate  to  any
great  undertaking.  He  depended  for  extraordinary
supplies  on  the  good- will  of  his  subjects,  who  granted
them  often  with  a  reluctant,  and  always  with  a  sparing
hand.

Their  ar-  As  the  revenues  of  princes  were  inconsider-
for6con"fit  a^e?  ^e  arm^es  which  they  could  bring  into
quest.  the  field  were  unfit  for  long  and  effectual  ser-
vice. Instead  of  being  able  to  employ  troops  trained
to  skill  in  arms,  and  to  military  subordination,  by  re-
gular discipline,  monarchs  were  obliged  to  depend  on
such  forces  as  their  vassals  conducted  to  their  standard
in  consequence  of  their  military  tenures.  These,  as  they
were  bound  to  remain  under  arms  only  for  a  short  time,
could  not  march  far  from  their  usual  place  of  residence,
and  being  more  attached  to  the  lord  of  whom  they  held,
than  to  the  sovereign  whom  they  served,  were  often  as
much  disposed  to  counteract  as  to  forward  his  schemes.
Nor  were  they,  even  if  they  had  been  more  subject  to
the  command  of  the  monarch,  proper  instruments  to
carry  into  execution  any  great  and  arduous  enterprise.
The  strength  of  an  army,  formed  either  for  conquest  or
defence,  lies  in  infantry.  To  the  stability  and  discipline
of  their  legions,  consisting  chiefly  of  infantry,  the  Ro-
mans, during  the  times  of  the  republic,  were  indebted
for  their  victories;  and  when  their  descendants,  forget-

i

SECT. II.  87

ting  the  institutions  which  had  led  them  to  universal
dominion,  so  far  altered  their  military  system  as  to  place
their  principal  confidence  in  a  numerous  cavalry,  the
undisciplined  impetuosity  of  the  barbarous  nations,  who
fought  mostly  on  foot,  was  sufficient,  as  I  have  already
observed,  to  overcome  them. These  nations,  soon  after
they  settled  in  their  new  conquests,  uninstructed  by  the
fatal  error  of  the  Romans,  relinquished  the  customs  of
their  ancestors,  and  converted  the  chief  force  of  their
armies  into  cavalry. Among  the  Romans  this  change
was  occasioned  by  the  effeminacy  of  their  troops,  who
could  not  endure  the  fatigues  of  service,  which  their
more  virtuous  and  hardy  ancestors  had  sustained  with
ease. Among  the  people  who established the  new
monarchies  into  which  Europe  was  divided,  this  inno-
vation in  military  discipline  seems  to  have  flowed  from
the  pride  of  the  nobles,  who,  scorning  to  mingle  with
persons  of  inferior  rank,  aimed  at  being  distinguished
from  them  in  the  field,  as  well  as  during  peace. The
institution  of  chivalry,  and  the  frequency  of  tourna-
ments, in  which  knights,  in  complete  armour,  entered
the  lists  on  horseback  with  extraordinary  splendour,
displaying  amazing  address,  force,  and  valour,  brought
cavalry  into  still  greater  esteem. The  fondness  for  that
service  increased  to  such  a  degree,  that,  during  the
thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries,  the  armies  of  Eu-
rope were  composed  almost  entirely  of  cavalry. No
gentleman  would  appear  in  the  field  but  on  horseback.
To  serve  in  any  other  manner,  he  would  have  deemed
derogatory  to  his  rank. The  cavalry,  by  way  of  dis-
tinction, was  called  The  Battle,  and  on  it  alone  de-
pended the  fate  of  every  action. The  infantry,  collected
from  the  dregs  and  refuse  of  the  people,  ill  armed  and
worse  disciplined,  was  almost  of  no  account.
They  are As  these  circumstances  rendered  the  opera-
SSg  tions  of  particular  kingdoms  less  considerable
any  general  an(j  ]ess  vigorous,  so  they  long  kept  the  princes

88  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

sive^lanof  °^  Europe  from  giving  such  attention  to  the
operation,  schemes  and  transactions  of  their  neighbours,
as  might  lead  them  to  form  any  regular  system  of  pub-
lic security.  They  were,  of  consequence,  prevented
from  uniting  in  confederacy,  or  from  acting  with  con-
cert, in  order  to  establish  such  a  distribution  and  ba-
lance of  power,  as  should  hinder  any  state  from  rising
to  a  superiority,  which  might  endanger  the  general  li-
berty and  independence.  During  several  centuries,  the
nations  of  Europe  appear  to  have  considered  themselves
as  separate  societies,  scarcely  connected  together  by
any  common  interest,  and  little  concerned  in  each  other's
affairs  or  operations.  An  extensive  commerce  did  not
afford  them  an  opportunity  of  observing  and  penetra-
ting into  the  schemes  of  every  different  state.  They
had  not  ambassadors  residing  constantly  in  every  court
to  watch  and  give  early  intelligence  of  all  its  motions.
The  expectation  of  remote  advantages,  or  the  prospect
of  distant  and  contingent  evils,  were  not  sufficient  to
excite  nations  to  take  arms.  Such  only  as  were  within
the  sphere  of  immediate  danger,  and  unavoidably  ex-
posed to  injury  or  insult,  thought  themselves  interested
in  any  contest,  or  bound  to  take  precautions  for  their
own  safety.
,,,,  Whoever  records  the  transactions  of  any  of

1  hey  were  J

little  con-  the  more  considerable  European  states  during:

nected  .  .

with  each  the  two  last  centuries,  must  write  the  history  of
Europe.  Its  various  kingdoms,  throughout  that
period,  have  been  formed  into  one  great  system,  so
closely  united,  that  each  holding  a  determinate  station,
the  operations  of  one  are  so  felt  by  all,  as  to  influence
their  counsels  and  regulate  their  measures.  But  pre-
vious to  the  fifteenth  century,  unless  when  vicinity  of
territory  rendered  the  occasions  of  discord  frequent  and
unavoidable,  or  when  national  emulation  fomented  or
imbittered  the  spirit  of  hostility,  the  affairs  of  different
countries  are  seldom  interwoven  with  each  other.  In

SECT. II.  89

each  kingdom  of  Europe  great  events  and  revolutions
happened,  which  the  other  powers  beheld  with  almost
the  same  indifference  as  if  they  had  been  uninterested
spectators,  to  whom  the  effect  of  these  transactions
could  never  extend.

A  con-  During  the  violent  struggles  between  France
onhis°n  and  England,  and  notwithstanding  the  alarming
fr°'?  thef  progress  which  was  made  towards  rendering  one
France,  prince  the  master  of  both  these  kingdoms,  hardly
one  measure  which  can  be  considered  as  the  result  of  a
sagacious  and  prudent  policy,  was  formed  in  order  to
guard  against  an  event  so  fatal  to  Europe.  The  dukes
of  Burgundy  and  Bretagne,  whom  their  situation  would
not  permit  to  remain  neutral,  engaged,  it  is  true,  in  the
contest;  but  in  taking  their  part  they  seem  rather  to
have  followed  the  impulse  of  their  passions,  than  to
have  been  guided  by  any  just  discernment  of  the  danger
which  threatened  themselves  and  the  tranquillity  of  Eu-
rope. The  other  princes,  seemingly  unaffected  by  the
alternate  successes  of  the  contending  parties,  left  them
to  decide  the  quarrel  by  themselves,  or  interposed  only
by  feeble  and  ineffectual  negotiations.
From  Notwithstanding  the  perpetual  hostilities  in

those  of  which  the  various  kingdoms  of  Spain  were  en-
gaged during  several  centuries,  and  the  succes-
sive occurrences  which  visibly  tended  to  unite  that  part
of  the  continent  into  one  great  monarchy,  the  princes
of  Europe  hardly  took  any  step  from  which  we  may
conclude  that  they  gave  a  proper  attention  to  that  im-
portant event.  They  permitted  a  power  to  arise  imper-
ceptibly, and  to  acquire  strength  there,  which  soon  be-
came formidable  to  all  its  neighbours.
From  Amidst  the  violent  convulsions  with  which

those  of the  spirit  of  domination  in  the  see  of  Rome,  and
iany'  the  turbulent  ambition  of  the  German  nobles,
agitated  the  empire,  neither  the  authority  of  the  popes  >
seconded  by  all  their  artifices  and  intrigues,  nor  the

90  STATE OF EUROPE.

solicitations  of  the  emperors,  could  induce  any  of  the
powerful  monarchs  in  Europe  to  engage  in  their  quar-
rel, or  to  avail  themselves  of  many  favourable  oppor-
tunities of  interposing  with  effect  and  advantage.
Thisinao  This  amazing  inactivity,  during  transactions
tivity  oc-  so  interesting,  is  not  to  be  imputed  to  any  in-

casioned  P*  .  .  J

entirely  by  capacity  of  discerning  their  political  conse-
o? govern-  quences.  The  power  of  judging  with  sagacity,

and  of  acting  with  vigour,  is  the  portion  of  men
of  every  age.  The  monarchs  who  reigned  in  the  dif-
ferent kingdoms  of  Europe  during  several  centuries,
were  not  blind  to  their  particular  interest,  negligent  of
the  public  safety,  or  strangers  to  the  method  of  securing
both.  If  they  did  not  adopt  that  salutary  system,  which
teaches  modern  politicians  to  take  the  alarm  at  the  pros-
pect of  distant  dangers,  which  prompts  them  to  check
the  first  encroachments  of  any  formidable  power,  and
which  renders  each  state  the  guardian,  in  some  degree,
of  the  rights  and  independence  of  all  its  neighbours,
this  was  owing  entirely  to  such  imperfections  and  dis-
orders in  the  civil  government  of  each  country,  as  made
it  impossible  for  sovereigns  to  act  suitably  to  those
ideas,  which  the  posture  of  affairs,  and  their  own  ob-
servation, must  have  suggested.

Events  But  during  the  course  of  the  fifteenth  cen-

durinenthe  tury '  var^ous  events  happened,  which,  by  giving
isth  cen-  princes  more  entire  command  of  the  force  in
renderthe  their  respective  dominions,  rendered  their  ope-
hations°f  rations  more  vigorous  and  extensive.  In  con-
Twerfui  se(luence  °f  tnis>  the  affairs  of  different  king-
andex-  doms  becoming  more  frequently  as  well  as

more  intimately  connected,  they  were  gradually
accustomed  to  act  in  concert  and  confederacy,  and  were
insensibly  prepared  for  forming  a  system  of  policy,  in
order  to  establish  or  to  preserve  such  a  balance  of  power
as  was  most  consistent  with  the  general  security.  It
was  during  the  reign  of  Charles  the  Fifth,  that  the  ideas,

SECT.  II.  91

on  which  this  system  is  founded,  first  came  to  be  fully
understood.  It  was  then,  that  the  maxims  by  which  it
has  been  uniformly  maintained  since  that  era,  were
universally  adopted.  On  this  account,  a  view  of  the
causes  and  events  which  contributed  to  establish  a  plan
of  policy,  more  salutary  and  extensive  than  any  that  has
taken  place  in  the  conduct  of  human  affairs,  is  not  only
a  necessary  introduction  to  the  following  work,  but  is
a  capital  object  in  the  history  of  Europe.
Th  first  ^ne  ^rst  event  ^at  occasioned  any  conside-
of  these  rable  alteration  in  the  arrangement  of  affairs  in
cteprivTng  Europe,  was  the  annexation  of  the  extensive
Ifeh  of"8"  territories,  which  England  possessed  on  the  con-
theirter-  tinent,  to  the  crown  of  France.  While  the  Eng-

ntones  on  p •  i

the  conti-  Hsh  were  masters  of  several  of  the  most  fertile
and  opulent  provinces  in  France,  and  a  great
part  of  its  most  martial  inhabitants  was  bound  to  fol-
low their  standard,  an  English  monarch  considered  him-
self rather  as  the  rival,  than  as  the  vassal,  of  the  sove-
reign of  whom  he  held.  The  kings  of  France  circum-
scribed and  thwarted  in  their  schemes  and  operations
by  an  adversary  no  less  jealous  than  formidable,  durst
not  enter  upon  any  enterprise  of  importance  or  of  dif-
ficulty. The  English  were  always  at  hand,  ready  to
oppose  them.  They  disputed  even  their,  right  to  their
crown,  and  being  able  to  penetrate,  with  ease,  into  the
heart  of  the  kingdom,  could  arm  against  them  those
very  hands  which  ought  to  have  been  employed  in  their
defence.  Timid  counsels  and  feeble  efforts  were  na-
tural to  monarchs  in  such  a  situation.  France,  dismem-
bered and  overawed,  could  not  attain  its  proper  station
in  the  system  of  Europe.  But  the  death  of  Henry  V.
of  England,  happily  for  France,  and  not  unfortunately
for  his  own  country,  delivered  the  French  from  the  ca-
lamity of  having  a  foreign  master  seated  on  their  throne.
The  weakness  of  a  long  minority,  the  dissensions  in  the
English  court,  together  with  the  unsteady  and  languid

02  STATE OF EUROPE.

conduct  which  these  occasioned,  afforded  the  French  a
favourable  opportunity  of  recovering  the  territories
which  they  had  lost.  The  native  valour  of  the  French
nobility,  heightened  to  an  enthusiastic  confidence,  by
a  supposed  interposition  of  Heaven  in  their  behalf;  con-
ducted in  the  field  by  skilful  leaders ;  and  directed  in
the  cabinet  by  a  prudent  monarch;  was  exerted  with
such  vigour  and  success,  during  this  favourable  junc-
ture, as  not  only  wrested  from  the  English  their  new
conquests,  but  stripped  them  of  their  possessions  in
France,  and  reduced  them  within  the  narrow  precincts
of  Calais,  and  its  petty  territory.

The  effect  As  soon  as  so  m^uY  considerable  provinces
of  this  on  were  reunited  to  their  dominions,  the  kin^s  of

increasing  .  .  ...

ihe  power  France,  conscious  of  this  acquisition  of  strength,
French  began  to  form  bolder  schemes  of  interior  policy,
monarchy.  ag  wej}  as  Qf  forejgn  operations.  They  imme-
diately became  formidable  to  their  neighbours,  who
began  to  fix  their  attention  on  their  measures  and  mo-
tions, the  importance  of  which  they  fully  perceived.
From  this  era,  France,  possessed  of  the  advantages
which  it  derives  from  the  situation  and  contiguity  of
its  territories,  as  well  as  from  the  number  and  valour
of  its  people,  rose  to  new  influence  in  Europe,  and  was
the  first  power  in  a  condition  to  give  alarm  to  the  jea-
lousy or  fears  of  the  states  around  it.
On  the  Nor  was  France  indebted  for  this  increase  of
^a°rfthe  importance  merely  to  the  reunion  of  the  pro-
force  in  vinces  which  had  been  torn  from  it.  A  circum-
'"'  stance  attended  the  recovery  of  these,  which,
though  less  considerable,  and  less  observed,  contributed
not  a  little  to  give  additional  vigour  and  decision  to
all  the  efforts  of  that  monarchy.  During  the  obstinate
struggles  between  France  and  England,  all  the  defects
of  the  military  system  under  the  feudal  government
were  sensibly  felt.  A  war  of  long  continuance  lan-
guished, when  carried  on  by  troops  bound  and  accus-

SECT.  II.  S3

tomed  to  keep  the  field  only  for  a  short  time.  Armies,
composed  chiefly  of  heavy-armed  cavalry  were  unfit
either  for  the  defence  or  attack  of  the  many  towns  and
castles,  which  it  became  necessary  to  guard  or  to  re-
duce. In  order  to  obtain  such  permanent  and  effective
force,  as  became  requisite  during  these  lengthened
contests,  the  kings  of  France  took  into  their  pay  con-
siderable bands  of  mercenary  soldiers,  levied  some-
times among  their  own  subjects,  and  sometimes  in  fo-
reign countries.  But  as  the  feudal  policy  provided  no
sufficient  fund  for  such  extraordinary  service,  these  ad-
venturers were  dismissed  at  the  close  of  every  cam-
paign, or  upon  any  prospect  of  accommodation  ;  and
having  been  little  accustomed  to  the  restraints  of  disci-
pline, they  frequently  turned  their  arms  against  the
country  which  they  had  been  hired  to  defend,  and  de-
solated it  with  cruelty  not  inferior  to  that  of  its  foreign
enemies.

itocca-  A  body  of  troops  kept  constantly  on  foot,
imroduc-  and  regularly  trained  to  military  subordination,
twn  of  would  have  supplied  what  was  wanting;  in  the

standing

armies,  feudal  constitution,  and  have  furnished  princes
with  the  means  of  executing  enterprises,  to  which  they
were  then  unequal.  Such  an  establishment,  however,
was  so  repugnant  to  the  genius  of  feudal  policy,  and  so
incompatible  with  the  privileges  and  pretensions  of  the
nobility,  that  during  several  centuries  no  monarch  was
either  so  bold,  or  so  powerful,  as  to  venture  on  any  step
towards  introducing  it.  At  last,  Charles  VII.,  availing
himself  of  the  reputation  which  he  had  acquired  by  his
successes  against  the  English,  and  taking  advantage  of
the  impressions  of  terror  which  such  a  formidable  enemy
had  left  upon  the  minds  of  his  subjects,  executed  that
which  his  predecessors  durst  not  attempt.  Under  pre-
tence of  having  always  ready  a  force  sufficient  to  de-
fend the  kingdom  against  any  sudden  invasion  of  the
English,  he,  at  the  time  when  he  disbanded  his  other
troops,  retained  under  arms  a  body  of  nine  thousand

I
94  STATE OF  EUROPE.

cavalry,  and  of  sixteen  thousand  infantry.  He  appro-
priated funds  for  the  regular  payment  of  these ;  he  sta-
tioned them  in  different  places  of  the  kingdom,  accord-
ing to  his  pleasure ;  and  appointed  the  officers  who,
commanded  and  disciplined  them.  The  prime  nobi-
lity courted  this  service,  in  which  they  were  taught  to
depend  on  their  sovereign,  to  execute  his  orders,  and
to  look  up  to  him  as  the  judge  and  re  warder  of  their
merit.  The  feudal  militia,  composed  of  the  vassals
whom  the  nobles  could  call  out  to  follow  their  stan-
dard, as  it  was  in  no  degree  comparable  to  a  body  of
soldiers  regularly  trained  to  war,  sunk  gradually  in  re-
putation. The  strength  of  an  army  was  no  longer  es-
timated solely  by  the  number  of  cavalry  which  served
in  it.  From  the  time  that  gunpowder  was  invented,
and  the  use  of  cannon  in  the  field  became  general,
horsemen  cased  in  complete  armour  lost  all  the  advan-
tages which  gave  them  the  pre-eminence  over  other  sol-
diers. The  helmet,  the  shield,  and  the  breastplate,
which  resisted  the  arrow  or  the  spear,  no  longer  afford-
ed them  security  against  these  new  instruments  of  de-
struction. The  service  of  infantry  rose  again  into  their
esteem,  and  victories  were  gained,  and  conquests  made,
chiefly  by  their  efforts.  The  nobles  and  their  military
tenants,  though  sometimes  summoned  to  the  field,  ac-
cording to  ancient  form,  were  considered  as  an  incum-
brance  upon  the  troops  with  which  they  acted  ;  and
were  viewed  with  contempt  by  soldiers  accustomed  to
the  vigorous  and  steady  operations  of  regular  service.
The  effects  Thus  the  regulations  of  Charles  the  Seventh,
of  this,  by  establishing  the  first  standing  army  known  in
Europe,  occasioned  an  important  revolution  in  its  af-
fairs and  policy.  By  taking  from  the  nobles  the  sole
direction  of  the  national  military  force,  which  had  raised
them  to  such  high  authority  and  importance,  a  deep
wound  was  given  to  the  feudal  aristocracy,  in  that  part
where  its  power  seemed  to  be  most  complete.

France,  by  forming  this  body  of  regular  troops,  at  a

SECT. II.

95

time  when  there  was  hardly  a  squadron  or  company
kept  in  constant  pay  in  any  other  part  of  Europe,  ac-
quired such  advantages  over  its  neighbours,  either  in
attack  or  defence,  that  self-preservation  made  it  neces-
sary for  them  to  imitate  its  example.  Mercenary  troops
were  introduced  into  all  the  considerable  kingdoms  on
the  continent.  They  gradually  became  the  only  mili-
tary force  that  was  employed  or  trusted.  It  has  long
been  the  chief  object  of  policy  to  increase  and  to  sup-
port them  ;  it  has  long  been  the  great  aim  of  princes
and  ministers  to  discredit  and  to  annihilate  all  other
means  of  national  activity  or  defence.
The  mo-  As  the  kings  of  France  got  the  start  of  other
marchs  of  powers  in  establishing  a  military  force  in  their

France  en-  r  °

couraged  dominions,  which  enabled  them  to  carry  on  to-
thelr  pre-  reign  operations  with  more  vigour,  and  to  greater
rogative,  extent?  so  they  were  the  first  who  effectually
broke  the  feudal  aristocracy,  and  humbled  the  great
vassals  of  the  crown,  who  by  their  exorbitant  power
had  long  circumscribed  the  royal  prerogative  within
very  narrow  limits,  and  had  rendered  all  the  efforts  of
the  monarchs  of  Europe  inconsiderable.  Many  things
concurred  to  undermine,  gradually,  the  power  of  the
feudal  aristocracy  in  France.  The  wealth  and  property
of  the  nobility  were  greatly  impaired  during  the  long
wars  which  the  kingdom  was  obliged  to  maintain  with
the  English.  The  extraordinary  zeal  with  which  they
exerted  themselves  in  defence  of  their  country  against
its  ancient  enemies,  exhausted  entirely  the  fortunes  of
some  great  families.  As  almost  every  province  in  the
kingdom  was  in  its  turn,  the  seat  of  war,  the  lands  of
others  were  exposed  to  the  depredations  of  the  enemy,
were  ravaged  by  the  mercenary  troops  which  their  so-
vereigns hired  occasionally,  but  could  not  pay,  or  were
desolated  with  rage  still  more  destructive  by  the  pea-
sants, in  different  insurrections.  At  the  same  time,  the
necessities  of  government  having  forced  their  kings

96  STATE  OF EUROPE.

upon  the  desperate  expedient  of  making  great  and
sudden  alterations  in  the  current  coin  of  the  kingdom,
the  fines,  quit-rents,  and  other  payments  fixed  by  an-
cient custom,  sunk  much  in  value,  and  the  revenues  of
a  fief  were  reduced  far  below  the  sum  which  it  had
once  yielded.  During  their  contests  with  the  English,
in  which  a  generous  nobility  courted  every  station
where  danger  appeared,  or  honour  could  be  gained,
many  families  of  note  became  extinct,  and  their  fiefs,
were  reunited  to  the  crown.  Other  fiefs,  in  a  long
course  of  years,  fell  to  female  heirs,  and  were  divided
among  them,  were  diminished  by  profuse  donations  to
the  church,  or  were  broken  and  split  by  the  succession
of  remote  collateral  heirs.8

The  pro-  Encouraged  by  these  manifest  symptoms  of
fhTroyii  decline  in  that  body  which  he  wished  to  de-
derWCharieSPress'  Charles  VII.,  during  the  first  interval  of
vii.  peace  with  England,  made  several  eiforts  to-
wards establishing  the  regal  prerogative  on  the  ruins  of
the  aristocracy.  But  his  obligations  to  the  nobles  were
so  many,  as  well  as  recent,  and  their  services  in  reco-
vering the  kingdom  so  splendid,  as  rendered  it  neces-
sary for  him  to  proceed  with  moderation  and  caution,
Such,  however,  was  the  authority  which  the  crown  had
acquired  by  the  progress  of  its  arms  against  the  English,
and  so  much  was  the  power  of  the  nobility  diminished,
that,  without  any  opposition,  he  soon  made  innovations
of  great  consequence  in  the  constitution.  He  not  only
established  that  formidable  body  of  regular  troops,  which
has  been  mentioned,  but  he  was  the  first  monarch  of
France  who,  by  his  royal  edict,  without  the  concurrence

A  D  1440  °^  ^e  states-general  °f  tne  kingdom,  levied  an
extraordinary  subsidy  on  his  people.  He  pre-
vailed likewise  with  his  subjects  to  render  several  taxes
perpetual  which  had  formerly  been  imposed  occasion-
ally, and  exacted  during  a  short  time.  By  means  of

•  Boulainvilliers  Histoire  de  Gouvememerit  de  France,  Lettre  xii.

SECT. II.  97

all  these  innovations,  he  acquired  such  an  increase  of
power,  and  extended  his  prerogative  so  far  beyond  its
ancient  limits,  that,  from  being  the  most  dependent
prince  who  had  ever  sat  upon  the  throne  of  France,  he
came  to  possess,  during  the  latter  years  of  his  reign,  a
degree  of  authority  which  none  of  his  predecessors  had
enjoyed  for  several  ages.fc

tinder  That  plan  of  humbling  the  nobility  which
LOUIS  XL  char]es  began  to  execute,  his  son  Louis  XL
carried  on  with  a  bolder  spirit,  and  with  greater  suc-
cess. Louis  was  formed  by  nature  to  be  a  tyrant;  and
at  whatever  period  he  had  been  called  to  ascend  the
throne,  his  reign  must  have  abounded  with  schemes  to
oppress  his  people,  and  to  render  his  own  power  abso-
lute. Subtle,  unfeeling,  cruel;  a  stranger  to  every
principle  of  integrity,  and  regardless  of  decency,  he
scorned  all  the  restraints  which  a  sense  of  honour,  or
the  desire  of  fame,  impose  even  upon  ambitious  men.
Sagacious,  at  the  same  time,  to  discern  what  he  deemed
his  true  interest,  and  influenced  by  that  alone,  he  was
capable  of  pursuing  it  with  a  persevering  industry,  and
of  adhering  to  it  with  a  systematic  spirit,  from  which
no  object  could  divert,  and  no  danger  could  deter  him.
Hismea-  The  niaxims  of  his  administration  were  as
hurobinT  Pro^oun^  as  tne7  wei>e  fatal  to  the  privileges  of
the  now-  the  nobility.  He  filled  all  the  departments  of
government  with  new  men,  and  often  with  per-
sons whom  he  called  from  the  lowest,  as  well  as  most
despised  functions  in  life,  and  raised  at  pleasure  to  sta-
tions of  great  power  or  trust.  These  were  his  only  con-
fidants, whom  he  consulted  in  forming  his  plans,  and
to  whom  he  committed  the  execution  of  them  :  while
the  nobles,  accustomed  to  be  the  companions,  the  fa-
vourites, and  the  ministers  of  their  sovereigns,  were
treated  with  such  studied  and  mortifying  neglect,  that

1  Histoire  de  France  par  Velly  et  Villaret,  torn.  xv.  331,  &c.  389.  torn.  xvi.  324.
Variations  de  !a  Monarchic  Fran9oise,  torn.  iii.  162.

VOL.  III.  II

»
98  STATE OF EUROPE.

if  they  would  not  submit  to  follow  a  court  in  which
they  appeared  without  any  shadow  of  their  ancient
power,  they  were  obliged  to  retire  to  their  castles,
where  they  remained  unemployed  and  forgotten.  Not
satisfied  with  having  rendered  the  nobles  of  less  consi-
deration, by  taking  out  of  their  hands  the  sole  direction
of  affairs,  Louis  added  insult  to  neglect ;  and  by  vio-
lating their  most  valuable  privileges,  endeavoured  to
degrade  the  order,  and  to  reduce  the  members  of  it  to
the  same  level  with  other  subjects.  Persons  of  the
highest  rank  among  them,  if  so  bold  as  to  oppose  his
schemes,  or  so  unfortunate  as  to  awaken  the  jealousy
of  his  capricious  temper,  were  persecuted  with  rigour,
from  which  all  who  belonged  to  the  order  of  nobility
had  hitherto  been  exempt ;  they  were  tried  by  judges
who  had  no  right  to  take  cognizance  of  their  actions,
and  were  subjected  to  torture,  or  condemned  to  an  ig-
nominious death,  without  regard  to  their  birth  or  con-
dition. The  people,  accustomed  to  see  the  blood  of
the  most  illustrious  personages  shed  by  the  hands  of  the
common  executioner,  to  behold  them  shut  up  in  dun-
geons, and  carried  about  in  cages  of  iron,  began  to
view  the  nobility  with  less  reverence  than  formerly,  and
looked  up  with  terror  to  the  royal  authority,  which
seemed  to  have  humbled  or  annihilated  every  other
power  in  the  kingdom.

And  of  At  tne  same  tmle>  Louis,  being  afraid  that
dividing  oppression  might  rouse  the  nobles,  whom  the

them.  .rr  . &  ii--,

rigour  ot  his  government  had  intimidated,  or
that  self-preservation  might  at  last  teach  them  to  unite,
dexterously  scattered  among  them  the  seeds  of  discord,
and  industriously  fomented  those  ancient  animosities
between  the  great  families,  which  the  spirit  of  jealousy
and  emulation,  natural  to  the  feudal  government,  had
originally  kindled  and  still  kept  alive.  To  accomplish
this,  all  the  arts  of  intrigue,  all  the  mysteries  and  refine-
ments of  his  fraudulent  policy  were  employed,  and  with

SECT.  IL  99

such  success,  that  at  a  juncture  which  required  the  most
strenuous  efforts,  as  well  as  the  most  perfect  union,  the
nobles  never  acted,  except  during  one  short  sally  of  re-
sentment at  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  either  with
vigour  or  in  concert.

He  adds  to  As  ^e  stripped  the  nobility  of  their  privileges,
ber  ofUm  ^e  a^ded to  tf16  Power  aii(i  prerogative  of  the
standing  crown.  In  order  to  have  at  command  such  a
body  of  soldiers  as  might  be  sufficient  to  crush
any  force  that  his  disaffected  subjects  could  draw  toge-
ther, he  not  only  kept  on  foot  the  regular  troops  which
his  father  had  raised,  but,  besides  augmenting  their
number  considerably,  he  took  into  his  pay  six  thousand
Swiss,  at  that  time  the  best  disciplined  and  most  formi-
dable infantry  in  Europe."  From  the  jealousy  natural
to  tyrants,  he  confided  in  these  foreign  mercenaries,  as
the  most  devoted  instruments  of  oppression,  and  the  most
faithful  guardians  of  the  power  which  he  had  usurped.
That  they  might  be  ready  to  act  on  the  shortest  warn-
ing, he,  during  the  latter  years  of  his  reign,  kept  a  con-
siderable body  of  them  encamped  in  one  place. w
He  aug-  Great  funds  were  requisite,  not  only  to  de-
revenuesof  fray  ^e  expense  of  this  additional  establish-
the  crown.  ment,  but  to  supply  the  sums  employed  in  the
various  enterprises  which  the  restless  activity  of  his  ge-
nius prompted  him  to  undertake.  But  the  prerogative
that  his  father  had  assumed,  of  levying  taxes  without
the  concurrence  of  the  states-general,  which  he  was
careful  not  only  to  retain  but  to  extend,  enabled  him  to
provide  in  some  measure  for  the  increasing  charges  of
government.

His  ad-  What  his  prerogative,  enlarged  as  it  was,
managing  could  not  furnish,  his  address  procured.  He
the  assem-  was  fae  £rst  mOnarch  in  Europe  who  discovered

bly  ot  A

states. the  method  of  managing  those  great  assemblies,

u  Mem.  de  Comines,  torn.  i.  367.  Dan.  Hist,  de  la  Millice  Fran9oise,  tom.i.  182.
w  Mem.  de  Com.  torn.  i.  381.

H  2

100  STATE OF EUROPE.

in  which  the  feudal  policy  had  vested  the  power  of
granting  subsidies  and  of  imposing  taxes.  He  first
taught  other  princes  the  fatal  art  of  beginning  their  at-
tack on  public  liberty,  by  corrupting  the  source  from
which  it  should  flow.  By  exerting  all  his  power  and
address  in  influencing  the  election  of  representatives,
by  bribing  or  overawing  the  members,  and  by  various
changes  which  he  artfully  made  in  the  form  of  their
deliberations,  Louis  acquired  such  entire  direction  of
these  assemblies,  that,  from  being  the  vigilant  guardians
of  the  privileges  and  property  of  the  people,  he  ren-
dered them  tamely  subservient  towards  promoting  the
most  odious  measures  of  his  reign.*  As  no  power  re-
mained to  set  bounds  to  his  exactions,  he  not  only  con-
tinued all  the  taxes  imposed  by  his  father,  but  he  made
great  additions  to  them,  which  amounted  to  a  sum  that
appeared  astonishing  to  his  contemporaries.1*
He  en-  ^or  was  ^  the  power  alone  or  wealth  of  the

largesthe  crown  that  Louis  increased:  he  extended  its

bounds  of  ...  ...  .

the  French  territories  by  acquisitions  01  various  kinds.  He
rc  y*  got  possession  of  Rousillon  by  purchase  ;  Pro-
vence was  conveyed  to  him  by  the  will  of  Charles  de
Anjou  ;  and  upon  the  death  of  Charles  the  Bold,  he
seized,  with  a  strong  hand,  Burgundy  and  Artois,  which
had  belonged  to  that  prince.  Thus,  during  the  course
of  a  single  reign,  France  was  formed  into  one  compact
kingdom,  and  the  steady  unrelenting  policy  of  Louis
XL  not  only  subdued  the  haughty  spirit  of  the  feudal
nobles,  but  established  a  species  of  government,  scarcely
less  absolute,  or  less  terrible  than  eastern  despotism.
By  aii  But  fatal  as  his  administration  was  to  the

Frenechhgo-liberties  of  his  subjects,  the  authority  which  he
acquired,  the  resources  of  which  he  became

*  Mem.  de  Corain.  torn.  i.  136. Chro.  Scandal,  ibid.  torn.  ii.  p.  71.

y  Mem.  de  Com.  torn.  i.  334.

Charles  VII.  levied  taxes  to  the  amount  of  1,800,000  francs  ;  Louis  XI.  raised
4,700,000.  The  former  had  in  pay  9000  cavalry  and  16,000  infantry.  The  latter
augmented  the  cavalry  to  15,000,  and  the  infantry  to  25,000.  Mem.  de  Comines,
!•  384.

SECT.  II.  101

rendered master,  and  his  freedom  from  restraint  in  con-

certmg  I1*8  plans>  as  well  as  in  executing  them,
enterpris-  rendered  his  reign  active  and  enterprising.

Louis  negotiated  in  all  the  courts  of  Europe;  he
observed  the  motions  of  all  his  neighbours  ;  he  engaged,
either  as  principal,  or  as  an  auxiliary,  in  every  great
transaction  ;  his  resolutions  were  prompt,  his  operations
vigorous  ;  and,  upon  every  emergence,  he  could  call
forth  into  action  the  whole  force  of  his  kingdom.  From
the  era  of  his  reign,  the  kings  of  France,  no  longer
fettered  and  circumscribed  at  home  by  a  jealous  no-
bility, have  exerted  themselves  more  abroad,  have
formed  more  extensive  schemes  of  foreign  conquests,
and  have  carried  on  war  with  a  spirit  and  vigour  long
unknown  in  Europe.

The  example  which  Louis  set  was  too  inviting
taken  to-  not  to  be  imitated  by  other  princes.  Henry
tendingXtheVII.,  as  soon  as  he  was  seated  on  the  throne  of
SiTcircwn  England,  formed  the  plan  of  enlarging  his  own
in  Eng-  prerogative,  by  breaking  the  power  of  the  no-

bility. The  circumstances  under  which  he  un-
dertook to  execute  it  were  less  favourable  than  those
which  induced  Charles  VII.  to  make  the  same  attempt  ;
and  the  spirit  with  which  he  conducted  it  was  very  dif-
ferent from  that  of  Louis  XI.  Charles,  by  the  success
of  his  arms,  against  the  English,  by  the  merit  of  having
expelled  them  out  of  so  many  provinces,  had  established
himself  so  firmly  in  the  confidence  of  his  people,  as
encouraged  him  to  make  bold  encroachments  on  the
ancient  constitution.  The  daring  genius  of  Louis
broke  through  every  barrier,  and  endeavoured  to  sur-
mount or  to  remove  every  obstacle  that  stood  in  his
way.  But  Henry  held  the  sceptre  by  a  disputed  title  ;
a  popular  faction  was  ready,  every  moment,  to  take
arms  against  him  ;  and  after  long  civil  wars,  during
which  the  nobility  had  often  displayed  their  power  in
creating  arid  deposing  kings,  he  felt  that  the  regal  au-

102  STATE OF  EUROPE.

thority  had  been  so  much  relaxed,  and  that  he  entered
into  possession  of  a  prerogative  so  much  abridged,  as
rendered  it  necessary  to  carry  on  his  measures  delibe-
rately, and  without  any  violent  exertion.  He  endea-
voured to  undermine  that  formidable  structure,  which
he  durst  not  attack  by  open  force.  His  schemes,
though  cautious  and  slow  in  their  operation,  were  well
concerted,  and  productive  in  the  end  of  great  effects.
By  his  laws,  permitting  the  barons  to  break  the  entails
of  their  estates,  and  expose  them  to  sale ;  by  his  regu-
lations to  prevent  the  nobility  from  keeping  in  their
service  those  numerous  bands  of  retainers,  which  ren-
dered them  formidable  and  turbulent ;  by  favouring  the
rising  power  of  the  commons ;  by  encouraging  popu-
lation, agriculture,  and  commerce ;  by  securing  to  his
subjects,  during  a  long  reign,  the  enjoyment  of  the
blessings  which  flow  from  the  arts  of  peace ;  by  accus-
toming them  to  an  administration  of  government,  under
which  the  laws  were  executed  with  steadiness  and
vigour;  he  made  imperceptibly  considerable  alterations
in  the  English  constitution,  and  transmitted  to  his  suc-
cessor authority  so  extensive,  as  rendered  him  one  of
the  most  absolute  monarchs  in  Europe,  and  capable  of
the  greatest  and  most  vigorous,  efforts.
And  m  In  Spain,  the  union  of  all  its  crowns  by  the
Spain'  marriage  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella ;  the  glory
that  they  acquired  by  the  conquest  of  Granada,  which
brought  the  odious  dominion  of  the  Moors  to  a  period  ;
the  command  of  the  great  armies  which  it  had  been
necessary  to  keep  long  on  foot,  in  order  to  accomplish
this ;  the  wisdom  and  steadiness  of  their  administra-
tion ;  and  the  address  with  which  they  availed  them-
selves of  every  incident  that  occurred  to  humble  the
nobility,  and  to  extend  their  own  prerogative,  conspired
in  raising  these  monarchs  to  such  eminence  and  au-
thority, as  none  of  their  predecessors  had  ever  enjoyed.
Though  several  causes,  which  shall  be  explained  in  an-

SECT.  II.

103

Events

other  place,  prevented  their  attaining  the  same  powers
with  the  kings  of  France  and  England,  and  preserved
the  feudal  constitution  longer  entire  in  Spain,  their
great  abilities  supplied  the  defects  of  their  prerogative,
and  improved,  with  such  dexterity,  all  the  advantages
which  they  possessed,  that  Ferdinand  carried  on  his
foreign  operations,  which  were  very  extensive,  with  ex-
traordinary vigour  and  eifect.

While  these  princes  were  thus  enlarging  the
boundaries  of  prerogative,  and  taking  such  steps
called  the  towards  rendering  their  kingdom  capable  of
acting  with  union  and  force,  events  occurred
which  called  them  forth  to  exert  the  new  powers
wk*ch  thev  had  acquired.  These  engaged
them  in  such  a  series  of  enterprises  and  nego-
tiations, that  the  affairs  of  all  the  considerable
nations  in  Europe  came  to  be  insensibly  interwoven
with  each  other  ;  and  a  great  political  system  was  gra-
dually formed,  which  grew  to  be  an  object  of  universal
attention.

The  first  The  first  event  which  merits  notice,  on  ac-
of  these  C0unt  of  its  influence  in  producing  this  change

events  was  m  r  ° t  °

the  mar-  in  the  state  of  Europe,  was  the  marriage  of  the
heigres°s  of6  daughter  of  Charles  the  Bold,  the  sole  heiress

had  ac-

of  the  house  of  Burgundy.  For  some  years
gundy,  before  her  father's  death,  she  had  been  consi-
dered as  the  apparent  successor  to  his  territories,  and
Charles  had  made  proposals  of  marrying  her  to  several
different  princes,  with  a  view  of  alluring  them,  by  that
offer,  to  favour  the  schemes  which  his  restless  ambition
was  continually  forming.

This  rendered  the  alliance  with  her  an  ob-
general  attention  ;  and  all  the  advan-
the  state  of  tages  of  acquiring  possession  of  her  territories,

the  most  opulent  at  that  time,  and  the  best  cul-
tivated of  any  on  this  side  of  the  Alps,  were  perfectly
understood.  As  soon,  then,  as  the  untimely  death  of

of  thTto  Ject

104  STATE OF EUROPE.

A.D.  1477.  Charles  opened  the'  succession,  the  eyes  of  all  the
Januarys.  princes  in  Europe  were  turned  towards  Mary,
and  they  felt  themselves  deeply  interested  in  the  choice
which  she  was  about  to  make  of  the  person  on  whom
she  would  bestow  that  rich  inheritance.
Views  of  Louis  XL,  from  whose  kingdom  several  of
with'r*1"  ^e  Provinces  which  she  possessed  had  been
spect  to  it.  dismembered,  and  whose  dominions  stretched
along  the  frontier  of  her  territories,  had  every  induce-
ment to  court  her  alliance.  He  had,  likewise,  a  good
title  to  expect  the  favourable  reception  of  any  reasonable
proposition  he  should  make,  with  respect  to  the  dis-
posal of  a  princess,  who  was  the  vassal  of  his  crown,
and  descended  from  the  royal  blood  of  France.  There
were  only  two  propositions,  however,  which  he  could
make  with  propriety.  The  one  was  the  marriage  of
the  dauphin,  the  other  that  of  the  count  Angouleme,  a
prince  of  the  blood,  with  the  heiress  of  Burgundy.  By
the  former,  he  would  have  annexed  all  her  territories  to
his  crown,  and  have  rendered  France  at  once  the  most
respectable  monarchy  in  Europe.  But  the  great  dis-
parity of  age  between  the  two  parties,  Mary  being
twenty,  and  the  dauphin  only  eight  years  old;  the
avowed  resolution  of  the  Flemings,  not  to  choose  a
master  possessed  of  such  power  as  might  enable  him  to
form  schemes  dangerous  to  their  liberties;  together
with  their  dread  of  falling  under  the  odious  and  op-
pressive government  of  Louis,  were  obstacles  in  the
way  of  executing  this  plan,  which  it  was  vain  to  think
of  surmounting.  By  the  latter,  the  accomplishment  of
which  might  have  been  attained  with  ease,  Mary  having
discovered  some  inclination  to  a  match  with  the  count
of  Angouleme,2  Louis  would  have  prevented  the  domi-
nions of  the  house  of  Burgundy  from  being  conveyed
to  a  rival  power,  and  in  return  for  such  a  splendid  esta-
blishment for  the  count  of  Angouleme,  he  must  have

z  Mem.  de  Comities,  i.  358.

SECT.  .II.

105

obtained,  or  would  have  extorted  from  him,  conces-
sions highly  beneficial  to  the  crown  of  France.  But
Louis  had  been  accustomed  so  long  to  the  intricacies
of  a  crooked  and  insidious  policy,  that  he  could  not
be  satisfied  with  what  was  obvious  and  simple ;  and
was  so  fond  of  artifice  and  refinement,  that  he  came  to
consider  these  rather  as  an  ultimate  object,  than  merely
as  the  means  of  conducting  affairs.  From  this  princi-
ple, no  less  than  from  his  unwillingness  to  aggrandize
any  of  his  own  subjects,  or  from  his  desire  of  oppress-
ing the  house  of  Burgundy,  which  he  hated,  he  neg-
lected the  course  which  a  prince,  less  able  and  artful,
would  have  taken,  and  followed  one  more  suited  to  his
own  genius.

The  singu-  He  proposed  to  render  himself,  by  force  of
whichUhee  arms>  master  of  those  provinces  which  Mary
followed,  held  of  the  crown  of  France,  and  even  to  push
his  conquests  into  her  other  territories,  while  he  amused
her  with  insisting  continually  on  the  impracticable
match  with  the  dauphin.  In  prosecuting  this  plan,  he
displayed  wonderful  talents  and  industry,  and  exhibited
such  scenes  of  treachery,  falsehood,  and  cruelty,  as  are
amazing  even  in  the  history  of  Louis  XI.  Immediately
upon  the  death  of  Charles,  he  put  his  troops  in  motion,
and  advanced  towards  the  Netherlands.  He  corrupted
the  leading  men  in  the  provinces  of  Burgundy  and  Ar-
tois,  and  seduced  them  to  desert  their  sovereign.  He
got  admission  into  some  of  the  frontier  towns,  by  bribing
the  governors ;  the  gates  of  others  were  opened  to  him
in  consequence  of  his  intrigues  with  the  inhabitants.
He  negotiated  with  Mary ;  and,  in  order  to  render  her
odious  to  her  subjects,  he  betrayed  to  them  her  most
important  secrets.  He  carried  on  a  private  correspond-
ence with  the  two  ministers  whom  she  chiefly  trusted,
and  then  communicated  the  letters  which  he  had  re-
ceived from  them  to  the  states  of  Flanders,  who,  enraged
at  their  perfidy,  brought  them  immediately  to  trial,  tor-

106  STATE OF EUROPE.

tured  them  with  extreme  cruelty,  and,  unmoved  by  the
tears  and  entreaties  of  their  sovereign,  who  knew  and
approved  of  all  that  the  ministers  had  done,  they  be-
headed them  in  her  presence.*

The  effect  While  Louis,  by  this  conduct,  unworthy  of  a
great  monarch,  was  securing  the  possession  of
Burgundy,  Artois,  and  the  towns  on  the  Somme,
the  heiress  the  states  of  Flanders  carried  on  a  negotiation
dy,AjD.n~  with  the  emperor  Frederic  III.,  and  concluded
a  treaty  of  marriage  between  their  sovereign
and  his  son,  Maximilian,  archduke  of  Austria.  The
illustrious  birth  of  that  prince,  as  well  as  the  high  dig-
nity of  which  he  had  the  prospect,  rendered  the  alliance
honourable  for  Mary,  while,  from  the  distance  of  his
hereditary  territories,  and  the  scantiness  of  his  revenues,
his  power  was  so  inconsiderable,  as  did  not  excite  the
jealousy  or  fear  of  the  Flemings.

Thus  Louis,  by  the  caprice  of  his  temper,
the  ^^  ^  exc^ss  of  his  refinements,  put  the  house
of  Austria  in  possession  of  this  noble  inheri-
tance. By  this  acquisition,  the  foundation  of
the  future  grandeur  of  Charles  V.  was  laid ;  and  he
became  master  of  those  territories  which  enabled  him
to  carry  on  his  most  formidable  and  decisive  operations
against  France.  Thus,  too,  the  same  monarch  who
first  united  the  interior  force  of  France,  and  established
it  on  such  a  footing  as  to  render  it  formidable  to  the
rest  of  Europe,  contributed,  far  contrary  to  his  inten-
tion, to  raise  up  a  rival  power,  which,  during  two  cen-
turies, ha&  thwarted  the  measures,  opposed  the  arms,
and  checked  the  progress  of  his  successors.
'Sfsidera-  The  next  event  of  consequence  in  the  fif-
bie  event  teenth  century  was  the  expedition  of  Charles

was  the  m-  -|TTTT  _  r

V1I1.  mto  Italy.  This  occasioned  revolutions
no  less  memorable;  produced  alterations,  both
*n  ^e  military  and  political  system,  which

»  Mera.  de  Combes,  liv.  v.  chap.  15.  p.  309,  &c.

SECT. II.  107

were  more  immediately  perceived;  roused  the  states
of  Europe  to  bolder  efforts;  and  blended  their  affairs
The  mo-  an(^  interests  more  closely  together.  The  mild
tives  of  administration  of  Charles,  a  weak  but  generous
prince,  seemed  to  have  revived  the  spirit  and
genius  of  the  French  nation,  which  the  rigid  despotism
of  Louis  XI.  his  father,  had  depressed,  and  almost
extinguished.  The  ardour  for  military  service,  natural
to  the  French  nobility,  returned,  and  their  young  mo-
narch was  impatient  to  distinguish  his  reign  by  some
splendid  enterprise.  While  he  was  uncertain  towards
what  quarter  he  should  turn  his  arms,  the  solicitations
and  intrigues  of  an  Italian  politician,  no  less  infamous
on  account  of  his  crimes,  than  eminent  for  his  abilities,
determined  his  choice.  Ludovico  Sforza,  having  formed
the  design  of  deposing  his  nephew  the  duke  of  Milan,
and  of  placing  himself  on  the  ducal  throne,  was  so
much  afraid  of  a  combination  of  the  Italian  powers  to
oppose  this  measure,  and  to  support  the  injured  prince,
with  whom  most  of  them  were  connected  by  blood  or
alliance,  that  he  saw  the  necessity  of  securing  the  aid
of  some  able  protector.  The  king  of  France  was  the
person  to  whom  he  applied;  and  without  disclosing
his  own  intentions,  he  laboured  to  prevail  with  him  to
march  into  Italy,  at  the  head  of  a  powerful  army,  in
order  to  seize  the  crown  of  Naples,  to  which  Charles
had  pretensions  as  heir  of  the  house  of  Anjou.  The
right  to  that  kingdom,  claimed  by  the  Anjevin  family,
had  been  conveyed  to  Louis  XL  by  Charles  of  Anjou,
count  of  Maine  and  Provence.  But  that  sagacious
monarch,  though  he  took  immediate  possession  of  those
territories  of  which  Charles  was  really  master,  totally
disregarded  his  ideal  title  to  a  kingdom,  over  which
another  prince  reigned  in  tranquillity ;  and  uniformly
declined  involving  himself  in  the  labyrinth  of  Italian
politics.  His  son,  more  adventurous,  or  more  inconsi-
derate, embarked  eagerly  in  this  enterprise;  and  con-

I
108  STATE OF EUROPE.

temning  all  the  remonstrances  of  his  most  experienced
counsellors,  prepared  to  carry  it  on  with  the  utmost
vigour.

His  re-  The  power  which  Charles  possessed  was  so
Z^te"  great,  that  he  reckoned  himself  equal  to  this
prise.  arduous  undertaking.  His  father  had  transmit-
ted to  him  such  an  ample  prerogative,  as  gave  him  the
entire  command  of  his  kingdom.  He  himself  had  added
considerably  to  the  extent  of  his  dominions,  by  his
prudent  marriage  with  the  heiress  of  Bretagne,  which
rendered  him  master  of  that  province,  the  last  of  the
great  fiefs  that  remained  to  be  annexed  to  the  crown.
He  soon  assembled  forces  which  he  thought  sufficient;
and  so  impatient  was  he  to  enter  on  his  career  as  a
conqueror,  that,  sacrificing  what  was  real  for  what  was
chimerical,  he  restored  Rousillon  to  Ferdinand,  and
gave  up  part  of  his  father's  acquisitions  in  Artois  to
Maximilian,  with  a  view  of  inducing  these  princes  not
to  molest  France,  while  he  was  carrying  on  his  opera-
tions in  Italy.
His  Pre-  But  so  different  were  the  efforts  of  the  states

°^  -^ur°Pe  m  tne  fifteenth  century,  from  those
which  we  shall  behold  in  the  course  of  this  his-
tory, that  the  army  with  which  Charles  undertook  this
great  enterprise,  did  not  exceed  twenty  thousand  men.
The  train  of  artillery,  however,  the  ammunition,  and
warlike  stores  of  every  kind  provided  for  its  use,  were
so  considerable,  as  to  bear  some  resemblance  to  the
immense  apparatus  of  modern  war.b

When  the  French  entered  Italy,  they  met

Its  success.  J  7  J

with  nothing  able  to  resist  them.  The  Italian
powers  having  remained,  during  a  long  period,  undis-
turbed by  the  invasion  of  any  foreign  enemy,  had  form-
ed a  system  with  respect  to  their  affairs,  both  in  peace
and  war,  peculiar  to  themselves.  In  order  to  adjust  the
interests,  and  balance  the  power  of  the  different  states

b  Mezeray  Hist.  torn.  ii.  777.

SECT.  II.  109

into  which  Italy  was  divided,  they  were  engaged  in
perpetual  and  endless  negotiations  with  each  other,
which  they  conducted  with  all  the  subtlety  of  a  refin-
ing and  deceitful  policy.  Their  contests  in  the  field,
when  they  had  recourse  to  arms,  were  decided  in  mock
battles,  by  innocent  and  bloodless  victories.  Upon  the
first  appearance  of  the  danger  which  now  impended,
they  had  recourse  to  the  arts  which  they  had  studied,
and  employed  their  utmost  skill  in  intrigue  in  order  to
avert  it.  But  this  proving  ineffectual,  their  bands  of
effeminate  mercenaries,  the  only  military  force  that  re-
mained in  the  country,  being  fit  only  for  the  parade  of
service,  were  terrified  at  the  aspect  of  real  war,  and
shrunk  at  its  approach.  The  impetuosity  of  the  French
valour  appeared  to  them  irresistible.  Florence,  Pisa,
and  Rome,  opened  their  gates  as  the  French  army  ad-
vanced. The  prospect  of  this  dreadful  invasion  struck
one  king  of  Naples  with  such  panic  terror,  that  he  died
(if  we  may  believe  historians)  of  the  fright.  Another
abdicated  his  throne  from  the  same  pusillanimous  spi-
rit. A  third  fled  out  of  his  dominions,  as  soon  as  the
enemy  appeared  on  the  Neapolitan  frontiers.  Charles,
after  marching  thither  from  the  bottom  of  the  Alps,
with  as  much  rapidity,  and  almost  as  little  opposition,
as  if  he  had  been  on  a  progress  through  his  own  do-
minions, took  quiet  possession  of  the  throne  of  Naples,
and  intimidated  or  gave  law  to  every  power  in  Italy,
its  effects,  Such  was  the  conclusion  of  an  expedition,
FngivingTy  that  must  be  considered  as  the  first  great  exer-
lystem  con-  ^on  of  those  new  powers  which  the  princes  of
ceming  a  Europe  had  acquired,  and  now  began  to  exer-

balanceof  .  °

power.  cise.  Its  eftects  were  no  less  considerable  than
its  success  had  been  astonishing.  The  Italians,  unable
to  resist  the  impression  of  the  enemy,  who  broke  in
upon  them,  permitted  him  to  hold  on  his  course  undis-
turbed. They  quickly  perceived,  that  no  single  power,
which  they  could  rouse  to  action,  was  an  equal  match

110  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

for  a  monarch  who  ruled  over  such  extensive  territories,
and  was  at  the  head  of  such  a  martial  people  ;  but  that
a  confederacy  might  accomplish  what  the  separate
members  of  it  durst  not  attempt.  To  this  expedient,
the  only  one  that  remained  to  deliver  or  to  preserve
them  from  the  yoke,  they  had  recourse.  While  Charles
inconsiderately  wasted  his  time  at  Naples  in  festivals
and  triumphs  on  account  of  his  past  successes,  or  was
fondly  dreaming  of  future  conquests  in  the  East,  to  the
empire  of  which  he  now  aspired,  they  formed  against
him  a  powerful  combination  of  almost  all  the  Italian
states,  supported  by  the  emperor  Maximilian,  and
Ferdinand,  king  of  Aragon.  The  union  of  so  many
powers,  who  suspended  or  forgot  all  their  particular
animosities,  that  they  might  act  in  concert  against  an
enemy  who  had  become  formidable  to  them  all,  awaken-
ed Charles  from  his  thoughtless  security.  He  saw  now
no  prospect  of  safety  but  in  returning  to  France.  An
army  of  thirty  thousand  men,  assembled  by  the  allies,
was  ready  to  obstruct  his  march;  and  though  the
French,  with  a  daring  courage,  which  more  than  coun-
tervailed their  inferiority  in  number,  broke  through  that
great  body,  and  gained  a  victory,  which  opened  to  their
monarch  a  safe  passage  into  his  own  territories,  he  was
stripped  of  all  his  conquests  in  Italy  in  as  short  a  time
as  it  had  taken  to  acquire  them  ;  and  the  political  sys-
tem in  that  country  resumed  the  same  appearance  as
before  his  invasion.

This  be- The  sudden  and  decisive  effects  of  this  con-
federacy  seems  to  have  instructed  the  princes
anc*  statesmen  °f  Itaty  as  much  as  the  irruption
rst  in of  the  French  had  disconcerted  and  alarmed
'11 them. They  had  extended,  on  this  occasion,

Europe. to the affairg Qf  Europe, the maxims Qf

political  science  which  had  hitherto  been  applied  only
to  regulate  the  operations  of  the  petty  states  in  their
own  country.  They  had  discovered  the  method  of

SECT. II.  Ill

preventing  any  monarch  from  rising  to  such  a  de-
gree of  power,  as  was  inconsistent  with  the  general
liberty,  and  had  manifested  the  importance  of  attend-
ing to  that  great  secret  in  modern  policy,  the  pre-
servation of  a  proper  distribution  of  power  among  all
the  members  of  the  system  into  which  the  states  of
Europe  are  formed. During  all  the  wars  of  which
Italy  from  that  time  was  the  theatre,  and  amidst  the
hostile  operations  which  the  imprudence  of  Louis  XII.
and  the  ambition  of  Ferdinand  of  Aragon,  carried  on
in  that  country,  with  little  interruption,  from  the  close
of  the  fifteenth  century  to  that  period  at  which  the
subsequent  history  commences,  the  maintaining  a  pro-
per balance  of  power  between  the  contending  parties,
became  the  great  object  of  attention  to  the  statesmen
of  Italy. Nor  was  the  idea  confined  to  them. Self-
preservation  taught  other  powers  to  adopt  it. It  grew
to  be  fashionable  and  universal. From  this  era  we
can  trace  the  progress  of  that  intercourse  between  na-
tions which  has  linked  the  powers  of  Europe  so  closely
together,  and  can  discern  the  operations  of  that  pro-
vident policy,  which,  during  peace,  guards  against
remote  and  contingent  dangers  ;  and,  in  war,  has  pre-
vented rapid  and  destructive  conquests.
The  wars This  was  not  the  only  effect  of  the  operations
which  the  great  powers  of  Europe  carried  on  in
-  *talv' They  contributed  to  render  general  such
a  change,  as  the  French  had  begun  to  make  in
the  state  of  their  troops,  and  obliged  all  the  princes,
who  appeared  on  this  new  theatre  of  action,  to  put  the
military  force  of  their  kingdoms  on  an  establishment
similar  to  that  of  France. When  the  seat  of  war  came
to  be  remote  from  the  countries  which  maintained  the
contest,  the  service  of  the  feudal  vassals  ceased  to  be
of  any  use ;  and  the  necessity  of  employing  soldiers  re-
gularly trained  to  arms,  and  kept  in  constant  pay,  came
at  once  to  be  evident. When  Charles  VIII.  marched

112  STATE OF  EUROPE.

into  Italy,  his  cavalry  was  entirely  composed  of  those
companies  of  gendarmes,  embodied  by  Charles  VII.  and
continued  by  Louis  XI. ;  his  infantry  consisted  partly
of  Swiss,  hired  of  the  Cantons,  and  partly  of  Gascons,
armed  and  disciplined  after  the  Swiss  model.  To  these
Louis  XII.  added  a  body  of  Germans,  well  known  in
the  wars  of  Italy  by  the  name  of  Black  Bands.  But
neither  of  these  monarchs  made  any  account  of  the
feudal  militia,  or  ever  had  recourse  to  that  military
force,  which  they  might  have  commanded,  in  virtue  of
the  ancient  institutions  in  their  kingdom.  Maximilian
and  Ferdinand,  as  soon  as  they  began  to  act  in  Italy,
employed  similar  instruments,  and  trusted  the  execu-
tion of  their  plans  entirely  to  mercenary  troops.
Teach  the  This  innovation  in  the  military  system  was
the^rr8  cpickty  followed  by  another,  which  the  custom
rior  im-  of  employing  Swiss  in  the  Italian  wars  was  the
ofinfantry occasion  of  introducing.  The  arms  and  dis-
m  war.  ciplme  of  the  Swiss  were  different  from  those
of  the  other  European  nations.  During  their  long  and
violent  struggles  in  defence  of  their  liberties  against
the  house  of  Austria,  whose  armies,  like  those  of  other
considerable  princes,  consisted  chiefly  of  heavy-armed
cavalry,  the  Swiss  found  that  their  poverty,  and  the
small  number  of  gentlemen  residing  in  their  country,
at  that  time  barren  and  ill-cultivated,  put  it  out  of  their
power  to  bring  into  the  field  any  body  of  horse  capable
of  facing  the  enemy.  Necessity  compelled  them  to
place  all  their  confidence  in  infantry  ;  and  in  order  to
render  it  capable  of  withstanding  the  shock  of  cavalry,
they  gave  the  soldiers  breast-plates  and  helmets  as  de-
fensive armour;  together  with  long  spears,  halberts,
and  heavy  swords,  as  weapons  of  offence.  They  formed
them  into  large  battalions,  ranged  in  deep  and  close
array,  so  that  they  could  present  on  every  side  a  for-
midable front  to  the  enemy .c  The  men  at  arms  could

c  Machiavel's  Art  of  War,  b.  ii.  chap.  ii.  p.  451.

SECT.  II.  113

make  no  impression  on  the  solid  strength  of  such  a
body.  It  repulsed  the  Austrians  in  all  their  attempts
to  conquer  Switzerland.  It  broke  the  Burgundian
gendarmerie,  which  was  scarcely  inferior  to  that  of
France,  either  in  number  or  reputation ;  and  when  first
called  to  act  in  Italy,  it  bore  down,  by  its  irresistible
force,  every  enemy  that  attempted  to  oppose  it.  These
repeated  proofs  of  the  decisive  effect  of  infantry,  ex-
hibited on  such  conspicuous  occasions,  restored  that
service  to  reputation,  and  gradually  re-established  the
opinion,  which- had  been  long  exploded,  of  its  superior
importance  in  the  operations  of  war.  But  the  glory
which  the  Swiss  had  acquired,  having  inspired  them
with  such  high  ideas  of  their  own  prowess  and  con-
sequence as  frequently  rendered  them  mutinous  and
insolent,  the  princes  who  employed  them  became
weary  of  depending  on  the  caprice  of  foreign  merce-
naries, and  began  to  turn  their  attention  towards  the
improvement  of  their  national  infantry.
National  The  German  powers  having  the  command
infa"f.ry  .  of  men,  whom  nature  had  endowed  with  that

established

in  Ger-  steady  courage  and  persevering  strength  which
forms  them  to  be  soldiers,  soon  modelled  their
troops  in  such  a  manner,  that  they  vied  with  the  Swiss
both  in  discipline  and  valour.

The  French  monarchs,  though  more  slowly,
and  with  greater  difficulty,  accustomed  the  im-
petuous spirit  of  their  people  to  subordination  and  dis-
cipline ;  and  were  at  such  pains  to  render  their  national
infantry  respectable,  that  as  early  as  the  reign  of  Louis
XII.,  several  gentlemen  of  high  rank  had  so  far  aban-
doned their  ancient  ideas,  as  to  condescend  to  enter
into  that  service/

The  Spaniards,  whose  situation  made  it  dif-
ficult to  employ  any  other  than  their  national
troops  in  the  southern  parts  of  Italy,  which  was  the

d  Branlomc,  torn.  x.  p.  18. Mem.  de  Fleuranges,  143.
VOL.  III.  I

114  STATE OF EUROPE.

chief  scene  of  their  operations  in  that  country,  not  only
adopted  the  Swiss  discipline,  but  improved  upon  it,  by
mingling  a  proper  number  of  soldiers,  armed  with  heavy
muskets,  in  their  battalions;  and  thus  formed  that
famous  body  of  infantry,  which,  during  a  century  and
a  half,  was  the  admiration  and  terror  of  all  Europe.
The  Italian  states  gradually  diminished  the  number  of
their  cavalry,  and,  in  imitation  of  their  more  powerful
neighbours,  brought  the  strength  of  their  armies  to
consist  in  foot  soldiers.  From  this  period  the  nations
of  Europe  have  carried  on  war  with  forces  more  adapted
to  every  species  of  service,  more  capable  of  acting  in
every  country,  and  better  fitted  both  for  making  con-
quests, and  for  preserving  them.

The  Italian As their efforts in Itaty led ^e Pe°ple of

wars  occa-  Europe  to  these  improvements  in  the  art  of  war,

sionanm-  A  _  .  .,  « ,

crease  of  they  gave  them  likewise  the  first  idea  ot  the
revenues10  expense  with  which  it  is  accompanied,  when
in  Europe- extensive  or  of  long  continuance,  and  accus-
tomed every  nation  to  the  burden  of  such  impositions
as  are  necessary  for  supporting  it.  While  the  feudal
policy  subsisted  in  full  vigour,  while  armies  were  com-
posed of  military  vassals,  called  forth  to  attack  some
neighbouring  power,  and  to  perform,  in  a  short  cam-
paign, the  services  which  they  owed  to  their  sovereign,
the  expense  of  war  was  extremely  moderate.  A  small
subsidy  enabled  a  prince  to  begin  and  to  finish  his
greatest  military  operations.  But  when  Italy  became
the  theatre  on  which  the  powers  of  Europe  contended
for  superiority,  the  preparations  requisite  for  such  a
distant  expedition,  the  pay  of  armies  kept  constantly
on  foot,  their  subsistence  in  a  foreign  country,  the  sieges
to  be  undertaken,  and  the  towns  to  be  defended,  swelled
the  cha'rges  of  war  immensely,  and,  by  creating  de-
mands unknown  in  less  active  times,  multiplied  taxes
in  every  kingdom.  The  progress  of  ambition,  however,
was  so  rapid,  and  princes  extended  their  operations  so

SECT.  If.  115

fast,  that  it  was  impossible  at  first  to  establish  funds
proportional  to  the  increase  of  expense  which  these
occasioned.  When  Charles  VIII.  invaded  Naples,  the
sums  requisite  for  carrying  on  that  enterprise  so  far
exceeded  those  which  France  had  been  accustomed  to
contribute  for  the  support  of  government,  that  before
he  reached  the  frontiers  of  Italy,  his  treasury  was  ex-
hausted, and  the  domestic  resources,  of  which  his  exten*
sive  prerogative  gave  him  the  command,  were  at  an
end.  As  he  durst  not  venture  to  lay  any  new  impo-
sition on  his  people,  oppressed  already  with  the  weight
of  unusual  burdens,  the  only  expedient  that  remained
was,  to  borrow  of  the  Genoese  as  much  money  as  might
enable  him  to  continue  his  march.  But  he  could  not
obtain  a  sufficient  sum,  without  consenting  to  pay  an-
nually the  exorbitant  interest  of  forty-two  livres  for
every  hundred  that  he  received.6  We  may  observe  the
same  disproportion  between  the  efforts  and  revenues
of  other  princes,  his  contemporaries.  From  this  period,
taxes  went  on  increasing;  and  during  the  reign  of
Charles  V.  such  sums  were  levied  in  every  state,  as
would  have  appeared  enormous  at  the  close  of  the  fif-
teenth century,  and  gradually  prepared  the  way  for  the
still  more  exorbitant  exactions  of  modern  times.
The  league  The  last  transaction,  previous  to  the  reign  of
Charles  V.,  that  merits  attention  on  account  of

0OTtantoc-  *ts  infiuence  upon  the  state  of  Europe,  is  the
currence.  league  of  Cambray.  To  humble  the  republic
of  Venice,  and  to  divide  its  territories,  was  the  object
of  all  the  powers  who  united  in  this  confederacy.  The
civil  constitution  of  Venice,  established  on  a  firm  basis,
had  suffered  no  considerable  alteration  for  several  cen-
turies ;  during  which,  the  senate  conducted  its  affairs
by  maxims  of  policy  no  less  prudent  than  vigorous,  and
adhered  to  these  with  a  uniform  consistent  spirit,  which
gave  that  commonwealth  great  advantage  over  other

*  Mem.  de  Comines,  lib.  vii.  c.  5.  p.  440.

i  2

116  STATE OF  EUROPE.

states,  whose  views  and  measures  changed  as  often  as
the  form  of  their  government,  or  the  persons  who  ad-
ministered it.  By  these  unintermitted  exertions  of  wis-
dom and  valour,  the  Venetians  enlarged  the  dominions
of  their  commonwealth,  until  it  became  the  most  consi-
derable power  in  Italy ;  while  their  extensive  commerce,
the  useful  and  curious  manufactures  which  they  carried
on,  together  with  the  large  share  which  they  had  ac-
quired of  the  lucrative  commerce  with  the  East,  rendered
Venice  the  most  opulent  state  in  Europe.
The  mo-  The  power  of  the  Venetians  was  the  object  of
tives  of  it.  terror  to  theij.  Italian  neighbours.  Their  wealth
was  viewed  with  envy  by  the  greatest  monarchs,  who
could  not  vie  with  many  of  their  private  citizens  in  the
magnificence  of  their  buildings,  in  the  richness  of  their
dress  and  furniture,  or  in  splendour  and  elegance  of
living/  Julius  II.,  whose  ambition  was  superior,  and
his  abilities  equal,  to  those  of  any  pontiifwho  ever  sat
on  the  papal  throne,  conceived  the  idea  of  this  league
against  the  Venetians,  and  endeavoured,  by  applying  to
those  passions  which  I  have  mentioned,  to  persuade
other  princes  to  join  in  it.  By  working  upon  the  fears
of  the  Italian  powers,  and  upon  the  avarice  of  several
monarchs  beyond  the  Alps,  he.  induced  them,  in  con-
currence with  other  causes,  which  it  is  not  my  province
tp  explain,  to  form  one  of  the  most  powerful  confede-
racies that  Europe  had  ever  beheld,  against  those
haughty  republicans.

The  rapid  The  emperor,  the  king  of  France,  the  king
fheSe0/  of  Aragon,  the  pope,  were  principals  in  the
derates,  league  of  Cambray,  to  which  almost  all  the
princes  of  Italy  acceded,  the  least  considerable  of  them
hoping  for  some  share  in  the  spoils  of  a  state  which
they  deemed  to  be  now  devoted  to  destruction.  The
Venetians  might  have  diverted  this  storm,  or  have
broken  its  force ;  but  with  a  presumptuous  rashness,  to

f  Heliani  Oratio  apud  Goldastam  in  Polit.  Imperial,  p.  980.

SECT.  II.  117

which  there  is  nothing  similar  in  the  course  of  their  his-
tory, they  waited  its  approach.  The  impetuous  valour
of  the  French  rendered  ineffectual  all  their  precautions
for  the  safety  of  the  republic ;  and  the  fatal  battle  of
Ghiarraddada  entirely  ruined  the  army  on  which  they
relied  for  defence.  Julius  seized  all  the  towns  which
they  held  in  the  ecclesiastical  territories.  Ferdinand  re-
annexed  the  towns  of  which  they  had  got  possession  on
the  coast  of  Calabria,  to  his  Neapolitan  dominions.
Maximilian,  at  the  head  of  a  powerful  army,  advanced
towards  Venice  on  the  one  side.  The  French  pushed
their  conquests  on  the  other.  The  Venetians,  surrounded
by  so  many  enemies,  and  left  without  one  ally,  sunk  from
the  height  of  presumption  to  the  depth  of  despair ;  aban-
doned all  their  territories  on  the  continent,  and  shut
themselves  up  in  their  capital,  as  their  last  refuge,  and
the  only  place  which  they  hoped  to  preserve.
Division  This  rapid  success,  however,  proved  fatal  to
am'ong  ^e  confederacy.  The  members  of  'it,  whose
them.  union  continued  while  they  were  engaged  in
seizing  their  prey,  began  to  feel  their  ancient  jealousies
and  animosities  revive,  as  soon  as  they  had  a  prospect  of
dividing  it.  When  the  Venetians  observed  these  symp-
toms of  distrust  and  alienation,  a  ray  of  hope  broke  in
upon  them  ;  the  spirit  natural  to  their  councils  returned ;
they  resumed  such  wisdom  and  firmness,  as  made  some
atonement  for  their  former  imprudence  and  dejection ;
they  recovered  part  of  the  territory  which  they  had  lost ;
they  appeased  the  pope  and  Ferdinand  by  well-timed
concessions  in  their  favour ;  and  at  length  dissolved  the
confederacy,  which  had  brought  their  commonwealth
to  the  brink  of  ruin.

Newob- Julius,  elated  with  beholding  the  effects  of  a
jects  of league  which  he  himself  had  planned,  and  ima-

their  po- . ?  r  '

licy  and gming  that  nothing  was  too  arduous  for  him  to

undertake,  conceived  the  idea  of  expelling  every

foreign  power  out  of  Italy,  and  bent  all  the  force  of  his

118  STATE OF EUROPE.

mind  towards  executing  a  scheme  so  well  suited  to  his
enterprising  genius.  He  directed  his  first  attack  against
the  French,  who,  on  many  accounts,  were  more  odious
to  the  Italians  than  any  of  the  foreigners  who  had  ac-
quired dominion  in  their  country.  By  his  activity  and
address,  he  prevailed  on  most  of  the  powers,  who  had
joined  in  the  league  of  Cambray,  to  turn  their  arms
against  the  king  of  France,  their  former  ally  ;  and  en-
gaged Henry  VIII.,  who  had  lately  ascended  the  throne
of  England,  to  favour  their  operations,  by  invading
France.  Louis.  XII.  resisted  all  the  efforts  of  this  for-
midable and  unexpected  confederacy  with  undaunted
fortitude.  Hostilities  were  carried  on,  during  several
campaigns,  in  Italy,  on  the  frontiers  of  Spain,  and  in
Picardy,  with  alternate  success.  Exhausted,  at  length,
by  the  variety  as  well  as  extent  of  his  operations ;  un-
able to  withstand  a  confederacy  which  brought  against
him  superior  force,  conducted  with  wisdom  and  acting
with  perseverance,  Louis  found  it  necessary  to  conclude
separate  treaties  of  peace  with  his  enemies ;  and  the  war
terminated  with  the  loss  of  every  thing  which  the  French
had  acquired  in  Italy,  except  the  castle  of  Milan,  and  a
few  inconsiderable  towns  in  that  duchy.
By  this  the  The  various  negotiations  carried  on  during

this  busy  period,  and  the  different  combinations
n-  f°rmed  among  powers  hitherto  little  connected
creases.  with  each  other,  greatly  increased  that  inter-
course among  the  nations  of  Europe,  which  I  have  men-
tioned as  one  effect  of  the  events  in  the  fifteenth  century ;
while  the  greatness  of  the  objects  at  which  different  na-
tions aimed,  the  distant  exhibitions  which  they  under-
took, as  well  as  the  length  and  obstinacy  of  the  contest
in  which  they  engaged,  obliged  them  to  exert  them-
selves with  a  vigour  and  perseverance  unknown  in  the
preceding  ages.

Those  active  scenes  which  the  following  his-

tory  will  exhibit,  as  well  as  the  variety  and  im-

SECT. II.  119

for  the portance  of  those  transactions  which  distinguish

transac- *  .

tbns  of  the  the  period  to  which  it  extends,  are  not  to  be  as-
century.  cribed  solely  to  the  ambition,  to  the  abilities,
or  to  the  rivalship  of  Charles  V.  and  Francis  I.  The
kingdom  of  Europe  had  arrived  at  such  a  degree  of  im-
provement in  the  internal  administration  of  government,
and  princes  had  acquired  such  command  of  the  national
force  which  was  to  be  exerted  in  foreign  wars,  that  they
were  in  a  condition  to  enlarge  the  sphere  of  their  opera-
tions, to  multiply  their  claims  and  pretensions,  and  to
increase  the  vigour  of  their  efforts.  Accordingly  the
sixteenth  century  opened  with  the  certain  prospect  of
its  abounding  in  great  and  interesting  events.

A

VIEW

or

THE  PROGRESS  OF  SOCIETY

IN

EUROPE,

FROM

THE  SUBVERSION  OF  THE  ROMAN  EMPIRE

TO THE

BEGINNING  OF  THE  SIXTEENTH  CENTURY.

SECT.  III.

View  of  the  Political  Constitution  of  the  principal  States
in  Europe,  at  the  Commencement  of  the  Sixteenth
Century.

A  consi- HAVING  thus  enumerated  the  principal  causes

derable  va-  .  /> i  • i

riety  in  the  and  events,  the  influence  of  which  was  felt  in
oTthe  dif°n  every  part  of  Europe,  and  contributed  either  to

improve  internal  order  and  police  in  its  various
Europe,  states,  or  to  enlarge  the  sphere  of  their  activity,
by  giving  them  more  entire  command  of  the  force  with
which  foreign  operations  are  carried  on  ;  nothing  far-
ther seems  requisite  for  preparing  my  readers  to  enter,
with  full  information,  upon  perusing  the  History  of
Charles  V.,  but  to  give  a  view  of  the  political  consti-
tution and  form  of  civil  government  in  each  of  the
nations  which  acted  any  considerable  part  during  that
period.  For  as  the  institutions  and  events  which  I  have
endeavoured  to  illustrate,  formed  the  people  of  Europe
to  resemble  each  other,  and  conducted  them  from  bar-
barism to  refinement,  in  the  same  path,  and  by  nearly

SECT. III.  121

equal  steps ;  there  were  other  circumstances  which  oc-
casioned a  difference  in  their  political  establishments,
and  gave  rise  to  those  peculiar  modes  of  government,
which  have  produced  such  variety  in  the  character  and
genius  of  nations.

Necessary  ^  *s  no  less'  necessary  to  become  acquainted
to  explain  wjth  the  latter,  than  to  have  contemplated  the

the  state  of

each  when  former.  Without  a  distinct  knowledge  of  the
be^his*  peculiar  form  and  genius  of  civil  government  in
reisn-  each  state,  a  great  part  of  its  transactions  must
appear  altogether  mysterious  and  inexplicable.  The
historians  of  particular  countries,  as  they  seldom  ex-
tended their  views  farther  than  to  the  amusement  or
instruction  of  their  fellow-citizens,  by  whom  they  might
presume  that  all  their  domestic  customs  and  institutions
were  perfectly  understood,  have  often  neglected  to  de-
scend into  such  details  with  respect  to  these,  as  are  suf-
ficient to  convey  to  foreigners  full  light  and  information
concerning  the  occurrences  which  they  relate.  But  a
history,  which  comprehends  the  transactions  of  so  many
different  countries,  would  be  extremely  imperfect,  with-
out a  previous  survey  of  the  constitution  and  political
state  of  each.  It  is  from  his  knowledge  of  these,  that
the  reader  must  draw  those  principles,  which  will  enable
him  to  judge  with  discernment,  and  to  decide  with  cer-
tainty, concerning  the  conduct  of  nations.

A  minute  detail,  however,  of  the  peculiar  forms  and
regulations  in  every  country,  would  lead  to  deductions
of  immeasurable  length.  To  sketch  out  the  great  lines
which  distinguish  and  characterize  each  government,
is  all  that  the  nature  of  my  present  work  will  admit  of,
and  all  that  is  necessary  to  illustrate  the  events  which
it  records.

The  state  At  the  opening  of  the  sixteenth  century,  the
of  Italy,  political  aspect  of  Italy  was  extremely  different
from  that  of  any  other  part  of  Europe.  Instead  of  those
extensive  monarchies,  which  occupied  the  rest  of  the
continent,  that  delightful  country  was  parcelled  out

122  STATE OF EUROPE.

among  many  small  states,  each  of  which  possessed
sovereign  and  independent  jurisdiction.  The  only
monarchy  in  Italy  was  that  of  Naples.  The  dominion
of  the  popes  was  of  a  peculiar  species,  to  which  there
is  nothing  similar  either  in  ancient  or  modern  times.
In  Venice,  Florence,  and  Genoa,  a  republican  form  of
government  was  established.  Milan  was  subject  to
sovereigns,  who  had  assumed  no  higher  title  than  that
of  dukes.

The  papal  The  pope  was  the  first  of  these  powers  in
hi!hS  ine  Dignity,  an^  not  the  least  considerable  by  the
Europe,  extent  of  his  territories.  In  the  primitive  church,
the  jurisdiction  of  bishops  was  equal  and  co-ordinate.
They  derived,  perhaps,  some  degree  of  consideration
from  the  dignity  of  the  see  in  which  they  presided.
They  possessed,  however,  no  real  authority  or  pre-
eminence, but  what  they  acquired  by  superior  abilities,
origin  and  or  superior  sanctity.  As  Rome  had  so  long
the^Tlf  been  tne  seat  °f  empire,  and  the  capital  of  the
power.  world,  its  bishops  were,  on  that  account,  enti-
tled to  respect ;  they  received  it ;  but,  during  several
ages,  they  received,  and  even  claimed,  nothing  more.
From  these  humble  beginnings,  they  advanced  with
such  adventurous  and  well-directed  ambition,  that  they
established  a  spiritual  dominion  over  the  minds  and
sentiments  of  men,  to  which  all  Europe  submitted  with
implicit  obedience.  Their  claim  of  universal  jurisdic-
tion, as  heads  of  the  church,  and  their  pretensions  to
infallibility  in  their  decisions,  as  successors  of  St.  Peter,
are  as  chimerical  as  they  are  repugnant  to  the  genius  of
the  Christian  religion.  But  on  these  foundations,  the
superstition  and  credulity  of  mankind  enabled  them  to
erect  an  amazing  superstructure.  In  all  ecclesiastical
controversies,  their  decisions  were  received  as  the  in-
fallible oracles  of  truth.  Nor  was  the  plenitude  of  their
power  confined  solely  to  what  was  spiritual ;  they  de-
throned monarchs ;  disposed  of  crowns ;  absolved  sub-
ects  from  the  obedience  due  to  their  sovereigns;  and

SECT. III.

1-23

The  terri-
tories of

laid  kingdoms  under  interdicts.  There  was  not  a  state
in  Europe  which  had  not  been  disquieted  by  their  am-
bition. There  was  not  a  throne,  which  they  had  not
shaken;  nor  a  prince,  who  did  not  tremble  at  their
power.

Nothing  was  wanting  to  render  this  empire
absolute,  and  to  establish  it  on  the  ruins  of  all
inadPe°qPuaSte  civil  authority,  but  that  the  popes  should  have
thelrPP?ri  possessed  such  a  degree  of  temporal  power,  as
tuai  juris-  was  sufficient  to  second  and  enforce  their  spi-
ritual decrees.  Happily  for  mankind,  at  the
time  when  their  spiritual  jurisdiction  was  most  exten-
sive and  most  revered,  their  secular  dominion  was
extremely  limited.  They  were  powerful  pontiffs,  formi-
dable at  a  distance ;  but  they  were  petty  princes,  with-
out any  considerable  domestic  force.  They  had  early
endeavoured,  indeed,  to  acquire  territory  by  arts  similar
to  those  which  they  had  employed  in  extending  their
spiritual  jurisdiction.  Under  pretence  of  a  donation
from  Constantine,  and  of  another  from  Charlemagne  or
his  father  Pepin,  they  attempted  to  take  possession  of
some  towns  adjacent  to  Rome.  But  these  donations
were  fictitious,  and  availed  them  little.  The  benefac-
tions, for  which  they  were  indebted  to  the  credulity  of
the  Norman  adventurers,  who  conquered  Naples,  and
to  the  superstition  of  the  countess  Matilda,  were  real,
and  added  ample  domains  to  the  holy  see.
Their  au-  But  the  power  of  the  popes  did  not  increase
Sei"7wn  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of  territory  which
territories  ^hey  j^  acquired.  In  the  dominions  annexed

extremely  ^  •*•

limited,  to  the  holy  see,  as  well  as  in  those  subject  to
other  princes  in  Italy,  the  sovereign  of  a  state  was  far
from  having  the  command  of  the  force  which  it  con-
tained. During  the  turbulence  and  confusion  of  the
middle  ages,  the  powerful  nobility,  or  leaders  of  popu-
lar factions  in  Italy,  had  seized  the  government  of  dif-
ferent towns ;  and,  after  strengthening  their  fortifica-

1-24  STATE OF EUROPE.

tions,  and  taking  a  body  of  mercenaries  into  pay,  they
aspired  at  independence.  The  territory  which  the
church  had  gained  was  filled  with  petty  lords  of  this
kind,  who  left  the  pope  hardly  the  shadow  of  domestic
authority.

itwascir-  As  these  usurpations  almost  annihilated  the
Kfceam-  PaPal  power  in  the  greater  part  of  the  towns
bitionof  subject  to  the  church,  the  Roman  barons  fre-

the  Roman  J  .  .

barons;  quently  disputed  the  authority  ot  the  popes,
even  in  Rome  itself.  In  the  twelfth  century,  an  opi-
nion began  to  be  propagated,  "  That  as  the  function
of  ecclesiastics  was  purely  spiritual,  they  ought  to
possess  no  property,  and  to  claim  no  temporal  jurisdic-
tion; but,  according  to  the  laudable  example  of  their
predecessors  in  the  primitive  church,  should  subsist
wholly  upon  their  tithes,  or  upon  the  voluntary  obla-
tions of  the  people."h  This  doctrine  being  addressed
to  men,  who  had  beheld  the  scandalous  manner  in  which
the  avarice  and  ambition  of  the  clergy  had  prompted
them  to  contend  for  wealth,  and  to  exercise  power,  they
listened  to  it  with  fond  attention.  The  Roman  barons,
who.had  felt  most  sensibly  the  rigour  of  ecclesiastical
oppression,  adopted  these  sentiments  with  such
'  ardour,  that  they  set  themselves  instantly  to
shake  off  the  yoke.  They  endeavoured  to  restore  some
image  of  their  ancient  liberty,  by  reviving  the  institu-
tion of  the  Roman  senate,  in  which  they  vested  supreme
authority ;  committing  the  executive  power  sometimes
to  one  chief  senator,  sometimes  to  two,  and  some-
times to  a  magistrate  dignified  with  the  name  of  The
Patrician.  The  popes  exerted  themselves  with  vigour,
in  order  to  check- -this  dangerous  encroachment  on  their
jurisdiction.  One  of  them,  finding  all  his  endeavours
ineffectual,  was  so  much  mortified,  that  extreme  grief
cut  short  his  days.  Another,  having  ventured  to  attack
the  senators,  at  the  head  of  some  armed  men,  was  mor-

h  Otto  Frisigensis  de  Gistis  Frider.  Imp.  lib.u.  cap.  10. j

SECT. III.  125

tally  wounded  in  the  fray.1 During a  considerable
period,  the  power  of  the  popes,  before  which  the  greatest
monarchs  in  Europe  trembled,  was  circumscribed  within
such  narrow  limits  in  their  own  capital,  that  they  durst
hardly  exert  any  act  of  authority,  without  the  permis-
sion and  concurrence  of  the  senate.
And  by  the Encroachments  were  made  upon  the  papal
of'theTo6-  sovereignty>  not  omly  by  the  usurpations  of  the
man  people  Roman  nobility,  but  by  the  mutinous  spirit  of
isos  to the  people. During  seventy  years  of  the  four-
A.D.1377.  Dentil  century,  the  popes  fixed  their  residence
in  Avignon. The  inhabitants  of  Rome,  accustomed  to
consider  themselves  as  the  descendants  of  the  people
who  had  conquered  the  world,  and  had  given  laws  to
it,  were  too  high-spirited  to  submit  with  patience  to
the  delegated  authority  of  those  persons  to  whom  the
popes  committed  the  government  of  the  city. On  many
occasions,  they  opposed  the  execution  of  the  papal
mandates,  and  on  the  slightest  appearance  of  innovation
or  oppression,  they  were  ready  to  take  arms  in  defence
of  their  own  immunities. Towards  the  middle  of  the
fourteenth  century,  being  instigated  by  Nicolas  Rienzo,
a  man  of  low  birth  and  a  seditious  spirit,  but  of  popular
eloquence,  and  an  enterprising  ambition,  they  drove  all
the  nobility  out  of  the  city,  established  a  democratical
form  of  government, elected  Rienzo  tribune  of  the
people, and invested  him  with  extensive  authority.
But  though  the  frantic  proceedings  of  the  tribune  soon
overturned  this  new  system;  though  the  government
of  Rome  was  reinstated  in  its  ancient  form ;  yet  every
fresh  attack  contributed  to  weaken  the  papal  jurisdiction :
and  the  turbulence  of  the  people  concurred  with  the
spirit  of  independence  among  the  nobility,  in  circum-
scribing it  more  and  more.k Gregory  VII.  and  other

1  Otto  Frising.  Chron.  lib.  vii.  cap.  27.31.  Id.de  Gest.  Frid.  lib.  i.  c.  27.
Muratori  Annali  d'ltalia,  vol.  ix.  398.  404.

k  Histoire  Florentine  de  Giov.  Viliani,  lib.  xii.  c.  89.  104.  ap.  Murat.  Script,
lierurn  Ital.  vol.  xiii.  Vita  de.Cola  di  Rienzo,  ap.  Murat.  Aritiq.  Ital.  vol.  iii.
p.  399,  &c.  Hist,  de  Nic.  Rienzy,  par  M.  de  Boispreaux;  p.  91,  &c.

126  STATE OF EUROPE.

domineering  pontiffs,  accomplished  those  great  things
which  rendered  them  so  formidable  to  the  emperors
with  whom  they  contended,  not  by  the  force  of  their
arms,  or  by  the  extent  of  their  power,  but  by  the  dread
of  their  spiritual  censures,  and  by  the  effect  of  their  in-
trigues, which  excited  rivals,  and  called  forth  enemies
against  every  prince  whom  they  wished  to  depress  or
to  destroy.
Alexander  Many  attempts  were  made  by  the  popes,  not

vi.  and only  to  humble  those  usurpers,  who  lorded  it

Julius  ii. J  .  .  i • • i

render  the over  the  cities  in  the  ecclesiastical  state,  but  to

nderaUe11"  break  the  turbulent  spirit  of  the  Roman  people,
princes.  These  were  long  unsuccessful.  But  at  last
Alexander  VI.,  with  a  policy  no  less  artful  than  flagitious,
subdued  or  extirpated  most  of  the  great  Roman  barons,
and  rendered  the  popes  masters  of  their  own  dominions.
The  enterprising  ambition  of  Julius  II.  added  conquests
of  no  inconsiderable  value  to  the  patrimony  of  St.  Peter.
Thus  the  popes,  by  degrees,  became  powerful  temporal
princes.  Their  territories,  in  the  age  of  Charles  V.,
were  of  greater  extent  than  at  present;  their  country
seems  to  have  been  better  cultivated,  as  well  as  more
populous;  and  as  they  drew  large  contributions  from
every  part  of  Europe,  their  revenues  far  exceeded  those
of  the  neigbouring  powers,  and  rendered  them  capable
of  more  sudden  and  vigorous  efforts.
Defects  in  The  genius  of  the  papal  government,  how-
ever,  was  better  adapted  to  the  exercise  of
spiritual  dominion,  than  of  temporal  power.

. TTT"*  i  /»  n

With  respect  to  the  former,  all  its  maxims  were
steady  and  invariable.  Every  new  pontiff  adopted  the
plan  of  his  predecessor.  By  education  and  habit,
ecclesiastics  were  so  formed  that  the  character  of  the
individual  was  sunk  in  that  of  the  profession;  and  the
passions  of  the  man  were  sacrified  to  the  interest  and
honour  of  the  order.  The  hands  which  held  the  reins
of  administration  might  change;  but  the  spirit  which

SECT. III.  127

conducted  them  was  always  the  same.  While  the
measures  of  other  governments  fluctuated,  and  the  ob-
jects at  which  they  aimed  varied,  the-  church  kept  one
end  in  view ;  and  to  this  unrelaxing  constancy  of  pur-
suit, it  was  indebted  for  its  success  in  the  boldest  at-
tempts ever  made  by  human  ambition.

But  in  their  civil  administration,  the  popes  followed
no  such  uniform  or  consistent  plan.  There,  as  in  other
governments,  the  character,  the  passions,  and  the  in-
terest of  the  person  who  had  the  supreme  direction  of
affairs,  occasioned  a  variation  both  in  objects  and  mea-
sures. As  few  prelates  reached  the  summit  of  eccle-
siastical dignity  until  they  were  far  advanced  in  life,  a
change  of  masters  was  more  frequent  in  the  papal  do-
minions than  in  other  states,  and  the  political  system
was,  of  course,  less  stable  and  permanent.  Every  pope
was  eager  to  make  the  most  of  the  short  period,  during
which  he  had  the  prospect  of  enjoying  power,  in  order
to  aggrandize  his  own  family,  and  to  attain  his  private
ends;  and  it  was  often  the  first  business  of  his  suc-
cessor to  undo  all  that  he  had  done,  and  to  overturn
what  he  had  established.

As  ecclesiastics  were  trained  to  pacific  arts,  and  early
initiated  in  the  mysteries  of  that  policy  by  which  the
court  of  Rome  extended  or  supported  its  spiritual
dominion,  the  popes  in  the  conduct  of  their  temporal
affairs  were  apt  to  follow  the  same  maxims,  and  in  all
their  measures  were  more  ready  to  employ  the  refine-
ments of  intrigue,  than  the  force  of  arms.  It  was  in
the  papal  court  that  address  and  subtlety  in  negotiation
became  a  science ;  and  during  the  sixteenth  century,
Rome  was  considered  as  the  school  in  which  it  might
be  best  acquired.

As  the  decorum  of  their  ecclesiastical  character  pre-
vented the  popes  from  placing  themselves  at  the  head
of  their  armies,  or  from  taking  the  command  in  person,
of  the  military  force  in  their  dominions,  they  were  afraid

128  STATE OF EUROPE.

to  arm  their  subjects;  and  in  all  their  operations,
whether  offensive  or  defensive,  they  trusted  entirely  to
mercenary  troops.

As  their  power  and  dominions  could  not  descend  to
their  posterity,  the  popes  were  less  solicitous  than  other
princes  to  form  or  to  encourage  schemes  of  public
utility  and  improvement.  Their  tenure  was  only  for
a  short  life;  present  advantage  was  what  they  chiefly
studied :  to  squeeze  and  to  amass,  rather  than  to  ame-
liorate, was  their  object.  They  erected,  perhaps,  some
work  of  ostentation,  to  remain  as  a  monument  of  their
pontificate;  they  found  it  necessary,  at  some  times,  to
establish  useful  institutions,  in  order  to  soothe  and  silence
the  turbulent  populace  of  Rome;  but  plans  of  general
benefit  to  their  subjects,  framed  with  a  view  to  futurity,
.were  rarely  objects  of  attention  in  the  papal  policy.
The  patrimony  of  St.  Peter  was  worse  governed  than
any  part  of  Europe;  and  though  a  generous  pontiff
might  suspend  for  a  little,  or  counteract  the  effects  of
those  vices  which  are  peculiar  to  the  administration  of
ecclesiastics;  the  disease  not  only  remained  without
remedy,  but  has  gone  on  increasing  from  age  to
age ;  and  the  decline  of  the  state  has  kept  pace  with  its
progress.

The  popes  ^ne  circumstance,  farther,  concerning  the
someead  PaPa^  government,  is  so  singlar  as  to  merit
vantages  attention.  As  the  spiritual  supremacy  and  tem-

frora  the  ,  r . , . r  J

union  of  poral  power  were  united  in  one  person,  and
uniformly  aided  each  other  in  their  operations,
^ey  Became  so  blended  together,  that  it  was
difficult  to  separate  them,  even  in  imagination.
The  potentates,  who  found  it  necessary  to  oppose  the
measures  which  the  popes  pursued  as  temporal  princes,
could  not  easily  divest  themselves  of  the  reverence
which  they  imagined  to  be  due  to  them  as  heads  of  the
church,  and  vicars  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  was  with  re-
luctance that  they  could  be  brought  to  a  rupture  with

SECT.  III.  12,9

the  head  of  the  church ;  they  were  unwilling  to  push
their  operations  against  him  to  extremity ;  they  listened
eagerly  to  the  first  overtures  of  accommodation,  and
were  anxious  to  procure  it  almost  upon  any  terms.
Their  consciousness  of  this  encouraged  the  enterpris-
ing pontiffs,  who  filled  the  papal  throne  about  the  be-
ginning of  the  sixteenth  century,  to  engage  in  schemes
seemingly  the  most  extravagant.  They  trusted,  that  if
their  temporal  power  was  not  sufficient  to  carry  them
through  with  success,  the  respect  paid  to  their  spiritual
dignity,  would  enable  them  to  extricate  themselves
with  facility  and  with  honour/1  But  when  the  popes
came  to  take  part  more  frequently  in  the  contests  among
princes,  and  to  engage  as  principals  or  auxiliaries  in
every  war  kindled  in  Europe,  this  veneration  for  their
sacred  character  began  to  abate ;  and  striking  instances
will  occur  in  the  following  history  of  its  being  almost
totally  extinct.

Constitu-  Of  all  the  Italian  powers,  the  republic  of
tion  of  the  Venice,  next  to  the  papal  see,  was  most  con-

repubhc  of  i •  i  /•  r\

Venice,  nected  with  the  rest  of  Europe.  The  rise  of
rise  and  that  commonwealth,  during  the  inroads  of  the
progress.  jjuns  jn  t^e  fifth  century ;  the  singular  situa-
tion of  its  capital  in  the  small  isles  of  the  Adriatic
gulf;  and  the  more  singular  form  of  its  civil  consti-
tution, are  generally  known.  If  we  view  the  Venetian

d  The  manner  in  which  Louis  XII.  of  France  undertook  and  carried  on  war  against
Julius  II.  remarkably  illustrates  this  observation.  Louis  solemnly  consulted  the
clergy  of  France,  whether  it  was  lawful  to  , take  arms  against  a  pope  who  had  wan-
tonly kindled  war  in  Europe,  and  whom  neither  the  faith  of  treaties,  nor  gratitude
for  favours  received,  nor  the  decorum  of  his  character,  could  restrain  from  the  most
violent  actions  to  which  the  lust  of  power  prompts  ambitious  princes.  Though  his
clergy  authorized  the  war,  yet  Anne  of  Bretagne,  his  queen,  entertained  scruples  with
regard  to  the  lawfulness  of  it.  The  king  himself,  from  some  superstition  of  the  same
kind,  carried  it  on  faintly;  and,  upon  every  fresh  advantage,  renewed  his  proposi-
tions of  peace.  Mezeray,  Hist,  de  France,  fol.  edit.  1685,  torn.  i.  852.  I  shall
produce  another  proof  of  this  reverence  for  the  papal  character,  still  more  striking.
Guicciardini,  the  most  sagacious,  perhaps,  of  all  modern  historians,  and  the  .boldest
in  painting  the  vices  and  ambition  of  the  popes,  represents  the  death  of  Migliau,  a
Spanish  officer,  who  was  killed  during  the  siege  of  Naples,  as  a  punishment  inflicted
on  him  by  Heaven,  on  account  of  his  having  opposed  the  setting  of  Clement  VII.
at  liberty.  Guic.  Historia  d'ltalia.  Genev.  1645,  vol.  ii.  lib.  18.  p.  467,

VOL. III.  K

I
130  STATE OF EUROPE.

government  as  calculated  for  the  order  of  nobles  alone,
its  institutions  may  be  pronounced  excellent ;  the  deli-
berative, legislative,  and  executive  powers,  are  so  ad-
mirably distributed  and  adjusted,  that  it  must  be  re-
garded as  a  perfect  model  of  political  wisdom.  But
if  we  consider  it  as  formed  for  a  numerous  body  of
people  subject  to  its  jurisdiction,  it  will  appear  a  rigid
and  partial  aristocracy,  which  lodges  all  power  in  the
hands  of  a  few  members  of  the  community,  while  it
degrades  and  oppresses  the  rest.

The  spirit  of  government,  in  a  commonwealth

Defects  in Jxll.  •  n  x- •  i n  - i

its  govern-  ot  this  species,  was,  ot  course,  timid  and  jealous.
Sarly'"  The  Venetian  nobles  distrusted  their  own  sub-
«pecttoife  Jects?  and  were  afraid  of  allowing  them  the  use
military  of  arms.  They  encouraged  among  them  arts

operations. r . ,  j  ,  ,  ,

of  industry  and  commerce;  they  employed
them  in  manufactures  and  in  navigation;  but  never
admitted  them  into  the  troops  which  the  state  kept  in
its  pay.  The  military  force  of  the  republic  consisted
entirely  of  foreign  mercenaries.  The  command  of  these
was  never  intrusted  to  noble  Venetians,  lest  they  should
acquire  such  influence  over  the  army,  as  might  endan-
ger the  public  liberty ;  or  become  accustomed  to  the
exercise  of  such  power,  as  would  make  them  unwilling
to  return  to  the  condition  of  private  citizens.  A  sol-
dier of  fortune  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the  armies  of
the  commonwealth ;  and  to  obtain  that  honour,  was
the  great  object  of  the  Italian  Condottieri,  or  leaders  of
bands,  who,  in  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries,
made  a  trade  of  war,  and  raised  and  hired  out  soldiers
to  different  states.  But  the  same  suspicious  policy,
which  induced  the  Venetians  to  employ  these  adven-
turers, prevented  their  placing  entire  confidence  in
them.  Two  noblemen,  appointed  by  the  senate,  ac-
companied their  army,  when  it  took  the  field,  with  the
appellation  of  Proveditori,  and,  like  the  field-deputies

SECT.  III.

131

of  the  Dutch  republic  in  latter  times,  observed  all  the
motions  of  the  general,  and  checked  and  controlled
him  in  all  his  operations.

A  commonwealth,  with  such  civil  and  military  in-
stitutions, was  not  formed  to  make  conquests.  While
its  subjects  were  disarmed,  and  its  nobles  excluded
from  military  command,  it  carried  on  its  warlike  en-
terprises with  great  disadvantage.  This  ought  to  have
taught  the  Venetians  to  rest  satisfied  with  making  self-
preservation,  and  the  enjoyment  of  domestic  security,
the  objects  of  their  policy.  But  republics  are  apt  to
be  seduced  by  the  spirit  of  ambition,  as  well  as  kings.
When  the  Venetians  so  far  forgot  the  interior  defects
in  their  government,  as  to  aim  at  extensive  con-
quests, the  fatal  blow  which  they  received  in  the  war
excited  by  the  league  of  Cambray,  convinced  them
of  the  imprudence  and  danger  of  making  violent  ef-
forts in  opposition  to  the  genius  and  tendency  of  their
constitution.

Excellence  It  is  not,  however,  by  its  military,  but  by  its
institu-aval  naval  and  commercial  power,  that  the  import-
tions.  ance  of  the  Venetian  commonwealth  must  be
estimated.  The  latter  constituted  the  real  force  and
nerves  of  the  state.  The  jealousy  of  government  did
not  extend  to  this  department.  Nothing  was  appre-
hended from  this  quarter  that  could  prove  formidable
to  liberty.  The  senate  encouraged  the  nobles  to  trade,
and  to  serve  on  board  the  fleet.  They  became  mer-
chants and  admirals.  They  increased  the  wealth  of
their  country  by  their  industry.  They  added  to  its
dominions,  by  the  valour  with  which  they  conducted
its  naval  armaments.

The  extent  Commerce  was  an  inexhaustible  source  of
of  its  com-  opulence  to  the  Venetians.  All  the  nations  in
Europe  depended  upon  them,  not  only  for  the
commodities  of  the  East,  but  for  various  manufactures
fabricated  by  them  alone,  or  finished  with  a  dexterity

K  2

'
132  STATE OF EUROPE.

and  elegance  unknown  in  other  countries.  From  this
extensive  commerce,  the  state  derived  such  immense
supplies,  as  concealed  those  vices  in  its  constitution
which  I  have  mentioned ;  and  enabled  it  to  keep  on
foot  such  armies,  as  were  not  only  an  overmatch  for
the  force  which  any  of  its  neighbours  could  bring  into
the  field,  but  were  sufficient  to  contend,  for  some  time,
with  the  powerful  monarchs  beyond  the  Alps.  Dur-
ing its  struggles  with  the  princes  united  against  it
by  the  league  of  Cambray,  the  republic  levied  sums
which,  even  in  the  present  age,  would  be  deemed  con-
siderable ;  and  while  the  king  of  France  paid  the  exor-
bitant interest  which  I  have  mentioned  for  the  money
advanced  to  him,  and  the  emperor,  eager  to  borrow,  but
destitute  of  credit,  was  known  by  the  name  of  Maxi-
milian the  Moneyless,  the  Venetians  raised  whatever
sums  they  pleased,  at  the  moderate  premium  of  five  in
the  hundred.0

The  con  ^ne  constituti°n  °f  Florence  was  perfectly
stitutionof  the  reverse  of  the  Venetian.  It  partook  as
much  of  democratical  turbulence  and  licen-
tiousness, as  the  other  of  aristocratical  rigour.  Flo-
rence, however,  was  a  commercial,  not  a  military  de-
mocracy. The  nature  of  its  institutions  was  favourable
to  commerce,  and  the  genius  of  the  people  was  turned
towards  it.  The  vast  wealth  which  the  family  of  Me-
dici had  acquired  by  trade,  together  with  the  magnifi-
cence, the  generosity,  and  the  virtue  of  the  first  Cosmo,
gave  him  such  an  ascendant  over  the  aifection  as  well
as  the  councils  of  his  countrymen,  that  though  the  forms
of  popular  government  were  preserved,  thougji  the
various  departments  of  administration  were  filled  by
magistrates  distinguished  by  the  ancient  names,  and
elected  in  the  usual  manner,  he  was  in  reality  the  head
of  the  commonwealth ;  and  in  the  station  of  a  private

•  Hist,  de  la  Ligue  fait  a  Cambray.  par  M.  1'Abbe  du  Bqs,  lib.  v. Sandi  Storia
Civil  Veaeziana,  lib.  viii.  c.  16.  p.  891,  &c.

SECT.  nr.

133

citizen,  he  possessed  supreme  authority.  Cosmo  trans-
mitted a  considerable  degree  of  this  power  to  his  de-
scendants ;  and  during  the  greater  part  of  the  fifteenth
century,  the  political  state  of  Florence  was  extremely
singular.  The  appearance  of  republican  government
subsisted,  the  people  were  passionately  attached  to  it,
and  on  some  occasions  contended  warmly  for  their  pri-
vileges, and  yet  they  permitted  a  single  family  to  as-
sume the  direction  of  their  affairs,  almost  as  absolutely
as  if  it  had  been  formally*  in  vested  with  sovereign  power.
The  jealousy  of  the  Medici  concurred  with  the  com-
mercial spirit  of  the  Florentines,  in  putting  the  military
force  of  the  republic  upon  the  same  footing  with  that
of  the  other  Italian  states.  The  troops,  which  the  Flo-
rentines employed  in  their  wars,  consisted  almost  en-
tirely of  mercenary  soldiers,  furnished  by  the  Condot-
tieri,  or  leaders  of  bands,  whom  they  took  into  their  pay.
The  con-  ^n  t^ie  kingdom  of  Naples,  to  which  the  so-
stitution  of  vereignty  of  the  island  of  Sicily  was  annexed,
doera0nfg"  the  feudal  government  was  established  in  the
Naples.  same  form,  and  with  the  same  defects,  as  in  the
other  nations  of  Europe.  The  frequent  and  violent
revolutions  which  happened  in  that  monarchy  had  con-
siderably increased  these  defects,  and  rendered  them
more  intolerable.  The  succession  to  the  crown  of  Naples
had  been  so  often  interrupted  or  altered,  and  so  many
princes  of  foreign  blood  had,  at  different  periods,  ob-
tained possession  of  the  throne,  that  the  Neapolitan  no-
bility had  lost,  in  a  great  measure,  that  attachment  to
the  family  of  their  sovereigns,  as  well  as  that  reverence
for  their  persons,  which,  in  other  feudal  kingdoms,  con-
tributed to  set  some  bounds  to  the  encroachments  of  the
barons  upon  the  royal  prerogative  and  power.  At  the
same  time,  the  different  pretenders  to  the  crown,  being
obliged  to  court  the  barons  who  adhered  to  them,  and
on  whose  support  they  depended  for  the  success  of  their
claims,  they  augmented  their  privileges  by  liberal  con-

134  STATE OF  EUROPE.

cessions,  and  connived  at  their  boldest  usurpations.
Even  when  seated  on  the  throne,  it  was  dangerous  for
a  prince,  who  held  his  sceptre  by  a  disputed  title,  to
venture  on  any  step  towards  extending  his  own  power,
or  circumscribing  that  of  the  nobles.

From  all  these  causes,  the  kingdom  of  Naples  was
the  most  turbulent  of  any  in  Europe,  and  the  authority
of  its  monarchs  the  least  extensive.  Though  Ferdinand
I.,  who  began  his  reign  in  the  year  1468,  attempted  to
break  the  power  of  .the  aristocracy ;  though  his  son  Al-
phonso,  that  he  might  crush  it  at  once  by  cutting  off
the  leaders  of  greatest  reputation  and  influence  among
the  Neapolitan  barons,  ventured  to  commit  one  of  the
most  perfidious  and  cruel  actions  recorded  in

A.D.  1487. ,  . r .  '  _

history ;  the  order  ot  nobles  was  nevertheless
more  exasperated  than  humbled  by  their  measures/
The  resentment  which  these  outrages  excited  was  so
violent,  and  the  power  of  the  malecontent  nobles  was
still  so  formidable,  that  to  these  may  be  ascribed,  in  a
great  degree,  the  ease  and  rapidity  with  which  Charles
VIII.  conquered  the  kingdom  of  Naples.8
state  of  The  event  that  gave  rise  to  the  violent  con-
the dispute  tests  concerning  the  succession  to  the  crown  of

concerning  »  T.I,

the  right  of  Naples  and  Sicily,  which  brought  so  many  ca-

succession -,  ,-.  -.  . '  -,  -,  , . .

to  the lamities  upon  these  kingdoms,  happened  m  the
crown. thirteenth  century. Upon  the  death  of  the  em-
peror Frederic  II.,  Manfred,  his  natural  son,  aspiring
to  the  Neapolitan  throne,  murdered  his  brother

A.D.  1254.  r _, '  '

the  emperor  Conrad  (it  we  may  believe  con-
temporary historians)  and  by  that  crime  obtained  pos-
session of  it.h  The  popes,  from  their  implacable  en-
mity to  the  house  of  Swabia,  not  only  refused  to  recog-
nize Manfred's  title,  but  endeavoured  to  excite  against
him  some  rival  capable  of  wresting  the  sceptre  out  of
his  hand.  Charles  count  of  Anjou,  the  brother  of  St.

fGianonne,  book  xxviii.  chap.  2.  vol.  ii.  p.  210.  g  Ibid.  p.  414.

h  Struv.  Corp.  Hist.  Germ.  i.  481.  Giannonc,  book  xviii.  chap  v.

SECT. III.

135

Louis  king  of  France,  undertook  this ;  and  he  received
from  the  popes  the  investiture  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples
and  Sicily  as  a  fief  held  of  the  holy  see.  The  count  of
Anjou's  efforts  were  crowned  with  success ;  Manfred
fell  in  battle ;  and  he  took  possession  of  the  vacant
throne.  But  soon  after,  Charles  sullied  the  glory  which
he  had  acquired,  by  the  injustice  and  cruelty  with  which
he  put  to  death,  by  the  hands  of  the  executioner,  Con-
radin,  the  last  prince  of  the  house  of  Swabia,  and  the
rightful  heir  of  the  Neapolitan  crown.  That  gallant
young  prince  asserted  his  title,  to  the  last,  with  a  cou-
rage worthy  of  a  better  fate.  On  the  scaffold,  he  de-
clared Peter,  at  that  time  prince,  and  soon  after  king
of  Aragon,  who  had  married  Manfred's  only  daughter,
his  heir ;  and  throwing  his  glove  among  the  people,  he
entreated  that  it  might  be  carried  to  Peter,  as  the  symbol
by  which  he  conveyed  all  his  rights  to  him.1  The  de-
sire of  avenging  the  insult  offered  to  royalty,  by  the
death  of  Conradin,  concurred  with  his  own  ambition,
in  prompting  Peter  to  take  arms  in  support  of  the  title
which  he  had  acquired.  From  that  period,  during  al-
most two  centuries,  the  houses  of  Aragon  and  Anjou
contended  for  the  crown  of  Naples.  Amidst  a  succes-
sion of  revolutions  more  rapid,  as  well  as  of  crimes
more  atrocious,  than  what  occur  in  the  history  of  almost
any  other  kingdom,  monarchs,  sometimes  of  the  Ara-
gonese  line,  and  sometimes  of  the  Angevin,  were  seated
on  the  throne.  At  length,  the  princes  of  the  house  of
Aragon  obtained  such  firm  possession  of  this

A.D.  1434.  & .  .  r  .

long-disputed  inheritance,  that  they  transmitted
it  quietly  to  a  bastard  branch  of  their  family .k

The  race^of  the  Angevin  kings,  however,  was
not  extinct ;  nor  had  they  relinquished  their  title
to  the  Neapolitan  crown.  The  count  of  Maine
and  Provence,  the  heir  of  this  family,  conveyed
all  his  rights  and  pretensions  to  Louis  XI.  and

Preten-
sions of
the

French
and  Spa-
nish mo-
narchs.

1  Giannone,  book  xix.  cli.  4.  §  2.

k  Ibid,  book  xxvi.  ch.  2.

136  STATE  OF EUROPE.

to  his  successors.  Charles  VIII.,  as  I  have
already  related,  crossed  the  Alps  at  the  head  of
a  powerful  army,  in  order  to  prosecute  his  claim  with
a  degree  of  vigour  far  superior  to  that  which  the  princes
from  whom  he  derived  it  had  been  capable  of  exerting.
The  rapid  progress  of  his  arms  in  Italy,  as  well  as  the
short  time  during  which  he  enjoyed  the  fruits  of  his
success,  have  already  been  mentioned,  and  are  well
known.  Frederic,  the  heir  of  the  illegitimate  branch
of  the  Aragonese  family,  soon  recovered  the  throne  of
which  Charles  had  dispossessed  him.  Louis  XII.  and
Ferdinand  of  Aragon  united  against  this  prince,  whom
both,  though  for  different  reasons,  considered  as  an
usurper,  and  agreed  to  divide  his  dominions  between
them.  Frederic,  unable  to  resist  the  combined
monarchs,  each  of  whom  was  far  his  superior
in  power,  resigned  his  sceptre.  Louis  and  Ferdinand,
though  they  had  concurred  in  making  the  conquest,
differed  about  the  division  of  it ;  and  from  allies  became
enemies.  But  Gonsalvo  de  Cordova,  partly  by  the  exer-
tion of  such  military  talents  as  gave  him  a  just  title  to
the  appellation  of  the  great  captain,  which  the  Spanish
historians  have  bestowed  upon  him ;  and  partly  by  such
shameless  and  frequent  violations  of  the  most  solemn
engagements,  as  leave  an  indelible  stain  on  his  memory ;
stripped  the  French  of  all  they  possessed  in  the  Neapo-
litan dominions,  and  secured  the  peaceable  possession
of  them  to  his  master.  These,  together  with  his  other
kingdoms,  Ferdinand  transmitted  to  his  grandson
Charles  V.,  whose  right  to  possess  them,  if  not  altoge-
ther uncontrovertible,  seems,  at  least,  to  be  as  well
founded  as  that  which  the  kings  of  France  set  up  in
opposition  to  it.1
state  of  There  is  nothing  in  the  political  constitution,

the  duchy

of  Milan,  or  interior  government  of  the  duchy  of  Milan,

l  Droils  de  Ruis  de  France  au Royaume  de  Sicile. Mem.  de  Com.  edit,  de
Fresnoy,  torn.  iv.  part  ii.  p.  5.

succession

SECT.  III.  137

and  the so  remarkable  as  to  require  a  particular  expla-
of nation. But  as  the  right  of  succession  to  that

ssion  o

fertile  province  was  the  cause  or  the  pretext  of
almost  all  the  wars  carried  on  in  Italy  during  the  reign
of  Charles  V.,  it  is  necessary  to  trace  these  disputes
to  their  source,  and  to  inquire  into  the  pretensions  of
the  various  competitors.
Rise  and  During  the  long  and  fierce  contests  excited

EisS-S  °f  in  Itaty  by  tbe  violence  °f  tne  Gruelf  and  Ghibel-
putescon-  line  factions,  the  family  of  Visconti  rose  to
this.'  great  eminence  among  their  fellow-citizens  of
A.D.  1354.  Miian  AS  the  Visconti  had  adhered  uni-
formly to  the  Ghibelline  or  imperial  interest,  they,
by  way  of  recompense,  received,  from  one  emperor,
the  dignity  of  perpetual  vicars  of  the  empire  in  Italy  :m
they  were  created  by  another,  dukes  of  Milan  ;  and,
together  with  that  title,  the  possession  of  the
city  and  its  territories  was  betowed  upon
them  as  a  hereditary  fief.n  John,  king  of  France,
among  other  expedients  for  raising  money,  which  the
calamities  of  his  reign  obliged  him  to  employ,  conde-
scended to  give  one  of  his  daughters  in  marriage  to
John  Galeazzo  Visconti  the  first  duke  of  Milan,  from
whom  he  had  received  considerable  sums.  Valentine
Visconti,  one  of  the  children  of  this  marriage,  married
her  cousin,  Louis  duke  of  Orleans,  the  only  brother  of
Charles  VI.  In  their  marriage-contract,  which  the  pope
confirmed,  it  was  stipulated  that,  upon  failure  of  heirs
male  in  the  family  of  Visconti,  the  duchy  of  Milan
should  descend  to  the  posterity  of  Valentine  and  the
duke  of  Orleans.  -That  event  took  place.  In  the  year
1447,  Philip  Maria,  the  last  prince  of  the  ducal  family
of  Visconti,  died.  Various  competitors  claimed  the  sue-
cession.  Charles,  duke  of  Orleans,  pleaded  his  right
to  it,  founded  on  the  marriage-  contract  of  his  mother

m  Petrarch  Epist.  ap.  Struv.  Corp.  i.  625.
B  Leibnit.  Cod.  Jur.  Gent.  Diplora.  vol.  i.  957.

138  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

Valentine  Visconti.  Alfonso,  king  of  Naples,  claimed
it  in  consequence  of  a  will  made  by  Philip  Maria  in  his
favour.  The  emperor  contended  that,  upon  the  extinc-
tion of  male  issue  in  the  family  of  Visconti,  the  fief  re-
turned to  the  superior  lord,  and  ought  to  be  re-annexed
to  the  empire.  The  people  of  Milan,  smitten  with  the
love  of  liberty  which  in  that  age  prevailed  among  the
Italian  states,  declared  against  the  dominion  of  any  mas-
ter, and  established  a  republican  form  of  government.

But  during  the  struggle  among  so  many  competitors,
the  prize  for  which  they  contended  was  seized  by  one
from  whom  none  of  them  apprehended  any  danger.
Francis  Sforza,  the  natural  son  of  Jacomuzzo  Sforza,
whom  his  courage  and  abilities  had  elevated  from  the
rank  of  peasant  to  be  one  of  the  most  eminent  and
powerful  of  the  Italian  Condottieri,  having  succeeded
his  father  in  the  command  of  the  adventurers  who  fol-
lowed his  standard,  had  married  a  natural  daughter  of  the
last  duke  of  Milan.  Upon  this  shadow  of  a  title  Francis
founded  his  pretensions  to  the  duchy,  which  he  sup-
ported with  such  talents  and  valour,  as  placed  him  at
last  -on  the  ducal  throne.  The  virtues,  as  well  as  abi-
lities, with  which  he  governed,  inducing  his  subjects  to
forget  the  defects  in  his  title,  he  transmitted  his  do-
minions quietly  to  his  son;  from  whom  they  descended
to  his  grandson.  He  was  murdered  by  his  grand- uncle
Ludovico,  surnamed  the  Moor,  who  took  possession  of
the  duchy;  and  his  right  to  it  was  confirmed  by  the
investiture  of  the  emperor  Maximilian  in  the  year  1494.°

Louis  XL,  who  took  pleasure  in  depressing  the  princes
of  the  blood,  and  who  admired  the  Apolitical  abilities  of
Francis  Sforza,  would  not  permit  the  duke  of  Orleans
to  take  any  step  in  prosecution  of  his  right  to  the  duchy
of  Milan.  Ludovico  the  Moor  kept  up  such  a  close
connexion  with  Charles  VIII.  that,  during  the  greater

0  Ripalin,  Hist  Mediol.  lib.  vi.  654.  ap.  Struv.  Corp.  i.  930.  Du  Mont  Corps  Di-
plora.  torn.  iii.  p.  ii.  333.  ibid.

SECT. III.

139

part  of  his  reign,  the  claim  of  the  family  of  Orleans  con-
tinued to  lie  dormant.  But  when  the  crown  of  France
devolved  on  Louis  XII.  duke  of  Orleans,  he  instantly
asserted  the  rights  of  his  family  with  the  ardour  which
it  was  natural  to  expect,  and  marched  at  the  head  of  a
powerful  army  to  support  them.  Ludovico  Sforza,  in-
capable of  contending  with  such  a  rival,  was  stripped
of  all  his  dominions  in  the  space  of  a  few  days.  The
king,  clad  in  the  ducal  robes,  entered  Milan  in  triumph  ;
and  soon  after,  Ludovico,  having  been  betrayed  by  the
Swiss  in  his  pay,  was  sent  a  prisoner  into  France,  and
shut  up  in  the  castle  of  Loches,  where  he  lay  unpitied
during  the  remainder  of  his  days.  In  consequence  of
one  of  the  singular  revolutions  which  occur  so  frequently
in  the  history  of  the  Milanese,  his  son  Maximilian  Sforza
was  placed  on  the  ducal  throne,  of  which  he  kept  pos-
session during  the  reign  of  Louis  XII.  But  his  succes-
sor Francis  I.  was  too  high-spirited  and  enterprising
tamely  to  relinquish  his  title.  As  soon  as  he  was
seated  upon  the  throne  he  prepared  to  invade
the  Milanese;  and  his  right  of  succession  to  it  appears,
from  this  detail,  to  have  been  more  natural  and  more
just  than  that  of  any  other  competitor.

It  is  unnecessary  to  enter  into  any  detail  with  re-
spect to  the  form  of  government  in  Genoa,  Parma,  Mo-
dena,  and  the  other  inferior  states  of  Italy.  Their  names,
indeed,  will  often  occur  in  the  following  history.  But
the  power  of  these  states  themselves  was  so  inconsi-
derable, that  their  fate  depended  little  upon  their  own
efforts;  and  the  frequent  revolutions  they  underwent,
were  brought  about  rather  by  the  operations  of  the
princes  who  attacked  or  defended  them,  than  by  any
thing  peculiar  in  their  internal  constitution.
The  con-  Of  the  great  kingdoms  on  this  side  of  the  Alps,

A.D.  1512.

Spain  is  one  of  the  most  considerable;  and  as  it
was  the  hereditary  domain  of  Charles  V.  as  well
as  the  chief  source  of  his  power  and  wealth,  a

140  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

distinct  knowledge  of  its  political  constitution  is  of
capital  importance  towards  understanding  the  transac-
tions of  his  reign.

The  Vandals  and  Goths,  who  overturned  the
by  the  Van-  Roman  power  of  Spain,  established  a  form  of

government  in  that  country,  and  introduced
customs  and  laws,  perfectly  similar  to  those  which  were
established  in  the  rest  of  Europe  by  the  other  victori-
ous tribes  which  acquired  settlements  there.  For  some
time,  society  advanced,  among  the  new  inhabitants  of
Spain,  by  the  same  steps,  and  seemed  to  hold  the
same  course,  as  in  other  European  nations.  To  this
AD  712  Pr°gress>  a  sudden  stop  was  put  by  the  inva-
And  by  the  sion  of  the  Saracens  or  Moors  from  Africa.  The

Goths  could  not  withstand  the  efforts  of  their
enthusiastic  valour,  which  subdued  the  greatest  part  of
Spain,  with  the  same  impetuous  rapidity  that  distin-
guishes all  the  operations  of  their  arms.  The  con-
querors introduced  into  the  country,  in  which  they  set-
tled, the  Mahometan  religion,  the  Arabic  language,
the  manners  of  the  East,  together  with  that  taste  for  the
arts,  and  that  love  of  elegance  and  splendour,  which
the  caliphs  had  begun  to  cultivate  among  their  subjects.
The  Chris-  Such  Gothic  nobles  as  disdained  to  submit  to
dually8™-  &*  Moorish  yoke,  fled  for  refuge  to  the  inac-
coverdo-  cessiblc  mountains  of  Asturias.  There  they

mimou  in  .  *

Spain.  comforted  themselves  with  enjoying  the  exer-
cise of  the  Christian  religion,  and  with  maintaining
the  authority  of  their  ancient  laws.  Being  joined
by  many  of  the  boldest  and  most  warlike  among  their
countrymen,  they  sallied  out  upon  the  adjacent  settle-
ments of  the  Moors  in  small  parties ;  but  venturing
only  upon  short  excursions  at  first,  they  were  satisfied
with  plunder  and  revenge,  without  thinking  of  con-
quest. By  degrees,  their  strength  increased,  their  views
enlarged,  a  regular  government  was  established  among
them,  and  they  began-  to  aim  at  extending  their  terri-

SECT. III.

141

tories.  While  they  pushed  on  their  attacks  with  the
unremitting  ardour  excited  by  zeal  for  religion,  by  the
desire  of  vengeance,  and  by  the  hope  of  rescuing  their
country  from  oppression;  while  they  conducted  their
operations  with  the  courage  natural  to  men  who  had
no  other  occupation  but  war,  and  who  were  strangers  to
all  the  arts  which  corrupt  or  enfeeble  the  mind;  the
Moors  gradually  lost  many  of  the  advantages  to  which
they  had  been  indebted  for  their  first  success.  They
threw  off  all  dependence  on  the  caliphs  ;p  they  neg-
lected to  preserve  a  close  connexion  with  their  coun-
trymen in  Africa;  their  empire  in  Spain  was  split  into
many  small  kingdoms;  the  arts  which  they  cultivated
together  with  the  luxury  to  which  these  gave  rise,  re-
laxed, in  some  measure,  the  force  of  their  military  in-
stitutions, and  abated  the  vigour  of  their  warlike  spirit.
The  Moors,  however,  continued  still  to  be  a  gallant  peo-
ple, and  possessed  great  resources.  According  to  the
magnificent  style  of  the  Spanish  historians,  eight  cen-
turies of  almost  uninterrupted  war  elapsed,  and  three
thousand  seven  hundred  battles  were  fought,

A.D. 1492.

'  before  the  last  of  the  Moorish  kingdoms  in  Spain
submitted  to  the  Christian  arms.  s
The  union  As  the  Christians  made  their  conquests  upon
"  tne  Mahometans  at  various  periods,  and  under
different  leaders,  each  formed  the  territory  which
he  had  wrested  from  the  common  enemy,  into  an  in-
dependent state.  Spain  was  divided  into  almost  as
many  separate  kingdoms  as  it  contained  provinces;  in
each  city  of  note,  a  petty  monarch  established  his
throne,  and  assumed  all  the  ensigns  of  royalty.  In  a
series  of  years,  however,  by  the  usual  events  of  inter-
marriages, or  succession,  or  conquest,  all  these  inferior
principalities  were  annexed  to  the  more  powerful  king-
doms of  Castile  and  of  Aragon.  At  length,  by  the  for-
tunate marriage  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  the  former

P  Jos.  Sim.  Assemanni  Histor.  Ital.  Scriptores,  vol.  Hi.  p.  135.

142  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

the  hereditary  monarch  of  Aragon,  and  the  latter  raised
to  the  throne  of  Castile  by  the  affection  of  her
subjects,  all  the  Spanish  crowns  were  united,
and  descended  in  the  same  line.

From  this  period,  the  political  constitution  of
dent'cul-  Spam  began  to  assume  a  regular  and  uniform
toms  and  appearance  ;  the  genius  of  its  government  may
served  be  delineated,  and  the  progress  of  its  laws  and
o-  manners  may  be  traced,  with  certainty.  Not-
withstanding  the  singular  revolution  which  the
invasion  of  the  Moors  occasioned  in  Spain,  and  the
peculiarity  of  its  fate,  in  being  so  long  subject  to  the
Mahometan  yoke,  the  customs  introduced  by  the  Vandals
and  Goths,  had  taken  such  deep  root,  and  were  so
thoroughly  incorporated  with  the  frame  of  its  govern-
ment, that  in  every  province  which  the  Christians  re-
covered from  the  Moors,  we  find  the  condition  of  indi-
viduals, as  well  as  the  political  constitution,  nearly  the
same  as  in  other  nations  of  Europe.  Lands  were  held
by  the  same  tenure  ;  justice  was  dispensed  in  the  same
form ;  the  same  privileges  were  claimed  by  the  nobility ;
Which  ren-  and  the  same  power  exercised  by  the  cortes,  or
general  assembly  of  the  kingdom.  Several  cir-
uS"-  cumstances  contributed  to  secure  this  perma-
lartothat  nence  of  the  feudal  institutions  in  Spain,  not-
nations  of  withstanding  the  conquest  of  the  Moors,  which
Europe.  seeme(j  to  jiave  overturned  them.  Such  of  the
Spaniards  as  preserved  their  independence,  adhered  to
their  ancient  customs,  not  only  from  attachment  to  them,
but  out  of  antipathy  to  the  Moors,  to  whose  ideas  con-
cerning property  and  government  these  customs  were
totally  repugnant.  Even  among  the  Christians,  who
submitted  to  the  Moorish  conquerors,  and  consented  to
become  their  subjects,  ancient  customs  were  not  entirely
abolished.  They  were  permitted  to  retain  their  religion,
their  laws  concerning  private  property,  their  forms  of
administering  justice,  and  their  mode  of  levying  taxes.

SECT. III.  143

The  followers  of  Mahomet  are  the  only  enthusiasts  who
have  united  the  spirit  of  toleration  with  zeal  for  making
proselytes,  and  who,  at  the  same  time  that  they  took
arms  to  propagate  the  doctrine  of  their  prophet,  permit-
ted such  as  would  not  embrace  it,  to  adhere  to  their  own
tenets,  and  to  practise  their  own  rites.  To  this  pecu-
liarity in  the  genius  of  the  Mahometan  religion,  as  well
as  to  the  desire  which  the  Moors  had  of  reconciling  the
Christians  to  their  yoke,  it  was  owing  that  the  ancient
manners  and  laws  in  Spain  survived  the  violent  shock
of  a  conquest,  and  were  permitted  to  subsist,  notwith-
standing the  introduction  of  a  new  religion  and  a  new
form  of  government  into  that  country.  It  is  obvious,
from  all  these  particulars,  that  the  Christians  must  have
found  it  extremely  easy  to  re-establish  manners  and
government  on  their  ancient  foundations,  in  those  pro-
vinces of  Spain  which  they  wrested  successively  from
the  Moors.  A  considerable  part  of  the  people  retained
such  a  fondness  for  the  customs,  and  such  a  reverence
for  the  laws  of  their  ancestors,  that,  wishing  to  see  them
completely  restored,  they  were  not  only  willing  but  eager
to  resume  the  former,  and  to  recognize  the  authority  of
the  latter.

Certain  But  though  the  feudal  form  of  government,
"  with  all  the  institutions  which  characterize  it,  was
kus  Preserved  entire  in  Castile  and  Aragon,  as
and  laws.  well  as  in  all  the  kingdoms  which  depended  on
these  crowns,  there  were  certain  peculiarities  in  their
political  constitutions,  whicn"  distinguish  them  from
Theprero-  those  of  any  other  country  in  Europe.  The
moreii-  r°yal  prerogative,  extremely  limited  in  every

raited,  and  feudal  kingdom,  was  circumscribed,  in  Spain,
within  such  narrow  bounds,  as  reduced  the  power

-e  °f  tne  sovereign  almost  to  nothing.  The  privi-
leges  of  the  nobility  were  great  in  proportion,
and  extended  so  far,  as  to  border  on  absolute  indepen-
dence. The  immunities  of  the  cities  ...  were  likewise

144  STATE OF  EUROPE.

greater  than  in  other  feudal  kingdoms,  they  possessed
considerable  influence  in  the  eortes,  and  they  aspired
at  obtaining  more.  Such  a  state  of  society,  in  which
the  political  machine  was  so  ill  adjusted,  and  tne  se-
veral members  of  the  legislature  so  improperly  balanced,
produced  internal  disorders  in  the  kingdoms  of  Spain,
which  rose  beyond  the  pitch  of  turbulence  and  anarchy
usual  under  the  feudal  government.  The  whole  tenor
of  the  Spanish  history  confirms  the  truth  of  this  obser-
vation ;  and  when  the  mutinous  spirit,  to  which  the
genius  of  their  policy  gave  birth  and  vigour,  was  no
longer  restrained  and  overawed  by  Jhe  immediate  dread
of  the  Moorish  arms,  it  broke  out  into  more  frequent  in-
surrections against  the  government  of  their  princes,  as
well  as  more  outrageous  insults  on  their  dignity,  than
occur  in  the  annals  of  any  other  country.  These  were
accompanied  at  some  times  with  more  liberal  sentiments
concerning  the  rights  of  the  people,  at  other  times  with
more  elevated  notions  concerning  the  privileges  of  the
nobles,  than  were  common  in  other  nations.
instances  1°  tne  principality  of  t  Catalonia,  which  was
of  this,  annexed  to  the  kingdom  of  Aragon,  the  impa-
tience of, the  people  to  obtain  the  redress  of  their  griev-
A.  D.1462. ances  kaving Tempted  them  to  take  arms  against
'their  sovereign  John  II.,  they, 'by  a  solemn
deed,  recalled  the  oath  of  allegiance  which  they  had
sworn  to  him,  declared  him  and  his  posterity  to  be  un-
worthy of  the  throne,q  and  endeavoured  to  establish  a
republican  form  of  government,  in  order  to  secure  the
perpetual  enjoyment  of  that  liberty  after  which  they
aspired/  Nearly  about  the  same  period,  the  indigna-
tion of  the  Castilian  nobility  against  the  weak  and  fla-
gitious administration  of  Henry  IV.,  having  led  them
to  combine  against  him,  they  arrogated,  as  one  of  the

iZurita  Annales  de  Arag.  torn.  iv.  113.  115,  £c

«  ?frf a"  Hi?t'  d'Espagne,  torn.  vii.  p.  92. P.  Orleans  Revol.  d'Espagrie,  torn.  iii.
p.  155.  L.  MannaeusSiculus  deReb.  Hispan.  apud  Schotti  Script.  Hispan.foL  429.

SECT.  111.  145

privileges  belonging  to  their  order,  the  right  of  trying
and  of  passing  sentence  on  their  sovereign.  That  the
exercise  of  this  power  might  be  as  public  and  solemn,
as  the  pretension  to  it  was  bold,  they  summoned  all  the
nobility  of  their  party  to  meet  at  Avila ;  a  spacious  thea-
tre was  erected  in  a  plain,  without  the  walls  of  the  town;
an  image  representing  the  king  was  seated  on  a  throne,
clad  in  royal  robes,  with  a  crown  on  its  head,  a  sceptre
in  its  hand,  and  the  sword  of  justice  by  its  side.  The
accusation  against  the  king  was  read,  and  the  sentence
of  deposition  was  pronounced,  in  presence  of  a  nume-
rous assembly.  At  the  close  of  the  first  article  of  the
charge,  the  archbishop  of  Toledo  advanced,  and  tore  the
crown  from  the  head  of  the  image ;  at  the  close  of  the
second,  the  conde  de  Placentia  snatched  the  sword  of
justice  from  its  side  ;  at  the  close  of  the  third,  the  conde
de  Benevente  wrested  the  sceptre  from  its  hand ;  at  the
close  of  the  last,  Don  Diego  Lopes  de  Stuniga  tumbled
it  headlong  from  the  throne.  At  the  same  instant,  Don
Alfonso,  Henry's  brother,  was  proclaimed  king  of  Castile
and  Leon  in  his  stead/

The  most  daring  leaders  of  faction  would  not  have
ventured  on  these  measures,  nor  have  conducted  them
with  such  public  ceremony,  if  the  sentiments  of  the  people
concerning  the  royal  dignity  had  not  been  so  formed  by
the  laws  and  policy,  to  which  they  were  accustomed  both
in  Castile  and  Catalonia,  as  prepared  them  to  approve
of  such  extraordinary  proceedings,  or  acquiesce  in  them.
The  con-  ^u  Aragon,  the  form  of  government  was  mo-
stitution  narchical,  but  the  genius  and  maxims  of  it  were

and  go-

vemment  purely  republican.  The  kings,  who  were  long
Dragon.  e|ec|.ivej  retained  only  the  shadow  of  power;  the
real  exercise  of  it  was  in  the  cortes  or  parliament  of  the
kingdom.  This  supreme  assembly  was  composed  of
four  different  arms  or  members.  The  nobility  of  the
first  rank.  The  equestrian  order,  or  nobility  of  the  se-

r  Marian.  Hist.  lib.  xxiii.  c.  9.
VOL.  III.  L

14(5  STATE OF EUROPE,

eond  class.  The  representatives  of  the  cities  and  towns,
whose  right  to  a  place  in  the  cortes,  if  we  may  give
credit  to  the  historians  of  Aragon,  was  coeval  with  the
constitution.  The  ecclesiastical  order,  composed  of
the  dignitaries  of  the  church,  together  with  the  repre-
sentatives of  the  inferior  clergy.8  No  law  could  pass
in  this  assembly  without  the  assent  of  every  single  mem-
ber who  had  a  right  to  vote.*  Without  the  permission
of  the  cortes,  no  tax  could  be  imposed  ;  no  war  could
be  declared ;  no  peace  could  be  included ;  no  money
could  be  coined ;  nor  could  any  alteration  be  made  in
the  current  specie."  The  power  of  reviewing  the  pro-
ceedings of  all  inferior  courts,  the  privilege  of  inspect-
ing every  department  of  administration,  and  the  right  of
redressing  all  grievances,  belonging  to  the  cortes.  Nor
did  those  who  conceived  themselves  to  be  aggrieved,
address  the  cortes  in  the  humble  tone  of  supplicants,
and  petition  for  redress ;  they  demanded  it  as  the  birth-
right of  freemen,  and  required  the  guardians  of  their
liberty  to  decide  with  respect  to  the  points  which  they
laid  before  them/  This  sovereign  court  was  held,  dur-
ing several  centuries,  every  year;  but,  in  consequence
of  a  regulation  introduced  about  the  beginning  of  the
fourteenth  century,  it  was  convoked  from  that  period
only  once  in  two  years.  After  it  was  assembled,  the  king
had  no  right  to  prorogue  or  dissolve  it  without  its  own
consent;  and  the  session  continued  forty  days/
office  and  Not  satisfied  with  having  erected  such  formid-
able  barriers  against  the  encroachments  of  the
r0yaj  prerogative,  nor  willing  to  commit  the  sole
guardianship  of  their  liberties  entirely  to  the  vigilance
and  authority  of  an  assembly,  similar  to  the  diets,
states-general,  and  parliaments,  in  which  the  other
feudal  nations  have  placed  so  much  confidence,  the

•  Forraa  de  Celebrar.  Cortes  in  Aragon.  por  Geron  Martel.

'Martel.  ibid.  p.  2.

*Hier.  Blanca  Comment.  Rer.  Aragen.  ap.  Schot.  Script.  Hispan.  vol.  iii.  p.  750 »
»  Martel.  Forma  de  Celebr.  p.  2.  y  Hier.  Blanca  Comment.  763.

SECT. HI.

147

Aragonese  had  recourse  to  an  institution  peculiar  to
themselves,  and  elected  a  justiza  or  supreme  judge.
This  magistrate,  whose  office  bore  some  resemblance
to  that  of  the  ephori  in  ancient  Sparta,  acted  as  the
protector  of  the  people,  and  the  comptroller  of  the
prince.  The  person  of  the  justiza  was  sacred,  his
power  and  jurisdiction  almost  unbounded.  He  was  the
supreme  interpreter  of  the  laws.  Not  only  inferior
judges,  but  the  kings  themselves,  were  bound  to  consult
him  in  every  doubtful  case,  and  to  receive  his  responses
with  implicit  deference.*  An  appeal  lay  to  him  from
the  royal  judges,  as  well  as  from  those  appointed  by  the
barons  within  their  respective  territories.  Even  when
no  appeal  was  made  to  him,  he  could  interpose  by  his
own  authority,  prohibit  the  ordinary  judge  to  proceed,
take  immediate  cognizance  of  the  cause  himself,  and
remove  the  party  accused  to  the  manifestation,  or  prison
of  the  state,  to  which  no  person  had  access  but  by  his
permission.  His  power  was  exerted  with  no  less  vigour
and  effect  in  superintending  the  administration  of
government,  than  in  regulating  the  course  of  justice.
It  was  the  prerogative  of  the  justiza  to  inspect  the
conduct  of  the  king.  He  had  a  title  to  review  all
the  royal  proclamations  and  patents,  and  to  declare
whether  or  not  they  were  agreeable  to  law,  and  ought
to  be  carried  into  execution.  He,  by  his  sole  authority,
could  exclude  any  of  the  king's  ministers  from  the  con-
duct of  affairs,  and  call  them  to  answer  for  their  male-
administration.  He  himself  was  accountable  to  the
cortes  only,  for  the  manner  in  which  he  discharged  the
duties  of  this  high  office ;  and  performed  functions  of
the  greatest  importance  that  could  be  committed  to  a
subject.5  c

The  regal It  is  evident,  from  a  bare  enumeration  of  the
cum-r  c  r"  privileges  of  the  Aragonese  cortes,  as  well  as  of

*  Blanca  has  preserved  two  responses  of  the  justiza  to  James  II.,  who  reigned
towards  the  close  of  the  thirteenth  century,  Blanca,  748.

*  See  Note  XXXI.  c  Hier.  Blanca  Comment  p.  747.  755.

L 2

148  STATE OF EUROPE.

,cribed  the  rights  belonging  to  the  justiza,  that  a  very
narrow  small  portion  of  power  remained  in  the  hands
limits.  of  the  ting.  The  Aragonese  seem  to  have  been
solicitous  that  their  monarchs  should  know  and  feel
this  state  of  impotence,  to  which  they  were  reduced.
Even  in  swearing  allegiance  to  their  sovereign,  an  act
which  ought  naturally  to  be  accompanied  with  profes-
sions of  submission  and  respect,  they  devised  an  oath,
in  such  a  form,  as  to  remind  him  of  his  dependence  on
his  subjects.  "  We,"  said  the  justiza  to  the  king,  in
name  of  his  high-spirited  barons,  "  who  are  each  of
us  as  good,  and  who  are  altogether  more  powerful  than
you,  promise  obedience  to  your  government,  if  you
maintain  our  rights  and  liberties ;  but,  if  not,  not."
Conformably  to  this  oath,  they  established  it  as  a  fun-
damental article  in  their  constitution,  that  if,  the  king
should  violate  their  rights  and  privileges,  it  was  lawful
for  the  people  to  disclaim  him  as  their  sovereign,  and
to  elect  another,  even  though  a  heathen,  in  his  place.b
The  attachment  of  the  Aragonese  to  this  singular  con-
stitution of  government  was  extreme,  and  their  respect
for  it  approached  to  superstitious  veneration.0  In  the
preamble  to  one  of  their  laws,  they  declare,  that  such
was  the  barrenness  of  their  country,  and  the  poverty  of
the  inhabitants,  that,  if  it  were  not  on  account  of  the
liberties  by  which  they  were  distinguished  from  other
nations,  the  people  would  abandon  it,  and  go  in  quest
of  a  settlement  to  some  more  fruitful  region.d
Constitu-  ^n  Castile,  there  were  not  such  peculiarities
tion  and  in  the  form  of  government,  as  to  establish  any

govern-  i i  i i  • • • -i  -11

mentof  remarkable  distinction  between  it  and  that  of
Castile.  t|ie  Qtkej,  European  nations.  The  executive
part  of  government  was  committed  to  the  king,  but  with
a  prerogative  extremely  limited.  The  legislative  autho-
rity resided  in  the  cortes,  which  was  composed  of  the

fc  Hier.  Blanca  Comment.  720.  «  See  Note  XXXII.

d  Hier.  Blanca  Cora.  p.  ?pl.

SECT.  III.  149

nobility,  the  dignified  ecclesiastics,  and  the  representa-
tives of  the  cities.  The  assembly  of  the  cortes  in  Castile
was  very  ancient,  and  seems  to  have  been  almost  coeval
with  the  constitution.  The  members  of  the  three  dif-
ferent orders,  who  had  a  right  of  suffrage,  met  in  one
place,  and  deliberated  as  one  collective  body ;  the  de-
cisions of  which  were  regulated  by  the  sentiments  of
the  majority.  The  right  of  imposing  taxes,  of  enacting
laws,  and  of  redressing  grievances,  belonged  to  this  as-
sembly ;  and,  in  order  to  secure  the  assent  of  the  king
to  such  statutes  and  regulations  as  were  deemed  salu-
tary or  beneficial  to  the  kingdom,  it  was  usual  in  the
cortes  to  take  no  step  towards  granting  money,  until
all  business  relative  to  the  public  welfare  was  concluded.
The  representatives  of  cities  seem  to  have  obtained  a
seat  very  early  in  the  cortes  of  Castile,  and  soon  ac-
quired such  influence  and  credit,  as  were  very  uncom-
mon, at  a  period  when  the  splendour  and  pre-eminence
of  the  nobility  had  eclipsed  or  depressed  all  other  orders
of  men.  The  number  of  members  from  cities  bore  such
a  proportion  to  that  of  the  whole  collective  body,  as
rendered  them  extremely  respectable  in  the  cortes/
The  degree  of  consideration,  which  they  possessed  in

the  state,  may  be  estimated by  one event.

Upon  the  death  of  John  I.,  a  council  of  regency
was  appointed  to  govern  the  kingdom  during  the  mino-
rity of  his  son.  It  was  composed  of  an  equal  number
of  noblemen,  and  of  deputies  chosen  by  the  cities ;  the
latter  were  admitted  to  the  same  rank,  and  invested  with
the  same  powers,  as  prelates  and  grandees  of  the  first
order/  But  though  the  members  of  communities  in
Castile  were  elevated  above  the  condition  wherein  they
were  placed  in  other  kingdoms  of  Europe ;  though  they
had  attained  to  such  political  importance,  that  evea  the
proud  and  jealous  spirit  of  the  feudal  aristocracy  could
not  exclude  them  from  a  considerable  share  in  govern-
ment ;  yet  the  nobles,  notwithstanding  these  acquisi-

•  See  Note  XXXIII.  '  Marian,  Hist.  lib.  xviii.  c.  15.

J50  STATE OF EUROPE.

tions  of  the  commons,  continued  to  assert  the  privileges
of  their  order  in  opposition  to  the  crown,  in  a  tone  ex-
tremely high.  There  was  not  any  body  of  nobility  in
Europe  more  distinguished  for  independence  of  spirit,
haughtiness  of  deportment,  and  bold  pretensions,  than
that  of  Castile.  The  history  of  that  monarchy  affords
the  most  striking  examples  of  the  vigilance  with  which
they  observed,  and  of  the  vigour  with  which  they  op-
posed, every  measure  of  their  kings,  that  tended  to  en-
croach on  their  jurisdiction,  to  diminish  their  dignity,
or  to  abridge  their  power.  Even  in  their  ordinary  in-
tercourse with  their  monarchs,  they  preserved  such  a
consciousness  of  their  rank,  that  the  nobles  of  the  first
order  claimed  it  as  a  privilege  to  be  covered  in  the  royal
presence,  and  approached  their  sovereigns  rather  as
equals  than  as  subjects.

The  constitutions  of  the  subordinate  monarchies,
which  depended  on  the  crowns  of  Castile  and  Aragon,
nearly  resembled  those  of  the  kingdoms  to  which  they
were  annexed.  In  all  of  them  the  dignity  and  indepen-
dence of  the  nobles  were  great,  the  immunities  and  power
of  the  cities  were  considerable.

Various  ^n  attentive  observation  of  the  singular  situa-
causes  of  tion  of  Spain,  as  well  as.  the  various  events  which

the  limit-  r  i T.  •  P

edautho-  occurred  there  from  the  invasion  of  the  Moors
Spanish  *  to  the  union  of  its  kingdom  under  Ferdinand

an(j  isakeua?  ^ill  discover  the  causes  to  which
all  the  peculiarities  in  its  political  constitution  I  have
pointed  out,  ought  to  be  ascribed.

As  the  provinces  of  Spain  were  wrested  from  the
Mahometans  gradually  and  with  difficulty,  the  nobles
who  followed  the  standard  of  any  eminent  leader  in
these  wars,  conquered  not  for  him  alone,  but  for  them-
selves. They  claimed  a  share  in  the  lands  which  their
valour  had  won  from  the  enemy,  and  their  prosperity
and  power  increased,  in  proportion  as  the  territory  of
••the  prince  extended.

JJXuring  their  perpetual  wars  with the  Moors,  the

SECT. 111.  151

monarehs  of  the  several  kingdoms  in  Spain  depended
so  much  on  their  nobles,  that  it  became  necessary  to
conciliate  their  good-will  by  successive  grants  of  new
honours  and  privileges.  By  the  time  that  any  prince
could  establish  his  dominion  in  a  conquered  province,
the  greater  part  of  the  territory  was  parcelled  out  by
him  among  his  barons,  with  such  jurisdiction  and  im-
munities as  raised  them  almost  to  sovereign  power.

At  the  same  time,  the  kingdoms  erected  in  so  many
different  comers  of  Spain,  were  of  inconsiderable  extent.
The  petty  monarch  was  but  little  elevated  above  his
nobles.  They,  feeling  themselves  to  be  almost  his
equals,  acted  as  such ;  and  could  not  look  up  to  the
kings  of  such  limited  domains  with  the  same  reverence
that  the  sovereigns  of  the  great  monarchies  in  Europe
were  viewed  by  their  subjects.1

While  these  circumstances  concurred  in  exalting  the
nobility,  and  in  depressing  the  royal  authority,  there
were  other  causes  which  raised  the  cities  in  Spain  to
consideration  and  power.

As  the  open  country,  during  the  wars  with  the  Moors,
was  perpetually  exposed  to  the  excursions  of  the  enemy,
with  whom  no  peace  or  truce  was  so  permanent  as  to
prove  any  lasting  security,  self-preservation  obliged
persons  of  all  ranks  to  fix  their  residence  in  places  of
strength.  The  castles  of  the  barons,  which,  in  other
countries,  afforded  a  commodious  retreat  from  the  de-
predations of  banditti,  or  from  the  transient  violence  of
any  interior  commotion,  were  unable  to  resist  an  enemy
whose  operations  were  conducted  with  regular  and
persevering  vigour.  Cities,  in  which  great  numbers
united  for  their  mutual  defence,  were  the  only  places
in  which  people  could  reside  with  any  prospect  of
safety.  To  this  was  owing  the  rapid  growth  of  those
cities  in  Spain  of  which  the  Christians  recovered  pos-
session. All  who  fled  from  the  Moorish  yoke  resorted

i  Sec  Note  XXXIV.

152  STATE OF  EUROPE.

to  them,  as  to  an  asylum;  and  in  them,  the  greater  part
of  those  who  took  the  field  against  the  Mahometans,
established  their  families.

Several  of  these  cities,  during  a  longer  or  shorter  course
of  years,  were  the  capitals  of  little  states,  and  enjoyed  all
the  advantages  which  accelerate  the  increase  of  inha-
bitants in  every  place  that  is  the  seat  of  government.

From  these  concurring  causes,  the  number  of  cities
in  Spain,  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century,  had
become  considerable,  and  they  were  peopled  far  beyond
the  proportion  which  was  common  in  other  parts  of
Europe,  except  in  Italy  and  the  Low  Countries.  The
Moors  had  introduced  manufactures  into  those  cities,
while  under  their  dominion.  The  Christians,  who,  by
intermixture  with  them,  had  learned  their  arts,  con-
tinued to  cultivate  these.  Trade,  in  several  of  the
Spanish  towns,  appears  to  have  been  carried  on  with
vigour;  and  the  spirit  of  commerce  continued  to  pre-
serve the  number  of  their  inhabitants,  as  the  sense  of
danger  had  first  induced  them  to  crowd  together.

As  the  Spanish  cities  were  populous,  many  of  the
inhabitants  were  of  a  rank  superior  to  those  who  re-
sided in  towns  in  other  countries  of  Europe.  That
cause,  which  contributed  chiefly  to  their  population,
affected  equally  persons  of  every  condition,  who  flocked
thither  promiscuously,  in  order  to  find  shelter  there,  or
in  hopes  of  making  a  stand  against  the  enemy,  with
greater  advantage  than  in  any  other  station.  The  per-
sons elected  as  their  representatives  in  the  cortes  by
the  cities,  or  promoted  to  offices  of  trust  and  dignity
in  the  government  of  the  community,  were  often,  as
will  appear  from  transactions  which  I  shall  hereafter
relate,  of  such  considerable  rank  in  the  kingdom,  as  re-
flected lustre  on  their  constituents,  and  on  the  stations
wherein  they  were  placed.

As  it  was  impossible  to  carry  on  a  continual  war
against  the  Moors,  without  some  other  military  force

SECT,  nr,

than  that  which  the  barons  were  obliged  to  bring  into
the  field,  in  consequence  of  the  feudal  tenures,  it  be-
came necessary  to  have  some  troops,  particularly  a  body
of  light  cavalry,  in  constant  pay.  It  was  one  of  the
privileges  of  the  nobles,  that  their  lands  were  exempt
from  the  burden  of  taxes.  The  charge  of  supporting
the  troops  requisite  for  the  public  safety  fell  wholly
upon  the  cities;  and  their  kings,  being  obliged  fre-
quently to  apply  to  them  for  aid,  found  it  necessary  to
gain  their  favour  by  concessions,  which  not  only  ex-
tended their  immunities,  but  added  to  their  wealth
and  power.

When  the  influence  of  all  these  circumstances,  pe-
culiar to  Spain,  is  added  to  the  general  and  common
causes,  which  contributed  to  aggrandize  cities  in  other
countries  of  Europe,  this  will  fully  account  for  the  ex-
tensive privileges  which  they  acquired,  as  well  as  for
the  extraordinary  consideration  to  which  they  attained,
in  all  the  Spanish  kingdoms.01
Measures  By  these  exorbitant  privileges  of  the  nobility,

of  different  an(:i  fais  unusual  power  of  the  cities  in  Spain,

princes,  m  r

order  to  the  royal  prerogative  was  hemmed  in  on  every
the?"  side,  and  reduced  within  very  narrow  bounds.
power ;  Sensible  of  this,  and  impatient  of  such  restraint,
several  monarchs  endeavoured,  at  various  junctures,
and  by  different  means,  to  enlarge  their  own  jurisdic-
tion. Their  power,  however,  or  their  abilities,  were  so
unequal  to  the  undertaking,  that  their  efforts  were  at-
tended  with  little  success.  But  when  Ferdi-
nand  and  Isabella  found  themselves  at  the  head
Isabella.  of  faQ  united  kingdoms  of  Spain,  and  delivered
from  the  danger  and  interruption  of  domestic  wars,  they
were  not  only  in  a  condition  to  resume,  but  were  able
to  prosecute  with  advantage,  the  schemes  of  extending
the  prerogative,  which  their  ancestors  had  attempted  in
vain.  Ferdinand's  profound  sagacity,  in  concerting  his

m  See  Note  XXXV.

'
1,54  STATE OF EUROPE.

measures,  his  persevering  industry  in  conducting  them,
and  his  uncommon  address  in  carrying  them  into  ex-
ecution, fitted  him  admirably  for  an  undertaking  which
required  all  these  talents.

Ferdinand's  As  the  overgrown  power  and  high  preten-
different  sions  of  the  nobility  were  what  the  monarchs

schemes  for  J

abridging  of  Spain  felt  most  sensibly,  and  bore  with  the
greatest  impatience,  the  great  object  of  Fer-
dinand's  policy  was  to  reduce  these  within
%•  more  moderate  bounds.  Under  various  pre-
texts, sometimes  by  violence,  more  frequently  in  con-
sequence of  decrees  obtained  in  the  courts  of  law,  he
wrested  from  the  barons  a  great  part  of  the  lands  which
had  been  granted  to  them  by  the  inconsiderate  bounty
of  former  monarchs,  particularly  during  the  feeble  and
profuse  reign  of  his  predecessor,  Henry  IV.  He  did
not  give  the  entire  conduct  of  affairs  to  persons  of  noble
birth,  who  were  accustomed  to  occupy  every  depart-
ment of  importance  in  peace  or  in  war,  as  if  it  had  been
a  privilege  peculiar  to  their  order,  to  be  employed  as
the  sole  counsellors  and  ministers  of  the  crown.  He
often  transacted  business  of  great  consequence,  without
their  intervention,  and  bestowed  many  offices  of  power
and  trust  on  new  men,  devoted  to  his  interest.d  He
introduced  a  degree  of  state  and  dignity  into  his  court,
which  being  little  known  in  Spain,  while  it  remained
split  into  many  small  kingdoms,  taught  the  nobles  to
approach  their  sovereign  with  more  ceremony,  and
gradually  rendered  him  the  object  of  greater  deference
and  respect.

Particular!  ^e  annexmg  tne  masterships  of  the  three
by  annex-  military  orders  of  St.  Jaoro,  Calatrava,  and  Al-

ing  the  f  ,  .

grand-mas,  cantara,  to  the  crown,  was  another  expedient,

b7  which  Ferdinand  greatly  augmented  the
orders  to revenue and power of  the  kings of  Spain.

the  crown  j  &  r

These  orders  were  instituted  in  imitation  oi

Zurita  Annales  de  Arag.  torn.  vi.  p.

SECT. III.  155

those  of  the  knights  templars  of  St.  John  of  Jerusalem,
on  purpose  to  wage  perpetual  war  with  the  Mahome-
tans, and  to  protect  the  pilgrims  who  visited  Compos-
tella,  or  other  places  of  eminent  sanctity  in  Spain.  The
zeal  and  superstition  of  the  ages  in  which  they  were
founded,  prompted  persons  of  every  rank  to  bestow
such  liberal  donations  on  those  holy  warriors,  that,  in
a  short  time,  they  engrossed  a  considerable  share  in  the
property  and  wealth  of  the  kingdom.  The  masterships
of  these  orders  came  to  be  stations  of  the  greatest  power
and  opulence  to  which  a  Spanish  nobleman  could  be
advanced.  These  high  dignities  were  in  the  disposal
of  the  knights  of  the  order,  and  placed  the  persons  on
whom  they  conferred  them  almost  on  a  level  with  their
sovereign.6  Ferdinand,  unwilling  that  the  nobility,
whom  he  considered  as  already  too  formidable,  should
derive  such  additional  credit  and  influence  from  pos-
sessing the  government  of  these  wealthy  fraternities,
was  solicitous  to  wrest  it  out  of  their  hands,  and  to
vest  it  in  the  crown.  His  measures  for  accomplishing
A.  D.  1476  this  were  wisely  planned,  and  executed  with
493t  vigour/  By  address,  by  promises,  and  by
threats,  he  prevailed  on  the  knights  of  each  order  to
place  Isabella  and  him  at  the  head  of  it.  Innocent  VIII.
and  Alexander  VI.  gave  this  election  the  sanction  of
papal  authority  ;g  and  subsequent  pontiffs  rendered  the
annexation  of  these  masterships  to  the  crown  perpetual.
While  Ferdinand,  by  this  measure,  dimi-
nished  the  power  and  influence  of  the  nobi-
onheno-  litv>  an(i  added  new  lustre  or  authority  to  the
biiity.  crown,  he  was  taking  other  important  steps
with  a  view  to  the  same  object.  The  sovereign  juris-
diction, which  the  feudal  barons  exercised  within  their
own  territories,  was  the  pride  and  distinction  of  their

e  See  Note  XXXVI.  f  Marian.  Hist.  lib.  xxv.  c.  5.

«  Zurita  Annales,  toni.  v.  p.  22, JElii  Anton.  Nebrissensis  rerum  a  Ferdinand
et  Elizabe  Gestarum  Decades  ii.  apud  Scliot,  script.  Hbpan,  i.  860.

156  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

order. To  have  invaded  openly  a  privilege  which  they
prized  so  highly,  and  in  defence  of  which  they  would
have  run  so  eagerly  to  arms,  was  a  measure  too  daring
for  a  prince  of  Ferdinand's  cautious  temper. He  took
advantage,  however,  of  an  opportunity  which  the  state
of  his  kingdoms  and  the  spirit  of  his  people  presented
him,  in  order  to  undermine  what  he  durst  not  assault.
The  incessant  depredations  of  the  Moors,  the  want  of
discipline  among  the  troops  which  were  employed  to
oppose  them,  the  frequent  civil  wars  between  the  crown
and  the  nobility,  as  well  as  the  undiscerning  rage  with
which  the  barons  carried  on  their  private  wars  with
each  other,  filled  all  the  provinces  of  Spain  with  dis-
order. Rapine,  outrage,  and  murder  became  so  com-
mon, as  not  only  to  interrupt  commerce,  but  in  a  great
measure  to  suspend  all  intercourse  between  one  place
and  another. That  security  and  protection,  which  men
expect  from  entering  into  civil  society,  ceased  in  a  great
degree. Internal  order  and  police,  while  the  feudal
institutions  remained  in  vigour,  were  so  little  objects
of  attention,  and  the  administration  of  justice  were  so
extremely  feeble,  that  it  would  have  been  vain  to  have
expected  relief  from  the  established  laws  or  the  or-
dinary judges. But 'the  evil  became  so  intolerable,
and  the  inhabitants  of  cities,  who  were  the  chief  suf-
ferers, grew  so  impatient  of  this  anarchy,  that  self-pre-
servation forced  them  to  have  recourse  to  an  extraor-
dinary remedy. About  the  middle  of  the  thir-
teenth century,  the  cities  in  the  kingdom  of
Aragon,  and,  after  their  example,  those  in  Castile,
formed  themselves  into  an  association,  distinguished
by  the  name  of  the  Holy  Brotherhood. They  exacted
a certain  contribution from  each of  the  associated
towns ;  they  levied  a  considerable  body  of  troops,  in
order  to  protect  travellers,  and  to  pursue  criminals;
they  appointed  judges,  who  opened  their  courts  in  va-
rious parts  of  the  kingdom. Whoever  was  guilty  of

SECT.  III.  157

murder,  robbery,  or  of  any  act  that  violated  the  public
peace,  and  was  seized  by  the  troops  of  the  Brotherhood,
was  carried  before  judges  of  their  nomination,  who,
without  paying  any  regard  to  the  exclusive  and  sove-
reign jurisdiction  which  the  lord  of  the  place  might
claim,  tried  and  condemned  the  criminals.  By  the
establishment  of  this  fraternity,  the  prompt  and  impar-
tial administration  of  justice  was  restored ;  and,  together
with  it,  internal  tranquillity  and  order  began  to  return.
The  nobles  alone  murmured  at  this  salutary  institution.
They  complained  of  it  as  an  encroachment  on  one  of
their  most  valuable  privileges.  They  remonstrated
against  it  in  a  high  tone ;  and,  on  some  occasions,  re-
fused to  grant  any  aid  to  the  crown,  unless  it  were  abo-
lished. Ferdinand,  however,  was  sensible  not  only  of
the  good  effects  of  the  holy  brotherhood  with  respect  to
the  police  of  his  kingdoms,  but  perceived  its  tendency
to  abridge,  and  at  length  to  annihilate,  the  territorial
jurisdiction  of  the  nobility.  He  countenanced  it  on
every  occasion,  He  supported  it  with  the  whole  force
of  royal  authority;  and,  besides  the  expedients  em-
ployed by  him  in  common  with  the  other  monarchs  of
Europe,  he  availed  himself  of  this  institution,  which
was  peculiar  to  his  kingdom,  in  order  to  limit  and  abo-
lish that  independent  jurisdiction  of  the  nobility,  which
was  no  less  inconsistent  with  the  authority  of  the  prince,
than  with  the  order  of  society.*

Notwith-  But  though  Ferdinand  by  these  measures
aUthese,  considerably  enlarged  the  boundaries  of  pre-
the  go-  rotative,  and  acquired  a  degree  of  influence

vernment  *

of  Spain  and  power  far  beyond  what  any  of  his  prede-
tremeiy  cessors  had  enjoyed,  yet  the  limitations  of  the
royal  authority,  as  well  as  the  barriers  against
its  encroachments,  continued  to  be  many  and  strong.
The  spirit  of  liberty  was  vigorous  among  the  people  of
Spain  ;  the  spirit  of  independence  was  high  among  the

»  See  Note  XXXVII.

>
158  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

nobility ;  and  though  the  love  of  glory,  peculiar  to  the
Spaniards  in  every  period  of  their  history,  prompted
them  to  support  Ferdinand  with  zeal  in  his  foreign
operations,  and  to  afford  him  such  aid  as  enabled  him
not  only  to  undertake  but  to  execute  great  enterprises  ;
he  reigned  over  his  subjects  with  a  jurisdiction  less  ex-
tensive than  that  of  any  of  the  great  monarchs  in  Eu-
rope. It  will  appear  from  many  passages  in  the  fol-
lowing history,  that,  during  a  considerable  part  of  the
reign  of  his  successor  Charles  V.,  the  prerogative  of  the
Spanish  crown  was  equally  circumscribed.
Constitu  ^^e  anc^ent  government  and  laws  in  France
tbn  and  so  nearly  resemble  those  of  the  other  feudal
mentof  kingdoms,  that  such  a  detail  with  respect  to
France,  them  as  was  necessary,  in  order  to  convey  some
idea  of  the  nature  and  effects  of  the  peculiar  insti-
tutions which  took  place  in  Spain  would  be  superflu-
ous. In  the  view  which  I  have  exhibited  of  the  means
by  which  the  French  monarchs  acquired  such  a  full
command  of  the  national  force  of  their  kingdom,  as
enabled  them  to  engage  in  extensive  schemes  of  foreign
operation,  I  have  already  pointed  out  the  great  steps  by
which  they  advanced  towards  a  more  ample  possession
of  political  power,  and  a  more  uncontrolled  exercise
of  their  royal  prerogative.  All  that  now  remains  is  to
take  notice  of  such  particulars  in  the  constitution  of
France,  as  serve  either  to  distinguish  it  from  that  of
other  countries,  or  tend  to  throw  any  light  on  the
transactions  of  that  period,  to  which  the  foil  owing  his-
tory extends.

Power  of  Under  the  French  monarchs  of  the  first  race,
the  gene-  the  royal  prerogative  was  very  inconsiderable.

ral  assem-  i

biies  under  1  he  general  assemblies  of  the  nation,  which
race  of  met  annually  at  stated  seasons,  extended  their
kin8s-  authority  to  every  department  of  government.
The  power  of  electing  kings,  of  enacting  laws,  of  re-
dressing grievances,  of  conferring  donations  on  the

Under  the
third.

SECT.  III.

prince,  of  passing  judgment  in  the  last  resort,  with  re-
spect to  every  person  and  to  every  cause,  resided  in
Under  the  this  great  convention  of  the  nation.  Under
nd'  the  second  race  of  kings,  notwithstanding  the
power  and  splendour  which  the  conquests  of  Charle-
magne added  to  the  crown,  the  general  assemblies  of
the  nation  continued  to  possess  extensive  authority.
The  right  of  determining  which  of  the  royal  family
should  be  placed  on  the  throne,  was  vested  in  them.
The  princes  elevated  to  that  dignity  by  their  suffrage,
were  accustomed  regularly  to  call  and  to  consult  them
with  respect  to  every  affair  of  importance  to  the  state,
and  without  their  consent  no  law  was  passed,  and  no
new  tax  was  levied.

But,  by  the  time  that  Hugh  Capet,  the  father
of  the  third  race  of  kings,  took  possession  of  the
throne  of  France,  such  changes  had  happened  in  the
political  state  of  the  kingdom,  as  considerably  affected
the  power  and  jurisdiction  of  the  general  assembly  of
the  nation.  The  royal  authority,  in  the  hands  elf  the
degenerate  posterity  of  Charlemagne,  had  dwindled  into
insignificance  and  contempt.  Every  considerable  pro-
prietor of  land  had  formed  his  territory  into  a  barony,
almost  independent  of  the  sovereign.  The  dukes  or
governors  of  provinces,  the  counts  or  governors  of
towns  and  small  districts,  and  the  great  officers  of  the
crown,  had  rendered  these  dignities,  which  originally
were  granted  only  during  pleasure  or  for  life,  heredi-
tary in  their  families.  Each  of  these  had  usurped  all
the  rights  which  hitherto  had  been  deemed  the  distinc-
tions of  royalty,  particularly  the  privileges  of  dispensing
justice  within  their  own  domains,  of  coining  money,
and  of  waging  war.  Every  district  was  governed
by  local  customs,  acknowledged  a  distinct  lord,  and
pursued  a  separate  interest.  The  formality  of  doing
homage  to  their  sovereign,  was  about  the  only  act  of
subjection  which  those  haughty  barons  would  perform,

160  STATE  OF EUROPE.

and  that  bound  them  no  farther  than  they  were  will-
ing to  acknowledge  its  obligation.6
The  power ^  a  kingdom  broken  into  so  many  indepen-
Of  the  ge-  dent  baronies,  hardly  any  common  principle  of

neral  as-  • i  i i  i

less  union  remained  ;  and  the  general  assembly,  in
d  its  deliberations,  could  scarcely  consider  the  na-
on  ag  forming  one  body,  or  establish  common
regulations  to  be  of  equal  force  in  every  part.  Within
the  immediate  domains  of  the  crown,  the  king  might
publish  laws,  and  they  were  obeyed,  because  there  he
was  acknowledged  as  the  only  lord.  But  if  he  had
aimed  at  rendering  these  laws  general,  that  would  have
alarmed  the  barons  as  an  encroachment  upon  the  inde-
pendence of  their  jurisdiction.  The  barons,  when  met
in  the  great  national  convention,  avoided,  with  no  less
care,  the  enacting  of  general  laws  to  be  observed  in
every  part  of  the  kingdom,  because  the  execution  of
them  must  have  been  vested  in  the  king,  and  would
have  enlarged  that  paramount  power  which  was  the
object  of  their  jealousy.  Thus,  under  the  descendants
of  Hugh  Capet,  the  states-general  (for  that  was  the
name  by  which  the  supreme  assembly  of  the  French
nation  came  then  to  be  distinguished)  lost  their  legis-
lative authority,  or  at  least  entirely  relinquished  the  ex-
ercise of  it.  From  that  period,  the  jurisdiction  of  the
states-general  extended  no  farther  than  to  the  imposi-
tion of  new  taxes,  the  determination  of  questions  with
respect  to  the  right  of  succession  to  the  crown,  the
settling  of  the  regency  when  the  preceding  monarch
had  not  fixed  it  by  his  will,  and  the  presenting  remon-
strances enumerating  the  grievances  of  which  the  na-
tion wished  to  obtain  redress.

As,  during  several  centuries,  the  monarchs  of  Europe
seldom  demanded  extraordinary  subsidies  of  their  sub-
jects, and  the  other  events,  which  required  the  interpo-
sition of  the  states,  rarely  occurred,  their  meetings  in

>  See  Note  XXXVIII.

SECT.  III.

161

France  were  not  frequent.  They  were  summoned  oc-
casionally by  their  kings,  when  compelled  by  their
wants,  or  by  their  fears,  to  have  recourse  to  the  great
convention  of  their  people  ;  but  they  did  not,  like  the
diet  in  Germany,  the  cortes  in  Spain,  or  the  parliament
in  England,  form  an  essential  member  of  the  constitu-
tion, the  regular  exertion  of  whose  powers  was  requi-
site to  give  vigour  and  order  to  government.
The  crown  When  the  states  of  France  ceased  to  exercise
begins  to  legislative  authority,  the  kings  began  to  assume
gisiative  it.  They  ventured  at  first  on  acts  of  legislation
mty*  with  great  reserve,  and  after  taking  every  pre-
caution that  could  prevent  their  subjects  from  being
alarmed  at  the  exercise  of  a  new  power.  They  did  not
at  once  issue  their  ordinances  in  a  tone  of  authority  and
command.  They  treated  with  their  subjects  ;  they
pointed  out  what  was  best;  and  allured  them  to  comply
with  it.  By  degrees,  however,  as  the  prerogative  of  the
crown  extended,  and  as  the  supreme  jurisdiction  of  the
royal  courts  came  to  be  established,  the  kings  of  France
assumed  more  openly  the  style  and  authority  of  law-
givers ;  and,  before  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury, the  complete  legislative  power  was  vested  in  the
crown.a
And  the  Having  secured  this  important  acquisition,  the

taxes.

stePs  which  led  to  the  right  of  imposing  taxes
were  rendered  few  and  easy.  The  people,  ac-
customed to  see  their  sovereigns  issue  ordinances,  by
their  sole  authority,  which  regulated  points  of  the  greatest
consequence  with  respect  to  the  property  of  their  sub-
jects, were  not  alarmed  when  they  were  required,
by  the  royal  edicts,  to  contribute  certain  sums  towards
supplying  the  exigencies  of  government,  and  carrying
forward  the  measures  of  the  nation.  When  Charles  VII.
and  Louis  XI.  first  ventured  to  exercise  this  new  power,
in  the  manner  which  I  have  already  described,  the  gra-

VOL.  III.

See  Note  XXXIX.
M

162  STATE  OF  EUROPE.

dual  increase  of  the  royal  authority  had  so  imperceptibly
prepared  the  minds  of  the  people  of  France  for  this  in-
novation, that  it  excited  no  commotion  in  the  kingdom,
and  seems  scarcely  to  have  given  rise  to  any  murmur
or  complaint.

Govern-  When  the  kings  of  France  had  thus  engrossed
France*  every  power  which  can  be  exerted  in  govern-
ment  ?  when  the  right  of  making  laws,  of  levy-
ing  money,  of  keeping  an  army  of  mercenaries
in  constant  pay,  of  declaring  war,  and  of  concluding
peace,  centred  in  the  crown,  the  constitution  of  the
kingdom,  which,  under  the  first  race  of  kings,  was
nearly  democratical ;  which,  under  the  second  race,  be-
came an  aristocracy  ;  terminated,  under  the  third  race,
in  a  pure  monarchy.  Every  thing  that  tended  to  pre-
serve the  appearance,  or  revive  the  memory,  of  the  an-
cient mixed  government,  seems  from  that  period  to  have
been  industriously  avoided.  During  the  long  and  ac-
tive reign  of  Francis  I.,  the  variety  as  well  as  extent  of
whose  operations  obliged  him  to  lay  many  heavy  im-
positions on  his  subjects,  the  states-general  of  France
were  not  once  assembled,  nor  were  the  people  once  al-
lowed to  exert  the  power  of  taxing  themselves,  which,
according  to  the  original  ideas  of  feudal  government,
was  a  right  essential  to  every  freeman.
The  exer-  '^wo  ^nSs»  however,  remained,  which  mode-
ciseofpre-  rated  the  exercise  of  the  regal  prerogative,  and

rogative  . , . . .  ,  .  , ,  &

restrained  restrained  it  within  such  bounds  as  preserved
vUejJeVoT  t^ie  constitution  of  France  from  degenerating
thenobi-  into  mere  despotism.  The  rights  and  privileges
claimed  by  the  nobility,  must  be  considered  as
one  barrier  against  the  absolute  dominion  of  the  crown.
Though  the  nobles  of  France  had  lost  that  political
power  which  was  vested  in  their  order  as  a  body,  they
still  retained  the  personal  rights  and  pre-eminence  which
they  derived  from  their  rank.  They  preserved  a  con-
sciousness of  elevation  above  other  classes  of  citizens ;

SECT. III.

163

an  exemption  from  burdens  to  which  persons  of  infe-
rior condition  were  subject;  a  contempt  of  the  occupa-
tions in  which  they  were  engaged ;  the  privilege  of  as-
suming ensigns  that  indicated  their  own  dignity ;  a
right  to  be  treated  with  a  certain  degree  of  deference
during  peace ;  and  a  claim  to  various  distinctions  when
in  the  field.  Many  of  these  pretensions  were  not  founded
on  the  words  of  statutes,  or  derived  from  positive  laws ;
they  were  defined  and  ascertained  by  the  maxims  of
honour,  a  title  more  delicate,  but  no  less  sacred.  These
rights,  established  and  protected  by  a  principle  equally
vigilant  in  guarding,  and  intrepid  in  defending  them,
are  to  the  sovereign  himself  objects  of  respect  and  ve-
neration. Wherever  they  stand  in  its  way,  the  royal
prerogative  is  bounded.  The  violence  of  a  despot  may
exterminate  such  an  order  of  men ;  but  as  long  as  it
subsists,  and  its  ideas  of  personal  distinction  remain  en-
tire, the  power  of  the  prince  has  limits.8

As  in  France,  the  body  of  nobility  was  very  nume-
rous, and  the  individuals  of  which  it  was  composed  re-
tained a  high  sense  of  their  own  pre-eminence,  to  this
we  may  ascribe,  in  a  great  measure,  the  mode  of  exer-
cising the  royal  prerogative  which  peculiarly  distin-
guishes the  government  of  that  kingdom.  An  interme-
diate order  was  placed  between  the  monarch  and  his
other  subjects,  and  in  every  act  of  authority  became  ne-
cessary to  attend  to  its  privileges,  and  not  only  to  guard
against  any  real  violation  of  them,  but  to  avoid  any  sus-
picion of  supposing  it  to  be  possible  that  they  might  be
violated.  Thus  a  species  of  government  was  established
in  France  unknown  in  the  ancient  world,  that  of  a  mo-
narchy, in  which  the  power  of  the  sovereign,  though
unconfined  by  any  legal  or  constitutional  restraint,  has
certain  bounds  set  to  it  by  the  ideas  which  one  class  of
his  subjects  entertain  concerning  their  own  dignity.

K  De  PEsprit  des  Loix,  liv.  ii.  c.  4.
Society,  parti,  sect.  10.

Dr.  Ferguson's  Essay  on  the  Hist,  of  Civil
M  2

164  STATE OF EUROPE.

The  jurisdiction  of  the  parliaments  in  France,

And  bv  the  »  11-

jurisdic-  particularly  that  of  Pans,  was  the  other  barrier
partia- th6  which  served  to  confine  the  exercise  of  the  royal
ticeuiar'ipar~  Prerogative  within  certain  limits.  The  parlia-
that  of  ment  of  Paris  was  originally  the  court  of  the
kings  of  France,  to  which  they  committed  the
supreme  administration  of  justice  within  their  own  do-
mains, as  well  as  the  power  of  deciding  with  respect
to  all  cases  brought  before  it  by  appeals  from  the  courts
of  the  barons.  When,  in  consequence  of  events  and
regulations  which  have  been  mentioned  formerly,  the
time  and  place  of  its  meeting  were  fixed,  when  not  only
the  form  of  its  procedure,  but  the  principles  on  which
it  decided,  were  rendered  regular  and  consistent,  when
every  cause  of  importance  was  finally  determined  there,
and  when  the  people  became  accustomed  to  "resort
thither  as  to  the  supreme  temple  of  justice,  the  parlia-
ment of  Paris  rose  to  high  estimation  in  the  kingdom,
its  members  acquired  dignity,  and  its  decrees  were  sub-
mitted to  with  deference.  Nor  was  this  the  only  source
of  the  power  and  influence  which  the  parliament  ob-
tained. The  kings  of  France,  when  they  first  began  to
assume  the  legislative  power,  in  order  to  reconcile  the
minds  of  their  people  to  this  new  exertion  of  preroga-
tive, produced  their  edicts  and  ordinances  in  the  par-
liament of  Paris,  that  they  might  be  approved  of  and
registered  there,  before  they  were  published  and  de-
clared to  be  of  authority  in  the  kingdom.  During  the
intervals  between  the  meetings  of  the  states-general  of
the  kingdom,  or  during  those  reigns  in  which  the  states-
general  were  not  assembled,  the  monarchs  of  France
were  accustomed  to  consult  the  parliament  of  Paris
with  respect  to  the  most  arduous  affairs  of  government,
and  frequently  regulated  their  conduct  by  its  advice,  in
declaring  war,  in  concluding  peace,  and  in  other  trans-
actions of  public  concern.  Thus  there  was  erected  in
the  kingdom  a  tribunal  which  became  the  great  depo-

SECT. Ill

165

sitory  of  the  laws,  and  by  the  uniform  tenor  of  its  de-
crees, established  principles  of  justice  and  forms  of  pro-
ceedings which  were  considered  as  so  sacred,  that  even
the  sovereign  power  of  the  monarch  durst  not  venture
to  disregard  or  to  violate  them.  The  members  of  this
illustrious  body,  though  they  neither  possess  legislative
authority,  nor  can  be  considered  as  the  representatives
of  the  people,  have  availed  themselves  of  the  reputation
and  influence  which  they  had  acquired  among  their
countrymen,  in  order  to  make  a  stand,  to  the  utmost  of
their  ability,  against  every  unprecedented  and  exorbi-
tant exertion  of  the  prerogative.  In  every  period  of  the
French  history,  they  have  merited  the  praise  of  being
the  virtuous  but  feeble  guardians  of  the  rights  and  pri-
vileges of  the  nation.8

After  taking  this  view  of  the  political  state  of
France,  I  proceed  to  consider  that  of  the  Ger-
man empire,  from  which  Charles  V.  derived  his
title  of  highest  dignity.  In  explaining  the  con-
stitution of  this  great  and  complex  body  at  the
beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,  I  shall  avoid  enter-
ing into  such  a  detail  as  would  involve  my  readers  in
that  inextricable  labyrinth,  which  is  formed  by  the  mul-
tiplicity of  its  tribunals,  the  number  of  its  members,
their  interfering  rights,  and  by  the  endless  discussions
or  refinements  of  the  public  lawyers  of  Germany,  with
respect  to  all  these.  .  i  *;  ,<  -7

its  state  The  empire  of  Charlemagne  was  a  structure
Charfe-  erected  in  so  short  a  time,  that  it  could  not  be
hisgdee-and  permanent.  Under  his  immediate  successor  it
scendants.  began  to  totter;  and  soon  after  fell  to  pieces.
The  crown  of  Germany  was  separated  from  that  of
France,  and  the  descendants  of  Charlemagne  esta-
blished two  great  monarchies  so  situated  as  to  give
rise  to  a  perpetual  rivalship  and  enmity  between  them.
But  the  princes  of  the  race  of  Charlemagne  who  were

9  See  Note  XL.

Constitu-
tion and
govern-
ment of
the  Ger-
man em-
pire. ,

lb*6  STATE OF EUROPE.

placed  on  the  Imperial  throne,  were  not  altogether  so
degenerate  as  those  of  the  same  family  who  reigned  in
France.  In  the  hands  of  the  former  the  royal  authority
retained  some  vigour,  and  the  nobles  of  Germany,
though  possessed  of  extensive  privileges  as  well  as  am-
ple territories,  did  not  so  early  attain  independence.
The  great  offices  of  the  crown  continued  to  be  at  the
disposal  of  the  sovereign,  and  during  a  long  period,
fiefs  remained  in  their  original  state,  without  becoming,
hereditary  and  perpetual  in  the  families  of  the  persons
to  whom  they  had  been  granted.
other  fa-  At  length  the  German  branch  of  the  family
to6  of  Charlemagne  became  extinct,  and  his  feeble

Ha!  dTgP-e"  descendants  who  reigned  in  France  had  sunk
nity«  into  such  contempt,  that  the  Germans,  without
looking  towards  them,  exercised  the  right  inherent  in
a  free  people  ;  and  in  a  general  assembly  of  the
nation  elected  Conrad,  count  of  Franconia,  em-
peror. After  him  Henry  of  Saxony,  and  his  descend-
ants, the  three  Othos,  were  placed  in  succession,  on  the
imperial  throne,  by  the  suffrages  of  their  countrymen.
The  extensive  territories  of  the  Saxon  emperors,  their
eminent  abilities  and  enterprising  genius,  not  only  ad-
ded new  vigour  to  the  imperial  dignity,  but  raised  it  to
A  D  5  higher  power  and  pre-eminence.  Otho  the
Great  marched  at  the  head  of  a  numerous  army
into  Italy,  and,  after  the  example  of  Charlemagne,
gave  law  to  that  country.  Every  power  there  recog-
nised his  authority.  He  created  popes,  and  deposed
them,  by  his  sovereign  mandate.  He  annexed  the  king-
dom of  Italy  to  the  German  empire.11  Elated  with  his
success,  he  assumed  the  title  of  -Caesar  Augustus.
A  prince,  born  in  the  heart  of  Germany,  pretended  to
be  the  successor  of  the  emperors  of  ancient  Rome,
and  claimed  a  right  to  the  same  power  and  prero-
gative.

h  Annalista  Saxo,  &c.  ap.  Struv.  Corp.  vol.  i.  p.  246.

SECT. III.

167

The  Ger- But  while  the  emperors,  by  means  of  the£e
man  nobi- new  titles  and  new  dominions,  gradually  ac-

hty  acquire  j i j

indepen-  quired  additional  authority  and  splendour,  the
soyeretgn  nobility  of  Germany  had  gone  on  at  the  same
)nty*  time  extending  their  privileges  and  jurisdiction.
The  situation  of  affairs  was  favourable  to  their  attempts.
The  vigour  which  Charlemagne  had  given  to  govern-
ment quickly  relaxed.  The  incapacity  of  some  of  his
successors  was  such,  as  would  have  encouraged  vassals,
less  enterprising  than  the  nobles  of  that  age,  to  have
claimed  new  rights,  and  to  have  assumed  new  powers.
The  civil  wars  in  which  other  emperors  were  engaged,
obliged  them  to  pay  perpetual  court  to  their  subjects,
on  whose  support  they  depended,  and  not  only  to  con-
nive at  their  usurpations,  but  to  permit,  and  even  to  au-
thorize them.  Fiefs  gradually  became  hereditary.  They
were  transmitted  not  only  in  the  direct,  but  also  in  the
collateral  line.  The  investiture  of  them  was  demanded
not  only  by  male  but  by  female  heirs.  Every  baron
began  to  exercise  sovereign  jurisdiction  within  his  own
domains ;  and  the  dukes  and  counts  of  Germany  took
wide  steps  towards  rendering  their  territories  distinct
The  Ger-  and  independent  states.1  The  Saxon  emperors
observed  their  progress,  and  were  aware  of  its

0  e

the  same  tendency.  But  as  they  could  not  hope  to  hum-
power.  ble  vassals  already  grown  too  potent,  unless
they  had  turned  their  whole  force  as  well  as  attention
to  that  enterprise,  and  as  they  were  extremely  intent  on
their  expeditions  into  Italy,  which  they  could  not  un-
dertake without  the  concurrence  of  their  nobles,  they
were  solicitous  not  to  alarm  them  by  any  direct  attack
on  their  privileges  and  jurisdictions.  They  aimed,
however,  at  undermining  their  power.  With  this  view,
they  inconsiderately  bestowed  additional  territories,
and  accumulated  new  honours  on  the  clergy,  in  hopes

•  Pfeffel.  Abrege,  p.  120.  152. Lib.  Feudor.  tit.  i.

168  STATE OF EUROPE,

that  this  order  might  serve  as  a  counterpoise  to  that  of
the  nobility  in  any  future  struggle. k
The  fatal The  unhappy  effects  of  this  fatal  error  in  po-
licy were  quickly  felt. Under  the  emperors  of

io-
dizing the the  Franconian  and  Swabian  lines,  whom  the

A.D.  1024.  Germans,  by  their  voluntary  election,  placed  on
the  imperial  throne,  a  new  face  of  things,  appeared,  and
a  scene  was  exhibited  in  Germany,  which  astonished  all
Christendom  at  that  time,  and  in  the  present  age  ap-
pears almost  incredible.  The  popes  hitherto  depended
on  the  emperors,  and  indebted  for  power  as  well  as
dignity  to  their  beneficence  and  protection,  began  to
claim  a  superior  jurisdiction;  and,  in  virtue  of  authority
which  they  pretended  to  derive  from  Heaven,  tried,  con-
demned, excommunicated,  and  deposed,  their  former
masters.  Nor  is  this  to  be  considered  merely  as  a  fran-
tic sally  of  passion  in  a  pontiff  intoxicated  with  high
ideas  concerning  the  extent  of  priestly  domination,  and
the  plenitude  of  papal  authority.  Gregory  VII.  was
able  as  well  as  daring.  His  presumption  and  violence
were  accompanied  with  political  discernment  and  sa-
gacity. He  had  observed  that  the  princes  and  nobles
of  Germany  had  acquired  such  considerable  territories
and  such  extensive  jurisdiction,  as  rendered  them  not
only  formidable  to  the  emperors,  but  disposed  them  to
favour  any  attempt  to  circumscribe  their  power.  He
foresaw  that  the  ecclesiastics  of  Germany,  raised  almost
to  a  level  with  its  princes,  were  ready  to  support  any
person  who  would  stand  forth  as  the  protector  of  their
privileges  and  independence.  With  both  of  these  Gre-
gory negotiated,  and  had  secured  many  devoted  adhe-
rents among  them,  before  he  ventured  to  enter  the  lists
against  the  head  of  the  empire.

Sts  be"~ ^e  began  his  rupture  with  Henry  IV.  upon  a
tween  the  pretext  that  was  popular  and  plausible. He

k  Pfeftel.  Abrege,  p.  154.

SECT. III.

169

these.

popes  and  complained  of  the  venality  and  corruption  with
'  which  the  emperor  had  granted  the  investiture

of  benefices  to  ecclesiastics. He  contended  that

this  right  belonged  to  him  as  the  head  of  the
church  ;  he  required  Henry  to  confine  himself  within
the  bounds  of  his  civil  jurisdiction,  and  to  abstain  for
the  future  from  such  sacrilegious  encroachments  on  the
spiritual  dominion.  All  the  censures  of  the  church  were
denounced  against  Henry,  because  he  refused  to  relin-
quish those  powers  which  his  predecessors  had  uni-
formly exercised.  The  most  considerable  of  the  Ger-
man princes  and  ecclesiastics  were  excited  to  take  arms
against  him.  His  mother,  his  wife,  his  sons,  were
wrought  upon  to  disregard  all  the  ties  of  blood  as  well
as  of  duty,  and  to  join  the  party  of  his  enemies.k  Such
were  the  successful  arts  with  which  the  court  of  Rome
inflamed  the  superstitious  zeal,  and  conducted  the  fac-
tious spirit,  of  the  Germans  and  Italians,  that  an  empe-
ror, distinguished  not  only  for  many  virtues,  but  pos-
sessed of  considerable  talents,  was  at  length  obliged  to
appear  as  a  supplicant  at  the  gate  of  the  castle  in  which
the  pope  resided,  and  to  stand  there,  three  days,  bare-
footed,  in  the  depth  of  winter,  imploring  a  pardon,

'  which  at  length  he  obtained  with  difficulty.1
This  act  of  humiliation  degraded  the  imperial  dig-
nity. Nor  was  the  depression  momentary  only.  The
contest  between  Gregory  and  Henry  gave  rise  to  the
two  great  factions  of  the  Guelfs  and  Ghibellines  ;  the
former  of  which  supporting  the  pretensions  of  the
popes,  and  the  latter  defending  the  rights  of  the  em-
peror, kept  Germany  and  Italy  in  perpetual  agitation

during  three  centuries. A  regular  system  for

The  irape-  »  &  .....

rial  autho-  humbling  the  emperors  and  circumscribing  their
aHy  le-  "  power  was  formed,  and  adhered  to  uniformly
cimes.  throughout  that  period.  The  popes,  the  free
states  in  Italy,  the  nobility,  and  ecclesiastics  of  Ger-

k  Annal.  German,  ap.  Struv.  i.  p.  325.

See  Note  XLI.

170  STATE OF EUROPE.

many,  were  all  interested  in  its  success  ;  and  notwith-
standing the  return  of  some  short  intervals  of  vigour,
under  the  administration  of  a  few  able  emperors,  the
imperial  authority  continued  to  decline. Dur-

A.D.1256.  .  , J  f , ,

mg  the  anarchy  ot  the  long  interregnum  sub-
sequent to  the  death  of  William  of  Holland,  it  dwindled

down  almost  to  nothing.  Rodulph  of  Haps-
'  burgh,  the  founder  of  the  house  of  Austria,  and
who  first  opened  the  way  to  its  future  grandeur,  was  at
length  elected  emperor,  not  that  he  might  re-establish
and  extend  the  imperial  authority,  but  because  his  ter-
ritories and  influence  were  so  inconsiderable  as  to  ex-
cite no  jealousy  in  the  German  princes,  who  were  will-
ing to  preserve  the  forms  of  a  constitution,  the  power
and  vigour  of  which  they  had  destroyed.  Several  of
his  successors  were  placed  on  the  imperial  throne  from
the  same  motive ;  and  almost  every  remaining  prero-
gative was  wrested  out  of  the  hands  of  feeble  princes
unable  to  exercise  or  to  defend  them.
A  total  During  this  period  of  turbulence  and  confu-

si°n>  tne  constitution  of  the  Germanic  body

underwent  a  total  change.  The  ancient  names
the  empire,  of  courts  and  magistrates,  together  with  the
original  forms  and  appearance  of  policy,  were  pre-
served ;  but  such  new  privileges  and  jurisdiction  were
assumed,  and  so  many  various  rights  established,  that
the  same  species  of  government  no  longer  subsisted.
The  princes,  the  great  nobility,  the  dignified  ecclesias-
tics, the  free  cities,  had  taken  advantage  of  the  inter-
regnum, which  I  have  mentioned,  to  establish  or  to  ex-
tend their  usurpations.  They  claimed  and  exercised
the  right  of  governing  their  respective  territories  with
full  sovereignty.  They  acknowledged  no  superior  with
respect  to  any  point  relative  to  the  interior  administra-
tion and  police  of  their  domains.  They  enacted  laws,
imposed  taxes,  coined  money,  declared  war,  concluded
peace,  and  exerted  every  prerogative  peculiar  to  inde-

SECT.  III.  Ill

pendent  states.  The  ideas  of  order  and  political  union >
which  had  originally  formed  the  various  provinces  of
Germany  into  one  body,  were  almost  entirely  lost;  and
the  society  must  have  dissolved,  if  the  forms  of  feudal
subordination  had  not  preserved  such  an  appearance  of
connexion  or  dependence  among  the  various  members
of  the  community,  as  preserved  it  from  falling  to  pieces.
Expedients  This  bond  of  union,  however,  was  extremely
for  putting  feeble:  and  hardly  any  principle  remained  in

an  end  to  J. .J  r .

this  state  of  the  German  constitution,  of  sufficient  force  to
rchy'  maintain  public  order,  or  even  to  ascertain  per-
sonal security.  From  the  accession  of  Rodulph  of
Hapsburgh,  to  the  reign  of  Maximilian,  the  immediate
predecessor  of  Charles  V.,  the  empire  felt  every  calamity
which  a  state  must  endure,  when  the  authority  of
government  is  so  much  relaxed  as  to  have  lost  its  pro-
per degree  of  vigour.  The  causes  of  dissension  among
that  vast  number  of  members,  which  composed  the
Germanic  body,  were  infinite  and  unavoidable.  These
gave  rise  to  perpetual  private  wars,  which  were  carried
on  with  all  the  violence  that  usually  accompanies  re-
sentment, when  unrestrained  by  superior  authority.
Rapine,  outrage,  exactions,  became  universal.  Com-
merce was  interrupted ;  industry  suspended ;  and  every
part  of  Germany  resembled  a  country  which  an  enemy
had  plundered  and  left  desolate.1  The  variety  of  ex-
pedients employed  with  a  view  to  restore  order  and
tranquillity,  prove  that  the  grievances  occasioned  by
this  state  of  anarchy  had  grown  intolerable.  Arbiters
were  appointed  to  terminate  the  differences  among  the
several  states.  The  cities  united  in  a  league,  the  object
of  which  was  to  check  the  rapine  and  extortions  of  the
nobility.  The  nobility  formed  confederacies,  on  pur-
pose to  maintain  tranquillity  among  their  own  order.
Germany  was  divided  into  several  circles,  in  each  of

1  See  above,  page  49.  and  note  xxi. Datt.  de  pace  publica  Imper.  p.  25.  no.  53.
p.  28.  no.  26.  p.  35,  no.  11.

172  STATE OF  EUROPE.

which  a  provincial  and  partial  jurisdiction  was  establish-
ed, to  supply  the  place  of  a  public  and  common  tribunal.8
Particularly  But  a^  t^iese  remedies  were  so  ineffectual,
bytheinsti-  th^  they  served  only  to  demonstrate  the  vio-

tutionofthe  J  i  i  • i  -i

imperial lence  of  that  anarchy  which  prevailed,  and  the

insufficiency  of  the  means  employed  to  correct  it.

At  length  Maximilian  re-established  public  order  in  the

empire,  by  instituting  the  imperial  chamber,  a  tribunal

composed  of  judges  named  partly  by  the  empe-

ror,  partly  by  the  several  states,  and  vested  with

authority  to  decide  finally  concerning  all  differences

among  the  members  of  the  Germanic  body.

A  few  years  after,  by  giving  a  new  form  to  the

Aulic  council,  which  takes  cognizance  of  all  feudal

causes,  and  such  as  belong  to  the  emperor's  immediate

jurisdiction,  he  restored  some  degree  of  vigour  to  the

imperial  authority.

At  the  be- But  notwithstanding  the  salutary  effects  of
°f  these  regulations  and  improvements,  the  poli-
1"  tical  constitution  of  the  German  empire,  at  the

empire  an commencement  of  the  period  of  which  I  pro-
association  , ,  .  f
ofsovereign  pose  to  write  the  history,  was  01  a  species  so

ates'  ,  peculiar,  as  not  to  resemble  perfectly  any  form
of  government  known  either  in  the  ancient  or  modem
world.  It  was  a  complex  body,  formed  by  the  associ-
ation of  several  states,  each  of  which  possessed  sove-
reign and  independent  jurisdiction,  within  its  own  ter-
ritories. Of  all  the  members  which  composed  this
united  body,  the  emperor  was  the  head.  In  his  name,
all  decrees  and  regulations,  with  respect  to  points  of
common  concern,  were  issued ;  and  to  him  the  power
of  carrying  them  into  execution  was  committed.  But
this  appearance  of  monarchical  power  in  the  emperor
was  more  than  counterbalanced  by  the  influence  of  the
princes  and. states  of  the  empire  in  every  act  of  ad-
ministration. No  law  extending  to  the  whole  body

i  Datt.  passim. Struv.  Corp.  Hist.  i.  510,  &c.

SECT. III.  173

could  pass,  no  resolution  that  affected  the  general  in-
terest could  be  taken,  without  the  approbation  of  the
diet  of  the  empire.  In  this  assembly,  every  sovereign
prince  and  state  of  the  Germanic  bo.dy  had  a  right  to
be  present,  to  deliberate,  and  to  vote.  The  decrees
or  recesses  of  the  diet  were  the  laws  of  the  empire,  which
the  emperor  was  bound  to  ratify  and  enforce.
Pecuiiari-  Under  this  aspect,  the  constitution  of  the
nature  of6  emP^re  aPPears  a  regular  confederacy,  similar
thisassoci-  to  the  Achaean  league  in  ancient  Greece,  or  to
that  of  the  United  Provinces,  and  of  the  Swiss
Cantons  in  modern  times.  But  if  viewed  in  another
light,  striking  peculiarities  in  its  political  state  present
themselves.  The  Germanic  body  was  not  formed  by
the  union  of  members  altogether  distinct  and  inde-
pendent. All  the  princes  and  states,  joined  in  this  as-
sociation, were  originally  subject  to  the  emperors,  and
acknowledged  them  as  sovereigns.  Besides  this,  they
originally  held  their  lands  as  imperial  fiefs,  and  in  con-
sequence of  this  tenure  owed  the  emperor  all  those  ser-
vices which  feudal  vassals  are  bound  to  perform  to  their
liege  lord.  But  though  this  political  subjection  was
entirely  at  an  end,  and  the  influence  of  the  feudal  re-
lation much  diminished,  the  ancient  forms  and  institu-
tions, introduced  while  the  emperors  governed  Germany
with  authority  not  inferior  to  that  which  the  other
monarchs  of  Europe  possessed,  still  remained.  Thus
an  opposition  was  established  between  the  genius  of
the  government,  and  the  forms  of  administration  in  the
German  empire.  The  former  considered  the  emperor
only  as  the  head  of  a  confederacy,  the  members  of  which,
by  their  voluntary  choice,  have  raised  him  to  that  dig-
nity; the  latter  seemed  to  imply,  that  he  is  really  in-
The  defects  vested  with  sovereign  power.  By  this  circum-
stitationof  stance?  sucn  principles  of  hostility  and  discord
the  empire,  were  inter  woven  into  the  frame  of  the  Ger-
manic body,  as  affected  each  of  its  members,  rendering

174  STATE OF EUROPE.

their  interior  union  incomplete,  and  their  external  efforts
feeble  and  irregular.  The  pernicious  influence  of  this
defect  inherent  in  the  constitution  of  the  empire  is  so
considerable,  that,  without  attending  to  it,  we  cannot
fully  comprehend  many  transactions  in  the  reign  of
Charles  V.,  or  form  just  ideas  concerning  the  genius  of
the  German  government.

Arising  The  emperors  of  Germany,  at  the  beginning
limited*6  of  the  sixteenth  century,  were  distinguished  by

tPh°eWera°f  *he  most  pompous  titles,  and  by  such  ensigns
perors.  of  dignity,  as  intimated  their  authority  to  be
superior  to  that  of  all  other  monarchs.  The  greatest
princes  of  the  empire  attended,  and  served  them,  on
some  occasions,  as  the  officers  of  their  household.
They  exercised  prerogatives  which  no  other  sovereign
ever  claimed.  They  retained  pretensions  to  all  the
extensive  powers  which  their  predecessors  had  enjoyed
in  any  former  age.  But,  at  the  same  time,  instead  of
possessing  that  ample  domain  which  had  belonged  to
the  ancient  emperors  of  Germany,  and  which  stretched
from  Basil  to  Cologne,  along  both  banks  of  the  Rhine,Q
they  were  stripped  of  all  territorial  property,  and  had
not  ,a  single  city,  a  single  castle,  a  single  foot  of  land,
that  belonged  to  them,  as  heads  of  the  empire.  As
their  domain  was  alienated,  their  stated  revenues  were
reduced  almost  to  nothing;  and  the  extraordinary  aids,
which,  on  a  few  occasions,  they  obtained,  were  granted
sparingly  and  paid  with  reluctance.  The  princes  and
states  of  the  empire,  though  they  seemed  to  recognise
the  imperial  authority,  were  subjects  only  in  name,  each
of  them  possessing  a  complete  municipal  jurisdiction
within  the  precincts  of  his  own  territories.
From  the  From  this  ill-compacted  frame  of  government
effects  that  were  unavoidable  resulted.  The

and  pre- emperors,  dazzled  with  the  splendour  of  their

tensions. .  ,  ....  ,.  „  ,1 •

titles  and  the  external  signs  01  vast  authority,

n  Pfeffel.  Abrege,  &c.  p.  241.

SECT. III.

175

were  apt  to  imagine  themselves  to  be  the  real  sovereigns
of  Germany,  and  were  led  to  aim  continually  at  re-
covering the  exercise  of  those  powers  which  the  forms
of  the  constitution  seemed  to  vest  in  them,  and  which
their  predecessors,  Charlemagne  and  the  Othos,  had
actually  enjoyed.  The  princes  and  states,  aware  of
the  nature  as  well  as  extent  of  these  pretensions,  were
perpetually  on  their  guard,  in  order  to  watch  all  the
motions  of  the  imperial  court,  and  to  circumscribe  its
power  within  limits  still  more  narrow.  The  emperors,
in  support  of  their  claims,  appealed  to  ancient  forms
and  institutions,  which  the  states  held  to  be  obsolete.
The  states  founded  their  rights  on  recent  practice  and
modern  privileges,  which  the  emperors  considered  as
usurpations.

From  the This  jealousy  of  the  imperial  authority,  toge-
manner  in  j-^gj,  with  the  opposition  between  it  and  the

winch  they t  *r

were rights  of  the  states,  increased  considerably  from
the  time  that  the  emperors  were  elected,  not
by  the  collective  body  of  German  nobles,  but  by  a  few
princes  of  chief  dignity. During  a  long  period,  all  the
members  of  the  Germanic  body  had  a  right  to  assem-
ble, and  to  make  choice  of  the  person  whom  they  ap-
pointed to  be  their  head. But  amidst  the  violence  and
anarchy  which  prevailed  for  several  centuries  in  the
empire,  seven  princes  who  possessed  the  most  extensive
territories,  and  who  had  obtained  an  hereditary  title  to
the  great  offices  of  the  state,  acquired  the  exclusive  pri-
vilege of  nominating  the  emperor. This  right  was
confirmed  to  them  by  the  golden  bull ;  the  mode  of  ex-
ercising it  was  ascertained,  and  they  were  dignified
with  the  appellation  of  Electors.  The  nobility  and  free
cities  being  thus  stripped  of  a  privilege  which  they  had
once  enjoyed,  were  less  connected  with  a  prince,  to-
wards whose  elevation  they  had  not  contributed  by
their  suffrages,  and  came  to  be  more  apprehensive  of
his  authority. The  electors,  by  their  extensive  power,

170  STATE OF EUROPE.

and  the  distinguishing  privileges  which  they  possessed,
became  formidable  to  the  emperors,  with  whom  they
were  placed  almost  on  a  level  in  several  acts  of  jurisdic-
tion. Thus  the  introduction  of  the  electoral  college  into
the  empire,  and  the  authority  which  it  acquired,  instead
of  diminishing,  contributed  to  strengthen,  the  principles
of  hostility  and  discord  in  the  Germanic  constitution.
From  the  These  were  farther  augmented  by  the  various
fmms  o{  an(^  rePugnant  forms  of  civil  policy  in  the  se-
veral  states  which  composed  the  Germanic  body.

~

mentesta-  T. .  -, .-,  * .

wished  in  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  render  the  union  ot  m-

dependent  states  perfect  and  entire,  even  when
composed  the  genius  and  forms  of  their  respective  gwern-

the  Ger-  '

manic  ments  happened  to  be  altogether  similar.  But
in  the  German  empire,  which  was  a  confederacy
of  princes,  of  ecclesiastics,  and  of  free  cities,  it  was  im-
possible that  they  could  incorporate  thoroughly.  The
free  cities  were  small  republics,  in  which  the  maxims
and  spirit  peculiar  to  that  species  of  government  pre-
vailed. The  princes  and  nobles  to  whom  supreme  ju-
risdiction belonged,  possessed  a  sort  of  monarchical
power  within  their  own  territories,  and  the  forms  of
their  interior  administration  nearly  resembled  those  of
the  great  feudal  kingdoms.  The  interests,  the  ideas,
the  objects  of  states  so  differently  constituted,  cannot
be  the  same.  Nor  could  their  common  deliberations
be  carried  on  with  the  same  spirit,  while  the  love  of
liberty,  and  attention  to  commerce,  were  the  reigning
principles  in  the  cities  ;  while  the  desire  of  power,  and
ardour  for  military  glory,  were  the  governing  passions
of  the  princes  and  nobility.
From  the  ^ke  secu^ar  and  ecclesiastical  members  of  the

emPire  W€re  as  little  fitted  for  union  as  the  free
the  secu-  cities  and  the  nobility.  Considerable  territories
ecciesitsti-  na^  been  granted  to  several  of  the  German  bi-
£J1rsmera-  shoprics  and  abbeys,  and  some  of  the  highest

offices  in  the  empire  having  been  annexed  to

SECT. III.  177

them  inalienably,  were  held  by  the  ecclesiastics  raised
to  these  dignities.  The  younger  sons  of  noblemen
of  the  second  order,  who  had  devoted  themselves  to
the  church,  were  commonly  promoted  to  these  stations
of  eminence  and  power ;  and  it  was  no  small  morti-
fication to  the  princes  and  great  nobility,  to  see  per-
sons raised  from  an  inferior  rank  to  the  same  level
with  themselves,  or  even  exalted  to  superior  dignity.
The  education  of  these  churchmen,  the  genius  of  their
profession,  and  their  connexion  with  the  court  of  Rome,
rendered  their  character  as  well  as  their  interest  diffe-
rent from  those  of  the  other  members  of  the  Germanic
body,  with  whom  they  were  called  to  act  in  concert.
Thus  another  source  of  jealousy  and  variance  was
opened,  which  ought  not  to  be  overlooked  when  we  are
searching  into  the  nature  of  the  German  constitution.
From  h  ^°  a^  these  causes  of  dissension  may  be
unequal  added  one  more,  arising  from  the  unequal  dis-
tionof"  tribution  of  power  and  wealth  among  the  states
Tndpower  °^  ^e  empire-  The  electors,  and  other  nobles
among  the  of  the  highest  rank,  not  only  possessed  sovereign

members. ..,.,.,  j  i

jurisdiction,  but  governed  such  extensive,  po-
pulous, and  rich  countries,  as  rendered  them  great
princes.  Many  of  the  other  members,  though  they  en-
joyed all  the  rights  of  sovereignty,  ruled  over  such  petty
domains,  that  their  real  power  bore  no  prpportion  to
this  high  prerogative.  A  well-compacted  and  vigorous
confederacy  could  not  be  formed  of  such  dissimilar
states.  The  weaker  were  jealous,  timid,  and  unable
either  to  assert  or  to  defend  their  just  privileges.  The
more  powerful  were  apt  to  assume  and  to  become  op-
pressive. The  electors  and  emperors,  by  turns,  endea-
voured to  extend  their  own  authority,  by  encroaching
on  those  feeble  members  of  the  Germanic  body,  who
sometimes  defended  their  rights  with  much  spirit,  but
more  frequently,  being  overawed  or  corrupted,  they

VOL. III.  N

178  STATE OF EUROPE.

tamely  surrendered  their  privileges,  or  meanly  favoured
the  designs  formed  against  them.n
Aiithes  After  contemplating  all  these  principles  of
render  the  disunion  and  opposition  in  the  constitution  of
bcfdy  tnca-  tne  German  empire,  it  will  be  easy  to  account
acthf  witu^or  the  want  of  concord  and  uniformity,  conspi-
Cuous  in  its  councils  and  proceedings.  That

slow,  dilatory,  distrustful,  and  irresolute  spirit,
which  characterizes  all  its  deliberations,  will  appear
natural  in  a  body,  the  junction  of  whose  members  was
so  incomplete,  the  different  parts  of  which  were  held
together  by  such  feeble  ties,  and  set  at  variance  by
such  powerful  motives.  But  the  empire  of  Germany,
nevertheless,  comprehended  countries  of  such  great
extent,  and  was  inhabited  by  such  a  martial  and  hardy
race  of  men,  that  when  the  abilities  of  an  emperor,  or
zeal  for  any  common  cause,  could  rouse  this  unwieldy
body  to  put  forth  its  strength,  it  acted  with  almost  ir-
resistible force.  In  the  following  history  we  shall  find,
that  as  the  measures  on  which  Charles  V.  was  most
intent  were  often  thwarted,  or  rendered  abortive  by  the
spirit  of  jealousy  and  division  peculiar  to  the  Germanic
constitution  ;  so  it  was  by  the  influence  which  he  ac-
quired over  the  princes  of  the  empire,  and  by  engaging
them  to  co-operate  with  him,  that  he  was  enabled  to
make  some  of  the  greatest  efforts  which  distinguish  his
reign.

view  of  the The  Turkish  history  is  so  blended,  during
Turkish the  rei~n  Of  Charles  V.,  with  that  of  the  great

govern-  °  *

nations  in  Europe,  and  the  Ottoman  Porte  in-

terposed so  often,  and  with  such  decisive  influence,  in
the  wars  and  negotiations  of  the  Christian  princes,  that
some  previous  account  of  the  state  of  government  in
that  great  empire,  is  no  less  necessary  for  the  informa-
tion of  my  readers  than  those  views  of  the  constitution

•  See  Note  XLII.

SECT. III.

179

Its  origin.

of  other  kingdoms  which  I  have  already  exhibited  to
them.

It  has  been  the  fate  of  the  southern  and  more
fertile  parts  of  Asia,  at  different  periods,  to  be
conquered  by  that  warlike  and  hardy  race  of  men,  who
inhabit  the  vast  country  known  to  the  ancients  by  the
name  of  Scythia,  and  among  the  moderns  by  that  of
Tartary.  One  tribe  of  these  people,  called  Turks  or
Turcomans,  extended  its  conquests,  under  various  lead-
ers, and  during  several  centuries,  from  the  shore  of  the
Caspian  sea  to  the  straits  of  the  Dardanelles.  Towards
the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century,  these  formidable
conquerors  took  Constantinople  by  storm,  and  esta-
blished the  seat  of  their  government  in  that  imperial
city.  Greece,  Moldavia,  Wallachia,  and  the  other  pro-
vinces of  the  ancient  kingdoms  of  Thrace  and  Macedo-
nia, together  with  part  of  Hungary,  were  subjected  to
their  power.

de  But  though  the  seat  of  the  Turkish  govern-

potic  ment  was  fixed  in  Europe,  and  the  sultans  ob-
tained possession  of  such  extensive  dominions
in  that  quarter  of  the  globe,  the  genius  of  their  policy
continued  to  be  purely  Asiatic ;  and  may  be  properly
termed  a  despotism,  in  contradistinction  to  those  mo-
narchical and  republican  forms  of  government  which
we  have  been  hitherto  contemplating.  The  supreme
power  was  vested  in  sultans  of  the  Ottoman  race,  that
blood  being  deemed  so  sacred,  that  no  other  was  thought
worthy  of  the  throne.  From  this  elevation,  these  so-
vereigns could  look  down  and  behold  all  their  subjects
reduced  to  the  same  level  before  them.  The  maxims  of
Turkish  policy  do  not  authorize  any  of  those  institu-
tions, which,  in  other  countries,  limit  the  exercise,  or
moderate  the  rigour  of  monarchical  power  :  they  admit
neither  of  any  great  court  with  constitutional  and  per-
manent jurisdiction  to  interpose,  both  in  enacting  laws,
and  in  superintending  the  execution  of  them ;  nor  of  a

N2

180  STATE OF  EUROPE.

body  of  hereditary  nobles,  whose  sense  of  their  own
pre-eminence,  whose  consciousness  of  what  is  due  to
their  rank  and  character,  whose  jealousy  of  their  pri-
vileges circumscribe  the  authority  of  the  prince,  and
serve  not  only  as  a  barrier  against  the  excesses  of  his
caprice,  but  stand  as  an  intermediate  order  between  him
and  the  people.  Under  the  Turkish  government,  the
political  condition  of  every  subject  is  equal.  To  be
employed  in  the  service  of  the  sultan  is  the  only  cir-
cumstance that  confers  distinction.  Even  this  distinc-
tion is  rather  official  than  personal,  and  so  closely  an-
nexed to  the  station  in  which  any  individual  serves,
that  it  is  scarcely  communicated  to  the  persons  of  those
who  are  placed  in  them.  The  highest  dignity  in  the
empire  does  not  give  any  rank  or  pre-eminence  to  the
family  of  him  who  enjoys  it.  As  every  man,  before  he
is  raised  to  any  station  of  authority,  must  go  through
the  preparatory  discipline  of  a  long  and  servile  obe-
dience,0 the  moment  he  is  deprived  of  power,  he  and
his  posterity  return  to  the  same  condition  with  other
subjects,  and  sink  back  into  obscurity.  It  is  the  dis-
tinguishing and  odious  characteristic  of  eastern  despo-
tism, that  it  annihilates  all  other  ranks  of  men,  in  order
to  exalt  the  monarch;  that  it  leaves  nothing  to  the
former,  while  it  gives  every  thing  to  the  latter ;  that  it
endeavours  to  fix  in  the  minds  of  those  who  are  subject
to  it,  the  idea  of  no  relation  between  men  but  that  of  a
master  and  of  a  slave,  the  former  destined  to  command
and  to  punish,  the  latter  formed  to  tremble  and  to  obey.p
Power  of  But  as  there  are  circumstances  which  fre-
itnUe^by  qu^ntly  obstruct  or  defeat  the  salutary  effects  of
religion;  the  best-regulated  governments,  there  are  others
which  contribute  to  mitigate  the  evils  of  the  most  de-
fective forms  of  policy.  There  can,  indeed,  be  no
constitutional  restraints  upon  the  will  of  a  prince  in  a
despotic  government;  but  there  may  be  such  as  are

0  State  of  the  Turkish  Empire  by  Rycaut,  p.  25.  P  See  Note  XL1II.

SECT.  III.  181

accidental.  Absolute  as  the  Turkish  sultans  are,  they
feel  themselves  circumscribed  both  by  religion,  the
principle  on  which  their  authority  is  founded,p  and  by
the  army,  the  instrument  which  they  must  employ  in
order  to  maintain  it.  Wherever  religion  interposes,
the  will  of  the  sovereign  must  submit  to  its  decrees.
When  the  Koran  hath  prescribed  any  religious  rite,
hath  enjoined  any  moral  duty,  or  hath  confirmed,  by
its  sanction,  any  political  maxim,  the  command  of  the
sultan  cannot  overturn  that  which  a  higher  authority
hath  established.  The  chief  restriction,  however,  on
the  will  of  the  sultans,  is  imposed  by  the  military  power.
And  by  the  An  armed  force  must  surround  the  throne  of
military.  eveiy  despot,  to  maintain  his  authority,  and  to
execute  his  commands.  As  the  Turks  extended  their
empire  over  nations  which  they  did  not  exterminate,
but  reduce  to  subjection,  they  found  it  necessary  to
render  their  military  establishment  numerous  and  for-
n  of  midable.  Amurath,  their  third  sultan,  in  order
to  ^orm  a  k0(ty  of  troops  devoted  to  his  will,
A.D.1362.  that  might,  serve  as  the  immediate  guards  of
his  person  and  dignity,  commanded  his  officers  to  seize
annually,  as  the  imperial  property,  the  fifth  part  of  the
youth  taken  in  war.  These,  after  being  instructed  in
the  Mahometan  religion,  inured  to  obedience  by  severe
discipline,  and  trained  to  warlike  exercises,  were  formed
into  a  body,  distinguished  by  the  name  of  janizaries,
or  new  soldiers.  Every  sentiment  which  enthusiasm
can  inspire,  every  mark  of  distinction  that  the  favour
of  the  prince  could  confer,  were  employed  in  order  to
animate  this  body  with  martial  ardour,  and  with  a
consciousness  of  its  own  pre-eminence.11  The  janizaries
soon  became  the  chief  strength  and  pride  of  the  Otto-
man armies ;  and,  by  number  as  well  as  their  reputation,
were  distinguished  above  all  the  troops,  whose  duty  it
was  to  attend  on  the  person  of  the  sultans/

v  Rycaut,  p.  8.  ri  Prince  Cantemir's  History  of  the  Othraan  empire,  p.  87.

'  See  Note  XLIV.

182  STATE  OF EUROPE.

Their  vast  Thus,  as  the  supreme  power  in  every  society
is  possessed  by  those  who  have  arms  in  their
hands,  this  formidable  body  of  soldiers,  destined
ment.  to  be  the  instruments  of  enlarging  the  sultan's
authority,  acquired,  at  the  same  time,  the  means  of  con-
trolling it.  The  janizaries  in  Constantinople,  like  the
praetorian  bands  in  ancient  Rome,  quickly  perceived
all  the  advantages  which  they  derived  from  being
stationed  in  the  capital;  from  their  union  under  one
standard;  and  from  being  masters  of  the  person  of
the  prince.  The  sultans  became  no  less  sensible  of
their  influence  and  importance.  The  capiculy,  or  sol-
diery of  the  Porte,  was  the  only  power  in  the  empire
that  a  sultan  or  his  vizier  had  reason  to  dread.  To
preserve  the  fidelity  and  attachment  of  the  janizaries,
was  the  great  art  of  government,  and  the  principal
object  of  attention  in  the  policy  of  the  Ottoman  court.
Under  a  monarch,  whose  abilities  and  vigour  of  mind
fit  him  for  command,  they  are  obsequious  instruments ;
execute  whatever  he  enjoins,  and  render  his  power  irre-
sistible. Under  feeble  princes,  or  such  as  are  unfortu-
nate, they  become  turbulent  and  mutinous  ;  assume  the
tone  of  masters  ;  degrade  and  exalt  sultans  at  pleasure;
and  teach  those  to  tremble,  on  whose  nod,  at  other
times,  life  and  death  depend.

Progress  From  Mahomet  II .,  who  took  Constantinople,
Turks- to  to  Solyman  the  Magnificent,  who  began  his
wards  do-  reign  a  few  months  after  Charles  V.  was  placed
on  the  imperial  throne  of  Germany,  a  succession
of  illustrious  princes  ruled  over  the  Turkish  empire.
By  their  great  abilities  they  kept  their  subjects  of
every  order,  military  as  well  as  civil,  submissive  to  go-
vernment, and  had  the  absolute  command  of  whatever
force  their  vast  empire  was  able  to  exert.  Solyman,  in
particular,  who  is  known  to  the  Christians  chiefly  as  a
conqueror,  but  is  celebrated  in  the  Turkish  annals  as
the  great  lawgiver  who  established  order  and  police

SECT. III.  183

in  their  empire,  governed,  during  his  long  reign,  with
no  less  authority  than  wisdom.  He  divided  his  domi-
nions into  several  districts  ;  he  appointed  the  number
of  soldiers  which  each  should  furnish  ;  he  appropriated
a  certain  proportion  of  the  land  in  every  province  for
their  maintenance ;  he  regulated,  with  a  minute  accu-
racy, every  thing  relative  to  their  discipline,  their  arms,
and  the  nature  of  their  service.  He  put  the  finances
of  the  empire  into  an  orderly  train  of  administration ;
and,  though  the  taxes  in  the  Turkish  dominions,  as
well  as  in  the  other  despotic  monarchies  of  the  east,
are  far  from  being  considerable,  he  supplied  that  defect
by  an  attentive  and  severe  economy.
Advan-  N°r  was  it  only  under  such  sultans  as  Soly-
whkh  the  man?  wnose  talents  were  no  less  adapted  to  pre-
possessed serve  internal  order  than  to  conduct  the  opera-
Christian  tions  of  war,  that  the  Turkish  empire  engaged
thTsTx-111  W^  advantage  in  its  contests  with  the  Christian
teenth  states.  The  long  succession  of  able  princes,
which  I  have  mentioned,  had  given  such  vigour
and  firmness  to  the  Ottoman  government,  that  it  seems
to  have  attained,  during  the  sixteenth  century,  the  high-
est degree  of  perfection  of  which  its  constitution  was
capable  :  whereas  the  great  monarchies  of  Christen-
dom were  still  far  from  that  state  which  could  enable
them  to  act  with  a  full  exertion  of  their  force.  Besides
this,  the  Turkish  troops  in  that  age  possessed  every
advantage  which  arises  from  superiority  in  military  dis-
cipline. At  the  time  when  Solyman  began  his  reign,
the  janizaries  had  been  embodied  near  a  century  and  a
half;  and,  during  that  long  period,  the  severity  of  their
military  discipline  had  in  no  degree  relaxed.  The
other  soldiers,  drawn  from  the  provinces  of  the  empire,
had  been  kept  almost  continually  under  arms,  in  the
various  wars  which  the  sultans  had  carried  on,  with
hardly  any  interval  of  peace.  Against  troops  thus
trained  and  accustomed  to  service,  the  forces  of  the

184  STATE OF EUROPE.

Christian  powers  took  the  field  with  great  disadvan-
tage. The  most  intelligent,  as  well  as  impartial  authors
of  the  sixteenth  century,  acknowledge  and  lament  the
superior  attainments  of  the  Turks  in  the  military  art.5
The  success  which  almost  uniformly  attended  their
arms,  in  all  their  wars,  demonstrates  the  justness  of
this  observation.  The  Christian  armies  did  not  acquire
that  superiority  over  the  Turks,  which  they  now  pos-
sess, until  the  long  establishment  of  standing  forces
had  improved  military  discipline  among  the  former ;
and  until  various  causes  and  events,  which  it  is  not  my
province  to  explain,  had  corrupted  or  abolished  their
ancient  warlike  institutions  among  the  latter.

« See  Note  XLV.

PROOFS

AND

ILLUSTRATIONS

Note  I. Sect.  I. p.  11.

THE  consternation  of  the  Britons,  when  invaded  by  the  Picts
and  Caledonians,  after  the  Roman  legions  were  called  out  of  the
island,  may  give  some  idea  of  the  degree  of  debasement  to  which
the  human  mind  was  reduced  by  long  servitude  under  the  Romans.
In  their  supplicatory  letter  to  JEtius,  which  they  call  the  Groans
of  Britain,  "  We  know  not  (say  they)  which  way  to  turn  us.  The
barbarians  drive  us  to  the  sea,  and  the  sea  forces  us  back  on  the
barbarians  ;  between  which  we  have  only  the  choice  of  two  deaths,
either  to  be  swallowed  up  by  the  waves,  or  to  be  slain  by  the
sword."  Histor.  Gildae.  ap.  Gale,  Hist.  Britain.  Script,  p.  6.  One
can  hardly  believe  this  dastardly  race  to  be  the  descendants  of  that
gallant  people,  who  repulsed  Ceesar,  and  defended  their  liberty  so
long  against  the  Roman  arms.

Note  II. Sect.  I.  p.  12.

THE  barbarous  nations  were  not  only  illiterate,  but  regarded
literature  with  contempt.  They  found  the  inhabitants  of  all  the
provinces  of  the  empire  sunk  in  effeminacy,  and  averse  to  war.
Such  a  character  was  the  object  of  scorn  to  a  high-spirited  and
gallant  race  of  men.  "  When  we  would  brand  an  enemy,"  says
Liutprandus,  "  with  the  most  disgraceful  and  contumelious  appel-
lation, we  call  him  a  Roman ;  hoc  solo,  id  est  Romani  nomine,
quicquid  ignobilitatis,  quicquid  timiditatis,  quicquid  avaritiae,  quic-
quid  luxuries,  quicquid  mendacii,  immo  quicquid  vitiorum  est  com-
prehendentes."  Liutprandi  Legatio  apud  Murat.  Scriptor.  Italic,
vol.  ii.  pars  1.  p.  481.  This  degeneracy  of  manners,  illiterate  bar-
barians imputed  to  their  love  of  learning.  Even  after  they  settled
in  the  countries  which  they  had  conquered,  they  would  not  permit
their  children  to  be  instructed  in  any  science;  "'for  (say  they)  in-

186  PROOFS AND

struction  in  the  sciences  tends  to  corrupt,  enervate,  and  depress
the  mind ;  and  he  who  has  been  accustomed  to  tremble  under  the
rod  of  a  pedagogue,  will  never  look  on  a  sword  or  spear  with  an
undaunted  eye."  Procop.  de  bello  Gothor.  lib.  1.  p.  4.  ap.  Scrip.
Byz.  edit.  Venet.  vol.  i.  A  considerable  number  of  years  elapsed,
before  nations  so  rude,  and  so  unwilling  to  learn,  could  produce
historians  capable  of  recording  their  transactions,  or  of  describing
their  manners  and  institutions.  By  that  time,  the  memory  of  their
ancient  condition  was  in  a  great  measure  lost,  and  few  monu-
ments remained  to  guide  their  first  writers  to  any  certain  know-
ledge of  it.  If  one  expects  to  receive  any  satisfactory  account  of
the  manners  and  laws  of  the  Goths,  Lombards,  or  Franks,  during
their  residence  in  those  countries  where  they  were  originally  seated,
from  Jornandes,  Paulus  Warnefridus,  or  Gregory  of  Tours,  the
earliest  and  most  authentic  historians  of  these  people,  he  will  be
miserably  disappointed.  Whatever  imperfect  knowledge  has  been
conveyed  to  us  of  their  ancient  state,  we  owe  not  to  their  own
writers,  but  to  the  Greek  and  Roman  historians.

Note  HI. Sect.  I.  p.  13.

A  CIRCUMSTANCE,  related  by  Priscus,  in  his  history  of  the  em-
bassy to  Attila,  king  of  the  Huns,  gives  a  striking  view  of  the  en-
thusiastic passion  for  war,  which  prevailed  among  the  barbarous
nations.  When  the  entertainment,  to  which  that  fierce  conqueror
admitted  the  Roman  ambassadors,  was  ended,  two  Scythians  ad-
vanced towards  Attila,  and  recited  a  poem,  in  which  they  cele-
brated his  victories  and  military  virtues.  All  the  Huns  fixed  their
eyes  with  attention  on  the  bards.  Some  seemed  to  be  delighted
with  the  verses ;  others,  remembering  their  own  battles  and  ex-
ploits, exulted  with  joy;  while  such  as  were  become  feeble  through
age,  burst  out  into  tears,  bewailing  the  decay  of  their  vigour,  and
the  state  of  inactivity  in  which  they  were  now  obliged  to  remain.
Excerpta  ex  Historia  Prisci  Rhetoris  ap.  Byz.  Hist.  Script,  vol.  i.
p.  45.

Note  IV. Sect.  I. p.  18.

A  REMARKABLE  confirmation  of  both  parts  of  this  reasoning
occurs  in  the  history  of  England.  The  Saxons  carried  on  the  con-
quest of  that  country  with  the  same  destructive  spirit  which  distin-
guished the  other  barbarous  nations.— The  ancient  inhabitants  of
Britain  were  either  exterminated,  or  forced  to  take  shelter  among
the  mountains  of  Wales,  or  reduced  to  servitude.  The  Saxon  go-
vernment, laws,  manners,  and  language,  were  of  consequence  in-
troduced into  Britain,  and  were  so  perfectly  established,  that  all

ILLUSTRATIONS.  187

memory  of  the  institutions  previous  to  their  conquest  of  the  country,
was,  in  a  great  measure,  lost.  The  very  reverse  of  this  happened
in  a  subsequent  revolution.  A  single  victory  placed  William  the
Norman  on  the  throne  of  England.  The  Saxon  inhabitants,  though
oppressed,  were  not  exterminated.  William  employed  the  utmost
efforts  of  his  power  and  policy  to  make  his  new  subjects  conform  in
every  thing  to  the  Norman  standard,  but  without  success.  The
Saxons,  though  vanquished,  were  far  more  numerous  than  their
conquerors ;  when  the  two  races  began  to  incorporate,  the  Saxon
laws  and  manners  gradually  gained  ground.  The  Norman  institu-
tions became  unpopular  and  odious;  many  of  them  fell  into  disuse;
and  in  the  English  constitution  and  language,  at  this  day,  many
essential  parts  are  manifestly  of  Saxon,  not  of  Norman  extraction.

Note  V. Sect.  I.  p.  18.

PROCOPIUS,  the  historian,  declines,  from  a  principle  of  benevo-
lence, to  give  any  particular  detail  of  the  cruelties  of  the  Goths :
"  Lest,"  says  he,  "  I  should  transmit  a  monument  and  example  of
inhumanity  to  succeeding  ages."  Proc.  de  bello  Goth.  lib.  iii.
cap.  10.  ap.  Byz.  Script,  vol.  i.  126.  But  as  the  change  which  I
have  pointed  out,  as  a  consequence  of  the  settlement  of  the  barbar-
ous nations  in  the  countries  formerly  subject  to  the  Roman  empire,
could  not  have  taken  place,  if  the  greater  part  of  the  ancient  inha-
bitants had  not  been  extirpated,  an  event  of  such  importance  and
influence  merits  a  more  particular  illustration.  This  will  justify  me
for  exhibiting  some  part  of  that  melancholy  spectacle,  over  which
humanity  prompted  Procopius  to  draw  a  veil.  I  shall  not,  however,
disgust  my  readers  by  a  minute  narration;  but  rest  satisfied  with
collecting  some  instances  of  the  devastations  made  by  two  of  the
many  nations  which  settled  in  the  empire.  The  Vandals  were  the
first  of  the  barbarians  who  invaded  Spain.  It  was  one  of  the  richest
and  most  populous  of  the  Roman  provinces :  the  inhabitants  had
been  distinguished  for  courage,  and  had  defended  their  liberty
against  the  arms  of  Rome,  with  greater  obstinacy,  and  during  a
longer  course  of  years,  than  any  nation  in  Europe.  But  so  entirely
were  they  enervated,  by  their  subjection  to  the  Romans,  that  the
Vandals,  who  entered  the  kingdom  A.  t>.  409,  completed  the  con-
quest of  it  with  such  rapidity,  that  in  the  year  41 1,  these  barbarians
divided  it  among  them,  by  casting  lots.  The  desolation  occasioned
by  their  invasion  is  thus  described  by  Idatius,  an  eye-witness  :  "  The
barbarians  wasted  every  thing  with  hostile  cruelty.  The  pestilence
was  no  less  destructive.  A  dreadful  famine  raged  to  such  a  degree,
that  the  living  were  constrained  to  feed  on  the  dead  bodies  of  their
fellow-citizens ;  and  all  those  terrible  plagues  desolated  at  once  the

188  PROOFS AND

unhappy  kingdoms."  Idatii  Chron.  ap.  Biblioth.  Patrum,  vol.  vii.
p.  1233.  edit.  Lugd.  1677.  The  Goths,  having  attacked  the  Van-
dals in  their  new  settlements,  a  fierce  war  ensued ;  the  country
was  plundered  by  both  parties  ;  the  cities  which  had  escaped  from
destruction,  in  the  first  invasion  of  the  Vandals,  were  now  laid  in
ashes,  and  the  inhabitants  exposed  to  suffer  every  thing  that  the
wanton  cruelty  of  barbarians  could  inflict.  Idatius  describes  these
scenes  of  inhumanity,  ibid.  p.  1235.b.  1236.  c.  f.  A  similar  account
of  their  devastations  is  given  by  Isidorus  Hispalensis,  and  other
contemporary  writers.  Isid.  Chron.  ap.  Grot.  Hist.  Goth.  732.
From  Spain  the  Vandals  passed  over  into  Africa,  A.  D.  428.  Africa
was,  next  to  Egypt,  the  most  fertile  of  the  Roman  provinces.  It
was  one  of  the  granaries  of  the  empire,  and  is  called  by  an  ancient
writer  the  soul  of  the  commonwealth.  Though  the  army  with
which  the  Vandals  invaded  it  did  not  exceed  30,000  fighting  men,
they  became  absolute  masters  of  the  province  in  less  than  two
years.  A  contemporary  author  gives  a  dreadful  account  of  the
havoc  which  they  made :  "  They  found  a  province  well  cultivated,
and  enjoying  plenty,  the  beauty  of  the  whole  earth.  They  carried
their  destructive  arms  into  every  corner  of  it ;  they  dispeopled  it  by
their  devastations,  exterminating  every  thing  with  fire,  and  sword.
They  did  not  even  spare  the  vines  and  fruit  trees,  that  those,  to
whom  caves  and  inaccessible  mountains  had  afforded  a  retreat,
might  not  find  nourishment  of  any  kind.  Their  hostile  rage  could
not  be  satiated,  and  there  was  no  place  exempted  from  the  effects
of  it.  They  tortured  their  prisoners  with  the  most  exquisite  cruelty,
that  they  might  force  from  them  a  discovery  of  their  hidden  trea-
sures. The  more  they  discovered,  the  more  they  expected,  and
the  more  implacable  they  became.  Neither  the  infirmities  of  age
nor  of  sex;  neither  the  dignity  of  nobility,  nor  the  sanctity  of  the
sacerdotal  office,  could  mitigate  their  fury  ;  but  the  more  illustrious
their  prisoners  were,  the  more  barbarously  they  insulted  them.
The  public  buildings,  which  resisted  the  violence  of  the  flames,
they  levelled  with  the  ground.  They  left  many  cities  without  an  in-
habitant. When  they  approached  any  fortified  place  which  their
undisciplined  army  could  not  reduce,  they  gathered  together  a  mul-
titude of  prisoners,  and  putting  them  to  the  sword,  left  their  bodies
unburied,  that  the  stench  of  the  carcases  might  oblige  the  garrison
to  abandon  it."  Victor  Vitensis  de  Persecutione  Africana,  ap.  Bibl.
Patrum,  vol.  viii.  p.  666.  St.  Augustin,  an  African,  who  survived
the  conquest  of  his  country  by  the  Vandals  some  years,  gives  a
similar  description  of  their  cruelties,  Opera,  vol.  x.  p.  372.  edit.
1616. — About  a  hundred  years  after  the  settlement  of  the  Van-
dals in  Africa,  Belisarius  attacked  and  dispossessed  them.  Proco-
us,  a  contemporary  historian,  describes  the  devastation  which

ILLUSTRATIONS.

180

that  war  occasioned.  "  Africa,"  says  he,  "  was  so  entirely  dispeo-
pled, that  one  might  travel  several  days  in  it  without  meeting  one
man ;  and  it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say,  that  in  the  course  of  the
war  five  millions  of  persons  perished."  Proc.  Hist.  Arcana,  cap.  18.
ap.  Byz.  Script,  vol.  i.  315. — I  have  dwelt  longer  upon  the  calami-
ties of  this  province,  because  they  are  described  not  only  by  con-
temporary authors,  but  by  eye-witnesses.  The  present  state  of
Africa  confirms  their  testimony.  Many  of  the  most  flourishing  and
populous  cities  with  which  it  was  filled,  were  so  entirely  ruined,
that  no  vestiges  remain  to  point  out  where  they  were  situated.
That  fertile  territory,  which  sustained  the  Roman  empire,  still  lies
in  a  great  measure  uncultivated ;  and  that  province,  which  Victor,
in  his  barbarous  Latin,  called  Speciositas  totius  terrcejlorentis,  is  now
the  retreat  of  pirates  and  banditti.

While  the  Vandals  laid  waste  a  great  part  of  the  empire,  the
Huns  desolated  the  remainder.  Of  all  the  barbarous  tribes,  they
were  the  fiercest  and  most  formidable.  Ammianus  Marcellinus,  a
contemporary  author,  and  one  of  the  best  of  the  later  historians,
gives  an  account  of  their  policy  and  manners,  which  nearly  resem-
bles those  of  the  Scythians  described  by  the  ancients,  and  of  theTar.
tars  known  to  the  moderns.  Some  parts  of  their  character,  and  se-
veral of  their  customs,  are  not  unlike  those  of  the  savages  in  North
America.  Their  passion  for  war  was  extreme.  "  As  in  polished
societies  (says  Ammianus)  ease  and  tranquillity  are  courted,  the
delight  in  war  and  dangers.  He  who  falls  in  battle  is  reckoned
happy.  They  who  die  of  old  age  or  of  disease  are  deemed  infamous.
They  boast,  with  the  utmost  exultation,  of  the  number  of  enemies
whom  they  have  slain,  and,  as  the  most  glorious  of  all  ornaments
they  fasten  the  scalps  of  those  who  have  fallen  by  their  hands  to
the  trappings  of  their  horses/'  Ammian.  Marc.  lib.  xxxi.  p.  477.
edit.  Gronov.  Ludg.  1693. — Their  incursions  into  the  empire  began
in  the  fourth  century ;  and  the  Romans,  though  no  strangers,  by
that  time,  to  the  effects  of  barbarous  rage,  were  astonished  at  the
cruelty  of  their  devastations.  Thrace,  Pannonia,  and  Illyricum,
were  the  countries  which  they  first  laid  desolate.  As  they  had  at
first  no  intention  of  settling  in  Europe,  they  made  only  inroads  of
short  continuance  into  the  empire,  but  these  were  frequent,  and
Procopius  computes  that  in  each  of  these,  at  a  medium,  two  hun-
dred thousand  persons  perished,  or  were  carried  off  as  slaves.
Procop.  Hist.  Arcan.  ap.  Byz.  Script,  vol.  i.  316.  Thrace,  the
best  cultivated  province  in  that  quarter  of  the  empire,  was  converted
into  a  desert;  and,  when  Priscus  accompanied  the  ambassadors
sent  to  Attila,  there  were  no  inhabitants  in  some  of  the  cities,  but
a  few  miserable  people  who  had  taken  shelter  among  the  ruins  of
the  churches  ;  and  the  fields  were  covered  with  the  bones  of  those

190  PROOFS AND

who  had  fallen  by  the  sword.  Priscus  ap.  Byz.  Script,  vol.  i.  34.
Attila  became  king  of  the  Huns,  A.  D.  434.  He  is  one  of  the
greatest  and  most  enterprising  conquerors  mentioned  in  history.
He  extended  his  empire  over  all  the  vast  countries  comprehended
under  the  general  names  of  Scythia  and  Germany  in  the  ancient
division  of  the  world.  While  he  was  carrying  on  his  wars  against
the  barbarous  nations,  he  kept  the  Roman  empire  under  perpetual
apprehensions,  and  extorted  enormous  subsidies  from  the  timid  and
effeminate  monarchs  who  governed  it.  In  the  year  451,  he  entered
Gaul,  at  the  head  of  an  army  composed  of  all  the  various  nations
which  he  had  subdued.  It  was  more  numerous  than  any  with
which  the  barbarians  had  hitherto  invaded  the  empire.  The  devas-
tations which  he  committed  were  horrible;  not  only  the  open
country,  but  the  most  flourishing  cities,  were  desolated.  The  ex-
tent and  cruelty  of  his  devastations  are  described  by  Salvianus  de
Gubernat.  Dei,  edit.  Baluz.  Par.  1669.  p.  139,  &c.  and  by  Idatius,
ubi  supra,  p.  1235.  ^Etius  put  a  stop  to  his  progress  in  that
country  by  the  famous  battle  of  Chalons,  in  which  (if  we  may  be-
lieve the  historians  of  that  age)  three  hundred  thousand  persons
perished.  Idat.  ibid.  Jornandes  de  Rebus  Geticis  ap.  Grot.  Hist.
Gothor.  p.  671.  Amst.  1665.  But  the  next  year  he-  resolved  to
attack  the  centre  of  the  empire,  and,  marching  into  Italy,  wasted
it  with  rage,  inflamed  by  the  sense  of  his  late  disgrace.  What  Italy
suffered  by  the  Huns  exceeded  all  the  calamities  which  the  preced-r
ing  incursions  of  the  barbarians  had  brought  upon  it.  Conringius
has  collected  several  passages  from  the  ancient  historians,  which
prove  that  the  devastations  committed  by  the  Vandals  and  Huns
in  the  countries  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  were  no  less
cruel  and  fatal  to  the  human  race.  Exercitatio  de  urbibus  Germa-
nise, Opera,  vol.  i.  488.  It  is  endless,  it  is  shocking,  to  follow  these
destroyers  of  mankind  through  so  many  scenes  of  horror,  and  to
contemplate  the  havoc  which  they  made  of  the  human  species.

But  the  state  in  which  Italy  appears  to  have  been,  during  several
ages  after  the  barbarous  nations  settled  in  it,  is  the  most  decisive
proof  of  the  cruelty  as  well  as  extent  of  their  devastations.  When-
ever any  country  is  thinly  inhabited,  trees  and  shrubs  spring  up  in
the  uncultivated  fields,  and,  spreading  by  degrees,  form  large
forests ;  by  the  overflowing  of  rivers,  and  the  stagnating  of  wa-
ters, other  parts  of  it  are  converted  into  lakes  and  marshes.  An-
cient Italy,  which  the  Romans  rendered  the  seat  of  elegance  and
luxury,  was  cultivated  to  the  highest  pitch.  But  so  effectually  did
the  devastations  of  the  barbarians  destroy  all  the  effects  of  Roman
industry  and  cultivation,  that  in  the  eighth  century  a  considerable
part  of  Italy  appears  to  have  been  covered  with  forests  and  marshes
of  great  extent.  Muratori  enters  into  a  minute  detail  concerning

ILLUSTRATIONS.

the  situation  and  limits  of  several  of  these ;  and  proves,  by  the
most  authentic  evidence,  that  great  tracts  of  territory  in  all  the  dif-
ferent provinces  of  Italy,  were  either  overrun  with  wood,  or  laid
under  water.  Nor  did  these  occupy  parts  of  the  country  naturally
barren  or  of  little  value,  but  were  spread  over  districts  which  an-
cient writers  represent  as  extremely  fertile,  and  which  at  present
are  highly  cultivated.  Mtiratori  Antiquitates  Italicse  Medii  jEvi,
dissert,  xxi.  v.  ii.  p.  149.  153,  &c.  A  strong  proof  of  this  occurs
in  a  description  of  the  city  of  Modena,  by  an  author  of  the  tenth
century.  Murat.  Scrip.  Rerum  Italic,  vol.  ii.  parsii.  p.  691.  The
state  of  desolation  in  other  countries  of  Europe  seems  to  have  been
the  same.  In  many  of  the  most  early  charters  now  extant,  the
lands  granted  to  monasteries,  or  to  private  persons,  are  distin-
tinguished  into  such  as  are  cultivated  or  inhabited,  and  such  as
were  eremi,  desolate.  In  many  instances,  lands  are  granted  to
persons  because  they  had  taken  them  from  the  desert,  ab  eremo,  and
had  cultivated  and  planted  them  with  inhabitants.  This  appears
from  a  charter  of  Charlemagne,  published  by  Eckhart  de  Rebus
Franciee  Orientalis,  vol.  ii.  p,  864.  and  from  many  charters  of  his
successors  quoted  byDu  Cange,  voc.  eremus. — Wherever  a  right  of
property  in  land  can  be  thus  acquired,  it  is  evident  that  the  country
must  be  extremely  desolate,  and  thinly  peopled.  The  first  settlers
in  America  obtained  possession  of  land  by  such  a  title.  Whoever
was  able  to  clear  and  to  cultivate  a  field,  was  recognised  as  the
proprietor.  His  industry  merited  such  a  recompense.  The  grants
in  the  charters  which  I  have  mentioned  flow  from  a  similar  princi-
ple, and  there  must  have  been  some  resemblance  in  the  state  of  the
countries.

Muratori  adds,  that  during  the  eighth  and  ninth  centuries,  Italy
was  greatly  infested  by  wolves  and  other  wild  beasts;  another  mark
of  its  being  destitute  of  inhabitants.  Murat.  Antiq.  vol.  ii.  p.  163.
Thus  Italy,  the  pride  of  the  ancient  world  for  its  fertility  and  culti-
vation, was  reduced  to  the  state  of  a  country  newly  peopled,  and
lately  rendered  habitable.

I  am  sensible,  not  only  that  some  of  these  descriptions  of  the  de-
vastations which  I  have  quoted,  may  be  exaggerated,  but  that  the
barbarous  tribes,  in  making  their  settlements,  did  not  proceed  inva-
riably in  the  same  manner.  Some  of  them  seemed  to  be  bent  on
exterminating  the  ancient  inhabitants;  others  were  more  disposed
to  incorporate  with  them.  It  is  not  my  province  either  to  inquire
into  the  causes  which  occasioned  this  variety  in  the  conduct  of  the
conquerors,  or  to  describe  the  state  of  those  countries  where  the
ancient  inhabitants  were  treated  most  mildly.  The  facts  which  I
have  produced  are  sufficient  to  justify  the  account  which  I  have
given  in  the  text,  and  to  prove,  that  the  destruction  of  the  human

192  PROOFS AND

species,  occasioned  by  the  hostile  invasions  of  the  northern  nations,
and  their  subsequent  settlements,  was  much  greater  than  many  au-
thors seem  to  imagine.

Note  VI. Sect.  I.  p.  19.

I  HAVE  observed,  Note  II.,  that  our  only  certain  information
concerning  the  ancient  state  of  the  barbarous  nations  must  be  de-
rived from  the  Greek  and  Roman  writers.  Happily  an  account  of
the  institutions  and  customs  of  one  people,  to  which  those  of  all  the
rest  seem  to  have  been  in  a  great  measure  similar,  has  been  trans-
mitted to  us  by  two  authors,  the  most  capable,  perhaps,  that  ever
wrote,  of  observing  them  with  profound  discernment,  and  of  de-
scribing them  with  propriety  and  force.  The  reader  must  perceive
that  Csesar  and  Tacitus  are  the  authors  whom  I  have  hi  view.  The
former  gives  a  short  account  of  the  ancient  Germans  in  a  few  chap-
ters of  the  sixth  book  of  his  Commentaries :  the  latter  wrote  a  trea-
tise expressly  on  that  subject.  These  are  the  most  precious  and
instructive  monuments  of  antiquity  to  the  present  inhabitants  of
Europe.  From  them  we  learn,

1.  That  the  state  of  society  among  the  ancient  Germans  was  of
the  rudest  and  most  simple  form.  They  subsisted  entirely  by
hunting  or  by  pasturage.  Gees.  lib.  vi.  c.  21.  They  neglected
agriculture,  and  lived  chiefly  on  milk,  cheese,  and  flesh.  Ibid,
c.  22.  Tacitus  agrees  with  him  in  most  of  these  points ;  De  Morib.
Germ.  c.  14,  15.  23.  The  Goths  were  equally  negligent  of  agri-
culture. Prise.  Rhet.  ap.  Byz.  Script,  v.  i.  p.  31.  B.  Society  was
in  the  same  state  among  the  Huns,  who  disdained  to  cultivate  the
earth,  or  to  touch  a  plough.  Amm.  Marcel,  lib.  xxxi.  p.  475.
The  same  manners  took  place  among  the  Alans;  ibid.  p.  477.
While  society  remains  in  this  simple  state,  men  by  uniting  together
scarcely  relinquish  any  portion  of  their  natural  independence.  Ac-
cordingly we  are  informed,  2.  That  the  authority  of  civil  govern-
ment was  extremely  limited  among  the  Germans.  During  times  of
peace  they  had  no  common  or  fixed  magistrate,  but  the  chief  men
of  every  district  dispensed  justice,  and  accommodated  differences.
Caes.  ibid.  c.  23.  Their  kings  had  not  absolute  or  unbounded
power ;  their  authority  consisted  rather  in  the  privilege  of  advising,
than  in  the  power  of  commanding.  Matters  of  small  consequence
were  determined  by  the  chief  men;  affairs  of  importance  by  the
whole  community.  Tacit,  c.  7.  11.  The  Huns,  in  like  manner,
deliberated  in  common  concerning  every  business  of  moment  to  the
society ;  and  were  not  subject  to  the  rigour  of  regal  authority.
Amm.  Marcel,  lib.  xxxi.  p.  474.  3.  Every  individual  among  the
ancient  Germans  was  left  at  liberty  to  choose  whether  he  would  take

ILLUSTRATIONS.  193

part  in  any  military  enterprise  which  was  proposed;  there  seems  to
have  been  no  obligation  to  engage  in  it  imposed  on  him  by  public
authority. "  When  any  of  the  chief  men  proposes  an  expedition,
such  as  approve  of  the  cause  and  of  the  leader,  rise  up,  and  declare
their  intention  of  following  him  ;  after  coming  under  this  engage-
ment, those  who  do  not  fulfil  it,  are  considered  as  deserters  and
traitors, and  are  looked  upon  as  infamous." Caes.  ibid.  c.  23.
Tacitus  plainly  points  at  the  same  custom,  though  in  terms  more
obscure. Tacit,  c.  11. 4.  As  every  individual  was  so  independent,
and  master  in  so  great  a  degree  of  his  own  actions,  it  became,  of
consequence,  the  great  object  of  every  person  among  the  Germans
who  aimed  at  being  a  leader,  to  gain  adherents,  and  attach  them
to  his  person  and  interest. These  adherents  Csesar  calls  Ambacti
and  Clientes,  i.  e.  retainers  or  clients ;  Tacitus,  Comites,  or  com-
panions. The  chief  distinction  and  power  of  the  leaders  consisted
in  being  attended  by  a  numerous  band  of  chosen  youth. This  was
their  pride  as  well  as  ornament  during  peace,  and  their  defence  in
war. The  leaders  gained  or  preserved  the  favour  of  these  retainers
by  presents  of  armour  and  of  horses ;  or  by  the  profuse  though
inelegant  hospitality  with which  they  entertained them. Tacit.
c.  14,  15. 5. Another  consequence  of  the  personal  liberty  and
independence  which  the  Germans  retained,  even  after  they  united
in  society,  was  their  circumscribing  the  criminal  jurisdiction  of  the
magistrate  within  very  narrow  limits,  and  their  not  only  claiming
but  exercising  almost  all  the  rights  of  private  resentment  and  re-
venge. Their  magistrates  had  not  the  power  either  of  imprisoning
or  of  inflicting  any  corporal  punishment  on  a  free  man. Tacit,  c.  7.
Every  person  was  obliged  to  avenge  the  wrongs  which  his  parents
or  friends  had  sustained. Their  enemies  were  hereditary,  but  not
irreconcilable. Even murder was compensated by paying a
certain  number  of  cattle. Tacit,  c.  21. A  part  of  the  fine  went
to  the  king,  or  state,  a  part  to  the  person  who  had  been  injured,
or  to  his  kindred. Ibid.  c.  12.

Those  particulars  concerning  the  institutions  and  manners  of  the
Germans,  though  well  known  to  every  person  conversant  in  ancient
literature,  I  have  thought  proper  to  arrange  in  this  order,  and  to
lay  before  such  of  my  readers  as  may  be  less  acquainted  with  these
facts,  both  because  they  confirm  the  account  which  I  have  given  of
the  state  of  the  barbarous  nations,  and  because  they  tend  to  illus-
trate all  the  observations  I  shall  have  occasion  to  make  concerning
the  various  changes  in  their  government  and  customs.  The  laws
and  customs  introduced  by  the  barbarous  nations  into  their  new
settlements,  are  the  best  commentary  on  the  writings  of  Csesar  and
Tacitus  ;  and  their  observations  are  the  best  key  to  a  perfect  know-
ledge of  these  laws  and  customs.

VOL.  III.  0

194  PROOFS AND

One  circumstance,  with  respect  to  the  testimonies  of  Caesar  and
Tacitus  concerning  the  Germans,  merits  attention.  Caesar  wrote
his  brief  account  of  their  manners  more  than  a  hundred  years
before  Tacitus  composed  his  Treatise  De  Moribus  Germanorum.
A  hundred  years  make  a  considerable  period  in  the  progress  of
national  manners,  especially  if,  during  that  time,  those  people  who
are  rude  and  unpolished  have  had  much  communication  with  more
civilized  states.  This  was  the  case  with  the  Germans.  Their
intercourse  with  the  Romans  began  when  Csesar  crossed  the  Rhine,
and  increased  greatly  during  the  interval  between  that  event  and
the  time  when  Tacitus  flourished.  We  may  accordingly  observe,
that  the  manners  of  the  Germans,  in  his  time,  which  Caesar  de-
scribes, were  less  improved  than  those  of  the  same  people  as
delineated  by  Tacitus.  Besides  this,  it  is  remarkable  that  there
was  a  considerable  difference  in  the  state  of  society  among  the
different  tribes  of  Germans.  The  Suiones  were  so  much  improved,
that  they  began  to  be  corrupted.  Tacit,  cap.  44.  The  Fenni
were  so  barbarous,  that  it  is  wonderful  how  they  were  able  to  sub-
sist. Ibid.  cap.  46.  Whoever  undertakes  to  describe  the  manners
of  the  Germans,  or  to  found  any  political  theory  upon  the  state  of
society  among  them,  ought  carefully  to  attend  to  both  these
circumstances.

Before  I  quit  this  subject,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  observe,
that,  though  successive  alterations  in  their  institutions,  together  with
the  gradual  progress  of  refinement,  have  made  an  entire  change  in
the  manners  of  the  various  people  who  conquered  the  Roman
empire,  there  is  still  one  race  of  men  nearly  in  the  same  political
situation  with  theirs,  when  they  first  settled  in  their  new  conquests ;
I  mean  the  various  tribes  and  nations  of  savages  in  North  America.
It  cannot  then  be  considered  either  as  a  digression,  or  as  an  im-
proper indulgence  of  curiosity,  to  inquire  whether  this  similarity  in
their  political  state  has  occasioned  any  resemblance  between  their
character  and  manners.  If  the  likeness  turns  out  to  be  striking,  it
is  a  stronger  proof  that  a  just  account  has  been  given  of  the
ancient  inhabitants  of  Europe,  than  the  testimony  even  of  Caesar
or  of  Tacitus.

1.  'The  Americans  subsist  chiefly  by  hunting  and  fishing.  Some
tribes  neglect  agriculture  entirely.  Among  those  who  cultivate
some  small  spot  near  their  huts,  that,  together  with  all  works  of
labour,  is  performed  by  the  women.  P.  Charlevoix  Journal  His-
torique  d'un  Voyage  de  I'Amerique,  4to.  Par.  1744.  p.  334.  In
such  a  state  of  society,  the  common  wants  of  men  being  few,  and
their  mutual  dependence  upon  each  other  small,  their  union  is
extremely  imperfect  and  feeble,  and  they  continue  to  enjoy  their
natural  liberty  almost  unimpaired.  It  is  the  first  idea  of  an

ILLUSTRATIONS.  195

American,  that  every  man  is  bom  free  and  independent,  and  that
no  power  on  earth  hath  any  right  to  diminish  or  circumscribe  his
natural  liberty.  There  is  hardly  any  appearance  of  subordination
either  in  civil  or  domestic  government.  Every  one  does  what  he
pleases.  A  father  and  mother  live  with  their  children,  like  persons
whom  chance  has  brought  together,  and  whom  no  common  bond
unites.  Their  manner  of  educating  their  children  is  suitable  to  this
principle.  They  never  chastise  or  punish  them,  even  during  their
infancy.  As  they  advance  in  years,  they  continue  to  be  entirely
masters  of  their  own  actions,  and  seem  not  to  be  conscious  of
being  responsible  for  any  part  of  their  conduct.  Ibid.  p.  272,

273. 2. The power of  their  civil magistrates is extremely

limited.  Among  most  of  their  tribes,  the  Sachem,  or  chief,  is  elec-
tive. A  council  of  old  men  is  chosen  to  assist  him,  without  whose
advice  he  determines  no  affair  of  importance.  The  Sachems  neither
possess  nor  claim  any  great  degree  of  authority.  They  propose
and  entreat,  rather  than  command.  The  obedience  of  their  people

is  altogether  voluntary. Ibid.  p.  266.  268. 3.  The  savages  of

America  engage  in  their  military  enterprises,  not  from  constraint,
but  choice.  When  war  is  resolved,  a  chief  arises,  and  offers  him-
self to  be  the  leader.  Such  as  are  willing  (for  they  compel  no
person)  stand  up  one  after  another,  and  sing  their  war-song.  But,
if  after  this,  any  of  these  should  refuse  to  follow  the  leader  to
whom  they  have  engaged,  his  life  would  be  in  danger,  and  he
would  be  considered  as  the  most  infamous  of  men.  Ibid.  p.  217,

218. 4.  Such  as  engage  to  follow  any  leader,  expect  to  be

treated  by  him  with  great  attention  and  respect ;  and  he  is  obliged

to  make  them  presents  of  considerable  value. Ibid.  p.  218.

5.  Among  the  Americans,  the  magistrate  has  scarcely  any  criminal
jurisdiction.  Ibid.  p.  272.  Upon  receiving  any  injury,  the  person
or  family  offended  may  inflict  what  punishment  they  please  on  the
person  who  was  the  author  of  it.  Ibid.  p.  274.  Their  resentment
and  desire  of  vengeance,  are  excessive  and  implacable.  Time  can
neither  extinguish  nor  abate  it.  It  is  the  chief  inheritance  parents
leave  to  their  children  ;  it  is  transmitted  from  generation  to  gene-
ration, until  an  occasion  be  found  of  satisfying  it.  Ibid.  p.  309.
Sometimes,  however,  the  offended  party  is  appeased.  A  compen-
sation is  paid  for  the  murder  that  has  been  committed.  The
relations  of  the  deceased  receive  it:  and  it  consists  most  commonly
of  a  captive  taken  in  war,  who  being  substituted  in  place  of  the
person  who  was  murdered,  assumes  his  name,  and  is  adopted  into
his  family.  Ibid.  p.  274.  The  resemblance  holds  in  many  other
particulars.  *  It  is  sufficient  for  my  purpose  to  have  pointed  out
the  similarity  of  those  great  features  which  distinguish  and  charac-
terize both  people.  Bochart,  and  other  philologists  of  the  last

o2

196  PROOFS AND

century,  who,  with  more  erudition  than  scienice,  endeavoured  to
trace  the  migrations  of  various  nations,  and  who  were  apt,  upon
the  slightest  appearance  of  resemblance,  to  find  an  affinity  between
nations  far  removed  from  each  other,  and  to  conclude  that  they
were  descended  from  the  same  ancestors,  would  hardly  have  failed,
on  viewing  such  an  amazing  similarity,  to  pronounce  with  con-
fidence, "  That  the  Germans  and  Americans  must  be  the  same
people."  But  a  philosopher  will  satisfy  himself  with  observing,
"  That  the  characters  of  nations  depend  on  the  state  of  society  in
which  they  live,  and  on  the  political  institutions  established  among
them  ;  and  that  the  human  mind,  whenever  it  is  placed  in  the  same
situation,  will,  in  ages  the  most  distant,  and  in  countries  the  most
remote,  assume  the  same  form,  and  be  distinguished  by  the  same
manners."

I  have  pushed  the  comparison  between  the  Germans  and  Ame-
ricans no  farther  than  was  necessary  for  the  illustration  of  my
subject.  I  do  not  pretend  that  the  state  of  society  in  the  two
countries  was  perfectly  similar  in  every  respect.  Many  of  the
German  tribes  were  more  civilized  than  the  Americans.  Some  of
them  were  not  unacquainted  with  agriculture ;  almost  all  of  them
had  flocks  of  tame  cattle,  and  depended  upon  them  for  the  chief
part  of  their  subsistence.  Most  of  the  American  tribes  subsist  by
hunting,  and  are  in  a  ruder  and  more  simple  state  than  the  ancient
Germans.  The  resemblance,  however,  between  their  condition,  is
greater,  perhaps,  than  any  that  history  affords  an  opportunity  of
observing  between  any  two  races  of  uncivilized  people,  and  this  has
produced  a  surprising  similarity  of  manners.

Note  VII. Sect.  I. p.  19.

THE  booty  gained  by  an  army  belonged  to  the  army.  The
king  himself  had  no  part  of  it  but  what  he  acquired  by  lot.  A  re-
markable instance  of  this  occurs  in  the  history  of  the  Franks.
The  army  of  Clovis,  the  founder  of  the  French  monarchy,  having
plundered  a  church,  carried  off,  among  other  sacred  utensils,  a
vase  of  extraordinary  size  and  beauty.  The  bishop  sent  deputies
to  Clovis,  beseeching  him  to  restore  the  vase,  that  it  might  be  again
employed  in  the  sacred  services  to  which  it  had  been  consecrated.
Clovis  desired  the  deputies  to  follow  him  to  Soissons,  as  the  booty
was  to  be  divided  in  that  place ;  and  promised,  that,  if  the  lot
should  give  him  the  disposal  of  the  vase,  he  would  grant  what  the
bishop  desired.  When  he  came  to  Soissons,  and  all  the  booty  was
placed  in  one  great  heap,  in  the  middle  of  the  army,  Clovis  en-
treated, that,  before  making  the  division,  they  would  give  him  that
vase  over  and  above  his  share.  All  appeared  willing  to  gratify  the

ILLUSTRATIONS.  197

king,  and  to  comply  with  his  request,  when  a  fierce  and  haughty
soldier  lifted  up  his  battle-axe,  and,  striking  the  vase  with  the
utmost  violence,  cried  out  with  a  loud  voice,  "  You  shall  receive
nothing  here  but  that  to  which  the  lot  gives  you  a  right."  Gregor.
Turon.  Histor.  Francorum,  lib.  ii.  c.  27.  p.  70.  Par  1610.

Note  VIII. Sect.  I.  p.  22.

THE  history  of  the  establishment  and  progress  of  the  feudal
system,  is  an  interesting  object  to  all  the  nations  of  Europe.  In
some  countries,  their  jurisprudence  and  laws  are  still  in  a  great
measure  feudal.  In  others,  many  forms  and  practices  established
by  custom,  or  founded  on  statutes,  took  their  rise  from  the  feudal
law,  and  cannot  be  understood  without  attending  to  the  ideas
peculiar  to  it.  Several  authors  of  the  highest  reputation  for  genius
and  erudition,  have  endeavoured  to  illustrate  this  subject,  but  still
many  parts  of  it  are  obscure.  I  shall  endeavour  to  trace,  with
precision,  the  progress  and  variation  of  ideas  concerning  property
in  land  among  the  barbarous  nations  ;  and  shall  attempt  to  point
out  the  causes  which  introduced  these  changes,  as  well  as  the
effects  which  followed  upon  them.  Property  in  land  seems  to  have
gone  through  four  successive  changes  among  the  people  who  settled
in  the  various  provinces  of  the  Roman  empire.

I.  While the barbarous nations remained in their original
countries,  their  property  in  land  was  only  temporary,  and  they  had
no  certain  limits  to  their  possessions. After  feeding  their  flocks  in
one  district,  they  removed  with  them,  and  with  their  wives  and
families,  to  another ;  and  abandoned  that  likewise  in  a  short  time.
They  were  not,  in  consequence  of  this  imperfect  species  of  property,
brought  under  any  positive  or  formal  obligation  to  serve  the  com-
munity ;  all  their  services  were  purely  voluntary. Every  individual
was  at  liberty  to  choose  how  far  he  would  contribute  towards  carry-
ing on  any  military  enterprise. If  he  followed  a  leader  in  any
expedition,  it  was  from  attachment,  not  from  a  sense  of  obligation.
The  clearest  proof  of  this  has  been  produced  in  Note  VI. While
property  continued  in  this  state,  we  can  discover  nothing  that  bears
any  resemblance  to  a  feudal  tenure,  or  to  the  subordination  and
military  service  which  the  feudal  system  introduced.

II.  Upon  settling  in  the  countries  which  they  had  subdued,  the
victorious  troops  divided  the  conquered  lands. Whatever  portion
of  them  fell  to  a  soldier,  he  seized  as  the  recompense  due  to  his
valour,  as  a  settlement  acquired  by  his  own  sword. He  took  pos-
session of  it  as  a  freeman  in  full  property. He  enjoyed  it  during
his  own  life,  and  could  dispose  of  it  at  pleasure,  or  transmit  it  as  an
inheritance  to  his  children. Thus  property  in  land  became  fixed.

198  PROOFS AND

It  was  at  the  same  time  allodial ;  i.  e.  the  possessor  had  the  entire
right  of  property  and  dominion ;  he  held  of  no  sovereign  or  superior
lord,  to  whom  he  was  bound  to  do  homage,  and  perform  service.
But  as  these  new  proprietors  were  in  some  danger  (as  has  been
observed  in  the  text)  of  being  disturbed  by  the  remainder  of  the
ancient  inhabitants,  and  in  still  greater  danger  of  being  attacked
by  successive  colonies  of  barbarians  as  fierce  and  rapacious  as
themselves,  they  saw  the  necessity  of  coming  under  obligations  to
defend  the  community,  more  explicit  than  those  to  which  they  had
been  subject  in  their  original  habitations.  On  this  account,  im-
mediately upon  their  fixing  in  their  new  settlements,  every  freeman
became  bound  to  take  arms  in  defence  of  the  community,  and,  if  he
refused  or  neglected  so  to  do,  was  liable  to  a  considerable  penalty.
I  do  not  mean  that  any  contract  of  this  kind  was  formally  con-
cluded, or  mutually  ratified  by  any  legal  solemnity.  It  was
established  by  tacit  consent,  like  the  other  compacts  which  hold
society  together.  Their  mutual  security  and  preservation  made  it
the  interest  of  all  to  recognise  its  authority,  and  to  enforce  the
observation  of  it.  We  can  trace  back  this  new  obligation  on  the
proprietors  of  land  to  a  very  early  period  in  the  history  of  the
Franks.  Chilperic,  who  began  his  reign  A.  D.  562,  exacted  a  fine,
bannos  jussit  exigi,  from  certain  persons  who  had  refused  to  accom-
pany him  in  an  expedition.  Gregor.  Turon.  lib.  v.  c.  26.  p.  211.
Childebert,  who  began  his  reign  A.  D.  576,  proceeded  in  the  same
manner  against  others  who  had  been  guilty  of  a  like  crime.  Ibid,
lib.  vii.  c.  42.  p.  342.  Such  a  fine  could  not  have  been  exacted
while  property  continued  in  its  first  state,  and  military  service
was  entirely  voluntary.  Charlemagne  ordained,  that  'every
freeman  who  possessed  five  mansi,  i.  e.  sixty  acres  of  land,  in
property,  should  march  in  person  against  the  enemy.  Capitul.
A.  D.  807.  Louis  le  Debonnaire,  A.  D.  815,  granted  lands  to
certain  Spaniards  who  fled  from  the  Saracens,  and  allowed  them
to  settle  in  his  territories,  on  condition  that  they  should  serve  in
the  army  like  other  freemen.  Capitul.  vol.  i.  p.  500.  By  land
possessed  in  property,  which  is  mentioned  in  the  law  of  Charle-
magne, we  are  to  understand,  according  to  the  style  of  that  age,
allodial  land ;  alodes  and  proprietas,  alodum  and  proprium,  being
words  perfectly  synonymous.  Du  Cange,  voce  Alodis.  The
clearest  proof  of  the  distinction  between  allodial  and  beneficiary
possession  is  contained  in  two  charters  published  by  Muratori,  by
which  it  appears,  that  a  person  might  possess  one  part  of  his  estate
as  allodial,  which  he  could  dispose  of  at  pleasure,  the  other  as  a
beneficium,  of  which  he  had  only  the  usufruct,  the  property  returning
to  the  superior  lord  on  his  demise.  Antiq.  Ital.  Medii  ,£vi,  vol.  i.
p.  559.  565.  The  same  distinction  is  pointed  out  in  a  Capitulare

ILLUSTRATIONS.  199

of  Charlemagne,  A.  D.  812,  edit.  Baluz.  vol.  i.  p.  491.  Count
Everard,  who  married  a  daughter  of  Louis  le  Debonnaire,  in  the
curious  testament,  by  which  he  disposes  of  his  vast  estate  among
his  children,  distinguishes  between  what  he  possessed  proprietate,
and  what  he  held  beneficio ;  and  it  appears  that  the  greater  part
was  allodial,  A.  D.  837.  Aub.  Mirsei  Opera  Diplomatica,  Lovan.
1723.  vol.  p.  19.

In  the  same  manner  Liber  homo. is  commonly  opposed  to  Vassus
or  Vassallus;  the  former  denotes  an  allodial  proprietor,  the  latter
one  who  held  of  a  superior.  These  free  men  were  under  an  obliga-
tion to  serve  the  state  ;  and  this  duty  was  considered  as  so  sacred,
that  freemen  were  prohibited  from  entering  into  holy  orders,  unless
they  had  obtained  the  consent  of  the  sovereign.  The  reason  given
for  this  in  the  statute  is  remarkable,  "  For  we  are  informed  that
some  do  so,  not  so  much  out  of  devotion,  as  in  order  to  avoid  that
military  service  which  they  are  bound  to  perform.  Capitul.  lib.  i.
§  1 14.  If,  upon  being  summoned  into  the  field,  any  freeman  re-
fused to  obey,  a  full  herebannum,  i.  e.  a  fine  of  sixty  crowns,  was  to
be  exacted  from  him  according  to  the  law  of  the  Franks/'  Capit.
Car.  Magn.  ap.  Leg.  Longob.  lib.  i.  tit.  14.  §  13.  p.  539.  This
expression,  according  to  the  law  of  the  Franks,  seems  to  imply,
that  both  the  obligation  to  serve,  and  the  penalty  on  those  who
disregarded  it,  were  coeval  with  the  laws  made  by  the  Franks  at
their  first  settlement  in  Gaul.  This  fine  was  levied  with  such
rigour,  "  That  if  any  person  convicted  of  this  crime  was  insolvent,
he  was  reduced  to  servitude,  and  continued  in  that  state  until  such
time  as  his  labour  should  amount  to  the  value  of  the  herebannum:1
Ibid.  The  emperor  Lotharius  rendered  the  penalty  still  more
severe ;  and  if  any  person,  possessing  such  an  extent  of  property
as  made  it  incumbent  on  him  to  take  the  field  in  person,  refused  to
obey  the  summons,  all  his  goods  were  declared  to  be  forfeited,  and
he  himself  might  be  punished  with  banishment.  Murat.  Script.
Ital.  vol.  i.  pars  ii.  p.  153.

III.  Property  in  land  having  thus  become  fixed,  and  subject  to
military  service,  another  change  was  introduced,  though  slowly,
and  step  by  step.  We  learn  from  Tacitus,  that  the  chief  men  among
the  Germans  endeavoured  to  attach  to  their  persons  and  interests
certain  adherents  whom  he  calls  Comites.  These  fought  under  their
standard,  and  followed  them  in  all  their  enterprises.  The  same
custom  continued  among  them  in  their  new  settlements,  and  those
attached  or  devoted  followers  were  called  jideles,  antrustioncs,  homines
in  truste  Dominica,  leudes.  Tacitus  informs  us,  that  the  rank  of  a
Comes  was  deemed  honourable;  De  Morib.  Germ.  c.  13.  The
composition,  which  is  the  standard  by  which  we  must  judge  of  the
rank  and  condition  of  persons  in  the  middle  ages,  paid  for  the  mur-

200  PROOFS  AND

der  of  one  in  trmte  Dominica,  was  triple  to  that  paid  for  the  murder
of  a  free  man.  Leg.  Salicor.  Tit.  44.  §  1.  &  2.  While  the  Ger-
mans remained  in  their  own  country,  they  courted  the  favour  of
these  Comites  by  presents  of  arms  and  horses,  and  by  hospitality.
See  Note  VI.  As  long  as  they  had  no  fixed  property  in  land,  these
were  the  only  gifts  that  they  could  bestow,  and  the  only  reward
which  their  followers  desired.  But  upon  their  settling  in  the  coun-
tries which  they  conquered,  and  when  the  value  of  property  came  to
be  understood  among  them,  instead  of  those  slight  presents,  the
kings  and  chieftains  bestowed  a  more  substantial  recompense  in
land  on  their  adherents.  These  grants  were  called  bcnefida,  because
they  were  gratuitous  donations ;  and  honores,  because  they  were  re-
garded as  marks  of  distinction.  What  were  the  seryices  originally
exacted  in  return  for  these  beneficia  cannot  be  determined  with  ab-
solute precision;  because  there  are  no  records  so  ancient.  When
allodial  possessions  were  first  rendered  feudal,  they  were  not,  at
once,  subjected  to  all  the  feudal  services.  The  transition  here,  as
in  all  other  changes  of  importance,  was  gradual.  As  the  great  ob-
ject of  a  feudal  vassal  was  to  obtain  protection,  when  allodial  pro-
prietors first  consented  to  become  vassals  of  any  powerful  leader,
they  continued  to  retain  as  much  of  their  ancient  independence  as
was  consistent  with  that  new  relation.  The  homage  which  they  did
to  the  superior  of  whom  they  chose  to  hold,  was  called  homagium
planum,  and  bound  them  to  nothing  more  than  fidelity,  but  without
any  obligation  either  of  military  service,  or  attendance  in  the  courts
of  their  superior.  Of  this  homagium  planum  some  traces,  though
obscure,  may  still  be  discovered.  Brussel,  torn.  i.  p.  97.  Among
the  ancient  writs  published  by  D.  D.  De  Vic  et  Vaisette  hist,  de
Langued.  are  a  great  many  which  they  call  homagia.  They  seem
to  be  an  intermediate  step  between  the  homagium  planum  mentioned
by  Brussel,  and  the  engagement  to  perform  complete  feudal  ser-
vice. The  one  party  promises  protection,  and  grants  certain  cas-
tles or  lands ;  the  other  engages  to  defend  the  person  of  the  granter,
and  to  assist  him  likewise  in  defending  his  property  as  often  as  he
shall  be  summoned  to  do  so.  But  these  engagements  are  accom-
panied with  none  of  the  feudal  formalities,  and  no  mention  is  made
of  any  of  the  other  feudal  services.  They  appear  rather  to  be  a
mutual  contract  between  equals,  than  the  engagement  of  a  vassal
to  perform  services  to  a  superior  lord.  Preuves  de  1'hist.  de  Lang,
torn.  ii.  173,  et  passim.  As  soon  as  men  were  accustomed  to  these,
the  other  feudal  services  were  gradually  introduced.  M.  de  Mon-
tesquieu considers  these  beneficia  as  fiefs,  which  originally  subjected
those  who  held  them  to  military  service.  L'Esprit  des  Loix,  1.  xxx.
c.  3  &  16.  M.  1'Abbe  de  Mably  contends,  that  such  as  held  these
were  at  first  subjected  to  no  other  service  than  what  was  incum-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  201

bent  on  every  free  man.  Observations  sur  1'histoire  de  France,  i.
356.  But,  upon  comparing  their  proofs  and  reasonings  and  con-
jectures, it  seems  to  be  evident,  that  as  every  free  man,  in  conse-
quence of  his  allodial  property,  was  bound  to  serve  the  community
under  a  severe  penalty,  no  good  reason  can  be  assigned  for  confer-
ring these  benejicia,  if  they  did  not  subject  such  as  received  them  to
some  new  obligation.  Why  should  a  king  have  stripped  himself  of
his  domain,  if  he  had  not  expected  that,  by  parcelling  it  out,  he  might
acquire  a  right  to  services,  to  which  he  had  formerly  no  title  ?  We
may  then  warrantably  conclude,  "  That  as  allodial  property  sub-
jected those  who  possessed  it  to  serve  the  community,  so  benejicia
subjected  such  as  held  them  to  personal  service  and  fidelity  to  him
from  whom  they  received  these  lands."  These  beneficia  were  granted
originally  only  during  pleasure.  No  circumstance  relating  to  the
customs  of  the  middle  ages  is  better  ascertained  than  this  ;  and  in-
numerable proofs  of  it  might  be  added  to  those  produced  in  L'Esprit
des  Loix,  1.  xxx.  c.  16.  and  by  Du  Cange,  voc.  benejicium  et
feudum.

IV.  But  the  possession  of  benefices  did  not  continue' long  in  this
state.  A  precarious  tenure  during  pleasure,  was  not  sufficient  to
satisfy  such  as-  held  lands,  and  by  various  means  they  gradually
obtained  a  confirmation  of  their  benefices  during  life.  Feudor.  lib.
tit.  i.  Du  Cange  produces  several  quotations  from  ancient  charters
and  chronicles  in  proof  of  this  ;  Glos.  voc.  Benejicium.  After  this
it  was  easy  to  obtain  or  extort  charters  rendering  beneficia  hereditary,
first  in  the  direct  line,  then  in  the  collateral,  and  at  last  in  the
female  line.  Leg.  Longob.  lib.  iii.  tit.  8.  Du  Cange,  voc.
Benejicium.

It  is  no  easy  matter  to  fix  the  precise  time  when  each  of  these
changes  took  place.  M.  1' Ab.  Mably  conjectures,  with  some  pro-
bability, that  Charles  Martel  first  introduced  the  practice  of  grant-
ing benejicia  for  life :  Observat.  torn.  i.  p.  103.  160  ;  and  that  Louis
le  Debonnaire  was  among  the  first  who  rendered  them  hereditary,
is  evident  from  the  authorities  to  which  he  refers ;  Ibid.  429.  Ma-
billon  however  has  published  a  placitum  of  Louis  le  Debonnaire,
A.  D.  860,  by  which  it  appears,  that  he  still  continued  to  grant  some
benejicia  only  during  life.  De  Re  Diplomatica,  lib.  vi.  p.  353.  In
the  year  889,  Odo  king  of  France  granted  lands  to  Ricabodo,  fideli
suo,  jure  beneficiario  et  fructuario,  during  his  own  life ;  and  if  he
should  die,  and  a  son  were  born  to  him,  that  right  was  to  continue
during  the  life  of  his  son.  Mabillon  ut  supra,  p.  556.  This  was  an
intermediate  step  between  fiefs  merely  during  life,  and  fiefs  heredi-
tary to  perpetuity.  While  benejicia  continued  under  their  first  form,
and  were  held  only  during  pleasure,  he  who  granted  them  not  only
exercised  the  dominium  or  prerogative  of  superior  lord,  but  he  re-

202  PROOFS AND

tained  the  property,  giving  his  vassal  only  the  usufruct.  But  under
the  latter  form,  when  they  became  hereditary,  although  feudal  law-
yers continued  to  define  a  beneficium  agreeably  to  its  original  nature,
the  property  was  in  effect  taken  out  of  the  hands  of  the  superior
lords,  and  lodged  in  those  of  the  vassal.  As  soon  as  the  reciprocal
advantages  of  the  feudal  mode  of  tenure  came  to  be  understood  by
superiors  as  well  as  vassals,  that  species  of  holding  became  so
agreeable  to  both,  that  not  only  lands,  but  casual  rents,  such  as  the
profits  of  a  toll,  the  fare  paid  at  ferries,  &c.  the  salaries  or  perqui-
sites of  offices,  and  even  pensions  themselves,  were  granted  and  held
as  fiefs ;  and  military  service  was  promised  and  exacted  on  account
of  these.  Morice  Mem.  pour  servir  de  preuves  a  1'Hist.  de  Bre-
tagne,  torn.  ii.  78.  690.  Brussel,  torn.  i.  p.  41.  How  absurd  so-
ever it  may  seem  to  grant  or  to  hold  such  precarious  and  casual
property  as  a  fief,  there  are  instances  of  feudal  tenures  still  more
singular.  The  profits  arising  from  the  masses  said  at  an  altar,  were
properly  an  ecclesiastical  revenue,  belonging  to  the  clergy  of  the
church  or  monastery  which  performed  that  duty;  but  these  were
sometimes  seized  by  the  powerful  barons.  In  order  to  ascertain
their  right  to  them,  they  held  them  as  fiefs  of  the  church,  and  par-
celled them  out  in  the  same  manner  as  other  property  to  their  sub-
vassals.  Bouquet,  Recueil  des  Hist.  vol.  x.  238.  480.  The  same
spirit  of  encroachment  which  rendered  fiefs  hereditary,  led  the  nobles
to  extort  from  their  sovereigns  hereditary  grants  of  offices.  Many  of  the
great  offices  of  the  crown  became  hereditary  in  most  of  the  kingdoms
in  Europe;  and  so  conscious  were  monarchs  of  this  spirit  of  usurpa-
tion among  the  nobility,  and  so  solicitous  to  guard  against  it,  that,
on  some  occasions,  they  obliged  the  persons  whom  they  promoted
to  any  office  of  dignity,  to  grant  an  obligation,  that  neither  they  nor
their  heirs  should  claim  it  as  belonging  to  them  by  hereditary  right.
A  remarkable  instance  of  this  is  produced,  Mem.  de  PA  cad.  des
Inscript.  torn.  xxx.  p.  595.  Another  occurs  in  the  Thesaur.  Anec-
dot.  published  by  Martene  andDurand,  vol.  i.  p.  873. — This  revolu-
tion in  property  occasioned  a  change  corresponding  to  it  in  political
government;  the  great  vassals  of  the  crown,  as  they  acquired  such
extensive  possessions,  usurped  a  proportional  degree  of  power,  de-
pressed the  jurisdiction  of  the  crown,  and  trampled  on  the  privileges
of  the  people.  It  is  on  account  of  this  connexion,  that  it  becomes
an  object  of  importance  in  history  to  trace  the  progress  of  feudal
property ;  for,  upon  discovering  in  what  state  property  was  at  any
particular  period,  we  may  determine  with  precision  what  was  the
degree  of  power  possessed  by  the  king  or  by  the  nobility  at  that
juncture.

One  circumstance  more,  with  respect  to  the  changes  which  pro-
perty underwent,  deserves  attention. I  have  shewn,  that  when  the

ILLUSTRATIONS.  203

various  tribes  of  barbarians  divided  their  conquests  in  the  fifth  and
sixth  centuries,  the  property  which  they  acquired  was  allodial ;  but
in  several  parts  of  Europe,  property  had  become  almost  entirely
feudal  by  the  beginning  of  the  tenth  century.  The  former  species
of  property  seems  to  be  so  much  better  and  more  desirable  than  the
latter,  that  such  a  change  appears  surprising,  especially  when  we  are
informed  that  allodial  property  was  frequently  converted  into  feudal,
by  a  voluntary  deed  of  the  possessor.  The  motives  which  determined
them  to  a  choice  so  repugnant  to  the  ideas  of  modern  times  con-
cerning property,  have  been  investigated  and  explained  by  M.  de
Montesquieu,  with  his  usual  discernment  and  accuracy,  lib.  xxxi.
c.  8.  The  most  considerable  is  that  of  which  we  have  a  hint  in
Lambertus  Ardensis,  an  ancient  writer  quoted  by  Du  Cange,  voce
Alodis.  In  those  times  of  anarchy  and  disorder  which  became  ge-
neral in  Europe  after  the  death  of  Charlemagne,  when  there  was
scarcely  any  union  among  the  different  members  of  the  community,
and  individuals  were  exposed,  single  and  undefended  by  govern-
ment, to  rapine  and  oppression,  it  became  necessary  for  every  man
to  have  a  powerful  protector,  under  whose  banner  he  might  range
himself,  and  obtain  security  against  enemies  whom  singly  he  could
not  oppose.  For  this  reason  he  relinquished  his  allodial  indepen-
dence, and  subjected  himself  to  the  feudal  services,  that  he  might
find  safety  under  the  patronage  of  some  respectable  superior.  In
some  parts  of  Europe,  this  change  from  allodial  to  feudal  property
became  so  general,  that  he  who  possessed  land  had  no  longer  any
liberty  of  choice  left.  He  was  obliged  to  recognise  some  liege  lord,
and  to  hold  of  him.  Thus  Beaumanoir  informs  us,  that  in  the  coun-
ties of  Clermont  and  Beauvois,  if  the  lord  or  count  discovered  any
lands  within  his  jurisdiction,  for  which  no  service  was  performed,
and  which  paid  to  him  no  taxes  or  customs,  he  might  instantly  seize
it  as  his  own ;  for,  says  he,  according  to  our  custom  no  man  can
hold  allodial  property.  Coust.  ch.  24.  p.  123.  Upon  the  same
principle  is  founded  a  maxim,  which  has  at  length  become  general
in  the  law  of  France,  Nulle  terre  sans  Seigneur.  In  other  pro-
vinces of  France,  allodial  property  seems  to  have  remained  longer
unalienated,  and  to  have  been  more  highly  valued.  A  great  number
of  charters,  containing  grants,  or  sales,  or  exchanges  of  allodial
lands  in  the  province  of  Languedoc,  are  published.  Hist.  Gener.  de
Langued.  par.  D.  D.  De  Vic  et  Vaisette,  torn.  ii.  During  the  ninth,
tenth,  and  great  part  of  the  eleventh  century,  the  property  in  that
province  seems  to  have  been  entirely  allodial ;  and  scarcely  any
mention  of  feudal  tenures  occurs  in  the  deeds  of  that  country.  The
state  of  property  during  these  centuries,  seems  to  have  been  per-
fectly similar  in  Catalonia  and  the  country  of  Rousillon,  as  appears
from  the  original  charters  published  in  the  Appendix  to  Petr.  de  la

204  PROOFS  AND

Marca's  Treatise  de  Marca  sive  Limite  Hispanico.  Allodial  property
seems  to  have  continued  in  the  Low  Countries  to  a  period  still  later.
During  the  eleventh,  twelfth,  and  thirteenth  centuries,  this  species
of  property  appears  to  have  been  of  considerable  extent.  Miraei
operadiplom.vol.i.34.74,75.  83.  817.  296.842.847.  578.  Some
vestiges  of  allodial  property  appear  there  as  late  as  the  fourteenth
century.  Ibid.  218.  Several  facts  which  prove  that  allodial  pro-
perty subsisted  in  different  parts  of  Europe  long  after  the  intro-
duction of  feudal  tenures,  and  which  tend  to  illustrate  the  distinc-
tion between  these  two  different  species  of  possession,  are  produced
by  M.  Houard,  Anciennes  Loix  des  Francois,  conservees  dans  les
Coutumes  Angloises,  vol.  i.  p.  192,  &c.  The  notions  of  men  with
respect  to  property,  vary  according  to  the  diversity  of  their  under-
standings, and  the  caprice  of  their  passions.  At  the  same  time  that
some  persons  were  fond  of  relinquishing  allodial  property,  in  order
to  hold  it  by  feudal  tenure,  others  seem  to  have  been  solicitous  to
convert  their  fiefs  into  allodial  property.  An  instance  of  this  occurs
in  a  charter  of  Louis  le  Debonnaire,  published  by  Eckhard,  Com-
mentarii  de  Rebus  Franciae  Orientalis,  vol.  ii.  p.  885.  Another
occurs  in  the  year  1299.  Reliquiae  MSS.  omnis  sevi,  by  Ludwig,
vol.  i.  p.  209 ;  and  even  one  as  late  as  the  year  1337,  ibid.  vol.  vii.
p.  40.  The  same  thing  took  place  in  the  Low  Countries.  Miraei
Oper.  i.  52.

In  tracing  these  various  revolutions  of  property,  I  have  hitherto
chiefly  confined  myself  to  what  happened  in  France,  because  the
ancient  monuments  of  that  nation  have  either  been  more  carefully
preserved,  or  have  been  more  clearly  illustrated  than  those  of  any
people  in  Europe.

In  Italy,  the  sarne  revolutions  happened  in  property,  and  suc-
ceeded each  other  in  the  same  order.  There  is  some  ground,  how-
ever, for  conjecturing  that  allodial  property  continued  longer  in
estimation  among  the  Italians,  than  among  the  French.  It  appears
that  many  of  the  charters  granted  by  the  emperors  in  the  ninth
century,  conveyed  an  allodial  right  to  land.  Murat.  Antiq.  Med.
.ffivi,  v.  i.  p.  575,  &c.  But  in  the  eleventh  century  we  find  some  ex-
amples of  persons  who  resigned  their  allodial  property,  and  received
it  back  as  a  feudal  tenure.  Ibid.  p.  610,  &c.  Muratori  observes,
that  the  word  feudum,  which  came  to  be  substituted  in  place  of
beneficium,  does  not  occur  in  any  authentic  charter  previous  to  the
eleventh  century.  Ibid.  594.  A  charter  of  king  Robert  of  France,
A.  D.  1008,  is  the  earliest  deed  in  which  I  have  met  with  the  word
feudum.  Bouquet  Recueil  des  Historiens  de  Gaule  et  de  la  France,
torn.  x.  p.  593,  b.  This  word  occurs  indeed  in  an  edict,  A.  D.  790.
published  by  Brussel,  vol.  i.  p.  77.  But  the  authenticity  of  that
deed  has  been  called  in  question,  and  perhaps  the  frequent  use  of

ILLUSTRATIONS.  205

the  word  feudum  in  it,  is  an  additional  reason  for  doing  so.  The
account  which  I  have  given  of  the  nature  both  of  allodial  and  feudal
possessions  receives  some  confirmation  from  the  etymology  of  the
words  themselves.  Alode  or  allodium  is  compounded  of  the  Ger-
man particle  an  and  lot,  i.  e.  land  obtained  by  lot.  Wachteri  Glos-
sar.  Germanicum,  voc.  Allodium,  p.  35.  It  appears  from  the  au-
thorities produced  by  him  and  by  Du  Cange,  voc.  Sors,  that  the
northern  nations  divided  the  lands  which  they  had  conquered  in  this
manner.  Feodum  is  compounded  of  od  possession  or  estate,
and  feo  wages,  pay  ;  intimating  that  it  was  stipendiary,  and
granted  as  a  recompense  for  service.  Wachterus,  ibid.  voc.  Feodum,
p.  441.

The  progress  of  the  feudal  system  among  the  Germans  was  per-
fectly similar  to  that  which  we  have  traced  in  France.  But  as  the
emperors  of  Germany,  especially  after  the  imperial  crown  passed
from  the  descendants  of  Charlemagne  to  the  house  of  Saxony,  were
far  superior  to  the  contemporary  monarchs  of  France  in  abilities,  the
imperial  vassals  did  not  aspire  so  early  to  independence,  nor  did
they  so  soon  obtain  the  privilege  of  possessing  their  benefices  by
hereditary  right.  According  to  the  compilers  of  the  Libri  Feudorum,
Conrad  II.  or  the  Salic,  was  the  first  emperor  who  rendered  fiefs
hereditary.  Lib.  i.  tit.  i.  Conrad  began  his  reign,  A.  D.  1024.
Ludovicus  Pius,  under  whose  reign  grants  of  hereditary  fiefs  were
frequent  in  France,  succeeded  his  father,  A.  D.  814.  Not  only  was
this  innovation  so  much  later  in  being  introduced  among  the  vassals
of  the  German  emperors,  but  even  after  Conrad  had  established  it,
the  law  continued  favourable  to  the  ancient  practice :  and  unless  the
charter  of  the  vassal  bore  expressly  that  the  fief  descended  to  his
heirs,  it  was  presumed  to  be  granted  only  during  life.  Lib.  Feud,
ibid.  Even  after  the  alteration  made  by  Conrad,  it  was  not  un-
common in  Germany  to  grant  fiefs  only  for  life ;  a  charter  of  this
kind  occurs  as  late  as  the  year  1376.  Charta  ap.  Boehmer.  Princip.
Jur.  feud.  p.  361.  The  transmission  of  fiefs  to  collateral  and  fe-
male heirs,  took  place  very  slowly  among  the  Germans.  There  is
extant  a  charter,  A.  D.  1201,  conveying  the  right  of  succession  to
females ;  but  it  is  granted  as  an  extraordinary  mark  of  favour,  and
in  reward  of  uncommon  services.  Boehmer.  ibid.  p.  365.  In  Ger-
many, as  well  as  in  France  and  Italy,  a  considerable  part  of  the
lands  continued  to  be  allodial  long  after  the  feudal  mode  of  tenure
was  introduced.  It  appears  from  the  Codex  Diplomaticus  Mona-
sterii  Buch,  that  a  great  part  of  the  lands  in  the  marquisate  of  Mis-
nia  was  still  allodial  as  late  as  the  thirteenth  century.  N°  31.  36,
37.  46,  &c.  ap.  Scriptores  Hist.  German,  cura  Schoetgenii  et
Kreysigii.  Altenb.  1755.  vol.  ii.  183,  &c.  Allodial  property  seems
to  have  been  common  in  another  district  of  the  same  province,

206  PROOFS  AND

during  the  same  period. Reliquise Diplomatics Sanctimonial.
Beautiz.  Nos.  17.  36.  58.  ibid.  374,  &c.

Note  IX. Sect.  I.  p.  23.

As  I  shall  have  occasion  in  another  note,  to  represent  the  con-
dition of  that  part  of  the  people  who  dwelt  in  cities,  I  will  confine
myself  in  this  to  consider  the  state  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  country.
The  persons  employed  in  cultivating  the  ground  during  the  ages
under  review  may  be  divided  into  three  classes  :  I.  Servi  or  slaves.
This  seems  to  have  been  the  most  numerous  class,  and  consisted
either  of  captives  taken  in  war,  or  of  persons,  the  property  in  whom
was  acquired  in  some  one  of  the  various  methods  enumerated  by
Du  Cange,  voc.  Servus,  v.  6.  p.  447.  The  wretched  condition  of
this  numerous  race  of  men  will  appear  from  several  circumstances.
1.  Their  masters  had  absolute  dominion  over  their  persons.  They
had  the  power  of  punishing  their  slaves  capitally,  without  the  in-
tervention of  any  judge.  This  dangerous  right  they  possessed  not
only  in  the  more  early  periods,  when  their  manners  were  fierce,  but
it  continued  as  late  as  the  twelfth  century.  Joach.  Potgiesserus  de
statu  servorum.  Lemgov.  1736.  4to.  lib.  ii.  cap  i.  §  4.  10.  13.  24.
Even  after  this  jurisdiction  of  masters  came  to  be  restrained,  the
life  of  a  slave  was  deemed  to  be  of  so  little  value,  that  a  very  slight
compensation  atoned  for  taking  it  away.  Idem,  lib.  in.  c.  6.  If
masters  had  power  over  the  lives  of  their  slaves,  it  is  evident  that
almost  no  bounds  would  be  set  to  the  rigour  of  the  punishments
which  they  might  inflict  upon  them.  The  codes  of  ancient  laws
prescribed  punishments  for  the  crimes  of  slaves,  different  from  those
which  were  inflicted  on  free  men.  The  latter  paid  only  a  fine  or
compensation ;  the  former  were  subjected  to  corporal  punishments.
The  cruelty  of  these  was  in  many  instances,  excessive.  Slaves
might  be  put  to  the  rack  on  very  slight  occasions.  The  laws,  with
respect  to  these  points,  are  to  be  found  in  Potgiesserus,  lib.  iii.  cap.
7.  and  are  shocking  to  humanity.  2.  If  the  dominion  of  masters
over  the  lives  and  persons  of  their  slaves  was  thus  extensive,  it  was
no  less  so  over  their  actions  and  property.  They  were  not  origi-
nally permitted  to  marry.  Male  and  female  slaves  were  allowed,
and  even  encouraged,  to  cohabit  together.  But  this  union  was  not
considered  as  a  marriage  ;  it  was  called  contubernium,  not  nuptice  or
matrimonium.  Potgiess.  lib.  ii.  c.  2.  §  1 .  This  notion  was  so  much
established,  that,  during  several  centuries  after  the  barbarous  na-
tions embraced  the  Christian  religion,  slaves,  who  lived  as  husband
and  wife,  were  not  joined  together  by  any  religious  ceremony,  and
did  not  receive  the  nuptial  benediction  from  a  priest.  Ibid.  §  10, 11.
When  this  conjunction  between  slaves  came  to  be  considered  as  a

ILLUSTRATIONS.  207

lawful  marriage,  they  were  not  permitted  to  marry  without  the  con-
sent of  their  master,  and  such  as  ventured  to  do  so,  without  obtain-
ing that,  were  punished  with  great  severity,  and  sometimes  were
put  to  death. Potgiess.  ibid.  §.  12,  &c.  Gregor.  Turon.  hist,  lib.v.
c.  3. When  the  manners  of  the  European  nations  became  more
gentle,  and  their  ideas  more  liberal,  slaves  who  married  without  their
master's  corsent  were  subjected  only  to  a  fine. Potgiess.  ibid.  §  20.
Du  Cange  Gloss,  voc.  Forismaritagium. 3.  All  the  children  of
slaves  were  in  the  same  condition  with  their  parents,  and  became
the  property  of  the  master. Du  Cange  Gloss,  voc.  Servus,  vol.  vi.
450. Murat.  Antiq.  Ital.  vol.  i.  766. 4.  Slaves  were  so  entirely
the  property  of  their  masters,  that  they  could  sell  them  at  pleasure.
While  domestic  slavery  continued,  property  in  a  slave  was  sold  in
the  same  manner  with  that  which  a  person  had  in  any  other1  move-
able. Afterward  slaves  became  adscriptiglebce,  and  were  conveyed
by  sale,  together  with  the  farm  or  estate  to  which  they  belonged.
Potgiesserus  has  collected  the  laws  and  charters  which  illustrate
this  well-known  circumstance  in  the  condition  of  slaves. Lib.  ii.
c.  4. 5.  Slaves  had  a  title  to  nothing  but  subsistence  and  clothes
from  their  master ; all  the  profits  of  their  labour  accrued  to  him.
If  a  master,  from  indulgence,  gave  his  slaves  any  peculium,  or  fixed
allowance  for  their  subsistence,  they  had  no  right  of  property  in
what  they  saved  out  of  that. All  that  they  accumulated  belonged
to  their  master. Potgiess.  lib.  ii.  c.  10. Murat.  Antiq.  Ital.  vol.  i.
768. Du  Cange,  voc.  Servus,  vol.  vi.  p.  451. Conformably  to  the
same  principle,  all  the  effects  of  slaves  belonged  to  their  master  at
their  death,  and  they  could  not  dispose  of  them  by  testament.  Pot-
giess. lib.  ii.  c.  11. 6.  Slaves  were  distinguished  from  free  men  by
a  peculiar  dress. — Among  all  the  barbarous  nations,  long  hair  was
a  mark  of  dignity  and  of  freedom  ;  slaves  were,  for  that  reason,
obliged  to  shave  their  heads  ; and  by  this  distinction,  how  indif-
ferent soever  it  may  be  in  its  own  nature,  they  were  reminded  every
moment  of-the  inferiority  of  their  condition. Potgiess.  lib.  iii.  c.  4.
For  the  same  reason  it  was  enacted  in  the  laws  of  almost  all  the
nations  of  Europe,  that  no  slave  should  be  admitted  to  give  evidence
against  a  free  man  in  a  court  of  justice. Du  Cange,  voc.  Servus,
vol.  vi.  p.  451. Potgiess.  lib.  iii.  c.  3.

2.  Villani.  They  were  likewise  adscripti  glebce  or  villce,  from
which  they  derived  their  name,  and  were  transferable  along  with
it.  Du  Cange,  voc.  Vittanus.  But  in  this  they  differed  from
slaves*  that  they  paid  a  fixed  rent  to  their  master  for  the  land
which  they  cultivated,  and,  after  paying  that,  all  the  fruits  of  their
labour  and  industry  belonged  to  themselves  in  property.  This
distinction  is  marked  by  Piere  de  Fontain's  Conseil.  Vie  de  St.
Louis  par  Joinville,  p.  119.  edit,  de  Du  Cange.  Several  cases

208  PROOFS AND

decided  agreeably to this  principle,  are mentioned by  Murat.
ibid.  p.  773.

3.  The  last  class  of  persons  employed  in  agriculture  were  free
men.  These  are  distinguished  by  various  names  among  the  writers
of  the  middle  ages,  Arimanni,  conditionales,  originarii,  tributales,
&c.  These  seem  to  have  been  persons  who  possessed  some  small
allodial  property  of  their  own,  and  besides  that,  cultivated  some
farm  belonging  to  their  more  wealthy  neighbours,  for  which  they
paid  a  fixed  rent;  and  bound  themselves  likewise  to  perform
several  small  services  in  prato  vel  in  messe,  in  aratura  vel  in  vinea,
such  as  ploughing  a  certain  quantity  of  their  landlord's  ground,
assisting  him  in  harvest  and  vintage  work,  &c.  The  clearest  proof
of  this  may  be  found  in  Muratori,  vol.  i.  p.  712.  and  in  Du  Cange
under  the  respective  words  above-mentioned.  I  have  not  been  able
to  discover  whether  these  arimanni,&c.  were  removable  at  pleasure,
or  held  their  farms  by  lease  for  a  certain  number  of  years.  The
former,  if  we  may  judge  from  the  genius  and  maxims  of  the  age,
seems  to  be  most  probable.  These  persons,  however,  were  con-
sidered as  free  men  in  the  most  honourable  sense  of  the  word ;  they
enjoyed  all  the  privileges  of  that  condition,  and  were  even  called
to  serve  in  war;  an  honour  to  which  no  slave  was  admitted.
Murat.  Antiq.  vol.  i.  p.  743.  vol.  ii.  p.  446.  This  account  of  the
condition  of  these  three  different  classes  of  persons  will  enable  the
reader  to  apprehend  the  full  force  of  an  argument  which  I  shall
produce  in  confirmation  of  what  I  have  said  in  the  text  concerning
the  wretched  state  of  the  people  during  the  middle  ages.  Notwith-
standing the  immense  difference  between  the  first  of  these  classes
and  the  third,  such  was  the  spirit  of  tyranny  which  prevailed
among  the  great  proprietors  of  lands,  and  so  various  their  oppor-
tunities of  oppressing  those  who  were  settled  on  their  estates,  and
of  rendering  their  condition  intolerable,  that  many  free  men,  in
despair,  renounced  their  liberty,  and  voluntarily  surrendered
themselves  as  slaves  to  their  powerful  masters.  This  they  did,  in
order  that  their  masters  might  become  more  immediately  interested
to  afford  them  protection,  together  with  the  means  of  subsisting
themselves  and  their  families.  The  forms  of  such  a  surrender,  or
obnoxiatio,  as  it  was  then  called,  are  preserved  by  Marculfus,
lib.  ii.  c.  28  ;  and  by  the  anonymous  author,  published  by
M.  Bignon,  together  with  the  collection  of  formula  compiled  by
Marculfus,  c.  16.  In  both,  the  reason  given  for  the  obnoxiatio,  is
the  wretched  and  indigent  condition  of  the  person  who  gives  up
his  liberty.  It  was  still  more  common  for  free  men  to  surrender
their  liberty  to  bishops  or  abbots,  that  they  might  partake  of  the
security  which  the  vassals  and  slaves  of  churches  and  monasteries
enjoyed,  in  consequence  of  the  superstitious  veneration  paid  to  the

ILLUSTRATIONS.  209

saint  under  whose  immediate  protection  they  were  supposed  to  be
taken.  Du  Cange,  voc.  Oblatus,  vol.  iv.  p.  1286.  That  condition
must  have  been  miserable  indeed,  which  could  induce  a  free  man
voluntarily  to  renounce  his  liberty,  and  to  give  up  himself  as  a
slave  to  the  disposal  of  another.  The.  number  of  slaves  in  every
nation  of  Europe  was  immense.  The  greater  part  of  the  inferior
class  of  people  in  France  were  reduced  to  this  state  at  the  com-
mencement of  the  third  race  of  kings.  L'Esprit  des  Loix,  liv.  xxx.
c.  11.  The  same  was  the  case  in  England.  Brady,  Pref.  to  Gen.
Hist. — Many  curious  facts,  with  respect  to  the  ancient  state  of
villains,  or  slaves  in  England,  are  published  in  Observations  on  the
Statutes,  chiefly  the  more  ancient,  3d  edit,  p,  269,  &c.

Note  X. Sect.  I.  p.  25.

INNUMERABLE proofs  of  this  might be  produced. Many
charters,  granted  by  persons  of  the  highest  rank,  are  preserved,
from  which  it  appears  that  they  could  not  subscribe  their  name.
It  was  usual  for  persons  who  could  not  write,  to  make  the  sign  of
the  cross  in  confirmation  of  a  charter. Several  of  these  remain,
where  kings  and  persons  of  great  eminence  affix  signum  crucis  manu
propria  pro  ignoratione  literarum. Du  Cange,  voc.  Crux,  vol.  iii.
p.  1191. From  this  is  derived  the  phrase  of  signing  instead  of
subscribing a  paper. In  the ninth century, Herbaud Comes
Palatii,  though  supreme  judge  of  the  empire  by  virtue  of  his  office,
could  not  subscribe  his  name. Nouveau  Traite  de  Diplomatique
par deux Benedictins, 4to. torn. ii. p,  422. As late as the
fourteenth century, Du Guesclin, constable of France, the
greatest  man  in  the  state,  and  one  of  the  greatest  men  of  his
age,  could neither  read nor  write. St.  Palaye Memoires sur
1'ancienne Chevalerie, tit. ii.  p.  82. Nor  was this ignorance
confined  to  laymen ;  the  greater  part  of  the  clergy  was  not  many
degrees  superior  to  them  in  science. Many  dignified  ecclesiastics
could  not  subscribe  the  canons  of  those  councils,  in  which  they  sat
as  members. Nouv.  Traite  de  Diplorn.  torn.  ii.  p.  424. One  of
the  questions  appointed  by  the  canons  to  be  put  to  persons  who
were  candidates  for  orders  was  this,  "  Whether  they  could  read
the  gospels  and  epistles,  and  explain  the  sense  of  them,  at  least
literally  ?" Regino Prumiensis ap. Bruck.  Hist.  Philos. v.  iii.
p.  631. Alfred  the  Great  complained,  that  from  the  Humber  to
the  Thames  there  was  not  a  priest  who  understood  the  liturgy  in
his  mother-tongue,  or who  could  translate  the  easiest  piece  of
Latin ;  and  that  from  the  Thames  to  the  sea,  the  ecclesiastics  were
still  more  ignorant. Asserus  de  rebus  gestis  Alfredi,  ap.  Camdeni
Anglica, &c.  p.  25. The ignorance  of  the clergy  is quaintly
described  by  an  author  of  the  dark  ages  ;  "  Potius  dediti  guise

VOL. III.  P

210  PROOFS AND

quam  glossse  ;  potius  colligunt  libras  quam  legunt  libros ;  libentius
intuentur Martham  quam  Marcum; malunt legere in Salmone
quam  in  Solomone." Alanus  de  Art.  Predicat.  ap.  Lebeuf  Dissert.
torn.  ii.  p.  21. To  the  obvious  causes  of  such  universal  ignorance,
arising  from  the  state  of  government  and  manners,  from  the  seventh
to  the  eleventh  century,  we  may  add  the  scarcity  of  books  during
that  period,  and  the  difficulty  of  rendering  them  more  common.
The  Romans  wrote  their  books  either  on  parchment  or  on  paper
made  of  the  Egyptian  papyrus. The  latter  being  the  cheapest,
was  of  course  the  most  commonly  used. But  after  the  Saracens
conquered Egypt in the seventh century, the communication
between  that  country  and  the  people  settled  in  Italy,  or  in  other
parts  of  Europe,  was  almost  entirely  broken  off,  and  the  papyrus
was  no  longer  in  use  among  them. They  were  obliged,  on  that
account,  to  write  all  their  books  upon  parchment,  and,  as  the  price
of  that  was  high,  books  became  extremely  rare,  and  of  great  value.
We  may  judge  of  the  scarcity  of  the  materials  for  writing  the-m  from
one  circumstance. There  still  remain  several  manuscripts  of  the
eighth,  ninth,  and  following  centuries,  written  on  parchment,  from
which  some  former  writing  had  been  erased,  in  order  to  substitute
a  new  composition  in  its  place. In  this  manner  it  is  probable  that
several  works  of  the  ancients  perished. A  book  of  Livy  or  of
Tacitus  might  be  erased,  to  make  room  for  the  legendary  tale  of  a
saint,  or  the  superstitious  prayers  of  a  missal. Murat.  Antiq.  Ital.
vol.  iii.  p.  833. P.  de  Montfau£on  affirms,  that  the  greater  part
of  the  manuscripts  on  parchment  which  he  has  seen,  those  of  an
ancient  date  excepted,  are  written  on  parchment,  from  which  some
former  treatise  had  been  erased. Mem.  de  TAcad.  des  Inscript.
torn.  ix.  p.  325. As  the  want  of  materials  for  writing  is  one  reason
why  so  many  of  the  works  of  the  ancients  have  perished,  it  accounts
likewise  for  the  small  number  of  manuscripts  of  any  kind,  previous
to  the  eleventh  century,  when  they  began  to  multiply,  from  a  cause
which  shall  be  mentioned. Hist.  Liter,  de  France,  torn.  vi.  p.  6.
Many  circumstances  prove  the  scarcity  of  books  during  these  ages.
Private persons seldom possessed any  books  whatever. Even
monasteries  of  considerable  note  had  only  one  missal. Murat.
Antiq.  vol.  ix.  p.  789. Lupus,  abbot  of  Ferrieres,  in  a  letter  to  the
pope,  A.  D.  855,  beseeches  him  to  lend  him  a  copy  of  Cicero  de
Oratore  and  Quintilian's  Institutions  ;  "  for,"  says  he,  "  although
we  have  parts  of  those  books,  there  is  no  complete  copy  of  them  in
all  France." Murat.  Ant.  v.  iii.  p.  835. The  price  of  books  be-
came so  high,  that  persons  of  a  moderate  fortune  could  not  afford
to  purchase  them. The  countess  of  Anjou  paid  for  a  copy  of  the
Homilies  of  Haimon,  bishop  of  Halberstadt,  two  hundred  sheep,
five  quarters  of  wheat,  and  the  same  quantity  of  rye  and  millet.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  211

Histoire  Literaire  de  France  par  des  Religieux  Benedictins,  torn.  vit.
p.  3.  Even  so  late  as  the  year  1471,  when  Louis  XL  borrowed  the
works  of  Rasis,  the  Arabian  physician,  from  the  faculty  of  medicine
in  Paris,  he  not  .only  deposited  in  pledge  a  considerable  quantity  of
plate,  but  was  obliged  to  procure  a  nobleman  to  join  with  him  as
surety  in  a  deed,  binding  himself,  under  a  great  forfeiture,  to  restore
it.  Gabr.  Naude  Addit.  a  THistoire  de  Louys  XL  par  Comines,
edit,  de  Fresnoy,  torn.  iv.  p.  281.  Many  curious  circumstances,
with  respect  to  the  extravagant  price  of  books  in  the  middle  ages,
are  collected  by  that  industrious  compiler,  to  whom  I  refer  such  of
my  readers  as  deem  this  small  branch  of  literary  history  an  object
of  curiosity.  When  any  person  made  a  present  of  a  book  to  a
church  or  a  monastery,  in  which  were  the  only  libraries  during
several  ages,  it  was  deemed  a  donative  of  such  value,  that  he
offered  it  on  the  altar  pro  remedio  anim<£  suce,  in  order  to  obtain  the
forgiveness  of  his  sins.  Murat.  vol.  iii.  p.  836.  Hist.  Liter,  de
France,  torn.  vi.  p.  6.  Nouv.  Trait,  du  Diplomat,  par  deux  Bene-
dictins, 4to.  torn.  i.  p.  481.  In  the  eleventh  century,  the  art  of
making  paper,  in  the  manner  now  become  universal,  was  invented ;
by  means  of  that,  not  only  the  number  of  manuscripts  increased,
but  the  study  of  the  sciences  was  wonderfully  facilitated.  Murat.
ib.  p.  871.  The  invention  of  the  art  of  making  paper,  and  the  in-
vention of  the  art  of  printing,  are  two  considerable  events  in  literary
history.  It  is  remarkable,  that  the  former  preceded  the  first  dawn-
ing of  letters  and  improvement  in  knowledge  towards  the  close  of
the  eleventh  century  ;  the  latter  ushered  in  the  light  which  spread
over  Europe  at  the  era  of  the  Reformation.

Note  XL Sect  I.  p.  26.

ALL  the  religious  maxims  and  practices  of  the  dark  ages  are  a
proof  of  this.  I  shall  produce  one  remarkable  testimony  in  con-
firmation of  it,  from  an  author  canonized  by  the  church  of  Rome,
St.  Eloy,  or  Egidius,  bishop  of  Noyon,  in  the  seventh  century.
"He  is  a  good  Christian  who  comes  frequently  to  church;  who
presents  the  oblation  which  is  offered  to  God  upon  the  altar ;  who
doth  not  taste  of  the  fruits  of  his  own  industry  until  he  has  con-
secrated a  part  of  them  to  God ;  who,  when  the  holy  festivals
approach,  lives  chastely  even  with  his  own  wife  during  several
days,  that  with  a  safe  conscience  he  may  draw  near  the  altar  of
God ;  and  who,  in  the  last  place,  can  repeat  the  Creed  and  the
Lord's  Prayer.  Redeem  then  your  souls  from  destruction,  while
you  have  the  means  in  your  power ;  offer  presents  and  tithes  to
churchmen ;  come  more  frequently  to  church  ;  humbly  implore  the
patronage  of  the  saints  ;  for,  if  you  observe  these  things,  you  may

212  PROOFS AND

come  with  security  in  the  day  of  retribution  to  the  tribunal  of  the
eternal  Judge,  and  say,  'Give  to  us,  O  Lord,  for  we  have  given
unto  thee.'"  Dacherii  Spicelegium  Vet.  Script,  vol.  ii.  p.  94.  The
learned  and  judicious  translator  of  Dr.  Mosheim's  Ecclesiastical
History,  to  one  of  whose  additional  notes  I  am  indebted  for  my
knowledge  of  this  passage,  subjoins  a  very  proper  reflection :
"  We  see  here  a  large  and  ample  description  of  a  good  Christian,
in  which  there  is  not  the  least  mention  of  the  love  of  God,
resignation  to  his  will,  obedience  to  his  laws,  or  of  justice,  bene-
volence, and  charity  towards  men."  Mosh.  Eccles.  Hist.  vol.  i.
p.  324.

Note  XII. Sect.  I.  p.  26.

THAT  infallibility  in  all  its  determinations,  to  which  the  church
of  Rome  pretends,  has  been  attended  with  one  unhappy  con-
sequence. As  it  is  impossible  to  relinquish  any  opinion,  or  to
alter  any  practice  which  has  been  established  by  authority  that
cannot  err,  all  its  institutions  and  ceremonies  must  be  immutable
and  everlasting,  and  the  church  must  continue  to  observe,  in
enlightened  times,  those  rites  which  were  introduced  during  the
ages  of  darkness  and  credulity.  What  delighted  and  edified  the
latter,  must  disgust  and  shock  the  former.  Many  of  the  rites
observed  in  the  Romish  church  appear  manifestly  to  have  been
introduced  by  a  superstition  of  the  lowest  and  most  illiberal
species.  Many  of  them  were  borrowed,  with  little  variation,  from
the  religious  ceremonies  established  among  the  ancient  Heathens.
Some  were  so  ridiculous,  that  if  every  age  did  not  furnish
instances  of  the  fascinating  influence  of  superstition,  as  well  as  of
the  whimsical  forms  which  it  assumes,  it  must  appear  incredible
that  they  should  have  been  ever  received  or  tolerated.  In  several
churches  of  France,  they  celebrated  a  festival  in  commemoration
of  the  Virgin  Mary's  flight  into  Egypt.  It  was  called  the  feast
of  the  Ass.  A  young  girl,  richly  dressed,  with  a  child  in  her  arms,
was  set  upon  an  ass  superbly  caparisoned.  The  ass  was  led  to
the  altar  in  solemn  procession.  High  mass  was  said  with  great
pomp.  The  ass  was  taught  to  kneel  at  proper  places ;  a  hymn  no
less  childish  than  impious  was  sung  in  his  praise :  and  when  the
ceremony  was  ended,  the  priest,  instead  of  the  usual  words  with
which  he  dismissed  the  people,  brayed  three  times  like  an  ass ;
and  the  people,  instead  of  the  usual  response,  We  bless  the  Lord,
brayed  three  times  in  the  same  manner.  Du  Cange,  voc.  Festum,
vol.  iii.  p.  424.  This  ridiculous  ceremony  was  not,  like  the  festival
of  fools,  and  some  other  pageants  of  those  ages,  a  mere  farcical
entertainment  exhibited  in  a  church,  and  mingled,  as  was  then  the

ILLUSTRATIONS.  213

custom,  with  an  imitation  of  some  religious  rites,  it  was  an  act  of
devotion,  performed  by  the  ministers,  of  religion,  and  by  the  au-
thority of  the  church.  However,  as  this  practice  did  not  prevail
universally  in  the  Catholic  church,  its  absurdity  contributed  at  last
to  abolish  it.

Note  XIII. Sect.  I.  p.  30.

As  there  is  no  event  in  the  history  of  mankind  more  singular
than  that  of  the  Crusades,  every  circumstance  that  tends  to  explain
or  to  give  any  rational  account  of  this  extraordinary  frenzy  of  the
human  mind  is  interesting.  I  have  asserted  in  the  text,  that  the
minds  of  men  were  prepared  gradually  for  the  amazing  effort  which
they  made  in  consequence  of  the  exhortations  of  Peter  the  Hermit,
by  several  occurrences  previous  to  his  time.  A  more  particular
detail  of  this  curious  and  obscure  part  of  history,  may  perhaps
appear  to  some  of  my  readers  to  be  of  importance.  That  the  end
of  the  world  was  expected  about  the  close  of  the  tenth,  and  be-
ginning of  the  eleventh  century;  and  that  this  occasioned  a  general
alarm,  is  evident,  from  the  authors  to  whom  I  have  referred  in  the
text.  This  belief  was  so  universal  and  so  strong,  that  it  mingled
itself  with  civil  transactions.  Many  charters,  in  the  latter  part
of  the  tenth  century,  begin  in  this  manner :  "  Appropinquante
mundi  termino,"  &c.  As  the  end  of  the  world  is  now  at  hand,
and  by  various  calamities  and  judgments  the  signs  of  its  approach
are  now  manifest.  Hist,  de  Langued.  par  D.D.  de  Vic.  Vaisette,
torn.  ii.  Preuves,  p.  86.  89,  90.  117.  158,  &c.  One  effect  of  this
opinion  was,  that  a  great  number  of  pilgrims  resorted  to  Jerusalem,
with  a  resolution  to  die  there,  or  to  wait  the  coming  of  the  Lord  ;
kings,  earls,  marquisses,  bishops,  and  even  a  great  number  of
women,  besides  persons  of  an  inferior  rank,  flocked  to  the  Holy
Land.  Glaber.  Rodulph.  Hist,  chez  Bouquet  Recueil,  torn.  x.
p.  50.  52.  Another  historian  mentions  a  vast  cavalcade  of  pil-
grims who  accompanied  the  count  of  Angouleme  to  Jerusalem  in
the  year  1026.  Chronic.  Ademari,  ibid.  p.  162.  Upon  their  re-
turn, these  pilgrims  filled  Europe  with  lamentable  accounts  of  the
state  of  Christians  in  the  Holy  Land.  Willerm.  Tyr.  Hist.  ap.
Gest.  Dei  per  Franc,  vol.  ii.  p.  636.  Guibert.  Abbat.  Hist.  ibid,
vol.  i.  p.  476.  Besides  this,  it  was  usual  for  many  of  the  Christian
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  as  well  as  of  other  cities  in  the  East,  to
travel  as  mendicants  through  Europe;  and,  by  describing  the
wretched  condition  of  the  professors  of  the  Christian  faith  under
the  dominion  of  infidels,  to  extort  charity,  and  to  excite  zealous
persons  to  make  some  attempt,  in  order  to  deliver  them  from
oppression.  Baldrici  Archiepiscopi  Histor.  ap.  Gesta  Dei,  &c.

214  PROOFS AND

vol.  i.  p.  86.  In  the  year  986,  Gerbert,  archbishop  of  Ravenna,
afterward  Pope  Silvester  II.  addressed  a  letter  to  all  Christians
in  the  name  of  the  church  of  Jerusalem.  It  is  eloquent  and
pathetic,  and  contains  a  formal  exhortation  to  take  arms  against
the  Pagan  oppressors,  in  order  to  rescue  the  holy  city  from  their
yoke.  Gerberti  Epistolae  ap.  Bouquet  Recueil,  torn.  x.  p.  426,
In  consequence  of  this  spirited  call,  some  subjects  of  the  republic
of  Pisa  equipped  a  fleet,  and  invaded  the  territories  of  the  Maho-
metans in  Syria,  Murat.  Script.  Rer.  Italic,  vol.  iii.  p.  400.  The
alarm  was  taken  in  the  East,  and  an  opinion  prevailed,  A.  D.  1010,
that  all  the  forces  of  Christendom  were  to  unite,  in  order  to  drive
the  Mahometans  out  of  Palestine.  Chron.  Ademari  ap.  Bouquet,
torn.  x.  p.  152.  It  is  evident,  from  all  these  particulars,  that  the
ideas  which  led  the  crusaders  to  undertake  their  wild  enterprise
did  not  arise,  according  to  the  description  of  many  authors,  from  a
sudden  fit  of  frantic  enthusiasm,  but  were  gradually  formed ;  so
that  the  universal  concourse  to  the  standard  of  the  cross,  when
erected  by  Urban  II.,  will  appear  less  surprising.

If  the  various  circumstances  which  I  have  enumerated  in  this
note,  as  well  as  in  the  history,  are  sufficient  to  account  for  the  ar-
dour with  which  such  vast  numbers  engaged  in  such -a  dangerous
undertaking,  the  extensive  privileges  and  immunities  granted  to  the
persons  who  assumed  the  cross,  serve  to  account  for  the  long  con-
tinuance of  this  spirit  in  Europe.  1.  They  were  exempted  from
prosecutions  on  account  of  debt  during  the  time  of  their  being  en-
gaged in  this  holy  service.  Du  Cange,  voc.  Crucis  privilegium^  vol.
ii.  p.  1194. — 2.  They  were  exempted  from  paying  interest  for  the
money  which  they  had  borrowed,  in  order  to  fit  them  for  this  sacred
warfare,  ibid. — 3.  They  were  exempted  either  entirely,  or  at  least
during  a  certain  time,  from  the  payment  of  taxes.  Ibid.  Ordonances
des  Rois  de  France,  torn.  i.  p.  33. — 4.  They  might  alienate  their
lands  without  the  consent  of  their  superior  lord  of  whom  they
held.  Ibid. — 5.  Their  persons  and  effects  were  taken  under  the  pro-
tection of  St.  Peter,  and  the  anathemas  of  the  church  were  de-
nounced against  all  who  should  molest  them,  or  carry  on  any
quarrel  or  hostility  against  them,  during  their  absence,  on  account
of  the  holy  war.  Du  Cange,  ibid.  Guibertus  Abbas  ap.  Bongars.
i.  p.  480.  482. — 6.  They  enjoyed  all  the  privileges  of  ecclesiastics,
and  were  not  bound  to  plead  in  any  civil  court,  but  were  declared
subject  to  the  spiritual  jurisdiction  alone.  Du  Cange,  ibid.  Ordon.
des  Rois,  torn.  i.  p.  34.  174. — 7.  They  obtained  a  plenary  remission
of  all  their  sins,  and  the  gates  of  heaven  were  set  open  to  them,
without  requiring  any  other  proof  of  their  penitence,  but  their  en-
gaging in  this  expedition;  and  thus,  by  gratifying  their  favourite
passion,  the  love  of  war>  they  secured  to  themselves  immunities

ILLUSTRATIONS.  2J5

which  were  not  usually  obtained,  but  by  paying  large  sums  of  money,
or  by  undergoing  painful  penances,  Guibert.  Abbas,  p.  480.
When  we  behold  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  powers  vying  with  each
other,  and  straining  their  invention  in  order  to  devise  expedients
for  encouraging  and  adding  strength  to  the  spirit  of  superstition,
can  we  be  surprised  that  it  should  become  so  general  as  to  render
it  infamous,  and  a  mark  of  cowardice,  to  decline  engaging  in  the
holy  war?  Willerm.  Tyriensis  ap.  Bongars.  vol.  ii.  p.  641.  The
histories  of  the  crusades,  written  by  modern  authors,  who  are  apt
to  substitute  the  ideas  and  maxims  of  their  own  age  in  the  place  of
those  which  influenced  the  persons  whose  actions  they  attempt  to
relate,  convey  a  very  imperfect  notion  of  the  spirit  at  that  time  pre-
dominant in  Europe.  The  original  historians,  who  were  animated
themselves  with  the  same  passions  which  possessed  their  contem-
poraries, exhibit  to  us  a  more  striking  picture  of  the  times  and  man-
ners which  they  describe.  The  enthusiastic  rapture  with  which
they  account  for  the  effects  of  the  pope's  discourse  in  the  council
of  Clermont ;  the  exultation  with  which  they  mention  the  numbers
who  devoted  themselves  to  this  holy  warfare ;  the  confidence  with
which  they  express  their  reliance  on  the  Divine  protection  ;  the  ec-
stacy  of  joy  with  which  they  describe  their  taking  possession  of  the
holy  city,  will  enable  us  to  conceive,  in  some  degree,  the  extrava-
gance of  that  zeal  which  agitated  the  minds  of  men  with  such  vio^
lence,  and  will  suggest  as  many  singular  reflections  to  a  philoso-
pher, as  any  occurrence  in  the  history  of  mankind.  It  is  unneces-
sary to  select  the  particular  passages  in  the  several  historians,
which  confirm  this  observation.  But  lest  those  authors  may  be
suspected  of  adorning  their  narrative  with  any  exaggerated  descrip-
tion, I  shall  appeal  to  one  of  the  leaders  who  conducted  the  enter-
prise. There  is  extant  a  letter  from  Stephen,  the  earl  of  Chartres
and  Blois,  to  Adela  his  wife,  in  which  he  gives  her  an  account  of
the  progress  of  the  crusaders.  He  describes  the  crusaders  as  the
chosen  army  of  Christ,  as  the  servants  and  soldiers  of  God,  as  men
who  marched  under  the  immediate  protection  of  the  Almighty,
being  conducted  by  his  hand  to  victory  and  conquest.  He  speaks
of  the  Turks  as  accursed,  sacrilegious,  and  devoted  by  Heaven  to
destruction;  and  when  he  mentions  the  soldiers  in  the  Christian
army,  who  had  died  or  were  killed,  he  is  confident  that  their  souls
were  admitted  directly  into  the  joys  of  Paradise.  Dacherii  Spicele-
gium,  vol.iv.  p.  257.

The  expense  of  conducting  numerous  bodies  of  men  from  Europe
to  Asia,  must  have  been  excessive,  and  the  difficulty  of  raising  the
necessary  sums  must  have  been  proportionally  great,  during  ages
when  the  public  revenues  in  every  nation  of  Europe  were  extremely
small.  Some  account  is  preserved  of  the  expedients  employed  by

PROOFS  AND

Humbert  II.  dauphin  of  Vienne,  in  order  to  levy  the  money  requi-
site towards  equipping  him  for  the  crusade,  A.  D.  1346. These  I
shall  mention,  as  they  tend  to  shew  the  considerable  influence  which
the  crusades  had,  both  on  the  state  of  property,  and  of  civil  govern-
ment. 1.  He  exposed  to  sale  part  of  his  domains; and  as  the
price  was  destined  for  such  a  sacred  service,  he  obtained  the  con-
sent of  the  French  king,  of  whom  these  lands  were  held,  ratifying
the  alienation. Hist,  de  Dauphine,  torn.  i.  p.  332.  335.— 2.  He
issued  a  proclamation,  in  which  he  promised  to  grant  new  privileges
to  the  nobles,  as  well  as  new  immunities  to  the  cities  and  towns,  in
his  territories,  in  consideration  of  certain  sums  which  they  were  in-
stantly to  pay  on  that  account. Ibid.  torn.  ii.  p.  512. Many  of  the
charters  of  community,  which  I  shall  mention  in  another  Note,  were
obtained  in  this  manner. — 3.  He  exacted  a  contribution-  towards
defraying  the  charges  of  the  expedition  from  all  his  subjects,  whe-
ther ecclesiastics  or  laymen,  who  did  not  accompany  him  in  per-
son to  the  East. Ibid.  torn.  i.  p.  335. — 4.  He  appropriated  a  con-
siderable part  of  his  usual  revenues  for  the  support  of  the  troops  to
be  employed  in  this  service. Ibid.  torn.  ii.  p.  518. — 5.  He  exacted
considerable  sums  not  only  of  the  Jews  settled  in  his  dominions,
but  also  of  the  Lombards  and  other  bankers  who  had  fixed  t^heir
residence  there. Ibid.  torn.  i.  p.  338.  torn.  ii.  p.  528. Notwith-
standing the  variety  of  these  resources,  the  dauphin  was  involved
in  such  expense  by  this  expedition,  that  on  his  return  he  was  obliged
to  make  new  demands  on  his  subjects,  and  to  pillage  the  Jews  by
fresh  exactions. Ibid.  torn.  i.  p.  344.  347. When  the  count  de
Foix  engaged  in  the  first  crusade,  he  raised  the  money  necessary  for
defraying  the  expenses  of  that  expedition,  by  alienating  part  of  his
territories. Hist,  de  Langued.  par  D.  D.  de  Vic  et  Vaisette,  torn,
ii.  p.  287. In  like  manner,  Baldwin,  count  of  Hainault,  mortgaged
or  sold  a  considerable  portion  of  his  dominions  to  the  bishop  of
Liege,  A.  r>.  1096. Du  Mont  Corps  Diplomatique,  torn.  i.  p.  59.
At  a  later  period,  Baldwin,  count  of  Namur,  sold  part  of  his  estate
to  a  monastery,  when  he  intended  to  assume  the  cross,  A.  D.  1239.
Mirsei  Oper.  i.  313.

Note.  XIV. Sect.  I.  p.  34.

THE  usual  method  of  forming  an  opinion  concerning  the  com-
parative state  of  manners  in  two  different  nations,  is  by  attending  to
the  facts  which  historians  relate  concerning  each  of  them.  Various
passages  might  be  selected  from  the  Byzantine  historians,  describing
the  splendour  and  magnificence  of  the  Greek  empire.  P.  de  Mont-
fau£on  has  produced  from  the  writings  of  St.  Chrysostom  a  very
full  account  of  the  elegance  and  luxury  of  the  Greeks  in  his  age.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  217

That  father  in  his  sermons  enters  into  such  minute  details  concern-
ing the  manners  and  customs  of  his  contemporaries,  as  appear
strange  in  discourses  from  the  pulpit.  P.  de  Montfau£on  has  col-
lected these  descriptions,  and  ranged  them  under  different  heads.
The  court  of  the  more  early  Greek  emperors  seems  to  have  resem-
bled those  of  Eastern  monarchs,  both  in  magnificence  and  in  cor-
ruption of  manners.  The  emperors  in  the  eleventh  century,  though
inferior  in  power,  did  not  yield  to  them  in  ostentation  and  splen-
dour. Memoirs  de  1'Acad.  des  Inscript.  torn.  xx.  p.  197. — But  we
may  decide  concerning  the  comparative  state  of  manners  in  the
Eastern  empire,  and  among  the  nations  in  the  west  of  Europe,  by
another  method,  which,  if  not  more  certain,  is  at  least  more  striking.
As  Constantinople  was  the  place  of  rendezvous  for  all  the  armies  of
the  crusaders,  this  brought  together  the  people  of  the  East  and
West  as  to  one  great  interview.  There  are  extant  several  contem-
porary authors,  both  among  the  Greeks  and  Latins,  who  were  wit-
nesses of  this  singular  congress  of  people,  formerly  strangers,  in  a
great  measure,  to  each  other.  They  describe,  with  simplicity  and
candour,  the  impression  which  that  new  spectacle  made  upon  their
own  minds.  This  may  be  considered  as  the  most  lively  and  just
picture  of  the  real  character  and  manners  of  each  people.  When
the  Greeks  speak  of  the  Franks,  they  describe  them  as  barbarians,
fierce,  illiterate,  impetuous,  and  savage.  They  assume  a  tone  of
superiority,  as  a  more  polished  people,  acquainted  with  the  arts  both
of  government  and  of  elegance,  of  which  the  other  was  ignorant.
It  is  thus  Anna  Comnena  describes  the  manners  of  the  Latins,
Alexias,  p.  224.  231.  237.  ap.  Byz.  Script,  vol.  xi.  She  always
views  them  with  contempt,  as  a  rude  people,  the  very  mention  of
whose  names  was  sufficient  to  contaminate  the  beauty  and  elegance
of  history,  p.  229.  Nicetas  Choniatas  inveighs  against  them  with
still  more  violence,  and  gives  an  account  of  their  ferocity  and  de-
vastations, in  terms  not  unlike  those  which  preceding  historians
had  employed  in  describing  the  incursions  of  the  Goths  and  Van-
dals. Nicet.  Chon.  ap.  Byz.  Script,  vol.  iii.  p.  302,  &c.  But,  on
the  other  hand,  the  Latin  historians  were  struck  with  astonishment
at  the  magnificence,  wealth,  and  elegance,  which  they  discovered
in  the  Eastern  empire.  "  O  what  a  vast  city  is  Constantinople  (ex-
claims Fulcherius  Carnotensis,  when  he  first  beheld  it),  and  how
beautiful !  How  many  monasteries  are  there  in  it,  and  how  many
palaces,  built  with  wonderful  art!  How  many  manufactures  are
there  in  the  city,  amazing  to  behold  !  It  would  be  astonishing  to
relate  how  it  abounds  with  all  good  things,  with  gold,  silver,  and
stuffs  of  various  kinds ;  for  every  hour  ships  arrive  in  its  port  laden
with  all  things  necessary  for  the  use  of  man."  Fulcher.  ap.  Bongars.

218  PROOFS  AND

vol.  i.  p.  386.  Willermus,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  the  most  intelligent
historian  of  the  crusades,  seems  to  be  fond,  on  every  occasion,  of
describing  the  elegance  and  splendour  of  the  court  of  Constanti-
nople, and  adds,  that  what  he  and  his  countrymen  observed  there
exceeded  any  idea  which  they  could  have  formed  of  it,  nostrarum
enim  rerum  modura  et  dignitatem  excedunt.  Willerm.  Tyr.  ap.
Bong.  vol.  ii.  p.  657.  664.  Benjamin  the  Jew,  of  Tudeia,  in  Na-
varre, who  began  his  travels  A.  D.  1173,  appears  to  have  been
equally  astonished  at  the  magnificence  of  that  city,  and  gives  a  de-
scription of  its  splendour,  in  terms  of  high  admiration.  Benj.
Tudel.  chez  les  Voyages  faits  en  12, 13,  &c.  Siecles,  par  Bergeron,
p.  10,  &c.  Guntherus,  a  French  monk,  who  wrote  a  history  of  the
conquest  of  Constantinople  by  the  crusaders,  in  the  thirteenth  cen-
tury, speaks  of  the  magnificence  of  that  city  in  the  same  tone  of  ad-
miration ;  "  Structuram  autem  sedificiorum  in  corpore  civitatis,  in
ecclesiis  videlicet,  et  turribus,  et  in  domibus  magnatorum,  vix  ullus
vel  describere  potest,  vel  credere  describenti,  nisi  qui  ea  oculata
fide  cognoverit."  Hist.  Constantinop.  ap.  Canisii  Lectiones  Anti-
quas,  fol.  Antw.  1725.  vol.  iv.  p.  14.  Geoffrey  de  Villehardouin,
a  nobleman  of  high  rank,  and  accustomed  to  all  the  magnificence
then  known  in  the  West,  describes,  in  similar  terms,  the  astonish-
ment and  admiration  of  such  of  his  fellow  soldiers  as  beheld  Con-
stantinople for  the  first  time  :  "  They  could  not  have  believed,"
says  he,  "  that  there  was  a  city  so  beautiful  and  so  rich  in  the  whole
world.  When  they  viewed  its  high  walls,  its  lofty  towers,  its  rich
palaces,  its  superb  churches,  all  appeared  so  great,  that  they  could
have  formed  no  conception  of  this  sovereign  city,  unless  they  had
seen  it  with  their  own  eyes."  Histoire  de  la  Conquete  de  Constant,
p.  49.  From  these  undisguised  representations  of  their  own  feel-
ings, it  is  evident,  that  to  the  Greeks,  the  crusaders  appeared  to  be
a  race  of  rude  unpolished  barbarians ;  whereas  the  latter,  how  much
soever  they  might  contemn  the  unwarlike  character  of  the  former,
could  not  help  regarding  them  as  far  superior  to  themselves  in  ele- '
gance  and  arts. — -That  the  state  of  government  and  manners  was
much  more  improved  in  Italy  than  in  the  other  countries  of  Europe,
is  evident  not  only  from  the  facts  recorded  in  history,  but  it  appears
that  the  more  intelligent  leaders  of  the  crusaders  were  struck  with
the  difference.  Jacobus  de  Vitriaco,  a  French  historian  of  the  holy
war,  makes  an  elaborate  panegyric  on  the  character  and  manners
of  the  Italians.  Reviews  them  as  a  more  polished  people,  and  par-
ticularly celebrates  them  for  their  love  of  liberty  and  civil  wisdom  ;
"  in  consiliis  circumspect!,  in  re  sua  publica  procuranda  diligentes
et  studiosi ;  sibi  in  posterum  providentes  ;  aliis  subjici  renuentes  ;
ante  omnia  libertatem  sibi  defendentes;  sub  uno  quern  eligunt  capi-

ILLUSTRATIONS.

taneo,  communitati  suae  jura  et  instituta  dicantes  et  similiter  obser-
vantes."  Histor.  Hierosol.  ap.  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos,  vol.  ii.  p.
1085.

Note  XV. Sect.  I.  p.  38.

THE  different  steps  taken  by  the  cities  of  Italy,  in  order  to  ex-
tend their  power  and  dominions,  are  remarkable.  As  soon  as  their
liberties  were  established,  and  they  began  to  feel  their  own  im-
portance, they  endeavoured  to  render  themselves  masters  of  the
territory  round  their  walls.  Under  the  Romans,  when  cities
enjoyed  municipal  privileges  and  jurisdiction,  the  circumjacent
lands  belonged  to  each  town,  and  were  the  property  of  the  com-
munity. But  as  it  was  not  the  genius  of  the  feudal  policy  to
encourage  cities,  or  to  shew  any  regard  for  their  possessions  and
immunities,  these  lands  had  been  seized  and  shared  among  the
conquerors.  The  barons,  to  whom  they  were  granted,  erected
their  castles  almost  at  the  gates  of  the  city,  and  exercised  their
jurisdiction  there.  Under  pretence  of  recovering  their  ancient
property,  many  of  the  cities  in  Italy  attacked  these  troublesome
neighbours,  and,  dispossessing  them,  annexed  their  territories  to
the  communities,  and  made  thereby  a  considerable  addition  to  their
power.  Several  instances  of  this  occur  in  the  eleventh,  and  be-
ginning of  the  twelfth  centuries.  Murat*  Antiq.  Ital.  vol.  iv.
p.  159,  &c.  Their  ambition  increasing  together  with  their  power,
the  cities  afterward  attacked  several  barons  situated  at  a  greater
distance  from  their  walls,  and  obliged  them  to  engage  that  they
would  become  members  of  their  community  ;  that  they  would  take
the  oath  of  fidelity  to  their  magistrates ;  that  they  would  subject
their  lands  to  all  burdens  and  taxes  imposed  by  common  consent ;
that  they  would  defend  the  community  against  all  its  enemies  ;  and
that  they  would  reside  within  the  city  during  a  certain  specified
time  in  each  year.  Murat.  ibid.  163.  This  subjection  of  the
nobility  to  the  municipal  government  established  in  cities,  became
almost  universal,  and  was  often  extremely  grievous  to  persons
accustomed  to  consider  themselves  as  independent.  Otto  Frigensis
thus  describes  the  state  of  Italy  under  Frederick  I.  "The  cities
so  much  affect  liberty,  and  are  so  solicitous  to  avoid  the  insolence
of  power,  that  almost  all  of  them  have  thrown  off  every  other
authority,  and  are  governed  by  their  own  magistrates.  Insomuch
that  all  that  country  is  now  filled  with  free  cities,  most  of  which
have  compelled  their  bishops  to  reside  within  their  walls,  and  there
is  scarcely  any  nobleman,  how  great  soever  his  power  may  be,  who
is  not  subject  to  the  laws  and  government  of  some  city."  De
Gestis  Frider.  I.  Imp.  lib.  ii.  c.  13.  p.  453.  In  another  place  he

220  PROOFS AND

observes  of  the  marquis  of  Montserrat,  that  he  was  almost  the  only
Italian  baron  who  had  preserved  his  independence,  and  had  not
become  subject  to  the  laws  of  any  city.  See  also  Muratori  Anti-
chita  Estensi,  vol.  i.  p.  411,  412.  That  state,  into  which  some  of
the  nobles  were  compelled  to  enter,  others  embraced  from  choice.
They  observed  the  high  degree  of  security,  as  well  as  of  credit  and
estimation,  which  the  growing  wealth  and  dominion  of  the  great
communities  procured  to  all  the  members  of  them.  They  were  de-
sirous to  partake  of  these,  and  to  put  themselves  under  such
powerful  protection.  With  this  view  they  voluntarily  became
citizens  of  the  towns  to  which  their  lands  were  most  contiguous ;
and,  abandoning  their  ancient  castle?,  took  up  their  residence  in
the  cities  at  least  during  part  of  the  year.  Several  deeds  are  still
extant,  by  which  some  of  the  most  illustrious  families  in  Italy  are
associated  as  citizens  of  different  cities.  Murat.  ib.  p.  165,  &c.
A  charter,  by  which  Atto  de  Macerata  is  admitted  as  a  citizen  of
Osimo,  A.  D.  1198,  in  the  Marcha  di  Ancona,  is  still  extant.  In
this  he  stipulates,  that  he  will  acknowledge  himself  to  be  a  burgess
of  that  community  ;  that  he  will  to  the  utmost  of  his  power  promote
its  honour  and  welfare  ;  that  he  will  obey  its  magistrates ;  that  he
will  enter  into  no  league  with  its  enemies;  that  he  will  "reside  in  the
town  during  two  months  in  every  year,  or  for  a  longer  time,  if  re-
quired by  the  magistrates.  The  community,  on  the  other  hand,
take  him,  his  family,  and  friends,  under  their  protection,  and
engage  to  defend  him  against  every  enemy.  Fr.  Ant.  Zacharias
Anecdota  medii.  jEvi.  Aug.  Taur.  1755,  fol.  p.  66.  This  privilege
was  deemed  so  important,  that  not  only  laymen,  but  ecclesiastics
of  the  highest  rank,  condescended  to  be  adopted  as  members  of
the  great  communities,  in  hopes  of  enjoying  the  safety  and  dignity
which  that  condition  conferred.  Murat.  ib.  179.  Before  the  in-
stitution of  communities,  persons  of  noble  birth  had  no  other
residence  but  their  castles.  They  kept  their  petty  courts  there ;
and  the  cities  were  deserted,  having  hardly  any  inhabitants  but
slaves  or  persons  of  low  condition.  But  in  consequence  of  the
practice  which  I  have  mentioned,  cities  not  only  became  more
populous,  but  were  filled  with  inhabitants  of  better  rank,  and  a
custom  which  still  subsists  in  Italy  was  then  introduced,  that  all
families  of  distinction  reside  more  constantly  in  the  great  towns,
than  is  usual  in  other  parts  of  Europe.  As  cities  acquired  hew
consideration  and  dignity  by  the  accession  of  such  citizens,  they
became  more  solicitous  to  preserve  their  liberty  and  independence.
The  emperors,  as  sovereigns,  had  anciently  a  palace  in  almost
every  great  city  of  Italy ;  when  they  visited  that  country,  they  were
accustomed  to  reside  in  these  palaces,  and  the  troops  which
accompanied  them  were  quartered  in  the  houses  of  the  citizens.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  221

This  the  citizens  deemed  both  ignominious  and  dangerous.  They
could  not  help  considering  it  as  receiving  a  master  and  an  enemy
within  their  walls.  They  laboured  therefore  to  get  free  of  this  sub-
jection. Some  cities  prevailed  on  the  emperors  to  engage  that  they
would  never  enter  their  gates,  but  take  up  their  residence  without
the  walls.  Chart.  Hen.  IV.  Murat.  ib.  p.  24.  Others  obtained
the  imperial  licence  to  pull  down  the  palace  situated  within  their
liberties,  on  condition  that  they  built  another  in  the  suburbs  for  the
occasional  reception  of  the  emperor.  Chart.  Hen.  IV.  Murat.
ibid.  p.  25.  These  various  encroachments  of  the  Italian  cities
alarmed  the  emperors,  and  put  them  on  schemes  for  re-establishing
the  imperial  jurisdiction  over  them  on  its  ancient  footing.  Frederick
Barbarossa  engaged  in  this  enterprise  with  great  ardour.  The  free
cities  of  Italy  joined  together  in  a  general  league,  and  stood  on
their  defence ;  and  after  a  long  contest,  carried  on  with  alternate
success,  a  solemn  treaty  of  peace  was  concluded  at  Constance,
A.  D.  1183,  by  which  all  the  privileges  and  immunities  granted  by
former  emperors  to  the  principal  cities  in  Italy  were  confirmed  and
ratified.  Murat.  Dissert.  XLVIII.  This  treaty  of  Constance  was
considered  as  such  an  important  article  in  the  jurisprudence  of  the
middle  ages,  that  it  is  usually  published  together  with  the  Libri
Feudorum  at  the  end  of  the  Corpus  Juris  Civilis.  The  treaty
secured  privileges  of  great  importance  to  the  confederate  cities,
and  though  it  reserved  a  considerable  degree  of  authority  and
jurisdiction  to  the  empire,  yet  the  cities  persevered  with  such
vigour  in  their  efforts  in  order  to  extend  their  immunities,  and  the
conjunctures  in  which  they  made  them  were  so  favourable,  that
before  the  conclusion  of  the  thirteenth  century,  most  of  the  great
cities  in  Italy  had  shaken  off  all  marks  of  subjection  to  the  empire,
and  were  become  independent  sovereign  republics.  It  is  not  re-
quisite that  I  should  trace  the  various  steps  by  which  they  advanced
to  this  high  degree  of  power,  so  fatal  to  the  empire,  and  so  bene-
ficial to  the  cause  of  liberty  in  Italy.  Muratori,  with  his  usual
industry,  has  collected  many  original  papers  which  illustrate  this
curious  and  little  known  part  of  history.  Murat.  Antiq.  Ital.
Dissert.  L.  See  also  Jo.  Bapt.  Villanovse  Hist.  Laudis  Pompeii
sive  Lodi,  in  Graev.  Thes.  Antiquit.  Ital.  vol  iii.  p.  &88.

Note  XVI. Sect.  I.  p.  39.

LONG  before  the  institution  of  communities  in  France,  charters
of  immunity  or  franchise  were  granted  to  some  towns  and  villages
by  the  lords  on  whom  they  depended.  But  these  are  very  different
from  such  as  became  common  in  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  cen-
turies. They  did  not  erect  these  towns  into  corporations ;  they

222  PROOFS  AND

did  not  establish  a  municipal  government ;  they  did  not  grant  them
the  privilege  of  bearing  arms.  They  contained  nothing  more  than
a  manumission  of  the  inhabitants  from  the  yoke  of  servitude ;  an
exemption  from  certain  services  which  were  oppressive  and  igno-
minious ;  and  the  establishment  of  a  fixed  tax  or  rent  which  the
citizens  were  to  pay  to  their  lord  in  place  of  impositions  which  he
could  formerly  lay  upon  them  at  pleasure.  Two  charters  of  this
kind  to  two  villages  in  the  county  of  Rousillon,  one  in  A.  D.  974,
the  other  in  A.  D.  1025,  are  still  extant.  Petr.  de  Marca,  Marca,
sive  Limes  Hispanicus,  App.  p.  909.  1038.  Such  concessions,  it
is  probable,  were  not  unknown  in  other  parts  of  Europe,  and  may
be  considered  as  a  step  towards  the  more  extensive  privileges  con-
ferred by  Louis  le  Gros,  on  the  towns  within  his  domains.  The
communities  in  France  never  aspired  to  the  same  independence
with  those  in  Italy.  They  acquired  new  privileges  and  immunities,
but  the  right  of  sovereignty  remained  entire  to  the  king  or  baron
within  whose  territories  the  respective  cities  were  situated,  and  from
whom  they  receive  the  charter  of  their  freedom.  A  great  number
of  these  charters,  granted  both  by  the  kings  of  France,  and  by
their  great  vassals,  are  published  by  M.  D'Achery  in  his  Spicele-
gium,  and  many  are  found  in  the  collection  of  the  Ordonnances
des  Rois  de  France.  These  convey  a  very  striking  representation
of  the  wretched  condition  of  cities  previous  to  the  institution  of
communities,  when  they  were  subject  to  the  judges  appointed  by
the  superior  lords  of  whom  they  held,  and  who  had  scarcely  any
other  law  but  their  will.  Each  concession  in  these  charters  must
be  considered  as  a  grant  of  some  new  privileges  which  the  people
did  not  formerly  enjoy,  and  each  regulation  as  a  method  of  re-
dressing some  grievance  under  which  the  inhabitants  of  cities
formerly  laboured.  The  charters  of  communities  contain  likewise
the  first  expedients  employed  for  the  introduction  of  equal  laws
and  regular  government.  On  both  these  accounts  they  merit
particular  attention,  and  therefore,  instead  of  referring  my  readers
to  the  many  bulky  volumes  in  which  they  are  scattered,  I  shall
give  them  a  view  of  some  of  the  most  important  articles  in  these
charters,  ranged  under  two  general  heads.  I.  Such  as  respect
personal  safety.  II.  Such  as  respect  the  security  of  property.

I.  During  that  state  of  turbulence  and  disorder  which  the  cor-
ruption of  the  feudal  government  introduced  into  Europe,  personal
safety  was  the  first  and  great  object  of  every  individual ;  and  as  the
great  military  barons  alone  were  able  to  give  sufficient  protection
to  their  vassals,  this  was  one  great  source  of  their  power  and
authority.  But,  by  the  institution  of  communities,  effectual  pro-
vision was  made  for  the  safety  of  individuals,  independent  of  the
nobles.  For,  1.  The  fundamental  article  in  every  charter  was,

ILLUSTRATIONS.  223

that  all  the  members  of  the  community  bound  themselves  by  oath
to  assist,  defend,  and  stand  by  each  other  against  all  aggressors,
and  that  they  should  not  suffer  any  person  to  injure,  distress,  or
molest  any  of  their  fellow-citizens. D'Acher.  Spicel.  x.  642.  xi.
341,  &c. — 2.  Whoever  resided  in  any  town,  which  was  made  free,
was  obliged,  under  a  severe  penalty,  to  accede  to  the  community,
and  to  take  part  in  the  mutual  defence  of  its  members. D'Acher.
Spic.  xi.  344. — 3.  The  communities  had  the  privilege  of  carrying
arms  ;  of  making  war  on  their  private  enemies  ;  and  of  executing
by  military  force  any  sentence  which  their  magistrates  pronounced.
D'Ach.  Spicel.  x.  643,  644.  xi.  343. — 4.  The  practice  of  making
satisfaction  by  a  pecuniary  compensation  for  murder,  assault,  or
other  acts  of  violence,  most  inconsistent  with  the  order  of  society,
and  the  safety  of  individuals,  was  abolished ;  and  such  as  committed
these  crimes  were  punished  capitally, or  with  rigour  adequate  to
their  guilt. D'Ach.  xi.  362.  Mirsei  Opera  Diploraatica,  i.  292.—
5.  No  member  of  a  community  was  bound  to  justify  or  defend  him-
self by  battle  or  combat ;  but,  if  he  was  charged  with  any  crime,  he
could  be  convicted  only  by  the  evidence  of  witnesses,  and  the  re-
gular course  of  legal  proceedings. Mirseus,  ibid.  D'Ach.  xi.  375.
349. Ordon.  torn.  iii.  265. — 6.  If  any  man  suspected  himself  to
be  in  danger  from  the  malice  or  enmity  of  another,  upon  his  making
oath  to  that  effect  before  a  magistrate,  the  person  suspected  was
bound  under  a  severe  penalty  to  give  security  for  his  peaceable
behaviour. D'Ach.  xi.  346. This  is  the  same  species  of  security
which  is  still  known  in  Scotland  under  the  name  of  Lawburrows.
In  France,  it  was  first  introduced  among  the  inhabitants  of  com-
munities, and  having  been  found  to  contribute  considerably  towards
personal  safety,  it  was  extended  to  ill  the  other  members  of  the
society. Establissemens  de  St.  Louis,  liv.  i.  cap.  28.  ap.  Du
Cange  Vie  de  St.  Louis,  p.  15.

II.  The  provisions  in  the  charters  of  communities  concerning
the  security  of  property,  are  not  less  considerable  than  those
respecting  personal  safety.  By  the  ancient  law  of  France,  no
person  could  be  arrested  or  confined  in  prison  on  account  of  any
private  debt.  Ordon.  des  Rois  de  France,  torn.  i.  p.  72.  80.  If
any  person  was  arrested  upon  any  pretext,  but  his  having  been
guilty  of  a  capital  crime,  it  was  lawful  to  rescue  him  out  of  the
hands  of  the  officers  who  had  seized  him.  Ordon.  iii.  p.  17.
Freedom  from  arrest,  on  account  of  debt,  seems  likewise  to  have
been  enjoyed  in  other  countries.  Gudenus  Sylloge  Diplom.  473,
In  society,  while  it  remained  in  its  rudest  and  most  simple  form,
debt  seems  to  have  been  considered  as  an  obligation  merely  per-
sonal. Men  had  made  some  progress  towards  refinement,  before
creditors  acquired  a  right  of  seizing  the  property  of  their  debtors,

224  PROOFS  AND

in  order  to  recover  payment. The  expedients  for  this  purpose
were  all  introduced  originally  in  communities,  and  we  can  trace
the  gradual  progress  of  them. 1.  The  simplest  and  most  obvious
species  of  security  was,  that  the  person  who  sold  any  commodity
should  receive  a  pledge  from  him  who  bought  it,  which  he  restored
upon  receiving  payment. Of  this  custom  there  are  vestiges  in
several  charters  of  community. D'Ach.  ix.  185.  xi.  377. — 2.  When
no  pledge  was  given,  and  the  debtor  became  refractory  or  insolvent,
the  creditor  was  allowed  to  seize  his  effects  with  a  strong  hand,  and
by  his  private  authority ;  the  citizens  of  Paris  are  warranted  by  the
royal  mandate, "  ut  ubicumque, et  quocumque  modo  poterunt,
tantum  capiant,  unde  pecuniam  sibi  debitam  integre  et  plenarie
habeant,  et  inde  sibi  invicem  adjutores  existaut." Ordon.  &c.
torn.  i.  p.  6. This  rude  practice,  suitable  only  to  the  violence  of
that  which  has  been  called  a  state  of  nature,  was  tolerated  longer
than  one  can  conceive  to  be  possible  in  any  society  where  laws  and
order  were  at  all  known. The  ordonance  authorizing  it  was  issued
A.  D.  1134  ;  and  that  which  corrects  the  law,  and  prohibits  creditors
from  seizing  the  effects  of  their  debtors,  unless  by  a  warrant  from
a  magistrate,  and  under  his  inspection,  was  not  published  until  the
year  1351.  Ordon.  torn.  ii.  p.  438. It  is  probable,  -however,  that
men  were  taught,  by  observing  the  disorders  which  the  former
mode  of  proceeding  occasioned, to  correct  it in  practice  long
before  a  remedy  was  provided  by  a  law  to  that  effect. Every  dis-
cerning reader  will  apply  this  observation  to  many  other  customs
and  practices  which  I  have  mentioned. New  customs  are  not
always  to  be  ascribed  to  the  laws  which  authorize  them. Those
statutes  only  give  a  legal  sanction  to  such  things  as  the  experience
of  mankind  has  previously  found  to  be  proper  and  beneficial. —
3.  As  soon  as  the  interposition  of  the  magistrate  became  requisite,
regular  provision  was  made  for  attaching  or  distraining  the  move-
able  effects  of  a  debtor  ;  and  if  his  moveables  were  not  sufficient  to
discharge  the  debt,  his  immoveable  property,  or  estate  in  land,  was
liable  to  the  same  distress,  and  was  sold  for  the  benefit  of  his  cre-
ditor. D'Ach.  ix.  p.  184,  185.  xi.  p.  348.  380. As  this  regulation
afforded  the  most  complete  security  to  the  creditor,  it  was  con-
sidered as  so  severe,  that  humanity  pointed  out  several  limitations
in  the  execution  of  it. Creditors  were  prohibited  from  seizing  the
wearing  apparel  of  their  debtors, their  beds, the  door  of  their
house,  their  instruments  of  husbandry,  &c. D'Ach.  ix.  184.  xi.
377. Upon  the  same  principles,  when  the  power  of  distraining
effects  became  more  general,  the  horse  and  arms  of  a  gentleman
could not  be seized. D'Ach. ix. 185. As hunting was the
favourite  amusement  of  martial nobles, the emperor  Ludovicus
Pius  prohibited  the  seizing  of  a  hawk  on  account  of  any  compo-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  225

sition  or  debt. CapituL  lib.  iv.  §  21. But  if  the  debtor  had  no
other  moveables,  even  these  privileged  articles  might  be  seized. —

4.  In  order  to  render  the  security  of  property  complete  within  a
comnlunity,  every  person  who  was  admitted  a  member  of  it,  was
obliged  to  buy  or  build a  house,  or  to  purchase  lands  within  its
precincts,  or  at  least  to  bring  into  the  town  a  considerable  portion
of  his  moveables,  per  qucejusticiari  possit,  si  quid  forte  in  eum  querelce
evenerit. D'Ach.  xi.  326. Ordon.  i.  367. Libertates  S.  Georgii
de  Esperanchia.  Hist,  de  Dauphine,  torn.  i.  p.  26. — 5.  That  se-
curity might  be  as  perfect  as  possible,  in  some  towns  the  members
of  the  community  seem  to  have  been  bound  for  each  other. D'Ach.
x.  644. — 6.  All  questions  with  respect  to  property  were  tried  within
the  community,  by  magistrates  and  judges  whom  the  citizens  elected
or  appointed. Their  decisions  were  more  equal  and  fixed  than  the
sentences  which  depended  on  the  capricious  and  arbitrary  will  of  a
baron,  who  thought  himself  superior  to  all  laws. D'Ach.  x.  644.
646.  xi.  344.  et  passim. Ordon.  iii.  204. — 7.  No  member  of  a
community  could  be  burdened  by  any  arbitrary  tax ;  for  the  su-
perior lord,  who  granted  the  charter  of  community,  accepted  of  a
fixed  census  or  duty  in  lieu  of  all  demands. Ordon.  torn.  iii.  204. —
Libertates  de  Calma.  Hist,  de  Dauphine,  torn.  i.  p.  19. Libertates

5.  Georgii  de  Esperanchia,  ibid.  p.  26. Nor  could  the  members  of
a  community  be  distressed  by  any  unequal  imposition  of  the  sum  to
be  levied  on the  community. Regulations are  inserted in  the
charters  of  some  communities,  concerning  the  method  of  deter-
mining the quota  of  any  tax  to  be  levied  on  each  inhabitant.
D'Ach.  xi. 350.  365. St.  Louis  published  an  ordonance  con-
cerning  this matter, which extended to all the communities.
Ordon.  torn.  i. 186. These  regulations  are  extremely  favourable
to  liberty,  as  they  vest  the  power  of  proportioning  the  taxes  in  a
certain  number  of  citizens  chosen  out  of  each  parish,  who  were
bound,  by  solemn  oath,  to  decide  according  to  justice. — That  the
more  perfect  security  of  property  was  one  great  object  of  those  who
instituted  communities,  we  learn,  not  only  from  the  nature  of  the
thing,  but  from  the  express  words  of  several  charters,  of  which  I
shall  only  mention  that  granted  by  Alienor,  queen  of England
and  duchess  of  Guienne,  to  the  community  of  Poitiers,  "  ut  sua
propria  melius  defendere possint, et  magis integre custodire."
Du  Cange,  voc. Communia,  vol.  ii.  p.  863.— Such  are  some  of  the
capital  regulations  established  in  communities  during  the  twelfth
and  thirteenth  centuries. These  may  be  considered  as  the  first
expedients  for  the  re-establishment  of  law  and  order,  and  con-
tributed greatly  to  introduce  regular  government  among  all  the
members  of  society. As  soon  as  communities  were  instituted,
high  sentiments  of.  liberty  began  to  manifest  themselves. When

VOL.  III.  Q

226  PROOFS AND

Humbert,  lord  of  Beaujeu,  upon  granting  a  charter  of  community
to  the  town  of  Belleville,  exacted  of  the  inhabitants  an  oath  of
fidelity  to  himself  and  successors,  they  stipulated,  on  their  part,
that  he  should  swear  to  maintain  their  franchises  and liberties  ;
and,  for  their  greater  security,  they  obliged  him  to  bring  twenty
gentlemen  to  take  the  same  oath,  and  to  be  bound  together  with
him. D'Ach.  ix.  183. In  the  same  manner  the  lord  of  Moriens
in  Dauphine  produced  a  certain  number  of  persons  as  his  sureties
for  the  observation  of  the articles  contained  in the charter  of
community  to  that  town. These  were  bound  to  surrender  them-
selves prisoners  to  the  inhabitants  of  Moriens,  if  their  liege  lord
should  violate  any  of  their  franchises,  and  they  promised  to  remain
in  custody  until  he  should  grant  the  members  of  the  community
redress. Hist,  de  Dauphine,  torn.  i.  p.  17. If  the  mayor  or  chief
magistrate  of  a  town  did  any  injury  to  a  citizen,  he  was  obliged  to
give  security  for  his  appearance  in  judgment,  in  the  same  manner
as  a  private  person ;  and  if  cast,  was  liable  to  the  same  penalty.
D'Ach.  ix. 183. These  are  ideas  of  equality  uncommon  in  the
feudal  times. Communities  were  so  favourable  to  freedom,  that
they  were  distinguished  by  the  name  of  Libertates. Du  Cange,
vol.  ii.  p.  863. They  were  at  first  extremely  odious  to  the  nobles,
who  foresaw  what  a  check  they  must  prove  to  their  power  and
domination. Guibert  abbot  of  Nogent  calls  them  execrable  in-
ventions,  by  which,  contrary  to  law  and  justice,  slaves  withdrew
themselves  from  that  obedience  which  they  owed  to  their  masters.
Du  Cange,  ibid.  862. The  zeal  with  which  some  of  the  nobles
and  powerful  ecclesiastics opposed the establishment of  com-
munities, and  endeavoured  to  circumscribe  their  privileges,  was
extraordinary. A  striking  instance  of  this  occurs  in  the  contests
between  the archbishop  of  Reims  and  the  inhabitants  of  that
community. It  was  the  chief  business  of  every  archbishop,  during
a  considerable  time,  to  abridge  the  rights  and  jurisdiction  of  the
community ;  and  the  great  object  of  the  citizens,  especially  when
the  see  was  vacant,  to  maintain,  to  recover,  and  to  extend  their
own  jurisdiction. Histoire  civile  et  politique  de  la  Ville  de  Reims,
par  M.  Anquetil,  torn.  i.  p.  287,  &c.

The  observations  which  I  have  made  concerning  the  low  state  of
cities,  and  the  condition  of  their  inhabitants,  are  confirmed  by  in-
numerable passages  in  the  historians  and  laws  of  the  middle  ages.
It  is  not  improbable,  however,  that  some  cities  of  the  first  order
were  in  a  better  state,  and  enjoyed  a  superior  degree  of  liberty.
Under  the  Roman  government,  the  municipal  government  esta-
blished in  cities  was  extremely. favourable  to  liberty.  The  jurisdic-
tion of  the  senate  in  each  corporation,  and  the  privileges  of  the
citizens,  were  both  extensive.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  some

ILLUSTRATIONS.

227

of  the  greater  cities,  which  escaped  the  destructive  rage  of  the
barbarous  nations,  still  retained  their  ancient  form  of  government,
at  least  in  a  great  measure.  They  were  governed  by  a  council  of
citizens,  and  by  magistrates  whom  they  themselves  elected.  Very
strong  presumptions  in  favour  of  this  opinion  are  produced  by
M.  1'Abbe  De  Bos,  Hist.  Crit.  de  la  Mon.  Franc,  torn.  i.  p.  18,
&c.  torn.  ii.  p.  524.,  edit.  1742.  It  appears  from  some  of  the
charters  of  community  to  cities,  granted  in  the  twelfth  and
thirteenth  centuries,  that  these  only  confirm  the  privileges  pos-
sessed by  the  inhabitants  previous  to  the  establishment  of  the
community.  D'Acher.  Spiceleg.  vol.  xi.  p.  345.  Other  cities
claimed  their  privileges,  as  having  possessed  them  without  in-
terruption from  the  times  of  the  Romans.  Hist.  Crit.  de  la  Mon.
Franc,  torn.  ii.  p.  333.  But  the  number  of  cities  which  enjoyed
such  immunities  was  so  small,  as  hardly,  in  any  degree,  to  dimmish
the  force  of  my  conclusions  in  the  text.

Note  XVII. Sect.  I.  p.  39.

HAVING  given  a  full  account  of  the  establishment,  as  well  as
effects  of  communities  in  Italy  and  France,  it  will  be  necessary
to  inquire,  with  some  attention,  into  the  progress  of  cities  and  of
municipal  government  in  Germany.  The  ancient  Germans  had  no
cities.  Even  in  their  hamlets  or  villages,  they  did  not  build  their
houses  contiguous  to  each  other.  Tacit,  de  Mor.  Germ.  cap.  16.
They  considered  it  as  a  badge  of  servitude,  to  be  obliged  to  dwell  in
a  city  surrounded  with  walls.  When  one  of  their  tribes  had  shaken
off  the  Roman  yoke,  their  countrymen  required  of  them,  as  an  evi-
dence of  their  having  recovered  liberty,  to  demolish  the  walls  of  a
town  which  the  Romans  had  built  in  their  country.  Even  the
fiercest  animals,  said  they,  lose  their  spirit  and  courage  when  they
are  confined.  Tacit.  Histor.  lib.  iv.  c.  64.  The  Romans  built  seve-
ral cities  of  note  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine.  But  in  all  the  vast
countries  from  that  river  to  the  coasts  of  the  Baltic,  there  was  hardly
one  city  previous  to  the  ninth  century  of  the  Christian  era.  Con-
ringius  Exercitatio  de  Urbibus  Germanise,  Oper.  vol.  i.  §  25.  27.
31,&c.  Heineccius  differs  from  Conringius  with  respect  to  this.
But  even,  after  allowing  to  his  arguments  and  authorities  their  ut-
most force,  they  prove  only,  that  there  were  a  few  places  in  those
extensive  regions  on  which  some  historians  have  bestowed  the  name
of  towns.  Elem.  Jur.  German,  lib.  i.  §  102.  Under  Charlemagne,
and  the  emperors  of  his  family,  as  the  political  state  of  Germany
began  to  improve,  several  cities  were  founded,  and  men  became
accustomed  to  associate  and  to  live  together  in  one  place.  Charle*-
magne  founded  two  archbishoprics  and  nine  bishoprics  in  the  most

Q2

228  PROOFS AND

considerable  towns  of  Germany. Aub.  Mirsei  Opera  Diplomatica,
vol.  i.  p.  16. His  successors  increased  the  number  of  these ;  and
as  bishops  fixed  their  residence  in  the  chief  town  of  their  diocess,
and  performed  religious  functions  there,  that  induced  many  people
to  settle  in  them. Conring.  ibid.  §  48. But  Henry,  surnamed  the
Fowler,  who  b.egan  his  reign  A.  D.  920,  must  be  considered  as  the
great  founder  of  cities  in  Germany. The  empire  was  at  that  time
infested  by  the  incursions  of  the  Hungarians  and  other  barbarous
people. In  order  to  oppose  them,  Henry  encouraged  his  subjects
to  settle  in  cities,  which  he  surrounded  with  walls  strengthened  by
towers.  He  enjoined  or  persuaded  a  certain  proportion  of  the  nobility
to  fix  their  residence  in  the  towns,  and  thus  rendered  the  condition
of  citizens  more  honourable  than  it  had  been  formerly. Wittikin-
dus  Annal.  lib.  i.  ap.  Conring.  §  82. From  this  period,  the  number
of  cities  continued  to  increase,  and  they  became  more  populous  and
more  wealthy. But  cities  in  Germany  were  still  destitute  of  muni-
cipal liberty  of  jurisdiction. Such  of  them  as  were  situated  in  the
Imperial  demesnes,  were  subject  to  the  emperors. Their  Comites,
Missi,  and  other  judges,  presided  in  them,  and  dispensed  justice.
Towns  situated  on  the  estate  of  a  baron,  were  part  of  his  fief,  and
he  or  his  officers  exercised  a  similar  jurisdiction  in  them. Conring.
ibid.  *  73,  74.  .  Heinec.  Elem.  Jur.  Germ.  lib.  i.  §  104. The  Ger-
mans borrowed  the  institution  of  communities  from  the  Italians.
Knipschilaius  Tractatus  Politico-Histor.  Jurid.  de  Civitatum  Impe-
rialium  Juribus,  vol.  i.  lib.  i.  cap.  5.  N°  23. Frederick  Barbarossa
was  the  first  emperor  who,  from  the  same  political  consideration
that  influenced  Louis  le  Gros,  multiplied  communities,  in  order  to
abridge  the  power  of  the  nobles. Pfeffel  Abrege  de  1'Histoire  etdu
Droit  Publique  d'Allemagne,  4to.  p.  297. From  the  reign  of  Henry
the  Fowler,  to  the  time  when  German  cities  acquired  full  posses-
sion of  their  immunities,  various  circumstances  contributed  to  their
increase. The  establishment  of  bishoprics  (already  mentioned),  and
the  building  of  cathedrals,  naturally  induced  many  people  to  settle
near  the  chief  place  of  worship. It  became  the  custom  to  hold
councils  and  courts  of  judicature  of  every  kind,  ecclesiastical  as  well
as  civil,  in  cities. In  the  eleventh  century,  many  slaves  were  en-
franchised, the  greater  part  of  whom  settled  in  cities. Several
mines  were  discovered  and  wrought  in  different  provinces,  which
drew  together  such  a  concourse  of  people,  as  gave  rise  to  several
cities,  and  increased  the  number  of  inhabitants  in  others. Conring.
§  105. The  cities  began,  in  the  thirteenth  century,  to  form  leagues
for  their  mutual  defence,  and  for  repressing  the  disorders  occasioned
by  the  private  wars  among  the  barons,  as  well  as  by  their  exactions.
This  rendered  the  condition  of  the  inhabitants  of  cities  more  secure
than  that  of  any  other  order  of  men,  and  allured  many  to  become

ILLUSTRATIONS.  229

members  of  their  communities.  Conring.  §  94.  There  were  in-
habitants of  three  different  ranks  in  the  towns  of  Germany :  the
nobles,  or  familiae;  the  citizens,  or  liberi ;  and  the  artisans,  who
were  slaves,  or  homines  proprii.  Knipschild.  lib.  ii.  cap.  29.  N°  13.
Henry  V.,  who  began  his  reign  A.  D.  1106,  enfranchised  the  slaves
who  were  artisans  or  inhabitants  in  several  towns,  and  gave  them
the  rank  of  citizens  or  liberi.  Pfeffel.  p.  254.  Knipsch.  lib.  ii.  c.
29.  N°  113.  119.  Though  the  cities  in  Germany  did  not  acquire
liberty  so  early  as  those  in  France,  they  extended  their  privileges
much  farther.  All  the  imperial  and  free  cities,  the  number  of  which
is  considerable,  acquired  the  full  right  of  being  immediate ;  by  which
term,  in  the  German  jurisprudence,  we  are  to  understand,  that  they
are  subject  to  the  empire  alone,  and  possess  within  their  own  pre-
cincts all  the  rights  of  complete  and  independent  sovereignty.  The
various  privileges  of  the  imperial  cities,  the  great  guardians  of  the
Germanic  liberties,  are  enumerated  by  Knipschild,  lib.  ii.  The
most  important  articles  are  generally  known,  and  it  would  be  im-
proper to  enter  into  any  disquisition  concerning  minute  particulars.

Note  XVIII. Sect.  I.  p.  39.

THE  Spanish  historians  are  almost  entirely  silent  concerning  the
origin  and  progress  of  communities  in  that  kingdom;  so  that  I  can-
not fix,  with  any  degree  of  certainty,  the  time  and  manner  of  their
first  introduction  there.  It  appears,  however,  from  Mariana,  vol.
ii.  p.  221.  fol.  Hagse,  1736,  that  in  the  year  1350,  eighteen  cities
•had  obtained  a  seat  in  the  cortes  of  Castile.  From  the  account,
which  will  be  given  of  their  constitution  and  pretensions,  Sect.  III.
of  this  volume,  it  appears  that  their  privileges  and  form  of  govern-
ment were  the  same  with  those  of  the  other  feudal  corporations  ;
and  this,  as  well  as  the  perfect  similarity  of  political  institutions  and
transactions  in  all  the  feudal  kingdoms,  may  lead  us  to  conclude,
that  communities  were  introduced  there  in  the  same  manner,  and
probably  about  the  same  time,  as  in  the  other  nations  of  Europe.
In  Aragon,  as  I  shall  have  occasion  to  observe  m  a  subsequent  Note,
cities  seem  early  to  have  acquired  extensive  immunities,  together
with  a  share  in  the  legislature.  In  the  year  1118,  the  citizens  of
Saragossa  had  not  only  attained  political  liberty,  but  they  were  de-
clared to  be  of  equal  rank  with  the  nobles  of  the  second  class ;  and
many  other  immunities,  unknown  to  persons  in  their  rank  of  life  in
other  parts  of  Europe,  were  conferred  upon  them.  Zurita  Annales
de  Aragon,  torn.  i.  p.  44.  In  England,  the  establishment  of  com-
munities or  corporations  was  posterior  to  the  conquest.  The  prac-
tice was  borrowed  from  France,  and  the  privileges  granted  by  the
crown  were  perfectly  similar  to  those  whicl}  I  have  enumerated.  But

230  PROOFS AND

as  this  part  of  history  Is  well  known  to  most  of  my  readers,  I  shall,
without  entering  into  any  critical  or  minute  discussion,  refer  them  to
authors  who  have  fully  illustrated  this  interesting  point  in  the  Eng-
lish history.  Brady's  Treatise  of  Boroughs.  Madox  Firma  Burgi,
cap.  i.  sect.  ix.  Hume's  History  of  England,  vol.  i.  append,  i.  and  ii.
It  is  not  improbable  that  some  of  the  towns  in  England  were  formed
into  corporations  under  the  Saxon  kings,  and  that  the  charters
granted  by  the  kings  of  the  Norman  race  were  not  charters  of  en-
franchisement from  a  state  of  slavery,  but  a  confirmation  of  privi-
leges which  they  already  enjoyed.  See  Lord  Lyttleton's  History  of
Henry  II.,  vol.  ii.  p.  317.  The  English  cities,  however,  were  very
inconsiderable  in  the  twelfth  century.  A  clear  proof  of  this  occurs
in  the  history  to  which  I  last  referred.  Fitzstephen,  a  contemporary
author,  gives  a  description  of  the  city  of  London,  in  the  reign  of
Henry  II.;  and  the  terms  in  which  he  speaks  of  its  trade,  its  wealth,
and  the  splendour  of  its  inhabitants,  would  suggest  no  inadequate
idea  of  its  state  at  present,  when  it  is  the  greatest  and  most  opulent
city  of  Europe.  But  all  ideas  of  grandeur  and  magnificence  are
merely  comparative ;  and  every  description  of  them  in  general  terms
is  very  apt  to  deceive.  It  appears  from  Peter  of  Blois,  archdeacon
of  London,  who  flourished  in  the  same  reign,  and  who  had  good
opportunity  of  being  well  informed,  that  this  city,  of  which  Fitzste-
phen gives  such  a  pompous  account,  contained  no  more  than  forty
thousand  inhabitants.  Ibid.  315,  316.  The  other  cities  were  small
in  proportion,  and  were  not  in  a  condition  to  extort  any  extensive
privileges.  That  the  constitution  of  the  boroughs  in  Scotland,  in
many  circumstances,  resembled  that  of  the  towns  in  France  and
England,  is  manifest  from  the  Leges  Burgorum,  annexed  to  the  Re-
giam  Majestatem.

Note  XIX. Sect.  I.  p.  43.

SOON  after  the  introduction  of  the  third  estate  into  the  national
council,  the  spirit  of  liberty  which  that  excited  in  France  began  to
produce  conspicuous  effects.  In  several  provinces  of  France,  the
nobility  and  communities  formed  associations,  whereby  they  bound
themselves  to  defend  their  rights  and  privileges  against  the  formi-
dable and  arbitrary  proceedings  of  the  king.  The  count  de  Boulain-
villiers  has  preserved  a  copy  of  one  of  these  associations,  dated  in
the  year  1314,  twelve  years  after  the  admission  of  the  deputies
from  towns  into  the  states-general.  Histoire  de  T Ancien,  Gouverne-
ment  de  la  France,  torn.  ii.  p.  94?.  The  vigour  with  which  the  peo-
ple asserted,  and  prepared  to  maintain  their  rights,  obliged  their  so-
vereigns to  respect  them.  Six  years  after  this  association,  Philip
the  Long  issued  a  writ  of  summons  to  the  community  of  Narbonne,

ILLUSTRATIONS.  .231

in  the  following  terms  :  "  Philip,  by  the  grace,  &c.  to  our  well  be-
loved, &c.  As  we  desire,  with  all  our  heart,  and  above  all  other
things,  to  govern  our  kingdom  and  people  in  peace  and  tranquillity,
by  the  help  of  God ;  and  to  reform  our  said  kingdom  in  so  far  as  it
stands  in  need  thereof,  for  the  public  good,  and  for  the  benefit  of
our  subjects,  who,  in  times  past,  have  been  aggrieved  and  oppres-
sed in  divers  manners  by  the  malice  of  sundry  persons,  as  we  have
learned  by  common  report,  as  well  as  by  the  information  of  good
men  worthy  of  credit,  and  we,  having  determined  in  our  council
which  we  have  called  to  meet  in  our  good  city,  &c.  to  give  redress
to  the  utmost  of  our  power,  by  all  ways  and  means  possible,  ac-
cording to  reason  and  justice,  and  willing  that  this  should  be  done
with  solemnity  and  deliberation  by  the  advice  of  the  prelates,  ba-
rons, and  good  towns  of  our  realm,  and  particularly  of  you,  and
that  it  should  be  transacted  agreeably  to  the  will  of  God,  and  for
the  good  of  our  people,  therefore  we  command,"  &c.  Mably,  Ob-
servat.  ii.  App.  p.  386.  I  shall  allow  these  to  be  only  the  formal
words  of  a  public  and  legal  style ;  but  the  ideas  are  singular,  and
much  more  liberal  and  enlarged  than  one  could  expect  in  that  age.
A  popular  monarch  of  Great  Britain  could  hardly  address  himself
to  parliament  in  terms  more  favourable  to  public  liberty.  There
occurs  in  the  history  of  France  a  striking  instance  of  the  progress
which  the  principles  of  liberty  had  made  in  that  kingdom,  and  of
the  influence  which  the  deputies  of  towns  had  acquired  in  the
states- general.  During  the  calamities  in  which  the  war  with  Eng-
land, and  the  captivity  of  king  John,  had  involved  France,  the
states-general  made  a  bold  effort  to  extend  their  own  privileges  and
jurisdiction.  The  regulations  established  by  the  states,  held  A.  D.
1355,  concerning  the  mode  of  levying  taxes,  the  administration  of
which  they  vested  not  in  the  crown,  but  in  commissioners  appointed
by  the  states ;  concerning  the  coining  of  money ;  concerning  the
redress  of  the  grievance  of  purveyance ;  concerning  the  regular  ad-
ministration of  justice ;  are  much  more  suitable  to  the  genius  of  a
republican  government  than  that  of  a  feudal  monarchy.  This  cu-
rious statute  is  published,  Ordon.  torn.  iii.  p.  19.  Such  as  have
not  an  opportunity  to  consult  that  large  collection,  will  find  an
abridgment  of  it  in  Hist,  de  France  par  Villaret,  torn.  ix.  p.  130.  or
in  Histoire  de  Boulainv.  torn.  ii.  213.  The  French  historians  re-
present the  bishop  of  Laon,  and  Marcel  provost  of  the  merchants  of
Paris,  who  had  the  chief  direction  of  this  assembly,  as  seditious  tri-
bunes, violent,  interested,  ambitious,  and  aiming  at  innovations  sub-
versive of  the  constitution  and  government  of  their  country.  That
may  have  been  the  case  ;  but  these  men  possessed  the  confidence
of  the  people  ;  and  the  measures  which  they  proposed  as  the  most
popular  and  acceptable,  as  well  as  most  likely  to  increase  their  own

232  PROOFS AND

influence,  plainly  prove  that  the  spirit  of  liberty  had  spread  wonder-
fully, and  that  the  ideas  which  then  prevailed  in  France  concerning
government  were  extremely  liberal.  The  states-general  held  at
Paris  A.  D.  1355,  consisted  of  about  eight  hundred  members,  and
above  one  half  of  these  were  deputies  from  towns.  M.  Secousse
Pref.  a  Ordon.  torn.  iii.  p.  48.  It  appears  that  in  all  the  different
assemblies  of  the  States,  held  during  the  reign  of  John,  the  repre-
sentatives of  towns  had  great  influence,  and  in  every  respect,  the
third  state  was  considered  as  co-ordinate,  and  equal  to  either  of  the
other  two.  Ib.  passim.  These  spirited  efforts  were  made  in  France
long  before  the  house  of  commons  in  England  acquired  any  con-
siderable influence  in  the  legislature.  As  the  feudal  system  was
carried  to  its  utmost  height  in  France  sooner  than  in  England,  so
it  began  to  decline  sooner  in  the  former  than  in  the  latter  kingdom.
In  England,  almost  all  attempts  to  establish  or  to  extend  the  liberty
of  the  people  have  been  successful ;  in  France  they  have  proved
unfortunate.  What  were  the  accidental  events,  or  political  causes,
which  occasioned  this  difference,  it  is  not  my  present  business  to
inquire.

Note  XX. Sect.  I.  p.  45. -

IN  a  former  Note,  No.  VIII.  I  have  inquired  into  the  condition
of  that  part  of  the  people  which  was  employed  in  agriculture  ;  and
have  represented  the  various  hardships  and  calamities  of  their  situ-
ation. When  charters  of  liberty  or  manumission  were  granted  to
such  persons,  they  contained  four  concessions  corresponding  to  the
four  capital  grievances  to  which  men  in  a  state  of  servitude  are  sub-
ject. 1.  The  right  of  disposing  of  their  persons  by  sale  or  grant
was  relinquished.  2.  Power  was  given  to  them  of  conveying  their
property  and  effects  by  will  or  any  other  legal  deed.  Or  if  they
happened  to  die  intestate,  it  was  provided  that  their  property  should
go  to  their  lawful  heirs  in  the  same  manner  as  the  property  of  other
persons.  3  The  services  and  taxes  which  they  owed  to  their  su-
perior or  liege  lord,  which  were  formerly  arbitrary  and  imposed  at
pleasure,  are  precisely  ascertained.  4.  They  are  allowed  the  privi-
lege of  marrying  according  to  their  own  inclination ;  formerly  they
could  contract  no  marriage  without  their  lord's  permission,  and  with
no  person  but  one  of  his  slaves.  All  these  particulars  are  found
united  in  the  charter  granted  Habitatoribus  Montis-Britonis,  A.  D.
1376.  Hist,  de  Dauphine,  torn.  i.  p.  81.  Many  circumstances
concurred  with  those  which  I  have  mentioned  in  the  text  in  pro-
curing them  deliverance  from  that  wretched  state.  The  gentle
spirit  of  the  Christian  religion;  the  doctrines  which  it  teaches,  con-
cerning the  original  equality  of  mankind;  its  tenets  with  respect  to

ILLUSTRATIONS.  233

the  divine  government,  and  the  impartial  eye  with  which  the  Al-
mighty regards  men  of  every  condition,  and  admits  them  to  a  par-
ticipation of  his  benefits,  are  all  inconsistent  with  servitude. But
in  this,  as  in  many  other  instances,  considerations  of  interest,  and
the  maxims  of  false  policy,  led  men  to  a  conduct  inconsistent  with
their  principles. They  were  so  sensible,  however,  of  this  incon-
sistency, that  to  set  their  fellow-Christians  at  liberty  from  servitude
was  deemed  an  act  of  piety  highly  meritorious  and  acceptable  to
Heaven. The  humane  spirit  of  the  Christian  religion  struggled V
long  with  the  maxims  and  manners  of  the  world,  and  contributed
more  than  any  other  circumstance  to introduce  the practice of
manumission. When  pope  Gregory  the  Great,  who  flourished  to-
wards the  end  of  the  sixth  century,  granted  liberty  to  some  of  his
slaves,  he  gives  this  reason  for  it,  "  Cum  Redemptor  noster,  totius
conditor naturae,  ad hoc  propitiatus  humanam camera voluerit
assumere,  utdivinitatis  suse  gratia,  dirempto  (quo  tenebamur  cap-
tivi)  vinculo,  pristinae  nos  restitueret  libertati ;  salubriter  agitur,  si
homines,  quos  ab  initio  liberos  natura  protulit,  et  jus  gentium  jugo
substituit  servitutis,  in  e£i,  qua  nati  fuerant,  manumittentis  bene-
ficio,  libertati  reddantur." Gregor.  Magn.  ap.  Potgiess.  lib.  iv.  c.
i.  §  3. Several  laws  or  charters  founded  on  reasons  similar  to  this,
are  produced  by  the  same  author. Accordingly,  a  great  part  of  the
charters  of  manumission,  previous  to  the  reign  of  Louis X.  are
granted  pro  amore  Dei,  pro  remedio  animee,  et  pro  mercede  animee.
Murat.  Antiq.  Ital.  vol.  i.  p.  849,  850.  Du  Cange,  voc.  Manumis-
sio. The  formality  of  manumission  was  executed  in  a  church,  as  a
religious  solemnity. The  person  to  be  set  free  was  led  round  the
great  altar  with  a  torch  in  his  hand,  he  took  hold  of  the  horns  of
the  altar,  and  there  the  solemn  words  conferring  liberty  were  pro-
nounced.  Du  Cange,  ibid,  vol.iv.  p.  467. I  shall  transcribe  a  part
of  a  charter  of  manumission  granted  A.'D.  1056;  both  as  it  contains
a  full  account  of  the  ceremonies  used  in  this  form  of  manumission,
and  as  a  specimen  of  the  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  Latin  tongue
in  that  barbarous  age. It  is  granted  by  Willa  the  widow  of  Hugo
the  duke  and  marquis,  in  favour  of  Clariza,  one  of  her  slaves.
"  Et  ideo  nos  Domine  Wille  inclite  cometisse — libera  et  absolve  te
Cleriza  filia  Uberto — pro  timore  omnipotentis  Dei,  et  remedio  lumi-
narie  anime  bone  memorie  quandam  supra  scripto  Domini  Ugo  glo-
riossissimo,  ut  quando  ilium  Dominus  de  hac  vita  migrare,  jusserit,
pars  iniqua  non  abeat  potestatem  ullam,  sed  anguelus  Domini  nostri
Jesu  Christi  colocare  dignitur  ilium  inter  sanctos  dilectos  suos ;  et
beatus  Petrus  princips  apostolorum,  qui  habed  potestatem  omnium
animarum  ligandi  et  absolvendi,  ut  ipsi  absolvat  animee  ejus  de  pec-
catis  sui,  aperiad  ilium  janua  paradisi;  pro  eadem  vero  rationi,  in
mano  mite  te  Benzo  presbiter,  ut  vatlat  tecum  in  ecclesia  sancti

234  PROOFS AND

Bartholomgei  apostoli ;  traad  de  tribus  viclbus  circa  altare  ipsius
ecclesiae  cum  caereo  apprehensum  in  manibus  tuis  et  manibus  suis  ;
deinde  exite  ambulate  in  via  quadrubio,  ubi  quatuor  vie  se  dividun-
tur.  Statimq ;  pro  remedio  luminarie  anime  bone  memorie  quon-
dam supra  scripto  Domini  Ugo  et  ipsi  presbiter  Benzo  fecit  omnia,
et  dixit,  Ecce  quatuor  vie,  ite  et  ambulate  in  quacunq ;  partem  tibi
placuerit,  tarn  sic  supra  scripta  Cleriza,  qua  nosque  tui  heredes,  qui
ab  ac  hora  in  antea  nati,  vel  procreati  fuerit  utriusq  ;  sexus,  &c."
Murat.  ibid.  p.  853.  Many  other  charters  might  have  been  selected,
which,  in  point  of  grammar  or  style,  are  in  no  wise  superior  to  this.
Manumission  was  frequently  granted  on  deathbed  or  by  latter  will.
As  the  minds  of  men  are  at  that  time  awakened  to  sentiments  of  hu-
manity and  piety,  these  deeds  proceeded  from  religious  motives,  and
were  granted  pro  redemptione  animce,  in  order  to  obtain  acceptance
with  God.  Du  Cange,  ubi  supra,  p.  470.  et  voc.  Servus,  vol.  vi.  p.
451.  Another  method  of  obtaining  liberty  was  by  entering  into
holy  orders,  or  taking  the  vow  in  a  monastery.  This  was  permitted
for  some  time;  but  so  many  slaves  escaped,  by  this  means,  out  of
the  hands  of  their  masters,  that  the  practice  was  afterward  restrain-
ed, and  at  last  prohibited  by  the  laws  of  almost  all  the  nations  of
Europe.  Murat.  ibid.  p.  842.  Conformably  to  the  same  principles,
princes,  on  the  birth  of  a  son,  or  upon  any  other  agreeable  event,
appointed  a  certain  number  of  slaves  to  be  enfranchised,  as  a  testi-
mony of  their  gratitude  to  God  for  that  benefit.  Marculfi  Form,
lib.  i.  cap.  39.  There  are  several  forms  of  manumission  published
by  Marculfus,  and  all  of  them  are  founded  on  religious  consider-
ations, in  order  to  procure  the  favour  of  God,  or  to  obtain  the  for-
giveness of  their  sins.  Lib.  ii.  c.  23.  33,  34.  edit.  Baluz.  The
same  observation  holds  with  respect  to  the  other  collections  of  For-
mulae annexed  to  Marculfus.  As  sentiments  of  religion  induced
some  to  grant  liberty  to  their  fellow- Christians  who  groaned  under
the  yoke  of  servitude  ;  so  mistaken  ideas  concerning  devotion  led
others  to  relinquish  their  liberty.  When  a  person  conceived  an  ex-
traordinary respect  for  the  saint  who  was  the  patron  of  any  church
or  monastery  in  which  he  was  accustomed  to  attend  religious  wor-
ship, it  was  not  unusual  among  men  possessed  with  an  excess  of
superstitious  reverence,  to  give  up  themselves  and  their  posterity  to
be  the  slaves  of  the  saint.  Mabillon  de  Re  Diplomat,  lib.  vi.  632.
The  oblati  or  voluntary  slaves  of  churches  or  monasteries  were  very
numerous,  and  may  be  divided  into  three  different  classes.  The
first  were  such  as  put  themselves  and  effects  under  the  protection  of
a  particular  church  or  monastery,  binding  themselves  to  defend  its
privileges  and  property  against  every  aggressor.  These  were
prompted  to  do  so  not  merely  by  devotion,  but  in  order  to  obtain
that  security  which  arose  from  the  protection  of  the  church.  They

ILLUSTRATIONS.  235

were  rather  vassals  than  slaves,  and  sometimes  persons  of  noble
birth  found  it  prudent  to  secure  the  protection  of  the  church  in  this
manner.  Persons  of  the  second  class  bound  themselves  to  pay  an
annual  tax  or  quit-rent  out  of  their  estates  to  a  church  or  monastery.
Besides  this,  they  sometimes  engaged  to  perform  certain  services.
They  were  called  censuaks.  The  last  class  consisted  of  such  as  ac-
tually renounced  their  liberty,  and  became  slaves  in  the  strict  and
proper  sense  of  the  word.  These  were  called  ministeriales,  and  en-
slaved their  bodies,  as  some  of  the  charters  bear,  that  they  might
procure  the  liberty  of  their  souls.  Potgiesserus  de  statu  servorum,
lib.  i.  cap.  i.  §  6,  7.  How  zealous  the  clergy  were  to  encourage  the
opinions  which  led  to  this  practice,  will  appear  from  a  clause  in  a
charter  by  which  one  gives  up  himself  as  a  slave  to  a  monastery.
"  Cum  sit  omni  carnan  ingenuitate  generosius  extremum  quod-
cumq ;  Dei  servitium,  scilicet  quod  terrena  nobilitas  multos  ple-
rumq ;  vitiorum  servos  facit,  servitus  vero  Christi  nobiles  virtutibus
reddit,  nemo  autem  sani  capitis  virtutibus  vitia  comparaverit,  claret
pro  certo  eum  esse  generosiorem,  qui  se  Dei  servitio  preebuerit  pro-
niorem.  Quod  ego  Ragnaldus  intelligens,"  &c.  Another  charter
is  expressed  in  the  following  words  :  "  Eligens  magis  esse  servus
Dei  quam  libertus  sseculi,  firmiter  credens  et  sciens,  quod  servire
Deo,  regnare  est,  summaque  ingenuitas  sit  in  qua  servitus  compara-
batur  Christi,"  &c.  Du  Cange,  voc.  Oblatus,  vol.  iv.  p.  1286, 1287.
Great,  however,  as  the  power  of  religion  was,  it  does  not  appear,
that  the  enfranchisement  of  slaves  was  a  frequent  practice  while
the  feudal  system  preserved  its  vigour.  On  the  contrary,  there
were  laws  which  set  bounds  to  it  as  detrimental  to  society.  Pot-
giess.  lib.  iv.  c.  2.  §  6.  The  inferior  order  of  men  owed  the  re-
covery of  their  liberty  to  the  decline  of  that  aristocratical  policy
which  lodged  the  most  extensive  power  in  the  hands  of  a  few  mem-
bers of  the  society,  and  depressed  all  the  rest.  When  Louis  X.
issued  his  ordonnance,  several  slaves  had  been  so  long  accustomed
to  servitude,  and  their  minds  were  so  much  debased  by  that  un-
happy situation,  that  they  refused  to  accept  of  the  liberty  which
was  offered  them.  D'Ach.  Spicel.  vol.  xi.  p.  387.  Long  after  the
reign  of  Louis  X.  several  of  the  French  nobility  continued  to  assert
their  ancient  dominion  over  their  slaves.  It  appears,  from  an  or-
donnance of  the  famous  Bertrand  de  Guesclin,  constable  of  France,
that  the  custom  of  enfranchising  them  was  considered  as  a  per-
nicious innovation.  Morice  Mem.  pour  servir  des  preuves  al'Hist.
de  Bret.  torn.  ii.  p.  1 00.  In  some  instances,  when  the  prsedial  slaves
were  declared  to  be  freemen,  they  were  still  bound  to  perform  cer-
tain services  to  their  ancient  masters  ;  and  were  kept  in  a  state  dif-
ferent from  other  subjects,  being  restricted  either  from  purchasing
land,  or  becoming  members  of  a  community  within  the  precincts  of

236  PROOFS AND

the  manor  to  which  they  formerly  belonged.  Martene  et  Durand.
Thesaur.  Anecdot.  vol.  i.  p.  914.  This,  however,  seems  not  to
have  been  common. — There  is  no  general  law  for  the  manumission
of  slaves  in  the  statute-book  of  England,  similar  to  that  which  has
been  quoted  from  the  ordonnances  of  the  kings  of  France.  Though
the  genius  of  the  English  constitution  seems  early  to  have  favoured
personal  liberty,  personal  servitude,  nevertheless,  continued  long  in
England  in  some  particular  places.  In  the  year  1514,  we  find  a
charter  of  Henry  VIII.  enfranchising  two  slaves  belonging  to  one  of
his  manors.  Rym.  Feeder,  vol.  xiii.  p.  470.  As  late  as  the  year
1574,  there  is  a  commission  from  queen  Elizabeth  with  respect  to
the  manumission  of  certain  bondmen  belonging  to  her.  Rymer,  in
Observat.  on  the  Statutes,  &c.  p.  251.

Note  XXI. Sect.  I.  p.  51.

THERE  is  no  custom  in  the  middle  ages  more  singular  than  that
of  private  war.  It  is  a  right  of  so  great  importance,  and  prevailed
so  universally,  that  the  regulations  concerning  it  occupy  a  con-
siderable place  in  the  system  of  laws  during  the  middle  ages.
M.  de  Montesquieu,  who  has  unravelled  so  many  intricate  points
in  feudal  jurisprudence,  and  thrown  light  on  so  many  customs
formerly  obscure  and  unintelligible,  was  not  led  by  his  subject  to
consider  this.  I  shall  therefore  give  a  more  minute  account  of  the
customs  and  regulations  which  directed  a  practice  so  contrary  to
the  present  ideas  of  civilized  nations  concerning  government  and
order.  I.  Among  the  ancient  Germans,  as  well  as  other  nations
in  a  similar  state  of  society,  the  right  of  avenging  injuries  was  a
private  and  personal  right  exercised  by  force  of  arms,  without  any
reference  to  an  umpire,  or  any  appeal  to  a  magistrate  for  decision.
The  clearest  proofs  of  this  were  produced,  Note  VI. — 2.  This
practice  subsisted  among  the  barbarous  nations  after  their  settle-
ment in  the  provinces  of  the  empire  which  they  conquered ;  and  as
the  causes  of  dissension  among  them  multiplied,  their  family  feuds
and  private  wars  became  more  frequent.  Proofs  of  this  occur  in
their  early  historians*  Greg.  Turon.  Hist.  lib.  vii.  c.  2.  lib.  viii.
c.  18.  lib.  x.  c.  27.  and  likewise  in  the  codes  of  their  laws.  It  was
not  only  allowable  for  the  relations  to  avenge  the  injuries  of  their
family,  but  it  was  incumbent  on  them.  Thus,  by  the  laws  of  the
Angli  and  Werini,  ad  quemcunque  hereditas  terras  pervenerit,  ad
ilium  vestis  bellica  id  est  lorica  et  ultio  proximi,  et  solatio  leudis,
debet  pertinere,  tit.  vi.  §  5.  ap  Lindenbr.  Leg.  Saliq.  tit.  63.  Leg.
Longob.  lib.  ii.  tit.  14.  §  10.— 3.  None  but  gentlemen,  or  persons
of  noble  birth,  had  the  right  of  private  war.  All  disputes  between
slaves,  villani,  the  inhabitants  of  towns,  and  freemen  of  inferior

ILLUSTRATIONS.  237

condition,  were  decided  in the  courts  of  justice. All  disputes
between  gentlemen  and  persons  of  inferior  rank,  were  terminated
in  the  same  manner. The  right  of  private  war  supposed  nobility
of  birth, and  equality  of  rank  in  both the contending  parties.
Beaumanoir  Coustumes  de  Beauv.  ch.  lix.  p.  300.  Ordon.  des  Rois
de  France,  torn.  ii. 395.  §  xvii. 508.  §  xv.  &c. The  dignified
ecclesiastics  likewise  claimed  and  exercised  the  right  of  private
war ;  but  as  it  was  not  altogether  decent  for  them  to  prosecute
quarrels  in  person  adwcati  or  vidames  were  chosen  by  the  several
monasteries,  and  bishoprics. These  were  commonly  men  of  high
rai}k  and  reputation,  who  became  the  protectors  of  the  churches
and  convents  by  which  they  were  elected ;  espoused  their  quarrels,
and  fought  their  battles ;  armis  omnia  quae  erant  ecclesiae  viriliter
defendebant,  et  vigilanter  protegebant. Brussel  Usage  des  Fiefs,
torn.  i.  p.  144. Du  Cange,  voc.  Advocatus. On  many  occasions,
the  martial  ideas  to  which ecclesiastics  of  noble  birth  were ac-
customed,  made  them  forget  the  pacific  spirit  of  their  profession,
and  led  them  into  the  field  in  person,  at  the  head  of  their  vassals,
"  flamma, ferro,  csede, possessiones ecclesiarum  prselati  defen-
debant." Guido  Abbas  ap.  Du  Cange,  ib.  p.  179. — 4.  It  was  not
every  injury  of  trespass  that  gave  a  gentleman  a  title  to  make  war
upon his adversary. Atrocious  acts of  violence, insults, and
affronts,  publicly  committed,  were  legal  and permitted motives
for  taking  arms  against  the  authors  of  them. Such  crimes  as  are
now  punished  capitally  in  civilized  nations,  at  that  time  justified
private hostilities. Beauman.  ch.  lix. Du Cange Dissert, xxix.
sur  Joinville,  p.  331. But  though  the  avenging  of  injuries  was  the
only  motive  that  could  legally  authorize  a  private  war,  yet  disputes
concerning  civil  property  often  gave  rise  to  hostilities,  and  were
terminated  by  the  sword. Du  Cange  Dissert,  p.  332. — 5.  All  per-
sons present,  when  any  quarrel  arose,  or  any  act  of  violence  was
committed,  were  included  in  the  war  which  it  occasioned ;  for  it
was  supposed  to  be  impossible  for  any  man  in  such  a  situation  to
remain  neuter,  without  taking  side  with  one  or  other  of  the  con-
tending parties. Beauman.  p.  300. — 6.  All  the  kindred  of  the  two
principals  in  the  war  were  included  in  it,  and  obliged  to  espouse
the  quarrel  of  the  chieftain  with  whom  they  were  connected. Du
Cange,  ibid.  232. This  was  founded  on  the  maxim  of  the  ancient
Germans,  "  suscipere  tarn  inimicitias  seu  patris,  seu  propinqui,  quam
amicitias,  necesse  est;"  a  maxim  natural  to  all  rude  nations,  among
which  the  form  of  society,  and  political  union,  strengthen  such  a
sentiment. This  obligation  was  enforced  by  legal  authority. If  a
person  refused* to  take  part  in  the  quarrel  with  his  kinsman,  and  to
aid  him  against  his  adversary,  he  was  deemed  to  have  renounced
all  the  rights  and  privileges  of  kindredship,  and  became  incapable

238  PROOFS AND

of  succeeding  to  any  of  his  relations,  or  of  deriving  any  benefit
from  any  civil  right  or  property  belonging  to  them.  Du  Cange
Dissert,  p.  333.  The  method  of  ascertaining  the  degree  of  affinity
which  obliged  a  person  to  take  part  in  the  quarrel  of  a  kinsman,
was  curious.  While  the  church  prohibited  the  marriage  of  persons
within  the  seventh  degree  of  affinity,  the  vengeance  of  private  war
extended  as  far  as  this  absurd  prohibition,  and  all  who  had  such  a
remote  connexion  with  any  of  the  principals,  were  involved  in  the
calamities  of  war.  But  when  the  church  relaxed  somewhat  of  its
rigour,  and  did  not  extend  its  prohibition  of  marrying  beyond  the
fourth  degree  of  affinity,  the  same  restriction  took  place  in  the  con-
duct of  private  war.  Beauman.  303.  Du  Cange  Dissert.  333. —

7.  A  private  war  could  not  be  carried  on  between  two  full  brothers,
because  both  have  the  same  common  kindred,  and  consequently
neither  had  any  persons  bound  to  stand  by  him  against  the  other,
in  the  contest ;  but  two  brothers  of  the  half  blood  might  wage  war,
because  each  of  them  has  a  distinct  kindred. Beauman.  p.  299.—

8.  The  vassals  of  each  principal  in  any  private  war  were  involved
in  the  contest,  because,  by  the  feudal  maxims,  they  were  bound  to
take  arms  in  defence  of  the  chieftain  of  whom  they  held,  and  to
assist  him  in  every  quarrel. As  soon,  therefore,  as  feudal  tenures
were  introduced,  and  this  artificial  connexion  was  established  be-
tween vassals  and  the  baron  of  whom  they  held,  vassals  came  to  be
considered  as  in  the  same  state  with  relations. Beauman.  303. —

9.  Private  wars  were  very  frequent  for  several  centuries. Nothing
contributed  more  to  increase  those  disorders  in  government,  or  to
encourage  such  ferocity  of  manners  as  reduced  the  nations  of  Europe
to  that  wretched  state  which  distinguished  the  period  of  history
which  I  am  reviewing. Nothing  was  such  an  obstacle  to  the  intro-
duction of  a  regular  administration  of  justice. Nothing  could  more
effectually  discourage  industry,  or  retard  the  progress  and  cultiva-
tion of  the  arts  of  peace. Private  wars  were  carried  on  with  all
the  destructive  rage  which  is  to  be  dreaded  from  violent  resentment
when  armed  with  force,  and  authorized  by  law. It  appears  from
the  statutes,  prohibiting  or  restraining the exercise  of  private
hostilities,  that  the  invasion  of  the  most  barbarous  enemy  could  not
be  more  desolating  to  a  country,  or  more  fatal  to  its  inhabitants,
than  those  intestine  wars. Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  701.  torn.  ii.  p.  395.
408.  507,  &c. The  contemporary  historians  describe  the  excesses
committed  in  prosecution  of  these  quarrels  in  such  terms  as  excite
astonishment  and  horror, I  shall  mention  only  one  passage  from
the  history  of  the  Holy  War,  by  Guibert  abbot  of  Nogent :  "  Erat
eo  tempore  maximis  ad  invicem  hostilitatibus,  totius  Francorum
regni  facta  turbatio  ; crebra  ubiq ; latrocinia,  viarum  obsessio ;
audiebantur  passim,  immo  fiebant  incendia  infinita ;  nullis  praeter

ILLUSTRATIONS.  239

sola  et  indoraita  cupiditate  exlstentibus  causis  extruebantur  prselia ;
et  ut  brevi  totum  claudam,  quicquid  obtutibus  cupidorum  subja-
cebat,  nusquam  attendendo  cujus  esset,  prsedse  patebat."  Gesta
Dei  per  Francos,  vol.  i.  p.  482.

Having  thus  collected  the  chief  regulations  which  custom  had
established  concerning  the  right  and  exercise  of  private  war,  1  shall
enumerate,  in  chronological  order,  the  various  expedients  employed
to  abolish  or  restrain  this  fatal  custom.  1.  The  first  expedient  em-
ployed by  the  civil  magistrate,  in  order  to  set  some  bounds  to  the
violence  of  private  revenge,  was  the  fixing  by  law  the  fine  or  com-
position to  be  paid  for  each  different  crime.  The  injured  person
was  originally  the  sole  judge  concerning  the  nature  of  the  wrong
which  he  had  suffered,  the  degree  of  vengeance  which  he  should
exact,  as  well  as  the  species  of  atonement  or  reparation  with  which
he  might  rest  satisfied.  Resentment  became  of  course  as  implacable
as  it  was  fierce.  It  was  often  a  point  of  honour  not  to  forgive,  nor
to  be  reconciled.  This  made  it  necessary  to  fix  those  compositions
which  make  so  great  a  figure  in  the  laws  of  barbarous  nations.  The
nature  of  crimes  and  offences  was  estimated  by  the  magistrate,  and
the  sum  due  to  the  person  offended  was  ascertained  with  a  minute,
and  often  a  whimsical  accuracy.  Rotharis,  the  legislator  of  the
Lombards,  who  reigned  about  the  middle  of  the  seventh  century,
discovers  his  intention  both  in  ascertaining  the  composition  to  be  paid
by  the  offender,  and  in  increasing  its  value ;  it  is,  says  he,  that  the
enmity  may  be  extinguished,  the  prosecution  may  cease,  and  peace
may  be  restored.  Leg.  Langob.  lib.  i.  tit.  7.  §  10. — 2.  About  the
beginning  of  the  ninth  century,  Charlemagne  struck  at  the  root  of
the  evil,  and  enacted,  "  That  when  any  person  had  been  guilty  of
a  crime,  or  had  committed  an  outrage,  he  should  immediately  sub-
mit to  the  penance  which  the  church  imposed,  and  offer  to  pay  the
composition  which  the  law  prescribed  ;  and  if  the  injured  person  or
his  kindred  should  refuse  to  accept  of  this,  and  presume  to  avenge
themselves  by  forc'e  of  arms,  their  lands  and  properties  should  be
forfeited."  Capitul.  A.  D.  802,  edit.  Baluz.  vol.  i.  371.— 3.  But
in  this,  as  well  as  in  other  regulations,  the  genius  of  Charlemagne
advanced  before  the  spirit  of  his  age.  The  ideas  of  his  contempo-
raries concerning  regular  government  were  too  imperfect,  and  their
manners  too  fierce  to  submit  to  this  law.  Private  wars,  with  all  the
calamities  which  they  occasioned,  became  more  frequent  than  ever
after  the  death  of  that  great  monarch.  His  successors  were  unable
to  restrain  them.  The  church  found  it  necessary  to  interpose.
The  most  early  of  these  interpositions  now  extant,  is  towards  the  end
of  the  tenth  century.  In  the  year  990,  several  bishops  in  the  south
of  France  assembled,  and  published  various  regulations,  in  order  to
set  some  bounds  to  the  violence  and  frequency  of  private  wars ;  if

240  PROOFS AND

any  person  within  their  diocesses  should  venture  to  transgress,  they
ordained  that  he  should  be  excluded  from  all  Christian  privileges
during  his  life,  and  be  denied  Christian  burial  after  his  death. Du
Mont  Corps  Diplomatique,  torn.  i.  p.  41. These,  however,  were
only  partial  remedies ;  and  therefore  a  council  was  held  at  Limoges,
A.  D.  994. The  bodies  of  the  saints,  according  to^the  custom  of
those  ages,  were  carried  thither ; and  by  these  sacred  relics  men
were exhorted  to  lay  down  their  arms,  to  extinguish  their  ani-
mosities, and  to  swear  that  they  would  not,  for  the  future,  violate
the  public  peace  by  their  private  hostilities. Bouquet  Recueil  des
Histor.  vol.  x.  p.  49.  147. Several  other  councils  issued  decrees
to  the  same  effect. Du  Cange  Dissert.  343. — 4.  But  the  authority
of  councils,  how  venerable  soever  in  those  ages,  was  not  sufficient
to  abolish  a  custom  which  flattered  the  pride  of  the  nobles,  and
gratified  their  favourite  passions. The  evil  grew  so  intolerable,
that  it  became  necessary  to  employ  supernatural  means  for  sup-
pressing it. A  bishop  of  Aquitaine,  A.  D.  1032,  pretended  that  an
angel  had  appeared  to  him,  and  brought  him  a  writing  from  heaven,
enjoining  men  to  cease  from  their  hostilities, and  to  be  reconciled
to  each  other. It  was  during  a  season  of  public  calamity  that  .he
published  this  revelation. The  minds  of  men  were  disposed  to  re-
ceive pious  impressions,  and  willing  to  perform  any  thing  in  order
to  avert  the  wrath  of  heaven. A  general  peace  and  cessation  from
hostilities  took  place  and  continued  for  seven  years  ;  and  a  resolu-
tion was  formed  that  no  man  should,  in  times  to  come,  attack  or
molest  his  adversaries  during  the  seasons  set  apart  for  celebrating
the  great  festivals  of  the  church,  or  from  the  evening  of  Thursday
in  each  week,  to  the  morning  of  Monday  in  the  week  ensuing,  the
intervening  days  being  considered  as  particularly  holy,  our  Lord's
Passion  having  happened  on  one  of  these  days,  and  his  resurrec-
tion on  another. A  change  in  the  dispositions  of  men  so  sudden,
and  which  produced  a  resolution  so  unexpected,  was  considered  as
miraculous  ;  and  the  respite  from  hostilities  which  followed  upon  it,
was  called  The  Truce  of  God. Glaber.  Rodulphus  Histor.  lib.  v.
ap.  Bouquet,  vol.  x.  p.  59. This,  from  being  a  regulation  or  con-
cert in  one  kingdom,  became  a  general  law  in  Christendom,  was
confirmed  by  the  authority  of  several  popes,  and  the  violators  were
subjected  to  the  penalty  of  excommunication. Corpus  Jur.  Canon.
Decretal,  lib.  i.  tit.  34.  c.  i. Du  Cange  Glossar.  voc. Trevga.
An  act  of  the  council  of  Toulujes  in  Roussillon,  A.  D.  1041,  con-
taining all  the  stipulations  required  by  the  truce  of  God,  is  published
by  Dom  de  Vic  et  Dom  Vaisette, Hist,  de  Languedoc,  torn.  ii.
Preuves,  p.  206. A  cessation  from  hostilities,  during  three  com-
plete days  in  every  week,  allowed  such  a  considerable  space  for
the  passions  of  the  antagonists  to  cool,  and  for  the  people  to  enjoy

ILLUSTRATIONS.  241

a  respite  from  the  calamities  of  war,  as  well  as  to  take  measures  for
their  own  security,  that,  if  this  truce  of  God  had  been  exactly  ob-
served, it  must  have  gone  far  towards  putting  an  end  to  private
wars. This,  however,  seems  not  to  have  been  the  case;  the  nobles,
disregarding  the  truce,  prosecuted  their  quarrels  without  interrup-
tion as  formerly. Qua  nimirum  tempestate,  universae  provincise
adeo  devastationis  continuae  importunitate  inquietantur,  ut  ne  ipsa,
pro  observatione  divinae  pacis,  professa  sacramenta  custodiantur.
Abbas  Uspurgensis,  apud  Datt.  de  pace  imperii  publica, p.  13.
N°  35. The  violent  spirit  of  the  nobility  could  not  be  restrained  by
any  engagements. The  complaints  of  this  were  frequent;  and
bishops,  in  order  to  compel  them  to  renew  their  vows  and  promises
of  ceasing  from  their  private  wars,  were  obliged  to  enjoin  their
clergy  to  suspend  the  performance  of  divine  service  and  the  ex-
ercise of  any  religious  function  within  the  parishes  of  such  as  were
refractory  and  obstinate. Hist,  de  Langued.  par  D.  D.  de  Vic  et
Vaisette,  torn,  ik Preuves,  p.  118. — 5.  The  people,  eager  to  obtain
relief  from  their  sufferings,  called  in  a  second  time  revelation  to
their  aid. Towards  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,  a  carpenter  in
Guienne  gave  out,  that  Jesus  Christ,  together  with  the  blessed
Virgin,  had  appeared  to  him,  and  having  commanded  him  to  exhort
mankind  to  peace,  had  given  him,  as  a  proof  of  his  mission,  an
image  of  the  Virgin  holding  her  son  in  her  arms,  with  this  inscrip-
tion, Lamb  of  God  who  takest  away  the  sins  of  the  world,  give  us  peace.
This  low  fanatic  addressed  himself  to  an  ignorant  age,  prone  to
credit  what  was  marvellous. He  was  received  as  an  inspired  mes-
senger of  God. Many  prelates  and  barons  assembled  at  Puy,  and
took  an  oath,  not  only  to  make  peace  with  all  their  enemies,  but  to
attack  such  as  refused  to  lay  down  their  arms,  and  to  be  reconciled
to  their  enemies. They  formed  an  association  for  this  purpose,  and
assumed  the  honourable  name  of  the  Brotherhood  of  God. Robertus
de  Monte  Michaele,  ap.  M.  de  Lauriere  Pref.  torn.  i.  Ordon.  p.  29.
But  the  influence  of  this  superstitious  terror  or  devotion  was  not
of  long  continuance. — 6.  The  civil  magistrate  was  obliged  to  exert
his  authority  in  order  to  check  a  custom  which  threatened  the  dis-
solution of  government. Philip  Augustas,  as  some  imagine,  or
St.  Louis,  as  is  more  probable,  published  an  ordonance,  A.  D.  1245,
prohibiting  any  person  to  commence  hostilities  against  the  friends
and  vassals  of  his  adversary,  until  forty  days  after  the  commission
of  the  crime  or  offence  which  gave  rise  to  the  quarrel ;  declaring,
that  if  any  map  presumed  to  transgress  this  statute,  he  should  be
considered  as  guilty  of  a  breach  of  the  public  peace,  and  be  tried
and  punished  by  the  judge  ordinary  as  a  traitor. Ordon.  torn.  i.
p.  56. This  was  called  the  Royal  Truce,  and  afforded  time  for  the
violence  of  resentment  to  subside,  as  well  as  leisure  for  the  good

VOL.  III.  R

242  PROOFS AND

offices  of  such  as  were  willing  to  compose  the  difference.  The
happy  effects  of  this  regulation  seem  to  have  been  considerable,  if
we  may  judge  from  the  solicitude  of  succeeding  monarchs  to  enforce

it. 7.  In  order  to  restrain  the  exercise  of  private  war  still  farther,

Philip  the  Fair,  towards  the  close  of  the  same  century,  A.  D.  1296,
published  an  ordonance  commanding  all  private  hostilities  to  cease,
while  he  was  engaged  in  war  against  the  enemies  of  the  state.
Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  328.  390. This  regulation,  which  seems  to  be
almost  essential  to  the  existence  and  preservation  of  society,  was
often  renewed  by  his  successors,  and  being  enforced  by  the  regal
authority,  proved  a  considerable  check  to  the  destructive  contests
of  the  nobles. Both  these  regulations,  introduced  first  in  France,
were  adopted  by  the  other  nations  of  Europe. — 8.  The  evil,  how-
ever, was  so  inveterate,  that  it  did  not  yield  to  all  these  remedies,
No  sooner  was  public  peace  established  in  any  kingdom,  than  the
barons  renewed  their  private  hostilities. They  not  only  struggled
to  maintain  this  pernicious  right,  but  to  secure  the  exercise  of  it
without  any  restraint. Upon  the  death  of  Philip  the  Fair,  the
nobles  of  different  provinces  in  France  formed  associations,  and
presented  remonstrances  to  his  successor,  demanding  the  repeal  of
several  laws,  by  which  he  had  abridged  the  privileges  of  their  order.
Among  these,  the  right  of  private  war  is  always  mentioned  as  one
of  the  most  valuable  ;  and  they  claim  that  the  restraint  imposed  by
the  truce  of  God,  the  royal  truce,  as  well  as  that  arising  from  the
ordonance  of  the  year  1296,  should  be  taken'  off. In  some  in-
stances, the  two  sons  of  Philip,  who  mounted  the  throne  successively,
eluded  their  demands ;  in  others,  they  were  obliged  to  make  conces-
sions. Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  551.  557.  561.  573. The  ordonances  to
which  I  here  refer  are  of  such  length  that  I  cannot  insert  them,  but
they  are  extremely  curious,  and  may  be  peculiarly  instructive  to  an
English  reader,  as  they  throw  considerable  light  on  that  period  of
English  history,  in  which  the  attempts  to  circumscribe  the  regal
prerogative  were  carried  on,  not  by  the  people  struggling  for  liberty,
but  by  the  nobles  contending  for  power. It  is  not  necessary  to
produce  any  evidence  of  the  continuance  and  frequency  of  private
wars  under  the  successors  of  Philip  the  Fair. — 9.  A  practice  some-
what similar  to  the  royal  truce  was  introduced,  in  order  to  strengthen
and  extend  it. Bonds  of  assurance, or  mutual  security, were
demanded  from the  parties  at  variance,  by  which  they  obliged
themselves  to  abstain  from  all  hostilities,  either  during  a  time  men-
tioned in  the  bond,  or  for  ever ;  and  became  subject  to  heavy
penalties,  if  they  violated this obligation. These  bonds were
sometimes  granted  voluntarily,  but  more  frequently  exacted  by  the
authority  of  the  civil  magistrate. Upon  a  petition  from  the  party
who  felt  himself  weakest,  the  magistrate  summoned  his  adversary

ILLUSTRATIONS.  243

to  appear  in  court,  and  obliged  him  to  give  him  a  bond  of  assu-
rance. If,  after  that,  he  committed  any  farther  hostilities,  he  became
subject  to  all  the  penalties  of  treason.  This  restraint  on  private
war  was  known  in  the  age  of  St.  Louis.  Establissemens,  liv.  i.  c.  28.
It  was  frequent  in  Bretagne ;  and  what  is  very  remarkable,  such
bonds  of  assurance  were  given  mutually  between  vassals  and  the
lord  of  whom  they  held.  Oliver  de  Clisson  grants  one  to  the  duke
of  Bretagne,  his  sovereign.  Morice  Mem.  pour  servir  de  preuves
a  1'Hist.  de  Bret.  torn.  i.  p.  846.  ii.  p.  371.  Many  examples  of  bonds
of  assurance  in  other  provinces  of  France  are  collected  by  Brussel,
torn.  ii.  p.  856.  The  nobles  of  Burgundy  remonstrated  against  this
practice,  and  obtained  exemption  from  it  as  an  encroachment  on  the
privileges  of  their  order.  Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  558.  This  mode  of
security  was  first  introduced  in  cities,  and  the  good  effects  of  it
having  been  felt  there,  was  extended  to  the  nobles.  See  Note  XVI,
— 10.  The  calamities  occasioned  by  private  wars  became  at  some
times  so  intolerable,  that  the  nobles  entered  into  voluntary  asso-
ciations, binding  themselves  to  refer  all  matters  in  dispute,  whether
concerning  civil  property,  or  points  of  honour,  to  the  determination
of  the  majority  of  the  associates.  Morice  Mem.  pour  servir  de
preuves  a  1'Hist.  de  Bret.  torn,  ii,  p.  728.— 11.  But  all  these  ex-
pedients proving  ineffectual,  Charles  VI.  A.  D.  1413,  issued  an
ordonance  expressly  prohibiting  private  wars  on  any  pretext  what-
soever, with  power  to  the  judge  ordinary  to  compel  all  persons  to
comply  with  this  injunction,  and  to  punish  such  as  should  prove
refractory  or  disobedient,  by  imprisoning  their  persons,  seizing  their
goods,  and  appointing  the  officers  of  justice,  Mangeurs  et  Gasteurs,
to  live  at  free  quarters  on  their  estate.  If  those  who  were  dis-
obedient to  this  edict  could  not  be  personally  arrested,  he  appointed
their  friends  and  vassals  to  be  seized,  and  detained  until  they  gave
surety  for  keeping  the  peace;  and  he  abolished  all  laws,  customs,  or
privileges  which  might  be  pleaded  in  opposition  to  this  ordonance.
Ordon.  torn.  x.  p,  138.  How  slow  is  the  progress  of  reason  and  of
civil  .order !  Regulations  which  to  us  appear  so  equitable,  obvious,
and  simple,  required  the  efforts  of  civil  and  ecclesiastical  authority,
during  several  centuries,  to  introduce  and  establish  them.  Even
posterior  to  this  period,  Louis  XI.  was  obliged  to  abolish  private
wars  in  Dauphine,  by  a  particular  edict,  A.  D.  1451.  Du  Cange
Dissert,  p.  348.

This  note  would  swell  to  a  disproportionate  bulk,  if  I  should  atr
tempt  to  inquire  with  the  same  minute  attention  into  the  progress
of  this  pernicious  custom  in  the  other  countries  of  Europe.  In
England,  the  ideas  of  the  Saxons  concerning  personal  revenge,  the
right  of  private  wars,  and  the  composition  due  to  the  party  offended,
seem  to  have  been  much  the  same  with  those  which  prevailed  on

R2

244  PROOFS AND

the  continent.  The  law  of  Ina  de  vindicantibus,  in  the  eighth  cen-
tury, Lamb.  p.  3 ;  those  of  Edmund  in  the  tenth  century,  de  homici-
dio,  Lamb,  p.  72,  et  de  inimicitiis,  p.  76  ;  and  those  of  Edward  the
Confessor,  in  the  eleventh  century,  de  temporibus  et  diebus  pads,  or
Treuga  Dei,  Lamb.  p.  126,  are  perfectly  similar  to  the  ordinances
of  the  French  kings  their  contemporaries.  The  laws  of  Edward,
de  pace  regis,  are  still  more  explicit  than  those  of  the  French  mo-
narchs,  and,  by  several  provisions  in  them,  discover  that  a  more
perfect  police  was  established  in  England  at  that  period.  Lam-
bard,  p.  128.  fol.  vers.  Even  after  the  Conquest,  private  wars,  and
the  regulations  for  preventing  them,  were  not  altogether  unknown,
as  appears  from  Madox  Formulare  Anglicanum,  N°  CXLV.  and
from  the  extracts  from  Domesday  Book,  published  by  Gale,  Scrip  -
tores  Hist.  Britan.  p.  759.  777.  The  well  known  clause  in  the  form
of  an  English  indictment,  which,  as  an  aggravation  of  the  criminal's
guilt,  mentions  his  having  assaulted  a  person  who  was  in  the  peace
of  God  and  of  the  king,  seems  to  be  borrowed  from  the  Treuga  or
Pax  Dei,  and  the  Pax  Regis,  which  I  have  explained.  But  after  the
conquest,  the  mention  of  private  wars  among  the  nobility  occurs
more  rarely  in  the  English  history,  than  in  that  of  any  other  Euro-
pean nation,  and  no  laws  concerning  them  are  to  be -found  in  the
body  of  their  statutes.  Such  a  change  in  their  own  manners,  and
such  a  variation  from  those  of  their  neighbours,  is  remarkable.  Is
it  to  be  ascribed  to  the  extraordinary  power  that  William  the  Nor-
man acquired  by  right  of  conquest,  and  transmitted  to  his  succes-
sors, which  rendered  the  execution  of  justice  more  vigorous  and  de-
cisive, and  the  jurisdiction  of  the  king's  court  more  extensive  than
under  the  monarchs  on  the  continent  ?  Or,  was  it  owing  to  the
settlement  of  the  Normans  in  England,  who,  having  never  adopted
the  practice  of  private  war  in  their  own  country,  abolished  it  in  the
kingdom  which  they  conquered  ?  It  is  asserted  in  an  ordonance  of
John,  king  of  France,  that  in  all  times  past,  persons  of  every  rank
in  Normandy  have  been  permitted  to  wage  private  war,  and  the
practice  has  been  deemed  unlawful.  Ordon.  torn.  ii.  p.  407.  If
this  fact  were  certain,  it  would  go  far  towards  explaining  the  pecu-
liarity which  I  have  mentioned.  But  as  there  are  some  English
Acts  of  Parliament,  which,  according  to  the  remark  of  the  learned
author  of  the  Observations  on  the  Statutes,  chiefly  the  more  ancient,
recite  falsehoods,  it  may  be  added,  that  this  is  not  peculiar  to  the
laws  of  that  country.  Notwithstanding  the  positive  assertion  con-
tained in  this  public  law  of  France,  there  is  good  reason  for  con-
sidering it  as  a  statute  which  recites  a  falsehood.  This,  however,
is  not  the  place  for  discussing  that  point.  It  is  an  inquiry  not  un-
worthy the  curiosity  of  an  English  antiquary.

In  Castile,  the  pernicious  practice  of  private  war  prevailed,  and

ILLUSTRATIONS.  245

was  authorized  by  the  customs  and  law  of  the  kingdom.  Leges
Tauri,  tit.  76.  cum  commentario  Anton.  Gomezii,  p.  551.  As  the
Castilian  nobles  were  no  less  turbulent  than  powerful,  their  quarrels
and  hostilities  involved  their  country  in  many  calamities.  Innu-
merable proofs  of  this  occur  in  Mariana.  In  Aragon,  the  right  of
private  revenge  was  likewise  authorized  by  law ;  exercised  in  its
full  extent,  and  accompanied  with  the  same  unhappy  consequences.
Hieron.  Blanca  Comment,  de  Rebus  Arag.  ap.  Schotti  Hispan.
illustrat.  vol.  iii.  p.  733.  Lex  Jacobi  I.  A.  D.  1247.  Fueros  et
Observancias  del  Reyno  de  Aragon,  lib.  ix.  p.  182.  Several  con-
federacies between  the  kings  of  Aragon  and  their  nobles,  for  the
restoring  of  peace,  founded  on  the  truce  of  God,  are  still  extant.
Petr.  de  Marca,  Marco,  sive  Limes  Hispanic.  App.  1303.  1388.
1428.  As  early  as  the  year  1165,  we  find  a  combination  of  the
king  and  court  of  Aragon,  in  order  to  abolish  the  right  of  private
war,  and  to  punish  those  who  presumed  to  claim  that  privilege.
Anales  de  Aragon  por  Zurita,  vol.  i.  p.  73.  But  the  evil  was  so
inveterate,  that,  as  late  as  A.  D.  1519,  Charles  V.  was  obliged  to
publish  a  law  enforcing  all  former  regulations  tending  to  suppress
this  practice.  Fueros  et  Observanc.  lib.  ix.  183.  b.

The  Lombards,  and  other  northern  nations  who  settled  in  Italy,
introduced  the  same  maxims  concerning  the  right  of  revenge  into
that  country,  and  these  were  followed  by  the  same  effects.  As  the
progress  of  the  evil  was  perfectly  similar  to  what  happened  in
France,  the  expedients  employed  to  check  its  career,  or  to  extirpate
it  finally,  resembled  those  which  I  have  enumerated.  Murat.  Ant.
Ital.  vol.  ii.  p.  306,  &c.

In  Germany,  the  disorders  and  calamities  occasioned  by  the
right  of  private  war,  were  greater  and  more  intolerable  than  in  any
other  country  of  Europe.  The  imperial  authority  was  so  much
shaken  and  enfeebled  by  the  violence  of  the  civil  wars  excited  by
the  contests  between  the  popes  and  the  emperors  of  the  Franconian
and  Suabian  lines,  that  not  only  the  nobility,  but  the  cities  acquired
almost  independent  power,  and  scorned  all  subordination  and  obe-
dience to  the  laws.  The  frequency  of  these  faidce,  or  private  wars,
is  often  mentioned  in  the  German  annals,  and  the  fatal  effects  of
them  are  most  pathetically  described,  Datt.  de  Pace  Imper.  pub.
lib.  i.  cap.  v.  N°  30.  et  passim.  The  Germans  early  adopted  the
Treuga  Dei,  which  was  first  established  in  France.  This,  however,
proved  but  a  temporary  and  ineffectual  remedy.  The  disorders
multiplied  so  fast,  and  grew  to  be  so  enormous,  that  they  threatened
the  dissolution  of  society,  and  compelled  the  Germans  to  have  re-
course to  the  only  remedy  of  the  evil,  viz.  an  absolute  prohibition  of
private  wars.  The  emperor  William  published  his  edict  to  this
purpose,  A.  D.  1255,  a  hundred  and  sixty  years  previous  to  the

246  PROOFS AND

ordonance  of  Charles  VI.  in  France.  Datt.  lib.  i.  cap.  4.  N°  20.
But  neither  he  nor  his  successors  had  authority  to  secure  the  ob-
servance of  it.  This  gave  rise  to  a  practice  in  Germany,  which  con-
veys to  us  a  striking  idea  both  of  the  intolerable  calamities  occa-
sioned by  private  wars,  and  of  the  feebleness  of  government  dur-
ing the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries.  The  cities  and  nobles
entered  into  alliances  and  associations,  by  which  they  bound  them-
selves to  maintain  the  public  peace,  and  to  make  war  on  such  as
should  violate  it.  This  was  the  origin  of  the  league  of  the  Rhine,
of  Suabia,  and  of  many  smaller  confederacies  distinguished  by  va-
rious names.  The  rise,  progress,  and  beneficial  effects  of  these
associations  are  traced  by  Datt,  with  great  accuracy.  Whatever
degree  of  public  peace  or  of  regular  administration  was  preserved
in  the  empire  from  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth  century  to  the  close
of  the  fifteenth,  Germany  owes  to  these  leagues.  During  that  pe-
riod, political  order,  respect  for  the  laws,  together  with  the  equal
administration  of  justice,  made  considerable  progress  in  Germany.
But  the  final  and  perpetual  abolition  of  the  right  of  private  war  was
not  accomplished  until  A.  D.  1495.  The  imperial  authority  was,
by  that  time,  more  firmly  established ;  the  ideas  of  men  with  re-
spect to  government  and  subordination  were  become  more  just.
That  barbarous  and  pernicious  privilege  of  waging  private  war,
which  the  nobles  had  so  long  possessed,  was  declared  to  be  incom-
patible with  the  happiness  and  existence  of  society.  In  order  to
terminate  any  differences  which  might  arise  among  the  various
members  of  the  Germanic  body,  the  imperial  chamber  was  instituted
with  supreme  jurisdiction,  to  judge  without  appeal  in  every  question
brought  before  it.  That  court  has  subsisted  since  that  period,
forming  a  very  respectable  tribunal  of  essential  importance  in  the
German  constitution.  Datt.  lib.  iii.  iv.  v.  Pfeffel  Abrege  de
1'Histoire  du  Droit,  &c.  p.  556.

Note  XXII. Sect.  I.  p.  60.

IT  would  be  tedious,  and  of  little  use,  to  enumerate  the  various
modes  of  appealing  to  the  justice  of  God,  which  superstition  intro-
duced during  the  ages  of  ignorance.  I  shall  mention  only  one,  be-
cause we  have  an  account  of  it  in  a  placitum,  or  trial,  in  the  pre-
sence of  Charlemagne,  from  which  we  may  learn  the  imperfect
manner  in  which  justice  was  administered  even  during  his  reign.
In  the  year  775,  a  contest  arose  between  the  bishop  of  Paris  and
the  abbot  of  St.  Denys,  concerning  the  property  of  a  small  abbey.
Each  of  them  exhibited  deeds  and  records,  in  order  to  prove  the
Tight  to  be  in  them.  Instead  of  trying  the  authenticity,  or  con-
sidering the  import  of  these,  the  point  was  referred  to  the  judicium

ILLUSTRATIONS.  247

cruets.  Each  produced  a  person,  who,  during  the  celebration  of
mass,  stood  before  the  cross  with  his  arms  expanded;  and  he,  whose
representative  first  became  weary,  and  altered  his  posture,  lost  the
cause.  The  person  employed  by  the  bishop  on  this  occasion,  had
less  strength  or  less  spirit  than  his  adversary,  and  the  question  was
decided  in  favour  of  the  abbot.  Mabillon  de  Re  Diplomat,  lib.  vi.
p.  498.  If  a  prince  so  enlightened  as  Charlemagne,  countenanced
such  an  absurd  mode  of  decision,  it  is  no  wonder  that  other  mo-
narchs  should  tolerate  it  so  long.  M.  de  Montesquieu  has  treated
of  the  trial  by  judicial  combat  at  considerable  length.  The  two  ta-
lents which  distinguish  that  illustrious  author,  industry  in  tracing  all
the  circumstances  of  ancient  and  obscure  institutions,  and  sagacity
in  penetrating  into  the  causes  and  principles  which  contributed  to
establish  them,  are  equally  conspicuous  in  his  observations  on  this
subject.  To  these  I  refer  the  reader,  as  they  contain  most  of  the
principles  by  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  explain  this  practice.
De  1'Esprit  des  Loix,  lib.  xxviii.  It  seems  to  be  probable  from  the
remarks  of  M.  de  Montesquieu,  as  well  as  from  the  facts  produced
by  Muratori,  torn.  iii.  Dissert,  xxxviii.  that  appeals  to  the  justice  of
God  by  the  experiments  with  fire  and  water,  &c.  were  frequent
among  the  people  who  settled  in  the  different  provinces  of  the  Ro-
man empire,  before  they  had  recourse  to  the  judicial  combat ;  and
yet  the  judicial  combat  seems  to  have  been  the  most  ancient  mode
of  terminating  any  controversy  among  the  barbarous  nations  in  their
original  settlements.  This  is  evident  from  Velleius  Paterculus.
lib.  ii.  c.  118.  who  informs  us,  that  all  questions  which  were  de-
cided among  the  Romans  by  legal  trial,  were  terminated  among
the  Germans  by  arms.  The  same  thing  appears  in  the  ancient  laws
and  customs  of  the  Swedes,  quoted  by  Jo.  O.  Stiernhbok  de  jure
Sueonum  et  Gothorum  vetusto,  4to.  Holmise,  1682,  lib.  i.  c.  7.  It
is  probable  that  when  the  various  tribes  which  invaded  the  empire
were  converted  to  Christianity,  their  ancient  custom  of  allowing
judicial  combats  appeared  so  glaringly  repugnant  to  the  precepts
of  religion,  that,  for  some  time,  it  was  abolished,  and,  by  degrees,
several  circumstances  which  I  hare  mentioned,  led  them  to
resume  it.

It  seems  likewise  to  be  probable  from  a  law  quoted  by  Stiernhook
in  the  treatise  which  I  have  mentioned,  that  the  judicial  combat  was
originally  permitted,  in  order  to  determine  points  respecting  the
personal  character  or  reputation  of  individuals,  and  was  afterward
extended  not  only  to  criminal  cases,  but  to  questions  concerning
property.  The  words  of  the  law  are,  "If  any  man  shall  say  to
another  these  reproachful  words,  *  you  are  not  a  man  equal  to  other
men,'  or,  *  you  have  not  the  heart  of  a  man/  and  the  other  shall
reply,  '  I  am  a  man  as  good  as  you/  let  them  meet  on  the  high-

248  PROOFS AND

way.  If  he  who  first  gave  offence  appear  and  the  person  offended
absent  himself,  let  the  latter  be  deemed  a  worse  man  even  than  he
was  called  ;  let  him  not  be  admitted  to  give  evidence  in  judgment
either  for  man  or  woman,  and  let  him  not  have  the  privilege  of
making  a  testament.  If  he  who  gave  the  offence  be  absent,  and
only  the  person  offended  appear,  let  him  call  upon  the  other  thrice
with  a  loud  voice,  and  make  a  mark  upon  the  earth,  and  then  let
him  who  absented  himself  be  deemed  infamous,  because  he  uttered
words  which  he  durst  not  support.  If  both  shall  appear  properly
armed,  and  the  person  offended  shall  fall  in  the  combat,  let  a  half
compensation  be  paid  for  his  death.  But  if  the  person  who  gave
the  offence  shall  fall,  let  it  be  imputed  to  his  own  rashness.  The
petulance  of  his  tongue  hath  been  fatal  to  him.  Let  him  lie  in
the  field  without  any  compensation  being  demanded  for  his  death."
Lex  Uplandica,  ap.  Stiern.  p.  76.  Martial  people  were  extremely
delicate  with  respect  to  every  thing  that  affected  their  reputation  as
soldiers.  By  the  laws  of  the  Salians,  if  any  man  called  another  a
hare,  or  accused  him  of  having  left  his  shield  in  the  field  of  battle,
he  was  ordained  to  pay  a  large  fine.  Leg.  Sal.  tit.  xxxii.  §  4.  6.
By  the  law  of  the  Lombards,  if  any  one  called  another  arga,  i.  e.  a
good-for-nothing  fellow,  he  might  immediately  challenge  him  to
combat.  Leg.  Longob.  lib.  i.  tit.  v.  §  1.  By  the  law  of  the  Salians,
if  one  called  another  cenitus,  a  term  of  reproach  equivalent  to  arga,
he  was  bound  to  pay  a  very  high  fine.  Tit.  xxxii.  §  1.  Paulus
Diaconus  relates  the  violent  impression  which  this  reproachful  ex-
pression made  upon  one  of  his  countrymen,  and  the  fatal  effects
with  which  it  was  attended.  De  Gestis  Longobard.  liv.  vi.  c.  34.
Thus  the  ideas  concerning  the  point  of  honour,  which  we  are  apt
to  consider  as  a  modern  refinement,  as  well  as  the  practice  of
duelling,  to  which  it  gave  rise,  are  derived  from  the  notions  of  our
ancestors  while  in  a  state  of  society  very  little  improved.

As  M.  de  Montesquieu's  view  of  this  subject  did  not  lead  him  to
consider  every  circumstance  relative  to  judicial  combats,  I  shall
mention  some  particular  facts  necessary  for  the  illustration  of  what
I  have  said  with  respect  to  them.  A  remarkable  instance  occurs
of  the  decision  of  an  abstract  point  of  law  by  combat.  A  question
arose  in  the  tenth  century  concerning  the  right  of  representation,
which  was  not  then  fixed,  though  now  universally  established  in
every  part  of  Europe.  "  It  was  a  matter  of  doubt  and  dispute  (saith
the  historian)  whether  the  sons  of  a  son  ought  to  be  reckoned  among
the  children  of  the  family,  and  succeed  equally  with  their  uncles,  if
their  father  happened  to  die  while  their  grandfather  was  alive.  An
assembly  was  called  to  deliberate  on  this  point,  and  it  was  the
general  opinion  that  it  ought  to  be  remitted  to  the  examination  and
decision  of  judges.  But  the  emperor  following  a  better  course,

ILLUSTRATIONS.  249

and  desirous  of  dealing  honourably  with  his  people  and  nobles,  ap-
pointed the  matter  to  be  decided  by  battle  between  two  champions.
He  who  appeared  in  behalf  of  the  right  of  children  to  represent
their  deceased  father  was  victorious ;  and  it  was  established,  by  a
perpetual  decree,  that  they  should  hereafter  share  in  the  inheritance
together  with  their  uncles." Wittickindus  Corbiensis,  lib.  Annal.
ap.  M.  de  Lauriere  Pref.  Ordon.  vol.  i.  p.  xxxiii. If  we  can  sup-
pose the  caprice  of  folly  to  lead  men  to  any  action  more  extravagant
than  this  of  settling  a  point  in  law  by  combat,  it  must  be  that  of
referring  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  a  religious  opinion  to  be  decided
in  the  same  manner. To  the  disgrace  of  human  reason,  it  has  been
capable  even  of  this  extravagance. A  question  was  agitated  in
Spain  in  the  eleventh  century,  whether  the  Musarabic  Liturgy  and
ritual  which  had  been  used  in  the  churches  of  Spain,  or  that  ap-
proved of  by  the  see  of  Rome,  which  differed  in  many  particulars  from
the  other,  contained  the  form  of  worship  most  acceptable  to  the
Deity. The  Spaniards  contended  zealously  for  the  ritual  of  their
ancestors. The  popes  urged  them  to  receive  that  to  which  they
had  given  their  infallible  sanction. A  violent  contest  arose. The
nobles  proposed  to  decide  the  controversy  by  the  sword. The  king
approved  of  this  method  of  decision. Two  knights  in  complete
armour  entered  the  list. John  Ruys  de  Matanca,  the  champion  of
the  Musarabic  Liturgy,  was  victorious. But  the  queen  and  arch-
bishop of  Toledo,  who  favoured  the  other  form,  insisted  on  having
the  matter  submitted  to  another  trial,  and  had  interest  enough  to
prevail  in  a  request,  inconsistent  with  the  laws  of  combat,  which
being  considered  as  an  appeal  to  God,  the  decision  ought  to  have
been  acquiesced  in  as  final. A  great  fire  was  kindled. A  copy  of
each  Liturgy  was  cast  into  the  flames. It  was  agreed  that  the  book
which  stood  this  proof,  and  remained  untouched,  should  be  received
in  all  the  churches  of  Spain. The  Musarabic  Liturgy  triumphed
likewise  in  this  trial,  and  if  we  may  believe  Roderigo  de  Toledo,
remained  unhurt  by  the  fire,  when  the  other  was  reduced  to  ashes.
The  queen  and  archbishop  had  power  or  art  sufficient  to  elude  this
decision  also,  and  the  use  of  the  Musarabic  form  of  devotion  was
permitted  only  in  certain  churches. A  determination  no  less  ex-
traordinary than  the  whole  transaction. Roder.  de  Toledo,  quoted
by  P.  Orleans,  Hist,  de  Revol.  d'Espagne,  torn.  i.  p.  217. Mariana,
lib.  i.  c.  18.  vol.  i.  p.  378. — A  remarkable  proof  of  the  general  use
of  trial  by  combat,  and  of  the  predilection  for  that  mode  of  decision,
occurs  in  the  laws  of  the  Lombards. It  was  a  custom  in  the  mid-
dle ages,  that  any  person  might  signify  publicly  the  law  to  which  he
chose  to  be  subjected ;  and  by  the  prescriptions  of  that  law  he  was
obliged  to  regulate  his  transactions,  without  being  bound  to  comply
with  any  practice  authorized  by  other  codes  of  law. Persons  who

250  PROOFS AND

had  subjected  themselves  to  the  Roman  law,  and  adhered  to  the
ancient  jurisprudence,  as  far  as  any  knowledge  of  it  was  retained  in
those  ages  of  ignorance,  were  exempted  from  paying  any  regard  to
the  forms  of  proceedings  established  by  the  laws  of  the  Burgun-
dians,  Lombards,  and  other  barbarous  people.  But  the  emperor
Otho,  in  direct  contradiction  to  this  received  maxim,  ordained,
*'  That  all  persons,  under  whatever  law  they  lived,  even  although  it
were  the  Roman  law,  should  be  bound  to  conform  to  the  edicts  con-
cerning the  trial  by  combat."  Leg.  Longob.  lib.  ii.  tit.  55.  §  38.
While  the  trial  by  judicial  combat  subsisted,  proof  by  charters,  con-
tracts, or  other  deeds,  became  ineffectual ;  and  even  this  species  of
written  evidence,  calculated  to  render  the  proceedings  of  courts
certain  and  decisive,  was  eluded.  When  a  charter  or  other  in-
strument was  produced  by  one  of  the  parties,  his  opponent  might
challenge  it,  affirm  that  it  was  false  and  forged,  and  offer  to  prove
this  by  combat.  Leg,  Longob.  ibid.  §  34.  It  is  true,  that  among
the  reasons  enumerated  by  Beaumanoir,  on  account  of  which  judges
might  refuse  to  permit  a  trial  by  combat,  one  is,  "  If  the  point  in
contest  can  be  clearly  proved  or  ascertained  by  other  evidenced
Coust,  de  Beauv.  ch.  63,  p.  325.  But  that  regulation  removed  the
evil  only  a  single  step.  For  the  party  who  suspected  that  a  witness
was  about  to  depose  in  a  manner  unfavourable  to  his  cause,  might
accuse  him  of  being  suborned,  give  him  the  lie,  and  challenge  him
to  combat ;  if  the  witness  was  vanquished  in  battle,  no  other  evi-
dence could  be  admitted,  and  the  party  by  whom  he  was  summoned
to  appear  lost  his  cause.  Leg,  Baivar.  tit,  16.  §  2,  Leg.  Burgund.
tit.  45.  Beauman.  ch.  61,  p.  315.  The  reason  given  for  obliging
a  witness  to  accept  of  a  defiance,  and  to  defend  himself  by  combat,
is  remarkable,  and  contains  the  same  idea  which  is  still  the  founda-
tion of  what  is  called  the  point  of  honour ;  u  for  it  is  just,  that  if
any  one  affirms  that  he  perfectly  knows  the  truth  of  any  thing,  and
offers  to  give  oath  upon  it,  that  he  should  not  hesitate  to  maintain
the  veracity  of  his  affirmation  in  combat."  Leg,  Burgund.  tit.  45,

That  the  trial  by  judicial  combat  was  established  in  every  country
of  Europe,  is  a  fact  well  known,  and  requires  no  proof.  That  this
mode  of  decision  was  frequent,  appears  not  only  from  the  codes  of
ancient  laws  which  established  it,  but  from  the  earliest  writers  con-
cerning the  practice  of  law  in  the  different  nations  of  Europe.
They  treat  of  this  custom  at  great  length  ;  they  enumerate  the  re-
gulations concerning  it  with  minute  accuracy ;  and  explain  them
with  much  solicitude.  It  made  a  capital  and  extensive  article  in
jurisprudence.  There  is  not  any  one  subject  in  their  system  of  law
which  Beaumanoir,  Defontaines,  or  the  compilers  of  the  Assises  de
Jerusalem,  seem  to  have  considered  as  of  greater  importance ;  and
none  upon  which  they  have  bestowed  so  much  attention.  The

ILLUSTRATIONS.  251

same  observation  will  hold  with  respect  to  the  early  authors  of  other
nations.  It  appears  from  Madox,  that  trials  of  this  kind  were  so
frequent  in  England,  that  fines,  paid  on  these  occasions,  made  no
inconsiderable  branch  of  the  king's  revenue.  Hist,  of  the  Excheq.
vol,  i.  p,  349.  A  very  curious  account  of  a  judicial  combat  between
Mesire  Robert  de  Beaumanoir,  and  Mesire  Pierre  Tournemine,  in
presence  of  the  duke  of  Bretagne,  A.  D.  1385,  is  published  by
Morice  Mem.  pour  servir  de  preuves  a  1'Hist,  de  Bretagne,  torn,  ii.
p.  498.  All  the  formalities  observed  in  such  extraordinary  pro-
ceedings are  there  described  more  minutely,  than  in  any  ancient
monument  which  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of  considering.  Tour-
nemine was  accused  by  Beaumanoir  of  having  murdered  his  brother.
The  former  was  vanquished,  but  was  saved  from  being  hanged  upon
the  spot,  by  the  generous  intercession  of  his  antagonist.  A  good
account  of  the  origin  of  the  laws  concerning  judicial  combat  is
published  in  the  history  of  Pavia,  by  Bernardo  Sacci,  lib,  ix.  c,  8.
in  Greev,  Thes.  Antiquit.  Ital,  vol.  iii.  743.

This  mode  of  trial  was  so  acceptable,  that  ecclesiastics,  notwith-
standing the  prohibitions  of  the  church,  were  constrained  not  only
to  connive  at  the  practice,  but  to  authorize  it.  A  remarkable  in-
stance of  this  is  produced  by  Pasquier  Recherches,  lib.  iv.  ch.  i.
p.  350.  The  abbot  Wittikindus,  whose  words  I  have  produced  in
this  Note,  considered  the  determination  of  a  point  in  law  by  com-
bat, as  the  best  and  most  honourable  mode  of  decision.  In  the
year  978,  a  judicial  combat  was  fought  in  the  presence  of  the
emperor.  The  archbishop  Aldebert  advised  him  to  terminate  a
contest  which  had  arisen  between  two  noblemen  of  his  court,  by
this  mode  of  decision.  The  vanquished  combatant,  though  a  person
of  high  rank,  was  beheaded  on  the  spot.  Chronic.  Ditmari  Episc,
Mersb,  chez  Bouquet  Recueil  des  Hist.  torn,  x,  p,  121,  Questions
concerning  the  property  of  churches  and  monasteries,  were  decided
by  combat.  In  the  year  961,  a  controversy  concerning  the  church
of  St.  Medard,  whether  it  belonged  to  the  abbey  of  Beaulieu  or  not,
was  terminated  by  judicial  combat.  Bouquet  Recueil  des  Hist,
torn.  ix.  p.  729.  Ibid.  p.  612,  &c.  The  emperor  Henry  I.  declares,
that  this  law,  authorizing  the  practice  of  judicial  combats,  was  en-
acted with  consent  and  applause  of  many  faithful  bishops.  Ibid,
p,  231.  So  remarkably  did  the  martial  ideas  of  those  ages  prevail
over  the  genius  and  maxims  of  the  canon  law,  which  in  other  in-
stances was  in  the  highest  credit  and  authority  with  ecclesiastics.
A  judicial  combat  was  appointed  in  Spain,  by  Charles  V.,  A,D.  1522.
The  combatants  fought  in  the  emperor's  presence,  and  the  battle
was  conducted  with  all  the  rites  prescribed  by  the  ancient  laws  of
chivalry.  The  whole  transaction  is  described  at  great  length  by
Pontus  Heuterus  Rer.  Austriac.  lib.  viii,  c.  17.  p.  205.

252  PROOFS  AND

The  last  instance  which  occurs  in  the  history  of  France,  of  a
judicial  combat  authorized  by  the  magistrate,  was  the  famous  one
between  M.  Jarnac  and  M,  de  la  Chaistaignerie,  A.  D.  1547.  A
trial  by  combat  was  appointed  in  England  A.  D.  1571,  under  the
inspection  of  the  judges  in  the  court  of  common  pleas  ;  and  though
it  was  not  carried  to  the  same  extremity  with  the  former,  queen
Elizabeth  having  interposed  her  authority,  and  enjoined  the  parties
to  compound  the  matter,  yet,  in  order  to  preserve  their  honour,  the
lists  were  marked  out,  and  all  the  forms  previous  to  the  combat
were  observed  with  much  ceremony.  Spelm.  Gloss,  voc.  Campus,
p.  103.  In  the  year  1631,  a  judicial  combat  was  appointed  between
Donald  Lord  Rea,  and  David  Ramsay,  Esq.  by  the  authority  of  the
lord  high  constable,  and  earl  marshal  of  England  ;  but  that  quarrel
likewise  terminated  without  bloodshed,  being  accommodated  by
Charles  I.  Another  instance  occurs  seven  years  later.  Rush-
worth  in  Observations  on  the  Statutes,  &c.  p,  266.

Note  XXIII. Sect.  I.  p.  65.

THE  text  contains  the  great  outlines  which  mark  the  course  of
private  and  public  jurisdiction  in  the  several  nations  of  Europe.
I  shall  here  follow  more  minutely  the  various  steps  of  this  progress,
as  the  matter  is  curious  and  important  enough  to  merit  this  atten-
tion. The  payment  of  a  fine  by  way  of  satisfaction  to  the  person  or
family  injured,  was  the  first  device  of  a  rude  people,  in  order  to
check  the  career  of  private  resentment,  and  to  extinguish  those
faidce,  or  deadly  feuds,  which  were  prosecuted  among  them  with
the  utmost  violence.  This  custom  may  be  traced  back  to  the
ancient  Germans,  Tacit,  de  Morib.  Germ,  c,  21.  and  prevailed
among  other  uncivilized  nations.  Many  examples  of  this  are  col-
lected by  the  ingenious  and  learned  author  of  Historical  Law  Tracts,
vol.  i.  p.  41,  These  fines  were  ascertained  and  levied  in  three
different  manners.  At  first  they  were  settled  by  voluntary  agree-
ment between  the  parties  at  variance.  When  their  rage  began  to
subside,  and  they  felt  the  bad  effects  of  their  continuing  in  enmity,
they  came  to  terms  of  concord,  and  the  satisfaction  made  was  called
a  composition,  implying  that  it  was  fixed  by  mutual  consent.  De
TEsprit  des  Loix,  lib.  xxx.  c.  19.  It  is  apparent  from  some  of  the
more  ancient  codes  of  laws,  that  at  the  time  when  these  were  com-
piled, matters  still  remained  in  that  simple  state.  In  certain  cases,
the  person  who  had  committed  an  offence,  was  left  exposed  to  the
resentment  of  those  whom  he  had  injured,  until  he  should  recover
their  favour,  quoquo  modo  potuerit.  Lex  Frision.  tit.  1 1.  §  1.  The
next  mode  of  levying  these  fines  was  by  the  sentence  of  arbiters.
An  arbiter  is  called  in  the  Regium  Majestatum  amicabilis  compositor*

ILLUSTRATIONS.  253

lib.  xi.  c.  4.  §  10.  He  could  estimate  the  degree  of  offence  with
more  impartiality  than  the  parties  interested,  and  determine  with
greater  equity  what  satisfaction  ought  to  be  demanded.  It  is
difficult  to  bring  an  authentic  proof  of  a  custom  previous  to  the  re-
cords preserved  in  any  nation  of  Europe.  But  one  of  the  Formulae
Andegavenses  compiled  in  the  sixth  century,  seems  to  allude  to  a
transaction  carried  on  not  by  the  authority  of  a  judge,  but  by  the
mediation  of  arbiters  chosen  by  mutual  consent.  Bouquet  Recueil
des  Histor.  torn.  iv.  p.  566.  But  as  an  arbiter  wanted  authority  to
enforce  his  decisions,  judges  were  appointed  with  compulsive  power
to  oblige  both  parties  to  acquiesce  in  their  decisions.  Previous  to
this  last  step,  the  expedient  of  paying  compositions  was  an  imperfect
remedy  against  the  pernicious  effects  of  private  resentment.  As
soon  as  this  important  change  was  introduced,  the  magistrate,
putting  himself  in  place  of  the  person  injured,  ascertained  the
composition  with  which  he  ought  to  rest  satisfied.  Every  possible
injury  that  could  occur  in  the  intercourse  of  civil  society  was  con-
sidered, and  estimated,  and  the  compositions  due  to  the  person
aggrieved  were  fixed  with  such  minute  attention  as  discovers,  in
most  cases,  amazing  discernment  and  delicacy,  in  some  instances
unaccountable  caprice.  Besides  the  composition  payable  to  the
private  party,  a  certain  sum  called  a  fredum,  was  paid  to  the  king
or  state,  as  Tacitus  expresses  it,  or  to  the  fiscus,  in  the  language  of
the  barbarous  laws.  Some  authors,  blending  the  refined  ideas  of
modern  policy  with  their  reasonings  concerning  ancient  transac-
tions, have  imagined  that  the  fredum  was  a  compensation  due  to
the  community,  on  account  of  the  violation  of  the  public  peace.
But  it  is  manifestly  nothing  more  than  the  price  paid  to  the  ma-
gistrate for  the  protection  which  he  afforded  against  the  violence  of
resentment.  The  enacting  of  this  was  a  considerable  step  towards
improvement  in  criminal  jurisprudence.  In  some  of  the  more
ancient  codes  of  laws,  thefreda  are  altogether  omitted,  or  so  seldom
mentioned,  that  it  is  evident  they  were  but  little  known.  In  the
latter  codes,  the  fredum  is  as  precisely  specified  as  the  composition.
In  common  cases  it  was  equal  to  the  third  part  of  the  composition.
Capitul.  vol.  i.  p.  52.  In  some  extraordinary  cases,  where  it  was
more  difficult  to  protect  the  person  who  had  committed  violence,
the  fredum  was  augmented.  Capitul.  vol.  i.  p.  515.  These  freda
made  a  considerable  branch  in  the  revenues  of  the  barons  ;  and  in
whatever  district  territorial  jurisdiction  was  granted,  the  royal
judges  were  prohibited  from  levying  any /recto.  In  explaining  the
nature  of  the  fredum,  I  have  followed,  in  a  great  measure,  the  opi-
nion of  M.  de  Montesquieu,  though  I  know  that  several  learned
antiquaries  have  taken  the  word  in  a  different  sense.  De  1'Esprit
des  Loix,  liv.  xxx.  c.  20>  &c.  The  great  object  of  judges,  was  to

254  PROOFS AND

compel  the  one  party  to  give,  and  the  other  to  accept  the  satisfac-
tion prescribed. They  multiplied  regulations  to  this  purpose,  and
enforced  them  by  grievous  penalties. Leg.  Longob.  lib.  i.  tit.  9.
§  34.  Ibid.  tit.  37.  §  I,  2. Capitul.  vol.  i.  p.  371.  §  22. The  per-
son who  received  a  composition  was  obliged  to  cease  from  all
farther  hostility,  and  to  confirm  his  reconciliation  with  the  adverse
party  by  an  oath. Leg.  Longob.  lib.  i.  tit.  9.  §  8. As  an  additional
and  more  permanent  evidence  of  reconciliation,  he  was  required  to
grant  a  bond  of  security  to  the  person  from  whom  he  received  a
composition,  absolving  him  from  all  farther  prosecution. Mar-
culfus,  and  the  other  collectors  of  ancient  writs,  have  preserved
several  different  forms  of  such  bonds. Marc.  lib.  xi.  §  18. Append.
§  23. Form.  Sirmondicae,  §  39. The  Letters  of  Slanes,  known  in
the  law  of  Scotland,  are  perfectly  similar  to  these  bonds  of  security.
By  the  Letters  of  Slanes,  the  heirs  and  relations  of  a  person  who
had  been,  murdered, bound  themselves in consideration of  an
Assythment  or  composition  paid  to  them  to  forgive,  "  pass  over,
and  for  ever  forget,  and  in  oblivion  enter,  all  rancour,  malice,  re-
venge, prejudice,  grudge,  and  resentment,  that  they  have  or  may
conceive  against  the  aggressor  or  his  posterity,  for  the  crime  which
he  had  committed,  and  discharge  him  of  all  action,  civil  or  criminal,
against  him  or  his  estate,  for  now  and  ever." System  of  Stiles  by
Dallas  of  St.  Martin's,  p.  862. In  the  ancient  form  of  Letters  of
Slanes,  the  private  party  not  only  forgives  and  forgets,  but  pardons
and  grants  remission  of  the  crime. This  practice,  Dallas,  reasoning
according  to  the  principles  of  his  own  age,  considers  as  an  .en-
croachment on  the  rights  of  sovereignty,  as  none,  says  he,  could  pardon
a  criminal  but  the  king.  Ibid. But  in  early  and  rude  times,  the
prosecution,  the  punishment,  and  the  pardon  of  criminals,  were  all
deeds  of  the  private  person  who  was  injured. Madox  has  published
two  writs,  one  in  the  reign  of  Edward  I.,  the  other  in  the  reign  of
Edward  III.,  by  which  private  persons  grant  a  release  or  pardon  of
all  trespasses,  felonies,  robberies,  and  murders  committed. Formul.
Anglican. N°  702.  705. In  the  last  of  these  instruments,  some
regard  seems  to  be  paid  to  the  rights  of  the  sovereign,  for  the  par-
don is  granted  en  quant  que  en  nous  est. Even  after  the  authority
of  the  magistrate  was  interposed  in  punishing  crimes,  the  punish-
ment of  criminals  is  long  considered  chiefly  as  a  gratification  to  the
resentment  of  the  persons  who  have  been  injured. In  Persia  a
murderer  is  still  delivered  to  the  relations  of  the  person  whom  he
has  slain,  who  put  him  to  death  with  their  own  hands. If  they  re-
fuse to  accept  of  a  sum  of  money  as  a  compensation,  the  sovereign,
absolute  as  he  is,  cannot  pardon  the  murderer. Voyages  de  Char-
din,  iii.  p.  417.  edit.  1735,  4to. Voyages  de  Tavernier,  liv.  5.  c.  5.
10. Among  the  Arabians,  though  one  of  the  first  polished  people

ILLUSTRATIONS.

255

in  the  East,  the  same  custom  still  subsists. Description  de  1'Arabie
par  M.  Niebuhr,  p.  28. By  a  law  in  the  kingdom  of  Aragon  as
late  as  the  year  1564,  the  punishment  of  one  condemned  to  death,
cannot  be  mitigated  but  by  consent  of  the  parties  who  have  been
injured. Fueros  et  Observancias  del  Reyno  de  Aragon,  p.  204.  6.
If,  after  all  the  engagements  to  cease  from  enmity  which  I  have
mentioned,  any  person  renewed  hostilities,  and  was  guilty  of  any
violence,  either  towards  the  person  from  whom  he  had  received  a
composition,  or  towards  his  relations  and  heirs,  this  was  deemed
a  most  heinous  crime,  and  punished  with  extraordinary  rigour. It
was  an  act  of  direct  rebellion  against  the  authority  of  the  magistrate,
and  was  repressed  by  the  interposition  of  all  his  power. Leg.  Lbn-
gob.  lib.  i.  tit.  9.  §  8.  34. Capit.  vol.i.  p.  371.  §  22. Thus  the
avenging  of  injuries  was  taken  out  of  private  hands,  a  legal  com-
position was  established,  and  peace  and  amity  were  restored  under
the  inspection,  and  by  the  authority  of  a  judge. It  is  evident,  that
at  the  time  when  the  barbarians  settled  in  the  provinces  of  the
Roman  empire,  they  had  fixed  judges  established  among  them  with
compulsive authority. Persons vested  with  this character  are
mentioned  by  the earliest  historians. Du  Cange.  voc.  Judices.
The  right  of  territorial  jurisdiction  was  not  altogether  a  usurpa-
tion of  the  feudal  barons,  or  an  invasion  of  the  prerogative  of  the
sovereign. There  is  good  reason to  believe,  that  the  powerful
leaders,  who  seized  different  districts  of  the  countries  which  they
conquered,  and  kept  possession  of  them  as  allodial  property,  as-
sumed from  the  beginning  the  right  of  jurisdiction,  and  exercised  it
within  their  own  territories. This  jurisdiction  was  supreme,  and
extended  to  all  causes. The  clearest  proofs  of  this  are  produced
by  M.  Bouquet. Le  Droit  publique  de  France  ecclairci,  &c.  torn.  i.
p.  206,  &c. The  privilege  of  judging  his  own  vassals,  appears  to
have  been  originally  a  right  inherent  in  every  baron  who  held  a  fief.
As  far  back  as  the  archives  of  nations  can  conduct  us  with  any  cer-
tainty, we  find  the  jurisdiction  and  fief  united. One  of  the  earliest
charters  to  a  layman  which  I  have  met  with,  is  that  of  Ludovicus
Pius,  A.  D.  814. And  it  contains  the  right  of  territorial  jurisdiction,
in  the  most  express  and  extensive  terms. Capitul.  vol.  ii.  p.  1405.
There  are  many  charters  to  churches  and  monasteries  of  a  more
early  date,  containing  grants  of  similar  jurisdiction,  and  prohibiting
any  royal  judge  to  enter  the  territories  of  those  churches  or  monas-
teries, or  to  perform  any  act  of  judicial  authority  there. Bouquet
Recueil  des  Hist.  torn.  iv.  p.  628.  631.  633.  torn.  v.  p.  703.,710.
752.  762. Muratori  has  published  many  very  ancient  charters
containing  the  same  immunities. Antiq. Ital.  Dissert.  Ixx. In
most  of  these  deeds,  the  royal  judge- is  prohibited  from  exacting
the  freda  due  to  the  possessor  of  territorial  jurisdiction,  which

256  PROOFS AND

shews  that  they  constituted  a  valuable  part  of  the  revenue  of  each
superior  lord  at  that  juncture.  The  expense  of  obtaining  a  sentence
in  a  court  of  justice  during  the  middle  ages  was  so  considerable,
that  this  circumstance  alone  was  sufficient  to  render  men  unwilling
to  decide  any  contest  in  judicial  form.  It  appears  from  a  charter
in  the  thirteenth  century,  that  the  baron  who  had  the  right  of  justice,
received  the  fifth  part  of  the  value  of  every  subject,  the  property  of
which  was  tried  and  determined  in  his  court.  If,  after  the  com-
mencement of  a  lawsuit,  the  parties  terminated  the  contest  in  an
amicable  manner,  or  by  arbitration,  they  were  nevertheless  bound  to
pay  the  fifth  part  of  the  subject  contested,  to  the  court  before  which
the  suit  had  been  brought.  Hist,  de  Dauphine,  Geneve,  1722,
torn.  i.  p.  22.  Similar  to  this  is  a  regulation  in  the  charter  of  liberty
granted  to  the  town  of  Friburg,  A.  D.  1 120.  If  two  of  the  citizens
shall  quarrel,  and  if  one  of  them  shall  complain  to  the  superior  lord
or  to  his  judge,  and  after  commencing  the  suit,  shall  be  privately
reconciled  to  his  adversary,  the  judge,  if  he  does  not  approve  of
this  reconciliation,  may  compel  him  to  go  on  with  his  lawsuit,  and
all  who  were  present  at  the  reconciliation  shall  forfeit  the  favour  of
the  superior  lord.  Historia  Zaringo  Badensis.  Auctor.  Jo.  Dan.
Schoepflinus.  Carolsr.  1765.  4to.  vol.  v.  p.  55.

What  was  the  extent  of  that  jurisdiction  which  those  who  held
fiefs  possessed  originally,  we  cannot  now  determine  with  certainty.
It  is  evident  that  during  the  disorders  which  prevailed  in  every
kingdom  of  Europe,  the  great  vassals  took  advantage  of  the  feeble-
ness of  their  monarchs,  and  enlarged  their  jurisdictions  to  the
utmost.  As  early  as  the  tenth  century,  the  more  powerful  barons
had  usurped  the  right  of  deciding  all  causes,  whether  civil  or  cri-
minal. They  had  acquired  the  High  Justice  as  well  as  the  Lov>y
Establ.  de  St.  Louis,  lib.  i.  c.  24,  25.  Their  sentences  were  final,
and  there  lay  no  appeal  from  them  to  any  superior  court.  Several
striking  instances  of  this  are  collected  by  Brussel.  Traite  des
Fiefs,  liv.  iii.  c.  11,  12,  13.  Not  satisfied  with  this,  the  more
potent  barons  got  their  territories  erected  into  Regalities,  with
almost  every  royal  prerogative  and  jurisdiction.  Instances  of  these
were  frequent  in  France.  Bruss.  ibid.  In  Scotland,  where  the
power  of  the  feudal  nobles  became  exorbitant,  they  were  very
numerous.  Historical  Law  Tracts,  vol.  i.  tract  vi.  Even  in  Eng-
land, though  the  authority  of  the  Norman  kings  circumscribed  the
jurisdiction  of  the  barons  within  more  narrow  limits  than  in  any
other  feudal  kingdom,  several  counties  palatine  were  erected,  into
which  the  king's  judges  could  not  enter,  and  no  writ  could  come
in  the  king's  name,  until  it  received  the  seal  of  the  county  pala-
tine. Spelm an.  Gloss,  voc.  Comites  Palatini;  Blackstone's  Com-
mentaries on  the  Laws  of  England,  vol.  iii.  p.  78.  These  Lords

ILLUSTRATIONS.  257

of  regalities  had  a  right  to  claim  or  rescue  their  vassals  from  the
king's  judges,  if  they  assumed  any  jurisdiction  over  them.  Brussel.
ubi  supra.  In  the  law  of  Scotland,  this  privilege  was  termed  the
right  of  rf pledging ;  and  the  frequency  of  it  not  only  interrupted  the
course  of  justice,  but  gave  rise  to  great  disorders  in  the  exercise
of  it.  Hist.  Law  Tracts,  ibid.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  counties
palatine  seems  to  have  been  productive  of  like  inconveniences  in
England.

The  rernedies  provided  by  princes  against  the  bad  effects  of
these  usurpations  of  the  nobles,  or  inconsiderate  grants  of  the
crown,  were  various,  and  gradually  applied.  Under  Charlemagne
and  his  immediate  descendants,  the  regal  prerogative  still  retained
great  vigour,  and  the  Duces,  Comites,  and  Missi  Dominici,  the  former
of  whom  were  ordinary  and  fixed  judges,  the  latter  extraordinary
and  itinerant  judges,  in  the  different  provinces  of  their  extensive
dominions,  exercised  a  jurisdiction  co-ordinate  with  the  barons  in
some  cases,  and  superior  to  them  in  others.  Du  Cange,  voc.  Dux,
Comites,  et  Missi.  Murat.  Antiq.  Dissert,  viii.  et  ix.  But  under
the  feeble  race  of  monarchs  who  succeeded  them,  the  authority  of
the  royal  judges  declined,  and  the  barons  acquired  that  unlimited
jurisdiction  which  has  been  described.  Louis  VI.  of  France,  at-
tempted to  revive  the  function  of  the  Missi  Dominici,  under  the
title  of  Juges  des  Exempts,  but  the  barons  were  become  too  powerful
to  bear  such  an  encroachment  on  their  jurisdiction,  and  he  was
obliged  to  desist  from  employing  them.  Henaut  Abrege  Chron.
torn.  ii.  p.  730,  His  successor  (as  has  been  observed)  had  recourse
to  expedients  less  alarming,  The  appeal  de  dcfaute  de  droit,  or  on
account  of  the  refusal  of  justice,  was  the  first  which  was  attended
with  any  considerable  effect.  According  to  the  maxims  of  feudal
law,  if  a  baron  had  not  as  many  vassals  as  enabled  him  to  try  by
their  peers,  the  parties  who  offered  to  plead  in  his  court,  or  if  he
delayed  or  refused  to  proceed  in  the  trial,  the  cause  might  be  car-
ried, by  appeal,  to  the  court  of  the  superior  lord  of  whom  the  baron
held,  and  tried  there.  De  1'Esprit  des  Loix,  liv.  xxviii.  c.  28.  Du
Cange,  voc.  Defectus  Justicix.  The  number  of  peers  or  assessors
in  the  courts  of  barons  was  frequently  very  considerable.  It  ap-
pears from  a  criminal  trial  in  the  court  of  the  viscount  de  Lautrec,
A.  D.  1299,  that  upwards  of  two  hundred  persons  were  present,  and
assisted  in  the  trial,  and  voted  in  passing  judgment.  Hist,  de
Langued.  par  D.D.  de  Vic  et  Vaisette,  torn.  iv.  Preuves,  p.  114.
But  as  the  right  of  jurisdiction  had  been  usurped  by  many  incon-
siderable barons,  they  were  often  unable  to  hold  courts.  This
gave  frequent  occasion  to  such  appeals,  and  rendered  the  practice
familiar.  By  degrees  such  appeals  began  to  be  made  from  the
courts  of  the  more  powerful  barons,  and  it  is  evident,  from  adeci-

VOL. III.  S

258  PROOFS  AND

sion  recorded  by  Brussel,  that  the  royal  judges  were  willing to
give  countenance  to  any  pretext  for  them. Traites  des  Fiefs,  torn.  i.
p.  235.  261. This  species  of  appeal  had  less  effect  in  abridging
the  jurisdiction  of  the  nobles,  than  the  appeal  on  account  of  the
injustice  of  the  sentence. When  the  feudal  monarchs  were  power-
ful, and  their  judges  possessed  extensive  authority,  such  appeals
seem  to  have  been  frequent. Capitul.  vol.  i.  p.  175.  180.;  and
they  were  made  in  a  manner  suitable  to  the  rudeness  of  a  simple
age. The  persons  aggrieved  resorted  to  the  palace  of  their  sove-
reign, and  with  outcries  and  loud  noise  called  to  him  for  redress-
Capitul.  lib.  iii.  c.  59. Chronic.  Lawterbergiense  ap.  Mencken.
Script.  German,  vol.  ii.  p.  284.  b. In  the  kingdom  of  Aragon,  the
appeals  to  the  Justiza,  or  supreme  judge,  were  taken  in  such  a
form  as  suppqsed  the  appellant  to  be  in  immediate  danger  of  death,
or  of  some  violent  outrage;  he  rushed  into  the  presence  of  the
judge,  crying  with  a  loud  voice,  Avi,  Avi,  Fuerza,  Fuerza,  thus
imploring  (as  it  were),  the  instant  interposition  of  that  supreme
judge  in  order  to  save  him. Hier.  Blanca  Comment,  de  Rebus
Aragon.  ap.  Script.  Hispanic.  Pistorii,  vol.  iii.  p.  753. The  aboli-
tion of  the  trial  by  combat  facilitated  the  revival  of  appeals  of  this
kind. The  effects  of  the  subordination  which  appeals  established,
in  introducing  attention,  equity,  and  consistency  of  decision  into
courts  of  judicature,  were  soon  conspicuous  ;  and  almost  all  causes
of  importance  were  carried  to  be  finally  determined  in  the  king's
courts. Brussel,  torn.  i.  252. Various  circumstances  which  con-
tributed towards  the.  introduction  and  frequency  of  such  appeals
are  enumerated  De  PEsprit  des  Loix,  liv.  xxviii.  c.  27. Nothing,
however,  was  of  such  effect  as  the  attention  which  monarchs  gave
to  the  constitution  and  dignity  of  their  courts  of  justice. It  was
the  ancient  custom  for  the  feudal  monarchs  to  preside  themselves
in  their  courts,  and  to  administer  justice  in  person. Marculf.  lib.  i.
§  25. Murat.  Dissert,  xxxi. Charlemagne,  whilst  he  was  dress-
ing, used  to  call  parties  into  his  presence,  and  having  heard  and
considered  the  subject  of  litigation,  gave  judgment  concerning  it.
Eginhartus  Vita  Caroli  magni,  cited  by  Madox  Hist,  of  Exchequer,
vol.  i.  p.  91. This  trial  and  decision  of  causes  by  the  sovereigns
themselves  could  not  fail  of  rendering  their  courts  respectable.
St.  Louis,  who  encouraged  to  the  utmost  the  practice  of  appeals,
revived  this  ancient  custom,  and  administered  justice  in  person
with  all  the  ancient  simplicity. "  I  have  often  seen  the  saint,"
says  Joinville,  "  sit  under  the  shade  of  an  oak  in  the  wood  of  Vin-
cennes,  when  all  who  had  any  complaint  freely  approached  him.
At  other  times,  he  gave  orders  to  spread  a  carpet  in  a  garden,  and
seating  himself  upon  it,  heard  the  causes  that  were  brought  before
him." Hist,  de  St.  Louis,  p.  13.  edit.  1761. Princes  of  inferior

ILLUSTRATIONS.  259

rank,  who  possessed  the  right  of  justice,  sometimes  dispensed  it  in
person,  and  presided  in  their  tribunals.  Two  instances  of  this
occur  with  respect  to  the  dauphines  of  Vienne.  Hist,  de  Dau-
phine,  torn.  i.  p.  18.  torn.  ii.  p.  257.  But  as  kings  and  princes
could  not  decide  every  cause  in  person,  nor  bring  them  all  to  be
determined  in  the  same  court ;  they  appointed  Eaillis,  with  a  right
of  jurisdiction,  in  different  districts  of  their  kingdom.  These  pos-
sessed powers  somewhat  similar  to 'those  of  the  ancient  Comites.
It  was  towards  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century  and  beginning  of  the
thirteenth,  that  this  office  was  first  instituted  in  France.  Brussel,
liv.  ii.  c.  35.  When  the  king  had  a  court  established  in  different
quarters  of  his  dominions,  this  invited  his  subjects  to  have  recourse
to  it.  It  was  the  private  interest  of  the  Baillis,  as  well  as  an  object
of  public  policy,  to  extend  their  jurisdiction.  They  took  advan-
tage of  every  defect  in  the  rights  of  the  barons,  and  of  every  error  in
their  proceedings,  to  remove  causes  out  of  their  courts,  and  to  bring
them  under  their  own  cognizance.  There  was  a  distinction  in  the
feudal  law,  and  an  extremely  ancient  one,  between  the  high  justice
and  the  low.  Capitul.  3.  A.  D.  812.  §  4.  A.  D.  815.  §  3.  Establ.  de
St.  Louis,  liv.  i.  c.  40.  Many  barons  possessed  the  latter  jurisdiction
who  had  no  title  to  the  former.  The  former  included  the  right  of
trying  crimes  of  every  kind,  even  the  highest ;  the  latter  was  con-
fined to  petty  trespasses.  This  furnished  endless  pretexts  for  ob-
structing, restraining,  and  reviewing  the  proceedings  in  the  baron

courts. Ordon.  ii.  457.  §  25.  458.  §  29.' A  regulation  of  greater

importance  succeeded  the  institution  of  Baillis.  The  king's  su-
preme court  or  parliament  was  rendered  fixed  as  to  the  place,  and
constant  as  to  the  time  of  its  meetings.  In  France,  as  well  as  in
the  other  feudal  kingdoms,  the  king's  court  of  justice  was  originally
ambulatory,  followed  the  person  of  the  monarch,  and  was  held  only
during  some  of  the  great  festivals.  Philip  Augustus,  A.  D.  1305,
rendered  it  stationary  at  Paris,  and  continued  its  terms  during  the
greater  part  of  the  year.  Pasquier  Recherches,  liv.  ii.  c.  2.  &  3,
&c.  Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  366.  §  62.  He  and  his  successors  vested
extensive  powers  in  that  court ;  they  granted  the  members  of  it
several  privileges  and  distinctions  which  it  would  be  tedious  to
enumerate.  Pasquier,  ibid.  Velly  Hist,  de  France,  torn.  vii.  p.
307.  Persons  eminent  for  integrity  and  skill  in  law  were  ap-
pointed judges  there.  Ibid.  By  degrees  the  final  decision  of  all
causes  of  importance  was  brought  into  the  parliament  of  Paris,  and
the  other  parliaments  which  administered  justice  in  the  king's
name,  irt  different  provinces  of  the  kingdom.  This  jurisdiction,  how-
ever, the  parliament  of  Paris  acquired  very  slowly,  and  the  great
vassals  of  the  crown  made  violent  efforts  in  order  to  obstruct  the
attempts  of  that  parliament  to  extend  its  authority.  Towards  the

s2  "•'*'."

260  PROOFS AND

close  of  the  thirteenth  century,  Philip  the  Fair  was  obliged  to  pro-
hibit his  parliament  from  taking  cognizance  of  certain  appeals
brought  into  it  from  the  courts  of  the  count  of  Bretagne,  and  to
recognise  and  respect  his  right  of  supreme  and  final  jurisdiction.
Memoirs  pour  servir  de  Preuves  a  THistoire  de  Bretagne  par  Mo-
rice,  torn.  i.  p.  1037.  1074.  Charles  VI.  at  the  end  of  the  follow-
ing century  was  obliged  to  confirm  the  rights  of  the  dukes  of  Bre-
tagne in  still  more  ample  form.  Ibid.  torn.  ii.  p.  580,  581.  So
violent  was  the  opposition  of  the  barons  to  this  right  of  appeal,
which  they  considered  as  fatal  to  their  privileges  and  power,  that
the  authors  of  the  Encyclopedic  have  mentioned  several  instances  in
which  barons  put  to  death,  or  mutilated,  such  persons  as  ventured
to  appeal  from  the  sentences  pronounced  in  their  courts,  to  the  par-
liament of  Paris,  torn.  xii.  Art.  Parlement,  p.  25.

The  progress  of  jurisdiction  in  the  other  feudal  kingdoms  was  in
a  great  measure  similar  to  that  which  we  have  traced  in  France.
In  England,  the  territorial  jurisdiction  of  the  barons  was  both
ancient  and  extensive.  Leg.  Edw.  Conf.  NOB  5  and  9.  After  the
Norman  conquest  it  became  more  strictly  feudal ;  and  it  is  evident
from  facts  recorded  in  the  English  history,  as  well  as  from  the
institution  of  counties  palatine,  which  I  have  already  mentioned,
that  the  usurpations  of  the  nobles  in  England  were  not  less  bold
or  extensive  than  those  of  their  contemporaries  on  the  continent.
The  same  expedients  were  employed  to  circumscribe  or  abolish
those  dangerous  jurisdictions.  William  the  Conqueror  established
a  constant  court  in  the  hall  of  his  palace ;  from  which  the  four
courts  now  intrusted  with  the  administration  of  justice  in  England
took  their  rise.  Henry  II.  divided  his  kingdom  into  six  circuits,
and  sent  itinerant  judges  to  hold  their  courts  in  them  at  stated
seasons.  Blackstone's  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  England,
vol.  iii,  57.  Justices  of  the  peace  were  appointed  in  every  county
by  subsequent  monarchs  ;  to  whose  jurisdiction  the  people  gradually
had  recourse  in  many  civil  causes.  The  privileges  of  the  counties
palatine  were  gradually  limited ;  with  respect  to  some  points  they
were  abolished  ;  and  the  administration  of  justice  was  brought  into
the  king's  courts,  or  before  judges  of  his  appointment.  The  several
steps  taken  for  this  purpose  are  enumerated  in  Darymple's  History
of  Feudal  Property,  chap.vii.

In  Scotland  the  usurpations  of  the  nobility  were  more  exorbitant
than  in  any  other  feudal  kingdom.  The  progress  of  their  encroach-
ments, and  the  methods  taken  by  the  crown  to  limit  or  abolish
their  territorial  and  independent  jurisdictions,  both  which  I  had
occasion  to  consider  and  explain  in  a  former  work,  differed  very
little  from  those  of  which  I  have  now  given  the  detail.  History  of
Scotland,  vol.  i.  p.  36.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  261

I  should  perplex  myself  and  my  readers  in  the  labyrinth  of
German  jurisprudence,  if  I  were  to  attempt  to  delineate  the  progress
of  jurisdiction  in  the  empire,  with  a  minute  accuracy.  It  is  suffi-
cient to  observe,  that  the  authority  which  the  Aulic  council  and
Imperial  chamber  now  possess,  took  its  rise  from  the  same  desire  of
redressing  the  abuses  of  territorial  jurisdiction,  and  was  acquired
in  the  same  manner  that  the  royal  courts  attained  influence  in  other
countries  of  Europe.  All  the  important  facts  with  respect  to  both
these  particulars,  may  be  found  in  Phil.  Datt,  de  pace  publica
Imperii,  lib.  iv.  The  capital  articles  are  pointed  out  in  Pfeffel
AbregS  de  1'Histoire  et  Droit  Publique  d'Allemagne,  p.  556.  581. ;
and  in  Traite  du  Droit  publique  de  TEmpire  par  M.  le  Coq.  de
Villeray.  The  two  last  treatises  are  of  great  authority,  having
been  composed  under  the  eye  of  M.  Schoepflin  of  Strasburg,  one
of  the  ablest  public  lawyers  in  Germany.

Note  XXIV. Sect.  I.  p.  68.

It  is  not  easy  to  fix  with  precision  the  period  at  which  ecclesiastics
first  began  to  claim  exemption  from  the  civil  jurisdiction. It  is
certain, that  during  the  early and purest  ages  of the  church,
they  pretended  to  no  such  immunity. The  authority  of  the  civil
magistrate  extended  to  all  persons,  and  to  all  causes. This  fact
has  not  only  been  clearly  established  by  Protestant  authors,  but  is
admitted  by  many  Roman  Catholics  of  eminence,  and  particularly
by  the  writers  in  defence  of  the  liberties  of  the  Gallican  church.
There  are  several  original  papers  published  by  Muratori,  which
shew  that,  in  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries,  causes  of  the  greatest
importance  relating  to  ecclesiastics  were  still  determined  by  civil
judges. Antiq.  Ital.  vol.  v.  dissert.  Ixx. Proofs  of  this  are  pro-
duced likewise  by  M.  Houard,  Anciennes  Loix  des  Francois,  &c.
vol.  i.  p.  209. Ecclesiastics  did  not  shake  off  all  at  once  their
subjection  to  civil  courts. This  privilege,  like  their  other  usurpa-
tions, was  acquired  slowly,  and  step by  step. This  exemption
seems  at  first  to  have  been  merely  an  act  of  complaisance,  flowing
from  veneration for  their  character. Thus from a  charter  of
Charlemagne  in  favour  of  the  church  of  Mans,  A.  D.  796,  to  which
M.  1'Abbe  de  Foy  refers  in  his  Notice  de  Diplomes,  torn.  i.  p.  201,
that  monarch  directs  his  judges,  if  any  difference  should  arise  be-
tween the  administrators  of  the  revenues  of  that  church  and  any
person  whatever,  not  to  summon  the  administrators  to  appear  in
mallo  publico ;  but  first  of  all  to  meet  with  them,  and  to  endeavour
to  accommodate  the  difference  in  an  amicable  manner. This  in-
dulgence was  in  process  of  time  improved  into  a  legal  exemption  ;
which  was  founded  on  the  same  superstitious  respect  of  the  laity

262  PROOFS  AND

for  the  clerical  character  and  function.  A  remarkable  instance  of
this  occurs  in  a  charter  of  Frederic  Barbarossa,  A.  D.  1172,  to  the
monastery  of  Altenburg.  He  grants  them  judicium  non  tantum
sanguinolentis  plagse,  sed  vitse  &  mortis  ;  he  prohibits  any  of  the
royal  judges  from  disturbing  their  jurisdiction  ;  and  the  reason
which  he  gives  for  this  ample  concession  is,  nam  quorum,  ex  Dei
gratia,  ratione  divini  ministerii  onus  leve  est,  &  jugum  suave;  nos
penitus  nolumus  illos  oppressions  contumelia  vel  manu  Laica,
fatigari.  Mencken  Script,  rer.  Germ.  vol.  iii.  p.  1067.

It  is  not  necessary  for  illustrating  what  is  contained  in  the  text,
that  I  should  describe  the  manner  in  which  the  code  of  the  canon
law  was  compiled,  or  shew  that  the  doctrines  in  it  most  favourable
to  the  power  of  the  clergy,  are  founded  on  ignorance,  or  supported
by  fraud  and  forgery. The  reader  will  find  a  full  account  of  these
in  Gerard.  Van  Mastricht, Historia  Juris Ecclesiastici, and  in
Science  de  Government,  par  M.  Real,  torn.  vii.  c.  1.  &  3.  §  2,  3,  &c.
The  history  of  the  progress  and  extent  of  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction,
with  an  account  of  the  arts  which  the  clergy  employed  in  order  to
draw  causes  of  every  kind  into  the  spiritual  courts,  is  no  less
curious,  and  would  throw  great  light  upon  many  of  the  customs  and
institutions  of  the  dark  ages ;  but  it  is  likewise  foreign  from  the
present  subject. Du  Gauge,  in  his  Glossary,  voc.  Curia  Christian-
itatis,  has  collected  most  of  the  causes  with  respect  to  which  the
clergy  arrogated  an  exclusive  jurisdiction,  and  refers  to  the  authors,
or  original  papers,  which  confirm  his  observations. Giannone,  in
his  Civil  History  of  Naples,  lib.  xix.  §  3.  has  ranged  these  under
proper  heads,  and  scrutinizes  the  pretensions  of  the  church  with
his  usual  boldness  and  discernment. M.  Fleury  observes,  that  the
clergy  multiplied  the  pretexts  for  extending  the  authority  of  the
spiritual  courts  with  so  much  boldness,  that  it  was  soon  in  their
power  to  withdraw  almost  every  person  and  every  cause  from  the
jurisdiction  of.  the  civil  magistrate. Hist.  Eccles.  torn.  xix. Disc.
Prelim.  16. But  how  ill-founded  soever  the  jurisdiction  of  the
clergy  may  have  been,  or  whatever  might  be  the  abuses  to  which
their  manner  of  exercising  it  gave  rise,  the  principles  and  forms  of
their  jurisprudence  were  far  more  perfect  than  that  which  was  known
in  the  civil  courts.  '  It  seems  to  be  certain  that  ecclesiastics  never
submitted,  during  any  period  in  the  middle  ages,  to  the  laws  con-
tained in  the  codes  of  the  barbarous  nations,  but  were  governed
entirely  by  the  Roman  law. They  regulated  all  their  transactions
by  such  of  its  maxims  as  were  preserved  by  tradition,  or  were  con-
tained in  the  Theodosian  code,  and  other  books  extant  among
them. This  we  learn  from  a  custom  which  prevailed  universally  in
those  ages. Every  person  was  permitted  to  choose  among  the
various  codes  of  laws  then  in  force,  that  to  which  he  was  witling  to

ILLUSTRATIONS.  263

conform.  In  any  transaction  of  importance,  it  was  .usual  for  the
persons  contracting  to  mention  the  law  to  which  they  submitted,
that  it  might  be  known  how  any  controversy  that  should  arise
between  them  was  to  be"  decided.  Innumerable  proofs  of  this  occur
in  the  charters  of  the  middle  ages.  But  the  clergy  considered
it  as  such  a  valuable  privilege  of  their  order  to  be  governed  by  the
Roman  law,  that  when  any  person  entered  into  holy  orders,  it  was
usual  for  him  to  renounce  the  code  of  laws  to  which  he  had  been
formerly  subject,  and  to  declare  that  he  now  submitted  to  the
Roman  law.  Constat  me  Johannem  clericum,  filium  quondam
Verandi,  qui  professus  sum,  ex  natione  mea,  lege  vivere  Lango-
bardorum,  sed  tamen,  pro  honore  ecclesiastico,  lege  nunc  videor
vivere  Romana.  Charta,  A.  D.  1072.  Farulfus  presbyter  qui  pro-
fessus sum,  more  sacerdotii  mei,  lege  vivere  Romana.  Charta,
A.  D.  1075.  Muratori  Antichita  Estensi.  vol.  i.  p.  78.  See  like-
wise Houard  Anciennes  Loix  des  Francois,  &c.  vol.  i.  p.  203.

The  code  of  the  canon  law  began  to  be  compiled  early  in  the
ninth  century.  Mem.  de  1'Acad.  des  Inscript.  torn,  xviii.  p.  346,
&c.  It  was  above  two  centuries  after  that  before  any  collection
was  made  of  those  customs,  which  were  the  rule  of  judgments  in
the  courts  of  the  barons.  Spiritual  judges  decided,  of  course,
according  to  written  and  known  laws ;  lay  judges,  left  without  any
fixed  guide,  were  directed  by  loose  traditionary  customs.  But,
besides  this  general  advantage  of  the  canon  law,  its  forms  and
principles  were  more  consonant  to  reason,  and  more  favourable  to
the  equitable  decision  of  every  point  in  controversy,  than  those
which  prevailed  in  lay  courts.  It  appears,  from  Notes  XXI.  and
XXIII.,  concerning  private  wars,  and  the  trial  by  combat,  that  the
whole  spirit  of  ecclesiastical  jurisprudence  was  adverse  to  those
sanguinary  customs  which  were  destructive  of  justice ;  and  the
whole  force  of  ecclesiastical  authority  was  exerted  to  abolish  them,
and  to  substitute  trials  by  law  and  evidence  in  their  room.  Almost
all  the  forms  in  lay  courts,  which  contribute  to  establish,  and  con-
tinue to  preserve  order  in  judicial  proceedings,  are  borrowed  from
the  canon  law,  Fleury  Instit.  du  Droit  canon,  partiii.  c.  6.  p.  52.
St.  Louis,  in  his  Establissemens,  confirms  many  of  his  new  regu-
lations concerning  property,  and  the  administration  of  justice,  by
the  authority  of  the  canon  law,  from  which  he  borrowed  them.
Thus,  for  instance,  the  first  hint  of  attaching  moveables,  for  the
recovery  of  a  debt,  was  taken  from  the  canon  law.  Estab.  liv.  ii.
c.  21  and  40.  And  likewise  the  cessio  bonorum,  by  a  person  who
was  insolvent.  Ibid.  In  the  same  manner  he  established  new  re-
gulations with  respect  to  the  effects  of  persons  dying  intestate,
liv.  i.  c.  89.  These,  and  many  other  salutary  regulations,  the
canonists  had  borrowed  from  the  Roman  law.  Many  other  exam-

2(j4  PROOFS AND

pies  might  be  produced,  of  more  perfect  jurisprudence  in  the
canon  law  than  was  known  in  lay  courts.  For  that  reason,  it  was
deemed  a  high  privilege  to  be  subject  to  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction.
Among  the  many  immunities,  by  which  men  were  allured  to  engage
in  the  dangerous  expeditions  for  the  recovery  of  the  Holy  Land,
one  of  the  most  considerable  was  the  declaring  such  as  took  the
cross  to  be  subject  only  to  the  spiritual  courts,  and  to  the  rules  of
decision  observed  in  them.  See  Note  XIII.  and  Du  Cange,  voc.
Crucis  Privilegia.

Note  XXV. Sect.  I.  p.  70.

THE  rapidity  with  which  the  knowledge  and  study  of  the  Roman
law  spread  over  Europe  is  amazing.  The  copy  of  the  Pandects
was  found  at  Araalphi,  A.  D.  1137.  Irnerius  opened  a  college  of
civil  law  at  Bologna  a  few  years  after.  Giann.  Hist,  book  xi.  c.  2.
It  began  to  be  taught  as  a  part  of  academical  learning  in  different
parts  of  France  .before  the  middle  of  the  century.  Vaccarius  gave
lectures  on  the  civil  law  at  Oxford,  as  early  as  the  year  1147.  A
regular  system  of  feudal  law,  formed  plainly  in  imitation  of  the
Roman  code,  was  composed  by  two  Milanese  lawyers  about  the
year  1150.  Gratian  published  the  code  of  canon  law,  with  large
additions  and  emendations,  about  the  same  time.  The  earliest
collection  of  those  customs,  which  served  as  the  rules  of  decision
in  the  courts  of  justice,  is  the  Assises  de  Jerusalem.  They  were  com-
piled, as  the  preamble  informs  us,  in  the  year  1099,  and  are  called
Jus  Consuetudinarium  quo  regebatur  regnum  orientale.  Willerm.
Tyr.  lib.  xix.  c.  2.  But  peculiar  circumstances  gave  occasion  to
this  early  compilation.  The  victorious  crusaders  settled  as  a  co-
lony in  a  foreign  country,  and  adventurers  from  all  the  different
nations  of  Europe  composed  this  new  society.  It  was  necessary  on
that  account  to  ascertain  the  laws  and  customs  which  were  to  regu-
late the  transactions  of  business,  and  the  administration  of  justice
among  them.  But  in  no  country  of  Europe  was  there,  at  that
time,  any  collection  of  customs,  nor  had  any  attempt  been  made  to
render  law  fixed.  The  first  undertaking  of  that  kind  was  by
Glanville,  lord  chief  justice  of  England,  in  his  Tractatus  de  Le-
gibus  et  Consuetudinibus  Angliae,  composed  about  the  year  1181.
The  Regiam  Majestatem  in  Scotland,  ascribed  to  David  I.,  seems
to  be  an  imitation,  and  a  servile  one,  of  Glanville.  Several  Scot-
tish antiquaries,  under  the  influence  of  that  pious  credulity,  which
disposes  men  to  assent,  without  hesitation,  to  whatever  they  deem
for  the  honour  of  their  native  country,  contend  zealously,  that  the
Regiam  Majestatem  is  a  production  prior  to  the  treatise  of  Glan-
ville ;  and  have  brought  themselves  to  belreve,  that  a  nation,  in  a

ILLUSTRATIONS.  265

superior  state  of  improvement,  borrowed  its  laws  and  institutions
from  one  considerably  less  advanced  in  its  political  progress. The
internal  evidence  (were  it  my  province  to  examine  it)  by  which  this
theory  might  be  refuted,  is,  in  my  opinion,  decisive. The  external
circumstances  which  have  seduced  Scottish  authors  into  this  mis-
take, )i  a  ve  been  explained  with  so  much  precision  and  candour  by
Sir  David  Dalrymple,  in  his  examination  of  some  of  the  arguments
for  the  high  antiquity  of  Regiam  Majestatem,  Edin.  1769,  4to.  that
it  is  to  be  hoped  the  controversy  will  not  be  again  revived. Pierre
de  Fontaines,  who  tells  us,  that  he  was  the  first  who  had  attempted
such  a  work  in  France,  composed  his  Cornell,  which  contains  an
account  of  the  customs  of  the  country  of  Vermandois,  in  the  reign
of  St.  Louis,  which  began  A.  D.  1226. Beaumanoir,  the  author  of
the  Coustumes  de  Beauvoisis,  lived  about  the  same  time. The  Es-
tablissemens  of  St.  Louis,  containing  a  large  collection  of  the  cus-
toms which  prevailed  within  the  royal  domains,  were  published  by
the  authority  of  that  monarch. As  soon  as  men  became  acquainted
with  the  advantages  of  having  written  customs  and  laws,  to  which
they  could  have  recourse  on  every  occasion,  the  practice  of  col-
lecting them  became  common. Charles  VII.  of  France,  by  an
ordonance  A.  D.  1453,  appointed  the  customary  laws  in  every  pro-
vince of  France  to  be  collected  and  arranged. Velley  and  Villaret,
Histoire,  torn.  xvi.  p.  113. His  successor,  Louis  XL,  renewed  the
injunction. But  this  salutary  undertaking  hath  never  been  fully
executed,  and  the  jurisprudence  of  the  French  nation  remains  more
obscure  and  uncertain  than  it  would  have  been  if  these  prudent
regulations  of  their  monarchs  had  taken  effect. A  mode  of  judi-
cial determination  was  established  in  the  middle  ages,  which  af-
fords the  clearest  proof  that  judges,  while  they  had  no  other  rule
to direct  their  decrees  but  unwritten  and  traditionary  customs,
were  often  at  a  loss  how  to  find  out  the  facts  and  principles,  accord-
ing to  which  they  were  bound  to  decide. They  were  obliged,  in
dubious  cases,  to  call  a  certain  number  of  old  men,  and  to  lay  the
case  before  them,  that  they  might  inform  them  what  was  the  prac-
tice or  custom  with  regard  to  the  point. This  was  called  Enqueste
par  tourbe. Du  Cange,  voc.  Turba. The  effects  of  the  revival  of
the  Roman  jurisprudence  have  been  explained  by  M.  de  Montes-
quieu, liv.  xxviii.  c.  42.  and  by  Mr.  Hume,  Hist,  of  England,  vol.
ii.  p.  441. I  have  adopted  many  of  their  ideas. Who  can  pre-
tend to  review  any  subject  which  such  writers  have  considered,
i  without  receiving  from  them  light  and  information  ? At  the  same
time  I  am  convinced,  that  the  knowledge  of  the  Roman  law  was
not  so  entirely  lost  in  Europe  during  the  middle  ages,  as  is  conb-
monly  believed. My  subject  does  not  require  me  to  examine  this
point. Many  striking  facts  with  regard  to  it  are  collected  by  Do-

266  PROOFS  AND

nato  Antonio  d'Asti  Dall'  Uso  e  autorita  della  regione  civile  nelle
proviucie  dell'  Imperio  Occidentale. Nap.  1751.  2  vol.  8vo.

That  the  civil  law  is  intimately  connected  with  the  municipal
jurisprudence  in  several  countries  of  Europe,  is  a  fact  so  well
known,  that  it  needs  no  illustration.  Even  in  England,  where  the
common  law  is  supposed  to  form  a  system  perfectly  distinct  from
the  Roman  code,  and  although  such  as  apply  in  that  country  to
the  study  of  the  common  law  boast  of  this  distinction  with  some
degree  of  affectation,  it  is  evident  that  many  of  the  ideas  and
maxims  of  the  civil  law  are  incorporated  into  the  English  jurispru-
dence. This  is  well  illustrated  by  the  ingenious  and  learned  author
of  Observations  on  the  Statutes,  chiefly  the  more,  ancient,  3d  edit,
p.  76,  &c.

Note  XXVI. Sect.  I.  p.  7L

THE  whole  history  of  the  middle  ages  makes  it  evident,  that  war
was  the  sole  profession  of  gentlemen,  and  almost  the  only  object
attended  to  in  their  education.  Even  after  some  change  in  man-
ners began  to  take  place,  and  the  civil  arts  of  life  had  acquired
some  reputation,  the  ancient  ideas  with  respect  to  the  accomplish-
ments necessary  for  a  person  of  noble  birth,  continued  long  in
force.  In  the  Memoires  de  Fleuranges,  p.  9,  &c.  we  have  an  ac-
count of  the  youthful  exercises  and  occupations  of  Francis  I.  and
they  were  altogether  martial  and  athletic.  That  father  of  letters  .
owed  his  relish  for  them,  not  to  education,  but  to  his  own  good
sense  and  good  taste.  The  manners  of  the  superior  order  of  eccle-
siastics during  the  middle  ages  furnish  the  strongest  proof  that,  in
some  instances,  the  distinction  of  professions  was  not  completely
ascertained  in  Europe.  The  functions  and  character  of  the  clergy
are  obviously  very  different  from  those  of  laymen  ;  and  among  the
inferior  orders  of  churchmen,  this  constituted  a  distinct  character
separate  from  that  of  other  citizens.  But  the  dignified  ecclesi-
astics, who  were  frequently  of  noble  birth,  were  above  such  a  dis-
tinction ;  they  retained  the  idea  of  what  belonged  to  them  as
gentlemen,  and  in  spite  of  the  decrees  of  popes,  or  the  canons  of
councils,  they  bore  arms,  led  their  vassals  to  the  field,  and  fought
at  their  head  in  battle.  Among  them  the  priesthood  was  scarcely
a  separate  profession;  the  military  accomplishments  which  they
thought  essential  to  them  as  gentlemen,  were  cultivated ;  the  theo-
logical science,  and  pacific  virtues  suitable  to  their  spiritual  func-
tion, were  neglected  and  despised.

As  soon  as  the  science  of  law  became  a  laborious  study,  and  the
practice  of  it  a  separate  profession,  such  persons  as  rose  to  emi-
nence in  it  obtained  honours  which  had  formerly  been  appropriated
to  soldiers.  Knighthood  was  the  most  illustrious  mark  of  distinc-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  207

tion  during  several  ages,  and  conferred  privileges  to  which  rank
or  birth  alone  were  not  entitled.  To  this  high  dignity  persons  emi-
nent for  their  knowledge  of  law  were  advanced,  and  were  thereby
placed  on  a  level  with  those  whom  their  military  talents  had  ren-
dered conspicuous.  Miles  Justifies,  Miles  Liter  atus,  became  common
titles.  Matthew  Paris  mentions  such  knights  as  early  as  A.  D.  1251.
If  a  judge  attained  a  certain  rank  in  the  courts  of  justice,  that
alone  gave  him  a  right  to  the  honour  of  knighthood.  Pasquier
Recherches,  liv.  xi.  c.  16.  p.  130.  Dissertations  Historiques  sur
la  Chevalerie  par  Honore  de  Sainte  Marie,  p.  164,  &c.  A  profes-
sion that  led  to  offices,  which  ennobled  the  persons  who  held  them,
grew  into  credit,  and  the  people  of  Europe  became  accustomed  to
see  men  rise  to  eminence  by  civil  as  well  as  military  talents.

Note  XXVII. Sect.  I.  p.  74.

THE  chief  intention  of  these  notes,  was  to  bring  at  once  under
the  view  of  my  readers,  such  facts  and  circumstances  as  tend  to
illustrate  or  confirm  what  is  contained  in  that  part  of  the  history  to
which  they  refer.  When  these  lay  scattered  in  many  different
authors,  and  were  taken  from  books  not  generally  known,  or  which
many  of  my  readers  might  find  it  disagreeable  to  consult,  I  thought
it  would  be  of  advantage  to  collect  them  together.  But  when  every
thing  necessary  for  the  proof  or  illustration  of  my  narrative  or  rea-
^soning  may  be  found  in  any  one  book  which  is  generally  known,  or
deserves  to  be  so,  I  shall  satisfy  myself  with  referring  to  it.  This  is
the  case  with  respect  to  chivalry.  Almost  every  fact  which  I  have
mentioned  in  the  text,  together  with  many  other  curious  and  instruc-
tive particulars  concerning  this  singular  institution,  may  be  found
in  Memoires  sur  Tancienne  Chevalerie  consideree  comme  une  Es-
tablissement  politique  et  militaire,  par  M.  de  la  Curne  de  St.  Palaye.

Note  XXVIII. Sect.  L  p.  78.

THE  subject  of  my  inquiries  does  not  call  me  to  write  a  history
of  the  progress  of  science.  The  facts  and  observations  which  I
have  produced,  are  sufficient  to  illustrate  the  effects  of  its  progress
upon  manners  and  the  state  of  society.  While  science  was  alto-
gether extinct  in  the  western  parts  of  Europe,  it  was  cultivated  in  Con-
stantinople and  other  parts  of  the  Grecian  empire.  But  the  subtile
genius  of  the  Greeks  turned  almost  entirely  to  theological  disputa-
tion. The  Latins  borrowed  that  spirit  from  them,  and  many  of  the
controversies  which  still  occupy  and  divide  theologians,  took  their
rise  among  the  Greeks,  from  whom  the  other  Europeans  derived  a
considerable  part  of  their  knowledge.  See  the  testimony  of  jEneag
Sylvius  ap.  Conringium  de  antiq.  Academicis,  p.  43.  Histoire

-268  PROOFS AND

literaire  de  France,  torn.  vii.  p.  113,  &c.  torn.  ix.  p.  151,  &c.  Soon
after  the  empire  of  the  caliphs  was  established  in  the  east,  some
illustrious  princes  arose  among  them,  who  encouraged  science.
But  when  the  Arabians  turned  their  attention  to  the,  literature
cultivated  by  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Romans,  the  chaste  and
correct  taste  of  their  works  of  genius  appeared  frigid  and  unani-
mated  to  a  people  of  a  more  warm  imagination.  Tnough  they
could  not  admire  the  poets  and  historians  of  Greece  or  of  Rome,
they  were  sensible  of  the  merit  of  their  philosophers.  The  opera-
tions of  the  intellect  are  more  fixed  and  uniform  than  those  of  the
fancy  or  taste.  Truth  makes  an  impression  nearly  the  same  in
every  place ;  the  ideas  of  what  is  beautiful,  elegant,  or  sublime,
vary  in  different  climates.  The  Arabians,  though  they  neglected
Homer,  translated  the  most  eminent  of  the  Greek  philosophers  into
their  own  language  ;  and,  guided  by  their  precepts  and  discoveries,
applied  themselves  with  great  ardour  to  the  study  of  geometry,  astro-
nomy, medicine,  dialectics,  and  metaphysics.  In  the  three  former
they  made  considerable  and  useful  improvements,  which  have  con-
tributed not  a  little  to  advance  those  sciences  to  that  high  degree
of  perfection  which  they  have  attained.  In  the  two  latter,  they
chose  Aristotle  for  their  guide,  and  refining  on  the  subtle  and  dis-
tinguishing spirit  which  characterizes  his  philosophy,  they  rendered
it  in  a  great  degree  frivolous  or  unintelligible.  The  schools  esta-
blished in  the  east  for  teaching  and  cultivating  these  sciences  were
in  high  reputation.  They  communicated  their  love  of  science  to
their  countrymen,  who  conquered  Africa  and  Spain;  and  the  schools
instituted  there  were  little  inferior  in  fame  to  those  in  the  east.
Many  of  the  persons  who  distinguished  themselves  by  their  profi-
ciency in  science  during  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,  were
educated  among  the  Arabians.  Bruckerus  collects  many  instances
of  this,  Histor.  Philos.  v.  iii.  p.  681,  &c.  Almost  all  the  men  emi-
nent for  science  during  several  centuries,  if  they  did  not  resort  in
person  to  the  schools  in  Africa  and  Spain,  were  instructed  in  the
philosophy  of  the  Arabians.  The  first  knowledge  of  the  Aristote-
lian philosophy  in  the  middle  ages  was  acquired  by  translations  of
Aristotle's  works  out  of  the  Arabic.  The  Arabian  commentators
were  deemed  the  most  skilful  and  authentic  guides  in  the  study  of
his  system.  Conring.  antiq.  Acad.  Diss.  iii.  p.  95,  &c.  Supplem.
p.  241,  &c.  Murat.  antiquit.  Ital.  vol.  iii.  p.  932,  &c.  From  them
the  schoolmen  derived  the  genius  and  principles  of  their  philo-
sophy, which  contributed  so  much  to  retard  the  progress  of  true
science.

The  establishment  of  colleges  or  universities  is  a  remarkable  era
in  literary  history.  The.  schools  in  cathedrals  and  monasteries
confined  themselves  chiefly  to  the  teaching  of  grammar.  There

ILLUSTRATIONS.  269

were  only  one  or  two  masters  employed  in  that  office.  But  in
colleges,  professors  were  appointed  to  teach  all  the  different  parts
of  science.  The  course  or  order  of  education  was  fixed.  The  time  that
ought  to  be  allotted  to  the  study  of  each  science  was  ascertained.
A  regular  form  of  trying  the  proficiency  of  students  was  prescribed ;
and  academical  titles  and  honours  were  conferred  on  such  as
acquitted  themselves  with  approbation.  A  good  account  of  the
origin  and  nature  of  these  is  given  by  Seb.  Bacmeisterus  Antiquitates
Rostochienses,  sive,  Historia  Urbis  et  Academiae  Rostoch.  ap.  Mo-
numenta  inedita  Rer.  Germ,  per  E.  J.  de  Westphalen,  vol.  iir.  p.  78 1 .
Lips.  1743.  The  first  obscure  mention  of  these  academical  degrees
in  the  university  of  Paris  (from  which  the  other  universities  in
Europe  have  borrowed  most  of  their  customs  anel  institutions),
occurs  JK  D.  1215.  Crevier.  hist,  de  Puniv.  de  Paris,  torn.  i.  p.  296,
&c.  They  were  completely  established  A.  D.  1231.  Ibid.  248.
It  is  unnecessary  to  enumerate  the  several  privileges  to  which
bachelors,  masters,  and  doctors  were  entitled.  One  circumstance
is  sufficient  to  demonstrate  the  high  degree  of  estimation  in  which
they  were  held.  Doctors  in  the  different  faculties  contended  with
knights  for  precedence,  and  the  dispute  was  terminated  in  many
instances  by  advancing  the  former  to  the  dignity  of  knighthood,
the  high  prerogatives  of  which  I  have  mentioned.  It  was  even
asserted,  that  a  doctor  had  a  right  to  that  title  without  creation.

Bartolus  taught doctorem  actualiter  regentem  in  jure  civili  per

decennium  effici  militem  ipso  facto.  Honore  de  St.  Marie  Dissert,
p.  165.  This  was  called  Chevalerie  de  lectures,  and  the  persons
advanced  to  that  dignity,  Milites  Clerici.  These  new  establish-
ments for  education,  together  with  the  extraordinary  honours  con-
ferred on  learned  men,  greatly  increased  the  number  of  scholars.
In  the  year  1262,  there  were  ten  thousand  students  in  the  university
of  Bologna;  and  it  appears  from  the  history  of  that  university,
that  law  was  the  only  science  taught  in  it  at  that  time.  In  the
year  1 340,  there  were  thirty  thousand  in  the  university  of  Oxford.
Speed's  Chron.  ap.  Anderson's  Chronol.  Deduction  of  Commerce,
vol.  i.  p.  172.  In  the  same  century,  ten  thousand  persons  voted
in  a  question  agitated  in  the  university  of  Paris  ;  and  as  graduates
alone  were  admitted  to  that  privilege,  the  number  of  students  must
have  been  very  great.  Velly  Hist,  de  France,  torn.  xi.  p.  147.
There  were  indeed  few  universities  in  Europe  at  that  time ;  but
such  a  number  of  students  may  nevertheless  be  produced  as  a
proof  of  the  extraordinary  ardour  with  which  men  applied  to  the
study  of  science  in  those  ages  ;  it  shews  likewise  that  they  already
began  to  consider  other  professions  beside  that  of  a  soldier  as
honourable  and  useful.

270  PROOFS AND

Note  XXIX. Sect.  I.  p.  79.

THE  great  variety  of  subjects  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  illus-
trate, and  the  extent  of  this  upon  which  I  now  enter,  will  justify
my  adopting  the  words  of  M.  de  Montesquieu,  when  he  begins  to
treat  of  commerce.  "  The  subject  which  follows  would  require
to  be  discussed  more  at  large  ;  but  the  nature  of  this  work  does  not
permit  it.  I  wish  to  glide  on  a  tranquil  stream ;  but  I  am  hurried
along  by  a  torrent/'

Many  proofs  occur  in  history  of  the  little  intercourse  between
nations  during  the  middle  ages.  Towards  the  close  of  the  tenth
century,  count  Bouchard,  intending  to  found  a  monastery  at  St.
Maur  des  Fosses,  near  Paris,  applied  to  an  abbot  of  CJpgny  in
Burgundy,  famous  for  his  sanctity,  entreating  him  to  conduct  the
monks  thither.  The  language  in  which  he  addressed  that  holy
man  is  singular :  he  tells  him,  that  he  had  undertaken  the  labour
of  such  a  great  journey  ;  that  he  was  fatigued  with  the  length  of  it,
therefore  he  hoped  to  obtain  his  request,  and  that  his  journey  into
such  a  distant  country  should  not  be  in  vain.  The  answer  of  the
abbot  is  still  more  extraordinary  :  He  refused  to  co.mply  with  his
desire,  as  it  would  be  extremely  fatiguing  to  go  along  with  him  into
a  strange  and  unknown  region.  Vita  Burchardi  venerabilis  Comitis
ap.  Bouquet  Rec.  des  Hist.  vol.  x.  p.  351.  Even  so  late  as  the
beginning  of  the  twelfth  century,  the  monks  of  Ferrieres,  in  the
diocess  of  Sens,  did  not  know  that  there  was  such  a  city  as  Tour-
nay  in  Flanders ;  and  the  monks  of  St.  Martin  of  Tournay,  were
equally  unacquainted  with  the  situation  of  Ferrieres.  A  transaction
in  which  they  were  both  concerned  made  it  necessary  for  them  to
have  some  intercourse.  The  mutual  interest  of  both  monasteries
prompted  each  to  find  out  the  situation  of  the  other.  After  a  long
search,  which  is  particularly  described,  the  discovery  was  made  by
accident.  Herimannus  Abbas  de  Restauratione  St.  Martini  Tor-
nacensis  ap.  Dacher.  Spicel.  vol.  xii.  p.  400.  The  ignorance  of
the  middle  ages  with  respect  to  the  situation  and  geography  of
remote  countries  was  still  more  remarkable.  The  most  ancient
geographical  chart  which  now  remains  as  a  monument  of  the  state
of  that  science  in  Europe  during  the  middle  ages,  is  found  in  a
manuscript  of  the  Chronique  de  St.  Denys.  There  the  three  parts
of  the  earth  then  known  are  so  represented,  that  Jerusalem  is
placed  in  the  middle  of  the  globe,  and  Alexandria  appears  to  be  as
near  to  it  as  Nazareth.  Mem  de  1'Acad.  des  Belles  Lettres,
torn.  xvi.  p.  185.  There  seems  to  have  been  no  inns  or  houses  of
entertainment  for  the  reception  of  travellers  during  the  middle
ages.  Murat.  Antiq.  Ital.  vol.  iii.  p.  581,  &c.  This  is  a  proof  of

ILLUSTRATIONS.  271

the  little  intercourse  which  took  place  between  different  nations.
Among  people  whose  manners  are  simple,  and  who  are  seldom
visited  by  strangers,  hospitality  is  a  virtue  of  the  first  rank. This
duty  of  hospitality  was  so  necessary  in  that  state  of  society  which
took  place  during  the  middle  ages,  that  it  was  not  considered  as
one  of  those  virtues  which  men  may  practise  or  not,  according  to
the temper of  their  minds,  and  the  generosity  of  their  hearts.
Hospitality  was  enforced  by  statutes,  and  such  as  neglected  this
duty  were  liable  to  punishment. Quicunque  hospiti  venienti  lec-
tum, aut  focum  negaverit,  trium  solidorum  inlatione  mulctetur.
Leg.  Burgund.  tit,  xxxviii.  §  1. Si  quis  homini  aliquo  pergenti  in
itinere  mansionem  vetaverit  sexaginta  solidos  componat  in  publico.
Capitul.  lib.  vi.  §  82. This  increase  of  the  penalty,  at  a  period  so
long  after  that  in  which  the  laws  of  the  Burgundians  were  pub-
lished, and  when  the  state  of  society  was  much  improved,  is  very
remarkable. Other  laws of  the  same  purport  are  collected  by
Jo.  Fred.  Polac.  Systema  Jurisprud.  Germanicae,  Lips.  1733,  p.  75.
The  laws  of  the  Slavi  were  more  rigorous  than  any  that  he  men-
tions : they  ordained, "  that  the  moveables  of  an  inhospitable
person  should  be  confiscated,  and  his  house  burnt. They  were
even  so  solicitous  for  the  entertainment  of  strangers,  that  they  per-
mitted the  landlord  to  steal  for  the  support  of  his  guest." Quod
noctu furatus fueris, eras  appone,  hospitibus. Rerum  Mecle-
burgicar,  lib.  viii.  a  Mat.  Jo.  Beehr. Lips.  1751,  p.  50. Inconse-
quence of  these  laws,  or  of  the  state  of  society  which  made  it  proper
to  enact  them,  hospitality  abounded  while  the  intercourse  among
men  was  inconsiderable,  and  secured  the  stranger  a  kind  reception
under  every  roof  where  he  chose  to  take  shelter. This,  too,  proves
clearly,  that  the  intercourse  among  men  was  rare ;  for  as  soon  as
this  became  frequent,  what  was  a  pleasure  became  a  burden,  and
the  entertaining  of  travellers  was  converted  into  a  branch  of  com-
merce.

But  the  laws  of  the  middle  ages  afford  a  proof  still  more  con-
vincing of  the  small  intercourse  between  different  nations.  The
genius  of  the  feudal  system,  as  well  as  the  spirit  of  jealousy  which
always  accompanies  ignorance,  concurred  in  discouraging  strangers
from  settling  in  any  new  country.  If  a  person  removed  from  one
province  in  a  kingdom  to  another,  he  was  bound  within  a  year  and
a  day  to  acknowledge  himself  the  vassal  of  the  baron  in  whose
estate  he  settled;  if  he  neglected  to  do  so,  he  became  liable  to  a
penalty  ;  and  if,  at  his  death,  he  neglected  to  leave  a  certain
legacy  to  the  baron  within  whose  territory  he  had  resided,  all  his
goods  were  confiscated.  The  hardships  imposed  on  foreigners
settling  in  a  country  were  still  more  intolerable.  In  more  early
times,  the  superior  lord  of  any  territory  in  which  a  foreigner  settled,

272  PROOFS AND

might  seize  his  person,  and  reduce  him  to  servitude. Very  striking
instances  of  this  occur  in  the  history  of  the  middle  ages. The
cruel  depredations  of  the  Normans  in  the  ninth  century,  obliged
many  inhabitants  of  the  maritime  provinces  of  France  to  fly  into
the  interior  parts  of  the  kingdom. But  instead  of  being  received
with  that  humanity  to  which  their  wretched  condition  entitled  them,
they  were  reduced  to  a  state  of  servitude. Both  the  civil  and
ecclesiastical  powers  found  it  necessary  to  interpose,  in  order  to
put  a  stop  to  this  barbarous  practice. Potgisser.  de  Statu  Servor.
lib.  i.  c.  1.  §  16. In  other  countries,  the  laws  permitted  the^inha-
bitants  of  the  maritime  provinces  to  reduce  such  as  were  ship-
wrecked on  their  coast  to  servitude. Ibid.  §  17. This  barbarous
custom  prevailed  in  many  countries  of  Europe. The  practice  of
seizing  the  goods  of  persons  who  had  been  shipwrecked, and  of
confiscating  them  as  the  property  of  the  lord  on  whose  manor  they
were  thrown, seems  to have  been universal. De  Westphalen
Monum.  inedita  Her  Germ.  vol.  iv.  p.  907,  &c.  et  Du  Cange,  voc.
Laganum,  Beehr.  Rer.  Macleb.  lib.  p.  512. Among  the  ancient
Welsh,  three  sorts  of  persons,  a  madman,  a  stranger,  and  a  leper,
might  be  killed with  impunity. Leges Hoel Dda, quoted  in
Observat.  on  the  Statutes,  chiefly  the  more  ancient,  p-.  22. M.  de
Lauriere  produces  several  ancient  deeds  which  prove,  that  in  differ-
ent provinces  of  France  strangers  became  the  slaves  of  the  lord  on
whose lands  they settled. Glossaire  du  Droit FranQois,  Art.
Aubaine,  p.  92. Beaumanoir  says,  "  that  there  are  several  places
in  France,  in  which,  if  a  stranger  fixes  his  residence  for  a  year  and
a  day,  he  becomes  the  slave  of  the  lord  of  the  manor." Const,  de
Beav.  ch.  45.  p.  254. As  a  practice  so  contrary  to  humanity  could
not  subsist  long,  the  superior  lords  found  it  necessary  to  rest  satis-
fied, instead  of  enslaving  aliens,  with  levying  certain  annual  taxes
upon  them,  or  imposing  upon  them  some  extraordinary  duties  or
services. But  when  any  stranger  died,  he  could  not  convey  his
effects  by  will ;  and  all  his  real  as  well  as  personal  estate  fell  to  the
king,  or  to  the  lord  of  the  barony,  to  the  exclusion  of  his  natural
heirs. This  is  termed  in  France  Droit  D^  Aubaine. Pref.  de  Laurier.
Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  15. Brussel.  torn.  ii.  p.  944. Du  Cange,  voc.
Albani. Pasquier  Recherches,  p.  367. This  practice  of  confis-
cating the  effects  of  strangers  upon  their  death  was  very  ancient.
It  is  mentioned,  though  very  obscurely,  in  a  law  of  Charlemagne,
A.D.813. Capitul.  Baluz.  p.  507.  §  5. Not  only  persons  who
were born in a foreign country were subject to the Droit
D'Aubaine,  but  in  some  countries  such  as  removed  from  one  diocess
to  another,  or  from  the  lands  of  one  baron  to  another. Brussel.
vol.  ii.  p.  947.  949. It  is  hardly  possible  to  conceive  any  law
more  unfavourable  to  the  intercourse  between  nations. Some-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  273

thing  similar  to  it,  however,  may  be  found  in  the  ancient  laws  of
every  kingdom  in  Europe.  With  respect  to  Italy,  see  Murat.  Ant.
vol.  ii.  p.  14.  As  nations  advanced  in  improvement  this  practice
was  gradually  abolished.  It  is  no  small  disgrace  to  the  French
jurisprudence,  that  this  barbarous,  inhospitable  custom  should  have
so  long  remained  among  a  people  so  highly  civilized.

The  confusion  and  outrage  which  abounded  under  a  feeble  form
of  government,  incapable  of  framing  or  executing  salutary  laws,
rendered  the  communication  between  the  different  provinces  of  the
same  kingdom  extremely  dangerous.  It  appears  from  a  letter  of
Lupus,  abbot  of  Ferrieres,  in  the  ninth  century,  that  the  highways
were  so  much  infested  by  banditti,  that  it  was  necessary  for  travellers
to  form  themselves  into  companies  or  caravans,  that  they  might  be
safe  from  the  assault  of  robbers.  Bouquet  Recueil  des  Hist.  vol.  vii.
p.  515.  The  numerous  regulations  published  by  Charles  the  Bald
in  the  same  century,  discover  the  frequency  of  these  disorders ;  and
such  acts  of  violence  were  become  so  common,  that  by  many  they
were  hardly  considered  as  criminal.  For  this  reason  the  inferior
judges,  called  Centenarii,  were  required  to  take  an  oath,  that  they
would  neither  commit  any  robbery  themselves,  nor  protect  such  as
were  guilty  of  that  crime.  Capitul.  edit.  Baluz.  vol.  ii.  p.  63.  68.
The  historians  of  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries  give  pathetic  de-
scriptions of  these  disorders.  Some  remarkable  passages  to  this
purpose  are  collected  by  Mat.  Jo.  Beehr.  Rer.  Mecleb.  lib.  viii.
p.  603.  They  became  so  frequent  and  audacious,  that  the  authority
of  the  civil  magistrate  was  unable  to  repress  them.  The  ecclesi-
astical jurisdiction  was  called  in  to  aid  it.  Councils  were  held  with
great  solemnity,  the  bodies  of  the  saints  were  brought  thither,  and,
in  presence  of  their  sacred  reliques,  anathemas  were  denounced
against  robbers,  and  other  violators  of  the  public  peace.  Bouquet
Recueil  des  Hist.  torn.  x.  p.  360.  431.  536.  One  of  these  forms
of  excommunication,  issued  A.  D.  988,  is  still  preserved,  and  is  so
singular,  and  composed  with  eloquence  of  such  a  peculiar  kind,  that
it  will  not  perhaps  be  deemed  unworthy  of  a  place  here.  After  the
usual  introduction,  and  mentioning  the  outrage  which  gave  occasion
to  the  anathema,  it  runs  thus :  "  Obtenebrescant  oculi  vestri,  qui
concupiverunt ;  arescant  manus,  quse  rapuerunt,  debilitentur  omnia
membra,  quse  adjuverunt.  Semper  laboretis,  nee  requiem  inveni-
atis,  fructuque  vestri  laboris  prevemini.  Formidetis,  et  paveatis,  a
facie  persequentis,  et  non  persequentis  hostis,  ut  tabescendo  de-
ficiatis.  Sit  portio  vestra  cum  Juda  traditore  Domini,  in  terra
mortis  et  tenebrarum  ;  donee  corda  vestra  ad  satisfactionem  plenam
convertantur.— Ne  cessant  a  vobis  hae  maledictiones,  scelerum
vestrorum  persecutrices,  quamdiu  permanebitis  in  peccato  perva-
sionis.  Amen,  Fiat,  Fiat."  Bouquet.  Ibid.  p.  517.

VOL.  III.  T

274  PROOFS  AND

Note  XXX. Sect.  I. p.  83.

WITH  respect  to  the  progress  of  commerce  which  I  have  de-
scribed,  p.  80, &c.  it  may  be observed  that  the Italian states
carried  on  some  commerce  with  the  cities  of  the  Greek  empire,  as
early  as  the  age  of  Charlemagne,  and  imported  into  their  own
country  the  rich  commodities  of  the  East. Murat.  Antiq.  Ital.
vol.  ii.  p.  882. In  the  tenth  century,  the  Venetians  had  opened  a
trade  with  Alexandria  in  Egypt.  Ibid. The  inhabitants  of  Amalphi
and  Pisa  had  likewise  extended  their  trade  to  the  same  ports.
Murat.  Ib.  p.  884,  885. The  effects  of  the  crusades  in  increasing
the  wealth  and  commerce  of  the  Italian  states,  and  particularly
that  which  they  carried  on  with  the  East,  I  have  explained,  page
34th  of  this  volume. They  not  only  imported  the  Indian  commo-
dities from  the  East,  but  established  manufactures  of  curious  fabric
in  their  own  country. Several  of  these  are  enumerated  by  Muratori
in his  Dissertations  concerning  the  arts  and  the  'weaving  of  the
middle  ages. Antiq.  Ital.  vol.  ii.  p.  349.  399. They  made  great
progress,  particularly  in  the  manufacture  of  silk,  which  had  long
been  peculiar  to  the  eastern  provinces  of  Asia. Silk-stuffs  were  of
such  high  price  in  ancient  Rome,  that  only  a  few  persons  of  the
first  rank  were  able  to  purchase  them. Under  Aurelian,  A.  D.  270,
a  pound  of  silk  was  equal  in  value  to  a  pound  of  gold. Absit  ut
auro  fila  pensentur. Libra  enirti  auri  tune  libra  serici  fuit. Vo-
piscus  in  Aureliano. Justinian,  in  the  sixth  century,  introduced  the
art  of  rearing  silkworms  into  Greece,  which  rendered  the  commo-
dity somewhat  more  plentiful,  though  still  it  was  of  such  great
value,  as  to  remain  an  article  of  luxury  or  magnificence,  reserved
only  for  persons  of  the  first  order,  or  for  public  solemnities.  Roger  I.
king  of  Sicily,  about  the  year  1 130,  carried  off  a  number  of  artificers
in  the  silk  trade  from  Athens,  and  settling  them  in  Palermo,  intror
duced  the  culture  of  silk  into  his  kingdom,  from  which  it  was
communicated  to  other  parts  of  Italy. Gianon.  Hist,  of  Naples,
b.  xi.  c.  7. This  seems  to  have  rendered  silk  so  common,  that,
about  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  a  thousand  citizens  of
Genoa  appeared  in  one  procession  clad  in  silk  robes. Sugar  is
likewise  a  production  of  the  East. Some  plants  of  the  sugar-cane
were  brought  from  Asia ;  and  the  first  attempt  to  cultivate  them  in
Sicily  was  made  about  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century. From
thence  they  were  transplanted  into  the  southern  provinces  of  Spain.
From  Spain  they  were  carried  to  the  Canary  and  Madeira  Isles,  and
at  length  into  the  New  World. Ludovico  Guicciardini,  in  enume-
rating the  goods  imported into  Antwerp  about  the  year 1500,
mentions  the  sugar  which  they  received  from  Spain  and  Portugal

ILLUSTRATIONS.  275

as  a  considerable  article.  He  describes  that  sugar  as  the  product
of  the  Madeira  and  Canary  Islands.  Descritt.  de  Paesi  Bassi,
p.  180,  181.  The  sugar-cane  was  introduced  into  the  West  Indies
before  that  time,  but  the  cultivation  of  it  was  not  so  improved,  or
so  extensive  as  to  furnish  an  article  of  much  consequence  in  com-
merce. In  the  middle  ages,  though  sugar  was  not  raised  in  such
quantities,  or  employed  for  so  many  purposes,  as  to  become  one  of
the  common  necessaries  of  life,  it  appears  to  have  been  a  consider-
able article  in  the  commerce  of  the  Italian  states.

These  various  commodities  with  which  the  Italians  furnished  the
other  nations  of  Europe,  procured  them  a  favourable  reception  in
every  kingdom..  They  were  established  in  France  in  the  thirteenth
century  with  most  extensive  immunities.  They  not  only  obtained
every  indulgence  favourable  to  their  commerce,  but  personal  rights
and  privileges  were  granted  to  them,  which  the  natives  of  the  king-
dom did  not  enjoy.  Ordon.  torn.  iv.  p.  668.  By  a  special  proviso,
they  were  exempted  from  the  Droit  d'Aubaine.  Ibid.  p.  670.  As
the  Lombards  (a  name  frequently  given  to  all  Italian  merchants  in
many  parts  of  Europe)  engrossed  the  trade  of  every  kingdom  in
which  they  settled,  they  became  masters  of  its  cash.  Money  of
course  was  in  their  hands  not  only  a  sign  of  the  value  of  other  com-
modities, but  became  an  object  of  commerce  itself.  They  dealt
largely  as  bankers.  In  an  ordonance,  A.  D.  1295,  we  find  them
styled  mercatores  and  campsores.  They  carried  on  this  as  well  as
other  branches  of  their  commerce  with  somewhat  of  that  rapacious
spirit  which  is  natural  to  monopolizers  who  are  not  restrained  by
the  competition  of  rival  traders.  An  absurd  opinion,  which  pre-
vailed in  the  middle  ages,  was,  however,  in  some  measure,  the
cause  of  their  exorbitant  demands,  and  may  be  pleaded  in  apology
for  them.  Trade  cannot  be  carried  on  with  advantage,  unless  the
persons  who  lend  a  sum  of  money  are  allowed  a  certain  premium
for  the  use  of  it,  as  a  compensation  for  the  risk  which  they  run  in
permitting  another  to  traffic  with  their  stock.  This  premium  is
fixed  by  law  irt  all  commercial  countries,  and  is  called  the  legal
interest  of  money.  But  the  fathers  of  the  church  had  preposterously
applied  the  prohibitions  of  usury  in  Scripture  to  the  payment  of
legal  interest,  and  condemned  it  as  a  sin.  The  schoolmen,  misled
by  Aristotle,  whose  sentiments  they  followed  implicitly,  and  without
examination,  adopted  the  same  error,  and  enforced  it.  Blackstone's
Commentaries  on,  the  Laws  of  England,  vol.  ii.  p.  455.  Thus  the
Lombards  found  themselves  engaged  in  a  traffic  which  was  every
where  deemed  criminal  and  odious.  They  were  liable  to  punish-
ment if  detected.  They  were  not  satisfied,  therefore,  with  that
moderate  premium,  which  they  might  have  claimed  if  their  trade
had  been  open  and  authorized  by  law.  They  exacted  a  sum  pro-

276  PROOFS  AND

portional  to  the  danger  and  infamy  of  a  discovery.  Accordingly,
we  find  that  it  was  usual  for  them  to  demand  twenty  per  cent,  for
the  use  of  money  in  the  thirteenth  century.  Murat.  Antiq.  Ital.
vol.  i.  p.  893.  About  the  beginning  of  that  century,  the  countess
of  Flanders  was  obliged  to  borrow  money  in  order  to  pay  her
husband's  ransom.  She  procured  the  sum  requisite  either  from
Italian  merchants  or  from  Jews.  The  lowest  interest  which  she
paid  to  them  was  above  twenty  per  cent,  and  some  of  them  exacted
near  thirty.  Martene  and  Durand.  Thesaur.  Anecdotorum,  vol.  i.
p.  886.  In  the  fourteenth  century,  A.  D.  1311,  Philip  IV.  fixed  the
interest  which  might  be  legally  exacted  in  the  fairs  of  Champagne
at  twenty  per  cent.  Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  484.  The  interest  of  money
in  Aragon  was  somewhat  lower.  James  I.  A.  D.  1242,  fixed  it  by
law  at  eighteen  per  cent.  Petr.  de  Marca.  Marca  sive  Limes  His-
pan.  app.  1433.  As  late  as  the  year  1490,  it  appears  that  the
interest  of  money  in  Placentia,  was  at  the  rate  of  forty  per  cent.
This  is  the  more  extraordinary,  because  at  that  time  the  commerce
of  the  Italian  states  was  become  considerable.  Memorie  Storiche
de  Piacenza,  torn.  viii.  p.  104.  Piac.  1760.  It  appears  from  Lud.
Guicciardini,  that  Charles  V.  had  fixed  the  rate  of  interest  in  his
dominions  in  the  Low  Countries  at  twelve  per  cent,  and  at  the  time
when  he  wrote,  about  the  year  1560,  it  was  not  uncommon  to  exact
more  than  that  sum.  He  complains  of  this  as  exorbitant,  and
points  out  its  bad  effects  both  on  agriculture  and  commerce.
Descrit.  di  Paesi  Bassi,  p.  172.  This  high  interest  of  money  is
alone  a  proof  that  the  profits  on  commerce  were  exorbitant ;  and
that  it  was  not  carried  on  to  great  extent. — The  Lombards  were
likewise  established  in  England  in  the  thirteenth  century,  and  a
considerable  street  in  the  city  of  London  still  bears  their  name.
They  enjoyed  great  privileges,,  and  carried  on  an  extensive  com-
merce, particularly  as  bankers.  See  Anderson's  Chronol.  Deduction.
vol.  i.  p.  137.  160.  204.  231,  where  the  statutes  or  other  authorities
which  confirm  this  are  quoted.  But  the  chief  mart  for  Italian  com-
modities was  at  Bruges.  Navigation  was  then  so  imperfect,  that
to  sail  from  any  port  in  the  Baltic,  and  to  return  again,  was  a  voy-
age too  great  to  be  performed  in  one  summer.  For  that  reason,  a
magazine,  or  storehouse  half-way  between  the  commercial  cities  in
the  north,  and  those  in  Italy,  became  necessary.  Bruges  was
pitched  upon  as  the  most  convenient  station.  That  choice  intro-
duced vast  wealth  into  the  Low  Countries.  Bruges  was  at  once  the
staple  for  English  wool;  for  the  woollen  and  linen  manufactures  of
the  Netherlands ;  for  the  naval  stores  and  other  bulky  commodities
of  the  north  ;  and  for  the  Indian  commodities,  as  well  as  domestic
productions  imported  by  the  Italian  states.  The  extent  of  its  com-
merce in  India  goods  with  Venice  alone,  appears  from  one  fact,

ILLUSTRATIONS.  277

In  the  year  1318,  five  Venetian  galeasses  laden  with  Indian  com-
modities arrived  at  Bruges,  in  order  to  dispose  of  their  cargoes  at
the  fair.  These  galeasses  were  vessels  of  very  considerable  bur-
den. L.  Guic,  Descritt.  di  Paesi  Bassi,  p.  174.  Bruges  was  the
greatest  emporium  in  all  Europe.  Many  proofs  of  this  occur  in
the  historians  and  records  of  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries.
But,  instead  of  multiplying  quotations,  I  shall  refer  my  readers  to
Anderson,  vol.  i.  p.  12.  137.  213.  246,  &c.  The  nature  of  this
work  prevents  me  from  entering  into  any  more  minute  detail,  but
there  are  some  detached  facts,  which  give  a  high  idea  of  the
wealth  both  of  the  Flemish  and  Italian  commercial  states.  The
duke  of  Brabant  contracted  his  daughter  to  the  Black  Prince,  son
of  Edward  III.  of  England,  A.  ».  1339,  and  gave  her  a*  portion
which  we  may  reckon  to  be  of  equal  value  with  three  hundred
thousand  pounds  of  our  present  money.  Ryroer's  Foedera,  vol.  v.
p,  113.  John  Galeazzo  Visconti  Duke  of  Milan  concluded  a  treaty
of  marriage  between  his  daughter  and  Lionel  duke  of  Clarence,
Edward's  third  son,  A.  D.  1367,  and  granted  her  a  portion  equal
to  two  hundred  thousand  pounds  of  our  present  money.  Rymer's
Fcedera,  vol.  vi.  p.  547.  These  exorbitant  sums  so  far  exceeded
what  was  then  granted  by  the  most  powerful  monarchs,  and  which
appear  extraordinary  even  in  the  present  age,  when  the  wealth  of
Europe  is  so  much  increased,  must  have  arisen  from  the  riches
which  flowed  into  those  countries  from  their  extensive  and  lucrative
commerce.  The  first  source  of  wealth  to  the  towns  situated  on
the  Baltic  sea  seems  to  have  been  the  herring-fishery ;  the  shoals
of  herrings  frequenting  at  that  time  the  coast  of  Sweden  and  Den-
mark, in  the  same  manner  as  they  now  resort  to  the  British  coasts.
The  effects  of  this  fishery  are  thus  described  by  an  author  of  the
thirteenth  century.  The  Danes,  says  he,  who  were  formerly  clad  in
the  poor  garb  of  sailors,  are  now  clothed  in  scarlet,  purple,  and
fine  linen.  For  they  abound  with  wealth  flowing  from  their  annual
fishery  on  the  coast  of  Schonen ;  so  that  all  nations  resort  to  them,
bringing  their  gold,  silver,  and  precious  commodities,  that  they
may  purchase  herrings,  which  the  divine  bounty  bestows  upon
them.  Arnoldus  Lubecensis  ap.  Conring.  de  Urbib.  German.  $  87.
The  Hanseatic  League  is  the  most  powerful  commercial  confe-
deracy known  in  history.  Its  origin  towards  the  close  of  the
twelfth  century,  and  the  objects  of  its  union,  are  described  by
Knipschildt  Tractatus  Historico-Politico  Juridicus  de  Juribus  Civi*
tat.  Imper.  lib.  i.  cap.  4.  Anderson  has  mentioned  the  chief  facts
with  respect  to  their  commercial  progress,  the  extent  of  the  privi-
leges which  they  obtained  in  different  countries,  their  successful
wars  with  several  monarchs,  as  well  as  the  spirit  and  zeal  with
which  they  contended  for  those  liberties  and  rights,  without  whicH

278  PROOFS AND

it  is  impossible  to  carry  on  commerce  to  advantage.  The  vigorous
efforts  of  a  society  of  merchants  attentive  only  to  commercial  ob-
jects, could  not  fail  of  diffusing  new  and  more  liberal  ideas  con-
cerning justice  and  order  in  every  country  of  Europe  where  they
settled.

In  England,  the  progress  of  commerce  was  extremely  slow ;  and
the  causes  of  this  are  obvious.  During  the  Saxon  heptarchy,
England,  split  into  many  petty  kingdoms,  which  were  perpetually
at  variance  with  each  other ;  exposed  to  the  fierce  incursions  of  the
Danes,  and  other  northern  pirates ;  and  sunk  in  barbarity  and
ignorance,  was  in  no  condition  to  cultivate  commerce,  or  to  pursue
any  system  of  useful  and  salutary  policy.  When  a  better  prospect
began  td  open,  by  the  union  of  the  kingdom  under  one  monarch,
the  Norman  conquest  took  place.  This  occasioned  such  a  violent
shock,  as  well  as  such  a  sudden  and  total  revolution  of  property,
that  the  nation  did  not  recover  from  it  during  several  reigns.  By
the  time  that  the  constitution  began  to  acquire  some  stability,  and
the  English  had  so  incorporated  with  their  conquerors,  as  to  become
one  people,  the  nation  engaged  with  no  less  ardour  than  impru-
dence in  support  of  the  pretensions  of  their  sovereigns  to  the  crown
of  France,  and  long  wasted  its  vigour  and  genius  in  its  wild  efforts
to  conquer  that  kingdom.  When,  by  ill  success,  and  repeated  dis-
appointments, a  period  was  at  last  put  to  this  fatal  frenzy,  and  the
nation  beginning  to  enjoy  some  repose,  had  leisure  to  breathe  and
to  gather  new  strength,  the  destructive  wars  between  the  houses  of
York  and  Lancaster  broke  out,  and  involved  the  kingdom  in  the
worst  of  all  calamities.  Thus,  besides  the  common  obstructions  of
commerce,  occasioned  by  the  nature  of  the  feudal  government,  and
the  state  of  manners  during  the  middle  ages,  its  progress  in  Eng-
land was  retarded  by  peculiar  causes.  Such  a  succession  of
events  adverse  to  the  commercial  spirit  was  sufficient  to  have
checked  its  growth,  although  every  other  circumstance  had  favoured
it.  The  English  were  accordingly  one  of  the  last  nations  in  Europe
who  availed  themselves  of  those  commercial  advantages  which
were  natural  or  peculiar  to  their  country.  Before  the  reign  of
Edward  IH.  all  the  wool  of  England,  except  a  small  quantity
wrought  into  coarse  cloths  for  home  consumption,  was  sold  to  the
Flemings  or  Lombards,  and  manufactured  by  them.  Though  Ed-
ward, A.  D.  1326,  began  to  allure  some  of  the  Flemish  weavers
to  settle  in  England,  it  was  long  before  the  English  were  capable
of  fabricating  cloth  for  foreign  markets,  and  the  export  of  un-
wrought  wool  still  continued  to  be  the  chief  article  of  their  com-
merce. Anderson,  passim. — All  foreign  commodities  were  brought
into  England  by  the  Lombards  or  Hanseatic  merchants.  The
English  ports  were  frequented  by  ships  both  from  the  north  and

ILLUSTRATIONS.  279

south  of  Europe,  and  they  tamely  allowed  foreigners  to  reap  all
the  profits  arising  from  the  supply  of  their  wants.  The  first  com-
mercial treaty  of  England  on  record,  is  that  with  Haquin,  king  of
Norway,  A.  D.  1217.  Anders,  vol.  i.  p.  108.  But  the  English
did  not  venture  to  trade  in  their  own  ships  to  the  Baltic  until  the
beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century.  Ibid.  p.  151.  It  was  after  the
middle  of  the  fifteenth,  before  they  sent  any  ship  into  the  Mediter-
ranean. Ibid.  p.  177.  Nor  was  it  long  before  this  period  that
their  vessels  began  to  visit  the  ports  "of  Spain  or  Portugal.  But
though  I  have  pointed  out  the  slow  progress  of  the  English  com-
merce as  a  fact  little  attended  to,  and  yet  meriting  consideration  ;
the  concourse  of  foreigners  to  the  ports  of  England,  together  with
the  communication  among  all  the  different  countries  iri  Europe,
which  went  on  increasing  from  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth  century,
is  sufficient  to  justify  all  the  observations  and  reasonings  in  the
text  concerning  the  influence  of  commerce  on  the  state  of  manners
and  of  society.

Note  XXXI. Sect.  III.  p.  147.

I  HAVE  not  been  able  to  discover  the  precise  manner  in  which
the  justiza  was  appointed.  Among  the  claims  of  the  junta  of
union  formed  against  James  I.  A.  D.  1264,  this  was  one  ;  that  the
king  should  not  nominate  any  person  to  be  justiza,  without  the
consent  or  approbation  of  the  ricoshombres  or  nobles.  Zurita
Anales  de  Aragon,  vol.  i.  p.  180.  But  the  king,  in  his  answer  to  their
remonstrance,  asserts,  "  that  it  was  established  by  immemorial
practice,  and  was  conformable  to  the  laws  of  the  kingdom,  that  the
king,  in  virtue  of  his  royal  prerogative,  should  name  the  justiza.''
Zurita,  ib.  181.  Blanca,  656.  From  another  passage  in  Zurita,  it
appears,  that  while  the  Aragonese  enjoyed  the  privilege  of  the
union,  i.  e.  the  power  of  confederating  against  their  sovereign  as
often  as  they  conceived  that  he  had  violated  any  of  their  rights
and  immunities,  the  justiza  was  not  only  nominated  by  the  king,
but  held  his  office  during  the  king's  pleasure.  Nor  was  this  prac-
tice attended  with  any  bad  effects,  as  the  privilege  of  the  union
was  a  sufficient  and  effectual  check  to  any  abuse  of  the  royal  pre-
rogative. But  when  the  privilege  of  the  union  was  abolished  as
dangerous  to  the  order  and  peace  of  society,  it  was  agreed  that  the
justiza  should  continue  in  office  during  life.  Several  kings,  how-
ever, attempted  to  remove  justizas»who  were  obnoxious  to  them,
and  they  sometimes  succeeded  in  the  attempt.  In  order  to  guard
against  this  encroachment,  which  would  have  destroyed  the  inten-
tion of  the  institution,  and  have  rendered  the  justiza  the  dependant
and  tool  of  the  crown,  instead  of  the  guardian  of  the  people,  a  law

280  PROOFS  AND

was  enacted  in  the  cortes,  A.  D.  1442,  ordaining  that  the  justiza
should  continue  in  office  during  life,  and  should  not  be  removed
from  it  unless  by  authority  of  the  cortes. Fueros  et  Observancias
del  Reyno  de  Arag.  lib.  i.  p.  22. By  former  laws  the  person  of
the  justiza  had  been  declared  sacred,  and  he  was  responsible  only
to  the  cortes.  Ibid.  p.  15.  b. Zurita  and  Blanca,  who  both  pub-
lished their  histories  while  the  justiza  of  Aragon  retained  the  full
exercise  of  his  privileges  and  jurisdiction,  have  neglected  to  explain
.several  circumstances  with  regard  to  the  office  of  that  respectable
magistrate,  because  they  addressed  their  works  to  their  country-
men, who  were  well  acquainted  with  every  particular  concerning
the  functions  of  a  judge,  to  whom  they  looked  up  as  to  the  guar-
dian of  their  liberties. It  is  vain  to  consult  the  later  historians  of
Spain,  about  any  point  with  respect  to  which  the  excellent  histo-
rians whom  I  have  named  are  silent. The  ancient  constitution  of
their  country  was  overturned,  and  despotism  established  on  the
ruin  of  its  liberties,  when  the  writers  of  this  and  the  preceding  cen-
tury composed  their  histories,  and  on  that  account  they  had  little
curiosity  to  know  the  nature  of  those  institutions  to  which  their
ancestors  owed  the  enjoyment  of  freedom,  or  they  were  afraid  to
describe  them  with  much  accuracy. The  spirit  with 'which  Mari-
ana, his  continuator  Miniana,  and  Ferreras,  write  their  histories,  is
very  different  from  that  of  the  two  historians  of  Aragon,  from  whom
I  have  taken  my  account  of  the  constitution  of  that  kingdom.

Two  circumstances  concerning  the  justiza,  besides  those  which  I
have  mentioned  in  the  text,  are  worthy  of  observation  :  1 .  None  of
the  ricoshombres,  or  noblemen  of  the  first  order,  could  be  ap-
pointed justiza.  He  was  taken  out  of  the  second  class  of  cavalleros,
wlio  seem  to  have  been  nearly  of  the  same  condition  or  rank  with
gentlemen  or  commoners  in  Great  Britain.  Fueros  et  Observanc.
del  Reyno,  &c.  lib.  i,  p.  21.  b.  The  reason  was,  by  the  laws  of
Aragon,  the  ricoshombres  were  not  subject  to  capital  punishment;
but  as  it  was  necessary  for  the  security  of  liberty,  that  the  justiza
should  be  accountable  for  the  manner  in  which  he  executed  the
high  trust  reposed  in  him,  it  was  a  powerful  restraint  upon  him  to
know  that  he  was  liable  to  be  punished  capitally.  Blanca,  p.  657.
756.  Zurita,  torn.  ii.  229.  Fueros  et  Observanc.  lib.  ix.  p.  182.
b.  183.  It  appears  too  from  many  passages  in  Zurita,  that  the
justiza  was  appointed  to  check  the  domineering  and  oppressive
spirit  of  the  nobles,  as  well  as  to  set  bounds  to  the  power  of  the
monarch,  and  therefore  he  was  chosen  from  an  order  of  citizens
equally  interested  in  opposing toth,

2.  A  magistrate  possessed  of  such  vast  powers  as  the  justiza,
might  have  exercised  them  in  a  manner  pernicious  to  the  state,  if
he  himself  had  been  subject  to  no  control  A  constitutional  re*

ILLUSTRATIONS.  281

medy  was  on  that  account  provided  against  this  danger.  Seven-
teen persons  were  chosen  by  lot  in  each  meeting  of  the  cortes.
These  formed  a  tribunal,  called  the  court  of  inquisition,  into  the
office  of  justiza.  This  court  met  at  three  stated  terms  in  each
year.  Every  person  had  liberty  of  complaining  to  it  of  any  ini-
quity or  neglect  of  duty  in  the  justiza,  or  in  the  inferior  judges,
who  acted  in  his  name.  The  justiza  and  his  deputies  were  called
to  answer  for  their  conduct.  The  members  of  the  court  passed
sentence  by  ballot.  They  might  punish  by  degradation,  confisca-
tion of  goods,  or  even  with  death.  The  law  which  erected  this
court,  and  regulated  the  form  of  its  procedure,  was  enacted  A.  D.
1461.  Zurita  Anales,  iv.  102.  Blanca  Comment.  Rer.  Aragon,
770.  Previous  to  this  period,  inquiry  was  made  into  the  conduct
of  the  justiza,  though  not  with  the  same  formality.  He  was,  from
the  first  institution  of  the  office,  subject  to  the  review  of  the  cortes.
The  constant  dread  of  such  an  impartial  and  severe  inquiry  into
his  behaviour,  was  a  powerful  motive  to  the  vigilant  and  faithful
discharge  of  his  duty.  A  remarkable  instance  of  the  authority  of
the  justiza,  when  opposed  to  that  of  the  king,  occurs  in  the  year
1386.  By  the  constitution  of  Aragon,  the  eldest  son  or  heir  ap-
parent of  the  crown  possessed  considerable  power  and  jurisdiction  in
the  kingdom.  Fueros  et  Observanc.  del  Reyno  de  Arag.  lib.  i.  p.
16.  Peter  IV.,  instigated  by  a  second  wife,  attempted  to  deprive
his  son  of  this,  and  enjoined  his  subjects  to  yield  him  no  obedi-
ence. The  prince  immediately  applied  to  the  justiza,  "  the  safe-
guard and  defence  (says  Zurita)  against  all  violence  and  oppres-
sion." The  justiza  granted  him  the  Jirmo  de  derecho,  the  effect  of
which  was,  that  upon  his  giving  surety  to  appear  in  judgment,  he
could  not  be  deprived  of  any  immunity  or  privilege  which  he  pos-
sessed, but  in  consequence  of  a  legal  trial  before  the  justiza,  and
of  a  sentence  pronounced  by  him.  This  was  published  throughout
the  kingdom ;  and  notwithstanding  the  proclamation  in  contradic-
tion to  this,  which  had  been  issued  by  the  king,  the  prince  continued
in  the  exercise  of  all  his  rights,  and  his  authority  was  universally
recognised.  Zurita  Anales  de  Aragon,  torn.  ii.  385.

Note  XXXII. Sect.  III.  p.  148.

I  HAVE  been  induced,  by  the  concurring  testimony  of  many
respectable  authors,  to  mention  this  as  the  constitutional  form  of
the  oath  of  allegiance,  which  the  Aragonese  took  to  their  sovereigns,
J  must  acknowledge,  however,  that  I  have  not  found  this  singular
oath  in  any  Spanish  author  whom  I  have  had  an  opportunity  of
consulting.  It  is  mentioned  neither  by  Zurita,  nor  Blanca,  nor
Argensola,  nor  Sayas,  who  were  all  historiographers  appointed  by

282  PROOFS AND

the  cortes  of  Aragon  to  record  the'  transactions  of  the  kingdom.
All  these  writers  possess  a  merit  which  is  very  rare  among  histo-
rians. They  are  extremely  accurate  in  tracing  the  progress  of  the
laws  and  constitution  of  their  country.  Their  silence  with  respect
to  this,  creates  some  suspicion  concerning  the  genuineness  of  the
oath.  But  as  it  is  mentioned  by  so  many  authors,  who  produce
the  ancient  Spanish  words  in  which  it  is  expressed,  it  is  probable
that  they  have  taken  it  from  some  writer  of  credit,  whose  works
have  not  fallen  into  my  hands.  The  spirit  of  the  oath  is  perfectly
agreeable  to  the  genius  of  the  Aragonese  constitution.  Since  the
publication  of  the  first  edition,  the  learned  M.  Totze,  professor  of
history  at  Batzow,  in  the  dutchy  of  Mecklenburgh,  has  been  so
good  as  to  point  out  to  me  a  Spanish  author  of  great  authority,
who  has  published  the  words  of  this  oath.  It  is  Antonio  Perez,
a  native  of  Aragon,  secretary  to  Philip  II.  The  words  of  the  oath
are,  "  Nos  que  valemos  tanto  como  vos,  os  hazemos  nuestro  Rey
y  Segnor,  con  tal  que  nos  guardeys  neustros  fueros,  y  libertades,
y  si  No,  No/'  Las  Obras  y  Relaciones  de  Ant.  Perez.  8vo.  par
Juan  de  la  Planche,  1631,  p.  143.

The  privilege  of  union  which  I  have  mentioned  in  the  preceding
Note,  and  alluded  to  in  the  text,  is  indeed  one  of  the  most  singular
which  could  take  place  in  a  regular  government,  and  the  oath  that
I  have  quoted  expresses  nothing  more  than  this  constitutional  pri-
vilege entitled  the  Aragonese  to  perform.  If  the  king  or  his  minis-
ters violated  any  of  the  laws  or  immunities  of  the  Aragonese,  and
did  not  grant  immediate  redress  in  consequence  of  their  representa-
tions and  remonstrances,  the  nobles  of  the  first  rank,  or  Ricos-
hombres  de  natura,  et  de  mesnada,  the  equestrian  order,  or  the  nobi-
lity of  the  second  class,  called  Hidalgos  et  Infanciones,  together
with  the  magistrates  of  cities,  might,  either  in  the  cortes,  or  in  a
voluntary  assembly,  join  in  union,  and  binding  themselves  by  mutual
oaths,  and  the  exchange  of  hostages,  to  be  faithful  to  each  other,
they  might  require  the  king,  in  the  name  and  by  the  authority  of
this  body  corporate,  to  grant  them  redress.  If  the  king  refused  to
comply  with  their  request,  or  took  arms  in  order  to  oppose  them,
they  might,  in  virtue  of  the  privilege  of  union,  instantly  withdraw
their  allegiance  from  the  king,  refuse  to  acknowledge  him  as  their
sovereign,  and  proceed  to  elect  another  monarch ;  nor  did  they
incur  any  guilt,  or  become  liable  to  any  prosecution  on  that  account.
BlancaCom.  Rer.  Arag.  661.  669.  This  union  did  not  resemble
the  confederacies  in  other  feudal  kingdoms.  It  was  a  constitutional
association,  in  which  legal  privileges  were  vested ;  which  issued
its  mandates  under  a  common  seal,  and  proceeded  in  all  its  opera-
tions by  regular  and  ascertained  forms.  This  dangerous  right  was
not  only  claimed,  but  exercised.  In  the  year  1287,  the  Aragonese

ILLUSTRATIONS.  283

formed  a  union  in  opposition  to  Alfonso  III.,  and  obliged  that
king  not  only  to  comply  with  their  demands,  but  to  ratify  a  privi-
lege so  fatal  to  the  power  of  the  crown. Zurita  Anales,  torn.  i.
p.  322. In  the  year  1347,  a  union  was  formed  against  Peter  IV.
with  equal  success,  and  a  new  ratification  of  the  privilege  was  ex-
torted. Zurita,  torn.  ii.  p.  202. But  soon  after,  the  king  having
defeated  the  leaders  of  the  union  in  battle,  the  privilege  of  union
was  finally  abrogated  in  the  cortes,  and  all  the  laws  or  records  which
contained*  any  confirmation  of  it  were  cancelled  or  destroyed. The
king,  in  presence  of  the  cortes,  called  for  the.  act  whereby  he  had
ratified  the  union,  and  having  wounded  his  hand  with  his  poniard,
he  held  it  above  the  record ;  "  That  privilege  (says  he)  which  has
been  so  fatal  to  the  kingdom,  and  so  injurious  to  royalty, should
be  effaced  with  the  blood  of  a  king." Zurita,  torn.  ii.  p.  229.
The  law  abolishing  the  union  is  published. Fueros  et  Observanc.
lib.  ix.  p.  178. From  that  period,  the  justiza  became  the  consti-
tutional guardian  of  public  liberty,  and  his  power  and  jurisdiction
occasioned  none  of  those  violent  convulsions  which  the  tumultuary
privilege  of  the  union  was  apt  to  produce. The  constitution  of
Aragon,  however,  still  remained  extremely  free. One  source  of
this  liberty  arose  from  the  early  admission  of  the  representatives
of  cities  into  the  cortes. It  seems  probable  from  Zurita,  that  bur-
gesses were  constituent  members  of  the  cortes  from  its  first  insti-
tution. He  mentions  a  meeting  of  cortes,  A.  D.  1 133,  in  which  the
procuradores  de  las  ciudades  y  villas  were  present. Tom.  i.  p.  51.
This  is  the  constitutional  language  in  which  their  presence  is  de-
clared in  the  cortes,  after  the  journals  of  that  court  were  regularly
kept. It  is  probable,  that  an  historian  so  accurate  as  Zurita  would
not  have  used  these  words,  if  he  had  not  taken  them  from  some
authentic  record. It  was  more  than  a  century  after  this  period
before  the  representatives  of  cities  formed  a  constituent  part  in  the
supreme  assemblies  of  the  other  European  nations. The  free  spirit
of  the  Aragonese  government  is  conspicuous  in  many  particulars.
The  cortes  not  only  opposed  the  attempts  of  their  kings  to  increase
their  revenue,  or  to  extend  their  prerogative,  but  they  claimed  rights
and  exercised  powers  which  will  appear  extraordinary  even  in  a
country  accustomed  to  the  enjoyment  of  liberty. In  the  year  1286,
the  cortes  claimed  the  privilege  of  naming  the  members  of  the
king's  council  and  the  officers  of  his  household  ;  and  they  seem  to
have  obtained  it  for  some  time. Zurita,  torn.  i.  p.  303.  307. It  was
the  privilege  of  the  cortes  to  name  the  officers  who  commanded
the  troops  raised  by  their  authority. This  seems  to  be  evident
from  a  passage  in  Zurita. When  the  cortes,  in  the  year  1503,
raised  a  body  of  troops  to  be  employed  in  Italy,  it  passed  an  act,
empowering  the  king  to  name  the  officers  who  should  command

284  PROOFS AND

them,  Zurita,  torn.  v.  p.  274. ;  which  plainly  implies,  that  without
this  warrant  it  did  not  belong  to  him  in  virtue  of  his  prerogative.
In  the  Fueros  et  Observancias  del  Reyno  de  Aragon,  two  general
declarations  of  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  Aragonese  are  pub-
lished ;  the  one  in  the  reign  of  Pedro  I.,  A.  D.  1283,  the  other  in
that  of  James  II.,  A.  D.  1325.  They  are  of  such  a  length,  that  I
cannot  insert  them  ;  but  it  is  evident  from  these,  that  not  only  the
privileges  of  the  nobility,  but  the  rights  of  the  people,  personal  as
well  as  political,  were,  at  that  period,  more  extensive  and  better
understood  than  in  any  kingdom  in  Europe.  Lib.  i.  p.  7.  9.  The
oath  by  which  the  king  bound  himself  to  observe  those  rights  and
liberties  of  the  people,  was  very  solemn.  Ibid.  p.  14.  b.  &  p<  15.
The  cortes  of  Aragon  discovered  not  only  the  jealousy  and  vigilance
which  are  peculiar  to  free  states,  in  guarding  the  essential  parts  of
the  constitution,  but  they  were  scrupulously  attentive  to  observe  the
most  minute  forms  and  ceremonies  to  which  they  were  accustomed.
According  to  the  established  laws  and  customs  of  Aragon,  no
foreigner  had  liberty  to  enter  the  hall  in  which  the  cortes  assem-
bled. Ferdinand,  in  the  year  1481,  appointed  his  queen,  Isabella,
regent  of  the  kingdom,  while  he  was  absent  during  the  course  of
the  campaign.  The  law  required  that  a  regent  should  "take  the  oath
of  fidelity  in  presence  of  the  cortes  ;  but,  as  Isabella  was  a  foreigner,
before  she  could  be  admitted,  the  cortes  thought  it  necessary  to
pass  an  act  authorizing  the  serjeant-porter  to  open  the  door  of  the
hall,  and  to  allow  her  to  enter;  "  so  attentive  were  they  (says
Zurita)  to  observe  their  laws  and  forms,  even  such  as  may  seem
most  minute,"  Tom.  iv.  p.  313.

The  Aragonese  were  no  less  solicitous  to  secure  the  personal
rights  of  individuals,  than  to  maintain  the  freedom  of  the  consti-
tution ;  and  the  spirit  of  their  statutes  with  respect  to  both  was
equally  liberal.  Two  facts  relative  to  this  matter  merit  observation.
By  an  express  statute  in  the  year  1335,  it  was  declared  to  be  un-
lawful to  put  any  native  Aragonese  to  the  torture.  If  he  could  not
be  convicted  by  the  testimony  of  witnesses,  he  was  instantly  ab-
solved. Zurita,  torn.  ii.  p.  66.  Zurita  records  the  regulation  with
the  satisfaction  natural  to  an  historian,  when  he  contemplates  the
humanity  of  his  countrymen.  He  compares  the  laws  of  Aragon
to  those  of  Rome,  as  both  exempted  citizens  and  freemen  from  such
ignominious  and  cruel  treatment,  and  had  recourse  to  it  only  in  the
trial  of  slaves.  Zurita  had  reason  to  bestow  such  an  encomium  on
the  laws  of  his  country.  Torture  was  at  that  time  permitted  by
the  laws  of  every  other  nation  in  Europe.  Even  in  England,  from
which  the  mild  spirit  of  legislation  has  long  banished  it,  torture  was
not,  at  that  time,  unknown.  Observations  on  the  Statutes,  chiefly
the  more  ancient,  &c.  p.  66.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  285

The  other  fact  shews,  that  the  same  spirit  which  influenced  the
legislature  prevailed  among  the  people.  In  the  year  1485,  the
religious  zeal  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  prompted  them  to  intro-
duce the  inquisition  into  Aragon.  Though  the  Aragonese  were  no
less  superstitiously  attached  than  the  other  Spaniards  to  the  Roman
Catholic  faith,  and  no  less  desirous  to  root  out  the  seeds  of  error
and  of  heresy  which  the  Jews  and  Moors  had  scattered,  yet  they
took  arms  against  the  inquisitors,  murdered  the  chief  inquisitor,
and  long  opposed  the  establishment  of  that  tribunal.  The  reason
which  they  gave  for  their  conduct  was,  that  the  mode  of  trial  in
the  inquisition  was  inconsistent  with  liberty.  The  criminal  was  not
confronted  with  the  witnesses,  he  was  not  acquainted  with  what
they  deposed  against  him,  he  was  subjected  to  torture,  and  the
goods  of  persons  condemned  were  confiscated.  Zurita  Anales,
tom.iv.  p.  341.

The  form  of  government  in  the  kingdom  of  Valencia,  and  prin-
cipality of  Catalonia,  which  were  annexed  to  the  crown  of  Aragon,
was  likewise  extremely  favourable  to  liberty.  The  Valencians  en-
joyed the  privilege  of  union  in  the  same  manner  with  the  Aragonese.
But  they  had  no  magistrate  resembling  the  justiza.  The  Cata-
lonians  were  no  less  jealous  of  their  liberties  than  the  two  other
nations,  and  no  less  bold  in  asserting  them.  But  it  is  not  necessary
for  illustrating  the  following  history,  to  enter  into  any  farther  detail
concerning  the  peculiarities  in  the  constitution  of  these  kingdoms.

Note  XXXIII. Sect.  III.  p.  149.

I  HAVE  searched  in  vain  among  the  historians  of  Castile  for  such
information  as  might  enable  me  to  trace  the  progress  of  laws  and
government  in  Castile,  or  to  explain  the  nature  of  the  constitution
with  the  same  degree  of  accuracy  wherewith  I  have  described  the
political  state  of  Aragon.  It  is  manifest,  not  only  from  the  histo-
rians' of  Castile,  but  from  its  ancient  laws,  particularly  the  Fuero
Juzgo,  that  its'  monarchs  were  originally  elective.  Ley,  2.  5.  8.  They
were  chosen  by  the  bishops,  the  nobility,  and  the  people.  Ibid.  It
appears  from  the  same  venerable  code  of  laws,  that  the  prerogative
of  the  Castilian  monarchs  was  extremely  limited.  Villaldiego,  in
his  commentary  on  the  Fuero  Juzgo,  produces  many  facts  and  au-
thorities in  confirmation  of  both  these  particulars.  Dr.  Geddes,
who  was  well  acquainted  with  Spanish  literature,  complains  that  he
could  find  no  author  who  gave  a  distinct  account  of  the  cortes  or
supreme  assembly  of  the  nation,  or  who  described  the  manner  in
which  it  was  held,  or  mentioned  the  precise  number  of  members
who  had  a  right  to  sit  in  it.  He  produces^  however,  from  Gil
Gonzales  d'Avila,  who  published  a  history  of  Henry  II.,  the  writ  of

286  PROOFS  AND

summons  to  the  town  of  Abula,  requiring  it  to  choose  representa-
tives to  appear  in  the  cortes,  which  he  called  to  meet  A.  D.  1390.
From  this  we  learn  that  prelates,  dukes,  marquisses,  the  masters  of
the  three  military  orders,  condes,  and  ricos-hombres,  were  required
to  attend.  These  composed  the  bodies  of  ecclesiastics  and  nobles,
which  formed  two  members  of  the  legislature.  The  cities  which
sent  members  to  that  meeting  of  the  cortes  were  forty-eight.  The
number  of  representatives  (for  the  cities  had  right  to  choose  more
or  fewer,  according  to  their  respective  dignity)  amounted  to  a
hundred  and  twenty-five.  Geddes'  Miscellaneous  Tracts,  vol.  i.
p.  331.  Zurita  having  occasion  to  mention  the  cortes  which  Ferdi-
nand held  at  Toro,  A.  D.  1505,  in  order  to  secure  for  himself  the
government  of  Castile  after  the  death  of  Isabella,  records,  with  his
usual  accuracy,  the  names  of  the  members  present,  and  of  the
cities  which  they  represented.  From  that  list  it  appears,  that  only
eighteen  cities  had  deputies  in  this  assembly.  Anales  de  Aragon,
torn.  vi.  p.  3.  What  was  the  occasion  of  this  great  difference  in
the  number  of  cities  represented  in  these  two  meetings  of  the
cortes,  I  am  unable  to  explain.  '  tv/

Note  XXXIV. Sect.  III.  p.  151.

A  GREAT  part  of  the  territory  in  Spain  was  engrossed  by  the
nobility.  L.  Marinseus  Siculus,  who  composed  his  treatise  De
Rebus  Hispaniae  during  the  reign  of  Charles  V.,  gives  a  catalogue
of  the  Spanish  nobility,  together  with  a  yearly  rent  of  their  estates.
According  to  his  account,  which  he  affirms  was  as  accurate  as  the
nature  of  the  subject  would  admit,  the  sum  total  of  the  annual
revenue  of  their  lands  amounted  to  one  million  four  hundred  and
eighty-two  thousand  ducats.  If  we  make  allowance  for  the  great
difference  in  the  value  of  money  in  the  fifteenth  century  from  that
which  it  now  bears,  and  consider  that  the  catalogue  of  Marinseus
includes  only  the  Titulados,  or  nobility  whose  families  were  dis-
tinguished by  some  honorary  title,  their  wealth  must  appear  very
great.  L.  Marinaeus  ap.  Schotti  Scriptores  Hispan.  vol.  i.  p.  323.
The  commons  of  Castile,  in  their  contest  with  the  crown,  which  I
shall  hereafter  relate,  complain  of  the  extensive  property  of  the
nobility  as  extremely  pernicious  to  the  kingdom.  In  one  of  their
manifestoes  they  assert,  that  from  Valladolid  to  St.  Jago  in  Galicia,
which  was  a  hundred  leagues,  the  crown  did  not  possess  more
than  three  villages.  All  the  rest  belonged  to  the  nobility,  and
could  be  subjected  to  no  public  burden.  Sandov.  Vida  del
Emperor  Carl.  V.,  vol.  i.  p.  422.  It  appears  from  the  testimony  of
authors  quoted  by  Bovadilla,  that  these  extensive  possessions  were
bestowed  upon  the  ricos-hombres,  hidalgos,  and  cavalleros,  by  the

ILLUSTRATIONS.  287

kings  of  Castile,  in  reward  for  the  assistance  which  they  had  re-
ceived from  them  in  expelling  the  Moors.  They  likewise  obtained
by  the  same  means  a  considerable  influence  in  the  cities,  many  of
which  anciently  depended  upon  the  nobility.  Politica  para  Corre-
gidores.  Amb.  1750,  fol.  vol.  i.  p.  440.  442.

Note  XXXV. Sect.  III.  p.  153.

I  HAVE  been  able  to  discover  nothing  certain,  as  I  observed,
Note  XVIII.,  with  respect  to  the  origin  of  communities  or  free  cities
in  Spain. It  is  probable,  that  as  soon  as  the  considerable  towns
were  recovered  from  the  Moors,  the  inhabitants  who  fixed  their
residence  in  them  being  persons  of  distinction  and  credit,  had  all
the  privileges  of  municipal  government  and  jurisdiction  conferred
upon  them. Many  striking  proofs  occur  of  the  splendour,  wealth,
and  power  of  the  Spanish  cities. Hieronymus  Paulus  wrote  a
description  of  Barcelona  in  the  year  1491,  and  compares  the  di-
mensions of  the  town  to  that  of  Naples,  and  the  elegance  of  its
buildings,  the  variety  of  its  manufactures,  and  the  extent  of  its
commerce, to Florence. Hieron. Paulus  ap. Schottum  Scrip.
Hisp.  ii.  844. Marinaeus  describes  Toledo  as  a  large  and  populous
city. A  great  number  of  its  inhabitants  were  persons  of  quality
and  of  illustrious  rank. Its  commerce  was  great. It  carried  on
with  great  activity  and  success  the  manufactures  of  silk  and  wool ;
and  the  number  of  inhabitants  employed  in  these  two  branches  of
trade,  amounted  nearly  to  ten  thousand. Marin.  ubi  supr.  p.  308.
I  know  no  city,  says  he,  that  I  would  prefer  to  Valladolid  for
elegance  and  splendour.  Ibid.  p.  312. We  may  form  some  estimate
of  its  populousness  from  the  following  circumstances. The  citizens
having  taken  arms  in  the  year  1516,  in  order  to  oppose  a  measure
concerted  by  cardinal  Ximenes,  they  mustered  in  the  city,  and  in
the  territory  which  belonged  to  it,  thirty  thousand  fighting  men.
Sandov.  Vida.  del  Emper.  Carl.  V.,  torn.  i.  p.  81. The  manu-
factures carried  on  in  the  towns  of  Spain  were  not  intended  merely
for  home  consumption,  they  were  exported  to  foreign  countries,  and
their  commerce  was  a  considerable  source  of  wealth  to  the  inha-
bitants. The  maritime  laws  of  Barcelona  are  the  foundation  of
mercantile  jurisprudence  in  modern  times,  as  the  Leges  Rhodise
were  among  the ancients. All the  commercial states  in  Italy
adopted  these  laws,  and  regulated  their  trade  according  to  them.
Sandi  Storia  Civile  Veneziani,  vol.  ii.  865. It  appears  from  several
ordonances  of  the  kings  of  France,  that  the  merchants  of  Aragon
and  Castile  were  received  on  the  same  footing,  and  admitted  to  the
same  privileges  with  those  of  Italy. Ordonances  des  Roys,  &c.
torn.  ii.  p.  135.  iii. 166.  504.  635. Cities  in  such  a  flourishing

PROOFS AND

state  became  a  respectable  part  of  the  society,  and  were  entitled  ta
a  considerable  share  in  the  legislature.  The  magistrates  of  Barce-
lona aspired  to  the  highest  honour  a  Spanish  subject  can  enjoy,
that  of  being  covered  in  the  presence  of  their  sovereign,  and  of
being  treated  as  grandees  of  the  kingdom.  Origin  de  la  dignidad
de  Grande  de  Castilla  por  don  Alonso  Carillo.  Madr.  1657.  p.  18.

Note  XXXVI. Sect.  III.  p.  155.

THE  military  order  of  St.  Jago,  the  most  honourable  and  opulent
of  the  three  Spanish  orders,  was  instituted  about  the  year  1170.
The  bull  of  confirmation  by  Alexander  III.  is  dated  A.  D.  1176.
At  that  time  a  considerable  part  of  Spain  still  remained  under  sub-
jection to  the  Moors,  and  the  whole  country  was  much  exposed  to
depredations  not  only  of  the  enemy,  but  of  banditti.  It  is  no
wonder,  then,  that  an  institution,  the  object  of  which  was  to  oppose
the  enemies  of  the  Christian  faith,  and  to  restrain  and  punish  those
who  disturbed  the  public  peace,  should  be  extremely  popular,  and
meet  with  general  encouragement.  The  wealth  and  power  of  the
order  became  so  great,  that,  according  to  one  historian,  the  grand-
master of  St.  Jago  was  the  person  in  Spain  of  greatest  power  and
dignity  next  to  the  king.  JE1.  Anton.  Nebrissensis,  ap.  Schott.
Script.  Hisp.  i.  812.  Another  historian  observes,  that  the  order
possessed  every  thing  in  Castile  that  a  king  would  most  desire  to
obtain.  Zurita  Anales,  v.  22.  The  knights  took  the  vows  of  obe-
dience, of  poverty,  and  of  conjugal  chastity.  By  the  former  they
were  bound  implicitly  to  obey  the  commands  of  their  grand-master.
The  order  could  bring  into  the  field  a  thousand  men  at  arms.  JEl.
Ant.  Nebriss.  p,  813.  If,  as  we  have  reason  to  believe,  these  men
at  arms  were  accompanied,  as  was  usual  in  that  age,  this  was  a
formidable  body  of  cavalry.  There  belonged  to  this  order  eighty-
four  commanders,  and  two  hundred  priories  and  other  benefices.
Dissertations  sur  la  Chevalerie  par  Hon.  de  St.  Marie,  p.  262.  It
is  obvious  how  formidable  to  his  sovereign  the  command  of  these
troops,  the  administration  of  such  revenues,  and  the  disposal  of  so
many  offices,  must  have  rendered  a  subject.  The  two  other  orders,
though  inferior  to  that  of  St.  Jago  in  power  and  wealth,  were
nevertheless  very  considerable  fraternities.  -  When  the  conquest  of
Granada  deprived  the  knights  of  St.  Jago  of  those  enemies  against
whom  their  zeal  was  originally  directed,  superstition  found  out  a
new  object,  in  defence  of  which  they  engaged  to  employ  their  cou-
rage. To  their  usual  oath,  they  added  the  following  clause  :  "  We
do  swear  to  believe,  to  maintain,  and  to  contend  in  public  and
private,  that  the  Virgin  Mary,  the  mother  of  God,  our  lady,  was
conceived  without  the  stain  of  original  sin."  This  addition  was

ILLUSTRATIONS.  289

made  about  the  middle  of  the  seventeenth  century.  Honore  de
St.  Marie  Dissertations,  &c.  p.  263. — Nor  is  such  a  singular  en-
gagement peculiar  to  the  order  of  St.  Jago.  The  members  of  the
second  military  order  in  Spain,  that  of  Calatrava,  equally  zealous
to  employ  their  prowess  in  defence  of  the  honours  of  the  blessed
Virgin,  have  likewise  professed  themselves  her  true  knights.  Their
vow,  conceived  in  terms  more  theologically  accurate  than  that  of
St.  Jago,  may  afford  some  amusement  to  an  English  reader.
"  I  vow  to  God,  to  the  grand  master,  and  to  you  who  here  re-
present his  person,  that  now,  and  for  ever,  I  will  maintain  and
contend,  that  the  Virgin  Mary,  mother  of  God,  our  lady,  was  con-
ceived without  original  sin,  and  never  incurred  the  pollution  of  it ;
but  that  in  the  moment  of  her  happy  conception,  and  of  the  union
of  her  soul  with  her  body,  the  divine  grace  prevented  and  preserved
her  from  original  guilt,  by  the  merits  of  the  passion  and  death  of
Christ  our  redeemer,  her  future  son,  foreseen  in  the  divine  council,
by  which  she  was  truly  redeemed,  and  by  a  more  noble  kind  of  re-
demption than  any  of  the  children  of  Adam.  In  the  belief  of  this
truth,  and  in  maintaining  the  honour  of  the  most  Holy  Virgin,
through  the  strength  of  Almighty  God,  I  will  live  and  will  die."
Definiciones  de  la  Orden  de  Calatrava,  conforme  al  Capitulo
General  en  1652,  fol.  Madr.  1748.  p.  153.  Though  the  church  of
Rome  hath  prudently  avoided  to  give  its  sanction  to  the  doctrine
of  the  immaculate  conception,  and  the  two  great  monastic  orders
of  St.  Dominic  and  St.  Francis  have  espoused  opposite  opinions
concerning  it,  the  Spaniards  are  such  ardent  champions  for  the
honour  of  the  Virgin,  that  when  the  present  king  of  Spain  instituted
a  new  military  order  in  the  year  1771,  in  commemoration  of  the
birth  of  his  grandson,  he  put  it  under  the  immediate  protection  of
the  most  Holy  Mary  in  the  mystery  of  her  immaculate  conception.
Constitutiones  de  la  Real  y  distinguida  Orden.  Espanola  de  Carlos
III.  p.  7.  To  undertake  the  defence  of  the  Virgin  Mary's  honour
had  such  a  resemblance  to  that  species  of  refined  gallantry,  which
was  the  original  object  of  chivalry,  that  the  zeal  with  which  the
military  orders  bound  themselves,  by  a  solemn  vow,  to  defend  it,
was  worthy  of  a  true  knight,  in  those  ages  when  the  spirit  of  the
institution  subsisted  in  full  vigour.  But  in  the  present  age,  it  must
excite  some  surprise  to  see  the  institution  of  an  illustrious  order
.connected  with  a  doctrine  so  extravagant  and  destitute  of  any
foundation  in  Scripture.

Note  XXXVII. Sect.  III.  p.  157.

I  HAVE  frequently  had  occasion  to  take  notice  of  the  defects  in
police  during  the  middle  ages,  occasioned  by  the  feebleness  of  go-
vernment, and  the  want  of  proper  subordination  among  the  different

VOL.  III.  .  U

290  PROOFS AND

ranks  of  men.  I  have  observed  in  a  former  Note,  that  this  greatly
interrupted  the  intercourse  between  nations,  and  even  between
different  places  in  the  same  kingdom.  The  description  whick  the
Spanish  historians  give  of  the  frequency  of  rapine,  murder,  and
every  act  of  violence,  in  all  the  provinces  of  Spain,  are  amazing,
and  present  to  us  the  idea  of  a  society  but  little  removed  from  the
disorder  and  turbulence  of  that  which  has  been  called  a  state  of
nature.  Zurita  Anales  de  Arag.  i.  175.  Ml  Ant.  Nebrissensis
rer.  a  Ferdin.  gestar.  Hist.  ap.  Schottum,  II.  849.  Though  the
excess  of  these  disorders  rendered  the  institution  of  the  Santa  Her-
mandad  necessary,  great  care  was  taken  at  first  to  avoid  giving  any
offence  or  alarm  to  the  nobility.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  judges  of
the  Hermandad  was  expressly  confined  to  crimes  which  violated
the  public  peace.  All  other  offences  were  left  to  the  cognizance
of  the  ordinary  judges.  If  a  person  was  guilty  of  the  most  noto-
rious perjury,  in  any  trial  before  a  judge  of  the  Hermandad,  he
could  not  punish  him,  but  was  obliged  to  remit  the  case  to  the
ordinary  judge  of  the  place.  Commentaria  in  Regias  Hispan.
Constitut.  per  Alph.  de  Azevedo,  pars  v.  p.  223,  &c.  fol.  Duaci,
1612.  Notwithstanding  these  restrictions,  the  barons  were  early
sensible  how  much  the  establishment  of  the  Hermandad  would
encroach  on  their  jurisdiction.  In  Castile,  some  opposition  was
made  to  the  institution ;  but  Ferdinand  had  the  address  to  obtain
the  consent  of  the  constable  to  the  introduction  of  the  Hermandad
into  that  part  of  the  kingdom  where  his  estate  lay ;  and  by  that
means,  as  well  as  the  popularity  of  the  institution,  he  surmounted
every  obstacle  that  stood  in  its  way.  .521.  Ant.  Nebrissen.  851.
In  Aragon,  the  nobles  combined  against  it  with  great  spirit ;  and
Ferdinand,  though  he  supported  it  with  vigour,  was  obliged  to
make  some  concessions  in  order  to  reconcile  them.  Zurita  Anales
de  Arag.  iv.  356.  The  power  and  revenue  of  the  Hermandad  in
Castile  seems  to  have  been  very  great.  Ferdinand,  when  preparing
for  the  war  against  the  Moors  of  Granada,  required  of  the  Her-
mandad to  furnish  him  sixteen  thousand  beasts  of  burden,  together
with  eight  thousand  men  to  conduct  them,  and  he  obtained  what
he  demanded.  JE\.  Ant.  Nebriss.  881.  The  Hermandad  has  been
found  to  be  of  so  much  use  in  preserving  peace,  and  restraining  or
detecting  crimes,  that  it  is  still  continued  in  Spain  ;  but  as  it  is  no
longer  necessary  either  for  moderating  the  power  of  the  nobility,  or
extending  that  of  the  crown,  the  vigour  and  authority  of  the  insti-
tution diminish  gradually.

Note  XXXVIII. Sect.  III.  p.  160.
NOTHING  is  more  common  among  antiquaries,  and  there  is  not
a  more  copious  source  of  error,  than  to  decide  concerning  the  in-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  291

stitutions  and  manners  of  past  ages,  by  the  forms  and  ideas  which
prevail  in  their  own  times. The  French  lawyers  in  the  seventeenth
and  eighteenth  centuries,  having  found  their  sovereigns  in  posses-
sion of  absolute  power,  seem  to  think  it  a  duty  incumbent  on  them
to  maintain  that  such  unbounded  authority  belonged  to  the  crown
in  every  period  of  their  monarchy. "  The  government  of  France,"
says  M.  de  Real  very  gravely,  "  is  purely  monarchical  at  this  day,
as  it  was  from  the  beginning. Our  kings  were  absolute  originally
as  they  are  at  present." Science  du  Governement,  torn.  ii.  p.  31.
It  is  impossible,  however,  to  conceive  two  states  of  civil  society
more  unlike  to  each  other,  than  that  of  the  French  nation  under
Clovis,  and  that  under  Louis  XV. It  is  evident  from  the  codes  of
laws  of  the  various  tribes  which  settled  in  Gaul,  and  the  countries
adjacent  to  it,  as  well  as  from  the  history  of  Gregory  of  Tours,  and
other  early  annalists,  that  among  all  these  people  the  form  of  go-
vernment was  extremely  rude  and  simple,  and  that  they  had  scarcely
begun  to  acquire  the  first  rudiments  of  that  order  and  police  which
.are  necessary  in  extensive  societies. The  king  or  leader  had  the
command  of  soldiers  or  companions,  who  followed  his  standard
from  choice,  not  by  constraint. I  have  produced  the  clearest  evi-
dence of  this,  Note  VI. An  event  related  by  Gregory  of  Tours,
lib.  iv.  c.  14,  affords  the  most  striking  proof  of  the  dependence  of
the  early  French  kings  on  the  sentiment  and  inclination  of  their
people. Clotaire  I.  having  marched  at  the  head  of  his  army,  in
the  year  553,  against  the  Saxons,  that  people,  intimidated  at  his
approach,  sued  for  peace,  and  offered  to  pay  a  large  sum  to  the
offended  monarch. Clotaire  was  willing  to  close  with  what  they
proposed. But  his  army  insisted  to  be  led  forth  to  battle. The
king  employed  all  his  eloquence  to  persuade  them  to  accept  of
what  the  Saxons  were  ready  to  pay. The  Saxons,  in  order  to
soothe  them,  increased  their  original  offer. The  king  renewed  his
solicitations ;  but  the  army  enraged,  rushed  upon  the  king,  tore
his  tent  in  pieces,  dragged  him  out  of  it,  and  would  have  slain  him
on  the  spot,  if  he  had  not  consented  to  lead  them  instantly  against
the  enemy.  *

If  the  early  monarchs  of  France  possessed  such  limited  autho-
rity, even  while  at  the  head  of  their  army,  their  prerogative  during
peace  will  be  found  to  be  still  more  confined.  They  ascended  the
throne  not  by  any  hereditary  right,  but  in  consequence  of  the  elec-
tion of  their  subjects.  In  order  to  avoid  an  unnecessary  number  of
quotations,  I  refer  my  readers  to  Hottomanni  Franco-gallia,  cap.
vi.  p.  47.  edit.  1573,  where  they  will  find  the  fullest  proof  of  this
from  Gregory  of  Tours,  Amoinus,  and  the  most  authentic  historians
of  the  Merovingian  kings.  The  effect  of  this  election  was  not  to
invest  them  with  absolute  power.  Whatever  related  to  the  general

u  2

292  PROOFS AND

welfare  of  the  nation,  was  submitted  to  public  deliberation,  and
determined  by  the  suffrage  of  the  people,  in  the  annual  assemblies
called  Les  Champs  de  Mars,  and  Les  Champs  deMai. These  as-
semblies were  called  Champs,  because,  according  to  the  custom  of
all  the  barbarous  nations,  they  were  held  in  the  open  air,  in  some
plain  capable  of  containing  the  vast  number  of  persons  who  had  a
right  to  be  present. Jo.  Jac.  Sorberus  de  Comitiis  veterum  Ger-
manorum,  vol.  i.  §  19,  &c. They  were  denominated  Champs  de
Mars  and  de  Mai,  from  the  months  in  which  they  were  held. —
Every  freeman  seems  to  have  had  a  right  to  be  present  in  these
assemblies. Sorberus,  ibid.  §  133,  &c. The  ancient  annals  of  the
Franks  describe  the  persons  who  were  present  in  the  assembly
held,  A.  D.  788,  in  these  words:  In  placito  Ingelheimensi  conve-
niunt  pontifices,  majores,  minores,  sacerdotes,  reguli,  duces,  co-
mites,  prsefecti,  cives,  oppidani. Apud  Sorber.  ^  304. There
every  thing  that  concerned  the  happiness  of  their  country,  says  an
ancient  historian,  every  thing  that  could  be  of  benefit  to  the  Franks,
was  considered  and  enjoined. Fredegarius  ap.  Du  Cange  Glossar.
voc.  Campus  Martii. Chlotharius  II.  describes  the  business,  and
acknowledges  the  authority  of  these  assemblies. They  are  called,
says  he,  that  whatever  relates  to  the  common  safety  "may  be  con-
sidered and  resolved  by  common  deliberation  ;  and  whatever  they
determine,  to  that  I  will  conform. Amoinus  de  Gest.  Franc,  lib.
iv.  c.  i.  ap.  Bouquet  Recueil,  iii.  116. The  statutory  clauses,  or
words  of  legislative  authority  in  the  decrees  issued  in  these  assem-
blies, run  not  in  the  name  of  the  king  alone. "  We  have  treated,
says  Childebert,  in  a  decree,  A.  D.  532,  in  the  assembly  of  March,
together  with  our  nobles,  concerning  some  affairs,  and  we  now
publish  the  conclusion,  that  it  may  come  to  the  knowledge  of  all."
Childeb.  Decret.  ap.  Bouquet  Recueil  des  Histor.  torn.  iv.  p.  3.
— We  have  agreed  together  with  our  vassals. Ibid.  §  2. It  is
agreed  in  the  assembly,  in  which  we  were  all  united. Ibid.  §  4.
The  Salic  laws,  the  most  venerable  monument  of  French  jurispru-
dence were  enacted  in  the  same  manner. Dictaverunt  Salicarr*
legem  proceres  ipsius  gentis,  qui  tune  temporis  apud  earn  erant
rectores. Sunt autem  electi  de  pluribus  viri quatuor — qui  per
tres  mallos  convenientes,  omnes  causarum  origines  solicite  discur-
rendo, tractantes de singulis  judicium  decreverunt  hoc modo.
Preef.  Leg.  Salic,  ap.  Bouquet. Ibid.  p.  122. Hoc  decretum  est
apud  regem  et  principes  ejus,  et  apud  cunctum  populum  chris-
tianum,  qui  infra  regnum  Merwingorum  consistunt. Ibid.  p.  124.
Nay,  even  in  their  charters,  the  kings  of  the  first  race  are  careful
to  specify  that  they  were  granted  with  the  consent  of  their  vassals:
Ego  Childebertus  Rex  una  cum  consensu  et  voluntate  Francorum,
&c.  A.  D.  558. Bouquet,  ibid.  622. Chlotharius  III.  una  cum

ILLUSTRATIONS.  2.93

patribus  nostris  episcopis,  optimatibus,  cseterisque  palatii  nostri
ministris,  A.  D.  664.  Ibid.  648.  De  consensu  fidelium  nostrorum.
Mably  Observ.  torn.  i.  p.  239.  The  historians  likewise  describe
the  functions  of  the  king  in  the  national  assemblies  in  such  terms
as  imply  that  his  authority  there  was  extremely  small,  and  that
every  thing  depended  on  the  court  itself.  Ipse  Rex  (says  the  au-
thor of  Annales  Francorum,  speaking  of  the  field  of  March)  sede-
bat  in  sella  regia,  circumstante  exercitu,  prsecipiebatque  is,  die
illo,  quicquid  a  Francis  decretum  erat.  Bouquet  Recueil,  torn.  ii.
p.  647,

That  the  general  assemblies  exercised  supreme  jurisdiction  over
all  persons,  and  with  respect  to  all  causes,  is  so  evident  as  to  stand
in  need  of  no  proof.  The  trial  of  Brunehaut,  A.  D.  613,  how  un-
just soever  the  sentence  against  her  may  be,  as  related  by  Frede-
garius,  Chron;  cap.  42,  Bouquet,  ibid.  430.,  is  in  itself  sufficient
proof  of  this.  The  notorious  violence  and  iniquity  of  the  sentence,
serve  to  demonstrate  the  extent  of  jurisdiction  which  this  assembly
possessed,  as  a  prince  so  sanguinary  as  Clothaire  II.  thought  the
sanction  of  its  authority  would  be  sufficient  to  justify  his  rigorous
treatment  of  the  mother  and  grandmother  of  so  many  kings.

With  respect  to  conferring  donatives  on  the  prince,  we  may  ob-
serve, that  among  nations  whose  manners  and  political  institutions
are  simple,  the  public  as  well  as  individuals,  having  few  wants,
they  are  little  acquainted  with  taxes,  and  free  uncivilized  tribes  dis-
dain to  submit  to  any  stated  imposition.  This  was  remarkably  the
case  of  the  Germans,  and  of  all  the  various  people  that  issued  from
that  country.  Tacitus  pronounces  two  tribes  not  to  be  of  German
origin,  because  they  submitted  to  pay  taxes.  De  Morib.  Germ.  c.
43.  And  speaking  of  another  tribe  according  to  the  ideas  preva-
lent in  Germany,  he  says,  "  they  were  not  degraded  by  the  impo-
sition of  taxes."  Ibid.  c.  29.  Upon  the  settlement  of  the  Franks
in  Gaul,  we  may  conclude,  that,  while  elated  with  the  conscious-
ness of  victory,  they  would  not  renounce  the  high-spirited  ideas  of
their  ancestors,  or  voluntarily  submit  to  a  burden  which  they  re-
garded as  a  badge  of  servitude.  The  evidence  of  the  earliest  re-
cords and  historians  justify  this  conclusion.  M.  de  Montesquieu,
in  the  twelfth  and  subsequent  chapters  of  the  thirteenth  book  of
I'Esprit  des  Loix,  and  M.  de  Mably  .Observat.  sur  1'Hist.  de
France,  torn.  i.  p.  247.  have  investigated  this  fact  with  great  at-
tention, and  have  proved  clearly  that  the  property  of  freemen
among  the  Franks  was  not  subject  to  any  stated  tax.  That  the
state  required  nothing  from  persons  of  this  rank,  but  military  ser-
vice at  their  own  expense,  and  that  they  should  entertain  the  king
in  their  houses  when  he  was  upon  any  progress  through  his  domi-
nions, or  his  officers  when  sent  on  any  public  employment,  fur-

294  PROOFS AND

nishing  them  with  carriages  and  horses.  Monarchs  subsisted
almost  entirely  upon  the  revenues  of  their  own  domains,  and  upon
the  perquisites  arising  from  the  administration  of  justice,  together
with  a  few  small  fines  and  forfeitures  exacted  from  such  as  had
been  guilty  of  certain  trespasses.  It  is  foreign  from  my  subject  to
enumerate  these.  The  reader  may  find  them  in  Observat.  de  M.
de  Mably,  vol.  i.  p.  267.

When  any  extraordinary  aid  was  granted  by  free  men  to  their
sovereign,  it  was  purely  voluntary.  In  the  annual  assembly  of
March  or  May,  it  was  the  custom  to  make  the  king  a  present  of
money,  of  horses  or  arms,  or  of  some  other  thing  of  value.  This
was  an  ancient  custom,  and  derived  from  their  ancestors  the  Ger-
mans. Mos  est  civitatibus,  ultro  ac  viritim  conferri  principibus  vel
armentorum  vel  frugum,  quod  pro  honore  acceptum,  etiam  neces-
sitatibus  subvenit.  Tacit,  de  Mor.  Germ.  c.  15.  These  gifts,  if
we  may  form  a  judgment  concerning  them  from  the  general  terms
in  which  they  are  mentioned  by  the  ancient  historians,  were  consi-
derable, and  made  no  small  part  of  the  royal  revenue.  Many  pas-
sages to  this  purpose  are  produced  by  M.  du  Cange,  Dissert,  iv.
sur  Joinville,  p.  153.  Sometimes  a  conquered  people  specified  the
gift  which  they  bound  themselves  to  pay  annually,  and  it  was  ex-
acted as  a  debt  if  they  failed.  Annales  Metenses,  ap.  du  Cange,
ibid.  p.  155.  It  is  probable  that  the  first  step  towards  taxation
was  to  ascertain  the  value  of  these  gifts  which  were  originally  gra-
tuitous, and  to  compel  the  people  to  pay  the  sum  at  which  they
were  rated.  Still,  however,  some. memory  of  their  original  was
preserved,  and  the  aids  granted  to  monarch s  in  all  the  kingdoms
of  Europe  were  termed  benevolences  or  free  gifts.

The  kings  of  the  second  race  in  France  were  raised  to  the  throne
by  the  election  of  the  people.  Pepinus  Rex  pius,  says  an  author
who  wrote  a  few  years  after  the  transaction  which  he  records,  per
authoritatem  Papse,  et  unctionem  sancti  chrismatis  et  electionem
omnium  Francorum  in  regni  solio  sublimatus  est.  Clausula  de
Pepini  consecratione  ap.  Bouq.  Recueil  des  Histor.  torn.  v.  p.  9.
At  the  same  time,  as  the  chief  men  of  the  nation  had  transferred
the  prown  from  one  family  to  another,  an  oath  was  exacted  of  them,
that  they  should  maintain  on  the  throne  the  family  which  they  had
now  promoted;  ut  nunquam  de  alterius  lumbis  regem  in  aevo
prsesumant  eligere.  Ibid.  p.  10.  This  oath  the  nation  faithfully
observed  during  a  considerable  space  of  time.  The  posterity  of
Pepin  kept  possession  of  the  throne ;  but  with  respect  to  the  man-
ner of  dividing  their  dominions  among  their  children,  princes  were
obliged  to  consult  the  general  assembly  of  the  nation.  Thus
Pepin  himself,  A.  D.  768,  appointed  his  two  sons,  Charles  and
Carlomannus,  to  reign  as  joint  sovereigns ;  but  he  did '  this,  una

ILLUSTRATIONS.  295

cum  consensu  Francorura  et  procerum  suorum  seu  et  episcoporum,
before  whom  he  laid  the  matter  in  their  general  assembly.  Con-
ventus  apud  sanctum  Dionysium,  Capitular,  vol.  i.  p.  187.  This
destination  the  French  confirmed  in  a  subsequent  assembly,  which
was  called  upon  the  death  of  Pepin  ;  for,  as  Eginhart  relates,  they
not  only  appointed  them  kings,  but  by  their  authority  they  regu-
lated the  limits  of  their  respective  territories.  Vita  Car.  Magni
ap.  Bouquet  Recueil,  torn.  v.  p.  90.  In  the  same  manner,  it  was
by  the  authority  of  the  supreme  assemblies  that  any  dispute  which
arose  among  the  descendants  of  the  royal  family  was  determined.
Charlemagne  recognises  this  important  part  of  their  jurisdiction,
and  confirms  it  in  his  charter  concerning  the  partition  of  his  domi-
nions ;  for  he  appoints,  that,  in  case  of  any  uncertainty  with  re-
spect to  the  right  of  the  several  competitors,  he  whom  the  people
shall  choose,  shall  succeed  to  the  crown.  Capitular,  vol.  i.  442.

Under  the  second  race  of  kings  the  assembly  of  the  nation  dis-
tinguished by  the  name  of  Conventus,  Malli,  Placita,  were  regu-
larly assembled  once  a  year  at  least,  and  frequently  twice  in  the
year.  One  of  the  most  valuable  monuments  of  the  history  of
France  is  the  treatise  of  Hincmarus,  archbishop  of  Rheims,  de
ordine  Palatii.  He  died  A.  D.  882,  only  sixty- eight  years  after
Charlemagne,  and  he  relates  in  that  short  discourse  the  facts
which  were  communicated  to  him  by  Adalhardus,  a  minister  and
confidant  of  Charlemagne.  From  him  we  learn,  that  this  great
monarch  never  failed  to  hold  the  general  assembly  of  his  subjects
every  year.  In  quo  placito  general itas  universorum  majorum  tarn
clericorum  quam  laicorum  conveniebat.  Hincm.  oper.  edit.  Sir-
mondi,  vol.  ii.  c.  29.  211.  In  these  assemblies,  matters  which  re-
lated to  the  general  safety  and  state  of  the  kingdom  were  always
discussed,  before  they  entered  upon  any  private  or  less  important
business.  Ibid.  c.  33.  p.  213.  His  immediate  successors  imitated
his  example,  and  transacted  no  affair  of  importance  without  the
advice  of  their  great  council.

Under  the  second  race  of  kings,  the  genius  of  the  French  go-
vernment continued  to  be  in  a  good  measure  democratical.  The
nobles,  the  dignified  ecclesiastics,  and  the  great  officers  of  the
crown,  were  not  the  only  members  of  the  national  council;  the
people  or  the  whole  body  of  free  men,  either  in  person  or  by  their
representatives,  had  a  right  to  be  present  in  it.  Hincmarus,  in
describing  the  manner  of  holding  the  general  assemblies,  says,  that
if  the  weather  was  favourable,  they  met  in  the  open  air;  but  if
Otherwise,  they  had  different  apartments  allotted  to  them :  so  that
the  dignified  clergy  were  separated  from  the  laity,  and  the  comites
vel  hujusmodi  principes  sibimet  honorificabiliter  a  csetera  multitu-
dine  segregarentur.  Ibid.  c.  35.  p,  114.  Agobardus,  Archbishop

296  PROOFS  AND

of  Lyons,  thus  describes  a  national  council  in  the  year  833,  wherein
he  was  present.  Qui  ubique  conventus  extitit  ex  reverendissimis
episcopis,  et  magnificentissimis  viris  illustribus,  collegio  quoque
abbatum  et  comitum,  promiscuseque  cetatis  et  dignitatis  populo.
The  extern  multitudo  of  Hincmarus  is  the  same  with  the  populus  of
Agobardus,  and  both  describe  the  inferior  order  of  free  men,  the
same  who  were  afterward  known  in  France  by  the  name  of  the
third  estate,  and  in  England  by  the  name  of  commons.  The  peo-
ple, as  well  as  the  members  of  higher  dignity,  were  admitted  to  a
share  of  the  legislative  power.  Thus,  by  a  law,  A.  D.  803,  it  is
ordained,  "  that  the  question  shall  be  put  to  the  people  with  respect
to  every  new  law,  and  if  they  shall  agree  to  it,  they  shall  confirm
it  by  their  signature."  Capit.  vol.  i.  394.  There  are  two  capitu-
laria  which  convey  to  us  a  full  idea  of  the  part  which  the  people
took  in  the  administration  of  government.  When  they  felt  the
weight  of  any  grievance,  they  had  a  right  to  petition  the  sovereign
for  redress.  One  of  these  petitions,  in  which  they  desire  that  ec-
clesiastics might  be  exempted  from  bearing  arms,  and  from  serv-
ing in  person  against  the  enemy,  is  still  extant.  It  is  addressed  to
Charlemagne,  A.  D.  803,  and  expressed  in  such  terms  as  could
have  been  used  only  by  men  conscious  of  liberty,  and  of  the  exten-
sive privileges  which  they  possessed.  They  conclude  with  requir-
ing him  to  grant  their  demand,  if  he  wished  that  they  should  any
longer  continue  faithful  subjects  to  him.  That  great  monarch,  in-
stead of  being  offended  or  surprised  at  the  boldness  of  their  peti-
tion, received  it  in  a  most  gracious  manner,  and  signified  his  wil-
lingness to  comply  with  it.  But  sensible  that  he  himself  did  not
possess  legislative  authority,  he  promises  to  lay  the  matter  before
the  next  general  assembly,  that  such  things  as  were  of  common
concern  to  all  might  be  there  considered  and  established  by  com-
mon consent.  Capitul.  torn.  i.  p.  405 — 409.  As  the  people  by
their  petitions  brought  matters  to  be  proposed  in  the  general  as-
sembly, we  learn  from  another  capitulare  the  form  in  which  they
were  approved  there,  and  enacted  as  laws.  The  propositions  were
read  aloud,  and  then  the  people  were  required  to  declare  whether
they  assented  to  them  or  not.  They  signified  their  assent  by  cry-
ing three  times,  "  We  are  satisfied ;"  and  then  the  capitulare  was
confirmed  by  the  subscription  of  the  monarch,  the  clergy,  and  the
chief  men  of  the  laity.  Capitul.  torn.  i.  p.  627.  A.  D.  822.  It
seems  probable  from  a  capitulare  of  Carolus  Calvus,  A.  D.  851,
that  the  sovereign  could  not  refuse  his  assent  to  what  was  proposed
and  established  by  his  subjects  in  the  general  assembly.  Tit.  ix.
§  6.  Capitul.  vol.  ii.  p.  47.  It  is  unnecessary  to  multiply  quota-
tions concerning  the  legislative  power  of  the  national  assembly  of
France  under  the  second  race,  or  concerning  its  right  to  determine-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  297

with  regard  to  peace  and  war.  The  uniform  style  of  the  Capitu-
laria  is  an  abundant  confirmation  of  the  former.  The  reader  who
desires  any  farther  information  with  respect  to  the  latter,  may  con-
sult Les  Origines  ou  1'Ancien  Gouvernement  de  la  France,  &c.
torn.  iii.  p.  87,  &c.  What  has  been  said  with  respect  to  the  ad-
mission of  the  people  or  their  representatives  into  the  supreme
assembly  merits  attention,  not  only  in  tracing  the  progress  of  the
French  government,  but  on  account  of  the  light  which  it  throws
upon  a  similar  question  agitated  in  England,  concerning  the  time
when  the  commons  became  part  of  the  legislative  body  in  that
kingdom.

Note  XXXIX. Sect.  III.  p.  161.

THAT  important  change  which  the  constitution  of  France  un-
derwent, when  the  legislative  power  was  transferred  from  the  great
council  of  the  nation  to  the  king,  has  been  explained  by  the  French
antiquaries  with  less  care  than  they  bestow  in  illustrating  other
events  in  their  history. For  that  reason  I  have  endeavoured  with
greater  attention  to  trace  the  steps  which  led  to  this  memorable
revolution; I  shall  here  add  some  particulars  which  tend  to  throw
additional  light  upon  it. The  Leges Salicse,  the  Leges  Burgun-
dionum,  and  other  codes  published  by  the  several  tribes  which
settled  in  Gaul,  were  general  laws  extending  to  every  person,  to
every  province  and  district  where  the  authority  of  those  tribes  was
acknowledged. But  they  seem  to  have  become  obsolete ;  and  the
reason  of  their  falling  into  disuse  is  very  obvious. Almost  the
whole  property  of  the  nation  was  allodial  when  these  laws  were
framed. But  when  the  feudal  institutions  became general,  and
gave  rise  to  an  infinite  variety  of  questions  peculiar  to  that  species
of  tenure,  the  ancient  codes  were  of  no  use  in  deciding  with  regard
to  these,  because  they  could  not  contain  regulations  applicable  to
cases  which  did  not  exist  at  the  time  when  they  were  compiled. —
This  considerable  change  in  the  nature  of  property  made  it  neces-
sary to  publish  the  new  regulations  contained  in  the  Capitularia.
Many  of  these^  as  is  evident  from  the  perusal  of  them,  were  public
laws  extending  to  the  whole  French  nation,  in  the  general  assem-
bly of  which  they  were  enacted. The  weakness  of  the  greater
part  of  the  monarchs  of  the  second  race,  and  the  disorder  into
which  the  nation  was  thrown  by  the  depredations  of  the  Normans,
encouraged  the  barons  to  usurp  an  independent  power  formerly
unknown  in  France. The  nature  and  extent  of  that  jurisdiction
which  they  assumed  I  have  formerly  considered. The  political
union,  of  the  kingdom  was  at  an  end,  its  ancient  constitution  was
dissolved,  and  only  a  feudal  relation  subsisted  between  the  king

098  PROOFS  AND

and  his  vassals.  The  regal  jurisdiction  extended  no  farther  than
the  domains  of  the  crown.  Under  the  last  kings  of  the  second
race,  these  were  reduced  almost  to  nothing.  Under  the  first  kings
of  the  third  race,  they  comprehended  little  more  than  the  patrimo-
nial estate  of  Hugh  Capet,  which  he  annexed  to  the  crown.  Even
with  this  accession,  they  continued  to  be  of  small  extent.  Velly,
Hist,  de  France,  torn.  iii.  p.  32.  Many  of  the  most  considerable
provinces  in  France  did  not  at  first  acknowledge  Hugh  Capet  as  a
lawful  monarch.  There  are  still  extant  several  charters,  granted
during  the  first  years  of  his  reign,  with  this  remarkable  clause  in
the  form  of  dating  the  charter :  «  Deo  regnante,  rege  expectante,"
regnante  domino  nostro  Jesu  Christo,  Francis  autem  contra  jus
regnum  usurpante  Ugone  rege.  Bouquet  Recueil,  torn.  x.  p.  544.
A  monarch  whose  title  was  thus  openly  disputed,  was  not  in  a
condition  to  assert  the  royal  jurisdiction,  or  to  limit  that  of  the
barons.

All  these  circumstances  rendered  it  easy  for  the  barons  to  usurp
the  rights  of  royalty  within  their  own  territories.  The  Capitularia
became  no  less  obsolete  than  the  ancient  laws  ;  local  customs  were
every  where  introduced,  and  became  the  sole  rule  by  which  all
civil  transactions  were  conducted,  and  all  causes  were  tried.  The
wonderful  ignorance  which  became  general  in  France  during  the
ninth  and  tenth  centuries,  contributed  to  the  introduction  of  cus-
tomary law.  Few  persons,  except  ecclesiastics,  could  read  ;  and
as  it  was  not  in  the  power  of  such  illiterate  persons  to  have  recourse
to  written  laws,  either  as  their  guide  in  business,  or  their  rule  in
administering  justice,  the  customary  law,  the  knowledge  of  which
was  preserved  by  tradition,  universally  prevailed.

During  this  period,  the  general  assembly  of  the  nation  seems
not  to  have  been  called,  nor  to  have  once  exerted  its  legislative
authority.  Local  customs  regulated  and  decided  every  thing.  A
striking  proof  of  this  occurs  in  tracing  the  progress  of  the  French
jurisprudence.  The  last  of  the  Capitularia  collected  by  M.  Baluze,
was  issued  in  the  year  921,  by  Charles  the  Simple.  A  hundred
and  thirty  years  elapsed  from  that  period  to  the  publication  of  the
first  ordonance  of  the  kings  of  the  third  race,  coptained  in  the
great  collection  of  M.  Lauriere,  and  the  first  ordonance  which  ap-
pears to  be  an  act  of  legislation  extending  to  the  whole  kingdom,
is  that  of  Philip  Augustus,  A.  D.  1190.  Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  1.  18.
During  that  long  period  of  two  hundred  and  sixty-nine  years,  all
transactions  were  directed  by  local  customs,  and  no  addition  was
made  to  the  statutory  law  of  France.  The  ordonances,  previous  to
the  reign  of  Philip  Augustus,  contain  regulations,  the  authority  of
which  did  not  extend  beyond  the  king's  domains.

Various  instances  occur  of  the  caution  with  which  the  kings  of

ILLUSTRATIONS.  299

France  ventured  at  first  to  exercise  legislative  authority. M.  1'Ab.
de  Mably  produces  an  ordonance  of  Philip  Augustus,  A.  D.  1206,
concerning  the  Jews,  who,  in  that  age,  were  in  some  measure  the
property  of  the  lord  in  whose  territories  they  resided. But  it  is
rather  a  treaty  of  the  king  with  the  countess  of  Champagne,  and
the  compte  de  Dampierre,  than  an  act  of  royal  power;  and  the
regulations  in  it  seem  to  be  established  not  so  much  by  his  autho-
rity, as  by  their  consent. Observat.  sur  1'Hist.  de  France,  ii.  p.
355. In  the  same  manner  an  ordonance  of  Louis  VIII.  concern-
ing the  Jews,  A.  D.  1223,  is  a  contract  between  the  king  and  his
nobles,  with  respect  to  their  manner  of  treating  that  unhappy  race
of  men. Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  47. The  Establissemens  of  St.  Louis,
though  well  adapted  to  serve  as  general  laws  to  the  whole  king-
dom, were  not  published  as  such,  but  only  as  a  complete  code  of
customary  law,  to  be  of  authority  within  the  king's  domains. The
wisdom,  the  equity,  and  the  order  conspicuous  in  that  code  of  St.
Louis,  procured  it  a  favourable  reception  throughout  the  kingdom.
The  veneration  due  to  the  virtues  and  good  intentions  of  its  author,
contributed  not  a  little  to  reconcile  the  nation  to  that  legislative
authority  which  the  king  began  to  assume. Soon  after  the  reign
of  St.  Louis,  the  idea  of  the  king's  possessing  supreme  legislative
power  became  common. If,  says  Beaumanoir,  the  king  makes  any
establishment  specially  for  his  own  domain,  the  barons  may  never-
theless adhere  to  their  ancient  customs ;  but  if  the  establishment
be  general,  it  shall  be  current  throughout  the  whole  kingdom,  and
we  ought  to  believe  that  such  establishments  are  made  with  ma-
ture deliberation,  and  for  the  general  good. Gout,  de  Beauvoisis,
c.  48.  p.  265. Though  the  kings  of  the  third  race  did  not  call  the
general  assembly  of  the  nation,  during  the  long  period  from  Hugh
Capet  to  Philip  the  Fair,  yet  they  seem  to  have  consulted  the
bishops  and  barons  who  happened  to  be  present  in  their  court,
with  respect  to  any  new  law  which  they  published. Examples  of
this  occur  Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  3.  and  5, This  practice  seems  to  have
continued  as  late  as  the  reign  of  St.  Louis,  when  the  legislative  au-
thority of  the  crown  was  well  established. Ordon.  torn.  i.  p.  58.
A.  D.  1246. This  attention  paid  to  the  barons  facilitated  the  king's
acquiring  such  full  possession  of  the  legislative  power,  as  enabled
them  afterward  to  exercise  it  without  observing  that  formality.

The  assemblies  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  states-general,
were  first  called  A.  D.  1302,  and  were  held  occasionally  from  that
period  to  the  year  1614,  since  which  time  they  have  not  been  sum-
moned. These  were  very  different  from  the  ancient  assemblies  of
the  French  nation  under  the  kings  of  the  first  and  second  race.
There  is  no  point  with  respect  to  which  the  French  antiquaries  are
more  generally  agreed,  than  in  maintaining  that  the  states-general

300  PROOFS  AND

had  no  suffrage  in  the  passing  of  laws,  and  possessed  no  proper
legislative  jurisdiction.  The  whole  tenor  of  the  French  history
confirms  this  opinion.  The  form  of  proceeding  in  the  states-general
was  this.  The  king  addressed  himself,  at  opening  the  meeting,  to
the  whole  body  assembled  in  one  place,  and  laid  before  them  the
affairs  on  account  of  which  he  had  summoned  them.  Then  the
deputies  of  each  of  the  three  orders,  of  nobles,  of  clergy,  and  of
the  third  estate,  met  apart,  and  prepared  their  cahier  or  memorial,
containing  their  answer  to  the  propositions  which  had  been  made
to  them,  together  with  the  representations  which  they  thought
proper  to  lay  before  the  king.  These  answers  and  representations
were  considered  by  the  king  in  his  council,  and  generally  gave  rise
to  an  ordonance.  These  ordonances  were  not  addressed  to  the
three  estates  in  common.  Sometimes  the  king  addressed  an  or-
donance to  each  of  the  estates  in  particular.  Sometimes  he  men-
tioned the  assembly  of  the  three  es.tates.  Sometimes  mention  is
made  only  of  the  assembly  of  that  estate  to  which  the  ordonance  is
addressed.  Sometimes  no  mention  at  all  is  made  of  the  assembly
of  estates,  which  suggested  the  propriety  of  enacting  the  law.
Preface  au  torn.  iii.  des  Ordon.  p.  xx.  Thus  the  states-general  had
only  the  privilege  of  advising  and  remonstrating ;  the  legislative
authority  resided  in  the  king  alone.

Note  XL. Sect.  III.  p.  165.

IT  the  parliament  of  Paris  be  considered  only  as  the  supreme
court  of  justice,  every  thing  relative  to  its  origin  and  jurisdiction
is  clear  and  obvious.  It  is  the  ancient  court  of  the  king's  palace,
new-modelled,  rendered  stationary,  and  invested  with  an  extensive
and  ascertained  jurisdiction.  The  power  of  this  court,  while  em-
ployed in  this  part  of  its  functions,  is  not  the  object  of  present  con-
sideration. The  pretensions  of  the  parliament  to  control  the
exercise  of  the  legislative  authority,  and  its  claim  of  a  right  to
interpose  with  respect  to  public  affairs,  and  the  political  adminis-
tration of  the  kingdom,  lead  to  inquiries  attended  with  great  diffi-
culty. As  the  officers  and  members  of  the  parliament  of  Paris
were  anciently  nominated  by  the  king,  were  paid  by  him,  and  on
several  occasions  were  removed  by  him  at  pleasure  (Chronic.  Scan-
daleuse  de  Louis  XI.  chez  les  Mem.  de  Comines,  torn.  ii.  p.  51.
Edit,  de  M.  Lenglet  de  Fresnoy),  they  cannot  be  considered  as
representatives  of  the  people,  nor  could  they  claim  any  share  in
the  legislative  power  as  acting  in  their  name.  We  must  therefore
search  for  some  other  source  of  this  high  privilege.  1;  The  par-
liament was  originally  composed  of  the  most  eminent  persons  in
the  kingdom.  The  peers  of  France,  ecclesiastics  of  the  highest

ILLUSTRATIONS.  301

order,  and  noblemen  of  illustrious  birth,  were  members  of  it,  to
whom  were  added  some  clerks  and  counsellors  learned  in  the  laws.
Pasquier  Recherches,  p.  44,  &c. Encyclopedic,  torn.  xii.  art.  Par-
lement,  p.  3. 5. A  court  thus  constituted  was  properly  a  committee
of  the  states-general  of  the  kingdom,  and  was  composed  of  those
barons  and^rfe/es,  whom  the  kings  of  France  were  accustomed  to
consult  with  regard  to  every  act  of  jurisdiction  or  legislative  autho-
rity. It  was  natural,  therefore,  during  the  intervals  between  the
meetings  of  the  states-general,  or  during  those  periods  when  that
assembly  was  not  called,  to  consult  the  parliament,  to  lay  matters
of  public  concern  before  it,  and  to  obtain  its  approbation  and  con-
currence, before  any  ordonance  was  published,  to  which  the  people
were  required  to  conform. 2.  Under  the  second  race  of  kings,
every  new  law  was  reduced  into  proper  form  by  the  chancellor  of
the  kingdom,  was  proposed  by  him  to  the  people,  and  when  enacted,
was  committed  to  him  to  be  kept  among  the  public  records,  that
he  might  give  authentic  copies  of  it  to  all  who  should  demand
them. Hincm.de  Ord.  Palat.  c.  16. Capitul.  Car.  Calv.  tit.  xiv.
§11.  tit.  xxxiii. The  chancellor  presided  in  the  parliament  of
Paris  at  its  first  institution. Encyclopedic,  torn.  iif.  art.  Chancdier,
p.  88. It  was,  therefore,  natural  for  the  king  to  continue  to  em-
ploy him  in  his  ancient  functions  of  framing,  taking  into  his  cus-
tody, and  publishing  the  ordonances  which  were  issued. To  an
ancient  copy  of  the  Capitularia  of  Charlemagne,  the  following
words are subjoined : Anno tertio clementissimi  domini  nostri
Caroli  Augusti,  sub  ipso  anno,  haec  facta  Capitula  sunt,  et  con-
signata  Stephano  comiti,  ut  haec  manifesta  faceret  Parisiis  mallo
publico,  et  ilia  legere  faceret  coram  Scabineis,  quod  ita  et  fecit,  et
omnes  in  uno  consenserunt,  quod  ipsi  voluissent  observare  usque
in  posterum,  etiam  omnes  Scabinei,  Episcopi,  Abbates,  Comites,
manu  propria  subter  signaverunt. Bouquet  Recueil,  torn.  v.  p.  663.
Mallus  signifies  not  only  the  public  assembly  of  the  nation,  but  the
court  of  justice  held  by  the  comes,  or  missus  dominicus. Scabini
were  the  judges,  or  the  assessors  of  the  judges  in  that  court.  Here,
then,  seems  to  be  a  very  early  instance,  not  only  of  laws  being  pub-
lished in  a  court  of  justice,  but  of  their  being  verified  or  confirmed
by  the  subscription  of  the  judges. If  this  was  the  common  prac-
tice, it  naturally  introduced  the  verifying  of  edicts  in  the  parliament
of  Paris. But  this  conjecture I  propose with that  diffidence,
which  I  have  felt  in  all  my  reasonings  concerning  the  laws  and
institutions  of  foreign  nations. 3.  This  supreme  court  of  justice
in  France  was dignified  with  the  appellation  of  parliament,  the
name  by  which  the  general  assembly  of  the  nation  was  distinguished
towards  the  close  of  the  second  race  of  kings  ;  and  men,  both  in
reasoning  and  in  conduct,  were  wonderfully  influenced  by  the  si-

PROOFS AND

milarity  of  names.  The  preserving  the  ancient  names  of  the  magis-
trates established  while  the  republican  government  subsisted  in
Rome,  enabled  Augustus  and  his  successors  to  assume  new  powers
with  less  observation  and  greater  ease.  The  bestowing  the  same
name  in  France  upon  two  courts  which  were  extremely  different,
contributed  not  a  little  to  confound  their  jurisdictions  and  functions.

All  these  circumstances  concurred  in  leading  the  kings  of  France
to  avail  themselves  of  the  parliament  of  Paris  as  the  instrument  of
reconciling  the  people  to  the  exercise  of  legislative  authority  by
the  crown.  The  French,  accustomed  to  see  all  new  laws  examined
and  authorized  before  they  were  published,  did  not  sufficiently
distinguish  between  the  effect  of  performing  this  in  the  national
assembly,  or  in  a  court  appointed  by  the  king.  But  as  that  court
was  composed  of  respectable  members,  and  who  were  well  skilled
in  the  laws  of  their  country,  when  any  new  edict  received  its  sanc-
tion, that  was  sufficient  to  dispose  the  people  to  submit  to  it.

When  the  practice  of  verifying  and  registering  the  royal  edicts
in  the  parliament  of  Paris  became  common,  the  parliament  con-
tended that  this  was  necessary  in  order  to  give  them  legal  autho-
rity. It  was  established  as  a  fundamental  maxim  in  French  juris-
prudence, that  no  law  could  be  published  in  any  other  manner;
that  without  this  formality  no  edict  or  ordonance  could  have  any
effect ;  that  the  people  were  not  bound  to  obey  it,  and  ought  not
to  consider  it  as  an  edict  or  ordonance,  until  it  was  verified  in  the
supreme  court,  after  free  deliberation.  Roche-flavin  des  Parlemens
de  France,  4to.  Gen.  1621,  p.  921.  The  parliament,  at  different
times,  hath,  with  great  fortitude  and" integrity,  opposed  the  will  of
their  sovereigns ;  and,  notwithstanding  their  repeated  and  peremp-
tory requisitions  and  commands,  hath  refused  to  verify  and  publish
such  edicts  as  it  conceived  to  be  oppressive  to  the  people,  or  sub-
versive of  the  constitution  of  the  kingdom.  Roche-flavin  reckons,
that  between  the  year  1562  and  the  year  1589,  the  parliament  re-
fused to  verify  nj.ore  than  a  hundred  edicts  of  the  kings.  Ibid.  925.
Many  instances  of  the  spirit  and  constancy  with  which  the  parlia-
ments of  France  opposed  pernicious  laws,  and  asserted  their  own
privileges,  are  enumerated  by  Limnseus  in  his  Notitiae  Regni  Fran-
cise,  lib.  i.  c.  9.  p.  224.

But  the  power  of  the  parliament  to  maintain  and  defend  this
privilege  bore  no  proportion  to  its  importance,  or  to  the  courage
with  which  the  members  asserted  it.  When  any  monarch  was  de-
termined that  an  edict  should  be  carried  into  execution,  and  found
the  parliament  inflexibly  resolved  not  to  verify  or  publish  it,  he
could  easily  supply  this  defect  by  the  plenitude  of  his  regal  power.
He  repaired  to  the  parliament  in  person,  he  took  possession  of  his
seat  of  justice,  and  commanded  the  edict  to  be  read,  verified,  re-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  303

gistered,  and  published  in  his  presence.  Then,  according  to  ano-
ther maxim  of  French  law,  the  king  himself  being  present,  neither
the  parliament,  nor  any  magistrate  whatever,  can  exercise  any
authority,  or  perform  any  function.  Adveniente  Principe,  cessat
magistratus.  Roche-flavin,  ibid.  p.  928,  929.  Encyclopedic,
torn.  ix.  art.  Lit.  de  Justice,  p.  581.  Roche-flavin  mentions  several
instances  of  kings  who  actually  exerted  this  prerogative,  so  fatal  to
the  residue  of  the  rights  and  liberties  transmitted  to  the  French  by
their  ancestors.  Pasquier  produces  some  instances  of  the  same
kind.  Rech,  p.  61.  Limnoeus  enumerates  many  other  instances;
but  the  length  to  which  this  note  has  swelled,  prevents  me  from  in-
serting them  at  length,  though  they  tend  greatly  to  illustrate  this
important  article  in  the  French  history,  p.  245.  Thus,  by  an  exer-
tion of  prerogative,  which,  though  violent,  seems  to  be  constitu-
tional, and  is  justified  by  innumerable  precedents,  all  the  efforts  of
the  parliament  to  limit  and  control  the  king's  legislative  authority,
are  rendered  ineffectual.

I  have  not  attempted  to  explain  the  constitution  or  jurisdiction  of
any  parliament  in  France  but  that  of  Paris.  All  of  them  are  formed
upon  the  model  of  that  most  ancient  and  respectable  tribunal,
and  all  my  observations  concerning  it  will  apply  with  full  force
to  them.

Note  XLI. Sect.  III.  p.  169.

THE  humiliating  posture  in  which  a  great  emperor  implored
absolution  is  an  event  so  singular,  that  the  words  in  which  Gregory
himself  describes  it  merit  a  place  here,  and  convey  a  striking  picture
of  the  arrogance  of  that  pontiff.  Per  triduum,  ante  portam  castri,
deposito  omni  regio  cultu>  miserabiliter,  utpote  discalceatus,  et
laneis,  indutus,  persistens,  non  prius  cum  multo  fletu  apostolicae
miserationis  auxilium,  et  consolationem  implorari  destitit,  quam
omnes  qui  ibi  aderant,  et  ad  quos  rumor  ille  pervenit,  ad  tantam
pietatem,  et  compassionis  misericordiam  movit,  ut  pro  eo  multis
precibus  et  lacrymis  intercedentes,  omnes  quidem  insolitam  nostrse
mentis  duritiem  mirarentur  ;  nonnulli  vero  in  nobis  non  apostolicse
sedis  gravitatem,  sed  quasi  tyrannicee  feritatis  crudelitatem  esse
clamarunt.  Epist.  Gregor.  ap.  Memorie  della  Contessa  Matilda
da  Fran.  Mar.  Fiorentini.  Lucca,  1756,  vol.  i.  p.  174.

Note  XLII. Sect.  III.  p.  175.

As  I  have  endeavoured  in  the  history  to  trace  the  various  steps
in  the  progress  of  the  constitution  of  the  empire,  and  to  explain  the
peculiarities  in  its  policy  very  fully,  it  is  not  necessary  to  add  much

304  PROOFS AND

by  way  of  illustration. What  appears  to  be  of  any  importance,  I

shall  range  under  distinct  heads.

1.  With  respect  to  the  power,  jurisdiction,  and  revenue  of  the
emperors.  A  very  just  idea  of  these  may  be  formed  by  attending
to  the  view  which  Pfeffel  gives  to  the  rights  of  the  emperors  at  two
different  periods.  The  first  at  the  close  of  the  Saxon  race,  A.  D.
1024.  These,  according  to  his  enumeration,  were  the  right  of  con-
ferring all  the  great  ecclesiastical  benefices  in  Germany ;  of  re-
ceiving the  revenues  of  them  during  a  vacancy;  of  mortmain,  or  of
succeeding  to  the  effects  of  ecclesiastics  who  died  intestate.  The
right  of  confirming  or  of  annulling  the  elections  of  the  popes.
The  right  of  assembling  councils,  and  of  appointing  them  to  decide
concerning  the  affairs  of  the  church.  The  right  of  conferring  the
title  of  king  upon  their  vassals.  The  right  of  granting  vacant  fiefs.
The  right  of  receiving  the  revenues  of  the  empire,  whether  arising
from  the  imperial  domains,  from  imposts  and  tolls,  from  gold  or
silver  mines,  from  the  taxes  paid  by  the  Jews,  or  from  forfeitures.
The  right  of  governing  Italy  as  its  proper  sovereigns.  The  right
of  erecting  free  cities,  and  of  establishing  fairs  in  them.  The  right
of  assembling  the  diets  of  the  empire,  and  of  fixing  the  time  of
their  duration.  The  right  of  coining  money,  and  of  conferring  that
privilege  on  the  states  of  the  empire.  The  right  of  administering
both  high  and  low  justice  within  the  territories  of  the  different
states.  Abrege,  p.  160.  The  other  period  is  at  the  extinction  of
the  emperors  of  the  families  of  Luxemburg  and  Bavaria,  A.D.  1437.
According  to  the  same  author,  the  imperial  prerogatives  at  that
time  were  the  right  of  conferring  all  dignities  and  titles,  except  the
privilege  of  being  a  state  of  the  empire.  The  right  of  Preces  pri-
maries, or  of  appointing  once  during  their  reign  a  dignitary  in  each
chapter  or  religious  house.  The  right  of  granting  dispensations
with  respect  to  the  age  of  majority.  The  right  of  erecting  cities,
and  of  conferring  the  privilege  of  coining  money.  The  right  of
calling  the  meetings  of  the  diet,  and  of  presiding  in  them.  Abrege,
&c.  p.  507.  It  were  easy  to  shew  that  Mr.  Pfeffel  is  well  founded
in  all  these  assertions,  and  to  confirm  them  by  the  testimony  of  the
most  respectable  authors.  In  the  one  period,  the  emperors  appear
as  mighty  sovereigns  with  extensive  prerogatives ;  in  the  other,  as
the  heads  of  a  confederacy  with  very  limited  powers.

The  revenues  of  the  emperors  decreased  still  more  than-  their
authority.  The  early  emperors,  and  particularly  those  of  the  Saxon
line,  besides  their  great  patrimonial  or  hereditary  territories,  pos-
sessed an  extensive  domain  both  in  Italy  and  Germany,  which
belonged  to  them  as  emperors.  Italy  belonged  to  the  emperors  as
their  proper  kingdom,  and  the  revenues  which  they  drew  from  it
were  very  considerable.  The  first  alienations  of  the  imperial  re-

ILLUSTRATIONS.

305

venue  were  made  in  that  country.  The  Italian  cities  having  acquired
wealth,  and  aspiring  at  independence,  purchased  their  liberty  from
different  emperors,  as  I  have  observed,  Note  XV.  The  sums  which
they  paid,  and  the  emperors  with  whom  they  concluded  these
bargains,  are  mentioned  by  Casp.  Klockius  de  ^Erario  Norimb.
1671,  p.  85,  &c.  Charles  IV.  and  his  son  Wenceslaus,  dissipated
all  that  remained  of  the  Italian  branch  of  the  domain.  The  German
domain  lay  chiefly  upon  the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  and  was  under  the
government  of  the  counts  palatine.  It  is  not  easy  to  mark  out  the
boundaries,  or  to  estimate  the  value  of  this  ancient  domain,  which
has  been  so  long  incorporated  with  the  territories  of  different  princes.
Some  hints  with  respect  to  it  may  be  found  in  the  glossary  .of  Spei-
delius,' which  he  has  entitled  Speculum  Juridica  Philologico-politico
Historicum  Observationem,  &c.  Norimb.  1673.  vol.  i.  679.  1045.
A  more  full  account  of  it  is  given  by  Klockius  de  ^Irario,  p.  84.
Besides  this,  the  emperors  possessed  considerable  districts  of  land
lying  intermixed  with  the  estates  of  the  dukes  and  barons.  They
were  accustomed  to  visit  these  frequently,  and  drew  from  their
vassals  in  each  what  was  sufficient  to  support  their  court  during
the  time  of  their  residence  among  them.  Annalistae,  ap.  Struv.
torn.  i.  611,  A  great  part  of  these  detached  possessions  were
seized  by  the  nobles  during  the  long  interregnum,  or  during  the
wars  occasioned  by  the  contests  between  the  emperors  and  the
court  of  Rome.  At  the  same  time  that  such  encroachments  were
made  on  the  fixed  or  territorial  property  of  the  emperors,  they  were
robbed  almost  entirely  of  their  casual  revenues ;  the  princes  and
barons  appropriating  to  themselves  taxes  and  duties  of  every  kind,
which  had  usually  been  paid  to  them.  Pfeffel  Abrege,  p.  374,  The
profuse  and  inconsiderate  ambition  of  Charles  IV.  squandered  what-
ever remained  of  the  imperial  revenues  after  so  many  defalcations.
He,  in  the  year  1376,  in  order  to  prevail  with  the  electors  to  choose
his  son  Wenceslaus  king  of  the  Romans,  promised  each  of  them  a
hundred  thousand  crowns.  But  being  unable  to  pay  so  large  a
sum,  and  eager  to  secure  the  election  to  his  son,  he  alienated  to
the  three  ecclesiastical  electors,  and  to  the  count  palatine,  such
countries  as  still  belonged  to  the  imperial  domain  on  the  banks  of
the  Rhine,  and  likewise  made  over  to  them  all  the  taxes  and  tolls
then  levied  by  the  emperors  in  that  district.  Trithemius,  and  the
author  of  the  Chronicle  of  Magdeburgh,  enumerate  the  territories
and  taxes  which  were  thus  alienated,  and  represent  this  as  the  last
and  fatal  blow  to  the  imperial  authority.  Struv.  Corp.  vol.  i.  p.  437.
From  that  period  the  shreds  of  the  ancient  revenues  possessed  by
the  emperors,  have,  been  so  inconsiderable,  that,  in  the  opinion  of
Speidelius,  all  that  they  yield  would  be  so  far  from  defraying  the
expense  of  supporting  their  household,  that  they  would  not  pay  the
VOL.  in.  x

306  PROOFS AND

charge  of  maintaining  the  posts  established  in  the  empire.  Speidelii
Speculum,  &c.  vol.  i.  p.  680.  These  funds,  inconsiderable  as  they
were,  continued  to  decrease.  Granvelle,  the  minister  of  Charles  V.
asserted  in  the  year  1546,  in  presence  of  several  of  the  German
princes,  that  his  master  drew  no  money  at  all  from  the  empire.
Sleid.  History  of  the  Reformation,  Lond.  1689,  p.  372.  The  same
is  the  case  at  present.  Traite  de  droite  publique  de  TEmpire,  par
M.  le  Coq.  de  Villeray,  p.  55.  From  the  reign  of  Charles  IV.
whom  Maximilian  called  the  pest  of  the  empire,  the  emperors  have
depended  entirely  on  their  hereditary  dominions,  as  the  chief,  and
almost  the  only  source  of  their  power,  and  even  of  their  subsistence.
2.  The  ancient  mode  of  electing  the  emperors,  and  the  various
changes  which  it  underwent,  require  some  illustration.  The  im-
perial crown  was  originally  attained  by  election,  as  well  as  those
of  most  monarchies  in  Europe.  An  opinion  long  prevailed  among
the  antiquaries  and  public  lawyers  of  Germany,  that  the  right  of
choosing  the  emperors  was  vested  in  the  archbishops  of  Mentz,
Cologne,  and  Treves,  the  king  of  Bohemia,  the  duke  of  Saxony,
the  marquis  of  Brandenburgh,  and  the  count  palatine  of  the  Rhine,
by  an  edict  of  Otho  III.  confirmed  by  Gregory  V.  about  the  year
996.  But  the  whole  tenor  of  history  contradicts  this  opinion.  It
appears,  that  from  the  earliest  period  in  the  history  of  Germany,
the  person  who  was  to  reign  over  all,  was  elected  by  the  suffrage
of  all.  Thus  Conrad  I.  was  elected  by  all  the  people  of  the  Franks,
say  some  annalists  ;  by  all  the  princes  and  chief  men,  say  others ;
by  all  the  nation,  say  others.  See  their  words,  Struv.  Corp.  211.
Conringius  de  German.  Imper.  Repub.  Acroamata  Sex.  Ebroduni,
1654,  p.  103.  In  the  year  1024,  posterior  to  the  supposed  regu-
lations of  Otho  III.,  Conrad  II.  was  elected  by  all  the  chief  men,
and  his  election  was  approved  and  confirmed  by  the  people,  Struv.
Corp.  284.  At  the  election  of  Lotharius  II.,  A.  D.  1125,  sixty
thousand  persons  of  all  ranks  were  present.  He  was  named  by  the
chief  men,  and  their  nomination  was  approved  by  the  people,
Struv.  ibid,  p,  357.  The  first  author  who  mentions  the  seven
electors,  is  Martinus  Polonus,  who  flourished  in  the  reign  of
Frederick  II,,  which  ended  A.  D.  1250.  We  find  that  in  all  the
ancient  elections  to  which  I  have  referred,  the  princes  of  the  greatest
power  and  authority  were  allowed  by  their  countrymen  to  name  the
person  whom  they  wished  to  appoint  emperor,  and  the  people  ap-
proved or  disapproved  of  their  nomination.  This  privilege  of
voting  first  is  called  by  the  German  lawyers  the  right  of  Prcetaxation.
Pfeffel  Abrege,  p.  316.  This  was  the  first  origin  of  the  exclusive
right  which  the  electors  acquired.  The  electors  possessed  the  most
extensive  territories  of  any  princes  in  the  empire ;  all  the  great
offices  of  the  state  were  in  their  hands  by  hereditary  right;  as  soon

ILLUSTRATIONS.  307

as  they  obtained  or  engrossed  so  much  influence  in  the  election  as
to  be  allowed  the  right  of  praetaxation,  it  was  vain  to  oppose  their
will,  and  it  even  became  unnecessary  for  the  inferior  ecclesiastics
and  barons  to  attend,  when  they  had  no  other  function  but  that  of
confirming  the  deed  of  these  more  powerful  princes  by  their  assent.
During  times  of  turbulence,  the  subordinate  members  of  the  Ger-
manic body  could  not  resort  to  the  place  of  election  without  a
retinue  of  armed  vassals,  the  expense  of  which  they  were  obliged
to  defray  out  of  their  own  revenues  ;  and  finding  their  attendance
to  be  unnecessary,  they  were  unwilling  to  waste  them  to  no  pur-
pose. The  rights  of  the  seven  electors  were  supported  by  all  the
descendants  and  allies  of  their  powerful  families,  who  shared  in  the
splendour  and  influence  which  they  enjoyed  by  this  distinguishing
privilege.  PfefFel  Abrege,  p.  376.  The  seven  electors  were  con-
sidered as  the  representatives  of  all  tha  orders  which  composed  the
highest  class  of  German  nobility.  There  were  three  archbishops,
chancellors  of  the  three  great  districts  into  which  the  empire  was
anciently  divided ;  one  king,  one  duke,  one  marquis,  and  one  count.
All  these  circumstances  contributed  to  render  the  introduction  of
this  considerable  innovation  into  the  constitution  of  the  Germanic
body  extremely  easy.  Every  thing  of  importance,  relating  to  this
branch  of  the  political  state  of  the  empire  is  well  illustrated  by
Onuphrius  Panvinius,  an  Augustinian  monk  of  Verona,  who  lived
in  the  reign  of  Charles  V.  His  treatise,  if  we  make  some  allowance
for  that  partiality  which  he  expresses  in  favour  of  the  powers  which
the  popes  claimed  in  the  empire,  has  the  merit  of  being  one  of  the
first  works  in  which  a  controverted  point  in  history  is  examined
with  critical  precision,  and  with  a  proper  attention  to  that  evidence
which  is  derived  from  records,  or  the  testimony  of  contemporary
historians.  It  is  inserted  by  Goldastus,  in  the  Politica  Imperialia,  p.  2.
As  the  electors  have  engrossed  the  sole  right  of  choosing  the
emperors,  they  have  assumed  likewise  that  of  deposing  them.
This  high  power  the  electors  have  not  only  presumed  to  claim,  but
have  ventured,  in  more  than  one  instance,  to  exercise.  In  the  year
1298,  a  part  of  the  electors  deposed  Adolphus  of  Nassau,  and  sub-
stituted Albert  of  Austria  in  his  place.  The  reasons  on  which  they
found  their  sentence,  shew  that  this  deed  flowed  from  factious,  not
from  public-spirited  motives.  Struv.  Corp.  vol.  i.  540.  In  the  first
year  of  the  fifteenth  century,  the  electors  deposed  Wenceslaus,  and
placed  the  imperial  crown  on  the  head  of  Rupert,  elector  palatine.
The  act  of  deposition  is  still  extant.  Goldasti  Constit.  vol.  i.  379.
It  is  pronounced  in  the  name  and  by  the  authority  of  the  electors,
and  confirmed  by  several  prelates  and  barons  of  the  empire,  who
were  present.  These  exertions  of  the  electoral  power  demonstrate
that  the  imperial  authority  was  sunk  very  low.

x  2

308  PROOFS  AND

The  other  privileges  of  the  electors,  and  the  rights  of  the  elec-
toral college,  are  explained  by  the  writers  on  the  public  law  in
Germany.

3.  With  respect  to  the  diets  or  general  assemblies  of  the  empire,
it  would  be  necessary,  if  my  object  were  to  write  a  particular  his-
tory of  Germany,  to  enter  into  a  minute  detail  concerning  the
forms  of  assembling  them,  the  persons  who  have  right  to  be  pre-
sent, their  division  into  several  colleges  or  benches,  the  objects  of
their  deliberation,  the  mode  in  which  they  carry  on  their  debates
or  give  their  suffrages,  and  the  authority  of  their  decrees  or  re-
cesses. But  as  my  only  object  is  to  give  the  outlines  of  the  con-
stitution of  the  German  empire,  it  will  be  sufficient  to  observe,
that,  originally,  the  diets  of  the  empire  were  exactly  the  same  with
the  assemblies  of  March  and  of  May,  held  by  the  kings  of  France.
They  met,  at  least,  once  a  year.  Every  freeman  had  a  right  to  be
present.  They  were  assemblies,  in  which  a  monarch  deliberated
with  his  subjects,  concerning  their  common  interest.  Arumseus  de
Comitiis  Rom.  German.  Imperii,  4to.  Jense,  1660,  cap.  7.  No.  20,
&c.  But  when  the  princes,  dignified  ecclesiastics,  and  barons,
acquired  territorial  and  independent  jurisdiction,  the  diet  became
an  assembly  of  the  separate  states,  which  formed  the  confederacy
of  which  the  emperor  was  head.  While  the  constitution  of  the
empire  remained  in  its  primitive  form,  attendance  on  the  diets  was
a  duty,  like  the  other  services  due  from  feudal  subjects  to  their
sovereign,  which  the  members  were  bound  to  perform  in  person ;
and  if  any  member  who  had  a  right  to  be  present  in  the  diet  neg-
lected to  attend  in  person,  he  not,  only  lost  his  vote,  but  was
liable  to  a  heavy  penalty.  Arumseus  de  Comit,  c.  5.  No.  40. —
Whereas,  from  the  time  that  the  members  of  the  diet  became  inde-
pendent states,  the  right  of  suffrage  was  annexed  to  the  territory
or  dignity,  not  to  the  person.  The  members,  if  they  could  not,  or
would  not  attend  in  person,  might  send  their  deputies,  as  princes
send  ambassadors,  and  they  were  entitled  to  exercise  all  the  rights
belonging  to  their  constituents.  Ibid.  No.  42.  46.  49.  By  degrees,
and  upon  the  same  principle  of  considering  the  diet  as  an  assembly
of  independent  states,  in  which  each  confederate  had  the  right  of
suffrage,  if  any  member  possessed  more  than  one  of  those  states
or  characters  which  entitle  to  a  seat  in  the  diet,  he  was  allowed  a
proportional  number  of  suffrages.  Pfeffel  Abrege,  622.  From
the  same  cause  the  imperial  cities,  as  soon  as  they  became  free,
and  acquired  supreme  and  independent  jurisdiction  within  their
own  territories,  were  received  as  members  oY  the  diet.  The  powers
of  the  diet  extend  to  every  thing  relative  to  the  common  concern
of  the  Germanic  body,  or  that  can  interest  or  affect  it  as  a  confe-
deracy. The  diet  takes  no  cognizance  of  the  interior  administra-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  309

tion  in  the  different  states,  unless  that  happens  to  disturb  or  threaten
the  general  safety.

4.  With  respect  to  the  imperial  chamber,  the  jurisdiction  of
which  has  been  the  great  source  of  order  and  tranquillity  in  Ger-
many, it  is  necessary  to  observe,  that  this  court  was  instituted  in
order  to  put  an  end  to  the  calamities  occasioned  by  private  wars  in
Germany.  I  have  already  traced  the  rise  and  progress  of  this
practice,  and  pointed  out  its  pernicious  effects  as  fully  as  their  ex-
tensive influence  during  the  middle  ages  required.  In  Germany,
private  wars  seem  to  have  been  more  frequent,  and  productive  of
worse  consequences,  than  in  the  other  countries  of  Europe.  There
are  obvious  reasons  for  this.  The  nobility  of  Germany  were  ex-
tremely numerous,  and  the  causes  of  their  dissension  multiplied  in
proportion.  The  territorial  jurisdiction  which  the  German  nobles
acquired,  was  more  complete  than  that  possessed  by  their  order  in
other  nations.  They  became,  in  reality,  independent  powers,  and
they  claimed  all  the  privileges  of  that  character.  The  long  inter-
regnum from  A.  D.  1256,  to  A.  D.  1273,  accustomed  them  to  an
uncontrolled  licence,  and  led  them  to  forget  that  subordination
which  is  necessary  in  order  to  maintain  public  tranquillity.  At  the
time  when  the^rther  monarchs  of  Europe  began  to  acquire  such  an
increase  of  power  and  revenues  as  added  new  vigour  to  their  go-
vernment, the  authority  and  revenues  of  the  emperors  continued
gradually  to  decline.  The  diets  of  the  empire,  which  alone  had
authority  to  judge  between  such  mighty  barons,  and  power  to  en-
force its  decisions,  met  very  seldom.  Conring.  Acroamata,  p.  234.
The  diets,  when  they  did  assemble,  were  often  composed  of  seve-
ral thousand  members.  Chronic  Constat.  ap.  Struv.  Corp.  i.  p.
546 ;  and  were  tumultuary  assemblies,  ill  qualified  to  decide  con-
cerning any  question  of  right.  The  session  of  the  diets  continued
only  two  or  three  days,  Pfeffel  Abreg6,  p.  244 ;  so  that  they  had
no  time  to  hear  or  discuss  any  cause  that  wasin  the  smallest  de-
gree intricate.  Thus  Germany  was  left,  in  some  measure,  without
any  court  of  judicature  capable  of  deciding  the  contests  between
its  more  powerful  members,  or  of  repressing  the  evils  occasioned
by  their  private  wars.  >  '

All  the  expedients  which  were  employed  in  other  countries  of
Europe,  in  order  to  restrain  this  practice,  and  which  I  have  de-
scribed Note  XXL,  were  tried  in  Germany  with  little  effect.  The
confederacies  of  the  nobles  and  of  the  cities,  and  the  division  of
Germany  into  various  circles,  which  I  mentioned  in  that  Note,
were  found  likewise  insufficient.  As  a  last  remedy,  the  Germans
had  recourse  to  arbiters  whom  they  called  Austregce.  The  barons
and  states  in  different  parts  of  Germany  joined  in  conventions,  by
which  they  bound  themselves  to  refer  all  controversies  that  might

310  PROOFS  AND

arise  between  them  to  the  determination  of  Austregce,  and  to  sub-
mit to  their  sentences  as  final.  These  arbiters  are  named  some-
times in  the  treaty  of  convention,  an  instance  of  which  occurs  in
Ludewig  Reliquse  Manuscr.  omnis  sevi,  vol.  ii.  212 ;  sometimes
they  were  chosen  by  mutual  consent  upon  occasion  of  any  contest
that  arose ;  sometimes  they  were  appointed  by  neutral  persons ;
and  sometimes  the  choice  was  left  to  be  decided  by  lot.  Datt.  de
Pace  publica  Imperil,  lib.  i.  cap.  27.  No.  60,  &c.  Speidelius  Spe-
culum, &c.  voc.  Austrag.  p.  95.  Upon  the  introduction  of  this
practice,  the  public  tribunals  of  justice  became  in  a  great  measure
useless,  and  were  almost  entirely  deserted.

In  order  to  re-establish  the  authority  of  government,  Maximilian
I.  instituted  the  imperial  chamber  at  the  period  which  I  have  men-
tioned. This  tribunal  consisted  originally  of  a  president,  who  was
always  a  nobleman  of  the  first  order,  and  of  sixteen  judges.  The
president  was  appointed  by  the  emperor,  and  the  judges,  partly  by
him,  and  partly  by  the  states,  according  to  forms  which  it  is  unne-
cessary to  describe.  A  sum  was  imposed  with  their  own  consent,
on  the  states  of  the  empire,  for  paying  the  salaries  of  the  judges
and  officers  in  this  court.  The  imperial  chamber  was  established
first  at  Francfort  on  the  Maine.  During  the  reign  of  -Charles  V.
it  was  removed  to  Spires,  and  continued  in  that  city  above  a  cen»
tury  and  a  half.  It  is  now  fixed  at  Wetzlar.  This  court  takes
cognizance  of  all  questions  concerning  civil  right  between  the  states
of  the  empire,  and  passes  judgment  in  the  last  resort,  and  without
appeal.  To  it  belongs  likewise  the  privilege  of  judging  in  criminal
causes,  which  may  be  considered  as  connected  with  the  preserva-
tion of  the  public  peace.  Pfeffel  Abrege,  560.

All  causes  relating  to  points  of  feudal  right  or  jurisdiction,  toge-
ther with  such  as  respect  the  territories  which  hold  of  the  empire
in  Italy,  belong  properly  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Aulic  council.
This  tribunal  was  formed  upon  the  model  of  the  ancient  court  of
the  palace,  instituted  by  the  emperors  of  Germany.  It  depended
not  upon  the  states  of  the  empire,  but  upon  the  emperor ;  he  hav-
ing the  right  of  appointing  at  pleasure  all  the  judges  of  whom  it  is
composed.  Maximilian,  in  order  to  procure  some  compensation
for  the  diminution  of  his  authority,  by  the  powers  vested  in  the
imperial  chamber,  prevailed  on  the  diet,  A.  D.  1512,  to  give  its
consent  to  the  establishment  of  the  Aulic  council.  Since  that  time,
it  has  been  a  great  object  of  policy  in  the  court  of  Vienna  to  ex-
tend the  jurisdiction,  and  support  the  authority  of  the  Aulic  coun-
cil, and  to  circumscribe  and  weaken  those  of  the  imperial  chamber.
The  tedious  forms  and  dilatory  proceedings  of  the  imperial  chamber
have  furnished  the  emperors  with  pretexts  for  doing  so.  Lites
Spirse,  according  to  the  witticism  of  a  German  lawyer,  spirant,  sed

ILLUSTRATIONS.  311

nunquam  expirant.  Such  delays  are  unavoidable  in  a  court  com-
posed of  members  named  by  many  different  states,  jealous  of  each
other.  Whereas  the  judges  of  the  Aulic  council,  depending  upon
one  master,  and  being  responsible  to  him  alone,  are  more  vigorous
and  decisive.  Puffendorf.  de  Statu  Imper.  German,  cap.  v.  §  20.
PfeffelAbrege,p.581.

Note  XLIII. Sect.  III.  p.  180.

THE  description  which  I  have  given  of  the  Turkish  government
is  conformable  to  the  accounts  of  the  most  intelligent  travellers
who  have  visited  that  empire.  The  count  de  Marsigli,  in  his
treatise  concerning  the  military  state  of  the  Turkish  empire,  ch.  vi.
and  the  author  of  Observations  on  the  religion,  laws,  government,
and  manners  of  the  Turks,  published  at  London  1768,  vel.  i.p.  81.,
differ  from  other  writers  who  have  described  the  political  consti-
tution of  that  powerful  monarchy.  As  they  had  opportunity,  dur-
ing their  long  residence  in  Turkey,  to  observe  the  order  and  justice
conspicuous  in  several  departments  of  administration,  they  seem
unwilling  to  admit  that  it  should  be  denominated  a  despotism.
But  when  the  form  of  government  in  any  country  is  represented  to
be  despotic,  this  does  not  suppose  that  the  power  of  the  monarch
is  continually  exerted  in  acts  of  violence,  injustice,  and  cruelty.
Under  political  constitutions,  of  every  species,  unless  when  some
frantic  tyrant  happens  to  hold  the  sceptre,  the  ordinary  adminis-
tration of  government  must  be  conformable  to  the  principles  of
justice,  and  if  not  active  in  promoting  the  welfare  of  the  people,
cannot  certainly  have  their  destruction  for  its  object.  A  state,  in
which  the  sovereign  possesses  the  absolute  command  of  a  vast
military  force,  together  with  the  disposal  of  an  extensive  revenue ;
in  which  the  people  have  no  privileges,  and  no  part  either  imme-
diate or  remote  in  legislation  ;  in  which  there  is  no  body  of  here-
ditary nobility,  jealous  of  their  own  rights  and  distinctions,  to  stand
as  an  intermediate  order  between  the  prince  and  the  people,  can-
not be  distinguished  by  any  name  but  that  of  a  despotism.  The
restraints,  however,  which  I  have  mentioned,  arising  from  the  Ca-
picvly,  and  from  religion,  are  powerful.  But  they  are  not  such  as
change  the  nature  or  denomination  of  the  government.  When  a
despotic  prince  employs  an  armed  force  to  support  his  authority,
he  commits  the  supreme  power  to  their  hands.  The  praetorian
bands  in  Rome  dethroned,  murdered,  and  exalted  their  princes,  in
the  same  wanton  manner  with  the  soldiery  of  the  Porte  at  Con-
stantinople. But  notwithstanding  this,  the  Roman  emperors  have
been  considered  by  all  political  writers  as  possessing  despotic
power.

312  PROOFS  AND

The  author  of  Observations  on  the  religion,  law,  government,
and  manners  of  the  Turks,  in  a  preface  to  the  second  edition  of  his
work,  hath  made  some  remarks  on  what  is  contained  in  this  Note,
and  in  that  part  of  the  text  to  which  it  refers.  It  is  with  diffidence
I  set  my  opinion  in  opposition  to  that  of  a  person,  who  has  ob-
served the  government  of  the  Turks  with  attention  and  has  de-
scribed it  with  ability.  But  after  a  careful  review  of  the  subject,
to  me  the  Turkish  government  still  appears  of  such  a  species  as
can  be  ranged  in  no  class  but  that  to  which  political  writers  have
given  the  name  of  despotism.  There  is  not  in  Turkey  any  constitu-
tional restraint  upon  the  will  of  the  sovereign,  or  any  barrier  to
circumscribe  the  exercise  of  his  power,  but  the  two  which  I  have
mentioned ;  one  afforded  by  religion,  the  principle  upon  which  the
authority  of  the  sultan  is  founded,  the  other  by  the  army,  the  in-
strument which  he  must  employ  to  maintain  his  power.  The  au-
thor represents  the  Ulema,  or  body  of  the  law,  as  an  intermediate
order  between  the  monarch  and  the  people.  Pref.  p.  30.  But
whatever  restraint  the  authority  of  the  Ulema  may  impose  upon  the
sovereign,  is  derived  from  religion.  The  Moulahs,  out  of  whom  the
mufti  and  other  chief  officers  of  the  law  must  be  chosen,  are  ec-
clesiastics. It  is  as  interpreters  of  the  koran  or  divine  will  that
they  are  objects  of  veneration.  The  check,  then,  which  they  give
to  the  exercise  of  arbitrary  power  is  not  different  from  one  of  those
of  which  I  took  notice.  Indeed,  this  restraint  cannot  be  very  con-
siderable. The  mufti,  who  is  the  head  of  the  order,  as  well  as
every  inferior  officer  of  law,  is  named  by  the  sultan,  and  is  re-
movable at  his  pleasure.  The  strange  means  employed  by  the
Ulema  in  1746,  to  obtain  the  dismission  of  a  minister  whom  they
hated,  is  a  manifest  proof  that  they  possess  but  little  constitutional
authority  which  can  serve  as  a  restraint  upon  the  will  of  the  so-
vereign. Observat.  p.  92.  of  2d  edit.  If  the  author's  idea  be  just,
it  is  astonishing  that  the  body  of  the  law  should  have  no  method  of
remonstrating  against  the  errors  of  administration,  but  by  setting
fire  to  the  capital.

The  author  seems  to  consider  the  Capiculy  or  soldiery  of  the
Porte,  neither  as  formidable  instruments  of  the  sultan's  power,  nor
as  any  restraint  upon  the  exercise  of  it.  His  reasons  for  this
opinion  are,  that  the  number  of  the  capiculy  is  small  in  proportion
to  the  other  troops  which  compose  the  Turkish  armies,  and  that  in
time  of  peace  they  are  undisciplined.  Pref.  2d  edit.  p.  23,  &c.
But  the  troops  stationed  in  a  capital,  though  their  number  be  not
great,  are  always  masters  of  the  sovereign's  person  and  power.
The  preetorian  bands  bore  no  proportion  to  the  legionary  troops  in
the  frontier  provinces.  The  soldiery  of  the  Porte  are  more  nu-
merous, and  must  possess  power  of  the  same  kind,  and  be  equally
'

ILLUSTRATIONS.  313

formidable,  sometimes  to  the  sovereign,  and  oftener  to  the  people.
However  much  the  discipline  of  the  janizaries  may  be  neglected
at  present,  it  certainly  was  not  so  in  that  age  to  which  alone  my
description  of  the  Turkish  government  applies.  The  author  ob-
serves, Pref.  p.  29.  that  the  janizaries  never  deposed  any  sultan  of
themselves,  but  that  some  form  of  law,  true  or  false,  has  been  ob-
served, and  that  either  the  mufti,  or  some  other  minister  of  religion,
has  announced  to  the  unhappy  prince  the  law  which  renders  him
unworthy  of  the  throne.  Observ.  p.  102.  This  will  always  happen.
In  every  revolution,  though  brought  about  by  military  power,  the
deeds  of  the  soldiery  must  be  confirmed  and  carried  into  execution
with  the  civil  and  religious  formalities  peculiar  to  the  constitution.

This  addition  to  the  note  may  serve  as  a  farther  illustration  of
my  own  sentiments,  but  is  not  made  with  an  intention  of  entering
into  any  controversy  with  the  author  of  Observations,  &c.,  to  whom
I  am  indebted  for  the  obliging  terms  in  which  he  has  expressed  his
remarks  upon  what  I  had  advanced.  Happy  were  it  for  such  as
venture  to  communicate  their  opinions  to  the  world,  if  every  ani-
madversion upon  them  were  conveyed  with  the  same  candid  and
liberal  spirit.  In  one  particular,  however,  he  seems  to  have  misap-
prehended what  I  meant.  Pref.  p.  17.  I  certainly  did  not  mention
his  or  count  Marsigli's  long  residence  in  Turkey,  as  a  circumstance
which  should  detract  from  the  weight  of  their  authority.  I  took
notice  of  it,  in  justice  to  my  readers,  that  they  might  receive  my
opinion  with  distrust,  as  it  differed  from  that  of  persons  whose
means  of  information  were  so  far  superior  to  mine.

NoteXLIV. Sect.  III.  p.  181.

THE  institution,  the  discipline,  and  privileges  of  the  janizaries
are  described  by  all  the  authors  who  give  any  account  of  the
Turkish  government.  The  manner  in  which  enthusiasm  was  em-
ployed in  order  to  inspire  them  with  courage,  is  thus  related  by
prince  Cantemir :  "  When  Amurath  I.  had  formed  them  into  a
body,  he  sent  them  to  Haji  Bektash,  a  Turkish  saint,  famous  for
his  miracles  and  prophecies,  desiring  him  to  bestow  on  them  a
banner,  to  pray  to  God  for  their  success,  and  to  give  them  a  name.
The  saint,  when  they  appeared  in  his  presence,  put  the  sleeve  of
his  gown  upon  one  of  their  heads,  and  said,  Let  them  be  called
Yengicheri.  Let  their  countenance  be  ever  bright,  their  hands  vic-
torious, their  sword  keen ;  let  their  spear  always  hang  over  the
heads  of  their  enemies,  and  wherever  they  go,  may  they  return
with  a  shining  face."  History  of  the  Ottoman  Empire,  p.  38.  The
number  of  janizaries,  at  the  first  institution  of  the  body,  was  not
considerable.  Under  Solyman,  in  the  year  1521,  they  amounted

314  PROOFS AND

to  twelve  thousand.  Since  that  time  their  number  has  greatly  in-
creased, Marsigli  Etat,  &c.  ch.  xvi.  p.  68.  Though  Solyman  pos-
sessed such  abilities  and  authority  as  to  restrain  this  formidable
body  within  the  bounds  of  obedience,  yet  its  tendency  to  limit  the
power  of  the  sultans  was,  even  in  that  age,  foreseen  by  sagacious
observers.  Nicolas  Daulphinois,  who  accompanied  M.  D'Aramon,
ambassador  from  Henry  II.  of  France  to  Solyman,  published  an
account  of  his  travels,  in  which  he  describes  and  celebrates  the  dis-
cipline of  the  janizaries ;  but  at  the  same  time  predicts  that  they
would,  one  day,  become  formidable  to  their  masters,  and  act  the
same  part  at  Constantinople,  as  the  praetorian  bands  had  done  at
Rome.  Collection  of  Voyages  from  the  Earl  of  Oxford's  library,
vol.  i.  p.  599.

Note  XLV. Sect.  III.  p.  184,

SOLYMAN  the  Magnificent,  to  whom  the  Turkish  historians  have
given  the  surname  of  Canuni,  or  instituter  of  rules,  first  brought  the
finances  and  military  establishment  of  the  Turkish  empire  into  a
regular  form.  He  divided  the  military  force  into  the  Capiculy  or
soldiery  of  the  Porte,  which  was  properly  the  standing  -army,  and
Serrataculy  or  soldiers  appointed  to  guard  the  frontiers.  The  chief
strength  of  the  latter  consisted  of  those  who  held  Timariots  and
Ziams.  These  were  portions  of  land  granted  to  certain  persons
for  life,  in  much  the  same  manner  as  the  military  fiefs  among  the
nations  of  Europe,  in  return  for  which  military  service  was  per-
formed. Solyman,  in  his  Canu-Name,  or  book  of  regulations,  fixed
with  great  accuracy  the  extent  of  these  lands  in  each  province  of
the  empire,  appointed  the  precise  number  of  soldiers  each  person
who  held  a  timariot  or  a  ziam  should  bring  into  the  field,  and
established  the  pay  which  they  should  receive  while  engaged  in
service.  Count  Marsigli  and  Sir  Paul  Rycaut  have  given  extracts
from  this  book  of  regulations,  and  it  appears,  that  the  ordinary
establishment  of  the  Turkish  army  exceeded  a  hundred  and  fifty
thousand  men.  When  these  were  added  to  the  soldiery  of  the
Porte,  they  formed  a  military  power  greatly  superior  to  what  any
Christian  state  could  command  in  the  sixteenth  century.  Marsigli
Etat  Militaire,  &c.  p.  136.  Rycaut's  State  of  the  Ottoman  Em-
pire, book  iii.  ch.  ii.  As  Solyman,  during  his  active  reign,  was
engaged  so  constantly  in  war,  that  his  troops  were  always  in  the
field,  the  Serrataculy  became  almost  equal  to  the  janizaries  them-
selves in  discipline  and  valour.

It  is  not  surprising,  then,  that  the  authors  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury should  represent  the  Turks  as  far  superior  to  the  Christians,
both  in  the  knowledge  and  in  the  practice  of  the  art  of  war.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  315

Guicciardini  informs  us,  that  the  Italians  learned  the  art  of  fortify-
ing towns  from  the  Turks.  Histor.  lib.  xv.  p.  266.  Busbequius,
who  was  ambassador  from  the  emperor  Ferdinand  to  Solyman,  and
who  had  opportunity  to  observe  the  state  both  of  the  Christian
and  Turkish  armies,  published  a  discourse  concerning  the  best
manner  of  carrying  on  war  against  the  Turks,  in  which  he  points
out  at  great  length  the  immense  advantages  which  the  infidels
possessed  with  respect  to  discipline,  and  military  improvements  of
every  kind.  Busbequii  opera,  edit.  Elzevir,  p.  393,  &c.  The  tes-
timony of  other  authors  might  be  added,  if  the  matter  were  in  any
degree  doubtful.

Before  I  conclude  these  Proofs  and  Illustrations,  I  ought  to
explain  the  reason  of  two  omissions  in  them ;  one  of  which  it  is
necessary  to  mention  on  my  own  account,  the  other  to  obviate  an
objection  to  this  part  of  the  work.

In  all  my  inquiries  and  disquisitions  concerning  the  progress  of
government,  manners,  literature,  and  commerce,  during  the  middle
ages,  as  well  as  in  my  delineations  of  the  political  constitution  of
the  different  states  of  Europe  at  the  opening  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury, I  have  not  once  mentioned  M.  de  Voltaire,  who,  in  his  Essay
sur  I'Histoire  generate,  has  reviewed  the  same  period,  and  has
treated  of  all  these  subjects.  This  does  not  proceed  from  inatten-
tion to  the  works  of  that  extraordinary  man,  whose  genius,  no  less
enterprising  than  universal,  has  attempted  almost  every  different
species  of  literary  composition.  In  many  of  these  he  excels.  In
all,  if  he  had  left  religion  untouched,  he  is  instructive  and  agree-
able. But  as  he  seldom  imitates  the  example  of  modern  historians
in  citing  the  authors  from  whom  they  derived  their  information,  I
could  not,  with  propriety,  appeal  to  his  authority  in  confirmation
of  any  doubtful  or  unknown  fact.  I  have  often,  however,  followed
him  as  my  guide  in  these  researches  ;  and  he  has  not  only  pointed
out  the  facts  with  respect  to  which  it  was  of  importance  to  inquire,
but  the  conclusions  which  it  was  proper  to  draw  from  them.  If
he  had,  at  the  same  time,  mentioned  the  books  which  relate  these
particulars,  a  great  part  of  my  labour  would  have  been  unnecessary,
and  many  of  his  readers,  who  now  consider  him  only  as  an  enter-
taining and  lively  writer,  would  find  that  he  is  a  learned  and  well-
informed  historian.

As  to  the  other  omission,  every  intelligent  reader  must  have
observed,  that  I  have  not  entered  either  in  the  historical  part  of
this  volume,  or  in  the  Proofs  and  Illustrations,  into  the  same  detail
with  respect  to  the  ancient  laws  and  customs  of  the  British  king-
doms, as  concerning  those  of  the  other  European  nations.  As
the  capital  facts  with  regard  to  the  progress  of  government  and
manners  in  their  own  country  are  known  to  most  of  my  readers,

316  PROOFS  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.

such  a  detail  appeared  to  me  to  be  less  essential.  Such  facts  and
observations,  however,  as  were  necessary  towards  completing  my
design  in  this  part  of  the  work,  I  have  mentioned  under  the  differ-
ent articles  which  are  the  subjects  of  my  disquisitions.  The  state
of  government,  in  all  the  nations  of  Europe,  having  been  nearly  the
same  during  several  ages,  nothing  can  tend  more  to  illustrate  the
progress  of  the  English  constitution,  than  a  careful  inquiry  into
the  laws  and  customs  of  the  kingdoms  on  the  continent.  This
source  of  information  has  been  too  much  neglected  by  the  English
antiquaries  and  lawyers.  Filled  with  admiration  of  that  happy
constitution  now  established  in  Great  Britain,  they  have  been  more
attentive  to  its  forms  and  principles,  than  to  the  condition  and
ideas  of  remote  times,  which  in  almost  every  particular  differ  from-
the  present.  While  engaged  in  perusing  the  laws,  charters,  and
early  historians  of  the  continental  kingdoms,  I  have  often  been  led
to  think  that  an  attempt  to  illustrate  the  progress  of  English  juris-
prudence and  policy,  by  a  comparison  with  those  of  other  kingdoms
in  a  similar  situation,  would  be  of  great  utility,  and  might  throw
much  light  on  some  points  which  are  now  obscure,  and  decide
others,  which  have  been  long  controverted.

THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

OF  THE

EMPEROR  CHARLES  V.

BOOK  I.

Birth  of  CHARLES  V.  was  born  at  Ghent  on  the  24th
Charles  v.  ^  of  Febmary?  in  the  year  1500.  His  father,
Philip  the  Handsome,  archduke  of  Austria,  was  the  son
of  the  emperor  Maximilian,  and  of  Mary,  the  only  child
of  Charles  the  Bold,  the  last  prince  of  the  house  of  Bur-
gundy. His  mother,  Joanna,  was  the  second  daughter
of  Ferdinand  king  of  Aragon,  and  of  Isabella,  queen  of
Castile.

His  domi-  A  long  train  of  fortunate  events  had  opened
thTe^nts  the  way  for  this  young  prince  to  the  inheritance
heTchquired  °f  more  extensive  dominions,  than  any  European
them.  monarch,  since  Charlemagne,  had  possessed.
Each  of  his  ancestors  had  acquired  kingdoms  or  provinces,
towards  which  their  prospect  of  succession  was  extremely
remote.  The  rich  possessions  of  Mary  of  Burgundy  had
been  destined  for  another  family,  she  having  been  con-
tracted by  her  father  to  the  only  son  of  Louis  XI.  of
France;  but  that  capricious*  monarch,  indulging  his
hatred  to  her  family,  chose  rather  to  strip  her  of  part  of
her  territories  by  force,  than  to  secure  the  whole  by  mar-
riage ;  and  by  his  misconduct,  fatal  to  his  posterity,  he
threw  all  the  Netherlands  and  Franche  Compte  into  the
hands  of  a  rival.  Isabella,  the  daughter  of  John  II.  of
Castile,  far  from  having  any  prospect  of  that  noble  inhe-

318  CHARLES  V.

ritance  which  she  transmitted  to  her  grandson,  passed  the
early  part  of  her  life  in  obscurity  and  indigence.  But
the  Castilians,  exasperated  against  her  brother  Henry  IV.,
an  ill-advised  and  vicious  prince,  publicly  charged  him
with  impotence,  and  his  queen  with  adultery.  Upon
his  demise,  rejecting  Joanna,  whom  Henry  had  uniformly,
and  even  on  his  death-bed,  owned  to  be  his  lawful
daughter,  and  whom  an  assembly  of  the  states  had  ac-
knowledged to  be  the  heir  of  his  kingdom,  they  obliged
her  to  retire  into  Portugal,  and  placed  Isabella  on  the
throne  of  Castile.  Ferdinand  owed  the  crown  of  Aragon
to  the  unexpected  death  of  his  elder  brother,  and  acquired
the  kingdoms  of  Naples  and  Sicily  by  violating  the  faith
of  treaties,  and  disregarding  the  ties  of  blood.  To  all
these  kingdoms,  Christopher  Columbus,  by  an  effort  of
genius  and  of  intrepidity,  the  boldest  and  most  success-
ful that  is  recorded  in  the  annals  of  mankind,  added  a
new  world,  the  wealth  of  which  became  one  consider-
able source  of  the  power  and  grandeur  of  the  Spanish
monarchs.

Philip  and  Don  John,  the  only  son  of  Ferdinand  and
fa°ther  andis  Isa^e^a?  an^  their  eldest  daughter,  the  queen
mother,  of  Portugal,  being  cut  off,  without  issue,  in  the
n*  flower  of  youth,  all  their  hopes  centered  in
Joanna  and  her  posterity.  But  as  her  husband,  the  arch-
duke, was  a  stranger  to  the  Spaniards,  it  was  thought  ex-
pedient to  invite  him  into  Spain,  that,  by  residing  among
them,  he  might  accustom  himself  to  their  laws  and  man-
ners ;  and  it  was  expected  that  the  cortes,  or  assembly  of
states,  whose  authority  was  then  so  great  in  Spain,  that
no  title  to  the  crown  was  reckoned  valid  unless  it  received
their  sanction,  would  acknowledge  his  right  of  succes-
sion, together  with  that  of  the  infanta  his  wife.  Philip
and  Joanna,  passing  through  France  in  their  way  to
Spain,  were  entertained  in  that  kingdom  with  the  utmost
magnificence.  The  archduke  did  homage  to
Louis  XII.  for  the  earldom  of  Flanders,  and

BOOK  I.  319

took  his  seat  as  a  peer  of  the  realm  in  the  parliament  of
Paris.  They  were  received  in  Spain  with  every  mark
of  honour  that  the  parental  affection  of  Ferdinand  and
Isabella,  or  the  respect  of  their  subjects,  could  devise  ;
and  their  title  to  the  crown  was  soon  after  acknowledged
by  the  cortes  of  both  kingdoms.
Ferdinand  But  amidst  these  outward  appearances  of  sa-

iealous  of ,  • r» ,  •  i  •  •  T

Philip's tistaction  and  joy,  some  secret  uneasiness  preyed

power.  Up0n  mn( Q eac Q ese  pruiceg

stately  and  reserved  ceremonial  of  the  Spanish  court  was
so  burdensome  to  Philip,  a  prince,  young,  gay,  affable,
fond  of  society  and  of  pleasure,  that  he  soon  began  to
express  a  desire  of  returning  to  his  native  country,  the
manners  of  which  were  more  suited  to  his  temper.  Fer-
dinand, observing  the  declining  health  of  his  queen,  with
whose  life  he  knew  that  his  right  to  the  government  of
Castile  must  cease,  easily  foresaw,  that  a  prince  of  Philip's
diposition,  and  who  already  discovered  an  extreme  im-
patience to  reign,  would  never  consent  to  his  retaining
any  degree  of  authority  in  that  kingdom  ;  and  the  pro-
spect of  this  diminution  of  his  power  awakened  the  jea-
lousy of  that  ambitious  monarch.

Isabella's  Isabella  beheld,  with  the  sentiments  natural
with  Je-de  to  a  mother,  the  indifference  and  neglect  with

w^icft  tne  archduke  treated  her  daughter,  who
daughter.  was  destitute  of  those  beauties  of  person,  as  well
as  those  accomplishments  of  mind,  which  fix  the  affections
of  a  husband.  Her  understanding,  always  weak,  was
often  disordered.  She  doated  on  Philip  with  such  an
excess  of  childish  and  indiscreet  fondness,  as  excited
disgust  rather  than  affection.  Her  jealousy,  for  which
her  husband's  behaviour  gave  her  too  much  cause,  was
proportioned  to  her  love,  and  often  broke  out  in  the  most
extravagant  actions.  Isabella,  though  sensible  of  her
defects,  could  not  help  pitying  her  condition,  which  was
soon  rendered  altogether  deplorable  by  the  archduke's
abrupt  resolution  of  setting  out  in  the  middle  of  winter

320  CHARLES V.

for  Flanders,  and  of  leaving  her  in  Spain.  Isabella  en-
treated him  not  to  abandon  his  wife  to  grief  and  melan-
choly, which  might  prove  fatal  to  her,  as  she  was  near
the  time  of  her  delivery.  Joanna  conjured  him  to  put
off  his  journey  for  three  days  only,  that  she  might  have
the  pleasure  of  celebrating  the  festival  of  Christmas  in  his
company.  Ferdinand,  after  representing  the  imprudence
of  his  leaving  Spain,  before  he  had  time  to  become  ac-
quainted with  the  genius,  or  to  gain  the  affections  of  the
people  who  were  one  day  to  be  his  subjects,  besought  him,
at  least,  not  to  pass  through  France,  with  which  kingdom
he  was  then  at  open  war.  Philip,  without  regarding
either  the  dictates  of  humanity,  orthemaximsofpruden.ee,
persisted  in  his  purpose ;  and,  on  the  22d  of  December,
set  out  for  the  Low  Countries,  by  the  way  of  France.a
Disorder  of  From  the  moment  of  his  departure,  Joanna
Joanna's  suuk  into  a  deep  and  sullen  melancholv,b  and,

mind.  111  i

Birth  of  while  she  was  in  that  situation,  bore  Ferdinand,
afterward  '  her  second  son,  for  whom  the  power  of  his  bro-
emperor.  ^er  Charles  afterward  procured  the  kingdoms
of  Hungary  and  Bohemia,  and  to  whom  he  at  last  trans-
mitted the  imperial  sceptre.  Joanna  was  the  only  person
in  Spain  who  discovered  no  joy  at  the  birth  of  this  prince.
Insensible  to  that,  as  well  as  to  every  other  pleasure,  she
was  wholly  occupied  with  the  thoughts  of  returning  to
her  husband  ;  nor  did  she,  in  any  degree,  recover  tran-
quillity of  mind,  until  she  arrived  at  Brussels

1.504.

next  year.0

Philip,  in  passing  through  France,  had  an  interview
with  Louis  XII.,  and  signed  a  treaty  with  him,  by  which
he  hoped  that  all  the  differences  between  France  and
Spain  would  have  been  finally  terminated.  But  Ferdi-
nand, whose  affairs,  at  that  time,  were  extremely  prosper-
ous in  Italy,  where  the  superior  genius  of  Gonsalvo  de
Cordova,  the  great  captain,  triumphed  on  every  occasion

a  Petri  Martyris  Anglerii  Epistolae,  250.  253.  b  Ib.  Epist.  255.

«  Mariana,  lib.  27.  c.  11.  14. Flechier  Vie  de  Ximen.  i.  191.

BOOK I.  321

over  the  arms  of  France,  did  not  pay  the  least  regard  to
what  his-  son-in-law  had  concluded,  and  carried  on  hos-
tilities with  greater  ardour  than  ever.
Death  of From  this  time  Philip  seems  not  to  have  taken
Isabella. any  parj.  'n  fae  affairs  of  Spain,  waiting  in  quiet
till  the  death  either  of  Ferdinand  or  of  Isabella  should
open  the  way  to  one  of  their  thron.es. The  latter  of  these
events  was  not  far  distant. The  untimely  death  of  her
son  and  eldest  daughter  had  made  a  deep  impression  on
the  mind  of  Isabella,  and  as  she  could  derive  but  little
consolation  for  the  losses  which  she  had  sustained  either
from  her  daughter  Joanna,  whose  infirmities  daily  in-
creased, or  from  her  son-in-law,  who  no  longer  preserved
even  the  appearance  of  decent  respect  towards  that  un-
happy princess,  her  spirits  and  health  began  gradually
to  decline,  and,  after  languishing  some  months,  she  died
at  Medina  del  Campo,  on  the  26th  of  November,  1504.
She  was  no  less  eminent  for  virtue  than  for  wisdom  ;  and
whether  we  consider  her  behaviour  as  a  queen,  as  a  .wife,
or  as  a  mother,  she  is  justly  entitled  to  the  high  encomiums
bestowed  upon  her  by  the  Spanish  historians."1
Her  win, A  few  weeks  before  her  death,  she  made  her
appointing  }ast  w[\\ .  an^ being  convinced  of  Joanna's  in-

Ferdmand

regent  of  capacity  to  assume  the  reins  of  government  into
her  own  hands,  and  having  no  inclination  to
commit  them  to  Philip,  with  whose  conduct  she  was  ex-
tremely dissatisfied,  she  appointed  Ferdinand  regent  or
administrator  of  the  affairs  of  Castile,  until  her  grandson
Charles  should  attain  the  age  of  twenty.  She  bequeathed
to  Ferdinand  likewise  one-half  of  the  revenues  which
should  arise  from  the  Indies,  together  with  the  grand-
masterships  of  the  three  military  orders ;  dignities  which
rendered  the  person  who  possessed  them  almost  inde-
pendent, and  which  Isabella  had,  for  that  reason,  an-
nexed to  the  crown.6  But,  before  she  signed  a  deed  so

*  P.  Mart.  Ep.  279.

e  Ibid.  Ep.  277. Mar.  Hist.  lib.  28.  c.  11. Fen-eras  Hist.  Gener.  d'E*>pagu«t
torn.  viii.  263.

VOL. III.  Y

322  CHARLES  V.

favourable  to  Ferdinand,  she  obliged  him  to  swear  that
he  would  not,  by  a  second  marriage,  or  by  any  other
means,  endeavour  to  deprive  Joanna  or  her  posterity  of
their  right  of  succession  to  any  of  his  kingdoms/

Immediately  on  the  queen's  death,  Ferdinand  resigned
the  title  of  king  of  Castile,  and  issued  orders  to  proclaim
Joanna  and  Philip  the  sovereigns  of  that  kingdom.  But,
at  the  sahie  time,  he  assumed  the  character  of  regent,  in
Ferdinand  consequence  of  Isabella's  testament;  and  not
TedTcTas  l°ng  a^ter'  he  P^vailed  on  the  cortes  of  Castile
regent  by  to  acknowledge  his  right  to  that  office.  This,

1505. '  however,  he  did  not  procure  without  difficulty,
Hans^isla-  nor  without  discovering  such  symptoms  of  alien-
tisfied.  ation  and  disgust  among  the  Castilians  as  filled
him  with  great  uneasiness.  The  union  of  Castile  and
Aragon  for  almost  thirty  years,  had  not  so  entirely  ex-
tirpated the  ancient  and  hereditary  enmity  which  sub-
sisted between  the  natives  of  these  kingdoms,  that  the
Castilian  pride  could  submit,  without  murmuring,  to  the
government  of  a  king  of  Aragon.  Ferdinand's  own  cha-
racter, with  which  the  Castilians  were  well  acquainted,
was  far  from  rendering  his  authority  desirable.  Suspi-
cious, discerning,  severe,  and  parsimonious,  he  was  ac-
customed to  observe  the  most  minute  actions  of  his  sub-
jects with  a  jealous  attention,  and  to  reward  their  highest
services  with  little  liberality ;  and  they  were  now  deprived
of  Isabella,  whose  gentle  qualities,  and  partiality  to  her
Castilian  subjects,  often  tempered  his  austerity,  or  ren-
dered it  tolerable.  The  maxims  of  his  government  were
especially  odious  to  the  grandees;  for  that  artful  prince,
sensible  of  the  dangerous  privileges  conferred  upon  them
by  the  feudal  institutions,  had  endeavoured  to  curb  their
exorbitant  power,g  by  extending  the  royal  jurisdiction,
by  protecting  their  injured  vassals,  by  increasing  the  im-
munities of  cities,  and  by  other  measures  equally  pru-
dent. From  all  these  causes  a  formidable  party  among

{  Mar.  Hist.  lib.  28.  c.  14.  t  Marian,  lib.  28.  c.  12.

BOOK I.  323

the  Castilians  united  against  Ferdinand,  and  though  the
persons  who  composed  it  had  not  hitherto  taken  any
public  step  in  opposition  to  him,  he  plainly  saw,  that
upon  the  least  encouragement  from  their  new  king,  they
would  proceed  to  the  most  violent  extremities.
Philip  en-  There  was  no  less  agitation  in  the  Nether-
to  obtain  lands  upon  receiving  the  accounts  of  Isabella's
the  go-  death,  and  of  Ferdinand's  having  assumed  the

vernraent

of  Castile,  government  of  Castile.  Philip  was  not  of  a  tem-
per tamely  to  suffer  himself  to  be  supplanted  by  the  am-
bition of  his  father-in-law.  If  Joanna's  infirmities,  and
the  non-age  of  Charles,  rendered  them  incapable  of  go-
vernment, he5  as  a  husband,  was  the  proper  guardian
of  his  wife,  and,  as  a  father,  the  natural  tutor  of  his  son.
Nor  was  it  sufficient  to  oppose  to  these  just  rights,  and
to  the  inclination  of  the  people  of  Castile,  the  authority
of  a  testament,  the  genuineness  of  which  was  perhaps
doubtful,  and  its  contents  to  him  appeared  certainly  to
be  iniquitous.  A  keener  edge  was  added  to  Philip's
resentment,  and  new  vigour  infused  into  his  councils
by  the  arrival  of  Don  Jo-hn  Manuel.  He  was  Ferdi-
nand's ambassador  at  the  Imperial  court ;  but  upon  the
first  notice  of  Isabella's  death,  repaired  to  Brussels,  flat-
tering himself,  th^t  under  a  young  and  liberal  prince,
he  might  attain  to  power  and  honours,  which  he  could
never  have  expected  in  the  service  of  an  old  and  frugal
master.  He  had  early  paid  court  to  Philip  during  his
residence  in  Spain,  with  such  assiduity  as  entirely
gained  his  confidence  ;  and  having  been  trained  to  bu-
siness under  Ferdinand,  could  oppose  his  schemes  with
equal  abilities,  and  with  arts  not  inferior  to  those  for
which  that  monarch  was  distinguished.11
He  re-  ^7  tne  advice  of  Manuel,  ambassadors  were

quires  Fer-  dispatched  to  require  Ferdinand  to  retire  into

dmand  to  A .  _ ~

resign  the Aragon,  and  to  resign  the  government  ot  Cas-
those  persons  whom  Philip  should  en-

h  Zurita  Annales  de  Aragon,  torn.  vi.  p.  12.
Y 2

.324  CHARLES V.

trust  with  it,  until  his  own  arrival  in  that  kingdom.
Such  of  the  Castilian  nobles  as  had  discovered  any  dis-
satisfaction with  Ferdinand's  administration,  were  en-
couraged by  every  method  to  oppose  it.  At  the  same
time  a  treaty  was  concluded  with  Louis  XII.  by  which
Philip  flattered  himself  that  he  had  secured  the  friend-
ship and  assistance  of  that  monarch.

Meanwhile,  Ferdinand  employed  all  the  arts  of  ad-
dress and  policy,  in  order  to  retain  the  power  of  which
he  had  got  possession.  By  means  of  Conchillos,  an
Aragonian  gentleman,  he  entered  into  a  private  nego-
tiation with  Joanna,  and  prevailed  on  that  weak  prin-
cess to  confirm,  by  her  authority,  his  right  to  the  re-
gency. But  this  intrigue  did  not  escape  the  penetrat-
ing eye  of  Don  John  Manuel;  Joanna's  letter  of  con-
sent was  intercepted;  Conchillos  was  thrown  into  a  dun-
geon ;  she  herself  confined  to  an  apartment  in  the  pa-
lace, and  all  her  Spanish  domestics  secluded  from  her
presence.1

Ferdinand  The  mortification  which  the  discovery  of  this
abandoned  intrigue  occasioned  to  Ferdinand,  was  much  in-

by  the  Cas-
tilian creased  by  his  observing  the  progress  which

Philip's  emissaries  made  in  Castile.  Some  of
the  nobles  retired  to  their  castles ;  others  to  the  towns
in  which  they  had  influence ;  they  formed  themselves
into  confederacies,  and  began  to  assemble  their  vassals.
Ferdinand's  court  was  almost  totally  deserted ;  not  a
person  of  distinction  but  Ximenes,  archbishop  of
Toledo,  the  duke  of  Alva,  and  the  marquis  of  Denia,  re-
maining there;  while  the  houses  of  Philip's  ambassadors
were  daily  crowded  with  noblemen  of  the  highest  rank.
Ferdinand  Exasperated  at  this  universal  defection,  and
mortified  perhaps  with  seeing  all  his  schemes
Defeated  by  a  younger  politician,  Ferdinand
froraglther  reso^ved'  i*1  defiance  of  the  law  of  nature  and
throne.  of  decency,  to  deprive  his  daughter  and  her

1  P.  Mart.  Ep.  287. Zurita  Annales,  vi.  p.  14.

BOOK  I.  32o

posterity  of  the  crown  of  Castile,  rather  than  renounce
the  regency  of  that  kingdom.  His  plan  for  accomplish-
ing this  was  no  less  bold,  than  the  intention  itself  was
wicked.  He  demanded  in  marriage  Joanna,  the  sup-
posed daughter  of  Henry  IV.,  on  the  belief  of  whose  ille-
gitimacy Isabella's  right  to  the  crown  of  Castile  was
founded ;  and  by  reviving  the  claim  of  this  princess,  in
opposition  to  which  he  himself  had  formerly  led  armies
and  fought  battles,  he  hoped  once  more  to  get  posses-
sion of  the  throne  of  that  kingdom.  But  Emanuel,
king  of  Portugal,  in  whose  dominions  Joanna  resided,
at  that  time,  having  married  one  of  Ferdinand's  daugh-
ters by  Isabella,  refused  his  consent  to  that  unnatural
match  ;  and  the  unhappy  princess  herself,  having  lost
all  relish  for  the  objects  of  ambition  by  being  long  im-
mured in  a  convent,  discovered  no  less  aversion  to  it.k
Marries  a  The  resources,  however,  of  Ferdinand's  am-
SIeCFrench  bition,were  not  exhausted.  Upon  meeting  with
kmg>  a  repulse  in  Portugal,  he  turned  towards  France,
and  sought  in  marriage  Germain  de  Foix^  a  daughter  of
the  viscount  of  Narbonne,  and  of  Mary,  the  sister  of
Louis  XII.  The  war  which  that  monarch  had  carried
on  against  Ferdinand  in  Naples,  had  been  so  unfortu-
nate, that  he  listened  with  joy  to  a  proposal,  which  fur-
nished him  with  an  honourable  pretence  for  concluding
peace ;  and  though  no  prince  was  ever  more  remark-
able than  Ferdinand  for  making  all  his  passions  bend
to  the  maxims  of  interest,  or  become  subservient  to  the
purposes  of  ambition,  yet  so  vehement  was  his  resent-
ment against  his  son-in-law,  that  the  desire  of  gratify-
ing it  rendered  him  regardless  of  every  other  conside-
ration. In  order  to  be  revenged  of  Philip,  by  detach-
ing Louis  from  his  interest,  and  in  order  to  gain  a  chance
of  excluding  him  from  his  hereditary  throne  of  Aragon,
and  the  dominions  annexed  to  it,  he  was  ready  once

*  Sandov.  Hist,  of  Civil  Wars  in  Castile ;  Lon.  1655,  p.  5.  Zurita  Annalei  de
Aragon,  torn.  vi.  p.  213.

3'2Q  CHARLES V.

more  to  divide  Spain  into  separate  kingdoms,  though
the  union  of  these  was  the  great  glory  of  his  reign,  and
had  been  the  chief  object  of  his  ambition  ;  he  consented
to  restore  the  Neapolitan  nobles  of  the  French  faction
to  their  possessions  and  honours  ;  and  submitted  to  the
ridicule  of  marrying,  in  an  advanced  age,  a  princess  of
eighteen.1

The  conclusion  of  this  match,  which  deprived  Philip
of  his  only  ally,  and  threatened  him  with  the  loss  of  so
many  kingdoms,  gave  him  a  dreadful  alarm,  and  con-
vinced Don  John  Manuel  that  there  was  now  a  necessity
of  taking  other  measures  with  regard  to  the  affairs  of
Spain."1  He  accordingly  instructed  the  Flemish  am-
bassadors in  the  court  of  Spain,  to  testify  the  strong  de-
sire which  their  master  had  of  terminating  all  differences
between  him  and  Ferdinand  in  an  amicable  manner,
and  his  willingness  to  consent  to  any  conditions  that
would  re-establish  the  friendship  which  ought  to  sub-
A  treaty  sist  between  a  father  and  a  son-in-law.  Ferdi-
nand,  though  he  had  made  and  broken  more

and  Philip,  treaties  than  any  prince  of  any  age,  was  apt  to

confide  so  far  in  the  sincerity  of  other  men,  or  to  depend

so  much  upon  his  own  address  and  their  weakness,  as

to  be  always  extremely  fond  of  a  negotiation. He  lis-

tened with  eagerness  to  the  declarations,  and  soon  con-

cluded a  treaty  at  Salamanca;  in  which  it  was

stipulated,  that  the  government  of  Castile  should

be  carried  on  in  the  joint  names  of  Joanna,  of  Ferdinand,

and  of  Philip  ;  and  that  the  revenues  of  the  crown,  as

well  as  the  right  of  conferring  offices,  should  be  shared

between  Ferdinand  and  Philip,  by  an  equal  division.0

1506. Nothing,  however,  was  farther  from  Philip's

jSa'Tet  tnougnts  than  to  observe  this  treaty. His  sole

sail  for intention  in  proposing  it  was  to  amuse  Ferdi-

nand, and  to  prevent  him  from  taking  any  mea-

>  P.  Mart.  Ep.  290.  292. Mariana,  lib.  28.  c.  16,  17.  ™  P.  Mart.  Ep.  293.

"  Zurita  Annales  de  Aragon,  vi.  19- P.  Mart.  Ep.  293,  294.

BOOK I.  327

sures  for  obstructing  his  voyage  into  Spain.  It  had  that
effect.  Ferdinand,  sagacious  as  he  was,  did  not'for  some
time  suspect  his  design ;  and  though  when  he  perceived
it,  he  prevailed  on  the  king  of  France  not  only  to  re-
monstrate against  the  archduke's  journey,  but  to  threaten
hostilities  if  he  should  undertake  it ;  though  he  solicited
the  duke  of  Gueldres  to  attack  his  son-in-law's  domi-
nions in  the  Low  Countries,  Philip  and  his  consort  ne-
vertheless set  sail  with  a  numerous  fleet  and  a  good
body  of  land  forces.  They  were  obliged  by  a  violent
tempest  to  take  shelter  in  England,  where  Henry  VII.,
in  compliance  with  Ferdinand's  solicitations,  detained
them  upwards  of  three  months ;°  at  last  they  were  per-
mitted to  depart,  and  after  a  more  prosperous

April  28.  r . , .  JF

voyage,  they  arrived  m  safety  at  Corunna  in
Galicia,  nor  durst  Ferdinand  attempt,  as  he  once  in-
tended, to  oppose  their  landing  by  force  of  arms.
The  nobi- ^he  Castilian  nobles,  who  had  been  obliged

iity  of  cas-  hitherto  to  conceal,  or  to  dissemble  their  sen-
tile  de-
clare for timents, now  declared openly in  favour  of

Philip.  From  every  corner  of  the  kingdom,
persons  of  the  highest  rank,  with  numerous  retinues  of
their  vassals,  repaired  to  their  new  sovereign.  The
treaty  of  Salamanca  was  universally  condemned,  and
all  agreed  to  exclude  from  the  government  of  Castile  a
prince,  who  by  consenting  to  disjoin  Aragon  and  Naples
from  that  crown,  discovered  so  little  concern  for  its  true
interests.  Ferdinand,  meanwhile,  abandoned  by  almost
all  the  Castilians,  disconcerted  by  their  revolt,  and  un-
certain whether  he  should  peaceably  relinquish  his
power,  or  take  arms  in  order  to  maintain  it,  earnestly
solicited  an  interview  with  his  son-in-law,  who,  by  the
advice  of  Manuel,  studiously  avoided  it.  Convinced
at  last,  by  seeing  the  number  and  zeal  of  Philip's  ad-
herents daily  increase,  that  it  was  vain  to  think  of  re-
sisting^  such  a  torrent,  Ferdinand  consented,  by  treaty,

«  Ferrer.  Hist.  viii.  285.

328  CHARLES  V.

to  resign  the  regency  of  Castile  into  the  hands  of  Philip,
to  retire  into  his  hereditary  dominions  of  Aragon,  and
June  27.  to  rest  satisfied  with  the  masterships  of  the  mi-
Ferdinand  Jitarv  orders,  and  that  share  of  the  revenue  of  the

resigns  the  *

regency  of  Indies,  which  Isabella  had  bequeathed  to  him.
and  ret'ires  Though  an  interview  between  the  princes  was
to  Aragon.  no  ]onger  necessary,  it  was  agreed  to  on  both
sides  from  motives  of  decency.  Philip  repaired  to  the
place  appointed,  with  a  splendid  retinue  of  Castilian
nobles,  and  a  considerable  body  of  armed  men.  Ferdi-
nand appeared  without  any  pomp,  attended  by  a  few
followers  mounted  on  mules,  and  unarmed.  On  that
occasion  Don  John  Manuel  had  the  pleasure  of  display-
ing before  the  monarch  whom  he  had  deserted,  the  ex-
tensive influence  which  he  had  acquired  over  his  new
master:  while  Ferdinand  suffered,  in  presence  of  his
former  subjects,  the  two  most  cruel  mortifications  which
an  artful  and  ambitious  prince  can  feel ;  being  at  once
overreached  in  conduct,  and  stripped  of  power.p

Not  long  after,  he  retired  into  Aragon ;  and
" y'  hoping  that  some  favourable  accident  would  soon
open  the  way  to  his  return  into  Castile,  he  took  care  to
protest,  though  with  great  secrecy,  that  the  treaty  con-
cluded with  his  son-in-law,  being  extorted  by  force,
ought  to  be  deemed  void  of  all  obligation.11
Philip  and  Philip  took  possession  of  his  new  authority
acknw-  w^  a  vouthful  joy.  The  unhappy  Joanna,
as  from  whom  he  derived  it,  remained,  during  all
these  contests,  under  the  dominion  of  a  deep
thecortes.  melancholy ;  she  was  seldom  allowed  to  appear
in  public ;  her  father,  though  he  had  often  desired  it,
was  refused  access  to  her ;  and  Philip's  chief  object
was  to  prevail  on  the  cortes  to  declare  her  incapable
of  government,  that  an  undivided  power  might  be
lodged  in  his  hands,  until  his  son  should  attain  to  full

P  Zurita  Annales  de  Arag.  vi.  64. Mar.  lib.  28.  c.  19,  20.  P.  Mart.  Ep.  304,
305,  &c.  1  Zurita  Annales^de  Arag.  vi.  p.  68. Ferrer.  Hist.  viii.  290 .

BOOK I.  3-29

age.  But  such  was  the  partial  attachment  of  the  Gas-
tilians  to  their  native  princess,  that  though  Manuel  had
the  address  to  gain  some  members  of  the  cortes  as-
sembled at  Valladolid;  and  others  were  willing  to  gra-
tify their  new  sovereign  in  his  first  request,  the  great
body  of  the  representatives  refused  their  consent  to  a
declaration  which  they  thought  so  injurious  to  the  blood
of  their  monarchs/  They  were  unanimous,  however,
in  acknowledging  Joanna  and  Philip,  queen  and  king
of  Castile,  and  their  son  Charles  prince  of  Asturias.
Death  of  This  was  almost  the  only  memorable  event
Sept.P25  Curing  Philip's  administration.  A  fever  put  an
t506.  end  to  his  life  in  the  twenty-eighth  year  of  his
age,  when  he  had  not  enjoyed  the  regal  dignity,  which
he  had  been  so  eager  to  obtain,  full  three  months.5
Thedis-  Tlie  whole  royal  authority  in  Castile  ought
order  of  of  course  to  have  devolved  upon  Joanna.  But

Joanna  s  .  r

mind  in-  the  shock  occasioned  by  a  disaster  so  unex-
pected as  the  death  of  her  husband,  completed
the  disorder  of  her  understanding,  and  her  incapacity
for  government.  During  all  the  time  of  Philip's  sick-
ness, no  entreaty  could  prevail  on  her,  though  in  the
sixth  month  of  her  pregnancy,  to  leave  him  for  a  mo-
ment. When  he  expired,  however,  she  did  not  shed
one  tear,  or  utter  a  single  groan.  Her  grief  was  silent
and  settled.  She  continued  to  watch  the  dead  body
with  the  same  tenderness  and  attention  as  if  it  had  been
alive  ;*  and  though  at  last  she  permitted  it  to  be  buried,
she  soon  removed  it  from  the  tomb  to  her  own  apart-
ment. There  it  was  laid  upon  a  bed  of  state,  in  a
splendid  dress ;  and  having  heard  from  some  monk  a
legendary  tale  of  a  king  who  revived  after  he  had  been
dead  fourteen  years,  she  kept  her  eyes  almost  con-
stantly fixed  on  the  body,  waiting  for  the  happy  mo-
ment of  its  return  to  life.  Nor  was  this  capricious  af-

r  Zurita  Annales  de  Arag.  vi.  p.  75  6  Marian,  lib.  28.  c.  23.

»P.  Mart.  Ep.  3 16.

330  CHARLES  V.

fection  for  her  dead  husband  less  tinctured  with  jea-
lousy, than  that  which  she  had  borne  to  him  while
alive.  She  did  not  permit  any  of  her  female  attend-
ants to  approach  the  bed  on  which  his  corpse  was  laid ;
she  would  not  suffer  any  woman  who  did  not  belong  to
her  family  to  enter  the  apartment;  and  rather  than
grant  that  privilege  to  a  midwife,  though  a  very  aged
one  had  been  chosen  on  purpose,  she  bore  the  princess
Catharine  without  any  other  assistance  than  that  of  her
own  domestics."

she  is  in-  A  woman  in  such  a  state  of  mind  was  little
capable  of  governing  a  great  kingdom;  and
Joanna,  who  made  it  her  sole  employment  to
bewail  the  loss,  and  to  pray  for  the  soul  of  her  hus-
band, would  have  thought  her  attention  to  public  af-
fairs an  impious  neglect  of  those  duties  which  she  owed
to  him.  But  though  she  declined  assuming,  the  ad-
ministration herself,  yet,  by  a  strange  caprice  of  jea-
lousy, she  refused  to  commit  it  to  any  other  person ;
and  no  entreaty  of  her  subjects  could  persuade  her  to
name  a  regent,  or  even  to  sign  such  papers  as  were  ne-
cessary for  the  execution  of  justice,  and  the  security  of
the  kingdom.
Maximi-  The  death  of  Philip  threw  the  Castilians  into

lian  the  i •  T

emperor  the  greatest  perplexity.  It  was  necessary  to  ap-
nandFcom- Pomt  a  regent,  both  on  account  of  Joanna's
^theV  frenzy,  and  the  infancy  of  her  son  ;  and  as  there
gency.  was  not  among  the  nobles  any  person  so  emi-
nently distinguished  either  by  superiority  in  rank  or
abilities  as  to  be  called  by  the  public  voice  to  that  high
office,  all  naturally  turned  their  eyes  either  towards
Ferdinand,  or  towards  the  emperor  Maximilian.  The
former  claimed  that  dignity,  as  administrator  for  his
daughter,  and  by  virtue  of  the  testament  of  Isabella  ;
the  latter  thought  himself  the  legal  guardian  of  his
grandson,  whom,  on  account  of  his  mother's  infirmity,

u  Mar.  Hist.  lib.  29.  c.  3.  and  5. P.  Mart.  Ep.  318.  324.  328.  332.

BOOK I.  331

he  already  considered  as  king  of  Castile.  Such  of  the
nobility  as  had  lately  been  most  active  in  compelling-
Ferdinand  to  resign  the  government  of  the  kingdom,
trembled  at  the  thoughts  of  his  being  restored  so  soon
to  his  former  dignity.  They  dreaded  the  return  of  a
monarch,  not  apt  to  forgive,  and  who,  to  those  defects
with  which  they  were  already  acquainted,  added  that
resentment  which  the  remembrance  of  their  behaviour,
and  reflection  upon  his  own  disgrace,  must  naturally
have  excited.  Though  none  of  these  objections  lay
against  Maximilian,  he  was  a  stranger  to  the  laws  and
manners  of  Castile ;  he  had  not  either  troops  or  money
to  support  his  pretensions  ;  nor  could  his  claim  be  ad-
mitted without  a  public  declaration  of  Joanna's  incapa-
city for  government,  an  indignity  to  which,  notwith-
standing the  notoriety  of  her  distemper,  the  delicacy  of
the  Castilians  could  not  bear  the  thoughts  of  subject-
ing her.

Don  John  Manuel,  however,  and  a  few  of  the  nobles,
who  considered  themselves  as  most  obnoxious  to  Fer-
dinand's displeasure,  declared  for  Maximilian,  and  of-
fered to  support  his  claim  with  all  their  interest.  Maxi-
milian, always  enterprising  and  decisive  in  council,
though  feeble  and  dilatory  in  execution,  eagerly  em-
braced the  offer.  But  a  series  of  ineffectual  negotiations
was  the  only  consequence  of  this  transaction.  The  em-
peror, as  usual,  asserted  his  rights  in  a  high  strain,
promised  a  great  deal,  and  performed  nothing.x

A  few  days  before  the  death  of  Philip,  Ferdi-
absent,aon  nand  had  set  out  for  Naples,  that,  by  his  own
Silking-  presence,  he  might  put  an  end,  with  greater
doro  of  decency,  to  the  viceroy  alty  of  the  great  captain,
whose  important  services,  and  cautious  conduct,
did  not  screen  him  from  the  suspicions  of  his  jealous
master.  Though  an  account  of  his  son-in-law's  death
reached  him  at  Porto-fino,  in  the  territories  of  Genoa,

*  Mariana,  lib.  29.  c.  7. Zurita  Annales  de  Arag.  vi.  93.

332  CHARLES V.

he  was  so  solicitous  to  discover  the  secret  intrigues
which  he  supposed  the  great  captain  to  have  been  car-
rying on,  and  to  establish  his  own  authority  on  a  firm
foundation  in  the  Neapolitan  dominions,  by  removing
him  from  the  supreme  command  there,  that,  rather  than
discontinue  his  voyage,  he  chose  to  leave  Castile  in  a
state  of  anarchy,  and  even  to  risk,  by  this  delay,  his  ob-
taining possession  of  the  government  of  that  kingdom/
Acquires  Nothing  but  the  great  abilities  and  prudent
the  re-  conduct  of  his  adherents,  could  have  prevented

gency  of

Castile,  the  bad  effects  of  this  absence.  At  the  head  of
through  these  was  Ximenes,  archbishop  of  Toledo,  who,
dinaTxi-  though  he  had  been  raised  to  that  dignity  by
menes.  Isabella,  contrary  to  the  inclination  of  Ferdi-
nand, and  though  he  could  have  no  expectation  of  en-
joying much  power  under  the  administration  of  a  master
little  disposed  to  distinguish  him  by  extraordinary
marks  of  attention,  was  nevertheless  so  disinterested,  as
to  prefer  the  welfare  of  his  country  before  his  own
grandeur,  and  to  declare,  that  Castile  could  never  be
so  happily  governed  as  by  a  prince,  whom  long  ex-
perience had  rendered  thoroughly  acquainted  with  its
true  interest.  The  zeal  of  Ximenes  to  bring  over  his
countrymen  to  this  opinion,  induced  him  to  lay  aside
somewhat  of  his  usual  austerity  and  haughti-
ness. He  condescended,  on  this  occasion,  to
court  the  disaffected  nobles,  and  employed  address,  as
well  as  arguments,  to  persuade  them.  Ferdinand  se-
conded his  endeavours  with  great  art;  and  by  con-
cessions to  some  of  the  grandees,  by  promises  to  others,
and  by  letters  full  of  complaisance  to  all,  he  gained
Aug.  21.  many  of  his  most  violent  opponents.2  Though
Ferdinand  many  cabals  were  formed,  and  some  commo-

relurns  to  J  ?

Spain,  tions  were  excited,  yet  when  Ferdinand,  after
having  settled  the  affairs  of  Naples,  arrived  in  Castile,
he  entered  upon  the  administration  without  opposition.

y  Zurita  Annalesde  Arag.  vi.  p.  85.  '  Ibid.  vi.  p.  87.  94.  109.

BOOK  I.  333

The  prudence  with  which  he  exercised  his  authority  in
that  kingdom,  equalled  the  good  fortune  by  which  he
H.  ru  had  recovered  it.  By  a  moderate,  but  steady
dent  admi  administration,  free  from  partiality  and  from

resentment,  he  entirely  reconciled  the  Castilians
to  his  person,  and  secured  to  them,  during  the  remain-
der of  his  life,  as  much  domestic  tranquillity,  as  was
consistent  with  the  genius  of  the  feudal  government,
which  still  subsisted  among  them  in  full  vigour/

Nor  was  the  preservation  of  tranquillity  in  his  here-
ditary kingdoms  the  only  obligation  which  the  arch-
duke Charles  owed  to  the  wise  regency  of  his  grand-
father ;  it  was  his  good  fortune,  during  that  period,  to
have  very  important  additions  made  to  the  dominions
Conquest  over  which  he  was  to  reign.  On  the  coast  of
of  Oran.  Barbary,  Oran,  and  other  conquests  of  no  small
value,  were  annexed  to  the  crown  of  Castile  by  cardi-
nal Ximenes,  who,  with  a  spirit  very  uncommon  in  a

monk,  led  in  person  a  numerous  army  against  the

Moors  of  that  country  ;  and,  with  a  generosity
and  magnificence  still  more  singular,  defrayed  the  whole
expense  of  the  expedition  out  of  his  own  revenues.5
In  Europe,  Ferdinand,  under  pretences  no  less  frivolous
than  unjust,  as  well  as  by  artifices  the  most  shameful
and  treacherous,  expelled  John  d'Albert,  the  lawful
Acquisi-  sovereign,  from  the  throne  of  Navarre;  and,
tjon  of  seizing  on  that  kingdom,  extended  the  limits  of

the  Spanish  monarchy  from  the  Pyrenees  on
the  one  hand,  to  the  frontiers  of  Portugal  on  the  other.0
Ferdinand  ^  wasi  not?  however,  the  desire  of  aggrandiz-
jeaious  of  jnn.  ^he  archduke,  which  influenced  Ferdinand

his  grand-

son in  this,  or  in  any  other  of  his  actions. He  was

Charles.  .  -, ,-,  .*'#

more  apt  to  consider  that  young  prince  as  a
rival,  who  might  one  day  wrest  out  of  his  hands  the
government  of  Castile,  than  as  a  grandson,  for  whose
interest  he  was  intrusted  with  the  administration.  This

*  Mariana,  lib.  29.  c.  10. «>  Ibid.  lib.  29.  c.  18, «  Ibid.  lib.  30.  c.  11,  12. 19.  24.

334  CHARLES V.  [1515.

jealousy  soon  begot  aversion,  and  even  hatred,  the
symptoms  of  which  he  was  at  no  pains  to  conceal.
Hence  proceeded  his  immoderate  joy  when  his  young
queen  was  delivered  of  a  son,  whose  life  would
have  deprived  Charles  of  the  crown  of  Aragon,  Naples,
Sicily,  and  Sardinia;  and  upon  the  untimely  death
of  that  prince,  he  discovered,  for  the  same  reason,
an  excessive  solicitude  to  have  other  children.  This
impatience  hastened,  in  all  probability,  the  accession
of  Charles  to  the  crown  of  Spain.  Ferdinand,  in  order
to  procure  a  blessing,  of  which,  from  his  advanced  age,
and  the  intemperance  of  his  youth,  he  could  have  little
prospect,  had  recourse  to  his  physicians,  and  by  their
prescription  took  one  of  those  potions,  which  are  sup-
posed to  add  vigour  to  the  constitution,  though
they  more  frequently  prove  fatal  to  it.  This
was  its  effect  on  a  frame  so  feeble  and  exhausted  as  that
of  Ferdinand  ;  for  though  he  survived  a  violent  dis-
order which  it  at  first  occasioned,  it  brought  on  such
an  habitual  languor  and  dejection  of  mind,  as  rendered
him  averse  from  any  serious  attention  to  public  affairs,
and  fond  of  frivolous  amusements,  on  which  he  had
not  hitherto  bestowed  much  time.d  Though  he  now
despaired  of  having  any  son  of  his  own,  his  jealousy  of
the  archduke  did  not  abate,  nor  could  he  help  viewing
him  with  that  aversion  which  princes  often  bear  to  their
1515  successors.  In  order  to  gratify  this  unnatural
passion,  he  made  a  will,  appointing  prince
Ferdinand,  who  having  been  born  and  edu-

n  y  cated  in  Spain,  was  much  beloved  by  the
Feral-0*  Spaniards,  to  be  regent  of  all  his  kingdoms,
nand.  until  the  arrival  of  the  archduke  his  brother  ;
and  by  the  same  deed  he  settled  upon  him  the  grand-
mastership  of  the  three  military  orders.  The  former
of  these  grants  might  have  put  it  in  the  power  of  the

d  Zurita  Annales  de  Arag.  vL  p.  347. P.  Mart.  Ep.  531. Argensola  Annales
-de  Aragon,  lib.  i.  p.  4.

1516.]  BOOK  I.  335

young  prince  to  have  disputed  the  throne  with  his  brother ;
the  latter  would,  in  any  event,  have  rendered  him  almost
independent  of  him.

Ferdinand  retained  to  the  last  that  jealous  love  of
power,  which  was  so  remarkable  through  his  whole  life.
Unwilling  even  at  the  approach  of  death  to  admit  a
thought  of  relinquishing  any  portion  of  his  authority,  he
removed  continually  from  place  to  place,  in  order  to  fly
from  his  distemper,  or  to  forget  it.  Though  his  strength
declined  every  day,  none  of  his  attendants  durst  mention
his  condition;  nor  would  he  admit  his  father-confessor,
who  thought  such  silence  criminal  and  unchristian,  into
his  presence.  At  last  the  danger  became  so  imminent,
that  it  could  be  no  longer  concealed.  Ferdinand  received
the  intimation  with  a  decent  fortitude ;  and  touched  per-
haps with  compunction  at  the  injustice  which  he  had
done  his  grandson,  or  influenced  by  the  honest  remon-
strances of  Carvajal,  Zapara,  and  Vargas,  his  most  an-
cient and  faithful  counsellors,  who  represented  to  him,
that  by  investing  prince  Ferdinand  with  the  regency,  he
would  infallibly  entail  a  civil  war  on  the  two  brothers,
and  by  bestowing  on  him  the  grandmas tership  of  the
military  orders,  would  strip  the  crown  of  its  noblest  or-
1516.  nament  and  chief  strength,  he  consented  to  alter
Jd  to"u«"  his  w^l  ^l1  Aspect  to  both  these  particulars,
that  \yiii,  By  a  new  deed  he  left  Charles  the  sole  heir  of
all  his  dominions,  and  allotted  to  prince  Ferdinand,
instead  of  that  throne  of  which  he  thought  himself
almost  secure,  an  inconsiderable  establishment  of  fifty
thousand  ducats  a  year.6  He  died  a  few  hours
after  signing  this  will,  on  the  23d  day  of  Ja-
nuary, 1516.

Education Charles  to  whom  such  a  noble  inheritance

of  Charles descended  by  his  death,  was  near  the  full  age

of  sixteen. He  had  hitherto  resided  in  the  Low

«  Mar.  Hist.  lib.  30.  c.  ult. Zurita  Annales  de  Arag. vi.  401. P.  Mart.  Ep.
565,  566. Argensola  Annales  de  Arag.  lib.  i.  p.  11.

336  CHARLES V.  [1516.

Countries,  his  paternal  dominions.  Margaret  of  Austria,
his  aunt,  and  Margaret  of  York,  the  sister  of  Edward  IV.
of  England,  and  widow  of  Charles  the  Bold,  two  prin-
cesses of  great  virtue  and  abilities,  had  the  care  of  form-
ing his  early  youth.  Upon  the  death  of  his  father,  the
Flemings  committed  the  government  of  the  Low  Coun-
tries to  his  grandfather,  the  emperor  Maximilian,  with
the  name  rather  than  the  authority  of  regent/  Maxi-
milian made  choice  of  William  de  Croy  lord  of  Chievres
to  superintend  the  education  of  the  young  prince  his
grandson.*  That  nobleman  possessed,  in  an  eminent
degree,  the  talents  which  fitted  him  for  such  an  im-
portant office,  and  discharged  the  duties  of  it  with  great
fidelity.  Under  Chievres,  Adrian  of  Utrecht  acted
as  preceptor.  This  preferment,  which  opened  his  way
to  the  highest  dignities  an  ecclesiastic  can  attain,  he
owed  not  to  his  birth,  for  that  was  extremely  mean;  nor

f  Pontius  Heuterus  Rerum  Austriacarum,  lib.  xv. Lov.  1649.  lib.  vii.  c  2.  p.  155.

S  The  French  historians,  upon  the  authority  of  M.  de  Bellay,  Mem.  p.  11.  have
unanimously  asserted,  that  Philip,  by  his  last  will,  having  appointed  the  king  of
France  to  have  the  direction  of  his  son's  education,  Louis  XII.,  with  a  disinterested-
ness suitable  to  the  confidence  reposed  in  him,  named  Chievres  for  that  office.  Even
the  president  Henaut  has  adopted  this  opinion.  Abreg6  Chron.  A.  D.  1507.  Va-
rillas,  in  his  usual  manner,  pretends  to  have  seen  Philip's  testament.  Pract.  de
1'Education  des  Princes,  p.  16.  But  the  Spanish,  German,  and  Flemish  historians
concur  in  contradicting  this  assertion  of  the  French  authors.  It  appears  from  Heuterus,
a  contemporary  Flemish  historian  of  great  authority,  that  Louis  XII.,  by  consenting
to  the  marriage  of  Germaine  de  Foix  with  Ferdinand,  had  lost  much  of  that  confi-
dence which  Philip  once  placed  in  him ;  that  his  disgust  was  increased  by  the
French  king's  giving  in  marriage  to  the  count  of  Angouleme  his  eldest  daughter,
whom  he  had  formerly  betrothed  to  Charles  ;  Heuter.  Ker.  Austr.  lib.  v.  151.  That
the  French,  a  short  time  before  Philip's  death,  had  violated  the  peace  which  subsisted
between  them  and  the  Flemings,  and  Philip  had  complained  of  this  injury,  and  was
ready  to  resent  it.  Heuter.  ibid.  All  these  circumstances  render  it  improbable  that
Philip,  who  made  his  will  a  few  days  before  he  died,  Heuter.  p.  152.  should  commit
the  education  of  his  son  to  Louis  XII.  In  confiirnation  of  these  plausible  conjec-
tures, positive  testimony  can  be  produced.  It  appears  from  Heuterus,  that  Philip,
when  he  set  out  for  Spain,  had  intrusted  Chievres  both  with  the  care  of  his  son's
education,  and  with  the  government  of  his  dominions  in  the  Low  Countries.  Heuter.
lib.  vii.  p.  153.  That  an  attempt  was  made,  soon  after  Philip's  death,  to  have  the
emperor  Maximilian  appointed  regent,  during  the  minority  of  his  grandson  ;  but
this  being  opposed,  Chievres  seems  to  have  continued  to  discharge  both  the  offices
which  Philip  had  committed  to  him.  Heuter.  ibid.  153.  155.  That  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  year  1508,  the  Flemings  invited  Maximilian  to  accept  of  the  regency-;
to  which  he  consented,  and  appointed  his  daughter  Margaret,  together  with  a  coun-
cil of  Flemings,  to  exercise  the  supreme  authority,  when  he  himself  should,  at  any
time,  be  absent.  He  likewise  named  Chievres  as  governor,  and  Adrian  of  Utrecht
as  preceptor  to  his  son.  Heut.  ibid.  155.  157.  What  Heuterus  relates  with  respect
to  this  matter  is  confirmed  by  Moringus  in  Vita  Adriani  apud  Analecta  Casp.  Bur-
manni  de  Adriano,  cap.  10. ;  by  Barlandus  Chronic.  Brabant,  ibid.  p.  25.  and  by
Haraeus,  Annal.  Brab.  vol.  ii.  520,  &c.

1516.]  BOOK I.  337

to  his  interest,  for  he  was  a  stranger  to  the  arts  of  a
court ;  but  to  the  opinion  which  his  countrymen  enter-
tained of  his  learning.  He  was  indeed  no  inconsiderable
proficient  in  those  frivolous  sciences,  which,  during
several  centuries,  assumed  the  name  of  philosophy,  and
had  published  a  commentary,  which  was  highly  esteemed,
upon  The  Book  of  Sentences,  a  famous  treatise  of  Petrus
Lombardus,  considered  at  that  time  as  the  standard
system  of  metaphysical  theology.  But  whatever  ad-
miration these  procured  him  in  an  illiterate  age,  it  was
soon  found  that  a  man  accustomed  to  the  retirement  of
a  college,  unacquainted  with  the  world,  and  without
any  tincture  of  taste  or  elegance,  was  by  no  means  quali-
fied for  rendering  science  agreeable  to  a  young  prince.
Charles,  accordingly,  discovered  an  early  aversion  to
learning,  and  an  excessive  fondness  for  those  violent
and  martial  exercises,  to  excel  in  which  was  the  chief
pride,  and  almost  the  only  study  of  persons  of  rank  in
that  age.  Chievres  encouraged  this  taste,  either  from
a  desire  of  gaining  his  pupil  by  indulgence,  or  from  too
slight  an  opinion  of  the  advantages  of  literary  accom-
plishments.11 He  instructed  him,  however,  with  great
care  in  the  arts  of  government ;  he  made  him  study  the
history  not  only  of  his  own  kingdoms,  but  of  those
with  which  they  were  connected ;  he  accustomed  him,
from  the*time  of  his  assuming  the  government  of  Flan-
ders in  the  year  1515,  to  attend  to  business  ;  he  per-
suaded him  to  peruse  all  papers  relating  to  public
affairs  ;  to  be  present  at  the  deliberations  of  his  privy-
counsellors,  and  to  propose  to  them  himself  those
matters,  concerning  which  he  required  their  opinion.1
The  first  From  such  an  education,  Charles  contracted
2f  cS££f  nabits  of  gravity  and  recollection  which  scarcely
«er.  suited  his  time  of  life.  The  first  openings  of

his  genius  did  not  indicate  that  superiority  which  its

h  Jovii  Vita  Adriani,  p.  91. Struvii  Corpus  Hist.  Gerra.  ii.  967. P.  Heuter.
Rer.  Austr.  lib.  vii.  c.  3.  p.  157.

*  Meraoires  de  Bellay,  8vo.  Par.  1573,  p.  11. P.  Heuter.  lib.  viii.  c.  1.  p.  184,

VOL. III.  Z

338  CHARLES  V.  [1516.

maturer  age  displayed.1"  He  did  not  discover  in  his
youth  the  impetuosity  of  spirit  which  commonly  ushers
in  an  active  and  enterprising  manhood.  Nor  did  his
early  obsequiousness  to  Chievres,  and  his  other  favourites,
promise  that  capacious  and  decisive  judgment,  which
afterward  directed  the  affairs  of  one  half  of  Europe.
But  his  subjects,  dazzled  with  the  external  accomplish-
ments of  a  graceful  figure  and  manly  address,  and
viewing  his  character  with  that  partiality  which  is  al-
ways shewn  to  princes  during  their  youth,  entertained
sanguine  hopes  of  his  adding  lustre  to  those  crowns
which  descended  to  him  by  the  death  of  Ferdinand.
state  of  The  kingdoms  of  Spain,  as  is  evident  from
quh-TsT  the  view  which  I  have  given  of  their  political
actainistra-  constitution,  were  at  that  time  in  a  situation
tion.  which  required  an  administration  no  less  vigor-
ous than  prudent.  The  feudal  institutions,  which  had
been  introduced  into  all  its  different  provinces  by  the
Goths,  the  Suevi,  and  the  Vandals,  subsisted  in  great
force.  The  nobles,  who  were  powerful  and  warlike,
had  long  possessed  all  the  exorbitant  privileges  which
these  institutions  vested  in  their  order.  The  cities  in
Spain  were  more  numerous  and  more  considerable,  than
the  genius  of  feudal  government,  naturally  unfavoura-
ble to  commerce  and  to  regular  police,  seemed  to  admit.
The  personal  rights  and  political  influence  which  the
inhabitants  of  these  cities  had  acquired,  were  extensive.
The  royal  prerogative,  circumscribed  by  the  privileges
of  the  nobility,  and  by  the  pretensions  of  the  people,
was  confined  within  very  narrow  limits.  Under  such
a  form  of  government,  the  principles  of  discord  were
many ;  the  bond  of  union  was  extremely  feeble ;  and
Spain  felt  not  only  all  the  inconveniences  occasioned
by  the  defects  in  the  feudal  system,  but  was  exposed
to  disorders  arising  from  the  peculiarities  in  its  own
constitution.

k  P.  Martyr.  Ep.  569.  655.

1516.]  BOOK  I.  339

During  the  long  administration  of  Ferdinand,  no  in-
ternal commotion,  it  is  true,  had  arisen  in  Spain.  His
superior  abilities  had  enabled  him  to  restrain  the  tur-
bulence of  the  nobles,  and  to  moderate  the  jealousy  of
the  commons.  By  the  wisdom  of  his  domestic  govern-
ment, by  the  sagacity  with  which  he  conducted  his
foreign  operations,  and  by  the  high  opinion  that  his
subjects  entertained  of  both,  he  had  preserved  among
them  a  degree  of  tranquillity,  greater  than  was  natural
to  a  constitution  in  which  the  seeds  of  discord  and  dis-
order were  so  copiously  mingled.  But,  by  the  death
of  Ferdinand,  these  restraints  were  at  once  withdrawn ;
and  faction  and  discontent,  from  being  long  repressed,
were  ready  to  break  out  with  fiercer  animosity.
Ferdinand  In  order  to  prevent  these  evils,  Ferdinand
pointed  had  in  his  last  will  taken  a  most  prudent  pre-
xlmenes  caution,  by  appointing  cardinal  Ximenes,  arch-
regent,  bishop  of  Toledo,  to  be  sole  regent  of  Castile,
until  the  arrival  of  his  grandson  in  Spain.  The  singu-
lar character  of  this  man,  and  the  extraordinary  quali-
ties which  marked  him  out  for  that  office  at  such  a
His  me  and  juncture,  merit  a  particular  description.  He
character.  was  descended  of  an  honourable,  not  of  a
wealthy  family ;  and  the  circumstances  of  his  parents,
as  well  as  his  own  inclinations,  having  determined  him
to  enter  into  the  church,  he  early  obtained  benefices  of
g'reat  value,  and  which  placed  him  in  the  way  of  the
highest  preferment.  All  these,  however,  he  renounced
at  once  ;  and  after  undergoing  a  very  severe  noviciate,
assumed  the  habit  of  St.  Francis  in  a  monastery  of  Ob-
servantine  Friars,  one  of  the  most  rigid  orders  in  the
Romish  church.  There  he  soon  became  eminent  for
his  uncommon  austerity  of  manners,  and  for  those  ex-
cesses of  superstitious  devotion,  which  are  the  proper
characteristics  of  the  monastic  life.  But  notwithstand-
ing these  extravagances,  to  which  weak  and  enthusiastic
minds  alone  are  usually  prone,  his  understanding,  na-

z  2

340  CHARLES V.  [1516.

turally  penetrating  and  decisive,  retained  its  full  vigour,
and  acquired  him  such  great  authority  in  his  own  order,
as  raised  him  to  be  their  provincial. His  reputation  for
sanctity  soon  procured  him  the  office  of  father  confessor
to  queen  Isabella,  which  he  accepted  with  the  utmost
reluctance. He  preserved  in  a  court  the  same  austerity
of  manners  which  had  distinguished  him  in  the  cloister.
He  continued  to  make  all  his  journeys  on  foot ;  he  sub-
sisted only  upon  alms  ;  his acts  of  mortification  were
as  severe  as  ever,  and  his  penances  as  rigorous.  Isabella,
pleased  with  her  choice,  conferred  on  him  not  long
after,  the  archbishopric  of  Toledo,  which,  next  to  the
papacy,  is  the  richest  dignity  in  the  church  of  Rome.
This  honour  he  declined  with  a  firmness,  which  nothing
but  the  authoritative  injunction  of  the  pope  was  able  to
overcome. Nor  did  this  height  of  promotion  change
his  manners. Though  obliged  to  display  in  public  that
magnificence  which  became  his  station,  he  himself  re-
tained his  monastic  severity. Under  his  pontifical  robes
he  constantly  wore  the  coarse  frock  of  St.  Francis,  the
rents  in  which  he  used  to  patch  with  his  own  hands. He
at  no  time  used  linen ;  but  was  commonly  clad  in  hair
cloth. He  slept  always  in  his  habit,  most  frequently  on
the  ground,  or  on  boards  ;  rarely  in  a  bed. He  did  not
taste  any  of  the  delicacies  which  appeared  at  his  table,
but  satisfied  himself  with  that  simple  diet  which  the  rule
of  his  order  prescribed.1 Notwithstanding  these  pecu-
liarities, so  opposite  to  the  manners  of  the  world,  he  pos-
sessed a  thorough  knowledge  of  its  affairs ;  and  no  sooner
was  he  called  by  his  station,  and  by  the  high  opinion
which  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  entertained  of  him,  to  take
a  principal  share  in  the  administration,  than  he  displayed
talents  for  business,  which  rendered  the  fame  of  his  wis-
dom equal  to  that  of  his  sanctity. His  political  conduct,
remarkable  for  the  boldness  and  originality  of  all  his

1  Histoire  de  I'Adnrinistration  du  Card.  Ximen.  par  Mich.  Baudier,  4to.  1635.
p.  13.

1516.]  BOOK I.  341

plans,  flowed  from  his  real  character,  and  partook  both  of
its  virtues  and  its  defects.  His  extensive  genius  suggested
to  him  schemes  vast  and  magnificent.  Conscious  of  the
integrity  of  his  intentions,  he  pursued  these  with  unre-
mitting and  undaunted  firmness.  Accustomed  from  his
early  youth  to  mortify  his  own  passions,  he  shewed  little
indulgence  towards  those  of  other  men.  Taught  by  his
system  of  religion  to  check  even  his  most  innocent  de-
sires, he  was  the  enemy  of  every  thing  to  which  he  could
affix  the  name  of  elegance  or  pleasure.  Though  free  from
any  suspicion  of  cruelty,  he  discovered  in  all  his  com-
merce with  the  world  a  severe  inflexibility  of  mind,  and
austerity  of  character,  peculiar  to  the  monastic  profession,
and  which  can  hardly  be  conceived  in  a  country  where
that  is  unknown.
„  ,.  .  Such  was  the  man  to  whom  Ferdinand  com-

Carainal

Adrian ap- mitted  the  regency  of  Castile;  and  though
regen*  by  Ximenes  was  then  near  fourscore,  and  perfectly
Charles.  acquainted  with  the  labour  and  difficulty  of  the
office,  his  natural  intrepidity  of  mind,  and  zeal  for  the
public  good,  prompted  him  to  accept  of  it  without  he-
sitation. Adrian  of  Utrecht,  who  had  been  sent  into
Spain  a  few  months  before  the  death  of  Ferdinand,
produced  full  powers  from  the  archduke  to  assume  the
name  and  authority  of  regent,  upon  the  demise  of  his
grandfather;  but  such  was  the  aversion  of  the  Spaniards
to  the  government  of  a  stranger,  and  so  unequal  the
abilities  of  the  two  competitors,  that  Adrian's  claim
would  at  once  have  been  rejected,  if  Ximenes  himself,
from  complaisance  to  his  new  master,  had  not  consented
to  acknowledge  him  as  regent,  and  to  carry  on  the
government  in  conjunction  with  him.  By  this,  how-
ximenes  ever>  Adrian  acquired  a  dignity  merely  nominal,
obtains  the  Ximenes.  though  he  treated  him  with  great  de-

soledirec-  . ' i i  i i

tionof cency,  and even  respect, retained  the  whole
power  in  his  own  hands.1"

»  Gometius  de  Reb,  Gest.  Ximenii,  p.  150.  fol,  Compl.  1569.

342  CHARLES V.  [1516.

His  pre- The  cardinal's  first  care  was  to  observe  the
cautions motions  of  the  infant  Don  Ferdinand,  who,  hav-

agamst  the  '

infant  Don  ing  been  nattered  with  so  near  a  prospect  of  su-

Ferdinand.  ,  ,, ,.  f  ,  .

preme  power,  bore  the  disappointment  of  his
hopes  with  greater  impatience  than  a  prince  at  a  period
of  life  so  early  could  have  been  supposed  to  feel.  Xi-
menes,  under  pretence  of  providing  more  effectually  for
his  safety,  removed  him  from  Guadaloupe,  the  place  in
which  he  had  been  educated,  to  Madrid,  where  he  fixed
the  residence  of  the  court.  There  he  was  under  the  car-
dinal's own  eye,  and  his  conduct,  with  that  of  his  do-
mestics, was  watched  with  the  utmost  attention."

The  first  intelligence  he  received  from  the  Low
Countries  gave  great  disquiet  to  the  cardinal,  and  con-
vinced him  how  difficult  a  task  it  would  be  to  conduct
the  affairs  of  an  unexperienced  prince,  under  the
influence  of  counsellors  unacquainted  with-  the  laws
and  manners  of  Spain.  No  sooner  did  the  account
Charles  of  Ferdinand's  death  reach  Brussels,  than
thTSiil  of  Charles,  by  the  advice  of  his  Flemish  minis-
kins-  ters,  resolved  to  assume  the  title  of  king.  By
the  laws  of  Spain,  the  sole  right  to  the  crowns,  both
of  Castile  and  of  Aragon,  belonged  to  Joanna;  and,
though  her  infirmities  disqualified  her  from  governing,
this  incapacity  had  not  been  declared  by  any  public  act
of  the  cortes  in  either  kingdom ;  so  that  the  Spaniards
considered  this  resolution,  not  only  as  a  direct  viola-
tion of  their  privileges,  but  as  an  unnatural  usurpation
in  a  son  on  the  prerogatives  of  a  mother,  towards  whom,
in  her  present  unhappy  situation,  he  manifested  a  less
delicate  regard  than  her  subjects  had  always  expressed.0
The  Flemish  court,  however,  having  prevailed  both  on
the  pope  and  on  the  emperor  to  address  letters  to
Charles  as  king  of  Castile ;  the  former  of  whom,  it
was  pretended,  had  a  right  as  head  of  the  church,  and

n  Miniana  Contin.  Marianae,  lib.  i.  c-  2. Baudier,  Hist,  de  Xiraenes,  p.  118.
0  P.  Mart.  Ep.  568.

1516.]  BOOK  I.  343

the  latter,  as  head  of  the  empire,  to  confer  this  title  ;
instructions  were  sent  to  Ximenes,  to  prevail  on  the
Spaniards  to  acknowledge  it.  Ximenes,  though  he  had
earnestly  remonstrated  against  the  measure,  as  no  less
unpopular  than  unnecessary,  resolved  to  exert  all  his
authority  and  credit  in  carrying  it  into  execution,  and
immediately  assembled  such  of  the  nobles  as  were  then
at  court.  What  Charles  required  was  laid  before  them  ;
and  when,  instead  of  complying  with  his  demands,  they
began  to  murmur  against  such  an  unprecedented  en-
croachment on  their  privileges,  and  to  talk  of  the  rights
of  Joanna,  and  their  oath  of  allegiance  to  her,  Ximenes
Recog-  hastily  interposed,  and  with  that  firm  and  deci-
nised  sive  tone  whicn  was  natural  to  him,  told  them,

through  '

the  influ-  that  they  were  not  called  now  to  deliberate,  but
xfmenes,  to  obey  ;  that  their  sovereign  did  not  apply  to
April  is.  them  for  advice,  but  expected  submission  ;  and
"  this  day,"  added  he,  "  Charles  shall  be  proclaimed
king  of  Castile  in  Madrid  ;  and  the  rest  of  the  cities,
I  doubt  not,  will  follow  its  example."  On  the  spot  he
gave  orders  for  that  purpose  ;p  and,  notwithstanding
the  novelty  of  the  practice,  and  the  secret  discontents
of  many  persons  of  distinction,  Charles's  title  was  uni-
versally recognised.  In  Aragon,  where  the  privileges
of  the  subject  were  more  extensive,  and  the  abilities,  as
well  as  authority,  of  the  archbishop  of  Saragossa,  whom
Ferdinand  had  appointed  regent,  were  far  inferior  to
those  of  Ximenes,  the  same  obsequiousness  to  the  will
of  Charles  did  not  appear,  nor  was  he  acknowledged
there  under  any  other  character  but  that  of  prince,  un-
til his  arrival  in  Spain.q

His  Ximenes,  though  possessed  only  of  delegated

-  power,  which,  from  his  advanced  age,  he  could

ing  the not  expect  to  enjoy  long,  assumed  ,  together  with
tive. the  character  of  regent,  all  the  ideas  natural  to

P  Gometius,  p.  152,  &c. Baudier,  Hist,  de  Xiraen.  p.  121.
a  P.  Mart.  Ep.  572.

341  CHARLES  V.  [1516.

a  monarch,  and  adopted  schemes  for  extending  the  re-
gal authority,  which  he  pursued  with  as  much  intrepi-
dity and  ardour,  as  if  he  himself  had  been  to  reap  the
advantages  resulting  from  their  success.  The  exorbi-
tant privileges  of  the  Castilian  nobles  circumscribed  the
prerogative  of  the  prince  within  very  narrow  limits.
These  privileges  the  cardinal  considered  as  so  many
unjust  extortions  from  the  crown,  and  determined  to
abridge  them.  Dangerous  as  the  attempt  was,  there
were  circumstances  in  his  situation  which  promised
him  greater  success  than  any  king  of  Castile  could
have  expected.  The  strict  and  prudent  economy  of
his  archiepiscopal  revenues,  furnished  him  with  more
ready  money  than  the  crown  could  at  any  time  com-
mand :  the  sanctity  of  his  manners,  his  charity  and
munificence,  rendered  him  the  idol  of  the  people ;  and
the  nobles  themselves,  not  suspecting  any  danger  from
him,  did  not  observe  his  motions  with  the  same  jealous
attention,  as  they  would  have  watched  those  of  one  of
their  monarchs.

Byde-  Immediately  upon  his  accession  to  the  re-
thTnobt  gency>  several  of  the  nobles,  fancying  that  the
i>ty.  reins  of  government  would  of  consequence  be
somewhat  relaxed,  began  to  assemble  their  vassals,  and
to  prosecute,  by  force  of  arms,  private  quarrels  and  pre-
tensions, which  the  authority  of  Ferdinand  had  obliged
them  to  dissemble,  or  to  relinquish.  But  Ximenes,  who
had  taken  into  pay  a  good  body  of  troops,  opposed  and
defeated  all  their  designs  with  unexpected  vigour  and
facility;  and  though  he  did  not  treat  the  authors  of
these  disorders  with  any  cruelty,  he  forced  them  to
acts  of  submission,  extremely  mortifying  to  the  haughty
spirit  of  Castilian  grandees.

By  forming  But  while  the  cardinal's  attacks  were  confined
?roo°Psyde-  to  individuals,  and  every  act  of  rigour  was  justi-
^e<^  ky  ^e  aPPearance  of  necessity,  founded  on
the  forms  of  justice,  and  tempered  with  a  mix-

1516.]  BOOK I.  345

ture  of  lenity,  there  was  scarcely  room  for  jealousy  or
complaint.  It  was  not  so  with  his  next  measure,  which,
by  striking  at  a  privilege  essential  to  the  nobility,  gave
a  general  alarm  to  the  whole  order.  By  the  feudal
constitution,  the  military  power  was  lodged  in  the
hands  of  the  nobles,  and  men  of  an  inferior  condition
were  called  into  the  field  only  as  their  vassals,  and  to
follow  their  banners.  A  king,  with  scanty  revenues,
and  a  limited  prerogative,  depended  on  those  potent
barons  in  all  his  operations.  It  was  with  their  forces
he  attacked  his  enemies,  and  with  them  he  defended
his  kingdom.  While  at  the  head  of  troops  attached
warmly  to  their  own  immediate  lords,  and  accustomed
to  obey  no  other  commands,  his  authority  was  preca-
rious, and  his  efforts  feeble.  From  this  state  Ximenes
resolved  to  deliver  the  crown ;  and  as  mercenary  stand-
ing armies  were  unknown  under  the  feudal  government,
and  would  have  been  odious  to  a  martial  and  generous
people,  he  issued  a  proclamation,  commanding  every
city  in  Castile  to  enrol  a  certain  number  of  its  bur-
gesses, in  order  that  they  might  be  trained  to  the  use
of  arms  on  Sundays  and  holidays ;  he  engaged  to  pro-
vide officers  to  command  them  at  the  public  expense ;
and,  as  encouragement  to  the  private  men,  promised
them  an  exemption  from  all  taxes  and  impositions.  The
frequent  incursions  of  the  Moors  from  Africa,  and  the
necessity  of  having  some  force  always  ready  to  oppose
them,  furnished  a  plausible  pretence  for  this  innovation.
The  object  really  in  view  was  to  secure  the  king  a  body
of  troops  independent  of  his  barons,  and  which  might
serve  to  counterbalance  their  power/  The  nobles  were
not  slow  in  perceiving  what  was  his  intention,  and  saw
how  effectually  the  scheme  which  he  had  adopted  would
accomplish  his  end ;  but  as  a  measure  which  had  the
pious  appearance  of  resisting  the  progress  of  the  infi-
dels was  extremely  popular,  and  as  any  opposition  to

r  Mmiauae  Continuatio  Mariana-,,  fol.  Hag.  1733,  p.  3.

346  CHARLES V.  [1516.

it,  arising  from  their  order  alone,  would  have  been  im-
puted wholly  to  interested  motives,  they  endeavoured
to  excite  the  cities  themselves  to  refuse  obedience,  and
to  inveigh  against  the  proclamation  as  inconsistent  with
their  charters  and  privileges.  In  consequence  of  their
instigations,  Burgos,  Valladolid,  and  several  other  cities,
rose  in  open  mutiny.  Some  of  the  grandees  declared
themselves  their  protectors.  Violent  remonstrances
were  presented  to  the  king.  His  Flemish  counsellors
were  alarmed.  Ximenes  alone  continued  firm  and  un-
daunted ;  and  partly  by  terror,  partly  by  entreaty ;  by
force  in  some  instances,  and  by  forbearance  in  others  ;
he  prevailed  on  all  the  refractory  cities  to  comply.5  Dur-
ing his  administration,  he  continued  to  execute  his  plan
with  vigour ;  but  soon  after  his  death  it  was  entirely
dropped.

By  recall-  His  success  in  this  scheme  for  reducing  the
'"rfntTof  exorb^ant  power  of  the  nobility,  encouraged
former  him  to  attempt  a  diminution  of  their  possessions,
to°theCno-  which  were  no  less  exorbitant.  During  the  con-
blllty*  tests  and  disorders  inseparable  from  the  feudal
government,  the  nobles,  ever  attentive  to  their  own  in-
terest, and  taking  advantage  of  the  weakness  or  distress
of  their  monarchs,  had  seized  some  parts  of  the  royal
demesnes,  obtained  grants  of  others,  and  having  gra-
dually wrested  almost  the  whole  out  of  the  hands  of  the
prince,  had  annexed  them  to  their  own  estates.  The
titles,  by  which  most  of  the  grandees  held  these  lands,
were  extremely  defective ;  it  was  from  some  successful
usurpation  which  the  crown  had  been  too  feeble  to  dis-
pute, that  many  derived  their  only  claim  to  possession.
An  inquiry  carried  back  to  the  origin  of  these  encroach-
ments, which  were  almost  coeval  with  the  feudal  sys-
tem, was  impracticable  ;  and  as  it  would  have  stripped
every  nobleman  in  Spain  of  great  part  of  his  lands,  it
must  have  excited  a  general  revolt.  Such  a  step  was

•  P.  Mart.  Ep.  556,  &c.  ,  Gometius,  p.  160,  &c.

1516.]  BOOK 1.  347

too  bold,  even  for  the  enterprising  genius  of  Ximenes.
He  confined  himself  to  the  reign  of  Ferdinand  ;  and
beginning  with  the  pensions  granted  during  that
time,  refused  to  make  any  farther  payment,  because  all
right  to  them  expired  with  his  life.  He  then  called
to  account  such  as  had  acquired  crown  lands  under
the  administration  of  that  monarch,  and  at  once  re-
sumed whatever  he  had  alienated.  The  effects  of
these  revocations  extended  to  many  persons  of  high
rank  ;  for  though  Ferdinand  was  a  prince  of  little  ge-
nerosity, yet  he  and  Isabella  having  been  raised  to  the
throne  of  Castile  by  a  powerful  faction  of  the  nobles,
they  were  obliged  to  reward  the  zeal  of  their  adherents
with  great  liberality,  and  the  royal  demesnes  were  their
only  fund  for  that  purpose.  The  addition  made  to  the
revenue  of  the  crown  by  these  revocations,  together  with
his  own  frugal  economy,  enabled  Ximenes  not  only  to
discharge  all  the  debts  which  Ferdinand  had  left,
and  to  remit  considerable  sums  to  Flanders,  but  to  pay
the  officers  of  his  new  militia,  and  to  establish  maga-
zines not  only  more  numerous,  but  better  furnished  with
artillery,  arms,  and  warlike  stores,  than  Spain  had
ever  possessed  in  any  former  age.1  The  prudent  and
disinterested  application  of  these  sums,  was  a  full  apo-
logy to  the  people  for  the  rigour  with  which  they  were
exacted.

The  nobles,  alarmed  at  these  repeated  at-
oppose  his  tacks,  began  to  think  of  precautions  for  the
es '  safety  of  their  order.  Many  cabals  were  formed,
loud  complaints  were  uttered,  and  desperate  resolutions
taken ;  but  before  they  proceeded  to  extremities,  they
appointed  some  of  their  number  to  examine  the  powers
in  consequence  of  which  the  cardinal  exercised  acts  of
such  high  authority.  The  admiral  of  Castile,  the  duke
de  Infantado,  and  the  conde  de  Benevento,  grandees
of  the  first  rank,  were  intrusted  with  this  commission.

1  Flechier,  Vie'de  Ximcn.  ii.  600.

348  CHARLES  V.  [1516.

Ximenes  received  them  with  cold  civility,  and  in  answer
to  their  demand,  produced  the  testament  of  Ferdinand
by  which  he  was  appointed  regent,  together  with  the
ratification  of  that  deed  by  Charles.  To  both  these  they
objected ;  and  he  endeavoured  to  establish  their  vali-
dity. As  the  conversation  grew  warm,  he  led  them  in-
sensibly towards  a  balcony,  from  which  they  had  a
But  with-  v*ew  °f  a  large  body  of  troops  under  arms,  and
out  sue-  of  a  formidable  train  of  artillery.  "  Behold,"

cess.  .  , . . ,  .

says  he,  pointing  to  these  and  raising  his  voice,
"  the  powers  which  I  have  received  from  his  Catholic
majesty.  With  these  I  govern  Castile  ;  and  with  these
I  will  govern  it,  until  the  king,  your  master  and  mine,
takes  possession  of  his  kingdom.""  A  declaration  so
bold  and  haughty,  silenced  them,  and  astonished  their
associates.  To  take  arms  against  a  man  aware  of  his
danger,  and  prepared  for  his  defence,  was  what  despair
alone  would  dictate.  All  thoughts  of  a  general  confe-
deracy against  the  cardinal's  administration  were  laid
aside  ;  and,  except  from  some  slight  commotipns,  ex-
cited by  the  private  resentment  of  particular  noblemen,
the  tranquillity  of  Castile  suffered  no  interruption.
Thwart-  It  was  not  only  from  the  opposition  of  the
Charles's  Spanish  nobility  that  obstacles  arose  to  the
Flemish  execution  of  the  cardinal's  schemes ;  he  had  a

constant  struggle  to  maintain  with  the  Flemish
ministers,  who,  presuming  upon  their  favour  with  the
young  king,  aimed  at  directing  the  affairs  of  Spain,  as
well  as  those  of  their  own  country.  Jealous  of  the  great
abilities  and  independent  spirit  of  Ximenes,  they  con-
sidered him  rather  as  a  rival  who  might  circumscribe
their  power,  than  as  a  minister,  who  by  his  prudence
and  vigour  was  adding  to  the  grandeur  and  authority  of
their  master.  Every  complaint  against  his  administra-
tion was  listened  to  with  pleasure  by  the  courtiers  in
the  Low  Countries.  Unnecessary  obstructions  were

u  Flech.  ii.551.  Ferreras,  Hist.  viii.  433.

1516.]  BOOK  I.  349

thrown  by  their  means  in  the  way  of  all  his  measures ;
and  though  they  could  not,  either  with  decency  or
safety,  deprive  him  of  the  office  of  regent,  they  endea-
voured to  lessen  his  authority  by  dividing  it.  They
soon  discovered  that  Adrian  of  Utrecht,  already  joined
with  him  in  office,  had  neither  genius  nor  spirit  suffi-
An  addi-  cient  to  give  the  least  check  to  his  proceedings ;
number  of  anc^  tneref°re  Charles,  by  their  advice,  added
regents  to  the  commission  of  regency  La  Chau,  a  Fle-
mish gentleman,  and  afterward  Amerstorf,  a
nobleman  of  Holland  ;  the  former  distinguished  for  his
address,  the  latter  for  his  firmness.  Ximenes,  though
no  stranger  to  the  malevolent  intention  of  the  Flemish
courtiers,  received  these  new  associates  with  all  the  ex-
ternal marks  of  distinction  due  to  the  office  with  which
they  were  invested ;  but  when  they  came  to  enter  upon
business,  he  abated  nothing  of  that  air  of  superiority
with  which  he  had  treated  Adrian,  and  still  retained  the
so^e  direction  of  affairs.  The  Spaniards,  more
averse>  Per^aPsj  than  any  other  people,  to  the
of  affairs,  government  of  strangers,  approved  of  all  his
efforts  to  preserve  his  own  authority.  Even  the  nobles,
influenced  by  this  national  passion,  and  forgetting  their
jealousies  and  discontents,  chose  rather  to  see  the  su-
preme power  in  the  hands  of  one  of  their  countrymen,
whom  they  feared,  than  in  those  of  foreigners,  whom
they  hated.

Ximenes,  though  engaged  in  such  great
schemes  of  domestic  policy,  and  embarrassed
in  Navarre.  ^  tlie  artifiCes  and  intrigues  of  the  Flemish
ministers,  had  the  burden  of  two  foreign  wars  to  sup-
port. The  one  was  in  Navarre,  which  was  invaded  by
its  unfortunate  monarch,  John  d'Albret.  The  death  of
Ferdinand,  the  absence  of  Charles,  the  discord  and  dis-
affection which  reigned  among  the  Spanish  nobles,
seemed  to  present  him  with  a  favourable  opportunity  of
recovering  his  dominions.  The  cardinal's  vigilance,

V

350  CHARLES V.  [1516.

however,  defeated  a  measure  so  well  concerted.  As  he
foresaw  the  danger  to  which  that  kingdom  might  be  ex-
posed, one  of  his  first  acts  of  administration  was  to  order
thither  a  considerable  body  of  troops.  While  the  king
was  employed  with  one  part  of  his  army  in  the  siege  of
St.  Jean  Pied  en  Port,  Villalva,  an  officer  of  great  ex-
perience and  courage,  attacked  the  other  by  surprise,
and  cut  it  to  pieces.  The  king  instantly  retreated  with
precipitation,  and  an  end  was  put  to  the  war.x  But  as
Navarre  was  filled  at  that  time  with  towns  and  castles
slightly  fortified  and  weakly  garrisoned,  which  being
unable  to  resist  an  enemy,  served  only  to  furnish  him
with  places  of  retreat ;  Ximenes,  always  bold  and  de-
cisive in  his  measures,  ordered  every  one  of  these  to
be  dismantled,  except  Pampeluna,  the  fortifications  of
which  he  proposed  to  render  very  strong.  To  this  un-
common precaution  Spain  owes  the  possession  of  Na-
varre. The  French,  since  that  period,  have  often,  en-
tered, and  have  as  often  overrun  the  open  country;
while  they  were  exposed  to  all  the  inconveniences  at-
tending an  invading  army,  the  Spaniards  have  easily
drawn  troops  from  the  neighbouring  provinces  to  op-
pose them ;  and  the  French,  having  no  place  of  any
strength  to  which  they  could  retire,  have  been  obliged
repeatedly  to  abandon  their  conquest  with  as  much  ra-
pidity as  they  gained  it.

His  opera-  The  other  war  which  he  carried  on  in  Africa,
Africa'iess  against  the  famous  adventurer  Horuc  Barba-
fortunate.  rossa>  who,  from  a  private  corsair,  raised  him-
self, by  his  singular  valour  and  address,  to  be  king  of
Algiers  and  Tunis,  was  far  from  being  equally  success-
ful. The  ill  conduct  of  the  Spanish  general,  and  the
rash  valour  of  his  troops,  presented  Barbarossa  with  an
•easy  victory.  Many  perished  in  the  battle,  more  in  the
retreat,  and  the  remainder  returned  into  Spain  covered
with  infamy.  The  magnanimity,  however,  with  which

*  P.  Mart.  Ep,  570.

1516.]  BOOK I.  351

the  cardinal  bore  this  disgrace,  the  only  one  he  expe-
rienced during  his  administration,  added  new  lustre  to
his  character/  Great  composure  of  temper  under  a
disappointment,  was  not  expected  from  a  man  so  re-
markable for  the  eagerness  and  impatience  with  which
he  urged  on  the  execution  of  all  his  schemes.
Co  -  This  disaster  was  soon  forgotten  ;  while  the
tipn  of  the  conduct  of  the  Flemish  court  proved  the  cause

Flemish  .  • *

ministers,  ot  constant  uneasiness,  not  only  to  the  cardinal,
but  to  the  whole  Spanish  nation.  All  the  great
qua]ities  of  Chievres,  the  prime  minister  and
favourite  of  the  young  king,  were  sullied  with  an  igno-
ble and  sordid  avarice.  The  accession  of  his  master  to
the  crown  of  Spain,  opened  a  new  and  copious  source  for
the  gratification  of  this  passion.  During  the  time  of
Charles's  residence  in  Flanders,  the  whole  tribe  of  pre-
tenders to  offices  or  to  favour  resorted  thither.  They
soon  discovered  that,  without  the  patronage  of  Chievres,
it  was  vain  to  hope  for  preferment ;  nor  did  they  want
sagacity  to  find  out  the  proper  method  of  securing  his
protection.  Great  sums  of  money  were  drawn  out  of
Spain.  Every  thing  was  venal,  and  disposed  of  to  the
highest  bidder.  After  the  example  of  Chievres,  the  in-
ferior Flemish  ministers  engaged  in  this  traffic,  which
became  as  general  and  avowed,  as  it  was  infamous.55
The  Spaniards  were  filled  with  rage  when  they  beheld
offices  of  great  importance  to  the  welfare  of  their  coun-
try, set  to  sale  by  strangers,  unconcerned  for  its  honour
or  its  happiness.  Ximenes,  disinterested  in  his  whole
administration,  and  a  stranger,  from  his  native  gran-
deur of  mind,  to  the  passion  of  avarice,  inveighed  with
the  utmost  boldness  against  the  venality  of  the  Flemings.
He  represented  to  the  king,  in  strong  terms,  the  mur-
murs and  indignation  which  their  behaviour  excited
among  a  free  and  high-spirited  people,  and  besought
him  to  set  out  without  loss  of  time  for  Spain,  that,  by

x  Gometius,  lib.  vi.  p.  179.  z  Miniana,  Contin.  1.  i.  c.  2.

352  CHARLES V.  [1516.

his  presence,  he  might  dissipate  the  clouds  which  were
gathering  all  over  the  kingdom.a

Charles  Charles  was  fully  sensible  that  he  had  delayed
persuaded  too  long  to  take  possession  of  his  dominions  in
nes  to  visit  Spain.  Powerful  obstacles,  however,  stood  in
his  way,  and  detained  him  in  the  Low  Coun-
tries. The  war  which  the  league  of  Cambray  had
kindled  in  Italy,  still  subsisted ;  though  during  its
course^  the  armies  of  all  the  parties  engaged  in  it  had
changed  their  destination  and  their  objects.  France  was
now  in  alliance  with  Venice,  which  it  had  at  first  com-
bined to  destroy.  Maximilian  and  Ferdinand  had  for
some  years  carried  on  hostilities  against  France,  their
original  ally,  to  the  valour  of  whose  troops  the  confe-
deracy had  been  indebted  in  a  great  measure  for  its  suc-
cess. Together  with  his  kingdoms,  Ferdinand  trans-
mitted this  war  to  his  grandson  ;  and  there  was  reason
to  expect  that  Maximilian,  always  fond  of  new  enter-
prises, would  persuade  the  young  monarch  to  enter  into
it  with  ardour.  But  the  Flemings,  who  had  long  pos-
sessed an  extensive  commerce,  which,  during  the  league
of  Cambray,  had  grown  to  a  great  height  upon  the  ruins
of  the  Venetian  trade,  dreaded  a  rupture  with  France ;
and  Chievres,  sagacious  to  discern  the  true  interest  of
his  country,  and  not  warped  on  this  occasion  by  his  love
of  wealth,  warmly  declared  for  maintaining  peace  with
the  French  nation.  Francis  I.,  destitute  of  allies,  and
solicitous  to  secure  his  late  conquests  in  Italy  by  a
treaty,  listened  with  joy  to  the  first  overtures  of  accom-
modation. Chievres  himself  conducted  the  negotiation
in  the  name  of  Charles  :  Gouffier  appeared  as  plenipo-
tentiary for  Francis.  Each  of  them  had  presided  over
the  education  of  the  prince  whom  he  represented.  They
had  both  adopted  the  same  pacific  system  ;  and  were
equally  persuaded  that  the  union  of  the  two  monarchs
was  the  happiest  event  for  themselves,  as  well  as  for

a  P.  Mart.  Ep.  576.

1516.]

BOOK I.

353

with  *

their  kingdoms. In  such  hands  the  negotiation  did
not  languish. A  few  days  after  opening  their  con-
A  peace ferences  at  Noyon,  they  concluded  a  treaty  of
confederacy  and  mutual  defence  between  the
two  monarchs  ;  the  chief  articles  in  which  were,
that  Francis  should  give  in  marriage  to  Charles
his  eldest  daughter  the  princess  Louise,  an  infant  of  a
year  old,  and  as  her  dowry,  should  make  over  to  him  all
his  claims  and  pretensions  upon  the  kingdom  of  Naples  ;
that,  in  consideration  of  Charles's  being  already  in  pos-
session of  Naples,  he  should,  until  the  accomplishment
of  the  marriage, pay  a  hundred  thousand  crowns  a
year  to  the  French  king  ;  and  the  half  of  that  sum  an-
nually, as  long  as  the  princess.  had  no  children;  that
when  Charles  shall  arrive  in  Spain,  the  heirs  of  the  king
of  Navarre  may  represent  to  him  their  right  to  that  king-
dom; and  if,  after  examining  their  claim,  he  does  not
give  them  satisfaction,  Franci§  shall  be  at  liberty  to  assist
them  with  all  his  forces.5  This  alliance  not  only  united
Charles  and  Francis,  but  obliged  Maximilian,  who  was
unable  alone  to  cope  with  the  French  and  Venetians,
to  enter  into  a  treaty  with  those  powers,  which  put  a
final  period  to  the  bloody  and  tedious  war  that  the  league
of  Cambray  had  occasioned. Europe  enjoyed  a  few
years  of  universal  tranquillity,  and  was  indebted  for  that
blessing  to  two  princes,  whose  rivalship  and  ambition
kept  it  in  perpetual  discord  and  agitation  during  the
remainder  of  their  reigns.

The  Fie-  By  the  treaty  of  Noyon,  Charles  secured  ;a
averse  to  sa^e  passage  into  Spain.  It  was  not,  however,
visiuo88  ^e  interest  °f  his  Flemish  ministers,  that  he
spam.  should  visit  that  kingdom  soon.  While  he  re-
sided in  Flanders,  the  revenues  of  the  Spanish  crown
were  spent  there,  and  they  engrossed,  without  any
competitors,  all  the  effects  of  their  monarch's  genero-
sity ;  their  country  became  the  seat  of  government,  and

VOL.  III.

Leonard  Recoeil  des  Traitez,  torn.  ii.  69.
2  A

354  CHARLES V,  [15ia

all  favours  were  dispensed  by  them.  Of  all  these  ad-
vantages they  run  the  risk  of  seeing  themselves  de-
prived, from  the  moment  that  their  sovereign  entered
Spain.  The  Spaniards  would  naturally  assume  the
direction  of  their  own  affairs  ;  the  Low  Countries
would  be  considered  only  as  a  province  of  that  mighty
monarchy ;  and  they  who  now  distributed  the  favours
of  the  prince  to  others,  must  then  be  content  to  receive
ithem  from  the  hands  of  strangers.  But  what  Chievres
Afraid  of  chiefly  wished  to  avoid  was,  an  interview  be-
ximenes.  tween  ^  king  and  ximenes.  On  the  one

hand,  the  wisdom,  the  integrity,  and  the  magnanimity
of  that  prelate,  gave  him  a  wonderful  ascendant  over
the  minds  of  men ;  and  it  was  extremely  probable,  that
these  great  qualities,  added  to  the  reverence  due  to  his
age  and  office,  would  command  the  respect  of  a  young
prince,  who,  capable  of  noble  and.  generous  sentiments
himself,  would,  in  proportion  to  his  admiration  of  the
eardinal's  virtues,  lessen  his  deference  towards  persons
of  another  character.  Or,  on  the  other  hand,  if  Charles
should  allow  his  Flemish  favourites  to  retain  all  the
influence  over  his  councils  which  they  at  present  pos-
sessed, it  was  easy  to  foresee  that  the  cardinal  would
remonstrate  loudly  against  such  an  indignity  to  the
Spanish  nation,  and  vindicate  the  rights  of  his  country
with  the  same  intrepidity  and  success,  with  which  he
had  asserted  the  prerogatives  of  the  crown.  For  these
reasons,  all  his  Flemish  counsellors  combined  to  retard
his  departure;  and  Charles,  unsuspicious,  from  want
of  experience,  and  fond  of  his  native  country,  suffered
himself  to  be  unnecessarily  detained  in  the  Netherlands
a  whole  year  after  signing  the  treaty  of  Noyon.

i5i7.  The  repeated  entreaties  of  Ximenes,  the  ad-
embark  vice  of  his  grandfather  Maximilian,  and  th,e
for  Spab.  impatient  murmurs  of  his  Spanish  subjects,  pre-
vailed on  him  at  last  to  embark.  He  was  attended  not
only  by  Chievres,  his  prime  minister,  but  by  a  nume-

1517.]  BOOK  I.  355

rous  and  splendid  train  of  the  Flemish  nobles,  fond  of
beholding  the  grandeur,  or  of  sharing  in  the  bounty  of

Se  t.  is  Prince- After  a  dangerous  voyage,  he

landed  at  Villa  Viciosa,  in  the  province  of  As-
turias,  and  was  received  with  such  loud  acclamations
of  joy  as  a  new  monarch,  whose  arrival  was  so  ardently
desired,  had  reason  to  expect.  The  Spanish  nobility
resorted  to  their  sovereign  from  all  parts  of  the  king-
dom, and  displayed  a  magnificence  which  the  Flemings
were  unable  to  emulate.0

His  Fie- Ximenes,  who  considered  the  presence  of
wish  mini-  the  king  as  the  greatest  blessing  to  his  domi-

sters  en-  e  to

deavour  to  nions,  was  advancing  towards  the  coast,  as  fast
as  the  infirm  state  of  his  health  would  permit,
*n  or(^er  to  receive  Mm.  During  his  regency,
and  notwithstanding  his  extreme  old  age,  he
had  abated,  in  no  degree,  the  rigour  or  frequency  of
his  mortifications  ;  and  to  these  he  added  such  labo-
rious assiduity  in  business,  as  would  have  worn  out  the
most  youthful  and  vigorous  constitution.  Every  day
he  employed  several  hours  in  devotion  ;  he  celebrated
mass  in  person  ;  he  even  allotted  some  space  for  study.
Notwithstanding  these  occupations,  he  regularly  at*
tended  the  council  ;  he  received  and  read  all  papers
presented  to  him;  he  dictated  letters  and  instructions;
and  took  under  his  inspection  all  business,  civil,  eccle-
siastical, or  military.  Every  moment  of  his  time  was
filled  np  with  some  serious  employment.  The  only
amusement  in  which  he  indulged  himself,  by  way  of
relaxation  after  business,  was  to  canvass,  with  a  few
friars  and  other  divines,  some  intricate  article  in  scho-
lastic theology.  Wasted  by  such  a  course  of  life,  the
infirmities  of  age  $aily  grew  upon  him.  On  his  jour-
ney,. a  violent  disorder  seized  him  at  Bos  Equillos,  at-
tended with  uncommon  symptoms  ;  which  his  followers
considered  a&  the  effect  of  poison,d  but  could  not  agree

e  P.  Mart.  Ep.  599.  6Q1.  d  Miniaha,  Contin.  lib.  i.  c.  3.

2  A  2

356  CHARLES  V.  [1517.

whether  the  crime  ought  to  be  imputed  to  the  hatred
of  the  Spanish  nobles,  or  to  the  malice  of  the  Flemish
Charles's  courtiers. This  accident  obliging  him  to  stop
todTto snort,  he  wrote  to  Charles,  and  with  his  usual
Ximenes.  boldness  advised  him  to  dismiss  all  the  strangers
in  his  train,  whose  numbers  and  credit  gave  offence  al-
ready to  the  Spaniards,  and  would  ere  long  alienate
the  affections  of  the  whole  people. At  the  same  time
he  earnestly  desired  to  have  an  interview  with  the
king,  that  he  might  inform  him  of  the  state  of  .the  na-
tion, and  the  temper  of  his  subjects. To  prevent  this,
not  only  the  Flemings,  but  the  Spanish  grandees,  em-
ployed all  their  address,  and  industriously  kept  Charles
at  a  distance  from  Aranda,  the  place  to  which  the  car-
dinal had  removed. Through  their  suggestions,  every
measure  that  he  recommended  was  rejected ;  the  utmost
care  was  taken  to  make  him  feel,  and  to  point  out  to
the  whole  nation,  that  his  power  was  on  the  decline ;
even  in  things  purely  trivial,  such  a  choice  was  always
made,  as  was  deemed  most  disagreeable  to  him. Xi-
menes did  not  bear  this  treatment  with  his  usual  forti-
tude of  spirit. Conscious  of  his  own  integrity  and
merit,  he  expected  a  more  grateful  return  from  a  prince
to  whom  he  delivered  a  kingdom  more  flourishing  than
it  had  been  in  any  former  age,  together  with  authority
more  extensive  and  better  established,  than  the  most
illustrious  of  his  ancestors  had  ever  possessed. He
could  not,  therefore,  on  many  occasions,  refrain  from
giving  vent  to  his  indignation  and  complaints. He
lamented  the  fate  of  his  country,  and  foretold  the  ca-
lamities which  it  would  suffer  from  the  insolence,  the
rapaciousness,  and  ignorance  of  strangers. While  his
mind  was  agitated  by  these  passions,  he  received  a  let-
ter from  the  king,  in  which,  after  a  few  cold  and  formal
expressions  of  regard,  he  was  allowed  to  retire  to  his
diocess ;  that  after  a  life  of  such  continued  labour,  he
might  end  his  days  in  tranquillity. This  message

1517.]  BOOK I.  357

His  death  Prove(*  fata^  to  Ximenes.  His  haughty  mind,  it
is  probable,  could  not  survive  disgrace ;  perhaps
his  generous  heart  could  not  bear  the  prospect  of  the
misfortunes  ready  to  fall  on  his  country.  Whichsoever
of  these  opinions  we  embrace,  certain  it  is  that  he  ex-
Nov  pi  red  a  few  hours  after  reading  the  letter.6  The
variety,  the  grandeur,  and  the  success  of  his
schemes,  during  a  regency  of  only  twenty  months,  leave
it  doubtful,  whether  his  sagacity  in  council,  his  pru-
dence in  conduct,  or  his  boldness  in  execution,  deserve
the  greatest  praise.  His  reputation  is  still  high  in
Spain,  not  only  for  wisdom,  but  for  sanctity;  and  he
is  the  only  prime  minister  mentioned  in  history,  whom
his  contemporaries  reverenced  as  a  saint/  and  to  whom
the  people  under  his  government  ascribed  the  power
of  working  miracles.

1518.  Soon  after  the  death  of  Ximenes,  Charles
Shut  ma(^e  his  Public  entry,  with  great  pomp,  into
Vaiiado-  Valladolid,  whither  he  had  summoned  the
cortes  of  Castile.  Though  he  assumed  on  all
occasions  the  name  of  king,  that  title  had  never  been
acknowledged  in  the  cortes.  The  Spaniards  consider-
ing Joanna  as  possessed  of  the  sole  right  to  the  crown,
and  no  example  of  a  son's  having  enjoyed  the  title  of
king  during  the  life  of  his  parents  occurring  in  their
history,  the  cortes  discovered  all  that  scrupulous  re*
spect  for  ancient  forms,  and  that  aversion  to  innova-
tion, which  are  conspicuous  in  popular  assemblies.
The  presence,  however,  of  their  prince,  the  address,
the  artifices,  and  the  threats  of  his  ministers,  prevailed

Declare  On  ^em  at  ^ast  tO  Proclaim  ^m  king,  in  COn-
Charles  junction  with  his  mother,  whose  name  they  ap*
pointed  to  be  placed  before  that  of  her  son  in
all  public  acts.  But,  when  they  made  this  concession,
they  declared,  that  if,  at  any  future  period,  Joanna

e  Marsollier,  Vie  de  Ximenes,  p.  447. Goraetius,  lib.  vii.  p.  206/&C. Baudier,
Hist,  de  Ximen.  ii.  p.  208.

f  Flechier,  Vie  de  Ximen.  ii.  p.  746.

358  CHARLES  V.  [1518.

should  recover  the  exercise  of  reason,  the  whole  au-
thority should  return  into  her  hands.  At  the  same  time
they  voted  a  free  gift  of  six  hundred  thousand  ducats
to  be  paid  in  three  years,  a  sum  more  considerable  than
had  ever  been  granted  to  any  former  monarch  ,g

Notwithstanding  this  obsequiousness  of  the
s!  cortes  to  the  will  of  the  king,  the  most  violent
and  % symptoms  of  dissatisfaction  with  his  govern-

causes  of ^ *  j3

it. ment began to break out  in the kingdom.
Chievres  had  acquired  over  the  mind  of  the  young
monarch  the  ascendant  not  only  of  a  tutor,  but  of  a
parent. Charles  seemed  to  have  no  sentiments  but
those  which  his  minister  inspired,  and  scarcely  uttered
a  word  but  what  he  put  into  his  mouth. He  was  con-
stantly surrounded  by  Flemings ;  no  person  got  access
to  him  without  their  permission ;  nor  was  any  admitted
to  audience  but  in  their  presence. As  he  spoke  the
Spanish  language  very  imperfectly,  his  answers  were
always  extremely  short,  and  often  delivered  with  hesi-
tation. From  all  these  circumstances,  many  of  the
Spaniards  were  led  to  believe  that  he  was  a  prince  of  a
slow  and  narrow  genius. Some  pretended  to  discover
a  strong  resemblance  between  him  and  his  mother,  and
began  to  whisper  that  his  capacity  for  government
would  never  be  far  superior  to  hers ;  and  though  they
who  had  the  best  opportunity  ot  judging  concerning
his  character,  maintained  that,  notwithstanding  such
unpromising  appearances,  he  possessed  a  large  fund  of
knowledge,  as  well  as  of  sagacity  ;h  yet  all  agreed  in
condemning  his  partiality  towards  the  Flemings,  and
his  attachment  to  his  favourites  as  unreasonable  and
immoderate. Unfortunately for Charles, these fa-
vourites were  unworthy  of  his  confidence. To  amass
wealth  seems  to  have  been  their  only  aim ;  and  as  they
reason  to  fear,  that  either  their  master's  good  sense,

s  Miniana,  Contin.  lib.  i.  c.  3. P.  Mart.  Ep.  608, Sandov.  p.  12.
11  Sandoval,  p.  31. P.  Mart.  Ep.  655.

15 IB.]  BOOK I.  359

or  the  indignation  of  the  Spaniards,  might  soon  abridge
their  power,  they  hastened  to  improve  the  present  op-
portunity, and  their  avarice  was  the  more  rapacious,
because  they  expected  their  authority  to  be  of  no  long
duration.  All  honours,  offices,  and  benefices,  were
either  engrossed  by  the  Flemings,  or  publicly  sold  by
them.  Chievres,  his  wife,  and  Sauvage,  whom  Charles,
on  the  death  of  Ximenes,  had  imprudently  raised  to  be
chancellor  of  Castile,  vied  with  each  other  in  all  the
refinements  of  extortion  and  venality.  Not  only  the
Spanish  historians,  who,  from  resentment,  may  be  sus-
pected of  exaggeration,  but  Peter  Martyr  Angleria,  an
Italian,  who  resided  at  that  time  in  the  court  of  Spain,
and  who  was  under  no  temptation  to  deceive  the  per*
sons  to  whom  his  letters  are  addressed,  give  a  descrip-
tion which  is  almost  incredible,  of  the  insatiable  and
shameless  covetousness  of  the  Flemings.  According
to  Angleria's  calculation,  which  he  asserts  to  be  ex*
tremely  moderate,  they  remitted  into  the  Low  Coun-
tries, in  the  space  of  ten  moriths,  no  less  a  sum  than  a
million  and  one  hundred  thousand  ducats.  The  no-
mination of  William  de  Croy,  Chievres'  nephew,  a
young  man  not  of  canonical  age,  to  the  archbishopric
of  Toledo,  exasperated  the  Spaniards  more  than  all
these  exactions.  They  considered  the  elevation  of  a
stranger  to  the  head  of  their  church,  and  to  the  richest
benefice  in  the  kingdom,  not  only  as  an  injury,  but  as
an  insult  to  the  whole  nation;  both  clergy  and  laity,
the  former  from  interest,  the  latter  from  indignationy
joined  in  exclaiming  against  it.1

Charles  Charles,  leaving  Castile  thus  disgusted  with
JoIfeVof  his  administration,  set  out  for  Saragossa,  the
Aragon.  capital  of  Aragon,  that  he  might  be  present  in
the  cortes  of  that  kingdom.  On  his  way  thither,  he
took  leave  of  his  brother  Ferdinand,  whom  he  sent  into

*  Sandoval,  28—31. P.  Mart.  Ep.  608.  611.  613,  614.  622,  623.  639. Mi-
,'iiana,  Contin.  lib.  i.  c.  3.  p.  8.

360  CHARLES  V.  [1518

Germany  on  the  pretence  of  visiting  their  grandfather
Maximilian,  in  his  old  age.  To  this  prudent  precau-
tion, Charles  owed  the  preservation  of  his  Spanish  do-
minions. During  the  violent  commotions  which  arose
there,  soon  after  this  period,  the  Spaniards  would  in-
fallibly have  offered  the  crown  to  a  prince,  who  was  the
darling  of  the  whole  nation ;  nor  did  Ferdinand  want
ambition,  or  counsellors^  that  might  have  prompted  him
to  accept  of  the  offer. k

TheAra-  The  Aragonese  had  not  hitherto  acknow-
m°0nreSun-  ledged  Charles  as  king,  nor  would  they  allow
thwHfce  *ke  cortes  t°  be  assembled  in  his  name,  but  in
CastiKans.  that  of  the  Justiza,  to  whom,  during  an  inter-
regnum^ this  privilege  belonged.1  The  opposition
Charles  had  to  struggle  with,  in  the  cortes  of  Aragon,
was  more  violent  and  obstinate  than  that  which  he  had
overcome  in  Castile  ;  after  long  delays,  however,  and
with  much  difficulty,  he  persuaded  the  members  to
confer  on  him  the  title  of  king,  in  conjunction  with  his
mother.  At  the  same  time  he  bound  himself  by  that
solemn  oath,  which  the  Aragonese  exacted  of  their
kings,  never  to  violate  any  of  their  rights  or  liberties.
When  a  donative  was  demanded,  the  members  were
still  more  intractable ;  many  months  elapsed  before
they  would  agree  to  grant  Charles  two  hundred  thou-
sand ducats,  and  that  sum  they  appropriated  so  strictly
for  paying  debts  of  the  crown,  which  had  long  been
forgotten,  that  a  very  small  part  of  it  came  into  the
king's  hands.  What  had  happened  in  Castile  taught
them  caution,  and  determined  them  rather  to  satisfy  the
claims  of  their  fellow-citizens,  how  obsolete  soever,  than
to  furnish  strangers  the  means  of  enriching  themselves,
with  the  spoils  of  their  country."1

During  these  proceedings  of  the  cortes,  ambassa-
dors arrived  at  Saragossa  from  Francis  I.  and  the  young

k  P.  Martyr,  Ep.  619. Ferreras,  via.  460.
i  P.  Martyr,  Ep.  605.  »  P.  Martyr,  Ep.  615— 631.

1519.]  BOOK I.  361

king  of  Navarre,  demanding  the  restitution  of  that  king-
dom in  terms  of  the  treaty  of  Noyon.  But  neither
Charles,  nor  the  Castilian  nobles,  whom  he  consulted
on  this  occasion,  discovered  any  inclination  to  part
with  this  acquisition.  A  conference  held  soon  after  at
Montpelier,  in  order  to  bring  this  matter  to  an  amica-
ble issue,  was  altogether  fruitless ;  while  the  French
urged  the  injustice  of  the  usurpation,  the  Spaniards
were  attentive  only  to  its  importance.11
J5i9  From  Aragon  Charles  proceeded  to  Catalo-
nia, where  he  wasted  as  much  time,  encoun-
tered more  difficulties,  and  gained  less  money*  The
Flemings  were  now  become  so  odious  in  every  pro-
vince of  Spain  by  their  exactions,  that  the  desire  of
mortifying  them,  and  of  disappointing  their  avarice,
augmented  the  jealousy  with  which  a  free  people
usually  conduct  their  deliberations.

The  Castilians,  who -had  felt  most  sensibly
the  Weight  and  rigour  of  the  oppressive  schemes
carried  on  by  the  Flemings,  resolved  no  longer
ministers,  to  submit  with  a  tameness  fatal  to  themselves,
and  which  rendered  them  the  objects  of  scorn  to  their
fellow-subjects  in  the  other  kingdoms,  of  which  the
Spanish  monarchy  was  composed.  Segovia,  Toledo,
Seville,  and  several  other  cities  of  the  first  rank,  entered
into  a  confederacy  for  the  defence  of  their  rights  and
privileges ;  and  notwithstanding  the  silence  of  the  no-
bility, who,  on  this  occasion,  discovered  neither  the
public  spirit,  nor  the  resolution  which  became  their
order,  the  confederates  laid  before  the  king  a  full  view
of  the  state  of  the  kingdom,  and  of  the  mal-administra-
tion  of  his  favourites.  The  preferment  of  strangers,  the
exportation  of  the  current  coin,  the  increase  of  taxes,
were  the  grievances  of  which  they  chiefly  complained ;
and  of  these  they  demanded  redress  with  that  boldness
which  is  natural  to  a  free  people.  These  remonstrances,,

"  P.  Mar'tyr,  Ep.  605.  633.  640.

362  CHARLES  V.  [1519.

presented  at  first  at  Saragossa,  and  renewed  afterward
at  Barcelona,  Charles  treated  with  great  neglect.  The
confederacy,  however,  of  these  cities,  at  this  juncture,
was  the  beginning  of  that  famous  union  among  the
commons  of  Castile,  which  not  long  after  threw  the
kingdom  into  such  violent  convulsions  as  shook  the
throne,  and  almost  overturned  the  constitution.0
Death  of  Soon  after  Charles's  arrival  at  Barcelona,  he
received  the  account  of  an  event  which  inte-

ror  Maxi-

miiian,  rested  him  much  more  than  the  murmurs  of  the
Castilians,  or  the  scruples  of  the  cortes  of  Ca-
talonia. This  was  the  death  of  the  emperor  Maximi-
lian ;  an  occurrence  of  small  importance  in  itself,  for
he  was  a  prince  conspicuous  neither  for  his  virtues,
nor  his  power,  nor  his  abilities  ;  but  rendered  by  its
consequences  more  memorable  than  any  that  had  hap-
pened during  several  ages.  It  broke  that  profound  and
universal  peace  which  then  reigned  in  the  Christian
world  ;  it  excited  a  rivalship  between  two  princes,
which  threw  all  Europe  into  agitation,  and  kindled
wars  more  general  and  of  longer  duration,  than  had
hitherto  been  known  in  modern  times.

The  revolutions  occasioned  by  the  expedition  of  the
French  king  Charles  VIII.  into  Italy,  had  inspired  the
European  princes  with  new  ideas  concerning  the  im-
portance of  the  imperial  dignity.  The  claims  of  the
empire  upon  some  of  the  Italian  states  were  numerous  •
its  jurisdiction  over  others  was  extensive  ;  and  though
the  former  had  been  almost  abandoned,  and  the  latter
seldom  exercised,  under  princes  of  slender  abilities  and
of  little  influence,  it  was  obvious,  that  in  the  hands  of
an  emperor  possessed  of  power  or  of  genius,  they  might
be  employed  as  engines  for  stretching  his  dominion
over  the  greater  part  of  that  country.  Even  Maximi-
lian, feeble  and  unsteady  as  his  conduct  always  was,
had  availed  himself  of  the  infinite  pretensions  of  the

0  P.  Martyr,  Ep.  630. Ferreras,  vlii.464.

1510.]  BOOK  I.  363

empire,  and  had  reaped  advantage  from  every  war,  and
every  negotiation  in  Italy  during  his  reign.  These
considerations,  added  to  the  dignity  of  the  station,
confessedly  the  first  among  Christian  princes,  and  to
the  rights  inherent  in  the  office,  which,  if  exerted  with
vigour,  were  far  from  being  inconsiderable,  rendered
the  imperial  crown  more  than  ever  an  object  of  ambi-
tion.

Not  long  before  his  death,  Maximilian  had

endea?d discovered  great  solicitude  to  preserve  this  dig-
voured  to  nity  in  the  Austrian  family,  and  to  procure  the

secure  the J  ~ .  J  '

imperial  king  ot  opain  to  be  chosen  his  successor,  but
his^d-  he  himself  having  never  been  crowned  by  the
90n>  pope,  a  ceremony  deemed  essential  in  that  age>
Was  considered  only  as  emperor  elect.  Though  histo-
rians have  not  attended  to  that  distinction,  neither  the
Italian  nor  German  chancery  bestdwed  any  other  title
upon  him  than  that  of  king  of  the  Romans  ;  and  no
example  occurring  in  history,  of  any  person's  being
chosen  a  successor  to  a  king  of  the  Romans,  the  Ger-
mans, always  tenacious  of  their  forms,  and  unwilling
to  confer  upon  Charles  an  office  for  which  their  consti-
tution knew  no  name,  obstinately  refused  to  gratify
Maximilian  in  that  point.p

Charles  By  his  death,  this  difficulty  was  at  once  re-
-  moved,  and  Charles  openly  aspired  to  that  dig-
n*tv  whicn  his  grandfather  had  attempted,  with-
out  success,  to  secure  for  him.  At  the  same  time,
Francis  I.,  a  powerful  rival,  entered  the  lists  against
him  ;  and  the  attention  of  all  Europe  was  fixed  upon
this  competition,  no  less  illustrious  from  the  high  rank
of  the  candidates,  than  for  the  importance  of  the  prize
for  which  they  contended.  Each  of  them  urged  his
pretensions  with  sanguine  expectations,  and  with  no

P  Guicciardini,  lib.  xiii.  p.  15. Hist.  Gener.  d'Allemagne,  par  P.  Barre,
viii.  part.  1.  p.  1087. P.  Heater.  Rer.  Austr.  lib.  vii.  c.  17.  179 ;  lib.  viii.  c.  2.
p.  183.

364  CHARLES V.  [1519.

Preten-  unpromising  prospect  of  success.  Charles  con-
"ope/of  sidered  the  imperial  crown  as  belonging  to  him
Charles.  of  right,  from  its  long  continuance  in  the  Aus-
trian line ;  he  knew  that  none  of  the  German  princes
possessed  power  or  influence  enough  to  appear  as  his
antagonist ;  he  flattered  himself,  that  no  consideration
would  induce  the  natives  of  Germany  to  exalt  any
foreign  prince  to  a  dignity,  which  during  so  many  ages
had  been  deemed  peculiar  to  their  own  nation  ;  and
least  of  all,  that  they  would  confer  this  honour  upon
Francis  I.,  the  sovereign  of  a  people  whose  genius,  and
laws,  and  manners,  differed  so  widely  from  those  of  the
Germans  that  it  was  hardly  possible  to  establish  any
cordial  union  between  them ;  he  trusted  not  a  little  to
the  effect  of  Maximilian's  negotiations,  which,  though
they  did  not  attain  their  end,  had  prepared  the  minds
of  the  Germans  for  his  elevation  to  the  imperial  throne ;
but  what  he  relied  on  as  a  chief  recommendation,  was
the  fortunate  situation  of  his  hereditary  dominions  in
Germany,  which  served  as  a  natural  barrier  to  the  em-
pire against  the  encroachments  of  the  Turkish  power.
The  conquests,  the  abilities,  and  the  ambition  of  the
sultan  Selim  II.  had  spread  over  Europe,  at  that  time,
a  general  and  well-founded  alarm.  By  his  victories
over  the  Mamelukes,  and  the  extirpation  of  that  gallant
body  of  men,  he  had  not  only  added  Egypt  and  Syria
to  his  empire,  but  had  secured  to  it  such  a  degree  of
internal  tranquillity,  that  he  was  ready  to  turn  against
Christendom  the  whole  force  of  his  arms,  which  nothing
hitherto  had  been  able  to  resist.  The  most  effectual  ex-
pedient for  stopping  the  progress  of  this  torrent,  seemed
to  be  the  election  of  an  emperor,  possessed  of  extensive
territories  in  that  country,  where  its  first  impression
would  be  felt,  and  who,  besides,  could  combat  this  for-
midable enemy  with  all  the  forces  of  a  powerful  monar-
chy, and  with  all  the  wealth  furnished  by  the  mines  of
the  New  World,  or  the  commerce  of  the  Low  Countries,

1519.]  BOOK  I.  365

These  were  the  arguments  by  which  Charles  publicly
supported  his  claim ;  and  to  men  of  integrity  and  re-
flection, they  appeared  to  be  not  only  plausible  but
convincing.  He  did  not,  however,  trust  the  success  of
his  cause  to  these  alone.  Great  sums  of  money  were
remitted  from  Spain  ;  all  the  refinements  and  artifice  of
negotiation  were  employed ;  and  a  considerable  body
of  troops,  kept  on  foot,  at  that  time,  by  the  states  of  the
circle  of  Suabia,  was  secretly  taken  into  his  pay.  The
venal  were  gained  by  presents ;  the  objections  of  the
more  scrupulous  were  answered  or  eluded;  and  some
feeble  princes  were  threatened  and  overawed.q

Of  Francis  *^n  ^e  ot^er  handj  Francis  supported  his  claim
with  equal  eagerness,  and  no  less  confidence  of
its  being  well-founded.  His  emissaries  contended  that
it  was  now  high  time  to  convince  the  princes  of  the  house
of  Austria,  that  the  imperial  crown  was  elective,  and  not
hereditary ;  that  other  persons  might  aspire  to  an  honour
which  their  arrogance  had  accustomed  them  to  regard  as
the  property  of  their  family ;  that  it  required  a  sovereign
of  mature  judgment,  and  of  approved  abilities,  to  hold
the  reins  of  government,  in  a  country  where  such  un-
known opinions  concerning  religion  had  been  published,
as  had  thrown  the  minds  of  men  into  an  uncommon  agi-
tation, which  threatened  the  most  violent  effects  ;  that  a
young  prince,  without  experience,  and  who  had  hitherto
given  no  specimens  of  his  genius  for  command,  was  no
fit  match  for  Selim,  a  man  grown  old  in  the  art  of  war,
and  in  the  course  of  victory ;  whereas  a  king,  who  in  his
early  youth  had  triumphed  over  the  valour  and  discipline
of  the  Swiss,  till  then  reckoned  invincible,  would  be  an
antagonist  not  unworthy  the  conqueror  of  the  east ;  that
the  fire  and  impetuosity  of  the  French  cavalry,  added  to
the  discipline  and  stability  of  the  German  infantry,  would
form  an  army  so  irresistible,  that,  instead  of  waiting  the

q  Guicc.  lib.  xiii.  159. Sleiden,  Hist,  of  the  Reformat.  14. Strtmi  Corp.  Hist.
German,  ii.  971. Not.  20.

360  CHARLES  V.  [1519.

approach  of  the  Ottoman  forces,  it  might  carry  hostilities
into  the  heart  of  their  dominions  ;  that  the  election  of
Charles  would  be  inconsistent  with  a  fundamental  con-
stitution, by  which  the  person  who  holds  the  crown  of
Naples  is  excluded  from  aspiring  to  the  imperial  dignity ;
that  his  elevation  to  that  honour  would  soon  kindle  a  war
in  Italy,  on  account  of  his  pretensions  to  the  duchy  of
Milan,  the  effects  of  which  could  not  fail  of  reaching  the
empire,  and  might  prove  fatal  to  it.r  But  while  the  French
ambassadors  enlarged  upon  these  and  other  topics  of  the
same  kind,  in  all  the  courts  of  Germany,  Francis,  sensible
of  the  prejudices  entertained  against  him  as  a  foreigner,
unacquainted  with  the  German  language  or  manners,  en-
deavoured to  overcome  these,  and  to  gain  the  favour  of
the  princes  by  immense  gifts,  and  by  infinite  promises.
As  the  expeditious  method  of  transmitting  money,  and  the
decent  mode  of  conveying  a  bribe,  by  bills  of  exchange,
were  then  little  known,  the  French  ambassadors  travelled
with  a  train  of  horses  loaded  with  treasure,  an  equipage
not  very  honourable  for  that  prince  by  whom  they  were
employed,  and  infamous  for  those  to  whom  they  were  sent.5
Views  and  The  otner  European  princes  could  not  remain
interest  of  indifferent  spectators  of  a  contest,  the  decision

other  states.  .

01  which  so  nearly  affected  every  one  of  them.
Their  common  interest  ought  naturally  to  have  formed  a
general  combination,  in  order  to  disappoint  both  com-
petitors, and  to  prevent  either  of  them  from  obtaining
such  a  pre-eminence  in  power  and  dignity,  as  might
prove  dangerous  to  the  liberties  of  Europe.  But  the
ideas  with  respect  to  a  proper  distribution  and  balance
of  power  were  so  lately  introduced  into  the  system  of
European  policy,  that  they  were  not  hitherto  objects  of
sufficient  attention.  The  passions  of  some  princes,  the
want  of  foresight  in  others,  and  the  fear  of  giving  offence
to  the  candidates,  hindered  such  a  salutary  union  of  the

r  Guicc.  lib.  siii.  160. Sleid.  p.  16. Geor.  Sabini  de  Elect. Car.  V. Hbtoria
apud  Scardii  Script.  Rer.  German,  vol.  ii.  p.  4.

•  Memoires  de  Marech.  de  Fl,euranges,  p.  296,

Of  the
Swiss.

OftheVe-

1519.]  BOOK I.  367

powers  of  Europe,  and  rendered  them  either  totally  neg-
ligent of  the  public  safety,  or  kept  them  from  exerting
themselves  with  vigour  in  its  behalf.

The  Swiss  Cantons,  though  they  dreaded  the
elevation  of  either  of  the  contending  monarchs,
and  though  they  wished  to  have  seen  some  prince  whose
dominions  were  less  extensive,  and  whose  power  was
more  moderate,  seated  on  the  imperial  throne,  were
prompted,  however,  by  their  hatred  of  the  French  nation,
to  give  an  open  preference  to  the  pretensions  of  Charles,
while  they  used  their  utmost  influence  to  frustrate  those
of  Francis.*

The  Venetians  easily  discerned,  that  it  was
interest  of  their  republic  to  have  both  the
rivals  set  aside ;  but  their  jealousy  of  the  house  of  Austria,
whose  ambition  and  neighbourhood  Jhad  been  fatal  to
their  grandeur,  would  not  permit  them  to  act  up  to  their
own  ideas,  and  led  them  hastily  to  give  the  sanction  of
their  approbation  to  the  claim  of  the  French  king.
Of  Henry  ^  was  equally  the  interest,  and  more  in  the
vm.  power  of  Henry  VIII.  of  England,  to  prevent
either  Francis  or  Charles  from  acquiring  a  dignity  which
would  raise  them  so  for  above  other  monarchs.  But
though  Henry  often  boasted,  that  he  held  the  balance  of
Europe  in  his  hand,  he  had  neither  the  steady  attention,
the  accurate  discernment,  nor  the  dispassionate  temper
which  that  delicate  function  required.  On  this  occasion
it  mortified  his  vanity  so  much,  to  think  that  he  had  not
entered  early  into  that  noble  competition  which  reflected
such  honour  upon  the  two  antagonists,  that  he  took  a
resolution  of  sending  an  ambassador  into  Germany,  and
of  declaring  himself  a  candidate  for  the  imperial  throne.
The  ambassador,  though  loaded  with  caresses  by  the
German  princes  and  the  pope's  nuncio,  informed  his  mas-
ter >  that  he  could  hope  for  no  success  in  a  claim  which
he  had  been  so  late  in  preferring.  Henry,  imputing  his

1  Sabimis,  p.  6.

368  CHARLES  V.  [1519.

disappointment  to  that  circumstance  alone,  and  soothed
with  this  ostentatious  display  of  his  own  importance,
seems  to  have  taken  no  farther  part  in  the  matter,  either
by  contributing  to  thwart  both  his  rivals,  or  to  promote
one  of  them."

Leo  X.,  a  pontiff  no  less  renowned  for  his
political  abilities,  than  for  his  love  of  the  arts,
was  the  only  prince  of  the  age  who  observed  the  motions
of  the  two  contending  monarchs,  with  a  prudent  atten-
tion, or  who  discovered  a  proper  solicitude  for  the  public
safety.  The  imperial  and  papal  jurisdiction  interfered
in  so  many  instances,  the  complaints  of  usurpation  were
so  numerous  on  both  sides,  and  the  territories  of  the
church  owed  their  security  so  little  to  their  own  force,
and  so  much  to  the  weakness  of  the  powers  around  them,
that  nothing  was  so  formidable  to  the  court  of  Rome  as
an  emperor  with  extensive  dominions,  or  of  enterprising
genius.  Leo  trembled  at  the  prospect  of  beholding  the
imperial  crown  placed  on  the  head  of  the  king  of  Spain
and  of  Naples,  and  the  master  of  the  New  World ;  nor
was  he  less  afraid  of  seeing  a  king  of  France,  who  was
duke  of  Milan  and  lord  of  Genoa,  exalted  to  that  dignity.
He  foretold  that  the  election  of  either  of  them  would  be
fatal  to  the  independence  of  the  holy  see,  to  the  peace  of
Italy,  and  perhaps  to  the  liberties  of  Europe.  But  to
oppose  them  with  any  prospect  of  success,  required  ad-
dress and  caution  in  proportion  to  the  greatness  of  their
power,  and  their  opportunities  of  taking  revenge.  Leo
was  defective  in  neither.  He  secretly  exhorted  the
German  princes  to  place  one  of  their  own  number  on  the
imperial  throne,  which  many  of  them  were  capable  of
filling  with  honour.  He  put  them  in  mind  .of  the  con-
stitution by  which  the  kings  of  Naples  were  for  ever  ex-
cluded from  that  dignity/  He  warmly  exhorted  the
French  king  to  persist  in  his  claim,  not  from  any  desire

u  Meraoires  de  Fleuranges,  314. Herbert^  Hist,  of  Henry  VIII.
*  Goldasti  Constitutiones  Iraperialeg. Francof.  1673,  vol.  i.  439.

1519.]  BOOK I.  3(j<)

that  he  should  gain  his  end,  but  as  he  foresaw  that  the
Germans  would  be  more  disposed  to  favour  the  king  of
Spain,  he  hoped  that  Francis  himself,  when  he  discovered
his  own  chance  of  success  to  be  desperate,  would  be
stimulated  by  resentment  and  the  spirit  of  rivalship,  to
concur  with  all  his  interest  in  raising  some  third  person
to  the  head  of  the  empire ;  or,  on  the  other  hand,  if
Francis  should  make  an  unexpected  progress,  he  did  not
doubt  but  that  Charles  would  be  induced  by  similar
motives  to  act  the  same  part ;  and  thus,  by  a  prudent
attention,  the  mutual  jealousy  of  the  two  rivals  might
be  so  dexterously  managed,  as  to  disappoint  both.  But
this  scheme,  the  only  one  which  a  prince  in  Leo's  situa-
tion could  adopt,  though  concerted  with  great  wisdom,
was  executed  with  little  discretion.  The  French  am-
bassadors in  Germany  fed  their  master  with  vain  hopes ;
the  pope's  nuncio,  being  gained  by  them,  altogether
forgot  the  instructions  which  he  had  received;  and
Francis  persevered  so  long,  and  with  such  obstinacy  in
urging  his  own  pretensions,  as  rendered  all  Leo's  mea-
sures abortive/

The  diet  Such  were  the  hopes  of  the  candidates,  and
assembles,  the  views  of  the  different  princes,  when  the
diet  was  opened  according  to  form  at  Frank-
fort. The  right  of  choosing  an  emperor  had  long  been
vested  in  seven  great  princes,  distinguished  by  the  name
of  electors,  the  origin  of  whose  office,  as  well  as  the
nature  and  extent  of  their  powers,  have  already  been
explained.  These  were,  at  that  time,  Albert  of  Bran-
denburg, archbishop  of  Mentz ;  Herman  count  de  Wied,
archbishop  of  Cologne;  Richard  de  Greiffenklau,  arch-
bishop of  Triers  ;  Lewis,  king  of  Bohemia ;  Lewis,
count  palatine  of  the  Rhine ;  Frederic,  duke  of  Saxony ;
and  Joachim  I.  marquis  of  Brandenburg.  Notwith-
Views  of  standing  the  artful  arguments  produced  by  the
the  electors,  ambassadors  of  the  two  kings  in  favour  of  their

VOL.  III.

Guicciar.  lib.  xiii.  161.
2 B

370  CHARLES V.

respective  masters,  and  in  spite  of  all  their  solicitations,
intrigues,  and  presents,  the  electors  did  not  forget  that
maxim  on  which  the  liberty  of  the  German  constitution
was  thought  to  be  founded.  Among  the  members  of
the  Germanic  body,  which  is  a  great  republic  composed
of  states  almost  independent,  the  first  principle  of  pa-
triotism is  to  depress  and  limit  the  power  of  the  em-
peror ;  and  of  this  idea,  so  natural  under  such  a  form
of  government,  a  German  politician  seldom  loses  sight.
No  prince  of  considerable  power  or  extensive  dominions,
had  for  some  ages  been  raised  to  the  imperial  throne.
To  this  prudent  precaution  many  of  the  great  families
in  Germany  owed  the  splendour  and  independence
which  they  had  acquired  during  that  period.  To  elect
either  of  the  contending  monarchs  would  have  been  a

o

gross  violation  of  that  salutary  maxim;  would  have
given  to  the  empire  a  master  instead  of  a  head ;  and
would  have  reduced  themselves  from  the  rank  of  being
almost  his  equals  to  the  condition  of  his  subjects.
Offer  the  Full  °f  these  ideas,  all  the  electors  turned
imperial  their  eyes  towards  Frederic,  duke  of  Saxony,  a

crown  to  . •/  m  . m  '  i i  «T •

Frederic  prince  of  such  eminent  virtue  and  abilities,  as
cony>  to  be  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  Sage,
and  with  one  voice  they  offered  him  the  imperial
crown.  He  was  not  dazzled  with  that  object,  which
monarchs,  so  far  superior  to  him  in  power,  courted
with  such  eagerness ;  and  after  deliberating  upon  the
Who  re-  matter  a  short  time,  he  rejected  it  with  a  mag-
jectsit;  nanimity  and  disinterestedness  no  less  singular
than  admirable.  "  Nothing,"  he  observed,  "  could  be
more  impolitic,  than  an  obstinate  adherence  to  a  maxim
which,  though  sound  and  just  in  many  cases,  was  not
applicable  to  all.  In  times  of  tranquillity,"  said  he,  "  we
wish  for  an  emperor  who  has  not  power  to  invade  our
liberties ;  times  of  danger  demand  one  who  is  able  to
secure  our  safety.  The  Turkish  armies,  led  by  a  gallant
and  victorious  monarch,  are  now  assembling.  They

1519.]  BOOK I.  371

are  ready  to  pour  in  upon  Germany  with  a  violence
unknown  in  former  ages. New  conjunctures  call  for
new  expedients. The  imperial  sceptre  must  be  conv
mitted  to  some  hand  more  powerful  than  mine,  or  that
of  any  other  German  prince. We  possess  neither  do-
minions, nor  revenues,  nor  authority,  which  enable  us
to  encounter  such  a  formidable  enemy. Recourse  must
be  had  in  this  exigency  to  one  of  the  rival  monarchs.
Each  of  them  can  bring  into  the  field  forces  sufficient
for  our  defence. But  as  the  king  of  Spain  is  of  German
extraction ;  as  he  is  a  member  and  prince  of  the  empire
by  the  territories  which  descend  to  him  from  his  grand-
father ; as  his  dominions  stretch  along  that  frontier
which  lies  most  exposed  to  the  enemy ;  his  claim  is
preferable,  in  my  opinion,  to  that  of  a  stranger  to  our
language,  to  our  blood,  and  to  our  country  ;  and  there-
fore I  give  my  vote  to  confer  on  him  the  imperial  crown."
This  opinion,  dictated  by  such  uncommon  genero-
sity, and  supported  by  arguments  so  plausible,  made  a
And  refuses  deep  impression  on  the  electors. The  king  of
Sfr'om Spain's  ambassadors,  sensible  of  the  important
Charles's service  which  Frederic  had  done  their  master.

ambassa-
dors, sent  him  a  considerable  sum  of  money,  as  the

first  token  of  that  prince's  gratitude.  But  he  who
had  greatness  of  mind  to  refuse  a  crown,  disdained
to  receive  a  bribe ;  and,  upon  their  entreating  that  at
least  he  would  permit  them  to  distribute  part  of  that
sum  among  his  attendants,  he  replied,  That  he  could
not  prevent  them  from  accepting  what  should  be  of-
fered, but  whoever  took  a  single  florin  should  be  dis-
missed next  morning  from  his  service/

*  P.  Daniel,  an  historian  of  considerable  name,  seems  to  call  in  question  the
truth  of  this  account  of  Frederic's  behaviour  in  refusing  the  imperial  crown,  because
it  is  not  mentioned  by  Georgius  Sabinus  in  his  History  of  the  Election  and  Coro-
nation of  Charles  V.,  torn.  iii.  p.  63.  But  no  great  stress  ought  to  be  laid  on  an
omission  in  a  superficial  author,  whose  treatise,  though  dignified  with  the  name  of
History,  contains  only  such  an  account  of  the  ceremonial  of  Charles's  election,  as  is
usually  published  in  Germany  on  like  occasions.  Scard.  Rer.  Germ.  Script,  vol.  ii.
p.  1.  The  testimony  of  Erasmus,  lib.  xiii.  epist.  4,  and  that  of  Sleiden,  p.  18,  are
express.  Seekendorf,  in  his  Commentarius  Historicus  and  Apologeticus  de  Luthe-

372  CHARLES  V.  [1519.

Farther  No  prince  in  Germany  could  aspire  to  a
^^rfa'he  dignity  which  Frederic  had  declined,  for  rea-
eiectors.  SOns  applicable  to  them  all.  It  remained  to
make  a  choice  between  the  two  great  competitors.
But  besides  the  prejudice  in  Charles's  favour,  arising
from  his  birth,  as  well  as  the  situation  of  his  German
dominions,  he  owed  not  a  little  to  the  abilities  of  the
cardinal  de  Gurk,  and  the  zeal  of  Erard  de  la  Mark,
bishop  of  Liege,  two  of  his  ambassadors,  who  had
conducted  their  negotiations  with  more  prudence
and  address  than  those  intrusted  by  the  French
king.  The  former,  who  had  long  been  the  minister
and  favourite  of  Maximilian,  was  well  acquainted  with
the  art  of  managing  the  Germans ;  and  the  latter,
having  been  disappointed  of  a  cardinal's  hat  by  Fran-
cis, employed  all  the  malicious  ingenuity  with  which
the  desire  of  revenge  inspires  an  ambitious  mind,  in
thwarting  the  measures  of  that  monarch.  The  Spanish
party  among  the  electors  daily  gained  ground ;  and
even  the  pope's  nuncio,  being  convinced  that  it  was
vain  to  make  any  farther  opposition,  endeavoured  to
acquire  some  merit  with  the  future  emperor,  by  offer-
ing voluntarily,  in  the  name  of  his  master,  a  dispensa-
tion to  hold  the  imperial  crown  in  conjunction  with
that  of  Naples."

On  the  28th  of  June,  five  months  and  ten  days  after
the  death  of  Maximilian,  this  important  contest,  which
had  held  all  Europe  in  suspense,  was  decided.  Six  of
the  electors  had  already  declared  for  the  king  of  Spain ;
dloYse  an(^  t^ie  arcnkishop  of  Triers,  the  only  firm  ad-
Ch°a°ries  herent  to  the  French  interest,  having  at  last
emperor.  jQ-ne(j  kis  brethren,  Charles  was,  by  the  unani-

ranismo,  p.  121,  has  examined  this  fact  with  his  usual  industry,  and  has  established
its  truth  by  the  most  undoubted  evidence.  To  these  testimonies  which  he  has  col-
lected, I  may  add  the  decisive  one  of  cardinal  Cajetan,  the  pope's  legate  at  Frank-
fort, in  his  letter,  July  5th,  1519.  Epistres  au  Princes,  &c.  recueilles  par  Ruscelli,
traduicts  par  Belforest.  Par.  1572,  p.  60.

*  Freheri  Rer.  German.  Scriptores,  vol.  iii. 172.  cur.  Struvii.  Argent.  1717.
Gianone  Hist,  of  Naples,  ii,  498.

1519.]  BOOK I.  373

mous  voice  of  the  electoral  college,  raised  to  the  imperial

throne.5

They  are But  though  the  electors.  consented,  from  va-

Sveof  Sis r*ous  m°tives,  to  promote  Charles  to  that  high

power,  and  station,  they  discovered  at  the  same  time  great

cautions jealousy  of  his  extraordinary  power,  and  en-

agamst  it. deayouj.^  witn  the  utmost  solicitude,  to  pro-
vide against  his  encroaching  on  the  privileges  of  the
Germanic  body. It  had  long  been  the  custom  to  de-
mand of  every  new  emperor  a  confirmation  of  these
privileges,  and  to  require  a  promise  that  he  never  would
violate  them  in  any  instance. While  princes,  who  were
formidable  neither  from  extent  of  territory,  nor  of  ge-
nius, possessed  the  imperial  throne,  a  general  and  ver-
bal engagement  to  this  purpose  was  deemed  sufficient
security. But  under  an  emperor  so  powerful  as  Charles,
other  precautions  seemed  necessary. A  capitulation,
or  claim  of  right,  was  formed,  in  which  the  privileges
and  immunities  of  the  electors,  of  the  princes  of  the
empire,  of  the  cities,  and  of  every  other  member  of  the
Germanic  body,  are  enumerated. This  capitulation
was  immediately  signed  by  Charles's  ambassadors  in
the  name  of  their  master,  and  he  himself,  at  his  coro-
nation, confirmed  it  in  the  most  solemn  manner. Since
that  period,  the  electors  have  continued  to  prescribe
the  same  conditions  to  all  his  successors  ;  and  the  ca-
pitulation, or  mutual  contract  between  the  emperor  and
his  subjects,  is  considered  in  Germany  as  a  strong
barrier  against  the  progress  of  the  imperial  power,  and
as  the  great  charter  of  their  liberties,  to  which  they
often  appeal.0

The  eieo  The  important  intelligence  of  his  election
fiedto°tl~  was  conveyed  *n  nine  days  fr°m  Frankfort  to
Charles.  Barcelona,  where  Charles  was  still  detained  by
the  obstinacy  of  the  Catalonian  cortes,  which  had  not

b  Jac.  Aug.  Thuan.  Hist,  sui  Temporis,  edit.  Bulkley,  lib.  i.  c.  9.
c  Pfeffel  Abrege  de  1'Hist.  de  Droit  Publique  d'Allemagne,  590. Limnei  Capi-
tulat.  Imper.  Epistres  des  Princes  par  Ruscelli,  p.  60.

374  CHARLES V.  [1519.

hitherto  brought  to  an  issue  any  of  the  affairs  which
came  before  it.  He  received  the  account  with  the  joy
natural  to  a  young  and  aspiring  mind,  on  an  accession
of  power  and  dignity  which  raised  him  so  far  above
the  other  princes  of  Europe.  Then  it  was  that  those
vast  prospects,  which  allured  him  during  his  whole  ad-
ministration, beo-an  to  open,  and  from  this  era  we  may
date  the  formation,  and  are  able  to  trace  the  gradual
progress,  of  a  grand  system  of  enterprising  ambition,
which  renders  the  history  of  his  reign  so  worthy  of
attention.

its  effect  A  trivial  circumstance  first  discovered  the
upon  him.  effects  of  this  great  elevation  upon  the  mind  of
Charles.  In  all  the  public  writs  which  he  now  issued
as  king  of  Spain,  he  assumed  the  title  of  Majesty,  and
required  it  from  his  subjects  as  a  mark  of  their  respect.
Before  that  time,  all  the  monarchs  of  Europe  were  sa-
tisfied with  the  appellation  of  Highness,  or  Grace;  but
the  vanity  of  other  courts  soon  led  them  to  imitate  the
example  of  the  Spanish.  The  epithet  of  majesty  is  no
longer  a  mark  of  pre-eminence.  The  most  inconsider-
able monarchs  in  Europe  enjoy  it,  and  the  arrogance  of
the  greater  potentates  has  invented  no  higher  deno-
mination/

TheS  a-  The  Spaniards  were  far  from  viewing  the
niards  dis-  promotion  of  their  king  to  the  imperial  throne

satisfied "  _  . , r  . .  . .„

with  this  with  the  same  satisfaction  which  he  himselt
felt.  To  be  deprived  of  the  presence  of  their
sovereign,  and  to  be  subjected  to  the  government  of  a
viceroy  and  his  council,  a  species  of  administration
often  oppressive  and  always  disagreeable,  were  the
immediate  and  necessary  consequences  of  this  new
dignity.  To  see  the  blood  of  their  countrymen  shed
in  quarrels  wherein  the  nation  had  no  concern  ;  to  be-
hold its  treasures  wasted  in  supporting  the  splendour

d  Miniaiias  Contin.  Mar.  p.  13. Ferrcras,  viii.  475. Memoires  Hist, de  la
Houssaie,  torn.  i.  p.  53,  &c.

1519.]  BOOK  I.  375

of  a  foreign  title ;  to  be  plunged  in  the  chaos  of  Italian
and  German  politics,  were  effects  of  this  event  almost
as  unavoidable.  From  all  these  considerations,  they
concluded,  that  nothing  could  have  happened  more
pernicious  to  the  Spanish  nation;  and  the  fortitude
and  public  spirit  of  their  ancestors,  who,  in  the  cortes
of  Castile,  prohibited  Alphonso  the  Wise  from  leaving
the  kingdom,  in  order  to  receive  the  imperial  crown,
were  often  mentioned  with  the  highest  praise,  and  pro-
nounced to  be  extremely  worthy  of  imitation  at  this
juncture.6

But  Charles,  without  regarding  the  sentiments  or
murmurs  of  his  Spanish  subjects,  accepted  of  the  im-
perial dignity  which  the  count  palatine,  at  the  head  of
a  solemn  embassy,  offered  him  in  the  name  of
the  electors ;  and  declared  his  intention  of
setting  out  soon  for  Germany,  in  order  to  take  pos-
session of  it.  This  was  the  more  necessary,  because
according  to  the  forms  of  the  German  constitution,  he
could  not,  before  the  ceremony  of  a  public  coronation,
exercise  any  act  of  jurisdiction  or  authority/
Their  dis-  Their  certain  knowledge  of  this  resolution
augmented  so  much  the  disgust  of  the  Spa-
niards, that  a  sullen  and  refractory  spirit  pre-
vailed among  persons  of  all  ranks.  The  pope  having
granted  the  king  the  tenths  of  all  ecclesiastical  bene-
fices in  Castile,  to  assist  him  in  carrying  on  war  with
greater  vigour  against  the  Turks,  a  convocation  of  the
clergy  unanimously  refused  to  levy  that  sum,  upon
pretence  that  it  ought  never  to  be  exacted  but  at  those
times  when  Christendom  was  actually  invaded  by  the
infidels ;  and  though  Leo,  in  order  to  support  his  au-
thority, laid  the  kingdom  under  an  interdict,  so  little
regard  was  paid  to  a  censure  which  was  universally
deemed  unjust,  that  Charles  himself  applied  to  have  it

*  Sandoval,  i.  p.  32. Minianae  Contin.  p.  14.
f  Sabinus,  P.  Barre,  viii.  1085.

content
increases.

376  CHARLES  V.  [1519.

taken  off.  Thus  the  Spanish  clergy,  besides  their  merit
in  opposing  the  usurpations  of  the  pope,  and  disregard-
ing the  influence  of  the  crown,  gained  the  exemption
which  they  had  claimed.8

The  commotions  which  arose  in  the  kingdom
rectionin  of  Valencia,  annexed  to  the  crown  of  Aragon,
Cla'  were  more  formidable,  and  produced  more  dan-
gerous and  lasting  effects.  A  seditious  monk,  having  by
his  sermons  excited  the  citizens  of  Valencia,  the  capital
city,  to  take  arms,  and  to  punish  certain  criminals  in  a
tumultuary  manner,  the  people,  pleased  with  this  ex-
ercise of  power,  and  with  such  a  discovery  of  their  own
importance,  not  only  refused  to  lay  down  their  arms,
but  formed  themselves  into  troops  and  companies,  that
they  might  be  regularly  trained  to  martial  exercises.  To
obtain  some  security  against  the  oppression  of  the
grandees  was  the  motive  of  this  association,  and  proved
a  powerful  bond  of  union  ;  for  as  the  aristocratical  pri-
vileges and  independence  were  more  complete  in  Va-
lencia than  in  any  other  of  the  Spanish  kingdoms,  the
nobles,  being  scarcely  accountable  for  their  conduct  to
any  superior,  treated  the  people  not  only  as  vassals  but
as  slaves.  They  were  alarmed,  however,  at  the  progress
of  this  unexpected  insurrection,  as  it  might  encourage
the  people  to  attempt  shaking  off  the  yoke  altogether ;
but  as  they  could  not  repress  them  without  taking  arms,
it  became  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  the  emperor,
1520  and  to  desire  his  permission  to  attack  them.  At
its  pro-  the  same  time  the  people  made  choice  of  depu-
ties to  represent  their  grievances,  and  to  implore
the  protection  of  their  sovereign.  Happily  for  the  latter,
they  arrived  at  court  when  Charles  was  exasperated  to
a  high  degree  against  the  nobility.  As  he  was  eager
to  visit  Germany,  where  his  presence  became  every  day
more  necessary,  and  as  his  Flemish  courtiers  were  still
more  impatient  to  return  into  their  native  country,  that

*  P.  Martyr,  Ep.  462. Ferreras,  viii.  473.

1520.]  BOOK  I.  377

they  might  carry  thither  the  spoils  which  they  had
amassed  in  Castile,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  hold
the  cortes  of  Valencia  in  person.  He  had  for  that  rea-
son empowered  the  cardinal  Adrian  to  represent  him  in
that  assembly,  and  in  his  name  to  receive  their  oath  of
allegiance,  to  confirm  their  privileges  with  the  usual
solemnities,  and  to  demand  of  them  a  free  gift.  But
the  Valencian  nobles,  who  considered  this  measure  as
an  indignity  to  their  country,  which  was  no  less  enti-
tled, than  his  other  kingdoms,  to  the  honour  of  their
sovereign's  presence,  declared,  that  by  the  fundamental
lawsjof  the  constitution  they  could  neither  acknowledge
as  king  a  person  who  was  absent,  nor  grant  him  any
subsidy  ;  and  to  this  declaration  they  adhered  with  a
haughty  and  inflexible  obstinacy.  Charles,  piqued  by
their  behaviour,  decided  in  favour  of  the  people,  and
rashly  authorized  them  to  continue  in  arms.  Their  de-
puties returned  in  triumph,  and  were  received  by  their
fellow-citizens  as  the  deliverers  of  their  country.  The
insolence  of  the  multitude  increasing  with  their  success,
they  expelled  all  the  nobles  out  of  the  city,  committed
the  government  to  magistrates  of  their  own  election,  and
entered  into  an  association  distinguished  by  the  name
of  Germanada  or  Brotherhood,  which  proved  the  source
not  only  of  the  wildest  disorders,  but  of  the  most  fatal
calamities  in  that  kingdom.11

The  cones  Meanwhile,  the  kingdom  of  Castile  was  agi-
of  Castile  tated  with  no  less  violence.  No  sooner  was  the
toTneetln  emperor's  intention  to  leave  Spain  made  known,
Galicia*  than  several  cities  of  the  first  rank  resolved  to
remonstrate  against  it,  and  to  crave  redress  once  more
of  those  grievances  which  they  had  formerly  laid  before
him.  Charles  artfully  avoided  admitting  their  deputies
to  audience ;  and  as  he  saw  from  this  circumstance  how
difficult  it  would  be,  at  this  juncture,  to  restrain  the  mu-
tinous spirit  of  the  greater  cities,  he  summoned  the

h  P.  Martyr,  Ep.  651. Ferreras,  viii.  476.  485.

378  CHARLES V.  [1520.

cortes  of  Castile  to  meet  at  Compostella,  a  town  in
Galicia.  His  only  reason  for  calling  that  assembly,  was
the  hope  of  obtaining  another  donative;  for  as  his  trea-
sury had  been  exhausted  in  the  same  proportion  that
the  riches  of  his  ministers  increased,  he  could  not,  with-
out some  additional  aid,  appear  in  Germany  with  splen-
dour suited  to  the  imperial  dignity.  To  appoint  a  meet-
ing of  the  cortes  in  so  remote  a  province,  and  to  de-
mand a  new  subsidy  before  the  time  for  paying  the  for-
mer was  expired,  were  innovations  of  a  most  dangerous
tendency;  and  among  a  people  not  only  jealous  of  their
liberties,  but  accustomed  to  supply  the  wants  of  their
sovereigns  with  a  very  frugal  hand,  excited  a  universal
alarm.  The  magistrates  of  Toledo  remonstrated  against
both  these  measures  in  a  very  high  tone ;  the  inhabi-
tants of  Valladolid,  who  expected  that  the  cortes  should
have  been  held  in  that  city,  were  so  enraged,  that  they
took  arms  in  a  tumultuary  manner ;  and  if  Charles,  with
his  foreign  counsellors,  had  not  fortunately  made  their
escape  during  a  violent  tempest,  they  would  have  mas-
sacred all  the  Flemings,  and  have  prevented  him  from
continuing  his  journey  towards  Compostella.
The  pro-  Every  city  through  which  he  passed  peti-
ti°ned  against  holding  a  cortes  in  Galicia,  a
point  with  regard  to  which  Charles  was  inflex-
ible. But  though  the  utmost  influence  had  been  ex-
erted by  the  ministers,  in  order  to  procure  a  choice  of
representatives  favourable  to  their  designs,  such  was  the
temper  of  the  nation,  that,  at  the  opening  of  the  assem-
bly, there  appeared  among  many  of  the  members  un-
usual symptoms  of  ill  humour,  which  threatened
a  fierce  opposition  to  all  the  measures  of  the
court.  No  representatives  were  sent  by  Toledo ;  for
the  lot,  according  to  which,  by  ancient  custom,  the  elec-
tion was  determined  in  that  city  having  fallen  upon  two
persons  devoted  to  the  Flemish  ministers,  their  fellow-
citizens  refused  to  grant  them  a  commission  in  the  usual

1520.]  BOOK I.  379

form,  and  in  their  stead  made  choice  of  two  deputies,
whom  they  empowered  to  repair  to  Compostella,  and
to  protest  against  the  lawfulness  of  the  cortes  assem-
The  disaf-  kkd  there.  The  representatives  of  Salamanca
faction  of  refused  to  take  the  usual  oath  of  fidelity,  unless
r.ans  in'-1  Charles  consented  to  change  the  place  of  meet-
ereases.  ing.  Thoge  of  TorOj  Ma(jrid,  Cordova,  and

several  other  places,  declared  the  demand  of  another
donative  to  be  unprecedented,  unconstitutional,  and  un-
necessary. All  the  arts,  however,  which  influence  po-
pular assemblies,  bribes,  promises,  threats,  and  even
force,  were  employed,  in  order  to  gain  members.  The
nobles,  soothed  by  the  respectful  assiduity  with  which
Chievres  and  the  other  Flemings  paid  court  to  them,  or
instigated  by  a  mean  jealousy  of  that  spirit  of  indepen-
dence which  they  saw  rising  among  the  commons,  openly
favoured  the  pretensions  of  the  court,  or  at  the  utmost  did
not  oppose  them  ;  and  at  last,  in  contempt  not  only  of
the  sentiments  of  the  nation,  but  of  the  ancient  forms  of
the  constitution,  a  majority  voted  to  grant  the  donative
for  which  the  emperor  had  applied.1  Together  with  this
grant,  the  Cortes  laid  before  Charles  a  representation
of  those  grievances  whereof  his  people  complained,  and
in  their  name  craved  redress  ;  but  he,  having  obtained
from  them  all  that  he  coul  d  expect,  paid  no  attention  to
this  ill-timed  petition,  which  it  was  no  longer  dangerous
to  disregard.1"

Charles  ap-  ^s  nothing  now  retarded  his  embarkation,
points  re-  ne  disclosed  his  intention  with  regard  to  the  re-
fng  his"  gency  of  Castile  during  his  absence,  which  he
absence,  kacl  hitherto  kept  secret,  and  nominated  car-
dinal Adrian  to  that  office.  The  viceroyalty  of  Aragon
he  conferred  on  Don  John  de  Lanuza;  that  of  Valencia
on  Don  Diego  de  Mendoza  conde  de  Melito.  The
choice  of  the  two  latter  was  universally  acceptable;  but
the  advancement  of  Adrian,  though  the  only  Fleming

1  P.  Martyr,  Ep.  663. Sandoval,  p.  32,  &c,  "  Ibid.  84.

380  CHARLES V.  [1520.

who  had  preserved  any  reputation  among  the  Spaniards,
animated  the  Castilians  with  new  hatred  against  fo-
reigners ;  and  even  the  nobles,  who  had  so  tamely  suf-
fered other  inroads  upon  the  constitution,  felt  the  in-
dignity offered  to  their  own  order  by  his  promotion,  and
remonstrated  against  it  as  illegal.  But  Charles's  desire
of  visiting  Germany,  as  well  as  the  impatience  of  his
ministers  to  leave  Spain,  were  now  so  much  increased,
that  without  attending  to  the  murmurs  of  the  Castilians,
or  even  taking  time  to  provide  any  remedy  against  an
insurrection  in  Toledo,  which  at  that  time  threatened,
and  afterward  produced,  most  formidable  effects,  he
sailed  from  Corunna  on  the  twenty-second  of
ba"ksefor  May ;  and  by  setting  out  so  abruptly  in  quest
.  °f  a  new  crown>  he  endangered  a  more  important
one  of  which  he  was  already  in  possession.1

1  P.  Martyr,  Ep.  670. Sandov.  86.

END OF VOL. III.

Printed  by  S.  F.  Dovu,  St.  John's  Square,

Robertson,  William
Works

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
