The Works of William Robertson, Vol. 6 (William Robertson, 1759)
==========================================================
Robertson's Works (1824, 9 vols.) - History of Scotland, Charles V, America, and the Historical Disquisition on India; Enlightenment historiography's great practitioner entire. Vol. 6 of 9.

WILLIAM  ROBERTSON,  D.D.

WITH  AN  ACCOUMT  OF

HIS LIFE  AND  WRITINGS.

IN  NINE  VOLUMES.
VOL.  VI.

LONDON:

PRINTED  FOR  WHITMORE  AND  FENN,  CHARING  CROSS;  J.HEAKNE,  STRAND;

SMITH  AND  ELDER,  FENCHURCH  STREET; H.  MOZLEY,  DERBY;

AND  M.  KEENE,  DUBLIN.

MDCCCXXIV.

Sf-ip .

THE

STANDARD  EDITION  OF  THE  HISTORIANS.

ROBERTSON'S  WORKS  :

IN NINE VOLUMES.  VOL. V I.

AMERICA.

CONTENTS

OF

THE  HISTORY OF  AMERICA.

BOOK I.

Progress  of  navigation  among  the  ancients — View  of  their  dis-
coveries as  preparatory  to  those  of  the  moderns — Imperfection
of  ancient  navigation  and  geography — Doctrine  of  the  zones —
Farther  discoveries  checked  by  the  irruption  of  barbarous  na-
tions— Geographical  knowledge  still  preserved  in  the  East,  and
among  the  Arabians — Revival  of  commerce  and  navigation  in
Europe — favoured  by  the  Croisades — extended  by  travellers
into  the  East — promoted  by  the  invention  of  the  mariner's  com-
pass— First  regular  plan  of  discovery  formed  by  Portugal — State
of  that  kingdom — Schemes  of  Prince  Henry — Early  attempts
feeble — Progress  along  the  western  coast  of  Africa — Hopes  of
discovering  a  new  route  to  the  East  Indies — Attempts  to  accom-
plish this — Prospects  of  success,

BOOK II.

Birth  and  education  of  Columbus — acquires  naval  skill  in  the  ser-
vice of  Portugal — conceives  hopes  of  reaching  the  East  Indies
by  holding  a  westerly  course — his  system  founded  on  the  ideas
of  the  ancients,  and  knowledge  of  their  navigation — and  on  the
discoveries  of  the  Portuguese — His  negotiations  with  different
courts — Obstacles  which  he  had  to  surmount  in  Spain — Voyage
of  discovery — difficulties — success — return  to  Spain — Astonish-

VOL. VI.  b

II  CONTENTS OF THE

ment  of  mankind  on  this  discovery  of  a  New  World — Papal  grant
of  it — Second  voyage — Colony  settled — Farther  discoveries —
War  with  the  Indians — ^First  tax  imposed  on  them — Third  voy-
age— He  discovers  the  continent — State  of  the  Spanish  colony
— Errors  in  the  first  system  of  colonizing — -Voyage  of  the  Por-
tuguese to  the  East  Indies  hy  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope — Effects
of  this — Discoveries  made  by  private  adventurers  in  the  New
World — Name  of  America  given  to  it — Machinations  against
Columbus — disgraced  and  sent  in  chains  to  Europe — Fourth
voyage  of  Columbus — His  discoveries — disasters — death.

BOOK  III.

State  of  the  colony  in  Hispaniola — New  war  with  the  Indians —
Cruelty  of  the  Spaniards— Fatal  regulations  concerning  the  con-
dition of  the  Indians — Diminution  of  that  people — Discoveries
and  settlements — First  colony  planted  on  the  continent — Con-
quest of  Cuba — Discovery  of  Florida — of  the  South  sea — Great
expectations  raised  by  this — Causes  of  disappointment  with  re-
spect to  these  for  some  time — Controversy  concerning  the
treatment  of  the  Indians — Contrary  decisions — Zeal  of  the  eccle-
siastics, particularly  of  Las  Casas — Singular  proceedings  of
Ximenes — Negroes  imported  into  America — Las  Casas's  idea  of
a  new  colony — permitted  to  attempt  it — unsuccessful — Disco-
Teries  towards  the  West — Yucatan — Campeachy — New  Spain
— Preparations  for  invading  it.

BOOK  IV.

View  of  America  when  first  discovered,  and  of  the  manners  and
policy  of  its  most  uncivilized  inhabitants — Vast  extent  of  Ame-
rica— grandeur  of  the  objects  it  presents  to  view — its  mountains
rivers — lakes — its  form  favourable  to  commerce — temperature —
predominance  of  cold — causes  of  this — uncultivated — unwhole-
some—its animals — soil — ^^Inquiry  how  America  was  peopled—

HISTORY OF AMERICA.  Ml

various  theories — what  appears  most  probable — Condition  and
character  of  the  Americans— All,  the  Mexicans  and  Peruvians
excepted,  in  the  state  of  savages— Inquiry  confined  to  the  un-
civilized tribes — Difficulty  of  obtaining  information — various
causes  of  this — Method  observed  in  the  Inquiry— I,  The  bodily
constitution  of  the  Americans  considered — II.  The  qualities  of
their  minds — III.  Their  domestic  state — IV.  Their  political
state  and  institutions — V.  Their  system  of  war  and  public  se-
curity— VI.  The  arts  with  which  they  were  acquainted — VII.
Their  religious  ideas  and  institutions — VIII.  Such  singular
and  detatched  customs  as  are  not  reduceable  to  any  of  the  for-
mer heads — IX.  General  reviews  and  estimate  of  their  virtues
and  defects.

BOOK  V.
History  of  the  conquest  of  New  Spain  by  Cortes.

BOOK  VI.

History  of  the  conquest  of  Peru  by  Pizarro — and  of  the  dissensions
and  civil  wars  of  the  Spaniards  in  that  country — Origin — pro-
gress— and  effects  of  these.

BOOK  VII.

View  of  the  institutions  and  manners  of  the  Mexicans  and  Peru-
vians— Civihzed  states  in  comparison  of  other  Americans — Re-
cent origin  of  the  Mexicans — Facts  which  prove  their  progress
in  civilization — View  of  their  policy  in  its  various  branches — of
their  arts — Facts  which  indicate  a  small  progress  in  civilization
— What  opinion  should  be  formed  on  comparing  those  contra-
dictory facts — Genius  of  their  religion — Peruvian  monarchy
more  ancient — Its  policy  founded  on  religion — Singular  eflfects
of  this — Peculiar  state  of  property  among  the  Peruvians — Their
public  works  and  arts — roads — bridges — buildings — Their  un-
warlike  spirit — View  of  other  dominions  of  Spain  in  America —

\

IV  CONTENTS or THE HISTORY  OF  AMERICA.

Cinaloaand  Sonora — Califoniia— Yucatan  and  Honduras— Cliili
' — Tucuman  —  Kingdom of  Tierra Firme —  New  kingdom  of
Granada.

BOOK  VIII.

View  of  tlie  interior  government,  commerce,  <!v;c.  of  the  Spanish
colonies — Depopulation  of  America — first  effect  of  their  sellle-
ments — not  the  consequence  of  any  system  of  policy — nor  to  be
imputed  to  religion — Number  of  Indians  still  remaining — Fun-
damental maxims  on  which  the  Spanish  system  of  colonization  is
founded — Condition  of  different  orders  of  men  in  their  colonies
— Chapetones  —  Creoles  — Negroes  —  Indians —  Ecclesiastical
state  and  policy — Character  of  secular  and  regular  clergy — Small
progress  of  Christianity  among  the  natives — Mines  chief  object
of  their  attention — Mode  of  working  these — their  produce —
Effects  of  encouraging  this  species  of  industry — Other  commo-
dities of  Spanish  America — First  effects  of  this  new  commerce
with  America  on  Spain — Why  the  Spanish  colonies  have  not
been  as  beneficial  to  the  parent-state  as  those  of  other  nations
— Errors  in  the  Spanish  system  of  regulating  this  commerce —
confined  to  one  port — carried  on  by  annual  fleets — Contraband
trade — Decline  of  Spain  both  in  population  and  wealth — Reme-
dies proposed — View  of  the  wise  regulations  of  the  Bourbon
princes — A  new  and  more  liberal  system  introduced — beneficial
effects  of  this — probable  consequences — Trade  between  New
Spain  and  the  Philippines — Revenue  of  Spain  from  America —
- whence  it  arises — to  what  it  amounts.

BOOK  IX.

History  of  Virginia  to  the  year  1688.

BOOK  X.
History  of  New  England  to  the  year  1652.

THE

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA.

VOL. VI.  B

PREFACE.

In  fulfilling"  the  engagement  which  I  had  come  under
to  the  Public  with  respect  to  the  History  of  America,
it  was  my  intention  not  to  have  published  any  part
of  the  work  until  the  whole  was  completed.  The
present  state  of  the  British  colonies  has  induced  me
to  alter  that  resolution.  While  they  are  engaged  in
civil  war  with  Great  Britain,  inquiries  and  specula-
tions concerning  their  ancient  forms  of  policy  and
laws,  which  exist  no  longer,  cannot  be  interesting.
The  attention  and  expectation  of  mankind  are  now
turned  towards  their  future  condition.  In  whatever
manner  this  unhappy  contest  may  terminate,  a  new
order  of  things  must  arise  in  North  America,  and  its
affairs  will  assume  another  aspect.  I  wait  with  the
solicitude  of  a  good  citizen,  until  the  ferment  sub-
side, and  regular  government  be  re-established,  and
then  I  shall  return  to  this  part  of  my  work,  in  which
I  had  made  some  progress.  That,  together  with  the
History  of  Portuguese  America,  and  of  the  settle-
ments made  by  the  several  nations  of  Europe  in  the
West  India  islands,  will  complete  my  plan.

The  three  volumes  which  I  now  publish  contain  an
account  of  the  discovery  of  the  New  World,  and  of
the  progress  of  the  Spanish  arms  and  colonies  there.
This  is  not  only  the  most  splendid  portion  of  the
American  story,  but  so  much  detached,  as,  by  itself,
to  form  a  perfect  whole,  remarkable  for  the  unity  of
the  subject.  As  the  principles  and  maxims  of  the
Spaniards  in  planting  colonies,  which  have  been
adopted  in  some  measure  by  every  nation,  are  un-

B  2

4  PREFACE.

i'olded  in  this  part  of  my  work;  it  will  serve  as  a  pro-
per introduction  to  the  history  of  all  the  European
establishments  in  America,  and  convey  such  informa-
tion concerning  this  important  article  of  policy,  as
may  be  deemed  no  less  interesting  than  curious.

In  describing  the  achievements  and  institutions  of
the  Spaniards  in  the  New  World,  I  have  departed,
in  many  instances,  from  the  accounts  of  preceding
historians,  and  have  often  related  facts  which  seem
to  have  been  unknown  to  them.  It  is  a  duty  I  owe
the  public  to  mention  the  sources  from  which  I  have
derived  such  intelligence  as  justifies  me  either  in
placing  transactions  in  a  new  light,  or  in  forming  any
new  opinion  with  respect  to  their  causes  and  effects.
This  duty  I  perform  with  greater  satisfaction,  as  it
will  afford  an  opportunity  of  expressing  my  gratitude
to  those  benefactors  who  have  honoured  me  with
their  countenance  and  aid  in  my  researches.

As  it  was  from  Spain  that  I  had  to  expect  the  most
important  information,  with  regard  to  this  part  of  my
work,  I  considered  it  as  a  very  fortunate  circum-
stance for  me,  when  Lord  Grantham,  to  whom  I  had
the  honour  of  being  personally  known,  and  with
whose  liberality  of  sentiment  and  disposition  to
oblige,  I  was  well  acquainted,  was  appointed  ambas-
sador to  the  court  of  Madrid.  Upon  applying  to  him,
I  met  with  such  a  reception  as  satisfied  me  that  his
endeavours  would  be  employed  in  the  most  proper
manner,  in  order  to  obtain  the  gratification  of  my
wishes;  and  I  am  perfectly  sensible,  that  what  pro-
gress 1  have  made  in  my  inquiries  among  the  Spa-
niards, ought  to  be  ascribed  chiefly  to  their  knowing
how  much  his  Lordship  interested  himself  in  my  suc-
cess.

But  did  I  owe  nothing  more  to  Lord  Grantham,
than  the  advantages  which  I  have  derived  from  his
attention  in  engaging  Mr.  Waddilove,  the  chaplain  of

PRKFACE.  5

his  embassy,  to  take  the  conduct  of  my  literary  in-
quiries in  Spain,  the  obligations  I  lie  under  to  him
would  be  very  great.  During  five  years  that  gentle-
man has  carried  on  researches  for  my  behoof,  with
such  activity,  perseverance,  and  knowledge  of  the
subject,  to  which  his  attention  was  turned,  as  have
filled  me  with  no  less  astonishment  than  satisfaction.
He  procured  for  me  the  greater  part  of  the  Spanish
books,  which  I  have  consulted;  and  as  many  of  them
were  printed  early  in  the  sixteenth  century,  and  are
become  extremely  rare,  the  collecting  of  these  was
such  an  occupation  as  alone  required  much  time  and
assiduity.  To  his  friendly  attention  I  am  indebted
for  copies  of  several  valuable  manuscripts,  containing
facts  and  details  which  I  mioht  have  searched  for  in
vain,  in  works  that  have  been  made  public.  Encou-
raged by  the  inviting  good-will  with  which  Mr.  Wad-
dilove  conferred  his  favours,  I  transmitted  to  him  a
set  of  queries,  with  respect  both  to  the  customs  and
policy  of  the  native  Americans,  and  the  nature  of
several  institutions  in  the  Spanish  settlements,  framed
in  such  a  manner,  that  a  Spaniard  might  answer  them,
without  disclosing  any  thing  that  was  improper  to  be
communicated  to  a  foreigner.  He  translated  these
into  Spanish,  and  obtained  from  various  persons  who
had  resided  in  most  of  the  Spanish  colonies,  such  re-
plies as  have  afforded  me  much  instruction.

Notwithstanding  those  peculiar  advantages  with
which  my  inquiries  were  carried  on  in  Spain,  it  is
with  regret  I  am  obliged  to  add,  that  their  success
must  be  ascribed  to  the  beneficence  of  the  individuals,
not  to  any  communication  by  public  authority.  By
a  singular  arrangement  of  Philip  H.  the  records  of
the  Spanish  monarchy  are  deposited  in  the  Archivo
of  Simancas,  near  Valladolid,  at  the  distance  of  a
hundred  and  twenty  miles  from  the  seat  of  govern-
ment, and  the  supreme  courts  of  justice. The  papers

0  PREFACE.

relative  to  America,  and  chiefly  to  that  early  period
of  its  history,  towards  which  my  attention  was  di-
rected, are  so  numerous,  that  they  alone,  according
to  one  account,  fill  the  largest  apartment  in  the  Ar-
chivo;  and  according  to  another,  they  compose  eight
hundred  and  seventy-three  large  bundles.  Conscious
of  possessing,  in  some  degree,  the  industry  which  be-
longs to  an  historian,  the  prospect  of  such  a  treasure
excited  my  most  ardent  curiosity.  But  the  prospect
of  it  is  all  that  1  have  enjoyed.  Spain,  with  an  ex-
cess of  caution,  has  uniformly  thrown  a  veil  over  her
transactions  in  America.  From  strangers  they  are
concealed  with  peculiar  solicitude.  Even  to  her  own
subjects  the  Archivo  of  Simancas  is  not  opened  with-
out a  particular  order  from  the  crown ;  and  after  ob-
taining that,  papers  cannot  be  copied,  without  pay-
ing fees  of  office  so  exorbitant,  that  the  expense  ex-
ceeds what  it  would  be  proper  to  bestow,  when  the
gratification  of  literary  curiosity  is  the  only  object.
It  is  to  be  hoped,  that  the  Spaniards  will  at  last  dis-
cover this  system  of  concealment  to  be  no  less  impo-
litic than  illiberal.  From  what  I  have  experienced
in  the  course  of  my  inquiries,  I  am  satisfied,  that
upon  a  more  minute  scrutiny  into  their  early  opera-
tions in  the  New  World,  however  reprehensible  the
actions  of  individuals  may  appear,  the  conduct  of  the
nation  will  be  placed  in  a  more  favourable  light.

In  other  parts  of  Europe  very  different  sentiments
prevail.  Having  searched,  without  success,  in  Spain,
for  a  letter  of  Cortes  to  Charles  V.  written  soon  after
lie  landed  in  the  Mexican  empire,  which  has  not
hitherto  been  published;  it  occurred  to  me,  that  as
the  emperor  was  setting  out  for  Germany  at  the  time
when  the  messengers  from  Cortes  arrived  in  Europe,
the  letter  with  which  they  Mere  intrusted  might  pos-
sibly be  preserved  in  the  imperial  library  of  Vienna.
I  communicated  this  idea  to  Sir  Robert  Murray  Keith,

PREFACE.  7

with  whom  I  have  long  had  the  honour  to  live  in
friendship,  and  I  had  soon  the  pleasure  to  learn,  that
upon  his  application,  her  imperial  majesty  had  been
graciously  pleased  to  issue  an  order,  that  not  only  a
copy  of  that  letter  (if  it  were  found),  but  of  any  other
papers  in  the  library,  which  could  throw  light  upon
the  History  of  America,  should  be  transmitted  to  me.
The  letter  from  Cortes  is  not  in  the  imperial  library,
but  an  authentic  copy,  attested  by  a  notary,  of  the
letter  written  by  the  magistrates  of  the  colony  planted
by  him  at  Vera  Cruz,  which  I  have  mentioned,  vol.
vii.  book  5,  having  been  found,  it  was  transcribed,  and
sent  to  me.  As  this  letter  is  no  less  curious,  and  as
little  known,  as  that  which  was  the  object  of  my  in-
quiries, I  have  given  some  account,  in  its  proper
place,  of  what  is  most  worthy  of  notice  in  it.  To-
gether with  it,  I  received  a  copy  of  a  letter  from
Cortes,  containing  a  long  account  of  his  expedition
to  Honduras,  with  respect  to  which  I  did  not  think
it  necessary  to  enter  into  any  particular  detail;  and
likewise  those  curious  Mexican  paintings,  which  I
have  described,  vol.  viii.  book  7.

My  inquiries  at  St.  Petersburg  were  carried  on
with  equal  facility  and  success.  In  examining  into
the  nearest  communication  between  our  continent
and  that  of  America,  it  became  of  consequence  to
obtain  authentic  information  concerning  the  discove-
ries of  the  Russians  in  their  navigation  from  Kam-
chatka towards  the  coast  of  America.  Accurate  re-
lations of  their  first  voyage,  in  1741,  have  been  pub-
lished by  Muller  and  Gmelin.  Several  foreign  authors
have  entertained  an  opinion,  that  the  court  of  Russia
studiously  conceals  the  progress  which  has  been
made  by  more  recent  navigators,  and  suffers  the  pub-
lic to  be  amused  with  false  accounts  of  their  route.
Such  conduct  appeared  to  me  unsuitable  to  those
liberal  sentiments,  and  that  patronage  of  science,  for

8  PREFACE.

which  the  present  sovereign  of  Russia  is  eminent;
nor  could  I  discern  any  political  reason,  that  might
render  it  improper  to  apply  for  information  con-
cerning the  late  attempts  of  the  Russians  to  open
a  communication  between  Asia  and  America.  My
ingenious  countryman,  Dr.  Rogerson,  first  physician
to  the  empress,  presented  my  request  to  her  impe-
rial majesty,  who  not  only  disclaimed  any  idea  of
concealment,  but  instantly  ordered  the  journal  of
captain  Krenitzin,  who  conducted  the  only  voyage
of  discovery  made  by  public  authority  since  the  year
1741,  to  be  translated, 'and  his  original  chart  to  be
copied  for  my  use.  By  consulting  them,  I  have  been
enabled  to  give  a  more  accurate  view  of  the  progress
and  extent  of  the  Russian  discoveries,  than  has  hither-
to been  communicated  to  the  public.

From  other  quarters  1  have  received  information
of  great  utility  and  importance.  M.  le  Chevalier  de
Pinto,  the  minister  from  Portugal  to  the  court  of
Great  Britain,  who  commanded  for  several  years  at
Matagrosso,  a  settlement  of  the  Portuguese  in  the
interior  part  of  Brazil,  where  the  Indians  are  nume-
rous, and  their  original  manners  little  altered  by  in-
tercourse with  Europeans,  was  pleased  to  send  me
very  full  answers  to  some  queries  concerning  the
character  and  institutions  of  the  natives  of  America,
which  his  polite  reception  of  an  application  made  to
him  in  my  name,  encouraged  me  to  propose.  These
satisfied  me,  that  he  had  contemplated  with  a  dis-
cerning attention  the  curious  objects  which  his  situa-
tion presented  to  his  view,  and  I  have  often  followed
him  as  one  of  my  best-instructed  guides.

M.  Suard,  to  whose  elegant  translation  of  the  His-
tory of  the  Reign  of  Charles  V.  I  owe  the  favourable
reception  of  that  work  on  the  continent,  procured  me
answers  to  the  same  queries  from  M.  de  Bougainville,
who  had  opportunities  of  observing  the  Indians  both

PREFACE.  9

of  North  and  South  America,  and  from  M.  Godin  le
Jemie,  who  resided  fifteen  years  among  Indians  in
Quito,  and  twenty  years  in  Cayenne.  The  latter
are  more  vahiable  from  having  been  examined  by
M.  do  la  Condamine,  who,  a  few  weeks  before  his
death,  made  some  short  additions  to  them,  which
may  be  considered  as  the  last  effort  of  that  attention
to  science  which  occupied  a  long  life.

My  inquiries  were  not  confined  to  one  region  in
America.  Governor  Hutchinson  took  the  trouble  of
recommending  the  consideration  of  my  queries  to
Mr.  Hawley  and  Mr.  Brainerd,  two  Protestant  mis-
sionaries, employed  among  the  Indians  of  the  Five
Nations,  who  favoured  me  with  answers,  which
discover  a  considerable  knowledge  of  the  people
whose  customs  they  describe.  From  WiUiam
Smith,  Esq.  the  ingenious  historian  of  New  York,
I  received  some  useful  information.  When  I  enter
upon  the  History  of  our  Colonies  in  North  America,
I  shall  have  occasion  to  acknowledge  how  much  I
have  been  indebted  to  many  other  gentlemen  of  that
country.

From  the  valuable  Collection  of  Voyages  made  by
Alexander  Dairy mple,  Esq.,  with  whose  attention  to
the  History  of  Navigation  and  Discovery,  the  public
is  well  acquainted,  I  have  received  some  very  rare
books,  particularly  two  large  volumes  of  Memorials,
partly  manuscript,  and  partly  in  print,  which  were
presented  to  the  court  of  Spain  during  the  reigns  of
Philip  III.  and  Philip  IV.  From  these  I  have  learned
many  curious  particulars  with  respect  to  the  interior
state  of  the  Spanish  colonies,  and  the  various  schemes
formed  for  their  improvement.  As  this  collection  of
Memorials  formerly  belonged  to  the  Colbert  Library,
I  have  quoted  them  by  that  title.

All  those  books  and  manuscripts  I  have  consulted
with  that  attention  which  the  respect  due  from  an

10  PREFACE.

Author  to  the  Public  required ;  and  by  minute  re-
ferences to  them,  I  have  endeavoured  to  authenticate
whatever  I  relate.  The  longer  I  reflect  on  the  nature
of  historical  composition,  the  more  I  am  convinced
that  this  scrupulous  accuracy  is  necessary.  The  his-
torian who  records  the  events  of  his  own  time,  is  cre-
dited in  proportion  to  the  opinion  which  the  public
entertains  with  respect  to  his  means  of  information
and  his  veracity.  He  who  delineates  the  transactions
of  a  remote  period,  has  no  title  to  claim  assent,  unless
he  produces  evidence  in  proof  of  his  assertions.  With-
out this,  he  may  w^ite  an  amusing  tale,  but  cannot  be
said  to  have  composed  an  authentic  history.  In  those
sentiments  I  have  been  confirmed  by  the  opinion  of
an  author,*  whom  his  industry,  erudition,  and  dis-
cernment, have  deservedly  placed  in  a  high  rank
among  the  most  eminent  historians  of  the  age.  Im-
boldened  by  a  hint  from  him,  I  have  published  a  ca-
talogue of  the  Spanish  books  which  I  have  consulted.
This  practice  was  frequent  in  the  last  century,  and
was  considered  as  an  evidence  of  laudable  industry
in  an  author;  in  the  present,  it  may,  perhaps,  be
deemed  the  effect  of  ostentation ;  but,  as  many  of
these  books  are  unknown  in  Great  Britain,  I  could
not  otherwise  have  referred  to  them  as  authorities,
without  encumbering  the  page  with  an  insertion  of
their  full  titles.  To  any  person  who  may  choose  to
follow  me  in  this  path  of  inquiry,  the  catalogue  must
be  very  useful.

My  readers  wdll  observe,  that  in  mentioning  sums
of  money,  I  have  uniformly  followed  the  Spanish
method  of  computing  by  j^esos.  In  America,  the
peso  fiiertc,  or  duro,  is  the  only  one  known ;  and
that  is  always  meant  when  any  sum  imported  from
America  is  mentioned.  The  peso  fuerte,  as  well  as
other  coins,  has  varied  in  its  numerary  value ;  but

»  Mr.  Gilihnn.

I'REF.VCr..  11

I  have  been  advised,  without  attending  to  such
minute  variations,  to  consider  it  as  equal  to  four
shillings  and  sixpence  of  our  money.  It  is  to  be
remembered,  however,  that,  in  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury, the  effective  value  of  a  peso,  i.  c.  the  quantity
of  labour  which  it  represented,  or  of  goods  which  it
would  purchase,  was  five  or  six  times  as  much  as  at
present.

N.  B.  Since  this  edition  was  put  into  the  press,  a
History  of  Mexico,  in  two  volumes  in  quarto,  trans-
lated from  the  Italian  of  the  Abbe  D.  Francesco  Sa-
verio  Clavigero,  has  been  published.  From  a  person
who  is  a  native  of  New  Spain,  wdio  has  resided  forty
years  in  that  country,  and  who  is  acquainted  with
the  Mexican  language,  it  was  natural  to  expect  much
new  information.  Upon  perusing  his  work,  how-
ever, I  find  that  it  contains  hardly  any  addition  to
the  ancient  History  of  the  Mexican  empire,  as  re-
lated by  Acosta  and  Herrera,  but  what  is  derived
from  the  improbable  narratives  and  fanciful  conjec-
tures of  Torquemada  and  Boturini.  Having  copied
their  splendid  descriptions  of  the  high  state  of  civili-
zation in  the  Mexican  empire,  M.  Clavigero,  in  the
abundance  of  his  zeal  for  the  honour  of  his  native
country,  charges  me  with  having  mistaken  some
points,  and  with  having  misrepresented  others,  in
the  History  of  it.  When  an  author  is  conscious  of
having  exerted  industry  in  research,  and  impartiality
in  decision,  he  may,  without  presumption,  claim  what
praise  is  due  to  these  qualities,  and  he  cannot  be  in-
sensible to  any  accusation  that  tends  to  weaken  the
force  of  his  claim.  A  feeling  of  this  kind  has  induced
me  to  examine  such  strictures  of  M.  Clavigero  on  my

J  3  P  R  1'^.  F  A  C  R.

History  of  America  as  merited  any  attention,  espe-
cially as  these  are  made  l)y  one  who  seemed  to  pos-
sess the  means  of  obtaining  accurate  information  ;
and  to  shew  that  the  greater  part  of  them  is  destitute
of  any  just  foundation.  This  1  have  done  in  notes
npon  the  passages  in  my  History,  which  gave  rise  to
his  criticisms.

Coi.i,EGE  OF  Edinburgh,
March  1st,  1788.

A

CATALOGUE

OF

SPANISH  BOOKS  AND  MANUSCRIPTS.

AcARETTE  de  Biscay,  Relation  des  Voyages  dans  la  Riviere  de  la  I'iata,
et  de  Ik  par  terre  au  Peroii. Exst.  l!ecncil  deThevenot,  Part  IV.

A  Voyage  up  the  River  de  ia  Plata,  and  thence  by  land

to  Peru.  8vo. London,  1698.

Acosta  (P.  Jos.  dc)  Historia  Natural  y  Moral  de  las  Indias.  4to. Ma-
drid, 1590.

(Joseph  do)  Histoire  Naturellc  et  Morale  des  Indes  taut  Orien-

tales  qu'  Occidentalcs.  8vo.  Paris,  1600.

Novi  Orbis  Historia  Naturalis  et  Moralis.  Exst.  in  Collect.

Thcod.  de  Bry,  Pars  IX.

De  Natura  Novi  Orbis,  Libri  duo,  et  de  procuranda  Indorum

Salute,  Libri  sex. Salmant.  8vo.  1589.

(Christov.)  Tratado  de  las  Drogas  y  Medccinas  dc  las  Indias

Occidentalcs,  con  sus  Planlas  Dibuxadas  al  vivo. 4to. Burgos,  1578.

Acugna  (P.  Christoph.)  Relation  de  la  Riviere  des  Amazones.  12mo.
Tom.  ii. Paris,  1682.

Acugna's  Relation  of  the  great  River  of  the  Amazons  in  South  Ame-
rica. 8vo. London,  1698.

Alarchon  (Fern.)  Navigationc  a  Scoprerc  il  Regno  di  sette  C'lik.  Ra-
musio  III.  363.

Albuquerque  Coello  (Duarte  de),  Memorial  de  Artes  de  la  Guerre  del
Brasil.  4to. Mad.  1634.

Alcafarado  (Franc.)  An  Historical  Relation  of  the  Discovery  of  the  Isle
of  Madeira.  4to. Lond.  1675.

Alcedo  y  Herrera  (D.  Dionysio  de)  Aviso  Historico-Politico-Geogra-
lico,  con  las  Noticias  mas  particulares,  del  Peru,  Tierre  Firme,  Chili,  y
nuevo  Rcyno  de  Granada.  4to. Mad.  1740.

Compcndi  Uistorico  de  la  Provincia  y  Puerto  de  Guayquil.  4to.

Mad.  1741.

Memorial  sobre  diftreutes  Punlos  toeantes  al  estado  de  la  Real

hazienda,  y  del  Coniercio,  &c.  en  las  Indias.  fol.

Aldamay  Guevara  (D.  Jos.  Augustin  de)  Arde  de  la  Lengua  Mexi-
cana. l2nio. Mexico,  1754.

Alvurado  (Pedro  de)  Dos  Relaciones  a  Hern.  Cortes  Refcriendole
sus  Exjiedicioncs  y  Conquistas  en  vaiias  Pro\incias  dc  N.  Espagua.
E\bt.  Barcia  Ilistoriud.  Primit.  loui.  1.

14  A  CATAL(U;UE  OF

Alvaiado  (I'cdro  do),  I.eltrc  due,  &c. Exst.  Hauuis.  III.  '296.

Aparicio  y  Leon  (D.  Lorenzo  de)  Disciirso  Hi.slorieo-Politieo  del  Hos-
pital San  Lazaro  de  Lima.  Svo. Lini.  17G1.

Aianzcles  Reales  dc  los  Ministros  dc  la  Real  Audiencia  dc  N.  Espagna.
lol. Mex.  1727.

Aigensola  (Baitolome  Leonardo  dc)  Conquista  de  las  Islas  Malucas.
fol. Mad.  l(iU9.

Analcs  de  Aiagon.  fol. Saragoca,  1G30.

Arguoilo  (Email.)  Senium  Coulessiojiis.  12mo. Mex,  1703.

Airiago  (P.  Pablo  Jos.  de)  Exlirpacion  de  la  Idolatria  de  Peru.  4to.

Lima,  1G21.

Aveiidagno  (Didae.)  Tlie.saurus  Indicus,  ceu  gcncralis  Instructor  pro
Rcgimine  Conscientia?,  in  ijs  iiuie  ad  Indias  spcctaut.  fol.  2  vols.  An-
twerp, 16G0.

Aznar  (D.  Bern.  Fran.)  Discurso  tocante  a  la  real  bazieuda  y  adminis-
tracion  de  ella.  4to.

Bandini  (Angelo  Maria)  Vila  e  Letterc  di  Amerigo  Vespucci.  4to.
Fircnze,  1745.

Barcia  {D.  And.  Goiizai.)  Plistoriadorcs  Primitives  dc  las  Indias  Occi-
dentales.  fol.  3  vols. Mad.  1749.

Barco-Centincra  (D.  Martin  de)  Argentina  y  Conquista  del  Rio  dc  la
Plata  Pocma. Exst.  Barcia  Historiad.  Primit.  III.

B'.uios  (Joao  dc)  Decadas  dc  Asia.  fol.  4  vols. Lisboa,  1G82.

Bellcsteros  (D.  TLonias  de)  Ordcnanzas  del  Peru.  fol.  2  vols. Lima,

1685.

Beltran  (P.  F.  Pedro)  Arte  de  el  Idioraa  Maya  reducido  a  sueiutas
roglas,  y  Scmilexicon.  4to. Mex.  1746.

Benzo  (Hierou.)  Novi  Orbis  Historiae — De  Bry  America,  Part  IV.
V.  VI.

Betancurt  y  Figucro  (Don  Luis)  Derecho  de  las  Inglesias  Metropo-
litanas  de  las  Indias.  4to. Mad.  1G37.

Blanco  (F.  Matias  Ruiz)  Conversion  de  Piritu  de  IndiosCumanagotos
y  otros.  12mo. Mad.  1690.

Boturini  Bcnaduci  (Lorenzo)  Idea  de  una  nucva  Historia  general  de
la  America  Septentrional,  fiuidada  sobre  material  copiosa  de  Figuras,
Synibolas  Caractcres,  Cantercs,  y  manuscritos  de  Autores  Indios.  4to.

Mad.  174G.

Botello  de  Moraes  y  Vasconccllos  (D.  Francisco  de)  El  Nuevo  Mundo
Poema  Hcroyco.  41o. Barcelona,  1701.

Botero  Bcnes  (Juan)  Description  de  Todas  las  Provincias,  Reynos,  y
Ciudados  del  Mundo.  4to. Girona,  1748.

Brictius  (Phil.)  Paralcia  Geograpbiaj  Vcteris  ct  Novae.  4to.  Paris,  1648.

Cabezade  Baca  (Alvar.  Nugnez)  Relacion  dc  los  Naufracios.  Exst.
Barcia  Hist.  Prim.  torn.  i.

l".xamen  Apologetico  de  la  llistor.  Narration  de  los

TSaufragio.s. Jixst.  Barcia  Hist.  I'rim-  torn.  i.

— Commentaries  dc  lo  succcdido  duarante  su  gubicrno

•lol  Rio  de  la  Plata. Exst.  ibid.  , .

SPANISH  BOOKS  AND  MANUSCRII'TS.  15

Cabo  de  Vacca  Relatione  <le, Exst.  Ramus.  III.  310.

Cabota  (Sebast.)  Navigazioue  de. Exst.  Ramiis  II.  211.

Cadamustus  (Aloysius)  Navigatio  ad  Terras  incognitas.  Exst.  Nov.
Orb.  Gryuaei,  p.  1.

Calancha  (E.  Anton,  de  la)  Crouica  nioralizada  del  Orden  de  San  Au-
gustin  en  el  Peru.  fol. Barcelona,  1638.

California— Diario  Historico  de  los  Viages  de  Mar  y  Tierra  hcchos  en
1768,  al  Norte  de  California  di  orden  del  Marques  de  Croix  Vi-rcy  dc
Nueva  Espagna,  &c.  JNIS.

CaIle(Juan  Diaz  de  la)  Memorial  Informatorio  dc  loque  a  su  Magestad
Pro\'ien  de  la  Nueva  Espagna  y  Peru.  4to. 1645.

Camponianes  (D.  Pedro  Rodrig.)  Autiguedad  Maritima  dc  la  Repub-
lica  de  Cartago,  con  en  Pcriplo  de  su  general  Hanuon  traducido  c  illus-
trado.  4to. Mad.  1756.

Discurso  sobre  el  foracnto  de  la  Induslria  popular.  Svo.

Mad.  1774.

Discurso  sobre  la  Educacion  popular  de  los  Artesanos.

Svo.  5  vol. Mad.  1775,  &c.

Caracas— Real  Cedula  de  Fundacion  de  la  real  Compagnia  Guipus-
coana  de  Caracas,  12mo. Mad.  1765.

Caravantes  (Fr.  Lopez  de)  Relacion  de  las  Provincias  que  ticue  el
Govierno  del  Peru,  los  Officios  que  en  el  se  Provien,  y  la  Hacienda  que
alii  tiene  su  Magestad,  lo  que  se  Gasta  de  ella  y  le  queda  Libre,  &c.  &c.
Dedicado  al  Marques  de  Santos  Claros,  Agno,  de  1611.  MS.

Cardenas  y  Cano  (Gabr.)  Ensayo  Cronologico  para  la  Historia  general
de  la  Florida,  fol. Mad.  1733.

Carranzana  (D.  Gonzales)  A  Geograpbical  Description  of  the  Coasts,
&c.  of  the  Spanish  West  Indies.  Svo. Lond.  1740.

Casas  (Bart  de  las)  Brevissima  Relacion  de  la  Destruycion  de  las
Indias.  4to.  1552.

.^ , Narratio  Iconibus  illustrata  per  Theod.  de  Bry.

4to. Oppent.  1614.

. An  Account  of  the  first  Voyages  and  Discoveries

of  the  Spaniards  in  America.  Svo. Lond.  1693.

Cassani  (P.  Joseph)  Historia  de  la  Provincia  de  Compagnia  de  Jesus
del  Nuevo  Reyno  de  Granada,  fol. Mad.  1741.

Castanheda  (Fern.  Lop.  de)  Historic  do  Descobrimento  et  Conquista
de  India  pelos  Portugueses,  fol.  2.  vol. Lisb.  1552.

Castellanos  (Juan  de)  Primera  y  Secunda  de  las  Elegias  de  Varones
Illustres  de  Indias.  4to.  2  vol. Mad.  1589,

Castillo  (Bernal  Dias  del)  Historia  Verdadera  de  la  Conquista  dc
Nueva  Espagna.  fol. Mad.  1632.

Castro,  Figucroay  Salazar  (D.  Pedro  de)  Relacion  di  su  ancimiento  y
scrvicios.  12mo.

Cavallero  (D.  Jos.  Garcia)  Brieve  Cotejo  y  Valance  de  las  Pesas  y
Medidas  di  varias  Naciones,  reduoidas  a  las  que  corren  en  Castilla.  4to.
Mad.  1731.

Cepeda(D,  Fern.)  Relacion  Universal  del  Sitio  en  que  esta  fundada  la
Ciudad  de  Mexico,  fol.  1637.

Cie^a  de  Leon  (Pedro  de)  Chronica  del  Peru.  fol. Seville,  1553.
Cisneros (Diego)  Sitio, Naturalcza,  y  Propriedades  dc  la  Ciudad  do
Mexico.  4to. Mexico,  16 IS.

1(3  A  CATALOGUE  Ol-

Clcincnlo  (P.  Cl.'iudiu)  Tablas  Chronologicas,  cii  «iuc  coiilicncn  los
Sncc'sos  Ecclcsiastioos  y  Sccularcs  dc  Indius.  4tu. \'al.  1G8!).

Cogullado  (P.  Fr.  Diego  Lopez)  Hisloria  do  Yucatan,  fol.  Mad.  1688-

Collrcao  dos  Brivcs  I'oiitificos  e  Lcjes  Hof^ias  (jue  forao  Expcdidos  y
Publicadas  dcsdc  o  Anno  1741,  sobrc  a  la  Libcrdada  dcs  Pessoas  bene
c  Coninicrcio  dos  Indos  dc  Brcsil.

Collcccion  General  de  la  Providcncias  hasla  aqui  tomadas  par  el  Go-
bierno  sobrc  el  Eslragnimcnto,  y  Occiipaeion  de  Temporalidadcs  de  los
Kcgnlarcs  de  la  Conipagnia,  de  Espagna,  Indias,  &,c.  Paries  IV.  4(o.
Mad.  17G7.

Colon  (D.  Fernando)  La  Historia  del  Almirante,  D.  Chri.stoval  Colon.
E\st.  Earcia  Hist.  Prim.  1.  1.

Colunibiis  (Clnist.)  Navigatio  qua  multas  Regiones  hactenus  incogni-
tas invcnit. Exst.  Nov.  Orb.  Gryuaei,  p.  90.

(Ferd.)  Life  and  Actions  of  bis  Father  Admiral  Clirislopb.

Columbus. Exst.  Cluircliill's  Voyages,  IL  479.

Compagnia  Real  dc  Coninicrcio  para  las  Islas  de  Sto  Domingo,  Puerto-
rico,  y  la  INFargarita.  12mo.

Conipendio  General  dc  las  contribucioncs  y  gattos  que  oceasionan  to-
dos  los  elRctos,  Autos,  caudales,  &c.  que  traficau  cntrc  losrcynos  de  Cas-
lilla  y  America.  4to.

Concilios  Provinciales  Primero  y  Segundo  celebrados  en  la  muy  Noble
y  inuy  leal  Ciudad  de  Mexico  en  los  Agnos  de  1555  &.  1565.  Ibl.  Mexico,

1769.
Concilium  Mcxicanum  Proviucialc  tertium  celcbralum  Mexici,  anno

158.5.  fol. Mexici,  1779.

Continentc  Americano,  Argonauta  de  las  costas  de  Nueva  Espagna  y
Ticrra  Firme.  l'2nio.

Cordeyro  (Antonio)  Historia  Insulana  das  ilhas  a  Portugas  sugeytas  no
Oceaiio  Occidental,  fol. Lisb.  1717.

Corila  (Dr.  Alonzo)  Breve  y  sumaria  Relacion  de  los  Segnores,  Manera,
y  Differencia  de  ellos,  que  havia  en  la  Nueva  Espagna,  y  otrasProvincias
sus  Comarcanas,  y  de  sus  Leyes,  Usos,  y  Costumbrcs,  y  de  lal'orma  que
tenian  en  Tributar  sus  Vasallos  en  Tiempo  de  su  Gentilidad,  &c.  MS.
4to.  pp.  307.

Coronada  (Fr.  Va.sq.  de)  Sommario  di  due  sue  Lettere  del  Viaggio  satto
del  I'ra.  Marco  da  Nizza  al  sctte  Citta  de  Cevola. Exst.  Ramusio  IIL  354.

Relacion  Viaggio  alle  sette  Citta. Ramusio  IIL  359.

Cortes  (Hern.)  Qnattro  Cartas  dirigidas  al  Emperador  Carlos  V.  en
que  ha  Relacion  de  sus  Conquistas  en  la  Nueva  Espagna.  Exst,  Rarcia
Hist.  Prim.  torn.  1.

Cortessii  (Ferd.)  De  Insulis  nupcr  invcntis  Narrationcs  ad  Carolum  V.
fol. 1532.

Cortcse  (Fern.)  Relacioni,  Sec. Exst.  Ramusio  IH.  225.

Cubcro  (D.  Pedro)  Pcrigrinacion  del  Mayor  Parte  del  Mundo.  Zara-
go.ss.  4to.  1688.

Cumana,  Govicrno  y  Noticia  dc,  fol.  MS.

Davila  Padilla  (F.  Aug.)  Historia  de  laFundacion  y  Discurso  dc  Pro-
vincia  de  St.  Jago  dc  Mexico,  fol. Bruss.  1625.

(Gil  Gonzalez)  Tcatro  Ecclesiastico  dc  la  Primitiva  Iglcsia

dc  los  Indias  Occidenlales,  fol.  2  vols.  1649.

SPANISH.  BOOKS  AND  MANUSCRIPTS.  17

Dociimentos  focaiitcs  a  la  Perscciicion,  que  los  Regulates  dc  la  Coni-
pagnia  suscitaron  coutra  Don  B.  de  Cardenas  Obispo  do  Paraguay.  4to.
Mad.  1768.

Ecliaveri  (D.  Bernardo  Ibagnez  de)  El  Reyno  Jesuitico  del  Paraguay.
Exst.  torn,  iv. Collcccion  de  Documentos,  41o. Mad.  1770.

Echave  y  Assu  (D.  Francisco  de)  La  Estrella  de  Lima  convertida  en
Sol  sobre  sur  tres  Coronas,  fol.  Amberes,  1G88.

Eguiara  El  Egucren  (D.  J.  Jos.)  Bibliolheca  Mexicana,  sive  Erudilo-
rum  llistoria  Virorum  in  America  Boreali  natorum,  Sec.  torn.  prim.  fol.
Mex.  1775.  N.  B.  No  more  than  one  volume  of  tbis  work  bas  been  pub-
lished.

Ercilla  y  Zuniga  (D.  Alonzo  de)  La  Araucana,  Poema  Eroico.  fol.
Mad.  1733.

• 2  vols.  8vo. Mad.  1777.

Escalona  (D.  Caspar  dc)  Gazopbylacium  Regium  Peruvicum.  fol.
Mad.  1775.

Faria  y  Sousa  (Manuel  de)  Hisloria  del  Reyno  de  Portugal,  fol.  Am-
ber. 1730.

Faria  y  Sousa,  History  of  Portugal  from  the  first  Ages  to  the  Revolu-
tion under  John  IV.  8vo. Lotid.  1698.

Fernandez  (Diego)  Prima  y  secunda  Parte  de  la  Historia  del  Peru.  fol.
Sevill.  1571.

(P.  Juan  Patr.)  Relacion  Historial  de  las  Missiones  de

los  Indias  que  claman  Chiquitos,  4to. Mad.  1726.

Feyjoo  (Benit.  Geron)  Espagnoles  Americanos — Discurso  VI.  del  torn,
iv.  del  Teatro  Critico. Mad.  1769.

Solucion  del  gran  Problcma  Historico  sobrc  la  Poblacion

dela  America — Discurso  XV.  del  tom.  v.  de  Teatro  Critico.

(D.  Miguel)  Relacion  Descriptiva  dc  la  Ciudad  y  Pro-

vincia  Truxillo  del  Peru.  fol. Mad.  1763.

Freyre  (Ant.)  Piratas  de  la  America.  4to.

Frasso  (D.  Petro)  Do  Regio  Patronatu  Indiarum.  fol.  2  vols.  Matriti,
1775.

Galvaft  (Antonio)  Tradato  dos  Descobrimcntos  Antigos  y  Modernos.
fol. Lisboa,  1731.

Galvano(Ant.)  The  Discoveries  of  the  World  from  the  first  Original
unto  the  Year  1555. Osborne's  Collect.  II.  354.

Gamboa  (D.  Fran.  Xavier  de)  Comentarios  a  los  ordinanzas  de  Minas.
fol. Mad.  1761.

Garcia  (Gregorio)  Historia  Ecclesiastica  y  Seglar  de  la  India  Oriental
y  Occidental,  y  Predicacion  de  la  Santa  Evangelia  en  ella.  12mo. Bacca,

1626.
(Fr.  Gregorio)  Origen  de  los  Indios  del  Nuevo  Mundo.  fol.

Mad.  1729.

Gastelu  (Anton.  Valesquez)  Arte  de  Lengua  Mexicana.  4to.  Puibia
de  los  Angeles.  1716.

Gazeta  de  Mexico  pos  los  Annos  1728,  1729,  1730,  4to.

Girava  (Hicronymo)  Dos  Libros  de  Cosmographia. Milan,  1556.
VOL. VI.  C

18  A  CATALOGUE  OF

Godoy  (Diego  de)  Rclacion  al  H.  Cortes,  quatrata  del  Dcscubrimiento
de  diveisas  Ciudadcs,  y  Provincias,  Gucrras  quo  tiiio  con  los  Indios.
Exst.  Earcia  Hist.  Prim.  torn.  i.

Godoy  Lettera  a  Cortese,  &c. Exst.  Ramusio  III.  300.

Goniara  (Fr.  Lopez  de)  La  Historin  general  de  las  India.  12mo.  Anv.
1654.

Historia  general  de  las  Indias.  Exst.  Barcia  Hist.  Prim.  torn.  ii.

(Fr.  Lopez  de)  Chronica  de  la  Nueva  Espagna  o  Conquesta

de  Mexico. Exst.  Barcia  Hist.  Prim.  torn.  ii.

Guatemala — Razon  puntual  de  los  successes  mas  memorabiles,  y  de
los  estragos  y  dannos  que  ha  padecido  la  rindad  de  Guatemala,  fol.  1774.

Gumilla  (P.  Jos.)  El  Orinoco  illuslrado  y  defcndido  ;  Historia  Natu-
ral, Civil,  y  Geographica  de  estc  Gran  Rio,  &c.  4to.  2  torn.  Mad.  1745.

Histoire Nalurellc, Civile, et Geographique de

rOrenoque. Traduite  par  M.  Eidous. 12mo.  torn.  iii. Avig.  1758.

Gasman  (Nugno  de)  Rclacion  scritta  in  Omitlan  Provincia  de  Me-
chuacan  dclla  maggior  Spagna  nell  1530. Exst.  Ramusio  IIL  331.

Henis  (P.  Tliadeus)  Ephcmeridcs  Belli  Guiaranici,  ab  Anno  1754.
Exst.  Colleccion  general  de  Docnm.  toin.iv.

Hcrnandes  (Fran.)  Plantarum,  Aiiimalium  &,  Mineralium  Mexicano-
rum  Historia.  fol. Rom.  1651.

Herera  (Anton,  de)  Historia  general  de  los  Hcehos  de  los  Castellanos
en  las  Islas  yTierra  Firma  de  Mar  Oceano.  fol.  4  vols. IVIad.  1601.

■ Historia  General,  &c.  4  vols. Mad.  1730.

General History,  &c. Translated  by  Stephens,  8vo.  6  vols.

Lond.  1740.

— Descriptio  Indi;e  Occidentalis.  fol.  Amst.  1622.

Huemex  y  Horcasitas  (D.  Juan  Francisco  de)  Extracto  de  los  Aatos
de  Diligencias  y  reconocimientos  de  los  rios,  lagunas,  vertientes,  y  desa-
gnas  de  Mexico  y  su  valle,  &c.  fol.  Mex.  1748.

Jesuitas — Colleccion  de  las  applicaciones  que  se  van  haciendo  de  los
Cienes,  casas  y  Coligios  que  fueron  dc  la  Compagnia  de  Jesus,  expatria-
dos  de  estos  Rcales  dominios.  4to.  2  vols.  Lima,  1772  y  1773.

Colleccion  General  de  Providcncias  liasta  aqui  tomadas  por

el  Gobierno  sobre  el  Fstrannamienlo  y  Oceupacion  dc  tcmporalidades,
de  los  Hegulares  de  la  Compagnia  de  Espagna,  Indias,  e  Islas  Filipinas,
4<o.  Mad.  1767.

Retrato  de  los  Jesuitas  formado  al  natural.  4to.  2  vols.  Mad,

1768.

Rclacion  Abbreviada  da  Republica  que  os  Religiosos  Je-
suitas estabcleceraon.  12mo.

Idea  del  Origen,  Gobierno,  &cc.  de  la  Compagnia  de  Jesus.

8vo.  Mad.  1768.

LcBvinius  (Appollonius)  Libri  V.  do  Peruviac  Invention,  &c  rebus  in
eadcm  gestis.  12mo Ant.  1567.

Leon  (Fr.  Ruiz  dc)  Hcrnandia,  Poema  Heroyco  de  Conquista  de
Mexico.  4to. Mad.  1755.

SPANISH  BOOKS  AND  MANUSCRIPTS.  19

Leon  (Ant.  de)  Epitome  de  la  Bibliotlieca  Oriental  y  Occidental,
Nautica  y  Geographica.  fol. Mad.  1737.

Lima,  A  true  account  of  the  Earthquake  which  happened  there,  28th
October  174G. Translated  from  the  Spanisli.  8vo. Lond.  1748.

Lima  Gozosa,  Description  de  las  festihas  Demonstraciones,  con  que
esta  ciiidad  Celebro  la  real  Proclamacion  de  el  Nombre  Augusto  del  Ca-
tolico  Monarcho  D.  Carlos  III. Lima.  4to.  1760.

Lano  Zapata  (D.  Jos.  Kuseb.)  Preliniinar  al  Tomo  1.  de  las  Memorias
Historico-Physicas,  Critico-Apologeticas  de  la  America  Meridional.  8vo.
Cadiz,  1759.

Lopez  (D.  Juan  Luis)  Discurso  Historico  Politico  en  defense  de  la
Jurisdiction  Real.  foi.  1685.

• (Thorn.)  Atlas  Geographico  de  la  America  Septentrional  y  Me-
ridional. 12mo. Par.  1758.

Loreuzana  (D.  Fr.  Ant.)  Arzobispo  de  Mexico,  ahora,  de  Toledo,  His-
toria  de  Nueva  Espagna,  escrita  por  su  Esclarecido  Conquistador  Her-
nan  Cortes,  Aumentada  con  otros  Documentos  y  Notas.  fol. Mex.  1770.

Lozano  (P.  Pedro)  Description  Chorographica,  del  Terretorios,  Ar-
boies,  Animales  del  Gran  Chaco,  y  de  los  Kitos  y  Costumbres,  de  las  in-
uumerabiles  Naciones  que  la  habitan.  4to. Cordov.  1733.

Historia  de  la  Compagnia  de  Jesus  eu  la  Provincia  del  Pa-
raguay, fol.  2  vols. Mad.  1753.

Madriga  (Pedro  de)  Description  de  la  Gouvernment  du  Perou.  Exst.
Voyages  qui  ont  servi  k  retablissemcnt  de  la  comp.  des  Indes.  torn,  ix
105.

Mariana  (P.  Juan  de)  Discurso  de  las  Enfermedades  de  la  Compagnia
de  Jesus.  4to. Mad.  1658.

Martinez  de  la  Pueute  (D.  Jos.)  Compendio  de  las  Historias  de  los
Descubrimientos,  Conquistas,  y  Gucrras  de  la  India  Oriental,  y  suslslas,
desde  los  Tiempos  del  Infante  Don  Euriqu  de  Portugal  su  inventor.
4to. Mad.  1681.

Martyr  ab  Angleria  (Petr.)  De  Rebus  Oceauicis  &  Novo  Orbe  Decades
tres.  12mo. Colon.  1574.

De  Insulis  nuper  inventis,  &  de  Moribus  Incolarum.  Ibid.

p.  329.

Opus  Epistolarum.  fol. Amst.  1670.

II  Sommario  cavato  della  sua  Historia  del  Nuevo  Mundo.

Ramusio  HI.  i.
Mata  (D.  Geron.  Ferm  de)  Ideas  politicas  y  morales. 12mo.  Toledo,

1640.  ., .

Mechuacan— Relacion  de  las  Ceremouias,  Ritos,  y  Poblacion  de  los
Indies  de Mechuacan hecha  al  I.  S.  D.  Ant.  de  Mendoza  Virrey  de

Nueva  Espagna.  fol.  MS.  ^^.  , . , ,

Melendez  (Fr.  Juan.)  Tesoros,  Verdaderos  de  las  Indias  Historia  de  la
Provincia  de  S.  Juan  Baptista  del  Peru,  del  Orden  de  Predicadores.  fol.

"  3  vols. Rom.lGSl.  ,. ^  ,  , a ^■
Memorial  Adjustado  por  D.  A.  Fern,  de  Hcredia  Gobernador  de  Ni-
caragua y  Honduras,  fol.  1753.  _
contar  los  Officiales  de  Casa  de  Moneda  a  Mexico

de  el  anno  1729.  fol.

c2

20  A  CATALOGUE  OF

Mendoza  (D.  Ant.  de)  Lettera  al  Imperulore  ilcl  Discopriincnlo  della
Terra  Firnia  dclla  N.  Spa^na  verso  Tnimoiitano.  Exst.  Kamiisio  111.
355.

(Juan  Gonz.  de)  Historia  del  gran  Rcjno  dc  China,  con  iin

Itinerario  del  Niicvo  Miuido.  8vo. Rom.  1585.

MigncI  (Vic.  Jos.)  Tabias  de  los  Siiecsos  Ecclesiasticos  en  Africa,
IndiasOrientales  y  Occidentales.  4to. Val.  1689.

Miscellanea  Econoniico-Politico,  &c.  fol. Pampl.  1749.

Molina  (P.  V.  Anion.)  Vocabulario  Castcllano  y  Mcxicano. Ibl.  1571,

Monardes  (El  Dottor)  Primera  y  Scgunda  y  Tercera  Parle  de  la  His-
toria Medicinal,  dc  las  Cosas  que  sc  traen  de  neustras  Indias  Occiden-
tales, que  sirvcn  en  Mcdiciria.  4to. Scviila,  1754.

IVIoncada  (Sanclio  de)  Kestauracion  I'olilica  de  Espagna.  y  deseos
Publicus.  41o. Mad.  1746.

Morales  (Anibrosio  de)  Coronica  General  dc  Espagna.  fol.  4  vols.
Alcala,  1574.

Moreno  y  Escaudon  (D.  Fran.  Ant.)  Description  y  Estado  del  Virrcy-
nato  de  Santa  Fe,  Nuevo  Reyno  de  Granada,  &c.  fol.  MS.

Munnz  (D.  Antonio)  Discurso  sobre  econoniia  polilica.  8vo.  Mad.
1769.

Nizza  (F.  Marco)  Relatione  del  Viaggio  fatta  Per  Terra  al  Ccvole,
Regno  di  eette  Citli.  Exst.  Ramus.  III.  356.

Nodal— Rclacion  del  Viage  que  lii<;ioron  losCapilancs  Barlli.  y  Gonz.
de  Nodal  al  descubriraiento  del  Estreclio  que  hoy  es  nombrado  de  Marie,
y  rcconocimionto  del  dc  Magellaiies.  4to.  Mad.

Noticia  Individual  de  los  derechos  segun  lo  reglado  on  ultimo  proyecto
de  1720.  4to. Rarcellona,  1732.

Nueva  Espagna— Historia  de  los  Indies  de  Nueva  Espagna  dibidida
en  tres  Partes.  En  la  primera  trala  de  los  Ritos,  Sacrificios  y  Idolatrias
del  Ticmpo  de  su  Gentilidad.  En  la  scgunda  dc  su  maruviilosa  Conversion
a  la  Fe,  y  modo  de  cclcbrar  las  Piestas  de  Nuestra  Santa  Iglesia.  En  la
tercera  del  Gcnio  y  Caracter  dc  aquella  Gente  ;  y  Figuras  con  que  nota-
ban  sus  Acoiitccimientos,  con  otras  particularidades  ;  y  Noticias  dc  las
principales  Cindades  en  aquel  Reyno.  Escrita  en  el  Agno  l.j41  por  mio
de  los  doce  ReligiososFranciscos  que  primero  Passaron  a  entender  en  sii
Conversion.  MS.  fol.  pp.618.

Ogna  (Pedro  de)  Arauco  Domado.  Poema.  12mo. Mad.  1605.

Ordenanzas  del  Consejo  real  de  las  Indias.  fol. Mad.  1681.

Ortega  (D.  Casimiro  de)  Refumcn  Ilistorieo  del  primer  Viage  heclio
al  rededor  del  Mundo.  4to. Mad.  1769.

O.ssorio  (Jerome)  Hi.story  of  the  Portuguese,  during  the  Reign  of  Em
manuel.  8vo.  2  vols. Lond.  17.52.

0.s.sorins  (Hieron.)  T)c  rebus  Emmanuelis  Lusitania;  Regis,  8vo.  Col.
Agr.  17.52.

Ovalle(Alonso)  Historica  Rclacion  del  Reyno  dc  Chili,  fol. Horn.  1646.

An  Historical  Relation  of  the  Kingdom  of  Chili.  Exst.  Churchill's

Collect.  III.  1.

Oviedo  y  Bagnos  (D.  .Tos.)  Historia  la  Conquista  y  Publicacioii  cc
Venezuela,  fol. Mad.  172.J.

Oviedo  Sommaria,  &e. Exst.  Ramusio  HI.  44.

SPANISH  ROOKS  AND  MANUSCRIPTS.  21

Oviedo  (Gonz.  Fern.  »lo)  liolacion  Sommaria  de  la  Histoiia  Natural
do  los  Iiidias. Ex.st.  Barcia  Hist.  Prim.  loin.  i.

Ovicdo  nistoria  Generalc  &  Naluralo  dell  l4idic  Occidenlale.  Exsl,
Kaniusio  IH.  74.

Relatione  della  Navigatione  per  la  Crandissima  Tiumc  Ma-

ragnon, Exst.  Ramus.  111.  415.

Palacia  (D.  Raim.  Mig.)  Discurso  Economieo  Politico,  4to.  Mad.  1778.
Palafox  y  Mciidoza(L).  Juuii.)  Virtiidcs  del  Indios  o  Naturaliica  y  Cos-
himbrcs  de  los  Indios  do  N.  Esj)agna.  4to.

Vie  de  Venerable  Dom.  Jean  Palafox  Evcque  de  rAngclo-

polis.  12mo. Cologne,  1772.

Pegna  (Juan  Nugnez  de  la)  Conquisla  y  Autiguedades  de  las  Islas  de
Gran  Canaria.  4to. Mad.  1676.

Pcgna  Montenegro  (D.  Aionso  de  la)  Itincrario  para  Parochos  de  In-
dios, en  que  tratan  Ics  materias  nias  partieularcs,  locantes  a  ellos  para  so
bueji  adminislracion.  41o. Amberes,  1754.

Pcnalosa  y  Mondragon  (Pr.  Benito  de)  Cineo  Execllencias  del  Es-
pagnol  que  des  i)eublan  a  Ivspagna.  4(o. Panipl.  1629.

Pcralta  Barnuovo  (D.  Pedro  de)  Lima  fundada  o  Conquista  del  Peru
Pot'ina  Eroyco.  4to. Lima,  1732.

Pcralla  Calderon  (D.  Mathias  de)  El  Apostol  de  las  Indias  y  nueves
gentcs  San  Francisco  Xavier  de  la  Compagnia  de  Jesus  Epitome  do  sus
Apostoli«os  hechos.  41o. Pampl.  1665.

Pcreira  do  Berrido  (Bernard.)  Aunales  Historicos  do  cstado  do  Ma-
ianeiiao.  fol. Lisboa.  1749.

Peru — Relatione  d'un  Capitano  Spagnuolo  del  Descoprimcnlo  y  Con-
quisla del  Peru. Exst.  Ramus.  111.  371.

Peru— Relatione  d'un  Seeretario  do  Franc.  Pizzarro  della  Conquisla
del  Peru. Exst.  Ramusio  HI.  371.

Relaeion  del  Peru.  MS.

Pesquisa  de  los  Oydores  de  Panama  contra  D.  Jayme  Mugnos,  &c.  pro
Ijaverlos  Coniinerciailo  illicitamente  en  tiempo  de  Guerra.  fol.  1755.

Pliilipinas— Carta  que  escribe  un  Religioso  autiguo  de  Pliilipinas,  auu
Amigo  suyo  en  Cs])agna,  que  Ic  pregunta  el  Nalurel  y  Geuio  de  los  In-
dios Nalurales  de  Estas  Islas.  MS.  4to,

Piedrabita  (Luc.  Fern.)  Mistoria  general  dc  las  Conquistas  del  Nuevo
Beyno  de  Granada,  fol. Ambres.

Pinelo  (Ant.  de  Leon)  Epitome  de  la  Bibliotheca  Oriental  y  Occidental
en  que  se  eontinen  los  Escritores  de  las  Indias  Orientales  yOccidentales-
fol.  2  vols. Mad.  17,37.

Pinzoiiius  socius  Adujirantis  Columbi — Navigatio  &  res  per  eum  re-
pcrfaj. Exst.  Nov.  Orb.  Gryuiei,  p.  119.

Pizarro  y  Orcllana  (D.  Fern.)  Varones  illuslres  del  N.  Mundo.  fol.
Mad.  1639.

Planctus  Judorum  Cbristianorum  in  America  Perunlina.  12mo.

Puentc  (D.  Jos.  Martinez  de  la)  Compendio  de  las  Hislorias  de  los
Descubrimientos  de  la  India  Oriental  y  sus  Islas.  4to. Mad.  1681.

Quir  (Ferd.  de)  Terra  Australis  Incognita;  or,  a  new  Southern  Dis-
covery, containing  a  fifth  part  of  the  World  lately  found  oul.4to  Lond.1617,

22  A  CATALOGUE  OF

Ramusio  (Giov.  Ballisla")  Racolto  dclle  Navigationi  c  Viaggi.  fol,  3  vols
Venct.  1588.

Real  Compai^nia  Guipuzcoana  dc  Caracas,  Noticias  historialcs  PracU-
cas,  (le  los  Successos  y  Adelautamicntos  de  csta  Coinpagiiia  dcsde  su
Fundacioii  en  1728  liasla  174G.  4to. 1706.

Recopjiacion  de  Leyes  dc  los  Rcynos  de  las  Indias.  fol.  4  vols.  Mad.
1756.

Rcglameiito  y  Aranceles  Reales  para  el  Comercio  de  Espagna  a  Indias.
fol. Mad.  1778.

Relatione  d'un  Genlilliuomo  dclSig.  Fern.Cortcse  dellagranCilta  Tc-
niistatan,  INIexico,  k  dclle  altrc  cose  delia  Nova  Spagtia.  Exst.  Ramus.
III.  304.

Remesal  (Fr.  Ant.)  Historia  general  de  las  Indias  Occidenlales  y  par-
ticular de  la  Govcrnacion  de  Cliiapa  a  Guatiniala.  ful. Mad.  1620.

Ril)adcneyra  (D.  Diego  Portichuelo  de)  Rclacion  del  Viage  dcsdc  qui
salio  de  Lima,  liasta  que  Ilego  a  Espagna.  4to. Mad.  1025.

Ribandencyray  Barrientos  (D.  Ant.  Joacli.)  Manuel  Compendio  dc  el
Regio  Patronato  Indiano.  fol. Mad.  1755.

Ribas  (Andr.  Perez  de)  Historia  de  los  Triumphos  de  NuestaSta  Fc,
entre  Gentes  la  mas  Barbaras,  en  las  niissioncs  de  Nueva  Espagna.  fol.
Mad.  1645.

Riol  (D.  Santiago)  Rcpresentacion  a  Philipe  V.  sobre  el  cstado  actual
de  los  Paj)ales  univcrsalcs  de  la  Monarchia,  MS.

Rijiia  (Juan  de  la)  Practicadela  Administraciony  cobranza  dc  lasren-
tas  reales.  fol. Mad.  1768.

Rocba  Pitta  (Scbastiano  de)  Historia  de  America  Portouguczadesde
o  Anno  de  1500  du  su  Dcscobrimento  ate  o  de  1724.  fol. Lisboa,  1730.

Rodriguez  (Manuel)  Explicacion  de  la  Bulla  de  la  Santa  Cruzada.4to.
Alcala,  15SU.

(P.  Man.)  El  Maragnon  y  Amozonas,  Historia  de

los  Descubrimicntos,  Entradas  y  Rcducion  de  Naciones.  fol.  Mad.  1084.

Roman  (Hieron)  Rcpiiblicas  del  Mundo.  fol.  3  vols. Mad.  1595.

Roma  y  Roseil  (De  Franc.)  Las  segnales  dc  la  felieidad  de  Espagna  y
medios  dc  haccrlas  cfficaces.  8vo. Mad.  1768.

Rosende  (P.  Ant.  Gonz.  de)  Vida  del  Juan  de  Palafox  Arzobispo  de
Mexico,  fol. Mad.  1671.

Rubaclava  (Don  Jos.  Gutierrez  dc)  Tratado  Historico-Politico,  y  Legal
de  elcommercio  de  las  Indias  Occidcntales.  12mo. Cad.  1750.

Ruiz  (P.  Ant.)  Conquista  Espiritual  licclia  per  los  Rcligiosos  de  la
Compagnia  de  Jesus,  en  las  Provincias  de  la  Paraguay  Uraguay,  Parana
yTape.4to. Mad.  1639.

Salazar  de  Mendoza  (D.  Pedro)  Monarquia  de  Espagna,  torn,  i.  ii.  iii.
fol. Mad.  1770.

y  Olarte  (D.  Ignacio)  Historia  de  la  Conquista  dc

Mexico — Segunda  parte. Cordov.  1743.

y  Zevallos  (D.  Alonz.  Ed.  de)  Constituciones  y  Or-

denanzas  antiguas  Agnadidasy  Modcrnas  de  la  Real  Universidady  estu-
dio  general  ste  San  Marcos  dc  la  Ciudad  de  los  Reyes  del  Pern.  fol.  En
la  Ciudad  dc  los  Reyes,  1735.

Sanchez  (Ant.  Ribero)  Dissertation  sur  rOriginc  de  la  Maladic  Vcne-

SPANISH  BOOKS  AND  MANUSCRIPTS.  23

yicuno,  dans  laquelleon  prcuvc  (ju'cllc  n'a  point  et6  port6cdc  rAmerique.
12mo. Paris,  1765.

Sarmiento  de  Gomboa  (Pedro  de)  Viage  al  Estreclio  de  Magelanes.  4to.
Mad.  17fi8.

Santa  Cruz  (El  Marques)  Conimercio  Suelto  }■  en  Corapanias  General.
12mo. Mad.  1732.

Santa  Domingo,  Puerto  Rico,  y  Margarita,  Real  Compagnia  de  Comer-
cio.  12mo. 1756.

Scheniidel  (Hulderico)  Historia  y  Discubrimiento  del  Rio  de  la  Plata  y
Paraguay. Exst.  Barcia  Hi.st.  I'rim.  toni,  iii,

Sebara  da  Sylva  (Jos.  dc)  Rccucil  Chronologique  ct  Analytiquc  de  tout
ce  qu'a  fait  en  Portugal  la  Socicte  dite  de  Jesus,  depuis  son  Entree  dans
ce  Royaume  en  1540jusqu'a  son  Expulsion  1759.  12mo.  3vols.  Lisb.
1769.

Segni  (D.  Diego  Rayraundo)  Antiquario  Noliciosa  General  de  Espagna
y  sus  Indios.  12mo. 1769.

Sepulveda  (Genesius)  Dialogus  de  justis  belli  causis,  praesertim  in  Indos
Novi  Orbis. MS.

(Jo.  Genesius)  Epistolarum  Libri  VII.  12mo. Salam.

1557.

Sepulveda  de  Regno,  Libri  III.  12mo. Ilerdae,  1570.

Seyxas  y  Lovero,  (D.  Fr.)  Theatro  Naval  Hydrographico.  4to. 1648.

Descripcion  Geographica  y  Derrotera  de  la  Religion  Au-
stral Magellanica.  4to. Mad.  1690.

Simon  (Pedro)  Noticias  Historialcs  dc  las  Conquistas  de  Terra  Firnic
en  las  Indias  Occideutales.  fol. Cucnca,  1627.

Solis  (D.  Ant.  de)  Historias  de  las  Conquistas  de  Mexico,  fol.  Mad.
1684.

History  of  the  Conquest  of  Mexico. — Translated  by  Towns-

hend.  fol.  1724.

Solarzauo  y  Pereyra  (Joan.)  Politica  Indiana,  fol. 2  vols. Mad.  1776-

De  Indiarum  jure,  sive  dc  justa  ludiarum  Occidentalium

Gubernatione.  fol.  2  vols. Lugd.  1672.

Obras  Varias  posthumas.  fol. Mad.  1776.

Soto  y  marne  (P.  Franc,  de)  Copia  de  la  Relacion  de  Viage  qui  desdc
la  ciudad  de  Cadiz  a  la  Cartagena  de  Indias  liizo.  4to. Mad.  1753.

Spilbergen  et  Le  Maire  Speculum  Orientalis  Occidentalisquc  Naviga-
tiouura.  4to. L.  Bat.  1619.

Suarez  de  Figueroa  (Cliristov.)  Hechos  de  D.  Garcia  Hurtado  de  Mcn-
doza.  4to. Mad.  1613.

Tanco  (Luis  Bezerra)  Felicidad  de  Mexico  en  la  admirable  Aparicion
de  N.  Signora  di  Guadalupe.  Bvo. Mad.  1745.
Tarragones  (Hieron  Gir.)  Dos  Libros  de  Cosmographia.  4to. Milan,

1556.

Teclio  (F.  Nichol.  de),  The  History  of  the  Provinces  Paraguay,  Tucu-
nian,  Rio  de  Plata,  &c.  Exst.  Churchill's  Coll.  VI.  3.

Torquemada  (Juan  de)  Monarquia  Indiana,  fol.  3  vols. Mad.  1723.

Torres  (Sim.  Per.  de)  Viage  del  Mundo.  Exst.  Barcia  Hist.  Prim.

III.

■ (Franc.  Caro  de)  Historia  de  las  Ordeucs  Militates  de  San-

•24  A  CATALOGUE  OF

tiago,  Caladavay  Alcantara,  dcsdcsu  Fuiidacion  hasta  cl  Key  D.  Felipe
II. A(ltnii)istadorpcrpetiiodcHas.  fol. Mad.  1629.

Torribio  (P.  F.  Jos.)  Aparato  para  la  Hisloria  Natural  Espagnala.  fol.
Mad.  1754.

* Dissrrtacion  Ilistorico-Politica  y  en  mnclia  parte  Gcogra-

pliica  delas  Isias  I'liilipiiias.  riiuo. I\lad.  1733.

Totancs  (F.  Sebastian  de)  Manual  Tagaiog  para  auxilio  de  Provincia
do  las  Philipiiias.  41o. Samplai  en  las  Philipinas,  1745.

Ulloa  (D.  Ant.  de)  Voyage  Historiqucde  rAuieriquo  Mcridionale.  4to.
2  torn. Paris,  1752.

(D.  Ant.  de)  Noticias  Anicricanas,  Entretcnimientos  Physi-

cos-Historicos,  sobrc  la  America  Meridional  y  la  Septentrional  Oriental.
4to. Mad.  1772.

(D.  Bern,  de)  Kestahlecimiento  de  las  Fabricas,  trasico,  y

eomercio  maritimo  de  F,spagna.  12mo.  2  vols. Mad.  1710.

(Franc.)  Navigatiimc  per  scoprirc  I'lsoie  dclle  Specicre  fino

al  Marcdctto  Vermejo  nel  1531). Exst.  Ramus.  111.339.

(D.  Bernardo)  Rctablissement  dcs  Manufactures ctdu  Com-
merce d'Espagn.  12nio. Amst.  1753.

Uztariz  (D.  Geron.)  Tlieoria  y  Praetica  do  Commercio  ct  de  Marina.
tol. Mad.  1757.

The  Theory  and Practice  of  Commerce, and Maritime

Afljiirs.  8vo,  2  vols. Lond.  1751.

Verages  (D.  'J'hom.  Tamaio  de)  Kestauracion  de  la  Ciudad  del  Salva-
dor y  Baia  de  Todos  Sanctos  en  la  Provincia  del  Brasil.  4to. Mad.  1628.

Vargas  Machuca  (D.  Bern,  de)  Milicia  y  Description  de  las  Indias.
4to. Mad.  1699.

Vega  (Garcilasso  de  la)  Histoire  de  la  Conquetc  do  la  Fioride.  Tra-
duitc  par  Richelct.  12mo.  2  torn. Leyd.  1731.

Royal  Commentaries  of  Peru,  by  Ricaut.fol. Lond.  1688.

Vega  (L'Ynea  Garcilasso  de  la)  Histoires  des  Guerrcs  Civiles  dos  Es-

pagnolesdans  les  Indcs,  parBaudouin.  4to.  2  tom. Paris,  1648.

Veitia  Linage  (Jos.)  The  Spanish  Rule  of  Trade  to  the  West  Indies.
8vo. Lond.  17U2.

Declamacion  Oratorio  en  Dcfensa  de  D.  Jos.

Fern.  Veitia  Linage,  fol.  1702.

Norte  dc  la  Contratacion  de  las  Indias  Occidentales.  fol.  Se-

vill.  1672.

Venegas  (Miguel),  A  Natural  and  Civil  History  of  California.  8vo
2  vols. Lond.  1759.

Verazzano  (Giov.)  Relatione  delle  Terra  per  lui  Scoperta  nel  1524.
Exst.  Kamusio  III.  p.  420.

Vesputius  (Americus)  Dua;  Navigationcs  sub  auspiciis  Ferdinand!  &c.
Exst.  de  Bry  America. Pars  X.  '

Navigatio  prima,  secunda,  tertia,  quarta,  Exst.  Nov. Orb

Grynaei.  p.  155.

Viage  de  Espagna.  12mo.  6tom. Mad.  1776.

Victoria  (Iranc.)  Ilelationes  Theological  dc  Indis  ct  de  jure  belli  con-
tra cos.  4to. 1766.

SPANISH  BOOKS  AND  MANUSCRIPTS.  25

Viciu  y  Clavijo  (D.  Jos.)  Nolicias  dc  la  Historia  general  dc  las  Islas
de  Canaiia.  4to.  3  torn. Mad.  1772.

Villalobos  (D.  Juau  de)  Manificsto  sobre  in  iniroduccion  do  csclavos
negrosen  las  Indias  Occidentales.  4to. Sevilla,  1G82.

Villagra(Gasp.  dc)  Historia  de  Nucva  Mexico  Po'ema.  12mo.  Alcala,
IGIO.

Villa  Scgnor  y  Sanchez  (D.  Jos.  Ant.)  Theatre  Americano.  Descrip-
tion general  delos  Reynos  y  Provincias  de  la  Nueva  Espagna.  fol.2tom.
Mcx.  1746.

Res  puesta  sobre  el  prccio  de  Azogue.  4to.

VocabulariaBrasiliano  y  Portugues.  4to. MS.

Ward  (D.  Bernardo)  Proyccto  Economico  sobre  la  poblacion  de  Es-
pagna, la  agricultura  en  todos  sus  ramos,  y  dc  mas  establecimientos  de
industria,  comercio  con  nuestra  marina,  arreglo  de  nuestra  intereses  en
America,  libertad  del  commereio  en  Indias,  &c.  2  vols.  4to. MS.

Xercs  (Franc,  de)  Vcrdadera  Rclacion  de  la  Coiiqnista  del  Peru  y  Pro-
vincia  de  Cuzco,  Embiada  al  Einpcrador  Carlos  V.  Exst.  Barcia  Hist.
Prim.  torn.  iii.

Relatione,  &c.  &c. Exst.  Ramusio  III,  372.

Zarate  (Aug.  de)  Historia  del  Descubrimiento  y  Conquista  de  la  Pro-
V'incia  del  Peru. Exst.  Barcia  Hist.  Prim.  tom.  iii.

Histoirc  dc  la  Decouverte  et  de  la  Conquetc  du  Perou.  12mo.

2  torn. Paris,  1742.

Zavala  y  Augnon  (D,  Miguel  de)  Representacion  al  Rey  N.  Scgnor  D.
Philipe  V.  dirigida  al  mas  seguro  Aumento  del  Real  Erario.  No  place.
1732.

Zevallos  (D.  Pedro  Ordogncz  de)  Historia  y  Viagc  del  Miindo.  4to.
Mad.  1691.

THE

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA,

BOOK  I.

Ihe  progress  of  men  in  discovering  and
slowly  peopling  the  various  parts  of  the  earth,  has
peope  .  i^ggj^  extremely  slovv^.  Several  ages  elapsed
before  they  removed  far  from  those  mild  and  fertile  re-
gions in  which  they  were  originally  placed  by  their
Creator.  The  occasion  of  their  first  general  dispersion
is  known ;  but  we  are  unacquainted  with  the  course  of
their  migrations,  or  the  time  when  they  took  possession
of  the  diiferent  countries  which  they  now  inhabit.  Nei-
ther history  nor  tradition  furnish  such  information  con-
cerning those  remote  events,  as  enables  us  to  trace,
with  any  certainty,  the  operations  of  the  human  race
in  the  infancy  of  society.

We  may  conclude,  however,  that  all  the  early
grations  migrations  of  mankind  were  made  by  land.  The
^  ^"  ■  ocean,  which  surrounds  the  habitable  earth,  as
well  as  the  various  arms  of  the  sea  which  separate  one
region  from  another,  though  destined  to  facilitate  the
communication  between  distant  countries,  seem,  at  first
view,  to  be  formed  to  check  the  progress  of  man,  and
to  mark  the  bounds  of  that  portion  of  the  globe  to  which
nature  had  confined  him.  It  was  long,  we  may  believe,
before  men  attempted  to  pass  these  formidable  barriers,
and  became  so  skilful  and  adventurous  as  to  commit
themselves  to  the  mercy  of  the  winds  and  waves,  or  to
quit  their  native  shores  in  quest  of  remote  and  unknown
regions.

28  AMERICA.

First  at-  Navigation  and  shipbuilding  are  arts  so  nice
3s'na-  ^^^  complicated,  that  they  require  the  ingenuity,
vigation.  as  wcll  as  experience,  of  many  successive  ages
to  bring  them  to  any  degree  of  perfection.  From  the
raft  or  canoe,  which  first  served  to  carry  a  savage  over
the  river  that  obstructed  him  in  the  chase,  to  the  con-
struction of  a  vessel  capable  of  conveying  a  numerous
crew  with  safety  to  a  distant  coast,  the  progress  in  im-
provement is  immense.  Many  efforts  would  be  made,
many  experiments  would  be  tried,  and  much  labour
as  well  as  invention  would  be  employed,  before  men
could  accomplish  this  arduous  and  important  under-
taking. The  rude  and  imperfect  state  in  which  navi-
o'ation  is  still  found  amono;  all  nations  which  are  not
considerably  civilized,  corresponds  with  this  account
of  its  progress,  and  demonstrates  that,  in  early  times,
the  art  was  not  so  far  improved  as  to  enable  men  to
undertake  distant  voyages,  or  to  attempt  remote  disco-

»

veries.

As  soon,  however,  as  the  art  of  navio-ation  be-

Introduc-  •  p  i

tion  of came  known,  a  new  species  oi  correspondence
commerce,  jj^j^^^^g  j^^^j^  ^q^],  pjace. It  is  from  this  era,

that  we  must  date  the  commencement  of  such  an  inter-
course between  nations,  as  deserves  the  appellation  of
commerce.  Men  are,  indeed,  far  advanced  in  improve-
ment before  commerce  becomes  an  object  of  great
importance  to  them.  They  must  even  have  made
some  considerable  progress  towards  civilization,  before
they  acquire  the  idea  of  property,  and  ascertain  it  so
perfectly  as  to  be  acquainted  with  the  most  simple  of
all  contracts,  that  of  exchanging  by  barter  one  rude
commodity  for  another.  But  as  soon  as  this  important
right  is  established,  and  every  individual  feels  that  he
has  an  exclusive  title  to  possess  or  to  alienate  whatever
he  has  acquired  by  his  own  labour  and  dexterity,  the
wants  and  ingenuity  of  his  nature  suggest  to  him  a
new  method  of  increasing  his  acquisitions  and  enjoy-

BOOK I.  29

ments,  by  disposing-  of  what  is  superfluous  in  his  own
stores,  in  order  to  procure  what  is  necessary  or  desira-
ble in  those  of  other  men.  Thus  a  commercial  inter-
course begins,  and  is  carried  on  among  the  members
of  the  same  community.  By  degrees,  they  discover
that  neighbouring  tribes  possess  what  they  themselves
want,  and  enjoy  comforts  of  which  they  wish  to  partake.
In  the  same  mode,  and  upon  the  same  principles,  that
domestic  traffic  is  carried  on  within  the  society,  an  ex-
ternal commerce  is  established  with  other  tribes  or  na-
tions. Their  mutual  interest  and  mutual  wants  render
this  intercourse  desirable,  and  imperceptibly  introduce
the  maxims  and  laws  which  facilitate  its  progress  and
render  it  secure.  But  no  very  extensive  commerce  can
take  place  between  contiguous  provinces,  whose  soil
and  climate  being  nearly  the  same,  yield  similar  pro-
ductions. Remote  countries  cannot  convey  their  com-
modities by  land,  to  those  places,  where  on  account  of
their  rarity  they  are  desired,  and  become  valuable.  It
is  to  navigation  that  men  are  indebted  for  the  power  of
transporting  the  superfluous  stock  of  one  part  of  the
earth  to  supply  the  wants  of  another.  The  luxuries
and  blessings  of  a  particular  climate  are  no  longer  con-
fined to  itself  alone,  but  the  enjoyment  of  them  is  com-
municated to  the  most  distant  regions.

In  proportion  as  the  knowledge  of  the  advantages
derived  from  navigation  and  commerce  continued  to
spread,  the  intercourse  among  nations  extended.  The
ambition  of  conquest,  or  the  necessity  of  procuring  new
settlements,  were  no  longer  the  sole  motives  of  visiting
distant  lands.  The  desire  of  gain  became  a  new  in-
centive to  activity,  roused  adventurers,  and  sent  them
forth  upon  long  voyages,  in  search  of  countries,  whose
products  or  wants  might  increase  that  circulation,  which
nourishes  and  gives  vigour  to  commerce.  Trade  proved
a  great  source  of  discovery,  it  opened  unknown  seas,  it
penetrated  into  new  regions,  and  contributed  more  than
any  other  cause,  to  bring  men  acquainted  with  the

30  AMERICA.

situation,  the  nature,  and  commodities  of  the  different
parts  of  the  g'lobe.  But  even  after  a  regular  commerce
was  established  in  the  world,  after  nations  were  consi-
derably civilized,  and  the  sciences  and  arts  were  culti-
vated with  ardour  and  success,  navigation  continued  to
be  so  imperfect,  that  it  can  hardly  be  said  to  have  ad-
vanced beyond  the  infancy  of  its  improvement  in  the
ancient  world.
- ,  Amono;  all  the  nations  of  antiquity,  the  struc-

Imperfcc-  o _  i j  '

tion  of  na-  turc  of  tlicir  vcsscls  was  extremely  rude,  and
among  the  their  mcthod  of  working  them  very  defective,
ancients.  f\^Qy  -^yere  unacquaiutcd  with  several  principles
and  operations  in  navigation,  which  are  now  considered
as  the  first  elements  on  which  that  science  is  founded.
Though  that  property  of  the  magnet,  by  which  it  at-
tracts iron,  was  well  known  to  the  ancients,  its  more
important  a:nd  amazing  virtue  of  pointing  to  the  poles
had  entirely  escaped  their  observation.  Destitute  of
this  faithful  guide,  which  now  conducts  the  pilot  with
so  much  certainty  in  the  unbounded  ocean,  during  the
darkness  of  night,  or  when  the  heavens  are  covered
with  clouds,  the  ancients  had  no  other  method  of  regu-
lating their  course  than  by  observing  the  sun  and  stars.
Their  navigation  was  of  consequence  uncertain  and
timid.  They  durst  seldom  quit  sight  of  land,  but  crept
along  the  coast,  exposed  to  all  the  dangers,  and  retarded
by  all  the  obstructions,  unavoidable  in  holding  such  an
awkward  course.  An  incredible  lenfrth  of  time  was  re-
quisite  for  performing  voyages,  which  are  now  finished
in  a  short  space.  Even  in  the  mildest  climates,  and  in
seas  the  least  tempestuous,  it  was  only  during  the  sum-
mer months  that  the  ancients  ventured  out  of  their  har-
bours. The  remainder  of  the  year  was  lost  in  inactivity.
It  would  have  been  deemed  most  inconsiderate  rash-
ness to  have  braved  the  fury  of  the  winds  and  waves
during  winter.''

While  both  the  science  and  practice  of  navigation

•  Vegetius  de  Re  milit.  lib.  iv.

BOOK  I.  31

continued  to  be  so  defective,  it  was  an  undertaking-
of  no  small  difficulty  and  danger  to  visit  any  remote
region  of  the  earth.  Under  every  disadvantage,  how-
ever, the  active  spirit  of  commerce  exerted  itself.  The
,,  . EffVPtians,  soon  after  the  establishment  of  the

Naviga-  OJ  r  '  ii

tion  and mouarchy,  are  said  to  have  opened  a  trade  be-
coraraerce ^^^^^^  ^j^^  Arabian  gulf  or  Red  sea,  and  the
Egyptians,  ^ggi-gj-^  coast  of  the  great  Indian  continent.
The  commodities  which  they  imported  from  the  East,
were  carried  by  land  from  the  Arabian  gulf  to  the  banks
of  the  Nile,  and  conveyed  down  that  river  to  the  Medi-
terranean. But  if  the  Egyptians  in  early  times  applied
themselves  to  commerce,  their  attention  to  it  was  of
short  duration. The  fertile  soil  and  mild  climate  of
Egypt  produced  the  necessaries  and  comforts  of  life
with  such  profusion,  as  rendered  its  inhabitants  so  in-
dependent of  other  countries,  that  it  became  an  esta-
blished maxim  among  that  people,  whose  ideas  and
institutions  diflPered  in  almost  every  point  from  those
of  other  nations,  to  renounce  all  intercourse  with  fo-
reigners. In  consequence  of  this,  they  never  went  out
of  their  own  country;  they  held  all  seafaring  persons
in  detestation,  as  impious  and  profane; and  fortifying-
their  own  harbours,  they  denied  strangers  admittance
into  them.'' It  was  in  the  decline  of  their  power,  and
when  their  veneration  for  ancient  maxims  had  greatly
abated,  that  they  again  opened  their  ports,  and  resumed
any  communication  with  foreigners.

The  character  and  situation  of  the  Phenicians
Pheni-  wcrc  as  favourablc  to  the  spirit  of  commerce
and  discovery  as  those  of  the  Egyptians  were
adverse  to  it.  They  had  no  distinguishing  peculiarity
in  their  manners  and  institutions;  they  were  not  ad-
dicted to  any  singular  and  unsocial  form  of  superstition;
they  could  mingle  with  other  nations  without  scruple

b  Diod.  Sicul.  lib.  i.  p.  78,  ed.  Wesselingi.  Amst.  1756.  Strabo,  lib.  xvii,  p.  1142.
ed.  Amst.  1707.

32  AMERICA.

or  reluctance.  The  territory  wliich  they  possessed  was
neither  large  nor  fertile.  Commerce  was  the  only  source
from  which  they  could  derive  opulence  or  power.  Ac-
cordingly, the  trade  carried  on  by  the  Phenicians  of
Sidon  and  Tyre,  was  more  extensive  and  enterprising
than  that  of  any  state  in  the  ancient  world.  The  genius
of  the  Phenicians,  as  well  as  the  object  of  their  policy
and  the  spirit  of  their  laws,  were  entirely  commercial.
They  were  a  people  of  merchants,  who  aimed  at  the  em-
pire of  the  sea,  and  actually  possessed  it.  Their  ships
not  only  frequented  all  the  ports  in  the  Mediterranean,
but  they  were  the  first  who  ventured  beyond  the  ancient
boundaries  of  navigation,  and,  passing  the  straits  of
Gades,  visited  the  western  coasts  of  Spain  and  Africa.
In  many  of  the  places  to  which  they  resorted,  they
planted  colonies,  and  communicated  to  the  rude  inha-
bitants some  knowledge  of  their  arts  and  improvements.
While  they  extended  their  discoveries  towards  the  north
and  the  west,  they  did  not  neglect  to  penetrate  into  the
more  opulent  and  fertile  regions  of  the  south  and  east.
Havino"  rendered  themselves  masters  of  several  com-
modious  harbours  towards  the  bottom  of  the  Arabian
gulf,  they,  after  the  example  of  the  Egyptians,  esta-
blished a  reo'ular  intercourse  with  Arabia  and  the  con-
tinent  of  India  on  the  one  hand,  and  with  the  eastern
coast  of  Africa  on  the  other.  From  these  countries  they
imported  many  valuable  commodities  unknown  to  the
rest  of  the  world,  and,  during  a  long  period,  engrossed
that  lucrative  branch  of  commerce  without  a  rival.*'
Qftjje  The  vast  wealth  which  the  Phenicians  ac-

Jews.  quired  by  monopolizing  the  trade  carried  on  in
the  Red  sea,  incited  their  neighbours  the  Jews,  under
the  prosperous  reigns  of  David  and  Solomon,  to  aim  at
being  admitted  to  some  share  of  it.  This  they  obtained,
partly  by  their  conquest  of  Idumea,  which  stretches
along  the  Red  sea,  and  partly  by  their  alliance  with

' '  See  Note  I.  at  tlie  end  of  tlie  volume.

BOOK I.  33

Hiram  king  of  Tyre.  Solomon  fitted  out  fleets,  which,
under  the  direction  of  Phenician  pilots,  sailed  from
the  Red  sea  to  Tarshish  and  Ophir.  These,  it  is  pro-
bable, were  ports  in  India  and  Africa,  which  their  con-
ductors were  accustomed  to  frequent,  and  from  them
the  Jewish  ships  returned  with  such  valuable  cargoes
as  suddenly  diffused  wealth  and  splendour  through  the
kingdom  of  Israel.'*  But  the  singular  institutions  of  the
Jews,  the  observance  of  which  was  enjoined  by  their
divine  Legislator,  with  an  intention  of  preserving  them
a  separate  people,  uninfected  by  idolatry,  formed  a
national  character,  incapable  of  that  open  and  liberal
intercourse  with  strangers  which  commerce  requires.
Accordingly,  this  unsocial  genius  of  the  people,  to-
gether with  the  disasters  which  befel  the  kingdom  of
Israel,  prevented  the  commercial  spirit  which  their
monarchs  laboured  to  introduce,  and  to  cherish,  from
spreading  among  them.  The  Jews  cannot  be  numbered
among  the  nations  which  contributed  to  improve  navi-
gation, or  to  extend  discovery.

Of  the  Car-  ^^^  though  the  instructions  and  example  of
thaginians.  ^j^g  Phcuicians  wcrc  unable  to  mould  the  man-
ners and  tempers  of  the  Jews,  in  opposition  to  the  ten-
dency of  their  laws,  they  transmitted  the  commercial
spirit  with  facility,  and  in  full  vigour,  to  their  own  de-
scendants the  Carthaginians.  The  commonwealth  of
Carthage  applied  to  trade  and  to  naval  affairs,  with  no
less  ardour,  ingenuity,  and  success,  than  its  parent-state.
Carthage  early  rivalled,  and  soon  surpassed  Tyre  in
opulence  and  power,  but  seems  not  to  have  aimed  at
obtaining  any  share  in  the  commerce  with  India.  The
Phenicians  had  engrossed  this,  and^  had  such  a  com-
mand of  the  Red  sea  as  secured  to  them  the  exclusive
possession  of  that  lucrative  branch  of  trade.  The  com-
mercial activity  of  the  Carthaginians  was  exerted  in

<^  Memoire  sur  le  Fays  d'Ophir,  par  M.  d'Anville,  Mem,  de  TAcadera.  des  In-
script.  &c.  torn.  xxx.  83.

VOL. VI.  D

34  AMERICA.

another  direction.  Without  contending-  for  the  trade
of  the  East  with  their  mother-country,  the}^  extended
their  navi2:ation  chiefly  towards  the  west  and  north.
Following  the  course  which  the  Phenicians  had  opened,
they  passed  the  straits  of  Gades,  and,  pushing  their
discoveries  far  beyond  those  of  the  parent-state,  visited
not  only  all  the  coasts  of  Spain,  but  those  of  Gaul,  and
penetrated  at  last  into  Britain.  At  the  same  time  that
they  acquired  knowledge  of  new  countries  in  this  part
of  the  globe,  they  gradually  carried  their  researches  to-
wards the  south.  They  made  considerable  progress,
by  land,  into  the  interior  provinces  of  Africa,  traded
with  some  of  them,  and  subjected  others  to  their  em-
pire. They  sailed  along  the  western  coast  of  that  great,
continent,  almost  to  the  tropic  of  Cancer,  and  planted
several  colonies,  in  order  to  civilize  the  natives,  and
accustom  them  to  commerce.  They  discovered  the
Fortunate  Islands,  now  known  by  the  name  of  the  Ca-
naries, the  utmost  boundary  of  ancient  navigation  in
the  western  ocean.*

Nor  was  the  progress  of  the  Phenicians  and  Cartha-
ginians in  their  knowledge  of  the  globe,  owing  entirely
to  the  desire  of  extending  their  trade  from  one  country
to  another.  Commerce  was  followed  by  its  usual  effects
among  both  these  people.  It  awakened  curiosity,  en-
larged the  ideas  and  desires  of  men,  and  incited  them
to  bold  enterprises.  Voyages  were  undertaken,  the  sole
object  of  which  was  to  discover  new  countries,  and  to
explore  unknown  seas.  Such,  during  the  prosperous
age  of  the  Carthaginian  republic,  were  the  famous  na-
visrations  of  Hanno  and  Himlico.  Both  their  fleets  were
equipped  by  authority  of  the  senate,  and  at  public  ex-
pense. Hanno  was  directed  to  steer  towards  the  south,
alono-  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  he  seems  to  have  advanced
much  nearer  the  equinoctial  line  than  any  former  navi-

•  Plini'i  Nat.  Hi!t.  lib.  v'\.  c.  37.  edit,  in  usum  Delph.  ito.  1685.

BOOK I  35

gator/  Himlico  had  it  in  charge  to  proceed  towards
the  north,  and  to  examine  the  western  coasts  of  the
European  continent.^'  Of  the  same  nature  was  the  ex-
traordinary navigation  of  the  Phenicians  round  Africa.
A  Phenician  fleet,  we  are  told,  fitted  out  by  Necho  king
of  Egypt,  took  its  departure  about  six  hundred  and  four
years  before  the  Christian  era,  from  a  port  in  the  Red
sea,  doubled  the  southern  promontory  of  Africa,  and,
after  a  voyage  of  three  years,  returned  by  the  straits  of
Gades  to  the  mouth  of  the  Nile."  Eudoxus  of  Cyzicus
is  said  to  have  held  the  same  course,  and  to  have  ac-
complished the  same  arduous  undertaking.'

These  voyages,  if  performed  in  the  manner  which  I
have  related,  may  justly  be  reckoned  the  greatest  eifort
of  navio^ation  in  the  ancient  world ;  and  if  we  attend  to
the  imperfect  state  of  the  art  at  that  time,  it  is  difficult
to  determine,  whether  we  should  most  admire  the  cou-
rage and  sagacity  with  which  the  design  was  formed,
or  the  conduct  and  good  fortune  with  which  it  was
executed.  But,  unfortunately,  all  the  original  and
authentic  accounts  of  the  Phenician  and  Carthaginian
voyages,  whether  undertaken  by  public  authority,  or  in
prosecution  of  their  private  trade,  have  perished.  The
information  which  we  receive  concerning  them  from
the  Greek  and  Roman  authors  is  not  only  obscure  and
inaccurate,  but,  if  we  except  a  short  narrative  of  Han-
no's  expedition,  is  of  suspicious  authority.""  Whatever
acquaintance  with  the  remote  regions  of  the  earth  the
Phenicians  or  Carthaginians  may  have  acquired,  was
concealed  from  the  rest  of  mankind  with  a  mercantile
jealousy.  Every  thing  relative  to  the  course  of  their
navigation  was  not  only  a  mystery  of  trade,  but  a  se-
cret of  state. Extraordinary  facts  are  related  concern-

f  Plinii  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  v.  c.  1.  Hanonis  Peripius  ap.  Gcograph.  minores,  edit.
Hudsoni,  vol.  i.  p.  1.

g  Plinii  Nat. Hist.  lib.  ii.  c.  67. Festus  Avienus  apud  Bochart.  Geogr.  Sacr.,
lib.  i.  c.  60.  p.  652. Oper.  vol.  iii.  L.  Bat.  1707.
''  Herodot.  lib.  iv.  c.  4'2.  *  Plinii  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  ii.  c.  67. ^  See  Note  H.

D 2

36  AMERICA.

ing  their  solicitude  to  prevent  other  nations  from  pene-
trating into  what  they  wished  should  remain  undivulged.'
Many  of  their  discoveries  seem,  accordingly,  to  have
been  scarcely  known  beyond  the  precincts  of  their  own
states.  The  navigation  round  Africa,  in  particular,  is
recorded  by  the  Greek  and  Roman  writers,  rather  as  a
strange  amusing  tale,  which  they  did  not  compreliend,
or  did  not  believe,  than  as  a  real  transaction,  which  en-
larged their  knowledge  and  influenced  their  opinions.""
As  neither  the  progress  of  the  Phenician  or  Carthagi-
nian discoveries,  nor  the  extent  of  their  navigation,
were  communicated  to  the  rest  of  mankind,  all  memo-
rials of  their  extraordinary  skill  in  naval  atlairs  seem,  in
a  great  measure,  to  have  perished,  when  the  maritime
power  of  the  former  was  annihilated  by  Alexander's
conquest  of  Tyre,  and  the  empire  of  the  latter  was
overturned  by  the  Roman  arms.

Of  the  Leaving,  then, the obscure and  pompous

Greeks,  accounts  of  the  Phenician  and  Carthaginian
voyages  to  the  curiosity  and  conjectures  of  antiquaries,
history  must  rest  satisfied  with  relating  the  progress  of
navigation  and  discovery  among  the  Greeks  and  Ro-
mans, which,  though  less  splendid,  is  better  ascertained.
It  is  evident  that  the  Phenicians,  who  instructed  the
Greeks  in  many  other  useful  sciences  and  arts,  did  not
communicate  to  them  that  extensive  knowledge  of  navi-
gation which  they  themselves  possessed ;  nor  did  the
Romans  imbibe  that  commercial  spirit  and  ardour  for
discovery  which  distinguished  their  rivals  the  Cartha-
ginians. Though  Greece  be  almost  encompassed  by
the  sea,  which  formed  many  spacious  bays  and  com-
modious harbours  ;  though  it  be  surrounded  by  a  great
number  of  fertile  islands,  yet,  notwithstanding  such  a
favourable  situation,  which  seemed  to  invite  that  inge-
nious people  to  apply  themselves  to  navigation,  it  was
long  before  this  art  attained  any  degree  of  perfection

•  Slrab.  Geogr.  lib.  iii.  p.  265.  lib.  xviii.  p.  1154,  «»  See  Note  III.

BOOK I.  ^f

among  them.  Their  early  voyages,  the  object  of  which
was  piracy  rather  than  commerce,  were  so  inconsidera-
ble, that  the  expedition  of  the  Argonauts  from  the  coast
of  Thessaly  to  the  Euxine  sea,  appeared  such  an  amaz-
ing effort  of  skill  and  courage,  as  entitled  the  conductors
of  it  to  be  ranked  among  the  demigods,  and  exalted  the
vessel  in  which  they  sailed  to  a  place  among  the  hea-
venly constellations.  Even  at  a  later  period,  when  the
Greeks  engaged  in  their  famous  enterprise  against  Troy,
their  knowledge  in  naval  affairs  seems  not  to  have  been
much  improved.  According  to  the  account  of  Homer,
the  only  poet  to  whom  history  ventures  to  appeal,  and
who,  by  his  scrupulous  accuracy  in  describing  the  man-
ners and  arts  of  early  ages,  merits  this  distinction,  the
science  of  navigation,  at  that  time,  had  hardly  advanced
beyond  its  rudest  state.  The  Greeks  in  the  heroic  age
seem  to  have  been  unacquainted  with  the  use  of  iron,
the  most  serviceable  of  all  the  metals,  without  which
no  considerable  progress  was  ever  made  in  the  mecha-
nical arts.  Their  vessels  were  of  inconsiderable  bur-
den, and  mostly  without  decks.  They  had  only  one
mast,  which  was  erected  or  taken  down  at  pleasure.
They  were  strangers  to  the  use  of  anchors.  All  their
operations  in  sailing  were  clumsy  and  unskilful.  They
turned  their  observation  towards  stars,  which  were  im-
proper for  regulating  their  course,  and  their  mode  of
observing  them  was  inaccurate  and  fallacious.  Whea
they  had  finished  a  voyage  they  drew  their  paltry  bark&
ashore,  as  savages  do  their  canoes,  and  these  remained
on  dry  land  until  the  season  of  returning  to  sea  ap-
proached. It  is  not  then  in  the  early  or  heroic  ages  of
Greece,  that  we  can  expect  to  observe  the  science  of
navigation,  and  the  spirit  of  discovery,  making  any  con-
siderable progress.  During  that  period  of  disorder  and
ignorance,  a  thousand  causes  concurred  in  restraining
curiosity  and  enterprise  within  very  narrow  bounds.
But  the  Greeks  advanced  with  rapidity  to  a  state  of

3^  AMERICA,

greater  civilization  and refinement. Government,  in
its  most  liberal  and  perfect  form,  began  to  be  established
in  their  diiferent  communities  ;  equal  laws  and  regular
police  were  gradually  introduced ;  the  sciences  and  arts
which  are  useful  or  ornamental  in  life  were  carried  to  a
high  pitch  of  improvement,  and  several  of  the  Grecian
commonwealths  applied  to  commerce  with  such  ardour
and  success,  that  they  were  considered,  in  the  ancient
world,  as  maritime  powers  af  the  first  rank.  Even  then,
however, the naval victories  of  the Greeks  must  be
ascribed  rather  to  the  native  spirit  of  the  people,  and  to
that  courage  which  the  enjoyment  of  liberty  inspires,
than  to  any  extraordinary progress in  the  science  of
navigation. In  the  Persian  war,  those  exploits  which
the  genius  of  the  Greek  historians  has  rendered  so  fa-
mous, were  performed  by  fleets,  composed  chiefly  of
small  vessels  without  decks  ;°  the  crews  of  which  rushed
forward  with  impetuous  valour,  but  little  art,  to  board
those  of  the  enemy. In  the  war  of  Peloponnesus,  their
ships  seem  still  to  have  been  of  inconsiderable  burden
and  force. The  extent  of  their  trade,  how  highly  soever
it  may  have  been  estimated  in  ancient  times,  was  in
proportion  to  this  low  condition  of  their  marine. The
maritime  states  of  Greece  hardly  carried  on  any  com-
merce beyond  the limits  of  the Mediterranean  sea.
Their  chief  intercourse  was  with  the  colonies  of  their
countrymen,  planted  in  the  Lesser  Asia,  in  Italy  and
Sicily. They  sometimes  visited  the  ports  of  Egypt,  of
the  southern  provinces  of  Gaul,  and  of  Thrace,  or  pass-
ing through  the  Hellespont,  they  traded  with  the  coun-
tries  situated around  the Euxine  sea. Amazing  in-
stances occur  of  their  ignorance,  even  of  those  countries
which  lay  within  the  narrow  precincts  to  which  their
navigation  was  confined. When  the Greeks  had  as-
sembled their  combined  fleet  against  Xerxes  at  Egina,
they  thought  it  unadvisable  to  sail  to  Samos,  because

,  "  Thucyd.  lib.  i.  c.  1 1.

BOOK r.  39

they  believed  the  distance  between  that  island  and
Egina  to  be  as  great  as  the  distance  between  Egina
and  the  Pillars  of  Hercules."  They  were  either  utterly
unacquainted  with  all  the  parts  of  the  globe  beyond
the  Mediterranean  sea,  or  what  knowledge  they  had  of
them  was  founded  on  conjecture,  or  derived  from  the
information  of  a  few  persons,  whom  curiosity  and  the
love  of  science  had  prompted  to  travel  by  land  into  the
Upper  Asia,  or  by  sea  into  Egypt,  the  ancient  seats  of
wisdom  and  arts.  After  all  that  the  Greeks  learned
from  them,  tbey  appear  to  have  been  ignorant  of  the
most  important  facts,  on  which  an  accurate  and  scien-
tific knowledge  of  the  globe  is  founded.

The  expedition  of  Alexander  the  Great  into  the  East,
considerably  enlarged  the  sphere  of  navigation  and  of
geographical  knowledge  among  the  Greeks.  That  ex-
traordinary man,  notwithstanding  the  violent  passions
which  incited  him,  at  some  times,  to  the  wildest  actions,
and  the  most  extravagant  enterprises,  possessed  talents
which  fitted  him  not  only  to  conquer,  but  to  govern  the
world.  He  was  capable  of  framing  those  bold  and
original  schemes  of  policy,  which  gave  a  new  form  to
human  affairs.  The  revolution  in  commerce,  brought
about  by  the  force  of  his  genius,  is  hardly  inferior  to
that  revolution  in  empire,  occasioned  by  the  success  of
his  arms.  It  is  probable,  that  the  opposition  and  efforts
of  the  republic  of  Tyre,  which  checked  him  so  long  in
the  career  of  his  victories,  gave  Alexander  an  oppor-
tunity of  observing  the  vast  resources  of  a  maritime
power,  and  conveyed  to  him  some  idea  of  the  immense
wealth  which  the  Tyrians  derived  from  their  commerce,
especially  that  with  the  East  Indies.  As  soon  as  he
had  accomplished  the  destruction  of  Tyre,  and  reduced
Egypt  to  subjection,  he  formed  the  plan  of  rendering
the  empire  which  he  proposed  to  establish,  the  centre
of  commerce  as  well  as  the  seat  of  dominion.  With  this

e  Herodot.  lib,  vm.  c.  132.

40  AMERICA.

view  he  founded  a  great  city,  which  lie  honoured  with
his  own  name,  near  one  of  the  mouths  of  the  river  Nile,
that  by  the  Mediterranean  sea,  and  the  neighbourhood
of  the  Arabian  aulf,  it  mio-ht  command  the  trade  both  of
the  east  and  west.**  This  situation  was  chosen  with
such  discernment,  tliat  Alexandria  soon  became  the  chief
commercial  city  in  the  world.  Not  only  during-  the
subsistence  of  the  Grecian  empire  in  Egypt  and  in  the
East,  but  amidst  all  the  successive  revolutions  in  those
countries  from  the  time  of  the  Ptolemies  to  the  discovery
of  the  navigation  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  commerce,
particularly  that  of  the  East  Indies,  continued  to  flow
in  the  channel  which  the  sagacity  and  foresight  of  Alex-
ander had  marked  out  for  it.

His  ambition  was  not  satisfied  with  having  opened
to  the  Greeks  a  communication  with  India  by  sea ;  he
aspired  to  the  sovereignty  of  those  regions  which  fur-
nished the  rest  of  mankind  with  so  many  precious  com-
modities, and  conducted  his  army  thither  by  land.
Enterprising,  however,  as  he  was,  he  may  be  said  ra-
ther to  have  viewed,  than  to  have  conquered  that  coun-
try. He  did  not,  in  his  progress  towards  the  east,  ad-
vance beyond  the  banks  of  the  rivers  that  fall  into  the
Indus,  which  is  now  the  western  boundary  of  the  vast
continent  of  India.  Amidst  the  wild  exploits  which
distinguish  this  part  of  his  history,  he  pursued  mea-
sures that  mark  the  superiority  of  his  genius  as  well  as
the  extent  of  his  views.  He  had  penetrated  as  far  into
India  as  to  confirm  his  opinion  of  its  commercial  im-
portance, and  to  perceive  that  immense  wealth  might
be  derived  from  intercourse  with  a  country,  where  the
arts  of  elegance,  having  been  more  early  cultivated,
were  arrived  at  greater  perfection  than  in  any  other  part
of  the  earth.''  Full  of  this  idea,  he  resolved  to  examine
the  course  of  navigation  from  the  mouth  of  the  Indus  to

P  Strab.  Geogr.  lib.  xvii.  p.  114,'i.  1149.
n  Sttab.  Geogr.  lib.  xv.  p.  1036. Q.  Curtius,  lib.  xTiii.  c.  y.

BOOK I.  41

the  bottom  of  the  Persian  gulf;  and,  if  it  should  be
found  practicable,  to  establish  a  regular  communication
between  them.  In  order  to  effect  this,  he  proposed  to
remove  the  cataracts,  with  which  the  jealousy  of  the
Persians,  and  their  aversion  to  correspondence  with
foreigners,  had  obstructed  the  entrance  into  the  Eu-
phrates ;'  to  carry  the  commodities  of  the  East  up  that
river,  and  the  Tigris,  which  unites  with  it,  into  the  in-
terior parts  of  his  Asiatic  dominions ;  while,  by  the  way
of  the  Arabian  gulf,  and  the  river  Nile,  they  might  be
conveyed  to  Alexandria,  and  distributed  to  the  rest  of
the  world.  Nearchus,  an  officer  of  eminent  abilities,
was  intrusted  with  the  command  of  the  fleet  fitted  out  for
this  expedition.  He  performed  this  voyage,  M^hich  was
deemed  an  enterprise  so  arduous  and  important,  that
Alexander  reckoned  'it  one  of  the  most  extraordinary
events  which  distinguished  his  reign.  Inconsiderable
as  it  may  now  appear,  it  was,  at  that  time,  an  under-
taking of  no  little  merit  and  difficulty.  In  the  prose-
cution of  it,  striking  instances  occur  of  the  small  pro-
gress which  the  Greeks  had  made  in  naval  knowledge.^
Having  never  sailed  beyond  the  bounds  of  the  Medi-
terranean, where  the  ebb  and  flow  of  the  sea  are  hardly
perceptible,  when  they  first  observed  this  phenomenon
at  the  mouth  of  the  Indus,  it  appeared  to  them  a  pro-
digy, by  which  the  gods  testified  the  displeasure  of
Heaven  against  their  enterprise.'  During  their  whole
course,  they  seem  never  to  have  lost  sight  of  land,  but
followed  the  bearings  of  the  coast  so  servilely,  that  they
could  not  much  avail  themselves  of  those  periodical
winds,  which  facilitate  navigation  in  the  Indian  ocean.
Accordingly,  they  spent  no  less  than  ten  months  in  per-
forming this  voyage,"  which,  from  the  mouth  of  the  In-
dus to  that  of  the  Persian  gulf,  does  not  exceed  twenty
degrees. It  is  probable,  that,  amidst  the  violent  con-

r  Strab.  Geogr.  lib.  xvi.  p.  1075.
s  Sec  Note  IV. «  See  Note  V. "  Plin.  Hist.  Nat  lib.  vi.  c.  23.

42  AMERICA.

'vulsions  and  frequent  revolutions  in  the  East,  occa-
sioned by  the  contests  among  the  successors  of  Alex-
ander, the  navigation  to  India  by  the  course  which
Nearchus  had  opened  was  discontinued.  The  Indian
trade  carried  on  at  Alexandria,  not  only  subsisted,  but
was  so  much  extended  under  the  Grecian  monarchs  of
Egypt,  that  it  proved  a  great  source  of  the  wealth  which
distino-uished  their  kino^dom.

Of  the  The  progress  which  the  Romans  made  in  na-

vigation  and  discovery,  was  still  more  mconsi-
derable  than  that  of  the  Greeks.  The  genius  of  the
Roman  people,  their  military  education,  and  the  spirit
of  their  laws,  concurred  in  estranoino^  them  from  com-
merce  and  naval  ail'airs.  It  was  the  necessity  of  oppos-
ing a  formidable  rival,  not  the  desire  of  extending  trade,
which  first  prompted  them  to  aim  at  maritime  power.
Though  they  soon  perceived  that  in  order  to  acquire
the  universal  dominion  after  which  they  aspired,  it  was
necessary  to  render  themselves  masters  of  the  sea,  they
still  considered  the  naval  service  as  a  subordinate  sta-
tion, and  reserved  for  it  such  citizens  as  were  not  of  a
rank  to  be  admitted  into  the  legions.^  In  the  history  of
the  Roman  republic,  hardly  one  event  occurs,  that
marks  attention  to  navigation  any  farther  than  as  it  was
instrumental  towards  conquest.  When  the  Roman  va-
lour and  discipline  had  subdued  all  the  maritime  states
known  in  the  ancient  world;  when  Carthage,  Greece,
and  Egypt,  had  submitted  to  their  pov/er,  the  Romans
did  not  imbibe  the  commercial  spirit  of  the  conquered
nations.  Among  that  people  of  soldiers,  to  have  ap-
plied to  trade  would  have  been  deemed  a  degradation
of  a  Roman  citizen.  They  abandoned  the  mechanical
arts,  commerce,  and  navigation,  to  slaves,  to  freedmen,
to  provincials,  and  to  citizens  of  the  lowest  class.  Even
after  the  subversion  of  liberty,  when  the  severity  and
haughtiness  of  ancient  manners  began  to  abate,  com-

''Polyb.  lib.  V.

BOOK 1.  43

merce  did  not  rise  into  high  estimation  among  the  Ro-
mans. The  trade  of  Greece,  Egypt,  and  the  other  con-
quered countries,  continued  to  be  carried  on  in  its  usual
channels,  after  they  were  reduced  into  the  form  of
Roman  provinces.  As  Rome  was  the  capital  of  the
world,  and  the  seat  of  government,  ail  the  wealth  and
valuable  productions  of  the  provinces  flowed  naturally
thither.  The  Romans,  satisfied  with  this,  seem  to  have
suifered  commerce  to  remain  almost  entirely  in  the
hands  of  the  natives  of  the  respective  countries.  The
extent,  however,  of  the  Roman  power,  which  reached
over  the  greatest  part  of  the  known  world,  the  vigilant
inspection  of  the  Roman  magistrates,  and  the  spirit  of
the  Roman  government,  no  less  intelligent  than  active,
gave  such  additional  security  to  commerce,  as  animated
it  with  new  vigour.  The  union  among  nations  was
never  so  entire,  nor  the  intercourse  so  perfect,  as  within
the  bounds  of  this  vast  empire.  Commerce,  under  the
Roman  dominion,  was  not  obstructed  by  the  jealousy
of  rival  states,  interrupted  by  frequent  hostilities,  or
limited  by  partial  restrictions.  One  superintending
power  moved  and  regulated  the  industry  of  mankind,
and  enjoyed  the  fruits  of  their  joint  efforts.

Navigation  felt  this  influence,  and  improved  under
it.  As  soon  as  the  Romans  acquired  a  taste  for  the
luxuries  of  the  East,  the  trade  with  India  through
Egypt  was  pushed  with  new  vigour,  and  carried  on  to
greater  extent.  By  frequenting  the  Indian  continent,
navigators  became  acquainted  with  the  periodical
course  of  the  winds,  which,  in  the  ocean  that  separates
Africa  from  India,  blow  with  little  variation  during  one
half  of  the  year  from  the  east,  and  during  the  other  half
blow  with  equal  steadiness  from  the  west.  Encouraged
by  observing  this,  the  pilots  who  sailed  from  Egypt  to
India  abandoned  their  ancient  slow  and  dangerous
course  along  the  coast,  and  as  soon  as  the  western  mon-
soon set  in,  took  their  departure  from  Ocelis,  at  the

44  AMERICA.

mouth  of  the  Arabian  gulf,  and  stretched  boldly  across
the  ocean/  The  uniform  direction  of  the  wind,  sup-
plying" the  place  of  the  compass,  and  rendering  the
guidance  of  the  stars  less  necessary,  conducted  them  to
the  port  of  Musiris,  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Indian
continent.  There  they  took  on  board  their  cargo,  and
returning  with  the  eastern  monsoon,  finished  their
voyage  to  the  Arabian  gulf  within  the  year.  This  part
of  India,  now  known  by  the  name  of  the  Malabar  coast,
seems  to  have  been  the  utmost  limit  of  ancient  navi-
gation in  that  quarter  of  the  globe.  What  imperfect
knowledo-e  the  ancients  had  of  the  immense  countries
which  stretch  beyond  this  towards  the  east,  they  received
from  a  few  adventurers,  who  had  visited  them  by  land.
Such  excursions  were  neither  frequent  nor  extensive,
and  it  is  probable,  that  while  the  Roman  intercourse
with  India  subsisted,  no  traveller  ever  penetrated  far-
ther than  to  the  banks  of  the  Ganges/  The  fleets  from
Egypt  which  traded  at  Musiris  were  loaded,  it  is  true,
with  the  spices  and  other  rich  commodities  of  the  con-
tinent and  islands  of  the  farther  India  ;  but  these  were
brought  to  that  port,  which  became  the  staple  of  the
commerce  between  the  east  and  west,  by  the  Indians
themselves,  in  canoes  hollowed  out  of  one  tree.^  The
Egyptian  and  Roman  merchants,  satisfied  with  acquiring
those  commodities  in  this  manner,  did  not  think  it  ne-
cessary to  explore  unknown  seas,  and  venture  upon  a
dangerous  navigation,  in  quest  of  the  countries  which
produced  them.  But  though  the  discoveries  of  the
Romans  in  India  were  so  limited,  their  commerce  there
was  such  as  will  appear  considerable,  even  to  the  pre-
sent age,  in  which  the  Indian  trade  has  been  extended
far  beyond  the  practice  or  conception  of  any  preceding
period.  We  are  informed  by  one  author  of  credit,*"
that  the  commerce  with  India  drained  the  Roman  em:-

y  Piin.Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  23.

»  Strab.  Googr.  lib.  xv.  p.  1006.  1010. See  Note  VL

^ Pliii.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  26.  b  Id.  ibid.

BOOK  I.  45

pire  every  year  of  more  than  four  hundred  thousand
pounds;  and  by  another,  that  one  hundred  and  twenty
ships  sailed  annually  from  the  Arabian  gulf  to  that
country.''

Discove-  The  discovery  of  this  new  method  of  sailing
ancient?^  to  India,  is  the  most  considerable  improvement
by  land.  [^  navigation  made  during  the  continuance  of
the  Roman  power.  But  in  ancient  times,  the  know-
ledge of  remote  countries  was  acquired  more  frequently
by  land  than  by  sea  f  and  the  Romans,  from  their  pecu-
liar disinclination  to  naval  affairs,  may  be  said  to  have
neglected  totally  the  latter,  though  a  more  easy  and  ex-
peditious method  of  discovery.  The  progress,  how-
ever, of  their  victorious  armies  through  a  considerable
portion  of  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  contributed  greatly
to  extend  discovery  by  land,  and  gradually  opened  the
navigation  of  new  and  unknown  seas.  Previous  to  the
Roman  conquests,  the  civilized  nations  of  antiquity  had
little  communication  with  those  countries  in  Europe,
which  now  form  its  most  opulent  and  powerful  king-
doms. The  interior  parts  of  Spain  and  Gaul  were  im-
perfectly known.  Britain,  separated  from  the  rest  of
the  world,  had  never  been  visited,  except  by  its  neigh-
bours the  Gauls,  and  by  a  few  Carthaginian  merchants.
The  name  of  Germany  had  scarcely  been  heard  of.  Into
all  these  countries  the  arms  of  the  Romans  penetrated.
They  entirely  subdued  Spain  and  Gaul ;  they  conquered
the  greatest  and  most  fertile  part  of  Britain ;  they  ad-
vanced into  Germany,  as  far  as  the  banks  of  the  river
Elbe.  In  Africa,  they  acquired  a  considerable  know-
ledge of  the  provinces,  which  stretch  along  the  Medi-
terranean sea,  from  Egypt  westward  to  the  straits  of
Gades.  In  Asia,  they  not  only  subjected  to  their  power
most  of  the  provinces  which  composed  the  Persian  and
the  Macedonian  empires,  but,  after  their  victories  over
Mithridates  and  Tigranes,  they  seem  to  have  made  a

e  Strab.  Geogr.  lib.  ii.  p.  179.  '*  See  Note  VU.

4G  AMERICA.

more  accurate  survey  of  the  countries  contiguous  to  the
Euxine  and  Caspian  seas,  and  to  have  carried  on  a
more  extensive  trade  than  that  of  the  Greeks  with  the
opulent  and  commercial  nations  then  seated  round  the
Euxine  sea.

iniperfec-  From  this  succiuct  survey  of  discovery  and
grlphicar  navigation,  which  I  have  traced  from  the  ear-
knowicdgie  |jgg|.  (Jawn  of  historical  l<nowledo;e,  to  the  full

among  the  y

ancients,  establishment  of  the  Roman  dominion,  the  pro-
gress of  both  appears  to  have  been  wonderfully  slow.
It  seems  neither  adequate  to  what  we  might  have  ex-
pected from  the  activity  and  enterprise  of  the  human
mind,  nor  to  what  might  have  been  performed  by  the
power  of  the  great  empires  which  successively  governed
the  world.  If  we  reject  accounts  that  are  fabulous  and
obscure ;  if  we  adhere  steadily  to  the  light  and  infor-
mation of  authentic  history,  without  substituting  in  its
place  the  conjectures  of  fancy  or  the  dreams  of  etymo-
logists, we  must  conclude,  that  the  knowledge  which
the  ancients  had  acquired  of  the  habitable  globe  was
extremely  confined.  In  Europe,  the  extensive  provinces
in  the  eastern  part  of  Germany  were  little  known  to
them.  They  were  almost  totally  unacquainted  with  the
vast  countries  which  are  now  subject  to  the  kings  of
Denmark,  Sweden,  Prusia,  Poland,  and  the  Russian  em-
pire. The  more  barren  regions,  that  stretch  within  the
arctic  circle,  were  quite  unexplored.  In  Africa,  their
researches  did  not  extend  far  beyond  the  provinces  which
border  on  the  Mediterranean,  and  those  situated  on  the
western  shore  of  the  Arabian  gulf.  In  Asia,  they  were
unacquainted,  as  I  formerly  observed,  with  all  the  fertile
and  opulent  countries  beyond  the  Ganges,  which  furnish
the  most  valuable  commodities  that,  in  modern  times,
have  been  the  great  object  of  the  European  commerce
with  India  ;  nor  do  they  seem  to  have  ever  penetrated
into  those  immense  regions  occupied  by  the  wander-
ing tribes,  which  they  called  by  the  general  name  of  Sar-

BOOK I.  47

matians  or  Scythians,  and  which  are  now  possessed  by
Tartars  of  various  denominations,  and  by  the  Asiatic
subjects  of  Russia.  '^

But  there  is  one  opinion,  that  universally  pre-

A  remark-  _  •  i • i

able  proof  vailcd  among"  the  ancients,  which  conveys  a
more  striking  idea  of  the  small  progress  they
had  made  in  the  knowledge  of  the  habitable  globe,  than
can  be  derived  from  any  detail  of  their  discoveries.
They  supposed  the  earth  to  be  divided  into  five  re-
gions, which  they  distinguished  by  the  name  of  zones.
Two  of  these,  which  were  nearest  the  poles,  they  termed
frigid  zones,  and  believed  that  the  extreme  cold  which
reigned  perpetually  there,  rendered  them  uninhabitable.
Another,  seated  under  the  line,  and  extending  on  either
side  towards  the  tropics,  they  called  the  torrid  zone,  and
imagined  it  to  be  so  burnt  up  with  unremitting  heat,  as
to  be  equally  destitute  of  inhabitants.  On  the  two  other
zones,  which  occupied  the  remainder  of  the  earth,  they
bestowed  the  appellation  of  temperate,  and  taught  that
these,  being  the  only  regions  in  which  life  could  sub-
sist, were  allotted  to  man  for  his  habitation.  This  wild
opinion  was  not  a  conceit  of  the  uninformed  vvdgar,  or
a  fanciful  fiction  of  the  poets,  but  a  system  adopted  by
the  most  enlightened  philosophers,  the  most  accurate
historians  and  geographers  in  Greece  and  Rome.  Ac-
cording to  this  theory,  a  vast  portion  of  the  habitable
earth  was  pronounced  to  be  unfit  for  sustaining  the  hu-
man species.  Those  fertile  and  populous  regions  within
the  torrid  zone,  which  are  now  known  not  only  to  yield
their  own  inhabitants  the  necessaries  and  comforts  of
life,  with  most  luxuriant  profusion,  but  to  communicate
their  superfluous  stores  to  the  rest  of  the  world,  were
supposed  to  be  the  mansion  of  perpetual  sterility  and
desolation.  As  all  the  parts  of  the  globe  with  which
the  ancients  were  acquainted,  lay  within  the  northern
temperate  zone,  their  opinion  that  the  other  temperate

48  AMERICA.

zone  was  filled  with  inhabitants,  was  founded  on  rea-
soning- and  conjecture,  not  on  discovery.  They  even
believed,  that  by  the  intolerable  heat  of  the  torrid  zone,
such  an  insuperable  barrier  was  placed  between  the  two
temperate  regions  of  the  earth,  as  would  prevent  for  ever
any  intercourse  between  their  respective  inhabitants.
Thus  this  extravagant  theory  not  only  proves  that  the
ancients  were  unacquainted  with  the  true  state  of  the
globe,  but  it  tended  to  render  their  ignorance  perpetual,
by  representing  all  attempts  towards  opening  a  com-
munication with  the  remote  regions  of  the  earth,  as  ut-
terly  impracticable.'

But,  however  imperfect  or  inaccurate  the  geogra-
phical knowledge  which  the  Greeks  and  Romans  had
acquired  may  appear,  in  respect  of  the  present  improved
state  of  that  science,  their  progress  in  discovery  will
seem  considerable,  and  the  extent  to  which  they  carried
navi2:ation  and  commerce  must  be  reckoned  o^reat,  when
compared  with  the  ignorance  of  early  times.  As  long
as  the  Roman  empire  retained  such  vigour  as  to  pre-
serve its  authority  over  the  conquered  nations,  and  to
keep  them  united,  it  was  an  object  of  public  policy,  as
well  as  of  private  curiosity,  to  examine  and  describe  the
countries  which  composed  this  great  body.  Even  when
the  other  sciences  began  to  decline,  geography,  enriched
with  new  observations,  and  receiving  some  accession
from  the  experience  of  every  age,  and  the  reports  of
.  every  traveller,  continued  to  improve. It  at-

Iniprove-  j  ^  f

mentsin talncd  to  the  hio^hest  point  of  perfection  and

geography  , . , .

by  Pto-  accuracy  to  which  it  ever  arrived  in  the  an-
'^'"'^'  cient  world,  by  the  industry  and  genius  of
Ptolemy  the  philosopher.  He  flourished  in  the  second
century  of  the  Christian  era,  and  published  a  descrip-
tion of  the  terrestrial  globe,  more  ample  and  exact  than
that  of  any  of  his  predecessors.

f  Sec  Note  VIII.  . '

BOOK I.  40

Theinva-  But,  sooii  after,  violciit  convulsions  began
Roman  ^  to  sliakc  the  Roman  state ;  the  fatal  ambition
empire  by  qj.  caprice  of  Coustantinc,  bv  chang-ino-  the  seat

barbarous  '^  .  .

nations,  of  government,  divided  and  weakened  its  force ;
the  barbarous  nations,  which  Providence  prepared  as
instruments  to  overturn  the  mighty  fabric  of  the  Roman
power,  began  to  assemble  and  to  muster  their  armies
on  its  frontier  :  the  empire  tottered  to  its  fall.  During
this  decline  and  old  age  of  the  Roman  state,  it  was
impossible  that  the  sciences  should  go  on  improving.
The  efforts  of  genius  were,  at  that  period,  as  languid
and  feeble  as  those  of  government.  From  the  time  of
Ptolemy,  no  considerable  addition  seems  to  have  been
made  to  geographical  knowledge,  nor  did  any  impor-
tant revolution  happen  in  trade,  excepting  that  Con-
stantinople, by  its  advantageous  situation,  and  the  en-
couragement of  the  eastern  emperors,  became  a  com-
mercial city  of  the  first  note.

Effects  of  At  leno[th,  the  clouds  which  had  been  so
qlfeJts  on  lo^g  gathering  round  the  Roman  empire,  burst
commer- jj^^q  g^  storm. Barbarous  nations  rushed  in

cial  inter-
course, from  several  quarters  with  irresistible  impetu-
osity, and,  in  the  general  wreck,  occasioned  by  the  in-
undation which  overwhelmed  Europe,  the  arts,  sci-
ences, inventions,  and  discoveries  of  the  Romans,  pe-
rished in  a  great  measure,  and  disappeared.^  All  the
various  tribes,  which  settled  in  the  different  provinces
of  the  Roman  empire,  were  vmcivilized,  strangers  to
letters,  destitute  of  arts,  unacquainted  with  regular
government,  subordination,  or  laws.  The  manners  and
institutions  of  some  of  them  were  so  rude,  as  to  be
hardly  compatible  with  a  state  of  social  union.  Europe,
when  occupied  by  such  inhabitants,  may  be  said  to
have  returned  to  a  second  infancy,  and  had  to  begin
anew  its  career  in  improvement,  science,  and  civility.
The  first  effect  of  the  settlement  of  those  barbarous

e  See  vol.  iii.  p.  S-l.  68.
VOL.  VJ.  E

50  x\MERICA.

invaders  was  to  dissolve  the  union  by  which  the  Roman
power  had  cemented  mankind  together. They  par-
celled out  Europe  into  many  small  and  independent
states,  differing  from  each  other  in  language  and  cus-
toms. No  intercourse  subsisted  between  the  members
of  those  divided  and  hostile  communities. Accustomed
to  a  simple  mode  of  life,  and  averse  to  industry,  they
had  few  wants  to  supply,  and  few  superfluities  to  dis-
pose of. The  names  of  stranger  and  enemy  became
once  more  words  of  the  same  import. Customs  every
where  prevailed,  and  even  laws  were  established,  which
rendered  it  disagreeable  and  dangerous  to  visit  any
foreign  country.'' Cities,  in  which  alone  an  extensive
commerce  can  be  carried  on,  were  few,  inconsiderable,
and  destitute  of  those  immunities  which  produce  se-
curity or  excite  enterprise. The  sciences,  on  which
geography  and  navigation  are  founded,  were  little  cul-
tivated. The  accounts  of  ancient  improvements  and
discoveries,  contained  in  the  Greek  and  Roman  authors,
were  neglected  or  misunderstood. The  knowledge  of
remote  regions  was  lost,  their  situation,  their  commo-
dities, and  almost  their  names,  were  unknown.
Commerce ^^^  circumstancc  prevented  commercial  in-
stui  pre- tercourse  with  distant  nations  from  ceasing  al-
the  eastern  together. Constantinople,  though  often  threat-
empire, ^^^^  ^^  ^^^  fiercc  invadcrs,  who  spread  deso-
lation over  the  rest  of  Europe,  was  so  fortunate  as  to
escape  their  destructive  rage. In  that  city,  the  know-
ledge of  ancient  arts  and  discoveries  was  preserved ;
a  taste  for  splendour  and  elegance  subsisted  ;  the  pro-
ductions and  luxuries  of  foreign  countries  were  in  re-
quest ;  and  commerce  continued  to  flourish  there  when
it  was  almost  extinct  in  every  other  part  of  Europe.
The  citizens  of  Constantinople  did  not  confine  their
trade  to  the  islands  of  the  Archipelago,  or  to  the  ad-
jacent coasts  of  Asia ;  they  took  a  wider  range,  and

''  See  vol.  iii.  p.  79.

BOOK 1.  51

foUowina'  the  course  which  the  ancients  had  marked
out,  imported  the  commodities  of  the  East  Indies  from
Alexandria.  When  Egypt  was  torn  from  the  Roman
empire  by  the  Arabians,  the  industry  of  the  Greeks
discovered  a  new  channel,  by  which  the  productions
of  India  might  be  conveyed  to  Constantinople.  They
were  carried  up  the  Indus,  as  far  as  that  great  river
is  navigable  ;  thence  they  were  transported  by  land
to  the  banks  of  the  river  Oxus,  and  proceeded  down  its
stream  to  the  Caspian  sea.  There  they  entered  the  Volga,
and  sailing  up  it,  were  carried  by  land  to  the  Tanais,
which  conducted  them  into  the  Euxine  sea,  where  ves-
sels from  Constantinople  waited  their  arrival.'  This
extraordinary  and  tedious  mode  of  conveyance  merits
attention,  not  only  as  a  proof  of  the  violent  passion
which  the  inhabitants  of  Constantinople  had  conceived
for  the  luxuries  of  the  East,  and  as  a  specimen  of  the
ardour  and  ingenuity  with  which  they  carried  on  com-
merce ;  but  because  it  demonstrates,  that  during  the
ignorance  which  reigned  in  the  rest  of  Europe,  an
extensive  knowledge  of  remote  countries  was  still  pre-
served in  the  capital  of  the  Greek  empire.
And  araoncT  -^^  the  samc  time,  a  gleam  of  light  and  know-
the  Ara-  ledge  brokc  in  upon  the  East.  The  Arabians
having  contracted  some  relish  for  the  sciences
of  the  people  whose  empire  they  had  contributed  to
overturn,  translated  the  books  of  several  of  the  Greek
philosophers  into  their  own  language.  One  of  the  first
was  that  valuable  work  of  Ptolemy,  which  I  have  al-
ready mentioned.  The  study  of  geography  became,
of  consequence,  an  early  object  of  attention  to  the  Ara-
bians. But  that  acute  and  ingenious  people  cultivated
chiefly  the  speculative  and  scientific  parts  of  geography.
In  order  to  ascertain  the  figure  and  dimensions  of  the
terrestrial  globe,  they  applied  the  principles  of  geo-
metry, they  had  recourse  to  astronomical  observations,

'  Ramusio,  vol.  i.  p.  S72.  F.
E 2

52  AMERICA.

they  employed  experiments  and  operations,  which  Eu-
rope, in  more  enlightened  times,  has  been  proud  to
adopt  and  to  imitate.  At  that  period,  however,  the
fame  of  the  improvements  made  by  the  Arabians  did
not  reach  Europe.  The  knowledge  of  their  discoveries
was  reserved  for  ages  capableof  comprehending  them.
T, ■ ,  r Bv  deorees,  the  calamities and desolation

Ivevival  of  V  o  '

commerce  brouglit upou the wcstcm  provinces of  the
gation'Tn Romau  empire by its barbarous  conquerors,
Europe. ^ygj.g  forgotten,  and  in  some  measure  repaired.
The  rude  tribes  which  settled  there,  acquiring  insen-
sibly some  idea  of  regular  government,  and  some  relish
for  the  functions  and  comforts  of  civil  life,  Europe  be-
gan to  awake  from  its  torpid  and  inactive  state. The
iirst  symptoms  of  revival  were  discerned  in  Italy. The
northern  tribes  which  took  possession  of  this  country,
made  progress  in  improvement  with  greater  rapidity
than  the  people  settled  in  other  parts  of  Europe. Va-
rious causes,  which  it  is  not  the  object  of  this  work  to
enumerate  or  explain,  concurred  in  restoring  liberty
and  independence  to  the  cities  of  Italy .'' The  acqui-
sition of  these  roused  industry,  and  gave  motion  and
vigour  to  all  the  active  powers  of  the  human  mind.
Foreign  commerce  revived,  navigation  was  attended
to  and  improved. Constantinople became  the  chief
mart  to  which  the  Italians  resorted. There  they  not
only  met  with  a  favourable  reception,  but  obtained  such
mercantile  privileges  as  enabled  them  to  carry  on  trade
with  great  advantage.  They  were  supplied  both  with  the
precious  commodities  of  the  East,  and  with  many  curi-
ous manufactures,  the  product  of  ancient  arts  and  inge-
nuity which  still  subsisted  among  the  Greeks. As  the
labour  and  expense  of  conveying  the  productions  of
India  to  Constantinople  by  that  long  and  indirect  course
which  I  have  described,  rendered  them  extremely  rare,
and  of  an  exorbitant  price,  the  industry  of  the  Italians

^  Sec  vol.  iii.  p.  35.

BOOK I.  53

discovered  other  methods  of  procuring  them  in  greater
abundance, and  at  an  easier  rate. They  sometimes
purchased  them  in  Aleppo,  Tripoli,  and  other  ports  on
the  coast  of  Syria,  to  which  they  were  brought  by  a
route  not  unknown  to  the  ancients. They  were  con-
veyed from  India  by  sea,  up  the  Persian  gulf,  and
ascending  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  as  far  as  Bagdat,
were  carried  by  land  across  the  desert  of  Palmyra,  and
from  thence  to  the  towns  on  the  Mediterranean. But,
from the  length  of  the  journey,  and  the  dangers  to
which  the  caravans  were  exposed,  this  proved  always
a  tedious,  and  often  a  precarious  mode  of  conveyance.
At  length,  the  soldans  of  Egypt,  having  revived  the
commerce  with  India  in  its  ancient  channel,  by  the
Arabian  gulf,  the  Italian  merchants,  notwithstanding
the  violent  antipathy  to  each  other  with  which  Chris-
tians and  the  followers  of  Mahomet  were  then  possessed,
repaired  to  Alexandria,  and  enduring,  from  the  love  of
g-ain,  the  insolence  and  exactions  of  the  Mahometans,
established  a  lucrative  trade  in  that  port. From  that
period,  the  commercial  spirit  of  Italy  became  active
and  enterprising. Venice,  Genoa, Pisa,  rose,  from
inconsiderable  towns,  to  be  populous  and  wealthy  cities.
Their  naval  power  increased  ;  their  vessels  frequented
not  only  all  the  ports  in  the  Mediterranean,  but,  ven-
turing sometimes  beyond  the  Straits,  visited  the  ma-
ritime towns  of  Spain,  France,  the  Low  Countries,  and
England  ;  and,  by  distributing  their  commodities  over
Europe,  began  to  communicate  to  its  various  nations
some  taste  for  the  valuable  productions  of  the  East,  as
well  as  some  ideas  of  manufactures  and  arts,  which
were  then  unknown  beyond  the  precincts  of  Italy.
Their  ro- While  the  cities  of  Italy  were  thus  advancing
gress  fa- {^i  their  career  of  improvement,  an  event  hap-

voured  by  *  • ,1

the  cru-  pened,  the  most  extraordmary,  perhaps,  m  the
*^  ^* '  history  of  mankind,  which,  instead  of  retarding
the  commercial  progress  of  the  Italians,  rendered  it

54  AMEllICA,

more  rapid.  The  martial  spirit  of  the  Europeans,
heiglitened  and  inflamed  by  religious  zeal,  prompted
them  to  attempt  the  deliverance  of  the  Holy  Land  from
the  dominion  of  infidels.  Vast  armies,  composed  of
all  the  nations  in  Europe,  marched  towards  Asia,  upon
this  wild  enterprise.  The  Genoese,  the  Pisans,  and
Venetians,  furnished  the  transports  which  carried  them
thither.  They  supplied  them  with  provisions  and  mi-
litary stores.  Besides  the  immense  sums  which  they
received  on  this  account,  they  obtained  commercial
privileges  and  establishments,  of  great  consequence  in
the  settlements  which  the  crusaders  made  in  Palestine,
and  in  other  provinces  of  Asia.  From  those  sources
prodigious  wealth  flowed  into  the  cities  which  I  have
mentioned.  This  was  accompanied  with  a  propor-
tional increase  of  power  ;  and,  by  the  end  of  the  holy
war,  Venice,  in  particular,  became  a  great  maritime
state,  possessing  an  extensive  commerce,  and  ample
territories.'  Italy  was  not  the  only  country  in  which
the  crusades  contributed  to  revive  and  difl^use  such  a
spirit  as  prepared  Europe  for  future  discoveries.  By
their  expeditixDns  into  Asia,  the  other  European  na-
tions became  well  acquainted  with  remote  regions,  which
formerly  they  knew  only  by  name,  or  by  the  reports  of
ignorant  and  credulous  pilgrims.  They  had  an  oppor-
tunity of  observing  the  manners,  the  arts,  and  the  ac-
commodations of  people  more  polished  than  themselves.
This  intercourse  between  the  east  and  the  west  sub-
sisted almost  two  centuries.  The  adventurers  who  re-
turned from  Asia,  communicated  to  their  countrymen
the  ideas  which  they  had  acquired,  and  the  heibits  of
life  they  had  contracted  by  visiting  more  refined  na-
tions. The  Europeans  began  to  be  sensible  of  wants,
with  which  they  were  formerly  unacquainted  :  new
desires  were  excited ;  and  such  a  taste  for  the  com-
modities and  arts  of  other  countries  gradually  spread

'  Kssai  de  I'Hiitoirc  du  Commerce  do  Venise,  p.  aZ,  &c.

BOOK I.  55

among  them,  that  they  not  only  encouraged  the  resort
of  foreigners  to  their  harbours,  but  began  to  perceive
the  advantage  and  necessity  of  applying  to  commerce
themselves."

By  the  dis-  This  communicatiou,  which  w^as  opened  be-
traveViers"  twccn  Europc  and  the  western  provinces  of
by  land,  ^sia,  encouraged  several  persons  to  advance
far  beyond  the  countries  in  which  the  crusaders  carried
on  their  operations,  and  to  travel  by  land  into  the  more
remote  and  opulent  regions  of  the  East.  The  wild  fa-
naticism, which  seems,  at  that  period,  to  have  mingled
in  all  the  schemes  of  individuals,  no  less  than  in  all  the
counsels  of  nations,  first  incited  men  to  enter  upon
those  long  and  dangerous  peregrinations.  They  were
afterward  undertaken  from  prospects  of  commercial
advantage,  or  from  motives  of  mere  curiosity.  Ben-
jamin, a  Jew  of  Tudela,  in  the  kingdom  of  Navarre,
possessed  with  a  superstitious  veneration  for  the  law  of
Moses,  and  solicitous  to  visit  his  countrymen  in  the
East,  whom  he  hoped  to  find  in  such  a  state  of  power
and  opulence  as  might  redound  to  the  honour  of  his
sect,  set  out  from  Spain  in  the  year  1160,  and  travel-
ling by  land  to  Constantinople,  proceeded  through  the
countries  to  the  north  of  the  Euxine  and  Caspian  seas,
as  far  as  Chinese  Tartary.  From  thence  he  took  his
route  towards  the  south,  and  after  traversing  various
provinces  of  the  farther  India,  he  embarked  on  the  In-
dian ocean,  visited  several  of  its  islands,  and  returned
at  the  end  of  thirteen  years  by  the  way  of  Egypt,  to
Europe,  with  much  information  concerning  a  large  dis-
trict of  the  globe,  altogether  unknown  at  that  time  to
the  western  world."  The  zeal  of  the  head  of  the  Chris-
tian church  co-operated  with  the  superstition  of  Ben-
jamin the  Jew,  in  discovering  the  interior  and  remote
1246. provinces  of  Asia. All  Christendom  having

'»  See  vol.  iii.  p.  28,  &c.
"  Bergeron  Recueil  des  Voyages,  &c.  toro.  i.  p.  1.

56  AMERICA.

been  alarmed  with  accounts  of  the  rapid  progress
of  the  Tartar  arms  under  Zengis  Khan,  Innocent  IV.,
who  entertained  most  exalted  ideas  concerning  the
plenitude  of  his  own  power,  and  the  submission  due  to
his  injunctions,  sent  father  John  de  Piano  Carpini,  at
the  head  of  a  mission  of  Franciscan  monks,  and  father
Ascolino,  at  the  head  of  another  of  Dominicans,  to  en-
join Kayuk  Khan,  the  grandson  of  Zengis,  who  was
then  at  the  head  of  the  Tartar  empire,  to  embrace  the
Christian  faith,  and  to  desist  from  desolating  the  earth
by  his  arms.  The  haughty  descendant  of  the  greatest
conqueror  Asia  had  ever  beheld,  astonished  at  this
strange  mandate  from  an  Italian  priest,  whose  name  and
jurisdiction  were  alike  unknown  to  him,  received  it  with
the  contempt  which  it  merited,  though  he  dismissed
the  mendicants  who  delivered  it  with  impunity.  But,
as  they  had  penetrated  into  the  country  by  different
routes,  and  followed  for  some  time  the  Tartar  camps,
which  were  always  in  motion,  they  had  opportunity  of
visiting  a  great  part  of  Asia.  Carpini,  who  proceeded
by  the  way  of  Poland  and  Russia,  travelled  through  its
northern  provinces  as  far  as  the  extremities  of  Thibet.
Ascolino,  who  seems  to  have  landed  somewhere  in
Syria,  advanced  through  its  southern  provinces,  into
the  interior  parts  of  Persia."
^^^^  Not  long  after,  St.  Louis  of  France  contri-
buted farther  towards  extending  the  know-
ledge which  the  Europeans  had  begun  to  acquire  of
those  distant  regions.  Some  designing  impostor,  who
took  advantage  of  the  slender  acquaintance  of  Christen-
dom with  the  state  and  character  of  the  Asiatic  nations,
having  informed  him  that  a  powerful  Khan  of  the  Tar-
tars had  embraced  the  Christian  faith,  the  monarch
listened  to  the  tale  with  pious  credulity,  and  instantly
resolved  to  send  ambassadors  to  this  illustrious  con-
vert, with  a  view  of  enticing  him  to  attack  their  com-

"  Hakluyf,  i.  21. Bergeron,  torn.  i.

BOOK I.  57

mon  enemy  the  Saracens  in  one  quarter,  while  he  fell
upon  them  in  another.  As  monks  were  the  only  per-
sons in  that  age  who  possessed  such  a  degree  of  know-
ledge as  qualified  them  for  a  service  of  this  kind,  he
employed  in  it  father  Andrew,  a  Jacobine,  who  was
followed  by  father  William  de  Rubruquis,  a  Fran-
ciscan. With  respect  to  the  progress  of  the  former,
there  is  no  memorial  extant.  The  journal  of  the  latter
has  been  published.  He  was  admitted  into  the  pre-
sence of  Mangu,  the  third  Khan  in  succession  from
Zengis,  and  made  a  circuit  through  the  interior  parts
of  Asia,  more  extensive  than  that  of  any  European  who
had  hitherto  explored  them.^

To  those  travellers,  whom  religious  zeal  sent  forth
to  visit  Asia,  succeeded  others  who  ventured  into  re-
mote countries,  from  the  prospect  of  commercial  ad-
vantage, or  from  motives  of  mere  curiosity.  The  first
and  most  eminent  of  these  was  Marco  Polo,  a  Venetian
of  a  noble  family.  Having  engaged  early  in
trade,  according  to  the  custom  of  his  country,
his  aspiring  mind  wished  for  a  sphere  of  activity  more
extensive  than  was  afforded  to  it  by  the  established
traffic  carried  on  in  those  ports  of  Europe  and  Asia,
which  the  Venetians  frequented.  This  prompted  him
to  travel  into  unknown  countries,  in  expectation  of
opening  a  commercial  intercourse  with  them,  more
suited  to  the  sanguine  ideas  and  hopes  of  a  young  ad-
venturer.

As  his  father  had  already  carried  some  European
commodities  to  the  court  of  the  great  Khan  of  the  Tar-
tars, and  had  disposed  of  them  to  advantage,  he  re-
sorted thither.  Under  the  protection  of  Kublay  Khan,
the  most  powerful  of  all  the  successors  of  Zengis,  he
continued  his  mercantile  peregrinations  in  Asia  up-
wards of  twenty-six  years  ;  and,  during  that  time,  ad-
vanced towards  the  east,  far  beyond  the  utmost  boun-

P  Hakl.  i.  71. Recucil  des  Voyages  par  Bergeron,  torn.  i.

58  AMERICA.

daries  to  which  any  European  traveller  had  ever  pro-
ceeded. Instead  of  following  the  course  of  Carpini
and Rubruquis,  along  the  vast  unpeopled plains  of
Tartary,  he passed  through the  chief  trading  cities
in  the  more  cultivated  parts  of  Asia,  and  penetrated  to
Cambalu,  or  Peking,  the  capital  of  the  great  kingdom
of  Cathay,  or  China,  subject  at  that  time  to  the  suc-
cessors of  Zengis. He  made  more  than  one  voyage  on
the  Indian  ocean ;  he  traded  in  many  of  the  islands,
from  which  Europe  had  long  received  spiceries  and
other  commodities,  which  it  held  in  high  estimation,
though  unacquainted  with  the  particular  countries  to
which  it  was  indebted  for  those  precious  productions;
and  he  obtained  information  concerning  several  coun-
tries, which  he  did  not  visit  in  person,  particularly  the
island  Zipangri,  probably  the  same  now  known  by  the
name  of  Japan.'' On  his  return,  he  astonished  his  con-
temporaries with  his  descriptions  of  vast  regions,  whose
names  had  never  been  heard  of  in  Europe,  and  with
such  pompous  accounts  of  their  fertility,  their  popu-
lousness,  their  opulence, the  variety  of  their  manu-
factures,  and the extent  of  their  trade, as rose  far
above  the  conception  of  an  uninformed  age.

About  half  a  century  after  Marco  Polo,  Sir
John  Mandeville,  an  Englishman,  encouraged
by  his  example,  visited  most  of  the  countries  in  the  east
which  he  had  described,  and,  like  him,  published  an
account  of  them/  The  narrations  of  those  early  tra-
vellers abound  with  many  wild  incoherent  tales,  con-
cerning giants,  enchanters,  and  monsters.  But  they
were  not,  from  that  circumstance,  less  acceptable  to  an
ignorant  age,  which  delighted  in  what  was  marvellous.
The  wonders  which  they  told,  mostly  on  hearsay,  filled
the^  multitude  with  admiration.  The  facts  which  they
related  from  their  own  observation  attracted  the  atten-

T  Viaggi  di  Marco  Polo. Ramus,  ii.  2. Bergeron,  torn.  ii.
'  N  oyagcs^aiid  Travcli,  by  Sir  Jolin  Mandeville.

BOOK I.  59

tion  of  the  more  discerning.  The  former,  which  may
be  considered  as  the  popular  traditions  and  fables  of
the  countries  through  which  they  had  passed,  were
gradually  disregarded  as  Europe  advanced  in  know-
ledge. The  latter,  however  incredible  some  of  them
may  have  appeared  in  their  own  time,  have  been  con-
firmed by  the  observations  of  modern  travellers.  By
means  of  both,  however,  the  curiosity  of  mankind  was
excited  with  respect  to  the  remote  parts  of  the  earth,
their  ideas  were  enlarged,  and  they  were  not  only  in-
sensibly disposed  to  attempt  new  discoveries,  but  re-
ceived such  information  as  directed  to  that  particular
course  in  which  these  were  afterward  carried  on.
And  by  the  While  this  spirit  was  gradually  forming  in
invention Europc,  a  fortunatc  discovery  was  made,  which

of  the  ma-  .  J  '

riner's coutributcd  morc  than  all  the  efforts  and  inge-

corapass.  -j. c  t  •  i

nuity  01  precedmg  ages,  to  miprove  and  to
extend  navigation.  That  wonderful  property  of  the
magnet,  by  which  it  communicates  such  virtue  to  a
needle  or  slender  rod  of  iron,  as  to  point  towards  the
poles  of  the  earth,  was  observed.  The  use  which  might
be  made  of  this  in  directing-  naviaration  was  immedi-
ately  perceived.  That  valuable,  but  now  familiar  in-
strument, the  ;7m;-i/?er',S'  co?7ipass,yv2iS  constructed.  When,
by  means  of  it,  navigators  found  that,  at  all  seasons,
and  in  every  place,  they  could  discover  the  north  and
south  with  so  much  ease  and  accuracy,  it  became  no
longer  necessary  to  depend  merely  on  the  light  of  the
stars  and  the  observation  of  the  sea-coast.  They  gra-
dually abandoned  their  ancient  timid  and  lingering
course  along  the  shore,  ventured  boldly  into  the  ocean,
and,  relying  on  this  new  guide,  could  steer  in  the  dark-
est night,  and  under  the  most  cloudy  sky,  with  a  secu-
rity and  precision  hitherto  unknown.  The  compass
may  be  said  to  have  opened  to  man  the  dominion  of
the  sea,  and  to  have  put  him  in  full  possession  of  the
earth,  by  enabling  him  to  visit  every  part  of  it. Flavio

60  AMERICA.

Gioia,  a  citizen  of  Amalfi,  a  town  of  considerable  trade
in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  was  the  author  of  this  great
discovery,  about  the  year  1302.  It  hath  been  often
the  fate  of  those  illustrious  benefactors  of  mankind,
who  have  enriched  science  and  improved  the  arts  by
their  inventions,  to  derive  more  reputation  than  benefit
from  the  happy  eiforts  of  their  genius.  But  the  lot  of
Gioia  has  been  still  more  cruel ;  through  the  inattention
or  ignorance  of  contemporary  historians,  he  has  been
defrauded  even  of  the  fame  to  which  he  had  such  a  just
title.  We  receive  from  them  no  information  with  re-
spect to  his  profession,  his  character,  the  precise  time
when  he  made  this  important  discovery,  or  the  acci-
dents and  inquiries  which  led  to  it.  The  knowledge
of  this  event,  though  productive  of  greater  effects  than
any  recorded  in  the  annals  of  the  human  race,  is  trans-
mitted to  us  without  any  of  those  circumstances  which
can  gratify  the  curiosity  that  it  naturally  awakens.'  But
though  the  use  of  the  compass  might  enable  the  Italians
to  perforin  the  short  voyages  to  which  they  were  ac-
customed, with  greater  security  and  expedition,  its  in-
fluence was  not  so  sudden  or  extensive,  as  immediately
to  render  navigation  adventurous,  and  to  excite  a  spirit
of  discovery.  Many  causes  combined  in  preventing
this  beneficial  invention  from  producing  its  full  effect
instantaneously.  Men  relinquish  ancient  habits  slowly,
and  with  reluctance.  They  are  averse  to  new  experi-
ments, and  venture  upon  them  with  timidity.  The
commercial  jealousy  of  the  Italians,  it  is  probable,  la-
boured to  conceal  the  happy  discovery  of  their  coun-
trymen from  other  nations.  The  art  of  steering  by  the
compass  with  such  skill  and  accuracy  as  to  inspire  a
full  confidence  in  its  direction,  was  acquired  gradually.
Sailors,  unaccustomed  to  quit  sight  of  land,  durst  not
launch  out  at  once  and  commit  themselves  to  unknown

»  Collinas  et  Trornbellus de  Acus  nauticae  Inventore.  Iiistit.  Acad.  Bonoii.  tom.^
ii.  part  iii.  p.  372.

BOOK I.  (>1

seas.  Accordingly,  near  half  a  century  elapsed  from
the  time  of  Gioia  s  discovery,  before  navigators  ven-
tured into  any  seas  which  they  had  not  been  accus-
tomed to  frequent.

The  first  appearance  of  a  bolder  spirit  may

Some  ap-  '^  ^  p i r>  •

pearance be  dated  from  the  voyages  of  the  Spaniards  to
spirit  in the  Canary  or  Fortunate Islands. By  what
x^avigation.  j^^^^i^jent  they  were  led to the discovery of
those  small  isles,  which  lie  near  five  hundred  miles  from
the  Spanish  coast,  and  above  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles
from  the  coast  of  Africa,  contemporary  writers  have  not
explained. But,  about  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth
century,  the  people  of  all  the  different  kingdoms  into
which  Spain  was  then divided,  were  accustomed  to
make  piratical  excursions  thither,  in  order  to  plunder
the  inhabitants,  or  to  carry  them  off  as  slaves. Clement
VI.,  in  virtue  of  the  right  claimed  by  the  holy  see,  to
dispose  of  all  countries  possessed  by  infidels,  erected
those  isles  into  a  kingdom,  in  the  year  1344,  and  con-
ferred it  on  Lewis  de  la  Cerda,  descended  from  the
royal  family  of  Castile. But  that  unfortunate  prince,
destitute  of  power  to  assert  his  nominal  title,  having
never  visited  the  Canaries,  John  de Bethencourt,  a
Norman  baron,  obtained  a  grant  of  them  from  Henry
III.  of  Castile.* Bethencourt,  with  the  valour  and  good
fortune  which distinguished the adventurers of  his
country,  attempted  and  effected  the  conquest ;  and  the
possession  of  the  Canaries  remained  for  some  time  in
his  family,  as  a  fief  held  of  the  crown  of  Castile. Pre-
vious to  this  expedition  of  Bethencourt,  his  country-
men settled  in  Normandy  are  said  to  have  visited  the
coast  of  Africa,  and  to  have  proceeded  far  to
the  south  of  the  Canary  Islands. But their
voyages  thither  seem  not  to  have  been  undertaken  in
consequence  of  any  public  or  regular  plan  for  extend-
ing navigation  and  attempting  new  discoveries. They

*  Viera  y  Clavijo  Notic.  de  laHistor.  de  Canaria,  I.  268,  &c. Glas.  Hist.  c.  1.

62  AMKIUCA.

were  either  excursions  suggested  by  that  roving  pira-
tical spirit,  which  descended  to  the  Normans  from  their
ancestors,  or  the  commercial  enterprises  of  private  mer-
chants, which  attracted  so  little  notice,  that  hardly  any
memorial  of  them  is  to  be  found  in  contemporary  au-
thors. In  a  general  survey  of  the  progress  of  disco-
very, it  is  sufficient  to  have  mentioned  this  event ;  and
leaving  it  among  those  of  dubious  existence,  or  of  small
importance,  we  may  conclude,  that  though  much  addi-
tional information  concernino- the  remote  reo-ions  of  the
East  had  been  received  by  travellers  who  visited  them
by  land,  navigation,  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth
century,  had  not  advanced  beyond  the  state  to  which  it
had  attained  before  the  downfal  of  the  Roman  empire.
^.  .  At  leng-th  the period  arrived,  when  Provi-

First  rcgu-  or  '

larpiauof  dcucc  decreed  that  men  were  to  pass  the  limits
within  which  they  had  been  so  long  confined,
and  open  to  themselves  a  more  ample  field  wherein  to
display  their  talents,  their  enterprise  and  courage.  The
first  considerable  efforts  towards  this  were  not  made  by
any  of  the  more  powerful  states  of  Europe,  or  by  those
who  had  applied  to  navigation  with  the  greatest  assi-
-, ^^ duity  and  success. The  glory  of  leading  the

Formed  by  •'^  _  >d J  o

the  Portu-  way  in  this  new  career,  was  reserved  for  Por-
tugal, one  of  the  smallest  and  least  powerful  of
the  European  kingdoms.  As  the  attempts  of  the  Por-
tuguese to  acquire  the  knowledge  of  those  parts  of  the
globe  with  which  mankind  were  then  unacquainted,  not
only  improved  and  extended  the  art  of  navigation,  but
roused  such  a  spirit  of  curiosity  and  enterprise,  as  led
to  the  discovery  of  the  New  World,  of  which  I  propose
to  write  the  history,  it  is  necessary  to  take  a  full  view
of  the  rise,  the  progress,  and  success  of  their  various
naval  operations.  It  was  in  this  school  that  the  dis-
coverer of  America  was  trained  ;  and  unless  we  trace
the  steps  by  which  his  instructors  and  guides  advanced,
it  will  be  impossible  to  comprehend  the  circumstances

BOOK  I.  m

which  sug-gested  the  idea,  or  facilitated  the  execution
of  his  great  design.

Circum- Various  circumstances  prompted  the  Portu-
which  kd  gu^se  to  exert  their  activity  in  this  new  direc-
to  this. tion,  and  enabled  them  to  accomplish  under-
takings apparently  superior  to  the  natural  force  of  their
monarchy. The  kings  of  Portugal,  having  driven  the
Moors  out  of  their  dominions,  had  acquired  power,  as
well  as  glory,  by  the  success  of  their  arms  against  the
infidels. By  their  victories  over  them,  they  had  ex-
tended the  royal  authority  beyond  the  narrow  limits
within  which  it  was  originally  circumscribed  in  Por-
tugal, as  well  as  in  other  feudal  kingdoms. They  had
the  command  of  the  national  force,  could  rouse  it  to
act  with  united  vigour,  and,  after  the  expulsion  of  the
Moors,  could  employ  it  without  dread  of  interruption
from  any  domestic  enemy. By  the  perpetual  hostilities
carried  on  for  several  centuries  ao^ainst  the  Mahome-
tans,  the  martial  and  adventurous  spirit  which  distin-
guished all  the  European  nations  during  the  middle
ages,  was  improved  and  heightened  among  the  Portu-
guese. A  fierce  civil  v/ar  towards  the  close  of  the
fourteenth  century,  occasioned  by  a  disputed  succes-
sion, augmented  the  military  ardour  of  the  nation,  and
formed  or  called  forth  men  of  such  active  and  daring
genius,  as  are  fit  for  bold  undertakings. The  situation
of  the  kingdom,  bounded  on  every  side  by  the  domi-
nions of  a  more  powerful  neighbour,  did  not  afford  free
scope  to  the  activity  of  the  Portuguese  by  land,  as  the
strength  of  their  monarchy  was  no  match  for  that  of
Castile. But  Portugal  was  a  maritime  state,  in  which
there  were  many  commodious  harbours ;  the  people
had  begun  to  make  some  progress  in  the  knowledge
and  practice  of  navigation ;  and  the  sea  was  open  to
them,  presenting  the  only  field  of  enterprise  in  which
they  could  distinguish  themselves.

G4  AMERICA.

First  at-  Such  was  the  state  of  Portugal,  and  such  the
'  tempt.  disposition  of  the  people,  when  John  I.,  sur-
named  the  Bastard,  obtained  secure  possession  of  the
crown  by  the  peace  concluded  with  Castile,  in  the  year
1411.  He  was  a  prince  of  great  merit,  who,  by  supe-
rior courage  and  abilities,  had  opened  his  way  to  a
throne,  which  of  right  did  not  belong  to  him.  He  in-
stantly perceived  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  pre-
serve public  order,  or  domestic  tranquillity,  without
finding  some  employment  for  the  restless  spirit  of  his
subjects.  With  this  view  he  assembled  a  numerous
fleet  at  Lisbon,  composed  of  all  the  ships  which  he
could  fit  out  in  his  own  kingdom,  and  of  many  hired
from foreie'ucrs. This ofreat  armament  was

1412.  .  °  ^

destined  to  attack  the  Moors  settled  on  the
coast  of  Barbary.  While  it  was  equipping,  a  few  ves-
sels were  appointed  to  sail  along  the  western  shore  of
Africa  bounded  by  the  iVtlantic  ocean,  and  to  discover
the  unknown  countries  situated  there.  From  this  in-
considerable attempt,  we  may  date  the  commencement
of  that  spirit  of  discovery,  which  opened  the  barriers
that  had  so  long  shut  out  mankind  from  the  knowledge
of  one  half  of  the  terrestrial  globe.

At  the  time  when  John  sent  forth  these  ships  on  this
new  voyage,  the  art  of  navigation  was  still  very  imper-
fect. Though  Africa  lay  so  near  to  Portugal,  and  the
fertility  of  the  countries  already  known  on  that  con-
tinent invited  men  to  explore  it  more  fully,  the  Portu-
guese had  never  ventured  to  sail  beyond  Cape  AW.
That  promontory,  as  its  name  imports,  was  hitherto
considered  as  a  boundary  which  could  not  be  passed.
But  the  nations  of  Europe  had  now  acquired  as  much
knowledge,  as  imboldened  them  to  disregard  the  pre-
judices and  to  correct  the  errors  of  their  ancestors.  The
long  reign  of  ignorance,  the  constant  enemy  of  every
curious inquiry, and of  every  new  undertaking,  was

BOOK 1.  (.'5

approaching  to  its  period.  The  light  of  science  began
to  dawn.  The  works  of  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Ro-
mans began  to  be  read  with  admiration  and  profit.  The
sciences  cultivated  by  the  Arabians  were  introduced
into  Europe  by  the  Moors  settled  in  Spain  and  Portu-
gal, and  by  the  Jews,  who  were  very  numerous  in  both
these  kingdoms.  Geometry,  astronomy,  and  geogra-
phy, the  sciences  on  which  the  art  of  navigation  is
founded,  became  objects  of  studious  attention.  The
memory  of  the  discoveries  made  by  the  ancients  was
revived,  and  the  progress  of  their  navigation  and  com-
merce began  to  be  traced.  Some  of  the  causes  which
have  obstructed  the  cultivation  of  science  in  Portus-al,
during  this  century  and  the  last,  did  not  exist,  or  did
not  operate  in  the  same  manner,  in  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury ;*  and  the  Portuguese,  at  that  period,  seem  to  have
kept  pace  with  other  nations  on  this  side  of  the  Alps  in
literary  pursuits.

As  the  genius  of  the  a^e  favoured  the  exe-

Its  success*

cution  of  that  new  undertaking,  to  which  the
peculiar  state  of  the  country  invited  the  Portuguese,  it
proved  successful.  The  vessels  sent  on  the  discovery
doubled  that  formidable  Cape,  which  had  terminated
the  progress  of  former  navigators,  and  proceeded  a
hundred  and  sixty  miles  beyond  it,  to  Cape  Bojador.
As  its  rocky  cliffs,  which  stretched  a  considerable  way
into  the  Atlantic,  appeared  more  dreadful  than  the  pro-
montory which  they  had  passed,  the  Portuguese  com-
manders durst  not  attempt  to  sail  round  it,  but  returned
to  Lisbon,  more  satisfied  with  having  advanced  so  far,
than  ashamed  of  having  ventured  no  farther.
Prince  luconsidcrable  as this  voyage  was, it  in-

Henrythe creased  tlic  passion  for  discovery,  which  begfan

director  of  •  • tt*  i n^^ n  •

the  Portu- to  arise  m  Portugal. The  fortunate  issue  of

coveries. the king's  expedition  against  the  Moors  of

guese  dis
;overi<

^^^'^^ Barbary,  added  strength  to  that  spirit  in  the

t  See  Note  IX.
VOL.  VI.  F

66  AMERTCA.

nation,  and  pushed  it  on  to  new  undertakings.  In  or-
der to  render  these  successful,  it  was  necessary  that  diey
should  be  conducted  by  a  person  who  possessed  abili-
ties capable  of  discerning  what  was  attainable,  who
enjoyed  leisure  to  form  a  regular  system  for  prosecut-
ing discovery,  and  who  was  animated  with  ardour  that
would  persevere  in  spite  of  obstacles  and  repulses.
Happily  for  Portugal,  she  found  all  those  qualities  in
Henry  duke  of  Viseo,  the  fourth  son  of  king  John  by
Philippa  of  Lancaster,  sister  of  Henry  IV.  king  of  Eng-
land. That  prince,  in  his  early  youth,  having  accom-
panied his  father  in  his  expedition  to  Barbary,  distin-
guished himself  by  many  deeds  of  valour.  To  the  mar-
tial spirit,  which  was  the  characteristic  of  every  man  of
noble  birth  at  that  time,  he  added  all  the  accomplish-
ments of  a  more  enlightened  and  polished  age.  He
cultivated  the  arts  and  sciences,  which  were  then  un-
known and  despised  by  persons  of  his  rank.  He  ap-
plied with  peculiar  fondness  to  the  study  of  geography;
and  by  the  instruction  of  able  masters,  as  well  as  by  the
accounts  of  travellers,  he  early  acquired  such  know-
ledge of  the  habitable  globe,  as  discovered  the  great
probability  of  finding  new  and  opulent  countries,  by
sailing  along  the  coast  of  Africa.  Such  an  object  was
formed  to  awaken  the  enthusiasm  and  ardour  of  a  youth-
ful mind,  and  he  espoused  with  the  utmost  zeal  the
patronage  of  a  design  which  might  prove  as  beneficial,
as  it  appeared  to  be  splendid  and  honourable.  In  order
that  he  might  pursue  this  great  scheme  without  inter-
ruption, he  retired  from  court  immediately  after  his
return  from  Africa,  and  fixed  his  residence  at  Sagres,
near  Cape  St.  Vincent,  where  the  prospect  of  the  At-
lantic ocean  invited  his  thoughts  continually  towards
his  favourite  project,  and  encouraged  him  to  execute  it.
In  this  retreat  he  was  attended  by  some  of  the  most
learned  men  in  his  country,  who  aided  him  in  his  re-
searches. He  applied  for  information  to  the  Moors  of

BOOK  I.  67

Barbary,  who  were  accustomed  to  travel  by  land  into
the  interior  provinces  of  Africa,  in  quest  of  ivory,  gold-
dust,  and  other  rich  commodities. He  consulted  the
Jews  settled  in  Portugal. By  promises,  rewards,  and
marks  of  respect,  he  allured  into  his  service  several  per-
sons, foreigners  as  well  as  Portuguese,  who  were  emi-
nent for  their  skill  in  navigation. In  taking  those  pre-
paratory steps,  the  great  abilities  of  the  prince  Avere
seconded  by  his private  virtues. His  integrity, his
affability, his  respect for  religion, his zeal for the
honour  of  his  country,  engaged  persons  of  all  ranks  to
applaud  his  design,  and  to  favour  the  execution  of  it.
His  schemes  were  allowed,  by  the  greater  part  of  his
countrymen,  to  proceed  neither  from  ambition  nor  the
desire  of  wealth, but  to  flow  from  the  warm  benevo-
lence of  a  heart  eager  to  promote the  happiness  of
mankind,  and  which  justly  entitled  him  to  assume  a
motto  for  his  device,  that  described  the  quality  by  which
he  wished  to  be  distinguished,  the  talent  of  doing  good.
Discovery His  first  effort,  as  is  usual  at  tlie  commence-
Santo. ment  of  any  new  undertaking,  was extremely
^*^^" inconsiderable.  He  fitted  out  a  single  ship,  and
giving  the  command  of  it  to  John  Gonzales  Zarco  and
Tristan  Vaz,  two  gentlemen  of  his  household,  who  vo-
luntarily ofiered  to  conduct  the  enterprise,  he  instructed
them  to  use  their  utmost  efforts  to  double  Cape  Boja-
dor,  and  thence  to  steer  towards  the  south. They,  ac-
cording to  the  mode  of  navigation  which  still  prevailed,
held  their  course  along  the  shore;  and  by  following
that  direction,  they  must have encountered almost
insuperable  difhculties  in  attempting  to  pass  Cape  Bo-
jador. But  fortune  came  in  aid  to  their  want  of  skill,
and  prevented  the  voyage  from  being  altogether  fruit-
less. A  sudden  squall  of  wind  arose,  drove  them  out
to  sea,  and  when  they  expected  every  moment  to  pe-
rish, landed  them  on  an  unknown  island,  which  from
their  happy  escape  they  named  Porto  Santo. In  the

F  2

GS  AMKIUCA.

infancy  of  navigation,  the  discovery  of  this  small  island

appeared  a  matter  of  such  moment,  that  they  instantly

returned  to  Portugal  with  the good  tidings,  and  were

received  by  Henry  with  the  applause  and  honour  due

to  fortunate  adventurers. This  faint  dawn  of  success

filled  a  mind  ardent  in  the  pursuit  of  a  favourite  object

with  such  sanguine  hopes  as  were  sufficient  incitements

to  proceed. Next  year  Henry  sent  out  three
1419. .  *^  *^

ships  under  the  same  commanders,  to  whom  he

joined  Bartholomew  Perestrello,  in  order  to  take  pos-
session of  the  island  which  they  had  discovered.  When
they  began  to  settle  in  Porto  Santo,  they  observed  to-
wards the  south  a  fixed  spot  in  the  horizon  like  a  small
Of  Ma- black  cloud.  By  degrees,  they  were  led  to  con-
deira. jecturc  that  it  might  be  land,  and  steering  to-
wards it,  they  arrived  at  a  considerable  island,  uninha-
bited and  covered  with  wood,  which  on  that  account
they  called  Madeira.'' As  it  was  Henry's  chief  object
to  render  his  discoveries  useful  to  his  country,  he  im-
mediately equipped  a  fleet  to  carry  a  colony  of
Portuguese  to  these  islands. By  his  provident
care,  they  w^ere furnished  not  only  with  the seeds,
plants,  and  domestic  animals  common  in  Europe ;  but
as  he  foresaw  that  the  warmth  of  the  climate  and  fer-
tility of  the  soil  would  prove  favourable  to  the  rearing
of  other  productions,  he  procured  slips  of  the  vine  from
the  island  of  Cyprus,  the  rich  wines  of  which  were  then
in  great  request,  and  plants  of  the  sugar-cane  from
Sicily, into which it had been lately introduced.
These  throve  so  prosperously  in  this  new  country,  that
the  benefit  of  cultivating  them  was  immediately  per-
ceived, and  the  sugar  and  wine  of  Madeira  quickly  be-
came articles  of  some  consequence  in  the  commerce  of
Portugal.''

As  soon  as  the  advantages  derived  from  this  first  set-

"  Historical  relation  of  the  first  discovery  of  Madeira  translated  from  the  Portu-
guese of  Fran.  Alcafarana,  p.  15,  &c.

*  Lud.  Guitciardini  Descritt.  de  Paesi  Bassi,  p.  180,  181.

BOOK  I.  69

tlement  to  the  west  of  the  European  continent  began  to
be  felt,  the  spirit  of  discovery  appeared  less  chimeri-
cal, and  became  more  adventurous.  By  their  voyages
to  Madeira,  the  Portuguese  were  gradually  accustomed
to  a  bolder  navigation,  and,  instead  of  creeping  ser-
vilely along  the  coast,  ventured  into  the  open  sea.
Double  ^^  consequence  of  taking  this  course,  Gilianez,
Cape  Bo-  ^ylio  Commanded  one  of  prince  Henry's  ships,
doubled  Cape  Bojador,  the  boundary  of  the
Portuguese  navigation  upwards  of  twenty  years,  and
which  had  hitherto  been  deemed  unpassable.  This
successful  voyage,  which  the  ignorance  of  the
age  placed  on  a  level  with  the  most  famous  exploits
recorded  in  history,  opened  a  new  sphere  to  naviga-
tion, as  it  discovered  the  vast  continent  of  Africa,  still
washed  by  the  Atlantic  ocean,  and  stretching  towards
Advance  thc  soutli.  Part  ofthis  was  soon  explored ;  the
within  the  Portus^uese  advanced  within  the  tropics,  and  in

tropics.  '-'  r '

the  space  of  a  few  years  they  discovered  the
river  Senegal,  and  all  the  coast  extending  from  Cape
Blanco  to  Cape  de  Verd.

Astonished  Hithcrto  the  Portuguese  had  been  guided  in.
they  disco-  their  discoveries,  or  encouraged  to  attempt  them,
vered  there.j^y  ^l^g  j-gj^^  g^j^^  information  which  they  received

from  the  works  of  the  ancient  mathematicians  and  g-eo-
graphers.  But  when  they  began  to  enter  the  torrid  zone,
the  notion  which  prevailed  among  the  ancients,  that
the  heat,  which  reigned  perpetually  there,  was  so  ex-
cessive as  to  render  it  uninhabitable,  deterred  them,  for
some  time,  from  proceeding.  Their  own  observations,
when  they  first  ventured  into  this  unknown  and  formi-
dable region,  tended  to  confirm  the  opinion  of  antiquity
concerning  the  violent  operation  of  the  direct  rays  of
the  sun.  "  As  far  as  the  river  Senegal,  the  Portuguese
had  found  the  coast  of  Africa  inhabited  by  people
nearly  resembling  the  Moors  of  Barbary.  When  they
advanced  to  the  south  of  that  river,  the  human  form

70  AMERICA.

seemed  to  put  on  a  new  appearance.  They  beheld  men
with  skins  black  as  ebony,  with  short  curled  hair,  flat
noses,  thick  lips,  and  all  the  peculiar  features  which  are
now  known  to  distinouish  the  race  of  negroes.  This
surprising  alteration  they  naturally  attributed  to  the
influence  of  heat,  and  if  they  should  advance  nearer  to
the  line,  they  began  to  dread  that  its  effects  would  be
still  more  violent.  Those  dano^ers  were  exasreferated :
and  many  other  objections  against  attempting  farther
discoveries  were  proposed  by  some  of  the  grandees,
who,  from  ignorance,  from  envy,  or  from  that  cold
timid  prudence  which  rejects  whatever  has  the  air  of
novelty  or  enterprise,  had  hitherto  condemned  all
prince  Henry's  schemes.  They  represented,  that  it
was  altogether  chimerical  to  expect  any  advantage  from
countries  situated  in  that  region  which  the  wisdom  and
experience  of  antiquity  had  pronounced  to  be  unfit  for
the  habitation  of  men ;  that  their  forefathers,  satisfied
with  cultivating  the  territory  which  Providence  had
allotted  them,  did  not  waste  the  strenofth  of  the  kins:-
dom  by  fruitless  projects,  in  quest  of  new  settlements ;
that  Portugal  was  already  exhausted  by  the  expense  of
attempts  to  discover  lands  which  either  did  not  exist,
or  which  nature  destined  to  remain  unknown;  and  was
drained  of  men,  who  might  have  been  employed  in
undertakings  attended  with  more  certain  success,  and
productive  of  greater  benefit.  But  neither  their  appeal
to  the  authority  of  the  ancients,  nor  their  reasonino-s
concerning  the  interests  of  Portugal,  made  any  impres-
sion upon  the  determined  philosophic  mind  of  prince
Henry.  The  discoveries  which  he  had  already  made
convinced  him  that  the  ancients  had  little  more  than  a
conjectural  knowledge  of  the  torrid  zone.  He  was  no
less  satisfied  that  the  political  arguments  of  his  oppo-
nents, with  respect  to  the  interests  of  Portugal,  were
malevolent  and  ill-founded.  In  those  sentiments  he
.  was  strenuously  supported  by  his  brother  Pedro,  who

BOOK  r.  71

governed  the  kingdom  as  guardian  of  their  nephew
Alphonso  v.,  who  had  succeeded  to  the  throne
during  his  minority ;  and,  instead  of  slacken-
ing his  efforts,  Henry  continued  to  pursue  his  disco-
veries with  fresh  ardour.

Papal  grant But,  iu  ordcr  to  silcncc  all  the  murmurs  of
S  what"^^'  opposition,  he  endeavoured  to  obtain  the  sanc-
countries ^"qj-^  ^f  ^\^q  highcst  authority  in  favour  of  his
discover, operations. With  this  view  he  applied  to  the
pope,  and  represented,  in  pompous  terms,  the  pious  and
unwearied zeal with  which  he  had  exerted  himself
during  twenty  years,  in  discovering  unknown  countries,
the  wretched  inhabitants  of  which  were  utter  strangers
to  true  religion,  wandering  in  heathen  darkness,  or  led
astray  by  the  delusions  of  Mahomet. He  besought  the
holy  father,  to  whom,  as  the  vicar of  Christ,  all  the
kingdoms  of  the  earth  were  subject,  to  confer  on  the
crown  of  Portugal  a  right  to  all  the  countries  possessed
by  infidels,  which  should  be  discovered  by  the  industry
of  its  subjects,  and  subdued  by  the  force  of  his  arms.
He  entreated  him'  to  enjoin  all  Christian  powers,  under
the  highest  penalties,  not  to  molest  Portugal  while  en-
gaged in  this  laudable  enterprise,  and  to  prohibit  them
from  settling  in  any  of  the  countries  which  the  Portu-
guese should  discover. He  promised  that,  in  all  their
expeditions,  it  should  be  the  chief  object  of  his  coun-
trymen to  spread  the  knowledge  of  the  Christian  reli-
gion, to  establish  the  authority  of  the  holy  see,  and  to
increase  the  flock  of  the  universal  pastor. As  it  was  by
improving  with  dexterity  every  favourable  conjuncture
for  acquiring  new  powers,  that  the  court  of  Rome  had
gradually  extended  its  usurpations,  Eugene  IV.,  the
pontiff  to  whom  this  application  was  made,  eagerly
seized  the  opportunity  which  now  presented  itself.  He
instantly  perceived,  that,  by  complying  with  prince
Henry's  request,  he  might  exercise  a  prerogative  no
less  flattering  in  its  own  nature,  than  likely  to  prove

72  AMERICA.

beneficial  in  its  consequences.  A  bull  was  accordingly
issued,  in  which,  after  applauding  in  the  strongest
terms  the  past  efforts  of  the  Portuguese,  and  exhorting
them  to  proceed  in  that  laudable  career  on  which  they
had  entered,  he  granted  them  an  exclusive  right  to  all
the  countries  which  they  should  discover,  from  Cape
Non  to  the  continent  of  India.

Extravagant  as  this  donation,  comprehending  such  a
large  portion  of  the  habitable  globe,  would  now  appear,
even  in  Catholic  countries,  no  person  in  the  fifteenth
century  doubted  that  the  pope,  in  the  plenitude  of  his
apostolic  power,  had  a  right  to  confer  it.  Prince
Henry  was  soon  sensible  of  the  advantages  which  he
derived  from  this  transaction.  His  schemes  were  au-
thorized and  sanctified  by  the  bull  approving  of  them.
The  spirit  of  discovery  was  connected  with  zeal  for  re-
ligion, which,  in  that  age,  was  a  principle  of  such  ac-
tivity and  vigour,  as  to  influence  the  conduct  of  nations.
All  Christian  princes  were  deterred  from  intruding  into
those  countries  which  the  Portuguese  had  discovered,
or  from  interrupting  the  progress  of  their  navigation
and  conquests.*'

Faroe  and  The  fame  of  the  Portuguese  voyages  soon
Ke  PortJ'-^  spread  over  Europe.  Men  long  accustomed  to
guesedis-  circumscribc  the  activity  and  knowledge  of  the
human  mind  within  the  limits  to  which  they
had  been  hitherto  confined,  were  astonished  to  behold
the  sphere  of  navigation  so  suddenly  enlarged,  and  a
prospect  opened  of  visiting  regions  of  the  globe,  the
existence  of  which  was  unknown  in  former  times.  The
learned  and  speculative  reasoned  and  formed  theories
concerning  those  unexpected  discoveries.  The  vulgar
inquired  and  wondered;  while  enterprising  adven-
turers crowded  from  every  part  of  Europe,  soliciting
prince  Henry  to  employ  them  in  this  honourable  ser-
vice.  Many  Venetians  and  Genoese,  in  particular,  who

y  See  Note  X.

BOOK I.  73

were,  at  that  time,  superior  to  all  other  nations  in  the
science  of  naval  affairs,  entered  aboard  the  Portuguese
ships,  and  acquired  a  more  perfect  and  extensive  know-
ledge of  their  profession  in  that  new  school  of  naviga-
tion. In  emulation  of  these  foreigners,  the  Portuguese
exerted  their  own  talents. The  nation  seconded  the
designs  of  the  prince.  Private  merchants  formed
companies,  with  a  view  to  search  for  unknown
countries. The  Cape  deVerd  islands,  which  lie  off  the
promontory  of  that  name,  were  discovered,  and
soon  after  the  isles  called  Azores. As  the  for-
mer of  these  are  above  three  hundred  miles  from  the
African  coast,  and  the  latter  nine  hundred  miles  from
any  continent,  it  is  evident,  by  their  venturing  so  boldly
into  the  open  seas,  that  the  Portuguese  had,  by  this
time,  improved  greatly  in  the  art  of  navigation.
Death  of While  the  passion  for  engaging  in  new  un-
Hen*iy. dcrtakiugs  was  thus  warm  and  active,  it  re-
1463. ceived  an  unfortunate  check  by  the  death  of
prince  Henry,  whose  superior  knowledge  had  hitherto
directed all the  operations of  the  discoverers,  and
whose  patronage  had  encouraged  and  protected  them.
But  notwithstanding  all  the  advantages  which  they  de-
rived from  these,  the  Portuguese,  during  his  life,  did
not  advance  in  their  utmost  progress  towards  the  south,
within  five  degrees  of  the  equinoctial  line;  and  after
From  1412^^^^^'  contiuucd  cxcrtious  for  half  a  century,
to  1463. hardly  fifteen  hundred  miles  of  the  coast  of
Africa  were  discovered. To  an  age  acquainted  with
the  efforts  of  navigation  in  its  state  of  maturity  and
improvement,  those  essays  of  its  early  years  must  neces-
sarily appear  feeble  and  unskilful. But  inconsiderable
as  they  may  be  deemed,  they  were  sufficient  to  turn  the
curiosity  of  the  European  nations  into  a  new  channel,
to  excite  an  enterprising  spirit,  and  to  point  the  way  to
future  discoveries.
Alphonso,  who  possessed  the  throne  of  Portugal  at  the

74  AMERICA.

The  pas-  time  of  princE  Henry's  death,  was  so  much  eii-
dTscovery  g^g^d  in  Supporting  his  own  pretensions  to
for^omr*  the  crown  of  Castile,  or  in  carrying  on  his  ex-
time,  peditions  against  the  Moors  in  Barbary,  that  the
force  of  his  kingdom  being  exerted  in  other  operations,
he  could  not  prosecute  the  discoveries  in  Africa  with
ardour.  He  committed  the  conduct  of  them  to  Fer-
nando Gomez,  a  merchant  in  Lisbon,  to  whom  he  granted
an  exclusive  right  of  commerce  with  all  the  countries
of  which  prince  Henry  had  taken  possession.  Under
the  restraint  and  oppression  of  a  monopoly,  the  spirit
of  discovery  languished.  It  ceased  to  be  a  national
object,  and  became  the  concern  of  a  private  man,  more
attentive  to  his  own  gain,  than  to  the  glory  of  his
country.  Some  progress,  however,  was  made.  The
Portuo'uese  ventured at len2:th to  cross the

1-171. .  .  .  ^

line,  and,  to  their  astonishment,  found  that  re-
gion of  the  torrid  zone,  which  was  supposed  to  be
scorched  with  intolerable  heat,  to  be  not  only  habit-
able, but  populous  and  fertile.

j^g^ John  n.,  who  succeeded  his  father  Alphonso,
Revives posscsscd  taleuts  capable  both  of  formino-  and

with  addi-  -^  .  i •  *

tionai  ar-  exccutuig  great  designs.  As  part  of  his  reve-
nues, while  prince,  had  arisen  from  duties  on
the  trade  with  the  newly-discovered  countries,  this  na-
turally turned  his  attention  towards  them,  and  satisfied
him  with  respect  to  their  utility  and  importance.  In
proportion  as  his  knowledge  of  these  countries  extend-
ed, the  possession  of  them  appeared  to  be  of  greater
consequence.  While  the  Portuguese  proceeded  along
the  coast  of  Africa,  from  Cape  Non  to  the  river  of  Sene-
gal, they  found  all  that  extensive  tract  to  be  sandy,
barren,  and  thinly  inhabited  by  a  wretched  people,
professing  the  Mahometan  religion,  and  subject  to  the
vast  empire  of  Morocco.  But  to  the  south  of  that  river,
the  power  and  religion  of  the  Mahometans  were  un-
known. The  country  was  divided  into  small  indepen-

BOOK  I.  75

dent  principalities,  the  population  was  considerable,
the  soil  fertile,^  and  the  Portuguese  soon  discovered
that  it  produced  ivory,  rich  gums,  gold,  and  other  va-
luable commodities.  By  the  acquisition  of  these,  com-
merce vy^as  enlarged,  and  became  more  adventurous.
Men,  animated  and  rendered  active  by  the  certain
prospect  of  gain,  pursued  discovery  with  greater  eager-
ness, than  when  they  were  excited  only  by  curiosity
and  hope.

Its  ro-  T'his  spirit  derived  no  small  reinforcement  of
gress.  vigour  from  the  countenance  of  such  a  monarch
as  John.  Declaring  himself  the  patron  of  every  attempt
towards  discovery,  he  promoted  it  with  all  the  ardour
of  his  grand-uncle  prince  Henry,  and  with  superior
power.  The  effects  of  this  were  immediately  felt.
A  powerful  fleet  was  fitted  out,  which,  after  dis-

1484.  •  t-~*

covering  the  kingdoms  of  Benin  and  Congo,
advanced  above  fifteen  hundred  miles  beyond  the  line,
and  the  Portuguese,  for  the  first  time,  beheld  a  new
heaven,  and  observed  the  stars  of  another  hemisphere.
John  was  not  only  solicitous  to  discover,  but  attentive
to  secure  the  possession  of  those  countries.  He  built
forts  on  the  coast  of  Guinea;  he  sent  out  colonies  to
settle  there ;  he  established  a  commercial  intercourse
with  the  more  powerful  kingdoms ;  he  endeavoured  to
render  such  as  were  feeble  or  divided  tributary  to  the
crown  of  Portugal.  Some  of  the  petty  princes  volun-
tarily acknowledged  themselves  his  vassals.  Others
were  compelled  to  do  so  by  force  of  arms.  A  regular
and  well-digested  system  was  formed  with  respect  to
this  new  object  of  policy,  and  by  firmly  adhering  to  it,
the  Portuguese  power  and  commerce  in  Africa  were
established  upon  a  solid  foundation.
Hopes  of  By  their  constant  intercourse  with  the  people
ing^arew  of  Africa,  the  Portuguese  gradually  acquired

^  Navigatio  Aloysii  Cadamustiapad  Novum  Orbem  Gr^^njei,  p.  2.  18. Navigat.
all  Isola  di  San  Tome  per  un  Pilotto  Portugh. Ramusio,  i.  115.

76  AMERICA.

route  to  some  knowledge  of  those  parts  of  that  country
Indies,  which  they  had  not  visited.  The  information
which  they  received  from  the  natives,  added  to  what
they  had  observed  in  their  own  voyages,  began  to  open
prospects  more  extensive,  and  to  suggest  the  idea  of
schemes  more  important,  than  those  which  had  hitherto
allured  and  occupied  them.  They  had  detected  the
error  of  the  ancients  concerning  the  nature  of  the  torrid
zone.  They  found  as  they  proceeded  southwards,  that
the  continent  of  Africa,  instead  of  extending  in  breadth,
according  to  the  doctrine  of  Ptolemy,"  at  that  time  the
oracle  and  guide  of  the  learned  in  the  science  of  geo-
graphy, appeared  sensibly  to  contract  itself,  and  to
bend  towards  the  east.  This  induced  them  to  give  cre-
dit to  the  accounts  of  the  ancient  Phenician  voyages
round  Africa,  which  had  long  been  deemed  fabulous,
and  led  them  to  conceive  hopes  that,  by  following  the
same  route,  they  might  arrive  at  the  East  Indies,  and
eno-ross  that  commerce  which  has  been  the  source  of
wealth  and  power  to  every  nation  possessed  of  it.  The
comprehensive  genius  of  prince  Henry,  as  we  may  con-
jecture from  the  words  of  the  pope's  bull,  had  early
formed  some  idea  of  this  navigation.  But  though  his
countrymen,  at  that  period,  were  incapable  of  conceiv-
ing the  extent  of  his  views  and  schemes,  all  the  Portu-
guese mathematicians  and  pilots  now  concurred  in  re-
presenting them  as  well-founded  and  practicable.  The
king  entered  with  warmth  into  their  sentiments,  and
becran  to  concert  measures  for  this  arduous  and  im-
portant  voyage.

Schemes  Bcforc  his  preparations  for  this  expedition
Sishing""  were  finished,  accounts  were  transmitted  from
this.  Africa,  that  various  nations  along  the  coast  had
mentioned  a  mighty  kingdom  situated  on  their  conti-
nent, at  a  great  distance  towards  the  east,  the  king  of
which,  according  to their  description,  professed the

»  Vide  Nov.  Orbis  Tabul.  Geograpli.  sccund.  Ptolera.  Amst.  173<).

BOOK I.  77

Christian  religion.  The  Portuguese  monarch  imme-
diately concluded,  that  this  must  be  the  emperor  of
Abyssinia,  to  whom  the  Europeans,  seduced  by  a  mis-
take of  Rubruquis,  Marco  Polo,  and  other  travellers  to
the  East,  absurdly  gave  the  name  of  Prester  or  Presby-
ter John:  and,  as  he  hoped  to  receive  information  and
assistance  from  a  Christian  prince,  in  prosecuting  a
scheme  that  tended  to  propagate  their  common  faith,
he  resolved  to  open,  if  possible,  some  intercourse  vi^ith
his  court.  With  this  view,  he  made  choice  of  Pedro  de
Covillam  and  Alphonso  de  Payva,  who  were  perfect
masters  of  the  Arabic  language,  and  sent  them  into  the
East  to  search  for  the  residence  of  this  unknown  poten-
tate, and  to  make  him  proffers  of  friendship.  They  had
in  charge  likewise  to  procure  whatever  intelligence  the
nations  which  they  visited  could  supply,  with  respect
to  the  trade  of  India,  and  the  course  of  navigation  to
that  continent.''

Vojage  of  While  John  made  this  new  attempt  by  land,
Barthoio-  ^q  obtain  some  knowled2:e  of  the  country  which

mew  Diaz.  ^  i t  i

1486. he  wished  so  ardently  to  discover,  he  did  not
neglect  the  prosecution  of  this  great  design  by  sea.
The  conduct  of  a  voyage  for  this  purpose,  the  most  ar-
duous and  important  which  the  Portuguese  had  ever
projected,  was committed  to  Bartholomew  Diaz,  an
officer  whose  sagacity,  experience,  and  fortitude  ren-
dered him  equal  to  the  undertaking. He  stretched
boldly  towards  the  south,  and,  proceeding  beyond  the
utmost  limits  to  which  his  countrymen  had  hitherto
advanced,  discovered  near  a  thousand  miles  of  new
country. Neither  the  danger  to  which  he  was  exposed,
by  a  succession  of  violent  tempests  in  unknown  seas,
and  by  the  frequent  mutinies  of  his  crew,  nor  the  cala-
mities of  famine  which  he  suffered  from  losing  his
storeship,  could  deter  him  from  prosecuting  his  enter-
prise. In  recompense  of  his  labours  and  perseverance,

b  Faria  y  Soiisa  Port.  Asia,  vol.  i.  p.  26. Lasitau  Decouv.  de  Port.  i.  46,

7H  AMERICA.

he  at  last  descried  that  lofty  promontory  which  bounds
Africa  to  the  south.  But  to  descry  it  was  all  that  he
had  in  his  power  to  accomplish.  The  violence  of  the
winds,  the  shattered  condition  of  his  ships,  and  the
turbulent  spirit  of  the  sailors,  compelled  him  to  return
after  a  vovao-c  of  sixteen  months,  in  which  he  disco-
vered  a  far  greater  extent  of  country  than  any  former
navigator.  Diaz  had  called  the  promontory  which  ter-
minated his  voyage,  Cabo  Tormentoso,  or  the  Stormy
Cape;  but  the  king,  his  master,  as  he  now  entertained
no  doubt  of  having:  found  the  lono'-desired  route  to
India,  gave  it  a  name  more  inviting,  and  of  better  omen,
The  Cape  of  Good  Hopef"

iMore  cer-  Thosc  sauguiuc  cxpcctatious  of  success  were
pec'ti'of'  confirmed  by  the  intelligence  which  John  re-
success.  ceived  over-land,  in  consequence  of  his  embassy
to  Abyssinia.  Covillam  and  Payva,  in  obedience  to
their  master's  instructions,  had  repaired  to  Grand  Cairo.
From  that  city  they  travelled  along  with  a  caravan  of
Egyptian  merchants,  and,  embarking  on  the  Red  sea,
arrived  at  Aden  in  Arabia.  There  they  separated;
Payva  sailed  directly  towards  Abyssinia ;  Covillam  em-
barked for  the  East  Indies,  and,  having  visited  Calecut,
Goa,  and  other  cities  on  the  Malabar  coast,  returned  to
Sofala,  on  the  east  side  of  Africa,  and  thence  to  Grand
Cairo,  which  Payva  and  he  had  fixed  upon  as  their
place  of  rendezvous.  Unfortunately  the  former  was
cruelly  murdered  in  Abyssinia,  but  Covillam  found  at
Cairo  two  Portuguese  Jews,  whom  John,  whose  pro-
vident sagacity  attended  to  every  circumstance  that
could  facilitate  the  execution  of  his  schemes,  had  dis-
patched after  them,  in  order  to  receive  a  detail  of  their
proceedings,  and  to  communicate  to  them  new  instruc-
tions. By  one  of  these  Jews,  Covillam  transmitted  to
Portugal  a  journal  of  his  travels  by  sea  and  land,  his
remarks  upon  the  trade  of  India,  together  with  exact

.  <"  Faria  y  Soiisa  Port.  Asia,  vol.  i.  p.  26.

BOOK I.  79

maps  of  the  coasts  on  which  he  had  touched  ;  and  from
what  he  himself  had  observed,  as  well  as  from  the  in-
formation of  skilful  seamen  in  different  countries,  he
concluded,  that,  by  sailing  round  Africa,  a  passage
might  be  found  to  the  East  Indies/
Prepara-  The  happy  coiucidencc  of  Covillam's  opinion
anothe7  ^^^  report,  with  the  discoveries  which  Diaz  had
voyage,  lately  made,  left  hardly  any  shadow  of  doubt
with  respect  to  the  possibility  of  sailing  from  Europe
to  India.  But  the  vast  length  of  the  voyage,  and  the
furious  storms  which  Diaz  had  encountered  near  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  alarmed  and  intimidated  the  Por-
tuguese to  such  a  degree,  although  by  long  experience
they  were  now  become  adventurous  and  skilful  mariners,
that  some  time  was  requisite  to  prepare  their  minds  for
this  dangerous  and  extraordinary  voyage.  The  cou-
rage, however,  and  authority  of  the  monarch,  gradually
dispelled  the  vain  fears  of  his  subjects  or  made  it  ne-
cessary to  conceal  them.  As  John  thought  himself  now
upon  the  eve  of  accomplishing  that  great  design,  which
had  been  the  principal  object  of  his  reign,  his  earnest-
ness in  prosecuting  it  became  so  vehement,  that  it  oc-
cupied his  thoughts  by  day,  and  bereaved  him  of  sleep
through  the  night.  While  he  was  taking  every  precau-
tion that  his  wisdom  and  experience  could  suggest,  in
order  to  ensure  the  success  of  the  expedition,  which
was  to  decide  concerning  the  fate  of  his  favourite  pro-
The  atten- J6ct,  the  fame  of  the  vast  discoveries  which  the
tionof  Portuguese  had  already  made,  the  reports  con-
fixed upon  cerning  the  extraordinary  intelligence  which
they  had  received  from  the  East,  and  the  pros-
pect of  the  voyage  which  they  now  meditated,  drew  the
attention  of  all  the  European  nations,  and  held  them  in
suspense  and  expectation.  By  some,  the  maritime  skill
and  navigations  of  the  Portuguese  were  compared  with
those  of  the  Phenicians  and  Carthaginians,  and  exalted

^  Faria  y  Soiisa  Port.  Asia,  vol.  i.  p.  27. Lasifau  Decouv.  i.  48.

it,

80  A  •NI  ERICA.

above  them.  Others  formed  conjectures  concerning  the
revolutions  which  the  success  of  the  Portuofuese schemes
might  occasion  in  the  course  of  trade,  and  the  political
state  of  Europe.  The  Venetians  began  to  be  disquieted
with  the  apprehension  of  losing  their  Indian  commerce,
the  monopoly  of  which  was  the  chief  source  of  their
power  as  well  as  opulence,  and  the  Portuguese  already
enjoyed  in  fancy  the  wealth  of  the  East.  But,  during
this  interval,  which  gave  such  scope  to  the  various
Suddenly  workiugs  of  curiosity,  of  hope,  and  of  fear,  an
l"new'^ob-  account  was  brought  to  Europe  of  an  event  no
j^'^^  less  extraordinary  than  unexpected,  the dis-

covery of  a  New  World  situated  in  the  west;  and  the
eyes  and  admiration  of  mankind  turned  immediately
towards  that  great  object.

THE

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA

BOOK  11.

Birth  and  Among  the  foreigners  whom  the  fame  of  the
of  Coimn-  discoveries  made  by  the  Portuguese  had  allured
''"*• into  their  service,  was  Christopher  Colon,  or
Columbus,  a  subject  of  the  republic  of  Genoa. Neither
the  time  nor  place  of  his  birth  are  known  with  cer-
tainty f-  but  he  was  descended  of  an  honourable  family,
though  reduced  to  indigence  by  various  misfortunes.
His  ancestors  having  betaken  themselves  for  subsis-
tence to  a  seafaring  life,  Columbus  discovered  in  his
early  youth  the  peculiar  character  and  talents  which
mark  out  a  man  for  that  profession. His  parents,  in-
stead of  thwarting  this  original  propensity  of  his  mind,
seem  to  have  encourae'ed  and  confirmed  it,  bv  the  edu-
cation  which  they  gave  him. After  acquiring  some
knowledge  of  the  Latin  tongue,  the  only  language  in
which  science  was  taught  at  that  time,  he  was  instructed
in  geometry,  cosmography,  astronomy,  and  the  art  of
drawing. To  these  he  applied  with  such  ardour  and
predilection,  on  account  of  their  connexion  with  navi-
gation, his  favourite  object,  that  he  advanced  with  rapid
proficiency  in  the  study  of  them. Thus  quali-
fied, he  went  to  sea  at  the  age  of  fourteen,  and
began  his  career  on  that  element  which  conducted  him
to  so  much  glory. His  early  voyages  were  to  those

a  See  Note  XI.
VOL.  VI.  G

82  AMERICA.

ports  in  the  Mediterranean  which  his  countrj'^men  the
Genoese  frequented. This  being-  a  sphere  too  narrow
for  his  active  mind,  he  made  an  excursion  to
the  nortliern  seas,  and  visited  the  coasts  of  Ice-
land, to  which  the  Englisli  and  other  nations  had  begun
to  resort  on  account  of  its  fishery. As  navigation,  in
every  direction,  was  now  become  enterprising,  he  pro-
ceeded beyond  that  island,  the  Thule  of  the  ancients,
and  advanced  several  degrees  within  the  polar  circle.
Having satisfied his curiosity,  by a voyage  which
tended  more  to  enlaro-e  his  knowledo-e  of  naval  affairs,
than  to  improve  his  fortune,  he  entered  into  the  service
of  a  famous  sea-captain,  of  his  own  name  and  family.
This  man  commanded  a  small  squadron  fitted  out  at  his
own  expense,  and  by  cruising  sometimes  against  the
Mahometans, sometimes against the  Venetians, the
rivals  of  his  country  in  trade,  had  acquired  both  wealth
and  reputation. With  him  Columbus  continued  for
several  years, no  less  distinguished  for  his  courage,
than  for  his  experience  as  a  sailor. At  length,  in  an
obstinate  engagement  off  the  coast  of  Portugal,  with
some  Venetian  caravals,  returning  richly  laden  from  the
Low  Countries,  the  vessel  on  board  which  he  served
took  fire,  together  with  one  of  the  enemy's  ships,  to
which  it  was  fast  grappled. In  this  dreadful  extremity
his  intrepidity  and  presence  of  mind  did  not  forsake
him. He  threw  himself  into  the  sea,  laid  hold  of  a
floating  oar,  and  by  the  support  of  it,  and  his  dexterity
in  swimming,  he  reached  the  shore,  though  above  two
leagues distant, and  saved  a  life  reserved  for  great
undertakings.''

He  enters  As  soon  as  he  Fccovered  strength  for  the
Portuguese  j^^^'^^y?  ^®  repaired  to  Lisbon,  where  many  of
service.  J^ig  couutrymcn  were  settled.  They  soon  con-
ceived such  a  favourable  opinion  of  his  merit,  as  well
as  talents,  that  they  warmly  solicited  him  to  remain  in

^  r/ifc  of  Colnrnbus,  c.  v.

BOOK  ir.  83

that  kingdom,  where  his  naval  skill  and  experience
could  not  fail  of  rendering  him  conspicuous.  To  every
adventurer  animated  either  with  curiosity  to  visit  new
countries,  or  with  ambition  to  distinguish  himself,  the
Portuguese  service  was  at  that  time  extremely  inviting.
Columbus  listened  with  a  favourable  ear  to  the  advice
of  his  friends,  and  having  gained  the  esteem  of  a  Por-
tuguese lady,  whom  he  married,  fixed  his  residence  in
Lisbon.  This  alliance,  instead  of  detaching  him  from
a  seafaring  life,  contributed  to  enlarge  the  sphere  of
his  naval  knowledge,  and  to  excite  a  desire  of  extend-
ing it  still  farther.  His  wife  was  a  daughter  of  Bar-
tholomew Perestrello,  one  of  the  captains  employed  by
prince  Henry  in  his  early  navigations,  and  who,  under
his  protection,  had  discovered  and  planted  the  islands
of  Porto  Santo  and  Madeira.  Columbus  got  possession
of  the  journals  and  charts  of  this  experienced  navigator,
and  from  them  he  learned  the  course  which  the  Portu-
guese had  held  in  making  their  discoveries,  as  well  as
the  various  circumstances  which  guided  or  encouraged
them  in  their  attempts.  The  study  of  these  soothed
and  inflamed  his  favourite  passion  ;  and  while  he  con-
templated the  maps,  and  read  the  descriptions  of  the
new  countries  which  Perestrello  had  seen,  his  impa-
tience to  visit  them  became  irresistible.  In  order  to
indulge  it,  he  made  a  voyage  to  Madeira,  and  con-
tinued during  several  years  to  trade  with  that  island,
with  the  Canaries,  the  Azores,  the  settlements  in  Gui-
nea, and  all  the  other  places  which  the  Portuguese  had
discovered  on  the  continent  of  Africa."
The  effects  By  the  experience  which  Columbus  acquired
of  their during;  such  a  variety  of  voyao;es,  to  almost

discoveries  O  *'  j o '

upon  him.  evcry  part  of  the  globe  with  which,  at  that
time,  any  intercourse  was  carried  on  by  sea,  he  was
now  become  one  of  the  most  skilful  navigators  in  Eu-
rope. But,  not  satisfied  with  that  praise,  his  ambition

•■  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  iv,  ▼.
G  2

84  AMERICA.

aimed  at  something  more.  The  successful  progress  of
the  Portuguese  navigators  had  awakened  a  spirit  of
curiosity  and  emulation,  which  set  every  man  of  science
upon  examining  all  the  circumstances  that  led  to  the
discoveries  which  they  had  made,  or  that  afforded  a
prospect  of  succeeding  in  any  new  and  bolder  under-
taking. The  mind  of  Columbus,  naturally  inquisitive,
capable  of  deep  reflection,  and  turned  to  speculations
of  this  kind,  was  so  often  employed  in  revolving  the  prin-
ciples upon  which  the  Portuguese  had  founded  their
schemes  of  discovery,  and  the  mode  on  which  they  had
carried  them  on,  that  he  gradually  began  to  form  an
idea  of  improving  upon  their  plan,  and  of  accomplishing
discoveries  which  hitherto  they  had  attempted  in  vain.
He  forms  '^^  ^"^  ^^^  ^  passagc  by  sea  to  the  East
the  idea Indics,  was  the p;reat  object in  view at  that

of  a  new  , '  1  •  1  1 T^

course  to  period.  From  the  time  that  the  Portuguese
doubled  Cape  de  Verd,  this  was  the  point  at
which  they  aimed  in  all  their  navigations,  and,  in  com-
parison with  it,  all  their  discoveries  in  Africa  appeared
inconsiderable.  The  fertility  and  riches  of  India  had
been  known  for  many  ages  :  its  spices  and  other  valua-
ble commodities  were  in  high  request  throughout  Eu-
rope, and  the  vast  wealth  of  the  Venetians  arising  from
their  having  engrossed  this  trade,  had  raised  the  envy
of  all  nations.  But  how  intent  soever  the  Portuguese
were  upon  discovering  a  new  route  to  those  desirable
regions,  they  searched  for  it  only  by  steering  towards
the  south,  in  hopes  of  arriving  at  India,  by  turning  to
the  east,  after  they  had  sailed  round  the  farther  extre-
mity of  Africa.  This  course  was  still  unknown,  and,
even  if  discovered,  was  of  such  immense  length,  that  a
voyage  from  Europe  to  India  must  have  appeared,  at
that  period,  an  undertaking,  extremely  arduous,  and  of
very  uncertain  issue.  More  than  half  a  century  had
been  employed  in  advancing  from  Cape  Non  to  the
equator ;  a  much  longer  space  of  time  might  elapse

BOOK II.  85

before  the  more  extensive  navigation  from  that  to  India
could  be  accomplished.  These  reflections  upon  the
uncertainty,  the  danger,  and  tediousness  of  the  course
which  the  Portuguese  were  pursuing,  naturally  led  Co-
lumbus to  consider  whether  a  shorter  and  more  direct
passage  to  the  East  Indies  might  not  be  found  out.
After  revolving  long  and  seriously  every  circumstance
suggested  by  his  superior  knowledge  in  the  theory  as
well  as  practice  of  navigation ;  after  comparing  atten-
tively the  observations  of  modern  pilots  with  the  hints
and  conjectures  of  ancient  authors,  he  at  last  concluded,
that  by  sailing  directly  towards  the  west,  across  the
Atlantic  ocean,  new  countries,  which  probably  formed
a  part  of  the  great  continent  of  India,  must  infallibly
be  discovered.
„, . . Principles  and  arg-uments  of  various  kinds,

J  he  pnnci-  .  .  .

pies  on  and  derived  from  different  sources,  induced
theory  was  him  to  adopt  this  opinion,  seemingly  as  cliime-
founded. j,-^^|  ^^  -^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^^  extraordinary. The

spherical  figure  of  the  earth  was  known,  and  its  magni-
tude ascertained  with  some  degree  of  accuracy.  From
this  it  was  evident,  that  the  continents  of  Europe,  Asia,
and  Africa,  as  far  as  they  were  known  at  that  time,
formed  but  a  small  portion  of  the  terraqueous  globe.
It  was  suitable  to  our  ideas  concerning  the  wisdom  and
beneficence  of  the  Author  of  Nature,  to  believe  that  the
vast  space  still  unexplored  was  not  covered  entirely  by
a  waste  unprofitable  ocean,  but  occupied  by  countries
fit  for  the  habitation  of  man.  It  appeared  likewise  ex-
tremely probable,  that  the  continent,  on  this  side  of  the
globe,  was  balanced  by  a  proportional  quantity  of  land
in  the  other  hemisphere.  These  conclusions  concern-
ing the  existence  of  another  continent,  drawn  from  the
figure  and  structure  of  the  globe,  were  confirmed  by
the  observations  and  conjectures  of  modern  navigators.
A  Portuguese  pilot,  having  stretched  farther  to  the
west  than  was  usual  at  tjiat  time,  took  up  a  piece  of

86  AMERICA.

timber  artificially  carved,  floating  upon  the  sea;  and  as
it  was  driven  towards  him  by  a  westerly  wind,  he  con-
cluded that  it  came  from  some  unknown  land  situated
in  that  quarter.  Columbus's  brother-in-law  had  found,
to  the  west  of  the  Madeira  isles,  a  piece  of  timber
fashioned  in  the  same  manner,  and  brought  by  the  same
wind  ;  and  had  seen  likewise  canes  of  an  enormous
size  floating  upon  the  waves,  which  resembled  those
described  by  Ptolemy  as  productions  peculiar  to  the
East  Indies/  After  a  course  of  westerly  winds,  trees,
torn  up  by  the  roots,  were  often  driven  upon  the  coasts
of  the  Azores;  and  atone  time, the  dead  bodies  of  two
men  with  singular  features,  resembling  neither  the  in-
habitants of  Europe  nor  of  Africa,  were  cast  ashore  there.
As  the  force  of  this  united  evidence,  arising  from
theoretical  principles  and  practical  observations,  led
Columbus  to  expect  the  discovery  of  new  countries  in
the  western  ocean,  other  reasons  induced  him  to  be-
lieve that  these  must  be  connected  with  the  continent
of  India.  Though  the  ancients  had  hardly  ever  pene-
trated into  India  farther  than  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,
yet  some  Greek  authors  had  ventured  to  describe  the
provinces  beyond  that  river.  As  men  are  prone,  and  at
liberty,  to  magnify  what  is  remote  or  unknown,  they
represented  them  as  regions  of  an  immense  extent.
Ctesias  affirmed  that  India  was  as  large  as  all  the  rest
of  Asia.  Onesicritus,  whom  Pliny  the  naturalist  fol-
lovrs,^  contended  that  it  was  equal  to  a  third  part  of  the
habitable  earth.  Nearchus  asserted,  that  it  would  take
four  months  to  march  in  a  straioht  line  from  one  extre-
mity  of  India  to  the  other.*  The  journal  of  Marco
Polo,  who  had  proceeded  towards  the  East  far  beyond
the  limits  to  which  any  European  had  ever  advanced,
seemed  to  confirm  these  exaggerated  accounts  of  the
ancients.  By  his  magnificent  descriptions  of  the  king-
doms oi  Cathay  and  Cipango,  and  of  many  other  coun-

•*  Lib.  i.  c.  17.  <^  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  17.  ^  Strab.  Georgr.  lib.  xt.  p.  1011.

BOOK  11.  87

tries,  the  names  of  which  were  unknown  in  Europe,
India  appeared  to  be  a  region  of  vast  extent. From
these accounts,  which, however  defective,  were  the
most  accurate  that  the  people  of  Europe  had  received
at  that  period,  with  respect  to  the  remote  parts  of  the
East,  Columbus  drew  a  just  conclusion. He  contended
that,  in  proportion  as  the  continent  of  India  stretched
out  towards  the  east,  it  must,  in  consequence  of  the
spherical  figure  of  the  earth,  approach  nearer  to  the
islands  which  had  lately  been  discovered  to  the  west  of
Africa  ;  that  the  distance  from  the  one  to  the  other  was
probably  not  very  considerable;  and  that  the  most  di-
rect, as  well  as  shortest  course  to  the  remote  regions  of
the  East,  was  to  be  found  by  sailing  due  west.* This
notion  concerning  the  vicinity  of  India  to  the  western
parts of  our  continent,  was countenanced by some
eminent  writers  among  the  ancients,  the  sanction of
whose  authority  was  necessary,  in  that  age,  to  procure
a  favourable  reception  to  any  tenet. Aristotle  thought
it  probable  that  the  Columns  of  Hercules,  or  Straits  of
Gibraltar,  were  not  far  removed  from  the  East  Indies,
and  that  there  might  be  a  communication  by  sea  be-
tween them.'' Seneca,  in  terms  still  more  explicit,  af-
firms, that,  with  a  fair  wind,  one  might  sail  from  Spain
to  India,  in  a  few  days.' The  famous  Atlantic  island
described  by  Plato,  and supposed  by  many  to  be a
real  country,  beyond  which  an  unknown  continent  was
situated,  is  represented  by  him  as  lying  at  no  great  dis-
tance from  Spain. After  weighing  all  these  particu-
lars, Columbus,  in  whose  character  the  modesty  and
diffidence  of  true  genius  was  united  with  the  ardent
enthusiasm  of  a  projector,  did  not  rest  with  such  abso-
lute assurance  either  upon  his  own  arguments,  or  upon
the  authority  of  the  ancients,  as  not  to  consult  such  of
his  contemporaries  as  were  capable  of  comprehending

s  See  Note  XII.

h  Aristot.  de  Coelo,  lib.  ii.  c.  14.  edit.  Du  Val.  Par.  1629.  vol.  i.  p.  472.

'Senec.  Quest,  Natur.  lib.  i.  in  proem.

88  AMERICA.

the  nature  of  the  evidence  which  he  produced  in  sup-
port of  his  opinion.  As  early  as  the  year  1474,  he
communicated  his  ideas  concerning-  the  probability  of
discovering  new  countries,  by  sailing  westwards,  to
Paul,  a  physician  of  Florence,  eminent  for  his  know-
ledge of  cosmography,  and  who,  from  the  learning  as
well  as  candour  which  he  discovers  in  his  reply,  ap-
pears to  have  been  well  entitled  to  the  confidence  which
Columbus  placed  in  him.  He  warmly  approved  of  the
plan,  suggested  several  facts  in  confirmation  of  it,  and
encouraged  Columbus  to  persevere  in  an  undertaking
so  laudable,  and  which  must  redound  so  much  to  the
honour  of  his  country,  and  the  benefit  of  Europe.''
pjj^  To  a  mind  less  capable  of  forming  and  of

schemes executiup;  Qfreat  desipfns  than  that  of  Columbus,

for  carry-  !s  o  o  >

ingitiiito  all  those  reasonings  and  observations  and  au-
thorities would  have  served  only  as  the  founda-
tion of  some  plausible  and  fruitless  theory,  which  might
have  furnished  matter  for  ingenious  discourse  or  fanci-
ful conjecture.  But  with  his  sanguine  and  enterprising
temper,  speculation  led  directly  to  action.  Fully  satis-
fied himself  with  respect  to  the  truth  of  his  system,  he
was  impatient  to  bring  it  to  the  test  of  experiment,  and
to  set  out  upon  a  voyage  of  discovery.  The  first  step
towards  this  was  to  secure  the  patronage  of  some  of  the
considerable  powers  in  Europe,  capable  of  undertaking
such  an  enterprise.  As  long  absence  had  not  extin-
guished the  affection  which  he  bore  to  his  native  coun-
try, he  wished  that  it  should  reap  the  fruits  of  his  la-
He  applies  ^ours  and  invention.  With  this  view,  he  laid
totheGe-  jj^g  schcmc  bcforc  the  senate  of  Genoa,  and
makmg  his  country  the  first  tender  of  his  ser-
vice, offered  to  sail  under  the  banners  of  the  republic,
in  quest  of  the  new  regions  which  he  expected  to  dis-
cover. But  Columbus  had  resided  for  so  many  years
in  foreign  parts,  that  his  countrymen  were  unacquainted

^  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  viii.

BOOK 11.  89

with  his  abilities  and  character  ;  and  though  a  maritime
people,  were  so  little  accustomed  to  distant  voyages,
that  they  could  form  no  just  idea  of  the  principles  on
which  he  founded  his  hopes  of  success.  They  incon-
siderately rejected  his  proposal,  as  the  dream  of  a  chi-
merical projector,  and  lost  for  ever  the  opportunity  of
restoring  their  commonwealth  to  its  ancient  splendour.'
^ ,  Havin2r  performed  what  was  due  to  his  coun-

To  the  or

king  of  try,  Columbus  was  so  little  discouraged  by  the
'"^"^^'  repulse  which  he  had  received,  that,  instead  of
relinquishing  his  undertaking,  he  pursued  it  with  fresh
ardour.  He  made  his  next  overture  to  John  II.  king  of
Portugal,  in  whose  dominions  he  had  been  long  establish-
ed, and  whom  he  considered,  on  that  account,  as  having
the  second  claim  to  his  service.  Here  every  circum-
stance seemed  to  promise  him  a  more  favourable  re-
ception :  he  applied  to  a  monarch  of  an  enterprising
genius,  no  incompetent  judge  in  naval  affairs,  and  proud
of  patronising  every  attempt  to  discover  new  countries.
His  subjects  were  the  most  experienced  navigators  in
Europe,  and  the  least  apt  to  be  intimidated  either  by  the
novelty  or  boldness  of  any  maritime  expedition.  In
Portugal,  the  professional  skill  of  Columbus,  as  well  as
his  personal  good  qualities,  were  thoroughly  known  :
and  as  the  former  rendered  it  probable  that  his  scheme
was  not  altogether  visionary,  the  latter  exempted  him
from  the  suspicion  of  any  sinister  intention  in  propos-
ing it.  Accordingly  the  king  listened  to  him  in  the
most  gracious  manner,  and  referred  the  consideration
of  his  plan  to  Diego  Ortiz,  bishop  of  Ceuta,  and  two
Jewish  physicians,  eminent  cosmographers,  whom  he
was  accustomed  to  consult  in  matters  of  this  kind.  As
in  Genoa,  ignorance  had  opposed  and  disappointed
Columbus ;  in  Lisbon,  he  had  to  combat  with  preju-
dice, an  enemy  no  less  formidable.  The  persons,  ac-
cording to  whose  decision  his  scheme  was  to  be  adopted

'  Herrera  Hist,  de  las  Indias  Occid.  dec.  i.  lib.  i.  c.  vii.

90  AMERICA.

or  rejected,  had  been  tlie  chief  directors  of  the  Portu-
guese navigations,  and  had  advised  to  search  for  a  pas-
sage to  India,  by  steering  a  course  directly  opposite  to
that  which  Columbus  recommended  as  shorter  and  more
certain.  They  could  not,  therefore,  approve  of  his  pro-
posal, without  submitting  to  the  double  mortification  of
condcnming  their  own  theory,  and  acknowledging  his
j^,^  superior  sagacity.  After  teasing  him  with  cap-
he  is  de-  tious  questions,  and  starting  innumerable  objec-
tions, with  a  view  of  betraying  him  into  such  a
particidar  explanation  of  his  system,  as  might  draw  from
him  a  full  discovery  of  its  nature,  they  deferred  passing
a  final  judgment  with  respect  to  it.  In  the  mean  time,
they  conspired  to  rob  him  of  the  honour  and  advantages
which  he  expected  from  the  success  of  his  scheme,  ad-
vising the  king  to  dispatch  a  vessel  secretly,  in  order  to
attempt  the  proposed  discovery,  by  following  exactly
the  course  which  Columbus  seemed  to  point  out.  John,
forgetting  on  this  occasion  the  sentiments  becoming  a
monarch,  meanly  adopted  this  perfidious  counsel.  But
the  pilot  chosen  to  execute  Columbus's  plan  had  neither
the  genius,  nor  the  fortitude  of  its  author.  Contrary
winds  arose,  no  sight  of  approaching  land  appeared,
his  courage  failed,  and  he  returned  to  Lisbon,  execrat-
ing the  project  as  equally  extravagant  and  dangerous.™
He  leaves  Upon  discovcring  this  dishonourable  transac-
amJ  repli'rs  tion,  Columbus  fclt  the  indignation  natural  to
^°  ^'"^  , an  inofenuous  mind,  and  in  the  warmth  of  his

court  or  ~  _

Spain.  resentment  determined  to  break  off  all  inter-
course with  a  nation  capable  of  such  flagrant  treachery.
He  instantly  quitted  the  kingdom,  and  landed  in  Spain
towards  the  close  of  the  year  1484.  As  he  was  now  at
liberty  to  court  the  protection  of  any  patron,  whom  he
could  engage  to  approve  of  his  plan,  and  to  carry  it  into
execution,  he  resolved  to  propose  it  in  person  to  Fer-
dinand and  Isabella,  who  at  that  time  governed  the

•n  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  xi. Herrcra,  dec.  1.  lib.  i.  c.  7.

BOOK II-  91

Sends  his united  kingdoms  of  Castile  and  Aragon. But
^■^"'^5 as  he  had  already  experienced  the  uncertain

into  t.ng-  .

land.  issue  of  application  to  kings  and  ministers,  he
took  the  precaution  of  sending  into  England  his  brother
Bartholomew,  to  whom  he  had  fully  communicated  his
ideas,  in  order  that  he  might  negotiate,  at  the  same
time,  with  Henry  VII.,  who  was  reputed  one  of  the  most
sagacious  as  well  as  opulent  princes  in  Europe.
Obstacles  It  was  not  without  reason  that  Columbus  en-
to  his  sue-  tertained  doubts  and  fears  with  respect  to  the

cess  in  '■ ^

Spain.  reception  of  his  proposals  in  the  Spanish  court.
Spain  was,  at  that  juncture,  engaged  in  a  dangerous
war  with  Granada,  the  last  of  the  Moorish  kingdoms  in
that  country.  The  wary  and  suspicious  temper  of  Fer-
dinand was  not  formed  to  relish  bold  or  uncommon  de-
signs. Isabella,  though  more  generous  and  enterpris-
ing, was  under  the  influence  of  her  husband  in  all  her
actions.  The  Spaniards  had  hitherto  made  no  efforts
to  extend  navigation  beyond  its  ancient  limits,  and  had
beheld  the  amazing  progress  of  discovery  among  their
neighbours  the  Portuguese,  without  one  attempt  to
imitate  or  to  rival  them.  The  war  with  the  infidels  af-
forded an  ample  field  to  the  national  activity  and  love
of  glory.  Under  circumstances  so  unfavourable,  it  was
impossible  for  Columbus  to  make  rapid  progress  with  a
nation,  naturally  slow  and  dilatory  in  forming  all  its
resolutions.  His  character,  however,  was  admirably
adapted  to  that  of  the  people  whose  confidence  and
protection  he  solicited.  He  was  grave,  though  courte-
ous in  his  deportment ;  circumspect  in  his  words  and
actions  ;  irreproachable  in  his  morals  ;  and  exemplary
in  his  attention  to  all  the  duties  and  functions  of  re-
ligion. By  qualities  so  respectable,  he  not  only  gained
many  private  friends,  but  acquired  such  general  esteem,
that,  notwithstanding  the  plainness  of  his  appearance,
suitable  to  the  mediocrity  of  his  fortune,  he  was  not
considered  as  a  mere  adventurer,  to  whom  indigence

92  AMERICA.

had  suggested  a  visionary  project,  but  was  received  as  a
person  to  whose  propositions  serious  attention  was  due.
His  scheme Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  though  fully  occu-
bvTnTkil P^^^  ^y  their  operations  against  the  Moors,  paid
fui  judges;  so  mucli  regard  to  Columbus,  as  to  remit  the
consideration  of  his  plan  to  the  queeii's  confessor,  Fer-
dinand de  Talavera. He  consulted  such  of  his  coun-
trymen as  were  supposed  best  qualified  to  decide  with
respect  to  a  subject  of  this  kind. But  true  science  had
hitherto  made  so  little  progress  in  Spain,  that  the  pre-
tended philosophers,  selected  to  judge  in  a  matter  of
such  moment,  did  not  comprehend  the  first  principles
upon  which  Columbus  founded  his  conjectures  and
hopes. Some  of  them,  from  mistaken  notions  concern-
ing the  dimensions  of  the  globe,  contended  that  a  voyage
to  those  remote  parts  of  the  east  which  Columbus  ex-
pected to  discover,  could  not  be  performed  in  less  than
three  years. Others  concluded,  that  either  he  would
find  the  ocean  to  be  of  infinite  extent,  according  to  the
opinion  of  some  ancient  philosophers  ;  or,  if  he  should
persist  in  steering  towards  the  west  beyond  a  certain
point,  that  the  convex  figure  of  the  globe  would  prevent
his  return,  and  that  he  must  inevitably  perish,  in  the
vain  attempt  to  open  a  communication  between  the  two
opposite  hemispheres,  which  nature  had  for  ever  dis-
joined. Even  without  deigning  to  enter  into  any  par-
ticular discussion,  many  rejected  the  scheme  in  general,
upon  the  credit  of  a  maxim,  under  which  the  ignorant
and  unenterprising  shelter themselves in every  age,
"  That  it  is  presumptuous  in  any  person,  to  suppose
that  he  alone  possesses  knowledge  superior  to  all  the
rest  of  mankind  united." They  maintained,  that  if  there
were  really  any  such  countries  as  Columbus  pretended,
they  could  not  have  remained  so  long  concealed,  nor
would  the  wisdom  and  sagacity  of  former  ages  have
left  the  glory  of  this  invention  to  an  obscure  Genoese
pilot.

BOOK II.  93

It  required  all  Columbus's  patience  and  ad-

Who  made  '■  .  ^

an  unfa-  dress  to  negotiate  with  men  capable  of  ad-
report  con-  vancing  such  strange  propositions.  He  had  to
cerningit.  (^gntcnd  uot  Only  with  the  obstinacy  of  igno-
rance, but  with  what  is  still  more  intractable,  the  pride
of  false  knowledge.  After  innumerable  conferences,
and  wasting  five  years  in  fruitless  endeavours  to  inform
and  to  satisfy  judges  so  little  capable  of  deciding  with
propriety,  Talavera,  at  last,  made  such  an  unfavourable
report  to  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  as  induced  them  to
acquaint  Columbus,  that  until  the  war  with  the  Moors
should  be  brought  to  a  period,  it  would  be  imprudent
to  engage  in  any  new  and  extensive  enterprise.

Whatever  care  was  taken  to  soften  the  harshness  of
this  declaration,  Columbus  considered  it  as  a  final  re-
jection of  his  proposals.  But,  happily  for  mankind,
that  superiority  of  genius,  which  is  capable  of  forming
great  and  uncommon  designs,  is  usually  accompanied
with  an  ardent  enthusiasm,  which  can  neither  be  cooled
by  delays,  nor  damped  by  disappointment.  Columbus
was  of  this  sanguine  temper.  Though  he  felt  deeply
the  cruel  blow  given  to  his  hopes,  and  retired  imme-
diately from  a  court,  where  he  had  been  amused  so  long
with  vain  expectations,  his  confidence  in  the  justness  of
his  own  system  did  not  diminish,  and  his  impatience  to
demonstrate  the  truth  of  it  by  an  actual  experiment,
became  greater  than  ever.  Having  courted  the  protec-
tion of  sovereign  states  without  success,  he  applied
next  to  persons  of  inferior  rank,  and  addressed  succes-
sively the  dukes  of  Medina  Sidonia,  and  Medina  Celi,
who,  though  subjects,  were  possessed  of  power  and
opulence  more  than  equal  to  the  enterprise  which  he
projected.  His  negotiations  with  them  proved  as
fruitless  as  those  in  which  he  had  been  hitherto  en-
gaged; for  these  noblemen  were  either  as  little  con-
vinced by  Columbus's  arguments  as  their  superiors,  or
they  were  afraid  of  alarming  the  jealousy,  and  offending

94  AMERICA.

the  pride  of  Ferdinand,  by  countenancing  a  scheme
which  he  had  rejected."

Negotia-  Amid  the  painful  sensations  occasioned  by
bmiherin  such  a  succcssiou  of  disappointments,  Colum-
Eiigiand.  ^yg  jjg^j  ^Q  sustain  the  additional  distress,  of
having  received  no  accounts  of  his  brother,  whom  he
had  sent  to  the  court  of  England.  In  his  voyage  to
that  country,  Bartholomew  had  been  so  unfortunate  as
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  pirates,  who  having  stripped
him  of  every  thing,  detained  him  a  prisoner  for  several
years.  At  length  he  made  his  escape,  and  arrived  in
London,  but  in  such  extreme  indigence,  that  he  was
obliged  to  employ  himself,  during  a  considerable  time,
in  drawing  and  selling  maps,  in  order  to  pick  up  as
much  money  as  would  purchase  a  decent  dress,  in
which  he  might  venture  to  appear  at  court.  He  then
laid  before  the  king  the  proposals  with  which  he  had
been  intrusted  by  his  brother,  and,  notwithstanding
Henry's  excessive  caution  and  parsimony,  which  ren-
dered him  averse  to  new  or  extensive  undertakings,  he
received  Columbus's  overtures  with  more  approbation
than  any  monarch  to  whom  they  had  hitherto  been
presented.
Columbus Meanwhile,  Columbus being  unacquainted

has  some ^ith  his  brother's  fate,  and  having;  now  no  pros-
prospects  . ^ .  1 ,
of  en- pect  of  encouragement  in  Spain,  resolved  to

rae"nTfn visit  the  court  of  England  in  person,  in  hopes

Spain. ^£  meeting  with  a  more favourable reception

there. He  had already  made preparations  for  this

purpose,  and  taken  measures  for  the  disposal  of  his

children during  his absence,  when  Juan  Perez,  the

guardian  of  the monastery  of  Rabida,  near  Palos,  in

which  they  had  been  educated,  earnestly  solicited  him

to  defer  his  journey  for  a  short  time. Perez  was  a  man

of  considerable  learning,  and  of  some  credit  with  queen

Isabella,  to  whom  he  was  known  personally. He  was

•"  Life  of  Columb.  c.  13. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  i.  c.  7.

BOOK  II.  95

warmly  attached  to  Columbus,  with  whose  abilities  a
well  as  integrity  he  had  many  opportunities  of  being
acquainted.  Prompted  by  curiosity  or  by  friendship,
he  entered  upon  an  accurate  examination  of  his  system,
in  conjunction  with  a  physician  settled  in  the  neigh-
bourhood, who  was  a  considerable  proficient  in  mathe-
matical knowledge.  This  investigation  satisfied  them
so  thoroughly,  with  respect  to  the  solidity  of  the  prin-
ciples on  which  Columbus  founded  his  opinion,  and  the
probability  of  success  in  executing  the  plan  which  he
proposed,  that  Perez,  in  order  to  prevent  his  country
from  being  deprived  of  the  glory  and  benefit  which
must  accrue  to  the  patrons  of  such  a  grand  enterprise,
ventured  to  write  to  Isabella,  conjuring  her  to  consider
the  matter  anew  with  the  attention  which  it  merited.

Moved  by  the  representations  of  a  person  whom  she
respected,  Isabella  desired  Perez  to  repair  immediately
to  the  village  of  Santa  Fe,  in  which,  on  account  of  the
siege  of  Granada,  the  court  resided  at  that  time,  that
she  might  confer  with  him  upon  this  important  subject.
The  first  effect  of  their  interview  was  a  gracious  invitation
of  Columbus  back  to  court,  accompanied  with  the  pre-
sent of  a  small  sum  to  equip  him  for  the  journey.  A
there  was  now  a  certain  prospect  that  the  war  with  the
Moors  would  speedily  be  brought  to  a  happy  issue  by
the  reduction  of  Granada,  which  would  leave  the  na-
tion at  liberty  to  engage  in  new  undertakings  ;  this,  as
well  as  the  mark  of  royal  favour,  with  which  Columbus
had  been  lately  honoured,  encouraged  his  friends  to
appear  with  greater  confidence  than  formerly  in  sup-
port of  his  scheme.  The  chief  of  these,  Alonso  de
Quintanilla,  comptroller  of  the  finances  in  Castile,  and
Luis  de  Santangel,  receiver  of  the  ecclesiastical  reve-
nues in  Aragon,  whose  meritorious  zeal  in  promoting
this  great  design  entitles  their  names  to  an  honourable
place  in  history,  introduced  Columbus  to  many  persons
of  high  rank,  and  interested  them  warmly  in  his  behalf.

Dfj  A  INI  ERIC  A.

Is  again ^^^  ^^  ^^^^  not  ail  casy  matter  to  inspire  Fer-
disap- dinand  with  favourable  sentiments. He  still  re-

poiiited.

garded  Columbus's  project  as  extravagant  and
chimerical ;  and  in  order  to  render  the  efforts  of  his  parti-
sans ineffectual,  he  had  the  address  to  employ,  in  this
new  negotiation  with  him,  some  of  the  persons  who  had
formerly  pronounced  his  scheme  to  be  impracticable.
To  their  astonishment,  Columbus  appeared  before  them
with  the  same  confident  hopes  of  success  as  formerly,  and
insisted  upon  the  same  high  recompense. He  proposed
that  a  small  fleet  should  be  fitted  out,  under  his  com-
mand, to  attempt  the  discovery,  and  demanded  to  be
appointed  hereditary  admiral  and  viceroy  of  all  the  seas
and  lands  which  he  should  discover,  and  to  have  the
tenths  of  the  profits  arising  from  them,  settled  irrevocably
upon  himself  and  his  descendants. At  the  same  time,
he  offered  to  advance  the  eighth  part  of  the  sum  neces-
sary for  his  accomplishing  this  design,  on  condition
that  he  should  be  entitled  to  a  proportional  share  of
benefit  from  the  adventure. If  the  enterprise  should
totally  miscarry,  he  made  no  stipulation  for  any  reward
or  emolument  whatever. Instead  of  viewinof  this  con-
duct  as  the  clearest  evidence  of  his  full  persuasion  with
respect  to  the  truth  of  his  own  system,  or  being  struck
with  that  magnanimity  which,  after  so  many  delays  and
repulses,  would  stoop  to  nothing  inferior  to  its  original
claims,  the  persons  with  whom  Columbus  treated  be-
gan meanly  to  calculate  the  expense  of  the  expedition,
and  the  value  of  the  reward  which  he  demanded. The
expense,  moderate  as  it  was,  they  represented  to  be
too  great  for  Spain  in  the  present  exhausted  state  of  its
finances. They  contended  that  the  honours  and  emo-
luments claimed  by  Columbus  were  exorbitant,  even  if
he  should  perform  the  utmost  of  what  he  had  pro-
mised ;  and  if  all  his  sanguine  hopes  should  prove  illu-
sive, such  vast  concessions  to  an  adventurer  would  be
deemed  not  only  inconsiderate,  but  ridiculous. In  this

1492]  BOOK 11.  97

imposing  garb  of  caution  and  prudence,  their  opinion
appeared  so  plausible,  and  was  so  warmly  supported  by
Ferdinand,  that  Isabella  declined  giving  any  counte-
nance to  Columbus,  and  abruptly  broke  off  the  nego-
tiation with  him  wdiich  she  had  beo-un.

This  was  more  mortifying  to  Columbus  than  all  the
disappointments  which  he  had  hitherto  met  with.  The
invitation  to  court  from  Isabella,  like  an  unexpected  ray
of  light,  had  opened  such  prospects  of  success  as  en-
couraged him  to  hope  that  his  labours  were  at  an  end ;
but  now  darkness  and  uncertainty  returned,  and  his
mind,  firm  as  it  was,  could  hardly  support  the  shock  of
such  an  unforeseen  reverse.  He  withdrew  in  deep
anguish  from  court,  with  an  intention  of  prosecuting
his  voyage  to  England  as  his  last  resource.
„ ^ About  that  time  Granada  surrendered,  and

Proves  at  ,  '

last  sue-  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  in  triumphal  pomp,
1492.  took  possession  of  a  city,  the  reduction  of  which
January '2.  extirpated  a  foreign  power  from  the  heart  of
their  dominions,  and  rendered  them  masters  of  all  the
provinces,  extending  from  the  bottom  of  the  Pyrenees  to
the  frontiers  of  Portugal.  As  the  flow  of  spirits  which
accompanies  success  elevates  the  mind,  and  renders  it
enterprising,  Quintanilla  and  Santangel,  the  vigilant  and
discerning  patrons  of  Columbus,  took  advantage  of  this
favourable  situation,  in  order  to  make  one  effort  more  in
behalf  of  their  friend.  They  addressed  themselves  to  Isa-
bella, and  after  expressing  some  surprise,  that  she,  who
had  always  been  the  munificent  patroness  of  generous  un-
dertakings, should  hesitate  so  long  to  countenance  the
most  splendid  scheme  thathad  ever  been  proposed  to  any
monarch  ;  they  represented  to  her,  that  Columbus  was  a
man  of  a  sound  understanding  and  virtuous  character,
well  qualified,  by  his  experience  in  navigation,  as  well
as  his  knowledge  of  geometry,  to  form  just  ideas  with
respect  to  the  structure  of  the  globe  and  the  situation  of
its  various  regions  ;  that  by  offering  to  risk  his  own  life

VOL. VI.  H

98  AMERICA.  [1492.

and  fortune  in  the  execution  of  his  scheme,  he  gave  the
most  satisfying  evidence  both  of  his  integrity  and  hope
of  success :  that  the  sum  requisite  for  equipping  such
an  armament  as  he  demanded  was  inconsiderable,  and
the  advantao-es  which  mio;ht  accrue  from  his  undertak-
ing  were  immense ;  that  he  demanded  no  recompense
for  his  invention  and  labour,  but  what  was  to  arise  from
the  countries  which  he  should  discover;  that,  as  it  was
worthv  of  her  magnanimity  to  make  this  noble  attempt
to  extend  the  sphere  of  human  knowledge,  and  to  open
an  intercourse  with  regions  hitherto  unknown,  so  it
would  afford  the  highest  satisfaction  to  her  piety  and
zeal,  after  re-establishing  the  Christian  faith  in  those
provinces  of  Spain  from  which  it  had  been  long  banish-
ed, to  discover  a  new  world,  to  which  she  might  com-
municate the  light  and  blessings  of  divine  truth  ;  that
if  now  she  did  not  decide  instantly  the  opportunity
would  be  irretrievably  lost ;  that  Columbus  was  on  his
way  to  foreign  countries,  where  some  prince,  more  for-
tunate or  adventurous,  would  close  with  his  proposals,
and  Spain  would  for  ever  bewail  that  fatal  timidity
which  had  excluded  her  from  the  glory  and  advantages
that  she  had  once  in  her  power  to  have  enjoyed.

These  forcible  arguments,  urged  by  persons  of  such
authority,  and  at  a  juncture  so  well  chosen,  produced
the  desired  effect.  They  dispelled  all  Isabella's  doubts
and  fears  ;  she  ordered  Columbus  to  be  instantly  re-
called, declared  her  resolution  of  employing  him  on  his
own  terms,  and  regretting  the  low  estate  of  her  finances,
generously  offered  to  pledge  her  own  jewels,  in  order
to  raise  as  much  money  as  might  be  needed  in  making
preparations  for  the  voyage.  Santangel,  in  a  transport
of  gratitude,  kissed  the  queen's  hand,  and  in  order  to
save  her  from  having  recourse  to  such  a  mortifying  ex-
pedient for  procuring  money,  engaged  to  advance  im-
mediately the  sum  that  was  requisite."

"  Herrcra,  dec.  1.  lib.  i.  c.  8.

1492.]  BOOK II.  .99

Thecondi- Columbus  had  proceeded  some  leagues  on
tionsofhis  jjjg  iournev,  when  the  messeno-er  from  Isabella

agfeeraent  j  ./  •>  o

with  Spain.  Qvertook  him.  Upon  receiving  an  account  of
the  unexpected  resolution  in  his  favour,  he  returned
directly  to  Santa  Fe,  though  some  remainder  of  diffi-
dence still  mingled  itself  with  his  joy.  But  the  cordial
reception  which  he  met  with  from  Isabella,  together
with  the  near  prospect  of  setting  out  upon  that  voyage
which  had  so  long  been  the  object  of  his  thoughts  and
Vv  ishes,  soon  effaced  the  remembrance  of  all  that  he  had
suffered  in  Spain,  during  eight  tedious  years  of  solici-
tation and  suspense.  The  negotiation  now  went  for-
ward with  facility  and  dispatch,  and  a  treaty  or  capitu-
lation with  Columbus  was  signed  on  the  17th  of  April,
1492.  The  chief  articles  of  it  were  : — 1.  Ferdinand
and  Isabella,  as  sovereigns  of  the  ocean,  constituted
Columbus  their  high  admiral  in  all  the  seas,  islands,
and  continents,  which  should  be  discovered  by  his  in-
dustry ;  and  stipulated  that  he  and  his  heirs  for  ever
should  enjoy  this  office,  with  the  same  powers  and  pre-
rogatives which  belonged  to  the  high  admiral  of  Castile,
within  the  limits  of  his  jurisdiction.  2.  They  appointed
Columbus  their  viceroy  in  all  the  islands  and  continents
which  he  should  discover ;  but  if,  for  the  better  admi-
nistration of  affairs,  it  should  hereafter  be  necessary  to
establish  a  separate  governor  in  any  of  those  countries,
they  authorized  Columbus  to  name  three  persons,  of
whom  they  would  choose  one  for  that  office ;  and  the
dignity  of  viceroy,  with  all  its  immunities,  was  likewise
to  be  hereditary  in  the  family  of  Columbus.  3.  They
granted  to  Columbus  and  his  heirs  for  ever,  the  tenth  of
the  free  profits  accruing  from  the  productions  and
commerce  of  the  countries  which  he  should  discover.
4.  They  declared,  that  if  any  controversy  or  lawsuit
shall  arise  with  respect  to  any  mercantile  transaction  in
the  countries  which  should  be  discovered,  it  should  be
determined  by  the  sole  authority  of  Columbus, or  of

H  2

100  AMERICA.  £1492.

judges  to  be  appointed  by  him.  5.  They  permitted
Columbus  to  advance  one-eighth  part  of  what  should
be  expended  in  preparing  for  the  expedition,  and  in
carrying  on  commerce  with  the  countries  which  he
should  discover,  and  entided  him,  in  return,  to  an  eighth
part  of  the  profit.''

Though  the  name  of  Ferdinand  appears  conjoined
with  that  of  Isabella  in  this  transaction,  his  distrust  of
Columbus  was  still  so  violent  that  he  refused  to  take
any  part  in  the  enterprise  as  king  of  Aragon.  As  the
whole  expense  of  the  expedition  was  to  be  defrayed  by
the  crown  of  Castile,  Isabella  reserved  for  her  subjects
of  that  kingdom  an  exclusive  right  to  all  the  benefits
which  might  redound  from  its  success.

As  soon  as  the  treaty  was  sig-ned,  Isabella,

1  he  prepa-  .  ...  .

rations  for  by  her  attention  and  activity  in  forwarding  the
lib  voyage,  p^gpai-ations  for  the  voyage,  endeavoured  to
make  some  reparation  to  Columbus  for  the  time  which
he  had  lost  in  fruitless  solicitation.  By  the  12th  of
May,  all  that  depended  upon  her  was  adjusted;  and
Columbus  waited  on  the  king  and  queen,  in  order  to
receive  their  final  instructions.  Every  thing  respecting
the  destination  and  conduct  of  the  voyage,  they  com-
mitted implicitly  to  the  disposal  of  his  prudence.  But
that  they  might  avoid  giving  any  just  cause  of  offence
to  the  king  of  Portugal,  they  strictly  enjoined  him  not
to  approach  near  to  the  Portuguese  settlements  on  the
coast  of  Guinea,  or  in  any  of  the  other  countries  to
which  the  Portuguese  claimed  right  as  discoverers.
Isabella  had  ordered  the  ships,  of  which  Columbus  was
to  take  the  command,  to  be  fitted  out  in  the  port  of
Palos,  a  small  maritime  town  in  the  province  of  Anda-
lusia. As  the  guardian  Juan  Perez,  to  whom  Colum-
bus had  already  been  so  much  indebted,  resided  in  the
neighbourhood  of  this  place,  he,  by  the  influence  of  that
good  ecclesiastic,  as  well  as  by  his  own  connexion  with

P  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  15. Herrrra,  dec.  1.  lib.  i.  c.  9.

1492.]  BOOK II.  101

the  inhabitants,  not  only  raised  among  them  what  he
wanted  of  the  sum  that  he  was  bound  by  treaty  to  ad-
vance, but  engaged  several  of  them  to  accompany  him
in  the  voyage.  The  chief  of  these  associates  were  three
brothers  of  the  name  of  Pinzon,  of  considerable  wealth,
and  of  great  experience  in  naval  affairs,  who  were
willing  to  hazard  their  lives  and  fortunes  in  the  expe-
dition.

But,  after  all  the  efforts  of  Isabella  and  Columbus,
the  armament  was  not  suitable,  either  to  the  dignity  of
the  nation  by  which  it  was  equipped,  or  to  the  impor-
tance of  the  service  for  which  it  was  destined.  It  con-
sisted of  three  vessels.  The  largest,  a  ship  of  no  con-
siderable burden,  was  commanded  by  Columbus,  as
admiral,  who  gave  it  the  name  of  Santa  Maria,  out  of
respect  for  the  blessed  Virgin,  whom  he  honoured  with
singular  devotion.  Of  the  second,  called  the  Pinta,
Martin  Pinzon  was  captain,  and  his  brother  Francis
pilot.  The  third,  named  the  Nigna,  was  under  the
command  of  Vincent  Yanez  Pinzon.  These  two  were
light  vessels,  hardly  superior  in  burden  or  force  to
large  boats.  The  squadron,  if  it  merits  that  name,  was
victualled  for  twelve  months,  and  had  on  board  ninety
men,  mostly  sailors,  together  with  a  few  adventurers
who  followed  the  fortune  of  Columbus,  and  some  2"en-
tlemen  of  Isabella's  court,  whom  she  appointed  to  ac-
company him.  Though  the  expense  of  the  undertaking
was  one  ofthe  circumstances  which  chiefly  alarmed  the
court  of  Spain,  and  retarded  so  long  the  negotiation
with  Columbus,  the  sum  employed  in  fitting  out  this
squadron  did  not  exceed  four  thousand  pounds.

As  the  art  of  ship-building  in  the  fifteenth  century
was  extremely  rude,  and  the  bulk  of  vessels  was  accom-
modated to  the  short  and  easy  voyages  along  the  coast
which  they  were  accustomed  to  perform,  it  is  a  proof
of  the  courage  as  well  as  enterprising  genius  of  Colum-
bus, that  he  ventured,  with  a  fleet  so  unfit  for  a  distant

10-2  AMERICA.  [149-2.

navigation,  to  explore  iinkno\\'Ti  seas,  where  he  had  no
chart  to  guide  him,  no  knowledge  of  the  tides  and  cur-
rents, and  no  experience  of  the  dangers  to  which  he
might  be  exposed.  His  eagerness  to  accomplish  the
srreat  desiofn  which  had  so  lonor  enorossed  his  thouGfhts
made  him  overlook  or  disregard  every  circumstance
that  would  have  intimidated  a  mind  less  adventurous.
He  pushed  forwards  the  preparations  with  such  ardour,
and  was  seconded  so  effectually  by  the  persons  to  whom
Isabella  committed  the  superintendence  of  this  business,
that  every  thing  was  soon  in  readiness  for  the  voyage.
But  as  Columbus  was  deeply  impressed  with  senti-
ments of  religion,  he  would  not  set  out  upon  an  expe-
dition so  arduous,  and  of  which  one  great  object  was
to  extend  the  knowledge  of  the  Christian  faith,  without
imploring  publicly  the  guidance  and  protection  of
Heaven.  With  this  view,  he,  together  with  all  the  per-
sons under  his  command,  marched  in  solemn  procession
to  the  monastery  of  Rabida.  After  confessing  their
sins,  and  obtaining  absolution,  they  received  the  holy
sacrament  from  the  hands  of  the  guardian,  who  joined
his  prayers  to  theirs  for  the  success  of  an  enterprise
which  he  had  so  zealously  patronised.
Hisdepar-  Ncxt  momiug,  being  Friday  the  3d  day  of
ture  from AuQ:ust,  in  the  year  1492,  Columbus  set  sail,  a

Spam.  » ^  .  .

little  before  sunrise,  in  presence  of  a  vast  crowd
of  spectators,  who  sent  up  their  supplications  to  Hea-
ven for  the  prosperous  issue  of  the  voyage,  which  they
wished  rather  than  expected.  Columbus  steered
directly  for  the  Canary  Islands,  and  arrived
there  without  any  occurrence  that  would  have  deserved
notice  on  any  other  occasion.  But,  in  a  voyage  of
such  expectation  and  importance,  every  circumstance
was  the  object  of  attention.  The  rudder  of  the  Pinta
broke  loose  the  day  after  she  left  the  harbour,  and  that
accident  alarmed  the  crew,  no  less  superstitious  than
unskilful,  as  a  certain  omen  of  the  unfortunate  destiny

1492.J  BOOK II.  103

of  the  expedition.  Even  in  the  short  run  to  the  Cana-
ries, the  ships  were  found  to  be  so  crazy  and  ill-ap-
pointed, as  to  be  very  improper  for  a  navigation  which
was  expected  to  be  both  long  and  dangerous.  Colum-
bus refitted  them,  however,  to  the  best  of  his  power,
and  having  supplied  himself  with  fresh  provisions,  he
took  his  departure  from  Gomera,  one  of  the  most  wes-
terly of  the  Canary  Islands,  on  the  Gth  day  of  September.
The  course  Here  the  voyage  of  discovery  may  properly
which  he \yQ  sai(j  to  beo-in ;  for  Columbus,  holdina:  his

held.  in-  •

course  due  west,  left  immediately  the  usual
track  of  navigation,  and  stretched  into  unfrequented
and  unknown  seas.  The  first  day,  as  it  was  very  calm,
he  made  but  little  way;  but  on  the  second,  he  lost  sight
of  the  Canaries ;  and  many  of  the  sailors,  dejected  al-
ready and  dismayed,  when  they  contemplated  the  bold-
ness of  the  undertaking,  began  to  beat  their  breasts,
and  to  shed  tears,  as  if  they  were  never  more  to  behold
land.  Columbus  comforted  them  with  assurances  of
success,  and  the  prospect  of  vast  wealth,  in  those  opu-
lent regions  whither  he  was  conducting  them.  This
early  discovery  of  the  spirit  of  his  followers  taught  Co-
lumbus, that  he  must  prepare  to  struggle,  not  only  with
the  unavoidable  difficulties  which  might  be  expected
from  the  nature  of  his  undertaking-,  but  with  such  as
were  likely  to  arise  from  the  ignorance  and  timidity  of
the  people  under  his  command  ;  and  he  perceived  that
the  art  of  governing  the  minds  of  men  would  be  no  less
requisite  for  accomplishing  the  discoveries  which  he
had  in  view,  than  naval  skill  and  undaunted  courage.
Happily  for  himself,  and  for  the  country  by  which  he
was  employed,  he  joined  to  the  ardent  temper  and  in-
ventive genius  of  a  projector,  virtues  of  another  species,
which  are  rarely  united  with  them.  He  possessed  a
thorough  knowledge  of  mankind,  an  insinuating  ad-
dress, a  patient  perseverance  in  executing  any  plan,
the  perfect  government  of  his  own  passions,  and  the

104  AMERICA.  [1492.

talent  of  acquiring  an  ascendant  over  those  of  other
men. All  these  qualities,  which  formed  him  for  com-
mand, were  accompanied  with  that  superior  knowledge
of  his  profession,  which  begets  confidence  in  times  of
Vigilance  difficulty  and danger. To unskilful Spanish
f^nof*^"'  sailors,  accustomed  only  to  coasting  voyages  in
Columbus.  f]^Q  Mediterranean,  the  maritime  science  of  Co-
lumbus, the  fruit  of  thirty  years'  experience,  improved
by  an  acquaintance  with  all  the  inventions  of  the  Por-
tuguese, appeared  immense. As  soon  as  they  put  to
sea,  he  regulated  every  thing  by  his  sole  authority ;  he
superintended  the  execution  of  every  order  ;  and  allow-
ing himself  only  a  few  hours  for  sleep,  he  was  at  all
other  times  upon  deck.  As  his  course  lay  through  seas
which  had  not  formerly  been  visited,  the  sounding-line,
or  instruments  for  observation,  were  continually  in  his
hands. After  the  example  of  the  Portuguese  disco-
verers, he  attended  to  the  motion  of  tides  and  currents,
watched  the  flight  of  birds,  the  appearance  of  fishes,
of  sea-weeds, and  every  thing that  floated  on the
waves,  and  entered  every  occurrence,  with  a  minute
exactness,  in  the  journal  which  he  kept.  As  the  length
of  the  voyage  could  not  fail  of  alarming  sailors  habi-
tuated only  to  short  excursions,  Columbus  endeavoured
to conceal  from  them  the  real progress  which  they
made. With this view,  though they  run eighteen
leagues  on  the  second  day  after  they  left  Gomera,  he
gave  out  that  they  had  advanced  only  fifteen,  and  he
uniformly  employed the same artifice of  reckoning
short  during  the  whole  voyage. By  the  14th  of  Sep-
tember, the  fleet  was  above  two  hundred  leagues  to  the
west  of  the  Canary  Isles,  at  a  greater  distance  from
land than any  Spaniard  had  been  before  that  time.
Apprciien-  There  they  were  struck  with  an  appearance  no
aianrof Igss  astouishiug  tlian  new.  They  observed  that
his  crew, ^jj^^  magnetic  needle,  in their  compasses,  did
not  point  exactly  to  the  polar  star,  but  varied  towards

1492.]  BOOK ir.  105

the  west ; and  as  they  proceeded,  this  variation  in-
creased. This appearance, which is now familiar,
though  it  still  remains  one  of  the  mysteries  of  nature,
into  the  cause  of  which  the  sagacity  of  man  hath  not
been  able  to  penetrate,  filled  the  companions  of  Colum-
bus with  terror. They  were  now  in  a  boundless  and
unknown  ocean,  far  from  the  usual  course  of  naviga-
tion ;  nature  itself  seemed  to  be  altered,  and  the  only
guide  which  they  had  left  was about  to fail  them.
Columbus,  with  no  less  quickness  than  ingenuity,  in-
vented a  reason  for  this  appearance,  which,  though  it
did  not  satisfy  himself,  seemed  so  plausible  to  them,
that  it  dispelled  their  fears,  or  silenced  their  murmurs.
He  still  continued  to  steer  due  west,  nearly  in  the
same  latitude  with  the  Canary  Islands. In  this  course
he  came  within  the  sphere  of  the  trade  wind,  which
blows  invariably  from  east  to  west,  between  the  tropics
and  a  few  degrees  beyond  them. He  advanced  before
this  steady  gale  with  such  uniform  rapidity,  that  it  was
seldom  necessary  to  shift  a  sail. When  about  four
hundred  leagues  to  the  west  of  the  Canaries,  he  found
the  sea  so  covered  with  weeds,  that  it  resembled  a  mea-
dow of  vast  extent,  and  in  some  places  they  were  so
thick,  as  to  retard  the  motion  of  the  vessels. This
strange  appearance  occasioned  new  alarm  and  disquiet.
The  sailors  imagined  that  they  were  now  arrived  at  the
utmost  boundary  of  the  navigable  ocean ;  that  these
floating  weeds  would  obstruct  their  farther  progress,
and  concealed  dangerous  rocks,  or  some  large  tract  of
land,  which  had  sunk,  they  knew  not  how,  in  that  place.
Columbus  endeavoured  to  persuade  them,  that  what  had
alarmed,  ought  rather  to  have  encouraged  them,  and
was  to  be  considered  as  a  sign  of  approaching  land.
At  the  same  time,  a  brisk  gale  arose,  and  carried  them
forward. Several  birds  were  seen  hovering  about  the
ship,''  and  directed  their  flight  towards  the  west. The

1  See  Note  XIII.

106  AMERICA.  [1492.

desponding-  crew  resumed  some  degree  of  spirit,  and
began  to  entertain  fresh  hopes.

These  Upon  the  1  st  of  October  they  were,  according

inciease.  ^^  ^|^g  admiral's  reckoning,  seven  hundred  and
seventy  leagues  to  the  west  of  the  Canaries ;  but  lest
his  men  should  be  intimidated  by  the  prodigious  length
of  the  navigation,  he  gave  out  that  they  had  proceeded
only  five  hundred  and  eighty-four  leagues  ;  and,  fortu-
nately for  Columbus,  neither  his  own  pilot,  nor  those
of  tlie  other  ships,  had  skill  sufficient  to  correct  this
error,  and  discover  the  deceit.  They  had  now  been
above  three  weeks  at  sea ;  they  had  proceeded  far  be-
yond what  former  navigators  had  attempted  or  deemed
possible  ;  all  their  prognostics  of  discovery,  drawn  from
the  flight  of  birds  and  other  circumstances,  had  proved
fallacious ;  the  appearances  of  land,  with  which  their
own  credulity  or  the  artifice  of  their  commander  had
from  time  to  time  flattered  and  amused  them,  had  been
altogether  illusive,  and  their  prospect  of  success  seemed
now  to  be  as  distant  as  ever.  These  reflections  occurred
often  to  men,  who  had  no  other  object  or  occupation
than  to  reason  and  discourse  concerning  the  intention
and  circumstances  of  their  expedition.  They  made  im-
pression, at  first,  upon  the  ignorant  and  timid,  and,  ex-
tending by  degrees,  to  such  as  were  better  informed  or
more  resolute,  the  contagion  spread  at  length  from  ship
to  ship.  From  secret  whispers  or  murmurings,  they
proceeded  to  open  cabals  and  public  complaints.  They
taxed  their  sovereign  with  inconsiderate  credulity,  in
paying  such  regard  to  the  vain  promises  and  rash  con-
jectures of  an  indigent  foreigner,  as  to  hazard  the  lives
of  so  many  of  her  own  subjects,  in  prosecuting  a  chi-
merical scheme.  They  affirmed  that  they  had  fully  per-
formed their  duty,  by  venturing  so  far  in  an  unknown
and  hopeless  course,  and  could  incur  no  blame  for  re-
fusing to  follow,  any  longer,  a  desperate  adventurer  to
certain  dc:jtruction. They  contended,  that  it  was  nc-

1492]  BOOK II.  107

cessary  to  think  of  returning  to  Spain,  while  their  crazy
vessels  were  still  in  a  condition  to  keep  the  sea,  but  ex-
pressed their  fears  that  the  attempt  would  prove  vain,
as  the  wind,  which  had  hitherto  been  so  favourable  to
their  course,  must  render  it  impossible  to  sail  in  the
opposite  direction.  All  agreed  that  Columbus  should
be  compelled  by  force  to  adopt  a  measure  on  which  their
common  safety  depended.  Some  of  the  more  audacious
proposed,  as  the  most  expeditious  and  certain  method
for  getting  rid  at  once  of  his  remonstrances,  to  throw
him  into  the  sea,  being  persuaded  that,  upon  their  re-
turn to  Spain,  the  death  of  an  unsuccessful  projector
would  excite  little  concern,  and  be  inquired  into  with
no  curiosity.

The  ad-  Columbus  was  fully  sensible  of  his  perilous

dress  of  situation.  He  had  observed,  with  great  uneasi-
in  sooth-  ness,  the  latal  operation  oi  ignorance  and  ot
mg  them.  ^^^^  -^  produciug  disaffcction  among  his  crew,
and  saw  that  it  was  now  ready  to  burst  out  into  open
mutiny.  He  retained,  however,  perfect  presence  of
mind.  He  affected  to  seem  ignorant  of  their  machina-
tions. Notwithstanding  the  agitation  and  solicitude  of
his  own  mind,  he  appeared  with  a  cheerful  countenance,
like  a  man  satisfied  with  the  progress  he  had  made,  and
confident  of  success.  Sometimes  he  employed  all  the
arts  of  insinuation,  to  soothe  his  men.  Sometimes  he
endeavoured  to  work  upon  their  ambition  or  avarice,  by
magnificent  descriptions  of  the  fame  and  wealth  which
they  were  about  to  acquire.  On  other  occasions,  he
assumed  a  tone  of  authority,  and  threatened  them  with
vengeance  from  their  sovereign,  if,  by  their  dastardly
behaviour,  they  should  defeat  this  noble  effort  to  pro-
mote the  glory  of  God,  and  to  exalt  the  Spanish  name
above  that  of  every  other  nation.  Even  with  seditious
sailors,  the  words  of  a  man  whom  they  had  been  accus-
tomed to  reverence,  were  weighty  and  persuasive,  and
not  only  restrained  them  from  those  violent  excesses

108  A  iM  ERICA.  [1492.

wliich  they  meditated,  but  prevailed  with  them  to  ac-
company their  admiral  for  some  time  longer.

As  they  proceeded,  the  indications  of  approaching
land  seemed  to  be  more  certain,  and  excited  hope  in
proportion.  The  birds  began  to  appear  in  flocks,  mak-
ing towards  the  south-west.  Columbus,  in  imitation  of
the  Portuguese  navigators,  who  had  been  guided,  in
several  of  their  discoveries,  by  the  motion  of  birds,
altered  his  course  from  due  west  towards  that  quarter
whither  they  pointed  their  flight.  But,  after  holding
on  for  several  days  in  this  new  direction,  without  any
better  success  than  formerly,  having  seen  no  object,
during  thirty  days,  but  the  sea  and  the  sky,  the  hopes
of  his  companions  subsided  faster  than  they  had  risen;
Theirfears  their  fcars  revived  with  additional  force;  im-
rcturn.  paticucc,  rage,  and  despair,  appeared  in  every
Danger  of  couutenancc.  All  sense  of  subordination  was
a  mutiny,  j^^^ .  ^j^^  officcrs,  who  had  hitherto  concurred
. """  with  Columbus  in  opinion,  and  supported  his  authority,
'now  took  part  with  the  private  men  ;  they  assembled
tumultuously  on  the  deck,  expostulated  with  their  com-

'-  mander,  mingled  threats  with  their  expostulations,  and
required  him  instantly  to  tack  about  and  to  return  to

•  Europe.  Columbus  perceived  that  it  would  be  of  no
avail  to  have  recourse  to  any  of  his  former  arts,  which
having  been  tried  so  often  had  lost  their  eft'ect;  and
that  it  was  impossible  to  rekindle  any  zeal  for  the  suc-
cess of  the  expedition  among  men,  in  whose  breasts

■  fear  had  extinguished  every  generous  sentiment.  He
Distress  of  saw  that  it  was  no  less  vain  to  think  of  employ-
Coiumbus.  jj^g  either  gentle  or  severe  measures  to  quell  a
mutiny  so  general  and  so  violent.  It  was  necessary,  on
all  these  accounts,  to  soothe  passions  which  he  could  no
longer  command,  and  to  give  way  to  a  torrent  too  im-
petuous to  be  checked.  He  promised  solemnly  to  his
men  that  he  would  comply  with  their  request,  provided
they  would  accompany  him,  and  obey  his  command  for

1492.]  BOOK  II.  109

three  days  longer,  and  if,  during  that  time,  land  were
not  discovered,  he  would  then  abandon  the  enterprise,
and  direct  his  course  towards  Spain.""
Encou-  Enraged  as  the  sailors  were,  and  impatient  to

raging  ap-  ^um  their  faces  ag-ain  towards  their  native  coun-
of  success,  try,  this  proposition  did  not  appear  to  them  un-
reasonable. Nor  did  Columbus  hazard  much  in  con-
fining himself  to  a  term  so  short.  The  presages  of
discovering  land  were  now  so  numerous  and  promising,
that  he  deemed  them  infallible.  For  some  days  the
sounding  line  reached  the  bottom,  and  the  soil  which  it
brought  up  indicated  land  to  be  at  no  great  distance.
The  flocks  of  birds  increased,  and  were  composed  not
only  of  sea-fowl,  but  of  such  land  birds  as  could  not
be  supposed  to  fly  far  from  the  shore.  The  crew  of
the  Pinta  observed  a  cane  floating,  which  seemed  to
have  been  newly  cut,  and  likewise  a  piece  of  timber
artificially  carved.  The  sailors  aboard  the  JNigna
took  up  the  branch  of  a  tree  with  red  berries,  perfectly
fresh.  The  clouds  around  the  setting  sun  assumed
a  new  appearance ;  the  air  was  more  mild  and  warm,
and,  during  night,  the  wind  became  unequal  and
variable.  From  all  these  symptoms,  Columbus  was
so  confident  of  being  near  land,  that  on  the  evening
of  the  11th  of  October,  after  public  prayers  for  suc-
cess, he  ordered  the  sails  to  be  furled,  and  the  ships
to  lie  to,  keeping  strict  watch,  lest  they  should  be
driven  ashore  in  the  night.  During  this  interval  of
suspense  and  expectation,  no  man  shut  his  eyes,  all
kept  upon  deck,  gazing  intently  towards  that  quarter
where  they  expected  to  discover  the  land,  which  had
been  so  long  the  object  of  their  wishes.
Landdis-  About  two  houi's  bcfore  midnight,  Colum-
covered.  j-^yg  standing  on  the  forecastle,  observed  a  light
at  a  distance,  and  privately  pointed  it  out  to  Pedro
Guttierez,  a  page  of  the  queen's  wardrobe. Guttierez

>"  Oviedo,  Hist.  ap.  Raiiuis,  vol.  iii.p.  81.  E.

110  AMERICA.  [1492.

perceived  it,  and  callino-  ta  Salccdo,  comptroller  of  tlie
fleet,  all  three  saw  it  in  motion,  as  if  it  were  carried
from  place  to  place. A  little  after  midnight  the  joyful
sound  of  land!  land!  was  heard  from  the  Pinta,  which
kept  always  a-head  of  the  other  ships. But,  having
been  so  often  deceived  by  fallacious  appearances,  every
man  was  now  become  slow  of  belief,  and  waited  in  all
the  anguisli  of  uncertainty  and  impatience,  for  the  re-
Friday, *^^'^  °^  ^^7* ^^  soou  as  momiug  dawned,  all
Oct.  12. doubts  and  fears  were  dispelled. From  every
ship  an  island  was  seen  about  two  leagues  to  the  north,
whose  flat  and  verdant  fields,  well  stored  with  wood,
and  watered  with  many  rivulets,  presented  the  aspect
of  a  delightful country. The  crew  of  the  Pinta  in-
stantly began  the  Tc  Deum,  as  a  hymn  of  thanksgiving
to  God,  and  were  joined  by  those  of  the  other  ships,
with  tears of  joy and  transports of  congratulation.
This  office  of  gratitude  to  Heaven  was  followed  by  an
act  of  justice  to  their  commander. They  threw  them-
selves at  the  feet  of  Columbus,  with  feelings  of  self-
condemnation  mingled  with  reverence.  They  implored
him  to  pardon  their  ignorance,  incredulity,  and  inso-
lence, which  had  created  him  so  much  unnecessary  dis-
quiet, and  had  so  often  obstructed  the  prosecution  of
his  well- concerted  plan  ;  and  passing,  in  the  warmth  of
their  admiration,  from  one  extreme  to  another,  they
now  pronounced  the  man,  whom  they  had  so  lately  re-
viled and  threatened,  to  be  a  person  inspired  by  Hea-
ven with  sagacity  and  fortitude  more  than  human,  in
order  to  accomplish  a  design  so  far  beyond  the  ideas
and  conception  of  all  former  ages.
First  in- As  soou  as  tlic  suu  arosc,  all  their  boats  were
**^.^';'*^" manned  and  armed. They  rowed  towards  the
natives, island  with  their  colours  displayed,  with  warlike
music,  and  other  martial  pomp. As  they  approached
the  coast,  they  saw  it  covered  with  a  multitude  of  peo-
ple, whom  tbo  novelty  of  the  spectacle  had  drawn  to-

1492.]  BOOK  II.  Ill

gether,  whose  attitudes  and  gestures  expressed  wonder
and  astonishment  at  the  strange  objects  which  presented
themselves  to  their  view.  Columbus  was  the  first  Eu-
ropean who  set  foot  in  the  New  World  which  he  had
discovered.  He  landed  in  a  rich  dress,  and  with  a
naked  sword  in  his  hand.  His  men  followed,  and
kneeling  down,  they  all  kissed  the  ground  which  they
had  so  long  desired  to  see.  They  next  erected  a  cru-
cifix, and  prostrating  themselves  before  it,  returned
thanks  to  God  for  conducting  their  voyage  to  such  a
happy  issue.  They  then  took  solemn  possession  of
the  country  for  the  crown  of  Castile  and  Leon,  with
all  the  formalities  which  the  Portuguese  were  accus-
tomed to  observe  in  acts  of  this  kind,  in  their  new  dis-
coveries."

Their  rau- '^^^  Spaniards,  while  thus  employed,  were
tuaiasto- surrounded  by  many  of  the  natives,  who  sfazed,

inshment. .  , . .  o  '

in  silent  admiration,  upon  actions  which  they
could  not  comprehend,  and  of  which  they  did  not  fore-
see the  consequences.  The  dress  of  the  Spaniards,  the
whiteness  of  their  skins,  their  beards,  their  arms,  ap-
peared strange  and  surprising.  The  vast  machines  in
which  they  had  traversed  the  ocean,  that  seemed  to
move  upon  the  waters,  with  wings,  and  uttered  a  dread-
ful sound  resembling  thunder,  accompanied  with  light-
ning and  smoke,  struck  them  with  such  terror,  that  they
began  to  respect  their  new  guests  as  a  superior  order
of  beings,  and  concluded  that  they  were  children  of
the  Sun,  who  had  descended  to  visit  the  earth.

The  Europeans  were  hardly  less  amazed  at  the  scene
now  before  them.  Every  herb,  and  shrub,  and  tree,
was  different  from  those  which  flourished  in  Europe.
The  soil  seemed  to  be  rich,  but  bore  few  marks  of
cultivation.  The  climate,  even  to  the  Spaniards,  felt
warm,  though  extremely  delightful.  The  inhabitants
appeared  in  the  simple  innocence  of  nature,  entirely

'  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  22,  53. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  i.  c.  13.

112  AMERICA.  [1492.

naked.  Their  black  hair,  long  and  uncurled,  floated
upon  their  shoulders,  or  was  bound  in  tresses  around
their  heads.  Tlicy  had  no  beards,  and  every  part  of
their  bodies  was  perfectly  smooth.  Their  complexion
was  of  a  dusky  copper  colour,  their  features  singular,
rather  than  disagreeable,  their  aspect  gentle  and  timid.
Though  not  tall,  they  were  well  shaped  and  active.
Their  faces,  and  several  parts  of  their  body,  were  fan-
tastically painted  with  glaring  colours.  They  were
shy  at  first  through  fear,  but  soon  became  familiar  with
the  Spaniards,  and  with  transports  of  joy  received  from
them  hawks-bells,  glass  beads,  or  other  baubles,  in  return
for  which  they  gave  such  provisions  as  they  had,  and
some  cotton  yarn,  the  only  commodity  of  value  that
they  could  produce.  Towards  evening,  Columbus  re-
turned to  his  ship,  accompanied  by  many  of  the  islanders
in  their  boats,  which  they  called  canoes,  and  though
rudely  formed  out  of  the  trunk  of  a  single  tree,  they
rowed  them  with  surprising  dexterity.  Ihus,  in  the
first  interview  between  the  inhabitants  of  the  old  and
new  worlds,  every  thing  was  conducted  amicably,  and
to  their  mutual  satisfaction.  The  former,  enlightened
and  ambitious,  formed  already  vast  ideas  with  respect
to  the  advantages  which  they  might  derive  from  the
regions  that  began  to  open  to  their  view.  The  latter,
simple  and  undiscerning,  had  no  foresight  of  the  cala-
mities and  desolation,  which  were  approaching  their
country.

Columbus  Columbus,  who  now  assumed  the  title  and
StrthTcof  authority  of  admiral  and  viceroy,  called  the
adinirai island  wliicli  he  had  discovered  San  Salvador.

and  vice-  />  y>  7 •

"•oy-  It  is  better  known  by  the  name  of  Guanahani,

which  the  natives  gave  to  it,  and  is  one  of  that  large
cluster  of  islands  called  the  Lucaya  or  Bahama  isles.
It  is  situated  above  three  thousand  miles  to  the  west  of
Gomera,  from  which  the  squadron  took  its  departure,
and  only  four  degrees  to  the  south  of  it;  so  little  had

1492.]  BOOK  II.  113

Columbus  deviated  from  the  westerly  course,  wliicli  he
had  chosen  as  the  most  proper.

Proceeds  Columbus  employed  the  next  day  in  visiting
towards  the  coasts  of  the  island ;  and  from  the  universal
poverty  of  the  inhabitants,  he  perceived  that
this  was  not  the  rich  country  for  which  he  sought.  But,
conformably  to  his  theory  concerning  the  discovery  of
those  regions  of  Asia  which  stretched  towards  the  east,
he  concluded  that  San  Salvador  was  one  of  the  isles
which  geographers  described  as  situated  in  the  great
ocean  adjacent  to  India.*  Having  observed  that  most
of  the  people  whom  he  had  seen  wore  small  plates  of
gold,  by  way  of  ornament,  in  their  nostrils,  he  eagerly
inquired  where  they  got  that  precious  metal.  They
pointed  towards  the  south,  and  made  him  comprehend
by  signs,  that  gold  abounded  in  countries  situated  in
that  quarter.  Thither  he  immediately  determined  to
direct  his  course,  in  full  confidence  of  finding  there
those  opuleiit  regions  which  had  been  the  object  of  his
voyage,  and  would  be  a  recompense  for  all  his  toils  and
dangers.  He  took  along  with  him  seven  of  the  natives
of  San  Salvador,  that,  by  acquiring  the  Spanish  lan-
guage, they  might  serve  as  guides  and  interpreters;
and  those  innocent  people  considered  it  as  a  mark  of
distinction  when  they  were  selected  to  accompany  him.
Discovers  He  saw  scvcral  islands,  and  touched  at  three
Cuba.  Qf  the  largest,  on  which  he  bestowed  the  names
of  St.  Mary  of  the  Conception,  Fernandina,  and  Isa-
bella. But,  as  their  soil,  productions,  and  inhabitants,
nearly  resembled  those  of  San  Salvador,  he  made  no
stay  in  any  of  them.  He  inquired  everywhere  for  gold,
and  the  signs  that  were  uniformly  made  by  way  of  an-
swer, confirmed  him  in  the  opinion  that  it  was  brought
from  the  south.  He  followed  that  course,  and  soon
discovered  a  country  which  appeared  very  extensive,
not  perfectly  level,  like  those  which  he  had  already

«  Pet.  Mart,  epist.  135.
VOL. VI.  I

114  AMERICA.  [1492.

visited,  but  so  diversified  with  rising  grounds,  hills,
rivers,  woods,  and  plains,  that  he  "was  uncertain  whe-
ther it  might  prove  an  island,  or  part  of  the  continent.
The  natives  of  San  Salvador,  whom  he  had  on  board,
called  it  Cuba;  Columbus  gave  it  the  name  of  Juana.
He  entered  the  mouth  of  a  large  river  with  his  squa-
dron, and  all  the  inhabitants  fled  to  the  mountains  as
he  approached  the  shore.  But  as  he  resolved  to  careen
his  ships  in  that  place,  he  sent  some  Spaniards,  to-
gether with  one  of  the  people  of  San  Salvador,  to  view
the  interior  part  of  the  country.  They,  having  ad-
vanced above  sixty  miles  from  the  shore,  reported,
upon  their  return,  that  the  soil  was  richer  and  more  cul-
tivated than  any  they  had  hitherto  discovered  ;  that,
besides  many  scattered  cottages,  they  had  found  one  vil-
lage, containing  above  a  thousand  inhabitants  ;  that  the
people,  though  naked,  seemed  to  be  more  intelligent
than  those  of  San  Salvador,  but  had  treated  them  with
the  same  respectful  attention,  kissing  their  feet,  and
honouring  them  as  sacred  beings  allied  to  Heaven  ;  that
they  had  given  them  to  eat  a  certain  root,  the  taste  of
which  resembled  roasted  chesnuts,  and  likewise  a  sin-
gular species  of  corn  called  maize,  which,  either  when
roasted  whole  or  ground  into  meal,  was  abundantly  pa-
latable; that  there  seemed  to  be  no  four-footed  animals
in  the  country,  but  a  species  of  dogs,  which  could  not
bark,  and  a  creature  resembling  a  rabbit,  but  of  a  much
smaller  size ;  that  they  had  observed  some  ornaments
of  gold  among  the  people,  but  of  no  great  value."
His  con-  These  messengers  had  prevailed  with  some
with're-  of  the  nativcs  to  accompany  them,  who  inform-
gard  to  It.  g^  Columbus,  that  the  gold  of  which  they  made
their  ornaments  was  found  in  Cuhanacan.  By  this
word  they  meant  the  middle  or  inland  part  of  Cuba;
but  Columbus,  being  ignorant  of  their  language,  as  well
as  unaccustomed  to  their  pronunciation,  and  his  thoughts

»  Lffe  of  Columbus,  c.  24 — 28. Hcrrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  i.  c.  14.

t492.]  BOOK II.  115

running  continually  upon  his  own  theory  concerning
the  discovery  of  the  East  Indies,  he  was  led,  by  the  re-
semblance of  sound,  to  suppose  that  they  spoke  of  the
Great  Khan,  and  imagined  that  the  opulent  kingdom  of
Cathay,  described  by  Marco  Polo,  was  not  very  remote.
This  induced  him  to  employ  some  time  in  viewing  the
country.  He  visited  almost  every  harbour,  from  Porto
del  Principe,  on  the  north  coast  of  Cuba,  to  the  eastern
extremity  of  the  island:  but,  though  delighted  with  the
beauty  of  the  scenes  which  every  where  presented  them-
selves, and  amazed  at  the  luxuriant  fertility  of  the  soil,
both  which,  from  their  novelty,  made  a  more  lively  im-
pression upon  his  imagination,''  he  did  not  find  gold  in
such  quantity  as  was  sufficient  to  satisfy  either  the  ava-
rice of  his  followers,  or  the  expectations  of  the  court  to
which  he  was  to  return.  The  people  of  the  country,  as
much  astonished  at  his  eagerness  in  quest  of  gold  as
the  Europeans  were  at  their  ignorance  and  simplicity,
pointed  towards  the  east,  where  an  island  which  they
called  Hayti  was  situated,  in  which  that  metal  was
more  abundant  than  amono-  them.  Columbus  ordered
his  squadron  to  bend  its  course  thither ;  but  Martin
Alonzo  Pinzon,  impatient  to  be  the  first  who  should
take  possession  of  the  treasures  which  this  country  was
supposed  to  contain,  quitted  his  companions,  regard-
less of  all  the  admiral's  signals  to  slacken  sail  until  they
should  come  up  with  him.

Discovers  Columbus,  retarded  by  contrary  winds,  did
the  island  jjot  Tcach  Hayti  till  the  6th  of  December.  He
called  the  port  where  he  first  touched  St.  Ni-
cholas, and  the  island  itself  Espagnola,  in  honour  of
the  kingdom  by  which  he  was  employed  ;  and  it  is  the
only  country,  of  those  he  had  yet  discovered,  which  has
retained  the  name  that  he  gave  it.  As  he  could  nei-
ther meet  with  the  Pinta,  nor  have  any  intercourse  with
the  inhabitants,  who  fled  in  g-reat  consternation  towards

■^  See  Note  XIV.

I2

116  AMERICA.  [1492.

the  woods,  he  soon  quitted  St.  Nicholas,  and,  sailing-
along  the  northern  coast  of  the  island,  he  entered  an-
other harbour,  which  he  called  Conception.  Here  he
was  more  fortunate ;  his  people  overtook  a  woman  who
was  flying  from  them,  and  after  treating  her  with  great
gentleness,  dismissed  her  with  a  present  of  such  toys
as  they  knew  were  most  valued  in  those  regions.  The
description  which  she  gave  to  her  countrymen  of  the
humanity  and  wonderful  qualities  of  the  strangers;
their  admiration  of  the  trinkets,  whichshe  shewed  with
exultation;  and  their  eagerness  to  participate  of  the  same
favours ;  removed  all  their  fears,  and  induced  many  of
them  to  repair  to  the  harbour.  The  strange  objects
which  they  beheld,  and  the  baubles  which  Columbus
bestowed  upon  them,  amply  gratified  their  curiosity
and  their  wishes.  They  nearly  resembled  the  people  of
Guanahani  and  Cuba.  They  were  naked  like  them,
ignorant  and  simple;  and  seemed  to  be  equally  unac-
quainted with  all  the  arts  which  appear  most  necessary
in  polished  societies ;  but  they  were  gentle,  credulous,
and  timid,  to  a  degree  which  rendered  it  easy  to  ac-
quire the  ascendant  over  them,  especially  as  their  ex-
cessive admiration  led  them  into  the  same  error  with
the  people  of  the  other  islands,  in  believing  the  Spa-
niards to  be  more  than  mortals,  and  descended  imme-
diately from  Heaven.  They  possessed  gold  in  greater
abundance  than  their  neighbours,  which  they  readily
exchanged  for  bells,  beads,  or  pins;  and  in  this  unequal
traffic  both  parties  were  highly  pleased,  each  consider-
ing themselves  as  gainers  by  the  transaction.  Here
Columbus  was  visited  by  a  prince  or  caziqne  of  the
country.  He  appeared  with  all  the  pomp  known
among  a  simple  people,  being  carried  in  a  sort  of  pa-
lanquin upon  the  shoulders  of  four  men,  and  attended
by  many  of  his  subjects,  who  served  him  with  great
respect-  His  deportment  was  grave  and  stately,  very
reserved  towards  his  own  people,  but  with  Columbus

1492.]  BOOK II.  117

and  the  Spaniards  extremely  courteous.  He  gave  the
admiral  some  thin  plates  of  gold,  and  a  girdle  of  curious
workmanship,  receiving  in  return  presents  of  small
value,  but  highly  acceptable  to  him/

Columbus,  still  intent  on  discovering  the  mines  which
yielded  gold,  continued  to  interrogate  all  the  natives
with  whom  he  had  any  intercourse,  concerning  their
situation.  They  concurred  in  pointing  out  a  moun-
tainous country,  which  they  called  Cibao,  at  some  dis-
tance from  the  sea,  and  farther  towards  the  east.  Struck
with  this  sound,  which  appeared  to  him  the  same  with
Cipango,  the  name  by  which  Marco  Polo,  and  other
travellers  to  the  East,  distinguished  the  island  of  Japan,
he  no  longer  doubted  with  respect  to  the  vicinity  of  the
countries  which  he  had  discovered  to  the  remote  parts
of  Asia  ;  and  in  full  expectation  of  reaching  soon  those
regions  which  had  been  the  object  of  his  voyage,  he
directed  his  course  towards  the  east.  He  put  into  a
commodious  harbour,  which  he  called  St.  Thomas,  and
found  that  district  to  be  under  the  ofovernment  of  a
powerful  cazique,  named  Guacajiahari,  who,  as  he
afterward  learned,  was  one  of  the  five  sovereigns
among  whom  the  whole  island  was  divided.  He  im-
mediately sent  messengers  to  Columbus,  who,  in  his
name,  delivered  to  him  the  present  of  a  mask  curiously
fashioned  with  the  ears,  nose,  and  mouth  of  beaten  gold,
and  invited  him  to  the  place  of  his  residence,  near
the  harbour  now  called  Cape  Francois,  some  leagues
towards  the  east.  Columbus  dispatched  some  of  his
officers  to  visit  this  prince,  who,  as  he  behaved  himself
with  greater  dignity,  seemed  to  claim  more  attention.
They  returned  with  such  favourable  accounts  both  of
the  country  and  of  the  people,  as  made  Columbus  im-
patient for  that  interview  with  Guacanahari  to  which
he  had  been  invited.

J  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  32. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  i.  c.  15,  &Co

118  AMERICA.  [149-2.

One  of  his  He  sailed  for  this  purpose  from  St.  Thomas,
ships  lost.  Qj^  |.]jg  24th  of  December,  with  a  fair  wind,  and
the  sea  perfectly  calm ;  and  as,  amidst  the  multiplicity
of  his  occupations,  he  had  not  shut  his  eyes  for  two
days,  he  retired  at  midnight  in  order  to  take  some  re-
pose, having-  committed  the  helm  to  the  pilot,  with
strict  injunctions  not  to  quit  it  for  a  moment.  The  pilot,
dreading  no  danger,  carelessly  left  the  helm  to  an  unex-
perienced cabin-boy,  and  the  ship,  carried  away  by  a
current,  was  dashed  against  a  rock.  The  violence  of
the  shock  awakened  Columbus.  He  ran  up  to  the  deck.
There  all  was  confusion  and  despair.  He  alone  re-
tained presence  of  mind.  He  ordered  some  of  the
sailors  to  take  a  boat,  and  carry  out  an  anchor  astern ;
but,  instead  of  obeying,  they  made  off  towards  the
Nigna,  which  was  about  half  a  league  distant.  He
then  commanded  the  masts  to  be  cut  down,  in  order  to
lighten  the  ship  ;  but  all  his  endeavours  were  too  late  ;
the  vessel  opened  near  the  keel,  and  filled  so  fast  with
water  that  its  loss  was  inevitable.  The  smoothness  of
the  sea,  and  the  timely  assistance  of  boats  from  the
Nigna,  enabled  the  crew  to  save  their  lives.  As  soon
as  the  islanders  heard  of  this  disaster,  they  crowded  to
the  shore,  with  their  prince  Guacanahari  at  their  head.
Instead  of  taking  advantage  of  the  distress  in  which
they  beheld  the  Spaniards,  to  attempt  any  thing  to  their
detriment,  they  lamented  their  misfortune  with  tears  of
condolence.  Not  satisfied  with  this  unavailing  expres-
sion of  their  sympathy,  they  put  to  sea  a  number  of
canoes,  and,  under  the  direction  of  the  Spaniards,  as-
sisted in  saving  whatever  could  be  got  out  of  the  wreck  ;
and,  by  the  united  labour  of  so  many  hands,  almost
every  thing  of  value  was  carried  ashore.  As  fast  as
the  goods  were  landed,  Guacanahari  in  person  took
charge  of  them.  By  his  orders  they  were  all  deposited
in  one  place,  and  armed  sentinels  were  posted,  who
kept  the  multitude  at  a  distance,  in  order  to  prevent

1492]  BOOK II.  119

them  not  only  from  embezzling,  but  from  inspecting  too
curiously  what  belonged  to  their  guests/  Next  morn-
ing this  prince  visited  Columbus,  who  was  now  on
board  the  Nigna,  and  endeavoured  to  console  him  for
his  loss,  by  offering  all  that  he  possessed  to  repair  it,*
Distress  of  The  couditiou  of  Columbus  was  such,  that
oura  us.  j^g  stood  in  need  of  consolation.  He  had  hi-
therto procured  no  intelligence  of  the  Pinta,  and  no
longer  doubted  but  that  his  treacherous  associate  had
set  sail  for  Europe,  in  order  to  have  the  merit  of  carry-
ing the  first  tidings  of  the  extraordinary  discoveries
which  had  been  made,  and  to  preoccupy  so  far  the  ear
of  their  sovereign,  as  to  rob  him  of  the  glory  and  re-
ward to  which  he  was  justly  entitled.  There  remained
but  one  vessel,  and  that  the  smallest  and  most  crazy  of
the  squadron,  to  traverse  such  a  vast  ocean,  and  carry
so  many  men  back  to  Europe.  Each  of  those  circum-
stances was  alarming,  and  filled  the  mind  of  Columbus
with  the  utmost  solicitude.  The  desire  of  overtaking
Pinzon,  and  of  effacing  the  unfavourable  impressions
which  his  misrepresentations  might  make  in  Spain,
made  it  necessary  to  return  thither  without  delay.  The
difficulty  of  taking  such  a  number  of  persons  aboard
the  Nigna,  confirmed  him  in  an  opinion,  which  the  ferti-
lity of  the  country,  and  the  gentle  temper  of  the  peo-
Resoives  P^®  ^^^^  already  induced  him  to  form.  He  re-
to  leave  a solvcd  to  Icavc  a  Dart  of  his  crew  in  the  island,

part  °'  "'s ^  •  T  1

crew  in  the  that  by  rcsidmg  there,  they  might  learn  the
language  of  the  natives,  study  their  disposition,
examine  the  nature  of  the  country,  search  for  mines,
prepare  for  the  commodious  settlement  of  the  colony,
with  which  he  purposed  to  return,  and  thus  secure  and
facilitate  the  acquisition  of  those  advantages  which  he
expected  from  his  discoveries.  When  he  mentioned  this
to  his  men,  all  approved  of  the  design ;  and  from  im-
patience under  the  fatigue  of  a  long  voyage,  from  the

»  See  Note  XV.  a  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  i.  c.  18.

120  AiNIKRICA.  [1492

levity  natural  to  sailors,  or  from  the  hopes  of  amassing-
wealth  in a  country,  which  afforded  such  promising-
specimens  of  its  riches,  many  offered  voluntarily  to  be
amono'  the  number  of  those  who  should  remain.
Obtains  Nothing  was  now  wanting  towards  the  exe-

scnt*^of'tiie  cution  of  this  scheme,  but  to  obtain  the  consent
natives,  of  Guacauahari ;  and  his  unsuspicious  simpli-
city soon  presented  to  the  admiral  a  favourable  oppor-
tunity of  proposing  it.  Columbus  having,  in  the  best
manner  he  could,  by  broken  words  and  signs,  expressed
some  curiosity  to  know  the  cause  which  had  moved  the
islanders  to  fly  with  such  precipitation  upon  the  ap-
proach of  his  ships,  the  cazique  informed  him  that  the
country  was  much  infested  by  the  incursions  of  certain
people,  whom  he  called  Carribeans,  who  inhabited  se-
veral islands  to  the  south-east.  These  he  described  as
a  fierce  and  warlike  race  of  men,  who  delighted  in
blood,  and  devoured  the  flesh  of  the  prisoners  who  were
so  unhappy  as  to  fall  into  their  hands;  and  as  the
Spaniards  at  their  first  appearance  were  supposed  to  be
Carribeans,  whom  the  natives,  however  numerous,  durst
not  face  in  battle,  they  had  recourse  to  their  usual  me-
thod of  securing  their  safety,  by  flying  into  the  thickest
and  most  impenetrable  woods.  Guacanahari,  while
speaking  of  those  dreadful  invaders,  discovered  such
symptoms  of  terror,  as  well  as  such  consciousness  of
the  inability  of  his  own  people  to  resist  them,  as  led
Columbus  to  conclude  that  he  would  not  be  alarmed  at
the  proposition  of  any  scheme  which  afforded  him  the
prospect  of  an  additional  security  against  their  attacks.
He  instantly  offered  him  the  assistance  of  the  Spaniards
to  repel  his  enemies  ;  he  engaged  to  take  him  and  his
people  under  the  protection  of  the  powerful  monarch
whom  he  served,  and  offered  to  leave  in  the  island  such
a  number  of  his  men  as  should  be  sufficient,  not  only  to
defend  the  inhabitants  from  future  incursions,  but  to
avenge  their  past  wrongs.

1492.]  BOOK II.  121

Builds  The  credulous  prince  closed  eagerly  with  the

a  fort.  proposal,  and  thought  himself  already  safe  un-
der the  patronage  of  beings  sprung  from  Heaven,  and
superior  in  power  to  mortal  men.  The  ground  was
marked  out  for  a  small  fort,  which  Columbus  called
Navidad,  because  he  had  landed  there  on  Christmas-
day.  A  deep  ditch  was  drawn  around  it.  The  ram-
parts were  fortified  with  pallisades,  and  the  great  guns,
saved  out  of  the  admiral's  ship,  were  planted  upon  them.
In  ten  days  the  work  was  finished  ;  that  simple  race  of
men  labouring  with  inconsiderate  assiduity  in  erecting
this  first  monument  of  their  own  servitude.  During
this  time,  Columbus,  by  his  caresses  and  liberality,  la-
boured to  increase  the  high  opinion  which  the  natives
entertained  of  the  Spaniards.  But  while  he  endea-
voured to  inspire  them  with  confidence  in  their  dispo-
sition to  do  good,  he  wished  likewise  to  give  them  some
striking  idea  of  their  power  to  punish  and  destroy  such
as  were  the  objects  of  their  indignation.  With  this
view,  in  presence  of  a  vast  assembly,  he  drew  up  his
men  in  order  of  battle,  and  made  an  ostentatious  but
innocent  display  of  the  sharpness  of  the  Spanish  swords,
of  the  force  of  their  spears,  and  the  operation  of  their
cross-bows.  These  rude  people,  strangers  to  the  use
of  iron,  and  unacquainted  with  any  hostile  weapons  but
arrows  of  reeds  pointed  with  the  bones  of  fishes,  wooden
swords,  and  javelins  hardened  in  the  fire,  wondered  and
trembled.  Before  this  surprise  or  fear  had  time  to
abate,  he  ordered  the  great  guns  to  be  fired.  The  sud-
den explosion  struck  them  with  such  terror,  that  they
fell  flat  to  the  ground,  covering  their  faces  with  their
hands  ;  and  when  they  beheld  the  astonishing  eifect  of
the  bullets  among  the  trees,  towards  which  the  cannon
had  been  pointed,  they  concluded  that  it  was  impossi-
ble to  resist  men,  who  had  the  command  of  such  de-
structive instruments,  and  who  came  armed  with  thun-
der and  lightning  against  their  enemies.

]-22  AMERICA.  [1492.

His  in-  After giving-  such  impressions  both  of  the

tl^'thosT*  beneficence  and  power  of  the  Spaniards,  as
lie  left  in  might  have  rendered  it  easy  to  preserve  an  as-
cendant over  the  minds  of  the  natives,  Colum-
bus appointed  thirty-eight  of  his  people  to  remain  in
the  island.  He  intrusted  the  command  of  these  to
Diego  de  Arado,  a  gentleman  of  Cordova,  investing
him  ^vitll  the  same  powers  which  he  himself  had  re-
ceived from  Ferdinand  and  Isabella ;  and  furnished
him  with  every  thing  requisite  for  the  subsistence  or
defence  of  this  infant  colony.  He  strictly  enjoined
them  to  maintain  concord  among  themselves,  to  yield
an  unreserved  obedience  to  their  commander,  to  avoid
giving  offence  to  the  natives  by  any  violence  or  exac-
tion, to  cultivate  the  friendship  of  Guacanahari,  but  not
to  put  themselves  in  his  power,  by  straggling  in  small
parties,  or  marching  too  far  from  the  fort.  He  pro-
mised to  revisit  them  soon,  with  such  a  reinforcement
of  strength  as  might  enable  them  to  take  full  possession
of  the  country,  and  to  reap  all  the  fruits  of  their  disco-
veries. In  the  mean  time,  he  engaged  to  mention  their
names  to  the  king  and  queen,  and  to  place  their  merit
and  services  in  the  most  advantageous  light.''

Having  thus  taken  every  precaution  for  the  se-
curity of  the  colony,  he  left  Navidad  on  the  4th  of
January,  1493,  and  steering  towards  the  east,
discovered  and  gave  names  to  most  of  the
harbours  on  the  northern  coast  of  the  island.  On
the  6th  he  descried  the  Pinta,  and  soon  came  up
with  her,  after  a  separation  of  more  than  six  weeks.
Pinzon  endeavoured  to  justify  his  conduct,  by  pre-
tending that  he  had  been  driven  from  his  course  by
stress  of  weather,  and  prevented  from  returning  by
contrary  winds.  The  admiral,  though  he  still  suspected
his  perfidious  intentions,  and  knew  well  what  he  urged

•>  Oviedo  ap,  Rarausio,  iii.  p.  82.  E. lltrrtra.  dec.  1.  lib.  i.  c  20. Life  of  Co-
lumbus, c.  o4.

1493.]  BOOK II.  123

in  his  own  defence  to  be  frivolous  as  well  as  false,  was
so  sensible  that  this  was  not  a  proper  time  for  ventur-
ing upon  any  high  strain  of  authority,  and  felt  such
satisfaction  in  this  junction  with  his  consort,  which  de-
livered him  from  many  disquieting  apprehensions,  that,
lame  as  Pinzon's  apology  was,  he  admitted  of  it  with-
out difficulty,  and  restored  him  to  favour.  During  his
absence  from  the  admiral,  Pinzon  had  visited  several
harbours  in  the  island,  had  acquired  some  gold  by
trafficking  with  the  natives,  but  had  made  no  dis-
covery of  any  importance.

Resolves  From  the  condition  of  his  ships,  as  well  as
to  Europe  ^^^  temper  of  his  men,  Columbus  now  found
it  necessary  to  hasten  his  return  to  Europe.
The  former  having  suffered  much  during  a  voyage  of
such  an  unusual  length,  were  extremely  leaky.  The
lattei*  expressed  the  utmost  impatience  to  revisit  their
native  country,  from  v/hich  they  had  been  so  long-
absent,  and  where  they  had  things  so  wonderful  and
unheard-of  to  relate.  Accordingly,  on  the  16th  of
January,  he  directed  his  course  towards  the  north-east,
and  soon  lost  sight  of  land.  He  had  on  board  some
of  the  natives,  whom  he  had  taken  from  the  different
islands  which  he  discovered;  and  besides  the  gold,
which  was  the  chief  object  of  research,  he  had  collected
specimens  of  all  the  productions  which  were  likely  to
become  subjects  of  commerce  in  the  several  countries,
as  well  as  many  unknown  birds,  and  other  natural
curiosities,  which  might  attract  the  attention  of  the
learned,  or  excite  the  wonder  of  the  people.  The
voyage  was  prosperous  to  the  14th  of  February,  and
he  had  advanced  near  five  hundred  leagues  across
A  violent  *^^^  Atlantic  ocean,  when  the  wind  began  to
storm Yise,  and  continued  to  blow  with  increasino-

arises*  O

rage,  which  terminated  in  a  furious  hurricane.
Every  thing  that  the  naval  skill  and  experience  of  Co-

124  AMERICA.  [1493.

lumbus  could  devise  was  employed,  in  order  to  save  the
ships. But  it  was  impossible  to  withstand  the  violence
of  the  storm,  and,  as  they  were  still  far  from  any  land,
destruction  seemed  inevitable.  The  sailors  had  recourse
to  prayers  to  Almighty  God,  to  the  invocation  of  saints,
to  vows  and  charms,  to  every  thing  that  religion  dictates,
or  superstition  suggests,  to  the  affrighted  mind  of  man.
No  prospect  of  deliverance  appearing,  they  abandoned
themselves  to  despair,  and  expected  every  moment  to
be  swallowed  up  in  the  waves. Besides  the  passions
which  naturally  agitate  and  alarm  the  human  mind  in
such  awful  situations,  when  certain  death,  in  one  of  his
The  con- ^n^^t  terrible  forms,  is  before  it,  Columbus  had
duct  of to  endure  feelings  of  distress  peculiar  to  him-
self He  dreaded  that  all  knowledge  of  the
amazino-  discoveries  which  he  had  made  was  now  to
perish ;  mankind  were  to  be  deprived  of  every  benefit
that  might  have  been  derived  from  the  happy  success
of  his  schemes,  and  his  own  name  would  descend  to
posterity  as  that  of  a  rash  deluded  adventurer,  instead
of  being  transmitted  with  the  honour  due  to  the  author
and  conductor  of  the  most  noble  enterprise  that  had
ever  been  undertaken. These  reflections  extinguished
all  sense  of  his  own  personal  danger. Less  affected
with  the  loss  of  life,  than  solicitous  to  preserve  the
memory  of  what  he  had  attempted  and  achieved,  he  re-
tired to  his  cabin,  and  wrote,  upon  parchment,  a  short
account  of  the  voyage  which  he  had  made,  of  the  course
which  he  had  taken,  of  the  situation  and  riches  of  the
countries  which  he  had  discovered,  and  of  the  colony
that  he  had  left  there. Having  wrapped  up  this  in  an
oiled  cloth,  which  he  enclosed  in  a  cake  of  wax,  he  put
it  into  a  cask  carefully  stopped  up,  and  threw  it  into
the  sea,  in  hopes  that  some  fortunate  accident  might
preserve  a  deposit  of  so  much  importance  to  the  world. *"

•^  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  37. Hcrrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  1,  2. Sec  Note  XVI.

1493.]  BOOK II.  125

Takes  -^^  length  Providence  interposed,  to  save  a

shelter  in \[fQ rescrved for other services. The wind

the  Azores.

abated,  the  sea  became  calm,  and  on  the  even-
ing of  the  15th,  Columbus  and  his  companions  dis-
covered land ;  and  though  uncertain  what  it  was,  they
made  towards  it.  They  soon  knew  it  to  be  St.  Mary,
one  of  the  Azores  or  western  isles,  subject  to  the  crown
of  Portugal.  There,  after  a  violent  contest  with  the
governor,  in  which  Columbus  displayed  no  less  spirit
than  prudence,  he  obtained  a  supply  of  fresh  provisions,
and  whatever  else  he  needed.  One  circumstance,  how-
ever, greatly  disquieted  him.  The  Pinta,  of  which  he
had  lost  sight  on  the  first  day  of  the  hurricane,  did  not
appear ;  he  dreaded  for  some  time  that  she  had  foun-
dered at  sea,  and  that  all  her  crew  had  perished  ;  after-
ward, his  former  suspicions  recurred,  and  he  became
apprehensive  that  Pinzon  had  borne  away  for  Spain,
that  he  might  reach  it  before  him,  and,  by  giving  the
first  account  of  his  discoveries,  might  obtain  some  share
of  his  fame.

Feb.  24.  Ill  order  to  prevent  this,  he  left  the  Azores  as

Arrives  at ^qqj^  ^s the  wcathcr  would  permit. At  no

Lisbon.  '^

great  distance  from  the  coast  of  Spain,  when
near  the  end  of  his  voyage,  and  seemingly  beyond  the
reach  of  any  disaster,  another  storm  arose,  little  inferior
to  the  former  in  violence  ;  and  after  driving  before  it
during  two  days  and  two  nights,  he  was  forced  to  take
March  4.  shelter  in  the  river  Tagus.  Upon  application  to
the  king  of  Portugal,  he  was  allowed  to  come  up
to  Lisbon;  and,  notwithstanding  the  envy  which  it  was
natural  for  the  Portuguese  to  feel,  when  they  beheld
another  nation  entering  upon  that  province  of  discovery
which  they  had  hitherto  deemed  peculiarly  their  own,
and  in  its  first  essay,  not  only  rivalling,  but  eclipsing
their  fame,  Columbus  was  received  with  all  the  marks
of  distinction  due  to  a  man  who  had  performed  things
so  extraordinary  and  unexpected. The  king  admitted

126  AMERICA.  [1493.

him  into  his  presence,  treated  liim  with  the  highest  re-
spect, and  listened  to  the  account  which  he  gave  of  his
voyage  with  admiration  mingled  with  regret.  While
Columbus,  on  his  part,  enjoyed  the  satisfaction  of  de-
scribing the  importance  of  his  discoveries,  and  of  being
now  able  to  prove  the  solidity  of  his  schemes  to  those
very  persons,  who,  with  an  ignorance  disgraceful  to
themselves,  and  fatal  to  their  country,  had  lately  re-
jected them  as  the  projects  of  a  visionary  or  designing
adventurer.*^

Returns  to  Columbuswas  SO  impatient  to  return  to  Spain,
^^'"'  that  he  remained  only  five  days  in  Lisbon.  On
the  15th  of  March  he  arrived  in  the  portof  Palos,  seven
months  and  eleven  days  from  the  time  when  he  set  out
thence  upon  his  voyage.  As  soon  as  the  ship  was  dis-
covered approaching  the  port,  all  the  inhabitants  of
Palos  ran  eagerly  to  the  shore,  in  order  to  welcome
their  relations  and  fellow-citizens,  and  to  hear  tidings
of  their  voyage.  When  the  prosperous  issue  of  it  was
known,  when  they  beheld  the  strange  people,  the  un-
known animals,  and  singular  productions,  brought  from
the  countries  which  had  been  discovered,  the  effusion
of  joy  was  general  and  unbounded.  The  bells  were
rung,  the  cannon  fired;  Columbuswas  received  at  land-
ing with  royal  honours,  and  all  the  people  in  solemn
procession,  accompanied  him  and  his  crew  to  the
church,  where  they  returned  thanks  to  Heaven,  which
had  so  wonderfully  conducted  and  crowned  with  suc-
cess a  voyage  of  greater  length  and  of  more  impor-
tance than  had  been  attempted  in  any  former  age.  On
the  evening  of  the  same  day,  he  had  the  satisfaction  of
seeing  the  Pinta,  which  the  violence  of  the  tempest  had
driven  far  to  the  north,  enter  the  harbour.
His  recep-  The  first  carc  of  Columbus  was  to  inform  the
king  and  queen,  who  were  then  at  Barcelona,
of  his  arrival  and  success. Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  no

^  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  40,  41. Herrcra,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  3.

1493.]  BOOK II.  127

less  astonished than  delighted  with  this  unexpected
event,  desired  Columbus,  in  terms  the  most  respectful
and  flattering,  to  repair  immediately  to  court,  that  from
his  own  mouth  they  might  receive  a  full  detail  of  his
extraordinary  services and discoveries. During  his
journey  to  Barcelona,  the  people  crowded  from  the  ad-
jacent country,  following  him  every  where  with  admi-
ration and  applause. His  entrance  into  the  city  was
conducted,  by  order  of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  with
pomp  suitable  to  the  great  event,  which  added  such
distinguishing  lustre  to  their  reign. The  people  whom
he  brought  along  with  him  from  the  countries  which
he  had  discovered,  marched  first,  and  by  their  singu-
lar complexion,  the  wild  peculiarity  of  their  features,
and  uncouth  finery,  appeared  like  men  of  another  spe-
cies. Next  to  them  were  carried  the  ornaments  of
gold,  fashioned  by  the rude art  of  the  natives,  the
grains  of  gold  found  in  the  mountains,  and  dust  of  the
same  metal  gathered  in  the  rivers. After  these  ap-
peared the  various  commodities  of  the  new  discovered
countries, together with  their curious productions.
Columbus  himself  closed  the  procession,  and  attracted
the  eyes  of  all  the  spectators,  who  gazed  with  admira-
tion on  the  extraordinary  man,  whose  superior  sagacity
and  fortitude  had  conducted  their  countrymen,  by  a
route  concealed  from  past  ages,  to  the  knowledge  of  a
new  world. Ferdinand  and  Isabella  received  him  clad
in  their  royal  robes,  and  seated  upon  a  throne,  under  a
magnificent  canopy.  When  he  approached,  they  stood
up,  and  raising  him  as  he  kneeled  to  kiss  their  hands,
commanded  him  to  take  his  seat  upon  a  chair  prepared
for  him,  and  to  give  a  circumstantial  account  of  his
voyage.  He  delivered  it  with  a  gravity  and  composure
no  less  suitable  to  the  disposition  of  the  Spanish  nation,
than  to  the  dignity  of  the  audience  in  which  he  spoke,
and  with  that  modest  simplicity  which  characterizes
men of  superior  minds,  who,  satisfied with having

128  AMERICA.  [1493.

performed  great  actions,  court  not  vain  applause  by  an
ostentatious  display  of  their  exploits.  When  he  had
finished  his  narration,  the  king  and  queen,  kneeling
down,  offered  up  solemn  thanks  to  Almighty  God  for
the  discovery  of  those  new  regions,  from  which  they
expected  so  many  advantages  to  flow  in  upon  the  king-
doms subject  to  their  government."  Every  mark  of
honour  that  gratitude  or  admiration  could  suggest  was
conferred  upon  Columbus.  Letters  patent  were  issued,
confirming  to  him  and  to  his  heirs  all  the  privileges
contained  in  the  capitulation  concluded  at  Santa  Fe  ;
his  family  was  ennobled;  the  king  and  queen,  and,
after  their  example,  the  courtiers  treated  him,  on  every
occasion,  with  all  the  ceremonious  respect  paid  to  per-
sons of  the  highest  rank.  But  what  pleased  him  most,
as  it  gratified  his  active  mind,  bent  continually  upon
great  objects,  was  an  order  to  equip,  without  delay,  an
armament  of  such  force,  as  might  enable  him  not  only
to  take  possession  of  the  countries  which  he  had  al-
ready discovered,  but  to  go  in  search  of  those  more  opu-
lent regions,  which  he  still  confidently  expected  tofind.^
Astonish-  While  preparations  were  making  for  this  ex-
nianWnd  p^dition,  the  fame  of  Columbus's  successful
athisdis-  vovao-e  spread  over  Europe,  and  excited  Q'ene-

coveries.  i  .  mi  •  •

ral  attention.  The  multitude,  struck  with  amaze-
ment when  they  heard  that  a  new  world  had  been  found,
could  hardly  believe  an  event  so  much  above  their  con-
ception. Men  of  science,  capable  of  comprehending  the
nature,  and  of  discerning  the  eflfects  of  this  great  dis-
covery, received  the  account  of  it  with  admiration  and
joy.  They  spoke  of  his  voyage  with  rapture,  and  con-
gratulated one  another  upon  their  felicity,  in  having
lived  in  the  period  when,  by  this  extraordinary  event,
the  boundaries  of  human  knowledge  were  so  much  ex
tended,  and  such  a  new  field  of  inquiry  and  observation
opened,  as  would  lead  mankind  to  a  perfect  acquaint-

•  See  Note  XVII.  f  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  42,  43. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  13.

1493.]  BOOK  II.  129

ance  with  the  structure  and  productions  of  the  habi-
table globe.^  Various  opinions  and  conjectures  were
formed  concerning  the  new-found  countries,  and  what
division  of  the  earth  they  belonged  to.  Columbus  ad-
hered tenaciously  to  his  original  opinion,  that  they
should  be  reckoned  a  part  of  those  vast  regions  in  Asia,
comprehended  under  the  general  name  of  India.  This
sentiment  was  confirmed  by  the  observations  which  he
made  concerning  the  productions  of  the  countries  he
had  discovered.  Gold  was  known  to  abound  in  India,
and  he  had  met  with  such  promising  samples  of  it  in
the  islands  which  he  visited,  as  led  him  to  believe  that
rich  mines  of  it  might  be  found.  Cotton,  another  pro-
duction of  the  East  Indies,  was  common  there.  The
pimento  of  the  islands  he  imagined  to  be  a  species  of
the  East  Indian  pepper.  He  mistook  a  root,  somewhat
resembling  rhubarb,  for  that  valuable  drug,  which  was
then  supposed  to  be  a  plant  peculiar  to  the  East  Indies. **
The  birds  brought  home  by  him  were  adorned  with  the
same  rich  plumage  which  distinguishes  those  of  India.
The  alligator  of  the  one  country  appeared  to  be  the
same  with  the  crocodile  of  the  other.  After  weighing
all  these  circumstances,  not  only  the  Spaniards,  but  the
other  nations  of  Europe,  seem  to  have  adopted  the  opi-
nion of  Columbus.  The  countries  which  he  had  disco-
vered were  considered  as  a  part  of  India.  Inconsequence
of  this  notion,  the  name  of  Indies  is  given  to  them  by
Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  in  a  ratification  of  their  former
agreement,  which  was  granted  to  Columbus  upon  his
return.'  Even  after  the  error  which  gave  rise  to  this
opinion  was  detected,  and  the  true  position  of  the  New
Distin-  World  was  ascertained,  the  name  has  remain-
fheliame^^  cd,  and  the  appellation  of  West  Indies  is  given
of  the  West  by  all  the  people  of  Europe  to  the  country,  and
that  of  Indians  to  its  inhabitants.

gP.  Mart,  epist.  133.  134,  13.5. See  Note  XVIII.
^  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  i.  c.  20.  Goniera  Hist.  c.  17.  '  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  44.

VOL. VI.  K

130  AMERICA.  [1493.

Prepara- The  iiaiiie  by  wliicli  Columbus  distinguished
a'second *^^^  counti'ies  whicli  he  had  discovered  was  so
Toyag'^- inviting,  the  specimens  of  their  riches  and  fer-
tility, which  he  produced, were  so  considerable, and
the reports  of  his  companions, delivered frequently
with  the  exaggeration  natural  to  travellers,  so  favour-
able,  as to excite a wonderful  spirit of  enterprise
among  the  Spaniards. Though  little  accustomed  to
naval  expeditions,  they  were  impatient  to  set  out  upon
their  voyage. Volunteers  of  every  rank  solicited  to  be
employed. Allured  by  the  inviting  prospects  which
opened  to  their  ambition  and  avarice,  neither  the  length
nor  danjrer  of  the  naviG:ation  intimidated  them. Can-
tious as Ferdinand  was,  and  averse  to  every thing-
new  or  adventurous,  he  seems  to  have  catched  the  same
spirit  with  his  subjects. Under  its  influence,  prepa-
rations for  a  second  expedition  were  carried  on  with  a
rapidity  unusual  in  Spain,  and  to  an  extent  that  would
be  deemed  not  inconsiderable  in  the  present  age. The
fleet  consisted  of  seventeen  ships,  some  of  which  were
of  good burden. It  had  on  board  fifteen  hundred
persons,  among  whom  were  many  of  noble  families,
who  had  served  in  honourable  stations. The  greater
part  of  these  being  destined  to  remain  in  the  country,
were  furnished  with  every  thing  requisite  for  conquest
or  settlement,  with  all  kinds  of  European domestic
animals,  with  such  seeds  and  plants  as  were  most  likely
to  thrive  in  the  climate  of  the  West  Indies,  with  utensils
and  instruments  of  every  sort,  and  with  such  artificers
as  might  be  most  useful  in  an  infant  colony .•"
The  right  of ^^h  formidable  and  well-provided  as  this
Spain  to  the  fleet  was,  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  did  not  rest

New  World , . .  /  ,  ,  . ,  , t

confirmed their  title  to  the  possession  oi  the  ncwly-dis-
yticpope.  ^.Q^gj.gj  countries  upon  its  operations  alone.

The  example  of  the  Portuguese,  as  well  as  the  super-
stition of  the  age,  made  it  necessary  to  obtain  from  the

''Herrera,  dec.  I.  lib.  ii.  c.  ;). Life  of  Columbus,  c.  4a.

1493.]  BOOK ir.  131

Roman  pontiff  a  grant  of  those  territories  which  they
wished  to  occupy.  The  pope,  as  the  vicar  and  repre-
sentative of  Jesus  Christ,  was  supposed  to  have  a  right
of  dominion  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth.
Alexander  VI.,  a  pontiff  infamous  for  every  crime
which  disgraces  humanity,  filled  the  papal  throne  at
that  time.  As  he  was  born  Ferdinand's  subject,  and
very  solicitous  to  secure  the  protection  of  Spain,
in  order  to  facilitate  the  execution  of  his  ambitious
schemes  in  favour  of  his  own  family,  he  was  extremely
willing  to  gratify  the  Spanish  monarchs.  By  an  act  of
liberality  which  cost  him  nothing,  and  that  served  to
establish  the  jurisdiction  and  pretensions  of  the  papal
see,  he  granted  in  full  right  to  Ferdinand  and  Isabella
all  the  countries  inhabited  by  infidels,  which  they  had
discovered,  or  should  discover ;  and,  in  virtue  of  that
power  which  he  derived  from  Jesus  Christ,  he  con-
ferred on  the  crown  of  Castile  vast  regions,  to  the
possession  of  which  he  himself  was  so  far  from  having
any  title,  that  he  was  unacquainted  with  their  situation,
and  ignorant  even  of  their  existence.  As  it  was  neces-
sary to  prevent  this  grant  interfering  with  that  for-
merly made  to  the  crown  of  Portugal,  he  appointed
that  a  line,  supposed  to  be  drawn  from  pole  to  pole,  a
hundred  leagues  to  the  westward  of  the  Azores,  should
serve  as  a  limit  between  them  ;  and,  in  the  plenitude  of
his  power,  bestowed  all  to  the  east  of  this  imaginary  line
upon  the  Portuguese,  and  all  to  the  west  of  it  upon  the
Spaniards.'  Zeal  for  propagating  the  Christian  faith
was  the  consideration  employed  by  Ferdinand  in  soli-
citing this  bull,  and  is  mentioned  by  Alexander  as  his
chief  motive  for  issuing  it.  In  order  to  manifest  some
concern  for  this  laudable  object,  several  friars,  under
the  direction  of  father  Boyl,  a  Catalonian  monk  of
great  reputation,  as  apostolical  vicar,  were  appointed
to  accompany  Columbus,  and  to  devote  themselves  to

'  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  4. Torquemecia  Moii.  Iinl.  lib.  xviii.  c.  3.

k2

];}2  AMERICA.  [1403.

the  instruction  of  tlie  natives,  ^lie  Indians,  whom
Columbus  had  brought  along  with  him,  having  re-
ceived some  tincture  of  Christian  knowledge,  were
baptized  with  much  solemnity,  the  king  himself,  the
prince  his  son,  and  the  chief  persons  of  his  court,
standinof  as  their  o^odfathers.  Those  first  fruits  of  the
New  World  have  not  been  followed  by  such  an  in-
crease as  pious  men  wished,  and  had  reason  to  expect.

Ferdinand  and  Isabella  having  thus  ac-
voyage  of  quircd  a  title,  which  was  then  deemed  com-
Coiunibus.  pig^giy  yalid,  to  extend  their  discoveries  and
to  establish  their  dominion  over  such  a  considerable
portion  of  the  globe,  nothing  now  retarded  the  depar-
ture of  the  fleet.  Columbus  was  extremely  impatient
to  revisit  the  colony  which  he  had  left,  and  to  pursue
that  career  of  glory  upon  which  he  had  entered.  He
set  sail  from  the  bay  of  Cadiz  on  the  25th  of  Sep-
tember, and  touching  again  at  the  island  of  Gomera,
he  steered  farther  towards  the  south  than  in  his  for-
mer voyage.  By  holding  this  course,  he  enjoyed
more  steadily  the  benefit  of  the  regular  winds,  which
reign  within  the  tropics,  and  was  carried  towards  a
larger  cluster  of  islands,  situated  considerably  to  the
east  of  those  which  he  had  already  discovered. On

the  twenty-sixth  day  after  his  departure  from

Nov.  2.  J  J  r

Gomera,  he  made  land.™  It  was  one  of  the
Caribbee  or  Leeward  Islands,  to  which  he  gave  the
name  of  Deseada,  on  account  of  the  impatience  of  his
crew  to  discover  some  part  of  the  New^  World.  After
this  he  visited  successively  Dominica,  Marigalante,
Guadaloupe,  Antigua,  San  Juan  de  Puerto  Rico,  and
several  other  islands,  scattered  in  his  way  as  he  ad-
vanced towards  the  north-west.  All  these  he  found  to
be  inhabited  by  that  fierce  race  of  people  whom  Gua-
canahari  had  painted  in  such  frightful  colours.  His  de-
scriptions appeared  not  to  have  been  exaggerated.  The

"'  Ovit'ilo  rij).  Kaiiius.  iii.  8.').

1493.]  BOOK  ir.  1,33

Spaniards  never  attempted  to  land  without  meeting-

with  such  a  reception,  as  discovered  the  martial  and

daring  spirit  of  the  natives ;  and  in  their  habitations

were found  relics  of  those  horrid  feasts  which  they

had  made  upon  the  bodies  of  their  enemies  taken  in

war.

.  .  But  as  Columbus  was  easrer  to  know  the

Arrives  at  i  • i i i i i

Hispanioia,  statc  of  tlic  colouy  which  he  had  planted,  and
to  supply  it  with  the  necessaries  of  which  he
supposed  it  to  be  in  want,  he  made  no  stay  in  any  of
those  islands,  and  proceeded  directly  to  Hispanioia."
When  he  arrived  off  Navidad,  the  station  in  which  he
had  left  the  thirty-eight  men  under  the  command  of
Arada,  he  was  astonished  that  none  of  them  appeared,
and  expected  every  moment  to  see  them  running-  with
transports  of  joy  to  welcome  their  countrymen. Full
of  solicitude  about  their  safety,  and  foreboding  in  his
mind  what  had  befallen  them,  he  rowed  instantly  to
land. All  the  natives  from  whom  he  might  have  re-
ceived information  had  fled. But  the  fort  which  he
had  built  was  entirely  demolished,  and  the  tattered
garments,  the  broken  arms  and  utensils  scattered  about
it,  left  no  room  to  doubt  concerning  the  unhappy  fate
of  the  garrison." While  the  Spaniards  were  shedding
tears  over  those  sad  memorials  of  their  fellow-citizens,
The  fate  of  a  brother  of  the  cazique  Guacanahari  arrived.
whom  he From  him  Columbus  received  a  particular  de-
left there, ^g^'j  Q^  what  had  happened  after  his  depar-
ture from  the  island. The  familiar intercourse of
the  Indians  with  the  Spaniards  tended  gradually  to
diminish  the  superstitious  veneration  with  which  their
first  appearance  had  inspired  that  simple  people. By
their  own  indiscretion  and  ill  conduct,  the  Spaniards
speedily  effaced  those  favourable  impressions,  and  soon
convinced  the  natives,  that  they  had  all  the  wants,  and

"  p.  Martyr,  dec.  p.  15.  18. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  7. Life  of  Columbus,
c.  46,  &c.  o  Hist,  de  Cura  do  los  Palacios. MS.

134  AMERICA.  [1493.

weaknesses,  and  passions  of  men. As  soon  as the
powerful restraint which the presence and autho-
rity of  Cokimbus  imposed  was  withdrawn, the  garri-
son threw  off  all  regfard  for  the  officer  whom  he  had
invested  with  command. Regardless  of  the  prudent
instructions  which  he  had given  them,  every  man  be-
came independent,  and  gratified his  desires  without
control. The  gold,  the  women,  the  provisions  of  the
natives,  were  all  the  prey  of  those  licentious  oppressors.
They  roamed  in  small  parties  over  the  island,  extend-
ing their  rapacity  and  insolence  to  every  corner  of  it.
Gentle  and  timid  as  the  people  were,  those  unpro-
voked injuries  at  length  exhausted  their  patience,  and
roused  their  courage. The  cazique  of  Cibao, whose
country  the  Spaniards  chiefly  infested  on account  of
the  gold  which it  contained, surprised  and cut off
several  of  them, while  they  straggled  in  as perfect
security  as  if  their  conduct  had  been  altogether  inof-
fensive. He  then assembled his  subjects, and sur-
rounding the  fort,  set  it  on  fire.  Some  of  the  Spaniards
were  killed  in  defending  it,  the  rest  perished  in  at-
tempting to  make  their  escape  by  crossing  an  arm  of
the  sea. Guacanahari,  whom  all  their  exactions  had
not  alienated  from  the  Spaniards,  took  arms  in  their
behalf,  and,  in  endeavouring  to  protect  them,  had  re-
ceived a  wound,  by  which  he  was  still  confined.''

Though  this  account  was  far  from  removing

His  pru-  ..  I'lici  • 1  •!

dent  con-  the  suspicious  which  the  J^paniards  entertamed
"'^^*  with  respect  to  the  fidelity  of  Guacanahari,
Columbus  perceived  so  clearly  that  this  was  not  a
proper  juncture  for  inquiring  into  his  conduct  with
scrupulous  accuracy,  that  he  rejected  the  advice  of
several  of  his  officers,  who  urged  him  to  seize  the
person  of  that  prince,  and  to  revenge  the  death  of
their  countrymen  by  attacking  his  subjects. He  re-

f  p.  Blartyr,  dec.  p.  2'J,  &c. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  7.  9. Life  of  Columbus,
c.  49,  30.

1493.]  BOOK II.  135

presented  to  them  the  necessity  of  securing  the  friend-
ship of  some  potentate  of  the  country,  in  order  to
facilitate  the  settlement  which  they  intended,  and
the  danofer  of  drivino^  the  natives  to  unite  in  some
desperate  attempt  against  them,  by  such  an  ill-timed
and  unavailing  exercise  of  rigour.  Instead  of  wasting
his  time  in  punishing  past  wrongs,  he  took  precautions
for  preventing  any  future  injury.  With  this  view  he
made  choice  of  a  situation  more  healthy  and  com-
modious than  that  of  Navidad.  He  traced  out  the
plan  of  a  town  in  a  large  plain  near  a  spacious  bay,
and  obliging  every  person  to  put  his  hand  to  a  work  on
which  their  common  safety  depended,  the  houses  and
ramparts  were  soon  so  far  advanced  by  their  united
labour,  as  to  afford  them  shelter  and  security.  This
rising  city,  the  first  that  the  Europeans  founded  in  the
New  World,  he  named  Isabella,  in  honour  of  his  pa-
troness the  queen  of  Castile.''

„.  ^^  ^^  In  carrying  on  this  necessary  work,  Columbus
of  his  foi-  had  not  only  to  sustain  all  the  hardships,  and  to
encounter  all  the  difficulties,  to  which  infant  co-
lonies are  exposed  when  they  settle  in  an  uncultivated
country,  but  he  had  to  contend  with  what  was  more  in-
superable, the  laziness,  the  impatience,  and  mutinous
disposition  of  his  followers.  By  the  enervating  influ-
ence of  a  hot  climate,  the  natural  inactivity  of  the
Spaniards  seemed  to  increase.  Many  of  them  were
gentlemen,  unaccustomed  to  the  fatigue  of  bodily  la-
bour, and  all  had  engaged  in  the  enterprise  with  the
sanguine  hopes  excited  by  the  splendid  and  exagge-
rated description  of  their  countrymen  who  returned
from  the  first  voyage,  or  by  the  mistaken  opinion  of
Columbus,  that  the  country  which  he  had  discovered
was  either  the  Cipango  of  Marco  Polo,  or  the  Ophir,'
from  which  Solomon  imported  those  precious'  commo-

t  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  51.  Heirera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  10.
r  P.  Martyr,  dec.  p.  29.

13(3  AMERICA.  [1493.

dities  which  suddenly  diffused  such  extraordinary  riches
through  his  kingdom.  But  when,  instead  of  that  golden
harvest  which  they  had  expected  to  reap  without  toil  or
pains,  the  Spaniards  saw  that  their  prospect  of  wealth
was  remote  as  well  as  uncertain,  and  that  it  could  not
be  attained  but  by  the  slow  and  persevering  efforts  of
industry,  the  disappointment  of  those  chimerical  hopes
occasioned  such  dejection  of  mind  as  bordered  on  de-
spair, and  led  to  general  discontent.  In  vain  did  Co-
lumbus endeavour  to  revive  their  spirits  by  pointing  out
the  fertility  of  the  soil,  and  exhibiting  the  specimens  of
gold  daily  brought  in  from  different  parts  of  the  island.
They  had  not  patience  to  wait  for  the  gradual  returns
which  the  former  might  yield,  and  the  latter  they  de-
spised as  scanty  and  inconsiderable.  The  spirit  of  dis-
aifection  spread,  and  a  conspiracy  was  formed,  which
might  have  been  fatal  to  Columbus  and  the  colony.
Happily  he  discovered  it ;  and,  seizing  the  ringleaders,
punished  some  of  them,  sent  others  prisoners  into  Spain,
whither  he  dispatched  twelve  of  the  ships  which  had
served  as  transports,  with  an  earnest  request  for  a  rein-
forcement of  men  and  a  large  supply  of  provisions.*

1494.  Meanwhile,  in  order  to  banish  that  idleness,
intoThe"  which,  by  allowing  his  people  leisure  to  brood
ti^'coun-  ^^^^  their  disappointment,  nourished  the  spirit
tfy-  of  discontent,  Columbus  planned  several  expe-

ditions into  the  interior  part  of  the  country.  He  sent
a  detachment,  under  the  command  of  Alonzo  de  Ojeda,
a  vigilant  and  enterprising  officer,  to  visit  the  district  of
Cibao,  which  was  said  to  yield  the  greatest  quantity  of
gold,  and  followed  him  in  person  with  the  main  body
of  his  troops.  In  this  expedition  he  displayed
all  the  pomp  of  military  magnificence,  that  he
could  exhibit,  in  order  to  strike  the  imaofination  of  the
natives.  He  marched  with  colours  flying,  with  martial
music,  and  with  a  small  body  of  cavalry  that  paraded

•  Hcrrcra,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  10,  11.

1494.]  BOOK II.  137

sometimes  in  the  front  and  sometimes  in  the  rear. As
those  were  the  first  horses  which  appeared  in  the  New
World,  they  were  objects  of  terror  no  less  than  of  ad-
miration to  the  Indians,  who,  having  no  tame  animals
themselves,  were  unacquainted  with  that  vast  accession
of  power  which  man  hath  acquired  by  subjecting  them
to  his  dominion. They  supposed  them  to  be  rational
creatures. They  imagined  that  the  horse  and  the  rider
formed  one  animal,  with  whose  speed  they  were  as-
tonished, and  whose  impetuosity  and  strength  they  con-
sidered as  irresistible. But  while  Columbus  endea-
voured to  inspire  the  natives  with  a  dread  of  his  power,
he  did  not  neglect  the  arts  of  gaining  their  love  and
confidence. He  adhered  scrupulously  to  the  principles
of  integrity  and  justice  in  all  his  transactions  with  them,
and  treated  them,  on  every  occasion,  not  only  with  hu-
manity, but  with  indulgence. The  district  of  Cibao
answered  the  description  given  of  it  by  the  natives. It
was  mountainous  and  uncultivated,  but  in  every  river
and  brook  gold  was  gathered  either  in  dust  or  in  grains,
some  of  which  were  of  considerable  size. The  Indians
had  never  opened  any  mines  in  search  of  gold. To
penetrate  into  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  to  refine  the
rude  ore,  were  operations  too  compli^ated  and  laborious
for  their  talents  and  industry,  and  they  had  no  such
high  value  for  gold  as  to  put  their  ingenuity  and  inven-
tion upon  the  stretch  in  order  to  obtain  it' The  small
quantity  of  that  precious  metal  which  they  possessed,
was  either  picked  up  in  the  beds  of  the  rivers,  or  washed
from  the  mountains  by  the  heavy  rains  that  fall  within
the  tropics. But,  from  those  indications,  the  Spaniards
could  no  longer  doubt  that  the  country  contained  rich
treasures  in  its  bowels,  of  which  they  hoped  soon  to  be
masters." In  order  to secure  the  command of  this
valuable  province,  Columbus  erected  a  small  fort,  to
which  he  gave  the  name  of  St.  Thomas,  by  way  of  ridi-

*  Oviedo,  lib.  ii.  p.  90.  A.  "  P.  Martyr,  dec.  p.  32.

138  AMERICA.  [1494.

cule  upon  some  of  his  incredulous  followers,  who  would

not  believe  that  the  country  produced  gold,  until  they

saw  it  with  their  own  eyes,  and  touched  it  with  their

hands.*

The  dis- The  account  of  those  promising  appearances

dTsaffec- of  Wealth  iu  the  country  of  Cibao  came  very

tionofiiie  seasonably  to  comfort  the  despondino;  colony,

colony  in-  •'  r  o  J  '

crease.  wliicli  was  affccted  with  distresses  of  various
kinds.  The  stock  of  provisions  which  had  been  brought
from  Europe  was  mostly  consumed  ;  what  remained  was
so  much  corrupted  by  the  heat  and  moisture  of  the  cli-
mate, as  to  be  almost  unfit  for  use ;  the  natives  culti-
vated so  small  a  portion  of  ground,  and  with  so  little
skill,  that  it  hardly  yielded  what  was  sufficient  for  their
own  subsistence  ;  the  Spaniards  at  Isabella  had  hitherto
neither  time  nor  leisure  to  clear  the  soil,  so  as  to  reap
any  considerable  fruits  of  their  own  industry.  On  all
these  accounts,  they  became  afraid  of  perishing  with
hunger,  and  were  reduced  already  to  a  scanty  allowance.
At  the  same  time,  the  diseases  predominant  in  the  torrid
zone,  and  which  rage  chiefly  in  those  uncultivated  coun-
tries, where  the  hand  of  industry  has  not  opened  the
woods,  drained  the  marshes,  and  confined  the  rivers
within  a  certain  channel,  began  to  spread  among  them.
Alarmed  at  the  violence  and  unusual  symptoms  of  those
maladies,  they  exclaimed  against  Columbus  and  his
companions  in  the  former  voyage,  who,  by  their  splen-
did but  deceitful  descriptions  of  Hispaniola,  had  allured
them  to  quit  Spain  for  a  barbarous  uncultivated  land,
where  they  must  either  be  cut  oil"  by  famine,  or  die  of
unknown  distempers.  Several  of  the  officers  and  per-
sons of  note,  instead  of  checking,  joined  in  those  sedi-
tious complaints.  Father  Boyl,  the  apostolical  vicar,
was  one  of  the  most  turbulent  and  outrageous.  It  re-
quired all  the  authority  and  address  of  Columbus  to
re-establish  subordination  and  tranquillity  in  the  colony.

'  Ilcrrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  12. Life  of  Columbus,  c.  52.

1494.]  BOOK II.  139

Threats  and  promises  were  alternately  employed  for  this
purpose ;  but  nothing  contributed  more  to  soothe  the
malecontents,  than  the  prospect  of  finding  in  the  mines
of  Cibao,  such  a  rich  store  of  treasure  as  would  be  a
recompense  for  all  their  sufferings,  and  efface  the  me-
mory of  former  disappointments.

Columbus When,  by  his  unwearied  endeavours,  con-
newTsco-  cord  and  order  were  so  far  restored,  that  he
veries. could  vcuture  to  Icavc  the  island,  Columbus
resolved  to  pursue  his  discoveries,  that  he  might  be
able  to  ascertain  whether  those new  countries  with
which  he  had  opened  a  communication  were  connected
with  any  region  of  the  earth  already  known,  or  whe-
ther they  were  to  be  considered  as  a  separate  portion
of  the  globe  hitherto  unvisited. He  appointed  his  bro-
ther Don  Dieofo,  with  the  assistance  of  a  council  of  offi-
cers,  to  govern  the  island  in  his  absence ;  and  gave  the
command  of  a  body  of  soldiers  to  Don  Pedro  Marga-
rita, with  which  he  was  to  visit  the  different  parts  of  the
island,  and  endeavour  to  establish  the  authority  of  the
Spaniards  among  the  inhabitants. Having  left  them
very  particular  instructions  with  respect  to  their  con-
duct, he  weighed  anchor  on  the  24th  of  April,  with  one
ship  and  two  small  barks,  under  his  command. Dur-
ing a  tedious  voyage  of  full  five  months,  he  had  a  trial
of  almost  all  the  numerous  hardships  to  which  persons
of  his  profession  are  exposed,  without  making  any  dis-
covery of  importance,  except  the island  of  Jamaica.
As  he  ranged  along  the  southern  coast  of  Cuba,''  he
was  entangled  in  a  labyrinth  formed  by  an  incredible
number  of  small  islands,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of
the  Queen's  Garden. In  this  unknown  course,  among
rocks  and  shelves,  he  was  retarded  by  contrary  winds,
assaulted with  furious  storms,  and  alarmed  with  the
terrible  thunder  and  lightning  which  is  often  almost  in-
cessant between  the  tropics. At  length  his  provisions

«  See  Note  XIX.

140  AMERICA.  [1494.

fell  short;  his  crew,  exhausted  with  fatigue  as  well  as
hunger,  murmured  and  threatened,  and  were  ready  to
proceed  to  the  most  desperate  extremities  against  him.
Beset  with  dano-er  in  such  various  forms,  he  was  oblisred
to  keep  continual  watch,  to  observe  every  occurrence
with  his  own  eyes,  to  issue  every  order,  and  to  super-
intend the  execution  of  it.  On  no  occasion  was  the
extent  of  his  skill  and  experience  as  a  navigator  so
much  tried.  To  these  the  squadron  owed  its  safety.
But  this  unremitted  fatigue  of  body,  and  intense  appli-
cation of  mind,  overpowering  his  constitution,  though
naturally  vigorous  and  robust,  brought  on  a  feverish
disorder,  which  terminated  in  a  lethargy,  that  deprived
him  of  sense  and  memory,  and  had  almost  proved  fatal
to  his  life.y

Sept.  27. . But,  on  his  return  to  Hispaniola,  the  sudden

•  t^rnffinds ^"^^tlon  of  joy  which  he  felt  upon meeting

his  brother  with  his  brothcr  Bartholomew  at  Isabella,  oc-

Bartholo-  •  j  i  n  e> • •

mew  at  casioncd  such  a  liow  oi  spirits  as  contributed
greatly  to  his  recovery.  It  was  now  thirteen
years  since  the  two  brothers,  whom  similarity  of  ta-
lents united  in  close  friendship,  had  separated  from
each  other,  and  during  that  long  period  there  had  been
no  intercourse  between  them.  Bartholomew,  after
finishing  his  negotiation  in  the  court  of  England,  had
set  out  for  Spain  by  the  way  of  France.  At  Paris  he
received  an  account  of  the  extraordinary  discoveries
which  his  brother  had  made  in  his  first  voyage,  and
that  he  was  then  preparing  to  embark  on  a  second  ex-
pedition. Though  this  naturally  induced  him  to  pur-
sue his  journey  with  the  utmost  dispatch,  the  admiral
had  sailed  for  Hispaniola  before  he  reached  Spain.
Ferdinand  and  Isabella  received  him  with  the  respect
due  to  the  nearest  kinsman  of  a  person  whose  merit  and
services rendered  him  so  conspicuous; and  as  they

y  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  54,  &c. Hcrrcra,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  i;5,  11. P.  MartjT,
dec.  p.  3'J,  &c.

1494.]  BOOK  II.  141

knew  what  consolation  his  presence  would  afford  to  his
brother,  they  persuaded  him  to  take  the  command  of
three  ships,  which  they  had  appointed  to  carry  provi-
sions to  the  colony  at  Isabella."'

The  In-  He  could  not  have  arrived  at  any  juncture

arms'  ^^''^  whcn  Columbus  stood  more  in  need  of  a  friend
against  the  capable  of  assistiug  him  with  his  counsels,  or  of
dividing  with  him  the  cares  and  burden  of  go-
vernment. For  although  the  provisions  now  brought
from  Europe,  afforded  a  temporary  relief  to  the  Spa-
niards from  the  calamities  of  famine,  the  supply  was
not  in  such  quantity  as  to  support  them  long,  and  the
island  did  not  hitherto  yield  what  was  sufficient  for
their  sustenance.  They  were  threatened  with  another
danger,  still  more  formidable  than  the  return  of  scarcity,
and  which  demanded  more  immediate  attention.  No
sooner  did  Columbus  leave  the  island  on  his  voyage  of
discovery,  than  the  soldiers  under  Margarita,  as  if  they
had  been  set  free  from  discipline  and  subordination,
scorned  all  restraint.  Instead  of  conforming  to  the
prudent  instructions  of  Columbus,  they  dispersed  in
straggling  parties  over  the  island,  lived  at  discretion
upon  the  natives,  wasted  their  provisions,  seized  their
women,  and  treated  that  inoffensive  race  with  all  the
insolence  of  military  oppression.^

As  long  as  the  Indians  had  any  prospect  that  their
sufferings  might  come  to  a  period  by  the  voluntary  de-
parture of  the  invaders,  they  submitted  in  silence,  and
dissembled  their  sorrow ;  but  they  now  perceived  that
the  yoke  would  be  as  permanent  as  it  was  intolerable.
The  Spaniards  had  built  a  town,  and  surrounded  it
with  ramparts.  They  had  erected  forts  in  different
places.  They  had  enclosed  and  sown  several  fields.
It  was  apparent  that  they  came  not  to  visit  the  coun-
try, but  to  settle  in  it.  Though  the  number  of  those
strangers  was  inconsiderable,  the  state  of  cultivation

»  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  15.  =»  P.  Marlvr,  dec.  p.  47.

142  AMERICA.  [1494.

among  this  rude  people  was  so  imperfect,  and  in  such
exact  proportion  to  their  own  consumption,  that  it  was
with  difficulty  they  could  afford  subsistence  to  their
new  guests.  Their  own  mode  of  life  was  so  indolent
and  inactive,  the  warmth  of  the  climate  so  enervating,
the  constitution  of  their  bodies  naturally  so  feeble,  and
so  unaccustomed  to  the  laborious  exertions  of  industry,
that  they  were  satisfied  with  a  proportion  of  food  amaz-
in2"lv  small.  A  handful  of  maize,  or  a  little  of  the  in-
sipid  bread  made  of  the  cassada-root,  was  sufficient  to
support  men,  whose  strength  and  spirits  were  not  ex-
hausted by  any  vigorous  efforts  either  of  body  or  mind.
The  Spaniards,  though  the  most  abstemious  of  all  the
European  nations,  appeared  to  them  excessively  vora-
cious. One  Spaniard  consumed  as  much  as  several
Indians.  This  keenness  of  appetite  surprised  them  so
much,  and  seemed  to  be  so  insatiable,  that  they  sup-
posed the  Spaniards  had  left  their  own  country,  because
it  did  not  produce  as  much  as  was  requisite  to  gratify
their  immoderate  desire  of  food,  and  had  come  among
them  in  quest  of  nourishment.''  Self-preservation
prompted  them  to  wish  for  the  departure  of  guests  who
wasted  so  fast  their  slender  stock  of  provisions.  The
injuries  which  they  suffered,  added  to  their  impatience
for  this  event.  They  had  long  expected  that  the  Spa-
niards would  retire  of  their  own  accord.  They  now
perceived  that,  in  order  to  avert  the  destruction  with
which  they  were  threatened,  either  by  the  slow  con-
sumption of  famine,  or  by  the  violence  of  their  oppres-
sors, it  was  necessary  to  assume  courage,  to  attack
those  formidable  invaders  with  united  force,  and  drive
them  from  the  settlements  of  which  they  had  violently
taken  possession.

War  with  Such  were  the  sentiments  which  universally
them.  prevailed  among  the  Indians,  when  Columbus
returned to Isabella. Inflamed  by  the unprovoked

b  Hcrreni,  (U-c.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  17.

1494.]  BOOK II.  143

outrages  of  the  Spaniards,  with  a  degree  of  rage  of
which  their  gentle  natures,  formed  to  suffer  and  submit,
seemed  hardly  susceptible,  they  waited  only  for  a  signal
from  their  leaders  to  fall  upon  the  colony.  Some  of
the  caziques  had  already  surprised  and  cut  off  several
stragglers.  The  dread  of  this  impending  danger  united
the  Spaniards,  and  re-established  the  authority  of  Co-
lumbus, as  they  saw  no  prospect  of  safety  but  in  com-
mitting themselves  to  his  prudent  guidance.  It  was
now  necessary  to  have  recourse  to  arms,  the  employment
of  which  against  the  Indians,  Columbus  had  hitherto
avoided  with  the  greatest  solicitude.  Unequal  as  the
conflict  may  seem,  between  the  naked  inhabitants  of
the  New  World,  armed  with  clubs,  sticks  hardened  in
the  fire,  wooden  swords,  and  arrows  pointed  with  bones
or  flints  ;  and  troops  accustomed  to  the  discipline,  and
provided  with  the  instruments  of  destruction  known  in
the  European  art  of  war,  the  situation  of  the  Spaniards
was  far  from  being  exempt  from  danger.  The  vast
superiority  of  the  natives  in  number,  compensated  many
defects.  A  handful  of  men  was  about  to  encounter  a
whole  nation.  One  adverse  event,  or  even  any  unfore-
seen delay  in  determining  the  fate  of  the  war,  might
prove  fatal  to  the  Spaniards.  Conscious  that  success
depended  on  the  vigour  and  rapidity  of  his  operations,
Columbus  instantly  assembled  his  forces.  They  were
reduced  to  a  very  small  number.  Diseases,  engender-
ed by  the  warmth  and  humidity  of  the  country,  or  oc-
casioned by  their  own  licentiousness,  had  raged  among
them  with  much  violence ;  experience  had  not  yet
taught  them  the  art  either  of  curing  these,  or  the  pre-
cautions requisite  for  guarding  against  them ;  two-
thirds  of  the  original  adventurers  were  dead,  and  many
1495,  of  those  who  survived  were  incapable  of  ser-
March  24.  yicc.*^  The  body  which  took  the  field  consisted
only  of  two  hundred  foot,  twenty  horse,  and  twenty

<^  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  61.

144  AMERICA.  [1495.

large  dogs ;  and  how  strange  soever  it  may  seem,  to
mention  the  last  as  composing  part  of  a  military  force,
they  were  not  perhaps  the  least  formidable  and  destruc-
tive of  the  whole,  when  employed  against  naked  and
timid  Indians.  All  the  caziques  of  the  island,  Guaca-
nahari  excepted,  who  retained  an  inviolable  attachment
to  the  Spaniards,  were  in  arms  to  oppose  Columbus,
wath  forces  amounting,  if  we  may  believe  the  Spanish
historians,  to  a  hundred  thousand  men.  Instead  of  at-
tempting to  draw  the  Spaniards  into  the  fastnesses  of
the  woods  and  mountains,  they  were  so  imprudent  as
to  take  their  station  in  the  Vega  Real,  the  most  open
plain  in  the  country.  Columbus  did  not  allow  them
time  to  perceive  their  error,  or  to  alter  their  position.
He  attacked  them  during  the  night,  when  undisciplined
troops  are  least  capable  of  acting  with  union  and  con-
cert, and  obtained  an  easy  and  bloodless  victory.  The
consternation  with  which  the  Indians  were  filled  by  the
noise  and  havoc  made  by  the  fire-arms,  by  the  impe-
tuous force  of  the  cavalry,  and  the  fierce  onset  of  the
dogs,  was  so  great,  that  they  threw  down  their  weapons,
and  fled  without  attempting  resistance.  Many  were
slain  ;  more  were  taken  prisoners,  and  reduced  to  ser-
vitude ; "  and  so  thoroughly  were  the  rest  intimidated,
that  from  that  moment  they  abandoned  themselves  to
despair,  relinquishing  all  thoughts  of  contending  with
aggressors  whom  they  deemed  invincible.
A  tax  im-  Columbus  employed  several  months  in  march-
posed ijjp,  through  the  island,  and  in  subjecting-  it  to

upon  tbem.  .  .

the  Spanish  government,  without  meeting  wuth
any  opposition.  He  imposed  a  tribute  upon  all  the  in-
habitants above  the  age  of  fourteen.  Each  person  who
lived  in  those  districts  where  gold  was  found,  was
obliged  to  pay  quarterly  as  much  gold  dust  as  filled  a
hawk's  bell ;  from  those  in  other  parts  of  the  country,
twenty-five  pounds  of  cotton  were  demanded. This

"See  Note  XX.

1495.]  BOOK II.  145

was  the  first  regular  taxation  of  the  Indians,  and  served
as  a  precedent  for  exactions  still  more  intolerable.  Such
an  imposition  was  extremely  contrary  to  those  maxims
which  Columbus  had  hitherto  inculcated,  with  respect
to  the  mode  of  treating  them.  But  intrigues  were  car-
rying on  in  the  court  of  Spain  at  this  juncture,  in  order
to  undermine  his  power,  and  discredit  his  operations,
which  constrained  him  to  depart  from  his  own  system
of  administration.  Several  unfavourable  accounts  of
his  conduct,  as  well  as  of  the  countries  discovered  by
him,  had  been  transmitted  to  Spain.  Margarita  and
father  Boyl  were  now  at  court,  and  in  order  to  justify
their  own  conduct,  or  to  gratify  their  resentment,  watch-
ed with  malevolent  attention  for  every  opportunity  of
spreading  insinuations  to  his  detriment.  Many  of  the
courtiers  viewed  his  growing  reputation  and  power
with  envious  eyes.  Fonseca,  archdeacon  of  Seville,
who  was  intrusted  with  the  chief  direction  of  Indian
affairs,  had  conceived  such  an  unfavourable  opinion  of
Columbus,  for  some  reason  which  the  contemporary
writers  have  not  mentioned,  that  he  listened  with  par-
tiality to  every  invective  against  him.  It  was  not  easy
for  an  unfriended  stranger,  unpractised  in  courtly  arts,
to  counteract  the  machinations  of  so  many  enemies.
Columbus  saw  that  there  was  but  one  method  of  sup-
porting his  own  credit,  and  of  silencing  all  his  adver-
saries. He  must  produce  such  a  quantity  of  gold  as
would  not  only  justify  what  he  had  reported  with  re-
spect to  the  richness  of  the  country,  but  encourage  Fer-
dinand and  Isabella  to  persevere  in  prosecuting  his
plans.  The  necessity  of  obtaining  it,  forced  him  not
only  to  impose  this  heavy  tax  upon  the  Indians,  but  to
exact  payment  of  it  with  extreme  rigour ;  and  may  be
pleaded  in  excuse  for  his  deviating  on  this  occasion
from  the  mildness  and  humanity  with  which  he  uni-
formly treated  that  unhappy  people.'

•  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  17.

VOL.  vr.  L

146  AMERICA.  [1495.

Fatal  ef-  ^^^^  labouv,  attention,  and  foresight,  which
fectsof  ^]jg  Indians  were  obliged  to  employ  in  pro-
sure,  curing  the  tribute  demanded  of  them,  appeared
the  most  intolerable  of  all  evils,  to  men  accustomed  to
pass  their  days  in  a  careless,  improvident  indolence.
They  were  incapable  of  such  a  regular  and  persevering
exertion  of  industry,  and  felt  it  such  a  grievous  restraint
upon  their  liberty,  that  they  had  recourse  to  an  expe-
dient for  obtaining  deliverance  from  this  yoke,  which
demonstrates  the  excess  of  their  impatience  and  de-
spair. They  formed  a  scheme  of  starving  those  op-
pressors whom  they  durst  not  attempt  to  expel ;  and
from  the  opinion  which  they  entertained  with  respect
to  the  voracious  appetite  of  the  Spaniards,  they  con-
cluded the  execution  of  it  to  be  very  practicable.
With  this  view  they  suspended  all  the  operations  of
agriculture ;  they  sowed  no  maize,  they  pulled  up  the
roots  of  the  manioc  or  cassada  which  were  planted,
and  retiring  to  the  most  inaccessible  parts  of  the
mountains,  left  the  uncultivated  plains  to  their  enemies.
This  desperate  resolution  produced  in  some  degree  the
effects  which  they  expected.  The  Spaniards  were  re-
duced to  extreme  want ;  but  they  received  such  season-
able supplies  of  provisions  from  Europe,  and  found
so  many  resources  in  their  own  ingenuity  and  indus-
try, that  they  suffered  no  great  loss  of  men.  The
wretched  Indians  were  the  victims  of  their  own  ill-
concerted  policy.  A  great  multitude  of  people,  shut
up  in  the  mountainous  or  wooded  part  of  the  country,
without  any  food  but  the  spontaneous  productions  of
the  earth,  soon  felt  the  utmost  distresses  of  famine.
This  brought  on  contagious  diseases ;  and,  in  the
course  of  a  few  months,  more  than  a  third  part  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  island  perished,  after  experiencing
misery  in  all  its  various  forms. '^

'  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  xi.  c.  18. Life  of  Columbus,  c.  61. Oriedo,  lib.  iii.  p.  93.
D.  Benzon  Hist.  Novi  Orbii,  lib.  i.  c.  9. P.  Martjr,  dec.  p.  48.

1495.]  BOOK 11.  147

Intrigues  But  while  Columbus  was  establishing  the
Sumbus  foundations  of  the  Spanish  grandeur  in  the
court'^of  ^^^  World,  his  enemies  laboured  with  un-
Spain.  wearied  assiduity  to  deprive  him  of  the  glory
and  rewards,  which  by  his  services  and  sufferings  he  was
entitled  to  enjoy.  The  hardships  unavoidable  in  a  new
settlement,  the  calamities  occasioned  by  an  unhealthy
climate,  the  disasters  attending  a  voyage  in  unknown
seas,  were  all  represented  as  the  effects  of  his  restless
and  inconsiderate  ambition.  His  prudent  attention  to
preserve  discipline  and  subordination  was  denomi-
nated excess  of  rigour  ;  the  punishments  which  he  in-
flicted upon  the  mutinous  and  disorderly  were  imputed
to  cruelty.  These  accusations  gained  such  credit  in  a
jealous  court,  that  a  commissioner  was  appointed  to  re-
pair to  Hispaniola,  and  to  inspect  into  the  conduct  of
Columbus.  By  the  recommendation  of  his  enemies,
Aguado,  a  groom  of  the  bed-chamber,  was  the  person
to  whom  this  important  trust  was  committed.  But  in
this  choice  they  seem  to  have  been  more  influenced  by
the  obsequious  attachment  of  the  man  to  their  interest,
than  by  his  capacity  for  the  station.  Puffed  up  with
such  sudden  elevation,  Aguado  displayed,  in  the  exer-
cise of  this  office,  all  the  frivolous  self-importance,  and
acted  with  all  the  disgusting  insolence,  which  are  na-
tural to  little  minds,  when  raised  to  unexpected  dignity,
or  employed  in  functions  to  which  they  are  not  equal.
By  listening  with  eagerness  to  every  accusation  against
Columbus,  and  encouraging  not  only  the  malecontent
Spaniards,  but  even  the  Indians,  to  produce  their
grievances,  real  or  imaginary,  he  fomented  the  spirit  of
dissension  in  the  island,  without  establishing  any  regu^
lations  of  public  utility,  or  that  tended  to  redress  the
many  wrongs,  with  the  odium  of  which  he  wished  to
load  the  admiral's  administration.  As  Columbus  felt
sensibly  how  humiliating  his  situation  must  be,  if  he

L  2

148  AMERICA.  [H96.

should  remain  in  the  country  while  such  a  partial  in-
spector observed  his  motions,  and  controlled  his  juris-
diction, he  took  the  resolution  of  returning-  to  Spain,  in
order  to  lay  a  full  account  of  all  his  transactions,  par-
ticularly with  respect  to  the  points  in  dispute  be-
tween him  and  his  adversaries,  before  Ferdinand  and
Isabella,  from  whose  justice  and  discernment  he  ex-
pected an  equal  and  a  favourable  decision.
He  committed  the  administration  of  affairs,
during  his  absence,  to  Don  Bartholomew  his  brother,
with  the  title  of  Adelantado,  or  Lieutenant-governor.
By  a  choice  less  fortunate,  and  which  proved  the
source  of  many  calamities  to  the  colony,  he  appoint-
ed Francis  Roldan  chief  justice,  with  very  extensive
powers.^

Returns  lu  returning  to  Europe,  Columbus  held  a
to  Spain.  ^Qyj,gg  different  from  that  which  he  had  taken
in  his  former  voyage.  He  steered  almost  due  east  from
Hispaniola,  in  the  parallel  of  twenty-two  degrees  of
latitude  ;  as  experience  had  not  yet  discovered  the  more
certain  and  expeditious  method  of  stretching  to  the
north,  in  order  to  fall  in  with  the  south-west  winds.
By  this  ill-advised  choice,  which,  in  the  infancy  of
navigation  between  the  New  and  Old  Worlds,  can
hardly  be  imputed  to  the  admiral  as  a  defect  in  naval
skill,  he  was  exposed  to  infinite  fatigue  and  danger,  in
a  perpetual  struggle  with  the  trade-winds,  which  blow
without  variation  from  the  east  between  the  tropics.
Notwithstanding  the  almost  insuperable  difficulties  of
such  a  navigation,  he  persisted  in  his  course  with  his
usual  patience  and  firmness,  but  made  so  little  way
that  he  was  three  months  without  seeing  land.  At
length  his  provisions  began  to  fail,  the  crew  was  re-
duced to  the  scanty  allowance  of  six  ounces  of  bread
a- day  for  each  person. The  admiral  fared  no  better

s  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  2.  c.  18.  lib.  iii.  c.  1.

1496.]  BOOK  II.  149

than  the  meanest  sailor.  But,  even  in  this  extreme  dis-
tress, he  retained  the  humanity  which  distinguishes  his
character,  and  refused  to  comply  with  the  earnest  soli-
citations of  his  crew,  some  of  whom  proposed  to  feed
upon  the  Indian  prisoners  whom  they  were  carrying
over,  and  others  insisted  to  throw  them  overboard,  in
order  to  lessen  the  consumption  of  their  small  stock.
He  represented  that  they  were  human  beings,  reduced
by  a  common  calamity  to  the  same  condition  with  them-
selves, and  entitled  to  share  an  equal  fate.  His  autho-
rity and  remonstrances  dissipated  those  wild  ideas  sug-
gested by  despair.  Nor  had  they  time  to  recur  ;  as  he
came  soon  within  sight  of  the  coast  of  Spain,  when  all
their  fears  and  sufferings  ended.*"

His  recep-  Columbus  appeared  at  court  with  the  modest
tiontiere.  -^^^  determined  confidence  of  a  man  conscious
not  only  of  integrity,  but  of  having  performed  great
services.  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  ashamed  of  their
own  facility  in  lending  too  favourable  an  ear  to  frivolous
or  unfounded  accusations,  received  him  with  such  dis-
tinguished marks  of  respect  as  covered  his  enemies
with  shame.  Their  censures  and  calumnies  were  no
more  heard  of  at  that  juncture.  The  gold,  the  pearls,
the  cotton,  and  other  commodities  of  value  which  Co-
lumbus produced,  seemed  fully  to  refute  what  the  male-
contents  had  propagated  with  respect  to  the  poverty  of
the  country.  By  reducing  the  Indians  to  obedience,
and  imposing  a  regular  tax  upon  them,  he  had  secured
to  Spain  a  large  accession  of  new  subjects,  and  the
establishment  of  a  revenue  that  promised  to  be  consi-
derable. By  the  mines  which  he  had  found  out  and
examined,  a  source  of  wealth  still  more  copious  was
opened.  Great  and  unexpected  as  those  advantages
were,  Columbus  represented  them  only  as  preludes  to
future  acquisitions,  and  as  the  earnest  of  more  important
discoveries,  which  he  still  meditated,  and  to  which

••  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  i. Life  of  Columbus,  c.  64.

150  AMERICA.  [1496.

those  he  had  already  made  would  conduct  him  with  ease
and  certainty.'

j^  ,an The  attentive  consideration  of  all  these  cir-
forraed  for  cumstanccs  made  such  an  impression,  not  only

the  more

regular  upou  Isabella,  who  was  flattered  with  the  idea
roentofa  of  being  the  patroness  of  all  Columbus's  enter-
coiony.  prises,  but  even  upon  Ferdinand,  who  having
originally  expressed  his  disapprobation  of  his  schemes,
was  still  apt  to  doubt  of  their  success,  that  they  resolved
to  supply  the  colony  in  Hispaniola  with  every  thing
which  could  render  it  a  permanent  establishment,  and
to  furnish  Columbus  with  such  a  fleet,  that  he  might
proceed  to  search  for  those  new  countries,  of  whose
existence  he  seemed  to  be  confident.  The  measures
most  proper  for  accomplishing  both  these  designs  were
concerted  with  Columbus.  Discovery  had  been  the
sole  object  of  the  first  voyage  to  the  New  World  ;  and
though,  in  the  second,  settlement  had  been  proposed,
the  precautions  taken  for  that  purpose  had  either  been
insufficient,  or  were  rendered  ineffectual  by  the  mutin-
ous spirit  of  the  Spaniards,  and  the  unforeseen  calami-
ties arising  from  various  causes.  Now  a  plan  was  to  be
formed  of  a  regular  colony,  that  might  serve  as  a  model
in  all  future  establishments.  Every  particular  was  con-
sidered with  attention,  and  the  whole  arranged  with  a
scrupulous  accuracy.  The  precise  number  of  adven-
turers who  should  be  permitted  to  embark  was  fixed.
They  were  to  be  of  different  ranks  and  professions  ;  and
the  proportion  of  each  was  established,  according  to
their  usefulness  and  the  wants  of  the  colony.  A  suit-
able number  of  women  was  to  be  chosen  to  accompany
these  new  settlers.  As  it  was  the  first  object  to  raise
provisions  in  a  country  where  scarcity  of  food  had  been
the  occasion  of  so  much  distress,  a  considerable  body  of
husbandmen  was  to  be  carried  over.  As  the  Spaniards
had  then  no  conception  of  deriving  any  benefit  from

'  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  65. Ilerrcin,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  1.

1496.]  BOOK II.  151

those  productions  of  the  New  World  which  have  since
yielded  such  large  returns  of  wealth  to  Europe,  but  had
formed  magnificent  ideas,  and  entertained  sanguine
hopes  with  respect  to  the  riches  contained  in  the  mines
which  had  been  discovered,  a  band  of  workmen,  skilled
in  the  various  arts  employed  in  digging  and  refining  the
precious  metals,  was  provided.  All  these  emigrants
were  to  receive  pay  and  subsistence  for  some  years,  at
the  public  expense.''

A  defect  Thus  far  the  regulations  were  prudent,  and
'"''•  well  adapted  to  the  end  in  view.  But  as  it  was
foreseen  that  few  would  engage  voluntarily  to  settle  in
a  country,  whose  noxious  climate  had  been  fatal  to  so
many  of  their  countrymen,  Columbus  proposed  to  trans-
port to  Hispaniola  such  malefactors  as  had  been  con-
victed of  crimes,  which,  though  capital,  were  of  a  less
atrocious  nature ;  and  that  for  the  future  a  certain  pro-
portion of  the  oflfenders  usually  sent  to  the  galleys,
should  be  condemned  to  labour  in  the  mines  which
were  to  be  opened.  This  advice,  given  without  due
reflection,  was  as  inconsiderately  adopted.  The  prisons
of  Spain  were  drained,  in  order  to  collect  members  for
the  intended  colony  ;  and  the  judges  empowered  to
try  criminals  were  instructed  to  recruit  it  by  their  future
sentences.  It  was  not,  however,  with  such  materials
that  the  foundations  of  a  society,  destined  to  be  per-
manent, should  be  laid.  Industry,  sobriety,  patience,
and  mutual  confidence,  are  indispensably  requisite  in
an  infant  settlement,  where  purity  of  morals  must  con-
tribute more  towards  establishing  order,  than  the  opera-
tion or  authority  of  laws.  But  when  such  a  mixture  of
what  is  corrupt  is  admitted  into  the  original  constitu-
tion of  the  political  body,  the  vices  of  those  unsound
and  incurable  members  will  probably  infect  the  whole,
and  must  certainly  be  productive  of  violent  and  un-
happy effects. This  the  Spaniards  fatally  experienced ;

^  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  2.

152  AMERICA.  [1496.

and  the  other  European  nations  having  successively
imitated  the  practice  of  Spain  in  this  particular,  perni-
cious consequences  have  followed  in  their  settlements,
w^liich  can  be  imputed  to  no  other  cause.'
Executed  Tliougli  Colunibus  obtained,  with  great  faci-
*"'^^'  lity  and  dispatch,  the  royal  approbation  of
every  measure  and  regulation  that  he  proposed,  his  en-
deavours to  carry  them  into  execution  were  so  long
retarded,  as  must  have  tired  out  the  patience  of  any
man  less  accustomed  to  encounter  and  to  surmount
difficulties.  Those  delays  were  occasioned  partly  by
that  tedious  formality  and  spirit  of  procrastination,
with  which  the  Spaniards  conduct  business;  and  partly
by  the  exhausted  state  of  the  treasury,  which  was
drained  by  the  expense  of  celebrating  the  marriage  of
Ferdinand  and  Isabella's  only  son  with  Margaret  of
Austria,  and  that  of  Joanna,  their  second  daughter,  with
Philip  archduke  of  Austria;'"  but  must  be  chiefly  im-
puted to  the  malicious  arts  of  Columbus's  enemies.
Astonished  at  the  reception  which  he  met  with  upon
his  return,  and  overawed  by  his  presence,  they  gave
way,  for  some  time,  to  a  tide  of  favour  too  strong  for
them  to  oppose.  Their  enmity,  however,  was  too  in-
veterate to  remain  long  inactive.  They  resumed  their
operations,  and  by  the  assistance  of  Fonseca,  the  minis-
ter for  Indian  aflairs,  who  was  now  promoted  to  the
bishopric  of  Badajos,  they  threw  in  so  many  obstacles
to  protract  the  preparations  for  Columbus's  expedition,
that  a  year  elapsed"  before  he  could  procure  two  ships
to  carry  over  a  part  of  the  supplies  destined  for  the
colony,  and  almost  two  years  were  spent  before  the
small  squadron  was  equipped,  of  which  he  himself  was
to  take  the  command."

This  squadron  consisted  of  six  ships  only,  of  no  great

'  Ilerrcra,  tloc.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  2. Touron  Hist.  Goner.  <le  I'Amcrique,  i.  p,  51.

w  P.  Martyr, cpist.  168.  "  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  63.

•  Hcrreta,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  9.

1498.]  BOOK IL  153

1498. burden, and but indifierently  provided for
vowe  of ^  long  or  dangerous  navigation. The  voyage
Columbus,  -^vhich  he  now  meditated  was  in  a  course  dif-
ferent from  any  he  had  undertaken. As  he  was  fully
persuaded  that  the  fertile  regions  of  India  lay  to  the
south-west  of  those  countries  which  he  had  discovered,
he  proposed  as  the  most  certain  method  of  finding  out
these,  to  stand  directly  south  from  the  Canary  or  Cape
de  Verd  islands,  until  he  came  under  the  equinoctial
line,  and  then  to  stretch  to  the  west  before  the  favour-
able wind  for  such  a  course,  which  blows  invariably
between  the  tropics.  With  this  idea  he  set  sail,
and  touched  first  at  the  Canary,  and  then  at  the
Cape  de  Verd  islands.  From  the  former  he  dis-

July  4.

patched  three  of  his  ships  with  a  supply  of  pro-
visions for  the  colony  in  Hispaniola :  with  the  other
three,  he  continued  his  voyage  towards  the  south.  No
remarkable occurrence happened  until  they  arrived

within  five  dep:rees  of  the  line. There  they

July  19.  ®  .  ''

were  becalmed,  and  at  the  same  time  the  heat
became  so  excessive,  that  many  of  their  wine  casks
burst,  the  liquors  in  others  soured,  and  their  provisions
corrupted.^  The  Spaniards,  who  had  never  ventured
so  far  to  the  south,  were  afraid  that  the  ships  would
take  fire,  and  began  to  apprehend  the  reality  of  what
the  ancients  had  taught  concerning  the  destructive  qua-
lities of  that  torrid  region  of  the  globe.  They  were
relieved,  in  some  measure,  from  their  fears,  by  a  sea-
sonable fall  of  rain.  This,  however,  though  so  heavy
and  unintermitting  that  the  men  could  hardly  keep  the
deck,  did  not  greatly  mitigate  the  intenseness  of  the
heat.  The  admiral,  who  with  his  usual  vigilance  had
in  person  directed  every  operation  from  the  beginning
of  the  voyage,  was  so  much  exhausted  by  fatigue  and
want  of  sleep,  that  it  brought  on  a  violent  fit  of  the
gout,  accompanied  with  a  fever. All  these  circum-

P  p.  Martyr,  dec,  p.  70.

154  AMERICA.  [1498.

stances  constrained  him  to  yield  to  the  importunities  of
his  crew,  and  to  alter  his  course  to  the  north-west,  in
order  to  reach  some  of  the  Caribbee  islands,  where  he
might  refit,  and  be  supplied  with  provisions.
Discovers  On  the  Ist  of  August,  the  man  stationed  in
nent'oT  ^lic  round  top  surpriscd  them  with  the  joyful
America,  ^^j-y  q{  land  !  They  stood  towards  it,  and  disco-
vered a  considerable  island,  which  the  admiral  called
Trinidad,  a  name  it  still  retains.  It  lies  on  the  coast
of  Guiana,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Orinoco.  This,
though  a  river  only  of  the  third  or  fourth  magnitude  in
the  New  World,  far  surpasses  any  of  the  streams  in
our  hemisphere.  It  rolls  towards  the  ocean  such  a  vast
body  of  water,  and  rushes  into  it  with  such  impetuous
force,  that  when  it  meets  the  tide,  which  on  that  coast
rises  to  an  uncommon  height,  their  collision  occasions
a  swell  and  agitation  of  the  waves  no  less  surprising
than  formidable.  In  this  conflict,  the  irresistible  torrent
of  the  river  so  far  prevails,  that  it  freshens  the  ocean
many  leagues  with  its  flood .''  Columbus,  before  he
could  conceive  the  danger,  was  entangled  among  those
adverse  currents  and  tempestuous  waves,  and  it  was
with  the  utmost  difliculty  that  he  escaped  through  a
narrow  strait,  which  appeared  so  tremendous,  that  he
called  it  La  Boca  del  Drago.  As  soon  as  the  conster-
nation which  this  occasioned,  permitted  him  to  reflect
upon  the  nature  of  an  appearance  so  extraordinary,  he
discerned  in  it  a  source  of  comfort  and  hope.  He
justly  concluded  that  such  a  vast  body  of  water  as  this
river  contained,  could  not  be  supplied  by  any  island,
but  must  flow  through  a  country  of  immense  extent,  and
of  consequence  that  he  was  now  arrived  at  that  conti-
nent which  it  had  long  been  the  object  of  his  wishes  to
discover.  Full  of  this  idea,  he  stood  to  the  west  along
the  coast  of  those  provinces  which  are  now  known  by
the  names  of  Paria  and  Cumana. He  landed  in  several

n  Gumilla  Hist,  de  I'Orcnoquc,  torn.  i.  p.  14.

1498.]  BOOK  II.  155

places,  and  had  some  intercourse  with  the  people,  who
resembled  those  of  Hispaniola  in  their  appearance  and
manner  of  life.  They  wore,  as  ornaments,  small  plates
of  gold,  and  pearls  of  considerable  value,  which  they
willingly  exchanged  for  European  toys.  They  seemed
to  possess  a  better  understanding,  and  greater  courage,
than  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands.  The  country  pro-
duced four-footed  animals  of  several  kinds,  as  well  as
a  great  variety  of  fowls  and  fruits/  The  admiral  was
so  much  delighted  with  its  beauty  and  fertility,  that
with  the  warm  enthusiasm  of  a  discoverer,  he  imagined
it  to  be  the  Paradise  described  in  Scripture,  which  the
Almighty  chose  for  the  residence  of  man,  while  he  re-
tained innocence  that  rendered  him  worthy  of  such  a
habitation/  Thus  Columbus  had  the  glory  not  only  of
discovering  to  mankind  the  existence  of  a  New  World,
but  made  considerable  progress  towards  a  perfect  know-
ledge of  it;  and  was  the  first  man  who  conducted  the
Spaniards  to  that  vast  continent  which  has  been  the
chief  seat  of  their  empire,  and  the  source  of  their  trea-
sures in  this  quarter  of  the  globe.  The  shattered  con-
dition of  his  ships,  scarcity  of  provisions,  his  own  in-
firmities, together  with  the  impatience  of  his  crew,  pre-
vented him  from  pursuing  his  discoveries  any  farther,
and  made  it  necessary  to  bear  away  for  Hispaniola.
In  his  way  thither  he  discovered  the  islands  of  Cuba-
gua  and  Margarita,  which  afterward  became  remark-
able for  their  pearl-fishery. When  he  arrived

Aug.  30.  ^_,  .11  1

at  Hispaniola,  he  was  wasted  to  an  extreme
degree  with  fatigue  and  sickness ;  but  found  the  affairs
of  the  colony  in  such  a  situation,  as  afforded  him  no
prospect  of  enjoying  that  repose  of  which  he  stood  so
much  in  need.

State  of  Many revolutions had happened in that

Hispaniola  couutry  duriug  his  absence. His  brother,  the

■■  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  9 — 11. Life  of  Columbus,  c.  66 — 73.
»  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  12. Gomara,  c.  84. See  Note  XXI.

156  AMERICA.  [1498.

on  his  ar-  adclaiitado,  in  consequence  of  an  advice  which
rival  there,  ^j^g  admiral  gave  before  his  departure,  had  re-
moved the  colony  from  Isabella  to  a  more  commodious
station,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  island,  and  laid  the
foundation  of  St.  Domingo, "  which  was  long  the  most
considerable  European  town  in  the  New  World,  and
the  seat  of  the  supreme  courts  in  the  Spanish  dominions
there.  As  soon  as  the  Spaniards  were  established  in
this  new  settlement,  the  adelantado,  that  they  might
neither  languish  in  inactivity,  nor  have  leisure  to  form
new  cabals,  marched  into  those  parts  of  the  island  which
his  brother  had  not  yet  visited  or  reduced  to  obedience.
As  the  people  were  unable  to  resist,  they  submitted
every  where  to  the  tribute  which  he  imposed.  But  they
soon  found  the  burden  to  be  so  intolerable,  that,  over-
awed as  they  were  by  the  superior  power  of  their  op-
pressors, they  took  arms  against  them.  Those  insurrec-
tions, however,  were  not  formidable.  A  conflict  with
timid  and  naked  Indians  was  neither  dangerous  nor  of
doubtful  issue.

iMutinyof  I^ut  wdiile  the  adelantado  was  employed
Roidan.  against  them  in  the  field,  a  mutiny  of  an  aspect
far  more  alarming,  broke  out  among  the  Spaniards.
The  ringleader  of  it  was  Francis  Roidan,  whom  Co-
lumbus had  placed  in  a  station  which  required  him  to
be  the  guardian  of  order  and  tranquillity  in  the  colony.
A  turbulent  and  inconsiderate  ambition  precipitated
him  into  this  desperate  measure,  so  unbecoming  his
rank.  The  arguments  which  he  employed  to  seduce
his  countrymen  were  frivolous  and  ill-founded.  He
accused  Columbus  and  his  two  brothers  of  arrogance
and  severity;  he  pretended  that  they  aimed  at  establish-
ing an  independent  dominion  in  the  country  ;  he  taxed
them  with  an  intention  of  cutting  oft' part  of  the  Spani-
ards by  hunger  and  fatigue,  that  they  might  more  easily
reduce  the  remainder  to  subjection ;  he  represented  it

■  «  p.  Martyr,  dec.  p.  36.

1498.]  BOOK II.  157

as  unworthy  of  Castilians,  to  remain  the  tame  and  pas-
sive slaves  of  three  Genoese  adventurers.  As  men  have
always  a  propensity  to  impute  the  hardships  of  which
they  feel  the  pressure,  to  the  misconduct  of  their  rulers  ;
as  every  nation  views  with  a  jealous  eye  the  power  and
exaltation  of  foreigners,  Roldan's  insinuations  made  a
deep  impression  on  his  countrymen.  His  character
and  rank  added  weight  to  them.  A  considerable
number  of  the  Spaniards  made  choice  of  him  as  their
leader ;  and,  taking  arms  against  the  adelantado  and
his  brother,  seized  the  king's  magazine  of  provisions,
and  endeavoured  to  surprise  the  fort  at  Stt  Domingo.
This  was  preserved  by  the  vigilance  and  courage  of
Don  Diego  Columbus.  The  mutineers  were  obliged
to  retire  to  the  province  of  Xaragua,  where  they  con-
tinued not  only  to  disclaim  the  adelantado's  authority
themselves,  but  excited  the  Indians  to  throw  off  the
yoke.''

Such  was  the  distracted  state  of  the  colony  when
Columbus  landed  at  St.  Domino^o.  He  was  astonished
to  find  that  the  three  ships  which  he  had  dispatched
from  the  Canaries  were  not  yet  arrived.  By  the  un-
skilfulness  of  the  pilots,  and  the  violence  of  currents,
they  had  been  carried  a  hundred  and  sixty  miles  to  the
west  of  St.  Domingo,  and  forced  to  take  shelter  in  a
harbour  of  the  province  of  Xaragua,  where  Roldan  and
his  seditious  followers  were  cantoned.  Roldan  care-
fully concealed  from  the  commanders  of  the  ships  his
insurrection  against  the  adelantado,  and  employing  his
utmost  address  to  gain  their  confidence,  persuaded
them  to  set  on  shore  a  considerable  part  of  the  new
settlers  whom  they  brought  over,  that  they  might  pro-
ceed by  land  to  St.  Domingo.  It  required  but  few  ar-
guments to  prevail  with  those  men  to  espouse  his  cause.
They  were  the  refuse  of  the  jails  of  Spain,  to  whom

'  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  5—8. Life  of  Columbus,  c.  T'4 — 77. Gomara,
c.  S3. P.  Martyr,  p.  78.

158  AMERICA.  [1498.

idleness,  licentiousness,  and  deeds  of  violence  were  fa-
miliar ;  and  they  returned  eagerly  to  a  course  of  life
nearly  resembling  that  to  which  they  had  been  accus-
tomed. The  commanders  of  the  ships  perceiving,  when
it  was  too  late,  their  imprudence  in  disembarking  so
many  of  their  men,  stood  away  for  St.  Domingo,  and
got  safe  into  the  port  a  few  days  after  the  admiral ;  but
their  stock  of  provisions  was  so  wasted  during  a  voyage
of  such  long  continuance,  that  they  brought  little  relief
to  the  colony/

Composed  By  this  juuction  with  a  band  of  such  bold
by  the  pru-  ^^^  desDcratc  associates,  Roldan  became  ex-

dent  con-  i  '

duct  of  tremely  formidable,  and  no  less  extravagant  in
his  demands.  Columbus,  though  filled  with
resentment  at  his  ingratitude,  and  highly  exasperated
by  the  insolence  of  his  followers,  made  no  haste  to  take
the  field.  He  trembled  at  the  thouMits  of  kindlins"  the
flames  of  a  civil  war,  in  which,  whatever  party  prevail-
ed, the  power  and  strength  of  both  must  be  so  much
wasted,  as  might  encourage  the  common  enemy  to  unite
and  complete  their  destruction.  At  the  same  time,  he
observed,  that  the  prejudices  and  passions  which  in-
cited the  rebels  to  take  arms,  had  so  far  infected  those
who  still  adhered  to  him,  that  many  of  them  were  ad-
verse, and  all  cold  to  the  service.  From  such  senti-
ments, with  respect  to  the  public  interest,  as  well  as
from  this  view  of  his  own  situation,  he  chose  to  nego-
tiate rather  than  to  fight  By  a  seasonable  proclama-
tion, offering  free  pardon  to  such  as  should  merit  it  by
returning  to  their  duty,  he  made  impression  upon  some
of  the  malecontents.  By  engaging  to  grant  such  as
should  desire  it  the  liberty  of  returning  to  Spain,  he  al-
lured all  those  unfortunate  adventurers,  who,  from  sick-
ness and  disappointment  were  disgusted  with  the  coun-
try. By  promising  to  re-establish  Roldan  in  his  former
oflftce,  he  soothed  his  pride ;  and,  by  complying  with

y  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  12. Life  of  Columbus,  c.  78,  79.

1499.]  BOOK II.  159

most  of  his  demands  in  behalf  of  his  followers,  he  sa-
tisfied their  avarice.  Thus,  gradually,  and  without
bloodshed,  but  after  many  tedious  negotiations,  he  dis-
solved this  dangerous  combination,  which  threatened
the  colony  with  ruin ;  and  restored  the  appearance  of
order,  regular  government,  and  tranquillity.^
^  „g^^.  In  consequence  of  this  agreement  with  the

mode  of mutincers,  lands  were  allotted  them  in  different
establish- parts  of  tlic  islaud,  and  the  Indians  settled  in

each  district  were  appointed  to  cultivate  a  cer-
tain portion  of  ground  for  tire  use  of  those  new  masters.

The  performance  of  this  work  was  substituted  in

1499.

place  of  the  tribute  formerly  imposed  ;  and  how
necessary  soever  such  a  regulation  might  be  in  a  sickly
and  feeble  colony,  it  introduced  among  the  Spaniards
the  Repai^timientos,  or  distributions  of  Indians  establish-
ed by  them  in  all  their  settlements,  which  brought  num-
berless calamities  upon  that  unhappy  people,  and  sub-
jected them  to  the  most  grievous  oppression.^  This
was  not  the  only  bad  effect  of  the  insurrection  in
Hispaniola ;  it  prevented  Columbus  from  prosecuting
his  discoveries  on  the  continent,  as  self-preservation
obliged  him  to  keep  near  his  person  his  brother  the
adelantado,  and  the  sailors  whom  he  intended  to  have
employed  in  that  service.  As  soon  as  his  affairs  would
permit,  he  sent  some  of  his  ships  to  Spain  with  a  jour-
nal of  the  voyage  which  he  had  made,  a  description  of
the  new  countries  which  he  had  discovered,  a  chart  of
the  coast  along  which  he  had  sailed,  and  specimens  of
the  gold,  the  pearls,  and  other  curious  or  valuable  pro-
ductions which  he  had  acquired  by  trafficking  with  the
natives.  At  the  same  time  he  transmitted  an  account
of  the  insurrection  in  Hispaniola ;  he  accused  the  muti-
neers not  only  of  having  thrown  the  colony  into  such
violent  convulsions  as  threatened  its  dissolution,  but  of

*  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  13, 14. Life  of  Columbus,  c.  80,  ice.
»  Henera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  14,  &c.

160  AMERICA.  [1499,

having-  obstructed  every  attempt  towards  discovery  and
improvement,  by  tlieir  unprovoked  rebellion  against
their  superiors,  and  proposed  several  regulations  for
the  better  government  of  the  island,  as  well  as  the  ex-
tinction of  that  mutinous  spirit,  which,  though  sup-
pressed at  present,  might  soon  burst  out  with  additional
rage.  Roldan  and  his  associates  did  not  neglect  to
convey  to  Spain,  by  the  same  ships,  an  apology  for
their  own  conduct,  together  with  their  recriminations
upon  the  admiral  and  his  brothers.  Unfortunately  for
the  honour  of  Spain,  and  the  happiness  of  Columbus,
the  latter  gained  most  credit  in  the  court  of  Ferdinand
and  Isabella,  and  produced  unexpected  eft'ects.**
Thevoyagc  But,  prcvious  to  tlic  relating  of  these,  it  is
Gamato  propcr  to  take  a  view  of  some  events,  which
indi?sTby  "''erit  attention,  both  on  account  of  their  own
the  Cape importance,  and  their  connexion  with  the  liis-

of  Good  r 1 T\T

Hope.  tory  of  the  New  World.  While  Columbus  was
engaged  in  his  successive  voyages  to  the  west,  the  spi-
rit of  discovery  did  not  languish  in  Portugal,  the  king-
dom where  it  first  acquired  vigour,  and  became  enter-
prising. Self-condemnation  and  neglect  were  not  the
only  sentiments  to  which  the  success  of  Columbus,  and
reflection  upon  their  own  imprudence  in  rejecting  his
proposals,  gave  rise  among  the  Portuguese.  They  ex-
cited a  general  emulation  to  surpass  his  performances,
and  an  ardent  desire  to  make  some  reparation  to  their
country  for  their  own  error.  With  this  view,  Emanuel,
who  inherited  the  enterprising  genius  of  his  predeces-
sors, persisted  in  their  grand  scheme  of  opening  a  pas-
sage to  the  East  Indies  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,
and,  soon  after  his  accession  to  the  throne,  equipped  a
squadron  for  that  important  voyage.  He  gave  the  com-
mand of  it  to  Vasco  de  Gama,  a  man  of  noble  birth,
possessed  of  virtue,  prudence  and  courage,  equal  to
the  station. The  squadron,  like  all  those  fitted  out  for

^  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  14. Eenzon.  Hist.  Nov.  Orb.  lib.  i.  c.  2.

1499.]  BOOK 11.  161

discovery  in  the  infancy  of  navigation,  was  extremely
feeble,  consisting  only  of  three  vessels,  of  neither  bur-
den nor  force  adequate  to  the  service. As  the  Euro-
peans were  at  that  time  little  acquainted  with  the  course
of  the  trade-winds  and  periodical  monsoons,  which
render  navigation  in  the  Atlantic  ocean,  as  well  as  in
the  sea  that  separates  Africa  from  India,  at  some  seasons
easy,  and  at  others  not  only  dangerous,  but  almost  im-
practicable, the  time  chosen  for  Gama's  departure  was
the  most  improper  during  the  whole  year. He
set  sail  from  Lisbon on  the  9th  of  July, and
standing  towards  the  south,  had  to  struggle  for  four
months  with  contrary  winds,  before  he  could  reach  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope. Here  their  violence  be-

Nov.  20.  ^  ,  11-  • i  ^ r ^

gan  to  abate ;  and  during  an  interval  oi  calm
weather,  Gama  doubled  that  formidable  promontory,
which  had  so  long  been  the  boundary  of  navigation,
and  directed  his  course  towards  the  north-east,  along
the  African  coast.  He  touched  at  several  ports ;  and
after  various  adventures,  which  the  Portuguese  histo-
rians relate  with  high  but  just  encomiums  upon  his
conduct  and  intrepidity,  he  came  to  anchor  before  the
city  of  Melinda.  Throughout  all  the  vast  countries
which  extend  along  the  coast  of  Africa,  from  the  river
Senegal  to  the  confines  of  Zanguebar,  the  Portuguese
had  found  a  race  of  men  rude  and  uncultivated,  strangers
to  letters,  to  arts  and  commerce,  and  differing  from  the
inhabitants  of  Europe,  no  less  in  their  features  and  com-
plexion than  in  their  manners  and  institutions.  As  they
advanced  from  this,  they  observed,  to  their  inexpressi-
ble joy,  that  the  human  form  gradually  altered  and  im-
proved; the  Asiatic  features  began  to  predominate,
marks  of  civilization  appeared,  letters  were  known,  the
Mahometan  religion  was  established,  and  a  commerce,
far  from  being  inconsiderable,  was  carried  on.  At  that
time  several  vessels  from  India  were  in  the  port  of
Melinda. Gama  now  pursued  his  voyage  with  almost

VOL.  VI.  M

162  AMERICA.  • [1499.

absolute  certainty  of  success,  and,  under  the  conduct  of
a  Mahometan  pilot,  arrived  at  Calecut,  upon  the  coast
of  Malabar,  on  the  22d  of  May,  1498.  What  he  be-
held of  the  wealth,  the  populousness,  the  cultivation,
the  industry,  and  arts  of  this  highly-civilized  country,
far  surpassed  any  idea  that  he  had  formed,  from  the
imperfect  accounts  which  the  Europeans  had  hitherto
received  of  it.  But  as  he  possessed  neither  sufficient
force  to  attempt  a  settlement,  nor  proper  commodities
with  which  he  could  carry  on  commerce  of  any  conse-
quence, he  hastened  back  to  Portugal,  with  an  account
of  his  success  in  performing  a  voyage,  the  longest,  as  well
as  most  difficult,  that  had  ever  been  made,  since  the  first
invention  of  navigation.  He  landed  at  Lisbon  on  the
i4th  of  September,  1499,  two  years  two  months  and
five  days  from  the  time  he  left  that  port.**

Thus,  during  the  course  of  the  fifteenth  century,
mankind  made  greater  progress  in  exploring  the  state
of  the  habitable  globe,  than  in  all  the  ages  which  had
elapsed  previous  to  that  period.  The  spirit  of  disco-
very, feeble  at  first  and  cautious,  moved  within  a  very
narrow  sphere,  and  made  its  effi^rts  with  hesitation  and
timidity.  Encouraged  by  success,  it  became  adven-
turous, and  boldly  extended  its  operations.  In  the
course  of  its  progression,  it  continued  to  acquire  vigour,
and  advanced  at  length  with  a  rapidity  and  force  which
burst  through  all  the  limits  within  which  ignorance  and
fear  had  hitherto  circumscribed  the  activity  of  the  hu-
man race.  Almost  fifty  years  were  employed  by  the
Portuguese  in  creeping  along  the  coast  of  Africa  from
Cape  Non  to  Cape  de  Verd,  the  latter  of  which  lies
only  twelve  degrees  to  the  south  of  the  former.  In  less
than  thirty  years  they  ventured  beyond  the  equinoctial
line  into  another  hemisphere,  and  penetrated  to  the
southern  extremity  of  Africa,  at  the  distance  of  forty-
nine  degrees  from  Cape  de  Verd. During  the  last

k  Romusio,  vol.  1.  119.  D.

1499.]  BOOK II.  163

seven  years  of  the  century,  a  New  World  was  disco-
vered in  the  west,  not  inferior  in  extent  to  all  the  parts
of  the  earth  with  which  mankind  were  at  that  time  ac-
quainted. In  the  east,  unknown  seas  and  countries
were  found  out,  and  a  communication,  long  desired,
but  hitherto  concealed,  was  opened  between  Europe
and  the  opulent  regions  of  India.  In  comparison  with
events  so  wonderful  and  unexpected,  all  that  had  hi-
therto been  deemed  great  or  splendid  faded  away  and
disappeared.  Vast  objects  now  presented  themselves.
The  human  mind,  roused  and  interested  by  the  prospect,
engaged  with  ardour  in  pursuit  of  them,  and  exerted  its
active  powers  in  a  new  direction.
Disco-  This  spirit  of  enterprise,  though  but  newly

veries  car-  i  j • c • i.  i.  j.

ried  on  in  awakened  in  fepam,  began  soon  to  operate  ex-
pSvate'^ad-  tcusively.  All  the  attempts  towards  discovery
venturers,  made  in  that  kingdom  had  hitherto  been  car-
ried on  by  Columbus  alone,  and  at  the  expense  of  the
sovereign.  But  now  private  adventurers,  allured  by
the  magnificent  descriptions  he  gave  of  the  regions
which  he  had  visited,  as  well  as  by  the  specimens  of
their  wealth  which  he  produced,  offered  to  fit  out  squa-
drons at  their  own  risk,  and  to  go  in  quest  of  new  coun-
tries. The  Spanish  court,  whose  scanty  revenues  were
exhausted  by  the  charge  of  its  expeditions  to  the  New
World,  which,  though  they  opened  alluring  prospects
of  future  benefit,  yielded  a  very  sparing  return  of  pre-
sent profit,  was  extremely  willing  to  devolve  the  burden
of  discovery  upon  its  subjects.  It  seized  with  joy  an
opportunity  of  rendering  the  avarice,  the  ingenuity,  and
efforts  of  projectors,  instrumental  in  promoting  designs
of  certain  advantage  to  the  public,  though  of  doubtful
ojeda  the  ^ucccss  with  rcspcct  to  thcmsclves.  One  of  the
first  of  first  propositions  of  this  kind  was  made  by
Alonso  de  Ojeda,  a  gallant  and  active  officer,
who  had  accompanied  Columbus  in  his  second  voyage.
His  rank  and  character  procured  him  such  credit  with

M  2

1(34  AMERICA.  [1499.

the  merchants  of  Seville,  that  they  undertook  to  equip
four  ships,  provided  he  could  obtain  the  royal  licence,
authorizing  the  voyage.  The  powerful  patronage  of
the  bishop  of  Badajos  easily  secured  success  in  a  suit
so  ao;'reeab}e  to  the  court.  Without  consultina*  Colum-
bus,  or  regarding  the  rights  and  jurisdiction  which  he
had  acquired  by  the  capitulation  in  1492,  Ojeda  was
permitted  to  set  out  for  the  New  World.  In  order  to
direct  his  course,  the  bishop  communicated  to  him  the
admirals  journal  of  his  last  voyage,  and  his  charts  of
the  countries  which  he  had  discovered. Ojeda

May.  ,  .  1 p  • •  1

struck  out  mto  no  new  path  oi  navigation,  but
adhering  servilely  to  the  route  which  Columbus  had
taken,  arrived  on  the  coast  of  Paria.  He  traded  with
the  natives,  and  standing  to  the  west,  proceeded  as  far
as  Cape  de  Vela,  and  ranged  along  a  considerable  ex-
tent  of  coast  beyond that  on  which  Columbus  had

touched. Having  thus  ascertained  the  opinion

October. n  r-i ^ ^  i  i  •  ^ ^

01  Columbus,  that  this  country  was  a  part  ot  the
continent,  Ojeda  returned  by  way  of  Hispaniola  to
Spain,  with  some  reputation  as  a  discoverer,  but  with
little  benefit  to  those  who  had  raised  the  funds  for  the
expedition.''

Is  accom-  Amcrigo  Vespucci,  a  Florentine  gentleman,
Araerf  o^  accompauicd  Ojeda  in  this  voyage.  In  what
Vespucci,  station  he  served,  is  uncertain ;  but  as  he  was
an  experienced  sailor,  and  eminently  skilful  in  all  the
sciences  subservient  to  navigation,  he  seems  to  have
acquired  such  authority  among  his  companions,  that
they  willingly  allowed  him  to  have  a  chief  share  in
directing  their  operations  during  the  voyage.  Soon
after  his  return,  he  transmitted  an  account  of  his  adven-
tures and  discoveries  to  one  of  his  countrymen ;  and
labourhig  with  the  vanity  of  a  traveller  to  magnify  his
own  exploits,  he  had  the  address  and  confidence  to
frame  his  narrative,  so  as  to  make  it  appear  that  he  had

' ■ - :' - .  «^  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ir.  c.  1,  2,  3.

1499.]  BOOK II.  165

the  glory  of  having  first  discovered  the  continent  in  the
New  World.  Amerigo's  account  was  drawn  up  not
only  with  art,  but  with  some  elegance.  It  contained
an  amusing  history  of  his  voyage,  and  judicious  obser-
vations upon  the  natural  productions,  the  inhabitants,
and  the  customs  of  the  countries  which  he  had  visited.
As  it  was  the  first  description  of  any  part  of  the  New
World  that  was  published,  a  performance  so  well  cal-
culated to  gratify  the  passion  of  mankind  for  what  is
new  and  marvellous,  circulated  rapidly,  and  was  read
From  "^ith  admiration.  The  country  of  which  Ame-
wiiom  the  yIq-o  was  suDDOscd  to  bc  the  discoverer,  came

name  of  "  •■■  *■

America  is  gradually  to  be  called  by  his  name.  The  ca-
fhe^New  price  of  mankind,  often  as  unaccountable  as
World,  unjust,  has  perpetuated  this  error.  By  the  uni-
versal consent  of  nations,  America  is  the  name  be-
stowed on  this  new  quarter  of  the  globe.  The  bold  pre-
tensions of  a  fortunate  impostor  have  robbed  the  disco-
verer of  the  New  World  of  a  distinction  which  belonged
him.  The  name  of  Amerigo  has  supplanted  that  of
Columbus  ;  and  mankind  may  regret  an  act  of  injustice,
which,  having  received  the  sanction  of  time,  it  is  now
too  late  to  redress.''
„  During:  the  same  year,  another  vovaffe  of  dis-

Voyage  ~  J  '  jo

of  Aionso  covery  was  undertaken.  Columbus  not  only
'^"°'  introduced  the  spirit  of  naval  enterprise  into
Spain,  but  all  the  first  adventurers  who  distinguished
themselves  in  this  new  career,  were  formed  by  his  in-
structions, and  acquired  in  his  voyages  the  skill  and  in-
formation which  qualified  them  to  imitate  his  example.
Aionso  Nigno,  who  had  served  under  the  admiral  in  his
last  expedition,  fitted  out  a  single  ship,  in  conjunction
with  Christopher  Guerra,  a  merchant  of  Seville,  and
sailed  to  the  coast  of  Paria.  This  voyage  seems  to  have
been  conducted  with  greater  attention  to  private  emo
lument,  than  to  any  general  or  national  object. Nigno

*  See  Note  XXII.'

166  AMERICA.  -  [1500.

and  Guerra  made  no  discoveries  of  any  importance ;
but  they  brought  home  such  a  return  of  gold  and  pearls,
as  inflamed  their  countrymen  with  the  desire  of  engaj^-
ing  in  similar  adventures/

1500.  Soon  after,  Vincent  Yanez  Pinzon,  one  of  the

Qr\^^'  admiral's  companions  in  his  first  voyage,  sailed
cent  Yanez  from  Palos  witli  four  sliips. He  stood  boldly

inzon.  towards  the  south,  and  was  the  first  Spaniard
who  ventured  to  cross  the  equinoctial  line ;  but  he  seems
to  have  landed  on  no  part  of  the  coast  beyond  the
mouth  of  the  Maragnon,  or  river  of  the  Amazons.  All
these  navigators  adopted  the  erroneous  theory  of  Co-
lumbus, and  believed  that  the  countries  which  they  had
discovered  were  part  of  the  vast  continent  of  India/
The  Portu-  Duriug  the  last  year  of  the  fifteenth  century,
cover  Bra-  t^i^t  fertile  district  of  America,  on  the  confines
*''•  of  which  Pinzon  had  stopped  short,  was  more

fully  discovered.  The  successful  voyage  of  Gama  to
the  East  Indies  having  encouraged  the  king  of  Portu-
gal to  fit  out  a  fleet  so  powerful,  as  not  only  to  carry  on
trade,  but  to  attempt  conquest,  he  gave  the  command
of  it  to  Pedro  Alvarez  Cabrah  In  order  to  avoid  the
coast  of  Africa,  where  he  was  certain  of  meeting  with
variable  breezes,  or  frequent  calms,  which  might  retard
his  voyage,  Cabral  stood  out  to  sea,  and  kept  so  far  to
the  west,  that,  to  his  surprise,  he  found  himself  upon
the  shore  of  an  unknown  country,  in  the  tenth  degree
beyond  the  line.  He  imagined,  at  first,  that  it  was
some  island  in  the  Atlantic  ocean,  hitherto  unobserved ;
but,  proceeding  along  its  coast  for  several  days,  he  was
led  gradually  to  believe,  that  a  country  so  extensive
formed  a  part  of  some  great  continent.  This  latter
opinion  was  well  founded.  The  country  with  which  he
fell  in  belongs  to  that  province  in  South  America,  now
known  by  the  name  of  Brasil. He  landed;  and  having

'  p.  I\Iartyr,  dec.  p.  87. Hcrrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iv.  c.  5.
'Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ir.  c.  6. P.  Martyr,  dec.  p.  95.

1500.]  BOOK  II.  167

formed  a  very  high  idea  of  the  fertility  of  the  soil,  and
agreeableness  of  the  climate,  he  took  possession  of  it
for  the  crown  of  Portugal,  and  dispatched  a  ship  to
Lisbon  with  an  account  of  this  event,  which  appeared
to  be  no  less  important  than  it  was  unexpected.'^  Co-
lumbus's discovery  of  the  New  World  was  the  effort  of
an  active  genius,  enlightened  by  science,  guided  by
experience,  and  acting  upon  a  regular  plan,  executed
with  no  less  courage  than  perseverance.  But  from  this
adventure  of  the  Portuguese,  it  appears  that  chance
might  have  accomplished  that  great  design  which  it  is
now  the  pride  of  human  reason  to  have  formed  and
perfected.  If  the  sagacity  of  Columbus  had  not  con-
ducted mankind  to  America,  Cabral,  by  a  fortunate  ac-
cident, might  have  led  them,  a  few  years  later,  to  the
knowledge  of  that  extensive  continent.^
Machina-  While  the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese,  by
agSnst  those  successive  voyages,  were  daily  acquiring
Columbus,  more  enlarged  ideas  of  the  extent  and  opulence
of  that  quarter  of  the  globe  which  Columbus  had  made
known  to  them,  he  himself,  far  from  enjoying  the
tranquillity  and  honours  with  which  his  services  should
have  been  recompensed,  was  struggling  with  every
distress  in  which  the  envy  and  malevolence  of  the  peo-
ple under  his  command,  or  the  ingratitude  of  the  court
which  he  served,  could  involve  him.  Though  the  pa-
cification with  Roldan  broke  the  union  and  weakened
the  force  of  the  mutineers,  it  did  not  extirpate  the  seeds
of  discord  out  of  the  island.  Several  of  the  malecon-
tents  continued  in  arms,  refusing  to  submit  to  the  ad-
miral. He  and  his  brothers  were  obliged  to  take  the
field  alternately,  in  order  to  check  their  incursions,  or
to  punish  their  crimes.  The  perpetual  occupation  and
disquiet  which  this  created,  prevented  him  from  giving
due  attention  to  the  dangerous  machinations  of  his
enemies  in  the  court  of  Spain. A  good  number  of

'  Herrera,  dee.  1.  lib.  ir.  c.  7.  »  Ibid.  dec.  1.  lib.  vii.  c.  5.

108  AMERICA.  [1500.

such  as  were  most  dissatisfied  with  his  administration,
had  embraced  the  opportunity  of  returning  to  Europe
with  the  ships  which  he  dispatched  from  St.  Domingo.
The  final  disappointment  of  all  their  hopes  inflamed
the  rage  of  these  unfortunate  adventurers  against  Co-
lumbus to  the  utmost  pitch.  Their  poverty  and  dis-
tress, by  exciting  compassion,  rendered  their  accusa-
tions credible,  and  their  complaints  interesting.  They
teased  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  incessantly  with  memo-
rials, containing  the  detail  of  their  own  grievances,  and
the  articles  of  their  charge  against  Columbus.  When-
ever either  the  king  or  queen  appeared  in  public,  they
surrounded  them  in  a  tumultuary  manner,  insisting  with
impoitunate  clamours  for  the  payment  of  the  arrears
due  to  them,  and  demanding  vengeance  upon  the  au-
thor of  their  sufferings.  They  insulted  the  admiral's
sons  wherever  they  met  them,  reproaching  them  as  the
offspring  of  the  projector,  whose  fatal  curiosity  had
discovered  those  pernicious  regions  which  drained
Spain  of  its  wealth,  and  would  prove  the  grave  of  its
people.  These  avowed  endeavours  of  the  malecontents
from  America  to  ruin  Columbus,  were  seconded  by  the
secret,  but  more  dangerous  insinuations  of  that  party
among  the  courtiers,  which  had  always  thwarted  his
schemes,  and  envied  his  success  and  credit.''
Their  in-  Ferdinand  was  disposed  to  listen,  not  only
F'rdmand  ^^^^^  ^  willing,  but  witli  a  partial  ear  to  these
andisa- accusatious.  Notwitlistaudiup- the  flatterinpf  ac-

bella.  .  ^

counts  which  Columbus  had  given  of  the  riches
of  America,  the  remittances  from  it  had  hitherto  been
so  scanty,  that  they  fell  far  short  of  defraying  the  ex-
pense of  the  armaments  fitted  out.  The  glory  of  the
discovery,  together  with  the  prospect  of  remote  com-
mercial advantages,  was  all  that  Spain  had  yet  received
in  return  for  the  efforts  which  she  had  made.  But  time
had  already  diminished  the  first  sensations  of  joy  which

''  Life  of  Culuiiibus,  c.  8.").

1500.]  BOOK  II.  169

the  discovery  of  a  new  world  occasioned,  and  fame
alone  was  not  an  object  to  satisfy  the  cold  interested
mind  of  Ferdinand.  The  nature  of  commerce  was  then
so  little  understood,  that  where  immediate  gain  was
not  acquired,  the  hope  of  distant  benefit,  or  of  slow  and
moderate  returns,  was  totally  disregarded.  Ferdinand
considered  Spain,  on  this  account,  as  having  lost  by
the  enterprise  of  Columbus,  and  imputed  it  to  his  mis-
conduct and  incapacity  for  government,  that  a  country
abounding  in  gold  had  yielded  nothing  of  value  to  its
conquerors.  Even  Isabella,  who  from  the  favourable
opinion  which  she  entertained  of  Columbus,  had  uni-
formly protected  him,  was  shaken  at  length  by  the
number  and  boldness  of  his  accusers,  and  began  to  sus-
pect that  a  disaffection  so  general  must  have  been  occa-
sioned by  real  grievances,  which  called  for  redress.
The  bishop  of  Badajos,  with  his  usual  animosity
against  Columbus,  encouraged  these  suspicions  and
confirmed  them.

As  soon  as  the  queen  began  to  give  way  to  the
fects  of  torrent  of  calumny,  a  resolution  fatal  to  Colum-
bus was  taken.  Francis  de  Bovadilla,  a  knight
of  Calatrava,  was  appointed  to  repair  to  Hispaniola,
with  full  powers  to  inquire  into  the  conduct  of  Colum-
bus, and,  if  he  should  find  the  charge  of  mal-adminis-
tration  proved,  to  supersede  him,  and  assume  the  go-
vernment of  the  island.  It  was  impossible  to  escape
condemnation,  when  this  preposterous  commission
made  it  the  interest  of  the  judge  to  pronounce  the
person  whom  he  was  sent  to  try,  guilty.  Though  Co-
lumbus had  how  composed  all  the  dissensions  in  the
island ;  though  he  had  brought  both  Spaniards  and
Indians  to  submitpeaceably  tohis  government;  though
he  had  made  such  effectual  provision  for  working  the
mines,  and  cultivating  the  country,  as  would  have  se-
cured a  considerable  revenue  to  the  king,  as  well  as
large  profits  to  individuals,  Bovadilla,  without  deign-

170  AMERICA.  [1500.

ing  to  attend  to  the  nature  or  merit  of  those  services,
discovered  from  the  moment  that  he  landed  in  Hispa-
niola,  a  determined  purpose  of  treating-  him  as  a  crimi-
nal. He  took  possession  of  the  admiral's  house  in  St.
Domingo,  from  which  its  master  happened  at  that  time
to  be  absent,  and  seized  his  effects,  as  if  his  guilt  had
been  already  fully  proved ;  he  rendered  himself  master
of  the  fort  and  of  the  king's  stores  by  violence;  he  re-
quired all  persons  to  acknowledge  him  as  supreme  go-
vernor ;  he  set  at  liberty  the  prisoners  confined  by  the
admiral,  and  summoned  him  to  appear  before  his  tri-
bunal, in  order  to  answer  for  his  conduct;  transmitting
to  him,  together  with  the  summons,  a  copy  of  the  royal
mandate,  by  which  Columbus  was  enjoined  to  yield
implicit  obedience  to  his  commands.
^  , ^ Columbus,  thou2:h  deeply  affected  with  the

Columbus  '  o _  1^ •'

sent  in  ingratitude  and  injustice  of  Ferdinand  and  Isa-
Spain.  bella,  did  not  hesitate  a  moment  about  his  own
October.  (.(^jj(jy(3t^  jjg  Submitted  to  the  will  of  his  sove-
reigns with  a  respectful  silence,  and  repaired  directly
to  the  court  of  that  violent  and  partial  judge  whom  they
had  authorized  to  try  him.  Bovadilla,  without  admitting
him  into  his  presence,  ordered  him  instantly  to  be  ar-
rested, to  be  loaded  with  chains,  and  hurried  on  board
a  ship.  Even  under  this  humiliating  reverse  of  fortune,
the  firmness  of  mind  which  distinguishes  the  character
of  Columbus  did  not  forsake  him.  Conscious  of  his
own  integrity,  and  solacing  himself  with  reflectingupon
the  great  things  which  he  had  achieved,  he  endured
this  insult  offered  to  his  character,  not  only  with  com-
posure, but  with  dignity.  Nor  had  he  the  consolation
of  sympathy  to  mitigate  his  sufferings.  Bovadilla  had
already  rendered  himself  so  extremely  popular,  by
granting  various  immunities  to  the  colony,  by  liberal
donations  of  Indians  to  all  who  applied  for  them,  and
by  relaxing  the  reins  of  discipline  and  government,  that
the  Spaniards,  who  were  mostly  adventurers,  whom

1500.]  BOOK II.  l-n

their  indigence  or  crimes  had  compelled  to  abandon
their  native  country,  expressed  the  most  indecent  satis-
faction with  the  disgrace  and  imprisonment  of  Colum-
bus. They  flattered  themselves,  that  now  they  should
enjoy  an  uncontrolled  liberty  more  suitable  to  their
disposition  and  former  habits  of  life. Among  persons
thus  prepared  to  censure  the  proceedings,  and  to  as-
perse the  character  of  Columbus,  Bovadilla  collected
materials  for  a  charge  against  him. All  accusations,
the  most  improbable,  as  well  as  inconsistent,  were  re-
ceived. No  informer,  however  infamous,  was  rejected.
The  result  of  this  inquest,  no  less  indecent  than  par-
tial, he  transmitted  to  Spain. At  the  same  time,  he
ordered  Columbus,  with  his  two  brothers,  to  be  carried
thither  in  fetters;  and,  adding  cruelty  to  insult,  he  con-
fined them  in  different  ships,  and  excluded  them  from
the  comfort  of  that  friendly  intercourse  which  might
have  soothed  their  common  distress. But  while  the
Spaniards  in  Hispaniola  viewed  the  arbitrary  and  inso-
lent proceedings  of  Bovadilla  with  a  general  approba-
tion, which  reflects  dishonour  upon  their  name  and
country,  one  man  still  retained  a  proper  sense  of  the
great  actions  which  Columbus  had  performed,  and  was
touched  with  the  sentiments  of  veneration  and  pity  due
to  his  rank,  his  age,  and  his  merit. Alonzo  de  Valejo,
the  captain  of  the  vessel  on  board  which  the  admiral
was  confined,  as  soon  as  he  was  clear  of  the  island,  ap-
proached his  prisoner  with  great  respect,  and  offered
to  release  him  from  the  fetters  with  which  he  was  un-
justly loaded. "  No,"  replied  Columbus,  with  a  gene-
rous indignation,  "  I  wear  these  irons  in  consequence
of  an  order  from  my  sovereigns. They  shall  find  me
as  obedient  to  this  as  to  their  other  injunctions. By
their  command  I  have  been  confined,  and  their  com-
mand alone  shall  set  me  at  liberty."'

'  Life  of  Columbus,  c. 86. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iv.  c.  8 — 11. Gomara  Hist.
c.  23. Oviedo,  lib,  iii.  c,  6.

172  AMERICA.  [1500.

Nov.  23.  Fortunately,  the  voyage  to  Spain  was  ex-
berty,  but  tremcly  short.  As  soon  as  Ferdinand  and  Isa-
of  Si'Tu-  bella  were  informed  that  Cokimbus  was  brought
thority.  home  a  prisoner,  and  in  chains,  they  perceived
at  once  what  universal  astonishment  this  event  must
occasion,  and  what  an  impression  to  their  disadvantage
it  must  make.  All  Europe,  they  foresaw,  would  be
filled  with  indignation  at  this  ungenerous  requital  of  a
man  who  had  performed  actions  worthy  of  the  highest
recompense,  and  would  exclaim  against  the  injustice
of  the  nation,  to  which  he  had  been  such  an  eminent

•j

benefactor, as  well  as  against  the  ino^ratitude  of  the

'  0  3

princes  whose  reign  he  had  rendered  illustrious
Ashamed  of  their  own  conduct,  and  eager  not  only  to
make  some  reparation  for  this  injury,  but  to  efface  the
stain  which  it  might  fix  upon  their  character,  they  in-
stantly issued  orders  to  set  Columbus  at  liberty,
invited  him  to  court,  and  remitted  money  to  en-
able him  to  appear  there  in  a  manner  suitable  to  his  rank.
When  he  entered  the  royal  presence,  Columbus  threw
himself  at  the  feet  of  his  sovereigns.  He  remained  for
some  time  silent;  the  various  passions  which  agitated
his  mind  suppressing  his  power  of  utterance.  At  length
he  recovered  himself,  and  vindicated  his  conduct  in  a
long  discourse,  producing  the  most  satisfying  proofs  of
his  own  integrity  as  well  as  good  intention,  and  evi-
dence, no  less  clear,  of  the  malevolence  of  his  enemies,
who,  not  satisfied  with  having  ruined  his  fortune,  la-
boured to  deprive  him  of  what  alone  was  now  left,  his
honour  and  his  fame.  Ferdinand  received  him  with
decent  civility,  and  Isabella  with  tenderness  and  re-
spect. They  both  expressed  their  sorrow  for  what  had
happened,  disavowed  their  knowledge  of  it,  and  joined
in  promising  him  protection  and  future  favour.  But
though  they  instantly  degraded  Bovadilla,  in  order  to
remove  from  themselves  any  suspicion  of  having  autho-
rized his  violent  proceedings,  they  did  not  restore  to

15O0.]  BOOK II.  173

Columbus  his  jurisdiction  and  privileges  as  viceroy  of
those  countries  which  he  had  discovered.  Though
willing  to  appear  the  avengers  of  Columbus's  wrongs,
that  illiberal  jealousy  which  prompted  them  to  invest
Bovadilla  with  such  authority  as  put  it  in  his  power  to
treat  the  admiral  with  indignity  still  subsisted.  They
were  afraid  to  trust  a  man  to  whom  they  had  been  so
highly  indebted,  and  retaining  him  at  court  under  va-
rious pretexts,  they  appointed  Nicholas  de  Ovando,  a
knight  of  the  military  order  of  Alcantara,  governor  of
Hispaniola.""

Columbus  was  deeply  affected  with  this  new  injurj^,
which  came  from  hands  that  seemed  to  be  employed  in
making  reparation  for  his  past  sufferings.  The  sensi-
bility with  which  great  minds  feel  every  thing  that  im-
plies any  suspicion  of  their  integrity,  or  that  wears  the
aspect  of  an  affront,  is  exquisite.  Columbus  had  ex-
perienced both  from  the  Spaniards ;  and  their  unge-
nerous conduct  exasperated  him  to  such  a  degree,  that
he  could  no  longer  conceal  the  sentiments  which  it  ex-
cited. Wherever  he  went  he  carried  about  with  him,
as  a  memorial  of  their  ingratitude,  those  fetters  with
which  he  had  been  loaded.  They  were  constantly  hung
up  in  his  chamber,  and  he  gave  orders,  that  when  he
died  they  should  be  buried  in  his  grave.'

Meanwhile, the spirit of  discovery, not-

Progress  of  withstanding  the  severe  check  which  it  had

iscoverj. j.g^,gjyg(j  -^y  ^i^g  ungenerous  treatment  of  the

man  who  first-^xcited  it  in  Spain,  continued  active  and
januar  vigorous.  Rodcrigo  de  Bastidas,  a  person  of
distinction,  fitted  out  two  ships  in  copartnery
with  John  de  la  Cosa,  who  having  served  under  the
admiral  in  ,two  of  his  voyages  was  deemed  the  most
skilful  pilot  in  Spain.  They  steered  directly  towards
the  continent,  arrived  on  the  coast  of  Paria,  and  pro-

'' Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iv.  c.  10 — 12. Life  of  Columbus,  c.  87.
'  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  86.  p.  577.

174  AMERICA.  [1501.

ceeding  to  the  west,  discovered  all  the  coast  of  the  pro-
vince now  known  by  the  name  of  Tierra  Firme,  from
Cape  de  Vela  to  the  gulf  of  Darien. Not  long  after,
Ojeda,  with  his  former  associate  Amerigo  Vespucci,
set  out  upon  a  second  voyage,  and  being  unacquainted
with  the  destination  of  Bastidas,  held  the  same  course,
and  touched  at  the  same  places. The  voyage  of  Bas-
tidas was  prosperous  and  lucrative,  that  of  Ojeda  un-
fortunate. But  both  tended  to  increase  the  ardour  of
discovery  ;  for  in  proportion  as  the  Spaniards  acquired
a  more  extensive  knowledge  of  the  American  conti-
nent, their  idea  of  its  opulence  and  fertility  increased."
Qy^j^^o Before  these  adventurers  returned  from  their
appointed  yoyagcs, a  flcct  was  equipped,  at  the  public
of  Hispa-  expense,  for  carrying  over  Ovando,  the  new  go-
vernor, to  Hispaniola. His  presence  there  was
extremely  requisite,  in  order  to  stop  the  inconsiderate
career  of  Bovadilla,  whose  imprudent  administration
threatened  the  settlement  w^th  ruin. Conscious  of  the
violence  and  iniquity  of  his  proceedings  against  Co-
lumbus, he  continued  to  make  it  his  sole  object  to  gain
the  favour  and  support  of  his  countrymen,  by  accom-
modating  himself  to  their passions  and  prejudices.
With  this  view,  he  established  regulations  in  every
point  the  reverse  of  those  which  Columbus  deemed
essential  to  the  prosperity  of  the  colony. Instead  of
the  severe  discipline,  necessary  in  order  to  habituate
the  dissolute  and  corrupted  members  of  which  the  so-
ciety was  composed,  to  the  restraints  of  law  and  sub-
ordination, he  suffered  them  to  enjoy  such  uncontrolled
licence,  as  encouraged  the  wildest  excesses. Instead
of  protecting  the  Indians,  he  gave  a  legal  sanction  to
the  oppression  of  that  unhappy  people. He  took  the
exact  number  of  such  as  survived  their  past  calamities,
divided  them  into  distinct  classes,  distributed  them  in
property  among  his  adherents,  and  reduced all  the

">  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iv.  c.  11.

1501.1  BOOK  II.  175

people  of  the  island  to  a  state  of  complete  servitude.
As  the  avarice  of  the  Spaniards  was  too  rapacious  and
impatient  to  try  any  method  of  acquiring  wealth  but
that  of  searching  for  gold,  this  servitude  became  as
grievous  as  it  was  unjust.  The  Indians  were  driven  in
crowds  to  the  mountains,  and  compelled  to  work  in
the  mines  by  masters,  who  imposed  their  tasks  with-
out mercy  or  discretion.  Labour  so  disproportioned
to  their  strenofth  and  former  habits  of  life,  wasted  that
feeble  race  of  men  with  such  rapid  consumption,  as
must  have  soon  terminated  in  the  utter  extinction  of  the
ancient  inhabitants  of  the  country."

The  necessity  of  applying  a  speedy  remedy
lationses-  to  thosc  disordcrs,  hastened  Ovando's  depar-
ture. He  had  the  command  of  the  most  re-
spectable armament  hitherto  fitted  out  for  the  New
World.  It  consisted  of  thirty-two  ships,  on  board  of
which  two  thousand  five  hundred  persons  embarked,
with  an  intention  of  settling  in  the  country.
Upon  the  arrival  of  the  new  governor  with  this
powerful  reinforcement  to  the  colony,  Bovadilla  re-
sio-ned  his  charge,  and  was  commanded  to  return  in-
stantly to  Spain,  in  order  to  answer  for  his  conduct.
Roldan,  and  the  other  ringleaders  of  the  mutineers,
who  had  been  most  active  in  opposing  Columbus,  were
required  to  leave  the  island  at  the  same  time.  A  pro-
clamation was  issued,  declaring  the  natives  to  be  free
subjects  of  Spain,  of  whom  no  service  was  to  be  ex-
acted contrary  to  their  own  inclination,  and  without
paying  them  an  adequate  price  for  their  labour.  With
respect  to  the  Spaniards  themselves,  various  regulations
were  made,  tending  to  suppress  the  licentious  spirit
which  had  been  so  fatal  to  the  colony,  and  to  establish
that  reverence  for  law  and  order  on  which  society  is
founded,  and  to  which  it  is  indebted  for  its  increase

n  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iv.  c.  11,  &c. Oviedo  Hist,  lib.  iii.  c.  6.  p.  97. Benzon
Hilt.  lib.  i.  c.  12.  p.  51.

17(3  AMERICA.  [1502.

and  stability.  In  order  to  limit  the  exorbitant  gain
which  private  persons  were  supposed  to  make  by  work-
ing the  mines,  an  ordinance  was  published,  directing  all
the  gold  to  be  brought  to  a  public  smelting-house,  and
declaring  one  half  of  it  to  be  the  property  of  the  crown."
^, ^.  While  these  steps  were  takino-  for  securino*

The  dis-  _  ^  o  '^

agreeable  tlic  tranquillity  and  welfare  of  the  colony  which
of  Coium-  Columbus  had  planted,  he  himself  was  engaged
^"'**  in  the  unpleasant  employment  of  soliciting  the

favour  of  an  ungrateful  court,  and  notwithstanding  all
his  merit  and  services,  he  solicited  in  vain.  He  de-
manded, in  terms  of  the  original  capitulation  in  1492,
to  be  reinstated  in  his  office  of  viceroy  over  the  coun-
tries which  he  had  discovered.  By  a  strange  fatality,
the  circumstance  which  he  urged  in  support  of  his
claim,  determined  a  jealous  monarch  to  reject  it.  The
greatness  of  his  discoveries,  and  the  prospect  of  their
increasing  value,  made  Ferdinand  consider  the  conces-
sions in  the  capitulation  as  extravagant  and  impolitic.
He  was  afraid  of  intrusting  a  subject  with  the  exercise
of  a  jurisdiction  that  now  appeared  to  be  so  extremely
extensive,  and  might  grow  to  be  no  less  formidable.
He  inspired  Isabella  with  the  same  suspicions ;  and
under  various  pretexts,  equally  frivolous  and  unjust,
they  eluded  all  Columbus's  requisitions  to  perform  that
Avhich  a  solemn  compact  bound  them  to  accomplish.
After  attending  the  court  of  Spain  for  near  two  years,
as  an  humble  suitor,  he  found  it  impossible  to  remove
Ferdinand's  prejudices  and  apprehensions ;  and  per-
ceived, at  length,  that  he  laboured  in  vain,  when  he
urged  a  claim  of  justice  or  merit  with  an  interested  and
unfeeling  prince.

He  forms  But  cvcu  this  ungcncrous  return  did  not  dis-
sdiemesof  couragc  him  from  pursuing  the  great  object
discovery,  ^hicli  first  Called  forth  his  inventive  genius,  and
excited  him  to  attempt  discovery. To  open  a  new  pas-

"  Solorzano  Politica  Indiana,  lib.  i.  c.  12. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iv.  c.  12.

1502.]  BOOK II.  177

sage  to  the  East  Indies,  was  his  original  and  favourite
scheme. This  still  engrossed  his  thoughts  ;  and  either
from  his  own  observations in his  voyage  to  Paria,  or
from  some  obscure  hint  of  the  natives,  or  from  the  ac-
counts given  by  Bastidas  and  de  la  Cosa,  of  their  ex-
pedition, he  conceived  an  opinion that,  beyond  the
continent  of  America,  there  was  a  sea  which  extended
to  the  East  Indies,  and  hoped  to  find  some  strait  or
narrow  neck  of  land,  by  which  a  communication  might
be  opened  with  it  and  the  part  of  the  ocean  already
known. By  a  very  fortunate  conjecture,  he  supposed
this  strait  or  isthmus  to  be  situated  near  the  gulf  of
Darien. Full  of  this  idea,  though  he  was  now  of  an
advanced  age,  worn  out  with  fatigue,  and  broken  with
infirmities,  he  offered,  with  the  alacrity  of  a  youthful
adventurer,  to  undertake  a  voyage  which  would  ascer-
tain this  important  point,  and  perfect  the  grand  scheme
which  from  the  beginning  he  proposed  to  accomplish.
Several  circumstances  concurred  in  disposing  Ferdi-
nand and  Isabella  to  lend  a  favourable  ear  to  this  pro-
posal. They  were  glad  to  have  the  pretext  of  any  ho-
nourable employment  for  removing  from  court  a  man
with  whose  demands  they  deemed  it  impolitic  to  com-
ply, and  whose  services  it  was  indecent  to  neglect.
Though  unwilling  to  reward  Columbus,  they  were  not
insensible  of  his  merit,  and  from  their  experience  of  his
skill  and  conduct,  had  reason  to  give  credit  to  his  con-
jectures, and  to  confide  in  his  success. To  these  con-
siderations, a  third  must  be  added  of  still  more  power-
ful influence. About  this  time  the  Portuguese  fleet,
under  Cabral,  arrived  from  the  Indies ;  and,  by  the
richness  of  its  cargo,  gave  the  people  of  Europe  a  more
perfect  idea  than  they  had  hitherto  been  able  to  form,
of  the  opulence  and  fertility  of  the  East. The  Portu-
guese had  been  more  fortunate  in  their  discoveries  than
the  Spaniards.  They  had  opened  a  communication  with
countries  where  industry,  arts,  and  elegance  flourished ;

VOL.  VJ.  N

178  AMERICA.  [1502.

and  where  commerce  had  been  longer  established,  and
carried  to  greater  extent,  than  in  any  region  of  the
earth.  Their  first  voyages  thither  yielded  immediate
as  well  as  vast  returns  of  profit,  in  commodities  ex-
tremely precious  and  in  great  request.  Lisbon  became
immediately  the  seat  of  commerce  and  wealth ;  while
Spain  had  only  the  expectation  of  remote  benefit,  and
of  future  gain,  from  the  western  world.  Nothing,  then,
could  be  more  acceptable  to  the  Spaniards  than  Co-
lumbus's offer  to  conduct  them  to  the  East,  by  a  route
which  he  expected  to  be  shorter,  as  well  as  less  dan-
gerous, than  that  which  the  Portuguese  had  taken.
Even  Ferdinand  was  rpused  by  such  a  prospect,  and
warmly  approved  of  the  undertaking.
His  fourth  But  interesting  as  the  object  of  this  voyage
▼oyage-  -was  to  the  nation,  Columbus  could  procure  only
four  small  barks,  the  largest  of  which  did  not  exceed
seventy  tons  in  burden,  for  performing  it.  Accustomed
to  brave  danger,  and  to  engage  in  arduous  undertakings
with  inadequate  force,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  accept  the
command  of  this  pitiful  squadron.  His  brother  Bar-
tholomew, and  his  second  son  Ferdinand,  the  historian
of  his  actions,  accompanied  him.  He  sailed  from  Cadiz
on  the  9th  of  May,  and  touched,  as  usual,  at  the  Ca-
nary islands  ;  from  thence  he  proposed  to  have  stood
directly  for  the  continent ;  but  his  largest  vessel  was
so  clumsy  and  unfit  for  service,  as  constrained  him  to
bear  away  for  Hispaniola,  in  hopes  of  exchanging  her
for  some  ship  of  the  fleet  that  had  carried  out  Ovando.
When  he  arrived  at  St.  Domingfo,  he  found

June  29.  .

eighteen  of  these  ships  ready  loaded,  and  on  the
point  of  departing  for  Spain.  Columbus  immediately
acquainted  the  governor  with  the  destination  of  his
voyage,  and  the  accident  which  had  obliged  him  to  alter
his  route.  He  requested  permission  to  enter  the  harbour,
not  only  that  he  might  negotiate  the  exchange  of  his  ship,
but  that  he  might  take  shelter  during  a  violent  hurri-

1502.]  BOOK II.  179

cane,  of  which  he  discerned  the  approach  from  various
prognostics,  which  his  experience  and  sagacity  had
taught  him  to  observe.  On  that  account,  he  advised
him  likewise  to  put  off  for  some  days  the  departure  of
the  fleet  bound  for  Spain.  But  Ovando  refused  his
request,  and  despised  his  counsel.  Under  circumstances
in  which  humanity  would  have  afforded  refuge  to  a
stranger,  Columbus  was  denied  admittance  into  a  coun-
try of  which  he  had  discovered  the  existence  and  ac-
quired the  possession.  His  salutary  warning,  which
merited  the  greatest  attention,  was  regarded  as  the
dream  of  a  visionary  prophet,  who  arrogantly  pretended
to  predict  an  event  beyond  the  reach  of  human  fore-
sight. The  fleet  set  sail  for  Spain.  Next  night  the
hurricane  came  on  with  dreadful  impetuosity.  Co-
lumbus, aware  of  the  danger,  took  precautions  against
it,  and  saved  his  little  squadron.  The  fleet  destined
for  Spain  met  with  the  fate  which  the  rashness  and
obstinacy  of  its  commanders  deserved.  Of  eighteen
ships  two  or  three  only  escaped.  In  this  general  wreck
perished  Bovadilla,  Roldan,  and  the  greater  part  of
those  who  had  been  the  most  active  in  persecuting  Co-
lumbus, and  oppressing  the  Indians.  Together  with
themselves,  all  the  wealth  which  they  had  acquired  by
their  injustice  and  cruelty  was  swallowed  up.  It  ex-
ceeded in  value  two  hundred  thousand  pesos ;  an  im-
mense some  at  that  period,  and  sufficient  not  only  to
have  screened  them  from  any  severe  scrutiny  into  their
conduct,  but  to  have  secured  them  a  gracious  reception
in  the  Spanish  court.  Among  the  ships  that  escaped,
one  had  on  board  all  the  effects  of  Columbus  which  had
been  recovered  from  the  ruins  of  his  fortune.  Histo-
rians, struck  with  the  exact  discrimination  of  characters,
as  well  as  the  just  distribution  of  rewards  and  punish-
ments, conspicuous  in  those  events,  universal Ij^attribute
them  to  an  immediate  interposition  of  Divine  Provi-
dence, in  order  to  avenge  the  wrongs  of  an  injured

N  2

180  AMERICA. '  [1502.

man,  and  to  punish  the  oppressors  of  an  innocent  peo-
ple. Upon  the  ignorant  and  superstitious  race  of  men,
who  were  witnesses  of  this  occurrence,  it  made  a  dif-
ferent impression.  From  an  opinion  which  vulgar  ad-
miration is  apt  to  entertain  with  respect  to  persons  who
have  distinguished  themselves  by  their  sagacity  and  in-
ventions, they  believed  Columbus  to  be  possessed  of
supernatural  powers,  and  imagined  that  he  had  con-
jured up  this  dreadful  storm  by  magical  art  and  incan-
tations, in  order  to  be  avenged  of  his  enemies.^
July  14.  Columbus  soon  left  Hispaniola,  where  he
inva*in"or  i^^^t  witli  such  an  iuliospitablc  reception,  and
a  passage g^Qod  towards  tlic  contincut. After  a  tedious

to  tlie  In-
dian ocean,  and  daugcrous  voyage,  he  discovered  Guanaia,

an  island  not  far  distant  from  the  coast  of  Honduras.
There  he  had  an  interview  with  some  inhabitants  of  the
continent,  who  arrived  in  a  large  canoe.  They  ap-
peared to  be  a  people  more  civilized,  and  who  had  made
greater  progress  in  the  knowledge  of  useful  arts,  than
any  whom  he  had  hitherto  discovered.  In  return  to
the  inquiries  which  the  Spaniards  made,  with  their
usual  eagerness,  concerning  the  places  where  the  In-
dians got  the  gold  which  they  wore  by  way  of  orna-
ment, they  directed  them  to  countries  situated  to  the
west,  in  which  gold  was  found  in  such  profusion,  that
it  was  applied  to  the  most  common  uses.  Instead  of
steering  in  quest  of  a  country  so  inviting,  which  would
have  conducted  him  alono-  the  coast  of  Yucatan  to  the
rich  empire  of  Mexico,  Columbus  was  so  bent  upon  his
favourite  scheme  of  finding  out  the  strait  which  he  sup-
posed to  communicate  with  the  Indian  ocean,  that  he
bore  away  to  the  east  towards  the  gulf  of  Darien.  In
this  navigation  he  discovered  all  the  coast  of  the  con-
tinent, from  Cape  Gracias  a  Dios,  to  a  harbour  which,
on  account  of  its  beauty  and  security,  he  called  Porto-
Bello. He  searched,  in  vain,  for  the  imaginary  strait,

P  Oviedo,  lib.  iii.  c.  7.  9. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib,  v.  c.  1,  2. Life  of  Columbus,  c.  88.

1502.]  BOOK  II.  181

through  which  he  expected  to  make  his  way  into  an
unknown  sea ;  and  though  he  went  on  shore  several
times,  and  advanced  into  the  country,  he  did  not  pene
trate  so  far  as  to  cross  the  narrow  isthmus  which  sepa-
rates the  gulf  of  Mexico  from  the  great  southern  ocean.
He  was  so  much  delighted,  however,  with  the  fertility
of  the  country,  and  conceived  such  an  idea  of  its  wealth,
from  the  specimens  of  gold  produced  by  the  natives,
that  he  resolved  to  leave  a  small  colony  upon  the  river
^^^^  Belen,  in  the  province  of  Veragua,  under  the
command  of  his  brother,  and  to  return  himself
to  Spain,  in  order  to  procure  what  was  requisite  for
rendering  the  establishment  permanent.  But  the  un-
governable spirit  of  the  people  under  his  command,
deprived  Columbus  of  the  glory  of  planting  the  first
colony  on  the  continent  of  America.  Their  insolence
and  rapaciousness  provoked  the  natives  to  take  arms,
and  as  these  were  a  more  hardy  and  warlike  race  of
men  than  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands,  they  cut  off
part  of  the  Spaniards  and  obliged  the  rest  to  abandon
a  station  which  was  found  to  be  untenable.''
Ship.  This  repulse,  the  first  that  the  Spaniards  met

wrecked ^^[i]^  fj-Qj^  ^j^y  Qf  j-\^q  American  nations,  was

on  the  "^ _  '

coast  of  not  the  only  misfortune  that  befel  Columbus  ;
it  was  followed  by  a  succession  of  all  the  disas-
ters to  which  navigation  is  exposed.  Furious  hurri-
canes, with  violent  storms  of  thunder  and  lightning,
threatened  his  leaky  vessels  with  destruction ;  while  his
discontented  crew,  exhausted  with  fatigue,  and  desti-
tute of  provisions,  was  unwilling  or  unable  to  execute
his  commands.  One  of  his  ships  perished;  he  was
obliged  to  abandon  another,  as  unfit  for  service  ;  and
with  the  two  which  remained,  he  quitted  that  part
of  the  continent,  which  in  his  anguish  he  named  the
Coast  of  Vexation,"^  and bore  away  for  Hispaniola.

<«  Herreia,  dec.  1.  lib.  v.  c.  5,  &c. Life  of  Columbus,  c.  89,  &c. Oviedo,  lib.
ill.  c.  9.  ^  La  Costa  de  los  Contrastes.

182  AMERICA.  [1503.

New  distresses  awaited  him  in  this  voyage. He  was
driven  back  by  a  violent  tempest  from  the  coast  of
Cuba,  his  ships  fell  foul  of  one  another,  and  were  so
much  shattered  by  the  shock,  that  with  the  ut-
most difficulty  they  reached  Jamaica,  where  he
was  obliged  to  run  them  aground,  to  prevent  them  from
sinking. The  measure  of  his  calamities  seemed  now  to
be  full.  He  was  cast  ashore  upon  an  island  at  a  consider-
able distance  from  the  only  settlement  of  the  Spaniards
in  America. His  ships  were  ruined  beyond  the  possi-
bility of  being  repaired. To  convey  an  account  of  his
situation  to  Hispaniola,  appeared  impracticable ;  and
without  this  it  was  vain  to  expect  relief. His  genius,
fertile  in  resources,  and  most  vigorous  in  those  perilous
extremities  when  feeble  minds  abandon  themselves  to
despair,  discovered  the  only  expedient  which  afforded
any  prospect  of  deliverance. He  had  recourse  to  the
hospitable  kindness  of  the  natives,  who,  considering  the
Spaniards  as  beings  of  a  superior  nature,  were  eager,
on  every  occasion,  to  minister  to  their  wants. From
them  he  obtained  two  of  their  canoes,  each  formed  out
of  the  trunk  of  a  single  tree  hollowed  with  fire,  and  so
misshapen  and  awkward  as  hardly  to  merit  the  name
of  boats. In  these,  which  were  fit  only  for  creeping
along  the  coast,  or  crossing  from  one  side  of  a  bay  to
another,  Mendez,  a  Spaniard,  and  Fieschi,  a  Genoese,
two  gentlemen  particularly  attached  to  Columbus,  gal-
lantly offered  to  set  out  for  Hispaniola,  upon  a  voyage
of  above  thirty  leagues." This  they  accomplished  in  ten
days,  after  surmounting  incredible  dangers, and  en-
during such  fatigues  that  several  of  the  Indians  who
accompanied  them  sunk  under  it,  and  died. The  at-
tention paid  to  them  by  the  governor  of  Hispaniola  was
neither  such  as  their  courage  merited,  nor  the  distress
of  the  persons  from  whom  they  came  required.  Ovando,
from  a  mean  jealousy  of  Columbus,  was  afraid  of  allow-

»  Ovicdo,  lib.  iii.  c.  9.

1503]  BOOK 11.  183

ing-  him  to  set  foot  in  the  island  under  his  government.
This  ungenerous  passion  hardened  his  heart  against
every  tender  sentiment,  which  reflection  upon  the  ser-
vices and  misfortunes  of  that  great  man,  or  compassion
for  his  own  fellow-citizens  involved  in  the  same  calami-
ties, must  have  excited.  Mendez  and  Fieschi  spent  eight
months  in  soliciting  relief  for  their  commander  and
associates,  without  any  prospect  of  obtaining  it.
His  dis-  During  this  period,  various  passions  agitated
suffertngs  the  mind  of  Cohimbus  and  his  companions  in
^^^^'''  adversity.  At  first  the  expectation  of  speedy
deliverance,  from  the  success  of  Mendez  and  Fieschi's
voyage,  cheered  the  spirits  of  the  most  desponding.
After  some  time  the  most  timorous  begfan  to

1504.  .

suspect  that  they  had  miscarried  in  their  daring
attempt.  At  length,  even  the  most  sanguine  concluded
that  they  had  perished.  The  ray  of  hope  which  had
broke  in  upon  them,  made  their  condition  appear  now
more  dismal.  Despair,  heightened  by  disappointment,
settled  in  every  breast.  Their  last  resource  had  failed,
and  nothing  remained  but  the  prospect  of  ending  their
miserable  days  among  naked  savages,  far  from  their
country  and  their  friends.  The  seamen,  in  a  transport
of  rage,  rose  in  open  mutiny,  threatened  the  life  of  Co-
lumbus, whom  they  had  reproached  as  the  author  of  all
their  calamities,  seized  ten  canoes,  which  he  had  pur-
chased from  the  Indians,  and,  despising  his  remon-
strances and  entreaties,  made  off  with  them  to  a  distant
part  of  the  island.  At  the  same  time,  the  natives  mur-
mured at  the  long  residence  of  the  Spaniards  in  their
country.  As  their  industry  was  not  greater  than  that
of  their  neighbours  in  Hispaniola,  like  them  they  found
the  burden  of  supporting  so  many  strangers  to  be  al-
together intolerable.  They  began  to  bring  in  provi-
sions with  reluctance,  they  furnished  them  with  a  spar-
ing hand,  and  threatened  to  withdraw  those  supplies
altogether. Such  a  resolution  must  have  been  quickly

184  AMERICA.  [1504

fatal  to  the  Spaniards. Their  safety  depended  upon
the  good-will  of  the  Indians;  and  unless  they  could  re-
vive the  admiration  and  reverence  with  which  that  sim-
ple people  had  at  first  beheld  them,  destruction  was
unavoidable. Thou^-h  the  licentious  proceedings of
the  mutineers  had,  in  a  great  measure,  effaced  those
impressions  which  had  been  so  favourable  to  the  Spa-
niards, the  ingenuity  of  Columbus  suggested  a  happy
artifice,  that  not  only  restored  but  heightened  the  high
opinion  which  the  Indians  liad  originally  entertained
of  them. By  his  skill  in  astronomy  he  knew  that  there
was  shortly  to  be  a  total  eclipse  of  the  moon. He  as-
sembled all  the  principal  persons  of  the  district  around
him  on  the  day  before  it  happened,  and,  after  reproach-
ing them  for  their  fickleness  in  withdrawing'  their  affec-
tion  and  assistance  from  men  whom  they  had  lately  re-
vered, he  told  them,  that  the  Spaniards  were  servants
of  the  Great  Spirit  who  dwells  in  heaven,  who  made
and  governs  the  world ;  that  he,  offended  at  their  re-
fusing to  support  men  who  were  the  objects  of  his  pe-
culiar favour,  was  preparing  to  punish  this  crime  with
exemplary severity,  and  that  very night the moon
should  withhold  her  light,  and  appear  of  a  bloody  hue,
!is  a  sign  of  the  divine  wrath,  and  an  emblem  of  the
vengeance  ready  to  fall  upon  them. To  this  marvellous
prediction  some  of  them  listened  with  the  careless  in-
difference peculiar  to  the  people  of  America  ;  others,
with  the  credulous  astonishment  natural  to  barbarians.
But  when  the  moon  began  gradually  to  be  darkened,
and  at  length  appeared  of  a  red  colour,  all  were  struck
with terror. They ran with consternation to their
houses,  and returning  instantly  to  Columbus  loaded
with  provisions,  threw  them  at  his  feet,  conjuring  him
to  intercede  with  the  Great  Spirit  to  avert  the  destruc-
tion with  which  they were  threatened. Columbus,
seeming  to  be  moved  by  their  entreaties,  promised  to
comply  with  their  desire. The  eclipse  went  off,  the

1504.1  BOOK  II.  185

moon  recovered  its  splendour,  and  from  that  day  the
Spaniards  were  not  only  furnished  profusely  with  pro-
visions, but  the  natives,  with  superstitious  attention,
avoided  every  thing  that  could  give  them  offence.'
A  cruel  During  those  transactions,  the  mutineers  had

addition made  repeated  attempts  to  pass  over  to  Hispa-

to  them. ,  ^  r  r  r

niola  in  the  canoes  which  they  had  seized.  But,
from  their  own  misconduct,  or  the  violence  of  the
winds  and  currents,  their  efforts  were  all  unsuccessful.
Enraged  at  this  disappointment,  they  marched  towards
that  part  of  the  island  where  Columbus  remained,
threatening  him  with  new  insults  and  danger.  While
they  were  advancing,  an  event  happened,  more  cruel
and  afflicting  than  any  calamity  which  he  dreaded  from
them.  The  governor  of  Hispaniola,  whose  mind  was
still  filled  with  some  dark  suspicions  of  Columbus,  sent
a  small  bark  to  Jamaica,  not  to  deliver  his  distressed
countrymen,  but  to  spy  out  their  condition.  Lest  the
sympathy  of  those  whom  he  employed  should  afford
them  relief,  contrary  to  his  intention,  he  gave  the  com-
mand of  this  vessel  to  Escobar,  an  inveterate  enemy  of
Columbus,  who,  adhering  to  his  instructions  with  ma-
lignant accuracy,  cast  anchor  at  some  distance  from
the  island,  approached  the  shore  in  a  small  boat,  ob-
served the  wretched  plight  of  the  Spaniards,  delivered
a  letter  of  empty  compliments  to  the  admiral,  received
his  answer,  and  departed.  When  the  Spaniards  first
descried  the  vessel  standing  towards  the  island,  every
heart  exulted,  as  if  the  long-expected  hour  of  their  de-
liverance had  at  length  arrived ;  but  when  it  disap-
peared so  suddenly,  they  sunk  into  the  deepest  dejec-
tion, and  all  their  hopes  died  away.  Columbus  alone,
though  he  felt  most  sensibly  this  wanton  insult  which
Ovando  added  to  his  past  neglect,  retained  such  com-
posure of  mind,  as  to  be  able  to  cheer  his  followers.

'  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  103. Herrera,  dec.  t.  lib.  vi.  c.  5,  6. Benaon.  Hist.  lib.  i.
c.  14.

^

186  AMERICA.  [1504.

He  assured  them,  that  Mendez  and  Fieschi  had  reached
Hispaniola  in  safety;  that  they  would  speedily  procure
ships  to  carry  them  off;  but,  as  Escobar's  vessel  could
not  take  them  all  on  board,  that  he  had  refused  to  go
with  her,  because  he  was  determined  never  to  abandon
the  faithful  companions  of  his  distress.  Soothed  with
the  expectation  of  speedy  deliverance,  and  delighted
with  his  apparent  generosity  in  attending  more  to  their
preservation  than  to  his  own  safety,  their  spirits  re-
vived, and  he  regained  their  confidence."

Without  this  confidence  he  could  not  have  resisted
the  mutineers,  who  were  now  at  hand.  All  his  endea-
vours to  reclaim  those  desperate  men  had  no  effect  but
to  increase  their  frenzy.  Their  demands  became  every
day  more  extravagant,  and  their  intentions  more  vio-
lent and  bloody.  The  common  safety  rendered  it  ne-
cessary to  oppose  them  with  open  force.  Columbus,  who
had  been  long  afflicted  with  the  gout,  could  not  take  the
field.  His  brother,  the  adelantado,  marched
against  them.  They  quickly  met.  The  muti-
neers rejected  with  scorn  terms  of  accommodation,
which  were  once  more  offered  them,  and  rushed  on
boldly  to  the  attack.  They  fell  not  upon  an  enemy
unprepared  to  receive  them.  In  the  first  shock,  seve-
ral of  their  most  daring  leaders  were  slain.  The  ade-
lantado, whose  strength  was  equal  to  his  courage,  closed
-with  their  captain,  wounded,  disarmed,  and  took  him
prisoner."  At  sight  of  this,  the  rest  fled  with  a  das-
tardly fear  suitable  to  their  former  insolence.  Soon
after,  they  submitted  in  a  body  to  Columbus,  and
bound  themselves  by  the  most  solemn  oaths  to  obey  all
his  commands.  Hardly  was  tranquillity  re-established,
when  the  ships  appeared,  whose  arrival  Columbus  had
promised  with  great  address,  though  he  could  foresee
it  with  little  certainty. With  transports  of  joy,  the

"  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  lOi. Hcrrcra,  dec.  1.  lib.  vi.  c.  17.
"  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  107. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  vi.  c.  11.

1504.]  BOOK II.  187

Spaniards  quitted  an  island  in  which  the  unfeeling  jea-
lousy of  Ovando  had  suffered  them  to  languish  above
a  year,  exposed  to  misery  in  all  its  various  forms.
His  deliver-  When  they  arrived  at  St.  Domingo,  the
a^Hvafal  govemor,  vi^ith  the  mean  artifice  of  a  vulgar
Hispanioia.  mind,  that  labours  to  atone  for  insolence  by
servility,  fawned  on  the  man  whom  he  envied,  and  had
attempted  to  ruin.  He  received  Columbus  with  the
most  studied  respect,  lodged  him  in  his  own  house,
and  distinguished  him  with  every  mark  of  honour.
But  amidst  those  over-acted  demonstrations  of  regard,
he  could  not  conceal  the  hatred  and  malignity  latent  in
his  heart.  He  set  at  liberty  the  captain  of  the  muti-
neers, whom  Columbus  had  brought  over  in  chains,  to
be  tried  for  his  crimes ;  and  threatened  such  as  had  ad-
hered to  the  admiral  with  proceeding  to  a  judicial
inquiry  into  their  conduct.  Columbus  submitted  in
silence  to  what  he  could  not  redress ;  but  discovered  an
extreme  impatience  to  quit  a  country  which  was  under
the  jurisdiction  of  a  man  who  had  treated  him,  on  every
occasion,  with  inhumanity  and  injustice. His

Sept.  12.  .  r> • 1 1  J  1  i. M

preparations  were  soon  hnished,  and  lie  set  sail
for  Spain  with  two  ships.  Disasters  similar  to  those
which  had  accompanied  him  through  life  continued  to
pursue  him  to  the  end  of  his  career.  One  of  his  ves-
sels being  disabled,  was  soon  forced  back  to  St.  Do-
mingo; the  other,  shattered  by  violent  storms,  sailed
seven hundred leagues with  jurymasts, and

'  reached  with  difficulty  the  port  of  St.  Lucas .^
^ , , There  he  received  the  account  of  an  event  the

Death  of

Isabella, most  fatal that  could  have  befallen  him,  and

Nov,  9.

which  completed  his  misfortunes.  This  was  the
death  of  his  patroness  queen  Isabella,  in  whose  justice,
humanity,  and  favour,  he  confided  as  his  last  resource.
None  now  remained  to  redress  his  wrongs,  or  to  reward
him  for  his  services  and  sufferings,  but  Ferdinand,  who

y  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  108. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  vi.  c.  12.

188  AMERICA.  [1604.

had  so  long  opposed  and  so  often  injured  him.  To  so-
licit a  prince  thus  prejudiced  against  him,  was  an  oc-
cupation no  less  irksome  than  hopeless.  In  this,  how-
ever, was  Columbus  doomed  to  employ  the  close  of  his
days.  As  soon  as  his  health  was  in  some  degree  re-
established, he  repaired  to  court;  and  though  he  was
received  there  with  civility,  barely  decent,  he  plied
Ferdinand  with  petition  after  petition,  demanding  the
punishment  of  his  oppressors,  and  the  restitution  of  all
the  privileges  bestowed  upon  him  by  the  capitulation
of  1492.  Ferdinand  amused  him  with  fair  words  and
unmeaning  promises.  Instead  of  granting  his  claims,
he  proposed  expedients  in  order  to  elude  them,  and
spun  out  the  aft'air  with  such  apparent  art,  as  plainly
discovered  his  intention  that  it  should  never  be  termi-
nated. The  declining  health  of  Columbus  flattered
Ferdinand  with  the  hopes  of  being  soon  delivered  from
an  importunate  suitor,  and  encouraged  him  to  persevere
in  this  illiberal  plan.  Nor  was  he  deceived  in  his  ex-
pectations. Disgusted  with  the  ingratitude  of  a  mo-
narch whom  he  had  served  with  such  fidelity  and  suc-
cess, exhausted  with  the  fatigues  and  hardships  which
he  had  endured,  and  broken  with  the  infirmities  which
these  had  brought  upon  him,  Columbus  ended  his  life
at  Valladolid  on  the  20th  of  May  1506,  in  the  fifty-
Death  of  nintli  year  of  his  age.  He  died  with  a  compo-
Coiumbus.  g^^j,g  Qf  niind  suitable  to  the  magnanimity  which
distino-uished  his  character,  and  with  sentiments  of
piety  becoming  that  supreme  respect  for  religion,  which
he  manifested  in  every  occurrence  of  his  life.''

^  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  lOB. Hcrrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  vi.  c.  13 — 15.

THE

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA.

BOOK  III.

1504. While  Columbus  was  employed  in  his  last

State  of  the  ,  ^i  p  i-  i

colony  in voyagc,  scveral  events  worthy  oi  notice  hap-
Hispanioia.  ^^^^^^  -^^  Hispauiola. The  colony  there,  the

parent  and  nurse  of  all  the  subsequent  establishments
of  Spain  in  the  New  World,  gradually  acquired  the
form  of  a  regular  and  prosperous  society.  The  humane
solicitude  of  Isabella  to  protect  the  Indians  from  op-
pression, and  particularly  the  proclamation  by  which
the  Spaniards  were  prohibited  to  compel  them  to  work,
retarded,  it  is  true,  for  some  time  the  progress  of  im-
provement. The  natives,  who  considered  exemption
from  toil  as  supreme  felicity,  scorned  every  allurement
and  reward  by  which  they  were  invited  to  labour.  The
Spaniards  had  not  a  sufficient  number  of  hands  either
to  work  the  mines  or  to  cultivate  the  soil.  Several  of
the  first  colonists,  who  had  been  accustomed  to  the
service  of  the  Indians,  quitted  the  island,  when  deprived
of  those  instruments,  without  which  they  knew  not  how
to  carry  on  any  operation.  Many  of  the  new  settlers
who  came  over  with  Ovando,  were  seized  with  the  dis-
tempers peculiar  to  the  climate,  and  in  a  short  space
above  a  thousand  of  them  died.  At  the  same  time,  the
exacting  one-half  of  the  product  of  the  mines  as  the
royal  share,  was  found  to  be  a  demand  so  exorbitant,
that  no  adventurers  would  engage  to  work  them  upon
such  terms.  In  order  to  save  the  colony  from  ruin,
Ovando  ventured  to  relax  the  rigour  of  the  royal  edicts.

KOO  AMERICA.  [150.5.

He  made  a new distribution  of  the  Indians

1505.

among  the  Spaniards,  and  compelled  them  to
labour,  for  a  stated  time,  in  digging  the  mines,  or  in
cultivating  the  ground ;  but  in  order  to  screen  himself
from  the  imputation  of  having  subjected  them  again  to
servitude,  he  enjoined  their  masters  to  pay  them  a  cer-
tain sum,  as  the  price  of  their  work.  He  reduced  the
royal  share  of  the  gold  found  in  the  mines  from  the
half  to  the  third  part,  and  soon  after  lowered  it  to  a
fifth,  at  which  it  long  remained.  Notwithstanding  Isa-
bella's tender  concern  for  the  good  treatment  of  the  In-
dians, and  Ferdinand's  eagerness  to  improve  the  royal
revenue,  Ovando  persuaded  the  court  to  approve  of
both  these  regulations."

War  with  But  the  Indians,  after  enjoying  respite  from
the  Indians,  opprcssiou,  though  during  a  short  interval,  now
felt  the  yoke  of  bondage  to  be  so  galling,  that  they
made  several  attempts  to  vindicate  their  own  liberty.
This  the  Spaniards  considered  as  rebellion,  and  took
arms  in  order  to  reduce  them  to  subjection.  When  war
is  carried  on  between  nations  whose  state  of  improve-
ment is  in  any  degree  similar,  the  means  of  defence
bear  some  proportion  to  those  employed  in  the  attack  ;
and  in  this  equal  contest  such  efforts  must  be  made,
such  talents  are  displayed,  and  such  passions  roused,
as  exhibit  mankind  to  view  in  a  situation  no  less  strik-
ing than  interesting.  It  is  one  of  the  noblest  functions
of  history,  to  observe  and  to  delineate  men  at  a  junc-
ture when  their  minds  are  most  violently  agitated,  and
all  their  powers  and  passions  are  called  forth.  Hence
the  operations  of  war,  and  the  struggles  between  con-
tending states,  have  been  deemed  by  historians,  ancient
as  well  as  modern,  a  capital  and  important  article  in
the  annals  of  human  actions.  But  in  a  contest  between
naked  savag-es,  and  one  of  the  most  warlike  of  the
European  nations,  where  science,  courage,  and  disci-

»  Herrera,  dec.  1 ,  lib.  v.  c.  5.

1505.]  BOOK III.  191

pline  on  one  side,  were  opposed  by  ignorance,  timidity,
and  disorder  on  the  other,  a  particular  detail  of  events
would  be  as  unpleasant  as  uninstructive.  If  the  sim-
plicity and  innocence  of  the  Indians  had  inspired  the
Spaniards  with  humanity,  had  softened  the  pride  of
superiority  into  compassion,  and  had  induced  them  to
improve  the  inhabitants  of  the  New  World,  instead  of
Oppressing  them,  some  sudden  acts  of  violence,  like  the
too  rigorous  chastisements  of  impatient  instructors,
might  have  been  related  without  horror.  But,  unfor-
tunately, this  consciousness  of  superiority  operated  in
a  different  manner.  The  Spaniards  were  advanced  so
far  beyond  the  natives  of  America  in  improvement  of
every  kind,  that  they  viewed  them  with  contempt.
They  conceived  the  Americans  to  be  animals  of  an  in-
ferior nature,  who  were  not  entitled  to  the  rights  and
privileges  of  men.  In  peace,  they  subjected  them  to
servitude.  In  war,  they  paid  no  regard  to  those  laws,
which,  by  a  tacit  convention  between  contending  na-
tions, regulate  hostility,  and  set  some  bounds  to  its  rage.
They  considered  them  not  as  men  fighting  in  defence
of  their  liberty,  but  as  slaves,  who  had  revolted  against
their  masters.  Their  caziques,  when  taken,  were  con-
demned, like  the  leaders  of  banditti,  to  the  most  cruel
and  ignominious  punishments;  and  all  their  subjects,
without  regarding  the  distinction  of  ranks  established
among  them,  were  reduced  to  the  same  state  of  abject
slavery.  With  such  a  spirit  and  sentiments  were  hos-
tilities carried  on  against  the  cazique  of  Higuey,  a  pro-
vince at  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  island.  This
war  was  occasioned  by  the  perfidy  of  the  Spaniards,  in
violating  a  treaty  which  they  had  made  with  the  na-
tives, and  it  was  terminated  by  hanging  up  the  cazique,
who  defended  his  people  with  bravery  so  far  superior
to  that  of  his  countrymen,  as  entitled  him  to  a  better
fate."

^  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ti.  c.  9,  10.

192  AMERICA.  [1505.

The  cruel '^^^^  conduct  of  Ovando,  in  another  part  of
and  trea- the  islaiid,  was  still  more  treacherous  and  cruel.

cherous  ^ni  •  •  i  i -»r  ^ • i

conduct  of  1  he  provnice  anciently  named  Xaragua,  which
extends  from  the  fertile  plain  where  Leogane
is  now  situated,  to  the  western  extremity  of  the  island,
was  subject  to  a  female  cazique,  named  Anacoana,
highly  respected  by  the  natives.  She,  from  that  partial
fondness  with  which  the  women  of  America  were  at-
tached to  the  Europeans  (the  cause  of  which  shall  be
afterward  explained),  had  always  courted  the  friend-
ship of  the  Spaniards,  and  loaded  them  with  benefits.
But  some  of  the  adherents  of  Roldan  having  settled  in
her  country,  were  so  much  exasperated  at  her  endea-
vouring to  restrain  their  excesses,  that  they  accused  her
of  having  formed  a  plan  to  throw  off  the  yoke,  and  to
exterminate  the  Spaniards.  Ovando,  though  he  knew
well  what  little  credit  was  due  to  such  profligate  men,
marched,  without  farther  inquiry,  towards  Xaragua,
with  three  hundred  foot  and  seventy  horsemen.  To
prevent  the  Indians  from  taking  alarm  at  this  hostile
appearance,  he  gave  out  that  his  sole  intention  was  to
visit  Anacoana,  to  whom  his  countrymen  had  been  so
much  indebted,  in  the  most  respectful  manner,  and  to
regulate  with  her  the  mode  of  levying  the  tribute  pay-
able to  the  king  of  Spain.  Anacoana,  in  order  to  re-
ceive this  illustrious  guest  with  due  honour,  assembled
the  principal  men  in  her  dominions,  to  the  number  of
three  hundred,  and  advancing  at  the  head  of  these,
accompanied  by  a  great  crowd  of  persons  of  inferior
rank,  she  welcomed  Ovando  with  songs  and  dances,  ac-
cording to  the  mode  of  the  country,  and  conducted  him
to  the  place  of  her  residence.  There  he  was  feasted  for
some  days,  with  all  the  kindness  of  simple  hospitality,
and  amused  with  the  games  and  spectacles  usual  among
the  Americans  upon  occasions  of  mirth  and  festi-
vity. But  amidst  the  security  which  this  inspired,
Ovando  was  meditating  the  destruction  of  his  unsuspi-

1505.]  BOOK III.  li)3

cious  entertainer  and  lier  subjects ;  and  the  mean  per-
fidy with  which  he  executed  this  scheme,  equalled  his
barbarity  in  forming  it. Under  colour  of  exhibiting  to
the  Indians  the  parade  of  a  European  tournament,  he
advanced  with  his  troops,  in  battle  array,  towards  the
house  in  which  Anacoana  and  the  chiefs  who  attended
her,  were  assembled. The  infantry  took  possession  of
all  the  avenues  which  led  to  the  village. The  horse-
men encompassed  the  house. These  movements  were
the  object  of  admiration  without  any  mixture  of  fear,
until,  upon  a  signal which had  been concerted,  the
Spaniards  suddenly  drew  their  swords,  and  rushed  upon
the  Indians,  defenceless,  and  astonished  at  an  act  of
treachery  which  exceeded  the  conception  of  undesign-
ing  men. In  a  moment  Anacoana  was  secured. All
her  attendants  were  seized  and  bound. Fire  was  set
to  the  house ;  and  without  examination  or  conviction,
all  these  unhappy  persons,  the  most  illustrious  in  their
own  country,  were  consumed  in  the  flames. Anacoana
was  reserved  for  a  more  io-nominious  fate. She  was
carried  in  chains  to  St.  Domingo,  and,  after  the  forma-
lity of  a  trial  before  Spanish  judges,  she  was con-
demned upon  the  evidence  of  those  very  men  who  had
betrayed  her,  to  be  publicly  hanged.''
Reduction Overawcd and  humbled  by  this  atrocious
d\lns,  and  treatment  of  their  princes  and  nobles,  who  were
its  effects, objccts  of  their  highest  reverence,  the  people
in  all  the  provinces  of  Hispaniola  submitted,  without
farther  resistance,  to  the  Spanish  yoke. Upon  the  death
of  Isabella  all  the  regulations  tending  to  mitigate  the
rigour  of  their  servitude  were  forgotten. The  small
gratuity  paid  to  them  as  the  price  of  their  labour  was
withdrawn,  and  at  the  same  time  the  tasks  im-
posed  upon them  were  increased. Ovando,
without  any  restraint,  distributed  Indians  among  his

«  Oviedo,  lib.  iii.  c.  12. Herrera,  dec. 1.  lib.  vi.  c.  4. Oviedo,  lib.  iii.  c,  12.
Kelacion  de  destruyc.  de  las  Indias  por  Bart,  de  las  Casas,  p.  8.

VOL. VI.  O

194  AMERICA.  [1506.

friends  in  the  island. Ferdinand,  to  whom  the  queen
had  left  by  will  one  half  of  the  revenue  arising  from  the
settlements  in  the  New  World,  conferred  grants  of  a
similar  nature  upon  his  courtiers,  as  the  least  expensive
mode  of  rewarding  their  services. They  farmed  out  the
Indians,  of  whom  they  were  rendered  proprietors,  to
their countrymen settled in Hispaniola ; and that
wretched  people,  being  compelled  to  labour  in order
to  satisfy  the  rapacity  of  both, the  exactions  of  their
oppressors  no  longer  knew  any  bounds. But,  barbarous
as  their  policy  was,  and  fatal  to  the  inhabitants  of  His-
paniola, it  produced,  for  some  time,  very  considerable
effects. By  calling  forth  the  force  of  a  whole  nation,
and  exerting  it  in  one  direction,  the  working  of  the
mines  was  carried  on  with  amazing  rapidity  and  suc-
cess. During  several  years,  the  gold  brought  into  the
royal  smelting-houses  in  Hispaniola  amounted  annually
to  four  hundred  and  sixty  thousand  pesos,  above  a  hun-
dred thousand  pounds  sterling  ;  which,  if  we  attend  to
the  great  change  in  the  value  of  money  since  the  be-
ginning of  the  sixteenth  century  to  the  present  times,
must  appear  a  considerable  sum. Vast  fortunes  were
created,  of  a  sudden,  by  some. Others  dissipated  in
ostentatious  profusion,  what  they  acquired  with  facility.
Dazzled  by  both,  new  adventurers  crowded  to  America,
with  the  most  eager  impatience,  to  share  in  those  trea-
sures which  had  enriched  their  countrymen ;  and,  not-
withstanding the  mortality  occasioned  by  the  unhealthi-
ness  of  the  climate,  the  colony  continued  to  increase.''
Progress  of Ovaudo  govcmcd  the  Spaniards  with  wis-
the  colony.  Jq^  g^j^  J  justicc  uot  inferior  to  the  rigour  with
which  he  treated  the  Indians. He  established  equal
laws  ;  and,  by  executing  them  with  impartiality,  accus-
tomed the  people  of  the  colony  to  reverence  them. He
founded  several  new  towns  in  different  parts  of  the
island,  and  allured  inhabitants  to  them,  by  the  con-

•*  Herrera,  dec  1.  lib.  vi.  c.  18,  &c.

1506.]  BOOK III.  195

cession  of  various  immunities.  He  endeavoured  to  turn
the  attention  of  the  Spaniards  to  some  branch  of  in-
dustry more  useful  than  that  of  searching  for  gold  in
the  mines.  Some  slips  of  the  sugar-cane  having  been
brought  from  the  Canary  islands  by  way  of  experiment,
they  were  found  to  thrive  with  such  increase  in  the  rich
soil  and  warm  climate  to  which  they  were  transplanted,
that  the  cultivation  of  them  soon  became  an  object  of
commerce.  Extensive  plantations  were  begun  ;  sugar-
works,  which  the  Spaniards  called  inge?iid's,  from  the
various  machinery  employed  in  them,  were  erected,  and
in  a  few  years  the  manufacture  of  this  commodity  was
the  great  occupation  of  the  inhabitants  of  Hispaniola,
and  the  most  considerable  source  of  their  wealth.*
Political  The  prudent  endeavours  of  Ovando,  to  pro-
r/Fe^dt"  "^^^^  *h^  welfare  of  the  colony,  were  powerfully
nand.  sccoudcd  by  Ferdinand.  The  large  remittances
v^^hich  he  received  from  the  New  World  opened  his
eyes,  at  length,  with  respect  to  the  importance  of  those
discoveries,  which  he  had  hitherto  aifected  to  under-
value. Fortune,  and  his  own  address,  having  now  ex-
tricated him  out  of  those  difficulties  in  which  he  had  been
involved  by  the  death  of  his  queen,  and  by  his  dis-
putes with  his  son-in-law  about  the  government
of  her  dominions,*^  he  had  full  leisure  to  turn  his  attention
to  the  affairs  of  America.  To  his  provident  sagacity,
Spain  is  indebted  for  many  of  those  regulations  which
gradually  formed  that  system  of  profound  but  jealous
policy,  by  which  she  governs  her  dominions  in  the  New
World.  He  erected  a  court  distinguished  by  the  title
of  Casa  de  Contratacion,  or  Board  of  Trade,  composed
of  persons  eminent  for  rank  and  abilities,  to  whom  he
committed  the  administration  of  American  affairs.  This
board  assembled  regularly  in  Seville,  and  was  invested
with  a  distinct  and  extensive  jurisdiction.  He  gave  a
regular  form  to  ecclesiastical  government  in  America,

«  Oviedo,  lib.  iv.  c.  8.  ^  Hist,  of  the  Reign  of  Charles  V.  vol.  ii.  p.  6,  &c.

O  2

196  AMERICA.  [1507.

by  nominating'  archbishops,  bishops,  deans,  togetlier
with  clergymen  of  subordinate  ranks,  to  take  charge  of
the  Spaniards  established  there,  as  well  as  of  the  natives
who  should  embrace  the  Christian  faith.  But  notwith-
standing the  obsequious  devotion  of  the  Spanish  court
to  the  papal  see,  such  was  Ferdinand's  solicitude  to
prevent  any  foreign  power  from  claiming  jurisdiction,
or  acquiring  influence,  in  his  new  dominions,  that  he
reserved  to  the  crown  of  Spain  the  sole  right  of  patron-
age to  the  benefices  in  America,  and  stipulated  that  no
papal  bull  or  mandate  should  be  promulgated  there,
until  it  was  previously  examined  and  approved  of  by
his  council.  With  the  same  spirit  of  jealousy,  he  pro-
hibited any  goods  to  be  exported  to  America,  or  any
•person  to  settle  there,  without  a  special  licence  from
that  council.^

Thenum-  ^ut,  notwithstanding  this  attention  to  the
beroftiie  police  and  welfare  of  the  colony,  a  calamity
diminishes  impended  wliicli  threatened  its  dissolutiou.  The
original  inhabitants,  on  whose  labour  the  Spa-
niards in  Hispaniola  depended  for  their  prosperity,
and  even  their  existence,  wasted  so  fast,  that  the  ex-
tinction of  the  whole  race  seemed  to  be  inevitable.
When  Columbus  discovered  Hispaniola,  the  number  of
its  inhabitants  was  computed  to  be  at  least  a  million.''
They  were  now  reduced  to  sixty  thousand  in  the  space
of  fifteen  years.  This  consumption  of  the  human  spe-
cies, no  less  amazing  than  rapid,  w^as  the  effect  of  seve-
ral concurring  causes.  The  natives  of  the  American
islands  were  of  a  more  feeble  constitution  than  the  in-
habitants of  the  other  hemisphere.  They  could  neither
perform  the  same  work,  nor  endure  the  same  fatigue,
with  men  whose  orjrans  were  of  a  more  vigorous  con-
formation.  The  listless  indolence  in  which  they  de-
lighted to  pass  their  days,  as  it  was  the  eflfect  of  their
debility,  contributed  likewise  to  increase  it,  and  ren-

t  Hen-era,  dec.  1.  lib.  vj.  c.  19,  20.  ''  Ibid.  dec.  1.  lib.  x.  c.  12.

1607,]  BOOK III.  197

dered  tliein,  from  habit  as  well  as  constitution,  inca-
pable of  hard  labour.  The  food  on  which  they  sub-
sisted afforded  little  nourishment,  and  they  were  ac-
customed to  take  it  in  small  quantities,  not  sufficient  to
invigorate  a  languid  frame,  and  render  it  equal  to  the
eiforts  of  active  industry.  The  Spaniards,  without  at-
tending to  those  peculiarities  in  the  constitution  of  the
Americans,  imposed  tasks  upon  them,  which,  though
not  greater  than  Europeans  might  have  performed  with
ease,  were  so  disproportioned  to  their  strength,  that
many  sunk  under  the  fatigue,  and  ended  their  wretched
days.  Others,  prompted  by  impatience  and  despair,
cut  short  their  own  lives  with  a  violent  hand.  Famine,
brought  on  by  compelling  such  numbers  to  abandon  the
culture  of  their  lands,  in  order  to  labour  in  the  mines,
proved  fatal  to  many.  Diseases  of  various  kinds,  some
occasioned  by  the  hardships  to  which  they  were  ex-
posed, and  others  by  their  intercourse  with  the  Euro-
peans, who  communicated  to  them  some  of  their  pecu-
liar maladies,  completed  the  desolation  of  the  island.
The  Spaniards,  being  thus  deprived  of  the  instruments
which  they  were  accustomed  to  employ,  found  it  impos-
sible to  extend  their  improvements,  or  even  to  carry  on
the  works  which  they  had  already  begun.  In
order  to  provide  an  immediate  remedy  for  an
evil  so  alarming,  Ovando  proposed  to  transport  the  in-
habitants of  the  Lucayo  islands  to  Hispaniola,  under
pretence  that  they  might  be  civilized  with  more  facility,
and  instructed  to  greater  advantage  in  the  Christian
religion,  if  they  were  united  to  the  Spanish  colony,  and
placed  under  the  immediate  inspection  of  the  mission-
aries settled  there.  Ferdinand,  deceived  by  this  arti-
fice, or  willing  to  connive  at  an  act  of  violence  which
policy  represented  aS  necessary,  gave  his  assent  to  the
proposal.  Several  vessels  were  fitted  out  for  the  Lu-
cayos,  the  commanders  of  which  informed  the  natives,
with  whose  language  they  were  now  well  acquainted,

108  AMERICA.  [1508,

tliat  they  came  from  a  delicious  country,  in  wliicli  the
departed  ancestors  of  the  Indians  resided,  by  whom
they  were  sent  to  invite  their  descendants  to  resort
thither,  to  partake  of  the  bliss  enjoyed  there  by  happy
spirits.  That  simple  people  listened  with  wonder  and
credulity ;  and  fond  of  visiting  their  relations  and
friends  in  that  happy  region,  followed  the  Spaniards
with  eagerness.  By  this  artifice,  above  forty  thousand
were  decoyed  into  Hispaniola,  to  share  in  the  suffer-
ings which  were  the  lot  of  the  inhabitants  of  that  island,
and  to  mingle  their  groans  and  tears  with  those  of  that
wretched  race  of  men.'

New  dis-  The  Spaniards  had,  for  some  time,  carried  on
anr"euie-  their  Operations  in  the  mines  of  Hispaniola
luents.  -with  such  ardour  as  well  as  success,  that  these
seemed  to  have  engrossed  their  whole  attention.  The
spirit  of  discovery  languished;  and,  since  the  last  voy-
age of  Columbus,  no  enterprise  of  any  moment  had
been  undertaken.  But  as  the  decrease  of  the  Indians
rendered  it  impossible  to  acquire  wealth  in  that  island
with  the  same  rapidity  as  formerly,  this  urged  some  of
the  more  adventurous  Spaniards  to  search  for  new
countries,  where  their  avarice  might  be  gratified  with
more  facility.  Juan  Ponce  de  Leon,  who  commanded
under  Ovando  in  the  eastern  district  of  Hispaniola,
passed  over  to  the  island  of  St.  Juan  de  Puerto  Rico,
which  Columbus  had  discovered  in  his  second  voyage,
and  penetrated  into  the  interior  part  of  the  country.
As  he  found  the  soil  to  be  fertile,  and  expected,  from
some  symptoms,  as  well  as  from  the  information  of  the
inhabitants,  to  discover  mines  of  gold  in  the  mountains,
Ovando  permitted  him  to  attempt  making  a  settlement
in  the  island.  This  was  easily  effected  by  an  officer
eminent  for  conduct  no  less  than  for  courage.  In  a
few  years  Puerto  Rico  was  subjected  to  the  Spanish
government,  the natives were  reduced  to  servitude ;

'  Hcrrcra,  dec.  i.  lib.  vii.  c.  3. Ovicdo,  lib.  iii.  c.  6. Gomara  Hist.  c.  -il.

1508.]  BOOK  III.  199

and,  being  treated  with  the  same  inconsiderate  rigour
as  their  neighbours  in  Hispaniola,  the  race  of  original
inhabitants,  worn  out  with  fatigue  and  sufferings,  was
soon  exterminated.''

About  the  same  time,  Juan  Diaz  de  Solis,  in  conjunc-
tion with  Vincent  Yanez  Pinzon,  one  of  Columbus's
original  companions,  made  a  voyage  to  the  continent.
They  held  the  same  course  which  Columbusi  had  taken,
as  far  as  to  the  island  of  Guanaios  ;  but,  standing  from
thence  to  the  west,  they  discovered  a  new  and  exten-
sive province,  afterward  known  by  the  name  of  Yuca-
tan, and  proceeded  a  considerable  way  along  the  coast
of  that  country.'  Though  nothing  memorable  occur-
red in  this  voyage,  it  deserves  notice,  because  it  led  to
discoveries  of  greater  importance.  For  the  same  rea-
son, the  voyage  of  Sebastian  de  Ocampo  must  be  men-
tioned. By  the  command  of  Ovando,  he  sailed  round
Cuba,  and  first  discovered  with  certainty,  that  this
country,  which  Columbus  once  supposed  to  be  a  part
of  the  continent  was  a  large  island.""
Diego  Co-  This  voyage  round  Cuba  was  one  of  the
lumbus  ap-  J  ^  occurrences  under  the  administration  of

pointed

governor  of  Qvaudo.  Evcr  siucc  the  death  of  Columbus,
ispanioa.  ^^^^  ^^^  ^^^  Dicgo  had  been  employed  in  soli-
citing Ferdinand  to  grant  him  the  offices  of  viceroy  and
admiral  in  the  New  World,  together  with  all  the  other
immunities  and  profits  which  descended  to  him  by  in-
heritance, in  consequence  of  the  original  capitulation
with  his  father.  But  if  these  dignities  and  revenues
appeared  so  considerable  to  Ferdinand,  that,  at  the
expense  of  being  deemed  unjust  as  well  as  ungrateful,
he  had  wrested  them  from  Columbus,  it  is  not  surpris-
ing: that  he  should  be  unwillino;  to  confer  them  on  his
son.  Accordingly,  Don  Diego  wasted  two  years  in
incessant  but  fruitless  importunity. Weary  of  this,  he

I*  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  vii.  c.  1 — 4. Goniara  Hist.  c.  44.  Relacion  de  B.  de  las
Casas,  p.  10.  •  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  vi.  c.  17.  m  Ibid.  dec.  1.  lib.  vii.  c.  1.

200  AMERICA.  [1508.

endeavoured  at  length  to  obtain,  by  a  legal  sentence,
what  he  could  not  procure  from  the  favour  of  an  inte-
rested monarch.  He  commenced  a  suit  ao-ainst  Ferdi-
nand  before  the  council  which  managed  Indian  affairs,
and  that  court,  with  integrity  which  reflects  honour
upon  its  proceedings,  decided  against  the  king,  and
sustained  Don  Diego's  claim  of  the  viceroyalty,  toge-
ther with  all  the  other  privileges  stipulated  in  the  capi-
tulation. Even  after  this  decree,  Ferdinand's  repug-
nance to  put  a  subject  in  possession  of  such  extensive
rights,  might  have  thrown  in  new  obstacles,  if  Don
Diego  had  not  taken  a  step  which  interested  very
powerful  persons  in  the  success  of  his  claims.  The
sentence  of  the  council  of  the  Indies  grave  him  a  title
to  a  rank  so  elevated,  and  a  fortune  so  opulent,  that  he
found  no  difficulty  in  concluding  a  marriage  with
Donna  Maria,  daughter  of  Don  Ferdinand  de  Toledo,
great  commendator  of  Leon,  and  brother  of  the  duke  of
Alva,  a  nobleman  of  the  first  rank,  and  nearly  related
to  the  king.  The  duke  and  his  family  espoused  so
warmly  the  cause  of  their  new  ally,  that  Ferdinand
could  not  resist  their  solicitations. He  recalled

1509.

Ovando,  and  appointed  Don  Diego  his  succes-
sor, though,  even  in  conferring  this  favour,  he  could
not  conceal  his  jealousy  ;  for  he  allowed  him  to  assume
only  the  title  of  governor,  not  that  of  viceroy,  which
had  been  adjudged  to  belong  to  him."
„  .  Don  Diego  quickly  repaired  to  Hispaniola,
to  Hispa-  attended  by  his brother,  his  uncles,  his  wife,

whom  the  courtesy  of  the  Spaniards  honoured
with  the  title  of  vice-queen,  and  a  numerous  retinue  of
persons  of  both  sexes,  born  of  good  families.  He  lived
with  a  splendour  and  magnificence  hitherto  unknown
in  the  New  World  ;  and  the  family  of  Columbus  seemed
now  to  enjoy  the  honours  and  rewards  due  to  his  in-
ventive genius,  of  which  he  himself  had  been  cruelly

»  Herrera,  dec  1.  lib.  vii.  c.  i,  &c.

1509.]  BOOK  III.  201

defrauded.  The  colony  itself  acquired  new  lustre  by
the  accession  of  so  many  inhabitants,  of  a  different
rank  and  character  from  most  of  those  who  had  hitherto
migrated  to  America,  and  many  of  the  most  illustrious
families  in  the  Spanish  settlements  are  descended  from
the  persons  who  at  that  time  accompanied  Don  Diego
Columbus.''

No  benefits  accrued  to  the  unhappy  natives  from  this
change  of  governors.  Don  Diego  was  not  only  autho-
rized by  a  royal  edict  to  continue  the  repartimientos,  or
distribution  of  Indians,  but  the  particular  number  which
he  might  grant  to  every  person,  according  to  his  rank
in  the  colony,  was  specified.  He  availed  himself  of
that  permission,  and  soon  after  he  landed  at  St.  Do-
mingo, he  divided  such  Indians  as  were  still  unappro-
priated, among  his  relations  and  attendants-^
„ ,  The  next  care  of  the  new  o-overnor  was  to

Pearl  ^  • i i

fishery  of  comply  witli  an  instruction  which  he  received
"^  ^^'^^'  from  the  king,  about  settling  a  colony  in  Cu-
bagua,  a  small  island  which  Columbus  had  discovered
in  his  third  voyage.  Though  this  barren  spot  hardly
yielded  subsistence  to  its  wretched  inhabitants,  such
quantities  of  those  oysters  which  produce  pearls  were
found  on  its  coast,  that  it  did  not  long  escape  the  in-
quisitive avarice  of  the  Spaniards,  and  became  a  place
of  considerable  resort.  Large  fortunes  were  acquired
by  the  fishery  of  pearls,  which  was  carried  on  with  ex-
traordinary ardour.  The  Indians,  especially  those  from
the  Lucayo  islands,  were  compelled  to  dive  for  them ;
and  this  dangerous  and  unhealthy  employment  was  an
additional  calamity,  which  contributed  not  a  little  to
the  extinction  of  that  devoted  race."^
i^g^  About  this  period,  Juan  Diaz  de  Solis  and

voyages. Pinzon  set  out,  in  conjunction,  upon  a  second

o  Oviedo,  Tib.  iii.  c.  1.

P  Recopilacion  de  Leyes,  lib.  vi.  tit,  8. 1.  1,  2. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  vii.  c.  10

1  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  vii.  c.  9. Gomara  Hist,  c,  78.

202  AMERICA.  [1509.

voyage.  They  stood  directly  south,  towards  the  equi-
noctial line,  which  Pinzon  had  formerly  crossed,  and
advanced  as  far  as  the  fortieth  degree  of  southern  lati-
tude. They  were  astonished  to  find  that  the  continent
of  America  stretched  on  their  rin-ht  hand,  throuo-h  all
this  vast  extent  of  ocean.  They  landed  in  different
places,  to  take  possession  in  name  of  their  sovereign;
but  though  the  country  appeared  to  be  extremely  fer-
tile and  invitino'  their  force  was  so  small,  havino;  been
fitted  out  rather  for  discovery  than  making  settlements,
that  they  left  no  colony  behind  them.  Their  voyage
served,  however,  to  give  the  Spaniards  more  exalted
and  adequate  ideas  with  respect  to  the  dimensions  of
this  new  quarter  of  the  globe.""

A  settle-  Though  it  was  about  ten  years  since  Colum-
menton -^^^  \^^^  discovcrcd  thc  main  land  of  America,

the  conti-  -^

ncntat-  the  Spaniards  had  hitherto  made  no  settlement
in  any  part  of  it.  What  had  been  so  long  neg-
lected was  now  seriously  attempted,  and  with  consi-
derable vigour ;  though  the  plan  for  this  purpose  was
neither  formed  by  the  crown,  nor  executed  at  the  ex-
pense of  the  nation,  but  carried  on  by  the  enterprising
spirit  of  private  adventurers.  This  scheme  took  its
rise  from  Alonso  de  Ojeda,  who  had  already  made  two
voyages  as  a  discoverer,  by  which  he  acquired  consi-
derable reputation,  but  no  wealth.  But  his  character
for  intrepidity  and  conduct  easily  procured  him  asso-
ciates, who  advanced  the  money  requisite  to  defray  the
charges  of  the  expedition.  About  the  same  time,
Diego  de  Nicuessa,  who  had  acquired  a  large  fortune
in  Hispaniola,  formed  a  similar  design.  Ferdinand
encouraged  both ;  and  though  he  refused  to  advance
the  smallest  sum,  was  extremely  liberal  of  titles  and
patents.  He  erected  two  governments  on  the  conti-
nent, one  extending  from  Cape  de  Vela  to  the  gulf  of
Darien,  and  thc  other  from  that  to  Cape  Gracias  aDios.

'  Ilerrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  vii.  c.  9.

1509.]  BOOK  III.  203

The  former  was  given  to  Ojeda,  the  latter  to  Nicuessa.
Ojeda  fitted  out  a  ship  and  two  brigantines,  with  three
hundred  men;  Nicuessa,  six  vessels,  with  seven  hun-
dred and  eighty  men.  They  sailed  about  the  same  time
from  St.  Domingo  for  their  respective  governments.
In  order  to  give  their  title  to  those  countries  some  ap-
pearance of  validity,  several  of  the  most  eminent  di-
vines and  lawyers  in  Spain  were  employed  to  prescribe
the  mode  in  which  they  should  take  possession  of  them.*
There  is  not  in  the  history  of  mankind  any  thing  more
singular  or  extravagant  than  the  form  which  they  de-
vised for  this  purpose.  They  instructed  those  invaders,
as  soon  as  they  landed  on  the  continent,  to  declare  to
the  natives  the  principal  articles  of  the  Christian  faith ;
to  acquaint  them,  in  particular,  with  the  supreme  ju-
risdiction of  the  pope  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the
earth ;  to  inform  them  of  the  grant  which  this  holy  pon-
tiff had  made  of  their  country  to  the  king  of  Spain  ;  to
require  them  to  embrace  the  doctrines  of  that  religion
which  the  Spaniards  made  known  to  them ;  and  to  sub-
mit to  the  sovereign  wliose  authority  they  proclaimed.
If  the  natives  refused  to  comply  with  this  requisition,
the  terms  of  which  must  have  been  utterly  incompre-
hensible to  uninstructed  Indians,  then  Ojeda  and  Ni-
cuessa were  authorized  to  attack  them  with  fire  and
sword;  to  reduce  them,  their  wives  and  children,  to  a
state  of  servitude ;  and  to  compel  them  by  force  to  re-
cognise the  jurisdiction  of  the  church,  and  the  autho-
rity of  the  monarch,  to  which  they  would  not  volunta-
rily subject  themselves.'
rru  A-  As  the  inhabitants  of  the  continent  could  not

The  dis-
asters at- at  once  yield  assent  to  doctrines  too  refined  for

their  uncultivated  understandings,  and  explain-
ed to  them  by  interpreters  imperfectly  acquainted  with
their  language;  as  they  did  not  conceive  how  a  foreign
priest,  of  whom  they  had  never  heard,  could  have  any

•  Herrera,  dec.  1 .  lib.  vii.  c.  15.  »  See  Note  XXIII.

204  AIM  ERICA.  [1509-

right  to  dispose  of  tlicir  country,  or  how  an  unknown
prince  should  claim  jurisdiction  over  them  as  his  sub-
jects; they  fiercely  opposed  the  new  invaders  of  their
territories.  Ojeda  and  Nicuessa  endeavoured  to  eft'ect
by  force  what  they  could  not  accomplish  by  persuasion.
The  contemporary  writers  enter  into  a  very  minute  de-
tail in  relating  their  transactions  ;  but  as  they  made  no
discovery  of  importance,  nor  established  any  permanent
settlement,  their  adventures  are  not  entitled  to  any  con-
siderable place  in  the  general  history  of  a  period,  where
romantic  valour,  struggling  with  incredible  hardships,
distinguish  every  effort  of  the  Spanish  arms.  They
found  the  natives  in  those  countries  of  which  they  went
to  assume  the  government,  to  be  of  a  character  very
different  from  that  of  their  countrymen  in  the  islands.
They  were  fierce  and  warlike.  Their  arrows  were  dipped
in  a  poison  so  noxious,  that  every  wound  was  followed
with  certain  death.  In  one  encounter  they  slew  above
seventy  of  Ojeda's  followers,  and  the  Spaniards,  for  the
first  time,  were  taught  to  dread  the  inhabitants  of  the
New  World.  Nicuessa  was  o])posed  by  people  equally
resolute  in  defence  of  their  possessions.  Nothing  could
soften  their  ferocity.  Though  the  Spaniards  employed
every  art  to  soothe  them,  and  to  gain  their  confidence,
they  refused  to  hold  any  intercourse,  or  to  exchange
any  friendly  oflfice,  with  men  whose  residence  among
them  they  considered  as  fatal  to  their  liberty  and  inde-
pendence. This  implacable  enmity  of  the  natives,
though  it  rendered  an  attempt  to  establish  a  set-
tlement in  their  country  extremely  difficult  as
well  as  dangerous,  might  have  been  surmounted  at
length  by  the  perseverance  of  the  Spaniards,  by  the
superiority  of  their  arms,  and  their  skill  in  the  art  of
war.  But  every  disaster  which  can  be  accumulated
upon  the  unfortunate,  combined  to  completp  their  ruin.
The  loss  of  their  ships  by  various  accidents  upon  an
unknown  coast,  the  diseases  peculiar  to  a  climate  the

1510.]  BOOK  III.  205

most  noxious  in  all  America,  the  want  of  provisions,
unavoidable  in  a  country  imperfectly  cultivated,  dissen-
sion amono'  themselves,  and  the  incessant  hostilities  of
the  natives,  involved  them  in  a  succession  of  calamities,
the  bare recital of  which strikes one with horror.
Though  they  received  two  considerable  reinforcements
from  Hispaniola,  the greater  part of  those  who  had
engaged  in  this  unhappy  expedition  perished,  in  less
than  a  year,  in  the  most  extreme  misery. A  few  who
survived,  settled  as  a  feeble  colony  at  Santa  Maria  el
Antigua,  on  the  gulf  of  Darien,  under  the  command  of
Vasco  Nugnez  de  Balboa,  who,  in  the  most  desperate
exigencies,  displayed  such courage and  conduct,  as
first  gained  the  confidence of  his countrymen, and
marked  him  out  as  their  leader  in  more  splendid  and
successful  undertakings. Nor  was  he  the  only  adven-
turer in  this  expedition  who  will  appear  with  lustre  in
more  important  scenes. Francisco  Pizarro  was  one  of
Ojeda's companions,  and  in  this  school  of  adversity
acquired  or  improved  the  talents  which  fitted  him  for
the extraordinary actions  which he afterward per-
formed. Hernan Cortes,  whose name became still
more  famous,  had  likewise  engaged  early  in  this  enter-
prise, which  roused  all  the  active  youth  of  Hispaniola
to  arms  ;  but  the  good  fortune  that  accompanied  him  in
his  subsequent  adventures,  interposed  to  save  him  from
the  disasters  to  which  his  companions  were  exposed.
He  was  taken  ill  at  St.  Domingo  before  the  departure  of
the  fleet,  and  detained  there  by  a  tedious  indisposition."
Conquest Notwithstanding  the  unfortunate  issue  of  this
of  Cuba, expedition,  the  Spaniards  were not deterred
from  engaging  in  new  schemes  of  a  similar  nature.
When  wealth  is  acquired  gradually  by  the  persevering
hand  of  industry,  or  accumulated  by  the  slow  opera-
tions of  regular  commerce,  the  means  employed  are  so

"  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.vii.  c.  11,  &c. Goraara  Hist.  c.  57 — 59. Benzon.  Hist,
lib.  i.  c.  19—23. P.  Martyr,  decad.  p.  123.

206  AMERICA.  [1510.

proportioned  to  the  end  attained,  that  there  is  nothing
to  strike  the  imagination,  and  little  to  urge  on  the  ac-
tive powers  of  the  mind  to  uncommon  efforts.  But
when  larofe  fortunes  were  created  almost  instantaneous-
ly ;  when  gold  and  pearls  were  procured  in  exchange
for  baubles  ;  when  the  countries  which  produced  these
rich  commodities,  defended  only  by  naked  savages,
might  be  seized  by  the  first  bold  invader ;  objects  so
singular  and  alluring,  roused  a  wonderful  spirit  of  en-
terprise among  the  Spaniards,  who  rushed  with  ardour
into  this  new  path  that  was  opened  to  wealth  and  dis-
tinction. While  this  spirit  continued  warm  and  vigor-
ous, every  attempt  either  towards  discovery  or  con-
quest was  applauded,  and  adventurers  engaged  in  it
with  emulation.  The  passion  for  new  undertakings,
which  characterizes  the  age  of  discovery  in  the  latter
part  of  the  fifteenth  and  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury, would  alone  have  been  sufficient  to  prevent  the
Spaniards  from  stopping  short  in  their  career.  But
circumstances  peculiar  to  Hispaniola  at  this  juncture,
concurred  with  it  in  extending  their  navigation  and
conquests.  The  rigorous  treatment  of  the  inhabitants
of  that  island  having  almost  extirpated  the  race,  many
of  the  Spanish  planters,  as  I  have  already  observed,
finding  it  impossible  to  carry  on  their  works  with  the
same  vigour  and  profit,  were  obliged  to  look  out  for
settlements  in  some  country  where  people  were  not  yet
wasted  by  oppression.  Others,  with  the  inconsiderate
le  ,ity  natural  to  men  upon  whom  wealth  pours  in  with
a  sudden  flow,  had  squandered  it  in  thoughtless  prodi-
gality, what  they  acquired  with  ease,  and  were  driven
by  necessity  to  embark  in  the  most  desperate  schemes,
in  order  to  retrieve  their  affairs. From  all  these

1511.

causes,  when  Don  Diego  Columbus  proposed
to  conquer  the  island  of  Cuba,  and  to  establish  a  colony
there,  many  persons  of  chief  distinction  in  Hispaniola
engaged  with  alacrity  in  the  measure.  He  gave  the  com-

1511.]  BOOK III.  207

mand  of  the  troops  destined  for  that  service  to  Diego
Velasquez,  one  of  his  father's  companions  in  his  second
voyage,  and  who,  having  been  long  settled  in  Hispa-
niola,  had  acquired  an  ample  fortune,  with  such  repu-
tation for  probity  and  prudence,  that  he  seemed  to  be
well  qualified  for  conducting  an  expedition  of  impor-
tance. Three  hundred  men  were  deemed  sufficient  for
the  conquest  of  an  island  of  above  seven  hundred  miles
in  length,  and  filled  with  inhabitants. But  they  were
of  the  same  unwarlike  character  with  the  people  of
Hispaniola. They  were  not  only  intimidated  by  the
appearance  of  their  new  enemies,  but  unprepared  to
resist  them. For  though,  from  the  time  that  the  Spa-
niards took  possession  of  the  adjacent  island,  there  was
reason  to  expect  a  descent  on  their  territories,  none  of
the  small  communities  into  which  Cuba  was  divided,
had  either  made  any  provision  for  its  own  defence,  or
had  formed  any  concert  for  their  common  safety. The
only  obstruction  the  Spaniards  met  with  was  from  Ha-
tuey,  a  cazique,  who  had  fled  from  Hispaniola,  and
had  taken  possession  of  the  eastern  extremity  of  Cuba.
He  stood  upon  the  defensive  at  their  first  landing,  and
endeavoured  to  drive  them  back  to  their  ships. His
feeble  troops,  however,  were  soon  broken  and  dispersed ;
and  he  himself  being  taken  prisoner,  Velasquez,  ac-
cording to  the  barbarous  maxim  of  the  Spaniards,  con-
sidered him  as  a  slave  who  had  taken  arms  against  his
master, and condemned  him  to  the flames. When
Hatuey  was  fastened  to  the  stake,  a  Franciscan  friar
labouring  to  convert  him,  promised  him  immediate  ad-
mittance into  the  joys  of  heaven,  if  he  would  embrace
the  Christian  faith. "  Are  there  any  Spaniards,"  says
he,  after  some  pause,  "  in  that  region  of  bliss  which  you
describe  ?"- — "  Yes,"  replied  the  monk,  "  but  only  such
as  are  worthy  and  good." — "  The  best  of  them, "returned
the  indignant  cazique,  "  have  neither  worth  nor  good-
ness : I  will  not  go  to  a  place  where  I  may  meet  with

£08  AMERICA.  [1511.

one  of  that  accursed  race."^  This  dreadful  example  of
vengeance  struck  the  people  of  Cuba  with  such  terror,
that  they  scarcely  gave  any  opposition  to  the  progress
of  their  invaders  ;  and  Velasquez,  without  the  loss  of  a
man,  annexed  this  extensive  and  fertile  island  to  the
Spanish  monarchy?'

Discovery  The  facility  with  which  this  important  con-
of  Florida,  q^ggj-  ^yg^g  completed,  served  as  an  incitement
to  other  undertakinos.  Juan  Ponce  de  Leon,  havino-
acquired  both  fame  and  wealth  by  the  reduction  of
Puerto  Rico,  was  impatient  to  engage  in  some  new
enterprise.  He  fitted  out  three  ships  at  his  own
expense,  for  a  voyage  of  discovery,  and  his  re-
putation soon  drew  together  a  respectable  body  of  fol-
lowers. He  directed  his  course  towards  the  Lucayo
islands  ;  and  after  touching  at  several  of  them,  as  w^ell
as  of  the  Bahama  isles,  he  stood  to  the  south-west,  and
discovered  a  country  hitherto  unknown  to  the  Spa-
niards, which  he  called  Florida,  either  because  he  fell
in  with  it  on  Palm  Sunday,  or  on  account  of  its  gay  and
beautiful  appearance.  He  attempted  to  land  in  dif-
ferent places,  but  met  with  such  vigorous  opposition
from  the  natives,  who  were  fierce  and  warlike,  as  con-
vinced him  that  an  increase  of  force  was  requisite  to
effect  a  settlement.  Satisfied  with  having  opened  a
communication  with  a  new  country,  of  whose  value  and
importance  he  conceived  very  sanguine  hopes,  he  re-
turned to  Puerto  Rico,  through  the  channel  now  known
by  the  name  of  the  gulf  of  Florida.

It  was  not  merely  the  passion  of  searching  for  new
countries  that  prompted  Ponce  de  Leon  to  undertake
this  voyage  ;  he  was  influenced  by  one  of  those  vision-
ary ideas,  which  at  that  time  often  mingled  with  the
spirit  of  discovery,  and  rendered  it  more  active.  A
tradition  prevailed  among  the  natives  of  Puerto  Rico,

^  U.  de  las  Casas,  p.  40.
y  Hcrrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ix.  c.  i?,  3,  &c. Ovicdo,  lib.  xvii.  c. .",  p.  179.

1512.]  BOOK  III.  209

that  in  the  isle  of  Bimini,  one  of  the  Lucayos,  there  was
a  fountain  of  such  wonderful  virtue  as  to  renew  the
youth,  and  recall  the  vigour  of  every  person  who
bathed  in  its  salutary  waters.  In  hopes  of  finding  this
grand  restorative,  Ponce  de  Leon  and  his  followers
ranged  through  the  islands,  searching  with  fruitless
solicitude  and  labour,  for  the  fountain  which  was  the
chief  object  of  their  expedition.  That  a  tale  so  fabulous
should  gain  credit  among  simple  uninstructed  Indians
is  not  surprising.  That  it  should  make  any  impression
upon  an  enlightened  people  appears,  in  the  present  age,
altogether  incredible.  The  fact,  however,  is  certain  ;
and  the  most  authentic  Spanish  historians  mention  this
extravagant  sally  of  their  credulous  countrymen.  The
Spaniards,  at  that  period,  were  engaged  in  a  career  of
activity  which  gave  a  romantic  turn  to  their  imagina-
tion, and  daily  presented  to  them  strange  and  marvel-
lous objects.  A  New  ^¥orld  was  opened  to  their  view.
They  visited  islands  and  continents,  of  whose  existence
mankind  in  former  ages  had  no  conception.  In  those
delightful  countries  nature  seemed  to  assume  another
form :  every  tree  and  plant  and  animal  was  different
from  those  of  the  ancient  hemisphere.  They  seemed
to  be  transported  into  enchanted  ground  ;  and  after  the
wonders  which  they  had  seen,  nothing,  in  the  warmth
and  novelty  of  their  admiration,  appeared  to  them  so
extraordinary  as  to  be  beyond  belief.  If  the  rapid  suc-
cession of  new  and  striking  scenes  made  such  impres-
sion even  upon  the  sound  understanding  of  Columbus,
that  he  boasted  of  having  found  the  seat  of  Paradise,  it
will  not  appear  strange  that  Ponce  de  Leon  should
dream  of  discovering  the  fountain  of  youth.^

Soon  after  the  expeditioi\  to  Florida,  a  dis-

Progress  r-  i  •

of  Balboa covery  of  much  greater  importance  was  made
in  another  part  of  America. Balboa  having

»  p.  Martyr,  decad.  p.  202.  Ensayo  Chronol.  para  la  Hist,  de  la  Florida,  par
T).  Gab.  Cardenas,  p.  1.  Ovicdo,  lib.  xvi.  c.  11.  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib,  ix.  c.  5.
Hibt.  de  la  Conq.  de  la  Florida,  par  Gave,  de  la  Vega,  lib.  i.  c.  3.

VOL. VI.  P

210  AMERICA.  [1512.

been  raised  to  tlie  government  of  the  small  colony  at
Santa  Maria  in  Darien,  by  the  voluntary  suffrage  of  his
associates,  was  so  extremely  desirous  to  obtain  from  the
crown  a  confirmation  of  their  election, that  he  dis-
patched one  of  his  officers  to  Spain,  in  order  to  solicit  a
royal  commission,  which  might  invest  him  with  a  legal
title  to  the  supreme  command. Conscious,  however,  that
he  could  not  expect  success  from  the  patronage  of  Fer-
dinand's ministers,  with  whom  he  was  unconnected,  or
from  negotiating  in  a  court  to  the  arts  of  which  he  was  a
stranger,  he  endeavoured  to  merit  the  dignity  to  which
he  aspired,  and  aimed  at  performing  some  signal  ser-
vice that  would  secure  him  the  preference  to  every  com-
petitor. Full  of  this  idea  he  made  frequent  inroads  into
the  adjacent  country,  subdued  several  of  the  caziques,
and  collected  a  considerable  quantity  of  gold,  which
abounded  more  in  that  part  of  the  continent  than  in  the
islands. In  one of  those excursions, the  Spaniards
contended  with  such  eagerness  about  the  division  of
some  gold,  that  they  were  at  the  point  of  proceeding  to
acts  of  violence  against  one  another. A  young  cazique
who  was  present,  astonished  at  the  high  value  which
they  set  upon  a  thing  of  which  he  did  not  discern  the
use,  tumbled  the  gold  out  of  the  balance  with  indigna-
tion ;  and,  turning  to  the  Spaniards,  "  Why  do  you
quarrel  (says  he)  about  such  a  trifle  ? If  you  are  so
passionately  fond  of  gold,  as  to  abandon  your  own
country,  and  to  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  distant  nations
for  its  sake,  I  will  conduct  you  to  a  region  where  the
metal  which  seems  to  be  the  chief  object  of  your  ad-
miration and  desire  is  so  common  that  the  meanest  uten-
sils are  formed  of  it." Transported  with  what  they
heard,  Balboa  and  his  companions  inquired  eagerly
where  this  happy  country  lay,  and  how  they  might  ar-
rive at  it. He  informed  them  that  at  the  distance  of  six
suns,  that  is,  of  six  days'  journey,  towards  the  south,
they  should  discover  another  ocean,  near  to  which  this

1512.]  BOOK III.  211

wealthy  kingdom  was  situated;  but  if  they  intended  to
attack  that  powerful  state,  they  must  assemble  forces
far  superior  in  number  and  strength  to  those  with  which
they  now  appeared."

The  This was the first information which the

whkhh'e Spaniards  received  concerning  the  great  south-
fornis. gpjj  ocean,  or  the  opulent  and  extensive  country
known  afterward  by  the  name  of  Peru. Balboa  had
now  before  him  objects  suited  to  his  boundless  ambi-
tion, and  the  enterprising  ardour  of  his  genius. He
immediately  concluded  the  ocean  which  the cazique
mentioned,  to  be  that  of  which  Columbus  had  searched
without  success  in  this  part  of  America,  in  hopes  of
opening  a  more  direct  communication  with  the  East
Indies  ;  and  he  conjectured  that  the  rich  territory  which
had  been  described  to  him  must  be  part  of  that  vast  and
opulent  region  of  the  earth. Elated  with  the  idea  of
performing  what  so  great  a  man  had  attempted  in  vain,
and  eager  to  accomplish  a  discovery  which  he  knew
would  be  no  less  acceptable  to  the  king  than  beneficial
to  his  country,  he  was  impatient  until  he  could  set  out
upon  this  enterprise, in  comparison  of  which  all  his
former  exploits  appeared  inconsiderable. But  previous
arrangement  and  preparation  were  requisite  to  ensure
success. He  began  with  courting  and  securing  the
friendship  of  the  neighbouring  caziques. He  sent  some
of  his  officers  to  Hispaniola  with  a  large  quantity  of
gold,  as  a  proof  of  his  past  success,  and  an  earnest  of
his  future  hopes. By  a  proper  distribution  of  this,  they
secured  the  favour  of  the  governor,  and  allured  volun-
teers into  the  service. A  considerable  reinforcement
from  that  island  joined  him,  and  he  thought  himself  in
a  condition  to  attempt  the  discovery.
Difficult '^^^^  isthmus  of  Darien  is  not  above  sixty
of  exe- miles  in  breadth  ;  but  this  neck  of  land,  which
<•»  '"g ' binds  together  the continents of  North and

»  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib,  ix.  c.  2. Goinara,  c.  60. P.  Martjr,  dec.  p.  149.

p  2

-212  AMERICA.  [1512.

South  America, is  strengthened  by  a  chain  of  lofty
mountains  stretching*  through  its  whole  extent,  which
render  it  a  barrier  of  solidity  sufficient  to  resist  the  im-
pulse of  two  opposite  oceans. The  mountains  are  co-
vered with  forests  almost  inaccessible. The  valleys  in
that  moist  climate,  where  it  rains  during  two-thirds  of
the  year,  are  marshy,  and  so  frequently  overflowed,  that
the  inhabitants  find  it  necessary,  in  many  places,  to
build  their  houses  upon  trees,  in  order  to  be  elevated  at
some  distance  from  the  damp  soil,  and  the  odious  rep-
tiles engendered  in  the  putrid  waters.'' Large  rivers
rush  down  with  an  impetuous  current  from  the  high
o-rounds. In  a  region  thinly  inhabited  by  wandering
savages,  the  hand  of  industry  had  done  nothing  to
mitigate  or  correct  those  natural  disadvantages. To
march  across  this  unexplored country  with  no  other
guides  but  Indians,  whose  fidelity  could  be  little  trusted,
was,  on  all  these  accounts,  the  boldest  enterprise  on
which  the  Spaniards  had  hitherto  ventured  in  the  New
World. But  the  intrepidity  of  Balboa  was  such  as  dis-
tinguished him  among  his  countrymen,  at  a  pe-
riod when  every  adventurer  was  conspicuous  for
daring  courage.  Nor  was  bravery  his  only  merit ;  he  was
prudent  in  conduct,  generous,  affable,  and  possessed  of
those  popular  -talents  which,  in  the  most  desperate  un-
dertakings, inspire  confidence  and  secure  attachment.
Even  after  the  junction  of  the  volunteers  from  Hispa-
niola,  he  was  able  to  muster  only  a  hundred  and  ninety
men  for  his  expedition. But  they  were  hardy  veterans,
inured  to  the  climate  of  America,  and  ready  to  follow
him  through  every  danger. A  thousand Indians  at-
tended them  to  carry  their  provisions  ;  and  to  complete
their  warlike  array, they  took  with  them  several  of
those  fierce  dogs,  which  were  no  less  formidable  than
destructive  to  their  naked  enemies.

Balboa  set  out  upon  this  important expedition  on

»>  p.  MartjT,  dec.  p.  158,

1.513]  BOOK III.  21.3

Discovers  ^^^^ ^^^  ^^  September,  about  tlie  time  that  the

the  South  periodical  rains  began  to  abate. He  proceeded
by  sea,  and  without  any  difficulty,  to  the  ter-
ritories of  a  cazique  whose  friendship  he  had  gained ;
but  no  sooner  did  he  begin  to  advance  into  the  interior
part  of  the  country,  than  he  was  retarded  by  every  ob-
stacle, which  he  had  reason  to  apprehend,  from  the
nature  of  the  territory,  or  the  disposition  of  its  inhabi-
tants. Some  of  the  caziques,  at  his  approach,  fled  to
the  mountains  with  all  their  people,  and  carried  off  or
destroyed  whatever  could  afford subsistence to his
troops. Others  collected  their  subjects, in  order  to
oppose  his  progress,  and  he  quickly  perceived  what  an
arduous  undertaking  it  was  to  conduct  such  a  body  of
men  through  hostile  nations,  across  swamps,  and  rivers,
and  woods,  which  had  never  been  passed  but  by  strag-
gling Indians. But  by  sharing  in  every  hardship  with
the  meanest  soldier,  by  appearing  the  foremost  to  meet
every  danger,  by  promising  confidendy  to  his  troops
the  enjoyment  of  honour  and  riches  superior  to  what
had  been  attained  by  the  most  successful  of  their  coun-
trymen, he  inspired  them  with  such  enthusiastic  reso-
lution,  that  they  followed him without  murmuring.
When  they  had  penetrated  a  good  way  into  the  moun-
tains, a  powerful  cazique  appeared  in  a  narrow  pass,
with  a  numerous  body  of  his  subjects,  to  obstruct  their
progress. But  men  who  had surmounted  so  many
obstacles,  despised  the  opposition  of  such  feeble  ene-
mies. They  attacked  them  with  impetuosity,  and  hav-
ing dispersed  them  with  much  ease  and  great  slaughter,
continued  their  march. Though  their  guides  had  re-
presented the  breadth  of  the  isthmus  to  be  only  a  jour-
ney of  six  days,  they  had  already  spent  twenty-five  in
forcing  their  way  through  the  woods  and  mountains.
Many  of  them  were  to  sink  under  such  uninterrupted
fatigue  in  that  sultry  climate,  several  were  taken  ill  of
the  dysentery  and  other  diseases  frequent  in  that  coun-

214  AMERICA.  [1513.

try,  and  all  became  impatient  to  reach  the  period  of
their  labours  and  sufferinos.  At  length  the  Indians
assured  them,  that  from  the  top  of  the  next  mountain
they  should  discover  the  ocean  which  was  the  object
of  their  wishes.  When,  with  infinite  toil,  they  had
climbed  up  the  greater  part  of  that  steep  ascent,  Balboa
commanded  his  men  to  halt,  and  advanced  alone  to  the
summit,  that  he  might  be  the  first  who  should  enjoy  a
spectacle  which  he  had  so  long  desired.  As  soon  as
he  beheld  the  South  sea  stretching  in  endless  prospect
below  him,  he  fell  on  his  knees,  and  lifting  up  his  hands
to  heaven,  returned  thanks  to  God,  who  had  conducted
him  to  a  discovery  so  beneficial  to  his  country,  and  so
honourable  to  himself.  His  followers,  observing  his
transports  of  joy,  rushed  forward  to  join  in  his  wonder,
exultation,  and  gratitude.  They  held  on  their  course
to  the  shore  with  great  alacrity,  when  Balboa  advanc-
ing up  to  the  middle  in  the  waves  with  his  buckler  and
sword,  took  possession  of  that  ocean  in  the  name  of  the
king  his  master,  and  vowed  to  defend  it,  with  these
arms,  ag-ainst  all  his  enemies/

That  part  of  the  great  Pacific  or  Southern  ocean,
which  Balboa  first  discovered,  still  retains  the  name  of
the  gulf  of  St.  Michael,  which  he  gave  to  it,  and  is
situated  to  the  east  of  Panama.  From  several  of  the
petty  princes,  who  governed  in  the  districts  adjacent  to
that  gulf,  he  extorted  provisions  and  gold  by  force  of
arms.  Others  sent  them  to  him  voluntarily.  To  these
acceptable  presents,  some  of  the  caziques  added  a  con-
siderable quantity  of  pearls  ;  and  he  learned  from  them,
with  much  satisfaction,  that  pearl  oysters  abounded  iix
the  sea  which  he  had  newly  discovered.
He  re-  Together  with  the  acquisition  of  this  wealth,

ceivesin- wliich  scrvcd  to  soothc  and  encourao-e  his  fol-

forriiation  .  . ,  ,

concern- lowcrs,  he  received  accounts  which  confirmed

"■  Hcrrclra,  dec.  1.  lib.  x.  c.  l,&c. Goinara,  c.  62,  &c. P.  Martyr,  dec.  p.
205,  &c.

1513.]  BOOK III.  215

his  sanp-iiine  hopes  of  future  and  more  extensive

ing  a  more  o  r

opulent  benefits  from  the  expedition.  All  the  people  on
the  coast  of  the  South  sea  concurred  in  inform-
ing him  that  there  was  a  mighty  and  opulent  kingdom
situated  at  a  considerable  distance  towards  the  south-
east, the  inhabitants  of  which  had  tame  animals  to  carry
their  burdens.  In  order  to  give  the  Spaniards  an  idea
of  these,  they  drew  upon  the  sand  the  figure  of  the  Lla-
mas or  sheep,  afterward  found  in  Peru,  which  the
Peruvians  had  taught  to  perform  such  services  as  they
described.  As  the  Llama,  in  its  form,  nearly  resembles
a  camel,  a  beast  of  burden  deemed  peculiar  to  Asia,
this  circumstance,  in  conjunction  with  the  discovery  of
the  pearls,  another  noted  production  of  that  country,
tended  to  confirm  the  Spaniards  in  their  mistaken  the-
ory with  respect  to  the  vicinity  of  the  New  World  to
the  East  Indies.''

Obliged  But  though  the  information  which  Balboa
to  return,  received  from  the  people  on  the  coast,  as  well  as
his  own  conjectures  and  hopes,  rendered  him  extremely
impatient  to  visit  this  unknown  country,  his  prudence
restrained  him  from  attempting  to  invade  it  with  a
handful  of  men,  exhausted  with  fatigue,  and  weakened
by  diseases.^  He  determined  to  lead  back  his  followers,
at  present,  to  their  settlement  of  Santa  Maria  in  Darien,
and  to  return  next  season  with  a  force  more  adequate
to  such  an  arduous  enterprise.  In  order  to  acquire  a
more  extensive  knowledge  of  the  isthmus,  he  marched
back  by  a  different  route,  which  he  found  to  be  no  less
dangerous  and  difficult  than  that  which  he  had  formerly
taken.  But  to  men  elated  with  success,  and  animated
with  hope,  nothing  is  insurmountable.  Balboa
returned  to  Santa  Maria,  from  which  he  had
been  absent  four  months,  with  greater  glory  and  more
treasure  than  the  Spaniards  had  acquired  in  any  expe-
dition in  the  New  World. None  of  Balboa's  officers

d  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  x.  c.  2.  «  See  Note  XXIV.

216  A  M  i:  R  I  C  A.  [1514.

disting-iiislied  themselves  more  in  this  service  than
Francisco  Pizarro,  or  assisted  vi'ith  greater  couraoe  and
ardour  in  opening-  a  communication  with  those  coun-
tries, in  which  he  was  destined  to  act  soon  a  most
illustrious  part/

redrarias Balboa's  first  care  was  to  send  information
goi-'ernor  to  Spain  of  the  important  discovery  which  he
of Dar.cn.  |^j^j  made;  and  to  demand  a  reinforcement  of
a  thousand  men,  in  order  to  attem])t  the  conquest  of  that
opulent  country,  concerning  which  he had received
such  invitino'  intelli "fence . The  first  account  of  the
discovery  of  the  New  World  hardly  occasioned  greater
joy,  than  the  unexpected  tidings  that  a  passage  was  at
last  found  to  the  great  southern  ocean. The  commu-
nication with  the  East  Indies,  by  a  course  to  the  west-
ward of  the  line  of  demarcation  drawn  by  the  pope,
seemed  now  to  be  certain. The  vast  wealth  which
flowed  into  Portugal  from  its  settlements  and  conquests
in  that  country,  excited  the  envy  and  called  forth  the
emulation  of  other  states. Ferdinand  hoped  now  to
come  in  for  a  share  in  this  lucrative  commerce,  and  in
his  eagerness  to  obtain  it,  was  willing  to  make  an  effort
beyond  what  Balboa  required. But  even  in  this  exer-
tion, his  jealous  policy,  as  well  as  the  fatal  antipathy  of
Fonseca,  now  bishop  of  Burgos,  to  every  man  of  merit
who  now  distinguished  himself  in  the  New  World,  were
conspicuous. Notwithstanding Balboa's recent ser-
vices, which  marked  him  out  as  the  most  proper  person
to  finish  that  great  undertaking  which  he  had  begun,
Ferdinand  was  so  ungenerous  as  to  overlook  these,  and
to  appoint  Pedrarias  Davila,  governor  of  Darien. He
gave  him  the  command  of  fifteen  stout  vessels, and
twelve  hundred  soldiers. These  were  fitted  out  at  the
public  expense,  with  a  liberality  which  Ferdinand  had
never  displayed  in  any  former  armament  destined  for
the  New  World  ;  and  such  was  the  ardour  of  the  Spa-

'Ucrrcrn,  dec,  1.  lib.  x,  c  3—6. Gomara,  c.  64. P.  Martyr,  dec  p.  '229, Sue.

514.]  BOOK III.  217

nish  gentlemen  to  follow  a  leader  who  was  about  to
conduct  them  to  a  country,  where,  as  fame  reported,
they  had  only  to  throw  their  nets  into  the  sea  and  draw
out  gold,^  that  fifteen  hundred  embarked  on  board  the
fleet,  and  if  they  had  not  been  restrained,  a  much  greater
number  would  have  engaged  in  the  service.''

Pedrarias  reached  the  gulf  of  Darien  without  any
remarkable  accident,  and  immediately  sent  some  of  his
principal  officers  ashore  to  inform  Balboa  of  his  arrival,
with  the  king's  commission,  to  be  governor  of  the
colony. To  their  astonishment,  they  found  Balboa,  of
whose  great  exploits  they  had  heard  so  much,  and  of
whose  opulence  they  had  formed  such  high  ideas,  clad
in  a  canvass  jacket,  and  wearing  coarse  hempen  sandals
used  only  by  the  meanest  peasants,  employed,  together
with  some  Indians  in  thatching  his  own  hut  with  reeds.
Even  in  this  simple  garb,  which  corresponded  so  ill
with  the  expectations  and  wishes  of  his  new  guests,
Balboa  received  them  with  dignity. The  fame  of  his
discoveries  had  drawn  so  many  adventurers  from  the
islands,  that  he  could  now  muster  four  hundred  and  fifty
men. At  the  head  of  those  daring  veterans,  he  was
more  than  a match  for  the  forces  which Pedrarias
brought  with  him. But  though  his  troops  murmured
loudly  at  the  injustice  of  the  king  in  superseding  their
commander,  and  complained  that  strangers  would  now
reap  the  fruits  of  their  toil  and  success,  Balboa  sub-
mitted with  implicit  obedience  to  the  will  of  his  sove-
reign, and  received  Pedrarias  with  all  the  deference
due  to  his  character.'

Dissension  Notwithstanding  this  moderation,  to  which
hfiTand  Pedrarias  owed  the  peaceable  possession  of  his
Balboa,  government,  he  appointed  a  judicial  inquiry  to
be  made  into  Balboa's  conduct,  while  under  the  com-
mand of  Nicuessa,  and  imposed  a  considerable  fine

f  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  x.  c.  14.  ^  Ibid.  c.  6,  7. P.  Martyr,  dec.  p.  177,  «96.

*  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  x.  c.  13,  14. ,

218  AMERICA.  [1514.

upon  him,  on  account  of  the  irregularities  of  which  he
had  then  been  guilty.  Balboa  felt  sensibly  the  morti-
fication of  being-  subjected  to  trial  and  to  punishment
in  a  place  where  he  had  so  lately  occupied  the  first  sta-
tion. Pedrarias  could  not  conceal  his  jealousy  of  his
superior  merit ;  so  that  the  resentment  of  the  one,  and
the  envy  of  the  other,  gave  rise  to  dissensions  extremely
detrimental  to  the  colony.  It  was  threatened  with  a
calamity  still  more  fatal.  Pedrarias  had  landed
in  Darien  at  a  most  unlucky  time  of  the  year,
about  the  middle  of  the  rainy  season,  in  that  part  of  the
torrid  zone  where  the  clouds  pour  down  such  torrents
as  are  unknown  in  more  temperate  climates.''  The  vil-
lage of  Santa  Maria  was  seated  in  a  rich  plain,  envi-
roned with  marshes  and  woods.  The  constitution  of
Europeans  was  unable  to  withstand  the  pestilential  in-
fluence of  such  a  situation,  in  a  climate  naturally  so
noxious,  and  at  a  season  so  peculiarly  unhealthy.  A
violent  and  destructive  malady  carried  off  many  of  the
soldiers  who  accompanied  Pedrarias.  An  extreme
scarcity  of  provision  augmented  this  distress,  as  it  ren-
dered it  impossible  to  find  proper  refreshment  for  the
sick,  or  the  necessary  sustenance  for  the  healthy.'  In
the  space  of  a  month,  above  six  hundred  persons  pe-
rished in  the  utmost  misery.  Dejection  and  despair
spread  through  the  colony.  Many  principal  persons
solicited  their  dismission,  and  were  glad  to  relinquish
all  their  hopes  of  wealth,  in  order  to  escape  from  that
pernicious  region.  Pedrarias  endeavoured  to  divert
those  who  remained  from  brooding  over  their  misfor-
tunes, by  finding  them  employment.  With  this  view,
he  sent  several  detachments  into  the  interior  parts  of
the  country,  to  levy  gold  among  the  natives,  and  to
search  for  the  mines  in  which  it  was  produced.  Those
rapacious  adventurers,  more  attentive  to  present  gain

"*  Richard  Hist.  Naturcilc  dc  i'Air,  ton),  i.  p.  20i.
'  Herrcrn,  dec.  1.  lib.  x.  c  I*. P.  Martyr,  dccad.  p.  272.

1514.]  BOOK III.  -219

than  to  the  means  of  facilitating  their  future  progress,
plundered  without  distinction  wherever  they  marched.
Regardless  of  the  alliances  which  Balboa  had  made
with  several  of  the  caziques,  they  stripped them  of
every  thing  valuable,  and  treated  them,  as  well  as  their
subjects,  with  the  utmost  insolence  and  cruelty. By
their  tyranny  and  exactions,  which  Pedrarias,  either
from  want  of  authority  or  inclination,  did  not  restrain,
all  the  country  from  the  gulf  of  Darien  to  the  lake  of
Nicaragua  was  desolated,  and  the  Spaniards  were  in-
considerately deprived  of  the  advantages  which  they
might  have  derived  from  the  friendship  of  the  natives,
in  extending  their  conquests  to  the  South  sea. Balboa,
who  saw  with  concern  that  such  ill-judged  proceedings
retarded  the  execution  of  his  favourite  scheme,  sent
violent  remonstrances  to  Spain  against  the  imprudent
government  of  Pedrarias,  which  had  ruined  a  happy
and  flourishing  colony. Pedrarias,  on  the  other  hand,
accused  him  of  having  deceived  the  king,  by  magnify-
ing his  own  exploits,  as  well  as  by  a  false  representation
of  the  opulence  and  value  of  the  country.""
Violent Ferdinand  became  sensible  at  length  of  his
proceed- imprudcnce  in  superseding  the  most  active  and
against experienced  officer  he  had  in  the  New  World,
and,  by  way  of  compensation  to  Balboa,  ap-
pointed him  AdelantadQ,  or  Lieutenant-governor  of  the
countries  upon  the  South  sea,  with  very  extensive  pri-
vileges and  authority. At  the  same  time  he  enjoined
Pedrarias  to  support  Balboa  in  all  his  operations,  and
to  consult  with  him  concerning  every  measure  which
he  himself  pursued. But  to  effect  such  a  sud-
den  transition  from  inveterate  enmity  to  perfect
confidence,  exceeded  Ferdinand's  power. Pedrarias
continued  to  treat  his  rival  with  neglect;  and  Balboa's
fortune  being  exhausted  by  the  payment  of  his  fine,  and

™Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  x.  c.  15.  dec.  2.  c.  1,  &c. Goraara,  c.  66. P.  Martyr,
dec.  3.  c.  10. Relacion  de  B.  de  las  Casus,  p.  12.

220  AMERICA.  [1515.

other  exactions  of  Pedrarias,  he  could  not  make  suit-
able preparations  for  taking-  possession  of  his  new  go-
vernment. At  length,  by  the  interposition  and  exhor-
tations of  the  bishop  of  Darien,  they  were  brought  to  a
reconciliation ;  and,  in  order  to  cement  this  union  more
firmly,  Pedrarias  agreed  to  give  his  daughter  in  mar-
riage to  Balboa. The  first  eflect  of  their  con-

1516.  '^  1 T^ 11  . T

cord  was,  that  Balboa  was  permitted  to  make
several  small  incursions  into  the  country.  These  he
conducted  with  such  prudence,  as  added  to  the  reputa-
tion which  he  had  already  acquired.  Many  adven-
turers resorted  to  him,  and,  with  the  countenance  and
aid  of  Pedrarias,  he  began  to  prepare  for  his  expedition
to  the  South  sea.  In  order  to  accomplish  this,  it  was
necessary  to  build  vessels  capable  of  conveying  his
troops  to  those  provinces  which  he  purposed  to  invade.
After  surmounting  many  obstacles,  and  endur-
ing a  variety  of  those  hardships  which  were  the
portion  of  the  conquerors  of  America,  he  at  length
finished  four  small  brigantines.  In  these,  with  three
hundred  chosen  men,  a  force  superior  to  that  with
which  Pizarro  afterward  undertook  the  same  expedi-
tion, he  was  ready  to  sail  towards  Peru,  when  he  re-
ceived an  unexpected  message  from  Pedrarias."  As
his  reconciliation  with  Balboa  had  never  been  cordial,
the  progress  which  his  son-in-law  was  making  revived
his  ancient  enmity,  and  added  to  its  rancour.  He
dreaded  the  prosperity  and  elevation  of  a  man  whom
he  had  injured  so  deeply.  He  suspected  that  success
would  encourage  him  to  aim  at  independence  upon  his
jurisdiction;  and  so  violently  did  the  passions  of  hatred,
fear,  and  jealousy,  operate  upon  his  mind,  that,  in  or-
der to  gratify  his  vengeance,  he  scrupled  not  to  defeat
an  enterprise  of  the  greatest  moment  to  his  country.
Under  pretexts  which  were  false,  but  plausible,  he  desired
Balboa  to  postpone  his  voyage  for  a  short  time,  and  to

"Herrcra,  dec.  a.  lib.  i.  c.  3.  lib.  ii.  c,  11.  13.  21. •• -  c

1517.]  BOOK HI.  221

repair  to  Ada,  in  order  that  he  miglit  have  an  interview
with  him.  Balboa,  with  the  unsuspicious  confidence
of  a  man  conscious  of  no  crime,  instantly  obeyed  the
summons ;  but  as  soon  as  he  entered  the  place,  he  was
arrested  by  order  of  Pedrarias,  whose  impatience  to
satiate  his  revenQ:e  did  not  suffer  him  to  lano^uish  lono-
in  confinement.  Judges  were  immediately  appointed
to  proceed  to  his  trial.  An  accusation  of  disloyalty  to
the  king,  and  of  an  intention  to  revolt  against  the  go-
vernor, was  preferred  against  him.  Sentence  of  death
was  pronounced;  and  though  the  judges  who  passed  it,
seconded  by  the  whole  colony,  interceded  warmly  for
his  pardon,  Pedrarias  continued  inexorable;  and  the
Spaniards  beheld,  with  astonishment  and  sorrow,  the
public  execution  of  a  man  whom  they  universally
deemed  more  capable  than  any  who  had  borne  com-
mand in  America,  of  forming  and  accomplishing  great
designs."  Upon  his  death,  the  expedition  which  he
had  planned  was  relinquished.  Pedrarias,  notwith-
standing the  violence  and  injustice  of  his  proceedings,
was  not  only  screened  from  punishment  by  the  power-
ful patronage  of  the  bishop  of  Burgos  and  other  cour-
tiers, but  continued  in  power.  Soon  after  he  obtained
permission  to  remove  the  colony  from  its  unwholesome
station  of  Santa  Maria  to  Panama,  on  the  opposite  side
of  the  isthmus;  and  though  it  did  not  gain  much  in
point  of  healthfulness  by  the  change,  the  commodious
situation  of  this  new  settlement  contributed  greatly  to
facilitate  the  subsequent  conquests  of  the  Spaniards  in
the  extensive  countries  situated  upon  the  southern
ocean.''

,..^  During-  these  transactions  in  Darien,  the  his-

Newdis- tory  of  which  it  was  proper  to  carry  on  in  an

coveries.  .  ,  i •  , .

unniterrupted  tenur,  several  important  events
occurred  with  respect  to  the  discovery,  the  conquest,
and  government,  of  other  provinces  in  the  New  World.

•  Herrera,  dec.  2.  Jib.  ii.  c.  21,22.  p  Ibid.  lib.  iv.  c.  1.

•22*2  AMERICA.  [1517.

Ferdinand  was  so  intent  upon  opening-  a  communica-
tion with  the  Molucca  or  Spice  Islands  by  the  west,
that,  in  the  year  1515,  he  fitted  out  two  ships  at  his
own  expense,  in  order  to  attempt  such  a  voyag-e,  and
gave  the  command  of  them  to  Juan  Diaz  de  Solis,  who
was  deemed  one  of  the  most  skilful  navigators  in  Spain.
He  stood  alono-  the  coast  of  South  America,  and  on  the
1st  of  January  1516,  entered  a  river  which  he  called
Janeiro,  where  an  extensive  commerce  is  now  carried
on.  From  thence  he  proceeded  to  a  spacious  bay,
which  he  supposed  to  be  the  entrance  into  a  strait  that
communicated  with  the  Indian  ocean;  but,  upon  ad-
vancing farther,  he  found  it  to  be  the  mouth  of  Rio  de
Plata,  one  of  the  vast  rivers  by  which  the  southern  con-
tinent of  America  is  watered.  In  endeavouring  to  make
a  descent  in  this  country,  De  Solis  and  several  of  his
crew^  were  slain  by  the  natives,  who,  in  sight  of  the
ships,  cut  their  bodies  in  pieces,  roasted  and  devoured
them.  Discouraoed  with  the  loss  of  their  commander,
and  terrified  at  this  shocking  spectacle,  the  surviving
Spaniards  set  sail  for  Europe,  without  aiming  at  any
farther  discovery.''  Though  tliis  attempt  proved  abor-
tive, it  was  not  without  benefit.  It  turned  the  atten-
tion ofinoenious  men  to  this  course  of  navio^ation,  and
prepared  the  way  for  a  more  fortunate  voyage,  by
which  a  few  years  posterior  to  this  period,  the  great
design  that  Ferdinand  had  in  view  was  accomplished.
State  of  Though the  Spaniards  w^ere thus  actively

i^n'^Hu'T^  employed  in  extending  their  discoveries  and
n'o'a-  settlements  in  America,  they  still  considered
Hispaniola  as  their  principal  colony,  and  the  seat  of
government.  Don  Diego  Columbus  wanted  neither
inclination  nor  abilities  to  have  rendered  the  members
of  this  colony,  who  were  most  immediately  under  his
jurisdiction,  prosperous  and  happy-  But  he  was  cir-
cumscribed in  all  his  operations  by  the  suspicious  policy

1  Heriera,  dec.  2.  lib.  i.  c.  7. P.  Martyr,  dtc.  p.  317.

1517.]  ROOK  III.  223

of  Ferdinand,  who  on  every  occasion,  and  under  pre-
texts the  most  frivolous,  retrenched  his  privileges,  and
encouraged  the  treasurer,  the  judges,  and  other  subor-
dinate officers,  to  counteract  his  measures,  and  to  dis-
pute his  authority.  The  most  valuable  prerogative
which  the  governor  possessed,  was  that  of  distributing-
Indians  among  the  Spaniards  settled  in  the  island.  The
rigorous  servitude  of  those  unhappy  men  having  been
but  little  mitigated  by  all  the  regulations  in  their  favour,
the  power  of  parcelling  out  such  necessary  instruments
of  labour  at  pleasure,  secured  to  the  governor  great  in-
fluence in  the  colony.  In  order  to  strip  him  of  this,
Ferdinand  created  a  new  office,  with  the  power  of  dis-
tributing the  Indians,  and  bestowed  it  upon  Rodrigo
Albuquerque,  a  relation  of  Zapata,  his  confidential  mi-
nister. Mortified  with  the  injustice,  as  well  as  indignity
of  this  invasion  upon  his  rights,  in  a  point  so  essential,
Don  Diego  could  no  longer  remain  in  a  place  where
his  power  and  consequence  were  almost  annihilated.
He  repaired  to  Spain  with  the  vain  hopes  of  obtaining
redress/  Albuquerque  entered  upon  his  office  with  all
the  rapacity  of  an  indigent  adventurer,  impatient  to
amass  wealth.  He  beo-an  with  takino-  the  exact  number
of  Indians  in  the  island,  and  found  that,  from  sixty
thousand,  who,  in  the  year  1508,  survived  after  all  their
sufferings,  they  were  now  reduced  to  fourteen  thousand.
These  he  threw  into  separate  divisions  or  lots,  and  be-
stowed them  upon  such  as  were  willing  to  purchase
them  at  the  highest  price.  By  this  arbitrary  distribu-
tion, several  of  the  natives  were  removed  from  their
original  habitation,  many  were  taken  from  their  ancient
masters,  and  all  of  them  subjected  to  heavier  burdens,
and  to  more  intolerable  labour,  in  order  to  reimburse
their  new  proprietors.  Those  additional  calamities
completed  tlie  misery,  and  hastened  on  the  extinction
of  this  wretched  and  innocent  race  of  men.*

'  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ix.  c.  5.  lib.  s.  c,  12.  *  Ibid.  dec.  1.  lib.  x.  c  it.

224  AMERICA. [1517.

Contro-  The  violence  of  these  proceedings,  together

Tespect't'o  witli the  fatal consequences  which  attended

the  treat-  them,  not  onlv  excited  complaints  among  such

nientoftlie  '  ''  •  i i  1 i

Indians,  as  tliouglit  thcmselvcs  aggrieved,  but  touclied
the  hearts  of  all  wlio  retained  any  sentiments  of  huma-
nity. From  the  time  that  ecclesiastics  were  sent  as  in-
structors into  America,  they  perceived  that  the  rigour
with  which  their  countrymen  treated  the  natives,  ren-
dered their  ministry  altogether  fruitless.  The  mission-
aries, in  conformity  to  the  mild  spirit  of  that  religion
which  they  were  employed  to  publish,  early  remon-
strated against  the  maxims  of  the  planters  with  respect
to  the  Americans,  and  condemned  the  repartbmentos,  or
distt^ibutions,  by  which  they  were  given  up  as  slaves  to
their  conquerors,  as  no  less  contrary  to  natural  justice
and  the  precepts  of  Christianity,  than  to  sound  policy.
The  Dominicans,  to  whom  the  instruction  of  the  Ame-
ricans was  originally  committed,  were  most  vehement
in  testifying  against  the  repart'imientos.  In  the  year
1511,  Montesino,  one  of  their  most  eminent  preachers,
inveighed  against  this  practice,  in  the  great  church  at
St.  Domingo,  with  all  the  impetuosity  of  popular  elo-
quence. Don  Diego  Columbus,  the  principal  officers
of  the  colony,  and  all  the  laymen  who  had  been  his
hearers,  complained  of  the  monk  to  his  superiors  ;  but
they,  instead  of  condemning,  applauded  his  doctrine,
as  equally  pious  and  seasonable.  The  Franciscans,  in-
fluenced by  the  spirit  of  opposition  andrivalship  which
subsists  between  the  two  orders,  discovered  some  incli-
nation to  take  part  with  the  laity,  and  to  espouse  the
defence  of  the  repartiniicntos.  But  as  they  could  not
with  decency  give  their  avowed  approbation  to  a  sys-
tem of  oppression,  so  repugnant  to  the  spirit  of  religion,
they  endeavoured  to  palliate  what  they  could  not  justify,
and  alleged,  in  excuse  for  the  conduct  of  their  country-
men, that  it  was  impossible  to  carry  on  any  improve-
ment in  the  colony,  unless  the  Spaniards  possessed  such

1517.]  BOOK HI.  225

dominion  over  the natives, that  they  could  compel

them  to  labour.'

„ .  The  Dominicans,  regardless  of  such  political

Contrary  _  ' O  r

decisions and  interested  considerations,  would  not  relax

concern- .  ,  ,  .  r> i •

ing  this  in  any  degree  the  rigour  ot  their  sentiments,
^'""  ■  and  even  refused  to  absolve,  or  admit  to  the
sacrament,  such  of  their  countrymen  as  continued  to
hold  the  natives  in  servitude."  Both  parties  applied  to
the  king  for  his  decision  in  a  matter  of  such  importance.
Ferdinand  empowered  a  committee  of  his  privy-council,
assisted  by  some  of  the  most  eminent  civilians  and  di-
vines in  Spain,  to  hear  the  deputies  sent  from  Hispa-
niola,  in  support  of  their  respective  opinions.  After  a
long  discussion,  the  speculative  point  in  controversy
was  determined  in  favour  of  the  Dominicans,  the  In-
dians were  declared  to  be  a  free  people,  entitled  to  all
the  natural  rights  of  men  ;  but  notwithstanding  this  de-
cision, the  repartimientos  were  continued  upon  their
ancient  footing."  As  this  determination  admitted  the
principle  upon  which  the  Dominicans  founded  their
opinion,  they  renewed  their  efforts  to  obtain  relief  for
the  Indians  with  additional  boldness  and  zeal.  At
length,  in  order  to  quiet  the  colony,  which  was  alarmed
by  their  remonstrances  and  censures,  Ferdinand  issued
a  decree  of  his  privy-council,  declaring,  that  after  ma-
ture consideration  of  the  Apostolic  Bull,  and  other  titles
by  which  the  crown  of  Castile  claimed  a  rig-ht

1513.

to  its  possessions  in  the  New  World,  the  servi-
tude of  the  Indians  was  warranted  both  by  the  laws  of
God  and  of  man ;  that  unless  they  were  subjected  to
the  dominion  of  the  Spaniards,  and  compelled  to  reside
under  their  inspection,  it  would  be  impossible  to  re-
claim them  from  idolatry,  or  to  instruct  them  in  the
principles  of  the  Christian  faith ;  that  no  farther  scruple
ought  to  be  entertained  concerning  the  lawfulness  of

'  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  viii.  c.  11. Oviedo,  lib.  iii.  c.  6.  p.  97.
"  Oviedo,  lib.  iii.  c.  6.  p.  97.  "  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  viii.  c.  12.  lib.  ix.  c.  .5.

VOL. VI.  ' Q,

22(5  AMERICA.  [1517.

the  repartimientos,  as  the  king  and  council  were  willing
to  take  the  charge  of  that  upon  their  own  consciences ;
and  that  therefore  the  Dominicans,  and  monks  of  other
religious  orders,  should  abstain,  for  the  future,  from
those  invectives,  which,  from  an  excess  of  charitable
but  ill-informed  zeal,  they  had  uttered  against  that
practice.^

,  That  his  intention  of  adhering  to  this  decree  might
be  fully  understood,  Ferdinand  conferred  new  grants
of  Indians  upon  several  of  his  courtiers.^  But  in  order
that  he  might  not  seem  altogether  inattentive  to  the
rights  of  humanity,  he  published  an  edict,  in  which  he
endeavoured  to  provide  for  the  mild  treatment  of  the
Indians  under  the  yoke  to  which  he  subjected  them  ;  he
regulated  the  nature  of  the  work  which  they  should  be
required  to  perform ;  he  prescribed  the  mode  in  which
they  should  be  clothed  and  fed,  and  gave  directions
with  respect  to  their  instruction  in  the  principles  of
Christianity.''  . .  •

Effect  of  But  the  Dominicans,  who,  from  their  experi-
these.  QXiQ,Q  of  what  was  passed,  judged  concerning  the
future,  soon  perceived  the  inefficacy  of  those  provisions,
and  foretold,  that  as  long  as  it  was  the  interest  of  indi-
viduals to  treat  the  Indians  with  rigour,  no  public  re-
gulations could  render  their  servitude  mild  or  tolerable.
They  considered  it  as  vain  to  waste  their  own  time
and  strength  in  attempting  to  communicate  the  sublime
truths  of  religion  to  men,  whose  spirits  were  broken,
and  their  faculties  impaired  by  oppression.  Some  of
them,  in  despair,  requested  the  permission  of  their  su-
periors to  remove  to  the  continent,  and  to  pursue  the
object  of  their  mission  among  such  of  the  natives  as
were  not  hitherto  corrupted  by  the  example  of  the  Spa-
niards, or  alienated  by  their  cruelty  from  the  Christian
faith. Such  as  remained  in  Hispaniola  continued  to

y  Hcrrera,  dec  1.  lib.  ix.  c.  14.  «  See  Note  XXV.

»  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ix.  c.  14-.  • *

1517.]  BOOK III.  -227

remonstrate,  with  decent  firmness,  against  the  servitude
of  the  Indians.''

Barthoio- The  violent  operations  of  Albuquerque,  the
niewdeias  j^g^  distributor  of  Indians,  revived  the  zeal  of

Casas  ap-

pears  in  the  Dominicaus  against  the  repartimientos,  and
the  In-  called  forth  an  advocate  for  that  oppressed  peo-
dians.  p|g^  ^j^Q  possessed  all  the  courage,  the  talents,
and  activity  requisite  in  supporting  such  a  desperate
cause.  This  was  Bartholomew  de  las  Casas,  a  native
of  Seville,  and  one  of  the  clergymen  sent  out  with
Columbus  in  his  second  voyage  to  Hispaniola,  in  order
to  settle  in  that  island.  He  early  adopted  the  opinion
prevalent  among  ecclesiastics,  with  respect  to  the  un-
lawfulness of  reducing  the  natives  to  servitude ;  and
that  he  might  demonstrate  the  sincerity  of  his  convic-
tion, he  relinquished  all  the  Indians  who  had  fallen  to
his  own  share  in  the  division  of  the  inhabitants  among
their  conquerors,  declaring  that  he  should  ever  bewail
his  own  misfortune  and  guilt,  in  having  exercised  for  a
moment  this  impious  dominion  over  his  fellow-crea-
tures.'' From  that  time,  he  became  the  avowed  patron
of  the  Indians  ;  and  by  his  bold  interpositions  in  their
behalf,  as  well  as  by  the  respect  due  to  his  abilities  and
character,  he  had  often  the  merit  of  setting  some  bounds
to  the  excesses  of  his  countrymen.  He  did  not  fail  to
remonstrate  warmly  against  the  proceedings  of  Albu-
querque, and,  though  he  soon  found  that  attention  to
his  own  interest  rendered  this  rapacious  officer  deaf  to
admonition,  he  did  not  abandon  the  wretched  people
whose  cause  he  had  espoused.  He  instantly  set  out  for
Spain,  with  the  most  sanguine  hopes  of  opening  the
eyes  and  softening  the  heart  of  Ferdinand,  by  that
striking  picture  of  the  oppression  of  his  new  subjects,
which  he  would  exhibit  to  his  view.*^

•»  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ix,  c.  14. Touron.  Hist.  Gener.  dc  rAmerique,  torn.  i.  p.  252.

•^  Fr.  Aug.  Davila  Padilla  Hist,  de  la  Fundacion  de  la  Provincia  de  St.  Jago  de
Mexico,  p.  303,  304. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  x.  c.  12.

<<  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  x.  c.  12. Dec.  ^.  lib.  i.  c.  11. Davila  Padilla  Hist.  p.  301.

Q  2

228 ►  AMERICA.  -  [1517.

Solicits  ^^  easily  obtained  admittance  to  the  king,

their  cause  ^y}^Qj^-j  ]^c  found  in  a  declinino;  state  of  hcaltli.

in  the  .  ,  ^

court  of  With  mnch  freedom,  and  no  less  eloquence,  he
''^'"'  represented  to  him  all  the  fatal  effects  of  the
rcpartimieutos  in  the  New  World,  boldly  charging-  him
with  the  guilt  of  having  authorized  this  impious  mea-
sure, which  had  brought  misery  and  destruction  upon
a  numerous  and  innocent  race  of  men,  whom  Provi-
dence had  placed  under  his  protection.  Ferdinand,
whose  mind  as  well  as  body  was  much  enfeebled  by
his  distemper,  was  greatly  alarmed  at  this  charge  of
impiety,  which  at  another  juncture  he  would  have  de-
spised. He  listened  with  deep  compunction  to  the
discourse  of  Las  Casas,  and  promised  to  take  into  se-
rious consideration  the  means  of  redressing  the  evil  of
which  he  complained.  But  death  prevented  him  from
executino-  his  resolution.  Charles  of  Austria,  to  whom
all  his  crowns  devolved,  resided  at  that  time  in  his  pa-
ternal dominions  in  the  Low  Countries.  Las  Casas,
with  his  usual  ardour,  prepared  immediately  to  set  out
for  Flanders,  in  order  to  occupy  the  ear  of  the  young
monarch,  when  cardinal  Ximenes,  who,  as  regent,  as-
sumed the  reins  of  government  in  Castile,  commanded
him  to  desist  from  the  journey,  and  engaged  to  hear  his
complaints  in  person.

Thcregu-  He  accordingly  weighed  the  matter  with  at-
cardhJaf  tcntiou  cqual  to  its  importance  ;  and  as  his  im-
ximenes.  petuous  mind  delighted  in  schemes  bold  and
uncommon,  he  soon  fixed  upon  a  plan  which  astonished
the  ministers,  trained  up  under  the  formal  and  cautious
administration  of  Ferdinand.  Without  regarding  either
the  rights  of  Don  Diego  Columbus,  or  the  regulations
established  by  the  late  king,  he  resolved  to  send  three
persons  to  America  as  superintendants  of  all  the  colo-
nies there,  with  authority,  after  examining  all  circum-
stances on  the  spot,  to  decide  finally  with  respect  to
the  point  in  question. It  was  a  matter  of  deliberation

1517.]  BOOK III.  229

and  delicacy  to  choose  men  qualified  for  such  an  im-
portant station.  As  all  the  laymen  settled  in  America,
or  who  had  been  consulted  in  the  administration  of  that
department,  had  given  their  opinion  that  the  Spaniards
could  not  keep  possession  of  their  new  settlements,
unless  they  were  allowed  to  retain  their  dominion  over
the  Indians,  he  saw  that  he  could  not  rely  on  their  im-
partiality, and  determined  to  commit  the  trust  to  eccle-
siastics. As  the  Dominicans  and  Franciscans  had  al-
ready espoused  opposite  sides  in  the  controversy,  he,
from  the  same  principle  of  impartiality,  excluded  both
these  fraternities  from  the  commission.  He  confined
his  choice  to  the  monks  of  St.  Jerome,  a  small,  but  re-
spectable order  in  Spain.  With  the  assistance  of  their
general,  and  in  concert  with  Las  Casas,  he  soon  pitched
upon  three  persons  whom  he  deemed  equal  to  the
charge.  To  them  he  joined  Zuazo,  a  private  lawyer  of
distinguished  probity,  with  unbounded  power  to  regu-
late all  judicial  proceedings  in  the  colonies.  Las  Casas
was  appointed  to  accompany  them,  with  the  title  of
protector  of  the  Indians.^

The  man-  '^^  "^^^^  such  extraordinary  powers,  as  might
ner '" at  oucc  overtum  the  system  of  g-overnment  es-

wliich  they  .  "^  . ^

were  exe-  tabUshcd  in  the  New  World,  in  four  persons,
who,  from  their  humble  condition  in  life,  were
little  entitled  to  possess  this  high  authority,  appeared
to  Zapata,  and  other  ministers  of  the  late  king,  a  mea-
sure so  wild  and  dangerous,  that  they  refused  to  issue
the  dispatches  necessary  for  carrying  it  into  execution.
But  Ximenes  was  not  of  a  temper  patiently  to  brook  op-
position to  any  of  his  schemes.  He  sent  for  the  refrac-
tory ministers,  and  addressed  them  in  such  a  tone,  that
in  the  utmost  consternation  they  obeyed  his  orders.^
The  superintendents,  with  their  associate  Zuazo,  and
Las  Casas,  sailed  for  St.  Domingo.  Upon  their  arrival,
the  first  act  of  their  authority  was  to  set  at  liberty  all

*=  Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  ii.  c.  3.  '  Ibid.  c.  6.

230  AMERICA.  [1517.

the  Indians  who  had  been  granted  to  the  Spanish  cour-
tiers, or  to  any  person  not  residing  in  America.  This,
together  with  the  information  which  had  been  received
from  Spain  concerning  the  object  of  the  commission,
spread  a  general  alarm.  The  colonists  concluded  that
they  were  to  be  deprived  at  once  of  the  hands  with
which  they  carried  on  their  labour,  and  that,  of  conse-
quence, ruin  was  unavoidable.  But  the  fathers  of  St.
Jerome  proceeded  with  such  caution  and  prudence,
as  soon  dissipated  all  their  fears.  They  discovered,  in
every  step  of  their  conduct,  a  knowledge  of  the  world,
and  of  affairs,  which  is  seldom  acquired  in  a  cloister ;
and  displayed  a  moderation  as  well  as  gentleness  still
more  rare  among  persons  trained  up  in  the  solitude  and
austerity  of  a  monastic  life.  Their  ears  were  open  to
information  from  every  quarter;  they  compared  the  dif-
ferent accounts  which  they  received;  and,  after  a  ma-
ture consideration  of  the  whole,  they  were  fully  satis-
fied that  the  state  of  the  colony  rendered  it  impossible
to  adopt  the  plan  proposed  by  Las  Casas,  and  recom-
mended by  the  cardinal.  They  plainly  perceived  that
the  Spaniards  settled  in  America  were  so  few  in  num-
ber, that  they  could  neither  work  the  mines  which  had
been  opened,  nor  cultivate  the  country ;  that  they  de-
pended for  effecting  both  upon  the  labour  of  the  na-
tives, and  if  deprived  of  it,  they  must  instantly  relin-
quish their  conquests,  or  give  up  all  the  advantages
which  they  derived  from  them;  that  no  allurement  was
so  powerful  as  to  surmount  the  natural  aversion  of  the
Indians  to  any  laborious  efibrt,  and  that  nothing  but  the
authority  of  a  master  could  compel  them  to  work;  and
if  they  were  not  kept  constantly  under  the  eye  and  dis-
cipline of  a  superior,  so  great  was  their  natural  listless-
jiess  and  indifference,  that  they  would  neither  attend  to
religious  instruction,  nor  observe  those  rights  of  Chris-
tianity which  they  had  been  already  taught.  Upon  all
those  accounts,  the  superintendents  found  it  necessary

1517.]  BOOK III.  231

to  tolerate  the  repartimioiton,  and  to  suffer  the  Indians
to  remain  under  subjection  to  their  Spanish  masters.
They  used  their  utmost  endeavours,  however,  to  pre-
vent the  fatal  effects  of  this  establishment,  and  to  se-
cure to  the  Indians  the  consolation  of  the  best  treatment
compatible  with  a  state  of  servitude.  For  this  purpose,
they  revived  former  regulations,  they  prescribed  new
ones,  they  neglected  no  circumstance  that  tended  to
mitigate  the  rigour  of  the  yoke ;  and  by  their  authority,
their  example,  and  their  exhortations,  they  laboured  to
inspire  their  countrjanen  v/ith  sentiments  of  equity  and
gentleness  towards  the  unhappy  people  upon  whose
industry  they  depended.  Zuazo,  in  his  department,
seconded  the  endeavours  of  the  superintendents.  He
reformed  the  courts  of  justice,  in  such  a  manner  as  to
render  their  decisions  equitable  as  well  as  expeditious,
and  introduced  various  regulations  which  greatly  im-
proved the  interior  police  of  the  colony.  The  satisfac-
tion which  his  conduct,  and  that  of  the  superintendents
gave,  was  now  universal  among  the  Spaniards  settled
in  the  New  World,  and  all  admired  the  boldness  of
Ximenes,  in  having  departed  from  the  ordinary  path  of
business  in  forming  his  plan,  as  well  as  his  sagacity  in
pitching  upon  persons,  whose  wisdom,  moderation,  and
disinterestedness  rendered  them  worthy  of  this  high
trust.^
, ^  Las  Casas  alone  was  dissatisfied. The  pru-

Las  Casas  _  ,  ,  i  • i • n

dissatisfied  dcutial  Considerations  which  influenced  the  su-

with  them.  • , ^ ,  i  •  •  i •

permtendents,  made  no  impression  upon  him.
He  regarded  their  idea  of  accommodating  their  con-
duct to  the  state  of  the  colony,  as  the  maxim  of  an  un-
hallowed timid  policy,  which  tolerated  what  was  un-
just because  it  was  beneficial.  He  contended  that  the
Indians  were  by  nature  free,  and  as  their  protector,  he
required  the  superintendents  not  to  bereave  them  of  the
common  privilege  of  humanity. They  received  his

s  Herrera,  dep.  2.  lib,  ii.  c.  l5. Reraesal  Hist.  Gener.  lib.  ii.c.  14—16.

•23-2  Al^I  ERICA.  [1517-

most  virulent  remonstrances  witliout  emotion,  but  ad-
hered firmly  to  their  own  system.  The  Spanish  planters
did  not  bear  with  him  so  patiently,  and  w^ere  ready  to
tear  him  in  pieces  for  insisting-  in  a  requisition  so  odious
to  them.  Las  Casas,  in  order  to  screen  himself  from
their  rage,  found  it  necessary  to  take  shelter  in  a  con-
vent ;  and  perceiving  that  all  his  eftbrts  in  America
were  fruitless,  he  soon  set  out  for  Europe,  with  a  fixed
resolution  not  to  abandon  the  protection  of  a  people
whom  he  deemed  to  be  cruelly  oppressed.*"
His  nego-  Had  Ximenes  retained  that  vigour  of  mind
wkh'the  "^^^^  which  he  usually  applied  to  business,  Las
ministers  of  Casas must  havc met  with  no  very  g^racious

CliarlesV.  .  , .  a •  r> ^

reception  upon  his  return  to  bpain.  15ut  he
found  the  cardinal  lano-uishino;  under  a  mortal  distem-
per,  and  preparing  to  resign  his  authority  to  the  young
king,  who  was  daily  expected  from  the  Low  Countries.
Charles  arrived,  took  possession  of  the  government,
and,  by  the  death  of  Ximenes,  lost  a  minister,  whose
abilities  and  integrity  entitled  him  to  direct  his  affairs.
Many  of  the  Flemish  nobility  had  accompanied  their
sovereign  to  Spain.  From  that  warm  predilection  to
his  countrymen,  which  was  natural  at  his  age,  he  con-
sulted them  with  respect  to  all  the  transactions  in  his
new  kingdom,  and  they,  with  an  indiscreet  eagerness,
intruded  themselves  into  every  business,  and  seized  al-
most every  department  of  administration.'  The  direc-
tion of  American  affairs  was  an  object  too  alluring  to
escape  their  attention.  Las  Casas  observed  their  glow-
ing influence,  and  though  projectors  are  usually  too
sanguine  to  conduct  their  schemes  with  much  dexterity,
he  possessed  a  bustling,  indefatigable  activity,  which
sometimes  accomplishes  its  purposes  with  greater  suc-
cess than  the  most  exquisite  discernment  and  address.
He  courted  the  Flemish  ministers  with  assiduity.  He
represented  to  them  the  absurdity  of  all  the  maxims

h  Ilerrcra,  dec.  2.  lib.  ii.  c.  16.  '  History  of  Charles  V.  vol.  ii.  p.  43.

1517.]  BOOK  III.  2;j;j

hitherto  adopted  with  respect  to  the  government  of
America,  particularly  during  the  administration  ofFer-  \
dinand,  and  pointed  out  the  defects  of  those  arrange-
ments which  Ximenes  had  introduced.  The  memory
of  Ferdinand  was  odious  to  the  Flemings.  The  supe-
rior virtue  and  abilities  of  Ximenes  had  lono-  been  the
object  of  their  envy.  They  fondly  wished  to  have  a
plausible  pretext  for  condemning  the  measures,  both  of
the  monarch  and  of  the  minister,  and  of  reflecting  some
discredit  on  their  political  wisdom.  The  friends  of
Don  Diego  Columbus,  as  well  as  the  Spanish  courtiers,
who  had  been  dissatisfied  with  the  cardinal's  adminis-
tration, joined  Las  Casas  in  censuring  the  scheme  of
sending  superintendents  to  America.  This  union  of  so
many  interests  and  passions  was  irresistible ;  and  in
consequence  of  it  the  fathers  of  St.  Jerome,  together
with  their  associate  Zuazo,  were  recalled.  Roderigo
de  Figueroa,  a  lawyer  of  some  eminence,  was  appointed
chief  judge  of  the  island,  and  received  instructions,  in
compliance  with  the  request  of  Las  Casas,  to  examine
once  more,  with  the  utmost  attention,  the  point  in  con-
troversy between  him  and  the  people  of  the  colony,  with
respect  to  the  treatment  of  the  natives ;  and  in  the  mean
time  to  do  every  thing  in  his  power  to  alleviate  their
sufferings,  and  prevent  the  extinction  of  the  race.''
Scheme  of  This  was  all  that  the  zeal  of  Las  Casas  could
supplying procure  at  that iuncture  in  favour  of  the  In-

the  colonies  *■  _  «^  _

with  ne-  dians.  The  impossibility  of  carrying  on  any
^'^°^*'  improvements  in  America,  unless  the  Spanish
planters  could  command  the  labour  of  the  natives,  was
an  insuperable  objection  to  his  plan  of  treating  them  as
free  subjects.  In  order  to  provide  some  remedy  for
this,  without  which  he  found  it  was  in  vain  to  mention
his  scheme.  Las  Casas  proposed  to  purchase  a  sufficient
number  of  negroes  from  the  Portuguese  settlements  on
the  coast  of  Africa,  and  to  transport  them  to  America,

''  HeiTera,  dec.  2.  lib.  ii,  c.  16.  19.  21.  lib  iii.  c.  7,  8.

234  AMERICA.  [1517.

in  order  that  they  might  be  employed  as  slaves  in  work-
ing the  mines  and  cultivating  the  ground. One  of  the
firet  advantages  which  the  Portuguese  had  derived  from
their  discoveries  in  Africa,  arose  from  the  trade  in  slaves.
Various  circumstances  concurred  in  reviving  this  odious
commerce,  which  had  been  long  abolished  in  Europe,
and  which  is  no  less  repugnant  to  the  feelings  of  hu-
manity, than  to  the  principles  of  religion. As  early  as
the  year  1503,  a  few  negro  slaves  had  been  sent  into
the  New  World.' In  the  year 1511, Ferdinand  per-
mitted the  importation  of  them  in  greater  numbers.""
They  were  found  to  be  a  more  robust  and  hardy  race
than  the  natives  of  America. They  were  more  capable
of  enduring  fatigue,  more  patient  under  servitude,  and
the  labour  of  one  negro  was  computed  to  be  equal  to
that  of  four  Indians." Cardinal Ximenes,  however,
when  solicited  to  encourage  this  commerce,  peremp-
torily rejected  the  proposition,  because  he  perceived  the
iniquity  of  reducing  one  race  of  men  to  slavery,  while
he  was  consulting  about  the  means  of  restoring  liberty
to  another." But  Las  Casas,  from  the  inconsistency
natural  to  men  who  hurry  with  headlong  impetuosity
towards  a  favourite  point,  was  incapable  of  makino-  this
distinction. While  he  contended  earnestly  for  the  li-
berty of  the  people  born  in  one  quarter  of  the  globe,  he
laboured  to  enslave  the  inhabitants  of  another  region;
and  in  the  warmth  of  his  zeal  to  save  the  Americans
from  the  yoke,  pronounced  it  to  be  lawful  and  expedient
to  impose  one  still  heavier  upon  the  Africans. Unfor-
tunately for  the  latter,  Las  Casas's  plan  was  adopted.
Charles  granted  a  patent  to  one  of  his  Flemish  favour-
ites, containing  an  exclusive right  of  importino-  four
thousand  negroes  into  America. The  favourite  sold  his
patent  to  some  Genoese  merchants  for  twenty-five  thou-
sand ducats,  and  they  were  the  first  who  brought  into

'  Herrcra.dec.  1.  lib.  v.  c.  12.  «'  Ibid.  lib.  viii.  c.  9.

»  Ibid.  lib.  i.x.  c.  5.  o  ibid.  dec.  2.  lib.  li.  c.  ».

1517.]  BOOK in.  235

a  reauiar  form  that  commerce  for  slaves  between  Africa
and  America,  whicli  has  since  been  carried  on  to  such
an  amazing  extent.^

j5ig  But  the  Genoese  merchants,  conducting  their

Las  Casas  operations,  at  first,  with  the  rapacity  of  mono-

proposes '■ ^  .  .

sending polists,  demanded  such  a  high  price  for  ne-

labourers  ■■  ,  ■.  .  i •  tt-

toHispa-  groes,  that  the  number  imported  into  Hispa-
niola  made  no  great  change  upon  the  state  of
the  colony.  Las  Casas,  whose  zeal  was  no  less  inven-
tive than  indefatigable,  had  recourse  to  another  expe-
dient for  the  relief  of  the  Indians.  He  observed,  that
most  of  the  persons  who  had  settled  hitherto  in  America,
were  sailors  and  soldiers  employed  in  the  discovery  or
conquest  of  the  country ;  the  younger  sons  of  noble
families,  allured  by  the  prospect  of  acquiring  sudden
wealth  ;  or  desperate  adventurers,  whom  their  indigence
or  crimes  forced  to  abandon  their  native  land.  Instead
of  such  men,  who  were  dissolute,  rapacious,  and  inca-
pable of  that  sober  persevering  industry,  which  is
requisite  in  forming  new  colonies,  he  proposed  to  sup-
ply the  settlements  in  Hispaniola  and  other  parts  of  the
New  World  with  a  sufficient  number  of  labourers  and
husbandmen,  who  should  be  allured  by  suitable  pre-
miums to  remove  thither.  These,  as  they  were  accus-
tomed to  fatigue,  would  be  able  to  perform  the  work,
to  which  the  Indians,  from  the  feebleness  of  their  con-
stitution, were  unequal,  and  might  soon  become  useful
and  opulent  citizens.  But  though  Hispaniola  stood
much  in  need  of  a  recruit  of  inhabitants,  having  been
visited  at  this  time  with  the  small-pox,  which  swept  off
almost  all  the  natives  who  had  survived  their  long  con-
tinued oppression ;  and  though  Las  Casas  had  the
countenance  of  the  Flemish  ministers,  this  scheme  was
defeated  by  the  bishop  of  Burgos,  who  thwarted  all  his
projects.''

P  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii,  c.  20.  t  Ibid.  dec.  2.  lib.  ii,  c.  21

2.30  AMERICA.  '  [1517.

Forms  iiie  Las  Casas  now  despaired  of  procuring  any
liovco-'*  relief  for  the  Indians  in  those  places  where  the
''^".v-  Spaniards  were  already  settled.  The  evil  was
become  so  inveterate  there,  as  not  to  admit  of  a  cure.
But  such  discoveries  were  daily  making  in  the  conti-
nent, as  gave  a  high  idea  both  of  its  extent  and  popu-
lousness.  In  all  those  vast  regions,  there  was  but  one
feeble  colony  planted  ;  and  except  a  small  spot  on  the
isthmus  of  Darien,  the  natives  still  occupied  the  whole
country.  This  opened  a  new  and  more  ample  field  for  the
humanity  and  zeal  of  Las  Casas,  who  flattered  himself
that  he  might  prevent  a  pernicious  system  from  beings
introduced  there,  though  he  had  failed  of  success  in  his
attempts  to  overturn  it,  where  it  was  already  established.
Full  of  this  idea,  he  applied  for  a  grant  of  the  unoccu-
pied country,  stretching  along  the  sea-coast  from  the
gulf  of  Paria,  to  the  western  frontier  of  that  province
now  known  by  the  name  of  Santa  Martha.  He  pro-
posed to  settle  there  with  a  colony  composed  of  hus-
bandmen, labourers,  and  ecclesiastics.  He  eno'aofed,  in
the  space  of  two  years,  to  civilize  ten  thousand  of  the
natives,  and  to  instruct  them  so  thoroughly  in  the  arts
of  social  life,  that,  from  the  fruits  of  their  industry,  an
annual  revenue  of  fifteen  thousand  ducats  should  arise
to  the  king.  In  ten  years  he  expected  that  his  im-
provements would  be  so  far  advanced,  as  to  yield  an-
nually sixty  thousand  ducats.  He  stipulated,  that  no
sailor  or  soldier  should  ever  be  permitted  to  settle  in
this  district ;  and  that  no  Spaniard  whatever  should
enter  it  without  his  permission.  He  even  projected  to
clothe  the  people  whom  he  took  along  with  him  in  some
distinguishing  garb,  which  did  not  resemble  the  Spanish
dress,  that  they  might  appear  to  the  natives  to  be  a  dif-
ferent race  of  men  from  those  who  had  brousfht  so
many  calamities  upon  their  country.'  From  this  scheme,

■■  Herrcra,  dec.  2.  lib.  iv.  c.  1.

1517.]  BOOK III.  237

of  which  I  have  traced  only  the  great  lines,  it  is  mani-
fest that  Las  Casas  had  formed  ideas  concerninof  the
method  of  treating  the  Indians,  similar  to  those  by
which  the  Jesuits  afterward  carried  on  their  great  ope-
rations, in  another  part  of  the  same  continent.  He
supposed  that  the  Europeans,  by  availing  themselves  of
that  ascendant  which  they  possessed  in  consequence  of
their  superior  progress  in  science  and  improvement,
might  gradually  form  the  minds  of  the  Americans  to
relish  those  comforts  of  which  they  were  destitute,
might  train  them  to  the  arts  of  civil  life,  and  render
them  capable  of  its  functions.
V  But  to  the  bishop  of  Burg:os  and  the  council

ravour-  i  o

ably  re- of  the  ludics,  this  project  appeared  not  only
chimerical, but  dangerous  in  a high  degree.
They  deemed  the  faculties  of  the  Americans  to  be  na-
turally so  limited,  and  their  indolence  so  excessive,  that
every  attempt  to  instruct  and  improve  them  would  be
fruitless. They  contended,  that  it  would  be  extremely
imprudent  to  give  the  command  of  a  country  extending
above  a  thousand  miles  along  the  coast,  to  a  fanciful
presumptuous enthusiast,  a  stranger  to  the  aifairs  of
the  world,  and  unacquainted  with  the  arts  of  govern-
ment. Las  Casas,  far  from  being  discouraged  with  a
repulse,  which  he  had  reason  to  expect,  had  recourse
once  more  to  the  Flemish  favourites,  who  zealously  pa-
tronised his  scheme,  merely  because  it  had  been  re-
jected by  the  Spanish  ministers. They  prevailed  with
their  master,  who  had  lately  been  raised  to  the  impe-
rial dignity,  to  refer  the  consideration  of  this  measure
to  a  select  number  of  his  privy-counsellors ;  and  Las
Casas having  excepted  against  the  members  of  the
council  of  the  Indies,  as  partial  and  interested,  they
were  all  excluded. The  decision  of  men  chosen  by
recommendation  of  the  Flemings,  was  perfectly  con-
formable to  their  sentiments. They  warmly  approved
of  Las  Casas's  plan ;  and  gave  orders  for  carrying  it

238  AMERICA.  [1517.

into  execution,  but  restricted  the  territory  allotted  him
to  three  hundred  miles  alonir  the  coast  of  Cumana,
allowing  him,  however,  to  extend  it  as  far  as  he  pleased
towards  the  interior  part  of  the  country/
A  solemn  ^his  determination  did  not  pass  uncensured.
deiibera- Almost  evcry  person  who  had  been  in  the  West

tion  con-  .  ".  .  .

cerningthe  Indics  exclaimcd  against  it,  and  supported  their
treatmt;  the  opiuiou  SO  Confidently,  and  with  such  plausible
Indians,  reasous,  as  made  it  advisable  to  pause  and  to
review  the  subject  more  deliberately.  Charles  himself,
though  accustomed,  at  this  early  period  of  his  life,  to
adopt  the  sentiments  of  his  ministers,  with  such  sub-
missive deference  as  did  not  promise  that  decisive  vi-
gour of  mind  which  distinguished  his  riper  years,  could
not  help  suspecting  that  the  eagerness  with  which  the
Flemings  took  part  in  every  affair  relating  to  America,
flow^ed  from  some  improper  motive,  and  began  to  dis-
cover an  inclination  to  examine  in  person  into  the  state
of  the  question  concerning  the  character  of  the  Ameri-
cans, and  the  proper  manner  of  treating  them.  An
opportunity  of  making  this  inquiry  with  great
advantage  soon  occurred.  Quevedo,  the  bishop
of  Darien,  who  had  accompanied  Pedrarias  to  the  con-
tinent in  the  year  1513,  happened  to  land  at  Barcelona,
where  the  court  then  resided.  It  was  quickly  known,
that  his  sentiments  concerning  the  talents  and  disposi-
tion of  the  Indians  differed  from  those  of  Las  Casas  :
and  Charles  naturally  concluded  that  by  confronting
two  respectable  persons,  who,  during  their  residence  in
America,  had  full  leisure  to  observe  the  manners  of  the
people  whom  they  pretended  to  describe,  he  might  be
able  to  discover  which  of  them  had  formed  his  opinion
with  the  greatest  discernment  and  accuracy.

A  day  for  this  solemn  audience, was  appointed.  The
emperor  appeared  with  extraordinary  pomp,  and  took
his  seat  on  a  throne  in  the  great  hall  of  the  palace.  His

»  Goinara  Hist.  Gcncr.  c.  77. Hcrrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  iv.  c.  3. Oviedo,  lib.  xix.  c.  5.

1517.]  BOOK III.  239

principal  courtiers  attended.  Don  Diego  Columbus,
admiral  of  the  Indies,  was  summoned  to  be  present.
The  bishop  of  Darien  was  called  upon  first  to  deliver
his  opinion.  He,  in  a  short  discourse,  lamented  the
fatal  desolation  of  America,  by  the  extinction  of  so
many  of  its  inhabitants;  he  acknowledged  that  this  must
be  imputed,  in  some  degree,  to  the  excessive  rigour  and
inconsiderate  proceedings  of  the  Spaniards;  but  de-
clared that  all  the  people  of  the  New  World  whom  he
had  seen  either  in  the  continent  or  in  the  islands,  ap-
peared to  him  to  be  a  race  of  men  marked  out,  by  the
inferiority  of  their  talents,  for  servitude,  and  whom  it
would  be  impossible  to  instruct  or  improve,  unless  they
were  kept  under  the  continual  inspection  of  a  master.
Las  Casas,  at  greater  length,  and  with  more  fervour,
defended  his  own  system.  He  rejected  with  indigna-
tion the  idea  that  any  race  of  men  was  born  to  servi-
tude, as  irreligious  and  inhuman.  He  asserted  that
the  faculties  of  the  Americans  were  not  naturally  des-
picable, but  unimproved ;  that  they  were  capable  of  re-
ceiving instruction  in  the  principles  of  religion,  as  well
as  of  acquiring  the  industry  and  arts  which  would  qua-
lify them  for  the  various  offices  of  social  life;  that  the
mildness  and  timidity  of  their  nature  rendered  them  so
submissive  and  docile,  that  they  might  be  led  and
formed  with  a  gentle  hand.  He  professed,  that  his  in-
tentions in  proposing  the  scheme  now  under  consider-
ation were  pure  and  disinterested ;  and  though,  from
the  accomplishment  of  his  designs,  inestimable  benefits
would  result  to  the  crown  of  Castile,  he  never  had
claimed,  nor  ever  would  receive,  any  recompense  on
that  account.

The  Charles,  after  hearing  both,  and  consulting

scheme  of  -^[([^  jj^g  ministcrs,  did  not  think  himself  suffi-

Las  Casas  '

approved  clcntly  informed  to  establish  any  general  ar-
rangement with  respect  to  the  state  of  the  In-
dians; but  as  he  had  perfect  confidence  in  the  integrity

2iO  AMERICA,  ,[1517.

of  Las  Casas,  and  as  even  the  bishop  of  Darien  admit-
ted his  sclieme  to  be  of  such  importance,  that  a  trial
should  be  made  of  its  effects,  he  issued  a  patent,
granting-  him  the  district  in  Cumana  formerly
mentioned,  with  full  power  to  establish  a  colony  there
according  to  his  own  plan/

His  prepa-  Las  Casas  pushed  on  the  preparations  for
e^vwiting  his  voyage  widi  his  usual  ardour.  But,  either
"•  from  his  own inexperience  in  the  conduct  of

affairs,  or  from  the  secret  opposition  of  the  Spanish
nobility,  who  universally  dreaded  the  success  of  an  in-  '
stitution  that  might  rob  them  of  the  industrious  and
useful  hands  which  cultivated  their  estates,  his  progress
in  engaging  husbandmen  and  labourers  was  extremely
slow,  and  he  could  not  prevail  on  more  than  two  hun-
dred to  accompany  him  to  Cumana.
Departs  Nothing, however, could damp his zeal,

rka.  and  With  tliis  slcudcr  train,  hardly  sufficient  to  take
fomiWabie^  posscssiou  of  such  a  large  territory,  and  alto-
obstacies.  getlicr  uuequal  to  any  effectual  attempt  towards
civilizing  its  inhabitants,  he  set  sail.  The  first  place  at
which  he  touched  was  the  island  of  Puerto  Rico.
There  he  received  an  account  of  a  new  obstacle  to  the
execution  of  his  scheme,  more  insuperable  than  any  he
had  hitherto  encountered.  When  he  left  America  in
the  year  1516,  the  Spaniards  had  little  intercourse  with
any  part  of  the  continent,  except  the  countries  adjacent
to  the  gulf  of  Darien,  But  as  every  species  of  internal
industry  began  to  stagnate  in  Hispaniola,  when,  by  the
rapid  decrease  of  the  natives,  the  Spaniards  were  de-
prived of  those  hands  with  which  they  had  hitherto
carried  on  their  operations,  this  prompted  them  to  try
various  expedients  for  supplying  that  loss.  Consider-
able numbers  of  negroes  were  imported  ;  but  on  account
of  their  exorbitant  price,  many  of  the  planters  could  not

"Herrera,  dec. 2.  lib.  iv.  c.  3 — 5. Argcnsola  Annales  d'Aragon,  74.  97. Re-
niisal  Hist.  Gener.  lib.  ii.  c.  19,  20.

1517.]  BOOK III.  241

afford  to  purchase  tliem. In  order  to  procure  slaves
at  an  easier  rate,  some  of  the  Spaniards  in  Hispaniola
fitted  out  vessels  to  cruise  along  the  coast  of  the  conti-
nent. In  places  where  they  found  themselves  inferior
in  strength,  they  traded  with  the  natives,  and  gave  Eu-
ropean toys  in  exchange  for  the  plates  of  gold  worn  by
them  as  ornaments ;  but,  wherever  they  could  surprise
or  overpower  the  Indians,  they  carried  them  off  by  force,
and  sold  them  as  slaves.* In  those  predatory  excur-
sions, such  atrocious  acts  of  violence  and  cruelty  had
been  committed,  that  the  Spanish  name  was  held  in  de-
testation all  over  the  continent. Whenever  any  ships
appeared,  the inhabitants  either  fled  to  the  woods,  or
rushed  down  to  the  shore  in  arms  to  repel  those  hated
disturbers of  their tranquillity. They forced some
parties  of  the  Spaniards  to  retreat  v*^ith  precipitation ;
they  cut  off  others;  and  in  the  violence  of  their  resent-
ment against  the  whole  nation,  they  murdered  two  Do-
rninican  missionaries,  whose  zeal  had  prompted  them  to
settle  in  the  province  of  Cumana."  This  outrage  against
persons  revered  for  their  sanctity,  excited  such  indig-
nation among  the  people  of  Hispaniola,  who,  notwith-
standing all their licentious  and cruel  proceedings,
were  possessed  with  a  wonderful  zeal  for  religion,  and
a  superstitious  respect  for  its  ministers,  that  they  deter-
mined to  inflict  exemplary  punishment,  not  only  upon
the  perpetrators  of  that  crime,  but  upon  the  whole  race.
With  this  view,  they  gave  the  command  of  five  ships
and  three  hundred  men  to  Diego  Ocampo,  with  orders
to lay  waste the country  of  Cumana  with  fire and
sword,  and  to  transport  all  the  inhabitants  as  slaves  to
Hispaniola.  This  armament  Las  Casas  found  at  Puerto
Rico,  in  its  way  to  the  continent ; and  as  Ocampo  re-
fused to  defer  his  voyage,  he  immediately  perceived
that  it  would  be  impossible  to  attempt  the  execution  of

t  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  ii.  c.  3.  "  Oviedo,  Hist.  lib.  xix.  p.  3.

VOL.  VI.  R

242  AMERICA.  [1517.

his  pacific  plan  in  a  country  destined  to  be  the  seat  of
war  and  desolation/

12th  April. In  ordcr  to  provide  against  the  effects  of  this
^ufmount'"  unfortunate  incident,  he  set  sail  directly  for  St.
them. Domino'o,  Icavino;  his  followers  cantoned  out
among  the  planters  in  Puerto  Rico. From  many  con-
curring causes,  the  reception  which  Las  Casas  met  with
in  Hispaniola  was  very  unfavourable. In  his  negotia-
tions for  the  relief  of  the  Indians,  he  had  censured  the
conduct  of  his  countrymen settled  there  with such
honest  severity  as  rendered  him  universally  odious  to
them. They  considered  their  own  ruin  as  the  inevita-
ble consequence  of  his  success. They  were  now  elated
with  hope of  receiving  a  large  recruit  of  slaves  from
Cumana,  which  must  be  relinquished  if  Las  Casas  were
assisted  in  settling  his  projected  colony  there. Figue-
roa,  in  consequence  of  the  instructions  which  he  had
received  in  Spain,  had  made  an  experiment  concerning
the  capacity  of  the  Indians,  that  was  represented  as  de-
cisive against  the  system  of  Las  Casas. He  collected
in  Hispaniola  a  good  number  of  the  natives,  and  settled
them  in  two  villages,  leaving  them  at  perfect  liberty,
and  with  the  uncontrolled  direction  of  their  own  actions.
But  that  people,  accustomed  to  a  mode  of  life  extremely
different  from  that  which  takes  place  wherever  civiliza-
tion has  made  any  considerable  progress,  were  incapa-
ble of  assuming  new  habits  at  once. Dejected  with
their  own  misfortunes  as  well  as  those  of  their  country,
they  exerted  so  little  industry  in  cultivating  the  ground,
appeared  so  devoid  of  solicitude  or  foresight  in  pro-
viding for  their  own  wants,  and  were  such  strangers  to
arrangement  in  conducting  their  affairs,  that  the  Spa-
niards pronounced  them  incapable  of  being  formed  to
live  like  men  in  social  life,  and  considered  them  as
children,  who  should  be  kept  under  the  perpetual  tute-

't  Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  ix.  c.  8,  9.

1517.]  BOOK  III.  ,  -243

lage  of  persons  superior  to  themselves  in  wisdom  and

sagacity.^

Final  mis- Notwithstanding all those circumstances,

carriage  of  whicli  alienated  the  persons  in  Hispaniola  to

his  sclicinc.

whom  Las  Casas  applied  from  himself  and  from
his  measures,  he,  by  his  activity  and  perseverance,  by
some  concessions,  and  many  threats,  obtained  at  length
a  small  body  of  troops  to  protect  him  and  his  colony
at  their  first  landing. But  upon  his  return  to  Puerto
Rico,  he  found  that  the  diseases  of  the  climate  had
been  fatal  to  several  of  his  people;  and  that  others  hav-
ing got  employment  in  that  island,  refused  to  follow
him. With  the  handful  that  remained,  he  set  sail  and
landed  in  Cumana. Ocampo  had  executed  his  com-
mission in  that  province  with such barbarous  rage,
having  massacred  many  of  the  inhabitants,  sent  others
in  chains  to  Hispaniola,  and  forced  the  rest  to  fly  for
shelter  to  the  woods,  that  the  people  of  a  small  colony,
which  he  had  planted  at  a  place  which  he  named  7b-
ledOy  were  ready  to  perish  for  want  in  a  desolated  coun-
try. There,  however,  Las  Casas  was  obliged  to  fix  his
residence,  though deserted both  by  the troops ap-
pointed to  protect  him,  and  by  those  under  the  com-
mand of  Ocampo,  who  foresaw  and  dreaded  the  cala-
mities to  which  he  must  be  exposed  in  that  wretched
station. He  made  the  best  provision  in  his  power  for
the  safety  and  subsistence  of  his  followers;  but  as  his
utmost  efforts  availed  little  towards  securing  either  the
one  or  the  other,  he  returned  to  Hispaniola,  in  order  to
solicit  more  effectual  aid  for  the  preservation  of  men
who,  from  confidence  in  him,  had  ventured  into  a  post
of  so  much  danger. Soon  after  his  departure,  the  na-
tives, having  discovered  the  feeble  and  defenceless  state
of  the  Spaniards,  assembled  secretly,  attacked  them
with  the  fury  natural  to  men  exasperated  by  many  in-
juries, cut  off"  a  good  number,  and  compelled  the  rest  to

V  Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  x.  c.  5.
R 2

24  4  AMERICA.  [1517.

fly  in  the  utmost  consternation  to  the  island  of  Cubagua.
The  small  colony  settled  there,  on  account  of  the  pearl
fishery,  catching  the  panic  with  which  their  countrymen
had  been  seized,  abandoned  the  island,  and  not  a  Spa-
niard remained  in  any  part  of  the  continent,  or  adja-
cent islands,  from  the  gulf  of  Paria  to  the  borders  of
Darien.  Astonished  at  such  a  succession  of  disasters,
Las  Casas  was  ashamed  to  shew  his  face  after  this  fatal
termination  of  all  his  splendid  schemes.  He  shut  him-
self up  in  the  convent  of  the  Dominicans  at  St.  Do-
mino'O,  and  soon  after  assumed  the  habit  of  that  order.''
Though  the  expulsion  of  the  colony  from  Cumana
happened  in  the  year  1521,  I  have  chosen  to  trace  the
progress  of  Las  Casas's  negotiations  from  their  first  rise
to  their  final  issue  without  interruption.  His  system
was  the  object  of  long  and  attentive  discussion ;  and
though  his  eftbrts  inbehalf  of  the  oppressed  Americans,
partly  from  his  own  rashness  and  imprudence,  and  partly
from  the  malevolent  opposition  of  his  adversaries,  were
not  attended  with  that  success  which  he  promised  with
too  sanguine  confidence,  great  praise  is  due  to  his  hu-
mane activity,  which  gave  rise  to  various  regulations
that  were  of  some  benefit  to  that  unhappy  people.  I
return  now  to  the  history  of  the  Spanish  discoveries,  as
they  occur  in  the  order  of  time.""

Newdis-  Diego  Velasquez,  who  conquered  Cuba  in
to^varlh  *^^^  y^^*^"  1511,  still  retained  the  government  of
the  west,  that  island,  as  the  deputy  of  Don  Diego  Colum-
bus, though  he  seldom  acknovv'ledged  his  superior,  and
aimed  at  rendering  his  own  authority  altogether  inde-
pendent.'' Under  his  prudent  administration,  Cuba
became  one  of  the  most  flourishing  of  the  Spanish  set-
tlements. The  fame  of  this  allured  thither  many  per-
sons from  the  other  colonies,  in  hopes  of  finding  either
some  permanent  establishment  or  some  employment  for

'  Ilerrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  x.  c.  5.  dec.  3.  lib.  ii.  c.  3 — 5. Oviedo  Hist.  lib.  xix.  c.  5.
Goraara,  c.  77. Uavila  Padiila,  lib.  i.  c.  «7. Reinisai  IlLst.  CJeii.  lib.  xi.  c.  22,  23.
»  Ilerrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  X.  c.  5.  p.  329.  ■  "^  Ibid.  lib.  ii.  c.  19.

1517.]  BOOK in.  245

their  activity.  As  Cuba  lay  to  the  west  of  all  the  islands
occupied  by  the  Spaniards,  and  as  the  ocean,  which
stretches  beyond  it  towards  that  quarter,  had  not  hi-
therto been  explored,  these  circumstances  naturally  in-
vited the  inhabitants  to  attempt  new  discoveries.  An
expedition  for  this  purpose,  in  which  activity  and  reso-
lution might  conduct  to  sudden  wealth,  was  more  suited
to  the  genius  of  the  age,  than  the  patient  industry  re-
quisite in  clearing  ground,  and  manufacturing  sugar.
Instigated  by  this  spirit,  several  officers,  who  had  served
under  Pedrarias  in  Darien,  entered  into  an  association
to  undertake  a  voyage  of  discovery.  They  persuaded
Francisco  Hernandez  Cordova,  an  opulent  planter  in
Cuba,  and  a  man  of  distinguished  courage,  to  join  with
them  in  the  adventure,  and  chose  him  to  be  their  com-
mander. Velasquez  not  only  approved  of  the  design,
but  assisted  in  carrying  it  on.  As  the  veterans  from
Darien  were  extremely  indigent,  he  and  Cordova  ad-
vanced money  for  purchasing  three  small  vessels,  and
furnishing  them  with  every  thing  requisite  either  for
traffic  or  for  war.  A  hundred  and  ten  men  embarked  on
board  of  them,  and  sailed  from  St.  Jago  de  Cuba  on  the
8th  of  February,  1517.  By  the  advice  oftheir  chief  pilot,
Antonio  Alaminos,  who  had  served  under  the  first  ad-
miral Columbus,  they  stood  directly  west,  relying  on
the  opinion  of  that  great  navigator,  who  uniformly
maintained  that  a  westerly  course  would  lead  to  the
most  important  discoveries.

On  the  twenty-first  day  after  their  departure  from  St.
Jago,  they  saw  land,  which  proved  to  be  Cape  Catoche,
the  eastern  point  of  that  large  peninsula  projecting  from
the  continent  of  America,  which  still  retains  its  original
name  of  Yucatan.  As  they  approached  the
shore,  five  canoes  came  off  full  of  people  de-
cently clad  in  cotton  garments ;  an  astonishing  spec-
tacle to  the  Spaniards,  who  had  found  every  other  part
of  America  possessed  by  naked  savages. Cordova  en-

246  AMRRICA.  [1517.

deavourcd  by  small  presents  to  gain  the  good-will  of
these  people.  They,  tliough  amazed  at  the  strange  ob-
jects now  presented  for  the  first  time  to  their  view,  in-
vited the  Spaniards  to  visit  their  habitations,  with  an
appearance  of  cordiality.  They  landed  accordingly,
and  as  they  advanced  into  the  country,  they  observed
with  new  wonder  some  large  houses  built  with  stone.
But  they  soon  found  that,  if  the  people  of  Yucatan  had
made  progress  in  improvement  beyond  their  country-
men, they  were  likewise  more  artful  and  warlike.  For
thouo-h  the  cazique  received  Cordova  with  many  tokens
of  friendship,  he  had  posted  a  considerable  body  of  his
subjects  in  ambush  behind  a  thicket,  who,  upon  a  signal
given  by  him,  rushed  out  and  attacked  the  Spaniards
with  great  boldness,  and  some  degree  of  martial  order.
At  the  first  flight  of  their  arrows,  fifteen  of  the  Spa-
niards were  wounded ;  but  the  Indians  were  struck  with
such  terror  by  the  sudden  explosion  of  the  fire-arms,
and  so  surprised  at  the  execution  done  by  them,  by  the
cross-bows,  and  by  the  other  weapons  of  their  new
enemies,  that  they  fled  precipitately.  Cordova  quitted
a  country  where  he  had  met  with  such  a  fierce  recep-
tion, carrying  off  two  prisoners,  together  with  the  orna-
ments of  a  small  temple,  which  he  plundered  in  his
retreat.

He  continued  his  course  towards  the  west,  without
losing  sight  of  the  coast,  and  on  the  sixteenth  day  tly-
ea,„.  rived  at  Campeachy.  There  the  natives  re-
peaciiy.  ccivcd  them  more  hospitably ;  but  the  Spa-
niards were  much  surprised,  that  on  all  the  extensive
coast  along  which  they  had  sailed,  and  which  they
imagined  to  be  a  large  island,  they  had  not  observed
any  river.''  As  their  water  began  to  fail,  they  advanced,
in  hopes  of  finding  a  supply  ;  and  at  length  they  dis-
covered the  mouth  of  a  river  at  Potonchan,  some  lea-
gues beyond  Campeachy.

<=  See  Note  XXVI.

1517.]  BOOK  HI.  247

Cordova  landed  all  his  troops,  in  order  to  protect
the  sailors  while  employed  in  filling  the  casks  ;  but  not-
withstanding this  precaution,  the  natives  rushed  down
upon  them  with  such  fury,  and  in  such  numbers,  that
forty-seven  of  the  Spaniards  were  killed  upon  the  spot,
and  one  man  only  of  the  whole  body  escaped  unhurt.
Their  commander,  though  wounded  in  twelve  different
places,  directed  the  retreat  with  presence  of  mind  equal
to  the  courage  with  which  he  had  led  them  on  in  the
engagement,  and  with  much  difficulty  they  regained
their  ships.  After  this  fatal  repulse,  nothing  remained
but  to  hasten  back  to  Cuba  with  their  shattered  forces.
In  their  passage  thither,  they  suffered  the  most  exqui-
site distress  for  want  of  water,  that  men  wounded  and
sickly,  shut  up  in  small  vessels,  and  exposed  to  the  heat
of  the  torrid  zone,  can  be  supposed  to  endure.  Some
of  them,  sinking  under  these  calamities,  died  by  the
way ;  Cordova,  their  commander,  expired  soon  after
they  landed  in  Cuba.'*

Voyage  of  Notwithstanding  the  disastrous  conclusion  of
Gnjaiva.  ^|j-g  gxpcdition,  it  Contributed  rather  to  animate
than  to  damp  a  spirit  of  enterprise  among  the  Spaniards.
They  had  discovered  an  extensive  country,  situated  at
no  great  distance  from  Cuba,  fertile  in  appearance,  and
possessed  by  a  people  far  superior  in  improvement  to
any  hitherto  known  in  America.  Though  they  had
carried  on  little  commercial  intercourse  with  the  natives,
they  had  brought  off  some  ornaments  of  gold,  not  con-
siderable in  value,  but  of  singular  fabric.  These  cir-
cumstances, related  with  the  exaggeration  natural  to
men  desirous  of  heightening  the  merit  of  their  own  ex-
ploits, were  more  than  sufficient  to  excite  romantic  hopes
and  expectations.  Great  numbers  offered  to  engage  in
a  new  expedition.  Velasquez,  solicitous  to  distinguish
himself  by  some  service  so  meritorious  as  might  entitle

^  Henera,  dec.  2.  lib.  ii.  c.  17,  18.  Histor.  Verdadera  de  la  Conquista  de  la
Nueva  Espana  por  Bernal  Diaz  del  Costillo,  cap.  1 — 7.  Oviedo,  lib.  xvii.  c.  3.
Goraara,  c.  52. P.  Martyr  de  Insulis  nuper  inveiitis,  p.  329.

248  AMERICA.  [1517.

him  to  claim  the  government  of"  Cuba  independent  of
the  admiral,  not  only  encouraged  their  ardour,  but  at
his  own  expense  fitted  out  four  ships  for  the  voyage.
Two  hundred  and  forty  volunteers,  among  whom  were
several  persons  of  rank  and  fortune,  embarked  in  his
enterprise.  The  command  of  it  was  given  to  Juan  de
Grijalva,  a  young  man  of  known  merit  and  courage,
with  instructions  to  observe  attentively  the  nature  of  the
countries  which  he  should  discover,  to  barter  for  gold,
and,  if  circumstances  were  inviting,  to  settle  a  colony
in  some  proper  station.  He  sailed  from  St.  Jago
deCuba,  on  the  8th  of  April,  1518.  The  pilot
Alaminos  held  the  same  course  as  in  the  former  voyage  ;
but  the  violence  of  the  currents  carrying  the  ships  to  the
Discovers  south,  the  first  land  which  they  made  was  the
New  Spain.  -^1^^^^  ^f  Cozumcl,  to  the  cast  of  Yucatan. As

all  the  inhabitants  fled  to  the  woods  and  mountains  at
the  approach  of  the  Spaniards,  they  made  no  long  stay
there,  and  without  any  remarkable  occurrence  they
reached  Potonchan  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  peninsula.
The  desire  of  avenging  their  countrymen  who  had  been
slain  there,  concurred  with  their  ideas  of  good  policy,
in  prompting  them  to  land,  that  they  might  chastise  the
Indians  of  that  district  with  such  exemplary  rigour,  as
would  strike  terror  into  all  the  people  around  them.
But  though  they  disembarked  all  their  troops,  and  car-
ried ashore  some  field-pieces,  the  Indians  fought  with
such  courage,  that  the  Spaniards  gained  the  victory
with  difficulty,  and  were  confirmed  in  their  opinion  that
the  inhabitants  of  this  country  would  prove  more  for-
midable enemies  than  any  they  had  met  with  in  other
parts  of  America.  From  Potonchan,  they  continued
their  voyage  towards  the  west,  keeping  as  near  as  pos-
sible to  the  shore,  and  casting  anchor  every  evening,
from  dread  of  the  dangerous  accidents  to  which  they
might  be  exposed  in  an  unknown  sea.  During  the  day
their  eyes  were  turned  continually  towards  land,  with  a

1518.]  BOOK  III.  240

mixture  of  surprise  and  wonder  at  the  beauty  of  the
country,  as  well  as  the  novelty  of  the  objects  which  they
beheld. Many  villages  were  scattered  along  the  coast,
in  which  they  could  distinguish  houses  of  stone  that
appeared  white  and  lofty  at  a  distance. In  the  warmth
of  their  admiration, they fancied  these to  be  cities
adorned  with  towers  and  pinnacles;  and  one  of  the
soldiers  happening  to  remark  that  this  country  resem-
bled Spain  in  its  appearance,  Grijalva,  with  universal  ap-
plause, called  it  New  Spain,  the  name  which  still  dis-
tinguishes this  extensive  and  opulent  province  of  the
June  9. Spanish  empire  in  America.^ They  landed  in  a
Tabasco, j-j^gj.  Yvhicli  the  natives  called  Tabasco,  and  the
fame  of  their  victory  at  Potonchan  having  reached  this
place,  the  cazique  not  only  received  them  amicably,  but
bestowed  presents  upon  them  of  such  value,  as  con-
firmed the  high  ideas  which  the  Spaniards  had  formed
with  respect  to  the  wealth  and  fertility  of  the  country.
These  ideas  were  raised  still  higher  by  what  occurred
at  the  place  where  they  next  touched. This  was  con-
siderably to  the  west  of  Tabasco,  in  the  province  since
known  by  the  name  of  Guaxaca. There  they
were  received  with  the  respect  paid  to  superior
beings. The  people  perfumed  them  as  they  landed,
with  incense  of  gum  copal,  and  presented  to  them  as
offerings  the  choicest  delicacies  of  their  country. They
were  extremely  fond  of  trading  with  their  new  visitants,
and  in  six  days  the  Spaniards  obtained  ornaments  of
gold,  of  curious  workmanship,  to  the  value  of  fifteen
thousand  pesos,  in  exchange  for  European  toys  of  small
price. The  two  prisoners  whom  Cordova  had  brought
from  Yucatan,  had  hitherto  served  as  interpreters  ;  but
as  they  did  not  understand  the  language  of  this  country,
the  Spaniards  learned  from  the  natives  by  signs,  that
they  were  subjects  of  a  great  monarch  called  Monte-
zuma, whose  dominion  extended  over  that  and  many

^  See  Note  XXVII.

250  ami:  RICA.  [1518.

other  provinces. Leaving  tliis  place,  with  which  he

had  so  much  reason  to  be  pleased,  Grijalva  continued

his  course  towards  the  west. He  landed  on  a

June  19.  .  .

small  island,  which  he  named  the  Isle  of  Sacri-
fices, because  there  the  Spaniards  beheld,  for  the  first
time,  the  horrid  spectacle  of  human  victims,  which  the
barbarous  superstition  of  the  natives  offered  to  their
St.  Juan  gods.  He  touched  at  another  small  island,  which
deUiua.  j^g  called  St.  Juan  de  Ulua.  From  this  place
he  dispatched  Pedro  de  Alvarado,  one  of  his  offi-
cers, to  Velasquez,  with  a  full  account  of  the  important
discoveries  which  he  bad  made,  and  with  all  the  trea-
sure that  he  had  acquired  by  trafficking  with  the  natives.
After  the  departure  of  Alvarado,  he  himself,  with  the
remaining  vessels,  proceeded  along  the  coast  as  far  as
the  river  Panuco,  the  country  still  appearing  to  be  well
peopled,  fertile,  and  opulent.

Reasons  Scvcral  of  Grijalva\s  officers  contended,  that
iZ  ^T  .  it  was  not  enouo^h  to  have  discovered  those  de-
colony lightful  rcgious,  or  to  have  performed,  at  their

different  landing-places,  the  empty  ceremony
of  taking  possession  of  them  for  the  crown  of  Castile,
and  that  their  glory  was  incomplete,  unless  they  planted
a  colony  in  some  proper  station,  which  might  not  only
secure  the  Spanish  nation  a  footing  in  the  country,  but,
with  the  reinforcements  which  they  were  certain  of  re-
ceiving, might  gradually  subject  the  whole  to  the  do-
minion of  their  sovereign.  But  the  squadron  had  now
been  above  five  months  at  sea  ;  the  greatest  part  of  their
provisions  was  exhausted,  and  what  remained  of  their
stores  so  much  corrupted  by  the  heat  of  the  climate,  as
to  be  almost  unfit  for  use ;  they  had  lost  some  men  by
death;  others  were  sickly;  the  country  was  crowded
with  people  who  seemed  to  be  intelligent  as  well  as
brave  ;  and  they  were  under  the  government  of  one
powerful  monarch,  who  could  bring  them  to  act  against
their  invaders  with  united  force. To  plant  a  colony

1518.]  BOOK  III.  251

under  SO  many  circumstances  of  disadvantage,  appeared
a  scheme  too  perilous  to  be  attempted.  Grijalv a,  though
possessed  both  of  ambition  and  courage,  was  destitute
of  the  superior  talents  capable  of  forming  or  executing
such  a  great  plan.  He  judged  it  more  prudent  to  re-
turn to  Cuba,  having  fulfilled  the  purpose  of  his  voy-
age, and  accomplished  all  that  the  armament  which  he
commanded  enabled  him  to  perform.  He  returned  to
St.  Jago  de  Cuba  on  the  26th  of  October,  from  which
he  had  taken  his  departure  about  six  months  before.^
Prcpara- This  was  tlic  longcst  as  well  as  the  most  suc-

anoOier"^  ccssful  voyagc  whicli  thc  Spaniards  had  hi-
expedition.  tj^g^^Q  ^^^^  ^^  ^1^^  ]Vfg^  World. They  had

discovered  that  Yucatan  was  not  an  island  as  they  had
supposed,  but  part  of  the  great  continent  of  America.
From  Potonchan  they  had  pursued  their  course  for
many  hundred  miles  along  a  coast  formerly  unexplored,
stretching  at  first  towards  the  west,  and  then  turning
to  the  north;  all  the  country  which  they  had  discovered
appeared  to  be  no  less  valuable  than  extensive.  As
soon  as  Alvarado  reached  Cuba,  Velasquez,  transported
with  success  so  far  beyond  his  most  sanguine  expecta-
tions, immediately  dispatched  a  person  of  confidence
to  carry  this  important  intelligence  to  Spain,  to  exhi-
bit the  rich  productions  of  the  countries  which  had
been  discovered  by  his  means,  and  to  solicit  such  an
increase  of  authority,  as  might  enable  and  encourage
him  to  attempt  the  conquest  of  them.  Without  wait-
ing for  the  return  of  his  messenger,  or  for  the  arrival  of
Grijalva,  of  whom  he  was  become  so  jealous  or  dis-
trustful that  he  was  resolved  no  longer  to  employ  him,
he  began  to  prepare  such  a  powerful  armament,  as
might  prove  equal  to  an  enterprise  of  so  much  danger
and  importance.

But  as  the  expedition  upon  which  Velasquez  was

f  Heireia,  dec.  11.  lib.  iii.  c.  1 ,  2.  9,  10. Bcrnal  Diaz,  c.  8.  17. Oviedo  Hist,
lib.  xvii.c.  9.20. Gomara,  c.  49.

252  AMERICA.  [151 S.

now  intent,  terminated  in  conquests  of  greater  moment
than  what  the  Spaniards  had  hitherto  achieved,  and
led  them  to  the  knowledge  of  a  people,  who,  if  com-
pared with  those  tribes  of  America  with  whom  they
were  hitherto  acquainted,  may  be  considered  as  highly
civilized;  it  is  proper  to  pause  before  we  proceed  to  the
history  of  events  extremely  different  from  those  which
we  have  already  related,  in  order  to  take  a  view  of  the
state  of  the  New  World  when  first  discovered,  and  to
contemplate  the  policy  and  manners  of  the  rude  uncul-
tivated tribes  that  occupied  all  the  parts  of  it  with  which
the  Spaniards  were  at  this  time  acquainted.

THE

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA.

BOOK IV.

What  1  wENTY-six  years  had  elapsed  since  Colum-
Amerka  bus  conductcd  the  people  of  Europe  to  the  New
were  then  w^orld. DurinQ;  that  period  the  Spaniards  had

known,  or  r

made  great  progress  in  exploring  its  various
regions. They  had  visited  all  the  islands  scattered  in
different  clusters  through  that  part  of  the  ocean  which
flows  in  between  North  and  South  America.  They  had
sailed  alouQ^  the  eastern  coast  of  the  continent  from  the
river  De  la  Plata  to  the  bottom  of  the  Mexican  gulf,
and  had  found  that  it  stretched  without  interruption
through  this vast portion  of  the globe. They  had
discovered  the great  Southern  ocean,  which  opened
new  prospects  in  that  quarter. They  had  acquired
some  knowledge  of  the  coast  of  Florida,  which  led
them  to  observe  the  continent  as  it  extended  in  an
opposite  direction;  and  though  they  pushed  their  dis-
coveries  no  farther  towards  the  north,  other  nations
had  visited  those  parts  which  they  neglected. The  Eng-
lish, in a  voyage,  the  motives  and  success  of  which
shall  be  related  in  another  part  of  this  history,  had
sailed  along  the  coast  of  America  from  Labrador  to  the
confines  of  Florida;  and  the  Portuguese,  in  quest  of  a
shorter  passage  to  the  East  Indies,  had  ventured  into
the northern seas, and viewed the same regions.''
Thus,  at  the  period  where  I  have  chosen  to  take  a  view
of  the  state  of  the  New  World,  its  extent  was  known
almost  from  its  northern  extremity  to  thiity-five  degrees

*  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib,  vi.  c.  16.

254  AMERICA.

south  of  the  equator.  Tlie  countries  which  stretch  from
thence  to  the  southern  boundary  of  America,  the  great
empire  of  Peru,  and  the  interior  state  of  the  extensive
dominions  subject  to  the  sovereigns  of  Mexico,  were
still  undiscovered.

The  vast  When  we  contemplate  the  New  World,  the
the  New  first  circumstancc  that  strikes  us  is  its  immense
^°'^''^*  extent.  It  was  not  a  small  portion  of  the  earth,
so  inconsiderable  that  it  might  have  escaped  the  obser-
vation or  research  of  former  ages,  which  Columbus  dis-
covered. He  made  known  a  new  hemisphere,  larger
than  either  Europe,  or  Asia,  or  Africa,  the  three  noted
divisions  of  the  ancient  continent,  and  not  much  inferior
in  dimensions  to  a  third  part  of  the  habitable  globe.

America  is  remarkable,  not  only  for  its  magnitude,
but  for  its  position.  It  stretches  from  the  northern
polar  circle  to  a  high  southern  latitude,  above  fifteen
hundred  miles  beyond  the  farthest  extremity  of  the  old
continent  on  that  side  of  the  line.  A  country  of  such
extent  passes  through  all  the  climates  capable  of  be-
coming the  habitation  of  man,  and  fit  for  yielding  the
various  productions  peculiar  either  to  the  temperate  or
to  the  torrid  regions  of  the  earth.

Grand  ob-  Ncxt  to  thc  cxtcut  of  tlic  Ncw  World,  the
presents  to  grandeur  of  the  objects  which  it  presents  to
view.  view  is  most  apt  to  strike  the  eye  of  an  observer.
Nature  seems  here  to  have  carried  on  her  operations
upon  a  larger  scale,  and  with  a  bolder  hand,  and  to
have  distinguished  the  features  of  this  country  by  a  pe-
lts nioun-  culiar  magnificence.  The  mountains  in  Ame-
*^'"*'  rica  are  much  superior  in  height  to  those  in  the
other  divisions  of  the  globe.  Even  the  plain  of  Quito,
which  may  be  considered  as  the  base  of  the  Andes,  is
elevated  farther  above  the  sea  than  the  top  of  the  Pyre-
nees. This  stupendous  ridge  of  the  Andes,  no  less  re-
markable for  extent  than  elevation,  rises  in  different
places  more  than  one-third  above  the  Pike  of  Teneriffe,

BOOK IV.  255

the  highest  land  in  the  ancient  hemisphere.  The  Andes
may  literally  be  said  to  hide  their  heads  in  the  clouds ;
the  storms  often  roll,  and  the  thunder  bursts  below
their  summits,  which,  though  exposed  to  the  rays  of  the
sun  in  the  centre  of  the  torrid  zone,  are  covered  with
everlasting  snows.**

From  these  lofty  mountains  descend  rivers,
proportionably  large,  with  which  the  streams  in
the  ancient  continent  are  not  to  be  compared,  either  for
length  of  course,  or  the  vast  body  of  water  which  they
roll  towards  the  ocean.  The  Maragnon,  the  Orinoco,
the  Plata  in  South  America,  the  Mississippi  and  St.
Laurence  in  North  America,  flow  in  such  spacious
channels,  that,  long  before  they  feel  the  influence  of
the  tide,  they  resemble  arms  of  the  sea  rather  than
rivers  of  fresh  water."

The  lakes  of  the  New  World  are  no  less  con-
spicuous for  grandeur  than  its  mountains  and
rivers.  There  is  nothing  in  other  parts  of  the  globe
which  resembles  the  prodigious  chain  of  lakes  in  North
America.  They  may  properly  be  termed  inland  seas
of  fresh  water ;  and  even  those  of  the  second  or  third
class  in  magnitude  are  of  larger  circuit  (the  Caspian
sea  excepted)  than  the  greatest  lake  of  the  ancient
continent.

Its  form  The  New  World  is  of  a  form  extremely  fa-
Ircon?^^  vourable  to  commercial  intercourse.  When  a
merce.  continent  is  formed,  like  Africa,  of  one  vast  solid
mass,  unbroken  by  arms  of  the  sea  penetrating  into  its
interior  parts,  with  few  large  rivers,  and  those  at  a  con-
siderable distance  from  each  other,  the  greater  part  of
it  seems  destined  to  remain  for  ever  uncivilized,  and  to
be  debarred  from  any  active  or  enlarged  communica-
tion with  the  rest  of  mankind.  When,  like  Europe,  a
continent  is  opened  by  inlets  of  the  ocean  of  great  ex-
tent, such  as  the  Mediterranean  and  Baltic;  or  when,

b  See  Note  XXVIII.  «  See  Note  XXIX.

256  AMERICA.

like  Asia,  its  coast  is  broken  by  deep  bays  advancing
far  into  tlic  country,  such  as  the  Black  sea,  the  gulfs  of
Arabia,  of  Persia,  of  Bengal,  of  Siam,  and  of  Leotang;
when  the  surroundinor  seas  are  filled  with  larp-e  and  fer-
tile  islands,  and  the  continent  itself  watered  with  a  va-
riety of  navigable  rivers,  those  regions  may  be  said  to
possess  whatever  can  facilitate  the  progress  of  their  in-
habitants in  commerce  and  improvement. In  all  these
respects  America  may  bear  a  comparison  with  the  other
quarters  of  the  globe.  The  gulf  of  Mexico,  which  flows
in  between  North  and  South  America,  may  be  consi-
dered as  a  Mediterranean  sea,  which  opens  a  maritime
commerce  with  all  the  fertile  countries  by  which  it  is
encircled. The  islands  scattered  in  it  are  inferior  only
to  those  in  the  Indian  Archipelago,  in  number,  in  mag-
nitude, and  in  value. As  we  stretch  along  the  north-
ern division  of  the  American  hemisphere,  the  bay  of
Chesapeak  presents  a  spacious  inlet,  which  conducts
the  navigator  far  into  the  interior  parts  of  provinces  no
less  fertile  than  extensive ; and  if  ever  the  progress  of
culture  and  population  shall  mitigate  the  extreme  ri-
gour of  the  climate  in  the  more  northern  districts  of
America,  Hudson's  Bay  may  become  as  subservient  to
commercial  intercourse  in  that  quarter  of  the  globe,  as
the  Baltic  is  in  Europe. The  other  great  portion  of
the  New  World  is  encompassed  on  every  side  by  the
sea,  except  one  narrow  neck  which  separates  the  Atlan-
tic from  the  Pacific  ocean ;  and  though  it  be  not  opened
by  spacious  bays  or  arms  of  the  sea,  its  interior  parts
are  rendered  accessible  by  anumber  of  large  rivers,  fed
by  so  many  auxiliary  streams,  flowing  in  such  various
directions,  that,  almost  without  any  aid  from  the  hand
of  industry  and  art,  an  inland  navigation  may  be  car-
ried on  through  all  the  provinces  from  the  river  De  la
Plata  to  the  gulf  of  Paria. Nor  is  this  bounty  of  nature
confined  to  the  southern  division  of  America;  its  north-
ern continent  abounds  no  less  in  rivers  which  are  navi-

BOOK IV.  257

gable  almost  to  their  sources,  and  by  its  immense  chain
of  lakes  provision  is  made  for  an  inland  communication,
more  extensive  and  commodious  than  in  any  quarter  of
the  globe.  The  countries  stretching  from  the  gulf  of
Darien  on  one  side,  to  that  of  California  on  the  other,
which  form  the  chain  that  binds  the  two  parts  of  the
American  continent  together,  are  not  destitute  of  pecu-
liar advantages.  Their  coast  on  one  side  is  washed  by
the  Atlantic  ocean,  on  the  other  by  the  Pacific.  Some
of  their  rivers  flow  into  the  former,  some  into  the  latter,
and  secure  to  them  all  the  commercial  benefits  that  may
result  from  a  communication  with  both.
„,  But  what  most  distino-uishes  America  from

lempera-  o

tureofits  other  parts  of  the  earth,  is  the  peculiar  tempe-

cliraate.  ,.  - ,  ,.„

rature  oi  its  climate,  and  the  clmerent  laws  to
which  it  is  subject  with  respect  to  the  distribution  of
heat  and  cold.  We  cannot  determine  with  precision
the  portion  of  heat  felt  in  any  part  of  the  globe,  merely
by  measuring  its  distance  from  the  equator.  The  cli-
mate of  a  country  is  affected,  in  some  degree,  by  its
elevation  above  the  sea,  by  the  extent  of  continent,  by
the  nature  of  the  soil,  the  height  of  adjacent  mountains,
and  many  other  circumstances.  The  influence  of  these,
however,  is,  from  various  causes,  less  considerable  in
the  greater  part  of  the  ancient  continent;  and  from
knowing  the  position  of  any  country  there,  we  can  pro-
nounce with  greater  certainty,  what  will  be  the  warmth
of  its  climate,  and  the  nature  of  its  productions.

The  maxims  which  are  founded  upon  obser-
nance  of  vation  of  our  hemisphere  will  not  apply  to  the
*^°'^'  other.  In  the  New  World,  cold  predominates.
The  rigour  of  the  frigid  zone  extends  over  half  of  those
regions,  which  should  be  temperate  by  their  position.
Countries  where  the  grape  and  the  fig  should  ripen,  are
buried  under  snow  one  half  of  the  year;  and  lands  si-
tuated in  the  same  parallel  with  the  most  fertile  and
best  cultivated  provinces  in  Europe,  are  chilled  with

VOL.  VI.  s

258  AMERICA.

perpetual  frosts,  wliicli  almost  destroy  the  power  of
vegetation.'^  As  we  advance  to  those  parts  of  America
which  lie  in  the  same  parallel  with  provinces  of  Asia
and  Africa,  blessed  with  a  uniform  enjoyment  of  such
genial  warmth  as  is  most  friendly  to  life  and  to  vegeta-
tion, the  dominion  of  cold  continues  to  be  felt,  and
winter  reigns,  though  during  a  short  period,  with  ex-
treme severity.  If  we  proceed  along  the  American  con-
tinent into  the  torrid  zone,  we  shall  find  the  cold  preva-
lent in  the  New  World  extending  itself  also  to  this
region  of  the  globe,  and  mitigating  the  excess  of  its
fervour.  While  the  negro  on  the  coast  of  Africa  is
scorched  with  unremitting  heat,  the  inhabitant  of  Peru
breathes  an  air  equally  mild  and  temperate,  and  is  per-
petually shaded  under  a  canopy  of  grey  clouds,  which
intercepts  the  fierce  beams  of  the  sun,  without  obstruct-
ing his  friendly  influence."  Along  the  eastern  coast
of  America,  the  climate,  though  more  similar  to  that
of  the  torrid  zone  in  other  parts  of  the  earth,  is  never-
theless considerably  milder  than  in  those  countries  of
Asia  and  Africa  which  lie  in  the  same  latitude.  If
from  the  southern  tropic  we  continue  our  progress  to
the  extremity  of  the  American  continent,  we  meet  with
frozen  seas,  and  countries  horrid,  barren,  and  scarcely
habitable  for  cold,  much  sooner  than  in  the  north. *^
Causes  Various  causes  combine  in  rendering  the  cli-

of  this,  ii-iate  of  America  so  extremely  different  from  that
of  the  ancient  continent.  Though  the  utmost  extent  of
America  towards  the  north  be  not  yet  discovered,  we
know  that  it  advances  much  nearer  to  the  pole  than
either  Europe  or  Asia.  Both  these  have  large  seas  to
the  north,  which  are  open  during  part  of  the  year;  and
even  when  covered  with  ice,  the  wind  that  blows  over
them  is  less  intensely  cold  than  that  which  blows  over

<•  Sec  Note  XXX. «  Voyage  de  Ulloa,  torn.  i.  p.  4.'>3.  Anson's  Voyage,  p.  184.
f  Arson's  Voyage,  p.  71. ;  and  Voyage  de  Quires,  cliez  Hist,  de  Gen.  des.  Voy-
ages, tora.  xiv.  p.  83. Ricliard  Hist.  Natur.  de  I'Air,  ii.  o0.i,&c.

BOOK IV.  '269

land  in  the  same  high  latitudes.  But  in  America  the  land
stretches  from  the  river  St.  Laurence  towards  the  pole,
and  spreads  out  immensely  to  the  west.  A  chain  of
enormous  mountains,  covered  with  snow  and  ice,  runs
through  all  this  dreary  region.  The  wind  in  passing
over  such  an  extent  of  high  and  frozen  land,  becomes
so  impregnated  with  cold,  that  it  acquires  a  piercing-
keenness,  which  it  retains  in  its  progress  through
warmer  climates,  and  it  is  not  entirely  mitigated  until
it  reach  the  gulf  of  Mexico.  Over  all  the  continent  of
North  America,  a  north-westerly  wind  and  excessive
cold  are  synonymous  terms.  Even  in  the  most  sultry
weather,  the  moment  that  the  wind  veers  to  that  quar-
ter, its  penetrating  influence  is  felt  in  a  transition  from
heat  to  cold  no  less  violent  than  sudden.  To  this
powerful  cause  we  may  ascribe  the  extraordinary  domi-
nion of  cold,  and  its  violent  inroads  into  the  southern
provinces  in  that  part  of  the  globe. ^

Other  causes,  no  less  remarkable,  diminish  the  active
power  of  heat  in  those  parts  of  the  American  continent
which  lie  between  the  tropics.  In  all  that  portion  of
the  globe,  the  wind  blows  in  an  invariable  direction  from
east  to  west.  As  this  wind  holds  its  course  across  the
ancient  continent,  it  arrives  at  the  countries  which
stretch  along  the  western  shores  of  Africa,  inflamed  with
all  the  fiery  particles  which  it  hath  collected  from  the
sultry  plains  of  Asia,  and  the  burning  sands  in  the  Afri-
can deserts.  The  coast  of  Africa  is,  accordingly,  the
region  of  the  earth  which  feels  the  most  fervent  heat,
and  is  exposed  to  the  unmitigated  ardour  of  the  torrid
zone.  But  this  same  wind  which  brings  such  an  ac-
cession of  warmth  to  the  countries  lying  between  the
river  of  Senegal  and  Cafraria,  traverses  the  Atlantic
ocean,  before  it  reaches  the  American  shore.  It  is
cooled  in  its  passage  over  this  vast  body  of  water,  and

5  Charlevoix Hist, de Nov,  Fr.  iii.  165. Hist. Generale  Voyages,  torn.  xv.
215,  &c.

S  2

260  ^  AMERICA.

is  felt  as  a  refreshing-  gale  along  the  coast  of  Brazil,"
and  Guiana,  rendering  these  countries,  though  among
the  warmest  in  America,  temperate,  when  compared  with
those  which  lie  opposite  to  them  in  Africa.'  As  this
wind  advances  in  its  course  across  America,  it  meets  with
immense  plains,  covered  with  impenetrable  forests,  or  oc-
cupied by  large  rivers,  marshes,  and  stagnating  waters,
where  it  can  recover  no  considerable  degree  of  heat.
At  length  it  arrives  at  the  Andes,  which  run  from  north
to  south,  through  the  whole  continent.  In  passing  over
their  elevated  and  frozen  summits,  it  is  so  thoroughly
cooled,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  countries  beyond
them  hardly  feel  the  ardour  to  which  they  seem  exposed
by  their  situation. *"  In  the  other  provinces  of  America,
from  Tierra  Firme  westward  to  the  Mexican  empire,
the  heat  of  the  climate  is  tempered,  in  some  places,  by
the  elevation  of  the  land  above  the  sea,  in  others,  by
their  extraordinary  humidity,  and  in  all,  by  the  enor-
mous mountains  scattered  over  this  tract.  The  islands
of  America  in  the  torrid  zone  are  either  small  or  moun-
tainous, and  are  fanned  alternately  by  refreshing  sea
and  land  breezes.

The  causes  of  the  extraordinary  cold  towards  the
southern  limits  of  America,  and  in  the  seas  beyond  it,
cannot  be  ascertained  in  a  manner  equally  satisfying.
It  was  long  supposed  that  a  vast  continent,  distinguished
by  the  name  of  Terra  Australis  Incognita.,  lay  between
the  southern  extremity  of  America  and  the  Antarctic
pole.  The  same  principles  which  account  for  the  ex-
traordinary degree  of  cold  in  the  northern  regions  of
America,  were  employed  in  order  to  explain  that  which
is  felt  at  Cape  Horn  and  the  adjacent  countries.  The
immense  extent  of  the  southern  continent,  and  the  large
rivers  which  it  poured  into  the  ocean,  were  mentioned
and  admitted  by  philosophers  as  causes  sufficient  to  occa-

»'  Sec  Note  XXXI.  i  See  Note  XXXII.

^  Acosta  Hist.  NoviOrbis,  lib.  ii.  c.  11. Buffon  Hist.  Nalurelio,  &c.totn.  ii.  512.
&c.  ix.  107,  &c. Osborn's  Collect,  of  Voyages,  ii.  p.  868.

BOOK IV.  261

sion  the  unusual  sensation  of  cold,  and  the  still  more
uncommon  appearances  of  frozen  seas  in  that  region  of
the  globe.  But  the  imaginary  continent  to  which  such
influence  was  ascribed,  having  been  searched  for  in
vain,  and  the  space  which  it  was  supposed  to  occupy
having  been  found  to  be  an  open  sea,  new  conjectures
must  be  formed  with  respect  to  the  causes  of  a  tem-
perature of  climate,  so  extremely  different  from  that
which  we  experience  in  countries  removed  af  the  same
distance  from  the  opposite  pole.'

Condition  After  Contemplating  those  permanent  and
when  first characteristic  qualities  of  the  American  conti-

Qiscovcrcd

nent,  which  arise  from  the  peculiarity  of  its
situation,  and  the  disposition  of  its  parts,  the  next  ob-
ject that  merits  attention  is  its  condition  when  first  dis-
covered, as  far  as  that  depended  upon  the  industry  and
operations  of  man.  The  effects  of  human  ingenuity
and  labour  are  more  extensive  and  considerable,  than
even  our  own  vanity  is  apt  at  first  to  imagine.  When
we  survey  the  face  of  the  habitable  globe,  no  small  part
of  that  fertility  and  beauty  which  we  ascribe  to  the
hand  of  nature,  is  the  work  of  man.  His  efforts,  when
continued  through  a  succession  of  ages,  change  the
appearance  and  improve  the  qualities  of  the  earth.  As
a  great  part  of  the  ancient  continent  has  long  been  oc-
cupied by  nations  far  advanced  in  arts  and  industry,  our
eye  is  accustomed  to  view  the  earth  in  that  form  which
it  assumes  when  rendered  fit  to  be  the  residence  of  a
numerous  race  of  men,  and  to  supply  them  with  nou-
rishment.

But  in  the  New  World,  the  state  of  mankind

Rude  and  i  i i  p  i

uncuiti-  was  ruder,  and  the  aspect  oi  nature  extremely
different.  Throughout  all  its  vast  regions,  there
were  only  two  monarchies  remarkable  for  extent  of  ter-
ritory, or  distinguished  by  any  progress  in  improve-
ment. The  rest  of  this  continent  was  possessed  by

1  See  Note  XXXIII.

-2G2  AMERICA.

small  independent  tribes,  destitute  of  arts  and  industry,
and  neither  capable  to  correct  the  defects,  nor  desirous
to  meliorate  the  condition  of  that  part  of  the  earth
allotted  to  them  lor  their  habitation.  Countries,  occu-
pied by  such  people,  were  almost  in  the  same  state  as
if  they  had  been  without  inhabitants.  Immense  forests
covered  a  great  part  of  the  uncultivated  earth ;  and  as
the  hand  of  industry  had  not  taught  the  rivers  to  run  in
a  proper  channel,  or  drained  ofi"  the  stagnating  water,
many  of  the  most  fertile  plains  were  overflowed  with
inundations,  or  converted  into  marshes.  In  the  south-
ern provinces,  where  the  warmth  of  the  sun,  the  mois-
ture of  the  climate,  and  the  fertility  of  the  soil,  combine
in  calling  forth  the  most  vigorous  powers  of  vegetation,
the  woods  are  so  choked  with  its  rank  luxuriance,  as  to
be  ahnost  impervious,  and  the  surface  of  the  ground  is
hid  from  the  eye  under  a  thick  covering  of  shrubs  and
herbs  and  weeds.  In  this  state  of  wild  unassisted  na-
ture, a  great  part  of  the  large  provinces  in  South  Ame-
rica, which  extend  from  the  bottom  of  tlie  Andes  to  the
sea,  still  remain.  The  European  colonies  have  cleared
and  cultivated  a  few  spots  along  the  coast,  but  the
original  race  of  inhabitants,  as  rude  and  indolent  as
ever,  have  done  nothing  to  open  or  improve  a  country,
possessing  almost  every  advantage  of  situation  and  cli-
mate. As  we  advance  towards  the  northern  provinces
of  America,  nature  continues  to  wear  the  same  unculti-
vated aspect,  and  in  proportion  as  the  rigour  of  the
climate  increases,  appears  more  desolate  and  horrid.
There  the  forests,  though  not  encumbered  with  the  same
exuberance  of  vegetation,  are  of  immense  extent ;  pro-
digious marshes  overspread  the  plains,  and  few  marks
appear  of  human  activity  in  any  attempt  to  cultivate  or
embellish  the  earth.  No  wonder  that  the  colonies  sent
from  Europe  were  astonished  at  their  first  entrance  into
the  New  World.  It  appeared  to  them  waste,  solitary,
and  uninviting. When  the  English  began  to  settle  in

HOOK iv  2rt;i

Amcrua,  tijty  Icrined  iIh;  cuuiitrios  oiwliicli  tlicy  took
possession,  Tlic  Wilderness.  Notliiii}^'  Ixit  tlu;ir  eager
cxpi'ctation  olIiiKlin^  mines  of  i^old,  eonld  Iiave  induced
IIk;  Spaniards  to  pentitrate  tljrou|4h  tlie  woods  and
inarshcs  of  Anierica,  where,  at  every  step,  they  ol)servfc'd
the  extreme  dillerence  hetwet'n  tin;  uncultivated  iace  of
Nature,  and  tliat  wliicli  it  ae(juires  under  lh(;  forming
liand  of  industry  and  art.'"

Unwiioir-  Tlie  )al)()ur  and  op<'rations  of"  njan  not  only
*"'"^'  imj)rove  and  embellish  the  earth,  hut  nnider  it
more  wholesome?  and  friendly  to  life.  WIumi  any  nrgion
lies  netrlected  and  destitute  oi" cultivation,  the;  air  sta<r-
nates  in  the  woods,  putrid  exhalations  arise  from  the
waters  ;  the  surface  of  the  earth,  loadi;d  with  rank  vege-
tation, feels  not  the  purifying  influence  of  the  sun  or  of
the  wind  ;  thr  malignity  of  the;  distrmjji'rs  natural  to  the
climate  increases,  and  new  maladies  no  less  noxious  arc;
engcMidered.  Accordingly,  all  tlie  provinces  of  Ame-
rica, when  first  discovered,  were  found  to  be  nunark-
ably  unhealthy,  This  the  Spaniards  expericMiced  in
every  (expedition  into  the  New  World,  whether  destiiued
for  con(juest  or  setthement.  'I'hough  by  the  natural  con-
stitution of  their  bodij's,  their  habitual  ttimperance,  and
the  persevering  vigour  of  tlu.'ir  minds,  they  were  as
much  formed  as  any  [)eopl('  in  I'^^urope  for  active  service
in  a  sultry  climate;,  th(;y  felt  severely  the;  fatal  and  [)er-
nicious  (jualities  of  those;  uncultivatcul  regions  through
which  th(;y  marched,  or  where  they  (endeavoured  to
plant  colonies,  (ireat  numbers  were  cut  off  by  the  un-
known and  violent  diseases  witli  which  they  were  in-
fected. Such  as  survived  the  destructive;  rage  of  those
maladies,  were  not  exempted  from  the  noxious  influence
of  the  climate'.  They  re'turned  to  Europe,  according
to  the;  eh'se  rij)tion  ejf  the  early  Spanish  historians,
feeble,  emaciate;el,  with  languid  looks  and  complexions
of  such  a  sickly  yellow  colour,  as  indicated  the  un-

"'  S«c  Note  XXXIV.

264  AMERICA.

wholesome  temperature  of  the  countries  where  they  had
resided."

The  uncultivated  state  of  the  New  World

Its  animals. rn  ■,  i> ^  • i

aitected  not  only  the  temperature  of  the  an-,  but
the  qualities  of  its  productions.  The  principle  of  life
seems  to  have  been  less  active  and  vigorous  there,  than
in  the  ancient  continent.  Notwithstandino;  the  vast  ex-
tent  of  America,  and  the  variety  of  its  climates,  the  dif-
ferent species  of  animals  peculiar  to  it  are  much  fewer
in  proportion,  than  those  of  the  other  hemisphere.  In
the  islands,  there  were  only  four  kinds  of  quadrupeds
known,  the  largest  of  which  did  not  exceed  the  size  of
a  rabbit.  On  the  continent,  the  variety  was  greater  ;
and  though  the  individuals  of  each  kind  could  not  fail
of  multiplying  exceedingly,  when  almost  unmolested,
by  men,  who  were  neither  so  numerous,  nor  so  united
in  society,  as  to  be  formidable  enemies  to  the  animal
creation,  the  number  of  distinct  species  must  still  be
considered  as  extremely  small.  Of  two  hundred  dif-
ferent kinds  of  animals  spread  over  the  face  of  the  earth,
only  about  one-third  existed  in  America  at  the  time  of
its  discovery."  Nature  was  not  only  less  prolific;  in  the
New  World,  but  she  appears  likewise  to  have  been  less
vigorous  in  her  productions.  The  animals  originally
belonging  to  this  quarter  of  the  globe  appear  to  be  of
an  inferior  race,  neither  so  robust,  nor  so  fierce,  as  those
of  the  other  continent.  America  gives  birth  to  no  crea-
ture of  such  bulk  as  to  be  compared  with  the  elephant
or  rhinoceros,  or  that  equals  the  lion  and  tiger  in
strength  and  ferocity."*  The  Tapi/r  of  Brazil,  the  largest
quadruped  of  the  ravenous  tribe  in  the  New  World,  is
not  larger  than  a  calf  of  six  months  old.  The  Fimia
and  Jaguar,  its  fiercest  beasts  of  prey,  which  Euro-
peans have  inaccurately  denominated  lions  and  tigers,
possess  neither  the  undaunted  courage  of  the  former,

n  Gomara  Hist.  c.  20.  22. Oviedo  Hist.  lib.  ii.  c.  13.  lib.  5.  c.  10. P.  Martvr,
Episl.  546. Decad.p.  176.

»  Buflfon  Hist.  Naturelle,  toni.  ix.  p.  86.  P  See  Note  XXXV.

BOOK IV.  265

nor  the  ravenous  cruelty  of  the  latter.''  They  are  inac-
tive and  timid,  hardly  formidable  to  man,  and  often
turn  their  backs  upon  the  least  appearance  of  resistance.'
The  same  qualities  in  the  climate  of  America  which
stinted  the  growth,  and  enfeebled  the  spirit,  of  its  native
animals,  have  proved  pernicious  to  such  as  have  mi-
grated into  it  voluntarily  from  the  other  continent,  or
have  been  transported  thither  by  the  Europeans/  The
bears,  the  wolves,  the  deer  of  America,  are  not  equal  in
size  to  those  of  the  Old  World.*  Most  of  the  domestic
animals,  with  which  the  Europeans  have  stored  the  pro-
vinces wherein  they  settled,  have  degenerated  with  re-
spect either  to  bulk  or  quality,  in  a  country  whose
temperature  and  soil  seem  to  be  less  favourable  to  the
strength  and  perfection  of  the  animal  creation."
,  The  same  causes  which  checked  the  a^rowth

Insects  _  ^  o

and  rep- and  the  vi2"our  of  the  more  noble  animals,  were

tiles.  .  .  .

friendly  to  the  propagation  and  increase  of  rep-
tiles and  insects.  Though  this  is  not  peculiar  to  the  New
World,  and  those  odious  tribes,  nourished  by  heat,  mois-
ture, and  corruption,  infest  every  part  of  the  torrid  zone ;
they  multiply  faster,  perhaps,  in  America,  and  grow  to
a  more  monstrous  bulk.  As  this  country  is,  on  the
whole,  less  cultivated,  and  less  peopled,  than  the  other
quarters  of  the  earth,  the  active  principle  of  life  wastes
its  force  in  productions  of  this  inferior  form.  The  air
is  often  darkened  with  clouds  of  insects,  and  the  ground
covered  with  shocking  and  noxious  reptiles.  The  coun-
try around  Porto-Bello  swarms  with  toads  in  such  mul-
titudes, as  hide  the  surface  of  the  earth.  At  Guyaquil,
snakes  and  vipers  are  hardly  less  numerous.  Cartha-
gena  is  infested  with  numerous  flocks  of  bats,  which

1  Buffon  Hist.  Natur.  torn.  ix.  p.  87. Margrarii  Hist.  Nat.  Brasil,  p.  229.

••  Buffon  Hist,  Natur.  ix.  p,  13.  203.  Acosta  Hist.  lib.  iv.  c.  34.  Pisonis
Hist.  p.  6. Herrera,  dec.  4.  lib.  iv.  c.  1.  lib.  x.  c.  13.

'  Churchill,  v.  p.  691.  Ovalle  Relat.  of  Chili,  Church,  iii.  p.  10.  Somario
de  Oviedo,  c.  14 — 22. Voyage  da  Des  Marchais,  iii.  299.

»  Buffon  Hist.  Natur.  ix.  103.  Kalra's  Travels,  i.  102.  Biet.  Yoy.  de  France
Equinox,  p.  339.  "  See  Note  XXXVI.

2(>f}  AMERICA.

annoy  not  only  the  cattle  but  the  inhabitants/  In  the
islands,  legions  of  ants  have,  at  diflbrent  times,  con-
sumed every  vegetable  production,^  and  left  the  earth
entirely  bare,  as  if  it  had  been  burnt  with  fire.  The
damp  forests,  and  rank  soil  of  the  countries  on  the
banks  of  the  Orinoco  and  Maragnon,  teem  with  almost
every  offensive  and  poisonous  creature,  which  the
power  of  a  sultry  sun  can  quicken  into  life.^

The  birds  of  the  New  World  are  not  distinguished
by  qualities  so  conspicuous  and  characteristical,  as
those,  which  we  have  observed  in  its  quadrupeds.
Birds  are  more  independent  of  man,  and  less  affected
by  the  changes,  which  his  industry  and  labour  make
upon  the  state  of  the  earth.  They  have  a  greater  pro-
pensity to  migrate  from  one  country  to  another,  and
can  gratify  this  instinct  of  their  nature  without  difficulty
or  dano-er.  Hence  the  number  of  birds  common  to  both
continents,  is  much  greater  than  that  of  quadrupeds ;
and  even  such  as  are  peculiar  to  America  nearly  resem-
ble those  with  which  mankind  were  acquainted  in  simi-
lar regions  of  the  ancient  hemisphere.  The  American
birds  of  the  torrid  zone,  like  those  of  the  same  climate
in  Asia  and  Africa,  are  decked  in  plumage,  which  daz-
zles the  eye  with  the  beauty  of  its  colours  ;  but  nature,
satisfied  with  clothing  them  in  this  gay  dress,  has  de-
nied most  of  them  that  melody  of  sound,  and  variety
of  notes,  which  catch  and  delight  the  ear.  The  birds
of  the  temperate  climates  there,  in  the  same  manner  as
in  our  continent,  are  less  splendid  in  their  appearance ;
but,  in  compensation  for  that  defect,  they  have  voices
of  greater  compass,  and  more  melodious.  In  some
districts  of  America,  the  unwholesome  temperature  of
the  air  seems  to  be  unfavourable  even  to  this  part  of

'  Voyage  de  Ulloa,  torn.  i.  p.  89. Id.  p.  147. Herrera,  dec.  11.  lib.  iii.  c.  3.  19.

y  See  Note  XXXVll.

^  Voyage  de  Condaniine,  p.  167.  Gumilla.  iii.  1'20,  &c.  Hist,  gencr.  des  Voy-
ages, xiv.  317.  Dumont  Meiuoires  sur  la  Louisianc,  i.  108.  Soinario  de  Oviedo,
c.  52—62.

BOOR  IV.  267

the  creation.  The  number  of  birds  is  less  than  in  other
countries,  and  the  traveller  is  struck  with  the  amazing
solitude  and  silence  of  its  forests.''  It  is  remarkable,
however,  that  America,  where  the  quadrupeds  are  so
dwarfish  and  dastardly,  should  produce  the  Condor,
which  is  entitled  to  pre-eminence  over  all  the  flying
tribe,  in  bulk,  in  strength,  and  in  courage.''

The  soil  in  a  continent  so  extensive  as  Ame-

Soil.

rica  must,  of  course,  be  extremely  various.  In
each  of  its  provinces,  we  find  some  distinguishing  pe-
culiarities ;  the  description  of  which  belongs  to  those
who  write  their  particular  history.  In  general,  we  may
observe,  that  the  moisture  and  cold,  which  predominate
so  remarkably  in  all  parts  of  America,  must  have  great
influence  upon  the  nature  of  its  soil ;  countries  lying  in
the  same  parallel  with  those  regions  which  never  feel
the  extreme  rigour  of  winter  in.  the  ancient  continent,
are  frozen  over  in  America  during  a  great  part  of  the
year.  Chilled  by  this  intense  cold,  the  groujid  never
acquires  warmth  suflScient  to  ripen  the  fruits,  which  are
found  in  the  corresponding  parts  of  the  other  continent.
If  we  wish  to  rear  in  America  the  productions  which
abound  in  any  particular  district  of  the  ancient  wo.rld,
we  must  advance  several  degrees  nearer  to  the  line  thaja
in  the  other  hemisphere,  as  it  requires  such  an  increas  e
of  heat  to  counterbalance  the  natural  frigidity  of  th  e
soil  and  climate.''  At  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  several
of  the  plants,  and  fruits  peculiar  to  the  countries  withi  n
the  tropics,  are  cultivated  with  success  ;  whereas,  at  S  t.
Augustine,  in  Florida,  and  Charles-Town,  in  South
Carolina,  though  considerably  nearer  the  line,  they
cannot  be  brought  to  thrive  with  equal  certainty.*^  Bu  t,
if  allowance  be  made,  for  this  diversity  in  the  degre:e

*  Bourguer  Voy.  au  Perou,  17.  Chanvalon  Voyage  a  la  Martinique,  p.  {'6.
Warren's  Descript.  Surinam.  Osborn's  Collect,  ii.  924.  Lettres  Edif.  xxiv.  p.  3^39.
Charlev.  Hist,  de  la  Nouv.  France,  iii.  155.

^  Voyage  de  Ulloa,  i.  363.  Voyage  de  Condamine,  175.  Buffon  Hist.  N'ut.
xvi.  184. Voyage  du  Des  Marchais,  iii.  320.  =  gee  Note  XXXVIII.

d  See  Note  XXXIX.

263  AMERIC^V.

of  heat,  the  soil  of  America  is  naturally  as  rich  and  fer-
tile as  in  any  part  of  the  earth.  As  the  country  was
thinly  inhabited,  and  by  a  people  of  little  industry,  who
had  none  of  the  domestic  animals,  which  civilized  na-
tions rear  in  such  vast  numbers,  the  earth  was  not  ex-
hausted by  their  consumption.  The  vegetable  produc-
tions, to  which  the  fertility  of  the  soil  gave  birth,  often
remained  untouched,  and  being  suffered  to  corrupt  on
its  surface,  returned  with  increase  into  its  bosom.'  As
trees  and  plants  derive  a  great  part  of  their  nourish-
ment from  air  and  water ;  if  they  were  not  destroyed
by  man  and  other  animals,  they  would  render  to  the
earth  more,  perhaps,  than  they  take  from  it,  and  feed
rather  than  impoverish  it.  Thus  the  unoccupied  soil
of  America  may  have  gone  on  enriching  for  many  ages.
The  vast  number  as  well  as  enormous  size  of  the  trees
in  America,  indicate  the  extraordinary  vigour  of  the
soil  in  its  native  state.  When  the  Europeans  first  be-
gan to  cultivate  the  New  World,  they  were  astonished
at  the  luxuriant  power  of  vegetation  in  its  virgin  mould  ;
and  in  several  places  the  ingenuity  of  the  planter  is  still
employed  in  diminishing  and  wasting  its  superfluous
fertility,  in  order  to  bring  it  down  to  a  state  fit  for  pro-
fi  table  culture.^

How  was  Having  thus  surveyed  the  state  of  the  New
A-mcrica  World  at  the  time  of  its  discovery,  and  consi-
dered the  peculiar  features  and  qualities,  which
distinguish  and  characterize  it,  the  next  inquiry  that
rcserits  attention  is,  How  was  America  peopled?  By
what  course  did  mankind  migrate  from  the  one  conti-
nent to  the  other  ?  and  in  what  quarter  is  it  most  pro-
bable that  a  communication  was  opened  between  them  ?
Notradi-  ^^  know,  with  infallible  certainty,  that  all
tion  con- ([^q  human  race  spring  from  the  same  source,

«  Buffon  Hist.  Natiir.  i.  242. Kalm,  i.  151.
'  Charlevoix,  Hist,  dc  Nouv.  Fran.  iii.  405. Voyage  du  Des  Marcliais,  iii.  229.
Ivery  ap.  de  Bry,  part  iii.  p.  174. See  Note  XL.

BOOK IV.  269

cerning  it ^nd  that  tlic  descendants  of  one  man,  under  the

among  .  n  •  i t

themselves,  protection  as  Well  as  in  obedience  to  the  com-
mand of  Heaven,  multiplied  and  replenished  the  earth.
But  neither  the  annals  nor  the  traditions  of  nations
reach  back  to  those  remote  ages,  in  which  they  took
possession  of  the  different  countries,  where  they  are
now  settled. We  cannot  trace  the  branches  of  this  first
family,  or  point  out  with  certainty  the  time  and  man-
ner in  which  they  divided  and  spread  over  the  face  of
the  globe. Even  among  the  most  enlightened  people,
the  period  of  authentic  history  is  extremely  short ; and
every  thing  prior  to  that,  is  fabulous  or  obscure. It  is
not  surprising,  then,  that  the  unlettered  inhabitants  of
America,  who  have  no  solicitude  about  futurity,  and
little  curiosity  concerning  what  is  passed,  should  be
altogether  unacquainted  with  their  own  original. The
people  on  the  two  opposite  coasts  of  America,  who
occupy those countries  in  America  which  approach
nearest  to  the ancient  continent,  are so  remarkably
rude,  that  it  is  altogether  vain  to  search  among  them
for  such  information  as  might  discover  the  place  from
whence  they  came,  or  the  ancestors  of  whom  they  are
descended.^ Whatever  light  has  been  thrown  on  this
subject,  is  derived,  not  from  the  natives  of  America,
but  from  the  inquisitive  genius  of  their  conquerors.
Various Whcu  the  pcoplc of  Europe  unexpectedly
theories. (Jigcovcred  a  New  World,  removed  at  a  vast  dis-
tance from  every  part  of  the  ancient  continent  which
was  then  known,  and  filled  with  inhabitants  whose  ap-
pearance and  manners  differed  remarkably  from  the  rest
of  the  human  species, the  question  concerning  their
original  became  naturally  an  object  of  curiosity  aad
attention. The  theories  and  speculations  of  ingenious
men  with  respect  to  this  subject,  would  fill  many  vo-
lumes ;  but  are  often  so  wild  and  chimerical,  that  I
should  offer  an  insult  to  the  understanding  of  my  read-
er Vinegas's  Hist,  of  California,  i.  60.

270  AMERICA.

ers,  if  I  attempted  either  minutely  to  enumerate  or  to
refute  them. Some  have  presumptuously  imagined,  that
the  people  of  America  were  not the ofl'spring-  of  the
same  common  parent  with  the  rest  of  mankind,  but  that
they  formed  a  separate  race  of  men,  distinguishable  by
peculiar  features  in  the  constitution  of  their  bodies,  as
well  as  in  the  characteristic  qualities  of  their  minds.
Others contend, that  they  are descended  from  some
renmant  of  the  antediluvian  inhabitants  of  the  earth,
who  survived  the  deluge,  which  swept  away  the  greatest
part  of  the  human  species  in  the  days  of  Noah  ;  and
preposterously  suppose  rude,  uncivilized  tribes,  scat-
tered over  an  uncultivated  continent,  to  be  the most
ancient  race  of  people  on  the  earth. There  is  hardly
any  nation  from  the  north  to  the  south  pole,  to  which
some  antiquary,  in  the  extravagance  of  conjecture,  has
not  ascribed  the  honour  of  peopling  America. The
Jews,  the  Canaanites, the  Phoenicians,  the  Carthagi-
nians, the  Greeks,  the  Scythians  in  ancient  times,  are
supposed  to  have  settled  in  this  western  world. The
Chinese,  the  Swedes,  the  Norwegians,  the  Welsh,  the
Spaniards,  are  said to have  sent  colonies  thither  in
later  ages,  at  different  periods,  and  on  various  occa-
sions. Zealous  advocates  stand  forth  to  support  the
respective  claims  of  those  people  ;  and  though  they  rest
upon  no  better  foundation  than  the  casual  resemblance
oi:*  some  customs,  or  the  supposed  affinity  between  a
few  words  in  their  different  languages,  much  erudition
and  more  zeal  have  been  employed,  to little  purpose,
ia  defence  of  the  opposite  systems. Those  regions
olf  conjecture  and  controversy  belong  not  to  the  histo-
rj.an. His  is  a more  limited province, confined to
"vrhat  is  established  by  certain  or  highly  probable  evi-
'dence. Beyond  this I shall  not  venture,  in  oflering
a  few observations,  which may  contribute  to  throw
some  light  upon  this  curious  and  much  agitated  ques-
tion.

BOOK IV.  2M

Ought  ^  •  There  are  authors  who  have  endeavoured

not  to  be i^y  mere  conjecture  to  account  for  the  peopling:

founded  -'  -a  ^ ^  ■

on  mere  oi  Amcrica.  Somc  have  supposed  that  it  was
conjee  ure.  Qj,jgjj-^g^j|y  united  to  the  ancient  continent,  and

disjoined  from  it  by  the  shock  of  an  earthquake,  or  the
irruption  of  a  delug-e.  Others  have  imagined,  that  some
vessel  being-  forced  from  its  course  by  the  violence  of  a
westerly  wind,  might  be  driven  by  accident  towards  the
American  coast,  and  have  given  a  beginning  to  popu-
lation in  that  desolate  continent.^  But  with  respect  to
all  those  systems,  it  is  vain  either  to  reason  or  inquire,
because  it  is  impossible  to  come  to  any  decision.  Such
events  as  they  suppose  are  barely  possible,  and  may
have  happened.  That  they  ever  did  happen,  we  have
no  evidence,  either  from  the  clear  testimony  of  history,
or  from  the  obscure  intimations  of  tradition.

2.  Nothing:  can  be  more  frivolous  or  uncer-

Or  on  re-  ^

semblance taiu  tliau  tlic  attempts  to  discover  the  original

of  manners, p ,i  *  •  i i ^  •  .1

01  the  Americans,  merely  by  tracmg  the  re-
semblance between  their  manners  and  those  of  any
particular  people  in  the  ancient  continent.  If  we  sup-
pose two  tribes,  though  placed  in  the  most  remote  re-
gions of  the  globe,  to  live  in  a  climate  nearly  of  the  same
temperature,  to  be  in  the  same  state  of  society,  and  to
resemble  each  other  in  the  degree  of  their  improvement,
they  must  feel  the  same  wants  and  exert  the  same  en-
deavours to  supply  them.  The  same  objects  will  allure,
the  same  passions  will  animate  them,  and  the  same  ideas
and  sentiments  will  arise  in  their  minds.  The  charac-
ter and  occupations  of  the  hunter  in  America  must  be
little  different  from  those  of  an  Asiatic,  who  depends
for  subsistence  on  the  chase.  A  tribe  of  savages  on  the
banks  of  the  Danube  must  nearly  resemble  one  upon  the
plains  washed  by  the  Mississippi.  Instead  then  of  pre-
suming from  this  similarity,  that  there  is  any  affinity

g  Parson's  Remains  of  Japhet,  p.  240.  Ancient  Univers.  Hist.  vol.  xx.  p.  164.
P.  Feyjoo  Teatro  Critico,  torn.  v.  p.  304,  &c.  Acosta  Hist,  Moral.  Novi  Orbis,
lib.  i.e.  16.  :19.

272  A.MKRICA.

between  them,  we  should  only  conclude,  that  the  dis-
position and  manners  of  men  are  formed  by  their  situa-
tion, and  arise  from  the  state  of  society  in  which  they
live.  The  moment  that  begins  to  vary,  the  character
of  a  people  must  change.  In  proportion  as  it  advances
in  improvement,  their  manners  refine,  their  powers  and
talents  are  called  forth.  In  every  part  of  the  earth,  the
progress  of  man  hath  been  nearly  the  same  ;  and  we
can  trace  him  in  his  career  from  the  rude  simplicity  of
savage  life,  until  he  attains  the  industry,  the  arts,  and
the  elegance  of  polished  society.  There  is  nothing
wonderful  then  in  the  similitude  between  the  Americans
and  the  barbarous  nations  of  our  continent.  Had  La-
fitau,  Garcia,  and  many  other  authors  attended  to  this,
they  would  not  have  perplexed  a  subject  which  they
pretend  to  illustrate,  by  their  fruitless  endeavours  to
establish  an  affinity  between  various  races  of  people,  in
the  old  and  new  continents,  upon  no  other  evidence
than  such  a  resemblance  in  their  manners  as  necessarily
arises  from  the  similarity  of  their  condition.  There  are,
it  is  true,  among  every  people,  some  customs  which,  as
they  do  not  flow  from  any  natural  want  or  desire  pecu-
liar to  their  situation,  may  be  denominated  usages  of
arbitrary  institution.  If  between  two  nations  settled  in
remote  parts  of  the  earth,  a  perfect  agreement  with  re-
spect to  any  of  these  should  be  discovered,  one  might
be  led  to  suspect  that  they  were  connected  with  some
affinity.  If,  for  example,  a  nation  were  found  in  Ame-
rica that  consecrated  the  seventh  day  to  religious  wor-
ship and  rest,  we  might  justly  suppose  that  it  had  de-
rived its  knowledge  of  this  usage,  which  is  of  arbitrary
institution,  from  the  Jews.  But,  if  it  were  discovered
that  another  nation  celebrated  the  first  appearance  of
every  new  moon  with  extraordinary  demonstrations  of
joy,  we  should  not  be  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  ob-
servation of  this  monthly  festival  was  borrowed  from
the  Jews,  but  ought  to  consider  it  merely  as  the  ex-

BOOK IV.  273

pression  of  that  joy  which  is  natural  to  man  on  the  re-
turn of  the  planet  which  guides  and  cheers  him  in  the
night.  The  instances  of  customs,  merely  arbitrary,
common  to  the  inhabitants  of  both  hemispheres,  are,
indeed,  so  few  and  so  equivocal,  that  no  theory  con-
cerning the  population  of  the  New  World  ought  to  be
founded  upon  them.

Or  of  reii- 3.  The  thcorics  which  have  been  formed  with
gioiis  rites,  ^.gspgct  to  thc  Original  of  the  Americans,  from
observation  of  their  religious  rites  and  practices,  are  no
less  fanciful,  and  destitute  of  solid  foundation. When
the  religious  opinions  of  any  people  are  neither  the  re-
sult of  rational  inquiry,  nor  derived  from  the  instruc-
tions of  revelation,  they  must  needs  be  wild  and  extra-
vagant. Barbarous  nations  are  incapable  of  the  for-
mer, and  have  not  been  blessed  with  the  advantages
arising  from  the  latter. Still,  however,  the  human  mind,
even  where  its  operations  appear  most  wild  and  capri-
cious, holds  a  course  so  regular,  that  in  every  age  and
country  the  dominion  of  particular  passions  will  be  at-
tended with  similar  effects. The  savage  of  Europe  or
America,  when  filled  with  superstitious  dread  of  invisi-
ble beings,  or  with  inquisitive  solicitude  to  penetrate
into  the  events  of  futurity,  trembles  alike  with  fear,  or
glows  with  impatience. He  has  recourse  to  rites  and
practices  of  the  same  kind,  in  order  to  avert  the  ven-
geance which  he  supposes  to  be  impending  over  him,
or  to  divine  the  secret  which  is  the  object  of  his  cu-
riosity. Accordingly  the  ritual  of  superstition  in  one
continent,  seems,  in  many  particulars,  to  be  a  transcript
of  that  established  in  the other,  and  both  authorize
similar  institutions,  sometimes  so  frivolous  as  to  excite
pity,  sometimes  so  bloody  and  barbarous  as  to  create
horror. But  without  supposing  any  consanguinity  be-
tween such  distant  nations,  or  imagining  that  their  re-
ligious ceremonies  were  conveyed  by  tradition  from  the

VOL.  VI.  T

•274  AMERICA,

one  to  the  other,  we  may  ascribe  this  uniformity,  which,
in  many  instances,  seems  very  amazing,  to  the  natural
operation  of  superstition  and  enthusiasm  upon  the  weak-
ness of  the  human  mind.

4.  We  may  lav  it  down  as  a  certain  principle

Not  peo- . ,  . .  .*^  ,  .  .  r ]

pled  by m  this  mquiry,  that  America  was  not  peopled
high"y  d"  by  any  nation  of  the  ancient  continent,  which
Tiiized; j^^j  made  considerable  progress  in  civilization.
The  inhabitants  of  the  New  World  were  in  a  state  of
society  so  extremely  rude,  as  to  be  unacquainted  with
those  arts  which  are  the  first  essays  of  human  ingenuity
in  its  advance  towards  improvement. Even  the  most
cultivated  nations  of  America  were  strangers  to  many
of  those  simple  inventions,  which  were  almost  coeval
with  society  in  other  parts  of  the  world, and  were
,  known  in  the  earliest  periods  of  civil  life  with  which
we  have  any  acquaintance. From  this  it  is  manifest,
that  the  tribes  which  originally  migrated  to  America,
came  off  from  nations  which  must  have  been  no  less
barbarous  than  their  posterity,  at  the  time  when  they
were  first  discovered  by  the  Europeans. For,  although
the  elegant  or  refined  arts  may  decline  or  perish,  amidst
the  violent  shocks  of  those  revolutions  and  disasters  to
wjbich  nations  are  exposed,  the  necessary  arts  of  life,
when  once  they  have  been  introduced  among  any  peo-
ple, are  never  lost. None  of  the  vicissitudes  in  hu-
man affairs  affect  these,  and  they  continue  to  be  prac-
tised as  long  as  the  race  of  men  exists. If  ever  the  use
of  iron  had  been  known  to  the  savages  of  America,  or
to  their  progenitors ; if  ever  they  had employed  a
plough,  a  loom,  or  a  forge,  the  utility  of  those  inven-
tions would  have  preserved  them,  and  it  is  impossible
that  they  should  have  been  abandoned  or  forgotten.
We  may  conclude,  then,  that  the  Americans  sprung
from  some  people,  wlio  were  themselves  in  such  an
ea^ly  and  unimproved  stage  of  society,  as  to  be  unac-

BOOK IV.  275

quainted  with  all  those  necessary  arts,  which  continued
to  be  unknown  among  their  posterity,  when  first  visited
by  the  Spaniards.
,, ,  5.  It  appears  no  less  evident  that  America

Nor  from  '■  ^  i  p  i

the  south-  was  not  peopled  by  any  colony  irom  the  more
orour^con-  southcm  uatious  of  the  ancient  continent.  None
tinent. ^£  ^|^g  ^.^j^  tribes  settled  in  that  part  of  our

hemisphere  can  be  supposed  to  have  visited  a  country  so
remote.  They  possessed  neither  enterprise,  nor  inge-
nuity, nor  power,  that  could  prompt  them  to  undertake,
or  enable  them  to  perform,  such  a  distant  voyage.  That
the  more  civilized  nations  in  Asia  or  Africa  are  not  the
progenitors  of  the  Americans  is  manifest,  not  only  from
the  observations  which  I  have  already  made  concern-
ing their  ignorance  of  the  most  simple  and  necessary
arts,  but  from  an  additional  circumstance.  Whenever,
any  people  have  experienced  the  advantages  which  men
enjoy  by  their  dominion  over  the  inferior  animals,  they
can  neither  subsist  without  the  nourishment  which  these
afford,  nor  carry  on  any  considerable  operation  inde-
pendent of  their  ministry  and  labour.  Accordingly,
the  first  care  of  the  Spaniards,  when  they  settled  in
America,  was  to  stock  it  with  all  the  domestic  animals
of  Europe ;  and  if,  prior  to  them,  the  Tyrians,  the  Car-
thaginians, the  Chinese,  or  any  other  polished  people,
had  taken  possession  of  that  continent,  we  should  have
found  there  the  animals  peculiar  to  those  regions  of  the
globe  where  they  were  originally  seated.  In  all  Ame-
rica, however,  there  is  not  one  animal,  tame  or  wild,
which  properly  belongs  to  the  warm,  or  even  the  more
temperate  countries  of  the  ancient  continent.  The
camel,  the  dromedary,  the  horse,  the  cow,  were  as
much  unknown  in  America,  as  the  elephant  or  the  lion.
From  which  it  is  obvious,  that  the  people  who  first  set-
tled in  the  western  world,  did  not  issue  from  the  coun-
tries where  those  animals  abound,  and  where  men,  from
having  been  long  accustomed  to  their  aid,  would  na-

T  2

27(;  AMERICA.

turally  consider  it,  not  only  as  beneficial,  but  as  indis-
pensably necessary  to  the  improvement,  and  even  the
preservation  of  civil  society.

6.  From  considering  the  animals  with  which
continents  America  is  stored,  we  may  conclude  that  the
appTolch  nearest  point  of  contact  between  the  old  and
nearest  to  j^g^y  continents  is  towards  the  northern  extre-

each  other  i i  i  i  • •

towards  mity  of  both,  and  that  there  the  communication
was  opened,  and  the  intercourse  carried  on  be-
tween them.  All  the  extensive  countries  in  America
which  lie  within  the  tropics,  or  approach  near  to  them,
are  filled  with  indigenous  animals  of  various  kinds,  en-
tirely different  from  those  in  the  corresponding  regions
of  the  ancient  continent.  But  the  northern  provinces
of  the  New  World  abound  with  many  of  the  wild  ani-
mals which  are  common  in  such  parts  of  our  hemisphere
as  lie  in  a  similar  situation.  The  bear,  the  wolf,  the
fox,  the  hare,  the  deer,  the  roebuck,  the  elk,  and  several
other  species  frequent  the  forests  of  North  America,  no
less  than  those  in  the  north  of  Europe  and  Asia.*'  It
seems  to  be  evident,  then,  that  the  two  continents  ap-
proach each  other  in  this  quarter,  and  are  either  united,
or  so  nearly  adjacent,  that  these  animals  might  pass
from  the  one  to  the  other.

7.  The  actual  vicinity  of  the  two  continents  is
tained  by  SO  clcarly  established  by  modern  discoveries,
discover^.  ^^^^  ^|^^  ^^lief  difficulty  with  respect  to  the  peo-
pling of  America  is  removed.  While  those  immense
regions  which  stretch  eastward  from  the  river  Oby  to
the  sea  of  Kamchatka  were  unknown  or  imperfectly
explored,  the  north-east  extremities  of  our  hemisphere
were  supposed  to  be  so  far  distant  from  any  part  of
the  New  World,  that  it  w^s  not  easy  to  conceive  how
any  communication  should  have  been  carried  on  be-
tween them.  But  the  Russians,  having  subjected  the
western  part  of  Siberia  to  their  empire,  gradually  ex-

''I3uffon  Hist.  Nat.  ix.  p.  9" &e.

BOOK IV.  277

tended  their  knowledge  of  that  vast  country,  by  ad-
vancing towards  the  east  into  unknown  provinces.
These  were  discovered  by  hunters  in  their  excursions
after  game,  or  by  soldiers  employed  in  levying  the
taxes ;  and  the  court  of  Moscow  estimated  the  impor-
tance of  those  countries,  only  by  the  small  addition
which  they  made  to  its  revenue.  At  length  Peter  the
Great  ascended  the  Russian  throne.  His  enlightened,
comprehensive  mind,  intent  upon  every  circumstance
that  could  aggrandize  his  empire,  or  render  his  reign
illustrious,  discerned  consequences  of  those  discoveries
which  had  escaped  the  observation  of  his  ignorant  pre-
decessors. He  perceived  that  in  proportion  as  the  re-
gions of  Asia  extended  towards  the  east,  they  must  ap-
proach nearer  to  America;  that  the  communication
between  the  two  continents,  which  had  lono-  been
searched  for  in  vain,  would  probably  be  found  in  this
quarter,  and  that  by  opening  it,  some  part  of  the  wealth
and  commerce  of  the  western  world  might  be  made  to
flow  into  his  dominions  by  a  new  channel.  Such  an
object  suited  a  genius  that  delighted  in  grand  schemes.
Peter  drew  up  instructions  with  his  own  hand  for  pro-
secuting this  design,  and  gave  orders  for  carrying  it
into  execution.'

His  successors  adopted  his  ideas,  and  pursued  his
plan.  The  officers  whom  the  Russian  court  employed
in  this  service,  had  to  struggle  with  so  many  difficul-
ties, that  their  progress  was  extremely  slow.  Encou-
raged by  some  faint  traditions  among  the  people  of
Siberia,  concerning  a  successful  voyage  in  the  year
1648,  round  the  north-east  promontory  of  Asia,  they
attempted  to  follow  the  same  course.  Vessels  were
fitted  out,  with  this  view,  at  diiferent  times,  from  the
rivers  Lena  and  Kolyma  ;  but  in  a  frozen  ocean,  which
nature  seems  not  to  have  destined  for  navigation,  they
were  exposed  to  many  disasters,  without  being  able  to

'  Muller  Voyages  el  Decouvertes  par  les  Russes,  torn.  i.  p.  4,  b.  111.

278  AMERICA.

accomplish  their  purpose.  No  vessel  fitted  out  by  the
Russian  court  ever  doubled  this  formidable  Cape  -^  we
are  indebted  for  what  is  known  of  those  extreme  re-
gions of  Asia,  to  the  discoveries  made  in  excursions  by
land.  In  all  those  provinces  an  opinion  prevails,  that
there  are  countries  of  great  extent  and  fertility,  which
lie  at  no  considerable  distance  from  their  own  coasts.
These  the  Russians  imagined  to  be  part  of  America ;
and  several  circumstances  concurred  not  only  in  con-
firming them  in  this  belief,  but  in  persuading  them  that
some  portion  of  that  continent  could  not  be  very  remote.
Trees  of  various  kinds  unknown  in  those  naked  regions
of  Asia,  are  driven  upon  the  coast  by  an  easterly  wind.
By  the  same  wind,  floating  ice  is  brought  thither  in  a
few  days ;  flights  of  birds  arrive  annually  from  the
same  quarter;  and  a  tradition  obtains  among  the  in-
habitants, of  an  intercourse  formerly  carried  on  with
some  countries  situated  to  the  east.

After  weighing  all  these  particulars,  and  comparing
the  position  of  the  countries  in  Asia  which  had  been
discovered,  with  such  parts  in  the  north-west  of  Ame-
rica as  were  already  known,  the  Russian  court  formed
a  plan,  which  would  have  hardly  occurred  to  a  nation
less  accustomed  to  engage  in  arduous  undertakings,
and  to  contend  with  great  difficulties.  Orders  were
issued  to  build  two  vessels  at  the  small  villaor-e  of
Ochotz,  situated  on  the  sea  of  Kamchatka,  to  sail  on  a
voyage  of  discovery.  Though  that  dreary,  uncultivated
region  furnished  nothing  that  could  be  of  use  in  con-
structing them,  but  some  larch  trees  :  though  not  only
the  iron,  the  cordage,  the  sails,  and  all  the  numerous
articles  requisite  for  their  equipment,  but  the  provisions
for  victualling  them  were  to  be  carried  through  the  im-
mense deserts  of  Siberia,  down  rivers  of  difficult  navi-
gation, and  along  roads  almost  impassable,  the  man-
date of  the  sovereign,  and  the  perseverance  of  the  peo-

"  See  Note  XLI.  ' '■ '

BOOK  IV.  279

1741.  P^6,  at  last  surmounted  ever  obstacle.  Two  ves-
Jui.e  4.  s,g|g  ^ere  finished,  and,  under  the  command  of
the  Captains  Behring  and  Tschirikow,  sailed  from  Kam-
chatka, in  quest  of  the  New  World,  in  a  quarter  where
it  had  never  been  approached.  They  shaped  their
course  towards  the  east ;  and  though  a  storm  soon  se-
parated the  vessels,  which  never  rejoined,  and  many
disasters  befel  them,  the  expectations  from  the  voyage
were  not  altogether  frustrated.  Each  of  the  command-
ers discovered  land,  which  to  them  appeared  to  be  part
of  the  American  continent ;  and,  according  to  their  ob-
servations, it  seems  to  be  situated  within  a  few  degrees
of  the  north-west  coast  of  California.  Each  set  some
of  his  people  ashore  :  but  in  one  place  the  inhabitants
fled  as  the  Russians  approached  ;  in  another,  they  car-
ried off  those  who  landed,  and  destroyed  their  boats.
The  violence  of  the  weather,  and  the  distress  of  their
crews,  obliged  both  captains  to  quit  this  inhospitable
coast.  In  their  return  they  touched  at  several  islands,
which  stretch  in  a  chain  from  east  to  west  between  the
country  which  they  had  discovered  and  the  coast  of
Asia.  They  had  some  intercourse  with  the  natives,
who  seemed  to  them  to  resemble  the  North  Americans.
They  presented  to  the  Russians  the  calumet,  or  pipe  of
peace,  which  is  a  symbol  of  friendship  universal  among
the  people  of  North  America,  and  a  usage  of  arbi-
trary institution,  peculiar  to  them.

Though  the  islands  of  the  New  Archipelago  have
been  frequented  since  that  time  by  the  Russian  hunters,
the  court  of  St.  Petersburgh,  during  a  period  of  more
than  forty  years,  seems  to  have  relinquished  every
thought  of  prosecuting  discoveries  in  that  quarter.
But  in  the  year  1768,  it  was  unexpectedly  resumed.
The  sovereign,  who  had  been  lately  seated  on  the  throne
of  Peter  the  Great,  possessed  the  genius  and  talents  of
her  illustrious  predecessor.  During  the  operations  of
the  most  arduous  and  extensive  war  in  which  the  Rus-

280  AMERICA.

sian  empire  was  ever  engaged,  she  formed  schemes  and
executed  undertakings,  to  which  more  limited  abilities
would  have  been  incapable  of  attending  but  amidst  the
leisure  of  pacific  times.  A  new  voyage  of  discovery
from  the  eastern  extremity  of  Asia  was  planned,  and
Captain  Krenitzin  and  Lieutenant  Levasheft'  were  ap-
pointed to  command  the  two  vessels  fitted  out  for  that
purpose.  In  their  voyage  outward  they  held  nearly
the  same  course  with  the  former  navigators,  they  touched
at  the  same  islands,  observed  their  situation  and  pro-
ductions more  carefully,  and  discovered  several  new
islands,  with  which  Behring  and  Tschirikow  had  not
fallen  in.  Though  they  did  not  proceed  so  far  to  the
east  as  to  revisit  the  country  Avhich  Behring  and  Tschi-
rikow supposed  to  be  part  of  the  American  continent,
yet,  by  returning  in  a  course  considerably  to  the  north
of  theirs,  they  corrected  some  capital  mistakes  into
which  their  predecessors  had  fallen,  and  have  contri-
buted to  facilitate  the  progress  of  future  navigators  in
those  seas.'

Thus  the  possibility  of  a  communication  between  the
continents  in  this  quarter  rests  no  longer  upon  mere
conjecture,  but  is  established  by  undoubted  evidence.'"
Some  tribe,  or  some  families  of  wandering  Tartars,  from
the  restless  spirit  peculiar  to  their  race,  might  migrate
to  the  nearest  islands,  and,  rude  as  their  knowledge  of
navigation  was,  might,  by  passing  from  one  to  the
other,  reach  at  length  the  coast  of  America,  and  give  a
beginning  to  population  in  that  continent.  The  dis-
tance between  the  Marian  or  Ladrone  islands  and  the
nearest  land  in  Asia,  is  greater  than  that  between  the
part  of  America  which  the  Russians  discovered,  and  the
coast  of  Kamchatka  ;  and  yet  the  inhabitants  of  those
islands  are  manifestly  of  Asiatic  extract.  If,  notwith-
standing their  remote  situation,  we  admit  that  the  Ma-
rian islands  were  peopled  from  our  continent,  distance

'  See  Note  XLll.  "  MuIIit  Voyages,  toiii.i .  248,  &c.  267.  276.

BOOK IV.  281

alone  is  no  reason  why  wfe  should  hesitate  about  ad-
mitting that  the  Americans  may  derive  their  original
from  the  same  source.  It  is  probable  that  future  navi-
gators in  those  seas,  by  steering  farther  to  the  north,
may  find  that  the  continent  of  America  approaches  still
nearer  to  Asia.  According  to  the  information  of  the
barbarous  people  w^ho  inhabit  the  country  about  the
north-east  promontory  of  Asia,  there  lies,  off  the  coast,
a  small  island,  to  which  they  sail  in  less  than  a  day.
From  that  they  can  descry  a  large  continent,  which,  ac-
cording to  their  description,  is  covered  with  forests,  and
possessed  by  people  whose  language  they  do  not  un-
derstand." By  them  they  are  supplied  with  the  skins
of  martens,  an  animal  unknown  in  the  northern  parts  of
Siberia,  and  which  is  never  found  but  in  countries
abounding  with  trees.  If  we  could  rely  on  this  account,
we  might  conclude,  that  the  American  continent  is  se-
parated from  ours  only  by  a  narrow  strait,  and  all  the
difficulties  with  respect  to  the  communication  between
them  would  vanish.  What  could  be  offered  only  as  a
conjecture  when  this  history  was  first  published,  is  now
known  to  be  certain.  The  near  approach  of  the  two
continents  to  each  other  has  been  discovered  and  traced
in  a  voyage  undertaken  upon  principles  so  pure  and  so
liberal,  and  conducted  with  so  much  professional  skill,
as  reflect  lustre  upon  the  reign  of  the  sovereign  by
whom  it  was  planned,  and  do  honour  to  the  officers
interested  with  the  execution  of  it.°
Another  ^^  ^^  likcwisc  cvidcnt  from  recent  discoveries,
commuiii-  ti^g^^  g^j^  intercourse  between  our  continent  and

cation  "y  ,  ,

tiie  north-  America  might  be  carried  on  with  no  less  faci-
lity from  the  north-west  extremities  of  Europe.
A.D.  830.  As  early  as  the  ninth  century,  the  Norwegians
discovered  Greenland,  and  planted  colonies  there.  The
communication  with  that  country,  after  a  long  inter-
ruption, was  renewed  in  the  last  century. Some  Lu-

"  MuUer  Voyages  et  Uecouv.  i.  166.  "  See  Note  XLIH.

282  AMERICA.

tlieran  and  Moravian  missionaries,  prompted  by  zeal  for
propagating  the  Christian  faitli,  have  ventured  to  settle
in  this  frozen  and  uncultivated  refrion.^  To  them  we
are  indebted  for  much  curious  information  with  respect
to  its  nature  and  inhabitants.  We  learn,  that  the  north-
west coast  of  Greenland  is  separated  from  America  by
a  very  narrow  strait ;  that,  at  the  bottom  of  the  bay  into
which  this  strait  conducts,  it  is  highly  probable  that
they  are  united  ;'^  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  two  coun-
tries have  some  intercourse  with  one  another  ;  that  the
Esquimaux  of  America  perfectly  resemble  the  Green-
landers  in  their  aspect,  dress,  and  mode  of  living ;  that
some  sailors  who  had  acquired  the  knowledge  of  a  few
words  in  the  Greenlandish  language,  reported  that  these

were  understood  by  the  Esquimaux  ;  that,  at
A.D.1764.  -  - ^^  . -^ . . ^  „  .  '

length,  a  Moravian  missionary,  well  acquainted

with  the  language  of  Greenland,  having  visited  the
country  of  the  Esquimaux,  found,  to  his  astonishment^
that  they  spoke  the  same  language  with  the  Green-
landers  ;  that  they  were  in  every  respect  the  same  peo-
ple, and  he  was  accordingly  received  and  entertained
by  them  as  a  friend  and  a  brother.'

By  these  decisive  fncts,  not  only  the  consanguinity  ,
of  the  Esquimaux  and  Greenlanders  is  established,  but
the  possibility  of  peopling  America  from  the  north  of
Europe  is  demonstrated.  If  the  Norwegians,  in  a  bar-
barous age,  when  science  had  not  begun  to  dawn  in  the
north  of  Europe,  possessed  such  naval  skill  as  to  open
a  communication  with  Greenland,  their  ancestors,  as
much  addicted  to  roving  by  sea,  as  the  Tartars  are  to
wandering  by  land,  might,  at  some  more  remote  period,
accomplish  the  same  voyage,  and  settle  a  colony  there,
whose  descendants  might,  in  progress  of  time,  migrate
into  America.  But  if,  instead  of  venturing  to  sail  di-  ^
rectly  from  their  own  coast  to  Greenland,  we  suppose

P  Crantz'  Hist,  of  Greenl.  i.  242.  244. Prevot.  Hist.  Geii.  des Vojages,  torn.
XV.  162.  not.  (96.)
1  Eggede,  p.  2,  3.  >■  Ciantz'  Hist,  of  Gfcenl.  p.  261,  262.

HOOK  IV.  2i\3

that  tlic  Norwof;iivns  held  ;i  more  cautious  course,  and
advanced  from  Slu^tland  to  tlie  l'\'roe  islands,  and  IVoni
flieni  to  Iceland,  in  all  which  they  had  planted  colonies  ;
their  progress  may  have  been  so  {gradual,  that  this  na-
vifi^ation  eatinot  be  considered  as  either  longer  or  more
hazardous,  than  those  voyages  which  tliat  liardy  and
enterprising-  race  of  men  is  known  to  have  performed
in  every  age.

rroimi.iy  H.  Tliougli  it  bc  possiblc  that  America  may
|Hoi)i.'(i jjj^^y^  received  its  first  inhabitants  from  our  con-

ilOIII tllL'

iiorii.-iust.  tincnt,  either  by  the  north-west  of  Europe  or  the
north-east  of  Asia,  there  seems  to  ])e  good  reason  for
suj)posing  that  tin;  progenitors  of  all  the  American  na-
tions from  Capo  Horn  to  tlie  southern  confines  of  La-
brador, migrated  from  tlie  latter  rather  than  the  former.
The  Esquimaux  are  the  only  people  in  America,  who,
in  their  aspect  or  character,  bear  any  resemblance  to  the
northern  I'^uropeans.  Tht^y  are  maiiiiestly  a  race  of
men  distimit  from  all  the  nations  of  the  American  con-
tinent, in  language,  in  disposition,  ;ind  in  habits  of  liie.
Their  original,  tliiMi,  niay  warrantably  b(^  traced  up  to
that  source  which  1  have  pointed  out.  Jiut  among  all  the
other  inhabitants  of  America,  tli(M'e  is  sucli  a  striking'
similitude  in  the  form  of  their  bodies  '.uid  \.\\o  <|ualities
of  th(!ir  minds,  that,  notwithstanding  the  diversities
occasioned  by  the  influence  of  climate,  or  unetpial  pro-
gress in  improvement,  we  must  pronounce  them  to  be
descend(!d  from  one  source.  There  may  be  a  variety
in  tlu!  shades,  but  we  can  every  where  trace  the  smne
originid  colour.  Iv.uli  tribe  has  soiru^thing  peculiar
which  distinguishes  it,  but  in  all  of  them  we  discern
certain  features  conunon  to  the  whoh;  race.  It  is  re-
n»arkable,  that  in  every  peculiarity,  whether  in  their
);)ersons  or  dispositions,  which  (  haract(!ri/e  tlu^  Ameri-
cans, they  have  some  resemblance  to  the  rude  tribes
scatt(!rcd  over  the  north-east  of  Asia,  but  almost  none
to  the  nations  settled  in the northern  extremities  of

204  AMERICA.

Europe. We  may,  therefore,  refer  them  to  tlie  former
origin,  and  conclude  that  dieir  Asiatic  progenitors,  hav-
ing setded  in  those  parts  of  America  where  the  Rus-
sians have  discovered  the  proximity  of  the  two  conti-
nents, spread  gradually  over  its  various  regions. This
account  of  the  progress  of  population  in  America  coin-
cides with  the  traditions  of  the  Mexicans  concernino"
their  own  origin,  which,  imperfect as  they  are,  were
preserved  with  more  accuracy,  and  merit  greater  credit,
than  those  of  any  people  in  the  New  World. Accord-
ing to  them,  their  ancestors  came  from  a  remote  coun-
try, situated  to  the  north-west  of  Mexico. The  Mexi-
cans point  out  their  various  stations  as  they  advanced
from  this,  into  their  interior  provinces,  and  it  is  pre-
cisely the  same  route  which  they  must  have  held,  if  they
had  been  emigrants  from  Asia. The  Mexicans,  in  de-
scribing the  appearance  of  their  progenitors,  their  man-
ners and  habits  of  life  at  that  period,  exactly  delineate
those  of  the  rude  Tartars,  from  whom  I  suppose  them
to  have  sprung.""  "• • '

Thus  have  I  finished  a  disquisition  which  has  been
deemed  of  so  much  importance,  that  it  would  have  been
improper  to  omit  it  in  writing  the  history  of  America.
I  have  ventured  to  inquire,  but  without  presuming  to
decide.  Satisfied  with  offering  conjectures,  I  pretend
not  to  establish  any  system.  When  an  investigation  is,
from  its  nature,  so  intricate  and  obscure,  that  it  is  im-
possible to  arrive  at  conclusions  which  are  certain,
there  may  be  some  merit  in  pointing  out  such  as  are
probable.^  . , .

Condition The  condition  and  character  of  the  American
and  cha- nations,  at  the  time  when  thev  became  known

racter  of  •'

theAme-  to  the  buropcans,  deserve  more  attentive  consi-
ricans, deration  than  the  inquiry  concerning  their  ori-

'  Acosta  Hist.  Nat.  et  Mor.  iib.  vii.  c.  2,  &c.  Garcia  Origcn  de  los  Indies,  lib.
V.  c.  3.  Torqueraada  Moiiar.  Ind.  lib.  i.  c.  iJ,&c.  Boturini  Bcnaduci  Idea  de'una'
Hist,  dc  la  Anit-r.  Septciitr.  §  xvii.  p.  127.

»  Mcinoircssur  la  Louisianc,  par  Dumoiit,  toiii.  i.  p.  liy.

BOOK IV.  285

ginal. The  latter  is  merely  an  object  of  curiosity  ;  the
former  is  one  of  the  most  important  as  well  as  instruc-
tive researches  which  can  occupy  the  philosopher  or
historian. In  order  to  complete  the  history  of  the  hu-
man mind,  and  attain  to  a  perfect  knowledge  of  its  na-
ture and  operations,  we  must  contemplate  man  in  all
those  various  situations  wherein  he  has  been  placed.
We  must  follow  him  in  his  progress  through  the  dif-
ferent stages  of  society,  as  he  gradually  advances  from
the  infant  state  of  civil  life  towards  its  maturity  and  de-
cline. We  must  observe, at each  period, how  the
faculties  of  his  understanding  unfold,  we  must  attend  to
the  efforts  of  his  active  powers,  watch  the  various  move-
ments of  desire  and  affection,  as  they  rise  in  his  breast,
and  mark  whither  they  tend,  and  with  what  ardour  they
are  exerted. The  philosophers  and  historians  of  ancient
Greece  and  Rome,  our  guides  in  this  as  well  as  every
other  disquisition,  had  only  a  limited  view  of  this  sub-
ject, as  they  had  hardly  any  opportunity  of  surveying
man  in  his  rudest  and  most  early  state. In  all  those
regions  of  the  earth  with  which  they  were  well  ac-
quainted, civil  society  had  made  considerable  advances,
and  nations  had  finished  a  good  part  of  their  career
before  they  began  to  observe  them. The  Scythians  and
Germans,  the  rudest  people  of  whom  any  ancient  author
has  transmitted  to  us an  authentic  account,  possessed
flocks  and  herds, had acquired property  of  various
kinds,  and,  when  compared  with  mankind  in  their  pri-
mitive state,  may  be  reckoned  to  have  attained  to  a
great  degree  of  civilization.

Less  im-  But  the  discovcry  of  the  New  World  enlarged
Kan^ii  the  sphere  of  contemplation,  and  presented  na-
any  part  ^^q^s  to  our  vicw,  iu  stagcs  of  their  progress,
earth.  much  Icss  advauced  than  those  wherein  they
have  been  observed  in  our  continent.  In  America,  man
appears  under  the  rudest  form  in  which  we  can  conceive
him  to  subsist. We  behold  communities  just  beginning

28()  AMERICA.

to  unite,  and  may  examine  the  sentiments  and  actions
of  human  beings  in  tlie  infancy  of  social  life,  Avhile  they
feel  but  imperfectly  the  force  of  its  ties,  and  have
scarcely  relinquished  their  native  liberty.  That  state  of
primceval  simplicity,  which  was  known  in  our  continent
only  by  the  fanciful  description  of  poets,  really  existed
in  the  other.  The  greater  part  of  its  inhabitants  w^ere
strangers  to  industry  and  labour,  ignorant  of  arts,  im-
perfectly acquainted  with  the  nature  of  property,  and
enjoying  almost  without  restriction  or  control  the  bless-
ings which  flowed  spontaneously  from  the  bounty  of
nature.  There  were  only  two  nations  in  this  vast  con-
tinent which  had  emerged  from  this  rude  state,  and  had
made  any  considerable  progress  in  acquiring  the  ideas,
and  adopting  the  institutions,  which  belong  to  polished
societies.  Their  government  and  manners  will  fall  na-
turally under  our  review  in  relating  the  discovery  and
conquest  of  the  Mexican  and  Peruvian  empires ;  and
we  shall  have  there  an  opportunity  of  contemplating  the
Americans  in  the  state  of  highest  improvement  to  which
they  ever  attained.

Thjj  j„. At  present,  our  attention  and  researches  shall
^uirycon-  \yQ  tumcd  to  the  small  independent  tribes  which

fined  to  _  -I

the  rudest  occupicd  evcry  other  part  of  America.  Among
these,  though  with  some  diversity  in  their  charac-
ter, their  manners,and  institutions,  the  state  of  society  was
nearly  similar,  and  so  extremely  rude,  that  the  denomina-
tion of  ,y«z.'rt'_g-e  may  be  applied  to  them  all.  In  a  general  his-
tory of  America,  it  would  be  highly  improper  to  describe
the  condition  of  each  petty  community,  or  to  investigate
every  minute  circumstance  which  contributes  to  form
the  character  of  its  members.  Such  an  inquiry  would
lead  to  details  of  immeasurable  and  tiresome  extent.
The  qualities  belonging  to  the  people  of  all  the  different
tribes  have  such  a  near  resemblance,  that  they  may  be
painted  with  the  same  features.  Where  any  circum-
stances seem  to  constitute  a  diversity  in  their  character

BOOK IV.  *287

and  manners  worthy  of  attention,  it  will  be  sufficient  to
point  these  out  as  they  occur,  and  to  inquire  into  the
cause  of  such  peculiarities.

Difficulty It  is  extremely  difficult  to  procure  satisfy ig
w°h!fo"  and authentic  information concerning  nations
Illation, while they remain  uncivilized. To discover
their  true  character  under  this  rude  form,  and  to  select
the  features  by  which  they  are  distinguished,  requires
an  observer  possessed  of  no  less  impartiality  than  dis-
cernment. For,  in  every  stage  of  society,  the  faculties,
the  sentiments,  and  desires  of  men  are  so  accommodated
to  their  own  state,  that  they  become  standards  of  excel-
lence to  themselves,  they  affix  the  idea  of  perfection  and
iiappiness  to  those  attainments  which  resemble  their  own,
and  wherever  the  objects  and  enjoyments  to  which  they
have  been  accustomed are  wanting, confidently  pro-
nounce a  people  to  be  barbarous  and  miserable. Hence
the  mutual  contempt  with  which  the  members  of  com-
munities, unequal  in  their  degrees  of  improvement,  re-
gard each  other. Polished  nations,  conscious  of  the
advantages  which  they  derive  from  their  knowledge  and
arts,  are  apt  to  view  rude  nations  with  peculiar  scorn,
and,  in  the  pride  of  superiority,  will  hardly  allow  either
their  occupations,  their  feelings,  or  their  pleasures,  to  be
worthy  of  men. It  has  seldom  been  the  lot  of  commu-
nities, in  their  early  and  unpolished  state,  to  fall  under
the  observation  of  persons  endowed  with  force  of  mind
superior  to  vulgar  prejudices,  and  capable  of  contem-
plating man,  under  whatever  aspect  he  appears,  with  a
candid  and  discerning  eye.

From  the  The  Spaniards,  who  first  visited  America,
onKrst  and  who  had  opportunity  of  beholding  its  va-
observers.  j-ious  tribcs  whilc  entire  and  unsubdued,  and
before  any  change  had  been  made  in  their  ideas  or  man-
ners by  intercourse  with  a  race  of  men  much  advanced
beyond  them  in  improvement,  were  far  from  possessing
the  qualities  requisite  for  observing  the  striking  spectacle

2»ii  A  M  E  in  C  A.

presented  to  their  view.  Neither  the  age  in  which  they
lived,  nor  the  nation  to  which  tliey  belonged,  had  made
such  progress  in  true  science,  as  inspires  enlarged  and
liberal  sentiments.  The  conquerors  of  the  New  World
were  mostly  illiterate  adventurers,  destitute  of  all  the
ideas  which  should  have  directed  them  in  contemplating
objects  so  extremely  different  from  those  with  which
they  were  acquainted.  Surrounded  continually  with
danger  or  struggling  with  hardships,  they  had  little
leisure,  and  less  capacity,  for  any  speculative  inquiry.
Eager  to  take  possession  of  a  country  of  such  extent  and
opulence,  and  happy  in  finding  it  occupied  by  inhabi-
tants so  incapable  to  defend  it,  they  hastily  pronounced
them  to  be  a  wretched  order  of  men,  formed  merely  for
servitude ;  and  were  more  employed  in  computing  the
profits  of  their  labour,  than  in  inquiring  into  the  opera-
tions of  their  minds,  or  the  reasons  of  their  customs  and
institutions.  The  persons  who  penetrated  at  subsequent
periods  into  the  interior  provinces,  to  which  the  know-
ledge and  devastations  of  the  first  conquerors  did  not
reach,  were  generally  of  a  similar  character  ;  brave  and
enterprising  in  a  high  degree,  but  so  uninformed  as  to
be  little  qualified  either  for  observing  or  describing  what
they  beheld.  •"

And  their  Not  Only  the  incapacity,  but  the  prejudices
preju  ices,  ^^  ^|^^  Spaniards,  render  their  accounts  of  the
people  of  America  extremely  defective.  Soon  after
they  planted  colonies  in  their  new  conquests,  a  differ-
ence in  opinion  arose  with  respect  to  the  treatment  of
the  natives.  One  party,  solicitous  to  render  their  ser-
vitude perpetual,  represented  them  as  a  brutish,  obsti-
nate race,  incapable  either  of  acquiring  religious  know-
ledge, or  of  being  trained  to  the  functions  of  social
life.  The  other,  full  of  pious  concern  for  their  conver-
sion, contended  that,  though  rude  and  ignorant,  they
were  gentle,  affectionate,  docile,  and  by  proper  instruc-
tions and  regulations  might  be  formed. gradually  into

BOOK IV.  289

good  Christians  and  useful  citizens.  This  controversy,
as  I  have  already  related,  was  carried  on  with  all  the
warmth  which  is  natural,  when  attention  to  interest  on
the  one  hand,  and  religious  zeal  on  the  other,  animate
the  disputants.  Most  of  the  laity  espoused  the  former
opinion ;  all  the  ecclesiastics  were  advocates  for  the
latter;  and  we  shall  uniformly  find  that,  accordingly  as
an  author  belonged  to  either  of  these  parties,  he  is  apt
to  magnify  the  virtues  or  aggravate  the  defects  of  the
Americans  far  beyond  truth.  Those  repugnant  accounts
increase  the  difficulty  of  attaining  a  perfect  knowledge
of  their  character,  and  render  it  necessary  to  peruse  all
the  descriptions  of  them  by  Spanish  writers  with  dis-
trust, and  to  receive  their  information  with  some  grains
of  allowance.

And  from  Aluiost  two  ccntuHes  elapsed  after  the  dis-
ofV^ios™^  covery  of  America,  before  the  manners  of  its
phers.  inhabitants  attracted,  in  any  considerable  de-
gree, the  attention  of  philosophers.  At  length  they
discovered  that  the  contemplation  of  the  condition  and
character  of  the  Americans,  in  their  original  state,
tended  to  complete  our  knowledge  of  the  human  spe-
cies; might  enable  us  to  fill  up  a  considerable  chasm  in
the  history  of  its  progress ;  and  lead  to  speculations  no
less  curious  than  important.  They  entered  upon  this
new  field  of  study  with  great  ardour;  but,  instead  of
throwing  light  upon  the  subject,  they  have  contributed,
in  ,some  degree,  to  involve  it  in  additional  obscurity.
Too  impatient  to  inquire,  they  hastened  to  decide;  and
began  to  erect  systems,  when  they  should  have  been
searching  for  facts  on  which  to  establish  their  founda-
tions. Struck  with  the  appearance  of  degeneracy  in
the  human  species  throughout  the  New  World,  and
astonished  at  beholding  a  vast  continent  occupied  by
a  naked,  feeble,  and  ignorant  race  of  men,  some  au-
thors of  great  name,  have  maintained  that  this  part  of
the  globe  had  but  lately  emerged  from  the  sea,  arid  be-

VOL.  VI.  u

'290  AMEIUCA.

come  fit  for  the  residence  of  man;  that  every  thing  in  it
bore  marks  of  a  recent  original ;  and  that  its  inhabitants,
lately  called  into  existence,  and  still  at  the  beginning
of  their  career,  were  unworthy  to  be  compared  with  the
people  of  a  more  ancient  and  improved  continent/
Others  have  imagined,  that,  under  the  influence  of  an
unkindly  climate,  which  checks  and  enervates  the  prin-
ciple of  life,  man  never  attained  in  America  the  perfec-
tion which  belongs  to  his  nature,  but  remained  an  ani-
mal of  an  inferior  order,  defective  in  the  vigour  of  his
bodily  frame,  and  destitute  of  sensibility,  as  well  as  of
force,  in  the  operations  of  his  mind."  In  opposition  to
both  these,  other  philosophers  have  supposed  that  man
arrives  at  his  highest  dignity  and  excellence  long  be-
fore he  reaches  a  state  of  refinement;  and,  in  the  rude
simplicity  of  savage  life,  displays  an  elevation  of  senti-
ment, an  independence  of  mind,  and  a  warmth  of  at-
tachment, for  which  it  is  vain  to  search  among  the  mem-
bers of  polished  societies."  They  seem  to  consider  that
as  the  most  perfect  state  of  man  which  is  the  least  civi-
lized. They  describe  the  manners  of  the  rude  Ameri-
cans with  such  rapture,  as  if  they  proposed  them  for
models  to  the  rest  of  the  species.  These  contradictory
theories  have  been  proposed  with  equal  confidence,  and
uncommon  powers  of  genius  and  eloquence  have  been
exerted,  in  order  to  clothe  them  with  an  appearance  of
truth.

As  all  those  circumstances  concur  in  renderino-  an
inquiry  into  the  state  of  the  rude  nations  in  America
intricate  and  obscure,  it  is  necessary  to  carry  it  on  with
caution.  When  guided  in  our  researches  by  the  intel-
ligent observations  of  the  few  philosophers  who  have
visited  this  part  of  the  globe,  we  may  venture  to  decide.
When  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  the  superficial  re-
marks of  vulgar  travellers,  of  sailors,  traders,  bucca-

»  M.  de  Buffon  Hist.  Nat.  iii.  484,  &c  is.  103.  114.
"  M.  de  P.  Recherebes  Philos.  sur  Ics  Americ.  passim.  ^  AI.  Rousseau.

BOOK IV.  291

neers,  and  missionaries,  we  must  often  pause,  and,
comparing  detached  facts,  endeavour  to  discover  what
they  wanted  sagacity  to  observe.  Without  indulging
conjecture,  or  betraying  a  propensity  to  either  system,
we  must  study  with  equal  care  to  avoid  the  extremes  of
extravagant  admiration,  or  of  supercilious  contempt,  for
those  manners  which  we  describe.
Method  In  order  to  conduct  this  inquiry  with  greater
in'the'^hi-  accuracy,  it  should  be  rendered  as  simple  as
qu'ry-  possible.  Man  existed  as  an  individual  before
he  became  the  member  of  a  community;  and  the  quali-
ties which  belong  to  him  under  his  former  capacity
should  be  known,  before  we  proceed  to  examine  those
which  arise  from  the  latter  relation.  This  is  peculiarly
necessary  in  investigating  the  manners  of  rude  nations.
Their  political  union  is  so  incomplete,  their  civil  insti-
tutions and  regulations  so  few,  so  simple,  and  of  such
slender  authority,  that  men  in  this  state  ought  to  be
viewed  rather  as  independent  agents,  than  as  members
of  a  regular  society.  The  character  of  a  savage  results
almost  entirely  from  his  sentiments  or  feelings  as  an  in-
dividual, and  is  but  little  influenced  by  his  imperfect
subjection  to  government  and  order.  I  shall  conduct
my  researches  concerning  the  manners  of  the  Ameri-
cans in  this  natural  order,  proceeding  gradually  from
what  is  simple  to  what  is  more  complicated.

I  shall  consider,  I.  The  bodily  constitution  of  the
Americans  in  those  regions  now  under  review.  II.  The
qualities  of  their  minds.  III.  Their  domestic  state.  IV.
Their  political  state  and  institutions.  V.  Their  system
of  war,  and  public  security.  VI.  The  arts  with  which
they  were  acquainted.  VII.  Their  religious  ideas  and
institutions.  VIII.  Such  singular  detached  customs  as
are  not  reducible  to  any  of  the  former  heads.  IX.  I
shall  conclude  with  a  general  review  and  estimate  of
their  virtues  and  defects.

I.  The  bodily  constitution  of  the  Americans .^ — The

u  2

202  AMERICA.

The  con-  liumaii  body  is  less  affected  by  climate  than  that
of'tLrr'  of  any  other  animal.  Some  animals  are  con-
bodies,  fined  to  a  particular  region  of  the  globe,  and
cannot  exist  beyond  it;  others,  though  they  may  be
brought  to  bear  the  injuries  of  a  climate  foreign  to  them,
cease  to  multiply  when  carried  out  of  that  district
"vvhich  nature  destined  to  be  their  mansion.  Even  such
as  seem  capable  of  being  naturalized  in  various  climates,
feel  the  effect  of  every  remove  from  their  proper  station,
and  gradually  dwindle  and  degenerate  from  the  vigour
and  perfection  peculiar  to  their  species.  Man  is  the
only  living  creature  whose  frame  is  at  once  so  hardy
and  so  flexible,  that  he  can  spread  over  the  whole  earth,
become  the  inhabitant  of  every  region,  and  thrive  and
multiply  under  every  climate.  Subject,  however,  to  the
general  law  of  nature,  the  human  body  is  not  entirely
exempt  from  the  operation  of  climate;  and  when  ex-
posed to  the  extremes  either  of  heat  or  cold,  its  size  or
vigour  diminishes.

Com-  The  first  appearance  of  the  inhabitants  of  the

pexion,  c  jyjg^  w;"qj.1(J  fii]g(j  ^[^q  discovcrers  witli  such  as-
tonishment, that  they  were  apt  to  imagine  them  a  race
of  men  different  from  those  of  the  other  hemisphere.
Their  complexion  is  of  a  reddish  brown,  nearly  resem-
bling the  colour  of  copper.^  The  hair  of  their  heads  is
always  black,  long,  coarse,  and  uncurled.  They  have
no  beard,  and  every  part  of  their  body  is  perfectly
smooth.  Their  persons  are  of  a  full  size,  extremely
straight,  and  well  proportioned.''  Their  features  are
regular,  though  often  distorted  by  absurd  endeavours
to  improve  the  beauty  of  their  natural  form,  or  to
render  their  aspect  more  dreadful  to  their  enemies.
More  In  the  islands,  where  four- footed  animals  were
both  few  and  small,  and  the  earth  yielded  her
productions  almost  spontaneously,  the  constitution  of
the  natives,  neither  braced  by  the  active  exercises  of

y  Oviedo  Soraario,  p.  46,  D. Life  of  Columbus,  c."24.  '  See  Note  XLIV.

BOOK  IV.  293

the  chase,  nor  invigorated  by  the  labour  of  cultivation,
vi^as  extremely  feeble  and  languid.  On  the  continent,
where  the  forests  abound  with  game  of  various  kinds,
and  the  chief  occupation  of  many  tribes  was  to  pursue
it,  the  human  frame  acquired  greater  firmness.  Still,
however,  the  Americans  were  more  remarkable  for  agi-
lity than  strength.  They  resembled  beasts  of  prey,  ra-
ther than  animals  formed  for  labour,''  They  were  not
only  averse  to  toil,  but  incapable  of  it;  and  when  roused
by  force  from  their  native  indolence,  and  compelled  to
work,  they  sunk  under  tasks  which  the  people  of  the
other  continent  would  have  performed  with  ease.''
This  feebleness  of  constitution  was  universal  among  the
inhabitants  of  those  regions  in  America  which  we  are
surveying,  and  may  be  considered  as  characteristic  of
the  species  there.*"

The  beardless  countenance  and  smooth  skin  of  the
American  seems  to  indicate  a  defect  of  vigour,  occa-
sioned by  some  vice  in  his  frame.  He  is  destitute  of
one  sign  of  manhood  and  of  strength.  This  peculi-
arity, by  which  the  inhabitants  of  the  New  World  are
distinguished  from  the  people  of  all  other  nations,  can-
not be  attributed,  as  some  travellers  have  supposed,  to
their  mode  of  subsistence.'^  For  though  the  food  of
many  Americans  be  extremely  insipid,  as  they  are  al-
together unacquainted  with  the  use  of  salt,  rude  tribes
in  other  parts  of  the  earth  have  subsisted  on  aliments
equally  simple,  without  this  mark  of  degradation,  or
any  apparent  symptom  of  a  diminution  in  their  vigour.
Less  an-  "^^  ^^^®  cxtcmal  form  of  the  Americans  leads
petite.  us  to  suspect  that  there  is  some  natural  debility
in  their  frame,  the  smallness  of  their  appetite  for  food
has  been  mentioned  by  many  authors  as  a  confirmation

aSeeNoteXLV.
*  Oviedo  Som.  p.  51,  C. A^ojf.  de  Correal,  ii.  138. Wafer's  Description,  p.  131.
*=  B.  Las  Casas  Brev.  Relac,  p.  4. Torqucm.  Monar.  i.  580. Oviedo  Somario,
p.  41. Histor.  lib.  iii.  c.  6. Herrera,  dec.  1.  iib.ix.  c.  5. Simon,  p.  41.
^  Charlev.  Hist,  de  Nouv.  Fr.  iii.  310.

294  AMERICA.

of  this  suspicion.  The  quantity  of  food  which  men
consume  varies  according  to  the  temperature  of  the  cli-
mate in  which  they  live,  the  degree  of  activity  which
they  exert,  and  the  natural  vigour  of  their  constitutions.
Under  the  enervating  heat  of  the  torrid  zone,  and  when
men  pass  their  days  in  indolence  and  ease,  they  require
less  nourishment  than  the  active  inhabitants  of  tempe-
rate or  cold  countries.  But  neither  the  warmth  of  their
climate,  nor  their  extreme  laziness,  will  account  for  the
uncommon  defect  of  appetite  among  the  Americans.
The  Spaniards  were  astonished  with  observing  this,  not
only  in  the  islands,  but  in  several  parts  of  the  conti-
nent. The  constitutional  temperance  of  the  natives  far
exceeded,  in  their  opinion,  the  abstinence  of  the  most
mortified  hermits  f  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the  appe-
tite of  the  Spaniards  appeared  to  the  Americans  insa-
tiably voracious  ;  and  they  affirmed,  that  one  Spaniard
devoured  more  food  in  a  day  than  was  sufficient  for  ten
Americans. *^

Lessvehe-  "^  proof  of  some  feebleness  in  their  frame,
inenceof still morc  Striking", is  the  insensibility  of  the

desire.  *^

Americans  to  the  charms  of  beauty,  and  the
power  of  love.  That  passion  which  was  destined  to
perpetuate  life,  to  be  the  bond  of  social  union,  and  the
source  of  tenderness  and  joy,  is  the  most  ardent  in  the
human  breast.  Though  the  perils  and  hardships  of  the
savage  state,  though  excessive  fatigue,  on  some  occa-
sions, and  the  difficulty  at  all  times  of  procuring  sub-
sistence, may  seem  to  be  adverse  to  this  passion,  and
to  have  a  tendency  to  abate  its  vigour,  yet  the  rudest
nations  in  every  other  part  of  the  globe  seem  to  feel  its
influence  more  powerfully  than  the  inhabitants  of  the
New  World.  The  negro  glows  with  all  the  warmth  of
desire  natural  to  his  climate  ;  and  the  most  unculti-
vated Asiatics  discover  that  sensibility,  which,  from

«  Ramiisio,  iii.  504,  F ; 306,  A. Simon  Conquista,  &c.  p.  39. Ilakiuyt,  iii.
468.  508.  f  Ilcrrcra,  dec.  1.  lib.  ii.  c.  10".

I

BOOK  IV.  295

their  situation  on  the  globe,  we  should  expect  them  to
have  felt.  But  the  Americans  are,  in  an  amazing  de-
gree, strangers  to  the  force  of  this  first  instinct  of  na-
ture. In  every  part  of  the  New  World  the  natives  treat
their  women  with  coldness  and  indifference.  They  are
neither  the  objects  of  that  tender  attachment  which
takes  place  in  civilized  society,  nor  of  that  ardent  de-
sire conspicuous  among  rude  nations.  Even  in  cli-
mates where  this  passion  usually  acquires  its  greatest
vigour,  the  savage  of  America  views  his  female  with
disdain,  as  an  animal  of  a  less  noble  species.  He  is  at
no  pains  to  win  her  favour  by  the  assiduity  of  court-
ship, and  still  less  solicitous  to  preserve  it  by  indul-
gence and  gentleness.^  Missionaries  themselves,  not-
withstanding the  austerity  of  monastic  ideas,  cannot
refrain  from  expressing  their  astonishment  at  the  dis-
passionate coldness  of  the  American  young  men  in  their
intercourse  with  the  other  sex.*"  Nor  is  this  reserve  to
be  ascribed  to  any  opinion  which  they  entertain  with
respect  to  the  merit  of  female  chastity.  That  is  an  idea
too  refined  for  a  savage,  and  suggested  by  a  delicacy
of  sentiment  and  affection  to  which  he  is  a  strang-er.
Reflections  But  in  inquiries  concerning  either  the  bodily
r'ectTo  ^^'  ^^"tal  qualities  of  particular  races  of  men,
these.  there  is  not  a  more  common  or  more  seducing
error,  than  that  of  ascribing  to  a  single  cause,  those
characteristic  peculiarities,  which  are  the  effect  of  the
combined  operation  of  many  causes.  The  climate  and
soil  of  America  differ,  in  so  many  respects,  from  those
of  the  other  hemisphere,  and  this  difference  is  so  ob-
vious and  striking,  that  philosophers  of  great  eminence
have  laid  hold  on  this  as  sufficient  to  account  for  what
is  peculiar  in  the  constitution  of  its  inhabitants. They

S  Hennepin  Mffiur  des  Savauges,  32,  &c.  Rochefort  Hist,  des  Isles  Antilles,  p.
461.  Voyage  de  Coreal,  ii.  141.  Ramusio,  iii.  309.  F.  Lozano  Descr.  del  Graa
Chaco,  71.  Falkner's  Descr.  of  Patagon,  p.  126.  Lettere  di  P.  Cataneo  ap.  Mu-
ratori  II  Christian. Felice,  i.  305.

h  Chanvalon.  p.  51.  Lettr.  Edif.  torn.  xxiv.  318.  Tertre,  ii.  377.  Venegas,  i.
81. Ribas  Hist!  de  los  Triumf.  p.  11.

296  AMERICA.

rest  on  physical  causes  alone,  and  consider  the  feeble
frame  and  lansfuid  desire  of  the  Americans,  as  conse-
qiiences  of  the  temperament  of  that  portion  of  the  globe
which  they  occupy. But  the  influences  of  political  and
moral  causes  ousfht  not  to  have  been  overlooked. These
operate  with  no  less  effect  than  that  on  which  many
philosophers  rest  as  a  full  explanation  of  the  singular
appearances  which  have  been  mentioned. Wherever
the  state  of  society  is  such  as  to  create  many  wants  and
desires,  which  cannot  be  satisfied  without  regular  ex-
ertions of  industry,  the  body  accustomed  to  labour  be-
comes robust  and  patient  of  fatigue. In  a  more  sim-
ple state,  where  the  demands  of  men  are  so  few  and  so
moderate,  that  they  may  be  gratified,  almost  without
any  effort,  by  the  spontaneous  productions  of  nature,
the  powers  of  the  body  are  not  called  forth,  nor  can
they  attain  their  proper  strength. The  natives  of  Chili
and  of  North  America,  the  two  temperate  regions  in
the  New  World,  who  live  by  hunting,  may  be  deemed
an  active  and  vigorous  race,  when  compared  with  the
inhabitants  of  the  isles,  or  of  those  parts  of  the  conti-
nent where  hardly  any  labour  is  requisite  to  procure
subsistence. The  exertions  of  a  hunter  are  not,  how-
ever, so  regular,  or  so  continued,  as  those  of  persons
employed  in  the  culture  of  the  earth,  or  in  the  various
arts  of  civilized  life,  and  though  his  agility  may  be
greater  than  theirs,  his  strength  is  on  the  whole  infe-
rior. If  another  direction  were  given  to  the  active
powers  of  man  in  the  New  World,  and  his  force  aug-
mented by  exercise,  he  might  acquire  a  degree  of  vi-
gour which  he  does  not  in  his  present  state  possess.
The  truth  of  this  is  confirmed  by  experience. Wher-
ever the  Americans  have  been  gradually  accustomed
to  hard  labour,  their  constitutions  become  robust,  and
they  have  been  found  capable  of  performing  such  tasks,
as  seemed  not  only  to  exceed  the  powers  of  such  a  fee-
ble frame  as  has  been  deemed  peculiar  to  their  country,

BOOK  IV.  297

but  to  equal  any  effort  of  the  natives,  either  of  Africa,
or  of  Europe.'

The  same  reasoning  will  apply  to  what  has  been  ob-
served concerning  their  slender  demand  for  food.  As
a  proof  that  this  should  be  ascribed  as  much  to  their
extreme  indolence,  and  often  total  want  of  occupation,
as  to  any  thing  peculiar  in  the  physical  structure  of
their  bodies,  it  has  been  observed,  that  in  those  dis-
tricts, where  the  people  of  America  are  obliged  to  exert
any  unusual  effort  of  activity,  in  order  to  procure  sub-
sistence, or  wherever  they  are  employed  in  severe  la-
bour, their  appetite  is  not  inferior  to  that  of  other  men,
and,  in  some  places,  it  has  struck  observers  as  remark-
ably voracious. "^

The  operation  of  political  and  moral  causes  is  still
more  conspicuous,  in  modifying  the  degree  of  attach-
ment between  the  sexes.  In  a  state  of  high  civilization,
this  passion,  inflamed  by  restraint,  refined  by  delicacy,
and  cherished  by  fashion,  occupies  and  engrosses  the
heart.  It  is  no  longer  a  simple  instinct  of  nature  ;  sen-
timent heightens  the  ardour  of  desire,  and  the  most
tender  emotions  of  which  our  frame  is  susceptible
soothe  and  agitate  the  soul.  This  description,  however,
applies  only  to  those,  who,  by  their  situation,  are  ex-
empted from  the  cares  and  labours  of  life.  Among
persons  of  inferior  order,  who  are  doomed  by  their
condition  to  incessant  toil,  the  dominion  of  this  passion
is  less  violent ;  their  solicitude  to  procure  subsistence,
and  to  provide  for  the  first  demand  of  nature,  leaves
little  leisure  for  attending  to  its  second  call.  But  if  the
nature  of  the  intercourse  between  the  sexes  varies  so
much  in  persons  of  different  rank  in  polished  societies,
the  condition  of  man,  while  he  remains  uncivilized,
must  occasion  a  variation  still  more  apparent.  We
may  well  suppose,  that  amidst  the  hardships,  the  dan-

»  See  Note  XLVI.
•' Gumilla,  ii.  12.  70.  247. Lafitau,  i.  515. Ovalle  Church,  ii.  81. Muratori.
5.295.

298  AMERICA.

gers,  and  the  simplicity  of  savage  life,  where  subsist-
ence is  always  precarious,  and  often  scanty,  where  men
are  almost  continually  engaged  in  the  pursuit  of  their
enemies,  or  in  guarding  against  their  attacks,  and  where
neither  dress  nor  reserve  are  employed  as  arts  of  female
allurement,  that  the  attention  of  the  Americans  to  their
women  would  be  extremely  feeble,  without  imputing
this  solely  to  any  physical  defect  or  degradation  in
their  frame.

It  is  accordingly  observed,  that  in  those  countries  of
America,  where,  from  the  fertility  of  the  soil,  the  mild-
ness of  the  climate,  or  some  farther  advances  which  the
natives  have  made  in  improvement,  the  means  of  sub-
sistence are  more  abundant,  and  the  hardships  of  sa-
vage life  are  less  severely  felt,  the  animal  passion  of  the
sexes  becomes  more  ardent.  Striking  examples  of  this
occur  among  some  tribes  seated  on  the  banks  of  great
rivers  well  stored  with  food,  among  others  who  are
masters  of  hunting  grounds  abounding  so  much  with
game,  that  they  have  a  regular  and  plentiful  supply  of
nourishment  with  little  labour.  The  superior  degree  of
security  and  affluence  which  these  tribes  enjoy,  is  fol-
lowed by  their  natural  effects.  The  passions  implanted
in  the  human  frame  by  the  hand  of  nature  acquire  ad-
ditional force  ;  new  tastes  and  desires  are  formed  ;  the
women,  as  they  are  more  valued  and  admired,  become
more  attentive  to  dress  and  ornament ;  the  men,  begin-
ning to  feel  how  much  of  their  own  happiness  depends
upon  them,  no  longer  disdain  the  arts  of  winning  their
favour  and  affection.  The  intercourse  of  the  sexes  be-
comes very  different  from  that  which  takes  place  among
their  ruder  countrymen  ;  and  as  hardly  any  restraint  is
imposed  on  the  gratification  of  desire,  either  by  reli-
gion, or  laws,  or  decency,  the  dissolution  of  their  man-

ners IS  excessive.'

Notwithstanding  the  feeble  make  of  the  Americans,

'Biet.  3B9. Cbarlev.  iii.  I'iJ. Dumuut.  Mem.  sur  Louibianc,  i.  155.

BOOK  IV.  299

None  of  ^^''clly  any  of  them  are  deformed,  or  mutilated,
them  de-  or  defectivc  in  any  of  their  senses.  All  travel-
lers have  been  struck  with  this  circumstance,  and
have  celebrated  the  uniform  symmetry  and  perfection  of
their  external  figure.  Some  authors  search  for  the  cause
of  this  appearance  in  their  physical  condition.  As  the
parents  are  not  exhausted  or  over-fatigued  with  hard
labour,  they  suppose  that  their  children  are  born  vigo-
rous and  sound.  They  imagine  that,  in  the  liberty  of
savage  life,  the  human  body,  naked  and  unconfined  from
its  earliest  age,  preserves  its  natural  form ;  and  that  all  its
limbs  and  members  acquire  a  juster  proportion,  than
when  fettered  with  artificial  restraints,  which  stint  its
growth  and  distort  its  shape.""  Something,  without
doubt,  may  be  ascribed  to  the  operation  of  these
causes ;  but  the  true  reasons  of  this  apparent  advantage,
which  is  common  to  all  savage  nations,  lie  deeper,  and
are  closely  interwoven  with  the  nature  and  genius  of
that  state.  The  infancy  of  man  is  so  long  and  so  help-
less, that  it  is  extremely  diflScult  to  rear  children  among
rude  nations.  Their  means  of  subsistence  are  not  only
scanty,  but  precarious.  Such  as  live  by  hunting  must
range  over  extensive  countries,  and  shift  often  from
place  to  place.  The  care  of  children,  as  well  as  every
other  laborious  task,  is  devolved  upon  the  women.  The
distresses  and  hardships  of  the  savage  life,  which  are
often  such  as  can  hardly  be  supported  by  persons  in
full  vigour,  must  be  fatal  to  those  of  more  tender  age.
Afraid  of  undertaking  a  task  so  laborious,  and  of  such
long  duration,  as  that  of  rearing  their  offspring,  the
women,4n  some  parts  of  America,  procure  frequent  abor-
tions by  the  use  of  certain  herbs,  and  extinguish  the  first
sparks  of  that  life  which  they  are  unable  to  cherish."
Sensible  that  only  stout  and  well  formed  children  have
force  of  constitution  to  struggle  through  such  a  hard  in-
fancy, other  nations  abandon  or  destroy  such  of  their

"•  Piso,  p.  6. "  Ellis's  Voyage  to  Hudson's  Bay,  198.  Herrera,  dec- 7.  lib.  ix.  c.  4.

300  AMERICA.

progeny  as  appear  feeble  or  defective,  as  unworthy  of
attention."  Even  when  they  endeavour  to  rear  all  their
children  without  distinction,  so  great  a  proportion  of
the  whole  number  perishes  under  the  rigorous  treatment
which  must  be  their  lot  in  the  savage  state,  that  few  of
those  who  laboured  under  any  original  frailty  attain  the
age  of  manhood.''  Thus,  in  polished  societies,  where
the  means  of  subsistence  are  secured  with  certainty,
and  acquired  with  ease ;  where  the  talents  of  the  mind
are  often  of  more  importance  than  the  powers  of  the
body;  children  are  preserved  notwithstanding  their  de-
fects or  deformity,  and  grow  up  to  be  useful  citizens.
In  rude  nations,  such  persons  are  either  cut  off  as  soon
as  they  are  born,  or,  becoming  a  burden  to  themselves
and  to  the  community,  cannot  long  protract  their  lives.
But  in  those  provinces  of  the  New  World,  where,  by
the  establishment  of  the  Europeans,  more  regular  pro-
vision has  been  made  for  the  subsistence  of  its  inhabit-
ants, and  they  are  restrained  from  laying  violent  hands
on  their  children,  the  Americans  are  so  far  from  beinor
eminent  for  any  superior  perfection  in  their  form,  that
one  should  rather  suspect  some  peculiar  imbecility  in
the  race,  from  the  extraordinary  number  of  individuals
who  are  deformed,  dwarfish,  mutilated,  blind,  or  deaf.''
Uniformity  How  fccble  socvcr  tlic  coustitutiou  of  the
oftiieirap-  Amcricaus  may  be,  it  is  remarkable,  that  there

pearance. ,  .  .

is  less  variety  in  the  human  form  throughout
the  New  World,  than  in  the  ancient  continent.  When
Columbus  and  the  other  discoverers  first  visited  the  dif-
ferent countries  of  America  which  lie  within  the  torrid
zone,  they  naturally  expected  to  find  people  of  the  same
complexion  with  tliose  in  the  corresponding  regions  of
the  other  hemisphere.  To  their  amazement,  however,
they  discovered  that  America  contained  no  negroes/

•  Gumilla  Hist.  ii.  234. 'J'echo's  Hist,  of  Paraguay,  &c. CliurcluH's  Collect.
Vi.  108.  p  Creiixii  Hist.  Caiiud.  p.  57.

1  Voyage  dc  Ulloa,  i.  232.  '  P.  Martyr,  dec-  p.  71.

BOOK  IV.  301

and  the  cause  of  this  singular  appearance  became  as
much  the  object  of  curiosity,  as  the  fact  itself  was  of
wonder.  In  what  part  or  membrane  of'  the  body  that
humour  resides  which  tinges  the  complexion  of  the
negro  with  a  deep  black,  it  is  the  business  of  anatomists
to  inquire  and  describe.  The  powerful  operation  of
heat  appears  manifestly  to  be  the  cause  which  produces
this  striking  variety  in  the  human  species.  All  Europe,
a  great  part  of  Asia,  and  the  temperate  countries  of
Africa,  are  inhabited  by  men  of  a  white  complexion.
All  the  torrid  zone  in  Africa,  some  of  the  warmer  re-
gions adjacent  to  it,  and  several  countries  in  Asia,  are
filled  with  people  of  a  deep  black  colour.  If  we  survey
the  nations  of  our  continent,  making  our  progress  from
cold  and  temperate  countries  towards  those  parts  which
are  exposed  to  the  influence  of  vehement  and  unremit-
ting heat,  we  shall  find,  that  the  extreme  whiteness  of
their  skin  soon  begins  to  diminish ;  that  its  colour  deep-
ens gradually  as  we  advance;  and  after  passing  through
all  the  successive  gradations  of  shade,  terminates  in
a  uniform  unvarying  black.  But  in  America,  where
the  agency  of  heat  is  checked  and  abated  by  various
causes,  which  I  have  already  explained,  the  climate
seems  to  be  destitute  of  that  force  which  produces  such
wonderful  effects  on  the  human  frame.  The  colour  of
the  natives  of  the  torrid  zone  in  America  is  hardly  of  a
deeper  hue  than  that  of  the  people  in  the  more  tempe-
rate parts  of  their  continent.  Accurate  observers,  who
had  an  opportunity  of  viewing  the  Americans  in  very
different  climates,  and  in  provinces  far  removed  from
each  other,  have  been  struck  with  the  amazing  similarity
of  their  figure  and  aspect.'

But  though  the  hand  of  nature  has  deviated  so  little
from  one  standard  in  fashioning  the  human  form  in
America,  the  creation  of  fancy  hath  been  various  and
extravagant. The  same  fables  that  were  current  in  the

'  See  Note  XLVII.

302  amp:rica.

ancient  continent,  have  been  revived  with  respect  to
the  New  World,  and  America  too  has  been  peopled
with  human  beings  of  monstrous  and  fantastic  appear-
ance. The  inhabitants  of  certain  provinces  were  de-
scribed to  be  pigmies  of  three  feet  high ;  those  of  otliers
to  be  giants  of  an  enormous  size.  Some  travellers  pub-
lished accounts  of  people  with  only  one  eye;  others
pretended  to  have  discovered  men  without  heads,
whose  eyes  and  mouths  were  planted  in  their  breasts.
The  variety  of  nature  in  her  productions  is,  indeed,  so
great,  that  it  is  presumptuous  to  set  bounds  to  her  ferti-
lity, and  to  reject  indiscriminately  every  relation  that
does  not  perfectly  accord  with  our  own  limited  obser-
vation and  experience.  But  the  other  extreme,  of
yielding  a  hasty  assent,  on  the  slightest  evidence,  to
whatever  has  the  appearance  of  being  strange  and  mar-
vellous, is  still  more  unbecoming  a  philosophical  in-
quirer; as,  in  every  period,  men  are  more  apt  to  be  be-
trayed into  error,  by  their  weakness  in  believing  too
much,  than  by  their  arrogance  in  believing  too  little.
In  proportion  as  science  extends,  and  nature  is  examined
with  a  discerning  eye,  the  wonders  which  amused  ages
of  ignorance  disappear.  The  tales  of  credulous  travel-
lers concerning  America  are  forgotten;  the  monsters
which  they  describe  have  been  searched  for  in  vain;
and  those  provinces  where  they  pretend  to  have  found
inhabitants  of  singular  forms,  are  now  known  to  be
possessed  by  people  nowise  different  from  the  other
Americans.

Though  those  relations  may,  without  discussion,  be
rejected  as  fabulous,  there  are  other  accounts  of  varie-
ties in  the  human  species  in  some  parts  of  the  New
World,  which  rest  upon  better  evidence,  and  merit  more
attentive  examination.  This  variety  has  been  particu-
larly observed  in  three  different  districts.  The  first  of
these  is  situated  in  the  isthmus  of  Darien,  near  the  cen-
tre of  America. Lionel  Wafer,  a  traveller  possessed  of

BOOK  IV.  303

more  curiosity  and  intelligence  than  we  should  have
expected  to  find  in  an  associate  of  buccaneers,  disco-
vered there  a  race  of  men  few  in  number,  but  of  a  sin-
gular make.  They  are  of  low  stature,  according  to  his
description,  of  a  feeble  frame,  incapable  of  enduring
fatigue.  Their  colour  is  a  dead  milk  white;  not  resem-
bling that  of  fair  people  among  Europeans,  but  without
any  tincture  of  a  blush  or  sanguine  complexion.  Their
skin  is  covered  with  a  fine  hairy  down  of  a  chalky
white;  the  hair  of  their  heads,  their  eye-brows,  and
eye-lashes,  are  of  the  same  hue.  Their  eyes  are  of  a
singular  form,  and  so  weak,  that  they  can  hardly  bear
the  light  of  the  sun;  but  they  see  clearly  by  moon-
light, and  are  most  active  and  gay  in  the  night.'  No
race  similar  to  this  has  been  discovered  in  any  other
part  of  America.  Cortes,  indeed,  found  some  persons
exactly  resembling  the  white  people  of  Darien,  among
the  rare  and  monstrous  animals  which  Montezuma  had
collected."  But  as  the  power  of  the  Mexican  empire
extended  to  the  provinces  bordering  on  the  isthmus  of
Darien,  they  were  probably  brought  thence.  Singular
as  the  appearance  of  those  people  may  be,  they  cannot
be  considered  as  constituting  a  distinct  species.  Among
the  negroes  of  Africa,  as  well  as  the  natives  of  the  In-
dian islands,  nature  sometimes  produces  a  small  num-
ber of  individuals,  with  all  the  characteristic  features
and  qualities  of  the  white  people  of  Darien.  The  former
are  called  Albinos  by  the  Portuguese,  the  latter  Kacker-
lakes  by  the  Dutch.  In  Darien  the  parents  of  those
Whites  are  of  the  same  colour  with  the  other  natives  of
the  country ;  and  this  observation  applies  equally  to  the
anomalous  progeny  of  the  negroes  and  Indians.  The
same  mother  who  produces  some  children  of  a  colour
that  does  not  belong  to  the  race,  brings  forth  the  rest
with  the  complexion  peculiar  to  her  country."^ One

'  Wafer  Descript.  of  Isth.  ap.  Dampier,  iii.  p.  346.
"  Cortes  ap.  Ramus,  iii.  p.  241,  E. "  Margrav.  Hist.  Rer.  Nat.  Bras.  lib.  vili.  c.  4.

304  AMERICA.

conclusion  may  then  be  formed  with  respect  to  the
people  described  by  Wafer,  the  Albinos  and  the  Kac-
kcrlakes;  they  are  a  degenerated  breed,  not  a  separate
class  of  men ;  and  from  some  disease  or  defect  of  their
parents,  the  peculiar  colour  and  debility  which  mark
their  degradation  are  transmitted  to  them.  As  a  deci-
sive  proof  of  this,  it  has  been  observed,  that  neither  the
white  people  of  Darien,  nor  the  Albinos  of  Africa,  pro-
pagate their  race :  their  children  are  of  the  colour  and
temperament  peculiar  to  the  natives  of  their  respective
countries."

The  second  district  that  is  occupied  by  inhabitants
differing  in  appearance  from  the  other  people  of  Ame-
rica, is  situated  in  a  high  northern  latitude,  extending
from  the  coast  of  Labrador  towards  the  pole,  as  far  as
the  country  is  habitable.  The  people  scattered  over
those  dreary  regions,  are  known  to  the  Europeans  by
the  name  of  EsquimaiLV.  They  themselves,  with  that
idea  of  their  own  superiority,  which  consoles  the  rudest
and  most  wretched  nations,  assume  the  name  of  Keralit
or  Men.  They  are  of  a  middle  size,  and  robust,  with
heads  of  a  disproportioned  bulk,  and  feet  as  remarkably
small.  Their  complexion,  though  swarthy,  by  being
continually  exposed  to  the  rigour  of  a  cold  climate,  in-
clines to  the  European  white,  rather  than  to  the  copper
colour  of  America,  and  the  men  have  beards  which  are
sometimes  bushy  and  long.^  From  these  marks  of  dis-
tinction, as  well  as  from  one  still  less  equivocal,  the
affinity  of  their  language  to  that  of  the  Greenlanders,
which  I  have  already  mentioned,  we  may  conclude,
with  some  degree  of  confidence,  that  the  Esquimaux  arc
a  race  different  from  the  rest  of  the  Americans.

We  cannot  decide  with  equal  certainty  concerning
the  inhabitants  of  the  third district,  situated  at  the

«  Wafer,  p.  348.  Demanet  Hist,  de  PAfrique,  ii.  23i.  Rechcrcli.  Philos.  sur
les  Amcr.  ii.  1,  &c. Note  XLVIII.

y  Ellis  Voy.  to  JIucis.  Bay,  p.  131.  1.39.  De  la  Polhesie,  torn.  i.  p.  79.  Wales
Journ.  of  ft  Vo^,  to  Churchill  River.  Phil.  Trans,  vol.  \\.  109.

BOOK IV.  .305

southern  extremity  of  America. These  are  the  famous
Patagonian.s,  who,  during  two  centuries  and  a  half,  have
afforded  a  subject  of  controversy  to  the  learned,  and  an
object  of  wonder  to  the  vulgar. They  are  supposed  to
be  one  of  the  wandering  tribes,  which  occupy  the  vast
but  least  known  region  of  America,  which  extends  from
the  river  De  la  Plata  to  the  straits  of  Magellan. Their
proper  station  is  in  that  part  of  the  interior  country
which  lies  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Negro  ;  but  in  the
hunting  season,  they  often  roam  as far  as the  straits
which  separate  Tierra  del  Fuego  from  the  main  land.
The  first  accounts  of  this  people  were  brought  to  Europe
by  the  companions  of  Magellan,^  who  described  them
as  a  gigantic  race,  above  eight  feet  high,  and  of  strength
in  proportion  to  their  enormous  size. Among  several
tribes  of  animals, a  disparity  in  bulk  as  considerable
may  be  observed. Some  large  breeds  of  horses  and
dogfs  exceed  the  more  diminutive  races  in  stature  and
strength,  as  far  as  the  Patagonian  is  supposed  to  rise
above  the  usual  standard  of  the  human  body. But  ani-
mals attain  the  highest  perfection  of  their  species,  only
in  mild  climates,  or  where  they  find  the  most  nutritive
food  in  greatest  abundance. It  is  not  then  in  the  un-
cultivated waste  of  the  Magellanic  regions,  and  among
a  tribe  of  improvident  savages,  that  we  should  expect
to  find  man  possessing  the  highest  honours  of  his  race,
and  distinguished  by  a  superiority  of  size  and  vigour,
far  beyond  what  he  has  reached  in  any  other  part  of  the
earth. The  most  explicit  and  unexceptionable  evidence
is  requisite,  in  order  to  establish  a  fact  repugnant  to
those  general  principles  and  laws,  which  seem  to  affect
the  human  frame  in  every  other  instance,  and  to  decide
with  respect  to  its  nature  and  qualities. Such  evidence
has  not  hitherto  been  produced. Though  several  per-
sons,  to  whose testimony  great  respect  is  due, have
visited  this  part  of  America  since  the  time  of  MagellaUj

»  Falkner's  Description  of  Patagonia,  p.  102.
VOL. VI.  X

306  AMERICA.

and  have  had  interviews  with  the  natives  ;  though  some
have  affirmed,  that  such  as  they  saw  were  of  gigantic
stature,  and  others  have  formed  the  same  conclusion
from  measuring  their  footsteps,  or  from  viewing  the
skeletons  of  their  dead ;  yet  their  accounts  vary  from
each  other  in  so  many  essential  points,  and  are  mingled
with  so  many  circumstances  manifestly  false  or  fabulous,
as  detract  much  from  their  credit. On  the  other  hand,
some  navigators,  and  those  among  the  most  eminent  of
their  order  for  discernment  and  accuracy,  have  asserted
that  the  natives  of  Patagonia,  with  whom  they  had  in-
tercourse, though  stout  and  well  made,  are  not  of  such
extraordinary  size  as  to  be  distinguished  from  the  rest
of  the  human  species.'' The  existence  of  this  gigantic
race  of  men  seems,  then,  to  be  one  of  those  points  in
natural  history,  with respect  to  which  a  cautious  in-
quirer will  hesitate,  and  will  choose  to  suspend  his  as-
sent until  more  complete  evidence  shall  decide,  whether
he  ought  to  admit  a  fact,  seemingly  inconsistent  with
what  reason  and  experience  have  discovered  concerning
the  structure  and  condition  of  man,  in  all  the  various
situations  in  which  he  has  been  observed.
Their  state In  Order  to  form  a  complete  idea  with  respect
of  health.  ^Q  |.^g  constitution  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  and
the  other  hemisphere,  we  should  attend  not  only  to  the
make  and  vigour  of  their  bodies,  but  consider  what  de-
gree of  health  they  enjoy,  and  to  what  period  of  longe-
vity they  usually  arrive. In  the  simplicity  of  the  savage
state,  when  man  is  not  oppressed  with  labour,  or  ener-
vated by  luxury,  or  disquieted  with  care,  we  are  apt  to
imao-ine  that  his  life  will  flow  on  almost  untroubled  by
disease  or  suffering,  until  his  days  be  terminated  in  ex-
treme old  age,  by  the  gradual  decays  of  nature. We
find, accordingly,  among the  Americans,  as  well as
among  other  rude  people,  persons,  whose  decrepit  and
shrivelled  form  seems  to  indicate  an  extraordinary  length

»  See  Note  XLIX.

BOOK  IV.  307

of  life.  But  as  most  of  them  arc  unacquainted  with  the
art  of  numbering',  and  all  of  them  as  forgetful  of  what
is  past,  as  they  are  improvident  of  what  is  to  come,  it
is  impossible  to  ascertain  their  age  with  any  degree  of
precision.''  It  is  evident  that  the  period  of  their  longe-
vity must  vary  considerably,  according  to  the  diversity
of  climates,  and  their  different  modes  of  subsistence.
They  seem,  however,  to  be  every  where  exempt  from
many  of  the  distempers  which  afflict  polished  nations.
None  of  the  maladies,  which  are  the  immediate  offspring
of  luxury,  ever  visited  them;  and  they  have  no  names
in  their  languages  by  which  to  distinguish  this  numer-
ous train  of  adventitious  evils.

But  whatever  be  the  situation  in  which  man
is  placed,  he  is  born  to  suffer  ;>  and  his  diseases,
in  the  savage  state,  though  fewer  in  number,  are  like
those  of  the  animals  whom  he  nearly  resembles  in  his
mode  of  life,  more  violent  and  more  fatal.  If  luxury
engenders  and  nourishes  distempers  of  one  species,  the
rigour  and  distresses  of  savage  life  bring  on  those  of
another.  As  men  in  this  state  are  wonderfully  impro-
vident, and  their  means  of  subsistence  precarious,  they
often  pass  from  extreme  want  to  exuberant  plenty,  ac-
cording to  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune  in  the  chase,  or
in  consequence  of  the  various  degrees  of  abundance
with  which  the  earth  affords  to  them  its  productions,  in
different  seasons.  Their  inconsiderate  gluttony  in  the
one  situation,  and  their  severe  abstinence  in  the  other,
are  equally  pernicious.  For  though  the  human  con-
stitution may  be  accustomed  by  habit,  like  that  of  ani-
mals of  prey,  to  tolerate  long  famine,  and  then  to  gorge
voraciously,  it  is  not  a  little  affected  by  such  sudden
and  violent  transitions.  The  strength  and  vigour  of
savages  are  at  some  seasons  impaired  by  v/hat  they  suf-
fer from  a  scarcity  of  food  ;  at  others  they  are  afflicted
with  disorders  arising'  from  indigestion  and a  super-

b  Ulloa  Notic.  Americ.  323. Bancroft  Nat.  Hist,  of  Guiana,  334.

x2

308  AMERICA.

fluity  of  gross  aliment.  These  are  so  common  that  they
may  be  considered  as  the  unavoidable  consequence  of
their  mode  of  subsisting,  and  cut  off  considerable  num-
bers in  the  prime  of  life.  They  are  likewise  extremely
subject  to  consumptions,  to  pleuritic,  asthmatic,  and  pa-
ralytic disorders,"  brought  on  by  the  immoderate  hard-
ships and  fatigue  which  they  endure  in  hunting  and  in
war  ;  or  owing  to  the  inclemency  of  the  seasons  to  which
they  are  originally  exposed.  In  the  savage  state,  hard-
ships and  fatigue  violently  assault  the  constitution.  In
polished  societies,  intemperance  undermines  it.  It  is
not  easy  to  determine  which  of  them  operates  with  most
fatal  effect,  or  tends  most  to  ^bridge  human  life.  The
influence  of  the  former  is  certainly  most  extensive.  The
pernicious  consequences  of  luxury  reach  only  a  few
members  in  any  community;  the  distresses  of  savage
life  are  felt  by  all.  As  far  as  I  can  judge,  after  very
minute  inquiry,  the  general  period  of  human  life  is
shorter  among  savages,  than  in  well  regulated  and  in-
dusti'ious  societies.

One  dreadful  malady,  the  severest  scourge  with
which,  in  this  life,  offended  Heaven  chastens  the  indul-
gence of  criminal  desire,  seems  to  have  been  peculiar
to  the  Americans.  By  communicating  it  to  their  con-
querors, they  have  not  only  amply  avenged  their  own
wrongs,  but  by  adding  this  calamity  to  those  which
formerly  imbittered  human  life,  they  have,  perhaps,
more  than  counterbalanced  all  the  benefits  which  Eu-
rope has  derived  from  the  discovery  of  the  New  World.
This  distemper,  from  the  country  in  which  it  first  raged,
or  from  the  people  by  whom  it  was  supposed  to  have
been  spread  over  Europe,  has  been  sometimes  called
the  Neapolitan,  and  sometimes  the  French  disease.  At
its  first  appearance,  the  infection  was  so  malignant,  its
symptoms  so  violent,  its  operations  so  rapid  and  fatal,  as
to  baffle  all  the  efforts  of  medical  skill. Astonishment

«  Cliarlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  j64. Lalitau,  ii.  360. De  la  Potherie,  ii.  37.

BOOK  IV.  309

and  terror  accompanied  this  unknown  affliction  in  its
progress,  and  men  began  to  dread  the  extinction  of  the
human  race  by  such  a  cruel  visitation.  Experience,
and  the  ingenuity  of  physicians,  gradually  discovered
remedies  of  such  virtue  as  to  cure  or  to  mitigfate  the
evil.  During  the  course  of  two  centuries  and  a  half,
its  virulence  seems  to  have  abated  considerably.  At
length,  in  the  same  manner  with  the  leprosy,  which
raged  in  Europe  for  some  centuries,  it  may  waste  its
force  and  disappear;  and  in  some  happier  age,  this
western  infection,  like  that  from  the  East,  may  be  known
only  by  description.'^

Powers  and  II.  After  Considering  wliat  appears  to  bc  pc-
Sf  their  culiar  in  the  bodily  constitution  of  the  Ameri-
iiiinds.  ^^jjg^  Qyj.  attention  is  naturally  turned  towards
the  powers  and  qualities  of  their  minds.  As  the  indi-
vidual advances  from  the  ignorance  and  imbecility  of
the  infant  state  to  vigour  and  maturity  of  understand-
ing, something  similar  to  this  may  be  observed  in  the
progress  of  the  species.  With  respect  to  it,  too,  there  is
a  period  of  infancy,  during  which  several  powers  of  the
mind  are  not  unfolded,  and  all  are  feeble  and  defective
in  their  operation.  In  the  early  ages  of  society,  while
the  condition  of  man  is  simple  and  rude,  his  reason  is
but  little  exercised,  and  his  desires  move  within  a  very
narrow  sphere.  Hence  arise  two  remarkable  characte-
ristics of  the  human  mind  in  this  state.  Its  intellectual
powers  are  extremely  limited ;  its  emotions  and  efforts
are  few  and  languid.  Both  these  distinctions  are  con-
spicuous among  the  rudest  and  most  unimproved  of  the
American  tribes,  and  constitute  a  striking  part  of  their
description.

inteiiec-  What,  amoug  polished  nations,  is  called  spe-
tks  ve?y "  culative  reasoning  or  research,  is  altogether  un-
limited, known  in  the  rude  state  of  society,  and  never
becomes  the  occupation  or  amusement  of  the  human

See  Note  L.

A*-'

310  AMERICA.

faculties,  until  man  be  so  far  improved  as  to  have  se-
cured, with  certainty,  the  means  of  subsistence,  as  well
as the possession  of  leisure  and tranquillity. The
thousfhtsand  attention  of  a  savaQ;e  are  confined  within
the  small  circle  of  objects,  immediately  conducive  to  his
preservation  or  enjoyment. Every  thing  beyond  that,
escapes  his  observation,  or  is  perfectly  indifferent  to
him. Like  a  mere  animal,  what  is  before  his  eyes  in-
terests and  affects  him  ;  what  is  out  of  sight,  or  at  a  dis-
tance, makes  little  impression.'  There  are  several  people
in  America  whose  limited  understandings  seem  not  to
be  capable  of  forming  an arrangement  for  futurity;
neither  their  solicitude  nor  their  foresight  extend  so  far.
They  follow  blindly  the  impulse  of  the  appetite  which
they  feel,  but  are  entirely  regardless  of  distant  conse-
quences, and  even  of  those  removed  in  the  least  degree
from immediate apprehension. While they highly
prize  such  things  as  serve  for  present  use,  or  minister  to
present  enjoyment,  they  set  no  value  upon  those  which
are  not  the  object  of  some  immediate  want.* When,
on  the  approach  of  the  evening,  a  Caribbee  feels  him-
self disposed  to  go  to  rest,  no  consideration  will  tempt
him  to  sell  his  hammock. But,  in  the  morning,  when
he  is  sallying  out  to  the  business  or  pastime  of  the  day,
he  will  part  with  it  for  the  slightest  toy  that  catches  his
fancy .^ At  the  close  of  winter,  while  the  impression  of
what  he  has  suffered  from  the  rigour  of  the  climate  is
fresh  in  the  mind  of  the  North  American,  he  sets  him-
self with  vigour  to  prepare  materials  for  erecting  a
comfortable  hut  to  protect  him  against  the  inclemency
of  the  succeeding  season;  but,  as  soon  as  the  weather
becomes  mild,  he  forgets  what  is  past,  abandons  his
work,  and  never  thinks  of  it  more,  until  the  return  of
cold  compels  him,  when  too  late,  to  resume  it.''

e  L'lloa  Noticias  Anieric.  222.
f  Venegas  Hist,  of  Calif,  i.  66. Supp.  Church.  Coll.  v.  69.3. Borde  Descr.  des
Caraibes,  p.  J6.  Ellis  Vo^^  194.  e  Lahat  Voy.  ii.  114, 115.  Tertrc,  ii.  3B5.

I'  Adair's  Hist,  of  Anicr.  Indians,  417.

BOOK IV.  311

If  in  concerns  the  most  interesting,  and  seemingly
the  most  simple,  the  reason  of  man,  while  rude  and
destitute  of  culture,  differs  so  little  from  the  thoughtless
levity  of  children,  or  the  improvident  instinct  of  ani-
mals, its  exertions  in  other  directions  cannot  be  very
considerable.  The  objects  tow^ards  which  reason  turns,
and  the  disquisitions  in  which  it  engages,  must  depend
upon  the  state  in  which  man  is  placed,  and  are  sug-
gested by  his  necessities  and  desires.  Disquisitions,
which  appear  the  most  necessary  and  important  to  men
in  one  state  of  society,  never  occur  to  those  in  another.
Among  civilized  nations,  arithmetic,  or  the  art  of  num-
bering, is  deemed  an  essential  and  elementary  science ;
and  in  our  continent,  the  invention  and  use  of  it  reaches
back  to  a  period  so  remote  as  is  beyond  the  knowledge
of  history.  But  among  savages,  who  have  no  property
to  estimate,  no  hoarded  treasures  to  count,  no  variety
of  objects  or  multiplicity  of  ideas  to  enumerate,  arith-
metic is  a  superfluous  and  useless  art.  Accordingly,
among  some  tribes  in  America  it  seems  to  be  quite  un-
known. There  are  many  who  cannot  reckoii  farther
than  three;  and  have  no  denomination  to  distinguish
any  number  above  it.'  Several  can  proceed  as  far  as
ten,  others  to  twenty.  When  they  would  convey  an
idea  of  any  number  beyond  these,  they  point  to  the
hair  of  their  head,  intimating  that  it  is  equal  to  them,
or  with  wonder  declare  it  to  be  so  great  that  it  cannot
be  reckoned.''  Not  only  the  Americans,  but  all  nations,
while  extremely  rude,  seem  to  be  unacquainted  with
the  art  of  computation.^  As  soon,  however,  as  they
acquire  such  acquaintance  or  connexion  with  a  variety
of  objects,  that  there  is  frequent  occasion  to  combine  or
divide  them,  their  knowledge  of  numbers  increases,  so

•  Condam.  p.  07.  Stadius  ap.  de  Bry,  ix.  128.  Lery,  ibid.  251.  Blet.  362.
Lettr.  Edif.  23.  314.

^  Duraont  Louis,  i.  187.  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  3.  Biet.  396.  Borde,  6.

'  This  is  the  case  with  the  Grer-nlanders,  Crantz.  i.  225.  and  with  the  Kamchat-
kadales,  ]M.  I'.-Vbb^  Chapp6,  iii.  17.

312  AMERICA.

that  the  state  of  this  art  among-  any  people  may  be  con-
sidered as  one  standard,  by  which  to  estimate  the  de-
gree of  their  improvement.  The  Iroquois,  in  North
America,  as  they  are  much  more  civilized  than  the  rude
inhabitants  of  Brazil,  Paraguay,  or  Guiana,  have  like-
wise made  greater  advances  in  this  respect;  though
even  their  arithmetic  does  not  extend  beyond  a  thou-
sand, as  in  their  petty  transactions  they  have  no  occa-
sion for  any  higher  number.'"  The  Cherokee,  a  less
considerable  nation  on  the  same  continent,  can  reckon
only  as  far  as  a  hundred,  and  to  that  extent  have  names
for  the  several  numbers;  the  smaller  tribes  in  their
neio-hbourhood  can  rise  no  higfher  than  ten."
No  abstract  ^^  othcr  rcspccts,  the  exercise  of  the  under-
ideas.  standing  among  rude  nations  is  still  more  li-
mited. The  first  ideas  of  every  human  being  must  be
such  as  he  receives  by  the  senses.  But  in  the  mind  of
man,  while  in  the  savage  state,  there  seem  to  be  hardly
any  ideas  but  what  enter  by  this  avenue.  The  objects
around  him  are  presented  to  his  eye.  Such  as  may  be
subservient  to  his  use,  or  can  gratify  any  of  his  appe-
tites, attract  his  notice;  he  views  the  rest  without  cu-
riosity or  attention.  Satisfied  with  considering  them
under  that  simple  mode  in  which  they  appear  to  him,
as  separate  and  detached,  he  neither  combines  them  so
as  to  form  general  classes,  nor  contemplates  their  qua-
lities apart  from  the  subject  in  which  they  inhere,  nor
bestows  a  thought  upon  the  operations  of  his  own  mind
concerning  them.  Thus  he  is  unacquainted  with  all
the  ideas  which  have  been  denominated  universal,  or
abstract,  or  of  reflection.  The  range  of  his  understand-
ing must,  of  course,  be  very  confined,  and  his  reasoning-
powers  be  employed  merely  on  what  is  sensible.  This
is  so  remarkably  the  case  with  the  ruder  nations  of
America,  that  their  languages  (as we shall  afterward

'"  Cliarlev.  Nouv.  Franc,  iii.  40'J.
n  Adair's  Hist,  of  Anicr.  Indians,  77. Sec  Note  LI.

BOOK  IV.  313

find)  have  not  a  word  to  express  any  thing  but  what  is
material  or  corporeal. Time,  space,  substance,  and  a
thousand  other  terms,  which  represent  abstract  and  uni-
versal ideas,  are altogether unknown  to them.° A
naked  savage,  cowering  over  the  fire  in  his  miserable
cabin,  or  stretched  under  a  few  branches  which  afford
him  a  temporary  shelter,  has  as  little  inclination  as  ca-
pacity for  useless  speculation. His  thoughts extend
not  beyond  what  relates  to  animal  life ;  and  when  they
are  not  directed  towards  some  of  its  concerns,  his  mind
is  totally  inactive. In  situations  where  no  extraordi-
nary effort either  of  ingenuity  or  labour  is  requisite,
in order to satisfy  the simple demands of  nature,
the  powers  of  the  mind  are  so  seldom  roused  to  any
exertion,  that  the  rational  faculties continue almost
dormant  and  unexercised. The  numerous  tribes  scat-
tered over  the  rich  plains  of  South  America,  the  inha-
bitants of  some  of  the  islands,  and  of  several  fertile  re-
gions on  the  continent,  come  under  this  description.  .
Their  vacant  countenance,  their  staring  unexpressive
eye,  their  listless  inattention,  and  total ignorance  of
subjects^,  which  seemed  to  be  the  first  which  should
occupy  the  thoughts  of  rational  beings,  made  such  im-
pression upon  the  Spaniards,  when  they  first  beheld
those  rude  people,  that  they  considered  them  as  animals
of  an  inferior  order,  and  could  not  believe  that  they
belonged  to  the  human  species.'' It  required  the  au-
thority of  a  papal  bull  to  counteract  this  opinion,  and
to  convince  them  that  the  Americans  were  capable  of
the  functions,  and  entitled  to  the  privileges  of  humanity.''
Since  that  time,]persons  more  enlightened  and  impartial
than  the  discoverers  or  conquerors  of  America,  have
had  an  opportunity  of  contemplating  the  most  savage
of  its  inhabitants,  and  they  have  been  astonished  and
humbled,  with  observing  how  nearly  man,  in  this  con-

*  Coudani.  p.  54.  p  Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  ii.  c.  15.

1  Torqucm.  Mon.Ind.  iii.  198.

314  AMERICA.

dition,  approaches  to  the  brute  creation.  But  in  severer
climates,  where  subsistence  cannot  be  procured  with
the  same  ease,  where  men  must  unite  more  closely,  and
act  with  jrreater  concert,  necessity  calls  forth  their  ta-
lents, and  sharpens  their  invention,  so  that  the  intellec-
tual powers  are  more  exercised  and  improved.  The
North  American  tribes  and  the  natives  of  Chili,  who
inhabit  the  temperate  regions  in  the  two  great  districts
of  America,  are  people  of  cultivated  and  enlarged  un-
derstandings, when  viewed  in  comparison  with  some
of  those  seated  in  the  islands,  or  on  the  banks  of  the
Maragnon  and  Orinoco.  Their  occupations  are  more
various,  their  system  of  policy,  as  well  as  of  war,  more
complex,  their  arts  more  numerous.  But  even  among
them,  the  intellectual  powers  are  extremely  limited  in
their  operations,  and  unless  when  turned  directly  to
those  objects  which  interest  a  savage,  are  held  in
no  estimation.  Both  the  North  Americans  and  Chi-
lese,  when  not  engaged  in  some  of  the  functions  be-
longing to  a  warrior  or  hunter,  loiter  away  their  time
in  thoughtless  indolence,  unacquainted  with  any  other
subject  worthy  of  their  attention,  or  capable  of  occupy-
ino'  their  minds.""  If  even  among:  them  reason  is  so
much  circumscribed  in  its  exertions,  and  never  arrives,
in  its  highest  attainments,  at  the  knowledge  of  those
general  principles  and  maxims,  which  serve  as  the
foundation  of  science,  we  may  conclude,  that  the  intel-
lectual powers  of  man  in  the  savage  state  are  destitute
of  their  proper  object,  and  cannot  acquire  any  consider-
able degree  of  vigour  and  enlargement.
. . , From  the  same  causes,  the  active  efforts  of  the

Active  ef-  '

forts  of  the  mind  are  few,  and,  on  most  occasions,  languid.

inind  few ^^  .  .  .  .  i ■ i

and  Ian-  It  wc  cxammc  mto  the  motives  which  rouse  men
^"'  ■  to  activity  in  civilized  life,  and  prompt  them  to
persevere  in  fatiguing  exertions  of  their  ingenuity  or
strength,  we  shall  find  that  they  arise  chiefly  from  ac-

"■  Lafitau,  ii.  2.

BOOK  IV.  315

quired  wants  and  appetites. These  are  numerous  and
importunate;  they  keep  the  mind  in  perpetual  agita-
tion, and,  in  order  to  gratify  them,  invention  must  be
always  on  the  stretch,  and  industry  must  be  incessantly
employed. But  the  desires  of  simple  nature  are  few,
and  where  a  favourable  climate  yields  almost  sponta-
neously what  suffices  to  gratify  them,  they  scarcely  stir
the  soul,  or  excite  any  violent  emotion. Hence  the
people  of  several  tribes  in  America  waste  their  life  in
a  listless  indolence. To  be  free  from  occupation,  seems
to  be all  the  enjoyment  towards  which  they  aspire.
They  will  continue  whole  days  stretched  out  in  their
hammocks,  or  seated  on  the  earth  in  perfect  idleness,
without  changing  their  posture,  or  raising  their  eyes
from  the  ground,  or  uttering  a  single  word.'
improvi- Such  is  their  aversion  to  labour,  that  neither
<^e°t' the  hope  of  future  good,  nor  the  apprehension
of  future  evil,  can  surmount  it. They  appear  equally
indifferent  to  both, discovering  little  solicitude,  and
taking  no  precautions  to  avoid  the  one,  or  to  secure  the
other. The  cravings  of  hunger  may  rouse  them  ;  but
as  they  devour,  with  little  distinction,  whatever  will
appease  its  instinctive  demands,  the  exertions  which
these  occasion  are  of  short  duration. Destitute  of  ar-
dour, as  well  as  variety  of  desire,  they  feel  not  the  force
of  those  powerful  springs  which  give  vigour  to the
movements  of  the  mind,  and  urge  the  patient  hand  of
industry  to  persevere  in  its  efforts. Man,  in  some  parts
of  America,  appears  in  a  form  so  rude,  that  we  can  dis-
cover no  effects  of  his  activity,  and  the  principle  of  un-
derstanding which  should  direct  it,  seems  hardly  to  be
unfolded. Like  the  other  animals,  he  has  no  fixed  re-
sidence ;  he  has  erected  no  habitation  to  shelter  him
from  the  inclemency  of  the  weather ;  he  has  taken  no
measures  for  securing  certain  subsistence ;  he  neither
sows  nor  reaps  ;  but  roams  about  as  led  in  search  of

*  Bouguer  Voy.  au  Peron,  102. Borde,  15.

316  '  AMERICA.

the  plants  and  fruits  which  the  eaVth  brings  forth  in

succession ;  and  in  quest  of  the  game  which  he  kills

in  the  forests,  or  of  the  fish  which  he  catches  in  the

rivers.

Some  va- This  dcscriptiott,  however, applies  only  to

''^'^'VI''  some  tribes. Man  cannot  continue  long  in  this

respect  to  ~

all  these,  state  of  fceblc  and  uninformed  infancy.  He
was  made  for  industry  and  action,  and  the  powers  of
his  nature,  as  well  as  the  necessity  of  his  condition,
urge  him  to  fulfil  his  destiny.  Accordingly,  among
most  of  the  American  nations,  especially  those  seated
in  rigorous  climates,  some  efforts  are  employed,  and
some  previous  precautions  are  taken,  for  securing  sub-
sistence. The  career  of  regular  industry  is  begun,  and
the  laborious  arm  has  made  the  first  essays  of  its  power.
Still,  however,  the  improvident  and  slothful  genius  of
the  savage  state  predominates.  Even  among  those  more
improved  tribes,  labour  is  deemed  ignominious  and  de-
grading. It  is  only  to  work  of  a  certain  kind  that  a  man
will  deign  to  put  his  hand.  The  greater  part  is  de-
volved entirely  upon  the  women.  One  half  of  the  com-
munity remains  inactive,  while  the  other  is  oppressed
with  the  multitude  and  variety  of  its  occupations.  Thus
their  industry  is  partial,  and  the  foresight  which  regu-
lates it  is  no  less  limited.  A  remarkable  instance  of
this  occurs  in  the  chief  arrangement  with  respect  to
their  manner  of  living.  They  depend  for  their  sub-
sistence, during  one  part  of  the  year,  on  fishing ;  dur-
ing another,  on  hunting  ;  during  a  third,  on  the  pro-
duce of  their  agriculture.  Though  experience  has
taught  them  to  foresee  the  return  of  those  various  sea-
sons, and  to  make  some  provision  for  the  respective
exigencies  of  each,  they  either  want  sagacity  to  pro-
portion this  provision  to  their  consumption,  or  are  so
incapable  of  any  command  over  their  appetites,  that,
from  their  inconsiderate  waste,  they  often  feel  the  ca-
lamities' of  famine  as  severely  as  the  rudest  of  the  sa-

BOOK IV.  317

vage  tribes.  What  they  suffer  one  year  does  not  aug-
ment their  industry,  or  render  them  more  provident  to
prevent  similar  distresses.'  This  inconsiderate  thought-
lessness about  futurity,  the  effect  of  ignorance  and  the
cause  of  sloth,  accompanies  and  characterizes  man  in
every  stage  of  savage  life  ;"  and,  by  a  capricious  sin-
gularity in  his  operations,  he  is  then  least  solicitous
about  supplying  his  wants,  when  the  means  of  satis-
fying them  are  most  precarious,  and  procured  with  the
greatest  difficulty.'''

Their  so-  ^^^-  ^^er  vicwiug  the  bodily  constitution  of
ciai  slate,  ^j^g  Amcricaus,  and  contemplating  the  powers
of  their  minds,  we  are  led,  in  the  natural  order  of  in-
quiry, to  consider  them  as  united  together  in  society.
Hitherto  our  researches  have  been  confined  to  the
operations  of  understanding  respecting  themselves  as
individuals,  now  they  will  extend  to  the  degree  of  their
sensibility  and  affection  towards  their  species.
Domestic  '^^^^  domcstic  State  is  the  first  and  most  sim-
union.  pig  form  of  human  association.  The  union  of
the  sexes,  among  different  animals,  is  of  longer  or
shorter  duration  in  proportion  to  the  ease  or  difficulty
of  rearing  their  offspring.  Among  those  tribes  where
the  season  of  infancy  is  short,  and  the  young  soon  ac-
quire vigour  or  agility,  no  permanent  union  is  formed.
Nature  commits  the  care  of  training  up  the  offspring
to  the  mother  alone,  and  her  tenderness,  without  any
other  assistance,  is  equal  to  the  task.  But  where  the
state  of  infancy  is  long  and  helpless,  and  the  joint  assi-
duity of  both  parents  is  requisite  in  tending  their  feeble
progeny,  there  a  more  intimate  connexion  takes  place,
and  continues  until  the  purpose  of  nature  be  accom-
plished, and  the  new  race  grow  up  to  full  maturity.
As  the  infancy  of  man  is  more  feeble  and  helpless  than
that  of  any  other  animal,  and  he  is  dependent,  during

«Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  338. Lettr.  Edif.  23.  298. Descript.  of  N.  France,  Os-
born's  Collect,  ii.  880. De  la  Potherie,  ii.  63.

»  Bancroft's  Nat.  Hist,  of  Guiana,  326.  333.  *  See  Note  LII.

318  AMERICA.

a  much  longer  period,  on  the  care  and  foresight  of  his
parents,  the  union  between  husband  and  wife  came
early  to  be  considered,  not  only  as  a  solemn,  but  as  a
permanent  contract.  A  general  state  of  promiscuous
intercourse  between  the  sexes  never  existed  but  in  the
imagination  of  poets.  In  the  infancy  of  society,  when
men,  destitute  of  arts  and  industry,  lead  a  hard  preca-
rious life,  the  rearing  of  their  progeny  demands  the  at-
tention and  efforts  of  both  parents  ;  and  if  their  union
had  not  been  formed  and  continued  with  this  view,  the
race  could  not  have  been  preserved.  Accordingly,  in
America,  even  among  the  rudest  tribes,  a  regular  union
between  husband  and  wife  was  universal,  and  the  rights
of  marriao;e  were  understood  and  recoo-nised.  In  those
districts  where  subsistence  was  scanty,  and  the  diffi-
culty of  maintaining  a  family  was  great,  the  man  con-
fined himself  to  one  wife.  In  warmer  and  more  fer-
tile provinces,  the  facility  of  procuring  food  concurred
with  the  influence  of  climate  in  inducino-  the  inhabi-
tants  to  increase  the  number  of  their  wives.''  In  some
countries,  the  marriage-union  subsisted  during  life  ;  in
others,  the  impatience  of  the  Americans  under  restraint
of  any  species,  together  with  their  natural  levity  and
caprice,  prompted  them  to  dissolve  it  on  very  slight
pretexts,  and  often  without  assigning  any  cause.^
Condition  ^ut  in  whatever  light  the  Americans  consi-
of  women,  jgred  thc  obligation  of  this  contract,  either  as
perpetual,  or  only  as  temporary,  the  condition  of  wo-
men was  equally  humiliating  and  miserable.  Whether
man  has  been  improved  by  the  progress  of  arts  and  ci-
vilization in  society,  is  a  question,  which,  in  the  wanton-
ness of  disputation,  has  been  agitated  among  philoso-
phers. That  women  are  indebted  to  the  refinements  of
polished  manners  for  a  happy  change  in  their  state,

»  Lettr.  Edif.  23.  318.  Lafilau  Mcears,  i.  534.  Lery  ap.  de  Bry,  iii.  234.
Journal  de  Grillet  et  Bechamel,  p.  88.

y  Lafitau,  i.  .iSO.  Joutel  Journ.  Histor.  345.  Lozano  Descr.  del  Gran  Chaco,  70.
Hennepin  Mteiirs  des  Sauvages,  p.  30.  S3.

BOOK IV.  319

is  a  point  wliicli  can  admit  of  no  doubt.  To  despise
and  to  degrade  the  female  sex,  is  the  characteristic  of
the  savage  state  in  every  part  of  the  globe.  Man,  proud
of  excelling  in  strength  and  in  courage,  the  chief  marks
of  pre-eminence  among  rude  people,  treats  woman,  as
an  inferior,  with  disdain.  The  Americans,  perhaps
from  that  coldness  and  insensibility  which  has  been
considered  as  peculiar  to  their  constitution,  add  neglect
and  harshness  to  contempt.  The  most  intelligent  tra-
vellers have  been  struck  with  this  inattention  of  the
Americans  to  their  women.  It  is  not,  as  I  have  already
observed,  by  a  studied  display  of  tenderness  and  attach-
ment, that  the  American  endeavours  to  gain  the  heart
of  the  woman  whom  he  wishes  to  marry.  Marriage
itself,  instead  of  being  a  union  of  affection  and  interests
between  equals,  becomes,  among  them,  the  unnatural
conjunction  of  a  master  with  his  slave.  It  is  the  obser-
vation of  an  author,  whose  opinions  are  deservedly  of
great  weight,  that  wherever,  wives  are  purchased,  their
condition  is  extremely  depressed.^  They  become  the
property  and  the  slaves  of  those  who  buy  them.  In
whatever  part  of  the  globe  this  custom  prevails,  the  ob-
servation holds.  In  countries  where  refinement  has
made  some  progress,  women,  when  purchased,  are  ex-
cluded from  society,  shut  up  in  sequestered  apartments,
and  kept  under  the  vigilant  guard  of  their  masters.  In
ruder  nations,  they  are  degraded  to  the  meanest  func-
tions. Among  many  people  of  America,  the  marriage-
contract  is  properly  a  purchase.  The  man  buys  his
wife  of  her  parents.  Though  unacquainted  with  the
use  of  money,  or  with  such  commercial  transactions  as
take  place  in  more  improved  society,  he  knows  how  to
give  an  equivalent  for  any  object  which  he  desires  to
possess.  In  some  places,  the  suitor  devotes  his  service
for  a  certain  time  to  the  parents  of  the  maid  whom  he
courts ;  in  others, he  hunts  for  them  occasionally,  or

^  Sketches  of  Hist,  of  xMan,  i.  184.

320  AMERICA.

assists  in  cultivating  their  fields,  and  forming  their
canoes;  in  others,  he  offers  presents  of  such  things  as
are  deemed  most  valuable  on  account  of  their  useful-
ness or  rarity.''  In  return  for  these,  he  receives  his  wife  ;
and  this  circumstance,  added  to  the  low  estimation  of
women  among  savages,  leads  him  to  consider  her  as  a
female  servant  whom  he  has  purchased,  and  whom  he
has  a  title  to  treat  as  an  inferior.  In  all  unpolished
nations,  it  is  true,  the  functions  in  domestic  economy,
which  fall  iiciturally  to  the  share  of  women,  are  so  many,
that  they  are  subjected  to  hard  labour,  and  must  bear
more  than  their  full  portion  of  the  common  burden.
But  in  America  their  condition  is  so  peculiarly  grievous,
and  their  depression  so  complete,- that  servitude  is  a
name  too  mild  to  describe  their  wretched  state.  A  wife,
among  most  tribes,  is  no  better  than  a  beast  of  burden,
destined  to  every  office  of  labour  and  fatigue.  While
the  men  loiter  out  the  day  in  sloth,  or  spend  it  in
amusement,  the  women  are  condemned  to  incessant  toil.
Tasks  are  imposed  upon  them  without  pity,  and  services
are  received  without  complacence  or  gratitude.''  Every
circumstance  reminds  women  of  this  mortifying  infe-
riority. They  must  approach  their  lords  wdth  reverence  ;
they  must  regard  them  as  more  exalted  beings,  and  are
not  permitted  to  eat  in  their  presence.''  There  are  dis-
tricts in  America  where  this  dominion  is  so  grievous,
and  so  sensibly  felt,  that  some  women,  in  a  wild  emo-
tion of  maternal  tenderness,  have  destroyed  their  female
children  in  their  infancy,  in  order  to  deliver  them  from
that  intolerable  bondage  to  which  they  knew  they  were
doomed.''  Thus  the  first  institution  of  social  life  is  per-
verted. That  state  of  domestic  union  towards  which
nature  leads  the  human  species,  in  order  to  soften  the

»  Lafitau  Moeurs,  &:c.  i.  560,  &c.  Charlev.  iii,  285,  &c.  Herrera,  dec.  4.  lib.  iv.
c.  7. Dumont,  ii.  156.

b  Tertre,  ii.  382.  Borde  Relat.  dcs  Moeurs  des  Caraibes,  p.  21.  Biet.  357.
Condaminc,  p.  110. Fermin.  i.  79.

'  Oumilla,  i.  153.  Barrere,  164.  Labat.  Voy.  ii.  78.  Ciianvalon,  51.  Terlre,
ii.  300.  '1  Gumilla,  ii.  233.  238. Herrera,  dec.  7.  lib.  ix.  c.  iv.

BOOK IV.  .321

heart  to  g-entleness  and  humanity,  is  rendered  so  un-
equal, as  to  establish  a  cruel  distinction  between  the
sexes,  which  forms  the  one  to  be  harsh  and  unfeelino-,
and  humbles  the  other  to  servility  and  subjection.
Their  wo-  ^^  is  owing-,  pcrhaps,  in  some  measure  to  this
men  not state  of  depression,  that  women  in  rude  nations

prolific.  n n

are  lar  from  being  prolific/  The  vig'our  of  their
constitution  is  exhausted  by  excessive  fatigue,  and  the
wants  and  distresses  of  savage  life  are  so  numerous,  as
to  force  them  to  take  various  precautions  in  order  to
prevent  too  rapid  an  increase  of  their  progeny.  Among
wandering  tribes,  or  such  as  depend  chiefly  upon  hunt-
ing for  subsistence,  the  mother  cannot  attempt  to  rear
a  second  child,  until  the  first  has  attained  such  a  degree
of  vigour  as  to  be  in  some  measure  independent  of  her
care.  From  this  motive  it  is  the  universal  practice  of
the  American  women  to  suckle  their  children  during
several  years  ;*  and  as  they  seldom  marry  early,  the
period  of  their  fertility  is  over  before  they  can  finish  the
long  but  necessary  attendance  upon  two  or  three  chil-
dren.^ Among  some  of  the  least  polished  tribes,  whose
industry  and  foresight  do  not  extend  so  far  as  to  make
any  regular  provision  for  their  own  subsistence,  it  is  a
maxim  not  to  burden  themselves  with  rearino-  more  than
two  children  ;''  and  no  such  numerous  families,  as  are
frequent  in  civilized  societies,  are  to  be  found  among
men  in  the  savage  state.'  When  twins  are  born,  one  of
them  commonly  is  abandoned,  because  the  mother  is
not  equal  to  the  task  of  rearing  both.*"  When  a  mother
dies  while  she  is  nursing  a  child,  all  hope  of  preserving-
its  life  fails,  and  it  is  buried  together  with  her  in  the
same  grave.' As  the  parents  are  frequently  exposed  to

»  Lafitau,  i.  590. Charlevoix,  iii.  304.  *' Herrera,  dec.  6.  lib.  i.  c.  4.

8  Charlev.  iii.  303.  Duiiiont  Mem.  sur  Louisiane,  ii.  '270.  Deny's  Hist.  Natur.
de  rAnierique,  <kc.  ii.  Sdj. Charlev.  Hist,  de  Parag.  ii.  4i22.

'•  Techo's  Account  of  Paraguay,  &c.  Church.  Collect  vi.  108.  Lett.  Edif..S?4.
200. Lozano  Descr.  92.

'  Maccleur's  Journal,  6:5.  ^  Lett.  Edif.  x.  '200. See  Note  LIII.

'  Charlev.  iii.  368.  Lett.  Edif.  x.  200.  P.  Melch.  Hernaiidei:  Memcr.  de  Cheri-
qui.  Colbert.  Collect.  Grig.  Pap  i.

VOL.  vr.  T

322  AMERICA.

want  by  their  own  improvident  indolence,  the  difficulty
of  sustaining  their  children  becomes  so  great,  that  it  is
not  uncommon  to  abandon  or  destroy  them.'"  Thus
their  experience  of  the  difficulty  of  training  up  an  in-
fant to  maturity,  amidst  the  hardships  of  savage  life,
often  stifles  the  voice  of  nature  among  the  Americans,
and  suppresses  the  strong  emotions  of  parental  tender-
ness.

Pnrentai  But,  though  ncccssity  compels  the  inhabitants
and?i5  of  America  thus  to  set  bounds  to  the  increase  of
<^"'y-  their  families,  they  are  not  deficient  in  affection
and  attachment  to  their  offspring.  They  feel  the  power
of  this  instinct  in  its  full  force,  and  as  long  as  their
progeny  continue  feeble  and  helpless,  no  people  exceed
them  in  tenderness  and  care."  But  in  rude  nations,  the
dependence  of  children  upon  their  parents  is  of  shorter
continuance  than  in  polished  societies.  When  men
must  be  trained  to  the  various  functions  of  civil  life  by
previous  discipline  and  education,  when  the  knowledge
of  abstruse  sciences  must  be  taught,  and  dexterity  in
intricate  arts  must  be  acquired,  before  a  young  man  is
prepared  to  begin  his  career  of  action,  the  attentive
feelings  of  a  parent  are  not  confined  to  the  years  of  in-
fancy, but  extend  to  what  is  more  remote,  the  establish-
ment of  his  child  in  the  world.  Even  then  his  solicitude
does  not  terminate.  His  protection  may  still  be  requi-
site, and  his  wisdom  and  experience  still  prove  useful
guides.  Thus  a  permanent  connexion  is  formed  ;  pa-
rental tenderness  is  exercised,  and  filial  respect  returned,
throughout  the  whole  course  of  life.  But  in  the  sim-
plicity of  the  savage  state,  the  affection  of  parents,  like
the  instinctive  fondness  of  animals,  ceases  almost  en-
tirely as  soon  as  their  oflspring  attain  maturity.  Little
instruction  fits  them  for  that  mode  of  life  to  which  they
are  destined.  The  parents,  as  if  their  duty  were  ac-
complished, when  they  have  conducted  their  children

-n  Vciiega's  Hist,  of  Califom.  i.  82.  »  Gumilla,  i.  211. Biet.  390.

BOOK  IV.  32:

through  the  helpless  years  of  infancy,  leave  them  after-
ward at  entire  liberty.  Even  in  their  tender  age,  they
seldom  advise  or  admonish  ;  they  never  chide  or  chastise
them.  They  suffer  them  to  be  absolute  masters  of  their
own  actions."  In  an  American  hut,  a  father,  a  mother,
and  their  posterity,  live  together  like  persons  assembled
by  accident,  without  seeming  to  feel  the  obligation  of
the  duties  mutually  arising  from  this  connexion.^  As
filial  love  is  not  cherished  by  the  continuance  of  atten-
tion or  good  offices,  the  recollection  of  benefits  received
in  early  infancy  is  too  faint  to  excite  it.  Conscious  of
their  own  liberty,  and  impatient  of  restraint,  the  youth
of  America  are  accustomed  to  act  as  if  they  were  totally
independent.  Their  parents  are  not  objects  of  greater
regard  than  other  persons.  They  treat  them  always
with  neglect,  and  often  with  such  harshness  and  inso-
lence, as  to  fill  those  who  have  been  witnesses  of  their
conduct  with  horror.''  Thus  the  idea  which  seems  to
be  natural  to  man  in  his  savage  state,  as  they  result  ne-
cessarily from  his  circumstances  and  condition  in  that
period  of  his  progress,  aflect  the  two  capital  relations
in  domestic  life.  They  render  the  union  between  hus-
band and  wife  unequal.  They  shorten  the  duration,
and  weaken  the  force,  of  the  connexion  between  parents
and  children,

0  Charlev.  iii.  272.  Biet.390.  Gurailla,  i.  212.  Lafitau,  i.  602.  Creuxii  Hist.
Canad.  p.  71. Fernandez,  Relac.  Hist,  de  los  Chequit.  33.

P  Charlev.  Hist.  X.  Fr.iii.  273.

1  Gumilla,  i.  212.  Tertre,  ii.  376.  Cbarlev.  Hist,  de  N.  France,  iii.  S09.  Char-
lev. Hist,  de  Parag.  i.  113.  Lozaiio  Descript.  del  Gran  Chaco,  p.  68.  100,  101.
Fernand.  R«lac.  Histor.  de  los  Chefjuit.  426.

y2

4

I

NOTES

AMD

ILLUSTRATIONS.

Note  I.  p.  32.

Tyre  was  situated  at  such  a  distance  from  the  Arabian  gulf,  or
Red  sea,  as  made  it  impracticable  to  convey  commodities  from
thence  to  that  city  by  land-carriage.  This  induced  the  Phenicians
to  render  themselves  masters  of  Rhinocrura  or  Rhinocolura,  the
nearest  port  in  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Red  sea.  They  landed
the  cargoes  which  they  purchased  in  Arabia,  Ethiopia,  and  India,
at  Elath,  the  safest  harbour  in  the  Red  sea  towards  the  north.
Thence  they  were  carried  by  land  to  Rhinocolura,  the  distance  not
being  very  considerable;  and,  being  re-shipped  in  that  port,  were
transported  to  Tyre,  and  distributed  over  the  world.  Strabon.
Geogr.  Edit.  Casaub.  lib.  xvi.  p.  1128.  Diodor.  Sicul.  Biblioth.
Histor.  Edit.  Wesselingi,  lib.  i.  p.  70.

Note  II.  p.  35.

The  Periplus  Hannonis  is  the'only  authentic  monument  of  the
Carthaginian  skill  in  naval  affairs,  and  one  of  the  most  curious  frag-
ments transmitted  to  us  by  antiquity.  Thelearned  and  industrious  Mr.
Dodwell,  in  a  dissertation  prefixed  to  the  Periplus  of  Hanno,  in  the
edition  of  the  Minor  Geographers  published  at  Oxford,  endeavours
to  prove  that  this  is  a  spurious work,  the  composition  of  some
Greek,  who  assumed  Hanno's  name. But  M.  de  Montesquieu,  in
his  I'Esprit  des  Loix,  lib.  xxi.  c.  8.  and  M.  de  Bougainville,  in  a
dissertation  published,  tom.  xxvi.  of  the  Memoires  de  I'Academie
des  Inscriptions,  &c.  have  established  its  authenticity  by  arguments
which  to  me  appear  unanswerable. Ramusio  has  accompanied  his
translation  of  this  curious  voyage  with  a  dissertation tending  to
illustrate  it. Racolte  de  Viaggi,  vol.  i.  p.  112. M.  de  Bougain-
ville has,  with  great  learning  and  ability,  treated  the  same  subject.
It  appears  that  Hanno,  according  to  the  mode  of  ancient  naviga-
tion, undertook  this  voyage  in  small  vessels,  so  constructed,  that
he could keep  in  close  with  the coast. He  sailed  from  Gades
to  the  island  of  Cerne  in  twelve  days. This  is  probably  what  is

^26  NOTES AND

known  to  the  moderns  by  the  name  of  the  isle  of  Art^uim. It  be-
came the  chief  station  of  the  Carthaginians  on  that  coast;  and  M.
de  Bougainville  contends,  that  the  cisterns  found  there  are  monu-
ments of  the  Carthaginian  power  and  ingenuity. Proceeding  from
Cerne,  and  still  following  the  winding  of  the  coast,  he  arrived,  in
seventeen  days,  at  a  promontory,  which  he  called  The  West  Horn,
probably  Cape  Palmas. From  this  he  advanced  to  another  pro-
montory, which  he named  The  South  Horn,  and  vphich  is  mani-
festly Cape  dc  Tres  Puntas,  about  five  degrees  north  of  the  line.
All  the  circumstances  contained  in  the  short  abstract  of  his  jour-
nal, which  is  handed  down  to  us  concerning  the  appearance  and
state  of  the  countries  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  arc confirmed and
illustrated  by  a  comparison  with  the  accounts  of  modern  naviga-
tors. Even  those  circumstances  which,  from  their  seeming  impro-
bability, have  been  produced  to  invalidate  the  credibility  of  his  re-
lation, tend  to  confirm  it. He  observes,  that  in  the  country  to  the
south  of  Cerne,  a  profound  silence  reigned  through  the  day  ;  but
during  the  night  innumerable  fires  were  kindled  along  the  banks
of  the  rivers,  and  the  air  resounded  with  the  noise  of  pipes  and
drums,  and  cries  of  joy. The  same  thing,  as  Ramusio  observes,  still
takes  place. The  excessive  heat  obliges  the  negroes  to  take  shelter
in  the  woods,  or  in  their  houses,  during  the  day. As  soon  as  the
sun  sets,  they  sally  out,  and  by  torch-light  enjoy  the  pleasure  of
music  and  dancing,  in  which  they  spend  the  night. Ramus,  i.  113.
F. In  another  place,  he  mentions  the  sea  as  burning  with  torrents
of  fire. What  occurred  to  M.  Adanson,  on  the  same  coast,  may
explain  this  :  "  As  soon,"  says  he,  "  as  the  sun  dipped  beneath  the
horizon,  and  night  overspread  the  earth  with  darkness,  the  sea  lent
us  its  friendly  light. While  the  prow  of  our  vessel  ploughed  the
foaming  surges,  it  seemed  to  set  them  all  on  fire. Thus  we  sailed  in
a  luminous  enclosure,  which  surrounded us  like  a  large  circle  of
rays,  from  whence  darted  in  the  wake  of  the  ship  a  long  stream  of
light." Voy. to  Senegal,  p.  176. This  appearance  of  the sea
observed  by  Hunter,  has  been  mentioned  as  an  argument  against
the  authenticity  of  the  Periplus. It  is,  however, a  phenomenon
very  common  in  warm  climates. Captain  Cook's  Second  Voyage,
vol.  i.  p.  15. The  Pcriplus  of  Hanno  has  been  translated,  and
every  point  with  respect  to  it  has  been  illustrated  with  much  learn-
ing and  ingenuity,  in  a  work  published  by  Don  Pcdr.  Rodrig.  Cam-
pomanes,  entitled,  Antiguedad  maritima  de  Cartago,  con  el  Peripio
de  su  General  Hannon  traducido  e  illustrado. Mad.  1756.  4to.

Note  III.  }).  36.
Long  after  the  navigation  of  the  Phenicians  and  of  Eudu.sus

ILLUSTRATIONS.  327

round  Africa,  Polybius,  the  most  intelligent  and  best  informed  his-
torian of  antiquity,  and  particularly  distinguished  by  his  attention
to  geographical  researches,  affirms,  that  it  was  not  known,  in  his
time,  whether  Africa  was  a  continued  continent,  stretching  to  the
south,  or  whether  it  was  encompassed  by  the  sea. Polybii  Hist,
lib.  iii. Pliny  the  naturalist  asserts,  that  there  can  be  no  com-
munication between  the  southern  and  northern  temperate  zones.
Plinii  Hist.  Natur.  Edit,  in  usum  Delph.  4to,  lib.  ii.  c.68. If  they
had  given  full  credit  to  the  accounts  of  those  voyages,  the  former
could  not  have  entertained  such  a  doubt,  the  latter  could  not  have
delivered  such  an  opinion. Strabo  mentions  the  voyage  of  Eu-
doxus,  but  treats  it  as  a  fabulous  tale,  lib.  ii.  p.  155. ;  and,  according
to  his  account  of  it,  no  other  judgment  can  be  formed  with  respect
to  it. Strabo  seems  not  to  have  known  any  thing  with  certainty
concerning  the  form  and  state  of  the  southern  parts  of  Africa.
Geogr.  lib.  xvii.  p.  1 180. Ptolemy,  the  most  inquisitive  and  learned
of  all  the  ancient  geographers,  was  equally  unacquainted  with  any
parts  of  Africa  situated  a  few  degrees  beyond  the  equinoctial  line;
for  he  supposes  that  this  great  continent  was  not  surrounded  by
the  sea,  but  that  it  stretched,  without  interruption,  towards  the
south  pole  ;  and  he  so  far  mistakes  its  true  figure,  that  he  describes
the continent  as  becoming  broader  and  broader  as  it  advanced
towards  the  south. Ptolemeei  Geogr.  lib.  iv.  c.  9, Brietii  Parallela
Geogr.  veteris  et  novee,  p.  86.

Note  IV.  p.  41.

A  FACT,  recorded  by  Strabo,  affords  a  very  strong  and  singular
proof  of  the  ignorance  of  the  ancients  with  respect  to  the  situation
of  the  various  parts  of  the  earth.  When  Alexander  marched  along
the  banks  of  the  Hydaspes  and  Acesine,  two  of  the  rivers  which  fall
into  the  Indus,  he  observed  that  there  were  many  crocodiles  in
those  rivers,  and  that  the  country  produced  beans  of  the  same
species  with  those  which  were  common  in  Egypt.  From  these  cir-
cumstances, he  concluded  that  he  had  discovered  the  source  of  thd"
Nile,  and  prepared  a  fleet  to  sail  down  the  Hydaspes  to  Egypt.
Strab.  Geogr.  lib.  xv.  p.  1020.  This  amazing  error  did  not  arise
from  any  ignorance  of  geography  peculiar  to  that  monarch ;  for  we
are  informed  by  Strabo,  that  Alexander  applied  with  particular
attention  in  order  to  acquire  the  knowledge  of  this  science,  and  had
accurate  maps  or  descriptions  of  the  countries  through  which  he
marched.  Lib.  ii.  p.  120.  But  in  his  age  the  knowledge  of  the
Greeks  did  not  extend  beyond  the  limits  of  the  Mediterranean.

328  NOTES AND

Note  V.  p.  41.

As  the  flux  and  reflux  of  tliesea  is  remarkably  great  at  the  mouth
of  the  river  Indus,  this  would  render  the  phenomenon  more  formi-
dable to  the  Greeks. Varen.  Geogr.  vol.  i.  p.  2.51.

Note  VI.  p.  44.

It  is  probable  that  the  ancients  were  seldom  induced  to  advance
so  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Ganges,  either  by  motives  of  curiosity,
or  views  of  commercial  advantage.  In  consequence  of  this,  their
idea  concerning  the  position  of  that  great  river  was  very  erroneous.
Ptolemy  places  that  branch  of  the  Ganges,  which  he  distinguishes
by  the  name  of  the  Great  Mouth,  in  the  hundred  and  forty-sixth
degree  of  longitude  from  his  first  meridian  in  the  Fortunate  Islands.
But  its  true  longitude,  computed  from  that  meridian,  is  now  de-
termined, by  astronomical  observations,  to  be  only  a  hundred  and
five  degrees.  A  geographer  so  eminent  must  have  been  betrayed
into  an  error  of  this  magnitude  by  the  imperfection  of  the  informa-
tion which  had  been  received  concerning  those  distant  regions  ;  and
this  affords  a  striking  proof  of  the  intercourse  with  them  being
extremely  rare.  With  respect  to  the  countries  of  India  beyond  the
Ganges,  his  intelligence  was  still  more  defective,  and  his  errors
more  enormous.  I  shall  have  occasion  to  observe,  in  another  place,
that  he  has  placed  the  country  of  the  Seres,  or  China,  no  less  than
sixty  degrees  farther  east  than  its  true  position.  M.  d'Anville,  one
of  the  most  learned  and  intelligent  of  the  modern  geographers,  has
set  this  matter  in  a  clear  light,  in  two  dissertations  published  in
Mem,  de  I'Academ.  des  Inscript.  &c.  tom.  xxxii.  p.  573.  604.

Note  VII.  p.  45.

It  is  remarkable,  that  the  discoveries  of  the  ancients  were  made
chiefly  by  land  ;  those  of  the  moderns  are  carried  on  chiefly  by  sea.
The  progress  of  conquest  led  to  the  former,  that  of  commerce  to
the  latter.  It  is  a  judicious  observation  of  Strabo,  that  the  con-
quests of  Alexander  the  Gnat  made  known  the  east,  those  of  the
Romans  opened  the  west,  and  tliose  of  Mithridates,  king  of  Pontus,
the  north.  J,ib.  i.  p.  'i'i.  When  discovery  is  carried  on  by  land
alone,  its  progress  must  be  slow  and  its  operations  confined.  When
it  is  carried  on  only  by  sea,  its  sphere  may  be  more  extensive,  and
its  advances  more  rapid  ;  but  it  labours  under  peculiar  defects.
Though  it  may  make  known  the  position  of  diflerent  countries,  and

ILLUSTRATIONS.  329

ascertain  their  boundaries  as  far  as  these  are  determined  by  the
ocean,  it  leaves  us  in  ignorance  with  respect  to  their  interior  state.
Above  two  centuries  and  a  half  have  elapsed  since  the  Europeans
sailed  round  the  southern  promontory  of  Africa,  and  have  traded
in  most  of  its  ports  ;  but,  in  a  considerable  part  of  that  great  con-
tinent, they  have  done  little  more  than  survey  its  coasts,  and  mark
its  capes  and  harbours. Its  interior  regions  are  in  a  great  measure
unknown. The  ancients,  who  had  a  very  imperfect  knowledge  of
its  coasts,  except  where  they  are  washed  by  the  Mediterranean  or
Red  sea,  were  accustomed  to  penetrate  into  its  inland  provinces,
and,  if  we  may  rely  on  the  testimony  of  Herodotus  and  Diodorus
Siculus,  had  explored  many  parts  of  it  now  altogether  unknown.
Unless  both  modes  of  discovery  be  united,  the  geographical  know-
ledge of  the  earth  must  remain  incomplete  and  inaccurate.

Note  VIII.  p.  48.

The  notion  of  the  ancients  concerning  such  an  excessive  degree
of  heat  in  the  torrid  zone,  as  rendered  it  uninhabitable,  and  their
persisting  in  this  error  long  after  they  began  to  have  some  com-
mercial intercourse  with  several  parts  of  India  lying  within  the
tropics,  must  appear  so  singular  and  absurd,  that  it  may  not  be
unacceptable  to  some  of  my  readers  to  produce  evidence  of  their
holding  this  opinion,  and  to  account  for  the  apparent  inconsistence
of  their  theory  with  their  experience. Cicero,  who  had  bestowed
attention  upon  every  part  of  philosophy  known  to  the  ancients,
seems  to  have  believed  that  the  torrid  zone  was  uninhabitable,  and,
of  consequence,  that  there  could  be  no  intercourse  between  the
northern  and  southern  temperate  zones. He  introduces  Africanus
thus  addressing  the  younger  Scipio  :  "  You  see  this  earth  encom-
passed, and  as  it  were  bound  in  by  certain  zones,  of  which  two,  at
the  greatest  distance  from  each  other,  and  sustaining  the  opposite
poles  of  heaven,  are  frozen  with  perpetual  cold  ;  the  middle  one,
and  the  largest  of  all,  is  burnt  with  the  heat  of  the  sun  ;  two  are
habitable,  the  people  in  the  southern  one  are  antipodes  to  us,  with
whom  we  have  no  connexion." Somnium  Scipiuiiis,  c.  6. Geminus,
a  Greek  philosopher,  contemporary  with  Cicero,  delivers  the  same
doctrine,  not  in  a  popular  work,  but  in  his  Eto-uywy/j  ug  (paivo^iEva,
a  treatise  purely  scientific. "When  we  speak,"  says  he,  "  of  the
southern  temperate  zone,  and  its  inhabitants,  and  concerning  those
who  are  called  antipodes, it  must  be  always  understood, that  we
have  no  certain  knowledge  or  information  concerning  the  southern
temperate  zone, whether  it  be inhabited  or  not. But  from  the
spherical  figure  of  the  earth,  and  the  course  which  the  sun  holds
between  the  tropics,  we  conclude  that  there  is  another  zone  situated

330  NOTES AND

to  the  south,  which  enjoys  the  same  degree  of  temperature  with
the  northern  one  which  we  inhabit."  Cap.  xiii.  p.  31.  ap.  Petavii
Opus  de  Doctr.  Temper,  in  quo  Uranologium  sive  Systemata  var.
Auctorum.  Amst.  1705.  vol.  iii.  The  opinion  of  Pliny  the  na-
turalist, with  respect  to  both  these  points,  was  the  same  :  "There  are
five  divisions  of  the  earth,  which  are  called  zones.  All  that  portion
which  lies  near  to  the  two  opposite  poles  is  oppressed  with  vehement
cold  and  eternal  frost.  There,  unblest  with  the  aspect  of  milder
stars,  perpetual  darkness  reigns,  or  at  the  utmost  a  feeble  light  re-
flected from  surrounding  snows.  The  middle  of  the  earth,  in  which
is  the  orbit  of  the  sun,  is  scorched  and  burnt  up  with  flames  and
fiery  vapour.  Between  tlicse  torrid  and  frozen  districts  lie  two
other  portions  of  the  earth,  which  are  temperate  ;  but,  on  account
of  the  burning  region  interposed,  there  can  be  no  communication
between  them.  Thus  Heaven  has  deprived  us  of  three  parts  of  the
earth."  Lib.  ii.  c.  68.  Strabo  delivers  his  opinion  to  the  same
effect,  in  terms  no  less  explicit :  "  The  portion  of  the  earth  which
lies  near  the  equator,  in  the  torrid  zone,  is  rendered  uninhabitable
by  heat."  Lib.  ii.  p.  154,  To  these  I  might  add  the  authority  of
many  other  respectable  philosophers  and  historians  of  antiquity.

In  order  to  explain  the  sense  in  which  this  doctrine  was  generally
received,  we  may  observe,  that  Parraenides,  as  we  are  informed  by
Strabo,  was  the  first  who  divided  the  earth  into  five  zones,  and  he
extended  the  limits  of  the  zone  which  he  supposed  to  be  uninha-
bitable on  account  of  heat,  beyond  the  tropics, Aristotle,  as  we
learn  likewise  from  Strabo,  fixed  the  boundaries  of  the  different
zones  in  the  same  manner  as  they  are  defined  by  modern  geo-
graphers. But  the  progress  of  discovery  having  gradually  demon-
strated that  several  regions  of  the  earth  which  lay  within  the  tropics
were  not  only  habitable,  but  populous  and  fertile,  this  induced  later
geographers  to  circumscribe  the  limits  of  the  torrid  zone. It  is  not
easy  to  ascertain  with  precision  the  boundaries  which  they  allotted
to  it. From  a  passage  in  Strabo,  who,  as  far  as  I  know,  is  the  only
author  of  antiquity  from  whom  we  receive  any  hint  concerning  this
subject,  I  should  conjecture,  that  those  who  calculated  according
to  the  measurement  of  the  earth  by  Eratosthenes,  supposed  the
torrid  zone  to  comprehend  near  sixteen  degrees,  about  eight  on
each  side  of  the  equator;  whereas  such  as  followed  the  computation
of  Posidonius  allotted  about  twenty-four  degrees, or somewhat
more  than  twelve  degrees  on  each  side  of  the  equator,  to  the  torrid
zone. Strabo,  lib.  ii.  p.  151. According  to  the  former  opinion,
about  two-thirds  of  that  portion  of  the  earth  which  lies  between  the
tropics  was  considered  as  habitable  ;  according  to  the  latter,  about
one  half  of  it. With  this  restriction,  the  doctrine  of  the  ancients
concerning  the  torrid  zone  appears  less  absurd;  and  we  can  con-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  ,'I3l

ceive  the  reason  of  their  asserting  this  zone  to  be  uninhabitable,
even  after  they  had  opened  a  communication  with  several  places
within  the  tropics.  When  men  of  science  spoke  of  the  torrid  zone,
they  considered  it  as  it  was  limited  by  the  definition  of  geographers
to  sixteen,  or  at  the  utmost  to  twenty-four  degrees;  and  as  they
knew  almost  nothing  of  the  countries  nearer  to  the  equator,  they
might  still  suppose  them  to  be  uninhabitable.  In  loose  and  popular
discourse,  the  name  of  the  torrid  zone  continued  to  be  given  to  all
that  portion  of  the  earth  which  lies  within  the  tropics.  Cicero
seems  to  have  been  unacquainted  with  those  ideas  of  the  later
geographers  ;  and,  adhering  to  the  division  of  Parmenides,  describes
the  torrid  zone  as  the  largest  of  the  five.  Some  of  the  ancients  re-
jected the  notion  concerning  the  intolerable  heat  of  the  torrid  zone
as  a  popular  error.  This  we  are  told  by  Plutarch,  was  the  sen-
timent of  Pythagoras;  and  we  learn  from  Strabo,  that  Eratosthenes
and  Polybius  had  adopted  the  same  opinion,  lib.  ii.  p.  L54.  Ptolemy
seems  to  have  paid  no  regard  to  the  ancient  doctrine  and  opinions
concerning  the  torrid  zone.

Note  IX.  p.  65.

The  court  of  inquisition,  which  effectually  checks  a  spirit  of
liberal  inquiry,  and  of  literary  improvement,  wherever  it  is  esta-
blished, was  unknown  in  Portugal  in  the  fifteenth  century,  when  the
people  of  that  kingdom  began  their  voyages  of  discovery.  More
than  a  century  elapsed,  before  it  was  introduced  by  John  III.
whose  reign  commenced  a.  d.  1521.

Note  X.  p.  72.

An  Instance  of  this  is  related  by  Hakluyt,  upon  the  authority  of
the  Portuguese  historian  Garcia  de  Resende.  Some  English  mer-
chants having  resolved  to  open  a  trade  with  the  coast  of  Guinea,
John  II.  of  Portugal  dispatched  ambassadors  to  Edward  IV.  in  order
to  lay  before  him  the  right  which  he  had  acquired  by  the  pope's
bull  to  the  dominion  of  that  country,  and  to  request  of  him  to  pro-
hibit his  subjects  to  prosecute  their  intended  voyage.  Edward  was
so  much  satisfied  with  the  exclusive  title  of  the  Portuguese,  that  he
issued  his  orders  in  the  terms  which  they  desired.  Hakluyt,
Navigations, Voyages,  and  Traffics  of  the  English,  vol.ii.  part  ii.  p.  2.

Note  XI.  p.  81.

The  time  of  Columbus's  death  maybe  nearly  ascertained  by  the
following  circumstances. It  appears  from  the  fragment  of  a  letter,

332  NOTES AND

addressed  by  him  to  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  a.  d.  1501,  that  he
had,  at  that  time,  been  engaged  forty  years  in  a  seafaring  life.  In
another  letter,  he  informs  them,  that  he  went  to  sea  at  the  age  of
fourteen :  from  those  facts  it  follows,  that  he  was  born  a.  d.  1447.
Life  of  Christo.  Columbus,  by  his  son  Don  Ferdinand.  Churchill's
Collection  of  Voyages,  vol.  ii.  p.  484,  485.

Note  XII.  p.  87.

The  spherical  figure of  the  earth  was  known to  the  ancient
geographers. They  invented  the  method, still  in use, of  com-
puting the  longitude  and  latitude  of  different  places. According
to  their  doctrine,  the  equator,  or  imaginary  line  which  encompasses
the  earth,  contained  three  hundred  and  sixty  degrees  ;  these  they
divided into  twenty-four  parts, or  hours,  each  equal to fifteen
degrees. The  country  of  the  Seres,  or  Since,  being  the  farthest  part
of  India  known  to  the  ancients,  was  supposed  by  Marinus  Tyrius,
the  most  eminent  of  the  ancient  geographers  before  Ptolemy,  to  be
fifteen  hours,  or  two  hundred  and  twenty-five  degrees  to  the  east
of  the first  meridian, passing through the Fortunate Islands.
Ptolemaei  Geogr.  lib.  i.  c.  11. If  this  supposition  was  well  founded,
the  country  of  the  Seres,  or  China,  was  only  nine  hours,  or  one
hundred  and  thirty-five  degrees  west  from  the  Fortunate  or  Canary
Islands  ;  and  the  navigation  in  that  direction  was  much  shorter  than
by  the  course  which  the  Portuguese  were  pursuing. Marco  Polo,
in  his  travels,  had  described  countries,  particularly  the  island  of
Cipango  or  Zipangri,  supposed  to  be  Japan,  considerably  to  the
east  of  any  part  of  Asia  known  to  the  ancients. Marcus  Paulus
de  Region.  Oriental, lib.  ii.  c.  70. lib.  iii.  c.  2. Of  course,  this
country,  as  it  extended  farther  to  the  east,  was  still  nearer  to  the
Canary  Islands. The  conclusions  of  Columbus,  though  drawn  from
inaccurate  observations,  were  just. If  the  suppositions  of  Marinus
had  been  well  founded,  and  if  the  countries,  which  Marco  Polo
visited,  had  been  situated to  the  east  of  those  whose  longitude
Marinus  had  ascertained,  the proper  and  nearest  course  to  the
East  Indies  must  have  been  to  steer  directly  west. Herrera,  dec.  1.
lib.  i,  c.  2. A  more  extensive  knowledge  of  the  globe  has  now  dis-
covered the  great  error  of  Marinus,  in  supposing  China  to  be  fifteen
hours, or two hundred and twenty-five  degrees east  from the
Canary  Islands  ;  and  that  even  Ptolemy  was  mistaken,  when  he  re-
duced the  longitude  of  China  to  twelve  hours,  or  one  hundred  and
eighty  degrees. The  longitude  of  the  western  frontier  of  that  vast
empire  is  seven  hours,  or  one  hundred  and  fifteen  degrees  from  the
meridian  of  the  Canary  Islands. But  Columbus  followed  the  light
which  his  age  afforded,  and  relied  upon  the  authority  of  writers,

ILLUSTRATIONS.  333

who  were,  at  that  time,  regarded  as  the  instructors  and  guides  of
mankind  in  the  science  of  geography.

Note  Xlir.  p.  105.

As  the  Portuguese,  in  making  their  discoveries,  did  not  depart
far  from  the  coast  of  Africa,  they  concluded  that  birds,  whose  flight
they  observed  with  great  attention,  did  not  venture  to  any  con-
siderable distance  from  land.  In  the  infancy  of  navigation,  it  was
not  known,  that  birds  often  stretched  their  flight  to  an  immense
distance  from  any  shore.  In  sailing  towards  the  West  Indian
islands,  birds  are  often  seen  at  the  distance  of  two  hundred  leagues
from  the  nearest  coast.  Sloane's  Nat.  Hist,  of  Jamaica,  vol.  i.
p.  30.  Catesby  saw  an  owl  at  sea,  when  the  ship  was  six  hundred
leagues  distant  from  land.  Nat.  Hist,  of  Carolina,  pref.  p.  7,  Hist.
Naturelle  de  M.  Buffon,  tom.  xvi.  p.  32.  From  which  it  appears,
that  this  indication  of  land,  on  which  Columbus  seems  to  have
relied  with  some  confidence,  was  extremely  uncertain.  This  ob-
servation is  confirmed  by  Capt.  Cook,  the  most  extensive  and
experienced  navigator  of  any  age  or  nation.  "  No  one  yet  knows,"
says  he,  "  to  what  distance  any  of  the  oceanic  birds  go  to  sea  ;  for
my  own  part,  I  do  not  believe  that  there  is  one  in  the  whole  tribe
that  can  be  rehed  on  in  pointing  out  the  vicinity  of  land."  Voyage
towards  the  South  Pole,  vol.  i.  p.  275.

Note  XIV.  p.  115.

In  a  letter  of  the  admiral's  to  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  he  de-
scribes one  of  the  harbours  in  Cuba,  with  all  the  enthusiastic
admiration  of  a  discoverer. — "  I  discovered  a  river  which  a  galley
might  easily  enter :  the  beauty  of  it  induced  me  to  sound,  and  I
found  from  five  to  eight  fathoms  of  water.  Having  proceeded  a
considerable  way  up  the  river,  every  thing  invited  me  to  settle
there.  The  beauty  of  the  river,  the  clearness  of  the  water,  through
which  I  could  see  the  sandy  bottom,  the  multitude  of  palm  trees  of
different  kinds,  the  tallest  and  finest  I  had  seen,  and  an  infinite
number  of  other  large  and  flourishing  trees,  the  birds,  and  the
verdure  of  the  plains  are  so  wonderfully  beautiful,  that  this  country
excels  all  others  as  far  as  the  day  surpasses  the  night  in  brightness
and  splendour,  so  that  I  often  said,  that  it  would  be  in  vain  for  me
to  attempt  to  give  your  highnesses  a  full  account  of  it,  for  neither  my
tongue  nor  my  pen  could  come  up  to  the  truth ;  and  indeed  I  am
so  much  amazed  at  the  sight  of  such  beauty,  that  I  know  not  how
to  describe  it." Life  of  Columb.  c.  30.

334  NOTES AND

Note  XV.  p.  119.

The  account  which  Columbus  gives  of  tlie  humanity  and  orderly
behaviour  of  the  natives  on  this  occasion  is  very  striking.  "  The
king  (says  he,  in  a  letter  to  Ferdinand  and  Isabella)  having  been
informed  of  our  misfortune,  expressed  great  grief  for  our  loss,  and
immediately  sent  aboard  all  the  people  in  tlie  place  in  many  large
canoes ;  we  soon  unloaded  the  ship  of  every  thing  that  was  upon
the  deck,  as  the  king  gave  us  great  assistance ;  he  himself,  with  his
brothers  and  relations,  took  all  possible  care  that  every  thing
should  be  properly  done,  both  aboard  and  on  shore.  And,  from
time  to  time,  he  sent  some  of  his  relations  weeping,  to  beg  of  me
not  to  be  dejected,  for  he  would  give  me  all  that  he  had.  I  can
assure  your  highnesses,  that  so  much  care  would  not  have  been  taken
in  securing  our  effects  in  any  part  of  Spain,  as  all  our  property  was
put  together  in  one  place  near  his  palace,  until  the  houses  which  he
wanted  to  prepare  for  the  custody  of  it,  were  emptied.  He  imme-
diately placed  a  guard  of  armed  men,  who  watched  during  the
whole  night,  and  those  on  shore  lamented  as  if  they  had  been  much
interested  in  our  loss.  The  people  are  so  affectionate,  so  tractable,
and  so  peaceable,  that  I  swear  to  your  highnesses,  that  there  is  not  a
better  race  of  men,  nor  a  better  country  in  the  world.  They  love
their  neighbour  as  themselves;  their  conversation  is  the  sweetest
and  mildest  in  the  world,  cheerful,  and  always  accompanied  with
a  smile.  And  although  it  is  true  that  they  go  naked,  yet  your
highnesses  may  be  assured  that  they  have  many  very  commendable
customs  ;  the  king  is  served  with  great  state,  and  his  behaviour  is
so  decent,  that  it  is  pleasant  to  see  him,  as  it  is  Ukewise  to  observe
tlie  wonderful  memory  which  these  people  have,  and  their  desire  of
knowing  every  thing,  which  leads  them  to  inquire  into  its  causes
and  effects."  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  32.  It  is  probable,  that  the
Spaniards  were  indebted  for  this  officious  attention,  to  the  opinion
which  the  Indians  entertained  of  them  as  a  superior  order  of  beings.

Note  XVI.  p.  120.

Every  monument  of  such  a  man  as  Columbus  is  valuable.  A
letter  which  he  wrote  to  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  describing  what
passed  on  this  occasion,  exhibits  a  most  striking  picture  of  his  in-
trepidity, his  humanity,  his  prudence,  his  public  spirit,  and  courtly
address.  "  I  would  have  been  less  concerned  for  this  misfortune,
had  I  alone  been  in  danger,  both  because  my  life  is  a  debt  that  I
owe  to  the  Supreme  Creator,  and  because  I  have  at  other  times  been
exposed  to  the  most  imminent  hazard. But  what  gave  me  infinite

ILLUSTRATIONS.  335

grief  and  vexation  was,  that  after  it  had  pleased  our  Lord  to  give
ine  faith  to  undertake  this  enterprise,  in  which  I  had  now  been  so
successful,  that  my  opponents  would  have  been  convinced,  and  the
glory  of  your  highnesses,  and  the  extent  of  your  territory,  increased
by  me  ;  it  should  please  the  Divine  Majesty  to  stop  all  by  my
death.  All  this  would  have  been  more  tolerable,  had  it  not  been
attended  with  the  loss  of  those  men  whom  I  had  carried  with  me,
upon  promise  of  the  greatest  prosperity,  who,  seeing  themselves  in
such  distress,  cursed  not  only  their  coming  along  with  me,  but  that
fear  and  awe  of  me,  which  prevented  them  from  returning,  as  they
often  had  resolved  to  have  done.  But  besides  all  this,  my  sorrow
was  greatly  increased  by  recollecting  that  I  had  left  my  two  sons  at
school  at  Cordova,  destitute  of  friends,  in  a  foreign  country,  when
it  could  not  in  all  probability  be  known  that  I  had  done  such  ser-
vices as  might  induce  your  highnesses  to  remember  them.  And
though  I  comforted  myself  with  the  faith  that  our  Lord  would  not
permit  that,  which  tended  so  much  to  the  glory  of  his  church,  and
which  I  had  brought  about  with  so  much  trouble,  to  remain  imper-
fect, yet  I  considered,  that,  on  account  of  my  sins,  it  was  his  will
to  deprive  me  of  that  glory,  which  I  might  have  attained  in  this
world.  While  in  this  confused  state,  I  thought  on  the  good  for-
tune which  accompanies  your  highnesses,  and  imagined  that  al-
though I  should  perish,  and  the  vessel  be  lost,  it  was  possible  that
you  might  somehow  come  to  the  knowledge  of  my  voyage,  and  the
success  with  which  it  was  attended.  For  that  reason  I  wrote  upon
parchment,  with  the  brevity  which  the  situation  required,  that  I  had
discovered  the  lands  which  I  promised,  in  how  many  days  I  had
done  it,  and  what  course  I  had  followed.  I  mentioned  the  good-
ness of  the  country,  the  character  of  the  inhabitants,  and  that  your
highnesses'  subjects  were  left  in  possession  of  all  that  I  had  dis-
covered. Having  sealed  this  writing,  I  addressed  it  to  your  high-
nesses, and  promised  a  thousand  ducats  to  ^y  person  who  should
deliver  it  sealed,  so  that  if  any  foreigner  found  it,  the  promised  re-
ward might  prevail  on  them  not  to  give  the  information  to  another.
I  then  caused  a  great  cask  to  be  brought  to  me,  and  wrapping  up
the  parchment  in  an  oiled  cloth,  and  afterward  in  a  cake  of  wax,  I
put  it  into  the  cask,  and  having  stopped  it  well,  I  cast  it  into  the
sea.  All  the  men  believed  that  it  was  some  act  of  devotion.  Ima-
gining that  this  might  never  chance  to  be  taken  up,  as  the  ships
approached  nearer  to  Spain,  I  made  another  packet  like  the  first,
and  placed  it  at  the  top  of  the  poop,  so  that  if  the  ship  sunk,  the
cask  remaining  above  water  might  be  committed  to  the  guidance  of
fortune."

33(i  NOTES AND

Note  XVII.  p.  128.

Some  Spanish  authors,  with  the  meanness  of  national  jealousy,
have  endeavoured  to  detract  from  the  glory  of  Columbus,  by  in-
sinuating that  he  was  led  to  the  discovery  of  the  New  World,  not
by  his  own  inventive  or  enterprising  genius, but  by  information
which  he  l>ad  received. According  to  their  account,  a  vessel  hav-
ing been  driven  from  its  course  by  easterly  winds,  was  carried
before  them  far  to  the  west,  and  landed  on  the  coast  of  an  unknown
country,  from  which  it  returned  with  difficulty  ;  the  pilot,  and  three
sailors,  being  the  only  persons  who  survived  the  distresses  which
the  crew  suft'ered,  from  want  of  provisions,  and  fatigue  in  this  long
voyage. In  a  few  days  after  their  arrival,  all  the  four  died;  but
the  pilot  having  been  received  into  the  house  of  Columbus,  his  in-
timate friend  disclosed  to  him,  before  his  death,  the  secret  of  the
discovery  which  he  had  accidentally  made,  and  left  him  his  papers,
containing  a  journal  of  the  voyage,  which  served  as  a  guide  to  Co-
lumbus in  his  undertaking. Gomara,  as  far  as  I  know,  is  the  first
author  who  published  this  story,  Hist.  c.  13. Every  circumstance
is  destitute  of  evidence  to  support  it. Neither  the  name  of  the  ves-
sel nor  its  destination  is  known. Some  pretend  that  it  belonged  to
one  of  the  sea-port  towns  in  Andalusia,  and  was  sailing  either  to
the  Canaries,  or  to  Madeira;  others,  that  it  was  a  Biscayner  in  its
way  to  England ;  others,  a  Portuguese  ship  trading  on  the  coast  of
Guinea. The  name  of  the  pilot  is  alike  unknown,  as  well  as  that
of  the  port  in  which  he  landed  on  his  return. According  to  some,
it  was  in  Portugal  ; according  to  others,  in  Madeira,  or  the  Azores.
The  year  in which  this voyage was  made  is  no less  uncertain.
Monson's  Nav.  Tracts.  Churchill,  iii.  371. No  mention  is  made  of
this  pilot,  or  his  discoveries,  by  And.  Bernaldes, or  Pet.  Martyr,
the  contemporaries  of  Columbus. Herrera,  with  his  usual  judg-
ment, passes  over  it  in  silence. Oviedo  takes  notice  of  this  report,
but  considers  it  as  a  tale  fit  only  to  amuse  the  vulgar. Hist.  lib.  ii.
c.  2. As  Columbus  held  his  course  directly  west  from  the  Canaries,
and  never  varied  it,  some  later  authors  have  supposed,  that  this
uniformity  is  a  proof  of  his  being  guided  by  some  previous  informa-
tion. But  they  do  not  recollect  the  principles  on  which  he  founded
all  his  hopes  of  success,  that  by  holding  a  westerly  course,  he  must
certainly  arrive  at  those  regions  of  the  east  described  by  the  ancients.
His  firm  belief  of  his  own  system  led  him  to  take  that  course,  and
to  pursue  it  without  deviation.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  337

The  Spaniards  are  not  the  only  people  who  have  called  in  question
Columbus's  claim  to  the  honour  of  having  discovered  America.
Some  German  authors  ascribed  this  honour  to  Martin  Behaim,
their  countryman. He  was  of  the  noble  family  of  the  Behaims  of
Schwartzbach,  citizens  of  the  first  rank  in  the  imperial  toAvn  of
Nuremberg. Having  studied  under  the  celebrated  John  MuUer,
better  known  by  the  name  of  Regiomontanus,  he  acquired  such
knowledge  of  cosmography,  as  excited  a  desire  of  exploring  those
regions,  the  situation  and  qualities  of  which  he  had  been  accus-
tomed, under  that  able  master,  to  investigate  and  describe. Under
the  patronage  of  the  duchess  of  Burgundy  he  repaired  to  Lisbon,
whither  the  fame  of  the  Portuguese  discoveries  invited  all  the  ad-
venturous spirits  of  the  age. There,  as  we  learn  from  Herman
Schedel, of  whose  Chronicon  Mundi  a  German translation  was
printed  at  Nuremberg,  a.  d.  1493,  his  merit  as  a  cosmographer
raised  him,  in  conjunction  with  Diego  Cano,  to  the  command  of  a
squadron  fitted  out  for  discovery  in  the  year  1483. In  that  voyage,
he  is  said  to  have  discovered  the  kingdom  of  Congo. He  settled
in  the  island  of  Fayal,  one  of  the  Azores,  and  was  a  particular
friend  of  Columbus. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  i.  c.  2. Magellan  had
a  terrestrial  globe  made  by  Behaim,  on  which  he  demonstrated  the
course  that  he  proposed  to  hold  in  search  of  the  communication
with  the  South  sea,  which  he  afterward  discovered. Gomara,
Hist.  c.  19. Herrera,  dec.  11.  lib.  ii.  c.  19. In  the  year  1492,
Behaim  visited  his  relations  in  Nuremberg,  and  left  with  them  a
map  drawn  with  his  own  hand,  which  is  still  preserved  among  the
archives  of  the  family. Thus  far  the  story  of  Martin  Behaim  seems
to  be  well  authenticated  ;  but  the  account  of  his  having  discovered
any  part  of  the  New  World  appears  to  be  merely  conjectural.

In  the  first  edition,  as  I  had  at  that  time  hardly  any  knowledge
of  Behaim  but  what  I  derived  from  a  frivolous  dissertation  "  De
vero  Novi  Orbis  Inventore,"  published  at  Francfort,  a.  d.  1714,  by
Jo.  Frid.  Stuvenius,  I  was  induced,  by  the  authority  of  Herrera,
to  suppose  that  Behaim  was  not  a  native  of  Germany ;  but  from
more  full  and  accurate  information,  communicated  to  me  by  the
learned  Dr.  John  Reinold  Forster,  I  am  now  satisfied  that  I  was
mistaken.  Dr.  Forster  has  been  likewise  so  good  as  to  favour  me
with  a  copy  of  Behaim's  map,  as  published  by  Doppelmayer  in  his
account  of  the  mathematicians  and  artists  of  Nuremberg.  From
this  map,  the  imperfection  of  cosmographical  knowledge  at  that
period  is  manifest.  Hardly  one  place  is  laid  down  in  its  true  situ-
ation. Nor  can  I  discover  from  it  any  reason  to  suppose  that
Behaim  had  the  least  knowledge  of  any  region  in  America.  He
delineates,  indeed,  an  island  to  which  he  gives  the  name  of  St.
Brandon. This,  it  is  imagined,  may  be  some  part  of  Guiana,  sup-

VOL.  VI.  Z

338  NOTES AND

posed  at  first  to  be  an  island. He  places  it  in  the  same  latitude
with  the  Cape  Verd  isles,  and  I  suspect  it  to  be  an  imaginary  island
which  has  been  admitted  into  some  ancient  maps  on  no  better  au-
thority than  the  legend  of  the  Irish  St.  Brandon  or  Brendan,  whose
story  is  so  childishly  fabulous  as  to  be  unworthy  of  any  notice.
Girald.  Cambriensis  ap.  Missingham  Florilegium  Sanctorum,  p.  427.
The  pretensions  of  the  Welsh  to  the  discovery  of  America  seem
not  to  rest  on  a  foundation  much  more  solid. In  the  twelfth  cen-
tury, according  to  Powell,  a  dispute  having  arisen  among  the  sons
of  Owen  Giiyneth,  king  of  North  Wales,  concerning  the  succession
to  his  crown,  Madoc,  one  of  their  number,  weary  of  this  contention,
betook  himself  to  sea  in  quest  of  a  more  quiet  settlement. He
steered  due  west,  leaving  Ireland  to  the  north,  and  arrived  in  an
unknown  country,  which  appeared  to  him  so  desirable,  that  he
returned  to  Wales,  and  carried  thither  several  of  his  adherents  and
companions. This  is  said  to  have  happened  about  the  year  1170,
and  after  that,  he  and  his  colony  were  heard  of  no  more. But  it  is
to  be  observed,  that  Powell, on  whose  testimony  the authenticity
of  this  story  rests,  published  his  history  above  four  centuries  from
the  date  of  the  event  which  he  relates. Among  a  people  as  rude
and  as  illiterate  as  the  Welsh  at  that  period,  the  memory  of  a
transaction  so  remote  must  have  been  very  imperfectly  preserved,
and  would  require  to  be  confirmed  by  some  author  of  greater  credit,
and  nearer  to  the  era  of  Madoc's  voyage  than  Powell. Later  anti-
quaries have  indeed  appealed  to  the  testimony  of  Meredith  ap  Rees,
a  Welsh  bard,  who  died  a.  d.  1477. But  he,  too,  lived  at  such  a
distance  of  time  from  the  event,  that  he  cannot  be  considered  as  a
witness  of  much  more  credit  than Powell. Besides, his  verses,
published  by  Hakluyt,  vol.  iii.  p.  1,  convey  no  information,  but  that
Madoc,  dissatisfied  with  his  domestic  situation,  employed  himself
in  searching  the  ocean  for  new  possessions. But  even  if  we  admit
the  authenticity  of  Powell's  story,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  un-
known country  which  Madoc  discovered  by  steering  west, in  such
a  course  as  to  leave  Ireland  to  the  north,  was  any  part  of  America.
The  naval  skill  of  the  Welsh  in  the  twelfth  century  was  hardly
equal  to  such  a  voyage. If  he  made  any  discovery  at  all,  it  is  more
probable  that  it  was  Madeira,  or  some  other  of  the  western isles.
The  aflBnity  of  the  Welsh  language  with  some  dialects  spoken  in
America,  has  been  mentioned  as  a  circumstance  which  confirms
the  truth  of  Madoc's  voyage. But  that  affinity  has  been  observed
in  so  few  instances,  and  in  some  of  these  is  so  obscure,  or  so  fan-
ciful, that  no  conclusion  can  be  drawn  from  the  casual  resemblance
of  a  small  number  of  words. There  is  a  bird,  which,  as  far  as  is
yet  known,  is  found  only  on  the  coasts  of  South  America,  from
Port  Desire  to  the  straits  of  Magellan. It  is  distinguished  by  the

I  LI.  U  ST  RATIONS.  330

name  of  Penguin.  This  word  in  the  Welsh  language  signifies
White-head.  Almost  all  the  authors  who  favour  the  pretensions  of
the  Welsh  to  the  discovery  of  America,  mention  this  as  an  irrefra-
gable proof  of  the  affinity  of  the  Welsh  language  with  that  spoken
in  this  region  of  America.  But  Mr.  Pennant,  who  has  given  a
scientific  description  of  the  penguin,  observes,  that  all  the  birds  of
this  genus  have  black  heads,  "  so  that  we  must  resign  every  hope
(adds  he)  founded  on  this  hypothesis  of  retrieving  the  Cambrian
race  in  the  New  World."  Philos.  Transact,  vol.  Iviii,  p.  91,  «fec:
Besides  this,  if  the  Welsh,  towards  the  close  of  the  twelfth  century,
had  settled  in  any  part  of  America,  some  remains  of  the  Christian
doctrine  and  rites  must  have  been  found  among  their  descendants,
when  they  were  discovered  about  three  hundred  years  posterior  to
their  migration  ;  a  period  so  short,  that,  in  the  course  of  it,  we
cannot  well  suppose  that  all  European  ideas  and  arts  would  be  totally
forgotten.  Lord  Lyttelton,  in  his  notes  to  the  fifth  book  of  his
History  of  Henry  U.,  p.  371.,  has  examined  what  Powell  relates
concerning  the  discoveries  made  by  Madoc,  and  invalidates  the  truth
of  his  story  by  other  arguments  of  great  weight.

The  pretensions  of  the  Norwegians  to  the  discovery  of  America
seem  to  be  better  founded  than  those  of  the  Germans  or  Welsh.
The  inhabitants  of  Scandinavia  were  remarkable  in  the  middle  ages
for  the  boldness  and  extent  of  their  maritime  excursions.  In  874,
the  Norwegians  discovered,  and  planted  a  colony  in  Iceland.  In
982,  they  discovered  Greenland,  and  established  settlements  there.
From  that,  some  of  their  navigators  proceeded  towards  the  west,
and  discovered  a  country  more  inviting  than  those  horrid  regions
with  which  they  were  acquainted.  According  to  their  representa-
tion, this  country  was  sandy  on  the  coasts,  but  in  the  interior  parts
level  and  covered  with  wood,  on  which  account  they  gave  it  the
name  of  HeUe-land,  and  Mark-land,  and  having  afterward  found
some  plants  of  the  vine  which  bore  grapes,  they  called  it  Win-land.
The  credit  of  this  story  rests,  as  far  as  I  know,  on  the  authority  of
the  saga,  or  chronicle  of  king  Olaus,  composed  by  Snorro  Sturlo-
nides,  or  Stiirlusons,  published  by  Peiinskiold,  at  Stockholm,  A.  d.
1697.  As  Snorro  was  born  in  the  year  1179,  his  chronicle  might
be  compiled  about  two  centuries  after  the  event  which  he  relates.
His  account  of  the  navigation  and  discoveries  of  Biorn,  and  his
companion  Lief,  is  a  very  rude  confused  tale,  p.  104.  110.  326.  It
is  impossible  to  discover  from  him  what  part  of  America  it  was  in
which  the  Norwegians  landed.  According  to  his  account  of  the
length  of  the  days  and  nights,  it  must  have  been  as  far  north  as  the
fifty-eighth  degree  of  latitude,  on  some  part  of  the  coast  of  Labra-
dore,  approaching  near  to  the  entry  of  Hudson's  straits.  Grapes,
certainly,  are  not  the  production  of  that  country.  Torfeus  supposes

z  2

340  ' NOTES AND

that  there  is  an  error  in  the  text,  by  rectifying  of  which  the  place
where  the  Norwegians  landed  may  be  supposed  to  be  situated  in
latitude  49°.  But  neither  is  that  the  region  of  the  vine  in  America.
From  perusing  Snorro's  tale,  I  should  think  that  the  situation  of
Newfoundland  corresponds  best  with  that  of  the  country  discovered
by  the  Norwegians.  Grapes,  however,  are  not  the  production  of
that  barren  island.  Other  conjectures  are  mentioned  by  M.  Mallet,
Introd.  a  I'Hist.  de  Dennem.  175,  &c.  I  am  not  sufficiently  ac-
quainted with  the  literature  of  the  north  to  examine  them.  It  seems
manifest,  that  if  the  Norwegians  did  discover  any  part  of  America
at  that  period,  their  attempts  to  plant  colonies  proved  unsuccessful,
and  all  knowledge  of  it  was  soon  lost.

Note  XVIII.  p.  129.

Peter  Martyr  ab  Angleria,  a  Milanese  gentleman,  residing  at
that  time  in  the  court  of  Spain,  whose  letters  contain  an  account  of
the  transactions  of  that  period,  in  the  order  wherein  they  occurred,
describes  the  sentiments  with  which  he  himself  and  his  learned  cor-
respondents were  affected,  in  very  striking  terms.  "  Prae  laetitia
prosiluisse  te,  vixque  a  lachrymis  prae  gaudio  temperasse,  quando
literas  adspexisti  meas  quibus,  de  antipodum  orbe  latenli  hactenus,
te,  certiorem  feci,  mi  suavissime  Pomponi,  insinuasti.  Ex  tuis  ipse
Uteris  colligo,  quid  senseris.  Sensisti  autem,  tantique  rem  fecisti,
quanti  virum  summa  doctrina  insignitum  decuit.  Quis  namque
cibus  sublimibus  prsestari  potest  ingeniis,  isto  suavior  ?  quod  con-
dimentum  gratius  ?  A  me  facio  conjecturam.  Beati  sentio  spiritus
meos,  quando  accitos  alloquor  prudentes  aliquos  ex  his  qui  ab  ea
redeunt  provincia.  Implicent  animos  pecuniarura  cumulis  augendis
miseri  avari,  libidinibus  obscoeui;  nostras  nos  mentes,  postquam
Deo  pleni  aliquando  fuerimus,  contemplando,  hujuscemodi  rerum
notitia  demulciamus." Epist.  152. Pomponio  Lseto.

Note  XIX.  p. 139.

So  firmly  were  men  of  science,  in  that  age,  persuaded  that  the
countries  which  Columbus  had  discovered  were  connected  with  the
East  Indies,  that  Benaldes,  the  Cura  de  los  Palacios,  who  seems
to  have  been  no  inconsiderable  proficient  in  the  knowledge  of  cos-
mography, contends  that  Cuba  was  not  an  island,  but  a  part  of  the
continent,  and  united  to  the  dominions  of  the  Great  Khan.  This,
he  delivered  as  his  opinion  to  Columbus  himself,  who  was  his  guest
for  some  time  on  his  return  from  his  second  voyage  ;  and  he  sup-
ports it  by  several  arguments,  mostly  founded  on  the  authority  of
§ir  John  Mandeville. MS.  penes  me. Antonio  Gallo,  who  was  se-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  341

cretary  to  the  magistracy  of  Genoa  towards  the  close  of  the  fifteenth
century,  pubhshed  a  short  account  of  the  navigations  and  discoveries
of  his  countryman  Columbus,  annexed  to  his  Opuscula  Historicade
Rebus  Populi  Genuensis ;  in  which  he  informs  us,  from  letters  of
Columbus  which  he  himself  had  seen,  that  it  was  his  opinion,
founded  upon  nautical  observations,  that  one  of  the  islands  he  had
discovered  was  distant  only  two  hours  or  thirty  degrees  from  Cat-
tigara,  which,  in  the  charts  of  the  geographers  of  that  age,  was  laid
down,  upon  the  authority  of  Ptolemy,  lib.  vii.  c.  3.,  as  the  most
easterly  place  in  Asia.  From  this  he  concluded,  that  if  some  un-
known continent  did  not  obstruct  the  navigation,  there  must  be  a
short  and  easy  access,  by  holding  a  westerly  course,  to  this  extreme
region  of  the  East.  Muratori  Scriptores  Rer.  Italicarum,  vol.  xxiii.
p.  304.

Note  XX.  p.  144.

Bernaldes,  the  Cura  or  Rector  de  los  Palacios,  a  contemporary
writer,  says,  that  five  hundred  of  these  captives  were  sent  to  Spain,
and  sold  publicly  in  Seville  as  slaves ;  but  that,  by  the  change  of
climate  and  their  inability  to  bear  the  fatigue  of  labour,  they  all
died  in  a  short  time. MS.  penes  me.

Note  XXI.  p.  155.

Columbus  seems  to  have  formed  some  very  singular  opinions
concerning  the  countries  which  he  had  now  discovered.  The  vio-
lent swell  and  agitation  of  the  waters  on  the  coast  of  Trinidad  led
him  to  conclude  this  to  be  the  highest  part  of  the  terraqueous
globe,  and  he  imagined  that  various  circumstances  concurred  in
proving  that  the  sea  was  here  visibly  elevated.  Having  adopted
this  erroneous  principle,  the  apparent  beauty  of  the  country  induced
him  to  fall  in  with  a  notion  of  Sir  John  Mandeville,  c.  102,  that
the  terrestrial  paradise  was  the  highest  land  in  the  earth ;  and  he
believed  that  he  had  been  so  fortunate  as  to  discover  this  happy
abode.  Nor  ought  we  to  think  it  strange  that  a  person  of  so  much
sagacity  should  be  influenced  by  the  opinion  or  reports  of  such  a
fabulous  author  as  Mandeville.  Columbus  and  the  other  disco-
verers were  obliged  to  follow  such  guides  as  they  could  find ;  and
it  appears  from  several  passages  in  the  manuscript  of  Andr.  Ber-
naldes, the  friend  of  Columbus,  that  no  inconsiderable  degree  of
credit  was  given  to  the  testimony  of  Mandeville  in  that  age.  Ber-
naldes frequently  quotes  him,  and  always  with  respect.  '  '

342  NOTES  AND

Note  XXII.  p. 165.

It  is  remarkable  that  neither  Gomara  nor  Oviedo,  the  most  ancient
Spanish  historians  of  America,  nor  Herrera,  consider  Ojeda,  or  his
companion  Vespucci,  as  the  firLst  discoverers  of  the  continent  of  Ame-
rica. They  uniformly  ascribe  this  honour  to  Columbus.  Some  have
supposed  that  national  resentment  against  Vespucci,  for  deserting
the  service  of  Spain,  and  entering  into  that  of  Portugal,  may  have
prompted  these  writers  to  conceal  the  actions  which  he  performed.
But  Martyr  and  Benzoni,both  Italians,  could  not  be  warped  by  the
same  prejudice.  Martyr  was  a  contemporary  author;  he  resided
in  the  court  of  Spain,  and  had  the  best  opportunity  to  be  exactly
informed  with  respect  to  all  public  transactions;  and  yet  neither  in
his  Decads,  the  first  general  history  published  of  the  New  World,
nor  in  his  Epistles,  which  contain  an  account  of  all  the  remarkable
events  of  his  time,  does  he  ascribe  to  Vespucci  the  honour  of  having
first  discovered  the  continent.  Benzoni  went  as  an  adventurer  to
America  in  the  year  1541,  and  resided  there  a  considerable  time.
He  appears  to  have  been  animated  with  a  warm  zeal  for  the  honour
of  Italy,  his  native  country,  and  yet  does  not  mention  the  exploits
and  discoveries  of  Vespucci.  Herrera,  who  compiled  his  general
history  of  America,  from  the  most  authentic  records,  not  only  fol-
lows those  early  writers,  but  accuses  Vespucci  of  falsifying  the
dates  of  both  the  vovas:es  which  he  made  to  the  New  World,  and
of  confounding  the  one  with  the  other,  in  order  that  he  might  arro-
gate to  himself  the  glory  of  having  discovered  the  continent.  Her.
dec.  1.  lib.  iv.  c.  2.  He  asserts,  that  in  a  judicial  inquiry  into  tliis
matter  by  the  royal  fiscal,  it  was  proved  by  the  testimony  of  Ojeda
himself,  that  he  touched  at  Hispaniola  when  returning  to  Spain
from  his  first  voyage  ;  whereas  Vespucci  gave  out  that  they  returned
directly  to  Cadiz  from  the  coast  of  Paria,  and  touched  at  Hispa-
niola only  in  their  second  voyage ;  and  that  he  had  finished  the
voyage  in  five  months;  whereas,  according  to  Vespucci's  account,
he  had  employed  seventeen  months  in  performing  it.  Viaggio
prime  de  Am.  Vespucci,  p.  36.  Viag.  secundo,  p.  45.  Herrera
gives  a  more  full  account  of  this  inquest  in  another  part  of  his
Decads,  and  to  the  same  effect.  Her.  dec.  1.  lib.  vii.  c.  5.  Colum-
bus was  in  Hispaniola  when  Ojeda  arrived  there,  and  had  by  that
time  come  to  an  agreement  with  Roldan,  who  opposed  Ojeda's  at-
teinpt  to  excite  a  new  insurrection,  and,  of  consequence,  his  voyage
must  have  been  posterior  to  that  of  the  admiral.  Life  of  Columbus,
c.  84.  According  to  Vespucci's  account,  he  set  out  on  his  first
voyage,  May  10th,  1497. Viag.  prime,  p.  6. At  that  time  Colum-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  343

bus  was  in  the  court  of  Spain  preparing  for  his  voyage,  and  seems
to  have  enjoyed  a  considerable  degree  of  favoar.  The  affairs  of  the
New  World  were  at  this  juncture  under  the  direction  of  Antonio
Torres,  a  friend  of  Columbus.  It  is  not  probable,  that  at  that  pe-
riod a  commission  would  be  granted  to  another  person,  to  antici-
pate the  admiral,  by  undertaking  a  voyage  which  he  himself  intended
to  perform.  Fonseca,  who  patronised  Ojeda,  and  granted  the  li-
cence for  his  voyage,  was  not  recalled  to  court,  and  reinstated  in
the  direction  of  Indian  affairs,  until  the  death  of  prince  John,
which  happened  September,  1497,  P.  Martyr,  Ep.  182,  several
months  posterior  to  the  ti  me  at  which  Vespucci  pretends  to  have
set  out  upon  his  voyage.  A  life  of  Vespucci  was  published  at  Flo-
rence by  the  Abate  Bandini,  a.  d.  1745,  4to.  It  is  a  work  of  no
merit,  written  with  little  judgment,  and  less  candour.  He  contends
for  his  countryman's  title  to  the  discovery  of  the  continent  with  all
the  blind  zeal  of  national  partiality,  but  produces  no  new  evidence
to  support  it.  We  learn  from  him  that  Vespucci's  account  of  his
voyage  was  published  as  early  as  the  year  1510,  and  probably
sooner.  Vitadi  Am.  Vesp.p.  52.  At  what  time  the  name  of  Ame-
rica came  to  be  first  given  to  the  New  World  is  not  certain.

Note  XXIII.  p.  203.

The  form  employed  on  this  occasion  served  as  a  model  to  the
Spaniards  in  all  their  subsequent  conquests  in  America.  It  is  so
extraordinary  in  its  nature,  and  gives  us  such  an  idea  of  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  Spaniards,  and  the  principles  upon  which  they
founded  their  right  to  the  extensive  dominions  which  they  acquired
in  the  New  World,  that  it  well  merits  the  attention  of  the  reader.
"  I,  Alonso  de  Ojeda,  servant  of  the  most  high  and  powerful  kings
of  Castile  and  Leon,  the  conquerors  of  barbarous  nations,  their
messenger  and  captain,  notify  to  you  and  declare,  in  as  ample  form
as  I  am  capable,  that  God  our  Lord,  who  is  one  and  eternal,
created  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  and  one  man  and  one  woman,  of
whom  you  and  we,  and  all  the  men  who  have  been  or  shall  be  in
the  world,  are  descended.  But  as  it  has  come  to  pass  through  the
number  of  generations  during  more  than  five  thousand  years,  that
they  have  been  dispersed  into  different  parts  of  the  world,  and  are
divided  into  various  kingdoms  and  provinces,  because  one  country
was  not  able  to  contain  them,  nor  could  they  have  found  in  one  the
means  of  subsistence  and  preservation ;  therefore  God  our  Lord
gave  the  charge  of  all  those  people  to  one  man  named  St.  Peter,
whom  he  constituted  the  lord  and  head  of  all  the  human  race,  that
all  men,  in  whatever  place  they  are  born,  or  in  whatever  faith  or
place  they  are  educated,  might  yield  obedience  unto  him. He

344  NOTES AND

hath  subjected  the  whole  world  to  his  jurisdiction,  and  commanded
him  to  establish  his  residence  in  Rome,  as  the  most  proper  place
for  the  government  of  the  world.  He  likewise  promised  and  gave
him  power  to  establish  his  authority  in  every  other  part  of  the
world,  and  to  judge  and  govern  all  Christians,  Moors,  Jews,  Gen-
tiles, and  all  other  people  of  whatever  sect  or  faith  they  may  be.
To  him  he  has  given  the  name  of  Pope,  which  signifies  admirable,
great  father  and  guardian,  because  he  is  the  father  and  governor
of  all  men.  Those  who  lived  in  the  time  of  this  holy  father  obeyed
and  acknowledged  him  as  their  lord  and  king,  and  the  superior  of
the  universe.  The  same  has  been  observed  with  respect  to  them
who,  since  his  time,  have  been  chosen  to  the  pontificate.  Thus  it
now  continues,  and  will  continue  to  the  end  of  the  world.

"  One  of  these  pontifls,  as  lord  of  the  world,  hath  made  a  grant  of
these  islands,  and  of  the  Tierra  Firme  of  the  ocean  sea,  to  the  Catho-
lic kings  of  Castile,  Don  Ferdinand  and  Donna  Isabella,  of  glorious
memory,  and  their  successors,  our  sovereigns,  with  all  they  contain,
as  is  more  fully  expressed  in  certain  deeds  passed  upon  that  occa-
sion, which  you  may  see,  if  you  desire  it.  Thus  his  majesty  is  king
and  lord  of  these  islands,  and  of  the  continent,  in  virtue  of  this  do-
nation ;  and,  as  king  and  lord  aforesaid,  most  of  the  islands  to  which
his  title  hath  been  notified,  have  recognised  his  majesty,  and  now
yield  obedience  and  subjection  to  him  as  their  lord,  voluntarily  and
without  resistance  ;  and  instantly,  as  soon  as  they  received  informa-
tion, they  obeyed  the  religious  men  sent  by  the  king  to  preach  to
them,  and  to  instruct  them  in  our  holy  faith  ;  and  all  these,  of  their
own  freewill,  without  any  recompense  or  gratuity,  became  Chris-
tians, and  continue  to  be  so  ;  and  his  majesty  having  received  them
graciously  under  his  protection,  has  commanded  that  they  should  be
treated  in  the  same  manner  as  his  other  subjects  and  vassals.  You
are  bound  and  obliged  to  act  in  the  same  manner.  Therefore  I
now  entreat  and  require  you  to  consider  attentively  what  I  have
declared  to  you  ;  and  that  you  may  more  perfectly  comprehend  it,
that  you  take  such  time  as  is  reasonable,  in  order  that  you  may
acknowledge  the  church  as  the  superior  and  guide  of  the  universe,
and  likewise  the  holy  father  called  the  pope,  in  his  own  right,  and
his  majesty  by  his  appointment,  as  king  and  sovereign  lord  of  these
islands,  and  of  the  Tierra  Firm^  ;  and  that  you  consent  that  the
aforesaid  holy  fathers  shall  declare  and  preach  to  you  the  doctrines
above-mentioned.  If  you  do  this,  you  act  well,  and  perform  that
to  which  you  are  bound  and  obliged  ;  and  his  majesty,  and  1  in
his  name,  will  receive  you  with  love  and  kindness,  and  will  leave
you,  your  wives  and  children,  free  and  exempt  from  servitude,  and
in  the  enjoyment  of  all  you  possess,  in  the  same  manner  as  the
inhabitants  of  the  islands. Besides  this,  his  majesty  will  bestow

ILLUSTRATIONS.  345

upon  you  many  privileges,  exemptions,  and  rewards.  But  if  you
will  not  comply,  or  maliciously  delay  to  obey  my  injunction,  then,
with  the  help  of  God,  I  will  enter  your  country  by  force,  I  will
carry  on  war  against  you  with  the  utmost  violence,  I  will  subject
you  to  the  yoke  of  obedience  to  the  church  and  king,  I  will  take
your  wives  and  children,  and  will  make  them  slaves,  and  sell  or
dispose  of  them  according  to  his  majesty's  pleasure ;  I  will  seize
your  goods,  and  do  you  all  the  mischief  in  ray  power,  as  rebellious
subjects,  who  will  not  acknowledge  or  submit  to  their  lawful  sove-
reign. And,  I  protest,  that  all  the  bloodshed  and  cala^iities  which
shall  follow  are  to  be  imputed  to  you,  and  not  to  his  majesty,  or  to
me,  or  the  gentlemen  who  serve  under  me ;  and  as  I  have  now
made  this  declaration  and  requisition  unto  you,  I  require  the  notary
here  present  to  grant  me  a  certificate  of  this,  subscribed  in  proper
form." Herrera,  dec.  L  lib.  vii.  c.  14.

Note  XXIV.  p.  215.

Balboa,  in  his  letter  to  the  king,  observes,  that  of  the  hundred
and  ninety  men  whom  he  took  with  him,  there  were  never  above
eighty  fit  for  service  at  one  time.  So  much  did  they  suffer  from
hunger,  fatigue,  and  sickness.  Herrera,  dec.  1,  lib,  x.  c.  16.  P.
Mart,  decad.  226.

Note  XXV.  p.  226.

FoNSECA,  bishop  of  Palencia,  the  principal  director  of  American
affairs,  had  eight  hundred  Indians  in  property ;  the  commendator.
Lope  de  Conchillos,  his  chief  associate  in  that  department,  eleven
hundred  ;  and  other  favourites  had  considerable  numbers.  They
sent  overseers  to  the  islands,  and  hired  out  those  slaves  to  the
planters. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ix.  c.  14.  p.  325.

Note  XXVI.  p.  246.

Though  America  is  more  plentifully  supplied  with  water  than
the  other  regions  of  the  globe,  there  is  no  river  or  stream  of  water
in  Yucatan.  This  peninsula  projects  from  the  continent  a  hundred
leagues,  but,  where  broadest,  does  not  extend  above  twenty-five
leagues.  It  is  an  extensive  plain,  not  only  without  mountains,
but  almost  without  an  inequality  of  ground.  The  inhabitants  are
supplied  with  water  from  pits,  and  wherever  they  dig  them,  find  it
in  abundance.  It  is  probable,  from  all  those  circumstances,  that
this  country  was  formerly  covered  by  the  sea.  Herrerse  Descriptio
Indiae  Occidentalis,  p.  14.  Histoire  Naturelle,  par  M.  de  Buffon,
torn.  i.  p.  593.

,34(5  NOTES AND

Note  XXVU.  p.  249.

M.  Clavigero  censures  me  for  having  represented  the  Spa*
niards  who  sailed  with  Cordova  and  Grijalva,  as  fancying,  in  the
warmth  of  their  imagination,  that  they  saw  cities  on  the  coast  of
Yucatan  adorned  with  towers  and  cupolas.  I  know  not  what  trans-
lation of  my  history  he  has  consulted,  (for  his  quotation  from  it  i»
not  taken  fgom  the  original,)  but  I  never  imagined  that  any  building
erected  by  Americans  could  suggest  the  idea  of  a  cupola  or  dome,
a  structure  which  their  utmost  skill  in  architecture  was  incapable
of  rearing.  My  words  are,  that  they  fancied  the  villages  which
they  saw  from  their  ships  "  to  be  cities  adorned  with  towers  and
pinnacles."  By  pinnacles  I  meant  some  elevation  above  the  rest  of
the  building  ;  and  the  passage  is  translated  almost  literally  from
Herrera,  dec.  2,  lib,  iii.  c.  i.  In  almost  all  the  accounts  of  new
countries  given  by  the  Spanish  discoverers  in  that  age,  this  warmth
of  admiration  is  conspicuous  ;  and  led  them  to  describe  these  new
objects  in  the  most  splendid  terms.  When  Cordova  and  his  com-
panions first  beheld  an  Indian  village  of  greater  magnitude  than
any  they  had  beheld  in  the  islands,  they  dignified  it  by  the  name
oi  Grand  Cairo,  B.  Diaz.  c.  2.  From  the  same  cause  Grijalva  and
his  associates  thought  the  country,  along  the  coast  of  which  they
held  their  course,  entitled  to  the  name  of  New  Spain.

Note  XXVIII.  p.  255.

The  height  of  the  most  elevated  point  in  the  Pyrenees  is,  ac-
cording to  M.  Cassini,  six  thousand  six  hundred  and  forty-six  feet.
The  height  of  the  mountain  Gemmi,  in  the  canton  of  Berne,  is  ten
thousand  one  hundred  and  ten  feet.  The  height  of  the  peak  of
Teneriffe,  according  to  the  measurement  of  P.  Feuillfe,  is  thirteen
thousand  one  hundred  and  seventy-eight  feet.  The  height  of
Chimborazzo,  the  most  elevated  point  of  the  Andes,  is  twenty  thou-
sand two  hundred  and  eighty  feet;  no  less  than  seven  thousand
one  hundred  and  two  feet  above  the  highest  mountain  in  the  ancient
continent.  Voyage  de  D.  Juan  Ulloa,  Observations  Astron.  et
Physiq.  torn.  ii.  p.  1 14.  The  line  of  congelation  on  Chimborazzo,
or  that  part  of  the  mountain  which  is  covered  perpetually  with
snow,  is  no  less  than  two  thousand  four  hundred  feet  from  its
summit. Prevot.  Hist.  Gener.  des  Voyages,  vol.  xiii.  p.  636.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  347

Note  XXIX.  p.  255.

As  a  particular  description  makes  a  stronger  impression  than
general  assertions,  I  shall  give  one  of  Rio  de  la  Plata  by  an  eye-
witness, P.  Cattaneo,  a  Modenese  Jesuit,  who  landed  at  Buenos
Ayres  in  1749,  and  thus  represents  what  he  felt  when  such  new
objects  were  first  presented  to  his  view.  "  While  I  resided  in  Eu-
rope, and  read  in  books  of  history  or  geography  that  the  mouth  of
the  river  de  la  Plata  was  a  hundred  and  fifty  miles  in  breadth,  I
considered  it  as  an  exaggeration,  because  in  this  hemisohere  we
have  no  example  of  such  vast  rivers.  When  I  approached  its
mouth,  I  had  the  most  vehement  desire  to  ascertain  the  truth  with
my  own  eyes  ;  and  I  have  found  the  matter  to  be  exactly  as  it  was
represented.  This  I  deduce  particularly  from  one  circumstance  :
When  we  took  our  departure  from  Monte-Video,  a  fort  situated
more  than  a  hundred  miles  from  the  mouth  of  the  river,  and  where
its  breadth  is  considerably  diminished,  we  sailed  a  complete  day
before  we  discovered  the  land  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river;
and  when  we  were  in  the  middle  of  the  channel,  we  could  not
discern  land  on  either  side,  and  saw  nothing  but  the  sky  and  water,
as  if  we  had  been  in  some  great  ocean.  Indeed  we  should  have
taken  it  to  be  sea,  if  the  fresh  water  of  the  river,  which  was  turbid
like  the  Po,  had  not  satisfied  us  that  it  was  a  river.  Moreover,  at
Buenos  Ayres,  another  hundred  miles  up  the  river,  and  where  it  is
still  much  narrower,  it  is  not  only  impossible  to  discern  the  oppo-
site coast,  which  is  indeed  very  low  and  flat ;  but  one  cannot  per-
ceive the  houses  or  the  tops  of  the  steeples  in  the  Portuguese  set-
tlement at  Colonia  on  the  other  side  of  the  river.  Lettera  prima,
published  by  Muratori,  II  Christianesimo  Felice,  &c.  i.  p.  257.

Note  XXX.  p.  258.

Newfoundland,  part  of  Nova  Scotia,  and  Canada,  are  the
countries  which  lie  in  the  same  parallel  of  latitude  with  the  kingdom
of  France  ;  and  in  every  part  of  these  the  water  of  the  rivers  is
frozen  during  winter  to  the  thickness  of  several  feet ;  the  earth  is
covered  with  snow  as  deep  ;  almost  all  the  birds  fly  during  that
season  from  a  climate  where  they  could  not  live.  The  country  of
the  Eskimaux,  part  of  Labrador,  and  the  countries  on  the  south  of
Hudson's  Bay,  are  in  the  same  parallel  with  Great  Britain;  and
yet  in  all  these  the  cold  is  so  intense,  that  even  the  industry  of
Europeans  has  not  attempted  cultivation.

318  NOTES AND

Note  XXXI.  p.  2C0.

AcosTA  is  the  first  philosopher,  as  far  as  I  know,  who  endea-
voured to  account  for  the  different  degrees  of  heat  in  the  old  and
new  continents,  by  the  agency  of  the  winds  which  blow  in  each.
Hist.  Moral.  &c.  lib.  ii.  and  iii.  M.  de  BufFon  adopts  this  theory,
and  has  not  only  improved  it  by  new  observations,  but  has  era-
ployed  his  amazing  powers  of  descriptive  eloquence  in  embellishing
and  placing  it  in  the  most  striking  light.  Some  remarks  may  be
added,  which  tend  to  illustrate  more  fully  a  doctrine  of  much  im-
portance in  every  inquiry  concerning  the  temperature  of  various
climates.

When  a  cold  wind  blows  over  land,  it  must  in  its  passage  rob
the  surface  of  some  of  its  heat.  By  means  of  this,  the  coldness  of
the  wind  is  abated.  But  if  it  continue  to  blow  in  the  same  direction,
it  will  come,  by  degrees,  to  pass  over  a  surface  already  cooled,  and
will  suffer  no  longer  any  abatement  of  its  own  keenness.  Thus,  as
it  advances  over  a  large  tract  of  land,  it  brings  on  all  the  severity
of  intense  frost.

Let  the  same  wind  blow  over  an  extensive  and  deep  sea ;  the
superficial  water  must  be  immediately  cooled  to  a  certain  degree,
and  the  wind  proportionally  warmed.  But  the  superficial  and
colder  water  becoming  specifically  heavier  than  the  warmer  water
below  it,  descends  ;  what  is  warmer  supplies  its  place,  which,  as
it  comes  to  be  cooled  in  its  turn,  continues  to  warm  the  air  which
passes  over  it,  or  to  diminish  its  cold.  This  change  of  the  super-
ficial water  and  successive  ascent  of  that  which  is  warmer,  and  the
consequent  successive  abatement  of  coldness  in  the  air,  is  aided  by
the  agitation  caused  in  the  sea  by  the  mechanical  action  of  the
wind,  and  also  by  the  motion  of  the  tides.  This  Avill  go  on,  and  the
rigour  of  the  wind  will  continue  to  diminish  until  the  whole  water
is  so  far  cooled,  that  the  water  on  the  surface  is  no  longer  removed
from  the  action  of  the  wind  fast  enough  to  hinder  it  from  being
arrested  by  frost.  Whenever  the  surface  freezes,  the  wind  is  no
longer  warmed  by  the  water  from  below,  and  it  goes  on  with  undi-
minished cold.

From  those  principles  may  be  explained  the  severity  of  winter
frosts  in  extensive  continents  ;  their  mildness  in  small  islands  ;
and  the  superior  rigour  of  winter  in  those  parts  of  North  America
with  which  we  are  best  acquainted.  In  the  north-west  parts  of
Europe,  the  severity  of  winter  is  mitigated  by  the  west  winds,  which
usually  blow  in  the  months  of  November,  December,  and  part  of
January.

On  the  other  hand,  when  a  warm  wind  blows  over  land,  it  heats

ILLUSTRATIONS.  349

the  surface,  which  must  therefore  cease  to  abate  the  fervour  of  the
wind.  But  the  same  wind  blowing  over  water,  agitates  it,  brings
up  the  colder  water  from  below,  and  thus  is  continually  losing  some-
what of  its  own  heat.

But  the  great  power  of  the  sea  to  mitigate  the  heat  of  the  wind
or  air  passing  over  it,  proceeds  from  the  following  circumstance  : —
that  on  account  of  the  transparency  of  the  sea,  its  surface  cannot
be  heated  to  a  great  degree  by  the  sun's  rays  ;  whereas  the  ground,
subjected  to  their  influence,  very  soon  acquires  great  heat.  When,
therefore,  the  wind  blows  over  a  torrid  continent,  it  is  soon  raised
to  a  heat  almost  intolerable  ;  but  during  its  passage  over  an  exten-
sive ocean,  it  is  gradually  cooled  ;  so  that  on  its  arrival  at  the  far-
thest shore,  it  is  again  fit  for  respiration.

Those  principles  will  account  for  the  sultry  heats  of  large  conti-
nents in  the  torrid  zone  ;  for  the  mild  climate  of  islands  in  the  same
latitude  ;  and  for  the  superior  warmth  in  summer  which  large  con-
tinents, situated  in  the  temperate  or  colder  zones  of  the  earth,
enjoy,  when  compared  with  that  of  islands.  The  heat  of  a  climate
depends  not  only  upon  the  immediate  effect  of  the  sun's  rays,  but
on  their  continued  operation,  on  the  effect  which  they  have  formerly
produced,  and  which  remains  for  some  time  in  the  ground.  This
is  the  reason  why  the  day  is  warmest  about  two  in  the  afternoon,
the  summer  warmest  about  the  middle  of  July,  and  the  winter
coldest  about  the  middle  of  January.

The  forests  which  cover  America,  and  hinder  the  sunbeams
from  heating  the  ground,  are  a  great  cause  of  the  temperate  cli-
mate in  the  equatorial  parts.  The  ground  not  being  heated,  cannot
heat  the  air ;  and  the  leaves,  which  receive  the  rays  intercepted
from  the  ground,  have  not  a  mass  of  matter  sufficient  to  absorb
heat  enough  for  this  purpose.  Besides,  it  is  a  known  fact,  that
the  vegetative  power  of  a  plant  occasions  a  perspiration  from  the
leaves  in  proportion  to  the  heat  to  which  they  are  exposed  ;  and,
from  the  nature  of  evaporation,  this  perspiration  produces  a  cold
in  the  leaf  proportional  to  the  perspiration.  Thus  the  effect  of  the
leaf  in  heating  the  air  in  contact  with  it,  is  prodigiously  diminished.
For  those  observations,  which  throw  much  additional  light  on  this
curious  subject,  I  am  indebted  to  my  ingenious  friend,  Mr.  Rpbison,
professor  of  natural  philosophy  in  the  university  of  Edinburgh.

Note  XXXII.  p.  260.

The  climate  of  Brazil  has  been  described  by  two  eminent  natu-
ralists, Piso  and  Margrave,  who  observed  it  with  a  philosophical
accuracy  for  which  we  search  in  vain  in  the  accounts  of  many
other  provinces  in  America. Both  represent  it  as  temperate  and

.'^oO  NOTKS  AND

mild,  when  compared  with  the  cHmate  of  Africa.  They  ascribe
this  chiefly  to  the  refreshing  wind  which  blows  continually  from  the
sea.  The  air  is  not  only  cool,  but  chilly  through  the  night,  in  so
much  that  the  natives  kindle  fires  every  evening  in  their  huts.  Piso
de  Mcdicina  Brasiliensi,  lib.  i.  p.  1.,  &c.  Margravius  Histor.
Rerum  Natural.  Brasilia;,  lib.  viii.  c.  3.  p.  264.  Nieuhoft',  who
resided  long  in  Brazil,  confirms  their  description.  Churchill's  Col-
lection, vol.  ii.  p.  26.  Gimiilla,  who  was  a  missionary  many  years
among  the  Indians  upon  the  river  Oronoco,  gives  a  similar  descrip-
tion of  the  temperature  of  the  climate  there.  Hist,  de  I'Orenoque,
torn.  i.  p.  26.  P.  Acugna  felt  a  very  considerable  degree  of  cold
in  the  countries  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Amazons.  Relat,  vol.  ii.
p.  56.  M.  Biet,  who  lived  a  considerable  time  in  Cayenne,  gives
a  similar  account  of  the  temperature  of  that  climate,  and  ascribes
it  to  the  same  cause.  Voyage  de  la  France,  Equinox,  p.  330.
Nothing  can  be  more  different  from  these  descriptions  than  that  of
the  burning  heat  of  the  African  coast  given  by  M.  Adanson.
Voyage  to  Senegal,  passim.

NoteXXXlII.  p.  261.

Two  French  frigates  were  sent  upon  a  voyage  of  discovery  in  the
year  1739.  In  latitude  44"  south,  they  began  to  feel  a  consider-
able degree  of  cold.  In  latitude  48°,  they  met  with  islands  of
floating  ice.  Histoire  des  Navigations  aux  Terres  Australes,  tom.  ii.
p.  256,  &c.  Dr.  Halley  fell  in  with  ice  in  latitude  59".  Id.  tom. i.
p.  47.  Commodore  Byron,  when  on  the  coast  of  Patagonia,
latitude  50"  33'  south,  on  the  15th  of  December,  which  is  mid-
summer in  that  part  of  the  globe,  the  21st  of  December  being  the
longest  day  there,  compares  the  climate  to  that  of  England  in  the
middle  of  winter.  Voyages  by  Hawkesworth,  i.  25.  Mr.  Banks
having  landed  on  Terra  del  Fuego,  in  the  Bay  of  Good  Success
latitude  55",  en  the  16th  of  January,  which  corresponds  to  the
month  of  July  in  our  hemisphere,  two  of  his  attendants  died  in  one
night  of  extreme  cold,  and  all  the  party  were  in  the  most  immi-
nent danger  of  perishing.  Id.  ii,  51,  52.  By  the  14th  of  March,
corresponding  to  September  in  our  hemisphere,  winter  was  set  in
with  rigour,  and  the  mountains  were  covered  with  snow.  Ibid.  72.
Captain  Cook,  in  his  voyage  towards  the  South  Pole,  furnishes  new
and  striking  instances  of  the  extraordinary  predominance  of  cold
in  this  region  of  the  globe.  "  Who  would  have  thought  (says  he)
that  an  island  of  no  greater  extent  than  seventy  leagues  in  circuit,
situated  between  the  latitude  of  54»  and  55",  should  in  the  very
height  of  summer  be,  in  a  manner,  wholly  covered,  many  fathoms
deep,  with  frozen  snow  ;  but  more  especially  the  S.  W.  coast  ? The

ILLUSTRATIONS.  351

very  summits  of  the  lofty  mountains  were  cased  with  snow  and  ice ;
but  the  quantity  that  lay  in  the  valleys  is  incredible ;  and  at  the
bottom  of  the  bays,  the  coast  was  terminated  by  a  wall  of  ice  of
considerable  height." Vol.  ii.  p.  217.

In  some  places  of  the  ancient  continent,  an  extraordinary  degree
of  cold  prevails  in  very  low  latitudes.  M.  Bogle,  in  his  embassy
to  the  court  of  the  Delai  Lama,  passed  the  winter  of  the  year  1774
at  Chamnanning,  in  latitude  31"  39'  N.  He  often  found  the  ther-
mometer in  his  room  twenty-nine  degrees  under  the  freezing  point
by  Fahrenheit's  scale  ;  and  in  the  middle  of  April  the  standing
waters  were  all  frozen,  and  heavy  showers  of  snow  frequently  fell.
The  extraordinary  elevation  of  the  country  seems  to  be  the  cause
of  this  excessive  cold.  In  travelling  from  Indostan  to  Thibet,  the
ascent  to  the  summit  of  the  Boutan  Mountains  is  very  great,  but
the  descent  on  the  other  side  is  not  in  equal  proportion.  The  king-
dom of  Thibet  is  an  elevated  region,  extremely  bare  and  desolate.
Account  of  Thibet,  by  Mr.  Stewart,  read  in  the  Royal  Society,  p.  7.
The  extraordinary  cold  in  low  latitudes  in  America  cannot  be  ac-
counted for  by  the  same  cause.  Those  regions  are  not  remarkable
for  elevation. Some  of  them  are  countries  depressed  and  level.

The  most  obvious  and  probable  cause  of  the  superior  degree  of
cold  towards  the  southern  extremity  of  America,  seems  to  be  the
form  of  the  continent  there.  Its  breadth  gradually  decreases  as  it
stretches  from  St.  Antonio  southwards,  and  from  the  bay  of  St.
Julian  to  the  straits  of  Magellan  its  dimensions  are  much  con-
tracted. On  the  east  and  west  sides,  it  is  washed  by  the  Atlantic
and  Pacific  oceans.  From  its  southern  point  it  is  probable  that  a
great  extent  of  sea,  without  any  considerable  tract  of  land,  reaches
to  the  Antarctic  pole.  In  whichever  of  these  directions  the  wind
blows,  it  is  cooled  before  it  approaches  the  Magellanic  regions,  by
passing  over  a  vast  body  of  water ;  nor  is  the  land  there  of  such
extent,  that  it  can  recover  any  considerable  degree  of  heat  in  its
progress  over  it.  These  circumstances  concur  in  rendering  the
temperature  of  the  air  in  this  district  of  America  more  similar  to
that  of  an  insular,  than  to  that  of  a  continental  climate,  and  hinder
it  from  acquiring  the  same  degree  of  summer  heat  with  places  in
Europe  and  Asia  in  a  correspondent  northern  latitude.  The  north
wind  is  the  only  one  that  reaches  this  part  of  America,  after  blow-
ing over  a  great  continent.  But  from  an  attentive  survey  of  its
position,  this  will  be  found  to  have  a  tendency  rather  to  diminish
than  augment  the  degree  of  heat.  The  southern  extremity  of
America  is  properly  the  termination  of  the  immense  ridges  of  the
Andes,  which  stretches  nearly  in  a  direct  line  from  north  to  south,
through  the  whole  extent  of  the  continent. The  most  sultry  regions

352  NOTES AND

in  South  America,  Guiana,  Brazil,  Paraguay,  and  Tucuman,  lie
many  degrees  to  the  east  of  the  Magellanic  regions.  The  level
country  of  Peru,  which  enjoys  the  tropical  heats,  is  situated  consi-
derably to  the  west  of  them.  The  north  wind  then,  though  it  blows
over  land,  does  not  bring  to  the  southern  extremity  of  America  an
increase  of  heat  collected  in  its  passage  over  torrid  regions  ;  but
before  it  arrives  there,  it  must  have  swept  along  the  summits  of  the
Andes,  and  comes  impregnated  with  the  cold  of  that  frozen  region.
Though  it  be  now  demonstrated  that  there  is  no  southern  con-
tinent in  that  region  of  the  globe  which  it  was  supposed  to  occupy,
it  appears  to  be  certain  from  Captain  Cook's  discoveries,  that  there
is  a  large  tract  of  land  near  the  south  pole,  which  is  the  source  of
most  of  the  ice  spread  over  the  vast  southern  ocean.  Vol.  ii.
p.  230.  239,  &c.  Whether  the  influence  of  this  remote  frozen
continent  may  reach  the  southern  extremity  of  America,  and  affect
its  climate,  is  an  inquiry  not  unworthy  of  attention.

Note  XXXIV.  p.  263.

M.  Con  DA  MINE  is  one  of  the  latest  and  most  accurate  observers
of  the  interior  state  of  South  America.  "  After  descending  from
the  Andes  (says  he),  one  beholds  a  vast  and  uniform  prospect  of
water  and  verdure,  and  nothing  more.  One  treads  upon  the  earth,
but  does  not  see  it ;  as  it  is  so  entirely  covered  with  luxuriant
plants,  weeds,  and  shrubs,  that  it  would  require  a  considerable  de-
gree of  labour  to  clear  it  for  the  space  of  a  foot."  Relation  abrege
d'un  Voyage,  &c.  p.  48.  One  of  the  singularities  in  the  forests
is  a  sort  of  osiers,  or  withes,  called  bcjucos  by  the  Spaniards,  lianes
by  the  French,  and  nibhes  by  the  Indians,  which  are  usually  em-
ployed as  ropes  iu  America.  This  is  one  of  the  parasitical  plants,
which  twists  about  the  trees  it  meets  with,  and  rising  above  their
highest  branches,  its  tendrils  descend  perpendicularly,  strike  into
the  ground,  take  root,  rise  up  round  another  tree,  and  thus  mount
and  descend  alternately.  Other  tendrils  are  carried  obliquely  by
the  wind,  or  some  accident,  and  form  a  confusion  of  interwoven
cordage,  which  resembles  the  rigging  of  a  ship.  Bancroft,  Nat.
Hist,  of  Guiana,  99,  These  withes  are  often  as  thick  as  the  arm  of
a  man.  lb.  p.  75,  M.  Bouguer's  account  of  the  forests  in  Peru,
perfectly  resembles  this  description.  Voyages  au  Peru,  p.  16.
Oviedo  gives  a  similar  description  of  the  forests  in  other  parts  of
America.  Hist.  lib.  ix,  p.  144.  D.  The  country  of  the  Moxos  is
so  much  overflowed,  that  they  are  obliged  to  reside  on  the  summit
of  some  rising  ground  during  some  part  of  the  year,  and  have  no
communication  with  their  countrymen  at  any  distance. Lettres

ILLUSTRATIONS.  353

Edifiantes,tom.  x.  p.  187.  Garcia  gives  a  full  and  just  description
of  the  rivers,  lakes,  woods,  and  marshes  in  those  countries  of  Ame-
rica which  lie  between  the  tropics.  Origin  de  los  Indios,  lib.  ii.
c.  5.  §  4,  5.  The  incredible  hardships  to  which  Gonzales  Pizarro
was  exposed  in  attempting  to  march  into  the  country  to  the  east
of  the  Andes,  convey  a  very  striking  idea  of  that  part  of  America  in
its  original  uncultivated  state.  Garcil.  de  la  Vega,  Royal.  Com-
ment, of  Peru,  part  ii.  book  iii.  c.  2 — 5.

Note  XXXV.  p.  264.

The  animals  of  America  seem  not  to  have  been  always  of  a  size
inferior  to  those  in  other  quarters  of  the  globe. From  antlers  of
the  moose-deer  which  have  been  found  in  America,  it  appears  to
have  been  an  animal  of  great  size. Near  the  banks  of  the  Ohio,  a
considerable  number  of  bones  of  an  immense  magnitude  have  been
found. The  place  where  this  discovery  has  been  made  lies  about
one  hundred  and  ninety  miles  below  the  junction  of  the  river  Scioto
with  the  Ohio. It  is  about  four  miles  distant  from  the  banks  of  the
latter,  on  the  side  of  the  marsh  called  the  Salt  Lick. The  bones
lie  in  vast  quantities  about  five  or  six  feet  under  ground,  and  the
stratum  is  visible  in  the  bank  on  the  edge  of  the  Lick. Journal  of
Colonel  George  Croglan,  MS.  penes  me. This  spot  seems  to  be  accu-
rately laid  down  by  Evans  in  his  map. These  bones  must  have
belonged  to  animals  of  enormous  bulk ;  but  naturalists  being  ac-
quainted with  no  living  creature  of  such  size,  were  at  first  inclined
to  think  that  they  were  mineral  substances. Upon  receiving  a
greater number  of  specimens, and after inspecting  them  more
narrowly,  they  are  now  allowed  to  be  the  bones  of  an  animal. As
the  elephant  is  the  largest  known  quadruped,  and  the  tusks  which
were  found  nearly  resembled,  both  in  form  and  quality,  the  tusks
of  an  elephant,  it  was  concluded  that  the  carcasses  deposited  on
the  Ohio  were  of  that  species. But  Dr.  Hunter,  one  of  the  persons
of  our  age  best  qualified  to  decide  with  respect  to  this  point,  having
accurately  examined  several  parcels  of  tusks, and grinders,  and
jaw  bones,  sent  from  the  Ohio  to  London,  gives  it  as  his  opinion,
that  they  did  not  belong  to  an  elephant,  but  to  some  huge  carni-
vorous animal  of  an  unknown  species. Phil.  Transact,  vol.  Iviii.
p.  34, Bones  of  the  same  kind,  and  as  remarkable  for  their  size,
have  been  found  near  the  mouths  of  the  great  rivers  Oby,  Jeniseia,
and  Lena,  in  Siberia. Stralhrenberg,  Descript.  of  North  and  East
Parts  of  Europe  and  Asia,  p.  402,  &c. The  elephant  seems  to  be
confined  in  his  range  to  the  torrid  zone,  and  never  multiplies  be-
yond it. In  such  cold  regions  as  those  bordering  on  the  frozen
sea,  he  could  not  live. The  existence  of  such  large  animals  in

VOL.  VI.  2  A

.354  NOTES AND

America  might  open  a  wide  field  for  conjecture.  The  more  we
contemplate  the  face  of  nature,  and  consider  the  variety  of  her
productions,  the  more  we  must  be  satisfied  that  astonishing  changes
have  been  made  in  the  terraqueous  globe  by  convulsions  and  revo-
lutions, of  which  no  account  is  preserved  in  history.

Note  XXXVI.  p.  265.

This  deaeneracy  of  the  domestic  European  animals  in  America
may  be  imputed  to  some  of  these  causes.  In  the  Spanish  settle-
ments, which  are  situated  either  within  the  torrid  zone,  or  in
countries  bordering  upon  it,  the  increase  of  heat,  and  diversity  of
food,  prevent  sheep  and  horned  cattle  from  attaining  the  same  size
as  in  Europe.  They  seldom  become  so  fat,  and  their  fiesh  is  not
so  juicy,  or  of  such  delicate  flavour.  In  North  America,  where  the
climate  is  more  favourable,  and  similar  to  that  of  Europe,  the
quality  of  the  grasses  which  spring  up  naturally  in  their  pasture-
grounds  is  not  good.  Mitchell,  p.  151.  Agriculture  is  still  so
much  in  it?  infancy,  that  artificial  food  for  cattle  is  not  raised  in  any
quantity.  During  a  winter,  long  in  many  provinces,  and  rigorous
in  all,  no  proper  care  is  taken  of  their  cattle.  The  general  treat-
ment of  their  horses  and  horned  cattle  is  injudicious  and  harsh  in
all  the  English  colonies.  These  circumstances  contribute  more,
perhaps,  than  any  thing  peculiar  in  the  quality  of  the  climate,  to
the  degeneracy  of  breed  in  the  horses,  cows,  and  sheep  of  many  of
the  North  American  provinces.

Note  XXXVII.  p.  266.

In  the  year  1518,  the  island  of  Ilispaniola  was  afflicted  with  a
dreadful  visitation  of  those  destructive  insects,  the  particulars  of
which  Herrera  describes,  and  mentions  a  singular  instance  of  the
superstition  of  the  Spanish  planters.  After  trying  various  methods
of  exterminating  the  ants,  they  resolved  to  implore  protection  of
the  saints  ;  but  as  the  calamity  was  new,  they  were  at  a  loss  to  find
out  the  saint  who  could  give  them  the  most  effectual  aid.  They
cast  lots  in  order  to  discover  the  patron  whom  they  should  invoke.
The  lots  decided  in  favour  of  St.  Saturninus.  They  celebrated  his
festival  with  great  solemnity,  and  immediately,  adds  the  historian,
the  calamity  began  to  abate. Herrera,  dec,  2,  lib.  iii.  c.  15,  p.  107.

Note  XXXVIII.  p.  267.

TiiF.  author  of  Recherches  Philosophiques  sur  les  Americains
supposes  this  difference  in  heat  to  be  equal  to  twelve  degrees,  and

ILLUgTHATIONS.  355

that  a  place  thirty  degrees  from  the  equator  in  the  old  continent  is
as  warm  as  one  situated  eighteen  degrees  from  it  in  America,  tom.  i.
p.  II.  Dr.  Mitchell,  after  observations  carried  on  during  thirty
years,  contends  that  the  difference  is  equal  to  fourteen  or  fifteen
degrees  of  latitude. Present  State,  &c.  p.  257.

Note  XXXIX.  p.  267.

January  3d,  1765,  Mr.  Bertram,  near  the  head  of  St.  John's
river,  in  East  Florida,  observed  a  frost  so  intense,  that  in  one  night
the  ground  was  frozen  an  inch  thick  upon  the  banks  of  the  river.
The  limes,  citrons,  and  banana  trees,  at  St.  Augustin,  were  de-
stroyed. Bertram's  Journal,  p.  20.  Other  instances  of  the  ex-
traordinary operations  of  cold  in  the  southern  provinces  of  North
America  are  collected  by  Dr.  Mitchell.  Present  State,  p.  206,  &c.
February  7th,  1747,  the  frost  at  Charlestown  was  so  intense,  that
a  person  having  carried  two  quart  bottles  of  hot  water  to  bed,  in  the
morning  they  were  split  to  pieces,  and  the  water  converted  into  solid
lumps  of  ice.  In  a  kitchen,  where  there  was  a  fire,  the  water  in  a
jar,  in  which  there  was  a  large  live  eel,  was  frozen  to  the  bottom.
Almost  all  the  orange  and  olive  trees  were  destroyed.  Description
of  South  Carolina,  8vo.  Lond.  1761.

Note  XL.  p.  268.

A  REM  ARK  ABLE  instance  of  this  occurs  in  Dutch  Guiana,  a
country  every  where  level,  and  so  low,  that  during  the  rainy  seasons
it  is  usually  covered  with  water  near  two  feet  in  height.  This
renders  the  soil  so  rich,  that  on  the  surface,  for  twelve  inches  in
depth,  it  is  a  stratum  of  perfect  manure,  and  as  such  has  been
transported  to  Barbadoes.  On  the  banks  of  the  Essequebo,  thirty
crops  of  ratan  canes  have  been  raised  successively ;  whereas  in  the
West  India  islands,  not  more  than  two  is  ever  expected  from  the
richest  land.  The  expedients  by  which  the  planters  endeavour  to
diminish  this  excessive  fertility  of  soil  are  various.  Bancroft,  Nat.
Hist,  of  Guiana,  p.  10,  &c.

Note  XLI.  p.  278.

MuLLER  seems  to  have  believed,  without  sufficient  evidence,
that  the  Cape  had  been  doubled,  tom.  i.  p.  11,  &c. ;  and  the  Im-
perial Academy  of  St.  Petersburgh  gives  some  countenance  to  it,  by
the  manner  in  which  Tschukofskoi-noss  is  laid  down  in  their  charts.
But  I  am  assured,  from  undoubted  authority,  that  no  Russian  ves-

2  A  2

3o(J  NOTES  AND

sel  has  ever  sailed  round  that  cape  ;  and  as  the  country  of  Tschutki
is  not  subject  to  the  Russian  empire,  it  is  very  imperfectly  known.

Note  XLII. p.  280.

Wf.re  this  the  place  for  entering  into  a  long  and  intricate  geo-
graphical disquisition,  many  curious  observations  might  arise  from
comparing  the  accounts  of  the  two  Russian  voyages  and  the  charts
of  their  respective  navigators. One  remark  is  applicable  to  both.
We  cannot  rely  with  absolute  certainty  on  the  position  which  they
assign  to  several  of  the  places  which  they  visited. The  weather  was
so  extremely  foggy,  that  they  seldom  saw  the  sun  or  stars  ;  and  the
position  of  the  islands  and  supposed  continents  was  commonly  de-
termined by  reckoning,  not  by  observation. Behring  and  Tschirikow
proceeded  much  farther  towards  the  east  than  Krenitzin, The  land
discovered  by  Behring,  which  he  imagined  to  be  part  of  the  Ame-
rican continent,  is  in  the  236th  degree  of  longitude  from  the  first
meridian  in  the  isle  of  Ferro,  and  in  58°  28'  of  latitude. Tschirikow
came  upon  the  same  coast  in  longit.  241°,  lat.  56". Muller,  i.
248,  249. The  former  must  have  advanced  60  degrees  from  the
port  of  Petropawlowski,  from  which  he  took  his  departure,  and  the
latter  65  degrees. But from  the  chart  of  Krenitzin's  voyage,  it
appears  that  he  did  not  sail  farther  towards  the  east  than  the  208th
degree, and only  32 degrees from  Petropawlowski. In 1741,
Behring  and  Tschirikow,  both  in  going  and  returning,  held  a  course
which  was  mostly  to  the  south  of  that  chain  of  islands,  which  they
discovered ;  and  observing  the  mountainous  and  rugged  aspect  of  the
head-lands  which  they  descried  towards  the  north,  they  supposed
them  to  be  promontories  belonging  to  some  part  of  the  American
continent,  which,  as  they  fancied,  stretched  as  far  south  as  the
latitude  56. In  this  manner  they  are  laid  down  in  the  chart  pub-
lished by  Muller,  and  likewise  in  a  manuscript  chart  drawn  by  a
mate  of  Behring's  ship,  communicated  to  me  by  Mr.  Professor
Robinson. But  in  1769,  Krenitzin,  after  wintering  in  the  island
Alaxa,  stood  so  far  towards  the  north  in  his  return,  that  his  course
lay  through  the  middle  of  what  Behring  and  Tschirikow  had  sup-
posed to  be  a  continent,  which  he  found  to  be  an  open  sea,  and  that
they  had  mistaken  rocky  isles  for  the  head-lands  of  a  continent.
It  is  probable,  that  the  countries  discovered  in  1741,  towards  the
east,  do  not  belong  to  the  American  continent,  but  are  only  a  con-
tinuation of  the  chain  of  islands. The  number  of  volcanoes  in  this
region  of  the  globe  is  remarkable. There  are  several  in  Kamtchatka,
and  not  one  of  the  islands,  great  or  small,  as  far  as  the  Russian
navigation  extends,  is  without  them. Many  are  actually  burning,
and  tlie  mountains  in  all  bear  marks  of  having  been  once  in  a  state

ILLUSTRATIONS.  357

of  eruption.  Were  I  disposed  to  admit  such  conjectures  as  have
found  place  in  other  inquiries  concerning  the  peopling  of  America,
I  might  suppose  that  this  part  of  the  earth,  having  manifestly  suf-
fered violent  convulsions  from  earthquakes  and  volcanoes,  an  Isthmus,
which  may  have  formerly  united  Asia  to  America,  has  been  broken,
and  formed  into  a  cluster  of  islands  by  the  shock.

It  is  singular,  that  at  the  very  time  the  Russian  navigators  were
attempting  to  make  discoveries  in  the  north-west  of  America,  the
Spaniards  were  prosecuting  the  same  design  from  another  quarter.
In  1769,  two  small  vessels  sailed  from  Loretto  in  California,  to  ex-
plore the  coasts  of  the  country  to  the  north  of  that  peninsula.  They
advanced  no  farther  than  the  port  of  Monte  Rey  in  latitude  36.
But,  in  several  successive  expeditions  fitted  out  from  the  port  of
St.  Bias  in  New  Galicia,  the  Spaniards  have  advanced  as  far  as  the
latitude  58.  Gazeta  de  Madrid,  March  19,  and  May  14,  1776.
But  as  the  journals  of  those  voyages  have  not  yet  been  pubhshed,
I  cannot  compare  their  progress  with  that  of  the  Russians,  or  shew
how  near  the  navigators  of  the  two  nations  have  approached  to  each
other.  It  is  to  be  hoped,  that  the  enlightened  minister,  who  has
now  the  direction  of  American  affairs  in  Spain,  will  not  withhold
this  information  from  the  public.

NoteXLIII.  p.  281.

OvR  knowledge  of  the  vicinity  of  the  two  continents  of  Asia  and
America,  which  was  very  imperfect  when  I  pubhshed  the  History
of  America  in  the  year  1777,  is  now  complete.  Mr.  Coxe"s  Account
of  the  Russian  Discoveries  between  Asia  and  America,  printed  in
the  year  1780,  contains  many  curious  and  important  facts  with  re-
spect to  the  various  attempts  of  the  Russians  to  open  a  communi-
cation with  the  New  World.  The  History  of  the  great  Voyage  of
Discovery,  begun  by  captain  Cook  in  1776,  and  completed  by
captains  Clerk  and  Gore,  published  in  the  year  1780,  communicates
all  the  information  that  the  curiosity  of  mankind  could  desire  with
regard  to  this  subject.

At  my  request,  my  friend  Mr.  Playfair,  professor  of  mathematics
in  the  university  of  Edinburgh,  has  compared  the  narrative  and
charts  of  those  illustrious  navigators,  with  the  more  imperfect  rela-
tions and  maps  of  the  Russians.  The  result  of  this  comparison  I
communicate  in  his  own  words,  with  much  greater  confidence  in
his  scientific  accuracy,  than  I  could  have  ventured  to  place  in  any
observations  which  I  myself  might  have  made  upon  the  subject.

"  The  discoveries  of  captain  Cook  in  his  last  voyage  have  con-
firmed the  conclusions  which  Dr.  Robertson  had  drawn,  and  have
connected  together  the  facts  from  which  they  were  deduced.
They  have  now  rendered  it  certain  that  Behring  and  Tschirikow

358  NOTES AND

touched  on  the  coast  of  America  in  1741.  The  former  discovered
land  in  latitude  58°  28',  and  about  236°  east  from  Ferro.  He  has
given  such  a  description  of  the  bay  in  which  he  anchored,  and  the
high  mountain  to  the  westward  of  it,  which  he  calls  St.  Elias,  that
though  the  account  of  his  voyage  is  much  abridged  in  the  English
translation,  captain  Cook  recognised  the  place  as  he  sailed  along
the  western  coast  of  America  in  the  year  1778.  The  isle  of  St.
Hermogenes,  near  the  mouth  of  Cook's  river,  Schumagins  Isles  on
the  coast  of  Alashka,  and  Foggy  Isle,  retain  in  captain  Cook's  chart
the  names  which  they  had  received  from  the  Russian  navigator.
Cook's  Voy.  vol.  ii.  p.  347.

"  Tschirikow  came  upon  the  same  coast  about  2°  30'  farther  south
than  Behring,  near  the  Mount  Edgecumbe  of  captain  Cook.

"  With  regard  to  Krenitzin,  we  learn  from  Coxe's  Account  of
the  Russian  Discoveries,  that  he  sailed  from  the  mouth  of  the
Kamtchatka  river  with  two  ships  in  the  year  1768.  With  his  own
ship  he  reached  the  island  Oonolashka,  in  which  there  had  been  a
Russian  settlement  since  the  year  1762,  where  he  wintered  probably
in  the  same  harbour  or  bay  where  captain  Cook  afterward  anchored.
The  other  ship  wintered  at  Alashka,  which  was  supposed  to  be  an
island,  though  it  be  in  fact  a  part  of  the  American  continent.
Krenitzin  accordingly  returned  without  knowing  that  either  of  his
ships  had  been  on  the  coast  of  America ;  and  this  is  the  more  sur-
prising, because  captain  Cook  has  informed  us  that  Alashka  is
understood  to  be  a  great  continent,  both  by  the  Russians  and  the
natives  at  Oonolashka.

"  According  to  Krenitzin,  the  ship  which  had  wintered  at  Alashka
had  hardly  sailed  32'^  to  the  eastward  of  the  harbour  of  St.  Peter
and  St.  Paul  in  Kamtchatka ;  but,  according  to  the  more  accurate
charts  of  Captain  Cook,  it  had  sailed  no  less  than  37"  17'  to  the
eastward  of  that  harbour.  There  is  nearly  the  same  mistake  of  5°
in  the  longitude  which  Krenitzin  assigns  to  Oonolashka.  It  is  re-
markable enough,  that  in  the  chart  of  those  seas,  put  into  the  hand
of  captain  Cook  by  the  Russians  on  that  island,  there  was  an  error
of  the  same  kind,  and  very  nearly  of  the  same  extent.

"  But  what  is  of  most  consequence  to  be  remarked  on  the  subject
is,  that  the  discoveries  of  captain  Cook  have  fully  verified  Dr.
Robertson's  conjecture,  '  that  it  is  probable  that  future  navigators
in  those  seas,  by  steering  farther  to  the  north  than  Behring  or  Tschi-
rikow or  Krenitzin  had  done,  may  find  that  the  continent  of  Ame-
rica approaches  still  nearer  to  that  of  Asia.'  Vol.  ii.  p.  43.  It  has
accordingly  been  found  that  these  two  continents,  which,  in  the
parallel  of  55°,  or  that  of  the  southern  extremity  of  Alashka,  are
about  four  hundred  leagues  asunder,  approach  continually  to  one
another  as  they  stretch  together  towards  the  north,  until  within  less

ILLUSTRATIONS.  359

than  a  degree  from  the  polar  circle,  they  are  terminated  by  two
capes,  only  thirteen  leagues  distant.  The  east  cape  of  Asia  is  in
latitude  66"  6'  and  in  longitude  190'*  22'  east  from  Greenwich  ;  the
western  extremity  of  America,  or  Prince  of  Wales'  Cape,  is  in  lati-
tude 65''  46',  and  in  longitude  191°  45'.  Nearly  in  the  middle  of
the  narrow  strait  (Behring's  Strait)  which  separates  these  capes,  are
the  two  islands  of  St.  Diomede,  from  which  both  continents  may  be
seen.  Captain  King  informs  us,  that  as  he  was  sailing  through
this  strait,  July  5,  1779,  the  fog  having  cleared  away,  he  enjoyed
the  pleasure  of  seeing  from  the  ship  the  continents  of  Asia  and
America  at  the  same  moment,  together  with  the  islands  of  St.
Diomede  lying  between  them. Cook's  Voy.  vol.  iii.  p.  244. ;

"  Beyond  this  point  the  strait  opens  towards  the  Arctic  sea,  and
the  coast  of  Asia  and  America  diverge  so  fast  from  one  another,
that  in  the  parallel  of  69°  they  are  more  than  one  hundred  leagues
asunder.  lb.  p.  277.  To  the  south  of  the  strait  there  are  a  num-
ber of  islands.  Clerk's,  King's,  Anderson's,  &c.  v/hich,  as  well  as
those  of  St.  Diomede,  may  have  facilitated  the  migrations  of  the
natives  from  the  one  continent  to  the  other.  Captain  Cook,  how-
ever, on  the  authority  of  the  Russians  at  Oonolashka,  and  for  other
good  reasons,  has  diminished  the  number  of  islands  which  had  been
inserted  in  former  charts  of  the  northern  Archipelago.  He  has
also  placed  Alashka,  or  the  promontory  which  stretches  from  the
continent  of  America  S.  W.  towards  Kamtchatka,  at  the  distance  of
five  degrees  of  longitude  farther  from  the  coast  of  Asia  than  it  was
reckoned  by  the  Russian  navigators.

"  The  geography  of  the  Old  and  New  World  is  therefore  equally
indebted  to  the  discoveries  made  in  this  memorable  voyage ;  and
as  many  errors  have  been  corrected,  and  many  deficiencies  supplied
by  means  of  these  discoveries,  so  the  accuracy  of  some  former  ob-
servations has  been  established.  The  basis  of  the  map  of  the
Russian  empire,  as  far  as  regarded  Kamtchatka,  and  the  country
of  the  Tschutzki,  was  the  position  of  four  places,  Yakutsh,  Ochotz,
Bolcheresk,  and  Petropawlowski,  which  had  been  determined  by
the  astronomer  Krassilnicovv,  in  the  year  1744.  Nov.  Comment.
Petrop.  vol.  iii.  p.  465,  &c.  But  the  accuracy  of  his  observations
was  contested  by  M.  Engel,  and  M.  Robert  de  Vaugondy ;  Coxe,
Append,  i.  No.  2.  p.  267.  272. ;  and  the  former  of  these  geogra-
phers ventured  to  take  away  no  less  than  28  degrees  from  the  longi-
tude, which,  on  the  faith  of  Krassilnicow's  observations,  was  as-
signed to  the  eastern  boundary  of  the  Russian  empire.  With  how
little  reason  this  was  done,  will  appear  from  considering  that  our
British  navigators,  having  determined  the  position  of  Petropaw-
lowski by  a  great  number  of  very  accurate  observations,  found  the
longitude  of  that  port  158°  43'  E.  from  Greenwich,  audits  latitude

360  NOTES AND

53°  r  ;  agreeing,  the  first  to  less  than  seven  minutes,  and  the
second  to  less  than  half  a  minute,  with  the  calculations  of  the
Russian  astronomer :  a  coincidence  which,  in  the  situation  of  so
remote  a  place,  does  not  leave  an  uncertainty  of  more  than  four
English  miles,  and  which,  for  the  credit  of  science,  deserves  to  be
particularly  remarked.  The  chief  error  in  the  Russian  maps  has
been  in  not  extending  the  boundaries  of  that  empire  sufficiently
towards  the  east.  For  as  there  was  nothing  to  connect  the  land
of  the  Tschutzki  and  tlic  north-east  point  of  Asia  with  those  places
whereof  the  position  had  been  carefully  ascertained,  except  the
imperfect  accounts  of  Behring's  and  Synd's  voyages,  considerable
errors  could  not  fail  to  be  introduced,  and  that  point  was  laid  down
as  not  more  than  23°  2'  east  of  the  meridian  of  Petropawlowski.
Coxe,  App.  i.  No.  2.  By  the  observations  of  captain  King,  the
dift'erence  of  longitude  between  Petropawlowski  and  the  East  Cape
is  31"  9' ;  that  is  8"  7'  greater  than  it  was  supposed  to  be  by  the
Russian  geographers." — It  appears  from  Cook's  and  King's  Voy.
iii.  p.  272,  that  the  continents  of  Asia  and  America  are  usually
joined  together  by  ice  during  winter.  Mr.  Samwell  confirms  this
account  of  his  superior  officer.  "  At  this  place,  viz.  near  the  lati-
tude of  06"  N.  the  two^coasts  are  only  thirteen  leagues  asunder,
and  about  midway  between  them  lie  two  islands,  the  distance  from
which  to  either  shore  is  short  of  twenty  miles.  At  this  place  the
natives  of  Asia  could  find  no  difficulty  in  passing  over  to  the  oppo-
site coast,  which  is  in  sight  of  their  own.  That  in  a  course  of
years  such  an  event  would  happen,  either  through  design  or  acci-
dent, cannot  admit  of  a  doubt.  The  canoes  which  we  saw  among
the  Tschutzki  were  capable  of  performing  a  much  longer  voyage ;
and,  however  rude  they  may  have  been  at  some  distant  period,  we
can  scarcely  suppose  them  unequal  to  a  passage  of  six  or  seven
leagues.  People  might  have  been  carried  over  by  accident  on
floating  pieces  of  ice.  They  might  also  have  travelled  across  on
sledges  or  on  foot ;  for  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  strait  is
entirely  frozen  over  in  the  winter ;  so  that,  during  that  season,  the
continents,  with  respect  to  the  communication  between  them,  may
be  considered  as  one  land."  Letter  from  Mr.  Samwell,  Scots
Magazine  for  1788,  p.  604.  It  is  probable  that  this  interesting
portion  of  geographical  knowledge  will,  in  the  course  of  a  few
years,  receive  farther  improvement.  Soon  after  the  publication  of
captain  Cook's  last  voyage,  the  great  and  enlightened  sovereign  of
Russia,  attentive  to  every  thing  that  may  contribute  to  extend  the
bounds  of  science,  or  to  render  it  more  accurate,  formed  the  plan
of  a  new  voyage  of  discovery,  in  order  to  explore  those  parts  of  the
ocean  lying  between  Asia  and  America,  which  captain  Cook  did
not  visit,  to  examine  more  accurately  the  islands  which  stretch.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  361

from  one  continent  almost  to  the  other,  to  survey  the  north-east
coast  of  the  Russian  empire,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Kovyma,  or
Kolyma,  to  the  North  Cape,  and  to  settle,  by  astronomical  obser-
vations, the  position  of  each  place  worth  notice.  The  conduct  of
this  important  enterprise  is  committed  to  captain  Billings,  an  Eng-
lish officer  in  the  Russian  service,  of  whose  abilities  for  that
station  it  will  be  deemed  the  best  evidence,  that  he  accompanied
captain  Cook  in  his  last  voyage.  To  render  the  expedition  more
extensively  useful,  an  eminent  naturalist  is  appointed  to  attend
captain  Billings.  Six  years  will  be  requisite  for  accomplishing  the
purposes  of  the  voyage.  Coxe,  Supplement  to  Russian  Discoveries,
p.  27,  &c.

Note  XLIV.  p.  292.

Few  travellers  have  had  such  opportunity  of  observing  the  na-
tives of  America,  in  its  various  districts,  as  Don  Antonio  Ulloa.
In  a  work  lately  published  by  him,  he  thus  describes  the  .char ac-
teristical  features  of  the  race :  "  A  very  small  forehead,  covered
with  hair  towards  its  extremities,  as  far  as  the  middle  of  the  eye-
brows ;  little  eyes ;  a  thin  nose,  small  and  bending  towards  the
upper  lip  ;  the  countenance  broad ;  the  ears  large  ;  the  hair  very
black,  lank,  and  coarse  ;  the  limbs  well  turned,  the  feet  small,  the
body  of  just  proportion;  and  altogether  smooth  and  free  from  hair,
until  old  age,  when  they  acquire  some  beard,  but  never  on  the
cheeks."  Noticias  Americanas,  &c.  p.  307.  M.  le  Chevalier  de
Pinto,  who  resided  several  years  in  a  part  of  America  which  Ulloa
never  visited,  gives  a  sketch  of  the  general  aspect  of  the  Indians
there.  "  They  are  all  of  copper  colour  with  some  diversity  of  shade,
not  in  proportion  to  their  distance  from  the  equator,  but  according
to  the  degree  of  elevation  of  the  territory  which  they  inhabit.
Those  who  live  in  a  high  country  are  fairer  than  those  in  the  marshy
low  lands  on  the  coast.  Their  face  is  round,  farther  removed,  per-
haps, than  that  of  any  people  from  an  oval  shape.  Their  forehead
is  small,  the  extremity  of  their  ears  far  from  the  face,  their  lips
thick,  their  nose  flat,  their  eyes  black,  or  of  a  chesnut  colour,  small,
but  capable  of  discerning  objects  at  a  great  distance.  Their  hair
is  always  thick  and  sleek,  and  without  any  tendency  to  curl.  They
have  no  hair  on  any  part  of  their  body  but  the  head.  At  the  first
aspect  a  southern  American  appears  to  be  mild  and  innocent,  but
on  a  more  attentive  view,  one  discovers  in  his  countenance  some-
thing wild,  distrustful,  and  sullen."  MS.  penes  me.  The  two  por-
traits drawn  by  hands  very  different  from  those  of  common  travel-
lers, have  a  near  resemblance.

3G2  NOTES AND

Note  XLV.  p.  293.

Amazing  accounts  are  given  of  the  persevering  speed  of  the
Americans.  Adair  relates  the  adventures  of  a  Chikkasah  warrior,
who  run  through  woods  and  over  mountains,  three  hundred  com-
puted miles,  in  a  day  and  a  half  and  two  nights.  Hist,  of  Amer.
Ind.  396.

Note  XLVI.  p.  297.

M.  GoDiN  I.E  Jel'xe,  who  resided  fifteen  years  among  the
Indians  of  Peru  and  Quito,  and  twenty  years  in  the  French  colony
of  Cayenne,  in  which  there  is  a  constant  intercourse  with  the  Galibis
and  other  tribes  on  the  Orinoco,  observes,  that  the  vigour  of  consti-
tution among  the  Americans  is  exactly  in  proportion  to  their  habits
of  labour.  The  Indians,  in  warm  climates,  such  as  those  on  the
coasts  of  the  South  sea,  on  the  river  Amazons,  and  the  river  Ori-
noco, are  not  to  be  compared  for  strength  to  those  in  cold
countries  ;  and  yet,  says  he,  boats  daily  set  out  from  Para,  a  Por-
tuguese settlement  on  the  river  of  Amazons,  to  ascend  that  river
against  the  rapidity  of  the  stream,  and  with  the  same  crew  they
proceed  to  San  Pablo,  which  is  eight  hundred  leagues  distant.  No
crew  of  white  people,  or  even  of  negroes,  would  be  found  equal
to  a  task  of  such  persevering  fatigue,  as  the  Portuguese  have  ex-
perienced, and  yet  the  Indians,  being  accustomed  to  this  labour
from  their  infancy,  perform  it. MS.  penes  me.

NoteXLVIl.  p.  301.

Dox  Antonio  Ulloa,  who  visited  a  great  part  of  Peru  and
Chili,  the  kingdom  of  New  Granada,  and  several  of  the  provinces
bordering  on  the  Mexican  gulf,  while  employed  in  the  same  service
with  the  French  mathematicians  during  the  space  of  ten  years,  and
who  afterward  had  an  opportunity  of  viewing  the  North  Ameri-
cans, asserts,  "  that  if  we  have  seen  one  American,  we  may  be  said
to  have  seen  them  all,  their  colour  and  make  are  so  nearly  the
same."  Notic.  Americanas,  p.  308.  A  more  early  observer,  Pedro
de  Cieca  de  Leon,  one  of  the  conquerors  of  Peru,  who  had  likewise
traversed  many  provinces  of  America,  affirms,  that  the  people,  men
and  women,  although  there  is  such  a  multitude  of  tribes  or  nations
as  to  be  almost  innumerable,  and  such  diversity  of  climates,  appear
nevertheless  like  the  children  of  one  father  and  mother.  Chronica
del'  Peru,  parte  i.  c.  19.  There  is,  no  doubt,  a  certain  combination
of  features,  and  peculiarity  of  aspect,  which  forms  what  may  be
called  a  European  or  Asiatic  countenance.  There  must  likewise
be  one  that  uuiv  be  denominated  American,  common  to  the  whok

ILLUSTRATIONS.  363

race.  This  may  be  supposed  to  strike  the  traveller  at  first  sight,
while  not  only  the  various  shades,  which  distinguish  people  of  dif-
ferent regions,  but  the  peculiar  features  which  discriminate  indi-
viduals, escape  the  notice  of  a  transient  observer.  But  when
persons  who  had  resided  so  long  among  the  Americans  concur  in
bearing  testimony  to  the  similarity  of  their  appearance  in  every
climate,  we  may  conclude  that  it  is  more  remarkable  than  that  of
any  other  race.  See  likewise  Garcia  Origen  de  los  Indios,  p.  54.
242. Torquemada  Monarch.  Indiana,  ii.  571.

Note  XLVIII.  p.  304.

M.  LE  Chevalier  de  Pinto  observes,  that  in  the  interior  parts
of  Brasil,  he  had  been  informed  that  some  persons  resembling  the
white  people  of  Darien  have  been  found ;  but  that  the  breed  did
not  continue,  and  their  children  became  like  other  Americans.
This  race,  however,  is  very  imperfectly  known. MS.  penes  me.

Note  XLIX.  p.  306.

The  testimonies  of  different  travellers,  concerning  the  Patago-
nians,  have  been  collected  and  stated  with  a  considerable  degree
of  accuracy  by  the  author  of  Recherches  Philosophiques,  &c,
tom.  i.  281,  &c.  iii.  181,  &c.  Since  the  publication  of  his  work,
several  navigators  have  visited  the  Magellanic  regions,  and,  like
their  predecessors,  differ  very  widely  in  their  accounts  of  its  inha-
bitants. By  commodore  Byron  and  his  crew,  who  sailed  through
the  straits  in  1764,  the  common  size  of  the  Patagonians  was  esti-
mated to  be  eight  feet,  and  many  of  them  much  taller.  Phil.
Transact,  vol.  Ivii,  p.  78.  By  captains  Wallis  and  Carteret,  who
actually  measured  them  in  1766,  they  were  found  to  be  from  six
feet  to  six  feet  five  and  seven  inches  in  height.  Phil.  Trans,  vol.  Ix.
p.  22.  These,  however,  seem  to  have  been  the  very  people  whose
size  had  been  rated  so  high  in  the  year  1764;  for  several  of  them
had  beads  and  red  baize  of  the  same  kind  with  what  had  been  put
on  board  captain  Wallis's  ship,  and  he  naturally  concluded  that
they  had  got  these  from  Mr,  Byron.  Hawkesw.  i.  In  1767  they
were  again  measured  by  M.  Bougainville,  whose  account  differs
little  from  that  of  captain  Wallis.  Voy.  129.  To  these  I  shall
add  a  testimony  of  great  weight.  In  the  year  1762,  Don  Bernardo
Ibegnez  de  Echavarri  accompanied  the  Marquis  de  Valdelirios  to
Buenos  Ayres,  and  resided  there  several  years.  He  is  a  very  in-
telligent author,  and  his  reputation  for  veracity  unimpeached  among
his  countrymen.  In  speaking  of  the  country  towards  the  southern
extremity  of  America,  "  By  what  Indians,"  says  he,  "  is  it  pos-
sessed ?  Not  certainly  by  the  fabulous  Patagonians,  who  are  sup-
posed to  occupy  this  district. I  have  from  many  eye-witnesses.

3(34  NOTES AND

who  have  lived  among  those  Indians,  and  traded  much  with  them,
a  true  and  accurate  description  of  their  persons.  Tiiey  are  of  the
same  stature  with  Spaniards.  I  never  saw  one  who  rose  in  height
two  varus  and  two  or  three  inches,"  i.  e.  about  80  or  81.332  inches
Enghsh,  if  Echavarri  makes  his  computation  according  to  the  vara
of  Madrid.  Tliis  agrees  nearly  with  the  measurement  of  captain
Wallis.  Reyno  Jesuitico,  238.  Mr.  Falkner,  who  resided  as  a
missionary  forty  years  in  the  southern  parts  of  America,  says,  that
*'  the  Patagonians,  or  Puelches,  are  a  large-bodied  people  ;  but  I
never  heard  of  that  gigantic  race  which  others  have  mentioned,
though  I  have  seen  persons  of  all  the  dilferent  tribes  of  southern
Indians."  Introd.  p.  26.  M.  DobrizhofFer,  a  Jesuit,  who  resided
eighteen  years  in  Paraguay,  and  who  had  seen  great  numbers  of
the  various  tribes  which  inhabit  the  countries  situated  upon  the
straits  of  Magellan,  confirms,  in  every  point,  the  testimony  of  his
brother  missionary  Falkner.  DobrizhofFer  enters  into  some  detail
with  respect  to  the  opinions  of  several  authors,  concerning  the
stature  of  the  Patagonians.  Having  mentioned  the  reports  of  some
early  travellers  with  regard  to  the  extraordinary  size  of  some  bones
found  on  that  coast  which  were  supposed  to  be  human  ;  and  having
endeavoured  to  shew  that  these  bones  belonged  to  some  large
marine  or  land  animal,  he  concludes,  "  de  hisce  ossibus  crede
quicquid  libuorit,  dummodo,  me  suasore,  Patagones  pro  gigautibus
desiuas  habere." Historia  de  Abissonibus,  vol.  ii.  p.  19,  &c.

Note  L.  p.  309.
Antonio  Sanchez  Ribeiro,  a  learned  and  ingenious  physician,
published  a  dissertation  in  the  year  1765,  in  which  he  endeavours
to  prove,  that  this  disease  was  not  introduced  from  America,  but
took  its  rise  in  Europe,  and  was  brought  on  by  an  epidemical  and
malignant  disorder.  Did  I  choose  to  enter  into  a  disquisition  on
this  subject,  which  I  should  not  have  mentioned,  if  it  had  not  been
intimately  connected  with  this  part  of  my  inquiries,  it  would  not
be  difficult  to  point  out  some  mistakes  with  respect  to  the  facts
upon  which  he  founds,  as  well  as  some  errors  in  the  consequences
which  he  draws  from  them.  The  rapid  communication  of  this  dis-
ease from  Spain  over  Europe,  seems  however  to  resemble  the  pro-
gress of  an  epidemic,  rather  than  that  of  a  disease  transmitted  by
infection.  The  first  mention  of  it  is  in  the  year  1493,  and  before
the  year  1497  it  had  made  its  appearance  in  most  countries  of
Europe,  with  such  alarming  symptoms  as  rendered  it  necessary  for
the  civil  magistrate  to  interpose,  in  order  to  check  its  career. — Since
the  publication  of  this  work,  a  second  edition  of  Dr.  Sanchez's  Dis-
sertation has  been  communicated  to  me.  It  contains  several  addi-
tional facts  in  confirmation  of  his  opinion,  which  is  supported  with

ILLUSTRATIONS.  365

such  plausible  arguments,  as  render  it  a  subject  of  inquiry  well
deserving  the  attention  of  learned  physicians.

Note  LI.  p.  312.
TiiE  people  of  Otaheite  have  no  denomination  for  any  number
above two hundred, which is sufficient for their transactions.
Voyages  by  Hawkesworth,  ii.  228.

Note  LII.  p.  317.
As  the  view  which  I  have  given  of  rude  nations  is  extremely
different  from  that  exhibited  by  very  respectable  authors,  it  may  be
proper  to  produce  some  of  the  many  authorities  on  which  I  found
my  description.  The  manners  of  the  savage  tribes  in  America  have
never  been  viewed  by  persons  more  capable  of  observing  them  with
discernment,  than  the  philosophers  employed  by  France  and  Spain,
in  the  year  1735,  to  determine  the  figure  of  the  earth.  M.  Bouguer,
D.  Antonio  d'Ulloa,  and  D.  Jorge  Juan,  resided  long  among  the
natives  of  the  least  civilized  provinces  in  Peru.  M.  dela  Condamine
had  not  only  the  same  advantages  with  them  for  observation,  but
in  his  voyage  down  the  Maragnon,  he  had  an  opportunity  of  in-
specting the  state  of  the  various  nations  seated  on  its  banks,  in  its
vast  course  across  the  continent  of  South  America.  There  is  a
wonderful  resemblance  in  their  representation  of  the  character  of
the  Americans.  "  They  are  all  extremely  indolent,"  says  M.  Bou-
guer ;  "  they  are  stupid  ;  they  pass  whole  days  sitting  in  the  same
place,  without  moving,  or  speaking  a  single  word.  It  is  not  easy
to  describe  the  degree  of  their  indifference  for  wealth,  and  all  its  ad-
vantages. One  does  not  well  know  what  motive  to  propose  to
them,  when  one  would  persuade  them  to  perform  any  service.  It
is  vain  to  offer  them  money  ;  the  answer,  that  they  are  not  hungry."
Voyage  au  Perou,  p.  102.  "  If  one  considers  them  as  men,  the
narrowness  of  their  understanding  seems  to  be  incompatible  with
the  excellence  of  the  soul.  Their  imbecility  is  so  visible,  that  one
can  hardly  form  an  idea  of  them  different  from  what  one  has  of  the
brutes.  Nothing  disturbs  the  tranquillity  of  their  souls,  equally
insensible  to  disasters  and  prosperity.  Though  half-naked,  they
are  as  contented  as  a  monarch  in  his  most  splendid  array.  Riches
do  not  attract  them  in  the  smallest  degree,  and  the  authority  or
dignities  to  which  they  may  aspire  are  so  little  the  objects  of  their
ambition,  that  an  Indian  will  receive  with  the  same  indifference  the
office  of  a  judge  (alcade)  or  that  of  a  hangman^  if  deprived  of  the
former  and  appointed  to  the  latter.  Nothing  can  move  or  change
them.  Interest  has  no  power  over  them,  and  they  often  refuse
to  perform  a  small  service,  though  certain  of  a  great  recompense.
Fear  makes  no  impression  upon  them,  and  respect  as  little. Their

S66  NOTFS  AND

disposition  is  so  singular  that  there  is  no  method  of  influencing  them,
no  means  of  rousing  them  from  that  indifference,  which  is  proof
against  all  the  endeavours  of  the  wisest  persons ; no  expedient
which  can  induce  them  to  abandon  that  gross  ignorance,  or  lay
aside  that  careless  negligence,  which  disconcert  the  prudence  and
disappoint the care  of  such  as  are  attentive  to  their  welfare."
Voyage  d'Ulloa,  tom.  i.  335.  356. Of  those  singular  qualities  he
produces  many  extraordinary  instances,  p.  336 — S^V. "  Insensi-
bility," says  M.  de  la  Condamine,  "  is  the  basis  of  the  American
character. I  leave  others  to  determine,  whether  this  should  be
dignified  with  the  name  of  apathy,  or  disgraced  with  that  of  stupi-
dity. It  arises,  without  doubt,  from  the small  number  of  their
ideas,  which  do  not  extend  beyond  their  wants. Gluttons  even  to
voracity,  when they  have  wherewithal to  satisfy  their  appetite.
Temperate,  when  necessity  obliges  them,  to  such  a  degree,  that
they  can  endure  want  without  seeming  to  desire  any  thing. Pusil-
lanimous and  cowardly  to  excess,  unless  when  they  are  rendered
desperate  by  drunkenness. Averse  to  labour,  indifferent  to  every
motive  of  glory,  honour,  or  gratitude  ; occupied  entirely  by  the
object  that  is  present,  and  always  determined  by  it  alone,  without
any  solicitude  about  futurity  ;  incapable  of  foresight  or  of  reflec-
tion ;  abandoning  themselves,  when  under  no  restraint,  to  a  puerile
joy,  which  they  express  by  frisking  about,  and  immoderate  fits  of
laughter;  without  object  or  design,  they  pass  their  life  without
thinking, and  grow  old  without  advancing  beyond  childhood,  of
which  they  retain  all  the  defects. If  this  description  were  appli-
cable only  to  the  Indians  in  some  provinces of  Peru,  who  are
slaves  in  every  respect  but  the  name,  one  might  believe,  that  this
degree  of  degeneracy  was  occasioned  by  the  servile  dependence
to  which  they  are  reduced  ; the  example  of  the  modern  Greeks
being  proof  how  far  servitude  may  degrade  the  human  species.
But  the  Indians  in  the  missions  of  the  Jesuits,  and  the  savages
who  still  enjoy  unimpaired  liberty,  being  as  limited  in  their  facul-
ties, not  to  say  as  stupid  as  the  other,  one  cannot  observe,  without
humiliation,  that  man,  when  abandoned  to  simple  nature,  and  de-
prived of  the  advantages  resulting  from  education  and  society,
differs  but  little  from  the  brute  creation." Voyage  de  la  Riv.  de
Amaz,  52,  53. M.  de  Chanvalon,  an  intelligent  and  philosophical
observer,  who  visited  Martinico  in 1751, and  resided there  six
years,  gives  the  following  description  of  the  Caraibs  :  "  It  is  not
the  red  colour  of  their  complexion,  it  is  not  the  singularity  of  their
features,  which  constitutes  the  chief  difference  between  them  and
us. It  is  their  excessive  simphcity  ; it  is  the limited degree  of
their  faculties. Their  reason  is  not  more  enlightened  or  more  pro-
vident than  the  instinct  of  brutes. The  reason  of  the  most  gross

ILLUSTRATIONS.  367

peasants,  that  of  the  negroes  brought  up  in  the  parts  of  Africa  most
remote  from  intercourse  with  Europeans,  is  such,  that  we  discover
appearances  of  inteUigence,  which,  though  imperfect,  is  capable  of
increase. But  of  this  the  understandings  of  the  Caraibs  seem  to
be  hardly  susceptible. If  sound  philosophy  and  religion  did  not
afford  us  their  light,  if  we  were  to  decide  according  to  the  first  im-
pression which  the  view  of  that  people  makes  upon  the  mind,  we
should  be  disposed  to  believe  that  they  do  not  belong  to  the  same
species  with  us. Their  stupid  eyes  are  the  true  mirror  of  their
souls ; it appears  to be  without  functions. Their  indolence  is
extreme  ;  they  have  never  the  least  solicitude  about  the  moment
which  is  to  succeed  that  which  is  present."  Voyage  a  la  Martinique,
p.  44,  45.  5 L M.  de  la  Borde,  Tertre,  and  Rochefort,  confirm
this  description. "  The  characteristics  of  the  Californians,"  says
P.  Venegas,  "  as  well  as  of  all  other  Indians, are  stupidity  and
insensibility  ;  want  of  knowledge  and  reflection  ; inconstancy,  im-
petuosity, and  blindness  of  appetite ;  an  excessive  sloth,  and  ab-
horrence of  all  labour  and  fatigue  ;  an  excessive  love  of  pleasure
and  amusement  of  every  kind,  however  trifling  or  brutal ;  pusilla-
nimity ;  and,  in  fine,  a  most  wretched  want  of  every  thing  which
constitutes  the  real  man,  and  renders  him  rational,  inventive,  tract-
able, and  useful  to  himself  and  society. It  is  not  easy  for  Eu-
ropeans, who  never  were  out  of  their  own  country,  to  conceive  an
adequate  idea  of  those  people  ;  for,  even  in  the  least  frequented
corners  of  the  globe,  there  is  not  a  nation  so  stupid,  of  such  con-
tracted ideas,  and  so  weak  both  in  body  and  mind,  as  the  unhappy
Californians. Their  understanding  comprehends  little  more  than
what  they  see  ;  abstract  ideas,  and  much  less  a  chain  of  reasoning,
being  far  beyond  their  power ;  so  that  they  scarce  ever  improve  their
first  ideas,  and  these  are  in  general  false  or  at  least  inadequate.
It  is  in  vain  to  represent  to  them  any  future  advantages  which  will
result  to  them  from  doing  or  abstaining  from  this  or  that  particular
immediately  present;  the  relation  of  means  and  ends  being  beyond
the  stretch  of  their  faculties. Nor  have  they  the  least  notion  of
pursuing  such  intentions  as  will  procure  themselves  some  future
good,  or  guard  them  against  future  evils. Their  will  is  propor-
tional to  their  faculties,  and  all  their  passions  move  in a  very
narrow  sphere. Ambition  they  have  none,  and  are  more  desirous
of  being  accounted  strong  than  valiant. The  objects  of  ambition
with  us,  honour,  fame,  reputation,  titles,  posts, and  distinctions  of
superiority,  are  unknown  among  them  ;  so  that  this  powerful  spring
of  action,  the  cause  of  so  much  seeming  good  and  real  evil  in  the
world,  has  no  power  here. This  disposition  of  mind,  as  it  gives
them  up  to  an  amazing  languor  and  lassitude,  their  lives  fleeting
away  in  a  perpetual  inactivity  and  detestation  of  labour,  so  it  like-

3f)8  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.

wise  induces  them  to  be  attracted  by  the  first  object  which  their
own  fancy,  or  the  persuasion  of  another,  places  before  them  ;  and
at  the  same  time  renders  them  as  prone  to  alter  their  resolutions
with  the  same  facility.  They  look  with  indifference  upon  any  kind-
ness done  them  ;  nor  is  even  the  bare  remembrance  of  it  to  be  ex-
pected from  them.  In  a  word,  the  unhappy  mortals  may  be  com-
pared to  children,  in  whom  the  developement  of  reason  is  not  com-
pleted. They  may  indeed  be  called  a  nation  who  never  arrive  at
manhood."  Hist,  of  Californ.  Engl.  Transl.  i.  64.  67.  Mr.  Ellis
gives  a  similar  account  of  the  want  of  foresight  and  inconsiderate
disposition  of  the  people  adjacent  to  Hudson's  Bay.  Voyage,
p.  194,  195.

The  incapacity  of  the  Americans  is  so  remarkable,  that  negroes
from  all  the  different  provinces  of  Africa  are  observed  to  be  more
capable  of  improving  by  instruction.  They  acquire  the  knowledge
of  several  particulars  which  the  Americans  cannot  comprehend.
Hence  the  negroes,  though  slaves,  value  themselves  as  a  superior
order  of  beings,  and  look  down  upon  the  Americans  with  contempt,
as  void  of  capacity  and  of  rational  discernment.  UUoa,  Notic.
Americ.  322,  323.

NoteLIII.  p.  321.

DoBRizHOFFER,  the  last  traveller  I  know  who  has  resided
among  any  tribe  of  the  ruder  Americans,  has  explained  so  fully
the  various  reasons  which  have  induced  their  women  to  suckle
their  children  long,  and  never  to  undertake  rearing  such  as  were
feeble  or  distorted,  and  even  to  destroy  a  considerable  number  of
their  offspring,  as  to  throw  great  light  on  the  observations  I  have
made,  p.  299,300.  Hist,  de  Abissonibus,  vol.  ii.  p.  107.  221.  So
deeply  were  these  ideas  imprinted  in  the  minds  of  the  Americans,
that  the  Peruvians,  a  civilized  people,  when  compared  with  the
barbarous  tribes,  whose  manners  I  am  describing,  retained  them  ;
and  even  their  intercourse  with  the  Spaniards  has  not  been  able  to
root  them  out.  When  twins  are  born  in  any  family  it  is  still  con-
sidered as  an  ominous  event,  and  the  parents  have  recourse  to
ri"-orous  acts  of  mortification,  in  order  to  avert  the  calamities  with
which  they  are  threatened.  When  a  child  is  born  with  any  de-
formity, they  will  not,  if  they  can  possibly  avoid  it,  bring  it  to  be
baptized,  and  it  is  with  difficulty  they  can  be  brought  to  rear  it.
Arriaga  Extirpac.  de  la  Idolat.  del  Peru,  p.  32,  33.

END OF VOL. VI.

Frinted  by  J.  F.  DovK,  St.  JohD's  Squtu-e.

D

7

R7

1324-

V.6

Robertson,  William
Works

^
r

r

-*  IF

%\

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

r^-  ■'•«'"
