The Works of William Robertson, Vol. 9 (William Robertson, 1759)
==========================================================
Robertson's Works (1824, 9 vols.) - History of Scotland, Charles V, America, and the Historical Disquisition on India; Enlightenment historiography's great practitioner entire. Vol. 9 of 9.

WILLIAM  ROBERTSON,  D.D.

WITH  AN ACCOUNT  OF

HIS  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS.

IN  NINE  VOLUMES.

VOL.  IX.

LONDON:

PRINTED  FORWHITMORE  AND  FENN,  CHARING  CROSS;  J.  HEARNE,  STRAND;

SMITH  AND  ELDER,  FENCHURCH  STREET; H.  MOZLEY,  DERBY;

AND  M.  KEENE,  DUBLIN.

MDCCCXXIV.

THE

STANDARD  EDITION  OF  THE  HISTORIANS.

ROBERTSON^S  WORKS:

IN NINE VOLUMES.  VOL. IX.

INDIA.

AN

HISTORICAL  DISQUISITION

CONCERNING

THE  KNOWLEDGE  WHICH  THE  ANCIENTS  HAD  OF

INDIA;

AND

THE  PROGRESS  OF  TRADE  WITH  THAT  COUNTRY  PRIOR
TO  THE  DISCOVERY  OF  THE  PASSAGE  TO  IT
BY  THE  CAPE  OF  GOOD  HOPE.

WITH

AN APPENDIX,

CONTAINING

OBSERVATIONS  ON  THE  CIVIL  POLICY— THE  LAWS  AND

JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS— THE ARTS AND SCIENCES— AND

RELIGIOUS  INSTITUTIONS  OF  THE  INDIANS,

VOL. IX.

PREFACE.

The  perusal  of  Major  Rennell's  Memoir  for  illus-
trating his  Map  of  Indostan,  one  of  the  most  valuable
geographical  treatises  that  has  appeared  in  any  age
or  country,  gave  rise  to  the  following  Work.  It  sug-
gested to  me  the  idea  of  examining  more  fully  than
I  had  done  in  the  Introductory  Book  to  my  History
of  America,  into  the  knowledge  which  the  Ancients
had  of  India,  and  of  considering  what  is  certain,
what  is  obscure,  and  what  is  fabulous,  in  the  ac-
counts of  that  country  which  they  have  handed  down
to  us.  In  undertaking  this  inquiry,  I  had  originally
no  other  object  than  my  own  amusement  and  instruc-
tion :  but  in  carrying  it  on,  and  consulting  with  di-
ligence the  authors  of  antiquity,  some  facts,  hitherto
unobserved,  and  many  which  had  not  been  examined
with  proper  attention,  occurred ;  new  views  opened  ;
my  ideas  gradually  extended  and  became  more  inte-
resting ,  until,  at  length,  I  imagined  that  the  result  of
my  researches  might  prove  amusing  and  instructive
to  others,  by  exhibiting  such  a  view  of  the  various
modes  in  which  intercourse  with  India  had  been  car-
ried on  from  the  earliest  times,  as  might  shew  how
much  that  great  branch  of  commerce  has  contributed,

B  2

iv  PREFACE.

in  every  age,  to  increase  the  wealth  and  power  of  the
nations  which  possessed  it.

Thus  the  Historical  Disquisition  which  I  now  lay
before  the  Reader  was  begun  and  completed. What
degree  of  merit  it  possesses,  the  Public  must  deter-
mine. My  grateful recollection  of  the  favourable
manner  in  which  my  other  works  have  been  received,
naturally  increases  the  solicitude  with  which  I  wait
for  its  decision  concerning  this  which  I  now  publish.
When  I  first  turned  my  thoughts  to  this  subject,  I
was  so  fully  aware  of  the  disadvantage  under  which
I  laboured  in  undertaking"  to  describe countries  of
which  I  had  not  any  local knowledge,  that  I  have
been  at  the  utmost  pains  to  guard  against  any  errors
which  this  might  occasion. I  have  consulted,  with
persevering  industry,  the  works  of  all  the  authors  I
could  procure,  who  have  given  any  account  of  India ;
I  have  never  formed  any  decided  opinion,  which  was
not  supported  by  respectable  authority ;  and  as  I  have
the  good  fortune  to  reckon  among  the  number  of  my
friends  some  Gentlemen  who  have  filled  important
stations,  civil  and  military,  in  India,  and  who  have
visited  many  different  parts  of  it,  I  had  recourse  fre-
quently to  them,  and  from  their  conversation  learned
things  which  I  could  not  have  found  in  books. Were
it  proper  to  mention  their  names,  the  public  would
allow  that,  by  their  discernment  and  abilities,  they
are  fully  entitled  to  the  confidence  which I  have
placed  in  them.

In  the  progress  of  the  work,  I  became  sensible  of
my  own  deficiency  with  respect  to  another  point.
In  order  to  give  an  accurate  idea  of  the  imperfection

PREFACE.  V

both  of  the  theory  and  practice  of  navigation  among
the  Ancients,  and  to  explain,  with  scientific  preci-
sion, the  manner  in  which  they  ascertained  the  posi-
tion of  places,  and  calculated  their  longitude  and
latitude,  a  greater  portion  of  mathematical  know-
ledge was  requisite,  than  my  attention  to  other  stu-
dies had  permitted  me  to  acquire.  What  I  wanted,
the  friendship  of  my  ingenious  and  respectable  col-
league, Mr.  Playfair,  Professor  of  Mathematics,  has
supplied ;  and  I  have  been  enabled  by  him  to  eluci-
date all  the  points  I  have  mentioned,  in  a  manner
which,  I  am  confident,  will  aflford  my  readers  com-
plete satisfaction.  To  him,  likewise,  I  am  indebted
for  the  construction  of  two  maps  necessary  for  illus-
trating this  Disquisition,  which  without  his  assist-
ance I  could  not  have  undertaken.

I  have  adhered,  in  this  work,  to  an  arrangement
I  followed  in  my  former  compositions,  and  to  which
the  Public  has  been  long  accustomed.  I  have  kept
historical  narrative  as  much  separate  as  possible  from
scientific  and  critical  discussions,  by  reserving  the
latter  for  Notes  and  Illustrations.  I  flatter  myself
that  I  may  claim,  without  presumption,  the  merit  of
having  examined  with  diligence  what  I  submit  to
public  inspection,  and  of  having  referred,  with  scru-
pulous accuracy,  to  the  authors  from  whom  I  have
derived  information.

College  of  Edinburgh,
May  10th,  1791.

'>

AN

HISTORICAL  DISQUISITION

CONCERNING

ANCIENT  INDIA.

SECTION  I.

Intercourse  with  India,  from  the  earliest  Times  until
the  Conquest  of  Egypt  by  the  Romans,

Whoever  attempts  to  trace  the  operations  of  men
in  remote  times,  and  to  mark  the  various  steps  of
their  progress  in  any  line  of  exertion,  will  soon  have
the  mortification  to  find,  that  the  period  of  authentic
history  is  extremely  limited.  It  is  little  more  than
three  thousand  years  since  the  Books  of  Moses,  the
most  ancient  and  only  genuine  record  of  what  pass-
ed in  the  early  ages  of  the  world,  were  composed.
Herodotus,  the  most  ancient  Heathen  historian  whose
works  have  reached  us,  flourished  a  thousand  years
later.  If  we  push  our  inquiries  concerning  any
point  beyond  the  era  where  written  history  com-
mences, we  enter  upon  the  region  of  conjecture,  of
fable,  and  of  uncertainty.  Upon  that  ground  I  will
neither  venture  myself,  nor  endeavour  to  conduct  my
readers.  In  my  researches  concerning  the  intercourse
between  the  Eastern  and  Western  regions  of  the  earth,
and  concerning  the  progress  of  that  great  branch  of
trade,  which,  in  every  age,  has  contributed  so  con-
spicuously towards  raising  the  people  who  carried
it  on  to  wealth  and  power,  I  shall  confine  myself
within  the  precincts  I  have  marked  out. Wherever

8  ANCIENT INDIA.

the  inspired  writers,  bent  upon  higher  objects,  men-
tion occasionally  any  circumstance  that  tends  to  il-
lustrate the  subject  of  my  inquiries,  I  shall  attend  to
it  with  reverence.  Whatever  other  writers  relate,  I
shall  examine  with  freedom,  and  endeavour  to  ascer-
tain the  degree  of  credit  to  which  they  are  entitled.
The  original  station  allotted  to  man  by  his  Crea-
tor was  in  the  mild  and  fertile  regions  of  the  East.
There  the  human  race  began  its  career  of  improve-
ment; and  from  the  remains  of  sciences  which  were
anciently  cultivated,  as  well  as  of  arts  which  were
anciently  exercised  in  India,  we  may  conclude  it  to
be  one  of  the  first  countries  in  which  men  made  any
considerable  progress  in  that  career.  The  wisdom
of  the  East  was  early  celebrated,"*  and  its  productions
were  early  in  request  among  distant  nations.*"  The
intercourse,  however,  between  different  countries  was
carried  on  at  first  entirely  by  land.  As  the  people
of  the  East  appear  soon  to  have  acquired  complete
dominion  over  the  useful  animals,'^  they  could  early
undertake  the  long  and  toilsome  journeys  which
it  was  necessary  to  make,  in  order  to  maintain  this
intercourse;  and  by  the  provident  bounty  of  Heaven
they  were  furnished  with  a  beast  of  burden,  without
whose  aid  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  accom-
plish them.  The  camel,  by  its  persevering  strength,
by  its  moderation  in  the  use  of  food,  and  the  singu-
larity of  its  internal  structure,  which  enables  it  to  lay
in  a  stock  of  water  suflficient  for  several  days,  put  it
in  their  power  to  convey  bulky  commodities  through
those  deserts  which  must  be  traversed  by  all  who
travel  from  any  of  the  countries  west  of  the  Euphrates
towards  India.  Trade  was  carried  on  in  this  man-
ner, particularly  by  the  nations  near  to  the  Arabian
gulf,  from  the  earliest  period  to  which  historical  in-

»  1  Kings,  iv.  30.  ^  Gen.  xxxvii.  25.  '  Ibid.  \ii.  16.  xxiv.  10,  11.

SECT. f.  .9

formation  reaches.  Distant  journeys,  however,  would
be  undertaken  at  first  only  occasionally,  and  by  a
few  adventurers.  But  by  degrees,  from  attention  to
their  mutual  safety  and  comfort,  numerous  bodies  of
merchants  assembled  at  stated  times,  and  forming
a  temporary  association  (known  afterward  by  the
name  of  a  Caravan),  governed  by  officers  of  their  own
choice,  and  subject  to  regulations  of  which  expe-
rience had  taught  them  the  utility,  they  performed
journeys  of  such  extent  and  duration,  as  appear  asto-
nishing to  nations  not  accustomed  to  this  mode  of
carrying  on  commerce.

But,  notwithstanding  every  improvement  that
could  be  made  in  the  manner  of  conveying  the  pro-
ductions of  one  country  to  another  by  land,  the  in-
conveniences which  attended  it  were  obvious  and
unavoidable.  It  was  often  dangerous;  always  ex-
pensive, and  tedious,  and  fatiguing.  A  method  of
communication  more  easy  and  expeditious  was
sought,  and  the  ingenuity  of  man  gradually  disco-
vered, that  the  rivers,  the  arms  of  the  sea,  and  even
the  ocean  itself,  were  destined  to  open  and  facilitate
intercourse  with  the  various  regions  of  the  earth,
between  which  they  appear,  at  first  view,  to  be  placed
as  insuperable  barriers.  Navigation,  however,  and
ship-building  (as  I  have  observed  in  another  work"^),
are  arts  so  nice  and  complicated,  that  they  require
the  talents  as  well  as  experience  of  many  successive
ages,  to  bring  them  to  any  degree  of  perfection.
From  the  raft  or  canoe,  which  first  served  to  carry  a
savage  over  the  river  that  obstructed  him  in  the  chase,
to  the  construction  of  a  vessel  capable  of  conveying  a
numerous  crew,  or  a  considerable  cargo  of  goods,  to
a  distant  coast,  the  progress  of  improvement  is  im-
mense. Many  efforts  would be made,  many  expe-

'•  Hisl.  of  AniericH,  vol.  i.  p.  28.

10  ANCIENT INDIA.

riments  would  be  tried,  and  mucli  labour  as  well  as
ingenuity  would  be  employed,  before  this  arduous
and  important  undertaking-  could  be  accomplished.

Even  after  some  improvement  was  made  in  ship-
building, the  intercourse  of  nations  with  each  other
by  sea  was  far  from  being  extensive.  From  the  ac-
counts of  the  earliest  historians,  we  learn,  that  navi-
gation made  its  first  efforts  in  the  Mediterranean  and
the  Arabian  gulf,  and  in  them  the  first  active  opera-
tions of  commerce  were  carried  on.  From  an  atten-
tive inspection  of  the  position  and  form  of  these  two
great  inland  seas,  these  accounts  appear  to  be  highly
probable.  These  seas  lay  open  the  continents  of
Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  and  spreading  to  a  great
extent  along  the  coasts  of  the  most  fertile  and  most
early  civilized  countries  in  each,  seem  to  have  been
destined  by  nature  to  facilitate  their  communication
with  one  another.  We  find,  accordingly,  that  the
first  voyages  of  the  Egyptians  and  Phenicians,  the
most  ancient  navigators  mentioned  in  history,  were
made  in  the  Mediterranean.  Their  trade,  however,
was  not  long  confined  to  the  countries  bordering
upon  it.  By  acquiring  early  possession  of  ports  on
the  Arabian  gulf,  they  extended  the  sphere  of  their
commerce,  and  are  represented  as  the  first  people  of
the  West  who  opened  a  communication  by  sea  with
India.

In  that  account  of  the  progress  of  navigation  and
discovery  which  I  prefixed  to  the  History  of  America,
I  considered  with  attention  the  maritime  operations
of  the  Egyptians  and  Phenicians;  a  brief  review  of
them  here,  as  far  as  they  relate  to  their  connexion
with  India,  is  all  that  is  requisite  for  illustrating  the
subject  of  my  present  inquiries.  With  respect  to  the
former  of  these  people,  the  information  which  his-
tory affords is  slender,  and  of  doubtful authority.

SECT. I.  11

The  fertile  soil  and  mild  climate  of  Egypt  produced
the  necessaries  and  comforts  of  life  in  such  profusion,
as  to  render  its  inhabitants  so  independent  of  other
countries,  that  it  became  early  an  established  maxim
in  their  policy,  to  renounce  all  intercourse  with  fo-
reigners. In  consequence  of  this,  they  held  all  sea-
faring persons  in  detestation,  as  impious  and  pro-
fane ;  and  fortifying  their  harbours,  they  denied
strangers  admission  into  them/

The  enterprising  ambition  of  Sesostris,  disdaining
the  restraints  imposed  upon  it  by  these  contracted
ideas  of  his  subjects,  prompted  him  to  render  the
Egyptians  a  commercial  people;  and  in  the  course
of  his  reign  he  so  completely  accomplished  this,  that
(if  we  may  give  credit  to  some  historians)  he  was
able  to  fit  out  a  fleet  of  four  hundred  ships  in  the
Arabian  gulf,  which  conquered  all  the  countries
stretching  along  the  Erythrean  sea  to  India.  At  the
same  time  his  army,  led  by  himself,  marched  through
Asia,  and  subjected  to  his  dominion  every  part  of  it
as  far  as  to  the  banks  of  the  Ganges;  and  crossino-
that  river,  advanced  to  the  Eastern  ocean/  But  these
efforts  produced  no  permanent  effect,  and  appear  to
have  been  so  contrary  to  the  genius  and  habits  of
the  Egyptians,  that,  on  the  death  of  Sesostris,  they
resumed  their  ancient  maxims,  and  many  ages
elapsed  before  the  commercial  connexion  of  Egypt
with  India  came  to  be  of  such  importance  as  to
merit  any  notice  in  this  Disquisition.^

The  history  of  the  early  maritime  operations  of
Phenicia  is  not  involved  in  the  same  obscurity  with
those  of  Egypt.  Every  circumstance  in  the  charac-
ter and  situation  of  the  Phenicians  was  favourable

«  Diodor.  Sicul.  lib. i.  p.  78.  edit. Wcsseliiigi.  Anist.  1746. Stral).  Geog.
lib.  xvii.  p.  1142.  A.  edit.  Casaub.  Amst.  1707.  f  Diod.  Sic.  lib.  i.  },.  64.

8  See  Note  I.  at  the  cad  u{  the  Volume.

12  ANCIENT INDIA.

to  the  commercial  spirit. The  territory  which  they
possessed  was  neithci-  large  nor  fertile. It  was  from
commerce  only  that  they  could  derive  either  opu-
lence or  power. Accordingly,  the  trade  carried  on
by  the  Phenicians  of  Sidon  and  Tyre  was  extensive
and  adventurous  ; and,  both  in  their  manners  and
policy,  they  resemble  the  great  commercial  states  of
modern  times,  more  than  any  people  in  the  ancient
world. Among  the  various  branches  of  their  com-
merce, that  with India  may  be  regarded  as  one  of
the  most  considerable  and  most  lucrative. As  by
their  situation  on  the  Mediterranean,  and  the  imper-
fect state  of  navigation,  they  could  not  attempt  to
open  a  direct  communication  with  India  by  sea,  the
enterprising  spirit  of  commerce  prompted  them  to
wrest  from  the Idumoeans  some  commodious  har-
bours towards the bottom of  the Arabian gulf.
From  these  they  held  a  regular  intercourse  with  India
on  the  one  hand,  and  with  the  eastern  and  southern
coasts  of  Africa  on  the  other. The  distance,  how-
ever, from  the  Arabian  gulf  to  Tyre  was  considera-
ble, and  rendered  the  conveyance  of  goods  to  it  by
land carriage so tedious and expensive, that it
became necessary  for  them  to take  possession of
Rhinocolura,  the  nearest  port  in  the  Mediterranean
to  the  Arabian  gulf. Thither  all  the  commodities
brought  from  India  were  conveyed  over  land  by  a
route  much  shorter,  and  more  practicable,  than  that
by  which  the  productions  of  the  East  were  carried  at
a  subsequent  period  from  the  opposite  shore  of  the
Arabian gulf  to the  Nile.'' At  Rhinocolura  they
were  reshipped,  and  transported  by  an  easy  naviga-
tion to  Tyre,  and distributed  through the world.
This,  as  it  is  the  earliest  route  of  communication  with
India  of  which  we  have  any  authentic  description,

h  Diod.  Sic.  lib.  i.  p.  70. Strab.  lib.  xvi.  p.  1128.  A.

SECT. [.  13

liad  so  many  advantages  over  any  ever  known  be-
fore the  modern  discovery  of  a  new  course  of  navi-
gation to  the  East,  that  the  Phenicians  could  supply
other  nations  with  the  productions  of  India  in  greater
abundance,  and  at  a  cheaper  rate,  than  any  people  of
antiquity. To  this  circumstance,  which,  for  a  con-
siderable time,  secured  to  them  a  monopoly  of  that
trade,  was  owing,  not  only  the  extraordinary  wealth
of  individuals,  v^^hich  rendered  the  "  merchants  of
Tyre  princes,  and  her  traffickers  the  honourable  of
the  earth,"' but  the  extensive  power  of  the  state  itself,
w^hich  first  taught  mankind  to  conceive  what  vast
resources  a commercial  people possess,  and  what
great  exertions  they  are  capable  of  making.""

The  Jews,  by  their  vicinity  to  Tyre,  had  such  an
opportunity  of  observing the  wealth  which  flowed
into  that  city  from  the  lucrative  commerce  carried  on
by  the  Phenicians  from  their  settlements  on  the  Ara-
bian gulf,  as  incited  them  to  aim  at  obtaining  some
share  of  it. This  they  effected  under  the  prosperous
reigns  of  David  and  Solomon,  partly  by  the  con-
quests which  they  made  of  a  small  district  in  the
land  of  Edom,  that  gave  them  possession  of  the  har-
bours of  Elath  and  Esiongeber  on  the  Red  sea,  and
partly  by  the  friendship  of  Hiram,  king  of  Tyre  ;  who
enabled  Solomon  to  fit  out  fleets,  which,  under  the
direction  of  Phenician  pilots,  sailed  to  Tarshish  and
Ophir.' In what  region of  the earth  we should
search  for  these  famous  ports  which  furnished  the
navy  of  Solomon  with  the  various  commodities  enu-
merated by  the  sacred  historians,  is  an  inquiry  that
has long  exercised the industry  of  learned  men.
They  were  early  supposed to  be  situated  in  some
part  of  India,  and  the  Jews  were  held  to  be  one  of
the  nations  which  traded  with that  country. But

•  Isaiah,  xxiii.  8.  •-  See  Noie  11.  '  Kin£;s,  ix.  26.  x.  22.

14  AXriEXT INDIA.

the  opinion  more  generally  adopted  is,  that  Solo-
mon's fleets,  after  passing  the  straits  of  Babelmandeb,
held  their  course  alongf  the  south-west  coast  of  Africa,
as  far  as  the  kingdom  of  Sofala,  a  country  celebrated
for  its  rich  mines  of  gold  and  silver  (from  which  it
has  been  denominated  the  Golden  Sofala  by  oriental
writers™),  and  abounding  in  all  the  other  articles
which  composed  the  cargoes  of  the  Jewish  ships.
This  opinion,  which  the  accurate  researches  of  M.
D'Anville  rendered  highly  probable,"  seems  now  to
be  established  with  the  utmost  certainty  by  a  late
learned  traveller ;  who  by  his  knowledge  of  the
monsoons  in  the  Arabian  gulf,  and  his  attention  to
the  ancient  mode  of  navigation,  both  in  that  sea  and
along  the  African  coast,  has  not  only  accounted  for
the  extraordinary  length  of  time  which  the  fleets  of
Solomon  took  in  o-oino;  and  returnino;',  but  has  shewn,
from  circumstances  mentioned  concerning  the  voy-
age, that  it  was  not  made  to  any  place  in  India.°
The  Jews,  then,  we  may  conclude,  have  no  title  to
be  reckoned  amono-  the  nations  which  carried  on  in-
tercourse  with  India  by  sea;  and  if,  from  deference
to  the  sentiments  of  some  respectable  authors,  their
claim  were  to  be  admitted,  we  know  with  certainty,
that  the  commercial  effort  which  they  made  in  the
reign  of  Solomon  was  merely  a  transient  one,  and
that  they  quickly  returned  to  their  former  state  of
unsocial  seclusion  from  the  rest  of  mankind.

From  collectino-  the  scanty  information  which  his-
tory  affords,  concerning  the  most  early  attempts  to
open  a  comrnercial  intercourse  with  India,  I  now
proceed,  with  more  certainty  and  greater  confidence,
to  trace  the  progress  of  communication  with  that
country,  under  the  guidance  of  authors  who  recorded

"  Notices  des  MSS.  du  Roi,  torn.  ii.  p.  40.

»  Dissert,  sur  le  Pays  d'Ophir,  Mem.  dc  Litorat.  torn.  xxx.  p.  83,  &c.

"  Briice's  Travels,  book  ii.  cli.  4.

SECT.  I.  ir>

events  nearer  to  their  own  times,  and  with  respect
to  which  they  had  received  more  full  and  accurate
intelligence.

The  first  establishment  of  any  foreign  power  in
India  which  can  be  ascertained  by  evidence  meriting
any  degree  of  credit,  is  that  of  the  Persians ;  and
even  of  this  we  have  only  a  very  general  and  doubt-
ful account.  Darius,  the  son  of  Hystaspes,  though
raised  to  the  throne  of  Persia  by  chance  or  by  arti-
fice, possessed  such  active  and  enterprising  talents,
as  rendered  him  worthy  of  that  high  station.  He
examined  the  different  provinces  of  his  kingdom  more
diligently  than  any  of  his  predecessors,  and  explored
regions  of  Asia  formerly  little  known. p  Having  sub-
jected to  his  dominion  many  of  the  countries  which
stretched  south-east  from  the  Caspian  sea  towards
the  river  Oxus,  his  curiosity  was  excited  to  acquire
a  more  extensive  and  accurate  knowledge  of  India,
on  which  they  bordered.  With  this  view  he  ap-
pointed Scylax  of  Caryandra  to  take  the  command
of  a  squadron  fitted  out  at  Caspatyrus,  in  the  coun-
try of  Pactya  (the  modern  Pehkely),  towards  the
upper  part  of  the  navigable  course  of  the  river  Indus,
and  to  fall  down  its  stream  until  he  should  reach  the
ocean.  This  Scylax  performed,  though  it  should
seem  with  much  difficulty,  and  notwithstanding  many
obstacles  ;  for  he  spent  no  less  than  two  years  and
six  months  in  conducting  his  squadron  from  the  place
where  he  embarked,  to  the  Arabian  gulf.''  The  ac-
count which  he  gave  of  the  populousness,  fertility,
and  high  cultivation  of  that  region  of  India  through
which  his  course  lay,  rendered  Darius  impatient  to
become  master  of  a  country  so  valuable.  This  he
soon  accomplished  ;  and  though  his  conquests  in
India  seem  not  to  have  extended  beyond  the  district

P  Herodot.  lib.  iv.  c.  44.  i  Ibid.  lib.  iv.  c.  42.  44.

If)  AXC  I  KNT INDIA.

watered  by  tlic  Indus,  we  are  led  to  form  a  liiirli  idea
of  its  opulence,  as  well  as  of  the  number  of  its  inha-
bitants, in  ancient  times,  when  we  learn  that  the
tribute  which  he  levied  from  it  was  near  a  third  part
of  the  whole  revenue  of  the  Persian  monarchy/  But
neither  this  voyage  of  Scylax,  nor  the  conquests  of
Darius,  to  which  it  gave  rise,  diffused  any  general
knowledge  of  India.  The  Greeks,  who  were  the
only  enlightened  race  of  men  at  that  time  in  Europe,
paid  but  little  attention  to  the  transactions  of  the
people  whom  they  considered  as  barbarians,  espe-
cially in  countries  far  remote  from  their  own  ;  and
Scylax  had  embellished  the  narrative  of  his  voyage
with  so  many  circumstances  manifestly  fabulous,"  that
he  seems  to  have  met  with  the  just  punishment  to
which  persons  who  have  a  notorious  propensity  to
what  is  marvellous  are  often  subjected,  of  being  lis-
tened to  with  distrust,  even  when  they  relate  what  is
exactly  true.

About  a  hundred  and  sixty  years  after  the  reign
of  Darius  Hystaspes,  Alexander  the  Great  under-
took his  expedition  into  India.  The  wild  sallies  of
passion,  the  indecent  excesses  of  intemperance,  and
the  ostentatious  displays  of  vanity  too  frequent  in  the
conduct  of  this  extraordinary  man,  have  so  degraded
his  character,  that  the  pre-eminence  of  his  merit,
either  as  a  conqueror,  a  politician,  or  a  legislator,  has
seldom  been  justly  estimated.  The  subject  of  my
present  inquiry  leads  me  to  consider  his  operations
only  in  one  light,  but  it  will  enable  me  to  exhibit  a
striking  view  of  the  grandeur  and  extent  of  his  plans.
He  seems,  soon  after  his  first  successes  in  Asia,  to
have  formed  the  idea  of  establishing  a  universal
monarchy,  and  aspired  to  the  dominion  of  the  sea,

■•  Herod,  lib.  iii.  c.  90—96. See  Note  III.
»  Philostr.  Vita  Apoll.  lib.  iii.  c.  47,  and  Note  3d  of  Oieariiis  Tzctzet.  Chiliad,
vii.  vers.  d.SO.

^

SECT.  I.  17

as  well  as  of  the  land.  From  the  wonderful  eftbrts
of  the  Tyrians  in  their  own  defence,  when  left  with-
out any  ally  or  protector,  he  conceived  a  high  opi-
nion of  the  resources  of  maritime  power,  and  of  the
wealth  to  be  derived  from  commerce,  especially  that
with  India,  which  he  found  engrossed  by  the  citizens
of  Tyre.  With  a  view  to  secure  this  commerce,  and
to  establish  a  station  for  it,  preferable  in  many  re-
spects to  that  of  Tyre,  as  soon  as  he  completed  the
conquest  of  Egypt,  he  founded  a  city  near  one  of  the
mouths  of  the  Nile,  which  he  honoured  with  his  own
name  ;  and  with  such  admirable  discernment  was  the
situation  of  it  chosen,  that  Alexandria  soon  became
the  greatest  trading  city  in  the  ancient  world  ;  and,
notwithstanding  many  successive  revolutions  in  em-
pire, continued  during  eighteen  centuries,  to  be  the
chief  seat  of  commerce  with  India/  Amidst  the
military  operations  to  which  Alexander  was  soon
obliged  to  turn  his  attention,  the  desire  of  acquiring
the  lucrative  commerce  which  the  Tyrians  had  car-
ried on  with  India,  was  not  relinquished.  Events
soon  occurred,  that  not  only  confirmed  and  added
strength  to  this  desire,  but  opened  to  him  a  prospect
of  obtaining  the  sovereignty  of  those  regions  which
supplied  the  rest  of  mankind  with  so  many  precious
commodities.

After  his  final  victory  over  the  Persians,  he  was
led  in  pursuit  of  the  last  Darius,  and  of  Bessus,  the
murderer  of  that  unfortunate  monarch,  to  traverse
that  part  of  Asia  which  stretches  from  the  Caspian
sea  beyond  the  river  Oxus.  He  advanced  towards
the  east  as  far  as  Maracanda,"  then  a  city  of  some
note,  and  destined  in  a  future  period,  under  the
modern  name  of  Samarcand,  to  be  the  capital  of  an
empire  not  inferior  to  his  own  either  in  extent  or  in

'  Hist,  of  America,  vol.  i.  p.  39.  "  Arrian,  iii.  c.  30.

VOL. IX-  C

18  ANCIENT INDIA.

power.  In  a  progress  of  several  months  through
provinces  hitherto  unknown  to  the  Greeks,  in  a
line  of  march  often  approaching-  near  to  India,  and
among  people  accustomed  to  much  intercourse  with
it,  he  learned  many  things  concerning  the  state  of  a
country"  that  had  been  long  the  object  of  his  thoughts
and  wishes,^  which  increased  his  desire  of  invading
it.  Decisive  and  prompt  in  all  his  resolutions,  he
set  out  from  Bactria,  and  crossed  that  ridge  of  moun-
tains which,  under  various  denominations,  forms  the
stony  girdle  (if  I  may  use  an  expression  of  the
oriental  geographers)  which  encircles  Asia,  and  con-
stitutes the  northern  barrier  of  India.

The  most  practicable  avenue  to  every  country,  it
is  obvious,  must  be  formed  by  circumstances  in  its
natural  situation,  such  as  the  defiles  which  lead
through  mountains,  the  course  of  rivers,  and  the
places  where  they  may  be  passed  with  the  greatest
ease  and  safety.  In  no  place  of  the  earth  is  this
line  of  approach  marked  and  defined  more  conspi-
cuously, than  on  the  northern  frontier  of  India ;  in-
somuch that  the  three  great  invaders  of  this  country,
Alexander,  Tamerlane,  and  Nadir  Shah,  in  three
distant  ages,  and  with  views  and  talents  extremely
different,  advanced  by  the  same  route,  with  very
little  deviation.  Alexander  had  the  merit  of  having
first  discovered  the  way.  After  passing  the  moun-
tains, he  encamped  at  Alexandria  Paropamisana,  not
far  from  the  mountains  denominated  the  Indian  Cau-
casus by  his  historians,  now  known  by  the  name  of
Hindoo  Kho ;''  and  having  subdued  or  conciliated
the  nations  seated  on  the  north-west  bank  of  the  In-
dus,  he crossed  the  river at  Taxila,  now  Attock,

"  Strabo,  XV.  p.  1021.  A.  ' y  Arrian.  iv.  c.  15.

■■'  In  the  second  edition  of  his  Memoir,  Major  Rcnneli  gives  tlie  modern
namcg  of  tlie  Hydaspcs,  with  some  variation  in  their  orthograpli^',  Behnt  and
Ihylam,

SECT.  I.  19

where  its  stream  is  so  tranquil  that  a  bridge  can  be
thrown  over  it  with  greater  ease  than  at  any  other
place/

After  passing  the  Indus,  Alexander  marched  for-
ward in  the  road  which  leads  directly  to  the  Ganges,
and  the  opulent  provinces  to  the  siouth-east,  now
comprehended  under  the  general  name  of  Indostan.
But,  on  the  banks  of  the  Hydaspes,  known  in  modern
times  by  the  name  of  the  Betah  or  Chelum,  he  was
opposed  by  Porus,  a  powerful  monarch  of  the  coun-
try, at  the  head  of  a  numerous  army.  The  war  with
Porus,  and  the  hostilities  in  which  he  was  succes-
sively engaged  with  other  Indian  princes,  led  him  to
deviate  from  his  original  route,  and  to  turn  more  to-
wards the  south-west.  In  carrying  on  these  opera-
tions, Alexander  marched  through  one  of  the  richest
and  best  peopled  countries  in  India,  now  called  the
Panjab,  from  the  five  great  rivers  by  which  it  is
watered  ;  and  as  we  know  that  this  march  was  per-
formed in  the  rainy  season,  when  even  Indian  armies
cannot  keep  the  field,  it  gives  a  high  idea  both  of
Alexander's  persevering  spirit,  and  of  the  extraor-
dinary vigour  and  hardiness  of  constitution,  which
soldiers,  in  ancient  times,  derived  from  the  united
effects  of  gymnastic  exercise  and  military  discipline.
In  every  step  of  his  progress,  objects  no  less  striking
than  new  presented  themselves  to  Alexander.  The
magnitude  of  the  Indus,  even  after  he  had  seen  the
Nile,  the  Euphrates,  and  the  Tigris,  must  have  filled
him  with  surprise.''  No  country  he  had  hitherto
visited  was  'so  populous  and  well  cultivated,  or
abounded  in  so  many  valuable  productions  of  nature
and  of  art,  as  that  part  of  India  through  which  he  had
led  his  army. But  when  he  was  informed  in  every

a  Rennell,  Mem  p.  92. See  Note  IV.
J"  Strabo,  lib  .xv.  p.  1027. C.  and  notf  a. Casaub.

c  2

20  ANCIENT INDIA.

place,  and  probably  with  exaggerated  description,
how  much  the  Indus  was  inferior  to  the  Gansres,  and
how  far  all  that  he  had  hitherto  beheld  was  surpassed
in  the  happy  regions  through  which  that  great  river
flows,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  his  eagerness  to  view
and  to  take  possession  of  them  should  have  prompt-
ed him  to  assemble  his  soldiers,  and  to  propose
that  they  should  resume  their  march  towards  that
quarter,  where  wealth,  dominion,  and  fame  awaited
them.  But  they  had  already  done  so  much,  and  had
suffered  so  greatly,  especially  from  incessant  rains
and  extensive  inundations,  that  their  patience  as  well
as  strength  were  exhausted,'"  and  with  one  voice  they
refused  to  advance  farther.  In  this  resolution  they
persisted  with  such  sullen  obstinacy,  that  Alexander,
though  possessed  in  the  highest  degree  of  every
quality  that  gains  an  ascendant  over  the  minds  of
military  men,  was  obliged  to  yield,  and  to  issue
orders  for  marching  back  to  Persia.'^

The  scene  of  this  memorable  transaction  was  on
the  banks  of  the  Hyphasis,  the  modern  Beyah,
which  was  the  utmost  limit  of  Alexander's  progress
in  India.  From  this  it  is  manifest,  that  he  did  not
traverse  the  whole  extent  of  the  Panjab.  Its  south-
west boundary  is  formed  by  a  river  anciently  known
by  the  name  of  Hysudrus,  and  now  by  that  of  the
Setlege,  to  which  Alexander  never  approached  nearer
than  the  southern  bank  of  the  Hyphasis,  where  he
erected  twelve  stupendous  altars,  which  he  intended
as  a  monument  of  his  exploits,  and  which  (if  we  may
believe  the  biographer  of  Apollonius  Tyanseus)  were
still  remaining,  with  legible  inscriptions,  when  that
fantastic  sophist  visited  India,  three  hundred  and
seventy- three years after  Alexander's expedition.'

c  See  Note  V.  <*  Arrian,  v.  c.  24,  2.5.

<-■  Philostr.  Vita  Apollon.  lib.  ii.  c.  43.  edit.  Olear.  Lips.  1709.

SECT. [.  21

The  breadth  of  the  Panjab,  from  Ludhana  on  the
Setlege  to  Attock  on  the  Indus,  is  computed  to  be
two  hundred  and  fifty-nine  geographical  miles,  in  a
straight  line ;  and  Alexander's  march,  computed  in
the  same  manner,  did  not  exceed  above  two  hundred
miles.  But,  both  as  he  advanced  and  returned,  his
troops  were  so  spread  over  the  country,  and  often
acted  in  so  many  separate  divisions,  and  all  his
movements  were  so  exactly  measured  and  delineated
by  men  of  science,  whom  he  kept  in  pay  for  the  pur-
pose, that  he  acquired  a  very  extensive  and  accurate
knowledge  of  that  part  of  India/

When,  upon  his  return,  he  reached  the  banks  of
the  Hydaspes,  he  found  that  the  officers  to  whom  he
had  given  it  in  charge  to  build  and  collect  as  many
vessels  as  possible,  had  executed  his  orders  with
such  activity  and  success,  that  they  had  assembled  a
numerous  fleet.  As  amidst  the  hurry  of  war,  and
the  rage  of  conquest,  he  never  lost  sight  of  his  pacific
and  commercial  schemes,  the  destination  of  his  fleet
v^as  to  sail  down  the  Indus  to  the  ocean,  and  from
its  mouth  to  proceed  to  the  Persian  gulf,  that  a  com-
munication by  sea  might  be  opened  with  India  and
the  centre  of  his  dominions.

The  conduct  of  this  expedition  was  committed  to
Nearchus,  an  officer  equal  to  that  important  trust.
But  as  Alexander  was  ambitious  to  acquire  fame  of
every  kind,  and  fond  of  engaging  in  new  and  splen-
did undertakings,  he  himself  accompanied  Nearchus
in  his  navigation  down  the  river.  The  armament
was  indeed  so  great  and  magnificent,  as  deserved  to
be  commanded  by  the  conqueror  of  Asia.  It  was
composed  of  an  army  of  a  hundred  and  twenty
thousand  men,  and  two  hundred  elephants,  and  of  a
fleet  of  near  two  thousand  vessels,  various  in  burden

f  Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  17.

22  ANCIENT INDIA.

and  form;''  on  board  of  which  one-third  of  the  troops
embarked,  while  the  remainder  marchino;  in  two  di-
visions,  one  on  the  right,  and  the  otlier  on  the  left,
of  the  river,  accompanied  them  in  their  progress.
As  they  advanced,  the  nations  on  each  side  were
either  compelled  or  persuaded  to  submit.  Retarded
by  the  various  operations  in  which  this  engaged  him,
as  well  as  by  the  slow  navigation  of  such  a  fleet  as
he  conducted,  Alexander  was  above  nine  months
before  he  reached  the  ocean. *"

Alexander's  progress  in  India,  in  this  line  of  di-
rection, was  far  more  considerable  than  that  which
he  made  by  the  route  we  formerly  traced  ;  and  when
we  attend  to  the  various  movements  of  his  troops,
the  number  of  cities  which  they  took,  and  the  dif-
ferent states  which  they  subdued,  he  may  be  said
not  only  to  have  viewed,  but  to  have  explored,  the
countries  through  which  he  passed.  This  part  of
India  has  been  so  little  frequented  by  Europeans  in
later  times,  that  neither  the  position  of  places,  nor
their  distances,  can  be  ascertained  with  the  same  ac-
curacy as  in  the  interior  provinces,  or  even  in  the
Panjab.  But  from  the  researches  of  major  Rennell,
carried  on  with  no  less  discernment  than  industry,
the  distance  of  that  place  on  the  Hydaspes,  where
Alexander  fitted  out  his  fleet  from  the  ocean,  cannot
be  less  than  a  thousand  British  miles.  Of  this  ex-
tensive region  a  considerable  portion,  particularly
the  upper  Delta,  stretching  from  the  capital  of  the
ancient  Malli,  now  Moultan,  to  Patala,  the  modern
Tatta,  is  distinguished  for  its  fertility  and  popula-
tion.'

Soon  after  he  reached  the  ocean,  Alexander,  satis-
fied with  having  accomplished  this  arduous  under-

z  See  Note  VI.  •■  Strabo,  lib.  xv.  p.  1014.

'  Rennell,  Mem.  68,  &c.

SECT. I.  23

taking,  led  his  army  by  land  back  to  Persia.  The
command  of  the  fleet,  with  a  considerable  body  of
troops  on  board  of  it,  he  left  to  Nearchus,  who,  after
a  coasting  voyage  of  seven  months,  conducted  it
safely  up  the  Persian  gulf  into  the  Euphrates.''

In  this  manner  did  Alexander  first  open  the  know-
ledge of  India  to  the  people  of  Europe,  and  an  ex-
tensive district  of  it  was  surveyed  with  greater  accu-
racy than  could  have  been  expected  from  the  short
time  he  remained  in  that  country.  Fortunately  an
exact  account,  not  only  of  his  military  operations,
but  of  every  thing  worthy  of  notice  in  the  countries
where  they  were  carried  on,  was  recorded  in  the
memoirs  or  journals  of  three  of  his  principal  officers,
Ptolemy,  the  son  of  Lagus,  Aristobulus,  and  Near-
chus. The  two  former  have  not,  indeed,  reached
our  times  ;  but  it  is  probable  that  the  most  important
facts  which  they  contained  are  preserved,  as  Arrian
professes  to  have  followed  them  as  his  guides  in  his
History  of  the  Expedition  of  Alexander ;'  a  work
which,  though  composed  long  after  Greece  had  lost
its  liberty,  and  in  an  age  when  genius  and  taste  were
on  the  decline,  is  not  unworthy  the  purest  times  of
Attic  literature.

With  respect  to  the  general  state  of  India,  we
learn  from  these  writers,  that,  in  the  age  of  Alex-
ander, though  there  was  not  established  in  it  any
powerful  empire,  resembling  that  which,  in  modern
times,  stretched  its  dominion  from  the  Indus  almost
to  Cape  Comorin,  it  was,  even  then,  formed  into
monarchies  of  considerable  extent.  The  king:  of  the
Prasij  was  prepared,  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  to
oppose  the  Macedonians,  with  an  army  of  twenty
thousand  cavalry,  two  hundred  thousand  infantry,

^  Pliu.  Nat.  Hist,  lib,  vi.  c.  23. See  Note  VII.
'  Arriau,  lib.  i.  in  proemio.

24:  ANCIExXT INDIA.

two  thousand  armed  chariots,  and  a  great  number  of
elephants.""  Tlie  territory  of  which  Alexander  con-
stituted Porus  the  sovereign,  is  said  to  have  contained
seven  distinct  nations,  and  no  fewer  than  two  thou-
sand towns.'  Even  in  the  most  restricted  sense  that
can  be  given  to  the  vague  indefinite  appellations  of
7iations  and  towns,  an  idea  is  conveyed  of  a  very  great
degree  of  population.  As  the  fleet  sailed  down  the
river,  the  country  on  each  side  was  found  to  be  in
no  respect  inferior  to  that  of  which  the  government
was  committed  to  Porus.

It  was  likewise  from  the  memoirs  of  the  same
officers  that  Europe  derived  its  first  authentic  infor-
mation concerning  the  climate,  the  soil,  the  produc-
tions, and  the  inhabitants  of  India;  and,  in  a  coun-
try where  the  manners,  the  customs,  and  even  the
dress  of  the  people,  are  almost  as  permanent  and  in-
variable as  the  face  of  nature  itself,  it  is  wonderful
how  exactly  the  descriptions  given  by  Alexander's
officers  delineate  what  we  now  behold  in  India,  at
the  distance  of  two  thousand  years.  The  stated
change  of  seasons,  now  known  by  the  name  oi  Mon^
soons;  the  periodical  rains ;  the  swelling  of  the  rivers;
the  inundations  which  these  occasion ;  the  appear-
ance of  the  country  during  their  continuance,  are
particularly  mentioned  and  described.  No  less  ac-
curate are  the  accounts  which  they  have  given  of  the
inhabitants,  their  delicate  and  slender  form,  their
dark  complexion,  their  black  uncurled  hair,  their
garments  of  cotton,  their  living  entirely  upon  vege-
table food,  their  division  into  separate  tribes  or  casts,
the  members  of  which  never  intermarry,  the  custom
of  wives  burning  themselves  with  their  deceased
husbands,  and  many  other  particulars,  in  all  which
they  perfectly  resemble  the  modern  Hindoos. To

"  Diod.  Sicul.  lib.  xvii.  p.  232.  "  Arrian,  lib.  vi.  g.  2.

SECT. I.  25

enter  into  any  detail  with  respect  to  these  in  this
place  would  be  premature ;  but  as  the  subject,  though
curious  and  interesting,  will  lead  unavoidably  into
discussions  not  well  suited  to  the  nature  of  an  histo-
rical work,  I  shall  reserve  my  ideas  concerning  it  for
an  Appendix,  to  be  annexed  to  this  Disquisition ;
and  hope  they  may  contribute  to  throw  some  addi-
tional light  upon  the  origin  and  nature  of  the  com-
merce with  India.

Much  as  the  Western  world  was  indebted  for  its
knowledge  of  India  to  the  expedition  of  Alexander,
it  was  only  a  small  portion  of  that  vast  continent
which  he  explored.  His  operations  did  not  extend
beyond  the  modern  province  of  Lahore,  and  the
countries  on  the  banks  of  the  Indus  from  Moultan  to
the  sea.  These,  however,  were  surveyed  with  that
degree  of  accuracy  which  I  have  already  described ;
and  it  is  a  circumstance  not  unworthy  of  notice,  that
this  district  of  India  which  Europeans  first  entered,
and  with  which  they  were  best  acquainted  in  ancient
times,  is  now  less  known  than  almost  any  part  of
that  continent,"  neither  commerce  nor  war,  to  which,
in  every  age,  geography  is  chiefly  indebted  for  its
improvement,  having  led  any  nation  of  Europe  to
frequent  or  explore  it.

If  an  untimely  death  had  not  put  a  period  to  the
reign  of  the  Macedonian  hero,  India,  we  have  reason
to  think,  would  have  been  more  fully  explored  by
the  ancients,  and  the  European  dominion  would
have  been  established  there  two  thousand  years
sooner.  When  Alexander  invaded  India,  he  had
something  more  in  view  than  a  transient  incursion.
It  was  his  object  to  annex  that  extensive  and  opulent
country  to  his  empire ;  and  though  the  refractory
spirit  of  his  army  obliged  him,  at  that  time,  to  sus-

o  Rennell,  Mem.  114.

2G  ANCIENT INDIA.

pcnd  the  prosecution  of  his  plan,  he  was  far  from
relinquish ino-  it.  To  exhibit  a  general  view  of  the
measures  which  he  adopted  for  this  purpose,  and  to
point  out  their  propriety  and  probable  success,  is  not
foreign  from  the  subject  of  this  Disquisition,  and
will  convey  a  more  just  idea  than  is  usually  enter-
tained, of  the  original  genius  and  extent  of  political
wisdom  which  distinguished  this  illustrious  man.

When  Alexander  became  master  of  the  Persian
empire,  he  early  perceived,  that  with  all  the  power
of  his  hereditary  dominions,  reinforced  by  the  troops
which  the  ascendant  he  had  acquired  over  the  va-
rious states  of  Greece  might  enable  him  to  raise
there,  he  could  not  hope  to  retain  in  subjection  ter-
ritories so  extensive  and  populous  ;  that,  to  render
his  authority  secure  and  permanent,  it  must  be  esta-
blished in  the  affection  of  the  nations  which  he  had
subdued,  and  maintained  by  their  arms  ;  and  that,  in
order  to  acquire  this  advantage,  all  distinctions  be-
tween the  victors  and  vanquished  must  be  abolished,
and  his  European  and  Asiatic  subjects  must  be  in-
corporated and  become  one  people,  by  obeying  the
same  laws,  and  by  adopting  the  same  manners,  in-
stitutions, and  discipline.

Liberal  as  this  plan  of  policy  was,  and  well  adapted
to  accomplish  what  he  had  in  view,  nothing  could  be
more  repugnant  to  the  ideas  and  prejudices  of  his
countrymen.  The  Greeks  had  such  a  high  opinion
of  the  pre-eminence  to  which  they  were  raised  by
civilization  and  science,  that  they  seem  hardly  to
have  acknowledged  the  rest  of  mankind  to  be  of  the
same  species  with  themselves.  To  every  other  people
they  gave  the  degrading  appellation  of  barbarians,
and,  in  consequence  of  their  own  boasted  superiority,
they  asserted  a  right  of  dominion  over  them,  in  the
same  manner  (to  use  their  own  expression),  as  the

SECT. I.  27

soul  has  over  the  body,  and  men  have  over  irrational
animals.  Extravagant  as  this  pretension  may  now
appear,  it  found  admission,  to  the  disgrace  of  an-
cient philosophy,  into  all  the  schools,  Aristotle,  full
of  this  opinion,  in  support  of  which  he  employs  ar-
guments more  subtle  than  solid,''  advised  Alexander
to  govern  theGreeks  like  subjects,  and  the  barbarians
as  slaves ;  to  consider  the  former  as  companions,  the
latter  as  creatures  of  an  inferior  nature.*^  But  the
sentiments  of  the  pupil  were  more  enlarged  than
those  of  his  master,  and  his  experience  in  governing
men  taught  the  monarch  what  the  speculative  science
of  the  philosopher  did  not  discover.  Soon  after  the
victory  at  Arbela,  Alexander  himself,  and  by  his  per-
suasion, many  of  his  officers,  assumed  the  Persian
dress,  and  conformed  to  several  of  their  customs.
At  the  same  time  he  encouraged  the  Persian  nobles
to  imitate  the  manners  of  the  Macedonians,  to  learn
the  Greek  language,  and  to  acquire  a  relish  for  the
beauties  of  the  elegant  writers  in  that  tongue,  which
were  then  universally  studied  and  admired.  In  or-
der to  render  the  union  more  complete,  he  resolved
to  marry  one  of  the  daughters  of  Darius,  and  chose
wives  for  a  hundred  of  his  principal  officers  in  the
most  illustrious  Persian  families.  Their  nuptials
were  celebrated  with  great  pomp  and  festivity,  and
with  high  exultation  of  the  conquered  people.  In
imitation  of  them,  above  ten  thousand  Macedonians,
of  inferior  rank,  married  Persian  women,  to  each  of
whom  Alexander  gave  nuptial  presents,  as  a  testi-
mony of  his  approbation  of  their  conduct.'^

But  assiduously  as  Alexander  laboured  to  unite
his  European  and  Asiatic  subjects  by  the  most  indis-

P  Aristot.  Polit.  i.  c.  3 — 7.
"J  Plut.  de  Fortuna  Alex.  Oral.  i.  p.  302.  vol.  vii.  edit.  Keiske. Strabo,  lib.  i.
p.  116.  A.

r  Arrian,  lib.  vii.  c.  4. Plut.  de  Fort. Alex.  p.  304. See  Note  VIU.

28  ANCIENT  INDIA.

soluble  ties,  he  did  not  trust  entirely  to  the  success
of  that  measure  for  the  security  of  his  new  conquests.
In  every  province  which  he  subdued,  he  made  choice
of  proper  stations,  where  he  built  and  fortified  cities,
in  which  he  placed  garrisons  composed  partly  of
such  of  the  natives  as  conformed  to  the  Grecian
manners  and  discipline,  and  peirtly  of  such  of  his
European  subjects  as  were  worn  out  with  the  fa-
tigues of  service,  and  wished  for  repose  and  a  per-
manent establishment.  These  cities  were  numerous,
and  served  not  only  as  a  chain  of  posts  to  keep  open
the  communication  between  the  different  provinces
of  his  dominions,  but  as  places  of  strength  to  over-
awe and  curb  the  conquered  people.  Thirty  thou-
sand of  his  new  subjects,  who  had  been  disciplined
in  these  cities,  and  armed  after  the  European  fashion,
appeared  before  Alexander  in  Susa,  and  were  formed
by  him  into  that  compact  solid'  body  of  infantry,
known  by  the  name  of  the  Phalanx,  which  constituted
the  strength  of  a  Macedonian  army.  But  in  order
to  secure  entire  authority  over  this  new  corps,  as
well  as  to  render  it  more  effective,  he  appointed  that
every  officer  in  it  intrusted  with  command,  either
superior  or  subaltern,  should  be  European.  As  the
ingenuity  of  mankind  naturally  has  recourse  in  simi-
lar situations  to  the  same  expedients,  the  European
powers,  who  now  in  their  Indian  territories  employ
numerous  bodiesof  the  natives  in  their  service,  have,
in  forming  the  establishment  of  these  troops,  adopted
the  same  maxims;  and,  probably  without  knowino-
it,  have  modelled  their  battalions  of  Seapoys  upon
the  same  principles  as  Alexander  did  his  phalanx  of
Persians.

The  farther  Alexander  pushed  his  conquests  from
the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,  which  may  be  considered
as  the  centre  of  his  dominions,  he  found  it  necessary

SECT.  I.  29

to  build  and  to  fortify  a  greater  number  of  cities.
Several  of  these  to  the  east  and  south  of  the  Caspian
sea,  are  mentioned  by  ancient  authors;  and  in  India
itself  he  founded  two  cities  on  the  banks  of  the  Hy-
daspes,  and  a  third  on  the  Acesines,  both  navigable
rivers,  which,  after  uniting  their  streams,  fall  into  the
Indus."" From  the  choice  of  such  situations,  it  is
obvious  that  he  intended,  by  means  of  these  cities,
to  keep  open  a  communication  with  India,  not  only
by  land,  but  by  sea. It  was  chiefly  with  a  view  to
the  latter  of  these  objects  (as  I  have  already  ob-
served), that  he  examined  the  navigation  of  the  In-
dus with  so  much  attention. With  the  same  view,
on  his  return  to  Susa,  he,  in  person,  surveyed  the
course  of  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  and  gave  direc-
tions to  remove  the  cataracts  or  dams,  with  which  the
ancient  monarchs  of  Persia,  induced  by  a  peculiar
precept  of  their  religion,  which  enjoined  them  to
guard  with  the  utmost  care  against  defiling  any  of
the  elements,  had  constructed  near  the  mouths  of  these
rivers,  in  order  to  shut  out  their  subjects  from  any
access  to  the  ocean.* By  opening  the  navigation  in
this  manner,  he  proposed,  that  the  valuable  com-
modities of  India  should  be  conveyed  from  the  Per-
sian gulf  into  the  interior  parts  of  his  Asiatic  domi-
nions, while  by  the  Arabian  gulf  they  should  be  car-
ried to  Alexandria,  and  distributed  to  the  rest  of  the
world.

Grand  and  extensive  as  these  schemes  were,  the
precautions  employed,  and  the  arrangements  made
for  carrying  them  into  execution,  were  so  various
and  so  proper,  that  Alexander  had  good  reason  to
entertain  sanguine  hopes  of  their  proving  successful.
At  the  time  when  the  mutinous  spirit  of  his  soldiers

»  See  Note  IX.
» Arrian,  lib.  vi.  c.  7. Strabo,  lib.  xvi.  p.  1074,  &c. See  Note  X.

30  ANCIENT INDIA.

obliged  him  to  relinquisli  his  operations  in  India,  he
was  not  thirty  years  of  age  complete. At  this  enter-
prising period  of  life,  a  prince,  of  a  spirit  so  active,
persevering,  and  indefatigable,  must  have  soon  found
means  to  resume  a  favourite  measure,  on  which  he
had  been  long  intent. If  he  had  invaded  India  a
second  time,  he  would  not,  as  formerly,  have  been
obliged  to  force  his  way  through  hostile  and  unex-
plored regions,  opposed  at  every  step  by  nations  and
tribes  of  barbarians  whose  names  had  never  reached
Greece. All  Asia,  from  the  shores  of  the  Ionian
sea  to  the  banks  of  the  Hyphasis,  would  then  have
been  subject  to  his  dominion;  and  through  that  im-
mense stretch  of  country  he  had  established  such  a
chain  of  cities,  or  fortified  stations,"  that  his  armies
might  have  continued  their  march  with  safety,  and
have  found  a  regular  succession  of  magazines  pro-
vided for  their  subsistence.  Nor  would  it  have  been
difficult  for  him  to  bring  into  the  field  forces  suffi-
cient to  have  achieved  the  conquest  of  a  country  so
populous  and  extensive  as India. Having  armed
and  disciplined  his subjects in  the  East  like  Eu-
ropeans, they  would  have  been  ambitious  to  imitate,
and  to  equal  their  instructors,  and  Alexander  might
have  drawn  recruits,  not  from  his  scanty  domains  in
Macedonia  and  Greece,  but  from  the  vast  regions
of  Asia,  which,  in  every  age,  has  covered  the  earth,
and  astonished  mankind  with  its  numerous  armies.
When  at  the  head  of  such  a  formidable  power  he  had
reached  the  confines  of  India,  he  might  have  entered
it  under  circumstances  very  diffijrent  from  those  in
his  first  expedition. He  had  secured  a  firm  footing
there,  partly  by  means  of  the  garrisons  that  he  left
in  the  three  cities  which  he  had  built  and  fortified,
and  partly  by  his  alliance  with  Taxiles  and  Porus.

"  See  Note  XI.

SECT- I.  31

These  two  Indian  princes,  won  by  Alexander's  hu-
manity and  beneficence,  which,  as  they  were  virtues
seldom  displayed  in  the  ancient  mode  of  carrying  on
war,  excited  of  course  a  higher  degree  of  admiration
and  gratitude,  had  continued  steady  in  their  attach-
ment to  the  Macedonians.  Reinforced  by  their
troops,  and  guided  by  their  information  as  well  as
by  the  experience  which  he  had  acquired  in  his  for-
mer campaigns,  Alexander  must  have  made  rapid
progress  in  a  country,  where  every  invader,  from  his
time  to  the  present  age,  has  proved  successful.

But  this  and  all  his  other  splendid  schemes  were
terminated  at  once  by  his  untimely  death.  In  con-
sequence of  that,  however,  events  took  place,  which
illustrate  and  confirm  the  justness  of  the  preceding
speculations  and  conjectures  by  evidence  the  most
striking  and  satisfactory.  When  that  great  empire,
which  the  superior  genius  of  Alexander  had  kept
united  and  in  subjection,  no  longer  felt  his  superin-
tending control,  it  broke  into  pieces,  and  its  various
provinces  were  seized  by  his  principal  officers,  and
parcelled  out  among  them.  From  ambition,  emu-
lation, and  personal  animosity,  they  soon  turned
their  arms  against  one  another;  and  as  several  of  the
leaders  were  equally  eminent  for  political  abilities
and  for  military  skill,  the  contest  was  maintained
long,  and  carried  on  with  frequent  vicissitudes  of
fortune.  Amidst  the  various  convulsions  and  revo-
lutions which  these  occasioned,  it  was  found  that  the
measures  of  Alexander  for  the  preservation  of  his
conquests  had  been  concerted  with  such  sagacity,
that,  upon  the  final  restoration  of  tranquillity,  the
Macedonian  dominion  continued  to  be  established
in  every  part  of  Asia,  and  not  one  province  had
shaken  off  the  yoke.  Even  India,  the  most  remote
of  Alexander's  conquests,  quietly  submitted  to  Pytho

32  ANCIENT INDIA.

the  son  of  Agenor,  and  afterward  to  Seleucus,  who
successively  obtained  dominion  over  that  part  of
Asia.  Porus  and  Taxiles,  notwithstanding  the  death
of  their  benefactor,  neither  declined  submission  to
the  authority  of  the  Macedonians,  nor  made  any
attempt  to  recover  independence.

During  the  contests  for  power  and  superiority
among  the  successors  of  Alexander,  Seleucus,  who,
in  every  effort  of  enterprising  ambition,  was  inferior
to  none  of  them,  having  rendered  himself  master  of
all  the  provinces  of  the  Persian  empire,  compre-
hended under  the  name  of  Upper  Asia,  considered
those  countries  of  India  which  had  been  subdued  by
Alexander,  as  belonging  to  that  portion  of  the  Ma-
cedonian empire  of  which  he  was  now  the  sovereign.
Seleucus,  like  all  the  officers  formed  under  Alex-
ander, entertained  such  ideas  of  the  advantages
which  might  be  derived  from  a  commercial  inter-
course with  India,  as  induced  him  to  march  into  that
country,  partly  with  a  view  of  establishing  his  own
authority  there,  and  partly  in  order  to  curb  Sandra-
cottus,  w^ho  having  lately  acquired  the  sovereignty  of
the  Prasij,  a  powerful  nation  on  the  banks  of  the
Ganges,  threatened  to  attack  the  Macedonians,  whose
Indian  territories  bordered  on  his  dominions.  Un-
fortunately no  account  of  this  expedition,  which
seems  to  have  been  splendid  and  successful,  has
reached  our  times.  All  we  know  of  it  is,  that  he  ad-
vanced considerably  beyond  the  utmost  boundary  of
Alexander's  progress  in  India,''  and  would  probably
have  proceeded  much  farther,  if  he  had  not  been
constrained  to  stop  short  in  his  career,  in  order  to
oppose  Antigonus,  who  was  preparing  to  invade  his
dominions  at  the  head  of  a  formidable  army.  Before
he  began  his  march  towards  the  Euphrates,  he  con-

- »  See  Note  XII.

SECT.  I.  .33

eluded  a  treaty  with  Sandracottus  ;  in  consequence  of
which,  that  monarch  quietly  retained  the  king-dom
he  had  acquired.  But  the  powers  and  possessions
of  the  Macedonians  seem  to  have  remained  unim-
paired during-  the  reign  of  Seleucus,  which  termi-
nated forty- two  years  after  the  death  of  Alexander.
With  a  view  of  cultivating  a  friendly  intercourse
with  Sandracottus,  Seleucus  made  choice  of  Me-
gasthenes,  an  officer,  who,  from  his  having  accom-
panied Alexander  in  his  expedition  into  India,  had
some  knowledge  of  the  state  of  the  country,  and
the  manners  of  its  inhabitants,  and  sent  him  as  his
ambassador  to  Palibothra."  In  this  famous  capital
of  the  Prasij,  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,
Megasthenes  resided  several  years,  and  was  pro-
bably the  first  European  who  ever  beheld  that
mighty  river,  far  superior  to  any  of  the  ancient  con-
tinent in  magnitude,""  and  no  less  distinguished  by
the  fertility  of  the  countries  through  which  it  flows.
This  journey  of  Megasthenes  to  Palibothra  made
Europeans  acquainted  with  a  large  extent  of  coun-
try, of  which  they  had  not  hitherto  any  knowledge  ;
for  Alexander  did  not  advance  farther  towards  the
south-east  than  that  part  of  the  river  Hydraotes  or
Rauvee,  where  the  modern  city  of  Lahore  is  situ-
ated, and  Palibothra,  the  site  of  which,  as  it  is  a
capital  position  in  the  geography  of  ancient  India,
I  have  investigated  with  the  utmost  attention,  ap-
pears to  me  the  same  with  that  of  the  modern  city
of  Allahabad,  at  the  confluence  of  the  two  great
rivers,  Jumna  and  Ganges/  As  the  road  from
Lahore  to  Allahabad  runs  through  some  of  the  most
cultivated  and  opulent  provinces  of  India,  the  more
the  country  was  explored,  the  idea  of  its  value  rose

"  Strabo,  lib.  ii.  p.  121,  &c. Arrian,  Hist.  Ind.  passim,
s  See  Note  XIH.  >'  See  Note  XIV.

VOL. IX.  D

34  ANCIENT INDIA.

higher.  According-ly,  what  Megasthencs  observed
during  his  progress  to  Palibotlira,  and  his  resi-
dence there,  made  such  an  impression  upon  his
own  mind,  as  induced  him  to  publish  an  ample
account  of  India,  in  order  to  make  his  countrymen
more  thoroughly  acquainted  with  its  importance.
From  his  writings  the  ancients  seem  to  have  derived
almost  all  their  knowledge  of  the  interior  state  of
India,  and  from  comparing  the  three  most  ample
accounts  of  it,  by  Diodorus  Siculus,  Strabo,  and
Arrian,  they  appear  manifestly,  from  their  near
resemblance,  to  be  a  transcript  of  his  words.  But,
unfortunately,  Megasthenes  was  so  fond  of  the
marvellous,  that  he  mingled  with  the  truths  which
he  related  many  extravagant  fictions  ;  and  to  him
may  be  traced  up  the  fabulous  tales  of  men  with
ears  so  large  that  they  could  wrap  themselves  up
in  them,  of  others  with  a  single  eye,  without
mouths,  without  noses,  with  long  feet,  and  toes
turned  backwards,  of  people  only  three  spans  in
height,  of  wild  men  with  heads  in  the  shape  of  a
wedge,  of  ants  as  large  as  foxes  that  dug  up  gold,
and  many  other  things  no  less  wonderful.''  The
extracts  from  his  narrative  which  have  been  trans-
mitted to  us  by  Strabo,  Arrian,  and  other  writers,
seem  not  to  be  entitled  to  credit,  imless  when  they
are  supported  by  internal  evidence,  and  confirmed
by  the  testimony  of  other  ancient  authors,  or  when
they  coincide  with  the  experience  of  modern  times.
His  account,  however,  of  the  dimensions  and  geo-
graphy of  India,  is  curious  and  accurate.  His  de-
scription of  the  power  and  opulence  of  the  Prasij
perfectly  resembles  that  which  might  have  been
gfiven  of  some  of  the  jrreater  states  in  the  modern
Indostan,  before  the  establishment  of  the  Maho-

'■  Strabo,  lib.  xx.  1032.  A.  1037.  C.

SECT.  r.  .1)

medan  or  European  power  in  India,  and  is  con-
sonant to  the  accounts  which  Alexander  had  re-
ceived concerning  that  people.  He  was  informed,
as  has  been  already  mentioned,  that  they  were  pre-
pared to  oppose  him  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,
with  an  army  consisting  of  twenty  thousand  cavalry,
two  hundred  thousand  infantry,  and  two  thousand
armed  chariots  f  and  Megasthenes  relates,  that  he
had  an  audience  of  Sandracottus  in  a  place  where
he  was  encamped  with  an  army  of  four  hundred
thousand  men.**  The  enormous  dimensions  which
he  assio-ns  to  Palibothra,  of  no  less  than  ten  miles
in  length,  and  two  in  breadth,  and  surrounded  by
walls  in  which  there  were  five  hundred  and  seventy
towers,  and  sixty-four  gates,  would  probably  have
been  ranked  by  Europeans  among  the  wonders
which  he  delighted  to  relate,  if  they  were  not  now
well  acquainted  with  the  rambling  manner  in  which
the  cities  of  India  were  built,  and  did  not  know
with  certainty  that,  both  in  former  and  in  the  pre-
sent times,  it  might  boast  of  cities  still  more  ex-
tensive.*"

This  embassy  of  Megasthenes  to  Sandracottus,
and  another  of  Diamachus  to  his  son  and  successor
Allitrochidas,  are  the  last  transactions  of  the  Syrian
monarchs  with  India,  of  which  we  have  any  ac-
count.'^ Nor  can  we  either  fix  with  accuracy  the
time,  or  describe  the  manner  in  which  their  pos-
sessions in  India  were  wrested  from  them.  It  is
probable  that  they  were  obliged  to  abandon  that
country  soon  after  the  death  of  Seleucus."

But  though  the  great  monarchs  of  Syria  lost,
about  this  period,  those  provinces  in  India,  which

a  Diod.  Sicul.  lib.  xvii.  p.  232. Q.  Curt.  lib.  Ix.  c.  2.
b  Strabo,  lib-  xv.  p.  1035.  C.  "  Rennell,  Mem.  49,  50.

<)  See  Note  XV.  «  Justin,  lib.  xv.  c.  4.

D 2

30  ANCIENT INDIA.

had  been  subject  to  their  domiiiions,  the  Greeks  in
a  smaller  kingdom,  composed  of  some  fragments  of
Alexander's  empire,  still  maintained  an  intercourse
with  India,  and  even  made  some  considerable  ac-
quisition of  territory  there.  This  was  the  king-
dom of  Bactria,  originally  subject  to  Seleucus,  but
wrested  from  his  son  or  grandson,  and  rendered  an
independent  state,  about  sixty-nine  years  after  the
death  of  Alexander.  Concerning  the  transactions
of  this  kingdom,  we  must  rest  satisfied  with  glean-
ing a  few  imperfect  hints  in  ancient  authors.  From
them  we  learn  that  its  commerce  with  India  was
great ;  that  the  conquests  of  the  Bactrian  kings  in
that  country,  were  more  extensive  than  those  of
Alexander  himself,  and  particularly  that  they  reco-
vered possession  of  the  district  near  the  mouth  of
the  Indus,  which  he  had  subdued.'  Each  of  the
six  princes  who  reigned  in  Bactria,  carried  on  mili-
tary operations  in  India  with  such  success,  that
they  penetrated  far  into  the  interior  part  of  the
country,  and  proud  of  the  conquests  which  they
had  made,  as  well  as  of  the  entensive  dominions
over  which  they  reigned,  some  of  them  assumed  the
lofty  title  of  Great  King,  which  distinguished  the
Persian  monarchs  in  the  days  of  their  highest  splen-
dour. But  we  should  not  have  known  how  long
this  kingdom  of  Bactria  subsisted,  or  in  what  man-
ner it  terminated,  if  M.  de  Guignes  had  not  called
in  the  historians  of  China  to  supply  the  defects  of
the  Greek  and  Roman  writers.  By  them  we  are
informed,  that  about  one  hundred  and  twenty-six
years  before  the  Christian  era,  a  powerful  horde  of
Tartars,  pushed  from  their  native  seats  on  the  con-
fines of  China,  and  obliged  to  move  towards  the

'  Strabo,  lib.  xi.  785.  D.  lib.  xv.  1006.  H. Justin,  lib.  xli.  c.  4. Bayer,
Hist.  Regni  Grajcor.  Bactriani,  passim.

SECT. I.  37

west  by  the  pressure  of  a  more  numerous  body  that
rolled  on  behind  them,  passed  the  Jaxartes,  and
pouring  in  upon  Bactria,  like  an  irresistible  torrent,
overwhelmed  that  kingdom,  and  put  an  end  to  the
dominion  of  the  Greeks^  there,  after  it  had  been
established  near  one  hundred  and  thirty  years. *"

From  this  time  until  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury, when  the  Portuguese,  by  doubling  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope,  opened  a  new  communication  with  the
East,  and  carried  their  victorious  arms  into  every
part  of  India,  no  European  power  acquired  territory,
or  established  its  dominion  there.  During  this  long
period,  of  more  than  sixteen  hundred  years,  all
schemes  of  conquest  in  India  seem  to  have  been
totally  relinquished,  and  nothing  more  was  aimed  at
by  any  nation,  than  to  secure  an  intercourse  of  trade
with  that  opulent  country.

It  was  in  Egypt  that  the  seat  of  this  intercourse
was  established ;  and  it  is  not  without  surprise  that
we  observe  how  soon  and  how  regularly  the  com-
merce with  the  East  came  to  be  carried  on  by  that
channel,  in  which  the  sagacity  of  Alexander  des-
tined it  to  flow.  Ptolemy,  the  son  of  Lagus,  as  soon
as  he  took  possession  of  Egypt,  established  the  seat
of  government  in  Alexandria.  By  some  exertions  of
authority,  and  many  acts  of  liberality,  but  chiefly  by
the  fame  of  his  mild  and  equal  administration,  he
drew  such  a  number  of  inhabitants  to  this  favourite
residence,  that  it  soon  became  a  populous  and
wealthy  city.  As  Ptolemy  deserved  and  had  pos-
sessed the  confidence  of  Alexander  more  perfectly
than  any  of  his  officers,  he  knew  well  that  his  chief
object  in  founding  Alexandria  was  to  secure  the
advantages  arising  from  the  trade  with  India.  A
long  and  prosperous  reign  was  favourable  to  the  pro-

?  Mem.  de  Literal,  torn.  xxv.  p.  17,  &c.  '■  See  Note  XVI.

38  ANCIENT INDIA.

sedition  of  that  object,  and  though  ancient  authors
liave  not  enabled  us  to  trace  tlie  steps  which  the  first
Ptolemy  took  for  this  purpose,  we  have  a  striking
evidence of his extraordinary attention to naval
affairs,  in  his  erecting  a  light-house  on  the  island  of
Pharos,  at  the  mouth  of  the  harbour  of  Alexandria,'
a  work  of  such  mao:nificence  as  to  be  reckoned  one
of  the  seven  wonders  of  the  world. With  respect  to
the  commercial arrangements of  his son Ptolemy
Philadclphus, we have more perfect information.
In  order  to  bring  the  trade  with  India,  (which  began
to  revive  at  Tyre,  its  ancient  station,"")  to centre  in
Alexandria,  he  set  about  forming  a  canal,  a  hundred
cubits  in  breadth,  and  thirty cubits  in  depth,  be-
tween Arsinoe  on the  Red sea,  not  far from  the
situation  of  the  modern  Suez,  and  the  Peleusiac  or
eastern  branch  of  the  Nile,  by  means  of  Avhich  the
productions  of  India  might  have  been  conveyed  to
that  capital  wholly  by  water. But either  on  ac-
count of  some  danger  apprehended  from  completing
it,  that  work  was  never  finished ; or  from  the  slow
and  dangerous  navigation  towards  the  northern  ex-
tremity of  the  Red  sea,  this  canal  was  found  to  be
of  so  little  use,  that  in  order  to  facilitate  the  com-
munication with  India,  he  built  a  city  on  the  west
coast  of  that  sea,  almost  under  the  tropic,  to which
he  gave  the  name  of  Berenice.' This  new  city  soon
became  the  staple  of  the  trade  with  India.'" From
Berenice  the goods were transported by land to
Coptos,  a  city  three  miles  distant  from  the  Nile,  but
which had  a  communication with  that  river  by  a
navigable  canal,  of  which there  are  still  som^  re-
mains," and  thence  carried  down  the  stream  to  Alex-

»  Slrabo,  lib.  xvii.  p.  It  10.  C.  ^  Strabo,  lib.  xvi.  108P.  A.

'  Strabo,  lib.  xvii.  1136.  D.  Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  29.
.  »  Sec  Note  XVII.  "  irAnvillc  3Iera.  de  TEg^sptc,  p.  21.

SECT. I.  39

andria.  The  distance  between  Berenice  and  Coptos
was,  according  to  Pliny,  two  hundred  and  fifty-
eight  Roman  miles,  and  the  road  lay  through  the
desert  of  Thebais,  almost  entirely  destitute  of  water.
But  the  attention  of  a  powerful  monarch  made  pro-
visions for  supplying  this  want,  by  searching  for
springs,  and  wherever  these  were  found  he  built
inns,  or  more  probably  in  the  eastern  style  caravan-
seras,  for  the  accommodation  of  merchants.''  In  this
channel  the  intercourse  between  the  East  and  West
continued  to  be  carried  on  during  two  hundred  and
fifty  years  as  long  as  Egypt  remained  an  indepen-
dent kingdom.

The  ships  destined  for  India  took  their  departure
from  Berenice,  and  sailing,  according  to  the  ancient
mode  of  navigation,  along  the  Arabian  shore,  to  the
promontory  Syagrus  (now  Cape  Rasalgate),  held
their  course  along  the  coast  of  Persia,  either  directly
to  Pattala  (now  Tatta),  at  the  head  of  the  lower
Delta  of  the  Indus,  or  to  some  other  emporium  on
the  west  coast  of  India.  To  this  part  of  India
which  Alexander  had  visited  and  subdued,  the
commerce  under  the  protection  of  the  Egyptian
monarchs  seems  to  have  been  confined  for  a  con-
siderable time.  Afterward  a  more  convenient
course  was  followed,  and  from  Cape  Rasalgate
vessels  sailed  in  a  direct  course  to  Zizerus.  This,
according  to  M.  de  Montesquieu,''  was  the  kingdom
of  Sigertis,  on  the  sea-coast  adjacent  to  the  mouth
of  the  Indus,  conquered  by  the  Greek  monarchs  of
Bactria ;  according  to  Major  Rennell,''  it  was  a  port
on  the  northern  part  of  the  Malabar  coast.  Ancient
authors  have  not  conveyed  such  information  as  will
enable  us  to  pronounce with certainty, which  of

»  Strabo,  lib.  xvii.  p.  1157.  D.  1169.  p  L'Esprit  des  Loix,  lib.  xxi.  c.  7.

1  Introduct.  p.  xxxvii.

40  ANCIENT INDIA.

these  two  opposite  opinions  is  best  founded.  Nor
can  v>'c  point  out  with  accuracy,  what  were  the  other
ports  in  India  whicli  the  merchants  from  Berenice
frequented,  when  that  trade  was  first  opened.  As
they  sailed  in  vessels  of  small  burden,  which  crept
timidly  along-  the  coast,  it  is  probable  that  their
voyages  were  circumscribed  within  very  narrow
limits,  and  that  under  the  Ptolemies  no  considerable
progress  was  made  in  the  discovery  of  India/

From  this  monopoly  of  the  commerce  by  sea  be-
tween the  East  and  West,  which  Egypt  long  en-
joyed, it  derived  that  extraordinary  degree  of  opu-
lence and  power  for  which  it  was  conspicuous.  In
modern  times,  acquainted  with  the  vigilant  and  en-
terprising activity  of  commercial  rivalship,  there  is
hardly  any  circumstance  in  ancient  story  which  ap-
pears more  surprising,  than  that  the  sovereigns  of
Egypt  should  have  been  permitted  to  engross  this
lucrative  trade  without  competition,  or  any  attempt
to  wrest  it  out  of  their  hands  ;  especially  as  the
powerful  monarchs  of  Syria  might,  from  the  Persian
o-ulf,  have  carried  on  an  intercourse  with  the  same
parts  of  India,  by  a  shorter  and  safer  course  of  navi-
Q-ation.  Different  considerations  seem  to  have  in-
duced  them  so  tamely  to  relinquish  all  the  obvious
advantages  of  this  commerce.  The  kings  of  Egypt^
by  their  attention  to  maritime  affairs,  had  formed  a
powerful  fleet,  which  gave  them  such  decided  com-
mand of  the  sea,  that  they  could  have  crushed  with
ease  any  rival  in  trade.  No  commercial  intercourse
seems  ever  to  have  been  carried  on  by  sea  between
Persia  and  India.  The  Persians  had  such  an  insu-
perable aversion  to  that  element,  or  were  so  much
afraid  of  foreign  invasion,  that  their  monarchs  (as  I
have  already  observed)  obstructed  the  navigation  of

'  Set-  Note  XVIII.

SECT. I.  41

the  great  rivers,  which  gave  access  to  the  interior
parts  of  the  country,  by  artificial  works. As  their
subjects,  however,  were  no  less desirous  than  the
people  around  them  to  possess  the  valuable  produc-
tions and  elegant  manufactures  of  India,  these  were
conveyed  to  all  the  parts  of  their  extensive  dominions
by  land-carriage. The  commodities  destined  for  the
supply  of  the  northern  provinces,  were  transported
on  camels  from  the  bank^  of  the  Indus  to  those  of  the
Oxus,  down  the  stream  of  which  they  were  carried
to  the  Caspian  sea,  and  distributed,  partly  by  land-
carriage,  and  partly  by  navigable  rivers,  through  the
different  countries,  bounded  on  one  hand  by  the
Caspian,  and  on  the  other  by  the  Euxine  sea.' The
commodities  of  India  intended  for  the  southern  and
interior  provinces,  proceeded  by  land  from  the  Cas-
pian gates  to  some  of  the  great  rivers,  by  which  they
were  circulated  through  every  part  of  the  country.
This  was  the  ancient  mode  of  intercourse  with  India,
while  the  Persian  empire  was  governed  by  its  native
princes  ;  and  it  has  been  observed  in  every  age,  that
when  any  branch  of  commerce  has  got  into  a  certain
channel,  although  it  maybe  neither  the  most  proper
nor  the  most  commodious  one,  it  requires  long  time,
and  considerable  efforts,  to  give  it  a  different  di-
rection.'

To  all  these  reasons  for  suffering  the  monarchs  of
Egypt  to  continue  in  the  undisturbed  possession  of
the  trade  with  India  by  sea,  another  may  be  added.
Many  of  the  ancients,  by  an  error  in  geography  ex-
tremely unaccountable,  and  in  which  they  persisted,
notwithstanding  repeated  opportunities  of  obtaining
more  accurate  information,  believed  the  Caspian  sea
to  be  a  branch  of  the  great  Northern  ocean,  and  the
kings  of  Syria  might  hope  by  that  means  to  open  a

»Strabo,  lib.  xii.  776.  D. Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  17.  *  See  Note  XIX.

42  ANCIENT INDIA.

communication  with  Europe,  and  to  circulate  tlirougli
it  the  vahiable  productions  of  the  East,  without  in-
trudino-  into  those  seas,  the  navio-ation  of  which  the
Egyptian  monarchs  seemed  to  consider  as  their  ex-
clusive right.  This  idea  had  been  early  formed  by
the  Greeks,  when  they  became  masters  of  Asia.
Seleucus  Nicator,  the  first  and  most  sas^acious  of  the
Syrian  kings,  at  the  time  when  he  was  assassinated,
entertained  thoughts  of  forming  a  junction  between
the  Caspian  and  Euxine  seas  by  a  canal,"  and  if  this
could  have  been  effected,  his  subjects,  besides  the
extension  of  their  trade  in  Europe,  might  have  sup-
plied all  the  countries  in  the  north  of  Asia,  on  the
coast  of  the  Euxine  sea  as  well  as  many  of  those
which  stretch  eastward  from  the  Caspian,  with  the
productions  of  India.  As  those  countries,  though
now  thinly  inhabited  by  a  miserable  race  of  men,
destitute  of  industry  and  of  wealth,  were  in  ancient
times  extremely  populous,  and  filled  with  great  and
opulent  cities,  this  must  have  been  considered  as  a
branch  of  commerce  of  such  maofuitude  and  value,
as  to  render  the  securing  of  it  an  object  worthy  the
attention  of  the  most  powerful  monarch,
f  But  w^hile  the  monarchs  of  Egypt  and  Syria  la-
boured wdth  emulation  and  ardour  to  secure  to  their
subjects  all  the  advantages  of  the  Indian  trade,  a
power  arose  in  the  West  which  proved  fatal  to  both.
The  Romans,  by  the  vigour  of  their  military  institu-
tions, and  the  wisdom  of  their  political  conduct,
having  rendered  themselves  masters  of  all  Italy  and
Sicily,  soon  overturned  the  rival  republic  of
Carthage,  subjected  Macedonia  and  Greece,
extended  their  dominion  over  Syria,  and  at  last
turned  their  victorious  arms  against  Egypt,  the  only
kingdom  remaining  of  those  established  by  the  suc-

"  Piin.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  11.

SECT.  I.  43

cessors  of  Alexander  tlie  Great.  After  a  series  of
events  which  belong  not  to  the  subject  of  this  Dis-
quisition, Egypt  was  annexed  to  the  Roman  empire,
and  reduced  into  the  form  of  a  Roman  province  by
Augustus.  Aware  of  its  great  importance,
he,  with  that  provident  sagacity  which  dis-
tinguishes his  character,  not  only  reserved  it  as  one
of  the  provinces  subject  immediately  to  imperial
authority,  but  by  various  precautions,  well  known  to
every  scholar,  provided  for  its  security.  This  ex-
traordinary solicitude  seems  to  have  proceeded  not
only  from  considering  Egypt  as  one  of  the  chief
granaries  on  which  the  capital  depended  for  sub-
sistence, but  as  the  seat  of  that  lucrative  commerce
which  had  enabled  its  ancient  monarchs  to  amass
such  enormous  wealth,  as  excited  the  admiration  and
envy  of  other  princes,  and  produced,  when  brought
into  the  treasury  of  the  empire,  a  considerable  altera-
tion both  in  the  value  of  property,  and  the  state  of
manners,  in  Rome  itself.

AN

HISTORICAL  DISQUISITION

CONCERNING

ANCIENT  INDIA.

SECTION  II.

Intercourse  ivith  India,  from  the  EstahlisJiment  of  the
Roman  Dominion  in  Egypt,  to  the  Conquest  of  that
Kingdom  by  the  Mahomedans.

Upox  tlie  conquest  of  Egypt  by  the  Romans,  and
the  reduction  of  that  kingdom  to  a  province  of  their
empire,  the  trade  with  India  continued  to  be  carried
on  in  the  same  mode  under  their  powerful  pro-
tection :  Rome  enriched  with  the  spoils  and  the  tri-
bute of  almost  all  the  known  world,  had  acquired  a
taste  for  luxuries  of  every  kind.  Among  people
of  this  description,  the  productions  of  India  have
always  been  held  in  the  highest  estimation.  The
capital  of  the  greatest  empire  ever  established  in
Europe,  filled  with  citizens,  who  had  now  no  occu-
pation but  to  enjoy  and  dissipate  the  wealth  accu-
mulated by  their  ancestors,  demanded  every  thing
elegant,  rare,  or  costly,  which  that  remote  region
could  furnish,  in  order  to  support  its  pomp,  or
heighten  its  pleasures.  To  supply  this  demand,
new  and  extraordinary  efforts  became  requisite,  and
the commerce  with  India  increased  to a  degree,

SECT. If.  45

which  (as  I  have  observed  in  another  place ')  will  ap-
pear astonishing  even  to  the  present  age,  in  which  that
branch  of  trade  has  been  extended  far  beyond  the
practice  or  conception  of  any  former  period.

Besides  the  Indian  commodities  imported  into  the
capital  of  the  empire  from  Egypt,  the  Romans  re-
ceived an  additional  supply  of  them  by  another  mode
of  conveyance.  From  the  earliest  times,  there  seems
to  have  been  some  communication  between  Meso-
potamia, and  other  provinces  on  the  banks  of  the
Euphrates,  and  those  parts  of  Syria  and  Palestine,
which  lay  near  the  Mediterranean.  The  migration
of  Abram  from  Ur,  of  the  Chaldees  from  Sichem  in
the  land  of  Canaan,  is  an  instance  of  this.''  The
journey  through  the  desert,  which  separated  these
countries,  was  much  facilitated  by  its  affording  one
station  abounding  with  water,  and  capable  of  culti-
vation. As  the  intercourse  increased,  the  possession
of  this  station  became  an  object  of  so  much  im-
portance, that  Solomon,  when  he  turned  his  attention
towards  the  extension  of  commerce  among-  his  sub-
jects,  built  a  fenced  city  there.*"  Its  Syrian  name  of
Tadmor  in  the  wilderness,  and  its  Greek  one  of  Pal-
myra,  are  both  descriptive  of  its  situation  in  a  spot
adorned  with  palm-trees.  This  is  not  only  plentifully
supplied  with  water,  but  surrounded  by  a  portion  of
fertile  land,  which  (though  of  no  great  extent)  ren-
ders it  a  delightful  habitation  in  the  midst  of  barren
sands  and  an  inhospitable  desert.  Its  happy  position,
at  the  distance  of  eighty-five  miles  from  the  river
Euphrates,  and  about  one  hundred  and  seventeen
miles  from  the  nearest  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,'^

*  Hist. of  America,  vol.i.  p.  42.  ''  Genes,  xi.  xii.

<:  1  Kings  ix.  18. 2  Chron.  viii.  4.

•^  In  a  former  edition,  I  stated  the  distance  of  Palmyra  from  tlie  Euphrates  at

sixty  miles,  and  from  the  Mediterranean  at  two  hundred  and  three  miles. Into

these  errors  T  was  led  by  M.  D'Anville,  who,  in  his  Memoire  sur  I'Euphrate  et  le

Tigris,  a  work  published  in  old  age,  did  not  retain  his  wonted  accuracy. From

46  ANCIENT INDIA.

induced  its  inhabitants  to  enter  with  ardour  into  the
trade  of  conveying  commodities  from  one  of  these  to
the  other.  As  the  most  valuable  productions  of  India,
brought  up  the  Euphrates  from  the  Persian  gulf,  are
of  such  small  bulk  as  to  bear  the  expense  of  a  long
land-carriage,  this  trade  soon  became  so  considerable
that  the  opulence  and  power  of  Palmyra  increased
rapidly.  Its  government  was  of  the  form  which  is
best  suited  to  the  genius  of  a  commercial  city,  repub-
lican ;  and  from  the  peculiar  advantages  of  its  situa-
tion, as  well  as  the  spirit  of  its  inhabitants,  it  long
maintained  its  independence,  though  surrounded  by
powerful  and  ambitious  neighbours.  Under  the
Syrian  monarchs  descended  from  Seleucus  it  attained
to  its  highest  degree  of  splendour  and  wealth,  one
great  source  of  which  seems  to  have  been  the  sup-
plying their  subjects  with  Indian  commodities.  When
Syria  submitted  to  the  irresistible  arms  of  Rome,
Palmyra  continued  upwards  of  two  centuries  a  free
state,  and  its  friendship  was  courted  with  emulation
and  solicitude  by  the  Romans,  and  their  rivals  for
empire,  the  Parthians.  That  it  traded  with  both,
and  particularly  that  from  it  Rome  as  well  as  other
parts  of  the  empire  received  the  productions  of  India,
we  learn  from  Appian,  an  author  of  good  credit.*
But  in  tracing  the  progress  of  the  commerce  of  the
ancients  with  the  East,  I  should  not  have  ventured,
upon  his  single  testimony,  to  mention  this  among
the  channels  of  note  in  which  it  was  carried  on,  if  a
singular  discovery,  for  which  we  are  indebted  to  the
liberal  curiosity  and  enterprising  spirit  of  our  ovvn
countrymen,  did  not  confirm  and  illustrate  what  he
relates. Towards  the  close  of  the  last  century,  some

information  communicated  by  Major  Rennell,  I  Iiave  subslitutcd  tlic  true  dis-
tances.

«  Appian.  dc  Bello  Civil,  lili.  v.  p.  1076.  edit.  Toilii.

SECT. II.  47

gentlemen  of  the  English  factory  at  Aleppo,  incited
by  what  they  heard  in  the  East  concerning  the  won-
derful ruins  of  Palmyra,  ventured,  notwithstanding
the  fatigue  and  danger  of  a  journey  through  the  de-
sert, to  visit  them.  To  their  astonishment  they  be-
held a  fertile  spot  of  some  miles  in  extent  arising  like
an  island  out  of  a  vast  plain  of  sand,  covered  with
the  remains  of  temples,  porticoes,  aqueducts,  and
other  public  works,  which,  in  magnificence  and
splendour,  and  some  of  them  in  elegance,  were  not
unworthy  of  Athens  or  of  Rome  in  their  most  pros-
perous state.  Allured  by  their  description  of  them,
about  sixty  years  thereafter,  a  party  of  more  en-
lightened travellers,  having  reviewed  the  ruins  of
Palmyra  with  greater  attention  and  more  scientific
skill,  declared  that  what  they  beheld  there  exceeded
the  most  exalted  ideas  which  they  had  formed  con  -

cermngf  it.

From  both  these  accounts,  as  well  as  from  recol-
lecting the  extraordinary  degree  of  power  to  which
Palmyra  had  attained,  when  Egypt,  Syria,  Mesopo-
tamia, and  a  considerable  part  of  Asia  Minor  were
conquered  by  its  arms  ;  when  Odenatus,  its  chief
magistrate,  was  decorated  with  the  imperial  purple,
and  Zenobia  contended  for  the  dominion  of  the  East
with  Rome  under  one  of  its  most  warlike  emperors,
it  is  evident  that  a  state  which  could  derive  little  im-
portance from  its  original  territory,  must  have  owed
its  aggrandizement  to  the  opulence  acquired  by  ex-
tensive commerce.  Of  this  the  Indian  trade  was  un-
doubtedly the  most  considerable,  and  most  lucrative
branch.  But  it  is  a  cruel  mortification,  in  searching
for  what  is  instructive  in  the  history  of  past  times,  to
find  that  the  exploits  of  conquerors  who  have  deso-
lated the  earth,  and  the  freaks  of  tyrants  who  have

f  Wood's  Ruins  of  Palmyra,  p.  37.

48  ANCIENT INDIA.

rendered  nations  unhappy,  are  recorded  with  minute
and  often  disgusting  accuracy,  while  the  discovery
of  useful  arts,  and  the  progress  of  the  most  beneficial
branches  of  commerce,  are  passed  over  in  silence,  and
suti'ered  to  sink  into  oblivion.

After  the  conquest  of  Palmyra  by  Aurelian,  trade
never  revived  there.  At  present  a  few  miserable  huts
of  beggarly  Arabs  are  scattered  in  the  courts  of  its
stately  temples,  or  deform  its  elegant  porticoes ;  and
exhibit  a  humiliating  contrast  to  its  ancient  magni-
ficence.

But  while  the  merchants  of  Egypt  and  Syria  ex-
erted their  activity  in  order  to  supply  the  increasing
demands  of  Rome  for  Indian  commodities,  and  vied
with  each  other  in  their  efforts,  the  eao;erness  of  g-ain
(as  Pliny  observes)  brought  India  itself  nearer  to  the
rest  of  the  world.  In  the  course  of  their  voyages  to
that  country,  the  Greek  and  Egyptian  pilots  could
not  fail  to  observe  the  regular  shifting  of  the  periodi-
cal winds  or  monsoons,  and  how  steadily  they  con-
tinued to  blow  during  one  part  of  the  year  from  the
east,  and  during  the  other  from  the  west.  Encqu-
raged  by  attending  to  this  circumstance,  Hippalus,
the  commander  of  a  ship  engaged  in  the  Indian  trade,
ventured,  about  fourscore  years  after  Egypt  was  an-
nexed to  the  Roman  empire,  to  relinquish  the  slow
and  circuitous  course  which  I  have  described,  and
stretching  boldly  from  the  mouth  of  the  Arabian  gulf
across  the  ocean,  was  carried  by  the  western  monsoon
to  Musiris,  a  harbour  in  that  part  of  India  now  known
by  the  name  of  the  Malabar  coast.

This  route  to  India  was  held  to  be  a  discovery  of
such  importance,  that  in  order  to  perpetuate  the  me-
mory of  the  inventor,  the  name  of  Hippalus  was  given
to  the  wind  which  enabled  him  to  perform  the  voyage.*^

s  Perip.  Mar.  Erytlir.  p.  32.

SECT  II;  49

As  this  was  one  of  the  greatest  efforts  of  navigation
in  the  ancient  world,  and  opened  the  best  communi-
cation by  sea  between  the  East  and  West  that  was
known  for  fourteen  hundred  years,  it  merits  a  parti-
cular description.  Fortunately  Pliny  has  enabled  us
to  give  it  with  a  degree  of  accuracy,  which  can  seldom
be  attained  in  tracing  the  naval  or  commercial  ope-
rations of  the  ancients.  From  Alexandria  (he  ob-
serves) to  Juliopolis  is  two  miles ;  there  the  cargo
destined  for  India  is  em-barked  on  the  Nile,  and  is
carried  to  Coptos,  which  is  distant  three  hundred  and
three  miles,  and  the  voyage  is  usually  accomplished
in  twelve  days.  From  Coptos  goods  are  conveyed
by  land  carriage  to  Berenice  on  the  Arabian  gulf,
halting  at  different  stations  regulated  according  to
the  conveniency  of  watering.  The  distance  between
these  cities  is  two  hundred  and  fifty-eight  miles.  On
account  of  the  heat  the  caravan  travels  only  during
the  night,  and  the  journey  is  finished  on  the  twelfth
day.  From  Berenice,  ships  take  their  departure
about  midsummer,  and  in  thirty  days  reach  Ocelis
(Gella)  at  the  mouth  of  the  Arabian  gulf,  or  Cane
(Cape  Fartaque)  on  the  coast  of  Arabia  Felix.  Thence
they  sail,  in  forty  days,  to  Musiris,  the  first  emporium
in  India.  They  begin  their  voyage  homewards  early
in  the  Egyptian  month  Thibi,  which  answers  to  our
December;  they  sail  with  a  north-east  wind,  and,
when  they  enter  the  Arabian  gulf,  meet  with  a  south-
west wind,  and  thus  complete  the  voyage  in  less  than
a  year.""

The  account  which  Pliny  gives  of  Musiris,  and  of
Barace,  another  harbour  not  far  distant,  which  was
likewise  frequented  by  the  ships  from  Berenice,  as
beinof  both  so  incommodious  for  trade  on  account  of
the  shallowness  of  the  ports,  that  it  became  necessary

h  Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  23. See  Note  XX.
VOL.  IX.  E

50  ANCIENT INDIA.

to  discharge  and  take  in  the  cargoes  in  small  boats,
does  not  enable  us  to  fix  their  position  with  perfect
accuracy.  This  description  applies  to  many  ports  on
the  Malabar  coast;  but,  from  two  circumstances
mentioned  by  him  ;  one,  that  they  are  not  far  distant
from  Cottonara,  the  country  which  produces  pepper
in  great  abundance ;  and  the  other,  that,  in  sailing
towards  them,  the  course  lay  near  Nitrias,  the  station
of  the  pirates  ;  I  adopt  the  opinion  of  Major  Ren-
nell,  that  they  were  situated  somewhere  between  Goa
and  Tellicherry,  and  that  probably  the  modern  Meer-
zaw  or  Merjee  is  the  Musiris  of  the  ancients,  and  Bar-
celore  their  Barace.'

As  in  these  two  ports  was  the  principal  staple  of
the  trade  between  Egypt  and  India,  when  in  its  most
flourishing  state,  this  seems  to  be  the  proper  place  for
inquiring  into  the  nature  of  the  commerce  which  the
ancients,  particularly  the  Romans,  carried  on  with
that  country,  and  for  enumerating  the  commodities
most  in  request,  which  they  imported  from  it.  But
as  the  operations  of  commerce  and  the  mode  of  re-
gulating it,  were  little  attended  to  in  those  states  of
antiquity,  of  whose  transactions  we  have  any  accu-
rate knowledge  ;  their  historians  hardly  enter  into
any  detail  concerning  a  subject  of  such  subordinate
importance  in  their  political  system  ;  and  it  is  mostly
from  brief  hints,  detached  facts,  and  incidental  obser-
vations, that  we  can  gather  information  concerning  it.''

In  every  age,  it  has  been  a  commerce  of  luxury,
rather  than  of  necessity,  which  has  been  carried  on
between  Europe  and  India.  Its  elegant  manufac-
tures, spices,  and  precious  stones,  are  neither  objects
of  desire  to  nations  of  simple  manners,  nor  are  such
nations  possessed  of  wealth  sufficient  to  purchase
them. But  at  the  time  the  Romans  became  masters

» Introd.  p.  xxxyii.  ^  See  Note  XXI.

SECT.  II.  51

of  the  Indian  trade,  they  were  not  only  (as  has  al-
ready been  observed)  in  that  stage  of  society  when
men  are  eager  to  obtain  every  thing  that  can  render
the  enjoyment  of  life  more  exquisite,  or  add  to  its
splendour,  but  they  had  acquired  all  the  fantastic
tastes  formed  by  the  caprice  and  extravagance  of
wealth.  They  were,  of  consequence,  highly  delighted
with  those  new  objects  of  gratification  with  which
India  supplied  them  in  such  abundance.  The
productions  of  that  country,  natural  as  well  as  arti-
ficial, seem  to  have  been  much  the  same  in  that
age  as  in  the  present.  But  the  taste  of  the  Romans
in  luxury  differed,  in  many  respects,  from  that  of  mo-
dern times ;  and,  of  course,  their  demands  from  India
differed  considerably  from  ours.

In  order  to  convey  an  idea  of  their  demands  as  com-
plete as  possible,  I  shall,  in  the  first  place,  make  some
observations  on  the  three  great  articles  of  general
importation  from  India.  1.  Spices  and  aromatics.
2.  Precious  stones  and  pearls.  3.  Silk.  And  then  I
shall  give  some  account  (as  far  as  I  can  venture  to  do
it  from  authentic  information)  of  the  assortment  of
cargoes,  both  outward  and  homeward  bound,  for  the
vessels  fitted  out  at  Berenice,  to  different  ports  of
India.

I.  Spices  and  aromatics.  From  the  mode  of  reli-
gious worship  in  the  heathen  world  ;  from  the  incre-
dible number  of  their  deities,  and  of  the  temples  con-
secrated to  them,  the  consumption  of  frankincense  and
other  aromatics,  which  were  used  in  every  sacred
function,  must  have  been  very  great.  But  the  vanity
of  men  occasioned  a  greater  consumption  of  these
fragrant  substances,  than  their  piety.  It  was  the  cus-
tom of  the  Romans  to  burn  the  bodies  of  their  dead  ;
and  they  deemed  it  a  display  of  magnificence,  to
cover  not  only  the  body,  but  the  funeral  pile  on  whicli

E  2

rr2  ANCIENT INDIA.

it  was  laid,  with  the  most  costly  spices.  At  the  fu-
neral of  Sylla,  two  hundred  and  ten  burdens  of  spices
were  strewed  upon  the  pile.  Nero  is  reported  to  have
burnt  a  quantity  of  cinnamon  and  cassia  at  the  funeral
of  Pappoea,  greater  tlian  the  countries  from  which  it
was  imported  produced  in  one  year.  We  consume
in  heaps  these  precious  substances  with  the  carcasses
of  the  dead  (says  Pliny)  :  we  ofl'er  them  to  the  gods
only  in  grains.'"  It  was  not  from  India,  I  am  aware,
but  from  Arabia,  that  aromatics  were  first  imported
into  Europe ;  and  some  of  them,  particularly  frank-
incense, were  productions  of  that  country.  But  the
Arabians  were  accustomed,  together  with  spices  of
native  growth,  to  furnish  foreign  merchants  with
others  of  higher  value,  which  they  brought  from
India,  and  the  regions  beyond  it.  The  commercial
intercourse  of  the  Arabians  with  the  eastern  parts  of
Asia,  was  not  only  early,  but  considerable.  By
means  of  their  trading  caravans,  they  conveyed  into
their  own  country  all  the  valuable  productions  of  the
East,  among  which  spices  held  a  chief  place.  In
every  ancient  account  of  Indian  commodities,  spices
and  aromatics  of  various  kinds  form  a  principal  arti-
cle." Some  authors  assert  that  the  greater  part  of
those  purchased  in  Arabia  were  not  the  growth  of
that  country,  but  brought  from  India."  That  this
assertion  was  well  founded,  appears  from  what  has
been  observed  in  modern  times.  The  frankincense
of  Arabia,  though  reckoned  the  peculiar  and  most
precious  production  of  the  country,  is  much  inferior
in  quality  to  that  imported  into  it  from  the  East;  and
it  is  chiefly  with  the  latter  that  the  Arabians  at  pre-
sent supply  the  extensive  demands  of  various  pro-

>"  Nat.  Hist,  lib.  xii.  c.  18.
1  Pcripl.Mar.Erytli,  p.22.  28.  Strabo,  lib.  ii.  p.  l.'>6.  A.  lib.  xv.  p.  1018.  A.
»  Strabo,  lib.  xvii.  p.  1129.  C.

SECT. ir.  53

vinces  of  Asia  for  this  commodity.''  It  is  upon  good
authority,  then,  that  I  have  mentioned  the  importa-
tion of  spices  as  one  of  the  most  considerable  branches
of  ancient  commerce  with  India.  In  the  Augustan
age,  an  entire  street  in  Rome  seems  to  have  been  oc-
cupied by  those  who  sold  frankincense,  pepper,  and
aromatics.''

II.  Precious  stones,  together  with  which  pearls  may
be  classed,  seem  to  be  the  article  next  in  value  im-
ported by  the  Romans  from  the  East.  As  these
have  no  pretension  to  be  of  any  real  use,  their  value
arises  entirely  from  their  beauty  and  their  rarity,  and
even  when  estimated  most  moderately  is  always  high.
But  among  nations  far  advanced  in  luxury,  when
they  are  deemed  not  only  ornaments,  but  marks  of
distinction,  the  vain  and  the  opulent  vie  so  eagerly
with  one  another  for  the  possession  of  them,  that
they  rise  in  price  to  an  exorbitant  and  almost  incre-
dible height.  Diamonds,  though  the  art  of  cutting
them  was  imperfectly  known  to  the  ancients,  held  a
high  place  in  estimation  among  them,  as  well  as
among  us.  The  comparative  value  of  other  precious
stones  varied  according  to  the  diversity  of  tastes  and
the  caprice  of  fashion.  The  immense  number  of
them  mentioned  by  Pliny,  and  the  laborious  care
with  which  he  describes  and  arranges  them,'  will
astonish,  I  should  suppose,  the  most  skilful  lapidary
or  jeweller  of  modern  times,  and  shews  the  high  re-
quest in  which  they  were  held  by  the  Romans.

But  among  all  the  articles  of  luxury,  the  Romans
seem  to  have  given  the  preference  to  pearls,'  Per-
sons of  every  rank  purchased  them  with  eagerness ;
they  were  worn  on  every  part  of  dress  ;  and  there  is
such  a  difference,  both  in  size  and  in  value,  among

P  Neibahr.  Desciipt.  de  I'Arabie,  torn.  i.  p.  126.  i  Hor.  lib.  ii.  epist.  1.

>■  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  xxxvii.  »  Sec  Note  XXII.

54  ANCIENT INDIA.

pearls,  that  while  such  as  were  large  and  of  superior
lustre  adorned  the  wealthy  and  the  great,  smaller
ones  and  of  inferior  quality  gratified  the  vanity  of
persons  in  more  humble  stations  of  life.  Julius
Caesar  presented  Servilia,  the  mother  of  Brutus,  with
a  pearl,  for  which  he  paid  forty-eight  thousand  four
hundred  and  fifty-seven  pounds.  The  famous  pearl
ear-rings  of  Cleopatra  were  in  value  one  hundred
and  sixty- one  thousand  four  hundred  and  fifty-eight
pounds.'  Precious  stones,  it  is  true,  as  well  as  pearls,
were  found  not  only  in  India,  but  in  many  different
countries,  and  all  were  ransacked  in  order  to  gratify
the  pride  of  Rome.  India,  however,  furnished  the
chief  part,  and  its  productions  were  allowed  to  be
most  abundant,  diversified,  and  valuable.

III.  Another  production  of  India  in  great  demand
at  Rome,  was  silk ;  and  when  we  recollect  the  va-
riety of  elegant  fabrics  into  which  it  may  be  formed,
and  how  much  these  have  added  to  the  splendour  of
dress  and  furniture,  we  cannot  wonder  at  it  being
held  in  such  estimation  by  luxurious  people.  The
price  it  bore  was  exorbitant ;  but  it  was  deemed  a
dress  too  expensive  and  too  delicate  for  men,"  and
was  appropriated  wholly  to  women  of  eminent  rank
and  opulence.  This,  however,  did  not  render  the
demand  for  it  less  eager,  especially  after  the  example
of  the  dissolute  Elagabalus  introduced  the  use  of  it
among  the  other  sex,  and  accustomed  men  to  the  dis-
grace (as  the  severity  of  ancient  ideas  accounted  it)
of  wearing  this  effeminate  garb.  Two  circumstances
concerning  the  traffic  of  silk  among  the  Romans
merit  observation.  Contrary  to  what  usually  takes
place  in  the  operations  of  trade,  the  more  general
use  of  that  commodity  seems  not  to  have  increased

«  Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  ix.  c.  3.5. Sec  Note  XXIII.
"  Tacit.  Annal.  lib.  ii.  c.  33.

SECT.  II.  55

tlie  quantity  imported,  in  such  proportion  as  to  an-
swer the  growing-  demand  for  it,  and  the  price  of  silk
was  not  reduced  during  the  course  of  two  hundred
and  fifty  years  from  the  time  of  its  being  first  known
in  Rome.  In  the  reign  of  Aurelian,  it  still  continued
to  be  valued  at  its  weight  in  gold.  This,  it  is  pro-
bable, was  owing  to  the  mode  in  which  that  com-
modity was  procured  by  the  merchants  of  Alexan-
dria. They  had  no  direct  intercourse  with  China,
the  only  country  in  which  the  silkworm  was  then
reared,  and  its  labour  rendered  an  article  of  com-
merce. All  the  silk  which  they  purchased  in  the
different  ports  of  India  that  they  frequented,  was
brought  thither  in  ships  of  the  country  ;  and  either
from  some  defect  of  skill  in  managing  the  silkworm,
the  produce  of  its  ingenious  industry  among  the  Chi-
nese was  scanty,  or  the  intermediate  dealers  found
greater  advantage  in  furnishing  the  market  of  Alex-
andria with  a  small  quantity  at  a  high  price,  than  to
lower  its  value  by  increasing  the  quantity.  The
other  circumstance  which  I  had  in  view  is  more
extraordinary,  and  affords  a  striking  proof  of  the
imperfect  communication  of  the  ancients  with  remote
nations,  and  of  the  slender  knowledge  which  they
had  of  their  natural  productions  or  arts.  Much  as
the  manufactures  of  silk  were  admired,  and  often  as
silk  is  mentioned  by  the  Greek  and  Roman  authors,
they  had  not,  for  several  centuries,  after  the  use  of  it
became  common,  any  certain  knowledge  either  of  the
countries  to  which  they  were  indebted  for  this  fa-
vourite article  of  elegance,  or  of  the  manner  in  which
it  was  produced.  By  some,  silk  was  supposed  to  be
a  fine  down  adhering  to  the  leaves  of  certain  trees
or  flowers  ;  others  imagined  it  to  be  a  delicate  spe-
cies of  wool  or  cotton ;  and  even  those  who  had
learned  that  it  was  the  work  of  an  insect,  shew,  by

5(5  ANCIENT INDIA.

their  descriptions,  that  they  had  no  distinct  idea  of
the  manner  in  which  it  was  formed/  It  was  in  con-
sequence of  an  event  that  happened  in  the  sixth  cen-
tury of  the  Christian  era,  of  which  I  shall  hereafter
take  notice,  that  the  real  nature  of  silk  became  known
in  Europe.

The  other  commodities  usually  imported  from  In-
dia will  be  mentioned  in  the  account,  which  I  now
proceed  to  give,  of  the  cargoes  sent  out  and  brought
home  in  the  ships  employed  in  the  trade  with  that
country.  For  this  we  are  indebted  to  the  Circum-
navigation of  the  Erythraean  Sea,  ascribed  to  Arrian,
d  curious  though  short  treatise,  less  known  than  it
deserves  to  be,  and  which  enters  into  some  details
concerning  commerce,  to  which  there  is  nothing  simi-
lar in  any  ancient  writer.  The  first  place  in  India,  in
which  the  ships  from  Egypt,  while  they  followed  the
ancient  course  of  navigation,  were  accustomed  to
trade,  was  Patala  in  the  river  Indus.  They  imported
into  it  woollen  cloth  of  a  slight  fabric,  linen  in  che-
quer-work, some  precious  stones,  and  some  aromatics
unknown  in  India,  coral,  storax,  glass  vessels  of  dif-
ferent kinds,  some  wrought  silver,  money,  and  wine-
In  return  for  these,  they  received  spices  of  various
kinds,  sapphires,  and  other  gems,  silk  stuffs,  silk
threads,  cotton  cloths,^'  and  black  pepper.  But  a  far
more  considerable  emporium  on  the  same  coast  was
Barygaza,  and  on  that  account  the  author,  whom  I
follow  here,  describes  its  situation  and  the  mode  of
approaching  it,  with  great  minuteness  and  accuracy.
Its  situation  corresponds  entirely  with  that  of  Baroach,
on  the  great  river  Nerbuddah,  down  the  stream  of
which,  or  by  land-carriage,  from  the  great  city  of
Tagara  across  high  mountains,^  all  the  productions  of
the  interior  country  were  conveyed  to  it. The  arti-

X  Sec  Note  XXIV.  y  See  Note  XXV.  '  See  Note  XXVI.

SECT. ir.  57

cles  of  importation  and  exportation  in  this  great  mart
were  extensive  and  various.  Besides  these  already
mentioned,  our  author  enumerates  among  tlie  former,
Italian,  Greek,  and  Arabian  wines,  brass,  tin,  lead,
girdles  or  sashes  of  curious  texture,  melilot,  white
glass,  red  arsenic,  black  lead,  gold  and  silver  coin.
Amonp-  the  exports  he  mentions  the  onyx,  and  other,
gems,  ivory,  myrrh,  various  fabrics  of  cotton,  both
plain  and  ornamented  with  flowers,  and  long  pepper.*
At  Musiris,  the  next  emporium  of  note  on  that  coast,
the  articles  imported  were  much  the  same  as  at  Bary-
gaza ;  but  as  it  lay  nearer  to  the  eastern  parts  of  In-
dia, and  seems  to  have  had  much  communication  with
them,  the  commodities  exported  from  it  were  more
numerous  and  more  valuable.  He  specifies  particularly
pearls  in  great  abundance  and  of  extraordinary  beauty,
a  variety  of  silk  stuffs,  rich  perfumes,  tortoiseshell,  dif-
ferent kinds  of  transparent  gems,  especially  diamonds,
and  pepper  in  large  quantities,  and  of  the  best  quality.''

The  justness  of  the  account  given  by  this  author  of
the  articles  imported  from  India,  is  confirmed  by  the
Roman  law,  in  which  the  Indian  commodities  subject
to  the  payment  of  duties  are  enumerated.''  By  com-
paring these  two  accounts,  we  may  form  an  idea
tolerably  exact  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  trade
with  India  in  ancient  times.

As  the  state  of  society  and  manners  among  the  na-
tives of  India,  in  the  earliest  period  in  which  they  are
known,  nearly  resembled  what  we  observe  among  their
descendants  in  the  present  age ;  their  wants  and  de-
mands were,  of  course,  much  the  same.  The  inge-
nuity of  their  own  artists  was  so  able  to  supply  these,
that  they  stood  little  in  need  of  foreign  manufactures
or  productions,  except  some  of  the  useful  metals  which

a  Peripl.  Mar.  Erjthr.  p.  28.  •>  Ibid.  31,  32.

f  Digest,  lib.  sxxix,  tit,  iv.  §  16. Du  publicaiiis  et  Vectigalibus.

58  ANCIENT INDIA.

their  own  country  did  not  furnish  in  sufficient  quan-
tity ;  and  then,  as  now,  it  was  mostly  with  gold  and
silver  that  the  luxuries  of  the  east  were  purchased.  In
two  particulars,  however,  our  importations  from  India
difter  greatly  from  those  of  the  ancients.  The  dress,
both  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  was  almost  entirely
woollen,  which,  by  their  frequent  use  of  the  warm
bath,  was  rendered  abundantly  comfortable.  Their
consumption  of  linen  and  cotton  cloths  was  much  in-
ferior to  that  of  modern  times,  when  these  are  worn
by  persons  in  every  rank  of  life.  Accordingly,  a
great  branch  of  modern  importation  from  that  part
of  India  with  which  the  ancients  were  acquainted,
is  in  piece-goods ;  comprehending,  under  that  mer-
cantile term,  the  immense  variety  of  fabrics  which
ancient  Indian  ingenuity  has  formed  of  cotton.  But
as  far  as  I  have  observed,  we  have  no  authority  that
will  justify  us  in  stating  the  ancient  importation  of
these  to  be  in  any  degree  considerable.

In  modern  times,  though  it  continues  still  to  be
chiefly  a  commerce  of  luxury  that  is  carried  on  with
India,  yet,  together  with  the  articles  that  minister  to
it,  we  import,  to  a  considerable  extent,  various  com-
modities which  are  to  be  considered  merely  as  the
materials  of  our  domestic  manufactures.  Such  are
the  cotton- wool  of  Indostan,  the  silk  of  China,  and
the  saltpetre  of  Bengal.  But  in  the  account  of  an-
cient importations  from  India,  raw  silk  and  silk
thread  excepted,  I  find  nothing  mentioned  that  could
serve  as  the  materials  of  any  home-manufacture.
The  navigation  of  the  ancients  never  having  ex-
tended to  China,  the  quantity  of  unwrought  silk  with
which  they  were  supplied,  by  means  of  the  Indian
traders,  appears  to  have  been  so  scanty,  that  the
manufacture  of  it  could  not  make  an  addition  of  any
moment  to  their  domestic  industry.

SECT.  II.  59

After  this  succinct  account  of  the  commerce  car-
ried on  by  the  ancients  in  India,  I  proceed  to  inquire
what  knowledge  they  had  of  the  countries  beyond
the  ports  of  Musiris  and  Barace,  the  utmost  boun-
dary towards  the  east  to  which  I  have  hitherto  traced
their  progress. The  author  of  the  Circumnavigation
of  the  Erythraean  sea,  whose  accuracy  of  description
justifies  the  confidence  with  which  I  have  followed
him  for  some  time, seems  to  have  been  little  ac-
quainted with  that  part  of  the  coast  which  stretches
from  Barace  towards  the  south. He  mentions,  in-
deed, cursorily,  two  or  three  different  ports,  but  gives
no  intimation  that  any  of  them  were  staples  of  the
commerce  with  Egypt. He  hastens  to  Comar,  or
Cape  Comorin,  the  southernmost  point  of  the  Indian
peninsula ;  and  his  description  of  it  is  so  accurate,
and  so  conformable  to  its  real  state,  as  shews  his  in-
formation concerning  it  to  have  been  perfectly  au-
thentic.'^ Near  to  this  he  places  the  pearl  fishery  of
Colchos,  the  modern  Kilkare,  undoubtedly  the  same
with  that  now  carried  on  by  the  Dutch  in  the  strait
which  separates  the  island  of  Ceylon  from  the  con-
tinent ;  as  adjacent  to  this  he  mentions  three  different
ports,  which  appear  to  have  been  situated  on  the
east  side  of  the  peninsula,  now  known  by  the  name
,of  the  Coromandel  coast. He  describes  these  as
emporia,  or  stations  of  trade  f  but  from  an  attentive
consideration  of  some  circumstances  in  his  account
of  them,  I  think  it  probable  that  the  ships  from  Be-
renice did  not  sail  to  any  of  these  ports,  though  they
were  supplied,  as  he  informs  us,  with  the  commo-
dities brought  from  Egypt,  as  well  as  with  the  pro-
ductions of  the  opposite  coast  of  the  peninsula ;  but
these  seem  to  have  been  imported  in  country  ships  J
It  was  likewise  in  vessels  of  their  own,  varying  in

d  Pcripl.  p.  33. D'Aiiville  Ant.  de  I'Indc,  118,  &c.  «  Peripl.  p.  34.

f  Tontna  wXoia.

60  ANCIENT INDIA.

form  and  burden,  and  distinguished  by  different
names,  some  of  which  he  mentions,  tliat  they  traded
with  the  Golden  Chersonesus,  or  kingdom  of  Ma-
lacca, and  the  countries  near  the  Ganges.  Not  far
from  the  mouth  of  that  river  he  places  an  island,
which  he  describes  as  situated  under  the  rising:  sun,
and  as  the  last  region  in  the  east  that  was  inhabited  J
Of  all  these  parts  of  India,  the  author  of  the  Circum-
navigation appears  to  have  had  very  slender  know-
ledge, as  is  manifest,  not  only  from  what  he  mentions
concerning  this  imaginary  island,  and  from  his  not
attempting  to  describe  them,  but  from  his  relating,
with  the  credulity  and  love  of  the  marvellous,  which
always  accompany  and  characterize  ignorance,  that
these  remote  regions  were  peopled  with  cannibals,
and  men  of  uncouth  and  monstrous  forms.*"

I  have  been  induced  to  bestow  this  attention  in
tracinor  the  course  delineated  in  the  Circumnavio^a-
tion  of  the  Erythrsean  Sea,  because  the  author  of  it  is
the  first  ancient  writer  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for
any  knowledge  of  the  eastern  coast  of  the  great  pe-
ninsula of  India,  or  of  the  countries  which  lie  beyond
it.  To  Strabo,  who  composed  his  great  work  on
geography  in  the  reign  of  Augustus,  India,  particu-
larly the  most  eastern  parts  of  it,  was  little  known.
He  begins  his  description  of  it  with  requesting  the
indulgence  of  his  readers,  on  account  of  the  scanty
information  he  could  obtain  with  respect  to  a  coun-
try so  remote,  which  Europeans  had  seldom  visited,
and  many  of  them  transiently  only,  in  the  functions
of  military  service.  He  observes,  that  even  com-
merce had  contributed  little  towards  an  accurate  in-
vestigation of  the  country,  as  few  of  the  merchants
from  Egypt,  and  the  Arabian  gulf,  had  ever  sailed  as
far  as  the  Ganges  ;  and  from  men  so  illiterate,  intel-

?  Peripl,  p.  36.  *"  ibiJ-  !'•  J^-

SECT. II.  61

lio'ence  tliat  merited  a  full  deg^ree  of  confidence  could
scarcely  be  expected.  His  descriptions  of  India,
particularly  its  interior  provinces,  are  borrowed  almost
entirely  from  the  memoirs  of  Alexander's  officers,
with  some  slender  additions  from  more  recent  ac-
counts, and  these  so  few  in  number,  and  sometimes
so  inaccurate,  as  to  furnish  a  striking-  proof  of  the
small  progress  which  the  ancients  had  made  from  the
time  of  Alexander,  in  exploring  that  country.  When
an  author,  possessed  of  such  discernment  and  in-
dustry as  Strabo,  who  visited  in  person  several  distant
regions,  that  he  might  be  able  to  describe  them  with
greater  accuracy,  relates,  that  the  Ganges  enters  the
ocean  by  one  mouth,' we  are  warranted  in  concluding,
that  in  his  time  there  was  either  no  direct  naviofation
carried  on  to  that  great  river,  by  the  traders  from  the
Arabian  gulf,  or  that  this  voyage  was  undertaken  so
seldom,  that  science  had  not  then  derived  much  in-
formation from  it.

The  next  author,  in  order  of  time,  from  whom  we
receive  any  account  of  India,  is  the  elder  Pliny,  who
flourished  about  fifty  years  later  than  Strabo.  As  in
the  short  description  of  India,  given  in  his  Natural
History,  he  follows  the  same  guides  with  Strabo,  and
seems  to  have  had  no  knowledge  of  the  interior
country,  but  what  he  derived  from  the  memoirs  of
the  officers  who  served  under  Alexander  and  his  im-
mediate successors,  it  is  unnecessary  to  examine  his
description  minutely.  He  has  added,  however,  two
valuable  articles,  for  which  he  was  indebted  to  more
recent  discoveries.  The  one  is  the  account  of  the
new  course  of  navigation  from  the  Arabian  gulf  to
the  coast  of  Malabar,  the  nature  and  importance  of
which  I  have  already  explained.  The  other  is  a
description  of  the  island of  Taprobana, which I

>  Strabo,  lib.  xv.  1011.  C.

62  ANCIENT INDIA.

shall  consider  particularly,  after  inquiring  into  what
Ptolemy  has  contributed  towards  our  knowledo;e  of
the  ancient  state  of  the  Indian  continent.

Though  Ptolemy,  who  publislied  his  works  about
fourscore  years  after  Pliny,  seems  to  have  been  dis-
tinguished  for  his  persevering  industiy,  and  talent
for  arrangement,  rather  than  for  an  inventive  genius  ;
geography  has  been  more  indebted  to  him  for  its  im-
provement, than  to  any  other  philosopher.  For-
tunately for  that  science,  in  forming  his  general
system  of  geography,  he  adopted  the  ideas,  and
imitated  the  practice  of  Hipparchus,  who  lived  near
four  hundred  years  before  his  time.  That  great
philosopher  was  the  first  who  attempted  to  make  a
catalogue  of  the  stars.  In  order  to  ascertain  their
position  in  the  heavens  with  accuracy,  he  measured
their  distance  from  certain  circles  of  the  spheres,
computing  it  by  degrees,  either  from  east  to  west,  or
from  north  to  south.  The  former  w^as  denominated
the  longitude  of  the  star,  the  latter  its  latitude.  This
mode  he  found  to  be  of  such  utility  in  his  astrono-
mical researches,  that  he  applied  it  with  no  less  happy
effect  to  geography;  and  it  is  a  circumstance  w^orthy
of  notice,  that  it  was  by  observing  and  describing  the
heavens,  men  were  first  taught  to  measure  and  de-
lineate the  earth  with  exactness.  This  method  of
fixing  the  position  of  places,  invented  by  Hipparchus,
though  known  to  the  geogTaphers  between  his  time
and  that  of  Ptolemy,  and  mentioned  both  by  Strabo^
and  Pliny,'  was  not  employed  by  any  of  them.  Of
tliis  neglect  the  most  probable  account  seems  to  be,
that  as  none  of  them  w-ere  astronomers,  they  did  not
fully  comprehend  all  the  advantages  geography  might
derive  from  ihis  invention."'  These  Ptolemy,  who
had  devoted  a  long  life  to  the  improvement  of  astro-

k  Lib.  ii.  '  Nat,  Hist.  lib.  ii.  c.  12.  26.  70.  '^  See  Note  XXVIl.

SECT. II.  63

nomy,  theoretical  as  well  as  practical,  perfectly  dis-
cerned, and,  as  in  both  Hipparchus  was  his  guide,
he,  in  his  famous  treatise  on  geography,  described
the  different  parts  of  the  earth  according  to  their
longitude  and  latitude.  Geography  was  thus  esta-
lished  upon  its  proper  principles,  and  intimately  con-
nected with  astronomical  observations  and  mathema-
tical science.  This  work  of  Ptolemy  soon  rose  high
in  estimation  amono-  the  ancients."  Durino-  the  mid-
die  ages,  both  in  Arabia  and  in  Europe,  the  decisions
of  Ptolemy,  in  every  thing  relating  to  geography,
were  submitted  to  with  an  assent  as  implicit  as  was
yielded  to  those  of  Aristotle  in  all  other  departments
of  science.  On  the  revival  of  a  more  liberal  spirit
of  inquiry  in  the  sixteenth  century,  the  merit  of
Ptolemy "s  improvements  in  geography  was  examined
and  recognised ;  that  scientific  language  which  he
first  rendered  general,  continues  to  be  used,  and  the
position  of  places  is  still  ascertained  in  the  same  dis-
tinct and  compendious  manner,  by  specifying  their
lono'itude  and  latitude.

Not  satisfied  with  adopting  the  general  principles-
of  Hipparchus,  Ptolemy  emulated  him  in  the  appli-
cation of  them ;  and,  as  that  philosopher  had  ar-
ranged all  the  constellations,  he  ventured  upon  what
was  no  less  arduous,  to  survey  all  the  regions  of  the
earth  which  were  then  known,  and  'with  minute  and
bold  decision  he  fixed  the  longitude  and  latitude  of
the  most  remarkable  places  in  each  of  them.  All
his  determinations,  however,  are  not  to  be  considered
as  the  result  of  actual  observation,  nor  did  Ptolemy
publish  them  as  such.  Astronomical  science  was
confined,  at  that  time,  to  a  few  countries.  A  con-
siderable part  of  the  globe  was  little  visited,  and  im-
perfectly described.  The  position  of  a  small  number
of  places  only  had  been  fixed  with  any  degree  of  ac-

n  See  Note  XXVIII.

64  ANCIENT INDIA.

curacy.  Ptolemy  was  tlierefore  oblio-ed  to  consult
the  itineraries  and  surveys  of  the  Roman  empire,
which  the  political  wisdom  of  that  great  state  had
completed  with  immense  labour  and  expense."  Be-
yond tlie  precincts  of  the  empire,  he  had  nothing  on
which  he  could  rely,  but  the  journals  and  reports  of
travellers.  Upon  these  all  his  conclusions  were
founded ;  and  as  he  resided  in  Alexandria  at  a  time
when  the  trade  of  that  city  to  India  was  carried  on  to
its  utmost  extent,  this  situation  might  have  been  ex-
pected to  afford  him  the  means  of  procuring  ample
information  concerning  it.  But  either  from  the  im-
perfect manner  in  which  that  country  was  explored
in  his  time,  or  from  his  placing  too  much  confidence
in  the  reports  of  persons  who  had  visited  it  with  little
attention  or  discernment,''  his  general  delineation  of
the  form  of  the  Indian  continent  is  the  most  erroneous
that  has  been  transmitted  to  us  from  antiquity.  By
an  astonishing  mistake,  he  has  made  the  peninsula
of  India  stretch  from  the  Sinus  Barygazenus,  or  gulf
of  Cambay,  from  west  to  east,  instead  of  extending,
according  to  its  real  direction,  from  north  to  south.''
This  error  will  appear  the  more  unaccountable,  when
we  recollect  that  Mcgasthenes  had  published  a  mea-
surement of  the  Indian  peninsula,  which  approaches
near  to  its  true  dimensions  ;  and  that  this  had  been
adopted,  with  some  variations,  by  Eratosthenes,
Strabo,  Diodorus  Siculus,  and  Pliny,  who  wrote  prior
to  the  age  of  Ptolemy.""

Although  Ptolemy  was  led  to  form  such  an  erroneous
opinion  concerning  the  general  dimensions  of  the
Indian  continent,  his  information  with  respect  to  the
country  in  detail,  and  the  situation  of  particular
places,  was  more  accurate  ;  and  he  is  the  first  author
possessed  of  such  knowledge  as  enabled  him  to  trace

0  Sec  Note  XXIX.  p  Geogr.  lib.  i.  c.  17.  ')  Sec  Note  XXX.

''  Strabo,  lib.  xv.  1010.  B. Arrian,  Hist.  Indie,  c.  3,  -1. Diod.  Sicul.  lib.  ii.
p.  148. Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  21. See  Note  XXXI.

SECT, II.  (35

tlie  sea-coast,  to  mention  the  most  noted  places  situ-
ated upon  it,  and  to  specify  the  longitude  and  lati-
tude of  each  from  Cape  Comorin  eastward,  to  the
utmost  boundary  of  ancient  navigation.  With  regard
to  some  districts,  particularly  along  the  east  side  of
the  peninsula  as  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Ganges,
the  accounts  which  he  had  received  seem  to  have
been  so  far  exact,  as  to  correspond  more  nearly  per-
haps with  the  actual  state  of  the  country,  than  the
descriptions  which  he  gives  of  any  other  part  of  India.
M.  D'Anville,  with  his  usual  industry  and  discern-
ment, has  considered  the  principal  stations  as  they
are  fixed  by  him,  and  finds  that  they  correspond  to
Kilkare,  Negapatam,  the  mouth  of  the  river  Cauveri,
Masulipatam,  Point  Gordeware,  &c.  It  is  foreign
to  the  object  of  this  Disquisition  to  enter  into  such  a
minute  detail ;  but  in  several  instances  we  may  ob-
serve, that  not  only  the  conformity  of  position,  but
the  similarity  of  ancient  and  modern  names,  is  very
striking.  The  great  river  Cauveri  is  by  Ptolemy
named  Chaberis ;  Arcot,  in  the  interior  country,  is  Ar-
eata Regia;  and  probably  the  whole  coast  has  received
its  present  name  of  Coromandel  from  *Sbr  MatidiUam,
or  the  kingdom  of  Sorae,  which  is  situated  upon  it.^

In  the  course  of  one  hundred  and  thirty-six  years,
which  elapsed  from  the  death  of  Strabo  to  that  of
Ptolemy,  the  commercial  intercourse  with  India  was
greatly  extended ;  the  latter  geographer  had  acquired
such  an  accession  of  new  information  concerning  the
Ganofes,  that  he  mentions  the  names  of  six  different
mouths  of  that  river,  and  describes  their  positions.
His  delineation,  however,  of  that  part  of  India  which
lies  beyond  the  Ganges,  is  not  less  erroneous  in  its  ge-
neral form,  than  that  which  he  gave  of  the  peninsula,
and  bears  as  little  resemblance  to  the  actual  position  of

*  Ptol.  Geogr.  lib.  vii.  c.  1. D'Anville,  Antiq.  de  I'lnde,  127,  &c.
VOL. IX.  F

66  ANCIENT INDIA.

those  countries.  He  ventures,  nevertheless,  upon  a
survey  of  them,  similar  to  that  which  he  had  made
of  the  other  great  division  of  India,  which  I  have  al-
ready examined.  He  mentions  the  places  of  note
along  the  coast,  some  of  which  he  distinguishes  as
emporia  ;  but  whether  that  name  was  given  to  them
on  account  of  their  being  staples  of  trade  to  the  na-
tives, in  their  traffic  carried  on  from  one  district  of
India  to  another,  or  whether  they  were  ports,  to
which  vessels  from  the  Arabian  gulf  resorted  di-
,  _  rectly,  is  not  specified.  The  latter  I  should  think  to
be  the  idea  which  Ptolemy  means  to  convey  ;  but
those  regions  of  India  were  so  remote,  and,  from  the
timid  and  slow  course  of  ancient  navigation,  were
probably  so  little  frequented,  that  his  information
concerning  them  is  extremely  defective,  and  his  de-
scriptions more  obscure,  more  inaccurate,  and  less
conformable  to  the  real  state  of  the  country,  than  in
any  part  of  his  geography.  That  peninsula  to  which
he  gives  the  name  of  the  Golden  Chersonesus,  he  de-
lineates as  if  it  stretched  directly  from  north  to  south,
and  fixes  the  latitude  of  Sabana  Emporium,  its  south-
ern extremity,  three  degrees  beyond  the  line.  To  the
east  of  this  peninsula  he  places  what  he  calls  the
Great  Bay,  and  in  the  most  remote  part  of  it  the  sta-
tion of  Catigara,  the  utmost  boundary  of  navigation
in  ancient  times,  to  which  he  assigns  no  less  than

eiofht  deofrees  and  a  half  of  southern  latitude. Be-
es o

yond  this  he  declares  the  earth  to  be  altogether  un-
known, and  asserts  that  the  land  turns  thence  to  the
westward,  and  stretches  in  that  direction  until  it  joins
the  promontory  of  Prassum  in  Ethiopia,  which,  ac-
cording to  his  idea,  terminated  the  continent  of  Africa
to  the  south.'  In  consequence  of  this  error,  no  less
unaccountable  than  enormous,  he  must  have  believed

'  Ptoleni.  Geogr.  lib.  vii.  c.  3.  5. D'Anville,  Ant.  d(>  I'lnde,  187.

SECT. 11.  07

the  Erythraean  sea,  in  its  whole  extent  from  the  coast
of  Africa  to  that  of  Cambodia,  to  be  a  vast  bason,
without  any  communication  Avith  the  ocean."

Out  of  the  confusion  of  those  wild  ideas,  in  which
the  accounts  of  ignorant  or  fabulous  travellers  have
involved  the  geography  of  Ptolemy,  M.  D'Anville
has  attempted  to  bring  order ;  and,  with  much  inge-
nuity, he  has  formed  opinions  with  respect  to  some
capital  positions,  which  have  the  appearance  of  being
well  founded.  The  peninsula  of  Malacca  is,  accord-
ing to  him,  the  Golden  Chersonesus  of  Ptolemy  ;  but
instead  of  the  direction  which  he  has  given  it,  we
know  that  it  bends  some  degrees  towards  the  east,
and  that  Cape  de  Romanio,  its  southern  extremity,
is  more  than  a  degree  to  the  north  of  the  line.  The
gulf  of  Siam  he  considers  as  the  Great  Bay  of  Pto-
lemy, but  the  position  on  the  east  side  of  that  bay,
corresponding  to  Catigara,  is  actually  as  many  de-
grees to  the  north  of  the  equator,  as  he  supposed  it
to  be  south  of  it.  Beyond  this  he  mentions  an  inland
city,  to  which  he  gives  the  name  of  Thinas  or  Sinse
Metropolis.  The  longitude  which  he  assigns  to  it,
is  one  hundred  and  eighty  degrees  from  his  first  me-
ridian in  the  Fortunate  island,  and  is  the  utmost  point
towards  the  east  to  which  the  ancients  had  advanced
by  sea.  Its  latitude  he  calculates  to  be  three  degrees
south  of  the  line.  If,  with  M.  D'Anville,  we  conclude
the  situation  of  Sin-hoa,  in  the  western  part  of  the
kingdom  of  Cochin-China,  to  be  the  same  with  Sinse
Metropolis,  Ptolemy  has  erred  in  fixing  its  position
no  less  than  fifty  degrees  of  longitude,  and  twenty
deofrees  of  latitude."

These  errors  of  Ptolemy  concerning  the  remote

"  See  Note  XXXII.
*  Ptolem.  Geogr.  lib.  vii.  c.  3. D'Anville.  Limites  du  Monde  cocnu  des  An-
ciens  au  dela  du  Gauge.  Mem.  de  Literal,  xxxii.  604,  &c. Ant.  de  I'lnde,
Suppleni.  i.  161,  &c. See  Note  XXXIII.

F 2

68  ANCIENT INDIA.

parts  of  Asia,  have  been  rendered  more  conspicuous
by  a  mistaken  opinion  of  modern  times  engrafted
upon  them.  Sinae,  the  most  distant  station  men-
tioned in  his  geography,  has  such  a  near  resem-
blance in  sound  to  China,  the  name  by  which  the
greatest  and  most  civilized  empire  in  the  east  is
known  to  Europeans,  that,  upon  their  first  acquain-
tance with  it,  they  hastily  concluded  them  to  be  the
same ;  and  of  consequence  it  was  supposed  that  China
was  known  to  the  ancients,  though  no  point  seems  to
be  more  ascertained,  than  that  they  never  advanced
by  sea  beyond  that  boundary  which  I  have  allotted  to
their  navis^ation.

Having  thus  traced  the  discoveries  of  India  which
the  ancients  made  by  sea,  I  shall  next  examine  what
additional  knowledge  of  that  country  they  acquired
from  their  progress  by  land.  It  appears  (as  I  have
formerly  related)  that  there  was  a  trade  carried  on
early  with  India  through  the  provinces  that  stretch
along  its  northern  frontier.  Its  various  productions
and  manufactures  were  transported  by  land-carriage
into  the  interior  parts  of  the  Persian  dominions,  or
were  conveyed,  by  means  of  the  navigable  rivers
which  flow  through  the  Upper  Asia,  to  the  Caspian
sea,  and  from  that  to  the  Euxine.  While  the  suc-
cessors of  Seleucus  retained  the  dominion  of  the
East,  this  continued  to  be  the  mode  of  supplying
their  subjects  with  the  commodities  of  India.  When
the  Romans  had  extended  their  conquests  so  far  that
the  Euphrates  was  the  eastern  limit  of  their  empire,
they  found  this  trade  still  established,  and  as  it  open-
ed to  them  a  new  communication  with  the  East,  by
means  of  which  they  received  an  additional  supply
of  luxuries  for  which  they  had  acquired  the  highest
relish,  it  became  an  object  of  their  policy  to  protect
and  encourage  it. As  the  progress  of  the  caravans

SECT. II.  69

or  companies  of  merchants,  which  travelled  towards
the  countries  whence  they  received  the  most  valuable
manufactures,  particularly  those  of  silk,  was  often  in-
terrupted, and  rendered  dangerous  by  the  Parthians,
who  had acquired  possession  of  all  the  provinces
which  extended  from  the  Caspian  sea  to  that  part  of
Scythia  or  Tartary  which  borders  on  China,  the  Ro-
mans endeavoured  to  render  this  intercourse  more
secure  by  a  negotiation  with  one  of  the  monarchs  of
that  great  empire. Of  this  singular  transaction  there
is,  indeed,  no  vestige  in  the  Greek  or  Roman  writers  ;
our  knowledge  of  it  is  derived  entirely  from  the  Chi-
nese historians,  by  whom  we  are  informed  that  An-
toun  (the  emperor  Marcus  Antoninus),  the  king  of
the  people  of  the  Western  ocean,  sent  an  embasy
with  this  view  to  Oun-ti,  who  reigned  over  China  in
the  hundred  and  sixty-sixth  year  of  the  Christian
era.^ What  was  the  success  of  this  attempt  is  not
known,  nor  can  we  say  whether  it  facilitated  such  an
intercourse  between  these  two  remote  nations  as  con-
tributed towards  the  supply  of  their  mutual  wants.
The  design  certainly  was  not  unworthy  of  the  en-
lightened emperor  of  Rome  to  whom  it  is  ascribed.
It  is  evident,  however,  that  in  prosecuting  this
trade  with  China,  a  considerable  part  of  the  exten-
sive countries  to  the  east  of  the  Caspian  sea  must
have  been  traversed ;  and  though  the  chief  induce-
ment to  undertake  those  distant  journeys  was  gain,
yet  in  the  course  of  ages,  there  must  have  mingled
among  the  adventurers  persons  of  curiosity  and  abi-
lities, who  could  turn  their  attention  from  commer-
cial objects  to  those  of  more  general  concern. From
them  such  information  was  procured,  and  subjected
to  scientific  discussion,  as  enabled  Ptolemy  to  give

y  Memoire  sur  les  Liaisons  et  le  Commerce  des  Homains,  avec  las  Tartares  et
Ics  Chinois,  par  M.  de  Guignes. Mem.  de  Literal,  xxxii.  355,  &c.

70  ANCIENT INDIA.

a  description  of  those  inland  and  remote  regions  of
Asia/  fully  as  accurate  as  that  of  several  countries,
of  which,  from  their  vicinity,  he  may  have  been  sup-
posed to  have  received  more  distinct  accounts. The
farthest  point  towards  the  east,  to  which  his  know-
ledge of  tliis  part  of  Asia  extended,  is  Sera  Metropo-
lis, which  from  various  circumstances  appears  to  have
been  in  the  same  situation  with  Kant-cheou,  a  city  of
some  note  in  Chen-si,  the  most  westerly  province  of
the  Chinese  empire. This  he  places  in  the  longitude
of  one  hundred and seventy-seven  degrees  fifteen
minutes,  near  three  degrees  to  the  west  of  Sinse  Me-
tropolis, which  he  had  described  as  the  utmost  limit
of  Asia  discovered  by  sea. Nor  was  Ptolemy's  know-
ledge of  this  district  of  Asia  confined  only  to  that  part
of  it  through  which  the  caravans  may  be  supposed  to
have  proceeded  directly  in  their  route  eastward ;  he
had  received  likewise  some  general  information  con-
cerning various  nations  towards  the  north,  which,  ac-
cording to  the  position  that  he  gives  them,  occupied
parts  of  the  great  plain  of  Tartary,  extending  consi-
derably beyond  Lassa,  the  capital  of  Thibet,  and  the
residence  of  the  Dalai  Lama.

The  latitudes  of  several  places  in  this  part  of  Asia
are  fixed  by  Ptolemy  with  such  uncommon  precision,
that  we  can  hardly  doubt  of  their  having  been  ascer-
tained by  actual  observation.  Out  of  many  instances
of  this,  I  shall  select  three  of  places  situated  in  very
different  parts  of  the  countiy  under  review.  The
latitude  of  Nagara,  on  the  river  Cophenes  (the  mo-
dern Attock),  is,  according  to  Ptolemy,  thirty-two
degrees  and  thirty  minutes,  which  coincides  precisely
with  the  observation  of  an  eastern  geographer  quoted
by  M.  D'Anville." The  latitude  of  Maracanda,  or

'Lib.  vi.  c.  11—18.
»  Etiaiaissemonts,  &c. English  Traiislaliosi,  p.  10.

SECT. II.  71

Samarcand,  as  fixed  by  him,  is  thirty-nine  degrees
fifteen  minutes.  According  to  the  Astronomical  Ta-
bles of  Uleg  Beg',  the  grandson  of  Timur,  whose
royal  residence  was  in  that  city,  it  is  thirty-nine  de-
grees thirty-seven  minutes.''  The  latitude  of  Sera
Metropolis,  in  Ptolemy,  is  thirty-eight  degrees  fifteen
minutes ;  that  of  Kant-cheou,  as  determined  by  the
Jesuit  missionaries,  is  thirty-nine  degrees.  I  have
enumerated  these  striking  examples  of  the  coinci-
dence of  his  calculations  with  those  established  by
modern  observations,  for  two  reasons :  one,  because
they  clearly  prove  that  these  remote  parts  of  Asia
had  been  examined  with  some  considerable  degree
of  attention  ;  the  other  because  I  feel  great  satisfac-
tion, after  having  been  obliged  to  mention  several
errors  and  defects  in  Ptolemy's  geography,  in  ren-
dering justice  to  a  philosopher,  who  has  contributed
so  much  towards  the  improvement  of  that  science.
The  facts  which  I  have  produced  afford  the  strong-
est evidence  of  the  extent  of  his  information,  as  well
as  the  justness  of  his  conclusions  concerning  coun-
tries with  which,  from  their  remote  situation,  we
might  have  supposed  him  to  be  least  acquainted.

Hitherto  I  have  confined  my  researches  concerning
the  knowledge  which  the  ancients  had  of  India,  to
the  continent ;  I  return  now  to  consider  the  disco-
veries which  they  had  made,  of  the  islands  situated
in  various  parts  of  the  ocean  with  which  it  is  sur-
rounded, and  begin,  as  I  proposed,  with  Taprobane,
the  greatest  and  most  valuable  of  them.  This  island
lay  so  directly  in  the  course  of  navigators  who  ven-
tured beyond  Cape  Comorin,  especially  when,  ac-
cording to  the  ancient  mode  of  sailing,  they  seldom
ventured  far  from  the  coast,  that  its  position,  one
should  have  thought,  must  have  been  determined

**  Tab.  Gcogr.  ap.  Hudson,  Geogr.  Minores,  iii.  145.

7*2  ANCIENT INDIA.

with  the  utmost  precision.  There  is,  liowever,  hard-
ly any  point  in  the  geography  of  the  ancients  more
undecided  and  uncertain.  Prior  to  the  age  of  Alex-
ander tlie  Great,  the  name  of  Taprobane  was  un-
known in  Europe.  In  consequence  of  the  active
curiosity  with  which  he  explored  every  country  that
he  subdued  or  visited,  some  infomiation  concerning
it  seems  to  have  been  obtained.  From  his  time  al-
most every  writer  on  geography  has  mentioned  it,
but  their  accounts  of  it  are  so  various,  and  often  so
contradictory,  that  we  can  scarcely  believe  them  to
be  describing  the  same  island.  Strabo,  the  earliest
writer  now  extant,  from  whom  we  have  any  particu-
lar account  of  it,  affirms  that  it  was  as  large  as  Bri-
tain, and  situated  at  the  distance  of  seven  days,  ac-
cording to  some  reports,  and  according  to  others,  of
twenty  days'  sailing  from  the  southern  extremity  of
the  Indian  peninsula;  from  which,  contrary  to  what
is  known  to  be  its  real  position,  he  describes  it  as
stretching  towards  the  west  above  five  hundred  sta-
dia.' Pomponius  Mela,  the  author  next  in  order  of
time,  is  uncertain  whether  he  should  consider  Tapro-
bane as  an  island,  or  as  the  beginning  of  another
world ;  but  as  no  person,  he  says,  had  ever  sailed
round  it,  he  seems  to  incline  towards  the  latter  opi-
nion.**  Pliny  gives  a  more  ample  description  of
Taprobane,  which,  instead  of  bringing  any  accession
of  light,  involves  every  thing  relating  to  it  in  addi-
tional obscurity.  After  enumerating  the  various  and
discordant  opinions  of  the  Greek  writers,  he  informs
us,  that  ambassadors  were  sent  by  a  king  of  that
island  to  the  emperor  Claudius,  from  whom  the
Romans  learned  several  thinsfs  concernino-  it  which
were  formerly  unknown,  particularly  that  there  were

<^  Sirabo,  lib.  ii.  121.  B.  180.  B.  192.  A.  lib.  xv.  1012.  B.
<J  Dc  Silu  Oibis,  lib.  iii.  c.  7.

SECT. If.  73

five  hundred  towns  in  the  island,  and  that  in  the
centre  of  it  there  was  a  lake  three  hundred  and  se-
venty-five miles  in  circumference.  These  ambassa-
dors were  astonished  at  the  sight  of  the  Great  Bear
and  the  Pleiades,  being  constellations  which  did  not
appear  in  their  sky ;  and  were  still  more  amazed
when  they  beheld  their  shadows  point  towards  the
north,  and  the  sun  rise  on  their  left  hand,  and  set  on
their  right.  They  affirmed,  too,  that  in  their  coun-
try the  moon  was  never  seen  until  the  eighth  day
after  the  change,  and  continued  to  be  visible  only  to
the  sixteenth."  It  is  surprising  to  find  an  author  so
intelligent  as  Pliny  relating  all  these  circumstances
without  animadversion,  and  particularly  that  he  does
not  take  notice,  that  what  the  ambassadors  reported
concerning  the  appearance  of  the  moon,  could  not
take  place  in  any  region  of  the  earth.

Ptolemy,  though  so  near  to  the  age  of  Pliny,
seems  to  have  been  altogether  unacquainted  with  his
description  of  Taprobane,  or  with  the  embassy  to  the
emperor  Claudius.  He  places  that  island  opposite
to  Cape  Comorin,  at  no  great  distance  from  the
continent,  and  delineates  it  as  stretching  from  north
to  south  no  less  than  fifteen  degrees,  two  of  which
he  supposes  to  be  south  of  the  equator ;  and,  if  his
representation  of  its  dimensions  had  been  just,  it  was
well  entitled,  from  its  magnitude,  to  be  compared
with  Britain.*  Agathemerus,  who  wrote  after  Pto-
lemy, and  was  well  acquainted  with  his  geography,
considers  Taprobane  as  the  largest  of  all  islands,
and  assigns  to  Britain  only  the  second  place.^

From  this  diversity  of  the  descriptions  given  by
ancient  writers,  it  is  not  surprising  tliat  the  moderns
should  have  entertained very different  sentiments

<?  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  22.

f  Ptol.  lib,  vii.c.  1. D'Anvillc,  Ant.  dc  riiide,  p.  142.

s  Lib.ii.  c.  8.  apud  Hudson. Geogr.  Minor,  vol.  ii.

74  ANCIENT INDIA.

with  respect  to  the  island  in  the  Indian  ocean,  which
was  to  be  considered  as  the  same  with  the  Taprobane
of  the  Greeks  and  Romans.  As  both  Pliny  and
Ptolemy  describe  it  as  lying  in  part  to  the  south  of
the  equator,  some  learned  men  maintain  Sumatra  to
be  the  island  which  corresponds  to  this  description.
But  the  great  distance  of  Sumatra  from  the  peninsula
of  India  does  not  accord  with  any  account  which  the
Greek  or  Roman  writers  have  given  of  the  situation
of  Taprobane,  and  we  have  no  evidence  that  the  na-
vigation of  the  ancients  ever  extended  so  far  as  Su-
matra. The  opinion  more  generally  received  is,  that
the  Taprobane  of  the  ancients  is  the  island  of  Cey-
lon ;  and  not  only  its  vicinity  to  the  continent  of  In-
dia, but  the  general  form  of  the  island,  as  delineated
by  Ptolemy,  as  well  as  the  position  of  several  places
in  it,  mentioned  by  him,  establish  this  opinion  (not-
withstanding some  extraordinary  mistakes,  of  which
I  shall  afterward  take  notice)  with  a  great  degree  of
certaint3^

The  other  islands,  to  the  east  of  Taprobane,  men-
tioned by  Ptolemy,  might  be  shewn  (if  such  a  detail
were  necessary)  to  be  the  Andaman  and  Nicobar
islands  in  the  gulf  of  Bengal.

After  this  long,  and,  I  am  afraid,  tedious  investi-
gation of  the  progress  made  by  the  ancients,  in  ex-
ploring the  different  parts  of  India,  and,  after  tracing
them  as  fiar  as  they  advanced  towards  the  east  either
by  sea  or  land,  I  shall  offer  some  general  remarks
concerning  the  mode  in  which  their  discoveries  were
conducted,  and  the  degree  of  confidence  with  which
we  may  rely  on  the  accoiuits  of  them,  which  could
not  have  been  ofiered  with  the  same  advantaofe  until
this  investigation  was  finished.

The  art  of  delineating  maps,  exhibiting  cither  the
figure  of  the  whole  earth,  as  far  as  it  had  been  ex-

SECT. II.  75

plored,  or  that  of  particular  countries,  was  known  to
the  ancients ;  and  without  the  use  of  them  to  assist
the  imagination,  it  was  impossible  to  have  formed  a
distinct  idea  either  of  the  one  or  of  the  other.  Some
of  these  maps  are  mentioned  by  Herodotus  and  other
early  Greek  writers.  But  no  maps  prior  to  those
which  were  formed  in  order  to  illustrate  the  geogra-
phy of  Ptolemy,  have  reached  our  times,  in  conse-
cjuence  of  which  it  is  very  difficult  to  conceive  what
was  the  relative  situation  of  the  different  places  men-
tioned by  the  ancient  geographers,  unless  when  it  is
precisely  ascertained  by  measurement.*"  As  soon,
however,  as  the  mode  of  marking  the  situation  of
each  place,  by  specifying  its  longitude  and  latitude,
was  introduced,  and  came  to  be  generally  adopted,
every  position  could  be  described  in  compendious
and  scientific  terms.  But  still  the  accuracy  of  this
new  method,  and  the  improvement  which  geography
derived  from  it,  depends  upon  the  mode  in  which
the  ancients  estimated  the  latitude  and  longitude  of
places.

Though  the  ancients  proceeded  in  determining
the  latitude  and  longitude  of  places  upon  the  same
principles  with  the  moderns,  yet  it  was  by  means  of
instruments  very  inferior  in  their  construction  to
those  now  used,  and  without  the  same  minute  atten-
tion to  every  circumstance  that  may  affect  the  accu-
racy of  an  observation,  an  attention  of  which  long
experience  only  can  demonstrate  the  necessity.  In
order  to  ascertain  the  latitude  of  any  place,  the  an-
cients observed  tha.  meridian  altitude  of  the  sun,
either  by  means  of  the  shadow  of  a  perpendicular
gnomon,  or  by  means  of  an  astrolabe,  from  which  it
was  easy  to  compute  how  many  degrees  and  minutes
the  place  of  observation  was  distant  from  the  equa-

h  See  Note  XXXIV.

76  A  N  C I  E  N  T I  N  D I  A.

tor.  When  neither  of  these  methods  could  be  em-
ployed, they  inferred  the  latitude  of  any  place  from
the  best  accounts  wliich  they  could  procure  of  the
lenoth  of  its  longest  day.

With  respect  to  determining  the  longitude  of  any
place,  they  were  much  more  at  a  loss,  as  there  was
only  one  set  of  celestial  phenomena  to  which  they
could  have  recourse.  These  were  the  eclipses  of  the
moon  (for  those  of  the  sun  were  not  then  so  well
understood  as  to  be  subservient  to  the  purposes  of
geography) :  the  difference  between  the  time  at
which  an  eclipse  was  observed  to  begin  or  to  end  at
two  different  places,  gave  immediately  the  ditference
between  the  meridians  of  those  places.  But  the  dif-
ficulty of  making  those  observations  with  accuracy,
and  the  impossibility  of  repeating  them  often,  ren-
dered them  of  so  little  use  in  geography,  that  the
ancients  in  determining  longitudes  were  obliged,  for
the  most  part,  to  have  recourse  to  actual  surveys,  or
to  the  vagfue  information  which  was  to  be  obtained
from  the  reckonings  of  sailors,  or  the  itineraries  of
travellers.

But  though  the  ancients,  by  means  of  the  opera-
tions which  I  have  mentioned,  could  determine  the
position  of  places  with  a  considerable  degree  of  ac-
curacy at  land,  it  is  very  uncertain  whether  or  not
they  had  any  proper  mode  of  determining  this  at  sea.
The  navigators  of  antiquity  seem  rarely  to  have  had
recourse  to  astronomical  observation.  They  had  no
instruments  suited  to  a  moveable  and  unsteady  ob-
servatory ;  and  though,  by  their  practice  of  landing
frequently,  they  might,  in  some  measure,  have  sup-
plied that  defect,  yet  no  ancient  author,  as  far  as  I
know,  has  given  an  account  of  any  astronomical  ob-
servation made  by  them  during  the  course  of  their
voyages. It  seems  to  be  evident  from  Ptolemy,  who

SECT. II.  77

employs  some  chapters  in  shewing  how  geography
may  be  improved,  and  its  errors  may  be  rectified,
from  the  reports  of  navigators,'  that  all  their  calcu-
lations were founded  solely  upon  reckoning, and
were  not  the  result  of  observation. Even  after  all
the  improvements  which  the  moderns  have  made  in
the  science  of  navigation,  this  mode  of  computing
by  reckoning  is  known  to  be  so  loose  and  uncertain,
that,  from  it  alone,  no  conclusion  can  be  deduced
with  any  great  degree  of  precision. Among  the  an-
cients, this  inaccuracy  must  have  been  greatly  aug-
mented, as  they  were  accustomed  in  their  voyages,
instead  of  steering  a  direct  course,  which  might  have
been  more  easily  measured,  to  a  circuitous  navigation
along  the  coast; and  were  unacquainted  with  the
compass,  or  any  other  instrument  by  which  its  bear-
ings might  have  been  ascertained. We  find,  accord-
ingly, the  position  of  many  places  which  we  may
suppose  to  have  been  determined  at  sea,  fixed  with
little  exactness. When,  in  consequence  of  an  active
trade,  the  ports  of  any  country  were  much  frequent-
ed, the  reckonings  of  different  navigators  may  have
served,  in  some  measure,  to  correct  each  other,  and
may  have  enabled  geographers  to  form  their  conclu-
sions with  a  nearer  approximation  to  truth. But  in
remote  countries,  which  have  neither  been  the  seat
of  military  operations,  nor  explored  by  caravans  tra-
velling frequently  through  them,  every  thing  is  more
vague  and  undefined,  and  the  resemblance  between
the  ancient  descriptions  of  them, and their actual
figure,  is  often  so  faint,  that  it  can  hardly  be  traced.
The  latitude  of  places,  too,  as  might  be  expected,  was
in  general,  much  more  accurately  known  by  the  an-
cients than  their  longitude. The  observations  by
which  the  former  was  determined  are  simple,  made

*  Lib.i.  c.  7— 14.

78  ANCIENT [NDIA.

with  ease,  and  are  not  liable  to  much  error.  The  other
cannot  be  ascertained  precisely,  without  more  complex
operations,  and  the  use  of  instruments  much  more
perfect  than  any  that  the  ancients  seem  to  have  pos-
sessed.'' Among  the  vast  number  of  places,  the  posi-
tion of  which  is  fixed  by  Ptolemy,  I  know  not  if  he  ap-
proaches as  near  to  truth  in  the  longitude  of  any  one,
as  he  has  done  in  fixing  the  latitude  of  the  three  cities
which  I  formerly  mentioned  as  a  striking,  though  not
singular,  instance  of  his  exactness.

These  observations  induce  me  to  adhere  to  an
opinion  which  I  proposed  in  another  place,'  that  the
Greeks  and  Romans,  in  their  commercial  intercourse
with  India,  were  seldom  led,  either  by  curiosity,  or
the  love  of  gain,  to  visit  the  more  eastern  parts  of  it.
A  variety  of  particulars  occur  to  confirm  this  opinion.
Though  Ptolemy  bestows  the  appellation  of  emporia
on  several  places  situated  on  the  coast,  which  stretches
from  the  eastern  mouth  of  the  Ganges  to  the  extre-
mity of  the  Golden  Chersonesus,  it  is  uncertain,  whe-
ther from  his  having  given  them  this  name,  we  are
to  consider  them  as  harbours  frequented  by  ships
from  Egypt,  or  merely  by  vessels  of  the  country.
Beyond  the  Golden  Chersonesus,  it  is  remarkable
that  he  mentions  one  empoj^ium  only,""  which  plainly
indicates  the  intercourse  with  this  reofion  of  India  to
have  been  very  inconsiderable.  Had  voyages  from
the  Arabian  gulf  to  those  countries  of  India  been  as
frequent  as  to  have  entitled  Ptolemy  to  specify  so
minutely  the  longitude  and  latitude  of  the  great
number  of  places  which  he  mentions,  he  must,  in
consequence  of  this,  have  acquired  such  information
as  would  have  prevented  several  great  errors  into
which  he  has  fallen. Had  it  been  usual  to  double

t*'-  See  Note  XXXV.  '  Hist,  of  America,  vol.  i.  p.  80.  316.

■  Lib.  vii.  c.  2.

SECT. II.  79

Cape  Comorin,  and  to  sail  up  the  bay  of  Bengal  to
the  mouth  of  the  Ganges,  some  of  the  ancient  geo-
graphers would  not  have  been  so  uncertain,  and
others  so  widely  mistaken,  with  respect  to  the  situa-
tion and  magnitude  of  the  island  of  Ceylon.  If  the
merchants  of  Alexandria  had  often  visited  the  ports
of  the  Golden  Chersonesus,  and  of  the  Great  Bay,
Ptolemy's  descriptions  of  them  must  have  been  ren-
dered more  correspondent  to  their  real  form,  nor
could  he  have  believed  several  places  to  lie  beyond
the  line,  which  are  in  truth  some  degrees  on  this  side
of  it.

But  though  the  navigation  of  the  ancients  may  not
have  extended  to  the  farther  India,  we  are  certain
that  various  commodities  of  that  country  were  im-
ported into Egypt,  and  thence  were  conveyed  to
Rome,  and  to  other  parts  of  the  empire. From  cir-
cumstances which  I  have  already  enumerated,  we  are
warranted  in  concluding,  that  these  were  brought  in
vessels  of  the  country  to  Musiris,  and  to  the  other
ports  on  the  Malabar  coast,  which  were,  at  that  pe-
riod, the  staples  of  trade  with  Egypt. In  a  country
of  such  extent  as  India,  where  the  natural  produc-
tions are  various,  and  greatly  diversified  by  art  and
industry,  an  active  domestic  commerce,  both  by  sea
and  by  land,  must  have  early  taken  place  among  its
different  provinces. Of  this  we  have  some  hints  in
ancient  authors  ;  and  where  the  sources  of  informa-
tion are  so  few  and  so  scanty,  we  must  rest  satisfied
with  hints. Among  the  different  classes  or  casts,
into  which  the  people  of  India  were  divided,  mer-
chants are  mentioned  as  one,"  from  which  we  may
conclude  trade  to  have  been  one  of  the  established
occupations  of  men  in  that  country. From  the  author
of  the  Circumnavigation  of  the  Erythraean  sea,  we

n  Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  22.

80  ANCIENT INDIA.

learn  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  Coromandel  coast
traded  in  vessels  of  their  own  with  those  of  Malabar ;
that  the  interior  trade  of  Barygaza  was  considerable ;
and  tliat  there  was,  at  all  seasons,  a  number  of  coun-
try ships  to  be  found  in  the  harbour  of  Musiris."  By
Strabo  we  are  informed,  that  the  most  valuable  pro-
ductions of  Taprobane  were  carried  to  different  em-
poria  of  India.''  In  this  way  the  traders  from  Egypt
might  be  supplied  with  them,  and  thus  could  finish
their  voyages  within  the  year,  which  must  have  been
protracted  much  longer  if  they  had  extended  as  far
towards  the  east  as  is  generally  supposed.

From  all  this  it  appears  to  be  probable,  that  Pto-
lemy derived  the  information  concerning  the  eastern
parts  of  India,  upon  which  he  founds  his  calculations,
not  so  much  from  any  direct  and  regular  intercourse
between  Egypt  and  these  countries,  as  from  the  re-
ports of  a  few  adventurers,  whom  an  enterprising
spirit,  or  the  love  of  gain,  prompted  to  proceed  be-
yond the  usual  limits  of  navigation.

Though,  from  the  age  of  Ptolemy,  the  trade  with
India  continued  to  be  carried  on  in  its  former  chan-
nel, and  both  Rome,  the  ancient  capital  of  the  em-
pire, and  Constantinople,  the  new  seat  of  govern-
ment, were  supplied  with  the  precious  commodities
of  that  country  by  the  merchants  of  Alexandria,  yet,
until  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Justinian,  we  have  no
new  information  concernino-  the  intercourse  with  the
East  by  sea,  or  the  progress  which  was  made  in  the
discovery  of  its  remote  regions.  Under  Justinian,
Cosmas,  an  Egyptian  merchant,  in  the  course  of  his
traffic,  made  some  voyages  to  India,  whence  he  ac-
quired the  sirname  of  Indicopleustes  ;  but  afterward,
by  a  transition  not  uncommon  in  that  superstitious
age,  he  renounced  all  the  concerns  of  this  life,  and

"  Porip.  I\Iar.  Ervtiir.  :U  oO.  \<  I,il).  ii.  I'.H.  B.

SECT. II.  81

assumed  the  monastic  character.  In  the  solitude  and
leisure  of  a  cell,  he  composed  several  works,  one  of
which,  dignified  by  him  with  the  name  of  Christian
Topography,  has  reached  us.  The  main  design  of  it
is  to  combat  the  opinion  of  those  philosophers,  who
assert  the  earth  to  be  of  a  spherical  figure,  and  to
prove  that  it  is  an  oblong  plane,  of  twelve  thousand
miles  in  length  from  east  to  west,  and  of  six  thousand
miles  in  breadth  from  north  to  south,  surrounded  by
high  walls,  covered  by  the  firmament  as  with  a  canopy
or  vault;  that  the  vicissitude  of  day  and  night  was
occasioned  by  a  mountain  of  prodigious  height,  si-
tuated in  the  extremities  of  the  north,  round  which
the  sun  moved ;  that  when  it  appeared  on  one  side
of  this  mountain,  the  earth  was  illuminated,  when
concealed  on  the  other  side,  the  earth  was  left  in-
volved in  darkness.''  But  amidst  those  wild  reveries,
more  suited  to  the  credulity  of  his  new  profession,
than  to  the  sound  sense  characteristic  of  that  in
which  he  was  formerly  engaged,  Cosmas  seems  to
relate  what  he  himself  had  observed  in  his  travels,
or  what  he  had  learned  from  others,  with  great  sim-
plicity and  regard  for  truth.

He  appears  to  have  been  well  acquainted  with
the  west  coast  of  the  Indian  peninsula,  and  names
several  places  situated  upon  it;  he  describes  it  as
the  chief  seat  of  the  pepper-trade,  and  mentions
Male,  in  particular,  as  one  of  the  most  frequented
ports  on  that  account."  From  Male,  it  is  probable
that  this  side  of  the  continent  has  derived  its  modem
name  of  Malabar ;  and  the  cluster  of  islands  conti-
guous to  it,  that  of  the  Maldives.  From  him  too  we
learn,  that  the  island  of  Taprobane,  which  he  sup-
poses to  lie  at  an  equal  distance  from  the  Persian

1  Cosmas  ap.  Montfaucon  Collect.  Patrura,  ii.  113, &c.  138.
f  Cosm.  lib.  ii.  p.  138.  lib.  xi.  337.

VOL.  IX.  Q

82  ANCIENT INDIA.

gulf  on  the  west,  and  the  country  of  the  Sinse  on  the
east,  had  become,  in  consequence  of  this  commodious
situation,  a  great  staple  of  trade ;  that  into  it  were
imported  the  silk  of  the  Sinoe,  and  the  precious
spices  of  the  eastern  countries,  which  were  conveyed
thence  to  all  parts  of  India,  to  Persia,  and  to  the
Arabian  gulf.  To  this  island  he  gives  the  name  of
Sielediba,*  nearly  the  same  with  that  of  Selendib,  or
Serendib,  by  which  it  is  still  known  all  over  the  East.
To  Cosmas  we  are  also  indebted  for  the  first  in-
formation of  a  new  rival  to  the  Romans  in  trade  hav-
ing appeared  in  the  Indian  seas.  The  Persians,
after  having  overturned  the  empire  of  the  Parthians,
and  re-established  the  line  of  their  ancient  monarchs,
seem  to  have  surmounted  entirely  the  aversion  of
their  ancestors  to  maritime  exertion,  and  made  early
and  vigorous  efforts  in  order  to  acquire  a  share  in
the  lucrative  commerce  with  India.  All  its  consi-
derable ports  were  frequented  by  traders  from  Per-
sia, who,  in  return  for  some  productions  of  their  own
country  in  request  among  the  Indians,  received  the
precious  commodities,  which  they  conveyed  up  the
Persian  gulf,  and  by  means  of  the  great  rivers  Eu-
phrates and  Tigris,  distributed  them  through  every
province  of  their  empire.  As  the  voyage  from  Per-
sia to  India  was  much  shorter  than  that  from  Egypt,
and  attended  with  less  expense  and  danger,  the  in-
tercourse between  the  two  countries  increased  ra-
pidly. A  circumstance  is  mentioned  by  Cosmas
which  is  a  striking  proof  of  this.  In  most  of  the
cities  of  any  note  in  India  he  found  Christian
churches  established,  in  which  the  functions  of  reli-
gion were  performed  by  priests  ordained  by  the
archbishop  of  Seleucia,  the  capital  of  the  Persian
empire,  and  who  continued  subject  to  his  jurisdic-

»  Cosm.  lib.  xi.  336,

SECT.  II.  83

tion.*  India  appears  to  have  been  more  thoroughly
explored  at  this  period,  than  it  was  in  the  age  of
Ptolemy,  and  a  greater  number  of  strangers  seem  to
have  been  settled  there.  •  It  is  remarkable,  however,
that,  according  to  the  account  of  Cosmas,  none  of
these  strangers  were  accustomed  to  visit  the  eastern
regions  of  Asia,  but  rested  satisfied  with  receiving
their  silk,  their  spices,  and  other  valuable  produc-
tions, as  they  were  imported  into  Ceylon,  and  con-
veyed thence  to  the  various  marts  of  India."

The  frequency  of  open  hostilities  between  the  em-
perors of  Constantinople  and  the  monarchs  of  Per-
sia, together  with  the  increasing  rivalship  of  their
subjects  in  the  trade  with  India,  gave  rise  to  an  event
which  produced  a  considerable  change  in  the  nature
of  that  commerce.  As  the  use  of  silk,  both  in  dress
and  furniture,  became  gradually  more  general  in  the
court  of  the  Greek  emperors,  who  imitated  and  sur-
passed the  sovereigns  of  Asia  in  splendour  and  mag-
nificence ;  and  as  China,  in  which,  according  to  the
concurring  testimony  of  oriental  writers,  the  culture
of  silk  was  originally  known,"  still  continued  to  be
the  only  country  which  produced  that  valuable  com-
modity ;  the  Persians,  improving  the  advantages
which  their  situation  gave  them  over  the  merchants
from  the  Arabian  gulf,  supplanted  them  in  all  the
marts  of  India  to  which  silk  was  brought  by  sea  from
the  East.  Having  it  likewise  in  their  power  to  molest
or  to  cut  off  the  caravans,  which,  in  order  to  procure
a  supply  for  the  Greek  empire,  travelled  by  land  to
China,  through  the  northern  provinces  of  their  king-
dom, they  entirely  engrossed  that  branch  of  commerce.
Constantinople  was  obliged  to  depend  on  the  rival
power  for  an  article  which  luxury  viewed  and  desired
as  essential  to  elegance.  The  Persians,  with  the  usual

«  Cosm.  lib.  iii.  178. »  Lib.  xi.  337.  ^  Herbelot  Bibl.  Orient,  art.  Harir.

G 2

84  ANCIENT  INDIA.

rapacity  of  monopolists,  raised  the  price  of  silk  to
such  an  exorbitant  height/  that  Justinian,  eager,  not
only  to  obtain  a  full  and  certain  supply  of  a  com-
modity which  was  become  of  indispensable  use,  but
solicitous  to  deliver  the  commerce  of  his  subjects  from
the  exactions  of  his  enemies,  endeavoured,  by  means
of  his  ally,  the  Christian  monarch  of  Abyssinia,  to
wrest  some  portion  of  the  silk  trade  from  the  Persians.
In  this  attempt  he  failed  ;  but  when  he  least
expected  it,  he,  by  an  unforeseen  event,  at-
tained, in  some  measure,  the  object  which  he  had  in
view. Two  Persian  monks  having  been  employed  as
missionaries  in  some  of  the  Christian  churches,  which
were  established  (as  we  are  informed  by  Cosmas)  in
different  parts  of  India,  had  penetrated  into  the  coun-
try of  the  Seres  or  China. There  they  observed  the
labours  of  the  silkworm,  and  became  acquainted  with
all  the  arts  of  man  in  working  up  its  productions  into
such  a  variety  of  elegant  fabrics. The  prospect  of
gain,  or  perhaps  an  indignant  zeal,  excited  by  seeing
this  lucrative  branch  of  commerce  engrossed  by  un-
believing nations,  prompted  them  to  repair  to  Con-
stantinople. There  they  explained  to  the  emperor
the  origin  of  silk,  as  well  as  the  various  modes  of  pre-
paring and  manufacturing  it,  mysteries  hitherto  un-
known,  or  very  imperfectly  understood  in  Europe,
and  encouraged  by  his  liberal  promises,  they  under-
took to  bring  to  the  capital  a  sufficient  number  of  those
wonderful  insects,  to  whose  labours  man  is  so  much
indebted. This  they  accomplished  by  conveying  the
eggs  of  the  silkworm  in  a  hollow  cane. They  were
hatched  by  the  heat  of  the  dunghill,  fed  with  the  leaves
of  a  wild  mulberry-tree,  and  they  multiplied and
worked  in  the  same  manner  as  in  those  climates  where
they  first  became  objects  of  human  attention  and

y  Procop.  Hist.  Arcan.  c.  35.

SECT.  II.  85

care.'  Vast  numbers  of  these  insects  were  soon  reared
in  different  parts  of  Greece,  particularly  in  the  Pelo-
ponnesus. Sicily  afterward  undertook  to  breed  silk-
worms with  equal  success,  and  was  imitated  from  time
to  time  in  several  towns  of  Italy.  In  all  these  places
extensive  manufactures  were  established  and  carried
on  with  silk  of  domestic  production.  The  demand  for
silk  from  the  East  diminished  of  course,  the  subjects
of  the  Greek  emperors  were  no  longer  obliged  to  have
recourse  to  the  Persians  for  a  supply  of  it,  and  a
considerable  change  took  place  in  the  nature  of  the
commercial  intercourse  between  Europe  and  India."

»  Procop.  de  Bello  Gothic,  lib.  iv.  c.  17.  *  See  Note  XXXVl.

AN

HISTORICAL DISQUISITION

CONCERNING

ANCIENT INDIA.

SECTION  III.

Intercourse  with  India,  from  the  Conquest  of  Egypt  by
the  Mahomedans,  to  the  Discoveiy  of  the  Passage
by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  the  Establishment
of  the  Portuguese  Dominion  in  the  East.

About  fourscore  years  after  the  death  of  Justinian,
an  event  happened,  which  occasioned  a  revolution
still  more  considerable  in  the  intercourse  of  Europe
with  the  East.  Mahomet,  by  publishing  a  new  re-
ligion, seems  to  have  animated  his  countrymen  with
a  new  spirit,  and  to  have  called  forth  latent  passions
and  talents  into  exertion.  The  greatest  part  of  the
Arabians,  satisfied  from  the  earliest  times  with  na-
tional independence  and  personal  liberty,  tended  their
camels,  or  reared  their  palm-trees  within  the  precincts
of  their  own  peninsula,  and  had  little  intercourse  with
the  rest  of  mankind,  unless  when  they  sallied  out  to
plunder  a  caravan,  or  to  rob  a  traveller.  In  some
districts,  however,  they  had  begun  to  add  the  labours
of  agriculture,  and  the  business  of  commerce,  to  the
occupations  of  pastoral  life.''  These  different  orders
of  men,  when  prompted  by  the  enthusiastic  ardour
with  which  the  exhortations  and  example  of  Mahomet
inspired  them,  displayed  at  once,  all  the  zeal  of  mis-

•■>  Sale's  Koran,  Prelim.  Dis.  p.  32,  53.

SECT.  III.  87

sionaries,  and  the  ambition  of  conquerors.  They
spread  the  doctrine  of  their  prophet,  and  extended  the
dominion  of  his  successors,  from  the  shores  of  the  At-
lantic to  the  frontiers  of  China,  with  a  rapidity  of  suc-
cess to  which  there  is  nothing:  similar  in  the

A.  C.  1640.  ,  .  _  1  • 1 T-  r.  .

history  oi  mankind,  i^gypt  was  one  oi  its
earliest  conquests ;  and  as  they  settled  in  that  inviting
country,  and  kept  possession  of  it,  the  Greeks  were
excluded  from  all  intercourse  with  Alexandria,  to
which  they  had  long  resorted  as  the  chief  mart  of  In-
dian goods.  Nor  was  this  the  only  effect  which  the
progress  of  the  Mahomedan  arms  had  upon  the  com-
merce of  Europe  with  India.  Prior  to  their  invasion
of  Egypt,  the  Arabians  had  subdued  the  great  king-
dom of  Persia,  and  added  it  to  the  empire  of  their
caliphs.  They  found  their  new  subjects  engaged  in
prosecuting  that  extensive  trade  with  India,  and  the
country  to  the  east  of  it,  the  commencement  and  pro-
gress of  which  in  Persia  I  have  already  mentioned  ;
and  they  were  so  sensible  of  the  great  advantages  de-
rived from  it,  that  they  became  desirous  to  partake
of  them.  As  the  active  powers  of  the  human  mind,
when  roused  to  vigorous  exertions  in  one  line,  are
most  capable  of  operating  with  force  in  other  direc-
tions, the  Arabians,  from  impetuous  warriors,  soon
became  enterprising  merchants.  They  continued  to
carry  on  the  trade  with  India  in  its  former  channel  from
the  Persian  gulf,  but  it  was  with  that  ardour  which
characterizes  all  the  early  efforts  of  Mahomet  s  fol-
lowers. In  a  short  time  they  advanced  far  beyond  the
boundaries  of  ancient  navigation,  and  brought  many
of  the  most  precious  commodities  of  the  East  directly
from  the  countries  which  produced  them.  In  order
to  engross  all  the  profit  arising  from  the  sale  of
them,  the  caliph  Omar,''  a  few  years  after  the  conquest

•*  Herbel.  BibliotU.  Orient,  artic.  Basrah. Abul.  Pharas.  Hist.  Dynast,  p.  113.

88  ANCIENT INDIA.

of  Persia,  founded  the  city  of  Bassora,  on  the  western
banks  of  the  great  stream  formed  by  the  junction  of
the  Euphrates  and  Tigris,  with  a  view  of  securing  the
command  of  these  two  rivers,  by  which  goods  im-
ported from  India  were  conveyed  into  all  parts  of
Asia.  With  such  discernment  was  the  situation
chosen,  that  Bassora  soon  became  a  place  of  trade
hardly  inferior  to  Alexandria.

This  general  information  with  respect  to  the  trade
of  the  Arabians  with  India,  which  is  all  that  can  be
derived  from  the  historians  of  that  period,  is  confirmed
and  illustrated  by  the  relation  of  a  voyage  from  the
Persian  gulf  towards  the  East,  written  by  an  Arabian
merchant  in  the  year  of  the  Christian  era  851,  about
two  centuries  after  Persia  was  subjected  to  the  caliphs,
and  explained  by  the  commentary  of  another  Arabian,
who  had  likewise  visited  the  eastern  parts  of  Asia.''
This  curious  relation,  which  enables  us  to  fill  up  a
chasm  in  the  history  of  mercantile  communication
with  India,  furnishes  materials  for  describing  more
in  detail  the  extent  of  the  Arabian  discoveries  in  the
East,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  made  them.

Though  some  have  imagined  that  the  wonderful
property  of  the  magnet,  by  which  it  communicates
such  virtue  to  a  needle  or  slender  rod  of  iron,  as  to
make  it  point  towards  the  poles  of  the  earth,  was
known  in  the  East  long  before  it  was  observed  in
Europe,  it  is  manifest  both  from  the  relation  of  the
Mahomedan  merchant,  and  from  much  concurring
evidence,  that  not  only  the  Arabians,  but  the  Chinese,
were  destitute  of  this  faithful  guide,  and  that  their
mode  of  navigation  was  not  more  adventurous  than
that  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans.*^  They  steered  ser-
vilely along  the  coast,  seldom  stretching  out  to  sea
so  far  as  to  lose  sight  of  land ;  and  as  they  shaped

«  Sec  Note  XXXVIl.  •'  Relation,  p.  '.',  8,  &cc.

SECT.  III.  89

their  course  in  this  timid  manner,  their  mode  of  reck-
oning was  defective,  and  liable  to  the  same  errors
which  I  observed  in  that  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans.^

Notwithstanding  these  disadvantages,  the  progress
of  the  Arabians  towards  the  east  extended  far  beyond
the  gulf  of  Siam,  the  boundary  of  European  navi-
gation. They  became  acquainted  with  Sumatra,  and
the  other  islands  of  the  great  Indian  Archipelago,
and  advanced  as  far  as  the  city  of  Canton  in  China.
Nor  are  these  discoveries  to  be  considered  as  the  ef-
fect of  the  enterprising  curiosity  of  individuals  ;  they
were  owing  to  a  regular  commerce  carried  on  from
the  Persian  gulf  with  China,  and  all  the  intermediate
countries.  Many  Mahomedans,  imitating  the  ex-
ample of  the  Persians,  described  by  Cosmas  Indico-
pleustes,  settled  in  India  and  the  countries  beyond  it.
They  were  so  numerous  in  the  city  of  Canton,  that
the  emperor  (as  the  Arabian  authors  relate)  permitted
them  to  have  a  cadi  or  judge  of  their  own  sect,  who
decided  controversies  among  his  countrymen  by  their
own  laws,  and  presided  in  all  the  functions  of  religion.^
In  other  places  proselytes  ^were  gained  to  the  Ma-
homedan  faith,  and  the  Arabian  language  was  under-
stood and  spoken  in  almost  every  sea-port  of  any
note.  Ships  from  China  and  different  places  of  In-
dia traded  in  the  Persian  gulf,^  and  by  the  frequency
of  mutual  intercourse,  all  the  nations  of  the  east  be-
came better  acquainted  with  each  other.''

A  striking  proof  of  this  is  the  new  information  con-
cerning- China  and  India  we  receive  from  the  two
authors  I  have  mentioned.  They  point  out  the  si-
tuation of  Canton,  now  so  well  known  to  Europeans,

6  Renaudot.  Inquiry  into  the  time  when  the  Mahomedans  first  entered  China,
p.  143.

f  Relation,  7. Remarks,  p.  19. Inquiry,  p.  171,  &c.
e  Sec  Note  XXXVIII.  h  Relation,  p.  8.

90  ANCIENT INDIA.

with  a  considerable  degree  of  exactness.  They  take
notice  of  the  general  use  of  silk  among  the  Chinese.
They  are  the  first  who  mention  their  celebrated  ma-
nufacture of  porcelain,  which,  on  account  of  its  de-
licacy and  transparency,  they  compare  to  glass.'
They  describe  the  tea-tree,  and  the  mode  of  using  its
leaves  ;  and  from  the  great  revenue  which  was  levied
(as  they  inform  us)  from  the  consumption  of  it,  tea
seems  to  have  been  as  universally  the  favourite  beve-
rage of  the  Chinese  in  the  ninth  century,  as  it  is  at
present.""

Even  with  respect  to  those  parts  of  India  which
the  Greeks  and  Romans  were  accustomed  to  visit,
the  Arabians  had  acquired  more  perfect  information.
They  mention  a  great  empire  established  on  the
Malabar  coast,  governed  by  monarchs  whose  autho-
rity was  paramount  to  that  of  every  power  in  India.
These  monarchs  were  distinguished  by  the  appella-
tion of  Ba/chara,  a  name  yet  known  in  India;'  and  it
is  probable  that  the  Samorin,  or  emperor  of  Calicut,
so  frequently  mentioned  in  the  accounts  of  the  first
voyages  of  the  Portuguese  to  India,  possessed  some
portion  of  their  dominions.  They  celebrate  the  ex-
traordinary progress  which  the  Indians  had  made  in
astronomical  knowledge,  a  circumstance  which  seems
to  have  been  but  little  known  to  the  Greeks  and  Ro-
mans, and  assert  that  in  this  branch  of  science  they
were  far  superior  to  the  most  enlightened  nations  of
the  East,  on  which  account  their  sovereign  was  de-
nominated the  King  of  Wisdom.'"  Other  peculiari-
ties in  the  political  institutions,  the  mode  of  judicial
proceedings,  the  pastimes,  and  the  superstitions  of  the
Indians,  particularly  the  excruciating  mortifications

i  See  Note  XXXIX.  k  Relation,  p.  21.  25.

'  Herbelot.  artic.  Hcnd.  &  Belhar.  •"  Relation,  p.  37.  58.

SECT.  III.  91

and  penances  of  the  faquirs,  might  be  produced  as
proofs  of  the  superior  knowledge  which  the  Arabians
had  acquired  of  the  manners  of  that  people.

The  same  commercial  spirit  or  religious  zeal,  which
prompted  the  Mahomedans  of  Persia  to  visit  the  re-
motest regions  of  the  East,  animated  the  Christians
of  that  kingdom.  The  Nestorian  churches  planted
in  Persia,  under  the  protection  first  of  its  native  sove-
reigns, and  afterward  of  its  conquerors  the  caliphs,
were  numerous,  and  governed  by  respectable  eccle-
siastics. They  had  early  sent  missionaries  into  India,
and  established  churches  in  different  parts  of  it,  par-
ticularly, as  I  have  formerly  related,  in  the  island  of
Ceylon.  When  the  Arabians  extended  their  navi-
gation as  far  as  China,  a  more  ample  field,  both  for
their  commerce  and  their  zeal,  opened  to  their  view.
If  we  may  rely  on  the  concurring  evidence  of  Chris-
tian authors,  in  the  East  as  well  as  in  the  West,  con-
firmed by  the  testimony  of  the  two  Mahomedan  tra-
vellers, their  pious  labours  were  attended  with  such
success,  that  in  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries  the
number  of  Christians  in  India  and  China  was  very
considerable."  As  the  churches  in  both  these  coun-
tries received  all  their  ecclesiastics  from  Persia,  where
they  were  ordained  by  the  Catholicos,  or'  Nestorian
primate,  whose  supremacy  they  acknowledged,  this
became  a  regular  channel  of  intercourse  and  intelli-
gence ;  and  to  the  combined  effect  of  all  these  cir-
cumstances, we  are  indebted  for  the  information  we
receive  from  the  two  Arabian  writers,"  concerning
those  regions  of  Asia  which  the  Greeks  and  Romans
never  visited.

But  while  both  the  Mahomedan  and  Christian
subjects  of  the  caliphs  continued  to  extend  their
knowledge  of  the  East,  the  people  of  Europe  found

"  See  Note  XL.  "  Relation,  p.  39.

92  ANCIENT INDIA.

themselves  excluded  almost  entirely  from  any  inter-
course with  it.  To  them  the  great  port  of  Alexandria
was  now  shut,  and  the  new  lords  of  the  Persian  gulf,
satisfied  with  supplying  the  demand  for  Indian  com-
modities in  their  own  extensive  dominions,  neglected
to  convey  them,  by  any  of  the  usual  channels,  to  the
trading  towns  on  the  Mediterranean.  The  opulent
inhabitants  of  Constantinople,  and  other  great  cities
of  Europe,  bore  this  deprivation  of  luxuries,  to  which
they  had  been  long  accustomed,  with  such  impatience,
that  all  the  activity  of  commerce  was  exerted,  in  or-
der to  find  a  remedy  for  an  evil  which  they  deemed
intolerable.  The  difiiculties  which  were  to  be  sur-
mounted in  order  to  accomplish  this,  afford  the  most
striking  proof  of  the  high  estimation  in  which  the
commodities  of  the  East  were  held  at  that  time.  The
silk  of  China  was  purchased  in  Chensi,  the  western-
most province  of  that  empire,  and  conveyed  thence
by  a  caravan,  in  a  march  of  eighty  or  a  hundred  days,
to  the  banks  of  the  Oxus,  where  it  was  embarked,  and
carried  down  the  stream  of  that  river  to  the  Caspian.
After  a  dangerous  voyage  across  that  sea,  and  ascend-
ing the  river  Cyrus  as  far  as  it  is  navigable,  it  was
conducted  by  a  short  land  carriage  of  five  days  to  the
river  Phasis,''  which  falls  into  the  Euxine  or  Black
sea.  Thence,  by  an  easy  and  well  known  course,  it
was  transported  to  Constantinople.  The  conveyance
of  commodities  from  that  region  of  the  East,  now
known  by  the  name  of  Indostan,  was  somewhat  less
tedious  and  operose.  They  were  carried  from  the
banks  of  the  Indus  by  a  route  early  frequented,  and
which  I  have  already  described,  either  to  the  river
Oxus,  or  directly  to  the  Caspian,  from  which  they
held  the  same  course  to  Constantinople.

It  is  obvious,  that  only  commodities  of  small  bulk,

p  Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  17.

SECT.  III.  J)3

and  of  considerable  value,  could  bear  the  expense  of
such  a  mode  of  conveyance ;  and  in  regulating  the
price  of  those  commodities,  not  only  the  expense,
but  the  risk  and  danger  of  conveying  them,  were  to
be  taken  into  account.  In  their  journey  across  the
vast  plain  extending  from  Samarcand  to  the  frontier
of  China,  caravans  were  exposed  to  the  assaults  and
depredations  of  the  Tartars,  the  Huns,  the  Turks,  and
other  roving  tribes  which  infest  the  north-east  of
Asia,  and  which  have  always  considered  the  mer-
chant and  traveller  as  their  lawful  prey ;  nor  were
they  exempt  from  insult  and  pillage  in  their  journey
from  the  Cyrus  to  the  Phasis,  through  the  kingdom
of  Colchis,  a  country  noted,  both  in  ancient  and  in
modern  times,  for  the  thievish  disposition  of  its  in-
habitants. Even  under  all  these  disadvantages,  the
trade  with  the  East  was  carried  on  with  ardour.
Constantinople  became  a  considerable  mart  of  In-
dian and  Chinese  commodities,  and  the  wealth  which
flowed  into  it  in  consequence  of  this,  not  only  added
to  the  splendour  of  that  great  city,  but  seems  to  have
retarded,  for  some  time,  the  decline  of  the  empire  of
which  it  was  the  capital.

As  far  as  we  may  venture  to  conjecture,  from  the
imperfect  information  of  contemporary  historians,  it
was  chiefly  by  the  mode  of  conveyance  which  I  have
described,  perilous  and  operose  as  it  was,  that  Europe
was  supplied  with  the  commodities  of  the  East,  dur-
ing more  than  two  centuries.  Throughout  that  pe-
riod the  Christians  and  Mahomedans  were  engaged
in  almost  uninterrupted  hostilities ;  prosecuted  with
all  the  animosity  which  rivalship  for  power,  height-
ened by  religious  zeal,  naturally  excites.  Under  cir-
cumstances which  occasioned  such  alienation,  com-
mercial intercourse  could  hardly  subsist,  and  the
merchants  of  Christendom  either  did  not  resort  at  all

94  ANCIENT INDIA.

to  Alexandria,  and  the  ports  of  Syria,  tlie  ancient
staples  for  the  commodities  of  the  East,  after  they
were  in  possession  of  the  Mahomedans,  or  if  the  love
of  gain,  surmounting  their  abhorrence  of  the  infidels,
prompted  them  to  visit  the  marts  which  they  had  long
frequented,  it  was  with  much  caution  and  distrust.

While  the  difficulties  of  procuring  the  productions
of  the  East  were  thus  augmented,  the  people  of  Europe
became  more  desirous  of  obtainino:  them.  About  this
time  some  cities  of  Italy,  particularly  Amalphi  and
Venice,  having  acquired  a  greater  degree  of  security
or  independence  than  they  formerly  possessed,  began
to  cultivate  the  arts  of  domestic  industry,  with  an  ar-
dour and  ingenuity  uncommon  in  the  middle  ages.
The  effect  of  these  exertions  was  such  an  increase  of
wealth,  as  created  new  wants  and  desires,  and  formed
a  taste  for  elegance  and  luxury,  which  induced  them
to  visit  foreign  countries  in  order  to  gratify  it.  Among
men  in  this  stage  of  their  advancement,  the  produc-
tions of  India  have  always  been  held  in  high  estima-
tion, and  from  this  period  they  were  imported  into
Italy  in  larger  quantities,  and  came  into  more  gene-
ral use.  Several  circumstances  which  indicate  this
revival  of  a  commercial  spirit,  are  collected  by  the  in-
dustrious Muratori,  and  from  the  close  of  the  seventh
century,  an  attentive  observer  may  discern  faint  traces
of  its  progress.''

Even  in  enlightened  ages,  when  the  transactions  of
nations  are  observed  and  recorded  with  the  oreatest
care,  and  the  store  of  historical  materials  seems  to  be
abundantly  ample,  so  little  attention  has  been  paid  to
the  operations  of  commerce,  that  every  attempt  to-
wards a  regular  deduction  of  them,  has  been  found

1  Anliquit.  Ital.  Medij.  ^vi,  ii.  400.  408.  410.  883.  885.  894.  Rer.  lUl.
Script,  ii.  487.  Histoire  du  Commerce  dc  )a  Russia  par  M.  Scherer.  torn.  i.
p.  ll.&c.

S-ECT. III.  95

an  undertaking  of  the  utmost  difficulty.  The  era,
however,  to  which  I  have  conducted  this  Disquisition,
is  one  of  the  periods  in  the  annals  of  mankind  con-
cerning which  history  furnishes  most  scanty  informa-
tion. As  it  was  chiefly  in  the  Greek  empire,  and  in
some  cities  of  Italy,  that  any  efforts  were  made  to
procure  the  commodities  of  India,  and  the  other  re-
gions of  the  East,  it  is  only  from  the  historians  of
those  countries  we  can  expect  to  find  any  account  of
that  trade.  But  from  the  age  of  Mahomet,  until  the
time  when  the  Comneni  ascended  the  throne  of  Con-
stantinople, a  period  of  more  than  four  centuries  and
a  half,  the  Byzantine  history  is  contained  in  meagre
chronicles,  the  compilers  of  which  seldom  extended
their  views  beyond  the  intrigues  in  the  palace,  the
factions  in  the  theatre,  or  the  disputes  of  theologians.
To  them  the  monkish  annalists  of  the  different  states
and  cities  of  Italy,  during  the  same  period,  are  (if
possible)  far  inferior  in  merit ;  and  in  the  early  ac-
counts of  those  cities,  which  have  been  most  cele-
brated for  their  commercial  spirit,  we  search  with
little  success  for  the  origin  or  nature  of  that  trade  by
which  they  first  rose  to  eminence."^  It  is  manifest,
however,  from  the  slightest  attention  to  the  events
which  happened  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries,
that  the  Italian  states,  while  their  coasts  were  con-
tinually infested  by  the  Mahomedans,  who  had  made
some  settlements  there,  and  had  subjected  Sicily  al-
most entirely  to  their  dominion,  could  not  trade  with
much  confidence  and  security  in  Egypt  and  Syria.
With  what  implacable  hatred  Christians  viewed  Ma-
homedans, as  the  disciples  of  an  impostor,  is  well
known ;  and  as  all  the  nations  which  professed  the
Christian  faith,  both  in  the  east  and  west,  had
mingled  the  worship  of  angels  and  saints  with  that

>•  See  Note  LXl.

96  ANCIENT  INDIA.

of  the  Supreme  Being",  and  had  adorned  their  churches
with  pictures  and  statues ;  the  true  Moslems  consi-
dered themselves  as  the  only  assertors  of  the  unity
of  God,  and  beheld  Christians  of  every  denomination
with  abhorrence,  as  idolaters.  Much  time  was  re-
quisite to  soften  this  mutual  animosity,  so  far  as  to
render  intercourse  in  any  degree  cordial.

Meanwhile  a  taste  for  the  luxuries  of  the  East
continued  not  only  to  spread  in  Italy,  but,  from  imi-
tation of  the  Italians,  or  from  some  improvement  in
their  own  situation,  the  people  of  Marseilles  and
other  towns  of  France  on  the  Mediterranean,  became
equally  fond  of  them.  But  the  profits  exacted  by
the  merchants  of  Amalphi  or  Venice,  from  whom
they  received  those  precious  commodities,  were  so
exorbitant  as  prompted  them  to  make  some  effort  to
supply  their  own  demands.  With  this  view,  they
not  only  opened  a  trade  with  Constantinople,  but
ventured  at  times  to  visit  the  ports  of  Egypt  and
Syria."^  This  eagerness  of  the  Europeans,  on  the  one
hand,  to  obtain  the  productions  of  India,  and  on  the
other  hand,  considerable  advantages  which  both  the
caliphs  and  their  subjects  derived  from  the  sale  of
them,  induced  both  so  far  to  conceal  their  reciprocal
antipathy,  as  to  carry  on  a  traffic  manifestly  for  their
common  benefit.  How  far  this  traffic  extended,  and
in  what  mode  it  was  conducted  by  these  new  adven-
turers, the  scanty  information  which  can  be  gathered
from  contemporary  writers,  does  not  enable  me  to
trace  with  accuracy.  It  is  probable,  however,  that
this  communication  would  have  produced  insensibly
its  usual  effect,  of  familiarizino-  and  reconcilingf  men
of  hostile  principles  and  discordant  manners  to  one
another,  and  a  regular  commerce  might  have  been
established  gradually  between  Christians  and  Maho-

'  Mem.  dc  Literat.  torn,  xxxvii.  p.  467, &c.  485.

SECT.  III.  .97

medans,  upon  such  equal  terms,  that  the  nations  of
Europe  might  have  received  all  the  luxuries  of  the
East  by  the  same  channels  in  which  they  were  for-
merly conveyed  to  them,  first  by  the  Tyrians,  then  by
the  Greeks  of  Alexandria,  next  by  the  Romans,  and
at  last  by  the  subjects  of  the  Constantinopolitan
empire.

But  whatever  might  have  been  the  influence  of
this  growing  correspondence,  it  was  prevented  from
operating  with  full  eifect  by  the  crusades,  or  expedi-
tions for  the  recovery  of  the  Holy  Land,  which,
during  two  centuries,  occupied  the  professors  of
the  two  rival  religions,  and  contributed  to  alienate
them  more  than  ever  from  each  other.  I  have,  in
another  work,*  contemplated  mankind  while  under
the  dominion  of  this  frenzy,  the  most  singular  per-
haps, and  the  longest  continued,  of  any  that  occurs
in  the  history  of  our  species  ;  and  I  pointed  out  such
effects  of  it  upon  government,  upon  property,  upon
manners  and  taste,  as  were  suited  to  what  were
then  the  objects  of  my  inquiry.  At  present  my
attention  is  confined  to  observe  the  commercial  con-
sequences of  the  crusades,  and  how  far  they  con-
tributed to  retard  or  to  promote  the  conveyance  of
Indian  commodities  into  Europe.

To  fix  an  idea  of  peculiar  sanctity  to  that  country,
which  the  Author  of  our  religion  selected  as  the  place
of  his  residence  while  on  earth,  and  in  which  he
accomplished  the  redemption  of  mankind,  is  a  senti-
ment so  natural  to  the  human  mind,  that,  from  the
first  establishment  of  Christianity,  the  visiting  of  the
holy  places  in  Judea  was  considered  as  an  exercise
of  piety,  tending  powerfully  to  awaken  and  to  che-
rish a  spirit  of  devotion.  Through  succeeding  ages,
the  practice  continued  and  increased  in  every  part  of
Christendom. When Jerusalem  was subjected  to

t  Hist,  of  Charles  V.  vol.  i.  p.  26.  edit.  1787.
VOL. IX.  H

96  ANCIENT  INDIA.

the  Mahomedan  empire,  and  danger  was  added  to
the  fatigue  and  expense  of  a  distant  pilgrimage,
the  undertaking  was  viewed  as  still  more  meritori-
ous. It  was  sometimes  enjoined  as  a  penance  to
be  performed  by  heinous  transgressors.  It  was  more
frequently  a  duty  undertaken  with  voluntary  zeal,
and  in  both  cases  it  was  deemed  an  expiation  for  all
past  offences.  From  various  causes,  which  I  have
elsewhere  enumerated,*  these  pious  visits  to  the  Holy
Land  multiplied  amazingly  during  the  tenth  and
eleventh  centuries.  Not  only  individuals  in  the  lower
and  middle  ranks  of  life,  but  persons  of  superior  con-
dition, attended  by  large  retinues,  and  numerous
caravans  of  opulent  pilgrims  resorted  to  Jerusalem.

In  all  their  operations,  however,  men  have  a  won-
derful dexterity  in  mingling  some  attention  to  in-
terest with  those  functions  which  seem  to  be  most
purely  spiritual.  The  Mahomedan  caravans,  which,
in  obedience  to  the  injunctions  of  their  religion,  visit
the  holy  temple  of  Mecca,  are  not  composed,  as  I
shall  hereafter  explain  more  fully,  of  devout  pilgrims
only,  but  of  merchants,  who,  both  in  going  and  re-
turning, are  provided  with  such  an  assortment  of
goods,  that  they  carry  on  a  considerable  traffic."
Even  the  Faquirs  of  India,  whose  wild  enthusiasm
seems  to  elevate  them  above  all  solicitude  about  the
concerns  of  this  world,  have  rendered  their  frequent
pilgrimages  subservient  to  their  interest,  by  trading
in  every  country  through  which  they  travel.''  In  like
manner,  it  was  not  by  devotion  alone  that  such
numerous  bands  of  Christian  pilgrims  were  induced
to  visit  Jerusalem.  To  many  of  them  commerce  was
the  chief  motive  of  undertaking  that  distant  voyage  ;
and,  by  exchanging  the  productions  of  Europe  for
the  more  valuable  commodities  of  Asia,  particularly

»  Hist,  of  Charles  V.  vol.  i.  p.  27.  285.
»  Viagi  di  Raniusio,  vol.  i.  p.  151,  152.  ^  Sec  Note  XLII.

SECT.  III.  99

those  of  India,  which  at  that  time  were  diffused
through  every  part  of  the  caliph's  dominions,  they
enriched  themselves,  and  furnished  their  country-
men with  such  an  additional  supply  of  eastern  luxu-
ries, as  augmented  their  relish  for  them.^

But  how  faint  soever the  lines  may  be,  which,
prior  to  the  crusades,  mark  the  influence  of  the  fre-
quent pilgrimages  to  the  East  upon  commerce,  they
became  so  conspicuous  after  the  commencement  of
these  expeditions,  as  to  meet  the  eye  of  every  obser-
ver. Various  circumstances  concurred  towards  this,
from  an  enumeration  of  which  it  will  appear,  that,
by  attending  to  the  progress  and  effects  of  the  cru-
sades, considerable  light  is  thrown  upon  the  subject
of  my  inquiries.  Great  armies,  conducted  by  the  most
illustrious  princes  and  nobles  of  Europe,  and  com-
posed of  men  of  the  most  enterprising  spirit  in  all  the
kino-doms  of  it,  marched  towards  Palestine,  through
countries  far  advanced  beyond  those  which  they  left,
in  every  species  of  improvement. They  beheld  the
dawn  of  posterity  in  the  republics  of  Italy,  which
had  beo'un  to  vie  with  each  other  in  the  arts  of  in-
dustry, and  in  their  efforts  to  engross  the  lucrative
commerce  with  the  East. They  next  admired  the
more  advanced  state  of  opulence  and  splendour  in
Constantinople, raised  to  a  pre-eminence  above  all
the  cities  then  known,  by  its  extensive  trade,  parti-
cularly that  which  it  carried  on  with  India  and  the
countries  beyond  it.  They  afterward  served  in  those
provinces  of  Asia  through  which  the  commodities
of  the East  were  usually  conveyed, and  became
masters of  several  cities  which  had  been staples
of  that  trade. They established the kingdom  of
Jerusalem,  which  subsisted  near  two  hundred  years.
They  took  possession  of  the  throne  of  the  Greek

y  Gul.  Tyr.  lib.  xvii.  c.  4,  p.  933.  ap.  Gcsta  Dei  per  Francos.

H  2

100  ANCIENT  INDIA.

empire,  and  governed  it  above  half  a  century.
Amidst  such  a  variety  of  events  and  operations,  the
ideas  of  the  fierce  warriors  of  Europe  gradually
opened  and  improved  ;  they  became  acquainted  with
the  policy  and  arts  of  the  people  whom  they  sub-
dued ;  they  observed  the  sources  of  their  wealth,
and  availed  themselves  of  all  this  knowledge.  An-
tioch  and  Tyre,  when  conquered  by  the  crusaders,
were  flourishing  cities,  inhabited  by  opulent  mer-
chants, who  supplied  all  the  nations  trading  in  the
Mediterranean  with  the  productions  of  the  East,^  and
as  far  as  can  be  gathered  from  incidental  occur-
rences, mentioned  by  the  historians  of  the  Holy  War,
who,  being  mostly  priests  and  monks,  had  their  at-
tention directed  to  objects  very  different  from  those
relating  to  commerce,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that,
both  in  Constantinople,  while  subject  to  the  Franks,
and  in  the  ports  of  Syria,  acquired  by  the  Chris-
tians, the  long-established  trade  with  the  East  con-
tinued to  be  protected  and  encouraged.

But  though  commerce  may  have  been  only  a
secondary  object  with  the  martial  leaders  of  the
crusades,  engaged  in  perpetual  hotilities  with  the
Turks  on  one  hand,  and  with  the  Soldans  of  Egypt
on  the  other,  it  was  the  primary  object  with  the
associates,  in  conjunction  with  whom  they  carried
on  their  operations.  Numerous  as  the  armies  were
which  assumed  the  cross,  and  enterprising  as  the
fanatical  zeal  was  with  which  they  were  animated,
they  could  not  have  accomplished  their  purpose,  or
even  have  reached  the  seat  of  their  warfare,  without
securing  the  assistance  of  the  Italian  states.  None
of  the  other  European  powers  could  either  furnish  a
sufficient  number  of  transports  to  convey  the  armies
of  the  crusaders  to  the  coast  of  Dalmatia,  whence

»  Gul.  T\r.  lib.  xiii.  c.  5. Alb.  Aquens.  Hist.  Hieros.  an.  Gesta  Dei,  vol.  i.
p.  247,  '

SECT.  iir.  101

they  marched  to  Constantinople,  the  place  of  general
rendezvous  ;  or  were  able  to  supply  them  with  mili-
tary stores  and  provisions  in  such  abundance  as  to
enable  them  to  invade  a  distant  country.  In  all  the
successive  expeditions,  the  fleets  of  the  Genoese,  of
the  Pisans,  or  of  the  Venetians,  kept  on  the  coast
as  the  armies  advanced  by  land,  and  supplying  them
from  time  to  time  with  whatever  was  wanting,  en-
grossed all  the  profits  of  a  branch  of  commerce,
which,  in  every  age,  has  been  extremely  lucrative.  It
was  with  all  the  interested  attention  of  merchants,
that  the  Italians  afforded  their  aid.  On  the  reduc-
tion of  any  place  in  which  they  found  it  for  their
interest  to  settle,  they  obtained  from  the  crusaders
valuable  immunities  of  different  kinds ;  freedom  of
trade  ;  an  abatement  of  the  usual  duties  paid  for
what  was  imported  and  exported,  or  a  total  exemp-
tion from  them  ;  the  property  of  entire  suburbs  in
some  cities,  and  of  extensive  streets  in  others ;  and
a  privilege  granted  to  every  person  who  resided
within  their  precincts,  or  who  traded  under  their
protection,  of  being  tried  by  their  own  laws,  and
by  judges  of  their  own  appointment/  In  conse-
quence of  so  many  advantages,  we  can  trace,  during
the  progress  of  the  crusades,  a  rapid  increase  of
wealth  and  of  power  in  all  the  commercial  states  of
Italy.  Every  port  open  to  trade  was  frequented  by
their  merchants,  who,  having  now  engrossed  entirely
the  commerce  of  the  East,  strove  with  such  active
emulation  to  find  new  markets  for  the  commodities
which  it  furnished,  that  they  extended  a  taste  for
them  to  many  parts  of  Europe,  in  which  they  had
hitherto  been  little  known.

Two  events  happened,  prior  to  the  termination  of
the  holy  war,  which,  by  acquiring  to  the  Venetians

»  Hist  cf  Charles  V.  vol.  i.  p.  34.

102  ANCIENT  INDIA.

and  GenoesQ  the  possession  of  several  provinces  in
the  Greek  empire,  enabled  them  to  supply  Europe
more  abundantly  with  all  the  productions  of  the
East.  The  first  was  the  conquest  of  Constantinople,
in  the  year  1204,  by  the  Venetians,  and  the  leaders
of  the  fourth  crusade.  An  account  of  the  political
interests  and  intrigues  which  formed  this  alliance,
and  turned  the  hallowed  arms  destined  to  deliver
the  holy  city  from  the  dominion  of  infidels,  against
a  Christian  monarch,  is  foreign  from  the  design  of
this  Disquisition.  Constantinople  was  taken  by
storm,  and  plundered  by  the  confederates.  An  earl
of  Flanders  was  placed  on  the  imperial  throne.  The
dominions  which  still  remained  subject  to  the  suc-
cessors of  Constantine  were  divided  into  four  parts,
one  of.  which  being  allotted  to  the  new  emperor,
for  supporting  the  dignity  and  expense  of  govern-
ment, an  equal  partition  of  the  other  three  was  made
between  the  Venetians  and  the  chiefs  of  the  cru-
sade. The  former,  who,  both  in  concerting  and
in  conducting  this  enterprise,  kept  their  eyes  stea-
dily fixed  on  what  might  be  most  for  the  emolu-
ment of  their  commerce,  secured  the  territories  of
greatest  value  to  a  trading  people.  They  obtained
some  part  of  the  Peloponnesus,  at  that  time  the  seat
of  flourishing  manufactures,  particularly  of  silk.  They
became  masters  of  several  of  the  largest  and  best
cultivated  islands  in  the  Archipelago,  and  esta-
blished a  chain  of  settlements,  partly  military  and
partly  commercial,  extending  from  the  Adriatic  to
the  IBosphorus.''  Many  Venetians  settled  in  Con-
stantinople, and  without  obstruction  from  their  war-
like associates,  little  attentive  to  the  arts  of  industry,
they  engrossed  the  various  branches  of  trade  which

*>  Dauduli Chronic, ap.  Murat. Script.  Rer.  Itai.  vol.  xii.  p.  328; Mar.
Sanulo  Vitc  deDuchi  di  Vciicz.  Murat.  vol.ixii.  p.  53i.'.

SECT.  III.  103

had  so  long  enriched  that  capital.  Two  of  these
particularly  attracted  their  attention  ;  their  silk  trade,
and  that  with  India.  From  the  reign  of  Justinian,
it  was  mostly  in  Greece,  and  some  of  the  adjacent
islands,  that  silk  worms,  which  he  first  introduced
into  Europe,  were  reared.  The  product  of  their
labours  was  manufactured  into  stuffs  of  various
kinds,  in  many  cities  of  the  empire.  But  it  was  in
Constantinople,  the  seat  of  opulence  and  luxury,
that  the  demand  for  a  commodity  of  such  high  price
was  greatest,  and  there,  of  consequence,  the  com-
merce of  silk  naturally  centred.  In  assorting  car-
goes for  the  several  ports  in  which  they  traded,  the
Venetians  had  for  some  time  found  silk  to  be  an  essen-
tial article,  as  it  continued  to  grow  more  and  more
into  request  in  every  part  of  Europe.  By  the  resi-
dence of  so  many  of  their  citizens  in  Constantinople,
and  by  the  immunities  granted  to  them,  they  not  only
procured  silk  in  such  abundance,  and  on  such  terms,
as  enabled  them  to  carry  on  trade  more  extensively,
and  with  greater  profit  than  formerly,  but  they
became  so  thoroughly  acquainted  with  every  branch
of  the  silk  manufacture,  as  induced  them  to  attempt
the  establishment  of  it  in  their  own  dominions.  The
measures  taken  for  this  purpose  by  individuals,  as  well
as  the  regulations  framed  by  the  state,  were  concerted
with  so  much  prudence,  and  executed  with  such  suc-
cess, that  in  a  short  time  the  silk  fabrics  of  Venice
vied  with  those  of  Greece  and  Sicily,  and  contri-
buted both  to  enrich  the  republic,  and  to  enlarge
the  sphere  of  its  commerce.  At  the  same  time  the
Venetians  availed  themselves  of  the  influence  which
they  had  acquired  in  Constantinople,  in  order  to  im-
prove their  Indian  trade.  The  capital  of  the  Greek
empire,  besides  the  means  of  being  supplied  with
the  productions  of  the East,  which  it  enjoyed  in

104  ANCrENT INDIA.

common  with  tlie  other  commercial  cities  of  Europe^
received  a  considerable  portion  of  them  by  a  channel
peculiar  to  itself. Some  of  the  most  valuable  com-
modities  of  India  and  China  were  conveyed  over
land,  by  routes  which  I  have  described,  to  the  Black
sea,  and  thence  by  a  short  navigation  to  Constanti-
nople. To  this  market,  the  best  stored  of  any  except
Alexandria,  the  Venetians  had  now  easy  access,  and
the goods which  they  purchased there, made an
addition  of  great  consequence  to  what  they  were
accustomed  to  acquire  in  the  ports  of  Egypt  and
Syria. Thus  while  the  Latin  empire  in  Constanti-
nople subsisted,  the  Venetians  possessed  such  advan-
taofes  over  all  their  rivals,  that  their  commerce  ex-
tended  greatly,  and  it  was  chiefly  from  them  every
part  of  Europe  received  the  commodities  of  the  East.
The  other  event  which  I  had  in  view,  was  the  sub-
version of  the  dominion  of  the  Latins  in  Constanti-
nople, and  the  re-establishment  of  the  imperial  family
on  the  throne. This  was  eftected  after  a  period  of
fifty-seven  years,  partly  by  a  transient  effort  of  vigour,
with  which  indignation  at  a  foreign  yoke  animated
the Greeks,  and  partly  by  the  powerful  assistance
which they received from the  republic  of  Genoa.
The Genoese were  so  sensible  of  the advantages
which  the  Venetians,  their  rivals  in  trade,  derived
from  their  union  with  the  Latin  emperors  of  Con-
stantinople, that,  in  order  to  deprive  them  of  these,
they  surmounted  the  most  deep-rooted  prejudices  of
their  ao-e,  and  combined  with  the  schismatic  Greeks
to  dethrone  a  monarch  protected  by  the  papal  power,
setting  at  defiance  the  thunders  of  the  Vatican,  which
at  that  time  made  the  greatest  princes  tremble. This
undertaking,  bold  and  impious  as  it  was  then  deemed,
proved  successful. Li  recompense  for  their  signal
services,  the  gratitude  or  weakness  of  the  Greek  em-

SECT. III.  105

peror,  among  otlier  donations,  bestowed  upon  the
Genoese  Pera,  the  chief  suburb  of  Constantinople,  to
be  held  as  a  fief  of  the  empire,  together  with  such
exemption  from  the  accustomed  duties  on  goods  im-
ported and  exported,  as  gave  them  a  decided  supe-
riority over  every  competitor  in  trade.  With  the
vigilant  attention  of  merchants,  the  Genoese  availed
themselves  of  this  favourable  situation.  They  sur-
rounded their  new  settlement  in  Pera  with  fortifica-
tions. They  rendered  their  factories  on  the  adjacent
coast  places  of  strength.*"  They  were  masters  of  the
harbour  of  Constantinople  more  than  the  Greeks
themselves.  The  whole  trade  of  the  Black  sea  came
into  their  hands ;  and,  not  satisfied  with  this,  they
took  possession  of  part  of  the  Chersonesus  Taurica,
the  modern  Crimea,  and  rendered  Caffa,  its  principal
town,  the  chief  seat  of  their  trade  with  the  East,  and
the  port  in  which  all  its  productions,  conveyed  to  the
Black  sea  by  the  diflferent  routes  I  have  formerly  de-
scribed, were  landed.'^

In  consequence  of  this  revolution,  Genoa  became
the  greatest  commercial  power  in  Europe ;  and  if  the
enterprising  industry  and  intrepid  courage  of  its  citi-
zens had  been  under  the  direction  of  wise  domestic
policy,  it  might  have  long  held  that  rank.  But  never
was  there  a  contrast  more  striking,  than  between  the
internal  administration  of  the  two  rival  republics  of
Venice  and  Genoa.  In  the  former,  government  was
conducted  with  steady  systematic  prudence ;  in  the
latter,  it  was  consistent  in  nothing  but  a  fondness  for
novelty,  and  a  propensity  to  change.  The  one  en-
joyed a  perpetual  calm,  the  other  was  agitated  with
all  the  storms  and  vicissitudes  of  faction. The  in-

c  Niceph.  Gregor.  lib.  xi.  c.  1.  §  6.  lib.  xvii.  c.  1.  §  2.
">  Folieta  Hist.  Genuens.  ap  Graev. Thes.  Antiq.  Ital.  i.  387. De  Marinis
de  Genuens.  Dignit.  ib.  1486. Niceph.  Greg.  lib.  xiii.  c.  12. Murat.  Anual,
d'ltal.  lib.  vii.  c.  351. See  Note  XLIII.

106  ANCIENT  INDIA.

crease  of  wealth,  which  flowed  into  Genoa  from  the
exertions  of  its  merchants,  did  not  counterbalance  the
defects  in  its  political  constitution ;  and  even  in  its
most  prosperous  state  we  may  discern  the  appearance
of  symptoms  which  foreboded  a  diminution  of  its
opulence  and  power.

As  long,  however,  as  the  Genoese  retained  the
ascendant  which  they  had  acquired  in  the  Greek  em-
pire, the  Venetians  felt  their  commercial  transactions
with  it  to  be  carried  on  upon  such  unequal  terms,
that  their  merchants  visited  Constantinople  seldom,
and  with  reluctance ;  and  in  order  to  procure  the
commodities  of  the  East  in  such  quantities  as  were
demanded  in  the  various  parts  of  Europe  which  they
were  accustomed  to  supply,  they  were  obliged  to  re-
sort to  the  ancient  staples  of  that  trade.  Of  these
Alexandria  was  the  chief,  and  the  most  abundantly
supplied,  as  the  conveyance  of  Indian  goods  by  land
through  Asia,  to  any  of  the  ports  of  the  Mediterra-
nean, was  often  rendered  impracticable  by  the  incur-
sions of  Turks,  Tartars,  and  other  hordes,  which  suc-
cessively desolated  that  fertile  country,  or  contended
for  the  dominion  of  it.  But  under  the  military  and
vigorous  government  of  the  Soldans  of  the  Mamelukes,
security  and  order  were  steadily  maintained  in  Egypt,
and  trade,  though  loaded  with  heavy  duties,  was  open
to  all.  In  proportion  to  the  progress  of  the  Genoese
in  engrossing  the  commerce  of  Constantinople  and
the  Black  sea,*  the  Venetians  found  it  more  and
more  necessary  to  enlarge  their  transactions  with
Alexandria.

But  such  an  avowed  intercourse  with  infidels
being  considered,  in  that  age,  as  unbecoming  the
character  of  Christians,  the  senate  of  Venice,  in  order
to  silence  its  own  scruples,  or  those  of  its  subjects,

•^  See  Note  XLIV.

SECT. III.  107

had  recourse  to  the  infallible  authority  of  the  pope,
who  was  supposed  to  be  possessed  of  power  to  dis-
pense with  the  rigorous  observation  of  the  most
sacred  laws,  and  obtained  permission  from  him  to  fit
out  annually  a  specified  number  of  ships  for  the  ports
of  Egypt  and  of  Syria.*^  Under  this  sanction  the
republic  concluded  a  treaty  of  commerce  with  the
Soldans  of  Egypt,  on  equitable  terms;  in  consequence
of  which  the  senate  appointed  one  consul  to  reside  in
Alexandria,  and  another  in  Damascus,  in  a  public
character,  and  to  exercise  a  mercantile  jurisdiction,
authorized  by  the  Soldans.  Under  their  protection,
Venetian  merchants  and  artisans  settled  in  each  of
these  cities.  Ancient  prejudices  and  antipathies  were
forgotten,  and  their  mutual  interests  established,  for
the  first  time,  a  fair  and  open  trade  between  Christians
and  Mahomedans.^

While  the  Venetians  and  Genoese  were  alternately
making  those  extraordinary  efforts,  in  order  to  en-
gross all  the  advantages  of  supplying  Europe  with
the  productions  of  the  East,  the  republic  of  Florence,
originally  a  commercial  democracy,  applied  with
such  persevering  vigour  to  trade,  and  the  genius  of
the  people,  as  well  as  the  nature  of  their  institutions,
were  so  favourable  to  its  progress,  that  the  state  ad-
vanced rapidly  in  power,  and  the  people  in  opulence.
But  as  the  Florentines  did  not  possess  any  commo-
dious sea-port,  their  active  exertions  were  directed
chiefly  towards  the  improvement  of  their  manufac-
tures, and  domestic  industry.  About  the  beginning
of  the  fourteenth  century,  the  Florentine  manufactures
of  various  kinds,  particularly  those  of  silk  and  wool-
len cloth,  appear  from  the  enumeration  of  a  well-

f  See  Note  XLV.
8  Sandi  Storia  Civile  Veneziana,  lib.  v.  c.  15.  p.  248,  &c.

108  ANCIENT HISTORY.

informed  historian,  to  have  been  very  considerable.''
The  connexion  which  they  formed  in  different  parts
of  Europe,  by  furnising  them  with  the  productions  of
their  own  industry,  led  them  to  engage  in  another
branch  of  trade,  that  of  banking.  In  this  they  soon
became  so  eminent,  that  the  money  transactions  of
almost  every  kingdom  in  Europe  passed  through
their  hands,  and  in  many  of  them  they  were  intrusted
with  the  collection  and  administration  of  the  public
revenues.  In  consequence  of  the  activity  and  success
with  which  they  conducted  their  manufactures  and
money-transactions,  the  former  always  attended  with
certain  though  moderate  profit,  the  latter  lucrative
in  a  high  degree,  at  a  period  when  neither  the  in-
terest of  money,  nor  the  premium  on  bills  of  exchange,
were  settled  with  accuracy,  Florence  became  one  of
the  first  cities  in  Christendom,  and  many  of  its  citi-
zens extremely  opulent.  Cosmo  di  Medici,  the  head
of  a  family  which  rose  from  obscurity  by  its  success
in  trade,  was  reckoned  the  most  wealthy  merchant
ever  known  in  Europe;'  and  in  acts  of  public  muni-
ficence, as  well  as  of  private  generosity,  in  the  pa-
tronage of  learning,  and  in  the  encouragement  of
useful  and  elegant  arts,  no  monarch  of  the  age  could
vie  with  him.  Whether  the  Medici,  in  their  first
mercantile  transactions,  carried  on  any  commerce
with  the  East,  I  have  not  been  able  to  discover.''
It  is  more  probable,  I  should  think,  that  their  trade

was  confined  to  the  same  articles  with  that  of
A.C.  U05. - .  „  ,

their  countrymen,  but  as  soon  as  the  com-
monwealth, by  the  conquest  of  Pisa,  had  acquired  a

^  Giov.  Villani  Hist.  Fiorent.  ap.  Murat.  Script.  Rer.  Ital.  vol.  xiii.  p.  823.
Deir  Istorie  Fioreutine,  di  Scip.  Anmiirato,  lib.  iv.  p.  151.  lib.  viii.  p.  '299.

'  Fr.  Mich.  Brutus  Hist.  Flor.  p.  37.  62.  Chron.  Eugubinum  ap.  Murat.
Script.  Rer.  Ital.  vol.  xiv.  p.  1007. Denina  Revol.  d'ltalic,  torn.  vi.  p.  263.  &c.

k  See  Note  XLVI.

SECT.  III.  109

communication  with  the  ocean,  Cosmo  di  Medici,
who  had  the  chief  direction  of  its  affairs,  endeavoured
to  procure  for  his  country  a  share  in  that  lucrative
commerce  which  had  raised  Venice  and  Genoa  so  far
above  all  the  other  Italian  states. With  this

A. C. 1425.

view  ambassadors  were  sent  to  Alexandria,
in  order  to  prevail  with  the  Soldan  to  open  that  and
the  other  ports  of  his  dominions,  to  the  subjects  of
the  republic,  and  to  admit  them  to  a  participation  in
all  the  commercial  privileges  which  were  enjoyed  by
the  Venetians.  The  neofotiation  terminated  with  such
success,  that  the  Florentines  seem  to  have  obtained
some  share  in  the  Indian  trade  ;^  and  soon  after  this
period,  we  find  spices  enumerated  among  the  commo-
dities imported  by  the  Florentines  into  England.""

In  some  parts  of  this  Disquisition,  concerning  the
nature  and  course  of  trade  with  the  East,  I  have  been
obliged  to  grope  my  way,  and  often  under  the  gui-
dance of  very  feeble  lights.  But  as  we  are  now  ap-
proaching to  the  period  when  the  modern  ideas,  with
respect  to  the  importance  of  commerce,  began  to  un-
fold, and  attention  to  its  progress  and  effects  became
a  more  considerable  object  of  policy,  we  may  hope
to  carry  on  what  researches  yet  remain  to  be  made,
with  greater  certainty  and  precision.  To  this  grow-
ing attention,  we  are  indebted  for  the  account  which
Marino  Sanudo,  a  Venetian  nobleman,  gives  of  the
Indian  trade,  as  carried  on  by  his  countrymen,  about
the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century.  They  were
supplied,  as  he  informs  us,  with  the  productions  of
the  East  in  two  different  ways.  Those  of  small  bulk
and  high  value,  such  as  cloves,  nutmegs,  mace,  gems,
pearls,  &c.  were  conveyed  from  the  Persian  gulf  up
the  Tigris  to  Bassora,  and  thence  to  Bagdat,  from
which  they  were  carried  to  some  port  on  the  Medi-

1  See  Note  XLVH.  '"  Hakluyt,  toI.  i.  p.  193.

110  ANCIENT INDIA.

terranean.  All  more  bulky  (^oods,  such  as  pepper,
ginger,  cinnamon,  &c.  together  with  some  portion  of
the  more  valuable  articles,  were  conveyed  by  the
ancient  route  to  the  Red  sea,  and  thence  across  the
desert,  and  down  the  Nile,  to  Alexandria.  The  goods
received  by  the  former  route  were,  as  Sanudo  ob-
serves, of  superior  quality,  but  from  the  tediousness
and  expense  of  a  distant  land-carriage,  the  supply
•was  often  scanty ;  nor  can  he  conceal  (though  con-
trary to  a  favourite  project  which  he  had  in  view
when  he  v.rote  the  treatise  to  Avhich  I  refer)  that,
from  the  state  of  the  countries  throu2:h  which  the
caravans  passed,  this  mode  of  conveyance  was  fre-
quently precarious  and  attended  with  danger."

It  was  in  Alexandria  only  that  the  Venetians
found  always  a  certain  and  full  supply  of  Indian
goods ;  and  as  these  were  conveyed  thither  chiefly
by  water-carriage,  they  might  have  purchased  them
at  a  moderate  price,  if  the  Soldans  had  not  imposed
upon  them  duties  which  amounted  to  a  third  part  of
their  full  value.  Under  this  and  every  other  disad-
vantage, however,  it  was  necessary  to  procure  them,
as  from  many  concurring  circumstances,  particularly
a  more  extensive  intercourse  established  among  the
different  nations  of  Europe,  the  demand  for  them
continued  to  increase  greatly  during  the  fourteenth
century.  By  the  irruptions  of  the  various  hostile
tribes  of  barbarians,  who  took  possession  of  the
greater  part  of  Europe,  that  powerful  bond  by  which
the  Romans  had  united  together  all  the  people  of
their  vast  empire  was  entirely  dissolved,  and  such
discouragement  was  given  to  the  communication  of
one  nation  with  another,  as  would  appear  altogether
incredible,  if  the  evidence  of  it  rested  wholly  upon
the  testimony  of  historians,  and  were  not  confirmed

"  Mar.  Sanuti  Secreta  Fidclium  Crucis,  p.  22,  &c.  ap.  Bongarsium.

SECT.  III.  Ill

by  what  is  still  more  authentic,  the  express  enactment
of  laws.  Several  statutes  of  this  kind,  which  dis-
grace the  jurisprudence  of  almost  every  European
nation,  I  have  enumerated  and  explained  in  another
work."  But  when  the  wants  and  desires  of  men
multiplied,  and  they  found  that  other  countries  could
furnish  the  means  of  supplying  and  gratifying  them,
the  hostile  sentiments  which  kept  nations  at  a  dis-
tance from  each  other  abated,  and  mutual  correspon-
dence gradually  took  place.  From  the  time  of  the
crusades,  which  first  brought  people  hardly  known  to
one  another,  to  associate,  and  to  act  in  concert  dur-
ing two  centuries,  in  pursuit  of  one  common  end,
several  circumstances  had  co-operated  towards  ac-
celerating this  general  intercourse.  The  people
around  the  Baltic,  hitherto  dreaded  and  abhorred  by
the  rest  of  Europe  as  pirates  and  invaders,  assumed
more  pacific  manners,  and  began  now  to  visit  their
neighbours  as  merchants.  Occurrences  foreign  from
the  subject  of  the  present  inquiry,  united  them  to-
gether in  the  powerful  commercial  confederacy  so  fa-
mous in  the  middle  ages,  under  the  name  of  the
Hanseatic  League,  and  led  them  to  establish  the  sta-
ple of  their  trade  with  the  southern  parts  of  Europe
in  Bruges.  Thither  the  merchants  of  Italy,  particu-
larly those  of  Venice,  resorted ;  and  in  return  for  the
productions  of  the  East,  and  the  manufactures  of  their
own  country,  they  received  not  only  the  naval  stores
and  other  commodities  of  the  north,  but  a  consider-
able supply  of  gold  and  silver  from  the  mines  in
various  provinces  of  Germany,  the  most  valuable  and
productive  of  any  known  at  that  time  in  Europe. ^
Bruges  continued  to  be  the  great  mart  or  storehouse
of  European  trade  during  the  period  to  which  my

o  Hist,  of  Charles  V.  vol.  i.  p.  92,  291,  &c.
P  Ziranierman's  Polit.  Survey  of  Europe,  p.  102.

112  ANCIENT INDIA.

inquiries  extend.  A  regular  communication,  for-
merly unknown,  was  kept  up  there  among  all  the
kingdoms  into  which  our  continent  is  divided,  and
we  are  enabled  to  account  for  the  rapid  progress  of
the  Italian  states  in  wealth  and  power,  by  observing
how  much  their  trade,  the  source  from  which  both
were  derived,  must  have  augmented  upon  the  vast
increase  in  the  consumption  of  Asiatic  goods,  when
all  the  extensive  countries  towards  the  north-east  of
Europe  were  opened  for  their  reception.

During  this  prosperous  and  improving  state  of
Indian  commerce,  Venice  received  from  one  of  its
citizens  such  new  information  concerning:  the  coun-
tries  which  produced  the  precious  commodities  that
formed  the  most  valuable  article  of  its  trade,  as  gave
an  idea  of  their  opulence,  their  population,  and  their
extent,  which  rose  far  above  all  the  former  concep-
tions of  Europeans.  From  the  time  that  the  Maho-
medans  became  masters  of  Egypt,  as  no  Christian
was  permitted  to  pass  through  their  dominions  to  the
East,''  the  direct  intercourse  of  Europeans  with  India
ceased  entirely.  The  account  of  India  by  Cosmas
Indicopleustes,  in  the  sixth  century,  is,  as  far  as  I
know,  the  last  which  the  nations  of  the  West  received
from  any  person  who  had  visited  that  country.  But
about  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century,  the  spirit
of  commerce,  now  become  more  enterprising,  and
more  eager  to  discover  new  routes  which  led  to
wealth,  induced  Marco  Polo,  a  Venetian  of  a  noble
family,  after  trading  for  some  time  in  many  of  the
opulent  cities  of  the  Lesser  Asia,  to  penetrate  into
the  more  eastern  parts  of  that  continent,  as  far  as  to
the  court  of  the  Great  Khan  on  the  frontier  of  China.
During  the  course  of  twenty-six  years,  partly  em-
ployed in  mercantile  transactions,  and  partly  in  con-

1  Sanuto,  p.  23.

SECT. III.  113

ducting  negotiations  with  which  the  Great  Khan  in-
rusted  him,  he  explored  many  regions  of  the  East
which  no  European  had  ever  visited.

He  describes  the  great  kingdom  of  Cathay,  the
name  by  which  China  is  still  known  in  many  parts
of  the  East,'  and  travelled  through  it  from  Chambalu,
or  Peking,  on  its  northern  frontier,  to  some  of  its
most  southern  provinces.  He  visited  different  parts
of  Indostan,  and  is  the  first  who  mentions  Bengal
and  Guzzerat,  by  their  present  names,  as  great  and
opulent  kingdoms.  Besides  what  he  discovered  on
his  journeys  by  land,  he  made  more  than  one  voyage
in  the  Indian  ocean,  and  acquired  some  information
concerning  an  island  which  he  calls  Zipangri  or  Ci-
pango,  probably  Japan.  He  visited  in  person  Java,
Sumatra,  and  several  islands  contiguous  to  them,  the
island  of  Ceylon,  and  the  coast  of  Malabar,  as  far  as
the  gulf  of  Cambay,  to  all  which  he  gives  the  names
that  they  now  bear.  This  was  the  most  extensive
survey  hitherto  made  of  the  East,  and  the  most  com-
plete description  of  it  ever  given  by  any  European ;
and,  in  an  age  which  had  hardly  any  knowledge  of
those  regions  but  what  was  derived  from  the  geogra-
phy of  Ptolemy,  not  only  the  Venetians,  but  all  the
people  of  Europe,  were  astonished  at  the  discovery
of  immense  countries  open  to  their  view  beyond  what
had  hitherto  been  reputed  the  utmost  boundary  of
the  earth  in  that  quarter.^

But  while  men  of  leisure  and  speculation  occupied
themselves  with  examining  the  discoveries  of  Marco
Polo,  which  gave  rise  to  conjectures  and  theories,
productive  of  most  important  consequences ;  an  event
happened,  that  drew  the  attention  of  all  Europe,  and

>■  Herbelot  Bib. Orient,  artic.  Khathai. Stewart,  Account  of  Thibet,  Piiil.
Trans.  Ixvii.  474. Voyage  of  A.  Jinkinson,  Hakluyt,  i.  333.

•  See  Note  XLVIII.

VOL. IX.  I

114  ANCIENT INDJ  A.

had  a  most  conspicuous  effect  upon  the  course  of
that  trade,  the  progress  of  which  I  am  endeavouring
to  trace.

The  event  to  which  I  allude,  is  the  final  conquest
of  the  Greek  empire  by  Mahomet  II.  and  the

A. D.  1453.  ,  ,. 1  .  1  n ^ m i  • i

establishmg  the  seat  oi  the  1  urkish  govern-
ment in  Constantinople.  The  immediate  effect  of
this  great  revolution  was,  that  the  Genoese  residing
in  Pera,  involved  in  the  general  calamity,  were
obliged  not  only  to  abandon  that  settlement,  but  all
those  which  they  had  made  on  the  adjacent  sea-coast,
after  they  had  been  in  their  possession  near  two  cen-
turies. Not  Ions:  after,  the  victorious  arms

A.  D.  1474.  ^

of  the  sultan  expelled  them  from  Caffa,  and
every  other  place  which  they  held  in  the  Crimea.*
Constantinople  was  no  longer  a  mart  open  to  the  na-
tions of  the  West  for  Indian  commodities,  and  no  sup-
ply of  them  could  now  be  obtained  but  in  Egypt  and
the  ports  of  Syria,  subject  to  the  soldans  of  the  Ma-
meluks.  The  Venetians,  in  consequence  of  the  pro-
tection and  privileges  which  they  had  secured  by
their  commercial  treaty  with  those  powerful  princes,
carried  on  trade  in  every  part  of  their  dominions  with
such  advantage,  as  gave  them  a  superiority  over  every
competitor.  Genoa,  which  had  long  been  their  most
formidable  rival,  humbled  by  the  loss  of  its  possessions
in  the  East,  and  weakened  by  domestic  dissensions,
declined  so  fast,  that  it  was  obliged  to  court  foreign
protection,  and  submitted  alternately  to  the  dominion
of  the  dukes  of  Milan  and  the  kings  of  France.  In
consequence  of  this  diminution  of  their  political
power,  the  commercial  exertions  of  the  Genoese  be-
came less  vigorous.  A  feeble  attempt  which  they
made  to  recover  that  .share  of  the  Indian  trade  which
they  had  formerly  enjoyed,  by  offering  to  enter  into

'  Folieta  Hist.  Genu.  602.  626. Murat.  Annali  d'ltal.  ix.  451.

SECT. III.  115

treaty  with  the  soldans  of  Egypt  upon  terms  similar
to  those  which  had  been  granted  to  the  Venetians,
proved  unsuccessful;  and  during  the  remainder  of  the
fifteenth  century,  Venice  supplied  the  greater  part  of
Europe  with  the  productions  of  the  East,  and  carried
on  trade  to  an  extent  far  beyond  what  had  been  known
in  those  times.

The  state  of  the  other  European  nations  was  ex-
tremely favourable  to  the  commercial  progress  of  the
Venetians.  England,  desolated  by  the  civil  wars
which  the  unhappy  contest  between  the  houses  of
York  and  Lancaster  excited,  had  hardly  begun  to  turn
its  attention  towards  those  objects  and  pursuits  to
which  it  is  indebted  for  its  present  opulence  and
power.  In  France,  the  fatal  effects  of  the  English
arms  and  conquests  were  still  felt,  and  the  king  had
neither  acquired  power,  nor  the  people  inclination,
to  direct  the  national  genius  and  activity  to  the  arts
of  peace.  The  union  of  the  different  kingdoms  of
Spain  was  not  yet  completed ;  some  of  its  most  fertile
provinces  were  still  under  the  dominion  of  the  Moors,
with  whom  the  Spanish  monarchs  waged  perpetual
war;  and,  except  by  the  Catalans,  little  attention  was
paid  to  foreign  trade.  Portugal,  though  it  had  already
entered  upon  that  career  of  discovery  which  termi-
nated with  most  splendid  success,  had  not  yet  made
such  progress  in  it  as  to  be  entitled  to  any  high  rank
among  the  commercial  states  of  Europe.  Thus  the
Venetians,  almost  without  rival  or  competitor,  except
from  some  of  the  inferior  Italian  states,  were  left  at
liberty  to  concert  and  to  execute  their  mercantile
plans ;  and  their  trade  with  the  cities  of  the  Hanseatic
league,  which  united  the  north  and  south  of  Europe,
and  which  hitherto  had  been  common  to  all  the  Ita-
lians, was  now  engrossed,  in  a  great  measure,  by
them  alone.

i2

116  ANCIENT INDIA.

While  the  incieu.sin<>-  demand  for  the  productions
of  Asia  induced  all  the  people  of  Europe  to  court  in-
tercourse with  the  Venetians  so  eagerly,  as  to  allure
them,  by  various  immunities,  to  frequent  their  sea-
ports, we  may  observe  a  peculiarity  in  their  mode  of
carrying  on  trade  with  the  East,  which  distinguishes
it  from  what  has  taken  place  in  other  countries  in  any
period  of  history.  In  the  ancient  world,  the  Tyrians,
the  Greeks  who  were  masters  of  Egypt,  and  the  Ro-
mans, sailed  to  India  in  quest  of  those  commodities
with  which  they  supplied  the  people  of  the  West.
In  modern  times,  the  same  has  been  the  practice  of
tlie  Portuguese,  the  Dutch,  the  English,  and,  after
their  example,  of  other  European  nations.  In  both
periods  loud  complaints  have  been  made,  that  in  car-
r^'ing  on  this  trade  every  state  must  be  drained  of  the
precious  metals,  which,  in  the  course  of  it,  flow  in-
cessantly from  the  West  to  the  East  never  to  return.
From  whatever  loss  might  have  been  occasioned  by
this  gradual  but  unavoidable  diminution  of  their  gold
and  silver  (whether  a  real  or  only  an  imaginary  loss,
it  is  not  incumbent  upon  me  in  this  place  to  inquire
or  to  determine),  the  Venetians  were,  in  a  great  mea-
sure, exempted.  They  had  no  direct  intercourse  with
India.  They  found  in  Egypt,  or  in  Syria,  warehouses
filled  with  all  the  commodities  of  the  East,  imported
by  the  Mahomedans  ;  and  from  the  best  accounts  we
have,  with  respect  to  the  nature  of  their  trade,  they
purchased  them  more  frequently  by  barter,  than  with
ready  money.  Egypt,  the  chief  mart  for  Indian  goods,
though  a  most  fertile  country,  is  destitute  of  many
things  requisite  in  an  improved  state  of  society,
either  for  accommodation  or  for  ornament.  Too  li-
mited in  extent,  and  too  highly  cultivated  to  aflbrd
space  for  forests  ;  too  level  to  have  mines  of  the  use-
ful metals;  it  must  be  supplied  with  timber  for  build-

SECT. III.  117

ing,  with  iron,  lead,  tin,  and  brass  by  importation
from  other  countries.  The  Egyptians,  while  under
the  dominion  of  the  Mameluks,  seem  not  themselves
to  have  traded  in  the  ports  of  any  Christian  state,  and
it  was  principally  from  the  Venetians,  that  they  re-
ceived all  the  articles  which  I  have  enumerated.  Be-
sides these,  the  ingenuity  of  the  Venetian  artists  fur-
nished a  variety  of  manufactures  of  woollen  cloths,
silk  stuffs  of  various  fabric,  camblets,  mirrors,  arms,
ornaments  of  gold  and  silver,  glass,  and  many  other
articles,  for  all  which  they  found  a  ready  market  in
Egypt  and  Syria.  In  return  they  received  from  the
merchants  of  Alexandria,  spices  of  every  kind,  drugs,
gems,  pearls,  ivory,  cotton  and  silk,  unwrought  as
well  as  manufactured,  in  many  different  forms,  and
other  productions  of  the  East,  together  with  several
valuable  articles  of  Egyptian  growth  or  fabric.  In
Aleppo,  Baruth,  and  other  cities,  besides  the  proper
commodities  of  India  brought  thither  by  land,  they
added  to  their  cargoes  the  carpets  of  Persia,  the  rich
wrought  silks  of  Damascus,  still  known  by  the  name
taken  from  that  city,  and  various  productions  of  art
and  nature  peculiar  to  Syria,  Palestine,  and  Arabia.
If,  at  any  time,  their  demand  for  the  productions  of
the  East  went  beyond  what  they  could  procure  in  ex-
change for  their  own  manufactures,  that  trade  with
the  cities  of  the  Hanseatic  league,  which  I  have  men-
tioned, furnished  them  from  the  mines  of  Germany,
with  a  regular  supply  of  gold  and  silver,  which  they
could  carry  with  advantage  to  the  markets  of  Egypt
and  Syria.

From  a  propensity,  remarkable  in  all  commercial
states,  to  subject  the  operations  of  trade  to  political
regulation  and  restraint,  the  authority  of  the  Venetian
government  seems  to  have  been  interposed,  both  in
directing  the  importation  of  Asiatic  goods,  and  in

118  ANCIENT INDIA.

the  mode  of  clrculatino^  them  amonor  the  different
nations  of  Europe.  To  every  considerable  staple  in
the  Mediterranean  a  certain  number  of  large  ves-
sels, known  by  the  name  of  Galeons  or  Caracks,  was
fitted  out  on  the  public  account,  and  returned  loaded
with  the  richest  merchandise,"  the  profit  arising  from
the  sale  of  which  must  have  been  no  slender  addition
to  the  revenue  of  the  republic.  Citizens,  however,
of  every  class,  particularly  persons  of  noble  families,
were  encourao-ed  to  engfaere  in  foreisfn  trade,  and
whoever  employed  a  vessel  of  a  certain  burden  for
this  purpose,  received  a  considerable  bounty  from  the
state.''  It  was  in  the  same  manner,  partly  in  ships
belonging  to  the  public,  and  partly  in  those  of  pri-
vate traders,  that  the  Venetians  circulated  throu2"h
Europe  the  goods  imported  from  the  East,  as  well  as
the  produce  of  their  own  dominions  and  manufactures.
There  are  two  different  ways  by  which  we  may
come  at  some  knowledg-e  of  the  mao-nitude  of  those
branches  of  commerce  carried  on  by  the  Venetians.
The  one,  by  attending  to  the  great  variety  and  high
value  of  the  commodities  which  they  imported  into
Bruges,  the  storehouse  from  which  the  more  northern
nations  of  Europe  were  supplied.  A  full  enumera-
tion of  these  is  given  by  a  well-informed  author,  in
which  is  contained  almost  every  article  deemed  in
that  age  essential  to  accommodation  or  to  elegance.^
The  other,  by  considering  the  effects  of  the  Venetian
trade  upon  the  cities  admitted  to  a  participation  of
its  advantages.  Never  did  wealth  appear  more  con-
spicuously in  the  train  of  commerce.  The  citizens  of
Bruges,  enriched  by  it,  displayed  in  their  dress,  their
buildings,  and  mode  of  living,  such  magnificence  as

"  Sabellicus,  Hist.  Rer.  V'enet.  Dec.  iv.  lib.  iii.  p.  868.  DeninaRevol.  d'Ifalie,
ton),  vj.  340.

*  Saudi  Stor.  Ciu.  Vcnex,  lib.  viii.  891.
'  1  Lud.  Guicciardini  Descripl.  dc  Pacsi  fiassi,  p.  173.

SECT.  III.  ]19

even  to  mortify  the  pride  and  excite  the  envy  of  roy-
alty.^ Antwerp,  when  the  staple  was  removed  thither,
soon  rivalled  Bruges  in  opulence  and  splendour.  In
some  cities  of  Germany,  particularly  in  Augsburg,
the  great  mart  for  Indian  commodities  in  the  inte-
rior parts  of  that  extensive  country,  we  meet  with
early  examples  of  such  large  fortunes  accumulated
by  mercantile  industry,  as  raised  the  proprietors  of
them  to  high  rank  and  consideration  in  the  empire.
From  observing  this  remarkable  increase  of  opu-
lence in  all  the  places  where  the  Venetians  had  an
established  trade,  we  are  led  to  conclude,  that  the
profit  accruing  to  themselves  from  the  different
branches  of  it,  especially  that  with  the  East,  must
have  been  still  more  considerable.  It  is  impossible,
however,  without  information  much  more  minute
than  that  to  which  we  have  access,  to  form  an  esti-
mate of  this  with  accuracy ;  but  various  circumstances
may  be  produced  to  establish,  in  general,  the  justness
of  this  conclusion.  From  the  first  revival  of  a  commer-
cial spirit  in  Europe,  the  Venetians  possessed  a  large
share  of  the  trade  with  the  East.  It  continued  gra-
dually to  increase,  and  during  a  great  part  of  the
fifteenth  century  they  had  nearly  a  monopoly  of  it.
This  was  productive  of  consequences  attending  all
monopolies.  Wherever  there  is  no  competition,  and
the  merchant  has  it  in  his  power  to  regulate  the  mar-
ket, and  to  fix  the  price  of  the  commodities  which  he
vends,  his  gains  will  be  exorbitant.  Some  idea  of
their  magnitude,  during  several  centuries,  may  be
formed  by  attending  to  the  rate  of  the  premium  or
interest  then  paid  for  the  use  of  money.  This  is  un-
doubtedly the  most  exact  standard  by  which  to  mea-
sure the  profit  arising  from  the  capital  stock  employed
in  commerce;  for,  according  as  the  interest  of  money

^  See  Note  XLIX.

1'20  ANCIENT  INDIA.

is  high  or  low,  the  gain  acquired  by  the  use  of  it
must  vary,  and  become  excessive  or  moderate.  From
the  close  of  the  eleventh  century  to  the  commence-
ment of  the  sixteenth,  the  period  during  which  the
Italians  made  their  chief  commercial  exertions,  the
rate  of  interest  was  extremely  high.  It  was  usually
twenty  per  cent,  sometimes  above  that;  and  so  late
as  the  year  1500,  it  had  not  sunk  below  ten  or  twelve
per  cent,  in  any  part  of  Europe.''  If  the  profits  of  a
trade  so  extensive  as  that  of  the  Venetians  corre-
sponded to  this  high  value  of  money,  it  could  no*t  fail
of  proving  a  source  of  great  wealth,  both  public  and
private.''  The  condition  ofVenice,  accordingly,  during
the  period  under  review,  is  described  by  writers  of
that  age,  in  terms  which  are  not  applicable  to  that  of
any  other  country  in  Europe.  The  revenues  of  the
republic,  as  well  as  the  wealth  amassed  by  indivi-
duals, exceeded  whatever  was  elsewhere  known.  In
the  maofnificence  of  their  houses,  in  richness  of  fur-
niture,  in  profusion  of  plate,  and  in  every  thing  which
contributed  either  towards  elegance  or  parade  in
their  mode  of  living,  the  nobles  of  Venice  surpassed
the  state  of  the  greatest  monarchs  beyond  the  Alps.
Nor  was  all  this  display  the  effect  of  an  ostentatious
and  inconsiderate  dissipation,  it  was  the  natural  con-
sequence of  successful  industry,  which,  having  accu-
mulated wealth  with  ease,  is  entitled  to  enjoy  it  in
spiendour."

Never  did  the  Venetians  believe  the  power  of  their
country  to  be  more  firmly  established,  or  rely  with
greater  confidence  on  the  continuance  and  increase
of  its  opulence,  than  towards  the  close  of  the  fifteenth
century,  when  two  events  (which  they  could  neither
foresee  nor  prevent)  happened,  that  proved  fatal  to
both. The  one  was  the  discovery  of  America. The

»  Hist,  of  Charles  V.  vol.  i.  p.  401,  &c. *>  Sec  Note  L. =  See  Note  LI.

SECT. III.  121

other  was  the  opening  a  direct  course  of  navigation
to  the  East  Indies  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  Of
all  occurrences  in  the  history  of  the  human  race,
these  are  undoubtedly  among  the  most  interesting ;
and  as  they  occasioned  a  remarkable  change  of  in-
tercourse among  the  different  quarters  of  the  globe,
and  finally  established  those  commercial  ideas  and
arrangements  which  constitute  the  chief  distinction
between  the  manners  and  policy  of  ancient  and  of
modern  times,  an  account  of  them  is  intimately  con-
nected with  the  subject  of  this  disquisition,  and  will
bring  it  to  that  period  which  I  have  fixed  upon  for
its  boundary.  But  as  I  have  related  the  rise  and  pro-
gress of  these  discoveries  at  great  length  in  another
work,**  a  rapid  view  of  them  is  all  that  is  requisite  in
this  place.

The  admiration  or  envy  with  which  the  other  na-
tions of  Europe  beheld  the  power  and  wealth  of
Venice,  led  them  naturally  to  inquire  into  the  causes
of  this  pre-eminence;  and  among  these,  its  lucrative
commerce  with  the  East  appeared  to  be  by  far  the
most  considerable.  Mortified  with  being-  excluded
from  a  source  of  opulence,  which  to  the  Venetians
had  proved  so  abundant,  different  countries  had  at-
tempted to  acquire  a  share  of  the  Indian  trade.  Some
of  the  Italian  states  endeavoured  to  obtain  admission
into  the  ports  of  Egypt  and  Syria,  upon  the  same
terms  with  the  Venetians  ;  but  either  by  the  superior
interest  of  the  Venetians  in  the  court  of  the  soldans,
their  negotiations  for  that  purpose  were  rendered  un-
successful ;  or  from  the  manifold  advantages  which
merchants,  long  in  possession  of  any  branch  of  trade,
have  in  a  competition  with  new  adventurers,  all  their
exertions  did  not  produce  effects  of  any  consequence.*

•^  Hist,  of  America,  Books  I.  and  II.  «  See  Note  LII.

122  ANCIENT INDIA.

In  other  countries,  various  schemes  were  formed  with
the  same  view.  As  early  as  the  year  1480,  the  in-
ventive and  enterprising'  genius  of  Columbus  con-
ceived the  idea  of  opening-  a  shorter  and  more  certain
communication  with  India,  by  holding  a  direct  west-
erly course  towards  those  regions,  which,  according
to  Marco  Polo  and  other  travellers,  extended  east-
ward far  beyond  the  utmost  limits  of  Asia  known  to
the  Greeks  or  Romans.  This  scheme,  supported  by
arguments  deduced  from  a  scientific  acquaintance
with  cosmography,  from  his  own  practical  knowledge
of  navigation,  from  the  reports  of  skilful  pilots,  and
from  the  theories  and  conjectures  of  the  ancients,  he
proposed  first  to  the  Genoese  his  countrymen,  and
next  to  the  king-  of  Portugal,  into  whose  service  he
had  entered.  It  was  rejected  by  the  former  from  igno-
rance, and  by  the  latter  with  circumstances  most  hu-
miliating to  a  generous  mind.  By  perseverance,
however,  and  address,  he  at  length  induced  the  most
wary  and  least  adventurous  court  in  Europe,  to  un-
dertake the  execution  of  his  plan ;  and  Spain,  as  the  re-
ward of  this  deviation  from  its  usual  cautious  maxims,
had  the  glory  of  discovering  a  new  world,  hardly  in-
ferior in  magnitude  to  a  third  part  of  the  habitable
globe.  Astonishing  as  the  success  of  Columbus  was,
it  did  not  fully  accomplish  his  own  wishes,  or  con-
duct him  to  those  regions  of  the  East,  the  expectation
of  reaching  which  was  the  original  object  of  his  voy-
age. The  eflfects,  however,  of  his  discoveries  were
great  and  extensive.  By  giving  Spain  the  possession
of  immense  territories,  abounding  in  rich  mines,  and
many  valuable  productions  of  nature,  several  of  which
had  hitherto  been  deemed  peculiar  to  India,  wealth
began  to  flow  so  copiously  into  that  kingdom,  and
thence  was  so  diffused  over  Europe,  as  gradually

SECT III.  123

awakened  a  general  spirit  of  industry,  and  called
forth  exertions,  which  alone  must  have  soon  turned
the  course  of  commerce  into  new  channels.

But  this  was  accomplished  more  speedily,  as  well
as  more  completely,  by  the  other  great  event  which
I  mentioned,  the  discovery  of  a  new  route  of  naviga-
tion to  the  East  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope. When
the  Portuguese,  to  whom  mankind  are  indebted  for
opening  this  communication  between  the  most  remote
parts  of  the  habitable  globe,  undertook their first
voyage  of  discovery,  it  is  probable  that  they  had  no-
thing farther  in  view  than  to  explore  those  parts  of  the
coast  of  Africa  which  lay  nearest  to  their  own  coun-
try. But  a  spirit  of  enterprise,  when  roused  and  put
in  motion,  is  always  progressive;  and  that  of  the
Portuguese,  though  slow  and  timid  in  its  first  opera-
tions, gradually  acquired  vigour,  and  prompted  them
to  advance  along  the  western  shore  of  the  African
continent,  far  beyond  the  utmost  boundary  of  ancient
navigation  in  that  direction. Encouraged  by  success,
this  spirit  became  more  adventurous,  despised  dangers
which  formerly  appalled  it,  and  surmounted  difficul-
ties which  it  once  deemed  insuperable. When  the
Portuguese  found  in  the  torrid  zone,  which  the  an-
cients had  pronounced  to  be  uninhabitable,  fertile
countries,  occupied  by  numerous  nations,  and  per-
ceived that  the  continent  of  Africa,  instead  of  extend-
ing in  breadth  towards  the  west,  according  to  the
opinion  of  Ptolemy,  appeared  to  contract  itself  and
to  bend  eastwards,  more  extensive  prospects  opened
to  their  view,  and  inspired  them  with  hopes  of  reach-
ing India,  by  continuing  to  hold  the  same  course  which
they  had  so  long  pursued.

After  several  unsuccessful  attempts  to  accomplish
what  they  had  in  view,  a  small  squadron  sailed  from
the  Tagus,  under  the  command  of  Vasco  de  Gama,

324  ANCIENT INDIA.

an  officer  of  rank,  whose  abilities  and  courage  fitted
him  to  conduct  the  most  difficult  and  arduous  enter-
prises. From  unacquaintance,  however,  with  the
proper  season  and  route  of  navigation  in  that  vast
ocean  through  which  he  had  to  steer  his  course,  his
voyage  was  long  and  dangerous.  At  length  he
doubled  that  promontory,  which  for  several  years  had
been  the  object  of  terror  and  of  hope  to  his  country-
men. From  that,  after  a  prosperous  navigation  along
the  south-east  of  Africa,  he  arrived  at  the  city  of
Melinda,  and  had  the  satisfaction  of  discovering  there,
as  well  as  at  other  places  where  he  touched,  people
of  a  race  very  different  from  the  rude  inhabitants  of
the  western  shore  of  that  continent,  which  alone  the
Portuguese  had  hitherto  visited.  These  he  found  to
be  so  far  advanced  in  civilization,  and  acquaintance
with  the  various  arts  of  life,  that  they  carried  on  an
active  commerce,  not  only  with  the  nations  on  their
own  coast,  but  with  remote  countries  of  Asia.  Con-
ducted by  their  pilots  (who  held  a  course  with  which
experience  had  rendered  them  well  acquainted)  he
sailed  across  the  Indian  ocean,  and  landed  at  Calecut,
on  the  coast  of  Malabar,  on  the  22d  of  May,  1498,  ten
months  and  two  days  after  his  departure  from  the
port  of  Lisbon.

The  Samorin,  or  monarch  of  the  country,  astonished
at  this  unexpected  visit  of  an  unknown  people,  whose
aspect,  and  arms,  and  manners,  bore  no  resemblance
to  any  of  the  nations  accustomed  to  frequent  his  har-
bours, and  who  arrived  in  his  dominions  by  a  route
hitherto  deemed  impracticable,  received  them,  at  first,
with  that  fond  admiration  which  is  often  excited  by
novelty.  But  in  a  short  time,  as  if  he  had  been  in-
spired with  foresight  of  all  the  calamities  now  ap-
proaching India  by  this  fatal  communication  opened
with  the  inhabitants  of  Europe,  he  formed  various

SECT. III.  J25

schemes  to  cut  off  Gama  and  his  followers.  But
from  every  danger  to  which  he  was  exposed,  either
by  the  open  attacks  or  secret  machinations  of  the  In-
dians, the  Portuguese  admiral  extricated  himself  with
singular  prudence  and  intrepidity,  and  at  last  sailed
from  Calecut  with  his  ships  loaded,  not  only  with  the
commodities  peculiar  to  that  coast,  but  with  many  of
the  rich  productions  of  the  eastern  parts  of  India.

On  his  return  to  Lisbon,  he  was  received  with  the
admiration  and  gratitude  due  to  a  man,  who,  by  his
superior  abilities  and  resolution,  had  conducted  to
such  a  happy  issue  an  undertaking  of  the  greatest
importance,  which  had  long  occupied  the  thoughts
of  his  sovereign,  and  excited  the  hopes  of  his  fellow-
subjects.^  Nor  did  this  event  interest  the  Portuguese
alone.  No  nation  in  Europe  beheld  it  with  uncon-
cern. For  although  the  discovery  of  a  new  world,
whether  we  view  it  as  a  display  of  genius  in  the  per-
son who  first  conceived  an  idea  of  that  undertaking:
which  led  mankind  to  the  knowledge  of  it,  whether
we  contemplate  its  influence  upon  science  by  giving
a  more  complete  knowledge  of  the  globe  which  we
inhabit,  or  whether  we  consider  its  effects  upon  the
commercial  intercourse  of  mankind,  be  an  event  far
more  splendid  than  the  voyage  of  Gama,  yet  the  lat-
ter seems  originally  to  have  excited  more  general  at-
tention. The  former,  indeed,  filled  the  minds  of  men
with  astonishment ;  it  was  some  time,  however,  be-
fore they  attained  such  a  sufficient  knowledge  of  that
portion  of  the  earth  now  laid  open  to  their  view,  as  to
form  any  just  idea,  or  even  probable  conjecture,  with
respect  to  what  might  be  the  consequences  of  commu-
nication with  it.  But  the  immense  value  of  the  Indian
trade,  which  both  in  ancient  and  in  modern  times

^  Asia  de  Joao  de  Bairos,  dec.  i,  lib.  iv.  c.  11. Castagneda,  Hist,  de  I'lnde
trad.  en.  f  ran«;ois,  liv.  i.  c  2 — 28.

126  ANCIENT INDIA.

had  enriched  every  nation  by  whicli  it  was  carried
on,  was  a  subject  familiar  to  the  thoughts  of  all  in-
telligent men,  and  they  at  once  perceived  that  the
discovery  of  this  new  route  of  navigation  to  the  East,
must  occasion  great  revolutions,  not  only  in  the
course  of  commerce,  but  in  the  political  state  of
Europe.

What  these  revolutions  were  most  likely  to  be,  and
how  they  would  operate,  were  points  examined  with
particular  attention  in  the  cities  of  Lisbon  and  of
Venice,  but  with  feelings  very  different.  The  Por-
tuguese, founding  upon  the  rights  to  which,  in  that
age,  priority  of  discovery,  confirmed  by  a  papal
grant,  were  supposed  to  confer,  deemed  themselves
entitled  to  an  exclusive  commerce  with  the  countries
which  they  had  first  visited,  began  to  enjoy,  by  an-
ticipation, all  the  benefits  of  it,  and  to  fancy  that  their
capital  would  soon  be  what  Venice  then  was,  the
great  storehouse  of  eastern  commodities  to  all  Europe,
and  the  seat  of  opulence  and  power.  On  the  first
intelligence  of  Gama's  successful  voyage,  the  Vene-
tians, with  the  quick-sighted  discernment  of  merchants,
foresaw  the  immediate  consequence  of  it  to  be  the
ruin  of  that  lucrative  branch  of  commerce  which  had
contributed  so  greatly  to  enrich  and  aggrandise  their
country  ;  and  they  observed  this  with  more  poignant
concern,  as  they  were  apprehensive  that  they  did  not
possess  any  effectual  means  of  preventing,  or  even
retarding,  its  operation.

The  hopes  and  fears  of  both  were  well  founded.
The  Portuguese  entered  upon  the  new  career  opened
to  them  with  activity  and  ardour,  and  made  exertions,
both  commercial  and  military,  far  beyond  what  could
have  been  expected  from  a  kingdom  of  such  incon-
siderable extent.  All  these  were  directed  by  an  in-
telligent monarch,  capable  of  forming  plans  of  the

SECT. III.  127

greatest  magnitude  with  calm  systematic  wisdom,
and  of  prosecuting  them  with  unremitting  perseve-
rance. The  prudence  and  vigour  of  his  measures,
however,  would  have  availed  little  without  proper
instruments  to  carry  them  into  execution. Happily
for  Portugal,  the  discerning  eye  of  Emanuel  selected
a  succession  of  officers  to  take  the  supreme  command
in  India,  who,  by  their  enterprising  valour,  military
skill,  and  political  sagacity,  accompanied  with  dis-
interested integrity,  public  spirit,  and  love  of  their
country,  have  a  title  to  be  ranked  with  the  persons
most  eminent  for  virtue  and  abilities  in  any  age  or
nation. Greater  things  perhaps  were  achieved by
them  than  were  ever  accomplished  in  so  short  a  time.
Before  the  close  of  Emanuers reign, twenty-four
years  only  after  the  voyage  of  Gama,  the  Portuguese
had  rendered  themselves  masters  of  the  city  of  Ma-
lacca, in  which  the  great  staple  of  trade  carried  on
among  the  inhabitants  of  all  those  regions  in  Asia,
which  Europeans  have  distinguished  by  the  general
name  of  the  East  Indies,  was  then  established. To
this  port,  situated  nearly  at  an  equal  distance  from
the  eastern  and  western  extremities  of  these  countries,
and  possessing  the  command  of  that  strait  by  which
they  keep  communication  with  each  other,  the  mer-
chants of  China,  of  Japan,  of  every  kingdom  on  the
continent,  of  the  Moluccas,  and  all  the  islands  in  the
Archipelago,  resorted  from  the  East;  and  those  of
Malabar,  of  Ceylon,  of  Coromandel,  and  of  Bengal,
from  the  West.^ This  conquest  secured  to  the  Por-
tuguese great  influence  over  the  interior  commerce  of
India,  while,  at  the  same  time,  by  their  settlements
at  Goa  and  Diu,  they  were  enabled  to  engross  the
trade  of  the  Malabar  coast,  and  to  obstruct  greatly
the  long  established  intercourse  of  Egypt  with  India

s  Decad.  de  Carros,  dec.  i.  liv.  viii.  c.  1. Osor.  de  reb.  Eman.  lib.  vii.  213,  &c.

12.i  ANCIENT INDIA.

by  the  Red  sea. Their  sliips  frequented  every  port
in  the  East  where  valuable  commodities  were  to  be
found,  from  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  the  river  of
Canton; and  along-  this  immense  stretch  of  coast,
extending  upwards  of  four  thousand  leagues,"  they
had  established  for  the  conveniency  or  protection  of
trade,  a  chain  of  forts  or  factories. They  had  like-
wise taken  possession  of  stations  most  favourable  to
commerce  along  the  southern  coast  of  Africa,  and  in
many  of  the  islands  which  lie  between  Madagascar
and  the  Moluccas. In  every  part  of  the  East  they
were  received  with  respect,  in  many  they  had  ac-
cjuired  the  absolute command. They carried  on
trade  there  without  rival  or  control ;  they  prescribed
to  the  natives  the  terms  of  their  mutual  intercourse ;
they  often  set  what  price  they  pleased  on goods
which  they  purchased ;  and  were  thus  enabled  to
import  from  Indostan  and  the  regions  beyond it,
whatever is useful, rare, or  agreeable, in  greater
abundance,  and  of  more  various  kinds,  than  had  been
known  formerly  in  Europe.

Not  satisfied  with  this  ascendant  which  they  had
acquired  in  India,  the  Portuguese  early  formed  a
scheme,  no  less  bold  than  interested,  of  excluding  all
other  nations  from  participating  of  the  advantages  of
commerce  with  the  East.  In  order  to  effect  this,  it
was  necessary  to  obtain  possession  of  such  stations
in  the  Arabian  and  Persian  gulfs,  as  might  render
them  masters  of  the  navitjation  of  these  two  inland
seas,  and  enable  them  both  to  obstruct  the  ancient
commercial  intercourse  between  Egypt  and  India,
and  to  command  the  entrance  of  the  great  rivers,
which  facilitated  the  conveyance  of  Indian  goods,
not  only  through  the  interior  provinces  of  Asia,  but
as  far  as  Constantinople. The  conduct  of  the  mea-

'•  Hist.  Gcner.  dcs  Voyages,  torn.  i.  p.  110.

SECT. III.  12<)

sures  for  this  purpose  was  committed  to  Alphonso
Albuquerque,' the  most  eminent  of  all  the  Portuguese
generals  who  distinguished  themselves  in  India.
After  the  utmost  efforts  of  genius  and  valour,  he  was
able  to  accomplish  one-half  only  of  what  the  ambi-
tion of  his  coantrymen  had  planned.  By  wresting
the  island  of  Ormuz,  which  commanded  the  mouth
of  the  Persian  gulf,  from  the  petty  princes,  who,  as
tributaries  to  the  monarchs  of  Persia,  had  established
their  dominion  there,  he  secured  to  Portugal  that
extensive  trade  with  the  East  which  the  Persians
had  carried  on  for  several  centuries.  In  the  hands
of  the  Portuguese,  Ormuz  soon  became  the  great
mart  from  which  the  Persian  empire,  and  all  the
provinces  of  Asia  to  the  west  of  it,  were  supplied
with  the  productions  of  India;  and  a  city  which
they  built  on  that  barren  island,  destitute  of  water,
was  rendered  one  of  the  chief  seats  of  opulence,
splendour,  and  luxury  in  the  eastern  world.'

The  operations  of  Albuquerque  in  the  Red  sea
were  far  from  being  attended  with  equal  success.
Partly  by  the  vigorous  resistance  of  the  Arabian
princes,  whose  ports  he  attacked,  and  partly  by  the
damaofc  his  fleet  sustained  in  a  sea  of  which  the  navi-
gation  is  remarkably  difficult  and  dangerous,  he  was
constrained  to  retire,  without  effecting  any  settlement
of  importance.''  The  ancient  channel  of  intercourse
with  India  by  the  Red  sea  still  continued  open  to  the
Egyptians  ;  but  their  commercial  transactions  in  that
country  were  greatly  circumscribed  and  obstructed,
by  the  influence  which  the  Portuguese  had  acquired
in  every  port  to  which  they  were  accustomed  to
resort.

'Osorius  He  rel>.  Gestis  £inan.  lib.  x.  p.  274,  &c.  Tavernier's  Travels,  book  Vj.
c.  23. Kcempfer  Amoenit.  Exot.  p.  736,  &c.

k  Osorius,  lit.  ix.  p.  248,  &c.

VOL.  IX.  K

130  ANCIENT INDIA.

In  consequence  of  this,  the  Venetians  soon  began
to  feel  that  decrease  of  their  own  Indian  trade  which
they  had  foreseen  and  dreaded. In  order  to  prevent
the  farther  progress  of  this  evil,  they  persuaded  the
soldan  of  the  Mamelukes,  equally  alarmed  with  them-
selves at  the  rapid  success  of  the  Portuguese  in  the
East,  and  no  less  interested  to  hinder  them  from  en-
grossing that  commerce,  which  had  so  long  been  the
chief  source  of  opulence  both  to  the  monarchs  and
to  the  people  of  Egypt,  to  enter  into  a  negotiation
with  the  pope  and  the  king  of  Portugal. The  tone
which  the  soldan  assumed  in  this  negotiation  was
such  as  became  the  fierce  chief  of  a  military  govern-
ment. After  stating  his  exclusive  right  to  the  trade
with  India,  he  forewarned  Julius  II.  and  Emanuel,
that  if  the  Portuguese  did  not  relinquish  that  new
course  of  navigation  by  which  they  had  penetrated
into  the  Indian  ocean,  and  cease  from  encroachino:
on  that  commerce,  which  from  time  immemorial  had
been  carried  on  between  the  east  of  Asia  and  his
dominions,  he  would  put  to  death  all  the  Christians
in  Egypt,  Syria,  and  Palestine,  burn  their  churches,
and  demolish  the  holy  sepulchre  itself.' This  for-
midable threat,  which,  during  several  centuries,  would
have  made  all  Christendom  tremble,  seems  to  have
made  so  little  impression,  that  the  Venetians,  as  the
last  expedient,  had  recourse  to  a  measure  which,  in
that  age,  was  deemed  not  only  reprehensible  but  im-
pious. They  incited  the  soldan  to  fit  out  a  fieet  in
the  Red  sea,  and  to  attack  those  unexpected  invaders
of  a  gainful  monopoly,  of  which  he  and  his  prede-
cessors had  long  enjoyed undisturbed possession.
As  Egypt  did  not  produce  timber  proper  for  building-
ships  of  force,  the  Venetians  permitted  the  soldan  to

'  Osorius  dc  Bebus  Eman.  lib.  iv.  p.  110.  edit.  1580.  Asia  de  Barros,  decad.
i.  lib.  viii.  c.  3.

SECT. III.  131

cut  it  in  their  forests  of  Dalmatia,  whence  it  was  con-
veyed to  Alexandria,  and  then  carried  partly  by  water
and  partly  by  land  to  Suez.  There  twelve  ships  of
war  were  built,  on  board  of  which  a  body  of  Mame-
lukes was  ordered  to  serve,  under  the  command  of  an
officer  of  merit.  These  new  enemies,  far  more  for-
midable than  the  natives  of  India  with  whom  the
Portuguese  had  hitherto  contended,  they  encountered
with  undaunted  courage,  and  after  some  conflicts,
they  entirely  ruined  the  squadron,  and  remained
masters  of  the  Indian  ocean."

Soon  after  this  disaster,  the  dominion  of  the  Ma-
melukes was  overturned,  and  Egypt,  Syria,  and  Pa-
lestine were  subjected  to  the  Turkish  empire  by  the
victorious  arms  of  Selim  I.  Their  mutual  interest
quickly  induced  the  Turks  and  Venetians  to  forget
ancient  animosities,  and  to  co-operate  towards  the
ruin  ofthe  Portuguese  trade  in  India.  With  this  view
Selim  confirmed  to  the  Venetians  the  extensive  com-
mercial privileges  which  they  had  enjoyed  under  the
government  ofthe  Mamelukes,  and  published  an  edict
permitting  the  free  entry  of  all  the  productions  of
the  East,  imported  directly  from  Alexandria,  into
every  part  of  his  dominions,  and  imposing  heavy
duties  upon  such  as  were  brought  from  Lisbon."

But  all  these  were  unavailing  efforts  against  the
superior  advantages  which  the  Portuguese  possessed
in  supplying  Europe  with  the  commodities  of  the
East,  in  consequence  of  having  opened  a  new  mode
of  communication  with  it.  At  the  same  time  the
Venetians,  brought  to  the  brink  of  ruin  by  the  fatal
league  of  Cambray,  which  broke  the  power  and
humbled  the  pride  of  the  republic,  were  incapable
of  such  efforts  for  the  preservation  of  their  commerce,

™  Asia  de  Barros,  dec. ii.  lib.  ii.  c.  6. Lafitau, Hist,  de Decourertes  des
Portugais,  i.  '292,  &c. Osor.  lib.  iv.  p.  120.

n  Sandi  Stor.  Civ.  Venez.  part  ii.  901.  part  iii.  432.

K  2

132  ANCIENT  IN  I)  FA.

as  they  mioht  have  made  in  tlie  more  vigorous  age
of  their  government,  and  were  reduced  to  the  feeble
expedients  of  a  declining  state.  Of  this  there  is  a
remarkable  instance  in  an  offer  made  by  them  to  the
king  of  Portugal,  in  the  year  1521,  to  purchase  at  a
stipulated  price  all  the  spices  imported  into  Lisbon,
ovef  and  above  what  might  be  requisite  for  the  con-
sumption of  his  own  subjects.  If  Emanuel  had  been
so  inconsiderate  as  to  close  with  this  proposal,  Ve-
nice would  have  recovered  all  the  benefit  of  the  j^ain-
ful  monopoly  which  she  had  lost.  But  the  off'er  met
with  the  reception  that  it  merited,  and  was  rejected
without  hesitation."

The  Portuguese,  almost  without  obstruction,  con-
tinued their  progress  in  the  East,  until  they  established
there  a  commercial  empire  ;  to  which,  whether  we
consider  its  extent,  its  opulence,  the  slender  power
by  which  it  was  formed,  or  the  splendour  with  which
the  government  of  it  was  conducted,  there  had  hi-
therto been  nothing  comparable  in  the  history  of  na-
tions. Emanuel,  who  laid  the  foundation  of  this
stupendous  fabric,  had  the  satisfaction  to  see  it  al-
most completed.  Every  part  of  Europe  was  supplied
by  the  Portuguese  with  the  productions  of  the  East ;
and  if  we  except  some  inconsiderable  quantity  of
them,  which  the  Venetians  still  continued  to  receive
by  the  ancient  channels  of  conveyance,  our  quarter  of
the  globe  had  no  longer  any  commercial  intercourse
with  India,  and  the  regions  of  Asia  beyond  it,  but  by
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope.

Though  from  this  period  the  people  of  Europe  have
continued  to  carry  on  their  trade  with  India  by  sea,
yet  a  considerable  portion  of  the  valuable  productions
of  the  East  is  still  conveyed  to  other  regions  of  the
earth  by  land-carriage. In  tracing  the  progress  of

0  Osor.  dc  Reb.  Eman.  lib.  xii.  265.

SECT.  III.  J33

trade  with  India,  this  branch  of  it  is  an  object  of  con-
siderable magnitude,  which  has  not  been  examined
with  sufficient  attention.  Tliat  the  ancients  should
have  had  recourse  frequently  to  the  tedious  and  ex-
pensive mode  of  transporting  goods  by  land,  will  not
appear  surprising,  when  we  recollect  the  imperfect
state  of  navigation  among  them.  The  reason  of  this
mode  of  conveyance  being  not  only  continued,  but
increased,  in  modern  times,  demands  some  explana-
tion.

If  we  inspect  a  map  of  Asia,  we  cannot  fail  to  ob-
serve that  the  communication  throughout  all  the
countries  of  that  great  continent  to  the  west  of  In-
dostan  and  China,  though  opened  in  some  degree
towards  the  south  by  the  navigable  rivers,  Euphrates
and  Tigris,  and  towards  the  north  by  two  inland  seas,
the  Euxine  and  Caspian,  must  be  carried  on  in  many
extensive  provinces  wholly  by  land.  This,  as  I  have
observed,  was  the  first  mode  of  intercourse  between
different  countries,  and  during  the  infancy  of  navi-
gation it  was  the  only  one.  Even  after  that  art  had
attained  some  degree  of  improvement,  the  conveyance
of  goods  by  the  two  rivers  formerly  mentioned,  ex-
tended so  little  way  into  the  interior  country,  and  the
trade  of  the  Euxine  and  Caspian  seas  were  so  often
obstructed  by  the  barbarous  nations  scattered  along
their  shores,  that  partly  on  that  account,  and  partly
from  the  adherence  of  mankind  to  ancient  habits,  the
commerce  of  the  various  provinces  of  Asia,  particu-
larly that  with  India  and  the  regions  beyond  it,  con-
tinued to  be  conducted  by  land.

The  same  circumstances  which  induced  the  inha-
bitants of  Asia  to  carry  on  such  a  considerable  part  of
their  commerce  with  each  other  in  this  manner,  ope-
rated with  still  more  powerful  effect  in  Africa.  That
vast  continent,  which  little  resembles  the  other  divi-

134  ANCIENT  INDIA.

sioDS  of  the  earth,  is  not  penetrated  with  inland  seas,
like  Europe  and  Asia,  or  by  a  chain  of  lakes  like
North  America,  or  opened  by  rivers  (the  Nile  alone
excepted)  of  extended  navigation.  It  forms  one  uni-
form, continuous  surface,  between  the  various  parts
of  which  there  could  be  no  intercourse  from  the
earliest  times,  but  by  land.  Rude  as  all  the  people  of
Africa  are,  and  slender  as  the  progress  is  which  they
have  made  in  the  arts  of  life,  such  a  communication
appears  to  have  been  early  opened  and  always  kept
up.  How  far  it  extended  in  the  more  early  periods
to  which  my  researches  have  been  directed,  and  by
what  different  routes  it  was  carried  on,  I  have  not
sufficient  information  to  determine  with  accuracy.
It  is  highly  probable  that  from  time  immemorial,  the
gold,  the  ivory,  the  perfumes,  both  of  the  southern
parts  of  Africa,  and  of  its  more  northern  districts,
were  conveyed  either  to  the  Arabian  gulf  or  to  Egypt,
and  exchanged  for  the  spices  and  other  productions
of  the  East.

The  Mahomedan  religion,  which  spread  with  amaz-
ing rapidity  over  all  Asia,  and  a  considerable  part  of
Africa,  contributed  greatly  towards  the  increase  of
commercial  intercourse  by  land  in  both  these  quarters
of  the  globe,  and  has  given  it  additional  vigour,  by
mingling  with  it  a  new  principle  of  activity,  and  by
directing  it  to  a  common  centre.  Mahomet  enjoined
all  his  followers  to  visit  once  in  their  lifetime  the
Caaba,  or  square  building  in  the  temple  of  Mecca,
the  immemorial  object  of  veneration  among  his  coun-
trymen, not  only  on  account  of  its  having  been  chosen
(according  to  their  tradition)  to  be  the  residence  of
man  at  his  creation,''  but  because  it  was  the  first  spot
on  this  earth  which  was  consecrated  to  the  worship

P  x\bul-Ghaii  Bajadur  Khan,  Hist.  Gen.  dcs  Tatars,  p.  15.

SECT.  Iir.  135

of  God.""  In  order  to  preserve  continually  upon  their
minds  a  sense  of  obligation  to  perform  this  duty,  he
directed  that  in  all  the  multiplied  acts  of  devotion
which  his  religion  prescribes,  true  believers  should
always  turn  their  faces  towards  that  holy  place/ In
obedience  to  a  precept  solemnly  enjoined  and  sedu-
lously inculcated,  large  caravans  of  pilgrims  assemble
annually  in  every  country  where  the  Mahomedan
faith  is  established. From  the  shores  of  the  Atlantic
on  one  hand,  and  from  the  most  remote  regions  of
the  East  on  the  other,  the  votaries  of  the  prophet
advanced  to  Mecca. Commercial  ideas  and  objects
minole  with  those  of  devotion,  the  numerous  camels'
of  each  caravan  are  loaded  with  those  commodities
of  every  country  which  are  of  easiest  carriage  and
most  ready  sale. The  holy  city  is  crowded,  not  only
with  zealous  devotees,  but  with  opulent  merchants.
During  the  few  days  they  remain  there,  the  fair  of
Mecca  is  the  greatest,  perhaps,  on  the  face  of  the
earth. Mercantile  transactions  are  carried  on  in  it
to  an  immense  value, of  which  the  dispatch,  the
silence,  the  mutual  confidence  and  good  faith  in  con-
ducting them,  are  the  most  unequivocal  proof. The
productions  and  manufactures  of  India  form  a  capital
article  in  this  great  traffic,  and  the  caravans  on  their
return  disseminate  them  through  every  part  of  Asia
and  Africa. Some  of  these  are  deemed  necessary,
not  only  to  the  comfort,  but  to  the  preservation  of
life,  and  others  contribute  to  its  elegance  and  plea-
sure. They  are  so  various  as  to  suit  the  taste  of  man-
kind in  every  climate,  and  in  diiferent  stages  of  im-
provement ;  and  are  in  high  request  among  the  rude
natives  of  Africa,  as  well  as  the  more  luxurious  in-
habitants of  Asia. In  order  to  supply  their  several

1  Ohsson  Tableau  General  de  I'Empire  Othoman,  torn.  iii.  p.  150,  &c.  289.
edit.  8vo.

>•  Herbelot  Biblioth.  Orient,  artic.  Caaba  and  Kehlah,  •  See  Note  LIII.

136  ANCIENT INDIA.

demands,  the  caravans  return  loaded  with  tlie  muslins
and  chintzes  of  Bengal  and  the  Deccan,  the  shawls
of  Cachemire,  the  pepper  of  Malabar,  the  diamonds
of  Golconda,  the  pearls  of  Kilcare,  the  cinnamon  of
Ceylon,  the  nutmeg,  cloves,  and  mace  of  the  Mo-
luccas, and  an  immense  number  of  other  Indian  com-
modities.

Besides  these  great  caravans,  formed  partly  by
respect  for  a  religious  precept,  and  partly  with  a
view  to  extend  a  lucrative  branch  of  commerce,  there
are  other  caravans,  and  these  not  inconsiderable,  com-
posed entirely  of  merchants,  who  have  no  object
but  trade.  These,  at  stated  seasons,  set  out  from  dif-
ferent  parts  of  the  Turkish  and  Persian  dominions,
and  proceeding  to  Indostan,  and  even  to  China,  by
routes  which  were  anciently  known,  they  convey  by
land-carriage  the  most  valuable  commodities  of  these
countries  to  the  remote  provinces  of  both  empires.
It  is  only  by  considering  the  distance  to  which  large
quantities  of  these  commodities  are  carried,  and  fre-
quently across  extensive  deserts,  which,  without  the
aid  of  camels,  would  have  been  impassable,  that  we
can  form  any  idea  of  the  magnitude  of  the  trade  with
India  by  land,  and  are  led  to  perceive,  that  in  a  Dis-
quisition concerning  the  various  modes  of  conduct-
ing this  commerce,  it  is  well  entitled  to  the  attention
which  I  have  bestowed  in  endeavouring  to  trace  it.*

Sec  Note  LIV.

AN

HISTORICAL DISQUISITION

CONCERNING

ANCIENT  INDIA.

SECT.  IV.

General  Observations.

1  Hus  I  have  endeavoured  to  describe  the  progress
of  trade  with  India,  both  by  sea  and  by  land,  from
the  earliest  times  in  which  history  affords  any  au-
thentic information  concerning  it,  until  an  entire  re-
volution was  made  in  its  nature,  and  the  mode  of
carrying  it  on,  by  that  great  discovery  which  I  ori-
ginally fixed  as  the  utmost  boundary  of  my  inquiries.
Here,  then,  this  Disquisition  might  have  been  termi-
nated. But  as  I  have  conducted  my  readers  to  that
period  when  a  new  order  of  ideas,  and  new  arrange-
ments of  policy  began  to  be  introduced  into  Europe,
in  consequence  of  the  value  and  importance  of  com-
merce being  so  thoroughly  understood,  that  in  al-
most every  country  the  encouragement  of  it  became
a  chief  object  of  public  attention ;  as  we  have  now
reached  that  point  whence  a  line  may  be  drawn  which
marks  the  chief  distinction  between  the  manners  and
political  institutions  of  ancient  and  modern  times,  it
will  render  the  work  more  instructive  and  useful,  to
conclude  it  with  some  general  observations,  which
naturally  arise  from  a  survey  of  both,  and  a  compa-
rison of  the  one  with  the  other. These  observations.

138  ANCIENT INDIA.

I  trust,  will  be  found  not  only  to  have  an  intimate
connexion  with  the  subject  of  my  researches,  and  to
throw  additional  light  upon  it ;  but  will  serve  to
illustrate  many  particulars  in  the  general  history  of
commerce,  and  to  point  out  effects  or  consequences
of  various  events,  which  have  not  been  generally  ob-
served, or  considered  with  that  attention  which  they
merited.

I.  After  viewing  the  great  and  extensive  effects  of
finding  a  new  course  of  navigation  to  India  by  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  it  may  appear  surprising  to  a
modern  observer,  that  a  discovery  of  such  impor-
tance was  not  made,  or  even  attempted,  by  any  of
the  commercial  states  of  the  ancient  world.  But  in
judging  with  respect  to  the  conduct  of  nations  in  re-
mote times,  we  never  err  more  widely,  than  when  we
decide  with  regard  to  it,  not  according  to  the  ideas
and  views  of  their  age,  but  of  our  own.  This  is  not,
perhaps,  more  conspicuous  in  any  instance,  than  in
that  under  consideration.  It  was  by  the  Tyrians,
and  by  the  Greeks,  who  were  masters  of  Egypt,  that
the  different  people  of  Europe  were  first  supplied
with  the  productions  of  the  East.  From  the  account
that  has  been  given  of  the  manner  in  which  they  pro-
cured these,  it  is  manifest  that  they  had  neither  the
same  inducements  with  modern  nations,  to  wish  for
any  new  communication  with  India,  nor  the  same
means  of  accomplishing  it.  All  the  commercial  trans-
actions of  the  ancients  with  the  East  were  confined
to  the  ports  on  the  Malabar  coast,  or  extended,  at
farthest,  to  the  island  of  Ceylon.  To  these  staples
the  natives  of  all  the  different  reoions  in  the  eastern
parts  of  Asia  brought  the  commodities  which  were
the  growth  of  their  several  countries,  or  the  product
of  their  ingenuity,  in  their  own  vessels,  and  with  them
the  ships  from  Tyre  and  from  Egypt  completed  their

SECT, IV.  13.0

investments.  While  the  operations  of  their  Indian
trade  were  carried  on  within  a  sphere  so  circum-
scribed, the  conveyance  of  a  cargo  by  the  Arabian
gulf,  notwithstanding  the  expense  of  land-carriage,
either  from  Elath  to  Rhinocolura,  or  across  the  de-
sert to  the  Nile,  was  so  safe  and  commodious,  that
the  merchants  of  Tyre  and  Alexandria  had  little  rea-
son to  be  solicitous  for  the  discovery  of  any  other.
The  situation  of  both  these  cities,  as  well  as  that  of
the  other  considerable  commercial  states  of  antiquity,
was  very  different  from  that  of  the  countries  to  which,
in  later  times,  mankind  have  been  indebted  for  keep-
ing up  intercourse  with  the  remote  parts  of  the  globe.
Portugal,  Spain,  England,  Holland,  which  have  been
most  active  and  successful  in  this  line  of  enterprise,
all  lie  on  the  Atlantic  ocean  (in  which  every  Eu-
ropean voyage  of  discovery  must  commence),  or  have
immediate  access  to  it.  But  Tyre  was  situated  at  the
eastern  extremity  of  the  Mediterranean,  Alexandria
not  far  from  it;  Rhodes,  Athens,  Corinth,  which
came  afterward  to  be  ranked  among  the  most  active
trading  cities  of  antiquity,  lay  considerably  advanced
towards  the  same  quarter  in  that  sea.  The  commerce
of  all  these  states  was  long  confined  within  the  pre-
cincts of  the  Mediterranean ;  and  in  some  of  them,
never  extended  beyond  it.  The  pillars  of  Hercules,
or  the  straits  of  Gibraltar,  were  long  considered  as
the  utmost  boundary  of  navigation.  To  reach  this
was  deemed  a  signal  proof  of  naval  skill ;  and  before
any  of  these  states  could  give  a  beginning  to  an  at-
tempt towards  exploring  the  vast  unknown  ocean
which  lay  beyond  it,  they  had  to  accomplish  a  voy-
age (according  to  their  ideas)  of  great  extent  and
much  danger.  This  was  sufficient  to  deter  them  from
engaging  in  an  arduous  undertaking,  from  which,

140  ANCIENT INDIA.

even  if  attended  witli  success,  tlieir  situation  pre-
vented their  entertaining  liopes  of  deriving  great  ad-
vantage."

But  could  we  suppose  the  discovery  of  a  new  pas-
sage to  India  to  have  become  an  object  of  desire  or
pursuit  to  any  of  these  states,  their  science  as  well  as
practice  of  navigation  was  so  defective,  that  it  would
have  been  hardly  possible  for  them  to  attain  it.  The
vessels  which  the  ancients  employed  in  trade  were  so
small  as  not  to  afford  stowage  for  provisions  sufficient
to  subsist  a  crew  during  a  long  voyage.  Their  con-
struction was  such,  that  they  could  seldom  venture
to  depart  far  from  land,  and  their  mode  of  steering
along  the  coast  (which  I  have  been  obliged  to  men-
tion often)  so  circuitous  and  slow,  that  from  these,  as
well  as  from  other  circumstances  which  1  might  have
specified,''  we  may  pronounce  a  voyage  from  the  Me-
diterranean to  India,  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  to
have  been  an  undertaking  beyond  their  power  to  ac-
complish, in  such  a  manner  as  to  render  it,  in  any
degree,  subservient  to  commerce.  To  this  decision,
the  account  preserved  by  Herodotus,  of  a  voyage
performed  by  some  Phenician  ships  employed  by  a
king  of  Egypt,  which,  taking  their  departure  from
the  Arabian  gulf,  doubled  the  southern  promontory
of  Africa,  and  arrived  at  the  end  of  three  years,  by
the  straits  of  Gades,  or  Gibraltar,  at  the  mouth  of  the
Nile,''  can  hardly  be  considered  as  repugnant ;  for
several  writers  of  the  gi-eatest  eminence  among  the
ancients,  and  most  distinguished  for  their  proficiency
in  the  knowledge  of  geography,  regarded  this  ac-
count rather  as  an  amusing  tale,  than  the  history  of  a
real  transaction ;  and  either  entertained  doubts  con-

*  See  Note  LV.  i'  Goguet  Grig,  des  Loix  des  Aries,  &c.  ii.  303.  329.

«:  Lib.  iv.  c.  42.

SECT. IV.  141

cerning  the  possibility  of  sailing*  round  Africa,  or  ab-
solutely denied  it.''  But  if  what  Herodotus  relates
concerning  the  course  held  by  these  Phenician  ships
had  ever  been  received  by  the  ancients  with  general
assent,  we  can  hardly  suppose  that  any  state  could
have  been  so  wildly  adventurous  as  to  imagine  that
a  voyage,  which  it  required  three  years  to  complete,
could  be  undertaken  with  a  prospect  of  commercial
benefit.

II.  The  rapid  progress  of  the  moderns  in  explor-
ing India,  as  well  as  the  extensive  power  and  valu-
able settlements  which  they  early  acquired  there,
mark  such  a  distinction  between  their  mode  of  con-
ducting naval  operations,  and  that  of  the  ancients,  as
merits  to  be  considered  and  explained  with  attention.
From  the  reign  of  the  first  Ptolemy,  to  the  conquest
of  Egypt  by  the  Mahomedans,  Europe  had  been  sup-
plied with  the  productions  of  the  East  by  the  Greeks
of  Alexandria,  by  the  Romans  while  they  were  mas-
ters of  Egypt,  and  by  the  subjects  of  the  emperors  of
Constantinople,  when  that  kingdom  became  a  pro-
vince of  their  dominions.  During  this  long  period,
extending  almost  to  a  thousand  years,  none  of  those
people,  the  most  enlightened,  undoubtedly,  in  the
ancient  world,  ever  advanced  by  sea,  farther  towards
the  east  than  the  gulf  of  Siam,  and  had  no  regular
established  trade  but  with  the  ports  on  the  coast  of
Malabar,  or  those  in  the  island  of  Ceylon.  They  at-
tempted no  conquests  in  any  part  of  India,  they  made
no  settlements,  they  erected  no  forts.  Satisfied  with
an  intercourse  merely  commercial,  they  did  not  aim
at  acquiring  any  degree  of  power  or  dominion  in  the
countries  where  they  traded ;  though  it  seems  to  be
probable  that  they  might  have  established  it  without

d  Poiyb.  lib.  iii.  p.  193.  edit.  Casaub. Plin.  Nat.  Flist.  lib.  ii,  c.  6. Ptol.
Geogr.  lib.  iv.  c.  9. See  Note  LVI.

142  ANCIENT INDIA.

much  opposition  from  tlie  natives,  a  gentle  effeminate
people,  with  whom,  at  that  time,  no  foreign  and  more
warlike  race  was  mingled.  But  the  enterprising  ac-
tivity of  the  Portuguese  was  not  long  confined  within
the  same  limits ;  a  few  years  after  their  arrival  at  Ca-
lecut,  they  advanced  towards  the  east,  into  regions
unknown  to  the  ancients.  The  kingdoms  of  Cambo-
dia, Cochin-China,  Tonquin,  the  vast  empire  of
China,  and  all  the  fertile  islands  in  the  great  Indian
Archipelago,  from  Sumatra  to  the  Philippines,  were
discovered,  and  the  Portuguese,  though  opposed  in
every  quarter  by  the  Mahomedans  of  Tartar  or  Ara-
bian origin  settled  in  many  parts  of  India,  enemies
much  more  formidable  than  the  natives,  established
there  that  extensive  influence  and  dominion  which  I
have  formerly  described.

Of  this  remarkable  difference  between  the  pro-
gress and  operations  of  the  ancients  and  moderns  in
India,  the  imperfect  knowledge  of  the  former,  with
respect  both  to  the  theory  and  practice  of  navi-
gation, seems  to  have  been  the  principal  cause.
From  the  coast  of  Malabar  to  the  Philippines,  was
a  voyage  of  an  extent  far  beyond  any  that  the
ancients  were  accustomed  to  undertake,  and,  ac-
cording to  their  manner  of  sailing,  must  have
required  a  great  length  of  time  to  perform  it.  The
nature  of  their  trade  with  India  was  such,  that  they
had  not  (as  has  been  formerly  observed)  the  same
inducements  with  the  moderns,  to  prosecute  dis-
covery with  ardour ;  and,  according  to  the  descrip-
tion given  of  the  vessels  in  which  the  merchants  of
Alexandria  carried  on  their  trade  from  the  Arabian
gulf,  they  appear  to  have  been  very  unfit  for  that
purpose.  On  all  these  accounts  the  ancients  re-
mained satisfied  with  a  slender  knowledge  of  India ;
and influenced by reasons proceeding from the

SECT. IV.  143

same  cause,  they  attempted neither  conquest  nor
settlement  there. In  order  to  accomplish  either  of
these,  they must have  transported  a considerable
number  of  men  into  India. But,  from  the  defective
structure  of  their  ships,  as  well  as  from  the  imper-
fection of  their  art  in  navigating  them,  the  ancients
seldom  ventured  to  convey  a  body  of  troops  to  any
distance  by  sea. From  Berenice to Musiris  was
to  them, even after  Hippalus  had  discovered  the
method of  steering  a  direct  course,  and  when  their
naval skill had attained to its highest state of
improvement, a voyage of  no less than seventy
days. By  the  ancient route  along the coast  of
Persia,  a  voyage  from  the  Arabian  gulf  to  any  part
of  India  must  have  been  of  greater  length,  and  ac-
complished more  slowly. As  no  hostile  attack  was
ever  made  upon  India  by  sea,  either  by  the  Greek
monarchs  of  Egypt,  though  the  two  first  of  them
were  able  and  ambitious princes,  or  by  the  most
enterprising  of  the  Roman  emperors,  it  is  evident
that  they  must  have  deemed  it  an  attempt  beyond
their  power  to  execute. Alexander  the  Great,  and^
in  imitation  of  him,  his  successors,  the  monarchs  of
Syria,  were  the  only  persons  in  the  ancient  world
who  formed  an  idea  of  establishing  their  dominion
in  any  part  of  India ;  but  it  was  with  armies  led
thither  by  land  that  they  hoped  to  achieve  this.

III.  The  sudden  effect  of  opening  a  direct  com-
munication with  the  East,  in  lowering  the  price  of
Indian  commodities,  is  a  circumstance  that  merits
observation.  How  compendious  soever  the  ancient
intercourse  with  India  may  appear  to  have  been,  it
was  attended  with  considerable  expense.  The  pro-
ductions of  the  remote  parts  of  Asia,  brought  to
Ceylon,  or  to  the  ports  on  the  Malabar  coast,  by
the  natives, were  put  on  board the ships which

144  ANCIENT INDIA.

arrived  from  the  Arabian  gulf.  At  Berenice  tliey
"were  landed,  and  carried  by  camels  two  hundred
and  fifty-eig'ht  miles  to  the  banks  of  the  Nile.  There
they  were  again  embarked,  and  conveyed  down  the
river  to  Alexandria,  whence  they  were  dispatched
to  diflerent  markets.  The  addition  to  the  price  of
goods  by  such  a  multiplicity  of  operations  must
have  been  considerable,  especially  when  the  rate
chargeable  on  eacli  operation  was  fixed  by  mo-
nopolists, subject  to  no  control.  But,  after  the  pas-
sage to  India  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  was  dis-
covered, its  various  commodities  were  purchased  at
first  hand  in  the  countries  of  which  they  were  the
growth  or  manufacture.  In  all  these,  particularly
in  Indostan  and  in  China,  the  subsistence  of  man  is
more  abundant  than  in  any  other  part  of  the  earth.
The  people  live  chiefly  upon  rice,  the  most  prolific
of  all  grains ;  population,  of  consequence,  is  so
great,  and  labour  so  extremely  cheap,  that  every
production  of  nature  or  of  art  is  sold  at  a  very  low
price.  When  these  were  shipped  in  different  parts
of  India,  they  were  conveyed  directly  to  Lisbon,  by
a  navigation,  long  indeed,  but  uninterrupted  and
safe,  and  thence  circulated  through  Europe.  The
carriage  of  mercantile  goods  by  water  is  so  much
less  expensive  than  by  any  other  mode  of  convey-
ance, that  as  soon  as  the  Portuguese  could  import
the  productions  of  India  in  sufficient  quantities  to
supply  the  demands  of  Europe,  they  were  able  to
afford  them  at  such  a  reduced  price,  that  the  com-
petition of  the  Venetians  ceased  almost  entirely,  and
the  full  stream  of  commerce  flowed  in  its  natural
direction  towards  the  cheapest  market.  In  what
proportion  the  Portuguese  lowered  the  price  of
Indian  commodities,  I  cannot  ascertain  with  pre-
cision, as  I  have  not  found  in  contemporary  writers

SECT. IV.  145

sufficient  information  with  respect  to  that  point.
Some  idea,  however,  of  this,  approaching  perhaps
near  to  accuracy,  may  be  formed,  from  the  compu-
tations of  Mr.  Munn,  an  intelligent  English  mer-
chant. He  has  published  a  table  of  the  prices  paid
for  various  articles  of  goods  in  India,  compared
with  the  prices  for  which  they  were  sold  in  Aleppo,
from  which  the  difference  appears  to  be  nearly  as
three  to  one;  and  he  calculates,  that,  after  a  rea-
sonable allowance  for  the  expense  of  the  voyage
from  India,  the  same  goods  may  be  sold  in  England
at  half  the  price  which  they  bear  in  Aleppo.  The
expense  of  conveying  the  productions  of  India  up
the  Persian  gulf  to  Bassora,  and  thence  either
through  the  Great  or  Little  Desert  to  Aleppo,  could
not,  I  should  imagine,  differ  considerably  from
that  by  the  Red  sea  to  Alexandria.  We  may  there-
fore suppose,  that  the  Venetians  might  purchase
them  from  the  merchants  of  that  city,  at  nearly  the
same  rate  for  which  they  were  sold  in  Aleppo  ;  and
when  we  add  to  this,  what  they  must  have  charged
as  their  own  profit  in  all  the  markets  which  they
frequented,  it  is  evident  that  the  Portuguese  might
afford  to  reduce  the  commodities  of  the  East  to  a
price  below  that  which  has  been  mentioned,  and
might  supply  every  part  of  Europe  with  them  more
than  one-half  cheaper  than  formerly.  The  enter-
prising schemes  of  the  Portuguese  monarchs  were
accomplished  sooner,  as  well  as  more  completely,
than  in  the  hour  of  most  sanguine  hope  they  could
have  presumed  to  expect;  and,  early  in  the  six-
teenth century,  their  subjects  became  possessed  of  a
monopoly  of  the  trade  with  India,  founded  upon
the  only  equitable  title,  that  of  furnishing  its  pro-
ductions  in  greater  abundance,  and  at  a  more
moderate  price.

yoL. IX.  h

I4(>  ANCIExXT INDIA.

IV. We  may  observe,  that,  in  consequence  of  a
more plentiful  supply of  Indian goods,  and  at  a
cheaper  rate,  the  demand  for  them  increased  rapidly
in  every  part  of  Europe. To  trace  the  progress  of
this  in  detail,  would  lead  me  far  beyond  the  period
which  I  have  fixed  as  the  limit  of  this  disquisition,
but some general remarks concerning it will be
found  intimately  connected  with  the  subject  of  my
inquiries. The  chief  articles  of  importation  from
India, while  the  Romans  had  the  direction  of  the
trade  with  that  country,  have  been  formerly  speci-
fied. But  upon  the  subversion  of  their  empire,  and
the  settlement  of  the  fierce  warriors  of  Scythia  and
Germany  in  the  various countries  of  Europe,  the
state  of  society,  as  well  as  the  condition  of  indi-
viduals, became so extremely different, that the
wants  and  desires  of  men  were  no  lonoer  the  same.
Barbarians,  many  of  them  not  far  advanced  in  their
progress  beyond  the  rudest  state  of  social  life,  had
little  relish  for  those  accommodations,  and  that  ele-
gance, which  are  so  alluring  to polished  nations.
The curious manufactures of silk, the precious
stones  and  pearls  of  the  East,  which  had  been  the
ornament  and  pride  of  the  wealthy  and  luxurious
citizens  of  Rome,  were  not  objects  of  desire  to  men,
who,  for  a  considerable  time after  they  took  pos-
session of  their  new  conquests,  retained  the  original
simplicity of  their pastoral manners. They ad-
vanced,  however,  from rudeness  to refinement  in
the  usual  course  of  progression  which  nations  are
destined to hold, and an  increase of  wants and
desires  requiring  new  objects  to  gratify  them,  they
began  to  acquire  a  relish  for  some  of  the  luxuries
of  India. Among  these  they  had  a  singular  pre-
dilection for  the  spicerics  and  aromatics  which  that
country yields in such variety and abundance.

SECT. IV.  147

Whence  their  peculiar  fondness  for  these  arose,  it  is
not of  importance  to  inquire. Whoever  consults
the  writers  of  the  middle  ages,  will  find  many  par-
ticulars which  confirm  this  observation. In  every
enumeration of Indian commodities which they
give, spices are always mentioned as the most
considerable  and  precious  article.' In  their  cook-
ery,  all dishes  were  highly  seasoned with  them.
In  every  entertainment  of  parade,  a  profusion  of
them  was deemed  essential  to  magnificence. In
every  medical  prescription  they  were  principal  in-
gredients.^ But  considerable as  the  demand  for
spices  had  become,  the  mode  in  which  the  nations
of  Europe  had  hitherto  been  supplied  with  them
was  extremely  disadvantageous. The  ships  employ-
ed by  the  merchants  of  Alexandria  never  ventured
to  visit  those  remote  regions  which  produce  the  most
valuable  spices,  and  before  they  could  be  circulated
through  Europe,  they  were  loaded  with  the  accumu-
lated profits  received  by  four  or  five  different  hands
through  which  they  had  passed. But  the  Portu-
guese, with  a  bolder  spirit  of  navigation,  having  pe-
netrated into  every  part  of  Asia,  took  in  their  cargo
of  spices  in  the  places  where  they  grew,  and  could
afford  to  dispose  of  them  at  such  a  price,  that,  from
being  an  expensive  luxury,  they  became  an  article  of
such  general  use,  as  greatly  augmented  the  demand
for  them. An  effect  similar  to  this  may  be  observed
with  respect  to  the  demand  for  other  commodities
imported  from  India,  upon  the  reduction  of  their
price  by  the  Portuguese. From  that  period  a  grow-
ing taste  for  Asiatic  luxuries  may  be  traced  in  every
country  of  Europe,  and  the  number  of  ships  fitted

*  Jac.  de  Vitriac.  Hist.  Hieros.  ap.  Bongars.  i.  p.  1099.  Wilh,  Tyr.  lib.
xJi.  c.  ?3.  I

f  Du  Cange  Glodsar.  Verb.  Aromata,  Species,  Henry's  Hist,  of  G.  Brit.  vol.
iv.  p.  597,  598.

L 2

148  ANCIENT INDIA.

out  for  that  trade  at  Lisbon  continued  to  increase
every  year.^

V.  Lucrative  as  tlie  trade  with  India  was,  and  had
long  been  deemed,  it  is  remarkable  tliat  the  Portu-
guese were  suflered  to  remain  in  the  undisturbed  and
exclusive  possession  of  it,  during  the  course  of  al-
most a  century.  In  the  ancient  world,  though  Alex-
andria, from  the  peculiar  felicity  of  its  situation,
could  carry  on  an  intercourse  with  the  East  by  sea,
and  circulate  its  productions  through  Europe  with
such  advantage,  as  gave  it  a  decided  superiority
over  every  rival ;  yet  various  attempts  (which  have
been  described  in  their  proper  places)  were  made,
from  time  to  time,  to  obtain  some  share  in  a  com-
merce so  apparently  beneficial.  From  the  growing
activity  of  the  commercial  spirit  in  the  sixteenth
century,  as  well  as  from  the  example  of  the  eager
solicitude  with  which  the  Venetians  and  Genoese
exerted  themselves  alternately  to  shut  out  each  other
from  any  share  in  the  Indian  trade,  it  might  have
been  expected  that  some  competitor  would  have
arisen  to  call  in  question  the  claim  of  the  Portuguese
to  an  exclusive  right  of  traffic  with  the  East,  and  to
wrest  from  them  some  portion  of  it.  There  were,
however,  at  that  time,  some  peculiar  circumstances
in  the  political  state  of  all  those  nations  in  Europe,
whose  intrusion,  as  rivals,  the  Portuguese  had  any
reason  to  dread,  which  secured  to  them  the  quiet
enjoyment  of  their  monopoly  of  Indian  commerce,
during  such  a  long  period.  From  the  accession  of
Charles  V.  to  the  throne,  Spain  was  either  so  much
occupied  in  a  multiplicity  of  operations  in  which  it
was  engaged  by  the  ambition  of  that  monarch,  and

of  his  son  Philip  IL,  or  so  intent  on  prose-
A.D.  15'21.  . .  ,.  .  1  ^ .

cutmg  its  own  discoveries  and  conquests  m

s  See  NoU"  LVII.

SECT. IV.  149

the  New  World,  that  although,  by  the  successful  en-
terprise of  Magellan,  its  fleets  were  unexpectedly
conducted  by  a  new  course  to  that  remote  region  of
Asia  which  was  the  seat  of  the  most  gainful  and  al-
luring branch  of  trade  carried  on  by  the  Portuguese,
it  could  make  no  considerable  eftbrt  to  avail  itself  of
the  commercial  advantages  which  it  might  have  de-
rived from  that  event.  By  the  acquisition  of  the
crown  of  Portugal,  in  the  year  1580,  the  kings  of
Spain,  instead  of  the  rivals,  became  the  protectors
of  the  Portuguese  trade,  and  the  guardians  of  all  its
exclusive  rights.  Throughout  the  sixteenth  century,
the  streng'th  and  resources  of  France  were  so  much
wasted  by  the  fruitless  expeditions  of  their  monarchs
into  Italy,  by  their  unequal  contest  with  the  power
and  policy  of  Charles  V.,  and  by  the  calamities  of
the  civil  wars  which  desolated  the  kingdom  upwards
of  forty  years,  that  it  could  neither  bestow  much  at-
tention upon  objects  of  commerce,  nor  engage  in  any
scheme  of  distant  enterprise.  The  Venetians,  how
sensibly  soever  they  might  feel  the  mortifying  reverse
of  being  excluded,  almost  entirely,  from  the  Indian
trade,  of  which  their  capital  had  been  formerly  the
chief  seat,  were  so  debilitated  and  humbled  by  the
league  of  Cambray,  that  they  were  no  longer  capa-
ble of  engaging  in  any  undertaking  of  magnitude.
England,  weakened  (as  was  formerly  observed)  by
the  long  contest  between  the  houses  of  York  and
Lancaster,  and  just  beginning  to  recover  its  proper
vigour^  was  restrained  from  active  exertion,  during
one  part  of  the  sixteenth  century,  by  the  cautious
maxims  of  Henry  VII.,  and  waited  its  strength,  dur-
ing another  part  of  it,  by  engaging  inconsiderately
in  the  wars  between  the  princes  on  the  continent.
The  nation,  though  destined  to  acquire  territories  in
India  more  extensive  and  valuable  than  were  ever
possessed  by  any  European  power,  had  no  such  pre-

150  ANCIENT  INDIA.

sentiment  of  its  future  eminence  there,  as  to  take  an
early  part  in  the  commerce  or  transactions  of  that
country,  and  a  great  part  of  the  century  elapsed
before  it  besfan  to  turn  its  attention  towards  the
East.

While  the  most  considerable  nations  in  Europe
found  it  necessary,  from  the  circumstances  which  I
have  mentioned,  to  remain  inactive  spectators  of  what
passed  in  the  East,  the  seven  United  Provinces  of  the
Low-Countries,  recently  formed  into  a  small  state,
still  struggling  for  political  existence,  and  yet  in  the
infancy  of  its  power,  ventured  to  appear  in  the  In-
dian ocean  as  the  rivals  of  the  Portuguese  ;  and,  de-
spising their  pretensions  to  an  exclusive  right  of  com-
merce with  the  extensive  countries  to  the  eastward
of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  invaded  that  monopoly
which  they  had  hitherto  guarded  with  such  jealous
attention.  The  English  soon  followed  the  example  of.
the  Dutch,  and  both  nations,  at  first  by  the  enterprising
industry  of  private  adventurers,  and  afterward  by  the
more  powerful  efforts  of  trading  companies,  under  the
protection  of  public  authority,  advanced  with  asto-
nishing ardour  and  success  in  this  new  career  opened
to  them.  The  vast  fabric  of  power  which  the  Por-
tuguese had  erected  in  the  East  (a  superstructure  much
too  large  for  the  basis  on  which  it  had  to  rest)  was  al-
most entirely  overturned,  in  as  short  time,  and  with  as
much  facility,  as  it  had  been  raised.  England  and
Holland,  by  driving  them  from  their  most  valuable
settlements,  and  seizing  the  most  lucrative  branches  of
their  trade,  have  attained  to  that  pre-eminence  in  naval
power  and  commercial  opulence,  by  which  they  are
distinguished  among  the  nations  of  Europe.

VI.  The  coincidence,  in  point  of  time,  of  the  dis-
coveries made  by  Columbus  in  the  West,  and  those  of
Gama  in  the  East,  is  a  singular  circumstance,  which
merits  observation,  on  account  of  the  remarkable  in-

SECT.  IV.  151

fluence  of  those  events  in  forming-  or  strengthening  the
commercial  connexion  of  the  different  quarters  of  the
globe  with  each  other. In  all  ages,  gold  and  silver,
particularly  the  latter,  have  been  the  commodities  ex-
ported with  the  greatest  profit  to  India. In  no  part
of  the  earth  do  the  natives  depend  so  little  upon  foreign
countries,  either  for  the  necessaries  or  luxuries  of  life.
The  blessings  of  a  favourable  climate  and  fertile  soil,
augmented  by  their  own  ingenuity,  afford  them  what-
ever they  desire. In  consequence  of  this,  trade  with
them  has  always  been  carried  on  in  one  uniform  man-
ner, and  the  precious  metals  have  been  given  in  ex-
change for  their  peculiar  productions,  whether  of  na-
ture or  art. But  when  the  communication  with  India
was  rendered  so  much  more  easy,  that  the  demand  for
its  commodities  began  to  increase  far  beyond  what  had
been  formerly  known,  if  Europe  had  not  been  supplied
with  the  gold  and  silver  which  it  was  necessary  to
carry  to  the  markets  of  the  East  from  sources  richer
and  more  abundant  than  her  own  barren  and  impo-
verished mines,  she  must  either  have  abandoned  the
trade  with  India  altogether,  or  have  continued  it  with
manifest  disadvantages. By  such  a  continual  drain
of  gold  and  silver,  as  well  as  by  the  unavoidable  waste
of  both  in  circulation  and  in  manufactures,  the  quan-
tity of  those  metals  must  have  gone  on  diminishing,
and  their  value  would  have  been  so  much  enhanced,
that  they  could  not  have  continued  long  to  be  of' the
same  utility  in  the  commercial  transactions  between
the  two  countries. But  before  the  effects  of  this  dimi-
nution could  be  very  sensibly  felt,  America  opened  her
mines,  and  poured  in  treasures  upon  Europe  in  the
most  copious  stream  to  which  mankind  ever  had  ac-
cess. This  treasure,  inspite  of  innumerable  anxious
precautions  to  prevent  it,  flowed  to  the  markets  where
the  commodities  necessary  for  supplying  the  wants.

\5'I  ANCIENT  INDIA.

or  gratifying  the  luxury  of  the  Spaniards,  were  to  be
found ;  and  from  that  time  to  the  present,  tlie  English
and  Dutch  have  purchased  the  productions  of  China
and  Indostan,  with  silver  brought  from  the  mines  of
Mexico  and  Peru.  The  immense  exportation  of  silver
to  the  East,  during  the  course  of  two  centuries,  has  not
only  been  replaced  by  the  continual  influx  from  Ame-
rica, but  the  quantity  of  it  has  been  considerably  aug-
mented, and  at  the  same  time  the  proportional  rate  of
its  value  in  Europe,  and  in  India,  has  varied  so  little,
that  it  is  chiefly  with  silver  that  many  of  the  capital
articles  imported  from  the  East  are  still  purchased.

While  America  contributed  in  this  manner  to  fa-
cilitate and  extend  the  intercourse  of  Europe  with
Asia,  it  gave  rise  to  a  traffic  with  Africa,  which,  from
slender  beginnings,  has  become  so  considerable,  as  to
form  the  chief  bond  of  commercial  connexion  with  that
continent.  Soon  after  the  Portuguese  had  extended
their  discoveries  on  the  coast  of  Africa  beyond  the
river  Senegal,  they  endeavoured  to  derive  some  benefit
from  their  new  settlements  there,  by  the  sale  of  slaves.
Various  circumstances  combined  in  favouring  the  re-
vival of  this  odious  traffic.  In  every  part  of  America,
of  which  the  Spaniards  took  possession,  they  found
that  the  natives,  from  the  feebleness  of  their  frame,
from  their  indolence,  or  from  the  injudicious  manner
of  treating  them,  were  incapable  of  the  exertions  re-
quisite either  for  working  mines,  or  for  cultivating  the
earth.  Eager  to  find  hands  more  industrious  and  ef-
ficient, the  Spaniards  had  recourse  to  their  neighbours
the  Portuguese,  and  purchased  from  them  negro
slaves.  Experience  soon  discovered  that  they  were
men  of  a  more  hardy  race,  and  so  much  better  fitted
for  enduring  fatigue,  that  the  labour  of  one  negro
was  computed  to  be  equal  to  that  of  four  Americans ;''

"  Hist,  of  America,  vol,  i.  p.  '3'20,

SECT. IV.  153

and  from  that  time  the  number  employed  in  tlie  New
World  has  gone  on  increasing  with  rapid  progress.
In  this  practice,  no  less  repugnant  to  the  feelings  of
humanity  than  to  the  principles  of  religion,  the  Spa-
niards have  unhappily  been  imitated  by  all  the  nations
of  Europe,  who  have  acquired  territories  in  the  warmer
climates  of  the  New  World.  At  present  the  number  of
neoTo  slaves  in  the  settlements  of  Great  Britain  and
France  in  the  West  Indies,  exceeds  a  million  ;  and  as
the  establishment  of  servitude  has  been  found,  both  in
ancient  and  in  modern  times,  extremely  unfavourable
to  population,  it  requires  an  annual  importation  from
Africa  of  at  least  fifty-eight  thousand  to  keep  up  the
stock.'  If  it  were  possible  to  ascertain,  with  equal
exactness,  the  number  of  slaves  in  the  Spanish  do-
minions, and  in  North  America,  the  total  number  of
negro  slaves  might  be  well  reckoned  at  as  many
more.

Thus  the  commercial  genius  of  Europe,  which  has
given  it  a  visible  ascendant  over  the  three  other  di-
visions of  the  earth,  by  discerning  their  respective
wants  and  resources,  and  by  rendering  them  reci-
procally subservient  to  one  another,  has  established
a  union  amono-  them,  from  which  it  has  derived  an
immense  increase  of  opulence,  of  power,  and  of  en-
joyments.

VII.  Though  the  discovery  of  a  New  World  in  the
west,  and  the  opening  of  a  more  easy  and  direct
communication  with  the  remote  regions  of  the  east,
co-operated  towards  extending  the  commerce,  and
adding  to  the  enjoyments  of  Europe,  a  remarkable
difference  may  be  observed,  with  respect  both  to  the
time  and  the  manner  in  which  they  produced  these
effects.  When  the  Portuguese  first  visited  the  dif-
ferent countries  of  Asia,  stretching  from  the  coast  of

i  Report  of  Lords  of  the  rrivy  Council,  A.D.  1788.

154  ANCIENT  INDIA.

Malabar  to  Cliina,  tliey  found  them  possessed  by  na-
tions liiglily  civilized,  wliicli  had  made  considerable
proo-ress  in  elegant  as  well  as  useful  arts,  which  were
accustomed  to  intercourse  with  strangers,  and  well
acquainted  with  all  the  advantages  of  commerce.
But  when  the  Spaniards  began  to  explore  the  New
World  which  they  discovered,  the  aspect  which  it
presented  to  them  was  very  different.  The  islands
were  inhabited  by  naked  savages,  so  unacquainted
with  the  simplest  and  most  necessary  arts  of  life,  that
they  subsisted  chiefly  on  the  spontaneous  productions
of  a  fertile  soil  and  genial  climate.  The  continent
appeared  to  be  a  forest  of  immense  extent,  along  the
coast  of  which  were  scattered  some  feeble  tribes,  not
greatly  superior  to  the  islanders  in  industry  or  im-
provement. Even  its  two  large  monarchies,  which
have  been  dignified  with  the  appellation  of  civilized
states,  had  not  advanced  so  far  beyond  their  country-
men, as  to  be  entitled  to  that  name.  The  inhabitants
both  of  Mexico  and  Peru,  unacquainted  with  the  use-
ful metals,  and  destitute  of  the  address  requisite  for
acquiring  such  command  of  the  inferior  animals  as  to
derive  any  considerable  aid  from  their  labours,  had
made  so  little  progress  in  agriculture,  the  first  of  all
arts,  that  one  of  the  greatest  difficulties  with  which
the  small  number  of  Spaniards,  who  overturned  those
highly  extolled  empires,  had  to  struggle,  was  how  to
procure  in  them  what  was  sufficient  for  their  sub-
sistence.

It  was  of  consequence,  with  a  very  different  spirit,
that  the  intercourse  with  two  countries,  resembling
each  other  so  little  in  their  degree  of  improvement,
was  begun  and  carried  on.  The  Portuguese,  certain
of  finding  in  the  East,  not  only  the  productions  with
which  the  bountiful  hand  of  nature  has  enriched  that
part  of  the  globe,  but  various  manufactures  which  had

SECT.  IV.  155

long  been  known  and  admired  in  Europe,  engaged
in  this  alluring  trade  with  the  greatest  eagerness.
The  encouragement  of  it  their  monarchs  considered
as  a  chief  object  of  government,  towards  which  they
directed  all  the  power  of  the  kingdom,  and  roused
their  subjects  to  such  vigorous  exertions  in  the  pro-
secution of  it,  as  occasioned  that  astonishing  rapidity
of  progress  which  I  have  described. The  sanguine
hopes  with  which  the  Spaniards  entered  upon  their
career  of  discovery,  met  not  with  the  same  speedy
gratification. From  the  industry  of  the  rude  inha-
bitants of  the  New  World,  they  did  not  receive  a  sin-
gle article  of  commerce. Even  the natural  pro-
ductions of  the  soil  and  climate,  when  not  cherished
and multiplied  by  the  fostering  and  active  hand  of
man,  were  of  little  account.,  Hope,  rather  than  success,
incited  them  to  persist  in  extending  their  researches
and  conquests  ; and as government  derived  little
immediate  benefit  from  these,  it  left  the  prosecution
of  them  chiefly  to  private  adventurers,  by  whose  en-
terprising activity,  more  than  by  any  eifort  of  the
state,  the  most  valuable  possessions  of  Spain  in  Ame-
rica were  acquired. Instead  of  the  instantaneous  and
great  advantages  which  the  Portuguese  derived  from
their  discoveries,  above  half  a  century  elapsed  before
the  Spaniards  reaped  any  benefit  of  consequence  from
their  conquests,  except  the  small  quantities  of  gold
which  the  islanders  were  compelled  to  collect,  and  the
plunder  of  the  gold  and  silver  employed  by  the  Mexi-
cans and  Peruvians,  as  ornaments  of  their  persons  and
temples,  or  as  utensils  of  sacred  or  domestic  use. It
was  not  until  the  discovery  of  the  mines  of  Potosi  in
Peru,  in  the  year  1545,  and  of  those  of  Sacotecas  in
Mexico,  soon  after,  that  the  Spanish  territories  in  the
New  World,  brought  a  permanent  and  valuable  ad-
dition of  wealth  and  revenue  to  the  mother-country.

lof)  ANCIENT INDIA.

Nor  did  the  trade  with  India  differ  more  from  that
with  America,  in  respect  of  the  particular  circum-
stances which  I  have  explained,  than  in  respect  to  the
manner  of  carrying  it  on,  after  it  grew  to  be  a  consi-
derable object  of  political  attention.  Trade  with  the
East  was  a  simple  mercantile  transaction,  confined  to
the  purchase  either  of  the  natural  productions  of  the
country,  such  as  spices,  precious  stones,  pearls,  &c.
or  of  the  manufactures  which  abounded  amonsr  an
industrious  race  of  men,  such  as  silk  and  cotton  stuffs,
porcelain,  &c.  Nothing-  more  was  requisite  in  con-
ducting this  trade,  than  to  settle  a  few  skilful  agents
in  proper  places,  to  prepare  a  proper  assortment  of
goods  for  completing  the  cargoes  of  ships  as  soon  as
they  arrived  from  Europe,  or  at  the  utmost  to  acquire
the  command  of  a  few  fortified  stations,  which  might
secure  them  admission  into  ports  where  they  might
careen  in  safety,  and  find  protection  from  the  insults
of  any  hostile  power.  There  was  no  necessity  of
making  any  attempt  to  establish  colonies,  either  for
the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  or  the  conduct  of  manufac-
tures. Both  these  remained,  as  formerly,  in  the  hands
of  the  natives.

But  as  soon  as  that  wild  spirit  of  enterprise,  which
animated  the  Spaniards  who  first  explored  and  sub-
dued the  New  World,  began  to  subside,  and  when,  in-
stead of  roving  as  adventurers  from  province  to  pro-
vince in  quest  of  gold  and  silver,  they  seriously  turned
their  thoughts  towards  rendering  their  conquests  be-
neficial by  cultivation  and  industry,  they  found  it  ne-
cessary to  establish  colonies  in  every  country  which
they  wished  to  improve.  Other  nations  imitated  their
example  in  the  settlements  which  they  afterward  made
in  some  of  the  islands,  and  on  the  continent  of  North
America.  Europe,  after  having  desolated  the  New
.World,  began  to  repeople  it,  and  under  a  system  of

SECT. IV.  157

colonization  (the  spirit  and  regulations  of  which  it  is
not  the  object  of  this  Disquisition  to  explain),  the  Eu-
ropean race  has  multiplied  there  amazingly.  Every
article  of  commerce  imported  from  the  New  World,  if
we  except  the  furs  and  skins  purchased  from  the  inde-
pendent tribes  of  hunters  in  North  America,  and  from
a  few  tribes  in  a  similar  state  on  the  southern  continent,
is  the  produce  of  the  industry  of  Europeans  settled
there.  To  their  exertions,  or  to  those  of  hands  which
they  have  taught  or  compelled  to  labour,  we  are  in-
debted for  sugar,  rum,  cotton,  tobacco,  indigo,  rice,
and  even  the  g'old  and  silver  extracted  from  the  bowels
of  the  earth.  Intent  on  those  lucrative  branches  of
industry,  the  inhabitants  of  the  New  World  pay  little
attention  to  those  kinds  of  labour  which  occupy  a  con-
siderable part  of  the  members  of  other  societies,  and
depend,  in  some  measure,  for  their  subsistence,  and
entirely  for  every  article  of  elegance  and  luxury,  upon
the  ancient  continent.  Thus  the  Europeans  have  be-
come manufacturers  for  America,  and  their  industry
has  been  greatly  augmented  by  the  vast  demands  for
supplying  the  wants  of  extensive  countries,  the  popu-
lation of  which  is  continually  increasing.  Nor  is  the
influence  of  this  demand  confined  solely  to  the  na-
tions which  have  a  more  immediate  connexion  with
the  American  colonies ;  it  is  felt  in  every  part  of
Europe  that  furnishes  any  article  exported  to  them,
and  gives  activity  and  vigour  to  the  hand  of  the  ar-
tisan in  the  inland  provinces  of  Germany,  as  well  as
to  those  in  Great  Britain  and  other  countries,  which
carry  on  a  direct  trade  with  the  New  World.

But  while  the  discovery  and  conquest  of  America
is  allowed  to  be  one  principal  cause  of  that  rapid  in-
crease of  industry  and  wealth,  which  is  conspicuous
in  Europe  during  the  two  last  centuries,  some  timid
theorists  have  maintained,  that  throughout  the  same

158  ANCIENT INDIA.

period  Europe  has  been  gradually  impoverished,  by
being  drained  of  its  treasure  in  order  to  carry  on  its
trade  with  India.  But  this  apprehension  has  arisen
from  inattention  to  the  nature  and  use  of  the  precious
metals.  They  are  to  be  considered  in  two  different
lights  ;  either  as  the  signs  which  all  civilized  nations
have  agreed  to  employ,  in  order  to  estimate  or  re-
present the  value  both  of  labour  and  of  all  commo-
dities, and  thus  to  facilitate  the  purchase  of  the  for-
mer and  the  conveyance  of  the  latter  from  one  pro-
prietor to  another  ;  or  gold  and  silver  may  be  viewed
as  being  themselves  commodities,  or  articles  of  com-
merce, for  which  some  equivalent  must  be  given  by
such  as  wish  to  acquire  them.  In  this  light  the  ex-
portation of  the  precious  metals  to  the  East  should  be
regarded ;  for,  as  the  nation  by  which  they  are  ex-
ported must  purchase  them  with  tlte  produce  of  its
own  labour  and  ingenuity,  this  trade  must  contribute,
though  not  in  the  same  obvious  and  direct  manner
as  that  with  America,  towards  auo-mentino-  the  sfe-
neral  industry  and  opulence  of  Europe.  If  England,
as  the  price  of  Mexican  and  Peruvian  dollars  which
are  necessary  for  carrying  on  its  trade  with  India,
must  give  a  certain  quantity  of  its  woollen  or  cotton
cloth  or  hardware,  then  the  hands  of  an  additional
number  of  manufacturers  are  rendered  active,  and
work  to  a  certain  amount  must  be  executed,  for
which,  without  this  trade,  there  would  not  have  been
any  demand.  The  nation  reaps  all  the  benefit  arising
from  a  new  creation  of  industry.  With  the  gold  and
silver  which  her  manufactures  have  purchased  in  the
West,  she  is  enabled  to  trade  in  the  markets  of  the
East,  and  the  exportation  of  treasure  to  India,  which
has  been  so  much  dreaded,  instead  of  impoverishing,
enriches  the  kingdom.

VIII.  It  is  to  the  discovery  of  the  passage  to  India

SECT. IV.  15,9

by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  and  to  the  vigour  and
success  with  which  the  Portuguese  prosecuted  their
conquests  and  established  their  dominion  there,  that
Europe  has  been  indebted  for  its  preservation  from
the  most  illiberal  and  humiliating  servitude  that  ever
oppressed  polished  nations. For  this  observation  I
am  indebted  to  an  autlior,  whose  ingenuity  has  illus-
trated, and  whose  eloquence  has  adorned,  the  History
of  the  Settlements  and  Commerce  of  Modern  Nations
in  the  East  and  West  Indies ;'  and  it  appears  to  me
so  well  founded  as  to  merit  more  ample  investigation.
A  few  years  after  the  first  appearance  of  the  Portu-
guese in  India,  the  dominion  of  the  Mamelukes  was
overturned  by  the  irresistible  power  of  the  Turkish
arms,  and  Egypt  and  Syria  were  annexed  as  pro-
vinces to  the  Ottoman  empire. If  after  this  event
the  commercial  intercourse  with  India  had  continued
to  be  carried  on  in  its  ancient  channels,  the  Turkish
sultans,  by  being  masters  of  Egypt  and  Syria,  must
have  possessed  the  absolute  command  of  it,  whether
the  productions  of  the  East  were  conveyed  by  the
Red  sea  to  Alexandria,  or  were  transported  by  land-
carriage  from  the  Persian  gulf  to  Constantinople,
and  the  ports  of  the  Mediterranean. The  monarchs
who  were  then  at  the  head  of  this  great  empire,  were
neither  destitute  of  abilities  to  perceive  the  pre-emi-
nence to  which  this  would  have  elevated  them,  nor
of  ambition  to  aspire  to  it. Selim,  the  conqueror  of
the  Mamelukes,  by  confirming  the  ancient  privileges
of  the  Venetians  in  Egypt  and  Syria,  and  by  his  re-
gulations concerning  the  duties  on  Indian  goods,
which  I  hav^  already  mentioned,  early  discovered
his  solicitude  to  secure  all  the  advantages  of  com-
merce with  the  East  to  his  own  dominions. The  at-
tention of  Solyman  the  Magnificent,  his  successor,

'  M.  L'Abb6  Raynal.

160  ANCIENT  INDIA.

seems  to  have  been  equally  directed  towards  the
same  object.  More  enlightened  than  any  monarch
of  the  Ottoman  race,  he  attended  to  all  the  transac-
tions of  the  European  states,  and  had  observed  the
power  as  well  as  opulence  to  which  the  republic  of-
Venice  had  attained  by  engrossing  the  commerce
with  the  East.  He  now  beheld  Portuo;al  risino-  to-
wards  the  same  elevation  by  the  same  means.  Eager
to  imitate  and  to  supplant  them,  he  formed  a  scheme
suitable  to  his  character  for  political  wisdom  and  the
appellation  of  Institutor  of  Rules,  by  which  the
Turkish  historians  have  distinguished  him,  and  esta-
blished, early  in  his  reign,  a  system  of  commercial
laws  in  his  dominions,  by  which  he  hoped  to  render
Constantinople  the  great  staple  of  Indian  trade,  as  it
had  been  in  the  prosperous  ages  of  the  Greek  empire.''
For  accomplishing  this  scheme,  however,  he  did  not
rely  on  the  operations  of  laws  alone ;  he  fitted  out
about  the  same  time  a  formidable  fleet  in  the  Red
sea,  under  the  conduct  of  a  confidential  officer,  with
such  a  body  of  janizaries  on  board  of  it,  as

A.D  1338  xf  •>  •"

he  deemed  sufficient  not  only  to  drive  the
Portuguese  out  of  all  their  new  settlements  in  India,
but  to  take  possession  of  some  commodious  station
in  that  country,  and  to  erect  his  standard  there.
The  Portuguese,  by  efforts  of  valour  and  constancy,
entitled  to  the  splendid  success  with  which  they
were  crowned,  repulsed  this  powerful  armament  in
every  enterprise  it  undertook,  and  compelled  the
.shattered  remains  of  the  Turkish  fleet  and  army  to
return  with  ignominy  to  the  harbours  from  which
they  had  taken  their  departure,  with  the  most  san-
guine hopes  of  terminating  the  expedition  in  a  very
different  manner.' Solyman,  though  he  never  relin-

'■  PariitH  Ilisl.  Vend.  !ih.  vii.  j>.  .)89. Sandi  Stor.  Civil.  Vcnez  part  ii.  p.  901.
'  Asia  de  Bai  ros,  dec.  iv.  lib.  x.  c.  1 ,  &c.

SECT. [V.  KJl

quished  the  design  of  expelling  the  Portuguese  from
India,  and  of  acquiring  some  establishment  there,
was  so  occupied,  during  tlie  remainder  of  his  reign,
by  the  multiplicity  of  arduous  operations  in  which
an  insatiable  ambition  involved  him,  that  he  never
had  leisure  to  resume  the  prosecution  of  it  with
vigour.

If  either  the  measures  of  Selim  had  produced  the
effect  which  he  expected,  or  if  the  more  adventurous
and  extensive  plan  of  Solyman  had  been  carried  into
execution,  the  command of  the  wealth  of  India,  to-
gether with  such  a  marine  as  the  monopoly  of  trade
with  that  country  has, in  every age, enabled  the
power  which  possessed  it  to  create  and  maintain,
must  have  brought  an  accession  of  force  to  an  empire
already  formidable  to  mankind,  that  would  have  ren-
dered it  altogether  irresistible. Europe,  at  that  pe-
riod, was  not  in  a  condition  to  have  defended  itself
against  the  combined  exertions  of  such  naval  and
military power, supported by  commercial  wealth,
and  under  the  direction  of  a  monarch  whose  compre-
hensive genius  was  able  to  derive  from  each  its  pe-
culiar advantages,  and  to  employ  all  with  the  greatest
effect. Happily  for  the  human  race,  the  despotic
system  of  Turkish  government,  founded  on  such  illi-
beral fanaticism  as  has  extinguished  science  in  Egypt,
in  Assyria,  and  in  Greece,  its  three  favourite  man-
sions in  ancient  times,  was  prevented  from  extending
its  dominion  over  Europe,  and  from  suppressing  li-
berty, learning,  and  taste,  when  beginning  to  make
successful  efforts  to  revive  there,  and  again  to  bless,
to  enlighten,  and  to  polish  mankind.

VOL.  IX.  M

APPENDIX.

1  SHALL  now  endeavour  to  fulfil  an  engagement  which
I  came  under,*  to  make  some  observations  upon  the
genius,  the  manners,  and  institutions  of  the  people  of
India,  as  far  as  they  can  be  traced  from  the  earliest
ages  to  which  our  knowledge  of  them  extends.  Were
I  to  enter  upon  this  wide  field  with  an  intention  of
surveying  its  whole  extent;  were  I  to  view  each  ob-
ject which  it  presents  to  a  philosophical  inquirer,
under  all  its  different  aspects,  it  would  lead  me  into
researches and  speculations,  not  only  of  immense
length,  but  altogether  foreign  from  the  subject  of  this
disquisition. My  inquiries  and  reflections  shall  there-
fore be  confined  to  what  is  intimately  connected  with
the  design  of  this  work. I  shall  collect  the  facts  which
the  ancients  have  transmitted  to  us  concerning  the
institutions  peculiar  to  the  natives  of  India,  and  by
comparing  them  with  what  we  now  know  of  that  coun-
try, endeavour  to  deduce  such  conclusion  as  tend  to
point  out  the  circumstances  which  have  induced  the
rest  of  mankind,  in  every  age,  to  carry  on  commer-
cial intercourse  to  so  great  an  extent  with  that  country.
Of  this  intercourse  there  are  conspicuous  proofs
in  the  earliest  periods  concerning  which  history  af-
fords information. Not  only  the  people  contiguous
to  India,  but  remote  nations,  seem  to  have  been  ac-
quainted, from  time  immemorial,  with  its  commodi-
ties, and  to  have  valued  them  so  highly,  that  in  order
to  procure  them  they  undertook  fatiguing,  expensive,

a  See  page  24,
M  2

1<>4  ANCIKNT INDIA.

and  danivcrous  journeys.  Whenever  men  give  a  de-
cided preference  to  the  commodities  of  any  particular
country,  this  must  be  owing-  either  to  its  possessing
some  valuable  natural  productions  peculiar  to  its  soil
and  climate,  or  to  some  superior  progress  w^liich  its
inhabitants  have  made  in  industry,  art,  and  elegance.
It  is  not  to  any  peculiar  excellence  in  the  natural  pro-
ductions of  India,  that  we  must  ascribe  entirely  the
predilection  of  ancient  nations  for  its  commodities  ;
for,  pepper  excepted,  an  article,  it  must  be  allowed,
of  great  importance,  they  are  little  different  from
those  of  other  tropical  countries  ;  and  Ethiopia  or
Arabia  might  have  fully  supplied  the  Phenicians,  and
other  trading  people  of  antiquity,  with  the  spices,  the
perfumes,  the  precious  stones,  the  gold  and  silver,
which  formed  the  principal  articles  of  their  commerce.

Whoever  then  wishes  to  trace  the  commerce  with
India  to  its  source,  must  search  for  it,  not  so  much  in
any  peculiarity  of  the  natural  productions  of  that
country,  as  in  the  superior  improvement  of  its  inha-
bitants. Many  facts  have  been  transmitted  to  us,
which,  if  they  are  examined  with  proper  attention,
clearly  demonstrate,  that  the  natives  of  India  were
not  only  more  early  civilized,  but  had  made  greater
progress  in  civilization  than  any  other  people.  These
I  shall  endeavour  to  enumerate,  and  to  place  them  in
such  a  point  of  view  as  may  serve  both  to  throw  light
upon  the  institutions,  manners,  and  arts  of  the  Indians,
and  to  account  for  the  eagerness  of  all  nations  to  ob-
tain the  productions  of  their  ingenious  industry.

By  the  ancient  heathen  writers,  the  Indians  were
reckoned  among  those  races  of  men  which  they  de-
nominated Autochthones  or  Aborigifies,  whom  they
considered  as  natives  of  the  soil,  whose  origin  could
not  be  traced.'' By  the  inspired  writers,  the  wisdom

''  Diod.  Sic.  lib.  ii.  p.  151.

APPENDIX.  IC)6

of  the  East  (an  expression  which  is  to  be  understood
as  a  description  of  their  extraordinary  progress  in
science  and  arts)  was  early  celebrated.''  In  order  to
illustrate  and  confirm  these  explicit  testimonies  con-
cerninof  the  ancient  and  hioh  civilization  of  t]ie  inha-
bitants  of  India,  I  shall  take  a  view  of  their  rank  and
condition  as  individuals;  of  their  civil  policy ;  of  their
laws  and  judicial  proceedings  ;  of  their  useful  and
elegant  arts  ;  of  their  sciences ;  and  of  their  religious
institutions  ;  as  far  as  information  can  be  gathered
from  the  accounts  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  writers,
compared  with  what  still  remains  of  their  ancient  ac-
quirements and  institutions.

I.  From  the  most  ancient  accounts  of  India  we
learn,  that  the  distinction  of  ranks  and  separation  of
professions  were  completely  established  there.  This
is  one  of  the  most  undoubted  proofs  of  a  society  con-
siderably advanced  in  its  progress.  Arts  in  the  early
stages  of  social  life  are  so  few,  and  so  simple,  that
each  man  is  sufficiently  master  of  them  all,  to  gratify
every  demand  of  his  own  limited  desires.  A  savage
can  form  his  bow,  point  his  arrows,  rear  his  hut,  and
hollow  his  canoe,  without  calling  in  the  aid  of  any
hand  more  skilful  than  his  own."^  But  when  time  has
augmented  the  wants  of  men,  the  productions  of  art
become  so  complicated  in  their  structure,  or  so  curious
in  their  fabric,  that  a  particular  course  of  education
is  requisite  towards  forming  the  artist  to  ingenuity  in
contrivance  and  expertness  in  execution.  In  propor-
tion as  refinement  spreads,  the  distinction  of  profes-
sions increases,  and  they  branch  out  into  more  nume-
rous and  minute  subdivisions.  Prior  to  the  records
of  authentic  history,  and  even  before  the  most  remote
era  to  which  their  own  traditions  pretend  to  reach,
this  separation  of  professions  had  not  only  taken  place

c  1  Kings  iv.  31.  ''  Hist,  of  Araer.  vol.  iii.  165.

166  ANCIENT INDIA.

among  tlie  natives  of  India,  but  the  perpetuity  of  it
was  secured  by  an  institution,  which  must  be  consi-
dered as  the  fundamental  article  in  the  system  of  their
policy. The  whole  body  of  the  people  was  divided
into  four  orders  or  casts. The  members  of  the  first,
deemed  the  most  sacred,  had  it  for  their  province  to
study  the  principles  of  religion  ;  to  perform  its  func-
tions ;  and  to  cultivate  the  sciences. They  were  the
priests,  the  instructors,  and  philosophers  of  the  nation.
The  members  of  the  second  order  were  intrusted  with
the  government  and  defence  of  the  state. In  peace
they  were  its  rulers  and  magistrates ;  in  war  they  were
the  generals  Avho  commanded  its  armies,  and  the  sol-
diers who  fought  its  battles. The  third  was  com-
posed of  husbandmen  and  merchants ;  and  the  fourth
of  artisans,  labourers,  and  servants. None  of  these
can  ever  quit  his  own  cast,  or  be  admitted  into  an-
other.' The  station  of  every  individual  is  unalter-
ably fixed  ;  his  destiny  is  irrecoverable  ;  and  the
walk  of  life  is  marked  out,  from  which  he  must  never
deviate.  This  line  of  separation  is  not  only  established
by  civil  authority,  but  confirmed  and  sanctioned  by
religion,  and  each  order  or  cast  is  said  to  have  pro-
ceeded from  the  Divinity  in  such  a  different  manner,
that  to  mingle  and  confound  them  would  be  deemed
an  act  of  most  daring  impiety.^  Nor  is  it  between  the
four  different  tribes  alone  that  such  insuperable  bar-
riers are  fixed ;  the  members  of  each  cast  adhere  in-
variably to  the  professions  of  their  forefathers.  From
generation  to  generation,  the  same  families  have  fol-
lowed, and  will  always  continue  to  follow,  one  uni-
form line  of  life.

Such  arbitrary  arrangements  of  the  various  mem-
bers which  compose  a  community,  seem,  at  first  view,

f  Ayccii  Akhcry,  iii.  HI,  5\c. Sketclics  relating  to  the  Hislorv,  ^.c  ot  the
Hindoos,  ]..  107,  &c.  ( Hcc  Nolc  lAlll.

APPENDIX.  167

to  be  adverse  to  improvement  either  in  science  or  in
arts  ;  and  by  forming  around  the  different  orders  of
men  artificial  barriers,  w^hich  it  would  be  impious  to
pass,  tend  to  circumscribe  the  operations  of  the  human
mind  within  a  narrower  sphere  than  nature  has  al-
lotted to  them. When  every  man  is  at  full  liberty  to
direct  his  efforts  towards  those  objects  and  that  end
which  the  impulse  of  his  own  mind  prompts  him  to
prefer,  he  may  be  expected  to  attain  that  high  degree
of  eminence  to  which  the  uncontrolled  exertions  of
genius  and  industry  naturally  conduct. The  regula-
tions of  Indian  policy,  with  respect  to  the  different
orders  of  men,  must  necessarily,  at  some  times,  check
genius  in  its  career,  and  confine  to  the  functions  of
an  inferior  cast,  talents  fitted  to  shine  in  a  higher
sphere. But  the  arrangements  of  civil  government
are  made,  not  for  what  is  extraordinary,  but  for  what
is  common ;  not  for  the  few,  but  for  the  many. The
object  of  the  first  Indian  legislators  was  to  employ  the
most  effectual  means  of  providing  for  the  subsistence,
the  security,  and  happiness  of  all  the  members  of  the
community  over  which  they  presided.  With  this  view
they  set  apart  certain  races  of  men  for  each  of  the  va-
rious professions  and  arts  necessary  in  a  well-ordered
society,  and  appointed  the  exercise  of  them  to  be
transmitted  from  father  to  son  in  succession. This
system,  though  extremely  repugnant  to  the  ideas  which
we,  by  being  placed  in  a  very  different  state  of  so-
ciety, have  formed,  will  be  found,  upon  attentive  in-
spection, better  adapted  to  attain  the  end  in  view,  than
a  careless  observer,  at  first  sight,  is  apt  to  imagine.
The  human  mind  bends  to  the  law  of  necessity,  and
is  accustomed  not  only  to  accommodate  itself  to  the
restraints  which  the  condition  of  its  nature,  or  the  in^
stitutions  of  its  country,  impose,  but  to  acquiesce  in
them. From  his  entrance  into  life,  an  Indian  knows

108  ANCIENT INDIA.

the  station  allotted  to  him,  and  the  functions  to  which
he  is  destined  by  his  birth.  The  objects  which  relate
to  these,  are  the  first  that  present  themselves  to  his
view.  They  occupy  his  thoughts,  or  employ  his
hands ;  and,  from  his  earliest  years,  he  is  trained  to
the  habit  of  doing  with  ease  and  pleasure  that  which
he  must  continue  through  life  to  do.  To  this  may  be
ascribed  that  high  degree  of  perfection  conspicuous
in  many  of  the  Indian  manufactures ;  and  though  vene-
ration for  the  practices  of  their  ancestors  may  check
the  spirit  of  invention,  yet,  by  adhering  to  these,  they
acquire  such  an  expertness  and  delicacy  of  hand,  that
Europeans,  with  all  the  advantages  of  superior  science,
and  the  aid  of  more  complete  instruments,  have  never
been  able  to  equal  the  equisite  execution  of  their  work-
jnanship.  While  this  high  improvement  of  their  more
curious  manufactures  excited  the  admiration,  and  at-
tracted the  commerce  of  other  nations,  the  separation
of  professions  in  India,  and  the  early  distribution  of
the  people  into  classes,  attached  to  particular  kinds
of  labour,  secured  such  abundance  of  the  more  com-
mon and  useful  commodities,  as  not  only  supplied
their  own  wants,  but  ministered  to  those  of  the  coun-
tries around  them.

To  this  early  division  of  the  people  into  casts,  we
must  likewise  ascribe  a  striking  peculiarity  in  the
state  of  India ;  the  permanence  of  its  institutions,  and
the  immutability  in  the  manners  of  its  inhabitants.
What  now  is  in  India  always  was  there,  and  is  likely
still  to  continue:  neither  the  ferocious  violence  and
illiberal  fanaticismof  its  Mahomedan  conquerors,  nor
the  power  of  its  European  masters,  have  eifected  any
considerable  alteration.^  The  same  distinctions  of
condition  take  place,  the  same  arrangements  in  civil
and domestic  society  remain,  the  same  maxims  of

i?  See  Aoie  LIX.

APPENDIX.  169

religion  are  held  in  veneration,  and  tlie  same  sciences
and  arts  are  cultivated.  Hence,  in  all  ages,  the
trade  with  India  has  been  the  same;  gold  and  silver
have  uniformly  been  carried  thither  in  order  to  pur-
chase the  same  commodities,  with  which  it  now  sup-
plies all  nations ;  and  from  the  age  of  Pliny  to  the
present  times,  it  has  been  always  considered  and
execrated  as  a  gulf  which  swallows  up  the  wealth  of
every  other  country,  that  flows  incessantly  towards
it,  and  from  which  it  never  returns.*'  According  to
the  accounts  which  I  have  given  of  the  cargoes  an-
ciently imported  from  India,  they  appear  to  have  con-
sisted of  nearly  the  same  articles  with  those  of  the
investments  in  our  own  times;  and  whatever  differ-
ence we  may  observe  in  them  seems  to  have  arisen,
not  so  much  from  any  diversity  in  the  nature  of  the
commodities  which  the  Indians  prepared  for  sale,  as
from  a  variety  in  the  tastes,  or  in  the  wants  of  the
nations  which  demanded  them.

II.  Another  proof  of  the  early  and  high  civiliza-
tion of  the  people  of  India,  may  be  deduced  from
considering  their  political  constitution  and  form  of
government.  The  Indians  trace  back  the  history  of
their  own  country  through  an  immense  succession
of  ages,  and  assert,  that  all  Asia,  from  the  mouth  of
the  Indus  on  the  west,  to  the  confines  of  China  on
the  east,  and  from  the  mountains  of  Thibet  on  the
north,  to  Cape  Comorin  on  the  south,  formed  a  vast
empire,  subject  to  one  mighty  sovereign,  under  whom
ruled  several  hereditary  princes  and  rajahs.  But
their  chronology,  which  measures  the  life  of  man  in
ancient  times  by  thousands  of  years,  and  computes
the  length  of  the  several  periods,  during  which  it
supposes  the  world  to  have  existed,  by  millions,  is  so
wildly  extravagant,  as  not  to  merit  any  serious  dis-

h  Sec  Note  LX,

170  ANCIENT INDIA.

cussion.  We  must  rest  satisfied,  then,  until  some
more  certain  information  is  obtained  with  respect  to
the  ancient  history  of  India,  with  taking  the  first  ac-
counts of  that  country,  which  can  be  deemed  authen-
tic, from  the  Greeks  who  served  under  Alexander  the
Great.  They  found  kingdoms  of  considerable  mag-
nitude established  in  that  country.  The  territories
of  Porus  and  of  Taxiles  comprehended  a  great  part  of
the  Panjab,  one  of  the  most  fertile  and  best  cultivated
countries  in  India.  The  kingdom  of  the  Prasij,  or
Gandaridse,  stretched  to  a  great  extent  on  both  sides
of  the  Ganges.  All  the  three,  as  appears  from  the
ancient  Greek  writers,  were  powerful  and  populous.

This  description  of  the  partition  of  India  into
states  of  such  magnitude,  is  alone  a  convincing  proof
of  its  having  advanced  far  in  civilization.  In  what-
ever region  of  the  earth  there  has  been  an  opportunity
of  observing  the  progress  of  men  in  social  life,  they
appear  at  first  in  small  independent  tribes  or  commu-
nities. Their  common  wants  prompt  them  to  unite;
and  their  mutual  jealousies,  as  well  as  the  necessity
of  securing  subsistence,  compel  them  to  drive  to  a
distance  every  rival  who  might  encroach  on  those
domains  which  they  consider  as  their  own.  Many
ages  elapse  before  they  coalesce,  or  acquire  sufficient
foresight  to  provide  for  the  wants,  or  sufficient  wis-
dom to  conduct  the  aflfairs  of  a  numerous  society,
even  under  the  jrenial  climate,  and  in  the  rich  soil  of
India,  more  favourable  perhaps  to  the  union  and  in-
crease of  the  human  species  than  any  other  part  of
the  globe;  the  formation  of  such  extensive  states,  as
were  established  in  that  country  when  first  visited, by
Europeans,  must  have  been  a  work  of  long  time;  and
the  members  of  them  must  have  been  long  accus-
tomed to  exertions  of  useful  industry.

Though  monarchical  government  was  established

APPENDIX.  171

in  all  the  countries  of  India  to  which  the  knowledge
of  the  ancients  extended,  the  sovereigns  were  far  from
possessing  uncontrolled  or  despotic  power.  No  trace,
indeed,  is  discovered  there,  of  any  assembly,  or  pub-
lic body,  the  members  of  which,  either  in  their  own
right,  or  as  representatives  of  their  fellow-citizens,
could  interpose  in  enacting  laws,  or  in  superintend-
inof  the  execution  of  them. Institutions  destined  to
assert  and  guard  the  rights  belonging  to  men  in  so-
cial state,  how  familiar  soever  the  idea  may  be  to  the
people  of  Europe,  never  formed  a  part  of  the  political
constitution  in  any  great  Asiatic  kingdom. It  was
to  different  principles  that  the  natives  of  India  were
indebted  for  restrictions  which  limited  the  exercise  of
regal  power. The  rank  of  individuals  was  unalter-
ably fixed,  and  the  privileges  of  the  different  casts
were  deemed  inviolable. The  monarchs  of  India,
who  were  all  taken from  the  second  of  the  four
classes  formerly  described,  which  is  intrusted  with
the  functions  of  government  and  exercise  of  war,
behold  among  their  subjects  an  order  of  men  far  su-
perior to  themselves  in  dignity,  and  so  conscious  of
their  own  pre-eminence,  both  in  rank  and  in  sanctity,
that  they  would  deem  it  degradation  and  pollution,
if  they  were  to  eat  of  the  same  food  with  their  sove-
reign.^ Their  persons  are  sacred,  and  even  for  the
most  heinous  crimes  they  cannot  be  capitally  pu-
nished; their  blood  must  never  be  shed.' To  men
in  this  exalted  station  monarchs  must  look  up  with
respect,  and  reverence  them  as  the  ministers  of  re-
ligion, and  the  teachers  of  wisdom. On  important
occasions,  it  is  the duty  of  sovereigns  to  consult
them,  and  to  be  directed  by  their  advice. Their
admonitions,  and  even  their  censures,  must  be  re-

^  Orme's  Dissert,  vol.  i.  p.  4. Skettlies,  &c.  p.  113.
'  Code  of  Gentoo  Laws,  ch.  xxi.  §  10.  p.  275.  283,  &c.

172  ANCIENT INDIA.

ceived  with  submissive  respect.  This  right  of  the
Brahmins  to  oft'er  tlieir  opinion  with  respect  to  tlie
administration  of  public  afiairs  was  not  unknown  to
the  ancients;""  and  in  some  accounts  preserved  in
India  of  the  events  which  liappened  in  their  own
country,  princes  are  mentioned,  who,  having  violated
the  privileges  of  the  casts,  and  disregarded  the  re-
monstrances of  the  Brahmins,  were  deposed  by  their
authority,  and  put  to  death."

While  the  sacred  rights  of  the  Brahmins  opposed  a
barrier  against  the  encroachments  of  regal  power  on
the  one  hand,  it  was  circumscribed  on  the  other  by
the  ideas  which  those  who  occupied  the  highest  sta-
tions in  society  entertained  of  their  own  dignity  and
privileges.  As  none  but  the  members  of  the  cast  next
in  rank  to  that  which  religion  has  rendered  sacred
could  be  employed  in  any  function  of  the  state,  the
sovereigns  of  the  extensive  kingdoms  anciently  esta-
blished in  India,  found  it  necessary  to  intrust  them
with  the  superintendence  of  the  cities  and  provinces
too  remote  to  be  under  their  own  immediate  inspec-
tion. In  these  stations  they  often  acquired  such
wealth  and  influence,  that  offices  conferred  during
pleasure,  continued  hereditarily  in  tlieir  families,  and
they  came  gradually  to  form  an  intermediate  order
between  the  sovereign  and  his  subjects;  and,  by  the
vigilant  jealousy  with  which  they  maintained  their
own  dignity  and  privileges,  they  constrained  their
rulers  to  respect  them,  and  to  govern  with  modera-
tion and  equity.

Nor  were  the  benefits  of  these  restraints  upon  the
power  of  the  sovereign  confined  wholly  to  the  two
superior  orders  in  the  state;  they  extended,  in  some
degree,  to  the  third  class  employed  in  agriculture.

•n  Strabo,  lib.  xv.  p.  1029.  C.
"Account  of  llic  Qualities  requisite  in a  Rlagistralc,  prefixed  by  tlic  Pundit?
♦<;  tlic  Code  of  Geiitoo  J^iuvs,  p.  tii.  and  cxvi.

APPENDIX.  173

The  labours  of  that  numerous  and  useful  body  of
men  are  so  essential  to  the  preservation  and  hapjpi-
ness  of  society,  that  the  greatest  attention  was  paid  to
render  their  condition  secure  and  comfortable.  Ac-
cording to  the  ideas  which  prevailed  among  the
natives  of  India  (as  we  are  informed  by  the  first  Eu-
ropeans who  visited  their  country),  the  sovereign  is
considered  as  the  sole  universal  proprietor  of  all  the
land  in  his  dominions,  and  from  him  is  derived  every
species  of  tenure  by  which  his  subjects  can  hold  it;
These  lands  were  let  out  to  the  farmers  who  culti-
vated them,  at  a  stipulated  rent,  amounting  usually
to  a  fourth  part  of  their  annual  produce  paid  in  kind."
In  a  country  where  the  price  of  work  is  extremely
low,  and  where  the  labour  of  cultivation  is  very  in-
considerable, the  earth  yielding  its  productions  al-
most spontaneously,  where  subsistence  is  amazingly
cheap,  where  few  clothes  are  needed,  and  houses  are
built  and  furnished  at  little  expense,  this  rate  cannot
be  deemed  exorbitant  or  oppressive.  As  long  as  the
husbandman  continued  to  pay  the  established  rent,
he  retained  possession  of  the  farm,  which  descended,
like  property,  from  father  to  son.

These  accounts  given  by  ancient  authors  of  the
condition  and  tenure  of  the  renters  of  land  in  India,
agree  so  perfectly  with  what  now  takes  place,  that  it
maybe  considered  almost  as  a  description  of  the  pre-
sent state  of  its  cultivation.  In  every  part  of  India
where  the  native  Hindoo  princes  retain  dominion,
the  ryots,  the  modern  name  by  which  the  renters  of
land  are  distinguished,  hold  their  possessions  by  a
lease,  which  may  be  considered  as  perpetual,  and  at
a  rate  fixed  by  ancient  surveys  and  valuations.  This
arrangement  has  been  so  long  established,  and  ac-
cords so  well  with  the  ideas  of  the  natives,  concern-

»  Strab.  lib.  xv.  p.  1030.  A. Diod.  Sic.  lib.  ii.  p.  53.

174  ANCIENT INDIA.

ing  the  distinctions  of  casts,  and  tlie  functions  allot-
ted to  each,  tliat  it  has  been  inviolably  maintained  in
all  the  provinces  subject  either  to  Mahomedans  or
Europeans;  and,  to  botli,  it  serves  as  the  basis  on
which  their  whole  system  of  finance  is  founded.''  In
a  more  remote  period,  before  the  original  institu-
tions of  India  were  subverted  by  foreign  invaders,
the  industry  of  the  husbandmen,  on  which  every
member  of  the  community  depended  for  subsistence,
was  as  secure  as  the  tenure  by  which  he  held  his
lands  was  equitable.  Even  war  did  not  interrupt
his  labours  or  endanger  his  property.  It  was  not
uncommon,  we  are  informed,  that  while  two  hostile
armies  were  fighting  a  battle  in  one  field,  the  pea-
sants were  ploughing  or  reaping  in  the  next  field  in
perfect  tranquillity.''  These  maxims  and  regulations
of  the  ancient  leo:islators  of  India  have  a  near  re-
semblance  to  the  system  of  those  ingenious  specula-
tors on  political  economy  in  modern  times,  who  re-
present the  produce  of  land  as  the  sole  source  of
wealth  in  every  country;  and  who  consider  the  dis-
covery of  this  principle,  according  to  which  they
contend  that  the  government  of  nations  should  be
conducted,  as  one  of  the  greatest  efforts  of  human
wisdom.  Under  a  form  of  government  which  paid
such  attention  to  all  the  different  orders  of  which  the
society  is  composed,  particularly  the  cultivators  of
the  earth,  it  is  not  wonderful  that  the  ancients  should
describe  the  Indians  as  a  most  happy  race  of  men ;
and  that  the  most  intellio-ent  modern  observers  should
celebrate  the  equity,  the  humanity,  and  mildness  of
Indian  policy.  A  Hindoo  rajah,  as  I  have  been  in-
formed by  persons  well  acquainted  with  the  state  of
India,  resembles  more  a  father  presiding  in  a  nume-
rous family  of  his  own  children,  than  a  sovereign

P  See  Note  LXI.  •)  Strabo,  lib.  \y.  p.  1030.  A.

APPENDIX.  175

ruling  over  inferiors,  subject  to  his  dominion. He
endeavours  to  secure  their  happiness  with  vigilant
solicitude ;  they  are  attached  to  him  with  the  most
tender  affection  and inviolable  fidelity. We  can
hardly  conceive  men  to  be  placed  in  any  state  more
favourable  to  their  acquiring  all  the  advantages  de-
rived from  social  union. It  is  only  when  the  mind
is  perfectly  at  ease,  and  neither  feels  nor  dreads  op-
pression, that  it  employs  its  active  powers  in  forming-
numerous  arrangements  of  police,  for  securing  its
enjoyments  and  increasing  them. Many  arrange-
ments of  this  nature  the  Greeks,  though  accustomed
to  their  own  institutions,  the  most  perfect  at  that  time
in  Europe,  observed,  and  admired  among  the  Indians,
and  mention  them  as  instances  of  hig'h  civilization
and  improvement. There  were  established  among
the  Indians  three  distinct  classes  of  officers,  one  of
which  had  it  in  charge  to  inspect  agriculture,  and
every  kind  of  country-work. They  measured  the
portions  of  land  allotted  to  each  renter. They  had
the  custody  of  the  tanks,  or  public  reservoirs  of  water,
without  a  regular  distribution  of  which,  the  fields  in
a  torrid  climate  cannot  be  rendered  fertile. They
marked  out  the  course  of  the  highways,  along  which,
at  certain  distances,  they  erected  stones,  to  measure
the  road  and  direct  travellers.' To  officers  of  a  se-
cond class  was  committed  the  inspection  of  the  police
in  cities ;  their  functions,  of  course,  were  many  and
various ;  some  of  which  only  I  shall  specify. They
appropriated  houses  for  the  reception  of  strangers;
they  protected  them  from  injury,  provided  for  their
subsistence,  and,  when  seized  with  any  disease,  they
appointed  physicians  to  attend  them;  and,  on  the
event  of  their  death,  they  not  only  buried  them  with
decency,  but  took  charge  of  their  effects,  and  restored

r  See  Note  LXII.

176  ANCIENT INDIA.

them  to  tlieir  relations.  They  kept  exact  registers  of
births  and  of  deaths.  Tliey  visited  the  public  mar-
kets, and  examined  weights  and  measures.  The  third
class  of  officers  superintended  the  military  depart-
ment; but,  as  the  objects  to  which  their  attention  was
directed  are  foreign  from  the  subject  of  my  inquiries,
it  is  unnecessary  to  enter  into  any  detail  with  respect
to  them.^

As  manners  and  customs  in  India  descend  almost
without  variation  from  age  to  age,  many  of  the  pe-
culiar institutions  which  I  have  enumerated  still  sub-
sist there.  There  is  still  the  same  attention  to  the
construction  and  preservation  of  tanks,  and  the  dis-
tribution of  their  waters.  The  direction  of  roads,  and
placing  stones  along  them,  is  still  an  object  of  police.
Choultries,  or  houses  built  for  the  accommodation  of
travellers,  are  frequent  in  every  part  of  the  country,
and  are  useful  as  well  as  noble  monuments  of  Indian
munificence  and  humanity.  It  is  only  among  men
in  the  most  improved  state  of  society,  and  under  the
best  forms  of  government,  that  we  discover  institu-
tions similar  to  those  which  I  have  described  ;  and
many  nations  have  advanced  far  in  their  progress,
without  establishing  arrangements  of  police  equally
perfect.

III.  In  estimating  the  progress  which  any  nation
has  made  in  civilization,  the  object  that  merits  the
greatest  degree  of  attention,  next  to  its  political  con-
stitution, is  the  spirit  of  the  laws  and  nature  of  the
forms  by  which  its  judicial  proceedings  are  regulated.
In  the  early  and  rude  ages  of  society,  the  few  disputes
with  respect  to  property  which  arise,  are  terminated
by  the  interposition  of  the  old  men,  or  by  the  autho-
rity of  the  chiefs  in  every  small  tribe  or  community ;
their  decisions  are  dictated  by  their  own  discretion,

'  Strabo,  lib.  xv.  p.  1034.  A.  &c. Diod.  Sicul.  lib.  ii.  p.  154.

APPENDIX.  177

or  founded  on  plain  and  obvious  maxims  of  equity.
But  as  the  controversies  multiply,  cases  similar  to
such  as  have  been  formerly  determined  must  recur,
and  the  awards  upon  these  grow  gradually  into  pre-
cedents, which  serve  to  regulate  future  judgments.
Thus,  long  before  the  nature  of  property  is  defined
by  positive  statutes,  or  any  rules  prescribed  concern-
ing the  mode  of  acquiring  or  conveying  it,  there  is
gradually  formed,  in  every  state,  a  body  of  customary
or  common  law,  by  which  judicial  proceedings  are
directed,  and  every  decision  conformable  to  it  is  sub-
mitted to  with  reverence,  as  the  result  of  the  accumu-
lated wisdom  and  experience  of  ages.

In  this  state  the  administration  of  justice  seems  to
have  been  in  India  when  first  visited  by  Europeans.
Though  the  Indians,  according  to  their  account,  had
no  written  laws,  but  determined  every  controverted
point,  by  recollecting  what  had  been  formerly  de-
cided ;*  they  assert  that  justice  was  dispensed  among
them  with  great  accuracy,  and  that  crimes  were  most
severely  punished." But  in  this  general  observation
is  contained  all  the  intelligence  which  the  ancients
furnish  concerning  the  nature  and  forms  of  judicial
proceedings  in  India. From  the  time  of  Megasthenes,
no  Greek  or  Roman  of  any  note  appears  to  have  re-
sided long  enough  in  the  country,  or  to  have  been  so
much  acquainted  with  the  customs  of  the  natives,  as
to  be  capable  of  entering  into  any  detail  with  respect
to  a  point  of  so  great  importance  in  their  policy.
Fortunately,  the  defects  of  their  information  have
been  amply  supplied  by  the  more  accurate  and  ex
tensive  researches  of  the  moderns. During  the  course
of  almost  three  centuries,  the  number  of  persons  who
have  resorted  from  Europe  to  India  has  been  great.
Many  of  them  who  have  remained  long  in  the  coun-

'  Slrabo,  lib.  xv.  1035.  D.  "  Diod.  Sicul.  lib.  ii.  p.  154.

VOL. IX.  N

178  ANCIENT INDIA.

try,  and  were  persons  of  liberal  education  and  en-
larged minds,  have  lived  in  such  familiar  intercourse
with  the  natives,  and  acquired  so  competent  a  know-
ledii'e  of  their  lanofuao'es,  as  enabled  them  to  observe
their  institutions  with  attention,  and  to  describe  them
with  fidelity. Respectable  as  their  authority  may  be,
I  shall  not,  in  what  I  offer  for  illustrating  the  judicial
proceedings  of  the  Hindoos,  rest  upon  it  alone,  but
shall  derive  my  information  from  sources  higher  and
more  pure.

Towards  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  Akber,
the  sixth  in  descent  from  Tamerlane,  mounted  the
throne  of  Indostan. He  is  one  of  the  few  sovereigns
entitled  to  the  appellation  both  of  Great  and  Good,
and  the  only  one  of  Mahomedan  race,  whose  mind
appears  to  have  arisen  so  far  above  all  the  illiberal
prejudices  of  that  fanatical  religion  in  which  he  was
educated,  as  to  be  capable  of  forming  a  plan  worthy
of  a  monarch  who  loved  his  people,  and  was  solicitous
to  render  them  happy. As,  in  every  province  of  his
extensive  dominions,  the  Hindoos  formed  the  great
body  of  his  subjects,  he  laboured  to  acquire  a  perfect
knowledge  of  their  religion,  their  sciences,  their  laws,
and  institutions ;  in  order  that  he  might  conduct  eveiy
part  of  his  government,  particularly  the  administration
of  justice,  in  a  manner  as  much  accommodated  as  pos-
sible to  their  own  ideas." In  this  generous  under-
taking  he  was  seconded  with  zeal  by  his  vizier  Abul
Fazel,  a  minister  whose  understanding  was  not  less
enlightened  than  that  of  his  master. By  their  assi-
duous researches,  and  consultation  of  learned  men,^
such  information  was  obtained  as  enabled  Abul  Fazel
to  publish  a  brief  compendium  of  Hindoo  jurispru-
dence in  the  Ayeen  Akbeiy,^  which  may  be  consi-

"  See  Note  LXIII.  y  A\xcii  Akbrry,  A.  vol.  iii.  p.  95.

'  Ibid.  vol.  iii.  p.  19?",  &:c.

APPENDIX.  179

dered  as  the  first  genuine  communication  of  its  prin-
ciples to  persons  of  a  different  relio;ion.  About

A.D. 1773. r  1  c

two  centuries  afterward,  the  illustrious  ex-
ample of  Akber  was  imitated  and  surpassed  by  Mi\
Hastings,  the  governor-general  of  the  British  settle-
ments in  India.  By  his  authority,  and  under  his  in-
spection, the  most  eminent  pundits,  or  Brahmins
learned  in  the  laws  of  the  provinces  over  which  he
presided,  were  assembled  at  Calcutta;  and,  in  the
course  of  two  years,  compiled,  from  their  most  ancient
and  approved  authors,  sentence  by  sentence,  without
addition  or  diminution,  a  full  code  of  Hindoo  laws ;""
which  is,  undoubtedly,  the  most  valuable  and  authen-
tic elucidation  of  Indian  policy  and  manners  that  has
been  hitherto  communicated  to  Europe.

According  to  the  pundits,  some  of  the  writers  upon
whose  authority  they  found  the  decrees  which  they
have  inserted  in  the  code,  lived  several  millions  of
years  before  their  time ;''  and  they  boast  of  having  a
succession  of  expounders  of  their  laws  from  that  period
to  the  present.  Without  entering  into  any  examina-
tion of  what  is  so  extravagant,  we  may  conclude,  that
the  Hindoos  have  in  their  possession  treatises  con-
cerning the  laws  and  jurisprudence  of  their  country,
of  more  remote  antiquity  than  are  to  be  found  in  any
other  nation.  The  truth  of  this  depends  not  upon  their
own  testimony  alone,  but  it  is  put  beyond  doubt  by
one  circumstance,  that  all  these  treatises  are  written
in  the  Sanskreet  language,  which  has  not  been  spoken
for  many  ages  in  any  part  of  Indostan,  and  is  now
understood  by  none  but  the  most  learned  Brahmins.
That  the  Hindoos  were  a  people  highly  civilized,  at
the  time  when  their  laws  were  composed,  is  most
clearly  established  by  internal  evidence  contained  in
the  Code  itself. Among  nations  beginning  to  emerge

*  Preface  lo  tbe  Code,  p.  x.  ''  Ibid,  p.  xxxviii.

N  2

IBO  ANCIENT INDIA.

from  barbarism,  the  regulations  of  law  are  extremely
simple,  and  applicable  only  to  a  few  obvious  cases  of
daily  occurrence.  Men  must  have  been  long  united
in  a  social  state,  their  transactions  must  have  been
numerous  and  complex,  and  judges  must  have  deter-
mined an  immense  variety  of  controversies  to  which
these  gave  rise,  before  the  system  of  law  becomes  so
voluminous  and  comprehensive  as  to  direct  the  judi-
cial proceedings  of  a  nation  far  advanced  in  improve-
ment. In  that  early  age  of  the  Roman  republic,  when
the  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables  were  promulgated,  no-
thing more  was  required  than  the  laconic  injunctions
which  they  contain  for  regulating  the  decisions  of
courts  of  justice ;  but,  in  a  later  period,  the  body  of
civil  law,  ample  as  its  contents  are,  was  found  hardly
sufficient  for  that  purpose.  To  the  jejune  brevity  of
the  Twelve  Tables,  the  Hindoo  Code  has  no  resem-
blance, but  with  respect  to  the  number  and  variety  of
points  it  considers,  it  will  bear  a  comparison  with  the
celebrated  Digest  of  Justinian ;  or  with  the  systems
of  jurisprudence  in  nations  most  highly  civilized.
The  articles  of  which  the  Hindoo  Code  is  composed,
are  arranged  in  natural  and  luminous  order.  They
are  numerous  and  comprehensive,  and  investigated
with  that  minute  attention  and  discernment  which
are  natural  to  a  people  distinguished  for  acuteness
and  subtilty  of  understanding,  who  have  been  long
accustomed  to  the  accuracy  of  judicial  proceedings,
and  acquainted  with  all  the  refinements  of  legal  prac-
tice. The  decisions  concerning  every  point  (with  a
few  exceptions  occasioned  by  local  prejudices  and  pe-
culiar customs)  are  founded  upon  the  great  and  im-
mutable principles  of  justice  which  the  human  mind
acknowledges  and  respects,  in  every  age,  and  in  all
parts  of  the  earth.  Whoever  examines  the  whole
work,  cannot  entertain  a  doubt  of  its  contuinini^:  the

APPENDIX.  181

jurisprudence  of  an  enliglitened  and  commercial  peo-
ple. Whoever  looks  into  any  particular  title,  will  be
surprised  with  a  minuteness  of  detail  and  nicety  of
distinction,  which,  in  many  instances,  seem  to  go  be-
yond the  attention  of  European  legislation  ;  and  it  is
remarkable  that  some  of  the  regulations  which  indi-
cate the  greatest  degree  of  refinement,  were  establish-
ed in  periods  of  the  most  remote  antiquity.  "  In  the
first  of  the  sacred  law  tracts  (as  is  observed  by  a  per-
son to  whom  oriental  literature,  in  all  its  branches,
has  been  greatly  indebted),  which  the  Hindoos  sup-
pose to  have  been  revealed  by  Menu,  some  millions
of  years  ago,  there  is  a  curious  passage  on  the  legal
interest  of  money,  and  the  limited  rate  of  it  in  different
cases,  with  an  exception  in  regard  to  adventures  at
sea;  an  exception  which  the  sense  of  mankind  ap-
proves, and  which  commerce  absolutely  requires,
though  it  was  not  before  the  reign  of  Charles  I.  that
our  English  jurisprudence  fully  admitted  it  in  respect
of  maritime  contracts.'"'  It  is  likewise  Avorthy  of  no-
tice, that  though  the  natives  of  India  have  been  dis-
tinguished in  every  age  for  the  humanity  and  mild-
ness of  their  disposition,  yet  such  is  the  solicitude  of
their  lawgivers  to  preserve  the  order  and  tranquillity
of  society,  that  the  punishments  which  they  inflict  on
criminals  are  (agreeably  to  an  observation  of  the
ancients  already  mentioned)  extremely  rigorous.
"  Punishment  (according  to  a  striking  personification
in  the  Hindoo  Code)  is  the  magistrate ;  punishment
is  the  inspirer  of  terror  ;  punishment  is  the  nourisher
of  the  subjects  ;  punishment  is  the  defender  from  ca-
lamity ;  punishment  is  the  guardian  of  those  that
sleep ;  punishment,  with  a  black  aspect  and  a  red  eye,
terrifies  the  guilty.'

"d

f  Sir  Will.  Jones's  Third  Discourse,  Asiat.  Research,  p.  428.
d  Code,  ch.  xxi.  §  8.

182  ANCIEiNT INDIA.

IV.  As  the  condition  of  tlie  ancient  inhabitants
of  India,  whether  we  consider  them  as  individuals
or  as  members  of  society,  appears  from  the  preced-
ing investigation,  to  have  been  extremely  favourable
to  the  cultivation  of  useful  and  elegant  arts ;  we  are
naturally  led  to  inquire  whether  the  progress  which
they  actually  made  in  them  was  such  as  might  have
been  expected  from  a  people  in  that  situation.  In
attempting  to  trace  this  progress,  we  have  not  the
benefit  of  guidance  equal  to  that  which  conducted
our  researches  concerning  the  former  articles  of
inquiry.  The  ancients,  from  their  slender  acquaint-
ance with  the  interior  state  of  India,  have  been  able
to  communicate  little  information  with  respect  to  the
arts  cultivated  there ;  and  though  the  moderns,  dur-
ing their  continued  intercourse  with  India  for  three
centuries,  have  had  access  to  observe  them  with
great  attention,  it  is  of  late  only,  that  by  studying
the  languages  now  and  formerly  spoken  in  India,
and  by  consulting  and  translating  their  most  emi-
nent authors,  they  have  begun  to  enter  into  that  path
of  inquiry  which  leads  with  certainty  to  a  thorough
knowledge  of  the  state  of  arts  cultivated  in  that
country.

One  of  the  first  arts  which  human  ingenuity  aimed
at  improving,  beyond  what  mere  necessity  requires,
was  that  of  building.  In  the  brief  remarks  which
the  subject  of  my  inquiries  leads  me  to  make  on
the  progress  of  this  art  in  India,  I  shall  confine  my
attention  wholly  to  those  of  highest  antiquity.  The
most  durable  monuments  of  human  industry  are  pub-
lic buildings.  The  productions  of  art,  formed  for  the
common  purposes  of  life,  waste  and  perish  in  using
them  ;  but  works  destined  for  the  benefit  of  posterity
subsist  through  ages,  and  it  is  according  to  the  man-
ner in  which  these  are  executed,  that  we  form  a  judg-

APPENDIX.  183

ment  witli  respect  to  the  degree  of  power,  skill,  and
improvement  to  which  the  people  by  whom  they
were  erected  had  attained. In  every  part  of  India
monuments  of  high  antiquity  are  found. These  are
of  two  kinds,  such  as  were  consecrated  to  the  offices
of  religon,  or  fortresses  built  for  the  security  of  the
country. In  the  former  of  these*,  to  which  Euro-
peans, whatever their  structure  may  be, give  the
general  name  of  Pagodas,  we  may  observe  a  diver-
sity of  style,  which  both  marks  the  gradual  progress
of  architecture,  and  throws  light  on  the  general  state
of  arts  and  manners  in  different  periods. The  most
early  pagodas  appear  to  have  been  nothing  more
than  excavations  in  mountainous  parts  of  the  coun-
try,  formed probably  in  imitation  of  the natural
caverns  to which  the  first  inhabitants  of  the  earth
retired  for  safety  during  the  night,  and  where  they
found  shelter  from  the  inclemency  of  the  seasons.
The  most  celebrated,  and,  as  there  is  reason  to  be-
lieve, the  most  ancient  of  all  these,  is  the  pagoda  in
the  island  of  Elephanta,  at  no  great  distance  from
Bombay. It  has  been  hewn  by  the  hands  of  man
out  of  a  solid  rock,  about  half  way  up  a  high  moun-
tain, and  formed  into  a  spacious  area,  nearly  120
feet  square. In  order  to  support  the  roof,  and  the
weight  of  the  mountain  that  lies  above  it,  a  number
of  massy  pillars,  and  of  a  form  not  inelegant,  have
been  cut  out  of  the  same  rock,  at  such  regular  dis-
distances,  as  on  the  first  entrance  presents  to  the  eye
of  the  spectator  an  appearance  both  of  beauty  and  of
strength. Great  part  of  the  inside  is  covered  with
human  figures  in  high  relief,  of  gigantic  size  as  well
as  singular  forms,  and  distinguished  by  a  variety  of
symbols,  representing,  it  is  probable,  the  attributes
of  the  deities  whom  they  worshipped,  or  the  actions

184  ANCIENT  INDIA.

of  the  heroes  whom  they  admired.  In  the  isle  of
Salsette,  still  nearer  to  Bombay,  are  excavations  in  a
similar  style,  hardly  inferior  in  magnificence,  and
destined  for  the  same  religious  purposes.

These  stupendous  works  are  of  such  high  anti-
quity, that  as  the  natives  cannot,  either  from  history
or  tradition,  give  any  information  concerning  the
time  in  which  they  were  executed,  they  universally
ascribe  the  formation  of  them  to  the  power  of  supe-
rior beings.  From  the  extent  and  grandeur  of  these
subterraneous  mansions,  which  intelligent  travellers
compare  to  the  most  celebrated  monuments  of  human
power  and  art  in  any  part  of  the  earth,  it  is  manifest
that  they  could  not  have  been  formed  in  that  stage
of  social  life  where  men  continue  divided  into  small
tribes,  unaccustomed  to  the  efforts  of  persevering-
industry.  It  is  only  in  states  of  considerable  extent,
and  among  people  long  habituated  to  subordination,
and  to  act  with  concert,  that  the  idea  of  such  magni-
ficent works  is  conceived,  or  the  power  of  accom-
plishing them  can  be  found.

That  some  such  powerful  state  was  established  in
India  at  the  time  when  the  excavations  in  the  islands
of  Elephanta  and  Salsette  were  formed,  is  not  the
only  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  a  survey  of  them  ;
and  the  style  in  which  the  sculptures  with  which
they  are  adorned  is  executed,  indicates  a  considerable
improvement  in  art  at  that  early  period.  Sculpture
is  the  imitative  art  in  which  man  seems  to  have  made
the  first  trial  of  his  own  talents.  But  even  in  those
countries  where  it  has  attained  to  the  highest  degree
of  perfection,  its  progress  has  been  extremely  slow.
Whoever  has  attended  to  the  history  of  this  art  in
Greece,  knows  how  far  removed  the  first  rude  essay
to  represent  the  human  form,  was  from  any  complete

APPENDIX.  185

delineation  of  it.'  But  the  different  groupes  of  figures
which  still  remain  entire  in  the  pagoda  of  Elephanta,
however  low  they  must  rank  if  they  be  compared
with  the  more  elegant  works  of  Grecian  or  even
Etruscan  artists,  are  finished  in  a  style  considerably
superior  to  the  hard  inexpressive  manner  of  the
Ecryptians,  or  to  the  figures  in  the  celebrated  palace
of  Persepolis.  In  this  light  they  have  appeared  to
persons  abundantly  qualified  to  appreciate  their  merit,
and  from  different  drawings,  particularly  those  of
Niebuhr,  a  traveller  equally  accurate  in  observing,
and  faithful  in  describing,  we  must  form  a  favoura-
ble opinion  of  the  state  of  arts  in  India  at  that  period,
-  It  is  worthy  of  notice,  that  although  several  of  the
figures  in  the  caverns  at  Elephanta  be  so  different
from  those  now  exhibited  in  the  pagodas  as  objects
of  veneration,  that  some  learned  Europeans  have
imagined  they  represent  the  rites  of  a  religion  more
ancient  than  that  now  established  in  Indostan,  yet  by
the  Hindoos  themselves  the  caverns  are  considered  as
hallowed  places  of  their  own  worship,  and  they  still
resort  thither  to  perform  their  devotions,  and  honour
the  figures  there,  in  the  same  manner  with  those
in  their  own  pagodas.  In  confirmation  of  this,  I
have  been  informed  by  an  intelligent  observer,  who
visited  this  subterraneous  sanctuary  in  the  year  1782,
that  he  was  accompanied  by  a  sagacious  Brahmin,  a
native  of  Benares,  who,  though  he  had  never  been  in
it  before  that  time,  recognised,  at  once,  all  the  figures  ;
was  well  acquainted  with  the  parentage,  education,
and  life  of  every  deity  or  human  personage  there  re-
presented, and  explained  with  fluency  the  meaning
of  the  various  symbols  by  which  the  images  were
distinguished.  This  may  be  considered  as  a  clear
proof  that  the  system  of  mythology  now  prevalent

«  Wlnkelman's  Hisl.  dc  I'Art.  cliez  les  Anciens,  torn.  i.  p-  SH,  &c.

18G  ANCIENT  INDIA.

in  Benares,  is  not  different  from  that  delineated  in
the  caverns  of  Elephanta.  Mr.  Hunter,  who  visited
Elephanta  in  the  year  1784,  seems  to  consider  the
fi2;ures  there  as  representing  deities  who  are  still  ob-
jects of  worship  among-  the  Hindoos/  One  circum-
stance serves  to  confirm  the  justness  of  this  opinion.
Several  of  the  most  conspicuous  personages  in  the
groupes  at  Elephanta  are  decorated  with  the  Zeimar,
the  sacred  string  or  cord  peculiar  to  the  order  of
Brahmins,  an  authentic  evidence  of  the  distinction
of  casts  having  been  established  in  India  at  the  time
when  these  works  were  finished.

2.  Instead  of  caverns,  the  original  places  of  wor-
ship, which  could  be  formed  only  in  particular  situa-
tions, the  devotion  of  the  people  soon  began  to  raise
temples  in  honour  of  their  deities  in  other  parts  of
India.  The  structure  of  these  was  at  first  extremely
simple.  They  were  pyramids  of  large  dimension,
and  had  no  light  within  but  what  came  from  a  small
door.  After  having  been  long  accustomed  to  per-
form all  the  rites  of  religion  in  the  gloom  of  caverns,
the  Indians  were  naturally  led  to  consider  the  solemn
darkness  of  such  a  mansion  as  sacred.  Some  pago-
das in  this  first  style  of  building  still  remain  in  In-
dostan.  Drawings  of  two  of  these  at  Deogur,  and  of
a  third  near  Tanjore  in  the  Carnatic,  all  fabrics  of
great  antiquity,  have  been  published  by  Mr.  Hodges  ;S
and  though  they  are  rude  structures,  they  are  of  such
magnitude  as  must  have  required  the  power  of  some
considerable  state  to  rear  them.

3.  In  proportion  to  the  progress  of  the  different
countries  of  India  in  opulence  and  refinement,  the
structure  of  their  temples  gradually  improved.  From
plain  buildings  they  became  highly  ornamental  fa-
brics, and,  both  by  their  extent  and  magnificence,

f  Aahiuologia,  vol.  vii.  p.  286,  S^c.  ^  No.  VI.

APPENDIX.  187

are  monuments  of  the  power  and  taste  of  the  people
by  whom  they  were  erected.  In  this  highly  finished
style  there  are  pagodas  of  great  antiquity  in  different
parts  of  Indostan,  particularly  in  the  southern  pro-
vinces, which  were  not  exposed  to  the  destructive
violence  of  Mahomedan  zeal.''  In  order  to  assist
my  readers  in  forming  such  an  idea  of  these  build-
ings as  may  enable  them  to  judge  with  respect  to  the
early  state  of  arts  in  India,  I  shall  briefly  describe
two,  of  which  we  have  the  most  accurate  accounts.
The  entry  to  the  pagoda  of  Chillambrum  near  Porto
Novo,  on  the  Coromandel  coast,  held  in  high  venera-
tion on  account  of  its  antiquity,  is  by  a  stately  gate
under  a  pyramid  a  hundred  and  twenty-two  feet
in  height,  built  with  large  stones  above  forty  feet
long,  and  more  than  five  feet  square,  and  all  covered
with  plates  of  copper,  adorned  with  an  immense  va-
riety of  figures  neatly  executed.  The  whole  structure
extends  one  thousand  three  hundred  and  thirty-two
feet  in  one  direction,  and  nine  hundred  and  thirty-six
in  another.  Some  of  the  ornamental  parts  are  finished
with  an  elegance  entitled  to  the  admiration  of  the
most  ingenious  artists.'  The  pagoda  of  Seringham,
superior  in  sanctity  to  that  of  Chillambrum,  surpasses
it  as  much  in  grandeur ;  and,  fortunately,  I  can  con- .
vey  a  more  perfect  idea  of  it  by  adopting  the  words
of  an  elegant  and  accurate  historian.  This  pagoda
is  situated  about  a  mile  from  the  western  extremity
of  the  island  of  Seringham,  formed  by  the  division
of  the  great  river  Caveri  into  two  channels.  "  It  is
composed  of  seven  square  inclosures,  one  within  the
other,  the  walls  of  which  are  twenty-five  feet  high,
and  four  thick.  These  inclosures  are  three  hundred
and  fifty  feet  distant  from  one  another,  and  each  has

h  See  Note  LXIV.
'  Mem.  de  Lilcral.  toiu.  sxxii.  p.  41,  &c. Voy.  de  M.  Somerat,  toni.  i.
p.  217.

188  ANCIENT INDIA.

four  large  gates,  with  a  high  tower ;  which  are  placed,
one  in  the  middle  of  each  side  of  the  enclosure,  and
opposite  to  the  four  cardinal  points.  The  outward
wall  is  near  four  miles  in  circumference,  and  its
gateway  to  the  south  is  ornamented  with  pillars,  se-
veral of  which  are  single  stones  thirty-three  feet  long,
and  nearly  five  in  diameter;  and  those  which  form
the  roof  are  still  larger  :  in  the  inmost  enclosures  are
the  chapels.  About  half  a  mile  to  the  east  of  Se-
ringham,  and  nearer  to  the  Caveri  than  the  Coleroon,
is  another  large  pagoda,  called  Jembikisma;  but  this
has  only  one  enclosure.  The  extreme  veneration  in
which  Seringham  is  held,  arises  from  a  belief  that  it
contains  that  identical  image  of  the  god  Wistchnu,
which  used  to  be  worshipped  by  the  god  Brahma.
Pilgrims  from  all  parts  of  the  peninsula  come  hereto
obtain  absolution,  and  none  come  without  an  offering
of  money ;  and  a  large  part  of  the  revenue  of  the
island  is  allotted  for  the  maintenance  of  the  Brahmins
who  inhabit  the  pagoda ;  and  these,  with  their  fami-
lies, formerly  composed  a  multitude  not  less  than
forty  thousand  souls,  maintained,  without  labour,  by
the  liberality  of  superstition.  Here,  as  in  all  the
other  great  pagodas  of  India,  the  Brahmins  live  in  a
subordination  which  knows  no  resistance,  and  slumber
in  a  voluptuousness  which  knows  no  wants. "''

The  other  species  of  public  buildings  which  I  men-
tioned, were  those  erected  for  the  defence  of  the
country.  From  the  immense  plains  of  Indostan,  there
arise,  in  different  parts,  eminences  and  rocks  formed
by  nature  to  be  places  of  strength.  Of  these  the  na-
tives early  took  possession,  and,  fortifying  them  with
works  of  various  kinds,  rendered  them  almost  impreg-
nable stations.  There  seems  to  have  been,  in  some
distant  age,  a  period  of  general  turbulence  and  dan-

^  Orijic's  Hist,  oliMiiir.  'I'ransacl.  of  Indostan,  vol.  i.  p.  178.

APPENDIX.  189

ger  in  India,  when  sucli  retreats  were  deemed  essen-
tially necessary  to  public  safety ;  for  among  the  du-
ties of  magistrates  prescribed  by  the  pundits,  one  is,
"  that  he  shall  erect  a  strong  fort  in  the  place  where
he  chooses  to  reside ;  and  shall  build  a  wall  on  all
the  four  sides  of  it,  with  towers  and  battlements,  and
shall  make  a  full  ditch  around  it."' Of  these  fortresses
several  remain,  which,  both  from  the  appearance  of
the  buildings,  and  from  the  tradition  of  the  natives,
must  have  been  constructed in  very  remote  times.
Mr.  Hodges  has  published  views  of  three  of  these,  one
of  Chunar  Gur,  situated  upon  the  river  Ganges,  about
sixteen  miles  above  the  city  of  Benares  ;"'  the  second,
of  Gwallior,  about  eighty  miles  to  the  south  of  Agra;"
the  third  of  Bidjegur,  in  the  territory  of  Benares."
They  are  all,  particularly  Gwallior,  works  of  consi-
derable magnitude  and  strength. The  fortresses  in
Bengal,  however,  are  not  to  be  compared  with  several
in  the  Deccan. Asseergur,  Burhampour,  and  Dow-
latabad,  are  deemed  by  the  natives  to  be  impregnable  f
and  I  am  assured  by  a  good  judge,  that  Asseergur  is
indeed  a  most  stupendous  work,  and  so  advanta-
geously situated,  that  it  would  be  extremely  difficult
to  reduce  it  by  force. Adoni,  of  which  Tippoo  Sul-
taun  lately  rendered  himself  master,  is  not  inferior  to
any  of  them,  either  in  strength  or  importance.''

Nor  is  it  only  from  surveying  their  public  works
that  we  are  justified  in  asserting  the  early  proficiency
of  the  Indians  in  elegant  and  useful  arts  :  we  are  led
to  form  the  same  conclusion  by  a  view  of  those  pro-
ductions of  their  ingenuity,  which  were  the  chief  ar-
ticles of  their  trade  with  foreign  nations.  Of  these
the  labours  of  the  Indian  loom  and  needle  have,  in
every  age,  been  the  most  celebrated ;  and  fine  linen  is

»  Introd.  to  Code  of  Gentoo  Laws,  p cxi.  >"  No.  I.  "  No.  II.

o  No.  III.  P  Rennell,  Mem.  p.  1.33.  139.

1  Historical  and  Political  View  of  the  Doccan,  p.  1'Ji.

190  ANCIENT INDIA.

conjectured,  with some  probability, to  have  been
called  by  the  ancients  Sindoii,  from  the  name  of  the
river  Indus  or  Sindus,  near  which  it  was  wrought  in
the  highest  perfection/ The  cotton  manufactures  of
India  seem  anciently  to  have  been  as  much  admired
as  Ihey  are  at  present,  not  only  for  their  delicate
texture,  but  for  the  elegance  with  which  some  of
them  are  embroidered,  and  the  beautiful  colour  of
the  flowers  with  which  others  are  adorned. From
the  earliest  period  of  European  intercourse  with  In-
dia, that  country  has  been  distinguished  for  the  num-
ber and  excellence  of  the  substances  for  dying  various
colours,  with  which  it  abounded.' The  dye  of  the
deep  blue  colour  in  highest  estimation  among  the
Romans,  bore  the  name  of  indicum.^ From  India,
too,  the  substance  used  in  dying  a  bright  red  colour,
seems  to  have  been  imported  ;"  and  it  is  well  known
that  both  in  the  cotton  and  silk  stuffs  which  we  now
receive  from  India,  the  blue  and  the  red  are  the  co-
lours of  most  conspicuous  lustre  and  beauty. But
however  much  the  ancients  may  have  admired  these
productions  of  Indian  art,  some  circumstances,  which
I  have  already  mentioned,  rendered  their  demand  for
the  cotton  manufactures  of  India  far  inferior  to  that
of  modern  times ;  and  this  has  occasioned  the  infor-
mation concerning;  them  which  we  receive  from  the
Greek  and  Roman  writers  to  be  very  imperfect. We
may  conclude,  however,  from  the  wonderful  resem-
blance of  the  ancient  state  of  India  to  the  modern,
that,  in  every  period,  the  productions  of  their  looms
were  as  vanous  as  beautiful. The  ingenuity  of  the
Indians  in  other  kinds  of  workmanship,  particularly
in  metals  and  in  ivory,  is  mentioned  with  praise  by

■■  Sir  William  Jones's  Third  Discourse,  p.  428.
s  Strabo,  lib.  xv.  p.  1018.  A.  1024.  B. «  Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  xxxv.  c.  6.  §  27.
"  Salniasius  Exercit.  Pliniana;  in  Soliii.  180,  &c.  810. Salraasius  de  Honji-
onyniis  Hyles  Jatrica,  r.  107. See  Note  LXV.

APPENDIX.  191

ancient  authors,  but  without  any  particular  descrip-
tion of  their  nature/ Of  these  early  productions  of
Indian  artists,  there  are  now  some  specimens  in  Eu-  .
rope,  from  which  it  appears  that  they  were  acquainted
with  the  method of  engraving  upon the hardest
stones  and  gems ;  and,  both  in  the  elegance  of  their
desio-ns  and  in  neatness  of  execution,  had  arrived  at  a^
considerable  degree  of  excellence. An  ingenious
writer  maintains,  that  the  art  of  engraving  on  gems
was  probably  an  Indian  invention,  and  certainly  was
early  improved  there,  and  he  supports  this  opinion
by  several  plausible  arguments.^ The  Indian  en-
graved' gems,  of  which  he  has  published  descriptions,
appear  to  be  the  workmanship  of  a  very  remote  pe-
riod, as  the  legends on  them  are  in  the  Sanskreet
language.^

But  it  is  not  alone  from  the  improved  state  of  me-
chanic arts  in  India,  that  we  conclude  its  inhabitants
to  have  been  highly  civilized ;  a  proof  of  this,  still
more  convincing,  may  be  deduced  from  the  early  and
extraordinary  productions  of  their  genius  in  the  fine
arts. This  evidence  is  rendered  more  interesting,  by
being  derived  from  a  source  of  knowledge  which  the
laudable  curiosity  of  our  countrymen  has  opened  to
the  people  of  Europe  within  these  few  years. That
all  the  science  and  literature  possessed  by  the  Brah-
mins, were  contained  in  books  written  in  a  language
understood  by  a  few  only  of  the  most  learned  among
them,  is  a  fact  which  has  long  been  known ;  and  all
the  Europeans  settled  in  India  during  three  centuries,
have  complained  that  the  Brahmins  obstinately  re-
fused to  instruct  any  person  in  this  language. But
at  length,  by  address,  mild  treatment,  and  a  persua-

^  Strabo,  lib.  xv.  p.  1044. B.  Dionjs.  Perieges,  ver.  1016.
y  Raspe's Introduct.  to  Tassie's  Descript. Catal. of engraved  Gems,  &c.
p.  xii.  &c.

^  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  74.  vol.  ii.  plate  xiii.

192  ANCIENT INDIA.

sion  that  the  earnestness  with  which  instruction  was
solicited,  proceeded  not  from  any  intention  of  turn-
ino-  their  reHoion  into  derision,  but  from  a  desire  of
acquiring  a  perfect  knowledge  of  their  sciences  and
literature,  the  scruples  of  the  Brahmins  have  been
overcome.  Several  British  gentlemen  are  now  com-
pletely masters  of  the  Sanskreet  language.  The
mysterious  veil,  formerly  deemed  impenetrable,  is
removed ;  and  in  the  course  of  five  years,  the  curio-
sity of  the  public  has  been  gratified  by  two  publica-
tions as  singular  as  they  were  unexpected.  The  one
is  a  translation  by  Mr.  Wilkius,  of  an  episode  from
the  JMahabarat,  an  epic  poem  in  high  estimation
among  the  Hindoos,  composed  according  to  their
account  by  Kreeshna  Dwypayen  Veias,  the  most
eminent  of  all  their  Brahmins,  above  three  thousand
years  before  the  Christian  era.  The  other  is  Sacon-
tala,  a  dramatic  poem,  written  about  a  century  be-
fore the  birth  of  Christ,  translated  by  Sir  W.  Jones.
I  shall  endeavour  to  give  my  readers  such  a  view  of
the  subject  and  composition  of  each  of  these,  as  may
enable  them  to  estimate,  in  some  measure,  the  degree
of  merit  which  they  possess.

The  Mahabarat  is  a  voluminous  poem,  consisting
of  upwards  of  four  hundred  thousand  lines.  Mr.
Wilkins  has  translated  more  than  a  third  of  it ;  but
only  a  short  episode,  entitled  Baghvat-Geeta,  is
hitherto  published,  and  from  this  specimen  we  must
form  an  opinion  with  respect  to  the  whole.  The
subject  of  the  poem  is  a  famous  civil  war  between
two  branches  of  the  royal  house  of  Bhaurat.  When
the  forces  on  each  side  were  formed  in  the  field,  and
ready  to  decide  the  contest  by  the  sword,  Arjoon,
the  favourite  and  pupil  of  the  god  Kreeshna,  who
accompanied  him  in  this  hour  of  danger,  requested
of  him  to  cause  his  chariot  to  advance  between  the

APPENDIX.  193

two  hostile  armies.  He  looked  at  both  armies,  and
beheld  on  either  side,  none  but  grandsires,  uncles,
cousins,  tutors,  sons,  and  brothers,  near  relations  or
bosom  friends;  and  when  he  had  gazed  for  a  while,
and  saw  these  prepared  for  the  fight,  he  was  seized
with  extreme  pity  and  compunction,  and  uttered  his
sorrow  in  the  following  words : — "  Having  beheld,  O
Kf^eeshna !  my  kindred  thus  waiting  anxious  for  the
fight,  my  members  fail  me,  my  countenance  wither-
eth,  the  hair  standeth  an  end  upon  my  body,  and  all
my  frame  trembleth  with  horror ;  even  Gandeev,  my
bow,  escapeth  from  my  hand,  and  my  skin  is  parched
and  dried  up. — When  I  have  destroyed  my  kindred,
shall  I  longer  look  for  happiness?  I  wish  not  for
victory,  Kreeskna;  I  want  not  dominion;  I  want
not  pleasure ;  for  what  is  dominion  and  the  enjoy-
ments of  life,  or  even  life  itself,  when  those  for  whom
dominion,  pleasure,  and  enjoyment  were  to  be  co-
veted, have  abandoned  life  and  fortune,  and  stand
here  in  the  field  ready  for  the  battle.  Tutors,  sons,
and  fathers,  grandsires,  and  grandsons,  uncles,  ne-
phews, cousins,  kindred,  and  friends !  although
they  would  kill  me,  I  wish  not  to  fight  them  ;  no  not
even  for  the  dominion  of  the  three  regions  of  the
universe,  much  less  for  this  little  earth.'"'  In  order
to  remove  his  scruples,  Kreeshna  informs  him  what
was  the  duty  of  a  prince  of  the  Chehteree  or  military
cast,  when  called  to  act  in  such  a  situation,  and  incites
him  to  perform  it  by  a  variety  of  moral  and  philoso-
phical arguments,  the  nature  of  which  I  shall  have
occasion  to  consider  particularly  in  another  part  of
this  Dissertation.  In  this  dialogue  between  Kreeshna
and  his  pupil,  there  are  several  passages  which  give
a  high  idea  of  the  genius  of  the  poet.  The  speech
of  Arjoon  I  have  quoted,  in  which  he  expresses  the

a  Baghvat-Geeta,  p.  30,  31.
VOL. IX.  O

194  ANCIENT INDIA.

ano'uisli  of  his  soul,  must  have  struck  every  reader  as
beautiful  and  pathetic ;  and  I  shall  afterward  pro-
duce a  description  of  the  Supreme  Being,  and  of  the
reverence  wherewith  he  should  be  worshipped,  which
is  sublime.  But  while  these  excite  our  admiration,
and  confirm  us  in  the  belief  of  a  hig:h  deg'ree  of  civi-
lization  in  that  country  where  such  a  work  was  pro-
duced, we  are  surprised  at  the  defect  of  taste  and  of
art  in  the  manner  of  introducing  this  episode.  Two
powerful  armies  are  drawn  up  in  battle-array,  eager
for  the  fight ;  a  young  hero  and  his  instructor  are
described  as  standing  in  a  chariot  of  war  between
them ;  that  surely  was  not  the  moment  for  teaching
him  the  principles  of  philosophy,  and  delivering
eighteen  lectures  of  metaphysics  and  theology.

With  regard,  however,  both  to  the  dramatic  and
epic  poetry  of  the  Hindoos,  we  labour  under  the  dis-
advantage of  being  obliged  to  form  an  opinion  from
a  single  specimen  of  each,  and  that  of  the  latter,  too
(as  it  is  only  a  part  of  a  large  work),  an  imperfect  one.
But  if,  from  such  scanty  materials,  we  may  venture
upon  any  decision,  it  must  be,  that  of  the  two,  the
drama  seems  to  have  been  conducted  with  the  most
correct  taste.  This  will  appear  from  the  observations
which  I  now  proceed  to  make  upon  Sacontala.

It  is  only  to  nations  considerably  advanced  in  re-
finement, that  the  drama  is  a  favourite  entertainment.
The  Greeks  had  been  for  a  good  time  a  polished
people  ;  Alcseus  and  Sappho  had  composed  their
odes,  and  Thales  and  Anaicimander  had  opened  their
schools  before  tragedy  made  its  first  rude  essay  in  the
cart  of  Thespis  ;  and  a  good  time  elapsed  before  it
attained  to  any  considerable  degree  of  excellence.
From  the  drama  of  Sacontala,  then,  we  must  form  an
advantageous  idea  of  the  state  of  improvement  in  that
society  to  whose  taste  it  was  suited. In  estimating

APPENDIX.  105

its  merit,  however,  we  must  not  apply  to  it  rules  of
criticism  drawn  from  the  literature  and  taste  of  nations
with  which  its  author  was  altogether  unacquainted  ;
we  must  not  expect  the  unities  of  the  Greek  theatre;
we  must  not  measure  it  by  our  own  standard  of  pro-
priety. Allowance  must  be  made  for  local  customs,
and  singular  manners,  arising  from  a  state  of  domestic
society,  an  order  of  civil  policy,  and  a  system  of  re-
ligious opinions,  very  different  from  those  established
in  Europe.  Sacontala  is  not  a  regular  drama,  but,
like  some  of  the  plays  early  exhibited  on  the  Spanish
and  English  theatres,  is  a  history  and  dialogue,  un-
folding events  which  happened  in  different  places,
and  during  a  series  of  years.  When  viewed  in  this
light,  the  fable  is  in  general  well  arranged,  many  of
the  incidents  are  happily  chosen,  and  the  vicissitudes
in  the  situation  of  the  principal  personages  are  sud-
den and  unexpected.  The  unravelling  of  the  piece,
however,  though  some  of  the  circumstances  prepa-
ratory to  it  be  introduced  with  skill,  is  at  last  brought
about  by  the  intervention  of  superior  beings,  which
has  always  a  bad  effect,  and  discovers  some  want  of
art.  But  as  Sacontala  was  descended  of  a  celestial
nymph,  and  under  the  protection  of  a  holy  hermit,
this  heavenly  interposition  may  appear  less  marvel-
lous, and  is  extremely  agreeable  to  the  oriental  taste.
In  many  places  of  this  drama  it  is  simple  and  tender,
in  some  pathetic  ;  in  others  there  is  a  mixture  of  co-
mic with  what  is  more  serious.  Of  each  examples
might  be  given.  I  shall  select  a  few  of  the  first,  both
because  simplicity  and  tenderness  are  the  charac-
teristic beauties  of  the  piece,  and  because  they  so  little
resemble  the  extravagant  imagery  and  turgid  style
conspicuous  in  almost  all  the  specimens  of  oriental
poetry  which  have  hitherto  been  published.

Sacontala,  the  heroine  of  the  drama,  a  princess  of

o  2

l.Q(>  ANCIENT INDIA.

high  biitlj,  had  been  educated  by  a  holy  hermit  in  a  hol-
low grove,  and  had  passed  the  early  part  of  her  life
in  rural  occupations  and  pastoral  innocence.  When
she  was  about  to  quit  this  beloved  retreat,  and  repair
to  the  court  of  a  great  monarch,  to  whom  she  had  been
married,  Cana,  her  foster-father,  and  her  youthful
companions,  thus  bewail  their  own  loss,  and  express
their  wishes  for  her  happiness,  in  a  strain  of  sen-
timent and  language  perfectly  suited  to  their  pastoral
character.

"  Hear,  O  ye  trees,  of  this  hallowed  forest,  hear
and  proclaim  that  Sacontala  is  going  to  the  palace  of
her  wedded  lord  ;  she  who  drank  not,  though  thirsty,
before  you  were  watered ;  she  who  cropped  not,
through  affection  for  you,  one  of  your  fresh  leaves,
though  she  would  have  been  pleased  with  such  an  or-
nament for  her  locks;  she,  whose  chief  delight  was
in  the  season  when  your  branches  are  spangled  with
flowers !

Chorus  of  Wood  Nymphs. — "  May  her  way  be  at-
tended with  prosperity  !  May  propitious  breezes
sprinkle,  for  her  delight,  the  odoriferous  dust  of  rich
blossoms  !  May  pools  of  clear  water,  green  with  the
leaves  of  the  lotus,  refresh  her  as  she  walks  !  and
may  shady  branches  be  her  defence  from  the  scorch-
ing sun-beams  !"

Sacontala,  just  as  she  was  departing  from  the
grove,  turns  to  Cana  :  "  Suffer  me,  venerable  father,
to  address  this  madhavi-creeper,  whose  red  blossoms
inflame  the  grove." — Cana.  "  My  child,  I  know  thy
affection  for  it." — Sacont.  *'  O  most  radiant  of  shining
plants,  receive  my  embraces,  and  return  them  with
thy  flexible  arms  !  from  this  day,  though  removed  at
a  fatal  distance,  I  shall  forever  be  thine. — 0  beloved
father,  consider  this  creeper  as  myself!"  As  she  ad-
vances, she  airain  addresses  Cana  : "  Father !  when

APPENDIX.  197

your  female  antelope,  who  now  moves  slowly  from
the  weight  of  the  young  ones  with  which  she  is  preg-
nant, shall  be  delivered  of  them,  send  me,  I  beg,  a
kind  message  with  tidings  of  her  safety. — Do  not  for-
get."  Cana. "My  beloved! I  will  not  forget  it."

Saco7Jt.  [stopping.'] "Ah  !  what  is  it  that  clings

to  the  skirts  of  my  robe  and  detains  me  ?"^ Cana.

"  It  is  thy  adopted  child,  the  little  fawn,  whose  mouth,
when  the  sharp  points  of  Cusa  grass  had  wounded  it,
has  been  so  often  smeaced  by  thee  with  the  healing
oil  of  Ingudi ;  who  has  been  so  often  fed  by  thee
with  a  handful  ofSynmaka  grains,  and  now  will  not

leave  the footsteps of  his protectress. Sacont.

"  Why  dost  thou  weep,  tender  fawn,  for  me  who  must
leave  our  common  dwelling-place? — As  thou  wast
reared  by  me  when  thou  hadst  lost  thy  mother,  who
died  soon  after  thy  birth,  so  will  my  foster-father  at-
tend thee,  when  we  are  separated,  with  anxious  care.

—Return, poor thing, return we must part."

[She  bursts  into  tears.] Cana. "  Thy  tears,  my

child,  ill  suit  the  occasion ;  we  shall  all  meet  again ;
be  firm ;  see  the  direct  road  before  thee,  and  follow
it.  When  the  big  tear  lurks  beneath  thy  beautiful
eye-lashes,  let  thy  resolution  check  its  first  efforts  to
disengage  itself. — In  thy  passage  over  this  earth,  where
the  paths  are  now  high,  now  low,  and  the  true  path
seldom  distinguished,  the  traces  of  thy  feet  must  needs
be  unequal ;  but  virtue  will  press  thee  right  on-
ward."''

From  this  specimen  of  the  Indian  drama,  every
reader  of  good  taste,  I  should  imagine,  will  be  sa-
tisfied, that  it  is  only  among  a  people  of  polished  man-
ners and  delicate  sentiments,  that  a  composition  so
simple  and  correct  could  be  produced  or  relished.  I
observe  one  instance  in  this  drama  of  that  wild  extra-

^  Act  IV.  p.  17,  &c.

190  ANCIENT INDIA.

vagance  so  frequent  in  oriental  poetry.  The  monarch,
in  replacing  a  bracelet  which  had  dropped  from  the
arm  of  Sacontala,  thus  addresses  her : "  Look,  my
darling,  this  is  the  new  moon  which  left  the  firmament
in  honour  of  superior  beauty,  and  having  descended
on  your  enchanting  wrist,  hath  joined  both  its  horns
round  it  in  the  shape  of  a  bracelet.'"" But  this  is  the
speech  of  an  enraptured  young  man  to  his  mistress,
and  in  every  age  and  nation  exaggerated  praise  is
expected  from  the  mouth  of  lovers. Dramatic  exhi-
bitions seem  to  have  been  a  favourite  amusement  of
the  Hindoos  as  well  as  of  other  civilized  nations.
"  The  tragedies,  comedies,  farces,  and  musical  pieces
of  the  Indian  theatre,  would  fill  as  many  volumes  as
that  of  any  nation  in  ancient  or  modern  Europe.
They  are  all  in  verse  where  the  dialogue  is  elevated,
and  in  prose  where  it  is  familiar  ; the  men  of  rank
and  learning  are  represented  speaking  pure  Sanskreet,
and  the  women  Pracrit,  which  is  little  more  than  the
language  of  the  Brahmins,  melted  down  by  a  delicate
articulation  to  the  softness  of  Italian  ;  while  the  low
persons  of  the  drama  speak  the  vulgar  dialects  of  the
several  provinces  which  they  are  supposed  to  inhabit. "'*
V.  The  attainments  of  the  Indians  in  science,  fur-
nish an  additional  proof  of  their  early  civilization.
By  every  person  who  has  visited  India  in  ancient  or
modern  times,  its  inhabitants  either  in  transactions  of
private  business,  or  in  the  conduct  of  political  affairs,
have  been  deemed  not  inferior  to  the  people  of  any
nation  in  sagacity  or  in  acuteness  of  understanding.
From  the  application  of  such  talents  to  the  cultivation
of  science,  an extraordinary  degree  of  proficiency
might  have  been  expected. The  Indians  were,  ac-
cordingly, early  celebrated  on  that  account,  and  some

•^  Act  III.  p.  36.
•*  Preface  to  Saeont.by  Sir  William  Jones,  p.  ix. Sec  Note  LXVI.

APPENDIX.  199

of  the  most  eminent  of  the  Greek  philosophers,  tra-
velled in  India,  that,  by  conversing  with  the  sages  of
that  country,  they  might  acquire  some  portion  of  the
knowledge  for  which  they  were  distinguished."  The
accounts,  however,  which  we  receive  from  the  Greeks
and  Romans,  of  the  sciences  which  attracted  the  at-
tention of  the  Indian  philosophers,  or  of  the  discoveries
which  they  had  made  in  them,  are  very  imperfect  To
the  researches  of  a  few  intelligent  persons,  who  have
visited  India  during  the  course  of  the  three  last  cen-
turies, we  are  indebted  for  more  ample  and  authentic
information.  But,  from  the  reluctance  with  which
the  Brahmins  communicate  their  sciences  to  strangers,
and  the  inability  of  Europeans  to  acquire  much  know-
ledge of  them,  while,  like  the  mysteries  of  their  reli-
gion, they  were  concealed  from  vulgar  eyes  in  an  un-
known tongue,  this  information  was  acquired  slowly,
and  with  great  difficulty.  The  same  observation,
however,  which  I  made  concerning  our  knowledge  of
the  state  of  the  fine  arts  among  the  people  of  India,  is
applicable  to  that  of  their  progress  in  science,  and  the
present  age  is  the  first  furnished  with  sufficient  evi-
dence upon  which  to  found  a  decisive  judgment  with
respect  to  either.

Science,  when  viewed  as  disjoined  from  religion,
the  consideration  of  which  I  reserve  for  another  head,
is  employed  in  contemplating  either  the  operations  of
the  understanding,  the  exercise  of  our  moral  powers,
or  the  nature  and  qualities  of  external  objects.  The
first  is  denominated  logic;  the  second  ethics;  the
third  physics,  or  the  knowledge  of  nature.  With  re-
spect to  the  early  progress  in  cultivating  each  of  these
sciences  in  India,  we  are  in  possession  of  facts  which
merit  attention.

But,  prior  to  the  consideration  of  them,  it  is  proper

*  Bruckeri  Hbt.  Philosoph.  vol.  i.  p.  190.

200  ANCIENT INDIA.

to  examine  the  ideas  of  the  Brahmins  with  respect  to
mind  itself,  for  if  these  were  not  just,  all  their  theo-
ries concerning  its  operations  must  have  been  erro-
neous and  fanciful. The  distinction  between  matter
and  spirit  appears  to  have  been  early  known  by  the
philosophers  of  India,  and  to  the  latter  they  ascribed
many  powers  of  which  they  deemed  the  former  to  be
incapable ;  and  when  we  recollect  how  inadequate
our  conceptions  are  of  every  object  that  does  not  fall
under  the  cognizance  of  the  senses,  we  may  affirm
(if  allowance  be  made  for  a  peculiar  notion  of  the
Hindoos  which  shall  be  afterward  explained)  that  no
description  of  the  human  soul  is  more  suited  to  the
dignity  of  its  nature  than  that  given  by  the  author  of
the  Mahabarat. "  Some,"  says  he,  "  regard  the  soul
as  a  wonder,  others  hear  of  it  with  astonishment,  but
no  one  knoweth  it. The  weapon  dividcth  it  not ;  the
fire  burneth  it  not ;  the  water  corrupteth  it  not ;  the
wind  drieth  it  not  away ; for  it  is  indivisible,  incon-
sumable, incorruptible ;  it  is  eternal,  universal,  per-
manent, immovable; it  is  invisible,  inconceivable,
and  unalterable." '^ After  this  view  of  the  sentiments
of  the  Brahmins  concerning  mind  itself,  we  may  pro-
ceed to  consider  their  ideas  with  respect  to  each  of
the  sciences,  in  that  tripartite  arrangement  which  I
mentioned.

1st,  Logic  and  metaphysics.  On  no  subject  has
the  human  understanding  been  more  exercised  than
in  analyzing  its  own  operations.  The  various  powers
of  the  mind  have  been  examined  and  defined.  The
origin  and  progress  of  our  ideas  have  been  traced ;
and  proper  rules  have  been  prescribed,  of  proceeding
from  the  observation  of  facts  to  the  establishment  of
principles,  or  from  the  knowledge  of  principles  to
form  arrangements  of  science. The  philosophers  of

f  Baglivat-Gceta,  p.  37.

APPENDIX.  201

ancient  Greece  were  highly  celebrated  for  their  pro-
ficiency in  these  abstruse  speculations  ;  and  in  their
discussions  and  arrangements,  discovered  such  depth
of  thought  and  acuteness  of  discernment,  that  their
systems  of  logic,  particularly  that  of  the  Peripatetic
school,  have  been  deemed  most  distinguished  efforts
of  human  reason.

But  since  we  became  acquainted,  in  some  degree,
with  the  literature  and  science  of  the  Hindoos,  we
find  that  as  soon  as  men  arrive  at  that  stage  in  social
life,  when  they  can  turn  their  attention  to  speculative
inquiries,  the  human  mind  will,  in  every  region  of
the  earth,  display  nearly  the  same  powers,  and  pro-
ceed in  its  investigations  and  discoveries  by  nearly
similar  steps. From  Abul  FazeVs  compendium  of  the
philosophy^  of  the  Hindoos,  the  knowledge  of  which
he  acquired,  as  he  informs  us,  by  associating  inti-
mately with  the  most  learned  men  of  the  nation ;  from
the  specimen  of  their  logical  discussions  contained  in
that  portion  of  the  Shastra  published  by  colonel  Dow,''
and  from  many  passages  in  the  Baghvat-Geeta,  it  ap-
pears that  the  same  speculations  which  occupied  the
philosophers  of  Greece  had  engaged  the  attention  of
the  Indian  Brahmins ;  and  the  theories  of  the  former,
either  concerning  the  qualities  of  external  objects,  or
the  nature  of  our  own  ideas,  were  not  more  ingenious
than  those  of  the  latter. To  define  with  accuracy,  to
distinguish  with  acuteness,  and  to  reason  with  sub-
tlety, are  characteristics  of  both ; and  in  both  the
same  excess  of  refinement,  in  attempting  to  analyze
those  operations  of  mind  which  the  faculties  of  man
were  not  formed  to  comprehend,  led  sometimes  to
the  most  false  and  dangerous  conclusions. That
sceptical  philosophy,  which  denies  the  existence  of
the  material  world,  and  asserts  nothing  to  be  real  but

S  Aycen  Akbery,  vol.  iii.  p.  95,  &c.  '•  Dissertation,  p.  xxxix.  fee

202  ANCIENT INDIA.

our  own  ideas,  seems  to  have  been  known  in  India
as  well  as  in  Europe ;'  and  the  sages  of  the  East,  as
they  were  indebted  to  philosophy  for  the  knowledge
of  many  important  truths,  were  not  more  exempt  than
those  of  the  West  from  its  delusions  and  errors.

2d,  Ethics.  This  science,  which  has  for  its  object
to  ascertain  what  distinguishes  virtue  from  vice,  to
investigate  what  motives  should  prompt  men  to  act,
and  to  prescribe  rules  for  the  conduct  of  life,  as  it  is
of  all  others  the  most  interesting,  seems  to  have  deeply
eno^ag'ed  the  attention  of  the  Brahmins.  Their  sen-
timents  with  respect  to  these  points  were  various,
and,  like  the  philosophers  of  Greece,  the  Brahmins
were  divided  into  sects,  distinguished  by  maxims  and
tenets  often  diametrically  opposite.  That  sect  with
whose  opinions  we  are,  fortunately,  best  acquainted,
had  established  a  system  of  morals,  founded  on  prin-
ciples the  most  generous  and  dignified  which  unas-
sisted reason  is  capable  of  discovering.  Man,  they
taught,  was  formed  not  for  speculation  or  indolence,
but  for  action.  He  is  born,  not  for  himself  alone,  but
for  his  fellow-men.  The  happiness  of  the  society  of
which  he  is  a  member,  the  good  of  mankind,  are  his
ultimate  and  highest  objects.  In  choosing  what  to
prefer  or  to  reject,  the  justness  and  propriety  of  his
own  choice  are  the  only  considerations  to  which  he
should  attend.  The  events  which  may  follow  his  ac-
tions are  not  in  his  own  power,  and  whether  they  be
prosperous  or  adverse,  as  long  as  he  is  satisfied  with
the  purity  of  the  motives  which  induced  him  to  act,
he  can  enjoy  that  approbation  of  his  own  mind,  which
constitutes  genuine  happiness,  independent  of  the
power  of  fortune  or  the  opinions  of  other  men.
"  Man  (says  the  author  of  the  Mahabarat)  enjoyeth
not  freedom  from  action. Every  man  is  involunta-

'  Dow's  Disseilalion,  p.  I>ii. A^tcn  Akbcrv,  vol.  iii.  p.  12o.

APPENDIX.  203

rily  urged  to  act  by  those  principles  which  are  inhe-
rent in  his  nature.  He  who  restraineth  his  active
faculties,  and  sitteth  down  with  his  mind  attentive  to
the  objects  of  his  senses,  may  be  called  one  of  an
astrayed  soul.  The  man  is  praised,  who  having  sub-
dued all  his  passions,  performeth  with  his  active  fa-
culties all  the  functions  of  life,  unconcerned  about
the  event.''  Let  the  motive  be  in  the  deed,  and  not
in  the  event.  Be  not  one  whose  motive  for  action  is
the  hope  of  reward.  Let  not  thy  life  be  spent  in  in-
action. Depend  upon  application,  perform  thy  duty,
abandon  all  thought  of  the  consequence,  and  make
the  event  equal,  whether  it  terminate  in  good  or  in
evil ;  for  such  an  equality  is  called  Yog  [i.  e.  atten-
tion to  what  is  spiritual].  Seek  an  asylum  then  in
wisdom  alone;  for  the  miserable  and  unhappy  are
so  on  account  of  the  event  of  things.  Men  who  are
endued  with  true  wisdom  are  unmindful  of  good  or
evil  in  this  world.  Study  then  to  obtain  this  appli-
cation of  thy  understanding,  for  such  application  in
business  is  a  precious  art.  Wise  men  who  have  aban-
doned all  thought  of  the  fruit  which  is  produced  from
their  actions,  are  freed  from  the  chains  of  birth,  and
go  to  the  regions  of  eternal  happiness."'

From  these  and  other  passages  which  I  might  have
quoted,  we  learn  that  the  distinguishing  doctrines  of
the  Stoical  school  were  taught  in  India  many  ages
before  the  birth  of  Zeno,  and  inculcated  with  a  per-
suasive earnestness  nearly  resembling  that  of  Epicte-
tus ;  and  it  is  not  without  astonishment  that  we  find
the  tenets  of  this  manly  active  philosophy,  which  seem
to  be  formed  only  for  men  of  the  most  vigorous  spirit,
prescribed  as  the  rule  of  conduct  to  a  race  of  people
more  eminent  (as  is  generally  supposed)  for  the  gen-

■*  Baglivat-Geeta,  p.  44.  •  Ibid.  p.  40.

204  ANCIENT INDIA.

tleness  of  their  disposition  tlian  for  the  elevation  of
tlieir  minds.

3d,  Physics.  In  all  the  sciences  which  contribute
towards  extending  our  knowledge  of  nature,  in  ma-
thematics, mechanics,  and  astronomy,  arithmetic  is
of  elementary  use.  In  whatever  country  then  we
find  that  such  attention  has  been  paid  to  the  im-
provement of  arithmetic  as  to  render  its  operations
most  easy  and  correct,  we  may  presume  that  the
sciences  depending  upon  it  have  attained  a  superior
degree  of  perfection.  Such  improvement  of  this
science  we  find  in  India.  While,  among  the  Greeks
and  Romans,  the  only  method  used  for  the  nota-
tion of  numbers  was  by  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,
which  necessarily  rendered  arithmetical  calculation
extremely  tedious  and  operose,  the  Indians  had,  from
time  immemorial,  employed  for  the  same  purpose  the
ten  ciphers,  or  figures,  now  universally  known,  and
by  means  of  them  performed  every  operation  in  arith-
metic with  the  greatest  facility  and  expedition.  By
the  happy  invention  of  giving  a  different  value  to  each
figure  according  to  its  change  of  place,  no  more  than
ten  figures  are  needed  in  calculations  the  most  com-
plex, and  of  any  given  extent ;  and  arithmetic  is  the
most  perfect  of  all  the  sciences.  The  Arabians,  not
long  after  their  settlement  in  Spain,  introduced  this
mode  of  notation  into  Europe,  and  were  candid
enough  to  acknowledge  that  they  had  derived  the
knowledge  of  it  from  the  Indians.  Though  the  ad-
vantages of  this  mode  of  notation  are  obvious  and
great,  yet  so  slowly  do  mankind  adopt  new  inven-
tions, that  the  use  of  it  was  for  some  time  confined
to  science.  By  degrees,  however,  men  of  business
relinquished  the  former  cumbersome  method  of  com-
putation by  letters,  and  the  Indian  arithmetic  came

APPENDIX.  205

into  general  use  tliroughout  Europe.""  It  is  now  so
familiar  and  simple,  that  the  ingenuity  of  the  people,
to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the  invention,  is  less
observed  and  less  celebrated  than  it  merits.

The  astronomy  of  the  Indians  is  a  proof  still  more
conspicuous  of  their  extraordinary  progress  in  science.
The  attention  and  success  with  which  they  studied  the
motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  were  so  little  known
to  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  that  it  is  hardly  mention-
ed by  them  but  in  the  most  cursory  manner." But  as
soon  as  the  Mahomedans  established  an  intercourse
with  the  natives  of  India,  they  observed  and  cele-
brated the  superiority  of  their  astronomical  know-
ledge. Of  the  Europeans  who  visited  India  after  the
communication  with  it  by  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope
was  discovered,  M.  Bernier,  an  inquisitive  and  phi-
losophical traveller,  was  one  of  the  first  who  learned
that  the  Indians  had  long  applied  to  the  study  of
astronomy,  and  had  made  considerable  progress  in
that  science." His  information,  however,  seems  to
have  been  very  general  and  imperfect. We  are  in-
debted for  the  first  scientific  proof  of  the  great  pro-
ficiency of  the  Indians  in  astronomical  knowledge,  to
M.  de  la  Loubere,  who,  on  his  return  from
'  his  embassy  to  Siam,  brought  with  him  an
extract  from  a  Siamese  manuscript,  which  contained
tables  and  rules  for  calculating  the  places  of  the  sun
and  moon. The  manner  in  which  these  tables  were
constructed  rendered  the  principles  on  which  they
were  founded  extremely  obscure,  and  it  required  a
commentator  as  conversant  in  astronomical  calcula-
tion as  the  celebrated  Cassini,  to  explain  the  mean-
ing of  this  curious  fragment. The  epoch  of  the

ra  Montucla,  Hist,  des  Mathemat.  toni.  i.  p.  360,  &c.

"  Strabo,  lib.  xv.  p.  1047.  A. Dion.  Perieg.  v.  1173.

•  Voyages,  torn.  ii.  p.  145,  &c.

•206  ANCIENT INDIA.

Siamese  tables  corresponds  to  the  21st  of  March,
A.D.  G38.  Another  set  of  tables  was  transmitted
from  Chrisnabouram,  in  the  Carnatic,  the  epoch  of
which  answers  to  the  10th  of  March,  a.  d.  1491.
A  third  set  of  tables  came  from  Narsapour,  and  the
epoch  of  them  goes  no  farther  back  than  a.d.  1569.
The  fourth  and  most  curious  set  of  tables  was  pub-
lished by  M.  le  Gentil,  to  whom  they  were  commu-
nicated by  a  learned  Brahmin  of  Tirvalore,  a  small
town  on  the  Coromandel  coast,  about  twelve  miles
west  of  Negapatam.  The  epoch  of  these  tables  is  of
high  antiquity,  and  coincides  with  the  beginning  of
the  celebrated  era  of  the  Calyougham  or  Collee
Jogue,  which  commenced,  according  to  the  Indian
account,  three  thousand  one  hundred  and  two  years
before  the  birth  of  Christ/

These  four  sets  of  tables  have  been  examined  and
compared  by  M.  Bailly,  who  with  singular  felicity
of  genius  has  conjoined  an  uncommon  degree  of
eloquence  with  the  patient  researches  of  an  astrono-
mer, and  the  profound  investigations  of  a  geome-
trician. His  calculations  have  been  verified,  and  his
reasonings  have  been  illustrated  and  extended  by
Mr.  Playfair,  in  a  very  masterly  Dissertation,  pub-
lished in  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of
Edinburgh.''

Instead  of  attempting  to  follow  them  in  reasonings
and  calculations,  which  from  their  nature  are  often
abstruse  and  intricate,  I  shall  satisfy  myself  with
giving  such  a  general  view  of  them  as  is  suited  to  a
popular  work.  This,  I  hope,  may  convey  a  proper
idea  of  what  has  been  published  concerning  the
astronomy  of  India,  a  subject  too  curious  and  im-
portant to  be  omitted  in  any  account  of  the  state  of
science  in  that  country ; and,  without  interposing

I'  See  Note  LXVIl.  s  Vol.  ii.  j).  135.

APPENDIX.  207

any  judgment  of  my  own,  I  shall  leave  each  of  my
readers  to  form  his  own  opinion.

It  may  be  considered  as  the  general  result  of  all
the  inquiries,  reasonings,  and  calculations,  with  re-
spect to  Indian  astronomy,  which  have  hitherto  been
made  public,  "  That  the  motion  of  the  heavenly
bodies,  and  more  particularly  their  situation  at  the
commencement  of  the  different  epochs  to  which  the
four  sets  of  tables  refer,  are  ascertained  with  great
accuracy ;  and  that  many  of  the  elements  of  their
calculations,  especially  for  very  remote  ages,  are
verified  by  an  astonishing  coincidence  with  the  tables
of  the  modern  astronomy  of  Europe,  when  improved
by  the  latest  and  most  nice  deductions  from  the  theory
of  gravitation."  These  conclusions  are  rendered  pe-
culiarly interesting,  by  the  evidence  which  they  af-
ford of  an  advancement  in  science  unexampled  in  the
history  of  rude  nations.  The  Indian  Brahmins,  who
annually  circulate  a  kind  of  almanack,  containing
astronomical  predictions  of  some  of  the  more  re-
markable phenomena  in  the  heavens,  such  as  the  new
and  full  moons,  the  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon,  are
in  possession  of  certain  methods  of  calculation,  which,
upon  examination,  are  found  to  involve  in  them  a
very  extensive  system  of  astronomical  knowledge.
M.  le  Gentil,  a  French  astronomer,  had  an  oppor-
tunity, while  in  India,  of  observing  two  eclipses  of
the  moon  which  had  been  calculated  by  a  Brahmin,
and  he  found  the  error  in  either  to  be  very  incon-
siderable.

The  accuracy  of  these  results  is  less  surprising
than  the  justness  and  scientific  nature  of  the  prin-
ciples on  which  the  tables,  by  which  they  calculate,
are  constructed.  For  the  method  of  predicting
eclipses,  which  is  followed  by  the  Brahmins,  is  of  a
kind  altogether  different  from  any  that  has  been

208  ANCIENT INDIA.

found  in  the  possession  of  rude  nations  in  the  infancy
of  astronomy.  In  Chaldea,  and  even  in  Greece,  in
the  early  ages,  the  mediod  of  calculating  eclipses  was
founded  on  the  observation  of  a  certain  period  or
cycle,  after  which  the  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon
return  nearly  in  the  same  order  ;  but  there  was  no
attempt  to  analyze  the  different  circumstances  on
which  the  eclipse  depends,  or  to  deduce  its  pheno-
mena from  a  precise  knowledge  of  the  motions  of
the  sun  and  moon.  This  last  was  reserved  for  a
more  advanced  period,  when  geometry,  as  well  as
arithmetic,  were  called  in  to  the  assistance  of  astro-
nomy, and,  if  it  was  attempted  at  all,  seems  not  to
have  been  attempted  with  success  before  the  age  of
Hipparchus.  It  is  a  method  of  this  superior  kind,
founded  on  principles  and  on  an  analysis  of  the  mo-
tions of  the  sun  and  moon,  which  guides  the  calcu-
lations of  the  Brahmins,  and  they  never  employ  any
of  the  grosser  estimations,  which  were  the  pride  of
the  first  astronomers  in  Egypt  and  Chaldea.

Tlie  Brahmins  of  the  present  times  are  guided  in
their  calculations  by  these  principles,  though  they  do
not  now  understand  them ;  they  know  only  the  use
of  the  tables  which  are  in  their  possession,  but  are
unacquainted  with  the  method  of  their  construction.
The  Brahmin  who  visited  M.  le  Gentil  at  Pondi-
cherry,  and  instructed  him  in  the  use  of  the  Indian
tables,  had  no  knowledge  of  the  principles  of  his  art,
and  discovered  no  curiosity  concerning  the  nature  of
M.  le  Gentil's  observations,  or  about  the  instruments
which  he  employed.  He  was  equally  ignorant  with
respect  to  the  authors  of  these  tables  :  and  whatever
is  to  be  learned  concerning  the  time  or  place  of  their
construction,  must  be  deduced  from  the  tables  them-
selves.  One  set  of  these  tables  (as  was  formerly  ob-
served) professes  to  be  as  old  as  the  beginning  of  the

APPENDIX.  209

Calyougham,  or  to  go  back  to  the  year  3102  before
the  Christian  era ;  but  as  nothing  (it  may  be  sup-
posed) is  easier  than  for  an  astronomer  to  give  to  his
tables  what  date  he  pleases,  and  by  calculating  back-
wards, to  establish  an  epoch  of  any  assigned  an-
tiquity, the  pretensions  of  the  Indian  astronomy  to
so  remote  an  origin  are  not  to  be  admitted  without
examination.

That  examination  has  accordingly  been  instituted
by  M.  Bailly,  and  the  result  of  his  inquiries  is  as-
serted to  be,  that  the  astronomy  of  India  is  founded
on  observations  which  cannot  be  of  a  much  later  date
than  the  period  above-mentioned.  For  the  Indian
tables  represent  the  state  of  the  heavens  at  that  period
with  astonishing  exactness  ;  and  there  is  between
them  and  the  calculations  of  our  modern  astronomy
such  a  conformity  with  respect  to  those  ages,  as
could  result  from  nothing,  but  from  the  authors  of
the  former  having  accurately  copied  from  nature,  and
having  delineated  truly  the  face  of  the  heavens,  in
the  age  wherein  they  lived.  In  order  to  give  some
idea  of  the  high  degree  of  accuracy  in  the  Indian
tables,  I  shall  select  a  few  instances  of  it,  out  of  many
that  might  be  produced.  The  place  of  the  sun  for
the  astronomical  epoch  at  the  beginning  of  the  Ca-
lyougham,  as  stated  in  the  tables  of  Tirvalore,  is  only
forty-seven  minutes  greater  than  by  the  tables  of  M.
de  la  Caille,  when  corrected  by  the  calculations  of
M.  de  la  Grange.  The  place  of  the  moon,  in  the
same  tables,  for  the  same  epoch,  is  only  thirty-seven
minutes  different  from  the  tables  of  Mayer.  The
tables  of  Ptolemy,  for  that  epoch,  are  erroneous  no
less  than  ten  degrees  with  respect  to  the  place  of  the
sun,  and  eleven  degrees  with  respect  to  that  of  the
moon.  The  acceleration  of  the  moon's  motion,  reckon-
ing from  the  beginning  of  the  Calyougham  to  the

VOL.  IX.  V

210  ANCIENT INDIA.

present  time,  agrees,  in  the  Indian  tables,  with  those
of  Mayer  to  a  single  minute.  The  inequality  of  the
sun's  motion,  and  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  which
were  both  g-reater  in  former  ages  than  they  are  now,
as  represented  in  the  tables  of  Tirvalore,  are  almost
of  the  precise  quantity  that  the  theory  of  gravitation
assigns  to  them  3000  years  before  the  Christian  era.
It  is  accordingly  for  those  very  remote  ages  (about
5000  years  distant  from  the  present)  that  their  astro-
nomy is  most  accurate,  and  the  nearer  we  come  down
to  our  own  times,  the  conformity  of  its  results  with
ours  diminishes.  It  seems  reasonable  to  suppose,
that  the  time  when  its  rules  are  most  accurate,  is  the
time  when  the  observations  were  made  on  which
these  rules  are  founded.

In  support  of  this  conclusion,  M.  Bailly  maintains,
that  none  of  all  the  astronomical  systems  of  Greece
or  Persia,  or  of  Tartary,  from  some  of  which  it  might
be  suspected  that  the  Indian  tables  were  copied,  can
be  made  to  agree  with  them,  especially  when  we  cal-
.  culate  for  very  remote  ages.  The  superior  perfec-
tion of  the  Indian  tables  becomes  always  more  con-
spicuous as  we  go  farther  back  into  antiquity.  This
shews,  likewise,  how  difficult  it  is  to  construct  any
astronomical  table  which  will  ao^ree  with  the  state  of
the  heavens  for  a  period  so  remote  from  the  time
when  the  tables  were  constructed,  as  four  or  five
thousand  years.  It  is  only  from  astronomy  in  its
most  advanced  state,  such  as  it  has  attained  in  modern
Europe,  that  such  accuracy  is  to  be  expected.

When  an  estimate  is  endeavoured  to  be  made  of
the  geometrical  skill  necessary  for  the  construction  of
the  Indian  tables  and  rules,  it  is  found  to  be  very
considerable  ;  and,  beside  the  knowledge  of  elemen-
tary geometry,  it  must  have  required  plain  and  sphe-
rical trigonometry,  or  something  equivalent  to  them,

APPENDIX.  211

together  with  certain  methods  of  approximating  to
the  values  of  geometrical  magnitudes,  which  seem  to
rise  very  far  above  the  elements  of  any  of  those
sciences.  Some  of  these  last  mark  also  very  clearly
(although  this  has  not  been  observed  by  M.  Bailly),
that  the  places  to  which  these  tables  are  adapted,
must  be  situated  between  the  tropics,  because  they
are  altogether  inapplicable  at  a  greater  distance  from
the  equator.

From  this  long  induction,  the  conclusion  which
seems  obviously  to  result  is,  that  the  Indian  astro-
nomy is  founded  upon  observations  which  were  made
at  a  very  early  period  ;  and  when  we  consider  the
exact  agreement  of  the  places  which  they  assign  to
the  sun  and  moon,  and  other  heavenly  bodies,  at  that
epoch,  with  those  deduced  from  the  tables  of  De  la
Caille  and  Mayer,  it  strongly  confirms  the  truth  of
the  position  which  I  have  been  endeavouring  to  esta-
blish concerning  the  early  and  high  state  of  civiliza-
tion in  India.

Before  I  quit  this  subject,  there  is  one  circum-
stance which  merits  particular  attention.  All  the
knowledge  which  we  have  hitherto  acquired  of  the
principles  and  conclusions  of  Indian  astronomy  is
derived  from  the  southern  part  of  the  Carnatic,  and
the  tables  are  adapted  to  places  situated  between  the
meridian  of  Cape  Comorin,  and  that  which  passes
through  the  eastern  part  of  Ceylon."  The  Brahmins
in  the  Carnatic  acknowledge  that  their  science  of
astronomy  was  derived  from  the  north,  and  that  their
method  of  calculation  is  denominated  Fakiam,  or
New,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  Siddajitam,  or  ancient
method  established  at  Benares,  which  they  allow  to
be  much  more  perfect ;  and  we  learn  from  Abul  Fazel,
that  all  the  astronomers  of  Indostan  rely  entirely  upon

>■  Bailly,  Dis.  Prelim,  p.  xvii.

p  2

212  ANCIENT INDIA.

the  precepts  contained  in  a  book  called  Soorej  Sudhant,
composed  in  a  very  remote  period."  It  is  manifestly
from  this  book  that  the  method  to  which  the  Brahmins
of  the  south  gave  the  name  of  Siddantam  is  taken.
Benares  has  been  from  time  immemorial  the  Athens
of  India,  the  residence  of  the  most  learned  Brahmins,
and  the  seat  both  of  science  and  literature.  There,
it  is  highly  probable,  whatever  remains  of  the  ancient
astronomical  knowledge  and  discoveries  of  the  Brah-
mins is  still  preserved.'  In  an  enlightened  age  and
nation,  and  during  a  reign  distinguished  by  a  suc-
cession of  the  most  splendid  and  successful  under-
takings to  extend  the  knowledge  of  nature,  it  is  an
object  worthy  of  public  attention,  to  take  measures
for  obtaining  possession  of  all  that  time  has  spared
of  the  philosophy  and  inventions  of  the  most  early
and  most  highly  civilized  people  of  the  East.  It  is
with  peculiar  advantages  Great  Britain  may  engage
in  this  laudable  undertaking.  Benares  is  subject  to
its  dominion ;  the  confidence  of  the  Brahmins  has
been  so  far  gained  as  to  render  them  communica-
tive ;  some  of  our  countrymen  are  acquainted  with
that  sacred  language  in  which  the  mysteries  both  of
religion  and  of  science  are  recorded  ;  movement  and
activity  has  been  given  to  a  spirit  of  inquiry  through-
out all  the  British  establishments  in  India ;  persons
who  visited  that  country  with  other  views,  though
engaged  in  occupations  of  a  very  different  kind,  are
now  carrying  on  scientific  and  literary  researches
with  ardour  and  success.  Nothing  seems  now  to  be
wanting  but  that  those  intrusted  with  the  adminis-
tration of  the  British  empire  in  India,  should  enable
some  person  capable,  by  his  talents  and  liberality  of
sentiment,  of  investigating  and  explaining  the  more

•  Ayeen  Akbery,  Hi.  p.  8.
'  M.  Bernier,  in  the  year  1668,  saw  a  large  hall  in  Benares  filled  with  the
works  of  the  Indian  philosophers,  physicians,  and  poets. Voy.  ii.  p.  liB.

APPENDIX.  215^

abstruse  parts  of  Indian  philosophy,  to  devote  his
whole  time  to  that  important  object.  Thus  Great
Britain  may  have  the  glory  of  exploring  fully  that
extensive  field  of  unknown  science,  which  the  acade-
micians of  France  had  the  merit  of  first  opening  to
the  people  of  Europe."

VI.  The  last  evidence  which  I  shall  mention  of  the
early  and  high  civilization  of  the  ancient  Indians,  is
deduced  from  the  consideration  of  their  religious  tenets
and  practices.  The  institutions  of  religion,  publicly
established  in  all  the  extensive  countries  stretching
from  the  banks  of  the  Indus  to  Cape  Comorin,  present
to  view  an  aspect  nearly  similar.  They  form  a  regu-
lar and  complete  system  of  superstition,  strengthened
and  upheld  by  every  thing  which  can  excite  the  reve-
rence and  secure  the  attachment  of  the  people.  The
temples  consecrated  to  their  deities  are  magnificent,
and  adorned  not  only  with  rich  offerings,  but  with  the
most  exquisite  works  in  painting  and  sculpture,  which
the  artists,  highest  in  estimation  among  them,  were
capable  of  executing.  The  rites  and  ceremonies  of
their  worship  are  pompous  and  splendid,  and  the
performance  of  them  not  only  mingles  in  all  the  more
momentous  transactions  of  common  life,  but  consti-
tutes an  essential  part  of  them.  The  Brahmins,  who,
as  ministers  of  religion,  preside  in  all  its  functions,
are  elevated  above  every  other  order  of  men,  by  an
origin  deemed  not  only  more  noble,  but  acknowledged
to  be  sacred.  They  have  established  among  them-
selves a  regular  hierarchy  and  gradation  of  ranks,
which,  by  securing  subordination  in  their  own  order,
adds  weight  to  their  authority,  and  gives  them  a  more
absolute  dominion  over  the  minds  of  the  people.
This  dominion  they  support  by  the  command  of  the
immense  revenues  with  which  the  liberality  of  princes,

u  See  Note  LXYIII,

214  ANCIENT INDIA.

and  the  zeal  of  pilgrims  and  devotees,  have  enriched
their  pagodas/

It  is  far  from  my  intention  to  enter  into  any  minute
detail  with  respect  to  this  vast  and  complicated  sys-
tem of  superstition. An  attempt  to  enumerate  the
multitude  of  deities  which  are  the  objects  of  adoration
in  India ;  to  describe  the  splendour  of  worship  in
their  pagodas,  and  the  immense  variety  of  their  rites
and  ceremonies ; to  recount  the  various  attributes
and  functions  which  the  craft  of  priests,  or  the  cre-
dulity of  the  people,  have  ascribed  to  their  divinities;
especially  if  I  were  to  accompany  all  this  with  a
review  of  the  numerous  and  often  fanciful  specula-
tions and  theories  of  learned  men  on  this  subject,
would  require  a  work  of  great  magnitude. I  shall,
therefore,  on  this,  as  on  some  of  the  former  heads,
confine  myself  to  the  precise  point  which  I  have  kept
uniformly  in  view,  and  by  considering  the  state  of
religion  in  India,  I  shall  endeavour  not  only  to  throw
additional  light  on  the  state  of  civilization  in  that
country,  but  I  flatter  myself  that,  at  the  same  time,
I  shall  be  able  to  give  what  may  be  considered  as  a
sketch  and  outline  of  the  history  and  progress  of  su-
perstition and  false  religion  in  every  region  of  the
earth.

I.  We  may  observe,  that,  in  every  country,  the
received  mythology,  or  system  of  superstitious  belief,
with  all  the  rites  and  ceremonies  which  it  prescribes,
is  formed  in  the  infancy  of  society,  in  rude  and  bar-
barous times.  True  religion  is  as  different  from  su-
perstition in  its  origin,  as  in  its  nature.  The  former
is  the  offspring  of  reason  cherished  by  science,  and
attains  to  its  highest  perfection  in  ages  of  light  and
improvement.  Ignorance  and  fear  give  birth  to  the
latter,  and  it  is  always  in  the  darkest  periods  that  it

'  Roger  Porte  Ouverte,  p.  3D.  209,  &.c.

APPENDIX.  215

acquires  the  greatest  vigour. That  numerous  part  of
the  human  species  whose  lot  is  labour,  whose  prin-
cipal and  almost  sole  occupation  is  to  secure  subsis-
tence, has  neither  leisure  nor  capacity  for  entering
into  that  path  of  intricate  and  refined  speculation,
which  conducts  to  the  knowledge  of  the  principles
of  rational  religion. When  the  intellectual  powers
are  just  beginning  to  unfold,  and  their  first  feeble
exertions  are  directed  towards  a  few  objects  of  pri-
mary necessity  and  use ;  when  the  faculties  of  the
mind  are  so  limited  as  not  to  have  formed  general  and
abstract  ideas  ;  when  language  is  so  barren  as  to  be
destitute  of  names  to  distinguish  any  thing  not  per-
ceivable by  some  of  the  senses ;  it  is  preposterous  to
expect  that  men  should  be  capable  of  tracing  the  re-
lation between  effects  and  their  causes  ;  or  to  suppose
that  they  should  rise  from  the  contemplation  of  the
former  to  the  discovery  of  the  latter,  and  form  just
conceptions  of  one  Supreme  Being,  as  the  Creator
and  Governor  of  the  universe. The  idea  of  creation
is  so  familiar,  wherever  the  mind  is  enlarged  by  sci-
ence, and  illuminated  by  revelation,  that  we  seldom
reflect  how  profound  and  abstruse  the  idea  is,  or  con-
sider what  progress  man  must  have  made  in  observa-
tion and  research,  before  he  could  arrive  at  any  dis-
tinct knowledge  of  this  elementary  principle  in  reli-
gion. But  even  in  its  rude  state,  the  human  mind,
formed  for  religion,  opens  to  the  reception  of  ideas,
which  are  destined,  when  corrected  and  refined,  to  be
the  great  source  of  consolation  amidst  the  calamities
of  life. These  apprehensions,  however,  are  originally
indistinct  and  perplexed,  and  seem  to  be  suggested
rather  by  the  dread  of  impending  evils,  than  to  flow '
from  gratitude  for  blessings  received. While  nature
holds  on  her  course  with  uniform  and  undisturbed
regularity,  men  enjoy  the  benefits  resulting  from  it,

216  ANCIENT INDIA.

without  much  inquiry concerning  its  cause. But
every  deviation  from  this  regular  course  rouses  and
astonishes  them. V/hen  they  behold  events  to  which
they  are  not  accustomed,  they  search  for  the  causes  of
them  with  eager  curiosity. Their  understanding  is
often  unable  to  discover  these,  but  imagination,  a
more  forward  and  ardent  faculty  of  the  mind,  decides
without  hesitation. It  ascribes  the  extraordinary  oc-
currences in  nature  to  the  influence  of  invisible  beings,
and  supposes  the thunder,  the  hurricane,  and the
earthquake, to be the immediate efl"ect of their
ao-ency. Alarmed  by  these  natural  evils,  and  ex-
posed, at  the  same  time,  to  many  dangers  and  disas-
ters, which  are  unavoidable  in  the  early  and  imcivi-
lized  state  of  society,  men  have  recourse  for  protec-
tion to  power  superior  to  what  is  human,  and  the  first
rites  or  practices  which  bear  any  resemblance  to  acts
of  religion,  have  it  for  their  object  to avert  evils
which  they  suffer  or  dread  .^

11.  As  superstition  and  false  religion  take  their
rise  in  every  country,  from  nearly  the  same  sentiments
and  apprehensions,  the  invisible  beings,  who  are  the
first  objects  of  veneration,  have  every  where  a  near
resemblance.  To  conceive  an  idea  of  one  superin-
tending mind,  capable  of  arranging  and  directing  all
the  various  operations  of  nature,  seems  to  be  an  at-
tainment far  beyond  the  powers  of  man  in  the  more
early  stages  of  his  progress.  His  theories,  more  suited
to  the  limited  sphere  of  his  own  observation,  are  not
so  refined.  He  supposes  that  there  is  a  distinct  cause
of  every  remarkable  effect,  and  ascribes  to  a  separate
power  every  event  which  attracts  his  attention,  or
excites  his  terror. He  fancies  that  it  is  the  province

y  In  ihe  second  volume  of  the  History  of  America,  p.  183,  of  fifth  edition,  I
gave  nearly  a  similar  account  of  the  origin  of  false  religion.  Instead  of  labour-
ing to  convey  the  same  ideas  in  dillerent  language,  I  have  inserted  here  some
paragraphs  in  the  same  words  I  then  used.

APPENDIX.  217

of  one  deity  to  point  the  lightning,  and.  with  an
awful  sound,  to  hurl  the  irresistible  thunderbolt  at
the  head  of  the  guilty;  that  another  rides  in  the
whirlwind,  and,  at  his  pleasure,  raises  or  stills  the
tempest ;  that  a  third  rules  over  the  ocean ;  that  a
fourtli  is  the  god  of  battles ;  that  while  malevolent
powers  scatter  the  seeds  of  animosity  and  discord,
and  kindle  in  the  breast  those  angry  passions  which
give  rise  to  war,  and  terminate  in  destruction,  others
of  a  nature  more  benign,  by  inspiring  the  hearts  of
men  with  kindness  and  love,  strengthen  the  bond  of
social  union,  augment  the  happiness,  and  increase
the  number  of  the  human  race.

Without descending farther into detail, or at-
tempting to enumerate that infinite multitude  of
deities  to  which  the  fancy  or  the  fears  of  men  have
allotted  the  direction  of  the  several  departments  in
nature,  we  may  recognise  a  striking  uniformity  of
features in  the  systems  of  superstition  established
throughout  every  part  of  the  earth. The  less  men
have  advanced  beyond  the  state  of  savage  life,  and
the  more  slender  their  acquaintance  with  the  opera-
tions of  nature,  the  fewer  were  their  deities  in  num-
ber, and  the  more  compendious  was  their  theological
creed  ;  but  as  their  mind  gradually  opened,  and  their
knowledge  continued  to  extend,  the  objects  of  their
veneration  multiplied,  and  the  articles  of  their  faith
became  more  numerous. This  took  place  remarkably
among  the  Greeks  in  Europe,  and  the  Indians  in
Asia,  the  two  people  in  those  great  divisions  of  the
earth,  who  were  most  early  civilized,  and  to  whom,
for  that  reason,  I  shall  confine  all  my  observations.
They  believed,  that  over  every  movement  in  the  na-
tural world,  and  over  every  function  in  civil  or  do-
mestic life,  even  the  most  common  and  trivial,  a  par-
ticular deity  presided. The  manner  in  which  they

218  ANCIENT INDIA.

arranged  the  stations  of  these  superintending-  powers,
and  the  offices  which  they  allotted  to  each,  were  in
many  respects  the  same.  What  is  supposed  to  be
performed  by  the  power  of  Jupiter,  of  Neptune,  of
iEolus,  of  Mars,  of  Venus,  according  to  the  mytho-
logy of  the  West,  is  ascribed  in  the  East  to  the  agency
of  Agnee,  the  god  of  fire ;  Varoon,  the  god  of  oceans ;
Vayoo,  the  god  of  wind  -^  Cama,  the  god  of  love ;
and  a  variety  of  other  divinities.

The  ignorance  and  credulity  of  men  having  thus
peopled  the  heavens  with  imaginary  beings,  they
ascribed  to  them  such  qualities  and  actions  as  they
deemed  suitable  to  their  character  and  functions.
It  is  one  of  the  benefits  derived  from  true  religion,
that  by  setting  before  men  a  standard  of  perfect  ex-
cellence, which  they  should  have  always  in  their  eye,
and  endeavour  to  resemble,  it  may  be  said  to  bring
down  virtue  from  heaven  to  earth,  and  to  form  the
human  mind  after  a  divine  model.  In  fabricating
systems  of  false  religion,  the  procedure  is  directly  the
reverse.  Men  ascribe  to  the  beings  whom  they  have
deified,  such  actions  as  they  themselves  admire  and
celebrate.  The  qualities  of  the  gods  who  are  the
objects  of  adoration,  are  copied  from  those  of  the
worshippers  who  bow  down  before  them ;  and  thus
many  of  the  imperfections  peculiar  to  men,  have
found  admittance  into  heaven.  By  knowing  the
adventures  and  attributes  of  any  false  deity,  we  can
pronounce,  with  some  degree  of  certainty,  what  must
have  been  the  state  of  society  and  manners  when  he
was  elevated  to  that  dignity.  The  mythology  of
Greece  plainly  indicates  the  character  of  the  age  in
which  it  was  formed.  It  must  have  been  in  times  of
the  greatest  licentiousness,  anarchy,  and  violence,
that  divinities  of  the  highest  rank  could  be  supposed

»  Baghvat-Gceta,  p.  94.

APPENDIX.  219

capable  of  perpetrating;  actions,  or  of  being-  influenced
by  passions, which, in  more enlightened periods,
would  be  deemed  a  disgrace  to  human  nature ; it
must  have  been  when  the  earth  was  still  infested
with  destructive  monsters,  and  mankind,  under  forms
of  government  too  feeble  to  afford  them  protection,
were  exposed  to  the  depredations  of  lawless  robbers,
or  the  cruelty  of  savage  oppressors,  that  the  well-
known  labours  of  Hercules,  by  which  he  was  raised
from  earth  to  heaven,  could  have  been  necessary,  or
would  have  been deemed  so highly meritorious.
The  same  observation  is  applicable  to  the  ancient  my-
thology of  India. Many  of  the  adventures  and  ex-
ploits of  the  Indian  deities  are  suited  to  the  rudest  ages
of  turbulence  and  rapine. It  was  to  check  disorder,
to  redress  wrongs,  and  to  clear  the  earth  of  power-
ful oppressors,  that  Vishnou,  a  divinity  of  the  highest
order,  is  said  to  have  become  successively  incarnate,
and  to  have  appeared  on  earth  in  various  forms. ^

III.  The  character  and  functions  of  those  deities
which  superstition  created  to  itself  as  objects  of  its  ve-
neration, having  everywhere  a  near  resemblance,  the
rites  of  their  worship  were  everywhere  extremely  si-
milar. Accordingly,  as  deities  were  distinguished,
either  by  ferocit}?  of  character  or  licentiousness  of  con-
duct, it  is  obvious  what  services  must  have  been
deemed  most  acceptable  to  them.  In  order  to  con-
ciliate the  favour,  or  to  appease  the  wrath  of  the
former,  fasts,  mortifications,  and  penances,  all  rigid,
and  many  of  them  excruciating  to  an  extreme  degree,
were  the  means  employed.  Their  altars  were  always
bathed  in  blood ;  the  most  costly  victims  were  offered ;
whole  hecatombs  were  slaughtered  ;  even  human  sa-
crifices were  not  unknown,  and  were  held  to  be  the
most  powerful  expiations. In  order  to  gain  the  good

*  Voyage  de  Sonnerat,  toin.  i.  p.  158,  &c.

220  AiNCIENT INDIA.

will  of  the  deities  of  the  latter  description,  recourse
was  had  to  institutions  of  a  very  ditferent  kind,  to
splendid  ceremonies,  gay  festivals,  heightened  by  all
the  pleasures  of  poetry,  music,  and  dancing,  but  often
terminating  in  scenes  of  indulgence  too  indecent  to  be
described.  Of  both  these,  instances  occur  in  the  rites
of  Greek  and  Roman  worship,  which  I  need  not  men-
tion to  my  learned  readers. "^  In  the  East  the  cere-
monial of  superstition  is  nearly  the  same.  The  man-
ners of  the  Indians,  though  distinguished  from  the
time  when  they  became  known  to  the  people  of  the
West,  for  mildness,  seem,  in  a  more  remote  period,  to
have  been  in  a  oreater  degree  similar  to  those  of  other
nations.  Several  of  their  deities  were  fierce  and  aw-
ful in  their  nature,  and  were  represented  in  their  tem-
ples under  the  most  terrific  forms.  If  we  did  not  know
the  dominion  of  superstition  over  the  human  mind,  we
should  hardly  believe,  that  a  ritual  of  worship  suited
to  the  character  of  such  deities  could  have  been  esta-
blished among  a  gentle  people.  Every  act  of  religion,
performed  in  honour  of  some  of  their  gods,  seems  to
have  been  prescribed  by  fear.  Mortifications  and
penances  so  rigorous,  so  painful,  and  so  long  con-
tinued, that  we  read  the  accounts  of  them  with  asto-
nishment and  horror,  were  multipl  ied .  Repugnant  as
it  is  to  the  feelings  of  a  Hindoo  to  shed  the  blood  of
any  creature  that  has  life,  many  different  animals,  even
the  most  useful,  the  horse  and  the  cow,  were  offered  up
as  victims  upon  the  altars  of  some  of  their  gods  f  and
what  is  still  more  strange,  the  pagodas  of  the  East
were  polluted  with  human  sacrifices  as  well  as  the
temples  of  the  West.'*  But  religious  institutions,  and
ceremonies  of  a  less  severe  kind,  were  more  adapted

''  Strabo,  lib.  viii.  p.  581.  A. Lib.  xii.  p.  837.  C.
'Ayeen  Akbery,  vol.  iii.  p.  241. Roger  Porte  Ouverte,  p.  251.
^  Hceto-pades,  p.  185 — 322. Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  i.  p.  265. \'oyage
tic  Sonncrat,  vol.  i.  p.  207. Roger,  p.  251.

APPENDIX.  -221

to  the  genius  of  a  people,  formed  by  the  extreme  sen-
sibility both  of  their  mental  and  corporeal  frame,  to  an
immoderate  love  of  pleasure.  In  no  part  of  the  earth  was
a  connexion  between  the  gratification  of  sensual  desire
and  the  rites  of  public  religion,  displayed  with  more
avowed  indecency  than  in  India.  In  every  pagoda
there  was  a  band  of  women  set  apart  for  the  service  of
the  idol  honoured  there,  and  devoted  from  their  early
years  to  a  life  of  pleasure;  for  which  the  Brahmins
prepared  them  by  an  education  which  added  so  many
elegant  accomplishments  to  their  natural  charms,  that
what  they  gained  by  their  profligacy,  often  brought  no
inconsiderable  accession  to  the  revenue  of  the  temple.
In  every  function  performed  in  the  pagodas,  as  well  as
in  every  public  procession,  it  is  the  office  of  these  wo-
men to  dance  before  the  idol,  and  to  sing  hymns  in  his
praise ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  say,  whether  they  tres-
pass most  against  decency  by  the  gestures  they  exhibit,
or  by  the  verses  which  they  recite.  The  walls  of  the
pagoda  are  covered  with  paintings,  in  a  style  no  less
indelicate  ;^  and  in  the  innermost  recess  of  the  temple,
for  it  would  be  profane  to  call  it  the  sanctuary,  is
placed  the  lingam,  an  emblem  of  productive  power  too
gross  to  be  explained.^

IV.  How  absurd  soever  the  articles  of  faith  may
be  which  superstition  has  adopted,  or  how  unhal-
lowed the  rites  which  it  prescribes,  the  former  are
received  in  every  age  and  country  with  unhesitating
assent,  by  the  great  body  of  the  people,  and  the  lat-
ter observed  with  scrupulous  exactness.  In  our  rea-
sonings concerning  religious  opinions  and  practices
which  differ  widely  from  our  own,  we  are  extremely
apt  to  err. Having  been  instructed  ourselves  in  the

«  Voyage  de  Gentil.  vol.  i.  p.  244.  260.  Preface  to  Code  of  Gentoo  Laws,
p.  Ivii.

f  Roger  Porte  Ou  verte,  p.  157.  Voyage  de  Sonnerat,  vol.  i.  41.  175.  Sketches,
Tol.  i.  p,  203. Hamilton's  Travels,  vol.  i.  p. 37  J.

222  ANCIENT INDIA.

principles  of  a  religion,  worthy  in  every  respect  of
that  divine  wisdom  by  which  they  were  dictated,  we
frequently  express  wonder  at  the  credulity  of  na-
tions in  embracing  systems  of  belief  which  appear  to
us  so  directly  repugnant  to  right  reason,  and  some-
times suspect  that  tenets  so  wild  and  extravagant  do
not  really  gain  credit  with  them.  But  experience
may  satisfy  us,  that  neither  our  wonder  nor  suspi-
cions are  well  founded.  No  article  of  the  public  re-
ligion was  called  in  question  by  those  people  of  an-
cient Europe,  with  whose  history  we  are  best  ac-
quainted, and  no  practice  which  it  enjoined  appeared
improper  to  them.  On  the  other  hand,  every  opinion
that  tended  to  diminish  the  reverence  of  men  for  the
gods  of  their  country,  or  to  alienate  them  from  their
worship,  excited  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  that
indignant  zeal  which  is  natural  to  every  people  at-
tached to  their  religion  by  a  firm  persuasion  of  its
truth.  The  attachment  of  the  Indians,  both  in  an-
cient and  modern  times,  to  the  tenets  and  rites  of
their  ancestors,  has  been,  if  possible,  still  greater.
In  no  country,  of  which  we  have  any  account,  were
precautions  taken  with  so  much  solicitude  to  place
tlie  great  body  of  the  people  beyond  the  reach  of
any  temptation  to  doubt  or  disbelief.  They  not  only
were  prevented  (as  I  have  already  observed  the
great  bulk  of  mankind  must  always  be,  in  every
country)  from  entering  upon  any  speculative  in-
quiry, by  the  various  occupations  of  active  and  la-
borious life,  but  any  attempt  to  extend  the  sphere  of
their  knowledge  was  expressly  prohibited.  If  one
of  the  Sooder  cast,  by  far  the  most  numerous  of  the
four  into  which  the  whole  nation  was  divided,  pre-
sumed to  read  any  portion  of  the  sacred  books,  in
which  all  the  science  known  in  India  is  contained,
he  was  severely  punished  ;  if  he  ventured  to  get  it  by

APPENDIX.  223

heart,  he  was  put  to  death.^  To  aspire  after  any
higher  degree  of  knowledge  than  the  Brahmins  have
been  pleased  to  teach,  would  be  deemed  not  only-
presumption  but  impiety.  Even  the  higher  casts
depended  entirely  for  instruction  on  the  Brahmins,
and  could  acquire  no  portion  of  science  but  what
they  deigned  to  communicate.  By  means  of  this,  a
devout  reverence  was  universally  maintained  for
those  institutions  which  were  considered  as  sacred ;
and  thoup-h  the  faith  of  the  Hindoos  has  been  often
tried  by  severe  persecutions,  excited  by  the  bigotry
of  their  Mahomedan  conquerors,  no  people  ever  ad-
hered with  greater  fidelity  to  the  tenets  and  rites  of
their  ancestors.*"

V.  We  may  observe,  that  when  science  and  philo-
sophy are  diffused  through  any  country,  the  system
of  superstition  is  subjected  to  a  scrutiny  from  which
it  was  formerly  exempt,  and  opinions  spread  which
imperceptibly  diminish  its  influence  over  the  minds
of  men.  A  free  and  full  examination  is  always  fa-
vourable to  truth,  but  fatal  to  error.  What  is  re-
ceived with  implicit  faith  in  ages  of  darkness,  will
excite  contempt  or  indignation  in  an  enlightened
period.  The  history  of  religion  in  Greece  and  Italy,
the  only  countries  of  Europe  which,  in  ancient  times,
were  distinguished  for  their  attainments  in  science,
confirms  the  truth  of  this  observation.  As  soon  as
science  made  such  progress  in  Greece  as  rendered
men  capable  of  discerning  the  wisdom,  the  foresight,
and  the  goodness  displayed  in  creating,  preserving,
and  governing  the  world,  they  must  have  perceived,
that  the  characters  of  the  divinities  which  were  pro-
posed as  the  objects  of  adoration  in  their  temples,
could  not  entitle  them  to  be  considered  as  the  pre-

S  Code  of  Gentoo  Laws,  ch.  xxi.  §  7.
•»  Orme's  Fragment,  p.  102. Sonnerat,  vol.  i.  p.  194.

224  ANCIENT INDIA.

siding  powers  in  nature.  A  poet  might  address  Ju-
piter as  the  father  of  gods  and  men,  who  governed
both  by  eternal  laws  ;  but  to  a  philosopher,  the  son
of  Saturn,  the  story  of  whose  life  is  a  series  of  violent
and  licentious  deeds,  which  would  render  any  man
odious  or  despicable,  must  have  appeared  altogether
unworthy  of  that  station.  The  nature  of  the  reli-
gious service  celebrated  in  their  temples  must  have
been  no  less  oft'ensive  to  an  enlio^htened  mind,  than
the  character  of  the  deities  in  honour  of  whom  it
was  performed.  Instead  of  institutions,  tending  to
reclaim  men  from  vice,  to  form  or  to  strengthen  habits
of  virtue,  or  to  elevate  the  mind  to  a  sense  of  its  pro-
per dignity,  superstition  either  occupied  its  votaries
in  frivolous  unmeaning  ceremonies,  or  prescribed
rites,  which  operated,  with  fatal  influence,  in  inflam-
ing the  passions  and  corrupting  the  heart.

It  is  with  timidity,  however,  and  caution,  that
men  venture  to  attack  the  established  relioion  of
their  country,  or  to  impugn  opinions  which  have
been  long  held  sacred.  At  first,  some  philosophers
endeavoured,  by  allegorical  interpretations  and  re-
fined comments,  to  explain  the  popular  mythology,
as  if  it  had  been  a  description  of  the  powers  of  na-
ture, and  of  the  various  events  and  revolutions  which
take  place  in  the  system  of  the  material  world,  and
endeavoured  by  this  expedient  to  palliate  many  of
its  absurdities.  By  degrees,  bolder  theories  con-
cernino-  reliofion  were  admitted  into  the  schools  of
science.  Philosophers  of  enlarged  views,  sensible
of  the  impiety  of  the  popular  superstition,  formed
ideas  concerning  the  perfection  of  one  Supreme
Being,  the  Creator  and  Ruler  of  the  universe,  just
and  rational  as  have  ever  been  attained  by  the  unas-
sisted powers  of  the  human  mind.

If  from  Europe  we  now  turn  to  Asia,  we  shall  find,

APPENDIX.  225

that  the  observation  which  I  have  made  upon  the  his-
tory of  false  religion  holds  equally  true  there. In
India  as  well  as  in  Greece,  it  was  by  cultivating
science  that  men  were  first  led  to  examine  and  to  en-
tertain doubts  with  respect  to  the  established  systems
of  superstition ;  and  when  we  consider  the  great  dif-
ference between  the  ecclesiastical  constitution  (if  I
may  use  that  expression)  of  the  two  countries,  we  are
apt  to  imagine  that  the  established  system  lay  more
open  to  examination  in  the  latter  than  in  the  former.
In  Greece  there  was  not  any  distinct  race  or  order  of
men  set  apart  for  performing  the  functions  of  religion,
or  to  serve  as  hereditary  and  interested  guardians  of
its  tenets  and  institutions.  But  in  India  the  Brahmins
were  born  the  ministers  of  religion,  and  they  had  an
exclusive  right  of  presiding  in  all  the  numerous  rites
of  worship  which  superstition  prescribed  as  necessary
to  avert  the  wrath  of  Heaven,  or  to  render  it  propi-
tious. These  distinctions  and  privileges  secured  to
them  a  wonderful  ascendant  over  their  countrymen ;
and  every  consideration  that  can  influence  the  human
mind,  the  honour,  the  interest,  the  power  of  their
order,  called  upon  them  to  support  the  tenets,  and  to
maintain  the  institutions  and  rites,  with  which  the
preservation  of  this  ascendant  was  so  intimately  con-
nected.

But  as  the  most  eminent  persons  of  the  cast  devoted
their  lives  to  the  cultivation  of  science,  the  progress
which  they  made  in  all  the  branches  of  it  (of  which
I  have  given  some  account)  was  great,  and  enabled
them  to  form  such  a  just  idea  of  the  system  of  nature,
and  of  the  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  displayed
in  the  formation  and  government  of  it,  as  elevated
their  minds  above  the  popular  superstition,  and  led
them  to  acknowledge  and  reverence  one  Supreme
Being,  "  the  Creator  of  all  things (to use their

VOL. IX.  Q

220  ANCIENT INDIA.

own  expression),  and  from  whom  all  things  pro-
ceed.""

This  is  the  idea  which  Abul  Fazel,  who  examined
the  opinions  of  the  Brahmins  with  the  greatest  atten-
tion and  candour,  gives  of  their  theology. "  They
all,"  says  he,  "  believe  in  the  unity  of  the  Godhead,
and  although  they  hold  images  in  high  veneration,
it  is  only  because  they  represent  celestial  beings,  and
prevent  the  thoughts  of  those  who  worship  them  from
wandering."' The  sentiments  of  the  most  intelligent
Europeans  who  have  visited  India,  coincide  perfectly
with  his,  in  respect  to  this  point.  The  accounts  which
Mr.  Bernier  received  from  the  Pundits  of  Benares,
both  of  their  external  worship,  and  of  one  Sovereign
Lord  being  the  sole  object  of  their  devotion,  is  pre-
cisely the  same  with  that  given  by  Abul  Fazel.''  Mr.
Wilkins,  better  qualified  perhaps  than  any  European
ever  was  to  judge  with  respect  to  this  subject,  repre-
sents the  learned  Brahmins  of  the  present  times  as
Theists,  believers  in  the  unity  of  God.' Of  the  same
opinion  is  M.  Sonnerat,  who  resided  in  India  seven
years,  in  order  to  inquire  into  the  manners,  sciences,
and  religion  of  the  Hindoos."' The  Pundits,  who
translated  the  Code  of  Gentoo  laws,  declare,  "  that
it  was  the  Supreme  Being,  who,  by  his  power,  formed
all  creatures  of  the  animal,  vegetable,  and  material
world,  from  the  four  elements  of  fire,  water,  air,  and
earth,  to  be  an  ornament  to  the  magazine  of  creation ;
and  whose  comprehensive  benevolence  selected  man,
the  centre  of  knowledg^e,  to  have  dominion  and  au-
thority  over  the  rest;  and,  having  bestowed  upon  this
favourite  object  judgment  and  understanding,  gave
him  supremacy  over  the  corners  of  the  world.""
Nor  are  these  to  be  regarded  as  refined  sentiments

*  Baghvat-Geeta,  p.  84.  '  Ayeen  Akbery,  vol.  iii.  p.  3.

I*  Voyage,  torn.  ii.  p.  159.  '  Preface  to  Baghvat-Geeta,  p.  21.

">  Voyage,  tora.  i.  p.  198.  °  Prelim.  Discourse,  p.  Ixxiii.

APPENDIX.  227

of  later  times.  The  Brahmins  being  considered  by
the  Mahomedan  conquerors  of  India  as  the  guardians
of  the  national  religion,  have  been  so  studiously  de-
pressed by  their  fanatical  zeal,  that  the  modern  mem-
bers of  that  order  are  as  far  inferior  to  their  ancestors
in  science  as  in  power.  It  is  from  the  writings  of
their  ancient  Pundits  that  they  derive  the  most  libe-
ral sentiments  which  they  entertain  at  present,  and
the  wisdom  for  which  they  are  now  celebrated  has
been  transmitted  to  them  from  ages  very  remote.

That  this  assertion  is  well  founded  we  are  enabled
to  pronounce  with  certainty,  as  the  most  profound
mysteries  of  Hindoo  theology,  concealed  with  the
greatest  care  from  the  body  of  the  people,  have  been
unveiled  by  the  translations  from  the  Sanskreet  lan-
guage lately  published.  The  principal  design  of  the
Baghvat-Geeta,  an  episode  in  the  Mahabarat,  a  poem
of  the  highest  antiquity,  and  of  the  greatest  authority
in  India,  seems  to  have  been  to  establish  the  doctrine
of  the  unity  of  the  Godhead,  and  from  a  just  view  of
the  divine  nature  to  deduce  an  idea  of  what  worship
will  be  most  acceptable  to  a  perfect  Being.  In  it,
amidst  much  obscure  metaphysical  discussion,  some
ornaments  of  fancy  unsuited  to  our  taste,  and  some
thoughts  elevated  to  a  tract  of  sublimity  into  which,
from  our  habits  of  reasoning  and  judging,  we  will
find  it  difficult  to  follow  them,**  we  find  descriptions
of  the  Supreme  Being  entitled  to  equal  praise  with
those  of  the  Greek  philosophers  which  I  have  cele-
brated. Of  these  I  shall  now  produce  one  to  which
I  formerly  alluded,  and  refer  my  readers  for  others  to
the  work  itself:  "  O  mighty  Being,"  says  Arjoon,
"  who  art  the  prime  Creator,  eternal  God  of  gods,  the
World's  Mansion !  Thou  art  the  incorruptible  Being,
distinct  from  all  things  transient.  Thou  art  before  all

«  Mr.  Hastings's  Letter,  prefixed  to  the  Baghvat-Geeta,  p.  7.

ci2

•2-28  ANCIENT INDIA.

gods,  tlie  ancient  Pooroosh  [i.  e.  vital  soul],  and  the
Supreme  supporter  of  the  universe.  Thou  knowest
all  things,  and  art  worthy  to  be  known  ;  thou  art  the
Supreme  mansion,  and  by  thee,  O  infinite  form,  the
universe  was  spread  abroad !  reverence  be  unto  thee
before  and  behind  ;  reverence  be  unto  thee  on  all
sides ;  O  thou  who  art  all  in  all !  Infinite  is  thy  power
and  thy  glory. — Thou  art  the  father  of  all  things,  ani-
mate and  inanimate.  Thou  art  the  wise  instructor  of
the  whole,  worthy  to  be  adored.  There  is  none  like
unto  thee ;  where,  then,  in  the  three  worlds,  is  there
one  above  thee  ?  Wherefore  I  bow  down;  and  with
my  body  prostrate  upon  the  ground,  crave  thy  mercy,
Lord !  worthy  to  be  adored ;  for  thou  shouldest  bear
with  me,  even  as  a  father  with  his  son,  a  friend  with
his  friend,  a  lover  with  his  beloved. "p  A  description
of  the  Supreme  Being  is  given  in  one  of  the  sacred
books  of  the  Hindoos,  from  which  it  is  evident  what
were  the  general  sentiments  of  the  learned  Brahmins
concerning  the  divine  nature  and  perfections  :  "  As
God  is  immaterial,  he  is  above  all  conception ;  as  he
is  invisible,  he  can  have  no  form  ;  but  from  what  we
behold  of  his  works,  we  may  conclude,  that  he  is  eter-
nal, omnipotent,  knowing  all  things,  and  present  every
where."''

To  men  capable  of  forming  such  ideas  of  the
Deity,  the  public  service  in  the  Pagodas  must  have
appeared  to  be  an  idolatrous  worship  of  images,  by  a
superstitious  multiplication  of  frivolous  or  immoral
rites  ;  and  they  must  have  seen  that  it  was  only  by
sanctity  of  heart,  and  purity  of  manners,  men  could
hope  to  gain  the  approbation  of  a  Being  perfect  in
goodness.  This  truth  Veias  labours  to  inculcate  in
the  Mahabarat,  but  with  the  prudent  reserve  and  art-
ful precautions  natural  to  a  Brahmin,  studious  neither

P  Baghvat-Geeta,  p.  94,  95.  q  Dow's  Dissert,  p.  xl.

APPENDIX.  229

to  offend  his  countrymen,  nor  to  dimmish  the  influ-
ence of  his  own  order.  His  ideas  concerning-  the
mode  of  worshipping  the  Deity,  are  explained  in  many
striking  passages  of  the  poem;  but  unwilling  to  mul-
tiply quotations,  I  satisfy  my  self  with  referring  to  them."^

When  we  recollect  how  slowly  the  mind  of  man
opens  to  abstract  ideas,  and  how  difficult  (according
to  an  observation  in  the  Mahabarat)  an  invisible  path
is  to  corporeal  beings,  it  is  evident  that  the  Hindoos
must  have  attained  a  high  degree  of  improvement
before  their  sentiments  rose  so  far  superior  to  the  po-
pular superstition  of  their  country.  The  different
states  of  Greece  had  subsisted  long,  and  had  made
considerable  progress  in  refinement,  before  the  errors
of  false  religion  began  to  be  detected.  It  was  not
until  the  age  of  Socrates,  and  in  the  schools  of  phi-
losophy established  by  his  disciples,  that  principles
adverse  to  the  tenets  of  the  popular  superstition  were
much  propagated.

A  longer  period  of  time  elapsed  before  the  Romans,
a  nation  of  warriors  and  statesmen,  were  enlightened
by  science,  or  ventured  upon  any  free  disquisition
concerning  the  objects  or  the  rights  of  worship,  au-
thorized by  their  ancestors.  But  in  India  the  happy
effects  of  progress  in  science  were  much  more  early
conspicuous.  Without  adopting  the  wild  computa-
tions of  Indian  chronology,  according  to  which,  the
Mahabarat  was  composed  above  four  thousand  years
ago,  we  must  allow,  that  it  is  a  work  of  very  great
antiquity,  and  the  author  of  it  discovers  an  acquaint-
ance with  the  principles  of  theology,  of  morals,  and
of  metaphysics,  more  just  and  rational  than  seems  to
have  been  attained,  at  that  period,  by  any  nation
whose  history  is  known.

But  so  unable  are  the  limited  powers  of  the  human

>•  Baghvat-Geeta,  p.  55.  67.  75.  97.  119.

230  ANCIENT  INDIA.

mind  to  form  an  adequate  idea  of  the  perfections  and
operations  of  the  Supreme  Being,  that  in  all  the  theo-
ries concerning  them,  of  the  most  eminent  philoso-
phers in  the  most  enlightened  nations,  we  find  a  la-
mentable mixture  of  ignorance  and  error.  From  these
the  Brahmins  were  not  more  exempt  than  the  sages
of  other  countries.  As  they  held  that  the  system  of
nature  was  not  only  originally  arranged  by  the  power
and  wisdom  of  God,  but  that  every  event  which  hap-
pened was  brought  about  by  his  immediate  interpo-
sition, and  as  they  could  not  comprehend  how  a
being  could  act  in  any  place  unless  where  it  was  pre-
sent, they  supposed  the  Deity  to  be  a  vivifying  prin-
ciple diffused  through  the  whole  creation,  a  univer-
sal soul  that  animated  each  part  of  it.*  Every  intel-
ligent nature,  particularly  the  souls  of  men,  they  con-
ceived to  be  portions  separated  from  this  great  spirit/
to  which,  after  fulfilling  their  destiny  on  earth,  and
attaining  a  proper  degree  of  purity,  they  would  be
again  re-united.  In  order  to  efface  the  stains  with
which  a  soul,  during  its  residence  on  earth,  has  been
defiled,  by  the  indulgence  of  sensual  and  corrupt  ap-
petites, they  taught  that  it  must  pass,  in  a  long  suc-
cession of  transmigrations,  through  the  bodies  of  dif-
ferent animals,  until,  by  what  it  suffers  and  what  it
learns  in  the  various  forms  of  its  existence,  it  shall  be
so  thoroughly  refined  from  all  pollution  as  to  be  ren-
dered meet  for  being  absorbed  into  the  divine  essence,
and  returns  like  a  drop  into  that  unbounded  ocean
from  which  it  originally  issued."  These  doctrines
of  the  Brahmins,  concerning  the  Deity,  as  the  soul
which  pervades  all  nature,  giving  activity  and  vigour
to  every  part  of  it,  as  well  as  the  final  re-union  of  all

•  Baghvat-Geeta,  p.  65.  78.  85.  Bernier.tom.  ii.  p.  163.
'  Dow's  Dissert,  p.  xliii.
"  Voy.  dp.  Sonncrat,  vol.  i.  p.  192. 200. Baghvat-Geeta,  p.  39.  115. Dow's
Dissert,  p.  xliii.

APPENDIX.  231

intelligent  creatures  to  their  primeval  source,  coin-
cide perfectly  with  the  tenets  of  the  Stoical  school.
It  is  remarkable,  that  after  having  observed  a  near
resemblance  in  the  most  sublime  sentiments  of  their
moral  doctrine,  we  should  likewise  discover  such  a
similarity  in  the  errors  of  their  theological  specula-
tions."

The  human  mind,  however,  when  destitute  of  su-
perior guidance,  is  apt  to  fall  into  a  practical  error
with  respect  to  religion,  of  a  tendency  still  more  dan-
gerous. When  philosophers,  by  their  attainments  in
science,  began  to  acquire  such  just  ideas  of  the  nature
and  perfections  of  the  Supreme  Being,  as  convinced
them  that  the  popular  system  of  superstition  was  not
only  absurd  but  impious,  they  were  fully  aware  of  all
the  danger  which  might  arise  from  communicating
what  they  had  discovered  to  the  people,  incapable  of
comprehending  the  force  of  those  reasons  which  had
swayed  with  them,  and  so  zealously  attached  to  esta-
blished opinions,  as  to  revolt  against  any  attempt  to
detect  their  falsehood. Instead,  therefore,  of  allow-
ing any  ray  of  that  knowledge  which  illuminated  their
own  minds  to  reach  them,  they  formed  a  theory  to
justify  their  own  conduct,  and  to  prevent  the  darkness
of  that  cloud  which  hung  over  the  minds  of  their  fel-
low-men from  being  ever  dispelled. The  vulgar  and
unlearned,  they  contended,  had  no  right  to  truth.
Doomed  by  their  condition  to  remain  in  ignorance,
they  were  to  be  kept  in  order  by  delusion,  and  allured
to  do  what  is  right,  or  deterred  from  venturing  upon
what  is  wrong,  by  the  hope  of  those  imaginary  re-
wards which  superstition  promises,  and  the  dread  of
those  punishments  which  it  threatens. In  confirma-
tion of  this,  I  might  quote  the  doctrine  of  most  of  the

"  Lipfij  Physiol.  Stoicor.  lib.  i.  dissert,  viii.  xxi. Seneca,  Antoninus,  Epictetu»,
yassini.

232  ANCIENT INDIA.

philosophic  sects,  and  produce  the  words  of  almost
every  eminent  Greek  and  Roman  writer.  It  will  be
sufficient,  however,  to  lay  before  my  readers  a  remark-
able passage  in  Strabo,  to  whom  I  have  been  so  often
indebted  in  the  course  of  my  researches,  and  who  was
no  less  qualified  to  judge  with  respect  to  the  political
opinions  of  his  contemporaries,  than  to  describe  the
countries  which  they  inhabited.  "  What  is  marvel-
lous in  fable,  is  employed,"  says  he,  "  sometimes  to
please,  and  sometimes  to  inspire  terror,  and  both  these
are  of  use,  not  only  with  children,  but  with  persons  of
mature  age.  To  children  we  propose  delightful  fic-
tions, in  order  to  encourage  them  to  act  well,  and  such
as  are  terrible,  in  order  to  restrain  them  from  evil.
Thus  when  men  are  united  in  society,  they  are  incited
to  what  is  laudable,  by  hearing  the  poets  celebrate  the
splendid  actions  of  fabulous  story,  such  as  the  labours
of  Hercules  and  Theseus,  in  reward  for  which  they
are  now  honoured  as  divinities,  or  by  beholding  their
illustrious  deeds  exhibited  to  public  view  in  painting
and  sculpture.  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  deterred
from  vice,  when  the  punishments  inflicted  by  the  gods
upon  evil-doers  are  related,  and  threats  are  denounced
against  them  in  awful  words,  or  represented  by  fright-
ful figures,  and  when  men  believe  that  these  threats
have  been  really  executed  upon  the  guilty.  For  it  is
impossible  to  conduct  women  and  the  gross  multi-
tude, and  to  render  them  holy,  pious,  and  upright,
by  the  precepts  of  reason  and  philosophy  ;  supersti-
tion, or  the  fear  of  the  gods,  must  be  called  in  aid,
the  influence  of  which  is  founded  on  fictions  and  pro-
digies. For  the  thunder  of  Jupiter,  the  aegis  of  Mi-
nerva, the  trident  of  Neptune,  the  torches  and  snakes
of  the  Furies,  the  spears  of  the  gods,  adorned  with
ivy,  and  the  whole  ancient  theology,  are  all  fables,
which  the  legislators  who  formed  the  political  consti-

APPENDIX.  233

tution  of  states  employ  as  bugbears  to  overawe  the
credulous  and  simple."^

These  ideas  of  the  philosophers  of  Europe  were
precisely  the  same  which  the  Brahmins  had  adopted
in  India,  and  according  to  which  they  regulated  their
conduct  with  respect  to  the  great  body  of  the  people.
As  their  order  had  an  exclusive  right  to  read  the  sa-
cred books,  to  cultivate  and  to  teach  science,  they
could  more  effectually  prevent  all  who  were  not  mem-
bers of  it  from  acquiring  any  portion  of  information
beyond  what  they  were  pleased  to  impart. When
the  free  circulation  of  knowledge  is  not  circumscribed
by  such  restrictions,  the  whole  community  derives
benefit  from  every  new  acquisition  in  science,  the  in-
fluence of  which,  both  upon  sentiment  and  conduct,
extends  insensibly  from  the  few  to  the  many,  from
the  learned  to  the  ignorant. But  wherever  the  do-
minion of  false  religion  is  completely  established,  the
body  of  the  people  gain  nothing  by  the  greatest  im-
provements in  knowledge. Their  philosophers  con-
ceal from  them,  with  the  utmost  solicitude,  the  truths
which  they  have  discovered,  and  labour  to  support
that  fabric  of  superstition  which  it  was  their  duty  to
have  overturned. They  not  only  enjoin  others  to  re-
spect the  religious  rites  prescribed  by  the  laws  of  their
country,  but  conform  to  them  in  their  own  practice,
and  with  every  external  appearance  of  reverence  and
devotion,  bow  down  before  the  altars  of  deities,  who
must  inwardly  be  the  objects  of  their  contempt. In-
stead of  resembling  the  teachers  of  true  religion  in  the
benevolent  ardour  with  which  they  have  always  com-
municated to  their  fellow-men  the  knowledge  of  those
important  truths  with  which  their  own  minds  were
enlightened  and  rendered  happy,  the  sages  of  Greece,
and  the  Brahmins  of  India,  carried  on,  with  studied

y  Strabo,  lib.  i.  p.  36.  B.

234  ANCIENT  INDIA.

artifice,  a  scheme  of  deceit,  and,  according  to  an  em-
phatic expression  of  an  inspired  writer,  they  detained
the  truth  in  unrighteousness/  They  knew  and  ap-
proved what  was  true,  but  among  the  rest  of  mankind
they  laboured  to  support  and  to  perpetuate  what  is
false.

Thus  I  have  gone  through  all  the  particulars  which
I  originally  proposed  to  examine,  and  have  endea-
voured to  discover  the  state  of  the  inhabitants  of  In-
dia with  respect  to  each  of  them.  If  I  had  aimed  at
nothing  else  than  to  describe  the  civil  policy,  the  arts,
the  sciences,  the  reliffious  institutions  of  one  of  the
most  ancient  and  most  numerous  race  of  men,  that
alone  would  have  led  me  into  inquiries  and  discus-
sions both  curious  and  instructive.  I  own,  however,
that  I  have  all  along  kept  in  view  an  object  more  in-
teresting, as  well  as  of  greater  importance,  and  enter-
tain hopes,  that  if  the  account  which  I  have  given  of
the  early  and  high  civilization  of  India,  and  of  the
wonderful  progress  of  its  inhabitants  in  elegant  arts
and  useful  science,  shall  be  received  as  just  and  well
established,  it  may  have  some  influence  upon  the  be-
haviour of  Europeans  towards  that  people.  Unfor-
tunately for  the  human  species,  in  whatever  quarter
of  the  globe  the  people  of  Europe  have  acquired  do-
minion, they  have  found  the  inhabitants  not  only  in
a  state  of  society  and  improvement  far  inferior  to  their
own,  but  diffierent  in  their  complexion,  and  in  all  their
habits  of  life.  Men  in  every  state  of  their  career  are
so  satisfied  with  the  progress  made  by  the  community
of  which  they  are  members,  that  it  becomes  to  them
a  standard  of  perfection,  and  they  are  apt  to  regard
people  whose  condition  is  not  similar,  with  contempt,
and  even  aversion.  In  Africa  and  America,  the  dis-
similitude is  so  conspicuous,  that,  in  the  pride  of  their

'■  Rora.  i.  18.

APPENDIX.  235

superiority,  Europeans  thought  themselves  entitled  to
reduce  the  natives  of  the  former  to  slavery,  and  to  ex-
terminate those  of  the  latter.  Even  in  India,  though
far  advanced  beyond  the  two  other  quarters  of  the
globe  in  improvement,  the  colour  of  the  inhabitants,
their  effeminate  appearance,  their  unwarlike  spirit,
the  wild  extravagance  of  their  religious  tenets  and
ceremonies,  and  many  other  circumstances,  confirmed
Europeans  in  such  an  opinion  of  their  own  pre-emi-
nence, that  they  have  always  viewed  and  treated
them  as  an  inferior  race  of  men.  Happy  would  it
be  if  any  of  the  four  European  nations,  who  have
successively  acquired  extensive  territories  and  power
in  India,  could  altogether  vindicate  itself  from  hav-
ing acted  in  this  manner.  Nothing,  however,  can
have  a  more  direct  and  powerful  tendency  to  inspire
Europeans,  proud  of  their  own  superior  attainments
in  policy,  science,  and  arts,  with  proper  sentiments
concerning  the  people  of  India,  and  to  teach  them  a
due  regard  for  their  natural  rights  as  men,  than  their
being  accustomed,  not  only  to  consider  the  Hindoos
of  the  present  times  as  a  knowing  and  ingenious  race
of  men,  but  to  view  them  as  descended  from  ancestors
who  had  attained  to  a  very  high  degree  of  improve-
ment, many  ages  before  the  least  step  towards  civili-
zation had  been  taken  in  any  part  of  Europe.  It  was
by  an  impartial  and  candid  inquiry  into  their  man-
ners that  the  emperor  Akber  was  led  to  consider  the
Hindoos  as  no  less  entitled  to  protection  and  favour
than  his  other  subjects,  and  to  govern  them  with  such
equity  and  mildness,  as  to  merit  from  a  grateful  peo-
ple the  honourable  appellation  of  "  The  Guardian  of
mankind."  It  was  from  a  thorough  knowledge  of
their  character  and  acquirements,  that  his  vizier  Abul
Fazel,  with  a  liberality  of  mind  unexampled  among
Mahomedans,  pronounces  a  high  encomium  on  the

236  ANCIENT INDIA.

virtues  of  the  Hindoos,  both  as  individuals  and  as
members  of  society,  and  celebrates  their  attainments
in  arts  and  sciences  of  every  kind.''  If  I  might  pre-
sume to  hope  that  the  description  which  I  have  given
of  the  manners  and  institutions  of  the  people  of  India
could  contribute  in  the  smallest  degree,  and  with  the
remote  influence,  to  render  their  character  more  re-
spectable, and  their  condition  more  happy,  I  shall
close  my  literary  labours,  with  the  satisfaction  of
thinking  that  I  have  not  lived  or  written  in  vain.

»  A^een  Akbery,  vol.  iii.  p.  2.  81.  95.

NOTES

AND

ILLUSTRATIONS.

Note  I.  Sect.  I.  p.  11.

Credulity  and  scepticism  are  two  opposite  extremes
into  which  men  are  apt  to  run,  in  examining  the  events
which  are  said  to  have  happened  in  the  early  ages  of
antiquity.  Without  incurring  any  suspicion  of  a  pro-
pensity to  the  latter  of  these,  I  may  be  allowed  to  enter-
tain doubts  concerning  the  expedition  of  Sesostris  into

India,  and  his  conquest  of  that  country. 1.  Few

facts  in  ancient  history  seem  to  be  better  established,
than  that  of  the  early  aversion  of  the  Egyptians  to  a  sea-
faring life.  Even  the  power  of  despotism  cannot  at  once
change  the  ideas  and  manners  of  a  nation,  especially
when  they  have  been  confirmed  by  long  habit,  and  ren-
dered sacred  by  the  sanction  of  religion.  That  Sesostris,
in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  should  have  so  entirely
overcome  the  prejudices  of  a  superstitious  people,  as  to
be  able  to  fit  out  four  hundred  ships  of  force,  in  the
Arabian  gulf,  besides  another  fleet  which  he  had  in  the
Mediterranean,  appears  to  be  extremely  improbable.
Armaments  of  such  magnitude  would  require  the  utmost
eflforts  of  a  great  and  long  established  maritime  power.

2.  It  is  remarkable  that  Herodotus,  who  inquired

with  the  most  persevering  diligence  into  the  ancient  his-
tory of  Egypt,  and  who  received  all  the  information
concerning  it  which  the  priests  of  Memphis,  Heliopolis,
and  Thebes  could  communicate,  Herodot.  Edit.  Wes-
selingij,  lib.  ii.  c.  3.,  although  he  relates  the  history  of
Sesostris  at  some  length,  does  not  mention  his  conquest
of  India,  lib.  ii.  c.  102.,  &c.  That  tale,  it  is  probable,
w^as  invented  in  the  period  between  the  age  of  Herodo-

238  NOTES AND

tus  and  that  of  Diodorus  Siculus,  from  whom  we  receive
a  particuhir  detail  of  the  Indian  expedition  of  Sesostris.
His  account  rests  entirely  upon  the  authority  of  the
Egyptian  priests ;  and  Diodorus  himself  not  only  gives
it  as  his  general  opinion,  "  that  many  things  which  they
related,  flowed  rather  from  a  desire  to  promote  the  ho-
nour of  their  country,  than  from  attention  to  truth,"  lib.
i.  p.  -U.  edit.  Wesselingij,  Amst.  1746;  but  takes  parti-
cular notice  that  the  Egyptian  priests,  as  well  as  the
Greek  writers,  differ  widely  from  one  another  in  the  ac-
counts which  they  give  of  the  actions  of  Sesostris,  lib.  i.

p.  02. 3.  Though  Diodorus  asserts  that  in  relating

the  history  of  Sesostris  he  had  studied  to  select  what  ap-
peared to  him  most  probable,  and  most  agreeable  to  the
monuments  of  that  monarch  still  remaining  in  Egypt,  he
has  admitted  into  his  narrative  many  marvellous  cir-
cumstances, which  render  the  whole  extremely  suspici-
ous. The  father  of  Sesostris,  as  he  relates,  collected  all
the  male  children  who  were  born  in  Egypt  on  the  same
day  with  his  son,  in  order  that  they  might  be  educated
together  with  him  conformable  to  a  mode  which  he  pre-
scribed with  a  view  of  preparing  them  as  proper  instru-
ments to  carry  into  execution  the  great  undertakings  for
which  he  destined  Sesostris.  Accordingly,  when  Se-
sostris set  out  upon  his  Indian  expedition,  which,  from
circumstances  mentioned  by  Diodorus,  must  have  been
about  the  40th  year  of  his  age,  one  thousand  seven
hundred  of  his  youthful  associates  are  said  to  have  been
still  alive,  and  were  intrusted  with  high  command  in  his
army.  But  if  we  apply  to  the  examination  of  this  story
the  certain  principles  of  political  arithmetic,  it  is  evi-
dent, that  if  one  thousand  seven  hundred  of  the  male
children  born  on  the  same  day  with  Sesostris  were  alive
when  his  great  expedition  commenced,  the  number  of
children  born  in  Egypt  on  each  day  of  the  year  must
have  been  at  least  ten  thousand,  and  the  population  of
the  kingdom  must  have  exceeded  sixty  millions  ;  Goguet
rOrigine  des  Loix,  des  Arts,  &c.  tom.  ii.  p.  12.,  &.C.,  a
number  far  beyond  the  bounds  of  credibility,  in  a  king-
dom which,  from  the  accurate  calculations  of  M.  D'An-
ville,  Memoire  sur  i'Egypt  Anc.  et  Modcrne,  p.  23.,  &c.,

ILLUSTRATIONS.  230

does  not  contain  more  than  two  thousand  one  hundred
square  leagues  of  habitable  country.  Decline  and  Fall
of  the  Rom.  Emp.  vol.  v.  p.  348.  Another  marvellous
particular  is  the  description  of  a  ship  of  cedar,  four  hun-
dred and  ninety  feet  in  length,  covered  on  the  outside
with  gold,  and  on  the  inside  with  silver,  which  Sesostris
consecrated  to  the  deity  who  was  the  chief  object  of
worship  at  Thebes.  Lib.  i.  p.  67.  Such  too  is  the  ac-
count he  gives  of  the  Egyptian  army,  in  which,  besides
six  hundred  thousand  infantry  and  twenty-four  thousand
cavalry,  there  were  twenty-seven  thousand  armed  cha-
riots. Ibid.  p.  64. 4.  These  and  other  particulars

appeared  so  far  to  exceed  the  bounds  of  probability,
that  the  sound  understanding  of  Strabo  the  geographer
rejected,  without  hesitation,  the  accounts  of  the  Indian
expedition  of  Sesostris ;  and  he  not  only  asserts,  in  the
most  explicit  terms,  that  this  monarch  never  entered
India,  lib.  xv.  p.  1007.  C  edit.  Casaub.  Amst.  1707;  but
he  ranks  what  has  been  related  concerning  his  opera-
tions in  that  country  with  the  fabulous  exploits  of  Bac-
chus and  Hercules,  p.  1007.  D.  1009.  B.  The  philoso-
phical historian  of  Alexander  the  Great  seems  to  have
entertained  the  same  sentiments  with  respect  to  the  ex-
ploits of  Sesostris  in  India,  Hist.  Ind.  c.  5.  Arrian  Eped.
Alex.  edit.  Gronov.  L.  Bat.  1704. — What  slender  infor-
mation concerning  India  or  its  inhabitants,  Herodotus
had  received,  seems  to  have  been  derived,  not  from  the
Egyptians,  but  from  the  Persians,  lib.  iii.  c.  105. ;  which
renders  it  probable,  that  in  his  time  there  was  little  inter-
course between  Egypt  and  India.  If  Reland  be  well
founded  in  his  opinion,  that  many  of  the  words  mentioned
by  ancient  authors  as  Indian  are  really  Persian,  we  may
conclude  that  there  was  an  early  intercourse  between
Persia  and  India,  of  which  hardly  any  trace  remains  in
history.  Reland.  Dissert,  de  Veteri  Lingua  Indie,  ap.
Dissert.  Miscel.  vol.  i.  p.  209.

Note  II.  Sect.  I.  p.  13.

When  we  consider  the  extent  and  effects  of  the  Phe-
nician  commerce,  the  scanty  information  concerning  it

•240  NOTES  AND

which  wc  receive  from  ancient  writers  must,  on  a  first
view,  appear  surprising.  But  when  we  recollect  that  all
the  Greek  historians  (Herodotus  excepted),  who  give
any  account  of  the  Phenicians,  published  their  w  orks
long  after  the  destruction  of  Tyre  by  Alexander  the
Great,  we  will  cease  to  wonder  at  their  not  having  en-
tered into  minute  details  with  respect  to  a  trade  which
w  as  then  removed  to  new  seats,  and  carried  on  in  other
channels.  But  the  power  and  opulence  of  Tyro,  in  the
prosperous  age  of  its  commerce,  must  have  attracted
general  attention.  In  the  prophecies  of  Ezekiel,  who
flourished  two  hundred  and  sixty  years  before  the  fall  of
Tyre,  there  is  the  most  particular  account  of  the  nature
and  variety  of  its  commercial  transactions  that  is  to  be
found  in  any  ancient  writer,  and  which  conveys  at  the
same  time  a  magnificent  idea  of  the  extensive  power  of
that  state. Cii.  xxvi.  xxvii.  xxviii.

Note  III.  Sect.  I.  p.  IC.

Tin:  account  given  of  the  revenue  of  the  Persian  mo-
narchy by  Herodotus  is  curious,  and  seems  to  have  been
copied  from  some  public  record,  which  had  been  com-
municated to  him.  According  to  it  the  Persian  empire
was  divided  into  twenty  satrapys,  or  governments.  The
tribute  levied  from  each  is  specified,  amounting  in  all  to
14,500  Euboean  talents,  which  Dr.  Arbuthnot  reckons
to  be  equal  to  2,807,437/.  sterling  money ;  a  sura  ex-
tremely small  for  the  reverme  of  the  Great  King,  and
which  ill  accords  with  many  facts,  concerning  the  riches,
magnificence,  and  luxury  of  the  East,  that  occur  in  an-
cient authors.

Note  IV.  Sect.  I.  p.  19.

Major  Rennell,  in  the  second  edition  of  his  Me-
moir, has  traced,  from  very  imperfect  materials,  the
routes  by  which  Alexander,  Tamerlane,  and  Nadir  Shah
penetrated  into  India,  with  a  degree  of  accuracy  which
does  honour  to  his  discernment,  and  displays  the  supe-
riority of  his  knowledge,  in  the  ancient  and  modern
geography  of  that  country. His  researches  he  has  illus-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  241

trated  by  an  additional  map.  To  these,  I  must  refer  my
readers.  Nor  are  they  to  consider  his  laborious  inves-
tigation merely  as  an  object  of  curiosity  ;  the  geography
of  that  fertile  and  extensive  region  of  India,  distinguished
by  the  name  of  Panjab,  with  which  we  are  at  present
little  acquainted,  may  soon  become  very  interesting.  If,
on  the  one  hand,  that  firm  foundation  on  which  the  Bri-
tish empire  in  India  seems  to  be  established,  by  the  suc-
cessful termination  of  the  late  war,  remains  unshaken; —
if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Seiks,  a  confederacy  of  several
independent  states,  shall  continue  to  extend  their  domi-
nions with  the  same  rapidity  that  they  have  advanced
since  the  beginning  of  the  current  century ;  it  is  highly
probable  that  the  enterprising  commercial  spirit  of  the
one  people,  and  the  martial  ardour  of  the  other,  who
still  retain  the  activity  and  ardour  natural  to  men  in  the
earliest  ages  of  social  union,  may  give  rise  to  events  of
the  greatest  moment.  The  frontiers  of  the  two  states
are  approaching  gradually  nearer  and  nearer  to  each
other,  the  territories  of  the  Seiks  having  reached  to  the
western  bank  of  the  river  Jumnah,  while  those  of  the
Nabob  of  Oude  stretch  along  its  eastern  bank.  This
Nabob,  the  ally  or  tributary  of  the  East  India  Company,
is  supported  by  a  brigade  of  the  Bengal  army,  constantly
stationed  on  his  western  frontier.  Ren.  Mem.  Introd.
p.  cxvi.  In  a  position  so  contiguous,  rivalry  for  power,
interference  of  interest,  and  innumerable  other  causes  of
jealousy  and  discord,  can  hardly  fail  of  terminating,
sooner  or  later,  in  open  hostility.  The  Seiks  possess
the  whole  Soubah  of  Lahore,  the  principal  part  of  Moul-
tan,  and  the  western  part  of  Delhi.  The  dimensions  of
this  tract  are  about  400  British  miles  from  N.  W.  to
S.  E.,  varying  in  breadth  from  320  to  150  miles.  Their
capital  city  is  Lahore.  Little  Is  known  concerning  their
government  and  political  maxims ;  but  they  are  repre-
sented as  mild.  In  their  mode  of  making  war,  they  are
unquestionably  savage  and  cruel.  Their  army  consists
almost  entirely  of  horse ;  of  which  they  can  bring  at
least  100,000  into  the  field.  Maj.  Ren.  Mem.  2d  edit.
Introd.  p.  cxxi.  cxxii.  and  p.  365.  See  also  Mr.  Crau-
furd's  Sketches,  2d  edit.  vol.  ii.  p.  263,  &c.

VOL.  IX.  R

242  N  O  T  K  S AND

Note  V.  Sect.  I.  p.  20.

It  is  surprising  that  Alexander  did  not  receive,  in  the
provinces  contiguous  to  India,  such  an  account  of  the
periodical  rains  in  that  country,  as  to  shew  him  the  im-
propriety of  carrying  on  military  operations  there  while
these  continued. His  expedition  into  India  commenced
towards  the  end  of  Spring,  Arrian,  lib.  iv.  c.  22.,  when
the  rains  were  already begun  in  the  mountains  from
which  ail  the  rivers  in  the  Panjab  flow,  and  of  course
they  must  have  been  considerably  swelled  before  he  ar-
rived on  their  banks,  Rennel,  p.  2G8.  — He  passed  the
Hydaspes  at  Midsummer,  about  the  height  of  the  rainy
season. In  a  country  through  which  so  many  large
rivers  run,  an  army  on  service  at  this  time  of  the  year
must  have  suffered  greatly. An  accurate  description  of
the  nature  of  the  rains  and  inundations  in  this  part  of
India,  is  given  by  Arrian,  lib.  v. c.  9.;  and  one  still
fuller  may  be  found  in  Strabo,  lib.  xv.  1013. — It  was  of
what  they  suffered  by  these  that  Alexander's  soldiers
complained,  Strabo,  lib.  xv.  1021.  D. ;  and  not  without
reason,  as  it  had  rained  incessantly  during  seventy  days,
Diod.  Sicul.  xvii.  c.  94. — A  circumstance  which  marks
the  accuracy with which  Alexander's  ofTicera  had  at-
tended to  every  thing  in  that  part  of  India,  deserves  no-
tice. Aristobulus,  in  his  Journal,  which I  have  men-
tioned, observes  that, though  heavy  rains  fell  in  the
mountains,  and  in  the  country  near  to  them,  in  the  plains
below  not  so  much  as  a  shower  fell. Strabo,  lib.  xv.
101-3,  B.  101.5. B. Major  Rennell  was  informed  by  a
person  of  character,  who  had  resided  in  this  district  of
India,  which  is  now  seldom  visited  by  Europeans,  that
during  great  part  of  the  S.  W. monsoon,  or  at  least  in
the months of  July,  August,  and  part  of  September,
which  is  the  rainy  season  in  most  other  parts  of  India,
the  atmosphere  in  the  Delta  of  the  Indus  is  generally
clouded,  but  no  rain  falls  except  very  near  the  sea. In-
deed, very  few  showers fall  during  the  whole  season.
Captain  Hamilton  relates,  that  when  he  visited  Tatta,
no  rain  had  fallen  for  three  years  before. Memoirs,

ILLUSTRATIONS.  243

p.  288. — Tamerlane,  who,  by  the  vicinity  of  the  seat  of
his  government  to  India,  had  the  means  of  being  well  in-
formed concerning  the  nature  of  the  country,  avoided  the
error  of  Alexander,  and  made  his  Indian  campaign  dur-
ing the  dry  season.  As  Nadir  Shah,  both  when  he  in-
vaded India,  A.  D.  1738,  and  in  his  return  next  year,
marched  through  the  same  countries  with  Alexander,  and
nearly  in  the  same  line  of  direction,  nothing  can  give  a
more  striking  idea  of  the  persevering  ardour  of  the  Ma-
cedonian conqueror,  than  the  description  of  the  difficul-
ties which  Nadir  Shah  had  to  surmount,  and  the  hard-
ships which  his  army  endured.  Though  possessed  of
absolute  power  and  immense  wealth,  and  distinguished
no  less  by  great  talents  than  long  experience  in  the  con-
duct of  war,  he  had  the  mortification  to  lose  a  great  part
of  his  troops  in  crossing  the  rivers  of  the  Panjab,  in  pe-
netrating through  the  mountains  to  the  north  of  India,
and  in  conflicts  with  the  fierce  natives  inhabiting  the
countries  which  stretch  from  the  banks  of  the  Oxus  to
the  frontiers  of  Persia.  An  interesting  account  of  his
retreat  and  sufferings  is  given  in  the  Memoirs  of  Khojeh
Abdulkurren,  a  Cashmerian  of  distinction,  who  served
in  his  army.

Note  VI.  Sect.  I.  p.  22.

That  a  fleet  so  numerous  should  have  been  collected
in  such  a  short  time,  is  apt  to  appear,  at  first  sight,  in-
credible. Arrian,  however,  assures  us,  that  in  specifying
this  number,  he  followed  Ptolemy,  the  son  of  Lagus,
whose  authority  he  considered  to  be  of  the  greatest
weight,  lib.  vi.  c.  3.  But  as  the  Panjab  country  is  full
of  navigable  rivers,  on  which  all  the  intercourse  among
the  natives  was  carried  on,  it  abounded  with  vessels  ready
constructed  to  the  conqueror's  hands,  so  that  he  might
easily  collect  that  number.  If  we  could  give  credit  to
the  account  of  the  invasion  of  India  by  Semiramis,  no
fewer  than  four  thousand  vessels  were  assembled  in  the
Indus  to  oppose  her  fleet.  Diod.  Sicul.  lib.  ii.  c.  74. — It
is  remarkable  that  when  Mahmoud  of  Gazna  invaded
India,  a  fleet  was  collected  on  the  Indus  to  oppose  him,

R  2

244  NOTES AND

consisting  of  the  same  number  of  vessels.  We  learn
from  the  Ayecn  Akbcry,  that  the  inhabitants  of  this  part
of  India  still  continue  to  carry  on  all  their  communica-
tion with  each  other  by  water;  the  inhabitants  of  the
Circar  of  Tatta  alone  have  not  less  than  forty  thousand
vessels  of  various  constructions. Vol.  ii.  p.  143.

Note  VII.  Sect.  I.  p.  23.

All  these  particulars  are  taken  from  the  Indian  His-
tory of  Arrian,  a  work  different  from  that  already  men-
tioned, and  one  of  the  most  curious  treatises  transmitted
to  us  from  antiquity. The  first  part  of  it  consists  of  ex-
tracts from  the  account  given  by  Xearchus  of  the  climate
and  soil  of  India,  and  the  manners  of  the  natives. The
second  contains  that  officer's  journal  of  his  voyage  from
the  mouth  of  tlie  Indus to  the  bottom  of  the  Persian
gulf. The  perusal  of  it  gives  rise  to  several  observa-
tions.— 1.  It  is  remarkable  that  neither  Xearchus,  nor
Ptolemy,  nor  Aristobulus,  nor  even  Anian,  once  mention
the  voyage  of  Scylax. This  could  not  proceed  from
their  being  unacquainted  with  it,  for  Herodotus  was  a
favourite  author  in  the  hands  of  every  Greek  who  had  any
pretensions  to  literature. It  was  probably  occasioned
by  the  reasons  which  they  had  to  distrust  the  veracity
of  Scylax,  of  which  I  have  already  taken  notice. Ac-
cordingly, in  a  speech  which  Arrian  puts  into  the  mouth
of  Alexander,  he  asserts  that,  except  Bacchus,  he  was
the  first  who  had  passed  the  Indus ;  which  implies  that
he  disbelieved  what  is  related  concerning  Scylax,  and
was  not  acquainted  with  what  Darius  Hystaspes  is  said
to  have  done,  in  order  to  subject  that  part  of  India  to
the  Persian  crown. Arrian,  vii.  c.  10. This  opinion  is
confirmed  by  Megasthenes,  who  resided  a  considerable
time  in  India. He  asserts  that,  except  Bacchus  and
Hercules  (to  whose  fabulous  expeditions  Strabo  is  as-
tonished that  he  should  have  given  any  credit,  lib.  xv.  p.
1007.  D.)  Alexander  was the  first  who  had invaded
India  ;  Arrian,  Hist.  Indie,  c.  5. ^Ye  are  informed  by
Arrian,  tliat  the  Assacani,  and  other  people  who  pos-
sessed that  country,  which  is  now  called  the  kingdom  of

ILLUSTRATIONS.  245

Candahar,  paid  tribute,  first  to  the  Assyrians,  and  after-
ward to  the  Medes  and  Persians;  Hist.  Indie,  c.  1.  As
all  the  fertile  provinces  on  the  north-west  of  the  Indus
were  anciently  reckoned  to  be  part  of  India,  it  is  proba-
ble, that  what  was  Ie\-ied  from  them  is  the  sum  mentioned
in  the  tribute-roll,  from  which  Herodotus  drew  his  ac-
count of  the  annual  revenue  of  the  Persian  empire,  and
that  none  of  the  provinces  to  the  south  of  the  Indus  were
ever  subject  to  the  kings  of  Persia. — 2.  This  voyage  of
Xearchus  affords  some  striking  instances  of  the  imper-
fect knowledge  which  the  ancients  had  of  any  navigation
different  from  that  to  which  they  were  accustomed  in  the
Mediterranean.  Though  the  enterprising  genius  and
enlarged  views  of  Alexander  prompted  him  to  attempt
opening  an  intercourse  by  sea,  between  India  and  his
Persian  dominions,  yet  both  he  and  Xearchus  knew  so
little  of  the  ocean  which  they  wished  to  explore,  as  to  be
apprehensive  that  it  might  be  found  impossible  to  navi-
gate it,  on  account  of  impervious  straits,  or  other  obsta-
cles. Hist.  Indie,  c.  '20.  Q.  Curt.  lib.  ix.  c.  9.  When
the  fleet  arrived  near  the  mouth  of  the  Indus,  the  asto-
nishment excited  by  the  extraordinary  flow  and  ebb  of
tide  in  the  Indian  ocean,  a  phenomenon  (according  to
Arrian)with  which  Alexander  and  his  soldiers  were  un-
acquainted, lib.  vi.  c.  19.,  is  another  proof  of  their  igno-
rance in  maritime  science.  Xor  is  there  any  reason  to
be  surprised  at  their  astonishment,  as  the  tides  are  hardly
perceptible  in  the  Mediterranean,  beyond  which  the
knowledge  of  the  Greeks  and  Macedonians  did  not  extend.
For  the  same  reason,  when  the  Romans  carried  their
victorious  arms  into  the  countries  situated  on  the  Atlan-
tic ocean,  or  on  the  seas  that  communicate  with  it,  this
new  phenomenon  of  the  tides  was  an  object  of  wonder
and  terror  to  them.  Ca?sar  describes  the  amazement  of
his  soldiers  at  a  spring-tide,  which  greatly  damaged  the
fleet  with  which  he  invaded  Britain,  and  acknowledges
that  it  was  an  appearance  with  which  they  were  unac-
quainted; Bell.  Gallic,  lib.  iv.  c.  29.  The  tides  on  the
coast  near  the  mouth  of  the  Indus  are  remarkably  high,
and  the  eflects  of  them  verv  sjeat,  especiallv  that  sudden

246  NOTES AND

and  abrupt  influx  of  the  tide  into  the  mouths  of  rivers  or
narrow  straits  which  is  known  in  India,  by  the  name  of
The  Bore,  and  is  accurately  described  by  Major  Rennell,
Introd.  xxiv.  Mem.  278. In  the  Periplus  Maris  Ery-
thrasi,  p.  26.  these  high  tides are  mentioned,  and  the
description  of  them  nearly  resembles  that  of  the  Bore.
A  very  exaggerated  account  of  the  tides  in  the  Indian
ocean  is  given  by  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  xiii.  c.  25. Ma-
jor Rennell  seems  to  think,  that  Alexander  and  his  fol-
lowers could  not  be  so  entirely  unacquainted  with  the
phenomenon  of  the  tides,  as  Herodotus  had  informed
the  Greeks,  "  that  in  the  Red  sea  there  was  a  regular
ebb  and  flow  of  the  tide  every  day  ;"  lib.  ii.  c.  11. This
is  all  the  explanation  of  that  phenomenon  given  by  He-
rodotus. But  among  the  ancients  there  occur  instances
of  inattention  to  facts,  related  by  respectable  authors,
which appear  surprising  in  modern  times. Though
Herodotus,  as  I  have  just  now  observed,  gave  an  ac-
count of  the  voyage  performed  by  Scylax  at  considerable
length,  neither  Alexander,  nor  his  historians,  take  any
notice  of  that  event. I  shall  afterward  have  occasion
to  mention  a  more  remarkable  instance  of  the  inattention
of  later  Avriters  to  an  accurate  description  w  hich  Hero-
dotus had  given  of  the  Caspian  sea. From  these,  and
other  similar  instances  which  might  have  been  produced,
we  may  conclude,  that  the  slight  mention  of  the  regular
flow  and  ebb  of  tide  in  the  Red  sea,  is  not  a  sufficient
reason  for  rejecting,  as  incredible,  Arrian's  account  of
the  surprise  of  Alexander's  soldiers  when  they  first  be-
held the  extraordinary  effects  of  the  tide  at  the  mouth  of
the  Indus. — 3.  The  course of  Nearchus's  voyage,  the
promontories,  the  creeks,  the  rivers,  the  cities,  the  moun-
tains, which  came  successively  in  his  view,  are  so  clear-
ly described,  and  the  distances  of  such  as  were  most
worthy  of  notice  are  so  distinctly  marked,  that  M.  D  An-
ville,  by  comparing  these  with  the actual  position  of
the  country,  according  to  the  best  accounts  of  it,  ancient
as  well  as  modern,  has  been  able  to  point  out  most  of
the  places  which  Nearchus  mentions,  with  a  degree  of
certainty  which  docs  as  much  honour  to  the  veracity  of

ILLUSTRATIONS.  247

the  Grecian  navigator,  as  to  the  industry,  learning,  and
penetration  of  the  French  geographer.  Mem.  de  Literat.
torn.  XXX.  p.  132,  &c.

In  modern  times,  the  Red  sea  is  a  name  appropriated
to  the  Arabian  gulf,  but  the  ancients  denominated  the
ocean  which  stretches  from  that  gulf  to  India,,  the  Ery-
thraean sea,  from  king  Erythras,  of  whom  nothing  more
is  known  than  the  name,  which  in  the  Greek  language
signifies  red.  From  this  casual  meaning  of  the  word,  it
came  to  be  believed  that  it  was  of  a  different  colour
from  other  seas,  and  consequently  of  more  dangerous
navigation.

Note  VIII.  Sect.  I.  p.  27.

Alexander  was  so  intent  on  rendering  this  union  of
his  subjects  complete,  that  after  his  death  there  was
found  in  his  tablets  or  commentaries  (among  other  mag-
nificent schemes,  which  he  meditated),  a  resolution  to
build  several  new  cities,  some  in  Asia,  and  some  in  Eu-
rope, and  to  people  those  in  Asia  with  Europeans,  and
those  in  Europe  with  Asiatics,  "  that  (says  the  histo-
rian), by  intermarriages,  and  exchange  of  good  offices,
the  inhabitants  of  these  two  great  continents  might  be
gradually  moulded  into  a  similarity  of  sentiments,  and
become  attached  to  each  other  with  mutual  aftection."
Diod.  Sicul.lib.  xviii.  c.  4.

The  oriental  historians  have  mingled  the  little  that
they  know  concerning  the  transactions  of  European  na-
tions, particularly  concerning  the  reign  of  Alexander  the
Great,  and  his  conquest  of  Persia,  with  so  many  fabu-
lous and  incredible  circumstances,  that  hardly  any  at-
tention is  due  to  them.  Though  they  misrepresented
every  event  in  his  life,  they  entertained  a  high  idea  of  his
great  power,  distinguishing  him  by  the  appellation  of
Escander  DMilcarnein,  i.  e.  the  Two-horned,  in  allusion
to  the  extent  of  his  dominions,  which,  according  to  them,
reached  from  the  western  to  the  eastern  extremity  of  the
earth.  Herbelot.  Bib.  Orient.  Article  Escander.  Anc.
Univ.  Hist.  vol.  v.  8vo.  edit.  p.  433.  Richardson's  Dissert,
prefixed  to  his  Dictionary  of  the  Persian  and  Arabic,

248  NOTES AND

p.  xii.  Whether  the  historians  of  Indostan  have  given  an
account  of  Alexander's  invasion  of  India  Avith  greater
accuracy,  cannot  be  known,  until  some  of  their  works,
w  ritten  in  the  Sanskreet,  are  translated.  That  some  tra-
ditional knowledge  of  Alexander's  invasion  of  India  is
still  preserved  in  the  northern  provinces  of  the  peninsula,
is  manifest  from  several  circumstances.  The  Rajahs  of
Chitore,  who  are  esteemed  the  most  ancient  establish-
ment of  Hindoo  princes,  and  the  noblest  of  the  Rajah-
pout  tribes,  boast  of  their  descent  from  Porus,  famous,
as  well  in  the  east  as  in  the  west,  for  his  gallant  oppo-
sition to  the  Macedonian  conqueror.  Orme's  Fragm.
p.  5.  Major  Rennell  has  informed  me,  by  accounts  lately
received  from  India,  and  confirmed  by  a  variety  of  tes-
timonies, that,  in  the  country  of  Kuttore,  the  eastern
extreme  of  the  ancient  Bactria,  a  people  who  claimed  to
be  the  descendants  of  Alexander's  followers,  were  exist-
ing when  Tamerlane  invaded  that  province.  In  Bijore,
a  country  more  to  the  west  in  the  same  district,  the
Bazira  of  Alexander,  there  is  a  tribe  at  this  day  which
traces  its  origin  to  certain  persons  left  there  by  the  con-
queror when  he  passed  through  that  province.  Both
Abul  Fazel,  and  Soojah  Rae,  an  eastern  historian  of
good  reputation,  report  this  tradition  without  any  mate-
rial variation.  The  latter,  indeed,  adds,  that  these  Euro-
peans, if  we  may  call  them  so,  continued  to  preserve
that  ascendancy  over  their  neighbours,  which  their  an-
cestors may  be  supposed  to  have  possessed  when  they
first  settled  here.  Although  we  should  reject  this  pedi-
gree as  false,  yet  the  bare  claim  argues  the  belief  of  the
natives,  for  which  there  must  have  been  some  foundation,
that  Alexander  not  only  conquered  Bijore,  but  also  trans-
ferred that  conquest  to  some  of  his  own  countrymen.
Rennell,  Mem.  2d  edit.  p.  162.  The  people  of  Bijore
had  likewise  a  high  idea  of  Alexander's  extensive  au-
thority ;  and  they,  too,  denominated  him  the  Two-horned,
agreeably  to  the  striking  emblem  of  power  in  all  the
eastern  languages.  Ayeen  Akbery,  xi.  194.  Many  in-
stances of  this  emblem  being  used,  will  occur  to  every
person  accustomed  to  read  the  sacred  Scriptures.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  249

Note  IX.  Sect.  I.  p.  29.

It  seems  to  be  an  opinion  generally  received,  that
Alexander  built  only  two  cities  in  India,  Nicaea,  and
Bucephalia,  situated  on  the  Hydaspes,  the  modern  Che-
lum,  and  that  Craterus  superintended  the  building  of
both.  But  it  is  evident,  from  Arrian,  lib.  v.  c.  ult.,  that
he  built  a  third  city  on  the  Acesines,  now  the  Jenaub,
under  the  direction  of  Hephaestion ;  and  if  it  was  his
object  to  retain  the  command  of  the  country,  a  place  of
strength  on  some  of  the  rivers  to  the  south  of  the  Hydaspes
seems  to  have  been  necessary  for  that  purpose.  This
part  of  India  has  been  so  little  visited  in  modern  times,
that  it  is  impossible  to  point  out  with  precision  the  si-
tuation of  these  cities.  If  P.  Tieffenthaler  were  well
founded  in  his  conjecture,  that  the  river  now  called
Rauvee  is  the  Acesines  of  Arrian,  Bernouilli,  vol.  i.
p.  39,  it  is  probable  that  this  city  was  built  somewhere
near  Lahore,  one  of  the  most  important  stations  in  that
part  of  India,  and  reckoned  in  the  Ayeen  Akbery  to  be
a  city  of  very  high  antiquity.  But  Major  Rennell,  in  my
opinion,  gives  good  reason  for  supposing  the  Jenaub  to
be  the  Acesines  of  the  ancients.

Note  X.  Sect.  I.  p.  29.

The  religious  scruples  which  prevented  the  Persians
from  making  any  voyage  by  sea,  were  known  to  the  an-
cients. Pliny  relates  of  one  of  the  Magi,  who  was  sent  on
an  embassy  from  Tiridates  to  the  emperor  Nero,  "  Navi-
gare  noluerat,  quoniam  exspuere  in  Maria,  aliisque  mor-
taliura  necessitatibus  violare  naturara  cam,  fas  non  pu-
tant;"  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  xxx.  c.  2.  This  aversion  to  the
sea  they  carried  so  far,  that,  according  to  the  observa-
tion of  a  well-informed  historian,  there  was  not  a  city
of  any  note  in  their  empire  built  upon  the  sea-coast ;
Ammian,  Marcel,  lib.  xxiii.  c.  6.  We  learn  from  Dr.
Hyde,  how  intimately  these  ideas  were  connected  with
the  doctrines  of  Zoroaster ;  Rel.  Vet.  Pers.  cap.  vi.  In
all  the  wars  of  the  Persians  with  Greece,  the  fleets  of
the  Great  King  consisted  entirely  of  ships  furnished  by

250  NOTES  AND

the  Phenicians,  Syrians,  the  conquered  provinces  of  the
Lesser  Asia,  and  the  islands  adjacent.  Herodotus  and
Diodorus  Siculus  mention  the  quota  furnished  by  each
country  in  order  to  compose  the  fleet  of  twelve  hundred
ships  with  which  Xerxes  invaded  Greece,  and  among
these  there  is  not  one  belonging  to  Persia.  At  the  same
time  it  is  proper  to  observe,  that,  according  to  Hero-
dotus, whose  authority  is  unexceptionable  with  regard
to  this  point,  Ariabigincs,  a  son  of  Darius,  acted  as  ad-
miral of  the  Persian  fleet,  and  had  several  satraps  of
high  rank  under  his  command,  and  both  Persians  and
Medes  served  as  soldiers  on  board  of  it ;  Herod,  lib.  vii.
c.  9G,  97.  By  what  motives,  or  what  authority,  they
were  induced  to  act  in  this  manner,  I  cannot  explain.
From  some  religious  scruples  similar  to  those  of  the
Persians,  many  of  the  natives  of  Indostan,  in  our  own
time,  refuse  to  embark  on  board  a  ship,  and  to  serve  at
sea;  and  yet  on  some  occasions  the  sepoys  in  the  ser-
vice of  the  European  powers  have  got  the  better  of
these  scruples.

Note  XI.  Sect.  I.  p.  30.

M.  Le Baron  de  Sainte-Croix,  in  his  ingenious  and
learned  Critique  des  Historiens  d'Alexandre  le  Grand;,
p.  96,  seems  to  entertain  some  doubt  with  respect  to  the
number  of  the  cities  which  Alexander  is  said  to  have
built.  Plutarch  de  Fort  Alex,  affirms,  that  he  founded
no  fewer  than  seventy.  It  appears  from  many  passages
in  ancient  authors,  that  the  building  of  cities,  or,  what
may  be  considered  as  the  same,  the  establishment  of  for-
tified stations,  was  the  mode  of  maintaining  their  au-
thority in  the  conquered  nations,  adopted  not  only  by
Alexander,  but  by  his  successors.  Seleucus  and  An-
tiochus,  to  whom  the  greater  part  of  the  Persian  empire
became  subject,  were  no  less  remarkable  for  founding
new  cities  than  Alexander,  and  these  cities  seemed
fully  to  have  answered  the  purposes  of  the  founders,  as
they  effectually  prevented  (as  I  shall  afterward  have
occasion  to  observe)  the  revolt  of  the  conquered  pro-
vinces. Though  the  Greeks,  animated  witli  the  love  of

ILLUSTRATIONS.  231

liberty  and  of  their  native  country,  refused  to  settle  in
the  Persian  empire  while  under  the  dominion  of  its  na-
tive monarchs,  even  when  allured  by  the  prospect  of
great  advantage,  as  M.  de  Sainte-Croix  remarks,  the
case  became  perfectly  different,  when  that  empire  was
subjected  to  their  own  dominion,  and  they  settled  there,
not  as  subjects  but  as  masters.  Both  Alexander  and
his  successors  discovered  much  discernment  in  choos-
ing the  situation  of  the  cities  which  they  built.  Seleucia,
which  Seleucus  founded,  is  a  striking  instance  of  this,
and  became  hardly  inferior  to  Alexandria  in  number  of
inhabitants,  in  wealth,  and  in  importance ;  Mr.  Gibbon,
vol.  i.  p.  250. M.  D'Anville,  Mem.  de  Literat.  xxx.

Note  XII.  Sect.  1.  p.  32.

It  is  from  Justin  we  receive  the  slender  knowledge
we  have  of  the  progress  which  Seleucus  made  in  India,
lib.  XV.  c.  4.  But  we  cannot  rely  on  his  evidence,  unless
when  it  is  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  other  authors.
Plutarch  seems  to  assert,  that  Seleucus  had  penetrated
far  into  India ;  but  that  respectable  writer  is  more  emi-
nent for  his  discernment  of  characters,  and  his  happy
selection  of  those  circumstances  which  mark  and  discri-
minate them,  than  for  the  accuracy  of  his  historical  re-
searches. Pliny,  whose  authority  is  of  greater  weight,
seems  to  consider  it  as  certain,  that  Seleucus  had  car-
ried his  arms  into  districts  of  India  which  Alexander
never  visited ;  Plin.  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  17.  The  pas-
sage in  which  this  is  mentioned  is  somewhat  obscure,
but  it  seems  to  imply,  that  Seleucus  had  marched  from
the  Hyphasis  to  the  Hysudrus,  from  thence  to  Pali-
bothra,  and  from  that  to  the  mouth  of  the  Ganges.  The
distances  of  the  principal  stations  in  this  march  are
marked,  the  whole  amounting  to  2244  Roman  miles.  In
this  sense  M.  Bayer  understands  the  words  of  Pliny ;
Histor.  Regni  Grascorum  Bactriani,  p.  37.  But  to  me
it  appears  highly  improbable,  that  the  Indian  expedition
of  Seleucus  could  have  continued  so  long  as  to  allow
time  for  operations  of  such  extent.  If  Seleucus  had
advanced  as  far  into  India  as  the  mouth  of  the  Ganges,

252  NOTES  AND

the  aucicnts  must  have  had  a  more  accurate  kaowled'-^e
of  that  part  ol'  the  country  than  they  seem  ever  to  have
possessed.

Note  XIII.  Sect.  I.  p.  33.

Major  Rknnell  gives  a  magnificent  idea  of  this,  by
informing  us,  that  "  the  Ganges,  after  it  has  escaped
from  the  mountainous  tract  in  which  it  had  wandered
above  eight  hundred  miles,"  Mem.  p.  233,  "  receives  in
its  course  through  the  plains  eleven  rivers,  some  of  them
as  large  as  the  Rhine,  and  none  smaller  than  the  Thames,
besides  as  many  more  of  lesser  note  ;"  p.  257.

Note  XIV.  Sect.  I.  p.  33.

In  fixing  the  position  of  Palibothra,  1  have  ventured
to  differ  from  Major  Ilennell,  and  I  venture  to  do  so
with  difKdence.  According  to  Strabo,  Palibothra  was
situated  at  the  junction  of  the  Ganges  and  another  river;
lib.  XV.  p.  1028.  A.  Arrian  is  still  more  explicit.  He
places  Palibothra  at  the  confluence  of  the  Gahges  and
Erranaboas,  the  last  of  w  hich  lie  describes  as  less  than
the  Ganges  of  Indus,  but  greater  than  any  other  known
river;  Hist.  Ind.  c.  10.  This  description  of  its  situation
corresponds  exactly  with  that  of  Allahabad.  P.  Bou-
dier,  to  whose  observations  the  geography  of  India  is
much  indebted,  says,  that  the  Jumna,  at  its  junction  with
the  Ganges,  appeared  to  him  not  much  inferior  in  mag-,
nitude  to  that  river;  D'Anvillc,  Antiq.  de  ITnde,  p.  53.
Allahabad  is  the  name  which  was  given  to  that  city  by
the  emperor  Akbar,who  erected  a  strong  fortress  there;
an  elegant  delineation  of  which  is  published  by  Mr.
Hodges,  N"IV.  of  his  Select  Views  in  India.  Its  ancient
name,  by  which  it  is  still  known  among  the  Hindoos,  is
Praecj,  or  Piyag,  and  the  people  of  the  district  arc  called
Praegi,  which  bears  a  near  resemblance  to  Prasij,  the
ancient  appellation  of  the  kingdom  of  which  Palibothra
was  the  capital ;  P.  Tiessenthaler,  Bernouilli,  torn.  i.  223.
D'Anville,  p.  56.  Allahabad  is  such  a  noted  seat  of
Hindoo  devotion,  that  it  is  denominated  The  King  of

ILLUSTRATIONS.  253

Worshipped  Places ;  Ayeen  Akbery,  vol.  ii.  p.  35.  "  The
territory  around  it,  to  the  extent  of  forty  miles,  is  deemed
holy  ground.  The  Hindoos  believe,  that  when  a  man
dies  in  this  place,  whatever  he  wishes  for  he  will  obtain
in  his  next  regeneration.  Although  they  teach  that  sui-
cide in  general  will  be  punished  with  torments  hereafter,
yet  they  consider  it  as  meritorious  for  a  man  to  kill  him-
self at  Allahabad ;'"  Ayeen  Akbery,  iii.  256.  P.  Ties-
senthaler  describes  the  various  objects  of  veneration  at
Allahabad,  which  are  still  visited  with  great  devotion
by  an  immense  number  of  pilgrims';  Bernouilli,  tom.  i.
224.  From  all  these  circumstances,  we  may  conclude
it  to  be  a  place  of  great  antiquity,  and  in  the  same  si-
tuation with  the  Palibothra  of  antiquity.

Major  Rennell  has  been  induced  to  place  Palibo-
thra on  the  same  site  with  Patna,  chiefly  by  two  con-
siderations.— 1.  From  having  learned  that  on  or  near
the  site  of  Patna  stood  anciently  a  very  large  city  named
Patelpoother,  or  Patalipputra,  which  nearly  resembles
the  ancient  name  of  Palibothra.  Although  there  is  not
now  a  confluence  of  two  rivers  at  Patna,  he  was  in-
formed that  the  junction  of  the  Soane  with  the  Ganges,
now  twenty-two  miles  from  Patna,  was  formerly  under
the  walls  of  that  city.  The  rivers  of  India  sometimes
change  their  course  in  a  singular  manner,  and  he  pro-
duces some  remarkable  instances  of  it.  But  even  should
it  be  allowed,  that  the  accounts  which  the  natives  give
of  this  variation  of  the  course  of  the  Soane  were  per-
fectly accurate,  I  question  whether  Arrian's  description
of  the  magnitude  of  Erranaboas  be  applicable  to  that

river,  certainly  not  so  justly  as  to  the  Jumna. 2.  He

seems  to  have  been  influenced,  in  some  degree,  by
Pliny's  Itinerary,  or  Table  of  Distances  from  Taxila
(the  modern  Attock)  to  the  mouth  of  the  Ganges ;  Nat.
Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  17.  But  the  distances  in  that  Itinerary
are  marked  so  inaccurately,  and  in  some  instances  are
so  palpably  erroneous,  that  one  cannot  found  upon  them
with  much  security.  According  to  it,  Palibothra  is  situated
four  hundred  and  twenty-five  miles  below  the  confluence
of  the  Jumna  and  Ganges.  The  actual  distance,  however,
between  Allahabad  and  Patna,  is  not  more  than  two

254  NOTES AND

hundred  British  miles.  A  disagreement  so  considerable
cannot  be  accounted  for,  without  supposing  some  ex-
traordinary error  in  the  Itinerary,  or  that  the  point  of
conflux  of  the  Jumna  with  the  Ganges  has  undergone  a
change.  For  the  former  of  these  suppositions  there  is
no  authority  (as  far  as  I  know)  from  any  manuscript,  or
for  the  latter  from  any  tradition.  Major  Rennell  has
produced  the  reasons  which  led  him  to  suppose  the  site
of  Palibothra  to  be  the  same  with  that  of  Patna ;  Me-
moires,  p.  49 — 54.  Some  of  the  objections  which  might
be  made  to  this  supposition  he  has  foreseen,  and  endea-
voured to  obviate;  and  after  all  that  I  have  added  to
them,  I  shall  not  be  surprised,  if,  in  a  geographical  dis-
cussion, my  readers  are  disposed  to  prefer  his  decision
to  mine.

Note  XV.  Sect.  I.  p.  35.

I  DO  not  mention  a  short  inroad  into  India  by  Antio-
chus  the  Great,  about  one  hundred  and  ninety-seven
years  posterior  to  the  invasion  of  his  ancestor  Seleucus.
We  know  nothing  more  of  this  transaction,  than  that  the
Syrian  monarch,  after  finishing  the  war  he  carried  on
against  the  two  revolted  provinces  of  Parthia  and  Bac-
tria,  entered  India,  and  concluding  a  peace  with  Sopha-
gasenus,  a  king  of  the  country,  received  from  him  a
number  of  elephants,  and  a  sum  of  money ;  Polyb.  lib.
X.  p.  597,  &c.  lib.  xi.  p.  G51.  edit.  Casaub.  Justin,  lib.  xv.
c.  4.  Bayer's  Hist.  Regn.  Grajcor.  Bactr.  p.  69,  &c.

Note  XVI.  Sect.  I.  p.  37.

A  FACT  cursorily  related  by  Strabo,  and  which  has
escaped  the  inquisitive  industry  of  M.  de  Guignes,  coin-
cides remarkably  with  the  narrative  of  the  Chinese
writers,  and  confirms  it.  The  Greeks,  he  says,  were  de-
prived of  Bactria  by  tribes  or  hordes  of  Scythian  No-
mades,  who  came  from  the  country  beyond  the  Jaxartes,
and  are  known  by  the  names  of  Asij,  Parsiani,  Tachari,
and  Sacarauli;  Strab.  lib.  xi.  p.  779.  A.  The  Nomades
of  the  ancients  were  nations  who,  like  the  Tartars,  sub-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  255

sisted  entirely,  or  almost  entirely,  as  shepherds,  without
aoriculture.

"a*

Note  XVII.  Sect.  I.  p.  38.

As  the  distance  of  Arsinoe,  the  modern  Suez,  from  the
Nile,  is  considerably  less  than  that  between  Berenice
and  Coptos,  it  was  by  this  route  that  all  the  commodities
imported  into  the  Arabian  gulf,  might  have  been  con-
veyed with  most  expedition  and  least  expense  into
Egypt.  But  the  navigation  of  the  Arabian  gulf,  which
even  in  the  present  improved  state  of  nautical  science  is
slow  and  difficult,  was  in  ancient  times  considered  by
the  nations  around  it  to  be  so  extremely  perilous,  that  it
led  them  to  give  such  names  to  several  of  its  promonto-
ries, bays,  and  harbours,  as  convey  a  striking  idea  of  the
impression  which  the  dread  of  this  danger  had  made
upon  their  imagination.  The  entry  into  the  gulf  they
called  Bahelmandehy  the  gate  or  port  of  affliction.  To
a  harbour  not  far  distant,  they  gave  the  name  oi  Mete,
I.  e.  Death.  A  headland  adjacent  they  called  Garde/an,
the  Cape  of  Burial.  Other  denominations  of  similar  im-
port are  mentioned  by  the  author  to  whom  I  am  in-
debted for  this  information.  Bruce's  Travels,  vol.  i.
p.  442,  &c.  It  is  not  surprising  then,  that  the  staple  of
Indian  trade  should  have  been  transferred  from  the
northern  extremity  of  the  Arabian  gulf  to  Berenice,  as
by  this  change  a  dangerous  navigation  was  greatly
shortened.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  chief  reason
that  induced  Ptolemy  to  establish  the  port  of  communi-
cation with  India  at  Berenice,  as  there  were  other  har-
bours on  the  Arabian  gulf  which  were  considerably
nearer  than  it  to  the  Nile.  At  a  later  period,  after  the
ruin  of  Coptos  by  the  emperor  Dioclesian,  we  are  in-
formed by  Abulfeda,  Descript.  Egypt,  edit.  Michaelis,
p.  77,  that  Indian  commodities  were  conveyed  from  the
Red  sea  to  the  Nile,  by  the  shortest  route,  viz.  from
Cosseir,  probably  the  Philoteras  Portus  of  Ptolemy,  to
Cous,  the  Vicus  Apollinis,  a  journey  of  four  days.  The
same  account  of  the  distance  was  given  by  the  natives
to  Dr.  Pococke,  Travels,  vol.  i.  p.  87. In  consequence

256  NOTES  AND

of  this,  Cous,  from  a  small  village,  became  the  city  in
Tipper  Egypt  next  in  magniludc  to  Fostat,  or  Old  Cairo.
In  process  of  time,  from  causes  Avhich  I  cannot  explain,
the  trade  from  tlie  Red  sea  by  Cosseir  removed  to  Kene,
farther  down  the  river  tlian  Cous,  Abulf.  p.  13.  77.
D'Anville,  Egypte,  196—200.  In  modern  times,  all  the
commodities  of  India,  imported  into  Egypt,  are  either
brought  by  sea  from  Gidda  to  Suez,  and  thence  carried
on  camels  to  Cairo,  or  are  conveyed  by  land-carriage  by
the  caravan  returning  from  the  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.
Niebuhr  Voyage,  torn.  i.  p.  224.  Volney,  1.  188,  &c.
This,  as  U\r  as  I  have  been  able  to  trace  it,  is  a  complete
account  of  all  the  different  routes  by  which  the  produc-
tions of  the  East  have  been  conveyed  to  the  Nile,  from
the  first  opening  of  that  communication.  It  is  singular
that  P.  Sicard,  Mem.  des  Missions  dans  le  Levant,  tom.
ii.  p.  157,  and  some  other  respectable  writers,  should
suppose  Cosseir  to  be  the  Berenice  founded  by  Ptolemy,
although  Ptolemy  has  laid  down  its  latitude  at  23°  50',
and  Strabo  has  described  it  as  nearly  under  the  same
parallel  with  that  of  Syene,  lib.  ii.  p.  195.  D.  In  conse-
quence of  this  mistake,  Pliny's  computation  of  the  dis-
tance between  Berenice  and  Coptos,  at  two  hundred  and
fifty-eight  miles,  has  been  deemed  erroneous.  Pococke,
p.  87.  But  as  Pliny  not  only  mentions  the  total  distance,
l)ut  names  the  different  stations  in  the  journey,  and  spe-
cifies the  number  of  miles  between  each ;  and  as  the
Itinerary  of  Antonius  coincides  exactly  with  his  account,
D'Anville  Egypte,  p.  21,  there  is  no  reason  to  call  in
question  the  accuracy  of  it.

Note  XVIII.  Sect.  I.  p.  40.

Major  Rennell  is  of  opinion,  "  that  under  the
Ptolemies,  the  Egyptians  extended  their  navigation  to
the  extreme  point  of  the  Indian  continent,  and  even
sailed  up  the  Ganges  to  Palibothra,"  on  the  same  site
(according  to  him)  with  the  modern  Patna.  Introd.
p.  xxxvi.  But  had  it  been  usual  to  sail  up  the  Ganges
as  high  as  Patna,  the  interior  parts  of  India  must  have
been  better  known  to  the  ancients  than  they  ever  were.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  257

and  they  would  not  have  contmued  to  derive  their  in-
formation concerning  them from  Megasthenes alone.
Strabo  begins  his  description  of  India  in  a  very  remark-
able manner. He  requests  his  readers  to  peruse  with
indulgence  the  account  which  he  gives  of  it,  as  it  was  a
country  very  remote,  and  few  persons  had  visited  it ;  and
of  these,  many  having  seen  only  a  small  part  of  the
country,  related  things  either  from  hear  say,  or,  at  the
best,  what  they  had  hastily  remarked  while  they  passed
through  it  in  the  course  of  military  service,  or  on  a
journey.  Strabo,  lib.  xv.  p.  1005.  B. He  takes  notice
that  few  of  the  traders from the  Arabian gulf  ever
reached  the  Ganges. Ibid.  1006.  C. He  asserts,  that
the  Ganges  enters  the  sea  by  one  mouth,  ibid.  1011.  C. ;
an  error  into  which  he  could  not  have  fallen  if  the  navi-
gation of  that  river  had  been  common  in  his  time. He
mentions  indeed  the  sailing  up  the  Ganges,  ibid.  1010,
but  it  is  cursorily  in  a  single  sentence;  whereas,  if  such
a  considerable  inland  voyage  of  above  four  hundred
miles  through  a  populous  and  rich  country,  had  been
customary,  or  even  if  it  had  ever  been  performed  by  the
Roman,  or  Greek,  or  Egyptian  traders,  it  must  have  me-
rited a  particular  description,  and  must  have  been  men-
tioned by  Pliny  and  other  writers,  as  there  was  nothing
similar  to  it  in  the  practice  of  navigation  among  the  an-
cients. It  is  observed  by  Arrian  (or  whoever  is  the  au-
thor of  the  Periplus  Maris  Erythraei),  that  previous  to
the  discovery  of  a  new  route  to  India,  which  shall  be
mentioned  afterward  the  commerce  with  that  country
was  carried  on  in  small  vessels  which  sailed  round  every
bay,  p.  32. Ap.  Huds.  Geogr.  Min. Vessels  of  such
light  construction,  and  which  followed  this  mode  of
sailing,  were  ill  fitted  for  a  voyage  so  distant  as  that
round  Cape  Comorin,  and  up  the  Bay  of  Bengal,  to  Patna.
It  is  not  improbable,  that  the  merchants,  whom  Strabo
mentions  as  having  reached  the  Ganges,  may  have  tra-
velled thither  by  land,  either  from  the  countries  towards
the  mouth  of  the  Indus,  or  from  some  part  of  the  Mala-
bar coast,  and  that  the  navigation  up  the  Ganges,  of
which  he  casually  takes  notice,  was  performed  by  the
natives  in  vessels  of  the  country. This  opiniori  derives
VOL. IX.  s

258  NOTES  AND

some  confirmation  from  his  remarks  upon  the  bad  struc-
ture of  the  vessels  which  frequented  that  part  of  the
Indian  ocean.  From  his  description  of  them,  p.  1012.
C,  it  is  evident  that  they  were  vessels  of  the  country.

Note  XIX.  Sect.  I.  p.  41.

The  erroneous  ideas  of  many  intelligent  writers  of
antiquity  with  respect  to  the  Caspian  sea,  though  well
known  to  every  man  of  letters,  are  so  remarkable,  and
afford  such  a  striking  example  of  the  imperfection  of
their  geographical  knowledge,  that  a  more  full  account
of  them  may  not  only  be  acceptable  to  some  of  my  read-
ers, but  in  endeavouring  to  trace  the  various  routes  by
which  the  commodities  of  the  East  were  conveyed  to  the
nations  of  Europe,  it  becomes  necessary  to  enter  into
some  detail  concerning  their  various  sentiments  with  re-
spect to  this  matter. 1.  According  to  Strabo,  the  Cas-
pian is  a  bay,  that  communicates  with  the  great  North-
em  ocean,  from  which  it  issues  at  first,  by  a  narrow  strait,
and  then  expands  into  a  sea  extending  in  breadth  live
hundred  stadia,  lib.  xi.  p.  773.  A.  With  him  Pomponius
Mela  agrees,  and  describes  the  strait  by  which  the  Cas-
pian is  connected  with  the  ocean,  as  of  considerable
length,  and  so  narrow  that  it  had  the  appearance  of  a
river,  lib.  iii.  c.  5.  edit. Pliny  likewise  gives  a  similar
description  of  it,  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  13. In  the  age  of
Justinian,  this  opinion,  concerning  the  communication
of  the  Caspian  sea  with  the  ocean,  w  as  still  prevalent ;
Cosm.  Indicopl.  Topog.  Christ,  lib.  ii.  p.  138.  C.  2.  Some
early  writers,  by  a  mistake  still  more  singular,  have  sup-
posed the  Caspian  sea  to  be  connected  with  the  Euxine.
Quintus  Curtius,  whose  ignorance  of  geography  is  noto-
rious, has  adopted  this  error,  lib.  vii.  c.  7.  edit.  3.  Arrian,
though  a  much  more  judicious  writer,  and  who,  by  re-
siding for  some  time  in  the  Roman  province  of  Cappa-
docia,  of  which  he  was  governor,  might  have  obtained
more  accurate  information,  declares  in  one  place  the
origin  of  the  Caspian  sea  to  be  still  unknown ;  and  it  is
doubtful  whether  it  was  connected  with  the  Euxine,  or
with  the  great  Eastern  ocean  which  surrounds  India  :

ILLUSTRATIONS.  26£>

lib.  vii.  c.  16.  In  another  place  he  asserts,  that  there
was  a  communication  between  the  Caspian  and  the
Eastern  ocean ;  lib.  v.  c.  26.  These  errors  appear  more
extraordinary,  as  a  just  description  had  been  given  of
the  Caspian  by  Herodotus,  near  five  hundred  years  be-
fore the  age  of  Strabo.  "  The  Caspian  (says  he)  is  a
sea  by  itself  unconnected  with  any  other.  Its  length  is
as  much  as  a  vessel  with  oars  can  sail  in  fifteen  days,
its  greatest  breadth  as  much  as  it  can  sail  in  eight  days ;"
lib.  1.  c.  203.  Aristotle  describes  it  in  the  same  manner,
and  with  his  usual  precision  contends  that  it  ought  to  be
called  a  great  lake,  not  a  sea ;  Meteorolog.  lib.  ii.  Dio-
dorus  Siculus  concurs  with  them  in  opinion,  vol.  ii.  lib.
xviii.  p.  261.  None  of  those  authors  determine  whether
the  greatest  length  of  the  Caspian  was  from  north  to
south,  or  from  east  to  west.  In  the  ancient  maps
which  illustrate  the  geography  of  Ptolemy,  it  is  deli-
neated, as  if  its  greatest  length  extended  from  east  to
west.  In  modern  times  the  first  information  concern-
ing the  true  form  of  the  Caspian  which  the  people  of
Europe  received,  was  given  by  Anthony  Jeiikinson  an
English  merchant,  who  with  a  caravan  from  Russia  tra-
velled along  a  considerable  part  of  its  coast  in  the  year
1558 ;  Hakluyt  Collect,  vol.  i.  p.  334.  The  accuracy  of
Jenkinson's  description  was  confirmed  by  an  actual
survey  of  that  sea  made  by  order  of  Peter  the  Great,
A.  D.  1718;  and  it  is  now  ascertained  not  only  that  the
Caspian  is  unconnected  with  any  other  sea,  but  that  its
length  from  north  to  south  is  considerably  more  than  its
greatest  breadth  from  east  to  west.  The  length  of  the
Caspian  from  north  to  south  is  about  six  hundred  and
eighty  miles,  and  in  no  part  more  than  two  hundred  and
sixty  miles  in  breadth  from  east  to  west.  Coxe's  Travels,
vol.  ii.  p.  257.  The  proportional  difference  of  its  length
and  breadth  accords  nearly  with  that  mentioned  by  He-
rodotus. From  this  detail,  however,  we  learn  how  the
ill-founded  ideas  concerning  it,  which  were  generally
adopted,  gave  rise  to  various  wild  schemes  of  conveying
Indian  commodities  to  Europe  by  means  of  its  supposed
communication  with  the  Euxine  sea,  or  with  the  North-
ern ocean. It  is  an  additional  proof  of  the  attention  of

s  2

200  NOTES  AND

Alexander  the  Great  to  every  thing  conducive  to  the
improvement  of  commerce,  that  a  short  time  before  his
death  he  gave  directions  to  fit  out  a  squadron  in  the
Caspian,  ia  order  to  survey  that  sea,  and  to  discover
whether  it  was  connected  either  with  the  Euxine  or  In-
dian ocean;  Arrian,  lib.  vii.  c.  1().

Note  XX.  Sect.  I.  p.  49.

From  this  curious  detail,  we  learn  how  imperfect  an-
cient navigation  was,  even  in  its  most  improved  state.
The  voyage  from  Berenice  to  Ocelis  could  not  have
taken  thirty  days,  if  any  other  course  had  been  held  than
that  of  servilely  following  the  windings  of  the  coast.
The  voyage  from  Ocelis  to  Musiris  would  be  (according
to  Major  Rennell)  fifteen  days'  run  for  a  European  ship
in  the  modern  style  of  navigation,  being  about  seventeen
hundred  and  fifty  marine  miles,  on  a  straight  course ;
Introd.  p.  xxxvii. It  is  remarkable, that  though  the
Periplus  Maris  Erythrasi  was  written  after  the  voyage  of
Hippalus,  the  chief  object  of  the  author  of  it  is  to  de-
scribe the  ancient  course  along  the  coasts  of  Arabia  and
Persia,  to  the  mouth  of  the  Indus,  and  from  thence  down
the  western  shore  of  the  continent  to  Musiris. I  can
account  for  this  only  by  supposing,  that  from  the  unwill-
ingness of  mankind  to  abandon  old  habits,  the  greater
part  of  the  traders  from  Berenice  still  continued  to  follow
that  route  to  which  they  were  accustomed. To  go  from
Alexandria  to  Musiris,  required  (according  to  Pliny)
ninety-four  days. In  the  year  1788,  the  Boddam,  a  ship
belonging  to  the  English  East  India  Company,  of  a  thou-
sand tons  burden,  took  only  fourteen  days  more  to  com-
plete her  voyage  from  Portsmouth  to  Madras. Such  are
the  improvements  which  have  been  made  in  navigation.

Note  XXI.  Sect.  I.  p.  50.

It  was  the  opinion  of  Plato,  that  in  a  well  regulated
commonwealth  the  citizens  should  not  engage  in  com-
merce, nor  the  state  aim  at  obtaining  maritime  power.
Commerce,  he  contends,  would corrupt the  purity  of

ILLUSTRATIONS.  261

their  morals,  and  by  entering  into  the  sea- service,  they
would  be  accustomed  to  find  pretexts  for  justifying  con-
duct so  inconsistent  with  what  was  manly  and  becoming,
as  would  gradually  relax  the  strictness  of  military  dis-
cipline. It  had  been  better  for  the  Athenians,  he  asserts,
to  have  continued  to  send  annually  the  sons  of  seven  of
their  principal  citizens  to  be  devoured  by  the  Minotaur,
than  to  have  changed  their  ancient  manners,  and  to  have
become  a  maritime  power.  In  that  perfect  republic,  of
which  he  delineates  the  form,  he  ordains  that  the  capital
should  be  situated  at  least  ten  miles  from  the  sea;  De
Legibus,  lib.  iv.  ab  initio.  These  ideas  of  Plato  were
adopted  by  other  philosophers.  Aristotle  enters  into  a
formal  discussion  of  the  question,  Whether  a  state  rightly
constituted  should  be  commercial  or  not  ?  and  though
abundantly  disposed  to  espouse  sentiments  opposite  to
those  of  Plato,  he  does  not  venture  to  decide  explicitly
with  respect  to  it;  De  Repub.  lib.  vii.  c.  6.  In  ages
when  such  opinions  prevail,  little  information  concerning
commerce  can  be  expected.

Note  XXII.  Sect.  II.  p.  53.

Pliny,  lib.  ix.  c.  35.  Principium  ergo  culmenque
omnium  rerum  praetij  Margaritae  tenent.  In  lib.  xxxvii.
c.  4,  he  afiirms.  Maximum  in  rebus  hnmanis  prastium,
non  solum  inter  gemmas,  habet  Adamas.  These  two
passages  stand  in  such  direct  contradiction  to  one
another,  that  it  is  impossible  to  reconcile  them,  or  to  de-
termine which  is  the  most  conformable  to  truth.  I  have
adhered  to  the  former,  because  we  have  many  instances
of  the  exorbitant  price  of  pearls,  but  none,  as  far  as  I
know,  of  diamonds  having  been  purchased  at  a  rate  so
high.  In  this  opinion  I  am  confirmed  by  a  passage  in
Pliny,  lib.  xix.  c.  1 ;  having  mentioned  the  exorbitant
price  of  Asbestos,  he  says,  "  aequat  praetia  excellentum
Margaritarum ;"  which  implies,  that  he  considered
pearls  to  be  of  higher  price  than  any  other  commodity.

262  NOTES AND

Note  XXIII.  Sect.  II.  p.  54.

Pliny  has  devoted  two  entire  books  of  his  Natural
History,  Jib.  xii.  and  xiii.,  to  the  enumeration  and  de-
scription of  the  spices,  aromatics,  ointments,  and  per-
fumes, the  use  of  which  luxury  had  introduced  among
his  countrymen.  As  many  of  these  were  the  productions
of  India,  or  of  the  countries  beyond  it,  and  as  the  trade
with  the  East  was  carried  on  to  a  great  extent  in  the
age  of  Pliny,  we  may  form  some  idea  of  the  immense
demand  for  them,  from  the  high  price  at  which  they
continued  to  be  sold  in  Rome.  To  compare  the  prices
of  the  same  commodities  in  ancient  Rome,  with  those
now  paid  in  our  own  country,  is  not  a  gratification  of
curiosity  merely,  but  aflfords  a  standard  by  which  we
may  estimate  the  different  degree  of  success  with  which
the  Indian  trade  has  been  conducted  in  ancient  and  mo-
dern times.  Many  remarkable  passages  in  ancient  au-
thors, concerning  the  extravagant  price  of  precious
stones  and  pearls  among  the  Romans,  as  well  as  the
general  use  of  them  by  persons  of  all  ranks,  are  collected
by  Meursius  de  Lux.  Romanorum,  cap.  5 ;  and  by
Stanislaus  Robierzyckius,  in  his  treatise  on  the  same
subject,  lib.  ii.  c.  1.  The  English  reader  will  receive
sufficient  information  from  Dr.  Arbuthnot,  in  his  valua-
ble Tables  of  ancient  coins,  weights,  and  measures,
p.  172,  &c.

Note  XXIV.  Sect.  II.  p.  56.

M.  Mahudel,  in  a  memoir  read  in  the  academy  of
inscriptions  and  belles  lettres  in  the  year  1719,  has  col-
lected the  various  opinions  of  the  ancients  concerning
the  nature  and  origin  of  silk,  which  tend  all  to  prove
their  ignorance  with  regard  to  it.  Since  the  publication
of  M.  Mahudcl's  memoir,  P.  du  Halde  has  described  a
species  of  silk,  of  which  I  believe  he  communicated  the
first  notice  to  the  moderns.  "  This  is  produced  by  small
insects  nearly  resembling  snails.  They  do  not  form
cocoons  either  round  or  oval  like  the  silkworm,  but  spin

ILLUSTRATIONS.  2G'6

very  long  threads,  which  lasteii  themselves  to  trees  and
bushes  as  they  are  driven  by  the  wind.  These  are
gathered  and  wrought  into  silk  stufts,  coarser  than  those
produced  by  domestic  silkworms.  The  insects  which
produce  this  coarse  silk  are  wild."  Description  de
['Empire  de  la  Chine,  torn.  ii.  folio,  p.  207.  This  nearly
resembles  Virgil's  description,

Velleraque  ut  foliis  depectant  tenuia  Seres.

Georg.  11.121.

An  attentive  reader  of  Virgil  will  find,  that,  besides  all
the  other  qualities  of  a  great  descriptive  poet,  he  pos-
sessed an  extensive  knowledge  of  natural  history.  The
nature  and  productions  of  the  wild  silkworms  are  illus-
trated at  greater  length  in  the  large  collection  of  Me-
moirs concernant  I'Histoire,  les  Sciences,  les  Arts,  &c.
des  Chinois,  tom.  ii.  p.  575,  &c. ;  and  by  Pere  de  Mailla,
in  his  voluminous  History  of  China,  tom.  xiii.  p.  434.
It  is  a  singular  circumstance  in  the  history  of  silk,  that
on  account  of  its  being  an  excretion  of  a  worm,  the  Ma-
homedans  consider  it  as  an  unclean  dres  s  ;and  it  has
been  decided,  with  the  unanimous  assent  of  all  the  doc-
tors, that  a  person  wearing  a  garment  made  entirely  of
silk,  cannot  lawfully  oflfer  up  the  daily  prayers  enjoined
by  the  Koran. Herbal.  Bibl.  Orient,  artic.  Harir.

Note  XXV.  Sect.  II.  p.  56.

If  the  use  of  the  cotton  manufactures  of  India  had
been  common  among  the  Romans,  the  various  kinds  of
them  would  have  been  enumerated  in  the  Law  de  Pub-
licanis  et  Vectigalibus,  in  the  same  manner  as  the
different  kinds  of  spices  and  precious  stones.  Such  a
specification  would  have  been  equally  necessary  for  the
direction  both  of  the  merchant  and  of  the  tax  gatherer.

Note  XXVI.  Sect.  II.  p.  56.

This  part  of  Arrian's  Periplus  has  been  examined
with  great  accuracy  and  learning  by  Lieutenant  Wilford  ;
and  from  his  investigation  it  is  evident,  that  the  Plithana
of  Anian  is  the  modern  Pultanah,  on  the  southern  banks

264  N  O  T  E  S A  N  D

(»t  the  river  Godavery,  two  hundrtd  and  seventeen
British  miles  south  from  Baroach ;  that  the  position  of
Tao-ara  is  the  same  with  that  of  the  modern  Dowlatabad,
and  the  hitjh  g:rounds  across  which  the  goods  were  con-
veyed to  Baroach,  are  the  Baihigant  mountains.  The
bearings  and  distances  of  these  difl'erent  places,  as  spe-
cified by  Arrian,  afford  an  additional  proof  (were  that
necessary)  of  the  exact  information  which  he  had  re-
ceived concerning  the  district  of  India;  Asiatic  Re-
searches, vol.  i.  p.  309,  &c.

Note  XXVIl.  Sect.  II.  p.  62.

Strabo  acknowledges  his  neglect  of  the  improvements
in  geography  which  Hipparchus  had  deduced  from
astronomical  observations,  and  justifies  it  by  one  of
those  logical  subtleties  which  the  ancients  were  apt  to
introduce  into  all  their  writings.  "A  geographer,"  says
he  (i.  e.  a  describer  of  the  earth),  *'  is  to  pay  no  at-
tention to  what  is  out  of  the  earth ;  nor  will  men,  en-
gaged in  conducting  the  aifairs  of  that  part  of  the  earth
which  is  inhabited,  deem  the  distinction  and  divisions
of  Hipparchus  worthy  of  notice." Lib.  ii.  194.  C.

Note  XXVIII.  Sect.  II.  p.  63.

What  a  high  opinion  the  ancients  had  of  Ptolemy
we  learn  from  Agathemerus,  who  flourished  not  long
after  him.  "  Ptolemy,"  says  he,  "  who  reduced  geogra-
phy into  a  regular  system,  treats  of  every  thing  relating
to  it,  not  carelessly,  or  merely  according  to  ideas  of  his
own,  but  attending  to  what  had  been  delivered  by  more
ancient  authors,  he  adopted  from  them  whatever  he
found  consonant  to  truth."  Epitome  Geogr.  lib.  i.  c.  6.
edit.  Hudson.  From  the  same  admiration  of  his  work,
Agathodaemon,  an  artist  of  Alexandria,  prepared  a  se-
ries of  maps  for  the  illustration  of  it,  in  which  the  position
of  all  the  places  mentioned  by  Ptolemy,  with  their  longi-
tude and  latitude,  is  laid  down  precisely  according  to
his  ideas. Fabric.  Biblioth.  Graec.  412.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  265

Note  XXIX. Sect.  11.  p.  64.

As  these  public  Surveys  and  Itineraries  furnished  the
ancient  geographers  with  the  best  information  concerning
the  position  and  distances  of  many  places,  it  meiy  be
proper  to  point  out  the  manner  in  which  they  were  com-
pleted by  the  Romans.  The  idea  of  a  general  survey
of  the  whole  empire  was  first  formed  by  Julius  Caesar,
and  having  been  begun  by  him  under  authority  of  a
decree  of  the  senate,  was  finished  by  Augustus.  As
Rome  was  still  far  inferior  to  Greece  in  science,  the
execution  of  this  great  undertaking  was  committed  to
three  Greeks,  men  of  great  abilities,  and  skilled  in  every
part  of  philosophy,  The  survey  of  the  eastern  division
of  the  empire  was  finished  by  Zenodoxus  in  fourteen
years,  five  months  and  nine  days.  That  of  the  northern
division  was  finished  by  Theodorus  in  twenty  years,
eight  months  and  ten  days.  The  southern  division  was
finished  in  twenty-five  years  one  month  and  ten  days,
^thici  Cosmographia  apud  Geographos,  editos  a  Hen.
Stephano,  1577.  p.  107.  This  undertaking  was  worthy
of  those  illustrious  persons  who  planned  it,  and  suited
to  the  magnificence  of  a  great  people.  Besides  this
general  survey,  every  new  war  produced  a  new  delinea-
tion and  measurement  of  the  countries  which  were  the
seat  of  it.  We  may  conclude  from  Vegetius,  Instit.  Rei
Militaris,  lib.  iii.  c.  6,  that  every  governor  of  a  Roman
province  was  furnished  with  a  description  of  it;  in
which  were  specified  the  distance  of  places  in  miles,  the
nature  of  the  roads,  the  bye-roads,  the  short  cuts,  the
mountains,  the  rivers,  &c.;  all  these,  says  he,  were  not
only  described  in  words,  but  were  delineated  in  a  map,
that,  in  deliberating  concerning  his  military  movements,
the  eyes  of  a  general  might  aid  the  decisions  of  his  mind.

Note  XXX.  Sect.  II.  p.  64.

The  consequence  of  this  mistake  is  remarkable.  Pto-
lemy, lib.  vii.  c.  1,  computes  the  latitude  of  Barrygaza,
or  Baroach,  to  be  17"  20' ; and  that  of  Cory,  or  Cape

'266  NOTES AND

Coraorin,  to  be  13°  20',  which  is  the  diflerence  four
degrees  precisely  ;  whereas  the  real  difference  between
these  two  places  is  nearly  fourteen  degrees.

Note  XXXI.  Sect.  II.  p.  64.

Ramusio,  the  publisher  of  the  most  ancient  and  per-
haps the  most  valuable  Collection  of  Voyages,  is  the
first  persoH,  as  far  as  I  know,  who  takes  notice  of  this
strange  error  of  Ptolemy ;  Viaggi,  vol.  i.  p.  181.  He
justly  observes,  that  the  author  of  the  circumnavigation
of  the  Erythraean  sea  had  been  more  accurate,  and  h  ad
described  the  peninsula  of  India,  as  extending  from
north  to  south;  Peripl.  p.  24.  29.

Note  XXXII.  Sect.  II.  p.  67.

This  error  of  Ptolemy  justly  merits  the  name  of
enormous,  which  I  have  given  to  it;  and  it  will  appear
more  surprising  when  we  recollect,  that  he  must  have
been  acquainted,  not  only  with  what  Herodotus  relates
concerning  the  circumnavigation  of  Africa  by  order  of
one  of  the  Egyptian  kings,  lib.  iv.  c.  4,  but  with  the
opinion  of  Eratosthenes,  who  held  that  the  great  extent
of  the  Atlantic  ocean  was  the  only  thing  which  prevented
a  communication  between  Europe  and  India  by  sea;
Strab.  Geogr.  lib.  1.  p.  113.  A.  This  error,  however,
must  not  be  imputed  wholly  to  Ptolemy.  Hipparchus,
whom  we  may  consider  as  his  guide,  had  taught  that  the
earth  is  not  surrounded  by  one  continuous  ocean,  but
that  it  is  separated  by  different  isthmuses,  which  divide
it  into  several  large  basins  ;  Strab.  lib.  i.  p.  11.  13.  Pto-
lemy, having  adopted  this  opinion,  was  induced  to
maintain  that  an  unknown  country  extended  from  Catti-
gara  to  Prassum,  on  the  south-east  coast  of  Africa ;
Geogr.  lib.  vii.  c.  3.  and  5.  As  Ptolemy's  system  of  ge-
ography was  universally  received,  this  error  spread  along
with  it.  In  conformity  to  it  the  Arabian  geographer
Edrissi,  who  wrote  in  the  twelfth  century,  taught  that  a
continued  tract  of  land  stretched  eastward  from  Sofala

ILLUSTRATIONS.  267

on  the  African  coast,  until  it  united  with  some  part  of
the  Indian  continent;  D'Anville,  Antiq.  p.  187.  An-
nexed to  the  first  volume  of  Gesta  Dei  per  Francos,
there  is  an  ancient  and  very  rude  map  of  the  habitable
globe,  delineated  according  to  this  idea  of  Ptolemy.  M.
Gossellin,  in  his  map  entitled  Ptolemaei  Systema  Geo-
graphicum,  has  exhibited  this  imaginary  tract  of  land
which  Ptolemy  supposes  to  have  connected  Africa  with
Asia;  Geographic  des  Grecs  analysee.

Note  XXXIII.  Sect.  II.  p.  67.

In  this  part  of  the  Disquisition,  as  well  as  in  the  map
prepared  for  illustrating  it,  the  geographical  ideas  of  M.
D'Anville,  to  which  Major  Rennell  has  given  the  sanc-
tion of  his  approbation,  Introd.  p.  xxxix.,  have  been
generally  adopted.  But  M.  Gossellin  has  lately  pub-
lished, *'  The  Geography  of  the  Greeks  analyzed ;  or,
the  Systems  of  Eratosthenes,  Strabo,  and  Ptolemy,  com-
pared with  each  other,  and  with  the  knowledge  which  the
Moderns  have  acquired;  a  learned  and  ingenious  work,
in  which  he  differs  from  his  countrymen  with  respect  to
many  of  his  determinations.  According  to  M.  Gossellin,
the  Magnum  Promontorium,  which  M.  D'Anville  con-
cludes to  be  Cape  Romania,  at  the  southern  extremity  of
the  peninsula  of  Malacca,  is  the  point  of  Bragu,  at  the
mouth  of  the  great  river  Ava ;  near  to  which  he  places
Zaba,  supposed  by  M.  D'Anville,  and  by  BaVros,  Decad.
ii.  liv.  vi.  c.  1,  to  be  situated  on  the  strait  of  Sincapura
or  Malacca.  The  Magnus  Sinus  of  Ptolemy  he  holds
to  be  the  same  with  the  gulf  of  Martaban,  not  the  gulf
of  Siam,  according  to  M.  D'Anville's  decision.  The
position  of  Cattigara,  as  he  endeavours  to  prove,  corre-
sponds to  that  of  Mergui,  a  considerable  port  on  the  west
coast  of  the  kingdom  of  Siam,  and  that  Thinae,  or  Sinae
Metropolis,  which  M.  D'Anville  removes  as  far  as  Sin-
hoa,  in  the  kingdom  of  Cochin  China,  is  situated  on  the
same  river  with  Mergui,  and  now  bears  the  name  of
Tana-serim.  The  Ibadij  Insula  of  Ptolemy,  which  M.
D'Anville  determines  to  be  Sumatra,  he  contends  is  one
of  that  cluster  of  small  isles  which  lie  off  this  part  of  the

2m  y O  T  E  SAND

coast  ofSiam;  p.  137—148.  According  to  M.  Gossellin's
system,  tlie  ancients  never  sailed  through  the  straits
of  Malacca,  had  no  knowledge  of  the  island  of  Sumatra,
and  were  altogether  unacquainted  with  the  Eastern
ocean.  If  to  any  of  my  reatlers  these  opinions  appear
to  be  well-founded,  the  navigation  and  commerce  of  the
ancients  in  India  must  be  circumscribed  within  limits
still  more  confined  than  those  which  I  have  allotted  to
them.  From  the  Ayeen  Akbery,  vol.  ii.  p.  7,  we  learn
that  Cheen  was  an  ancient  name  of  the  kingdom  of  Pegu ;
as  that  country  borders  upon  Ava,  where  M.  Gossellin
places  the  Great  Promontory,  this  near  resemblance  of
names  may  appear,  perhaps,  to  confirm  his  opinion  that
Sinae  Metropolis  was  situated  on  this  coast,  and  not  so
far  east  as  M.  D'Anville  has  placed  it.

As  Ptolemy's  geography  of  this  eastern  division  of
Asia,  is  more  erroneous,  obscure,  and  contradictory  than
in  any  other  part  of  his  w^ork,  and  as  all  the  manuscripts
of  it,  both  Greek  and  Latin,  are  remarkably  incorrect  in
the  two  chapters  which  contain  the  description  of  the
countries  beyond  the  Ganges,  M.  D'Anville,  in  his  Me-
moire  concerning  the  limits  of  the  world  known  to  the
ancients  beyond  the  Ganges,  has  admitted  into  it  a  larger
portion  of  conjecture  than  we  find  in  the  other  researches
of  that  cautious  geographer.  He  likewise  builds  more
than  usual  upon  the  resemblances  between  the  ancient
and  modern  names  of  places,  though  at  all  times  he  dis-
covers a  propensity,  perhaps  too  great,  to  trace  these,
and  to  rest  upon  them.  These  resemblances  are  often,
indeed,  very  striking,  and  have  led  him  to  many  happy
discoveries.  But  in  perusing  his  w  orks,  it  is  impossible,
1  should  think,  not  to  perceive  that  some  which  he  men-
tioned are  far  fetched  and  fanciful.  Whenever  I  follow
him  I  have  adopted  only  such  conclusions  as  seem  to
be  established  with  his  accustomed  accuracy.

Note  XXXIV.  Sect.  II.  p.  75.

The  author  of  the  Circumnavigation  of  the  Erythraean
Sea  has  marked  the  distances  of  many  of  the  places  which
he  mentions,  with  such  accuracy  as  renders  it  a  nearer

ILLUSTRATIONS.  269

approach,  than  what  is  to  be  found  in  any  writer  of  an-
tiquity, to  a  complete  survey  of  the  coast  from  Myos-
hormus,  on  the  west  side  of  the  Arabian  gulf,  along  the
shores  of  Ethiopia,  Arabia,  Persia,  and  Caramania,  to
the  mouth  of  the  Indus,  and  thence  down  the  west  coast
of  the  Indian  Peninsula  to  Musiris  and  Barace.  This
adds  to  the  value  of  this  short  treatise,  which,  in  every
other  respect,  possesses  great  merit.  It  may  be  consi-
dered as  a  remarkable  proof  of  the  extent  and  accuracy
of  this  author's  intelligence  concerning  India,  that  he  is
the  only  ancient  writer  who  appears  in  any  degree  to
have  been  acquainted  with  the  great  division  of  the
country,  which  still  subsists,  viz.  Indostan  Proper,  com-
prehending the  northern  provinces  of  the  Peninsula,  and
the  Deccan,  comprehending  the  southern  provinces.
"  From  Barygaza  (says  he)  the  continent  stretches  to  the
south  ;  hence  that  district  is  called  Dachinabades,  for,  in
the  language  of  the  countryjthe  south  is  called  Dachanos ;"
Peripl.  p.  29.  As  the  Greeks  and  Romans,  when  they
adopt  any  foreign  name,  always  gave  it  a  termination
peculiar  to  their  own  language,  which  the  grammatical
structure  of  both  tongues  rendered,  in  some  degree,  ne-
cessary, it  is  evident  that  Dachanos  is  the  same  with
Deccan,  which  word  has  still  the  same  signification,
and  is  still  the  name  of  the  division  of  the  Peninsula.
The  northern  limit  of  the  Deccan  at  present  is  the  river
Narbudda,  where  our  author  likewise  fixes  it.  Peripl.
ibid.

Note  XXXV.  Sect.  11.  p.  78.

Though,  in  deducing  the  latitudes  of  places  from
observations  of  the  sun  or  stars,  the  ancient  astronomers
neglected  several  corrections,  which  ought  to  have  been
applied,  their  results  were  sometimes  exact  to  a  few
minutes,  but  at  other  times  they  appear  to  have  been
erroneous  to  the  extent  of  two  or  even  three  degrees,
and  may  perhaps  be  reckoned,  one  with  another,  to  have
come  within  half  a  degree  of  the  truth.  This  part  of  the
ancient  geography  would  therefore  have  been  tolerably
accurate,  if  there  had  been  a  sufficient  number  of  such

270  NOTES AND

determinations.  These,  however,  were  far  from  being
numerous,  and  appear  to  have  been  confined  to  some  of
the  more  remarkable  places  in  the  countries  which  sur-
round the  Mediterranean  sea.

When,  from  want  of  more  accurate  observations,  the
latitude  was  inferred  from  the  length  of  the  longest  or
shortest  day,  no  great  degree  of  precision  was,  in  any
case,  to  be  expected,  and  least  of  all  in  the  vicinity  of
the  equator.  An  error  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  which,
Avithout  some  mode  of  measuring  time  more  accurate
than  ancient  observers  could  employ,  was  not  easily
avoided,  might  produce  in  such  situations,  an  error  of
four  degrees  in  the  determination  of  the  latitude.

With  respect  to  places  in  the  torrid  zone,  there  was
another  resource  for  determining  the  latitude.  This  was
by  observing  the  time  of  the  year  when  the  sun  was  ver-
tical to  any  place,  or  when  bodies  that  stood  perpendi-
cular to  the  horizon  had  no  shadow  at  noon-day ;  the
sun's  distance  from  the  equator  at  that  time,  which  was
known  from  the  principles  of  astronomy,  was  equal  to
the  latitude  of  the  place.  We  have  instances  of  the  ap-
plication of  this  method  in  the  determination  of  the  pa-
rallels of  Syene  and  Meroe.  The  accuracy  which  this
method  would  admit  of,  seems  to  be  limited  to  about
half  a  degree,  and  this  only  on  the  supposition  that  the
observer  was  stationary  ;  for  if  he  was  travelling  from
one  place  to  another,  and  had  not  an  opportunity  of  cor-
recting the  observation  of  one  day  by  that  of  the  day
following,  he  was  likely  to  deviate  much  more  consider-
ably from  the  truth.

With  respect  to  the  longitude  of  places,  as  eclipses
of  the  moon  are  not  frequent,  and  could  seldom  be  of
use  for  determining  it,  and  only  when  there  were  astro-
nomers to  observe  them  with  accuracy,  they  may  be  left
out  of  the  account  altogether  when  we  are  examining  the
geography  of  remote  countries.  The  differences  of  the
meridians  of  places  were  therefore  anciently  ascertained
entirely  by  the  bearings  and  distances  of  one  place  from
another,  and  of  consequence  all  the  errors  of  reckonings,
surveys,  and  itineraries,  fell  chiefly  upon  the  longitude,
in  the  same  manner  as  happens  at  present  in  a  ship

ILLUSTRATIONS.  271

which  has  no  method  of  determining  its  longitude,  but
by  comparing  the  dead-reckoning  with  the  observations
of  the  latitude;  though  with  this  difference,  that  the  er-
rors, to  which  the  most  skilful  of  the  ancient  navigators
was  liable,  were  far  greater  than  what  the  most  ignorant
ship-master  of  modern  times,  provided  with  a  compass,
can  well commit. The  length  of  the  Mediterranean
measured  in  degrees  of  longitude,  from  the  Pillars  of
Hercules,  to  the  bay  of  Issus  is  less  than  forty  degrees ;
but  in  Ptolemy's  maps  it  is  more  than  sixty,  and,  in  ge-
neral, its  longitudes,  counting  from  the  meridian  of  Alex-
andria, especially  toward  the  east,  are  erroneous  nearly
in  the  same  proportion. It  appears,  indeed,  that  in  re-
mote seas  the  coasts  were  often  delineated  from  an  im-
perfect account  of  the  distances  sailed,  without  the  least
knowledge  of  the  bearings  or  direction  of  the  ship's
course. Ptolemy,  it  is  true,  used  to  make  an  allowance
of  about  one-third  for  the  winding  of  a  ship's  course.
Geogr.  lib.  i.  c.  12 ;  but  it  is  plain,  that  the  application  of
this  general  rule  could  seldom  lead  to  an  accurate  con-
clusion. Of  this  there  is  a  striking  instance  in  the  form
which  that  geographer  has  given  to  the  peninsula  of  In-
dia. From  the  Barygazenura  Promontorium  to  the  place
marked  Locus  undo  solvunt  in  Chrysen  navigantes,  that
is,  from  Surat  on  the  Malabar  coast,  to  about  Narsapour
on  the  Coromandel  coast,  the  distance  measured  along
the  sea-shore  is  nearly  the  same  with  what  it  is  in  reality ;
that  is,  about  five  hundred  and  twenty  leagues. But  the
mistake  in  the  direction  is  astonishing,  for  the  Malabar
and  Coromandel  coast,  instead  of  stretching  to  the  south,
and  intersecting  one  another  at  Cape  Comorin,  in  a  very
acute  angle,  are  extended  by  Ptolemy  almost  in  the  same
straight  line  from  west  to  east,  declining  a  little  to  the
south. This  coast  is,  at  the  same  time,  marked  with  se-
veral bays  and  promontories,  nearly  resembling,  in  their
position,  those  which  actually  exist  on  it. All  these  cir-
cumstances compared  together,  point  out  very  clearly
what  were  the  materials  from  which  the  ancient  map  of
India  was  composed. The  ships  which  had  visited  the
coast  of  that  country,  had  kept  an  account  of  the  time
which  they  took  to  sail  from  one  place  to  another,  and

272  NOTES  AND

had  marked  as  they  stood  along  shore,  on  what  hand
the  hind  lay,  when  they  shaped  their  course  across  a  bay
or  doubled  a  promontor).  This  imperfect  journal,  with
an  inaccurate  account,  perhaps  of  the  latitude  of  one  or
two  places,  was  probably  all  the  information  concerning
the  coast  of  India,  which  Ptolemy  w  as  able  to  procure.
That  he  should  have  been  able  to  procure  no  better  in-
formation from  merchants  who  sailed  with  no  particular
view  of  exploring  the  coast,  will  not  appear  wonderful,
if  we  consider  that  even  the  celebrated  Periplus  of
Haniio  would  not  enable  a  geographer  to  lay  down  the
coast  of  Africa  with  more  precision,  than  Ptolemy  has
delineated  that  of  India.

Note  XXXVI.  Sect.  II.  p.  85.

The  introduction  of  the  silkworm  into  Europe,  and
the  effects  which  this  produced,  came  under  the  \icw  of
Mr.  Gibbon,  in  writing  the  history  of  the  emperor  Jus-
tinian, and  though  it  was  an  incident  of  subordinate  im-
portance only,  amidst  the  multiplicity  of  great  transac-
tions which  must  have  occupied  his  attention,  he  has
examined  this  event  with  an  accuracy,  and  related  it
with  a  precision,  which  would  have  done  honour  to  an
author  who  had  no  higher  object  of  research.  Vol.
iv.  p.  71,  &c.  Nor  is  it  here  only  that  I  am  called  upon
to  ascribe  to  him  this  merit.  The  subject  of  my  inqui-
ries has  led  me  several  times  upon  ground  which  he  had
gone  over,  and  I  have  uniformly  received  information
from  the  industry  and  discernment  with  which  he  has
surveyed  it.

Note  XXXVII.  Sect.  III.  p.  88.

This  voyage,  together  with  the  observations  of  Abu
Zcid  al  Hasen  of  Siraf,  was  published  by  M.  Renaudot,
A.  D.  1718,  under  the  title  of  "  Anciennes  Relations  des
Indes,  et  de  la  Chine,  de  deux  Voyageurs  Mahometans,
qui  y  allcrent  dans  le  Veuvieme  Siecle  traduites  de
Arabe,  avec  des  remarqucs  sur  les  principaux  endroits
de  ces  Relations."  As  M.  Renaudot,  in  his  remarks,
represents  the  literature  and police  of  the  Chinese  in

ILLUSTRATIONS.  273

colours  very  different  from  those  of  the  splendid  descrip-
tions which  a  blind  admiration  had  prompted  the  Je-
suits to  publish,  two  zealous  missionaries  have  called  in
question  the  authenticity  of  these  relations,  and  have
asserted  that  the  authors  of  them  had  never  been  in
China ;  P.  Prcmare  Lettr.  edifiantes  et  curieuses,  tom.
xix.  p.  420,  &c.  P.  Parennin,  ibid.  tom.  xxi.  p.  158,
&c.  Some  doubts  concerning  their  authenticity  were
entertained  likewise  by  several  learned  men  in  England,
on  account  of  M.  Renaudot's  having  given  no  notice  of
the  manuscript  which  he  translated,  but  that  he  found
it  in  the  library  of  M.  le  comte  de  Seignelay.  As  no
person  had  seen  the  manuscript  since  that  time,  the
doubts  increased,  and  M.  Renaudot  was  charged  with
the  crime  of  imposing  upon  the  public.  But  the  Colbert
manuscripts  having  been  deposited  in  the  king's  library,
as  (fortunately  for  literature)  most  private  collections
are  in  France,  M.  de  Guignes,  after  a  long  search,  dis-
covered the  identical  manuscript  to  which  M.  Renaudot
refers.  It  appears  to  have  been  written  in  the  twelfth
century ;  Journal  des  Scavans,  Dec.  1764,  p.  315,  &c.
As  I  had  not  the  French  edition  of  M.  Renaudot's
book,  my  references  are  made  to  the  English  translation.
The  relation  of  the  two  Arabian  travellers  is  confirmed
in  many  points,  by  their  countryman  Massoudi,  who
published  his  treatise  on  universal  history,  to  which  he
gives  the  fantastical  title  of  "  Meadows  of  Gold,  and
Mines  of  Jewels,"  a  hundred  and  sixty  years  after  their
time.  From  him,  likewise,  we  receive  such  an  account  of
India  in  the  tenth  century,  as  renders  it  evident  that  the
Arabians  had  then  acquired  an  extensive  knowledge  of
that  country.  According  to  his  description,  the  penin-
sula of  India  was  divided  into  four  kingdoms.  The  first
was  composed  of  the  provinces  situated  on  the  Indus,
and  the  rivers  which  fall  into  it ;  the  capital  of  which
was  Moultan.  The  capital  of  the  second  kingdom  was
Canoge,  which,  from  the  ruins  of  it  still  remaining,  ap-
pears to  have  been  a  very  large  city;  Rennell's  Memoirs,
p.  54.  In  order  to  give  an  idea  of  its  populousness,  the
Indian  historians  assert,  that  it  contained  thirty  thou-

VOL.  IX.  T

274  NOTES AND

sand  shops,  in  which  betehiut  was  sold,  and  sixty  thou-
sand sets  of  musicians  and  singers,  who  paid  a  tax  to
government :  Ferishta,  translated  by  Dow,  vol.  i.  p.  32.
The  third  kingdom  was  Cachcmire. Massoudi,  as  far
as  I  know,  is  the  first  author  who  mentions  this  paradise
of  India,  of  which  he  gives  a  short  but  just  description.
The  fourth  is  the  kingdom  of  Guzeratc,  which  he  repre-
sents as  the  greatest  and  most  powerful;  and  he  concurs
with  the  two  xlrabian  travellers,  in  giving  the  sovereigns
of  it  the  appellation  of  Belhara. What  Massoudi  re-
lates concerning  India  is  more  worthy  of  notice,  as  he
himself  had  visited  that  country ;  Notices  et  Extraits
des  Manuscrits  de  la  Bibliotheque  du  Roi,  tom.  i.  p.  9,
10. Massoudi  confirms  what  the  Iw  o  Arabian  travellers
relate,  concerning  the  extraordinary  progress  of  the  In-
dians in  astronomical  science. According  to  his  ac-
count, a  temple  was  built  during  the  reign  of  Brahmin,
the  first  monarch  of  India,  with  twelve  towers,  repre-
senting the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac  ;  and  in  which
was  delineated  a  view  of  all  the  stars  as  they  appear  in
the  heavens. In  the  same  reign  was  composed  the  fa-
mous Sind-Hind,  which  seems  to  be  the  standard  trea-
tise of  Indian  astronomy  ;  Notices,  &c.  tom.  i.  p.  7.
Another  Arabian  author,  who  wrote  about  the  middle  of
the  fourteenth  century,  divides  India  into  three  parts.
The  northern,  comprehending  all  the  provinces  on  the
Indus. The  middle,  extending  from  Guzerate  to  the
Ganges. The  southern,  which  he  denominates  Comar,
from  Cape  Comorin ;  Notices,  &c.  tom.  ii.  p.  46.

Note  XXXVIII. Sect.  III.  p.  89.  '.

The  naval  skill  of  the  Chinese  seems  not  to  have
been  superior  to  that  of  the  Greeks,  the  Romans,  or
Arabians.  The  course  which  they  held  from  Canton  to
Siraf,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Persian  gulf,  is  described
by  their  own  authors.  They  kept  as  near  as  possible  to
the  shore  until  they  reached  the  island  of  Ceylon,  and
then  doubling  Cape  Comorin,  they  sailed  along  the  west
side  of  the  peninsula,  so  far  as  the  mouth  of  the  Indus,
and  thence  steered  along  the  coast  to  the  place  of  their

ILLUSTRATIONS.  275

destination ;  Mem.  de  Literat.  torn,  xxxii.  p.  3C7. Some
authors  have  contended, that  both  the  Arabians  and
Chinese  were  well  acquainted  with  the  mariner's  com-
pass, and  the  use  of  it  in  navigation  ;  but  it  is  remark-
able that  in  the  Arabic,  Turkish,  and  Persian  languages,
there  is  no  original  name  for  the  compass. They  com-
monly call  it  Bosola,  the  Italian  name,  which  shews  that
the  knowledge  of  this  useful  instrument  was  communi-
cated to  them  by  the  Europeans. There  is  not  one  sin-
gle observation,  of  ancient  date,  made  by  the  Arabians
on  the  variation  of  the  needle,  or  any  instruction  de-
duced from  it,  for  the  assistance of  navigators. Sir
John  Chardin,  one  of  the  most  learned  and  best-informed
travellers  who  has  visited  the  East,  having  been  con-
sulted upon  this  point,  returns  for  answer,  "  I  boldly
assert,  that  the  Asiatics  are  beholden  to  us  for  this  won-
derful instrument;  which  they  had  from  Europe  a  long
time  before  the  Portuguese  conquests. For,  tirst,  their
compasses  are  exactly  like  ours,  and  they  buy  them  of
Europeans  as  much  as  they  can,  scarce  daring  to  med-
dle with  their  needles  themselves. Secondly,  it  is  cer-
tain that  the  old  navigators  only  coasted  it  along,  which
I  impute  to  their  want  of  this  instrument  to  guide  and
instruct  them  in  the  middle  of  the  ocean. We  cannot
pretend  to  say  that  they  were  afraid  of  venturing  far  from
home,  for  the  Arabians,  the  first  navigators  in  the  world
in  my  opinion,  at  least  for  the  eastern  seas,  have,  time
out  of  mind,  sailed  from  the  bottom  of  the  Red  Sea,  all
.  along  the  coast  of  Africa ;  and  the  Chinese  have  always
traded  with  Java  and  Sumatra,  which  is  a  very  consider-
able voyage. So  many  islands  uninhabited  and  yet  pro-
ductive, so  many  lands  unknown  to  the  people  I  speak
of,  are  a  proof  that  the  old  navigators  had  not  the  art  of
sailing  on  the  main  sea. I  have  nothing  but  argument
to  offer  touching  this  matter,  having  never  met  with  any
person  in  Persia  or  the  Indies  to  inform  me  when  the
compass  was  first  known  among  them,  though  I  made
inquiry  of  the  most  learned  men  in  both  countries. I
have  sailed  from  the  Indies  to  Persia  in  Indian  ships,
when  no  European  has  been  on  board  but  myself. The
pilots  were  all  Indians,  and  they  used  the  fore- staff  and

t2

27(;  NOTES AND

quadrant  lor  their  observations.  These  instruments
they  have  I'rom  us,  and  made  by  our  artists,  and  they  do
not  in  the  least  vary  from  ours,  except  that  the  charac-
ters arc  Arabic.  The  Arabians  arc  the  most  skilful  na-
A  igators  oi  all  the  Asiatics  or  Africans  ;  but  neither  they
nor  the  Indians  make  use  of  charts ;  and  they  do  not
much  want  them  :  some  they  have,  but  they  are  copied
from  ours,  for  they  are  altogether  ignorant  of  perspec-
tive." Inquiry  when  the  Mahomedans  lirst  entered
China,  p.  141,  &c.  When  M.  Niebuhr  was  at  Cairo,
he  found  a  magnetic  needle  in  the  possession  of  a  Ma-
homedan,  which  served  to  point  out  the  Kaaba,  and  he
gave  it  the  name  of  El  Maynatis,  a  clear  proof  of  its
European  origin.  Voyage  en  Arabic,  tom.  ii.p.  Kit).

Note  XXXIX. Sect.  III.  p.  90.

Some  learned  men,  Cardan,  Scaliger,  &c.  have  ima-
gined that  the  Vasa  Murrhina,  particularly  described  by
Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.  lib.  xxxvii.  and  occasionally  men-
tioned by  several  ancient  authors  both  Greek  and  Ro-
man, were  the  true  porcelain  of  China.  M.  I'Abbe  Le
Bland  and  M.  Larcher  have  examined  this  opinion,
with  full  as  much  industry  and  erudition  as  the  subject
merited,  in  two  Dissertations  published  in  Mem.  de
Literat.  tom.  xliii.  From  them  it  is  evident  that  the
Vasa  Murrhina  w^ere  formed  of  a  transparent  stone  dug
out  of  the  earth  in  some  of  the  eastern  provinces  of  Asia.
These  were  imitated  in  vessels  of  coloured  glass.  As
both  were  beautiful  ujid  rare,  they  were  sold  at  a  very
high  price  to  the  luxurious  citizens  of  Home.

Note  XL. Sect.  III.  p.  91.

The  progress  of  Christianity,  and  of  Mahomedanism,
both  in  China  and  India,  is  attested  by  such  evidence  as
leaves  no  doubt  with  respect  to  it.  This  evidence  is
collected  by  Assemanus,  Biblioth.  Orient,  vol.  iv.  p.
437,  &c.  521,  &c. ;  and  by  M.  Renaudot,  in  two  Dis-
sertations annexed  to  Anciennes  Relations  ;  and  by  M,

ILLUSTRATIONS.  277

de  la  Croze,  Historic  de  Christianisme  des  Indes.  In
our  own  age,  however,  we  know  that  the  number  of
proselytes  to  either  of  these  religions  is  extremely  small,
especially  in  India.  A  Gentoo  considers  all  the  dis-
tinctions and  privileges  of  his  cast,  as  belonging  to  him
by  an  exclusive  and  incommunicable  right.  To  convert,
or  to  be  converted,  are  ideas  equally  repugnant  to  the
principles  most  deeply  rooted  in  his  mind  ;  nor  can  either
the  Catholic  or  Protestant  missionaries  in  India  boast
of  having  overcome  these  prejudices,  except  among  a
few  in  the  lowest  casts,  or  of  such  as  have  lost  their  cast
altogether.  This  last  circumstance  is  a  great  obstacle
to  the  progress  of  Christianity  in  India.  As  Europeans
eat  the  flesh  of  that  animal  which  the  Hindoos  deem
sacred,  and  drink  intoxicating  liquors,  in  which  practices
they  are  imitated  by  the  converts  to  Christianity,  this
sinks  them  to  a  level  with  the  Pariars,  the  most  con-
temptible and  odious  race  of  men.  Some  Catholic  mis-
sionaries were  so  sensible  of  this,  that  they  affected  to
imitate  the  dress  and  manner  of  living  of  Brahmins,  and
refused  to  associate  with  the  Pariars,  or  to  admit  them
to  the  participation  of  the  sacraments.  But  this  was
condemned  by  the  apostolic  legate  Tournon,  as  incon-
sistent with  the  spirit  and  precepts  of  the  Christian
religion  ;  Voyage  aux  Indes  Orientales,  par  M.  Sonne-
rat,  tom.  i.  p.  58.  note.  Notwithstanding  the  labours
of  missionaries  for  upwards  of  two  hundred  years  (says
a  late  ingenious  writer),  and  the  establishments  of  dif-
ferent Christian  nations,  who  support  and  protect  them,
out  of,  perhaps,  one  hundred  millions  of  Hindoos,  there
are  not  twelve  thousand  Christians,  and  those  almost
entirely  Cliancalas,  or  outcasts.  Sketches  relating  to  the
history,  religion,  learning,  and  manners  of  the  Hindoos,
p.  48.  The  number  of  Mahomedans,  or  Moors,  now
in  Indostan  is  supposed  to  be  near  ten  millions ;  but
they  are  not  the  original  inhabitants  of  the  country,  but
the  descendants  of  adventurers  who  have  been  pouring
in  from  Tartary,  Persia,  and  Arabia,  ever  since  the  in-
vasion of  Mahmoud  of  Gazna,  a.  d.  1002,  the  first
Mahomedan  conqueror  of  India.  Orme  Hist,  of  Mili-
tary Transact,  in  Indostan, vol.  i.  p.  24. Herbelot,

278  NO  T  E  S AND

Biblioth.  Orient,  artic.  Gaznaviah.  As  the  manners  of
the  Indians  in  ancient  times  seem  to  have  been,  in  every
respect,  the  same  with  those  of  the  present  age,  it  is  pro-
bable that  the  Christians  and  Mahomedans,  said  to  be  so
numerous  in  India  and  China,  were  chiefly  foreigners,
alhired  thither  by  a  hicrativc  commerce,  or  their  de-
scendants. The  number  of  Mahomedans  in  China  has
been  considerably  increased  by  a  practice,  common
among  them,  of  buying  children  in  years  of  famine,
whom  they  educate  in  the  Mahomedan  religion.  Hist.
Gener.  des  Voyages,  tom.  vi.  p.  857.

Note  XLI. Sect.  III.  p.  95.

From  the  Chronicle  of  Andrew  Dandulo,  Doge  of
Venice,  who  was  elevated  to  that  high  station  at  a  time
when  his  countrymen  had  established  a  regular  trade
with  Alexandria,  and  imported  from  it  all  the  produc-
tions of  the  East,  it  was  natural  to  expect  some  informa-
tion concerning  their  early  trade  w  ith  that  country  ;  but,
except  an  idle  tale  concerning  some  Venetian  ships
which  had  sailed  to  Alexandria  about  the  year  828,  con-
trary to  a  decree  of  the  state,  and  which  stole  thence  the
body  of  St.  Mark ;  Murat.  Script.  Rer.  Ital.  vol.  xii.  lib.
8.  c.  2.  p.  170. ;  I  find  no  other  hint  concerning  the  com-
munication between  the  two  countries.  On  the  con-
trary, circumstances  occur  which  shew  that  the  resort  of
Europeans  to  Egypt  had  ceased,  almost  entirely,  for
some  time.  Prior  to  the  seventh  and  eighth  centuries,
the  greater  part  of  the  public  deeds  in  Italy  and  in  other
countries  of  Europe,  were  written  upon  paper  fabricated
of  the  Egyptian  Papyrus ;  but  after  that  period,  as  Eu-
ropeans seldom  ventured  to  trade  in  Alexandria,  almost
all  charters  and  other  deeds  are  written  upon  parchment.
Murat.  Antiq.  Ital.  Medii  ^Evi,  vol.  iii.  p.  832.  I  have
been  induced  both  in  the  text  and  in  this  note,  to  state
these  particulars  concerning  the  interruption  of  trade
between  the  Christians  and  Mahomedans  so  fully,  in
order  to  correct  an  error  into  which  several  modern  au-
thors have  fallen,  by  supposing,  that  soon  after  the  first
conquests  of  the  Caliphs,  the  trade  with  India  returned

ILLUSTRATIONS.  279

into  its  ancient  channels,  and  the  merchants  of  Europe
resorted  with  the  same  freedom  as  formerly  to  the  ports
of  Egypt  and  Syria.

Note  XLII. Sect.  III.  p.  98.

It  is  proper  to  remark  (says  Mr.  Stewart)  that  the
Indians  have  an  admirable  method  of  rendering  their
religion  lucrative,  it  being  usual  for  the  Faquirs  to  carry
with  them,  in  their  pilgrimages  from  the  sea-coasts  to  the
interior  parts,  pearls,  corals,  spices,  and  other  precious
articles,  of  small  bulk,  which  they  exchange  on  their  re-
turn, for  gold  dust,  musk,  and  other  things  of  a  similar
nature,  concealing  them  easily  in  their  hair,  and  in  the
cloths  round  their  middle,  carrying  on  in  proportion  to
their  numbers,  no  inconsiderable  traffic  by  these  means.
Account  of  the  kingdom  of  Thibet,  Philos.  Transact,  vol.
Ixvii.  part  ii.  p.  483.

Note  XLIII. Sect.  III.  p.  105.

Caffa  is  the  most  commodious  station  for  trade  in
the  Black  Sea.  While  in  the  hands  of  the  Genoese,  who
kept  possession  of  it  above  two  centuries,  they  rendered
it  the  seat  of  an  extensive  and  flourishing  commerce.
Even  under  all  the  disadvantages  of  its  subjection,  at
present,  to  the  Turkish  government,  it  continues  to  be  a
place  of  considerable  trade.  Sir  John  Chardin,  who  vi-
sited it  A.D.  1672,  relates  that  during  his  residence  of
forty  days  there,  about  four  hundred  ships  arrived  at
Caffa,  or  sailed  from  it.  Voyages,  i.  48.  He  observed
there  several  remains  of  Genoese  magnificence.  The
number  of  its  inhabitants,  according  to  M.  Peysonel,
amounts  still  to  eighty  thousand.  Commerce  de  la  Mer
Noire,  tom.  i.  p.  15.  He  describes  its  trade  as  very  great.

Note  XLIV. Sect.  HI.  p.  106.

The  rapacity  and  insolence  of  the  Genoese  settled  la
Constantinople,  are  painted  by  Nicephorus  Gregoras,  an
eye-witness  of  their  conduct,  in  very  striking  colours.

280  NOTES  AND

"They,"  says  he,  "no>v,  i.  c.  about  the  year  1340,
dreamed  that  they  had  acquired  the  dominion  of  the
sea,  and  claimed  an  exclusive  right  to  the  trade  of  the
Euxine,  prohibiting  the  Greeks  to  sail  to  the  Maeotis,
the  Chersoncsus,  or  any  part  of  the  coast  beyond  the
mouth  of  the  Danube,  without  a  licence  from  them.
This  exclusion  they  extended  likewise  to  the  Venetians,
and  their  arrogance  proceeded  so  far  as  to  form  a  scheme
of  imposing  a  toll  upon  every  vessel  passing  through
the  Bosphorus." Lib.  x-siii.  c.  2.  §  1.

Note  XLV. Sect.  III.  p.  107.

A  PERMISSION  from"  the  pope  was  deemed  so  neces-
sary to  authorize  a  commercial  intercourse  with  infidels,
that  long  after  this  period,  in  the  year  1454,  Nicholas  V.
in  his  famous  bull  in  favour  of  Prince  Henry  of  Portugal,
among  other  privileges,  grants  him  a  licence  to  trade  with
Mahomedans,  and  refers  to  similar  concessions  from
Pope  Martin  V.  and  Eugenius  to  the  kings  of  Portugal.
Leibnitz  Codex  Jur.  Gent. Diplomat.  Pars  I.  p.  489.

NoteXLVL Sect.  IIL  p.  108.

Neither  Jovius,  the  professed  panegyrist  of  the
Medici,  nor  Jo.  M.  Brutus,  their  detractor,  though  both
mention  the  exorbitant  wealth  of  the  family,  explain  the
nature  of  the  trade  by  which  it  was  acquired.  Even
Machiavel,  whose  genius  delighted  in  the  investigation
of  every  circumstance  which  contributed  to  aggrandize
or  depress  nations,  seems  not  to  have  viewed  the  com-
merce of  his  country  as  a  subject  that  merited  any  elu-
cidation. Denina,  who  has  entitled  the  first  chapter  of
his  eighteenth  book,  "  The  Origin  of  the  Medici,  and  the
Commencement  of  their  Power  and  Grandeur,"  furnishes
little  information  with  regard  to  the  trade  carried  on  by
them.  This  silence  of  so  many  authors  is  a  proof  that
historians  had  not  yet  begun  to  view  commerce  as  an
object  of  such  importance  in  the  political  state  of
nations,  as  to  enter  into  any  detail  concerning  its  nature
and  effects.  From  the  references  of  different  writers  to
Scipio  Ammirato,  Istorie  Florentine ;  to  Pagnini,  Delia

ILLUSTRATIONS.  281

Decima  ed  altri  gravezze  della  Mercatura  di  Fiorentini,
and  to  Balducci,  Practica  dcUa  Mercatura,  I  should
imagine  that  something  more  satisfactory  might  be
learned  concerning  the  trade  both  of  the  republic  and
the  family  of  Medici ;  but  I  could  not  find  any  of  these
books  either  in  Edmburgh  or  in  London.

Note  XLVIL Sect.  III.  p.  109.

Leibnitz  has  preserved  a  curious  paper,  containing
the  instructions  of  the  republic  of  Florence  to  the  two
ambassadors  sent  to  the  Soldan  of  Egypt,  in  order  to
negoiatte  this  treaty  with  him,  together  with  the  report
of  these  ambassadors  on  their  return.  The  great  object
of  the  republic  was  to  obtain  liberty  of  trading  in  all
parts  of  the  Soldan's  dominions,  upon  the  same  terms
with  the  Venetians.  The  chief  privileges  which  they
solicited,  were ;  1.  A  perfect  freedom  of  admission
into  every  port  belonging  to  the  Soldan,  protection  while
they  continued  in  it,  and  liberty  of  departure  at  what
time  they  chose.  2.  Permission  to  have  a  consul,  with
the  same  rights  and  jurisdiction  as  those  of  the  Vene-
tians ;  and  liberty  to  build  a  church,  a  warehouse,  and
a  bath  in  every  place  where  they  settled.  3.  That  they
should  not  pay  for  goods  imported  or  exported  higher
duties  than  were  paid  by  the  Venetians.  4.  That  the
effects  of  any  Florentine  who  died  in  the  dominions  of
the  Soldan  should  be  consigned  to  the  consul.  5.  That
the  gold  and  silver  coin  of  Florence  should  be  received
in  payments.  All  these  privileges  (which  shew  on  what
equal  and  liberal  terms  Christians  and  Mahomedans  now
carried  on  trade)  the  Florentines  obtained ;  but  from
the  causes  mentioned  in  the  text,  they  seem  never  to
have  acquired  any  considerable  share  in  the  commerce
with  India.  Leibnitz,  Mantissa  Cod.  Jur.  Gent.  Diplom.
Pars  altera,  p.  163.

NoteXLVIII.  Sect.  III.  p.  113.

The  Eastern  parts  of  Asia  are  now  so  completely
explored,  that  the  first  imperfect  accounts  of  them,  by

28-2  NOTES  AND

Marco  Polo,  attract  little  of  that  attention  which  was
originally  excited  by  the  publication  of  his  travels;  and
some  circumstances  in  his  narrative  have  induced  dif-
ferent authors  to  justify  this  neglect,  by  calling  in  question
the  truth  of  what  he  relates,  and  even  to  assert  that  he
had  never  visited  those  countries  which  he  pretends  to
describe. lie  does  not,  say  they,  ascertain  the  position
of  any  one  place  by  specifying  its  longitude  or  latitude.
lie  gives  names  to  provinces  and  cities,  particularly  in
his  description  of  Cathay,  which  have  no  resemblance
to  those  which  they  now^  bear. AYe  may  observe,  how-
ever, that  as  Marco  Polo  seems  to  have  been,  in  no  de-
gree, a  man  of  science,  it  was  not  to  be  expected  that
he  should  fix  the  position  of  places  with  geographical
accuracy. As  he  travelled  through  China,  either  in  the
suite  of  the  great  Khan,  or  in  execution  of  his  orders,
it  is  probable  that  the  names  which  he  gives  to  different
provinces  and  cities,  are  those  by  which  they  were  knoNvn
to  the  Tartars,  in  whose  service  he  was,  not  their  ori-
ginal Chinese  names. Some  inaccuracies  which  have
been  observed  in  the  relation  of  his  travels,  may  be  ac-
counted for,  l)y  attending  to  one  circumstance,  that  it
was  not  published  from  a  regular  journal,  which,  per-
haps, the  vicissitudes  in  his  situation,  during  such  a  long
series  of  adventures,  did  not  permit  him  to  keep,  or  to
preserve. It  was  composed  after  his  return  to  his  native
country,  and  chiefly  from  recollection. But  notwith-
standing this  disadvantage,  his  account  of  those  regions
of  the  East,  towards  which  my  inquiries  have  been  di-
rected, contains  information  with  respect  to  several  par-
ticulars altogether  unknow  n  in  Europe  at  that  time,  the
accuracy  of  which  is  now  fully  confirmed. Mr.  Mars-
den,  whose  accuracy  and  discernment  are  well  known,
traces  his  description  of  the  island  which  he  calls  Java
Minor,  evidently  Sumatra ;  from  which  it  is  apparent
that,  as  Marco  Polo  had  resided  a  considerable  time  in
that  island,  he  had  examined  some  parts  w  ith  care,  and
had  inquired  with  diligence  concerning  others. Hist,  of
Sumat.  p.  281. I  shall  mention  some  other  particulars
with  respect  to  India,  which,  though  they  relate  to  mat-
ters of  no  great  consequence,  afford  the  best  proof  of  his
having  visited  these  countries,  and  of  his  having  ob-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  283

served  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  people  with  at-
tention. He  gives  a  distinct  account  of  the  nature  and
preparation  of  Sago,  the  principle  article  of  subsistence
among  all  the  nations  of  Malayan  race,  and  he  brought
the  first  specimen  of  this  singular  production  to  Venice.
Ramus,  lib.  iii.  c.  IG. He  takes  notice,  likewise,  of  the
general  custom  of  chewing  Betel,  and  his  description  of
the  mode  of  preparing  it  is  the  same  with  that  still  in
use. Ramus.  Viaggi,  ii.  p.  55.  D.  p.  56.  B. He  even
descends  into  such  detail  as  to  mention  the  peculiar
manner  of  feeding  horses  in  India,  which  still  continues.
Ramus,  p.  53.  F. What  is  of  greater  importance,  we
learn  from  him  that  the  trade  with  Alexandria  con-
tinued when  he  travelled  through  India,  to  be  carried  on
in  the  same  manner  as  I  conjectured  it  to  have  been  in
ancient  times. The  commodities  of  the  East  were  still
brought  to  the  Malabar  coast  by  vessels  of  the  country,
and  conveyed  thence,  together  with  pepper  and  other
productions  peculiar  to  that  part  of  India,  by  ships  which
arrived  from  the  Red  Sea. Lib,  iii.  c.  27. This,  per-
haps, may  account  for  the  superior  quality  which  Sanudo
ascribes  to  the  goods  brought  to  the  coast  of  Syria  from
the  Persian  Gulf,  above  those  imported  into  Egypt  by
the  Red  Sea. The  former  were  chosen  and  purchased
in  the  places  where  they  grew  or  where  they  were  manu-
factured, by  the  merchants  of  Persia,  who  still  continued
their  voyages  to  every  part  of  the  East ;  while  the  Egyp-
tian merchants,  in  making  up  their  cargoes,  depended  upon
the  assortment  of  goods  brought  to  the  Malabar  coast
by  the  natives. To  some  persons  in  his  own  age,  what
Marco  Polo  related  concerning  the  numerous  armies  and
immense  revenues  of  the  Eastern  princes,  appeared  so
extravagant  (though  perfectly  consonant  to  what  we
now  know  concerning  the  population  of  China,  and  the
wealth  of  Indostan),  that  they  gave  him  the  name  of
Messer  Marco  Milioni.  Prefat.  de  Ramus,  p.  4. But
among  persons  better  informed,  the  reception  he  met  with
was  very  diflferent. Columbus,  as  well  as  the  men  of
science  with  whom  he  corresponded,  placed  such  con-
fidence in  the  veracity  of  his  relations,  that  upon  them
the  speculations  and  theories,  which  led  to  the  discovery

284  NOTES AND

of  the  New  World,  were  in  a  great  measure  founded.
Life  of  Columbus  by  his  Son,  c.  7,  8.

Note  XLIX. Sect.  III.  p.  119.

In  the  year  1301,  Joanna  of  Navarre,  the  wife  of  Philip
le  Bel  kini>of  France,  having-  been  some  days  in  Bruges,
was  so  much  struck  with  the  grandeur  and  wealth  of  that
city,  and  particularly  with  the  splendid  appearance  of
the  citizens'  wives,  that  she  was  moved  (says  Guicciar-
dini)  by  female  envy  to  exclaim  with  indignation,  "  I
thought  that  I  had  been  the  only  queen  here,  but  I  find
there  are  many  hundreds  more."  Dcscrit.  de  Paesi
Bassi,  p.  408.

Note  L. Sect.  III.  p.  120.

In  the  history  of  the  reign  of  Charles  V.  vol.  i.  p.  132,
I  observe,  that,  during  the  war  excited  by  the  famous
league  of  Cambray,  while  Charles  VIII.  of  France
could  not  procure  money  at  a  less  premium  than  forty-
two  per  cent.,  the  Venetians  raised  what  sums  they
pleased  at  five  per  cent.  But  this,  I  imagine,  is  not  to
be  considered  as  the  usual  commercial  rate  of  interest  at
that  period,  but  as  a  voluntary  and  public-spirited  eflbrt
of  the  citizens,  in  order  to  support  their  country  at  a
dangerous  crisis.  Of  such  laudable  exertions,  there  are
several  striking  instances  in  the  history  of  the  republic.
In  the  year  1379,  when  the  Genoese,  after  obtaining  a
great  naval  victory  over  the  Venetians,  were  ready  to
attack  their  capital,  the  citizens,  by  a  voluntary  contri-
bution, enabled  the  senate  to  fit  out  such  a  powerful
armament  as  saved  their  country.  Sabellicus,  Hist.  Rer.
Venet.  Dec.  ii.  lib.  vi.  p.  385. 390.  In  the  war  with  Fer-
rara,  which  began  in  the  year  1472,  the  senate  relying
upon  the  attachment  of  the  citizens  to  their  country,  re-
quired them  to  bring  all  their  gold  and  silver  plate,  and
jewels,  into  the  public  treasury,  upon  promise  of  paying
the  value  of  them  at  the  conclusion  of  the  war,  with  five
per  cent,  of  interest ;  and  this  requisition  was  complied
with  cheerfully.  Petr.  Cyrnajus  de  Bello  Ferrar.  ap
Murat.  Script.  Rer.  Ital.  vol.  xxi.  p.  lOlG.

I  L  L  U  S  TR  A  V  IONS.  285

Note  LI. Sect.  III.  p.  120.

Two  facts  may  be  mentioned  as  proofs  of  an  extraor-
dinary extension  of  the  Venetian  trade  at  this  period.
— 1.  There  is  in  Rymer's  Great  Collection,  a  series  of
grants  from  the  kings  of  England,  of  various  privileges
and  immunities  to  Venetian  merchants  trading  in  Eng-
land, as  well  as  several  commercial  treaties  with  the  re-
public, which  plainly  indicate  a  considerable  increase  of
their  transactions  in  that  country.  These  are  mentioned
in  their  order  by  Mr.  Anderson,  to  whose  patient  indus-
try and  sound  understanding,  every  person  engaged  in
any  commercial  research  must  have  felt  himself  greatly
indebted  on  many  occasions. — 2.  The  establishment
of  a  Bank  by  public  authority,  the  credit  of  which  was
founded  on  that  of  the  state.  In  an  age  and  nation  so
well  acquainted  with  the  advantages  which  commerce
derives  from  the  institution  of  banks,  it  is  unnecessary
to  enumerate  them.  Mercantile  transactions  must  have
been  numerous  and  extensive  before  the  utility  of  such
an  institution  could  be  fully  perceived,  or  the  principles
of  trade  could  be  so  fully  understood  as  to  form  the  re-
gulations proper  for  conducting  it  with  success.  Venice
may  boast  of  having  given  the  first  example  to  Europe,
of  an  establishment  altogether  unknown  to  the  ancients,
and  which  is  the  pride  of  the  modern  commercial  system.
The  constitution  of  the  Bank  of  Venice  was  originally
founded  on  such  just  principles,  that  it  has  served  as  a
model  in  the  establishment  of  banks  in  other  countries,
and  the  administration  of  its  affairs  has  been  conducted
with  so  much  integrity,  that  its  credit  has  never  been
shaken.  I  cannot  specify  the  precise  year  in  which  the
Bank  of  Venice  was  established  by  a  law  of  the  State.
Anderson  supposes  it  to  have  been  a.  d.  1157.  Chron.
Deduct,  vol.  i.  p.  84.  Sandi  Stor.  Civil.  Venes.  part  II.
vol.  ii.  p.  768.  part  III.  vol.  ii.  p.  892.

NoteLII. Sect.  III.  p.  121.

An  Italian  author  of  good  credit,  and  a  diligent  in-
quirer into  the  ancient  history  of  its  different  govern-
ments, affirms,  that  if  the  several  States  which  traded  in

286  NOTES AND

the  Mediterranean  had  united  toijether,  Venice  alone
would  have  been  superior  to  them  all,  in  naval  power
and  in  extent  ol'commerce.  Denina  Revolutions  d'lta-
lic  traduits  par  I'Abbe  Jardin,  lib.  xviii.  c.  C.  torn.  vi.
p.  S-M).  About  the  year  1420,  the  Doge  Mocenigo  gives
a  view  of  the  naval  lorce  of  the  republic,  which  con-
tirnis  this  decision  of  Denina.  At  that  time  it  con-
sisted of  three  thousand  trading  vessels,  of  various  di-
mensions, on  board  which  were  employed  seventeen
thousand  sailors;  of  three  hundred  shipsof  greater  force,
manned  by  eight  thousand  sailors ;  and  of  forty-five  large
galeasses,  or  carracks,  navigated  by  eleven  thousand
sailors.  In  public  and  private  arsenals  sixteen  thousand
carpenters  were  employed.  Mar.  Sanuto  \  ite  de  Duchi
di  Venczia,  ap.  Mur.  Script.  Rer.  Ital.  vol.  xxii.  p.  959.

Note  LIII. Sect.  III.  p.  135.

AViiEN  we  take  a  view^  of  the  form  and  position  of  the
habitable  parts  of  Asia  and  Africa,  we  w  ill  see  good  rea-
sons for  considering  the  camel  as  the  most  useful  of  all
the  animals  over  which  the  inhabitants  of  these  great
continents  have  acquired  dominion.  In  both,  some  of
the  most  fertile  districts  are  separated  from  each  other
by  such  extensive  tracts  of  barren  sands,  the  seats  of  de-
solation and  drought,  as  seem  to  exclude  the  possibility  of
communication  between  them.  But  as  the  ocean,  which
appears,  at  first  view,  to  be  placed  as  an  inseparable  bar-
rier between  different  regions  of  the  earth,  has  been  ren-
dered, by  navigation,  subservient  to  their  mutual  inter-
course, so,  by  means  of  the  camel,  which  the  Arabians
emphatically  call  The  Ship  of  the  Desert,  the  most  dreary
wastes  are  traversed,  and  the  nations  which  they  disjoin
are  enabled  to  trade  with  one  another.  Those  painful
journeys,  impracticable  by  any  other  animal,  the  camel
performs  with  astonishing  dispatch.  Under  heavy  bur-
dens of  six,  seven,  and  eight  hundred  weight,  they  can
continue  tlieir  march  during  a  long  period  of  time,  with
little  food  or  rest,  and  sometimes  without  tasting  water
for  eiglit  or  nine  days.  By  the  wise  economy  of  Provi-
dence, the  camel  seems  formed  of  purpose  to  be  the  beast

ILLUSTRATIONS.  287

of  burden  in  those  regions  where  he  is  placed,  and  where
his  service  is  most  wanted. In  all  the  districts  of  Asia
and  Africa,  where  deserts  are  most  frequent  and  exten-
sive, the  ceimel  abounds. This  is  his  proper  station,  and
beyond  this  the  sphere  of  his  activity  does  not  extend
far. He  dreads  alike  the  excesses  of  heat  and  of  cold,
and  does  not  agree  even  with  the  mild  climate  of  our
temperate  zone. As  the  first  trade  in  Indian  commodi-
ties, of  which  we  have  any  authentic  account,  was  car-
ried on  by  means  of  camels.  Genesis,  xxxvii.  25,  and  as
it  is  by  employing  them  that  the  conveyance  of  these
commodities  has  been  so  widely  extended  over  Asia  and
Africa,  the  particulars  which  I  have  mentioned  concern-
ing this  singular  animal  appeared  to  be  necessary  towards
illustrating  this  part  of  my  subject. If  any  of  my  readers
desire  more  full  information,  and  wish  to  know  how  the
ingenuity  and  art  of  man  have  seconded  the  intentions
of  Nature,  in  training  the  camel  from  his  birth  for  that
life  of  exertion  and  hardship  to  which  he  is  destined,  he
may  consult  Histoire Naturelle, by  M.  le  Comte  de
Bufi'on,  artic.  Chameau  et  Dromedaire,  one  of  the  most
eloquent,  and,  as  far  as  I  can  judge  from  examining  the
authorities  which  he  has  quoted,  one  of  the  most  accu-
rate descriptions  given  by  that  celebrated  writer. M.
Volney,  whose  accuracy  is  well  known,  gives  a  descrip-
tion of  the  manner  in  which  the  camel  performs  its  jour-
ney, which  may  be  agreeable  to  some  of  my  readers.
"  In  travelling  through  the  desert,  camels  are  chiefly  em-
ployed because  they  consume  little,  and  carry  a  great
load. His  ordinary  burden  is  about  seven  hundred  and
fifty  pounds;  his  food,  whatever  is  given  him,  straw,
thistles,  the  stones  of  dates,  beans,  barley,  &c. With  a
pound  of  food  a  day,  and  as  much  water,  he  will  travel
for  weeks. In  the  journey  from  Cairo  to  Suez,  which  is
forty  or  forty-six  hours,  they  neither  eat  nor  drink ;  but
these  long  fasts,  if  often  repeated,  wear  them  out. Their
usual  rate  of  travelling  is  very  slow,  hardly  above  two
miles  an  hour;  it  is  vain  to  push  them,  they  will  not
quicken  their  pace,  but,  if  allowed  some  short  rest,  they
will  travel  fifteen  or  eighteen  hours  a  day." Voyage,
torn.  ii.  p.  383.

•288  N  O  T  K  SAND

Note  LIV. Sect.  III.  p.  13G.
In  order  to  irivc  an  adequate  idea  of  the  extensive  cir-
culation of  Indian  commodities  by  land  carriage, it  would
be  necessary  to  trace  the  route  and  to  estimate  the  num-
ber of  the  various  caravans  by  which  they  are  conveyed.
Couhl  this  be  executed  with  accuracy,  it  would  be  a
curious  subject  of  geographical  research,  as  well  as  a
valuable  addition  to  commercial  history.  Though  it  is  in-
consistent with  the  brevity  which  I  have  uniformly  studied
in  conducting  this  Disquisition,  to  enter  into  a  detail  of  so
great  length,  it  may  be  proper  here,  for  illustrating  this
part  of  my  subject  to  tai<;e  such  a  view  of  two  caravans
Avhich  visit  Mecca,  as  may  enable  my  readers  to  estimate
more  justly  the  magnitude  of  their  commercial  transac-
tions. The  first  is  the  caravan  which  takes  its  departure
from  Cairo  in  Egypt,  and  the  other  from  Damascus  in
Syria ;  and  I  select  these,  both  because  they  are  the  most
considerable,  and  because  they  are  described  by  au-
thors of  undoubted  credit,  who  had  the  best  opportuni-
ties of  receiving  full  information  concerning  them. The
former  is  composed  not  only  of  pilgrims  from  every  part
of  Egypt,  but  of  those  which  arrive  from  all  the  small
Mahomedan  states  on  the  African  coast  of  the  Mediter-
ranean, from  the  empire  of  Morocco,  and  even  from  the
Negro  kingdoms  on  the  Atlantic. When  assembled,
the  caravan  consists  at  least  of  fifty  thousand  persons,
and  the  number  of  camels  employed  in  carrying  water,
provisions,  and  merchandize,  is  still  greater. The  jour-
ney, which,  in  going  from  Cairo,  and  returning  thither,
is  not  completed  in  less  than  a  hundred  days,  is  per-
formed wholly  by  land  ;  and  as  the  route  lies  mostly
through  sandy  deserts,or  barren  uninhabited  wilds,  which
seldom afford any subsistence,  and where often no
sources  of  water  can  be  found,  the  pilgrims  always  un-
dergo much  fatigue,  and  sometimes  must  endure  incre-
dible hardships. An  early  and  good  description  of  this
caravan  is  published  ))y  Ilakluyt,  vol. ii.  p.  202,  &c.
INlaillet  has  entered  into  a  minute  and  curious  detail
with  regard  to  it;  Descript.  de  I'Egypte,  part  ii.  p.  212,
&c. Pocock  has  given  a  route,  together  with  the  length

ILLUSTRATIONS;  289

of  each  day's  march,  which  he  received  from  a  person
who  had  been  fourteen  times  at  jNIecca,  voL  i.  p.  188.  261,
&c. — The  caravan  from  Damascus,  composed  of  pil-
grims from  almost  every  province  of  the  Turkish  empire,
is  little  inferior  to  the  former  in  number,  and  the  com-
merce which  it  carries  on  is  hardly  less  valuable.  Voy-
age de  Volney,  tom.  ii.  p.  251,  &c.  Ohsson  Tabl.  Gener.
de  I'Empire  Othom.  III.  p.  275,  &c.  This  pilgrimage
was  performed  in  the  year  1741,  by  Khojeh  Abdulkur-
reem,  whom  I  formerly  mentioned.  Note  V.  p.  243.  He
gives  the  usual  route  from  Damascus  to  Mecca,  com-
puted by  hours,  the  common  mode  of  reckoning  a  jour-
ney in  the  East,  through  countries  little  frequented.
According  to  the  most  moderate  estimate,  the  distance
between  the  two  cities,  by  his  account,  must  be  above
a  thousand  miles ;  a  great  part  of  the  journey  is  through
a  desert,  and  the  pilgrims  not  only  endure  much  fatigue,
but  are  often  exposed  to  great  danger  from  the  wild
Arabs.  Memoirs,  p.  114,  &c.  It  is  a  singular  proof  of
the  predatory  spirit  of  the  Arabs,  that  although  all  their
independent  tribes  are  zealous  Mahomedans,  yet  they
make  no  scruple  of  plundering  the  caravans  of  pilgrims,
while  engaged  in  performing  one  of  the  most  indispensa-
ble duties  of  their  religion.  A  remarkable  instance  of
this  occurred  in  the  year  1757.  Travels  through  Cyprus,
Syria,  &c.  by  Abbe  Mariti,  vol.  ii.  p.  117,  &c.  Engl.
Translation.  Great  as  these  caravans  are,  we  must  not
suppose  that  all  the  pilgrims  who  visit  Mecca  belong  to
them ;  such  considerable  additions  are  received  from  the
extensive  dominions  of  Persia,  from  every  province  of
Indostan,  and  the  countries  to  the  east  of  it,  from  Abys-
sinia, from  various  states  on  the  southern  coast  of
Africa,  and  from  all  parts  of  Arabia,  that  when  the  whole
are  assembled  they  have  been  computed  to  amount  to
two  hundred  thousand.  In  some  years  the  number  is
farther  increased  by  small  bands  of  pilgrims  from  seve-
ral interior  provinces  of  Africa,  the  names  and  situations
of  which  are  just  beginning  to  be  known  in  Europe.  For
this  last  fact  we  are  indebted  to  the  Association  for  pro-
moting the  Discovery  of  the  Interior  Parts  of  Africa,
formed  by  some  British  gentlemen,  upon  principles  so

VOL. IX,  u

290  NOTES  AND

liberal,  and  with  views  so  public-spirited,  as  do  honour
to  themselves  and  to  their  country.  Proceedings,  &c.
p.  174.

In  the  Report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Privy  Council
on  the  Slave  Trade,  other  particulars  are  contained ;  and
it  appears  that  the  commerce  carried  on  by  caravans  in
the  interior  parts  of  Africa  is  not  only  widely  extended,
but  of  considerable  value.  Besides  the  great  caravan
which  proceeds  to  Cairo,  and  is  joined  by  Mahomedan
pilgrims  from  every  part  [of  Africa,  there  are  caravans
which  have  no  object  but  commerce,  which  set  out  from
Fez,  Algiers,  Tunis,  Tripoli,  and  other  states  on  the  sea-
coast,  and  penetrate  far  into  the  interior  country.  Some
of  them  take  no  less  than  fifty  days  to  reach  the  place  of
their  destination ;  and,  as  the  medium  of  their  rate  of
travelling  may  be  estimated  at  about  eighteen  miles  a
day,  the  extent  of  their  journey  may  be  easily  computed.
As  both  the  time  of  their  outset  and  their  route  are
known,  they  are  met  by  the  people  of  all  the  countries
through  which  they  travel,  who  trade  with  them.  Indian
goods  of  every  kind  form  a  considerable  article  in  this
traffic,  in  exchange  for  which  the  chief  commodity  they
can  give  is  slaves. Part  vi.

As  the  journeys  of  the  caravans,  which  are  purely
commercial,  do  not  commence  at  stated  seasons,  and
their  routes  vary  according  to  the  convenience  or  fancy
of  the  merchants  of  whom  they  are  composed,  a  descrip-
tion cannot  be  given  of  them  with  the  same  degree  of  ac-
curacy as  of  the  great  caravans  which  visit  Mecca.  But
by  attending  to  the  accounts  of  some  authors,  and  the
occasional  hints  of  others,  sufficient  information  may  be
gathered  to  satisfy  us,  that  the  circulation  of  eastern
goods  by  these  caravans  is  very  extensive.  The  same
intercourse  which  was  anciently  kept  up  by  the  pro-
vinces in  the  north-east  of  Asia  with  Indostan  and
China,  and  which  I  formerly  described,  still  subsists.
Among  all  the  numerous  tribes  of  Tartars,  even  of  those
which  retain  their  pastoral  manners  in  greatest  purity,
the  demand  for  the  productions  of  these  two  countries  is
very  considerable.  Voyages  de  Pallas,  tom.  i.  p.  357,
&c.  tom.  ii.  p.  422. In  order  to  supply  them  with  these,

ILLUSTRATIONS.  291

caravans  set  out  annually  from  Boghar,  (Hakhiyt,  vol.
i.  p.  032.)  Samarcand,  Thibet,  and  several  other  places,
and  return  \\'ith  large  cargoes  of  Indian  and  Chinese
goods. But  the  trade  carried  on  between  Russia  and
China  in  this  part  of  Asia  is  by  far  the  most  extensive
and  best  known. Some  connexion  of  this  kind,  it  is
probable,  was  kept  up  between  them  from  the  earliest
period,  but  it  increased  greatly  after  the  interior  parts  of
Russia  were  rendered  more  accessible  by  the  conquests
of  Zingis  Khan  and  Tamerlane. The  commercial  na-
tions of  Europe  were  so  well  acquainted  with  the  mode
of  carrying  on  this  trade,  that  soon  after  the  Portuguese
had  opened  the  communication  with  the  East  by  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  an  attempt  was  made  in  order  to
diminish  the  advantages  which  they  derived  from  this
discovery,  to  prevail  on  the  Russians  to  convey  Indian
and  Chinese  commodities  through  the  whole  extent  of
their  empire,  partly  by  land-carriage,  and  partly  by  means
of  navigable  rivers  to  some  port  on  the  Baltic,  from
which  they  might  be  distributed  through  every  part  of
Europe. Ramusio  Raccolto  da  Viaggi,  vol.  i.  p.  374.  B.
Hist,  du  Commerce  de  la  Russie,  par  M.  Schreder,  torn.
i.  p.  13, 14. This  scheme,  too  great  for  the  monarch
then  on  the  throne  of  Russia  to  carry  into  execution,  was
rendered  practicable  by  the  conquests  of  Ivan  Basilo-
witz,  and  the  genius  of  Peter  the  Great. Though  the
capitals  of  the  two  empires  were  situated  at  the  immense
distance  of  six  thousand  three  hundred  and  seventy-eight
miles  from  each  other,  and  the  route  lay  for  above  four
hundred  miles  through an  uninhabited  desert,  (Bell's
Travels,  vol.  ii.  p.  167.)  caravans  travelled  from  the  one
to  the  other. But  though  it  had  been  stipulated,  when
this  intercourse  was  established,  that  the  number  of  per-
sons in  each  caravan  should  not  exceed  two  hundred,
and  though  they  were  shut  up  within  the  walls  of  a  Ca-
ravanserai during  the  short  time  they  were  suffered  to
remain  in  Pekin,  and  were  allowed  to  deal  only  with  a
few  merchants,  to  whom  a  monopoly  of  the  trade  with
them  had  been  granted ;  yet,  notwithstanding  all  these
restraints  and  precautions,  the  jealous  vigilance  with
which  the  Chinese  government  excludes  foreigners  from

u  2

•29-2  NOTES AND

a  free  intercourse  with  its  subjects,  was  alarmed,  and  the
admission  ol"  the  Russian  caravans  into  the  empire  was
soon  prohibited.  After  various  negotiations,  an  expe-
dient was  at  length  devised,  by  which  the  advantages  of
mutual  commerce  were  secured,  without  infringing  the
cautious  arrangements  of  Chinese  policy.  On  the  boun-
dary of  the  two  empires,  two  small  towns  were  built  al-
most contiguous,  Kiachta  inhabited  by  Russians,  and
Maimatschin  by  Chinese.  To  these  all  the  marketable
productions  of  their  respective  countries  are  brought  by
the  subjects  of  each  empire  ;  and  the  furs,  the  linen  and
woollen  cloth,  the  leather,  the  glass,  &c.  of  Russia,  are
exchanged  for  the  silk,  the  cotton,  the  tea,  the  rice,  the
toys,  &;c.  of  China.  By  some  well-judged  concessions  of
the  sovereign  now  seated  on  the  throne  of  Russia,  whose
enlarged  mind  is  superior  to  the  illiberal  maxims  of  many
of  her  predecessors,  this  trade  is  rendered  so  flourishing,
that  its  amount  annually  is  not  less  than  eight  hundred
thousand  pounds  sterling,  and  it  is  the  only  trade  which
China  carries  on  almost  entirely  by  barter.  Mr.  Coxe,
in  his  account  of  the  Russian  discoveries,  has  collected,
with  his  usual  attention  and  discernment,  every  thing
relative  to  this  branch  of  trade,  the  nature  and  extent  of
which  were  little  known  in  Europe:  Part  ii.  chap.  ii.  iii.
iv.  Nor  is  Kiachta  the  only  place  where  Russia  receives
Chinese  and  Indian  commodities.  A  considerable  sup-
ply of  both  is  brought  by  caravans  of  independent  Tar-
tars to  Orenburg,  on  the  river  Jaik  ;  Voyage  de  Pallas,
tom.  i.  p.  355,  &c.;  to  Troitzkaia,  on  the  river  Oui,  and
to  other  places  which  1  might  mention.  I  have  entered
into  this  long  detail  concerning  the  mode  in  which  the
productions  in  India  and  China  are  circulated  through
Russia,  as  it  affords  the  most  striking  instance,  I  know,
of  the  great  extent  to  which  valuable  commodities  may
be  conveyed  by  land  carriage.

• . Note  LV.  Sect.  IV.  p.  140.

The  only  voyage  of  discovery  in  the  Atlantic  ocean
towards  the  south,  by  any  of  the  ancient  commercial
states  in  the  Mediterranean,  is  that  of  Hanno,  undertaken^

ILLUSTRATIONS.  293

by  order  of  the  republic  of  Carthage.  As  the  situation
of  that  city,  so  '  much  nearer  the  Straits  than  Tyre,
Alexandria,  and  the  other  §eats  of  ancient  trade  which
have  been  mentioned,  gave  it  more  immediate  access  to
the  ocean ;  that  circumstance,  together  with  the  various
settlements  which  the  Carthaginians  had  made  in  dift'er-
ent  provinces  of  Spain,  naturally  suggested  to  them  this
enterprise,  and  afforded  them  the  prospect  of  consider-
able advantages  from  its  success.  The  voyage  of  Hanno,
instead  of  invalidating,  seems  to  confirm  the  justness  of
the  reasons  which  have  been  given,  why  no  similar  at-
tempt was  made  by  the  other  commercial  states  in  the
Mediterranean.

NoteLVI.  Sect.  IV.  p.  141.

Though  the  intelligent  authors  whom  I  have  quoted
considered  this  voyage  of  the  Phenicians  as  fabulous,
Herodotus  mentions  a  circumstance  concerning  it  which
seems  to  prove  that  it  had  really  been  performed.  "The
Phenicians,"  says  he,  "  affirmed  that,  in  sailing  round
Africa,  they  had  the  sun  on  their  right  hand,  which  to
me  appears  not  to  be  credible,  though  it  may  be  deemed
so  by  others."  Lib.  iv.  c.  42.  This,  it  is  certain,  must
have  happened,  if  they  really  accomplished  such  a  voy-
age. The  science  of  astronomy,  however,  was  in  that
early  period  so  imperfect,  that  it  was  by  experience  only
that  the  Phenicians  could  come  at  the  knowledge  of
this  fact;  they  durst  not,  without  this,  have  ventured  to
assert  what  would  have  appeared  to  be  an  improbable
fiction.  Even  after  what  they  related,  Herodotus  dis-
believed it.

Note  LVII.  Sect.  IV.  p.  148.

Notwithstanding  this  increasing  demand  for  the
productions  of  India,  it  is  remarkable  that  during  the
sixteenth  century  some  commodities  which  are  now  the
chief  articles  of  importation  from  the  East,  were  either
altogether  unknown,  or  of  little  account. Tea,  the  im-

294  NOTES AND

portation  of  which,  at  present,  far  exceeds  that  of  any
other  pvoductioii  oi'  the  East,  has  not  been  in  general  use
in  any  country  of  Europe  a  full  century  ;  and  yet,  during
that  short  period,  from  some  singular  caprice  of  taste,  or
po^\  cr  of  fashion,  the  infusion  of  a  leaf  brought  from  the
farthest  extremity  of  the  earth,  of  which  it  is  perhaps  the
highest  praise  to  say  that  it  is  innoxious,  has  become  al-
most a  necessary  of  life,  in  several  parts  of  Europe,  and
the  passion  for  it  descends  from  the  most  elevated  to  the
lowest  orders  in  society.  In  1785  it  was  computed  that
the  whole  quantity  of  tea  imported  into  Europe  from
China  was  about  nineteen  millions  of  pounds,  of  w  hich
it  is  conjectured  that  twelve  millions  were  consumed  in
Great  Britain  and  the  dominions  depending  upon  it.
Dodsley's  Annual  Register  for  1784  and  1785,  p.  156.
In  1789  twenty-one  millions  of  pounds  were  imported.
The  porcelain  of  China,  now  as  common  in  many  parts
of  Europe  as  if  it  were  of  domestic  manufacture,  was
not  known  to  the  ancients.  Marco  Polo  is  the  first
among  the  moderns  who  mentions  it.  The  Portuguese
began  to  import  it  not  long  after  their  first  voyage  to
China,  a.  d.  1517 ;  but  it  was  a  considerable  time  before
the  use  of  it  became  extensive.

Note  LVIII.  p.  166.

According  to  all  the  writers  ot  antiquity,  the  Indian^?
are  said  to  be  divided  into  seven  tribes  or  casts.  Strabo ,
lib.  XV.  p.  1029.  C.  &c.  Diod.  Sicul.  lib.  ii.  p.  153,  &c.
Arrian.  Indie,  c.  10.  They  were  led  into  this  error,itis
probable,  by  considering  some  of  the  subdivisions  of  the
casts,  as  if  they  had  been  a  distinct  independent  order.
But  that  they  were  no  more  than  four  original  casts,  we
learn  from  the  concurring  testimony  of  the  best  informed
modern  travellers.  A  most  distinct  account  of  these  we
have  in  "  La  Porte  Ouverte,  on  la  vraye  Representation
de  la  Vie,  des  Moeurs,  de  la  Religion,  et  du  Service,  des
Brahmines,  qui  demeurent  sur  les  Costes  de  Choroman-
del,"  &c.  This  was  compiled  before  the  middle  of  last
century,  by  Abraham  Roger,  chaplain  of  the  Dutch  fac-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  295

tory  at  Pullicate.  By  gaining  the  confidence  of  an  in-
telligent Brahmin,  he  acquired  information  concerning
the  manners  and  religion  of  the  Indians,  more  authentic
and  extensive  than  was  known  to  Europeans  prior  to  the
late  translations  from  the  Sanskreet  language.  I  men-
tion this  book,  because  it  seems  to  be  less  known  than
it  deserves  to  be.  There  remains  now  no  doubt  with  re-
spect either  to  the  number  or  the  functions  of  the  casts,
as  both  are  ascertained  from  the  most  ancient  and  sacred
books  of  the  Hindoos,  and  confirmed  by  the  accounts  of
their  own  institutions,  given  by  the  Brahmins  eminent
for  their  learning.  According  to  them,  the  different  casts
proceeded  from  Brahma,  the  immediate  agent  of  the  cre-
ation under  the  Supreme  Power,  in  the  following  man-
ner, which  establishes  both  the  rank  which  they  were  to
hold,  and  the  office  which  they  were  required  to  per-
form.

The  Brahmin,  from  the  mouth  (wisdom):  To  pray,  to
read,  to  instruct.

The  Chehetree,  from  the  arms  (strength) :  To  draw  the
bow,  to  fight,  to  govern.

The  Bice,  from  the  belly  or  thighs  (nourishment):  To
provide  the  necessaries  of  life  by  agriculture  and  traffic.

The  Sooder,  from  the  feet  (subjection) :  To  labour  to
serve.

The  prescribed  occupations  of  all  these  classes  are
essential  in  a  well  regulated  state.  Subordinate  to  them
is  a  fifth,  or  adventitious  class,  denominated  BurrunSun-
kur,  supposed  to  be  the  offspring  of  an  unlawful  union
between  persons  of  different  casts.  These  are  mostly
dealers  in  petty  articles  of  retail  trade.  Preface  to  the
Code  of  Gentoo  Laws,  p.xlvi.  and  xcix.  This  adventi-
tious class  is  not  mentioned,  as  far  as  I  know,  by  any  Euro-
pean author.  The  distinction  was  too  nice  to  be  observed
by  them,  and  they  seem  to  consider  the  members  of  this
cast  as  belonging  to  the  Sooder.  Besides  these  acknow-
ledged casts,  there  is  a  race  of  unhappy  men,  denomi-
nated, on  the  Coromandel  coast,  Pariars,  and  in  other
parts  of  India,  Chandalas.  These  are  outcasts  from  their
original  order,  who  by  their  misconduct  have  forfeited
all  the  privileges  of  it. Their  condition  is,  undoubtedly.

290  N  O  T  E  S A  N  D

the  lowest  degradation  of  human  nature.  No  person  of
any  cast  will  have  the  least  communication  with  them.
Sonnerat,  torn.  i.  p.  55,  5G.  If  a  Pariar  approach  a  Naijr,
i.  e.  a  warrior  of  high  cast,  on  the  Malabar  coast,  he  may
put  him  to  death  ^vith  impunity.  Water  or  milk  are  con-
sidered as  defiled  even  by  their  shadow  passing-  over
them,  and  cannot  be  used  until  they  are  purified.  Ayeen
Akbery,  vol.  iii.  p.  243.  It  is  almost  impossible  for  words
to  express  the  sensation  of  vileness  that  the  name  of  Pa-
riar or  Chandala  conveys  to  the  mind  of  a  Hindoo.  Every
Hindoo  who  violates  the  rules  or  institutions  of  his  cast
sinks  into  this  degraded  situation.  This  it  is  which  ren-
ders Hindoos  so  resolute  in  adhering  to  the  institutions
of  their  tribe,  because  the  loss  of  cast  is,  to  them,  the
loss  of  all  human  comfort  and  respectability ;  and  is
a  punishment,  beyond  comparison,  more  severe  than  ex-
communication in  the  most  triumphant  period  of  papal
power.

The  four  original  casts  are  named,  and  their  functions
described  in  the  Mahabarat,  the  most  ancient  book  of
the  Hindoos,  and  of  higher  authority  than  any  with
which  the  Europeans  are  hitherto  acquainted.  Baghvat-
Geeta,  p.  130.  The  same  distinction  of  casts  was  known
to  the  author  of  Heeto-pades,  another  work  of  consider-
able antiquity,  translated  from  the  Sanskreet,  p.  251.

The  mention  of  one  circumstance  respecting  the  dis-
tinction of  casts  has  been  omitted  in  the  text.  Though
the  line  of  separation  be  so  drawn,  as  to  render  the  as-
cent from  an  inferior  to  a  higher  cast  absolutely  impos-
sible, and  it  would  be  regarded  as  a  most  enormous  im-
piety, if  one  in  a  lower  order  should  presume  to  perform
any  function  belonging  to  those  of  a  superior  cast ;  yet
in  certain  cases,  the  Pundits  declare  it  to  be  lawful  for
persons  of  a  high  class  to  exercise  some  of  the  occupa-
tions allotted  to  a  class  below  their  own,  without  losing
their  cast  by  doing  so.  Pref.  of  Pundits  to  the  Code  of
Gentoo  Laws,  p.  100.  Accordingly  we  find  Brahmins
employed  in  the  service  of  their  princes,  not  only  as
ministers  of  state,  Orme's  Fragments,  p.  207.,  but  in  sub-
ordinate stations.  Most  of  the  officers  of  high  rank  in
the  army  of  Sevagi,  the  founder  of  the  Mahratta  state^

ILLUSTRATIONS.  2f)7

were  Brahmins,  and  some  of  them  Pundits  or  learned
Brahmins.  Ibid.  p.  97.  Hurry  Punt  and  Purseram
BhoWjWho  commanded  the  Mahratta  forces,  which  acted
in  conjunction  with  the  army  of  Lord  Cornwallis  against
Tippoo  Saib,  were  Brahmins.  Many  Seapoys  in  the  ser-
vice of  the  East-India  Company,  particularly  in  the
Bengal  presidency,  are  of  the  Brahmin  cast.

Another  fact  concerning  the  casts  deserves  notice.
An  immense  number  of  pilgrims,  amounting  in  some
years  to  more  than  150,000,  visit  the  Pagoda  of  Jagger-
naut  in  Orissa,  (one  of  the  most  ancient  and  most  rever-
ed places  of  Hindoo  worship,)  at  the  time  of  the  annual
festival  in  honour  of  the  deity  to  whom  the  temple  is  con-
secrated. The  members  of  all  the  four  casts  are  allowed
promiscuously  to  approach  the  altar  of  the  idol,  and  seat-
ing themselves  without  distinction  eat  indiscriminate  of
the  same  food .  This  seems  to  indicate  some  remembrance
of  a  state  prior  to  the  institutions  of  casts  when  all  men
were  considered  as  equal.  I  have  not  such  information
as  enables  me  to  account  for  a  practice  so  repugnant  to
the  first  ideas  and  principles  of  the  Hind<  "S,  either  sa-
cred or  civil.  Bernier,  torn.  ii.  p.  102.  Tavernier,  book
ii.  c.  9.  Anquetil.  Disc.  Prelim,  p.  81.  Sketches,  p.  96.

Some  of  my  readers  must  have  observed,  that  1  have
not  mentioned  the  numerous  orders  of  Indian  devotees,
to  all  of  whom  European  writers  gave  the  appellation
of  Faquirs ;  a  name  by  which  the  Mahomedans  dis-
tinguish fanatical  monks  of  their  own  religion.  The  light
in  which  I  have  viewed  the  religious  institutions  of  the
Hindoos,  did  not  render  it  necessary  that  I  should  con-
sider the  Indian  Faquirs  particularly.  Their  number,
the  rigour  of  their  mortifications,  the  excruciating  pe-
nances which  they  voluntarily  undergo,  and  the  high
opinion  which  the  people  entertain  of  their  sanctity,
have  struck  all  travellers  who  had  visited  India,  and
their  descriptions  of  them  are  well  known.  The  power-
ful influence  of  enthusiasm,  the  love  of  distinction,  and
the  desire  of  obtaining  some  portion  of  that  reverence
and  those  honours  which  the  Brahmins  are  born  to  enjoy,
may  account  for  all  the  extraordinary  things  which  they
do  and  suffer. One  particular  concerning  them  merits

298  NOTES AND

notice.  This  order  of  devotees  appears  to  have  been
very  ancient  in  India.  The  description  of  the  Germani,
which  Strabo  takes  from  Megasthenes,  applies,  almost
in  every  circumstance,  to  the  modern  Faquirs.  Lib.  xv.
p.  1040.  B.

Note  LIX.  p.  168.

What  I  have  asserted  in  the  text  is  in  general  well-
founded.  It  is  the  opinion,  however,  of  gentlemen  who
have  seen  much  of  India,  and  who  observed  all  they  saw
with  a  discerning  eye,  that  the  conquests  both  of  the
Mahomcdans  and  of  the  Europeans  have  had  some  effect
upon  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  natives.  They
imagine  that  the  dress  which  the  Hindoos  now  wear,
the  turban,  the  jummah,  and  long  drawers,  is  an  imita-
tion of  that  worn  by  their  Mahomedan  conquerors.  The
ancient  dress  of  the  Indians,  as  described  by  Arrian,
Hist.  Indie,  c.  IC,  was  a  muslin-cloth  thrown  loosely
about  their  shoulders,  a  muslin-shirt  reaching  to  the
middle  of  the  leg,  and  their  beards  were  dyed  various
colours ;  which  is  not  the  same  w  ith  that  used  at  present.
The  custom  of  secluding  w  omen,  and  the  strictness  with
which  they  are  confined,  is  likewise  supposed  to  have
been  introduced  by  the  Mahomcdans.  This  supposition
is  in  some  measure  confirmed  by  the  drama  of  Sacon-
tala,  translated  from  the  Sanskreet.  In  that  play  seve-
ral female  characters  are  introduced,  who  mingle  in  so-
ciety, and  converse  as  freely  with  men,  as  w  omen  are
accustomed  to  do  in  Europe.  The  author,  we  may  pre-
sume, describes  the  manners,  and  adheres  to  the  cus-
toms of  his  own  age.  But  while  I  mention  this  remark,
it  is  proper,  likewise,  to  observe,  that,  from  a  passage
in  Strabo,  there  is  reason  to  think,  that  in  the  ago  of
Alexander  the  Great,  women  in  India  were  guarded
with  the  same  jealous  attention  as  at  present.  "When
their  princes"  (says  he,  copying  Megasthenes)  ''  set  out
upon  a  public  hunt,  they  are  accom2)anicd  by  a  number
of  their  women,  but  along  the  road  in  which  they  travel
ropes  are  stretched  on  each  side,  and  if  any  man  approach
near  to  them,  he  is  instantly  put  to  death."  Lib,  xv.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  299

p.  1037.  A.  In  some  parts  of  India,  where  the  original
manners  of  the  people  may  be  supposed  to  subsist  in
greatest  purity,  particularly  in  the  high  country  towards
the  sources  of  the  Indus,  women  of  rank  reside  in  private
apartments,  secluded  from  society.  Forster's  Travels,
vol.  i.  p.  228.  Women  even  of  the  Brahmin  cast  ap-
pear in  the  streets  without  a  veil;  and  it  is  only,  as  I  am
informed,  in  the  houses  of  persons  of  high  rank  or  great
opulence,  that  a  distinct  quarter  or  haram  is  allotted  to
the  women.  The  influence  of  European  manners  begins
to  be  apparent  among  the  Hindoos  who  reside  in  the
town  of  Calcutta.  Some  of  them  drive  about  in  English
chariots,  sit  upon  chairs,  and  furnish  their  houses  with
mirrors.  Many  circumstances  might  be  mentioned,  were
this  the  proper  place,  which,  it  is  probable,  will  contri-
bute to  the  progress  of  this  spirit  of  imitation.

Note  LX.  p.  196.

It  is  amusing  to  observe  how  exactly  the  ideas  of  an
intelligent  Asiatic  coincide  with  those  of  the  Europeans
on  this  subject. "In  reflecting,"  says  he,  "upon  the
poverty  of  Turan  [the  countries  beyond  the  Oxus]  and
Arabia,  I  was  at  first  at  a  loss  to  assign  a  reason  why
these  countries  have  never  been  able  to  retain  wealth,
whilst,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  daily  increasing  in  Indos-
tan. Timour  carried  into  Turan  the  riches  of  Turkey,
Persia,  and  Indostan,  but  they  are  all  dissipated ;  and,
during  the  reigns  of  the  four  first  caliphs,  Turkey,  Per-
sia, part  of  Arabia,  Ethiopia,  Egypt,  and  Spain,  were
their  tributaries ;  but  still  they  were  not  rich. It  is  evi-
dent, then,  that  this  dissipation  of  the  riches  of  a  state,
must  have  happened  either  from  extraordinary  drains,
or  from  some  defect  in  the  government. Indostan  has
been  frequently  plundered  by  foreign  invaders,  and  not
one  of  its  kings  ever  gained  for  it  any  acquisition  of
wealth ;  neither  has  the  country  many  mines  of  gold  and
silver,  an'd  yet  Indostan  abounds  in  money  and  every
other  kind  of  wealth. The  abundance  of  specie  is  un-
doubtedly owing  to  the  large  importation  of  gold  and
silver  in  the  ships  of  Europe,  and  other  nations,  many

300  NOTES AND

of  whom  bring  ready  money  in  exchange  for  the  manu-
factures and  natural  productions  of  the  country.  If  this
is  not  the  cause  of  the  prosperous  state  of  Indostan,  it
must  be  owing  to  the  peculiar  blessing  of  God."  Me-
moirs of  Kojeh  Abdulkureem,  a  Cashmerian  of  dis-
tinction, p.  42.

Note  LXI.  p.  174.

That  the  monarchs  of  India  were  the  sole  proprietors
of  land,  is  asserted  in  most  explicit  terms  by  the  ancients.
The  people  (say  they)  pay  a  land-tax  to  their  kings,  be-
cause the  whole  kingdom  is  regal  property.  Strabo,  lib.
XV.  p.  1030.  A.  Diod.  Sicul.  lib.  ii.  p.  153.  'J'his  was
not  peculiar  to  India.  In  all  the  great  monarchies  of
the  East,  the  sole  property  of  land  seems  to  be  vested  in
the  sovereign  as  lord  paramount.  According  to  Chardin,
this  is  the  state  of  property  in  Persia,  and  lands  were  let
by  the  monarch  to  the  farmers  who  cultivated  them,  on
conditions  nearly  resembling  those  granted  to  the  Indian
Ryots.  Voyages,  tom.  iii.  p.  339,  &c.  4to.  M.  Volney
gives  a  similar  account  of  the  tenure  by  which  lands  are
held  in  one  of  the  great  provinces  of  the  Turkish  empire.
Voy.  en  Syrie,  &c.  tom  ii.  p.  3G9,  &c.  The  precise
mode,  however,  in  which  the  Ryots  of  Indostan  held
their  nossessions,  is  a  circumstance  in  its  ancient  poli-
tical constitution,  wilh  respect  to  which  gentlemen  of
superior  discernment,  who  have  resided  long  in  the
country,  and  filled  some  of  the  highest  stations  in  go-
vernment, have  formed  very  different  opinions.  Some
have  imagined  that  grants  of  lands  were  made  by  the  so-
vereign to  villages  or  small  communities,  the  inhabitants
of  w  hich,  under  the  direction  of  their  ow  n  chiefs  or  heads-
men, laboured  it  in  common,  and  divided  the  produce  of
it  among  them  in  certain  proportions.  Descript.  de  ITnd.
par  M.  Bernoulli,  torn.  ii.  223,  &c.  Others  maintain,
that  the  property  of  land  has  been  transferred  from  the
crown  to  hereditary  officers  of  great  eminence  and  power,
denominated  Zemindars,  who  collect  the  rents  from  the
Ryots,  and  parcel  out  the  lands  among  them.  Others
contend,  that  the  office  of  the  Zemindars  is  temporary
and  ministerial,  that  they  are  merely  collectors  of  revc-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  .'JOl

nue,  removable  at  pleasure,  and  the  tenure  by  which  the
Ryots  hold  their  possessions  is  derived  immediately  I'rom
the  sovereign. This  last  opinion  is  supported  with  great
ability  by  Mr.  Grant,  in  an  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of
Zemindary  Tenures  in  the  landed  Property  of  Bengal,
&c. This  question  still  continues  to  be  agitated  in  Ben-
gal, and  such  plausible  arguments  have  been  produced
in  support  of  the  different  opinions,  that  although  it  be
a  point  extremely  interesting,  as  the  future  system  of
British  finance  in  India  appears  likely  to  hinge,  in  an
essential  degree,  upon  it,  persons  well  acquainted  with
the  state  of  India  have  not  been  able  to  form  a  final  and
satisfactory  opinion  on  this subject. Captain  Kirk-
patrick's  Introd.  to  the  Institutes  ofGhazan  Khan,  New
Asiatic  Miscel.  N"  II.  p.  130. Though  the  sentiments
of  the  Committee  of  Revenue,  composed of  persons
eminent  for  their  abilities,  lean  to  a  conclusion  against
the  hereditary  right  of  the  Zemindars  in  the  soil,  yet  the
Supreme  Council,  in  the  year  178G,  declined,  for  good
reasons,  to  give  any  decisive  judgment  on  a  subject  of
such  magnitude. — This  note  was  sent  to  the  press  before
I  had  it  in  my  power  to  peruse  Mr.  Rouse's  ingenious
and  instructive  dissertation  concerning  the  landed  pro-
perty of  Bengal. In  it  he  adopts  an  opinion  contrary  to
that  of  Mr.  Grant,  and  maintains,  with  that  candour  and
liberality  of  sentiment  which  are  always  conspicuous
where  there  is  no  other  object  in  view  but  the  discovery
of  truth,  that  the  Zemindars  of  Bengal  possess  their
landed  property  by  hereditary  right. Were  I  possessed
of  such  knowledge  either  of  the  state  of  India,  or  of  the
system  of  administration  established  there,  as  would  be
requisite  for  comparing  these  different  theories,  and  de-
termining which  of  them  merits  the  preference,  the  sub-
ject of  my  researches  does  not  render  it  necessary  to
enter  into  such  a  disquisition. I  imagine,  however,  that
the  state  of  landed  property  in  India  might  be  greatly
illustrated  by  an  accurate  comparison  of  it  with  the  na-
ture of  feudal  tenures ;  and  I  apprehend  that  there  might
be  traced  there  a  succession  of  changes  taking  place  in
much  the  same  order  as  has  been  observed  in  Europe,,
from  which  it  might  appear,  that  the  possession  of  land

302  ^OTES AND

was  granted  at  first  during'  pleasure,  afterward  for  life,
and  at  length  became  perpetual  and  hereditary  property.
But  even  under  this  last  form,  when  land  is  acquired
either  by  purchase  or  inheritance,  the  manner  in  which
the  light  of  property  is  confirmed  and  rendered  complete,
in  Europe  by  a  charter,  in  India  by  a  Suimud  from  the
sovereign,  seems  to  point  out  what  was  its  original  state.
According  to  each  of  the  theories  which  I  have  mentioned,
the  tenure  and  condition  of  the  Ryots  nearly  resemble
the  description  which  I  have  given  of  them. Their  state,
we  learn  from  the  accounts  of  intelligent  observers,  is  as
happy  and  independent  as  falls  to  the  lot  of  any  race  of
men  employed  in  the  cultivation  of  the  earth. The  an-
cient Greek  and  Roman  writers,  whose  acquaintance
with  the  interior  parts  of  India  was  very  imperfect,  re-
present the  fourth  part  of  the  annual  produce  of  land  as
the  general  average  of  rent  paid  to  the  sovereign. Upon
the  authority  of  a  popular  author  who  flourished  in  India
prior  to  the  Christian  era,  we  may  conclude  that the
sixth  part  of  the  people's  income  was,  in  his  time,  the
usual  portion  of  the  sovereign. Sacontala,  Act  V.  p.  53-
It  is  now  known  that  what  the  sovereign  receives  from
land  varies  greatly  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  and
is  regulated  by  the  fertility  or  barrenness  of  the  soil,  the
nature  of  the  climate,  the  abundance  or  scarcity  of  water,
and  many  other  obvious  circumstances. By  the  account
given  of  it,  I  should  imagine  that,  in  some  districts,  it
has  been  raised  beyond  its  due  proportion. One  cir-
cumstance with  respect  to  the  administration  of  revenue
in  Bengal  merits  notice,  as  it  redounds  to  the  honour  of
the  emperor  Akber,  the  wisdom  of  whose  government  I
have  often  had  occasion  to  celebrate. A  general  and  re-
gular assessment  of  revenue  in  Bengal  was  formed  in  his
reign. All  the  lands  were  then  valued,  and  the  rent  of
each  inhabitant  and  of  each  village  ascertained. A  re-
gular gradation  of  accounts  was  established. The  rents
of  the  difl'erent  inhabitants  who  lived  in  one  neighbour-
hood being  collected  together,  formed  the  account  of  a
village ;  the  rents  of  several  villages  being  next  collected
into  one  view,  formed  the  accounts  of  a  larger  portion
of  land. The  aggregate  of  these  accounts  exhibited  the

ILLUSTRATIONS.  303

rent  of  a  district,  and  the  sum  total  of  the  rents  of  all  the
districts  in  Bengal  formed  the  account  of  the  revenue  of
the  whole  province.  From  the  reign  of  Akber  to  the  go-
vernment of  Jafl^er  All  Cavvn,  a.  d.  1757,  the  annual
amount  of  revenue,  and  the  modes  of  levying  it,  con-
tinued with  little  variation.  But  in  order  to  raise  the
sum  which  he  had  stipulated  to  pay  the  English  on  his
elevation,  he  departed  from  the  wise  arrangements  of
Akber ;  many  new  modes  of  assessment  were  introduced,
and  exactions  multiplied.

Note  LXII.  p.  175.

I  SHALL  mention  only  one  instance  of  their  attention
to  this  useful  regulation  of  police.  Lahore,  in  the  Pan-
jab,  is  distant  from  Agra,  the  ancient  capital  of  Indos-
tan,  five  hundred  miles.  Along  each  side  of  the  road
between  these  two  great  cities,  there  is  planted  a  con-
tinued row  of  shady  trees,  forming  an  avenue,  to  which
(whether  we  consider  its  extent,  its  beauty,  or  utility,  in
a  hot  climate)  there  is  nothing  similar  in  any  country.
Rennell's  Memoir,  p.  69.

Note  LXIII.  p.  178.

We  cannot  place  the  equitable  and  mild  government
of  Akber  in  a  point  of  view  more  advantageous,  than  by
contrasting  it  with  the  conduct  of  other  Mahomedan
princes.  In  no  country  did  this  contrast  ever  appear
more  striking  than  in  India.  In  the  thousandth  year  of
the  Christian  era,  Mahmud  of  Ghazna,  to  whose  domi-
nion were  subjected  the  same  countries  which  formed
the  ancient  kingdom  of  Bactria,  invaded  Indostan.  Every
step  of  his  progress  in  it  was  marked  with  blood  and
desolation.  The  most  celebrated  pagodas,  the  ancient
monuments  of  Hindoo  devotion  and  magnificence,  were
destroyed,  the  ministers  of  religion  were  massacred,  and
with  undistinguishing  ferocity  the  country  was  laid  waste,
and  the  cities  were  plundered  and  burnt.  About  four
hundred  years  after,  Mahmud,  Timur,  or  Tamerlane,  a
conqueror  of  higher  fame,  turned  his  irresistible  arms

304  NOTES  AND

against  Indostan  ;  and  though  born  in  an  age  more  im-
proved, he  not  only  equalled,  but  often  po  far  surpassed
the  cruel  deeds  of  Mahmud,  as  to  be  justly  branded  Avith
the  odious  name  of  the  "  Destroying  Prince,"  which  was
given  to  him  by  the  Hindoos,  the  undeserving  victims  of
his  rage.  A  rapid  but  striking  description  of  their  de-
vastations may  be  found  in  JNIr,  Orme's  Dissertation  on
the  Establishments  made  by  the  Mahomedan  Conquerors
in  Indostan.  A  more  full  account  of  them  is  given  by
Mr.  Gibbon,  vol.  v.  p.  G46.  vol.  vi.  p.  339,  &c.  The  ar-
rogant contempt  with  which  bigoted  Mahomedans  view
all  the  nations  who  have  notcmbraced  the  religion  of  the
prophet  will  account  for  the  unrelenting  rigour  of  Mah-
mud and  Timur  towards  the  Hindoos,  and  greatly  en-
hances the  merit  of  the  tolerant  spirit  and  moderation
with  which  Akber  governed  his  subjects.  What  im-
pression the  mild  administration  of  Akber  made  upon
the  Hindoos,  we  learn  from  a  beautiful  letter  of  Jess-
want  Sing,  Rajah  of  Joudpore,  to  Aurengzebe,  his  fana-
tical and  persecuting  successor.  "  Your  royal  ancestor,
Akber,  whose  throne  is  now  in  heaven,  conducted  the
affairs  of  this  empire  in  equity  and  firm  security  for  the
space  of  fifty-two  years,  preserving  every  tribe  of  men
in  ease  and  happiness ;  whether  they  were  followers  of
Jesus  or  of  Moses,  of  David  or  of  Mahomed;  were  they
Brahmins,  were  they  of  the  sect  of  Dharians,  which  de-
nies the  eternity  of  matter,  or  of  that  which  ascribes  the
existence  of  the  world  to  chance,  they  all  equally  en-
joyed his  countenance  and  favour;  insomuch  that  his
people,  in  gratitude  for  the  indiscriminate  protection
which  he  afforded  them,  distinguished  him  by  the  appel-
lation of  Jiiggot Grow,  Guardian  of  Mankind. If

Your  Majesty  places  any  faith  in  those  books,  by  dis-
tinction called  divine,  you  w  ill  (here  be  instructed  that
God  is  the  God  of  all  mankind,  not  the  God  of  Maho-
medans alone.  The  Pagan  and  the  Mussulman  are
equally  in  his  presence.  Distinction  of  colours  are  of
his  ordination.  It  is  he  who  gives  existence.  In  your
temples,  to  his  name,  the  voice  is  raised  in  prayer ;  in  a
house  of  images,  where  the  bell  is  shaken,  still  he  is  the
object  of  adoration. To  vilify  the  religion  and  customs

ILLUSTRATIONS.  .305

of  other  men,  is  to  set  at  naught  the  pleasure  of  the
Almighty.  When  we  deface  a  picture,  we  naturally  in-
cur the  resentment  of  the  painter ;  and  justly  has  the
poet  said,  *  Presume  not  to  arraign  or  to  scrutinize  the
various  works  of  Power  Divine.'"  For  this  valuable
communication  we  are  indebted  to  Mr.  Orme.  Frag-
ments, notes,  p.  xcvii.  I  have  been  asssured  by  a
gentleman  who  has  read  this  letter  in  the  original,  that
the  translation  is  not  only  faithful  but  elegant.

NoteLXIV.  p.  187.

I  HAVE  not  attempted  a  description  of  any  subterra-
neous excavations  but  those  of  Elephanta,  because  none
of  them  have  been  so  often  visited,  or  so  carefully  in-
spected. In  several  parts  of  India,  there  are,  however,
stupendous  works  of  a  similar  nature.  The  extent  and
magnificence  of  the  excavations  in  the  island  of  Salsetta
are  such,  that  the  artist  employed  by  Governor  Boon  to
make  drawings  of  them,  asserted,  that  it  would  require
the  labour  of  forty  thousand  men  for  forty  years  to  finish
them.  Archaeologia,  vol.  vii.  p.  336.  Loose  as  this
mode  of  estimation  may  be,  it  conveys  an  idea  of  the
impression  which  the  view  of  them  made  upon  his  mind.
The  pagodas  of  Ellore,  eighteen  miles  from  Aurungabad,
are  likewise  hewn  out  of  the  solid  rock,  and  if  they  do
not  equal  those  of  Elephanta  and  Salsetta  in  magnitude,
they  surpass  them  far  in  their  extent  and  number.  M.
Thevenot,  who  first  gave  any  description  of  these  sin-
gular mansions,  asserts,  that  for  above  two  leagues  all
around  the  mountain  nothing  is  to  be  seen  but  pagodas.
Voy.  part  iii.  chap.  44.  They  were  examined  at  greater
leisure  and  with  more  attention  by  M.  Anquetil  du  Per-
ron ;  but  as  his  long  description  of  them  is  not  accom-
panied with  any  plan  or  drawing,  I  cannot  convey  a  dis-
tinct idea  of  the  whole.  It  is  evident,  however,  that
they  are  the  works  of  a  powerful  people,  and  among  the
innumerable  figures  in  sculpture  with  which  the  walls
are  covered,  air  the  present  objects  of  Hindoo  worship
may  be  distinguished.  Zend-avesta.  Disc.  Prelim,  p.
233. There  are  remarkable  excavations  in  a  mountain

VOL.  IX.  X

30G  NOTES AND

at  Mavalipiiram  near  Sadras.  This  mountain  is  well
known  on  the  Cororaandel  coast  by  the  name  of  the
Seven  Pagodas.  A  good  description  of  the  works  there
which  are  mairnificent  and  of  high  antiquity  is  given.
Asiat.  Researches,  vol.  i.  p.  145,  &c.  Many  other  in-
stances of  similar  works  might  be  produced  if  it  w  ere
necessary.  What  I  have  asserted,  p.  225,  concerning
the  elegance  of  some  of  the  ornaments  in  Indian  build-
ings, is  confirmed  by  Colonel  Call,  chief  engineer  at
Madras,  who  urges  this  as  a  proof  of  the  early  and  high
civilization  of  the  Indians.  "  It  may  safely  be  pro-
nounced," says  he,  **  that  no  part  of  the  world  has  more
marks  of  antiquity  for  arts,  sciences,  and  civilization,
than  the  peninsula  of  India,  from  the  Ganges  to  Cape
Comorin.  I  think  the  carvings  on  some  of  the  pagodas
and  choultries,  as  well  as  the  grandeur  of  the  work,  ex-
ceeds any  thing  executed  now-a-days,  not  only  for  the
delicacy  of  the  chisel,  but  the  expense  or  construction,
considering,  in  many  instances,  to  what  distances  the
component  parts  were  carried,  and  to  what  heights
raised."  Philosophical  Transactions,  vol.  Ixii.  p.  354.
I  am  happy  to  tind  my  idea,  that  the  first  temples  erect-
ed by  the  Hindoos  were  formed  upon  the  model  of  those
caverns  in  which  the  rites  of  religion  were  originally  ce-
lebrated, confirmed,  and  more  fully  unfolded  by  Mr.
Hodges.  In  a  short  dissertation  on  the  primitive  stand-
ard, or  prototype  of  the  dificsrent  styles  of  architecture,
viz.  the  Egyptian,  Hindoo,  Moorish,  Gothic,  and  Chi-
nese, he  has  examined  and  illustrated  that  curious  sub-
ject with  great  ingenuity. Travels  in  India,  p.  63 — 77.

Note  LXV.  p.  190.

India,  says  Strabo,  produces  a  variety  of  substances
w  hich  dye  the  most  admirable  colours.  That  the  Indicum
which  produced  the  beautiful  blue  colour,  is  the  same
with  the  Indigo  of  the  moderns,  we  may  conclude  not
only  from  the  resemblance  of  the  name,  and  the  simi-
larity of  the  eftccts,  but  from  the  description  given  by
Pliny  in  the  passage  which  I  have  quoted  in  the  text.
He  knew  that  it  was  a  preparation  of  a  vegetable  sub-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  307

stance,  though  he  was  ill-informed  both  concerning  the
plant  itself,  and  the  process  by  which  it  was  fitted  for  use ;
which  will  not  appear  surprising,  when  we  recollect  the
account  formerly  given  of  the  strange  ignorance  of  the
ancients  with  respect  to  the  origin  and  preparation  of
silk. From  the  colour  of  Indigo,  in  the  form  in  which  it
was  imported,  it  is  denominated  by  some  authors,  Atra-
mentum  Indicum,  and  Indicum  Nigrum,  Salmas.  Exercit.
p.  180,  and  is  mentioned  under  the  last  of  these  names,
among  the  articles  of  importation  from  India. Peripl.
Mar.  Erythr.  p.  22. The  colour  of  the  modern  Indigo,
when  undiluted,  resembles  that  of  the  ancient  Indicum,
being  so  intensely  coloured  as  to  appear  black. De-
laval's  Experim.  Inquiry  into  the  Cause  of  the  Changes
of  Colours,  Pref.  p.  xxiii. Indigo  is  the  principal  dye-
stuff  used  by  the  natives  of  Sumatra,  and  is  much  cul-
tivated in  that  island; but  the  mode  of  preparing  it
differs  from  that  which  is  common  among  the  people  of
Indostan. Marsden.  Hist,  of  Sumatra,  p.  77. There
has  been  lately  found  in  the  Circar  of  Rajamundry,  a
new  species  of  Indigo,  denominated  the Tree  Indigo,
which,  as  it  grows  wild  and  in  great  abundance,  pro-
mises to  be  a  discovery  of  considerable  use.  Oriental  Re-
pertory, No.  I.  p.  39,  &c. The  Gum  Lacca,  used  in
dying  a  red  colour,  was  likewise  known  to  the  ancients,
and  by  the  same  name  which  it  now  bears. Salmas.
Exercit.  p.  810. This  valuable  substance,  of  such  ex-
tensive utility  in  painting,  dying,  japanning,  varnishing,
and  in  the  manufacture  of  sealing  wax,  is  the  production
of  a  very  minute  insect. These  insects  fix  themselves
upon  the  succulent  extremities  of  the  branches  of  certain
trees,  and  are  soon  glued  to  the  place  on  which  they  set-
tle, by  a  thick  pellucid  liquid  which  exudes  from  their
bodies,  the  gradual  accumulation  of  which  forms  a  com-
plete cell  for  each  insect,  which  is  the  tomb  of  the  parent,
and  the  birth-place  of  its  offspring. This  glutinous  sub-
stance, with  which  the  branches  of  trees  are  entirely
covered,  is  the  Gum-lacca.  An  account  of  its  formation,
nature,  and  use,  is  given  in  the  Philos.  Trans,  vol.  Ixxi.
part  ii.  p.  374,  in  a  concise,  accurate,  and  satisfactory
manner. Some  curious  observations  upon  this  insect

x2

;308  NOTES  AND

aro  published  by  Mr.  Roxburgh,  who  cultivates  the
study  of  Natural  History  in  India  with  great  assiduity
and  success.  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  iii.  p.  361.  It  is
remarkable  that  Ctesias  seems  to  have  received  an  ac-
count tolerably  distinct  of  the  insect  by  which  the  Gum-
lacca  is  produced,  and  celebrates  the  beauty  of  the  co-
lour which  it  dyes.  Excerpta  ex  Indie,  ad  calc.  Hero-
dot,  edit.  Wesseling,  p.  830.  Indian  Dyers  was  the
ancient  name  of  those  who  dyed  either  the  fine  blue  or
the  fine  red,  which  points  out  the  country  whence  the
materials  they  used  were  brought.  Salmas.  ib.  p.  810.
From  their  dying  cotton  stuffs  with  different  colours,  it
is  evident  that  the  ancient  Indians  must  have  made  some
considerable  proficiency  in  chemical  knowledge.  Pliny,
lib.  xxxv.  c.  ii.  §  42.  gives  an  account  of  this  art  as  far
as  it  was  known  anciently.  It  is  precisely  the  same  with
that  now  practised  in  calico-printing.

Note  LXVI.  p.  198.

As  Sanskreet  literature  is  altogether  a  new  acquisition
to  Europe,  Baghvat-Geeta,  the  first  translation  from  that
language  having  been  published  so  late  as  a.  d.  1785,  it
is  intimately  connected  Avith  the  subject  of  ray  inquiries,
and  may  afford  entertainment  to  some  of  my  readers,
after  having  reviewed  in  the  text,  with  a  greater  degree  of
critical  attention,  the  two  Sanskreet  works  most  worthy
of  notice,  to  give  here  a  succinct  account  of  other  compo-
sitions in  that  tongue  with  which  we  have  been  made
acquainted. The  extensive  use  of  the  Sanskreet  lan-
guage is  a  circumstance  which  merits  particular  atten-
tion. "The  grand  source  of  Indian  literature"  (says
Mr.  Ilalhed, the  first  Englishman who acquired the
knowledge  of  Sanskreet),  "  the  parent  of  almost  every
dialect  from  the  Persian  gulf  to  the  China  seas,  is  the
Sanskreet,  a  language  of  the  most  venerable  and  unfa-
thomable antiquity ;  which,  although  at  present  shut  up
in  the  libraries  of  Brahmins,  and  appropriated  solely  to
the  records  of  their  religion,  appears  to  have  been  current
over  most  of  the  Oriental  world ;  and  traces  of  its  ori-
ginal extent  may  still  be  discovered  in  almost  every  dis-
trict of  Asia. I  have  been  often  astonished  to  find  the

ILLUSTRATIONS.  309

similitude  of  Sanskreet  words  with  those  of  Persian  and
Arabic,  and  even  of  Latin  and  Greek ;  and  those  not  in
technical  and  metaphorical  terras,  which  the  mutation
of  refined  arts  and  improved  maimers  might  have  occa-
sionally introduced,  but  in  the  groundwork  of  language,
in  monosyllables,  in  the  names  of  numbers,  and  the  ap-
pellations of  such  things  as  would  be  first  discriminated
on  the  immediate  daw  n  of  civilization.  The  resemblance
which  may  be  observed  in  the  characters  on  the  medals
and  signets  of  various  districts  of  Asia,  the  light  which
they  reciprocally  reflect  upon  each  other,  and  the  general
analogy  which  they  all  bear  to  the  same  grand  prototype,
afford  another  ample  field  for  curiosity.  The  coins  of
Assam,  Napaul,  Cashmecre,  and  many  other  kingdoms,
are  all  stamped  with  Sanskreet  characters,  and  mostly  con-
tain allusions  to  the  old  Sanskreet  mythology.  The  same
conformity  I  have  observed  on  the  impression  of  seals  from
Bootan  and  Thibet.  A  collateral  inference  may  likewise
be  deduced  from  the  peculiar  arrangement  of  the  San-
skreet alphabet,  so  very  difierent  from  that  of  any  other
quarter  of  the  world.  This  extraordinary  mode  of  com-
bination still  exists  in  the  greatest  part  of  the  East,  from
the  Indus  to  Pegu,  in  dialects  now  apparently  uncon-
nected, and  in  characters  completely  dissimilar ;  and  it
is  a  forcible  argument  that  they  are  all  derived  from  the
same  source.  Another  channel  of  speculation  presents
itself  in  the  names  of  persons  and  places,  of  titles  and
dignities,  w  hich  are  open  to  general  notice,  and  in  which,
to  the  farthest  limits  of  Asia,  may  be  found  manifest  traces
of  the  Sanskreet."  Preface  to  the  Grammar  of  the  Ben-
gal Language,  p.  3.  After  this  curious  account  of  the
Sanskreet  tongue,  I  proceed  to  enumerate  the  works
which  have  been  translated  from  it,  besides  the  two  men-
tioned in  the  text.— 1.  To  Mr.  Wilkins  we  are  indebted
for  Heeto-pades  or  Amicable  Instruction,  in  a  series  of
connected  fables,  interspersed  with  moral,  prudential,
and  political  maxims.  This  work  is  in  such  high  esteem
throughout  the  East,  that  it  has  been  translated  into  every
language  spoken  there.  It  did  not  escape  the  notice  of
the  emperor  Akber,  attentive  to  every  thing  that  could
contribute  to  promote  useful  knowledge. He  directed

310  NOTES AND

his  vizier,  Abiil  Fazel,  to  put  it  into  a  style  suited  to  all
capacities,  and  to  illustrate  the  obscure  passages  in  it,
which  he  accordingly  did,  and  gave  it  the  title  of,  The
Criterion  of  Wisdom. At  length,  these  fables  made  their
way  into  Europe,  and  have  been  circulated  there  with
additions  and  alterations,  under  the  names  of  Pilpay
and  Esop. Many  of  the  Sanskreet  apologues  are  inge-
nious and  beautiful,  and  having  been  copied  or  imitated
by  the  fabulists  of  other  nations. But  in  some  of  them
the  characters  of  the  animals  introduced  are  very  ill  sus-
tained ;  to  describe  a  tiger  as  extremely  devout,  and  prac-
tising charity,  and  other  religious  duties,  p.  16.  or  an  old
mouse  well  read  in  the  Nectee  Sastras,  i.  e.  Systems  of
morality  and policy, p. 24 ;  a  cat  reading  religious
books, p.  35,  &c. discovers  a  want  of  taste,  and  an
inattention to  propriety. Many of the moral say-
ings, if  considered  as  detached  maxims,  are  founded
upon  a  thorough  knowledge  of  life  and  manners,  and
convey  instruction  with  elegant  simplicity. But  the  at-
tempt of  the  author  to  form  his  work  into  a  connected
series  of  fables,  and  his  mode  of  interweaving  with  them
such  a  number  of  moral  reflections  in  prose  and  in  verse,
renders  the  structure  of  the  whole  so  artificial  that  the
perusal  of  it  becomes  often  unpleasant. Akber  was  so
sensible  of  this,  that,  among  other  instructions,  he  ad-
vises his  vizier  to  abridge  the  long  digressions  in  that
work. By  these  strictures  it  is  far  from  my  intention  to
detract  in  the  smallest  degree  from  the  merit  of  Mr.  Wil-
kins. His  country  is  much  indebted  to  him  for  having
opened  a  new  source  of  science  and  taste.  The  celebrity
of  the  Heetoo-pades,  as  well  as  its  intrinsic  merit,  not-
withstanding the  defects  which  I  have  mentioned,  justify
his  choice  of  it,  as  a  work  worthy  of  being  made  known
to  Europe  in  its  original  form. From  reading  this  and
his  other  translations,  no  man  will  refuse  him  the  praise,
to  which  he  modestly  confines  his  pretensions  "  of  having
drawn  a  picture  which  we  suppose  to  be  a  true  likeness,
although  we  are  unacquainted  with  the  original." Pref.
p.  xiv. — 2. In  the  first  number  of  the  New^  Asiatic  Mis-
cellany, we  have  a  translation  of  a  celebrated  composi-
tion in  the  East,  known  by  the  title  of  the  Five  Gems.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  .311

It  consists  of  stanzas  by  five  poets  who  attended  the
court  of  Abissura,  king  of  Bengal.  Some  of  these  stanzas
are  simple  and  elegent. — 3.  An  ode  translated  from
Wulli ;  in  which  that  extravagance  of  fancy,  and  those
far  fetched  and  unnatural  conceits,  which  so  often  disgust
Europeans  with  the  poetical  compositions  of  the  East,
abound  too  much.  The  editor  has  not  informed  us  to
whose  knowledge  of  the  Sanskreet  we  are  indebted  for
these  two  translations. — 4.  Some  original  grants  of  land»
of  very  ancient  dates,  translated  by  Mr.  Wilkins.  It
may  seem  odd,  that  a  charter  or  legal  conveyance  of  pro-
perty should  be  ranked  among  the  literary  compositions
of  any  people.  But  so  widely  do  the  manners  of  the  Hin-
doos differ  from  those  of  Europe,  that  as  our  lawyers
multiply  words  and  clauses,  in  order  to  render  a  grant
complete,  and  to  guard  against  every  thing  that  may  in-
validate it,  the  Pundits  seem  to  dispatch  the  legal  part
of  the  deed  with  brevity,  but,  in  a  long  preamble  and
conclusion,  make  an  extraordinary  display  of  their  own
learning,  eloquence,  and  powers  of  composition,  both  in
prose  and  verse.  The  preamble  to  one  of  these  deeds  is
an  encomium  of  the  monarch  who  grants  the  land,  in  a
bold  strain  of  Eastern  exaggeration  :  "  When  his  innu-
merable army  marched,  the  heavens  were  so  filled  with
the  dust  of  their  feet  that  the  birds  of  the  air  could  rest
upon  it." — "  His  elephants  moved  like  walking  moun-
tains, and  the  earth  oppressed  by  their  weight  mouldered
into  dust."  It  concludes  with  denouncing  vengeance
against  those  who  should  venture  to  infringe  this  grant :
"  Riches  and  the  life  of  man  are  as  transient  as  drops  of
water  upon  the  leaf  of  the  lotus.  Learning  this  truth,  O
man !  do  not  attempt  to  deprive  another  of  his  property."
Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  i.  p.  123,  &c.  The  other  grant
which  appears  to  be  still  more  ancient,  is  not  less  re-
markable. Both  were  found  engraved  on  plates  of  cop-
per, lb.  p.  357,  &c.— 5.  The  translation  of  part  of  the
Shaster,  published  by  Colonel  Dow,  in  the  year  1768,
ought  perhaps  to  have  been  first  mentioned.  But  as  this
translation  was  not  made  by  him  from  the  Sanskreet,  but
taken  from  the  mouth  of  a  Brahmin,  who  explained  the
Shaster  in  Persian,  or  in  the  vulgar  language  of  Bengal,

312  NOTES AND

it  will  fall  more  properly  under  notice  when  we  come  to
inquire  into  the  state  of  science  among  the  Hindoos,  than
in  this  place,  where  we  are  endeavouring  to  give  some
idea  of  their  taste  and  composition.

Note  LXVII.  p.  206.

As  many  of  my  readers  may  be  unacquainted  with  the
extravagant  length  of  the  four  eras  or  periods  of  Indian
chronology,  it  may  be  proper  to  give  an  account  of  them
from  Mr.  Halhed's  Preface  to  the  Code  of  Gentoo  Laws,
p.  xxxvi.

1.  The  Suttee  Jogue  (or  age  of  purity)  is  said  to  have
lasted  three  million  two  hundred  thousand  years ;  and
they  hold  that  the  life  of  man  was  extended  in  that  age
to  one  hundred  thousand  years  ;  and  that  his  stature  was
twenty-one  cubits.

2.  The  Tirtah  Jogue  (in  which  one  third  of  mankind
was  corrupted)  they  suppose  to  have  consisted  of  two
million  four  hundred  thousand  years,  and  that  men  lived
to  the  age  often  thousand  years.

•3.  The  Dwapaar  Jogue  (in  which  half  of  the  human
race  became  depraved)  endured  one  million  six  hundred
thousand  years  ;  and  the  life  of  man  was  then  reduced  to
a  thousand  years.

4.  The  Collee  Jogue  (in  which  all  mankind  are  cor-
rupted, or  rather  lessened,  for  that  is  the  true  meaning
of  Collee)  is  the  present  era,  which  they  suppose  ordained
to  subsist  four  hundred  thousand  years,  of  which  near
five  thousand  are  already  past ;  and  the  life  of  man  in
that  period  is  limited  to  one  hundred  years.

If  we  suppose  the  computation  of  time  in  the  Indian
chronology  to  be  made  by  solar  or  even  by  lunar  years,
nothing  can  be  more  extravagant  in  itself,  or  more  re-
pugnant to  our  mode  of  calculating  the  duration  of  the
world,  founded  on  sacred  and  infallil)le  authority.  Some
attempts  have  been  made  by  learned  men,  particularly
by  M.Bailly,in  a  very  ingenious  dissertation  on  that  sub-
ject, to  bring  the  chronology  of  the  Hindoos  to  accord
somewhat  better  with  that  of  the  Old  Testament ;  but  as
I  could  not  explain  the  principles  upon  which  he  founds

ILLUSTRATIONS.  313

his  conclusions,  without  entering  into  long  and  intricate
discussions,  foreign  from  the  subject  of  this  dissertation,
and  as  I  cannot  assent  to  some  of  his  opinions,  I  shall
rest  satisfied  with  referring  to  his  Astron.  Indienne,  Disc.
Prelim,  p.  Ixxvii.  and  leave  ray  readers  to  judge  for
themselves. I  am  happy  to  observe  that  a  memoir  on
the  Chronology  of  the  Hindoos  will  be  published  in  the
Second  Volume  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Society  of
Bengal,  and  1  hope  that  some  learned  member  of  that
body  will  be  ablcj-^from  his  acquaintance  with  the  lan-
guages and  history  of  the  country,  to  throw  light  upon  a
subject  which  its  connexion  with  religion  and  science
renders  extremely  interesting. From  one  circumstance,
however,  which  merits  attention,  we  may  conclude,  that
the  information  which  we  have  hitherto  received  con-
cerning the  chronology  of  the  Hindoos  is  very  incorrect.
We  have,  as  far  as  I  know,  only  five  original  accounts
of  the  difterent  Jogues  or  eras  of  the  Hindoos. The  first
is  given  by  M.  Roger,  who  received  it  from  the  Brahmins
on  the  Coromandel  coast. According  to  it,  the  Suttee
Jogue  is  a  period  of  one  million  seven  hundred  and
twenty-eight  thousand  years ;  the  Tirtah  Jogue  is  one
million  two  hundred  and  ninety-six  thousand  years  ;  the
Dwapaar  Jogue  is  eight  hundred  and  sixty-four  thousand
years. The  duration  of  the  Collee  Jogue  he  does  not
specify. Porte  Ouverte,  p.  179.  The  next  is  that  of  M.
Bernier,  who  received  it  from  the  Brahmins  of  Benares.
According  to  him,  the  duration  of  the  Suttee  Jogue  was
two  million  five  hundred  thousand  years  ;  that  of  Tirtah
Jogue  one  million  two  hundred  thousand  years  ;  that  of
the  Dwapaar  Jogue  is  eight  hundred and  sixty-four
thousand  years. Concerning  the  period  of  the  Collee
Jogue,  he,  likewise,  is  silent. Voyages,  torn.  ii.  p.  lO'O.
The  third  is  that  of  Colonel  Dow,  according  to  which  the
Suttee  Jogue  is  a  period  of  fourteen  million  of  years  ;
the  Tirtah  Jogue  one  million  eighty  thousand ;  the  Dwa-
paar Jogue  seventy-two  thousand ;  and  the  Collee  Jogue
thirty-six  thousand  years. Hist,  of  Hindost.  vol.  i.  p.  2.
The  fourth  account  is  that  of  M.  de  Gentil,  who  received
it  from  the  Brahmins  of  the  Coromandel  coast,  and  as
bis  information  was  acquired  in  the  same  part  of  India,

314  NOTES AND

and  derived  from  the  same  source  with  that  of  M.  Ro-
ger, it  agrees  with  his  in  every  particular. Mem.  de
I'Academ.  des  Sciences  pour  2772,  torn.  ii.  part.  i.  p.
176. The  fifth  is  the  account  of  Mr.  Halhed,  which  I
have  already  given. From  this  discrepancy,  not  only  of
the  total  numbers,  but  of  many  of  the  articles  in  the  dif-
ferent accounts,  it  is  manifest  that  our  information  con-
cerning Indian  chronology  is  hitherto  as  uncertain  as
the  whole  system  of  it  is  wild  and  fabulous. To  me  it
appears  highly  probable,  that  when  we  understand  more
thoroughly  the  principles  upon  which  the  factitious  eras
or  Jogues  of  the  Hindoos  have  been  formed,  that  we  may
be  more  able  to  reconcile  their  chronology  to  the  true
mode  of  computing  time,  founded  on  the  authority  of  the
Old  Testament;  and  may  likewise  find  reason  to  con-
clude, that  the  account  given  by  their  astronomers  of  the
situation  of  the  heavenly  bodies  at  the  beginning  of  the
CoUce  Jogue,  is  not  established  by  actual  observation,
but  the  result  of  a  retrospective  calculation. Whoever
undertakes  to  investigate  farther  the  chronology  of  the
Hindoos,  will  derive  great  assistance  from  a  Memoir  of
Mr.  Marsden  on  that  subject,  in  which  he  has  explained
the  nature  of  their  year  and  the  several  eras  in  use  among
them, with much ingenuity and precision. Philos.
Transact,  vol.  Ixxx.part.  ii.  p.  560.

Note  LXVIII.  p.  213.

In  the  public  buildings  of  India,  we  find  proofs  and
monuments  of  the  proficiency  of  the  Brahmins  in  science,
particularly  of  their  attention  to  astronomical  observa-
tion. Their  religion  enjoins,  that  the  four  sides  of  a
pagoda  should  face  the  four  cardinal  points.  In  order
to  execute  this  with  accuracy,  they  take  a  method  de-
scribed by  M.  le  Gentil,  which  discovers  a  considerable
degree  of  science.  He  carefully  examined  the  position
of  one  of  their  pagodas,  and  found  it  to  bo  perfectly
exact.  Voy.  torn.  i.  p.  133.  As  some  of  their  pagodas
are  very  ancient,  they  must  have  early  attained  such  a
portion  of  knowledge  as  was  requisite  for  placing  them
properly.  On  the  ceilings  of  Choultrys,  and  other  ancient

ILLUSTRATIONS.  315

edifices,  tlie  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac  are  often  deli-
neated ;  and  from  their  resemblance  to  those  which  are
now  universally  used,  it  is  highly  probable  that  the  know-
ledge of  these  arbitrary  symbols  was  derived  from  the
East.  Colonel  Call  has  published  a  drawing  of  the
signs  of  the  zodiac,  which  he  found  on  the  ceiling  of  a
Choultry  at  Verdapettah,  in  the  Madura  country.  Phil.
Transact,  vol.  Ixii.  p.  353.  I  have  a  drawing  of  them  in
my  possession,  differing  from  his  in  some  of  the  figures,
but  I  cannot  say  in  what  particular  place  it  was  found.
Sir  Robert  Barker  describes  an  observatory  at  Benares,
which  he  visited  a.  d.  1772.  In  it  he  found  instruments
for  astronomical  observation,  of  very  large  dimensions,
and  constructed  with  great  skill  and  ingenuity.  Of  all
these  he  has  published  drawings.  Phil.  Transact,  vol.
Ixvii.  p.  598.  According  to  traditionary  account,  this
observatory  was  built  by  the  emperor  Akber.  The  view
which  Sir  Robert  took  of  it  was  a  hasty  one.  It  merits
a  more  attentive  inspection,  in  order  to  determine  whe-
ther it  was  constructed  by  Akber,  or  erected  in  some
more  early  period.  Sir  Robert  intimates,  that  none  but
Brahmins  who  understood  the  Sanskreet,  and  could  con-
sult the  astronomical  tables  written  in  that  language,
were  capable  of  calculating  eclipses.  P.  Tiessenthaler
describes,  in  a  very  cursory  manner,  two  observatories
furnished  with  instruments  of  extraordinary  magni-
tude, at  Jepour  and  Ougein,  in  the  country  of  Malwa.
Bernouilli,  torn.  i.  p.  316.  347.  But  these  are  modern
structures.

Since  the  first  edition  of  the  Historical  Disquisition
was  published,  the  Souriak  Seddantam,  or,  according  to
a  more  correct  orthography,  the  Surya  Siddhanta,  on  the
principles  of  which  I  had  observed  that  all  the  Indian
astronomy  is  founded,  has  been  discovered  at  Benares
by  Sir  Robert  Chambers.  He  immediately  communi-
cated this  valuable  work  to  Samuel  Davis,  Esq.  who  has
favoured  the  world  with  a  translation  of  several  consi-
derable extracts  from  it.

316  NOTES  AND

The  SOrya  Siddh^nta  is  composed  in  the  Sanskrcct
language,  and  professes  to  be  a  divine  relation,  (as  Abul
Fazel  had  related,  Ayeen  Akbery,  III.  p.  8.)  communi-
cated to  mankind  more  than  two  millions  of  years  ago,
towards  the  close  of  the  Sutty  or  Satya  Jogue,  the  first
of  the  four  fabulous  ages  into  which  the  Hindoo  mytho-
logists  divide  the  period  during  which  they  suppose  the
world  to  have  existed.  But  when  this  accompaniment
of  fiction  and  extravagance  is  removed,  there  is  left  be-
hind a  very  rational  and  elaborate  system  of  astronomi-
cal calculation.  From  this  Mr.  Davis  has  selected  what
relates  to  the  calculation  of  eclipses,  and  has  illustrated
it  with  great  ingenuity.  The  manner  in  which  that  sub-
ject is  treated  has  so  close  an  affinity  to  the  methods
formerly  brought  from  India,  and  of  which  I  have  given
some  account,  as  to  confirm  strongly  the  opinion  that
the  Surya  Siddh^nta  is  the  source  from  which  all  the
others  are  derived.  How  far  the  real  date  of  this  work
may  be  ascertained  from  the  rules  and  tables  which  it
contains,  will  be  more  clearly  established  when  a  trans-
lation of  the  whole  is  published.  In  the  mean  time  it  is
evident,  that  what  is  already  known  w  ith  respect  to  these
rules  and  tables,  is  extremely  favourable  to  the  hypo-
thesis which  ascribes  a  very  high  antiquity  to  the  astro-
nomy of  the  Brahmins.

The  circumstance,  perhaps,  most  worthy  of  attention,
in  the  Extracts  now  referred  to,  is  the  system  of  trigo-
nometry included  in  the  astronomical  rules  of  the  Siirya
Siddhcinta.  Asiat.  Research,  ii.  p.  245.  249.  It  may  be
shewn  that  this  system  is  founded  on  certain  geometrical
theorems,  which,  though  modern  mathematicians  be  well
acquainted  with,  were  certainly  unknown  to  Ptolemy  and
the  Greek  geometricians.

It  is  with  pleasure,  too,  we  observe,  that  Mr.  Davis
has  in  his  possession  several  other  ancient  books  of
Hindoo  astronomy,  and  that  there  is  reason  to  expect
from  him  a  translation  of  the  whole  Surya  Siddhanta.

It  must  be  added,  that  we  also  learn  from  the  second
volume  of  the  Asiatic  Researches,  that  some  vestiges  of
algebraical  calculation  have  been  discovered  among  the
Brahmins ;  particularly  rules  for  the  solution  of  certain

ILLUSTRATIONS.  317

arithmetical  questions,  with  which  it  would  seem  that
nothing  but  algebra  could  have  furnished  them.  Asiat.
Research,  ii.  p.  468.  note,  487.  495.

My  friend,  Mr.  Professor  Playfair,  has  eamined  that
Extract  from  the  S6rya  Siddhdnta,  which  gives  an  ac-
count of  the  ancient  Hindoo  system  of  trigonometry,
and  has  discovered  the  principles  on  which  it  is  founded.
It  is  with  pleasure  I  announce,  that  the  result  of  this
examination  will  be  communicated  soon  to  the  public,
and  will  afford  an  additional  proof  of  the  extraordinary
progress  which  the  natives  of  India  had  early  made  in
the  most  abstruse  sciences.

INDEX.

INDEX

TO THE

DISQUISITION CONCERNING ANCIENT INDIA.

Abul  Fazel,  minister  to  Akber,  sovereign  of  Indostan,  pub-
lishes the  Ayeen  Akbery,  178. And  Heeto-Pades,  309.

Acesines,  a  city  built  on  that  river  by  Alexander  the  Great,  249.

Africa,  general  idea  of  the  continent  of,  and  of  its  trade,  134.
Origin  of  the  slave-trade,  152.

Agathemerus,  his  account  of  the  island  of  Taprobana,  73.  His
character  of  Ptolemy  the  geographer,  264.

Agathodeemon  illustrates  the  geography  of  Ptolemy,  by  maps,
264.

Akber,  sovereign  of  Indostan,  his  character,  178.  304.

Albuquerque,  Alphonso,  the  Portuguese  admiral,  seizes  the
island  of  Orinus,  129. His  operations  on  the  Red  sea,  ib.

Alexander  the  Great,  his  extensive  views  respecting  India,  16.
His  expedition  to  India,  17.  His  war  with  Porus,  19.  How
obliged  to  rehnquish  his  enterprise,  20.  His  measures  for
opening  a  maritime  communication  with  India,  21.  His  ac-
count of  India  confirmed  by  modern  observations,  24.  His
political  views  in  exploring  that  country,  26.  His  measures
to  unite  his  European  and  Asiatic  subjects,  28.  Consequences
of  his  death,  31.  The  sufferings  of  his  army  from  the  peri-
odical rains,  242.  His  surprise  at  the  tides  of  the  Indian
ocean,  245.  Cities  built  by  him  in  India,  249.  251.  In-
tended a  survey  of  the  Caspian  sea,  260.

Alexandria,  long  the  chief  seat  of  commerce  with  India,  17.
The  light-house  on  the  Pharos  erected  by  Ptolemy  Lagus,  38.
Mode  of  conducting  the  silk  trade  at  that  port,  55.  The  Ve-
netians trade  there  for  silk,  106.  And  the  Florentines,  109.
Is  subjected  to  the  Turks,  131.

Algebra,  a  mode  of  calculation  not  unknown  to  the  Brahmins,
316.

Allahabad,  the  modern  name  of  the  ancient  city  of  Pahbothra,
33.  Account  of  this  city  by  Magasthenes,  35.  Remarks  of
Major  Rennell  on  this  subject,  253.

America,  discovered  by  Christopher  Columbus,  122.  East-
India  trade  a  continual  drain  from  its  silver  mines,  151.  Ori-
gin of  the  slave-trade,  152. Contrast  between  the  natives  of

VOL.  IX.  Y

;}22  INDEX.

America,  and  of  India,  when  first  discovered,  154.  The  trade
of  Europe  with  each  compared,  156.  Was  obliged  to  be  co-
lonized in  order  to  be  improved,  ib.  Supplies  Europe  with
its  products,  in  return  for  manufactures,  157.

Antiochus  the  Great,  his  inroad  into  India,  254.

Antoninus,  Marcus,  emperor,  notices  of  an  embassy  sent  by
him  to  the  emperor  of  China,  69.

Antwerp,  greatly  enriched  by  becoming  the  staple  of  the  Han-
seatic  league,  119.

Arabians,  anciently  great  dealers  in  spices  from  the  East,  52.
Great  alterations  effected  in  their  manners  by  the  religion  of
Mahomet,  86.  They  conquer  Egypt  and  Persia,  87.  A  view
of  their  commercial  navigation,  88.  Are  the  first  who  men-
tion porcelain  and  tea,  90.  Derived  the  knowledge  of  the
mariner's  compass  from  Europe,  274.  Make  no  scruple  to
plunder  the  caravans  travelling  to  Mecca,  289.

Aristotle,  his  political  advice  to  Alexander  the  Great,  27.  His
just  description  of  the  Caspian  sea,  259.  Doubted  the  expe-
diency of  encouraging  commerce  in  a  well-regulated  state,
261.

Aromatics,  why  much  used  by  the  ancients,  51.

Arrian,  character  of  his  history  of  the  Indian  expedition  of
Alexander  the  Great,  23.  His  account  of  the  commerce  of
the  ancients,  56.  Inquiry  into  his  geographical  knowledge
of  India,  59.  Is  the  first  ancient  writer  who  had  any  know-
ledge of  the  eastern  coast  of  the  great  peninsula  of  India,  60.
His  account  of  Alexander's  Indian  fleet  corroborated,  243.
Character  of  his  Indian  history,  244.  His  account  of  the
Caspian  sea,  258.  The  places  mentioned  in  his  Periplus
compared  with  modern  situations  and  names,  264.  268.

Arts  and  Sciences,  where  first  cultivated,  8.

Asbestos,  its  extravagant  price  among  the  Romans  261.

Astronomy,  testimonies  of  the  great  proficiency  of  the  Indostans
in,  205.

Augsburg,  greatly  enriched  by  becoming  a  mart  for  Indian
commodities,  119.

Augustus,  emperor,  reduces  Egypt  to  a  Roman  province,  43.

Ayeon  Akbery,  account  of  the  mutual  intercourse  of  the  East
Indians  by  water,  from,  244. — See  Sanskreet  literature.

Babelmandeb,  derivation  of  the  name,  255.

Bactria,  rise  of  the  kingdom  of,  and  its  acquisitions  in  India,  36.
Is  overwhelmed  by  the  Tartars,  37.  255.

Baghvat  Geta,  the  pure  theology  taught  in  that  poem,  227.

Bailly,  M.,  his  examination  into  the  antiquity  of  astronomy  in
India,  209.

Bank  of  Venice,  the  first  establishment  of  that  kind  formed  in
Europe,  285.

Barygaza,  a  considerable  emporium  on  the  coast  of  ancient  In-
dia, its  situation  ascertained,  56.

INDEX.  323

Bassora,  the  city  of,  founded  by  the  caU[)h  Omar,  87.

Benares,  the  peculiar  seat  of  Indostan  science  and  hterature,
212. Account  of  the  observatory  there,  315.

Berenice,  the  city  of,  founded  to  "facilitate  the  trade  between
Alexandria  and  India,  38.

Bernier,  M.,  his  account  of  the  Indian  chronology,  313,

Bijore,  inhabited  by  a  tribe  descended  from  a  colony  left  there
by  Alexander  the  Great,  248.

Boddam,  East-India  ship,  remarkable  speedy  voyage  of,  from
Portsmouth  to  Madras,  260.

Brahmins,  in  India,  their  sacred  rites  and  high  privileges,  172,
Inquiry  into  the  state  of  scientific  knowledge  among  them,
199.  Their  religious  hierarchy  and  worship,  213.  Their
great  learning  taught  them  a  theology  superior  to  the  popular
superstition,  226,  Their  doctrines  coincide  with  the  tenets
of  the  Stoical  school,  230.  Studiously  concealed  religious
truths  from  the  people,  233.

Bruce,  the  information  his  travels  afford  concerning  the  maritime
expeditions  of  king  Solomon,  13.

Bruges,  made  the  staple  of  the  trade  of  the  Hanseatic  league,
111. Is  greatly  enriched,  118.

Burrun  Sunker,  a  class  among  the  Hindoos,  described,  295.

Byzantine  historians,  a  character  of,  91.

Caffa,  the  great  trade  carried  on  there,  279.

Cairo,  account  of  the  caravan  that  travels  from  thence  to  Mecca,
287,

Calecut,  reception  of  Vasco  de  Gamain  that  country,  123,  124.

Call,  colonel,  his  general  opinion  of  the  antiquity  of  arts  and
sciences  in  India,  306.

Camel,  the  valuable  properties  of  that  animal,  8.  Is  peculiarly
formed  for  traversing  sandy  deserts,  286.

Candahar,  under  what  name  known  to  Alexander  the  Great,  19.

Canton,  in  China,  a  factory  settled  there  by  the  early  Arabs,  89.

Cape  of  Good  Hope,  circumstances  that  led  to  the  discovery  of
a  passage  to  India  that  way,  123.  Is  said  by  Herodotus
to  have  been  passed  by  some  Phenician  ships,  141,  Impor-
tance of  the  discovery  of  this  passage  by  the  Portuguese,  158,
159.

Caravans,  the  origin  of,  9.  Were  protected  and  encouraged
under  the  Roman  dominion,  68.  Great  commercial  use  of,
in  the  East,  136,  Account  of  the  caravans  which  visit  Mecca,
288,  A  considerable  slave-trade  carried  on  by  the  African
caravans,  290.

Caspian  sea,  erroneous  opinion  of  the  ancient  geographers  con-
cerning, 41,  258,  259,  By  whom  first  described  in  modern
times,  259. Its  dimensions,  ib.

Casts,  or  orders  of  society  among  the  native  Gentoos  described,
166.  Remarks  on  the  policy  and  tendency  of  this  arrange-
ment, ib.  167.  Their  peculiar  names,  ranks,  and  offices
described,  295.

Y  2

324  INDEX.

Cathay,  the  ancient  name  of  China,  1 1 3.

Ceylon,  supposed  to  be  the  island  described  by  ancient  geogra-
phers under  the  name  of  Taprobana,  74.  Christian  churches
planted  there  by  Persian  missionaries,  91.  Is  visited  by
Marco  Polo,  the  Venetian,  113.

Chardin,  sir  John,  his  testimony  that  the  Orientals  derived  the
use  of  the  mariner's  compass  from  the  Europeans,  275.  His
account  of  the  trade  of  CafFa,  279.

Chillambrum,  description  of  the  Pagoda  there,  187.

China,  the  only  country  whence  the  Romans  obtained  silk,  56.
Through  what  medium  they  received  it,  59.  How  the  silk-
worm was  conveyed  from  thence  to  Europe,  84.  Is  traded
to  by  the  Arabians,  89,  90.  First  mention  of  porcelain  and  tea,
90.  The  Christian  religion  propagated  there  by  Persian
missionaries,  91.  How  the  silk  of,  was  conveyed  to  Constanti-
nople, after  the  Greeks  were  excluded  from  the  port  of  Alex-
andria, 92.  Estimate  of  the  Chinese  practice  of  navigation,
274.  How  the  number  of  Mahometans  increase  in  China,
278.  A  commercial  intercourse,  by  land,  opened  between
that  country  and  Russia,  291.  Amazing  exportation  of  tea
from,  to  Europe,  294.

Chitore,  the  high  descent  claimed  by  the  rajahs  of,  248.

Chronology,  Indian,  the  four  eras  of,  212. Remarks  on,  313. '

Cleopatra,  value  of  her  famous  pearl  earrings,  54.

Culchos,  the  ancient  pearl  fishery  there,  still  carried  on  by  the
Dutch,  59.

Colours,  Indian,  for  dyeing,  account  of,  306,  307.

Columbus,  his  views  in  that  voyage  by  which  he  discovered
America,  122.  His  reliance  on  the  authority  of  Marco  Polo,
the  Venetian  traveller,  283. — See  Gama.

Commerce,  the  extension  of,  abated  the  hostile  sentiments
which  actuated  one  nation  against  another,  111.  Unfavour-
able opinion  of  Plato,  concerning,  260.

Common  law,  the  origin  of,  traced,  178.

Comorin,  Cape,  is  accurately  described  by  Arrian,  59.

Compass,  mariner's,  was  unknown  by  the  ancient  Chinese  and
Arabs,  274.

Constantinople,  taken  and  plundered  by  the  crusaders,  102,
Subversion  of  the  Latin  empire  there,  104.  Is  conquered  by
the  Turks,  and  made  the  seat  of  their  government,  114.

Conveyancing,  specimen  of  the  ancient  Indian  style  of,  311.

Coromandel  coast,  the  inhabitants  of,  always  great  traders,  80.

Cosmas,  Indicopleustes,  some  account  of,  and  of  his  Christian
topography,  80,  81.  His  account  of  the  island  of  Taprobana,
81,  82.

Cotton  manufactures,  evidence  of  their  not  being  common
among  the  Romans,  264.

Crusades  to  the  Holy  Land,  the  origin  of,  traced,  and  their
commercial  effects,  98.  The  crusaders  acquired  the  policy
and  arts  of  the  people  whom  they  subdued,  99.  Brought
different  nations  acquainted  with  each  other,  111.

INDEX.  325

Damascus,  account  of  the  caravan  that  travels  from  thence
to  Mecca,  289.

Damask,  the  name  of  that  species  of  silk  manufacture,  whence
derived,  117.

Dandulo,  Andrew,  the  character  of  his  Venetian  Chronicle,  278.

D'Anville,  M.,  his  opinion  as  to  the  course  pursued  in  the  trad-
ing voyages  of  king  Solomon's  ships,  14.  His  corrections
of  Ptolemy's  geography  of  India,  65.  Corroborates  Near-
chus's  account  of  India,  246.  His  geography  of  India  con-
troverted by  M.  Gossellin,  267.

Darius,  the  son  of  Hystaspes,  king  of  Persia,  his  researches
into  and  conquests  in  India,  17.

Deccan,  the  ancient  Dachanos  of  Arrian,  269.

Delta  of  the  Indus,  the  general  state  of  the  weather  there,  243.

Diamonds,  not  so  highly  esteemed  by  the  Romans  as  pearls,
262.

Diodorus  Siculus,  his  history  of  the  Indian  expedition  of  Sesos-
tris  examined,  238.

Dow,  colonel,  account  of  his  translation  of  the  Shaster,  201.
311. His  account  of  the  Indian  chronology,  313.

Dowlatabad,  the  same  with  the  ancient  Tagara,  264.

Du  Halde,  his  description  of  a  peculiar  species  of  silk,  262.

Dutch  States,  became  the  first  rivals  of  the  Portuguese  in  the
trade  to  India,  150.

Dyes,  Indian,  the  excellence  of,  306,  307.

East,  the  regions  of,  where  arts  and  sciences  were  first  culti-
vated, 8.  The  intercourse  between  different  countries  how
first  carried  on,  ib.  The  first  maritime  communication  with,
from  the  West,  10. — See  India.

Echpses,  how  calculated  by  the  Brahmins  of  India,  207.

Egypt,  ancient  prejudices  of  the  inhabitants  against  any  inter-
"course  with  foreigners,  10.  How  the  Egyptians  became  a
commercial  people,  11.  The  city  of  Alexandria  built,  17.
The  seat  of  government  fixed  there  by  Ptolemy  Lagus,  37.
Intercourse  between  the  city  ofBernice  and  India,  38.  Its
opulence  derived  from  its  commerce  with  the  East,  40.  Is
reduced  to  a  Roman  province,  43.  Manner  of  conducting
the  silk  trade  at  the  port  of  Alexandria,  55.  Conquest  of,
by  the  Arabs,  87.  The  Venetians  resort  to  Alexandria  for
silk,  106.  And  the  Florentines,  109.  Commercial  view  of
the  countries,  116.  Is  subdued  by  the  Turks,  131.  How
the  Indian  trade  has  been  conducted  through  that  country  at
different  times,  255.

Elagabulus,  the  first  Roman  Emperor  who  wore  silk,  54.

Elephanta,  island,  account  of  the  ancient  pagoda  there,  183.

EUore,  general  account  of  the  pagodas  there,  305.

Eras  of  Indian  chronology,  explained,  312. Remarks  on,  312,
313.

^sop's  Fables,  the  origin  of,  traced,  310.

326  TNDKX.

Ethics,  state  of,  in  India,  202.

Europe,  a  review  of  the  state  of,  at  the  time  of  the  subversion  of
the  Greek  enapire,  114.  Extensive  operation  of  the  commer-
cial genius  of,  153.  The  Europeans  receive  the  products  of
America,  and  supply  it  with  manufactures,  157.  The  expor-
tation of  silver  to  India,  how  beneficial  to  Europe,  158.  Im-
portance of  the  discovery  of  the  passage  to  India  round  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  159.

Faquirs  of  India,  unite  trade  with  devotion  in  their  pilgrimages,

98.279. Brief  account  of,  297.
Figures,  arithmetical,  originally  derived  from  India,  204.
Five  Gems,  an  ancient  Sanskreet  poem,  account  of,  311.
Florence,  rise  of  the  state  of,  by  manufactures  and  the  banking

business, 108. A  commercial  treaty  concluded  with  Egypt,

109. Summary  of  the  instructions  to  their  ambassadors  to

the  soldan,  281.

Gama,  Vasco  de,  his  voyage  from  Lisbon  to  India,  123.

Ganges,  account  of  that  river  by  Major  Rennell,  252.

Genoa,  motives  that  stimulated  the  Genoese  to  assist  in  subvert-
ing the  Latin  empire  at  Constantinople,  104.  The  great  ad-
vantages they  derived  from  this  measure,  105.  Character  of
the  Genoese  government,  106.  The  Genoese  expelled  from
all  their  Grecian  settlements  by  the  Turks,  114.  Character
of,  by  Nicephorus  Gregoras,  280.

Genti),  M,  le,  his  account  of  the  Indian  chronology,  313.

Gentoos,  see  Brahmins  and  Hindoos.

Gibbon,  Mr.,  the  Roman  historian,  testimony  in  favour  of  his
accuracy,  272.

Gosselin,  M.,  character  of  his  geography  of  the  Greeks  Ana-
lyzed, 267.

Greeks,  their  national  pride  at  the  time  of  Alexander  the  Great,
26.  How  they  attained  the  breeding  of  silkworms  under  the
emperor  Justinian,  84.  Are  shut  out  from  the  port  of  Alex-
andria by  the  Mahomedan  Arabs,  87.  The  Greek  empire
conquered  by  Mahomet  II.,  114.  How  they  were  deprived
of  Bactria,  254. Origin  of  the  ancient  mythology  of,  218.

Gum  Lacca,  natural  history  of,  and  its  uses  in  manufacture,  307.

Halhead,  Mr.,  his  account  of  the  Sanskreet  literature,  308,

309.
Hanno,  commanded  the  only  voyage  for  discovery  undertaken

by  any  of  the  ancient  states  in  the  Mediterranean,  292.
Hanseatic  league,  formed,  and  the  staple  fixed  at  Bruges,  111.
Hastings,  Mr.,  governor-general  of  Bengal,  his attention to

forming  a  code  of  Hindoo  laws,  179.
Heeto-Pades,  or  amicable  instruction,  and  ancient Sanskreet

composition,  account,  and  character  of,  309.
Herodotus  affirms  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  to  have  been  passed

INDEX.  327

by  some  Phenician  vessels,  140.  His  history  of  Sesostris
examined,  238.  His  unsatisfactory  account  of  the  tides  in
the  Red  sea,  246. Caspian  sea,  259.

Hindoos,  that  people  exactly  described  in  the  account  of  the
Indian  expedition  of  Alexander  the  Great,  25.  Their  inflexi-
ble adherence  to  their  religion,  and  casts,  277.  Their  four
orders,  or  casts,  described,  166.  Remarks  on  the  policy  and
tendency  of  this  popular  arrangement,  167.  Their  high  anti-
quity, and  nature  of  their  institutions,  180.  Character  of
their  judicial  code,  ib.  State  of  sciences  among  them,  200.
Their  religious  tenets  and  practices,  214.  Their  names,
ranks,  and  offices  of  their  several  casts  described,  295.  Their
temples,  306.

Hiram,  king  of  Tyre,  assists  king  Solomon  in  his  naval  under-
takings, 13.

Hippalus,  captain  of  an  Egyptian  vessel,  avails  himself  of  the
monsoons,  in  sailing  from  the  Arabian  gulf  to  the  Malabar
coast,  48.

Hipparchus,  the  first  who  attempted  to  make  a  catalogue  of  the
stars,  62.

History,  authentic,  the  period  of  extremely  limited,  7.  Is  mi-
nute in  the  records  of  blood,  but  silent  as  to  the  progress  of
useful  arts,  48.

Hydaspes,  river,  a  numerous  fleet  assembled  there  by  Alexander
the  Great,  21.

Hyphasis,  river,  the  utmost  limit  of  Alexander  the  Great's  pro-
gress in  India,  20.

Java  Minor,  of  Marco  Polo,  ascertained,  282.

Jenaub,  a  city  built  on  that  river  by  Alexander  the  Great,  249.

Jenkinson,  Anthony,  the  first  modern  traveller  who  gives  a  just

description  of  the  Caspian  sea,  259.
Jeswont  Sing,  his  letter  to  Aurengzebe,  containing  a  character

of  sultan  Akber,  304.
Jewels,  their  great  use  and  high  estimation  among  the  ancients,

53.  .  , , ,.

Jews,  when  they  effected  a  commercial  intercourse  with  India,

13.  Inquiry  into  the  maritime  commerce  of  king  Solomon,

14.  Their  commercial  effort  terminated  in  his  reign,  ib.
India,  the  first  naval  communication  with,  from  the  West, 10.

The  trade  of  the  Phenicians  with,  how  conducted,  12.  Naval
expedition  of  thePersians  to,  15.  Conquests  of  Darius  Hystaspes
in,  16.  Alexandria,  for  many  centuries  the  chief  seat  of
trade  with,  17.  Expedition  of  Alexander  the  Great  to,  18.
Flourishing  state  of  the  country  at  that  time,  19.  Alexander's
voyage  down  the  Indus,  2 1 .  Political  state  of  the  country  at
that  time,  23.  Alexander's  views  in  this  expedition,  25,  26.
Expedition  of  Seleucus,  one  of  the  successors  of  Alexander,
32.  Embassy  of  Megasthenes  to,  33.  Conquests  of  the
Bactrian  princes  in,  36. Remains  afterward  undisturbed  by

328  INDEX.

Europeans,  until  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  was  doubled  by  the
Portuguese,  37. A  commercial  intercourse  established  with
Egypt,  ih. How  Rome  was  supplied  with  eastern  commodi-
ties, 45. Advantage  taken  of  the  monsoons,  in  sailing  from
the  gulf  of  Arabia  to  the  Malabar  coast,  48. Its  commodi-
ties, articles  of  luxury,  50. Spices  and  aromatics,  51. Pre-
cious stones,  53. Silk,  54. General  view  of  its  exports  and
imports,  56,  57. Comparison  between  the  ancient  and  mo-
dern trade  with  India,  58. D'Anville's  corrections  of  Pto-
lemy's geography  of,  65. The  trade  by  caravans  protected
and  encouraged  by  the  Romans,  68. The  inhabitants  of  the
Coromandel  coast  always  great  traders, 80. The  account
given  of  India  by  Cosmas  Indicopleustes,  82. The  Romans
rivalled  in  the  Indian  trade  by  the  Persians,  ib. The  Italian
states  engaged  in  the  Indian 'trade,  95. Account  of  the  In-
dian trade  by  Marino  Sanudo,  109. Comparative  view  of  the
Indian  trade,  as carried on  by  different  nations  at  different
times,  116. A  direct  voyage  to  India  effected  by  the  Portu-
guese, 124. The  staple  of  the  Portuguese  trade  established
at  the  city  of  Malacca,  127. A  commercial  empire  established
in  the  East  by  the  Portuguese,  132. How  it  came  to pass
that  the  discovery  of  a  direct  navigation  to  India  was  reserved
for  modern  times,  138. The  conduct  of  ancient  and  modern
navigators  to  the  East,  compared,  141, The  prices  of  Indian
commodities  greatly  reduced  by  the  opening  a  direct  com-
munication with  India,  143, The  India  trade a  continual
drain  of  American  silver  from Europe,  151. Contrast  be-
tween the  state  of  the  natives  of  India  and  America,  when
first  discovered,  154. The  trade  of  Europe  with  each,  com-
pared, 156. The  silver  exported  to  India  contributes  to  en-
rich instead  of  impoverishing  Europe,  158. Importance  of
the  discovery  of  the  passage  to  India  round  the  Cape  of  Good
Hope  to Europe,  159. Examination  of  the  improbabilities
attending  the  supposed  expedition  of  Sesostris  to  India,  237.
Remarks  on  the  weather  there,  242. Remarks  of  the  naval
expedition  of  Nearchus,  245.  Peculiarities  in  the  Indian  tides,
ib.  Aversion  of  the  natives  of  the  East  to  the  sea,  249.  Major
Rennell's  account  of  the  river  Ganges,  252. Endeavours  to
ascertain  the  situation  of  the  ancient  city  of  Palibothra,  ib.
How  the  Indian  trade  has  been  carried  on  through  Egypt  at
different  times,  255. Erroneous  descriptions  of  the  Caspian
sea  by  ancient  writers,  259. Deccan,  the  ancient  Dachanos
of  Arrian,  269. The  use  of  the  mariner's  compass  learned  by
the  Easterns  from  the  Europeans,  274. The  Gentoos  inflexi-
ble in  their  religion,  277. Computed  number  of  Mahome-
dans  in  India,  ib. Extensive  circulation  of  eastern  goods  by
the  caravans,  298. The  natives  of  India  the  earliest known
people  who  were civilized,  164. Their division into  casts,
166. The  perfection  of  Indian manufactures  accounted  for,
168. The  general  tenure  of  land  there,  178. Character  of

INDEX.  329

the  Hindoo  code  of  laws,  180.  General  account  of  the  pa-
godas, 183.  Fortresses,  188.  Mechanic  arts,  189.  Litera-
ture, 191.  Their  sciences,  198.  Their  rehgious  tenets,  213.
Origin  of  superstition,  217.  The  pure  theology  of  the  Brah-
mins, 226.  General  reflections  formed  on  the  preceding  re-
view of  the  eastern  nations,  233.  The  manners  and  customs
of  the  natives  influenced  by  the  Mahomedan  and  European
intruders,  298.  Account  of  the  Sanskreet  literature,  308.
The  Heeto-Pades,  309.  The  Five  Gems,  311.  Ode  from
Wulli,  ib.  Specimen  of  Indian  conveyancing,  ib.  The  four
eras  of  Indian  chronology,  explained,  312.

Indicum,  of  the  ancients,  the  same  with  modern  indigo,  307.

Indigo,  the  several  kinds  of,  mentioned  by  authors,  and  its  uses,
307.

Indus,  river,  passed  by  Alexander  the  Great,  19.  His  voyage
down  that  river,  22.

Institutions  of  India,  the  permanency  of,  accounted  for,  168.

Interest  of  money,  the  most  exact  standard  of  commercial  pro-
fits, 119. Chronological  view  of,  121.

Joanna  of  Navarre,  her  exclamation  at  the  wealth  of  the  city  of
Bruges,  284.

Italy,  rise  of  the  commercial  states  of,  94.  They  import  the
productions  of  India,  ib.  The  profits  they  reaped  from  the
crusades,  101. — See  Venice,  Genoa,  &c.

Itineraries  of  the  Roman  empire,  how  formed,  265,

Julius  C32sar,  his  magnificent  present  to  Servilla,  the  mother  of
Brutus,  54.  His  ignorance  of  the  British  tides,  245.  A  ge-
neral survey  of  the  whole  Roman  empire  undertaken  by  him,
265.

Justin,  observations  on  his  account  of  the  progress  made  by  Se-
leucus  in  India,  251.

Justinian,  emperor,  how  he  introduced  the  silkworm  into  the
Greek  empire,  84.

Land,  the  general  tenures  of,  in  India,  173.  299. Specimen

from  an  ancient  grant  of,  311.
Latitudes,  how  ascertained  by  the  ancient  geographers,  75,  76.

Were  more  readily  determined  by  them  than  longitudes,  77.

269.  .  , , - .

Lawyers, European,  the  style  of,  compared  with  that  ot  the

Eastern  Pundits,  31 1.
Leibnitz,  his  account  of  the  instructions  given  to  the  Florentine

ambassadors  to  the  soldan  of  Egypt,  281.
Logic  and  metaphysics,  state  of,  in  India,  201.
Longitudes  of  places,  how  determined  by  ancient  geographers,

75,  76.  270.

Magellan  effects  a  passage  for  the  East  Indies  westward  from
America,  149.

330  INDEX.

Mahabarat,  an  ancient  Indian  epic  poem,  account  of,  192.  Ex-
tracts from,  200.  202.  227,  228.

Mahmoud  of  Gaznah,  the  vast  fleet  that  opposed  his  invasion  of
India,  243.

Mahomet,  rapid  spread  of  his  reHgion,and  the  great  effects  pro-
duced by  it,  86.  Contributed  greatly  to  extend  the  com-
merce of  Asia  and  Africa,  134.

Mahomet  II.,  emperor  of  the  Turks,  subdues  the  Grecian  em-
pire, 144.

Mahudel,  M.,  his  proofs  of  the  ignorance  of  the  ancients  as  to
the  nature  of  silk,  262,

Malabar  coast,  probable  derivation  of  its  name,  81.  How  men-
tioned by  the  Arabian  writers,  90.

Malacca,  the  city  of,  rendered  the  staple  of  the  trade  carried  on
in  the  East  by  the  Portuguese,  127.

Maldive  islands,  probable,  derivation  of  their  name,  81.

Man,  a  review  of  his  progress  in  social  life,  170.

Manufactures,  Indian,  the  perfection  of,  accounted  for,  167.

Maps,  none  prior  to  those  formed  to  illustrate  Ptolemy's  geo-
graphy have  reached  modern  times,  75.

Marco  Polo,  the  Venetian,  account  of  his  travels,  112.  Objec-
tions to  his  relations,  and  vindication  of  them,  282.

Marseilles  opens  a  trade  with  Constantinople  for  Indian  com-
modities, 96.

Massoudi,  the  Arabian,  his  account  of  India,  274.

Mecca,  the  temple  there  visited  as  well  by  commercial  as  by  de-
vout pilgrims,  98.  The  pilgrimages  to,  contributed  greatly
to  facihtate  trade,  134.  Account  of  the  caravans  which  visit
the  temple  there,  288.

Medici,  Cosmo  di,  a  Florentine  merchant,  negotiates  a  com-
mercial treaty  with  Egypt  in  favour  of  his  countrymen,  98.
109.

Mediterranean  sea,  the  chief  seat  of  ancient  commerce,  139.

Megasthenes,  his  embassy  from  Seleucus  king  of  Syria,  to  India,
33. His  account  of  India,  34.

Mocenigo,  doge  of  Venice  in  the  fifteenth  century,  his  account
of  the  naval  strength  of  that  republic,  286.

Monkish  annalists,  a  character  of,  95.

Monsoons,  the  first  application  of  them  in  voyages  to  India,  48.

Moses,  the  books  of,  the  most  ancient  and  genuine  record  of
the  early  ages  of  the  world,  7.

Musiris,  a  port  on  the  coast  of  Malabar,  frequented  by  ancient
navigators  in  the  Indian  trade,  48.

Mythology  of  the  Greeks,  the  natural  origin  of,  218.

Nadir  Shah,  general  review  of  his  Indian  expedition,  243.
Nagara  of  Ptolemy,  its  latitude  according  to  D'Anville,  71.
Navigation, origin  of,  traced, 9. Where  first  cultivated, 10.
How  introduced  among  the  Egyptians,  II. Nearchus,  com-

INDEX.  331

mands  the  naval  expedition  of  Alexander  the  Great  down  the
Indus,  21, Remarks  on,  245.

Nicephorus  Gregoras,  his  character  of  the  Genoese  at  Constan-
tinople, 280.

Niebuhr,  his  evidence  in  favour  of  the  European  origin  of  the
mariner's  compass,  276.

Omar,  caliph,  founds  the  city  of  Bassora,  88.

Ormus,  the  island  of,  seized  by  the  Portuguese,  129.  Descrip-
tion of,  ib.

Oude,  Nabob  of,  the  great  probability  of  disputes  between  him
and  the  Seiks,  241.

Pagodas  of  India,  general  account  of  183.  305.  Are  placed
with  astronomical  precision,  314.

Palibothra,  endeavours  to  ascertain  the  situation  of  that  city,
252.

Palmyra,  by  whom,  and  on  what  occasion  built,  45.  Its  stu-
pendous ruins,  47. Its  present  state,  48.

Panjab,  progress  of  Alexander  the  Great  through  that  country,
19.

Papyrus,  occasion  of  its  being  disused  for  writing  on,  278.

ParchmentjWhen  first  used  for  the  record  of  charters  and  deeds,
278.

Pariars,the  most  contemptible  race  of  men  in  India,  248.  296.

Patna,  evidences  of  its  not  being  the  ancient  city  of  Palibothra,
253.

Pearls,  their  high  estimation  among  the  Romans,  53.  Were
dearer  than  diamonds,  261.

Pera,  the  chief  suburb  of  Constantinople,  granted  to  the  Genoese
on  the  subversion  of  the  Latin  empire  there,  105.  The  Ge-
noese expelled  by  the  Turks,  114.

Persia,  how  the  commerce  between  that  country  and  India  was
conducted,  41.  Vigorous  cultivation  of  the  India  trade,  82.
The  silk  trade  engrossed  by  the  Persians,  83.  Their  extor-
tions introduce  the  silkworm  to  Europe,  84.  Is  conquered
by  the  Arabs,  87.  Nestorian  churches  planted  there,  91.
Amount  of  the  revenue  of  the  Persian  monarchs  from  Hero-
dotus, 240.  Instances  of  their  ancient  aversion  to  the  sea,
250.

Phalanx,  Macedonian,  how  formed  by  Alexander  the  Great,  28.

Phenicians,  how  they  opened  a  commercial  intercourse  with
India,  12.  Are  said  by  Herodotus  to  have  passed  the  Cape
of  Good  Hope,  140.

Philosophy,  the  cure  for  superstition,  224.

Pilgrimages  to  the  Holy  Land,  undertaken  as  well  from  com-
mercial as  from  pious  motives,  99.  Account  of  the  pilgrim-
ages to  Mecca,  288.

Pilpay's  fables,  the  origin  of,  310.

332  INDEX.

Plato,  his  political  objections  to  commerce  in  a  well-regulated
commonwealth,  260.

Pliny  the  elder,  his  slender  knowledge  of  India,  61.  His  ac-
count of  the  island  of  Taprobane,  74.  Observations  on  his
account  of  the  progress  of  Seleucus  in  India,  250.

Pomponius  Mela,  his  account  of  the  island  of  Taprobane,  72.
And  of  the  Caspian  sea,  258.

Porcelain,  the  first  mention  of,  by  Arabian  travellers,  90.

Portugal,  circumstances  that  led  the  Portuguese  to  the  discovery
of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  123,  Vigorous  exertions  of  the
Portuguese  to  cultivate  the  eastern  trade,  126.  They  aim  at
a  monopoly  of  the  trade  to  the  East,  128.  Establish  a  com-
mercial empire  in  the  East,  132.  Their  activity  in  exploring
the  eastern  countries,  142.  They  drive  the  Venetians  out  of
the  European  markets,  by  reducing  the  prices  of  India  goods,
144.  How  they  remained  so  long  in  the  exclusive  possession
of  the  Indian  trade,  148.  Are  rivalled  at  length  in  the  Indian
ocean  by  the  Dutch,  150.  And  by  the  English,  ib.  Repulse
the  efforts  of  Solyman  the  Magnificent  to  drive  them  from
India,  161.  Their  intercourse  with  infidels  licensed  by  a  Pa-
pal bull,  280.

Porus  opposes  the  progress  of  Alexander  the  Great  in  India,  19.
Remains  steady  to  the  INIacedonian  interest,  31.

Potosi,  the  discovery  of  the  silver  mines  of,  the  first  permanent
source  of  wealth  derived  by  Spain  from  America,  155.

Ptolemy,  the  geographer,  estimate  of  his  scientifical  knowledge,
62.  Established  geography  upon  its  proper  principles,  ib.
His  accounts  of  the  continent  of  India  examined,  64.  His
geography  of  India  adjusted  by  that  of  modern  times  by  M.
D'Anville,  65.  Instances  of  his  exactness  in  some  positions,
71.  His  account  of  the  island  of  Taprobane,  73.  His  cha-
racter, by  Agathemerus,  264.  His  geographical  errors,  266.
From  what  materials  he  composed  his  geography  of  India,
272.

Ptolemy  Lagus,  establishes  the  seat  of  the  Egyptian  govern-
ment at  Alexandria,  and  erects  the  hghthouse  on  the  Pharos,
37.

Ptolemy  Philadelphus,  projects  a  grand  canal  to  facilitate  the
intercourse  between  Egypt  and  India,  38.  Founds  the  city
of  Berenice,  ib.

Pultanah,  the  ancient  Plithania  of  Arrian,  264.

Ramusio  detects  the  geographical  errors  of  Ptolemy,  266.
Raynal,  Abbe,  character  of  his  history  of  the  East  and  West

Indies,  158.
Red  sea,  derivation  of  the  name,  and  the  different  applications

of  it  by  the  ancients  and  the  moderns,  247.
Religion  and  superstition  discriminated,  214.
Renaudot,  M.,  his  translation  of  the  eastern  voyage  of  two  Ma-

INDEX.  333

homedans,  from  the  Arabic  vindicated  from  the  charge  of
imposition,  272.

Rennell,  major,  his  illustrations  of  the  Indian  expedition  of
Alexander  the  Gieat,  22.  240.  248.  His  account  of  the  river
Ganges,  252.  Remarks  on  his  account  of  the  situation  of  the
city  of  Palibothra,  ib.  His  opinion  of  the  Egyptian  navigation
examined,  256.

Rhinocolura,  the  ancient  port  of  communication  between  Phe-
nicia  and  India,  127.

Roger,  M.,  his  account  of  the  Indian  chronology,  313.

Rome,  rise  of  the  power  of,  43.  How  supplied  with  Indian  com-
modities, 45.  Its  imports  from  thence,  articles  of  luxury,  50.
Spices,  51.  Precious  stones,  53.  Silk,  54.  Remained  ignorant
of  the  nature  or  production  of  silk,  55.  How  the  breeding  silk-
worms was  introduced  into  the  eastern  empire,  83.  Con-
sequences of  the  Roman  empire  being  dissolved  by  the  Bar-
barians, 110.  How  the  itineraries  of  the  empire  were  formed,
265.

Russia,  a  commercial  intercourse  by  land  opened  between  that
country  and  China,  291.

Ryots  of  Indostan,  inquiry  into  the  tenure  by  which  they  hold
their  possessions,  301.

Sacontala,  an  ancient  Indian  dramatic  poem,  account  of,  195.
Sacotecas,  the  mines  of,  in  Mexico,  importance  of  the  discovery

of,  to  Spain,  155.
Saint  Croix,  baron  de,  observations  on  his  Critique  des  Historiens

d'Alexander  le  Grand,  250.
Samarcand,  by  what  name  known  to  Alexander  the  Great,  17.

Its  latitude,  as  ascertained  by  D'Anville,  71.
Sandracottus,  an  Indian  prince,  his  revolt  against,  and  treaty

with  Seleucus,  king  of  Syria,  32.
Sanskreet  literature,  a  new  acquisition,  308.  Mr.  Halhed's  account

of,  309.
Sanudo,  Marino,  his  account  of  the  Venetian  trade  with  India

in  the  fourteenth  century,  109.
Sciences  and  Arts,  where  first  cultivated,  8.  A  view  of  the  state

of,  in  India,  200.
Scylax,  of  Caryandra,  his  naval  expedition  to  India,  15. Gives

fabulous  accounts  of  the  country,  16. Why  his  voyage  is  not

mentioned  by  Arrian,  244.
Seapoys,  modern,  established  upon  the  same  principle  with  the

phalanx  of  Persians  formed  by  Alexander  the  Great,  28.
Seiks  of  India,  probability of  disputes  between them  and  the

British,  241.  Their  situation  and  character,  242.
Seleucus,  the  successor  of  Alexander,  his  expedition  to  India,  32.

Observations  on,  251.
Selim,  sultan,  the  conqueror  of  the  Mamelukes,  his  attention  to

the  advantages  of  the  Indian  commerce,  159.
Semiramis,  the  vast  fleet  that  opposed  her  invasion  of  India,  243.

334  INDEX.

Sera  Metropolis,  of  Ptolemy,  its  latitude  according  to  D'Anville
71.

Seringham,  description  of  the  pagoda  there,  188,  189.

Sesostris,  king  of  Egypt,  the  first  who  rendered  the  Egyptians
a  commercial  people,  11.  Improbabilities  attending  his  sup-
posed expedition  to  and  conquest  of  India,  237.

Shastra,  some  account  of,  201.  311.

Sielediba,  account  given  of  this  island  by  Cosmas  Indicopleustes,
82.  *

Silk,  its  high  estimation  among  the  Romans,  54.  The  trade
for,  engrossed  by  the  Persians,  83.  Silkworms  obtained  and
cultivated  by  the  Greeks,  84.  Account  of  the  Venetian  and
Florentine  trade  for  silk,  106.  Ignorance  of  the  ancients,  as  to
its  production,  262.  Why  disliked  by  the  Turks,  261.

Silver  is  continually  drained  from  Europe  to  carry  on  the  East-
Indiatrade,  151.  Europe  how  enriched  by  this  exportation,  157.

Sinffi  Metropolis,  of  Ptolemy,  endeavours  of  M.  D'Anville  to
ascertain  its  situation,  67.

Slave  trade,  modern,  the  origin  of,  152.  Is  largely  carried  on
by  the  African  caravans,  290.

Solomon,  king  of  Judea,  inquiry  into  his  maritime  commerce,  13.
Builds  Tadmor,  in  the  desert,  45.

Solyman,  the  Magnificent,  his  efforts  to  drive  the  Portuguese
from  India,  159.

Soul,  description  of,  from  the  Mahabarat,  200.

Spain,  how  that  country  happened  to  have  the  advantage  and
honour  of  discovering  America,  122.  Gold  and  silver  the  only
profitable  articles  they  found  in  America,  155.  Are  obliged  to
colonize  in  order  to  improve  their  discoveries,  157.

Spices,  and  aromatics,  why  much  used  by  the  ancients,  51.  Vast
modern  consumption  of  them,  147.

Strabo,  his  obscure  knowledge  of  India,  60.  His  account  of  the
island  of  Taprobane,  71,  72,  Denies  that  Sesostris  ever
entered  India,  239.  Evidence  of  his  slender  knowledge  of
India,  257.  His  account  of  the  Caspian  sea,  258.  How  he
justifies  his  neglect  of  Hipparchus,  264.  His  free  exposition
of  ancient  theology,  232.  His  account  of  the  jealous  caution
with  which  the  Indian  women  were  guarded,  298,  29,').  His
account  of  the  ancient  dyes,  306,  307.

Sumatra,  the  island  of,  visited  by  the  early  Arabians,  89.  Was
the  Java  Minor  of  Marco  Polo,  282.

Superstition  and  religion  discriminated,  214.  Origin  of  supersti-
tion, 216.  Progress  of,  219.  Picture  of  oriental  superstition,
220.  Philosophy  fatal  to,  223.

Surya  Siddhanta,  the  scientifical  merit  of  that  ancient  Oriental
composition,  315.

Sylla,  vast  quantities  of  spices  consumed  in  his  funeral  pile,  52.

Tadmoii,  in  the  desert,  by  whom  built,  and  for  what  purpose,
45.  Its  stupendous  ruins,  46.  Its  present  state,  48.

INDEX.  335

Tamerlane,  his  judicious  choice  of  the  season  for  his  Indian

campaign,  243.
Taprobane,  Strabo's  account  of  that  island,  72.  Pliny's  account

of  it,  ib.  Ptolemy's  account  of  it,  73.  Appears  to  be  the  island

of  Ceylon,  74. Account  given of  this  island  by  Cosmas

Indicopleustes,  81.
Tatta,  great  drought  there,  242. Vast  numbers of  vessels  for

water-carriage  there,  244.
Tea  has  within  a  century  become  a  necessary  of  life  in  many

parts  of  Europe,  294.  Amazing  annual  importation  of  ib.
Tea-tree,  first  mention  of,  by  Arabian  travellers,  90.
Tides,  of  the  Indian  ocean,  peculiarities  in,  245.
Trade,  how  at  first  conducted  between different  countries,  8.

Between  Egypt  and  India,  37.  Exports  and  imports  of  India,

50.
Transmigration  of  souls,  the  eastern  doctrine  of,  explained,  230.
Turks,  their  scruples  concerning  the  wearing  of  silk,  263.
Tyre,  the  best  account of  the  commercial  transactions  of  that

city  to  be  found  in  the  prophet  Ezekiel,  240.

Vasa  Murriiina,  of  Phny,  inquiry  into  the  nature  and  com-
position of,  276.

Venice,  first  rise  of,  as  a  commercial  state,  94.  Constantinople
taken,  in  conjunction  with  the  crusaders,  102.  The  Venetians
engage  largely  in  the  trade  and  manufacture  of  silk,  103,  The
Latm  empire  in  the  east  subverted,  104.  The  Venetians  sup-
planted in  the  trade  with  Constantinople  by  the  Genoese,  106.
They  settle  a  trade  with  Alexandria,  107.  Account  of  the
Venetian  trade  with  India  in  the  fourteenth  century,  109,  110.
Travels  of  Marco  Polo,  112.  Their  trade  extended  by  the
Turks  subduing  the  Greek  empire,  114.  Remarks  on  their
trade  for  Indian  goods,  116.  Evidences  of  the  great  wealth
they  acquired  by  this  trade,  119.  Alarm  taken  at  the  direct
voyage  to  East  India,  by  Vasco  de  Gama,  126.  Measures
prosecuted  by  the  Venetians  to  check  the  progress  of  the
Portuguese  in  the  East,  130.  The  Portuguese  supplant
them  in  the  European  market,  by  reducing  the  prices  of
Indian  goods,  144.  The  great  extent  of  their  trade,  285.
The  bank  of  Venice  the  first  formed  of  any  in  Europe,  ib.
Amount  of  the  Venetian  naval  strength  in  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury, 286.

Ulug  Beg,  his  astronomical  tables,  71.

Virgil,  a  good  natural  historian,  as  well  as  a  descriptive  poet,
262.

Volney,  M.,  his  account  of  the  camel,  287.  And  of  the  caravan
from  Damascus  to  Mecca,  289.

WiLFORD,  lieutenant,  his  examination  of  Arrian's  Periplus  by
modern  names  and  situations,  264.

3.36  INDEX.

Wilkins,  Mr,,  account  of  his  translation of  the  Heeto-pades,

309.
Women, the  jealous  seclusion  of,  in India,  whence derived,

298.
Wulli,  character  of  an  ode  translated  from,  311.

Zeminders,  their  office  in  the  government  of  Indostan,  300,
301.

THE END.

Printed  bj  J.  F.  Dove,  St.  John's  Square.

mm<-^  //J

V.9

AttflEcda!#^

Robertson,  William
Works

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

'g-

i

■if ■:*

**■•/'.<•

M^

h  i';v :

•I  ^<

^

^.^^

fi^

<■(■' '^'

^■.^v  ■>;■>'

\>->~

?Vtv-,^-

K

■■*  'd

^-.:}^'

m

'«:

■n

IS^-

m&»

'w4>wgmk
