The Works of William Robertson, Vol. 8 (William Robertson, 1759)
==========================================================
Robertson's Works (1824, 9 vols.) - History of Scotland, Charles V, America, and the Historical Disquisition on India; Enlightenment historiography's great practitioner entire. Vol. 8 of 9.

WILLIAM  ROBERTSON,  D.D

WITH  AN  ACCOUNT  OF

HIS  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS.

IN NINE  VOLUMES.

VOL. VIII.

LONDON:

PRINTED  FOR  V/HITMORE  ANDFENN,  CHARING  CROSS;  J.  HEARNE,  STRAND  ;

SMITH AND  ELDER.  FENCUURCH  STREET; H.  MOZLEY,  DERBY;

AND  M.  KEENE,  DUBLIN.

MDCCCXXIV.

THE

STANDARD  EDITION  OF  THE  HISTORIANS.

ROBERTSON^S  WORKS  :

IN NINE VOLUMES.  VOL. VI IL

AMERICA.

THE

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA.

BOOK VII.

As  the  conquest  of  the  two  great  empires  of  Mexico
and  Peru  forms  the  most  splendid  and  interesting  pe-
riod in  the  history  of  America,  a  view  of  their  political
institutions,  and  a  description  of  their  national  manners,
will  exhibit  the  human  species  to  the  contemplation  of
intelligent  observers  in  a  very  singular  stage  of  its  pro-
gress/

Mexico  When  compared  with  other  parts  of  the

and  Peru ]\^g^  World,  Mcxico  and  Peru  may  be  consi-

more  po-  i r>

lished  than  dercd  as  polished  states.  Instead  of  small,
of  Amt-^^  independent, hostile  tribes,  struggling  for  sub-
"*^^'  sistence  amidst  woods  and  marshes,  strangers

to  industry  and  arts,  unacquainted  with  subordination,
and  almost  without  the  appearance  of  regular  govern-
ment, we  find  countries  of  great  extent  subjected  to  the
dominion  of  one  sovereign,  the  inhabitants  collected
together  in  cities,  the  wisdom  and  foresight  of  rulers
employed  in  providing  for  the  maintenance  and  secu-
rity of  the  people,  the  empire  of  laws  in  some  measure
established,  the  authority  of  religion  recognised,  many
of  the  arts  essential  to  life  brought  to  some  degree  of
maturity,  and  the  dawn  of  such  as  are  ornamental  be-
ginning to  appear.

The  infe-  But  if  the  comparison  be  made  with  the  peo-

tliTnations  plc  of  the  aucicut  continent,  the  inferiority  of

»  See  Note  I.
VOL. VIII.  B

2  AMERICA.

America  in  improvement,  will  be  conspicuous,
cientcoii-  and  neither  the  Mexicans  nor  Peruvians  will
be  entitled  to  rank  with  those  nations  which
merit  the  name  of  civilized.  The  people  of  both  the
great  empires  in  America,  like  the  rude  tribes  around
them,  were  totally  unacquainted  with  the  useful  metals,
and  the  progress  which  they  had  made  in  extending
their  dominion  over  the  animal  creation  was  inconsi-
derable. The  Mexicans  had  gone  no  farther  than  to
tame  and  rear  turkeys,  ducks,  a  species  of  small  dogs,
and  rabbits.""  By  this  feeble  essay  of  ingenuity,  the
means  of  subsistence  were  rendered  somewhat  more
plentiful  and  secure,  than  when  men  depend  solely  on
hunting;  but  they  had  no  idea  of  attempting  to  subdue
the  more  robust  animals,  or  of  deriving  any  aid  from
their  ministry  in  carrying  on  works  of  labour.  The
Peruvians  seem  to  have  neglected  the  inferior  animals,
and  had  not  rendered  any  of  them  domestic  except
the  duck;  but  they  were  more  fortunate  in  taming  the
Llama,  an  animal  peculiar  to  their  country,  of  a  form
which  bears  some  resemblance  to  a  deer,  and  some  to
a  camel,  and  is  of  a  size  somewhat  larger  than  a  sheep.
Under  the  protection  of  man,  this  species  multiplied
greatly.  Its  wool  furnished  the  Peruvians  with  cloth-
ing, its  flesh  with  food.  It  was  even  employed  as  a
beast  of  burden,  and  carried  a  moderate  load  with  much
patience  and  docility.''  It  was  never  used  for  draught;
and  the  breed  being  confined  to  the  mountainous  coun-
try, its  service,  if  we  may  judge  by  incidents  which  oc-
cur in  the  early  Spanish  writers,  was  not  very  extensive
among  the  Peruvians  in  their  original  state.

In  tracing  the  line  by  which  nations  proceed  towards
civilization,  the  discovery  of  the  useful  metals,  and  the
acquisition  of  dominion  over  the  animal  creation,  have
been  marked  as  steps  of  capital  importance  in  their

^  Herrera,  dec.  11.  lib.  vii.  c.  12.
«  Vega,  p.  1.  lib.  viii.  c.  16. Zarate,  lib.  i.  c.  14.

BOOK VII.  3

progress.  In  our  continent,  long  after  men  had  attained
both,  society  continued  in  that  state  which  is  denomi-
nated barbarous.  Even  with  all  that  command  over
nature  which  these  confer,  many  ages  elapse,  before
industry  becomes  so  regular  as  to  render  subsistence
secure,  before  the  arts  which  supply  the  wants  and  fur-
nish the  accommodations  of  life  are  brought  to  any  con-
siderable degree  of  perfection,  and  before  any  idea  is
conceived  of  various  institutions  requisite  in  a  well-
ordered  society.  The  Mexicans  and  Peruvians,  with-
out knowledge  of  the  useful  metals,  or  the  aid  of  do-
mestic animals,  laboured  under  disadvantages  which
must  have  greatly  retarded  their  progress,  and  in  their
highest  state  of  improvement  their  power  was  so  limited,
and  their  operations  so  feeble,  that  they  can  hardly  be
considered  as  having  advanced  beyond  the  infancy  of
civil  life.

After  this general  observation  concerning

View  of  ^  IT-  • 1  •  •

the  institu-  the  most  singular  and  distmguishmg  circum-
m°anne?sof  staucc  in  the  statc  of  both  the  great  empires  in
^^''^'  America,  I  shall  endeavour  to  give  such  a  view

of  the  constitution  and  interior  police  of  each,  as  may
enable  us  to  ascertain  their  place  in  the  political  scale,
to  allot  them  their  proper  station  between  the  rude  tribes
in  the  New  World,  and  the  polished  states  of  the  an-
cient, and  to  determine  how  far  they  had  risen  above
the  former,  as  well  as  how  much  they  fell  below  the
latter.

Imperfect  Mcxico  was  first  subjcctcd  to  the  Spanish
tbn^n-  crown.  But  our  acquaintance  with  its  laws  and
*l"""'"s manners  is  not,  from  that  circumstance,  more

those  of  '  .

Mexico,  complete.  What  I  have  remarked  concernmg
the  defective  and  inaccurate  information  on  which
we  must  rely  with  respect  to  the  condition  and  cus-
toms of  the  savage  tribes  in  America,  may  be  applied
likewise  to  our  knowledge  of  the  Mexican  empire.
Cortes,  and  the  rapacious  adventurers  who  accompa-

B  2

4  AMERICA.

nied  him,  had  not  leisure  or  capacity  to  enrich  either
civil  or  natural  history  with  new  observations.  They
undertook  their  expedition  in  quest  of  one  object,  and
seemed  hardly  to  have  turned  their  eyes  towards  any
other.  Or,  if  during-  some  short  interval  of  tranquillity,
when  the  occupations  of  war  ceased,  and  the  ardour  of
plunder  was  suspended,  the  institutions  and  manners
of  the  people  whom  they  had  invaded,  drew  their  at-
tention, the  inquiries  of  illiterate  soldiers  were  con-
ducted with  so  little  sagacity  and  precision,  that  the
accounts  given  by  them  of  the  policy  and  order  esta-
blished in  the  Mexican  monarchy  are  superficial,  con-
fused, and  inexplicable.  It  is  rather  from  incidents  which
they  relate  occasionally,  than  from  their  own  deduc-
tions and  remarks,  that  we  are  enabled  to  form  some
idea  of  the  genius  and  manners  of  that  people.  The
obscurity  in  which  the  ignorance  of  its  conquerors
involved  the  annals  of  Mexico,  was  augmented  by  the
superstition  of  those  who  succeeded  them.  As  the
memory  of  past  events  was  preserved  among  the  Mexi-
cans by  figures  painted  on  skins,  on  cotton  cloth,  on  a
kind  of  pasteboard,  or  on  the  bark  of  trees,  the  early
missionaries,  unable  to  comprehend  their  meaning,  and
struck  with  their  uncouth  forms,  conceived  them  to  be
monuments  of  idolatry  which  ought  to  be  destroyed,  in
order  to  facilitate  the  conversion  of  the  Indians.  In
obedience  to  an  edict  issued  by  Juan  de  Zummaraga,
a  Franciscan  monk,  the  first  bishop  of  Mexico,  as  many
records  of  the  ancient  Mexican  story  as  could  be  col-
lected were  committed  to  the  flames.  In  consequence
of  this  fanatical  zeal  of  the  monks  who  first  visited  New
Spain  (which  their  successors  soon  began  to  lament),
whatever  knowledge  of  remote  events  such  rude  monu-
ments contained  was  almost  entirely  lost,  and  no  in-
formation remained  concerning  the  ancient  revolutions
and  policy  of  the  empire,  but  what  was  derived  from
tradition,  or  from  some  fragments  of  their  historical

BOOK  VII.  5

paintings  that  escaped  the  barbarous  researches  of  Zum-
maraga/  From  the  experience  of  all  nations  it  is  mani-
fest, that  the  memory  of  past  transactions  can  neither
be  long  preserved,  nor  be  transmitted  with  any  fidelity,
by  tradition.  The  Mexican  paintings,  which  are  sup-
posed to  have  served  as  annals  of  their  empire,  are  few
in  number,  and  of  ambiguous  meaning.  Thus,  "^amidst
the  uncertainty  of  the  former,  and  the  obscurity  of  the
latter,  we  must  glean  what  intelligence  can  be  collected
from  the  scanty  materials  scattered  in  the  Spanish
writers.*

Origin  of  Accordiug  to  the  account  of  the  Mexicans
theMexi-  thcmsclves  their  empire  was  not  of  long  du-

d  Acosta,  lib.  vi.  c.  7, Torquem.  Proem,  lib.  ii.  lib.  iii.  c.  6.  lib.  xiv.  c.  6.

"*  In  the  first  edition,  I  observed  that  in  consequence  of  the  destruction  of  the
ancient  Mexican  paintings,  occasioned  by  the  zeal  of  Zummaraga,  whatever  know-
ledge they  might  have  conveyed  was  entirely  lost.  Every  candid  reader  must  have
perceived  that  the  expression  was  inaccurate  ;  as  in  a  few  lines  afterward  T  mention
some  ancient  paintings  to  be  still  extant.  M.  Clavigero,  not  satisfied  with  laying
hold  of  this  inaccuracy,  which  I  corrected  in  the  subsequent  editions,  labours  to  ren-
der it  more  glaring,  by  the  manner  in  which  he  quotes  the  remaining  part  of  the  sen-
tence. He  reprehends  with  great  asperity  the  account  which  I  gave  of  the  scanty
materials  for  writing  the  ancient  history  of  Mexico.  Vol.  I.  Account  of  writers,
p.  xxvi.  Vol.  II.  380.  My  words,  however,  are  almost  the  same  with  those  of  Tor-
quemada,  who  seems  to  have  been  better  acquainted  with  the  ancient  monuments  of
the  Mexicans  than  any  Spanish  author  whose  works  I  have  seen.  Lib.  xiv.  c.  6.
M.  Clavigero  himself  gives  a  description  of  the  destruction  of  ancient  painlings  in
almost  the  same  terras  I  have  used  ;  and  mentions,  as  an  additional  reason  of  there
being  so  small  a  number  of  ancient  paintings  known  to  the  Spaniards,  that  the  na-
tives have  become  so  solicitous  to  preserve  and  conceal  them,  that  it  is  "  difficult,  if
not  impossible,  to  make  them  part  with  one  of  them."  Vol.  I.  407.  II.  194.  No
point  can  be  more  ascertained  than  that  few  of  the  Mexican  historical  paintings  have
been  preserved.  Though  several  Spaniards  have  carried  on  inquiries  into  t];e  anti-
quities of  the  Mexican  empire,  no  engravings  from  Mexican  paintings  have  been  com-
municated to  the  public,  except  those  by  Purchas,  Gemelli  Carreri,  and  Lorenzaiia.
It  affords  me  some  satisfaction,  that  in  the  course  of  my  researches  I  have  discovered
two  collections  of  Mexican  paintings  which  were  unknown  to  former  inquirers.  The
cut  which  I  published  is  an  exact  copy  of  the  original,  and  gives  no  high  idea  of  the
progress  which  the  Mexicans  had  made  in  the  art  of  painting.  I  cannot  conjecture
what  could  induce  M.  Clavigero  to  express  some  dissatisfaction  with  me  for  having
published  it  without  the  same  colours  it  has  in  the  original  painting,  ]i.  xxix.  He
might  have  recollected,  that  neither  Purchas,  nor  Gemelli  Carreri,  nor  Loreuzana,
thought  it  necessary  to  colour  the  prints  which  they  have  published,  and  they  iiave
never  been  censured  on  that  account.  He  may  rest  assured,  that  though  the  colours  in
the  painlings  in  the  Imperial  Library  are  remarkably- briglit,  they  are  laid  on  without
art,  and  without  "  any  of  that  regard  to  light  and  shade,  or  the  rules  of  perspective,"
which  M.  Clavigero  requires.  Vol.  II.  378.  If  the  public  express  any  desire  to  h:ive
the  seven  paintings  still  in  my  possession  engraved,  I  am  ready  to  communicate  them.
The  print  published  by  Gemelii  Carreri,  of  the  route  of  the  ancient  Mexicans  when
they  travelled  towards  the  lake  on  which  they  built  the  capital  of  their  empire,
(Churchill,  Vol.  IV.  p.  481.)  is  the  most  finished  monument  of  art  brought  from  the
New  World,  and  yet  a  very  slight  inspection  of  it  will  satisfy  every  one,  tiiat  the
annals  of  a  nation  conveyed  in  this  manner  must  be  very  meagre  and  imperfect.

6  AMERICA.

can  mo-  nation.  Thcii*  country,  as  they  relate,  was  origi-
narchy,  ^^lly  possessed,  rather  than  peopled,  by  small
independent  tribes,  whose  mode  of  life  and  manners
resembled  those  of  the  rudest  savages  which  we  have
described.  But  about  a  period  corresponding  to  the
beginning  of  the  tenth  century  in  the  Christian  era,
several  tribes  moved  in  successive  migrations  from  un-
known regions  towards  the  north  and  north-west,  and
settled  in  different  provinces  of  Anahuac,  the  ancient
name  of  New  Spain.  These,  more  civilized  than  the
original  inhabitants,  began  to  form  them  to  the  arts  of
social  life.  At  length  towards  the  commencement  of
the  thirteenth  century,  the  Mexicans,  a  people  more
polished  than  any  of  the  former,  advanced  from  the
border  of  the  Californian  gulf,  and  took  possession  of
the  plains  adjacent  to  the  great  lake  near  the  centre  of
the  country.  After  residing  there  about  fifty  years
they  founded  a  town,  since  distinguished  by  the  name
of  Me.vico,  which  from  humble  beginnings  soon  grew
to  be  the  most  considerable  city  in  the  New  World.  The
Mexicans,  long  after  they  were  established  in  their
new  possessions,  continued,  like  other  martial  tribes  in
America,  unacquainted  with  regal  dominion,  and  were
governed  in  peace,  and  conducted  in  war,  by  such  as
were  entitled  to  pre-eminence  by  their  wisdom  or  their
valour.  But  among  them,  as  in  other  states  whose
power  and  territories  become  extensive,  the  supreme
authority  centred  at  last  in  a  single  person ;  and  when
the  Spaniards  under  Cortes  invaded  the  country,  Mon-
tezuma was  the  ninth  monarch  in  order  who  had  swayed
the  Mexican  sceptre,  not  by  hereditary  right,  but  by
election.

Very  re-  Such  is  the  traditional  tale  of  the  Mexicans
cent.  concerning  the  progress  of  their  own  empire.
According  to  this,  its  duration  was  very  short.  From
the  first  migration  of  their  parent  tribe,  they  can  reckon
little  more  than  three  hundred  years. From  the  esta-

BOOK  VII.  7

blishment  of  monarchical  goverament,  not  above  a
hundred  and  thirty  years  according  to  one  account/  or
a  hundred  and  ninety-seven,  according  to  another  com-
putation/ had  elapsed.  If,  on  one  hand,  we  suppose
the  Mexican  state  to  have  been  of  higher  antiquity,
and  to  have  subsisted  during  such  a  length  of  time  as
the  Spanish  accounts  of  its  civilization  would  naturally
lead  us  to  conclude,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  how,
among  a  people  who  possessed  the  art  of  recording
events  by  pictures,  and  who  considered  it  as  an  essen-
tial part  of  their  national  education,  to  teach  their
children  to  repeat  the  historical  songs  which  celebrated
the  exploits  of  their  ancestors,^  the  knowledge  of  past
transactions  should  be  so  slender  and  limited.  If,  on
the  other  hand,  we  adopt  their  own  system  with  respect
to  the  antiquities  of  their  nation,  it  is  no  less  difficult
to  account  either  for  that  improved  state  of  society,  or
for  the  extensive  dominion  to  which  their  empire  had
attained,  when  first  visited  by  the  Spaniards.  The
infancy  of  nations  is  so  long,  and,  even  when  every
circumstance  is  favourable  to  their  progress,  they  ad-
vance so  slowly  towards  any  maturity  of  strength  or
policy,  that  the  recent  origin  of  the  Mexicans  seems  to
be  a  strong  presumption  of  some  exaggeration  in  the
splendid  descriptions  which  have  been  given  of  their
government  and  manners.

But  it  is  not  by  theory  or  conjectures  that
which  history  decides  with  regard  to  the  state  or  cha-
progre?s^"  racter  of  nations.  It  produces  facts  as  the
'^^^iviiiza-  foundation  of  every  judgment  which  it  ventures
to  pronounce.  In  collecting  those  which  must
regulate  our  opinion  in  the  present  inquiry,  some  occur
that  suggest  an  idea  of  considerable  progress  in  civili-
zation in  the  Mexican  empire,  and  others  which  seem
to  indicate  that  it  had  advanced  but  little  beyond  the

e  Acost.  Hist.  lib.  vii.  c.  8,  &:c.  ^  Purchas  Pilgr.  iii.  p.  1068,  &c.

g  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  ii.  c.  18.

in
tion.

8  AMERICA.

savaofe  tribes  around  it.  Both  shall  be  exhibited  to
the  view  of  the  reader,  that,  from  comparing  them,  he
may  determine  on  which  side  the  evidence  prepon-
derates.

The  ri  ht  ^^  ^^^^  Mexican  empire,  the  right  of  private
of  pro-  property  was  perfectly  understood,  and  esta-
estabiish-  blislicd  in  its  full  extent.  Among  several  savage
^  ■  tribes,  we  have  seen,  that  the  idea  of  a  title  to

the  separate  and  exclusive  possession  of  any  object  was
hardly  known  ;  and  that  among  all  it  was  extremely
limited  and  ill-defined.  But  in  Mexico,  where  agri-
culture and  industry  had  made  some  progress,  the
distinction  between  property  in  land  and  property  in
goods  had  taken  place.  Both  might  be  transferred  from
one  person  to  another  by  sale  or  barter ;  both  might
descend  by  inheritance.  Every  person  who  could  be
denominated  a  freeman  had  property  in  land.  This,
however,  they  held  by  various  tenures.  Some  possessed
it  in  full  right,  and  it  descended  to  their  heirs.  The
title  of  others  to  their  lands  was  derived  from  the  office
or  dignity  which  they  enjoyed  ;  and  when  deprived  of
the  latter,  they  lost  possession  of  the  former.  Both
these  modes  of  occupying  land  were  deemed  noble,
and  peculiar  to  citizens  of  the  highest  class.  The  te-
nure, by  which  the  great  body  of  the  people  held  their
property,  was  very  different.  In  every  district  a  certain
quantity  of  land  was  measured  out  in  proportion  to  the
number  of  families.  This  was  cultivated  by  the  joint
labour  of  the  whole ;  its  produce  was  deposited  in  a
common  storehouse,  and  divided  among  them  accord-
ing to  their  respective  exigencies.  The  members  of
the  Calpuliee,  or  associations,  could  not  alienate  their
share  of  the  common  estate ;  it  was  an  indivisible  per-
manent property,  destined  for  the  support  of  their  fa-
milies.'' In  consequence  of  this  distribution  of  the  ter-
ritory of  the  state,  every  man  had  an  interest  in  its  wel-

h  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  15. Torquem.  Mon.  Ind.  lib.  xiv,  c.  7. Corita,  MS.

BOOK VII.  9

fare,  and  the  happiness  of  the  individual  was  connected
with  the  public  security.

The  num. Another  striking  circumstance,  which  distin-
ber  and gfuishcs  the  Mcxicau  empire  from  those  nations

greatness y  .  ^  iin  •^ -i ■ ^

of  their in  Anicrica  we  have  already  aescribed, is  the
"''^*' number  and  greatness  of  its  cities. While  so-
ciety continues  in  a  rude  state,  the  wants  of  men  are  so
few,  and  they  stand  so  little  in  need  of  mutual  assist-
ance, that  their  inducements  to  crowd  together  are  ex-
tremely feeble. Their  industry  at  the  same  time  is  so
imperfect,  that  it  cannot  secure  subsistence  for  any  con-
siderable number  of  families  settled  in  one  spot. They
live  dispersed,  at  this  period,  from  choice  as  well  as
from  necessity,  or  at  the  utmost  assemble  in  small  ham-
lets on  the  banks  of  the  river  which  supplies  them  with
food,  or  on  the  border  of  some  plain  left  open  by  nature,
or  cleared  by  their  own  labour. The  Spaniards,  ac-
customed to  this  mode  of  habitation  amono^  all  the  sa-
vage  tribes  with  which  they  were  hitherto  acquainted,
were  astonished,  on  entering  New  Spain,  to  find  the
natives  residing  in  towns  of  such  extent  as  resembled
those  of  Europe. In  the  first  fervour  of  their  admira-
tion, they  compared  Zempoalla,  though  a  town  only  of
the  second  or  third  size,  to  the  cities  of  greatest  note  in
their  own  country. When,  afterward,  they  visited  in
succession  Tlascala, Cholula,  Tacuba,  Tezeuco, and
Mexico  itself,  their  amazement  increased  so  much,  that
it  led  them  to  convey  ideas  of  their  magnitude  and
populousness  bordering  on  what  is  incredible. Even
when  there  is  leisure  for  observation,  and  no  interest
that  leads  to  deceive,  conjectural  estimates  of  the  num-
ber of  people  in  cities  are  extremely  loose,  and  usually
much  exaggerated. It  is  not  surprising,  then, that
Cortes  and  his  companions,  little  accustomed  to  such
computations,  and  powerfully  tempted  to  magnify,  in
order  to  exalt  the  merit  of  their  own  discoveries  and
conquests,  should  have  been  betrayed  into  this  common

10  AMERICA.

error,  and  have  raised  their  descriptions  considerably
above  truth.  For  this  reason,  some  considerable  abate-
ment ought  to  be  made  from  their  calculations  of  the
number  of  inhabitants  in  the  Mexican  cities,  and  we
may  fix  the  standard  of  their  population  much  lower
than  they  have  done;  but  still  they  will  appear  to  be
cities  of  such  consequence,  as  are  not  to  be  found  but
among-  people  who  have  made  some  considerable  pro-
gress in  the  arts  of  social  life.'  From  their  accounts,
we  can  hardly  suppose  Mexico,  the  capital  of  the  em-
pire, to  have  contained  fewer  than  sixty  thousand  in-
habitants.

Thesepa- The  Separation of  professions among the
^pjof^^f Mexicans  is  a  symptom of  improvement  no
sions. igss  remarkable. Arts,  in  the  early  ages  of  so-
ciety, are  so  few  and  so  simple,  that  each  man  is  suffi-
ciently master  of  them  all,  to  gratify  every  demand  of
his  own  limited  desires. The  savage  can  form  his
bow,  point  his  arrows,  rear  his  hut,  and  hollow  his  ca-
noe, without  calling  in  the  aid  of  any  hand  more  skilful
than  his  own. Time  must  have  augmented  the  wants
of  men,  and  ripened  their  ingenuity,  before  the  produc-
tions of  art  became  so  complicated  in  their  structure,  or
so  curious  in  their  fabric,  that  a  particular  course  of
education  was  requisite  towards  forming  the  artificer  to
expertness  in  contrivance  and  workmanship. In  pro-
portion as  refinement  spreads,  the  distinction  of  profes-
sions increases,  and  they  branch  out  into  more  numer-
ous and  minute  subdivisions. Among  the  Mexicans,
this  separation  of  the  arts  necessary  in  life  had  taken
place  to  a  considerable  extent. The  functions  of  the
mason,  the  weaver,  the  goldsmith,  the  painter,  and  of
several  other  crafts,  were  carried  on  by  different  per-
sons. Each  was  regularly  instructed  in  his  calling.
To  it  alone  his  industry  was  confined ;  and,  by  assidu-
ous application  to  one  object,  together  with  the  perse-

•  See  Note  II.

BOOK VII.  11

veiing  patience  peculiar  to  Americans,  their  artisans  at-
tained to  a  degree  of  neatness  and  perfection  in  work,
far  beyond  what  could  have  been  expected  from  the  rude
tools  which  they  employed.  Their  various  productions
were  brought  into  commerce ;  and  by  the  exchange  of
them  in  the  stated  markets  held  in  the  cities,  not  only
were  their  mutual  wants  supplied/  in  such  orderly  in-
tercourse as  characterizes  an  improved  state  of  society,
but  their  industry  was  daily  rendered  persevering  and
inventive.

The  dis-  ^^^  distinction  of  ranks  established  in  the
tinction  of  Mcxican  empire  is  the  next  circumstance  that
merits  attention.  In  surveying  the  savage  tribes
of  America,  we  observed,  that  consciousness  of  equality,
and  impatience  of  subordination,  are  sentiments  natural
to  man  in  the  infancy  of  civil  life.  During  peace,  the
authority  of  a  superior  is  hardly  felt  among  them,  and
even  in  war  it  is  but  little  acknowledged.  Strangers
to  the  idea  of  property,  the  difference  in  condition  re-
sulting from  the  inequality  of  it  is  unknown.  Birth  or
titles  confer  no  pre-eminence ;  it  is  only  by  personal  me-
rit and  accomplishments  that  distinction  can  be  ac-
quired. The  form  of  society  was  very  different  among
the  Mexicans.  The  great  body  of  the  people  was  in  a
most  humiliating  state.  A  considerable  number,  known
by  the  name  of  Mayeques^  nearly  resembling  in  con-
dition those  peasants  who,  under  various  denomina-
tions, were  considered,  during  the  prevalence  of  the
feudal  system,  as  instruments  of  labour  attached  to  the
soil.  The  Mayeques  could  not  change  their  place  of
residence  without  permission  of  the  superior  on  whom
they  depended.  They  were  conveyed,  together  with
the  lands  on  which  they  were  settled,  from  one  pro-
prietor to  another;  and  were  bound  to  cultivate  the
ground,  and  to  perform  several  kinds  of  servile  work.'

^  Cortes  Relat.  ap.  Ramus,  iii.  239,  &c. Goni.  Cron.  c.  79. Torquem.  lib.  xiii.
c.  34. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  vii.  c.  15,  &c.

>  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  IT". Corita,  MS.

12  AMERICA.

Others  were  reduced  to  the  lowest  form  of  subjection,
that  of  domestic  servitude,  and  felt  the  utmost  rigour
of  that  wretched  state.  Their  condition  was  held  to  be
so  vile,  and  their  lives  deemed  to  be  of  so  little  value,
that  a  person  who  killed  one  of  these  slaves  was  not
subjected  to  any  punishment.™  Even  those  considered
as  freemen  were  treated  by  their  haughty  lords  as  be-
ings of  an  inferior  species.  The  nobles,  possessed  of
ample  territories,  were  divided  into  various  classes,  to
each  of  which  peculiar  titles  of  honour  belonged.
Some  of  these  titles,  like  their  lands,  descended  from
father  to  son  in  perpetual  succession.  Others  were
annexed  to  particular  offices,  or  conferred  during
life  as  marks  of  personal  distinction."  The  monarch,
exalted  above  all,  enjoyed  extensive  power,  and  su-
preme dignity.  Thus  the  distinction  of  ranks  was
completely  established,  in  a  line  of  regular  subordina-
tion, reaching  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  member
of  the  community.  Each  of  these  knew  what  he  could
claim,  and  what  he  owed.  The  people,  who  were  not
allowed  to  wear  a  dress  of  the  same  fashion,  or  to  dwell
in  houses  of  a  form  similar  to  those  of  the  nobles,  ac-
costed them  with  the  utmost  submissive  reverence.  In
the  presence  of  their  sovereign,  they  durst  not  lift  their
eyes  from  the  ground,  or  look  him  in  the  face."  The
nobles  themselves,  when  admitted  to  an  audience  of
their  sovereign,  entered  barefooted,  in  mean  garments,
and,  as  his  slaves,  paid  him  homage  approaching  to
adoration.  This  respect,  due  from  inferiors  to  those
above  them  in  rank,  was  prescribed  with  such  ceremo-
nious accuracy,  that  it  incorporated  with  the  language,
and  influenced  its  genius  and  idiom.  The  Mexican
tongue  abounded  in  expressions  of  reverence  and  cour-
tesy. The  style  and  appellations,  used  in  the  inter-
course between  equals,  would  have  been  so  unbecoming

•»  Herrcra,  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  7.  «  lb.  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  15. Corita,  MS.

"  llerara,  dec,  3.  lib.  ii.  c.  li.

BOOK VII.  13

in  the  mouth  of  one  in  a  lower  sphere,  when  he  ac-
costed a  person  in  higher  rank,  as  to  be  deemed  an  in-
sult.'' It  is  only  in  societies,  which  time  and  the  insti-
tution of  regular  government  have  moulded  into  form,
that  we  find  such  an  orderly  arrangement  of  men  into
different  ranks,  and  such  nice  attention  paid  to  their
various  rights.

The  spirit  of  the  Mexicans,  thus  familiarized

Their  poll-  ^  i  i ^  it-  in

ticai  con-  and  bended  to  subordmation,  was  prepared  tor
submitting  to  monarchical  government.  But
the  descriptions  of  their  policy  and  laws,  by  the  Spaniards
who  overturned  them,  are  so  inaccurate  and  contra-
dictory, that  it  is  difficult  to  delineate  the  form  of  their
constitution  with  any  precision.  Sometimes  they  re-
present the  monarchs  of  Mexico  as  absolute,  deciding
according  to  their  pleasure  with  respect  to  every  ope-
ration of  the  state.  On  other  occasions,  we  discover
the  traces  of  established  customs  and  laws,  framed  in
order  to  circumscribe  the  power  of  the  crown,  and  we
meet  with  rights  and  privileges  of  the  nobles  which
seem  to  be  opposed  as  barriers  against  its  encroach-
ments. This  appearance  of  inconsistency  has  arisen
from  inattention  to  the  innovations  of  Montezuma  upon
the  Mexican  policy.  His  aspiring  ambition  subverted
the  original  system  of  government,  and  introduced  a
pure  despotism.  He  disregarded  the  ancient  laws,
violated  the  privileges  held  most  sacred,  and  reduced
his  subjects  of  every  order  to  the  level  of  slaves.''  The
chiefs,  or  nobles  of  the  first  rank,  submitted  to  the  yoke
with  such  reluctance,  that,  from  impatience  to  shake  it
off",  and  hope  of  recovering  their  rights,  many  of  them
courted  the  protection  of  Cortes,  and  joined  a  foreign
power  against  their  domestic  oppressor.""  It  is  not
then  under  the  dominion  of  Montezuma,  but  under  the
government  of  his  predecessors,  that  we  can  discover

V  See  Note  III,
1  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  ii.  c.  14. Torquem.  lib.  ii.  c.  69.
'  Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  v.  c.  10,  11. Torquem.  lib.  iv.  c.  49.

14  AMERICA.

what  was  the  original  form  and  genius  of  Mexican
policy.  From  the  foundation  of  the  monarchy  to  the
election  of  Montezuma,  it  seems  to  have  subsisted  with
little  variation.  That  body  of  citizens,  which  may  be
distinguished  by  the  name  of  nobility,  formed  the  chief
and  most  respectable  order  in  the  state.  They  were
of  various  ranks,  as  has  been  already  observed,  and
their  honours  were  acquired,  and  transmitted  in  dif-
ferent manners.  Their  number  seems  to  have  been
great.  According  to  an  author  accustomed  to  examine
with  attention  what  he  relates,  there  were  in  the  Mexi-
can empire  thirty  of  this  order,  each  of  whom  had  in
his  territories  about  a  hundred  thousand  people,  and
subordinate  to  these,  there  were  about  three  thousand
nobles  of  a  lower  class.^  The  territories  belonging  to
the  chiefs  of  Tezeuco  and  Tacuba  were  hardly  inferior
in  extent  to  those  of  the  Mexican  monarch.'  Each
of  these  possessed  complete  territorial  jurisdiction,  and
levied  taxes  from  their  own  vassals.  But  all  followed
the  standard  of  Mexico  in  war,  serving  with  a  number
of  men  in  proportion  to  their  domain,  and  most  of  them
paid  tribute  to  its  monarch  as  their  superior  lord.

In  tracing  those  great  lines  of  the  Mexican  constitu-
tion, an  image  of  feudal  policy,  in  its  most  rigid  form,
rises  to  view,  and  we  discern  its  three  distinguishing
characteristics,  a  nobility  possessing  almost  indepen-
dent authority,  a  people  depressed  into  the  lowest  state
of  subjection,  and  a  king  intrusted  with  the  executive
power  of  the  state.  Its  spirit  and  principles  seem  to
have  operated  in  the  New  World  in  the  same  manner
as  in  the  ancient.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  crown  was
extremely  limited.  All  real  and  effective  authority
was  retained  by  the  Mexican  nobles  in  their  own  hands,
and  the  shadow  of  it  only  left  to  the  king.  Jealous  to
excess  of  their  own  rights,  they  guarded  with  the  most

»  Hcrreia,  dec.  2.  lib.  viii.  c.  12.
'  Torqiiem.  lib.  ii.  c.  57. Corita  IMS.

BOOK  VII.  15

vigilant  anxiety  against the  encroachments  of  their
sovereigns. By  a  fundamental  law  of  the  empire,  it
was  provided  that  the  king  should  not  determine  con-
cerning any  point  of  general  importance  without  the
approbation  of  a  council  composed  of  the  prime  nobi-
lity." Unless  he  obtained  their  consent,  he  could  not
engage  the  nation  in  war,  nor  could  he  dispose  of  the
most  considerable  branch  of  the  public revenue at
pleasure  ;  it  was  appropriated  to  certain  purposes  from
which  it  could  not  be  diverted  by  the  regal  authority
alone." In  order  to  secure  full  effect  to  those  consti-
tutional restraints,  the  Mexican  nobles  did  not  permit
their  crown  to  descend  by  inheritance,  but  disposed  of
it  by  election. The  right  of  election  seems  to  have
been  originally  vested  in  the  whole  body  of  nobility,
but  was  afterward  committed  to  six  electors,  of  whom
the  chiefs  of  Tezeuco  and  Tacuba  were  always  two.
From  respect  for  the  family  of  their  monarchs,  the
choice  fell  generally  upon  some  person  sprung  from  it.
But  as  the  activity  and  valour  of  their  prince  were  of
greater  moment  to  a  people  perpetually  engaged  in
war,  than  a  strict  adherence  to  the  order  of  birth,  col-
laterals of  mature  age  or  of  distinguished  merit  were
often  preferred  to  those  who  were  nearer  the  throne  in
direct  descent.^ To  this  maxim  in  their  policy,  the
Mexicans  appear  to  be  indebted  for  such  a  succession
of  able  and  warlike  princes,  as  raised  their  empire  in  a
short  period  to  that  extraordinaryheight  of  power  which
it  had  attained  when  Cortes  landed  in  New  Spain.
Power  and While  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Mexican  mo-
of  their' narch  continued  to  be  limited,  it  is  probable
monarchs. ^^^^t  it  was  cxcrciscd  with  little  ostentation.
But  as  their authority  became  more extensive,  the
splendour  of  their  government  augmented. It  was  in
this  last  state  that  the  Spaniards  beheld  it ;  and  struck

"  Herrera,  dec,  3.  lib.  ii,  c.  19.  lib.  iv.  c.  16. Corita  MS.

"  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  17.

y  Acosta,  lib.  vi.  c  24. Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  ii.  c.  13. Corita  MS.

16  AMERICA.

with  the  appearance  of  Montezuma's  court,  they  describe
its  pomp  at  great  length,  and  with  much  admiration.
The  number  of  his  attendants,  the  order,  the  silence,
and  the  reverence  with  which  they  served  him  ;  the
extent  of  his  royal  mansion,  the  variety  of  its  apart-
ments allotted  to  different  officers,  and  the  ostentation
with  which  his  grandeur  was  displayed,  whenever  he
permitted  his  subjects  to  behold  him,  seem  to  resemble
the  magnificence  of  the  ancient  monarchies  in  Asia,
rather  than  the  simplicity  of  the  infant  states  in  the
New  World.

Order  of ^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^  ^^®  mcrc  parade  of  royalty
their  go- that the  Mexican potentates  exhibited their

vernment.  -  .„  , .

power ;  they  maniiested  it  more  beneficially  in
the  order  and  regularity  with  which  they  conducted
the  internal  administration  and  police  of  their  domi-
nions. Complete  jurisdiction,  civil  as  well  as  criminal,
over  its  own  immediate  vassals,  was  vested  in  the
crown.  Judges  were  appointed  for  each  department,
and  if  we  may  rely  on  the  account  which  the  Spanish
writers  give  of  the  maxims  and  laws  upon  which  they
founded  their  decisions  with  respect  to  the  distribution
of  property  and  the  punishment  of  crimes,  justice  was
administered  in  the  Mexican  empire  with  a  degree  of
order  and  equity  resembling  what  takes  place  in  so-
cieties highly  civilized.

Provision  Their  attention  in  providing  for  the  support
support  ^^  government  was  not  less  sagacious.  Taxes
of  it.  were  laid  upon  land,  upon  the  acquisitions  of
industry,  and  upon  commodities  of  every  kind  exposed
to  sale  in  the  public  markets.  These  duties  were  con-
siderable, but  not  arbitrary  or  unequal.  They  were
imposed  according  to  established  rules,  and  each  knew
what  share  of  the  common  burden  he  had  to  bear.
As  the  use  of  money  was  unknown,  all  the  taxes  were
paid  in  kind,  and  thus  not  only  the  natural  produc-
tions of  all  the  different  provinces  in  the  empire,  but

BOOK VII.  17

every  species  of  manufacture,  and  every  work  of  inge-
nuity and  art,  were  collected  in  the  public  storehouses.
From  those  the  emperor  supplied  his  numerous  train
of  attendants  in  peace,  and  his  armies  during  war,
with  food,  with  clothes,  and  ornaments.  People  of
inferior  condition,  neither  possessing  land  nor  engaged
in  commerce,  were  bound  to  the  performance  of  va-
rious services.  By  their  stated  labour  the  crown-lands
were  cultivated,  public  works  were  carried  on,  and
the  various  houses  belonging  to  the  emperor  were  built
and  kept  in  repair.''

Tiieirpo-  The  improved  state  of  government  among
'"^^'  the  Mexicans  is  conspicuous,  not  only  in  points
essential  to  the  being  of  a  well-ordered  society,  but  in
several  regulations  of  inferior  consequence  with  re-
spect to  police.  The  institution  which  I  have  already
mentioned,  of  public  couriers,  stationed  at  proper  in-
tervals, to  convey  intelligence  from  one  part  of  the  em-
pire to  the  other,  was  a  refinement  in  police  not  intro-
duced into  any  kingdom  of  Europe  at  that  period.
The  structure  of  the  capital  city  in  a  lake,  with  artifi-
cial dykes,  and  causeways  of  great  length,  which  served
as  avenues  to  it  from  different  quarters,  erected  in  the
water,  with  no  less  ingenuity  than  labour,  seems  to  be
an  idea  that  could  not  have  occurred  to  any  but  a  ci-
vilized people.  The  same  observation  may  be  applied
to^the  structure  of  the  aqueducts,  or  conduits,  by  which
they  conveyed  a  stream  of  fresh  water  from  a  consider-
able distance,  into  the  city,  along  one  of  the  cause-
ways.'' The  appointment  of  a  number  of  persons  to
clean  the  streets,  to  light  them  by  fires  kindled  in  dif-
ferent places,  and  to  patrole  as  watchmen  during  the
night,''  discovers  a  degree  of  attention  which  even  po-
lished nations  are  late  in  acquiring.
,  .  The  prooTcss  of  the  Mexicans  in  various  arts,

Their  arts.

is  considered  as  the most  decisive  proof  of

y  Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  vii.  c.  13.  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c,  16,  17. See  Note  IV.
»  See  Note  V.  ^  Herrera,  dec.  lib.  viii.  c.  4. Torilbio  MS.

VOL.  viir.  c

18  AMERICA.

their  superior  refinement.  Cortes,  and  the  early  Spa-
nish authors,  describe  this  with  rapture,  and  maintain,
that  the  most  celebrated  European  artists  could  not
surpass  or  even  equal  them  in  ingenuity  and  neatness
of  workman-ship.  They  represented  men,  animals,  and
other  objects,  by  such  a  disposition  of  various  coloured
feathers,  as  is  said  to  have  produced  all  the  effects  of
light  and  shade,  and  to  have  imitated  nature  with
truth  and  delicacy.  Their  ornaments  of  gold  and  silver
have  been  described  to  be  of  a  fabric  no  less  curious.
But  in  forming  any  idea,  from  general  descriptions,
concerning  the  state  of  arts  among  nations  imperfectly
polished,  we  are  extremely  ready  to  err.  In  examin-
ing the  works  of  people  whose  advances  in  improve-
ment are  nearly  the  same  with  our  own,  we  view  them
with  a  critical,  and  often  with  a  jealous  eye.  Whereas,
when  conscious  of  our  own  superiority,  we  survey  the
arts  of  nations  comparatively  rude,  we  are  astonished
at  works  executed  by  them  under  such  manifest  disad-
vantages, and,  in  the  warmth  of  our  admiration,  are
apt  to  represent  them  as  productions  more  finished
than  they  really  are.  To  the  influence  of  this  illusion,
without  supposing  any  intention  to  deceive,  we  may
impute  the  exaggeration  of  some  Spanish  authors,  in
their  accounts  of  the  Mexican  arts.

It  is  not  from  those  descriptions,  but  from  consider-
ing such  specimens  of  their  arts  as  are  still  preserved,  that
we  must  decide  concerning  their  degree  of  merit.  As
the  ship  in  which  Cortes  sent  to  Charles  V.  the  most
curious  productions  of  the  Mexican  artisans,  which
were  collected  by  the  Spaniards  when  they  first  pil-
laged the  empire,  was  taken  by  a  French  corsair,''  the
remains  of  their  ingenuity  are  less  numerous  than  those
of  the  Peruvians.  Whether  any  of  their  works  with
feathers,  in  imitation  of  painting,  be  still  extant  in
Spain,  I  have  not  learned ;  but  many  of  their  orna-
ments in  gold  and  silver,  as  well  as  various  utensils

"  Relac.  de  Cort.  Ramus,  iii.  294.  F.

BOOK Vfl.  \U

employed  in  common  life,  are  deposited  in  the  magni-
ficent cabinet  of  natural  and  artificial  productions,
lately  opened  by  the  king  of  Spain;  and  I  am  in-
formed by  persons  on  whose  judgment  and  taste  I  can
rely,  that  these  boasted  efforts  of  their  art  are  uncouth
representations  of  common  objects,  or  very  coarse
images  of  the  human  and  some  other  forms,  destitute
of  grace  and  propriety."  The  justness  of  these  obser-
vations is  confirmed  by  inspecting  the  wooden  prints
and  copper-plates  of  their  paintings,  which  have  been
published  by  various  authors.  In  them,  every  figure  of
men,  of  quadrupeds,  or  birds,  as  well  as  every  repre-
sentation of  inanimated  nature,  is  extremely  rude  and
awkward.'^  The  hardest  Egyptian  style,  stiff  and  imper-

«  See  Note  VI.
<•  As  a  specimen  of  the  spirit  and  st^le  in  which  M.CIavigero  makes  his  strictnres
upon  my  History  of  America,  I  shall  publish  his  remarks  upon  this  passage.  "  Thus
far  Robertson  ;  to  whoraweanswcr,  first.  That  there  is  no  reason  to  believe  that  those
rude  works  were  really  Mexican  ;  secondly.  That  neither  do  we  know  whctlicr  those
persons  in  whose  judgment  he  confides,  may  be  persons  fit  to  merit  our  faith,  be-
cause we  have  observed  that  Robertson  trusts  frequently  the  testimony  of  Gage,
Correal,  Ibagnez,  and  other  such  authors,  who  are  entirely  undeserving  of  credit;
thirdly.  It  is  more  probable  that  the  arms  of  copper,  believed  by  those  intelligent
judges  to  be  certainly  Oriental,  are  really  Mexican."  Vol.  II.  391. — When  ati  au-
thor, not  entirely  destitute  of  integrity  or  discernment,  and  who  has  some  solicitude
about  his  own  character,  asserts  that  he  received  his  information  concerning  any
particular  point  from  persons  "  on  whose  judgment  and  taste  he  can  rely  ;"  a  very
slender  degree  of  candour,  one  should  think,  might  induce  the  reader  to  believe
that  he  does  not  endeavour  to  impose  upon  the  public  by  an  appeal  to  testimony
altogether  unworthy  of  credit.  My  information  concerning  the  Alexican  works  of
art  deposited  in  the  king  of  Spain's  cabinet,  was  received  from  the  late  lord  Gran-
tham, ambassador  extraordinary  from  the  court  of  London  to  that  of  Madrid,  and
from  Mr.  Archdeacon  Waddilove,  chaplain  to  the  embassy;  and  it  was  upon  their
authority  that  I  pronounced  the  coat  of  armour,  mentioned  in  the  note,  lo  be  of
Oriental  fabric.  As  they  were  both  at  Madrid  in  their  public  character  when  the
first  edition  of  the  History  of  America  was  publisiied,  I  thought  it  improper  at  that
time  to  mention  their  names.  Did  their  decision  concerning  a  matter  of  taste,  or
their  testimony  concerning  a  point  of  fact,  stand  in  need  of  confirmation,  I  might
produce  the  evidence  of  an  intelligent  traveller,  who,  in  describing  the  royal  cabi-
net at  Madrid,  takes  notice  that  it  contains  "  specimens  of  Mexican  and  Peruvian
utensils,  vases,  &c.  iu  earthenware,  wretched  both  in  tasic  and  execution."  Dil-
lon's Travels  through  Spain,  p.  77.  As  Gage  composed  his  Survey  of  New  Spain
with  all  the  zeal  and  acrimony  of  a  new  convert,  I  have  paid  little  regard  to  his  tes-
timony with  respect  to  points  relating  to  religion.  But  as  he  resided  in  several  pro-
vinces in  New  Spain,  which  travellers  seldom  visit,  and  as  he  seems  to  have  ob-
served their  manners  and  laws  with  an  intelligent  eye,  I  have  availed  myself  of  his
information  with  respect  to  matters  where  religious  opinion  could  have  little  influence.
Correal  I  have  seldom  quoted,  and  never  rested  upon  his  evidence  alone.  The  sta-
tion in  which  Ibagnez  was  employed  in  America,  as  well  as  the  credit  given  to  his
veracity  by  printing  his  Regno  Jesuitico  among  the  large  collection  of  documenis
poblished  (as  I  believe  by  authority)  at  Madrid,  .\.D.  1767,  justifies  me  for  appeal-
ing to  his  authority.

c  2

20  AMERICA.

feet  as  it  was,  is  more  elegant. The  scrawls  of  chil-
dren delineate  objects  almost  as  accurately.

But  however  low  the  Mexican  paintings  may  be
ranked,  when  viewed  merely  as  works  of  art,  a  very
different  station  belongs  to  them,  when  considered  as
the  records  of  their  country,  as  historical  monuments
of  its  policy  and  transactions  ;  and  they  become  curious
as  well  as  interesting  objects  of  attention.  The  no-
blest and  most  beneficial  invention  of  which  human
ingenuity  can  boast,  is  that  of  writing.  But  the  first
essays  of  this  art,  which  hath  contributed  more  than
all  others  to  the  improvement  of  the  species,  were  very
rude,  and  it  advanced  towards  perfection  slowly,  and
by  a  gradual  progression.  When  the  warrior,  eager
for  fame,  wished  to  transmit  some  knowledge  of  his
exploits  to  succeeding  ages ;  when  the  gratitude  of  a
people  to  their  sovereign  prompted  them  to  hand  down
an  account  of  his  beneficent  deeds  to  posterity ;  the
first  method  of  accomplishing  this,  which  seems  to
have  occurred  to  them,  was  to  delineate,  in  the  best
manner  they  could,  figures  representing  the  action  of
which  they  were  solicitous  to  preserve  the  memory.
Of  this,  which  has  very  properly  been  called  picture-
writing,^  we  find  traces  among  some  of  the  most  sa-
vage tribes  of  America.  When  a  leader  returns  from
the  field,  he  strips  a  tree  of  its  bark,  and  with  red  paint
scratches  upon  it  some  uncouth  figures  which  repre-
sent the  order  of  his  march,  the  number  of  his  fol-
lowers, the  enemy  whom  he  attacked,  the  scalps  and
captives  which  he  brought  home.  To  those  simple
annals  he  trusts  for  renown,  and  soothes  himself  with
hope  that  by  their  means  he  shall  receive  praise  from
the  warriors  of  future  times. ^

Compared  with  those  awkward  essays  of  their  sa-

e  Divine  Legat.  of  Moses,  iii.  73.
'Sir  W.  Johnson, Philos.  Transact,  vol.  Ixiii.  p.  143. Mem.  de  la  Hoiitan.  ii.
191. Lafitau  Moeurs  de  Sauv.  ii.  43.

BOOK VII.  2t

vage  countrymen,  the  paintings  of  the  Mexicans  may
be  considered  as  works  of  composition  and  design.
They  were  not  acquainted,  it  is  true,  with  any  other
method  of  recording  transactions,  than  that  of  deline-
ating the  objects  which  they  wished  to  represent.  But
they  could  exhibit  a  more  complex  series  of  events  in
progressive  order,  and  describe,  by  a  proper  disposi-
tion of  figures,  the  occurrences  of  a  king's  reign  from
his  accession  to  his  death  ;  the  progress  of  an  infant's
education  from  its  birth  until  it  attain  to  the  years  of
maturity ;  the  different  recompenses  and  marks  of  dis-
tinction conferred  upon  warriors,  in  proportion  to  the
exploits  which  they  had  performed.  Some  singular
specimens  of  this  picture-writing  have  been  preserved,
which  are  justly  considered  as  the  most  curious  monu-
ments of  art  brought  from  the  New  World.  The  most
valuable  of  these  was  published  by  Purchas  in  sixty-
six  plates.  It  is  divided  into  three  parts.  The  first
contains  the  history  of  the  Mexican  empire  under  its
ten  monarchs.  The  second  is  a  tribute-roll,  repre-
senting what  each  conquered  town  paid  into  the  royal
treasury.  The  third  is  a  code  of  their  institutions,  do-
mestic, political,  and  military.  Another  specimen  of
Mexican  painting  has  been  published  in  thirty-two
plates,  by  the  present  archbishop  of  Toledo.  To  both
are  annexed  a  full  explanation  of  what  the  figures  were
intended  to  represent,  which  was  obtained  by  the  Spa-
niards from  Indians  well  acquainted  with  their  own
arts.  The  style  of  painting  in  all  these  is  the  same.
They  represent  things  not  tvords.  They  exhibit  images
to  the  eye,  not  ideas  to  the  understanding.  They  may,
therefore,  be  considered  as  the  earliest  and  most  im-
perfect essay  of  men  in  their  progress  towards  disco-
vering the  art  of  writing.  The  defects  in  this  mode  of
recording  transactions  must  have  been  early  felt.
paint  every  occurrence  was,  from  its  nature,  a  very  te-
dious operation  ;  and  as  affairs  became  more  compli-

22  AMERICA.

cated,  and  events  multiplied  in  any  society,  its  annals
must  have  swelled  to  an  enormous  bulk.  Besides  this,
no  objects  could  be  delineated  but  those  of  sense ;  the
conceptions  of  the  mind  had  no  corporeal  form,  and  as
long  as  picture-writing  could  not  convey  an  idea  of
these,  it  must  have  been  a  very  imperfect  art.  The
necessity  of  improving  it  must  have  roused  and  sharp-
ened invention,  and  the  human  mind  holding  the  same
course  in  the  New  World  as  in  the  Old,  might  have
advanced  by  the  same  successive  steps,  first,  from  an
actual  picture  to  the  plain  hieroglyphic ;  next  to  the
allegorical  symbol ;  then  to  the  arbitrary  character ;
until,  at  length,  an  alphabet  of  letters  was  discovered,
capable  of  expressing  all  the  various  combinations  of
sound  employed  in  speech.  In  the  paintings  of  the
Mexicans  we,  accordingly,  perceive,  that  this  progress
was  begun  among  them.  Upon  an  attentive  inspec-
tion of  the  plates,  which  I  have  mentioned,  we  may
observe  some  approach  to  the  plain  or  simple  hiero-
glyphic, where  some  principal  part  or  circumstance  in
the  subject  is  made  to  stand  for  the  whole.  In  the
annals  of  their  kings,  published  by  Purchas,  the  towns
conquered  by  each  are  uniformly  represented  in  the
same  manner  by  a  rude  delineation  of  a  house  ;  but  in
order  to  point  out  the  particular  towns  which  submit-
ted to  their  victorious  arms,  peculiar  emblems,  some-
times natural  objects,  and  sometimes  artificial  figures,
are  employed.  In  the  tribute-roll  published  by  the
archbishop  of  Toledo,  the  house  which  was  properly
the  picture  of  the  toAvn,  is  omitted,  and  the  emblem
alone  is  employed  to  represent  it.  The  Mexicans  seem
even  to  have  made  some  advances  beyond  this,  to-
wards the  use  of  the  more  figurative  and  fanciful  hiero-
glyphic. In  order  to  describe  a  monarch,  who  had
enlarged  his  dominions  by  force  of  arms,  they  painted
a  target  ornamented  with  darts,  and  placed  it  between
him  and  those towns  which  he  subdued. But it  is

BOOK VII.  23

only  in  one  instance,  the  notation  of  numbers,  that  we
discern  any  attempt  to  exhibit  ideas  which  had  no  cor-
poreal form.  The  Mexican  painters  had  invented  ar-
tificial marks,  or  sigiis  of  convention^  for  this  purpose.
By  means  of  these,  they  computed  the  years  of  their
kings'  reigns,  as  well  as  the  amount  of  tribute  to  be
paid  into  the  royal  treasury.  The  figure  of  a  circle
represented  unit,  and  in  small  numbers,  the  computa-
tion was  made  by  repeating  it.  Larger  numbers  were
expressed  by  a  peculiar  mark,  and  they  had  such  as
denoted  all  integral  numbers,  from  twenty  to  eight
thousand.  The  short  duration  of  their  empire  pre-
vented the  Mexicans  from  advancing  farther  in  that
long  course  which  conducts  men  from  the  labour  of
delineating  real  objects,  to  the  simplicity  and  ease  of
alphabetic  writing.  Their  records,  notwithstanding
some  dawn  of  such  ideas  as  might  have  led  to  a  more
perfect  style,  can  be  considered  as  little  more  than  a
species  of  picture-writing,  so  far  improved  as  to  mark
their  superiority  over  the  savage  tribes  of  America ;
but  still  so  defective,  as  to  prove  that  they  had  not  pro-
ceeded far  beyond  the  first  stage  in  that  progres  which
must  be  completed  before  any  people  can  be  ranked
among  polished  nations.^
„,  . , Their  mode  of  computing:  time  may  be  consi-

Tneirmode  r  O  J

of  coraput-  dered  as  a  more  decisive  evidence  of  their  pro-
gress in  improvement.  They  divided  their  year
into  eighteen  months,  each  consisting  "of  twenty  days,
amounting  in  all  to  three  hundred  and  sixty.  But  as
they  observed  that  the  course  of  the  sun  was  not  com-
pleted in  that  time,  they  added  five  days  to  the  year.
These,  which  were  properly  intercalary  days,  they
tenned  supejmumei^aty  ov  waste;  and  as  they  did  not
belong  to  any  month,  no  work  was  done,  and  no  sacred
rite  performed  on  them ;  they  were  devoted  wholly  to
festivity  and  pastime.'' This  near  approach  to  philo-

e  See  Note  VII.  b  Acosta,  lib.  vi.  c.  2.

24  AMERICA.

sophical  accuracy  is  a  remarkable  proof  that  the  Mex-
icans had  bestowed  some  attention  upon  inquiries  and
speculations,  to  which  men  in  a  very  rude  state  never
turn  their  thoughts.*

Facts  indi-  Such  are  the  most  striking  particulars  in  the
smiii^^  manners  and  policy  of  the  Mexicans,  which
gress  in  ci-  exhibit  them  to  view  as  a  people  considerably
refined.  But  from  other  circumstances,  one  is
apt  to  suspect  that  their  character,  and  many  of  their
institutions,  did  not  differ  greatly  from  those  of  the
other  inhabitants  of  America.

Their  wars  Like  the  rudc  tribes  around  them,  the  Mexi-
contiiiuai ^^j^g  were  incessantly  eng^a^ed in  war, and

and  feroci-  j  o o  '

ous.  the  motives  which  prompted  them  to  hostility

seem  to  have  been  the  same.  They  fought,  in  order
to  gratify  their  vengeance,  by  shedding  the  blood  of
their  enemies.  In  battle  they  were  chiefly  intent  on
taking  prisoners,  and  it  was  by  the  number  of  these
that  they  estimated  the  glory  of  victory.  No  captive
was  ever  ransomed  or  spared.  All  were  sacrificed
without  mercy,  and  their  flesh  devoured  with  the  same
barbarous  joy  as  among  the  fiercest  savages.  On  some
occasions  it  arose  to  even  wilder  excesses.  Their
principal  warriors  covered  themselves  with  the  skins  of
the  unhappy  victims,  and  danced  about  the  streets,
boasting  of  their  own  valour,  and  exulting  over  their
enemies.'  Even  in  their  civil  institutions  we  discover
traces  of  that  barbarous  disposition  which  their  system
of  war  inspired.  The  four  chief  counsellors  of  the
empire  were  distinguished  by  titles,  which  could  have
been  assumed  only  by  a  people  who  delighted  in
blood. *"  This  ferocity  of  character  prevailed  among  all
the  nations  of  New  Spain. The  Tlascalans,  the  people

*  Tlie  Mexican  mode  of  computing  time,  and  every  other  particular  relating  to
their  chronology,  have  been  considerably  elucidated  by  M.  Clavigero,  Vol.  I.  288. ;
Vol.  II.  225,  &.C.  The  observations  and  theories  of  the  Mexicans  concerning  those
subjects  discover  a  greater  progress  in  speculative  science  than  we  find  among  any
people  in  the  New  World.

'  Hcrrcra,  dec.  3.  lib.  ii.  c.  1  j. Gcun.  Cron.  c.  217. •»  See  Note  VIII.

BOOK  VII.  25

of  Mechoacan,  and  other  states  at  enmity  with  the
Mexicans,  delighted  equally  in  war,  and  treated  their
prisoners  with  the  same  cruelty. In  proportion  as  man-
kind combine  in  social  union,  and  live  under  the  in-
fluence of  equal  laws  and  regular  policy,  their  manners
soften,  sentiments  of  humanity  arise,  and  the  rights  of
the  species  come  to  be  understood. The  fierceness  of
war  abates,  and  even  while  engaged  in  hostility,  men
remember  what  they  owe  one  to  another. The  savage
fights  to  destroy,  the  citizen  to  conquer. The  former
neither  pities  nor  spares,  the  latter  has  acquired  sensi-
bility which  tempers  his  rage. To  this  sensibility  the
Mexicans  seem  to  have  been  perfect  strangers,  and
amongf  them  war  was  carried  on  with  so  much  of  its
original  barbarity,  that  we  cannot  but  suspect  their  de-
gree of  civilization  to  have  been  very  imperfect.
Their  fune- Their fuucral rites were  not less  bloody
rai  rites, ^.j^^j^  those  of  the  most  savage  tribes. On  the
death  of  any  distinguished  personage,  especially  of  the
emperor, a certain  number  of  his attendants were
chosen  to  accompany  him  to  the  other  world ;  and
those  unfortunate  victims  were  put  to  death  without
mercy,  and  buried  in  the  same  tomb.'
Their  agri- Though  their  agriculturc  was  more  extensive
perfect  ™ than  that of  the roving  tribes who  trusted
chiefly  to  their  bow  for  food,  it  seems  not  to  have  sup-
plied them  with  such  subsistence  as  men  require  when
engaged  in  efforts  of  active  industry. The  Spaniards
appear  not  to  have  been  struck  with  any  superiority  of
the Mexicans over  the other  people of  America  in
bodily  vigour. Both,  according  to  their  observation,
were  of  such  a  feeble  frame  as  to  be  unable  to  endure
fatigue,  and  the  strength  of  one Spaniard  exceeded
that  of  several  Indians. This  they  imputed  to  their
scanty  diet,  on  poor  fare,  sufficient  to  preserve  life,  but
not  to  give  firmness  to  their  constitution. Such  a  re-

1  Herrcra,  dec.  3.  lib.  ii.  c.  18. Gom.  Cron.  c.  202.

26  AMERICA.

mark  could  hardly  have  been  made  with  respect  to  any
people  furnished  plentifully  with  the  necessaries  of
life.  The  difficulty  which  Cortes  found  in  procuring
subsistence  for  his  small  body  of  soldiers,  who  were
often  constrained  to  live  on  the  spontaneous  produc-
tions of  the  earth,  seems  to  confirm  the  remark  of  the
Spanish  writers,  and  gives  no  high  idea  of  the  state  of
cultivation  in  the  Mexican  empire.""
A  fariiier  A  practicc  that  was  universal  in  New  Spain
tliTs!  ^  appears  to  favour  this  opinion.  The  Mexican
women  gave  suck  to  their  children  for  several  years,
and  during  that  time  they  did  not  cohabit  with  their
husbands."  This  precaution  against  a  burdensome  in-
crease of  progeny,  though  necessary,  as  I  have  already
observed,  among  savages,  who  from  the  hardships  of
their  condition,  and  the  precariousness  of  their  sub-
sistence, find  it  impossible  to  rear  a  numerous  family,
can  hardly  be  supposed  to  have  continued  among  a
people  who  lived  at  ease  and  in  abundance.
Doubts  '^^^  ^^^^  extent  of  the  Mexican  empire,  which
concerning  }j as  bccu  cousidcrcd, and  with  iustice,  as  the

the  extent  , .  '  .

of  the  em-  most  dccisivc  proof  of  a  considerable  progress
^"^^'  in  regular  government  and  police,  is  one  of
those  facts  in  the  history  of  the  New  World  which
seems  to  have  been  admitted  without  due  examination
or  sufficient  evidence.  The  Spanish  historians,  in  order
to  magnify  the  valour  of  their  countrymen,  are  accus-
tomed to  represent  the  dominion  of  Montezuma  as
stretching  over  all  the  provinces  of  New  Spain  from
the  Northern  to  the  Southern  ocean.  But  a  great
part  of  the  mountainous  country  was  possessed  by  the
Otomies,  a  fierce  uncivilized  people,  who  seem  to  have
been  the  residue  of  the  original  inhabitants.  The  pro-
vinces towards  the  north  and  west  of  Mexico  were  oc-
cupied by  the  Chichemecas,  and  other  tribes  of  hunters.

"'  Relat.  ap.  Ramus,  iii.  306.  A.  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  17.  dec.  2.  lib.  vi.  c.  \6-
n  Gem.  Cron.  c.  208. Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  16.

BOOK  VII.  27

None  of  tliese  recognised  the  Mexican  monarch  as  their
superior.  Even  in  the  interior  and  more  level  coun-
try, there  were  several  cities  and  provinces  which  had
never  submitted  to  the  Mexican  yoke.  Tlascala,  though
only  twenty-one  leagues  from  the  capital  of  the  em-
pire, was  an  independent  and  hostile  republic.  Cholula,
though  still  nearer,  had  been  subjected  only  a  short
time  before  the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards.  Tepeaca,  at
the  distance  of  thirty  leagues  from  Mexico,  seems  to
have  been  a  separate  state,  governed  by  its  own  laws."
Mechoacan,  the  frontier  of  which  extended  within
forty  leagues  of  Mexico,  was  a  powerful  kingdom,  re-
markable for  its  implacable  enmity  to  the  Mexican
name.''  By  these  hostile  powers  the  Mexican  empire
Avas  circumscribed  on  every  quarter,  and  the  high  ideas
which  we  are  apt  to  form  of  it  from  the  description  of  the
Spanish  historians,  should  be  considerably  moderated.
Little  in^  ^^  conscqucncc  of  this  independence  of  se-
tercourse ycral  states  in  New  Spain  upon  the  Mexican

among  its  .  *■  ^

several empire,  there  was  not  any  considerable  inter-
provinces.  1 .  •.  •  •  -r\ '
course  between  its  various  provinces, hven  m

the  interior  country  not  far  distant  from  the  capital,
there  seem  to  have  been  no  roads  to  facilitate  the  com-
munication of  one  district  with  another  ;  and  when  the
Spaniards  first  attempted  to  penetrate  into  its  several
provinces,  they  had  to  open  their  way  through  forests
and  marshes.''  Cortes,  in  his  adventurous  march
from  Mexico  to  Honduras  in  1525,  met  with  obstruc-
tions, and  endured  hardships  little  inferior  to  those  with
which  he  must  have  struggled  in  the  most  uncivilized
regions  of  America.  In  some  places  he  could  hardly
force  a  passage  through  impervious  woods,  and  plains
overflowed  with  water.  In  others  he  found  so  little
cultivation,  that  his  troops  were  frequently  in  danger  of
perishing  by  famine. Such  facts  correspond  ill  with

°  Hencra,  dec.  3.  lib.  x.  c.  13.  21,  B.  Diaz.  c.  130.
r  Herrcra,  dec.  3.  lib.  ii.  c.  10.  i  B.  Diaz.  c.  166.  176.

28  AMERICA.

the  pompous  description  which  the  Spanish  writers
gave  of  Mexican  police  and  industry,  and  convey  an
idea  of  a  country  nearly  similar  to  that  possessed  by  the
Indian  tribes  in  North  America.  Here  and  there  a
treading  or  a  war-path,  as  they  are  called  in  North
America,  led  from  one  settlement  to  another,"^  but  ge-
nerally there  appeared  no  sign  of  any  established  com-
munication, few  marks  of  industry,  and  fewer  monu-
ments of  art.

A  proof  of  this  imperfection  in  their  corn-
Farther  r  \  .,..,.
proof  of mercial  intercourse  no  less  strikmg  is  their  want

of  money,  or  some  universal  standard  by  which
to  estimate  the  value  of  commodities.  The  discovery
of  this  is  among  the  steps  of  greatest  consequence  in
the  progress  of  nations.  Until  it  has  been  made,  all
their  transactions  must  be  so  awkward,  so  operose,  and
so  limited,  that  we  may  boldly  pronounce  that  they
have  advanced  but  a  little  way  in  their  career.  The  in-
vention of  such  a  commercial  standard  is  of  such  high
antiquity  in  our  hemisphere,  and  rises  so  far  beyond
the  era  of  authentic  history,  as  to  appear  almost  coeval
with  the  existence  of  society.  The  precious  metals
seem  to  have  been  early  employed  for  this  purpose,  and
from  their  permanent  value,  their  divisibility,  and  from
many  other  qualities,  they  are  better  adapted  to  serve
as  a  common  standard  than  any  other  substance  of  which
nature  has  given  us  the  command.  But  in  the  New
World,  where  these  metals  abound  most,  this  use  of
them  was  not  known.  The  exigencies  of  rude  tribes,
or  of  monarchies  imperfectly  civilized,  did  not  call  for
it.  All  their  commercial  intercourse  was  carried  on  by
barter,  and  their  ignorance  of  any  common  standard  by
which  to  facilitate  that  exchange  of  commodities  which
contributes  so  much  towards  the  comfort  of  life,  may  be
justly  mentioned  as  an  evidence  of  the  infant  state  of
their  policy. But  even  in  the  New  World  the  inconve-

'  Herrcra,  dec.  3.  lib.  vii.  c.  8.

BOOK  Vlf.  29

nience  of  wanting-  some  general  instrument  of  commerce
began  to  be  felt,  and  some  efforts  were  making  towards
supplying  that  defect.  The  Mexicans,  among  whom
the  number  and  greatness  of  their  cities  gave  rise  to  a
more  extended  commerce  than  in  any  other  part  of
America,  had  begun  to  employ  a  common  standard  of
value,  which  rendered  smaller  transactions  much  more
easy.  As  chocolate  was  the  favourite  drink  of  persons
in  every  rank  of  life,  the  nuts  or  almonds  of  cacao,  of
which  it  is  composed,  were  of  such  universal  consump-
tion, that,  in  their  stated  markets,  these  were  willingly
received  in  return  for  commodities  of  small  price.  Thus
they  came  to  be  considered  as  the  instrument  of  com-
merce, and  the  value  of  what  one  wished  to  dispose  of
was  estimated  by  the  number  of  nuts  of  the  cacao,
which  he  might  expect  in  exchange  for  it.  This  seems
to  be  the  utmost  length  which  the  Americans  had  ad-
vanced towards  the  discovery  of  any  expedient  for  sup-
plying the  use  of  money.  And  if  the  want  of  it  is  to
be  held,  on  one  hand,  as  a  proof  of  their  barbarity,  this
expedient  for  supplying  that  want  should  be  admitted,
on  the  other,  as  an  evidence  no  less  satisfying,  of  some
progress  which  the  Mexicans  had  made  in  refinement
and  civilization,  beyond  the  savage  tribes  around  them.
Doubts  In  such  a  rude  state  were  many  of  the  Mexi-

fng'thT  can  provinces  when  first  visited  by  their  con-
state of  querors.  Even  their  cities,  extensive  and  po-
cities,  pulous  as  they  were,  seem  more  fit  to  be  the
habitation  of  men  just  emerging  from  barbarity,  than
the  residence  of  a  polished  people.  The  description
of  Tlascala  nearly  resembles  that  of  an  Indian  village.
A  number  of  low  straggling  huts,  scattered  about  ir-
regularly, according  to  the  caprice  of  each  proprietor,
built  with  turf  and  stone  and  thatched  with  reeds,
without  any  light  but  what  they  received  by  a  door,  so
low  that  it  could  not  be  entered  upright." In  Mexico,

»  Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  vi.  c.  12.

30  AMERICA.

though,  from  the  peculiarity  of  its  situation,  the  dispo-
sition of  the  houses  was  more  orderly,  the  structure  of
the  greater  part  was  equally  mean.  Nor  does  the  fabric
of  their  temples,  and  other  public  edifices,  ap-
pear to  have  been  such  as  entitled  them  to  the
high  praise  bestowed  upon  them  by  many  Spanish  au-
thors.  As  far  as  one  can  gather  from  their  obscure  and
inaccurate  descriptions,  the  great  temple  of  Mexico,  the
most  famous  in  New  Spain,  which  has  been  represented
as  a  magnificent  building,  raised  to  such  a  height,  that
the  ascent  to  it  was  by  a  flight  of  a  hundred  and  four-
teen steps,  was  a  solid  mass  of  earth  of  a  square  form,
faced  partly  with  stone.  Its  base  on  each  side  extended
ninety  feet,  and  decreased  gradually  as  it  advanced  in
height,  it  terminated  in  a  quadrangle  of  about  thirty
feet,  where  were  placed  a  shrine  of  the  deity,  and  two
altars  on  which  the  victims  were  sacrificed.* All  the
other  celebrated  temples  of  New  Spain  exactly  resem-
bled that  of  Mexico." Such  structures  convey  no  high
idea  of  progress  in  art  and  ingenuity ;  and  one  can
hardly  conceive  that  a  form  more  rude  and  simple  could
have  occurred  to  a  nation  in  its  first  efforts  towards
erecting  any  great  work.

And  other Greater  skill  and  ingenuity  were  displayed,
public if  we  may  believe  the  Spanish  historians,  in  the

buildings.  •;  i  • i

houses  of  the  emperor,  and  m  those  of  the  prin-
cipal nobility.  There,  some  elegance  of  design  was
visible,  and  a  commodious  arrangement  of  the  apart-
ments was  attended  to.  But  if  buildings  corresponding
to  such  descriptions  had  ever  existed  in  the  Mexican
cities,  it  is  probable  that  some  remains  of  them  would
still  be  visible.  From  the  manner  in  which  Cortes
conducted  the  siege  of  Mexico,  we  can  indeed  easily
account  for  the  total  destruction  of  whatever  had  any
appearance  of  splendour  in  that  capital.  But  as  only
two  centuries  and  a  half  have  elapsed  since  the  conquest

«  Herrera,  dec.  8.  Kb.  vii.  c.  17.  "  See  Note  IX.

BOOK  VII.  31

of  New  Spain,  it  seems  altogether  incredible  that  in  a
period  so  short,  every  vestige  of  this  boasted  elegance
and  grandeur  should  have  disappeared  ;  and  that  in  the
other  cities,  particularly  in  those  which  did  not  suffer
by  the  destructive  hand  of  the  conquerors,  there  are  not
any  ruins  which  can  be  considered  as  monuments  of
their  ancient  magnificence.

Even  in  a  village  of  the  rudest  Indians,  there  are
buildings  of  greater  extent  and  elevation  than  common
dwelling-houses.  Such  as  are  destined  for  holding
the  council  of  the  tribe,  and  in  which  all  assemble
on  occasions  of  public  festivity,  may  be  called  stately
edifices,  when  compared  with  the  rest.  As  among
the  Mexicans  the  distinction  of  ranks  was  established,
and  property  was  unequally  divided,  the  number  of
distinguished  structures  in  their  towns  would  of  course
be  greater  than  in  other  parts  of  America.  But  these
seem  not  to  have  been  either  so  solid  or  magnificent  as
to  merit  the  pompous  epithets  which  some  Spanish
authors  employ  in  describing  them.  It  is  probable,
that,  though  more  ornamented,  and  built  on  a  larger
scale,  they  were  erected  with  the  same  slight  materials
which  the  Indians  employed  in  their  common  build-
ings,'' and  time,  in  a  space  much  less  than  two  hundred
and  fifty  years,  may  have  swept  away  all  remains  of
them.^

From  this  enumeration  of  facts,  it  seems,  upon  the
whole,  to  be  evident,  that  the  state  of  society  in  Mexico
was  considerably  advanced  beyond  that  of  the  savage
tribes  which  we  have  delineated.  But  it  is  no  less
manifest,  that  with  respect  to  many  particulars,  the
Spanish  accounts  of  their  progress  appear  to  be  highly
embellished.  There  is  not  a  more  frequent  or  a  more
fertile  source  of  deception  in  describing  the  manners
and  arts  of  savage  nations,  or  of  such  as  are  imperfectly
civilized,  than  that  of  applying  to  them  the  names  and

=<  See  Note  X-  y  See  Note  XI.

32  AMERICA.

phrases  appropriated  to  the  institutions  and  refinements
of  polished  life.  When  the  leader  of  a  small  tribe,  or
the  head  of  a  rude  community,  is  dignified  with  the
name  of  king  or  emperor,  the  place  of  his  residence  can
receive  no  other  name  but  that  of  his  palace ;  and
whatever  his  attendants  may  be,  they  must  be  called
his  court.  Under  such  appellations  they  acquire,  in
our  estimation,  an  importance  and  dignity  which  does
not  belong  to  them.  The  illusion  spreads,  and  giving
a  false  colour  to  every  part  of  the  narrative,  the  ima-
gination is  so  much  carried  away  with  the  resemblance,
that  it  becomes  difficult  to  discern  objects  as  they  really
are.  The  Spaniards,  when  they  first  touched  on  the
Mexican  coast,  were  so  much  struck  with  the  appear-
ance of  attainments  in  policy  and  in  the  arts  of  life,  far
superior  to  those  of  the  rude  tribes  with  which  they
were  hitherto  acquainted,  that  they  fancied  they  had  at
length  discovered  a  civilized  people  in  the  New  World.
This  comparison  between  the  people  of  Mexico  and
their  uncultivated  neighbours,  they  appear  to  have  kept
constantly  in  view,  and  observing  with  admiration  many
things  which  marked  the  pre-eminence  of  the  former,
they  employ  in  describing  their  imperfect  policy  and
infant  arts,  such  terms  as  are  applicable  to  the  institu-
tions of  men  far  beyond  them  in  improvement.  Both
these  circumstances  concur  in  detracting  from  the  cre-
dit due  to  the  descriptions  of  Mexican  manners  by  the
early  Spanish  writers.  By  drawing  a  parallel  between
them  and  those  of  people  so  much  less  civilized,  they
raised  their  own  ideas  too  high.  By  their  mode  of
describing  them,  they  conveyed  ideas  to  others  no  less
exalted  above  truth.  Later  writers  have  adopted  the
style  of  the  original  historians,  and  improved  upon  it.
The  colours  with  which  De  Solis  delineates  the  charac-
ter and  describes  the  actions  of  Montezuma,  the  splen-
dour of  his  court,  the  laws  and  policy  of  his  empire,  are
the  same  that  he  must  have  employed  in  exhibiting  to

BOOK  VII.  33

view  the  monarch  and  institutions  of  a  highly  polished
people.

But  though  we  may  admit,  that  the  warm  imao-ina-
tion  of  the  Spanish  writers  has  added  some  embellish-
ment to  their  descriptions,  this  will  not  justify  the  de-
cisive and  peremptory  tone  with  which  several  authors
pronounce  all  their  accounts  of  the  Mexican  power,
policy,  and  laws,  to  be  the  jfictions  of  men  who  wished
to  deceive,  or  who  delighted  in  the  marvellous. There
are  few  historical  facts  that  can  be  ascertained  by  evi-
dence more  unexceptionable  than  may  be  produced  in
support  of  the  material  articles,  in  the  description  of
the  Mexican  constitution  and  manners. Eye-witnesses
relate  what  they  beheld. Men  who  had  resided  among
the  Mexicans,  both  before  and  after  the  conquest,  de-
scribe institutions  and  customs  which  were  familiar  to
them. Persons  of  professions  so  different  that  objects
must  have  presented  themselves  to  their  view  under
every  various aspect ; soldiers,  priests,  and  lawyers,
all  concur  in  their  testimony. Had  Cortes  ventured  to
impose  upon  his  sovereign,  by  exhibiting  to  him  a  pic-
ture of  imaginary  manners,  there  wanted  not  enemies
and  rivals  who  were  qualified  to  detect  his  deceit,  and
who  would  have  rejoiced  in  exposing  it. But  accord-
ing to  the  just  remark  of  an  author,  whose  ingenuity
has  illustrated,  and  whose  eloquence  has  adorned,  the
history  of  America,^  this  supposition  is  in  itself  as  im-
probable as  the  attempt  would  have  been  audacious.
Who  among  the  destroyers  of  this  great  empire  was  so
enlightened  by  science,  or  so  attentive  to  the  progress
and  operations  of  men  in  social  life,  as  to  frame  a  ficti-
tious system  of  policy  so  well combined  and  so  con-
sistent, as  that  which  they  delineate,  in  their  accounts
of  the  Mexican  government  ? Where  could  they  have
borrowed  the  idea  of  many  institutions  in  legislation
and  police,  to  which,  at  that  period,  there  was  nothing

y  M.  I'Abb^  Raynal  Hist,  philos.  et  polit.  &c.  iii.  127.
VOL. VIII.  D

34  AMERICA.

parallel  in  the  nations  with  which  they  were  acquainted  ?■
There  was  not,  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury, a  regular  establishment  of  posts  for  conveying  in-
telligence to  the  sovereign  of  any  kingdom  in  Europe.
The  same  observation  will  apply  to  what  the  Spaniards
relate,  with  respect  to  the  structure  of  the  city  of
Mexico,  the  regulations  concerning  its  police,  and
various  laws  established  for  the  administration  of  jus-
tice, or  securing  the  happiness  of  the  community.
Whoever  is  accustomed  to  contemplate  the  progress  of
nations,  will  often,  at  very  early  stages  of  it,  discover
a  premature  and  unexpected  dawn  of  those  ideas,  which
gave  rise  to  institutions  that  are  the  pride  and  ornament
of  its  most  advanced  period.  Even  in  a  state  as  im-
perfectly polished  as  the  Mexican  empire,  the  happy
genius  of  some  sagacious  observer,  excited  or  aided  by
circumstances  unknown  to  us,  may  have  introduced
institutions  which  are  seldom  found  but  in  societies
highly  refined.  But  it  is  almost  impossible  that  the
illiterate  conquerors  of  the  New  World  should  have
formed  in  any  one  instance  a  conception  of  customs
and  laws  beyond  the  standard  of  improvement  in  their
own  age  and  country.  Or  if  Cortes  had  been  capable
of  this,  what  inducement  had  those  by  whom  he  was
superseded  to  continue  the  deception?  Why  should
Corita,  or  Motolinea,  or  Acosta,  have  amused  their
sovereign  or  their  fellow-citizens  with  a  tale  purely
fabulous  ?

In  one  particular,  however,  the  guides  whom
of  the  we  must  follow  have  represented  the  Mexicans
Mexicans.  ^^  ^^  morc  barbarous,  perhaps,  than  they  really
were.  Their  religious  tenets,  and  the  rites  of  their
worship,  are  described  by  them  as  wild  and  cruel  in  an
extreme  degree.  Religion,  which  occupies  no  con-
siderable place  in  the  thoughts  of  a  savage,  whose  con-
ceptions of  any  superior  power  are  obscure,  and  his
sacred  rites  few  as  well  as  simple,  was  formed,  among

BOOK VII.  35

the  Mexicans,  into  a  regular  system,  with  its  complete
train  of  priests,  temples,  victims,  and  festivals. This,
of  itself,  is  a  clear  proof  that  the  state  of  the  Mexicans
was  very  different  from  that  of  the  ruder  American
tribes. But  from  the  extravagance  of  their  religious
notions,  or  the  barbarity  of  their  rites,  no  conclusion
can  be  drawn  with  certainty  concerning  the  degree  of
their  civilization. For  nations,  long  after  their  ideas
begin  to  enlarge,  and  their  manners  to  refine,  adhere
to  systems  of  superstition  founded  on  the  crude  con-
ceptions of  early  ages. From  the  genius  of  the  Mex-
ican religion  we  may,  however,  form  a  most  just  con-
clusion with  respect  to  its  influence  upon  the  character
of  the  people. The  aspect  of  superstition  in  Mexico
was  gloomy  and  atrocious. Its  divinities  were  clothed
with  terror,  and  delighted  in  vengeance. They  were
exhibited  to  the  people  under  detestable  forms,  which
created  horror. The  figures  of  serpents,  of  tigers,  and
of  other  destructive  animals,  decorated  their  temples.
Fear  was  the  only  principle  that  inspired  their  votaries.
Fasts,  mortifications,  and  penances,  all  rigid,  and  many
of  them  excruciating  to  an  extreme  degree,  were  the
means  employed  to  appease  the  wrath  of  their  gods,
and  the  Mexicans  never  approached  their  altars  with-
out sprinkling  them  with  blood  drawn  from  their  own
bodies. But,  of  all  offerings,  human  sacrifices  were
deemed  the  most  acceptable. This  religious  belief,
mingling  with  the  implacable  spirit  of  vengeance,  and
adding  new  force  to  it,  every  captive  taken  in  war  was
brought  to  the  temple,  was  devoted  as  a  victim  to  tlie
deity,  and  sacrificed  with  rites  no  less  solemn  than
cruel.^ The  heart  and  head  were  the  portion  conse-
crated to  the  gods  ;  the  warrior,  by  whose  prowess  the
prisoner  had  been  seized,  carried  oflf  the  body  to  feast
upon  it  with  his  friends. Under  the  impression  of  ideas

*  Cort.  Relat.  ap.  Rarans,  iii.  240,  &c.  B.  Diaz,  c.  83. Acosta,  lib.  v.  c.  13,  &c.
Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  ii.  c.  15,  &c. Gomara  Cron.  c.  80,  &c. See  Note  XII.

D 2

36  AMERICA,

so  dreary  and  terrible,  and  accustomed  daily  to  scenes
of  bloodshed  rendered  awful  by  religion,  the  heart  of
man  must  harden  and  be  steeled  to  every  sentiment  of
humanity.  The  spirit  of  the  Mexicans  was  accordingly
unfeeling,  and  the  genius  of  their  religion  so  far  coun-
terbalanced the  influence  of  policy  and  arts,  that  not-
withstanding their  progress  in  both,  their  manners,  in-
stead of  softening,  became  more  fierce.  To  what  cir-
cumstances it  was  owing  that  superstition  assumed  such
a  dreadful  form  among  the  Mexicans,  we  have  not  suf-
ficient knowledge  of  their  history  to  determine.  But
its  influence  is  visible,  and  produced  an  eftect  that  is
singular  in  the  history  of  the  human  species.  The
manners  of  the  people  in  the  New  World  who  had  made
the  greatest  progress  in  the  arts  of  policy,  were,  in
several  respects,  the  most  ferocious,  and  the  barbarity
of  some  of  their  customs  exceeded  even  those  of  the
savage  state.

Pretensions ^hc  empire  of  Pcru  boasts  of  a  higher  anti-
of  Peru  to  quity  than  that  of  Mexico. According^  to  the

;i  high  an- ^ . .  ^,  n i ci  • i

tiquity  un-  traditionary  accounts  collected  by  the  Spaniards,
it  had  subsisted  four  hundred  years,  under
twelve  successive  monarchs.  But  the  knowledo^e  of
their  ancient  story,  which  the  Peruvians  could  commu-
nicate to  their  conquerors,  must  have  been  both  im-
perfect and  uncertain.*  Like  the  other  American  na-
tions, they  were  totally  unacquainted  with  the  art  of
writing,  and  destitute  of  the  only  means  by  which  the
memory  of  past  transactions  can  be  preserved  with  any
degree  of  accuracy.  Even  among  people  to  whom  the
use  of  letters  is  known,  the  era  where  the  authenticity
of  history  commences  is  much  posterior  to  the  intro-
duction of  writing.  That  noble  invention  continued,
every  where,  to  be  long  subservient  to  the  common
business  and  wants  of  life,  before  it  was  employed  in
recording  events,  with  a  view  of  conveying  information

^  See  Ncie  XIII.

BOOK  VII.  31

from  one  age  to  another.  But  in  no  country  did  ever
tradition  alone  carry  down  historical  knowledge,  in  any
full  continued  stream,  during  a  period  of  half  the  length
that  the  monarchy  of  Peru  is  said  to  have  subsisted.
Defects  in  The  Quipos,  OT  kuots  ou  cords  of  different
cords  b  colours,  whicli  are  celebrated  by  authors  fond
Quipos.  Qf  the  marvellous,  as  if  they  had  been  regular
annals  of  the  empire,  imperfectly  supplied  the  place  of
writing.  According  to  the  obscure  description  of  them
by  Acosta,""  which  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  has  adopted
with  little  variation  and  no  improvement,  the  quipos
seem  to  have  been  a  device  for  rendering  calculation
more  expeditious  and  accurate.  By  the  various  colours
different  objects  were  denoted,  and  by  each  knot  a  dis-
tinct number.  Thus  an  account  was  taken,  and  a  kind
of  register  kept  of  the  inhabitants  in  each  province,  or
of  the  several  productions  collected  there  for  public
use.  But  as  by  these  knots,  however,  varied  or  com-
bined, no  moral  or  abstract  idea,  no  operation  or  quality
of  the  mind  could  be  represented,  they  contributed
little  towards  preserving  the  memory  of  ancient  events
and  institutions.  By  the  Mexican  paintings  and  sym-
bols, rude  as  they  were,  more  knowledge  of  remote
transactions  seems  to  have  been  conveyed  than  the
Peruvians  could  derive  from  their  boasted  quipos.  Had
the  latter  been  even  of  more  extensive  use,  and  better
adapted  to  supply  the  place  of  written  records,  they
perished  so  generally,  together  with  other  monuments
of  Peruvian  ingenuity,  in  the  wreck  occasioned  by  the
Spanish  conquest,  and  the  civil  wars  subsequent  to  it,
that  no  accession  of  light  or  knowledge  comes  from
them.  All  the  zeal  of  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  for  the
honour  of  that  race  of  monarchs  from  whom  he  de-
scended, all  the  industry  of  his  researches,  and  the
superior  advantages  with  which  he  carried  them  on,
opened  no  source  of  information  unknown  to  the  Spanish

^  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  8.

38  AMERICA.

authors  who  wrote  before  him.  In  his  Royal  Com-
mentaries, he  confines  himself  to  illustrate  what  they
had  related  concerning  the  antiquities  and  institutions
of  Peru ;"  and  his  illustrations,  like  their  accounts,  are
derived  entirely  from  the  traditionary  tales  current
among  his  countrymen.

Very  little  credit  then  is  due  to  the  minute  details
which  have  been  given  of  the  exploits,  the  battles,  the
conquests,  and  private  character  of  the  early  Peruvian
monarchs.  We  can  rest  upon  nothing  in  their  story,
as  authentic,  but  a  few  facts  so  interwoven  in  the  sys-
tem of  their  religion  and  policy,  as  preserved  the  me-
mory of  them  from  being  lost ;  and  upon  the  descrip-
tion of  such  customs  and  institutions  as  continued  in
force  at  the  time  of  the  conquest,  and  fell  under  the
immediate  observation  of  the  Spaniards.  By  attend-
ing carefully  to  these,  and  endeavouring  to  separate
them  from  what  appears  to  be  fabulous,  or  of  doubtful
authority,  I  have  laboured  to  form  an  idea  of  the  Peru-
vian government  and  manners.
^ .  . , The  people  of  Peru,  as  I  have  already  ob-

Ongin  of  1  H 1 1

their  civil scrvcd, had  not  advanced  beyond  the  rudest
poicy. fonxi  of  savage  life,  when  Manco  Capac,  and
his  consort  Mama  Ocollo,  appeared to  instruct  and
civilize  them. Who  these  extraordinary  personages
were,  whether  they  imported  their  system  of  legislation
and  knowledge  of  arts  from  some  country  more im-
proved, or,  if  natives  of  Peru,  how  they  acquired  ideas
so  far  superior  to  those  of  the  people  whom  they  ad-
dressed, are  circumstances  with  respect  to  which  the
Peruvian  tradition  conveys  no  information. Manco
Capac  and  his  consort,  taking  advantage  of  the  pro-
pensity in  the  Peruvians  to  superstition,  and  particu-
larly of  their  veneration  for  the  Sun,  pretended  to  be
children  of  that  glorious  luminary,  and  to  deliver  their
instructions  in  his  name,  and  by  authority  from  him.

'■  Lib.  i.  c.  10.  d  Boot  vi.

BOOK  VII.  39

The  multitude  listened  and  believed.  What  reforma-
tion in  policy  and  manners  the  Peruvi-ans  ascribe  to
those  founders  of  their  empire,  and  how,  from  the  pre-
cepts of  the  Inca  and  his  consort,  their  ancestors  gra-
dually acquired  some  knowledge  of  those  arts,  and
some  relish  for  that  industry,  which  render  subsist-
ence secure  and  life  comfortable,  hath  been  formerly
related.  Those  blessings  were  originally  confined
within  narrow  precincts  ;  but  in  process  of  time,  the
successors  of  Manco  Capac  extended  their  dominion
over  all  the  regions  that  stretch  to  the  west  of  the
Andes  from  Chili  to  Quito,  establishing  in  every  pro-
vince their  peculiar  policy  and  religious  institutions.
Founded  The  most  singular  and  striking  circumstance
m  religion.  [^  ^}^g  Peruviau  government,  is  the  influence
of  religion  upon  its  genius  and  laws.  Religious  ideas
make  such  a  feeble  impression  on  the  mind  of  a  savage,
that  their  effect  upon  his  sentiments  and  manners  is
hardly  perceptible.  Among  the  Mexicans,  religion,
reduced  into  a  regular  system,  and  holding  a  consider-
able place  in  their  public  institutions,  operated  with
conspicuous  efficacy  in  forming  the  peculiar  character
of  that  people.  But  in  Peru,  the  whole  system  of  civil
policy  was  founded  on  religion.  The  Inca  appeared  not
only  as  a  legislator,  but  as  the  messenger  of  Heaven.  His
precepts  were  received  not  merely  as  the  injunctions  of
a  superior,  but  as  the  mandates  of  the  Deity.  His  race
was  to  be  held  sacred  ;  and  in  order  to  preserve  it  dis-
tinct, without  being  polluted  by  any  mixture  of  less
noble  blood,  the  sons  of  Manco  Capac  married  their
own  sisters,  and  no  person  was  ever  admitted  to  the
throne  who  could  not  claim  it  by  such  a  pure  descent.
To  those  Child f^en  of  the  Sun,  for  that  was  the  appel-
lation bestowed  upon  all  the  offspring  of  the  first  Inca,
the  people  looked  up  with  the  reverence  due  to  beings
of  a  superior  order.  They  were  deemed  to  be  under
the  immediate  protection  of  the  deity  from  whom  they

40  AMERICA.

issued,  and  by  him  every  order  of  the  reigning  Inca
was  supposed  to  be  dictated.

Two  re-  From  those  ideas  two  consequences  resulted.

dFect^IJ  '^^^  authority  of  the  Inca  was  unlimited  and
this.  absolute',  in the most  extensive meaning  of

the  words.  Whenever  the  decrees  of  a  prince  are
considered  as  the  commands  of  the  Divinity,  it  is
not  only  an  act  of  rebellion,  but  of  impiety,  to  dispute
^, ^ or  oppose  his will. Obedience  becomes a

1  he  abso-  . .

lute  power  duty  of  rcUgion  ;  and  as  it  would  be  profane  to
'  control  a  monarch  who  is  believed  to  be  under
the  guidance  of  Heaven,  and  presumptuous  to  advise
him,  nothing  remains  but  to  submit  with  implicit  re-
spect. This  must  necessarily  be  the  effect  of  every
government  established  on  pretensions  of  intercourse
with  superior  powers.  Such  accordingly  was  the  blind
submission  which  the  Peruvians  yielded  to  their  sove-
reigns. The  persons  of  highest  rank  and  greatest
power  in  their  dominions  acknowledged  them  to  be  of
a  more  exalted  nature  ;  and  in  testimony  of  this,  when
admitted  into  their  presence,  they  entered  with  a  bur-
den upon  their  shoulders,  as  an  emblem  of  their  ser-
vitude, and  willingness  to  bear  whatever  the  Inca  was
pleased  to  impose.  Among  their  subjects,  force  was
not  requisite  to  second  their  commands.  Every  officer
intrusted  with  the  execution  of  them  was  revered,  and,
according  to  the  account^  of  an  intelligent  observer  of
Peruvian  manners,  he  might  proceed  alone  from  one
extremity  of  the  empire  to  another  without  meeting
opposition ;  for,  on  producing  a  fringe  from  the  royal
Borla,  an  ornament  of  the  head  peculiar  to  the  reigning
Inca,  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  the  people  were  at  his
disposal.

Another  consequence  of  establish ino:  e^overn-

All  crimes  .

punished  mcut  in  Pcru  on  the  foundation  of  religion  was,
capitally. ^|^^^  ^|j  ^^^jj^^gg  ^^j.^  punishcd  Capitally. They

'  Zarate,  lib.  i.  c.  1^.

BOOK VII.  41

were  not  considered  as  transgressions  of  human  laws,
but  as  insults  offered  to  the  Deity.  Each,  without  any
distinction  between  such  as  were  slight  and  such  as
were  atrocious,  called  for  vengeance,  and  could  be  ex-
piated only  by  the  blood  of  the  offender.  Consonantly
to  the  same  ideas,  punishment  followed  the  trespass
with  inevitable  certainty,  because  an  offence  against
Heaven  was  deemed  such  a  high  enormity  as  could  not
be  pardoned.*^  Among  a  people  of  corrupted  morals,
maxims  of  jurisprudence  so  severe  and  unrelenting,  by
rendering  men  ferocious  and  desperate,  would  be  more
apt  to  multiply  crimes  than  to  restrain  them.  But  the
Peruvians,  of  simple  manners  and  unsuspicious  faith,
were  held  in  such  awe  by  this  rigid  discipline,  that  the
number  of  offenders  was  extremely  small.  Veneration
for  monarchs,  enlightened  and  directed,  as  they  believed,
by  the  divinity  whom  they  adored,  prompted  them  to
their  duty ;  the  dread  of  punishment  which  they  were
taught  to  consider  as  unavoidable  vengeance  inflicted
by  offended  Heaven,  withheld  them  from  evil.

The  system  of  superstition  on  which  the
nius  of  their  Incas  ingrafted  their  pretensions  to  such  high
religion,  authority,  was  of  a  genius  very  different  from
that  established  among  the  Mexicans.  Manco  Capac
turned  the  veneration  of  his  followers  entirely  towards
natural  objects.  The  Sun,  as  the  great  source  of  light,
of  joy,  and  fertility  in  the  creation,  attracted  their  prin-
cipal homage.  The  Moon  and  Stars,  as  co-operating
with  him,  were  entitled  to  secondary  honours.  Wherever
the  propensity  in  the  human  mind  to  acknowledge  and
to  adore  some  superior  power  takes  this  direction,  and
is  employed  in  contemplating  the  order  and  beneficence
that  really  exist  in  nature,  the  spirit  o£  superstition  is
mild.  Wherever  imaginary  beings,  created  by  the
fancy  and  the  fears  of  men,  are  supposed  to  preside  in
nature,  and  become  the  objects  of  worship,  superstition

Vega,  lib.  ii.  c.  6.

42  AMERICA.

always  assumes  a  more  severe  and  atrocious  form.  Of
the  latter  we  have  an  example  among  the  Mexicans,
of  the  former  among  the  people  of  Peru.  The  Peru-
vians had  not,  indeed,  made  such  progress  in  obser-
vation or  inquiry,  as  to  have  attained  just  conceptions
of  the  Deity  ;  nor  was  there  in  their  language  any  pro-
per name  or  appellation  of  the  Supreme  Power,  which
intimated,  that  they  had  formed  any  idea  of  him  as
the  Creator  and  Governor  of  the  World. ^  But  by
directing  their  veneration  to  that  glorious  luminary,
which,  by  its  universal  and  vivifying  energy,  is  the
best  emblem  of  divine  beneficence,  the  rites  and  ob-
servances which  they  deemed  acceptable  to  him  were
innocent  and  humane.  They  offered  to  the  sun  a  part
of  those  productions  which  his  genial  warmth  had
called  forth  from  the  bosom  of  the  earth,  and  reared  to
maturity.  They  sacrificed,  as  an  oblation  of  gratitude,
some  of  the  animals  which  were  indebted  to  his  in-
fluence for  nourishment.  They  presented  to  him
choice  specimens  of  those  works  of  ingenuity  which
his  light  had  guided  the  hand  of  man  in  forming.  But
the  Incas  never  stained  his  altars  with  human  blood,
nor  could  they  conceive  that  their  beneficent  father,
the  Sun,  would  be  delighted  with  such  horrid  victims.''
Thus  the  Peruvians,  unacquainted  with  those  barbarous
rites  which  extinguish  sensibility,  and  suppress  the
feelings  of  nature  at  the  sight  of  human  sufferings,  were
formed  by  the  spirit  of  the  superstition  which  they  had
adopted,  to  a  national  character,  more  gentle  than  that
of  any  people  in  America.

Its  in-  The  influence  of  this  superstition  operated  in

dvtrpo  °"  *^^®  same  manner  upon  their  civil  institutions,
*icy>  and  tended  to  correct  in  them  whatever  was  ad-
verse to  gentleness  of  character.  The  dominion  of  the
Incas,  though  the  most  absolute  of  all  despotisms,  was
mitigated  by  its  alliance  with  religion. The  mind  was

«  Acosta,  lib.  v.  c.  3.  ''  See  Note  XIV.

BOOK  VII.  43

not  humbled  and  depressed  by  the  idea  of  a  forced  sub-
jection to  the  will  of  a  superior;  obedience,  paid  to  one
who  was  believed  to  be  clothed  with  divine  authority,
was  willingly  yielded,  and  implied  no  degradation.
The  sovereign,  conscious  that  the  submissive  reverence
of  his  people  flowed  from  their  belief  of  his  heavenly
descent,  was  continually  reminded  of  a  distinction  which
prompted  him  to  imitate  that  beneficent  power  which
he  was  supposed  to  represent.  In  consequence  of  those
impressions,  there  hardly  occurs  in  the  traditional
history  of  Peru,  any  instance  of  rebellion  against  the
reigning  prince,  and  among  twelve  successive  monarchs
there  was  not  one  tyrant.

And  on Evcu  the  wars  in  which  the  Incas  engaged
tarTsys'-' "^^^^  Carried  on  with  a  spirit  very  different  from
tem- that  of  other  American  nations. They  fought
not,  like  savages,  to  destroy  and  to  exterminate;  or,
like  the  Mexicans,  to  glut  blood-thirsty  divinities  with
human  sacrifices. They  conquered,  in  order  to  reclaim
and  civilize  the  vanquished,  and  to  diffuse  the  know-
ledge of  their  own  institutions  and  arts. Prisoners
seem  not  to  have  been  exposed  to  the  insults  and  tor-
tures which  were  their  lot  in  every  other  part  of  the
New  World. The  Incas  took  the  people  whom  they
subdued  under  their  protection,  and  admitted  them  to
a  participation  of  all  the  advantages  enjoyed  by  their
original  subjects. This  practice,  so  repugnant  to  Ame-
rican ferocity,  and  resembling  the  humanity  of  the  most
polished  nations,  must  be  ascribed,  like  other  peculi-
arities which  we  have  observed  in  the  Peruvian  man-
ners, to  the  genius  of  their  religion. The  Incas,  con-
sidering the  homage  paid  to  any  other  object  than  to
the  heavenly  powers  which  they  adored  as  impious,
were  fond  of  gaining  proselytes  to  their  favourite  system.
The  idols  of  every  conquered  province  were  carried  in
triumph  to  the  great  temple  at  Cuzco,'  and  placed  there

'  Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  iv.  c.  4. Vega,  lib.  v.  c.  1'2.

44  AMERICA.

as  trophies  of  the  superior  power  of  the  divinity  who
was  the  protector  of  the  empire.  The  people  were
treated  with  lenity,  and  instructed  in  the  religious  te-
nets of  their  new  masters,''  that  the  conqueror  might
have  the  glory  of  having  added  to  the  number  of  the
votaries  of  his  father  the  Sun.

Peculiar  ^^^^  ^*^*^  ^^  property  in  Peru  was  no  less  sin-
state  of gular  than  that  of  reliction, and  contributed,

property, f.,  .  ,  . .

likewise,  towards  giving  a  mild  turn  of  charac-
ter to  the  people. All  the  lands  capable  of  cultivation
were  divided  into  three  shares. One  was  consecrated
to  the  Sun,  and  the  product  of  it  was  applied  to  the
erection  of  temples,  and  furnishing  what  was  requisite
towards  celebrating  the  public  rites  of  religion. The
second  belonged  to  the  Inca,  and  was  set  apart  as  the
provision  made  by  the  community  for  the  support  of
government. The  third  and  largest  share  was  reserved
for  the  maintenance  of  the  people,  among  whom  it  was
parcelled  out. Neither  individuals,  however,  nor  com-
munities, had  a  right  of  exclusive  property  in  the  por-
tion set  apart  for  their  use. They  possessed  it  only  for
a  year,  at  the  expiration  of  which  a  new  division  was
made  in  proportion  to  the  rank,  the  number,  and  exi-
gencies of  each  family. All  those  lands  were  cultivated
by  the  joint  industry  of  the  community. The  people,
summoned  by  a  proper  officer,  repaired  in  a  body  to
the  fields,  and  peformed  their  common  task,  while  songs
and  musical  instruments  cheered  them  to  their  labour.'
Effects  of  ^y  t^^is  singular  distribution  of  territory,  as  well
*^'*- as  by  the  mode  of  cultivating  it,  the  idea  of  a
common  interest,  and  of  mutual  subserviency,  was  con-
tinually inculcated. Each  individual  felt  his  connexion
with  those  around  him,  and  knew  that  he  depended  on
their  friendly  aid  for  what  increase  he  was  to  reap. A
state  thus  constituted  may  be  considered  as  one  great
family,  in  which  the  union  of  the  members  was  so  com-

•'  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  8.  '  lb.  dec.  h.  lib.  iv.  c.  2. Vega,  lib.  v.  c.  5.

BOOK  VII.  45

plete,  and  the  exchange  of  good  offices  so  perceptible,
as  to  create  stronger  attachment,  and  to  bind  man  to
man  in  closer  intercourse,  than  subsisted  under  any
form  of  society  established  in  America.  From  this  re-
sulted gentle  manners,  and  mild  virtues  unknown  in  the
savage  state,  and  with  which  the  Mexicans  were  little
acquainted.

Inequality But,  though  the  institutious  of  the  Incas  were
of  ranks. ^^  framed  as  to  strengthen  the  bonds  of  affec-
tion among  their  subjects,  there  was  great  inequality  in
their  condition. The  distinction  of  ranks  was  fully  es-
tablished in  Peru. A  great  body  of  the  inhabitants,
under  the  denomination  of  Yanacouas,  were  held  in  a
state  of  servitude. Their  garb  and  houses  were  of  a
form  different  from  those  of  freemen. Like  the Ta-
menes  of  Mexico,  they  were  employed  in  carrying  bur-
dens, and  in  performing  every  other  work  of  drudgery.™
Next  to  them  in  rank,  were  such  of  the  people  as  were
free,  but  distinguished  by  no  official  or  hereditary  ho-
nours. Above  them  were  raised,  those  whom  the  Spa-
niards call  Orejones,  from  the  ornaments  worn  in  their
ears. They  formed  what  may  be denominated  the
order  of  nobles,  and  in  peace  as  well  as  war  held  every
office  of  power  or  trust." At  the  head  of  all  were  the
children  of  the  Sun,  who,  by  their  high  descent  and
peculiar  privileges,  were  as  nmch  exalted  above  the
Orejones  as  these  were  elevated  above  the  people.
State  of Such  a  form  of  society,  from  the  union  of  its
^'*^' members,  as  well  as  from  the  distinction  in  their
ranks,  was  favourable  to  progress  in  the  arts. But  the
Spaniards  having  been  acquainted  with  the  improved
state  of  various  arts  in  Mexico,  several  years  before  they
discovered  Peru,  were  not  so  much  struck  with  what
they  observed  in  the  latter  country,  and  describe  the
appearances  of  ingenuity  there  with  less  warmth  of  ad-
miration. The  Peruvians,  nevertheless,  had  advanced

™  Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  iii.  c.  4.  lib.  x.  c.  8.  »  lb.  dec.  5.  lib.  iv.  c.  1.

46  AMERICA.

far  beyond  tlie  Mexicans,  both  in  the  necessary  arts  of

life,  and  in  such  as  have  some  title  to  the  name  of

elegant.

Improved In  Pcru,  agriculture,  the  art  of  primary  ne-^

state  of  •■•  -IT/*  ,•  1

agricui-  cessity  m  social  lite,  was  more  extensive,  and
*"'^^-  carried  on  with  greater  skill  than  in  any  part  of
America.  The  Spaniards,  in  their  progress  through
the  country,  were  so  fully  supplied  with  provisions  of
every  kind,  that  in  the  relation  of  their  adventures
we  meet  with  few  of  those  dismal  scenes  of  distress  oc-
casioned by  famine,  in  which  the  conquerors  of  Mexico
were  so  often  involved.  The  quantity  of  soil  under
cultivation  was  not  left  to  the  discretion  of  individuals,
but  regulated  by  public  authority  in  proportion  to  the
exigencies  of  the  community.  Even  the  calamity  of  an
unfruitful  season  was  but  little  felt,  for  the  product  of
the  lands  consecrated  to  the  Sun,  as  well  as  those  set
apart  for  the  Incas,  being  deposited  in  the  Tambos,  or
public  storehouses,  it  remained  there  as  a  stated  pro-
vision for  times  of  scarcity."  As  the  extent  of  cultiva-
tion was  determined  with  such  provident  attention  to
the  demands  of  the  state,  the  invention  and  industry  of
the  Peruvians  were  called  forth  to  extraordinary  exer-
tions, by  certain  defects  peculiar  to  their  climate  and
soil.  All  the  vast  rivers  that  flow  from  the  Andes  take
their  course  eastward  to  the  Atlantic  ocean.  Peru  is
watered  only  by  some  streams  which  rush  down  from
the  mountains  like  torrents.  A  great  part  of  the  low
country  is  sandy  and  barren,  and  never  refreshed  with
rain.  In  order  to  render  such  an  unpromising  region
fertile,  the  ingenuity  of  the  Peruvians  had  recourse  to
various  expedients.  By  means  of  artificial  canals,  con-
ducted with  much  patience  and  considerable  art,  from
the  torrents  that  poured  across  their  country,  they  con-
veyed a  regular  supply  of  moisture  to  their  fields.^

0  Zarate,  lib.  i.  c.  14. Vega,  lib.  i.  c.  8.
P  Zarate,  lib.  i.  c.  4. Vega,  lib.  v.  c,  1.  &  24.

BOOK VII.  47

They  enriched  the  soil  by  manuring  it  with  the  dung  of
sea-fowls,  of  which  they  found  an  inexhaustible  store
on  all  the  islands  scattered  along  their  coasts. '^  In  de-
scribing the  customs  of  any  nation  thoroughly  civilized,
such  practices  would  hardly  draw  attention,  or  be  men-
tioned as  in  any  degree  remarkable;  but  in  the  history
of  the  improvident  race  of  men  in  the  New  World,  they
are  entitled  to  notice  as  singular  proofs  of  industry  and
of  art.  The  use  of  the  plough,  indeed,  was  unknown
to  the  Peruvians.  They  turned  up  the  earth  with  a
kind  of  mattock  of  hard  wood.""  Nor  was  this  labour
deemed  so  degrading  as  to  be  devolved  wholly  upon
the  women.  Both  sexes  joined  in  performing  this  ne-
cessary work.  Even  the  children  of  the  Sun  set  an
example  of  industry,  by  cultivating  a  field  near  Cuzco
with  their  own  hands,  and  they  dignified  this  function
by  denominating  it  their  triumph  over  the  earth.'
Their  The  supcrior  ingenuity  of  the  Peruvians  is

buildings,  obvious,  likewisc,  in  the  construction  of  their
houses  and  public  buildings.  In  the  extensive  plains
which  stretch  along  the  Pacific  ocean,  where  the  sky
is  perpetually  serene,  and  the  climate  mild,  their  houses
were  very  properly  of  a  fabric  extremely  slight.  But
in  the  higher  regions,  where  rain  falls,  where  the  vicis-
situde of  seasons  is  known,  and  their  rigour  felt,  houses
were  constructed  with  greater  solidity.  They  were
generally  of  a  square  form,  the  walls  about  eight  feet
high,  built  with  bricks  hardened  in  the  sun,  without
any  windows,  and  the  door  low  and  straight.  Simple
as  these  structures  were,  and  rude  as  the  materials  may
seem  to  be  of  which  they  are  formed,  they  were  so  du-
rable, that  many  of  them  still  subsist  in  different  parts
of  Peru,  long  after  every  monument  that  might  have
conveyed  to  us  any  idea  of  the  domestic  state  of  the
other  American  nations  has  vanished  from  the  face  of

1 Acosta,  lib.  iv.  c.  37. Vega,  lib.  v.  c.  3. See  Note  XV.
■■  Zarate,  lib.  i.  c.  8.  '  Vega,  lib.  v.  c.  2.

48  AMERICA.

the  earth.  But  it  was  in  the  temples  consecrated  to
the  Sun,  and  in  the  buildings  destined  for  the  residence
of  their  monarchs,  that  the  Peruvians  displayed  the
utmost  extent  of  their  art  and  contrivance.  The  de-
scriptions of  them  by  such  of  the  Spanish  writers  as  had
an  opportunity  of  contemplating  them,  while  in  some
measure  entire,  might  have  appeared  highly  exagge-
rated, if  the  ruins  which  still  remain,  did  not  vouch  the
truth  of  their  relations.  These  ruins  of  sacred  or  royal
buildings  are  found  in  every  province  of  the  empire,
and  by  their  frequency  demonstrate  that  they  are  mo-
numents of  a  powerful  people,  who  must  have  subsist-
ed, during  a  period  of  some  extent,  in  a  state  of  no
inconsiderable  improvement.  They  appear  to  have
been  edifices  various  in  their  dimensions.  Some  of  a
moderate  size,  many  of  immense  extent,  all  remarkable
for  solidity,  and  resembling  each  other  in  the  style  of
architecture.  The  temple  of  Pachacamac,  together
with  a  palace  of  the  Inca,  and  a  fortress,  were  so  con-
nected together  as  to  form  one  great  structure,  above
half  a  league  in  circuit.  In  this  prodigious  pile,  the
same  singular  taste  in  building  is  conspicuous,  as  in
other  works  of  the  Peruvians.  As  they  were  unac-
quainted with  the  use  of  the  pulley,  and  other  mecha-
nical powers,  and  could  not  elevate  the  large  stones
and  bricks  which  they  employed  in  building  to  any
considerable  height,  the  walls  of  this  edifice,  in  which
they  seem  to  have  made  their  greatest  effort  towards
magnificence,  did  not  rise  above  twelve  feet  from  the
ground.  Though  they  had  not  discovered  the  use  of
mortar  or  of  any  other  cement  in  building,  the  bricks
or  stones  were  joined  with  so  much  nicety,  that  the
seams  can  hardly  be  discerned.'  The  apartments,  as
far  as  the  distribution  of  them  can  be  traced  in  the
ruins,  were  ill-disposed,  and  afforded  little  accommo-
dation. There  was  not  a  single  window  in  any  part  of

t  See  Note  XVI.

BOOK  VI[.  40

the  building- ;  and  as  no  light  could  enter  but  by  the
door,  all  the  apartments  of  largest  dimension  must
either  have  been  perfectly  dark,  or  illuminated  by  some
other  means.  But  with  all  these,  and  many  other  im-
perfections that  might  be  mentioned  in  their  art  of
building,  the  works  of  the  Peruvians  which  still  re-
main, must  be  considered  as  stupendous  efforts  of  a
people  unacquainted  with  the  use  of  iron,  and  convey
to  us  a  high  idea  of  the  power  possessed  by  their
ancient  monarchs.

Their  pub-  Thesc,  howcvcr,  were  not  the  noblest  or  most
lie  roads,  useful  works  of  the  Incas.  The  two  great
roads  from  Cuzco  to  Quito,  extending  in  an  uninter-
rupted stretch  above  fifteen  hundred  miles,  are  entitled
to  still  higher  praise.  The  one  was  conducted  through
the  interior  and  mountainous  country,  the  other  through
the  plains  on  the  sea-coast.  From  the  language  of  ad-
miration in  which  some  of  the  early  writers  express
their  astonishment  when  they  first  viewed  those  roads,
and  from  the  more  pompous  description  of  later  writers,
who  labour  to  support  some  favourite  theory  concern-
ing America,  one  might  be  led  to  compare  this  work
of  the  Incas  to  the  famous  military  ways  which  remain
as  monuments  of  the  Roman  power ;  but  in  a  country
where  there  was  no  tame  animal,  except  the  Llama,
which  was  never  used  for  draught,  and  but  little  as  a
beast  of  burden,  where  the  high  roads  were  seldom
trod  by  any  but  a  human  foot,  no  great  degree  of  la-
bour or  art  was  requisite  in  forming  them.  The  Peru-
vian roads  were  only  fifteen  feet  in  breadth,"  and  in
many  places  so  slightly  formed,  that  time  has  effaced
every  vestige  of  the  course  in  which  they  raif.  In  the
low  country  little  more  seems  to  have  been  done,  than
to  plant  trees  or  to  fix  posts  at  certain  intervals,  in
order  to  mark  the  proper  route  to  travellers.  To  open
a  path  through  the  mountainous  country  was  a  more

"  Cieca,  c.  60.
VOL.  VIII.  E

50  AMERICA.

arduous  task. Eminences  were  levelled,  and  hollows
filled  up,  and  for  the  preservation  of  the  road  it  was
fenced  with  a  bank  of  turf. At proper distances,
Tambos,  or  storehouses,  were  erected  for  the  accom-
modation of  the  Inca  and  his  attendants,  in  their  pro-
gress through  his  dominions. From  the  manner  in
which  the  road  was  originally  formed  in  this  higher
and  more  impervious  region,  it  has  proved  more  dura-
ble ;  and  though,  from  the  inattention  of  the  Spaniards
to  every  object  but  that  of  working  their  mines,  nothing-
has  been  done  towards  keeping  it  in  repair,  its  course
may  still  be  traced.''' Such  was  the  celebrated  road  of
the  Incas ;  and  even  from  this  description,  divested  of
every  circumstance of  manifest  exaggeration, or  of
suspicious  aspect,  it  must  be  considered  as  a  striking
proof  of  an  extraordinary  progress  in  improvement  and
policy. To  the  savage  tribes  of  America,  the  idea  of
facilitating  communication  with  places  at  a  distance
had  never  occurred. To  the  Mexicans  it  was  hardly
known. Even  in  the  most  civilized  countries  in  Eu-
rope, men  had  advanced  far  in  refinement,  before  it
became  a  regular  object  of  national  police  to  form  such
roads  as  render  intercourse  commodious. It  was  a  ca-
pital object  of  Roman  policy  to  open  a  communication
with  all the  provinces  of  their extensive  empire  by
means  of  those  roads  which  are  justly  considered  as
one  of  the  noblest  monuments  both  of  their  wisdom
and  their  power. But  during  the  long  reign  of  barba-
rism, the  Roman  roads  were  neglected  or  destroyed ;
and  at  the  time  when  the  Spaniards  entered  Peru,  no
kingdom  in  Europe  could  boast  of  any  work  of  public
utility  that  could  be  compared with  the  great  roads
formed  by  the  Incas.

And  The  formation  of  those  roads  introduced  an-

bridges. Q^ijg^  improvement  in  Peru  equally  unknown

'  Xerez,  p.  189.  191. Zarate,  lib.  i.  c.  13,  14. Vega,  lib.  ix.  c.  13. Bourguer
Voyage,  p.  103. Ulioa  Entretenemientos,  p.  365.

BOOK VI  r.  .51

over  all  the  rest  of  America.  In  its  course  from  south
to  north,  the  road  of  the  Incas  was  intersected  by  all
the  torrents  which  roll  from  the  Andes  towards  the
Western  ocean.  From  the  rapidity  of  their  course,  as
well  as  from  the  frequency  and  violence  of  their  inun-
dation, these  were  not  fordable.  Some  expedient,
however,  was  to  be  found  for  passing  them.  The  Pe-
ruvians, from  their  unacquaintance  with  the  use  of
arches,  and  their  inability  to  work  in  wood,  could  not
construct  bridges  either  of  stone  or  timber.  But  ne-
cessity, the  parent  of  invention,  suggested  a  device
which  supplied  that  defect.  They  formed  cables  of
great  strength,  by  twisting  together  some  of  the  pliable
withs  or  osiers,  with  which  their  country  abounds ;  six
of  these  cables  they  stretched  across  the  stream  parallel
to  one  another,  and  made  them  fast  on  each  side.
These  they  bound  firmly  together  by  interweaving
smaller  ropes  so  close,  as  to  form  a  compact  piece  of
net- work,  which  being  covered  with  branches  of  trees
and  earth,  they  passed  along  it  with  tolerable  security,"
Proper  persons  were  appointed  to  attend  at  each
bridge,  to  keep  it  in  repair,  and  to  assist  passengers.^
In  the  level  country,  where  the  rivers  became  deep
and  broad  and  still,  they  are  passed  in  Balzas,  or
floats ;  in  the  construction,  as  well  as  navigation  of
which,  the  ingenuity  of  the  Peruvians  appears  to  be  far
superior  to  that  of  any  people  in  America.  These  had
advanced  no  farther  in  naval  skill  than  the  use  of  the
paddle,  or  oar ;  the  Peruvians  ventured  to  raise  a  mast,
and  spread  a  sail,  by  means  of  which  their  balzas  not
only  went  nimbly  before  the  wind,  but  could  veer  and
tack  with  great  celerity.''

Nor  were  the  ing-enuity  and  art  of  the  Peruvians

Mode  of  n -,  11  1  •  £«  • ^  •^^

refining coniiued  solcly  to  objects  ot  essential  utility.
silver  ore.  'fj^gy  \^^^  made  some  progress  in  arts,  which

"^  See  Note  XVII. y  Sancho  ap.  Ram.  iii.  376.  B, Zarate,  lib.  i.  c.  14.  Vegn,
lib.  iii.  c.  7,  8. Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  3,  4.  ^  Ulloa  Voy.  i.  167,  &c.

E 2

6-2  AMERICA.

may  be  called  elegant.  They  possessed  the  precious
metals  in  greater  abundance  than  any  people  of  Ame-
rica. They  obtained  gold  in  the  same  manner  with
the  Mexicans,  by  searching  in  the  channels  of  rivers,
or  washing  the  earth  in  which  particles  of  it  were  con-
tained. But  in  order  to  procure  silver,  they  exerted
no  inconsiderable  degree  of  skill  and  invention.  They
had  not,  indeed,  attained  the  art  of  sinking  a  shaft  into
the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  penetrating  to  the  riches
concealed  there ;  but  they  hollowed  deep  caverns  on
the  banks  of  rivers  and  the  sides  of  mountains,  and
emptied  such  veins  as  did  not  dip  suddenly  beyond
their  reach.  In  other  places,  where  the  vein  lay  near
the  surface,  they  dug  pits  to  such  a  depth,  that  the
person  who  worked  below  could  throw  out  the  ore,  or
hand  it  up  in  baskets.*  They  had  discovered  the  art
of  smelting  and  refining  this,  either  by  the  simple  ap-
plication of  fire,  or  where  the  ore  was  more  stubborn,
and  impregnated  with  foreign  substances,  by  placing
it  in  small  ovens  or  furnaces,  on  high  grounds,  so  arti-
ficially constructed,  that  the  draught  of  air  performed
the  function  of  a  bellows,  an  engine  with  which  they
were  totally  unacquainted.  By  this  simple  device,  the
purer  ores  were  smelted  with  facility,  and  the  quantity
of  silver  in  Peru  was  so  considerable,  that  many  of  the
utensils  employed  in  the  functions  of  common  life  were
made  of  it.''  Several  of  those  vessels  and  trinkets  are
said  to  have  merited  no  small  degree  of  estimation,  on
account  of  the  neatness  of  the  workmanship,  as  well  as
the  intrinsic  value  of  the  materials.  But  as  the  con-
querors of  America  were  well  acquainted  with  the  lat-
ter, but  had  scarcely  any  conception  of  the  former,
most  of  the  silver  vessels  and  trinkets  were  melted
down,  and  rated  according  to  the  weight  and  fineness
of  the  metal  in  the  division  of  the  spoil.

*  Raniusio,  iii.  414.  A.
■•  Acosta,  lib.  iv.  c.  4,  5. Vega,  p.  J,  lib.  viii.  c.  25. Ulloa  Entreten.  258.

BOOK VII.  S3

Works  of  ^^  other  works  of  mere  curiosity  or  ornament,
elegance,  their  ingenuity  has  been  highly  celebrated.
Many  specimens  of  those  have  been  dug  out  of  the
Guacas,  or  mounds  of  earth,  with  which  the  Peruvians
covered  the  bodies  of  the  dead.  Amons:  these  are  mir-
rors  of  various  dimensions,  of  hard  shining  stones  highly
polished ;  vessels  of  earthenware  of  different  forms ;
hatchets,  and  other  instruments,  some  destined  for  war,
and  others  for  labour.  Some  were  of  flint,  some  of
copper,  hardened  to  such  a  degree  by  an  unknown  pro-
cess, as  to  supply  the  place  of  iron  on  several  occasions.
Had  the  use  of  those  tools  formed  of  copper  been  ge-
neral, the  progress  of  the  Peruvians  in  the  arts  might
have  been  such  as  to  emulate  that  of  more  cultivated
nations.  But  either  the  metal  was  so  rare,  or  the  ope-
ration by  which  it  was  hardened  so  tedious,  that  their
instruments  of  copper  were  few,  and  so  extremely  small,
that  they  seem  to  have  been  employed  only  in  slighter
works.  But  even  to  such  a  circumscribed  use  of  this
imperfect  metal,  the  Peruvians  were  indebted  for  their
superiority  to  the  other  people  of  America  in  various
arts.^  The  same  observation,  however,  may  be  ap-
plied to  them,  which  I  formerly  made  with  respect
to  the  arts  of  the  Mexicans.  From  several  specimens
of  Peruvian  utensils  and  ornaments,  which  are  deposited
in  the  royal  cabinet  of  Madrid,  and  from  some  pre-
served in  different  collections  in  other  parts  of  Europe,
I  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  workmanship  is  more
to  be  admired  on  account  of  the  rude  tools  with  which
it  was  executed,  than  on  account  of  its  intrinsic  neat-
ness and  elegance  ;  and  that  the  Peruvians,  though  the
most  improved  of  all  the  Americans,  were  not  advanced
beyond  the  infancy  of  arts.

Aniraper- But notwithstanding so many  particulars,
Slon?'"' which  seem  to  indicate  a  high  degree  of  im-

«  Ulloa  Voy.  torn.  i.  381,  &c. Id.  Entreten.  p.  369,  &:c-

54  AMERICA.

provement  in  Peru,  other  circumstances  occur  that
suggest  the  idea  of  a  society  still  in  the  first  stages  of
its  transition  from  barbarism  to  civilization.  In  all
No  cities  t^6  dominions  of  the  Incas,  Cuzco  was  the  only
but  Cuzco.  place  that  had  the  appearance,  or  was  entitled
to  the  name  of  a  city.  Every  where  else,  the  people
lived  mostly  in  detached  habitations,  dispersed  over
the  country,  or,  at  the  utmost,  settled  together  in  small
villages.''  But  until  men  are  brought  to  assemble  in
numerous  bodies,  and  incorporated  in  such  close  union,
as  to  enjoy  frequent  intercourse,  and  to  feel  mutual
dependence,  they  never  imbibe  perfectly  the  spirit,  or
assume  the  manners  of  social  life.  In  a  country  of
immense  extent,  with  only  one  city,  the  progress  of
manners,  and  the  improvement  either  of  the  neces-
sary or  more  refined  arts,  must  have  been  so  slow,
and  carried  on  under  such  disadvantages,  that  it  is
more  surprising  the  Peruvians  should  have  advanced
fo  far  in  refinement,  than  that  they  did  not  proceed
farther.

No  perfect  In  conscqucncc  of  this  state  of  imperfect  union,
separation  ^^^  separation  of  professions  in  Peru  was  not  so

ot  pro-  i^  r

fessions.  complctcas  amongthcMexicans.  The  less  closely
men  associate,  the  more  simple  are  their  manners,  and
the  fewer  their  wants.  The  crafts  of  common  and  most
necessary  use  in  life  do  not,  in  such  a  state,  become  so
complex  or  difficult,  as  to  render  it  requisite  that  men
should  be  trained  to  them  by  any  particular  course  of
education.  All  the  arts,  accordingly,  which  were  of
daily  and  indispensable  utility,  were  exercised  by  every
Peruvian  indiscriminately.  None  but  the  artists  em-
ployed in  works  of  mere  curiosity,  or  ornament,  consti-
tuted a  separate  order  of  men,  or  were  distinguished
from  other  citizens. *"

''  Zarate,  lib.  i.  c.  9. Herrera,  dec.  .5.  lib.  vi.  c.  4.
'  Acosta,  lib.  vi.  c.  1.5. Vega,  lib.  v.  c.  9. Herrera,  dec  5.  lib.  iv.  c.  i.

BOOK VII.  55

Little  com- FroiTi  the  Want  of  cities  in Peru, another

mercial  in-  conseouence  followed. There  was  little  com-

tcrcoursc*

mercial  intercourse  among  the  inhabitants  of
that  great  empire.  The  activity  of  commerce  is  coeval
with  the  foundation  of  cities ;  and  from  the  moment
that  the  members  of  any  community  settle  in  consider-
able numbers  in  one  place,  its  operations  become  vi-
gorous. The  citizen  must  depend  for  subsistence  on
the  labour  of  those  who  cultivate  the  ground.  They,  in
return,  must  receive  some  equivalent.  Thus  mutual
intercourse  is  established,  and  the  productions  of  art
are  regularly  exchanged  for  the  fruits  of  agriculture.  In
the  towns  of  the  Mexican  empire,  stated  markets  were
held,  and  whatever  could  supply  any  want  or  desire  of
man  was  an  object  of  commerce.  But  in  Peru,  from
the  singular  mode  of  dividing  property,  and  the  manner
in  which  the  people  were  settled,  there  was  hardly  any
species  of  commerce  carried  on  between  diiferent  pro-
vinces,*^ and  the  community  was  less  acquainted  with
that  active  intercourse,  which  is  at  once  a  bond  of  union,
and  an  incentive  to  improvement.
Unwariike  But  the  unwarlikc  spirit  of  the  Peruvians  was
spirit  of ^Yie  most  remarkable,  as  well  as  the  most  fatal

the  Peru-  '

vians.  dcfcct  in  their  character.^  The  greater  part  of
the  rude  nations  of  America  opposed  their  invaders
with  undaunted  ferocity,  though  with  little  conduct  or
success.  The  Mexicans  maintained  the  struggle  in
defence  of  their  liberties,  with  such  persevering  forti-
tude, that  it  was  with  difficulty  the  Spaniards  triumphed
over  them.  Peru  was  subdued  at  once,  and  almost
without  resistance ;  and  the  most  favourable  opportu-
nities of  regaining  their  freedom,  and  of  crushing  their
oppressors,  were  lost  through  the  timidity  of  the  people.
Though  the  traditional  history  of  the  Peruvians  repre-
sents all  the  Incas  as  warlike  princes,  frequently  at  the

f  Vega,  lib.  vi.  c.  S.
s  Xctez,  190. Sancho  ap.  Ram.  iii.  372, Herrera,  dec.  H,  lib.  i.  c.  3.

56  AMERICA.

head  of  armies,  which  they  led  to  victory  and  conquest;
few  symptoms  of  such  a  martial  spirit  appear  in  any  of
their  operations  subsequent  to  the  invasion  of  the  Spa-
niards. The  influence,  perhaps,  of  those  institutions
which  rendered  their  manners  gentle,  gave  their  minds
this  unmanly  softness ;  perhaps,  the  constant  serenity
and  mildness  of  the  climate  may  have  enervated  the
vigour  of  their  frame  ;  perhaps,  some  principle  in  their
government,  unknown  to  us,  was  the  occasion  of  this
political  debility.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  cause,
the  fact  is  certain,  and  there  is  not  an  instance  in  his-
tory of  any  people  so  little  advanced  in  refinement,  so
totally  destitute  of  military  enterprise.  This  character
hath  descended  to  their  posterity.  The  Indians  of  Peru
are  now  more  tame  and  depressed  than  any  people  of
America.  Their  feeble  spirits,  relaxed  in  lifeless  inac-
tion, seem  hardly  capable  of  any  bold  or  manly  ex-
ertion.

But,  besides  those  capital  defects  in  the  political
state  of  Peru,  some  detached  circumstances  and  facts
occur  in  the  Spanish  writers,  which  discover  a  consi-
derable remainder  of  barbarity  in  their  manners.  A
cruel  custom,  that  prevailed  in  some  of  the  most  savage
tribes,  subsisted  among  the  Peruvians.  On  the  death
of  the  Incas,  and  of  other  eminent  persons,  a  consider-
able number  of  their  attendants  was  put  to  death,  and
interred  around  their  guacas,  that  they  might  appear
in  the  next  world  with  their  former  dignity,  and  be
served  with  the  same  respect.  On  the  death  of  Huana-
Capac,  the  most  powerful  of  their  monarchs,  above  a
thousand  victims  were  doomed  to  accompany  him  to
the  tomb.''  In  one  particular  their  manners  appear  to
have  been  more  barbarous  than  those  of  most  rude
tribes.  Though  acquainted  with  the  use  of  fire  in  pre-
paring maize,  and  other  vegetables  for  food,  they  de-
voured both  flesh  and  fish  perfectly  raw,  and  astonished

^  Acosta,  lib.  V.  c.  7.

BOOK VII.  57

the  Spaniards,  with  a  practice  repugnant  to  the  ideas  of
all  civilized  people.'

Other  do- But  though  Mcxico  and  Peru  are  the  pos-
niinions  of  gggsions  of  Spain  in  the  New  World,  which,  on

Spain  m  t^  '  '

America,  account  both  of  their  ancient  and  present  state,
have  attracted  the  greatest  attention ;  her  other  domi-
nions there  are  far  from  being  inconsiderable,  either  in
extent  or  value.  The  greater  part  of  them  was  re-
duced to  subjection  during  the  first  part  of  the  sixteenth
century,  by  private  adventurers  who  fitted  out  their
small  armaments  either  in  Hispaniola  or  in  Old  Spain :
and  were  we  to  follow  each  leader  in  his  progress,  we
should  discover  the  same  daring  courage,  the  same
persevering  ardour,  the  same  rapacious  desire  for  wealth,
and  the  same  capacity  for  enduring  and  surmounting
every  thing  in  order  to  attain  it,  which  distinguished
the  operations  of  the  Spaniards  in  their  greater  Ame-
rican conquests.  But,  instead  of  entering  into  a  detail,
which,  from  the  similarity  of  the  transactions,  would
appear  almost  a  repetition  of  what  has  been  already
A  brief  related,  I  shall  satisfy  myself  with  such  a  view
survey  of  of  thosc  proviuccs  of  the  Spanish  empire  in
America,  which  have  not  hitherto  been  men-
tioned, as  may  convey  to  my  readers  an  adequate  idea
of  its  greatness,  fertility,  and  opulence.
Such  as  ^  begin  with  the  countries  contiguous  to  the

are  adja- ^wo  Q-reat  mouarchics,  of  whose  history  and  in-

centtothe . .  t  i  •  i i n

empire  of  stitutious  1  havc  givcu  somc  accouut,  and  shall
then  briefly  describe  the  other  districts  of  Spa-
nish America.  The  jurisdiction  of  the  viceroy  of  New
Spain  extends  over  several  provinces,  which  were  not
subject  to  the  dominion  of  the  Mexicans.  The  coun-
r-  1  tries  of  Cinaloa  and  Sonora  that  stretch  alonor
and  So-  the  east  side  of  the  Vermillion  sea,  or  gulf  of
California,  as  well  as  the  immense  kingdoms  of
New  Navarre  and  New  Mexico,  which  bend  towards

i  Xerez.  p.  190. Sancho,  Ram.  iii.  372.  C. Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  i.  c.  3.

58  AMERICA.

the  west  and  north,  did  not  acknowledge  the  sove-
reignty of  Montezuma,  or  his  predecessors.  These  re^
gions,  not  inferior  in  magnitude  to  all  the  Mexican
empire,  are  reduced  some  to  a  greater,  others  to  a  less
degree  of  subjection  to  the  Spanish  yoke.  They  extend
through  the  most  delightful  part  of  the  temperate  zone;
their  soil  is,  in  general,  remarkably  fertile,  and  all  their
productions,  whether  animal  or  vegetable,  are  most
perfect  in  their  kind.  They  have  all  a  communication
either  with  the  Pacific  ocean,  or  with  the  gulf  of  Mexi-
co, and  are  watered  by  rivers  which  not  only  enrich
them,  but  may  become  subservient  to  commerce.  The
number  of  Spaniards  settled  in  those  vast  countries  is
indeed  extremely  small.  They  may  be  said  to  have
subdued  rather  than  to  have  occupied  them.  But  if
the  population  in  their  ancient  establishments  in  Ame-
rica shall  continue  to  increase,  they  may  gradually
spread  over  those  provinces,  of  which,  however  invit-
ing, they  have  not  hitherto  been  able  to  take  full  pos-
session.

One  circumstance  may  contribute  to  the  speedy

Richiumes.  .  t •  tt  • i  •

population  01  some  districts.  Very  rich  mines
both  of  gold  and  silver  have  been  discovered  in  many  of
the  regions  which  I  have  mentioned.  Wherever  these  are
opened,  and  worked  with  success,  a  multitude  of  people
resort.  In  order  to  supply  them  with  the  necessaries  of
life,  cultivation  must  be  increased,  artisans  of  various
kinds  must  assemble,  and  industry  as  well  as  wealth  will
be  gradually  diffused.  Many  examples  of  this  have  oc-
curred in  different  parts  of  America  since  they  fell
under  the  dominion  of  the  Spaniards.  Populous  vil-
lages and  large  towns  have  suddenly  arisen  amidst  un-
inhabited wilds  and  mountains ;  and  the  working  of
mines,  though  far  from  being  the  most  proper  object  to-
wards which  the  attention  of  an  infant  society  should
be  turned,  may  become  the  means  both  of  promoting
useful  activity,  and  of  augmenting  the  number  of  peo-

BOOK  VII.  69

A  recent plc. A recent  and  singular  instance  of  this
maskable  ^as  happened,  which,  as  it  is  but  little  known  in
discovery.  Europc,  and  may  be  productive  of  great  effects,
merits  attention. The  Spaniards  settled  in  the  pro-
vinces of  Cinaloa  and  Sonora  had  been  long  disturbed
by  the  depredations  of  some  fierce  tribes  of  Indians.
In  the  year  1765,  the  incursions  of  those  savages  became
so  frequent,  and  so  destructive,  that  the  Spanish  inha-
bitants, in  despair,  applied  to  the  marquis  de  Croix,
viceroy  of  Mexico,  for  such  a  body  of  troops  as  might
enable  them  to  drive  those  formidable  invaders  from
their  places  of  retreat  in  the  mountains. But  the  trea-
sury of  Mexico  was  so  much  exhausted  by  the  large  suras
drawn  from  it,  in  order  to  support  the  late  war  against
Great  Britain,  that  the  viceroy  could  afford  them  no  aid.
The  respect  due  to  his  virtues  accomplished  what  his
official  power  could  not  effect. He  prevailed  with  the
merchants  of  New  Spain  to  advance  about  two  hundred
thousand  pesos  for  defraying  the  expense  of  the  expe-
dition. The  war  was  conducted  by  an  officer  of  abi-
lities ;  and  after  being  protracted  for  three  years,  chiefly
by  the  difficulty  of  pursuing  the  fugitives  over  moun-
tains and  through  defiles  which  were  almost  impassable,
it  terminated  in  the  year  1771,  in  the  final  submission  of
the  tribes,  which  had  been  so  long  the  object  of  terror
to  the  two  provinces. In  the  course  of  this  service,  the
Spaniards  marched  through  countries  into  which  they
seem  not  to  have  penetrated  before  that  time,  and  dis-
covered mines  of  such  value,  as  was  astonishing  even  to
men  acquainted  with  the  riches  contained  in  the  moun-
tains of  the  New  World. At  Cineguilla,  in  the  pro-
vince of  Sonora,  they  entered  a  plain  of  fourteen  leagues
in  extent,  in  which,  at  the  depth  of  only  sixteen  inches,
they  found  gold  in  grains  of  such  a  size,  that  some  of
them  weighed  nine  marks,  and  in  such  quantities,  that
in  a  short  time,  with  a  few  labourers,  they  collected  a
thousand  marks  of  gold  in  grains,  even  without  taking

60  AMERICA.

time  to  wash  the  earth  that  had  been  dug,  which  ap-
peared to  be  so  rich,  that  persons  of  skill  computed  that
it  might  yield  what  would  be  equal  in  value  to  a  mil-
Probabie  ^^^"  of  pcsos.  Before  the  end  of  the  year  1771,
effects  of  above  two  thousand  persons  were  settled  in
Cineguilla,  under  the  government  of  proper
magistrates,  and  the  inspection  of  several  ecclesiastics.
As  several  other  mines,  not  inferior  in  richness  to  that
of  Cineguilla,  have  been  discovered,  both  in  Sonora
and  Cinaloa,''  it  is  probable  that  these  neglected  and
thinly-inhabited  provinces  may  soon  become  as  popu-
lous and  valuable  as  any  part  of  the  Spanish  empire  in
America.

California; Thc  pcttiusula  of  California,  on  the  other  side
Its  state. Qf  ti^g  Vermillion  sea,  seems  to  have  been  less
known  to  the  ancient  Mexicans  than the  provinces
which  I  have  mentioned. It  was  discovered  by  Cortes,
in  the  year  1536.' During  a  long  period  it  continued
to  be  so  little  frequented,  that  even  its  form  was  un-
known, and  in  most  charts  it  was  represented  as  an
island,  not  as  a  peninsula." Though  the  climate  of  this
country,  if  we  may  judge  from  its  situation,  must  be
very  desirable,  the  Spaniards  have  made  small  progress
in  peopling  it. Towards  the  close  of  the  last  century,
the  Jesuits,  who  had  great  merit  in  exploring  this  neg-
lected province,  and  in  civilizing  its  rude  inhabitants,
imperceptibly  acquired  a  dominion  over  it  as  complete
as  that  which  they  possessed  in  their  missions  in  Para-
guay, and  they  laboured  to  introduce  into  it  the  same
policy,  and  to  govern  the  natives  by  the  same  maxims.
In  order  to  prevent  the  court  of  Spain  from  conceiving
any  jealousy  of  their  designs  and  operations,  they  seem
studiously  to  have  depreciated  the  country,  by  repre-
senting the  climate  as  so  disagreeable  and  unwholesome,
and  the  soil  as  so  barren,  that  nothing  but  a  zealous
desire  of  converting  the  natives  could  have  induced

''  See  Note  XVIII.  '  Book  v.  vol.  vli.  w  See  Note  XIX.

BOOK VII.  61

them  to  settle  there."  Several  public-spirited  citizens
endeavoured  to  undeceive  their  sovereigns,  and  to  give
them  a  better  view  of  California;  but  in  vain.  At
And  pro-  length,  on  the  expulsion  of  the  Jesuits  from  the
its  im-"'^  °  Spanish  dominions,  the  court  of  Madrid,  as  prone
proving.  ^|.  ^Y^^^  juncture  to  suspect  the  purity  of  the
Order's  intentions,  as  formerly  to  confide  in  them  vi'ith
implicit  trust,  appointed  Don  Joseph  Galvez,  whose
abilities  have  since  raised  him  to  the  high  rank  of  mi-
nister for  the  Indies,  to  visit  that  peninsula.  His  ac-
count of  the  country  was  favourable ;  he  found  the
pearl-fishery  on  its  coasts  to  be  valuable,  and  he  dis-
covered mines  of  gold  of  a  very  promising  appearance."
From  its  vicinity  to  Cinaloa  and  Sonora,  it  is  probable,
that  if  the  population  of  these  provinces  shall  increase
in  the  manner  which  I  have  supposed,  California  may,
by  degrees,  receive  from  them  such  a  recruit  of  inha-
bitants, as  to  be  no  longer  reckoned  among  the  deso-
late and  useless  districts  of  the  Spanish  empire.
Yucatan  ^^  ^^^®  ^^^^  ^^  Mexico,  Yucatau  and  Hon-
and  Hon-  duras  are  comprehended  in  the  srovernment  of

duras.  .

New  Spain,  though  anciently  they  can  hardly
be  said  to  have  formed  a  part  of  the  Mexican  empire.
These  large  provinces,  stretching  from  the  bay  of  Cam-
peachy  beyond  Cape  Gracias  a  Dios,  do  not,  like  the
other  territories  of  Spain  in  the  New  World,  derive  their
value  either  from  the  fertility  of  their  soil,  or  the  rich-
ness of  their  mines  :  but  they  produce  in  greater  abun-
dance, than  any  part  of  America,  the  logwood-tree,
which,  in  dyeing  some  colours,  is  so  far  preferable  to
any  other  material,  that  the  consumption  of  it  in  Eu-
rope is  considerable,  and  it  has  become  an  article  in
commerce  of  great  value.  During  a  long  period,  no
European  nation  intruded  upon  the  Spaniards  in  those
provinces,  or  attempted  to  obtain  any  share  in  this
branch  of  trade. But  after  the  conquest  of  Jamaica

"  Venegas,  Hist,  of  California,  i.  2d.  •  Lorenzano,  349i  330.

(i-2  AMERICA.

by  the  English,  it  soon  appeared  that  a  formidable
rival  was  now  seated  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Spa-
nish territories. One  of  the  first  objects  which  tempted
the  English  settled  in  that  island,  was  the  great  profit
arising  from  the  logwood  trade,  and  the  facility  of
wresting  some  portion  of  it  from  the  Spaniards. Some
Their  de-  advcnturcrs  from  Jamaica  made  the  first  at-
ciine, -  tempt  at  Cape  Catoche,  the  south-east  promon-
tory of  Yucatan,  and  by  cutting  logwood  there,  carried
on  a  gainful  traffic. When  most  of  the  trees  near  the
coast  in  that  place  were  felled,  they  removed  to  the
island  of  Trist,  in  the  bay  of  Campeachy,  and  in  later
times,  their  principal  station  has  been  in  the  bay  of
Honduras. The  Spaniards,  alarmed  at  this  encroach-
ment, endeavoured  by  negotiation,  remonstrances,  and
open  force,  to  prevent  the  English  from  obtaining  any
footing  on  that  part  of  the  American  continent. But
after  struggling  against  it  for  more  than  a  century,  the
disasters  of  last  war  extorted  from  the  court  of  Madrid
a  reluctant  consent  to  tolerate  this  settlement  of  fo-
reigners in  the  heart  of  its  territories. ^  The  pain  which
this  humbling  concession  occasioned,  seems  to  have
prompted  the  Spaniards  to  devise  a  method  of  render-
ing it  of  little  consequence,  more  efiectual  than  all  the
efforts  of  negotiation  or  violence. The  logwood  pro-
duced on  the  west  coast  of  Yucatan,  where  the  soil  is
drier,  is  in  quality  far  superior  to  that  which  grows  on
the  marshy  grounds  where  the English  are  settled.
Andre- By  cucouraging  the  cutting  of  this,  and  per-
'''''^'" mitting  the  importation  of  it  into  Spain  with-
out paying  any  duty,""  such  vigour  has  been  given  to
this  branch  of  commerce,  and  the  logwood  which  the
English  bring  to  market  has  sunk  so  much  in  value,
that  their  trade  to  the  bay  of  Honduras  has  gradually
declined'  since  it  obtained  a  legal  sanction ;  and,  it  is

P  Treaty  of  Paris,  Art.  xviii.
H  Real  Cedilla,  Campomanes,  iii.  145.  ''  See  Note  XX.

BOOK VII.  63

probable,  will  soon  be  finally  abandoned.  In  that
event,  Yucatan  and  Honduras  will  become  possessions
of  considerable  importance  to  Spain.

Still  farther  east  than  Honduras  lie  the  two
and  Vera-  proviuccs  of  Costa  Rica  and  Veragua,  which
^"^"  likewise belong  to  the viceroyalty of  New

Spain ;  but  both  have  been  so  much  neglected  by  the
Spaniards,  and  are  apparently  of  such  small  value,  that
they  merit  no  particular  attention.

The  most  important  province  depending  on
the  viceroyalty  of  Peru  is  Chili.  The  Incas
had  established  their  dominion  in  some  of  its  northern
districts  ;  but  in  the  greater  part  of  the  country,  its
gallant  and  high-spirited  inhabitants  maintained  their
independence.  The  Spaniards,  allured  by  the  fame  of
its  opulence,  early  attempted  the  conquest  of  it  under
Diego  Almagro ;  and  after  his  death,  Pedro  de  Valdi-
via  resumed  the  design.  Both  met  with  fierce  oppo-
sition. The  former  relinquished  the  enterprise  in  the
manner  which  I  have  mentioned."  The  latter,  after
having  given  many  displays,  both  of  courage  and  mi-
litary skill,  was  cut  off,  together  with  a  considerable
body  of  troops  under  his  command.  Francisco  de
Villagra,  Valdivia's  lieutenant,  by  his  spirited  conduct,
checked  the  natives  in  their  career,  and  saved  the  re-
mainder of  the  Spaniards  from  destruction.  By  de-
grees, all  the  champaign  country  along  the  coast  was
subjected  to  the  Spanish  dominion.  The  mountainous
country  is  still  possessed  by  the  Puelches,  Araucos,
and  other  tribes  of  its  original  inhabitants,  formidable
neighbours  to  the  Spaniards  ;  with  whom,  during  the
course  of  two  centuries,  they  have  been  obliged  to  main-
tain almost  perpetual  hostility,  suspended  only  by  a
few  intervals  of  insecure  peace.

Excellence That  part  of  Chili  then,  which  may  properly
mate*  and be  dccmcd  a  Spanish  province,  is  a  narrow

soil.

*  Book  vi.  vol.vii.

(54  AMERICA.

district,  extending  along  the  coast  from  the  desert
of  Atacamas  to  the  island  of  Chiloe,  above  nine  hun-
dred miles.  Its  climate  is  the  most  delicious  in  the
New  World,  and  is  hardly  equalled  by  that  of  any  re-
gion on  the  face  of  the  earth.  Though  bordering  on
the  torrid  zone,  it  never  feels  the  extremity  of  heat,
being  screened  on  the  east  by  the  Andes,  and  refresh-
ed from  the  west  by  cooling  sea-breezes.  The  tem-
perature of  the  air  is  so  mild  and  equable  that  the
Spaniards  give  it  the  preference  to  that  of  the  southern
provinces  in  their  native  country.  The  fertility  of  the
soil  corresponds  with  the  benignity  of  the  climate,  and
is  wonderfully  accommodated  to  European  produc-
tions. The  most  valuable  of  these,  corn,  wine,  and
oil,  abound  in  Chili,  as  if  they  had  been  native  to  the
country.  All  the  fruits  imported  from  Europe  attain
to  full  maturity  there.  The  animals  of  our  hemisphere
not  only  multiply,  but  improve  in  this  delightful  re-
gion. The  horned  cattle  are  of  larger  size  than  those
of  Spain.  Its  breed  of  horses  surpasses,  both  in  beauty
and  in  spirit,  the  famous  Andalusian  race,  from  which
they  sprung.  Nor  has  nature  exhausted  her  bounty
on  the  surface  of  the  earth ;  she  has  stored  its  bowels
with  riches.  Valuable  mines  of  gold,  of  silver,  of  cop-
per, and  of  lead,  have  been  discovered  in  various  parts
of  it.

Cause  of  its  "^  couutry  distinguished  by  so  many  bless-
being  neg-  ings,  wc  may  be  apt  to  conclude,  would  early
the  spani-  bccomc  a  favouritc  station  of  the  Spaniards,
and  must  have  been  cultivated  with  peculiar
predilection  and  care.  Instead  of  this,  a  great  part  of
it  remains  unoccupied.  In  all  this  extent  of  country,
there  are  not  above  eighty  thousand  white  inhabitants,
and  about  three  times  that  number  of  negroes  and  peo-
ple of  a  mixed  race.  The  most  fertile  soil  in  America
lies  uncultivated,  and  some  of  its  most  promising  mines
remain  unwrought. Strange as this  neglect  of  the

BOOK  vir.  05

Spaniards  to  avail  themselves  of  advantages  which
seemed  to  court  their  acceptance,  may  appear,  the
causes  of  it  can  be  traced.  The  only  intercourse  of
Spain  w^ith  its  colonies  in  the  South  sea,  was  carried
on  during  two  centuries  by  the  annual  fleet  to  Porto-
Bello.  All  the  produce  of  these  colonies  was  shipped
in  the  ports  of  Callao,  or  Arica  in  Peru,  for  Panama,
and  carried  from  thence  across  the  isthmus.  All  the
commodities  which  they  received  from  the  mother-
country,  were  conveyed  from  Panama  to  the  same
harbours.  Thus  both  the  exports  and  imports  of  Chili
passed  through  the  hands  of  merchants  settled  in  Peru.
These  had  of  course  a  profit  on  each ;  and  in  both
transactions  the  Chilese  felt  their  own  subordination ;
and  having  no  direct  intercourse  with  the  parent-state,
they  depended  upon  another  province  for  the  disposal
of  their  productions,  as  well  as  for  the  supply  of  their
wants.  Under  such  discouragements,  population  could
not  increase,  and  industry  was  destitute  of  one  chief
Prospect  of  incitement.  But  now  that  Spain,  from  motives
its  improve-  which  I  shall  mention  hereafter,  has  adopted

ment.  _  ^  ^^

a  new  system,  and  carries  on  her  commerce
with  the  colonies  in  the  South  sea,  by  ships  which  go
round  Cape  Horn,  a  direct  intercourse  is  opened  be-
tween Chili  and  the  mother-country.  The  gold,  the  sil-
ver, and  the  other  commodities  of  the  province  will  be
exchanged  in  its  own  harbours  for  the  manufactures  of
Europe.  Chili  may  speedily  rise  into  that  importance
among  the  Spanish  settlements  to  which  it  is  entitled
by  its  natural  advantages.  It  may  become  the  granary
of  Peru,  and  the  other  provinces  alongthe  Pacific  ocean.
It  may  supply  them  with  wine,  with  cattle,  with  horses,
with  hemp,  and  many  other  articles  for  which  they
now  depend  upon  Europe.  Though  the  new  system
has  been  established  only  a  few  years,  those  effects  of
it  begin  already  to  be observed.* If  it  shall  be  ad-

'  Campomanes, ii.  157.
VOL.  VIII.  F

66  AMERICA.

hered  to  with  any  steadiness  for  half  a  century,  one
may  venture  to  foretell,  that  population,  industry,  and
opulence  will  advance  in  this  province  with  rapid
progress.

Provinces To  the  cast  of  the  Andes,  the  provinces  of
and  RTde  Tucumau  and  Rio  de  la  Plata  border  on  Chili,
la  Plata, ^i^^  \[\^q  [^  ^crc  dependent  on  the  viceroyalty
of  Peru. These  regions  of  immense  extent  stretch  in
length from  north  to  south above  thirteen hundred
miles, and  in  breadth  more  than  a  thousand. This
Northern couutry,  wliicli  is larger  than  most  European
em d^vu' kingdoms,  naturally  forms  itself  into  two  great
sion. divisions,  one  on  the  north,  and  the  other  on
the  south  of  Rio  de  la  Plata. The  former  comprehends
Paraguay,  the  famous  missions  of  the  Jesuits,  and  se-
veral other  districts. But  as  disputes  have  long  sub-
sisted between  the  courts  of  Spain  and  Portugal,  con-
cerning its  boundaries,  which, it  is  probable, will  be
soon  finally  ascertained,  either  amicably,  or  by  the  de-
cision of  the  sword,  I  choose  to  reserve  my  account  of
this  northern  division,  until  I  enter  upon  the  history  of
Portuguese  America,  with  which  it  is  intimately  con-
nected ;  and,  in  relating  it, I shall  be  able,  from  au-
thentic materials,  supplied  both  by  Spain  and  Portugal,
to  give  a  full  and  accurate  description  of  the  operations
and  views  of  the  Jesuits,  in  rearing  that  singular  fa-
bric of  policy  in  America, which  has  drawn  so  much
attention,  and  has  been  so  imperfectly  understood.  The
latter  division  of  the  province  contains  the govern-
ments of  Tucuman  and  Buenos- Ayres,  and  to  these  I
shall  at  present  confine  my  observations.
View  of The  Spaniards  entered  this  part  of  America
the  latter. ^^  ^^^  ^-^^^^  j^g  ^^  Plata;  and  though  a  suc-
cession of  cruel  disasters  befel  them  in  their  early  at-
tempts to  establish  their  dominion  in  it,  they  were  en-
couraged to  persist  in  the  design,  at  first  by  the  hopes
of  discovering  mines  in  the  interior  country,  and  after-

BOOK VII.  ()7

ward  by  the  necessity  of  occupying  it,  in  order  to
prevent  any  other  nation  from  settling  there,  and  pene-
trating by  this  route  into  their  rich  possessions  in  Peru.
But  except  at  Buenos- Ay  res,  they  have  made  no  settle-
ment of  any  consequence  in  all  the  vast  space  which  I
have  mentioned.  There  are  indeed,  scattered  over  it,
a  few  places  on  which  they  have  bestowed  the  name
of  towns,  and  to  which  they  have  endeavoured  to  add
some  dignity,  by  erecting  them  into  bishoprics ;  but
they  are  no  better  than  paltry  villages,  each  with  two
or  three  hundred  inhabitants.  One  circumstance,  how-
ever, which  was  not  originally  foreseen,  has  contri-
buted to  render  this  district,  though  thinly  peopled,
of  considerable  importance.  The  province  of  Tucuman,
together  with  the  country  to  the  south  of  the  Plata,
instead  of  being  covered  with  wood  like  other  parts
of  America,  forms  one  extensive  open  plain,  almost
without  a  tree.  The  soil  is  a  deep  fertile  mould,  wa-
tered by  many  streams  descending  from  the  Andes,
and  clothed  in  perpetual  verdure.  In  this  rich  pas-
turage, the  horses  and  cattle  imported  by  the  Spa-
niards from  Europe  have  multiplied  to  a  degree  which
almost  exceeds  belief.  This  has  enabled  the  inhabi-
tants not  only  to  open  a  lucrative  trade  with  Peru,  by
supplying  it  with  cattle,  horses,  and  mules,  but  to
carry  on  a  commerce  no  less  beneficial,  by  the  expor-
tation of  hides  to  Europe.  From  both,  the  colony  has
derived  great  advantages.  But  its  commodious  situa-
tion for  carrying  on  contraband  trade,  has  been  the
chief  source  of  its  prosperity.  While  the  court  of  Ma-
drid adhered  to  its  ancient  system,  with  respect  to  its
communication  with  America,  the  river  De  la  Plata
lay  so  much  out  of  the  course  of  Spanish  navigation,
that  interlopers,  almost  without  any  risk  of  being  either
observed  or  obstructed,  could  pour  in  European  manu-
factures in  such  quantities,  that  they  not  only  supplied
the  wants  of  the  colony,  but  were  conveyed  into  all  the

' F  2

m  -  AMERICA.

eastern  districts  of  Peru.  When  the  Portuguese  in
Brazil  extended  their  settlements  to  the  banks  of  Rio
de  la  Plata,  a  new  channel  was  opened,  by  which  pro-
hibited commodities  flowed  into "  the  Spanish  territo-
ries, with  still  more  facility,  and  in  greater  abundance.
This  illegal  traffic,  however  detrimental  to  the  parent-
state,  contributed  to  the  increase  of  the  settlement,
which  had  the  immediate  benefit  of  it,  and  Buenos-
Ayres  became  gradually  a  populous  and  opulent  town.
What  may  be  the  effect  of  the  alteration  lately  made
in  the  government  of  this  colony,  the  nature  of  which
shall  be  described  in  the  subsequent  Book,  cannot  hi-
therto be  known.

Other  tcrri-  "^^^  ^^^®  otlicr  territories  of  Spain  in  the  New
tories  of  World,  the  islands  excepted,  of  whose  disco-
very and  reduction  I  have  formerly  given  an
account,  are  comprehended  under  two  great  divisions  ;
the  former  denominated  the  kingdom  of  Tierra  Firme,
the  provinces  of  which  stretch  along  the  Atlantic,  from
the  eastern  frontier  of  New  Spain  to  the  mouth  of  the
Orinoco  ;  the  latter,  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada,  si-
tuated in  the  interior  country.  With  a  short  view  of
these  I  shall  close  this  part  of  my  work.

To the  east  of  Vera^ua, the  last  province

Darien.  .  o ^  x

subject  to  the  viceroy  of  Mexico,  lies  the
isthmus  of  Darien.  Though  it  was  in  this  part  of  the
continent  that  the  Spaniards  first  began  to  plant  colo-
nies, they  have  made  no  considerable  progress  in  peo-
pling it.  As  the  country  is  extremely  mountainous,
deluged  with  rain  during  a  good  part  of  the  year,  re-
markably unhealthful,  and  contains  no  mines  of  great
value,  the  Spaniards  would  probably  have  abandoned
it  altogether,  if  they  had  not  been  allured  to  continue
by  the  excellence  of  the  harbour  of  Porto-Bello  on  the
one  sea,  and  that  of  Panama  on  the  other.  These  have
been  called  the  keys  to  the  communication  between  the
north  and  south  sea,  between  Spain  and  her  most  va-

BOOK Vil.  69

luable  colonies.  In  consequence  of  this  advantage,
Panama  lias  become  a  considerable  and  thriving  town.
The  peculiar  noxiousness  of  its  climate  has  prevented
Porto-Bello  from  increasing  in  the  same  proportion.
As  the  intercourse  with  the  settlements  in  the  Pacific
ocean  is  now  carried  on  by  another  channel,  it  is  pro-
bable that  both  Porto-Bello  and  Panama  will  decline,
when  no  longer  nourished  and  enriched  by  that  com-
merce to  which  they  were  indebted  for  their  prosperity,
and  even  their  existence.

Cartha-  The  proviuccs  of  Carthagena  and  Santa
lanL^"  Martha  stretch  to  the  eastward  of  the  isthmus
Martha,  ^f  Daricu.  The  country  still  continues  moun-
tainous, but  its  valleys  begin  to  expand,  are  well  wa-
tered, and  extremely  fertile.  Pedro  de  Heredia  sub-
jected this  part  of  America  to  the  crown  of  Spain,
about  the  year  1532.  It  is  thinly  peopled,  and  of
course  ill  cultivated.  It  produces,  however,  a  variety
of  valuable  drugs,  and  some  precious  stones,  particu-
larly emeralds.  But  its  chief  importance  is  derived
from  the  harbour  of  Carthagena,  the  safest  and  best
fortified  of  any  in  the  American  dominions  of  Spain.
In  a  situation  so  favourable,  commerce  soon  beo-an  to
flourish.  As  early  as  the  year  1544,  it  seems  to  have
been  a  town  of  some  note.  But  when  Carthaorena  was
chosen  as  the  port  in  which  the  gal  eons  should  first
begin  to  trade  on  their  arrival  from  Europe,  and  to
which  they  were  directed  to  return,  in  order  to  prepare
for  their  voyage  homeward,  the  commerce  of  its  inha-
bitants was  so  much  favoured  by  this  arrangement,
that  it  soon  became  one  of  the  most  populous,  opulent,
and  beautiful  cities  in  America.  There  is,  however,,
reason  to  apprehend,  that  it  has  reached  its  highest
point  of  exaltation,  and  that  it  will  be  so  far  affected
by  the  change  in  the  Spanish  system  of  trade  with
America,  which  has  withdrawn  from  it  the  desirable-
visits  of  the  galeons,  as  to  feel  at  least  a  temporary  de-

70  AMERICA.

cline.  But  the  wealth  now  collected  there,  will  soon
find  or  create  employment  for  itself,  and  may  be  turned
with  advantaofe  into  some  new  channel.  Its  harbour
is  so  safe,  and  so  conveniently  situated  for  receiving
commodities  from  Europe,  its  merchants  have  been  so
long  accustomed  to  convey  these  into  all  the  adjacent
provinces,  that  it  is  probable  they  will  still  retain  this
branch  of  trade,  and  Carthagena  continue  to  be  a  city
of  great  importance.

The  province  contig-uous  to  Santa  Martha  on

Venezuela.  ^  ••ii  ai  i r\- i

the  east,  was  first  visited  by  Alonso  de  Ojeda,
in  the  year  1499;"  and  the  Spaniards,  on  their  land-
ing there,  having  observed  some  huts  in  an  Indian  vil-
lage built  upon  piles,  in  order  to  raise  them  above  the
stagnated  water  which  covered  the  plain,  were  led  to
bestow  upon  it  the  name  of  Venezuela,  or  Little  Ve-
nice, by  their  usual  propensity  to  find  a  resemblance
between  what  they  discovered  in  America,  and  the
objects  which  were  familiar  to  them  in  Europe.  They
made  some  attempts  to  settle  there,  but  with  little  suc-
cess. The  final  reduction  of  the  province  was  accom-
plished by  means  very  different  from  those  to  which
Spain  was  indebted  for  its  other  acquisitions  in  the
New  World.  The  ambition  of  Charles  V.  often  en-
gaged him  in  operations  of  such  variety  and  extent,
that  his  revenues  were  not  sufficient  to  defray  the  ex-
pense of  carrying  them  into  execution.  Among  other
expedients  for  supplying  the  deficiency  of  his  funds,  he
had  borrowed  large  sums  from  the  Velsers  of  Augsburgh,
the  most  opulent  merchants  at  that  time  in  Europe.
By  way  of  retribution  for  these,  or  in  hopes,  perhaps,
of  obtaining  a  new  loan,  he  bestowed  upon  them  the
province  of  Venezuela,  to  be  held  as  an  hereditary  fief
from  the  crown  of  Castile,  on  condition  that  within  a
limited  time  they  should  render  themselves  masters  of
the  country,  and  establish  a  colony  there. Under  the

"  Book  ii.  Tol.  vi.  p.  16.3.

BOOK  vn.  71

direction  of  such  persons,  it  might  have  been  expect-
ed, that  a  settlement  would  have  been  established  on
maxims  very  different  from  those  of  the  Spaniards,  and
better  calculated  to  encourage  such  useful  industry,  as
mercantile  proprietors  might  have  known  to  be  the
most  certain  source  of  prosperity  and  opulence. But
unfortunately  they  committed  the  execution  of  their
plan  to  some  of  those  soldiers  of  fortune  with  which
Germany  abounded  in  the  sixteenth  century. These
adventurers,  impatient  to  amass  riches,  that  they  might
speedily  abandon  a  station  which  they  soon  discovered
to  be  very  uncomfortable,  instead  of  planting  a  colony
in  order  to  cultivate  and  improve  the  country,  wan-
dered from  district  to  district  in  search  of  mines,  plun-
dering the  natives  with  unfeeling  rapacity,  or  oppress-
ing them  by  the  imposition  of  intolerable  tasks. In
the  course  of  a  few  years,  their  avarice  and  exactions,
in  comparison  with  which  those  of  the  Spaniards  were
moderate,  desolated  the  province  so  completely,  that  it
could  hardly  afford  them  subsistence,  and  the  Velsers
relinquished  a  property  from  which  the  inconsiderate
conduct  of  their  agents  left  them  no  hope  of  ever  de-
riving any  advantage.'" When  the  wretched  remain-
der of  the  Germans  deserted  Venezuela,  the  Spaniards
again  took  possession  of  it ;  but  notwithstanding  many
natural  advantages,  it  is  one  of  their  most  languishing
and  unproductive  settlements.

The  provinces  of  Caraccas  and  Cumana  are

Caraccas iinio  -i  ••  i-

and  Cu-  the  last  oi  the  k>panisii  territories  on  this  coast ;
but  in  relating  the  origin  and  operations  of  the
mercantile  company,  in  which  an  exclusive  right  of
trade  with  them  has  been  vested,  I  shall  hereafter  have
occasion  to  consider  their  state  and  productions.
„ , . The  new  kino-dom  of  Granada  is  entirely  an

New  king-  '^  rr^^  ■

dom  of inland  country  of  great  extent. This  impor-
tant addition  was  made  to  the  dominions  of

"  Ovicdo  y  Bagiios  Hist,  de  Venezuela,  p.  11,  «kc.

72  AMERICA.

Spain  about  the  year  1536,  by  Sebastian  de  Benal-
cazar  and  Gonzalo  Ximenes  de  Quesada,  two  of  the
bravest  and  most  accomplished  officers  employed  in
the  conquest  of  America.  The  former,  who  com-
manded at  that  time  in  Quito,  attacked  it  from  the
south  ;  the  latter  made  his  invasion  from  Santa  Martha
on  the  north.  As  the  original  inhabitants  of  this  re-
gion were  farther  advanced  in  improvement,  than  any
people  in  America  but  the  Mexicans  and  Peruvians,"
they  defended  themselves  with  great  resolution  and
good  conduct.  The  abilities  and  perseverance  of
Benalcazar  and  Quesada  surmounted  all  opposition,
though  not  without  encountering  many  dangers,  and
reduced  the  country  into  the  form  of  a  Spanish  pro-
vince.

The  new  kingdom  of  Granada  is  so  far  elevated
above  the  level  of  the  sea,  that  though  it  approaches
almost  to  the  equator,  the  climate  is  remarkably  tem-
perate. The  fertility  of  its  valleys  is  not  inferior  to
that  of  the  richest  districts  in  America,  and  its  higher
grounds  yield  gold  and  precious  stones  of  various
kinds.  It  is  not  by  digging  into  the  bowels  of  the
earth  that  this  gold  is  found ;  it  is  mingled  with  the
soil  near  the  surface,  and  separated  from  it  by  re-
peated washing  with  water.  This  operation  is  carried
on  wholly  by  negro  slaves ;  for  though  the  chill  sub-
terranean air  has  been  discovered,  by  experience,  to  be
so  fatal  to  them,  that  they  cannot  be  employed  with  ad-
vantage in  the  deep  silver  mines,  they  are  more  capa-
ble of  performing  the  other  species  of  labour  than  In-
dians. As  the  natives  in  the  new  kingdom  of  Gra-
nada are  exempt  from  that  service,  which  has  wasted
their  race  so  rapidly  in  other  parts  of  America,  the
country  is  still  remarkably  populous.  Some  districts
yield  gold  with  a  profusion  no  less  wonderful  than
that  in  the  vale  of  Cineguilla,  which  I  have  formerly

*  Book  iv.  vol.  vii.  p.  19,  &c.

BOOK  vri.  73

mentioned,  and  it  is  often  found  in  large  pepitas,  or
grains,  which  manifest  the  abundance  in  which  it  is
produced.  On  a  rising  ground  near  Pamplona,  sin-
gle labourers  have  collected  in  a  day  what  was  equal
in  value  to  a  tliousand  pesos/  A  late  governor  of
Santa  Fe  brought  with  him  to  Spain  a  lump  of  pure
gold,  estimated  to  be  worth  seven  hundred  and  forty
pounds  sterling.  This,  which  is,  perhaps,  the  largest
and  finest  specimen  ever  found  in  the  New  World,  is
now  deposited  in  the  royal  cabinet  of  Madrid.  But
without  founding  any  calculation  on  what  is  rare  and
extraordinary,  the  value  of  the  gold  usually  collected  in
this  country,  particularly  in  the  provinces  of  Popayan
and  Choco  is  of  considerable  amount.  Its  towns  are
populous  and  flourishing.  The  number  of  inhabitants
in  almost  every  part  of  the  country  daily  increases.
Cultivation  and  industry  of  various  kinds  begin  to  be
encouraged,  and  to  prosper.  A  considerable  trade  is
carried  on  with  Carthagena,  the  produce  of  the  mines,
and  other  commodities,  being  conveyed  down  the  great
river  of  St.  Magdalene  to  that  city.  On  another  quar-
ter, the  new  kingdom  of  Granada  has  a  communica-
tion with  the  Atlantic  by  the  river  Orinoco ;  but  the
country  which  stretches  along  its  banks  towards  the
east,  is  little  known ;  and  imperfectly  occupied  by  the
Spaniards.

y  Piedrahita  Hist,  del  N.  Reyno.  p.  481. MS.  penes  me.

THE

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA.

BOOK VIII.

View  of After  tracing  the  progress  of  the  Spaniards

the  policy . , . , .  .  ,  .

and  trade  HI  their  discoveries  and  conquests  during  more
splntsh  than  half  a  century,  I  have  conducted  them  to
colonies.  |.]^g^^  period  when  their  authority  was  established
over  almost  all  the  vast  regions  in  the  New  World  still
subject  to  their  dominion.  The  effect  of  their  settle-
ments upon  the  countries  of  which  they  took  posses-
sion, the  maxims  which  they  adopted  in  forming  their
new  colonies,  the  interior  structure  and  policy  of  these,
together  with  the  influence  of  their  progressive  improve-
ment upon  the  parent-state,  and  upon  the  commercial
intercourse  of  nations,  are  the  objects  to  which  we  now
turn  our  attention.

Depopu-  The  first  visible  consequence  of  the  establish-
An°e"icf  ments  made  by  the  Spaniards  in  America,  was
*'J5  ^"V the  diminution  of  the  ancient  inhabitants,  to  a

effect  of

them.  degree  equally  astonishing  and  deplorable.  I
have  already,  on  diff'erent  occasions,  mentioned  the  dis-
astrous influence  under  which  the  connexion  of  the
Americans  with  the  people  of  our  hemisphere  com-
menced, both  in  the  islands  and  in  several  parts  of
the  continent,  and  have  touched  upon  various  causes
of  their  rapid  consumption.  Wherever  the  inhabitants
of  America  had  resolution  to  take  arms  in  defence  of
their  liberty  and  rights,  many  perished  in  the  unequal
contest,  and  were  cut  off  by  their  fierce  invaders. But

BOOK VIII.  75

the  greatest  desolation  followed  after  the  sword  was

sheathed,  and  the  conquerors  were  settled  in  tranquil-

f  litv. It  was  in  the  islands,  and  in  those  pro-

Causes  of J  /  i r  ^

this  in  the  vinces  of  the  continent  which  stretch  from  the
and  some  gulf  of  Trinidad  to  the  confines  of  Mexico,  that
fhTco^n-  the  fatal  effects  of  the  Spanish  dominion  were
tinent.  ^j,g^  ^^^^  ^^^^  scusibly  felt.  All  these  were
occupied  either  by  wandering  tribes  of  hunters,  or  by
such  as  had  made  but  small  progress  in  cultivation  and
industry.  When  they  were  compelled  by  their  new
masters  to  take  up  a  fixed  residence,  and  to  apply  to
regular  labour;  when  tasks  were  imposed  upon  them
disproportioned  to  their  strength,  and  were  exacted
with  unrelenting  severity,  they  possessed  not  vigour
either  of  mind  or  of  body  to  sustain  this  unusual  load
of  oppression.  Dejection  and  despair  drove  many  to
end  their  lives  by  violence.  Fatigue  and  famine  de-
stroyed more.  In  all  those  extensive  regions,  the  ori-
ginal race  of  inhabitants  wasted  away ;  in  some  it  was
totally  extinguished.  In  Mexico,  where  a  powerful  and
martial  people  distinguished  their  opposition  to  the
Spaniards  by  efforts  of  courage  worthy  of  a  better  fate,
great  numbers  fell  in  the  field ;  and  there,  as  well  as  in
Peru,  still  greater  numbers  perished  under  the  hard-
ships of  attending  the  Spanish  armies  in  their  various
expeditions  and  civil  wars,  worn  out  with  the  incessant
toil  of  carrying  their  baggage,  provisions,  and  military

stores.

^ ,  But  neither  the  ra2:e  nor  cruelty  of  the  Spa-

InNew  .  » .  ''  1  r

Spain  and  niards  wcrc  so  destructive  to  the  people  oi
Mexico  and  Peru  as  the  inconsiderate  policy
with  which  they  established  their  new  settlements.  The
former  were  temporary  calamities,  fatal  to  individuals:
the  latter  was  a  permanent  evil,  which,  with  gradual
consumption,  wasted  the  nation.  When  the  provinces
of  Mexico  and  Peru  were  divided  among  the  con-
querors, each  was  eager  to  obtain  a  district,  from  which

76  AMERICA.

he  might  expect  an  instantaneous  recompense  for  alt
his  services.  Soldiers,  accustomed  to  the  carelessness
and  dissipation  of  a  military  life,  had  neither  industry
to  carry  on  any  plan  of  regular  cultivation,  nor  patience
to  M^ait  for  its  slow  but  certain  returns.  Instead  of  set-
tling in  the  valleys  occupied  by  the  natives,  where  the
fertility  of  the  soil  would  have  amply  rewarded  the  dili-
gence of  the  planter,  they  chose  to  fix  their  stations  in
some  of  the  mountainous  regions,  frequent  both  in  New
Spain  and  in  Peru.  To  search  for  mines  of  gold  and
silver,  was  the  chief  object  of  their  activity.  The  pros-
pects which  this  opens,  and  the  alluring  hopes  which
it  continually  presents,  correspond  wonderfully  with
the  spirit  of  enterprise  and  adventure  that  animated  the
first  emigrants  to  America  in  every  part  of  their  con-
duct. In  order  to  push  forward  those  favourite  projects,
so  many  hands  were  wanted,  that  the  service  of  the
natives  became  indispensably  requisite.  They  were  ac-
cordingly compelled  to  abandon  their  ancient  habita-
tions in  the  plains,  and  driven  in  crowds  to  the  moun-
tains. This  sudden  transition  from  the  sultry  climate
of  the  valleys  to  the  chill  penetrating  air  peculiar  to
high  lands  in  the  torrid  zone ;  exorbitant  labour,  scanty
or  unwholesome  nourishment,  and  the  despondency
occasioned  by  a  species  of  oppression  to  which  they
were  not  accustomed,  and  of  which  they  saw  no  end,
affected  them  nearly  as  much  as  their  less  industrious
countrymen  in  the  islands.  They  sunk  under  the  united
pressure  of  those  calamities,  and  melted  away  with  al-
most equal  rapidity.^  In  consequence  of  this,  together
with  the  introduction  of  the  small-pox,  a  malady  un-
known in  America,  and  extremely  fatal  to  the  natives,''
the  number  of  people  both  in  New  Spain  and  Peru  was
so  much  reduced,  that  in  a  few  years  the  accounts  of
their  ancient  population  appeared  almost  incredible.*'

'^  Torquemeda,  i.  613.

>»  B.  Diaz.  c.  V24. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  x.  c.  4. Ulloa  Enlreten.  206.

c  Torquem.  615.  642,  643. See  Note  XXI.

BOOK Vlir.  77

Not  ti.e  Such  are  the  most  considerable  events  and

Tny  s/sLti  causcs which, by  their  combined  operation,
of  policy; contributed  to  depopulate  America. Without
attending  to these,  many  authors, astonished at  the
suddenness  of  the  desolation,  have  ascribed  this  unex-
ampled event  to  a  system  of  policy  no  less  profound
than  atrocious. The  Spaniards,  as  they  pretend,  con-
scious of  their  own  inability  to  occupy  the  vast  regions
which  they  had  discovered,  and  foreseeing  the  impossi-
bility of  maintaining  their  authority  over  a  people  in-
finitely superior  to  themselves  in  number,  in  order  to
preserve  the  possession  of  America,  resolved  to  exter-
minate the  inhabitants,  and  by  converting  a  great  part
of  the  country  into  a  desert,  endeavoured  to  secure  their
own  dominion  over  it.'* But  nations  seldom  extend
their  views  to  objects  so  remote,  or  lay  their  plans  so
deep ;  and,  for  the  honour  of  humanity  we  may  observe,
that  no  nation  ever  deliberately  formed  such  an  execra-
ble scheme. The  Spanish  monarchs,  far  from  acting
upon  any  such  system  of  destruction,  were  uniformly
solicitous  for  the  preservation  of  their  new  subjects.
With  Isabella,  zeal  for  propagating  the  Christian  faith,
together  wuth  the  desire  of  communicating  the  know-
ledge of  truth,  and  the  consolations  of  religion,  to  peo-
ple destitute  of  spiritual  light,  were  more  than  ostensi-
ble motives  for  encouraging  Columbus  to  attempt  his
discoveries. Upon  his  success,  she  endeavoured  to  ful-
fil her  pious  purpose,  and  manifested  the  most  tender
concern  to  secure  not  only  religious  instruction,  but
mild  treatment,  to  that  inoffensive  race  of  men  subjected
to  her  crown.'' Her  successors  adopted  the  same  ideas ;
and,  on  many  occasions,  which  I  have  mentioned,  their
authority  was  interposed,  in  the  most  vigorous  exer-
tions, to  protect  the  people  of  America  from  the  oppres-
sion of  their  Spanish  subjects. Their  regulations  for
this  purpose  were  numerous,  and  often  repeated. They

^  See  Note  XXII.  '  See  Note  XXIII.

78  AMERICA.

were  framed  with  wisdom,  and  dictated  by  humanity.
After  their  possessions  in  the  New  World  became  so  ex-
tensive, as  might  have  excited  some  apprehensions  of
difficulty  in  retaining  their  dominion  over  them,  the
spirit  of  their  regulations  was  as  mild  as  when  their
settlements  were  confined  to  the  islands  alone.  Their
solicitude  to  protect  the  Indians  seems  rather  to  have
augmented  as  their  acquisitions  increased :  and  from
ardour  to  accomplish  this,  they  enacted,  and  endea-
voured to  enforce  the  execution  of  laws,  which  excited
a  formidable  rebellion  in  one  of  their  colonies,  and
spread  alarm  and  disaffection  through  all  the  rest.  But
the  avarice  of  individuals  was  too  violent  to  be  con-
trolled by  the  authority  of  laws.  Rapacious  and  daring
adventurers,  far  removed  from  the  seat  of  government,
little  accustomed  to  the  restraints  of  military  discipline
while  in  service,  and  still  less  disposed  to  respect  the
feeble  jurisdiction  of  civil  power  in  an  infant  colony,
despised  or  eluded  every  regulation  that  set  bounds  to
their  exactions  and  tyranny.  The  parent-state,  with
persevering  attention,  issued  edicts  to  prevent  the  op-
pression of  the  Indians;  the  colonists,  regardless  of
these,  or  trusting  to  their  distance  for  impunity,  con-
tinued to  consider  and  treat  them  as  slaves.  The  go-
vernors themselves,  and  other  officers  employed  in  the
colonies,  several  of  whom  were  as  indigent  and  rapa-
cious as  the  adventurers  over  whom  they  presided,  were
too  apt  to  adopt  their  contemptuous  ideas  of  the  con-
quered people;  and  instead  of  checking,  encouraged
or  connived  at  their  excesses.  The  desolation  of  the
New  World  should  not  then  be  charged  on  the  court
of  Spain,  or  be  considered  as  the  effect  of  any  sys-
tem of  policy  adopted  there.  It  ought  to  be  imputed
wholly  to  the  indigent  and  often  unprincipled  adven-
turers, whose  fortune  it  was  to  be  the  conquerors  and
first  planters  of  America,  who,  by  measures  no  less
inconsiderate  than  unjust,  counteracted  the  edicts  of

BOOK VIII.  79

their  sovereign,  and  have  brought  disgrace  upon  their

country.

Nor  the With  still  greater  injustice  have  many  authors

effect

ect  of represented  the  intoleratino:  spirit  of  the  Roman

igion.  IT  T-  1  n

Catholic  religion,  as  the  cause  of  exterminating
the  Americans,  and  have  accused  the  Spanish  eccle-
siastics of  animating  their  countrymen  to  the  slaughter
of  that  innocent  people,  as  idolaters  and  enemies  of
God.  But  the  first  missionaries  who  visited  America,
though  weak  and  illiterate,  were  pious  men.  They
early  espoused  the  defence  of  the  natives,  and  vindi-
cated their  character  from  the  aspersions  of  their  con-
querors, who,  describing  them  as  incapable  of  being-
formed  to  the  offices  of  civil  life,  or  of  comprehending
the  doctrines  of  religion,  contended,  that  they  were
a  subordinate  race  of  men,  on  whom  the  hand  of  na-
ture had  set  the  mark  of  servitude.  From  the  accounts
which  I  have  given  of  the  humane  and  persevering  zeal
of  the  Spanish  missionaries,  in  protecting  the  helpless
flock  committed  to  their  charge,  they  appear  in  a  light
which  reflects  lustre  upon  their  function.  They  were
ministers  of  peace,  who  endeavoured  to  wrest  the  rod
from  the  hands  of  oppressors.  To  their  powerful  in-
terposition the  Americans  were  indebted  for  every  re-
gulation tending  to  mitigate  the  rigour  of  their  fate.
The  clergy  in  the  Spanish  settlements,  regular  as  well
as  secular,  are  still  considered  by  the  Indians  as  their
natural  guardians,  to  whom  they  have  recourse  under
the  hardships  and  exactions  to  which  they  are  too  often
exposed/

The  nutn-  ^ut,  notwithstanding  the  rapid  depopulation  of
Indian^ ^  America,  a  very  considerable  number  of  the  na-
stiii  re- tive  race  still  remains  both  in  Mexico  and  Peru

raaining.  • n • i  '

especially  in  those  parts  which  were  not  exposed
to  the  first  fury  of  the  Spanish  arms,  or  desolated  by
the  first  efforts  of  their  industry,  still  more  ruinous. In

f  Sec  Note  XXIV.

80  AMERICA.

Guatimala,  Chiapa,  Nicaragua,  and  the  other  delight-
ful provinces  of  the  Mexican  empire, which  stretch
along  the  South  sea,  the  race  of  Indians  is  still  nume-
rous. Their  settlements in  some  places are  so  popu-
lous, as  to  merit  the  name of  cities." In  the  three
audiences  into  which  New  Spain  is  divided,  there  are
at  least  two  millions  of  Indians  ;  a  pitiful  remnant,  in-
deed, of  its  ancient  population,  but  such  as  still  forms
a  body  of  people  superior  in  number  to  that  of  all  the
other  inhabitants  of  this  extensive  country.*" In  Peru
several  districts,  particularly  in  the  kingdom  of  Quito,
are  occupied  almost  entirely  by Indians. In other
provinces  they  are  mingled  with  the  Spaniards,  and  in
many  of  their  settlements  are  almost  the  only  persons
who  practise  the  mechanic  arts,  and  fill  most  of  the
inferior  stations  in  society. As  the  inhabitants  both  of
Mexico  and  Peru  were  accustomed  to  a  fixed  residence,
and  to  a  certain  degree  of  regular  industry,  less  vio-
lence was  requisite  in  bringing  them  to  some  confor-
mity with  the  European  modes  of  civil  life. But  wher-
ever the  Spaniards  settled  among  the  savage  tribes  of
America,  their  attempts  to  incorporate  with  them  have
been  always  fruitless,  and  often  fatal  to  the  natives.
Impatient  of  restraint,  and  disdaining  labour  as  a  mark
of  servility,  they  either  abandoned  their  original  seats,
and  sought  for  independence  in  mountains  and  forests
inaccessible  to  their  oppressors,  or  perished  when  re-
duced to  a  state  repugnant  to  their  ancient  ideas  and
habits. In  the districts  adjacent  to Carthagena,  to
Panama,  and  to  Buenos-Ayres,  the  desolation  is  more
general  than  even  in  those  parts  of  Mexico  and  Peru,
of  which  the  Spaniards  have  taken  most  full  possession.
General  But  the  establishments  of  the  Spaniards  in

ideas  of  the  ^he  Ncw  World,  thoug-h  fatal  to  its  ancient  in-

policy  of  ■'  o  -111

Spain  in  its  habitants,  were  made  at  a  period  when  that
monarchy  was  capable  of  forming  them  to  best

K  See  Note  XXV.  "  See  Note  XXVI.

BOOK VIII.  81

advantage.  By  the  union  of  all  its  petty  kingdoms,
Spain  was  become  a  powerful  state,  equal  to  so  great
an  undertaking.  Its  monarchs,  having  extended  their
prerogatives  far  beyond  the  limits  which  once  circum-
scribed the  regal  power  in  every  kingdom  of  Europe,
were  hardly  subject  to  control,  either  in  concerting  or
in  executing  their  measures.  In  every  wide-extended
empire,  the  form  of  government  must  be  simple,  and
the  sovereign  authority  such,  that  its  resolutions  may
be  taken  with  promptitude,  and  may  pervade  the  whole
with  sufficient  force.  Such  was  the  power  of  the  Spa-
nish monarchs,  when  they  were  called  to  deliberate
concernino-  the  mode  of  establishino-  their  dominion
over  the  most  remote  provinces  which  had  ever  been
subject  to  any  European  state.  In  this  deliberation,
they  felt  themselves  under  no  constitutional  restraint,
and  that,  as  independent  masters  of  their  own  resolves,
they  might  issue  the  edicts  requisite  for  modelling  the
government  of  the  new  colonies,  by  a  mere  ^act  of  pre-
rogative.

Early  in-  This  early  interposition  of  the  Spanish  crown,
o75"e  regal  ^^  ordcr  to  Tcgulate  the  policy  and  trade  of  its
authority,  colonics,  is  a  peculiarity  which  distinguishes
their  progress  from  that  of  the  colonies  of  any  other
European  nation.  When  the  Portuguese,  the  English,
and  French,  took  possession  of  the  regions  in  America
which  they  now  occupy,  the  advantages  which  these
promised  to  yield  were  so  remote  and  uncertain,  that
their  colonies  were  suffered  to  struggle  through  a  hard
infancy,  almost  without  guidance  or  protection  from
the  parent-state.  But  gold  and  silver,  the  first  pro-
ductions of  the  Spanish  settlements  in  the  New  World,
were  more  alluring,  and  immediately  attracted  the  at-
tention of  their  monarchs.  Though  they  had  contri-
buted little  to  the  discovery,  and  almost  nothing  to  the
conquest  of  the  New  World,  they  instantly  assumed

VOL. VIII.  G

^2  AMERICA.

the  function  of  its  legislators,  and  having  acquired  a
species  of  dominion  formerly  unknown,  they  formed  a
plan  for  exercising  it,  to  which  nothing  similar  occurs
in  the  history  of  human  affairs.

All  power The  fundamental  maxim  of  Spanish  juris-
ty  vesTexTin  prudcucc,  with  rcspcct  to  Amcrica,  is  to  con-
the  crown,  gjjjgj.  -yj^liat  has  bccu  acquircd  there  as  vested
in  the  crown,  rather  than  in  the  state. By  the  bull  of
Alexander  VI.,  on  which,  as  its great  charter,  Spain
founded  its  right,  all  the  regions  that  had  been,  or
should  be  discovered,  were  bestowed as  a  free  gift
upon  Ferdinand  and  Isabella. They  and  their  succes-
sors were  uniformly  held  to  be  the  universal  proprietors
of  the  vast  territories  which  the  arms  of  their  subjects
conquered  in  the  New  World.  From  them  all  grants  of
land  there  flowed,  and  to  them  they  finally  returned.
The  leaders  who  conducted  the  various  expeditions,  the
governors  who  presided  over  the  different  colonies,  the
officers  of  justice  and  the  ministers  of  religion,  were  all
appointed  by  their  authority,  and  removable  at  their
pleasure. The  people  who  composed  infant  settle-
ments were  entitled  to  no  privileges  independent  of
the  sovereign,  or  that  served  as  a  barrier  against  the
power  of  the  crown. It  is  true,  that  when  towns  were
built,  and  formed  into  bodies  corporate,  the  citizens
were  permitted  to  elect  their  own  magistrates,  who  go-
verned them  by  laws  which  the  community  enacted.
Even  in  the  most  despotic  states,  this  feeble  spark  of
liberty  is  not  extinguished. But  in  the  cities  of  Spa-
nish America,  this  jurisdiction  is  merely  municipal,
and  is  confined  to  the  regulation  of  their  own  interior
commerce  and  police. In  whatever  relates  to  public
government,  and  the  general  interest,  the  will  of  the
sovereign  is  law. No  political  power  originates  from
the  people. All  centres  in  the  crown,  and  in  the  offi-
cers of  its  nomination.

BOOK  vni.  83

AH  the  new When  the conquests of  the  Spaniards  in

dominions .  •  i , i ,i •  i  •

of  Spain  America  were  compieted,  their  monarchs,  in
tStwo'Jice-  forming  the  plan  of  internal  policy  for  their
roys.  new  dominions, divided  them into two im-

mense governments,  one  subject  to  the  viceroy  of  New
Spain,  the  other  to  the  viceroy  of  Peru.  The  jurisdic-
tion of  the  former  extended  over  all  the  provinces  be-
longing to  Spain  in  the  northern  division  of  the  Ame-
rican continent.  Under  that  of  the  latter,  was  com-
prehended whatever  she  possessed  in  South  America.
This  arrangement,  which,  from  the  beginning,  was
attended  with  many  inconveniences,  became  intolerable
when  the  remote  provinces  of  each  viceroyalty  began
to  improve  in  industry  and  population.  The  people
complained  of  their  subjection  to  a  superior,  whose
place  of  residence  was  so  distant,  or  so  inaccessible,
as  almost  excluded  them  from  any  intercourse  with  the
seat  of  government.  The  authority  of  the  viceroy
over  districts  so  far  removed  from  his  own  eye  and
observation,  was  unavoidably  both  feeble  and  ill  di-
rected. As  a  remedy  for  those  evils,  a  third  viceroyalty
has  been  established  in  the  present  century,  at  Santa
Fe  de  Bogota,  the  capital  of  the  new  kingdom  of  Gra-
nada, the  jurisdiction  of  which  extends  over  the  whole
kingdom  of  Tierra  Firme  and  the  province  of  Quito.'
rpjjgjj  Those  viceroys  not  only  represent  the  person
powers.  Qf  their  sovereign,  but  possess  his  regal  prero-
gatives within  the  precincts  of  their  own  governments
in  their  utmost  extent.  Like  him,  they  exercise  supreme
authority  in  every  department  of  government,  civil,
military,  and  criminal.  They  have  the  sole  right  of
nominating  the  persons  who  hold  many  offices  of  the
highest  importance,  and  the  occasional  privilege  of
supplying  those  which,  when  they  become  vacant  by
death,  are  in  the  royal  gift,  until  the  successor  appoint-
ed by  the  king  shall  arrive. The  external  pomp  of

*  Voy.  de  Ulloa,  i.  23.  255.
Q  2

84  AMERICA.

their  government  is  suited  to  its  real  dignity  and  power.
Their  courts  are  formed  upon  the  model  of  that  at
Madrid,  with  horse  and  foot  guards,  a  household  regu-
larly established,  numerous  attendants,  and  ensigns  of
command,  displaying  such  magnificence,  as  hardly  re-
tains the  appearance  of  delegated  authority.''
Courts  of  But  ^^  t^^®  viceroys  cannot  discharge  in  per-
audience.  gQj-,  ^|-jg  fuuctions  of  a  Supreme  magistrate  in
every  part  of  their  extensive  jurisdiction,  they  are  aided
in  their  government  by  officers  and  tribunals  similar  to
those  in  Spain.  The  conduct  of  civil  affairs  in  the
various  provinces  and  districts,  into  which  the  Spanish
dominions  in  America  are  divided,  is  committed  to
magistrates  of  various  orders  and  denominations;  some
appointed  by  the  king,  others  by  the  viceroy,  but  all
subject  to  the  command  of  the  latter,  and  amenable  to
his  jurisdiction.  The  administration  of  justice  is  vested
in  tribunals,  known  by  the  name  of  Audiences,  and
formed  upon  the  model  of  the  court  of  chancery  in
Spain.  These  are  eleven  in  number,  and  dispense
justice  to  as  many  districts,  into  which  the  Spanish  do-
minions in  America  are  divided.'  The  number  of
judges  in  the  court  of  audience  is  various,  according
to  the  extent  and  importance  of  their  jurisdiction.  The
station  is  no  less  honourable  than  lucrative,  and  is  com-
monly filled  by  persons  of  such  abilities  and  merit  as
renders  this  tribunal  extremely  respectable.  Both  civil
and  criminal  causes  come  under  their  cognizance,  and
for  each  peculiar  judges  are  set  a  part.  Though  it  is
Their  juris- only  in  the  most  despotic  governments,  that
diction.  ^Q  sovereign  exercises  in  person  the  formida-
ble prerogative  of  administering  justice  to  his  subjects,
and  in  absolving,  or  condemning,  consults  no  law  but
what  is  deposited  in  his  own  breast ;  though,  in  all
the  monarchies  of  Europe,  judicial  authority  is  com-
mitted to  magistrates,  whose  decisions  are  regulated

k  UiJoa,  Voj.  i.  432. Gage,  61.  »  See  Note  XXVII.

BOOK  vm.  85

by  known  laws  and  established  forms,  the  Spanish  vice-
roys have  often  attempted  to  intrude  themselves  into
the  seat  of  justice,  and  with  an  ambition  which  their
distance  from  the  control  of  a  superior  rendered  bold,
have  aspired  at  a  power  which  their  master  does  not
venture  to  assume.  In  order  to  check  a  usurpation
which  must  have  annihilated  justice  and  security  in  the
Spanish  colonies,  by  subjecting  the  lives  and  property
of  all  to  the  will  of  a  single  man,  the  viceroys  have  been
prohibited,  in  the  most  explicit  terms,  by  repeated  laws,
from  interfering  in  the  judicial  proceedings  of  the  courts
of  audience,  or  from  delivering  an  opinion,  or  giving  a
voice  with  respect  to  any  point  litigated  before  them.""
In  some  particular  cases,  in  which  any  question  of  civil
right  is  involved,  even  the  political  regulations  of  the
viceroy  may  be  brought  under  the  review  of  the  court
of  audience,  which,  in  those  instances,  maybe  deemed
an  intermediate  power  placed  between  him  and  the
people,  as  a  constitutional  barrier  to  circumscribe  his
jurisdiction.  But  as  legal  restraints  on  a  person  who
represents  the  sovereign,  and  is  clothed  with  his  autho-
rity, are  little  suited  to  the  genius  of  Spanish  policy  ;
the  hesitation  and  reserve  with  which  it  confers  this
power  on  the  courts  of  audience  are  remarkable.  They
may  advise,  they  may  remonstrate  ;  but,  in  the  event
of  a  direct  collision  between  their  opinion  and  the  will
of  the  viceroy,  what  he  determines  must  be  carried  into
execution,  and  nothing  remains  for  them,  but  to  lay  the
matter  before  the  king  and  the  council  of  the  Indies."
But  to  be  entitled  to  remonstrate,  and  inform  against
a  person,  before  whom  all  others  must  be  silent,  and
tamely  submit  to  his  decrees,  is  a  privilege  which  adds
dignity  to  the  courts  of  audience.  This  is  farther
augmented  by  another  circumstance.  Upon  the  death
of  a  viceroy,  without  any  provision  of  a  successor  by

ra  Recop.  lib.  ii.  tit.  xv.  1.  35.  38.  44.  lib.  iii.  tit  iii.  I.  36,  37.
n  Solorz.  de  Jure  Ind.  lib.  iv.  c.  3.  n.  40,  41. Recop.  lib.  ii.  tit.  xv.  I.  36.  lib.
iii.  lit.  iii.  1.  34.  lib.  v.  tit.  ix.  1.  1.

86  AMERICA.

the  king,  the  supreme  power  is  vested  in  the  court  of
audience  resident  in  the  capital  of  the  viceroyalty,  and
the  senior  judge,  assisted  by  his  brethren,  exercises  all
the  functions  of  the  viceroy  while  the  office  continues
vacant."  In  matters  which  come  under  the  cognizance
of  the  audiences,  in  the  course  of  their  ordinary  juris-
diction, as  courts  of  justice,  their  sentences  are  final  in
every  litigation  concerning  property  of  less  value  than
six  thousand  pesos  ;  but  when  the  subject  in  dispute
exceeds  that  sum,  their  decisions  are  subject  to  review,
and  may  be  carried  by  appeal  before  the  royal  council
of  the  Indies.P

Council  of  In  this  council,  one  of  the  most  considerable
the  Indies,  jj^  |.|-jg  mouarchy  for  dignity  and  power,  is
vested  the  supreme  government  of  all  the  Spanish  do-
minions in  America.  It  was  first  established  by  Fer-
dinand, in  the  year  1511,  and  brought  into  a  more
perfect  form  by  Charles  V.  in  the  year  1524.  Its
jurisdiction  extends  to  every  department,  eccle-

Its  power. . .  ....  ./I

siastical,  civil,  military,  and  commercial.  All
laws  and  ordinances  relative  to  the  government  and
police  of  the  colonies  originate  there,  and  must  be  ap-
proved of  by  two-thirds  of  the  members,  before  they
are  issued  in  the  name  of  the  king.  All  the  offices,
of  which  the  nomination  is  reserved  to  the  crown,  are
conferred  in  this  council.  To  it  each  person  employed
in  America,  from  the  viceroy  downwards,  is  accountable.
It  reviews  their  conduct,  rewards  their  services,  and
inflicts  the  punishments  due  to  their  malversations.''
Before  it  is  laid  whatever  intelligence,  either  public  or
secret,  is  received  from  America ;  and  every  scheme  of
improving  the  administration,  the  police,  or  the  com-
merce of  the  colonies,  is  submitted  to  its  consideration.
From  the  first  institution  of  the  council  of  the  Indies,
it  has  been  the  constant  object  of  the  Catholic  monarchs

°  Recop.  lib.  ii.  tit.  xv.  1.  67,  &c.  p  lb.  lib.  v.  tit.  xiii.  I.  1,  &c.

t  lb.  lib.  ii.  tit.  ii.  1.  12,  &c.

BOOK  VIII.  87

to  maintain  its  authority,  and  to  make  such  additions
from  time  to  time,  both  to  its  power  and  its  splendour,
as  might  render  it  formidable  to  all  their  subjects  in
the  New  World.  Whatever  degree  of  public  order  and
virtue  still  remains  in  that  country,  where  so  many  cir-
cumstances conspire  to  relax  the  former,  and  to  corrupt
the  latter,  may  be  ascribed  in  a  great  measure  to  the
wise  regulations  and  vigilant  inspection  of  this  respect-
able tribunal. "^

As  the  king  is  supposed  to  be  always  present
Conirata-  in  his  couucil  of  the  Indies,  its  meetings  are
held  in  the  place  where  he  resides.  Another
tribunal  has  been  instituted,  in  order  to  regulate  such
commercial  affairs  as  required  the  immediate  and  per-
sonal inspection  of  those  appointed  to  superintend
them.  This  is  called  Casa  de  la  Contratacion,  or  the
house  of  trade,  and  was  established  in  Seville,  the  port
to  which  commerce  with  the  New  World  was  confined,
Its  func-  ^s  early  as  the  year  1 50 1 .  It  may  be  considered
tions.  |3Q^}j  j^g  ^  board  of  trade,  and  as  a  court  of
judicature.  In  the  former  capacity,  it  takes  cognizance
of  whatever  relates  to  the  intercourse  of  Spain  with
America,  it  regulates  what  commodities  should  be  ex-
ported thither,  and  has  the  inspection  of  such  as  are
received  in  return.  It  decides  concerning  the  departure
of  the  fleets  for  the  West  Indies,  the  freight  and  burden
of  the  ships,  their  equipment  and  destination.  In  the
latter  capacity,  it  judges  with  respect  to  every  question,
civil,  commercial,  or  criminal,  arising  in  consequence
of  the  transactions  of  Spain  with  America  ;  and  in  both
these  departments  its  decisions  are  exempted  from  the
review  of  any  court  but  that  of  the  council  of  the
Indies.*

Such  is  the  great  outline  of  that  system  of  govern-
ment, which  Spain  has  established in  her  American

•"  Solerz.  de  Jure  Iiid.  lib.  iv.  1.  12  .
'  llecop.  lib.  ix.  tit.  i. Veitia  Norte  de  la  Contratacipn,  lib.  i.  c.  1.

S8  AMERICA.

colonies.  To  enumerate  the  various  subordinate  boards
and  officers  employed  in  the  administration  of  justice,
m  collecting  the  public  revenue,  and  in  regulating  the
interior  police  of  the  country  ;  to  describe  their  dif-
ferent functions,  and  to  inquire  into  the  mode  and
effect  of  their  operations  ;  would  prove  a  detail  no  less
intricate  than  minute  and  uninteresting.
Firstobject,  The  first  object  of  the  Spanish  monarchs  was
exSve^"  to  secure  the  productions  of  the  colonies  to  the
trade.  pareut-statc,  by  an  absolute  prohibition  of  any
intercourse  with  foreign  nations.  They  took  posses-
sion of  America  by  right  of  conquest,  and  conscious
not  only  of  the  feebleness  of  their  infant  settlements,
but  aware  of  the  difficulty  in  establishing  their  dominion
over  regions  so  extensive,  or  in  retaining  so  many  re-
luctant nations  under  the  yoke,  they  dreaded  the  in-
trusion of  strangers ;  they  even  shunned  their  inspec-
tion, and  endeavoured  to  keep  them  at  a  distance  from
their  coasts.  This  spirit  of  jealousy  and  exclusion,
which  at  first  was  natural,  and  perhaps  necessary,
augmented  as  their  possessions  in  America  extended,
and  the  value  of  them  came  to  be  more  fully  under-
stood. In  consequence  of  it,  a  system  of  colonising
was  introduced,  to  which  there  had  hitherto  been  no-
thing similar  among  mankind.  In  the  ancient  world,
it  was  not  uncommon  to  send  forth  colonies.  But  they
were  of  two  kinds  only.  They  were  either  migrations,
which  served  to  disburden  a  state  of  its  superfluous
subjects,  when  they  multiplied  too  fast  for  the  territory
which  they  occupied  ;  or  they  were  military  detach-
ments, stationed  as  garrisons,  in  a  conquered  province.
The  colonies  of  some  Greek  republics,  and  the  swarms
of  northern  barbarians  which  settled  in  different  parts
of  Europe,  were  of  the  first  species.  The  Roman  colo-
nies were  of  the  second.  In  the  former,  the  connexion
with  the  mother-country  quickly  ceased,  and  they  be-
came independent  states. In  the  latter,  as  the  dis-

BOOK  VIII.  89

junction  was  not  complete,  the  dependence  continued.
„ ,  . In  their  American settlements, the Spanish

Kegiilations  .  *

for  that  monarchs  took  what  was  peculiar  to  each,  and
purpose.  g^y(jig(j  to  unitc  them.  By  sending  colonies
to  regions  so  remote,  by  establishing  in  each  a  form  of
interior  policy  and  administration,  under  distinct  go-
vernors, and  with  peculiar  laws,  they  disjoined  them
from  the  mother-country.  By  retaining  in  their  own
hands  the  rights  of  legislation,  as  well  as  that  of  im-
posing taxes,  together  with  the  power  of  nominating
the  persons  who  filled  every  department  of  executive
government,  civil  or  military,  they  secured  their  de-
pendence upon  the  parent-state.  Happily  for  Spain,
the  situation  of  her  colonies  was  such,  as  rendered  it
possible  to  reduce  this  new  idea  into  practice.  Almost
all  the  countries  which  she  had  discovered  and  occu-
pied, lay  within  the  tropics.  The  productions  of  that
large  portion  of  the  globe  are  different  from  those  of
Europe,  even  in  its  most  southern  provinces.  The
qualities  of  the  climate  and  of  the  soil  naturally  turn
the  industry  of  such  as  settle  there  into  new  channels.
When  the  Spaniards  first  took  possession  of  their  do-
minions in  America,  the  precious  metals  which  they
yielded  were  the  only  object  that  attracted  their  atten-
tion. Even  when  their  efforts  began  to  take  a  better
direction,  they  employed  themselves  almost  wholly  in
rearing  such  peculiar  productions  of  the  climate,  as,
from  their  rarity  or  value,  were  of  chief  demand  in  the
mother-country.  Allured  by  vast  prospects  of  imme-
diate wealth,  they  disdained  to  waste  their  industry
on  what  was  less  lucrative,  but  of  superior  moment.
In  order  to  render  it  impossible  to  corr.ect  this  error,
and  to  prevent  them  from  making  any  efforts  in  industry
which  might  interfere  with  those  of  the  mother-country,
the  establishment  of  several  species  of  manufactures,
and  even  the  culture  of  the  vine,  or  olive,  are  prohibited

90  AMERICA.

in  the  Spanish  colonies/  under  severe  penalties." They
must  trust  entirely  to  the  mother-country  for  the  objects
of  primary  necessity. Their  clothes,  their  furniture,
their  instruments  of  labour,  their  luxuries,  and  even  a
considerable  part  of  the  provisions  vv^hich  they  consume,
were  imported  from  Spain. During  a  great  part  of
the  sixteenth  century,  Spain,  possessing  an  extensive
commerce  and  flourishing  manufactures,  could  supply
with  ease  the  growing  demands  of  her  colonies,  from
her  own  stores. The  produce  of  their  mines  and  plan-
tations was  given  in  exchange  for  these. But  all  that
the  colonies  received,  as  well  as  all  that  they  gave,  was
conveyed  in  Spanish  bottoms. No  vessel  belonging  to
the  colonies  was  ever  permitted  to  carry  the  commodi-
ties of  America  to  Europe. Even  the  commercial  in-
tercourse of  one  colony  with  another  was  either  abso-
lutely prohibited,  or  limited  by  many  jealous  restrictions.
All  that  America  yields  flows  into  the  ports  of  Spain  ;
all  that  it  consumes  must  issue  from  them.  No  foreigner
can  enter  its  colonies  without  express  permission ;  no
vessel  of  any  foreign  nation  is  received  into  their  har-
bours ;  and  the  pains  of  death,  with  confiscation  of
moveables,  are  denounced  against  every  inhabitant  who
presumes  to  trade  with  them." Thus  the  colonies  are
kept  in  a  state  of  perpetual  pupillage  ;  and  by  the  in-
troduction of  this  commercial  dependence,  a  refinement
in  policy  of  which  Spain  set  the  first  example  to  the
European  nations,  the supremacy  of  the  parent-state
hath  been  maintained  over  remote  colonies  during  two
centuries  and  a  half.

Such  are  the  capital  maxims  to  which  the

Slow  pro-  *^  1 J •

gress  of  Spanish  monarchs  seem  to  have  attended  m
Sorfrom  forming  their  new  settlements  in  America.  But
Europe. ^^^^^  could  not  plant  with  the  same  rapidity

»  See  Note  XX VIII.  "  B.  Ulloa  Rctab.  des  Manuf.,  &c.  p.  206.

"  Recopil.  lib.  ix.  tit.  xxvii.  1.  i.  4.  7,  &c.

BOOK VIII.  91

that  they  had  destroyed ;  and  from  many  concurring
causes,  their  progress  has  been  extremely  slow,  in  fill-
ing up  the  immense  void  which  their  devastations  had
occasioned. As  soon  as  the  rage  for  discovery  and
adventure  began  to  abate,  the  Spaniards  opened  their
eyes  to  dangers  and  distresses,  which  at  first  they  did
not  perceive,  or  had  despised. The  numerous  hard-
ships with  which  the  members  of  infant  colonies  have
to  struggle,  the  diseases  of  unwholesome  climates,  fatal
to  the constitution of Europeans  ; the difficulty  of
bringing  a  country,  covered  with  forests  into  culture ;
the  want  of  hands  necessary  for  labour  in  some  pro-
vinces, and  the  slow  reward  of  industry  in  all,  unless
where  the  accidental  discovery  of  mines  enriched  a  few
fortunate adventurers,  were  evils  universally  felt  and
magnified. Discouraged by  the  view  of  these,  the
spirit  of  migration  was  so  much damped,  that  sixty
years  after  the  discovery  of  the  New  World,  the  num-
ber of  Spaniards  in  all  its  provinces  is  computed  not  to
have  exceeded  fifteen  thousand.^

Discou-  The  mode  in  which  property  was  distributed

thfs^ta^e  of  ^^  ^^^  Spauisli  colouics,  and  the  regulations
property,  established  with  respect  to  the  transmission  of
it,  whether  by  descent  or  by  sale,  were  extremely  un-
favourable to  population.  In  order  to  promote  a  rapid
increase  of  people  in  any  new  settlement,  property  in
land  ought  to  be  divided  into  small  shares,  and  the
alienation  of  it  should  be  rendered  extremely  easy.^
But  the  rapaciousness  of  the  Spanish  conquerors  of  the
New  World  paid  no  regard  to  this  fundamental  maxim
of  policy  ;  and,  as  they  possessed  power,  which  enabled
tliem  to  gratify  the  utmost  extravagance  of  their  wishes,
many  seized  districts  of  great  extent,  and  held  them  as
encomiendas .  By  degrees  they  obtained  the  privilege
of  converting  a  part  of  these  into  Mayorasgos,  a  species
of  fief,  introduced  into  the  Spanish  system  of  feudal

y  See  Note  XXIX.  »  Dr.  Smith's  Inquiry,  ii.  166.  -

92  AMERICA.

jurisprudence/  which  can  neither  be  divided  nor  alien-
ated. Thus  a  great  portion  of  landed  property,  under
this  rigid  form  of  entail,  is  withheld  from  circulation,
and  descends from  father  to  son unimproved,  and  of
little  value  either  to  the  proprietor  or  to  the  community.
In  the  account  which  I  have  given  of  the  reduction  of
Peru,  various  examples  occur  of  enormous  tracts  of
country  occupied  by  some  of  the  conquerors.'' The
excesses  in other  provinces  were similar,  for  as  the
value  of  the  lands  which  the  Spaniards  acquired  was
originally  estimated  according  to  the  number  of  Indians
which lived  upon  them,  America  was  in general  so
thinly  peopled,  that  only  districts  of  great  extent  could
afford  such  a  number  of  labourers  as  might  be  employed
in  the  mines  with  any  prospect  of  considerable  gain.
The  pernicious  effects  of  those  radical  errors  in  the
distribution  and  nature  of  property  in  the  Spanish  set-
tlements, are  felt  through  every  department  of  industry,
and  may  be  considered  as  one  great  cause  of  a  pro-
gress in  population  so  much  slower  than  that  which  has
taken  place  in  better  constituted  colonies."
Andthena- To  this  wc  may  add,  that  the  support  of  the
ecde°:ast1-'^  cnomious  and  expensive  fabric  of  their  eccle-
cai  policy, siastical  establishment,  has  been  a  burden  on
the  Spanish  colonies,  which  has  greatly  retarded  the
progress  of  population  and  industry. The  payment  of
tithes  is  a  heavy  tax  on  industry  ;  and  if  the  exaction
of  them  be  not  regulated  and  circumscribed  by  the
wisdom  of  the  civil  magistrate,  it  becomes intolerable
and  ruinous. But,  instead  of  any  restraint  on  the  claims
of  ecclesiastics,  the  inconsiderate  zeal  of  the  Spanish
legislators  admitted  them into  America  in  their  full
extent,  and  at  once  imposed  on  their  infant  colonies  a
burden  which  is  in no  slight degree oppressive  to
society,  even  in  its  most  improved  state. As  early  as
the  year  1501,  the  payment  of  tithes  in  the  colonies

*  Becop.  lib.  iv.  tit.  iii.  1.  24.  »  Book  vi.  <=  See  Note  XXX.

BOOK VIII.  93

was  enjoined,  and  the  mode  of  it  regulated  by  law.
Every  article  of  primary  necessity,  towards  which  the
attention  of  new  settlers  must  naturally  be  turned,  is
subjected  to  that  grievous  exaction.*"  Nor  were  the
demands  of  the  clergy  confined  to  articles  of  simple
and  easy  culture.  Its  more  artificial  and  operose  pro-
ductions, such  as  sugar,  indigo,  and  cochineal,  were
soon  declared  to  be  tithable  f  and  thus  the  industry  of
the  planter  was  taxed  in  every  stage  of  its  progress,
from  its  rudest  essay  to  its  highest  improvement.  To
the  weight  of  this  legal  imposition,  the  bigotry  of  the
American  Spaniards  has  made  many  voluntary  addi-
tions. From  their  fond  delight  in  the  external  pomp
and  parade  of  religion,  and  from  superstitious  reverence
for  ecclesiastics  of  every  denomination,  they  have  be-
stowed profuse  donatives  on  churches  and  monasteries,
and  have  unprofitably  wasted  a  large  proportion  of  that
wealth,  which  might  have  nourished  and  given  vigour
to  productive  labour  in  growing  colonies.
Various  or-  But  SO  fertile  and  inviting  are  the  regions  of
*^k'in'^the°'  America,  which  the  Spaniards  have  occupied,
colonies,  that,  notwithstanding  all  the  circumstances
which  have  checked  and  retarded  population,  it  has
gradually  increased,  and  filled  the  colonies  of  Spain
with  citizens  of  various  orders.  Among  these,  the
Spaniards,  who  arrive  from  Europe,  distinguished  by
Chapetones  the  name  of  Chapetones,  are  the  first  in  rank
the  first,  g^jj^j  power.  From  the  jealous  attention  of  the
Spanish  court  to  secure  the  dependence  of  the  colonies
on  the  parent-state,  all  departments  of  consequence  are
filled  by  persons  sent  from  Europe  ;  and,  in  order  to
prevent  any  of  dubious  fidelity  from  being  employed,
each  must  bring  proof  of  a  clear  descent  from  a  family
of  Old  Christians,  untainted  with  any  mixture  of  Jewish
or  Mahometan  blood,  and  never  disgraced  by  any  cen-
sure of  the  inquisition.'' In  such  pure  hands,  power  is

«  Recop.  lib.  i.  tit.  xiv.  1.  2.  "^  lb.  lib.  i.  tit.  xiv.  1.  3,  and  4.

e  lb.  lib.  ix.  tit.  xiLvi.  !.  la,  16.

94  AMERICA.

deemed  to  be  safely  lodged,  and  almost  every  public
function,  from  the  viceroyalty  downwards,  is  committed
to  them  alone.  Every  person,  who,  by  his  birth  or  re-
vsidence  in  America,  may  be  suspected  of  any  attach-
ment or  interest  adverse  to  the  mother-country,  is  the
object  of  distrust  to  such  a  degree,  as  amounts  nearly
to  an  exclusion  from  all  offices  of  confidence  or  autho-
rity.*^ By  this  conspicuous  predilection  of  the  court,
the  Chapetones  are  raised  to  such  pre-eminence  in
America,  that  they  look  down  with  disdain  on  every
other  order  of  men.

Creoles  the  '^^^^  cliaractcr  and  state  of  the  Creoles,  or
second.  descendants  of  Europeans  settled  in  America,
the  second  class  of  subjects  in  the  Spanish  colonies,
have  enabled  the  Chapetones  to  acquire  other  advan-
tages, hardly  less  considerable  than  those  which  they
derive  from  the  partial  favour  of  government.  Though
some  of  the  Creolian  race  are  descended  from  the  con-
querors of  the  New  World ;  though  others  can  trace
up  their  pedigree  to  the  noblest  families  in  Spain ;
though  many  are  possessed  of  ample  fortunes,  yet,  by
the  enervating  influence  of  a  sultry  climate,  by  the  ri-
gour of  a  jealous  government,  and  by  their  despair  of
attaining  that  distinction  to  which  mankind  naturally
aspire,  the  vigour  of  their  minds  is  so  entirely  broken,
that  a  great  part  of  them  waste  life  in  luxurious  indul-
gencies,  mingled  with  an  illiberal  superstition  still  more
debasing.  Languid  and  unenterprising,  the  operations
of  an  active  extended  commerce  would  be  to  them  so
cumbersome  and  oppressive,  that  in  almost  every  part
of  America,  they  decline  engaging  in  it.  The  interior
traffic  of  every  colony,  as  well  as  any  trade  which  is
permitted  with  the  neighbouring  provinces,  and  with
Spain  itself,  are  carried  on  chiefly  by  the  Chapetones;^
who,  as  the  recompense  of  their  industry,  amass  im-
mense wealth,  while  the  Creoles,  sunk  in  sloth,  are  sa-
tisfied with  the  revenues  of  their  paternal  estates.

f  See  Note  XXXI. «  Voy.  de  Ulloa,  i.  27.  261. Voy.  de  Frezier,  227.

BOOK  VIII.  95

From  tins  stated  competition  for  power  and
between''  Wealth  betwccn  these  two  orders  of  citizens,  and
these. ^YiQ  various  passions  excited  by  a  rivalship  so
interesting:,  their  hatred  is  violent  and  implacable. On
every  occasion, symptoms  of  this  aversion  break  out,
and  the  common  appellations  which  each  bestows  on
the  other  are  as  contemptuous  as  those  which  flow  from
the  most  deep-rooted  national  antipathy.'' The  court
of  Spain,  from  a  refinement  of  distrustful  policy,  che-
rishes those  seeds  of  discord,  and  foments  this  mutual
jealousy  which  not  only  prevents  the  two  most  powerful
classes  of  its  subjects  in  the  New  World  from  combin-
ing against  the  parent-state,  but  prompts  each,  with
the  most  vigilant  zeal,  to observe  the  motions  and  to
counteract  the  schemes  of  the  other.
A  mixed '^^^  third  class  of  inhabitants  in  the  Spanish
race  forms  colouics  is  a  mixcd  racc,  the  offspring  either  of
order  of a Europcau  and  a Negro,  or  of  a  European
citizens. ^^^  Indian, the  former  called  Mulattoes,  the
latter  Mestizos. As  the  court  of  Spain,  solicitous  to
incorporate  its  new  vassals  with  its  ancient  subjects,
early  encouraged  the  Spaniards  settled  in  America  to
marry  the  natives  of  that  country,  several  alliances  of
this  kind  were  formed  in  their  infant  colonies.' But
it  has  been  more  owing  to  licentious  indulgence,  than
to  compliance  with  this  injunction  of  their  sovereigns,
that  this  mixed  breed  has  multiplied  so  greatly,  as  to
constitute  a  considerable  part  of  the  population  in  all
the  Spanish  settlements. The  several  stages  of  de-
scent in  this  race,  and  the  gradual  variations  of  shade
until  the  African  black  or  the  copper  colour  of  Ame-
rica  brighten  into  a  European  complexion, are  ac-
curately marked  by  the  Spaniards,  and  each distin-
guished by  a  peculiar  name. Those  of  the  first  and
second  generations  are  considered  and  treated  as  mere

•>  Gage's  Survey,  p.  9. Frezier,  226.
*  Recopil.  lib.  vi.  tit.  1.1. 2. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  v.  c.  12.  dec.  3.  lib.  vii.  c.  2.

9G X  AMERICA.

Indians  and  Negroes ;  but  in  the  third  descent,  the  cha-
racteristic hue  of  the  former  disappears;  and  in  the  fifth,
the  deeper  tint  of  the  latter  is  so  entirely  effaced,  that
they  can  no  longer  be  distinguished  from  Europeans,
and  become  entitled  to  all  their  privileges.''  It  is
chiefly  by  this  mixed  race,  whose  frame  is  remarkably
robust  and  hardy,  that  the  mechanic  arts  are  carried  on
in  the  Spanish  settlements,  and  other  active  functions  in
society  are  discharged,  which  the  two  higher  classes  of
citizens,  from  pride  orfrom  indolence  disdain  to  exercise.
Negroes  The  ucgToes  hold  the  fourth  rank  among
fouTth'^  the  inhabitants  of  the  Spanish  colonies.  The
order.  introductiou  of  that  unhappy  part  of  the  hu-
man species  into  America,  together  with  their  services
and  sufferings  there,  shall  be  fully  explained  in  an-
other place  ;  here  they  are  mentioned  chiefly  in  order
to  point  out  a  peculiarity  in  their  situation  under  the
Spanish  dominion.  In  several  of  their  settlements,  par-
ticularly in  New  Spain,  negroes  are  mostly  employed
in  domestic  service.  They  form  a  principal  part  in
the  train  of  luxury,  and  are  cherished  and  caressed  by
their  superiors,  to  whose  vanity  and  pleasures  they  are
equally  subservient.  Their  dress  and  appearance  are
hardly  less  splendid  than  that  of  their  masters,  whose
manners  they  imitate,  and  whose  passions  they
imbibe.™  Elevated  by  this  distinction,  they  have
assumed  such  a  tone  of  superiority  over  the  Indians,
and  treat  them  with  such  insolence  and  scorn,  that
the  antipathy  between  the  two  races  has  become
implacable.  Even  in  Peru,  where  Negroes  seem  to  be
more  numerous,  and  are  employed  in  field-work  as
well  as  domestic  service,  they  maintain  their  ascendant
over  the  Indians,  and  the  mutual  hatred  of  one  to  the
other  subsists  with  equal  violence.  The  laws  have  in-
dustriously fomented  this  aversion,  to  which  accident

k  Voy.  de  Ulloa,  i.  p.  27.
'  Ibid.  i.  29.  Voy.  de  Bouguer,  p.  104. Melendez,  Tesoros  Vcrdaderos,  i.  354.
"  Gage,  p.  56. Voy.  de  Ulloa,  i.  451.

BOOK VIII.  97

gave  rise,  and,  by  most  rigorous  injunctions,  have  en-
deavoured to  prevent  every  intercourse  that  might  form
a  bond  of  union  between  the  two  races.  Thus,  by  an
artful  policy,  the  Spaniards  derive  strength  from  that
circumstance  in  population  which  is  the  weakness  of
other  European  colonies,  and  have  secured,  as  asso-
ciates and  defenders,  those  very  persons  who  elsewhere
are  objects  of  jealousy  and  terror."
The  In-  ^^^^  Indians  form  the  last  and  the  most  de-
diansform  presscd  Order  of  men  in  the  countrv,  which  be-

tl'elast f  Till

order  of  ci-  lougcd  to  their  auccstors.  1  have  ah^eady
traced  the  progress  of  the  Spanish  ideas  with
respect  to  the  condition  and  treatment  of  that  people ;
and  have  mentioned  the  most  important  of  their  more
early  regulations,  concerning  a  matter  of  so  much  con-
sequence in  the  administration  of  their  new  dominions.
But  since  the  period  to  which  I  have  brought  down
the  history  of  America,  the  information  and  experience
acquired  during  two  centuries  have  enabled  the  court
of  Spain  to  make  such  improvements  in  this  part  of  its
American  system,  that  a  short  view  of  the  present  con-
dition of  the  Indians  may  prove  both  curious  and  in-
teresting.

By  the  famous  regulations  of  Charles  V.  in
sent  con-  1542,  whicli  havc  been  so  often  mentioned,  the
high  pretensions  of  the  conquerors  of  the  New
World,  who  considered  its  inhabitants  as  slaves  to
whose  service  they  had  acquired  a  full  right  of  pro-
perty, were  finally  abrogated.  From  that  period,  the
Indians  have  been  reputed  freemen,  and  entitled  to  the
privileges  of  subjects.  When  admitted  into  this  rank,
it  was  deemed  just  that  they  should  contribute  towards
the  support  and  improvement  of  the  society  which  had
adopted  them  as  members.  But  as  no  considerable
benefit  could  be  expected  from  the  voluntary  efforts  of

n  Recopil.  lib.  vii.  tit.  v.  I.  7. Herrera,  dec.  8.  lib.  vii.  c.  12. Frezier,  244.
VOL.  VIII.  H

98  AMERICA.

men  unacquainted  with  regular  industry,  and  averse  to
labour,  the  court  of  Spain  found  it  necessary  to  fix  and
secure,  by  proper  regulations,  what  it  thought  reason-
Tax  impos-  able  to  exact  from  them.  With  this  view  an
ed  on  them,  j^jjjj^^i  f^x  was  imposcd  upou  cvcry  male,
from  the  age  of  eighteen  to  fifty;  and  at  the  same
time  the  nature  as  well  as  the  extent  of  the  services
which  they  might  be  required  to  perform,  were  ascer-
tained with  precision.  This  tribute  varies  in  different
provinces ;  but  if  we  take  that  paid  in  New  Spain  as
a  medium,  its  annual  amount  is  nearly  four  shillings  a
head  ;  no  exorbitant  sum  in  countries  where,  as  at
the  source  of  wealth,  the  value  of  money  is  extremely
low.°  The  right  of  levying  this  tribute  likewise  varies.
In  America,  every  Indian  is  either  an  immediate  vassal
of  the  crown,  or  depends  upon  some  subject  to  whom
the  district  in  which  he  resides  has  been  granted  for  a
limited  time,  under  the  denomination  of  an  encomienda.
In  the  former  case,  about  three-fourths  of  the  tax  is
paid  into  the  royal  treasury;  in  the  latter,  the  same
proportion  of  it  belongs  to  the  holder  of  the  grant.
When  Spain  first  took  possession  of  America,  the  greater
part  of  it  was  parcelled  out  among  its  conquerors,
or  those  who  first  settled  there,  and  but  a  small  portion
reserved  for  the  crown.  As  those  grants  which  were
made  for  two  lives  only,^  reverted  successively  to  the
sovereign,  he  had  it  in  his  power  either  to  diffuse  his
favours  by  grants  to  new  proprietors,  or  to  augment  his
own  revenue  by  valuable  annexations.'^  Of  these,  the
latter  has  been  frequently  chosen  ;  the  number  of  In-
dians now  depending  immediately  on  the  crown  is
much  greater  than  in  the  first  stage  after  the  conquest,
and  this  branch  of  the  royal  revenue  continues  to
extend.

o See  Note  XXXII. Recopil.  lib.  vi.  tit.  v.  1.  42. Hakluyt,  vol.  iii.  p.  461.
P  Recopil.  lib.  vi.  tit.  viii.  1.  48. Solorz.  de  Ind.  Jure,  lib.  ii.  c,  16,
q  See  Note  XXXIII.

BOOK VIII.  99

The  ser-  ^^^  benefit  arising  from  the  services  of  the
vices  de-  Indians,  accrues  either  to  the  crown,  or  to  the
holder  of  the  e?ico77iienda,  according  to  the  same
rule  observed  in  the  payment  of  tribute.  Those  ser-
vices, however,  which  can  now  be  legally  exacted,  are
very  different  from  the  tasks  originally  imposed  upon
the  Indians.  The  nature  of  the  work  which  they  must
perform  is  defined,  and  an  equitable  recompense  is  grant-
ed for  their  labour.  The  stated  services  demanded  of
the  Indians  may  be  divided  into  two  branches.  They
are  either  employed  in  works  of  primary  necessity,  with-
out which  so>nety  cannot  subsist  comfortably,  or  are
compelled  to  labour  in  the  mines,  from  which  the  Spa-
nish colonies  derive  their  chief  value  and  importance.
In  consequence  of  the  former,  they  are  obliged  to  as-
sist in  the  culture  of  maize,  and  other  grain  of  necessary
consumption ;  in  tending  cattle ;  in  erecting  edifices  of
public  utility ;  in  building  bridges ;  and  in  forming
high  roads  f  but  they  cannot  be  constrained  to  labour
in  raising  vines,  olives,  and  sugar-canes,  or  any  species
of  cultivation,  which  has  for  its  object  the  gratification
of  luxury,  or  commercial  profit.^  In  consequence  of
the  latter,  the  Indians  are  compelled  to  undertake  the
more  unpleasant  task  of  extracting  ore  from  the  bowels
of  the  earth,  and  of  refining  it  by  successive  processes,
no  less  unwholesome  than  operose.*
The  mode  '^^^  modc  of  cxactiug  both  these  services  is
of  exacting  the  sauic,  and  is  under  reoulations  framed  with

these.  ~

a  view  of  rendering  it  as  little  oppressive  as
possible  to  the  Indians.  They  are  called  out  succes-
sively in  divisions,  termed  Mitas,  and  no  person  can  be
compelled  to  go  but  in  his  turn.  In  Peru,  the  number
called  out  must  not  exceed  the  seventh  part  of  the  in-
habitants in  any  district."  In  New  Spain,  where  the  In-
dians are  more  numerous,  it  is  fixed  at  four  in  the  hun-

••  Recopil.  lib.  vi.  tit.  xiii.  1.  19. Solorz.  de  Ind.  Jure,  ii.  lib.  i.  c.  6,  7.  9.

«  Recopil.  lib.  vi.  tit.  xiii.  1.  8. Solorz.  lib.  i.  c.  7.  N"  41,  &c.

»  See  Note  XXXIV.  "  Recop.  lib.  vi.  tit.  xii.  1.  21.

H 2

100  AMERICA.

dred." During  what  time  the  labour  of  such  Indians
as  are  employed  in  agriculture  continues,  I  have  not
been  able  to  learn." But  in  Peru,  each  mita,  or  divi-
sion, destined  for  the  mines,  remains  there  six  months ;
and  while  engaged  in  this  service,  a  labourer  never  re-
ceives less  than  two  shillings  a-day,  and  often  earns
more  than  double  that  sum.^ No  Indian,  residing  at  a
greater  distance  than  thirty  miles  from  a  mine,  is  in-
cluded in  the  mita,  or  division  employed  in  working
it  ;^  nor  are  the  inhabitants  of  the  low  country  exposed
now  to  certain  destruction  as  they  were  at  first,  when
under  the  dominion  of  the  conquerors,  by  compelling
them  to  remove  from  that  warm  climate  to  the  cold  ele-
vated regions  where  minerals  abound.^
How  go- The  Indians  who  live  in  the  principal  towns
verned. ^^^  entirely  subject  to  the  Spanish  laws  and
magistrates  :  but  in  their  own  villages  they  are  go-
verned by  caziques,  some  of  whom  are  the  descendants
of  their  ancient  lords,  others  are  named  by  the  Spanish
viceroys. These  regulate  the  petty  affairs  of  the  people
under  them,  according  to  maxims  of  justice  transmitted
to  them  by  tradition  from  their  ancestors. To  the  In-
dians this  jurisdiction,  lodged  in  such  friendly  hands,
affords  some  consolation;  and  so  little  formidable  is
this  dignity  to  their  new  masters,  that  they  often  allow
it  to  descend  by  hereditary  right.*" For  the  farther  re-
lief of  men  so  much  exposed  to  oppression,  the  Spanish
court  has  appointed  an  officer  in  every  district  with  the
title  of  Protector  of  the  Indians. It  is  his  function,  as
the  name  implies,  to  assert  the  rights  of  the  Indians;
to  appear  as  their  defender  in  the  courts  of  justice ;
and,  by  the  interposition  of  his  authority,  to  set  bounds
to  the  encroachments  and  exactions  of  his  countrymen.''

•

w  Recopil.  lib.  vi.  1.  22.  .  ■ ^  See  Note  XXXV.

y  Ulloa  Entreten.  265,  266.  *  Recopil.  lib.  vi.  tit.  xii.  1.  3.

a  Recopil.  lib.  vi.  tit.  xii.  1.  29.  aud  tit.  i.  1. 13. See  Note  XXXVI.

b  Soiorz.  de  Jure  Ind.  lib.  i.  c.  '26. Recopil.  lib.  vi.  tit.  vii.

c  Soiorz.  lib.  i.  c.  17.  p.  201. Recopil.  lib.  vi.  tit.  vi.

BOOK VIII.  101

A  certain  portion  of  the  reserved  fourth  of  the  annual
tribute  is  destined  for  the  salary  of  the  caziques  and
protectors;  another  is  applied  to  the  maintenance  of
the  clergy  employed  in  the  instruction  of  the  Indians.*^
Another  part  seems  to  be  appropriated  for  the  benefit
of  the  Indians  themselves,  and  is  applied  for  the  pay-
ment of  their  tribute  in  years  of  famine,  or  when  a
particular  district  is  affected  by  any  extraordinary  local
calamity.^  Besides  this,  provision  is  made  by  various
laws,  that  hospitals  shall  be  founded  in  every  new  set-
tlement for  the  reception  of  Indians/  Such  hospitals
have  accordingly  been  erected,  both  for  the  indigent
and  infirm,  in  Lima,  in  Cuzco,  and  in  Mexico,  where
the  Indians  are  treated  with  tenderness  and  humanity.^
Such  are  the  leading  principles  in  the  jurisprudence
and  policy  by  which  the  Indians  are  now  governed  in
the  provinces  belonging  to  Spain.  In  those  regulations
of  the  Spanish  monarchs,  we  discover  no  traces  of  that
cruel  system  of  extermination,  which  they  have  been
charged  with  adopting ;  and  if  we  admit  that  the  ne-
cessity of  procuring  subsistence  for  their  colonies,  or  the
advantages  derived  from  working  the  mines,  give  them
a  right  to  avail  themselves  of  the  labour  of  the  Indians,
we  must  allow,  that  the  attention  with  which  they  regu-
late and  recompense  that  labour,  is  provident  and  sa-
gacious. In  no  code  of  laws  is  greater  solicitude  dis-
played, or  precautions  multiplied  with  more  prudent
concern  for  the  preservation,  the  security,  and  the  hap-
piness of  the  subject,  than  we  discover  in  the  collection
of  the  Spanish  laws  for  the  Indies.  But  those  latter
regulations,  like  the  more  early  edicts  which  have  been
already  mentioned,  have  too  often  proved  ineffectual
remedies  against  the  evils  which  they  were  intended  to
prevent.  In  every  age,  if  the  same  causes  continue  to
operate,  the  same  effects  ftiust  follow. From  the  im-

d  Recop.  lib.  vi.  tit.  v.  1.  30.  tit.  xvi.  1.  12—15.  e  Jb.  lib.  vi.  tit.  iv.  I.  13.

f  lb.  lib.  i.  tit.  iv.  I.  i.  &c. e  Voy.  de  Ulloa,  i,  429.  509. Churchill,  iv.  496.

102  AMERICA.

mense  distance  between  the  power  intrusted  with  the
execution  of  laws,  and  that  by  whose  authority  they  are
enacted,  the  vigour  even  of  the  most  absolute  govern-
ment must  relax,  and  the  dread  of  a  superior,  too  re-
mote to  observe  with  accuracy,  or  to  punish  with  dis-
patch, must  insensibly  abate.  Notwithstanding  the  nu-
merous injunctions  of  the  Spanish  monarch,  the  Indians
still  suffer  on  many  occasions,  both  from  the  avarice  of
individuals,  and  from  the  exactions  of  the  magistrates,
who  ought  to  have  protected  them ;  unreasonable  tasks
are  imposed  ;  the  term  of  their  labour  is  prolonged  be-
yond the  period  fixed  by  law,  and  they  groan  under
many  of  the  insults  and  wrongs  which  are  the  lot  of  a
dependent  people. *"  From  some  information  on  which
I  can  depend,  such  oppression  abounds  more  in  Peru
than  in  any  other  colony.  But  it  is  not  general.  Ac-
cording to  the  accounts,  even  of  those  authors  who  are
most  disposed  to  exaggerate  the  sufferings  of  the  In-
dians, they,  in  several  provinces,  enjoy  not  only  ease,
but  affluence ;  they  possess  large  farms  ;  they  are  mas-
ters of  numerous  herds  and  flocks  ;  and,  by  the  know-
ledge which  they  have  acquired  of  European  arts  and
industry,  are  supplied  not  only  with  the  necessaries,
but  with  many  luxuries  of  life.'

Ecciesias- After  explaining  the  form  of  civil  government
ticai  con-  [^1  the  Spanish  colonies,  and  the  state  of  the  va-

stitution .  \  n  1  •  • 1  T

of  the  CO-  nous  orders  oi  persons  subject  to  it,  the  peculi-
arities in  their  ecclesiastical  constitution  merit
consideration.  Notwithstanding  the  superstitious  ve-
neration with  which  the  Spaniards  are  devoted  to  the
Holy  See,  the  vigilance  and  jealous  policy  of  Ferdinand
early  prompted  him  to  take  precautions  against  the
Hestraints  introduction  of  the  papal  dominion  into  America.
papafju-  With  this  view  he  solicited  Alexander  VI.  for  a
lisdiction.  grant  to  the  crown  of  the  tithes  in  all  the  newly-

>'  See  Note  XXXVII.
•  Gage's  Survey,  p.  85.  90.  104.  119,  &c.

BOOK VIII.  103

discovered  countries,^  which  he  obtained  on  condition
of  his  making  provision  for  the  religious  instruction  of
the  natives.  Soon  after  Julius  II.  conferred  on  him,
and  his  successors,  the  right  of  patronage,  and  the  ab-
solute disposal  of  all  ecclesiastical  benefices  there.'
But  these  pontiffs,  unacquainted  with  the  value  of  what
he  demanded,  bestowed  those  donations  with  an  incon-
siderate liberality,  which  their  successors  have  often
lamented,  and  wished  to  recall.  In  consequence  of
those  grants,  the  Spanish  monarchs  have  become  in
effect  the  heads  of  the  American  church.  In  them  the
administration  of  its  revenues  is  vested.  Their  nomi-
nation of  persons  to  supply  vacant  benefices  is  in-
stantly confirmed  by  the  pope.  Thus,  in  all  Spanish
America,  authority  of  every  species  centres  in  the
crown.  There  no  collision  is  known  between  spiritual
and  temporal  jurisdiction.  The  king  is  the  only  supe-
rior, his  name  alone  is  heard  of,  and  no  dependence
upon  any  foreign  power  has  been  introduced.  Papal
bulls  cannot  be  admitted  into  America,  nor  are  they  of
any  force  there,  until  they  have  been  previously  exa-
mined, and  approved  of  by  the  royal  council  of  the  In-
dies ;""  and  if  any  bull  should  be  surreptitiously  intro-
duced, and  circulated  in  America  without  obtaining
that  approbation,  ecclesiastics  are  required  not  only  to
prevent  it  from  taking  effect,  but  to  seize  all  the  copies
of  it,  and  transmit  them  to  the  council  of  the  Indies."
To  this  limitation  of  the  papal  jurisdiction,  equally  sin-
gular, whether  we  consider  the  age  and  nation  in  which
it  was  devised,  or  the  jealous  attention  with  which  Fer-
dinand and  his  successors  have  studied  to  maintain  it
in  full  force,"  Spain  is  indebted,  in  a  great  measure,  for
the  uniform  tranquillity  which  has  reigned  in  her  Ame-
rican dominions.

^  Bulla  Alex.  VI.  A.D.  1501,  ap.  Solorz.  de  Jure  Ind.  ii.  p.  498.

•  Bulla  Julii.  ii.  1508,  ap.  Solorz.  de  Jure  Ind.  ii.  .509.

•n  Recopil.  lib.  i.  tit.  ix.  1.  2.  and  Autas  del  Consejo  de  las  Indias,  clxi.

n  lb.  lib.  i.  tit.  vii.  1.  55.  »  lb.  lib.  i.  tit.  vii.  1.  55.  passim,

104  AMERICA.

Form  and Tlic  hierarchy  is  established  in  America  in
endow- ii^Q  same  form  as  in  Spain,  with  its  full  train

nieiits  of  r  '

the  church  of  arclibishops,  bishops,  deans,  and  other  dig-
Spanish  nitaries.  The  inferior  clergy  are  divided  into
colonies.  ^}^j.gg  classcs,  undcr  the  denomination  of  Cur  as,
Doct)^ineros,  and  JMissioneros.  The  first  are  parish
priests  in  those  parts  of  the  country  where  the  Spa-
niards have  settled.  The  second  have  the  charge  of
such  districts  as  are  inhabited  by  Indians  subjected  to
the  Spanish  government,  and  living  under  its  protec-
tion. The  third  are  employed  in  instructing  and  con-
verting those  fiercer  tribes,  which  disdain  submission
to  the  Spanish  yoke,  and  live  in  remote  or  inaccessible
regions,  to  which  the  Spanish  arms  have  not  pene-
trated. So  numerous  are  the  ecclesiastics  of  all  those
various  orders,  and  such  the  profuse  liberality  with
which  many  of  them  are  endowed,  that  the  revenues  of
the  church  in  America  are  immense.  The  Romish. su-
perstition appears  with  its  utmost  pomp  in  the  New
World.  Churches  and  convents  there  are  magnificent,
and  richly  adorned  ;  and  on  high  festivals,  the  display
of  gold  and  silver,  and  precious  stones,  is  such  as  ex-
ceeds the  conception  of  a  European.^  An  ecclesi-
astical establishment  so  splendid  and  expensive,  is  un-
favourable, as  has  been  formerly  observed,  to  the  pro-
gress of  rising  colonies  ;  but  in  countries  where  riches
abound,  and  the  people  are  so  delighted  with  parade,
that  religion  must  assume  it,  in  order  to  attract  their
veneration,  this  propensity  to  ostentation  has  been  in-
dulged, and  becomes  less  pernicious.
Pernicious  '^^^  early  institutions  of  monasteries  in  the
effects  of  Spanish  colonies,  and  the  inconsiderate  zeal  in

monastic  , . . .  ^  .  ^

institu- multiplying  them,  have  been  attended  with  con-
sequences more fatal. In  every  new  settle-
ment, the  first  object  should  be  to  encourage  popula-
tion, and  to  incite  every  citizen  to  contribute  towards

P  Voy.  de  UUoa,  i.  430.

BOOK VIII.  103

augmenting  the  number  and  strength  of  the  commu-
nity. During  the  youth  and  vigour  of  society,  while
there  is  room  to  spread,  and  sustenance  is  procured
with  facility,  mankind  increases  with  amazing  rapidity.
But  the  Spaniards  had  hardly  taken  possession  of
America,  when,  with  a  most  preposterous  policy,  they
began  to  erect  convents,  where  persons  of  both  sexes
were  shut  up,  under  a  vow  to  defeat  the  purpose  of
nature,  and  to  counteract  the  first  of  her  laws.  Influ-
enced by  a  misguided  piety,  which  ascribes  transcend-
ent merit  to  a  state  of  celibacy,  or  allured  by  the  pros-
pect of  that  listless  ease,  which,  in  sultry  climates,  is
deemed  supreme  felicity,  numbers  crowded  into  those
mansions  of  sloth  and  superstition,  and  are  lost  to  so-
ciety. As  none  but  persons  of  Spanish  extract  are
admitted  into  the  monasteries  of  the  New  World,  the
evil  is  more  sensibly  felt,  and  every  monk  or  nun  may
be  considered  as  an  active  person  withdrawn  from
civil  life.  The  impropriety  of  such  foundations  in  any
situation  where  the  extent  of  territory  requires  addi-
tional hands  to  improve  it,  is  so  obvious,  that  some
Catholic  states  have  expressly  prohibited  any  person
in  their  colonies  from  taking  the  monastic  vows.''
Even  the  Spanish  monarchs,  on  some  occasions,  seem
to  have  been  alarmed  with  the  spreading  of  a  spirit  so
adverse  to  the  increase  and  prosperity  of  their  colonies,
that  they  have  endeavoured  to  check  it.'^  But  the
Spaniards  in  America,  more  thoroughly  under  the  in-
fluence of  superstition  than  their  countrymen  in  Eu-
rope, and  directed  by  ecclesiastics  more  bigoted  and
illiterate,  have  conceived  such  a  high  opinion  of  mo-
nastic sanctity,  that  no  regulations  can  restrain  their
zeal ;  and  by  the  excess  of  their  ill-judged  bounty,  re-
ligious houses  have  multiplied  to  a  degree  no  less
amazing  than  pernicious  to  society.'

1  Voy.  de  Ulloa,  ii.  124.
^  Herrera.  dec.  v.  lib.  ix.  c.  1,2.  Recop.  lib.  i.  tit.  iii.  1.  1,2.  tit.  iv.  c.  ii.  Solorz.
lib.  iii.  c.  23.  s  See  Note  XXXVIII.

106  AMERICA.

Character ^^  viewing  the  State  of  colonies,  where  not

of  ecciesi-  Only  the  number  but  influence  of  ecclesiastics
Spanish  is  SO  gTcat,  the  character  of  this  powerful  body
raerica,  -^  ^^  objcct  that  mcrits  particular  attention.
A  considerable  part  of  the  secular  clergy  in  Mexico
and  Peru  are  natives  of  Spain.  As  persons  long  ac-
customed, by  their  education,  to  the  retirement  and
indolence  of  academic  life,  are  more  incapable  of  active
enterprise,  and  less  disposed  to  strike  into  new  paths,
than  any  order  of  men,  the  ecclesiastical  adventurers
by  whom  the  American  church  is  recruited,  are  com-
monly such,  as,  from  merit  or  rank  in  life,  have  little
Of  these-  prospect  of  success  in  their  own  country.  Ac-
cuiars;  cordiugly,  the  secular  priests  in  the  New  World
are  still  less  distinguished  than  their  brethren  in  Spain
for  literary  accomplishments  of  any  species ;  and
though,  by  the  ample  provision  which  has  been  made
for  the  American  church,  many  of  its  members  enjoy
the  ease  and  independence  which  are  favourable  to  the
cultivation  of  science,  the  body  of  secular  clergy  has
hardly,  during  two  centuries  and  a  half,  produced  one
author  whose  works  convey  such  useful  information,
or  possess  such  a  degree  of  merit,  as  to  be  ranked
among  those  which  attract  the  attention  of  enlightened
Of  the  re-  natious.  But  the  greatest  part  of  the  ecclesi-
guiars.  astics  in  the  Spanish  settlements  are  regulars.
On  the  discovery  of  America,  a  new  field  opened  to
the  pious  zeal  of  the  monastic  orders  ;  and,  with  a  be-
coming alacrity,  they  immediately  sent  forth  mission-
aries to  labour  in  it.  The  first  attempt  to  instruct  and
convert  the  Americans  was  made  by  monks ;  and,  as
soon  as  the  conquest  of  any  province  was  completed,
and  its  ecclesiastical  establishment  began  to  assume
some  form,  the  popes  permitted  the  missionaries  of  the
four  mendicant  orders,  as  a  reward  for  their  services,
to  accept  of  parochial  charges  in  America,  to  perform
all  spiritual  functions,  and  to  receive  the  tithes,  and

BOOK VIII.  107

other  emoluments  of  the  benefice,  without  depending
on  the  jurisdiction  of  the  bishop  of  the  diocess,  or  being
subject  to  his  censures.  In  consequence  of  this,  a  new
career  of  usefulness,  as  well  as  new  objects  of  ambition,
presented  themselves.  Whenever  a  call  is  made  for  a
fresh  supply  of  missionaries,  men  of  the  most  ardent
and  aspiring  minds,  impatient  under  the  restraint  of  a
cloister,  weary  of  its  insipid  uniformity,  and  fatigued
with  the  irksome  repetition  of  its  frivolous  functions,
offer  their  service  with  eagerness,  and  repair  to  the
New  World  in  quest  of  liberty  and  distinction.  Nor
do  they  pursue  distinction  without  success.  The
highest  ecclesiastical  honours,  as  well  as  the  most  lu-
crative preferments  in  Mexico  and  Peru,  are  often  in
the  hands  of  regulars  ;  and  it  is  chiefly  to  the  monastic
orders  that  the  Americans  are  indebted  for  any  portion
of  science  which  is  cultivated  among  them.  They  are
almost  the  only  Spanish  ecclesiastics  from  whom  we
have  received  any  accounts,  either  of  the  civil  or  na-
tural history  of  the  various  provinces  in  America.  Some
of  them,  though  deeply  tinged  with  the  indelible  su-
perstition of  their  profession,  have  published  books
which  give  a  favourable  idea  of  their  abilities.  The
natural  and  moral  history  of  the  New  World,  by  the
Jesuit  Acosta,  contains  more  accurate  observations,
perhaps,  and  more  sound  science,  than  are  to  be  found
in  any  description  of  remote  countries  published  in
the  sixteenth  century.

Dissolute  But  the  same  disgust  with  monastic  life,  to
STomrof  which  America  is  indebted  for  some  instruc-
them.  tors  of  worth  and  abilities,  filled  it  with  others
of  a  very  different  character.  The  giddy,  the  profli-
gate, the  avaricious,  to  whom  the  poverty  and  rigid
discipline  of  a  convent  are  intolerable,  consider  a  mis-
sion to  America  as  a  release  from  mortification  and
bondage.  There  they  soon  obtain  some  parochial
charge ;  and  far  removed,  by  their  situation,  from  the

108  AMERICA-

inspection  of  their  monastic  superiors,  and  exempt,  by
their  character,  from  the  jurisdiction  of  their  diocesan,"
they  are  hardly  subject  to  any  control. According  to
the testimony  of  the most  zealous  Catholics,  many
of  the  regular  clergy  in  the  Spanish  settlements  are  not
only  destitute  of  the  virtues  becoming  their  profession,
but  regardless  of  that  external  decorum  and  respect  for
the  opinion  of  mankind,  which  preserves  a  semblance
of  M^orth  where  the  reality  is  wanting. Secure  of  im-
punity,  some  regulars, in  contempt  of  their  vows  of
poverty,  engage  openly  in  commerce,  and  are  so  rapa-
ciously eager  in  amassing  wealth, that  they  become
the  most  grievous  oppressors  of  the Indians,  whom  it
was  their  duty  to  have  protected. Others,  with  no
less  flagrant  violation  of  their  vow  of  chastity,  indulge
with  little  disguise  in  the  most  dissolute  licentiousness."
Various  schemes  have  been  proposed  for  redressing
enormities  so  manifest  and  so  offensive. Several  per-
sons, no  less  eminent  for  piety  than  discernment,  have
contended,  that  the  regulars,  in  conformity  to  the  canons
of  the  church,  ought  to  be  confined  within  the  walls  of
their  cloisters,  and  should  no  longer  be  permitted  to
encroach  on  the  functions  of  the  secular  clergy. Some
public-spirited  magistrates,  from  conviction  of  its  being
necessary  to  deprive  the  regulars  of  a  privilege  bestowed
at  first  with  good  intention,  but  of  which  time  and  ex-
perience had  discovered  the  pernicious  effects,  openly
countenanced  the  secular  clergy  in  their  attempts  to  as-
sert their  own  rights. The  prince  D'Esquilache,
viceroy  of  Peru  under  Philip  III.,  took  measures
so  decisive  and  effectual  for  circumscribing  the  regulars
within  their  proper  sphere,  as  struck  them  with  general
consternation.^ They  had  recourse  to  their  usual  arts.
They  alarmed  the  superstitious,  by  representing  the
proceedings  of  the  viceroy  as  innovations  fatal  to  reli-

"  Avendano  Thcs.  ludic.  ii.  233.
s  See  Note  XXXIX.  \  See  Note  XL.

BOOK VIII.  109

gion.  They  employed  all  the  refinements  of  intrigue,
in  order  to  gain  persons  in  power;  and  seconded  by  the
powerful  influence  of  the  Jesuits,  who  claimed  and  en-
joyed all  the  privileges  which  belonged  to  the  mendi-
cant orders  in  America,  they  made  a  deep  impression
on  a  bigoted  prince,  and  a  weak  ministry.  The  ancient
practice  was  tolerated.  The  abuses  which  it  occasioned
continued  to  increase,  and  the  corruption  of  monks,
exempt  from  the  restraints  of  discipline,  and  the  inspec-
tion of  any  superior,  became  a  disgrace  to  religion.  At
last,  as  the  veneration  of  the  Spaniards  for  the  monas-
June  23,  tic  ordcrs  began  to  abate,  and  the  power  of  the
^^^^-  Jesuits  was  on  the  decline,  Ferdinand  VI.  ven-
tured to  apply  the  only  effectual  remedy,  by  issuing  an
edict,  prohibiting  regulars  of  every  denomination  from
taking  the  charge  of  any  parish  with  the  cure  of  souls;
and  declaring,  that  on  the  demise  of  the  present  in-
cumbents, none  but  secular  priests  subject  to  the  juris-
diction of  their  diocesans,  shall  be  presented  to  vacant
benefices.^  If  this  regulation  is  carried  into  execution
with  steadiness  in  any  degree  proportional  to  the  wis-
dom with  which  it  is  framed  a  very  considerable  re-
formation may  take  place  in  the  ecclesiastical  state  of
Spanish  America,  and  the  secular  clergy  may  gradually
become  a  respectable  body  of  men.  The  deportment
of  many  ecclesiastics,  even  at  present,  seems  to  be  de-
cent and  exemplary,  otherwise  we  can  hardly  suppose
that  they  would  be  held  in  such  high  estimation,  and
possess  such  a  wonderful  ascendant  over  the  minds  of
their  countrymen,  throughout  all  the  Spanish  settlements.
Small  pro-  ^ut  whatcvcr  merit  the  Spanish  ecclesiastics
convejtin  ^^  Amcrica  may  possess,  the  success  of  their
theindi- eudcavours  in  communicating:  the  knowledo-e

sns  to

Chris-  of  true  religion  to  the  Indians,  has  been  more
tianity.  imperfect  than  might  have  been  expected,  either
from  the  degree  of  their  zeal,  or  from  the  dominion

*  Real  Cedula  MS.  penes  me.

110  AMERICA.

which  they  had  acquired  over  that  people. For  this,
various  reasons  may  be  assigned.  The  first  missionaries,
in  their  ardour  to  make  proselytes,  admitted  the  people
of  America  into  the  Christian  church,  without  previous
instruction  in  the  doctrines  of  religion,  and  even  before
they  themselves  had  acquired  such  knowledge  of  the
Indian  language,  as  to  be  able  to  explain  to  the  natives
the  mysteries  of  faith,  or  the  precepts  of  duty. Rest-
ing upon  a  subtle  distinction  in  scholastic  theology,
between  that  degree  of  assent  which  is  founded  on  a
complete  knowledge  and  conviction  of  duty,  and  that
which  may  be  yielded  when  both  these  are  imperfect,
they  adopted  this  strange  practice,  no  less  inconsistent
with  the  spirit  of  a  religion  which  addresses  itself  to
the  understanding  of  men,  than  repugnant  to  the  dic-
tates of  reason. As  soon  as  any  body  of  people,  over-
awed by  dread  of  the  Spanish  power,  moved  by  the
example  of  their  own  chiefs,  incited  by  levity,  or  yield-
ing from  mere  ignorance,  expressed  the  slightest  desire
of  embracing  the  religion of  their  conquerors, they
were  instantly  baptized. While  this  rage  of  conversion
continued, a  single  clergyman  baptized  in  one  day
above  five  thousand  Mexicans,  and  did  not  desist  until
he  was  so  exhausted  by  fatigue,  that  he  was  unable  to
lift  his  hands.^ In  the  course  of  a  few  years,  after  the
reduction  of  the  Mexican  empire,  the  sacrament  of  bap-
tism was  administered  to  more than  four  millions.''
Proselytes  adopted  with  such  inconsiderate  haste,  and
who  were  neither  instructed  in  the  nature  of  the  tenets
to  which  it  was  supposed  they  had  given  assent,  nor
taught  the  absurdity  of  those  which  they  were  required
to  relinquish,  retained  their  veneration  for  their  ancient
superstitions  in  full  force,  or  mingled  an  attachment  to
its  doctrines  and  rites  with  that  slender  knowledge  of
Christianity  which  they  had  acquired. These  senti-

a  P.  Torribio,  MS.  Torquein.  Mond.  Ind.  lib.  xvi.  c.  6.
b  Torribio,  MS. Torquem.  lib.  xvi.  c.  8.

BOOK VIII.  Ill

ments  the  new  converts  transmitted  to  their  posterity,
into  whose  minds  they  have  sunk  so  deep,  that  the
Spanish  ecclesiastics,  with  all  their  industry,  have  not
been  able  to  eradicate  them.  The  religious  institutions
of  their  ancestors  are  still  remembered  and  held  in  ho-
nour by  many  of  the  Indians,  both  in  Mexico  and  Peru;
and  whenever  they  think  themselves  out  of  reach  of  in-
spection by  the  Spaniards,  they  assemble  and  celebrate
their  idolatrous  rites.''

But  this  is  not  the  most  unsurmountable  obstacle  to
the  progress  of  Christianity  among  the  Indians.  The
powers  of  their  uncultivated  understandings  are  so  li-
mited, their  observations  and  reflections  reach  so  little
beyond  the  mere  objects  of  sense,  that  they  seem  hardly
to  have  the  capacity  of  forming  abstract  ideas,  and  pos-
sess not  language  to  express  them.  To  such  men  the
sublime  and  spiritual  doctrines  of  Christianity  must  be,
in  a  great  measure,  incomprehensible.  The  numerous
and  splendid  ceremonies  of  the  popish  worship  catch
the  eye,  please  and  interest  them;  but  when  their  in-
structors attempt  to  explain  the  articles  of  faith,  with
which  those  external  observances  are  connected,  though
the  Indians  may  listen  with  patience,  they  so  little  con-
ceive the  meaning  of  what  they  hear,  that  their  acqui-
escence does  not  merit  the  name  of  belief.  Their  indif-
ference is  still  greater  than  their  incapacity.  Attentive
only  to  the  present  moment,  and  engrossed  by  the  ob-
jects before  them,  the  Indians  so  seldom  reflect  upon
what  is  past,  or  take  thought  for  what  is  to  come,  nei-
ther the  promises  nor  threats  of  religion  make  much
impression  upon  them ;  and  while  their  foresight  rarely
extends  so  far  as  the  next  day,  it  is  almost  impossible
to  inspire  them  with  solicitude  about  the  concerns  of  a
future  world.  Astonished  equally  at  their  slowness  of
comprehension,  and  at  their  insensibility,  some  of  the
early  missionaries  pronounced  them  a  race  of  men  so

•-•  Voy.  de  Ulloa,  i.  341. Torquera.  Hb.  xv.  c.  23.  lib.  xti.  c.  28. Gage,  171.

112  AMERICA.

brutish,  as  to  be  incapable  of  understanding  the  first
principles  of  religion.  A  council  held  at  Lima  decreed,
that,  on  account  of  this  incapacity,  they  ought  to  be
excluded  from  the  sacrament  of  the  Eucharist.''  Though
Paul  III.,  by  his  famous  bull  issued  in  the  year  1537,
declared  them  to  be  rational  creatures,  entitled  to  all
the  privileges  of  Christians;*  yet,  after  the  lapse  of  two
centuries,  during  which  they  have  been  members  of  the
church,  so  imperfect  are  their  attainments  in  know-
ledge, that  very  few  possess  such  a  portion  of  spiritual
discernment,  as  to  be  deemed  worthy  of  being  admitted
to  the  holy  communion.^  From  this  idea  of  their  in-
capacity and  imperfect  knowledge  of  religion,  when
the  zeal  of  Philip  II.  established  the  inquisition  in  Ame-
rica in  the  year  1570,  the  Indians  were  exempted  from
the  jurisdiction  of  that  severe  tribunal,^  and  still  con-
tinue under  the  inspection  of  their  diocesans.  Even
after  the  most  perfect  instruction,  their  faith  is  held  to
be  feeble  and  dubious ;  and  though  some  of  them  have
been  taught  the  learned  languages,  and  have  gone
through  the  ordinary  course  of  academic  education  with
applause,  their  frailty  is  still  so  much  suspected,  that
few  Indians  are  either  ordained  priests,  or  received  into
any  religious  order.""

Produc-  Prom  this  brief  survey,  some  idea  may  be
tionsof  formed  of  the  interior  state  of  the  Spanish  colo-
nish  So-  nies.  The  various  productions  with  which  they
"'"'  supply  and  enrich  the  mother-country,  and  the
system  of  commercial  intercourse  between  them,  come
next  in  order  to  be  explained.  If  the  dominions  of
Spain  in  the  New  World  had  been  of  such  moderate
extent,  as  bore  a  due  proportion  to  the  parent  state,
the  progress  of  her  colonizing  might  have  been  attended
with  the  same  benefit  as  that  of  other  nations.  But
when,  in  less  than  half  a  century,  her  inconsiderate

d  Torquem.  lib.  xvi.  c.  20.  «  Ibid.  lib.  xvi.  c.  25. Garcia  origin.  311.

^  Voy.  de  Ulloa,  i.  343.  e  Recop.  lib.  vi.  tit.  i.  1.  35.

h  Torquem.  lib.  xvii.  c.  13. See  Note  XLl.

BOOK VIU.  113

rapacity  had  seized  on  countries  larger  than  all  Europe,
her  inabihty  to  fill  such  vast  reg-ions  with  a  number  of
inhabitants  sufficient  for  the  cultivation  of  them  M^as  so
obvious,  as  to  give  a  v^^rong  direction  to  all  the  efforts
of  the  colonists. They  did  not  form  compact  settle-
ments,, where industry, circumscribed  within  proper
limits,  both  in  its  views  and  operations,  is  conducted
with  that  sober  persevering  spirit,  which  gradually  con-
verts whatever  is  in  its  possession  to  a  proper  use,  and
derives  thence  the  greatest  advantage. Instead  of  this,
the  Spaniards,  seduced  by  the  boundless  prospect  which
opened  to  them,  divided  their  possessions  in  America
into  governments  of  great  extent. As  their  number  was
too  small  to  attempt  the  regular  culture  of  the  immense
provinces  which  they  occupied  rather  than  peopled,
they  bent  their  attention  to  a  few  objects,  that  allured
them  with  hopes  of  sudden  and  exorbitant  gain,  and
turned  away  with  contempt  from  the  humbler  paths  of
industry,  which  lead  more  slowly,  but  with  greater  cer-
tainty to  wealth  and  increase  of  national  strength.
From  their Of  all  the  mcthods  by  which  riches  may  be
"""^''' acquired,  that  of  searching  for  the  precious
metals  is  one  of  the  most  inviting  to  men,  who  are
either  unaccustomed  to  the  regular  assiduity  with  which
the culture  of  the  earth  and  the  operations  of  com-
merce must  be  carried  on,  or  who  are  so  enterprising
and  rapacious  as  not  to  be  satisfied  with  the  gradual
returns  of  profit  which  they  yield. Accordingly,  as
soon  as  the  several  countries  in  America  were  subjected
to  the  dominion  of  Spain,  this  was  almost  the  only  me-
thod of  acquiring  wealth  which  occurred  to  the  adven-
turers by  whom  they  were  conquered. Such  provinces
of  the  continent  as  did  not  allure  them  to  settle,  by  the
prospect  of  their  affording  gold  and  silver,  were  totally
neglected. Those  in  which they  met  with a  disap-
pointment of  the  sanguine  expectations  they  had  form-
ed,  were  abandoned. Even  the  value  of  the  islands,

VOL.  VIII.  I

114  AMERICA.

the  first  fruits  of  their  discoveries,  and  the  first  object
of  their  attention,  sunk  so  much  in  their  estimation,
when  the  mines  which  had  been  opened  in  them  were
exhausted,  that  they  were  deserted  by  many  of  the
planters,  and  left  to  be  occupied  by  more  industrious
possessors.  All  crowded  to  Mexico  and  Peru,  where
the  quantities  of  gold  and  silver  found  among  the  na-
tives, who  searched  for  them  with  little  industry  and
less  skill,  promised  an  unexhausted  store,  as  the  recom-
pense of  more  intelligent  and  persevering  efforts.
Discovery  During  several  years,  the  ardour  of  their  re-
PotosUnd  searches  was  kept  up  by  hope,  rather  than
Sacotecas.  succcss.  At  length,  the  rich  silver  mines  of
Potosi,  in  Peru,  were  accidentally  discovered  in  the
year  1545,'  by  an  Indian,  as  he  was  clambering  up  the
mountain,  in  pursuit  of  a  Llama  which  had  strayed
from  his  flock.  Soon  after  the  mines  of  Sacotecas,  in
New  Spain,  little  inferior  to  the  other  in  value,  were
opened.  From  that  time,  successive  discoveries  have
been  made  in  both  colonies,  and  silver  mines  are  now
so  numerous,  that  the  working  of  them,  and  of  some
few  mines  of  gold  in  the  provinces  of  Tierra  Firme,  and
the  new  kingdom  of  Granada,  has  become  the  capital
occupation  of  the  Spaniards,  and  is  reduced  into  a  sys-
tem no  less  complicated  than  interesting.  To  describe
the  nature  of  the  various  ores,  the  mode  of  extracting
them  from  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  and  to  explain  the
several  processes  by  which  the  metals  are  separated
from  the  substances  with  which  they  are  mingled,
either  by  the  action  of  fire,  or  the  attractive  powers  of
mercury,  is  the  province  of  the  natural  philosopher  or
chymist,  rather  than  of  the  historian.

The  exuberant  profusion  with  which  the
which  they  mountaius  of  the  New  World  poured  forth
^'^  ■  their  treasures  astonished  mankind,  who  had
been  accustomed  hitherto  to  receive  a  penurious  supply

'  Fernandez,  p.  I.  lib.  xi.  c.  11.

BOOK  VIII.  115

of  the  precious  metals,  from  the  more  scanty  stores
contained  in  the  mines  of  the  ancient  hemisphere.  Ac-
cording to  principles  of  computation,  which  appear  to
be  extremely  moderate,  the  quantity  of  gold  and  silver
that  has  been  regularly  entered  in  the  ports  of  Spain,
is  equal  in  value  to  four  millions  sterling  annually,
reckoning  from  the  year  1492,  in  which  America  was
discovered  to  the  present  time.  This,  in  two  hundred
and  eighty-three  years,  amounts  to  eleven  hundred  and
thirty-two  millions.  Immense  as  this  sum  is,  the  Spa-
nish writers  contend,  that  as  much  more  ought  to  be
added  to  it,  in  consideration  of  treasure  which  has  been
extracted  from  the  mines,  and  imported  fraudulently
into  Spain,  without  paying  duty  to  the  king.  By  this
account,  Spain  has  drawn  from  the  New  World  a  sup-
ply of  wealth,  amounting  at  least  to  two  thousand  mil-
lions of  pounds  sterling.''

Spirit  to The  mines,  which  have  yielded  this  amazing
which  this  quantity  of  treasure,  are  not  worked  at  the  ex-
pense  of  the  crown  or  of  the  public. In  order
to  encourage  private  adventurers,  the  person  who  dis-
covers and  works  a  new  vein,  is  entitled  to  the  property
of  it. Upon  laying  his  claim  to  such  a  discovery  be-
fore the  governor  of  the  province,  a  certain  extent  of
land  is  measured  off,  and  a  certain  number  of  Indians
allotted  him,  under  the  obligation  of  his  opening  the
mine  within  a  limited  time,  and  of  his  paying  the  cus-
tomary duty  to  the  king,  for  what  it  shall  produce.
Invited  by  the  facility  with  which  such  grants  are  ob-
tained, and  encouraged  by  some  striking  examples  of
success  in  this  line  of  adventure  ;  not  only  the  sanguine
and  the  bold,  but  the  timid  and  diffident,  enter  upon
it  with  astonishing  ardour. With  vast  objects  always
in  view,  fed  continually  with  hope,  and  expecting  every
moment  that  fortune  will  unveil  her  secret  stores,  and

''■  Uzfariz  Theor.  y  Pract.  de  Cornmercia,  c.  3. Herrera,  dec.  viii.  lib.  xi,  c.  l5.
See  Note  XLII.

1  2

116  AMERICA.

give  up  the  wealth  which  they  contain  to  their  wishes,
they  deem  every  other  occupation  insipid  and  uninte-
resting. The  charms  of  this  pursuit,  like  the  rage  for
deep  play,  are  so  bewitching,  and  take  such  full  pos-
session of  the  mind,  as  even  to  give  a  new  bent  to  the
natural  temper.  Under  its  influence  the  cautious  be-
come enterprising,  and  the  covetous  profuse.  Power-
ful as  this  charm  naturally  is,  its  force  is  augmented
by  the  arts  of  an  order  of  men  known  in  Peru  by  the
cant  name  of  searchers.  These  are  commonly  persons
of  desperate  fortune,  who,  availing  themselves  of  some
skill  in  mineralogy,  accompanied  with  the  insinuating
manner  and  confident  pretensions  pecidiar  to  projec-
tors, address  the  wealthy  and  the  credulous.  By  plau-
sible descriptions  of  the  appearances  which  they  have
discovered  of  rich  veins  hitherto  unexplored  ;  by  pro-
ducing, when  requisite,  specimens  of  promising  ore  ;
by  affirming,  with  an  imposing  assurance,  that  success
is  certain,  and  that  the  expense  must  be  trifling,  they
seldom  fail  to  persuade.  An  association  is  formed  ;  a
small  sum  is  advanced  by  each  copartner ;  the  mine  is
opened  ;  the  searcher  is  intrusted  with  the  sole  direc-
tion of  every  operation  :  unforeseen  difficulties  occur ;
new  demands  of  money  are  made;  but,  amidst  a  suc-
cession of  disappointments  and  delays,  hope  is  never
extinguished,  and  the  ardour  of  expectation  hardly
abates.  For  it  is  observed,  that  if  any  person  once  en-
ter this  seducing  path,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  return ;
his  ideas  alter,  he  seems  to  be  possessed  with  another
spirit ;  visions  of  imaginary  wealth  are  continually  be-
fore his  eyes,  and  he  thinks,  and  speaks,  and  dreams
of  nothing  else.^

Fatal  ef-  Such  is  the  Spirit  that  must  be  formed,  wher-
fectsofjt.  ^^^j,  ^^  active  exertions  of  any  society  are
chiefly  employed  in  working  mines  of  gold  and  silver.
No  spirit  is more adverse  to  such  improvements  in

'  Ulloa  Entrc'teii.  p.  223.

BOOK  VIII.  117

agriculture  and  commerce,  as  render  a  nation  really
opulent.  If  the  system  of  administration  in  the  Spanish
colonies  had  been  founded  upon  principles  of  sound
policy,  the  power  and  ingenuity  of  the  legislator  would
have  been  exerted  with  as  much  ardour  in  restraining
its  subjects  from  such  pernicious  industry,  as  is  now
employed  in  alluring  them  towards  it.  "  Projects  of
mining"  (says  a  good  judge  of  the  political  conduct
of  nations),  "  instead  of  replacing  the  capital  employed
in  them,  together  with  the  ordinary  profit  of  stock,
commonly  absorb  both  capital  and  profit.  They  are
the  projects,  therefore,  to  which,  of  all  others,  a  pru-
dent lawgiver,  who  desired  to  increase  the  capital  of
his  nation,  would  least  choose  to  give  any  extraor-
dinary encouragement,  or  to  turn  towards  them  a
greater  share  of  that  capital  than  would  go  to  them
of  its  own  accord.  Such,  in  reality,  is  the  absurd
confidence  which  all  men  have  in  their  own  good
fortune,  that  wherever  there  is  the  least  probability
of  success,  too  great  a  share  of  it  is  apt  to  go  to  them
of  its  own  accord.'™  But  in  the  Spanish  colonies,
government  is  studious  to  cherish  a  spirit  which  it
should  have  laboured  to  depress,  and,  by  the  sanction
of  its  approbation,  augments  that  inconsiderate  credu-
lity, which  has  turned  the  active  industry  of  Mexico
and  Peru  into  such  an  improper  channel.  To  this
may  be  imputed  the  slender  progress  which  Spanish
America  has  made,  during  two  centuries  and  a  half,
either  in  useful  manufactures,  or  in  those  lucrative
branches  of  cultivation,  which  furnish  the  colonies  of
other  nations  with  their  staple  commodities.  In  com-
parison with  the  precious  metals  every  bounty  of  na-
ture is  so  much  despised,  that  this  extravagant  idea  of
their  value  has  mingled  with  the  idiom  of  language  in
America,  and  the  Spaniards  settled  there,  denominate
a  country  rich,  not  from  the  fertility  of  its  soil,  the

*n  Dr.  Smith's  Inquiry,  &c.  ii.  165.

118  AMERICA.

abundance  of  its  crops,  or  the  exuberance  of  its  pas-
tures, but  on  account  of  the  minerals  which  its  moun-
tains contain.  In  quest  of  these,  they  abandon  the
delightful  plains  of  Peru  and  Mexico,  and  resort  to
barren  and  uncomfortable  regions,  where  they  have
built  some  of  the  largest  towns  which  they  possess  in
the  New  World.  As  the  activity  and  enterprise  of  the
Spaniards  originally  took  this  direction,  it  is  now  so
difficult  to  bend  them  a  different  v/ay,  that  although,
from  various  causes,  the  gain  of  working  mines  is  much
decreased,  the  fascination  continues,  and  almost  every
person,  who  takes  any  active  part  in  the  commerce  of
New  Spain  or  Peru,  is  still  engaged  in  some  adventure
of  this  kind."

Other  com-  But  though  miucs  are  the  chief  object  of  the
"he'spanish  Spaniards,  and  the  precious  metals  which  these
colonies,  yield  form  the  principal  article  in  their  com-
merce with  America ;  the  fertile  countries  which  they
possess  there  abound  with  other  commodities  of  such
value  or  scarcity,  as  to  attract  a  considerable  degree  of
attention.  Cochineal  is  a  production  almost  peculiar
to  New  Spain,  of  such  demand  in  commerce,  that  the
sale  is  always  certain,  and  yet  yields  such  profit,  as
amply  rewards  the  labour  and  care  employed  in  rearing
the  curious  insects  of  which  this  valuable  drug  is  com-
posed, and  preparing  it  for  the  market.  Quinquina,
or  Jesuits'  Bark,  the  most  salutary  simple,  perhaps,  and
of  most  restorative  virtue,  that  Providence,  in  compas-
sion to  human  infirmity,  has  made  known  unto  man,  is
found  only  in  Peru,  to  which  it  affords  a  lucrative
branch  of  commerce.  The  indigo  of  Guatimala  is
superior  in  quality  to  that  of  any  province  in  America,
and  cultivated  to  a  considerable  extent.  Cacao,
though  not  peculiar  to  the  Spanish  colonies,  attains  to
its  highest  state  of  perfection  there,  and,  from  the  great
consumption  of  chocolate  in  Europe,  as  well  as  in

n  See  Note  XLIII.

BOOK  VIII.  119

America,  is  a  valuable  commodity.  The  tobacco  of
Cuba,  of  more  exquisite  flavour  than  any  brought  from
the  New  World ;  the  sugar  raised  in  that  island,  in
Hispaniola,  and  in  New  Spain,  together  with  drugs  of
various  kinds,  may  be  mentioned  among  the  natural
productions  of  America,  which  enrich  the  Spanish
commerce.  To  these  must  be  added  an  article  of  no
inconsiderable  account,  the  exportation  of  hides  ;  for
which,  as  well  as  for  many  of  those  which  I  have  enu-
merated, the  Spaniards  are  more  indebted  to  the  won-
derful fertility  of  the  country,  than  to  their  own  fore-
sight and  industry.  The  domestic  animals  of  Europe,
particularly  horned  cattle,  have  multiplied  in  the  New
World  with  a  rapidity  which  almost  exceeds  belief.  A
few  years  after  the  Spaniards  settled  there,  the  herds
of  tame  cattle  became  so  numerous,  that  their  proprie-
tors reckoned  them  by  thousands."  Less  attention  being-
paid  to  them,  as  they  continued  to  increase,  they  were
suffered  to  run  wild,  and  spreading  over  a  country  of
boundless  extent,  under  a  mild  climate,  and  covered
with  rich  pasture,  their  number  became  immense. —
They  range  over  the  vast  plains  which  extend  from
Buenos  Ayres,  towards  the  Andes,  in  herds  of  thirty
to  forty  thousand ;  and  the  unlucky  traveller  who  once
falls  in  among  them,  may  proceed  several  days  before
he  can  disentangle  himself  from  among  the  crowd  that
covers  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  seems  to  have  no  end.
They  are  hardly  less  numerous  in  New  Spain,  and  in
several  other  provinces  :  they  are  killed  merely  for  the
sake  of  their  hides ;  and  the  slaughter  at  certain  sea-
sons is  so  great  that  the  stench  of  their  carcases,  which
are  left  in  the  field,  would  infect  the  air,  if  large  packs
of  wild  dogs,  and  vast  flocks  oi  gallinazos,  or  American
vultures,  the  most  voracious  of  all  the  feathered  kind,
did  not  instantly  devour  them. The  number  of  those

"  Oviedo  ap.  Ramus,  iii.  101.  B. Hacklujt,  iii.  466.  511.

120  AMERICA.

hides  exported  in  every  fleet  to  Europe  is  very  great,
and  is  a  lucrative  branch  of  commerce. ^

Almost  all  these  may  be  considered  as  staple  com-
modities peculiar  to  America,  and  different,  if  we  ex-
cept that  last  mentioned,  from  the  productions  of  the
mother-country.

Advan-  When  the  importation  into  Spain  of  those
which  various  articles  from  her  colonies  first  became
Spain  de-  active  and  considerable,  her  interior  industry

rives  from  i  p  •

iier  coio-  and  manufactures  were  in  a  state  so  prosperous
that  with  the  product  of  these  she  was  able
both  to  purchase  the  commodities  of  the  New  World,
and  to  answer  its  growing  demands.  Under  the  reigns
of  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,  and  Charles  V.,  Spain  was
one  of  the  most  industrious  countries  in  Europe.  Her
manufactures  in  wool,  and  flax,  and  silk,  were  so  ex-
tensive, as  not  only  to  furnish  what  was  sufficient  for
her  own  consumption,  but  to  aff"ord  a  surplus  for  ex-
portation. When  a  market  for  them,  formerly  un-
known, and  to  which  she  alone  had  access,  opened  in
America,  she  had  recourse  to  her  domestic  store,  and
found  there  an  abundant  supply."*  This  new  employ-
ment must  naturally  have  added  vivacity  to  the  spirit
of  industry.  Nourished  and  invigorated  by  it,  the
manufactures,  the  population,  and  wealth  of  Spain,
might  have  gone  on  increasing  in  the  same  proportion
with  the  growth  of  her  colonies.  Nor  was  the  state  of
the  Spanish  marine  at  this  period  less  flourishing  than
that  of  its  manufactures.  In  the  beginning  of  the  six-
teenth century,  Spain  is  said  to  have  possessed  above
a  thousand  merchant-ships,'  a  number  probably  far  su-
perior to  that  of  any  nation  in  Europe  in  that  age.  By
the  aid  which  foreign  trade  and  domestic  industry
give  reciprocally  to  each  other  in  their  progress,  the

P  Acosta,  lib.  iii.  c 33. Ovallo  Hist,  of  Chili. Church.  Collect,  iii.  47.  scpf.
Ibid.  V.  p.  680.  692. Lettrcs  Edif.  xiii.  235. Fcuille,  i.  249.

'I  See  NoteXLIV^  ■"  Campoiuanes,  ii.  140.

BOOK VIII.  121

augmentation  of  both  must  have  been  rapid  and  exten-
sive, and  Spain  might  have  received  the  same  acces-
sion of  opulence  and  vigour  from  her  acquisitions  in
the  New  World,  that  other  powers  have  derived  from
their  colonies  there.

Why  she  "^^^  various  causes  prevented  this.  The  same
does  not thing: happens to nations as to individuals,

now  de-  .  .

rive  the  Wealth,  which  flows  in  gradually,  and  with
moderate  increase,  feeds  and  nourishes  that
activity  which  is  friendly  to  commerce,  and  calls  it
forth  into  vigorous  and  well-conducted  exertions ;  but
when  opulence  pours  in  suddenly,  and  with  too  full  a
stream,  it  overturns  all  sober  plans  of  industry,  and
brino^s  alono:  with  it  a  taste  for  what  is  wild  and  ex-
travagant,  and  daring  in  business  or  in  action.  Such
was  the  great  and  sudden  augmentation  of  power  and
revenue,  that  the  possession  of  America  brought  into
Spain ;  and  some  symptoms  of  its  pernicious  influence
upon  the  political  operations  of  that  monarchy  soon
began  to  appear.  For  a  considerable  time,  however,
the  supply  of  treasure  from  the  New  World  was  scanty
and  precarious ;  and  the  genius  of  Charles  V.  con-
ducted public  measures  with  such  prudence,  that  the
eftects  of  this  influence  were  little  perceived.  But
when  Philip  II.  ascended  the  Spanish  throne,  with  ta-
lents far  inferior  to  those  of  his  father,  and  remittances
from  the  colonies  became  a  regular  and  considerable
branch  of  revenue,  the  fatal  operation  of  this  rapid
change  in  the  state  of  the  kingdom,  both  on  the  mo-
narch and  his  people,  was  at  once  conspicuous.  Phi-
lip, possessing  that  spirit  of  unceasing  assiduity,  which
often  characterizes  the  ambition  of  men  of  moderate
talents,  entertained  such  a  high  opinion  of  his  own  re-
sources, that  he  thought  nothing  too  arduous  for  him
to  undertake.  Shut  up  himself  in  the  solitude  of  the
escurial,  he  troubled  and  annoyed  all  the  nations
around  him. He  waged  open  war  with  the  Dutch  and

122  AMERICA.

English ;  he  encouraged  and  aided  a  rebellious  faction
in  France  ;  he  conquered  Portugal,  and  maintained  ar-
mies and  garrisons  in  Italy,  Africa,  and  both  the  In-
dies. By  such  a  multiplicity  of  great  and  compli-
cated operations,  pursued  with  ardour  during  the
course  of  a  long  reign,  Spain  was  drained  both  of  men
and  money.  Under  the  weak  administration  of  his
successor,  Philip  III.,  the  viafour  of  the  na-

A.D.  1611. .  -11  11-  1

tion  contniued  to  decrease,  and  sunk  mto  the
lowest  decline,  when  the  inconsiderate  bigotry  of  that
monarch  expelled  at  once  near  a  million  of  his  most
industrious  subjects,  at  the  very  time  when  the  ex-
hausted state  of  the  kingdom  required  some  extraor-
dinary exertion  of  political  wisdom  to  augment  its
numbers,  and  to  revive  its  strength.  Early  in  the  se-
venteenth century,  Spain  felt  a  diminution  in  the  num-
ber of  her  people,  that  from  inability  to  recruit  her
armies,  she  was  obliged  to  contract  her  operations.
Her  flourishing  manufactures  were  fallen  into  decay.
Her  fleets,  which  had  been  the  terror  of  all  Europe,
were  ruined.  Her  extensive  foreign  commerce  was
lost.  The  trade  between  different  parts  of  her  own
dominions  was  interrupted,  and  the  ships  which  at-
tempted to  carry  it  on  were  taken  and  plundered  by
enemies  whom  she  once  despised.  Even  agriculture,
the  primary  object  of  industry  in  every  prosperous
state,  was  neglected,  and  one  of  the  most  fertile  coun-
tries in  Europe  hardly  raised  what  was  sufficient  for
the  support  of  its  own  inhabitants.

In  proportion  as  the  population  and  manu-

Rapid  de-  pi  i i  • i i

dine  of  its  facturcs  of  tiic  parent  state  declmed,  the  de-
mands of  her  colonies  continued  to  increase.
The  Spaniards,  like  their  monarchs,  intoxicated  with
the  wealth  that  poured  in  annually  upon  them,  de-
serted the  paths  of  industry,  to  which  they  had  been
accustomed,  and  repaired  with  eagerness  to  those  re-
gions from  which  this  opulence  issued. By  this  rage

BOOK VIII.  123

of  emigration,  another  drain  was  opened,  and  the
strength  of  the  colonies  augmented  by  exhausting  that
of  the  mother-country.  All  those  emigrants,  as  well
as  the  adventurers  who  had  at  first  settled  in  America,
depended  absolutely  upon  Spain  for  almost  every  article
of  necessary  consumption.  Engaged  in  more  alluring
and  lucrative  pursuits,  or  prevented  by  restraints  which
government  imposed,  they  could  not  turn  their  own
attention  towards  establishing  the  manufactures  requi-
site for  comfortable  subsistence.  They  received  (as  I
have  observed  in  another  place)  their  clothing,  their
furniture,  whatever  ministers  to  the  ease  or  luxury  of
life,  and  even  their  instruments  of  labour,  from  Eu-
rope. Spain,  thinned  of  people,  and  decreasing  in  in-
dustry, was  unable  to  supply  their  growing  demands.
She  had  recourse  to  her  neighbours.  The  manufactures
of  the  Low  Countries,  of  England,  of  France,  and  of
Italy,  which  her  wants  called  into  existence,  or  ani-
mated with  new  vivacity,  furnished  in  abundance
whatever  she  required.  In  vain  did  the  fundamental
law,  concernino;  the  exclusion  of  foreio-ners  from  trade
with  America,  oppose  this  innovation.  Necessity,
more  powerful  than  any  statute,  defeated  its  opera-
tion, and  constrained  the  Spaniards  themselves  to  con-
cur in  eluding  it.  The  English,  the  French,  and  Dutch,
relying  on  the  fidelity  and  honour  of  Spanish  mer-
chants, who  lend  their  names  to  cover  the  deceit,  send
out  their  manufactures  to  America,  and  receive  the  ex-
orbitant price  for  which  they  are  sold  there,  either  in
specie,  or  in  the  rich  commodities  of  the  New  World.
Neither  the  dread  of  danger,  nor  the  allurement  of
profit,  ever  induced  a  Spanish  factor  to  betray  or  de-
fraud the  person  who  confided  in  him  ;'  and  that  pro-
bity, which  is  the  pride  and  distinction  of  the  nation,
contributes  to  its  ruin.  In  a  short  time,  not  above  a
twentieth  part  of  the  commodities  exported  to  America

*  Zavala  Eepresciitacion,  p.  226.

124  AMERICA.

was  of  Spanish  growth  or  fabric*  All  the  rest  was  the
property  of  foreign  merchants,  though  entered  in  the
name  of  Spaniards.  The  treasure  of  the  New  World
may  be  said  henceforward  not  to  have  belonged  to
Spain.  Before  it  reached  Europe,  it  was  anticipated
as  the  price  of  goods  purchased  from  foreigners.  That
wealth  which,  by  an  internal  circulation,  would  have
spread  through  each  vein  of  industry,  and  have  conveyed
life  and  movement  to  every  branch  of  manufacture,
flowed  out  of  the  kingdom  with  such  a  rapid  course,  as
neither  enriched  nor  animated  it.  On  the  other  hand,
the  artisans  of  rival  nations,  encouraged  by  this  quick
sale  of  their  commodities,  improved  so  much  in  skill
and  industry,  as  to  be  able  to  afford  them  at  a  rate  so
low,  that  the  manufactures  of  Spain  which  could  not
vie  with  theirs,  either  in  quality  or  cheapness  of  work,
were  still  farther  depressed.  This  destructive  com-
merce drained  off  the  riches  of  the  nation  faster  and
more  completel}^  than  even  the  extravagant  schemes  of
ambition  carried  on  by  its  monarchs.  Spain  was  so
much  astonished  and  distressed,  at  beholding  her  Ame-
rican treasures  vanish  almost  as  soon  as  they  were  im-
ported, that  Philip  III.,  unable  to  supply  what  was
requisite  in  circulation,  issued  an  edict,  by  which  he
endeavoured  to  raise  copper  money  to  a  value  in  cur-
rency nearly  equal  to  that  of  silver ;"  and  the  lord  of
the  Peruvian  and  Mexican  mines  was  reduced  to  a
wretched  expedient,  which  is  the  last  resource  of  petty
impoverished  states.

Thus  the  possessions  of  Spain  and  America  have  not
proved  a  source  of  population  and  of  wealth  to  her,  in
the  same  manner  as  those  of  other  nations.  In  the  coun-
tries of  Europe,  where  the  spirit  of  industry  subsists  in
full  vigour,  every  person  settled  in  such  colonies  as  are
similar  in  their  situation  to  those  of  Spain  is  supposed
to  give  employment  to  three  or  four  at  home  in  sup-

t  CaiDiiomaiies,  ii.  138.  "  Uztaiez,  c.  104.

BOOK VIll.  125

plying  his  wants." But  wherever  the  mother-country
cannot  afford  this  supply,  every  emigrant  may  be  con-
sidered as  a  citizen  lost  to  the  community,  and  strangers
must  reap  all  the  benefit  of  answering  his  demands.
Such  has  been  the  internal  state  of  Spain

Increased r  ^  ^  n ^  •

by  the  from  the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and
l^gukting  such  her  inability  to  supply  the  growing  wants
cour"?'  of  her  colonies.  The  fatal  effects  of  this  dis-
withAme-  proportion  between  their  demands,  and  her
capacity  of  answering  them,  have  been  much
increased  by  the  mode  in  which  Spain  has  endeavoured
to  regulate  the  intercourse  between  the  mother-country
and  the  colonies.  It'is  from  her  idea  of  monopolizing
the  trade  with  America,  and  debarring  her  subjects
there  from  any  communication  with  foreigners,  that  all
her  jealous  and  systematic  arrangements  have  arisen.
These  are  so  singular  in  their  nature  and  consequences
as  to  merit  a  particular  explanation.  In  order  to  se-
cure the  monopoly  at  which  she  aimed,  Spain  did  not
vest  the  trade  with  her  colonies  in  an  exclusive  com-
pany, a  plan  which  has  been  adopted  by  nations  more
commercial,  and  at  a  period  when  mercantile  policy
was  an  object  of  greater  attention,  and  ought  to  have
been  better  understood.  The  Dutch  gave  up  the  whole
trade  with  their  colonies,  both  in  the  East  and  West
Indies,  to  exclusive  companies.  The  English,  the
French,  the  Danes,  have  imitated  their  example  with
respect  to  the  East-Indian  commerce ;  and  the  two  for-
mer have  laid  a  similar  restraint  upon  some  branches
of  their  trade  with  the  New  World.  The  wit  of  man
cannot,  perhaps,  devise  a  method  for  checking  the  pro-
gress of  industry  and  population  in  a  new  colony  more
effectual  than  this.  The  interest  of  the  colony,  and  of
the  exclusive  company,  must  in  every  point  be  diametri-
cally opposite ;  and  as  the  latter  possesses  such  advan-
tages in  this  unequal  contest,  that  it  can  prescribe  at

*  Child  on  Trade  and  Colonic!.

120  AMERICA.

pleasure  the  terms  of  intercourse,  the  former  must  not
only  buy  dear  and  sell  cheap,  but  must  suffer  the  mor-
tification of  having  the  increase  of  its  surplus  stock
discouraged  by  those  very  persons  to  whom  alone  it
can  dispose  of  its  productions/

This  con- Spain,  it  is  probable,  was  preserved  from
one  port  in  falling  iuto  this  error  of  policy,  by  the  high
Spain. ideas  which  she  early  formed  concerning  the
riches  of  the  New  World. Gold  and  silver  were  com-
modities of  too  high  a  value  to  vest  a  monopoly  of  them
in  private  hands. The  crown  wished  to  retain the
direction  of  a  commerce  so  inviting ;  and,  in  order  to
secure  that,  ordained  the  cargo  of  every  ship  fitted  out
for  America  to  be  inspected  by  the  officers  of  the  Casa
de  Contratacion in  Seville,  before  it  could  receive  a
license  to  make  the  voyage ;  and  that  on  its  return,  a
report  of  the  commodities  which  it  brought  should  be
made  to  the  same  board,  before  it  could  be  permitted
to  land  them. In  consequence  of  this  regulation,  all
the  trade  of  Spain  with  the  New  World  centred  ori-
ginally in  the  port  of  Seville,  and  was  gradually  brought
into  a  form,  in  which  it  has  been  conducted,  with  little
variation,  from  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century  al-
most to  our  own  times. For  the  greater  security  of  the
valuable  cargoes  sent  to  America,  as  well  as  for  the
more  easy  prevention  of  fraud,  the  commerce  of  Spain
with  its  colonies  is  carried  on  by  fleets  which  sail  under
strong  convoys. These  fleets,  consisting  of  two  squa-
drons, one  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  Galeons,
the  other  by  that  of  the  Flota,  are  equipped  annually.
Formerly  they  took their  departure  from  Seville ;  but
as  the  port  of  Cadiz  has  been  found  more  commodious,
they  have  sailed  from  it  since  the  year  1720.
^ .  ,  The  o-aleons  destined  to  supply  Tierra  Firme,

Carried  on  ~ ,  , . .  .

by  the  ga-  and  the  kingdoms  of  Peru  and  Chili,  with  al-
most every  article  of  luxury,  or  necessary  con-
s' Smith's  Inquiry,  ii.  171.

BOOR VIII.  127

sumption,  that  an  opulent  people  can  demand,  touch
first  at  Carthagena,  and  then  at  Porto-Bello.  To  the
former,  the  merchants  of  Santa  Martha,  Caraccas,  the
new  kingdom  of  Granada,  and  several  other  provinces,
resort.  The  latter  is  the  great  mart  for  the  rich  com-
merce of  Peru  and  Chili.  At  the  season  when  the
galeons  are  expected,  the  product  of  all  the  mines  in
these  two  kingdoms,  together  with  their  other  valuable
commodities,  is  transported  by  sea  to  Panama.  From
thence,  as  soon  as  the  appearance  of  the  fleet  from
Europe  is  announced,  they  are  conveyed  across  the
isthmus,  partly  on  mules,  and  partly  down  the  river
Chagre  to  Porto-Bello.  This  paltry  village,  the  climate
of  which,  from  the  pernicious  union  of  excessive  heat,
continual  moisture,  and  the  putrid  exhalations  arising
from  a  rank  soil,  is  more  fatal  to  life  than  any  perhaps
in  the  known  world,  is  immediately  filled  with  people.
From  being  the  residence  of  a  few  negroes  and  mulat-
toes,  and  of  a  miserable  garrison  relieved  every  three
months,  Porto-Bello  assumes  suddenly  a  very  diflerent
aspect,  and  its  streets  are  crowded  with  opulent  mer-
chants from  every  corner  of  Peru,  and  the  adjacent  pro-
vinces. A  fair  is  opened,  the  wealth  of  America  is
exchanged  for  the  manufactures  of  Europe  ;  and,  dur-
ing its  prescribed  term  of  forty  days,  the  richest  trafiic
on  the  face  of  the  earth  is  begun  and  finished,  with
that  simplicity  of  transaction  and  that  unbounded  con-
fidence, which  accompany  extensive  commerce.''  The
flota  holds  its  course  to  Vera  Cruz. The  trea-

And  flota.  .  n  -\j  o •  i i

sures  and  commodities  ol  JNew  Spam,  and  the
depending  provinces,  which  were  deposited  at  Puebla
de  los  Angeles,  in  expectation  of  its  arrival,  are  carried
thither  ;  and  the  commercial  operations  of  Vera  Cruz,
conducted  in  the  same  manner  with  those  of  Porto-Bello,
are  inferior  to  them  only  in  importance  and  value.
Both  fleets,  as  soon  as  they  have  completed  their  car-

^  See  Note  XLV.

128  AMERICA.

goes  from  America,  rendezvous  at  the  Havanna,  and  re-
turn in  company  to  Europe.
„  , ^  The  trade  of  Spain  with  her  colonies,  while

Bad  effects  "^  .

of  this  ar-  thus  fettered  and  restricted,  came  necessarily
rangenien .  ^^  ^^  couductcd  witli  the  samc  Spirit,  and  upon
the  same  principles,  as  that  of  an  exclusive  company.
Being  confined  to  a  single  port,  it  was  of  course  thrown
into  a  few  hands,  and  almost  the  whole  of  it  was  gra-
dually engrossed  by  a  small  number  of  wealthy  houses,
formerly  in  Seville,  and  now  in  Cadiz.  These  by  com-
binations, which  they  can  easily  form,  may  altogether
prevent  that  competition  which  preserves  commodities
at  their  natural  price ;  and  by  acting  in  concert,  to
which  they  are  prompted  by  their  mutual  interest,  they
,  may  raise  or  lower  the  value  of  them  at  pleasure.  In
consequence  of  this,  the  price  of  European  goods  in
America  is  always  high,  and  often  exorbitant.  A
hundred,  two  hundred,  and  even  three  hundred  per
cent.,  are  profits  not  uncommon  in  the  commerce  of
Spain  with  her  colonies."  From  the  same  engrossing
spirit  it  frequently  happens,  that  traders  of  the  second
order,  whose  warehouses  do  not  contain  a  complete
assortment  of  commodities  for  the  American  market,
cannot  purchase  from  the  more  opulent  merchants  such
goods  as  they  want,  at  a  lower  price  than  that  for  which
they  are  sold  in  the  colonies.  With  the  same  vigilant
jealousy  that  an  exclusive  company  guards  against  the
intrusion  of  the  free  trader,  those  overgrown  monopo-
lists endeavour  to  check  the  progress  of  every  one  whose
encroachments  they  dread.''  This  restraint  of  the  Ame-
rican commerce  to  one  port,  not  only  affects  its  domestic
state,  but  limits  its  foreign  operations.  A  monopolist
may  acquire  more,  and  certainly  will  hazard  less,  by  a
confined  trade  which  yields  exorbitant  profit,  than  by
an  extensive  commerce  in  which  he  receives  only  a

a  B.  Ulloa  Retabliss.  partii.  p.  191.
^  Smith's  Inquiry,  ii.  171. Campomanes,  Educ.  Popul.  i.  43??.

BOOK VIII.  129

moderate  return  of  gain. It  is  often  his  interest  not  to
enlarge,  but  to  circumscribe  the  sphere  of  his  activity ;
and,  instead  of  calling  forth  more  vigorous  exertions  of
commercial  industry,  it  may  be  the  object  of  his  atten-
tion to  check  and  set  bounds  to  them. By  some  such
maxim,  the  mercantile  policy  of  Spain  seems  to  have
regulated its  intercourse  with  America. Instead  of
furnishing  the  colonies  vv^ith  European  goods  in  such
quantity  as  might  render  both  the  price  and  the  profit
moderate,  the  merchants  of  Seville  and  Cadiz  seem  to
have  supplied  them  with  a  sparing  hand,  that  the  eao-er-
ness  of  competition  amongst  customers,  obliged  to  pur-
chase in  a  scanty  market,  might  enable  the  Spanish
factors  to  dispose  of  their  cargoes  with  exorbitant  gain.
About  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  when  the  exclusive
trade  to  America  from  Seville  was  in  its  most  flourish-
ing state,  the  burden  of  the  two  united  squadrons  of
the  galeons  and  flota  did not exceed twenty-seven
thousand  five  hundred  tons.*" The  supply  which  such
a  fleet  could  carry  must  have  been  very  inadequate  to
the  demands  of  those  populous  and  extensive  colonies,
which  depended  upon  it  for  all  the  luxuries,  and  many
of  the  necessaries  of  life.

Remedies  Spain  early  became  sensible  of  her  declen-
proposed.  ^-^^^  froYU  her  former  prosperity ;  and  many  re-
spectable and  virtuous  citizens  employed  their  thoughts
in  devising  methods  for  reviving  the  decaying  industry
and  commerce  of  their  country.  From  the  violence  of
the  remedies  proposed,  we  may  judge  how  desperate
and  fatal  the  malady  appeared.  Some,  confounding
a  violation  of  police  with  criminality  against  the  state,
contended  that,  in  order  to  check  illicit  commerce,  every
person  convicted  of  carrying  it  on  should  be  punished
with  death,  and  confiscation  of  all  his  effects.'*  Others,
forgetting  the  distinction  between  civil  offences  and

^  Campomanes,  Educ.  Popul.  i.  435.  ii.  110.
*  M.  de  Santa  Cruz  Commercia  Suelto,  p.  142.

VOL.  VIII.  K

130  AMERICA.

acts  of  impiety,  insisted,  that  contraband  trade  should
be  ranked  among  the  crimes  reserved  for  the  cogni-
zance of  the  Inquisition ;  that  such  as  were  guilty  of
it  might  be  tried  and  punished,  according  to  the  secret
and  summary  form  in  which  that  dreadful  tribunal  ex-
ercises its  jurisdiction/  Others,  uninstructed  by  ob-
serving the  pernicious  effects  of  monopolies  in  every
country  where  they  have  been  established,  have  pro-
posed to  vest  the  trade  with  America  in  exclusive  com-
panies, which  interest  would  render  the  most  vigilant
guardians  of  the  Spanish  commerce  against  the  en-
croachment of  the  interlopers/

Besides  these  wild  projects,  many  schemes,  better
digested  and  more  beneficial,  were  suggested. But
under  the  feeble  monarchs,  with whom  the  reign  of
the  Austrian  line  in  Spain  closed,  incapacity  and  in-
decision are  conspicuous  in  every  department  of  govern-
ment. Instead  of  taking  for  their  model  the  active
administration  of  Charles  V.,  they  affected  to  imitate
the  cautious  procrastinating  wisdom  of  Philip  II. ;  and
destitute  of  his  talents,  they  deliberated  perpetually,
but  determined  nothing. No  remedy  was  applied  to
the  evils  under  which  the  national  commerce,  domestic
as  well  as  foreign,  languished. These  evils  continued
to  increase  ;  and  Spain,  with  dominions  more  exten-
sive and  more  opulent  than  any  European  state,  pos-
sessed neither  vigour,  nor  money/  nor  industry. At
length,  the  violence  of  a great  national  convulsion
roused  the  slumbering  genius  of  Spain.  The  efforts  of  the
two  contending  parties  in  the  civil  war,  kindled  by  the
dispute  concerning  the  succession  of  the  crown  at  the
beginning  of  this  century,  called  forth,  in  some  degree,
the  ancient  spirit  and  vigour  of  the  nation. While
men  were  thus  forming,  capable  of  adopting  sentiments

«  Moncada  Restauracion  politica  de  Espagna,  p.  41.
f  Zavalla  y  Augnon  Representacion.  &c.  p.  190.
6  See  Note  XLVI.

BOOK VIII.  131

more  liberal  than  those  which  had  influenced  the  coun-
cils of  the  monarchy  during  the  course  of  a  century,
Spain  derived  from  an  unexpected  source  the  means  of
availing  itself  of  their  talents.  The  various  powers  who
favoured  the  pretensions  either  of  the  Austrian  or
Bourbon  candidate  for  the  Spanish  throne,  sent  for-
midable fleets  and  armies  to  their  support ;  France,
England,  and  Holland  remitted  immense  sums  to  Spain.
These  were  spent  in  the  provinces  which  became  the
theatre  of  war.  Part  of  the  American  treasure,  of
which  foreigners  had  drained  the  kingdom,  flowed  back
thither.  From  this  era,  one  of  the  most  intelligent
Spanish  authors  dates  the  revival  of  the  monarchy ;
and,  however  humiliating  the  truth  may  be,  he  acknow-
ledges, that  it  is  to  her  enemies  his  country  is  indebted
for  the  acquisition  of  a  fund  of  circulating  specie,  in
some  measure  adequate  to  the  exigencies  of  the  public.''
Step  to-  As  soon  as  the  Bourbons  obtained  quiet  pos-
pmvem™nt  scssiou  of  the  throuc,  they  discerned  this  change
B'^ulbon  ^"  ^^^  spirit  of  the  people,  and  in  the  state  of
monarchs,  tlic  uatiou,  and  took  advantage  of  it;  for  al-
though that  family  has  not  given  monarchs  to  Spain  re-
markable for  superiority  of  genius,  they  have  all  been
beneficent  princes,  attentive  to  the  happiness  of  their
subjects,  and  solicitous  to  promote  it.  It  was,  accord-
ingly, the  first  object  of  Philip  V.  to  suppress  an  inno-
vation which  had  ci*ept  in  during  the  course  of  the  war,
and  had  overturned  the  whole  system  of  the  Spanish
commerce  with  America.  The  English  and  Dutch,  by
their  superiority  in  naval  power,  having  acquired  such
command  of  the  sea,  as  to  cut  ofl"  all  intercourse  be-
B  exciud-  tween  Spain  and  her  colonies,  Spain,  in  order
Jng  fo-  to  furnish  her  subjects  in  America  those  neces-
Stlade  saries  of  life,  without  which  they  could  not  ex-
withPeru;  -^^^  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^y  mcaus  of  rccciving  from

thence  any  part  of  their  treasure,  departed  so  far  from

h  Campomanes,  i.  420.
K  2

132  AMERICA.

the  usual  rigour  of  its  maxims  as  to  open  the  trade  with
Peru  to  her  allies  the  French. The  merchants  of  St.
Malo,  to  whom  Louis  XIV.  granted  the  privilege  of  this
lucrative  commerce,  engaged  in  it  with  vigour,  and
carried  it  on  upon  principles  very  different  from  those
of  the  Spaniards. They  supplied  Peru  with  European
commodities  at  a  moderate  price,  and  not  in  stinted
quantity. The  goods  which  they  imported  were  con-
veyed to  every  province  of  Spanish  America,  in  such
abundance  as  had  never  been  known  in  any  former  pe-
riod. If  this  intercourse  had  been  continued,  the  ex-
portation of  European  commodities  from  Spain  must
have  ceased,  and  the  dependence  of  the  colonies  on  the
mother-country  have  been  at  an  end. The  most
peremptory  injunctions  were  therefore  issued,
prohibiting  the  admission  of  foreign  vessels  into  any
port  of  Peru  or  Chili,'  and  a  Spanish  squadron  was  em-
ployed to  clear  the  South  sea  of  intruders,  whose  aid
was  no  longer  necessary.

By  check-  But  though  ou  the  ccssatiou  of  the  war  which
Sand  was  terminated  by  the  treaty  of  Utrecht,  Spain
trade;  obtained  relief  from  one  encroachment  on  her
commercial  system,  she  was  exposed  to  another  which
she  deemed  hardly  less  pernicious.  As  an  inducement
that  might  prevail  with  queen  Anne  to  conclude  a  peace,
which  France  and  Spain  desired  with  equal  ardour,
Particu-  Philip  V.  not  only  conveyed  to  Great  Britain  the
iaAy  of  th^  j^gsiento,  or  contract  for  supplying  the  Spanish
Assiento  colouics  witli  ucgrocs,  which  had  formerly  been
company,  gj^j^y^^  j^y  Fraucc,  but  granted  it  the  more  ex-
traordinary privilege  of  sending  annually  to  the  fair  of
Porto-Bello  a  ship  of  five  hundred  tons,  laden  with  Eu-
ropean commodities.  In  consequence  of  this,  British
factories  were  established  at  Carthagena,  Panama,  Vera
Cruz,  Buenos  Ayres,  and  other  Spanish  settlements.

*  Frezier  Voy.  "^56. B.  Ulloa  Retab.  ii.  104,  &e. Alcedo  y  Herrera. Aviso
&c.  236.

BOOK VIII.  133

The  veil  with  which  Spain  had  hitherto  covered  the
state  and  transactions  of  her  colonies  was  removed.
The  agents  of  a  rival  nation,  residing  in  the  towns  of
most  extensive  trade,  and  of  chief  resort,  had  the  best
opportunities  of  becoming  acquainted  with  the  interior
condition  of  the  American  provinces,  of  observing  their
stated  and  occasional  wants,  and  of  knowing  what  com-
modities might  be  imported  into  them  with  the  greatest
advantage.  In  consequence  of  information  so  authen-
tic and  expeditious,  the  merchants  of  Jamaica  and
other  English  colonies  who  traded  to  the  Spanish  main,
were  enabled  to  assort  and  proportion  their  cargoes  so
exactly  to  the  demands  of  the  market,  that  the  contra-
band commerce  was  carried  on  with  a  facility  and  to
an  extent  unknown  in  any  former  period.  This,  how-
ever, was  not  the  most  fatal  consequence  of  the  assiento
to  the  trade  of  Spain.  The  agents  of  the  British  South
Sea  Company,  under  cover  of  the  importation  which
they  were  authorized  to  make  by  the  ship  sent  annually
to  Porto-Bello,  poured  in  their  commodities  on  the  Spa-
nish continent,  without  limitation  or  restraint.  Instead
of  a  ship  of  five  hundred  tons,  as  stipulated  in  the
treaty,  they  usually  employed  one  which  exceeded  nine
hundred  tons  in  burden.  She  was  accompanied  by
two  or  three  smaller  vessels,  which,  mooring  in  some
neighbouring  creek,  supplied  her  clandestinely  with
fresh  bales  of  goods,  to  replace  such  as  were  sold.
The  inspectors  of  the  fair,  and  officers  of  the  revenue,
gained  by  exorbitant  presents,  connived  at  the  fraud.*"
Thus,  partly  by  the  operations  of  the  company,  and
partly  by  the  activity  of  private  interlopers,  almost  the
whole  trade  of  Spanish  America  was  engrossed  by  fo-
1707  reigners.  The  immense  commerce  of  the  ga-
leons,  formerly  the  pride  of  Spain,  and  the  envy
of  other  nations,  sunk  to  nothing,  and  the  squadron  it-
self reduced  from  fifteen  thousand  to  two  thousand

k  See  Note  XLVIl.

134  AMERICA.

tons/  served  hardly  any  purpose  but  to  fetch  home  the
royal  revenue  arising  from  the  fifth  on  silver.
Guarda While  Spain  observed  these  encroachments,
Costas  em- and  felt  SO  seusiblv  their  pernicious  effects,  it

ployed  for  .  -i  i  i  rr

this  pur-  v^^as  impossible  not  to  make  some  eiiort  to  re-
^°*^*  strain  them.  Her  first  expedient  was  to  station
ships  of  force,  under  the  appellation  of  Guarda  Castas,
upon  the  coasts  of  those  provinces  to  which  interlopers
most  frequently  resorted.  As  private  interest  concur-
red with  the  duty  which  they  owed  to  the  public,  in
rendering  the  officers  who  commanded  those  vessels
vigilant  and  active,  some  check  was  given  to  the  pro-
gress of  the  contraband  trade,  though  in  dominions  so
extensive,  and  so  accessible  by  sea,  hardly  any  number
of  cruisers  was  sufficient  to  guard  against  its  inroads
in  every  quarter.  This  interruption  of  an  intercourse,
which  had  been  carried  on  with  so  much  facility,  that
the  merchants  in  the  British  colonies  were  accustomed
to  consider  it  almost  as  an  allowed  branch  of  commerce,
excited  murmurs  and  complaints.  These,  authorized,  in
some  measure,  and  rendered  more  interesting,  by  several
unjustifiable  acts  of  violence  committed  by  the  captains
of  the  Spanish  guarda  costas,  precipitated  Great
Britain  into  a  war  with  Spain ;  in  consequence
of  which  the  latter  obtained  a  final  release  from  the  assi-
ento,  and  was  left  at  liberty  to  regulate  the  commerce  of
her  colonies,  without  being  restrained  by  any  engagement
with  a  foreign  power.

The  use  of  As  the  formidable  encroachments  of  the  Eng-
shfpsln-  lish  on  their  American  trade,  had  discovered  to
troduced.  ^^  Spaniards  the  vast  consumption  of  European
goods  in  their  colonies,  and  taught  them  the  advantage
of  accommodating  their  importations  to  the  occasional
demand  of  the  various  provinces,  they  perceived  the  ne-
cessity of  devising  some  method  of  supplying  their  colo-
nies, different  from  their  ancient  one  of  sending  thither

'  Alcedo  y  Herrera,  p.  359. Campomanes,  i.  436.

BOOK VIII.  , 135

periodical  fleets.  That  mode  of  communication  had
been  found  not  only  to  be  uncertain,  as  the  departure  of
the  galeons  and  flota  was  sometimes  retarded  by  various
accidents,  and  often  prevented  by  the  wars  which  raged
in  Europe;  but  long  experience  had  shewn  it  to  be  ill
adapted  to  afford  America  a  regular  and  timely  supply
of  what  it  wanted.  The  scarcity  of  European  goods  in
the  Spanish  settlements  frequently  became  excessive;
their  price  rose  to  an  enormous  height ;  the  vigilant  eye
of  mercantile  attention  did  not  fail  to  observe  this  favour-
able opportunity ;  an  ample  supply  was  poured  in  by  in-
terlopers from  the  English,  the  French,  and  Dutch  islands ;
and  when  the  galeons  at  length  arrived,  they  found  the
markets  so  glutted  by  this  illicit  commerce,  that  there
was  no  demand  for  the  commodities  with  which  they
were  loaded.  In  order  to  remedy  this,  Spain  has  per-
mitted a  considerable  part  of  her  commerce  with  Ame-
rica to  be  carried  on  by  register-shi'ps.  These  are  fitted
out  during  the  intervals  between  the  stated  seasons  when
the  galeons  and  flota  sail,  by  merchants  in  Seville  or  Ca-
diz, upon  obtaining  a  license  from  the  council  of  the  Indies,
for  which  they  pay  a  very  high  premium,  and  are  destined
for  those  ports  in  America  where  any  extraordinary  de-
mand is  foreseen  or  expected.  By  this  expedient,  such  a
regular  supply  of  the  commodities,  for  which  there  is  the
greatest  demand,  is  conveyed  to  the  American  market,
that  the  interloper  is  no  longer  allured  by  the  same  pro-
spect of  excessive  gain,  or  the  people  in  the  colonies
urged  by  the  same  necessity  to  engage  in  the  hazardous
adventures  of  contraband  trade.

In  proportion  as  experience  manifested  the  advantages
of  carrying  on  trade  in  this  mode,  the  number  of  regis-
^^^  ter-ships  increased ;  and  at  length,  in  the  year
icons  abo-  1748,  the  galeons,  after  having  been  employed
upwards  of  two  centuries,  were  finally  laid  aside.
From  that  period  there  has  been  no  intercourse  with
Chili  and  Peru  but  by  single  ships,  dispatched  from  time

136  AMERICA.

to  time  as  occasion  requires,  and  when  the  merchants
expect  a  profitable  market  will  open.  These  ships  sail
round  Cape  Horn,  and  convey  directly  to  the  ports  in
the  South  sea  the  productions  and  manufactures  of
Europe,  for  which  the  people  settled  in  those  countries
were  formerly  obliged  to  repair  to  Porto-Bello  or  Pa-
nama. These  towns,  as  has  been  formerly  observed,
must  gradually  decline,  when  deprived  of  that  com-
merce to  which  they  owed  their  prosperity.  This  dis-
advantage, however,  is  more  than  compensated  by  the
beneficial  effects  of  this  new  arrangement,  as  the  whole
continent  of  South  America  receives  new  supplies  of
European  commodities  with  so  much  regularity,  and  in
such  abundance,  as  must  not  only  contribute  greatly  to
the  happiness,  but  increase  the  population  of  all  the  colo-
nies settled  there.  But  as  all  the  register-ships  destined
for  the  South  seas  must  still  take  their  departure  from
Cadiz,  and  are  obliged  to  return  thither,"'  this  branch  of
the  American  commerce,  even  in  its  new  and  improved
form,  continues  subject  to  the  restraints  of  a  species  of
monopoly,  and  feels  those  pernicious  effects  of  it,  which
I  have  already  described.

Schemes  Nor  has  the  attention  of  Spain  been  confined

Svin*g  ^^  regulating  the  trade  with  its  more  flourish-
commerce.  {^ig  colonics;  it  iias  cxtcndcd  likewise  to  the
reviving  commerce  in  those  settlements  where  it  was
neglected,  or  had  decayed.  Among  the  new  tastes
which  the  people  of  Europe  had  acquired,  in  conse-
quence of  importing  the  productions  of  those  countries
which  they  conquered  in  America,  that  for  chocolate  is
one  of  the  most  universal.  The  use  of  this  liquor  made
with  a  paste,  formed  of  the  nut  or  almond  of  the  cacao-
tree,  compounded  with  various  ingredients,  the  Spa-
niards first  learned  from  the  Mexicans;  and  it  has  ap-
peared to  them,  and  to  the  other  European  nations,  so
palatable,  so  nourishing,  and  so  wholesome,  that  it  has

ni  Camponiancs,  i.  '134.  410.

BOOK VIII.  K37

become  a  commercial  article  of  considerable  impor-
tance. The  cacao-tree  grows  spontaneously  in  several
parts  of  the  torrid  zone;  but  the  nuts  of  the  best  quality,
next  to  those  of  Guatimala,  on  the  South  sea,  are  pro-
duced in  the  rich  plains  of  Caraccas,  a  province  of
Tierra  Firme.  In  consequence  of  this  acknowledged
superiority  in  the  quality  of  cacao  in  that  province,
and  its  communication  with  the  Atlantic,  v^^hich  facili-
tates the  conveyance  to  Europe,  the  culture  of  the  cacao
there  is  more  extensive  than  in  any  district  of  America.
But  the  Dutch,  by  the  vicinity  of  their  settlements  in
the  small  islands  of  Curazoa  and  Buen-Ayre,  to  the
coast  of  Caraccas,  gradually  engrossed  the  greatest  part
of  the  cacao  trade.  The  traffic  with  the  mother-country
for  this  valuable  commodity  ceased  almost  entirely;
and  such  was  the  supine  negligence  of  the  Spaniards,
or  the  defects  of  their  commercial  arrangements,  that
they  were  obliged  to  receive  from  the  hands  of  foreigners
this  production  of  their  own  colonies,  at  an  exorbitant
B  esta  P'^ice.  In  order  to  remedy  an  evil  no  less  dis-
biisiiing  graceful  than  pernicious  to  his  subjects,  Philip
pany  of  V.,  in  the  year  1728,  granted  to  a  body  of  mer-
chants an  exclusive  right  to  the  commerce  with
Caraccas  and  Cumana,  on  condition  of  their  employing,
at  their  own  expense,  a  sufficient  number  of  armed  ves-  ^
sels  to  clear  the  coast  of  interlopers.  This  society,  dis-
tinguished sometimes  by  the  name  of  the  company  of
Guipuscoa,  from  the  province  of  Spain  in  v/hich  it  is
established,  and  sometimes  by  that  of  the  Company  of
Caraccas,  from  the  district  of  America  to  which  it  trades,
has  carried  on  its  operations  with  such  vigour  and  suc-
cess, that  Spain  has  recovered  an  important  branch  of
commerce,  which  she  had  suffered  to  be  wrested  from
her,  and  is  plentifully  supplied  with  an  article  of  ex-
tensive consumption  at  a  moderate  price.  Not  only  the
parent  state,  but  the  colony  of  Caraccas,  has  derived
great  advantages  from  this  institution ;  for  although,  at

138  AMERICA.

the  first  aspect,  it  may  appear  to  be  one  of  those  mono-
polies, whose  tendency  is  to  check  the  spirit  of  indus-
try, instead  of  calling  it  forth  to  new  exertions,  it  has
been  prevented  from  operating  in  this  manner  by  several
salutary  regulations,  framed  upon  foresight  of  such  bad
effects,  and  of  purpose  to  obviate  them.  The  planters
in  the  Caraccas  are  not  left  to  depend  entirely  on  the
company,  either  for  the  importation  of  European  com-
modities, or  the  sale  of  their  own  productions.  The
inhabitants  of  the  Canary  islands  have  the  privilege  of
sending  thither  annually  a  register-ship  of  considerable
burden;  and  from  Vera  Cruz  in  New  Spain,  a  free  trade
is  permitted  in  every  port  comprehended  in  the  charter
of  the  company.  In  consequence  of  this,  there  is  such
a  competition,  that  both  with  respect  to  what  the  colo-
nies purchase,  and  what  they  sell,  the  price  seems  to
be  fixed  at  its  natural  and  equitable  rate.  The  company
has  not  the  power  of  raising  the  former,  or  of  degrading
the  latter  at  pleasure;  and  accordingly,  since  it  was
established,  the  increase  of  culture,  of  population,  and
of  live  stock,  in  the  province  of  Caraccas,  has  been  very
considerable."

Eniar  'e-  ^^^  ^^  ^^  ^^  slowly  that  nations  relinquish  any
ment  of svstem  wliich  time  has  rendered  venerable,  and

commer-  . .  .,,  i i i  i

ciai  ideas  as  it  IS  Still  more  slowly  that  commerce  can  be

■ s ■  ...

pain-  (diverted  from  the  channel  in  which  it  has  long
been  accustomed  to  flow,  Philip  V.,  in  his  new  regula-
tions concerning  the  American  trade,  paid  such  defer-
ence to  the  ancient  maxim  of  Spain,  concerning  the
limitation  of  all  importation  from  the  New  World  to
one  harbour,  as  to  oblige  both  the  registered-ships
which  returned  from  Peru,  and  those  of  the  Guipuscoaii
Company  from  Caraccas,  to  deliver  their  cargoes  in  the
port  of  Cadiz.  Since  his  reign,  sentiments  more  liberal
and  enlarged  begin  to  spread  in  Spain.  The  spirit  of
philosophical  inquiry,  which  it  is  the  glory  of  the  pre-

■■'  See  Note  XLVIII.

^^^ BOOK VIIL  139

sent  age  to  have  turned  from  frivolous  or  abstruse  specu-
lations, to  the  business  and  affairs  of  men,  has  extended
its  influence  beyond  the  Pyrenees.  In  the  researches
of  ino-enious  authors,  concerning  the  police  or  com-
merce of  nations,  the  errors  and  defects  of  the  Spanish
system  with  respect  to  both  met  every  eye,  and  have
not  only  been  exposed  with  severity,  but  are  held  as  a
warning  to  other  states.  The  Spaniards,  stung  with
the  reproaches  of  these  authors,  or  convinced  by  their
arguments,  and  admonished  by  several  enlightened
writers  of  their  own  country,  seem  at  length  to  have
discovered  the  destructive  tendency  of  those  narrow
maxims,  which,  by  cramping  commerce  in  all  its  opera-
tions, have  so  long  retarded  its  progress.  It  is  to  the
monarch  now  on  the  throne,  that  Spain  is  indebted  for
the  first  public  regulation  formed  in  consequence  of
such  enlarged  ideas.

Establish-  While  Spain  adhered  with  rigour  to  her  an-
raentof  cicut  maxims  concerning  her  commerce  with
packet-  America,  she  was  so  much  afraid  of  opening
^°^*^'  any  channel,  by  which  an  illicit  trade  might
find  admission  into  the  colonies,  that  she  almost  shut
herself  out  from  any  intercourse  with  them,  but  that
which  was  carried  on  by  her  annual  fleets.  There  was
no  establishment  for  a  regular  communication  of  either
public  or  private  intelligence,  between  the  mother-
country  and  its  American  settlements.  From  the  want
of  this  necessary  institution,  the  operations  of  the
state,  as  well  as  the  business  of  individuals,  were  re-
tarded or  conducted  unskilfully,  and  Spain  often  re-
ceived from  foreigners  her  first  information  with  respect
to  very  interesting  events  in  her  own  colonies.  But
though  this  defect  in  police  was  sensibly  felt,  and  the
remedy  for  it  was  obvious,  that  jealous  spirit  with  which
the  Spanish  monarchs  guarded  the  exclusive  trade,  re-
strained them  from  applying  it.  At  length  Charles  III.
surmounted  those  considerations  which  had  deterred

140  AMERICA. ^^

his  predecessors,  and  in  the  year  1764  appointed  packet-
boats  to  be  dispatched  on  the  first  day  of  each  month,
from  Corugna  to  the  Havanna  or  Porto-Rico.  From
thence  letters  are  conveyed  in  smaller  vessels  to  Vera
Cruz  and  Porto-Bello,  and  transmitted  by  post  through
the  kingdoms  of  Tierra  Firme,  Granada,  Peru,  and
New  Spain.  With  no  less  regularity  packet-boats  sail
once  in  two  months  to  Rio  de  la  Plata,  for  the  accom-
modation of  the  provinces  to  the  east  of  the  Andes.
Thus  provision  is  made  for  a  speedy  and  certain  circu-
lation of  intelligence  throughout  the  vast  dominions  of
Spain,  from  which  equal  advantages  must  redound  to
the  political  and  mercantile  interests  of  the  kingdom."
With  this  new  arrangement  a  scheme  of  extending  com-
merce has  been  more  immediately  connected.  Each  of
the  packet-boats,  which  are  vessels  of  some  considerable
burden,  is  allowed  to  take  in  half  a  loading  of  such
commodities  as  are  the  product  of  Spain,  and  most  in
demand  in  the  ports  whither  they  are  bound.  In  re-
turn for  these  they  may  bring  home  to  Corugna  an
equal  quantity  of  American  productions.^  This  may
be  considered  as  the  first  relaxation  of  those  rig-id  laws,
which  confined  the  trade  with  the  New  World  to  a
single  port,  and  the  first  attempt  to  admit  the  rest  of  the
kingdom  to  some  share  in  it.

Free  trade  It  was  soon  followcd  by  ouc  more  decisive.
foseS  In  the  year  1765,  Charles  III.  laid  open  the
provinces,  trade  to  the  windward  islands,  Cuba,  Hispa-
niola,  Porto-Rico,  Margarita,  and  Trinidad,  to  his  sub-
jects in  every  province  of  Spain.  He  permitted  them  to
sail  from  certain  ports  in  each  province,  which  are
specified  in  the  edict  at  any  season,  and  with  whatever
cargo  they  deemed  most  proper,  without  any  other
warrant  than  a  simple  clearance  from  the  custom-house
of  the  place  whence  they  took  their  departure. He  re-

°  Pontz  Viage  de  Espagna,  vi.  Prol.  p.  15.
P  Append,  ii.  a  la  Educ.  Pop.  p.  31 .

BOOK  VIII.  141

leased  them  from  the  numerous  and  oppressive  duties
imposed  on  goods  exported  to  America,  and  in  place
of  the  whole  substituted  a  moderate  tax  of  six  in  the
hundred  on  the  commodities  sent  from  Spain.  He  al-
lowed them  to  return  either  to  the  same  port,  or  to  any
other  where  they  might  hope  for  a  more  advantageous
market,  and  there  to  enter  the  homeward  cargo,  on  pay-
ment of  the  usual  duties.  This  ample  privilege,  which
at  once  broke  through  all  the  fences  which  the  jealous
policy  of  Spain  had  been  labouring,  for  two  centuries
and  a  half,  to  throw  round  its  commercial  intercourse
with  the  New  World,  was  soon  after  extended  to
Louisiana,  and  to  the  provinces  of  Yucatan  and  Cam-
peachy."'

Beneficial  '^^^  propriety  of  this  innovation,  which  may
effects  be  considered  as  the  most  liberal  eftbrt  of  Spa-
nish legislation,  has  appeared  from  its  effects.
Prior  to  the  edict  in  favour  of  the  free  trade,  Spain
derived  hardly  any  benefit  from  its  neglected  colonies
in  Hispaniola,  Porto-Rico,  Margarita,  and  Trinidad.
Its  commerce  with  Cuba  was  inconsiderable,  and  that
of  Yucatan  and  Campeachy  was  engrossed  almost  en-
tirely by  interlopers.  But  as  soon  as  a  general  liberty
of  trade  was  permitted,  the  intercourse  with  those  pro-
vinces revived,  and  has  gone  on  with  a  rapidity  of
progression,  of  which  there  are  few  examples  in  the
history  of  nations.  In  less  than  ten  years,  the  trade
of  Cuba  has  been  more  than  tripled.  Even  in  those
settlements  where,  from  the  languishing  state  of  in-
dustry, greater  efforts  were  requisite  to  restore  its  ac-
tivity, their  commerce  has  been  doubled.  It  is  com-
puted, that  such  a  number  of  ships  is  already  employed
in  the  free  trade,  that  the  tonnage  of  them  far  exceeds
that  of  the  gal  eons  and  flota,  at  the  most  flourishing
era  of  their  commerce.  The  benefits  of  this  arrang^e-
ment  are  not  confined  to  a  few  merchants,  established

1  Append,  ii.  a  la  Educ.  Pop.  37.  54.  91.

142  AMERICA.

in  a  favourite  port  They  are  diffused  through  every
province  of  the  kingdom  ;  and  by  opening  a  new  mar-
ket for  their  various  productions  and  manufactures,
must  encourage  and  add  vivacity  to  the  industry  of
the  farmer  and  artificer.  Nor  does  the  kingdom  pro-
fit only  by  w^hat  it  exports  ;  it  derives  advantage  like-
wise from  what  it  receives  in  return,  and  has  the  pros-
pect of  being  soon  able  to  supply  itself  with  several
commodities  of  extensive  consumption,  for  which  it
formerly  depended  on  foreigners.  The  consumption
of  sugar  in  Spain  is  perhaps  as  great,  in  proportion  to
the  number  of  its  inhabitants,  as  that  of  any  European
kingdom.  But  thougii  possessed  of  countries  in  the
New  World,  whose  soil  and  climate  are  most  proper
for  rearing  the  sugar-cane ;  though  the  domestic  cul-
ture of  that  valuable  plant  in  the  kingdom  of  Granada
was  once  considerable ;  such  has  been  the  fatal  ten-
dency of  ill-judged  institutions  in  America,  and  such
the  pressure  of  improper  taxes  in  Europe,  that  Spain
has  lost  almost  entirely  this  branch  of  industry,  which
has  enriched  other  nations.  This  commodity,  which
has  now  become  an  article  of  primary  necessity  in  Eu-
rope, the  Spaniards  were  obliged  to  purchase  of  fo-
reigners, and  had  the  mortification  to  see  their  country
drained  annually  of  great  sums  on  that  account."  But
if  that  spirit,  which  the  permission  of  free  trade  has
put  in  motion,  shall  persevere  in  its  efforts  with  the
same  vigour,  the  cultivation  of  sugar  in  Cuba  and
Porto-Rico  may  increase  so  much,  that  in  a  few  years,
it  is  probable,  that  their  growth  of  sugars  may  be
equal  to  the  demand  of  the  kingdom.
Free  trade  Spain  has  been  induced,  by  her  experience
permitted  of  the  bcucficial  consequences  resulting  from
theTob-  having  relaxed  somewhat  of  the  rigour  of  her
"'^''  ancient  laws  with  respect  to  the  commerce  of
the  mother-country  with  the  colonies,  to  permit  a  more

f  Uztariz,  c.  94.

BOOK  Vlll.  143

liberal  intercourse  of  one  colony  with  another.  By-
one  of  the  jealous  maxims  of  the  old  system,  ail  the
provinces  situated  on  the  South  seas  were  prohibited,
under  the  most  severe  penalties,  from  holding  any  com-
munication with  one  another.  Though  each  of  these
yield  peculiar  productions,  the  reciprocal  exchange  of
which  might  have  added  to  the  happiness  of  their  re-
spective inhabitants,  or  have  facilitated  their  progress
in  industry,  so  solicitous  was  the  council  of  the  Indies
to  prevent  their  receiving  any  supply  of  their  wants,
but  by  the  periodical  fleets  from  Europe,  that  in  order
to  guard  against  this,  it  cruelly  debarred  the  Spaniards
in  Peru,  in  the  southern  provinces  of  New  Spain,  in
Guatimala,  and  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada,  from
such  a  correspondence  with  their  fellow- subjects,  as
tended  manifestly  to  their  mutual  prosperity.  Of  all
the  numerous  restrictions  devised  by  Spain  for  secur-
ing the  exclusive  trade  with  her  American  settlements,
'■^  none  perhaps  was  more  illiberal,  none  seems  to  have
been  more  sensibly  felt,  or  to  have  produced  more
hurtful  effects.  This  grievance,  coeval  with  the  set-
tlements of  Spain  in  the  countries  situated  on  the  Pa-
cific ocean,  is  at  last  redressed.  In  the  year  1774,
Charles  III.  published  an  edict,  granting  to  the  four
great  provinces  which  I  have  mentioned  the  privilege
of  a  free  trade  with  each  other.'  What  may  be  the  effects
of  opening  this  communication  between  countries  des-
tined by  their  situation  for  reciprocal  intercourse,  cannot
yet  be  determined  by  experience.  They  can  hardly  fail
of  being  beneficial  and  extensive.  The  motives  for
granting  this  permission  are  manifestly  no  less  laud-
able, than  the  principle  on  which  it  is  founded  is  libe-
ral ;  and  both  discover  the  progress  of  a  spirit  in
Spain,  far  elevated  above  the  narrow  prejudices  and
maxims  on  which  her  system  for  regulating  the  trade,

'  Real  Cedula  penes  me. Pontz  Viage  de  Espagna,  vi. Prologo.  p.  2. Note
XLIX.  *^  ^ .

144  AMERICA.

and  conducting  the  government  of  her  colonies,  was
originally  founded.

jjg^  regu- -^^  the  same  time  that  Spain  has  been  intent
lations QYi  introducing"  regulations,  sug-^ested  by  more

concern-  .  'no  J

ing  the  go-  enlarged  views  of  policy,  into  her  system  of

vernment .  .  ■■ ,  ,  .

of  the  CO-  American  commerce,  she  has  not  been  mat-
lonies.  tentive  to  the  interior  government  of  her  co-
lonies.  Here,  too,  there  was  much  room  for  reforma-
tion and  improvement ;  and  Don  Joseph  Galvez,  who
has  now  the  direction  of  the  department  for  Indian
affairs  in  Spain,  has  enjoyed  the  best  opportunities,
not  only  of  observing  the  defects  and  corruption  in  the
political  frame  of  the  colonies,  but  of  discovering  the
sources  of  those  evils.  After  being  employed  seven
years  in  the  New  World  on  an  extraordinary  mission,
and  with  very  extensive  powers,  as  inspector-general
of  New  Spain;  after  visiting  in  person  the  remote  pro-
vinces of  Cinaloa,  Sonora,  and  California,  and  making
several  important  alterations  in  the  state  of  the  police
and  revenue;  he  began  his  ministry  with  a  general  re-
Rcforma-  formation  of  the  tribunals  of  justice  in  America.
court's^ of *^  In  consequence  of  the  progress  of  population
justice.  and  wealth  in  the  colonies,  the  business  of  the
courts  of  audience  has  increased  so  much,  that  the  num-
ber of  judges  of  which  they  were  originally  composed
has  been  found  inadequate  to  the  growing  labours  and
duties  of  the  office,  and  the  salaries  settled  upon  them
have  been  deemed  inferior  to  the  dignity  of  the  station.
As  a  remedy  for  both,  he  obtained  a  royal  edict,  esta-
blishing an  additional  number  of  judges  in  each  court  of
audience,  with  higher  titles,  and  more  ample  appoint-
ments.'

New  dis- To  the  Same  intelligent  minister  Spain  is  in-
tnbution jgi^^^fj  foj.  ^  ncw  distribution  of  government  in

of  govern-  o

ment. its  American  provinces. Even  since  the  esta-
blishment of  a  third  viceroyalty  in  the  new  kingdom

'  Gazeta  de  Madrid,  I9th  March,  1776.

BOOK VIII.  145

of  Granada,  so  great  is  the  extent  of  the  Spanish  do-
minions in  the  New  World,  that  several  places  subject
to  the  jurisdiction  of  each  viceroy,  were  at  such  an  enor-
mous distance  from  the  capitals  in  which  they  resided,
that  neither  their  attention,  nor  their  authority,  could
reach  so  far. Some  provinces  subordinate  to  the  vice-
roy of  New  Spain  lay  above  two  thousand  miles  from
Mexico. There  were  countries  subject  to  the  viceroy
of  Peru  still  farther  from  Lima. The  people  in  those
remote  districts  could  hardly  be  said  to  enjoy  the  bene-
fit of  civil  government. The  oppression  and  insolence
of  its  inferior  ministers  they  often  feel,  and  rather  sub-
mit to  these  in  silence,  than  involve  themselves  in  the
expense  and  trouble  of  resorting  to  the  distant  capitals.
New  vice- whcrc  alouc  they  can  find  redress. As  a  re-
royaity, mcdy  for  this,  a  fourth  viceroyalty  has  been

Aug.  1776,  -^  . . ..  /.1-1

on  Rio  de  crcctcd,  to  the  jurisdiction  of  which  are  sub-
jected the  provinces  of  Rio  de  la  Plata,  Buenos-
Ayres,  Paraguay,  Tucuman,  Potosi,  St.  Cruz  de  la
Sierra,  Charcas,  and  the  towns  of  Mendozaand  St.  Juan.
By  this  well-judged  arrangement,  two  advantages  are
gained.  All  the  inconveniences  occasioned  by  the  re-
mote situation  of  those  provinces,  which  had  been  long-
felt,  and  long  complained  of,  are,  in  a  great  measure,
removed.  The  countries  most  distant  from  Lima  are
separated  from  the  viceroyalty  of  Peru,  and  united
under  a  superior,  whose  seat  of  government  at  Buenos-
Ayres  will  be  commodious  and  accessible.  The  con-
traband trade  with  the  Portuguese,  which  was  become
so  extensive,  as  must  have  put  a  final  stop  to  the  ex-
portation of  commodities  from  Spain  to  her  southern
colonies,  may  be  checked  more  thoroughly,  and  with
greater  facility,  when  the  supreme  magistrate,  by  his
vicinity  to  the  places  in  which  it  is  carried  on,  can
view  its  progress  and  effects  with  his  own  eyes.  Don
Pedro  Zevallos,  who  has  been  raised  to  this  new
dignity,  with  appointments  equal  to  those  of  the  other

VOL.  VIII.  L

146  AMERICA.

viceroys,  is  well  acquainted  both  with  the  state  and
the  interest  of  the  countries  over  which  he  is  to  preside,
having  served  in  them  long,  and  with  distinction.  By
this  dismemberment,  succeeding  that  which  took  place
at  the  erection  of  the  viceroyalty  of  the  new  king-
dom of  Granada,  almost  two-third  parts  of  the  terri-
tories, originally  subject  to  the  viceroys  of  Peru,  are
now  lopped  off  from  their  jurisdiction.
New  go-  The  limits  of  the  viceroyalty  of  New  Spain
in  p™-"  have  likewise  been  considerably  circumscribed,
Sonora°^  and  with  no  less  propriety  and  discernment.
&c.  Four  of  its  most  remote  provinces,  Sonora,  Cina-

loa,  California,  and  New  Navarre,  have  been  formed  into
a  separate  government.  The  chevalier  de  Croix,  who
is  intrusted  with  this  command,  is  not  dignified  with  the
title  of  viceroy,  nor  does  he  enjoy  the  appointments  be-
longing to  that  rank;  but  his  jurisdiction  is  altogether
independent  on  the  viceroyalty  of  New  Spain.  The
erection  of  this  last  government  seems  to  have  been  sug-
gested not  only  by  the  consideration  of  the  remote
situation  of  those  provinces  from  Mexico ;  but  by  atten-
tion to  the  late  discoveries  made  there  which  I  have
mentioned.^  Countries  containing  the  richest  mines  of
gold  that  have  hitherto  been  discovered  in  the  New
World,  and  which  probably  may  arise  into  great  im-
portance, required  the  immediate  inspection  of  a  go-
vernor, to  whom  they  should  be  specially  committed.
As  every  consideration  of  duty,  of  interest,  and  of  vanity,
must  concur  in  prompting  those  new  governors  to  en-
courage such  exertions  as  tend  to  diffuse  opulence  and
prosperity  through  the  provinces  committed  to  their
charge,  the  beneficial  effects  of  this  arrangement  may
be  considerable.  Many  districts  in  America,  long  de-
pressed by  the  languor  and  feebleness  natural  to  pro-
vinces which  compose  the  extremities  of  an  overgrown
empire, may  be  animated with  vigour  and  activity,

"  Book  vii.

BOOK  vm.  147

when  brought  so  near  the  seat  of  power  as  to  feel  its
invigorating  influence.

Attempts  Such,  since  the  accession  of  the  princes  of
d'omeSc  ^^^  housc  of  Bourbou  to  the  throne  of  Spain,
policy.  has  been  the  progress  of  their  regulations,  and
the  gradual  expansion  of  their  views  with  respect  to
the  commerce  and  government  of  their  American  colo-
nies. Nor  has  their  attention  been  so  entirely  engrossed
by  what  related  to  the  more  remote  parts  of  their  do-
minions, as  to  render  them  neo-lectful  of  what  was  still
more  important,  the  reformation  of  domestic  errors  and
defects  in  policy.  Fully  sensible  of  the  causes  to  which
the  declension  of  Spain,  from  her  former  prosperity,
ought  to  be  imputed ;  they  have  made  it  a  great  object
of  their  policy  to  revive  a  spirit  of  industry  among  their
subjects,  and  to  give  such  extent  and  perfection  to  their
manufactures,  as  may  enable  them  to  supply  the  de-
mands of  America  from  their  own  stock,  and  to  exclude
foreigners  from  a  branch  of  commerce  which  has  been
so  fatal  to  the  kingdom.  This  they  have  endeavoured
to  accomplish,  by  a  variety  of  edicts  issued  since  the
peace  of  Utrecht.  They  have  granted  bounties  for  the
encouragement  of  some  branches  of  industry ;  they  have
lowered  the  taxes  on  others;  they  have  either  entirely
prohibited,  or  have  loaded  with  additional  duties,  such
foreign  manufacturers  as  come  in  competition  with  their
own ;  they  have  instituted  societies  for  the  improvement
of  trade  and  agriculture;  they  have  planted  colonies  of
husbandmen  in  some  uncultivated  districts  of  Spain,
and  divided  among  them  the  waste  fields ;  they  have
had  recourse  to  every  expedient  devised  by  commercial
wisdom,  or  commercial  jealousy,  for  reviving  their  own
industry,  and  discountenancing  that  of  other  nations.
These,  however,  it  is  not  my  province  to  explain,  or  to
inquire  into  their  propriety  and  effects.  There  is  no
effort  of  legislation  more  arduous,  no  experiment  in  po-
licy more  uncertain,  than  an  attempt  to  revive  the  spirit

l2

148  AMERICA.

of  industry  where  it  has  declined,  or  to  introduce  it  where
it  is  unknown.  Nations,  already  possessed  of  extensive
commerce,  enter  into  competition  with  such  advantages,
derived  from  the  large  capitals  and  extensive  credit  of
their  merchants,  the  dexterity  of  their  manufacturers,  the
alertness  acquired  by  habit  in  every  department  of  busi-
ness, that  the  state  which  aims  at  rivalling  or  supplant-
ing them,  must  expect  to  struggle  with  many  difficulties,
and  be  content  to  advance  slowly.  If  the  quantity  of
productive  industry,  now  in  Spain,  be  compared  with
that  of  the  kingdom  under  the  last  listless  monarchs  of
the  Austrian  line,  its  progress  must  appear  considerable,
and  is  sufficient  to  alarm  the  jealousy,  and  to  call  forth
the  most  vigorous  efforts  of  the  nations  now  in  possession
of  the  lucrative  trade  which  the  Spaniards  aim  at  wrest-
ing from  them.  One  circumstance  may  render  those  ex-
ertions of  Spain  an  object  of  more  serious  attention  to
the  other  European  powers.  They  are  not  to  be  ascribed
wholly  to  the  influence  of  the  crown  and  its  ministers.
The  sentiments  and  spirit  of  the  people  seem  to  second
the  provident  care  of  their  monarchs,  and  to  give  it
greater  effect.  The  nation  has  adopted  more  liberal
ideas,  not  only  with  respect  to  commerce,  but  domestic
policy.  In  all  the  later  Spanish  writers,  defects  in  the
arrangements  of  their  country  concerning  both  are  ac-
knowledged, and  remedies  proposed,  which  ignorance
rendered  their  ancestors  incapable  of  discerning,  and
pride  would  not  have  allowed  them  to  confess.''  But
after  all  that  the  Spaniards  have  done  much  remains  to
do.  Many  pernicious  institutions,  and  abuses,  deeply
incorporated  with  the  system  of  internal  policy  and
taxation  which  has  been  long  established  in  Spain,  must
be  abolished  before  industry  and  manufactures  can  re-
cover an  extensive  activity.

Contra- Still,  howcvcr,  the  commercial  regulations  of
band  trade,  ^p^in  with  rcspcct  to  her  colonies  are  too  rigid

»  See  Note  L.

BOOK VIII.  149

and  systematical  to  be  carried  into  complete  execution.
The  legislature  that  loads  trade  with  impositions  too
heavy,  or  fetters  it  by  restrictions  too  severe,  defeats  its
own  intention,  and  is  only  multiplying  the  inducements
to  violate  its  statutes,  and  proposing  a  high  premium  to
encourage  illicit  traffic.  The  Spaniards,  both  in  Europe
and  America,  being  circumscribed  in  their  mutual  in-
tercourse by  the  jealousy  of  the  crown,  or  oppressed  by
its  exactions,  have  their  invention  continually  on  the
stretch  how  to  elude  its  edicts.  The  vigilance  and  inge-
nuity of  private  interest  discover  means  of  effecting  this,
which  public  wisdom  cannot  foresee,  nor  public  authority
prevent.  This  spirit,  counteracting  that  of  the  laws,
pervades  the  commerce  of  Spain  with  America  in  all  its
branches ;  and  from  the  highest  departments  in  govern-
ment descends  to  the  lowest.  The  very  officers  ap-
pointed to  check  contraband  trade  are  often  employed  as
instruments  in  carrying  it  on ;  and  the  boards  instituted
to  restrain  and  punish  it  are  the  channels  through  which
it  flows.  The  king  is  supposed,  by  the  most  intelligent
Spanish  writers,  to  be  defrauded,  by  various  artifices,  of
more  than  one  half  of  the  revenue  which  he  ought  to  re-
ceive from  America  •/  and  as  long  as  it  is  the  interest  of
so  many  persons  to  screen  those  artifices  from  detection,
the  knowledge  of  them  will  never  reach  the  throne.
"  How  many  ordinances,"  says  Corita,  "  how  many  in-
structions, how  many  letters  from  our  sovereign,  are  sent
in  order  to  correct  abuses,  and  how  little  are  they  ob-
served, and  what  small  advantage  is  derived  from  them  !
To  me  the  old  observation  appears  just,  that  where  there
are  many  physicians,  and  many  medicines,  there  is  a
want  of  health ;  where  there  are  many  laws,  and  many
judges,  there  is  want  of  justice.  We  have  viceroys,
presidents,  governors,  oydors,  corrigidors,  alcaldes,  and
thousands  of  alguazils  abound  every  where ;  but  not-
withstanding all  these,  public  abuses  continue  to  mul-

y  Solorz.  dc  Ind.  Jure,  ii.  lib.  r.

150  AMERICA.

tiply."''  Time  has  increased  the  evils  which  he  lamented
as  early  as  the  reign  of  Philip  II,  A  spirit  of  corruption
has  infected  all  the  colonies  of  Spain  in  America.  Men
far  removed  from  the  seat  of  government ;  impatient  to
acquire  wealth,  that  they  may  return  speedily  from  what
they  are  apt  to  consider  as  a  state  of  exile  in  a  remote
unhealthful  country ;  allured  by  opportunities  too  tempt-
ing to  be  resisted,  and  seduced  by  the  example  of  those
around  them ;  find  their  sentiments  of  honour  and  of
duty  gradually  relax.  In  private  life  they  give  them-
selves up  to  a  dissolute  luxury,  while  in  their  public
conduct  they  become  unmindful  of  what  they  owe  to
their  sovereign  and  to  their  country.
Trade  be-  Bcforc  I  closc  tliis  accouut  of  the  Spanish
tweenNew  trade  iu  America,  there  remains  one  detached,

Spain  and  .  i r"  i  •  j

the  Phi-  but  important  branch  of  it,  to  be  mentioned.
ippines.  gQQj^  after  his  accession  to  the  throne,  Philip
II.  formed  a  scheme  of  planting  a  colony  in  the  Philip-
pine islands  which  had  been  neglected  since  the  time
of  their  discovery ;  and  he  accomplished  it  by  means
of  an  armament  fitted  out  from  New  Spain.''  Manila,
in  the  island  of  Luconia,  was  the  station  chosen

1564.

for  the  capital  of  this  new  establishment.  From
it  an  active  commercial  intercourse  began  with  the
Chinese,  and  a  considerable  number  of  that  industrious
people,  allured  by  the  prospect  of  gain,  settled  in  the
Philippine  islands  under  the  Spanish  protection.  They
supplied  the  colony  so  amply  with  all  the  valuable  pro-
ductions and  manufactures  of  the  East,  as  enabled  it  to
.  open  a  trade  with  America,  by  a  course  of  navigation
the  longest  from  land  to  land  on  our  globe.  In  the
infancy  of  this  trade,  it  was  carried  on  with  Callao,
on  the  coast  of  Peru  ;  but  experience  having  discovered
the  impropriety  of  fixing  upon  that  as  the  port  of  com-
munication with  Manila,  the  staple  of  the  commerce
between  the  East  and  West  was  removed  from  Callao
to  Acapulco,  on  the  coast  of  New  Spain.

^  MS.  penes  me.  »  Torquem.  i.  lib.  v.  c.  14.

BOOK VIII.  151

After  various  arrangements,  it  has  been  brought  into
a  regular  form.  One  or  two  ships  depart  annually  from
Acapulco,  which  are  permitted  to  carry  out  silver  to
the  amount  of  five  hundred  thousand  pesos  ;''  but  they
have  hardly  any  thing  else  of  value  on  board  ;  in  re-
turn for  which,  they  bring  back  spices,  drugs,  china,
and  japan  wares,  calicoes,  chintz,  muslins,  silks,  and
every  precious  article  with  which  the  benignity  of  the
climate,  or  the  ingenuity  of  its  people,  has  enabled  the
East  to  supply  the  rest  of  the  world.  For  some  time
the  merchants  of  Peru  were  admitted  to  participate  in
this  traffic,  and  might  send  annually  a  ship  to  Acapulco,
to  wait  the  arrival  of  the  vessels  from  Manila,  and  re-
ceive a  proportional  share  of  the  commodities  which  they
imported.  At  length,  the  Peruvians  were  exchided  from
this  trade  by  most  rigorous  edicts,  and  all  the  commo-
dities from  the  East  reserved  solely  for  the  consumption
of  New  Spain.

In  consequence  of  this  indulgence,  the  inhabitants  of
that  country  enjoy  advantages  unknown  in  the  other
Spanish  colonies.  The  manufactures  of  the  East  are  not
only  more  suited  to  a  warm  climate,  and  more  showy
than  those  of  Europe,  but  can  be  sold  at  a  lower  price ;
while,  at  the  same  time,  the  profits  upon  them  are  so  con-
siderable, as  to  enrich  all  those  who  are  employed,  either
in  bringing  them  from  Manila,  or  vending  them  in  New
Spain.  As  the  interest  both  of  the  buyer  and  seller  con-
curred in  favouring  this  branch  of  commerce,  it  has  con-
tinued to  extend  in  spite  of  regulations  concerted  with  the
most  anxious  jealousy  to  circumscribe  it.  Under  cover
of  what  the  laws  permit  to  be  imported,  great  quantities
of  India  goods  are  poured  into  the  markets  of  New  Spain  f
and  when  the  flota  arrives  at  Vera  Cruz  from  Europe,  it
often  finds  the  wants  of  the  people  already  supplied  by
cheaper  and  more  acceptable  commodities.

There  is  not,  in  the  commercial  arrangements  of  Spain,

b  Recop.  lib.  ix.  c.  45.  1.  6.  <=  See  Note  LI

152  AMERICA.

any  circumstance  more  inexplicable  than  the  permission
of  this  trade  between  New  Spain  and  the  Philippines,  or
more  repugnant  to  its  fundamental  maxim  of  holding  the
colonies  in  perpetual  dependence  on  the  mother-country,
by  prohibiting  any  commercial  intercourse  that  might
suggest  to  them  the  idea  of  receiving  a  supply  of  their
wants  from  any  other  quarter.  This  permission  must  ap-
pear still  more  extraordinary,  from  considering  that  Spain
herself  carries  on  no  direct  trade  with  her  settlements
in  the  Philippines,  and  grants  a  privilege  to  one  of  her
American  colonies  which  she  denies  to  her  subjects  in
Europe.  It  is  probable,  that  the  colonists  who  originally
took  possession  of  the  Philippines,  having  been  sent  out
from  New  Spain,  begun  this  intercourse  with  a  country
which  they  considered,  in  some  measure,  as  their  parent-
state,  before  the  court  of  Madrid  was  aware  of  its  conse-
quences, or  could  establish  regulations  in  order  to  prevent
it.  Many  remonstrances  have  been  presented  against
this  trade,  as  detrimental  to  Spain,  by  diverting  into  ano-
ther channel  a  large  portion  of  that  treasure  which  ought
to  flow  into  the  kingdom,  as  tending  to  give  rise  to  a
spirit  of  independence  in  the  colonies,  and  to  encourage
innumerable  frauds,  against  which  it  is  impossible  to
guard,  in  transactions  so  far  removed  from  the  inspection
of  government.  But  as  it  requires  no  slight  effort  of
political  wisdom  and  vigour  to  abolish  any  practice  which
numbers  are  interested  in  supporting,  and  to  which  time
has  added  the  sanction  of  its  authority,  the  commerce  be-
tween New  Spain  and  Manila  seems  to  be  as  considerable
as  ever,  and  may  be  considered  as  one  chief  cause  of  the
elegance  and  splendour  conspicuous  in  this  part  of  the
Spanish  dominions.

Public  re- ^^^  notwithstanding  this  general  corruption
Tenue  from  in  the  colouics  of  Spain,  and  the  diminution  of

America.  .  .  .,  ,,.

the  mcome  belongmg  to  the  public,  occasioned
by  the  illicit  importations  made  by  foreigners,  as  well  as
b}"  the  various  frauds  of  which  the  colonists  themselves

BOOK  Vlir.  153

are  guilty  in  their  commerce  with  the  parent-state,  the
Spanish  monarchs  receive  a  very  considerable  revenue
from  their  American  dominions.  This  arises  from  taxes
of  various  kinds,  which  may  be  divided  into  three  capital
branches.  The  first  contains  what  is  paid  to  the  king,
as  sovereign,  or  superior  lord  of  the  New  World :  to  this
class  belongs  the  duty  on  the  gold  and  silver  raised  from
the  mines,  and  the  tribute  exacted  from  the  Indians;  the
former  is  termed  by  the  Spaniards  the  right  of  signiory,
the  latter  is  the  duty  of  vassalage.  The  second  branch
comprehends  the  numerous  duties  upon  commerce,  which
accompany  and  oppress  it  in  every  step  of  its  progress,
from  the  greatest  transactions  of  the  wholesale  merchant,
to  the  petty  traffic  of  the  vender  by  retail.  The  third  in-
cludes what  accrues  to  the  king,  as  head  of  the  church,
and  administrator  of  ecclesiastical  funds  in  the  New
World.  In  consequence  of  this  he  receives  the  first  fruits,
annates,  spoils,  and  other  spiritual  revenues,  levied  by  the
apostolic  chamber  in  Europe  ;  and  is  entitled  likewise  to
the  profit  arising  from  the  sale  of  the  bull  of  Cruzado.
This  bull,  which  is  published  every  two  years,  contains
an  absolution  from  past  offences  by  the  pope,  and,  among
other  immunities,  a  permission  to  eat  several  kinds  of
prohibited  food  during  Lent,  and  on  meagre  days.  The
monks  employed  in  dispersing  those  bulls  extol  their  vir-
tues with  all  the  fervour  of  interested  eloquence ;  the
people,  ignorant  and  credulous,  listen  with  implicit  assent ;
and  every  person  in  the  Spanish  colonies,  of  European,
Creolian  or  mixed  race,  purchases  a  bull,  which  is  deem-
ed essential  to  his  salvation,  at  the  rate  set  upon  it  by
government.''

What  may  be  the  amount  of  those  various

Its  amount.  ^ -, . . -,  .  .,  ,

funds,  it  IS  almost  impossible  to  determine  with
precision.  The  extent  of  the  Spanish  dominions  in  Ame-
rica, the  jealousy  of  government,  which  renders  them  in-
accessible to  foreigners,  the  mysterious  silence  which  the

d  See  Note  LII.

154  AMERICA.

Spaniards  are  accustomed  to  observe  with  respect  to  the
interior  state  of  their  colonies,  combine  in  covering  this
subject  with  a  veil,  which  it  is  not  easy  to  remove.  But
an  account,  apparently  no  less  accurate  than  it  is  curious,
has  lately  been  published  of  the  royal  revenue  in  New
Spain,  from  which  we  may  form  some  idea  with  respect  -
to  what  is  collected  in  the  other  provinces.  According
to  that  account,  the  crown  does  not  receive  from  all  the
departments  of  taxation  in  New  Spain  above  a  million  of
our  money,  from  which  one-half  must  be  deducted  as  the
expense  of  the  provincial  establishment.*^  Peru,  it  is
probable,  yields  a  sum  not  inferior  to  this ;  and  if  we
suppose  that  all  the  other  regions  of  America,  including
the  islands,  furnish  a  third  share  of  equal  value,  we  shall
not  perhaps  be  far  wide  from  the  truth,  if  we  conclude,
that  the  net  public  revenue  of  Spain,  raised  in  America,
does  not  exceed  a  million  and  a  half  sterling.  This  falls
far  short  of  the  immense  sums  to  which  suppositions,
founded  upon  conjecture,  have  raised  the  Spanish  revenue
in  America.^  It  is  remarkable,  however,  upon  one  ac-
count. Spain  and  Portugal  are  the  only  European
powers  who  derive  a  direct  revenue  from  their  colonies.
All  the  advantage  that  accrues  to  other  nations,  from  their
American  dominions,  arises  from  the  exclusive  enjoyment
of  their  trade ;  but  besides  this,  Spain  has  brought  her
colonies  to  contribute  towards  increasing  the  power  of  the
state ;  and  in  return  for  protection,  to  bear  a  proportional
share  of  the  common  burden.

Accordingly,  the  sum  which  I  have  computed  to  be
the  amount  of  the  Spanish  revenue  from  America  arises
wholly  from  the  taxes  collected  there,  and  is  far  from
being  the  whole  of  what  accrues  to  the  king  from  his  do-
minions in  the  New  World.  The  heavy  duties  imposed
on  the  commodities  exported  from  Spain  to  America,^  as
well  as  what  is  paid  by  those  which  she  sends  home  in
return ;  the  tax  upon  the  negro-slaves,  with  which  Africa

e  See  Note  LIII.  '  See  Note  LIV.  «  See  Note  LV.

BOOK VIII.  155

supplies  the  New  World,  together  with  several  smaller

branches  of  finance,  bring  large  sums  into  the  treasury,

the  precise  extent  of  which  I  cannot  pretend  to  ascertain.

But  if  the  revenue  which  Spain  draws  from

Jixpense  o* .  . ,

administra-  Amcrica  bc  great,  the  expense  of  administration
in  her  colonies  bears  proportion  to  it.  In  every
department,  even  of  her  domestic  police  and  finances,
Spain  has  adopted  a  system  more  complex,  and  more
encumbered  with  a  variety  of  tribunals,  and  a  multitude
of  officers,  than  that  of  any  European  nation,  in  which
the  sovereign  possesses  such  extensive  power.  From
the  jealous  spirit  with  which  Spain  watches  over  her
American  settlements,  and  her  endeavours  to  guard
against  fraud  in  provinces  so  remote  from  inspection ;
boards  and  officers  have  been  multiplied  there  with  still
more  anxious  attention.  In  a  country  where  the  expense
of  living  is  great,  the  salaries  allotted  to  every  person  in
public  office  must  be  high,  and  must  load  the  revenue
with  an  immense  burden.  The  parade  of  government
greatly  augments  the  weight  of  it.  The  viceroys  of
Mexico,  Peru,  and  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada,  as  re-
presentatives of  the  king's  person,  among  people  fond  of
ostentation,  maintain  all  the  state  and  dignity  of  royalty.
Their  courts  are  formed  upon  the  model  of  that  at
Madrid,  with  horse  and  foot-guards,  a  household  re-
gularly established,  numerous  attendants,  and  ensigns  of
power,  displaying  such  pomp,  as  hardly  retains  the  ap-
pearance of  a  delegated  authority.  All  the  expense  in-
curred by  supporting  the  external  and  permanent  order
of  government  is  defrayed  by  the  crown.  The  viceroys
have,  besides,  peculiar  appointments  suited  to  their  ex-
alted station.  The  salaries  fixed  by  law  are  indeed  ex-
tremely moderate ;  that  of  the  viceroy  of  Peru  is  only
thirty  thousand  ducats;  and  that  of  the  viceroy  of
Mexico,  twenty  thousand  ducats.''  Of  late  they  have
been  raised  to  forty  thousand.

•>  Recop.  lib.  iii.  tit,  iii.  c.  72.

156  AMERICA.

These  salaries,  however,  constitute  but  a  small  part
of  the  revenue  enjoyed  by  the  viceroys.  The  exercise
of  an  absolute  authority  extending  to  every  department
of  government,  and  the  power  of  disposing  of  many
lucrative  oflfices,  afford  them  many  opportunities  of  accu-
mulating wealth.  To  these,  which  may  be  considered
as  legal  and  allowed  emoluments,  large  sums,  are  often
added  by  exactions,  which,  in  countries  so  far  removed
from  the  seat  of  government,  it  is  not  easy  to  discover,
and  impossible  to  restrain.  By  monopolizing  some
branches  of  commerce,  by  a  lucrative  concern  in  others,
by  conniving  at  the  frauds  of  merchants,  a  viceroy  may
raise  such  an  annual  revenue,  as  no  subject  of  any  Euro-
pean monarch  enjoys.'  From  the  single  article  of  presents
made  to  him  on  the  anniversary  of  his  Name-day  (which
is  always  observed  as  a  high  festival),  I  am  informed  that
a  viceroy  has  been  known  to  receive  sixty  thousand  pesos.
According  to  a  Spanish  saying,  the  legal  revenues  of  a
viceroy  are  known,  his  real  profits  depend  upon  his  op-
portunities and  his  conscience.  Sensible  of  this,  the
kings  of  Spain,  as  I  have  formerly  observed,  grant  a
commission  to  their  viceroys  only  for  a  few  years.  This
circumstance,  however,  renders  them  often  more  rapa-
cious, and  adds  to  the  ingenuity  and  ardour  wherewith
they  labour  to  improve  every  moment  of  power  which
they  know  is  hastening  fast  to  a  period ;  and,  short  as  its
duration  is,  it  usually  affords  sufficient  time  for  repairing
a  shattered  fortune,  or  for  creating  a  new  one.  But
even  in  situations  so  trying  to  human  frailty,  there  are
instances  of  virtue  that  remains  unseduced.  In  the  year
1772,  the  Marquis  de  Croix  finished  the  term  of  his
viceroyalty  in  New  Spain  with  unsuspected  integrity ;
and  instead  of  bringing  home  exorbitant  wealth,  returned
with  the  admiration  and  applause  of  a  grateful  people,
whom  his  government  had  rendered  happy.

'  See  Note  LVI.

THE

HISTORY OF  AMERICA.

BOOKS  IX.  AND  X.

CONTAINING

THE  HISTORY  OF  VIRGINIA,

TO  THE  YEAR  1688  ;  AND

THE  HISTORY  OF  NEW  ENGLAND,

TO  THE  YEAR  1652.

ADVERTISEMENT.

The  original  plan  of  my  father,  the  late  Dr.  Robertson,
with  respect  to  the  History  of  America,  comprehended
not  only  an  account  of  the  discovery  of  that  country,
and  of  the  conquests  and  colonies  of  the  Spaniards,  but
embraced  also  the  history  of  the  British  and  Portuguese
establishments  in  the  New  World,  and  of  the  settle-
ments made  by  the  several  nations  of  Europe  in  the
West  India  islands.  It  was  his  intention  not  to  have
published  any  part  of  the  work  until  the  whole  was  com-
pleted. In  the  preface  to  his  History  of  America,  he
has  stated  the  reasons  which  induced  him  to  depart
from  that  resolution,  and  to  publish  the  two  volumes
which  contain  an  account  of  the  discovery  of  the  New
World,  and  of  the  progress  of  the  Spanish  arms  and  co-
lonies in  that  quarter  of  the  globe.  He  says,  "  he  had
made  some  progress  in  the  History  of  British  America;"
and  he  announces  his  intention  to  return  to  that  part  of
his  Work,  as  soon  as  the  ferment  which  at  that  time
prevailed  in  the  British  colonies  in  America  should  sub-
side, and  reofular  oovernment  be  re-established.  Various
causes  concurred  in  preventing  him  from  fulfilling  his
intention.

During  the  course  of  a  tedious  illness,  which  he  early
foresaw  would  have  a  fatal  termination.  Dr.  Robertson
at  different  times  destroyed  many  of  his  papers.  But
after  his  death,  I  found  that  part  of  the  History  of
British  America  which  he  had  wrote  many  years  before,
and  which  is  now  offered  to  the  public.  It  is  written  with
his  own  hand,  as  all  his  works  were;  it  is  as  carefully
corrected  as  any  part  of  his  manuscripts  which  I  have
ever  seen  ;  and  he  had  thought  it  worthy  of  being  pre-
served, as  it  escaped  the  flames  to  which  so  many  other
papers  had  been  committed.  I  read  it  with  the  utmost

160  ADVERTISEMENT.

attention ;  but,  before  I  came  to  any  resolution  about
the  publication,  I  put  the  MS.  into  the  hands  of  some
of  those  friends  whom  my  father  used  to  consult  on  such
occasions,  as  it  would  have  been  rashness  and  presump-
tion in  me  to  have  trusted  to  my  own  partial  decision.
It  was  perused  by  some  other  persons  also,  in  whose  taste
and  judgment  I  have  the  greatest  confidence  :  by  all  of
them  I  was  encouraged  to  offer  it  to  the  Public,  as  a
fragment  curious  and  interesting  iu  itself,  and  not  infe-
rior to  any  of  my  father's  works.

When  I  determined  to  follow  that  advice,  it  was  a
circumstance  of  great  weight  with  me,  that  as  I  never
could  think  myself  at  liberty  to  destroy  those  papers,
which  my  father  had  thought  worthy  of  being  preserved,
and  as  I  could  not  know  into  whose  hands  they  might
hereafter  fall,  I  considered  it  as  certain  that  they  would
be  published  at  some  future  period,  when  they  might
meet  with  an  Editor  who,  not  being  actuated  by  the
same  sacred  regard  for  the  reputation  of  the  Author,
which  I  feel,  might  make  alterations  and  additions,  and
obtrude  the  whole  on  the  public  as  a  genuine  and  au-
thentic work.  The  MS.  is  now  published,  such  as  it
was  left  by  the  Author ;  nor  have  I  presumed  to  make
any  addition,  alteration,  or  correction  whatever.

Wm.  ROBERTSON.

Queen-Street,  Edinburgh,
April,  1796.

THE

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA.

BOOK IX.

SiMiH  of  I  HE  dominions  of  Great  Britain  in  America  are
awXS  ^^xt  i^  extent  to  those  of  Spain.  Its  acquisi-
by  c"ofura?  tions  there  are  a  recompense  due  to  those  en-
bus's  dis-  terprising  talents  which  prompted  the  English
to  enter  early  on  the  career  of  discovery,  and
to  pursue  it  with  persevering  ardour.  England  was  the
second  nation  that  ventured  to  visit  the  New  World.
The  account  of  Columbus's  successful  voyage  filled  all
Europe  with  astonishment  and  admiration.  But  in  Eng-
land it  did  something  more ;  it  excited  a  vehement  desire
of  emulating  the  glory  of  Spain,  and  of  aiming  to  obtain
some  share  in  those  advantages  which  were  expected
in  this  new  field  opened  to  national  activity.  The  at-
tention of  the  English  court  had  been  turned  towards
the  discovery  of  unknown  countries,  by  its  negotiation
with  Bartholomew  Columbus.  Henry  VII.,  having  lis-
tened to  his  propositions  with  a  more  favourable  ear  than
could  have  been  expected  from  a  cautious,  distrustful
prince,  averse  by  habit  as  well  as  by  temper  to  new  and
hazardous  projects,  he  was  more  easily  induced  to  ap-
prove of  a  voyage  for  discovery,  proposed  by  some  of
his  own  subjects,  soon  after  the  return  of  Christopher
Columbus.

Checked  But  though  the  English  had  spirit  to  form  the
fiirsfin"  scheme,  they  had  not,  at  that  period,  attained  to
naviga- such  skiU  in  navi2:ation  as  qualified  them  for

tion.  ...  ^

carrying  it  into  execution. Front  the  inconsi-
yox.  VIII.  M

162  AMERfCA.

derate  ambition  of  its  monarchs,  the  nation  had  long
wasted  its  genius  and  activity  in  pernicious  and  ineffec-
tual efforts  to  conquer  France. When  this  ill-directed
ardour  began  to  abate,  the  fatal  contest  between  the
houses  of  York  and  Lancaster  turned  the  arms  of  one
half  of  the  kingdom  against  the  other,  and  exhausted  the
vigour  of  both. During  the  course  of  two  centuries,
while  industry  and  commerce  were  making  gradual
progress,  both  in  the  south  and  north  of  Europe,  the
English  continued  so  blind  to  the  advantages  of  their
own  situation,  that  they  hardly  began  to  bend  their
thoughts  towards  those  objects  and  pursuits,  to  which
they  are  indebted  for  their  present  opulence  and  power.
While  the  trading  vessels  of  Italy,  Spain,  and  Portugal,
as  well  as  those  of  the  Hans  Towns,  visited  the  most
remote  ports  in  Europe,  and  carried  on  an  active  inter-
course with  its  various  nations,  the  English  did  little
more  than  creep  along  their  own  coasts,  in  small  barks,
which  conveyed  the  productions  of  one  country  to  an-
other. Their  commerce  was  almost  wholly  passive.
Their  wants  were  supplied  by  strangers ;  and  whatever
necessary  or  luxury  of  life  their  own  country  did  not
yield,  was  imported  in  foreign  bottoms. The  cross  of
St.  George  was  seldom  displayed  beyond  the  precincts
of  the  narrow  seas. Hardly  any  English  ship  traded
with  Spain  or  Portugal  before  the  beginning  of  the
fifteenth  century ;  and  half  a  century  more  elapsed  be-
fore the  English  mariners  became  so  adventurous  as  to
enter  the  Mediterranean.

Expedition  In  this  infancy  of  navigation,  Henry  could
td^under  1^0^  commit  the  conduct  of  an  armament,  des-
thecom- ^incd  to  cxplore  unknown  resrions,  to  his  own

mand  of  r  O  '

Cabot,  subjects.  He  invested  Giovanni  Gaboto,  a  Ve-
netian adventurer,  who  had  settled  in  Bristol,  with  the
chief  command ;  and  issued  a  commission  to  him  and
his  three  sons,  empowering  them  to  sail,  under  the  ban-
ner of  England,  towards  the  east,  north,  or  west,  in  order

BOOK IX.  163

to  discover  countries  unoccupied  by  any  Christian  state ;
to  take  possession  of  them  in  his  name,  and  to  carry  on
an  exclusive  trade  with  the  inhabitants,  under  condition
of  paying  a  fifth  part  of  the  free  profit  on  every  voyage
to  the  crown.  This  commission  was  granted  on  March
5th,  1495,  in  less  than  two  years  after  the  return  of  Co-
lumbus from  America.*  But  Cabot  (for  that  is  the  name
he  assumed  in  England,  and  by  which  he  is  best  known)
did  not  set  out  on  his  voyage  for  two  years.  He,  toge-
1497.  ther  with  his  second  son  Sebastian,  embarked  at
May.  Bristol,  on  board  a  ship  furnished  by  the  king,
and  was  accompanied  by  four  small  barks,  fitted  out  by
the  merchants  of  that  city.
„  , ,. As  in  that  a^e  the  most  eminent  navigators,

Cabot  dis-  i i  i ?  •  r^  *  .

covers  formed  by  the  instructions  of  Columbus,  or  ani-
foundiand,  Hiatcd  by  liis  cxamplc,  were  guided  by  ideas  de-
aioiirthe  ^'iv®^  from  his  superior  knowledge  and  expe-
coastof rience,  Cabot  had adopted  the  system  of  that

Virginia.  ,  J-  i i  -i-

great  man,  concerning  the  probability  oi  opening
a  new  and  shorter  passage  to  the  East  Indies,  by  holding
a  western  course.  The  opinions  which  Columbus  had
formed  with  respect  to  the  islands  which  he  had  disco-
vered, was  universally  received.  They  were  supposed
to  lie  contiguous  to  the  great  continent  of  India,  and  to
constitute  a  part  of  the  vast  countries  comprehended
under  that  general  name.  Cabot  accordingly  deemed  it
probable,  that,  by  steering  to  the  north-west,  he  might
reach  India  by  a  shorter  course  than  that  which  Colum-
bus had  taken,  and  hoped  to  fall  in  with  the  coast  of
Cathay,  or  China,  of  whose  fertility  and  opulence  the
descriptions  of  Marco  Polo  had  excited  high  ideas.  Af-
ter sailing  for  some  weeks  due  west,  and  nearly  on  the
parallel  of  the  port  from  which  he  took  his  departure,  he
discovered  a  large  island,  which  he  called  Prima  Vista,
and  his  sailors  Newfoundland;  and  in  a  few  days  he
descried  a  smaller  isle,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of

»  Hakluyt,  iii.  4.
M  2

164  AMERICA.

St.  John. He  landed  on  both  these,  made  some

June  24.  .  i •  -i  i  i •

observations  on  their  soil  and  productions,  and
brought  off  three  of  the  natives.  Continuing  his  course
westward,  he  soon  reached  the  continent  of  North  Ame-
rica, and  sailed  along  it  from  the  fifty-sixth  to  the  thirty-
eighth  degree  of  latitude,  from  the  coast  of  Labrador,  to
that  of  Virginia.  As  his  chief  object  was  to  discover
some  inlet  that  might  open  a  passage  to  the  west,  it
does  not  appear  that  he  landed  anywhere  during  this
extensive  run ;  and  he  returned  to  England  without  at-
tempting either  settlement,  or  conquest  in  any  part  of
that  continent.''

II  If  it  had  been  Henry's  purpose  to  prosecute

does  not ^^le  object  of  the  commission  g-iven  by  him  to

profit  by  «^  o  J

Cabot's  Cabot,  and  to  take  possession  of  the  countries
'  which  he  had  discovered,  the  success  of  this
voyage  must  have  answered  his  most  sanguine  expecta-
tions. His  subjects  were  undoubtedly  the  first  Europeans
who  had  visited  that  part  of  the  American  continent,  and
were  entitled  to  whatever  right  of  property  prior  dis-
covery is  supposed  to  confer.  Countries  which  stretched
in  an  uninterrupted  course  through  such  a  large  portion
of  the  temperate  zone,  opened  a  prospect  of  settling  to
advantage  under  mild  climates,  and  in  a  fertile  soil.
But  by  the  time  that  Cabot  returned  to  England,  he
found  both  the  state  of  affairs  and  the  kino;\s  inclination
unfavourable  to  any  scheme,  the  execution  of  which
would  have  required  tranquillity  and  leisure.  Henry
was  involved  in  a  war  with  Scotland,  and  his  kingdom
was  not  yet  fully  composed  after  the  commotion  excited
by  a  formidable  insurrection  of  his  own  subjects  in  the
west.  An  ambassador  from  Ferdinand  of  Aragon  was
then  in  London  ;  and  as  Henry  set  a  high  value  upon  the
friendship  of  that  monarch,  for  whose  character  he  pro-
fessed much  admiration,  perhaps  from  its  similarity  to
his  Dwn,  and  was  endeavouring  to  strengthen  their  union

•»  Monson's  Naval  Tracts,  in  ChiirchiU's  Collect,  iii.  211.

BOOK  IX.  J 65

by  negotiating  the  marriage  which  afterward  took  place
between  his  eldest  son  and  the  princess  Catharine,  he
,was  cautious  of  giving  any  offence  to  a  prince  jealous  to
excess  of  all  his  rights. From  the  position  of  the  islands
and  continent  which  Cabot  had  discovered,  it  was  evi-
dent that  they  lay  within  the  limits  of  the  ample  dona-
tive which  the  bounty  of  Alexander  VI.  had  conferred
upon  Ferdinand  and  Isabella. No  person,  in  that  age,
questioned  the  validity  of  a  papal  grant ;  and  Ferdinand
was  not  of  a  temper  to  relinquish  any  claim  to  which  he
had  a  shadow  of  title. Submission  to  the  authority  of
the  pope,  and  deference  for  an  ally  whom  he  courted,
seem  to  have  concurred  with  Henry's  own  situation,  in
determininof  him  to  abandon  a  scheme,  in  which  he  had
engaged  with  some  degree  of  ardour  and  expectation.
No  attempt  towards  discovery was  made  in England
during  the  remainder  of  his  reign  ;  and  Sebastian  Cabot,
findino'  no  eneourno'ement  for  his  active  talents  there,
entered  into  the  service  of  Spain.""

Nor  his  ira- '^^^^^  is  the  most  probable  account  of  the  sud-
niediate (Jgn  ccssatiou  of  Hcnry's  activity,  after  such  sue-

successors*

cess  in  his  first  essay  as  might  have  encouraged
him  to  persevere.  The  advantages  of  commerce,  as  well
as  its  nature,  were  so  little  understood  in  England  about
this  period,  that  by  an  act  of  parliament  in  the  year
1488,  the  takino;  of  interest  for  the  use  of  money  was
prohibited  under  severe  penalties.''  And  by  another
law,  the  profit  arising  from  dealing  in  bills  of  ex-
change was  condemned  as  savouring  of  usury  ."^  It  is  not
surprising,  then,  that  no  'great  effort  should  be  made  to
extend  trade,  by  a  nation  whose  commercial  ideas  were

<=  Some  schemes  of  discovery  seem  to  have  been  formed  in  England  towards  the
beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century.  But  as  there  is  no  other  memorial  of  thera,  than
uhat  remains  in  a  patent  granted  by  the  king  to  the  adventurers,  it  is  probable
that  they  were  feeble  or  abortive  projects.  If  any  attempt  had  been  made  in  con-
sequence of  this  patent,  it  would  not  have  escaped  the  knowledge  of  a  compiler  so
industrioiis  and  inquisitive  as  Hakluyt.  In  his  patent,  Henry  restricts  the  adven-
turers from  encroaching  on  the  countries  discovered  by  the  kings  of  Portugal,  or  any
other  princein  confederacy  with  England.  Rymer'sFoedera,  vol.  xiii.  p.  37.
d  3  Hen.  Vll.  c.  5.  *  3  Hen.  VII.  c.  6.

16a  AMERICA.

still  so  crude  and  illiberal. But  it  is  more  difficult  to
discover  what  prevented  this  scheme  of  Henry  VII.  from
being  resumed  during  the  reigns  of  his  son  and  grandson ;
and  to  give  any  reason  why  no  attempt  was  made,  either
to  explore  the  northern  continent  of  America  more  fully,
or  to  settle  in  it. Henry  VIII.  was  frequently  at  open
enmity  with  Spain ;  the  value  of  the  Spanish  acquisi-
tions in  America  had  become  so  well  known,  as  might
have  excited  his  desire  to  obtain  some  footing  in  those
opulent  regions  ;  and  during  a  considerable  part  of  his
reign,  the  prohibitions  in  a  papal  bull  would  not  have
restrained  him  from making  encroachment  upon  the
Spanish  dominions. But  the  reign  of  Henry  was  not
favourable  to  the  progress  of  discovery. During  one
period  of  it,  the  active  part  which  he  took  in  the  affairs  of
the  continent,  and  the  vigour  with  which  he  engaged
in  the  contest  between  the  two  mighty  rivals,  Charles  V.
and  Francis  I.,  gave  full  occupation  to  the  enterprising
spirit  both  of  the  king  and  his  nobility. During  an-
other period  of  his  administration,  his  famous  contro-
versy with  the  court  of  Rome  kept  the  nation  in  perpe-
tual agitation  and  suspense.  Engrossed  by  those  objects,
neither  the  king  nor  the  nobles  had  inclination  or  lei-
sure to  turn  their  attention  to  new  pursuits ;  and  without
their  patronage  and  aid,  the  commercial  part  of  the  na-
tion was  too  inconsiderable  to  make  any  effort  of  conse-
quence. Though  England,  by  its  total  separation  from
the  church  of  Rome,  soon  after  the  accession  of  Edward
VI.,  disclaimed  that  authority  which,  by  its  presumptuous
partition  of  the  globe  between  two  favourite  nations,  cir-
cumscribed the  activity  of  every  other  state  within  very
narrow  limits,  yet  a  feeble  minority,  distracted  with  fac-
tion, was  not  a  juncture  for  forming  schemes  of  doubtful
success,  and  remote  utility. The  bigotry  of  Mary,  and
her  marriage  with  Philip,  disposed  her  to  pay  a  sacred
regard  to  that  grant  of  the  holy  see,  which  vested  in  a
husband,  on  whom  she  doated, an  exclusive  right  to

BOOK IX.  167

every  part  of  the  New  World.  Thus,  through  a  singular
succession  of  various  causes,  sixty-one  years  elapsed
from  the  time  that  the  English  discovered  North  Ame-
rica, during  which  their  monarchs  gave  little  attention
to  that  country  which  was  destined  to  be  annexed  to
their  crown,  and  to  be  a  chief  source  of  its  opulence
and  power.

Expe-  But  though  the  public  contributed  little  to-

touth  *° wards  the progress of  discovery,  naval  skill,

America,  knowlcdge  of  commercc,  and  a  spirit  of  enter-
under  the .  ^  1 ■r' T  1

command  prisc,  bcgau  to  Spread  among  the  English.
tian^Ca-  During  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII.  several  new
*"**•  channels  of  trade  were  opened,  and  private  ad-

venturers visited  remote  countries,  with  which  England
had  formerly  no  intercourse.  Some  merchants  of  Bristol,
having  fitted  out  two  ships  for  the  southern  regions  of
America,  committed  the  conduct  of  them  to  Sebastian
Cabot,  who  had  quitted  the  service  of  Spain.  He  visited
the  coasts  of  Brazil,  and  touched  at  the  islands
of  Hispaniola  and  Puerto  Rico ;  and  though  this
voyage  seems  not  to  have  been  beneficial  to  the  adven-
turers, it  extended  the  sphere  of  English  navigation,  and
added  to  the  national  stock  of  nautical  science.'  Though
disappointed  in  their  expectations  of  profit  in  this  first
essay,  the  merchants  were  not  discouraged.  They  sent,
successively,  several  vessels  from  diflferent  ports  towards
the  -same  quarter,  and  seem  to  have  carried  on  an  inter-
loping trade  in  the  Portuguese  settlements  with  success.^
Nor  was  it  only  towards  the  West,  that  the  activity  of
the  English  was  directed.  Other  merchants  began  to
extend  their  commercial  views  to  the  East ;  and  by  es-
tablishing an  intercourse  with  several  islands  in  the  Ar-
chipelago, and  with  some  of  the  towns  on  the  coast  of
Syria,  they  found  a  new  market  for  woollen  cloths  (the
only  manufacture  which  the  nation  had  begun  to  culti-
vate), and  supplied  their  countrymen  with  various  pro-

f  Haklu^t,  iii.  498.  s  Ibid.iii.  700.

168  AMERICA.

ductions  of  the  East,  formerly  unknown,  or  received' from
the  Venetians  at  an  exorbitant  price.*"
Unsuc-  But  the  discovery  of  a  shorter  passage  to  the

tempts  to  East  Indies,  by  the  north-west,  was  still  the  fa-
nonh*wes*t  vouritc  project  of  the  nation,  which  beheld  with
passage  to  euvv  the  vast  wealth  that  flowed  into  Portupfal

the  East „  .  • i i  rni

Indies,  from  its  commerce  with  those  regions.  The
scheme  was  accordingly  twice  resumed  under  the  long
1527  and  administration  of  Henry  VIII. ;  first,  with  some
1536.  slender  aid  from  the  king,  and  then  by  private
merchants.  Both  voyages  were  disastrous  and  unsuc-
cessful. In  the  former,  one  of  the  ships  was  lost.  In
the  latter,  the  stock  of  provisions  was  so  ill-proportioned
to  the  number  of  the  crew,  that  although  they  were  but
six  months  at  sea,  many  perished  with  hunger,  and  the
survivors  were  constrained  to  support  life  by  feeding  on
the  bodies  of  their  dead  companions.'
Sir  Hugh  The  vigour  of  a  commercial  spirit  did  not  re-
by  saih'in  ^^^  ^^  the  rcigu  of  Ed  Ward  VI.  The  great  fishery
search  of  a  ^j^  ^^le  bauks  of  Ncwfoundlaud  became  an  ob-

north-east

passage,  ject  of  attention ;  and  from  some  regulations  for
the  encouragement  of  that  branch  of  trade,  it  seems  to
have  been  prosecuted  with  activity  and  success.''  But^
the  prospect  of  opening  a  communication  with  China
and  the  Spice  Islands,  by  some  other  route  than  round
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  still  continued  to  allure  the
English,  more  than  any  scheme  of  adventure.  Cabot,
whose  opinion  was  deservedly  of  high  authority  in
whatever  related  to  naval  enterprise,  warmly  urged  the
English  to  make  another  attempt  to  discover  this  pas-
sage. As  it  had  been  thrice  searched  for  in  vain,  by
steering  towards  the  north-west,  he  proposed  that  a  trial
should  now  be  made  by  the  north-east ;  and  supported
this  advice  by  such  plausible  reasons  and  conjectures,
as  excited  sanguine  expectations  of  success.  Several
noblemen  and  persons  of  rank,  together  with  some  prin-

>>  Hakliijt,  ii.  96,  &.C.  » Ibid.  i.  213,  &c.; iii.  129,150. t' Ibid.  iii.  131.

BOOK  IX.  169

cipal  merchants,  having  associated  for  this  purpose,
were  incorporated,  by  a  charter  from  the  king,  under  the
title  of  The  Company  of  Merchant  Adventurers  for  the-
Discovery  of  Regions,  Dominions,  Islands,  and  places
unknown.  Cabot,  who  was  appointed  governor
of  this  company,  soon  fitted  out  two  ships  and
a  bark,  furnished  with  instructions  in  his  own  hand,
which  discover  the  great  extent  both  of  his  naval  skill
and  mercantile  sagacity.

Sir  Hugh  Willoughby,  who  was  intrusted  with  the

command,  stood  directly  northwards  along  the  coast  of

Norv/ay,  and  doubled  the  North  Cape. But  in

May  10. ,  ''  ,  .  n  1

that  tempestuous  ocean,  his  small  squadron  was
separated  in  a  violent  storm.  Willoughby's  ship  and
Wiiiou"h-  ^^®  bark  took  refuge  in  an  obscure  harbour  in
\y  pe- a  desert  part  of  Russian  Lapland,  where  he  and

rishcs.

One  of  his  all  his  compauions  were  frozen  to  death.  Richard
tVrTa^ ""  Chancelour,  the  captain  of  the  other  vessel,
Archangel,  ^^^g  more  fortuuate ;  he  entered  the  White
sea,  and  wintered  in  safety  at  Archangel.  Though  no
vessel  of  any  foreign  nation  had  ever  visited  that  quar-
ter of  the  globe  before,  the  inhabitants  received  their
new  visitors  with  an  hospitality  which  would  have  done
honour  to  a  more  polished  people.  The  English  learned
there,  that  this  was  a  province  of  a  vast  empire,  subject
to  the  great  duke  or  Czar  of  Muscovy,  who  resided  in
a  great  city  twelve  hundred  miles  from  Arch-
tain  vtiits  angel.  Chancelour,  with  a  spirit  becoming  an
Moscow.  Q^(,gj.  employed  in  an  expedition  for  discovery,
did  not  hesitate  a  moment  about  the  part  which  he  ought
to  take,  and  set  out  for  that  distant  capital.  On  his  ar-
rival in  Moscow,  he  was  admitted  to  audience,  and
delivered  a  letter  which  the  captain  of  each  ship  had
received  from  Edward  VI.  for  the  sovereign  of  whatever
country  they  should  discover,  to  John  Vasilowitz,  who
at  that  time  filled  the  Russian  throne.  John,  though
he  ruled  over  his  subjects  with  the  cruelty  and  capric

170  AMERICA.

of  a  barbarous  despot,  was  not  destitute  of  political  sa-
gacity. He  instantly  perceived  the  happy  consequences
that  might  flow  from  opening  an  intercourse  between
his  dominions  and  the  western  nations  of  Europe ;  and,
delighted  with  the  fortunate  event  to  which  he  was  in-
debted for  this  unexpected  benefit,  he  treated  Chance-
lour  with  great  respect ;  and,  by  a  letter  to  the  king  of
^  ^ _ England,  invited  his  subjects  to  trade  in  the

Feb.  1od4. -p, . , . .  .  ,

Russian  dommions,  with  ample  promises  of  pro-
tection and  favour.'

Trade  Chaucelour,  on  his  return,  found  Mary  seated

S"*"^  on  the  English  throne.  The  success  of  this
Russia,  voyage,  the  discovery  of  a  new  course  of  navi-
gation, the  establishment  of  commerce  with  a  vast  em-
pire, the  name  of  which  was  then  hardly  known  in  the
West,  and  the  hope  of  arriving,  in  this  direction,  at  those
regions  which  had  been  so  long  the  object  of  desire,
excited  a  wonderful  ardour  to  prosecute  the  design  with
greater  vigour.  Mary,  implicitly  guided  by  her  hus-
band in  every  act  of  administration,  was  not  unwilling
to  turn  the  commercial  activity  of  her  subjects  towards  a
quarter  where  it  could  not  excite  the  jealousy  of  Spain,
by  encroaching  on  its  possessions  in  the  New  World.
She  wrote  to  John  Vasilowitz  in  the  most  respectful
terms,  courting  his  friendship.  She  confirmed  the
charter  of  Edw^ard  VI.,  empowered  Chancelour,  and
two  agents  appointed  by  the  company,  to  negotiate
with  the  Czar  in  her  name  ;  and  according  to  the  spirit
of  that  age,  she  granted  an  exclusive  right  of  trade  with
Russia  to  the  Corporation  of  Merchant  Adventurers.""
In  virtue  of  this,  they  not  only  established  an  active  and
gainful  commerce  with  Russia,  but,  in  hopes  of  reach-
ing China,  they  pushed  their  discoveries  eastwards  to
the  coast  of  Nova  Zembla,  the  straits  of  Waigatz,  and
towards  the  mouth  of  the  great  river  Oby.  But  in  those
frozen  seas,  which  nature  seems  not  to  have  destined  for

'  Hakluyl,  i.  226,  &t.  "■  Ibid.  i.  '.'53,  &c.

BOOK IX.  171

navigation,  they  were  exposed  to  innumerable  disasters,
and  met  with  successive  disappointments.
Communi- ^^^  ^crc  their  attempts  to  open  a  commu-
*^^.H°"  ,. nication  with  India  made  only  in  this  channel.

■with  India  n i • n

hy  land.  They  appointed  some  oi  their  lactors  to  accom-
pany the  Russian  caravans  which  travelled  into  Persia
by  the  way  of  Astracan  and  the  Caspian  sea,  instruct-
ing them  to  penetrate  as  far  as  possible  towards  the  East,
and  to  endeavour,  not  only  to  establish  a  trade  with
those  countries,  but  to  acquire  every  information  that
might  afford  any  light  towards  the  discovery  of  a  pas-
sage to  China  by  the  north-east."  Notwithstanding  a
variety  of  dangers  to  which  they  were  exposed  in  tra-
velling through  so  many  provinces,  inhabited  by  fierce
and  licentious  nations,  some  of  these  factors  reached
Bokara,  in  the  province  of  Chorassan ;  and  though  pre-
vented from  advancing  farther  by  the  civil  wars  which
desolated  the  country,  they  returned  to  Europe  with
some  hopes  of  extending  the  commerce  of  the  company
into  Persia,  and  with  much  intelligence  concerning  the
state  of  those  remote  regions  of  the  east."
Espedi-  The  successful  progress  of  the  Merchant  Ad-
tion  to  the  venturers  in  discovery  roused  the  emulation  of

coast  of  *'  - .  . .

Africa.  their  countrymen,  and  turned  their  activity
into  new  channels.  A  commercial  intercourse,  hitherto
unattempted  by  the  English,  having  been  opened  with
the  coast  of  Barbary,  the  specimens  which  that  afforded
of  the  valuable  productions  of  Africa  invited  some  en-
terprising navigators  to  visit  the  more  remote  prov^inces
of  that  quarter  of  the  globe.  They  sailed  along  its
western  shore,  traded  in  different  ports  on  both  sides  of
the  Line,  and  after  acquiring  considerable  knowledge
of  those  countries,  returned  with  a  cargo  of  gold  dust,
ivory,  and  other  rich  commodities,  little  known  at  that
time  in  England.  This  commerce  with  Africa  seems  to
have  been  pursued  with  vigour,  and  was  at  that  time  no

»  Haklu^t,  i.  ;301.  °  Ibid.  i.  310,  &c.

172  AMERICA.

less  innocent  than  lucrative;  for  as  the  English  had
then  no  demand  for  slaves,  they  carried  it  on  for  many-
years,  without  violating  the  rights  of  humanity. Thus
far  did  the  English  advance  during  a  period  w^hich  may
be  considered  as  the  infant  state  of  their  navigation  and
commerce  ;  and  feeble  as  its  steps  at  that  time  appear
to  us,  we  trace  them  with  an  interesting  curiosity,  and
look  back  with  satisfaction  to  the  early  essays  of  that
spirit  which  we  now  behold  in  the  full  maturity  of  its
strength. Even  in  those  first  efforts  of  the  English,  an
intelligent  observer  will  discern  presages  of  their  future
improvement.  As  soon  as  the  activity  of  the  nation  was
put  in  motion,  it  took  various  directions,  and  exerted
itself  in  each  with  that  steady,  persevering  industry,
which  is  the  soul  and  guide  of  commerce.  Neither  dis-
couraged by  the  hardships  and  dangers  to  which  they
were  exposed  in  those  northern  seas  which  they  first  at-
tempted to  explore,  nor  afraid  of  venturing  into  the  sultry
climates  of  the  torrid  zone,  the  English,  during  the  reigns
of  Henry  VIII.,  Edward  VI.,  and  Mary,  opened  some  of
the  most  considerable  sources  of  their  commercial  opu-
lence, and  gave  a  beginning  to  their  trade  with  Turkey,
with  Africa,  with  Russia,  and  with  Newfoundland.
Rei  n  of ^y  ^^^^  progress  which  England  had  already
Elizabeth  made  in  navigation  and  commerce,  it  was  now
to  disco- prepared  for  advancing  farther ;  and  on  the  acces-
^"^' sion  of  Elizabeth  to  the  throne,  a  period  commenced
extremely  auspicious  to  this  spirit  which  was  rising  in  the
nation. The  domestic  tranquillity  of  the  kingdom,  main-
tained, almost  without  interruption,  during  the  course  of
a  long  and  prosperous  reign  ;  the  peace  with  foreign  na-
tions, that  subsisted  more  than  twenty  years  after  Eliza-
beth was  seated  on  the  throne ; the queen's  attentive
economy,  which  exempted  her  subjects  from  the  burden
of  taxes  oppressive  to  trade  ;  the  popularity  of  her  admi-
nistration, were  all  favourable  to  commercial  enterprise,
and  called  it  forth  into  vio-orous  exertion. The  dis-

BOOK TX.  173

ceming  eye  of  Elizabeth  having  early  perceived,  that  the
security  of  a  kingdom,  environed  by  the  sea,  depended  on
its  naval  force,  she  began  her  government  with  adding  to
the  number  and  strength  of  the  royal  navy ;  which,  during
a  factious  minority,  and  a  reign  intent  on  no  object  but
that  of  suppressing  heresy,  had  been  neglected,  and  suf-
fered to  decay.  She  filled  her  arsenals  with  naval  stores  ;
she  built  several  ships  of  great  force,  according  to  the
ideas  of  that  age,  and  encouraged  her  subjects  to  imitate
her  example,  that  they  might  no  longer  depend  on  fo-
reigners, from  whom  the  English  had  hitherto  purchased
all  vessels  of  any  considerable  burden-^  By  those  ef-
forts the  skill  of  the  English  artificers  was  improved,  the
number  of  sailors  increased,  and  the  attention  of  the
public  turned  to  the  navy,  as  the  most  important  national
object.  Instead  of  abandoning  any  of  the  new  chan-
nels of  commerce,  which  had  been  opened  in  the  three
preceding  reigns,  the  English  frequented  them  wdth
greater  assiduity,  and  the  patronage  of  their  sovereign
added  vigour  to  all  their  efforts.  In  order  to  secure  to
them  the  continuance  of  their  exclusive  trade  with  Rus-
sia, Elizabeth  cultivated  the  connexion  with  John  Vasi-
lowitz,  which  had  been  formed  by  her  predecessor,  and,
by  successive  embassies,  gained  his  confidence  so  tho-
roughly, that  the  English  enjoyed  that  lucrative  privilege
during  his  long  reign.  She  encouraged  the  Company  of
Merchant  Adventurers,  whose  monopoly  of  the  Russian
trade  was  confirmed  by  act  of  parliament,''  to  resume
their  design  of  penetrating  into  Persia  by  land.  Their  se-
cond attempt,  conducted  with  greater  pmdence,  or  under-
taken  at  a  more  favourable  juncture  than  the  first,
was  more  successful.  Their  ao;ents  arrived  in  the
Persian  court,  and  obtained  such  protection  and  immunities
from  the  Shah,  that  for  a  course  of  years  they  carried  on  a
gainful  commerce  in  his  kingdom  ;'  and,  by  frequenting

P  Camd.  Annales,  p.  70,  edit.  1615  ;  fol.
T Hakliiyt,  i.36?'.  r  Ibid.  i.  344,  &c.

174  AMERICA.

the  various  provinces  of  Persia,  became  so  well  ac-
quainted with  the  vast  riches  of  the  East,  as  strengthened
their  design  of  opening  a  more  direct  intercourse  with
those  fertile  regions  by  sea.

Frobisher  But  as  cvcry  eifort  to  accomplish  this  by  the
three  north-east  liad  proved  abortive,  a  scheme  was
to  Sever  formed,  under  the  patronage  of  the  earl  of
l^est"pas-"  Warwick,  the  head  of  the  enterprising  family  of
sage-  Dudley,  to  make  a  new  attempt,  by  holding  an
opposite  course  by  the  north-west.  The  conduct  of  this
enterprise  was  committed  to  Martin  Frobisher,  an  officer
1576.1577,  of  experience  and  reputation.  In  three  successive
and  1578.  yoyages,  he  explored  the  inhospitable  coast  of  La-
brador, and  that  of  Greenland  (to  which  Elizabeth  gave
the  name  oi  Meta  Incognita),  without  discovering  any
probable  appearance  of  that  passage  to  India  for  which
he  sought.  This  new  disappointment  was  sensibly  felt,
and  might  have  damped  the  spirit  of  naval  enterprise
among  the  English,  if  it  had  not  resumed  fresh  vi-
Sir  Francis  gour,  amidst  the  general  exultation  of  the  na-
roun/S'tion,  upon  the  successful  expedition  of  Francis
world.  Drake.  That  bold  navigator,  emulous  of  the  glory
which  Magellan  had  acquired  by  sailing  round  the  globe,
formed  a  scheme  of  attempting  a  voyage,  which  all  Eu-
rope had  admired  for  sixty  years,  without  venturing  to
follow  the  Portuguese  discoverer  in  his  adventurous
course.  Drake  undertook  this  with  a  feeble  squadron,
in  which  the  largest  vessel  did  not  exceed  a  hundred  tons,
and  he  accomplished  it  with  no  less  credit  to  himself,
than  honour  to  his  country.  Even  in  this  voyage,  con-
ducted with  other  views,  Drake  seems  not  to  have  been
inattentive  to  the  favourite  object  of  his  countrymen,  the
discovery  of  a  new  route  to  India.  Before  he  quitted  the
Pacific  Ocean,  in  order  to  stretch  towards  the  Philippine
islands,  he  ranged  along  the  coast  of  California,  as  high
as  the  latitude  of  forty-two  degrees  north,  in  hopes  of  dis-
covering, on  that  side,  the  communication  between  the

BOOK  IX.  175

two  seas,  which  had  so  often  been  searched  for  in  vain  on
the  other.  But  this  was  the  only  unsuccessful  attempt  of
Drake.  The  excessive  cold  of  the  climate,  intolerable  to
men  who  had  long  been  accustomed  to  tropical  heat,
obliged  him  to  stop  short  in  his  progress  towards  the
north  ;  and  whether  or  not  there  be  any  passage  from  the
Pacific  to  the  Atlantic  Ocean  in  that  quarter,  is  a  point
still  unascertained.'

From  this  period,  the  Endish  seem  to  have

Enthu-  ^  ,  -T •  1

siasm  of  coufidcd  in  their  own  abilities  and  courage,  as
iscovery.  ^^^^j  ^^  ^^y  uaval  enterprise.  They  had  now  vi-
sited every  region  to  which  navigation  extended  in  that
age,  and  had  rivalled  the  nation  of  highest  repute  for  naval
skill  in  its  most  splendid  exploit.  But  notwithstanding
the  knowledge  which  they  had  acquired  of  the  diiferent
quarters  of  the  globe,  they  had  not  hitherto  attempted
any  settlement  out  of  their  own  country.  Their  mer-
chants had  not  yet  acquired  such  a  degree,  either  of
wealth,  or  of  political  influence,  as  were  requisite  to-
wards carrying  a  scheme  of  colonization  into  execution.
Persons  of  noble  birth  were  destitute  of  the  ideas  and
information  which  might  have  disposed  them  to  patronise
such  a  design.  The  growing  power  of  Spain,  however,
and  the  ascendant  over  the  other  nations  of  Europe  to
which  it  had  attained  under  Charles  V.  and  his  son,  na-
turally turned  the  attention  of  mankind  towards  the  im-
portance of  those  settlements  in  the  New  World,  to  which
they  were  so  much  indebted  for  that  pre-eminence.  The
intercourse  between  Spain  and  England,  during  the  reign
of  Philip  and  Mary  ;  the  resort  of  the  Spanish  nobility
to  the  English  court,  while  Philip  resided  there;  the
study  of  the  Spanish  language,  which  became  fashionable ;
and  the  translation  of  several  histories  of  America  into
English,  diffused  gradually  through  the  nation  a  more
distinct  knowledge  of  the  policy  of  Spain  in  planting  its
colonies,  and  of  the  advantages  which  it  derived  from

«  Ilakluyt,  iii.  440. Carod.  Annal.  301,  &c.

176  AMERICA.

them.  When  hostilities  commenced  between  Elizabeth
and  Philip,  the  prospect  ofannoying  Spain  by  sea  opened
a  new  career  to  the  enterprising  spirit  of  the  English  no-
bility. Almost  every  eminent  leader  of  the  age  aimed
at  distinguishing  himself  by  naval  exploits.  That  ser-
vice, and  the  ideas  connected  with  it,  the  discovery  of  un-
known countries,  the  establishment  of  distant  colonies,
and  the  enriching  of  commerce  by  new  commodities,
became  familiar  to  persons  of  rank.
First  pro-  ^^  couscquencc  of  all  those  concurring  causes,
jectofa the  English  bep:an  seriously  to form  plans  of

colony  111  Ti-i  PA  1

North  setthng  colonies  m  those  parts  of  America  which
hitherto  they  had  only  visited.  The  projectors
and  patrons  of  these  plans  were  mostly  persons  of  rank
and  influence.  Among  them,  Sir  Humphry  Gilbert,  of
Compton  in  Devonshire,  ought  to  be  mentioned  with  the
distinction  due  to  the  conductor  of  the  first  English  co-
lony to  America.  He  had  early  rendered  himself  conspi-
<JUOus.byhis  military  services  both  in  France  and  Ire-
land ;  and  having  afterward  turned  his  attention  to  naval
affairs,  he  published  a  discourse  concerning  the  pro-
bability of  a  north-west  passage,  which  discovered  no
inconsiderable  portion  botli  of  learning  and  ingenuity,
mingled  with  the  enthusiasm,  the  credulity,  and  sanguine
expectations,  which  incite  men  to  new  and  hazardous
undertakings.'  With  those  talents  he  v/as  deemed  a  pro-
per person  to  be  employed  in  establishing  a  new  colony,
June  11,  and  easily  obtained  from  the  queen  letters  pa-
^^'^"  tent,  vesting  in  him  sufficient  powers  for  this
purpose.

Charter  As  tliis  is  the  first  charter  to  a  colony,  granted

by  queen  ^7  the  crowu  of  England,  the  articles  in  it  merit
Eiizabetii.  particular  attention,  as  they  unfold  the  ideas  of
that  age  with  respect  to  the  nature  of  such  settlements.
Elizabeth  authorizes  him  to  discover  and  take  possession
of  all  remote  and  barbarous  lands,  unoccupied  by  any

»  Hakluyt,  iii.  11.

BOOK IX.  177

Christian  prince  or  people.  She  vests  in  him,  his  heirs
and  assigns  for  ever,  the  full  right  of  property  in  the  soil
of  those  countries  whereof  he  shall  take  possession.  She
permits  such  of  her  subjects  as  were  willing  to  accompany
Gilbert  in  his  voyage,  to  go  and  settle  in  the  countries
which  he  shall  plant.  She  empowers  him,  his  heirs  and
assigns,  to  dispose  of  whatever  portion  of  those  lands  he
shall  judge  meet  to  persons  settled  there,  in  fee  simple,
according  to  the  laws  of  England.  She  ordains,  that
all  the  lands  granted  to  Gilbert  shall  hold  of  the  crown
of  England  by  homage,  on  payment  of  the  fifth  part  of
the  gold  or  silver  ore  found  there.  She  confers  upon
him,  his  heirs  and  assigns,  the  complete  jurisdictions
and  royalties,  as  well  marine  as  other,  within  the  said
lands  and  seas  thereunto  adjoining;  and  as  their  com-
mon safety  and  interest  would  render  good  government
necessary  in  their  new  settlements,  she  gave  Gilbert,  his
heirs  and  assigns,  full  power  to  convict,  punish,  pardon,
govern  and  rule,  by  their  good  discretion  and  policy,  as
well  in  causes  capital  or  criminal  as  civil,  both  marine
and  other,  all  persons  who  shall,  from  time  to  time,  set-
tle within  the  said  countries,  according  to  such  statutes,
laws,  and  ordinances,  as  shall  be  by  him,  his  heirs  and
assigns,  devised  and  established  for  their  better  govern-
ment. She  declared,  that  all  who  settled  there  should
have  and  enjoy  all  the  privileges  of  free  denizens  and
natives  of  England,  any  law,  custom,  or  usage  to  the
contrary  notwithstanding.  And  finally,  she  prohibited
all  persons  from  attempting  to  settle  within  two  hundred
leagues  of  any  place  which  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert,  or
his  associates,  shall  have  occupied,  during  the  space  of
six  years."

First  ex- With  thosc  extraordinary  powers, suited  to
pedition the  high  notions  of  authority  and  prerogative
prevalent  in  England  during  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury, but  very  repugnant  to  more  recent  ideas  with  re-

"  Haklu^t,  iii.  135.
VOL.  VIII.  N

178  AMERICA.

spect  to  the  rights  of  freemen,  who  voluntarily  unite  to
form  a  colony,  Gilbert  began  to  collect  associates,  and  to
prepare  for  embarkation. His  own  character,  and  the
zealous  efforts  of  his  half-brother  Walter  Ralegh,  who,
even  in  his  early  youth,  displayed  those  splendid  talents,
and  that  undaunted  spirit,  which  create  admiration  and
confidence,  soon  procured  him  a  sufficient  number  of
followers. But  his  success  was  not  suited  either  to  the
sanguine  hopes  of  his  countrymen,  or  to  the  expense  of
his  preparations. Two  expeditions,  both  of  which  he
conducted  in  person,  ended  disastrously. In  the
last  he  himself  perished,  without  having  effected
his  intended  settlement  on  the  continent  of  America,  or
performing  any  thing  more  worthy  of  notice,  than  the
empty  formality  of  taking  possession  of  the  island  of
Newfoundland,  in  the  name  of  his  sovereign. The  dis-
sensions among  his  officers ;  the  licentious  and  ungo-
vernable spirit  of  some  of  his  crew ;  his  total  ignorance
of  the  countries  which  he  purposed  to  occupy ;  his  mis-
fortune in  approaching  the  continent  too  far  towards  the
north,  where  the  inhospitable  coast  of  Cape  Breton  did
not  invite  them  to  settle ;  the  shipwreck  of  his  largest
vessel ;  and,  above  all,  the  scanty  provision  which  the
funds  of  a  private  man  could  make  of  what  was  requisite
for  establishing  a  new  colony,  were  the  true  causes  to
which  the  failure  of  the  enterprise  must  be  imputed,  not
to  any  deficiency  of  abilities  or  resolution  in  its  leader.''
^, ,  But  the  miscarriao-e  of  a  scheme,  in  which

Tbe  plan  '^  . '  ,

resumed Gilbert  had  wasted  his  fortune,  did  not  discou-

^ ^^'  rage  Ralegh. He adopted all  his  brother's

ideas ;  and  applying  to  the  queen,  in  whose  favour  he

1584. stood  high  at  that  time,  he  procured  a  patent,

March  26.  ^j^j^  jurisdiction  and  prerogatives  as  ample  as

had  been  granted  unto  Gilbert. "" Ralegh,  no  less  eager

to  execute  than  to  undertake  the  scheme,  instantly

dispatched  two  small  vessels,  under  the  command

w  Hakluyt,  iii.  143,  &c.  ='  Ibid.  243.

BOOK IX.  179

of  Amadas  and  Barlow,  two  officers  of  trust,  to  visit  the
countries  which  he  intended  to  settle,  and  to  acquire
some  previous  knowledge  of  their  coasts,  their  soil,  and
productions.  In  order  to  avoid  Gilbert's  error,
ofVir-  in  holding  too  far  north,  they  took  their  course
^'"'^'  by  the  Canaries  and  the  West  India  islands,  and
approached  the  North  American  continent  by  the  gulf  of
Florida.  Unfortunately,  their  chief  researches  were  made
in  that  part  of  the  countiy  now  known  by  the  name  of
North  Carolina,  the  province  in  America  most  destitute
of  commodious  harbours.  They  touched  first  at  an
island,  which  they  call  Wokocon  (probably  Ocakoke),
situated  on  the  inlet  into  Pamplicoe  sound,  'and  then  at
Roanoke,  near  the  mouth  of  Albemarle  sound.  In  both
they  had  some  intercourse  with  the  natives,  whom  they
found  to  be  savages,  with  all  the  characteristic  qualities
of  uncivilized  life,  bravery,  aversion  to  labour,  hospi-
tality, a  propensity  to  admire,  and  a  willingness  to  ex-
change their  rude  productions  for  English  commodities,
especially  for  iron,  or  any  of  the  useful  metals  of  which
they  were  destitute.  After  spending  a  few  weeks  in  this
traffic,  and  in  visiting  some  parts  of  the  adjacent  conti-
nent, Amadas  and  Barlow  returned  to  Eno^land
with  two  of  the  natives,  and  gave  such  splendid
descriptions  of  the  beauty  of  the  country,  the  fertility  of
the  soil,  and  the  mildness  of  the  climate,  that  Elizabeth,
delighted  with  the  idea  of  occupying  a  territory  so  far  su-
perior to  the  barren  regions  towards  the  north  hitherto
visited  by  her  subjects,  bestowed  on  it  the  name  of  Vir-
ginia; as  a  memorial  that  this  happy  discovery  had
been  made  under  a  virgin  queen.^
Colony  es- Tlicir rcport  'encouraged  Ralegh  to  hasten

tablished i  .  .  •  /• , i  •  •  c  ^

in  Virginia  his  preparations  lor  takmg  possession  oi  such  an
lUchard  invitiug  propci'ty.  He  fitted  out  a  squadron  of
Greenville,  scveii  Small  sliips,  uudcr  tlic  command  of  Sir
Richard  Greenville,  a  man  of  honourable  birth,  and  of

y  Haklujt,  iii.  246.
N  2

180  AMERICA.

courage  so  undaunted  as  to  be  conspicuous  even  in  that
gallant  age.  But  the  spirit  of  that  predatory  war  which
the  English  carried  on  against  Spain,  mingled  with  this
scheme  of  settlement ;  and  on  this  account,  as  well  as
from  unacquaintance  with  a  more  direct  and  shorter
course  to  North  America,  Greenville  sailed  by  the  West
India  islands.  He  spent  some  time  in  cruising  among
these,  and  in  taking  prizes ;  so  that  it  was  towards  the
close  of  June  before  he  arrived  on  the  coast  of  North
America.  He  touched  at  both  the  islands  where  Ama-
das  and  Barlow  had  landed,  and  made  some  excursions
into  different  parts  of  the  continent  round  Pamplicoe  and
Albemarle  sounds.  But  as,  unfortunately,  he  did  not
advance  far  enough  towards  the  north,  to  discover  the
noble  bay  of  Chesapeak,  he  established  the  colony
"^'  '  which  he  left  on  the  island  of  Roanoke,  an  in-
commodious station,  without  any  safe  harbour,  and  al-
most uninhabited.^

In  danger  This  colouy  cousistcd  Only  of  one  hundred  and
ing^byW-  eighty  pcrsous,  under  the  command  of  captain
Srnt'to^  Lane,  assisted  by  some  men  of  note,  the  most
England,  distinguished  of  whom  was  Hariot,  an  eminent
mathematician.  Their  chief  employment,  during  a  re-
sidence of  nine  months,  was  to  obtain  a  more  extensive
knowledge  of  the  country ;  and  their  researches  were
carried  on  with  greater  spirit,  and  reached  farther  than
could  have  been  expected  from  a  colony  so  feeble,  and  in
a  station  so  disadvantageous.  But  from  the  same  impa-
tience of  indigent  adventurers  to  acquire  sudden  wealth,
which  gave  a  wrong  direction  to  the  industry  of  the  Spa-
niards in  their  settlements,  the  greater  part  of  the  Eng-
lish seem  to  have  considered  nothing  as  worthy  of  atten-
tion but  mines  of  gold  and  silver.  These  they  sought
for  wherever  they  came  :  these  they  inquired  after  with
unwearied  eagerness.  The  savages  soon  discovered  the
favourite  objects  which  allured  them,  and  artfully  amused

^  Hakluyt,  iii.  251.

BOOK IX.  181

them  with  so  many  tales  concerning  pearl  fisheries,  and
rich  mines  of  various  metals,  that  Lane  and  his  compa-
nions wasted  their  time  and  activity  in  the  chimerical
pursuit  of  these,  instead  of  labouring  to  raise  provisions
for  their  own  subsistence. On  discovering  the  deceit  of
the  Indians,  they  were  so  much  exasperated,  that  from
expostulations  and  reproaches,  they  proceeded  to  open
hostility. The  supplies  of  provisions  which  they
had  been  accustomed  to  receive  from  the  natives
were  of  course  withdrawn. Throug^h  their  own  neg^li-
gence,  no  other  precaution  had  been  taken  for  their  sup-
port. Ralegh,  having  engaged  in  a  scheme  too  expen-
sive for  his  narrow  funds,  had  not  been  able  to  send
them  that  recruit  of  stores  with  which  Greenville  had
promised  to  furnish  them  early  in  the  spring. The  co-
lony, reduced  to  the  utmost  distress,  and  on  the  point  of
perishing  with  famine,  was  preparing  to  disperse  into  dif-
ferent districts  of  the  country  in  quest  of  food,  when
Sir  Francis  Drake  appeared  with  his  fleet,  re-
turning from  a  successful  expedition  against  the
Spaniards in  the  West  Indies. A  scheme  which  he
formed,  of  furnishing  Lane  and  his  associates  with  such
supplies  as  might  enable  them  to  remain  with  coiOfort  in
their  station,  was  disappointed  by  a  sudden  storm,  in
which  a  small  vessel  that  he  destined  for  their  service
was  dashed  to  pieces ;  and  as  he  could  not  supply  them
with  another,  at  their  joint  request,  as  they  were  worn
out  with  fatiffue  and  famine,  he  carried  them

June  19. ,  _, o _  '

home  to  bngland.^
Know-  Such  was  the  inauspicious  beginning  of  the

ledge  of English  settlements  in  the  New  World;  and,

the  coun-  ...

try  ac-  after  exciting  high  expectations,  this  first  attempt
this  expe-  produced  no  effect  but  that  of  affording  a  more
^'''*"'"  complete  knowledge  of  the  country ;  as  it  enabled
Hariot,  a  man  of  science  and  observation,  to  describe
its  soil,  climate,  productions,  and  the  manners  of  its  in-

a  Haklujt,  ii.  25b. Camd.  Annal.  387".

182  AMERICA.

habitants,  with  a  degree  of  accuracy  which  merits  no
inconsiderable  praise,  when  compared  with  the  childish
and  marvellous  tales  published  by  several  of  the  early
visitants  of  the  New  World.  There  is  another  conse-
quence of  this  abortive  colony  important  enough  to  en-
title it  to  a  place  in  history.  Lane  and  his  associates,  by
their  constant  intercourse  with  the  Indians,  had  acquired
Use  of  to-  ^  relish  for  their  favourite  enjoyment  of  smoking
bacco  in-  tobacco  I  to  the  use  of  which,  the  credulity  of

troduced  .  '  •' ,

in  Eng-  that  people  not  only  ascribed  a  thousand  imagi-
nary virtues,  but  their  superstition  considered  the
plant  itself  as  a  gracious  gift  of  the  gods,  for  the  solace
of  human  kind,  and  the  most  acceptable  offering  which
man  can  present  to  heaven.''  They  brought  with  them
a  specimen  of  this  new  commodity  to  England,  and
taught  their  countrymen  the  method  of  using  it ;  which
Ralegh,  and  some  young  men  of  fashion,  fondly  adopted.
From  imitation  of  them,  from  love  of  novelty,  and  from
the  favourable  opinion  of  its  salutary  qualities  enter-
tained by  several  physicians,  the  practice  spread  among
the  English.  The  Spaniards  and  Portuguese  had,  pre-
vious to  this,  introduced  it  in  other  parts  of  Europe.
This  habit  of  taking  tobacco  gradually  extended  from
the  extremities  of  the  north  to  those  of  the  south,  and
in  one  form  or  other  seems  to  be  equally  grateful  to  the
inhabitants  of  every  climate ;  and  by  a  singidar  caprice
of  the  human  species,  no  less  inexplicable  than  unex-
ampled (so  bewitching  is  the  acquired  taste  for  a  weed
of  no  manifest  utility,  and  at  first  not  only  unpleasant,
but  nauseous),  that  it  has  become  almost  as  universal  as
the  demands  of  those  appetites  originally  implanted  in
our  nature.  Smoking  was  the  first  mode  of  taking  to-
bacco in  England ;  and  we  learn  from  the  comic  writers
towards  the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century  and  the  be-
ginning of  the  seventeenth,  that  this  was  deemed  one  of
the  accomplishments  of  a  man  of  fashion  and  spirit.

•»  Harlot  ap.  Hakluyt,iii.271, Dc  Bry.  America,  Pars  i.

BOOK  IX.  183

A  few  days  after  Drake  departed  from  Roanoke,  a
small  bark,  dispatched  by  Ralegh  with  a  supply  of  stores
for  the  colony,  landed  at  the  place  where  the  English
had  settled  ;  but  on  finding  it  deserted  by  their  country-
men, they  returned  to  England.  The  bark  was  hardly
gone,  when  Sir  Richard  Greenville  appeared  with  three
ships.  After  searching  in  vain  for  the  colony  which  he
had  planted,  without  being  able  to  learn  what  had  be-
fallen it,  he  left  fifteen  of  his  crew  to  keep  possession  of
the  island.  This  handful  of  men  was  soon  overpowered
and  cut  in  pieces  by  the  savages. *"

Ralegh's  Though  all  Ralegh's  efforts  to  establish  a  co-
tempt^tr  ^o^y  i"  Virginia  had  hitherto  proved  abortive,
settle  a and  had  been  defeated  by  a  succession  of  disas-

colony  in  in-

Virginia,  tcrs  and  disappointments,  neither  his  hopes  nor
1587.  resources  were  exhausted.  Early  in  the  follow-
ing year,  he  fitted  out  three  ships,  under  the  command  of
captain  John  White,  who  carried  thither  a  colony  more
numerous  than  that  which  had  been  settled  under  Lane.
On  their  arrival  in  Virginia,  after  viewing  the  face  of  the
country  covered  with  one  continued  forest,  which  to
them  appeared  an  uninhabited  wild,  as  it  was  occupied
only  by  a  few  scattered  tribes  of  savages,  they  discovered
that  they  were  destitute  of  many  things  which  they
deemed  essentially  necessary  towards  their  subsistence
in  such  an  uncomfortable  situation ;  and,  with  one  voice,
requested  White,  their  commander,  to  return  to  Eng-
land, as  the  person  among  them  most  likely  to  solicit,
with  eflScacy,  the  supply  on  which  depended  the  exist-
ence of  the  colony.  White  landed  in  his  native  country
at  a  most  unfavourable  season  for  the  negotiation  which
he  had  undertaken.  He  found  the  nation  in  universal
alarm  at  the  formidable  preparations  of  Philip  II.  to  in-
vade England,  and  collecting  all  its  force  to  oppose  the
fleet  to  which  he  had  arrogantly  given  the  name  of  the

c  Hakluyt,  iii.  265.  283.

184  AMERICA.

Invincible  Armada.  Ralegh,  Greenville,  and  all  the  most
zealous  patrons  of  the  new  settlement,  were  called  to  act
a  distinguished  part  in  the  operations  of  a  year  equally-
interesting  and  glorious  to  England. Amidst
danger  so  imminent,  and  during  a  contest  for  the
honour  of  their  sovereign  and  the  independence  of  their
country,  it  was  impossible  to  attend  to  a  less  important
and  remote  object. The  unfortunate  colony  in
perishes Roauokc  reccivcd  no  supply,  and  perished  mise-
y  amin  .  ^^^^^  ^^  famine,  or  by  the  unrelenting  cruelty  of
those  barbarians  by  whom  they  were  surrounded.
Ralegh During  the  remainder  of  Elizabeth's  reign,
the  design  thc  schcmc  of  establishing  a  colony  in  Virginia
of  settling  ^^g^g  ^^^  rcsumed. Ralep-h,  with  a  most  aspirins:

a  colony  in  .  .

Virginia,  mind  and  extraordinary  talents,  enlightened  by
knowledge  no  less  uncommon,  had  the  spirit  and  the  de-
fects of  a  projector.  Allured  by  new  objects,  and  always
giving  the  preference  to  such  as  were  most  splendid  and
arduous,  he  was  apt  to  engage  in  undertakings  so
vast  and  so  various,  as  to  be  far  beyond  his  power
of  accomplishing.  He  was  now  intent  on  peopling
and  improving  a  large  district  of  country  in  Ireland,
of  which  he  had  obtained  a  grant  from  the  queen.
He  was  a  deep  adventurer  in  the  scheme  of  fitting
out  a  powerful  armament  against  Spain,  in  order
to  establish  Don  Antonio  on  the  throne  of  Portugal.
He  had  begun  to  form  his  favourite  but  visionary  plan,
of  penetrating  into  the  province  of  Guiana,  where  he
fondly  dreamed  of  taking  possession  of  inexhaustible
wealth,  flowing  from  the  richest  mines  in  the  New
World.  Amidst  this  multiplicity  of  projects,  of  such
promising  appearance,  and  recommended  by  novelty,  he
naturally  became  cold  towards  his  ancient  and  hitherto
unprofitable  scheme  of  settling  a  colony  in  Virginia,
and  was  easily  induced  to  assign  his  right  of  property
in  that  country,  which  he  had  never  visited,  together

BOOK  IX.  185

with  all  the  privileges  contained  in  his  patent,  to  Sir
jyi3,pi,  Thomas  Smith,  and  a  company  of  merchants  in
1596.  London.  This  company,  satisfied  with  a  paltry
traflac  carried  on  by  a  few  small  barks,  made  no  attempt
to  take  possession  of  the  country.  Thus,  after  a  period
of  a  hundred  and  six  years  from  the  time  that  Cabot
discovered  North  America,  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VII.,
and  of  twenty  years  from  the  time  that  Ralegh  planted
the  first  colony,  there  was  not  a  single  Englishman
settled  there  at  the  demise  of  queen  Elizabeth,  in  the
year  1603.

Circura-  ^  hB.Ye  already  explained  the  causes  of  this,
En"T  ii"  ^^^^'^g  ^1^^  period  previous  to  the  accession  of
reign  unfa- Elizabeth.  Otlicr  causcs  produced  the  same
toc'obni-  effect  undcr  her  administration.  Though  for
zation. ^^^  jjg^i^  q£  j^gj.  j.gigjj  England  was  engaged  in

no  foreign  war,  and  commerce  enjoyed  that  perfect
security  which  is  friendly  to  its  progress  ;  though  the
glory  of  her  later  years  gives  the  highest  tone  of  eleva-
tion and  vigour  to  the  national  spirit ;  the  queen  her-
self, from  her  extreme  parsimony,  and  her  aversion  to
demand  extraordinary  supplies  of  her  subjects,  was
more  apt  to  restrain  than  to  second  the  ardent  genius
of  her  people.  Several  of  the  most  splendid  enterprises
in  her  reign  were  concerted  and  executed  by  private
adventurers.  All  the  schemes  for  colonization  were
carried  on  by  the  funds  of  individuals,  without  any
public  aid.  Even  the  felicity  of  her  government  was
adverse  to  the  establishment  of  remote  colonies.  So
powerful  is  the  attraction  of  our  native  soil,  and  such
our  fortunate  partiality  to  the  laws  and  manners  of  our
own  country,  that  men  seldom  choose  to  abandon  it,
unless  they  be  driven  away  by  oppression,  or  allured
by  vast  prospects  of  sudden  wealth.  But  the  provinces
of  America,  in  which  the  English  attempted  to  settle,
did  not,  like  those  occupied  by  Spain,  invite  them
thither  by  any  appearance  of  silver  or  golden  mines.

186  AMERICA.

All  their  hopes  of  gain  were  distant ;  and  they  saw
that  nothing  could  be  earned  but  by  persevering  exer-
tions of  industry.  The  maxims  of  Elizabeth's  adminis-
tration were,  in  their  general  tenor,  so  popular,  as  did
not  force  her  subjects  to  emigrate,  in  order  to  escape
from  the  heavy  or  vexatious  hand  of  power.  It  seems
to  have  been  with  difficulty  that  these  slender  bands  of
planters  were  collected,  on  which  the  writers  of  that
age  bestow  the  name  of  the  first  and  second  Virginian
colonies.  The  fulness  of  time  for  English  colonisation
was  not  yet  arrived.

1603.  But  the  succession  of  the  Scottish  line  to  the
Jarals  fa-  crowu  of  England  hastened  its  approach.  James
to'thJes-  ^^^  hardly  seated  on  the  throne  before  he  dis-
tabiish- covered  his  pacific  intentions,  and  he  soon  ter-

ment  of  .  iii  i-iiii

colonies,  mmatcd  the  long  war  which  had  been  carried
on  between  Spain  and  England,  by  an  amicable  treaty.
From  that  period,  uninterrupted  tranquillity  continued
during  his  reign.  Many  persons  of  high  rank,  and  of
ardent  ambition,  to  whom  the  war  with  Spain  had  af-
forded constant  employment,  and  presented  alluring
prospects,  not  only  of  fame  but  of  wealth,  soon  became
so  impatient  of  languishing  at  home  without  occupa-
tion or  object,  that  their  invention  was  on  the  stretch
to  find  some  exercise  for  their  activity  and  talents.
To  both  these  North  America  seemed  to  open  a  new
field,  and  schemes  of  carrying  colonies  thither  became
more  general  and  more  popular.

A  voyage,  undertaken  by  Bartholomew  Gos-

Direct  t/ a  *,!

course  from  uold  iu  the  last  year  of  the  queen,  facilitated,
to^Nonh  ^s  well  as  encouraged,  the  execution  of  these
America, sclicmes. Hc  Sailed  from  Falmouth  in  a  small

first  at-
tempted by  bark,  with  thirty-two men. Instead of  fol-

Gosnold. 1  •  r>  • ,  • L^ •

lowing  lormer  navigators  in  their  unnecessary
circuit  by  the  West  India  isles  and  the  gulf  of  Florida,
Gosnold  steered  due  west  as  nearly  as  the  winds  would
permit, and  was the  first  English  commander  who

BOOK IX.  187

reached  America  by  this  shorter  and  more  direct  course.
That  part  of  the  continent  which  he  first  descried  was
a  promontory  in  the  province  now  called  Massachusets
Bay,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Cape  Cod.  Hold-
ing along  the  coast,  as  it  stretched  towards  the  south-
west,  he  touched  at  two  islands,  one  of  which  he  called
Martha's  Vineyard,  the  other  Elizabeth's  Island  ;  and
visited  the  adjoining  continent,  and  traded  with  its
inhabitants.  He  and  his  companions  were  so  much
delighted  everywhere  with  the  inviting  aspect  of  the
country,  that  notwithstanding  the  smallness  of  their
number,  a  part  of  them  consented  to  remain  there.  But
when  they  had  leisure  to  reflect  upon  the  fate  of  former
settlers  in  America,  they  retracted  a  resolution  formed
in  the  first  warmth  of  their  admiration ;  and  Gosnold
returned  to  England  in  less  than  four  months  from  the
time  of  his  departure.'^

Conse-  This  voyagc,  however  inconsiderable  it  may

GoTrSd?  appear,  had  important  effects.  The  English  now
voyage.  discovered  the  aspect  of  the  American  continent
to  be  extremely  inviting  far  to  the  north  of  the  place
where  they  had  formerly  attempted  to  settle.  The  coast
of  a  vast  country,  stretching  through  the  most  desirable
climates,  lay  before  them.  The  richness  of  its  virgin
soil  promised  a  certain  recompense  to  their  industry.  In
its  interior  provinces  unexpected  sources  of  wealth  might
open,  and  unknown  objects  of  commerce  might  be  found.
Its  distance  from  England  was  diminished  almost  a  third
part,  by  the  new  course  which  Gosnold  had  pointed  out.
Plans  for  establishing  colonies  began  to  be  formed  in  dif-
ferent parts  of  the  kingdom ;  and  before  these  were  ripe
for  execution,  one  small  vessel  was  sent  out  by  the  mer-
chants of  Bristol,  another  by  the  earl  of  Southampton
and  Lord  Arundel  of  Wardour,  in  order  to  learn  whether
Gosnold's  account  of  the  country  was  to  be  considered  as
a  just  representation  of  its  state,  or  as  the  exaggerated

"*  Purchas,  iv.  p.  1647.

188  AMERICA.

description  of  a  fond  discoverer.  Both  returned  with  a
full  confirmation  of  his  veracity,  and  with  the  addition
of  so  many  new  cijrcumstances  in  favour  of  the  country,
acquired  by  a  more  extensive  view  of  it,  as  greatly  in-
creased the  desire  of  planting  it.

Hakiuyt  Tlic  most  activc  and  efficacious  promoter  of

t™e'com-  this  was  Richard  Hakiuyt,  prebendaiy  of  West-
merciaiand  jninstcr,  to  whom  EnQ:land  is  more  indebted  for

naval  skill  '  _  ©

of  that  age.  its  American  possessions  than  to  any  man  of  that
age.  Formed  under  a  kinsman  of  the  same  name,  emi-
nent for  naval  and  commercial  knowledge,  he  imbibed  a
similar  taste,  and  applied  early  to  the  study  of  geography
and  navigation.  These  favourite  sciences  engrossed  his
attention,  and  to  diifuse  a  relish  for  them  was  the  great
object  of  his  life.  In  order  to  excite  his  countrymen  to
naval  enterprise,  by  flattering  their  national  vanity,  he
published,  in  the  year  1589,  his  valuable  collection  of
voyages  and  discoveries  made  by  Englishmen.  In  order
to  supply  them  with  what  information  might  be  derived
from  the  experience  of  the  most  successful  foreign  navi-
gators, he  translated  some  of  the  best  accounts  of  the
progress  of  the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese  in  their  voyages
both  to  the  East  and  West  Indies,  into  the  English  tongue.
He  was  consulted  with  respect  to  many  of  the  attempts
towards  discovery  or  colonization  during  the  latter  part
of  Elizabeth's  reign.  He  corresponded  with  the  officers
who  conducted  them,  directed  their  researches  to  proper
objects,  and  published  the  history  of  their  exploits.  By
the  zealous  endeavours  of  a  person,  equally  respected  by
men  of  rank  and  men  of  business,  many  of  both  orders
formed  an  association  to  establish  colonies  in  America,
and  petitioned  the  king  for  the  sanction  of  his  authority
to  warrant  the  execution  of  their  plans.
James  di-  Jamcs,  who  prided  himself  on  his  profound
coast  oi  skill  in  the  science  of  government,  and  who  had
Hc^aintotwo  ^umcd  his  attention  to  consider  the  advantages
parts  J which  might  be  derived  from  colonies,  at  a

BOOK IX.  189

time  when  he  patronized  his  scheme  for  planting  them
in  some  of  the  ruder  provinces  of  his  ancient  kingdom,
with  a  view  of  introducing  industry  and  civilization
there,*  was  no  less  fond  of  directing  the  active  genius  of
his  English  subjects  towards  occupations  not  repugnant
to  his  own  pacific  maxims,  and  listened  with  a  favourable
ear  to  their  application.  But  as  the  extent  as  well  as
value  of  the  American  continent  began  now  to  be  better
known,  a  grant  of  the  whole  of  such  a  vast  region  to
any  one  body  of  men,  however  respectable,  appeared  to
him  an  act  of  impolitic  and  profuse  liberality.  For  this
reason  he  divided  that  portion  of  North  America,  which
stretches  from  the  thirty-fourth  to  the  forty-fifth  degree
of  latitude,  into  two  districts  nearly  equal ;  the  one  called
the  first  or  south  colony  of  Virginia,  the  other,  the  second
1606.  01'  north  colony.  He  authorized  Sir  Thomas
April  10.  Qates,  Sir  George  Summers,  Richard  Hakluyt,
and  their  associates,  mostly  resident  in  London,  to  settle
any  part  of  the  former  which  they  should  choose,  and
vested  in  them  a  right  of  property  to  the  land  extending
along  the  coast  fifty  miles  on  each  side  of  the  place  of
their  first  habitation,  and  reaching  into  the  interior  coun-
And  grants  try  a  huudred  miles.  The  latter  district  he  al-
chartersto  \q^qA ^s  the  placc  of  Settlement, to  sundry

twocorapa-  '  r  .

nies.  knights,  gentlemen,  and  merchants  of  Bristol,

Plymouth,  and  other  parts  in  the  west  of  England,  with
a  similar  grant  of  territory.  Neither  the  monarch  who
issued  this  charter,  nor  his  subjects  who  received  it,  had
any  conception  that  they  were  proceeding  to  lay  the
foundation  of  mighty  and  opulent  states.  What  James
granted  was  nothing  more  than  a  simple  charter  of  cor-
poration to  a  trading  company,  empowering  the  members
of  it  to  have  a  common  seal,  and  to  act  as  a  body  politic.
But  as  the  object  for  which  they  associated  was  new,
the  plan  established  for  the  administration  of  their  affairs
was  uncommon. Instead  of  the  power  usually  granted

e  Hist,  of  Scotland,  ii.

190  AMERICA.

to  corporations,  of  electing  officers  and  framing  bye-^
laws  for  the  conduct  of  their  own  operations,  the  supreme
Tenor  of  government  of  the  colonies  to  be  settled  was
these  char-  ycstcd  in  a  couucil  resident  in  England,  to  be

named  by  the  king,  according  to  sach  laws  and
ordinances  as  should  be  given  under  his  sign-manual ;
and  the  subordinate  jurisdiction  was  committed  to  a
council  resident  in  America,  which  was  likewise  to  be
nominated  by  the  king,  and  to  act  conformably  to  his  in-
structions. To  this  important  clause,  which  regulated
the  form  of  their  constitution,  was  added  the  concession
of  several  immunities,  to  encourage  persons  to  settle  in
the  intended  colonies.  Some  of  these  were  the  same
which  had  been  granted  to  Gilbert  and  Ralegh ;  such
as  the  securing  to  the  emigrants  and  their  descendants
all  the  rights  of  denizens,  in  the  same  manner  as  if  they
had  remained  or  had  been  born  in  England  ;  and  grant-
ing them  the  privilege  of  holding  their  lands  in  America
by  the  freest  and  least  burdensome  tenure.  Others  were
more  favourable  than  those  granted  by  Elizabeth.  He
permitted  whatever  was  necessary  for  the  sustenance  or
commerce  of  the  new  colonies  to  be  exported  from
England,  during  the  space  of  seven  years,  without  pay-
ing any  duty  ;  and,  as  a  farther  incitement  to  industry,
he  granted  them  liberty  of  trade  with  other  nations,  and
appropriated  the  duty  to  be  levied  on  foreign  commodi-
ties, for  twenty-one  years,  as  a  fund  for  the  benefit  of  the
colony.^

Defects  of  ^^  ^^^^^  siugular  charter,  the  contents  of  which
tiiese  char-  bavc  becu  little  attended  to  by  the  historians  of

America,  some  articles  are  as  unfavourable  to
the  rights  of  the  colonists,  as  others  are  to  the  interest
of  the  parent  state.  By  placing  the  legislative  and  exe-
cutive powers  in  a  council  nominated  by  the  crown,  and
guided  by  its  instructions,  every  person  settling  in  Ame-
rica seems  to  be  bereaved  of  the  noblest  privilege  of  a

f  Stith,  Hist,  of  Virginia,  p.  35. Append,  p.  1. Purchas,  v.  1683.

BOOK  IX.  191

free  man ;  by  the  unlimited  permission  of  trade  with
foreigners,  the  parent  state  is  deprived  of  that  exclusive
commerce  v^^hich  has  been  deemed  the  chief  advantage
resulting  from  the  establishment  of  colonies.  But  in  the
infancy  of  colonization,  and  without  the  guidance  of  ob-
servation or  experience,  the  ideas  of  men,  with  respect  to
the  mode  of  forming  new  settlements,  were  not  fully  un-
folded, or  properly  arranged.  At  a  period  when  they
could  not  foresee  the  future  grandeur  and  importance  of
the  communities  which  they  were  about  to  call  into  ex-
istence, they  were  ill  qualified  to  concert  the  best  plan
for  governing  them.  Besides,  the  English  of  that  age,
accustomed  to  the  high  prerogative  and  arbitrary  rule  of
their  monarchs,  were  not  animated  with  such  liberal
sentiments,  either  concerning  their  own  personal  or  poli-
tical rights,  as  have  become  familiar  in  the  more  mature
and  improved  state  of  their  constitution.
Colonies  of  Without  hesitation  or  reluctance  the  proprie-
anKew  tors  of  botli  colouics  prepared  to  execute  their
England,  rcspcctive  plans ;  and  under  the  authority  of  a
charter,  which  would  now  be  rejected  with  disdain,  as
a  violent  invasion  of  the  sacred  and  inalienable  rights  of
liberty,  the  first  permanent  settlements  of  the  English  in
America,  were  established.  From  this  period,  the  pro-
gress of  the  two  provinces  of  Virginia  and  New  England,
form  a  regular  and  connected  story.  The  former  in  the
south,  and  the  latter  in  the  north,  may  be  considered  as
the  original  and  parent  colonies ;  in  imitation  of  which,
and  under  whose  shelter,  all  the  others  have  been  suc-
cessively planted  and  reared.

Advantages  '^^^^  ^^^^  attempts  to  occupy  Virginia  and
of  tracing '^Qy^  Eno;land  wcrc  made  by  very  feeble  bodies

the  history n  •  a i  i

of  these  CO-  01  emigrants. As  these  settled  under  great  dis-

lonies  in  i  ,  ^ -i  /•  ^ ■

their  infant  advantages,  among  tribes  oi  savages,  and  in  an
state.  uncultivated  desert ;  as  they  attained  gradually,
after  long  struggles  and  many  disasters,  to  that  maturity
of  strength,  and  order  of  policy,  which  entitles  them  to  be

192  AMERICA.

considered  as  respectable  states,  the  history  of  their  perse-
vering efforts  merits  particular  attention. It  will  exhibit  a
spectacle  no  less  striking  than  instructive,  and  presents  an
opportunity,  which  rarely  occurs,  of  contemplating  a  so-
ciety in  the  first  moment  of  its  political  existence,  and  of
observing  how  its  spirit  forms  in  its  infant  state,  how  its
principles  begin  to  unfold  as  it  advances,  and  how  those
characteristic  qualities  which  distinguish  its  maturer  age,
are  successively  acquired. The  account  of  the  establish-
ment of  the  other  English  colonies,  undertaken  at  periods
when  the  importance  of  such  possessions  was  better  under-
stood, and  effected  by  more  direct  and  vigorous  exertions
of  the  parent  state,  is  less  interesting, I  shall  therefore
relate  the  history  of  the  two  original  colonies  in  detail.
With  respect  to  the  subsequent  settlements,  some  more
general  observations  concerning  the  time,  the  motives,  and
circumstances  of  their  establishment  will  be  sufficient. I
begin  with  the  history  of  Virginia,  the  most  ancient  and
most  valuable  of  the  British  colonies  in  North  America.
Newport Though  many  persons  of  distinction  became
Virginia, proprietors  in  the  company  which  undertook  to
Dec.  19. plant  a  colony  in  Virginia,  its  funds  seem  not  to
have  been  considerable,  and  its  first  effort  was  certainly
extremely  feeble. A  small  vessel  of  a  hundred  tons,
and  two  barks,  under  the  command  of  Captain  Newport,
sailed  with  a  hundred  and  five  men,  destined  to  remain
in  the  country. Some  of  these  were  of  respectable  fa-
milies,  particularly a  brother of  the earl of North-
umberland, and  several  officers  who  had  served  with
1607. reputation  in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth. Newport,
April  26. J  ]^now  not  for  what  reason,  followed  the  ancient
course  by  the  West  Indies,  and  did  not  reach  the  coast
of  North  America  for  four  months. But  he  approached
it  with  better  fortune  than  any  former  navigator ;  for
having  been  driven  by  the  violence  of  a  storm,  to  the
northward  of  Roanoke,  the  place  of  his  destination,  the
first  land  he  discovered  was  a  promontory  which he

BOOK IX.  103

Discovers  called  Cape  Henry,  the  soutliward  boundary  of
peak.  the  Bay  of  Chesapeak.  The  English  stood
directly  into  that  spacious  inlet,  which  seemed  to  invite
them  to  enter ;  and  as  they  advanced,  contemplated  with
a  mixture  of  delight  and  admiration,  that  grand  re-
servoir, into  which  are  poured  the  waters  of  all  the  vast
rivers,  which,  not  only  diffuse  fertility  through  that  dis-
trict of  America,  but  open  the  interior  parts  of  the
country  to  navigation,  and  render  a  commercial  inter-
course more  extensive  and  commodious  than  in  any  othei*
region  of  the  globe.  Newport,  keeping  along  the
southward  shore,  sailed  up  a  river,  which  the  natives
called  Powhatan,  and  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of
Sailed  up  Jamcs-Rivcr.  After  viewing  its  banks,  during
River.  a  run  of  above  forty  miles  from  its  mouth,  they
all  concluded,  that  a  country,  where  safe  and  convenient
harbours  seemed  to  be  numerous,  would  be  a  more  suit-
able station  for  a  trading  colony,  than  the  shoally  and
dangerous  coast  to  the  south,  on  which  their  countrymen
had  formerly  settled.  Here,  then,  they  determined  to
abide ;  and  having  chosen  a  proper  spot  for  their  resi-
founds dence,  thev  orave  this  infant  settlement  the  name

Jaraes-  •"  ./ o

Town.  of  James-Town,  which  it  still  retains ;  and
though  it  has  never  become  either  populous  or  opulent,
it  can  boast  of  being  the  most  ancient  habitation  of  the
English  in  the  New  World.  But,  however  well  chosen
the  situation  might  be,  the  members  of  the  colony  were
far  from  availing  themselves  of  its  advantages.  Violent  ani-
mosities had  broke  out  among  some  of  their  leaders,  dur-
ing their  voyage  to  Virginia.  These  did  not  subside  on
Badadmi-  their  arrival  there.  The  first  deed  of  the  council,
iiistration.  which  assumed  the  government  in  virtue  of  a
commission  brought  from  England,  under  the  seal  of  the
company,  and  opened  on  the  day  after  they  landed,  was
an  act  of  injustice.  Captain  Smith,  who  had  been  ap-
pointed a  member  of  the  council,  was  excluded  from  his
seat  at  the  board,  by  the  mean  jealousy  of  his  colleagues,

VOL. VIII.  O

194  AMERICA.

and  not  only  reduced  to  the  condition  of  a  private  man,
but  of  one  suspected,  and  watched  by  his  superiors.
This  diminution  of  his  influence,  and  restraint  on  his
activity,  was  an  essential  injury  to  the  colony,  which,  at
that  juncture,  stood  in  need  of  the  aid  of  both.  For
soon  after  they  began  to  settle,  the  English  were  involved
in  a  war  with  the  natives,  partly  by  their  own  indis-
cretion, and  partly  by  the  suspicion  and  ferocity  of  those
Colony  barbarians.  And,  although  the  Indians  scattered
T'di^^in.  ^^^^  *^^  countries  adjacent  to  James-River,  were
dians.  divided  into  independent  tribes, "so  extremely  fee-
ble, that  hardly  one  of  them  could  muster  above  two
hundred  warriors  f  they  teased  and  annoyed  an  infant
colony  by  their  incessant  hostilities. To  this  was  added,

a  calamity  still  more  dreadful ;  the  stock  of  pro-
June  15. . .  T n n ^ •  1 •  7 1

Visions  left  for  their  subsistence,  on  the  departure
of  their  ships  for  England,  was  so  scanty,  and  of  such
bad  quality,  that  a  scarcity,  approaching  almost  to  absolute
Suffers  famine,  soon  followed.  Such  poor  unwholesome
from  scar-  f^j.^  brouofht  ou  discascs,  the  violence  of  which

city,  and  o  '

theun-  was  SO  much  increased  by  the  sultry  heat  of
ness  of  the  the  cUmatc,  and  the  moisture  of  a  country  co-
ciimate.  ygyg^j  ^j^}j  wood,  that  bcforc  the  beginning  of
September,  one  half  of  their  number  died,  and  most  of
the  survivors  were  sickly  and  dejected.  In  such  trying
extremities,  the  comparative  powers  of  every  individual
are  discovered  and  called  forth,  and  each  naturally  takes
that  station,  and  assumes  that  ascendant,  to  which  he  is
entitled  by  his  talents  and  force  of  mind.  Every  eye
Smith  was  now  turned  towards  Smith,  and  all  willingly
t^heLm"  devolved  on  him  that  authority,  of  which  they
™or"et'th^e"  ^^^  formerly  deprived  him.  His  undaunted
prosperity  temper,  deeply  tinctured  with  the  wild  romantic
lony.  spirit  characteristic  of  military  adventurers  in
that  age,  was  peculiarly  suited  to  such  a  situation.  The
vigour of  his constitution continued  fortunately still

!?  Purchas,  vol.  iv.  169'i. Smith's  Travels,  p.  2j,

BOOK  IX.  195

unimpaired  by  disease,  and  his  mind  was  never  appalled
by  danger.  He  instantly  adopted  the  only  plan  that
could  save  them  from  destruction.  He  began  by  sur-
rounding James-Town  with  such  rude  fortifications  as
were  a  suflScient  defence  against  the  assaults  of  savages.
He  then  marched  at  the  head  of  a  small  detachment  in
quest  of  their  enemies.  Some  tribes  he  gained  by  ca-
resses and  presents,  and  procured  from  them  a  supply  of
provisions.  Others  he  attacked  with  open  force;  and
defeating  them  on  every  occasion,  whatever  their  supe-
riority in  numbers  might  be,  compelled  them  to  impart  to
him  some  portion  of  their  winter  stores.  As  the  recom-
pense of  all  his  toils  and  dangers,  he  saw  abundance  and
contentment  re-established  in  the  colony,  and  hoped,  that
he  should  be  able  to  maintain  them  in  that  happy  state,
until  the  arrival  of  ships  from  England  in  the  spring :
but  in  one  of  his  excursions,  he  was  surprised  by  a  nu-
merous body  of  Indians,  and  in  making  his  escape  from
them,  after  a  gallant  defence,  he  sunk  to  the  neck  in  a
He  is  swamp,  and  was  obliged  to  surrender.  Though
taken  pri-  }yQ  kncw  wcll  what  a  dreadful  fate  awaits  the
Uie  In-  prisoners  of  savages,  his  presence  of  mind  did  not
^^^'  forsake  him.  He  shewed  those  who  had  taken  him
captive  a  mariner's  compass,  and  amused  them  with  so
many  wonderful  accounts  of  its  viitues,  as  filled  them
with  astonishment  and  veneration,  which  began  to  operate
very  powerfully  in  his  favour.  They  led  him,  however,
in  triumph  through  various  parts  of  the  country,  and  con-
ducted him  at  last  to  Powhatan,  the  most  considerable
Sachim  in  that  part  of  Virginia.  There  the  doom  of
death,  being  pronounced,  he  was  led  to  the  place  of  exe-
cution, and  his  head  already  bowed  down  to  receive  the
fatal  blow,  when  that  fond  attachment  of  the  American
women  to  their  European  invaders,  the  beneficial  effects
of  which  the  Spaniards  often  experienced^  interposed  in
his  behalf.  The  favourite  daughter  of  Powhatan  rushed
in  between  him  and  the  executioner,  and  by  her  en-

o  2

196  AMERICA.

treaties  and  tears,  prevailed  on  her  father  to  spare  his
life.  The  beneficence  of  his  deliverer,  whom  the  early  En-
glish writers  dignify  with  the  title  of  the  Princess  Poca-
huntas,  did  not  terminate  here ;  she  soon  after  procured
his  liberty,  and  sent  him  from  time  to  time  seasonable
presents  of  provisions.''

Smith,  on  his  return  to  James-Town,  found
reuirnt  he  tlic  colouy  rcduccd  to  thirty-cight  persons,  who
coitV^^  in  despair,  were  preparing  to  abandon  a  coun-
aimost  try  which  did  not  seem  destined  to  be  the  ha-
bitation of  Englishmen.  He  employed  caresses,
threats,  and  even  violence,  in  order  to  prevent  them  from
executing  this  fatal  resolution.  With  difficulty  he  pre-
vailed on  them  to  defer  it  so  long,  that  the  succour
Seago,,.  anxiously  expected  from  England  arrived.
able  sue- Plenty  was  instantly  restored  :  a  hundred  new

cours  from  •'  .

England,  planters  were  added  to  their  number  ;  and  an
ample  stock  of  whatever  was  requisite  for  clearing  and
sowing  the  ground  was  delivered  to  them.  But  an  un-
lucky incident  turned  their  attention  from  that  species
of  industry  which  alone  could  render  their  situation  com-
n  , ■ , fortable.  In  a  small  stream  of  water  that  issued

Colonists  ^^

deceived  from  a  bank  of  sand  near  James-Town,  a  sedi-
pearances  mcut  of  somc  shiuiug  mineral  substance,  which
^"  ■  had  some  resemblance  of  gold,  was  discovered.
At  a  time  when  the  precious  metals  were  conceived  to
be  the  peculiar  and  only  valuable  productions  of  the
New  World,  when  every  mountain  was  supposed  to  con-
tain a  treasure,  and  every  rivulet  was  searched  for  its
golden  sands,  this  appearance  was  fondly  considered  as
an  infallible  indication  of  a  mine.  Every  hand  was  eager
to  dig;  and  large  quantities  of  this  glittering  dust  were
amassed.  From  some  assay  of  its  nature,  made  by  an
artist  as  unskilful  as  his  companions  were  credulous,  it
was  pronounced  to  be  extremely  rich.  "  There  was
now,"  says  Smith,  "  no  talk,  no  hope,  no  work,  but  dig

h  Smith's  Travels,  p.  44,  &c. Purchas,  iv.  1704,  Stith.  p.  4.5,  &c.

BOOK IX.  197

gold,  wash  gold,  refine gold."' With  this  imaginary
wealth  the  first  vessel  returning  to  England  was  loaded,
while  the  culture  of  the  land,  and  every  useful  occupa-
tion, were  totally  neglected.
„  ..,  The  effects  of  this  fatal  delusion  were  soon

ainitn  un-
dertakes a  felt. Notwithstanding  all  the  provident  acti-

the  coun-  vity  of  Smith,  in  procuring  corn  from  the  na-
*'^^'  tives  by  traffic  or  by  force,  the  colony  began  to

suffer  as  much  as  formerly  from  scarcity  of  food,  and
was  wasted  by  the  same  distempers.  In  hopes  of  ob-
taining some  relief.  Smith  proposed,  as  they  had  not
hitherto  extended  their  researches  beyond  the  countries
contiguous  to  James-River,  to  open  an  intercourse  with
the  more  remote  tribes,  and  to  examine  into  the  state  of
culture  and  population  among  them.  The  execution  of
this  arduous  design  he  undertook  himself,  in  a  small
open  boat,  with  a  feeble  crew,  and  a  very  scanty  stock  of
provisions.  He  began  his  survey  at  Cape  Charles,  and
in  two  different  excursions,  which  continued  above  four
months,  he  advanced  as  far  as  the  river  Susquehannah,
which  flows  into  the  bottom  of  the  bay.  He  visited  all
the  countries  both  on  the  east  and  west  shores ;  he  en-
tered most  of  the  considerable  creeks ;  he  sailed  up  many
of  the  great  rivers  as  far  as  their  falls.  He  traded  with
some  tribes  ;  he  fought  with  others ;  he  observed  the
nature  of  the  territory  which  they  occupied,  their  mode
of  subsistence,  the  peculiarities  in  their  manners ;  and
left  among  all  a  wonderful  admiration  either  of  the  be-
neficence or  valour  of  the  English.  After  sailing  above
three  thousand  miles  in  a  paltry  vessel,  ill  fitted  for
such  an  extensive  navigation,  during  which  the  hard-
ships to  which  he  was  exposed,  as  well  as  the  patience
with  which  he  endured,  and  the  fortitude  with  which
he  surmounted  them,  equal  whatever  is  related  of  the
celebrated  Spanish  discoverers  in  their  most  daring  en-
terprises, he  returned  to  James-Town ;  he  brought  with

«  Smith's  Travels,  p.  r>3.

198  AMERICA.

him  an  account  of  that  large  portion  of  the  American
continent  now  comprehended  in  the  two  provinces  of
Virginia  and  Maryland, "^  so  full  and  exact,  that  after
the  progress  of  information  and  research  for  a  cen-
tury and  a  half,  his  map  exhibits  no  inaccurate  view
of  both  countries,  and  is  the  original  upon  which  all
subsequent  delineations  and  descriptions  have  been
formed.'

But  whatever  pleasing  prospect  of  future  benefit
might  open  upon  this  complete  discovery  of  a  country
formed  by  nature  to  be  the  seat  of  an  exclusive  com-
merce, it  afforded  but  little  relief  for  their  present  wants.
The  colony  still  depended  for  subsistence  chiefly  on
supplies  from  the  natives ;  as,  after  all  the  efforts  of  their
own  industry,  hardly  thirty  acres  of  ground  were  yet
cleared  so  as  to  be  capable  of  culture.""  By  Smith's  at-
tention, however,  the  stores  of  the  English  were  so  re-
gularly filled,  that  for  sometime  they  felt  no  considerable
distress  ;  and  at  this  juncture  a  change  was  made  in  the
constitution  of  the  company,  which  seemed  to  promise  an
increase  of  their  security  and  happiness.  That  supreme
direction  of  all  the  company's  operations,  which  the  king
by  his  charter  had  reserved  to  himself,  discouraged  per-
sons of  rank  or  property  from  becoming  members  of  a
society  so  dependent  on  the  arbitrary  will  of  the  crown.
1609.  Upon  a  representation  ofthis  to  James,  he  granted
May  23.  them  a  new  charter,  with  more  ample  privileges,
charter  Hc  enlarged  the  boundaries  of  the  colony  ;  he
^^^^  ^  '  rendered;the  powers  of  the  company,  as  a  corpora-
tion, more  explicit  and  complete ;  he  abolished  the  juris-
diction of  the  council  resident  in  Virginia ;  he  vested  the
government  entirely  in  a  council  residing  in  London;  he
granted  to  the  proprietors  of  the  company  the  right  of
electing  the  persons  who  were  to  compose  this  council,
by  a  majority  of  voices ;  he  authorized  this  council  to
establish  such  laws,  orders,  and  forms  of  goverment  and

k  Smith's  Travels,  p.  65,  &c.  '  Stilh.  p.  83.  "•  Ibid.  p.  97.

BOOK  IX.  Id9

magistracy,  for  the  colony  and  plantation,  as  they  in
their  discretion  should  think  to  be  fittest  for  the  good  of
the  adventurers  and  inhabitants  there  ;  he  empowered
them  to  nominate  a  governor  to  have  the  administration
of  affairs  in  the  colony ;  and  to  carry  their  orders  into
execution."  In  consequence  of  these  concessions,  the
company  having  acquired  the  power  of  regulating  all
its  own  transactions,  the  number  of  proprietors  in-
creased, and  among  them  we  find  the  most  respectable
names  in  the  nation.

Lord  De-  The  first  dccd  of  the  new  council  was  to  ap-
^™e/''  point  Lord  Delaware  governor  and  captain-gene-
governor.  fg^i  of  their  colouy  in  Virginia.  To  a  person  of
his  rank  those  high-sounding  titles  could  be  no  allure-
ment ;  and  by  his  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  pro-
gress and  state  of  the  settlement,  he  knew  enough  of
the  labour  and  difficulty  with  which  an  infant-colony  is
reared,  to  expect  any  thing  but  anxiety  and  care  in  dis-
charging the  duties  of  that  delicate  office.  But,  from
zeal  to  promote  an  establishment  which  he  expected  to
prove  so  highly  beneficial  to  his  country,  he  was  will-
ing to  relinquish  all  the  comforts  of  an  honourable
station,  to  undertake  a  long  voyage  to  settle  in  an  un-
cultivated region  destitute  of  every  accommodation  to
which  he  had  been  accustomed,  and  where  he  foresaw
that  toil,  and  trouble,  and  danger  awaited  him.
Summer"  But  as  hc  could  uot  immediately  leave  England,
toPPom!""  the  council  dispatched  Sir  Thomas  Gates  and
mand  till  gj^,  Gcoroe  Summcrs,  the  former  of  whom  had

tlie  arrival  ~  '  i  i i i

of  Lord  been  appointed  lieutenant-general  and  the  latter
e  aware.  ^^^^^^|^  ^'^j-^  j-^-^^g  gj^ipg  ^nd  fivc  liundrcd  plan-
ters. They  carried  with  them  commissions,  by  which
they  were  empowered  to  supersede  the  jurisdiction  of
the  former  council,  to  proclaim  Lord  Delaware  gover-
nor, and,  until  he  should  arrive,  to  take  the  administra-
tion of  affairs  into  their  own  hands. A  violent  hurri-

"  Stith,  Append.  8.

200  AMERICA,

cane  separated  the  vessel  in  which  Gates  and  Summers
had  embarked  from  the  rest  of  the  fleet,  and  stranded  it
Their  ship  ^^  ^hc  coast  of  Bermudas.  The  other  ships  ar-

tTJ'coas'^tTf  ^^"^^^  ^^^^^y  ^^  James-Town.  But  the  fate  of
Bermudas, their  commandcrs  was  unknown. Their  com-

Aug.  11.  . . f,  1 11  •  1  J

mission  tor  new  modelhng  the  government,  ana
all  other  public  papers,  were  supposed  to  be  lost,  toge-
ther with  them.  The  present  form  of  government,  how-
ever, was  held  to  be  abolished.  No  legal  warrant  could
be  produced  for  establishing  any  other.  Smith  was  not
in  a  condition  at  this  juncture  to  assert  his  own  rights,
or  to  act  with  his  wonted  vigour.  By  an  accidental  ex-
plosion of  gunpowder,  he  had  been  so  miserably  scorch-
ed and  mangled,  that  he  was  incapable  of  moving,  and
under  the  necessity  of  committing  himself  to  the  guid-
ance of  his  friends,  who  carried  him  aboard  one  of  the
ships  returning  to  England,  in  hopes  that  he  might  re-
cover by  more  skilful  treatment  than  he  could  meet
with  in  Virginia."

J,  After  his  departure, every  thing  tended  fast

ill  the  to  the  wildest  anarchy.  Faction  and  discontent
had  often  risen  so  high  among  the  old  settlers,
that  they  could  hardly  be  kept  within  bounds.  The
spirit  of  the  new  comers  was  too  ungovernable  to  bear
any  restraint.  Several  among  them  of  better  rank  were
such  dissipated  hopeless  young  men,  as  their  friends
were  glad  to  send  out  in  quest  of  whatever  fortune
might  betide  them  in  a  foreign  land.  Of  the  lower  order
many  were  so  profligate  or  desperate,  that  their  country
was  happy  to  throw  them  out  as  nuisances  in  society.
Such  persons  were  little  capable  of  the  regular  subor-
dination, the  strict  economy,  and  persevering  industry,
which  their  situation  required.  The  Indians  observing
their  misconduct,  and  that  every  precaution  for  suste-
nance or  safety  was  neglected,  not  only  withheld  the
supplies  of  provisions  which  they  were  accustomed  to

"  Fuicha?,  iv.  173-1,  &c. Smith's  Travels,  p.  89. Stitl;,  p.  lOJ,  .Jcc.

BOOK IX.  i>01

furnish,  but  harassed  them  with  continual  hos-

The  colo-  '  T ■ 1  n

ny  reduced  tilitics.  All  their  subsistencc  was  derived  from
y  amine.  ^^^  gtorcs  which  they  had  brought  from  Eng-
land ;  these  were  soon  consumed ;  then  the  domestic
animals  sent  out  to  breed  in  the  country  were  devoured  ;
and  by  this  inconsiderate  waste,  they  were  reduced  to
such  extremity  of  famine,  as  not  only  to  eat  the  most
nauseous  and  unwholesome  roots  and  berries,  but  to
feed  on  the  bodies  of  the  Indians  whom  they  slew,  and
even  on  those  of  their  companions  who  sunk  under  the
oppression  of  such  complicated  distress.  In  less  than
six  months,  of  five  hundred  persons  whom  Smith  left
in  Virginia,  only  sixty  remained ;  and  these  so  feeble
and  dejected,  that  they  could  not  have  survived  for  ten
days,  if  succour  had  not  arrived  from  a  quarter  whence
they  did  not  expect  it.P

Gates  and  Whcu  Gatcs  and  Summers  were  thrown
arTve  from  ashore  ou  Bcrmudas,  fortunately  not  a  single
Bermudas,  persou  OU  board  their  ship  perished.  A  con-
siderable part  of  their  provisions  and  stores,  too,  was
saved,  and  in  that  delightful  spot.  Nature,  with  spon-
taneous bounty,  presented  to  them  such  a  variety  of  her
productions,  that  a  hundred  and  fifty  people  subsisted
in  affluence  for  ten  months  on  an  uninhabited  island.
Impatient,  however,  to  escape  from  a  place  where  they
were  cut  off  from  all  intercourse  with  mankind,  they  set
about  buildino:  two  barks  with  such  tools  and  materials
as  they  had,  and  by  amazing  efibrts  of  perseverance  and
ingenuity  they  finished  them.  In  these  they  embarked,
and  steered  directly  towards  Virginia,  in  hopes  of  find-
ing an  ample  consolation  for  all  their  toils  and  dangers
in  the  embraces  of  their  companions,  and  amidst  the
comforts  of  a  flourishing  colony.  After  a  more  pros-
perous navigation  than  they  could  have  expected  in
their  ill-constructed  vessels,  they  landed  at
^^  "'" James-Town. But  instead  of  that  joyful  inter-

P  Stitli,  p.  116. Purclias,  iv.  1748.

202  AMERICA.

view  for  which  they  fondly  looked,  a  spectacle  pre-
Find  the  scntcd  itsclf  whicli  struck  them  with  horror.
the°utmo^st  They  beheld  the  miserable  remainder  of  their
distress,  countrymcn  emaciated  with  famine  and  sick-
ness, sunk  in  despair,  and  in  their  figure  and  looks  ra-
ther resembling  spectres  than  human  beings.  As  Gates
and  Summers,  in  full  confidence  of  finding  plenty  of
provisions  in  Virginia,  had  brought  with  them  no
larger  stock  than  was  deemed  necessary  for  their  own
support  during  the  voyage,  their  inability  to  afford  re-
lief to  their  countrymen  added  to  the  anguish  with  which
they  viewed  this  unexpected  scene  of  distress.  No-
thing now  remained  but  instantly  to  abandon  a  country,
where  it  was  impossible  to  subsist  any  longer ;  and
though  all  that  could  be  found  in  the  stores  of  the  co-
lony, when  added  to  what  remained  of  the  stock  brought
from  Bermudas,  did  not  amount  to  more  than  was  suf-
ficient to  support  them  for  sixteen  days,  at  the  most
scanty  allowance,  they  set  sail,  in  hopes  of  being  able
to  reach  Newfoundland,  where  they  expected  to  be  re-
lieved by  their  countrymen  employed  at  that  season  in
the  fishery  there.''

Are  about  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^  *^^  "^^^^  ^^  Hcaveu  that  all  the
to  ^turn  labour  of  the  English,  in  planting  this  colony,  as
land, when  well  as  all  their  hopes  of  benefit  from  its  future
laware  ar-  prosperity,  sliould  be  for  ever  lost.  Before  Gates,
"'^^**  and  the  melancholy  companions  of  his  voyage,
had  reached  the  mouth  of  James- River,  they  were  met
by  Lord  Delaware,  with  three  ships,  that  brought  a
large  recruit  of  provisions,  a  considerable  number  of
new  settlers,  and  every  thing  requisite  for  defence  or
cultivation.  By  persuasion  and  authority  he  prevailed
on  them  to  return  to  James-Town,  where  they  found
their  fort,  their  magazines,  and  houses  entire,  which
Sir  Thomas  Gates,  by  some  happy  chance,  had  pre-

1  A  minute  and  curious  account  of  tlie  shipwreck  of  Gates  and  Summers,  and  of
their  adventures  in  Bermudas,  was  composed  by  Strachy,  a  gentleman  who  accom-
panied them,  and  was  published  by  Purchas,  iv.  1734.

BOOK  IX.  203

served  from  being  set  on  fire  at  the  time  of  their  de-
parture. A  society  so  feeble  and disordered  in  its
frame,  required  a  tender  and  a  skilful  hand  to  cherish
Wise  ad-  ^^'  ^"^  rcstorc  its  vigour. This  it  found  in  Lord
rainistra- Delaware  ;  he  searched  into  the  causes  of  their
Lord  De-  misfortuncs,  as  far  as  he  could  discover  them,
^'^^^^' amidst  the  violence  of  their  mutual  accusations ;
but  instead  of  exerting  his  power  in  punishing  crimes
that  were  past,  he  employed  his  prudence  in  healing
their  dissensions,  and  in  guarding  against  a  repetition
of  the  same  fatal  errors. By  unwearied  assiduities,  by
the  respect  due  to  an  amiable  and  beneficent  character,
by  knowing  how  to  mingle  severity  with  indulgence,
and  when  to  assume  the  dignity  of  his  office,  as  well
as  when  to  display  the  gentleness  natural  to  his  own
temper,  he gradually  reconciled men corrupted  by
anarchy  to  subordination  and  discipline,  he  turned  tlie
attention of  the  idle  and  profligate  to  industry,  and
taught  the  Indians  again  to  reverence  and  dread  the
^gj^ English  name. Under  such  an  administration,
March 28.  ^he  colouv  bcofan  once  more  to  assume  a  pro-

His  health . .  J  to  ^

obliges  mismg  appearance ;  when,  unhappily  tor  it,  a
turn  to '^'^  complication  of  diseases  brought  on  by  the  cli-
Engiand.  ^a^ite  obliged  Lord  Delaware  to  quit  the  coun-
try ;^  the  government  of  which  he  committed  to  Mr.
Percy.

May  10.  He  was  soon  superseded  by  the  arrival  of  Sir
mls^Dai  'T^^"^^^  Dale ;  in  whom  the  company  had
appointed  vcstcd  morc  absolutc  authority  than  in  any  of
governor,  j^.^  prcdcccssors,  cmpow^riug  him  to  rule  by
lawVsta-  martial  law ;  a  short  code  of  which,  founded
Wished.  Qjj  ^jjg  practice  of  the  armies  in  the  Low  Coun-
tries, the  most  rigid  military  school  at  that  time  in
Europe,  they  sent  out  with  him.  This  system  of  go-
vernment is  so  violent  and  arbitrary,  that  even  the
Spaniards  themselves  had  not  ventured  to  introduce  it

r  Stith,  p.  117. Purchas,  iv.  1764.

204  AMERICA.

into  their  settlements ;  for  among  them,  as  soon  as  a
plantation  began  and  the  arts  of  peace  succeeded  to
the  operations  of  war,  the  jurisdiction  of  the  civil  ma-
gistrate was  uniforml}^  established.  But  however  un-
constitutional or  oppressive  this  may  appear,  it  was
adopted  by  the  advice  of  Sir  Francis  Bacon,  the  most
enlightened  philosopher,  and  one  of  the  most  eminent
lawyers  of  the  age.'  The  company,  well  acquainted
with  the  inefficacy  of  every  method  which  they  had
hitherto  employed  for  restraining  the  unruly  mutinous
spirits  which  they  had  to  govern,  eagerly  adopted  a
plan  that  had  the  sanction  of  such  high  authority  to
recommend  it.  Happily  for  the  colony,  Sir  Thomas
Dale,  who  was  intrusted  with  this  dangerous  power,
exercised  it  with  prudence  and  moderation.  By  the
vigour  which  the  summary  mode  of  military  punish-
ment gave  to  his  administration,  he  introduced  into  the
colony  more  perfect  order  than  had  ever  been  esta-
blished there  ;  and  at  the  same  time  he  tempered  his
vigour  with  so  much  discretion,  that  no  alarm  seems  to
have  been  given  by  this  formidable  innovation.*
1612. The  regular  form  which  the  colony  now  be-

March  12.  "  .  -^

'New  char-  gau  to  assumc  iuduccd  the  king  to  issue  a  new
toMiTcV  charter  for  the  encouragement  of  the  adven-
priviJeger  tui^^rs,  by  which  he  not  only  confirmed  all  their
conferred,  former  privileges,  and  prolonged  the  term  of
exemption  from  payment  of  duties  on  the  commodities
exported  by  them,  but  granted  them  more  extensive
property,  as  well  as  more  ample  jurisdiction.  All  the
islands  lying  within  three  leagues  of  the  coast  were
annexed  to  the  province  of  Virginia.  In  consequence
of  this,  the  company  took  possession  of  Bermudas,  and
the  other  small  islands  discovered  by  Gates  and  Sum-
mers, and  at  the  same  time  prepared  to  send  out  a  con-
siderable reinforcement  to  the  colony  at  James-Town.
The  expense  of  those  extraordinary  efforts  was  defrayed

*  Bacon,  Essay  on  Plantations,  p.  3.  '  Stith,  p.  112.

BOOK IX.  205

by  the  profits  of  a  lottery,  which  amounted  nearly  to
thirty  thousand  pounds.  This  expedient  they  were
authorized  to  employ  by  their  new  charter ;"  and  it  is
remarkable,  as  the  first  instance,  in  the  English  history,
of  any  public  countenance  given  to  this  pernicious  se-
ducing mode  of  levying  money.  But  the  House  of
Commons,  which  towards  the  close  of  this  reio-n  beo-an
to  observe  every  measure  of  government  with  jealous
attention,  having  remonstrated  against  the  institution,
as  unconstitutional  and  impolitic,  James  recalled  the
license  under  the  sanction  of  which  it  had  been  esta-
blished.^'

CuitiTa-  By  the  severe  discipline  of  martial  law,  the
tionof  the  activity  of  the  colonists  was  forced  into  a  pro-

lands  pro-  J  r

nioted.  per  direction,  and  exerted  itself  in  useful  in-
dustry. This,  aided  by  a  fertile  soil  and  favourable
climate,  soon  enabled  them  to  raise  such  a  large  stock
of  provisions,  that  they  were  no  longer  obliged  to  trust
for  subsistence  to  the  precarious  supplies  which  they
obtained  or  extorted  from  the  Indians.  In  proportion
as  the  English  became  more  independent,  the  natives
courted  their  friendship  upon  more  equal  terms.  The
-P^g^t^  happy  eft'ects  of  this  were  quickly  felt.  Sir  Tho-
with  the jYias  Dale  concluded  a  treaty  with  one  of  their

natives.  , .  .

most  powerful  and  warlike  tribes,  situated  on
the  River  Chickahominy,  in  which  they  consented  to
acknowledge  themselves  subjects  to  the  king  of  Great
Britain,  to  assume  henceforth  the  name  of  Eno-Hsh-
men,  to  send  a  body  of  their  warriors  to  the  assistance
of  the  English,  as  often  as  they  took  the  field,  against
any  enemy,  and  to  deposit  annually  a  stipulated  quan-
tity of  Indian  corn  in  the  storehouses  of  the  colony."'
An  event,  which  the  early  historians  of  Virginia  relate
with  peculiar  satisfaction,  prepared  the  way  for  this
union. Pocahuntas,  the  favourite  daughter  of  the  great

"  Stith,  p.  191 . Appendii,  23,  &c.  *'  Chalmer's  Annals,  i.  32.

*'  Haraer  Solida  Narratio,  ap.  de  Bry.  Pars  x.  p.  33. Stith,  p.  130.

20(J  AMERICA.

chief  Powhatan,  to  whose  intercession  Captain  Smith
was  indebted  for  his  life,  persevered  in  her  partial  at-
tachment to  the  English ;  and  as  she  frequently  visited
their  settlements,  where  she  was  always  received  with
respectful  hospitality,  her  admiration  of  their  arts  and
manners  continued  to  increase.  Durino^  this  inter-
course,  her  beauty,  which  is  represented  as  far  supe-
rior to  that  of  her  countrywomen,  made  such  impres-
Roife  mar-  ^^^^  ^^  ^^^^  heart  of  Mr.  Rolfe,  a  young  man  of
Ties  the rank  in  the  colony,  that  he  warmly  solicited  her

daughter  .

of  an  In-  to  acccpt  of  him  as  a  husband.  Where  man-
'  ners  are  simple,  courtship  is  not  tedious.  Nei-
ther artifice  prevents,  nor  ceremony  forbids  the  heart
from  declaring  its  sentiments.  Pocahuntas  readily  gave
her  consent ;  Dale  encouraged  the  alliance,  and  Pow-
hatan did  not  disapprove  it.  The  marriage  was  cele-
brated with  extraordinary  pomp ;  and  from  that  pe-
riod a  friendly  correspondence  subsisted  between  the
colony  and  all  the  tribes  subject  to  Powhatan,  or  that
stood  in  awe  of  his  power.  Rolfe  and  his  princess
(for  by  that  name  the  writers  of  the  last  age  always
distinguish  her)  set  out  for  England,  where  she  was  re-
ceived by  James  and  his  queen  with  the  respect  suited
to  her  birth.  Being  carefully  instructed  in  the  princi-
ples of  the  Christian  faith,  she  was  publicly  baptized,
but  died  a  few  years  after,  on  her  return  to  America,
leaving  one  son  from  whom  are  sprung  some  of  the
most  respectable  families  in  Virginia,  who  boast  of  their
descent  from  the  race  of  the  ancient  rulers  of  their
country."  But  notwithstanding  the  visible  good  effects
of  that  alliance,  none  of  Rolfe's  countrymen  seem  to
have  imitated  the  example  which  he  set  them,  of  inter-
marrying with  the  natives.  Of  all  the  Europeans  who
have  settled  in  America,  the  English  have  availed  them-
selves least  of  this  obvious  method  of  conciliating  the

»  Hanier  Solida  Narralio,  ap  de  Bry.  Pars  x.  p.  23. Stith,  p.  129.  146. Smith's
Travels,  p.  lis.  121.

BOOK.  IX.  207

affection  of  its  original  inhabitants ;  and,  either  from
the  shyness  conspicuous  in  their  national  character,  or
from  the  want  of  that  pliant  facility  of  manners  which
accommodates  itself  to  every  situation,  they  have  been
more  averse  than  the  French  and  Portuguese,  or  even
the  Spaniards,  from  incorporating  with  the  native  Ame-
ricans. The  Indians,  courting  such  a  union,  offered
their  daughters  in  marriage  to  their  new  guests :  and
when  they  did  not  accept  of  the  proffered  alliance,  they
naturally  imputed  it  to  pride,  and  to  their  contempt  of
them  as  an  inferior  order  of  beings/
^,?"'j  i"  During  the  interval  of  tranquillity,  pro-
first  be-  cured  by  the  alliance  with  Powhatan,  an  im-
pertj!  ^  portant  change  was  made  in  the  state  of  the
colony.  Hitherto  no  right  of  private  property  in  land
had  been  established.  The  fields  that  were  cleared
had  been  cultivated  by  the  joint  labour  of  the  colonists  ;
their  product  was  carried  to  the  common  storehouses,
and  distributed  weekly  to  every  family,  according  to  its
number  and  exigencies.  A  society,  destitute  of  the
first  advantage  resulting  from  social  union,  was  not
formed  to  prosper.  Industry,  when  not  excited  by  the
idea  of  property  in  what  was  acquired  by  its  own  efforts,
made  no  vigorous  exertion.  The  head  had  no  induce-
mentto  contrive,  nor  the  hand  to  labour.  The  idle
and  improvident  trusted  entirely  to  what  was  issued
from  the  common  store ;  the  assiduity,  even  of  the
sober  and  attentive  relaxed,  when  they  perceived  that
others  were  to  reap  the  fruit  of  their  toil ;  and  it  was
computed,  that  the  united  industry  of  the  colony  did
not  accomplish  as  much  work  in  a  week,  as  might  have
been  performed  in  a  day,  if  each  individual  had  la-
boured on  his  own  account.  In  order  to  remedy  this.
Sir  Thomas  Dale  divided  a  considerable  portion  of  the
land  into  small  lots,  and  granted  one  of  these  to  each
individual  in  full  property. From  the  moment  that  in-

*  Beverley's  Hist,  of  Virginia,  p.  25.

208  AMERICA.

dustry  had  the  certain  prospect  of  a  recompense,  it  ad-
vanced with  rapid  progress.  The  articles  of  primary-
necessity  were  cultivated  with  so  much  attention,  as  se-
cured the  means  of  subsistence ;  and  such  schemes  of
improvement  were  formed  as  prepared  the  way  for  the
introduction  of  opulence  into  the  colony.^
Culture  of The  iudustrious  spirit  which  be^an  to  rise

tobacco  in-  ,  ^  t  i

troduced.  amoug  the  planters,  was  soon  directed  towards
a  new  object ;  and  they  applied  to  it  for  some  time  with
such  inconsiderate  ardour,  as  was  productive  of  fatal
consequences.  The  culture  of  tobacco,  which  has  since
become  the  staple  of  Vireinia,  and  the  source  of  its

1616.  .  ^  nil  1 . .  .  ,

prosperity,  was  introduced  about  this  time  into  the
colonv.  As  the  taste  for  that  weed  continued  to  increase
in  England,  notwithstanding  the  zealous  declamations  of
James  against  it,  the  tobacco  imported  from  Virginia
came  to  a  ready  market ;  and  though  it  was  so  much
inferior  in  quality,  or  in  estimation  to  that  raised  by  the
Spaniards  in  the  West  Indian  islands,  that  a  pound  of
the  latter  sold  for  eighteen  shillings,  and  of  the  former
for  no  more  than  three  shillings,  it  yielded  a  considerable
Bad  conse-  profit.  Allurcd  by  the  prospect  of  such  a  cer-
ar'ising^*  taiu  and  quick  return,  every  other  species  of
from  it.  industry  was  neglected.  The  land  which  ought
to  have  been  reserved  for  raising  provisions,  and  even
the  streets  of  James-Town,  were  planted  with  tobacco.
Various  regulations  were  framed  to  restrain  this  ill-
directed  activity.  But,  from  eagerness  for  present  gain,
the  planters  disregarded  every  admonition.  The  means
of  subsistence  became  so  scanty,  as  forced  them  to  renew
their  demands  upon  the  Indians,  who  seeing  no  end  of
those  exactions,  their  antipathy  to  the  English  name  re-
vived with  additional  rancour,  and  they  began  to  form
.schemes  of  vengeance,  with  a  secrecy  and  silence  pecu-
liar to  Americans.*

»  Smith's  Travels,  p.  114. Stith,  p.  131 .
a  Stith,  p.  140.  147.164.  168. Smith,  p.  130. Piirchas,  iv.  1787.

BOOK  IX.  209

Meanwhile  the  colony,  notwithstanding  this  error  in
its  operations,  and  the  cloud  that  was  gathering  over  its
head,  continued  to  wear  an  aspect  of  prosperity.  Its
number  increased  by  successive  migrations ;  the  quan-
tity of  tobacco  exported,  became  every  year  more  consi-
derable, and  several  of  the  planters  were  not  only  in  an
easy  situation,  but  advancing  fast  to  opulence  ;''  and  by
two  events,  which  happened  nearly  at  the  same  time,
both  population  and  industry  were  greatly  promoted.
As  few  women  had  hitherto  ventured  to  encounter  the
hardships  which  were  unavoidable  in  an  unknown  and
uncultivated  country,  most  of  the  colonists,  constrained
to  live  single,  considered  themselves  as  no  more  than
sojourners  in  a  land  to  which  they  were  not  attached  by
the  tender  ties  of  a  family  and  children.  In  order  to
induce  them  to  settle  there,  the  company  took  advantage
Young  of  the  apparent  tranquillity  in  the  country,  to
emigrate  scud  a  Considerable  number  of  young  women,  of
knd  fo"^'  humble  birth  indeed,  but  of  unexceptionable  cha-
Virginia.  ractcr,  and  encouraged  the  planters  by  premiums
and  immunities,  to  marry  them.*"  These  new  com-
panions were  received  with  such  fondness,  and  many  of
them  so  comfortably  established,  as  invited  others  to  fol-
low their  example ;  and  by  degrees,  thoughtless  adven-
turers, assuming  the  sentiments  of  virtuous  citizens,  and
of  provident  fathers  of  families,  became  solicitous  about
the  prosperity  of  a  country,  which  they  now  considered
as  their  own.  As  the  colonists  began  to  form  more  ex-
tensive plans  of  industry,  they  were  unexpectedly  fur-
-.  nished  with  means  of  executino;  them  with  e^reater

Wegroes  ^  "

first  in-  facility.  A  Dutch  ship  from  the  coast  of  Gui-
nea, having  sailed  up  James  River,  sold  a  part
of  her  cargo  of  negroes  to  the  planters  f  and  as  that
hardy  race  was  found  more  capable  of  enduring  fatigue,
under  a  sultry  climate  than  Europeans,  their  number  has
been  increased  by  continual  importation ;  their  aid  seems

»>  Smith,  p.  139.  ■=  Stith,  p.  166.  19r.  •!  Beverley,  p.  37.

VOL. VIII.  P

210  AMERICA.

now  to  be  essential  to  the  existence  of  the  colony,  and
the  greater  part  of  field-labour  in  Virginia  is  performed
by  servile  hands.

But  as  the  condition  of  the  colony  improved,  the  spirit
of  its  members  became  more  independent.  To  English-
men the  summary  and  severe  decisions  of  martial  law,
however  tempered  by  the  mildness  of  their  governors,
appeared  intolerably  oppressive  ;  and  they  longed  to  re-
cover the  privileges  to  which  they  had  been  accustomed
under  the  liberal  form  of  government  in  their  native
1619.  country.  In  compliance  with  this  spirit.  Sir
y"J*^t".  George  Yeardley,  in  the  year  1619,  called  the
rai  assem-  flpgt  general  assembly  that  was  ever  held  in  Vir-
presenta-  giuia  ;  and  the  numbers  of  the  people  were  now
so  increased,  and  their  settlements  so  dispersed,
that  eleven  corporations  appeared  by  their  represen-
tatives in  this  convention,  where  they  were  permitted
to  assume  legislative  power,  and  to  exercise  the  noblest
function  of  free  men.  The  laws  enacted  in  it  seem
neither  to  have  been  many,  nor  of  great  importance ;
but  the  meeting  was  highly  acceptable  to  the  people,
as  they  now  beheld  among  themselves  an  image  of  the
English  constitution,  which  they  reverenced  as  the  most
perfect  model  of  free  government.  In  order  to
New  con-  render  this  resemblance  more  complete,  and  the
gilen°S  rights  of  the  planters  more  certain,  the  company
the  colony,  jggugjj  ^i  charter  or  ordinance,  which  gave  a
legal  and  permanent  form  to  the  government  of  the
colony.  The  supreme  legislative  authority  in  Virginia,
in  imitation  of  that  in  Great  Britain,  was  divided,  and
lodged  partly  in  the  governor,  who  held  the  place  of
the  sovereign ;  partly  in  a  council  of  state  named  by
the  company,  which  possessed  some  of  the  distinctions,
and  exercised  some  of  the  functions  belonging  to  the
peerage ;  partly  in  a  general  council  or  assembly,  com-
posed of  the  representatives  of  the  people,  in  which
were  vested  powers  and  privileges  similar  to  those  of

BOOK  IX.  211

the  house  of  commons.  In  both  these  councils,  all
questions  were  to  be  determined  by  the  majority  of
voices,  and  a  negative  was  reserved  to  the  governor  ;
but  no  law  or  ordinance,  though  approved  of  by  all  the
three  members  of  the  legislature,  was  to  be  of  force,
until  it  was  ratified  in  England  by  a  general  court  of
the  company,  and  returned  under  its  seal/  Thus  the
constitution  of  the  colony  was  fixed,  and  the  members
of  it  are  henceforth  to  he  considered,  not  merely  as
servants  of  a  commercial  company,  dependent  on  the
will  and  orders  of  their  superior,  but  as  free  men  and
citizens.

Industry  The  natural  effect  of  that  happy  change  in
increased,  ^jjgj,,  couditiou,  was  an  iucrcasc  of  their  in-
dustry. The  product  of  tobacco  in  Virginia  was  now
equal,  not  only  to  the  consumption  of  it  in  Great
Britain,^  but  could  furnish  some  quantity  for  a  foreign
Direct  market.  The  company  opened  a  trade  for  it
thecoio-  with  Holland,  and  established  warehouses  in
HoiTand;  Middlcburgh  and  Flushing.  James,  and  his
offence  to  pi^'ivy- council,  alarmed  at  seeing  the  commerce
James.  of  a  Commodity,  for  which  the  demand  was
daily  increasing,  turned  into  a  channel,  that  tended  to
the  diminution  of  the  revenue,  by  depriving  it  of  a
considerable  duty  imposed  on  the  importation  of  to-
bacco, interposed  with  vigour  to  check  this  innovation.
Some  expedient  was  found,  by  which  the  matter  was
adjusted  for  the  present ;  but  it  is  remarkable  as  the
first  instance  of  a  difference  in  sentiment  between  the
parent-state  and  the  colony,  concerning  their  respective

e  Stith,  Appendix,  p.  32,  &c.
'  It  is  a  matter  of  some  curiosity  to  trace  the  progress  of  the  consumption  of  this
unnecessary  commodity.  The  use  of  tobacco  seems  to  have  been  first  introduced
into  England  about  the  year  1586.  Possibly  a  few  seafaring  persons  may  have
acquired  a  relish  for  it  by  their  intercourse  with  the  Spaniards  previous  to  that  period  ;
but  the  use  of  it  cannot  be  denominated  a  national  habit  sooner  than  the  time  I  have
mentioned.  Upon  an  average  of  the  seven  years  immediately  preceding  the  year
1622,  the  whole  import  of  tobacco  into  England  amounted  to  a  hundred  and  forty-
two  thousand  and  eighty-five  pounds  weight.  Stith,  p.  246.  From  this  it  appears,
that  the  taste  had  spread  with  a  rapidity  which  is  remarkable.  But  how  inconsiderable
is  that  quantity  to  what  is  now  consumed  in  Great  Britain.

p  2

212  AMERICA.

rights.  The  former  concluded,  that  the  trade  of  the
colony  should  be  confined  to  England,  and  all  its  pro-
ductions be  landed  there.  The  latter  claimed,  not  only
the  general  privilege  of  Englishmen  to  carry  their
commodities  to  the  best  market,  but  pleaded  the  par-
ticular concessions  in  their  charter,  by  which  an  unli-
mited freedom  of  commerce  seemed  to  be  granted
to  them.^  The  time  for  a  more  full  discussion  of  this
important  question,  was  not  yet  arrived.

But  while  the  colony  continued  to  increase  so
negiectsUie  fast,  that  Settlements  were  scattered,  not  only
neceSiy"'  ''^^^^'^S  ^^^  ^auks  of  James  and  York  rivers,  but
for  its  de- began  to  extend  to  the  Rapahannock,  and  even
against  the to  tlic  Potowmack,  tlic  Euglisli,  relying  on  their
own  numbers,  and  deceived  by  this  appearance
of  prosperity,  lived  in  full  security. They  neither  at-
tended to  the  movements  of  the  Indians,  nor  suspected
their  machinations,  and  though  surrounded  by  a  people
whom  they  might  have  known  from  experience  to  be
both  artful  and  vindictive,  the}?'  neglected  every  precau-
tion for  their  own  safety  that  was  requisite  in  such  a
situation. Like  the  peaceful  inhabitants  of  a society
completely  established,  they  were  no  longer  soldiers  but
citizens,  and  were  so  intent  on  what  was  subservient  to
the  comfort  or  embellishment  of  civil  life,  that  every
martial  exercise  began  to  be  laid  aside  as  unnecessary.
The  Indians,  whom  they  commonly  employed  as  hunters,
were  furnished  with  firearms,  and  taught  to  use  them
with  dexterity. They  were  permitted  to  frequent  the
habitations  of  the  English  at  all  hours,  and  received  as
innocent  visitants  whom  there  was  no  reason  to  dread.
This  inconsiderate  security  enabled  the  Indians  to  pre-
pare for  the  execution  of  that  plan  of  vengeance,  which
they  meditated  with  all  the  deliberate  forethought  which
is  agreeable  to  their  temper. Nor  did  they  want  a
leader  capable  of  conducting  their  schemes  with  address.

g  Stith,  p.  200,  &c.

BOOK IX.  213

General  ^^  ^^^^  death  of  Powliatan,  in  the  year  1G18,
massacre  of  Opechancanough  succeeded  him,  not  only  as
planned  by  wirowancc,  OF  chief  of  his  own  tribe,  but  in  that
extensive  influence  over  all  the  Indian  nations
of  Virginia,  which  induced  the  English  writers  to  dis-
tinguish him  by  the  name  of  emperor.  According  to
the  Indian  tradition,  he  was  not  a  native  of  Virginia,  but
came  from  a  distant  country  to  the  south-west,  possibly
from  some  province  of  the  Mexican  empire.**  But  as  he
was  conspicuous  for  all  the  qualities  of  highest  estimation
among  savages,  a  fearless  courage,  great  strength  and
agility  of  body,  and  crafty  policy,  he  quickly  rose  to
eminence  and  power.  Soon  after  his  elevation  to  the
supreme  command,  a  general  massacre  of  the  English
seems  to  have  been  resolved  upon;  and  during  four
years,  the  means  of  perpetrating  it  with  the  greatest
facility  and  success  were  concerted  with  amazing  secrecy.
All  the  tribes  contiguous  to  the  English  settlements  were
successively  gained,  except  those  on  the  eastern  shore,
from  whom,  on  account  of  their  peculiar  attachment  to
their  new  neighbours,  every  circumstance  that  might
discover  what  they  intended  was  carefully  concealed.
To  each  tribe  its  station  was  allotted,  and  the  part  it  was
to  act  prescribed. On  the  morning  of  the  day

March  22.  ^ .  i  .  .1  i

consecrated  to  vengeance,  each  was  at  the  place
of  rendezvous  appointed,  while  the  English  were  so  little
aware  of  the  impending  destruction,  that  they  received
with  unsuspicious  hospitality  several  persons  sent  by
Opechancanough,  under  pretext  of  delivering  presents  of
Executed  vcnison  and  fruits,  but  in  reality  to  observe  their
u?ertde°/  motions.  Finding  them  perfectly  secure,  at
raents.  mid-day,  the  moment  that  was  previously  fixed
for  this  deed  of  horror,  the  Indians  rushed  at  once  upon
them  in  all  their  different  settlements,  and  murdered  men,
women,  and  children,  with  undistinguishing  rage,  and
that  rancorous  cruelty  with  which  savages  treat  their

h  Beverley,  p.  51.

214  AMERICA.

enemies.  In  one  hour  nearly  a  fourth  part  of  the  whole
colony  was  cut  oif,  almost  without  knowing  by  whose
hands  they  fell.  The  slaughter  would  have  been  universal,
if  compassion,  or  a  sense  of  duty,  had  not  moved  a  con-
verted Indian,  to  whom  the  secret  was  communicated  the
night  before  the  massacre,  to  reveal  it  to  his  master  in
such  time  as  to  save  James-Town,  and  some  adjacent  set-
tlements ;  and  if  the  English  in  other  districts  had  not
run  to  their  arms  with  resolution  prompted  by  despair,
and  defended  themselves  so  bravely  as  to  repulse  their
assailants,  who,  in  the  execution  of  their  plan,  did  not
discover  courage  equal  to  the  sagacity  and  art  with  which
they  had  concerted  iV

But  though  the  blow  was  thus  prevented  from  descend-
ing with  its  full  effect,  it  proved  very  grievous  to  an  in-
fant colony.  In  some  settlements  not  a  single  English-
man escaped.  Many  persons  of  prime  note  in  the  colony,
and  among  these  several  members  of  the  council,  were
slain.  The  survivors,  overwhelmed  with  grief,  astonish-
ment, and  terror,  abandoned  all  their  remote  settlements,
and,  crowding  together  for  safety  to  James-Town,  did
not  occupy  a  territory  of  greater  extent  than  had  been
planted  soon  after  the  arrival  of  their  countrymen  in
Virginia.  Confined  within  those  narrow  boundaries,
they  were  less  intent  on  schemes  of  industry,  than  on
thoughts  of  revenge.  Every  man  took  arms.  A  bloody
^, , war  ao:ainst  the  Indians  commenced ;  and,  bent

Bloody  war  *  ..  .iii

with  the  In-  on  exterminating  the  whole  race,  neither  old
nor  young  were  spared.  The  conduct  of  the
Spaniards  in  the  southern  regions  of  America  was  openly
proposed  as  the  most  proper  model  to  imitate ;''  and  re-
gardless, like  them,  of  those  principles  of  faith,  honour,
and  humanity,  which  regulate  hostility  among  civilized
nations  and  set  bounds  to  its  rage,  the  English  deemed
every  thing  allowable  that  tended  to  accomplish  their
design. They  hunted  the  Indians  like  wild  beasts,  ra-

'  Stith,  p.  208,  &c. Purchas.  iv.  1788,  &c.  k  Stith,  p.  233.

BOOK IX.  215

ther  than  enemies  ;  and  as  the  pursuit  of  them  to  their
places  of  retreat  in  the  woods,  which  covered  their  country,
was  both  difficult  and  dangerous,  they  endeavoured  to
allure  them  from  their  inaccessible  fastnesses  by  offers
of  peace  and  promises  of  oblivion,  made  with  such  an
artful  appearance  of  sincerity  as  deceived  their  crafty
leader,  and  induced  them  to  return  to  their  former  settle-
ments, and  resume  their  usual  peaceful  occupations.  The
behaviour  of  the  two  people  seemed  now  to  be  perfectly
reversed.  The  Indians,  like  men  acquainted  with  the
principles  of  integrity  and  good  faith,  on  which  the  in-
tercourse between  nations  is  founded,  confided  in  the  re-
conciliation, and  lived  in  absolute  security  without  sus-
picion of  danger  ;  while  the  English,  with  perfidious
craft,  were  preparing  to  imitate  savages  in  their  revenge
and  cruelty.  On  the  approach  of  harvest,  when  they
knew  a  hostile  attack  would  be  most  formidable  and  fatal,
they  fell  suddenly  upon  all  the  Indian  plantations,  mur-
dered every  person  on  whom  they  could  lay  hold,  and
drove  the  rest  to  the  woods,  where  so  many  perished
with  hunger,  that  some  of  the  tribes  nearest  to  the  English
were  totally  extirpated.  This  atrocious  deed,  which  the
perpetrators  laboured  to  represent  as  a  necessary  act  of
retaliation,  was  followed  by  some  happy  effects.  It  de-
livered the  colony  so  entirely  from  any  dread  of  the  In-
dians, that  its  settlements  began  again  to  extend,  and  its
industry  to  revive.

Company  But  unfortunatcly  at  this  juncture  the  state  of
vickTbV^'"  the  company  in  England,  in  which  the  property
factions.  Qf  Virginia  and  the  government  of  the  colony
settled  there  were  vested,  prevented  it  from  seconding
the  efforts  of  the  planters,  by  such  a  reinforcement  of
men,  and  such  a  supply  of  necessaries,  as  were  requisite
to  replace  what  they  had  lost.  The  company  was  ori-
ginally composed  of  many  adventurers,  and  increased  so
fast  by  the  junction  of  new  members,  allured  by  the
prospect  of  gain,  or  the  desire  of  promoting  a  scheme  of

216  AMERICA.

public  utility,  that  its  general  courts  formed  a  numerous
assembly.'  The  operation  of  every  political  principle
and  passion,  that  spread  through  the  kingdom,  was  felt
in  those  popular  meetings,  and  influenced  their  decisions.
As  towards  the  close  of  James's  reign  more  just  and  en-
larged sentiments  with  respect  to  constitutional  liberty
were  diffused  among  the  people,  they  came  to  understand
their  rights  better  and  to  assert  them  with  greater  bold-
ness ;  a  distinction  formerly  little  known,  but  now  familiar
in  English  policy,  began  to  be  established  between  the
court  and  country  parties,  and  the  leaders  of  each  endea-
voured to  derive  power  and  consequence  from  every
quarter.  Both  exerted  themselves  with  emulation,  in
order  to  obtain  the  direction  of  a  body  so  numerous  and
respectable  as  the  company  of  Virginia  adventurers.  In
consequence  of  this,  business  had  been  conducted  in  every
general  court  for  some  years,  not  with  the  temperate  spirit
of  merchants,  deliberating  concerning  their  mutual  in-
terest, but  with  the  animosity  and  violence  natural  to
numerous  assemblies,  by  which  rival  factions  contend  for
superiority.™

James  insti-  ^^  *^^  ^^'^S  ^^^  ^^*  oftcu  asscmblc  the  great
tutes  an  in-  council  of  the  uatiou  in  parliament,  the  Ofeneral

quiry  into  ^  '  &

their  con-  courts  of  the  compauy  became  a  theatre,  on
which  popular  orators  displayed  their  talents ;
the  proclamations  of  the  crown,  and  acts  of  the  privy-
council,  with  respect  to  the  commerce  and  police  of  the
colony,  were  canvassed  there  with  freedom,  and  censured
with  severity,  ill-suited  to  the  lofty  ideas  which  James
entertained  of  his  own  wisdom,  and  the  extent  of  his  pre-
rogative. In  order  to  check  this  growing  spirit  of  dis-
cussion, the  ministers  employed  all  their  address  and  in-
fluence to  gain  as  many  members  of  the  company  as  might
give  them  the  direction  of  their  deliberations.  But  so
unsuccessful  were  they  in  this  attempt,  that  every  mea-
sure proposed  by  them  was  reprobated  by  a  vast  majority,

»  Stitb,  p.  272.  376.  "'  lb.  p.  229,  &c. Chalmers,  p.  39.

BOOK IX.  217

and  sometimes  without  any  reason,  but  because  they  were
the  proposers  of  it.  James,  little  favourable  to  the  power
of  any  popular  assembly,  and  weary  of  contending  with
one  over  which  he  had  laboured  in  vain  to  obtain  an  as-
cendant, began  to  entertain  thoughts  of  dissolving  the
company,  and  new-modelling  its  constitution.  Pretexts,
neither  unplausible,  nor  destitute  of  some  foundation,
seemed  to  justify  this  measure.  The  slow  progress  of  the
colony,  the  large  sums  of  money  expended,  and  great
number  of  men  who  had  perished  in  attempting  to  plant
it,  the  late  massacre  by  the  Indians,  and  every  disaster
that  had  befallen  the  English  from  their  first  migration  to
America,  were  imputed  solely  to  the  inability  of  a  numer-
ous company  to  conduct  an  enterprise  so  complex  and
arduous.  The  nation  felt  sensibly  its  disappointment  in
a  scheme  in  which  it  had  engaged  with  sanguine  ex-
pectations of  advantage,  and  wished  impatiently  for  such
an  impartial  scrutiny  into  former  proceedings  as  might
suggest  more  salutary  measures  in  the  future  administra-
tion of  the  colony.  The  present  state  of  its  affairs,  as  well
as  the  wishes  of  the  people,  seemed  to  call  for  the  inter-
position of  the  crown  ;  and  James,  eager  to  display  the
superiority  of  his  royal  wisdom,  in  correcting  those
errors  into  which  the  company  had  been  betrayed  by  in-
1623.  experience  in  the  arts  of  government,  boldly  un-
May  9.  dcrtook  the  work  of  reformation.  Without  re-
garding the  rights  conveyed  to  the  company  by  their
charter,  and  without  the  formality  of  any  judicial  pro-
ceeding for  annulling  it,  he,  by  virtue  of  his  prerogative,
issued  a  commission,  empowering  some  of  the  judges,
and  other  persons  of  note,  to  examine  into  all  the  trans-
actions of  the  company  from  its  first  establishment,  and
to  lay  the  result  of  their  inquiries,  together  with  their
opinion  concerning  the  most  effectual  means  of  rendering
the  colony  more  prosperous,"  before  the  privy-council.
At  the  same  time,  by  a  strain  of  authority  still  higher,  he

n  Stith,  p.  G88.

218  AMERICA.

ordered  all  tlie  records  and  papers  of  the  company  to  be
seized,  and  two  of  its  principal  officers  to  be  arrested.
Violent  and  arbitrary  as  these  acts  of  authority  may  now
appear,  the  commissioners  carried  on  their  inquiry  with-
out any  obstruction,  but  what  arose  from  some  feeble  and
ineffectual  remonstrances  of  the  company.  The  commis-
sioners, though  they  conducted  their  scrutiny  with  much
activity  and  vigour,"  did  not  communicate  any  of  their
proceedings  to  the  company ;  but  their  report,  with  re-
spect to  its  operations,  seems  to  have  been  very  unfavour-
Oct.  8.  able,  as  the  king,  in  consequence  of  it,  signified
re°Sed"t  ^°  *^^  company  his  intention  of  vesting  the
surrender  suprcmc  government  of  the  company  in  a  go-
vernor and  twelve  assistants,  to  be  resident  in
England,  and  the  executive  power  in  a  council  of  twelve,
which  should  reside  in  Virginia.  The  governor  and  as-
sistants were  to  be  originally  appointed  by  the  king.
Future  vacancies  were  to  be  supplied  by  the  governor
and  his  assistants,  but  their  nomination  was  not  to  take
effect  until  it  should  be  ratified  by  the  privy-council.
The  twelve  counsellors  in  Virginia  were  to  be  chosen  by
the  governor  and  assistants ;  and  this  choice  was  like-
wise subjected  to  the  review  of  the  privy-council.  With
an  intention  to  quiet  the  minds  of  the  colonists,  it  was
declared  that  private  property  should  be  deemed  sacred  •
and  for  the  more  effectual  security  of  it,  all  grants  of
lands  from  the  former  company  were  to  be  confirmed  by
the  new  one.  In  order  to  facilitate  the  execution  of  this
plan,  the  king  required  the  company  instantly  to  surren-
der its  charter  into  his  hands. p

Company  ^^^  ^^^^  Jamcs  and  his  ministers  encountered
refuses,  ^i  Spirit,  of  whicli  they  seem  not  to  have  been
aware.  They  found  the  members  of  the  company  un-
willing tamely  to  relinquish  rights  of  franchises,  con-
veyed to  them  with  such  legal  formality,  that  upon  faith
in  their  validity  they  had  expended  considerable  sums  -^

0  Smith's  Travels,  p.  165,  &c.  P  Stith,  p.  293,  &c.  i  Chalmers,  p.  61.

BOOK  IX.  219

and  still  more  averse  to  the  abolition  of  a  popular  form
of  government,  in  w^hicli  every  proprietor  had  a  voice,
in  order  to  subject  a  colony,  in  v^^hich  they  v^ere  deeply
interested,  to  the  dominion  of  a  small  junto  absolutely
dependent  on  the  crown. Neither  promises  nor

Oct.  20.

threats  could  induce  them  to  depart  from  these

sentiments  ;  and  in  a  general  court  the  king's  proposal

was  almost  unanimously  rejected,  and  a  resolution  taken

to  defend  to  the  utmost  their  chartered  rights,  if  these

should  be  called  in  question  in  any  court  of  justice.

James,  highly  offended  at  their  presumption  in  daring

to  oppose  his  will,  directed  o.  writ  oi quo  warranto
Nov.  10. /  ^.  .'  ^

to  be  issued  agamst  the  company,  that  the  vali-
dity of  its  charter  might  be  tried  in  the  court  of  king's
bench  ;  and  in  order  to  aggravate  the  charge,  by  col-
lecting additional  proofs  of  maleadministration,  he  ap-
pointed some  persons  in  whom  he  could  confide,  to  re-
pair to  Virginia  to  inspect  the  state  of  the  colony,  and
inquire  into  the  conduct  of  the  company,  and  of  its  offi-
cers there.
„.,.  The lawsuit  in  the king-'s  bench  did  not

Trial  mtbe ,  ,  .  ^ *  .  .

king's hang  long  m  suspense. It  terminated,  as  was

bench,  and  i • ^i ^ •  •  i • •  r n

dissolution  usual  lu  that  rcign,  m  a  decision  periectly  con-
°^*® sonant  to  the  wishes  of  the  monarch. The

company.

June, charter  was  forfeited,  the  company  was  dis-

1624.  .  . .

solved,  and  all  the  rights  and  privileges  con-
ferred upon  it  returned  to  the  king,  from  whom  they
flowed.'

Defects  in Somc  writcrs,  particularly  Stith,  the  most  in-
the  first tellip-ent  and  best  informed  historian  of  Virc-i-

constitu-  o  o

tion  of  the  nia,  mcntiou  the  dissolution  of  the  company  as
a  most  disastrous  event  to  the  colony.  Anima-
ted with  liberal  sentiments,  imbibed  in  an  age  when  the
principles  of  liberty  were  more  fully  unfolded  than
under  the  reign  of  James,  they  viewed  his  violent  and
arbitrary  proceedings  on  this  occasion  with  such  indig-

f  Ryraer,  toI.  xvii.  p.  618,  6cc. Chalmers,  p.  62.

220  AMERICA.

nation,  that  tlieir  abhorrence  of  the  means  which  he
employed  to  accomplish  his  design  seems  to  have  ren-
dered them  incapable  of  contemplating  its  effects  with
discernment  and  candour.  There  is  not  perhaps  any
mode  of  governing  an  infant  colony  less  friendly  to  its
liberty,  than  the  dominion  of  an  exclusive  corporation,
possessed  of  all  the  powers  which  James  had  conferred
upon  the  company  of  adventurers  in  Virginia.  During
several  years  the  colonists  can  hardly  be  considered  in
any  other  light  than  as  servants  to  the  company,  nou-
rished out  of  its  stores,  bound  implicitly  to  obey  its
orders,  and  subjected  to  the  most  rigorous  of  all  forms
of  government,  that  of  martial  law.  Even  after  the  native
spirit  of  Englishmen  began  to  rouse  under  oppression,
and  had  extorted  from  their  superiors  the  right  of  enact-
ing laws  for  the  government  of  that  community  of
which  they  were  members,  as  no  act,  though  approved
of  by  all  the  branches  of  the  provincial  legislature,  was
held  to  be  of  legal  force,  until  it  was  ratified  by  a  ge-
neral court  in  England,  the  company  still  retained  the
paramount  authority  in  its  own  hands.  Nor  was  the
power  of  the  company  more  favourable  to  the  prospe-
rity of  the  colony  than  to  its  freedom.  A  numerous
body  of  merchants,  as  long  as  its  operations  are  purely
commercial,  may  carry  them  on  with  discernment  and
success.  But  the  mercantile  spirit  seems  ill  adapted  to
conduct  an  enlarged  and  liberal  plan  of  civil  policy,  and
colonies  have  seldom  grown  up  to  maturity  and  vigour
under  its  narrow  and  interested  regulations.  To  the
unavoidable  defects  in  administration  which  this  occa-
sioned, were  added  errors  arising  from  inexperience.
The  English  merchants  of  that  age  had  not  those  exten-
sive views  which  a  general  commerce  opens  to  such  as
have  the  direction  of  it.  When  they  first  began  to  ven-
ture out  of  the  beaten  track,  they  groped  their  way  with
timidity  and  hesitation.  Unacquainted  with  the  climate
and  soil  of  America,  and  ignorant  of  the  productions

BOOK  IX.  221

best  suited  to  them,  they  seem  to  have  had  no  settled
plan of  improvement,  and  their schemes  were  con-
tinually varying. Their  system of  government  was
equally  fluctuating.  In  the  course  of  eighteen  years  ten
different  persons  presided  over  the  province  as  chief
governors. No  wonder  that,  under  such  administra-
tion, all  the  efforts  to  give  vigour  and  stability  to  the
colony  should  prove  abortive,  or  produce  only  slender
effects.  These  efforts,  however,  when  estimated  accord-
ing to  the  ideas  of  that  age,  either  with  respect  to  com-
merce or  to  policy,  were  very  considerable,  and  con-
ducted with  astonishing  perseverance.
Weakness Abovc  a  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  pounds
of  the  CO-  were  expended  in  this  first  attempt  to  plant  an
English  colony  in  America;*  and  more  than  nine
thousand  persons  were  sent  out  from  the  mother-country
to  people  this  new  settlement.  At  the  dissolution  of  the
company,  the  nation,  in  return  for  this  waste  of  treasure
and  of  people  did  not  receive  from  Virginia  an  annual
importation  of  commodities  exceeding  twenty  thousand
pounds  in  value  ;  and  the  colony  was  so  far  from  having
added  strength  to  the  state  by  an  increase  of  popula-
tion, that,  in  the  year  1624,  scarcely  two  thousand  per-
sons survived  :"  a  wretched  remnant  of  the  numerous
emigrants  who  had  flocked  thither  with  sanguine  ex-
pectations of  a  very  different  fate.
Tempo-  The  company,  like  all  unprosperous  socie-

rarycoun-  tics,  fell  uupiticd.  Tlic  violcut  hand  with  whicli

cil  ap-  ^  t

pointed  for  prero2:ative  had  invaded  its  rio^hts  was  forg-ot-

the  govern- ^  *,  „  '^  , ^,

ment  of  tcu,  and  ucw prospects  oi  success  opened,  under
irginia.  ^  form  of  govcrnmcnt  exempt  from  all  the  de-
fects to  which  past  disasters  were  imputed.  The  king
and  the  nation  concurred  with  equal  ardour  in  resolving
to  encourage  the  colony.  Soon  after  the  final  judgment
in  the  court  of  king's  bench  against  the  company,
James  appointed  a  council  of  twelve  persons  to  take

»  Smith's  Travels,  p.  42.  167.  «  Chalmers'  Annals,  p.  69.

222  AMERICA.

the  temporary  direction  of  affairs  in  Virginia,  that  he
mio;ht  have  leisure  to  frame  with  deliberate  con-

Aug.  26. .  ,°  .  - .  n .1

sideration  proper  regulations  tor  the  permanent
government  of  the  colony."'  Pleased  with  such  an  op-
portunity of  exercising  his  talents  as  a  legislator,  he
began  to  turn  his  attention  towards  the  subject;  but
death  prevented  him  from  completing  his  plan.
^.„.  Charles  I.  on  his  accession  to  the  throne,

162a.  '

March  27.  adoptcd  all  his  father's  maxims  with  respect  to

Accession  ^  .-,7....  *^

of  Charles  the  colouy  m  Virgmia.  He  declared  it  to  be
ms  a'rbi-  a  part  of  the  empire  annexed  to  the  crown,  and
trary  go- inimcdiatelv  subordinate  to  its  jurisdiction  :  he

vernnient  •/  J

of  the  CO-  conferred  the  title  of  Governor  on  Sir'George
Yardely,  and  appointed  him,  in  conjunction  with
a  council  of  twelve,  and  a  secretary,  to  exercise  supreme
authority  there,  and  enjoined  them  to  conform,  in  every
point,  to  such  instructions  as  from  time  to  time  they  might
receive  from  him."^  From  the  tenor  of  the  king's  commis-
sion, as  well  as  from  the  known  spirit  of  his  policy,  it
is  apparent,  that  he  intended  to  vest  every  power  of  go-
vernment, both  legislative  and  executive,  in  the  gover-
nor and  council,  without  recourse  to  the  representatives
of  the  people,  as  possessing  a  right  to  enact  laws  for
the  community,  or  to  impose  taxes  upon  it.  Yardely
and  his  council,  who  seem  to  have  been  fit  instruments
for  carrying  this  system  of  arbitrary  rule  into  execution,
did  not  fail  to  put  such  a  construction  on  the  words  of
their  commission  as  was  most  favourable  to  their  own
jurisdiction.  During  a  great  part  of  Charles's  reign,
Virginia  knew  no  other  law  than  the  will  of  the  sove-
reign.  Statutes  were  published,  and  taxes  imposed,
without  once  calling  the  representatives  of  the  people
to  authorize  them  by  their  sanction.  At  the  same  time
that  the  colonists  were  bereaved  of  political  rights,
which  they  deemed  essential  to  freemen  and  citizens,
their  private  property  was  violently  invaded. A  pro-

V  Rynier,  xvii.  618,  &c.  "  Ibid,  xviii.  72.  311.

BOOK  IX.  223

^  clamation  was  issued,  by  which,  under  pretexts

Grants  and  i r>  • i

monopoly  equallj  absurd  and  frivolous,  they  were  prohi-
o  acco.  i^-^g^  £j,^j^  selling  tobacco  to  any  person  but  cer-
tain commissioners  appointed  by  the  king  to  purchase
it  on  his  account;"  and  they  had  the  cruel  mortification
to  behold  the  sovereign,  who  should  have  afforded  them
protection,  engross  all  the  profits  of  their  industry,  by
seizing  the  only  valuable  commodity  which  they  had  to
vend,  and  retaining  the  monopoly  of  it  in  his  own  hands.
While  the  staple  of  the  colony  in  Virginia  sunk  in  value
under  the  oppression  and  restraints  of  a  monopoly,  pro-
perty in  land  was  rendered  insecure  by  various  grants
of  it,  which  Charles  inconsiderately  bestowed  upon  his
favourites.  These  were  not  only  of  such  exorbitant  ex-
tent as  to  be  unfavourable  to  the  progress  of  cultivation;
but  from  inattention,  or  imperfect  acquaintance  with  the
geography  of  the  country,  their  boundaries  were  so  in-
accurately defined,  that  large  tracts  already  ^occupied
and  planted  were  often  included  in  them.

The  murmurs  and  complaints  which  such  a  system  of
administration  excited,  were  augmented  by  the  rigour
with  which  Sir  John  Harvey,  who  succeeded  Yardely  in
the  government  of  the  colony,^  enforced  every  act  of
power.  Rapacious,  unfeeling,  and  haughty,  he
added  insolence  to  oppression,  and  neither  re-
garded the  sentiments,  nor  listened  to  the  remonstrances
of  the  people  under  his  command.  The  colonists,  far
from  the  seat  of  government,  and  overawed  by  authority
derived  from  a  royal  commission,  submitted  long  to  his
tyranny  and  exactions.  Their  patience  was  at  last  ex-
Coionists  hausted ;  and  in  a  transport  of  popular  rage  and
hLTvc"  indignation,  they  seized  their  governor,  and  sent
their  go-  him  a  prisoucr  to  England,  accompanied  by  two
and  send  of  their  uumbcr,  whom  they  deputed  to  prefer
soner^to  their  accusations  against  him  to  the  king.  But
England, ^^jg  attempt  to  redress  their  own  wrongs,  by  a

»  Rynier,  xviii.  19.  y  Ibid,  xviii.  980.

224  AMERICA.

proceeding  so  summary  and  violent  as  is  hardly  consist-
ent with  any  idea  of  regular  government,  and  can  be  jus-
tified only  in  cases  of  such  urgent  necessity  as  rarely  oc-
cur in  civil  society,  was  altogether  repugnant  to  every
notion  which  Charles  entertained  with  respect  to  the
obedience  due  by  subjects  to  their  sovereign.  To  him
the  conduct  of  the  colonists  appeared  to  be  not  only  an
usurpation  of  his  right  to  judge  and  to  punish  one  of  his
own  officers,  but  an  open  and  audacious  act  of  rebellion
against  his  authority.  Without  deigning  to  admit  their
deputies  into  his  presence,  or  to  hear  one  article  of  their
He  is  re-  chargc  against  Harvey,  the  king  instantly  sent
leased  by  i^jj^  back  to  liis  former  station,  with  an  ample

tlie  king,  1 f» 11 1  IT-  •  -n

and  rein-  rcucwal  of  all  the  powers  belongmg  to  it.  But
his  govern-  tliougli  Cliarlcs  dccmcd  this  vigorous  step  neces-
"'^"*'  sary  in  order  to  assert  his  own  authority,  and  to
testify  his  displeasure  with  those  who  had  presumed  to
offer  such  an  insult  to  it,  he  seems  to  have  been  so  sen-
sible of  the  grievances  under  which  the  colonists  groaned,
and  of  the  chief  source  from  which  they  flowed,  that  soon
^ggg  after  he  not  only  removed  a  governor  so  justly
Sir  w. odious  to  them,  but  named  as  a  successor  Sir

Bcrkclov

appointed  William  Berkeley,  a  person  far  superior  to  Har-
governor.  ^^^  -^  ^^^^  ^^^  abilities,  and  still  more  distin-
guished by  possessing  all  the  popular  virtues  to  which
the  other  was  a  stranger.^

His  mild  Under  his  government  the  colony  in  Virginia
admits-  remained,  with  some  short  intervals  of  interrup-
traUon.  ^[q^^  almost  forty  years;  and  to  his  mild  and
prudent  administration  its  increase  and  prosperity  is  in  a
great  measure  to  be  ascribed.  It  was  indebted,  however,
to  the  king  himself  for  such  a  reform  of  its  constitution
and  policy,  as  gave  a  different  aspect  to  the  colony,  and
animated  all  its  operations  with  new  spirit.  Though  the
tenor  of  Sir  William  Berkeley's  commission  was  the
same  with  that  of  his  predecessor,  he  received  instructions

»  Beverley's  Hist,  of  Virg.  p.  50. Chalmers'  Annals,  i.  118,  &c.

BOOK  IX.  225

"under  the  great  seal,  by  which  he  was  empowered  to  de-
clare, that  in  all  its  concerns,  civil  as  well  as  ecclesiasti-
cal, the  colony  was  to  be  governed  according  to  the  laws
New  pri-  of  England :  he  was  directed  to  issue  writs  for
^Mnted  b  electing  representatives  of  the  people,  who,  in
Charles,  conjunction  with  the  governor  and  council,  were
to  form  a  general  assembly,  and  to  possess  supreme  legis-
lative authority  in  the  community:  he  was  ordered  to
establish  courts  of  justice,  in  which  all  questions,  whether
civil  or  criminal,  were  to  be  decided  agreeably  to  the
forms  of  judicial  procedure  in  the  mother-country.  It
is  not  easy  to  discover  what  were  the  motives  which  in-
duced a  monarch,  tenacious  in  adhering  to  any  opinion
or  system  which  be  had  once  adopted,  jealous  to  excess
of  his  own  rights,  and  adverse  on  every  occasion  to  any
extension  of  the  privileges  claimed  by  his  people,  to  re-
linquish his  original  pUn  of  administration  in  the  colony,
and  to  grant  such  immunities  to  his  subjects  settled
there.  From  the  historians  of  Virginia,  no  less  super-
ficial than  ill-informed,  no  light  can  be  derived  with  re-
Motives  spect  to  this  point.  It  is  most  probable,  the  dread
pSr'to  of  the  spirit  then  rising  in  Great  Britain  extorted
have  in- ^-^.^j^^  Charlcs  couccssious  so  favourable  to  Vir-

nueiiccd

the  king,  ginia.  After  an  intermission  of  almost  twelve
years,  the  state  of  his  affairs  compelled  him  to  have  re-
course to  the  great  council  of  the  nation.  There  his  sub-
jects would  find  a  jurisdiction  independent  of  the  crown,
and  able  to  control  its  authority.  There  they  hoped  for
legal  redress  of  all  their  grievances.  As  the  colonists  in
Virginia  had  applied  for  relief  to  a  former  parliament,  it
might  be  expected  with  certainty  that  they  would  lay
their  case  before  the  first  meeting  of  an  assembly,  in
which  they  were  secure  of  a  favourable  audience.  Charles
knew,  that  if  the  spirit  of  his  administration  in  Virginia
were  to  be  tried  by  the  maxims  of  the  English  constitu-
tion, it  must  be  severely  reprehended.  He  v/as  aware
that  many  measures  of  greater  moment  in  his  government

VOL. VI IT.  Q

226  AMERICA.

would  be  brought  under  a  strict  review  in  parliament ;
and  unwilling  to  give  malecontents  the  advantage  of  add-
ing a  charge  of  oppression  in  the  remote  part  of  his  do-
minions to  a  catalog-ue  of  domestic  grievances,  he  art-
fully endeavoured  to  take  the  merit  of  having  granted
voluntarily  to  his  people  in  Virginia  such  privileges  as
he  foresaw  would  be  extorted  from  him.
Virginia  -^^^^  though  Charlcs  established  the  internal
flourishes o'overnment  of  Virginia  on  a  model  similar  to

under  the i-,-r-,Ti

new  go.  that  of  the  English  constitution,  and  conferred
on  his  subjects  there  all  the  rights  of  freemen  and
citizens,  he  was  extremely  solicitous  to  maintain  its  con-
nexion with  the  parent-state.  With  this  view  he  in-
structed Sir  William  Berkeley  strictly  to  prohibit  any
commerce  of  the  colony  with  foreign  nations ;  and  in
order  more  certainly  to  secure  exclusive  possession  of  all
the  advantages  arising  from  the  sale  of  its  productions,
he  was  required  to  take  a  bond  from  the  master  of  each
vessel  that  sailed  from  Virginia,  to  land  his  cargo  in
some  part  of  the  king's  dominions  in  Europe.''  Even
under  this  restraint,  such  is  the  kindly  influence  of  free
government  on  society,  the  colony  advanced  so  rapidly
in  industry  and  population,  that  at  the  beginning  of  the
civil  war  the  English  settled  in  it  exceeded  twenty
thousand.''

Remains  Gratitudc  towards  a  monarch,  from  whose
?he^r<>^a/°  hauds  they  had  received  immunities  which  they
cause.  i^g^j  JQjjg  -vvislied,  but  hardly  expected  to  enjoy,
the  influence  and  example  of  a  popular  governor,  pas-
sionately devoted  to  the  interests  of  his  master,  concur-
red in  preserving  in  violated  loyalty  among  the  colonists.
Even  after  monarchy  was  abolished,  after  one  king  had
been  beheaded,  and  another  driven  into  exile,  the  autho-
rity of  the  crown  continued  to  be  acknowledg'ed

1650.  *^

and  revered  in  Virginia. Irritated  at  this  open
defiance  of  its  power,  the  parliament  issued  an  ordi-

»  Chalmers'  Annals,  p.  219.  232.  ^  Ibid.  p.  125.

BOOK IX.  227

nance,  declaring,  that  as  the  settlement  in  Virginia  had
been  made  at  the  cost  and  by  the  people  of  England,  it
ought  to  be  subordinate  to  and  dependant  upon  the  Eng-
lish commonwealth,  and  subject  to  such  laws  and  regu-
lations as  are  or  shall  be  made  in  parliament ;  that,  in-
stead of  this  dutiful  submission,  the  colonists  had  dis-
claimed the  authority  of  the  state,  and  audaciously  re-
belled against  it;  that  on  this  account  they  were  de-
nounced notorious  traitors,  and  not  only  all  vessels  be-
longing to  natives  of  England,  but  those  of  foreign
nations,  were  prohibited  to  enter  their  ports,  or  to  carry
on  any  commerce  with  them.
„  ,. , It  was  not  the  mode  of  that  ao-e  to  wage  a

rarliaraent  o  o

makes  war war  of  words  alouc. The  efforts  of  a  high-

on  Virginia. . . ,  .  . .  t •

spirited  government  m  asserting  its  own  dignity
were  prompt  and  vigorous.  A  powerful  squadron,  with
a  considerable  body  of  land  forces,  was  dispatched  to  re-
duce the  Virginians  to  obedience.  After  compelling  the
colonies  in  Barbadoes  and  the  other  islands  to  submit  to
the  commonwealth,  the  squadron  entered  the
bay  of  Chesapeak.  Berkeley,  with  more  cou-
rage than  prudence,  took  arms  to  oppose  this  formidable
armament ;  but  he  could  not  long  maintain  such  an  un-
equal contest.  His  gallant  resistance,  however,  pro-
cured favourable  terms  to  the  people  under  his  go-
Virginia  is  vemmcut.  A  general  indemnity  for  "all  past
Icknow*° oifences  w^s  granted ;  they  acknowledged  the

ledge  the  autlioritv  of  the  commonwealth,  and  were  ad-
common-  ''

wealth,  mitted  to  a  participation  of  all  the  rights  enjoyed
by  citizens.'^  Berkeley,  firm  to  his  principles  of  loyalty,
disdained  to  make  any  stipulation  for  himself;  and
choosing  to  pass  his  days  far  removed  from  the  seat  of  a
government  which  he  detested,  continued  to  reside  in
Virginia  as  a  private  man,  beloved  and  respected  by  all
over  whom  he  had  formerly  presided.

«  Thurlow's  State  Papers,  i.  197. Chalmers'  Annals,  p.  122. Beverley's  Hist,
p.  53.

q2

2-28  AMERICA.

Restraints Not  Satisfied  with  taking  measures  to  subject
""  !''^  e tlie  colonies,  tlie  commonwealth  turned  its  atten-

trade  ot  '

the  colony,  tion  towards  the  most  effectual  mode  of  retaining
them  in  dependence  on  the  parent-state,  and  of  securing
to  it  the  benefit  of  their  increasing  commerce.  With
this  view  the  parliament  framed  two  laws,  one  of  which
expressly  prohibited  all  mercantile  intercourse  between
the  colonies  and  foreign  states,  and  the  other  ordained,
that  no  production  of  Asia,  Africa,  or  America,  should
be  imported  into  the  dominions  of  the  commonwealth,
but  in  vessels  belouQ-ino:  to  Endish  owners,  or  to  the
people  of  the  colonies  settled  there,  and  navigated  by  an
English  commander,'^  and  by  crews  of  which  the  greater
part  must  be  Englishmen.  But  while  the  wisdom  of
the  commonwealth  prescribed  the  channel  in  which  the
trade  of  the  colonies  was  to  be  carried  on,  it  was  soli-
citous to  encourage  the  cultivation  of  the  staple  com-
modity of  Virginia,  by  an  act  of  parliament,  which
gave  legal  force  to  all  the  injunctions  of  James
and  Charles  against  planting  tobacco  in  England.^

Under  governors  appointed  by  the  commonwealth,  or
by  Cromwell,  when  he  usurped  the  supreme  power,
Virginia  remained  almost  nine  years  in  perfect  tranquil-
lity. During  that  period,  many  adherents  to  the  royal
party,  and  among  these  some  gentlemen  of  good  fami-
lies, in  order  to  avoid  danger  and  oppression,  to  which
they  were  exposed  in  England,  or  in  hopes  of  repairing
their  ruined  fortunes,  resorted  thither.  Warmly
Lists  dissa-  attached  to  the  cause  for  which  they  had  fought
Ihes^e  t7-^^  and  suffered,  and  animated  with  all  the  passions
straints.  j^^^^ral  to  mcu  recently  engaged  in  a  fierce  and
long  protracted  civil  war,  they,  by  their  intercourse  with
the  colonists,  confirmed  th'em  in  principles  of  loyalty,  and
added  to  their  impatience  and  indignation  under  the  re-
straints imposed  on  their  commerce  by  their  new  mas-
ters. On  the  death  of  Mathews,  the  last  governor  named

J  Scobel's  Acts,  p.  132.  176.  «  Ibid.  p.  117.

BOOK IX.  229

by  Cromwell,  the  sentiments  and  inclination  of  the  peo-
ple, no  longer  under  the  control  of  authority,  burst  out
with  violence.  They  forced  Sir  William  Berkeley  to
quit  his  retirement ;  they  unanimously  elected  him  go-
vernor of  the  colony  ;  and  as  he  refused  to  act  under  a
usurped  authority,  they  boldly  erected  the  royal  stan-
Arethe  dard,  and  acknowledging  Charles  II.  to  be  their
knowledge  l^wful  sovcrcigu,  proclaimed  him  with  all  his
Charles  II.  titles ;  and  the  Virginians  long  boasted,  that  as
they  were  the  last  of  the  king's  subjects  who  renounced
their  allegiance,  they  were  the  first  who  returned  to
their  duty.*^

Happily  for  the  people  of  Virginia,  a  revolu-
ahy  ill  re- tion  in  England,  no  less  sudden  and  unex-
'"^^"^  ^  '  pected,  seated  Charles  on  the  throne  of  his  an-
cestors, and  saved  them  from  the  severe  chastisement
to  which  their  premature  declaration  in  his  favour  must
have  exposed  them.  On  receiving  the  first  account  of
this  event,  the  joy  and  exultation  of  the  colony  were
universal  and  unbounded.  These,  however,  were  not
of  long  continuance.  Gracious  but  unproductive  pro-
fessions of  esteem  and  good-will  were  the  only  return
made  by  Charles  to  loyalty  and  services,  which  in  their
own  estimation  were  so  distinguished,  that  no  recom-
pense was  beyond  what  they  might  claim.  If  the  king's
neglect  and  ingratitude  disappointed  all  the  sanguine
hopes  which  their  vanity  had  founded  on  the  merit  of
their  past  conduct,  the  spirit  which  influenced  parlia-
ment in  its  commercial  deliberations  opened  a  prospect
that  alarmed  them  with  respect  to  their  future  situation.
In  framing  regulations  for  the  encouragement  of  trade,
which,  during  the  convulsions  of  civil  war,  and  amidst
continual  fluctuations  in  government,  had  met  with  such
obstruction  that  it  declined  in  every  quarter ;  the  house
of  commons,  instead  of  granting  the  colonies  that  re-
lief which  they  expected  from  the  restraints  in  their

'  Beverley,  p.  35. Chalmers,  p.  124.

230  .  AMERICA.

commerce  imposed  by  the  commonwealth  and  Crom-
well, not  only  adopted  all  their  ideas  concerning  this
branch of legislation, but extended them farther.
Navigation '^^^^  produccd  the  ttct  of  navigation,  the  most
^^*- important  and  memorable  of  any  in  the  statute-
book  with  respect  to  the  history  of  English  commerce.
By  it,  besides  several  momentous  articles  foreign  to
the  subject  of  this  work,  it  was  enacted,  that  no  com-
modities should  be  imported  into  any  settlement  in
Asia,  Africa,  or  America,  or  exported  from  them,  but
in  vessels  of  English  or  plantation  built,  whereof  the
master  and  three-fourths  of  the  mariners  shall  be  Eng-
lish subjects,  under  pain  of  forfeiting  ship  and  goods  ;
that  none  but  natural-born  subjects,  or  such  as  have
been  naturalized,  shall  exercise  the  occupation  of  mer-
chant or  factor  in  any  English  settlement,  under  pain
of  forfeiting  their  goods  and  chattels ;  that  no  sugar,
tobacco,  cotton,  wool,  indigo,  ginger,  or  woods  used
in  dying,  of  the  growth  or  manufacture  of  the  colonies,
shall  be  shipped  from  them  to  any  other  country  but
England  ;  and  in  order  to  secure  the  performance  of
this,  a  sufficient  bond,  with  one  surety,  shall  be  given
before  sailing  by  the  owners,  for  a  specific  sum  pro-
portional to  the  rate  of  the  vessel  employed  by  them.^
The  productions  subjected  to  this  restriction  are  dis-
tinguished, in  the  language  of  commerce  and  finance,
by  the  name  of  enumerated  commodities;  and  as  in-
dustry in  its  progress  furnished  new  articles  of  value,
these  have  been  successively  added  to  the  roll,  and
subjected  to  the  same  restraint. Soon  after,  the
act  of  navigation  was  extended,  and  additional
restraints  were  imposed,  by  a  new  law,  which  prohi-
bited the  importation  of  any  European  commodity  into
the  colonies,  but  what  was  laden  in  England  in  vessels
navigated  and  manned  as  the act  of  navigation  re-
quired. More  effectual  provision  was  made  by  this

s  12  Car.  II.  c.  18.

BOOK  IX.  2.'U

law  for  exacting  the  penalties  to  which  the  transgres-
sors of  the  act  of  navigation  were  subjected ;  and  the
principles  of  policy,  on  which  the  various  regulations
contained  in  both  statutes  are  founded,  were  openly
avowed  in  a  declaration,  that  as  the  plantations  be-
yond seas  are  inhabited  and  peopled  by  subjects  of
England,  they  may  be  kept  in  a  firmer  dependence
upon  it,  and  rendered  yet  more  beneficial  and  advan-
tageous unto  it,  in  the  farther  employment  and  increase
of  English  shipping  and  seamen,  as  well  as  in  the  vent
of  English  woollen  and  other  manufactures  and  com-
modities ;  and  in  making  England  a  staple,  not  only
of  the  commodities  of  those  plantations,  but  also  of  the
commodities  of  other  countries  and  places,  for  the  sup-
plying of  them ;  and  it  being  the  usage  of  other  na-
tions to  keep  the  trade  of  their  plantations  to  them-
selves."^  In  prosecution  of  those  favourable  maxims,
the  English  legislature  proceeded  a  step  farther.  As
the  act  of  navigation  had  left  the  people  of  the  colonies
at  liberty  to  export  the  enumerated  commodities  from
one  plantation  to  another  without  paying  any  duty,  it
subjected  them  to  a  tax  equivalent  to  what  was
paid  by  the  consumers  of  these  commodities  in
England.'

Effects  of  By  these  successive  regulations,  the  plan  of
the  act.  securing  to  England  a  monopoly  of  the  com-
merce with  its  colonies,  and  of  shutting  up  every  other
channel  into  which  it  might  be  diverted,  was  perfected
and  reduced  into  complete  system.  On  one  side  of  the
Atlantic  these  regulations  have  been  extolled  as  an  ex-
traordinary effort  of  political  sagacity,  and  have  been
considered  as  the  great  charter  of  national  commerce,
to  which  the  parent-state  is  indebted  for  all  its  opulence
and  power.  On  the  other,  they  have  been  execrated
as  a  code  of  oppression,  more  suited  to  the  illiberality
of  mercantile  ideas,  than  to  extensive  views  of  legisla-

''  15  Car.  II.  c.  7.  *  25  Car.  II.  c.  7.

232  AMERICA. .

tive  wisdom.  Which  of  these  opinions  is  best  founded,
I  shall  examine  at  large  in  another  part  of  this  work.
But  in  writing  the  history  of  the  English  settlements
in  America,  it  was  necessary  to  trace  the  progress  of
those  restraining  laws  with  accuracy,  as  in  every  sub-
sequent transaction  we  may  observe  a  perpetual  exer-
tion, on  the  part  of  the  mother-country,  to  enforce  and
extend  them ;  and  on  the  part  of  the  colonies,  endea-
vours no  less  unremitting,  to  elude  or  to  obstruct  their
operation.

Coionibts  Hardly  was  the  act  of  navigation  known  in
agahi'stthe^  Virginia,  and  its  effects  began  to  be  felt,  when
^'-■''  the  colony  remonstrated  against  it  as  a  griev-

ance, and  petitioned  earnestly  for  relief.  But  the  com-
mercial ideas  of  Charles  and  his  ministers  coincided  so
perfectly  with  those  of  parliament,  that,  instead  of  listen-
ing with  a  favourable  ear  to  their  applications,  they
laboured  assiduously  to  carry  the  act  into  strict  execu-
tion. For  this  purpose,  instructions  were  issued  to  the
governor,  forts  were  built  on  the  banks  of  the  principal
rivers,  and  small  vessels  appointed  to  cruise  on  the
coast.  The  Virginians,  seeing  no  prospect  of  obtaining
exemption  from  the  act,  set  themselves  to  evade  it ;  and
found  means,  notwithstanding  the  vigilance  with  which
they  were  watched,  of  carrying  on  a  considerable  clan-
destine trade  with  foreigners,  particularly  with  the  Dutch
settled  on  Hudson's  River.  Imboldened  by  observing  dis-
affection spread  through  the  colony,  some  veteran  soldiers
who  had  served  under  Cromwell,  and  had  been  banished
to  Virginia,  formed  a  design  of  rendering  themselves  mas-
ters of  the  country,  and  of  asserting  its  indepen-
dence on  England.  This  rash  project  was  dis-
covered by  one  of  their  associates,  and  disconcerted  by
the  vigorous  exertions  of  Sir  William  Berkeley.  But
the  spirit  of  discontent,  though  repressed,  was  not  ex-
tinguished. Every  day  something  occurred  to  revive
and  to  nourish  it. As  it  is  with  extreme  difficulty  that

BOOK  IX.  283

commerce  can  be  turned  into  a  new  channel,  tobacco,
the  staple  of  the  colony,  sunk  prodigiously  in  value,
when  they  were  compelled  to  send  it  all  to  one  market.
It  was  some  time  before  England  could  furnish  them
regularly  with  full  assortments  of  those  necessary  arti-
cles, without  which  the  industry  of  the  colony  could  not
be  carried  on,  or  its  prosperity  secured.  Encouraged
Colony  at- by  tlic  symptouis  of  general  languor  and  de-
tacked  by  gpondcucy  whicli  this  declining  state  of  the  co-
dians.  Jony  occasioucd,  the  Indians  seated  towards  the
heads  of  the  rivers  ventured  first  to  attack  the  remote
settlements,  and  then  to  make  incursions  into  the  in-
terior parts  of  the  country.  Unexpected  as  these  hosti-
lities were,  from  a  people  who  during  a  long  period
had  lived  in  friendship  with  the  English,  a  mea-
^JiTpro-  sure  taken  by  the  king  seems  to  have  excited
ducedby g^Qj pfrcater terror amono; the most opulent

the  grants  »  i i i •  i i

of  land  by  people  of  thc  colouy. Charles  had  miprudently
*  imitated  the  example  of  his  father,  by  granting
such  large  tracts  of  land  in  Virginia  to  several  of  his
courtiers,  as  tended  to  unsettle  the  distribution  of  pro-
perty in  the  country,  and  to  render  the  title  of  the  most
ancient  planters  to  their  estates  precarious  and
questionable. From  those  various  causes,  which
in  a  greater  or  lesser  degree  affected  every  individual  in
the  colony,  the  indignation  of  the  people  became  gene-
ral, and  was  worked  up  to  such  a  pitch,  that  nothing
was  wanting  to  precipitate  them  into  the  most  desperate
acts  but  some  leader  qualified  to  unite  and  to  direct
their  operations. *"

An  insur- Sucli  a  leader  they  found  in  Nathaniel  Bacon,
rection  in  ^  coloucl  of  militia,  who,  though  he  had  been

Virginia,  ii-tt''-  i  i

beaded  by  settled HI Virgmia  only three  years,  had  ac-

N.  Bacon.  • i i  i  • •  .  •  i

quired,  by  popular  manners,  an  msmuatmg  ad-
dress, and  the  consideration  derived  from  having  been
j-egularly  trained  in  England  to  the  profession  of  law,

•*  Chalmers'  Annals,  cli.  10. 13,  1-4,  passim. Beverley,  p.  58,  &c.

234  AMERICA.

such  general  esteem,  that  he  had  been  admitted  into
the  council,  and  was  regarded  as  one  of  the  most  re-
spectable persons  in  the  colony.  Bacon  was  ambi-
tious, eloquent,  daring,  and,  prompted  either  by  ho-
nest zeal  to  redress  the  public  wrongs,  or  allured  by
hopes  of  raising  himself  to  distinction  and  power,  he
mingled  with  the  malecontents,  and  by  his  bold  ha-
rangues and  confident  promises  of  removing  all  their
grievances,  he  inflamed  them  almost  to  madness.  As
the  devastations  committed  by  the  Indians  was  the
calamity  most  sensibly  felt  by  the  people,  he  accused
the  governor  of  having  neglected  the  proper  measures
for  repelling  the  invasions  of  the  savages,  and  exhorted
them  to  take  arms  in  their  own  defence,  and  to  exter-
minate that  odious  race.  Great  numbers  assembled,
and  chose  Bacon  to  be  their  general.  He  applied  to
the  governor  for  a  commission,  confirming  this  election
of  the  people,  and  offered  to  march  instantly  against
the  common  enemy.  Berkeley,  accustomed  by  long
possession  of  supreme  command  to  high  ideas  of  the
respect  due  to  his  station,  considered  this  tumultuary
armament  as  an  open  insult  to  his  authority,  and  sus-
pected that,  under  specious  appearances.  Bacon  con-
cealed most  dangerous  designs.  Unwilling,  how-
ever, to  give  farther  provocation  to  an  incensed  multi-
tude, by  a  direct  refusal  of  what  they  demanded,  he
thought  it  prudent  to  negotiate,  in  order  to  gain  time  ;
and  it  was  not  until  he  found  all  endeavours  to  soothe
them  ineffectual,  that  he  issued  a  proclamation,  re-
quiring them,  in  the  king's  name,  under  the  pain  of
being  denounced  rebels,  to  disperse.

But  Bacon,  sensible  that  he  had  now  advanced  so  far
as  rendered  it  impossible  to  recede  with  honour  or  safety,
instantly  took  the  only  resolution  that  remained  in  his
situation.  At  the  head  of  a  chosen  body  of  his  fol-
lowers, he  marched  rapidly  to  James  Town,  and  sur-
rounding the  house  where  the  governor  and  council

BOOK IX.  235

were  assembled,  he  demanded  the  commission  for  v/hich
he  had  formerly  applied.  Berkeley,  with  the  proud
indignant  spirit  of  a  cavalier,  disdaining  the  requisitions
of  a  rebel,  peremptorily  refused  to  comply,  and  calmly
presented  his  naked  breast  to  the  weapons  which,  were
pointed  against  it.  The  council,  however,  foreseeing
the  fatal  consequences  of  driving  an  enraged  multitude,
in  whose  power  they  were,  to  the  last  extremiti  es  of  vio-
lence, prepared  a  commission,  constituting  tiacon  ge-
neral of  all  the  forces  in  Virginia,  and  by  their  en-
treaties prevailed  on  the  governor  to  sign  it,  Bacon
with  his  troops  retired  in  triumph.  Hardly  was  the
council  delivered  by  his  departure  from  the  dread  of
present  danger,  when,  by  a  transition,  not  u  nusual  in
feeble  minds,  presumptuous  boldness  succeed  ed  to  ex-
cessive fear.  The  commission  granted  to  Bacon  was
declared  to  be  null,  having  been  extorted  by  force ;  he
was  proclaimed  a  rebel,  his  followers  were  req  uired  to
abandon  his  standard,  and  the  militia  ordered  to  arm,
and  to  join  the  governor.

Bacon  Enraged  at  conduct  which  he  branded  with

w.  Berke-  the  name  of  base  and  treacherous,  Bacon,  instead
thecoun.  ^f  continuing  his  march  towards  the  Indian
ciitofly.  country,  instantly  wheeled  about,  and  ad^^anced
with  all  his  forces  to  James  Town.  The  governor,  unable
to  resist  such  a  numerous  body,  made  his  escape,  and
fled  across  the  bay  to  Acomack,  on  the  eastern  s-hore.
Some  of  the  counsellors  accompanied  him  thither,  others
retired  to  their  own  plantations.  Upon  the  flight  of  Sir
William  Berkeley,  and  dispersion  of  the  council,  the
frame  of  civil  government  in  the  colony  seemed  to  be
dissolved,  and  Bacon  became  possessed  of  supreme  and
uncontrolled  power.  But  as  he  was  sensible  that  his  coun-
trymen would  not  long  submit  with  patience  to  authority
acquired  and  held  merely  by  force  of  arms,  he  endea-
voured to  found  it  on  a  more  constitutional  basis,  by  ob-
taining the  sanction  of  the  people  s  approbation. With

236  AMERICA.

this  view  he  called  together  the  most  considerable  gen-
tlemen in  the  colony,  and  having  prevailed  on  them  to
bind  themselves  by  oath,  to  maintain  his  authority,  and
to  resist  every  enemy  that  should  oppose  it,  he  from  that
time  considered  his  jurisdiction  as  legally  established.
Sirvv.  Berkeley,  meanwhile,  having  collected  some

fppiij'j'for  ^^^'^^^'  ^^^^^  inroads  into  different  parts  of  the
succour  to  colony,  where  Bacon's  authority  was  recognised.

"^  ^"  ■  Several  sharp  conflicts  happened  with  various  suc-
-cess.  James  Town  was  reduced  to  ashes,  and  the  best  cul-
tivated districts  in  the  province  were  laid  waste,  some-
times by  one  party,  and  sometimes  by  the  other.  But
it  was  not  by  his  own  exertions  that  the  governor  hoped
to  terminate  the  contest.  He  had  early  transmitted  an
account  of  the  transactions  in  Virginia  to  the  king,  and
demanded  such  a  body  of  soldiers,  as  would  enable  him
to  quell  the  insurgents,  whom  he  represented  as  so  ex-
lisperated  by  the  restraints  imposed  on  their  trade,  that
they  were  impatient  to  shake  off  all  dependence  on  the
parent-state.  Charles,  alarmed  at  a  commotion  no
less  dangerous  than  unexpected,  and  solicitous  to  main-
tain his  authority  over  a  colony,  the  value  of  which  was
daily  increasing,  and  more  fully  understood,  speedily
dispatched  a  small  squadron  with  such  a  number  of  re-
gular troops  as  Berkeley  had  required.  Bacon  and  his  fol-
lowers received  information  of  this  armament,  but  were
not  intimidated  at  its  approach.  They  boldly  deter-
mined to  oppose  it  with  open  force,  and  declared  it  to  be
consistant  with  their  duty  and  allegiance,  to  treat  all  who
should  aid  Sir  William  Berkeley  as  enemies,  until  they
should  have  an  opportunity  of  laying  their  grievances
before  their  sovereign.^

1677.  But  while  both  parties  prepared  with  equal
Bacon  ter-  auimosity,  to  involve  their  country  in  the  horrors
the"rebei-  ^^  ^^^^^  ^^^'  ^^  Gvcut  happened,  which  quieted
^on. the  commotion  almost  as  suddenly  as  it  had  been

'  Beverley's  Hist p.  75.  76.

BOOK IX.  237

excited.  Bacon,  when  ready  to  take  the  field,  sickened
and  died.  None  of  his  followers  possessed  such  talents,  or
were  so  much  objects  of  the  people's  confidence,  as  en-
titled them  to  aspire  to  the  supreme  command.  Des-
titute of  a  leader  to  conduct  and  animate  them,  their
sanguine  hopes  of  success  subsided ;  mutual  distrust
accompanied  this  universal  despondency ;  all  began  to
wish  for  an  accommodation ;  and  after  a  short  nego-
tiation with  Sir  William  Berkeley,  they  laid  down  their
arms,  and  submitted  to  his  government,  on  obtaining  a
promise  of  general  pardon.

Thus  terminated  an  insurrection,  which,  in  the  annals
of  Virginia,  is  distinguished  by  the  name  of  Bacons
rebellion.  During  seven  months  this  darino;  leader
was  master  of  the  colony,  while  the  royal  governor  was
shut  up  in  a  remote  and  ill-peopled  corner  of  it.  What
were  the  real  motives  that  prompted  him  to  take  arms,
and  to  what  length  he  intended  to  carry  his  plans  of
reformation,  either  in  commerce  or  government,  it  is  not
easy  to  discover  in  the  scanty  materials  from  which  we
derive  our  information  with  respect  to  this  transaction.
It  is  probable,  that  his  conduct,  like  that  of  other  adven-
turers in  faction,  would  have  been  regulated  chiefly  by
events ;  and  accordingly  as  these  proved  favourable  or
adverse,  his  views  and  requisitions  would  have  been  ex-
tended or  circumscribed.

An  assem-  Sir  William  Berkeley,  as  soon  as  ne  was  rein-
hs'^mode- '  s^^^^^  in  his  office,  called  together  the  repre-
ration.  scutatives  of  the  people,  that  by  their  advice  and
authority  public  tranquillity  and  order  might  be  per-
fectly established.  Though  this  assembly  met  a  few
weeks  after  the  death  of  Bacon,  while  the  memory  of
reciprocal  injuries  was  still  recent ;  and  when  the  pas-
sions excited  by  such  a  fierce  contest  had  but  little  time
to  subside,  its  proceedings  were  conducted  with  a  mode-
ration seldom  exercised  by  the  successful  party  in  a  civil
war. No  man  suffered  capitally  ;  a  small  number  were

238  AMERICA.

subjected  to  fines;  others  were  declared  incapable  of
holding  any  office  of  trust ;  and  with  those  exceptions,
the  promise  of  general  indemnity  was  confirmed  by  law.
Soon  after  Berkeley  was  recalled,  and  colonel  Jeffreys
was  appointed  his  successor.

From  that  period  to  the  Revolution  in  1688,
the  colony  there  is  scarcely  any  memorable  occurrence  in
AevoTu-  the  history  of  Virginia.  A  peace  was  concluded
tion  in ^[i}y  the  Indians. Under  several  successive  ofo-

1688.  ...  "

vernors,  administration  was  carried  on  in  the  co-
lony with  the  same  arbitrary  spirit  that  distinguished  the
latter  years  of  Charles  II.  and  the  precipitate  counsels  of
James  II.  The  Virginians,  with  a  constitution  which,
in  form,  resembled  that  of  England,  enjoyed  hardly  any
portion  of  the  liberty  which  that  admirable  system  of
policy  is  framed  to  secure.  They  were  deprived  even  of
the  last  consolation  of  the  oppressed,  the  power  of  com-
plaining, by  a  law,  which,  under  severe  penalties,  prohi-
bit(jd  them  from  speaking  disrespectfully  of  the  governor,
or  defaming,  either  by  words  or  writing,  the  admi-
nistTation  of  the  'colony."'  Still,  however,  the  laws  re-
straining their  commerce  were  felt  as  an  intolerable  griev-
ance, and  nourished  in  secret  a  spirit  of  discontent,  which,
from  the  necessity  of  concealing  it,  acquired  a  greater
degree  of  acrimony.  But  notwithstanding  those  unfa-
vourable circumstances,  the  colony  continued  to  increase.
The  use  of  tobacco  was  now  become  general  in  Europe ;
and  though  it  had  fallen  considerably  in  price,  the  extent
of  demand  compensated  that  diminution,  and  by  giving
constant  employment  to  the  industry  of  the  planters,
diffused  wealth  among  them.  At  the  Revolution,  the
number  of  inhabitants  in  the  colony  exceeded  sixty
thousand,"  and  in  the  course  of  twenty-eight  years  its
population  had  been  more  than  doubled."

™  Beverley,  p.  81. Chalmers,  p.  341.  "  Chalmers' Annals,  p.  356.

o  Ibid.  p.  125.

THE

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA.

BOOK  X.

History  of  When  James  I.,  in  the  year  1606,  made  that
ern  co-"'  magnificent  partition,  which  has  been  mention-
lony,  and  q^  of  a  vast  rcp^ion  in  North  America,  extend-

ofthe  V  '

Plymouth  ing  from  the  thirty-fourth  to  the  forty-fifth  de-
company.  gj.gg  Qf  latitude,  bctwccn  two  trading  companies
of  his  subjects,  he  established  the  residence  of  the  one
in  London,  and  of  the  other  in  Plymouth.  The  former
was  authorized  to  settle  in  the  southern,  and  the  latter
in  the  northern  part  of  this  territory,  then  distinguished
by  the  general  name  of  Virginia.  This  arrangement
seems  to  have  been  formed  upon  the  idea  of  some
speculative  refiner,  who  aimed  at  diflfusing  the  spirit  of
industry,  by  fixing  the  seat  of  one  branch  of  the  trade
that  was  now  to  be  opened  on  the  east  coast  of  the
island,  and  the  other  on  the  west.  But  London  pos-
sesses such  advantages  of  situation,  that  the  commercial
wealth  and  activity  of  England  have  always  centred
in  the  capital.  At  the  beginning  of  the  last  century,
the  superiority  of  the  metropolis  in  both  these  respects
was  so  great,  that,  though  the  powers  and  privileges
conferred  by  the  king  on  the  two  trading  companies
were  precisely  the  same,  the  adventurers  settled  in  Ply-
mouth fell  far  short  of  those  in  London,  in  the  vigour
and  success  of  their  efforts  towards  accomplishing  the
purpose  of  their  institution.  Though  the  operations
of  the  Plymouth  company  were  animated  by  the  public-
spirited  zeal  of  Sir  John  PopJiam,  chief  justice  of  Eng-

240  AMERICA.

land,  Sir  Ferdinando  Gorges,  and  some  other  gentle-
men of  the  west,  all  its  exertions  were  feeble  and  un-
fortunate.

^  The  first  vessel  fitted out  by  the  company

First  at-  was  taken  by  the  Spaniards.  In  the  year  1607,
seuTeon"  a  feeble  Settlement  was  made  at  Sagahadoc ;  but
Irn  coast!"  ^^  account  of  the  rigour  of  the  climate,  was  soon
relinquished,  and  for  some  time  nothing  far-
ther was  attempted,  than  a  few  fishing  voyages  to  Cape
Cod,  or  a  pitiful  traffic  with  the  natives  for  skins  and  oil.
Smith  ^1^6  of  the  vessels  equipped  for  this  purpose,
surveys  -^g^g  commanded  by  Captain  Smith,  whose  name
andcaiisit  has  bccu  SO  oftcu  mentioned  with distinction

New  En£-

land.  in  the  History  of  Virginia.  The  adventure  was
^^*  prosperous  and  lucrative.  But  his  ardent  enter-
prising mind  could  not  confine  its  attention  to  objects
so  unequal  to  it  as  the  petty  details  of  a  trading  voy-
age. He  employed  a  part  of  his  time  in  exploring  the
coast,  and  in  delineating  its  bays  and  harbours.  On
his  return,  he  laid  a  map  of  it  before  prince  Charles,
and,  with  the  usual  exaggeration  of  discoverers,  painted
the  beauty  and  excellence  of  the  country  in  such  glowing
colours,  that  the  young  prince,  in  the  warmth  of  admi-
ration, declared,  that  it  should  be  called  New  England  f
a  name  which  effaced  that  of  Virginia,  and  by  which
it  is  still  distinguished.

First  at-  The  favourablc  accounts  of  the  country  by
seuleVn-  Smith,  as  well  as  the  success  of  his  voyage,
successful,  seem  to  have  encouraged  private  adventurers  to
prosecute  the  trade  on  the  coast  of  New  England  with
greater  briskness  ;  but  did  not  inspire  the  languishing
company  of  Plymouth  with  such  vigour  as  to  make  any
new  attempt  towards  establishing  a  permanent  colony
there.  Something  more  than  the  prospect  of  distant
gain  to  themselves,  or  of  future  advantages  to  their
country,  was  requisite,  in  order  to  induce  men  to  aban-

»  Smith's  Travels,  Book  vi.  p.  203,  &c. Purchase,  iv.  p.  1837.

BOOK X.  241

don  the  place  of  their  nativity,  to  migrate  to  another
quarter  of  the  globe,  and  endure  innumerable  hard-
ships under  an  untried  climate,  and  in  an  uncultivated
land,  covered  with  woods,  or  occupied  by  fierce  and
hostile  tribes  of  savages.  But  what  mere  attention  to
private  emolument,  or  to  national  utility,  could  not  ef-
fect, was  accomplished  by  the  operation  of  a  higher
principle. Religion had gradually excited

Religious *^  ^  -*=,  „.  ^1  •'..,

disputes  among  a  great  body  oi  the  people,  a  spirit  that
fhrNew'"  fitted  them  remarkably  for  encountering  the
coiolf"'^  dangers,  and  surmounting  the  obstacles,  which
had  hitherto  rendered  abortive  the  schemes  of
colonization  in  that  part  of  America  allotted  to  the
company  of  Plymouth.  As  the  various  settlements  in
New  England  are  indebted  for  their  origin  to  this
spirit,  as  in  the  course  of  our  narrative,  we  shall  dis-
cern its  influence  mingled  in  all  their  transactions,  and
giving  a  peculiar  tincture  to  the  character  of  the  people,
as  well  as  to  their  institutions,  both  civil  and  eccle-
siastical, it  becomes  necessary  to  trace  its  rise  and  pro-
gress with  attention  and  accuracy.
Different  When  the  superstitions  and  corruptions  of
sentiments  ^\^q  Romish  cliurch  prompted  different  nations

respecting  r  ^  r

church-go-  of  Europe  to  throw  off  its  yoke,  and  to  with-

vernmenl, i  r  •  •  i  i  n

tiiat  pre-  draw  irom  its  communion,  the  mode,  as  well  as
the  Re-*  degree  of  their  Separation,  was  various.  Wher-
formation.  gyg^  reformation  was  sudden,  and  carried  on  by
the  people  without  authority  from  their  rulers,  or  in
opposition  to  it,  the  rupture  was  violent  and  total.
Every  part  of  the  ancient  fabric  was  overturned,  and
a  different  system,  not  only  with  respect  to  doctrine,
but  to  church-government,  and  the  external  rites  of
worship  was  established.  Calvin,  who,  by  his  abi-
lities, learning,  and  austerity  of  manners,  had  acquired
high  reputation  and  authority  in  the  Protestant  churches,
was  a  zealous  advocate  for  this  plan  of  thorough  refor-
mation. He  exhibited  a  model  of  that  pure  form  of

r VOL. VIII.  R

242  AMERICA.

ecclesiastical  policy,  which  he  approved  in  the  con-
stitution of  the  church  of  Geneva.  The  simplicity  of
its  institutions,  and  still  more  their  repugnancy  to  those
of  the  Popish  church,  were  so  much  admired  by  all
the  stricter  reformers,  that  it  was  copied  with  some
small  variations  in  Scotland,  in  the  republic  of  the
United  Provinces,  in  the  dominions  of  the  House  of
Brandenburg,  in  those  of  the  Elector  Palatine,  and
in  the  churches  of  the  Hugonots  in  France.

But  in  those  countries  where  the  steps  of  departure
from  the  church  of  Rome  were  taken  with  greater  deli-
beration, and  regulated  by  the  wisdom  or  policy  of  the
supreme  magistrate,  the  separation  was  not  so  wide.
Of  all  the  reformed  churches,  that  of  England  has  de-
viated least  from  the  ancient  institutions.  The  violent,
but  capricious  spirit  of  Henry  VHI.  who,  though  he  dis-
claimed the  supremacy,  revered  the  tenets  of  the  papal
see,  checked  innovations  in  doctrine  or  worship  during
his  reign.  When  his  son  ascended  the  throne,  and  the
Protestant  religion  was  established  by  law,  the  cautious
prudence  of  archbishop  Cranmer  moderated  the  zeal
of  those  who  had  espoused  the  new  opinions.  Though
the  articles  to  be  recognised  as  the  system  of  national
faith  were  framed  comformably  to  the  doctrines  of  Cal-
vin, his  notions  with  respect  to  church-government,  and
the  mode  of  worship  were  not  adopted.  As  the  hie-
rarchy in  England  was  incorporated  with  the  civil  policy
of  the  kingdom,  and  constituted  a  member  of  the  legis-
lature, archbishops  and  bishops,  with  all  the  subordinate
ranks  of  ecclesiastics  subject  to  them,  were  continued  ac-
cording to  ancient  form,  and  with  the  same  dignity  and
jurisdiction.  The  peculiar  vestments  in  which  the  clergy
performed  their  sacred  functions,  bowing  at  the  name  of
Jesus,  kneeling  at  receiving  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's
Supper,  the  sign  of  the  cross  in  baptism,  the  use  of  the
ring  in  marriage,  with  several  other  rites  to  which  long
usage  had  accustomed  the  people,  and  which  time  had

BOOK X.  243

rendered  venerable,  were  still  retained.  But  though
Parliament  enjoined  the  observance  of  these  ceremonies
under  very  severe  penalties,*"  several  of  the  most  zealous
clergy  entertained  scruples  with  respect  to  the  lawfulness
of  complying  with  this  injunction ;  and  the  vigilance
and  authority  of  Cranmer  and  Ridley,  with  difficulty
saved  their  infant  church  from  the  disgrace  of  a  schism
on  this  account.

Religious  On  the  accession  of  Mary,  the  furious  zeal
lion  b^y  with  which  she  persecuted  all  who  had  adopted
Mary.  ^}^q  tcncts  of  the  reformers  forced  many  eminent
Protestants,  laymen  as  well  as  ecclesiastics,  to  seek  an
asylum  on  the  continent.  Frankfort,  Geneva,  Basil,
and  Strasburgh,  received  them  with  aifectionate  hospi-
tality as  sufferers  in  the  cause  of  truth,  and  the  magis-
trates permitted  them  to  assemble  by  themselves  for  re-
ligious worship.  The  exiles  who  took  up  their  residence
in  the  two  former  cities,  modelled  their  little  congrega-
tions according  to  the  ideas  of  Calvin,  and,  with  a  spirit
natural  to  men  in  their  situation,  eagerly  adopted  insti-
tutions which  appeared  to  be  farther  removed  from  the
superstitions  of  Popery  than  those  of  their  own  church.
They  returned  to  England  as  soon  as  Elizabeth  re-esta-
blished the  Protestant  religion,  not  only  with  more  vio-
lent antipathy  to  the  opinions  and  practices  of  that
church,  by  which  they  had  been  oppressed,  but  with  a
strong  attachment  to  that  mode  of  worship  to  which
they  had  been  for  some  years  accustomed.  As  they
were  received  by  their  countrymen  with  the  veneration
due  to  confessors,  they  exerted  all  the  influence  derived
from  that  opinion,  in  order  to  obtain  such  a  reformation
in  the  English  ritual  as  might  bring  it  nearer  to  the
standard  of  purity  in  foreign  churches.  Some  of  the
queens  most  confidential  ministers  were  warmly  dis-
Queen  poscd  to  co-opcrate  with  them  in  this  measure.
Elisabeth,  gu^  Elizabeth  paid  little  regard  to  the  inclina-

b  2and3  Edw.  VI.c.  1.

r2

iJ>44  AMERICA.

tions  of  the  one,  or  the  sentiments  of  the  other.  Fond  of
pomp  and  ceremony,  accustomed,  according  to  the  mode
of  that  age,  to  study  rehgious  controversy,  and  possess-
ing, like  her  father,  such  confidence  in  her  own  under-
standing, that  she  never  doubted  her  capacity  to  judge
and  decide  with  respect  to  every  point  in  dispute  be-
tween contending  sects,"  she  chose  to  act  according  to
her  own  ideas,  which  led  her  rather  to  approach  nearer
to  the  church  of  Rome,  in  the  parade  of  external  worship,
than  to  widen  the  breach  by  abolishing  any  rite  already
established/  An  act  of  parliament,  in  the  first  year  of
her  reign,  not  only  required  an  exact  conformity  to  the
mode  of  worship  prescribed  in  the  service-book,  under
most  rigorous  penalties,  but  empowered  the  queen  to  en-
join the  observance  of  such  additional  ceremonies  as
might  tend,  in  her  opinion,  to  render  the  public  exercises
of  devotion  more  decent  and  edifying/
„  .  The  advocates  for  a  farther  reformation,  not-

Withstanding  this  cruel  disappointment  of  the
sanguine  hopes  with  which  they  returned  to  their  native
country,  did  not  relinquish  their  design.  They  dissemi-
nated their  opinions  with  great  industry  among  the  peo-
ple. They  extolled  the  purity  of  foreign  churches,  and
inveighed  against  the  superstitious  practices  with  which

<=  Of  the  high  idea  which  Elizabeth  entertained  with  respect  to  her  own  supeiior
skill  in  theology,  as  well  as  the  haughty  tone  in  which  she  dictated  to  her  subjects
wliat  they  ought  to  believe,  "e  have  a  striking  picture  in  her  speech  at  the  close  of
the  parliament,  A.D.  1583. — "  One  thing  I  may  not  overskip — Religion,  the  ground
on  which  all  other  matters  ought  to  take  root,  and,  being  corrupted,  may  mar  all  the
tree.  And  that  there  be  some  fault-finders  with  the  order  of  the  clergy,  which  so
may  make  a  slander  to  myself,  and  to  the  church,  whose  overruler  God  hath  made
me,  whose  negligence  cannot  be  excused,  if  any  schisms  or  errors  heretical  were  suf-
fered. Thus  much  I  must  say,  that  some  faults  and  negligences  must  grow  and  be,
as  in  all  other  great  charges  it  happeneth  ;  and  what  vocation  without:  All  which,
if  you,  my  lords  of  the  clergy,  do  not  amend,  I  mean  to  depose  you.  Look  ye,
therefore,  well  to  your  charges.  This  may  be  amended  without  needless  or  open  ex-
clamations. I  am  supposed  to  have  many  studies,  but  most  philosophical.  I  must
yield  this  to  be  true,  that  I  suppose  few  (that  be  not  professors)  have  read  more.
And  I  need  not  fell  you,  that  I  am  not  so  simple  that  I  understand  not,  nor  so  for-
getful that  I  remember  not;  and  yet,  amidst  my  many  volumes,  I  hope  God's  book
hath  not  been  my  seldomest  lectures,  in  »hich  we  find  tliat  by  which  reason  ail  ought
to  believe.  I  see  many  overbold  with  God  Almighty,  making  too  many  subtle
scannings  of  his  blessed  will.  'J'he  presumption  is  so  great  that  I  may  not  suffer  it,"
&c. — D'Ewes's  Journal,  p.  328.

<»  Neaie's  Hist,  of  the  Puritans,  i.  138.  176.  ^  j  Eliz.  c.  2.

BOOK  X.  245

religion  was  defiled  in  their  own  church.  In  vain  did
the  defenders  of  the  established  system  represent  that
these  forms  and  ceremonies  were  in  themselves  things
perfectly  indifferent,  which,  from  long  usage,  were  viewed
with  reverence ;  and,  by  their  impression  upon  the  senses
and  imagination,  tended  not  only  to  fix  the  attention,
but  to  affect  the  heart,  and  to  wann  it  with  devout  and
worthy  sentiments.  The  Puritans  (for  by  that  name
such  as  scrupled  to  comply  with  what  was  enjoined  by
the  act  of  uniformity  were  distinguished)  maintained,
that  the  rites  in  question  were  inventions  of  men,  super-
added to  the  simple  and  reasonable  service  required  in
the  word  of  God ;  that  from  the  excessive  solicitude
with  which  conformity  to  them  was  exacted,  the  multi-
tude must  conceive  such  a  high  opinion  of  their  value
and  importance,  as  might  induce  them  to  rest  satisfied
with  the  mere  form  and  shadow  of  religion,  and  to  ima-
gine that  external  observances  may  compensate  for  the
want  of  inward  sanctity;  that  ceremonies  which  had
been  long  employed  by  a  society  manifestly  corrupt,  to
veil  its  own  defects,  and  to  seduce  and  fascinate  man-
kind, ought  now  to  be  rejected  as  relics  of  superstition
unworthy  of  a  place  in  a  church  which  gloried  in  the
name  of  reformed.

The  people,  to  whom  in  every  religious  con-
spirit  of  troversy  the  final  appeal  is  made,  listened  to  the
'  arguments  of  the  contending  parties;  and  it  is
obvious  to  which  of  them,  men  who  had  lately  beheld
the  superstitious  spirit  of  Popery,  and  felt  its  persecuting
rage,  would  lend  the  most  favourable  ear.  The  desire
of  a  farther  separation  from  the  church  of  Rome  spread
wide  through  the  nation.  The  preachers  who  con-
tended for  this,  and  who  refused  to  wear  the  surplice,
and  other  vestments  peculiar  to  their  order,  or  to  observe
the  ceremonies  enjoined  by  law,  were  followed  and  ad-
mired, while  the  ministry  of  the  zealous  advocates  for
conformity  was  deserted,  and their  persons  often  ex-

246  AMERICA.

posed  to  insult. For  some time  the  Nonconformists
were  connived  at;  but  as  their  number  and  boldness  in-
creased, the  interposition  both  of  spiritual  and  civil  au-
thority was  deemed  necessary  in  order  to  check  their
progress. To  the  disgrace of  Christians,  the  sacred
rights  of  conscience  and  private  judgment,  as  well  as  the
charity  and mutual  forbearance  suitable  to  the  mild
spirit  of  the  religion  which  they  professed,  were  in  that
age  little  understood. Not  only  the  idea  of  toleration,
but  even  the  word  itself  in  the  sense  now  affixed  to  it,
was  then  unknown. Every  church  claimed  a  right  to
employ  the  hand  of  power  for  the  protection  of  truth  and
the  extirpation of  error. The  laws of  her kingdom
armed  Elizabeth  with  ample  authority  for  this  purpose,
and  she  was  abundantly  disposed  to  exercise  it  with  full
vigour. Many  of  the  most  eminent  among  the  Puritan
clergy  were  deprived  of  their  benefices,  others  were  im-
prisoned, several  were fined,  and  some  put  to  death.
But  persecution,  as  usually  happens,  instead  of  extin-
guishing, inflamed  their  zeal  to  such  a  height,  that  the
jurisdiction  of  the  ordinary  courts  of  law  was  deemed
insufficient  to  suppress  it,  and  a  new  tribunal  was  esta-
blished under  the  title  of  the  High  Commission  for  Ec-
clesiastical Affairs,  whose  powers  and  mode  of  proce-
dure were  hardly  less  odious  or  less  hostile  to  the  prin-
ciples of  justice  than  those  of  the  Spanish  inquisition.
Several  attempts  were  made  in  the  house  of  commons
to  check  these  arbitrary  proceedings,  and  to  moderate  the
rage  of  persecution ;  but  the  queen  always  imposed  si-
lence upon  those  who  presumed  to  deliver  any  opinion
with  respect  to  a  matter  appertaining  solely  to  her  pre-
rogative, in  a  tone  as  imperious  and  arrogant  as  was  ever
used  by  Henry  VIII.  in  addressing  his  parliaments ;  and
so  tamely  obsequious  were  the  guardians  of  the  peoples
rights,  that  they  not  only  obeyed  those  unconstitutional
commands,  but  consented  to  an  act,  by  which  every  per-
.'  son  who  should  absent  himself  from  church  durina'  a

BOOK X.  247

month  was  subjected  to  punishment  by  fine  and  impri-
sonment ;  and  if,  after  conviction,  he  did  not  within  three
months  renounce  his  erroneous  opinions  and  conform  to
the  laws,  he  was  then  obliged  to  abjure  the  realm ;  but
if  he  either  refused  to  comply  with  this  condition,  or  re-
turned from  banishment,  he  should  be  put  to  death  as  a
felon  without  benefit  of  clergy/

Entire  se-  ^J  ^^^^  iniquitous  Statute,  equally  repugnant
Jf  the*Pu-  to  ideas  of  civil  and  of  religious  liberty,  the  Pu-
ritans from  ritans  were  cut  off  from  any  hope  of  obtainino-

the  church. .  t/  i  o

*  either  reformation  in  the  church  or  indulgence
to  themselves. Exasperated  by  this  rigorous  treatment,
their  antipathy  to  the  established  religion  increased,  and,
with  the  progress  natural  to  violent  passions,  carried
them  far  beyond  what  wks  their  original  aim. The  first
Puritans  did  not  entertain  any  scruples  with  respect  to
the  lawfulness  of  episcopal  government, and seem  to
have  been  very  unwilling  to  withdraw  from  communion
with  the  church  of  which  they  were  members. But
when  they  were  thrown  out  of  her  bosom,  and  constrained
to  hold  separate  assemblies  for  the  worship  of  God,  their
followers  no  longer  viewed  a  society  by  which  they  were
oppressed  with  reverence  or  aifection. Her  government,
her  discipline,  her  ritual,  were  examined  with  minute
attention. Every  error  was  pointed  out,  and  every  de-
fect magnified. The  more  boldly  any  teacher  inveighed
against  the  corruptions  of  the  church,  he  was  listened  to
with  greater  approbation  ;  and  the  farther  he  urged  his
disciples  to  depart  from  such  an  impure  community,  the
more  eagerly  did  they  follow  him. By  degrees,  ideas  of
ecclesiastical  policy,  altogether  repugnant  to  those  of  the
established  church,  gained  footing  in  the  nation. The
more  sober  and  learned  Puritans  inclined  to  that  form
which  is  known  by  the  name  of  Presbyterian. Such  as
were  more  thoroughly  possessed  with  the  spirit  of  inno-
vation, however  much  they  might  approve  the  equality

f  35  Eliz.  c.  1.

248  AMERICA.

of  pastors  which  that  system  establishes,  reprobated  the
authority  which  it  vests  in  various  judicatories,  descend-
ing from  one  to  another  in  regular  subordination,  as  in-
consistent with  Christian  liberty.

These  wild  notions  floated  for  some  time  in  the  minds
of the people, and amused them with  many  ideal
Brownists.  schcmcs of ecclesiastical policy. At length
1580. Robert  Brown,  a  popular  declaimer  in  high  esti-
mation, reduced  them  to  a  system,  on  which  he  modelled
his  own  congregation. He  taught,  that  the  church  of
England  was  corrupt,  and  antichristian,  its  ministers
not  lawfully  ordained,  its  ordinances  and  sacraments
invalid  ;  and, therefore,  he  prohibited  his  people to
hold  communion  with  it  in  any  religious  function. He
maintained,  that  a  society  of  Christians,  uniting  toge-
ther to  worship  God,  constituted  a  church,  possessed  of
complete  jurisdiction,  in  the  conduct  of  its  own  aifairs,
independent  of  any  other  society,  and  unaccountable  to
any  superior,  that  the  priesthood  was  neither  a  distinct
order  in  the  church,  nor  conferred  an indelible  cha-
racter ;  but  that  every  man  qualified  to  teach,  might  be
set  apart  for  that  office,  by  the  election  of  the  brethren,
and  by  imposition  of  their  hands  ;  in  like  manner,  by
their authority, he  might  be discharged from that
function,  and  reduced  to  the  rank  of  a  private  Christian  ;
that every  person, when admitted a member of  a
church,  ought  to  make  a  public  confession  of  his  faith,
and  give  evidence  of  his  being  in a  state  of  favour
with  God  ;  and  that  all  the  affairs  of  a  church  were  to
be  regulated by  the  decision  of  the  majority  of  its
members.

Brownists  T'^^is  dcmocratical  form  of  government,
take  re- vvhich  abolishcd all  distinction  of  ranks  in  the

fuge  in

Holland,  church,  and  conferred  an  equal  portion  of
power  on  every  individual,  accorded  so  perfectly  with
the  levelling  genius  of  fanaticism^  that  it  was  fondly
adopted  by  many as  a  complete  model  of  Christian

BOOK  X,  • '240

policy.  From  their  founder,  they  were  denominated
Brownists ;  and  as  their  tenets  were  more  hostile  to
the  established  religion  than  those  of  other  separatists,
the  fiercest  storm  of  persecution  fell  upon  their  heads.
Many  of  them  were  fined  or  imprisoned,  and  some
put  to  death  ;  and  though  Brown,  with  a  levity  of
which  there  are  few  examples  among  enthusiasts,
whose  vanity  has  been  soothed  by  being  recognised  as
heads  of  a  party,  abandoned  his  disciples,  conformed
to  the  established  religion,  and  accepted  of  a  benefice
in  the  church,  the  sect  not  only  subsisted,  but  continued
to  spread,  especially  among  persons  in  the  middle  and
lower  ranks  of  life.  But  as  all  their  motions  were  care-
fully watched,  both  by  the  ecclesiastical  and  civil
courts,  which,  as  often  as  they  were  detected,  punished
them  with  the  utmost  rigour,  a  body  of  them,  weary
of  living  in  a  state  of  continual  danger  and  alarm,  fled
to  Holland,  and  settled  in  Ley  den,  under  the  care  of
Mr.  John  Robinson,  their  pastor.  There  they  resided
for  several  years  unmolested  and  obscure.  But  rhany  of
their  aged  members  dying,  and  some  of  the  younger
marrying  into  Dutch  families,  while  their  church  re-
ceived no  increase,  either  by  recruits  from  England,
or  by  proselytes  gained  in  the  country,  they  began  to
be  afraid,  that  all  their  high  attainments  in  spiritual
knowledge  would  be  lost,  and  that  perfect  fabric  of
policy,  which  they  had  erected,  would  be  dissolved,
and  consigned  to  oblivion,  if  they  remained  longer  in  a
strange  land.

Remove  Deeply  affected  with  the  prospect  of  an  event,
thence  to  whicli  to  them  appeared  fatal  to  the  interests
America,  of  truth,  they  thought  themselves  called,  in  order
to  prevent  it,  to  remove  to  some  other  place,  where
they  might  profess  and  propagate  their  opinions  with
greater  success.  America,  in  which  their  countrymen
were  at  that  time  intent  on  planting  colonies,  presented
itself  to  their  thoughts. They  flattered  themselves  with

250  AMERICA,

hopes  of  being  permitted,  in  that  remote  region,  to  fol-
low their  own  ideas  in  religion  without  disturbance.
The  dangers  and  hardships  to  which  all  former  emi-
grants to  America  had  been  exposed,  did  not  deter
them. "They  were  well  weaned  (according  to  their
own  description)  from  the  delicate  milk  of  their  mother-
country,  and  inured  to  the  difficulties  of  a  strange  land.
They  were  knit  together  in  a  strict and  sacred  band,
by  virtue  of  which  they  held  themselves obliged  to
take  care  of  the  good  of  each  other,  and  of  the  whole.
It  was  not  with  them,  as  with  other  men,  whom  small
things could discourage, or  small  discontents  cause
1618. ^^  ^^^^  themselves  at  home  again.''^ The  first
object  of  their  solicitude,  was  to  secure  the  free
exercise  of  their  religion. For  this  purpose  they  ap-
plied to  the  king  ; and  though  James  refnsed  to  give
them  any  explicit  assurance  of  toleration,  they  seem  to
have  obtained  from  him  some  promise  of  his  connivance,
as  long  as  they  continued  to  demean  themselves  quietly.
So eager were they to accomplish their favourite
scheme,  that,  relying  on  this  precarious  security, they
began  to  negotiate  with  the  Virginian  company,  for  a
tract  of  land  within  the  limits  of  their  patent. This
they  easily  procured  from  a  society  desirous  of  encou-
raging migration  to  a  vast  country,  of  which  they  had
hitherto  occupied  only  a  few  spots.

1620.  After  the  utmost  efforts,  their  preparations
Fifst  au  ^^^^  ^^^  short  of  what  was  requisite  for  beginning
tempt  to the  settlement  of  a  new colony. A  hundred  .

settle  3.t

Massachu-  and  twenty  persons  sailed  from  England  in  a
ay.  gjjjgig  ship,  on  this  arduous  undertaking.  The
place  of  their  destination  was  Hudson's  River,  where
they  intended  to  settle  ;  but  their  captain  having  been
bribed,  as  is  said,  by  the  Dutch,  who  had  then  formed
a  scheme,  which  they  afterward  accomplished,  of
planting  a  colony  there,  carried  them  so  far  towards  the

e  Hutchinson's  Hist,  of  JVIassach,  p.  4.

BOOK X.  -251

north,  that  the  first  land  in  America  which  they  made,
was  Cape  Cod. They  were  now  not  only  be-
yond the  precincts  of  the  territory which  had
been  granted  to  them,  but  beyond  those  of  the com-
pany from  which  they  derived  their  right. The  season,
however,  was  so  far  advanced,  and  sickness  raged  so
violently  among  men  unaccustomed  to  the  hardships  of
a  long  voyage, that  it  became  necessary  to  take  up
their  abode  there. After  exploring  the  coast,
NewViy-  they  chose  for  their  station,  a  place  now  be-
mouth. longing  to  the  province  of  Massachusets  Bay,
to  which  they  gave  the  name  of  New Plymouth,  pro-
bably  out  of  respect  to  that  company,  within  whose
jurisdiction, they now  found  themselves  situated.*"

No  season  could  be  more  unfavourable  to  settlement
than  that  in  which  the  colony  landed.  The  winter,
which,  from  the  predominance  of  cold  in  America,  is
rigorous  to  a  degree  unknown  in  parallel  latitudes  of
our  hemisphere,  was  already  set  in  ;  and  they  were
slenderly  provided  with  what  was  requisite  for  com-
fortable subsistence,  under  a  climate  considerably  more
severe  than  that  for  which  they  had  made  preparation.
Above  one  half  of  them  was  cut  oft'  before  the  return  of
spring,  by  diseases,  or  by  famine  ;  the  survivors,  instead
of  having  leisure  to  attend  to  the  supply  of  their  own
wants,  were  compelled  to  take  arms  against  the  savages
Plan  of  go-  ^^  their  neighbourhood.  Happily  for  the  Eng-
vemment.  Jigh,  a  pcstilcnce  whicli  raged  in  America  the
year  before  they  landed,  had  swept  off  so  great  a  num-
ber of  the  natives,  that  they  were  quickly  repulsed  and
humbled.  The  privilege  of  professing  their  own  opi-
nions, and  of  being  governed  by  laws  of  their  own
framing,  afforded  consolation  to  the  colonists  amidst  all
their  dang(  and  hardships.  The  constitution  of  their
church  was  ihe  same  with  that  which  they  had  esta-
blished in  Holland. Their  system  of  civil  government

^  Hubbard's  Pres.  State,  p.  3.  Cotton's  Magnalia,  p.  7.  Hutchinson's  Hist.  p.  3,  &g.

252  AMERICA.

was  founded  on  those  ideas  of  the  natural  equality
among  men,  to  which  their  ecclesiastical  policy  had
accustomed  them.  Every  free  man,  who  was  a  mem-
ber of  the  church,  was  admitted  into  the  supreme  legis-
lative body.  The  laws  of  England  were  adopted  as
the  basis  of  their  jurisprudence,  though  with  some  di-
versity in  the  punishments  inflicted  upon  crimes,  bor-
rowed from  the  Mosaic  institutions.  The  executive
power  was  vested  in  a  governor  and  some  assistants,
who  were  elected  annually  by  the  members  of  the  legis-
lative assembly.'  So  far  their  institutions  appear  to  be
founded  on  the  ordinary  maxims  of  human  prudence.
But  it  was  a  favourite  opinion  with  all  the  enthusiasts  of
that  age,  that  the  Scriptures  contained  a  complete  system,
not  only  of  spiritual  instruction,  but  of  civil  wisdom  and
polity ;  and  without  attending  to  the  peculiar  circum-
stances, or  situation  of  the  people,  whose  history  is
there  recorded,  they  often  deduced  general  rules  for  their
own  conduct,  from  what  happened  among  men  in  a
very  different  state.  Under  the  influence  of  this  wild
notion,  the  colonists  of  New  Plymouth,  in  imitation  of

the  primitive  Christians,  threw  all  their  pro-
nityof  perty  mto  a  common  stock,  and,  like  members
^^°  **  of  one  family,  carried  on  every  work  of  industry
by  their  joint  labour  for  public  behoof.''  But,  however
this  resolution  might  evidence  the  sincerity  of  their
faith,  it  retarded  the  progress  of  their  colony.  The
same  fatal  effects  flowed  from  this  community  of  goods,
and  of  labour,  which  had  formerly  been  experienced  in
This  insti-  Virginia  ;  and  it  soon  became  necessary  to  relin-
tution  quish  what  was  too  refined  to  be  capable  of  being
the  CO- accommodated to the affairs of  men. But

though  they  built  a  small  town,  and  surrounded
it  with  such  a  fence  as  afforded  sufficient  security  against
the  assaults  of  the  Indians, the  soil  around it  was  so

■  Chaliner's  Annals,  p.  87.
''Chnliiier's  Amials,  p.  89.  Douglas's  Summary-,  i.  p.  370.

BOOK X.  -253

poor,  their  religious  principles  were  so  unsocial,  and
the  supply  sent  them  by  their  friends,  so  scanty,  that  at
the  end  of  ten  years,  the  number  of  people  belonging
to  the  settlement,  did  not  exceed  three  hundred.'  During
some  years  they  appear  not  to  have  acquired  right  by
any  legal  conveyance  to  the  territory  which  they  had
occupied.  At  length  they  obtained  a  grant  of  property
from  the  council  of  the  New  Plymouth  company,  but
were  never  incorporated  as  a  body  politic  by  royal  char-
1630.  ter.'"  Unlike  all  the  other  settlements  in  Ame-
lony  not  ricE,  this  colouy  must  be  considered  merely  as  a
IaS'7by  voluntary  association,  held  together  by  the  tacit
charter,  couscut  of  its  mcmbcrs  to  renognise  the  authority
of  laws,  and  submit  to  the  jurisdiction  of  magistrates,
framed  and  chosen  by  themselves.  In  this  state  it  re-
mained an  independent,  but  feeble  community,  until  it
was  united  to  its  more  powerful  neighbour,  the  colony
of  Massachusets  Bay,  the  origin  and  progress  of  which
I  now  proceed  to  relate.

Giaud  The  original  company  of  Plymouth  having

piyraouS  ^^"^  nothing  effectual  towards  establishing  any
appointed,  pernianent  settlement  in  America,  James  I.,  in
the  year  1620,  issued  a  new  charter  to  the  duke
of  Lenox,  the  marquis  of  Buckingham,  and  several
other  persons  of  distinction  in  his  court,  by  which  he
conveyed  to  them  a  right  to  a  territory  in  America,
still  more  extensive  than  what  had  been  granted  to  the
former  patentees,  incorporating  them  as  a  body  politic,
in  order  to  plant  colonies  there,  with  powers  and  juris-
dictions similar  to  those  contained  in  his  charters
to  the  companies  of  South  and  North  Virginia.  This
society  was  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  Grand
Council  of  Plymouth  for  planting  and  governing  New
England.  What  considerations  of  public  utility  could
induce  the  king  to  commit  such  an  undertaking  to  per-
sons  apparently  so  ill  qualified for  conducting  it,  or

'  Chalmers'  Annals,  p.  97.  '"  Clialmers'  Annals,  p.  97.  107.

254  AMERICA.

what  prospect  of  private  advantage  prompted  them  to
engage  in  it,  the  information  we  receive  from  con-
temporary writers  does  not  enable  us  to  determine.
Certain  it  is,  that  the  expectations  of  both  were  dis-
appointed ;  and  after  many  schemes  and  arrangements,
all  the  attempts  of  the  new  associates  towards  coloniza-
tion proved  unsuccessful.

Project  cf  ^^^  England  must  have  remained  unoccu-
a  new  co  pied,  if  the  same  causes  which  occasioned  the
"""''■  emigration  of  the  Brownists  had  not  continued
to  operate.  Notwithstanding  the  violent  persecution
to  which  Puritans  of  every  denomination  were  still
exposed,  their  number  and  zeal  daily  increased.  As
they  now  despaired  of  obtaining  in  their  own  country
any  relaxation  of  the  penal  statutes  enacted  against
iheir  sect,  many  began  to  turn  their  eyes  towards  some
other  place  of  retreat,  where  they  might  profess  their
own  opinions  with  impunity.  From  the  tranquillity
which  their  brethren  had  hitherto  enjoyed  in  New  Ply-
mouth, they  hoped  to  find  this  desired  asylum  in  New
England ;  and  by  the  activity  of  Mr.  White,  a  Non-
conformist minister  at  Dorchester,  an  association  was
formed  by  several  gentlemen  who  had  imbibed  puri-
tanical notions,  in  order  to  conduct  a  colony  thither.
They  purchased  from  the  council  of  Plymouth  all  the
territory,  extending  in  length  from  three  miles  north  of
the  river  Merrimack,  to  three  miles  south  of  Charles
River,  and  in  breadth,  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  South-
ern ocean.  Zealous  as  these  proprietors  were
March  19.  to  accompUsh  tlicir  favourite  purpose,  they
quickly  perceived  their  own  inability  to  attempt
the  population  of  such  an  immense  region,  and  deemed  it
necessary  to  call  in  the  aid  of  more  opulent  co-partners."
Of  these  they  found,  without  difficulty,  a  sufficient
number,  chiefly  in  the  capital,  and  among  persons  in
the  commercial  and  other  industrious  walks  of  life,

"  Neale's  Hist,  of  New  Engl.  i.  p.  122.

BOOK X.  255

who  had  openly  joined  the  sect  of  the  Puritans,  or
secretly  favoured  their  opinions.  These  new  adven-
turers, with  the  caution  natural  to  men  conversant  in
business,  entertained  doubts  concerning  the  propriety
of  founding  a  colony  on  the  basis  of  a  grant  from  a  pri-
vate company  of  patentees,  who  might  convey  a  right  of
property  in  the  soil,  but  could  not  confer  jurisdiction,
or  the  privilege  of  governing  that  society  which  they
had  in  contemplation  to  establish.  As  it  was  only
from  royal  authority  that  such  powers  could  be  derived,
they  applied  for  these ;  and  Charles  granted  their  re-
quest, with  a  facility  which  appears  astonishing,  when
we  consider  the  principles  and  views  of  the  men  who
were  suitors  for  the  favour.

Charter  to  Time  has  been  considered  as  the  parent  of
the  new  political  wisdom,  but  its  instructions  are  com-
Massachu-  muuicatcd  slowly.  Although  the  experience  of
sets  Bay.  ^jjovetwentyyears  might havctaught  the  English
the  impropriety  of  committing  the  government  of  settle-
ments in  America  to  exclusive  corporations  resident
in  Europe,  neither  the  king  nor  his  subjects  had  pro-
fited so  much  by  what  passed  before  their  eyes,  as  to
have  extended  their  ideas  beyond  those  adopted  by
James,  in  his  first  attempts  towards  colonization.  The
charter  of  Charles  I.  to  the  adventurers  associated  for
planting  the  province  of  Massachusets  Bay,  was  per-
fectly similar  to  those  granted  by  his  father  to  the  two
Virginian  companies,  and  to  the  council  of  Plymouth.
The  new  adventurers  were  incorporated  as  a  body
politic,  and  their  right  to  the  territory,  which  they  had
purchased  from  the  council  at  Plymouth,  being  con-
firmed by  the  king,  they  were  empowered  to  dispose
of  the  lands,  and  to  govern  the  people  who  should
settle  upon  them.  The  first  governor  of  the  company,
and  his  assistants,  were  named  by  the  crown  :  the
right  of  electing  their  successors  was  vested  in  the
members  of  the corporation. The executive power

'2.5(i  AMERICA.

was  committed  to  the  governor  and  assistants ;  that  of
legislation  to  the  body  of  proprietors,  who  might  make
statutes  and  orders  for  the  good  of  the  community,  not
inconsistent  with  the  laws  of  England,  and  enforce  the
observance  of  them,  according  to  the  course  of  other
corporations  within  the  realm.  Their  lands  were  to
be  held  by  the  same  liberal  tenure  with  those  granted
to  the  Virginian  company.  They  obtained  the  same
temporary  exemption  from  internal  taxes,  and  from
duties  on  goods  exported  or  imported ;  and  notwith-
standing their  migration  to  America,  they  and  their
descendants  were  declared  to  be  entitled  to  all  the
rights  of  natural-born  subjects."

The  manifest  object  of  this  charter  was  to  confer  on
the  adventurers  who  undertook  to  people  the  territory
on  Massachusets  Bay,  all  the  corporate  rights  possessed
by  the  council  of  Plymouth,  from  which  they  had  pur-
chased it,  and  to  form  them  into  a  public  body,  resem-
bling other  great  trading  companies,  which  the  spirit  of
monarchy  had  at  that  time  multiplied  in  the  kingdom.
The  king  seems  not  to  have  foreseen,  or  to  have  sus-
pected, the  secret  intentions  of  those  who  projected  the
measure  :  for  so  far  was  he  from  alluring-  emigrants,
by  any  hopes  of  indulgence  with  respect  to  their  reli-
gious scruples,  or  from  promising  any  relaxation  from
the  rigour  of  the  penal  statutes  against  Nonconformists,
that  he  expressly  provides  for  having  the  oath  of  su-
premacy administered  to  every  person  who  shall  pass
to  the  colony,  or  inhabit  there. ^

"  Hutchinson's  Collect,  of  Orig.  Papers,  p.  1,  &c.
P  Hutchinson's  Collect,  of  Grig.  Papers,  p.  18  — It  is  surprising  that  Mr.  Neale,
an  industrious  and  generally  well-informed  writer,  should  affirm,  that  "free  liberty
of  conscience  was  granted  by  this  charter  to  all  who  should  settle  in  those  parts,  to
worship  God  in  their  own  way."  Hist,  of  New  Engl.  i.  124.  This  he  repeats  in
his  History  of  the  Puritans,  ii.  210  ;  and  subsequent  historians  have  copied  him
implicitly.  No  permission  of  that  kind,  however,  is  contained  in  the  charter;  and
such  an  indulgence  would  have  been  inconsistent  with  all  the  maxims  of  Charles  and
his  ministers  during  the  course  of  his  reign.  At  the  time  when  Charles  issued  the
charter,  the  influence  of  Laud  over  his  councils  was  at  its  height,  the  Puritans  were
prosecuted  with  the  greatest  severity,  and  the  kingdom  was  ruled  entirely  by  pre-
rogative. This  is  not  an  era  in  which  one  can  expect  to  meet  with  concessions  in
favour  of  Nonconformists,  from  a  prince  of  Charles's  character  and  principles.

BOOK  X.  257

i629_ But  whatever  were  the  intentions  of  the  king',
^^"K" the  adventurers  kept  their  own  obiect  steadily

ment  m  r  j  j

conse-  in  view.  Soon  after  their  powers  to  establish
this  char,  a  colony  were  rendered  complete  by  the  royal
*"'  charter,  they  fitted  out  five  ships  for  New  Eng-

land ;  on  board  of  which  embarked  upwards  of  three
hundred passengers, with a  view of  settling there.
These were mostly zealous Puritans, whose chief
inducement  to relinquish  their  native land  was  the
hope  of  enjoying  religious liberty  in a  country  far
removed  from  the  seat  of  government  and  the  oppres-
sion of  ecclesiastical  courts. Some  eminent  noncon-
formist ministers  accompanied  them  as  their  spiritual
instructors.  On  their  arrival  in  New  England,  they  found
the  wretched  remainder  of  a  small  body  of  emigrants,
who  had  left  England  the  preceding  year,  under
the  conduct  of  Endicott,  a  deep  enthusiast,  whom,
prior  to  their  incorporation  by  the  royal  charter,  the
associates  had  appointed  deputy-governor.  They  were
settled  at  a  place called  by  the  Indians  Naunekeag,
and  to  which  Endicott, with  the  fond  affectation  of
fanatics  of  that  age  to  employ  the  language  and  appel-
lations of  Scripture  in  the  affairs  of  common  life,  had
given  the  name  of  Salem.

Begin  with  The  emigrants  under  Endicott,  and  such  as
establish-  ^^^^  joined  them,  coincided  perfectly  in  reli-
church.  gious  principles.  They  were  Puritans  of  the
strictest  form ;  and  to  men  of  this  character  the  in-
stitution of  a  church  was  naturally  of  such  interesting-
concern  as  to  take  place  of  every  other  object.  In  this
first  transaction,  they  displayed  at  once  the  extent  of
the  reformation  at  which  they  aimed.  Without  regard
to  the  sentiments  of  that  monarch  under  the  sanction
of  whose  authority  they  settled  in  America,  and  from
whom  they  derived  right  to  act  as  a  body  politic,  and
in  contempt  of  the  laws  of  England,  with  which  the
charter  required  that  none  of  their  acts  or  ordinances

VOL.  VIII.  s

258  AMERICA.

should  be inconsistent,  they  adopted  in  their  infant
church that  form  of  policy  which  has  since  been  dis-
tinguished by  the  name  of  Independent. They  united
together  in  religious  society,  by  a  solemn  cove-
"^'  ' nant  with  God  and  with  one  another,  and  in
strict  conformity,  as they  imagined, to  the  rules  of
Scripture. They  elected  a  pastor,  a  teacher,  and  an
elder,  whom  they  set  apart  for  their  respective  offices,
by  imposition  of  the  hands  of  the  brethren. All  who
were  that  day  admitted  members  of  the  church  signified
their  assent  to  a  confession  of  faith  drawn  up  by  their
teacher,  and  srave  an  account  of  the  foundation  of  their
own  hopes  as  Christians ; and  it  was  declared  that  no
person  should  hereafter  be  received  into  communion
until  he  gave  satisfaction  to  the  church  with  respect  to
his  faith  and  sanctity. The  form  of  public  worship
which  they  instituted  was  without  a  liturgy,  disencum-
bered of  every  superfluous  ceremony,  and  reduced  to
the  lowest  standard  of  Calvinistic  simplicity.'^
^ .  It  was  with  the  utmost  complacence  that  men,

Intolerance  .  i i  i •

of  the  new  passiouatcly  attached  to  their  own  notions,  and
who  had  long  been  restrained  from  avowing
them,  employed  themselves  in  framing  this  model  of  a
pure  church.  But  in  the  first  moment  that  they  began
to  taste  of  Christian  liberty  themselves,  they  forgot  that
other  men  had  an  equal  title  to  enjoy  it.  Some  of  their
number,  retaining  a  high  veneration  for  the  ritual  of  the
English  church,  were  so  much  offended  at  the  total
abolition  of  it,  that  they  withdrew  from  communion  with
the  newly  instituted  church,  and  assembled  separately
for  the  worship  of  God.  With  an  inconsistency  of
which  there  are  such  flagrant  instances  among  Christians
of  every  denomination,  that  it  cannot  be  imputed  as
a  reproach  peculiar  to  any  sect,  the  very  men  who  had
themselves  fled  from  persecution  became  persecutors;
and  had  recourse,  in  order  to  enforce  their  own  opinions,

q  Math.  Magnal.  p.  18. Neal's  Hist,  of  N.  Eng.  i.  126. Chalmer's,  p.  143.

BOOK X.  259

to  the  same  unhallowed  weapons,  against  the  employment
of  which  they  had  lately  remonstrated  with  so  much
violence.  Endicott  called  the  two  chief  malecontents
before  him ;  and  though  they  were  men  of  note,  and
among  the  number  of  original  patentees,  he  expelled
them  from  the  society,  and  sent  them  home  in  the  ships
which  were  returning  to  England/  The  colonists  were
now  united  in  sentiments  ;  but,  on  the  approach  of  win-
ter, they  suffered  so  much  from  diseases,  which  carried
off  almost  one  half  of  their  number,  that  they  made  little
progress  in  occupying  the  country.

Meanwhile  the  directors  of  the  company  in  England
exerted  their  utmost  endeavours  in  order  to  reinforce  the
Emigra-  colony  with  a  numerous  body  of  new  settlers ;
Eriand""  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  intolerant  spirit  of  Laud  exacted  con-
increased formity  to  all  the  iniunctions  of  the  church  with

by  the  iu-  *' .  ,  -^  ,  , . .  r^  -,

tolerance  greater  rigour  than  ever,  the  condition  of  such
of  Laud,  g^g  i^g^^  ^j^y  scruples  with  respect  to  this  became
so  intolerable,  that  many  accepted  of  their  invitation  to  a
secure  retreat  in  New  England.  Several  of  these  were
persons  of  greater  opulence  and  of  better  condition  than
any  who  had  hitherto  migrated  to  that  country.  But  as
they  intended  to  employ  their  fortunes,  as  well  as  to  ha-
zard their  persons  in  establishing  a  permanent  colony
there,  and  foresaw  many  inconveniences  from  their  sub-
jection to  laws  made  without  their  own  consent,  and
framed  by  a  society  which  must  always  be  imperfectly
acquainted  with  their  situation,  they  insisted  that  the
corporate  powers  of  the  company  should  be  transferred
from  England  to  America,  and  the  government  of  the  co-
lony be  vested  entirely  in  those  who,  by  settling  in  the
latter  country,  became  members  of  it.'  The  company
had  already  expended  considerable  sums  in  prosecuting
the  design  of  their  institution,  without  having  received
almost  any  return,  and  had  no  prospect  of  gain,  or  even
of  reimbursement,  but  what  was  too  remote  and  uncer-

■•  Mather,  p.  19. Neal,  p.  129.  "  Hutchinson's  Coll.  of  Papers,  p  2.5.

S  2

260  AMERICA.

tain  to  be  suitable  to  the  ideas  of  merchants,  the  most
numerous  class  of  its  members.  They  hesitated,  how-
ever, with  respect  to  the  legality  of  granting  the  demand
of  the  intended  emigrants.  But  such  was  their  eagerness
to  be  disengaged  from  an  unpromising  adventure,  that,
Charter  of  "by  general  consent  it  was  determined,  that  the
pa^ny°tTans-  chartcr  should  be  transferred,  and  the  govern-
ferredto j^-^gj^^  ^jg  settled  iu  Ncw  England."' To  the

the  colo-  •  1  1

nists.  members  of  the  corporation  who  chose  to  re-
main at  home  was  reserved  a  share  in  the  trading  stock
and  profits  of  the  company  during  seven  years.

In  this  singular  transaction,  to  which  there  is  nothing
similar  in  the  history  of  English  colonization,  two  cir-
cumstances merit  particular  attention  :  one  is  the  power
of  the  company  to  make  this  transference;  the  other  is,
the  silent  acquiescence  with  which  the  king  permitted  it
to  take  place.  If  the  validity  of  this  determination  of
the  company  be  tried  by  the  charter  which  constituted  it
a  body  politic,  and  conveyed  to  it  all  the  corporate  pow-
ers with  which  it  was  invested,  it  is  evident  that  it  could
neither  exercise  those  powers  in  any  mode  diiferent  from
what  the  charter  prescribed,  nor  alienate  them  in  such  a
manner  as  to  convert  the  jurisdiction  of  a  trading  cor-
poration in  England  into  a  provincial  government  in
America.  But  from  the  first  institution  of  the  company
of  Massachusets  Bay,  its  members  seem  to  have  been
animated  with  a  spirit  of  innovation  in  civil  policy,  as
well  as  in  religion  ;  and  by  the  habit  of  rejecting  esta-
blished usages  in  the  one,  they  were  prepared  for  devi-
ating from  them  in  the  other.  They  had  applied  for  a
royal  charter,  in  order  to  give  legal  effect  to  their  ope-
rations in  England,  as  acts  of  a  body  politic;  but  the
persons  whom  they  sent  out  to  America,  as  soon  as  they
landed  there,  considered  themselves  as  individuals,
united  together  by  voluntary  association,  possessing  the
natural  right  of  men  who  form  a  society,  to  adopt  what

'  Mather,  p.  20. Hutchinson's  Hist.  p.  12. Chalmers,  p.  150.

BOOK X.  261

mode  of  government,  and  to  enact  what  laws  they  deemed
most  conducive  to  general  felicity.  Upon  this  principle
of  being  entitled  to  judge  and  to  decide  for  themselves,
they  established  their  church  in  Salem,  without  regard
to  the  institutions  of  the  church  of  England,  of  which
the  charter  supposed  them  to  be  members,  and  bound  of
consequence  to  conformity  with  its  ritual.  Suitably  to
the  same  ideas,  we  shall  observe  them  framing  all  their
future  plans  of  civil  and  ecclesiastical  policy.  The
king,  though  abundantly  vigilant  in  observing  and  check-
ing slighter  encroachments  on  his  prerogative,  was  either
so  much  occupied  at  that  time  with  other  cares,  occa-
sioned by  his  fatal  breach  with  his  parliament,  that  he
could  not  attend  to  the  proceedings  of  the  company ;  or
he  was  so  much  pleased  with  the  prospect  of  removing
a  body  of  turbulent  subjects  to  a  distant  country,  where
they  might  be  useful,  and  could  not  prove  dangerous,
that  he  was  disposed  to  connive  at  the  irregularity  of  a
measure  which  facilitated  their  departure.
Colony  Without  interruption  from  the  crown,  the  ad-

extended.  yenturcrs  procccdcd  to  carry  their  scheme  into
execution.  In  a  general  court,  John  Winthrop  was  ap-
pointed governor,  and  Thomas  Dudley,  deputy-governor,
and  eighteen  assistants  were  chosen ;  in  whom,  together
with  the  body  of  freemen  who  should  settle  in  New
England,  were  vested  all  the  corporate  rights  of  the  com-
pany. With  such  zeal  and  activity  did  they  prepare
for  emigration,  that  in  the  course  of  the  ensuing  year
seventeen  ships  sailed  for  New  England,  and  aboard
these  above  fifteen  hundred  persons,  among  whom  were
several  of  respectable  families,  and  in  easy  circum-
stances. On  their  arrival  in  New  England,  many  were
so  ill  satisfied  with  the  situation  of  Salem,  that  they
explored  the  country  in  quest  of  some  better  station  ;
and  settling  in  difl^brent  places  around  the  bay,  accord-
ing to  their  various  fancies,  laid  the  foundations  of  Bos-
ton, Charles-town,  Dorchester,  Roxborough,  and  other

2(32  AMERICA.

towns,  which  have  since  become  considerable  in  the  pro-
vince. In  each  of  these  a  church  was  established  on  the
same  model  with  that  of  Salem. This,  together  with
the  care  of  making  provision  for  their  subsistence  during
winter, occupied them entirely during some
months. But  in  the  first  general  court,  their
disposition  to  consider  themselves  as  members  of  an  in-
dependent society,  unconfined  by  the  regulations  in  their
charter,  began  to  appear. The  election  of  the  governor
and  deputy-governor,  the  appointment  of  all  other  of-
ficers, and  even  the  power  of  making  laws,  all  which
were  granted  by  the  charter  to  the  freemen,  were  taken
from  them,  and  vested  in  the  council  of  assistants. But
the  aristocratical  spirit  of  this  resolution  did  not  accord
with  the  ideas  of  equality  prevalent  among  the  people,
who  had  been  surprised  into  an  approbation  of  it. Next
year,  the  freemen,  whose numbers had been
greatly  augmented  by  the  admission  of  new  mem-
bers, resumed  their  former  rights.

None  but  But,  at  the  same  time,  they  ventured  to  devi-
™/the^"  ate  from  the  charter  in  a  matter  of  greater  mo-
church  ment,  which  deeply  affected  all  the  future  opera-
as  freemen,  tious  of  the  colouy,  and  Contributed  greatly  to
form  that  peculiar  character  by  which  the  people  of  New
England  have  been  distinguished.  A  law  was  passed,
declaring  that  none  shall  hereafter  be  admitted  freemen,
or  be  entitled  to  any  share  in  the  government,  or  be
capable  of  being  chosen  magistrates,  or  even  of  serving
as  jurymen,  but  such  as  have  been  received  into  the
church  as  members."  By  this  resolution,  every  person
who  did  not  hold  the  favourite  opinions  concerning  the
doctrines  of  religion,  the  discipline  of  the  church,  or  the
rites  of  worship,  was  at  once  cast  out  of  the  society,  and
stripped  of  all  the  privileges  of  a  citizen.  An  uncon-
trolled power  of  approving  or  rejecting  the  claims  of
those  who  applied  for  admission  into  communion  witli

"  Hutchinson,  p.  '26. Chalmers,  p.  153.

BOOK X.  263

the  church  being  vested  in  the  ministers  and  leading
men  of  each  congregation,  the  most  valuable  of  all  civil
rights  was  made  to  depend  on  their  decision  with  re-
„ . . spect  to  qualifications  purely  ecclesiastical. As

Jrernicious r  t.  i

conse-  in  examining  into  these,  they  proceeded  not  by
this"regu-  any  known  or  established  rules,  but  exercised  a
lation.  discretionary  judgment,  the  clergy  rose  gradually
to  a  degree  of  influence  and  authority,  from  which  the
levelling  spirit  of  the  independent  church  policy  was
calculated  to  exclude  them.  As  by  their  determination
the  political  condition  of  every  citizen  was  fixed,  all
paid  court  to  men  possessed  of  such  an  important  power,
by  assuming  those  austere  and  sanctimonious  manners
which  were  known  to  be  the  most  certain  recommenda-
tion to  their  favour.  In  consequence  of  this  ascendant,
which  was  acquired  chiefly  by  the  wildest  enthusiasts
among  the  clergy,  their  notions  became  a  standard  to
which  all  studied  to  conform,  and  the  singularities  cha-
racteristic of  the  Puritans  in  that  age  increased,  of  which
many  remarkable  instances  will  occur  in  the  course  of
our  narrative.

Indian  tcr-  Though  a  Considerable  number  of  planters
ritoriesde-  -^^s cut ofl"  by  tlic  discascs  prevalent  in  a

populated  .  r>i  i-  ii-  ••!

by  the  couutry  SO  imperfectly  cultivated  by  its  original
sraa  -pox. ^jjjjj^i^j^g^jj^g  j^g  ^Q  \^Q  g^-jll  almost  oue  continual

forest,  and  several,  discouraged  by  the  hardships  to

which  they  were  exposed,  returned  to  England,  recruits

suflicient  to  replace  them  arrived. At  the  same

1632

time  the  small-pox,  a  distemper  fatal  to  the
people  of  the  New  World,  swept  away  such  multitudes
of  the  natives  that  some  whole  tribes  disappeared;  and
Heaven,  by  thus  evacuating  a  country  in  which  the
English  might  settle  without  molestation,  was  supposed
to  declare  its  intention  that  they  should  occupy  it.
Settlements  As  scvcral  of  the  vacaut  Indian  stations  were
nits  ex°'°  "well  chosen,  such  was  the  eagerness  of  the
tended. Eiiglisli  to  take  possession  of  them,  that  their

26*4  AMERICA.

settlements  became  more  numerous  and  more  widely-
dispersed  than  suited  the  condition  of  an  infant
colony.  This  led  to  an  innovation  which  totally  altered
J  (33^  the  nature  and  constitution  of  the  government.
Frtemen When  a  general court  was  to  be  held  in  the

meet  by  ^ n

repre- year 1634,  the  freemen,  instead of  attendmg
*  it  in  person,  as  the  charter  prescribed,  elected
representatives in their different  districts, authoriz-
ing  them  to  appear  in  their  name, with full  power
to  deliberate  and  decide  concerning  every  point  that
fell  under  the  cognizance  of  the  general  court. Whe-
ther this measure  was  suggested  by  some designing
leaders,  or  whether  they  found  it  prudent  to  soothe
the  people  by  complying  with  their  inclination,  is  un-
certain. The  representatives  were  admitted,  and  con-
sidered themselves,  in  conjunction  with  the  governor
and  assistants,  as  the  supreme  legislative  assem-
poihicai* bly  of  the  colony. In  assertion  of  their  own
sumedT'  i^ig^its they  enacted, that no law should be
the assem- passed, uo tax  should  be imposed,  and  no
^' public  officer  should  be  appointed,  but  in  the
general  assembly. The  pretexts  for  making  this  new
arrangement  were  plausible. The  number  of  freemen
was  greatly  increased ; many resided  at  a  distance
from  the  places  where  the  supreme  courts  were  held  ;
personal  attendance  became  inconvenient ;  the  form  of
government  in  their  own  country  had  rendered  familiar
the  idea  of  delegating  their  rights,  and  committing  the
guardianship  of  their  liberties to  representatives of
their  own  choice, and  the experience of  ages  had
taught  them  that  this  important  trust  might  with  safety-
be  lodged in  their  hands. Thus  did  the  company  of
Massachusets  Bay,  in  less  than  six  years  from  its  in-
corporation by  the  king,  mature  and  perfect  a  scheme
which,  I  have  already  observed,  some  of  its  more  art-
ful and  aspiring  leaders  seem  to  have  had  in  view  when
the  association  for  peopling  New  England  was  first

BOOK X.  265

formed.  The  colony  must  henceforward  be  considered,
not  as  a  corporation  whose  powers  were  defined,
and  its  mode  of  procedure  regulated  by  its  charter,
but  as  a  society,  which,  having  acquired  or  assumed
political  liberty,  had,  by  its  own  voluntary  deed,  adopted
a  constitution  or  government  framed  on  the  model  of
that  in  England.
. . , But  however  liberal  their system of  civil

Spirit  oi  . , ,  .1 •  T •

fanaticism  policy  might  bc,  as  their  religious  opinions
were  no  longer  under  any  restraint  of  authority,
the  spirit  of  fanaticism  continued  to  spread,  and  became
every  day  wilder  and  more  extravagant.  Williams,  a
minister  of  Salem,  inJbigh  estimation,  having  conceived
an  antipathy  to  the  cross  of  St.  George  in  the  standard
of  England,  declaimed  against  it  with  so  much  vehe-
mence, as  a  relic  of  superstition  and  idolatry  which
ought  not  to  be  retained  among  a  people  so  pure  and
sanctified,  that  Endicott,  one  of  the  members  of  the
court  of  assistants,  in  a  transport  of  zeal,  publicly  cut
out  the  cross  from  the  ensign  displayed  before  the  go-
vernor's gate.  This  frivolous  matter  interested  and  di-
vided the  colony.  Some  of  the  militia  scrupled  to  fol-
low colours  in  which  there  was  a  cross,  lest  they  should
do  honour  to  an  idol ;  others  refused  to  serve  under  a
mutilated  banner,  lest  they  should  be  suspected  of  hav-
ing renounced  their  allegiance  to  the  crown  of  Eng-
land. After  a  long  controversy,  carried  on  by  both
parties  with  that  heat  and  zeal  which  in  trivial  disputes
supply  the  want  of  argument,  the  contest  was  termi-
nated by  a  compromise.  The  cross  was  retained  in
the  ensigns  of  forts  and  ships,  but  erased  from  the
colours  of  the  militia.  Williams,  on  account  of  this,
as  well  as  of  some  other  doctrines  deemed  unsound,
was  banished  out  of  the  colony.''

New  set- The  prosperous state  of  New  England  was
*'*''*' now  so  highly  extolled,  and  the  simple  frame  of

"  Neal's  Hist,  of  N.  Eng.  p.  140,  &c. Hutchinson,  p.  37. Chalmers,  p.  166.

2(JG  AMERICA.

its  ecclesiastic  policy  was  so  much  admired  by  all  whose
affections  were  estranged  from  the  church  of  Eup--

1 635.  ^

land,  that  crowds  of  new  settlers  flocked  thither.
Among  these  were  two  persons,  whose  names  have  been
rendered  memorable  by  the  appearance  which  they  af-
terward made  on  a  more  conspicuous  theatre  :  one  was
Hug-h  Peters,  the  enthusiastic  and  intriguing*  chaplain
of  Oliver  Cromwell ;  the  other  Mr,  Henry  Vane,  son
of  Sir  Henry  Vane,  a  privy-counsellor,  high  in  office,
and  of  great  credit  with  the  king ;  a  young  man  of  a
noble  family,  animated  with  such  zeal  for  pure  reli-
gion and  such  love  of  liberty  as  induced  him  to  relin-
quish all  his  hopes  in  England,  and  to  settle  in  a
colony  hitherto  no  farther  advanced  in  improvement
than  barely  to  afford  subsistence  to  its  members,  was
received  with  the  fondest  admiration.  His  mortified
appearance,  his  demure  look,  and  rigid  manners,  car-
ried even  beyond  the  standard  of  preciseness  in  that
society  which  he  joined,  seemed  to  indicate  a  man  of
high  spiritual  attainments,  while  his  abilities  and  ad-
dress in  business  pointed  him  out  as  worthy  of  the
hisfhest  station  in  the  community.  With  univer-
sal  consent,  and  high  expectations  of  advantage
from  his  administration,  he  was  elected  governor  in  the
year  subsequent  to  his  arrival.  But  as  the  affairs  of
an  infant  colony  afforded  not  objects  adequate  to  the
talents  of  Vane,  his  busy  pragmatical  spirit  occupied
itself  with  theological  subtilties  and  speculations  un-
worthy of  his  attention.  These  were  excited  by  a
woman,  whose  reveries  produced  such  effects  both
within  the  colony  and  beyond  its  precincts,  that,  frivo-
lous as  they  may  now  appear,  they  must  be  mentioned
as  an  occurrence  of  importance  in  its  history.
Aiitino-  It  was  the  custom  at  that  time  in  New  Eng-
raiansect.  land,  amoug  the  chief  men  in  every  congre-
gation, to  meet  once  a  week,  in  order  to  repeat  the
sermons  which  they  had  heard,  and  to  hold  religious

BOOK X.  2G7

conference  with  respect  to  the  doctrme  contained  in
them.  Mrs,  Hutchinson,  whose  husband  was  among
the  most  respectable  members  of  the  colony,  regretting
that  persons  of  her  sex  were  excluded  from  the  benefit
of  those  meetings,  assembled  statedly  in  her  house  a
number  of  women,  who  employed  themselves  in  pious  ex-
ercises similar  to  those  of  the  men.  At  first  she  satisfied
herself  with  repeating  what  she  could  recollect  of  the
discourses  delivered  by  their  teachers.  She  began
afterward  to  add  illustrations,  and  at  length  proceeded
to  censure  some  of  the  clergy  as  unsound,  and  to  vent
opinions  and  fancies  of  her  own.  These  were  all
founded  on  the  system  which  is  denominated  Antino-
mian  by  divines,  and  tinged  with  the  deepest  enthu-
siasm. She  taught,  that  sanctity  of  life  is  no  evidence
of  justification,  or  of  a  state  of  favour  with  God  ;  and
that  such  as  inculcated  the  necessity  of  manifesting  the
reality  of  our  faith  by  obedience,  preached  only  a  co-
venant of  works ;  she  contended  that  the  Spirit  of
God  dwelt  personally  in  good  men,  and  by  inward  reve-
lations and  impressions  they  received  the  fullest  dis-
coveries of  the  divine  will.  The  fluency  and  confidence
with  which  she  delivered  these  notions  gained  her
many  admirers  and  proselytes,  not  only  among  the  vul-
gar, but  among  the  principal  inhabitants.  The  whole
colony  was  interested  and  agitated.  Vane,  whose  sa-
gacity and  acuteness  seemed  to  forsake  him  whenever
they  were  turned  towards  religion,  espoused  and  de-
1637.  fended  her  wildest  tenets.  Many  conferences
Their  doc- ^gj.g  held,  davs  of  fasting;  and  humiliation  were

trinescon-  ' ./  o  ^^ -i  ^ r

deintied  appointed,  a  general  synod  was  called,  and,  alter
neraiTy-  disscusious  SO  violcut  as  threatened  the  dis-
^°^'  solution  of  the  colony,  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  opi-
nions were  condemned  as  erroneous,  and  she  herself
banished.  Several  of  her  disciples  withdrew  from  the
province  of  their  own  accord.  Vane  quitted  America
in  disgust,  unlamented  even  by  those  who  had  lately  ad-

268  AMERICA.

mired  him  ;  some  of  whom  now  regarded  him  as  a  mere

visionary,  and  others  as  one  of  those  dark  turbulent

spirits  doomed  to  embroil  every  society  into  which  they

enter."^

The  secta- Howevcr  much  these theological contests

ries  settle  in  miorht disquict  the  colonv  of  Massachusets

1  rovidence  .

and  Rhode  Bay,  they  contributed  to  the  more  speedy
population  of  America.  When  Williams  was
banished  from  Salem  in  the  year  1634,  such  was  the
attachment  of  his  hearers  to  a  pastor  whose  piety
they  revered,  that  a  good  number  of  them  volun-
tarily accompanied  him  in  his  exile.  They  directed
their  march  towards  the  south  ;  and  having  purchased
from  the  natives  a  considerable  tract  of  land,  to  which
Williams  gave  the  name  of  Providence,  they  settled
there.  They  were  joined  soon  after  by  some  of  those
to  whom  the  proceedings  against  Mrs.  Hutchinson
gave  disgust;  and  by  a  transaction  with  the  Indians
they  obtained  a  right  to  a  fertile  island  in  Naraganset
Bay,  which  acquired  the  name  of  Rhode  Island.  Wil-
liams remained  among  them  upwards  of  forty  years,  re-
spected as  the  father  and  the  guide  of  the  colony  which
he  had  planted.  His  spirit  differed  from  that  of  the
Tiieir  mo-  Puritaus  in  Massachusets ;  it  was  mild  and  to-
deration.  leratiug ;  and  having  ventured  himself  to  re-
ject established  opinions,  he  endeavoured  to  secure  the
same  liberty  to  other  men,  by  maintaining,  that  the
exercise  of  private  judgment  was  a  natural  and  sacred
right ;  that  the  civil  magistrate  has  no  compulsive  juris-
diction in  the  concerns  of  religion ;  that  the  punishment
of  any  person  on  account  of  his  opinions  was  an  en-
croachment on  conscience,  and  an  act  of  persecution.*
These  humane  principles  he  instilled  into  his  followers ;
and  all  who  felt  or  dreaded  oppression  in  other  settle-

*  Alather,  book  vii.  c.  3. Hutchinson,  p.  53  74. Neal,  p.  1.  3  44.  165,  &c.
Chalmers,  p.  163.

"  Neal's  Hist,  of  N.  Eng.  p.  141.

BOOK X.  269

ments  resorted  to  a  community  in  which  universal  to-
leration was  known  to  be  a  fundamental  maxim.  In  the
plantations  of  Providence  and  Rhode  Island,  political
union  was  established  by  voluntary  association,  and  the
equality  of  condition  among  the  members,  as  well  as
their  religious  opinions  ;  their  form  of  government  was
purely  democratical,  the  supreme  power  being  lodged
in  the  freemen  personally  assembled.  In  this  state  they
remained  until  they  were  incorporated  by  charter.^'
Colon  of  '^^  similar  causes  the  colony  of  Connecti-
Connecti- cut  is  indebted  for  its  oris'in. The  rivalship

cut.  ~  '■

between  Mr.  Cotton  and  Mr.  Hooker,  two
favourite  ministers  in  the  settlement  of  Massachusets
Bay,  disposed  the  latter,  who  was  least  successful  in
this  contest  for  fame  and  power,  to  wish  for  some  set-
tlement at  a  distance  from  a  competitor  by  whom  his
reputation  was  eclipsed.  A  good  number  of  those
who  had  imbibed  Mrs.  Hutchinson's  notions,  and  were
offended  at  such  as  combated  them,  offered  to  accom-
pany him.  Having  employed  proper  persons  to  ex-
plore the  country,  they  pitched  upon  the  west  side
of  the  great  river  Connecticut  as  the  most  inviting
station;  and  in  the  year  1636,  about  a  hundred  per-
sons, with  their  wives  and  families,  after  a  fatiguing
march  of  many  days  through  woods  and  swamps,  ar-
rived there,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  the  towns  of
Hartford,  Springfield,  and  Weatherfield.  This  settle-
ment was  attended  with  peculiar  irregularities.  Part
of  the  district  now  occupied  lay  beyond  the  limits  of
the  territory  granted  to  the  colony  of  Massachusets
Bay ;  and  yet  the  emigrants  took  a  commission  from  the
governor  and  court  of  assistants,  empowering  them  to
exercise  jurisdiction  in  that  country.  The  Dutch  from
Manhados  or  New  York,  having  discovered  the  river
Connecticut,  and  established  some  trading  houses  upon

J  Hutchinson,  p.  38. Neal,  ii.  142. Dougl.  Sura.  ii.  p.  76,  &c. Chalmers,
ch.  iL

270  AMERICA.

it,  had  acquired  all  the  right  that  prior  possession  con-
fers. Lord  Say  and  Sele,  and  lord  Brook,  the  heads
of  two  illustrious  families,  were  so  much  alarmed  at  the
arbitrary  measures  of  Charles  I.,  both  in  his  civil  and
ecclesiastical  administration,  that  they  took  a  resolution,
not  unbecoming  young  men  of  noble  birth  and  liberal
sentiments,  of  retiring  to  the  New  World,  in  order  to
enjoy  such  a  form  of  religion  as  they  approved  of,  and
those  liberties  which  they  deemed  essential  to  the  well-
being  of  society. They,  too,  fixed  on  the  banks  of  the
Connecticut  as  their  place  of  settlement,  and  had  taken
possession,  by  building  a  fort  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,
which,  from  their  united  names,  was  called  Say  Brook.
The  emigrants  from  Massachusets,  without  regarding
either  the  defects  in  their  own  right  or  the  pretensions
of  other  claimants,  kept  possession,  and  proceeded  with
vigour  to  clear  and  cultivate  the  country. By  degrees
they  got  rid  of  every  competitor. The  Dutch,  recently
settled  in  America,  and  too  feeble  to  engage  in  a  war,
peaceably  withdrew  from  Connecticut. Lord  Say  and
Sele  and  lord  Brook  made  over  to  the  colony  whatever
title  they  might  have  to  any  lands  in  that  region. So-
ciety was  established  by  a  voluntary  compact  of  the
freemen ; and  though  they  soon  disclaimed  all  de-
pendence on  the  colony  of  Massachusets  Bay,  they  re-
tained such  veneration  for  its  legislative  wisdom  as  to
adopt  a  form  of  government  nearly  resembling  its  in-
stitutions, with  respect  both  to  civil  and  ecclesiastical
policy. At  a  subsequent  period,  the  colony  of  Con-
necticut was  likewise  incorporated  by  royal  charter.^

The  history  of  the  first  attempt  to  people  the
Hampshire  provinccs  of  New  Hampshire  and  Main,  which
form  the  fourth  and  most  extensive  division  in
New  England,  is  obscured  and  perplexed  by  the  inter-
fering claims  of  various  proprietors. The  company  of

*  Hu,tchinson,  p.  44,  &c. Neal,  i.  147. Douglas,  ii.  158,  &c. Chalmers' An-
nals, ch.  12.

BOOK  X.  271

Plymouth  had  inconsiderately  parcelled  out  the  northern
part  of  the  territory  contained  in  its  grant  among  diffe-
rent persons  ;  of  these  only  Sir  Ferdinando  Gorges  and
Captain  Mason  seem  to  have  had  any  serious  intention
to  occupy  the  lands  allotted  to  them.  Their  efforts  to
accomplish  this  were  meritorious  and  persevering,  but
unsuccessful.  The  expense  of  settling  colonies  in  an
uncultivated  country  must  necessarily  be  great  and  im-
mediate ;  the  prospect  of  a  return  is  often  uncertain,  and
always  remote.  The  funds  of  two  private  adventurers
were  not  adequate  to  such  an  undertaking.  Nor  did
the  planters  whom  they  sent  out  possess  that  principle
of  enthusiasm,  which  animated  their  neighbours  of  Mas-
sachusets  with  vigour,  to  struggle  through  all  the  hard-
ships and  dangers  to  which  society,  in  its  infancy,  is
exposed  in  a  savage  land.  Gorges  and  Mason,  it  is
probable,  must  have  abandoned  their  design,  if,  from
the  same  motives  that  settlements  had  been  made  in
Rhode  Island  and  Connecticut,  colonists  had  not  unex-
pectedly migrated  into  New  Hampshire  and  Main.
Mr.  Wheelwright,  a  minister  of  some  note,  nearly  re-
lated to  Mrs.  Hutchinson,  and  one  of  her  most  fervent
admirers  and  partisans,  had  on  this  account  been  ba-
nished from  the  province  of  Massachusets  Bay.''  In
quest  of  a  new  station,  he  took  a  course  opposite  to  the
other  exiles ;  and  advancing  towards  the  north,  founded
the  town  of  Exeter,  on  a  small  river  flowing  into  Piska-
taqua  Bay.  His  followers,  few  in  number,  but  firmly
united,  were  of  such  rigid  principles,  that  even  the
churches  of  Massachusets  did  not  appear  to  them  suf-
ficiently pure.  From  time  to  time  they  received  some
recruits,  whom  love  of  novelty,  or  dissatisfaction  with
the  ecclesiastical  institutions  of  the  other  colonies,
prompted  to  join  them-  Their  plantations  were  widely
dispersed,  but  the  country  was  thinly  peopled,  and  its
political state  extremely unsettled. The  colony  of

^  Hutchinson,  p.  70.

272  AMERICA.

Massachusets  Bay  claimed  jurisdiction  over  them,  as
occupying  lands  situated  within  the  limits  of  their
grant.  Gorges  and  Mason  asserted  the  rights  conveyed
to  them  as  proprietors  by  their  charter.  In  several  dis-
tricts the  planters,  without  regarding  the  pretensions  of
either  party,  governed  themselves  by  maxims  and  laws
copied  from  those  of  their  brethren  in  the  adjacent  co-
lonies.'' The  first  reduction  of  the  political  constitution
in  the  provinces  of  New  Hampshire  and  Main  into  a
regular  and  permanent  form,  was  subsequent  to  the
revolution.

By  extending  their  settlements,  the  English  became
exposed  to  new  danger.  The  tribes  of  Indians  around
Massachusets  Bay  were  feeble  and  unwarlike  ;  yet,  from
regard  to  justice,  as  well  as  motives  of  prudence,  the
first  colonists  were  studious  to  obtain  the  consent  of  the
natives  before  they  ventured  to  occupy  any  of  their
lands  ;  and  though  in  such  transactions  the  considera-
tion given  was  often  very  inadequate  to  the  value  of  the
territory  acquired,  it  was  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  demands
The  farther  of  the  proprietors.  The  English  took  quiet
nlentTof the  posscssiou  of  the  lauds  thus  conveyed  to  them,
English  re-  ^^^  ^^  opeu  hostiUtv  broke  out  between  them

sisted  by  tr  J

the  natives,  and  the  aucicnt  possessors.  But  the  colonies
of  Providence  and  Connecticut  soon  found  that  they
were  surrounded  by  more  powerful  and  martial  nations.
Among  these  the  most  considerable  were  the  Naragan-
sets  afid  Pequods  ;  the  former  seated  on  the  bay  which
bears  their  name,  and  the  latter  occupying  the  territory
which  stretches  from  the  river  Pequod  along  the  banks
of  the  Connecticut.  The  Pequods  were  a  formidable
people,  who  could  bring  into  the  field  a  thousand  war-
riors, not  inferior  in  courage  to  any  in  the  New  World.
They  foresaw,  not  only  that  the  extermination  of  the
Indian  race  must  be  the  consequence  of  permitting  the

^  Hutchinson,  p.  103,  &c.  176. Douglas's  Sum.  ii.  22,  &c. Chalmers'  Annals,
cli.  17.

BOOK  X.  273

English  to  spread  over  the  continent  of  America,  but
that  if  measures  were  not  speedily  concerted  to  prevent
it,  the  calamity  would  be  unavoidable.  With  this  view
they  applied  to  the  Naragansets,  requesting  them  to
forget  ancient  animosities  for  a  moment,  and  to  co-
operate with  them  in  expelling  a  common  enemy  who
threatened  both  with  destruction.  They  represented
that,  when  those  strangers  first  landed,  the  object  of  their
visit  was  not  suspected,  and  no  proper  precautions  were
taken  to  check  their  progress ;  that  now,  by  sending  out
colonies  in  one  year  towards  three  different  quarters,
their  intentions  were  manifest,  and  the  people  of  Ame-
rica must  abandon  their  native  seats  to  make  way  for
unjust  intruders.

But  the  Naragansets  and  Pequods,  like  most  of  the
contiguous  tribes  in  America,  were  rivals,  and  there
subsisted  between  them  a  hereditary  and  implacable
enmity.  Revenge  is  the  darling  passion  of  savages ;  in
order  to  secure  the  indulgence  of  which,  there  is  no  pre-
sent advantage  that  they  will  not  sacrifice,  and  no  future
consequence  which  they  do  not  totally  disregard.  The
War  with  Naragauscts,  instead  of  closing  with  the  prudent
the  Pequod  proposal  of  their  neighbours,  discovered  their
hostile  intentions  to  the  governor  of  Massa-
chusets  Bay  ;  and,  eager  to  lay  hold  on  such  a  favour-
able opportunity  of  wreaking  their  vengeance  on  their
ancient  foes,  entered  into  an  alliance  with  the  English
against  them.  The  Pequods,  more  exasperated  than
discouraged  by  the  imprudence  and  treachery  of  their
countrymen,  took  the  field,  and  carried  on  the  war  in  the
usual  mode  of  Americans.  They  surprised  stragglers,
and  scalped  them ;  they  plundered  and  burnt  remote
settlements  ;  they  attacked  Fort  Say  Brook  without  suc-
cess, though  garrisoned  only  by  twenty  men ;  and  when
the  English  began  to  act  offensively,  they  retired  to  fast-
nesses which  they  deemed  inaccessible.  The  different
colonies  had  agreed  to  unite  against  the  common  enemy,

VOL. VIII.  T

274  AMERICA.

each  furnishing  a  quota  of  men  in  proportion  to  its
numbers.  The  troops  of  Connecticut,  which  lay  most
exposed  to  danger,  were  soon  assembled.  The  march
of  those  from  Massachusets,  which  formed  the  most  con-
siderable body,  was  retarded  by  the  most  singular  cause
that  ever  influenced  the  operations  of  a  military  force.
Purification  When  they  were  mustered  previous  to  their  de-
ofthearray.  parturc,  it  was  fouud  that  some  of  the  officers,
as  well  as  of  the  private  soldiers,  were  still  under  a
covenant  of  works  ;  and  that  the  blessing  of  God  could
not  be  implored  or  expected  to  crown  the  arms  of  such
unhallowed  men  with  success.  The  alarm  was  general,
and  many  arrangements  necessary  in  order  to  cast  out
the  unclean,  and  to  render  this  little  band  sufficiently
pure  to  fight  the  battles  of  a  people  who  entertained  high
ideas  of  their  own  sanctity.*"

Defeat  of  Mcanwliile  the  Connecticut  troops,  rein-
the  Indians,  forced  by  a  Small  detachment  from  Say  Brook,
found  it  necessary  to  advance  towards  the  enemy.  They
were  posted  on  a  rising  ground,  in  the  middle  of  a
swamp  towards  the  head  of  the  river  Mistick,  which
they  had  surrounded  with  palisadoes,  the  best  defence
that  their  slender  skill  in  the  art  of  fortification  had  dis-
covered. Though  they  knew  that  the  English  were  in
motion,  yet,  with  the  usual  improvidence  and  security  of
savages,  they  took  no  measures  either  to  observe  their
progress,  or  to  guard  against  being  surprised  themselves.

The  enemy,  unperceived,  reached  the  palisadoes ;

and  if  a  dog  had  not  given  the  alarm  by  barking,
the  Indians  must  have  been  massacred  without  resistance.
In  a  moment,  however,  they  started  to  arms,  and  raising
the  war-cry,  prepared  to  repel  the  assailants.  But  at  that
early  period  of  their  intercourse  with  the  Europeans,  the
Americans  were  little  acquainted  with  the  use  of  gun-
powder, and  dreaded  its  effects  extremely.  While  some
of  the  English  galled  them  with  an  incessant  fire  through

=  Neal,  i.  168.

BOOK  X.  275

the  intervals  between  the  palisadoes,  others  forced  their
way  by  the  entries  into  the  fort,  filled  only  with  branches
of  trees ;  and  setting  fire  to  the  huts  which  were  covered
with  reeds,  the  confusion  and  terror  quickly  became
general.  Many  of  the  women  and  children  perished  in
the  flames ;  and  the  warriors,  in  endeavouring  to  escape,
were  either  slain  by  the  English,  or  falling  into  the
hands  of  their  Indian  allies,  who  surrounded  the  fort  at
a  distance,  were  reserved  for  a  more  cruel  fate.  After
the  junction  of  the  troops  from  Massachusets,  the  English
resolved  to  pursue  their  victory ;  and  hunting  the  Indians
from  one  place  of  retreat  to  another,  some  subsequent
encounters  were  hardly  less  fatal  to  them  than  the  action
on  the  Mistick.  In  less  than  three  months  the  tribe  of
Pequods  was  extirpated :  a  few  miserable  fugitives,  who
took  refuge  among  the  neighbouring  Indians,  being  in-
corporated by  them,  lost  their  name  as  a  distinct  people.
In  this  first  essay  of  their  arms,  the  colonists  of  New
England  seem  to  have  been  conducted  by  skilful  and
enterprising  officers,  and  displayed  both  courage  and
perseverance  as  soldiers.  But  they  stained  their  laurels
Cruelties  by  the  use  which  they  made  of  victory.  Instead
agabsTthe  of  treating  the  Pequods  as  an  independent
Indians.  people,  who  made  a  gallant  effort  to  defend
the  property,  the  rights,  and  the  freedom  of  their  nation,
they  retaliated  upon  them  all  the  barbarities  of  Ame-
rican war.**  Some  they  massacred  in  cold  blood,  others
they  gave  up  to  be  tortured  by  their  Indian  allies,  a
considerable  number  they  sold  as  slaves  in  Bermudas,
the  rest  were  reduced  to  servitude  among  themselves,
j,^.  ^  But  reprehensible  as  this conduct  of  the

tions  from EugUsh  must  be  deemed,  their  vigorous  efforts
in  this  decisive  campaign  filled  all  the  surround-
ing tribes  of  Indians  with  such  a  high  opinion  of  their
valour  as  secured  a  long  tranquillity  to  all  their  settle-

*  Hutchinson,  p.  58.  76,  &c. Mather,  Magnalia,  b.  vii.  ch.  6. Hubbard's  State
of  New  England,  p.  5.  116,  &c.

T 2

276  AMERICA.

ments.  At  the  same  time  the  violence  of  administra-
tion in  England  continued  to  increase  their  population
and  strength,  by  forcing  many  respectable  subjects  to
tear  themselves  from  all  the  tender  connexions  that
bind  men  to  their  native  country,  and  to  fly  for  refuge
to  a  reo-ion  of  the  New  World,  which  hitherto  presented
to  them  nothing  that  could  allure  them  thither  but  ex-
Prohibited  emption  from  oppression.  The  number  of
bj  royal thosc  emigrants  drew  the  attention  of  p;overn-

proclania-  ^  •  i i  i i

tion.  ment,  and  appeared  so  tormidable,  that  a  pro-

clamation was  issued,  prohibiting  masters  of  ships  from
carrying  passengers  to  New  England  without  special
permission.  On  many  occasions  this  injunction  was
eluded  or  disregarded.  Fatally  for  the  king,  it  operated
with  full  effect  in  one  instance.  Sir  Arthur  Haslerig,
John  Hampden,  Oliver  Cromwell,  and  some  other  per-
sons whose  principles  and  views  coincided  with  theirs,
impatient  to  enjoy  those  civil  and  religious  liberties
which  they  struggled  in  vain  to  obtain  in  Great  Britain,
hired  some  ships  to  carry  them  and  their  attendants  to
New  England.  By  order  of  council,  an  embargo  was
laid  on  these  when  on  the  point  of  sailing ;  and  Charles,
far  from  suspecting  that  the  future  revolutions  in  his
kingdoms  were  to  be  excited  and  directed  by  persons
in  such  an  humble  sphere  of  life,  forcibly  detained  the
men  destined  to  overturn  his  throne,  and  to  terminate
his  days  by  a  violent  death. ^

But  in  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of  government  to  check
this  spirit  of  migration,  the  measures  of  the  king  and
his  ministers  were  considered  by  a  great  body  of  the
people  as  so  hostile  to  those  rights  which  they  deemed
most  valuable,  that  in  the  course  of  the  year  1638,  about
three  thousand  persons  embarked  for  New  England,
choosing  rather  to  expose  themselves  to  all  the  conse-
quences of  disregarding  the  royal  proclamation,  than  to

c  Mather,  Magnalia,  b.  i.  ch.  5.  p.  23. Neal's  Hist,  of  N.  Eng.  i.  151. Chalmers'
Annals,  i.  15.5. 160,  &c.

BOOK X.  277

remain  longer  under  oppression.  Exasperated  at  this
contempt  of  his  authority,  Charles  had  recourse  to  a  vio-
lent but  effectual  mode  of  accomplishing  what  he  had
in  view.  A  writ  of  quo  ivarranto  was  issued  against  the
Colony  of  corporatiou  of  Massachusets  Bay.  The  colonists
Massachu- j^^^j  conformcd  so  little  to  the  terms  of  their

sets  Bay

sued  at  charter,  that  judgment  was  given  against  them
found  to  without  difficulty.  They  were  found  to  have
felled^Us  foi'feitcd  all  their  rights  as  a  corporation,  which
rights.  Qf  course  returned  to  the  crown,  and  Charles
began  to  take  measures  for  new-modelling  the  political
frame  of  the  colony,  and  vesting  the  administration  of
its  affairs  in  other  hands.  But  his  plans  were  never
carried  into  execution.  In  every  corner  of  his  dominions,
the  storm  now  began  to  gather,  which  soon  burst  out  with
such  fatal  violence,  that  Charles,  during  the  remainder
of  his  unfortunate  reign,  occupied  with  domestic  and
more  interesting  cares,  had  not  leisure  to  bestow  any  at-
tention upon  a  remote  and  inconsiderable  province.*^

On  the  meeting  of  the  Long  Parliament,  such  a  revo-
lution took  place  in  England,  that  all  the  motives  for
migrating  to  the  New  World  ceased.  The  maxims  of
the  Puritans  with  respect  to  the  government  both  of
church  and  state  became  predominant  in  the  nation,  and
were  enforced  by  the  hand  of  power.  Their  oppressors
were  humbled  ;  that  perfect  system  of  reformed  policy,
which  had  long  been  the  object  of  their  admiration  and
desire,  was  established  by  law;  and  amidst  the  intrigues
and  conflicts  of  an  obstinate  civil  war,  turbulent  and
aspiring  spirits  found  such  full  occupation,  that  they
had  no  inducement  to  quit  a  busy  theatre,  on  which  they
had  risen  to  act  a  most  conspicuous  part.  From  the
Station  of  year  1620,  when  the  first  feeble  colony  was  con-
nies'a°t "this  ^uctcd  to  Ncw  England  by  the  Brownists,  to
period.  the  year  1640,  it  has  been  computed,  that
twenty-one  thousand  two  hundred  British  subjects  had

f  Hutchinson,  p.  86. 502,  &:c. Chahners'  Annals,!.  161.

278  AMERICA.

settled  there.  The  money  expended  by  various  ad-
venturers during  that  period,  in  fitting  out  ships,  in  pur-
chasing stock,  and  transporting  settlers,  amounted,  on
a  moderate  calculation,  nearly  to  two  hundred  thousand
pounds  ;^  avast  sum  in  that  age,  and  which  no  principles,
inferior  in  force  to  those  wherewith  the  Puritans  were
animated,  could  have  persuaded  men  to  lay  out,  on  the
uncertain  prospect  of  obtaining  an  establishment  in  a
remote  uncultivated  region,  which,  from  its  situation
and  climate,  could  allure  them  with  no  hope  but  that
of  finding  subsistence  and  enjoying  freedom.  For  some
years,  even  subsistence  was  procured  with  difficulty ;
and  it  was  towards  the  close  of  that  period  to  which  our
narrative  is  arrived,  before  the  product  of  the  settlement
yielded  the  planters  any  return  for  their  stock.  About
that  time  they  began  to  export  corn  in  small  quantities
to  the  West  Indies,  and  made  some  feeble  attempts  to
extend  the  fishery,  and  to  open  the  trade  in  lumber,
which  have  since  proved  the  staple  articles  of  commerce
in  the  colony.''  Since  the  year  1640,  the  number  of
people  with  which  New  England  has  recruited  the  popu-
lation of  the  parent-state,  is  supposed  at  least  to  equal
what  may  have  been  drained  from  it  by  occasional  mi-
grations thither.

But  though  the  sudden  change  of  system  in  Great
Britain  stopped  entirely  the  influx  of  settlers  into  New
England,  the  principles  of  the  colonists  coincided  so
perfectly  with  those  of  the  popular  leaders  in  parliament,
that  they  were  soon  distinguished  by  peculiar  marks  of
Exemp-  their  brotherly  affection.  By  a  vote  of  the  house
tionfrom of  commons  in  the  year  1642,  the  people  in  all

certain  ^  ^ ^

duties  the  different  plantations  of  New  England  were
t^he"coio-°  exempted  from  payment  of  any  duties,  either
""*^^'  upon  goods  exported  thither,  or  upon  those
which  they  imported  into  the  mother-country,  until  the

(  Mather,  b.  i.  ch.  4.  p.  17.  ch.  5.  p.  23. Hutchinson,  p.  193.  Chalmers'  Annals,
p.  i.  165,  ^  Hutchinson,  p.  91, 92.

BOOK X.  279

house  shall  take  farther  order  to  the  contrary.

This  was  afterward  confirmed  by  the  authority
of  both  houses.  Encouraged  by  such  an  extraordinary
privilege,  industry  made  rapid  progress  in  all  the  dis-
tricts of  New  England,  and  population  increased  along
with  it.  In  return  for  those  favours,  the  colonists  ap-
plauded the  measures  of  parliament,  celebrated  its  ge-
nerous efforts  to  vindicate  the  rights  and  liberties  of  the
nation,  prayed  for  the  success  of  its  arms,  and  framed
regulations  in  order  to  prevent  any  exertion  in  favour
of  the  king  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic'

Relying  on  the  indulgent  partiality  with  which  all
their  proceedings  were  viewed  by  men  thus  closely  united
with  them  in  sentiments  and  wishes,  the  people  of  New
England  ventured  on  a  measure,  which  not  only  in-
creased their  security  and  power,  but  may  be  regarded
as  a  considerable  step  towards  independence.  Under
the  impression  or  pretext  of  the  danger  to  which  they
were  exposed  from  the  surrounding  tribes  of  Indians,
1643.  the  four  colonies  of  Massachusets,  Plymouth,
Cwffide-  Connecticut,  and  Newhaven,  entered  into  a
r?<=y  °f*^^  league  of  perpetual  confederacy,  offensive  and
land  states,  defcnsivc  ;  an  idea  familiar  to  several  leading
men  in  the  colonies,  as  it  was  framed  in  imitation  of  the
famous  bond  of  union  among  the  Dutch  provinces,  in
whose  dominions  the  Brownists  had  long  resided.  It
was  stipulated,  that  the  confederates  should  henceforth
be  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  United  Colonies  of
New  England  ;  that  each  colony  shall  remain  separate
and  distinct,  and  have  exclusive  jurisdiction  within  its
own  territory  ;  and,  that  in  every  war,  offensive  or  de-
fensive, each  of  the  confederates  shall  furnish  his  quota
of  men,  provisions,  and  money,  at  a  rate  to  be  fixed
from  time  to  time,  in  proportion  to  the  number  of  people
in  each  settlement ;  that  an  assembly  composed  of  two
commissioners  from  each  colony  shall  be  held  annually,

•  Hutchinson,  p.  114. App.  517. Chalmers' Annals,  i.  174.  176.

280  AMERICA.

with  power  to  deliberate  and  decide  in  all  points  of
common  concern  to  the  confederacy  ;  and  every  deter-
mination, in  which  six  of  their  number  concur,  shall  be
binding  on  the  whole.*"  In  this  transaction  the  colonies
of  New  England  seem  to  have  considered  themselves
as  independent  societies,  possessing  all  the  rights  of
sovereignty,  and  free  from  the  control  of  any  superior
power.  The  governing  party  in  England,  occupied  with
affairs  of  more  urgent  concern,  and  nowise  disposed
to  observe  the  conduct  of  their  brethren  in  America  with
any  jealous  attention,  suffered  the  measure  to  pass
without  animadversion.

Imboldened  by  this  connivance,  the  spirit  of  inde-
pendence gathered  strength,  and  soon  displayed  itself
more  openly :  some  persons  of  note  in  the  colony  of
Massachusets,  averse  to  the  system  of  ecclesiastical  po-
lity established  there,  and  preferring  to  it  the  govern-
ment and  discipline  of  the  churches  of  England  or
Scotland,  having:  remonstrated  to  the  general
court  against  the  injustice  of  depriving  them  of
their  rights  as  freemen,  and  of  their  privileges  as
Christians,  because  they  could  not  join  as  members  with
any  of  the  congregational  churches,  petitioned  that  they
might  no  longer  be  bound  to  obey  laws  to  which  they
had  not  assented,  nor  be  subjected  to  taxes  imposed
by  an  assembly  in  which  they  were  not  represented.
Petition  of  Their  demands  were  not  only  rejected,  but  they
theDis-  were  imprisoned,  and  fined  as  disturbers  of  the
jected.  public  peacc  ;  and  when  they  appointed  some
of  their  number  to  lay  their  grievances  before  parliament,
the  annual  court,  in  order  to  prevent  this  appeal  to  the
supreme  power,  attempted  first  to  seize  their  papers,  and
then  to  obstruct  their  embarkation  for  England.  But
though  neither  of  these  could  be  accomplished,  such
was  the  address  and  influence  of  the  colonies'  agents  in

kNeal's  Hist,  of  New  England,  i.  202,  &c. Hutcliinson,  p.  124.  Chalmers'  An-
nals, p.  177.

BOOK  X.  281

Eno-land,  tliat  no  inquiry  seems  to  have  been  made  into
this  transaction.'  This  was  followed  by  an  indication
still  less  ambiguous  of  the  aspiring  spirit  prevalent
among  the  people  of  Massachusets.  Under  every  form
of  government  the  right  of  coining  money  has  been  con-
sidered as  a  prerogative  peculiar  to  sovereignty,  and
which  no  subordinate  member  in  any  state  is  entitled  to
1652.  claim.  Regardless  of  this  established  maxim,
SingL-  the  general  court  ordered  a  coinage  of  silver
sumed  by  nioncy  at  Boston,  stamped  with  the  name  of
nists.  the  colony,  and  a  tree  as  an  apt  symbol  of  its
progressive  vigour."  Even  this  usurpation  escaped
without  notice.  The  independents,  having  now  humbled
all  rival  sects,  engrossed  the  whole  direction  of  aifairs
in  Great  Britain ;  and  long  accustomed  to  admire  the
government  of  New  England,  framed  agreeably  to  those
principles  which  they  had  adopted  as  the  most  perfect
model  of  civil  and  ecclesiastical  polity,  they  were  un-
willing to  stain  its  reputation,  by  censuring  any  part  of
its  conduct.

Cromwell  When  Cromwell  usurped  the  supreme  power,
patronises  the  colonics  of  Ncw  England  continued  to  stand

the  New

England  as  high  in  his  estimation.  As  he  had  deeply
CO  omes.  -jj^^^jj^g^j  ^jj  ^]^q  fanatical  notions  of  the  inde-
pendents, and  was  perpetually  surrounded  by  the  most
eminent  and  artful  teachers  of  that  sect,  he  kept  a  con-
stant correspondence  with  the  leading  men  in  the
American  settlements,  who  seem  to  have  looked  up  to
him  as  a  zealous  patron."  He  in  return  considered
them  as  his  most  devoted  adherents,  attached  to  him
Proposes  uo  Icss  by  affcctiou  than  by  principle.  He
p°ortthe'  soon  gavc  a  striking  proof  of  this.  On  the
colonists  conquest  of  Jamaica,  he  formed  a  scheme  for
maica. the  sccurity  and  improvement  of  the  acquisi-

•  Neal's  Hist,  of  New  England,  i.  121.  Hutchinson's  Hist.  145,  &c. Collect.  188,
&c. Chalm.  Ann.  179. Mather,  Magnal.  b.iii.cli.i.  p.  30.

M  Hutchinson's  Hist.  177,  178. Chalmers'  Annals,  p.  181.
n  Hutchinson,  App.  520,  &:c.  Collect,  p.  233.

282  AMERICA.

tion  made  by  his  victorious  arms,  suited  to  the  ardour
of  an  impetuous  spirit  that  delighted  in  accomplishing
its  ends  by  extraordinary  means.  He  proposed  to
transport  the  people  of  New  England  to  that  island,
and  employed  every  argument  calculated  to  make  im-
pression upon  them,  in  order  to  obtain  their  consent.
He  endeavoured  to  rouse  their  religious  zeal  by  repre-
senting what  a  fatal  blow  it  would  be  to  the  man  of  sin,
if  a  colony  of  the  faithful  were  settled  in  the  midst  of
his  territories  in  the  New  World.  He  allured  them  with
prospects  of  immense  wealth  in  a  fertile  region,  which
would  reward  the  industry  of  those  who  cultivated  it,
with  all  the  precious  productions  of  the  torrid  zone,
and  expressed  his  fervent  wish  that  they  might  take
possession  of  it,  in  order  to  fulfil  God's  promise  of
making  his  people  the  head  and  not  the  tail.  He  as-
sured them  of  being  supported  by  the  whole  force  of
his  authority,  and  of  vesting  all  the  powers  of  govern-
Coionists  ment  entirely  in  their  hands.  But  by  this  time
accepting  the  colouists  wcrc  attached  to  a  country  in
this  offer,  which  they  had  resided  for  many  years,  and
where,  though  they  did  not  attain  opulence,  they  en-
joyed the  comforts  of  life  in  great  abundance ;  and  they
dreaded  so  much  the  noxious  climate  of  the  "West  In-
dies, which  had  proved  fatal  to  a  great  number  of  the
English  who  first  settled  in  Jamaica,  that  they  declined,
though  in  the  most  respectful  terms,  closing  with  the
protector  s  proposition."

»  Hutchinson,  p.  190,  &c. Chalmers,  p.  188.

NOTES

AND

ILLUSTRATIONS.

Note  I.  p.  1.

In  my  inquiries  concerning  the  manners  and  policy  of  the  Mexi-
cans, I  have  received  much  information  from  a  large  manuscript  of
Don  Alonso  de  Corita,  one  of  the  judges  in  the  court  of  audience
of  Mexico.  In  the  year  1553,  Philip  II.,  in  order  to  discover  the
mode  of  levying  tribute  from  his  Indian  subjects,  that  would  be
most  beneficial  to  the  crown,  and  least  oppressive  to  them,  ad-
dressed a  mandate  to  all  the  courts  of  audience  in  America,  en-
joining them  to  answer  certain  queries  which  he  proposed  to  them,
concerning  the  ancient  form  of  government  established  among  the
various  nations  of  Indians,  and  the  mode  in  which  they  had  been
accustomed  to  pay  taxes  to  their  kings  or  chiefs.  In  obedience  to
this  mandate,  Corita,  who  had  resided  nineteen  years  in  America,
fourteen  of  which  he  passed  in  New  Spain,  composed  the  work  of
which  I  have  a  copy.  He  acquaints  his  sovereign,  that  he  had
made  it  an  object,  during  his  residence  in  America,  and  in  all  its
provinces  which  he  had  visited,  to  inquire  diligently  into  the  man-
ners and  customs  of  the  natives ;  that  he  had  conversed  for  this
purpose  with  many  aged  and  intelligent  Indians,  and  consulted
several  of  the  Spanish  ecclesiastics,  who  understood  the  Indian
languages  most  perfectly,  particularly  some  of  those  who  landed  in
New  Spain  soon  after  the  conquest.  Corita  appears  to  be  a  man
of  some  learning,  and  to  have  carried  on  his  inquiries  with  the  dili-
gence and  accuracy  to  which  he  pretends.  Greater  credit  is  due
to  his  testimony  from  one  circumstance.  His  work  was  not  com-
posed with  a  view  to  publication,  or  in  support  of  any  particular
theory,  but  contains  simple  though  full  answers  to  queries  pro-
posed to  him  officially.  Though  Herrera  does  not  mention  him
among  the  authors  whom  he  had  followed  as  guides  in  his  his-
tory, I  should  suppose,  from  several  facts  of  which  he  takes  notice,
as  well  as  from  several  expressions  which  he  uses,  that  this  memo-
rial of  Corita  was  not  unknown  to  him.

284  NOTES AND

Note  II.  p.  10.

The  early  Spanish  writers  were  so  hasty  and  inaccurate  in  esti-
mating the  numbers  of  people  in  the  provinces  and  towns  of  Ame-
rica, that  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  that  of  Mexico  itself  with  any
degree  of  precision.  Cortes  describes  the  extent  and  populousness
of  Mexico  in  general  terms,  which  imply  that  it  was  not  inferior  to
the  greatest  cities  in  Europe.  Gomara  is  more  explicit,  and  af-
firms, that  there  were  60,000  houses  or  families  in  Mexico.  Cron.
c.  78.  Herrera  adopts  his  opinion,  Dec.  2.  lib.  vii.  c,  13 ;  and
the  generality  of  writers  follow  them  implicity  without  inquiry  or
scruple.  According  to  this  account,  the  inhabitants  of  Mexico
must  have  been  about  300,000.  Torquemada,  with  his  usual  pro-
pensity to  the  marvellous,  asserts,  that  there  were  a  hundred  and
twenty  thousand  houses  or  families  in  Mexico,  and  consequently
about  six  hundred  thousand  inhabitants.  Lib.  iii.  c.  23,  But  in  a
very  judicious  account  of  the  Mexican  empire,  by  one  of  Cortes's
officers,  the  population  is  fixed  at  60,000  people.  Ramusio,  iii.
309.  A.  Even  by  this  account,  which  probably  is  much  nearer  the
truth  than  any  of  the  foregoing,  Mexico  was  a  great  city.

Note  III.  p.  13.

It  is  to  P.  Torribio  de  Benavente,  that  I  am  indebted  for  this
curious  observation.  Palafox,  bishop  of  Ciudad  de  la  Puebla  Los
Angeles,  confirms  and  illustrates  it  more  fully.  The  Mexican
(says  he)  is  the  only  language  in  which  a  termination  indicating  re-
spect, si/ara*  reierentiaks y  de  corfesia,  may  be  affixed  to  every  word.
By  adding  the  final  syllable  zin  or  azin  to  any  word,  it  becomes  a
proper  expression  of  veneration  in  the  mouth  of  an  inferior.  If,  in
speaking  to  an  equal,  the  word  Father  is  to  be  used,  it  is  Tat/,  but
an  inferior  says  Tatzin.  One  priest  speaking  to  another,  calls  him
Teopixque ;  a  person  of  inferior  rank  calls  him  Teopixcatzin.  The
name  of  the  emperor  who  reigned  when  Cortes  invaded  Mexico,
was  Montezuma,  but  his  vassals,  from  reverence,  pronounced  it  Mon-
tezumazin.  Torribio,  MS,  Palaf.  Virtudes  del  Indio.  p.  Q5.  The
Mexicans  had  not  only  reverential  nouns,  but  reverential  verbs.
The  manner  in  which  these  are  formed  from  the  verbs  in  common
use,  is  explained  by  D,  Jos.  Aug,  Aldama  y  Guevara  in  his  Mexi-
can Grammar,  N°  188.

Note  IV.  p.  17.
From  comparing  several  passages  in  Corita  and  Herrera,  we

ILLUSTRATIONS.  285

may  collect,  with  some  degree  of  accuracy,  the  various  modes  in
which  the  Mexicans  contributed  towards  the  support  of  government.
1 .  Some  persons  of  the  first  order  seem  to  have  been  exempted  from
the  payment  of  any  tribute,  and  as  their  only  duty  to  the  public,
were  bound  to  personal  service  in  war,  and  to  follow  the  banner  of
their  sovereign^with  their  vassals.  2.  The  immediate  vassals  of
the  crown  were  bound  not  only  to  personal  military  service,  but
paid  a  certain  proportion  of  the  produce  of  their  lands  in  kind.
3.  Those  who  held  offices  of  honour  or  trust,  paid  a  certain  share
of  what  they  received  in  consequence  of  holding  these.  4.  Each
Capullce,  or  association,  cultivated  some  part  of  the  common  field
allotted  to  it,  for  the  behoof  of  the  crown,  and  deposited  the  pro-
duce in  the  royal  granaries.  5.  Some  part  of  whatever  was  brought
to  the  public  markets,  whether  fruits  of  the  earth,  or  the  various
productions  of  their  artists  and  manufacturers,  was  demanded  for
the  public  use,  and  the  merchants  who  paid  this  were  exempted
from  every  other  tax.  6.  The  Mayeques,  or  adscripti  gleboe,  were
bound  to  cultivate  certain  districts  in  every  province,  which  may  be
considered  as  croun  lands,  and  brought  the  increase  into  public
storehouses.  Thus  the  sovereign  received  some  part  of  whatever
was  useful  or  valuable  in  the  country,  whether  it  was  the  natural
production  of  the  soil,  or  acquired  by  the  industry  of  the  people.
What  each  contributed  towards  the  support  of  government,  seems
to  have  been  inconsiderable.  Corita,  in  answer  to  one  of  the
queries  put  to  the  audience  of  Mexico  by  Philip  II.,  endeavours  to
estimate  in  money  the  value  of  what  each  citizen  might  be  supposed
to  pay,  and  does  not  reckon  it  at  more  than  three  or  four  reals^
about  eighteen  pence  or  two  shillings  a-head.

Note  V.  p.  17.

Cortes,  who  seems  to  have  been  as  much  astonished  with  this,
as  with  any  instance  of  Mexican  ingenuity,  gives  a  particular  de-
scription of  it.  Along  one  of  the  causeways,  says  he,  by  which  they
enter  the  city,  are  conducted  two  conduits,  composed  of  clay  tem-
pered with  mortar,  about  two  paces  in  breadth,  and  raised  about
six  feet.  In  one  of  them  is  conveyed  a  stream  of  excellent  water,
as  large  as  the  body  of  a  man,  into  the  centre  of  the  city,  and  it
supplies  all  the  inhabitants  plentifully.  The  other  is  empty,  that
when  it  is  necessary  to  clean,  or  repair  the  former,  the  stream  of
water  may  be  turned  into  it.  As  this  conduit  passes  along  two  of
the  bridges,  where  there  are  breaches  in  the  causeway,  through
which  the  salt-water  of  the  lake  flows,  it  is  conveyed  over  them  in
pipes  as  large  as  the  body  of  an  ox,  then  carried  from  the  conduit

286  NOTES  AND

to  the  remote  quarters  of  the  city  in  canoes,  and  sold  to  the  inha-
bitants. Relat.  ap.  Ramus.  241.  A.

Note  VI.  p.  19.

In  the  armoury  of  the  royal  palace  of  Madrid  are  shewn  suits  of
armour,  which  are  called  Montezuma's.  They  are  composed  of
thin  lacquered  copperplates.  In  the  opinion  of  very  intelligent
judges,  they  are  evidently  eastern.  The  forms  of  the  silver  orna-
ments upon  them,  representing  dragons,  &c.,  may  be  considered  as
a  confirmation  of  this.  They  are  infinitely  superior,  in  point  of
workmanship,  to  any  effort  of  American  art.  The  Spaniards  pro-
bably received  them  from  the  Philippine  Islands.  The  only  un-
questionable specimen  of  Mexican  art,  that  I  know  of  in  Great
Britain,  is  a  cup  of  very  fine  gold,  which  is  said  to  have  belonged
to  Montezuma.  It  weighs  5  oz.  12  dwt.  Three  drawings  of  it
were  exhibited  to  the  society  of  antiquaries,  June  10,  1765.  A
man's  head  is  represented  on  this  cup.  On  one  side  the  full  face,
on  the  other  the  profile,  on  the  third  the  back  parts  of  the  head.
The  relievo  is  said  to  have  been  produced  by  punching  the  inside
of  the  cup,  so  as  to  make  the  representation  of  a  face  on  the  out-
side. The  features  are  gross,  but  represented  with  some  degree  of
art,  and  certainly  too  rude  for  Spanish  workmanship.  This  cup  was
purchased  by  Edward  earl  of  Orford,  while  he  lay  in  the  harbour
of  Cadiz  with  the  fleet  under  his  command,  and  is  now  in  the  pos-
session of  his  grandson,  lord  Archer.  I  am  indebted  for  this  in-
formation to  my  respectable  and  ingenious  friend  Mr.  Barrington.
In  the  sixth  volume  of  the  Archseologia,  p.  107,  is  published  an
account  of  some  masks  of  Terra  Cotta,  brought  from  a  burying-
ground  on  the  American  continent,  about  seventy  miles  from  the
British  settlement  on  the  Mosquito  shore.  They  are  said  to  be
likenesses  of  chiefs,  or  other  eminent  persons.  From  the  descrip-
tions and  engravings  of  them,  we  have  an  additional  proof  of  the
imperfect  state  of  arts  among  the  Americans.

Note  VII.  p.  23.

The  learned  reader  will  perceive  how  much  I  have  been  indebted,
in  this  part  of  my  work,  to  the  guidance  of  the  bishop  of  Glouces-
ter, who  has  traced  the  successive  steps  by  which  the  human  mind
advanced  in  this  line  of  its  progress,  with  much  erudition,  and
greater  ingenuity.  He  is  the  first,  as  far  as  I  know,  who  formed  a
rational  and  consistent  theory  concerning  the  various  modes  of
writing  practised  by  nations,  according  to  the  various  degrees  of

ILLUSTRATIONS.  287

their  improvement.  Div.  Legation  of  Moses,  iii.  69,  &c.  Some
important  observations  have  been  added  by  M.  le  President  de
Brosses,  the  learned  and  intelUgent  author  of  the  Traite  de  la  For-
mation Mechanique  des  Langues,  torn.  i.  295,  &c.

As  the  Mexican  paintings  are  the  most  curious  monuments  ex-
tant of  the  earliest  mode  of  writing,  it  will  not  be  improper  to  give
some  account  of  the  means  by  which  they  were  preserved  from  the
general  wreck  of  every  work  of  art  in  America,  and  communicated
to  the  public.  For  the  most  early  and  complete  collection  of  these
published  by  Purchas,  we  are  indebted  to  the  attention  of  that
curious  inquirer,  Hakluyt.  Don  Antonio  Mendoza,  viceroy  of  New
Spain,  having  deemed  those  paintings  a  proper  present  for  Charles
v.,  the  ship  in  which  they  were  sent  to  Spain  was  taken  by  a
French  cruiser,  and  they  came  into  the  possession  of  Thevet,  the
king's  geographer,  who,  having  travelled  himself  into  the  New
World,  and  described  one  of  its  provinces,  was  a  curious  observer  of
whatever  tended  to  illustrate  the  manners  of  the  Americans.  On
his  death,  they  were  purchased  by  Hakluyt,  at  that  time  chaplain
of  the  English  ambassador  to  the  French  court ;  and,  being  left  by
him  to  Purchas,  were  published  at  the  desire  of  the  learned  anti-
quary Sir  Henry  Spelman.  Purchas,  iii.  1065.  They  were  trans-
lated from  English  into  French  by  Melchizedeck  Thevenot,  and
published  in  his  collection  of  voyages,  a.  d.  1683.

The  second  specimen  of  Mexican  picture-writing  was  published
by  Dr.  Francis  Gemelli  Carreri,  in  two  copperplates.  The  first  is
a  map,  or  representation  of  the  progress  of  the  ancient  Mexicans  on
their  first  arrival  in  the  country,  and  of  the  various  stations  in  which
they  settled,  before  they  founded  the  capital  of  their  empire  in  the
lake  of  Mexico.  The  second  is  a  chronological  wheel,  or  circle,
representing  the  manner  in  which  they  computed  and  marked  their
cycle  of  fifty-two  years.  He  received  both  from  Don  Carlos  de
Siguenza  y  Congorra,  a  diligent  collector  of  ancient  Mexican  docu«.
ments.  But  as  it  seems  now  to  be  a  received  opinion  (founded,
as  far  as  I  know,  on  no  good  evidence),  that  Carreri  was  never  out
of  Italy,  and  that  his  famous  Giro  del  Mundo  is  an  account  of  a
fictitious  voyage,  I  have  not  mentioned  these  paintings  in  the  text.
They  have,  however,  manifestly  the  appearance  of  being  Mexican
productions,  and  are  allowed  to  be  so  by  Boturini,  who  was  well
qualified  to  determine  whether  they  were  genuine  or  supposititious.
M.  Clavigero  likewise  admits  them  to  be  genuine  paintings  of  the
ancient  Mexicans.  To  me  they  always  appeared  to  be  so,  though,
from  my  desire  to  rest  no  part  of  my  narrative  upon  questionable
authority,  I  did  not  refer  to  them.  The  style  of  painting  in  the
former  is  considerably  more  perfect  than  any  other  specimen  of
Mexican  design ;  but  as  the  original  is  said  to  have  been  much  de-

288  NOTES AND

faced  by  time,  I  suspect  that  it  has  been  improved  by  some  touches
from  the  hand  of  an  European  artist.  Carreri,  Churchill,  iv.
p.  487.  The  chronological  wheel  is  a  just  delineation  of  the  Mex-
ican mode  of  computing  time,  as  described  by  Acosta,  lib.  vi.  c.  2,
It  seems  to  resemble  one  which  that  learned  Jesuit  had  seen  ;  and
if  it  be  admitted  as  a  genuine  monument,  it  proves  that  the
Mexicans  had  artificial  or  arbitrary  characters,  which  represented
several  tilings  besides  numbers.  Each  month  is  there  represented
by  a  symbol  expressive  of  some  work  or  rite  peculiar  to  it.

The  third  specimen  of  Mexican  painting  was  discovered  by
another  Italian.  In  1736,  Lorenzo  Boturini  Benaduci  set  out  for
New  Spain,  and  was  led  by  several  incidents  to  study  the  language
of  the  Mexicans,  and  to  collect  the  remains  of  their  historical  mo-
numents. He  persisted  nine  years  in  his  researches,  with  the
enthusiasm  of  a  projector,  and  the  patience  of  an  antiquary.  In
1746,  he  published  at  Madrid,  Idea  de  una  Nueva  Historia  General
de  la  America  Septentrional,  containing  an  account  of  the  result  of
his  inquiries ;  and  he  added  to  it  a  catalogue  of  his  American  His-
torical Museum,  arranged  under  thirty-six  different  heads.  His
idea  of  a  New  History  appears  to  me  the  work  of  a  whimsical
credulous  man.  But  his  catalogue  of  Mexican  maps,  paintings,
tribute-rolls,  calendars,  &c.  is  much  larger  than  one  could  have
expected.  Unfortunately  a  ship,  in  which  he  had  sent  a  consi-
derable part  of  them  to  Europe,  was  taken  by  an  English  privateer
during  the  war  between  Great  Britain  and  Spain,  which  com-
menced in  the  year  1739  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  they  perished  by
falling  into  the  hands  of  ignorant  captors.  Boturini  himself  in-
curred the  displeasure  of  the  Spanish  court,  and  died  in  a  hospital
at  Madrid.  The  history,  of  which  the  Idea,  &c.  was  only  a  pros-
pectus,was  never  published.  The  remainder  of  his  Museum  seems
to  have  been  dispersed.  Some  part  of  it  came  into  the  possession
of  the  present  archbishop  of  Toledo,  when  he  was  primate  of  New
Spain  ;  and  he  published  from  it  that  curious  tribute-roll  which  I
have  mentioned.

The  only  other  collection  of  Mexican  paintings,  as  far  as  I  can
learn,  is  in  the  imperial  library  at  Vienna.  By  order  of  their  im-
perial majesties,  I  have  obtained  such  a  specimen  of  these  as  I
desired,  in  eight  paintings  made  with  so  much  fidelity,  that  I  am
informed  the  copies  could  hardly  be  distinguished  from  the  ori-
ginals. According  to  a  note  in  this  Codex  Mexicanus,  it  appears  to
have  been  a  present  from  Emanuel,  king  of  Portugal,  to  pope
Clement  VII.,  who  died  a,  d.  1533.  After  passing  through  the
hands  of  several  illustrious  proprietors,  it  fell  into  those  of  the
cardinal  of  Saxe-Eisenach,  who  presented  it  to  the  emperor
Leopold. These  paintings  are  manifestly  Mexican,  but  they  are  in

ILLUSTRATIONS.  289

a  style  very  different  from  any  of  the  former.  An  engraving  has
been  made  of  one  of  them,  in  order  to  gratify  such  of  my  readers
as  may  deem  this  an  object  worthy  of  their  attention.  Were  it  an
object  of  sufficient  importance,  it  might  perhaps  be  possible,  by
recourse  to  the  plates  of  Purchas,  and  the  archbishop  of  Toledo,
as  a  key,  to  form  plausible  conjectures  concerning  the  meaning  of
this  picture.  Many  of  the  figures  are  evidently  similar.  A.  A.  are
targets  and  darts,  almost  in  the  same  form  with  those  published  by
Purchas,  p.  1070,  1071,  &c.  B.  B.  are  figures  of  temples,  nearly
resembling  those  in  Purchas,  p.  1109.  and  1113,  and  in  Lorenzana,
Plate  II.  C.  is  a  bale  of  mantles,  or  cotton  cloths,  the  figure  of
which  occurs  in  almost  every  plate  of  Purchas  and  Lorenzana.
E.E.  E.  seems  to  be  Mexican  captains  in  their  war  dress,  the  fan-
tastic ornaments  of  which  resemble  the  figures  in  Purchas,  p.  11 10,
1111.  2113.  I  should  suppose  this  picture  to  be  a  tribute-roll,  as
their  mode  of  noting  numbers  occurs  frequently.  D.  D.  D.,  &c.
According  to  Boturini,  the  mode  of  computation  by  the  number  of
knots  was  known  to  the  Mexicans  as  well  as  to  the  Peruvians,
p.  85,  and  the  manner  in  which  the  number  of  units  is  represented
in  the  Mexican  paintings  in  my  possession  seems  to  confirm  this
opinion.  They  plainly  resemble  a  string  of  knots  on  a  cord  or
slender  rope.

Since  I  published  the  former  edition,  Mr.  Waddilove,  who  is  still
pleased  to  continue  his  friendly  attention  to  procure  me  information,
has  discovered,  in  the  library  of  the  Escurial,  a  volume  in  folio,
consisting  of  forty  sheets  of  a  kind  of  pasteboard,  each  the  size  of
a  common  sheet  of  writing  paper,  with  great  variety  of  uncouth  and
whimsical  figures  of  INIexican  painting,  in  very  fresh  colours,  and
with  an  explanation  in  Spanish  to  most  of  them.  The  first  twenty-
two  sheets  are  the  signs  of  the  months,  days,  &c.  About  the
middle  of  each  sheet  are  two  or  more  large  figures  for  the  months,
surrounded  by  the  signs  of  the  days.  The  last  eighteen  sheets  are
not  so  filled  with  figures.  They  seem  to  be  signs  of  deities,  and
images  of  various  objects.  According  to  this  calendar  in  the
Escurial,  the  Mexican  year  contained  286  days,  divided  into  22
months  of  13  days.  Each  day  is  represented  by  a  diflferent  sign,
taken  from  some  natural  object,  a  serpent,  a  dog,  a  lizard,  a  reed,
a  house,  &c.  The  signs  of  days  in  the  calendar  of  the  Escurial  are
precisely  the  same  with  those  mentioned  by  Boturini,  Idea,  &c.
p.  45.  But,  if  we  may  give  credit  to  that  author,  the  Mexican
year  contained  360  days,  divided  into  18  months  of  20  days.  The
order  of  days  in  every  month  was  computed,  according  to  him,
first  by  what  he  calls  a  tridecennary  progression  of  days  from  one
to  thirteen,  in  the  same  manner  as  in  the  calendar  of  the  Escurial,
and  then  by  a  septenary  progression  of  days  from  one  to  seven,

VOL,  VTII.  u

290  NOTES AND

making  in  all  twenty.  In  this  calendar,  not  only  the  signs  which
distinguish  each  day,  but  the  qualities  supposed  to  be  peculiar  to
each  month,  are  marked.  There  are  certain  weaknesses  which
seem  to  accompany  the  human  mind  through  every  stage  of  its
progress  in  observation  and  science.  Slender  as  was  the  know-
ledge of  the  Mexicans  in  astronomy,  it  appears  to  have  been
already  connected  with  judicial  astrology.  The  fortune  and  cha-
racter of  persons  born  in  each  month  are  supposed  to  be  decided
by  some  superior  influence  predominant  at  the  time  of  nativity.
Hence  it  is  foretold  in  the  calendar,  that  all  who  are  born  in  one
month  will  be  rich,  in  another  warlike,  in  a  third  luxurious,  &c.
The  pasteboard,  or  whatever  substance  it  may  be  on  which  the
calendar  in  the  Escurial  is  painted,  seems,  by  Mr.  Waddilove's  de-
scription of  it,  to  resemble  nearly  that  in  the  imperial  library  at
Vienna.  In  several  particulars,  the  figures  bear  some  likeness  to
those  in  the  plate  which  I  have  published.  The  figures  marked  D.,
which  induced  me  to  conjecture  that  this  painting  might  be  a
tribute-roll  similar  to  those  published  by  Purchas  and  the  arch-
bishop of  Toledo,  Mr.  Waddilove  supposes  to  be  signs  of  days :
and  I  have  such  confidence  in  the  accuracy  of  his  observations,  as
to  conclude  his  opinion  to  be  well  founded.  It  appears,  from  the
characters  in  which  the  explanations  of  the  figures  are  written,  that
this  curious  monument  of  Mexican  art  has  been  obtained,  soon
after  the  conquest  of  the  empire.  It  is  singular  that  it  should
never  have  been  mentioned  by  any  Spanish  author.

Note  VIII.  p.  24.

The  first  was  called  the  Prince  of  the  Deathful  Lance;  the
second  the  Divider  of  Men  ;  the  third  the  Shedder  of  Blood ;  the
fourth  the  Lord  of  the  Dark-house. Acosta,  lib.  vi.  c.  25.

Note  IX.  p.  30.

The  temple  of  Cholula,  which  was  deemed  more  holy  than  any
in  New  Spain,  was  likewise  the  most  considerable.  But  it  was
nothing  more  than  a  mount  of  solid  earth.  According  to  Torque-
mada,  it  was  above  a  quarter  of  a  league  in  circuit  at  the  base,  and
rose  to  the  height  of  forty  fathoms.  Mon.  Ind.  Lib.  iii.  c.  19.
Even  M.  Clavigero  acknowledges  that  all  the  Mexican  temples
were  solid  structures,  or  earthen  mounts,  and  of  consequence
canned  be  considered  as  any  evidence  of  their  having  made  any
considerable  progress  in  the  art  of  building. Clavig.  II.  207.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  291

From  inspecting  various  figures  of  temples  in  the  paintings  en-
graved by  Purchas,  there  seems  to  be  some  reason  for  suspecting,
that  all  their  temples  were  constructed  in  the  same  manner.  See
Vol.  iii.  p.  1109,  1110.  1113.

Note  X.  p.  31.

Not  only  in  Tlascala,  and  Tepeaca,  but  even  in  Mexico  itself,
the  houses  of  the  people  were  mere  huts  built  with  turf,  or  mud,  or
the  branches  of  trees.  They  were  extremely  low,  and  slight,  and
without  any  furniture  but  a  few  earthen  vessels.  Like  the  rudest
Indians,  several  families  resided  under  the  same  roof,  without
having  any  separate  apartments.  Herrera,  Dec.  2.  lib.  vii.  c.  13.
lib.  X.  c.  22. Dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  17. Torquem.  lib.  iii.  c.  23.

Note  XI.  p.  31.

I  AM  informed  by  a  person  who  resided  long  in  New  Spain,  and
visited  almost  every  province  of  it,  that  there  is  not,  in  all  the  ex-
tent of  that  vast  empire,  any  monument,  or  vestige  of  any  building
more  ancient  than  the  conquest,  nor  of  any  bridge  or  highway,
except  some  remains  of  the  causeway  from  Guadaloupe  to  that
gate  of  Mexico  by  which  Cortes  entered  the  city.  MS.  penes  me.
The  author  of  another  account  in  manuscript  observes,  "That  at
this  day  there  does  not  remain  even  the  smallest  vestige  of  the  ex-
istence of  any  ancient  Indian  building,  pubUc  or  private,  either  in
Mexico  or  in  any  province  of  New  Spain.  I  have  travelled,  says
he,  through  all  the  countries  adjacent  to  them,  viz.  New  Galicia,
New  Biscay,  New  Mexico,  Sonora,  Cinaloa,  the  New  Kingdom  of
Leon,  and  New  Santandero,  without  having  observed  any  mo-
nument worth  notice,  except  some  ruins  near  an  ancient  village  in
the  valley  de  Cams  Grandes,  in  lat.  N.  3°.  46'.  long.  258°.  24'.  from
the  island  of  TenerifFe,  or  460  leagues  N.N.W.  from  Mexico."
He  describes  these  ruins  minutely,  and  they  appear  to  be  the  re-
mains of  a  paltry  building  of  turf  and  stone,  plastered  over  with
white  earth  or  lime.  A  missionary  informed  that  gentleman,  that
he  had  discovered  the  ruins  of  another  edifice  similar  to  the  former,
about  a  hundred  leagues  towards  N.  W.  on  the  banks  of  the  river
St.  Pedro.  MS.  penes  me.

These  testimonies  derive  great  credit  from  one  circumstance,
that  they  were  not  given  in  support  of  any  particular  system  or
theory,  but  as  simple  answers  to  queries  which  1  had  proposed.  It
is  probable,  however,  that  when  these  gentlemen  assert,  that  no
ruins  or  monuments  of  any  ancient  work  whatever  are  now  to  be
discovered  in  the  Mexican  empire,  they  meant  that  there  were  no

u2

292  NOTES AND

such  ruins  or  monuments  as  conveyed  any  idea  of  grandeur  or
magniricence  in  the  works  of  its  ancient  inhabitants.  For  it  ap-
pears from  the  testimony  of  several  Spanish  authors,  that  in  Otum-
ba,  Tlascala,  Cholula,  &c.  some  vestiges  of  ancient  buildings  are
still  visible.  Villa  Segnor  Theatro  Amer.  p.  143.  308.  353.  D.
Fran.  Ant.  Lorenzana,  formerly  archbishop  of  Mexico,  and  now  of
Toledo,  in  his  introduction  to  that  edition  of  the  Cartas  de  Rela-
cion  of  Cortes,  which  he  published  at  Mexico,  mentions  some  ruins
which  are  still  visible  in  several  of  the  towns  through  which  Cortes
-passed  in  his  way  to  the  capital,  p.  4,  &c.  But  neither  of  these
authors  give  any  description  of  them,  and  they  seem  to  be  so  very
inconsiderable,  as  to  shew  only  that  some  buildings  had  once  been
there.  The  large  mount  of  earth  at  Cholula,  which  the  Spaniards
dignified  with  the  name  of  temple,  still  remains,  but  without  any
steps  by  which  to  ascend,  or  any  facing  of  stone.  It  appears  now
like  a  natural  mount,  covered  with  grass  and  shrubs,  and  possibly
it  was  never  any  thing  more.  Torquem.  hb.  iii.  c.  19.  1  have  re-
ceived a  minute  description  of  the  remains  of  a  temple  near  Cuer-
navaca,  on  the  road  from  Mexico  to  Acapulco.  It  is  composed  of
large  stones,  fitted  to  each  other  as  nicely  as  those  in  the  buildings
of  the  Peruvians,  which  are  hereafter  mentioned.  At  the  founda-
tion it  forms  a  square  of  twenty-five  yards;  but  as  it  rises  in  height,
it  diminishes  in  extent,  not  gradually,  but  by  being  contracted  sud-
denly at  regular  distances,  so  that  it  must  have  resembled  the  figure
B.  in  the  plate. It  terminated,  it  is  said,  in  a  spire.

Note  XII.  p.  35.

TjiE  exaggeration  of  the  Spanish  historians,  with  respect  to  the
number  of  human  victims  sacrificed  in  Mexico,  appears  to  be  very
great.  According  to  Gomara,  there  was  no  year  in  which  twenty
thousand  human  victims  were  not  offered  to  the  Mexican  divinities,
and  in  some  years  they  amounted  to  fifty  thousand.  Cron.  c.  229.
The  skulls  of  those  unhappy  persons  were  ranged  in  order  in  a
building  erected  for  that  purpose,  and  two  of  Cortes's  officers  who
had  counted  them,  informed  Gomara,  that  their  number  was  a
hundred  and  thirty-six  thousand.  Ibid.  c.  82.  Herrera's  account
is  still  more  incredible,  that  the  number  of  victims  was  so  great,
that  five  thousand  have  been  sacrificed  in  one  day,  nay,  on  some
occasions,  no  less  than  twenty  thousand,  Dec.  iii.  lib.  ii.  c.  16.
Torqueroada  goes  beyond  both  in  extravagance,  for  he  asserts,
that  twenty  thousand  children,  exclusive  of  other  victims,  were
slaughtered  annually.  Mon.  Ind.  lib.  vii.  c.  21.  The  most  re-
spectable authority  in  favour  of  such  high  numbers  is  that  of
Zuraurraga,  the  first  bishop  of  Mexico,  who,  in  a  letter  to  the

ILLUSTRATIONS.  293

chapter-general  of  his  order,  A.  D.  1631 ,  asserts  that  the  Mexicans
sacrificed  annually  twenty  thousand  victims.  Davila.  Teatro
Eccles.  126.  In  opposition  to  all  these  accounts,  B.  de  las  Casas
observes,  that  if  there  had  been  such  an  annual  waste  of  the  human
species,  the  country  could  never  have  arrived  at  that  degree  of
populousness  for  which  it  was  remarkable  when  the  Spaniards  first
landed  there.  This  reasoning  is  just.  If  the  number  of  victims  in
all  the  provinces  of  New  Spain  had  been  so  great;  not  only  must
population  have  been  prevented  from  increasing,  but  the  human
race  must  have  been  exterminated  in  a  short  time.  For  besides
the  waste  of  the  species  by  such  numerous  sacrifices,  it  is  observ-
able, that  wherever  the  fate  of  captives  taken  in  war  is  either  cer-
tain death  or  perpetual  slavery,  as  men  can  gain  nothing  by  submit-
ting speedily  to  an  enemy,  they  always  resist  to  the  uttermost,  and
war  becomes  bloody  and  destructive  to  the  last  degree.  Las  Casas
positively  asserts,  that  the  Mexicans  never  sacrificed  more  than  fifty
or  a  hundred  persons  in  a  year.  See  his  dispute  with  Sepulveda,
subjoined  to  his  Brevissima  Relacion,  p.  105,  Cortes  does  not
specify  what  number  of  victims  was  sacrificed  annually,  but  B.  Diaz
del  Castillo  relates,  that  an  inquiry  having  been  made,  with  respect
to  this,  by  the  Franciscan  monks,  who  were  sent  into  New  Spain
immediately  after  the  conquest,  it  was  found  that  about  two
thousand  five  hundred  were  sacrificed  every  year  in  Mexico,  C.  207.

Note  XIII.  p.  36.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  observe,  that  the  Peruvian  Chronology
is  not  only  obscure,  but  repugnant  to  conclusions  deduced  from  the
most  accurate  and  extensive  observations,  concerning  the  time  that
elapses  during  each  reign,  in  any  given  succession  of  princes.  The
medium  has  been  found  not  to  exceed  twenty  years.  According  to
Acosta  and  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  Huana  Capac,  who  died  about
the  year  1527,  was  the  twelfth  Inca.  According  to  this  rule  of
computing,  the  duration  of  the  Peruvian  monarchy  ought  not  to
have  been  reckoned  above  two  hundred  and  forty  years;  but  they
affirm  that  it  had  subsisted  four  hundred  years.  Acosta,  lib.  vi.  c.
19.  Vega,  lib.  i,  c.  9.  By  this  account  each  reign  is  extended  at
a  medium  to  thirty-three  years,  instead  of  twenty,  the  number
ascertained  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  observations  ;  but  so  imperfect
were  the  Peruvian  traditions,  that  though  the  total  is  boldly  marked,
the  number  of  years  in  each  reign  is  unknown.

Note  XIV.  p.  42.
Many  of  the  early  Spanish  writers  assert,  that  the  Peruvians

294  NOTES AN  D

offered  human  sacrifices.  Xerez,  p.  190.  Zarate,  lib.  i.  c.  !!•
Acosta,  lib.  V.  c.  19.  But  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  contends,  that
though  this  barbarous  practice  prevailed  among  their  uncivilized
ancestors,  it  was  totally  abolished  by  the  Incas,  and  that  no  human
victim  was  ever  offered  in  any  temple  of  the  Sun,  This  assertion,
and  the  plausible  reasons  with  which  he  confirms  it,  are  sufficient
to  refute  the  Spanish  writers,  whose  accounts  seem  to  be  founded
entirely  upon  report,  not  upon  what  they  themselves  had  observed.
Vega,  lib,  ii,  c.  4.  In  one  of  their  festivals,  the  Peruvians  offered
cakes  of  bread  moistened  with  blood  drawn  from  the  arms,  the  eye-
brows, and  noses  of  their  children.  Id.  lib.  vii,  c.  6.  This  rite  may
have  been  derived  from  their  ancient  practice,  in  their  uncivilized
state,  of  sacrificing  human  victims.

Note  XV.  p.  47.

The  Spaniards  have  adopted  both  those  customs  of  the  ancient
Peruvians.  They  have  preserved  some  of  the  aqueducts  or  canals,
made  in  the  days  of  the  Incas,  and  have  made  new  ones,  by  which
they  water  every  field  that  they  cultivate.  Ulloa  Voyage,  tom.  i.
422.  477.  They  likewise  continue  to  use  guano,  or  the  dung  of
sea-fowls,  as  manure.  Ulloa  gives  a  description  of  the  almost  in-
credible quantity  of  it  in  the  small  islands  near  the  coast. Ibid.  481.

Note  XVI.  p.  48.

The  temple  of  Cayambo,  the  palace  of  the  Inca  at  Callo  in  the
plain  of  Lacatunga,  and  that  of  Atun-Cannar,  are  described  by
Ulloa,  tom,  i.  286,  &c.  who  inspected  them  with  great  care.  M.
de  Condamine  published  a  curious  memoir  concerning  the  ruins  of
Atun-Cannar.  Mem.  de  I'Academie  de  Berlin,  a.  d.  1746,  p.  435.
Acosta  describes  the  ruins  of  Cuzco,  which  he  had  examined.  Lib.
vi.  c.  H.  Garcilasso,  in  his  usual  style,  gives  pompous  and  con-
fused descriptions  of  several  temples,  and  other  public  edifices.
Lib.  iii.  c.  1 .  c.  2 1 .  lib.  vi.  c.  4,  Don Zapata,  in  a  large  trea-
tise concerning  Peru,  which  has  not  hitherto  been  published,  com-
municates some  information  with  respect  to  several  monuments  of
the  ancient  Peruvians,  which  have  not  been  mentioned  by  other
authors.  MS.  penes  me,  Articulo  xx.  Ulloa  describes  some  of  the
ancient  Peruvian  fortifications,  which  were  likewise  works  of  great
extent  and  solidity.  Tom.  i.  391.  Three  circumstances  struck  all
those  observers  :  the  vast  size  of  the  stones  which  the  Peruvians
employed  in  some  of  their  buildings.  Acosta  measured  one,  which
was  thirty  feet  long,  eighteen  broad,  and  six  in  thickness ;  and
yet,  he  adds,  that  in  the  fortress  at  Cuzco  there  were  stones  con-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  '295

siderably  larger.  It  is  difficult  to  conceive  how  the  Peruvians
could  move  these,  and  raise  them  to  the  height  even  of  twelve  feet.
The  second  circumstance  is,  the  imperfection  of  the  Peruvian  art,
when  applied  to  working  in  timber.  By  the  patience  and  persever-
ance natural  to  Americans,  stones  may  be  formed  into  any  shape,
merely  by  rubbing  one  against  another,  or  by  the  use  of  hatchets
or  other  instruments  made  of  stone ;  but  with  such  rude  tools,
little  progress  can  be  made  in  carpentry.  The  Peruvians  could
not  mortise  two  beams  together,  or  give  any  degree  of  union  or
stabihty  to  any  work  composed  of  timbei-.  As  they  could  not  form
a  centre,  they  were  totally  unacquainted  with  the  use  of  arches  in
building ;  nor  can  the  Spanish  authors  conceive  how  they  were  able
to  frame  a  roof  for  those  ample  structures  which  they  raised.

The  third  circumstance  is  a  striking  proof,  which  all  the  monu-
ments of  the  Peruvians  furnish,  of  their  want  of  ingenuity  and  in-
vention, accompanied  with  patience  no  less  astonishing.  None  of
the  stones  employed  in  those  works  were  formed  into  any  particular
or  uniform  shape,  which  could  render  them  fit  for  being  compacted
together  in  building.  The  Indians  took  them  as  they  fell  from  the
mountains,  or  were  raised  out  of  the  quarries.  Some  were  square,
some  triangular,  some  convex,  some  concave.  Their  art  and  in-
dustry were  employed  in  joining  them  together,  by  forming  such
hollows  in  the  one,  as  perfectly  correspond  to  the  projections  or
risings  in  the  other.  This  tedious  operation,  which  might  have
been  so  easily  abridged,  by  adapting  the  surface  of  the  stones  to
each  other,  either  by  rubbing,  or  by  their  hatchets  of  copper,  would
be  deemed  incredible,  if  it  were  not  put  beyond  doubt  by  inspect-
ing the  remains  of  those  buildings.  It  gives  them  a  very  singular
appearance  to  an  European  eye.  There  is  no  regular  layer  or  stra-
tum of  building,  and  no  one  stone  resembles  another  in  dimensions
or  form.  At  the  same  time,  by  the  persevering  but  ill-directed  in-
dustry of  the  Indians,  they  are  all  joined  with  that  minute  nicety
which  I  have  mentioned.  Ulloa  made  this  observation  concerning
the  form  of  the  stones  in  the  fortress  of  Atun-Cannar.  Voy.  i.  p.
387.  Pineto  gives  a  similar  description  of  the  fortress  of  Cuzco,
the  most  perfect  of  all  the  Peruvian  works.  Zapata  MS.  pe?ies  me.
According  to  M.  de  Condamine,  there  were  regular  strata  of  build-
ing in  some  parts  of  Atun-Cannar,  which  he  remarks  as  singular,
and  as  a  proof  of  some  progress  in  improvement.

Note  XVII.  p.  51.

The  appearance  of  those  bridges,  which  bend  with  their  own
weight,  wave  with  the  wind,  and  are  considerably  agitated  by  the
motion  of  every  person  who  passes  along  them,  is  very  frightful  at

296  NOTES AND

first.  But  the  Spaniards  have  found  them  to  be  the  easiest  mode
of  passing  the  torrents  in  Peru,  over  which  it  would  be  difficult  to
throw  more  solid  structures  either  of  stone  or  timber.  They  form
those  hanging  bridges  so  strong  and  broad,  that  loaded  mules  pass
along  them.  All  the  trade  of  Cuzco  is  carried  on  by  means  of
such  a  bridge  over  the  river  Apurimac.  Ulloa,  torn.  i.  358.  A
more  simple  contrivance  was  employed  in  passing  smaller  streams.
A  basket,  in  which  the  traveller  was  placed,  being  suspended  from
a  strong  rope  stretched  across  the  stream,  it  was  pushed  or  drawn
from  one  side  to  the  other. Ibid.

Note  XVIII.  p.  60.

My  information  with  respect  to  those  events  is  taken  from  Noticia
hreie  de  la  expedicion  mihtar  de  Sinora  y  Cinaloa,  su  exito  feliz,
y  vantojoso  estado,  en  que  por  consecuentia  de  ello,  se  han  puesto
ambas  provincias,  published  at  Mexico,  June  17th,  1771,  in  order
to  satisfy  the  curiosity  of  the  merchants,  who  had  furnished  the
viceroy  with  money  for  defraying  the  expense  of  the  armament.
The  copies  of  this  Noticia  are  very  rare  in  Madrid  ;  but  I  have  ob-
tained one,  which  has  enabled  me  to  communicate  these  curious
facts  to  the  public.  According  to  this  account  there  was  found  in
the  mine  Yecorato  in  Cinaloa  a  grain  of  gold  of  twenty-two  carats,
which  weighed  sixteen  marks  four  ounces  four  ochavas  ;  this  was
sent  to  Spain  as  a  present  fit  for  the  king,  and  is  now  deposited  in
the  royal  cabinet  at  Madrid.

Note  XIX.  p.  GO.

The  uncertainty  of  geographers  with  respect  to  this  point  is  re-
markable, for  Cortes  seems  to  have  surveyed  its  coasts  with  great
accuracy.  The  archbishop  of  Toledo  has  published,  from  the  ori-
ginal, in  the  possession  of  the  Marquis  del  Valle,  the  descendant  of
Cortes,  a  map  drawn  in  1541,  by  the  pilot  Domingo  Castillo,  in
which  California  is  laid  down  as  a  peninsula,  stretching  out  nearly
in  the  same  direction  which  is  now  given  to  it  in  the  best  maps  ;  and
the  point  where  Rio  Colorado  enters  the  gulf  is  marked  with  pre-
cision. Hist,  de  Nueva  Espagna,  327.

Note  XX.  p.  62.

I  AM  indebted  for  this  fact  to  M.  L'Abbe  Raynal,  tom.  iii.  103  ;
and  upon  consulting  an  intelligent  person,  long  settled  on  the  Mos-
quito shore,  and  who  has  been  engaged  in  the  logwood  trade,  I
find  that  ingenious  author  has  been  well  informed. The  logwood

ILLUSTRATIONS.  297

cut  near  the  town  of  St.  Francis  of  Campeachy  is  of  much  better
quality  than  that  on  the  other  side  of  Yucatan ;  and  the  Enghsh
trade  in  the  bay  of  Honduras  is  almost  at  an  end.

Note  XXI.  p.  76.

P.  ToRRiBio  de  Benevente,  or  Motolinea,  has  enumerated  ten
causes  of  the  rapid  depopulation  of  Mexico,  to  which  he  gives  the
name  of  the  ten  plagues. Many  of  these  are  not  peculiar  to  that
province. 1.  The  introduction  of  the  small-pox. This  disease  was
first  brought  into  New  Spain  in  the  year  1520,  by  a  negro  slave
who  attended  Narvaez  in  his  expedition  against  Cortes. Torribio
affirms,  that  one  half  of  the  people  in  the  provinces  visited  with
this  distemper  died. To  this  mortality,  occasioned  by  the  small-
pox, Torquemada  adds  the destructive  effects  of  two  contagious
distempers  which  raged  in  the  year  1545  and  1576. In  the  former,
eight  hundred  thousand,  in  the  latter,  above  two  millions  perished,
according  to  an  exact  account  taken  by  order  of  the  viceroys,
Mon.  Ind.  i.  642. The  small-pox  was not  introduced  into  Peru
for  several  years  after  the  invasion  of  the  Spaniards,  but  there,  too,
that  distemper  proved  very  fatal  to  the  natives. Garcia Origen,
p.  88. 2.  The  numbers  who  were  killed  or  died  of  famine  in  their
war  with  the  Spaniards,  particularly  during  the siege  of  Mexico.
3.  The  great  famine  that  followed  after  the  reduction  of  Mexico,
as  all  the  people  engaged,  either  on  one  side  or  other,  had  neglected
the  cultivation  of  their  lands. Something  similar  to  this  happened
in  all  the  other  countries  conquered  by  the Spaniards. 4.  The
grievous  tasks  imposed  by  the  Spaniards  upon  the  people  belonging
to  their  repartimientos. 5.  The  oppressive  burden  of  taxes  which
they  were  unable  to  pay,  and  from  which  they  could  hope  for  no
exemption. 6.  The  numbers  employed  in  collecting  the  gold  car-
ried down  by  the  torrents  from  the mountains,  who  were  forced
from  their  own  habitations,  without  any  provision  made  for  their
subsistence,  and  subjected  to  all  the  rigour  of  cold  in  those  elevated
regions. 7.  The  immense labour of  rebuilding Mexico, which
Cortes  urged  on  with  such  precipitate  ardour,  as  destroyed  an  in-
credible number  of  people. 8. The  number  of  people  condemned
to  servitude,  under  various  pretexts,  and  employed  in  working  the
silver  mines. These,  marked  by  each  proprietor  with  a  hot  iron,
like  his  cattle,  were  driven  in  herds  to  the  mountains. The  nature
of  the  labour  to  which  they  were  subjected  to  there,  the  noxious
vapours  of  the  mines,  the  coldness  of  the  climate, and  scarcity  of
food,  were  so  fatal,  that  Torribio  affirms  the  country  round  several
of  those  mines,  particularly  near  Gauxago,  was  covered  with  dead
bodies,  the  air  corrupted  with  their  stench,  and  so  many  vultures

298  NOTES AND

and  other  voracious  birds  hovered  about  for  their  prey,  that  the  sun
was  darkened  with  their  flight.  10.  The  Spaniards,  in  the  different
expeditions  which  they  undertook,  and  by  the  civil  wars  which
they  carried  on,  destroyed  many  of  the  natives,  whom  they  com-
pelled to  serve  them  as  Tamemes,  or  carriers  of  burdens.  This  last
mode  of  oppression  was  particularly  ruinous  to  the  Peruvians.
From  the  number  of  Indians  who  perished  in  Gonzalo  Pizarro's
expedition  into  the  countries  to  the  east  of  the  Andes,  one  may
form  some  idea  of  what  they  suffered  in  similar  services,  and  how
fast  they  were  wasted  by  them.  Torribio,  MS.  Corita,  in  his
Breve  y  Summaria  Relacion,  illustrates  and  confirms  several  of
Torribio's  observations,  to  which  he  refers. MS.  penes  me.

Note  XXII.  p.  77.

Even  Montesquieu  has  adopted  this  idea,  lib.  viii.  c.  18,  But
the  passion  of  that  great  man  for  system  sometimes  rendered  him
inattentive  to  research ;  and  from  his  capacity  to  refine,  he  was
apt,  in  some  instances,  to  overlook  obvious  and  just  causes.

Note  XXIII.  p.  77.

A  STRONG  proof  of  this  occurs  in  the  testament  of  Isabella,
where  she  discovers  the  most  tender  concern  for  the  humane  and
mild  usage  of  the  Indians.  Those  laudable  sentiments  of  the
queen  have  been  adopted  into  the  public  law  of  Spain,  and  serve
as  the  introduction  to  the  regulations  contained  under  the  title  Of
the  good  treatment  of  the  Indians. Recopil.  lib.  vi.  tit.  x.

Note  XXIV.  p.  79.

In  the  seventh  Title  of  the  first  book  of  the  Recopilacion,  which
contains  the  laws  concerning  the  powers  and  functions  of  arch-
bishops and  bishops,  almost  a  third  part  of  them  relates  to  what  is
incumbent  upon  them  as  guardians  of  the  Indians,  and  points  out
the  various  methods  in  which  it  is  their  duty  to  interpose,  in  order
to  defend  them  from  oppression  either  with  respect  to  their  persons
or  property.  Not  only  do  the  laws  commit  to  them  this  honour-
able and  humane  office,  but  the  ecclesiastics  of  America  actually
exercise  it.

Innumerable  proofs  of  this  might  be  produced  from  Spanish
authors.  But  1  rather  refer  to  Gage,  as  he  was  not  disposed  to
ascribe  any  merit  to  the  popish  clergy,  to  which  they  were  not  fully
entitled.  Survey,  p.  142.  192,  &c.  Henry  Hawks,  an  English
merchant,  who  resided  five  years  in  New  Spain,  previous  to  the

ILLUSTRATIONS.  299

year  1572,  gives  the  same  favourable  account  of  the  Popish  clergy,
Hakhiyt,  iii.  466.  By  a  law  of  Charles  V.  not  only  bishops,  but
other  ecclesiastics,  are  empowered  to  inform  and  admonish  the  civil
magistrates,  if  any  Indian  is  deprived  of  his  just  liberty  and  rights  ;
Recopilac.  lib.  vi.  tit.  vi.  ley  14 :  and  thus  were  constituted  legal
protectors  of  the  Indians.  Some  of  the  Spanish  ecclesiastics  re-
fused to  grant  absolution  to  such  of  their  countrymen  as  possessed
Encomiendas,  and  considered  the  Indians  as  slaves,  or  employed
them  in  working  their  mines. Gonz.  Davil  Teatro  Eccles.  i.  157.

Note  XXV.  p.  80.

According  to  Gage,  Chiapa  dos  Indos  contains  4000  families  ;
and  he  mentions  it  only  as  one  of  the  largest  Indian  towns  in  Ame-
rica, p.  104.

Note  XXVL  p.  80.

It  is  very  difficult  to  obtain  an  accurate  account  of  the  state  of
population  in  those  kingdoms  of  Europe  where  the  police  is  most
perfect,  and  where  science  has  made  the  greatest  progress.  In
Spanish  America,  where  knowledge  is  still  in  its  infancy,  and  few
men  have  leisure  to  engage  in  researches  merely  speculative,  little
attention  has  been  paid  to  this  inquiry.  But  in  the  year  1741,
Philip  V.  enjoined  the  viceroys  and  governors  of  the  several  pro-
vinces in  America,  to  make  an  actual  survey  of  the  people  under
their  jurisdiction,  and  to  transmit  a  report  concerning  their  number
and  occupations.  In  consequence  of  this  order,  the  conde  de
Fuen-Clara,  viceroy  of  New  Spain,  appointed  D.  Jos.  Antonio  de
Villa  Segnor  y  Sanchez  to  execute  that  commission  in  New  Spain.
From  the  reports  of  the  magistrates  in  the  several  districts,  as  well
as  from  his  own  observations,  and  long  acquaintance  with  most  of
the  provinces,  Villa  Segnor  published  the  result  of  his  inquiries  in
his  Teatro  Americano.  His  report,  however,  is  imperfect.  Of  the
nine  diocesses,  into  which  the  Mexican  empire  has  been  divided,  he
has  published,  an  account  of  five  only,  viz.  the  archbishopric  of
Mexico,  the  bishoprics  of  Puebla  de  los  Angeles,  Mechoacan,
Oaxaca.  and  Nova  Galicia.  The  bishoprics  of  Yucatan,  Verapaz,
Chiapa,  and  Guatimala,  are  entirely  omitted,  though  the  two  latter
comprehend  countries  in  which  the  Indian  race  is  more  numerous
than  in  any  part  of  New  Spain.  In  his  survey  of  the  extensive
diocesses  of  Nova  Galicia,  the  situation  of  the  different  Indian
villages  is  described,  but  he  specifies  the  number  of  people  only  in
a  small  part  of  it.  The  Indians  of  that  extensive  province,  in  which
the  Spanish  dominion  is  imperfectly  established,  are  not  registered
with  the  same accuracy  as  in  other  parts  of  New  Spain. Ac-

300  NOTES AND

cording  to  Villa  Segnor,  the  actual  state  of  population  in  the  five
diocesses  above  mentioned,  is  of  Spaniards,  negroes,  mulattoes,
and  mestizos,  in  the  diocesses  of

Families.
Mexico  --.-...- 105,202

Los  Angeles 30,600

Mechoacan 30,840

Oaxaca - 7,296

NovaGalicia 16,770

190,708

At  the  rate  of  five  to  a  family,  the  total  number  is -  953,540

Indian  families  in  the  diocess  of  Mexico - -  119,611

Los  Angeles 88,240

Mechoacan _--____  36,176

Oaxaca --------  44,222

NovaGalicia ....--.  6,222

294,391

At  the  rate  of  five  to  a  family,  the  total  number  is  1,471,955.
We  may  rely  with  great  certainly  on  this  computation  of  the  num-
ber of  Indians,  as  it  is  taken  from  the  Matricula,  or  register,
according  to  which  the  tribute  paid  by  them  is  collected.  As  four
diocesses  of  nine  are  totally  omitted,  and  in  that  of  Nova  Galicia  the
numbers  are  imperfectly  recorded,  we  may  conclude,  that  the  num-
ber of  Indians  in  the  Mexican  empire  exceeds  two  millions.

The  account  of  the  number  of  Spaniards,  &c.  seems  not  to  be
equally  complete.  Of  many  places,  Villa  Segnor  observes  in
general  terms,  that  several  Spaniards,  negroes,  and  people  of  mixed
race,  reside  there,  without  specifying  their  number.  If,  therefore,
we  make  allowance  for  these,  and  for  all  who  reside  in  the  four
diocesses  omitted,  the  number  of  Spaniards,  and  of  those  of  a  mixed
race,  may  probably  amount  to  a  million  and  a  half.  In  some  places
Villa  Segnor  distinguishes  between  Spaniards  and  the  three  inferior
races  of  negroes,  mulattoes,  and  mestizos,  and  marks  their  number
separately.  But  he  generally  blends  them  together.  But  from
the  proportion  observable  in  those  places,  where  the  number  of
each  is  marked,  as  well  as  from  the  account  of  the  state  of  popu-
lation in  New  Spain  by  other  authors,  it  is  manifest  that  the
number  of  negroes  and  persons  of  a  mixed  race  far  exceeds  that  of
Spaniards,  Perhaps  the  latter  ought  not  to  be  reckoned  above
500,000  to  a  million  of  the  former.

Defective  as  this  account  may  be,  I  have  not  been  able  to  procure

ILLUSTRATIONS.  301

such  intelligence  concerning  the  number  of  people  in  Peru,  as
might  enable  me  to  form  any  conjecture  equally  satisfying  with
"respect  to  the  degree  of  its  population.  I  have  been  informed  that
in  the  year  1761,  the  protector  of  the  Indians  in  the  viceroyalty  of
Peru  computed  that  612,780  paid  tribute  to  the  king.  As  all
females,  and  persons  under  age,  are  exempted  from  this  tax  in
Peru,  the  total  number  of  Indians  ought,  by  that  account,  to  be
2,449,120. MS.  penes  me.

I  shall  mention  another  mode,  by  which  one  may  compute,  or  at
least  form  a  guess  concerning,  the  state  of  population  in  New  Spain
and  Peru.  According  to  an  account  which  I  have  reason  to  con-
sider as  accurate,  the  number  of  copies  of  the  bull  of  Cruzada
exported  to  Peru  on  each  new  publication,  is  1,171,953  ;  to  New
Spain,  2,649,326.  I  am  informed,  that  but  few  Indians  purchase
bulls,  and  that  they  are  sold  chiefly  to  the  Spanish  inhabitants,  and
those  of  mixed  race  ;  so  that  the  number  of  Spaniards,  and  people
of  a  mixed  race,  will  amount,  by  this  mode  of  computation,  to  at
least  three  millions.

The  number  of  inhabitants  in  many  of  the  towns  in  Spanish
America  may  give  us  some  idea  of  the  extent  of  population,  and
correct  the  inaccurate  but  popular  notion  entertained  in  Great
Britain  concerning  the  weak  and  desolate  state  of  their  colonies.
The  city  of  Mexico  contains  at  least  150,000  people.  It  is  re-
markable that  Torquemada,  who  wrote  his  Monarquia  Indiana
about  the  year  1612,  reckons  the  inhabitants  of  Mexico  at  that
time  to  be  only  7000  Spaniards  and  8000  Indians.  Lib.  iii.  c.  26.
Puebla  de  los  Angeles  contains  above  60,000  Spaniards,  and
people  of  a  mixed  race.  Villa  Segnor,  p.  247.  Guadalaxara  con-
tains above  30,000,  exclusive  of  Indians.  Id.  ii.  206.  Lima  contains
54,000.  De  Cosme  Bueno  Descr.  de  Peru,  1764.  Carthagena
contains  25,000.  Potosi  contains  25,000.  Bueno  1767.  Popayan
contains  above  20,000.  Ulloa,  i.  287.  Towns  of  a  second  class
are  still  more  numerous.  The  cities  in  the  most  thriving  settlements
of  other  European  nations  in  America  cannot  be  compared  with
these.

Such  are  the  detached  accounts  of  the  number  of  people  in
several  towns,  which  I  have  found  scattered  in  authors  whom  I
thought  worthy  of  credit.  But  I  have  obtained  an  enumeration  of
the  inhabitants  of  the  towns  in  the  province  of  Quito,  on  the  accu-
racy of  which  I  can  rely;  and  I  communicate  it  to  the  public,  both
to  gratify  curiosity,  and  to  rectify  the  mistaken  notion  which  I  have
mentioned.  St.  Francisco  de  Quito  contains  between  50  and
60,000  people  of  all  the  different  races.  Besides  the  city,  there
are  in  the  Corregimicnto  29  euros  or  parishes  established  in  the
principal  villages,  each  of  which  has  smaller  hamlets  depending

302  NOTES AND

upon  it.  The  inhabitants  of  these  are  mostly  Indians  and  mestizos.
St.  Juan  de  Pasto  has  between  6  and  8,000  inhabitants,  besides
27  dependent  villages.  St.  Miguelde  Ibarra,  7000  citizens,  and
ten  villages.  The  district  of  Havala  between  18  and  20,000
people.  The  district  of  Tacuna  between  10  and  12,000.  The
district  of  Ambato  between  8  and  10,000,  besides  16  depending
villages.  The  city  of  Riobamba  between  16  and  20,000  inhabitants,
and  nine  depending  villages.  The  district  of  Chimbo  between  6
and  8000.  The  city  of  Guayaquil  from  16  to  20,000  inhabitants,
and  14)  depending  villages.  The  district  of  Atuasi  between  5  and
6000  inhabitants,  and  four  depending  villages.  The  city  of
Cuenza  between  25  and  30,000  inhabitants,  and  nine  populous  de-
pending villages.  The  town  of  Laxa  from  8  to  10,000  inhabitants,
and  14  depending  villages.  This  degree  of  population,  though
slender  if  we  consider  the  vast  extent  of  the  country,  is  far  beyond
what  is  commonly  supposed.  I  have  omitted  to  mention,  in  its
proper  place,  that  Quito  is  the  only  province  in  Spanish  America
that  can  be  denominated  a  manufacturing  country ;  hats,  cotton
stuffs,  and  coarse  woollen  cloths,  are  made  there  in  such  quantities
as  to  be  sufficient  not  only  for  the  consumption  of  the  province,
but  to  furnish  a  considerable  article  for  exportation  into  other  parts
of  Spanish  America.  I  know  not  whether  the  uncommon  industry
of  this  province  should  be  considered  as  the  cause  or  the  effect  of
its  populousness.  But  among  the  ostentatious  inhabitants  of  the
New  World,  the  passion  for  every  thing  that  comes  from  Europe  is
so  violent,  that  I  am  informed  the  manufactures  of  Quito  are  so
much  undervalued,  as  to  be  on  the  decline.

Note  XXVII.  p.  84.

These  are  established  at  the  following  places  : — St.  Domingo  in
the  island  of  Hispaniola,  Mexico  in  New  Spain,  Lima  in  Peru,
Panama  in  Tierra  Firm^,  Santiago  in  Guatimala,  Guadalaxara  in
New  Galicia,  Santa  Fe  in  the  Nev/  Kingdom  of  Granada,  La
Plata  in  the  country  of  Los  Charcas,  St.  Francisco  de  Quito,
St.  Jago  de  Chili,  Buenos  Ayres.  To  each  of  these  are  subjected
several  large  provinces,  and  some  so  far  removed  from  the  cities
■where  the  courts  are  fixed,  that  they  can  derive  little  benefit  from
their  jurisdiction.  The  Spanish  writers  commonly  reckon  up  twelve
courts  of  audience,  but  they  include  that  of  Manilla  in  the  Phi-
lippine islands.

Note  XXVIII.  p.  90.

Ok  account  of  the  distance  of  Peru  and  Chili  fromSpain,and  the
difficulty  of  carrying  commodities  of  such  bulk  as  wine  and  oil

ILLUSTRATIONS.  303

across  the  isthmus  of  Paraana,  the  Spaniards  in  those  provinces
have  been  permitted  to  plant  vines  and  olives  ;  but  they  are  strictly
prohibited  from  exporting  wine  or  oil  to  any  of  the  provinces  on
the  Pacific  Ocean,  which  are  in  such  a  situation  as  to  receive  them
from  Spain. Recop.  lib.  i.  tit.  xvii.  1.  15 — -18.

Note  XXIX.  p.  91.

This  computation  was  made  by  Benzoni,  a.  d.  1550,  fifty-eight
years  after  the  discovery  of  America.  Hist.  Novi  Orbis,  lib.  iii.
c.  21.  But  as  Benzoni  wrote  with  the  spirit  of  a  malecontent,
disposed  to  detract  from  the  Spaniards  in  every  particular,  it  is
probable  that  his  calculation  is  considerably  too  low.

Note  XXX.  p.  92.

My  information  with  respect  to  the  division  and  transmission  of
property  in  the  Spanish  colonies,  is  imperfect.  The  Spanish  authors
do  not  explain  this  fully,  and  have  not  perhaps  attended  sufficiently
to  the  efi'ects  of  their  own  institutions  and  laws.  Solorzano  de
Jure  Ind.  (vol.  ii.  lib.  ii.  1.  16.)  explains  in  some  measure  the  in-
troduction of  the  tenure  of  Mayorasgo,  and  mentions  some  of  its
effects.  Villa  Segnor  takes  notice  of  a  singular  consequence  of  it.
He  observes,  that  in  some  of  the  best  situations  in  the  city  of  Mex-
ico, a  good  deal  of  ground  is  unoccupied,  or  covered  only  with
the  ruins  of  the  houses  once  erected  upon  it ;  and  adds,  that  as  this
ground  is  held  by  right  of  Mayorasgo,  and  cannot  be  alienated,
that  desolation  and  those  ruins  become  perpetual.  Teatr.  Amer.
vol.  i.  p.  34.

Note  XXXI.  p.  94.

There  is  no  law  that  excludes  Creoles  from  offices,  either  civil
or  ecclesiastic.  On  the  contrary,  there  are  many  Cedulas  which
recommend  the  conferring  places  of  trust  indiscriminately  on  the
natives  of  Spain  and  America.  Betancurt  y  Figueroa  Derecho,
&c.  p.  5,  6.  But  notwithstanding  such  repeated  recommendations,
preferment  in  almost  every  line  is  conferred  on  native  Spaniards.
A  remarkable  proof  of  this  is  produced  by  the  author  last  quoted.
From  the  discovery  of  America  to  the  year  1637,  three  hundred  and
sixty-nine  bishops,  or  archbishops,  have  been  appointed  to  the
different  diocesses  in  that  country,  and  of  all  that  number  only
twelve  were  Creoles,  p.  40.  This  predilection  for  Europeans  seems
still  to  continue.  By  a  royal  mandate,  issued  in  1776,  the  chapter
of  the  cathedral  of  Mexico  is  directed  to  nominate  European
ecclesiastics  of  known  merit  and  abilities,  that  the  king  may
appoint  them  to  supply  vacant  benefices. MS.  penes  me.

304  NOTES AND

Note  XXXII.  p.  98,

Moderate  as  this  tribute  may  appear,  such  is  the  extreme
poverty  of  the  Indians  in  many  provinces  of  America,  that  the
exacting  of  it  is  intolerably  oppressive.  Pegna  Itiner.  par  Pa-
roches  de  Indios,  p.  192.

Note  XXXIII.  p.  98.

In  New  Spain,  on  account  of  the  extraordinary  merit  and  ser-
vices of  the  first  conquerors,  as  well  as  the  small  revenue  arising
from  the  country  previous  to  the  discovery  of  the  mines  of  Sacatecas,
the  encomiendas  were  granted  for  three,  sometimes  for  four  lives.
Recopil.  lib.  vi.  tit.  ii.  c.  14,  &c.

Note  XXXIV. p.  99.

D.  Ant.  Ulloa  contends,  that  working  in  mines  is  not  noxious,
and  as  a  proof  of  this  informs  us,  that  many  Mestizos  and  Indians,
who  do  not  belong  to  any  Repartimiento,  voluntarily  hire  themselves
as  miners ;  and  several  of  the  Indians,  when  the  legal  term  of
their  service  expires,  continue  to  work  in  the  mines  of  choice.
Entrefen.  p.  265.  But  his  opinion  concerning  the  wholesomeness
of  this  occupation  is  contrary  to  the  experience  of  all  ages  ;  and
wherever  men  are  allured  by  high  wages,  they  will  engage  in  any
species  of  labour,  however  fatiguing  or  pernicious  it  may  be.
D.  Hern.  Carillo  Altemirano  relates  a  curious  fact  incompatible
with  this  opinion.  Wherever  mines  are  wrought,  says  he,  the
number  of  Indians  decreases  ;  but  in  the  province  of  Campeachy,
where  there  are  no  mines,  the  number  of  Indians  has  increased
more  than  a  third  since  the  conquest  of  America,  though  neither
the  soil  nor  climate  be  so  favourable  as  in  Peru  or  Mexico.  Colbert,
Collect.  In  another  memorial  presented  to  Philip  III.  in  the  year
1609,  captain  Juan  Gonzales  de  Azevedo  asserts,  that  in  every
district  of  Peru,  where  the  Indians  are  compelled  to  labour  in  the
mines,  their  numbers  were  reduced  to  the  half,  and  in  some  places
to  the  third,  of  what  it  was  under  the  viceroyalty  of  Don  Fran.
Toledo  in  1581. Colb.  Collect.

Note  XXXV.  p.  100.

As  labour  of  this  kind  cannot  be  prescribed  with  legal  accuracy,
the  tasks  seem  to  be  in  a  great  measure  arbitrary,  and  like  the
services  exacted  by  feudal  superiors,  in  vinea,  prato,  aut  messe,  from
their  vassals,  are  extremely  burdensome,  and  often  wantonly  op-
pressive. Pegna  Itiner.  par  Paroches  de  Indios.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  305

Note  XXXVI.  p.  100.

The  turn  of  service  known  in  Peru  by  the  name  of  Mita,  is
called  Tanda  in  New  Spain.  There  it  continues  no  longer  than  a
week  at  a  time.  No  person  is  called  to  serve  at  a  greater  distance
from  his  habitation  than  twenty-four  miles.  This  arrangement  is
less  oppressive  to  the  Indians  than  that  established  in  Peru.  Me-
morial of  Hern.  Carillo  Altamirano. Colbert,  Collect.

Note  XXXVII.  p.  102.

The  strongest  proof  of  this  may  be  deduced  from  the  laws  them-
selves. By  the  multitude  and  variety  of  regulations  to  prevent
abuses,  we  may  form  an  idea  of  the  number  of  abuses  that  prevail.
Though  the  laws  have  wisely  provided  that  no  Indian  shall  be
obliged  to  serve  in  any  mine  at  a  greater  distance  from  his  place
of  residence  than  thirty  miles ;  we  are  informed,  in  a  memorial  of
D.  Hernan  Carillo  Altamirano,  presented  to  the  king,  that  the
Indians  of  Peru  are  often  compelled  to  serve  in  mines  at  the  dis-
tance of  a  hundred,  a  hundred  and  fifty,  and  even  two  hundred
leagues  from  their  habitation.  Colbert,  Collect.  Many  mines  are
situated  in  parts  of  the  country  so  barren,  and  so  distant  from  the
ordinary  habitations  of  the  Indians,  that  the  necessity  of  procur-
ing labourers  to  work  there  has  obliged  the  Spanish  monarchs  to
dispense  with  their  own  regulations  in  several  instances,  and  to
permit  the  viceroys  to  compel  the  people  of  more  remote  provinces
to  resort  to  those  mines.  Escalona  Gazophyl.  Perub.  lib.  i.  c.  16.
But  in  justice  to  them  it  should  be  observed,  that  they  have  been
studious  to  alleviate  this  oppression  as  much  as  possible,  by  en-
joining the  viceroys  to  employ  every  method  in  order  to  induce  the
Indians  to  settle  in  some  part  of  the  country  adjacent  to  the  mines.
Id.  ibid.

Note  XXXVIII.  p.  105.

ToRQUEMADA,  after  a  long  enumeration,  which  has  the  appear-
ance of  accuracy,  concludes  the  number  of  monasteries  in  New
Spain  to  be  four  hundred.  Mon.  Ind.  lib.  xix.  c.  32.  The  number
of  monasteries  in  the  city  of  Mexico  alone  was,  in  the  year  1745,
fifty-five.  Villa  Segnor.  Theat.  Amer.  i.  34.  Ulloa  reckons  up
forty  convents  in  Lima;  and  mentioning  those  for  nuns,  he  says,
that  a  small  town  might  be  peopled  out  of  them,  the  number  of
persons  shut  up  is  so  great.  Voy.  i.  429.  Philip  III.,  in  a  letter
to  the  viceroy  of  Peru,  a.  d.  1620,  observes,  that  the  number  of
convents  in  Lima  was  so  great,  that  they  covered  more  group'd  than
all  the  rest  of  the  city. Solorz.  lib.  iii.  c.  23.  n.  57. Lib.  iii.  c.  16.

VOL.  vin.  X

306  NOTES AND

Torquem.  lib.  xv.  c.  3.  The  first  monastery  in  New  Spain  was
founded  a.  d.  1525,  four  years  only  after  the  conquest.  Torq.
lib.  XV.  c.  16.

According  to  Gil  Gonzalez  Davila,  the  complete  establishment
of  the  American  church  in  all  the  Spanish  settlements  was,  in  the
year  1649,  1  patriarch,  6  archbishops,  32  bishops,  346  prebends,
2  abbots,  5  royal  chaplains,  840  convents.  Teatro  Ecclesiastico
de  las  Ind.  Occident,  vol.  i.  Pref.  When  the  order  of  Jesuits  was
expelled  from  all  the  Spanish  dominions,  the  colleges,  professed
houses,  and  residencies,  which  it  possessed  in  the  province  of
New  Spain,  were  thirty,  in  Quito  sixteen,  in  the  New  Kingdom  of
Granada  thirteen,  in  Peru  seventeen,  in  Chili  eighteen,  in  Paraguay
eighteen ;  in  all  a  hundred  and  twelve.  Collection  General  de
Providencias  hasta  aqui  tomadas  sobre  estranamento,  &c.  de  la
Compagnia,  part  i.  p.  19.  The  number  of  Jesuits,  priests,  and
novices  in  all  these  amounted  to  2245. MS.  penes  me.

In  the  year  1644,  the  city  of  Mexico  presented  a  petition  to  the
king,  praying  that  no  new  monastery  might  be  founded,  and  that
the  revenues  of  those  already  established  might  be  circumscribed,
otherwise  the  religious  houses  would  soon  acquire  the  property  of
the  whole  country.  The  petitioners  request  likewise,  that  the
bishops  might  be  laid  under  restrictions  in  conferring  holy  orders,
as  there  were  at  that  time  in  New  Spain  above  six  thousand  clergy-
men without  any  living.  Id.  p.  16.  These  abuses  must  have  been
enormous  indeed,  when  the  superstition  of  American  Spaniards
was  shocked,  and  induced  to  remonstrate  against  them.

Note  XXXIX.  p.  108.
This  description  of  the  manners  of  the  Spanish  clergy,  I  should
not  have  ventured  to  give  upon  the  testimony  of  Protestant  authors
alone,  as  they  may  be  suspected  of  prejudice  or  exaggeration.
Gage,  in  particular,  who  had  a  better  opportunity  than  any  Pro-
testant to  view  the  interior  state  of  Spanish  America,  describes  the
corruption  of  the  church  which  he  had  forsaken  with  so  much  of
the  acrimony  of  a  new  convert,  that  I  should  have  distrusted  his
evidence,  though  it  communicates  some  very  curious  and  striking
facts.  But  Benzoni  mentions  the  profligacy  of  ecclesiastics  in
America  at  a  very  early  period  after  their  settlement  there.  Hist,
lib.  ii.  c.  19,  20.  M.  Frezier,  an  intelligent  observer,  and  zealous  for
his  own  religion,  paints  the  dissolute  manners  of  the  Spanish  eccle-
'  siastics  in  Peru,  particularly  the  regulars,  in  stronger  colours  than
I  have  employed.  Voy.  p.  51.  215,  &c.  M.  Gentil  confirms  this
account.  Voy.  i.  34.  Correal  concurs  with  both,  and  adds  many
remarkable  circumstances.  Voy.  i.  61.  155.  161.  I  have  good
reason  to  believe  that  the  manners  of  the  regular  clergy,  particularly

ILLUSTRATIONS.  307

in  Peru,  are  still  extremely  indecent.  Acosta  himself  acknow-
ledges that  great  corruption  of  manners  had  been  the  consequence
of  permitting  monks  to  forsake  the  retirement  and  discipline  of  the
cloister,  and  to  mingle  again  with  the  world,  by  undertaking  the
charge  of  the  Indian  parishes.  De  procur.  Ind.  Salute,  lib.  iv.
c.  13,  &c.  He  mentions  particularly  those  vices  of  which  I  have
taken  notice,  and  considers  the  temptations  to  them  as  so  formi-
dable, that  he  leans  to  the  opinion  of  those  who  hold  that  the
regular  clergy  should  not  be  employed  as  parish-priests.  Lib.  v.
c.  20.  Even  the  advocates  for  the  regulars  admit,  that  many  and
great  enormities  abounded  among  the  monks  of  different  orders,
when  set  free  from  the  restraint  of  monastic  discipline ;  and,  from
the  tone  of  their  defence,  one  may  conclude  that  the  charge  brought
against  them  was  not  destitute  of  truth.  In  the  French  colonies
the  state  of  the  regular  clergy  is  nearly  the  same  as  in  the  Spanish
settlements,  and  the  same  consequences  have  followed.  M.  Biet,
superior  of  the  secular  priests  in  Cayenne,  inquires  with  no  less
appearance  of  piety  than  of  candour,  into  the  causes  of  this  cor-
ruption, and  imputes  it  chiefly  to  the  exemption  of  regulars  from
the  jurisdiction  and  censures  of  their  diocesans;  to  the  temptations
to  which  they  are  exposed ;  and  to  their  engaging  in  commerce.
Voy.  p.  320.  It  is  remarkable  that  all  the  authors,  who  censure
the  licentiousness  of  the  Spanish  regulars  with  the  greatest  severity,
concur  in  vindicating  the  conduct  of  the  Jesuits.  Formed  under  a
discipline  more  perfect  than  that  of  the  other  monastic  orders,  or
animated  by  that  concern  for  the  honour  of  the  society,  which  takes
such  full  possession  of  every  member  of  the  order,  the  Jesuits,  both
in  Mexico  and  Peru,  it  is  allowed,  maintained  a  most  irreproachable
decency  of  manners.  Frezier,  223.  Gentil,  i.  34.  The  same
praise  is  likewise  due  to  the  bishops  and  most  of  the  dignified
clergy. Frez.  ibid.

A  volume  of  the  Gazette  de  Mexico  for  the  years  1728,  1729,
1730,  having  been  communicated  to  me,  I  find  there  a  striking
confirmation  of  what  I  have  advanced  concerning  the  spirit  of  low
illiberal  superstition  prevalent  in  Spanish  America.  From  the
newspapers  of  any  nation,  one  may  learn  what  are  the  objects  which
chiefly  engross  its  attention,  and  which  appear  to  it  most  interesting.
The  Gazette  of  Mexico  is  filled  almost  entirely  with  accounts  of
religious  functions,  with  descriptions  of  processions,  consecrations
of  churches,  beatifications  of  saints,  festivals,  autos  de  fe,  &c.
Civil  or  commercial  affairs,  and  even  the  transactions  of  Europe,
occupy  but  a  small  corner  in  this  magazine  of  monthly  intelligence.
From  the  titles  of  new  books,  which  are  regularly  inserted  in  this
Gazette,  it  appears  that  two-thirds  of  them  are  treatises  of  scholastic
theology,  or  of  monkish  devotion.

X  2

308  NOTES AND

Note  XL.  p.  108.

SoLORZANo,  after  mentioning  the  corrupt  morals  of  some  of
the  regular  clergy,  with  that  cautious  reserve  which  became  a
Spanish  layman,  in  touching  on  a  subject  so  delicate,  gives  his
opinion  very  explicitly,  and  with  much  firmness,  against  committing
parochial  charges  to  monks.  He  produces  the  testimony  of  several
respectable  authors  of  his  country,  both  divines  and  lawyers,  in
confirmation  of  his  opinion.  De  Jure  Ind.  ii.  lib.  iii.  c.  16.  A
striking  proof  of  the  alarm  excited  by  the  attempt  of  the  prince
d'Esquilache  to  exclude  the  regulars  from  parochial  cures,  is
contained  in  the  Colbert  collection  of  papers.  Several  memorials
were  presented  to  the  king  by  the  procurators  for  the  monastic
orders,  and  replies  were  made  to  these  in  name  of  the  secular
clergy.  An  eager  and  even  rancorous  spirit  is  manifest  on  both
sides,  in  the  conduct  of  this  dispute.

NoteXLI.  p.  112.

Not  only  the  native  Indians,  but  the  mestizos,  or  children  of  a
Spaniard  and  Indian,  were  originally  excluded  from  the  priesthood,
and  refused  admission  into  any  religious  order.  But  by  a  law
issued  Sept.  28th,  1588,  Philip  II.  required  the  prelates  of  America
to  ordain  such  mestizos  bom  in  lawful  wedlock,  as  they  should  find
to  be  properly  qualified,  and  to  permit  them  to  take  the  vows  in
any  monasteiy  where  they  had  gone  through  a  regular  noviciate.
Recopil.  lib.  i.  tit.  vii.  1.  7.  Some  regard  seems  to  have  been  paid
to  this  law  in  New  Spain  ;  but  none  in  Peru.  Upon  a  representa-
tion of  this  to  Charles  II.  in  the  year  1697,  he  issued  a  new  edict,
enforcing  the  observation  of  it,  and  professing  his  desire  to  have
all  his  subjects,  Indians  and  mestizos,  as  well  as  Spaniards,  ad-
mitted to  the  enjoyment  of  the  same  privileges.  Such,  however,
was  the  aversion  of  the  Spaniards  in  America  to  the  Indians,  and
their  race,  that  this  seems  to  have  produced  little  effect;  for,  in
the  year  1725,  Philip  V.  was  obliged  to  renew  the  injunction  in  a
more  peremptory  tone.  But  so  insurmountable  are  the  hatred  and
contempt  of  the  Indians  among  the  Peruvian  Spaniards,  that  the
present  king  has  been  constrained  to  enforce  the  former  edicts
anew,  by  a  law  pubhshed  Sept.  11,  1774.  Real  Cedula,  MS.
penes  me.

M.  Clavigero  has  contradicted  what  I  have  related  concerning
the  ecclesiastical  state  of  the  Indians,  particularly  their  exclusion
from  the  sacrament  of  the  eucharist,  and  from  holy  orders,  either
as  seculars  or  regulars,  in  such  a  manner  as  cannot  fail  to  make
a  deep  impression. He,  from  his  own  knowledge,  asserts,  "that

ILLUSTRATIONS.  309

in  New  Spain  not  only  are  Indians  permitted  to  partake  of  the
sacrament  of  the  altar,  but  that  Indian  priests  are  so  numerous
that  they  may  be  counted  by  hundreds ;  and  among  these  bare
been  many  hundreds  of  rectors,  canons,  and  doctors,  and,  as  report
goes,  even  a  very  learned  bishop.  At  present  there  are  many
priests,  and  not  a  few  rectors,  among  whom  whom  there  have  been
three  or  four  our  own  pupils."  Vol.  ii.  348,  &c.  I  owe  it  there-
fore as  a  duty  to  the  public,  as  well  as  to  myself,  to  consider  each
of  these  points  with  care,  and  to  explain  the  reasons  which  induced
me  to  adopt  the  opinion  which  I  have  published.

I  knew  that  in  the  Christian  church  there  is  no  distinction  of
persons,  but  that  men  of  every  nation,  who  embrace  the  religion  of
Jesus,  are  equally  entitled  to  every  Christian  privilege  which  they
are  qualified  to  receive.  I  knew  likewise  that  an  opinion  prevailed,
not  only  amongst  most  of  the  Spanish  laity  settled  in  America,
but  among  "  many  ecclesiastics  (I  use  the  words  of  Herrera,
dec.  ii.  lib.  ii.  c.  15),  that  the  Indians  were  not  perfect  or  rational
men,  and  were  not  possessed  of  such  capacity  as  qualified  them  to
partake  of  the  sacrament  of  the  altar,  or  of  any  other  benefit  of  our
religion."  It  was  against  this  opinion  that  Las  Casas  contended
with  the  laudable  zeal  which  I  have  described  in  Books  III,  and
VI.  But  as  the  bishop  of  Darien,  doctor  Sepulvida,  and  other
respectable  ecclesiastics,  vigorously  supported  the  common  opinion
concerning  the  incapacity  of  the  Indians,  it  became  necessary,  in
order  to  determine  the  point,  that  the  authority  of  the  holy  see
should  be  interposed;  and,  accordingly,  Paul  III.  issued  a  bull,
A.  D.  1537,  in  which,  after  condemning  the  opinion  of  those  who
held  that  the  Indians,  as  being  on  a  level  with  brute  beasts,  should
be  reduced  to  servitude,  he  declares,  that  they  were  really  men,
and  such  as  were  capable  of  embracing  the  Christian  religion,  and
participating  of  all  its  blessings.  My  account  of  this  bull,  not-
withstanding the  cavils  of  M.  Clavigero,  must  appear  just  to  every
person  who  takes  the  trouble  of  perusing  it ;  and  my  account  is
the  same  with  that  adopted  by  Torquemada,  lib.  xvi.  c.  25,  and  by
Garcia,  Orig.  p.  311.  But  even  after  this  decision,  so  low  did  the
Spaniards  residing  in  America  rate  the  capacity  of  the  natives,
that  the  first  council  of  Lima  (I  call  it  by  that  name  on  the  au-
thority of  the  best  Spanish  authors)  discountenanced  the  admission
of  Indians  to  the  holy  communion.  Torquera.  lib.  xvi.  c.  20.  In
New  Spain  the  exclusion  of  Indians  from  the  sacrament  was  still
more  explicit.  Ibid.  After  two  centuries  have  elapsed,  and  not-
withstanding all  the  improvement  that  the  Indians  may  be  supposed
to  have  derived  from  their  intercourse  with  the  Spaniards  during
that  period,  we  are  informed  by  D.  Ant.  Ulloa,  that  in  Peru,  where,
as  will  appear  in  the  sequel  of  this  note,  they  are  supposed  to  be

310  NOTES AND

better  instructed  than  in  New  Spain,  their  ignorance  is  so  pro-
digious, that  very  few  are  permitted  to  communicate,  as  being
altogether  destitute  of  the  requisite  capacity.  Voy.  I.  341,  &c.
Solorz.  PoUt.  Ind.  I.  203.

With  respect  to  the  exclusion  of  Indians  from  the  priesthood,
either  as  seculars  or  regulars,  we  may  observe,  that  while  it  con-
tinued to  be  the  common  opinion  that  the  natives  of  America,  on
account  of  their  incapacity,  should  not  be  permitted  to  partake
of  the  holy  sacrament,  we  cannot  suppose  that  they  would  be
clothed  with  that  sacred  character  which  entitled  them  to  consecrate
and  to  dispense  it.  When  Torquemada  composed  his  Monarquia
Indiana,  it  was  almost  a  century  after  the  conquest  of  New  Spain ;
and  yet  in  his  time  it  was  still  the  general  practice  to  exclude
Indians  from  holy  orders.  Of  this  we  have  the  most  satisfying
evidence.  Torquemada  having  celebrated  the  virtues  and  graces
of  the  Indians  at  great  length,  and  with  all  the  complacency  of  a
missionary,  he  starts  as  an  objection  to  what  he  had  asserted,  "  If
the  Indians  really  possess  all  the  excellent  qualities  which  you
have  described,  why  are  they  not  permitted  to  assume  the  religious
habit  ?  Why  are  they  not  ordained  priests  and  bishops,  as  the
Jewish  and  Gentile  converts  were  in  the  primitive  church,  es-
pecially as  they  might  be  employed  with  such  superior  advantage
in  the  instruction  of  their  countrymen?" Lib.  xvii.  c.  13.

In  answer  to  this  objection,  which  establishes,  in  the  most  un-
equivocal manner,  what  was  the  general  practice  at  that  period,
Torquemada  observes,  that  although  by  their  natural  dispositions
the  Indians  are  well  fitted  for  a  subordinate  situation,  they  are
destitute  of  all  the  qualities  requisite  in  any  station  of  dignity  and
authority  ;  and  that  they  are  in  general  so  addicted  to  drunkenness,
that,  upon  the  slightest  temptation,  one  cannot  promise  on  their
behaving  with  the  decency  suitable  to  the  clerical  character.  The
propriety  of  excluding  them  from  it,  on  these  accounts,  was,  he
observed,  so  well  justified  by  experience,  that  when  a  foreigner  of
great  erudition,  who  came  from  Spain,  condemned  the  practice  of
the  Mexican  church,  he  was  convinced  of  his  mistake  in  a  public
disputation  with  the  learned  and  most  religious  father  D.  Juan  de
Gaona,  and  his  retraction  is  still  extant.  Torquemada  indeed
acknowledges,  as  M.  Clavigero  observes  with  a  degree  of  exultation,
that  in  his  time  some  Indians  had  been  admitted  into  monasteries;
but,  with  the  art  of  a  disputant,  he  forgets  to  mention  that  Tor-
quemada specifies  only  two  examples  of  this,  and  takes  notice  that
in  both  instances  those  Indians  had  been  admitted  by  mistake.
Relying  upon  the  authority  of  Torquemada  with  regard  to  New
Spain,  and  of  UUoa  with  regard  to  Peru,  and  considering  the
humiliating  depression  of  the  Indians  in  all  the  Spanish  settlements.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  311

I  concluded  that  they  were  not  admitted  into  the  ecclesiastical
order,  which  is  held  in  the  highest  veneration  all  over  the  New
World.

But  when  M.  Clavigero,  upon  his  own  knowledge,  asserted  facts
so  repugnant  to  the  conclusion  I  had  formed,  I  began  to  distrust  it,
and  to  wish  for  farther  information.  In  order  to  obtain  this,  I  ap-
plied to  a  Spanish  nobleman,  high  in  office,  and  eminent  for  his
abilities,  who,  on  different  occasions,  has  permitted  me  to  have  the
honour  and  benefit  of  corresponding  with  him.  I  have  been  favoured
with  the  following  answer :  "  What  you  have  written  concerning
the  admission  of  Indians  into  holy  orders,  or  into  monasteries,  in
Book  VIII.,  especially  as  it  is  explained  and  limited  in  Note
LXXXVIII.  of  the  quarto  edition,  is  in  general  accurate,  and  con-
formable to  the  authorities  which  you  quote.  And  although  the
congregation  of  the  council  resolved  and  declared,  Feb.  13.  a.d.
1682,  that  the  circumstance  of  being  an  Indian,  a  mulatto,  or
mestizo,  did  not  disqualify  any  person  from  being  admitted  into  holy
orders,  if  he  was  possessed  of  what  is  required  by  the  canons  to
entitle  him  to  that  privilege ;  this  only  proves  such  ordinations  to
be  legal  and  valid  (of  which  Solorzano  and  the  Spanish  lawyers
and  historians  quoted  by  him,  Pol.  Ind.  lib.  ii.  c.  29.  were  per-
suaded), but  it  neither  proves  the  propriety  of  admitting  Indians
into  holy  orders,  nor  what  was  then  the  common  practice  with  re-
spect to  this ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  it  shews  that  there  was  some
doubt  concerning  the  ordaining  of  Indians,  and  some  repugnance
to  it.

"  Since  that  time,  there  have  been  some  examples  of  admitting
Indians  into  holy  orders.  We  have  now  at  Madrid  an  aged  priest,
a  native  of  Tlascala.  His  name  is  D.  Juan  Cerilo  de  Castilla
Aquihual  Catehutle,  descended  of  a  cazique  converted  to  Chris-
tianity soon  after  the  conquest.  He  studied  the  ecclesiastical
sciences  in  a  seminary  of  Puebla  de  los  Angeles.  He  was  a  can-
didate, nevertheless,  for  ten  years,  and  it  required  much  interest
before  bishop  Abren  would  consent  to  ordain  him.  This  ecclesias-
tic is  a  man  of  unexceptionable  character,  nnodest,  self-denied,  and
■with  a  competent  knowledge  of  what  relates  to  his  clerical  functions.
He  came  to  Madrid  above  thirty-four  years  ago,  with  the  sole  view
of  soliciting  admission  for  the  Indians  into  the  colleges  and  semina-
ries in  New  Spain,  that  if,  after  being  well  instructed  and  tried,
they  should  find  an  inclination  to  enter  into  the  ecclesiastical  state,
they  might  embrace  it,  and  perform  its  functions  with  the  greatest
benefit  to  their  countrymen,  whom  they  could  address  in  their  na-
tive tongue.  He  has  obtained  various  regulations  favourable  to  his
scheme,  particularly  that  the  first  college  which  became  vacant  in
consequence  of  the  exclusion  of  the  Jesuits,  should  be  set  apart  for

312  NOTES AND

this  purpose.  But  neither  these  regulations,  nor  any  similar  ones
inserted  in  the  laws  of  the  Indies,  have  produced  any  effect,  on
account  of  objections  and  representations  from  the  greater  part  of
persons  of  chief  consideration  employed  in  New  Spain.  Whether
their  opposition  be  well  founded  or  not,  is  a  problem  difficult  to  re-
solve, and  towards  the  solution  of  which  several  distinctions  and
modifications  are  requisite.

"  According  to  the  accounts  of  this  ecclesiastic,  and  the  in-
formation of  other  persons  who  have  resided  in  the  Spanish  domi-
nions in  America,  you  may  rest  assured  that  in  the  kingdom  of  Tierra
Firme  no  such  thing  is  known  as  either  an  Indian  secular  priest  or
monk ;  and  that  in  New  Spain  there  are  very  few  ecclesiastics  of
Indian  race.  In  Peru,  perhaps,  the  number  may  be  greater,  as  in
that  country  there  are  more  Indians  who  possess  the  means  of  ac-
quiring such  a  learned  education  as  is  necessary  for  persons  who
aspire  to  the  clerical  character."

NoteXLII.  p.  115.

UzTARiz,  an  accurate  and  cautious  calculator,  seems  to  admit,
that  the  quantity  of  silver  which  does  not  pay  duty  may  be  stated
thus  high.  According  to  Herrera,  there  was  not  above  a  third  of
■what  was  extracted  from  Potosi  that  paid  the  king's  fifth.  Dec.  8.
lib.  ii.  c.  15.  Solorzano  asserts  likewise,  that  the  quantity  of  silver
which  is  fraudulently  circulated,  is  far  greater  than  that  -which  is
regularly  stamped,  after  paying  the  fifth.  De  Ind.  Jure,  vol.  ii.  lib.
V.  p.  846.

NoteXLIII.  p.  118.

When  the  mines  of  Potosi  were  discovered  in  the  year  1 545,  the
veins  were  so  near  the  surface,  that  the  ore  was  easily  extracted,
and  so  rich  that  it  was  refined  with  little  trouble  and  at  a  small  ex-
pense, merely  by  the  action  of  fire.  The  simple  mode  of  refining
by  fusion  alone  continued  until  the  year  1574,  when  the  use  of
mercury  in  refining  silver,  as  well  as  gold,  was  discovered.  Those
mines  having  been  wrought  without  interruption  for  two  centuries,
the  veins  are  now  sunk  so  deep,  that  the  expense  of  extracting  the
ore  is  greatly  increased.  Besides  this,  the  richness  of  the  ore,  con-
trary to  what  happens  in  most  other  mines,  has  become  less  as  the
vein  continued  to  dip.  The  vein  has  likewise  diminished  to  such  a
degree,  that  one  is  amazed  that  the  Spaniards  should  persist  in
working  it.  Other  rich  mines  have  been  successively  discovered,
but  in  general  the  value  of  the  ores  has  decreased  so  much,  while
the  expense  cf  extracting  them  has  augmented,  that  the  court  of

ILLUSTRATIONS.  313

Spain  in  the  year  1736,  reduced  the  duty  payable  to  the  king  from
a  Jifth  to  a  tenth.  All  the  quicksilver  used  in  Peru  is  extracted
from  the  famous  mine  of  Guancabelica,  discovered  in  the  year  1563.
The  crown  has  reserved  the  property  of  this  mine  to  itself;  and
the  persons  who  purchase  the  quicksilver  pay  not  only  the  price  of
it,  but  likewise  2i  Jifth,  as  a  duty  to  the  king.  But,  in  the  year  1761,
this  duty  on  quicksilver  was  abolished,  on  account  of  the  increase
of  expense  in  working  mines.  Ulloa,  Entretenimientos,  xii. — xv.
Voyage,  i.  p.  505.  523.  In  consequence  of  this  abolition  of  the
fifth,  and  some  subsequent  abatements  of  price,  which  became
necessary  on  account  of  the  increasing  expense  of  working  mines,
quicksilver,  which  was  formerly  sold  at  eighty  pesos  the  quintal,  is
now  delivered  by  the  king  at  the  rate  of  sixty  pesos.  Campomanes.
Educ.  Popul.  ii.  132.  note.  The  duty  on  gold  is  reduced  to  a
twentieth,  or  five  per  cent.  Any  of  ray  readers,  who  are  desirous
of  being  acquainted  with  the  mode  in  which  the  Spaniards  conduct
the  working  of  their  mines,  and  the  refinement  of  the  ore,  will  find
an  accurate  description  of  the  ancient  method  by  Acosta.  Lib.  iv.
c.  1 — 13i  And  of  their  more  recent  improvements  in  the  metallur-
gic  art,  by  Gamboa  Comment,  a  las  ordenanz.  de  Minas,  c.  22.

Note  XLIV.  p.  120.

Many  remarkable  proofs  occur  of  the  advanced  state  of  industry
in  Spain  at  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century.  The  number  of
cities  in  Spain  was  considerable,  and  they  were  peopled  far  beyond
the  proportion  that  was  common  in  other  parts  of  Europe.  The
causes  of  this  I  have  explained,  Hist,  of  Cha.  V.  book  i.  Wher-
ever cities  are  populous,  that  species  of  industry  which  is  peculiar
to  them  increases  ;  artificers  and  manufacturers  abound.  The
effect  of  the  American  trade  in  giving  activity  to  these  is  manifest,
from  a  singular  fact.  In  the  year  1545,  while  Spain  continued  to
depend  on  its  own  industry  for  the  supply  of  its  colonies,  so  much
work  was  bespoke  from  the  manufacturers,  that  it  was  supposed
they  could  hardly  finish  it  in  less  than  six  years.  Campom.  i.406.
Such  a  demand  must  have  put  much  industry  in  motion,  and  have
excited  extraordinary  efforts.  Accordingly,  we  are  informed,  that
in  the  beginning  of  Philip  II. 's  reign,  the  city  of  Seville  alone,
where  the  trade  with  America  centered,  gave  employment  to  no
fewer  than  16,000  looms  in  silk  or  woollen  work,  and  that  above
130,000  persons  had  occupation  in  carrying  on  these  manufactures.
Campom.  ii.  472.  But  so  rapid  and  pernicious  was  the  operation
of  the  causes  which  I  shall  enumerate,  that  before  Philip  III.  ended
his  reign,  the  looms  in  Seville  were  reduced  to  400. Uztariz,  c.  7.

Since  the  publication  of  the  first  edition,  I  have  the  satisfaction

314  NOTES  AND

to  find  my  ideas  concerning  the  early  commercial  intercourse  be-
tween Spain  and  her  colonies  confirmed  and  illustrated  by  D.  Ber-
nardo Ward,  of  the  Junta  de  Comercio  at  Madrid,  in  his  Froykto
Economico,  Part.  ii.  c.  1.  "  Under  the  reigns  of  Charles  V.  and
Philip  II.,"  says  he,  "  the  manufacturers  of  Spain  and  of  the  Low-
Countries  subject  to  her  dominion  were  in  a  most  flourishing  state.
Those  of  France  and  England  were  in  their  infancy.  The  republic
of  the  United  Provinces  did  not  tl^en  exist.  No  European  power
but  Spain  had  colonies  of  any  value  in  the  New  World.  Spain
could  supply  her  settlements  there  with  the  productions  of  her  own
soil,  the  fabric  wrought  by  the  hands  of  her  own  artisans,  and  all
she  received  in  return  for  these,  belonged  to  herself  alone.  Then
the  exclusion  of  foreign  manufactures  was  proper,  because  it  might
be  rendered  eff"ectual.  Then  Spain  might  lay  heavy  duties  upon
goods  exported  to  America,  or  imported  from  it,  and  might  impose
what  restraints  she  deemed  proper  upon  a  commerce  entirely  in  her
own  hands.  But  when  time  and  successive  revolutions  had  occa-
sioned an  alteration  in  all  those  circumstances,  when  the  manufac-
tures of  Spain  began  to  decline,  and  the  demands  of  America  were
supplied  by  foreign  fabrics,  the  original  maxims  and  regulations  of
Spain  should  have  been  accommodated  to  the  change  in  her  situa-
tion. The  policy  that  was  wise  at  one  period  became  absurd  in
the  other."

Note  XLV.  p.  127.

No  bale  of  goods  is  ever  opened,  no  chest  of  treasure  is  ex-
amined. Both  are  received  on  the  credit  of  the  persons  to  whom
they  belong ;  and  only  one  instance  of  fraud  is  recorded,  during
the  long  period  in  which  trade  was  carried  on  with  this  liberal  con-
fidence. All  the  coined  silver  that  was  brought  from  Peru  to
Porto-Bello  in  the  year  1654  was  found  to  be  adulterated,  and  to
be  mingled  with  a  fifth  part  of  base  metal.  The  Spanish  merchants,
with  sentiments  suitable  to  their  usual  integrity,  sustained  the
whole  loss,  and  indemnified  the  foreigners  by  whom  they  were  em-
ployed. The  fraud  was  detected,  and  the  treasurer  of  the  revenue
in  Peru,  the  author  of  it,  was  publicly  burnt.  B.  UUoa  Retablis.
de  Manuf.  &c.  liv.  ii.  p.  102.

Note  XLVI.  p.  130.

Many  striking  proofs  occur  of  the  scarcity  of  money  in  Spain.
Of  all  the  immense  sums  which  have  been  imported  from  America,
the  amount  of  which  I  shall  afterward  have  occasion  to  mention,
Moncada  asserts,  that  there  did  not  remain  in  Spain,  in  1619,  above

ILLUSTRATIONS.  315

two  hundred  millions  of  pesos,  one  half  in  coined  money,  the  other
in  plate  and  jewels.  Restaur  de  Espagna,  disc.  iii.  c.  I.  Uztariz,
•who  published  his  valuable  work  in  1724,  contends,  that  in  money,
plate,  and  jewels,  there  did  not  remain  a  hundred  millions.  Theor.
&c.  c.  3.  Campomanes,  on  the  authority  of  a  remonstrance  from
the  community  of  merchants  in  Toledo  to  Philip  IIL,  relates,  as  a
certain  proof  how  scarce  cash  had  become,  that  persons  who  lent
money  received  a  third  part  of  the  sum  which  they  advanced  as  in-
terest and  premium.  Educ.  Popul.  i.  417.

Note  XLVII.  p.  133.

The  account  of  the  mode  in  which  the  factors  of  the  South-Sea
Company  conducted  the  trade  in  the  fair  of  Porto-Bello,  which  was
opened  to  them  by  the  Assiento,  I  have  taken  from  Don  Dion.
Alcedo  y  Herrera,  president  of  the  court  of  audience  in  Quito,  and
governor  of  that  province.  Don  Dionysio  was  a  person  of  such  re-
spectable character  for  probity  and  discernment,  that  his  testimony
in  any  point  would  be  of  much  weight ;  but  greater  credit  is  due
to  it  in  this  case,  as  he  was  an  eye-witness  of  the  transactions  which
he  relates,  and  was  often  employed  in  detecting  and  authenticating
the  frauds  which  he  describes.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  his
representation,  being  composed  at  the  commencement  of  the  war
which  broke  out  between  Great  Britain  and  Spain,  in  the  year  1739,
may,  in  some  instances,  discover  a  portion  of  the  acrimonious  spirit
natural  at  that  juncture.  His  detail  of  facts  is  curious ;  and  even
English  authors  confirm  it  in  some  degree,  by  admitting  both  that
various  frauds  were  practised  in  the  transactions  of  the  annual  ship,
and  that  the  contraband  trade  from  Jamaica,  and  other  British
colonies,  was  become  enormously  great.  But  for  the  credit  of  the
English  nation  it  may  be  observed,  that  those  fraudulent  operations
are  not  to  be  considered  as  deeds  of  the  company,  but  as  the  dis-
honourable arts  of  their  factors  and  agents.  The  company  itself
sustained  a  considerable  loss  by  the  Assiento  trade.  Many  of  its
servants  acquired  immense  fortunes.  Anderson  Chronol.  deduct.
ii.  388.

Note  XLVIII.  p.  138.

Several  facts  with  respect  to  the  institution,  the  progress,  and
the  effects  of  this  company,  are  curious,  and  but  little  known  to
English  readers.  Though  the  province  of  Venezuela,  or  Caraccas,
extends  four  hundred  miles  along  the  coast,  and  is  one  of  the  most
fertile  in  America ;  is  was  so  much  neglected  by  the  Spaniards,
that  during  the  twenty  years  prior  to  the  establishment  of  the  com-

316  NOTES  AND

pany,  only  five  ships  sailed  from  Spain  to  that  province;  and  dur-
ing sixteen  years,  from  1706  to  1722,  not  a  single  ship  arrived  from
the  Caraccas  in  Spain.  Noticias  de  Real  Campania  de  Caraccas,
p.  28.  During  this  period  Spain  must  have  been  supplied  almost
entirely  with  a  large  quantity  of  cacao,  which  it  consumes,  by
foreigners.  Before  the  erection  of  the  company,  neither  tobacco
nor  hides  were  imported  from  Caraccas  into  Spain.  Id.  p.  117.
Since  the  commercial  operations  of  the  company,  begun  in  the  year
1731,  the  importation  of  cacao  into  Spain  has  increased  amazingly.
During  thirty  years  subsequent  to  1701,  the  number  of  fanegas  of
cacao  (each  a  hundred  and  ten  pounds)  imported  from  Caraccas  was
643,215.  During  eighteen  years  subsequent  to  1731,  the  number
oi  fanegas  imported  was  869,247  ;  and  if  we  suppose  the  importa-
tion to  be  continued  in  the  same  proportion  during  the  remainder
of  thirty  years,  it  will  amount  to  1,448,746  fanegas,  which  is  an  in-
crease of  805,531  fanegas.  Id.  p.  148.  During  eight  years  sub-
sequent to  1756,  there  has  been  imported  into  Spain  by  the  com-
pany 88,482  arrobas  (each  twenty-five  pounds)  of  tobacco ;  and
hides  to  the  number  of  177,354.  Id.  161.  Since  the  publication  of
the  Noticias  de  Campania,  in  1 765,  its  trade  seems  to  be  on  the  in-
crease. During  five  years  subsequent  to  1769,  it  has  imported
179,156  fanegas  of  cacao  into  Spain,  36,208  arrobas  of  tobacco,
75,496  hides,  and  221,432  pesos  in  specie.  Campomanes,  ii.  162.
The  last  article  is  a  proof  of  the  growing  wealth  of  the  colony.  It
receives  cash  from  Mexico  in  return  for  the  cacao,  with  which  it
supplies  that  province,  and  this  it  remits  to  Spain,  or  lays  out  in
purchasing  European  goods.  But,  besides  this,  the  most  explicit
evidence  is  produced,  that  the  quantity  of  cacao  raised  in  the  pro-
vince is  double  to  what  it  yielded  in  1731 ;  the  number  of  its  live
stock  is  more  than  treble,  and  its  inhabitants  much  augmented.  The
revenue  of  the  bishop,  which  arises  wholly  from  tithes,  has  increased
from  eight  to  twenty  thousand  pesos.  Notic.  p.  Q9.  In  consequence
of  the  augmentation  of  the  quantity  of  cacao  imported  into  Spain,
its  price  has  decreased  from  eighty  pesos  for  the  fanega  to  forty.
Id.  61.  Since  the  publication  of  the  first  edition,  I  have  learned
that  Guyana,  including  all  the  extensive  provinces  situated  on  the
banks  of  the  Orinoco,  the  islands  of  Trinidad  and  Margarita  are
added  to  the  countries  with  which  the  company  of  Caraccas  had
liberty  of  trade  by  their  former  charters.  Real  Cedula,  Nov.  19,
1776.  But  I  have  likewise  been  informed,  that  the  institution  of
this  company  has  not  been  attended  with  all  the  beneficial  effects
which  I  have  ascribed  to  it.  In  many  of  its  operations  the  illiberal
and  oppressive  spirit  of  monopoly  is  still  conspicuous.  But  in
order  to  explain  this,  it  would  be  necessary  to  enter  into  minute
details,  which  are  not  suited  to  the  nature  of  this  work.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  317

NoteXLIX.  p.  143.

This  first  experiment  made  by  Spain  of  opening  a  free  trade
with  any  of  her  colonies,  has  produced  effects  so  remarkable,  as
to  merit  some  farther  illustration.  The  towns  to  which  this  liberty
has  been  granted,  are  Cadiz  and  Seville,  for  the  province  of  Anda-
lusia; Alicant  and  Carthagena,  for  Valencia  and  Murcia  :  Barce-
lona, for  Catalonia  and  Aragon  ;  Santander,  for  Castile ;  Corugna,
for  Galicia;  and  Gijon,  for  Asturias.  Append,  ii.  a  la  Educ.
Popul.  p.  41.  These  are  either  the  ports  of  chief  trade  in  their
respective  districts,  or  those  most  conveniently  situated  for  the  ex-
portation of  their  respective  productions.  The  following  facts  give
a  view  of  the  increase  of  trade  in  the  settlements  to  which  the  new
regulations  extend.  Prior  to  the  allowance  of  free  trade,  the
duties  collected  in  the  custom-house  at  the  Havannah  were  com-
puted to  be  104,208  pesos  annually.  During  the  five  years  pre-
ceding 1774,  they  rose  at  a  medium  to  308,000  pesos  a  year.  In
Yucatan,  the  duties  have  arisen  from  8000  to  150,000.  In  His-
paniola,  from  2500  to  5600.  In  Porto  Rico,  from  1200  to  7000.
The  total  value  of  goods  imported  from  Cuba  into  Spain  was
reckoned,  in  1774,  to  be  1,500,000  pesos. Educ.  Popul.  450,  &c.

Note  L.  p.  148.

The  two  treatises  of  Don  Pedro  Rodriguez  Campomanes,  Fiscal
del  real  consejo  y  Supremo  (an  office  in  rank  and  power  nearly  similar
to  that  of  attorney-general  in  England),  and  director  of  the  royal
academy  of  history,  the  one  entitled,  Discurso  sobre  el  Fomento  de
la  Industria  Popular;  the  other,  Discurso  sobre  la  Education
Popular  de  los  Artesanos  y  su  Fomento  ;  the  former  published  in
1774,  and  the  latter  in  1775,  afford  a  striking  proof  of  this.
Almost  every  point  of  importance  with  respect  to  interior  police,
taxation,  agriculture,  manufactures,  and  trade,  domestic  as  well  as
foreign,  is  examined  in  the  course  of  these  works ;  and  there  are
not  many  authors,  even  in  the  nations  most  eminent  for  commercial
knowledge,  who  have  carried  on  their  inquiries  with  a  more
thorough  knowledge  of  those  various  subjects,  and  a  more  perfect
freedom  from  vulgar  and  national  prejudices,  or  who  have  united
more  happily  the  calm  researches  of  philosophy  with  the  ardent
zeal  of  a  public-spirited  citizen.  These  books  are  in  high  estima-
tion among  the  Spaniards  ;  and  it  is  a  decisive  evidence  of  the
progress  of  their  own  ideas,  that  they  are  capable  of  relishing  an
author  whose  sentiments  are  so  liberal.

ai8  NOTES AND

Note  LI.  p.  151.

The  galeon  employed  in  that  trade,  instead  of  the  six  hundred
tons,  to  which  it  is  Uraited  by  law,  Recop.  lib.  xlv.  1.  15.,  is  com-
monly from  twelve  hundred  to  two  thousand  tons  burden.  The
ship  from  Acapulco,  taken  by  lord  Anson,  instead  of  the  500,000
pesos  permitted  by  law,  had  on  board  1,313,843  pesos,  besides
uncoined  silver  equal  in  value  to  43,611  pesos  more.  Anson's
Voyage,  384.

Note  LIT.  p.  153.

The  price  paid  for  the  bull  varies  according  to  the  rank  of
different  persons.  Those  in  the  lowest  order  who  are  servants  or
slaves,  pay  two  reals  of  plate,  or  one  shilling ;  other  Spaniards  pay
eight  reals,  and  those  in  public  office,  or  who  hold  encomiendas,
sixteen  reals.  Solorz.  de  Jurelnd.  vol.  ii.  lib.iii.  c.  25.  Accordins:
to  Chilton,  an  English  merchant  who  resided  long  in  the  Spanish
settlements,  the  bull  of  Cruzado  bore  a  higher  price  in  the  year
1570,  being  then  sold  for  four  reals  at  the  lowest.  Hakluyt,  iii.
461.  The  price  seems  te  have  varied  at  different  periods.  That
exacted  for  the  bulls  issued  in  the  last  Predicacion  will  appear  from
the  ensuing  table,  which  will  give  some  idea  of  the  proportional
numbers  of  the  different  classes  of  citizens  in  New  Spain  and  Peru.

There  were  issued  for  New  Spain —

Bulls  at  10  pesos  each  _____  4

at  2  pesos  each  - - - - -  22,601

at  1  peso  each -__---  164,220

at  2  reals  each 2,462,500

2,649,325

For  Peru —

at  16  pesos  4|  reals  each _ _ - -  3

at  3  pesos  3  reals  each _ _ _ _  14,202

at  1  peso'5|  reals 78,822

at  4  reals - 410,325

at  3  reals - - - - - - -  . 668,601

1,171,953

Note  LIII.  p.  154.

As  Villa  Segnor,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  this  information
contained  in  his  Theatro  Americano,  published  in  Mexico,  a.  d.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  .119

1746,  was  accomptant-general  in  one  of  the  most  considerable  de-
partments of  the  royal  revenue,  and  by  that  means  had  access  to
proper  information,  his  testimony  with  respect  to  this  point  merits
great  credit.  No  such  accurate  detail  of  the  Spanish  revenues  in
any  part  of  America  has  hitherto  been  published  in  the  English
language  ;  and  the  particulars  of  it  may  appear  curious  and  inte-
resting to  some  of  my  readers.

From  the  bull  of  Cruzado,  published  every  two  years,  there  arises
an  annual  revenue  in  pesos, - - - - 150,000

From  the  duty  on  silver 700,000

From  the  duty  on  gold -----  60,000

From  tax  on  cards ------  70,000

From  tax  on  pulque,  a  drink  used  by  the  Indians  - 161,000
From  tax  on  stamped  paper _ - - -  41,000

From  ditto  on  ice - - - - - -  15,522

From  ditto  on  leather  _ . _ _ _  2,500

From  ditto  on  gunpowder  - _ - _  71,550

From  ditto  on  salt ------  32,000

From  ditto  on  copper  of  Mechochan - - -  1,000

From  ditto  on  alum - _ „ - -  6,500

From  ditto  on  Juego  de  los  gallos - - -  21,100

From  the  half  of  ecclesiastical  annats - -  49,000

From  royal  ninths  of  bishoprics,  &c. - -  68,800

From  the  tribute  of  Indians  -  -  _  -  650,000
From  alcavala,  or  duty  on  sale  of  goods  -  -  721,875
From  the  Almajorifasgo,  custom-house  -  -  373,333
From  the  mint 357,500

3,552,680

This  sum  amounts  to  819,161/.  sterling;  and  if  we  add  to  it  the
profit  accruing  from  the  sale  of  5000  quintals  of  quicksilver,  im-
ported from  the  mines  of  Almaden,  in  Spain,  on  the  king's  account,
and  what  accrues  from  the  Averia,  and  some  other  taxes  which
Villa  Segnor  does  not  estimate,  the  public  revenue  in  New  Spain
may  well  be  reckoned  above  a  million  pounds  sterling  money.  Theat.
Mex.  vol.  i.  p.  38,  &c.  According  to  Villa  Segnor,  the  total  pro-
duce of  the  Mexican  mines  amounts  at  a  medium  to  eight  millions
of  pesos  in  silver  annually,  and  to  5912  marks  of  gold.  Id.  p.  24.
Several  branches  of  the  revenue  have  been  explained  in  the  course
of  the  history  ;  some,  which  there  was  no  occasion  of  mentioning,
require  a  particular  illustration.  The  right  to  the  tithes  in  the  New
World  is  vested  in  the  crown  of  Spain,  by  a  bull  of  Alexander  VI.
Charles  V.  appointed  them  to  be  applied  in  the  following  manner :
one-fourth  is  allotted  to  the  bishop  of  the  diocess,  another  fourth  to

.320  NOTES AND

the  dean  and  chapter,  and  other  officers  of  the  cathedral.  The
remaining  half  is  divided  into  nine  equal  parts.  Two  of  these,
under  the  denomination  of  los  dos  Novenos  reales,  are  paid  to  the
crown,  and  constitute  a  branch  of  the  royal  revenue.  The  other
seven  parts  are  applied  to  the  maintenance  of  the  parochial  clergy,
the  building  and  support  of  churches,  and  other  pious  uses.  Re-
copil.  lib.  i.  tit.  xvi.  Ley.  23,  &c.  Avendano  Thesaur.  Indie,
vol.  i.  p.  184.

The  Akavala  is  a  duty  levied  by  an  excise  on  the  sale  of  goods.
In  Spain  it  amounts  to  ten  per  cent.  In  America  to  four  per  cent.
Solorzano.  Polit.  Indiana,  lib.  vi.  c.  8. Avendano,  vol.  i.  186.

The  Almajorifasgo,  or  custom  paid  in  America  on  goods  imported
and  exported,  may  amount  on  an  average  to  fifteen  per  cent.
Recopil.  lib.  viii.  tit.  xiv.  Ley.  1. Avendano,  vol  i.  188.

The  Averia,  or  tax  paid  on  account  of  convoys  to  guard  the  ships
sailing  to  and  from  America,  was  first  imposed  when  Sir  Francis
Drake  filled  the  New  World  with  terror  by  his  expedition  to  the
South  Sea.  It  amounts  to  two  per  cent,  on  the  value  of  goods.
Avendano,  vol.  i.  p.  189. Recopil.  lib.  ix.  tit.  ix. Ley.  43,  44.

I  have  not  been  able  to  procure  any  accurate  detail  of  the  several
branches  of  revenue  in  Peru,  later  than  the  year  1614.  From  a
curious  manuscript,  containing  a  state  of  that  viceroyalty  in  all  its
departments,  presented  to  the  marquis  of  Montes-Claros,  by  Fran.
Lopez  Caravantes,  accomptant-general  in  the  tribunal  of  Lima,  it
appears  that  the  public  revenue,  as  nearly  as  I  can  compute  the
value  of  the  money  in  which  Caravantes  states  his  accounts,
amounted  in  ducats  at  4s.  lid.  to  - - - 2,372,768

Expenses  of  government - - . _ 1,242,992

Net  free  revenue 1,129,776

The  total  in  sterling  money - - - - £583,303
Expenses  of  government - - - - -  305,568

Net  free  revenue 277,735

But  several  articles  appear  to  be  omitted  in  this  computation,
such  as  the  duty  on  stamped  paper,  leather,  ecclesiastical  annats,
&c.,  so  that  the  revenue  of  Peru  may  be  well  supposed  equal  to
that  of  Mexico.

In  computing  the  expense  of  government  in  New  Spain,  I  may
take  that  of  Peru  as  a  standard.  There  the  annual  establishment
for  defraying  the  charge  of  administration  exceeds  one  half  of  the
revenue  collected,  and  there  is  no  reason  for  supposing  it  to  be  less
in  New  Spain.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  .321

I  have  obtained  a  calculation  to  the  total  amount  of  the  public
revenue  of  Spain  from  America  and  the  Philippines,  which,  as
the  reader  will  perceive  from  the  two  last  articles,  is  more  recent
than  any  of  the  former.

Alcavalas  (Excise)  and  Aduanas  (Customs),  &c.  in

pesos  fuertes 2,500,000

Duties  on  gold  and  silver - _ - -  3,000,000

BullofCruzado 1,000,000

Tribute  of  the  Indians -----  2,000,000

By  sale  of  quicksilver -----  300,000
Paper  exported  on  the  king's  account,  and  sold  in

the  royal  warehouses -----  300,000

Stamped  paper,  tobacco,  and  other  small  duties  1,000,000
Duty  on  coinage  of,  at  the  rate  of  one  real  de  la

Plata  for  each  mark -----  300,000
From  the  trade of  Acapulco,  and  the  coasting

trade  from  province  to  province - - -  500,000

Assiento  of  negroes -----  200,000
From  the  trade  of  Mathe,  or  herb  of  Paraguay,

formerly  monopolized  by  the  Jesuits - -  500,000
From  other  revenues  formerly  belonging  to  that

order - - - "  - - - -  400,000

Total 12,000,000

Total  in  sterling  money £2,700,000

Deduct  half,  at  the  expense  of  administration,  and

there  remains  net  free  revenue - - - £1,350,000

Note  LIV.  p.  154.

An  author,  long  conversant  in  commercial  speculation,  has  com-
puted, that  from  the  mines  of  New  Spain  alone,  the  king  receives
annually,  as  his  fifth,  the  sum  of  two  millions  of  our  money.  Harris,
Collect,  of  Voy.  ii.  p.  164.  According  to  this  calculation,  the
total  produce  of  the  mines  must  be  ten  millions  sterling  ;  a  sum  so
exorbitant,  and  so  little  corresponding  with  all  accounts  of  the
annual  importation  from  America,  that  the  information  on  which  it
is  founded  must  evidently  be  erroneous.  According  to  Campo-
manes,  the  total  product  of  the  American  mines  may  be  computed
at  thirty  millions  of  pesos,  which,  at  four  shillings  and  sixpence  a
peso,  amounts  to  7,425,000/.  sterling,  the  king's  fifth  of  which  (if
that  were  regularly  paid)  would  be  1,485,000/.  But  from  this  sum
must  be  deducted  what  is  lost  by  a  fraudulent  withholding  of  the

VOL.  VIII.  Y

322  PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

fifth  due  to  the  crown,  as  well  as  the  sum  necessary  for  defraying  the
expense  of  administration.  Educ.  Popular,  vol.  ii.  p.  131.  note*
Both  these  suras  are  considerable.

Note  LV.  p.  154.

According  to  Bern,  de  Ulloa,  all  foreign  goods  exported  from
Spain  to  America  pay  duties  of  various  kinds,  amounting  in  all  to
more  than  25  per  cent.  As  most  of  the  goods  with  which  Spain
supplies  her  colonies  are  foreign,  such  a  tax  upon  a  trade  so  ex-
tensive must  yield  a  considerable  revenue.  Retablis.  de  Manuf.
et  du  Commerce  d'Esp.  p.  150.  He  computes  the  value  of  goods
exported  annually  from  Spain  to  America  to  be  about  two  millions
and  a  half  sterling,  p.  97.

Note  LVI.  p.  156.

The  marquis  de  Serralvo,  according  to  Gage,  by  a  monopoly  of
salt,  and  by  embarking  deeply  in  the  Manilla  trade,  as  well  as  in
that  to  Spain,  gained  annually  a  million  of  ducats.  In  one  year  he
remitted  a  million  of  ducats  to  Spain,  in  order  to  purchase  from  the
Conde  Olivares,  and  his  creatures,  a  prolongation  of  his  govern-
ment, p.  61.  He  was  successful  in  his  suit,  and  continued  in  office
from  1624  to  1635,  double  the  usual  time.

kmr.;fi  !■'  .^.l-lUi.  Ih^'  ,10- '/t*-™*-'

"«*■

INDEX

TO THE

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA.

N.  B. The  Numeral  Letters  refer  to  the  Volume,  and  the
Figures  to  the  Page.

xtleyssixia,  au  embassy  sent  to  that
country  by  Jolin  II.  king  of  Portugal,  vi,
78.

Acapnlco,  Ibe  nature  of  tbe  trade  car-
ried on  from  tbeiice  to  Manila,  viii.  151.
Amount  of  the  treasure  on  board  tbe  sliip
taken  by  lord  Anson,  318.

Acosta,  his  method  of  accounting  for
the  different  degrees  of  heat,  in  tbe  old
and  new  continents,  vi.S-lS.

Adair,  his  account  of  the  revengeful
temper  of  ihe  native  Americans,  vii.  ,S.i2.

Adanson,  his  justification  of  Hanno's
account  of  the  African  seas,  vi.  326.

Africa,  the  western  cnast  of,  first  ex-
plored by  order  of  John  I.  king  of  Portu-
gal, vi.  64.  Is  discovered  from  Cape
Non  to  Bojador,  6.5.  Cape  Bojador
doubled,  69.  The  countries  soulhward
of  the  river  Senegal  discovered,  74.
Cape  of  Good  Hope  seen  by  Barlholo-
mew  Dias  78.  Causes  of  the  extreme
beat  of  the  climate  there,  259.  Igno-
rance of  the  ancient  astronomers  concern-
ing, 327.  Expedition  to  the  coast  ofj  viii.
171,

Agricollure,  tbe  state  of,  among  the  na-
tive Americans,  vii.  5.  Two  principal
causes  of  the  defects  of,  8.

Aguado  is  sent  to  Kispaniola,  as  a
commissioner  to  inspect  the  conduct  of
Columbus,  vi.  147.

Aguilar,  Jerome  de,  is  relieved  from  a
long  captivity  among  the  Indians  at  Cozu-
mel,  by  Fernando  Cortes,  vii.  101.

Albuquerque,  Rodrigo,  bis  barbarous
treatment  of  the  Indians  of  Hispaniola,
vi.  223.

Alcavala,  in  the  Spanish  castoms,  the
terra  explained,  viii.  320.

Alexander  tlie  Great,  his  polllical  cha-

racter, vi.  39.  His  motive  in  founding
the  city  of  Alexandria,  ib.  His  discove-
ries in  India,  40.

Alexander  VI.,  pope,  grants  to  Ferdi-
nand and  Isabella  of  Castile  the  right  of
all  their  western  discoveries,  vi.  130.
Sends  missionaries  with  Columbus  on  bis
second  voyage,  131.

Almagro,  Diego  de,  his  birth  and  cha-
racter, vii.  236.  Associates  willi  Pizarro
and  De  Luque,  in  a  voyage  of  discovery,
ib.  His  unsuccessful  attempts, 233.  Is
neglected  by  Pizarro  in  his  Spr.nish  nego-
tiation, 244.  Is  reconciled  lo  him,  246.
Brings  reinforcements  to  Pizarro  atPe:n,
262.  Beginning  of  dissensions  between
him  and  Pizarro,  275.  Invades  Chili,
273.  Is  created  governor  of  Chili,  and
marches  to  Cuzco,  282.  Seizes  Cuzco
cut  of  the  hands  of  Pizarro,  28.3.  De-
feats Alvarado,  and  takes  him  prisoner,
284.  Is  deceived  by  the  artful  negotia-
tions of  Francis  Pizarro,  286.  Is  de-
feated by  the  Pizarros,  289.  Is  taken
prisoner,  290.  Is  tried  and  condemned,
291. Is  put  to  death,  ib.

Almagro,  the  son,  affords  refuge  to  bis
father's  followers  at  Lima,  vii.  299.  Cha-
racter, 300.  Heads  a  conspiracy  against
Francis  Pizarro,  ib.  Pizarro  assassinated,
302.  Is  acknowledged  as  his  successor,
ib.  His  precarious  situation,  303.  Is  de-
feated by  A'aca  de  Castro,  305.  Is  be-
trayed and  executed,  306.

Alraajorifasgo,  in  the  Spanish  Ameri-
can customs,  the  amount  of,  viii.  320.

Alvarado,  ."Monzo,  is  sent  from  Liraaby
Francis  Pizarro,  with  a  body  of  Spaniards
to  relieve  his  brothers  at  Cuzco,  vii.  284.
Is  taken  a  prisoner  by  Almagro,  283.
His  escape,  286.

y  2

324

INDEX.

Alvarado,  Pedro  dc,  is  left  bj  Cones
to  command  at  Mexico,  while  he  marched
against  Narvaez,  vii.l67.  He  is  besieged
by  the  Mexicans,  173.  His  imprudent
conduct,  174.  His  expedition  to  Qaito
iu  Peru, '273.

Amazons,  a  coramunily  of,  said  to  exist
in  South  America,  by  Francis  Orellana,
vii.  298.

America,  the  continent  of, discovered  by
Christopher  Columbus,  vi.  134.  How  it  ob-
tained this  name,  165.  Ferdinand  of  Castile
nominates  two  governments  in,  :i!02.  The
propositions  ofTered  to  the  natives,  203.
Ill  reception  of  Ojeda  and  Nicnessa
among  thera,  ib.  The  South  sea  dis-
covered by  Balboa,  214.  Rio  de  Plata
discovered,  222.  The  natives  of,  inju-
riously treated  by  the  Spaniards,  240.
The  vast  extent  of,  254.  The  grand  ob-
jects it  presented  to  view,  ib.  The  cir-
cumstances of,  favourable  for  commerce
and  civilization,  255.  The  climates  of,
256,  237.  Various  causes  of  the  peculi-
arity of  its  climates,  258.  Its  rude  and
uncultivated  state  when  first  discovered,
261.  Its  animals,  264.  Its  insects  and
reptiles,  265.  Birds,  266.  General  ac-
count of  its  soil,  267.  Inquiry  into  the
first  population  of,  268.  Could  not  be
peopled  by  civilized  nations,  274.  The
northern  extremity  of,  contiguous  to  Asia,
276.  Frobr.bly  peopled  by  Asiatics,  283.
Condition  and  character  of  the  native  in-
habitants inquired  into,  284.  Were  more
rude  th:;!)  t!ie  natives  of  atiy  other  known
parts  of  the  earth,  285.  The  Peruvians
and  Mexicans  excepted,  286.  The  first
discoverers  incapable  of  a  judicious  spe-
culative examination,  287.  The  various
systems  of  philosophers  respecting  the  na-
tives, 289.  Method  observed  in  the  pre-
sent review  of  their  bodily  constitution
and  circumstances,  291.  The  venereal
disease  derived  from  this  part  of  the
world,  308.  Why  so  thinly  inhabited,
vii.  13.  The  country  depopulated  by
continual  wars,  41.  Cause  of  the  extreme
coldness  towards  the  southern  extre-
mity of,  vi.  351.  The  natural  unculti-
vated state  of  the  country  described,  352.
Bones  of  large  extinct  species  of  ani-
mals discovered  underground  near  the
banks  of  the  Ohio,  353.  Why  European
animals  degenerate  there,  354.  Supposed
to  have  undergone  a  convulsive  separation
from  Asia,  3.57.  The  vicinity  of  the  two
continents  of  Asia  and  America  clearly
ascertained,  ib. — 360.  Causes  oftlie  de-
population of,  traced,  viii.  75.  This  de-
population not  the  result  of  any  intentional
system  of  policy,  77,  Nor  the  result  of
religion,  79.  Number  of  Indian  natives
still  remaining  in  Mexico  and  Peru,  ib.
All the Spanish  dominions  there sub-

jected to  two  viceroys,  83.  Its  third
viceroyalty  lately  established,  ib.  See
Mexico,  Pern,  Cortes,  Pizarro,  Cabot,
&c.

America,  North,  project  of  settling
there,  viii.  176.  First  expedition  to,
fails,  177.  A  second  expedition  to,  ends
disastrously,  178.  Plan  of  settling  there
resumed  without  effect,  ib.  The  coast  of,
divided  into  two  parts,  188.  Charters
granted  to  two  companies  for  settling
colonies  in,  189.  Emigrations  from  Eng-
land to,  259.  See  Colonies,  New  Eng-
land, Virginia,  &c.

Americans, native, in Spanish Ame-
rica, their bodily  constitution  and  com-
plexion, vi.  292. Their strength and
abilities,  ib. Their  insensibility  with  re-
gard lo  their  women,  294. No  deformities
in  their  frame, 298. This  circumstance
accounted  for,  299. Uniformity  of  their
colour,  300. A peculiar race of, de-
scribed, 303.  The  Esquimaux,  304. Pa-
tagonians,  305. The  existence  of  Pata-
gonian  giants  yet  remaining  to  be  decided,
306. Their  diseases,  307. The  venereal
diseasepeculiarly  theirs,  308.  The  powers
and  qualities of  their  minds,  309. Are
only solicitous to supply immediate
wants, 310. The art of compulation
scarcely  known  to  them, 311. Have  no
abstract  ideas, 312. The  North  Ameri-
cans much more intelligent than those
of  the  South, 313. Their aversion to
labour, 315. Their social state,  317.
Domestic union, ib. The  women, 318.
Their women not prolific, 321. Their
parental affection and filial duty, 322.
Their  modes  of  subsistence,  vii.  1. Fish-
ing, 2. Hunting,  3. Agriculture, 3.
The  various  objects  of  their  culture,  ib.
Two principal causes of  the  defects  of
their  agriculture,  8. Their  want  of  tame
animals, ib. Their want of  useful  me-
tals, 10. Their  political  institutions,  12.
Were divided into small independent
communities, ib. Unacquainted with
the idea of  properly, 14. Their high
sense  of  equality  and  independence,  15.
Their ideas of  subordination imperfect,
16. To  what tribes the.se descriptions
apply,  17. Some  exceptions, 19. Flo-
rida, 20. The  Natchez,  ib. The  islands,
21. In Bogota, ib. Inquiry into the
causes  of  these  irregularities,  23. Their
art  of  war,  25.  Their  motives  to  hostility,
26. Causes  of  their  ferocity,  27. Per-
petuity of  their animosities, 28. Their
modes  of  conducting  war, 29. Are  not
destitute  of  courage and fortitude, 31.
Incapable of military discipline, 32.
Their  treatment  of  prisoners,  33. Their
fortitude under  torture,  35. Never  eat
human flesh  but  to gratify  revenge,  37.
How  the  South  Americans  treated their

INDEX.

325

]prisoners,  ib.  Their  inilltary  edacation,
38.  Strange  method  of  choosing  a  cap-
tain among  the  Indians  on  the  banks  of
the  Orinoco,  39,  40.  Their  nombers
wasted  by  continual  wars,  41.  Their
tribes  now  recruit  their  numbers  by  adopt-
ing prisoners,  4^2.  Are  never  formidable
in  war  to  more  polished  nations,  43.
Their  arts,  dress,  and  ornaments,  44.
Their  habitations,  47.  Their  arms,  49.
Their  domestic  utensils,  50.  Construc-
tion of  their  canoes,  51.  The  listlessness
with  which  they  apply  to  labour,  52.
Their  religion,  53.  Some  tribes  altoge-
ther destitute  of  any,  56.  Remarkable
diversity  in  their  religious  notions,  59.
Their  ideas  of  the  immortality  of  the  soul,
61.  Their  modes  of  burial,  62,  63.  Why
their  physicians  pretend  to  be  conjurers,
64.  Their  love  of  dancing,  67.  Their
immoderate  passion  for  gaming,  69.  Are
extremely  addicted  to  drunkenness,  ib.
Pat  their  aged  and incurable  to  death,

74.  General  estimate  of  their  character,

75.  Their  intellectual  powers,  76.  Their
political  talents,  ib.  Powers  of  affection,
78.  Hardness  of  heart,  79.  Their  in-
sensibility, 80.  Taciturnity,  81.  Their
cunning,  82.  Their  virtues,  83.  Their
spirit  of  independence,  ib.  Fortitude,  ib.
Attachment  to  their  community,  84.  Their
satisfaction  with  their  own  condition,  85.
General  caution  with  respect  to  this  in-
quiry, 87.  Iwo  distinguishable  classes
of,  88.  Exceptions  as  to  their  character,
90.  Their  characteristic  features  de-
scribed, vi.  361.  Instances  of  their  per-
severing speed,  362.  An  antipathy  in-
dustriously encouraged  between  them  and
the  negroes  in  America,  by  the  Spaniards,
viii.  96.  Their  present  condition,  97.
How  taxed,  98.  Stated  services  de-
manded from  them,  99.  Mode  of  exact-
ing these  services,  ib.  How  governed,
100.  Protector  of  the  Indians,  his  func-
tion, ib.  Reasons  why  so  small  a  pro-
gress is  made  in  tlieir  conversion,  109.

Amerigo  Vespucci  publishes  the  first
written  account  of  the  New  World,  and
hence  gave  name  to  America,  vi.  16  i.
His  claim  as  a  discoverer  examined,  342.

Anacoana,  a  female  cazique  of  Hispa-
niola,  her  base  and  cruel  usage  by  the
Spaniards,  vi.  192.

Andes,  stupendous  height  and  extent
of  that  range  of  mountains,  vi.  254.
Their  height  coiupared  with  other  moun-
tains, 346.  Gonzalo  Pizarro's  remark-
able expedition  over,  vii.  235.

Animals,  large,  very  few  found  in  Ame-
rica at  its  lirst  discovery,  vi.  264.

Ancients,  cause  of  the  imperfection  of
the  art  of  navigation  among  them,  vi.  30.
Their  geographical  kiiowltdge  extremely
•oofined,  327—329.

Arabians  peculiarly  attached  to  the
study  of  geography,  vi.  51.

Argonauts,  the  expedition  of,  why  so
famous  among  the  Greeks,  vi.  37.

Arithmetic,  or  compulation,  the  art  of,
hardly  known  to  the  native  Americans,
vi.  311.

Ascolino,  fatiier,  his  extraordinary  mis-
sion to  the  prince  of  the  Tartars,  vi.  ,56.

Asiatic  discoveries  made  by  the  Rus-
sians, vi.  277.

Assiento  trade,  the  natureof,  explained,
viii.  132.  The  frauds  in,  and  how  put
an  end  to,  133,  134.

Atahualpa,  is  left  by  his  father  Huascar
his  successor  in  the  kingdom  of  Quito,
vii.  252.  Defeats  his  brother  Huascar,
and  usurps  the  empire  of  Peru,  253.
Sends  presents  to  Pizarro,  255.  Visits
Pizarro,  258.  Is  perfidiously  seized  by
him,  260.  Agrees  with  Pizarro  on  a  ran-
som, 261.  Is  refused  his  liberty,  264.
His  behaviour  during  his  confinement,
267.  A  form  of  trial  bestowed  on  him,
ib.  Is  put  to  death,  269.  Comparison
of  authorities  relating  to  his  tranr-actions
with,  and  treatment  by  Pizarro,  381.

Audience  of  New  Spain,  board  of,  esta-
blished by  the  emperor  Charles  V.,  vii.
231.  Courts  of,  their  jurisdiction,  viii.
84.

Averia,  a  Spanish  tax  for  convoy  to
and  from  America,  when  first  imposed,
viii.  320. Its  rate,  ib.

Azores,  those  islands  discovered  by
the  Portuguese,  vi.  72.

Bacon,  Nathaniel,  heads  an  insurrec-
tion in  Virginia,  viii.  233.  Forces  the
governor  and  council  there  to  fly,  233.
They  apply  to  England  fi)r  succour,  236.
His  death  terminates  the  rebellion,  ib.

Balboa,  Vasco  Nugnez  de,  settles  a
colony  at  Santa  Maria,  in  the  gulf  of
Darien,  vi.  205.  Receives  intelligence
of  liie  rich  country  of  Peru,  210.  His
cliaracfer,  211.  Marches  across  the  isth-
mus, 213.  Discovers  t!ie  Southern
ocean,  214.  Returns,  215.  Is  super-
sede<l  in  his  command  by  the  appointment
of  Pedf arias  Davila,  217.  Is  lined  by
Pedrarias  lor  former  transactions,  ib.  Is
a])i)oiiile(l  lieutenant-governor  of  the  coun-
tries on  the  Sooth  sea,  and  marries  Pe-
drarias's  daugliler,  219.  Is  arrested  and
put  to  death  by  Pedrarias,  221.

Bark,  Jesuit's,  a  production  peculiar  to
Peru,  viii.  118.

Bsrrere,  his  description  of  the  con-
sti action  of  Indian  houses,  vii.  357.

Behaim,  Martin,  ihe  honour  of  having
discovered  America  falsely  ascribed  to
him  by  some  German  authors,  vi.  337,
Account  of  him  and  his  family,  ib.

Behring  and  Tschirikow,  Russian  na-

320

INDEX.

vifjators,  thought  to  have  discovered  the
DOith-west  extreinitj  «f  America  from
the  eastward,  vi.  279.  Uncertainty  of
their  accounts,  356.

Benalcazar,  governor  of  St.  Michael,
reduces  the  kingdom  of  Quito,  vii.  Ti%.
Is  deprived  of  his  command  by  Pizarro,
295.

Benjamin,  the  Jew  ofTudela,  his  ex-
traordinary travels,  vi.  55.

Bernaldes,  instance  of  the  bravery  of
the  Caribbees  mentioned  by  him,  vii.  361.

Belhencourt,  John  de,  a  Norman  baron,
conquers  and  possessesthe  Canary  Islands,
vi.  61.

Birds,  an  account  of  those  natural  to
America,  vi.  266.  The  flight  of,  often
stretch  to  an  immense  distance  from  land,
333.

Bogota  in  America,  some  account  of
the  inhabitants  of,  vii.  22.  Causes  of
tlieir  tame  submission  to  the  Spaniards,
24.  Their  religious  doctrines  and  rites,
61.

Bojador,  Cape,  tlie  first  discovery  of,
vi.  65.  Is  doubled  by  the  Portuguese
discoverers,  69.

Bossu,  his  account  of  the  American
war-song,  vU.  354.

Bovadilla,  Francis  de,  is  sent  to  His-
panlola  to  Inquire  into  the  conduct  of
Cblumbiis,  vi.  169.  Sends  Columbus
home  in  irons,  170.  Is  degraded,  172.
176.

Bougainville,  his  defence  of  the  Peri-
plus  of  Haniio,  vi.  otb-

Bouguer,  M.,  his  character  of  the  na-
tive 5'eruvians,  vi.  365.

Biasil,  the  coast  of,  discovered  by
Alvarez  Cabral,  vi.  166.  Remarks  on
the  climate  of,  349.

Bridges,  Peruvian,  described,  viii.  295.

Buenos-Ayres,  in  South  America,  some
account  of  that  province,  viii.  0)1 .

Bulls,  papal,  of  no  force  in  Spanish
America,  before  exa.iiined  and  approved
by  the  royal  council  of  the  Lulies,  viii.
103. See  Crusado.

Burial  of  the  dead,  American  mode  of,
vii.  &o.

Cadot,  Giovanni,  is  appointed  to  com-
mand the  first  expedition  to  explore  un-
known countries,  viii.  162.  Embarks
with  his  son  at  Bristol,  163.  Discovers
Newfoundland,  ib.  Returns  to  England,
164.  No  advantage  is  derived  fioin  his
discoveries,  lb.  The  scheme  is  aban-
doned, 165.  He  is  appointed  governor
of  a  company  of  merchant  adventurers,
for  whom  he  obtains  a  charter,  169.

• ,  .Sebastian,  sails  on  an  expedi-
tion to  South  America,  viii.  167.  Visits
Brazil,  and  touches  at  Hispaniola,  and
Puerto  Rico, ib. His voyage  extends

the  sphere  of  English  navigation,  and
proves  the  means  of  opening  an  inter-
course with  the  Archipelago,  and  some
towns  on  the  coast  of  Syria,  lb.

Cabral,  Alvarez,  a  Portuguese  com-
mander, discovers  the  coast  of  Brazil,
vi.  166.

Cacao,  the  best  in  quality,  produced
in  the  Spanish  American  colonies,  viii.
118.  The  preparation  of  chocolate  from,
derived  from  the  Mexicans,  136.

Cadiz,  the  galeons  and  tlota,  removed
thither  from  Seville,  viii.  126.

California,  the  peninsula  of,  discovered
by  Fernando  Cortes,  vii.  232.  The  true
state  of  this  country  long  unknown,  viii.
60.  Why  depreciated  by  the  Jesuits,  ib.
Favourable  account  of,  given  by  Don
Joseph  Galvez,  61.

Californlans,  the  character  of,  by  P.
Venegas,  vi.  oOtl .

Campeachy,  discovered  by  Cordova,
who  is  repulsed  by  the  natives,  vi.  246.

Campoinanes,  Don  Pedro  Rodriguez,
cliaracter  of  his  political  and  commercial
writings,  viii,  317.  His  account  of  the
produce  of  the  Spanish  American  mines,
321.

Canary  islands  erected  into  a  kingdom
by  pope  Clement  VI.,  vl.  (il.  Are  con-
quered by  John  de  Bethencourt,  ib.

Cannibals,  no  people  ever  found  to  eat
human  tlesh  for  subsistence,  though  often
for  revenge,  ^il.  37.  354.  »

Canoes,  American,  the  construction  of,
described,  vii.  51.

Caraccas,  establishment  of  the  company
trading  to  that  coast,  viii.  137.  Growth
of  the  trade,  313.

Carlbbee  islands  discovered  by  Co-
lumbus in  his  second  voyage,  vi.  132.

Caribbees,  their  character,  by  iM.  de
Chanvalon,  vi.  366.  Their  spirit  peculi-
arly- fierce,  vii.  90.  Probable  conjecture  as
to  the  distluclion  in  character  between
them  and  the  nature  of  the  larger  islands,
362.

Carpini,  his  extraordinary  mission  to
the  prince  of  the  Tartars,  vi.  56.

Cartbagena,  the  harbour  of,  the  safest
and  best  fortified  of  any  in  all  the  Spa-
nish American  dominions,  viii.  69.

Carthaginians,  state  of  commerce  and
navigation  among,  vi.  33.  The  famous
voyages  of  Hanno  and  Himllco,  34.

Carvajal,  Francisco  de,  contributes  to
Vaca  de  Castro's  victory  over  young  Al-
niagro,  vii.  306.  Encourages  Gonzalo
Pizarro  to  assume  the  government  of
Peru,  319.  Advists  Pizarro  to  assume
the  sovereignty  of  the  country,  323.  Is
seized  by  Gasca,  and  executed,  336.

Castillo,  Bernal  Diaz  del,  character  of
his  Historia  Vardadera  de  la  Conquista
de  la  Nueva  Espagna,  vii.  oii^.

INDEX.

327

Ceuteuo,  Diego,  revolts  from  Gonzalo
Pizarro  to  the  viceroj  of  Peru,  vii.  321.
Is  defeated  by  Carvajal,  and  secretes  him-
self in  a  cave,  323.  Sallies  out  and
seizes  Cazco,  332.  Is  reduced  by  Pi-
zarro, 333.  Is  employed  by  Gasca  to
make  discoveries  in  the  regions  about
the  river  Plata,  341.

Cbancellour,  Richard,  sails  in  search
of  a  north-west  passage,  viii.  169.  The
fleet  is  scattered  in  a  storm,  ib.  He  en-
ters the  White  sea,  and  winters  at  Arch-
angel, ib.  Visits  Moscow,  a  distance  of
1200  miles,  and  delivers  a  letter  to  the
czar,  ib.  Is  the  means  of  opening  a  trade
with  Russia,  170.  Is  empowered  by
qaeen  Elizabeth  tonegoliale  with  the  czar
in  her  name,  ib.

Clianvalon,  M.  de,  his  character  of  the
native  Caribbees,  vi,  366.

Cliapetones,  in  the  Spanish  American
colonies,  who  thus  distinguished,  viii.  93.

Charles  III,  king  of  Spain,  establishes
packet-boats  belv^een  Spain  and  the  colo-
nies, viii.  139,  140.  Allows  free  trade
to  the  Windward  islands,  140.  Grants
the  colonies  a  free  trade  with  each  olher,
143.

Charles  V.,  emperor,  sends  Roderigo
de  Figueroa  to  Hispaniola,  as  chiefjudge,
to  regulate  the  treatment  of  the  Indians,
vi.  233.  Causes  this  subject  to  be  de-
bated before  him,  238.  Equips  a  squadron
at  the  solicitation  of  Ferdinand  Magellan,
vii.  217.  Resigns  his  claim  on  the  Mo-
luccas to  the  Portuguese,  221 .  A|)points
Corles  governor  of  New  Spain,  224.  Re-
wards him  on  coming  home,  230.  Esta-
blishes a  board  called  the  Audience  of
New  Spain,  231.  His  consultations  on
American  affairs,  307.  Establishes  new
regulations,  311.

Chesapeak. .See  Virginia.

Chili,  is  invaded  by  Almagro,  vii.  278.
How  subjected  by  the  Spaniards,  viii.  63.
Excellence  of  its  climate  and  soil,  64.
Cause  of  its  being  neglected,  ib.  Prospect
of  its  improvement,  65.

Chiquitos,  political  stale  of  that  people,
from  Fernandez,  vii.  351.

Chocolate,  the  nse  of,  derived  from  the
Jlexicatis,  viii.  136.

Cholula,  in  Mexico,  arrival  of  Cortes
there,  with  some  account  of  the  town,  vii.
136.  A  conspirac}'  against  Coites  dis-
covered, and  the  inhabitants  destroyed,
1.S7,  138.

Church  government,  sentiments  respect-
ing, at  the  Reformation,  viii.  241.  Ue-
ligious  persecution  in  the  reigns  of  queen
Mary  and  queen  Elizabeth,  243.  Intole-
rant spirit  of  of  the  cliurcb,  245.  Separa-
tion of  the  Puritans  from  the  church,  247.
They  arc  rrduced  into  an  ecclesiastical
system  by  Robert  Brown,  a  popular  de-

claimer,  and  adopt  the  name  of  Brownists,
248.  Take  refuge  in  Holland,  ib.  Re-
move thence  to  America,  249.  Church
government  is  established  in  Massaohu-
sets  Bay,  257.  Its  intolerance,  258.  The
intolerance  of  Laud  increases  the  emigra-
tions from  England,  259.

Cicero,  instance  of  Lis  ignorance  in
geography,  vi.  3-'9.

Cinaloa,  political  state  of  the  people
there  vii.  251.  Their  mode  of  living, 356.
Are  destitute  of  all  religion,  359.  Ex-
traordinary large  grain  of  gold  found
there,  viii.  296.

Cineguilla,  in  the  province  of  Sonora,
late  discoveries  of  rich  mines  made  there
by  the  Spaniards,  viii.  .58,  59.  Pi'obable
effects  of  these  discoveries,  60,

Clavigero,  M.,  several  of  his  objec-
tions answered,  viii.  308 — 312.

Clement  VI.,  pope,  erects  the  Canary
islands  into  a  kingdom,  vi.  61.

Climates,  influenced  by  a  variety  of
causes,  vi.  257.  Inquiry  into  the  cause  of
the  different  degrees  of  heat  in,  348.
Their  operation  on  mankind,  vii.  87.

Cochineal,  an  important  production,
almost  peculiar  to  New  Spain,  viii.  118.

Cold,  extraordinary  p.redominance  of,
in  the  climate  of  Ameiica,  vi.  257.  Causes
of  this  peculiarity,  258.

Colonies,  English  American,  project  of
settling  them,  viii.  176.  Two  expedi-
tions fail,  177,  173.  The  first  colony
established  in  Virginia,  179.  In  danger
of  perishing  by  i'amine  :  it  returns  to  Kng-
land,  181.  A  second  attempt  made  to
settle  there,  but  the  colony  perishes  by
famine,  183,  184.  The  scheme  of  settling
there  is  abandoned,  185.  Circumstances
in  the  reign  of  Elizabeth  unfavourable  to
colonization,  ib.  The  reign  of  James  fa-
vourable to  the  establishment  of  colonies,
186.  James  divides  the  coast  of  America
into  two  parts,  the  one  called  the  first  or
south  colony  of  Virginia;  the  olher,  the
second  or  north  colony,  188.  He  grants
charters  to  two  companies  for  the  go-
vernment of  them,  189.  Tenor  and  defects
of  those  charters,  190.  Under  these
charters  the  settlements  of  the  English  in
Virginia  and  New  England  were  esta-
blished, 191.  Capt.  Newport  sails  from
England  for  Virginia,  and  discovers  the
Chesapeak,  192,  193.  Sails  up  James-
River,  and  founds  a  settlement  in  James-
Town,  193.  Its  bad  adminlslration,  ib.
It  is  annoyed  by  the  Indians,  and  sutlers
from  scarcity  and  the  nnheallliiiiess  of  the
climate,  194.  Seasonable  succours  are
sent  from  England,  196.  A  survey  of  the
country  is  undertaken,  197.  The  colony
depends  for  subsistence  chiefly  on  sup-
plies from  the  natives,  198.  A  change  is
made  in  the  constitution  of  the  company,

328

INDEX.

and  a  new  charter  is  granted  witli  more
ample  privileges,  ib.  Lord  Delaware  is
appoiiiled  governor  of  llie  colony,  199.
Anarchy  prevails  there,  200.  It  is  almost
reduced  by  t'ainiiie,  201.  Lord  Delaware
arrives,  and  by  his  wise  adraiuistraliuii
restores  order  and  discipline,  202,  203.
His  health  obli^tes  him  to  return  to  Eng-
land, and  he  is  superseded  by  Sir  Thomas
Dale,  who  establishes  martial  law,  203.  A
new  charter  is  issued  to  the  colony,  and
new  privileges  are  granted,  204,  205.
Cultivation  of  the  land  is  promoted,  and
a  treaty  entered  into  with  the  natives,
205.  The  land  in  Virginia  becomes  pro-
perly, 207.  The  cnlture  of  tobacco  is  in-
troduced ,  and  its  pernicious  consequences,
208.  The  company  in  England  send  out
a  number  of  young  women  to  induce  thf;
colonists  to  form  more  extensive  plans  of
industry,  209.  Negroes  are  first  intro-
duced, ib.  A  new  constitution  is  given
to  the  colony,  210.  A  general  massacre
of  the  English  is  planned  by  the  Indians,
and  executed  in  most  of  the  settlements,
213.  A  bloody  war  is  commenced  with
the  Indians,  and  neither  old  nor  young  are
spared,  214.  The  settlements  extend,  and
industry  revives,  215.  Defects  in  the
first  constitution  of  the  colonies,  221.
King  Charles's  arbitrary  government  of
them,  222.  He  grants  them  new  privi-
leges, 225.  They  flourish  under  the  new
government,  226.  The  colonists  remain
attached  to  the  royal  cause,  and  parlia-
ment makes  war  on  Virginia,  which  is
obliged  to  acknowledge  the  common-
wealth, ib.  227.  Restraints  are  laid  on
the  trade  of  the  colonies,  228.  The  colo-
nists are  dissatisGed  with  these  restraints,
ib.  Are  the  first  to  acknowledge  Charles,
II.,  hut  their  loyalty  is  ill  rewarded,  229.
Restraints  ou  their  commerce  farther  ex-
tended by  the  navigation  act,  ib.  Effects
of  the  act,  231.  Colonists  remonstrate
against  it,  232.  The  colony  of  Virginia
is  attacked  by  the  Indians,  233.  Discon-
tents are  produced  by  the  grants  of  land
by  the  crown,  ib.  A  colony  is  established
at  New  Plymouth  in  New  England,  251.
Flan  of  its  government,  ib.  A  grand
council  is  appointed,  253.  A  new  colony
is  projected,  254.  Settles  at  Massachusets
Biiv,  257.  The  charter  of  the  company
in  England  being  transferred  to  the  colo-
nies, they  extend  in  cimsequence  of  it,
260,  261.  The  colonists  increase,  263.
New  settlers  arrive,  265.  Sectaries  settle
in  Providence  and  Rhode  Island,  268.
')'hcological  contests  give  rise  to  a  colony
at  Connecticut,  269.  Emigrants  from
Massachnsets  Bay  settle  there,  270.  Set-
tlements are  formed  in  the  provinces  of
New  Hanijishire  and  Main,  ib.  State  of
the  colonies  at  the  revolution,  277. .ire

exempted  from  certain  duties,  278.  Enter
into  a  league  of  confederacy,  279.  Assume
the  right  of  coining,  281.  Are  patronised
by  Cromwell,  who  proposes  to  transport
them  to  Jamaica,  ib.  They  decline  his
ofler,  282.  See  New  England,  Virginia,
&c.

Colonies, Spanish American,  view  of
the  policy  and  trade  of,  viii.  74. Depo-
pulation the  first  effect  of  them,  ib.  Causes
of  this  depopulation,  75. The  small-pox
very  fatal  to,  76. General idea  of the
Spanish  policy  in, 80. Early  interposi-
tion of  the  regal  authority  in,  81. An  ex-
clusive trade  the  first  object  in,  88.  Com-
pared with  those  of  ancient  Greece  and
Rome,  ib.  The  great  restrictions  they  are
subject  to,  89. Slow  progress  of their
population from Europe,  90. Are  dis-
couraged by  the  state  of  property  there,
91. And  by  the  nature of  their  ecclesi-
astical policy,  92. Tiie  various  classes  of
people  in,  93. Ecclesiastical  constitutiou
of, 102. Form  and  endowments  of  the
church  there,  104. Pernicious  effects  of
monastic  institutions  there,  ib. Character
of  the  ecclesiastics  there,  106. Produc-
tions of,  112.  The  mines,  113. Those  of
Potosi and  Sacotecas, 114. The spirit
with  which  they  are  worked,  115. Fatal
effects  of  this  ardour,  116. Other  com-
modities that  compose  the commerce  of,
118.  Amazing  increase  of  horned cattle
there,  119. Advantages  which  Spain  for-
merly derived  from  them,  120. Why  the
same  advantages are  not  still received,
121. Guarda  Coslas  employed  to  check
the  contraband  trade  in,  134. The  use  of
register- ships  introduced,  ib.  And  galeons
laid  aside,  135. Company  of  the  Caraccas
instituted,  137. Establishment  of  regular
packet-boats  to,  139. Free  trade  permit-
ted between  them,  142. New  regulations
in  the  government  of,  144. Reformation
of  the  courts  of  justice,  ib.  New  distribu-
tion of  governments,  ib. A  fourth vice-
royaity  established,  145.  Attempts  to  re-
form domestic  policy, 147. Their  trade
with  the  Philippine  islands,  150.  Revenue
derived  from,  by  Spain,  152. Expense  of
administration  there,  155. State  of  popu-
lation in,  300.  The  number  of  monasteries
there,  305.  See  Mexico,  Peru,  tkc.

Columbus,  Bartholomew,  is  sent  by  his
brother  Christopher  to  negotiate  with
Henry  VII.  king  of  England,  vi.  91.  The
misfortunes  of  bis  voyage,  94.  F'ollows
his  brother  at  Hispaiiiola,  140.  Is  vested
with  the  admiiiislration  of  affairs  thereby
his  brother  on  his  return  to  Spain,  148.
Founds  the  town  of  St.  Domingo,  156.

Columbus,  Christopher,  birth  and  edu-
cation of,  vi.  81.  His  early  voyages,  82.
Marries  and  settles  at  Lisbon,  83.  His
geographical  reflections,  85. Conceives

INDKX.

329

the  idea  of  making  discoveries  to  the
westward,  87.  Offers  his  services  to  the
Genoese  senate,  88.  Cause  of  his  over-
tures being  rejected  in  Portugal,  89.  Ap-
plies to  the  courts  of  Castile  and  Eng-
land, 90,  91.  His  proposal,  bow  treated
bj  the  Spanish  geographers,  92.  Is  pa-
tronised hy  Juan  Perez,  94.  His  propo-
sals again  rejected,  96.  Is  invited  by
Isabella,  and  engaged  ip  the  Spanish  ser-
vice, 99.  Preparations  for  his  voyage,
100.  The  amount  of  his  equipment,  101.
Sails  from  Spain,  102.  His  vigilant  at-
tention to  all  circumstances  during  his
voyage,  104.  Apprehensions  of  his  crew,
ib.  His  address  in  quieting  their  cabals,
108.  Indications  of  their  approaching
land,  109.  An  island  discovered,  110.
He  lands,  ib.  His  interview  with  the
natives,  ib.  Names  the  island  San  Salva-
dor, 112.  Prosecutes  his  discoveries
southward,  113.  Discovers,  and  lands
on,  the  island  of  Cuba,  ib.  Discovers
Hispaniola,  115.  Suffers  shipwreck,  but
is  saved  by  the  Indians,  118.  Builds  a
fort,  121.  Returns  to  Europe,  1S?3.  His
expedient  to  preserve  the  memory  of  his
discoveries  daring  a  storm,  124.  Arrives
at  the  Azores,  125.  Arrives  at  Lisbon,
ib.  His  reception  iti  Spain,  126.  His
audience  with  Ferdinand  and  Isabella,
127.  His  equipment  for  a  second  voy-
age, 128.  Discovers  the  Caribbee  is-
lands, 132.  Finds  his  colony  on  Hispa-
niola destroyed,  133.  Builds  a  city,
which  he  calls  Isabella,  135.  Visits  the
interior  parts  of  the  country,  136.  His
men  discontented  and  factious,  138.  Dis-
«overs  the  island  of  Jamaica,  139.  fleets
his  brother  Bartholomew  at  Isabella,  140.
The  natives  ill  used  by  his  men,  and  be-
gin to  be  alarmed,  141.  He  defeats  the
Indians,  144.  Exacts  tribute  from  them,
ib.  Returns  to  Spain  to  justify  his  con-
duct, 148.  Is  furnished  with  a  more  re-
gular plan  for  colonization,  150.  His
third  voyage,  153.  Discovers  the  island
of  Trinidad,  154.  Discovers  the  conti-
nent of  America,  ib.  Slate  of  Hispaniola
on  his  arrival,  155.  Composes  the  mutiny
of  Roldan  and  his  adherents,  158.  Is  dis-
tressed by  the  factious  behaviour  of  his
^en,  167.  Complaints  carried  to  Spain
against  him,  167,  168.  Is  sent  home  in
irons,  170.  Clears  his  conduct,  but  is
not  restored  to  his  authority,  172.  His
solicitations  neglected,  176.  Forms  new
schemes  of  discovery,  ib.  Engages  in  a
fourth  voyage,  178.  His  treatment  at
Hispaniola,  178,  179.  Searches  after  a
passage  to  the  Indian  ocean,  180.  Is  ship-
wrecked on  the  coast  of  Jamaica,  181.
His  artilice  to  secure  the  friendship  of  the
Indians,  184.  Is  delivered  and  arrives
at  Hispaniola,  187.  Returns)  to  Spain, ib.

His  death,  188.  His  right  to  the  original
discovery  of  America  defended,  335.  The
spirit  of  adventure  raised  in  England  by
his  discoveries,  viii.  161.  Is  checked  by
the  want  of  skill  in  navigation,  ib.  His
system  of  opening  a  passage  to  India  by
steering  a  western  course  is  adopted  bj
Cabot,  163.

Columbus,  Don  Diego,  sues  out  his
claim  to  his  father's  privileges,  vi.  199.
Marries  and  goes  over  to  Hispaniola,  200.
Establishes  a  pearl  fishery  at  Cubagua,
201.  Projects  the  conquest  of  Cuba,  207.
His  measures  thwarted  by  Ferdinand,
222. Returns  to  Spain,  223.

Commerce,  the  era  from  which  its  com-
mencement is  to  be  dated,  vi.  28.  Mo-
tives to  an  intercourse  among  distant  na-
tions, 29.  Still  flourished  in  the  eastern
empire,  after  the  subversion  of  the  west-
ern, 50. Revival  of,  in  Europe,  52.

Compass, mariner's, navigation  extend-
ed more  by  the  invention  of,  than  by  all
the  efforts  of  preceding  ages,  vi.  59.  By
whom  invented,  ib.  60.

Condamine,  M.,  his  account  of  the
country  at  the  foot  of  the.\ndes,  in  South
America,  vi.  352.  His  remarks  on  the  cha-
racter of  the  native  Americans,  366.

Congo,  the  kingdom  of,  discovered  by
the  Portuguese,  vi.  75.

Constantinople,  the  consequence  of  re-
moving the  seat  of  the  Roman  empire  to,
vi.  49.  Continued  a  commercial  cily  after
the  extinction  of  the  western  empire,  50.
Became  the  chief  mart  of  Italy,  52.

Cordova,  Francisco  Hernandez,  disco-
vers Yucatan,  vi.  245.  Is  repulsed  at
Campeachy,  and  returns  to  Cuba,  247.

Corita,  .Alonzo,  his  observations  on  the
contraband  trade  of  tlie  Spanish  culonies,
viii.  149.  Character  of  his  American  me-
moirs, 283.

Cortes,  Fernando,  his  birth;  education,
and  character,  vii.  93.  Is  by  Velasquez
appointed  commander  of  the  armament
fitted  out  by  him  against  New  Spain,  95.
Velasquez  becomes  jealous  of  him,  96.
Velasquez  sends  order  to  deprive  him  of
his  commission,  and  lay  him  under  an  ar-
rest, 97.  Is  protected  by  his  troops,  98.
The  amount  of  his  forces,  99.  Reduces
the  Indians  at  Tabasco,  101.  Arrives  at
St.  Juan  de  lllua,  ib.  His  interview  with
two  Mexican  commanders,  103.  Sends
presents  to  Montezuma,  105.  Receives
others  in  return,  106.  His  schemes,  111,
Ivstablisiies  a  form  of  civil  government,
114.  Resigns  his  commission  under  Ve-
lasquez, and  assumes  the  command  in  the
king's  name,  116.  His  friendship  courted
by  the  Zenipoallans,  118.  Builds  a  fort,
119.  Concludes  a  formal  alliance  with
sever. 1  caziques,  120.  Discovers  a  con-
spiracy among  his  men,  and  destroys  his

330

I  N  D  E  X.

ships,  123.  Advances  into  the  country,
125.  Is  opposed  by  the  Tlascalans,  129.
Concludes  a  peace  with  them,  132.  His
rash  zeal,  134.  Proceeds  to  Cholnla,
136.  Discovers  a  conspiracy  against  him
here,  and  destroys  the  inhabitants,  137,
138.  Approaches  in  siglit  of  the  capital
city  of  Mexico,  139.  His  first  interview
with  Monteznraa,  140.  His  anxietyat  his
situation  in  the  city  of  Mexico,  146.
Seizes  Montezuma,  149.  Orders  Jiim  to
be  fettered,  151.  Reasons  of  his  conduct,
152.  Prevails  on  Moiiteznma  to  own
himself  a  vassal  to  the  Spanish  crown,
155.  Amount  and  division  of  his  trea-
sure, 156,  157.  Enrages  the  Mex-
icans by  his  imprudent  zeal,  159.  An  ar-
mament sent  by  Velasquez  to  supersede
him,  161.  His  deliberations  on  this
event,  165.  Advances  to  meet  Narvaez,
168.  Defeats  Narvaez,  and  takes  him
prisoner,  171.  Gains  over  the  Spanish
soldiers  to  his  interest,  172.  Returns  to
Mexico,  174.  His  improper  conduct  on
his  arrival,  175.  Is  resolutely  attacked
by  the  3Iexicans,  176.  Attacks  them  in
return  without  success,  177.  Death  of
Montezuma,  178.  His  extraordinary  es-
cape from  death,  180.  Abandons  the  city
of  Mexio,  181.  Is  attacked  by  the  Mex-
icans, 182.  His  great  losses  in  the  en-
counter, 183,  184.  Difficulties  of  his  re-
treat, 184.  Battle  of  Otumba,  186.  De-
feats the  Mexicans,  187.  Mutinous  spi-
rit of  his  troops,  190.  Reduces  the  Te-
peacans,  191.  Is  strengthened  by  seve-
ral reinforcements,  ib.  Returns  to  Mex-
ico, 193.  Establishes  his  head-quarters
at  Tezeuco,  195.  Reduces  or  conciliates
the  surrounding  country,  196.  Cabals
among  his  troops,  197.  His  prudence  in
suppressing  them,  199.  Builds  and
launches  a  fleet  of  brigantines  on  the  lake,
201.  Besieges  Mexico,  202.  Makes  a
grand  assault  to  take  the  city  by  storm,
but  is  repulsed,  205,  206.  Evades  the
Mexican  prophecy,  209.  Takes  Gnatinio-
zin  prisoner,  212.  Gains  possession  of
the  city,  ib.  And  of  the  whole  empire,
213.  Defeats  another  attempt  to  snper-
sede  him  in  his  command,  222.  Is  ap-
pointed governor  of  New  Spain,  224.  His
schemes  and  arrangements,  ib.  Cruel
treatment  of  (he  natives,  225.  His  con-
duct subjected  to  inquiry,  229.  Returns
to  Spain  to  justify  himself,  ib.  Is  re-
warded by  the  emperor  Charles  V.,  230.
Goes  back  to  Mexico  with  limited  powers,
231.  Discovers  California,  232.  Returns
to  S[)ain  and  dies,  ib.  233.  Inquiry  into
the  nature  of  his  letters  to  the  emperor
Charles  V.,  362.  Authors  who  wrote  of
his  conquest  of  New  Spain,  363,  364.

Council of the Indies, its power,
viii.  86.

Creoles  in  the  Spanish  American  colo-
nies, character  of,  viii.  94.

Croglan,  colonel  George,  his  account  of
the  discovery  of  the  bones  of  a  laro-e  ex-
tinct species  of  animals  in  North  America
vi.  3.53.

Crusades  to  the  Holy  Land,  the  great
political  advantages  derived  from,  by  the
European  nations,  vi.  53,  54.

Cruzado,  hulls  of,  published  regularly
every  two  years  in  the  Spanish  colonies,
viii.  153.  Prices  of,  and  amount  of  the
sale  at  the  last  publication,  318.

Cuba,  the  island  of,  discovered  by
Christopher  Columbus,  vi.  114.  Is  sailed
round  by  Ocampo,  199.  The  conquest
of,  undertaken  by  Diego  Velasquez,  206.
Cruel  treatment  of  the  cazique  Hatuey,
and  his  repartee  to  a  friar,  207.  Colum-
bus's enthusiastic  description  of  a  harbour
in,  333.  The  tobacco  produced  there  the
finest  in  all  America,  viii.  119.

Cubagua,  a  pearl  fishery  established
there,  vi.  201.

Curaana,  the  natives  of,  revenge  their
ill  treatment  by  the  Spaniards  vi.  241.
The  country  desolated  by  Diego  Ocampo,
243.

Cuzco,  the  capital  of  the  Peruvian  em-
pire founded  by  Manco  Capac,  vii.  250.
Is  seized  by  Pizarro,  272.  Is  besieged
by  the  Peruvians,  281.  Is  surprised  by
Almagro,  284.  Is  recovered  and  pillaged
by  the  Pizarros,  290.  Was  the  only  city
in  all  Pern,  viii.  54.

Dancing,  the  love  of,  a  favoarile  pas-
sion among  the  Americans,  vii.  67.

Darien,  the  isthmus  of,  described,  vi.
211.  The  increase  of  settlement  there,
obstructed  by  the  noxiousness  of  the  cli-
mate, viii.  68.

Delaware,  lord,  is  appointed  governor
of  Virginia,  viii.  199.  His  wise  adminis-
tration there,  203.  Is  obliged  to  return
to  England  on  account  of  his  health,  ib.

De  Solis,  his  unfortunate  expedition  up
the  river  Plata,  vi.  222.

,  Antonio,  character  of  his  His-

toria  de  la  Conquistade  Mexico,  vii.  364.

D'Esquilache,  prince,  viceroy  of  Peru,
his  vigorous  measures  for  restraining  the
excesses  of  the  regular  clergy  there,
viii.  108. Rendered  ineffectual,  109.

Diaz,  Bartholomew,  discovers  the  Cape
of  Good  Hope,  vi.  77.

Discoveries,  the  difference  between
those  made  by  land,  and  those  by  sea,
stated,  vi.328.

Dodwell,  his  objections  to  the  Periplus
of  Hanno  exploded,  vi.  325.

Domingo,  St.  on  the  island  of  Hispani-
ola,  founded  by  Bartholomew  Columbus,
vi.  156.

Dominicans,  those  in  Ilispajiiola  pub-

INDEX.

331

licly  remonstrate  against  tbe  cruel  treat-
ineut  of  tbe  Indians,  vi.  224.  See  Las
Casas.

Drake,  sir  Francis,  sails  round  the
world,  viii.  174.

Drunkenness,  strong  propensity  of  the
Americans  to  indulge  in,  vii.  70.

Earth,  the  globe  of,  bow  divided  into
zones  by  tbe  ancients,  vi.  47.

Egyptians,  ancient,  state  of  commerce
and  navigation  among  them,  vi.  30.

El  Dorado,  wonderful  reports  of  a  coun-
try so  called,  made  by  Francis  Orellana,
vii.  298.

Elephant,  that  animal  peculiar  to  the
torrid  zone,  vi.  353.

Elizabeth,  the  reign  of,  auspicious  to
discovery,  viii.  172.  She  encourages  com-
inerce,  and  secures  tbe  trade  to  Russia,
173.  Circumstances  in  her  reign  unfavour-
able to  colonization,  185.  Her  high  idea
of  her  superior  skill  in  theology,  243.

Escurial,  curious  calendar  discovered
in  the  library  there  by  Mr.  Waddilove,
viii.  289.  Description  of  that  valuable
monument  of  Mexican  art,  ib.

Esquimaux  Indians,  resemblance  be-
tween them  and  their  ueiglibours  the
Greenianders,  vi.  282.  Some  account  of,
vii.  357.

Eugene  IV.,  pope,  grants  to  the  Por-
tuguese an  exclusive  right  to  all  the  coun-
tries they  should  discover,  from  Cape
Non  to  tbe  continent  of  India,  vi.  72.

Europe,  how  affected  by  tbe  dismem-
berment of  the  Roman  empire  by  the  bar-
barous nations,  vi.  49.  Revival  of  com-
merce and  navigation  in,  52.  Political
advantages  derived  from  the  crusades,  53.

Feudinand,  king  of  Castile.  See  Co-
lumbus snd  Isabella.  Turns  his  attention
at  length  to  the  regulation  of  American
affairs,  vi.  195.  Don  Diego  de  Columbus
sues  out  his  father's  claims  against  him,
200.  Erects  two  governments  on  the
continent  of  America,  202.  Sends  a  fleet
to  Darian,  and  supersedes  Balboa,  217.
Appoints  Balboa  lieutenant-governor  of
the  countries  of  the  South  sea,  219.  Sends
Diaz  de  Solis  to  discover  a  western  pas-
sage to  the  Moluccas,  222.  Thwarts  the
measures  of  Diego  Colucibus,  ib.  His
decree  concerning  the  treatment  of  the
Indians,  225.

Fernandez,  Don  Diego,  character  of  liis
Historia  del  Peru,  vii.  379.

,  P.,  his  description  of  the  po-
litical state  of  the  Chiquitos,  vii.  351.

Figueroa,  Roderigo  de,  is  appointed
chief  judge  of  Hispaniola,  witli  a  com-
mission to  examine  into  the  treatment  of
tbe Indian  natives,  vi. 233. Makes  an

experiment  to  determine  the  capacity  of
the  Indians,  242.

Florida,  dicovered  by  Juan  Ponce  de
Leon,  vi.  208.  The  chiefs  there  heredi-
tary, vii.  20.  Account  cf,  from  Alvara
Nugnez  Cabeca  de  Vaca,  347.

Flota,  Spanish,  some  account  of,  viii.
126.

Fonseca,  bishop  of  Badajos,  minister
for  Indian  affairs,  obstructs  the  plans  of
colonization  and  discovery  formed  by
Columbus,  vi.  145.  152.  Patronises  the
expedition  of  Alonzo  de  Ojeda,  164.  ^

Frobisher,  Martin,  makes  three  unsuc-
cessful attempts  to  discover  a  north-east
passage  to  India,  viii.  174.

Galeons,  Spanish,  the  nature  and
purpose  of  these  vessels,  viii.  126.  Ar-
rangement of  their  voyage,  ib.

Galvez,  Don  Joseph,  sent  to  discover
the  true  slate  of  California,  viii.  61.

Gama,  Vasoo  de,  his  voyage  for  dis-
covery, vi.  160.  Doubles  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope,  161.  Anchors  before  the
city  of  Melinda,  ib.  Arrives  at  Calecut,
in  Malabar,  162.

Gaming,  strange  propensity  of  the  Ame-
ricans to,  vii.  70.

Ganges,  erroneous  ideas  of  the  an-
cients as  to  the  position  of  that  river,  vi.
328.

Gasca,  Pedro  de  la,  sent  to  Peru  as
president  of  the  court  of  audience  in  Lima,
vii.  327.  His  character  and  moderation,
327,  328.  The  powers  he  w;is  vested
with,  328.  Arrives  at  Panama,  329.  Ac-
quires possession  of  Panama  with  the  fleet
and  forces  there,  331.  Advances  towards
Cuzco,  334.  Pizarro's  troops  desert  lo
him,  336.  His  moderate  use  of  the  vic-
tory, ib.  Devises  employment  for  his
soldiers,  341.  His  division  of  the  country
among  his  followers,  ib.  The  discontents
it  occasions,  342.  Restores  order  and  go-
vernment, 343.  His  reception  at  his  re-
turn to  Spain,  ib.

Geminus,  instance  of  his  ignorance  in
geography,  vi.  329.

Geography,  the  knowledge  of,  ex-
tremely confused  among  the  ancients,  vi.
46.  Became  a  favourite  study  among  the
Arabians,  51.

Giants,  the  accounts  of,  in  our  early
travellers,  unconfirmed  bj'  recent  disco-
veries, vi.  58,  363,  364.

Gilbert,  sir  Humphrey,  conducts  the
first  colony  to  North  America,  viii.  176.
A  charter  is  granted  to  bim  and  Ids  heirs,
ib.  Conducts  anolher  expedition,  which
ends  disastrously,  and  in  which  he  pe-
rishes, 178.

Gioia,  Flavio,  the  inventor  of  the  ma-
riners  conipass,  vi.  59.

332

INDEX.

Globe,  its  division  into  zones  by  tbe
ancients,  vi.  47.

Gold,  why  the  first  metal  witli  which
man  was  acquainted,  viii.  63.  Extraor-
dinary large  grain  of,  found  in  the  mines
at  Cinaloa,  298.

Gomara,  character  of  his  Cronica  de  la
Noeva  Espagna.vii.  363.

Good  Hope,  Cape  of,  discovered  by
Bartholomew  Diaz,  vi.  78.

Gosnoid,  Barllioloniew,  is  the  first  who
attempts  to  steer  a  direct  course  from
England  to  North  America,  viii.  186.
Descries  Massacliusets  Bay,  and  returns
to  England,  187.  The  consequences  of
his  voyage,  ib.

Government,  no  visible  form  of,  among
the  native  Americans,  vii.  17.  Excep-
tions, 19.

Gran  Chaco,  account  of  the  method  of
making  war  among  the  natives  of.  from
Lozano,  vii.  3.t2.

Granada,  new  kingdom  of,  in  America,
by  whom  reduced  to  the  Spanisii  domi-
nion, viii.  72.  Its  climate  and  produce,
ib. A  viceroy  lately  established  there,  83.

Greeks,  ancient  progress  of  navigation
and  discovery  among  tlieni,  vi.  36.  Their
commercial  intercourse  with  other  nations
very  limited,  38.

Greenland,  its  vicinity  to  North  Ame-
rica, vi.  281.

Greenville,  sir  Ricliard,  establishes  a
colonvin  Virginia,  xvhicli,  being  in  danger
of  perishing  by  famine,  is  obliged  to  re-
turn to  England,  viii.  179,  180.  Appears
off  the  coast  soon  after  the  departure  of
the  colony,  and  lands  fifteen  of  his  crew
to  keep  possession  of  the  island,  who  are
destroyed  by  the  savages, 183.

Grijalva,  Juan  de,  sets  out  from  Cuba
on  a  voyage  of  discovery,  vi.  248.  Dis-
covers and  gives  name  to  New  Spain,
249.  His  reasons  for  not  planting  a  co-
lony in  his  newly  discovered  lands,  250.

Guarda  Costas,  employed  by  Spain  to
check  illicit  trade  in  the  American  colo-
nies, viii.  134.

Guatimala,  the  indigo  there  superior  to
any  in  America,  viii.  118.

Gualimozin,  nephew  and  son-in-law  of
Montezuma,  succeeds  Quetlavaca  in  the
kingdom  of  Alexico,  vii.  195.  Repulses
the  attacks  of  the  Spaniards,  in  storming
the  city  of  Mexico,  206.  Is  taken  pri-
soner by  Cortes,  212.  Is  tortured  to  dis-
cover his  treasure,  214.  Is  hanged,  226.
Guiana,  Dutch,  cause  of  the  excessive
fertility  of  the  soil  there,  vi.  355.

Hakt.uvt,  improves  the  naval  and
commercial  skill  of  the  age  in  wliicli  he
lived,  viii.  188.  Is  empowered  to  settle  any
part  of  the  south  colony  of  Virginia,  189.

Hauno,  his  Periplus  defended,  with  an
account  of  his  voyage,  vi.  325.

Haluey,  a  cazique  of  Cuba,  his  cruel
treatment,  and  memorable  repartee  to  a
Franciscan  friar,  vi.  207.

Hawkeswortli's  voyages,  account  of
New  Holland,  and  the  inhabitants,  from,
vii.  349.

Heat,  the  different  degrees  of,  in  the
old  and  new  continents,  accounted  for,  vi.
348. Estimated, 354.

Henry,  Prince  of  Portugal,  his  cha-
racter and  studies,  vi.  66.  Expeditions
formed  by  his  order,  67.  Applies  for  a
papal  grant  of  his  new  discoveries,  71.
His  death,  74.

Herrada,  Juan  de,  assassinates  Francis
Pizarro,  vii.  301. Dies,  305.

Herrera,  the  best  historian  of  the  con-
quest of  New  Spain,  vii.  365.  His  ac-
count of  Orellana's  voyage,  385.

Hispaniola,  the  island  of,  discovered  by
Christopher  Columbus,  vi.  115.  His
transactions  with  the  natives,  116.  A
colony  left  there  by  Columbus,  122.
The  colony  destroyed,  133.  Columbus
builds  a  city  called  Isabella,  135.  The
natives  ill  used,  and  begin  to  be  alarmed,
141.  Are  defeated  by  the  Spaniards,
143.  Tribute  exacted  from  them,  144.
They  scheme  to  starve  the  Spaniards,  146.
St.  Domingo  founded  by  Bartholomew
Columbus,  156.  Columbus  sent  home  in
irons  by  Bovadilla,  170.  Nicholas  de
Ovando  appointed  governor,  173.  Sum-
mary view  of  the  conduct  of  the  Spaniards
towards  the  natives  of,  190.  Unhappy
fate  of  Anacoana,  192.  Great  produce
from  the  mines  there,  194.  The  inhabit-
ants diminish,  196.  The  Spaniards  re-
cruit Ihem  by  trepanning  tbe  natives  of
the  Lucayos,  197.  Arrival  of  Don  Diego
de  Columbus,  200.  The  natives  of,  al-
most extirpated  by  slavery,  206.  223.
Controversy  concerning  the  treatment  of
them,  224.  Columbus's  account  of  the
humane  treatment  he  received  from  the
natives  of,  334.  Curious  instance  of  su-
perstition in  the  Spanish  planters  there,
354.

Holgain,  Pedro  Alvarez,  erects  the
royal  standard  in  Peru,  in  opposition  to
the  younger  Alraagro,  vii.  305.  Vaca  de
Castro  arrives,  and  assumes  the  com-
mand, ib.

Homer,  his  account  of  the  navigation
of  \he  ancient  Greeks,  vi.  37.

Honduras,  the  value  of  that  country,
owing  to  its  production  nf  the  logwood
tree,  viii.  62.

Horned  cattle,  amazing  increase  of  them
in  Spanish  America,  viii.  119.

Horses,  astonishment  and  mistakes  of
the  Mexicans  at the  first sight  of  thein.

INDEX.

333

■vi'u  368.  Expedient  of  the  Peruvians  to
render  them  incapable  of  action,  385.

Haana  Capac,  Inca  of  Pern,  his  cha-
racter and  famil}',  vii.  251.

Haascar  Capac,  Inca  of  Peru,  disputes
his  brother  Atahualpa's  succession  (o
Quito,  vii.  252.  Is  defeated  and  taken
prisoner  by  Afahualpa,  253.  Solicits  the
assistance  of  Pizarro  against  his  brother,
SdJ-.  Is  put  to  death  by  order  of  Atu-
hualpa,  262.

Hutchinson,  Mrs.,  heads  a  sect  of  reli-
gious women  in  New  England,  who  are
denominated  Anlinomiaos,  viii.  267.  Her
doctrines  are  condemned  by  a  general
synod  there,  ib.

Jamaica,  discovered  b}-  Christopher
Columbus,  vi.  139.

Jerome,  St.,  three  monks  of  that  order
sent  by  cardinal  Xiraenes  to  Hispaniola,
to  regulate  the  treatment  of  the  Indians,
vi.  229.  Their  conduct  under  this  com-
mission, 231. Are  recalled,  233.

Jesuits,  acquire  an  absolute  dominion
over  California,  viii.  60.  Their  motives
for  depreciating  the  country,  61.

Jews,  ancient  state  of  commerce  and
navigation  among  them,  vi.  32.

Incas  of  Peru,  received  origin  of  their
empire,  vii.  251.  viii.  38.  Their  empire
founded  both  in  religion  and  policy,  39.
See  Peru.

India,  the  motives  of  Alexander  the
Great,  in  his  expedition  to,  vi.  39.  The
commerce  with,  how  carried  on  in  ancient
times,  43,  44.  And  when  arts  began  to
revive  in  Europe,  52.  The  first  voyage
made  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  160.
Attempts  to  discover  a  north-west  pas-
sage to,  unsuccessful,  viii.  168, 174.  An
attempt  made  by  the  north-east  to,  168.
A  company  of  merchants  in  England  is
incorporated  to  prosecute  discoveries  in,
ib.  A  communication  with,  attempted  by
land,  171.  The  design  is  encouraged  by
queen  Elizabeth,  173.

Indians  in  Spanish  America.  See  Ame-
ricans.

Indies,  West,  why  Columbus's  discove-
ries were  so  named,  vi.  129.

Innocent  IV.,  pope,  his  extraordinary
mission  to  the  prince  of  theTartars,vi.  56.

Inquisition,  court  of,  when  and  by  whom
first  introduced  into  Portugal,  vi.  331.

Insects  and  reptiles,  why  so  numerous
and  noxious  in  America,  vi.  265.

John  I.,  king  of  Portugal,  the  first  who
sent  ships  to  explore  the  western  coasts
of  Africa,  vi.  64.  His  son  prince  Henry
engages  in  these  attempts,  66,

John  II.,  king  of  Portugal,  patronises
all  attempts  towards  discoveries,  vi.  75.
Sends  an  embassy  to  Abyssinia,  78.  His
ungenerous  treatment  of  Columbus,  90.

Iron,  the  reason  why  savage  nations
were  unacquainted  with  this  metal,  vii.  11.

Isabella,  queen  of  Castile,  is  applied  to
by  Joan  Perez  in  behalf  of  Christopher
Columbus,  vi.  94.  Is  again  applied  to  by
Quintaiiilla  and  Sanlangel,  97.  Is  pre-
vailed on  to  equip  him,  98.  Dies,  187.
Her  real  motives  for  encouraging  discove-
ries in  America,  viii.  77.

Isabella,  the  city  of,  in  Hispaniola,
built  by  Christopher  Columbus,  vi.  135.

Italy,  the  first  country  in  Europe
where  civilization  and  arts  revived  after
the  overthrow  of  the  Roman  empire,  vi.
52.  The  commercial  spirit  of,  active  and
enterprising,  53.

La  DRONE  Islands,  discovered  by  Fer-
dinand Magellan,  vii.  2l9.

Lakes,  amazing  size  of  those  in  North
America,  vi.  255.

Las  Casas,  Bartholomew,  returns  from
Hispaniola  to  solicit  the  cause  of  the  en-
slaved Indians  at  the  court  of  Spain,  vi.
227.  Is  sent  back  with  powers  by  cardi-
nal Ximenes,  229.  Returns  dissatisfied,
ib.  233.  Procures  a  new  commission  to
be  sent  over  on  this  subject,  233.  Hecora-
mends  the  scheme  of  supplying  the  colo-
nies with  negroes,  235.  Undertakes  a
new  colony,  236.  His  conference  with  the
bishop  of  Uarien  before  the  emperor
Charles  V.,  238.  Goes  to  America  to
carry  his  schemes  into  execution,  240.
Circumstances  unfavourable  to  him,  241.
His  final  miscarriage,  243.  Revives  his
representations  in  favoar  of  the  Indians,
at  the  desire  of  the  emperor,  vii.  309.
Composes  a  treatise  on  the  destrocliou  of
America,  310.

Leon,  Pedro  Cieza  de,  character  of  his
Chronica  del  Peru,  vii.  378.

Lery,  his  description  of  the  courage  and
ferocity  of  the  Toupinambos,  vii.  353.

Lima,  the  city  of,  in  Peru,  founded  by
Pizarro,  vii.  277.

Liston,  Mr.,  the  British  minister  at
Madrid,  his  answer  to  several  interesting
inquiries  relating  to  the  admission  of  In-
dians into  holy  orders,  viii.  311.

Logwood,  the  commodity  that  gives
importance  to  the  jirovinces  of  Honduras
and  Yucatan,  viii.  62.  Policy  of  the  Spa-
niards to  defeat  the  English  trade  in,  ib.

Louis,  St.,  kingof  France,  his  embassy
to  the  Khan  of  the  Tartars,  vi.  56.

Lozano,  his  account  of  the  method  of
making  war  among  the  natives  of  Gran
Chaco,  vii.  352.

Luque,  Hernando  de,  a  priest,  associ-
ates with  Pizarro  in  his  Peruvian  expedi-
tion, vii.  236.

Madeira,  the  island  of,  first  disco-
vered, vi.  68.

334

INDEX.

Madoc,  prince  of  Norlh  Wales,  story
of  bis  voyage  and  discovery  of  North
America  examined,  vi.  33B.

Magellan,  Ferdinand,  liis  account  of
the  gigantic  size  of  the  Patagonians,  vi.
305.  The  existence  of  this  gigantic  race
yet  to  be  decided,  306,  363,  364.  His
introduction  to  the  court  ol  Castile,  vii.
217.  Is  equipped  with  a  squadron  for  a
voyage  of  discovery,  ib.  Sails  through  the
famous  strait  that  bears  his  name,  218.
Discovers  theLadrone  and  Philippine  is-
lands, 219. Is  killed,  220.

Magnet,  its  property  of  attracting  iron
known  to  the  ancients,  but  not  its  polar
inclination,  vi.  30.  Extraordinary  advan-
tages resulting  from  this  discover^',  59.

Malo,  St.,  account  of  its  commerce  with
Spanish  America,  viii.  132.

Manco,  Capac,  founder  of  the  Peruvian
empire,  account  of,  vii.  350,  viii.  38.

Mandeville,  sir  John,  his  eastern  tra-
vels, with  a  character  of  bis  writings,
vi.  58.

Manila,  the  colony  of,  established  by
Philip  II.  of  Spain,  viii.  150.  Trade
between,  and  South  America,  ib.

Mankind,  their  disposition  and  manners
formed  by  their  situation,  vi.  272.  Hence
resemblances  to  be  traced  in  very  distant
places  without  communication,  ib.  Have
uniformly  attained  the  greatest  perfection
of  their  nature  in  temperate  regions,
vii.  88.

Marco  Polo,  the  Venetian,  his  extraor-
dinary travels  in  the  East,  vi.  57.

Marest,  Gabriel,  his  account  of  the
connlry  between  the  Illinois  and  Machilli-
makinac,  vii.  349.

Marina,  Donna,  a  Mexican  slave,  her
history,  vii.  102.

Marinus,  Tyrius,  his  erroneous  posi-
tion of  China,  vi.  332.

Martyr,  Peter,  his  sentiments  on  the
first  discovery  of  America,  vi.  340.

Maryland. See  Virginia.

Massachusets  Bay.  See  America,  New
England,  &c.

Merchants,  English,  the  right  of  pro-
perty in  the  North  American  colonies,
vested  in  a  company  of,  resident  in  Lon-
don, viii.  185.  Charters  are  granted  to
two  companies  of,  to  make  settlements  in
America,  189.  Tenor  and  defects  of  these
charters,  190.  A  new  charter  is  granted
to  them,  with  more  ample  privileges,  198.
They  are  divided  by  factions,  215.  An  in-
quiry is  instituted  into  their  conduct,  216.
They  are  required  to  surrender  theirchar-
ter,  which  they  refuse,  218.  A  writ  ofqno
rcarraiUo  is  issued  out  against  them,  219.
They  are  tried  in  the  court  of  King's  Bench,
and  the  company  is  dissolved,  ib.  Tlieir
charter  is  transferred  to  the  colonies,  260.

Mestizos,  in  the  Spanish  American  co-

lonies, distinction  between  them  and  inn-  -
lattnes,  viii.  9.).

Metals,  useful,  the  original  natives  of
America  totally  unacquainted  with,  vii.  11.

Mexicans,  their  account  of  tlieir  own
origin,  compared  with  later  discoveries,
vi.  284.  Their  paintings  few  in  num-
ber, and  of  ambiguous  meaning,  viii.  5.
Two  collections  of  them  discovered,  ib.
note.  Their  language  furnished  wilh  re-
spectful terminations  for  all  its  words,  284.
How  they  contributed  to  the  support  of
government,  285.  Descriptions  of  their
historical  pictures,  287.  Various  exagge-
rated accounts  of  the  number  of  human
victims  sacrificed  by  them,  299.

Mexico,  arrival  of  Fernando  Cortes  on
the  coast  of,  vii.  101 .  His  interview  with
two  Mexican  officers,  103.  Information
sent  to  Monte/.uma,  with  some  Spanish
presents,  105.  Montezuma  sends  presents
to  Cortes,  with  orders  not  to  approach  his
capital,  106,  107.  State  of  the  empire  at
that  time,  107.  The  Zempoallans  court
the  friendship  of  Cortes,  118.  Several
caziques  enter  into  alliance  with  Cortes,
120.  Character  of  the  natives  of  Tlascala,
126.  The  Tlascaians  reduced  to  sue  for
peace,  131.  Arrival  of  Cortes  at  the
capital  city,  140.  The  city  described,
143.  Montezuma  acknowledges  himself  a
vassal  to  the  Spanish  crown,  155.  Amount
of  the  treasure  collected  by  Cortes,  156.
Reasons  of  gold  being  found  in  such  small
qnantities,  158.  The  Mexicans  enraged
by  the  imprudent  zeal  of  Cortes,  159.
Attack  Alvarado  during  the  absence  of
Cortes,  173.  Their  resolute  attack  on
Cortes  when  he  returned,  176.  Death  of
Montezuma,  179.  The  city  abandoned
by  Cortes,  181.  Battle  of  Olumba,  186.
The  Tepeacans  reduced,  191.  Prepara-
tions of  the  Blexicans  against  the  return
of  Cortes,  194.  Cortes  besieges  the  city
with  a  fleet  on  the  lake,  203.  The  Spani-
ards repulsed  in  storming  the  city,  206.
Guatimozin  taken  prisoner,  212.  Cortes
appointed  governor,  224.  His  schemes
and  arrangements,  ib.  Inhuman  treatment
of  the  natives,  225.  Reception  of  the  new
regulations  there,  312.  A  retrospect  into
the  form  of  government,  policy,  and  arts
in,  viii.  1.  Our  information  concerning,
very  imperfect,  3.  Originof  the  monarchy,
5.  Number  and  greatness  of  the  cities,
9.  Mechanical  professions  there  dis-
tinguished from  each  other,  10.  Distinc-
tion of  ranks,  11.  Political  institutions,
13.  Power  and  splendour  of  their  mo-
narchs,  15.  Order  of  government,  16.
Provision  for  the  support  of  it,  ib.  Police
of,  17.  Tlieir  arts,  ib.  Their  paintings,  18.
Their  method  of  computing  time,  23.
Their  wars  continual  and  ferocious,  24.
Their funeral  rites,  25. Imperfection  of

INDEX.

335

their  agiicuUure,  ib.  Doubts  concerning
the  extent  of  tlie  empire,  26.  Little  in-
tercourse among  its  several  provinces,  27.
Ignorance  of  money,  28.  State  of  their
cities,  "9.  Temples  and  other  public
buildings,  30.  Religion  of,  34.  Causes  of
the  depopulation  of  this  country,  74.  The
small-pox  very  fatal  there,  76.  Number
of  Indian  natives  remaining  there,79.  List
and  character  of  those  authors  who  wrote
accounts  of  the  conquest  of,  vii.  362.
Description  of  the  aqueduct  for  the  supply
of  the  capital  city,  viii.  285.  See  Colo-
nies.

Michael,  St.,  the  gulf  of,  in  the  South
sea  discovered  and  named  by  Balhoa,  vi.
214.  The  colony  of,  established  by  Pi-
zarro,  vii.  249.

Migrations,  of  mankind,  why  first  made
by  land,  vi.  27.

Mind,  human,  the  efforts  of  it  propor-
tioned to  the  wants  of  the  body,  vi.  315.

Mines  of  Soulb  America,  the  great  in-
ducement to  population,  viii.  58.  Some
account  of,  ll3.  Their  produce,  114.  The
spirit  with  which  they  are  worked,  115.
Fatal  effects  of  this  ardour,  ib.  Evidence
of  Ihepernicious  effects  of  labouring  in
them,  304.  Of  Mexico,  total  produce  of,
to  the  Spanish  revenue,  321,  322.

Molucca  islands,  the  Spanish  claims
on,  sold  by  the  emperor  Charles  V.,  to
the  Portuguese,  vii.  221.

Monastic  institutions,  the  pernicious
effect  of,  in  the  Spanish  American  colo-
nies, viii.  104.  Number  of  convents  there,
305.

Monsoons,  the  periodical  course  of,
when  discovered  by  navigators,  vi.  43.

Montesino,  a  Dominican  preacher  at  St.
Domingo,  publicly  remonstrates  against
the  cruel  treatment  of  the  Indians,  vi.  224.

Montezuma,  the  first  intelligence  re-
ceived by  the  Spaniards  of  this  prince,  vi.
249.  Receives  intelligence  of  the  arrival
of  Fernando  Cortes  in  his  dominions,  vii.
106.  His  presents  to  Cortes,  ib.  Forbids
him  to  approach  his  capital,  107.  Slate
of  his  empire  at  this  time,  ib.  His  cha-
racter, 108.  His  perplexity  at  the  arrival
of  the  Spaniards,  109.  His  timid  negotia-
tions with  Cortes,  110.  His  scheme  for
destroying  Cortes  at  Cholnla  discovered,
137.  His  irresolute  conduct,  140.  His
first  interview  with  Cortes,  ib.  Is  seized
by  Cortes,  and  confined  to  the  Spanish
quarters,  149.  Is  fettered,  151.  Acknow-
ledges himself  a  vassal  to  the  Spanish
crown,  155.  Remains  inflexible  with  re-
gard to  religion,  159.  Circumstances  of
his  death,  178.  Account  of  a  gold  cup  of
his,  in  England,  viii.  286.

Mulattoes,  in  the  Spanish  American
colonies,  explanation  of  this  distinction,
viii.  95.

Narvaez,  Pamphilo,  is  sent  by  Velas-
quez with  an  armament  to  Mexico,  to
supersede  Cortes,  vii.  163.  Takes  pos-
session to  Zempoalla,  168.  Is  defeated  and
taken  prisoner  by  Cortes,  171.  How  he
carried  on  his  correspondence  with  Mon-
tezuma, vii.  373.

Natchez,  an  American  nation,  their  po-
litical institutions,  vii.  20,  21.  Causes  of
their  tame  submission  to  the  Spaniards,
24. Their  religious  dcclrines,  25.

Navigation,  tbe  arts  of,  very  slowly  im-
proved by  mankind,  vi.  28.  The  know-
ledge of,  prior  to  commercial  intercourse,
ib.  Imperfections  of,  among  the  ancients,
30.  More  improved  by  the  invention  of
the  mariner's  compass,  than  by  all  the
efforts  of  preceding  ages,  59.  The  first
naval  discoveries  undertaken  by  Portugal,
62.

Negroes,  their  peculiar  situation  under
the  Spanish  dominion  in  America,  viii.  96.
Are  first  introduced  into  Virginia,  209.

New  England,  first  attempts  to  settle
in,  unsuccessful,  viii.  240.  Religious  dis-
putes give  rise  to  the  colony  there,  241.
A  settlement  is  formed  at  New  Plymouth
in  Massachusets  Bay ,  25 1 .  Plan  of  its  go-
vernment, ib.  All  property  is  tlirown  into
a  common  stock,  252.  A  grand  council  is
appointed,  253.  A  new  colony  is  project-
ed at  Massachusets  Bay,  and  a  charter
granted  for  its  cstablisliment,  255.  Its
settlement  there,  257.  A  new  church  is
instituted  there,  ib.  Its  intolerance,  258.
Charter  of  the  English  company  of  mer-
chants in  London  is  transferred  to  the  co-
lonies, 260.  The  colony  at  Massachusets
Bay  extends,  26!.  None  but  members  of
the  church  are  admitted  as  freemen  there,

262.  Bad  consequences  of  this  regulation,

263.  The  settlement  increases,  and  the
assembly  is  restricted  to  the  representa-
tives of  freemen,  264.  Extent  of  political
liberty  assumed  by  the  assembly,  ib.  Spirit
of  fanaticism  spreads  in  the  colony,  26.5.
New  settlers  arrive,  and  the  doctrines  of
the  Anlinomians  are  condemned  by  a  ge-
neral synod,  267.  Sectaries  settle  in  Pro-
vidence and  Rhode  Island,  268.  Theolo-
gical contests  give  rise  to  the  colony  of
Connecticut,  269.  Emigrants  from  Mas-
sachusets Bay  settle  in  Connecticut,  270.
The  Dutch,  who  had  established  a  few
trading  towns  on  the  river  there,  peace-
ably withdrew,  ib.  Settlements  are  formed
in  the  provinces  of  New  Hampshire  and
Main,  ib.  Farther  encroachments  of  the
English  are  resisted  by  the  natives,  272.
War  with  thePeqnod  tribes  is  commenced,
273.  Purification  of  the  array,  274.
The  Indians  are  defeated,  275.  Cruelties
exercised  against  them,  ib.  Emigrations
from  England  to  the  colonies  are  prohibit-
ed by  proclamation,  276.  Colony  of  Mas-

336

INDEX.

achusets  Bay  is  sued  at  law,  and  found  to
have  forfeited  its  rights,  277.  Confederacy
of  the  states  in,  279.  See  Colonies.

Newfoundland,  its  situation  described,
vi.  347.  Discovery  of,  by  Cabot,  viii.163.

New  Holland,  some  account  of  the
country  and  inhabitants,  vii.  349.

New  Plymouth,  settlement  at,  viii.251.
See  Colonies,  New  England.

New  Spain,  discovered  and  named  by
Juan  de  Grijalva,  vi.  249.  See  Mexico.

Nijjno,  Alonso,  his  voyage  to  America,
vi.  165.

Norwegians,  might  in  ancient  times
have  migrated  to,  and  colonized,  Ame-
rica, vi.  28;3.

Nugnez  Vela,  Blasco,  appointed  vice-
roy of  Peru,  to  enforce  tiie  new  regu-
lations, vii.  31?.  His  character,  316.
Commits  Vaca  de  Castro  to  pri.son,  ib.
Dissensions  between  him  and  the  court
of  audience,  318.  Is  confined,  319.  Re-
covers his  liberty,  320.  Resumes  his
command,  321.  Is  pursued  by  Gonzalo
Fizarro,  322.  Is  defeated  and  killed  by
Pizarro,  523.

OcAMPo,  Diego,  sent  with  a  squadron
from  Hispaniola  to  desolate  the  country
of  Cumana,  vi.  241.  243.

,  Sebastian  de,  first  sails  round

Cuba,  and  discovers  it  to  be  an island,
vi.  199.

Ocean,  though  adapted  to  facilitate  the
Intercourse  between  distant  countries,
continued  long  a  formidable  barrier,  vi.
27. See  Compass  and  Navigation.

Ojeda,  Alonso  de,  his  private  expedi-
tion to  the  West  Indies,  vi.  163.  His
second  voyage,  174.  Obtains  a  govern-
ment on  the  continent,  203.

Olniedo,  fatiier  Bartholomew  de,  checks
the  rash  zeal  of  Cortes  at  TIascala  in
Mexico,  vii.  133.  Is  sent  by  Cortes  to
negotiate  with  Narvaez,  166.

Orellana,  Francis,  is  appointed  to  the
command  of  a  bark  built  by  Gonzalo  Pi-
zarro, and  deserts  him,  vii.  296.  Sails
down  the  Maragnon,  297.  Returns  to
Spain  with  a  report  of  wonderful  disco-
veries, ib.  Herrera's  account  of  his
voyage,  385.

Orgognez  commands  Almagro's  party
against  the  Pizarros,  and  is  defeated  and
killed  by  them,  vii.  289,  290.

Orinoco,  liie  great  river  of,  disco-
vered by  Christopher  Columbus,  vi.  154.
Strange  method  of  choosing  a  captain
among  the  Indian  tribes  on  the  banks  of,
vii.  39.  The  amazing  plenty  of  fish  in,
347.

Otaheite,  the  inhabitants  of,  ignorant
of  the  art  of  boiling  water,  vii.  338.

Otumba,  battle  of,  between  Cortes  and
the  Mexicans,  vii.  186.

Ovando,  Nicholas  de,  is  sent  governor
to  Hispaniola,  vi.  174.  His  prudent  re-
gulations, 175.  Refuses  admission  to
Columbus,  on  his  fourth  voyage,  179.
His  ungenerous  behaviour  to  Columbus,
on  his  shipwreck,  183.  185.  Receives
him  at  length,  and  sends  him  home,  187.
Engages  in  a  war  with  the  Indians,  190.
His  cruel  treatment  of  them,  191.  En-
courages cultivation  and  manufactures,
195.  His  method  of  trepanning  the  na-
tives of  the  Lucayos,  197.  Is  recalled,
200.

Pacific  ocean,  why  and  by  whom  so
named,  vii.  219.

Packet  boats,  first  establishment  of,
between  Spain  and  her  American  colo-
nies, viii.  140.

Panama  is  settled  by  Pedrarias  Da-
vila,  vi.  221.

Parmenides,  the  first  who  divided  the
earth  by  zones,  vi.  330.

Patagonians,  some  account  of,  vi.  305.
The  reality  of  their  gigantic  size  yet  to
be  decided,  306.  363,  364.

Pedrarias  Davila  is  sent  with  a  fleet
to  supersede  Balboa  in  his  government
of  Santa  Maria  on  the  isthmus  of  Darien,
vi.  216.  Treats  Balboa  ill,  217.  Rapa-
cious conduct  of  his  men,  218.  Is  re-
conciled to  Balboa,  and  gives  him  his
daughter,  220.  Puts  Balboa  to  death,
221.  Removes  bis  settlement  from  Santa
Maria  to  Panama,  ib.

Penguin,  the  name  of  that  bird  not  de-
rived from  the  Welsh  language,  vi.  339.

Perez,  Juan,  patronises  Columbus  at
the  court  of  Castile,  vi.  94.  His  solemn
invocation  for  the  success  of  Columbus's
voyage,  102.

Periplus  of  Hanno,  the  authenticity  of
that  work  justified,  vi.  325.

Peru,  the  first  intelligence  concerning
this  country,  received  by  Vasco  Nugnez
de  Balboa,  vi.  211.  215.  The  coast  of,
first  discovered  by  Pizarro,  vii.  242.
Pizarro's  second  arrival,  247.  His  hos-
tile proceedings  against  the  natives,  248.
The  colony  of  St.  Michael  established,
249.  State  of  the  empire  at  the  time  of
this  invasion,  ib.  The  kingdom  divided
between  Huascar  and  Atahualpa,  252.
Atahualpa  usurps  the  government,  ib.
Huascar  solicits  assistance  from  Pizarro,
254.  Atahualpa  visits  Pizarro,  258.  Is
seized  by  Pizarro,  260.  Agreement  for
his  ransom,  261.  Is  refused  his  liberty,
264.  Is  cruelly  put  to  death,  269.  Con-
fusion of  the  empire  on  this  event,  270.
Quito  reduced  by  Beualcazar,  272.  The
city  of  Lima  founded  by  Pizarro,  277,
Chili  invaded  by  Almagro,  278.  Insur-
rection of  the  Peruvians,  279.  Almagro
put  to  death  by  Pizarro,  291. Pizarro

INDEX.

337

divides  (he  counlrj  among  his  followers,
294.  Progress  of  the  Spanish  arms  Iheie,
ib.  Francis  Pizarro  assassinated,  302.
Reception  of  tlie  iiew  regulations  there,
314.  The  viceroy  confined  by  the  court
of  audience,  319.  The  viceroy  defeated
and  killed  by  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  323.  Ar-
rival of  Pedro  de  la  Gasca,  329.  Reduc-
tion and  deatli  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  336.
The  civil  v/ars  there  not  carried  on  with
mercenary  soldiers,  337.  But  neverthe-
less gratified  with  iinmetise  rewards,  338.
Their  profusion  and  luxury,  339.  Fero-
city of  tlieir  contests,  ib.  Their  want  of
faith,  340.  Instances,  ib.  Division  of,
by  Gasca,  among  his  followers,  341.  A
retrospect  into  the  original  government,
ar(s,  and  manners  of  the  natives,  viii.  1.
The  high  antiquity  they  pretend  to,  36.
Their  records,  37.  Origin  of  their  civil
policy,  38.  This  founded  in  religion,  39.
The  authority  of  the  Incas  absolute  and
unlimited,  40.  All  crimes  were  punished
capitally,  ib.  Mild  genius  of  their  reli-
gion, 41.  Its  influence  on  their  civil
policy,  42.  And  on  their  military  sys'
lem,  43.  Peculiar  state  of  property  there,
44.  Distinction  of  ranks,  45.  State  of
arts,  ib.  Improved  state  Ot  agriculture,
46.  Their  buildings,  47.  Their  public
roads,  49.  Their  bridges,  50.  Their
mode  of  refining  silver  ore,  51.  Works
of  elegance,  53.  Their  civilization  never-
theless but  imperfect,  ib.  Cuzco  the
only  place  that  had  the  appearance  of  a
city,  54.  No  perfect  separation  of  pro-
fessions, ib.  Little  commercial  inter-
course, 55.  Their  unwarlike  spirit,  ib.
Eat  their  flesh  and  fish  raw,  56.  Brief
account  of  other  provinces  under  the
viceroy  of  New  Spain,  57.  Causes
of  the  depopulation  of  this  country,  75.
The  small-pox  very  fatal  there,  76.
Writers  who  gave  accounts  of  the  con-
quest of,  251.  Their  method  of  building,
294.  State  of  the  revenue  derived  from,
by  the  crown  of  Spain,  319.  See  Co-
lonies.

Peter  I.  czar  of  Rassia,  his  extensive
views  in  prosecuting  Asiatic  discoveries,
vi.  277.

Phenicians,  ancient,  state  of  commerce
and  navigation  among  them,  vi.  31.
Their  trade,  how  conducted,  325.

Philip  II.  of  Spain,  his  turbulent  dis-
position aided  by  his  .American  treasures,
viii.  121.  Establishes  the  colony  of
Manila,  150.

III.  exhausts  his  country  by  in-
considerate bigotry,  viii.  122.

Philippine  Islands,  discovered  by  Fer-
dinand Magellan,  vii.  219.  A  colony  esta-
blished there  by  Philip  II.  of  Spain,
viii.  150.  Trade  between,  and  Ame-
rica, ib.

VOL.  Via.

Physic,  the  art  of,  in  America,  why
connected  with  divination,  vii.  04.

Piuto,  chevalier,  his  description  of  the
characteristic  features  of  the  native  Ame-
ricans, vi.  361.

Pinzon,  Vincent  Yanez,  commands  a
vessel  under  Columbus  in  his  first  voyage
of  discovery,  vi.  101.  Sails  to  America  on
a  private  adventure  with  four  ships,  102.
Discovers  Yucatan,  199.

Pizarro,  Ferdinand,  is  besieged  in  Cuzco
by  the  Peruvians,  vii.  280.  Is  surprised
there  by  Almagro,  284.  Escapes  with
Alvarado,  286.  Defends  his  brother  at
the  court  of  Spain,  292.  Is  committed
to  prison,  293.

,  Francisco,  attends Balboa  in

his  settlement  on  the  isthmus  of  Darieu,
vi.  205.  Marches  under  him  across  the
isthmus,  where  they  discover  the  South
sea,  214.  His  birth,  education,  and  cha-
racter, vii.  235.  Associates  with  Alma-
gro and  De  Luque,  in  a  voyge  of  disco-
very,236.  Hisillsuccess,  238.  Isrecalled,
and  deserttd  by  most  of  his  followers,
240.  Remains  on  the  island  of  Gorgona
for  supplies,  241.  Discovers  the  coast
of  Peru,  242.  Returns  to  Panama,  ib.
Goes  to  Spr.in  to  solicit  reinforcements,
244.  Focures  the  supreme  command  for
himself,  ib.  Is  assisted  with  money  by
Cortes,  245.  Lands  again  in  Peru,  247.
His  hostile  proceedings  against  the  na-
tives, ib.  Establishes  the  colony  of  St.
Michael,  248.  Stale  of  the  Peruvian  em-
pire at  this  time,  249.  Cause  of  his  easy
penetration  into  the  country,  253.  Is  ap-
plied to  by  Hoascar  for  assistance  against
his  victorious  brother,  Atahualpa,  254.
State  of  his  forces,  ib.  Arrives  at  Caxa-
malca,  256.  Is  visited  by  the  Inca,  258.
His  perfidious  seizure  of  him,  260.  Agrees
to  Atahualpa's  oifer  for  his  ransom,  261.
Division  of  their  plunder,  263.  Refuses
Atahualpa  his  liberty,  264.  His  ignorance
exposed  to  Atahualpa,  267.  Bestows  a
form  of  trial  on  the  Inca,  ib.  Puts  him
to  death,  269.  Advances  to  Cuzco,  271.
Honours  conferred  on  him  by  the  Spanish
court,  274.  Beginning  of  dissensions  be-
tween riim  and  Almagro,  275.  His  civil
regulations,  276.  Founds  thecity  of  Lima,
277.  Insurrection  of  the  Peruvians,  279.
Cuzco  seized  by  Almagro,  283.  Deludes
Almagro  bj'  negotiations,  286.  Defeats
Almagro,  and  takes  him  prisoner,  289,
290.  Puts  Almagro  to  death,  291.  Divides
the  country  among  his  followers  294.  The
impolitic  partiality  of  his  allotments,  ib.
Makes  his  brother  Gouzalo  governor  of
Quito,  295.  Is  assassinated  by  Juan  de
Herreda,  .302.

, Gonzalo, is made governor

of  Quito  by  his  brother  Francis,  vii.  295.
His  expedition  over  the  And^itt.  Is  dc-

338

INDEX.

serted  by  Orellaiia,  296.  His  distress  on
this  event,  298.  His  disastrous  retarn  to
Quito,  299.  Is  encouraged  by  the  people
to  oppose  Nugnez  Vela,  tbe  new  viceroy,
317.  Assumes  the  government  of  Peru,
320.  jMarches  against  tlie  viceroy,  321.
Defeats  and  kills  bini,  323.  Is  advised
by  Carvajal  to  assume  the  sovereignty  of
the  country,  ib.  Chooses  to  negotiate  with
the  court  of  Spain,  323.  Consultations  of
the  court  on  his  conduct,  ib.  His  violent
resolutions  on  the  arrival  of  Pedro  de  la
Gasca,  330.  Resolves  to  oppose  him  by
violence,  331.  Marches  to  reduce  Centeno
at  Cuzco,  333.  Defeats  him,  ib.  Is  de-
serted by  his  troops  on  the  ar.proach  of
Gasca,  336.  Surrenders,  and  is  executed,
ib.  His  adherents  men  of  no  principle,  340.
Plata,  Rio  de,  discovered  by  Dias  de
Solis,  vi.  222.  Its  amazing  width,  347.

Playfair,  Mr.,  professor  of  mathematics
in  Edinburgh,  the  result  of  his  comparison
of  the  narrative  and  charts  given  in  Cap-
tain Cook's  voyages,  published  in  1780  ;
and  Mr.  Coxe's  account  of  the  Russian
discoveries,  printed  in  the  same  year,  in
Vpfhich  the  vicinity  of  the  two  continents
of  Asia  and  America  is  clearly  ascertained,
vi.  3.57. 360.

Pliny,  the  naturalist,  instance  of  his  ig-
norance in  geography,  vi.  330.

Ponce  de  Leon,  Juan,  discovers  Florida,
Ti.  208.  Romantic  motive  of  his  voyage,  ib.
Population  of  the  earth,  slow  progress
of,  vi.  27.

Porto  Bello,  discovered  and  named  by
Christopher  Columbus,  vi.  180.

Porto  Rico  is  settled  and  subjected  by
Juan  Ponce  deLeon,  vi.  198.

Porto  Santo,  the  first  dicovery  of,  vi.  67.
Portugal,  when  and  by  whom  the  court
of  inquisition  was  first  introduced  into,  vi.
331.

Portuguese,  a  view  of  the  circum-
stances that  induced  them  to  undertake
the  dicovery  of  unknown  countries  vi.  63,
64.  First  African  discoveries  of,  65,
Madeira  discovered,  68.  They  double
Cape  Bojador,  69.  Obtain  a  papal  grant
of  all  the  countries  they  should  dicover,  72.
Cape  Verd  islands  and  the  Azores  disco-
vered, 73.  Voyage  to  the  East  Indies  by
Vasco  de  Gama,  160.

Potosi,  the  rich  silver  mines  there,  how
discovered,  viii.  114.  The  mines  of,  greatly
exhausted,  and  scarcely  worth  working,
312.

Prisoners  of  war,  how  treated  by  the
native  Americans  vii.  33.

Property,  the  idea  of,  unknown  to  the
native  Americans,  vii.  14.  Notions  of  the
Brazilians  concerning,  350.

Protector  of  the  Indians  in  Spanish
America,  his  function,  viii,  100.

Ptolemy,  the  philosopher,  his  geogra-

phical descriptions  more  ample  and  exact
than  those  of  his  predecessors,  vi.  48.  His
geography  translated  by  the  Arabians,  51.
His  erroneous  position  of  the  Ganges,  328.

QuETLAVACA,  brother  of  Montezuma,
succeeds  him  as  king  of  Mexico,  vii.  19.
Conducts  in  person  the  fierce  attacks  which
obliged  Cortes  to  abandon  his  capital,  ib.
Dies  of  the  suiall-pox,  1  95.

Qnevedo,  bishop  of  Darien,  his  confer-
ence with  Las  Casas  on  the  treatment  of
the  Indians,  in  the  presence  of  the  em-
peror Charles  V,,  vi.  238.

Quicksilver,  the  property  of  the  famous
mines  of,  at  Guanacabelica,  reserved  by
the  crown  of  Xpain,  viii.  312.  The  price
of,  why  reduced,  313.

Quinquina,  or  Jesuits'  Bark,  a  produc-
tion peculiar  to  Peru,  viii.  118.

Quipos,  or  historic  cords  of  the  Peru-
vians, some  account  of,  viii.  37.

Quilo,  the  kingdom  of,  conquered  by
Huana  Capac,  Inca  of  Peru,  vii.  252.  Is
left  to  his  son  Atahualpa,  ib.  Atahualpa's
general  revolts  after  his  death,  270.  Is
reduced  by  the  Spaniards  under  Benal-
cazar,  272.  Benalcazar  deposed,  and  Gon-
zalo  Pizarro  made  governor,  295.

Ralegh  resumes  the  plan  of  settling
colonies  in  North  America,  viii.  178.  Dis-
patches Amadas  and  Bailow  to  examine
the  intended  settlements,  who  discover
Virginia,  and  return  to  England,  179.  Es-
tablishes a  colony  in  Virginia,  which,  on
account  of  famine,  is  obliged  to  return  to
England,  180.  Makes  a  second  attempt
to  settle  a  colony  there,  which  perishes
by  famine,  184.  Abandons  the  design,  ib.

Ramusio,  his  defence  of  Hanno's  ac-
count of  the  coast  of  Africa,  vi.  326.

Register  ships,  for  what  purpose  intro-  =
duced  in  the  trade  between  Spain  and  her
colonies,  viii.  134. Supersede  the  ase  of
the  galeons,  135.

Religion  of  the  native  Americans,  an
inquiry  into,  vii.  53.

Ribas,  his  account  of  the  political  state
of  the  people  of  Cinaloa,  vii.  356.  Of
their  want  of  religion,  359.

Rio  de  la  Plata,  and  Tncuraan,  account
of  those  provinces,  viii.  66.

Rivers,  the  amazing  size  of  tho.se  in
America,  vi.  256.

Kobison,  professor,  his  remarks  on
the  temperature  of  various  climates,  vi.
348,  349.

Roldan,  Francis,  is  left  chief-justice  in
Hispaniola,  by  Christopher  Columbus,  vi.
148.  Becomes  the  ringleader  of  a  mutiny,
156.  Submits,  160.

Romans,  their  progress  in  navigation
and  discovery,  vi.  42.  Their  military
spirit  averse  to  mechanical  arts  and  com-

INDEX.

339

merce,  ib.  Navigation  and  trade  favoured
in  the  provinces  under  their  government,
43.  Their  extensive  dicoveries  by  land,
45.  Tlieir  empire  and  the  sciences  de-
stroyed together, 49.

Rubruqais,  father,  his  embassy  from
France  to  the  Khan  of  the  Tartars,  vi.  57.

Russia,  a  trade  to,  opened  by  the  Eng-
lish, viii.  171.  Restricted  to  a  company
of  British  merchants,  ib.  The  connexion
Tfitli  the  Russian  empire  encouraged  by
queen  Elizabeth,  173.

Russians,  Asiatic  discoveries  made  by
them,  vi.  276. Uncertainly  of,  356.

Sacotecas,  the  rich  silver  mines  there,
when  discovered,  viii.  114.

San  Salvador,  discovered  and  named
by  Christopher  Columbus,  vi.  112.

Sancho,  Don  Pedro,  account  of  his  his-
tory of  the  conquest  of  Pern,  vii.  378.

Sandoval,  the  shocking  barbarities  exe-
cuted by,  in  Mexico,  vii.  226.

Sandoval,  Francisco  Tello  de,  is  sent  by
the  emperor  Charles  V.  to  Mexico,  as
visitador  of  America,  vii.  312.  His  mode-
ration and  prudence,  313.

Savage  life,  a  general  estimate  of,  vii.
76.

Scalps,  motive  of  the  native  Americans

for  taking  them  from  their  enemies,  354.

Serralvo,  marquis  de,  his  extraordinary

gains  during  his  viceroyalty  in  America,

viii.  322.

Seville,  extraordinary  increase  of  its
manufactures  by  the  American  trade,  viii.
313.  Its  trade  greatly  reduced,  314.  The
American  trade  removed  to  Cadiz,  126.

Silver  ore,  method  of  refining  it  prac-
tised by  the  native  Peruvians,  viii.  51.

Small-pox,  Indian  territories  depopu-
lated by,  viii.  263.

Sonora,  late  discoveries  of  rich  mines
made  there  by  the  Spaniards,  viii.  58.

Soul,  American  ideas  of  the  immortality
of,  vii.  61.

South  sea,  first  discovered  by  Vasco
Nnguez  de  Balboa,  vi.  214.

Spain,  getieral  idea  of  the  policy  of,
with  regard  to  the  American  colonies,
viii.  80.  Early  interposition  of  the  regal
authority  in  the  colonies,  81.  All  the  Ame-
rican dominions  of,  subjected  to  two  vice-
roys, 83.  A  third  viceroyalty  lately  es-
tablished, ib.  The  colonies  of,  compared
with  those  of  Greece  and  Rome,  88.  Ad-
vantages she  derived  from  her  colonies,
120.  Why  she  does  not  still  derive  the
same,  121.  Rapid  decline  of  trade,  122.
This  decline  increased  by  the  mode  of  re-
gulating the  intercourse  with  America,
125.  Employs  Gaarda  Costas  to  check
illicit  trade,  134.  The  use  of  register
ships  introduced,  ib.  Establishment  of
the  company  of  Caraccas,  137. Enlarge-

ment of  commercial  ideas  there,  138.
Free  trade  permitted  to  several  provinces,
140.  Revenue  derived  from  America,
152. Specification,  319.

Spaniards,  their  curious  form  of  taking
possession  of  new-discovered  countries,
vi.  343.

Strabo.  a  citation  from,  proving  the
great  geographical  ignorance  of  the  an-
cients, vi.  327.  His  own  want  of  geo-
graphical knowledge,  330.

Superstition,  always  connected  with  a
desire  of  penetrating  into  the  secrets  of
futurity,  vii.  63.

Tapia,  Christoval  de,  is  sent  from
Spain  to  Mexico,  to  supersede  Cortes  in
his  command,  but  fails  in  the  attempt,  vii.
222.

Tartars,  the  possibility  of  their  migrat-
ing to  America,  vi.  280.

Tithes  of  Spanish  America,  how  applied
by  the  court  of  Spain,  viii.  319.

TIascala,  in  Mexico,  character  of  the
natives  of,  vii.  126.  Oppose  the  passage
of  the  Spaniards,  127.  Are  reduced  to
sue  for  peace,  1.31.

Tobacco,  that  of  Cuba  the  best  flavoured
of  any  in  all  America,  viii.  119.  The  use
of,  first  introduced  into  England,  182.
Culture  of,  in  Virginia,  and  its  conse-
quences, 208.  Its  exportation  thence  is
annually  increased,  ib.  Trade  for,  opened
with  Holland,  211.  Grants  and  monopoly
of,  223.

Toupinambos,  account  of  their  ferocious
courage  from  Lery,  vii.  353.

Trade,  no  efforts  made  in  England  to
extend  it  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VII.  or  his
immediate  successors,  viii.  165.  To  what
causes  that  neglect  was  owing,  166.

, free,  opened  between  Spain  and

her  colonies, viii.  140. Increase  of  the
Spanish  customs  from  this  measure,  317.

winds, the periodical  course  of,

when  discovered  by  ntvigators,  vi.  43.

Travellers,  ancient  character  of  their
writings,  vi.  58.

Trinidad,  the  island  of,  discovered  by
Christopher  Columbus  on  his  third  voyage,
vi.  154.

Tucnraan,  and  Rio  de  la  Plata,  account
of  those  provinces,  viii.  66.

Tyre,  the  commerce  of  that  city,  how
conducted,  vi.  325.

Vaca  de  Castro,  Christoval,  is  sent
from  Spain  to  regulate  the  government  of
Peru,  vii.  293.  Arrives  at  Quito,  303.
Assumes  the  supreme  authority,  304.
Defeats  young  Almagro,  305.  The  seve-
rity of  his  proceedings,  306.  Prevents  an
insurrection  concerted  to  oppose  the  new
regulations,  315.  Is  imprisoned  by  tlie
new  viceroy,  317.

2 2

340

INDEX.

Valverde, father  Vincent, liis  curious
harangue  to  Atahualpa,  Incaof  Peru,  vii..
iftS. Gives  liis  sanction  to  tlie  trial  and
condemnation  of  Ataliualpa,  268.

Vega,  Garcilasso  de  la,  character  of  bis
commentary  on  the  Spanish  writers  con-
cerning Peru,  vii.  379.

Vegetables,  their  natnral  tendencj  to
fertilize  the  soil  where  they  grow,  vi.  "268.

Velasqaez,  Diego  de,  conquers  the  is-
land of  Cuba,  vi.  206,  244.  His  prepa-
rations for  invading  New  Spain,  vii.  92.
His  difiiculty  in  choosing  a  commander
for  the  expedition,  ib.  Appoints  Fer-
nando Cortes,  9J.  His  motives  to  this
choice,  95.  Becomes  suspicions  of
Cortes,  ib.  Orders  Cortes  to  be  de-
prived of  his  commission  and  arrested,
97.  Sends  an  armament  to  Mexico  after
Cortes,  161.

Venegas,  P.,  his  character  of  the  native
Californians,  vi.  367.

Venereal  disease  orig-nally  brought
from  America,  vi.  308.  Appears  to  be
wearing  out,  309.  Its  first  rapid  progress,
364.

Venezuela,  history  of  that  settlement,
viii.  70.

Venice,  its  origin  as  a  maritime  state,
vi.  54. Travels  of  Marco  Polo,  57.

Verd  Islands,  discovered  by  the  Por-
tugnese,  vi.  73.

Viceroys,  all  the  Spanish  dominions
in  America  subjected  to  two,  viii.  83.  A
third  lately  established, ib.  Their  powers,
ib. A  fourth  established,  145.

Vi'llaSegnor,  bis  account  of  the  state  of
population  in  New  Spain,  viii.  37.  His  de-
tail of  the  Spanish  American  revenue,  319.

^'illefagna,  Antonio,  one  of  Cortes's
soldiers,  foments  a  mutiny  among  his
troops,  vii.  198.  Is  discovered  by  Cortes
and  hanged,  199.

Virginia,  first  discovery  of,  viii.  179.
Attempt  to  settle  there  unsuccessful,  ib.
A  second  attempt  to  settle  there,  when
the  colony  perishes  by  famine,  184.  The
scheme  of  settling  there  abandoned,  ib.
Is  divided  into  two  colonies,  189.  Cliar-
ters  arc  granted  to  two  companies  to  make
settlements  in,  ib.  Captain  Newport  sails
from  England  to,  and  discovers  the  Cliesa-
peak,  192.  He  proceeds  up  James-river,
and  foands  a  colony  in  James-town,  193.
Its  bad  administration,  193.  Captain
Smith  is  excluded  from  his  seat  at  the
council-board,  ib.  The  colony  is  an-
noyed by  the  Indians,  and  suffers  from
scarcity  and  the  nnhealthiness  of  the  cli-
mate, 194.  Smith  is  recalled,  and  the
prosperity  of  the  colony  restored,  ib.  He
is  taken  prisoner  by  the  Indians,  his  life
spared,  and  his  liberty  obtained  through
the  intercession  of  the  favourite  danghter
of  an  Indian  chief,  195,  196. Retnrns  to

James-town,  aud  linds  the  colony  in  dis-
tress, 196.  The  colonists  are  deceived
by  the  appearance  of  gold,  ib.  A  survey
of  the  country  is  undertaken  by  .Smith,
197.  The  company  obtains  a  new  charter
with  more  ample  privileges,  198.  The  ju-
risdiction of  the  council  in,  is  abolished,
and  the  government  vested  in  a  council
resident  in  London,  ib.  Lord  Delaware
is  appointed  governor  and  captain-general
of  ibe  colony,  and  Sir  Thomas  Gates  and
.Sir  George  .Summers  are  vested  with  the
command  till  his  arrival,  199.  The  vessel
in  which  they  embark  is  stranded  on  the
coast  of  Bermudas,  200.  Smith  returns
lo  England,  and  anarchy  prevails  in  the
colony,  ib.  The  Indians  withhold  sup-
plies, and  the  colony  is  reduced  by  famine,
201.  Gates  and  Summers  arrive  from
Bermudas,  and  find  the  colony  in  a  des-
perate situation,  202.  They  are  about  to
return  to  England,  when  Lord  Delaware
arrives,  ib.  He  reconciles  all  differences,
and  perfectly  restores  subordination,  203.
Is  obliged  to  resign  the  government,  and
return  to  England  on  account  of  his  health,
ib.  Is  superseded  by  Sir  Thomas  Dale,
who  establishes  martial  law,  ib.  Another
charter  is  granted  to  the  colony,  with
new  privileges,  204.  The  land  is  culti-
vated, and  a  treaty  concluded  with  the
Indians,  205.  Roife,  a  man  of  rank  in
the  colony,  marries  the  daughter  of  an
Indian  chief,  206.  The  land  first  becomes
properly,  207.  The  culture  of  tobacco  is
introduced,  208.  The  quantity  exported
increases  every  year,  209.  Negroes  are
first  introduced,  ib.  A  general  assembly
of  representatives  is  formed,  210.  A  new
constitution  is  given  to  the  colony,  and
a  trade  for  tobacco  opened  with  Holland,
211,  212.  The  necessary  precautions  for
the  defence  of  the  colony  being  neglect-
ed, a  general  massacre  of  the  English  is
planned  by  the  Indians,  and  executed  in
most  of  the  settlements,  212,  213.  A
bloody  w^ar  is  commenced  with  the  In-
dians, 214.  Their  plantations  are  at-
tacked, and  the  owners  murdered,  215.
A  few  escape  to  the  woods  where  they
perish  with  hunger,  ib.  The  settlements
extend,  and  industry  revives,  ib.  The
strength  of  the  colony  is  considerably
weakened,  221.  A  temporary  council  is
appointed  for  its  government,  ib.  The
arbitrary  government  of  the  colonies  on
the  accession  of  Charles  I.,  222.  The
colonists  seize  Sir  John  Harvey,  the  go-
vernor, and  send  him  prisoner  to  England,
223.  He  is  released  by  the  king,  and  re-
instated in  his  government,  224.  Is  suc-
ceeded by  Sir  William  Berkely,  whose
wise  administration  is  productive  of  the
best  effects,  ib.  New  privileges  are  grant-
ed to  the  colony,  which  flourishes  under  the c^^ '

INDEX.

341

nevr  goverDment,  225,226.  It  is  attacked
by  the  Indians,  233.  Discontents  are
prodnced  bj  grants  of  land  from  the
crown,  ib.  An  insurrection  breaks  oat,
and  tlie  governor  and  council  are  forced
to  fly,  235.  Tbey  apply  to  England  for
succour,  236.  The  rebellion  is  terminated
by  the  death  of  Nathaniel  Bacon,  ib.  The
governor  is  reinstated,  and  an  assembly
called,  237.  The  moderation  of  its  pro-
ceedings, ib.  General  slate  of  the  colony
till  the  year  1688,  238. See  Colonies.

Ulloa,  Don  Antonio  de,  his  description
of  the  characteristic  features  of  the  native
Americans,  vi.  361.  His  reason  for  the
Americans  not  being  so  sensible  of  pain
as  the  rest  of  mankind,  vii.  355.  His  ac-
count of  the  goods  exported  from  Spain  to
America,  with  the  duty  on  them,  viii.  319.

Volcanoes, remarkablenuraber  of,  in  the
northern  parts  of  the  globe  discovered  by
the  Russians,  vi.  356.

Wafer,  Lionel,  his  account  of  a  pecu-
liar race  of  diminutive  Americans,  vi.
302,  303.  Compared  with  similar  pro-
ductions in  Africa,  303.

War-song  of  the  native  Americans,  the
sentiments  and  terms  of,  vii.  354.

Willoughby,  sir  Hugh,  sails  in  search
of  a  north-east  passage  to  India,  viii.
169.  Steers  along  the  coast  of  Norway,
and doubles the north cape, ib. His

squadron  is  separated  in  a  storm,  and  bis
ship  driven  into  an  obscure  harbour  in
Russian  Lapland,  where  be  and  all  bis
companions  are  frozen  to  death,  ib.

Women,  the  condition  of,  among  the
native  Americans,  vi.  318.  Are  not  pro-
lific, 321.  Are  not  permitted  to  join  in
their  drunken  feasts,  vii.  73.  Nor  to
wear  ornaments,  356.

Xerez,  Francisco  de,  secretary  to  Pi-
zarro,  the  earliest  writer  on  bis  Peruvian
expedition,  vii.  378.

Ximenes,  cardinal,  his  regulations  for
the  treatment  of  the  Indians  in  the  Spa-
nish colonies,  vi.  228.  Patronises  the  at-
tempt of  Ferdinand  Magellan,  vii.  217.

Yucatan,  the  province  of,  discovered
by  Pinzon  and  Dias  de  Solis,  vi.  199.
Described,  345.  From  whence  that  pro-
vince derives  its  value,  viii.  61.  Policy
of  the  court  of  Spain  with  respect  to,  63.

Zarate,  Don  Augustine,  character  of
his  History  of  the  Conquest  of  Peru,  viii.
378.

Zones,  the  earth  how  divided  into,  by
the  geography  of  the  ancients,  vi.  47.
By  whom  first  so  divided,  330.

Zummaraga,  Juan  de,  first  bishop  of
Mexico,  the  destroyer  of  all  the  ancient
records  of  the  Mexican  empire,  viii,  4.

END OF VOL. VIII.

Printed  by  J.  F,  Dove,  St.  John's  Square.

w

^

A

}/M

-  4i'\

^-■'S

D

7

R7

1824

V.8

Robertson,  V/illiara
Works

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

f
