The Works of William Robertson, Vol. 2 (William Robertson, 1759)
==========================================================
Robertson's Works (1824, 9 vols.) - History of Scotland, Charles V, America, and the Historical Disquisition on India; Enlightenment historiography's great practitioner entire. Vol. 2 of 9.

WILLIAM  ROBERTSON,  D.D

WITH  AN  ACCOUNT  OF

HIS  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS.

IN  NINE  VOLUMES.

VOL.  II.

LONDON:

PRINTED  FOR  WHITMORE  AND  FENN,  CHARING  CROSS;  J.HEARNE,  STRAND;

SMITH  AND  ELDER,  FENCHURCH  STREET; H.  MOZLEY,  DERBY;

AND  M.  KEENE,  DUBLIN.

MDCCCXXIV.

THE

STANDARD  EDITION  OF  THE  HISTORIANS.

ROBERTSON'S  WORKS  :

IN NINE VOLUMES.  —  VOL. II.

SCOTLAND.

THE

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND

BOOK  VI.

1570. THE  unexpected  blow,  by  which  the  regent

Disorders  :.';.',  •  i -i

occasion-  was  cut  off,  struck  the  kings  party  with  the
regent'?6  utmost  consternation.  Elizabeth  bewailed  his
death.  death  as  the  most  fatal  disaster  which  could
have  befallen  her  kingdom ;  and  was  inconsolable  to  a
degree  that  little  suited  her  dignity.  Mary's  adherents
exulted,  as  if  now  her  restoration  were  not  only  certain,
but  near  at  hand.  The  infamy  of  the  crime  naturally
fell  on  those  who  expressed  such  indecent  joy  at  the
commission  of  it ;  and  as  the  assassin  made  his  escape
on  a  horse  which  belonged  to  lord  Claud  Hamilton,  and
fled  directly  to  Hamilton,  where  he  was  received  in  tri-
umph, it  was  concluded  that  the  regent  had  fallen  a  sacri-
fice to  the  resentment  of  the  queen's  party,  rather  than
to  the  revenge  of  a  private  man.  On  the  day  after  the
murder,  Scott  of  Buccleugh  and  Ker  of  Ferniherst,  both
zealous  abettors  of  the  queen's  cause,  entered  England
in  a  hostile  manner,  and  plundered  and  burnt  the  coun-
try, the  inhabitants  of  which  expected  no  such  outrage.
If  the  regent  had  been  alive,  they  would  scarce  have
ventured  on  such  an  irregular  incursion,  nor  could  it
well  have  happened  so  soon  after  his  death,  unless  they
had  been  privy  to  the  crime.

This  was  not  the  only  irregularity  to  which  the  an-
archy that  followed  the  regent's  death  gave  occasion.
During  such  general  confusion,  men  hoped  for  univer-
sal impunity,  and  broke  out  into  excesses  of  every  kind.

VOL. II.  B

2  SCOTLAND. [1570.

Step3  As  it  was  impossible  to  restrain  these  without

w^d"  to~  a  sett^e(^  f°rm  °f  government,  a  convention  of

electing  the  nobles  was  held,  in  order  to  deliberate  con-

re^ent? cerning  the  election  of  a  regent. The  queen's
Feb.  12.  refused  to  be  present  at  the  meeting,

and  protested  against  its  proceedings.  The  king's  own
party  was  irresolute  and  divided  in  opinion.  Maitland,
whom  Kirkaldy  had  set  at  liberty,  and  who  obtained
from  the  nobles  then  assembled  a  declaration  acquitting
him  of  the  crime  which  had  been  laid  to  his  charge,  en-
deavoured to  bring  about  a  coalition  of  the  two  parties,
by  proposing  to  admit  the  queen  to  the  joint  adminis-
tration of  government  with  her  son.  Elizabeth,  adher-
ing to  her  ancient  system  with  regard  to  Scottish  affairs,
laboured,  notwithstanding  the  solicitations  of  Mary's
friends,a  to  multiply,  and  to  perpetuate  the  factions,
which  tore  in  pieces  the  kingdom.  Randolph,  whom  she
dispatched  into  Scotland  on  the  first  news  of  the  regent's
death,  and  who  was  her  usual  agent  for  such  services,
found  all  parties  so  exasperated  by  mutual  injuries,  and
so  full  of  irreconcilable  rancour,  that  it  cost  him  little
trouble  to  inflame  their  animosity.  The  convention
broke  up  without  coming  to  any  agreement;  and  anew
meeting,  to  which  the  nobles  of  all  parties  were  in-
vited, was  appointed  on  the  1st  of  May.b
A  coalition  Meantime,  Maitland  and  Kirkaldy,  who  still
attempted  con^nue^  to  acknowledge  the  king's  authority,
in  vain,  were  at  the  utmost  pains  to  restore  some  degree
of  harmony  among  their  countrymen.  They  procured
for  this  purpose  an  amicable  conference  among  the  lead-
ers of  the  two  factions.  But  while  the  one  demanded
the  restoration  of  the  queen,  as  the  only  thing  which
could  re-establish  the  public  tranquillity  ;  while  the
other  esteemed  the  king's  authority  to  be  so  sacred,
that  it  was,  on  no  account,  to  be  called  in  question  or
impaired;  and  neither  of  them  would  recede  in  the  least

»  See  Appendix,  No.  XXXIV-  b  Crawf.  Mem.  131. Cald.  ii.  157.

1570.]  BOOK VI.  3

point  from  their  opinions,  they  separated  without  any
prospect  of  concord. Both  were  rendered  more  averse
from  reconcilement,  by  the  hope  of  foreign  aid. An
envoy  arrived  from  France  with  promises  of  powerful
succour  to  the  queen's  adherents ;  and  as  the  civil  wars
in  that  kingdom  seemed  to  be  on  the  point  of  terminat-
ing in  peace,  it  was  expected  that  Charles  would  soon
be  at  liberty  to  fulfil  what  he  promised. On  the  other
hand,  the  earl  of  Sussex  was  assembling  a  powerful
army  on  the  borders,  and  its  operations  could  not  fail
of  adding  spirit  and  strength  to  the  king's  party.0
Queen's Though  the  attempt  towards  a  coalition  of
Po«es^on  ^e  facti°ns  proved  ineffectual,  it  contributed
of  Edin- somewhat  to  moderate  or  suspend  their  rage ;
but  they  soon  began  to  act  with  their  usual  vio-
lence. Morton,  the  most  vigilant  and  able  leader  on
the  king's  side,  solicited  Elizabeth  to  interpose,  with-
out delay,  for  the  safety  of  a  party  so  devoted  to  her
interest,  and  which  stood  so  much  in  need  of  her  assist-
ance. The  chiefs  of  the  queen's  faction,  assembling  at
Linlithgow,  marched  thence  to  Edinburgh ;  and
Kirkaldy,  who  was  both  governor  of  the  castle
and  provost  of  the  town,  prevailed  on  the  citizens,
though  with  some  difficulty,  to  admit  them  within  the
gates. Together  with  Kirkaldy,  the  earl  of  Athol  and
Maitland  acceded  almost  openly  to  their  party ;  and
the  duke  and  lord  Herries,  having  recovered  their  liberty
by  Kirkaldy's  favour,  resumed  the  places  which  they
had  formerly  held  in  their  councils.  Encouraged  by  the
acquisition  of  persons  so  illustrious  by  their  birth,  or
so  eminent  for  their  abilities,  they  published  a  procla-
mation, declaring  their  intention  to  support  the  queen's
authority,  and  seemed  resolved  not  to  leave  the  city  be-
fore the  meeting  of  the  approaching  convention,  in  which,
by  their  numbers  and  influence,  they  did  not  doubt  of
securing  a  majority  of  voices  on  their  side.d

« Crawf.  Metn.  134.  d  Ibid.  137. Cald.  ii.  176.

B 2

4  SCOTLAND.  [1570,

Endeavour  At  the  same  time  they  had  formed  a  design
theinna°tion  of  kindling  war  between  the  two  kingdoms,
in  a  war  jf  they  could  engage  them  in  hostilities,  and

with  Eng-  *  -i-i

land.  revive  their  ancient  emulation  and  antipathy?
they  hoped,  not  only  to  dissolve  a  confederacy  of  great
advantage  to  the  king's  cause,  but  to  reconcile  their
countrymen  to  the  queen,  Elizabeth's  natural  and  most
dangerous  rival.  With  this  view  they  had,  immedi-
ately after  the  murder  of  the  regent,  prompted  Scott  and
Ker  to  commence  hostilities,  and  had  since  instigated
them  to  continue  and  extend  their  depredations.  As
Elizabeth  foresaw,  on  the  one  hand,  the  dangerous  con-
sequences of  rendering  this  a  national  quarrel;  and
resolved,  on  the  other,  not  to  suffer  such  an  insult  on
her  government  to  pass  with  impunity ;  she  issued  a
proclamation,  declaring  that  she  imputed  the  outrages
which  had  been  committed  on  the  borders  not  to  the
Scottish  nation,  bat  a  few  desperate  and  ill-designing
persons;  that,  with  the  former,  she  was  resolved  to
maintain  an  inviolable  friendship,  whereas  the  duty
which  she  owed  to  her  own  subjects  obliged  her  to  chas-
tise the  licentiousness  of  the  latter.6  Sussex  and  Scrope
accordingly  entered  Scotland,  the  one  on  the  east,  the
other  on  the  west  borders,  and  laid  waste  the  adjacent
countries  with  fire  and  sword/  Fame  magnified  the
number  and  progress  of  their  troops,  and  Mary's  adhe-
rents, not  thinking  themselves  safe  in  Edinburgh,  the
inhabitants  whereof  were  ill-affected  to  their  cause,
^  t  retired  to  Linlithgow.  There,  by  a  public  pro-
clamation, they  asserted  the  queen's  authority,
and  forbade  giving  obedience  to  any  but  the  duke,  or
the  earls  of  Argyle  and  Huntly,  whom  she  had  consti-
tuted her  lieutenants  in  the  kingdom.
parly  en-  ^  nobles  wno  continued  faithful  to  the
ter  Edin-  king,  though  considerably  weakened  by  the  de-
May  i.  fection  of  so  many  of  their  friends,  assembled  at

«  Calderw.  ii.  181.  f  Cabbala,  174.

1570.]  BOOK VI.  5

Edinburgh  on  the  day  appointed.  They  issued  a
counter-proclamation,  declaring  such  as  appeared  for
the  queen  enemies  of  their  country;  and  charging
them  with  the  murder  both  of  the  late  king  and  of  the
regent.  They  could  not,  however,  presume  so  much
on  their  own  strength  as  to  venture  either  to  elect  a  re-
gent, or  to  take  the  field  against  the  queen's  party ;  but
the  assistance  which  they  received  from  Elizabeth,
enabled  them  to  do  both.  By  her  order  Sir  William
Drury  marched  into  Scotland,  with  a  thousand  foot  and
three  hundred  horse;  the  king's  adherents  joined  him
with  a  considerable  body  of  troops,  and  advancing
towards  Glasgow,  where  the  adverse  party  had  already
begun  hostilities  by  attacking  the  castle,  they  forced  them
to  retire,  plundered  the  neighbouring  country,  which  be-
longed to  the  Hamiltons,  and,  after  seizing  some  of  their
castles,  and  rasing  others,  returned  to  Edinburgh.
Motives  Under  Drury 's  protection,  the  earl  of  Lennox
.  returned  into  Scotland.  It  was  natural  to  com-
mit the  government  of  the  kingdom  to  him
them.  during  the  minority  of  his  grandson.  His  illus-
trious birth,  and  alliance  with  the  royal  family  of  Eng-
land, as  well  as  of  Scotland,  rendered  him  worthy  of
that  honour.  His  resentment  against  Mary  being  im-
placable, and  his  estate  lying  in  England,  and  his  fa-
mily residing  there,  Elizabeth  considered  him  as  a  man,
who,  both  from  inclination  and  from  interest,  would  act
in  concert  with  her,  and  ardently  wished  that  he  might
succeed  Murray  in  the  office  of  regent.  But  on  many
accounts,  she  did  not  think  it  prudent  to  discover  her
own  sentiments,  or  to  favour  his  pretensions  too  openly.
The  civil  wars  in  France,  which  had  been  excited
partly  by  real  and  partly  by  pretended  zeal  for  religion,
and  carried  on  with  a  fierceness  that  did  it  real  dis-
honour, appeared  now  to  be  on  the  point  of  coming  to
an  issue  ;  and  after  shedding  the  best  blood,  and  wast-
ing the  richest  provinces  in  the  kingdom,  both  parties

6  SCOTLAND.  [1570.

desired  peace  with  an  ardour  that  facilitated  the  nego-
tiations which  were  carrying  on  for  thatpurpose.  Charles
IX.  was  known  to  be  a  passionate  admirer  of  Mary's
beauty.  Nor  could  he,  in  honour,  suffer  a  queen  of
France,  and  the  most  ancient  ally  of  his  crown,  to  lan-
guish in  her  present  cruel  situation,  without  attempting
to  procure  her  relief.  He  had  hitherto  been  obliged  to
satisfy  himself  with  remonstrating,  by  his  ambassadors,
against  the  indignity  with  which  she  had  been  treated.
But  if  he  were  once  at  full  liberty  to  pursue  his  inclina-
tions, Elizabeth  would  have  every  thing  to  dread  from
the  impetuosity  of  his  temper  and  the  power  of  his  arms.
It  therefore  became  necessary  for  her  to  act  with  some
reserve,  and  not  to  appear  avowedly  to  countenance  the
choice  of  a  regent,  in  contempt  of  Mary's  authority.
The  jealousy  and  prejudices  of  the  Scots  required  no
less  management.  Had  she  openly  supported  Lennox's
claim ;  had  she  recommended  him  to  the  convention,  as
the  candidate  of  whom  she  approved ;  this  might  have
roused  the  independent  spirit  of  the  nobles,  and  by  too
plain  a  discovery  of  her  intention,  she  might  have  de-
feated its  success.  For  these  reasons  she  hesitated  long
and  returned  ambiguous  answers  to  all  the  messages
which  she  received  from  the  king's  party.  A  more  ex-
plicit declaration  of  her  sentiments  was  at  last  obtain-
ed, and  an  event  of  an  extraordinary  nature  seems  to
have  been  the  occasion  of  it.  Pope  Pius  V.  having
issued  a  bull,  whereby  he  excommunicated  Elizabeth,
deprived  her  of  her  kingdom,  and  absolved  her  subjects
from  their  oath  of  allegiance,  Felton,  an  Englishman,
had  the  boldness  to  affix  it  on  the  gates  of  the  bishop
of  London's  palace.  In  former  ages,  a  pope,  moved  by
his  own  ambition,  or  pride,  or  bigotry,  denounced  this
fatal  sentence  against  the  most  powerful  monarchs  ;  but
as  the  authority  of  the  court  of  Rome  was  now  less  re-
garded, its  proceedings  were  more  cautious  ;  and  it  was
only  when  they  were  roused  by  some  powerful  prince,

1570.]  BOOK VI.  7

that  the  thunders  of  the  church  were  ever  heard.  Eliza-
beth, therefore,  imputed  this  step,  which  the  pope  had
taken,  to  a  combination  of  the  Roman  Catholic  princes
againstjher,  and  suspected  that  some  plot  was  formed  in
favour  of  the  Scottish  queen. In  that  event,  she  knew
that  the  safety  of  her  own  kingdom  depended  on  pre-
serving her  influence in  Scotland ;  and  in  order  to
strengthen  this,  she  renewed  her  promises  of  protecting
the  king's  adherents,  encouraged  them  to  proceed  to
the  election  of  a  regent,  and  even  ventured  to  point  out
the  earl  of^Lennox  as  the  person  who  had  the  best  title.
That  honour  was  accordingly  conferred  upon  him,  in  a
convention  of  the  whole  party,  held  on  the  12th  of  July.5
Lennox The  Agent's  first  care  was,  to  prevent  the
elected meeting  of  the  parliament,  which  the  queen's
party  had  summoned  to  convene  at  Linlithgow.
Having  effected  that,  he  marched  against  the  earl  of
Huntly,  Mary's  lieutenant  in  the  north,  and  forced  the
garrison  which  he  had  placed  in  Brechin  to  surrender  at
discretion. Soon  after,  he  made  himself  master  of  some
of  the  castles.  Imboldened  by  this  successful  beginning
of  his  administration,  as  well  as  by  the appearance
of  a  considerable  army,  with  which  the  earl  of  Sussex
hovered  on  the  borders,  he  deprived  Maitland  of  his
office of  secretary,  and proclaimed him,  the duke,
Huntly,  and  other  leaders  of  the  queen's  party,  traitors
and  enemies  of  their  country11

Mary's  ad-  In  this  desperate  situation  of  their  affairs,  the
negate  queen's  adherents  had  recourse  to  the  king  of
with  Spain,  gpai^1  with  whom  Mary  had  held  a  close  cor-
respondence ever  since  her  confinement  in  England.
They  prevailed  on  the  duke  of  Alva  to  send  two  of
his  officers  to  take  a  view  of  the  country,  and  to  ex-
amine its  coasts  and  harbours ;  and  obtained  from  them
a  small  supply  of  money  and  arms,  which  were  sent  to

s  Spotsw.  240. Cald.  ii.  186. See  Append.  No.  XXXV.
J'  Crawf.  Mem.  159.  Cald.  ii.  198.  *  See  Append.  No,  XXXVI.

8  SCOTLAND.  [1570.

Elizabeth  the  earl  of  Huntly.k  But  this  aid,  so  dispropor-
treaty'of  *  tionate  to  their  exigencies,  would  have  availed
accpmmo-  them  little.  They  were  indebted  for  their  safety

tlOT1  • 1 TIT  * •

between to  a  treaty  which  Elizabeth  was  carrying*  on,

Marjand  f  J

her  sub-  under  colour  ot  restoring  the  captive  queen  to
her  throne.  The  first  steps  in  this  negotiation
had  been  taken  in  the  month  of  May ;  but  hitherto  lit-
tle progress  was  made  in  it.  The  peace  concluded  be-
tween the  Roman  Catholics  and  Hugonots  in  France,
and  her  apprehensions  that  Charles  would  interpose
with  vigour  in  behalf  of  his  sister-in-law,  quickened
Elizabeth's  motions.  She  affected  to  treat  her  prisoner
with  more  indulgence,  she  listened  more  graciously  to
the  solicitations  of  foreign  ambassadors  in  her  favour,
and  seemed  fully  determined  to  replace  her  on  the
throne  of  her  ancestors.  As  a  proof  of  her  sincerity,
she  laboured  to  procure  a  cessation  of  arms  between
the  two  contending  factions  in  Scotland.  Lennox,
elated  with  the  good  fortune  which  had  hitherto  attend-
ed his  administration,  and  flattering  himself  with  an  easy
triumph  over  enemies  whose  estates  were  wasted,  and
their  forces  dispirited,  refused  for  some  time  to  come  into
this  measure.  It  was  not  safe  for  him,  however,  to  dis-
pute the  will  of  his  protectress.  A  cessation  of  hostili-
ties during  two  months,  to  commence  on  the  3d  of  Sep-
tember, was  agreed  upon  ,•  and,  being  renewed  from  time
to  time,  it  continued^till  the  1st  of  April  next  year.1

Soon  after,  Elizabeth  dispatched  Cecil  and  Sir  Wal-
ter Mildmay  to  the  queen  of  Scots.  The  dignity  of
these  ambassadors,  the  former  her  prime  minister,  the
latter  chancellor  of  the  exchequer,  and  one  of  her  ablest
counsellors,  convinced  all  parties  that  the  negotiation
was  serious,  and  the  hour  of  Mary's  liberty  was  now
approaching.  The  propositions  which  they  made  to
her  were  advantageous  to  Elizabeth,  but  such  as  a
prince  in  Mary's  situation  had  reason  to  expect.  The

k  Anders,  iii.  122. Crawf.  Mem.  153.  »  Spotsw.  243.

1570.]  BOOK VI.  9

ratification  of  the  treaty  of  Edinburgh ;  the  renouncing
any  pretensions  to  the  English  crown,  during  Eliza-
beth's own  life,  or  that  of  her  posterity;  the  adhering
to  the  alliance  between  the  two  kingdoms  ;  the  pardon-
ing her  subjects  who  had  taken  arms  against  her ;  and
her  promising  to  hold  no  correspondence,  and  to  coun-
tenance no  enterprise,  that  might  disturb  Elizabeth's
government;  were  among  the  chief  articles.  Byway
of  security  for  the  accomplishment  of  these,  they  de-
manded that  some  persons  of  rank  should  be  given  as
hostages,  that  the  prince,  her  son,  should  reside  in  Eng-
land, and  that  a  few  castles  on  the  border  should  be  put
into  Elizabeth's  hands.  To  some  of  these  propositions
Mary  consented;  some  she  endeavoured  to  mitigate;
and  others  she  attempted  to  evade.  In  the  mean  time,
she  transmitted  copies  of  them  to  the  pope,  to  the  kings
of  France  and  Spain,  and  to  the  duke  of  Alva.  She  in-
sinuated, that  without  some  timely  and  vigorous  inter-
position in  her  behalf,  she  would  be  obliged  to  accept
of  these  hard  conditions,  and  to  purchase  liberty  at  any
price.  But  the  pope  was  a  distant  and  feeble  ally,  and
by  his  great  efforts  at  this  time  against  the  Turks,  his
treasury  was  entirely  exhausted.  Charles  had  already
begun  to  meditate  that  conspiracy  against  the  Hugo-
nots,  which  marks  his  reign  with  such  infamy;  and  it
required  much  leisure,  and  perfect  tranquillity,  to  bring
that  execrable  plan  to  maturity.  Philip  was  employed
in  fitting  out  that  fleet  which  acquired  so  much  renown
to  the  Christian  arms,  by  the  victory  over  the  infidels
at  Lepanto;  the  Moors  in  Spain  threatened  an  insur-
rection; and  his  subjects  in  the  Netherlands,  provoked
by  much  oppression  and  many  indignities,  were  break-
ing out  into  open  rebellion.  All  of  them,  for  these  dif-
ferent reasons,  advised  Mary,  without  depending  on
their  aid,  to  conclude  the  treaty  on  the  best  terms  she
could  procure."1

m  Anders,  vol.  iii.  119, 120.

10  SCOTLAND.  [1570.

Ellza.  Mary  accordingly  consented  to  many  of  Eli-

beth's  ar-  zabeth's  demands,  and  discovered  a  facility  of

tificesm  '  *

the  con- disposition,  which  promised  still  farther  conces-
sions. But  no  concession  she  could  have  made,
would  have  satisfied  Elizabeth,  who,  in  spite  of  her  re-
peated professions  of  sincerity  to  foreign  ambassadors,
and,  notwithstanding  the  solemnity  with  which  she  car-
ried on  the  treaty,  had  no  other  object  in  it,  than  to
amuse  Mary's  allies,  and  to  gain  time.n After  having
so  long  treated  a  queen,  who  fled  to  her  for  refuge,  in  so
ungenerous  a  manner,  she  could  not  now  dismiss  her
with  safety. Under  all  the  disadvantages  of  a  rigorous
confinement,  Mary  had  found  means  to  excite  commo-
tions in  England,  which  were  extremely  formidable.
What  desperate  effects  of  her  just  resentment  might  be
expected,  if  she  were  set  at  liberty,  and  recovered  her
former  power? What  engagements  could  bind  her
not  to  revenge  the  wrongs  which  she  had  suffered,  nor
to  take  advantage  of  the  favourable  conjunctures  that
might  present  themselves? Was  it  possible  for  her  to
give  such  security  for  her  behaviour,  in  times  to  come,
as  might  remove  all  suspicions  and  fears? And  was
there  not  good  cause  to  conclude,  that  no  future  bene-
fits could  ever  obliterate  the  memory  of  past  injuries  ?
It  was  thus  Elizabeth  reasoned ;  though  she  continued
to  act  as  if  her  views  had  been  entirely  different. She
appointed  seven  of  her  privy-counsellors  to  be  com-
missioners for  settling  the  articles  of  the  treaty;  and,  as
Mary  had  already  named  the  bishops  of  Ross  and  Gal-
loway, and  lord  Livingston,  for  her  ambassadors,  she
required  the  regent  to  empower  proper  persons  to  ap-
pear in  behalf  of  the  king. The  earl  of  Morton,
Pitcairn  abbot  of  Dunfermline,  and  Sir  James
Macgill,  were  the  persons  chosen  by  the  regent. They
prepared  for  their  journey  as  slowly  as  Elizabeth  herself
could  have  wished. At  length  they  arrived  at  Lon-

n  Digges,  Corapl.  Arab.  78.

1571.]  BOOK VI.  Jl

don,  and  met  the  commissioners  of  the  two
queens.  Mary's  ambassadors  discovered  the
strongest  inclination  to  comply  with  every  thing  that
would  remove  the  obstacles  which  stood  in  the  way  of
their  mistress's  liberty.  But  when  Morton  and  his  as-
sociates were  called  upon  to  vindicate  their  conduct,
and  to  explain  the  sentiments  of  their  party,  they  be-
gan, in  justification  of  their  treatment  of  the  queen,
to  advance  such  maxims  concerning  the  limited  pow-
ers of  princes,  and  the  natural  right  of  subjects  to
resist  and  to  control  them,  as  were  extremely  shocking
to  Elizabeth,  whose  notions  of  regal  prerogative,  as  has
been  formerly  observed,  were  very  exalted.  With  re-
gard to  the  authority  which  the  king  now  possessed,
they  declared  they  neither  had,  nor  could  possibly  re-
ceive instructions,  to  consent  to  any  treaty  that  tended
to  subvert,  or  even  to  impair  it  in  the  least  degree.0
Nothing  could  be  more  trifling  and  ridiculous,  than
such  a  reply  from  the  commissioners  of  the  king  of
Scots  to  the  queen  of  England.  His  party  depended  ab-
solutely on  her  protection;  it  was  by  persons  devoted
to  her  he  had  been  seated  on  the  throne,  and  to  her
power  he  owed  the  continuance  of  his  reign.  With  the
utmost  ease  she  could  have  brought  them  to  hold  very
different  language;  and  whatever  conditions  she  might
have  thought  fit  to  subscribe,  they  would  have  had  no
it  proves  other  choice  but  to  submit.  This  declaration,  how-
fruitiess.  everj  ghe  affected  to  consider  as  an  insuperable
difficulty ;  and  finding  that  there  was  no  reason  to  dread
any  danger  from  the  French  king,  who  had  not  disco-
vered that  eagerness  in  support  of  Mary  which  was  ex-
pected, the  reply  made  by  Morton  furnished  her

March  24. r ,  r*  ,*•  ,1

with  a  pretence  tor  putting  a  stop  to  the  nego-
tiation, until  the  regent  should  send  ambassadors  with
more  ample  powers.  Thus,  after  being  amused  for  ten
months  with  the  hopes  of  liberty,  the  unhappy  queen

0  Cald.  ii,  234. Digges,  51. Hayncs,  523,  524.

12  SCOTLAND.  [1571.

of  Scots  remained  under  stricter  custody  than  ever,
and  without  any  prospect  of  escaping  from  it ;  while
those  subjects  who  still  adhered  to  her  were  exposed,
without  ally  or  protector,  to  the  rage  of  enemies,  whom
their  success  in  this  negotiation  rendered  still  more  in-
solent^

Dumbarton  On  tne  day  after  the  expiration  of  the  truce,
castle  sur-  wnicn  nacL  been  observed  with  little  exactness

prised  by

the  regent,  on  either  side,  captain  Crawford  of  Jordan-
hill,  a  gallant  and  enterprising  officer,  performed  a
service  of  great  importance  to  the  regent,  by  surprising
the  castle  of  Dumbarton.  This  was  the  only  fortified
place  in  the  kingdom,  of  which  the  queen  had  kept
possession  ever  since  the  commencement  of  the  civil
wars.  Its  situation,  on  the  top  of  a  high  and  almost
inaccessible  rock,  which  rises  in  the  middle  of  a  plain,
rendered  it  extremely  strong,  and,  in  the  opinion  of
that  age,  impregnable ;  as  it  commanded  the  river
Clyde,  it  was  of  great  consequence,  and  was  deemed
the  most  proper  place  in  the  kingdom  for  landing  any
foreign  troops  that  might  come  to  Mary's  aid.  The
strength  of  the  place  rendered  lord  Fleming,  the  go-
vernor, more  secure  than  he  ought  to  have  been,  con-
sidering its  importance.  A  soldier  who  had  served  in
the  garrison,  and  had  been  disgusted  by  some  ill-usage,
proposed  the  scheme  to  the  regent,  endeavoured  to
demonstrate  that  it  was  practicable,  and  offered  him-
self to  go  the  foremost  man  on  the  enterprise.  It  was
thought  prudent  to  risk  any  danger  for  so  great  a  prize.
Scaling-ladders,  and  whatever  else  might  be  necessary,
were  prepared  with  the  utmost  secrecy  and  dispatch.
All  the  avenues  to  the  castle  were  seized,  that  no  in-
telligence of  the  design  might  reach  the  governor.
Towards  evening  Crawford  marched  from  Glasgow
with  a  small  but  determined  band.  By  midnight  they
arrived  at  the  bottom  of  the  rock.  The  moon  was  set,

P  Anders,  iii,  91,  &c.

1571.]  BOOK VI.  13

and  the  sky,  which  had  hitherto  been  extremely  clear,
was  covered  with  a  thick  fog. It  was  where  the  rock
was  highest  that  the  assailants  made  their  attempt,  be-
cause in  that  place  there  were  few  sentinels,  and  they
hoped  to  find  them  least  alert. The  first  ladder  was
scarcely  fixed,  when  the  weight  and  eagerness  of  those
who  mounted  brought  it  to  the  ground. None  of  the
assailants  were  hurt  by  the  fall,  and  none  of  the  garri-
son alarmed  at  the  noise. Their  guide  and  Crawford
scrambled  up  the  rock,  and  fastened  the  ladder  to  the
roots  of  a  tree  which  grew  in  a  cleft. This  place  they
all  reached  with  the  utmost  difficulty,  but  were  still  at
a  great  distance  from  the  foot  of  the  wall. Their  lad-
der was  made  fast  a  second  time ;  but  in  the  middle  of
the  ascent,  they  met  with  an  unforeseen difficulty.
One  of  their  companions  was  seized  with  some  sudden
fit,  and  clung,  seemingly  without  life,  to  the  ladder.
All  were  at  a  stand. It  was  impossible  to  pass  him.
To  tumble  him  headlong  was  cruel;  and  might  occa-
sion a  discovery. But  Crawford's  presence  of  mind
did  not  forsake  him. He  ordered  the  soldier  to  be
bound  fast  to  the  ladder,  that  he  might  not  fall  when
the  fit  was  over;  and  turning  the  other  side  of  the
ladder,  they  mounted  with  ease  over  his  belly. Day
now  began  to  break,  and  there  still  remained  a  high  wall
to  scale ;  but  after  surmounting  so  many  great  difficul-
ties, this  was  soon  accomplished. A  sentry  observed
the  first  man  who  appeared  on  the  parapet,  and  had
just  time  to  give  the  alarm,  before  he  was  knocked  on
the  head. The  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  garrison
ran  out  naked,  unarmed,  and  more  solicitous  about
their  own  safety,  than  capable  of  making  resistance.
The  assailants  rushed  forward,  with  repeated  shouts,
and  with  the utmost  fury; took  possession  of  the
magazine ;  seized  the  cannon,  and  turned  them  against
their  enemies. Lord  Fleming  got  into  a  small  boat,
and  fled  all  alone  into  Argyleshire. Crawford,  in  re-

14  SCOTLAND.  [1571.

ward  of  his  valour  and  good  conduct,  remained  master
of  the  castle;  and  as  he  did  not  lose  a  single  man  in
the  enterprise,  he  enjoyed  his  success  with  unmixed
pleasure.  Lady  Fleming,  Verac  the  French  envoy,  and
Hamilton  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  were  the  pri-
soners of  greatest  distinction.01

Archbishop  Verac's  character  protected  him  from  the
of  st.  An-  usage  which  he  merited  by  his  activity  in

drew'sput . °  .  J  mi

to  death  by  stirring  up  enemies  against  the  king,  ine  re-
gent treated  the  lady  with  great  politeness  and
humanity.  But  a  very  different  fate  awaited  the
archbishop ;  he  was  carried  under  a  strong  guard  to
Stirling;  and  as  he  had  formerly  been  attainted  by  act
of  parliament,  he  was,  without  any  formal  trial,  con-
demned to  be  hanged ;  and,  on  the  fourth  day  after  he
was  taken,  the  sentence  was  executed.  An  attempt
was  made  to  convict  him  of  being  accessary  to  the
murder  both  of  the  king  and  regent,  but  these  accusa-
tions were  supported  by  no  proof.  Our  historians
observe,  that  he  was  the  first  bishop  in  Scotland,  who
died  by  the  hands  of  the  executioner.  The  high  of-
fices he  had  enjoyed,  both  in  church  and  state,  ought  to
have  exempted  him  from  a  punishment  inflicted  only
on  the  lowest  criminals.  But  his  zeal  for  the  queen,
his  abilities,  and  his  profession,  rendered  him  odious
and  formidable  to  the  king's  .adherents.  Lennox  hated
him  as  the  person  by  whose  counsels  the  reputation
and  power  of  the  house  of  Hamilton  were  supported.
Party-rage  and  personal  enmity  dictated  that  indecent
sentence,  for  which  some  colour  was  sought,  by  im-
puting to  him  such  odious  crimes/
Kirkaidy  The  loss  of  Dumbarton,  and  the  severe
casftied0Sfthe  treatment  °f  the  archbishop,  perplexed  no  less
^an  ^ey  enraged  the  queen's  party ;  and  hos-
tilities  were  renewed  with  all  the  fierceness
which  disappointment  and  indignation  can  in-

Buch.  394.  r  Spotswood,  252.

name

1571.]  BOOK VI.  15

spire. Kirkaldy,  who,  during  the  truce,  had  taken  care
to  increase  the  number  of  his  garrison,  and  to  provide
every  thing  necessary  for  his  defence,  issued  a  procla-
mation declaring  Lennox's  authority  to  be  unlawful
and  usurped ; commanded  all  who  favoured  his  cause
to  leave  the  town  within  six  hours  ;  seized  the  arms
belonging  to  the  citizens; planted  a  battery  on  the
steeple  of  St.  Giles's,  repaired  the  walls,  and  fortified
the  gates  of  the  city;  and,  though  the  affections  of  the
inhabitants  leaned  a  different  way,  held  out  the  metro-
polis against  the  regent^ The  duke,  Huntly,  Home,
Herries,  and  other  chiefs  of  that  faction,  repaired  to
Edinburgh  with  their  followers ;  and  having  received
a  small  sum  of  money  and  some  ammunition  from
France,  formed  no  contemptible  army  within  the  walls.
On  the  other  side,  Morton  seized  Leith  and  fortified  it;
and  the  regent  joined  him  with  a  considerable  body  of
men. While  the  armies  lay  so  near  each  other,  daily
skirmishes  happened,  and  with  various  success. The
queen's  party  was  not  strong  enough  to  take  the  field
against  the  regent,  nor  was  his  superiority  so  great  as
to  undertake  the  siege  of  the  castle  or  of  the  town/
Both  par- Some  time  before  Edinburgh  fell  into  the
pariia!ld hands  of  his  enemies,  the  regent  had  summoned
merits. a  parliament  to  meet  in  that  place. In  order
to  prevent  any  objection  against  the  lawfulness  of  the
meeting,  the  members  obeyed  the  proclamation  as  ex-
Ma  14 actty  as  Possikle,  and  assembled  in  a  house  at
the  head  of  the  Cannongate, which,  though
without  the  walls,  lies  within  the  liberties  of  the  city.
Kirkaldy  exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  to  interrupt  their
meeting;  but  they  were  so  strongly  guarded,  that  all
efforts were  vain. They  passed  an act  attainting
Maitland  and  a  few  others,  and  then  adjourned  to  the
28th  of  August.1

The  other  party,  in  order  that  their  proceedings  might

•  Cald.  ii.  233,  &c.  t  Crawf.  Mem.  177.

16  SCOTLAND.  [1571.

be  countenanced  by  the  same  show  of  legal  authority,
held  a  meeting  of  parliament  soon  after.  There  was
produced  in  this  assembly  a  declaration  by  the  queen
of  the  invalidity  of  that  deed  whereby  she  had  resigned
the  crown,  and  consented  to  the  coronation  of  her  son.
Conformable  to  this  declaration,  an  act  was  passed  pro-
nouncing the  resignation  to  have  been  extorted  by  fear;
to  be  null  in  itself,  and  in  all  its  consequences;  and
enjoining  all  good  subjects  to  acknowledge  the  queen
alone  to  be  their  lawful  sovereign,  and  to  support  those
who  acted  in  her  name.  The  present  establishment
of  the  Protestant  religion  was  confirmed  by  another
statute;  and,  in  imitation  of  the  adverse  party,  a  new
meeting  was  appointed  on  the  26th  of  August.u
Miserable  Meanwhile  all  the  miseries  of  civil  war  de-
ofntheion  solated  the  kingdom.  Fellow-citizens,  friends,
kingdom,  brothers,  took  different  sides,  and  ranged  them-
selves under  the  standards  of  the  contending  factions.
In  every  county,  and  almost  in  every  town  and  village,
king's  men  and  queeris  men  were  names  of  distinction.
Political  hatred  dissolved  all  natural  ties,  and  extin-
guished the  reciprocal  good-will  and  confidence  which
holds  mankind  together  in  society.  Religious  zeal
mingled  itself  with  these  civil  distinctions,  and  con-
tributed not  a  little  to  heighten  and  to  inflame  them.
state  of  The  factions  which  divided  the  kingdom  were,
factions.  jn  appearance,  only  two;  but  in  both  these
there  were  persons  with  views  and  principles  so  dif-
ferent from  each  other,  that  they  ought  to  be  dis-
tinguished. With  some,  considerations  of  religion  were
predominant,  and  they  either  adhered  to 'the  queen,
because  they  hoped  by  her  means  to  re-establish  Popery,
or  they  defended  the  king's  authority,  as  the  best  sup-
port of  the  Protestant  faith.  Among  these  the  oppo-
sition was  violent  and  irreconcilable.  Others  were
influenced  by  political  motives  only,  or  allured  by  views

u  Crawf.  Mem.  177.

1571.]  BOOK VI.  17

of  interest ;  the  regent  aimed  at  uniting  these,  and  did
not  despair  of  gaining,  by  gentle  arts,  many  of  Mary's
adherents  to  acknowledge  the  king's  authority.  Mait-
land  and  Kirkaldy  had  formed  the  same  design  of  a
coalition,  but  on  such  terms  that  the  queen  might  be
restored  to  some  share  in  the  government,  and  the  king-
dom shake  off  its  dependence  upon  England.  Morton,
the  ablest,  the  most  ambitious,  and  the  most  powerful
man  of  the  king's  party,  held  a  particular  course ;  and
moving  only  as  he  was  prompted  by  the  court  of
England,  thwarted  every  measure  that  tended  towards  a
reconcilement  of  the  factions ;  and  as  he  served  Eliza-
beth with  much  fidelity,  he  derived  both  power  arid
credit  from  her  avowed  protection.

The  time  appointed  by  both  parties  for  the  meeting
of  their  parliaments  now  approached.  Only  three
peers  and  two  bishops  appeared  in  that  which  was  held
in  the  queen's  name  at  Edinburgh.  But,  contemptible
as  their  numbers  were,  they  passed  an  act  for  attainting
upwards  of  two  hundred  of  the  adverse  faction.  The
meeting  at  Stirling  was  numerous  and  splendid.  The
regent  had  prevailed  on  the  earls  of  Argyle,  Eglinton,
Cassils,  and  lord  Boyd,  to  acknowledge  the  king's  au-
thority. The  three  earls  were  among  the  most  power-
ful noblemen  in  the  kingdom,  and  had  hitherto  been
zealous  in  the  queen's  cause.  Lord  Boyd  had  been  one
of  Mary's  commissioners  at  York  and  Westminster,  and
since  that  time  had  been  admitted  into  all  her  most  se-
cret counsels.  But,  during  that  turbulent  period,  the
conduct  of  individuals,  as  well  as  the  principles  of  fac-
tions, varied  so  often,  that  the  sense  of  honour,  a  chief
preservative  of  consistence  in  character,  was  entirely
lost ;  and,  without  any  regard  to  decorum,  men  sud-
denly abandoned  one  party,  and  adopted  all  the  violent
passions  of  the  other.  The  defection,  however,  of  so
many  persons  of  distinction,  not  only  weakened  the
queen's  party,  but  added  reputation  to  her  adversaries*

VOL.  II.  C

18  SCOTLAND.  [1571.

The  king's  After  the  example  of  the  parliament  at  Edin-
p52d?rT  burgh,  that  at  Stirling  began  with  framing  acts
Stirling,  against  the  opposite  faction.  But  in  the  midst
of  all  the  security,  which  confidence  in  their  own  num-
bers or  distance  from  danger  could  inspire,  they
were  awakened  early  in  the  morning  of  Septem-
ber the  third,  by  the  shouts  of  the  enemy  in  the  heart
of  the  town.  In  a  moment  the  houses  of  every  person
of  distinction  were  surrounded,  and  before  they  knew
what  to  think  of  so  strange  an  event,  the  regent,  the
earls  of  Argyle,  Morton,  Glencairn,  Cassils,  Eglinton,
Montrose,  Buchan,  the  lords  Sempil,  Cathcart,  Ogilvie,
were  all  made  prisoners,  and  mounted  behind  troopers,
who  were  ready  to  carry  them  to  Edinburgh.  Kirkaldy
was  the  author  of  this  daring  enterprise  ;  and  if  he  had
not  been  induced,  by  the  ill-timed  solicitude  of  his
friends  about  his  safety,  not  to  hazard  his  own  person
in  conducting  it,  that  day  might  have  terminated  the
contest  between  the  two  factions,  and  have  restored
peace  to  his  country.  By  his  direction  four  hundred
men,  under  the  command  of  Huntly,  lord  Claud  Hamil-
ton, and  Scott  of  Buccleugh,  set  out  from  Edinburgh,
and,  the  better  to  conceal  their  design,  marched  to-
wards the  south.  But  they  soon  wheeled  to  the  right,
and,  horses  having  been  provided  for  the  infantry,  rode
straight  to  Stirling.  By  four  in  the  morning  they  ar-
rived there;  not  one  sentry  was  posted  on  the  walls,
not  a  single  man  was  awake  about  the  place.  They
met  with  no  resistance  from  any  person  whom  they  at-
tempted to  seize,  except  Morton.  He  defended  his
house  with  obstinate  valour;  they  were  obliged  to  set
it  on  fire,  and  he  did  not  surrender  till  forced  out  of  it
by  the  flames.  In  performing  this,  some  time  was  con-
sumed ;  and  the  private  men,  unaccustomed  to  regular
discipline,  left  their  colours,  and  began  to  rifle  the
houses  and  shops  of  the  citizens.  The  noise  and  up-
roar in  the  town  reached  the  castle.  The  earl  of  Mar

1571.]  BOOK  VI.  19

sallied  out  with  thirty  soldiers;  fired  briskly  upon  the
enemy,  of  whom  almost  none  but  the  officers  kept  to-
gether in  a  body.  The  townsmen  took  arms  to  assist
their  governor ;  a  sudden  panic  struck  the  assailants ;
some  fled,  some  surrendered  themselves  to  their  own
prisoners ;  and  had  not  the  borderers,  who  followed
Scott,  prevented  a  pursuit,  by  carrying  off  all  the  horses
within  the  place,  not  a  man  would  have  escaped.  If
The  regent  the  regent  had  not  unfortunately  been  killed,
killed.  the  loss  on  the  king's  side  would  have  been  as
inconsiderable  as  the  alarm  was  great.  Think  on  the
archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  was  the  word  among  the
queen's  soldiers ;  and  Lennox  fell  a  sacrifice  to  his
memory.  The  officer  to  whom  he  surrendered,  en-
deavouring to  protect  him,  lost  his  own  life  in  his
defence.  He  was  slain,  according  to  the  general
opinion,  by  command  of  lord  Claud  Hamilton.  Kirk-
aldy  had  the  glory  of  concerting  this  plan  with  great
secrecy  and  prudence ;  but  Morton's  fortunate  obsti-
nacy, and  the  want  of  discipline  among  his  troops,
deprived  him  of  success,  the  only  thing  wanting  to
render  this  equal  to  the  most  applauded  military  enter-
prises of  the  kind.x

Mar  cho ^s  so  manv  °f  the  nobles  were  assembled,
sen  regent,  they  proceeded  without  delay  to  the  election  of

Sept,  6.  Jr  TT./T  i-myr

a  regent.  Argyle,  Morton,  and  Mar,  were  can-
didates for  the  office.  Mar  was  chosen  by  a  majority
of  voices.  Amidst  all  the  fierce  dissensions  which  had
prevailed  so  long  in  Scotland,  he  had  distinguished
himself  by  his  moderation,  his  humanity,  and  his  dis-
interestedness. As  his  power  was  far  inferior  to  Ar-
gyle's,  and  his  abilities  not  so  great  as  Morton's,  he
was,  for  these  reasons,  less  formidable  to  the  other
nobles.  His  merit,  too,  in  having  so  lately  rescued  the
leaders  of  the  party  from  imminent  destruction,  contri-
buted not  a  little  to  his  preferment.

*  Melv.  226. CrawF.  Mem.  204.

c2

20  SCOTLAND.  [1571.

Proceed-  While  these  things  were  carrying  on  in  Scot-
ing8  in  land,  the  transactions  in  England  were  no  less
aJLt  interesting  to  Mary,  and  still  more  fatal  to  her
cause.  The  parliament  of  that  kingdom,  which
met  in  April,  passed  an  act,  by  which  it  was  declared
to  be  high-treason  to  claim  any  right  to  the  crown
during  the  life  of  the  queen;  to  affirm  that  the  title
of  any  other  person  was  better  than  hers,  or  to  main-
tain that  the  parliament  had  not  power  to  settle  and  to
limit  the  order  of  succession.  This  remarkable  statute
was  intended  not  only  for  the  security  of  their  own  so-
vereign, but  to  curb  the  restless  and  intriguing  spirit  of
the  Scottish  queen  and  her  adherents/
Marriage  At  this  time  a  treaty  of  marriage  between
negotiated  Elizabeth  and  the  duke  of  Anjou,  the  French

between  J '

Elizabeth  king's  brother,  was  well  advanced.  Both  courts
duke  of  seemed  to  desire  it  with  equal  ardour,  and  gave
Anjou.  Qu^  w-|.j1  t|ie  uj.most  confidence,  that  it  could  not

fail  of  taking  place.  Neither  of  them,  however,  wished
it  success ;  and  they  encouraged  it  for  no  other  end,
but  because  it  served  to  cover  or  to  promote  their  par-
ticular designs.  The  whole  policy  of  Catherine  of  Me-
dicis  was  bent  towards  the  accomplishment  of  her  de-
testable project  for  the  destruction  of  the  Hugonot
chiefs ;  and  by  carrying  on  a  negotiation  for  the  mar-
riage of  her  son  with  a -princess  who  was  justly  es-
teemed the  protectress  of  that  party,  by  yielding  some
things  in  point  of  religion,  and  by  discovering  an  in-
difference with  .regard  to  others,  she  hoped  to  amuse
all  the  Protestants  in  Europe,  and  to  lull  asleep  the  jea-
lousy even  of  the  Hugonots  themselves.  Elizabeth
flattered  herself  with  reaping  advantages  of  another
kind.  During  the  dependence  of  the  negotiation,  the
French  could  not  with  decency  give  any  open  assistance
to  the  Scottish  queen ;  if  they  conceived  any  hopes  of
jsuccess  in  the  treaty  of  marriage,  they  would  of  course

7  Carnd.  436.

1571.]  BOOK VI.  21

interest  themselves  but  coldly  in  her  concerns ;  Mary
herself  must  be  dejected  at  losing  an  ally,  whom  she
had  hitherto  reckoned  her  most  powerful  protector ;
and,  by  interrupting  her  correspondence  with  France,
one  source,  at  least,  of  the  cabals  and  intrigues  which
disturbed  the  kingdom  would  be  stopt.  Both  queens
succeeded  in  their  schemes.  Catherine's  artifices  im-
posed upon  Elizabeth,  and  blinded  the  Hugonots.  The
French  discovered  the  utmost  indifference  about  the  in-
terest of  the  Scottish  queen ;  and  Mary,  considering
that  court  as  already  united  with  her  rival,  turned  for
protection  with  more  eagerness  than  ever  towards  the
king  of  Spain.2  Philip,  whose  dark  and  thoughtful
mind  delighted  in  the  mystery  of  intrigue,  had  held  a
secret  correspondence  with  Mary  for  some  time,  by
means  of  the  bishop  of  Ross,  and  had  supplied  both
herself  and  her  adherents  in  Scotland  with  small  sums
of  money.  Ridolphi,  a  Florentine  gentleman,  who  re-
sided at  London  under  the  character  of  a  banker,  and
who  acted  privately  as  an  agent  for  the  pope,  was  the
person  whom  the  bishop  intrusted  with  this  negotiation.
Norfolk's  Mary  thought  it  necessary  likewise  to  commu-
fo  "Sour7  nicate  the  secret  to  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  whom
of  Mary,  Elizabeth  had  lately  restored  to  liberty,  upon
his  solemn  promise  to  have  no  farther  intercourse  with
the  queen  of  Scots.  This  promise,  however,  he  regarded
so  little,  that  he  continued  to  keep  a  constant  corre-
spondence with  the  captive  queen ;  while  she  laboured
to  nourish  his  ambitious  hopes,  and  to  strengthen  his
amorous  attachment  by  letters  written  in  the  fondest
caressing  strain.  Some  of  these  he  must  have  received
at  the  very  time  when  he  made  that  solemn  promise  of
holding  no  farther  intercourse  with  her,  in  consequence
of  which  Elizabeth  restored  him  to  liberty.  Mary,  still
considering  him  as  her  future  husband,  took  no  step  in
any  matter  of  moment  without  his  advice.  She  early

»  Digges,  144.  148, Camd.  434.

22  SCOTLAND.  [1571.

communicated  to  him  her  negotiations  with  Ridolphi ;
and,  in  a  long  letter,  which  she  wrote  to  him  in  ci-
phers,a  after  complaining  of  the  baseness  with  which  the
French  court  had  abandoned  her  interest,  she  declared
her  intention  of  imploring  the  assistance  of  the  Spanish
monarch,  which  was  now  her  only  resource ;  and  re-
commended Ridolphi  to  his  confidence,  as  a  person
capable  both  of  explaining  and  advancing  the  scheme.
The  duke  commanded  Hickford,  his  secretary,  to  deci-
pher, and  then  to  burn  this  letter;  but,  whether  he  had
been  already  gained  by  the  court,  or  resolved  at  that
time  to  betray  his  master,  he  disobeyed  the  latter  part
of  the  order,  and  hid  the  letter,  together  with  other
treasonable  papers,  under  the  duke's  own  bed.

Ridolphi,  in  a  conference  with  Norfolk,  omitted  none
of  those  arguments,  and  spared  none  of  those  promises,
which  are  the  usual  incentives  to  rebellion.  The  pope,
he  told  him,  had  a  great  sum  in  readiness  to  bestow  in
so  good  a  cause.  The  duke  of  Alva  had  undertaken
to  land  ten  thousand  men  not  far  from  London.  The
Catholics,  to  a  man,  would  rise  in  arms.  Many  of  the
nobles  were  ripe  for  a  revolt,  and  wanted  only  a  leader.
Half  the  nation  had  turned  their  eyes  towards  him,
and  called  on  him  to  revenge  the  unmerited  injuries
which  he  himself  had  suffered ;  and  to  rescue  an  unfor-
tunate queen,  who  offered  him  her  hand  and  her  crown,
as  the  reward  of  his  success.  Norfolk  approved  of  the
design,  and  though  he  refused  to  give  Ridolphi  any  let-
ter of  credit,  allowed  him  to  use  his  name  in  negotiat-
ing with  the  pope  and  Alva.b  The  bishop  of  Ross,
who,  from  the  violence  of  his  temper,  and  impatience
to  procure  relief  for  his  mistress,  was  apt  to  run  into
rash  and  desperate  designs,  advised  the  duke  to  assem-
ble secretly  a  few  of  his  followers,  and  at  once  to  seize
Elizabeth's  person.  But  this  the  duke  rejected  as  a

»  Haynes,  597,  598. Hardw.  State  Papers,  i.  190,  &c. Digges's  Compleat
Ambas.  147.  &  Anders.  Hi.  161.

1571.]  BOOK VI.  23

Discovered  scheme  equally  wild  and  hazardous.  Mean-
betifJlza  while,  the  English  court  had  received  some  im-
August,  perfect  information  of  the  plot,  by  intercepting
one  of  Ridolphi's  agents ;  and  an  accident  happened,
which  brought  to  light  all  the  circumstances  of  it.  The
duke  had  employed  Hickford  to  transmit  to  lord  Her-
ries  some  money,  which  was-  to  be  distributed  among
Mary's  friends  in  Scotland.  A  person  not  in  the  secret
was  intrusted  with  conveying  it  to  the  borders,  and  he,
suspecting  it  from  the  weight  to  be  gold,  whereas  he
had  been  told  that  it  was  silver,  carried  it  directly  to
the  privy-council.  The  duke,  his  domestics,  and  all
who  were  privy,  or  could  be  suspected  of  being  privy,
to  the  design,  were  taken  into  custody.  Never  did  the
accomplices  in  a  conspiracy  discover  less  firmness,  or
servants  betray  an  indulgent  master  with  greater
baseness.  Every  one  confessed  the  whole  of
what  he  knew.  Hickford  gave  directions  how  to  find
the  papers  which  he  had  hidden.  The  duke  himself,
relying  at  first  on  the  fidelity  of  his  associates,  and  be-
lieving all  dangerous  papers  to  have  been  destroyed,
confidently  asserted  his  own  innocence ;  but  when  their
depositions  and  the  papers  themselves  were  produced,
astonished  at  their  treachery,  he  acknowledged  his
guilt,  and  implored  the  queen's  mercy.  His  offence
was  too  heinous,  and  too  often  repeated,  to  obtain  par-
don ;  and  Elizabeth  thought  it  necessary  to  deter  her
subjects,  by  his  punishment,  from  holding  correspond-
ence with  the  queen  of  Scots,  or  her  emissaries.  Being
tried  by  his  peers,  he  was  found  guilty  of  high-treason,
and,  after  several  delays,  suffered  death  for  the  crime.0
The  discovery  of  this  conspiracy  produced  many
effects  extremely  detrimental  to  Mary's  interest.  The
bishop  of  Ross,  who  appeared,  by  the  confession  of  all
concerned,  to  be  the  prime  mover  in  every  cabal  against
Elizabeth,  was  taken  into  custody,  his  papers  searched,

c  Anders,  iii.  149. State  Trials,  185.

24  SCOTLAND.  [1571.

himself  committed  to  the  Tower,  treated  with  the  utmost
rigour,  threatened  with  capital  punishment,  and,  after
a  long  confinement,  set  at  liberty,  on  condition  that  he
should  leave  the  kingdom.  Mary  was  not  only  de-
prived of  a  servant,  equally  eminent  for  his  zeal  and
his  abilities,  but  was  denied  from  that  time  the  privi-
lege of  having  an  ambassador  at  the  English  court.
The  Spanish  ambassador,  whom  the  power  and  dignity
of  the  prince  he  represented,  exempted  from  such  in-
sults as  Ross  had  suffered,  was  commanded  to  leave
England/  As  there  was  now  the  clearest  evidence
that  Mary,  from  resentment  of  the  wrongs  she  had  suf-
fered, and  impatience  of  the  captivity  in  which  she  was
held,  would  not  scruple  to  engage  in  the  most  hostile
and  desperate  enterprises  against  the  established  go-
vernment and  religion,  she  began  to  be  regarded  as  a
public  enemy,  and  was  kept  under  a  stricter  guard  than
formerly ;  the  number  of  her  domestics  was  abridged,
and  no  person  permitted  to  see  her,  but  in  presence  of
her  keepers.6

Elizabeth  At  the  same  time,  Elizabeth,  foreseeing  the
storm  which  was  gathering  on  the  continent
tbe  against  her  kingdom,  began  to  wish  that  tran-
party.  quillity  were  restored  in  Scotland ;  and  irritated
by  Mary's  late  attempt  against  her  government,  she  de-
termined to  act  without  disguise  or  ambiguity,  in  favour
of  the  king's  party.  This  resolution  she  intimated  to
Oct  23  ^e  ^ea(^ers  °f  k°tn  factions.  Mary,  she  told
them,  had  held  such  a  criminal  correspondence
with  her  avowed  enemies,  and  had  excited  such  dan-
gerous conspiracies  both  against  her  crown  and  her
life,  that  she  would  henceforth  consider  her  as  unworthy
of  protection,  and  would  never  consent  to  restore  her
to  liberty,  far  less  to  replace  her  on  her  throne.  She
exhorted  them,  therefore,  to  unite  in  acknowledging
the  king's  authority.  She  promised  to  procure,  by  her

d  Digges,  163.  e  Strype,  Ann.  ii.  50.

1571.]  BOOK VI.  25

mediation,  equitable  terms  for  those  who  had  hitherto
opposed  it.  But  if  they  still  continued  refractory,  she
threatened  to  employ  her  utmost  power  to  compel  them
to  submit/  Though  this  declaration  did  not  produce
an  immediate  effect;  though  hostilities  continued  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Edinburgh ;  though  Huntly's  bro-
ther, Sir  Adam  Gordon,  by  his  bravery  and  good  con-
duct, had  routed  the  king's  adherents  in  the  north  in
many  encounters ;  yet,  such  an  explicit  discovery  of
Elizabeth's  sentiments  contributed  not  a  little  to  animate
one  party,  and  to  depress  the  spirit  and  hopes  of  the
other.g

1572< As  Morton,  who  commanded  the regent's
Hostilities  forces,  lay  at  Leith,  and  Kirkaldy  still  held  out

carried  on  *  .  !j

between  the  town  and  castle  of  Edinburgh,  scarce  a  day
passed  without  a  skirmish  ;  and  while  both
avoided  any  decisive  action,  they  harassed  each  other
by  attacking  small  parties,  beating  up  quarters,  and  in-
tercepting convoys.  These  operations,  though  little
memorable  in  themselves,  kept  the  passions  of  both  fac-
tions in  perpetual  exercise  and  agitation,  and  wrought
them  up,  at  last,  to  a  degree  of  fury,  which  rendered
them  regardless,  not  only  of  the  laws  of  war,  but  of  the
principles  of  humanity.  Nor  was  it  in  the  field  alone,
and  during  the  heat  of  combat,  that  this  implacable  rage
appeared ;  both  parties  hanged  the  prisoners  which  they
took,  of  whatever  rank  or  quality,  without  mercy,  and
without  trial.  Great  numbers  suffered  in  this  shocking
manner ;  the  unhappy  victims  were  led,  by  fifties  at  a
time,  to  execution  ;  and  it  was  not  till  both  sides  had
smarted  severely,  that  they  discontinued  this  barbarous
practice,  so  reproachful  to  the  character  of  the  nation.h
Meanwhile,  those  in  the  town  and  castle,  though  they
had  received  a  supply  of  money  from  the  duke  of  Alva,1
began  to  suffer  for  want  of  provisions.  As  Morton  had

(  See  Append.  No.  XXX VII.  e  Cald.  ii.  289.  294. Strype,  ii.  76.

h  Crawf.  Mem.  218.  220.  *  Cald.  ii.  34r>.

26  SCOTLAND.  [1572.

destroyed  all  the  mills  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city,
and  had  planted  small  garrisons  in  all  the  houses  of
strength  around  it,  scarcity  daily  increased.  At  last
all  the  miseries  of  famine  were  felt,  and  they  must  have
been  soon  reduced  to  such  extremities,  as  would  have
forced  them  to  capitulate,  if  the  English  and  French
ambassadors  had  not  procured  a  suspension  of  hostili-
ties between  the  two  parties ,k

League Though  the  negotiation  for  a  marriage  be-
iTnland tween  Elizabeth  and  the  duke  of  Anjou  had
and been  fruitless,  both  Charles  and  she  were  desir-
ous of  concluding  a  defensive  alliance  between
the  two  crowns. He  considered  such  a  treaty  not  only
as  the  best  device  for  blinding  the  Protestants,  against
whom  the  conspiracy  was  now  almost  ripe  for  execu-
tion ;  but  as  a  good  precaution,  likewise,  against  the
dangerous  consequences  to  which  that  atrocious  mea-
sure might  expose  him. Elizabeth,  who  had  hitherto
reigned  without  a  single  ally,  now  saw  her  kingdom
so  threatened  with  intestine  commotions,  or  exposed  to
invasions  from  abroad,  that  she  was  extremely  solicitous
to  secure  the  assistance  of  so  powerful  a  neighbour.
The  difficulties  arising  from  the  situation  of  the  Scottish
queen  were  the  chief  occasions  of  any  delay. Charles
demanded  some  terms  of  advantage  for  Mary  and  her
party. Elizabeth  refused  to  listen  to  any  proposition
of  that  kind. Her  obstinacy  overcame  the  faint  efforts
of  the  French  monarch.  Mary's  name  was  not  so  much
as  mentioned  in  the  treaty;  and  with  regard  to  Scottish
affairs,  a  short  article  was  inserted,  in  general  and  am-
A  rii  11 kiguous  terms,  to  this  purpose  :  "  That  the  par-
ties contracting  shall  make  no  innovations  in
Scotland,  nor  suffer  any  stranger  to  enter,  and  to  fo-
ment the  factions  there ;  but  it  shall  be  lawful  for  the
queen  of  England  to  chastise,  by  force  of  arms,  those
Scots  who  shall  continue  to  harbour  the  English  rebels

kCaId.n.346.

1572.]  BOOK VI.  27

now  in  Scotland."1  In  consequence  of  this  treaty,
France  and  England  affected  to  act  in  concert  with
regard  to  Scotland,  and  Le  Croc  and  Sir  William  Drury
appeared  there,  in  the  name  of  their  respective  sove-
reigns. By  their  mediation,  a  truce  for  two  months
was  agreed  upon,  and  during  that  time  conferences  were
to  be  held  between  the  leaders  of  the  opposite  factions,
in  order  to  accommodate  their  differences  and  restore
peace  to  the  kingdom.  This  truce  afforded  a  seasonable
interval  of  tranquillity  to  the  queen's  adherents  in  the
south  ;  but  in  the  north  it  proved  fatal  to  her  interest.
Sir  Adam  Gordon  had  still  maintained  his  reputation
and  superiority  there.  Several  parties,  under  different
officers,  were  sent  against  him.  Some  of  them  he  at-
tacked in  the  field  ;  against  others  he  employed  stra-
tagem ;  and  as  his  courage  and  conduct  were  equal,
none  of  his  enterprises  failed  of  success.  He  made  war
too  with  the  humanity  which  became  so  gallant  a  man,
and  gained  ground  by  that,  no  less  than  by  the  terror
of  his  arms.  If  he  had  not  been  obliged  by  the  truce
to  suspend  his  operations,  he  would  .in  all  probability
have  brought  that  part  of  the  kingdom  to  submit  en-
tirely to  the  queen's  authority.111

Proceed-  Notwithstanding  Gordon's  bravery  and  suc-
EnYand  cess>  Mary's  interest  was  on  the  decline,  not
against  only  in  her  own  kingdom,  but  among  the  Eng-
lish. Nothing  could  be  more  offensive  to  that
nation,  jealous  of  foreigners,  and  terrified  at  the  prospect
of  the  Spanish  yoke,  than  her  negotiations  with  the  duke
of  Alva.  The  parliament,  which  met  in  May,  proceeded
against  her  as  the  most  dangerous  enemy  of  the  king-
dom ;  and,  after  a  solemn  conference  between  the  lords
and  commons,  both  houses  agreed  in  bringing  in  a  bill
to  declare  her  guilty  of  high-treason,  and  to  deprive
her  of  all  right  of  succession  to  the  crown.  This  great
cause,  as  it  was  then  called,  occupied  them  during  the

1  Digges,  170.  191. Camden,  444.  >n  Crawf.  Mem.

28  SCOTLAND.  [1572.

whole  session,  and  was  carried  on  with  much  unani-
mity. Elizabeth,  though  she  applauded  their  zeal,  and
approved  greatly  of  the  course  they  were  taking,  was
satisfied  with  shewing  Mary  what  she  might  expect
from  the  resentment  of  the  nation ;  but  as  she  did  not
yet  think  it  time  to  proceed  to  the  most  violent  extre-
mity against  her,  she  prorogued  the  parliament."
The  French  These  severe  proceedings  of  the  English  par-
negiecther  Hament  were  not  more  mortifying  to  Mary,

interest.  .  ,  /•  i  n  • i

than  the  coldness  and  neglect  ot  her  allies  the
French.  The  duke  of  Montmorency,  indeed,  who
came  over  to  ratify  the  league  with  Elizabeth,  made  a
show  of  interesting  himself  in  favour  of  the  Scottish
queen ;  but,  instead  of  soliciting  for  her  liberty,  or  her
restoration  to  her  throne,  all  that  he  demanded  was  a
slight  mitigation  of  the  rigour  of  her  imprisonment.
Even  this  small  request  he  urged  with  so  little  warmth
or  importunity,  that  no  regard  was  paid  to  it.0

The  alliance  with  France  afforded  Elizabeth

1  he  rnas-

sacre  of  much  satisfaction,  and  she  expected  from  it  a
great  increase  of  security.  She  now  turned  her
whole  attention  towards  Scotland,  where  the  animosi-
ties of  the  two  factions  were  still  so  high,  and  so  many
interfering  interests  to  be  adjusted,  that  a  general  pa-
cification seemed  to  be  at  a  great  distance.  But  while
she  laboured  to  bring  them  to  some  agreement,  an
event  happened  which  filled  a  great  part  of  Europe
with  astonishment  and  with  horror.  This  was  the  mas-
sacre at  Paris  ;  an  attempt,  to  which  there  is  no  paral-
lel in  the  history  of  mankind,  either  for  the  long  train
of  craft  and  dissimulation  with  which  it  was  contrived,
or  for  the  cruelty  and  barbarity  with  which  it  was  car-
ried into  execution.  By  the  most  solemn  promises  of
safety  and  of  favour,  the  leaders  of  the  Protestants  were
drawn  to  court ;  and  though  doomed  to  destruction,
they  were  received  with  caresses,  loaded  with  honours,

n  D'Ewes,  Journ.  206,  &c.  °  Jebb,  ii.  512.

1572,]  BOOK  VI.  29

and  treated,  for  seven  months,  with  every  possible
mark  of  familiarity  and  of  confidence.  In  the
midst  of  their  security,  the  warrant  for  their
destruction  was  issued  by  their  sovereign,  on  whose
word  they  had  relied  ;  and,  in  obedience  to  it,  their
countrymen,  their  fellow-citizens,  and  companions,  im-
brued their  hands  in  their  blood.  Ten  thousand  Pro-
testants, without  distinction  of  age,  or  sex,  or  condi-
tion, were  murdered  in  Paris  alone.  The  same  bar-
barous orders  were  sent  to  other  parts  of  the  kingdom,
and  a  like  carnage  ensued.  This  deed,  which  no  Po-
pish writer,  in  the  present  age,  mentions  without  de-
testation, was  at  that  time  applauded  in  Spain ;  and  at
Rome  solemn  thanksgivings  were  offered  to  God  for  its
success.  But  among  the  Protestants,  it  excited  incre-
dible horror ;  a  striking  picture  of  which  is  drawn  by
the  French  ambassador  at  the  court  of  England,  in  his
account  of  his  first  audience  after  the  massacre.  "  A
gloomy  sorrow,"  says  he,  "  sat  on  every  face ;  silence,
as  in  the  dead  of  night,  reigned  through  all  the  cham-
bers of  the  royal  apartment ;  the  ladies  and  courtiers
were  ranged  on  each  side,  all  clad  in  deep  mourning,
and,  as  I  passed  through  them,  not  one  bestowed
on  me  a  civil  look,  or  made  the  least  return  to  my
salutes.  "p

Detrimen-  But  horror  was  not  the  only  passion  with
tai  to  Ma-  whicn  this  event  inspired  the  Protestants ;  it

ry  s  inte-  t  V  .  .

rest.  filled  them  with  fear.  They  considered  it  as
the  prelude  to  some  greater  blow,  and  believed,  not
without  much  probability,  that  all  the  Popish  princes
had  conspired  the  destruction  of  their  sect.  This  opi-
nion was  of  no  small  disservice  to  Mary's  affairs  in
Scotland.  Many  of  her  adherents  were  Protestants  ;
and,  though  they  wished  her  restoration,  were  not  will-
ing, on  that  account,  to  sacrifice  the  faith  which  they
professed.  They  dreaded  her  attachment  to  a  religion

P  Carte,  iii.  522.

30  SCOTLAND.  [1572.

which  allowed  its  votaries  to  violate  the  most  solemn
engagements,  and  prompted  them  to  perpetrate  the
most  barbarous  crimes.  A  general  confederacy  of  the
Protestants  seemed  to  them  the  only  thing  that  could
uphold  the  Reformation  against  the  league  which  was
formed  to  overturn  it.  Nor  could  the  present  esta-
blishment of  religion  be  long  maintained  in  Britain,
but  by  a  strict  union  with  Elizabeth,  and  by  the  con-
currence of  both  nations,  in  espousing  the  defence  of
it  as  a  common  cause.q

Encouraged  by  this  general  disposition  to  place  con-
fidence in  her,  Elizabeth  resumed  a  scheme  which  she
had  formed  during  the  regency  of  the  earl  of  Murray,
of  sending  Mary  as  a  prisoner  into  Scotland.  But  her
sentiments  and  situation  were  now  very  different  from
what  they  had  been  during  her  negotiation  with  Mur-
ray. Her  animosity  against  the  queen  of  Scots  was
greatly  augmented  by  recent  experience,  which  taught
her  that  she  had  inclination  as  well  as  power,  not  only
to  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  her  reign,  but  to  wrest
from  her  the  crown  ;  the  party  in  Scotland  favourable
to  Mary  was  almost  entirely  broken ;  and  there  was  no
reason  to  dread  any  danger  from  France,  which  still
continued  to  court  her  friendship.  She  aimed,  accord-
ingly, at  something  very  different  from  that  which  she
had  in  view  three  years  before.  Then  she  discovered
a  laudable  solicitude,  not  only  for  the  safety  of  Mary's
life,  but  for  securing  to  her  treatment  suited  to  her  rank.
Now  she  required,  as  an  express  condition,  that  imme-
diately after  Mary's  arrival  in  Scotland,  she  should  be
brought  to  public  trial ;  and,  having  no  doubt  that  sen-
tence would  be  passed  according  to  her  deserts,  she
insisted  that,  for  the  good  of  both  kingdoms,  it  should
be  executed  without  delay/  No  transaction,  perhaps,
in  Elizabeth's  reign,  merits  more  severe  censure.  Eager
to  cut  short  the  days  of  a  rival,  the  object  both  of  her

i  Digges,  244.  267.  r  Murdin,  224.

1572.]  BOOK VI.  31

hatred  and  dread,  and  no  less  anxious  to  avoid  the
blame  to  which  such  a  deed  of  violence  might  ex-
pose her,  she  laboured,  with  timid  and  ungenerous  ar-
tifice, to  transfer  the  odium  of  it  from  herself  to  Mary's
own  subjects.  The  earl  of  Mar,  happily  for  the  ho-
nour of  his  country,  had  more  virtue  than  to  listen  to
such  an  ignominious  proposal ;  and  Elizabeth  did  not
venture  to  renew  it.

The  re-  While  she  was  engaged  in  pursuing  this  in-
sidious  measure,  the  regent  was  more  honour-
^ar-  akty  employed  in  endeavouring  to  negotiate  a
ties.  general  peace  among  his  countrymen.  As  he
laboured  for  this  purpose  with  the  utmost  zeal,  and  the
adverse  faction  placed  entire  confidence  in  his  inte-
grity, his  endeavours  could  hardly  have  failed  of  being
successful.  Maitland  and  Kirkaldy  came  so  near  to
an  agreement  with  him,  that  scarce  any  thing  remain-
ed, except  the  formality  of  signing  the  treaty.  But
Morton  had  not  forgotten  the  disappointment  he  met
with  in  his  pretensions  to  the  regency ;  his  abilities,
his  wealth,  and  the  patronage  of  the  court  of  England,
gave  him  greater  sway  with  the  party,  than  even  the
regent  himself;  and  he  took  pleasure  in  thwarting
every  measure  pursued  by  him.  He  was  afraid  that,
if  Maitland  and  his  associates  recovered  any  share  in
the  administration,  his  own  influence  would  be  consi-
derably diminished ;  and  the  regent,  by  their  means,
would  acquire  that  ascendant  which  belonged  to  his
station.  With  him  concurred  all  those  who  were  in
possession  of  the  lands  which  belonged  to  any  of  the
queen's  party.  His  ambition,  and  their  avarice,  frus-
trated the  regent's  pious  intentions,  and  retarded  a
blessing  so  necessary  to  the  kingdom,  as  the  establish-
ment of  peace.8

Such  a  discovery  of  the  selfishness  and  am-

HIs  death. ...  ...  . J

bition  which  reigned  among  his  party,  made

8  Melv.  233. Crawf.  Mem.  237.

32  SCOTLAND.  [1572.

a  deep  impression  on  the  regent,  who  loved  his  coun-
try, and  wished  for  peace  with  much  ardour.  This  in-
ward grief  broke  his  spirit,  and  by  degrees  brought  on
a  settled  melancholy,  that  ended  in  a  distemper,  of
which  he  died  on  the  29th  of  October.  He  was,  per-
haps, the  only  person  in  the  kingdom  who  could  have
enjoyed  the  office  of  regent  without  envy,  and  have
left  it  without  loss  of  reputation.  Notwithstanding
their  mutual  animosities,  both  factions  acknowledged
his  views  to  be  honourable,  and  his  integrity  to  be
uncormpted.*

Morton  No  competitor  now  appeared  against  Mor-
rcehg°esn£  ton-  Tne  <lue™  °f  England  powerfully  sup-
NOV.  24.  ported  his  claim,  and  notwithstanding  the  fears
of  the  people,  and  the  jealousy  of  the  nobles,  he  was
elected  regent ;  the  fourth  who,  in  the  space  of  five
years,  had  held  that  dangerous  office.

As  the  truce  had  been  prolonged  to  the  1st  of  Ja-
nuary, this  gave  him  an  opportunity  of  continuing  the
negotiations  with  the  opposite  party,  which  had  been
set  on  foot  by  his  predecessor.  They  produced  no  ef-
fects, however,  till  the  beginning  of  the  next  year.

Before  we  proceed  to  these,  some  events,  hitherto
untouched,  deserve  our  notice.

The  earl  of  Northumberland,  who  had  been  kept
prisoner  in  Lochlevin  ever  since  his  flight  into  Scot-
land, in  the  year  1569,  was  given  up  to  lord  Hunsdon,
governor  of  Berwick ;  and  being  carried  to  York,  suf-
fered there  the  punishment  of  his  rebellion.  The  king's
party  were  so  sensible  of  their  dependence  on  Eliza-
beth's protection,  that  it  was  scarcely  possible  for  them
to  refuse  putting  into  her  hands  a  person  who  had
taken  up  arms  against  her ;  but,  as  a  sum  of  money
was  paid  on  that  account,  and  shared  between  Morton
and  Douglas  of  Lochlevin,  the  former  of  whom,  during
his  exile  in  England,  had  been  much  indebted  to  Nor-

» Crawf.  Mem.  241.

1572.]  BOOK  VI.  33

thumberland's  friendship,  the  abandoning  this  unhappy
nobleman,  in  such  a  manner,  to  certain  destruction,
was  universally  condemned  as  a  most  ungrateful  and
mercenary  action  .u

Affairs  of  This  year  was  remarkable  for  a  considerable
the  church.  innovation  in  the  government  of  the  church.
Soon  after  the  Reformation,  the  Popish  bishops  had
been  confirmed  by  law  in  possession  of  part  of  their
benefices ;  but  the  spiritual  jurisdiction,  which  belonged
to  their  order,  was  exercised  by  superintendents,  though
with  more  moderate  authority.  On  the  death  of  the
archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  Morton  obtained  from  the
crown  a  grant  of  the  temporalities  of  that  see.  But  as
it  was  thought  indecent  for  a  layman  to  hold  a  benefice
to  which  the  cure  of  souls  was  annexed,  he  procured
Douglas,  rector  of  the  university  of  St.  Andrew's,  to  be
chosen  archbishop ;  and,  allotting  him  a  small  pension,
out  of  the  revenues  of  the  see,  retained  the  remainder  in
his  own  hands.  The  nobles,  who  saw  the  advantages
which  they  might  reap  from  such  a  practice,  supported
him  in  the  execution  of  his  plan.  It  gave  great  offence,
however,  to  the  clergy,  who,  instead  of  perpetuating  an
order  whose  name  and  power  were  odious  to  'them,
wished  that  the  revenues  which  had  belonged  to  it
might  be  employed  in  supplying  such  parishes  as  were
still  unprovided  with  settled  pastors.  But,  on  the  one
hand,  it  would  have  been  rash  in  the  clergy  to  have
irritated  too  much  noblemen,  on  whom  the  very  exist-
ence of  the  Protestant  church  in  Scotland  depended  ;
and  Morton,  on  the  other,  conducted  his  scheme  with
such  dexterity,  and  managed  them  with  so  much  art,
that  it  was  at  last  agreed,  in  a  convention  composed  of
the  leading  men  among  the  clergy,  together  with  a
committee  of  privy-council,  "  That  the  name  and  office
of  archbishop  and  bishop  should  be  continued  during
the  king's  minority,  and  these  dignities  be  conferred

»  Crawf.  Mem,  55.  222. Carad.  445.
VOL. II.  D

34  SCOTLAND.  [1572.

upon  the  best  qualified  among  the  Protestant  ministers ;
but  that,  with  regard  to  their  spiritual  jurisdictions,
they  should  be  subject  to  the  general  assembly  of  the
church."  The  rules  to  be  observed  in  their  election,
and  the  persons  who  were  to  supply  the  place,  and
enjoy  the  privileges  which  belonged  to  the  dean  and
chapter  in  times  of  Popery,  were  likewise  particularly
specified/  The  whole  being  laid  before  the  general
assembly,  after  some  exceptions  to  the  name  of  arch-
bishop,  dean,  chapter,  &c.  and  a  protestation  that  it  should
be  considered  only  as  a  temporary  constitution,  until
one  more  perfect  could  be  introduced,  it  obtained  the
approbation  of  that  court.y  Even  Knox,  who  was  pre-
vented from  attending  the  assembly  by  the  ill  state  of
his  health,  though  he  declaimed  loudly  against  the
simoniacal  paction  to  which  Douglas  owed  his  prefer-
ment, and  blamed  the  nomination  of  a  person  worn  out
with  age  and  infirmities,  to  an  office  which  required
unimpaired  vigour  both  of  body  and  mind,  seems  not
to  have  condemned  the  proceedings  of  the  convention ;
and,  in  a  letter  to  the  assembly,  approved  of  some  of
the  regulations  with  respect  to  the  election  of  bishops,
as  worthy  of  being  carefully  observed.2  In  consequence
of  the  assembly's  consent  to  the  plan  agreed  upon  in
the  convention,  Douglas  was  installed  in  his  office,  and
at  the  same  time  an  archbishop  of  Glasgow  and  a  bi-
shop of  Dunkeld  were  chosen  from  among  the  Protes-
tant clergy.  They  were  all  admitted  to  the  place  in
parliament  which  belonged  to  the  ecclesiastical  order.
But  in  imitation  of  the  example  set  by  Morton,  such
bargains  were  made  with  them  by  different  noblemen,
as  gave  them  possession  only  of  a  very  small  part  of
the  revenues  which  belonged  to  their  sees.a
NOV.  27.  Soon  after  the  dissolution  of  this  assembly,
bhwwte?  Knox,  the  prime  instrument  of  spreading  and
of  Knox.  establishing  the  reformed  religion  in  Scotland,

••*  Cald.  ii.  305. y  Id.  354. *  See  App.  No.  XXXVIII. »  Spotsw.  261.

1572.]  BOOK  VI.  35

ended  his  life,  in  the  sixty-seventh  year  of  his  age.
Zeal,  intrepidity,  disinterestedness,  were  virtues  which
he  possessed  in  an  eminent  degree. He  was  acquainted
too  with  the  learning  cultivated  among  divines  in  that
age ;  and  excelled  in  that  species  of  eloquence  which
is  calculated  to  rouse  and  to  inflame.5 His  maxims,
however,  were  often  too  severe,  and  the  impetuosity  of
his  temper  excessive. Rigid  and  uncomplying  himself,
he  shewed  no  indulgence  to  the  infirmities  of  others.
Regardless  of  the  distinctions  of  rank  and  character,  he
uttered  his  admonitions  with  an  acrimony  and  vehe-
mence, more  apt  to  irritate  than  to  reclaim.  This  often
betrayed  him  into  indecent  and  undutiful  expressions
with  respect  to  the  queen's  person  and  conduct. Those
very  qualities,  however,  which  now  render  his  charac-
ter less  amiable,  fitted  him  to  be  the  instrument  of  Pro-
vidence for  advancing  the  Reformation  among  a  fierce
people,  and  enabling  him  to  face  dangers,  and  to  sur-
mount opposition,  from  which  a  person  of  a  more  gen-
tle spirit  would  have  been  apt  to  shrink  back. By  an
unwearied  application  to  study  and  to  business,  as  well
as  by  the  frequency  and  fervour  of  his  public  discourses,
he  had  worn  out  a  constitution  naturally  robust.  During
a  lingering  illness  he  discovered  the  utmost  fortitude  ;
and  met  the  approaches  of  death  with  a  magnanimity

b  A  striking  description  of  that  species  of  eloquence  for  which  Knox  was  distin-
guished, is  given  by  one  of  his  contemporaries,  Mr.  James  Melville,  minister  of
Anstruther.  "  But  of  all  the  benefits  I  had  that  year  [1571],  was  the  coming
of  that  most  notable  prophet  and  apostle  of  our  nation,  Mr.  John  Knox,  to  St.
Andrew's,  who,  by  the  faction  of  the  queen  occupying  the  castle  and  town  of  Edin-
burgh, was  compelled  to  remove  therefra  with  a  number  of  the  best,  and  chused  to
come  to  St.  Andrew's.  I  heard  him  teach  there  the  prophecies  of  Daniel  that  sum-
mer and  the  winter  following.  I  had  my  pen  and  little  buike,  and  took  away  sic
things  as  I  could  comprehend.  In  the  opening  of  his  text,  he  was  moderate  the
space  of  half  an  hour ;  but  when  he  entered  to  application,  he  made  me  so  to  grue

[thrill]  and  tremble  that  I  could  not  hald  the  pen  to  write. He  was  very  weak.

I  saw  him  every  day  of  his  doctrine  go  hulie  [slowly]  and  fair,  with  a  furring  of  mar-
ticks  about  his  neck,  a  staff  in  the  one  hand,  and  good  godlie  Richart  Ballenden
holding  him  up  by  the  oxter  [under  the  arm],  from  the  abbey  to  the  parish  kirk ;
and  he  the  said  Richart  and  another  servant  lifted  him  up  to  the  pulpit,  where  he
behoved  to  lean  at  his  first  entrie ;  but  e're  he  was  done  with  his  sermon,  he  was  so
active  and  vigorous,  that  he  was  like  to  ding  the  pulpit  in  blads  [beat  the  pulpit  to

Eieces],  and  fly  out  of  it." MS.  Life  of  Mr.  James  Melville,  communicated  to  me
y  Mr.  Paton  of  the  Custom-house,  Edinburgh,  p.  14,  21.

D2

36  SCOTLAND.  [1572.

inseparable  from  his  character.  He  was  constantly  em-
ployed in  acts  of  devotion,  and  comforted  himself  with
those  prospects  of  immortality  which  not  only  preserve
good  men  from  desponding,  but  fill  them  with  exulta-
tion in  their  last  moments.  The  earl  of  Morton,  who
was  present  at  his  funeral,  pronounced  his  eulogium  in
a  few  words,  the  more  honourable  for  Knox,  as  they
came  from  one  whom  he  had  often  censured  with  pecu-
liar severity :  "  There  lies  He,  who  never  feared  the
face  of  man." c

1573 Though  Morton  did  not  desire  peace  from
The  regent  g^fo  generous  motives  as  the  former  regent,  he

treats  with  '  .  ' .

the  queen's  laboured,  however,  in  good  earnest,  to  establish
it.  The  public  confusions  and  calamities,  to
which  he  owed  his  power  and  importance  when  he  was
only  the  second  person  in  the  nation,  were  extremely
detrimental  to  him  now  that  he  was  raised  to  be  the
first.  While  so  many  of  the  nobles  continued  in  arms
against  him,  his  authority  as  regent  was  partial,  feeble,
and  precarious.  Elizabeth  was  no  less  desirous  of  ex-
tinguishing the  flame  which  she  had  kindled  and  kept
so  long  alive  in  Scotland/  She  had  discovered  the
alliance  with  France,  from  which  she  had  expected  such
advantages,  to  be  no  foundation  of  security.  Though
appearances  of  friendship  still  subsisted  between  her
and  that  court,  and  Charles  daily  renewed  his  protesta-
tions of  inviolable  adherence  to  the  treaty,  she  was  con-
vinced, by  a  fatal  example,  how  little  she  ought  to  rely
on  the  promises  or  oaths  of  that  perfidious  monarch.
Her  ambassador  warned  her  that  the  French  held  secret
correspondence  with  Mary's  adherents  in  Scotland,  and
encouraged  them  in  their  obstinacy.6  The  duke  of
Alva  carried  on  his  intrigues  in  that  kingdom  with  less
disguise.  She  was  persuaded  that  they  would  embrace
the  first  serene  interval,  which  the  commotions  in  France
and  in  the  Netherlands  would  allow  them,  and  openly

c  Spotsw.  266. Cald.  ii.  273. i A  Digges,  299. e  Id.  296.  312,

1573.]  BO  OK  VI.  37

attempt  to  land  a  body  of  men  in  Scotland.  She  resolved,
therefore,  to  prevent  their  getting  any  footing  in  the
island,  and  to  cut  off  all  their  hopes  of  finding  any  as-
sistance there,  by  uniting  the  two  parties.
His  over- The  situation  of  Mary's  adherents  enabled  the
jectecTby  regent  to  carry  on  his  negotiations  with  them  to
Maitjand  greaj  advantage. They  were  now  divided  into
aidy. two  factions.  At  the  head  of  the  one  were  Cha-
telherault  and  Huntly. Maitland  and  Kirkaldy  were
the  leaders  of  the  other. Their  high  rank,  their  exten-
sive property,  and  the  numbers  of  their  followers,  ren-
dered the  former  considerable. The  latter  were  in-
debted for  their  importance  to  their  personal  abilities,
and  to  the  strength  of  the  castle  of  Edinburgh,  which
was  in  their  possession. The  regent-had  no  intention
to  comprehend  both  in  the  same  treaty; but  as  he
dreaded  that  the  queen's  party,  if  it  remained  entire,
would  be  able  to  thwart  and  embarrass  his  administra-
tion, he  resolved  to  divide  and  weaken  it,  by  a  separate
negotiation.  .  He  made  the  first  overture  to  Kirkaldy
and  his  associates,  and  endeavoured  to  renew  the  ne-
gotiation with  them,  which,  during  the  life  of  his  pre-
decessor, had  been  broken  off  by  his  own  artifices.  But
Kirkaldy  knew  Morton's  views,  and  system  of  govern-
ment, to  be  very  different  from  those  of  the  former
regent. Maitland  considered  him  as  a  personal  and
implacable  enemy. They  received  repeated  assurances
of  protection  from  France ;  and  though  the  siege  of
Rochelle  employed  the  French  arms  at  that  time,  the
same  hopes,  which  had  so  often  deceived  the  party,
still  amused  them,  and  they  expected  that  the  obstinacy
of  the  Hugonots  would soon  be  subdued,  and  that
Charles  would  then  be  at  liberty  to  act  with  vigour  in
Scotland. Meanwhile  a  supply  of  money  was  sent,
and  if  the  castle  could  be  held  out  till  Whitsunday,
effectual  aid  was  promised.* Maitland's  genius  de-

e  Digges,  314.

38  SCOTLAND.  [1573.

lighted  in  forming  schemes  that  were  dangerous  ;  and
Kirkaldy  possessed  the  intrepidity  necessary  for  put-
ting them  in  execution.  The  castle,  they  knew,  was
so  situated,  that  it  might  defy  all  the  regent's  power.
Elizabeth,  they  hoped,  would  not  violate  the  treaty  with
France,  by  sending  forces  to  his  assistance  ;  and  if  the
French  should  be  able  to  land  any  considerable  body
of  men,  it  might  be  possible  to  deliver  the  queen  from
captivity,  or,  at  least,  to  balance  the  influence  of  France
and  England  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  rescue  Scotland
from  the  dishonourable  dependence  upon  the  latter,
under  which  it  had  fallen.  This  splendid  but  chime-
rical project  they  preferred  to  the  friendship  of  Morton.
They  encouraged  the  negotiation,  however,  because  it
served  to  gain  time ;  they  proposed,  for  the  same  pur-
pose, that  the  whole  of  the  queen's  party  should  be
comprehended  in  it,  and  that  Kirkaldy  should  retain  the
command  of  the  castle  six  months  after  the  treaty  was
signed.  His  interest  prompted  the  regent  to  reject  the
former  ;  his  penetration  discovered  the  danger  of  com-
plying with  the  latter ;  and  all  hopes  of  accommodation
vanished/

As  soon  as  the  truce  expired,  Kirkaldy  began  to  fire
on  the  city  of  Edinburgh,  which,  by  the  return  of  the
inhabitants  whom  he  had  expelled,  was  devoted  as
zealously  as  ever  to  the  king's  cause.  But,  as  the  regent
had  now  set  on  foot  a  treaty  with  Chatelherault  and
Huntly,  the  cessation  of  arms  still  continued  with  them.
Accepted  They  were  less  scrupulous  than  the  other

party,  and  listened  eagerly  to  his  overtures.

Yhe  duke  was  naturally  unsteady,  and  the
approach  of  old  age  increased  his  irresolution,  and
aversion  to  action.  The  miseries  of  civil  discord  had
afflicted  Scotland  almost  five  years,  a  length  of  time  far
beyond  the  duration  of  any  former  contest.  The  war,
instead  of  doing  service,  had  been  detrimental  to  the

'Melv.  235,  &c.

1573.]  BOOK VI.  39

queen;  and  more  ruinous  than  any  foreign  invasion
to  the  kingdom.  In  prosecuting  it,  neither  party  had
gained  much  honour;  both  had  suffered  great  losses,
and  had  exhausted  their  own  estates  in  wasting  those
of  their  adversaries.  The  commons  were  in  the  utmost
misery,  and  longed  ardently  for  a  peace,  which  might
terminate  this  fruitless  but  destructive  quarrel.
Articles  of  ^  great  steP  was  taken  towards  this  desirable
the  treaty,  event,  by  the  treaty  concluded  at  Perth,  be-
tween the  regent  on  one  hand,  and  Chatel-
herault  and  Huntly  on  the  other,  under  the  mediation
of  Killegrew,  Elizabeth's  ambassador.g  The  chief  ar-
ticles in  it  were  these  :  That  all  the  parties  comprehend-
ed in  the  treaty  should  declare  their  approbation  of  the
reformed  religion  now  established  in  the  kingdom  ;
that  they  should  submit  to  the  king's  government,  and
own  Morton's  authority  as  regent;  that  they  should  ac-
knowledge every  thing  done  in  opposition  to  the  king,
since  his  coronation,  to  be  illegal ;  that  on  both  sides
the  prisoners  who  had  been  taken  should  be  set  at  li-
berty, and  the  estates  which  had  been  forfeited  should
be  restored  to  their  proper  owners  ;  that  the  act  of  at-
tainder passed  against  the  queen's  adherents  should  be
repealed,  and  indemnity  granted  for  all  the  crimes  of
which  they  had  been  guilty  since  the  15th  of  June,
1567;  and  that  the  treaty  should  be  ratified  by  the
common  consent  of  both  parties  in  parliament.11
siege  of  Kirkaldy,  though  abandoned  by  his  asso-
ofVdTn-6  ciateS,  who  neither  discovered  solicitude  nor
bursh-  made  provision  for  his  safety,  did  not  lose  cou-
rage, nor  entertain  any  thoughts  of  accommodation.1

S  See  Appendix,  No.  XXXIX.  h  Crawf.  Mem.  251.

1  Melvil,  whose  brother,  Sir  Robert,  was  one  of  those  who  joined  with  Kirkaldy  in
the  defence  of  the  castle,  and  who  was  himself  strongly  attached  to  their  party,
asserts  that  Kirkaldy  offered  to  accept  of  any  reasonable  terms  of  composition,  but
that  all  his  offers  were  rejected  by  the  regent.  Melv.  240.  Bat,  as  Elizabeth  was,
at  that  time,  extremely  desirous  of  restoring  peace  in  Scotland,  and  her  ambassador
Killegrew,  as  well  as  the  earl  of  Rothes,  used  their  utmost  endeavours  to  persuade
Kirkaldy  to  accede  to  the  treaty  of  Perth,  it  seems  more  credible  to  impute  the
continuance  of  hostilities  to  Kirkaldy 's  obstinacy,  his  distrust  of  Morton,  or  his
hope  of  foreign  aid,  than  to  any  other  cause.

That  this  was  really  the  case,  is  evident  from  the  positive  testimony  of  Spotsw.

40  SCOTLAND.  [1573.

Though  all  Scotland  had  now  submitted  to  the  king,
he  still  resolved  to  defend  the  castle  in  the  queen's
name,  and  to  wait  the  arrival  of  the  promised  succours.
The  regent  was  in  want  of  every  thing  necessary  for
carrying  on  a  siege.  But  Elizabeth,  who,  determined
at  any  rate  to  bring  the  dissensions  in  Scotland  to  a
period  before  the  French  could  find  leisure  to  take  part
in  the  quarrel,  soon  afforded  him  sufficient  supplies.
Sir  William  Drury  marched  into  Scotland  with  fifteen
hundred  foot,  and  a  considerable  train  of  artillery.  The
regent  joined  him  with  all  his  forces;  and  trenches
were  opened  and  approaches  regularly  carried  on
against  the  castle.  Kirkaldy,  though  discou-
raged by  the  loss  of  a  great  sum  of  money  re-
mitted to  him  from  France,  and  which  fell  into  the
regent's  hands  through  the  treachery  of  Sir  James  Bal-
four,  the  most  corrupt  man  of  that  age,  defended  him-
self with  bravery  augmented  by  despair.  Three-and-
thirty  days  he  resisted  all  the  efforts  of  the  Scotch  and
English,  who  pushed  on  their  attacks  with  courage,
and  with  emulation.  Nor  did  he  demand  a  parley,  till
the  fortifications  were  battered  down,  and  one  of  the
wells  in  the  castle  dried  up,  and  the  other  choked  with
rubbish.  Even  then,  his  spirit  was  unsubdued,  and
he  determined  rather  to  fall  gloriously  behind  the  last
intrenchment,  than  to  yield  to  his  inveterate  enemies.
But  his  garrison  was  not  animated  with  the  same  heroic
or  desperate  resolution,  and  rising  in  a  mutiny,  forced
him  to  capitulate.  He  surrendered  himself  to
Drury,  who  promised,  in  the  name  of  his  mis-
tress, that  he  should  be  favourably  treated.  Together
with  him,  James  Kirkaldy  his  brother,  lord  Home,  Mait-
land,  Sir  Robert  Melvil,  a  few  citizens  of  Edinburgh,
and  about  one  hundred  and  sixty  soldiers,  were  made
prisoners.1"

269,  270. Camd.  448. Johnst.  Hist.  3, 4. Digges, 334. Crawford's  account
agrees,  in  the  main,  with  theirs,  Mem.  263.

k  Cald.  ii.  408. Melv.  240. Crawf.  Mem.  265.

1573.]  BOOK VI.  41

Several  of  the  officers,  who  had  been  kept  in  pay
during  the  war,  prevailed  on  their  men  to  accompany
them  into  the  Low  Countries,  and  entering  into  the
service  of  the  States,  added,  by  their  gallant  behaviour,
to  the  reputation  for  military  virtue  which  has  always
been  the  characteristic  of  the  Scottish  nation,
Review  of  Thus  by  the  treaty  with  Chatelherault  and
Jerofb'olh  Huntly,  and  the  surrender  of  the  castle,  the
parties.  cjyjj  wars  jn  Scotland  were  brought  to  a  period.
When  we  review  the  state  of  the  nation,  and  compare
the  strength  of  the  two  factions,  Mary's  partisans  among
the  nobles  appear,  manifestly,  to  have  been  superior
both  in  numbers  and  in  power.  But  these  advan-
tages were  more  than  counterbalanced  by  others,  which
their  antagonists  enjoyed.  Political  abilities,  military
skill,  and  all  the  talents  which  times  of  action  form,  or
call  forth,  appeared  chiefly  on  the  king's  side.  Nor
could  their  enemies  boast  of  any  man,  who  equalled
the  intrepidity  of  Murray,  tempered  with  wisdom ;  the
profound  sagacity  of  Morton ;  the  subtle  genius,  and
insinuating  address,  of  Maitland  ;  or  the  successful  va-
lour of  Kirkaldy ;  all  of  which  were,  at  first,  employed
in  laying  the  foundations  of  the  king's  authority.  On
the  one  side,  measures  were  concerted  with  prudence,
and  executed  with  vigour ;  on  the  other,  their  resolu-
tions were  rash,  and  their  conduct  feeble.  The  people,
animated  with  zeal  for  religion,  and  prompted  by  indig-
nation against  the  queen,  warmly  supported  the  king's
cause.  The  clergy  threw  the  whole  weight  of  their
popularity  into  the  same  scale.  By  means  of  these,  as
well  as  by  the  powerful  interposition  of  England,  the
king's  government  was  finally  established.  Mary  lost
even  that  shadow  of  sovereignty,  which,  amidst  all  her
sufferings  she  had  hitherto  retained  among  part  of  her
own  subjects.  As  she  was  no  longer  permitted  to  have
an  ambassador  at  the  court  of  England,  the  only  mark
of  dignity  which  she  had,  for  some  time,  enjoyed  there,

42  SCOTLAND.  [1573.

she  must  henceforth  be  considered  as  an  exile  stripped
of  all  the  ensigns  of  royalty  ;  guarded  with  anxiety  in
the  one  kingdom,  and  totally  deserted  or  forgotten  in
the  other.

Kirkaid  Kirkaldy  and  his  associates  remained  in
put  to  Drury's  custody,  and  \yere  treated  by  him  with
great  humanity,  until  the  queen  of  England,
whose  prisoners  they  were,  should  determine  their  fate.
Morton  insisted  that  they  should  suffer  the  punishment
due  to  their  rebellion  and  obstinacy ;  and  declared
that,  so  long  as  they  were  allowed  to  live,  he  did  not
reckon  his  own  person  or  authority  secure  ;  and  Eliza-
beth, without  regarding  Drury's  honour,  or  his  pro-
mises in  her  name,  gave  them  up  to  the  regent's  dis-
posal. He  first  confined  them  to  separate  prisons ;
.  and  soon  after,  with  Elizabeth's  consent,  con-

'  demned  Kirkaldy,  and  his  brother,  to  be  hanged
at  the  cross  of  Edinburgh.  Maitland,  who  did  not
expect  to  be  treated  more  favourably,  prevented  the
ignominy  of  a  public  execution  by  a  voluntary  death,
and  "  ended  his  days,"  says  Melvil,  "  after  the  old  Ro-
man fashion."1

While  the  regent  was  wreaking  his  vengeance  on  the
remains  of  her  party  in  Scotland,  Mary,  incapable  of
affording  them  any  relief,  bewailed  their  misfortunes  in
the  solitude  of  her  prison.  At  the  same  time  her  health
began  to  be  much  impaired  by  confinement  and  want
of  exercise.  At  the  entreaty  of  the  French  ambassador,
lord  Shrewsbury,  her  keeper,  was  permitted  to  conduct
her  to  Buxton-wells,  not  far  from  Tuthbury,  the  place
of  her  imprisonment.  Cecil,  who  had  lately  been
created  'baron  of  Burleigh,  and  lord  high  treasurer  of
England,  happened  to  be  there  at  the  same  time.
Though  no  minister  ever  entered  more  warmly  into  the
views  of  a  sovereign,  or  gave  stronger  proofs  of  his
fidelity  and  attachment,  than  this  great  man,  yet  such

1  Melv.  242.

1573.]  BOOK  VI.  43

was  Elizabeth's  distrust  of  every  person  who  approached
the  queen  of  Scots,  that  her  suspicions,  in  consequence
of  this  interview,  seem  to  have  extended  even  to  him ;
and  while  Mary  justly  reckoned  him  her  most  dan-
gerous enemy,  he  found  some  difficulty  in  persuading
his  own  mistress  that  he  was  not  partial  to  that  un-
happy queen  .m

The  duke  of  Alva  was  this  year  recalled  from  the
government  of  the  Netherlands,  where  his  haughty  and
oppressive  administration  roused  a  spirit,  in  attempting
to  subdue  which,  Spain  exhausted  its  treasures,  ruined
its  armies,  and  lost  its  glory.  Requesens,  who  suc-
ceeded him,  was  of  a  milder  temper,  and  of  a  less  en-
terprising genius.  This  event  delivered  Elizabeth  from
the  perpetual  disquietude  occasioned  by  Alva's  nego-
tiations with  the  Scottish  queen,  and  his  zeal  for  her
interest.

1574  Though  Scotland  was  now  settled  in  profound
^ntCad  Peace>  manv  °f tne  evi^&  which  accompany  civil
miuistra-  war  were  still  felt.  The  restraints  of  law,  which,
co°raese  in  times  of  public  confusion,  are  little  regarded
odious.  even  by  civilized  nations,  were  totally  despised
by  a  fierce  people,  unaccustomed  to  a  regular  admi-
nistration of  justice.  The  disorders  in  every  corner  of
the  kingdom  were  become  intolerable  ;  and,  under  the
protection  of  the  one  or  the  other  faction,  crimes  of
every  kind  were  committed  with  impunity.  The  regent
set  himself  to  redress  these,  and  by  his  industry  and
vigour,  order  and  security  were  re-established  in  the
kingdom.  But  he  lost  the  reputation  due  to  this  im-
portant service,  by  the  avarice  which  he  discovered  in
performing  it;  and  his  own  exactions  became  more
pernicious  to  the  nation  than  all  the  irregularities
which  he  restrained."  Spies  and  informers  were  every
where  employed;  the  remembrance  of  old  offences
was  revived ;  imaginary  crimes  were  invented ;  petty

m  Strype,  ii.  248.  288.  «  See  Append.  No.  XL.  -

44  SCOTLAND.  [1574.

trespasses  were  aggravated ;  and  delinquents  were
forced  to  compound  for  their  lives  by  the  payment  of
exorbitant  fines.  At  the  same  time  the  current  coin
was  debased  ;°  licences  were  sold  for  carrying  on  pro-
hibited branches  of  commerce ;  unusual  taxes  were  im-
posed on  commodities;  and  all  the  refinements  in  op-
pression, from  which  nations  so  imperfectly  polished
as  the  Scots  are  usually  exempted,  were  put  in  practice.
None  of  these  were  complained  of  more  loudly,  or  with
greater  reason,  than  his  injustice  towards  the  church.
The  thirds  of  benefices,  out  of  which  the  clergy  received
their  subsistence,  had  always  been  slowly  and  irregu-
larly paid  to  collectors,  appointed  by  the  general  as-
sembly ;  and  during  the  civil  wars,  no  payment  could
be  obtained  in  several  parts  of  the  kingdom.  Under
colour  of  redressing  this  grievance,  and  upon  a  promise
of  assigning  every  minister  a  stipend  within  his  own
parish,  the  regent  extorted  from  the  church  the  thirds
to  which  they  had  right  by  law.  But  the  clergy,  in-
stead of  reaping  any  advantage  from  this  alteration,
found  that  payments  became  more  irregular  and  dila-
tory than  ever.  One  minister  was  commonly  bur-
dened with  the  care  of  four  or  five  parishes,  a  pitiful
salary  was  allotted  him,  and  the  regent's  insatiable
avarice  seized  on  the  rest  of  the  fund.p

The  death  of  Charles  IX.  which  happened  this  year,
was  a  new  misfortune  to  the  Scottish  queen.  Henry
IIL,  who  succeeded  him,  had  not  the  same  attachment
to  her  person ;  and  his  jealousy  of  the  house  of  Guise,
and  obsequiousness  to  the  queen-mother,  greatly  alien-
ated him  from  her  interest.

0  The  corruption  of  the  coin,  during  Morton's  administration,  was  very  great.  Al-
though the  quantity  of  current  money  coined  out  of  a  pound  of  bullion,  was  gra-
dually increased  by  former  princes,  the  standard  or  fineness  suffered  little  alteration,
and  the  mixture  of  alloy  was  nearly  the  same  with  what  is  now  used.  But  Morton
mixed  a  fourth  part  of  alloy  with  every  pound  of  silver,  and  sunk,  by  consequence,
the  value  of  coin  in  proportion.  In  the  year  J  581,  all  the  money  coined  by  him  was
called  in,  and  appointed  to  be  recoined.  The  standard  was  restored  to  the  same
purity  as  formerly.  Ruddim.  Praef.  to  Anders.  Diplom.  p.  74.

P  Crawf.  Mem.  272. Spotsw.  273. '  Cald.  ii.  420.  427.

1575.]  BOOK VI.  45

1575i  The  death  of  the  duke  of  Chatelherault  must
Jan.  22.  likewise  be  considered  as  some  loss  to  Mary.
As  the  parliament  had  frequently  declared  him  next
heir  to  the  crown,  this  entitled  him  to  great  respect
among  his  countrymen,  and  enabled  him,  more  than
any  other  person  in  the  kingdom,  to  counterbalance  the
regent's  power.

Soon  after,  at  one  of  the  usual  interviews  between
the  wardens  of  the  Scottish  and  English  marches,  a
scuffle  happened,  in  which  the  English  were  worsted;
a  few  killed  on  the  spot ;  and  Sir  James  Forrester,  the
warden,  with  several  gentlemen  who  attended  him,
taken  prisoners.  But  both  Elizabeth  and  the  regent
were  too  sensible  of  the  advantage  which  resulted  from
the  good  understanding  that  subsisted  between  the  two
kingdoms,  to  allow  this  slight  accident  to  interrupt  it
Attempts  The  domestic  tranquillity  of  the  kingdom  was
clergy  in  some  danger  of  being  disturbed  by  another
the'elsco- cause-  Though  the  persons  raised  to  the  dig-
Pai  order.  m'ty  of  bishops  possessed  very  small  revenues,
and  a  very  moderate  degree  of  power,  the  clergy,  to
whom  the  regent  and  all  his  measures  were  become
extremely  odious,  began  to  be  jealous  of  that  order.
Knowing  that  corruptions  steal  into  the  church  gra-
dually, under  honourable  names  and  upon  decent  pre-
tences, they  were  afraid  that,  from  such  small  begin-
nings, the  hierarchy  might  grow  in  time  to  be :  as
powerful  and  oppressive  as  ever.  The  chief  author  of
these  suspicions  was  Mr.  Andrew  Melvil,  a  man  dis-
tinguished by  his  uncommon  erudition,  by  the  severity
of  his  manners,  and  the  intrepidity  of  his  mind.  But,  bred
up  in  the  retirement  of  a  college,  he  was  unacquainted
with  the  arts  of  life ;  and  being  more  attentive  to  the
ends  which  he  pursued,  than  to  the  means  which  he  em-
ployed for  promoting  them,  he  often  defeated  laudable
designs  by  the  impetuosity  and  imprudence  with  which
he  carried  them  on.  A  question  was  moved  by  him  in

46  SCOTLAND.  [157,5.

the  assembly,  "  whether  the  office  of  bishop,  as  now
exercised  in  the  kingdom,  were  agreeable  to  the  word
of  God  ?"  In  the  ecclesiastical  judicatories,  continual
complaints  were  made  of  the  bishops  for  neglect  of  duty,
many  of  which  their  known  remissness  too  well  justified.
The  bishop  of  Dunkeld,  being  accused  of  dilapidating
his  benefice,  was  found  guilty  by  the  assembly.  The
regent,  instead  of  checking,  connived  at  these  disputes
about  ecclesiastical  government,  as  they  diverted  the
zeal  of  the  clergy  from  attending  to  his  daily  encroach-
ments on  the  patrimony  of  the  church. q

1576  The  weight  of  the  regent's  oppressive  admi-
Stes^some  nistrati°n  na^j  hitherto,  fallen  chiefly  on  those
of  the  in  the  lower  and  middle  rank;  but  he  began
now  to  take  such  steps  as  convinced  the  nobles,
that  their  dignity  would  not  long  exempt  them  from  feel-
ing the  effects  of  his  power.  An  accident,  which  was  a
frequent  cause  of  dissension  among  the  Scottish  nobles,
occasioned  a  difference  between  the  earls  of  Argyle  and
Athol.  A  vassal  of  the  former  had  made  some  depre-
dations on  the  lands  of  the  latter.  Athol  took  arms  to
punish  the  offender ;  Argyle  to  protect  him ;  and  this
ignoble  quarrel  they  were  ready  to  decide  in  the  field,
when  the  regent,  by  interposing  his  authority,  obliged
them  to  disband  their  forces.  Both  of  them  had  been
guilty  of  irregularities,  which,  though  common,  were
contrary  to  the  letter  of  the  law.  Of  these  the  regent
took  advantage,  and  resolved  to  found  on  them  a  charge
of  treason.  This  design  was  revealed  to  the  two  earls
by  one  of  Morton's  retainers.  The  common  danger  to
which  they  were  exposed,  compelled  them  to  forget  old
quarrels,  and  to  unite  in  a  close  confederacy  for  their
mutual  defence.  Their  junction  rendered  them  for-
midable ;  they  despised  the  summons  which  the  regent
gave  them  to  appear  before  a  court  of  justice ;  and  he
was  obliged  to  desist  from  any  farther  prosecution.

9  Cald.  Assemblies,  1574,  &c. Johnst.  Hist.  15.

1576.]  BOOK VI.  47

But  the  injury  he  intended  made  a  deep  impression  on
their  minds,  and  drew  upon  him  severe  vengeance/

Nor  was  he  more  successful  in  an  attempt  which  he
made,  to  load  lord  Claud  Hamilton  with  the  guilt  of
having  formed  a  conspiracy  against  his  life.  Though
those  who  were  supposed  to  be  his  accomplices  were
seized  and  tortured,  no  evidence  of  any  thing  criminal
appeared  ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  many  circumstances
discovered  his  innocence,  as  well  as  the  regent's  secret
views  in  imputing  to  him  such  an  odious  design.5

1577  The  Scottish  nobles,  who  were  almost  equal
They  turn  to  their  monarchs  in  power,  and  treated  by  them

their  eyes  r  ;  .

towards  with  much  distinction,  observed  these  arbitrary
proceedings  of  a  regent  with  the  utmost  indig-
nation. The  people,  who,  under  a  form  of  government
extremely  simple,  had  been  little  accustomed  to  the
burden  of  taxes,  complained  loudly  of  the  regent's
rapacity.  And  all  began  to  turn  their  eyes  towards
the  young  king,  from  whom  they  expected  the  redress
of  all  their  grievances,  and  the  return  of  a  more  gentle
and  more  equal  administration.

James's  James  was  now  in  the  twelfth  year  of  his
andCdis-n  age-  The  queen,  soon  after  his  birth,  had  com-
position. mitted  him  to  the  care  of  the  earl  of  Mar,  and
during  the  civil  wars  he  had  resided  securely  in  the
castle  of  Stirling.  Alexander  Erskine,  that  nobleman's
brother,  had  the  chief  direction  of  his  education.  Un-
der him,  the  famous  Buchanan  acted  as  preceptor,
together  with  three  other  masters,  the  most  eminent  the
nation  afforded  for  skill  in  those  sciences  which  were
deemed  necessary  for  a  prince.  As  the  young  king
shewed  an  uncommon  passion  for  learning,  and  made
great  progress  in  it,  the  Scots  fancied  that  they  al-
ready discovered  in  him  all  those  virtues  which  the
fondness  or  credulity  of  subjects  usually  ascribes  to
princes  during  their  minority.  But,  as  James  was  still

r  Crawf.  Mem.  285.  •  Ibid.  287.

48  SCOTLAND.  [1577.

far  from  that  age  at  which  the  law  permitted  him  to
assume  the  reins  of  government,  the  regent  did  not
sufficiently  attend  to  the  sentiments  of  the  people,  nor
reflect  how  naturally  these  prejudices  in  his  favour
might  encourage  the  king  to  anticipate  that  period.  He
not  only  neglected  to  secure  the  friendship  of  those  who
were  about  the  king's  person,  and  who  possessed  his
ear,  but  had  even  exasperated  some  of  them  by  personal
He  is  sus-  injuries.  Their  resentment  concurred  with  the
Sere- °^  ambition  of  others,  in  infusing  into  the  king
gent's  early  suspicions  of  Morton's  power  and  designs.
A  king,  they  told  him,  had  often  reason  to  fear,
seldom  to  love,  a  regent.  Prompted  by  ambition,  and
by  interest,  he  would  endeavour  to  keep  the  prince  in
perpetual  infancy,  at  a  distance  from  his  subjects,  and
unacquainted  with  business.  A  small  degree  of  vigour,
however,  was  sufficient  to  break  the  yoke.  Subjects
naturally  reverence  their  sovereign,  and  become  impa-
tient of  the  temporary  and  delegated  jurisdiction  of  a
regent.  Morton  had  governed  with  rigour  unknown
to  the  ancient  monarchs  of  Scotland.  The  nation
groaned  under  his  oppressions,  and  would  welcome
the  prospect  of  a  milder  administration.  At  present
the  king's  name  was  hardly  mentioned  in  Scotland,  his
friends  were  without  influence,  and  his  favourites  with-
out honour.  But  one  effort  would  discover  Morton's
power  to  be  as  feeble  as  it  was  arbitrary.  The  same
attempt  would  put  himself  in  possession  of  his  just  au-
thority, and  rescue  the  nation  from  intolerable  tyranny.
If  he  did  not  regard  his  own  rights  as  a  king,  let  him
listen,  at  least,  to  the  cries  of  his  people.*
A  plot  These  suggestions  made  a  deep  impression
against  the  on  the  y oung  king,  who  was  trained  up  in  an
regent,  opinion  that  he  was  born  to  command.  His
approbation  of  the  design,  however,  was  of  small  con-
sequence, without  the  concurrence  of  the  nobles.  The

«  Melvil,  249.

1577.]  BOOK VI.  49

earls  of  Argyle  and  Athol,  two  of  the  most  powerful  of
that  body,  were  animated  with  implacable  resentment
against  the  regent.  To  them  the  cabal  in  Stirling-castle
communicated  the  plot  which  was  on  foot ;  and  they
entering  warmly  into  it,  Alexander  Erskine,  who,  since
the  death  of  his  brother,  and  during  the  minority  of
his  nephew,  had  the  command  of  that  fort,  and  the
custody  of  the  king's  person,  admitted  them  secretly
into  the  king's  presence.  They  gave  him  the  same
account  of  the  misery  of  his  subjects,  under  the  regent's
arbitrary  administration ;  they  complained  loudly  of
the  injustice  with  which  themselves  had  been  treated,
and  besought  the  king,  as  the  only  means  for  redressing
the  grievances  of  the  nation,  to  call  a  council  of  all  the
nobles.  James  consented,  and  letters  were  issued  in
his  name  for  that  purpose ;  but  the  two  earls  took  care
that  they  should  be  sent  only  to  such  as  were  known  to
bear  no  good-will  to  Morton."

The  number  of  these  was,  however,  so  considerable,
that  on  the  day  appointed,  far  the  greater  part  of  the
nobles  assembled  at  Stirling ;  and  so  highly  were  they
incensed  against  Morton,  that  although,  on  receiving
intelligence  of  Argyle  and  Athol's  interview  with  the
1578  king,  he  had  made  a  feint  as  if  he  would  resign
March  4.  faQ  regency,  they  advised  the  king,  without  re-
garding this  offer,  to  deprive  him  of  his  office,  and  to
take  the  administration  of  government  into  his  own
hands.  Lord  Glamis  the  chancellor,  and  Herries,  were
appointed  to  signify  this  resolution  to  Morton,  who
was  at  that  time  in  Dalkeith,  his  usual  place  of  resi-
He  resigns  dence.  Nothing  could  equal  the  joy  with
his  office,  which  this  unexpected  resolution  filled  the  na-

and  retires. .  L .

tion,  but  the  surprise  occasioned  by  the  seem-
ing alacrity  with  which  the  regent  descended  from  so
high  a  station.  He  neither  wanted  sagacity  to  foresee
the  danger  of  resigning,  nor  inclination  to  keep  posses-

u  Spotsw.  278.
VOL.  II.  E

50  SCOTLAND.  [1578,

sion  of  ah  office,  for  the  expiration  of  which  the  law
had  fixed  so  distant  a  term.  But  all  the  sources
whence  the  faction  of  which  he  was  head  derived  their
strength,  had  either  failed,  or  now  supplied  his  adver-
saries with  the  means  of  humbling  him.  The  com-
mons, the  city  of  Edinburgh,  the  clergy,  were  all  totally
alienated  from  him,  by  his  multiplied  oppressions.  Eli-
zabeth, having  lately  bound  herself  by  treaty,  to  send
a  considerable  body  of  troops  to  the  assistance  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  Netherlands,  who  were  struggling  for
liberty,  had  little  leisure  to  attend  to  the  affairs  of  Scot-
land ;  and  as  she  had  nothing  to  dread  from  France,
in  whose  councils  the  princes  of  Lorrain  had  not  at  that
time  much  influence,  she  was  not  displeased,  perhaps,
at  the  birth  of  new  factions  in  the  kingdom.  Even
those  nobles,  who  had  long  been  joined  with  Morton
in  faction,  or  whom  he  had  attached  to  his  person  by
benefits,  Glamis,  Lindsay,  Ruthven,  Pitcairn  the  secre-
tary, Murray  of  Tullibardin,  comptroller,  all  deserted
his  falling  fortunes,  and  appeared  in  the  council  at
Stirling.  So  many  concurring  circumstances  convinced
Morton  of  his  own  weakness,  and  determined  him  to
give  way  to  a  torrent,  which  was  too  impetuous  to  be
resisted.  He  attended  the  chancellor  and  Her-
ries  to  Edinburgh ;  was  present  when  the  king's
acceptance  of  the  government  was  proclaimed ;  and,
in  the  presence  of  the  people,  surrendered  to  the  king
all  the  authority  to  which  he  had  any  claim  in  virtue
of  his  office.  This  ceremony  was  accompanied  with
such  excessive  joy  and  acclamations  of  the  multitude,
as  added,  no  doubt  to  the  anguish  which  an  ambitious
spirit  must  feel,  when  compelled  to  renounce  supreme
power ;  and  convinced  Morton  how  entirely  he  had
lost  the  affections  of  his  countrymen.  He  obtained,
however,  from  the  king  an  act  containing  the  appro-
bation of  every  thing  done  by  him  in  the  exercise  of  his
office,  and  a  pardon,  in  the  most  ample  form  that  his

1578.]  BOOK VI.  51

fear  or  caution  could  devise,  of  all  past  offences,  crimes,
and  treasons.  The  nobles,  who  adhered  to  the  king,
bound  themselves  under  a  great  penalty,  to  procure  the
ratification  of  this  act  in  the  first  parliament.x
Continues  A  council  of  twelve  peers  was  appointed  to
\hemo-  assist  the  king  in  the  administration  of  affairs.
thTadverse  M°rton>  deserted  by  his  own  party,  and  unable
party.  to  struggle  with  the  faction  which  governed
absolutely  at  court,  retired  to  one  of  his  seats,  and
seemed  to  enjoy  the  tranquillity,  and  to  be  occupied
only  in  the  amusements,  of  a  country  life.  His  mind,
however,  was  deeply  disquieted  with  all  the  uneasy
reflections  which  accompany  disappointed  ambition,
and  intent  on  schemes  for  recovering  his  former  gran-
deur. Even  in  this  retreat,  which  people  called  the
Lions  Den,  his  wealth  and  abilities  rendered  him  formi-
dable; and  the  new  counsellors  were  so  imprudent  as
to  rouse  him,  by  the  precipitancy  with  which  they
hastened  to  strip  him  of  all  the  remains  of  power.
They  required  him  to  surrender  the  castle  of  Edinburgh,
which  was  still  in  his  possession.  He  refused  at  first
to  do  so,  and  began  to  prepare  for  its  defence  ;  but  the
citizens  of  Edinburgh  having  taken  arms,  and  repulsed
part  of  the  garrison,  which  was  sent  out  to  guard  a
convoy  of  provisions,  he  was  obliged  to  give  up  that
important  fortress  without  resistance.  This  encouraged
his  adversaries  to  call  a  parliament  to  meet  at  Edin-
burgh, and  to  multiply  their  demands  upon  him,  in  such
a  manner,  as  convinced  him  that  nothing  less  than  his
utter  ruin  would  satisfy  their  inveterate  hatred.

Their  power  and  popularity,  however,  began  already
to  decline.  The  chancellor,  the  ablest  and  most  mo-
derate man  in  the  party,  having  been  killed  at  Stirling,
in  an  accidental  rencounter  between  his  followers  and
those  of  the  earl  of  Crawford ;  Athol,  who  was  ap-
pointed his  successor  in  that  high  office,  the  earls  of

*  Spotsw.  278, Crawf.  Mem.  289. Cald.  ii.  522.
E  2

52  SCOTLAND.  [1578,

Eglinton,  Caithness,  and  lord  Ogilvie,  all  the  prime
favourites  at  court,  were  either  avowed  Papists,  or  sus-
pected of  leaning  to  the  opinions  of  that  sect. In  an
age  when  the  return  of  Popery  was  so  much  and  so
justly  dreaded,  this  gave  universal  alarm. As  Morton
had  always  treated  the  Papists  with  rigour,  this  unsea-
sonable favour  to  persons of  that  religion  made  all
zealous  Protestants  remember  that  circumstance  in  his
administration  with  great  praise/
Resumes Morton,  to  whom  none  of  these  particulars
his  former  were  unknown,  thought  this  the  proper  juncture
"  y for  setting  to  work  the  instruments  which  he  had
been  preparing. Having  gained  the  confidence  of  the
earl  of  Mar,  and  of  the  countess  his  mother,  he  insinu-
ated to  them,  that  Alexander  Erskine  had  formed  a  plot
to  deprive  his  nephew  of  the  government  of  Stirling-
castle,  and  the  custody  of  the  king's  person ;  and  easily
induced  an  ambitious  woman,  and  a  youth  of  twenty,
to  employ  force  to  prevent  this  supposed  injury. The
earl  repairing  suddenly  to  Stirling,  and  being
admitted  as  usual  into  the  castle  with  his  at-
tendants, seized  the  gates  early  in  the  morning,  and
turned  out  his  uncle,  who  dreaded  no  danger  from  his
hands. The  soldiers  of  the  garrison  submitted  to  him
as  their  governor,  and,  with  little  danger  and  no  effusion
of  blood,  he  became  master  both  of  the  king's  person,
and  of  the  fortress.2

An  event  so  unexpected  occasioned  great  consterna-
tion. Though  Morton's  hand  did  not  appear  in  the  exe-
cution, he  was  universally  believed  to  be  the  author  of
the  attempt.  The  new  counsellors  saw  it  to  be  neces-
sary, for  their  own  safety,  to  change  their  measures,
and,  instead  of  pursuing  him  with  such  implacable  re-
sentment, to  enter  into  terms  of  accommodation  with  an
adversary,  still  so  capable  of  creating  them  trouble.
Four  were  named,  on  each  side,  to  adjust  their  difier-

y  Spotsw.  283.  *  Cald,  ii.  535.

1578.]  BOOK VI.  53

ences.  They  met  not  far  from  Dalkeith ;  and  when
they  -had  brought  matters  near  a  conclusion,  Morton,
who  was  too  sagacious  not  to  improve  the  advantage
which  their  security  and  their  attention  to  the  treaty
afforded  him,  set  out  in  the  night-time  for  Stirling,  and
having  gained  Murray  of  Tullibardin,  Mar's
uncle,  was  admitted  by  him  into  the  castle ;  and
managing  matters  there  with  his  usual  dexterity,  he  soon
had  more  entirely  the  command  of  the  fort,  than  the  earl
himself.  He  was  likewise  admitted  to  a  seat  in  the  privy-
council,  and  acquired  as  complete  an  ascendant  in  it.a

As  the  time  appointed  for  the  meeting  of  parliament
at  Edinburgh  now  approached,  this  gave  him  some
anxiety.  He  was  afraid  of  conducting  the  young  king
to  a  city  whose  inhabitants  were  so  much  at  the  devo-
tion of  the  adverse  faction.  He  was  no  less  unwilling
to  leave  James  behind  at  Stirling.  In  order  to  avoid
this  dilemma,  he  issued  a  proclamation  in  the  king's
name,  changing  the  place  of  meeting  from  Edinburgh
to  Stirling-castle.  This  Athol  and  his  party  represented
as  a  step  altogether  unconstitutional.  The  king,  said
they,  is  Morton's  prisoner ;  the  pretended  counsellors
are  his  slaves ;  a  parliament,  to  which  all  the  nobles
may  repair  without  fear,  and  where  they  may  deliberate
with  freedom,  is  absolutely  necessary  for  settling  the
nation,  after  disorders  of  such  long  continuance.  But
in  an  assembly,  called  contrary  to  all  form,  held  within
the  walls  of  a  garrison,  and  overawed  by  armed  men,
what  safety  could  members  expect  ?  what  liberty  could
prevail  in  debate  ?  or  what  benefit  result  to  the  public  ?
The  parliament  met,  however,  on  the  day  ap-

July  25.  . r  .  . r

pointed,  and,  notwithstanding  the  protestation
of  the  earl  of  Montrose  and  lord  Lindsay,  in  the  name
of  their  party,  proceeded  to  business.  The  king's  ac-
ceptance of  the  government  was  confirmed ;  the  act
granted  to  Morton,  for  his  security,  ratified ;  some  re-

»  Cald.  H.  536.

54  SCOTLAND.  [1578.

gulations  with  regard  to  the  numbers  and  authority  of
the  privy-council,  were  agreed  upon  ;  and  a  pension  for
life  granted  to  the  countess  of  Mar,  who  had  been  so
instrumental  in  bringing  about  the  late  revolution.5
Argyie  Meanwhile  Argyle,  Athol,  and  their  follow-

ers>  took  arms,  upon  the  specious  pretence  of
.  rescuing  the  king  from  captivity,  and  the  king-
dom from  oppression.  James  himself,  impatient  of  the
servitude  in  which  he  was  held,  by  a  man  whom  he  had
long  been  taught  to  hate,  secretly  encouraged  their  en-
terprise ;  though,  at  the  same  time,  he  was  obliged  not
only  to  disavow  them  in  public,  but  to  levy  forces  against
them,  and  even  to  declare,  by  proclamation,  that  he  was

AU  st  11  Per^ec^7  free  fr°m  any  constraint,  either  upon
his  person  or  his  will.  Both  sides  quickly  took
the  field.  Argyle  and  Athol  were  at  the  head  of  seven
thousand  men  ;  the  earl  of  Angus,  Morton's  nephew,  met
them  with  an  army  five  thousand  strong  ;  neither  party,
however,  was  eager  to  engage.  Morton  distrusted  the
fidelity  of  his  own  troops.  The  two  earls  were  sensi-
ble that  a  single  victory  >  however  complete,  would  not
be  decisive  ;  and  as  they  were  in  no  condition  to  under-
take the  siege  of  Stirling-castle,  where  the  king  was
kept,  their  strength  would  soon  be  exhausted,  while
Morton's  own  wealth,  and  the  patronage  of  the  queen
of  England,  might  furnish  him  with  endless  resources.
Elizabeth  By  the  mediation  of  Bowes,  whom  Elizabeth
-  nad  sent  into  Scotland  to  negotiate  an  accom-
m°dation  between  the  two  factions,  a  treaty  was
them.  concluded,  in  consequence  of  which,  Argyle
and  Athol  were  admitted  into  the  king's  presence  ;  some
of  their  party  were  added  to  the  privy-councij  ;  and  a
convention  of  nobles  called,  in  order  to  bring  all  re-
maining differences  to  an  amicable  issue/

As  soon  as  James  assumed  the  government  into  his
own  hands,  he  dispatched  the  abbot  of  Dunfermline  to

b  Cald.  ii.  547. Parl.  5.  Jac.  6.  *  Crawf.  Mom.  307.

anSaccom

1578.]  BOOK VI.  55

inform  Elizabeth  of  that  event ;  to  offer  to  renew  the
alliance  between  the  two  kingdoms ;  and  to  demand
possession  of  the  estate  which  had  lately  fallen  to  him
by  the  death  of  his  grandmother  the  countess  of  Lennox.
That  lady's  second  son  had  left  one  daughter,  Arabella
Stewart,  who  was  born  in  England.  And  as  the  chief
objection  against  the  pretensions  of  the  Scottish  line  to
the  crown  of  England,  was  that  maxim  of  English  law,
which  excludes  aliens  from  any  right  of  inheritance
within  the  kingdom,  Elizabeth,  by  granting  this  de-
mand, would  have  established  a  precedent  in  James's
favour,  that  might  have  been  deemed  decisive  with  re-
gard to  a  point  which  it  had  been  her  constant  care  to
keep  undecided.  Without  suffering  this  delicate  ques-
tion to  be  tried,  or  allowing  any  new  light  to  be  thrown
on  that  which  she  considered  as  the  great  mystery  of
her  reign,  she  commanded  lord  Burleigh,  master  of  the
wards,  to  sequester  the  rents  of  the  estate  ;  and  by  this
method  of  proceeding,  gave  the  Scottish  king  early
warning  how  necessary  it  would  be  to  court  her  favour,
if  ever  he  hoped  for  success  in  claims  of  greater  im-
portance, but  equally  liable  to  be  controverted/

After  many  delays,  and  with  much  difficulty,

the  contending  nobles  were  at  last  brought  to
some  agreement. But  it  was  followed  by  a  tragical
event. Morton,  in  token  of  reconcilement,  having  in-
vited the  leaders  of  the  opposite  party  to  a  great  enter-
.  o tainment,  Athol  the  chancellor  was  soon  after

taken  ill,  and  died  within  a  few  days.  The
symptoms  and  violence  of  the  disease  gave  rise  to  strong
suspicions  of  his  being  poisoned  ;  and  though  the  phy-
sicians, who  opened  his  body,  differed  in  opinion  as  to
the  cause  of  the  distemper,  the  chancellor's  relations
publicly  accused  Morton  of  that  odious  crime.  The
advantage  which  visibly  accrued  to  him  by  the  removal
of  a  man  of  great  abilities,  and  averse  from  all  his  mea-

d  Camd.  461.

1579.

56  SCOTLAND.  [1579.

sures,  was  deemed  a  sufficient  proof  of  his  guilt  by  the
people,  who  are  ever  fond  of  imputing  the  death  of
eminent  persons  to  extraordinary  causes.6

The  office  of  chancellor  was  bestowed  upon  Argyle,
whom  this  preferment  reconciled,  in  a  great  measure,
Morton's  to  Morton's  administration.  He  had  now  reco-
Uedhigs°~  vered  all  the  authority  which  he  possessed  dur-
^"^^ing  his  regency,  and  had  entirely  broken,  or
Hamilton,  baffled,  the  power  and  cabals  of  his  enemies.
None  of  the  great  families  remained  to  be  the  objects
of  his  jealousy  or  to  obstruct  his  designs,  but  that  of
Hamilton.  The  earl  of  Arran,  the  eldest  brother,  had
never  recovered  the  shock  which  he  received  from  the
ill  success  of  his  passion  for  the  queen,  and  had  now
altogether  lost  his  reason.  Lord  John,  the  second  bro-
ther, was  in  possession  of  the  family  estate.  Lord  Claud
was  commendator  of  Paisley ;  both  of  them  young
men,  ambitious  arid  enterprising.  Morton  dreaded  their
influence  in  the  kingdom ;  the  courtiers  hoped  to  share
their  spoils  among  them ;  and  as  all  princes  naturally
view  their  successors  with  jealousy  and  hatred,  it  was
easy  to  infuse  these  passions  into  the  mind  of  the  young
king.  A  pretence  was  at  hand  to  justify  the  most  vio-
lent proceedings.  The  pardon,  stipulated  in  the  treaty
of  Perth,  did  not  extend  to  such  as  were  accessary  to
the  murder  of  the  regents'  Murray  or  Lennox.  Lord
John  and  his  brother  were  suspected  of  being  the  au-
thors of  both  these  crimes,  and  had  been  included  in  a
general  act  of  attainder  on  that  account.  Without  sum-
moning them  to  trial,  or  examining  a  single  witness  to
prove  the  charge,  this  attainder  was  now  thought  suffi-
cient to  subject  them  to  all  the  penalties  which  they
would  have  incurred  by  being  formally  convicted.  The
earls  of  Morton,  Mar,  and  Eglinton,  together  with  the
lords  Ruthven,  Boyd,  and  Cathcart,  received  a  com-
mission to  seize  their  persons  and  estates.  On  a  few

e  Spotsw.  306.

1579.]  BOOK VI.  57

hours' warning,  a  considerable  body  of  troops  was  ready,
and  marched  towards  Hamilton  in  hostile  array.  Hap-
pily the  two  brothers  made  their  escape,  though  with
great  difficulty.  But  their  lands  were  confiscated  ;  the
castles  of  Hamilton  and  Draffan  besieged ;  those  who
defended  them  punished.  The  earl  of  Arran,  though
incapable,  from  his  situation,  of  committing  any  crime,
was,  involved,  by  a  shameful  abuse  of  law,  in  the  com-
mon ruin  of  his  family  ;  and  as  if  he,  too,  could  have
been  guilty  of  rebellion,  he  was  confined  a  close  pri-
soner. These  proceedings,  so  contrary  to  the  funda-
mental principles  of  justice,  were  all  ratified  in  the
subsequent  parliament/

About  this  time  Mary  sent,  by  Naue  her  secretary,
a  letter  to  her  son,  together  with  some  jewels  of  value,
and  a  vest  embroidered  with  her  own  hands.  But,  as
she  gave  him  only  the  title  of  prince  of  Scotland,  the
messenger  was  dismissed  without  being  admitted  into
his  presence.8

Though  Elizabeth  had,  at  this  time,  no  particular
reason  to  fear  any  attempt  of  the  Popish  princes  in
Mary's  favour,  she  still  continued  to  guard  her  with
the  same  anxious  care.  The  acquisition  of  Portugal,
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  defence  of  the  Netherlands,
on  the  other,  fully  employed  the  councils  and  arms  of
Spain.  France,  torn  in  pieces  by  intestine  commotions,
and  under  a  weak  and  capricious  prince,  despised  and
distrusted  by  his  own  subjects,  was  in  no  condition  to
disturb  its  neighbours.  Elizabeth  had  long

Negotia-  --I

a  amused  that  court  by  carrying  on  a  treaty  of
marriage  with  the  duke  of  Alen^on,  the  king's
brotner- But  whether,  at  the  age  of  forty-five,
duke  of she  really  intended  to  marry  a  prince  of  twenty ;

Alenyon. 111  i  n i •  n  11

whether  the  pleasure  ot  being  nattered  and
courted  made  her  listen  to  the  addresses  of  so  young  a
lover,  whom  she  allowed  to  visit  her  at  two  different

f  Crawf.  Mem.  311. Spotsw.  306.  ?  Crawf.  Mem.  314.

58  SCOTLAND.  [1579.

times,  and  treated  with  the  most  distinguishing  re-
spect ;  or  whether  considerations  of  interest  predomi-
nated in  this  as  well  as  in  every  other  transaction  of
her  reign,  are  problems  in  history  which  we  are  not
concerned  to  resolve.  During  the  progress  of  this  ne-
gotiation, which  was  drawn  out  to  an  extraordinary
length,  Mary  could  expect  no  assistance  from  the
French  court,  and  seems  to  have  held  little  correspond-
ence with  it ;  and  there  was  no  period  in  her  reign,
wherein  Elizabeth  enjoyed  more  perfect  security.
TWO  fa-  Morton  seems  at  this  time  to  have  been
vourites  equally  secure  ;  but  his  security  was  not  so  well
cendant  founded.  He  had  weathered  out  one  storm,

overJaraes.  i -,  r i i  • j  •  i  •

had  crushed  his  adversaries,  and  was  again  in
possession  of  the  sole  direction  of  affairs.  But  as  the
king  was  now  of  an  age  when  the  character  and  dispo-
sitions of  the  mind  begin  to  unfold  themselves,  and  to
become  visible,  the  smallest  attention  to  these  might
have  convinced  him,  that  there  was  reason  to  expect  new
and  more  dangerous  attacks  on  his  power.  James  early
discovered  that  excessive  attachment  to  favourites,  which
accompanied  him  through  his  whole  life.  This  passion,
which  naturally  arises  from  inexperience,  and  youthful
warmth  of  heart,  was,  at  his  age,  far  from  being  culpa-
ble ;  nor  could  it  be  well  expected  that  the  choice  of
the  objects,  on  whom  he  placed  his  affections,  should
be  made  with  great  skill.  The  most  considerable  of
them  was  Esme  Stewart,  a  native  of  France,  and  son
of  a  second  brother  of  the  earl  of  Lennox.  He  was  dis-
tinguished by  the  title  of  lord  d'Aubigne,  an  estate  in
France,  which  descended  to  him  from  his  ancestors,  on
whom  it  had  been  conferred,  in  reward  of  their  valour
ge  )t  g  and  services  to  the  French  crown.  He  arrived

in  Scotland  about  this  time,  on  purpose  to  de-
mand the  estate  and  title  of  Lennox,  to  which  he  pre-
tended a  legal  right.  He  was  received  at  first  by  the
king  with  the  respect  due  to  so  near  a  relation.  The

1579.]  BOOK VI.  59

gracefulness  of  his  person,  the  elegance  of  his  dress,
and  his  courtly  behaviour,  made  a  great  impression  on
James,  who,  even  in  his  more  mature  years,  was  little
able  to  resist  these  frivolous  charms  ;  and  his  affection
flowed  with  its  usual  rapidity  and  profusion.  Within
a  few  days  after  Stewart's  appearance  at  court,  he  was
created  lord  Aberbrothock.  soon  after  earl,  and  then
duke  of  Lennox,  governor  of  Dumbarton-castle,  captain
of  the  guard,  first  lord  of  the  bedchamber,  and  lord
high  chamberlain.  At  the  same  time,  and  without  any
of  the  envy  or  emulation  which  is  usual  among  candi-
dates for  favour,  captain  James  Stewart,  the  second  son
of  lord  Ochiltree,  grew  into  great  confidence.  But,
notwithstanding  this  union,  Lennox  and  captain  Stew-
art were  persons  of  very  opposite  characters.  The
former  was  naturally  gentle,  humane,  candid  ;  but,  un-
acquainted with  the  state  of  the  country,  and  misled
or  misinformed  by  those  whom  he  trusted  ;  not  un-
worthy to  be  the  companion  of  the  young  king  in  his
amusements,  but  utterly  disqualified  for  acting  as  a
minister  in  directing  his  affairs.  The  latter  was  re-
markable for  all  the  vices  which  render  a  man  formi-
dable to  his  country,  and  a  pernicious  counsellor  to  his
prince  ;  nor  did  he  possess  any  one  virtue  to  counter-
balance these  vices,  unless  dexterity  in  conducting  his
own  designs,  and  an  enterprising  courage,  superior  to
the  sense  of  danger,  may  pass  by  that  name.  Unre-
strained by  religion,  regardless  of  decency,  and  undis-
mayed by  opposition,  he  aimed  at  objects  seemingly
unattainable  ;  but,  under  a  prince  void  of  experience,
and  blind  to  all  the  defects  of  those  who  had  gained
his  favour,  his  audacity  was  successful  ;  and  honours,
wealth,  and  power,  were  the  reward  of  his  crimes.
They  la-  Both  the  favourites  concurred  in  employing

to. their  whole  address  to  undermine  Morton's  cre-

undermme

Morton's dit,  which  alone  obstructed  their  full  possession
1  y>  of  power. As  James  had  been  bred  up  with  an

60  SCOTLAND  [1579.

aversion  for  that  nobleman,  who  endeavoured  rather
to  maintain  the  authority  of  a  tutor,  than  to  act  with
the  obsequiousness  of  a  minister,  they  found  it  no  diffi-
cult matter  to  accomplish  their  design.  Morton,
who  could  no  longer  keep  the  king  shut  up
within  the  walls  of  Stirling-castle,  having  called  a  par-
liament to  meet  at  Edinburgh,  brought  him  thither.
James  made  his  entry  into  the  capital  with  great  solem-
nity ;  the  citizens  received  him  with  the  loudest  accla-
mations of  joy,  and  with  many  expensive  pageants,
according  to  the  mode  of  that  age.  After  a  long  period
of  thirty-seven  years,  during  which  Scotland  had  been
subjected  to  the  delegated  power  of  regents,  or  to  the
feeble  government  of  a  woman  ;  after  having  suffered
all  the  miseries  of  civil  war,  and  felt  the  insolence  of
foreign  armies,  the  nation  rejoiced  to  see  the  sceptre
once  more  in  the  hands  of  a  king.  Fond  even  of  that
shadow  of  authority,  which  a  prince  of  fifteen  could
possess,  the  Scots  flattered  themselves,  that  union,
order,  and  tranquillity,  would  now  be  restored  to  the
kingdom.  James  opened  the  parliament  with  extra-
ordinary pomp,  but  nothing  remarkable  passed  in  it.

These  demonstrations,  however,  of  the  peo-
ple's love  and  attachment  to  their  sovereign,  en-
couraged the  favourites  to  continue  their  insinuations
against  Morton ;  and  as  the  king  now  resided  in  the
palace  of  Holyrood-house,  to  which  all  his  subjects  had
access,  the  cabal  against  the  earl  grew  daily  stronger,
and  the  intrigue,  which  occasioned  his  fall,  ripened
gradually.

Morton  Morton  began  to  be  sensible  of  his  danger,
toprevent8  ancl  endeavoured  to  put  a  stop  to  the  career  of
them.  Lennox's  preferment,  by  representing  him  as  a
formidable  enemy  to  the  reformed  religion,  a  secret
agent  in  favour  of  Popery,  and  a  known  emissary  of
the  house  of  Guise.  The  clergy,  apt  to  believe  every
rumour  of  this  kind,  spread  the  alarm  among  the  peo-

1580.]  BOOK VI.  (Jl

pie.  But  Lennox,  either  out  of  complaisance  to  his
master,  or  convinced  by  the  arguments  of  so  me  learned
divines  whom  the  king  appointed  to  instruct  him  in  the
principles  of  the  Protestant  religion,  publicly  renounced
the  errors  of  Popery,  in  the  church  of  St.  Giles,  and
declared  himself  a  member  of  the  church  of  Scotland,
by  signing  her  confession  of  faith.  This,  though  it
did  not  remove  all  suspicions,  nor  silence  some  zealous
preachers,  abated,  in  a  great  degree,  the  force  of  the
accusation.11

On  the  other  hand,  a  rumour  prevailed  that  Morton
was  preparing  to  seize  the  king's  person,  and  to  carry
him  into  England.  Whether  despair  of  maintaining
his  power  by  any  other  means,  had  driven  him  to  make
any  overture  of  that  kind  to  the  English  court,  or  whe-
ther it  was  a  calumny  invented  by  his  adversaries  to
render  him  odious,  cannot  now  be  determined  with
certainty.  As  he  declared  at  his  death  that  such  a
design  had  never  entered  into  his  thoughts,  the  latter
seems  to  be  most  probable.  It  afforded  a  pretence,
however,  for  reviving  the  office  of  lord-chamberlain,
which  had  been  for  some  time  disused.  That  honour
was  conferred  on  Lennox.  Alexander  Erskine,  Mor-
ton's capital  enemy,  was  his  deputy ;  they  had  under
them  a  band  of  gentlemen,  who  were  appointed  con-
stantly to  attend  the  king,  and  to  guard  his  person.1
Elizabeth  Morton  was  not  ignorant  of  what  his  enemies
iSbe5-8  ^tended  to  insinuate  by  such  unusual  precau-
half-  tions  for  the  king's  safety  ;  and,  as  his  last
resource,  applied  to  Elizabeth,  whose  protection  had
often  stood  him  in  stead  in  his  greatest  difficulties.  In
consequence  of  this  application,  Bowes,  her  envoy,
accused  Lennox  of  practices  against  the  p'eace  of  the
two  kingdoms,  and  insisted,  in  her  name,  that  he  should
be  removed  from  the  privy-council.  Such  an  unpre-
cedented demand  was  considered  by  the  counsellors  as

11  Crawf.  Mem.  319. Spotsw.  308,  *  Crawf.  Mem,  320.

62  SCOTLAND.  [1580.

an  affront  to  the  king,  and  an  encroachment  on  the  in-
dependence of  the  kingdom.  They  affected  to  call  in
question  the  envoy's  powers,  and  upon  that  pretence
refused  him  farther  audience ;  and  he  retiring  in  dis-
gust, and  without  taking  leave,  Sir  Alexander  Home
was  sent  to  expostulate  with  Elizabeth  on  the  subject.
After  the  treatment  which  her  envoy  had  received,
Elizabeth  thought  it  below  her  dignity  to  admit  Home
into  her  presence.  Burleigh,  to  whom  he  was  com-
manded to  impart  his  commission,  reproached  him
with  his  master's  ingratitude  towards  a  benefactress
who  had  placed  the  crown  on  his  head,  and  required
him  to  advise  the  king  to  beware  of  sacrificing  the
friendship  of  so  necessary  an  ally  to  the  giddy  humours
of  a  young  man,  without  experience,  and  strongly  sus-
pected of  principles  and  attachments  incompatible  with
the  happiness  of  the  Scottish  nation.
Morton  This  accusation  of  Lennox  hastened,  in  all
accused  of  probability,  Morton's  fall.  The  act  of  indem-

the  murder r.  i i i i i •

of  the  late  mty,  which  he  had  obtained  when  he  resigned
the  regency,  was  worded  with  such  scrupulous
exactness,  as  almost  screened  him  from  any  legal  pro-
secution. The  murder  of  the  late  king  was  the  only
crime  which  could  not,  with  decency,  be  inserted  in  a
pardon  granted  by  his  son.  Here  Morton  still  lay
open  to  the  penalties  of  the  law  ;  and  captain  Stewart,
who  shunned  no  action,  however  desperate,  if  it  led  to
power  or  to  favour,  entered  the  council- chamber  while
Dec  CTO  the  king  and  nobles  were  assembled,  and  falling
on  his  knees,  accused  Morton  of  being  accessary,
or,  according  to  the  language  of  the  Scottish  law,  art
and  part,  in  the  conspiracy  against  the  life  of  his  ma-
jesty's father,  and  offered,  under  the  usual  penalties,
to  verify  this  charge  by  legal  evidence.  Morton,  who
was  present,  heard  this  accusation  with  firmness ;  and
replied  with  a  disdainful  smile,  proceeding  either  from
contempt  of  the  infamous  character  of  his  accuser,  or

L580.]  BOOK  VI.  63

from  consciousness  of  his  own  innocence,  "  that  his
known  zeal  in  punishing  those  who  were  suspected  of
that  detestable  crime,  might  well  exempt  himself  from
any  suspicion  of  being  accessary  to  it ;  nevertheless,  he
would  cheerfully  submit  to  a  trial,  either  in  that  place
or  in  any  other  court ;  and  doubted  not  but  his  own
innocence,  and  the  malice  of  his  enemies,  would  then
appear  in  the  clearest  light."  Stewart,  who  was  still  on
his  knees,  began  to  inquire  how  he  would  reconcile
his  bestowing  so  many  honours  on  Archibald  Douglas,
whom  he  certainly  knew  to  be  one  of  the  murderers,
with  his  pretended  zeal  against  that  crime.  Morton
was  ready  to  answer.  But  the  king  commanded  both
to  be  removed.  The  earl  was  confined,  first  of  all  to
1581i  his  own  house,  and  then  committed  to  the  cas-
jan.  2.  tie  of  Edinburgh,  of  which  Alexander  Erskine
was  governor ;  and,  as  if  it  had  not  been  a  sufficient
indignity  to  subject  him  to  the  power  of  one  of  his  ene-
mies, he  was  soon  after  carried  to  Dumbarton,  of  which
Lennox  had  the  command.  A  warrant  was
likewise  issued  for  apprehending  Archibald
Douglas ;  but  he,  having  received  timely  intelligence
of  the  approaching  danger,  fled  into  England .k

The  earl  of  Angus,  who  imputed  these  violent  pro-
ceedings, not  to  hatred  against  Morton  alone,  but  to
the  ancient  enmity  between  the  houses  of  Stewart  and
of  Douglas,  and  who  believed  that  a  conspiracy  was
now  formed  for  the  destruction  of  all  who  bore  that
name,  was  ready  to  take  arms  in  order  to  rescue  his
kinsman.  But  Morton  absolutely  forbade  any  such  at-
tempt, and  declared  that  he  would  rather  suffer  ten
thousand  deaths,  than  bring  an  imputation  upon  his
own  character  by  seeming  to  decline  a  trial.1
Elizabeth's  Elizabeth  did  not  fail  to  interpose,  with
warmth,  in  behalf  of  a  man  who  had  contri-
him.  buted  so  much  to  preserve  her  influence  over

k  Crawf.  Mem.  323.  »  Jolmst.  64. Spots.  311.

64  SCOTLAND.

Scotland.  The  late  transactions  in  that  kingdom  had
given  her  great  uneasiness.  The  power  which  Lennox
had  acquired  independent  of  her  was  dangerous ;  the
treatment  her  ambassadors  had  met  with  differed  greatly
from  the  respect  with  which  the  Scots  were  in  use  to
receive  her  ministers  ;  and  the  attack  now  made  on
Morton,  fully  convinced  her  that  there  was  an  intention
to  sow  the  seeds  of  discord  between  the  two  nations,
and  to  seduce  James  into  a  new  alliance  with  France,
or  into  a  marriage  with  some  Popish  princess.  Full
of  these  apprehensions,  she  ordered  a  considerable  body
of  troops  to  be  assembled  on  the  borders  of  Scotland,
and  dispatched  Randolph  as  her  ambassador  into  that
kingdom.  He  addressed  himself  not  only  to  James,
and  to  his  council,  but  to  a  convention  of  estates,  met
at  that  time.  He  began  with  enumerating  the  extra-
ordinary benefits  which  Elizabeth  had  conferred  on  the
Scottish  nation  :  that  without  demanding  a  single  foot
of  land  for  herself,  without  encroaching  on  the  liberties
of  the  kingdom  in  the  smallest  article,  she  had,  at  the
expense  of  the  blood  of  her  subjects  and  the  treasures
of  her  crown,  rescued  the  Scots  from  the  dominion  of
France,  established  among  them  true  religion,  and  put
them  in  possession  of  their  ancient  rights  :  that  from  the
beginning  of  civil  dissensions  in  the  kingdom,  she  had
protected  those  who  espoused  the  king's  cause,  and  by
her  assistance  alone,  the  crown  had  been  preserved  on
his  head,  and  all  the  attempts  of  the  adverse  faction
baffled :  that  a  union,  unknown  to  their  ancestors,  but
equally  beneficial  to  both  kingdoms,  had  subsisted  for
a  long  period  of  years,  and  though  so  many  Popish
princes  had  combined  to  disturb  this  happy  state  of
things,  her  care  and  her  constancy  had  hitherto  de-
feated all  these  efforts  :  that  she  had  observed  of  late
an  unusual  coolness,  distrust,  and  estrangement  in  the
Scottish  council,  which  she  could  impute  to  none  but
to  Lennox,  a  subject  of  France,  a  retainer  to  the  house

1581.]  BOOK VI.  65

of  Guise,  bred  up  in  the  errors  of  Popery,  and  still  sus-
pected of  favouring  that  superstition.  Not  satisfied
with  having  mounted  so  fast  to  an  uncommon  height
of  power,  which  he  exercised  with  all  the  rashness  of
youth,  and  all  the  ignorance  of  a  stranger ;  nor  thinking
it  enough  to  have  deprived  the  earl  of  Morton  of  the
authority  due  to  his  abilities  and  experience,  he  had
conspired  the  ruin  of  that  nobleman,  who  had  often
exposed  his  life  in  the  king's  cause,  who  had  contri-
buted more  than  any  other  subject  to  place  him  on  the
throne,  to  resist  the  encroachments  of  Popery,  and  to
preserve  the  union  between  the  two  kingdoms.  If  any
zeal  for  religion  remained  among  the  nobles  in  Scot-
land, if  they  wished  for  the  continuance  of  amity  with
England,  if  they  valued  the  privileges  of  their  own  order,
he  called  upon  them,  in  the  name  of  his  mistress,  to
remove  such  a  pernicious  counsellor  as  Lennox  from
the  presence  of  the  young  king,  to  rescue  Morton  out
of  the  hands  of  his  avowed  enemy,  and  secure  to  him
the  benefit  of  a  fair  and  impartial  trial :  and  if  force
was  necessary  towards  accomplishing  a  design  so  salu-
tary to  the  king  and  kingdom,  he  promised  them  the
protection  of  his  mistress  in  the  enterprise,  and  what-
ever assistance  they  should  demand,  either  of  men  or
money."3

But  these  extraordinary  remonstrances,  accompanied
with  such  an  unusual  appeal  from  the  king  to  his  sub-
jects, were  not  the  only  means  employed  by  Elizabeth
in  favour  of  Morton,  and  against  Lennox.  She  per-
suaded the  prince  of  Orange  to  send  an  agent  into
Scotland,  and,  under  colour  of  complimenting  James
on  account  of  the  valour  which  many  of  his  subjects
had  displayed  in  the  service  of  the  States,  to  enter  into
a  long  detail  of  the  restless  enterprises  of  the  Popish
princes  against  the  Protestant  religion  ;  to  beseech  him
to  adhere  inviolably  to  the  alliance  with  England,  the

«  Cald.  iii.  6. Strype,  ii.  621.
VOL.  II.  F

66  SCOTLAND.  [158!.

only  barrier  which  secured  his  kingdom  against  their
dangerous  cabals  ;  and,  above  all  things,  to  distrust  the
insinuations  of  those  who  endeavoured  to  weaken  or
to  dissolve  that  union  between  the  British  nations,
which  all  the  Protestants  in  Europe  beheld  with  so
much  pleasure.11

James  de-  James's  counsellors  were  too  intent  upon  the
terraines  to  destruction  of  their  enemy  to  listen  to  these  re-
against  monstrances.  The  officious  interposition  of  the
prince  of  Orange,  the  haughty  tone  of  Eliza-
beth's message,  and  her  avowed  attempt  to  excite  sub-
jects to  rebel  against  their  sovereign,  were  considered
as  unexampled  insults  on  the  majesty  and  indepen-
dence of  a  crowned  head.  A  general  and  evasive  an-
swer was  given  to  Randolph.  James  prepared  to  assert
his  own  dignity  with  spirit.  All  those  suspected  of
favouring  Morton  were  turned  out  of  office,  some  of
them  were  required  to  surrender  themselves  prisoners  ;
the  men  capable  of  bearing  arms  throughout  the  king-
dom were  commanded  to  be  in  readiness  to  take  the
field;  and  troops  were  levied  and  posted  on  the  borders.
The  English  ambassador,  finding  that  neither  the  public
manifesto  which  he  had  delivered  to  the  convention,
nor  his  private  cabals  with  the  nobles,  could  excite
them  to  arms,  fled  in  the  night-time  out  of  Scotland,
where  libels  against  him  had  been  daily  published,  and
even  attempts  made  upon  his  life.  In  both  kingdoms
every  thing  wore  a  hostile  aspect.  But  Elizabeth,
though  she  wished  to  have  intimidated  the  Scottish
king  by  her  preparations,  had  no  inclination  to  enter
into  a  war  with  him,  and  the  troops  on  the  borders,
which  had  given  such  umbrage,  were  soon  dispersed.0
The  greater  solicitude  Elizabeth  discovered  for  Mor-
ton's safety,  the  more  eagerly  did  his  enemies  drive
on  their  schemes  for  his  destruction.  Captain  Stewart,

n  Cald.  iii.  9. See  Append.  No.  XLI.
0  Crawf.  Mem.  328. Strype,  ii.  App.  138.

1581.]

BOOK  VI.

07

his  accuser,  was  first  appointed  tutor  to  the  earl  of
Arran,  and  soon  after  both  the  title  and  estate  of  his
unhappy  ward,  to  which  he  advanced  some  frivolous
claim,  were  conferred  upon  him.  The  new-made  peer
was  commanded  to  conduct  Morton  from  Dumbarton
to  Edinburgh ;  and  by  that  choice  the  earl  was  not  only
warned  what  fate  he  might  expect,  but  had  the  cruel
mortification  of  seeing  his  deadly  enemy  already  loaded
with  honours,  in  reward  of  the  malice  with  which  he
had  contributed  to  his  ruin.

He  is  tried  ^6  records  °f  t^ie  court  ofjusticiary  at  this
and  con-  period  are  lost.  The  account  which  our  histo-

deinned.  .  .  p-m/r  >  • i • •  i

rians  give  01  Morton  s  trial  is  inaccurate  and
unsatisfactory.  The  proceedings  against  him  seem
to  have  been  carried  on  with  violence.  During  the
trial,  great  bodies  of  armed  men  were  drawn  up  in
different  parts  of  the  city.  The  jury  was  composed
of  the  earl's  known  enemies;  and  though  he  chal-
lenged several  of  them,  his  objections  were  overruled.
After  a  short  consultation,  his  peers  found  him  guilty
of  concealing,  and  of  being  art  and  part  in  the  con-
spiracy against  the  life  of  the  late  king.  The  first  part
of  the  verdict  did  not  surprise  him ;  but  he  twice  re-
peated the  words  art  and  part  with  some  vehemence,
and  added,  "  God  knows  it  is  not  so."  The  doom
which  the  law  decrees  against  a  traitor  was  pronounced.
The  king,  however,  remitted  the  cruel  and  ignominious
part  of  the  sentence,  and  appointed  that  he  should  suf-
fer death  next  day,  by  being  beheaded. p

During  that  awful  interval,  Morton  possessed

the  utmost  composure  of  mind.  He  supped
cheerfully  ;  slept  a  part  of  the  night  in  his  usual  man-
ner, and  employed  the  rest  of  his  time  in  religious  con-
ferences, and  in  acts  of  devotion  with  some  ministers  of
the  city.  The  clergymen  who  attended  him,  dealt  freely

P  Spotsw.  314. Johnst.  65. Crawf.  Mem.  332. Cald.  iii.  45. Arnot's  Crimin.
Trials,  388.

F  2

His  death.

68  SCOTLAND.  [1581,

with  his  conscience,  and  pressed  his  crimes  home  upon
him.  What  he  confessed  with  regard  to  the  crime  for
which  he  suffered,  is  remarkable,  and  supplies,  in  some
measure,  the  imperfection  of  our  records.  He  acknow-
ledged, that  on  his  return  from  England,  after  the  death
of  Rizio,  Bothwell  had  informed  him  of  the  conspiracy
against  the  king,  which  the  queen,  as  he  told  him,  knew
of  and  approved ;  that  he  solicited  him  to  concur  in  the
execution  of  it,  which  at  that  time  he  absolutely  de-
clined ;  that  soon  after  Bothwell  himself,  and  Archibald
Douglas,  in  his  name,  renewing  their  solicitations  to
the  same  purpose,  he  had  required  a  warrant  under  the
queen's  hand,  authorizing  the  attempt,  and  as  that  had
never  been  produced,  he  had  refused  to  be  any  farther
concerned  in  the  matter.  "  But,"  continued  he,  "  as
I  neither  consented  to  this  treasonable  act,  nor  assisted
in  the  committing  of  it,  so  it  was  impossible  for  me  to
reveal,  or  to  prevent  it.  To  whom  could  I  make  the
discovery?  The  queen  was  the  author  of  the  enterprise.
Darnley  was  such  a  changeling,  that  no  secret  could  be
safely  communicated  to  him.  Huntly  and  Bothwell,
who  bore  the  chief  sway  in  the  kingdom,  were  them-
selves the  perpetrators  of  the  crime."  These  circum-
stances, it  must  be  confessed,  go  some  length  towards
extenuating  Morton's  guilt;  and  though  his  apology  for
the  favour  he  had  shewn  to  Archibald  Douglas,  whom
he  knew  to  be  one  of  the  conspirators,  be  far  less  satis-
factory, no  uneasy  reflections  seem  to  have  disquieted
his  own  mind  on  that  account^  When  his  keepers  told
him  that  the  guards  were  attending,  and  all  things  in
readiness,  "  I  praise  my  God,"  said  he,  "  I  am  ready
likewise."  Arran  commanded  these  guards  ;  and  even
in  those  moments,  when  the  most  implacable  hatred  is
apt  to  relent,  the  malice  of  his  enemies  could  not  for-
bear this  insult.  On  the  scaffold,  his  behaviour  was
calm ;  his  countenance  and  voice  unaltered ;  and,  after

<i  Crawf.  Mem.  App.  Hi.

1581. J  BOOK VI.  69

some  time  spent  in  devotion,  he  suffered  death  with  the
intrepidity  which  became  the  name  of  Douglas. His
head  was  placed  on  the  public  jail  of  Edinburgh;  and
his  body,  after  lying  till  sunset  on  the  scaffold,  covered
with  a  beggarly  cloak,  was  carried  by  common  porters
to  the  usual  burial-place  of  criminals. None  of  his
friends  durst  accompany  it  to  the  grave,  or  discover
their  gratitude  and  respect  by  any  symptoms  of  sorrow/
odious Arran,  no  less  profligate  in  private  life,  than
conduct  of  audacious  in  his  public  conduct,  soon  after  drew
the  attention  of  his  countrymen,  by  his  infamous
marriage  with  the  countess  of  March. Before  he  grew
into  favour  at  court,  he  had  been  often  entertained  in
her  husband's  house,  and,  without  regarding  the  laws
of  hospitality  or  of  gratitude,  carried  on  a  criminal  in-
trigue with  the  wife  of  his  benefactor,  a  woman  young
and  beautiful,  but,  according  to  the  description  of  a
contemporary  historian,  "  intolerable  in  all  the  imper-
fections incident  to  her  sex."  Impatient  of  any  restraint
upon  their  mutual  desires,  they,  with  equal  ardour,
wished  to  avow  their  union  publicly,  and  to  legitimate,
by  a  marriage,  the  offspring  of  their  unlawful  passion.
The  countess  petitioned  to  be  divorced  from  her  hus-
band, for  a  reason  which  no  modest  woman  will  ever
plead. The  judges,  overawed  by  Arran,  passed  sen-
tence without  delay. This  infamous  scene  was  con-
cluded by  a  marriage,  solemnised  with  great
pomp,  and  beheld  by  all  ranks  of  men  with  the
utmost  horror.5

A  parliament  was  held  this  year,  at  the  open-
ing of  which  some  disputes  arose  between  Arran
and  the  new  created  duke  of  Lennox.  Arran,  haughty
by  nature,  and  pushed  on  by  his  wife's  ambition,  began
to  affect  an  equality  with  the  duke,  under  whose  pro-
tection he  had  hitherto  been  contented  to  place  himself.
After  various  attempts  to  form  a  party  in  the  council

r  Crawf.  Mem.  334. Spotsw.  314.  s  Spotsw.  316.

70  SCOTLAND.  [1581.

against  Lennox,  he  found  him  fixed  so  firmly  in  the
king's  affections,  that  it  was  impossible  to  shake  him ;
and,  rather  than  lose  all  interest  at  court,  from  which
he  was  banished,  he  made  the  most  humble  submissions
to  the  favourite,  and  again  recovered  his  former  credit.
This  rupture  contributed,  however,  to  render  the  duke
still  more  odious  to  the  nation.  During  the  continu-
ance of  it,  Arran  affected  to  court  the  clergy,  pretended
an  extraordinary  zeal  for  the  Protestant  religion,  and
laboured  to  confirm  the  suspicions  which  were  enter-
tained of  his  rival,  as  an  emissary  of  the  house  of  Guise,
and  a  favourer  of  Popery.  As  he  was  supposed  to  be
acquainted  with  the  duke's  most  secret  designs,  his  ca-
lumnies were  listened  to  with  greater  credit  than  was
due  to  his  character.  To  this  rivalship  between  Lennox
and  Arran,  during  the  continuance  of  which  each  en-
deavoured to  conciliate  the  good-will  of  the  clergy,  we
must  ascribe  several  acts  of  this  parliament  uncommonly
favourable  to  the  church,  particularly  one  which  abo-
lished the  practice  introduced  by  Morton,  of  appoint-
ing but  one  minister  to  several  parishes.
Ecciesiasti-  No  notice  hath  been  taken  for  several  years
cai  affairs.  of  ecclesiastical  affairs.  While  the  civil  govern-
ment underwent  so  many  extraordinary  revolutions,  the
church  was  not  free  from  convulsions.  Two  objects
chiefly  engrossed  the  attention  of  the  clergy .  The  one
was,  the  forming  a  system  of  discipline,  or  ecclesiastical
polity.  After  long  labour,  and  many  difficulties,  this
system  was  at  last  brought  to  some  degree  of  perfection.
The  assembly  solemnly  approved  of  it,  and  appointed  it
to  be  laid  before  the  privy-council  in  order  to  obtain
the  ratification  of  it  in  parliament.  But  Morton,  during
his  administration,  and  those  who,  after  his  fall,  go-
verned the  king,  were  equally  unwilling  to  see  it  car-
ried into  execution;  and  by  starting  difficulties  and
throwing  in  objections,  prevented  it  from  receiving  a
legal  sanction.  The  other  point  in  view  was,  the  abo-

1581/J  BOOK VI.  71

lition  of  the  episcopal  order.  The  bishops  were  so  de-
voted to  the  king,  to  whom  they  owed  their  promotion,
that  the  function  itself  was  by  some  reckoned  danger-
ous to  civil  liberty.  Being  allowed  a  seat  in  parliament,
and  distinguished  by  titles  of  honour,  these  not  only
occasioned  many  avocations  from  their  spiritual  func-
tions, but  soon  rendered  their  character  and  manners
extremely  different  from  those  of  the  clergy  in  that  age.
The  nobles  viewed  their  power  with  jealousy ;  the  popu-
lace considered  their  lives  as  profane  ;  and  both  wished
their  downfal  with  equal  ardour.  The  personal  emu-
lation between  Melvil  and  Adamson,  a  man  of  learning
and.eminent  for  his  popular  eloquence,  who  was  pro-
moted, on  the  death  of  Douglas,  to  be  archbishop  of
St.  Andrew's,  mingled  itself  with  the  passions  on  each
side,  and  heightened  them,  Attacks  were  made  in  every
assembly  on  the  order  of  bishops  ;  their  privileges  were
gradually  circumscribed ;  and  at  last  an  act  was  passed,
declaring  the  office  of  bishop,  as  it  was  then  exercised
within  the  realm,  to  have  neither  foundation  nor  war-
rant in  the  word  of  God  ;  and  requiring,  under  pain  of
excommunication,  all  who  now  possessed  that  office,
instantly  to  resign  it,  and  to  abstain  from  preaching  or
administering  the  sacraments,  until  they  should  receive
permission  from  the  general  assembly.  The  court  did
not  acquiesce  in  this  decree.  A  vacancy  happened  soon
after  in  the  see  of  Glasgow,  Montgomery,  minister  at
Stirling,  a  man  vain,  fickle,  presumptuous,  and  more
apt,  by  the  blemishes  in  his  character,  to  have  alienated
the  people  from  an  order  already  beloved,  than  to
reconcile  them  to  one  which  was  tHe  object  of  their
hatred,  made  an  infamous  simoniacal  bargain  with
Lennox,  and  on  his  recommendation  was  chosen  arch-
bishop. The  presbytery  of  Stirling,  of  which  he  was  a
member,  the  presbytery  of  Glasgow,  whither  he  was  to
be  translated,  the  general  assembly,  vied  with  each
other  in  prosecuting  him  on  that  account.  In  order  to

72  SCOTLAND.  [1582.

screen  Montgomery,  James  made  trial  both  of  gentle
and  of  rigorous  measures,  and  both  were  equally
ineffectual.  The  general  assembly  was  just
ready  to  pronounce  against  him  the  sentence  of  excom-
munication, when  a  herald  entered,  and  commanded
them  in  the  king's  name,  and  under  pain  of  rebellion,
to  stop  farther  proceedings.  Even  this  injunction  they
despised ;  and  though  Montgomery,  by  his  tears  and
seeming  penitence,  procured  a  short  respite,  the  sen-
tence was  at  last  issued  by  their  appointment,  and  pub-
lished in  all  the  churches  throughout  the  kingdom.

The  firmness  of  the  clergy  in  a  collective  body  was
not  greater  than  the  boldness  of  some  individuals,  par-
ticularly of  the  ministers  of  Edinburgh.  They  inveighed
daily  against  the  corruptions  in  the  administration ;  and,
with  the  freedom  of  speech  admitted  into  the  pulpit  in
that  age,  named  Lennox  and  Arran  as  the  chief  authors
of  the  grievances  under  which  the  church  and  kingdom
groaned.  The  courtiers,  in  their  turn,  complained  to
the  king  of  the  insolent  and  seditious  spirit  of  the
clergy.  In  order  to  check  the  boldness  of  their  dis-
courses, James  issued  a  proclamation,  commanding
Dury,  one  of  the  most  popular  ministers,  not  only  to
leave  the  town,  but  to  abstain  from  preaching  in  any
other  place.  Dury  complained  to  the  judicatories  of
this  encroachment  upon  the  immunities  of  his  office.
They  approved  of  the  doctrine  which  he  had  delivered ;
and  he  determined  to  disregard  the  royal  proclama-
tion. But  the  magistrates  being  determined  to  compel
him  to  leave  the  city,  according  to  the  king's  orders,
he  was  obliged  to  abandon  his  charge,  after  protesting
publicly,  at  the  cross  of  Edinburgh,  against  the  vio-
Jence  which  was  put  upon  him.  The  people  accom-
panied him  to  the  gates  with  tears  and  lamentations;
and  the  clergy  denounced  the  vengeance  of  Heaven
against  the  authors  of  this  outrage.1

*  Cald.  Assem.  1576—1582. Spotsw.  277,  &c.

1582.]  BOOK  VI.  73

In  this  perilous  situation  stood  the  church,  the  au-
thority of  its  judicators  called  in  question,  and  the
liberty  of  the  pulpit  restrained,  when  a  sudden  revolu-
tion of  the  civil  government  procured  them  unexpected
relief.

His  favour- The  two  favourites,  by  their  ascendant  over
ites  engage the  king,  possessed  uncontrolled  power  in  the

the  king  in  »'  J  :  1 i

unpopular  kingdom,  and  exercised  it  with  the  utmost
wantonness.  James  usually  resided  at  Dal-
keith,  or  Kinneil,  the  seats  of  Lennox  and  of  Arran,  and
was  attended  by  such  company,  and  employed  in  such
amusements,  as  did  not  suit  his  dignity.  The  services
of  those  who  had  contributed  most  to  place  the  crown
on  his  head  were  but  little  remembered.  Many  who
had  opposed  him  with  the  greatest  virulence,  enjoyed
the  rewards  and  honours  to  which  the  others  were  en-
titled. Exalted  notions  of  regal  prerogative,  utterly
inconsistent  with  the  constitution  of  Scotland,  being
instilled  by  his  favourites  into  the  mind  of  the  young
monarch,  unfortunately  made,  at  that  early  age,  a  deep
impression  there,  and  became  the  source  of  almost  all
his  subsequent  errors  in  the  government  of  both  king-
doms." Courts  of  justice  were  held  in  almost  every
county,  the  proprietors  of  land  were  called  before  them,
and  upon  the  slightest  neglect  of  any  of  the  numerous
forms  which  are  peculiar  to  the  feudal  holdings,  they
were  fined  with  unusual  and  intolerable  rigour.  The
lord  chamberlain  revived  the  obsolete  jurisdiction  of
his  office  over  the  boroughs,  and  they  were  subjected
to  actions  no  less  grievous.  A  design  seemed  likewise
to  have  been  formed  to  exasperate  Elizabeth,  and  to
dissolve  the  alliance  with  her,  which  all  good  Pro-
testants esteemed  the  chief  security  of  their  religion  in
Scotland.  A  close  correspondence  was  carried  on  be-
tween the  king  and  his  mother,  and  considerable  pro-
gress made  towards  uniting  their  titles  to  the  crown,

u  Cald.  iii.  157.

74  SCOTLAND.  [1582.

by  such  a  treaty  of  association  as  Maitland  had  pro-
jected ;  which  could  not  fail  of  endangering  or  dimi-
nishing his  authority,  and  must  have  proved  fatal  to
those  who  had  acted  against  her  with  the  greatest  vi-
gour/

The  nobles  All  these  circumstances  irritated  the  impa-
againsT  ^ent  SPIY^  of  the  Scottish  nobles,  who  resolved
them.  to  tolerate  no  longer  the  insolence  of  the  two
minions,  or  to  stand  by,  while  their  presumption  and
inexperience  ruined  both  the  king  and  the  kingdom.
Elizabeth,  who,  during  the  administration  of  the  four
regents,  had  the  entire  direction  of  the  affairs  of  Scot-
land, felt  herself  deprived  of  all  influence  in  that  king-
dom ever  since  the  death  of  Morton,  and  was  ready  to
countenance  any  attempt  to  rescue  the  king  out  of  the
hands  of  favourites  who  were  leading  him  into  measures
so  repugnant  to  all  her  views.  The  earls  of  Mar  and
Glencairn,  lord  Ruthven,  lately  created  earl  of  Gowrie,
lord  Lindsay,  lord  Boyd,  the  tutor  of  Glamis,  the  eldest
son  of  lord  Oliphant,  with  several  barons  and  gentle-
men of  distinction,  entered  into  a  combination  for  that
purpose;  and  as  changes  in  administration,  which,
among  polished  nations,  are  brought  about  slowly  and
silently,  by  artifice  and  intrigue,  were  in  that  rude  age
effected  suddenly  and  by  violence,  the  king's  situation,
and  the  security  of  the  favourites,  encouraged  the  con-
spirators to  have  immediate  recourse  to  force.
Seize  the  James,  after  having  resided  for  some  time  in
^dn8atper"  Athol,  where  he  enjoyed  his  favourite  amuse-
Ruthven.  nient  of  hunting,  was  now  returning  towards
Edinburgh  with  a  small  train.  He  was  invited  to
Ruthven-castle,  which  lay  in  his  way ;  and  as  he  sus-
pected ,no  danger,  he  went  thither  in  hopes  of  farther
sport.  The  multitude  of  strangers  whom  he
found  there  gave  him  some  uneasiness ;  and  as
those  who  were  in  the  secret  arrived  every  moment  from

*  Cald.  iii.  357.

1582.]

BOOK VI.

75

different  parts,  the  appearance  of  so  many  new  faces
increased  his  fears.  He  concealed  his  uneasiness,  how-
ever, with  the  utmost  care ;  and  next  morning  pre-
pared for  the  field,  expecting  to  find  there  some  oppor-
tunity of  making  his  escape.  But  just  as  he  was  ready
to  depart,  the  nobles  entered  his  bed-chamber  in  a  body,
and  presented  a  memorial  against  the  illegal  and  op-
pressive actions  of  his  two  favourites,  whom  they  repre-
sented as  most  dangerous  enemies  to  the  religion  and
liberties  of  the  nation.  James,  though  he  received  this
remonstrance  with  the  complaisance  which  was  neces-
sary in  his  present  situation,  was  extremely  impatient
to  be  gone ;  but  as  he  approached  the  door  of  his
apartment,  the  tutor  of  Glamis  rudely  stopped  him.
The  king  complained,  expostulated,  threatened,  and
finding  all  these  without  effect,  burst  into  tears  :  "  No
matter,"  said  Glamis  fiercely,  "  better  children  weep
than  bearded  men."  These  words  made  a  deep  im-
pression on  the  king's  mind,  and  were  never  forgotten.
The  conspirators,  without  regarding  his  tears  or  indig-
nation, dismissed  such  of  his  followers  as  they  suspect-
ed ;  allowed  none  but  persons  of  their  own  party  to
have  access  to  him ;  and,  though  they  treated  him  with
great  respect,  guarded  his  person  with  the  utmost  care.
This  enterprise  is  usually  called,  by  our  historians,  The
Raid  of  Ruthven*

Lennox  and  Arran  were  astonished  to  the  last

Commit

Arran  to  degree  at  an  event  so  unexpected,  and  so  fatal
to  their  power.  The  former  endeavoured,  but
without  success,  to  excite  the  inhabitants  of  Edinburgh
to  take  arms  in  order  to  rescue  their  sovereign  from
captivity.  The  latter,  with  his  usual  impetuosity,
mounted  on  horseback  the  moment  he  heard  what  had
befallen  the  king,  and  with  a  few  followers  rode  to-
wards Ruthven-castle ;  and  as  a  considerable  body  of
the  conspirators,  under  the  command  of  the  earl  of  Mar,

y  Cald.  iii.  134. Spotsw.  320. %lv.  357.

76  SCOTLAND.  [1582.

lay  in  his  way  ready  to  oppose  him,  he  separated  him-
self from  his  companions,  and  with  two  attendants  ar-
rived at  the  gate  of  the  castle.  At  the  sight  of  a  man
so  odious  to  his  country,  the  indignation  of  the  con-
spirators rose,  and  instant  death  must  have  been  the
punishment  of  his  rashness,  if  the  friendship  of  Gowrie,
or  some  other  cause  not  explained  by  our  historians,
had  not  saved  a  life  so  pernicious  to  the  kingdom.  He
was  confined,  however,  to  the  castle  of  Stirling,  with-
out being  admitted  into  the  king's  presence.
Command  The  king,  though  really  the  prisoner  of  his
teave°the°  own  subjects,  with  whose  conduct  he  could  not
kingdom.  heip  discovering  many  symptoms  of  disgust,
was  obliged  to  publish  a  proclamation,  signifying  his
approbation  of  their  enterprise,  declaring  that  he  was
at  full  liberty,  without  any  restraint  or  violence  offered
to  his  person  ;  and  forbidding  any  attempt  against
those  concerned  in  the  Raid  of  Ruthven,  under  pre-
tence of  rescuing  him  out  of  their  hands.  At
the  same  time,  he  commanded  Lennox  to  leave
Scotland  before  the  20th  of  September.2
The  con-  Soon  after,  Sir  George  Carey  and  Robert

Bowes  arrived  as  ambassadors  from  Elizabeth.

counte-  .

nanced  by  1  he  pretext  of  their  embassy  was  to  inquire
after  the  king's  safety  ;  to  encourage  and  coun-
tenance the  conspirators  was  the  real  motive  of  it.  By
their  intercession,  the  earl  of  Angus,  who,  ever  since  the
death  of  his  uncle  Morton,  had  lived  in  exile,  obtained
leave  to  return.  And  the  accession  of  a  nobleman  so
powerful  and  so  popular  strengthened  the  faction.a

Lennox,  whose  amiable  and  gentle  qualities  had  pro-
cured him  many  friends,  and  who  received  private  as-
surances that  the  king's  favour  towards  him  was  in  no
degree  abated,  seemed  resolved,  at  first,  to  pay  no  regard
to  a  command  extorted  by  violence,  and  no  less  disagree-
able to  James,  than  it  was  rigorous  with  regard  to  him-

z  Cald.  iii.  135.  138.  »  Ibid.  iii.  152.

1582.]

BOOK  VI.

77

self.  But  the  power  of  his  enemies,  who  were  masters
of  the  king's  person,  who  were  secretly  supported  by
Elizabeth,  and  openly  applauded  by  the  clergy,  deter-
red him  from  any  enterprise,  the  success  of  which  was
dubious,  and  the  danger  certain,  both  to  himself  and  his
sovereign.  He  put  off  the  time  of  his  departure,  how-
ever, by  various  artifices,  in  expectation  either  that  James
might  make  his  escape  from  the  conspirators,  or  that  for-
tune might  present  some  more  favourable  opportunity
of  taking  arms  for  his  relief.

Their  con-  On  the  other  hand,  the  conspirators  were  ex-
prove^  tremely  solicitous  not  only  to  secure  the  appro-
sembiy8  bation  of  their  countrymen,  but  to  obtain  some
and  aeon-  Wai  sanction  of  their  enterprise.  For  this  pur-

vention  of  11-111  11

estates,  pose  they  published  a  long  declaration,  contain-
ing the  motives  which  had  induced  them  to  venture  on
such  an  irregular  step,  and  endeavoured  to  heighten
the  public  indignation  against  the  favourites,  by  repre-
senting, in  the  strongest  colours,  their  inexperience  and
insolence,  their  contempt  of  the  nobles,  their  violation
of  the  privileges  of  the  church,  and  their  oppression  of
the  people.  They  obliged  the  king,  who  could  not  with
safety  refuse  any  of  their  demands,  to  grant  them  a
remission  in  the  most  ample  form ;  and  not  satisfied
with  that,  they  applied  to  the  assembly  of  the  church,
and  easily  procured  an  act,  declaring,  "  that  they  had
done  good  and  acceptable  service  to  God,  to
their  sovereign,  and  to  their  native  country;"
and  requiring  all  sincere  Protestants  to  concur  with
them  in  carrying  forward  such  a  laudable  enterprise.  In
order  to  add  the  greater  weight  to  this  act,  every  mi-
nister was  enjoined  to  read  it  in  his  own  pulpit,  and  to
inflict  the  censures  of  the  church  on  those  who  set  them-
selves in  opposition  to  so  good  a  cause.  A  convention
of  estates  assembled  a  few  days  after,  passed  an  act  to
the  same  effect,  and  granted  full  indemnity  to  the  con-
spirators for  every  thing  they  had  done.b

b  Cald.  iii.  177. 187.  200. Spotsw.  322.

Oct.  3.

78  SCOTLAND.  [1582.

Lennox's  James  was  conducted  by  them,  first  to  Stir-
departure  iing  an(j  afterward  to  the  palace  of  Holyrood-

fromScot-  r .  J

land.  house;  and  though  he  was  received  every  where
with  the  external  marks  of  respect  due  to  his  dignity,
his  motions  were  carefully  observed,  and  he  was  under
a  restraint  no  less  strict  than  at  the  first  moment  when
he  was  seized  by  the  conspirators.  Lennox,  after  elud-
ing many  commands  to  depart  out  of  the  kingdom,
was  at  last  obliged  to  begin  his  journey.  He  lingered
however  for  some  time  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Edin-
burgh, as  if  he  had  still  intended  to  make  some  effort
towards  restoring  the  king  to  liberty.  But  either  from
the  gentleness  of  his  own  disposition,  averse  to  blood-
shed and  the  disorders  of  civil  war,  or  from  some  other
cause  unknown  to  us,  he  abandoned  the  design,  and
set  out  for  France,  by  the  way  of  England.  The
king  issued  the  order  for  his  departure  with  no
less  reluctance  than  the  duke  obeyed  it ;  and  both
mourned  a  separation,  which  neither  of  them  had  power
to  prevent.  Soon  after  his  arrival  in  France,  the  fa-
tigue of  the  journey,  or  the  anguish  of  his  mind,  threw
him  into  a  fever.  In  his  last  moments  he  discovered
such  a  firm  adherence  to  the  Protestant  faith,  as  fully
vindicates  his  memory  from  the  imputation  of  an  attach-
ment to  Popery,  with  which  he  had  been  uncharitably
loaded  in  Scotland.0  As  he  was  the  earliest,  and  best
beloved,  he  was,  perhaps,  the  most  deserving,  though
not  the  most  able  of  all  James's  favourites.  The  warmth
and  tenderness  of  his  master's  affection  for  him  were
not  abated  by  death  itself.  By  many  acts  of  kindness
and  generosity  towards  his  posterity,  the  king  not  only
did  great  honour  to  the  memory  of  Lennox,  but  set  his
own  character  in  one  of  its  most  favourable  points  of
view.

Mary's  The  success  of  the  conspiracy  which  de-
about'her  Priye(^  James  of  liberty  made  great  noise  over
son.  all  Europe,  and  at  last  reached  the  ears  of  Mary

c  Spotsw.  324. Cald.  iii.  172.

1582.]  BOOK VI.  79

in  the  prison  to  which  she  was  confined.  As  her  own  ex-
perience had  taught  her  what  injuries  a  captive  prince
is  exposed  to  suffer ;  and  as  many  of  those  who  were
now  concerned  in  the  enterprise  against  her  son,  were
the  same  persons  whom  she  considered  as  the  chief  au-
thors of  her  own  misfortunes,  it  was  natural  for  the  ten-
derness of  a  mother  to  apprehend  that  the  same  calami-
ties were  ready  to  fall  on  his  head ;  and  such  a  prospect
did  not  fail  of  adding  to  the  distress  and  horror  of  her
own  situation.  In  the  anguish  of  her  heart,  she  wrote
to  Elizabeth,  complaining  in  the  bitterest  terms  of  the
unprecedented  rigour  with  which  she  herself  had  been
treated,  and  beseeching  her  not  to  abandon  her  son  to  the
mercy  of  his  rebellious  subjects ;  nor  permit  him  to  be
involved  in  the  same  misfortunes  under  which  she  had
so  long  groaned.  The  peculiar  vigour  and  acrimony
of  style,  for  which  this  letter  is  remarkable,  discover  both
the  high  spirit  of  the  Scottish  queen,  unsubdued  by  her
sufferings,  and  the  violence  of  her  indignation  at  Eliza-
beth's artifices  and  severity.  But  it  was  ill  adapted  to
gain  the  end  which  she  had  in  view,  and  accordingly  it
neither  procured  any  mitigation  of  the  rigour  of  her  own
confinement,  nor  any  interposition  in  favour  of  the  king.d
1383  Henry  III.  who,  though  he  feared  and  hated
Ambas-  the  princes  of  Guise,  was  often  obliged  to  court

sadorsar-  r  «

rive  from  their  favour,  interposed  with  warmth,  in  order
and  Eng-  to  extricate  James  out  of  the  hands  of  a  party
Iand*  so  entirely  devoted  to  the  English  interest.  He
commanded  M.  de  la  Motte  Fenelon,  his  ambassador
at  the  court  of  England,  to  repair  to  Edinburgh,  and  to
contribute  his  utmost  endeavours  towards  placing  James
in  a  situation  more  suitable  to  his  dignity.  As  Eliza-
beth could  not,  with  decency,  refuse  him  liberty  to  exe-
cute his  commission,  she  appointed  Davison  to  attend
him  into  Scotland  as  her  envoy,  under  colour  of  .concur-
ring with  him  in  the  negotiation,  but  in  reality  to  be  a  spy

d  Camd.  489.

80  SCOTLAND.  [1583.

upon  his  motions,  and  to  obstruct  his  success.  James,
whose  title  to  the  crown  had  not  hitherto  been  recog-
nised by  any  of  the  princes  on  the  continent,  was  ex-
tremely fond  of  such  an  honourable  embassy  from  the
French  monarch  ;  and,  on  that  account,  as  well  as  for  the
sake  of  the  errand  on  which  he  came,  received  Fenelon
Jan  7  W^  £reat  resPect«  The  nobles,  in  whose  power
the  king  was,  did  not  relish  this  interposition  of
the  French  court,  which  had  long  lost  its  ancient  in-
fluence over  the  affairs  of  Scotland.  The  clergy  were
alarmed  at  the  danger  to  which  religion  would  be  ex-
posed, if  the  princes  of  Guise  should  recover  any  ascen-
dant over  the  public  counsels.  Though  the  king  tried
every  method  for  restraining  them  within  the  bounds  of
decency,  they  declaimed  against  the  court  of  France,
against  the  princes  of  Guise,  against  the  ambassador,
against  entering  into  any  alliance  with  such  notorious
persecutors  of  the  church  of  God,  with  a  vehemence
which  no  regular  government  would  now  tolerate,  but
which  was  then  extremely  common.  The  ambassador,
watched  by  Davison,  distrusted  by  the  nobles,  and  ex-
posed to  the  insults  of  the  clergy  and  of  the  people,  re-
turned into  England  without  procuring  any  change  in
the  king's  situation,  or  receiving  any  answer  to  a  pro-
posal which  he  made,  that  the  government  should  be
carried  on  in  the  joint  names  of  James  and  the  queen
his  mother.6

James Meanwhile  James,  though  he  dissembled  with
ouurfthe great  art?  became  every  day  more  uneasy  under

hands  of his  confinement  :  his  uneasiness  rendered  him

the  con-  .  7

spirators.  continually  attentive  to  find  out  a  proper  oppor-
tunity for  making  his  escape;  and  to  this  attention  he
at  last  owed  his  liberty,  which  the  king  of  France  was
not  able,  nor  the  queen  of  England  willing  to  procure
for  him.  As  the  conspirators  had  forced  Lennox  out
of  the  kingdom,  and  kept  Arran  at  a  distance  from  court,

e  Cald.  iii.  207.  Spotsw.  324. Murdin,  372,  &c. See  Appendix,  No.  XLII.

1583.]  SCOTLAND.  81

they  grew  secure ;  and  imagining  that  time  had  recon-
ciled the  king  to  them,  and  to  his  situation,  they  watch-
ed him  with  little  care.  Some  occasions  of  discord  had
arisen  among  themselves ;  and  the  French  ambassador,
by  fomenting  these  during  the  time  of  his  residence  in
Scotland,  had  weakened  the  union,  in  which  alone  their
safety  consisted/  Colonel  William  Stewart,  the  com-
mander of  the  band  of  gentlemen  who  guarded  the  king's
person,  being  gained  by  James,  had  the  principal
merit  in  the  scheme  for  restoring  his  master  to  liberty.
Under  pretence  of  paying  a  visit  to  the  earl  of

June  27.  r  i  i T  •

March,  his  grand-uncle,  James  was  permitted
to  go  from  Falkland  to  St  Andrew's.  That  he  might
not  create  any  suspicion,  he  lodged  at  first  in  an  open
defenceless  house  in  the  town,  but  pretending  a  curio-
sity to  see  the  castle,  no  sooner  was  he  entered  with
some  of  his  attendants  whom  he  could  trust,  than  co-
lonel Stewart  commanded  the  gates  to  be  shut,  and  ex-
cluded all  the  rest  of  his  train.  Next  morning  the  earls
of  Argyle,  Huntly,  Crawford,  Montrose,  Rothes,  with
others  to  whom  the  secret  had  been  communicated,  en-
tered the  town  with  their  followers  ;  and  though  Mar,
with  several  of  the  leaders  of  the  faction,  appeared  in
arms,  they  found  themselves  so  far  outnumbered,  that
it  was  in  vain  to  think  of  recovering  possession  of  the
king's  person,  which  had  been  in  their  power  somewhat
longer  than  ten  months.  James  was  naturally  of  so  soft
and  ductile  a  temper,  that  those  who  were  near  his  per-
son commonly  made  a  deep  impression  on  his  heart,
which  was  formed  to  be  under  the  sway  of  favourites.
As  he  remained  implacable  and  unreconciled  to  the
conspirators  during  so  long  a  time,  and  at  a  period  of
life  when  resentments  are  rather  violent  than  lasting,
they  must  either  have  improved  the  opportunities  of  in-
sinuating themselves  into  favour  with  little  dexterity,
or  the  indignation,  with  which  this  first  insult  to  his

f  Camd.  482.
VOL. II.  £

82  SCOTLAND.  [1583.

person  and  authority  filled  him,  must  have  been  very

great.

Resolves, His  joy  at  his  escape  was  youthful  and  ex-

to  tfca?' cessive. He  resolved,  however,  by  the  advice

them  with  Of  gjr  James  Melvil,  and  his  wisest  counsellors.

modera-  .

tion.  to  act  with  the  utmost  moderation.  Having
called  into  his  presence  the  leaders  of  both  factions,
the  neighbouring  gentry,  the  deputies  of  the  adja-
cent boroughs,  the  ministers,  and  the  heads  of  col-
leges, he  declared,  that  although  he  had  been  held
under  restraint  for  some  time  by  violence,  he  would  not
impute  that  as  a  crime  to  any  man,  but,  without  remem-
bering the  irregularities  which  had  been  so  frequent
during  his  minority,  would  pass  a  general  act  of
oblivion,  and  govern  all  his  subjects  with  undistin-
guishing  and  equal  affection.  As  an  evidence  of  his
sincerity,  he  visited  the  earl  of  Gowrie,  at  Ruthven-
castle,  and  granted  him  a  full  pardon  of  any  guilt  he  had
contracted,  by  the  crime  committed  in  that  very  place.8
But  Arran  But  James  did  not  adhere  long  to  this  pru-
ascendant3  dent  an(^  moderate  plan.  His  former  favour-
over  Mm;  jte,  the  earl  of  Arran,  had  been  permitted  for
some  time  to  reside  at  Kinneil,  one  of  his  country-seats.
As  soon  as  the  king  felt  himself  at  liberty,  his  love  for
him  began  to  revive,  and  he  expressed  a  strong  desire
to  see  him.  The  courtiers  violently  opposed  the  return
of  a  minion,  whose  insolent  and  overbearing  temper  they
dreaded,  as  much  as  the  nation  detested  his  crimes.
James,  however,  continued  his  importunity,  and  pro-
mising that  he  should  continue  with  him  no  longer
than  one  day,  they  were  obliged  to  yield.  This  inter-
view rekindled  ancient  affection ;  the  king  forgot  his
promise ;  Arran  regained  his  ascendant  over  him ;  and,
within  a  few  days,  resumed  the  exercise  of  power,  with
all  the  arrogance  of  an  undeserving  favourite,  and  all
the  rashness  peculiar  to  himself.11

S  Melv.  272.  h  Ibid.  274.

And  the
suef  ano-

1583.]  BOOK VI.  x  83

The  first  effect  of  his  influence  was  a  procla-
ma^on  Wl^  regard  to  those  concerned  in  the
therpian.  Raid  of  Ruthven.  They  were  required  to  ac-
knowledge their  crime  in  the  humblest  manner  ;  and
the  king  promised  to  grant  them  a  full  pardon,  pro-
vided their  future  conduct  were  such  as  did  not  oblige
him  to  remember  past  miscarriages.  The  tenor  of  this
proclamation  was  extremely  different  from  the  act  of
oblivion  which  the  conspirators  had  been  encouraged
to  expect.  Nor  did  any  of  them  reckon  it  safe  to  rely
on  a  promise  clogged  with  such  an  equivocal  condi-
tion, and  granted  by  a  young  prince  under  the  domi-
nion of  a  minister  void  of  faith,  regardless  of  decency,
and  transported  by  the  desire  of  revenge  even  beyond
the  usual  ferocity  of  his  temper.  Many  of  the  leaders,
who  had  at  first  appeared  openly  at  court,  retired  to
their  own  houses  ;  and,  foreseeing  the  dangerous  storm
which  was  gathering,  began  to  look  out  for  a  retreat
in  foreign  countries.1  '^;

Eli2a_  Elizabeth,  who  had  all  along  protected  the

beth'ssoii- conspirators, was extremely  disgusted  with

citations  in  7  i

behalf  of  measures  which  tended  so  visibly  to  their  de-
struction, and  wrote  to  the  king  a  harsh  and
haughty  letter,  reproaching  him,  in  a  style
very  uncommon  among  princes,  with  breach  of  faith
in  recalling  Arran  to  court,  and  with  imprudence  in
proceeding  so  rigorously  against  his  best  and  most
faithful  subjects.  James,  with  a  becoming  dignity,  re-
plied, that  promises  extorted  by  violence,  and  condi-
tions yielded  out  of  fear,  were  no  longer  binding,  when
these  were  removed  ;  that  it  belonged  to  him  alone  to
choose  what  ministers  he  would  employ  in  his  service  ;
and  that  though  he  resolved  to  treat  the  conspirators
at  Ruthven  with  the  utmost  clemency,  it  was  necessary,
for  the  support  of  his  authority,  that  such  an  insult  on
his  person  should  not  pass  altogether  uncensured.k

the  conspi
rators.
Aug.  7.

Melv.  278. Spotsw.  326. Cald.  Hi.  330.

o2

k  Melv.  279,

84  SCOTLAND.  [1583.

Se  t  l  Elizabeth's  letter  was  quickly  followed  by

Walsingham  her  secretary,  whom  she  appoint-
bassy  into  ed  her  ambassador  to  James,  and  who  appeared
n  '  at  the  Scottish  court  with  a  splendour  and  mag-
nificence well  calculated  to  please  and  dazzle  a  young
prince.  Walsingham  was  admitted  to  several  confe-
rences with  James  himself,  in  which  he  insisted  on  the
same  topics  contained  in  the  letter,  and  the  king  re-
peated his  former  answers.

After  suffering  several  indignities  from  the  arro-
gance of  Arran  and  his  creatures,  he  returned  to  Eng-
land, without  concluding  any  new  treaty  with  the  king.
Walsingham  was,  next  to  Burleigh,  the  minister  on
whom  the  chief  weight  of  the  English  administration
rested  ;  and  when  a  person  of  his  rank  stept  so  far  out  of
the  ordinary  road  of  business,  as  to  undertake  a  long
journey  in  his  old  age,  and  under  a  declining  state  of
health,  some  affair  of  consequence  was  supposed  to  be
the  cause,  or  some  important  event  was  expected  to  be
the  effect,  of  this  measure.  But  as  nothing  conspi-
cuous either  occasioned  or  followed  this  embassy,  it  is
probable  that  Elizabeth  had  no  other  intention  in  em-
ploying this  sagacious  minister,  than  to  discover,  with
exactness,  the  capacity  and  disposition  of  the  Scottish
king,  who  was  now  arrived  at  a  time  of  life  when,  with
some  degree  of  certainty,  conjectures  might  be  formed
concerning  his  character  and  future  conduct.  As  James
possessed  talents  of  that  kind,  which  make  a  better
figure  in  conversation  than  in  action,  he  gained  a  great
deal  by  this  interview  with  the  English  secretary,  who,
notwithstanding  the  cold  reception  which  he  met  with,
gave  such  an  advantageous  representation  of  his  abili-
ties, as  determined  Elizabeth  to  treat  him,  hencefor-
ward, with  greater  decency  and  respect.1

Elizabeth's  eagerness  to  protect the  conspirators,
rendered  James  more  violent  in  his  proceedings  against

J  Melv.  293. Cald.  iii.  258. Jebb,  ii.  536.

1583.]  BOOK VI.  85

them.  As  they  had  all  refused  to  accept  of  pardon
upon  the  terms  which  he  had  offered,  they  were  re-
quired, by  a  new  proclamation,  to  surrender  themselves
prisoners.  The  earl  of  Angus  alone  complied;  the
rest  either  fled  into  England,  or  obtained  the  king's
licence  to  retire  into  foreign  parts.  A  con-
vention of  estates  was  held,  the  members  of
which,  deceived  by  an  unworthy  artifice  of  Arran's,
declared  those  concerned  in  the  Raid  of  Ruthven  to
have  been  guilty  of  high-treason  ;  appointed  the  act
passed  last  year  approving  of  their  conduct  to  be  ex-
punged out  of  the  records  ;  and  engaged  to  support
the  king  in  prosecuting  the  fugitives  with  the  utmost
rigour  of  law.

The  conspirators,  though  far  from  having  done  any
thing  that  was  uncommon  in  that  age,  among  mutinous
nobles,  and  under  an  unsettled  state  of  government,
must  be  acknowledged  to  have  been  guilty  of  an  act
of  treason  against  their  sovereign  ;  and  James,  who
considered  their  conduct  in  this  light,  had  good  rea-
son to  boast  of  his  clemency,  when  he  offered  to  par-
don them  upon  their  confessing  their  crime.  But,  on
the  other  hand,  it  must  be  allowed  that,  after  the  king's
voluntary  promise  of  a  general  oblivion,  they  had  some
reason  to  complain  of  breach  of  faith,  and,  without  the
most  unpardonable  imprudence,  could  not  have  put
their  lives  in  Arran's  power.

1584  The  interest  of  the  church  was  considerably
an<ected  by  these  contrary  revolutions.  While
the  conspirators  kept  possession  of  power,  the

StTthe  clergy  not  only  recovered,  but  extended,  their
king*  privileges.  As  they  had  formerly  declared  the
hierarchy  to  be  unlawful,  they  took  some  bold  mea-
sures towards  exterminating  the  episcopal  order  out  of
the  church  ;  and  it  was  owing  more  to  Adamson's  dex-
terity in  perplexing  and  lengthening  out  the  process
for  that  purpose,  than  to  their  own  want  of  zeal,  that

86  SCOTLAND.  [1584.

they  did  not  deprive,  and  perhaps  excommunicate,  all
the  bishops  in  Scotland.  When  the  king  recovered
his  liberty,  things  put  on  a  very  different  aspect.  The
favour  bestowed  upon  Arran,  the  enemy  of  every  thing
decent  and  sacred,  and  the  rigorous  prosecution  of
those  nobles  who  had  been  the  most  zealous  defenders
of  the  Protestant  cause,  were  considered  as  sure  pre-
sages of  the  approaching  ruin  of  the  church.  The
clergy  could  not  conceal  their  apprehensions,  nor  view
this  impending  danger  in  silence.  Dury,  who  had
been  restored  to  his  office  as  one  of  the  ministers  of
Edinburgh,  openly  applauded  the  Raid  of  Ruthven  in
the  pulpit,  at  which  the  king  was  so  enraged,  that,  not-
withstanding some  symptoms  of  his  submission,  he
commanded  him  to  resign  his  charge  in  the  city.  Mr.
Andrew  Melvil,  being  summoned  before  the  privy-
council,  to  answer  for  the  doctrine  which  he  had  ut-
tered in  a  sermon  at  St.  Andrew's,  and  accused  of  com-
paring the  present  grievances  of  the  nation  with  those
under  James  III.,  and  of  intimating  obliquely  that  they
ought  to  be  redressed  in  the  same  manner,  thought  it
incumbent  on  him  to  behave  with  great  firmness.  He
declined  the  jurisdiction  of  a  civil  court,  in  a  cause
which  he  maintained  to  be  purely  ecclesiastical ;  the
presbytery,  of  which  he  was  a  member,  had,  as  he  con-
tended, the  sole  right  to  call  him  to  account  for  words
spoken  in  the  pulpit ;  and  neither  the  king  nor  council
could  judge,  in  the  first  instance,  of  the  doctrine  deli-
vered by  preachers,  without  violating  the  immunities
of  the  church.  This  exemption  from  civil  jurisdiction
was  a  privilege  which  the  Popish  ecclesiastics,  admira-
ble judges  of  whatever  contributed  to  increase  the  lustre
or  power  of  their  body,  had  long  struggled  for,  and
had  at  last  obtained.  If  the  same  plea  had  now  been
admitted,  the  Protestant  clergy  would  have  become  in-
dependent of  the  civil  magistrate ;  and  an  order  of
men  extremely  useful  to  society,  while  they  inculcate

1584.]  BOOK VI.  87

those  duties  which  tend  to  promote  its  happiness  and
tranquillity,  might  have  become  no  less  pernicious,  by
teaching,  without  fear  or  control,  the  most  dangerous
principles,  or  by  exciting  their  hearers  to  the  most  des-
perate and  lawless  actions.  The  king,  jealous  to  ex-
cess of  his  prerogative,  was  alarmed  at  this  daring  en-
croachment on  it ;  and  as  Melvil,  by  his  learning  and
zeal,  had  acquired  the  reputation  and  authority  of  head
of  the  party,  he  resolved  to  punish  him  with  the  rigour
which  that  pre-eminence  rendered  necessary,  and  to
discourage,  by  a  timely  severity,  the  revival  of  such  a
dangerous  claim.  Melvil,  however,  avoided  his  rage,  by
flying  into  England ;  and  the  pulpits  resounded  with
complaints  that  the  king  had  extinguished  the  light  of
learning  in  the  kingdom,  and  deprived  the  church  of
the  ablest  and  most  faithful  guardian  of  it  liberties  and
discipline."1

These  violent  declamations  of  the  clergy  against  the
measures  of  the  court  were  extremely  acceptable  to  the
people.  The  conspirators,  though  driven  out  of  the
kingdom,  still  possessed  great  influence  there  ;  and  as
they  had  every  thing  to  fear  from  the  resentment  of  a
young  prince,  irritated  by  the  furious  counsels  of  Arran,
they  never  ceased  soliciting  their  adherents  to  take
arms  in  their  defence.  Gowrie,  the  only  person  among
them  who  had  submitted  to  the  king,  and  accepted  of
a  pardon,  soon  repented  of  a  step  which  Ipst  him  the
esteem  of  one  party,  without  gaming  the  confidence  of
the  other ;  and,  after  suffering  many  mortifications  from
the  king's  neglect  and  the  haughtiness  of  Arran,  he  was
at  last  commanded  to  leave  Scotland,  and  to  reside  in
France.  While  he  waited  at  Dundee  for  an  opportu-
nity to  embark,  he  was  informed  that  the  earls  of  Angus,
Mar,  and  the  tutor  of  Glamis,  had  concerted  a  scheme
for  surprising  the  castle  of  Stirling.  In  his  situation,
little  persuasion  was  necessary  to  draw  him  to  engage

m  Spotsw  330. Cald.  iii.  304.

88  SCOTLAND.  [1584.

in  it.  Under  various  pretexts  he  put  off  his  voyage,
and  lay  ready  to  take  arms  on  the  day  fixed  by  the  con-
spirators for  the  execution  of  their  enterprise.  His  lin-
gering so  long  at  Dundee,  without  any  apparent  reason,
awakened  the  suspicion  of  the  court,  proved  fatal  to
himself,  and  disappointed  the  success  of  the  conspi-
racy. Colonel  William  Stewart  surrounded  the  house
where  he  lodged  with  a  body  of  soldiers,  and,  in  spite
of  his  resistance,  took  him  prisoner.  Two  days  after,
Angus,  Mar,  and  Glamis  seized  the  castle  of  Stirling,
and  erecting  their  standard  there,  published  a  mani-
festo, declaring  that  they  took  arms  for  no  other  reason
but  to  remove  from  the  king's  presence  a  minion  who
had  acquired  power  by  the  most  unworthy  actions,  and
who  exercised  it  with  the  most  intolerable  insolence.
The  account  of  Gowrie's  imprisonment  struck  a  damp
upon  their  spirits.  They  imputed  it  to  treachery  on
his  part,  and  suspected,  that  as  he  had  formerly  desert-
ed, he  had  now  betrayed  them.  At  the  same  time  Eli-
zabeth having  neglected  to  supply  them  in  good  time
with  a  sum  of  money,  which  she  had  promised  to  them,
and  their  friends  and  vassals  coming  in  slowly,  they
appeared  irresolute  and  disheartened  ;  and  as  the  king,
who  acted  with  great  vigour,  advanced  towards  them
at  the  head  of  twenty  thousand  men,  they  fled  preci-
pitately towards  England,  arid  with  difficulty  made  their
escape.0  This  rash  and  feeble  attempt  produced  such
effects  as  usually  follow  disappointed  conspiracies.  It
not  only  hurt  the  cause  for  which  it  was  undertaken,
but  added  strength  and  reputation  to  the  king;  con-
firmed Arran's  power;  and  enabled  them  to  pursue
their  measures  with  more  boldness  and  greater  suc-
cess. Gowrie  was  the  first  victim  of  their  resentment.
After  a  very  informal  trial,  a  jury  of  peers  found  him
guilty  of  treason,  and  he  was  publicly  beheaded  at
Stirling.

»  Home's  Hist,  of  House  of  Douglas,  376. Spotsw.  330. Cald.  Hi.  324,  &c.

1584.]  BOOK  VI.  89

Ma  g2  To  humble  the  church  was  the  king's  next
A  pariia-  step.  But  as  it  became  necessary,  for  this  pur-
'  pose,  to  call  in  the  aid  of  the  legislative  autho-
rity, a  parliament  was  hastily  summoned :  and  while
so  many  of  the  nobles  were  banished  out  of  the  king-
dom, or  forbidden  to  appear  in  the  king's  presence ;
while  Arran's  haughtiness  kept  some  at  a  distance,  and
intimidated  others;  the  meeting  consisted  only  of  such
Severe  as  were  absolutely  at  the  devotion  of  the  court-
against  the  In  order  to  conceal  the  laws  which  were  framing
church.  from  the  knowledge  of  the  clergy,  the  lords  of
the  articles  were  sworn  to  secrecy  ;  and  when  some  of
the  ministers,  who  either  suspected  or  were  informed
of  the  danger,  deputed  one  of  their  number  to  declare
their  apprehensions  to  the  king,  he  was  seized  at  the
palace-gate,  and  carried  to  a  distant  prison.  Others,
attempting  to  enter  the  parliament-house,  were  refused
admittance ;°  and  such  laws  were  passed,  as  totally
overturned  the  constitution  and  discipline  of  the  church.
The  refusing  to  acknowledge  the  jurisdiction  of  the
privy-council ;  the  pretending  an  exemption  from  the
authority  of  the  civil  courts ;  the  attempting  to  dimi-
nish the  rights  and  privileges  of  any  of  the  three  estates
in  parliament,  were  declared  to  be  high-treason.  The
holding  assemblies,  whether  civil  or  ecclesiastical,  with-
out the  king's  permission  or  appointment;  the  uttering,
either  privately  or  publicly,  in  sermons,  or  in  declama-
tions, any  false  and  scandalous  reports  against  the  king,
his  ancestors,  or  ministers,  were  pronounced  capital
crimes.p  v

When  these  laws  were  published  at  the  cross  of  Edin-
burgh, according  to  the  ancient  custom,  Mr.  Robert
Pont,  minister  of  St.  Cuthbert's  and  one  of  the  lords  of
session,  solemnly  protested  against  them,  in  the  name
of  his  brethren,  because  they  had  been  passed  without
the  knowledge  or  consent  of  the  church.  Ever  since

o  Cald.  ili.  365.  P  Parl.  8.  Jac.  VI.

90  SCOTLAND.  [1584.

the  Reformation,  the  pulpits  and  ecclesiastical  judica-
tories  had  both  been  esteemed  sacred.  In  the  former,
the  clergy  had  been  accustomed  to  censure  and  admo-
nish with  unbounded  liberty.  In  the  latter,  they  exer-
cised an  uncontrolled  and  independent  jurisdiction.
The  blow  was  now  aimed  at  both  these  privileges.
These  new  statutes  were  calculated  to  render  church-
men as  inconsiderable  as  they  were  indigent ;  and  as
the  avarice  of  the  nobles  had  stripped  them  of  the
wealth,  the  king's  ambition  was  about  to  deprive  them
of  the  power,  which  once  belonged  to  their  order.  No
wonder  the  alarm  was  universal,  and  the  complaints
loud.  All  the  ministers  of  Edinburgh  forsook  their
charge,  and  fled  into  England.  The  most  eminent
clergymen  throughout  the  kingdom  imitated  their  ex-
ample. Desolation  and  astonishment  appeared  in  every
part  of  the  Scottish  church ;  the  people  bewailed  the
loss  of  pastors  whom  they  esteemed  ;  and,  full  of  con-
sternation at  an  event  so  unexpected,  openly  expressed
their  rage  against  Arran,  and  began  to  suspect  the  king
himself  to  be  an  enemy  to  the  reformed  religion.9

i  Spotsw.  333.

THE

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND.

BOOK  VII.

1584. VV  HILE  Scotland  was  torn  by  intestine  factions,
ton™  era-"  Elizabeth  was  alarmed  with  the  rumour  of  a

Pr°ject  in  agitation  for  setting  Mary  at  liberty.
Elizabeth.  Francis  Throkmorton,  a  Cheshire  gentleman,
was  suspected  of  being  deeply  concerned  in  the  design,
and  on  that  suspicion  he  was  taken  into  custody.  Among
his  papers  were  found  two  lists  ;  one,  of  the  principal
harbours  in  the  kingdom,  with  an  account  of  their  situ-
ation, and  of  the  depth  of  water  in  each  ;  the  other,  of
all  the  eminent  Roman  Catholics  in  England.  This
circumstance  confirmed  the  suspicion  against  him,  and
some  dark  and  desperate  conspiracy  was  supposed  just
ready  to  break  out.  At  first  he  boldly  avowed  his  in-
nocence, and  declared  that  the  two  papers  were  forged
by  the  queen's  ministers,  in  order  to  intimidate  or  in-
snare  him  ;  and  he  even  endured  the  rack  with  the
utmost  fortitude.  But  being  brought  a  second  time  to
the  place  of  torture,  his  resolution  failed  him,  and  he
not  only  acknowledged  that  he  had  held  a  secret  cor-
respondence with  the  queen  of  Scots,  but  discovered  a
design  that  was  formed  to  invade  England.  The  duke
of  Guise,  he  said,  undertook  to  furnish  troops,  and  to
conduct  the  enterprise.  The  pope  and  king  of  Spain
were  to  supply  the  money  necessary  for  carrying  it  on  ;
all  the  English  exiles  were  ready  to  take  arms  ;  many
of  the  Catholics  at  home  would  be  ready  to  join  them
at  their  landing  ;  Mendoza,  the  Spanish  ambassador,

92  SCOTLAND.  [1584.

who  was  the  life  of  the  conspiracy,  spared  no  pains  in
fomenting  the  spirit  of  disaffection  among  the  English,
or  in  hastening  the  preparations  on  the  continent ;  and
by  his  command,  he  made  the  two  lists,  the  copies
whereof  had  been  found  in  his  possession.  This  con-
fession he  retracted  at  his  trial ;  returned  to  it  again
after  sentence  was  passed  on  him  ;  and  retracted  it  once
more  at  the  place  of  execution.3

To  us  in  the  present  age  who  are  assisted  in  forming
our  opinion  of  this  matter  by  the  light  which  time  and
history  have  thrown  upon  the  designs  and  characters
of  the  princes  of  Guise,  many  circumstances  of  Throk-
morton's  confession  appear  to  be  extremely  remote
from  truth,  or  even  from  probability.  The  duke  of
Guise  was,  at  that  juncture,  far  from  being  in  a  situa-
tion to  undertake  foreign  conquests.  Without  either
power  or  office  at  court ;  hated  by  the  king,  and  per-
secuted by  the  favourites ;  he  had  no  leisure  for  any
thoughts  of  disturbing  the  quiet  of  neighbouring  states ;
his  vast  and  ambitious  mind  was  wholly  occupied  in
laying  the  foundation  of  that  famous  league  which
shook  the  throne  of  France.  But  at  the  time  when
Elizabeth  detected  this  conspiracy,  the  close  union
between  the  house  of  Guise  and  Philip  was  remarkable
to  all  Europe ;  and  as  their  great  enterprise  against
Henry  III.  was  not  yet  disclosed,  as  they  endeavoured
to  conceal  that  under  their  threatenings  to  invade
England,  Throkmorton's  discovery  appeared  to  be
extremely  probable ;  and  Elizabeth,  who  knew  how
ardently  all  the  parties  mentioned  by  him  wished  her
downfall,  thought  that  she  could  not  guard  her  kingdom
Designs  w^tn  to°  mucn  care.  The  indiscreet  zeal  of  the
of  Mary's  English  exiles  increased  her  fears.  Not  satis-

adherents

against fied  with  incessant  outcries  against  her  severity

Elizabeth. , - ,-,, _."  ,  ,  ,  ,  ?

to  the  Scottish  queen,  and  her  cruel  persecution
of  her  Catholic  subjects,  not  thinking  it  enough  that

a  Hollingshed,  1370.

1584.]  BOOK Vri.  93

one  pope  had  threatened  her  with  the  sentence  of  ex-
communication, and  another  had  actually  pronounced
it,  they  now  began  to  disperse  books  and  writings,  in
which  they  endeavoured  to  persuade  their  disciples,
that  it  would  be  a  meritorious  action  to  take  away  her
life  ;  they  openly  exhorted  the  maids  of  honour  to  treat
her  as  Judith  did  Holofernes,  and,  by  such  an  illus-
trious deed,  to  render  their  own  names  honourable  and
sacred  in  the  church  throughout  all  future  ages.b  For
all  these  reasons,  Elizabeth  not  only  inflicted  the  punish-
ment of  a  traitor  on  Throkmorton,  but  commanded  the
Spanish  ambassador  instantly  to  leave  England ;  and
that  she  might  be  in  no  danger  of  being  attacked  within
the  island,  she  determined  to  use  her  utmost  efforts,  in
order  to  recover  that  influence  over  the  Scottish  coun-
cils, which  she  had  for  some  time  entirely  lost.
She  endea-  There  were  three  different  methods  by  which
^-establish  Elizabeth  might  hope  to  accomplish  this ;  either
ence^n""  ^7  furnishing  such  effectual  aid  to  the  banished
Scotland  nobles,  as  would  enable  them  to  resume  the

by  gaming ,. „ ,.  e rr  •  i

Arran.  chief  direction  01  affairs ;  or  by  entering  into
such  a  treaty  with  Mary,  as  might  intimidate  her  son,
who,  being  now  accustomed  to  govern,  would  not  be
averse  from  agreeing  to  any  terms  rather  than  resign
the  sceptre,  or  admit  an  associate  in  the  throne;  or
by  gaining  the  earl  of  Arran,  to  secure  the  direction
of  the  king  his  master.  The  last  was  not  only  the
easiest  and  speediest,  but  most  likely  to  be  successful.
This  Elizabeth  resolved  to  pursue ;  but  without  laying
the  other  two  altogether  aside.  With  this  view  she
sent  Davison,  one  of  her  principal  secretaries,  a  man
of  abilities  and  address,  into  Scotland.  A  minister  so
venal  as  Arran,  hated  by  his  own  countrymen,  and
holding  his  power  by  the  most  precarious  of  all  tenures,
the  favour  of  a  young  prince,  accepted  Elizabeth's
offers  without  hesitation,  and  deemed  the  acquisition  of

b  Carad.  497.

94  SCOTLAND.  [1584.

her  protection  to  be  the  most  solid  foundation  of  his
own  greatness. Soon  after  he  consented  to  an

August  13.  .  .  •  i i i  TT

interview  with  lord  Hunsdon,  the  governor  of
Berwick,  and  being  honoured  with  the  pompous  title
of  lieutenant-general  for  the  king,  he  appeared  at  the
place  appointed  with  a  splendid  train.  In  Hunsdon's
presence  he  renewed  his  promises  of  an  inviolable  and
faithful  attachment  to  the  English  interest,  and  assured
him  that  James  should  enter  into  no  negotiation  which
might  tend  to  interrupt  the  peace  between  the  two
kingdoms ;  and  as  Elizabeth  began  to  entertain  the
same  fears  and  jealousies  concerning  the  king's  mar-
riage, which  had  formerly  disquieted  her  with  regard
to  his  mother's,  he  undertook  to  prevent  James  from
listening  to  any  overture  of  that  kind,  until  he  had
previously  obtained  the  queen  of  England's  consent0
Serere  The  banished  lords  and  their  adherents  soon

proceed- feit  the  effects  of  Arran's  friendship  with  Eng-

ings  against  r

the  banish-  land.  As  Elizabeth  had  permitted  them  to  take
refuge  in  her  dominions,  and  several  of  her
ministers  were  of  opinion  that  she  ought  to  employ  her
arms  in  the  defence  of  their  cause,  the  fear  of  this  was
the  only  thing  which  restrained  James  and  his  favourite
from  proceeding  to  such  extremities  against  them,  as
might  have  excited  the  pity  or  indignation  of  the  Eng-
lish, and  have  prompted  them  to  exert  themselves  with
vigour  in  their  behalf.  But  every  apprehension
'  of  this  kind  being  now  removed,  they  ventured
to  call  a  parliament,  in  which  an  act  was  passed,  at-
tainting Angus,  Mar,  Glamis,  and  a  great  number  of
their  followers.  Their  estates  devolved  to  the  crown,
and  according  to  the  practice  of  the  Scottish  monarchs,
who  were  obliged  to  reward  the  faction  which  adhered
to  them,  by  dividing  with  it  the  spoils  of  the  vanquished,
James  dealt  out  the  greater  part  of  these  to  Arran  and
his  associates/

«  Cald.  iii.  491. Melv.  315. See  Append.  No.  XL1II.  d  Cald.  Hi.  527.

1584.]  BOOK VII.  95

Against  the  Nor  was  the  treatment  of  the  clergy  less
dergy.  rig0rous.  All  ministers,  readers,  and  professors
in  colleges,  were  enjoined  to  subscribe,  within  forty
days,  a  paper  testifying  their  approbation  of  the  laws
concerning  the  church  enacted  in  last  parliament.
Many,  overawed  or  corrupted  by  the  court,  yielded
obedience ;  others  stood  out.  The  stipends  of  the  latter
were  sequestered,  some  of  the  more  active  committed
to  prison,  and  numbers  compelled  to  fly  the  kingdom.
Such  as  complied,  fell  under  the  suspicion  of  acting
from  mercenary  or  ambitious  motives.  Such  as  ad-
hered to  their  principles,  and  suffered  in  consequence
of  it,  acquired  a  high  reputation,  by  giving  this  con-
vincing evidence  of  their  firmness  and  sincerity.  The
judicatories  of  the  church  were  almost  entirely  sup-
pressed. In  some  places  scarce  as  many  ministers
remained,  as  to  perform  the  duties  of  religious  worship ;
they  soon  sunk  in  reputation  among  the  people,  and
being  prohibited  not  only  from  discoursing  of  public
affairs,  but  obliged,  by  the  jealousy  of  the  adminis-
tration, to  frame  every  sentiment  and  expression  in  such
a  manner  as  to  give  the  court  no  offence,  their  sermons
were  deemed  languid,  insipid,  and  contemptible ;  and
it  became  the  general  opinion,  that,  together  with  the
most  virtuous  of  the  nobles  and  the  most  faithful  of  the
clergy,  the  power  and  vigour  of  religion  were  now
banished  out  of  the  kingdom.6

Meanwhile,  Elizabeth  was  carrying  on  one  of  those
fruitless  negotiations  with  the  queen  of  Scots,  which  it
had  become  almost  matter  of  form  to  renew  every  year.
They  served  not  only  to  amuse  that  unhappy  princess
with  some  prospect  of  liberty  ;  but  furnished  an  apo-
logy for  eluding  the  solicitations  of  foreign  powers
on  her  behalf;  and  were  of  use  to  overawe  James,
by  shewing  him  that  she  could  at  any  time  set  free
a  dangerous  rival  to  dispute  his  authority.  These

«  Cald.  iii.  589.

96  SCOTLAND.  [1584.

treaties  she  suffered  to  proceed  to  what  length  she
pleased,  and  never  wanted  a  pretence  for  breaking
them  off,  when  they  became  no  longer  necessary.  The
treaty  now  on  foot  was  not,  perhaps,  more  sincere
than  many  which  preceded  it ;  the  reasons,  however,
which  rendered  it  ineffectual  were  far  from  being-
frivolous.

New  con-  As  Crichton,  a  Jesuit,  was  sailing  from  Flan^
agS  ders  towards  Scotland,  the  ship  on  board  of
Elizabeth.  wfticn  he  Was  a  passenger  happened  to  be
chased  by  pirates,  who,  in  that  age,  often  infested  the
narrow  seas.  Crichton,  in  great  confusion,  tore  in
pieces  some  papers  in  his  custody,  and  threw  them
away;  but,  by  a  very  extraordinary  accident,  the  wind
blew  them  back  into  the  ship,  and  they  were  immedi-
ately taken  up  by  some  of  the  passengers,  who  carried
them  to  Wade,  the  clerk  of  the  privy-council.  He,  with
great  industry  and  patience,  joined  them  together,  and
they  were  found  to  contain  the  account  of  a  plot^  said
to  have  been  formed  by  the  king  of  Spain  and  the  duke
of  Guise,  for  invading  England.  The  people  were  not
yet  recovered  from  the  fear  and  anxiety  occasioned  by
the  conspiracy  in  which  Throkmorton  had  been  engaged,
and  as  his  discoveries  appeared  now  to  be  confirmed
by  additional  evidence,  not  only  all  their  former  appre-
hensions recurred,  but  the  consternation  became  general
and  excessive.  As  all  the  dangers  with  which  England
had  been  threatened  for  some  years,  flowed  either  im-
mediately from  Mary  herself,  or  from  such  as  made  use
of  her  name  to  justify  their  insurrections  and  con-
spiracies, this  gradually  diminished  the  compassion  due
to  her  situation,  and  the  English,  instead  of  pitying,
began  to  fear  and  to  hate  her.  Elizabeth,  under  whose
wise  and  pacific  reign  the  English  enjoyed  tranquillity,
and  had  opened  sources  of  wealth  unknown  to  their
ancestors,  was  extremely  beloved  by  all  her  people ;  and
regard  to  her  safety,  not  less  than  to  their  own  interest,

1584.]

BOOK VII.

97

Occasions  them  against  the  Scottish  queen. In

an  associ-  order to discourage her adherents, it was

ation  in ,  ,  ,  ,

opposition  thought  necessary  to  convince  them,  by  some

to  Mary; pukiic  ^ee(jj  of  the  attachment  of  the  English

to  their  own  sovereign,  and  that  any  attempt  against

her  life  would  prove  fatal  to  her  rival. With  this

Oct.  19.

view  an  association  was  framed,  the  subscribers
of  which  bound  themselves  by  the  most  solemn  oaths,
"  to  defend  the  queen  against  all  her  enemies,  foreign
and  domestic ;  and  if  violence  should  be  offered  to  her
life,  in  order  to  favour  the  title  of  any  pretender  to  the
crown,  they  not  only  engaged  never  to  allow  or  ac-
knowledge the  person  or  persons  by  whom,  or  for
whom,  such  a  detestable  act  should  be  committed,  but
vowed,  in  the  presence  of  the  eternal  God,  to  prosecute
such  person  or  persons  to  the  death,  and  to  pursue  them,
with  their  utmost  vengeance,  to  their  utter  overthrow
and  extirpation. "f  Persons  of  all  ranks  subscribed  this
combination  with  the  greatest  eagerness  and  unanimity.g
which  Mary  considered  this  association,  not  only

greatly as  an  avowed  design  to  exclude  her  from  all

alarms  her. .  • i

right  ot  succession,  but  as  the  certain  and  im-
mediate forerunner  of  her  destruction.  In  order  to  avert
this,  she  made  such  feeble  efforts  as  were  still  in  her
power,  and  sent  Naue,  her  secretary,  to  court,  with  offers
of  more  entire  resignation  to  the  will  of  Elizabeth,  in
every  point,  which  had  been  the  occasion  of  their  long
enmity,  than  all  her  sufferings  hitherto  had  been  able
to  extort.h  But  whether  Mary  adhered  inflexibly  to  her
privileges  as  an  independent  sovereign,  or,  yielding  to
the  necessity  of  her  situation,  endeavoured,  by  conces-
sions, to  soothe  her  rival,  she  was  equally  unsuccessful.
Her  firmness  was  imputed  to  obstinacy,  or  to  the  secret
hope  of  foreign  assistance ;  her  concessions  were  either
believed  to  be  insincere,  or  to  flow  from  the  fear  of  some
imminent  danger.  Her  present  willingness,  however,

f  State  Trials,  i.  122.
VOL.  II.

e  Camd.  499.
H

•»  Id.  ib.

98  SCOTLAND.  [1584.

to  comply  with  any  terms  was  so  great,  that  Walsing-
ham  warmly  urged  his  mistress  to  come  to  a  final  agree-
ment with  her.1 But  Elizabeth  was  persuaded,  that  it
was  the  spirit  raised  by  the  association  which  had  ren-
dered her  so  passive  and  compliant. She  always  ima-
gined that  there  was  something  mysterious  and  deceit-
ful in  all  Mary's  actions,  and  suspected  her  of  carrying
on  a  dangerous  correspondence  with  the  English  Catho-
lics, both  within  and  without  the  kingdom. Nor  were
her  suspicions  altogether  void  of  foundation.  Mary  had,
about  this  time,  written  a  letter  to  Sir  Francis  Inglefield,
urging  him  to  hasten  the  execution  of  what  she  calls  the
Great  Plot  or  Designment,  without  hesitating  on  ac-
count of  any  danger  in  which  it  might  involve  her  life,
which  she  would  most  willingly  part  with,  if  by  that
sacrifice  she  could  procure  relief  for  so  great  a  number
she  is °f  the  oppressed  children  of  the  church. k In-
treated stead,  therefore,  of  hearkening  to  the  overtures
greater which  the  Scottish  queen  made,  or  granting  any
ngour. mitigation  of  the  hardships  of  which  she  com-
plained, Elizabeth  resolved  to  take  her  out  of  the  hands
of  the  earl  of  Shrewsbury,  and  to  appoint  Sir  Amias
Paulet  and  Sir  Drue  Drury  to  be  her  keepers. Shrews-
bury had  discharged  his  trust  with  great  fidelity,  during
fifteen  years,  but,  at  the  same  time,  had  treated  Mary
with  gentleness  and  respect;  and  had  always  sweetened
harsh  commands  by  the  humanity  with  which  he  put
them  in  execution. The  same  politeness  was  not  to  be
expected  from  men  of  an  inferior  rank,  whose  severe
vigilance  perhaps  was  their  chief  recommendation  to
that  employment,  and  the  only  merit  by  which  they
could  pretend  to  gain  favour  or  preferment.1
Gray,  a As  James  was  no  less  eager  than  ever  to  de-
vourite'of  Prive  tne  banished  nobles  of  Elizabeth's  protec-
the  king's,  tion,  he  appointed  the  master  of  Gray  his  am-
bassador to  the  court  of  England,  and  intrusted  him

1  See  App.  No.  XLIV.  k  Strype,  iii.  246.  >  Camd.  500.

1584.]  BOOK VII.  9£

with  the  conduct  of  a  negotiation  for  that  purpose.  For
this  honour  he  was  indebted  to  the  envy  and  jealousy
of  the  earl  of  Arran.  Gray  possessed  all  the  talents  of
a  courtier ;  a  graceful  person,  an  insinuating  address,
boundless  ambition,  and  a  restless  and  intriguing  spirit.
During  his  residence  in  France,  he  had  been  admitted
into  the  most  intimate  familiarity  with  the  duke  of  Guise,
and,  in  order  to  gain  his  favour,  had  renounced  the  Pro-
testant religion,  and  professed  the  utmost  zeal  for  the
captive  queen,  who  carried  on  a  secret  correspondence
with  him,  from  which  she  expected  great  advantages.
On  his  return  into  Scotland,  he  paid  court  to  James
with  extraordinary  assiduity,  and  his  accomplishments
did  not  fail  to  make  their  usual  impression  on  the  king's
heart.  Arran,  who  had  introduced  him,  began  quickly
to  dread  his  growing  favour ;  and  flattering  himself,
that  absence  would  efface  any  sentiments  of  tenderness,
which  were  forming  in  the  mind  of  a  young  prince,
pointed  him  out  by  his  malicious  praises,  as  the  most
proper  person  in  the  kingdom  for  an  embassy  of  such
importance ;  and  contributed  to  raise  him  to  that  high
dignity,  in  order  to  hasten  his  fall.  Elizabeth,  who  had
an  admirable  dexterity  in  discovering  the  proper  in-
struments for  carrying  on  her  designs,  endeavoured,  by
caresses  and  by  presents,  to  secure  Gray  to  her  interest.
The  former  flattered  his  vanity,  which  was  great ;  the
latter  supplied  his  profuseness,  which  was  still  greater.
He  abandoned  himself  without  reserve  to  Elizabeth's
direction,  and  not  only  undertook  to  retain  the  king
under  the  influence  of  England,  but  acted  as  a  spy  upon
the  Scottish  queen,  and  betrayed  to  her  rival  every
secret  that  he  could  draw  from  her  by  his  high  preten-
sions of  zeal  in  her  service.1"

His  interest  Gray's  credit  with  the  English  court  was  ex -
wStrf*  tremety  galling  to  the  banished  nobles.  Eliza-
. England,  beth  no  longer  thought  of  employing  her  power

m  Strype,  iii.  302. Melv.  316.
H 2

100  SCOTLAND.  [1584.

to  restore  them ;  she  found  it  easier  to  govern  Scotland
by  corrupting  the  king's  favourites ;  and,  in  compliance
with  Gray's  solicitations,  she  commanded  the
exiles  to  leave  the  north  of  England,  and  to  re-
move into  the  heart  of  the  kingdom.  This  rendered  it
difficult  for  them  to  hold  any  correspondence  with  their
partisans  in  Scotland,  and  almost  impossible  to  return
thither  without  her  permission.  Gray,  by  gaining  a
point  which  James  had  so  much  at  heart,  riveted  him-
self more  firmly  than  ever  in  his  favour;  and,  by  ac-.
quiring  greater  reputation,  became  capable  of  serving
Elizabeth  with  greater  success."

1583<  Arran  had  now  possessed  for  some  time  all
Arran's  the  power,  the  riches,  and  the  honours,  that  his
and  inso-  immoderate  ambition  could  desire,  or  the  fond-
>ce<  ness  of  a  prince,  who  set  no  limits  to  his  liberality
towards  his  favourites,  could  bestow.  The  office  of  lord-
chancellor,  the  highest  and  most  important  in  the  king-
dom, was  conferred  upon  him,  even  during  the  life  of  the
earl  of  Argyle,  who  succeeded  Athol  in  that  dignity ;°
and  the  public  beheld,  with  astonishment  and  indigna-
tion, a  man  educated  as  a  soldier  of  fortune,  ignorant  of
law,  and  a  contemner  of  justice,  appointed  to  preside  in
parliament,  in  the  privy-council,  in  the  court  of  session,
and  intrusted  with  the  supreme  disposal  of  the  property
of  his  fellow-subjects.  He  was,  at  the  same  time,  go-
vernor of  the  castles  of  Stirling  and  Edinburgh,  the  two
principal  forts  in  Scotland  ;  provost  of  the  city  of  Edin-
burgh ;  and  as  if  by  all  these  accumulated  dignities  his
merits  were  not  sufficiently  recompensed,  he  had  been
created  lieutenant-general  over  the  whole 'kingdom.  No
person  was  admitted  into  the  king's  presence  without
his  permission ;  no  favour  could  be  obtained  but  by  his
mediation.  James,  occupied  with  youthful  amusements,
devolved  upon  him  the  whole  regal  authority.  Such
unmerited  elevation  increased  his  natural  arrogance,

«  Cald.  iii.  643.  °  Crawf.  Offic.  of  State,  App.  447.

1585.]  BOOK VII.  101

and  rendered  it  intolerable.  He  was  no  longer  content
with  the  condition  of  a  subject,  but  pretended  to  derive
his  pedigree  from  Murdo  duke  of  Albany  ;  and  boasted
openly,  that  his  title  to  the  crown  was  preferable  to  that
of  the  king  himself.  But,  together  with  these  thoughts
of  royalty,  he  retained  the  meanness  suitable  to  his  pri-
mitive indigence.  His  venality  as  a  judge  was  scan-
dalous, and  was  exceeded  only  by  that  of  his  wife,  who,
in  defiance  of  decency,  made  herself  a  party  in  almost
every  suit  which  came  to  be  decided,  employed  her  in-
fluence to  corrupt  or  overawe  the  judges,  and  almost
openly  dictated  their  decisions.13  His  rapaciousness  as
a  minister  was  insatiable.  Not  satisfied  with  the  re-
venues of  so  many  offices ;  with  the  estate  and  honours
which  belonged  to  the  family  of  Hamilton ;  or  with  the
greater  part  of  Gowrie's  lands,  which  had  fallen  to  his
share ;  he  grasped  at  the  possessions  of  several  of  the
nobles.  He  required  lord  Maxwell  to  exchange  part  of
his  estate  for  the  forfeited  lands  of  Kinneil ;  and  be-
cause he  was  unwilling  to  quit  an  ancient  inheritance
for  a  possession  so  precarious,  he  stirred  up  against  him
his  hereditary  rival,  the  laird  of  Johnston,  and  involved
that  corner  of  the  kingdom  in  a  civil  war.  He  com-
mitted to  prison  the  earl  of  Athol,  lord  Home,  and  the
master  of  Cassils ;  the  first,  because  he  would  not  di-
vorce his  wife,  the  daughter  of  the  earl  of  Gowrie,  and
entail  his  estate  on  him ;  the  second,  because  he  was
unwilling  to  part  with  some  lands  adjacent  to  one  of
Arran's  estates  ;  and  the  third,  for  refusing  to  lend  him
money.  His  spies  and  informers  filled  the  whole  coun-
try, and  intruded  themselves  into  every  company.  The
nearest  neighbours  distrusted  and  feared  each  other.
All  familiar  society  was  at  an  end.  Even  the  common
intercourses  of  humanity  were  interrupted,  no  man  know-
ing in  whom  to  confide  or  where  to  utter  his  complaints.
There  is  not  perhaps  in  history  an  example  of  a  mi-

P  Cald.  Hi.  331. Scotstarvet's  Staggering  State,  7.

102  SCOTLAND.  [1585.

nister  so  universally  detestable  to  a  nation,  or  who  more
justly  deserved  its  detestation.q

Arran.,  notwithstanding,  regardless  of  the  sentiments
and  despising  the  murmurs  of  the  people,  gave  a  loose
to  his  natural  temper,  and  proceeded  to  acts  still  more
violent. David  Home  of  Argaty,  and  Patrick  his  bro-
ther, having  received  letters  from  one  of  the  banished
lords  about  private  business,  were  condemned  and  put
to  death,  for  holding  correspondence  with  rebels.  Cun-
ninghame  of  Drumwhasel,  and  Douglas  of  Mains,  two
gentlemen  of  honour  and  reputation,  were  accused  of
having  conspired  with  the  exiled  nobles  to  seize  the
king's  person ; a single  witness only  appeared ;  the
evidence  they  produced  of  their  innocence  was  unan-
swerable ;  their  accuser  himself  not  long  after  acknow-
ledged that  he  had  been  suborned  by  Arran  ;  and  all
men  believed  the  charge  against  them  to  be  groundless;
they  were  found  guilty,  notwithstanding,  and
suffered  the  death  of  traitors/

Parry's  About  the  same  time  that  these  gentlemen
againstacy  were  punished  for  a  pretended  conspiracy,
Elizabeth.  Elizabeth's  life  was  endangered  by  a  real  one.
Parry,  a  doctor  of  laws,  and  a  member  of  the  house  of
commons,  a  man  vain  and  fantastic,  but  of  a  resolute
spirit,  had  lately  been  reconciled  to  the  church  of  Rome ;
and  fraught  with  the  zeal  of  a  new  convert,  he  offered
to  demonstrate  the  sincerity  of  his  attachment  to  the
religion  which  he  had  embraced,  by  killing  Elizabeth.
Cardinal  Allen  had  published  a  book,  to  prove  the  mur-
der of  an  excommunicated  prince  to  be  not  only  lawful,
but  a  meritorious  action.  The  pope's  nuncio  at  Venice,
the  Jesuits  both  there  and  at  Paris,  the  English  exiles,
all  approved  of  the  design.  The  pope  himself  exhorted
him  to  persevere  ;  and  granted  him  for  his  encourage-
ment a  plenary  indulgence,  and  remission  of  his  sins.
Cardinal  di  Como  wrote  to  him  a  letter  to  the  same

<i  Spotsw.  337,  338.  r  Ibid.  338, Cald.  Hi.  794.

1585.]  BOOK  VII.  103

purpose ;  but  though  he  often  got  access  to  the  queen,
fear,  or  some  remaining  sense  of  duty,  restrained  him
from  perpetrating  the  crime. Happily  his  intention
was  at  last  discovered  by  Nevil,  the  only  person  in  Eng-
land to  whom  he  had  communicated  it;  and
having  himself  voluntarily  confessed  his  guilt,
he  suffered  the  punishment  which  it  deserved.5
A  severe These  repeated  conspiracies  against  their  so-
whictT' vereign  awakened  the  indignation  of  the  Eng-
fataTto ^s^  Parliamentj  and  produced  a  very  extraor-
Mary. dinary  statute,  which,  in  the  end,  proved  fatal
to  the  queen  of  Scots. By  this  law  the  association  in
defence  of  Elizabeth's  life  was  ratified,  and  it  was  far-
ther enacted,  "  That  if  any  rebellion  shall  be  excited
in  the  kingdom,  or  any  thing  attempted  to  the  hurt  of
her  majesty's  person,  by  or  for  any  person  pretending
a  title  to  the  crown,  the  queen  shall  empower  twenty-
four  persons,  by  a  commission  under  the  great  seal,  to
examine  into,  and  pass  sentence  upon  such  offences ;
and  after  judgment  given,  a  proclamation  shall  be  issued,
declaring  the  persons  whom  they  find  guilty  excluded
from  any  right  to  the  crown ;  and  her  majesty's  sub-
jects may  lawfully  pursue  every  one  of  them  to  the
death,  with  all  their  aiders  and  abettors;  and  if  any
design  against  the  life  of  thie  queen  take  effect,  the  per-
sons by  or  for  whom  such  a  detestable  act  is  executed,
and  their  issues,  being  in  any  wise  assenting  or  privy
to  the  same,  shall  be  disabled  for  ever  from  pretending
to  the  crown,  and  be  pursued  to  death  in  the  like  man-
ner."* This  act  was  plainly  levelled  at  the  queen  of
Scots ;  and,  whether  we  consider  it  as  a  voluntary  ex
pression  of  the  zeal  and  concern  of  the  nation  for  Eli
zabeth's  safety,  or  whether  we  impute  it  to  the  influence
which  that  artful  princess  preserved  over  her  parlia-
ments, it  is  no  easy  matter  to reconcile  it  with  the
general  principles  of  justice  or  humanity. Mary  was

8  State  Trials,  i.  103.  *  Ibid.  i.  123.

104  SCOTLAND.  [1585.

thereby  rendered  accountable  not  only  for  her  own
actions,  but  for  those  of  others;  in  consequence  of
which  she  might  forfeit  her  right  of  succession,  and
even  her  life  itself.

The  rigour  Mary  justly  considered  this  act  as  a  warning
Slfw*sich  to  PrePare  f°r  &e  worst  extremities.  Eliza-
treatedin-  beth's  ministers,  it  is  probable,  had  resolved  by

creased.  '  «• j

this  time  to  take  away  her  me ;  and  sunered
books  to  be  published,  in  order  to  persuade  the  nation
thi'it  this  cruel  and  unprecedented  measure  was  not
on./  necessary  but  just.u  Even  that  short  period  of  her
dayc  which  remained,  they  rendered  uncomfortable,  by
every  hardship  and  indignity  which  it  was  in  their
power  to  inflict.  Almost  all  her  servants  were  dis-
missed, she  was  treated  no  longer  with  the  respect  due
to  a  queen ;  and,  though  the  rigour  of  seventeen  years'
imprisonment  had  broken  her  constitution,  she  was
confined  to  two  ruinous  chambers,  scarcely  habitable,
even  in  the  middle  of  summer,  by  reason  of  cold.  Not-
withstanding the  scantiness  of  her  revenue,  she  had
been  accustomed  to  distribute  regularly  some  alms
among  the  poor  in  the  village  adjoining  to  the  castle.
Paulet  now  refused  her  liberty  to  perform  this  pious
and  humane  office,  which  had  afforded  her  great  conso-
lation amidst  her  own  sufferings.  The  castle  in  which
she  resided  was  converted  into  a  common  prison ;  and
a  young  man,  suspected  of  Popery,  was  confined  there,
and  treated  under  her  eye  with  such  rigour,  that  he  died
of  the  ill  usage.  She  often  complained  to  Elizabeth  of
these  multiplied  injuries,  and  expostulated  as  became
a  woman  and  a  queen ;  but  as  no  political  reason  now
obliged  that  princess  to  amuse  her  any  longer  with
fallacious  hopes,  far  from  granting  her  any  redress,  she
did  not  even  deign  to  give  her  any  answer.  The  king
of  France,  closely  allied  to  Elizabeth,  on  whom  he  de-
pended for  assistance  against  his  rebellious  subjects,

u  Strype,  Hi.  299.

1585.]  BOOK VII.  105

was  afraid  of  espousing  Mary's  cause  with  any  warmth ;
and  all  his  solicitations  in  her  behalf  were  feeble,  for-
mal, and  inefficacious.  But  Castelnau,  the  French  am-
bassador, whose  compassion  and  zeal  for  the  unhappy
queen  supplied  the  defects  in  his  instructions,  remon-
strated with  such  vigour  against  the  indignities  to  which
she  was  exposed,  that  by  his  importunity,  he  prevailed
at  length  to  have  her  removed  to  Tuthbury;  though
she  was  confined  the  greater  part  of  another  winter  in
her  present  wretched  habitation.3"
A  breach Neither  the  insults  of  her  enemies,  nor  the
Maly  and  neglect  of  her  friends,  made  such  an  impression
her  son. on  Mary  as  the  ingratitude  of  her  son. James
had  hitherto  treated  his  mother  with  filial  respect,  and
had  even  entered  into  negotiations  with  her,  which
gave  umbrage  to  Elizabeth. But  as  it  was  not  the  inte-
rest of  the  English  queen  that  his  good  correspondence
should  continue,  Gray,  who,  on  his  return  to  Scotland,
found  his  favour  with  the  king  greatly  increased  by  the
success  of  his  embassy,  persuaded  him  to  write  a  harsh
and  undutiful  letter  to  his  mother,  in  which  he  ex-
pressly refused  to  acknowledge  her  to  be  queen  of  Scot-
land, or  to  consider  his  affairs  as  connected,  in  any
wise,  with  hers. This  cruel  requital  of  her  maternal
tenderness  overwhelmed  Mary  with  sorrow  and  de-
spair. "  Was  it  for  this,"  said  she,  in  a  letter
to  the  French  ambassador,  "  that  I  have  en-
dured so  much,  in  order  to  preserve  for  him  the  inhe-
ritance to  which  I  have  a  just  right  ? I  am  far  from
envying  his  authority  in  Scotland, I  desire  no  power
there ;  nor  wish  to  set  my  foot  in  that  kingdom,  if  it
were  not  for  the  pleasure  of  once  embracing  a  son,
whom  I  have  hitherto  loved  with  too  tender  affection.
Whatever  he  either  enjoys  or  expects,  he  derived  it
from  me. From  him  I  never  received  assistance,  sup-
ply, or  benefit  of  any  kind. Let  not  my  allies  treat  him

x  Jebb,  vol.  'ii,  576—598.

106  SCOTLAND.  [1585.

any  longer  as  a  king :  he  holds  that  dignity  by  my
consent ;  and  if  a  speedy  repentance  do  not  appease
my  just  resentment,  I  will  load  him  with  a  parent's
curse,  and  surrender  my  crown,  with  all  my  preten-
sions, to  one  who  will  receive  them  with  gratitude,  and
defend  them  with  vigour."y  The  love  which  James
bore  to  his  mother,  whom  he  had  never  known,  and
whom  he  had  been  early  taught  to  consider  as  one  of
the  most  abandoned  persons  of  her  sex,  cannot  be  sup-
posed ever  to  have  been  ardent ;  and  he  did  not  now  take
any  pains  to  regain  her  favour.  But  whether  her  in-
dignation at  his  undutiful  behaviour,  added  to  her
bigotted  attachment  to  Popery,  prompted  Mary  at  any
time  to  think  seriously  of  disinheriting  her  son;  or
whether  these  threatenings  were  uttered  in  a  sudden
sally  of  disappointed  affection,  it  is  now  no  easy  mat-
ter to  determine.  Some  papers  which  are  still  extant
seem  to  render  the  former  not  improbable.2
Dangerous  Cares  of  another  kind,  and  no  less  disquiet-
ofEur  ^g,  occupied  Elizabeth's  thoughts.  The  calm
beth;  which  she  had  long  enjoyed,  seemed  now  to
be  at  an  end  ;  and  such  storms  were  gathering  in  every
quarter,  as  filled  her  with  just  alarm.  All  the  neigh-
bouring nations  had  undergone  revolutions  extremely
to  her  disadvantage.  The  great  qualities  which  Henry
III.  had  displayed  in  his  youth,  and  which  raised  the
expectations  of  his  subjects  so  high,  vanished  on  his
ascending  the  throne  ;  and  his  acquiring  supreme
power  seems  not  only  to  have  corrupted  his  heart,  but
to  have  impaired  his  understanding.  He  soon  lost  the
esteem  and  affection  of  the  nation  ;  and  a  life  divided
between  the  austerities  of  a  superstitious  devotion,  and
the  extravagancies  of  the  most  dissolute  debauchery,
rendered  him  as  contemptible  as  he  was  odious  on  ac-
count of  his  rapaciousness,  his  profusion,  and  the  fond-
ness with  which  he  doated  on  many  unworthy  minions.

y  Murdin,  566. Jebb,  ii.  571. See  App.  No.  XLV.  z  See  App.  No.  XLVI.

1585.]  BOOK VII.  107

On  the  death  of  his  only  brother,  those  sentiments  of
the  people  burst  out  with  violence. Henry  had  no
children,  and  though  but  thirty-two  years  of  age,  the
succession  of  the  crown  was  already  considered  as  open.
The  king  of  Navarre,  a  distant  descendant  of  the  royal
family,  but  the  undoubted  heir  to  the  crown,  was  a
From  the zealous  Protestant. The  prospect  of  an  event
Sf°theSS so  fata^  to  lneir  religion,  as  his  ascending  the
League ; throne  of  France,  alarmed  all  the  Catholics  of
Europe;  and  induced  the  duke  of  Guise,  countenanced
by  the  pope,  and  aided  by  the  king  of  Spain,  to  appear
as  the  defender  of  the  Romish  faith,  and  the  asserter
of  the  cardinal  of  Bourbon's  right  to  the  crown. In
order  to  unite  the  party,  a  bond  of  confederacy  was
formed,  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  Holy  League.
All  ranks  of  men  joined  in  it  with  emulation. The
spirit  spread  with  the  irresistible  rapidity  which  was
natural  to  religious  passions  in  that  age. The  destruc-
tion of  the  Reformation,  not  only  in  France,  but  all  over
Europe,  seemed  to  be  the  object  and  wish  of  the  whole
party ;  and  the  duke  of  Guise,  the  head  of  this  mighty
and  zealous  body,  acquired  authority  in  the  kingdom,
far  superior  to  that  which  the  king  himself  possessed .
From  the  Phi^P  Ik»  ^Y  t^ie  ccmqiiest  of  Portugal,  had
power  of greatly  increased  the  naval  power  of  Spain,  and
had  at  last  reduced  under  his  dominion  all  that
portion  of  the  continent  which  lies  beyond  the  Pyre-
nean  mountains,  and  which  nature  seems  to  have  des-
tined to  form  one  great  monarchy. William  prince  of
Orange,  who  first  encouraged  the  inhabitants  of  the
Netherlands  to  assert  their  liberties,  and  whose  wisdom
and  valour  formed  and  protected  the  rising  common-
wealth, had  fallen  by  the  hands  of  an  assassin. The
superior  genius  of  the  prince  of  Parma  had  given  an
entire  turn  to  the  fate  of  war  in  the  Low  Countries ;  all
his  enterprises,  concerted  with  consummate  skill,  and
executed  with  equal  bravery,  had  been  attended  with
success ;  and  the  Dutch,  reduced  to  the  last  extremity,

108  SCOTLAND.  [1585.

were  on  the  point  of  falling  under  the  dominion  of  their
ancient  master.

Her  wise None  of  those  circumstances,  to  which  Eli-
ous  col-r zabeth  had  hitherto  owed  her  security,  existed
duct- any  longer. She  could  derive  no  advantage
from  the  jealousy  which  had  subsisted  between  France
and  Spain ;  Philip,  by  means  of  his  confederacy  with
the  duke  of  Guise,  had  an  equal  sway  in  the  councils
of  both  kingdoms. The  Hugonots  were  unable  to  con-
tend with  the  power  of  the  league  ;  and  little  could  be
expected  from  any  diversion  which  they  might  create.
Nor  was  it  probable  that  the  Netherlands  could  long
employ  the  arms,  or  divide  the  strength  of  Spain. In
this  situation  of  the  affairs  of  Europe,  it  became  neces-
sary for  Elizabeth  to  form  a  new  plan  of  conduct ;  and
her  wisdom  in  forming  it  was  not  greater  than  the  vi-
gour with  which  she  carried  it  on. The  measures  most
suitable  to  her  natural  temper,  and  which  she  had
hitherto  pursued,  were  cautious  and  safe ;  those  which
she  now  adopted  were  enterprising  and  hazardous.
She  preferred  peace,  but  was  not  afraid  of  war  ;  and
was  capable,  when  compelled  by  necessity,  not  only
of  defending  herself  with  spirit,  but  of  attacking  her
enemies  with  a  boldness  which  averted  danger  from  her
own  dominions. She  immediately  furnished  the  Hu-
gonots with  a  considerable  supply  in  money. She  car-
ried on  a  private  negotiation  with  Henry  III.,  who,
though  compelled  to  join  the  league,  hated  the  leaders
of  it,  and  wished  for  their  destruction. She  openly
undertook  the  protection  of  the  Dutch  commonwealth,
and  sent  a  powerful  army  to  its  assistance. She  en-
deavoured to  form  a  general  confederacy  of  the  Protes-
Resolves tant  Prmces>  m  opposition  to  the  Popish  league,
to  punish She  determined  to  proceed  with  the  utmost  ri-
tog^i5"1 gour  against  the  queen  of  Scots,  whose  sufFer-
e  kmg' ings  and  rights  afforded  her  enemies  a  specious
pretence  for  invading  her  dominions. She  resolved  to
redouble  her  endeavours,  in  order  to  effect  a  closer

May  29.

1585.]  BOOK VII.  109

union  with  Scotland,  and  to  extend  and  perpetuate  her
influence  over  the  counsels  of  that  nation.

She  found  it  no  difficult  matter  to  induce  most  of  the
Scottish  courtiers  to  promote  all  her  designs.  Gray,
Sir  John'Maitland,  who  had  been  advanced  to  the  office
of  secretary,  which  his  brother  formerly  held,  Sir  Lewis
Bellenden  the  justice  clerk,  who  had  succeeded  Gray
as  the  king's  resident  at  London,  were  the  persons  in
whom  she  chiefly  confided.  In  order  to  direct
and  quicken  their  motions,  she  dispatched  Sir
Edward  Wotton  along  with  Bellenden  into  Scotland.
This  man  was  gay,  well-bred,  and  entertaining;  he
excelled  in  all  the  exercises  for  which  James  had  a
passion,  and  amused  the  young  king  by  relating  the
adventures  which  he  had  met  with,  and  the  observa-
tions he  had  made,  during  a  long  residence  in  foreign
countries;  but,  under  the  veil  of  these  superficial  qua-
lities, he  concealed  a  dangerous  and  intriguing  spirit.
He  soon  grew  into  high  favour  with  James,  and  while
he  was  seemingly  attentive  only  to  pleasure  and  diver-
sions, he  acquired  influence  over  the  public  counsels,
to  a  degree  which  was  indecent  for  a  stranger  to
possess/1

Proposes  Nothing,  however,  could  be  more  acceptable
with  Scot-  to  tne  nation,  than  the  proposal  which  he  made
land.  of  a  strict  alliance  between  the  two  kingdoms,
in  defence  of  the  reformed  religion.  The  rapid  and
alarming  progress  of  the  Popish  league  seemed  to  call
on  all  Protestant  princes  to  unite  for  the  preservation  of
their  common  faith.  James  embraced  the  overture  with
warmth,  and  a  convention  of  estates  empowered

July  29. ,  .

him  to  conclude  such  a  treaty,  and  engaged  to
ratify  it  in  parliament.5  The  alacrity  with  which  James
concurred  in  this  measure  must  not  be  wholly  ascribed
either  to  his  own  zeal,  or  to  Wotton's  address  ;  it  was
owing  in  part  to  Elizabeth's  liberality.  As  a  mark  of

Melv.  317.

Spotsw.  339,

110  SCOTLAND.  [1585.

her  motherly  affection  for  the  young  king,  she  settled
on  him  an  annual  pension  of  five  thousand  pounds ;
the  same  sum  which  her  father  had  allotted  her  before
she  ascended  the  throne.  This  circumstance,  which
she  took  care  to  mention,  rendered  a  sum,  which  in  that
age  was  far  from  being  inconsiderable,  a  very  accept-
able present  to  the  king,  whose  revenues,  during  a  long
minority,  had  been  almost  totally  dissipated.0
Under-  But  the  chief  object  of  Wotton's  intrigues  was
Armn's  ^°  rum  AiTan.  While  a  minion  so  odious  to  the
power.  nation  continued  to  govern  the  king,  his  assist-
ance could  be  of  little  advantage  to  Elizabeth.  And
though  Arran,  ever  since  his  interview  with  Hunsdon,
had  appeared  extremely  for  her  interest,  she  could  place
no  great  confidence  in  a  man  whose  conduct  was  so
capricious  and  irregular,  and  who,  notwithstanding  his
protestations  to  the  contrary,  still  continued  a  secret
correspondence  both  with  Mary  and  with  the  duke  of
Guise.  The  banished  lords  were  attached  to  England
from  affection  as  well  as  principle,  and  were  the  only
persons  among  the  Scots  whom,  in  any  dangerous  exi-
gency, she  could  thoroughly  trust.  Before  Bellenden
left  London,  they  had.  been  summoned  thither,  under
colour  of  vindicating  themselves  from  his  accusations,
but,  in  reality,  to  concert  with  him  the  most  proper
measures  for  restoring  them  to  their  country.  Wotton
pursued  this  plan,  and  endeavoured  to  ripen  it  for  exe-
cution ;  and  it  was  greatly  facilitated  by  an  event  nei-
ther uncommon  nor  considerable.  Sir  John  Forster,
and  Ker  of  Ferniherst,  the  English  and  Scottish  war-
dens of  the  middle  marches,  having  met,  according  to
the  custom  of  the  borders,  about  midsummer,  a  fray
arose,  and  lord  Russel,  the  earl  of  Bedford's  eldest  son,
happened  to  be  killed.  This  scuffle  was  purely  acci-
dental, but  Elizabeth  chose  to  consider  it  as  a  design
formed  by  Ker,  at  the  instigation  of  Arran,  to  involve

«  Caid.  iii.  505.

1585.]  BOOK VII.  Ill

the  two  kingdoms  in  war.  She  insisted  that  both  should
be  delivered  up  to  her ;  and,  though  James  eluded  that
demand,  he  was  obliged  to  confine  Arran  in  St.  An-
drew's, and  Ker  in  Aberdeen.  During  his  absence
from  court,  Wotton  and  his  associates  carried  on  their
intrigues  without  interruption.  By  their  advice,

Assists  the  _to . - ,  .  ,r  jj

banished the  banished  nobles  endeavoured  to  accommo-
date their  differences  with  lord  John  and  lord
Claud,  the  duke  of  Chatelherault's  two  sons,  whom
Morton's  violence  had  driven  out  of  the  king-

Oct.  16.  .  j

dom.  Ineir  common  sunermgs,  and  common
interest,  induced  both  parties  to  bury  in  oblivion  the
ancient  discord  which  had  subsisted  between  the  houses
of  Hamilton  and  Douglas.  By  Elizabeth's  permission,
they  returned  in  a  body  to  the  borders  of  Scotland.
Arran,  who  had  again  recovered  favour,  insisted  on
putting  the  kingdom  in  a  posture  of  defence ;  but  Gray,
Bellenden,  and  Maitland,  secretly  thwarted  all  his
measures.  Some  necessary  orders  they  prevented  from
being  issued ;  others  they  rendered  ineffectual  by  the
manner  of  execution ;  and  all  of  them  were  obeyed
slowly,  and  with  reluctance/

Wotton's  fertile  brain  was,  at  the  same  time,  big  with
another  and  more  dangerous  plot.  He  had  contrived
to  seize  the  king,  and  to  carry  him  by  force  into  Eng-
land. But  the  design  was  happily  discovered  ;  and,
in  order  to  avoid  the  punishment  which  his  treachery
merited,  he  departed  without  taking  leave.6
They  re-  Meanwhile  the  banished  lords  hastened  the
suc™tiTnd,  execution  of  their  enterprise ;  and,  as  their  friends
conciiwHo  anc^  vassa^s  were  now  ready  to  join  them,  they
the  king,  entered  Scotland.  Wherever  they  came,  they
were  welcomed  as  the  deliverers  of  their  country,  and
the  most  fervent  prayers  were  addressed  to  Heaven
for  the  success  of  their  arms.  They  advanced,  without
losing  a  moment,  towards  Stirling,  at  the  head  of  ten

<»  Spotsw.  340.  e  Melv.  335.

112  SCOTLAND.  [1585.

thousand  men.  The  king,  though  he  had  assembled
an  army  superior  in  number,  could  not  venture  to
meet  them  in  the  field,  with  troops  whose  loyalty  was
extremely  dubious,  and  who  at  best  were  far  from  being
hearty  in  the  cause ;  nor  was  either  the  town  or  castle
provided  for  a  siege.  The  gates,  however,  of  both  were
Nov  shut,  and  the  nobles  encamped  at  St.  Ninian's.

That  same  night  they  surprised  the  town,  or,
more  probably,  it  was  betrayed  into  their  hands ;  and
Arran,  who  had  undertaken  to  defend  it,  was  obliged
to  save  himself  by  a  precipitate  flight.  Next  morning
they  invested  the  castle,  in  which  there  were  not  pro-
visions for  twenty-four  hours  ;  and  James  was  necessi-
tated immediately  to  hearken  to  terms  of  accommoda-
tion. They  were  not  so  elated  with  success  as  to  urge
extravagant  demands,  nor  was  the  king  unwilling  to
make  every  reasonable  concession.  They  obtained  a
pardon  in  the  most  ample  form,  of  all  the  offences  which
they  had  committed ;  the  principal  forts  in  the  kingdom
were,  by  way  of  security,  put  into  their  hands ;  Craw-
ford, Montrose,  and  colonel  Stewart,  were  removed  from
the  king's  presence;  and  a  parliament  was  called,  in
order  to  establish  tranquillity  in  the  nation/
A  ariia-  Though  a  great  majority  in  this  parliament
raent.  consisted  of  the  confederate  nobles  and  their

adherents,  they  were  far  from  discovering  a  vin-
dictive spirit.  Satisfied  with  procuring  an  act,  restor-
ing them  to  their  ancient  honours  and  estates,  and  rati-
fying the  pardon  granted  by  the  king,  they  seemed  will-
ing to  forget  all  past  errors  in  the  administration,  and
spared  James  the  mortification  of  seeing  his  ministers
branded  with  any  public  note  of  infamy.  Arran  alone,
deprived  of  all  his  honours,  stripped  of  his  borrowed
spoils,  and  declared  an  enemy  to  his  country  by  public
proclamation,  sunk  back  into  obscurity,  and  must  hence-
forth be  mentioned  by  his  primitive  title  of  captain

f  Cald.  iii.  795.

1585.]

BOOK  VII.

113

Church
affairs.

James  Stewart.  As  he  had  been,  during  his  unmerited
prosperity,  the  object  of  the  hatred  and  indignation  of
his  countrymen,  they  beheld  his  fall  without  pity,  nor
did  all  his  sufferings  mitigate  their  resentment  in  the
least  degree.

The  clergy  were  the  only  body  of  men  who

obtained  no  redress  of  their  grievances  by  this
revolution.  The  confederate  nobles  had  all  along  af-
fected to  be  considered  as  guardians  of  the  privileges
and  discipline  of  the  church.  In  all  their  manifestos
they  had  declared  their  resolution  to  restore  these,  and
by  that  popular  pretence  had  gained  many  friends.  It
was  now  natural  to  expect  some  fruit  of  these  promises,
and  some  returns  of  gratitude  towards  many  of  the  most
eminent  preachers  who  had  suffered  in  their  cause,  and
who  demanded  the  repeal  of  the  laws  passed  the  pre-
ceding year.  The  king,  however,  was  resolute  to  main-
tain these  laws  in  full  authority ;  and  as  the  nobles
were  extremely  solicitous  not  to  disgust  him,  by  in-
sisting on  any  disagreeable  request,  the  claims  of  the
church  in  this,  as  well  as  in  many  other  instances,  were
sacrificed  to  the  interest  of  the  laity.  The  ministers
gave  vent  to  their  indignation  in  the  pulpit,  and  their
impatience  under  the  disappointment  broke  out  in  some
expressions  extremely  disrespectful  even  towards  the
king  himself.6

The  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  too,  felt  the

effects  of  their  anger.  The  provincial  synod  ot
Fife  summoned  him  to  appear,  and  to  answer  for  his
contempt  of  the  decrees  of  former  assemblies,  in  pre-
suming to  exercise  the  functions  of  a  bishop.  Though
he  refused  to  acknowledge  the  jurisdiction  of  the  court,
and  appealed  from  it  to  the  king,  a  sentence  of  excom-
munication, equally  indecent  and  irregular,  was  pro-
nounced against  him.  Adamson,  with  no  less  inde-

e  Spotsw.  343.
VOL.  II.  I

1586.

114  SCOTLAND.  [1586.

cency,  thundered  his  archiepiscopal  excommunication
against  Melvil,  and  some  other  of  his  opponents.

Soon  after,  a  general  assembly  was  held,  in
which  the  king,  with  some  difficulty,  obtained
an  act,  permitting  the  name  and  office  of  bishop  still  to
continue  in  the  church. The  power  of  the  order,  how-
ever, was  considerably  retrenched. The  exercise  of
discipline,  and  the  inspection  of  the  life  and  doctrine
of  the  clergy,  were  committed  to  presbyteries,  in  which
uishops  should  be  allowed  no  other  pre-eminence  but
that  of  presiding  as  perpetual  moderators.  They  them-
selves were  declared  to  be  subject,  in  the  same  manner
as  other  pastors,  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  general  as-
sembly. As  the  discussion  of  the  archbishop's  appeal
might  have  kindled  unusual  heats  in  the  assembly,  that
affair  was  terminated  by  a  compromise. He  renounced
any  claim  of  supremacy  over  the  church,  and  promised
to  demean  himself  suitably  to  the  character  of  a  bishop,
as  described  by  St.  Paul. The  assembly,  without  exa-
mining the  foundations  of  the  sentence  of  excommuni-
cation, declared  that  it  should  be  held  of  no  effect,  and
restored  him  to  all  the  privileges  which  he  enjoyed  be-
fore it  was  pronounced. Notwithstanding  the  extraor-
dinary tenderness  shewn  for  the  honour  of  the  synod,
and  the  delicacy  and  respect  with  which  its  jurisdiction
was  treated,  several  members  were  so  zealous  as  to
protest  against  this  decision.11

A  league The  court  of  Scotland  was  now  filled  with
land  con"  persons  so  warmly  attached  to  Elizabeth,  that

eluded.  t^e  ieague  between  the  two  kingdoms,  which
had  been  proposed  last  year,  met  with  no  interruption,
but  from  D'Esneval,  the  French  envoy.  James  himself
first  offered  to  renew  the  negotiations.  Elizabeth  did
not  suffer  such  a  favourable  opportunity  to  slip,  and
instantly  dispatched  Randolph  to  conclude  a  treaty,

h  Cald.  iii.  894. Spotsw.  346.

1586.]  BOOK VII.  115

which  she  so  much  desired.  The  danger  to
which  the  Protestant  religion  was  exposed,  by
the  late  combination  of  the  Popish  powers  for  its  de-
struction, and  the  necessity  of  a  strict  confederacy  among
those  who  had  embraced  the  Reformation,  in  order  to
obstruct  their  pernicious  designs,  were  mentioned  as
the  foundation  of  the  league.  The  chief  articles  in  it
were,  that  both  parties  should  bind  themselves  to  de-
fend the  evangelical  religion  ;  that  the  league  should
be  offensive  and  defensive  against  all  who  shall  endea-
vour to  disturb  the  exercise  of  religion  in  either  king-
dom ;  that  if  one  of  the  two  parties  be  invaded,  the
other,  notwithstanding  any  former  alliance,  should  not,
directly  or  indirectly,  assist  the  invader  ;  that  if  Eng-
land be  invaded  in  any  part  remote  from  Scotland,
James  should  assist  the  queen  with  two  thousand  horse
and  five  thousand  foot ;  that  if  the  enemy  landed  or  ap-
proached within  sixty  miles  of  Scotland,  the  king  should
take  the  field  with  his  whole  forces,  in  the  same  manner
as  he  would  do  in  defence  of  his  own  kingdom.  Eli-
zabeth, in  return,  undertook  to  act  in  defence  of  Scot-
land, if  it  should  be  invaded.  At  the  same  time  she
assured  the  king  that  no  step  should  be  taken,  which
might  derogate  in  any  degree  from  his  pretensions  to
the  English  crown.1  Elizabeth  expressed  great  satis-
faction with  a  treaty,  which  rendered  Scotland  a  useful
ally  instead  of  a  .dangerous  neighbour,  and  afforded
her  a  degree  of  security  on  that  side,  which  all  her  an-
cestors had  aimed  at,  but  none  of  them  had  been  able
to  obtain.  Zeal  for  religion,  together  with  the  bless-
ings of  peace  which  both  kingdoms  had  enjoyed  during
a  considerable  period,  had  so  far  abated  the  violence
of  national  antipathy,  that  the  king's  conduct  was  uni-
versally acceptable  to  his  own  people.k

The  acquittal  of  Archibald  Douglas,  at  this  time,  ex-
posed James  to  much  and  deserved  censure.  This  man

1  Spotsw.  351.  k  Camd.513.

i  2

116  SCOTLAND.  [1586.

was  deeply  engaged  in  the  conspiracy  against  the  life
of  the  king  his  father.  Both  Morton,  and  Binny  one
of  his  own  servants,  who  suffered  for  that  crime,  had
accused  him  of  being  present  at  the  murder.1  He  had
escaped  punishment  by  flying  into  England,  and  James
had  often  required  Elizabeth  to  deliver  up  a  person  so
unworthy  of  her  protection.  He  now  obtained  a  li^
cence,  from  the  king  himself,  to  return  into  Scotland  ;
and,  after  undergoing  a  mock  trial,  calculated  to  con-
ceal, rather  than  to  detect  his  guilt,  he  was  not  only
taken  into  favour  by  the  king,  but  sent  back  to  the  court
of  England,  with  the  honourable  character  of  his  am-
bassador. James  was  now  of  such  an  age,  that  his
youth  and  inexperience  cannot  be  pleaded  in  excuse
for  this  indecent  transaction.  It  must  be  imputed  to
the  excessive  facility  of  his  temper,  which  often  led  him
to  gratify  his  courtiers  at  the  expense  of  his  own  dig-
nity and  reputation."1
Rise  of  Not  long  after,  the  inconsiderate  affection  of

"K V»*

ton's  con-  the  English  Catholics  towards  Mary,  and  their
agafast  implacable  resentment  against  Elizabeth,  gave
Elizabeth,  rise  to  a  conspiracy  which  proved  fatal  to  the
one  queen,  left  an  indelible  stain  on  the  reputation  of
the  other,  and  presented  a  spectacle  to  Europe,  of
which  there  had  been  hitherto  no  example  in  the  his-
tory of  mankind.

Doctor  Gifford,  Gilbert  Gifford,  and  Hodgson,  priests
educated  in  the  seminary  at  Rheims,  had  adopted  an
extravagant  and  enthusiastic  notion,  that  the  bull  of
Pius  V,  against  Elizabeth  was  dictated  immediately  by
the  Holy  Ghost.  This  wild  opinion  they  instilled  into
Savage,  an  officer  in  the  Spanish  army,  noted  for  his
furious  zeal  and  daring  courage ;  and  persuaded  him
that  no  service  could  be  so  acceptable  to  heaven,  as  to
take  away  the  life  of  an  excommunicated  heretic.  Sa-

>  See  Append.  No.  XLVII.  Arnot,  Crim.  Trials,  7,  &c.
*  Spotsw.  348. Cald.  iu.  917.

April  26.

May  15.

1586.]  BOOK VII.  117

vage,  eager  to  obtain  the  crown  of  martyrdom,  bound
himself  by  a  solemn  vow  to  kill  Elizabeth.
Ballard,  a  pragmatical  priest  of  that  seminary,
had  at  that  time  come  over  to  Paris,  and  solicited  Men-
doza,  the  Spanish  ambassador  there,  to  procure  an  in-
vasion of  England,  while  the  affairs  of  the  league  were
so  prosperous,  and  the  kingdom  left  naked  by  sending
so  many  of  the  queen's  best  troops  into  the  Netherlands.
Paget  and  the  English  exiles  demonstrated  the  fruit-
lessness  of  such  an  attempt,  unless  Elizabeth  were  first
cut  off,  or  the  invaders  secured  of  a  powerful  concur-
rence on  their  landing.  If  it  could  be  hoped  that  either
of  these  events  would  happen,  effectual  aid  was  pro-
mised ;  and  in  the  mean  time  Ballard  was  sent  back  to
renew  his  intrigues.

He  communicated  his  designs  to  Anthony
Babington,  a  young  gentleman  in  Derbyshire,
of  a  large  fortune  and  many  amiable  qualities,  who
having  contracted,  during  his  residence  in  France,  a
familiarity  with  the  archbishop  of  Glasgow,  had  been
recommended  by  him  to  the  queen  of  Scots.  He  con-
curred with  Paget,  in  considering  the  death  of  Eliza-
beth as  a  necessary  preliminary  to.  any  invasion.  Bal-
lard gave  him  hopes  that  an  end  would  soon  be  put
to  her  days,  and  imparted  to  him  Savage's  vow,  who
was  now  in  London  waiting  for  an  opportunity  to  strike
the  blow.  But  Babington  thought  the  attempt  of  too
much  importance,  to  rely  on  a  single  hand  for  the  exe-
cution of  it,  and  proposed  that  five  resolute  gentlemen
should  be  joined  with  Savage  in  an  enterprise,  the  suc-
cess of  which  was  the  foundation  of  all  their  hopes.
He  offered  to  find  out  persons  willing  to  undertake  the
service,  whose  honour,  secrecy,  and  courage,  they  might
safely  trust.  He  accordingly  opened  the  matter  to  Ed-
ward Windsor,  Thomas  Salisbury,  Charles  Tinley,  Chi-
dioc  Tichbourne,  Robert  Gage,  John  Travers,  Robert
BarnwelJ,  John  Charnock,  Henry  Dun,  John  Jones,

118  SCOTLAN.D.  [1686.

and  Robert  Polly ;  all  of  them,  except  Polly,  whose
bustling  forward  zeal  introduced  him  into  their  society,
gentlemen  of  good  families,  united  together  in  the  bonds
of  private  friendship,  strengthened  by  the  more  power-
ful tie  of  religious  zeal.  Many  consultations  were  held  ;
their  plan  of  operations  was  at  last  settled ;  and  their
June.  different  parts  assigned.  Babington  himself

was  appointed  to  rescue  the  queen  of  Scots ;

Salisbury,  with  some  others,  undertook  to  ex-
cite several  counties  to  take  arms ;  the  murder  of  the
queen,  the  most  dangerous  and  important  service  of
all,  fell  to  Tichbourne  and  Savage,  with  four  associates.
So  totally  had  their  bigotted  prejudices  extinguished
the  principles  of  honour,  and  the  sentiments  of  huma-
nity suitable  to  their  rank,  that,  without  scruple  or  com-
punction, they  undertook  an  action  which  is  viewed
with  horror,  even  when  committed  by  the  meanest  and
most  profligate  of  mankind.  This  attempt,  on  the  con-
trary, appeared  to  them  ho  less  honourable  than  it  was
desperate ;  and,  in  order  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of
it,  they  had  a  picture  drawn,  containing  the  portraits
of  the  six  assassins,  with  that  of  Babington  in  the
middle^  and  a  motto  intimating  that  they  were  jointly
embarked  in  some  hazardous  design.
Discover-  ^ie  conspirators?  as  appefars  by  this  wanton
ed  by  Wai-  and  imprudent  instance  of  vanity,  seem  to  have

thought  a  discovery  hardly  possible,  andneither
distrusted  the  fidelity  of  their  companions,  nor  doubted
the  success  of  their  undertaking.  But  while  they  be-
lieved ;that  their  machinations  were  carried  on  with  the
most  profound  and  impenetrable  secrecy,  every  step
they  took  was  fully  known  to  Walsingham.  Polly  was
one  of  his  spies,  and  had  entered  into  the  conspiracy,
with  no  other  desigti  than  to  betray  his  associates.
Gilbert  Gifford  too,  having  been  sent  over  to  England
to  quicken  the  motions  of  the  conspirators,  had  been
gained  by  Walsingham,  and  gave  him  sure  intelligence

1586.]

BOOK  VII.

119

of  all  their  projects.  That  vigilant  minister  imme-
diately imparted  the  discoveries  which  he  had  made
to  Elizabeth  ;  and,  without  communicating  the  matter
to  any  other  of  the  counsellors,  they  agreed,  in  order
to  understand  the  plot  more  perfectly,  to  wait  until  it
was  ripened  into  some  form,  and  brought  near  the
point  of  execution.

They  are  At  last,  Elizabeth  thought  it  dangerous  and
punished,  criminal  to  expose  her  own  life,  and  to  tempt
Augusts  Providence  any  farther.  Ballard,  the  prime
mover  in  the  whole  conspiracy,  was  arrested.  His  as-
sociates, disconcerted  and  struck  with  astonishment,
endeavoured  to  save  themselves  by  flight.  But  within
a  few  days,  all  of  them,  except  Windsor,  were  seized
in  different  places  of  the  kingdom,  and  committed  to
the  Tower.  Though  they  had  undertaken  the  part,  they
wanted  the  firm  and  determined  spirit  of  assassins  ;
and,  influenced  by  fear  or  by  hope,  at  once  confessed  all
that  they  knew.  The  indignation  of  the  people,and  their
impatience  to  revenge  such  an  execrable  combination
Se  t  20  agamst  the  life  of  their  sovereign,  hastened  their

trial,  and  all  of  them  suffered  the  death  of  traitors*
Mary  is  ac-  Thus  far  Elizabeth's  conduct  may  be  pro-
being  an  nounced  both  prudent  and  laudable,  nor  can

-  sne  be  accused  of  violating  any  law  of  hu-
manity,  or  of  taking  any  precautions  beyond
what  were  necessary  for  her  own  safety.  But  a  tragi-
cal scene  followed,  with  regard  to  which  posterity  will
pass  a  very  different  judgment.

The  frantic  zeal  of  a  few  rash  young  men  accounts
sufficiently  for  all  the  wild  and  wicked  designs  which
they  had  formed.  But  this  was  not  the  light  in  which
Elizabeth  and  her  ministers  chose  to  place  the  con-
spiracy. They  wished  to  persuade  the  nation,  that
Babington  and  his  associates  should  be  considered
merely  as  instruments  employed  by  the  queen  of  Scots,

n  Camd.  515. State  Trials,  vol.  i.  110.

120  SCOTLAND.  [1586,

the  real  though  secret  author  of  so  many  attempts
against  the  life  of  Elizabeth,  and  the  peace of  her
kingdoms. They  produced  letters,  which  they  ascribed
to  her,  in  support  of  this  charge. These,  as  they  gave
out,  had  come  into  their  hands  by  the  following  singular
and  mysterious  method  of  conveyance. Gilford,  on  his
return  into  England,  had  been  trusted  by  some  of  the
exiles  with  letters  to  Mary;  but,  in  order  to  make  a
trial  of  his  fidelity  and  address,  they  were  only  blank
papers  made  up  in  that  form. These  being  safely  de-
livered by  him,  he  was  afterward  employed  without
farther  scruple. Walsingham  having  found  means  to
gain  this  man,  he,  by  the  permission  of  that  minister,
and  the  connivance  of  Paulet,  bribed  a  tradesman  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Chartley,  whither  Mary  had  been
conveyed,  who  deposited  the  letters  in  a  hole  in  the
wall  of  the  castle,  covered  with  a  loose  stone. Thence
they  were  taken  by  the  queen,  and  in  the  same  manner
her  answers  returned. All  these  were  carried  to  Wal-
singham, opened  by  him,  deciphered,  sealed  again  so
dexterously  that  the  fraud  could  not  be  perceived,  and
then  transmitted  to  the  persons  to  whom  they  were
directed. Two  letters  to  Babington,  with  several  to
Mendoza,  Paget,  Englefield,  and  the  English  fugitives,
were  procured  by  this  artifice. It  was  given  out,  that
in  these  letters  Mary  approved  of  the  conspiracy,  and
even  of  the  assassination;  that  she  directed  them  to
proceed  with  the  utmost  circumspection,  and  not  to
take  arms  until  foreign  auxiliaries  were  ready  to  join
them;  that  she  recommended  the  earl  of  Arundel,  his
brothers,  and  the  young  earl  of  Northumberland,  as
proper  persons  to  conduct  and  to  add  reputation  to
their  enterprise;  that  she  advised  them,  if  possible,  to
excite  at  the  same  time  some  commotion  in  Ireland ;
and,  above  all,  besought  them  to  concert  with  care  the
means  of  her  own  escape,  suggesting  to  them  several
expedients  for  that  purpose.

1586.]  BOOK  VII.  121

The  indig-  All  these  circumstances  were  opened  at  the
Se  English  trial  of  the  conspirators;  and  while  the  nation
onlha't  ac-  was  under  the  influence  of  those  terrors  which
count.  the  association  had  raised,  and  the  late  danger
had  augmented,  they  were  believed  without  hesitation
or  inquiry,  and  spread  a  general  alarm.  Mary's  zeal
for  her  religion  was  well  known  ;  and  in  that  age,  ex-
amples of  the  violent  and  sanguinary  spirit  which  it
inspired  were  numerous.  All  the  cabals  against  the
peace  of  the  kingdom  for  many  years  had  been  carried
on  in  her  name  ;  and  it  now  appears  evidently,  said  the
English,  that  the  safety  of  the  one  queen  is  incompati-
ble with  that  of  the  other.  Why  then,  added  they,
should  the  tranquillity  of  England  be  sacrificed  for  the
sake  of  a  stranger?  Why  is  a  life  so  dear  to  the  nation,
exposed  to  the  repeated  assaults  of  an  exasperated
rival?  The  case  supposed  in  the  association  has  now
happened,  the  sacred  person  of  our  sovereign  has  been
threatened,  and  why  should  not  an  injured  people  ex-
ecute that  just  vengeance  which  they  had  vowed  ?
Elizabeth  No  sentiments  could  be  more  agreeable  than
proceed  to  these  to  Elizabeth  and  her  ministers.  They

themselves  had  at  first  propagated  them  among
against  her.  the  people,  and  they  now  served  both  as  an
apology  and  a  motive  for  their  proceeding  to  such  ex-
tremities against  the  Scottish  queen  as  they  had  long
meditated.  The  more  numerous  the  injuries  were  which
Elizabeth  had  heaped  on  Mary,  the  more  she  feared
and  hated  that  unhappy  queen,  and  came  at  last  to  be
persuaded  that  there  could  be  no  other  security  for  her
own  life,  but  the  death  of  her  rival.  Burleigh  and
Walsingham  had  promoted  so  zealously  all  Elizabeth's
measures  with  regard  to  Scottish  affairs,  and  had  acted
with  so  little  reserve  in  opposition  to  Mary,  that  they
had  reason  to  dread  the  most  violent  effects  of  her
resentment,  if  ever  she  should  mount  the  throne  of
England.  From  tnis  additional  consideration  they  en-

122  SCOTLAND.  [1586.

deavoured,  with  the  utmost  earnestness,  to  hinder  an
event  so  fatal  to  themselves,  by  confirming  their  mis-
tress's fear  and  hatred  of  the  Scottish  queen.
Her  do-  Meanwhile,  Mary  was  guarded  with  unusual
paeperCss,&c.  vigilance,  and  great  care  was  taken  to  keep  her
seized.  ignorant  of  the  discovery  of  the  conspiracy.
Sir  Thomas  Gorges  was  at  last  sent  from  court  to  ac-
quaint her  both  of  it,  and  of  the  imputation  with  which
she  was  loaded  as  accessary  to  that  crime,  and  he  sur-
prised her  with  the  account  just  as  she  had  got  on  horse-
back to  ride  out  along  with  her  keepers.  She  was
struck  with  astonishment,  and  would  have  returned  to
her  apartment,  but  she  was  not  permitted ;  and,  in  her
absence,  her  private  closet  was  broke  open,  her  cabinet
and  papers  were  seized,  sealed,  and  sent  up  to  court.
Her  principal  domestics  too  were  arrested,  and  com-
mitted to  different  keepers.  Naue  and  Curie,  her  two
secretaries,  the  one  a  native  of  France,  the  other  of
Scotland,  were  carried  prisoners  to  London.  All  the
money  in  her  custody,  amounting  to  little  more  than
two  thousand  pounds,  was  secured.0  And,  after  lead-
ing her  about  for  some  days,  from  one  gentleman's
house  to  another,  she  was  conveyed  to  Fotheringay,  a
strong  castle  in  Northamptonshire.11
Deliberates  ^°  far*her  evidence  could  now  be  expected
concerning  against  Mary,  and  nothing  remained  but  to

the  method ° .  *"  °  -YTT-

of  proceed-  decide  what  should  be  her  fate.  With  regard
to  this,  Elizabeth,  and  those  ministers  in  whom
she  chiefly  confided,  seem  to  have  taken  their  resolu-
tion; but  there  was  still  great  variety  of  sentiments
among  her  other  counsellors.  Some  thought  it  suffi-
cient to  dismiss  all  Mary's  attendants,  and  to  keep  her
under  such  close  restraint,  as  would  cut  off  ail  pos-
sibility of  corresponding  with  the  enemies  of  the  king-
dom ;  and  as  her  constitution,  broken  by  long  confine-
ment, and  her  spirit,  dejected  with  so  many  sorrows,

«  See  Appendix,  No.  XLVIII.  P  Camd.  517.

1586.]  BOOK VII.  123

could  not  long  support  such  an  additional  load,  the
queen  and  nation  would  soon  be  delivered  from  all
their  fears.  But  though  it  might  be  easy  to  secure
Mary's  own  person,  it  was  impossible  to  diminish  the
reverence  which  the  Roman  Catholics  had  for  her  name,
or  to  extinguish  the  compassion  with  which  they  viewed
her  sufferings ;  while  such  sentiments  continued,  insur-
rections and  invasions  would  never  be  wanting  for  her
relief,  and  the  only  effect  of  any  new  rigour  would  be
to  render  these  attempts  more  frequent  and  more  dan-
gerous. For  this  reason  the  expedient  was  rejected.

Determines ^ PU^^C an(^ legal ^^  though the HlOSt

to  try  her  unexampled,  was  j  udged  the  most  unexception-
10  J*  able  method  of  proceeding ;  and  it  had  at  the
same  time,  a  semblance  of  justice,  accompanied  with
an  air  of  dignity.  It  was  in  vain  to  search  the  ancient
records  for  any  statute  or  precedent  to  justify  such  an
uncommon  step,  as  the  trial  of  a  foreign  prince,  who
had  not  entered  the  kingdom  in  arms,  but  had  fled
thither  for  refuge.  The  proceedings  against  her  were
founded  on  the  act  of  last  parliament,  and  by  applying
it  in  this  manner,  the  intention  of  those  who  had  framed
that  severe  statute  became  more  apparent.q

Elizabeth  resolved  that  no  circumstance  of  pomp  or
solemnity  should  be  wanting,  which  could  render  this
transaction  such  as  became  the  dignity  of  the  person
to  be  tried.  She  appointed,  by  a  commission  under
the  great  seal,  forty  persons,  the  most  illustrious  in  the
kingdom  by  their  birth  or  offices,  together  with  five  of
the  judges,  to  hear  and  decide  this  great  cause.  Many
difficulties  were  started  by  the  lawyers  about  the  name
and  title  by  which  Mary  should  be  arraigned ;  and,
while  the  essentials  of  justice  were  so  grossly  violated,
the  empty  forms  of  it  were  the  objects  of  their  care.
They  at  length  agreed  that  she  should  be  styled  "  Mary,
daughter  and  heir  of  James  V.  late  king  of  Scots,

9  Camd.  519. Johnst.  Hist.  113.

124  SCOTLAND.  [1586.

commonly called queen of  Scots and dowager of
France/'1"

After  the  many  indignities  which  she  had  lately  suf-
fered, Mary  could  no  longer  doubt  but  that  her  destruc-
tion was  determined.  She  expected  every  moment  to
end  her  days  by  poison,  or  by  some  of  those  secret
means  usually  employed  against  captive  princes.  Lest
the  malice  of  her  enemies,  at  the  same  time  that  it  de-
prived her  of  life,  should  endeavour  likewise  to  blast
her  reputation,  she  wrote  to  the  duke  of  Guise,  and
vindicated  herself,  in  the  strongest  terms,  from  the  im-
putation of  encouraging  or  of  being  accessary  to  the
conspiracy  for  assassinating  Elizabeth.3  In  the  solitude
of  her  prison,  the  strange  resolution  of  bringing  her  to
a  public  trial  had  not  reached  her  ears,  nor  did  the  idea
of  any  thing  so  unprecedented,  and  so  repugnant  to
regal  majesty,  once  enter  into  her  thoughts.
The  trial  ^n  ^e  ^^  °^  October,  the  commissioners
at  Fother-  appointed  by  Elizabeth  arrived  at  Fotheringay.
Next  morning  they  delivered  a  letter  from  their
sovereign  to  Mary,  in  which,  after  the  bitterest  re-
proaches and  accusations,  she  informed  her,  that  regard
for  the  happiness  of  the  nation  had  at  last  rendered  it
necessary  to  make  a  public  inquiry  into  her  conduct,
and  therefore  required  her,  as  she  had  lived  so  long
under  the  protection  of  the  laws  of  England,  to  submit
now  to  the  trial  which  they  ordained  to  be  taken  of  her
Mary  re-  crimes.  Mary,  though  surprised  at  this  message,
was  neither  appalled  at  the  danger,  nor  unmind-
fuj  Of  ner  own  dignity.  She  protested,  in  the
most  solemn  manner,  that  she  was  innocent  of  the  crime
laid  to  her  charge,  and  had  never  countenanced  any
attempt  against  the  life  of  the  queen  of  England ;  but
at  the  same  time,  refused  to  acknowledge  the  jurisdiction
of  her  commissioners.  "  I  came  into  the  kingdom,"
said  she,  "  an  independent  sovereign,  to  implore  the

*  Strype,  iii.  362.  »  Jebb,  ii.  283.

1586.]  BOOK  VII.  125

queen's  assistance,  not  to  subject  myself  to  her  authority.
Nor  is  my  spirit  so  broken  by  its  past  misfortunes,  or  so
intimidated  by  present  dangers,  as  to  stoop  to  any  thing
unbecoming  the  majesty  of  a  crowned  head,  or  that
will  disgrace  the  ancestors  from  whom  I  am  descended,
and  the  son  to  whom  I  shall  leave  my  throne.  If  I  must
be  tried,  princes  alone  can  be  my  peers.  The  queen
of  England's  subjects,  however  noble  their  birth  may
be,  are  of  a  rank  inferior  to  mine.  Ever  v since  my
arrival  in  this  kingdom  I  have  been  confined  as  a  pri-
soner. Its  laws  never  afforded  me  any  protection.
Let  them  not  now  be  perverted  in  order  to  take  away
my  life."

The  commissioners  employed  arguments  and  entrea-
ties to  overcome  Mary's  resolution.  They  even  threat-
ened to  proceed  according  to  the  forms  of  law,  and  to
pass  sentence  against  her  on  account  of  her  contumacy
.in  refusing  to  plead;  she  persisted,  however,  for  two
days,  to  decline  their  jurisdiction.  An  argument,  used
by  Hatton,  the  vice-chamberlain,  at  last  prevailed.  He
told  her,  that  by  avoiding  a  trial,  she  injured  her  own
reputation,  and  deprived  herself  of  the  only  opportunity
of  setting  her  innocence  in  a  clear  light ;  and  that  no-
thing would  be  more  agreeable  to  them,  or  more  accept-
able to  the  queen  their  mistress,  than  to  be  convinced,
by  undoubted  evidence,  that  she  had  been  unjustly  load-
ed with  foul  aspersions.

Consents  ^°  wonder  pretexts  so  plausible  should  impose
however  on  the  unwary  queen,  or  that  she,  unassisted

to  do  so.  .  P  • i

at  that  time  by  any  mend  or  counsellor,  should
not  be  able  to  detect  and  elude  all  the  artifices  of  Eliza-
beth's ablest  ministers.  In  a  situation  equally  melan-
choly, and  under  circumstances  nearly  similar,  her  grand-
son, Charles  I.  refused,  with  the  utmost  firmness,  to
acknowledge  the  usurped  jurisdiction  of  the  high  court
of  justice ;  and  posterity  has  approved  his  conduct,  as
suitable  to  the  dignity  of  a  king.  If  Mary  was  less  con-

126  SCOTLAND.  [1586.

stant  in  her  resolution,  it  must  be  imputed  solely  to  her
anxious  desire  of  vindicating  her  own  honour.

At  her  appearance  before  the  judges,  who  were
seated  in  the  great  hall  of  the  castle,  where  they
received  her  with  much  ceremony,  she  took  care  to
protest,  that  by  condescending  to  hear  and  to  give  an
answer  to  the  accusations  which  should  be  brought
against  her,  she  neither  acknowledged  the  jurisdiction
of  the  court,  nor  admitted  the  validity  and  justice  of  those
acts  by  which  they  pretended  to  try  her.

The  chancellor,  by  a  counter-protestation,  endeavour-
ed to  vindicate  the  authority  of  the  court.
The  accu-  Then  Elizabeth's  attorney  and  solicitor  opened
against  the  charge  against  her,  with  all  the  circum-
her-  stances  of  the  late  conspiracy.  Copies  of  Mary's
letters  to  Mendoza,  Babington,  Englefield,  and  Paget,
were  produced.  Babington's  confession,  those  of  Bal-
lard,  Savage,  and  the  other  conspirators,  together  with
the  declarations  of  Naue  and  Curie,  her  secretaries,  were
read,  and  the  whole  ranged  in  the  most  specious  order
which  the  art  of  the  lawyers  could  devise,  and  height-
ened by  every  colour  their  eloquence  could  add.

Mary  listened  to  their  harangues  attentively,  and
without  emotion.  But  at  the  mention  of  the  earl  of
Arundel's  name,  who  was  then  confined  in  the  Tower,
she  broke  out  into  this  tender  and  generous  exclamation;
"  Alas,  how  much  has  the  noble  house  of  Howard  suf-
fered for  my  sake !"

When  the  queen's  counsel  had  finished,  Mary  stood
up,  and  with  great  magnanimity,  and  equal  presence  of
mind,  began  her  defence.  She  bewailed  the  unhappi-
ness  of  her  own  situation,  that  after  a  captivity  of  nine-
teen years,  during  which  she  had  suffered  treatment  no
less  cruel  than  unmerited,  she  was  at  last  loaded  with
an  accusation,  which  tended  not  only  to  rob  her  of  her
right  of  succession,  and  to  deprive  her  of  life  itself,  but
to  transmit  her  name  with  infamy  to  future  ages  :  that,

1586.]  BOOK VII.  127

without  regarding  the  sacred  rights  of  sovereignty,  she
was  now  subjected  to  laws  framed  against  private  per-
sons ;  though  an  anointed  queen,  commanded  to  appear
before  the  tribunal  of  subjects ;  and,  like  a  common  cri-
minal, her  honour  exposed  to  the  petulant  tongues  of
lawyers,  capable  of  wresting  her  words,  and  of  misre-
presenting her  actions  :  that,  even  in  this  dishonourable
situation,  she  was  denied  the  privileges  usually  granted
to  criminals,  and  obliged  to  undertake  her  own  defence,
without  the  presence  of  any  friend  with  whom  to  advise,
without  the  aid  of  counsel,  and  without  the  use  of  her
own  papers.

She  then  proceeded  to  the  particular  articles  in  the
accusation.  She  absolutely  denied  any  correspondence
with  Babington  or  Ballard  :  copies  only  of  her  pretend-
ed letters  to  them  were  produced ;  though  nothing  less
than  her  handwriting  or  subscription  was  sufficient  to
convict  her  of  such  an  odious  crime ;  no  proof  could  be
brought  that  their  letters  were  delivered  into  her  hands,
or  that  any  answer  was  returned  by  her  direction ;  the
confessions  of  wretches  condemned  and  executed  for
such  a  detestable  action,  were  of  little  weight ;  fear  or
hope  might  extort  from  them  many  things  inconsistent
with  truth,  nor  ought  the  honour  of  a  queen  to  be  stain-
ed by  such  vile  testimony.  The  declaration  of  her  se-
cretaries was  not  more  conclusive  :  promises  and  threats
might  easily  overcome  the  resolution  of  two  strangers ;
in  order  to  screen  themselves,  they  might  throw  the
blame  on  her;  but  they  could  discover  nothing  to  her
prejudice,  without  violating,  in  the  first  place,  the  oath
of  fidelity  which  they  had  sworn  to  her ;  and  their  per-
jury, in  one  instance,  rendered  them  unworthy  of  credit
in  another :  the  letters  to  the  Spanish  ambassador  were
either  nothing  more  than  copies,  or  contained  only  what
was  perfectly  innocent :  "  I  have  often,"  continued  she,
"  made  such  efforts  for  the  recovery  of  my  liberty,  as
are  natural  to  a  human  creature.  Convinced,  by  the

128  SCOTLAND.  [1586.

sad  experience  of  so  many  years,  that  it  was  vain  to
expect  it  from  the  justice  or  generosity  of  the  queen  of
England,  I  have  frequently  solicited  foreign  princes,
and  called  upon  all  my  friends  to  employ  their  whole
interest  for  my  relief.  I  have  likewise  endeavoured  to
procure  for  the  English  Catholics  some  mitigation  of
the  rigour  with  which  they  are  now  treated ;  and  if  I
could  hope,  by  my  death,  to  deliver  them  from  oppres-
sion, I  am  willing  to  die  for  their  sake.  I  wish,  however,
to  imitate  the  example  of  Esther,  not  of  Judith,  and
would  rather  make  intercession  for  my  people,  than  shed
the  blood  of  the  meanest  creature,  in  order  to  save  them.
I  have  often  checked  the  intemperate  zeal  of  my  adhe-
rents, when  eitherjthe  severity  of  their  own  persecutions,
or  indignation  at  the  unheard-of  injuries  which  I  have
endured,  were  apt  to  precipitate  them  into  violent  coun-
sels. I  have  even  warned  the  queen  of  dangers  to  which
these  harsh  proceedings  exposed  herself.  And  worn
out,  as  I  now  am,  with  cares  and  sufferings,  the  pros-
pect of  a  crown  is  not  so  inviting,  that  I  should  ruin  my
soul  in  order  to  obtain  it.  I  am  no  stranger  to  the  feel-
ings of  humanity,  nor  unacquainted  with  the  duties  of
religion,  and  abhor  the  detestable  crime  of  assassination,
as  equally  repugnant  to  both.  And,  if  ever  I  have  given
consent  by  my  words,  or  even  by  my  thoughts,  to  any
attempt  against  the  life  of  the  queen  of  England,  far
from  declining  the  judgment  of  men,  I  shall  not  even
pray  for  the  mercy  of  God."*

Two  different  days  did  Mary  appear  before  the  judges,
and  in  every  part  of  her  behaviour  maintained  the
magnanimity  of  a  queen,  tempered  with  the  gentleness
and  modesty  of  a  woman.

Sentence  The  commissioners,  by  Elizabeth's  express
her.ms  command,  adjourned^  without  pronouncing  any
Oct.  25.  sentence,  to  the  star-chamber  in  Westminster.
When  assembled  in  that  place,  Naue  and  Curie  were

*  Camd.  520,  &c.

1586.]  BOOK VII.  129

brought  into  court,  and  confirmed  their  former  decla-
ration upon  oath ;  and  after  reviewing  all  their  proceed-
ings, the  commissioners  unanimously  declared  Mary
"  to  be  accessary  to  Babington's  conspiracy,  and  to
have  imagined  divers  matters  tending  to  the  hurt,  death,
and  destruction  of  Elizabeth,  contrary  to  the  express
words  of  the  statute  made  for  the  security  of  the  queen's
life.""

It  is  no  easy  matter  to  determine  whether  the  in-

Irregulan- .  .  .  . .

ties  in  the  justice  in  appointing  this  trial,  or  the  irregula-
rity in  conducting  it,  were  greatest  and  most  fla-
grant. By  what  right  did  Elizabeth  claim  authority  over
an  independent  queen  ?  Was  Mary  bound  to  comply  with
the  laws  of  a  foreign  kingdom?  How  could  the  subjects  of
another  prince  become  her  judges  ?  or,  if  such  an  insult
on  royalty  were  allowed,  ought  not  the  common  forms
of  justice  to  have  been  observed?  If  the  testimony  of
Babington  and  his  associates  were  so  explicit,  why  did
not  Elizabeth  spare  them  for  a  few  weeks,  and  by  con-
fronting them  with  Mary,  overwhelm  her  with  the  full
conviction  of  her  crimes?  Naue  and  Curie  were  both
alive ;  wherefore  did  not  they  appear  at  Fotheringay,  and
for  what  reason  were  they  produced  in  the  star-chamber,
where  Mary  was  not  present  to  hear  what  they  deposed  ?
Was  this  suspicious  evidence  enough  to  condemn  a
queen  ?  Ought  the  meanest  criminal  to  have  been  found
guilty  upon  such  feeble  and  inconclusive  proofs?

It  was  not,  however,  on  the  evidence  produced  at
her  trial,  that  the  sentence  against  Mary  was  founded.
That  served  as  a  pretence  to  justify,  but  was  not  the
cause  of  the  violent  steps  taken  by  Elizabeth  and  her
ministers  towards  her  destruction  ;.  and  was  employed
to  give  some  appearance  of  justice  to  what  was  the  off-
spring of  jealousy  and  fear.  The  nation,  blinded  with
resentment  against  Mary,  and  solicitous  to  secure  the
life  of  its  own  sovereign  from  every  danger,  observed

u  Camd.  525.
VOL.  II.  K

130  SCOTLAND.  [1586.

no  irregularities  in  the  proceedings,  and  attended  to  no
defects  in  the  proof,  but  grasped  at  the  suspicions  and
probabilities,  as  if  they  had  been  irrefragable  demon-
strations.

The  pariia-  The  parliament  met  a  few  days  after  sentence
firmer*  was  pronounced  against  Mary.  In  that  illus-
sentence,  trious  assembly  more  temper  and  discernment
than  are  to  be  found  among  the  people  might  have
been  expected.  Both  lords  and  commons,  however,
were  equally  under  the  dominion  of  popular  preju-
dices and  passions,  and  the  same  excess  of  zeal,  or
of  fear,  which  prevailed  in  the  nation,  are  apparent  in
all  their  proceedings.  They  entered  with  impatience
upon  an  inquiry  into  the  conspiracy,  and  the  danger
which  threatened  the  queen's  life,  as  well  as  the  peace
of  the  kingdom.  All  the  papers  which  had  been  pro-
duced at  Fotheringay  were  laid  before  them ;  and,
after  many  violent  invectives  against  the  queen  of  Scots,
both  houses  unanimously  ratified  the  proceedings  of  the
commissioners  by  whom  she  had  been  tried,  and  de-
clared the  sentence  against  her  to  be  just  and  well-
founded.  Not  satisfied  with  this,  they  pre-
tion  sented  a  joint  address  to  the  queen,  beseeching
of  h-  her,  as  she  regarded  her  own  safety,  the  preser-
vation of  the  Protestant  religion,  the  welfare  and  wishes
of  her  people,  to  publish  the  sentence ;  and,  without
farther  delay,  to  inflict  on  a  rival,  no  less  irreclaimable
than  dangerous,  the  punishment  which  she  had  merited
by  so  many  crimes.  This  request,  dictated  by  fears
unworthy  of  that  great  assembly,  was  enforced  by  rea-
sons still  more  unworthy.  They  were  drawn,  not  from
justice,  but  from  conveniency.  The  most  rigorous
confinement,  it  was  pretended,  could  not  curb  Mary's
intriguing  spirit ;  her  address  was  found,  by  long  ex-
perience, to  be  an  overmatch  for  the  vigilance  and
jealousy  of  all  her  keepers ;  the  severest  penal  laws
could  not  restrain  her  adherents,  who,  while  they  be-

Elizabeth's

1586.]  BOOK VII.  131

lieved  her  person  to  be  sacred,  would  despise  any  danger
to  which  themselves  alone  were  exposed  :  several  fo-
reign princes  were  ready  to  second  their  attempts,  and
waited  only  a  proper  opportunity  for  invading  the
kingdom,  and  asserting  the  Scottish  queen's  title  to  the
crown.  Her  life,  they  contended,  was,  for  these  rea-
sons, incompatible  with  Elizabeth's  safety  ;  and  if  she
were  spared  out  of  a  false  clemency,  the  queen's  per-
son, the  religion  and  liberties  of  the  kingdom,  could  not
be  one  moment  secure.  Necessity  required  that  she
should  be  sacrificed  in  order  to  preserve  these  ;  and  to
prove  this  sacrifice  to  be  no  less  just  than  necessary,
several  examples  in  history  were  produced,  and  many
texts  of  Scripture  quoted  ;  but  both  the  one  and  the
other  were  misapplied,  and  distorted  from  their  true
meaning.

Nothing,  however,  could  be  more  acceptable
to  Elizabeth,  than  an  address  in  this  strain.  It
extricated  her  out  of  a  situation  extremely  em-
barrassing ;  and,  without  depriving  her  of  the  power
of  sparing,  it  enabled  her  to  punish  her  rival  with  less
appearance  of  blame.  If  she  chose  the  former,  the
whole  honour  would  redound  to  her  own  clemency.  If
she  determined  on  the  latter,  whatever  was  rigorous
might  now  seem  to  be  extorted  by  the  solicitations  of
her  people,  rather  than  to  flow  from  her  own  inclina-
tion. Her  answer,  however,  was  in  a  style  which  she
often  used,  ambiguous  and  evasive,  under  the  appear-
ance of  openness  and  candour  ;  full  of  such  professions
of  regard  for  her  people,  as  served  to  heighten  their
loyalty  ;  of  such  complaints  of  Mary's  ingratitude,  as
were  calculated  to  excite  their  indignation  ;  and  of  such
insinuations  that  her  own  life  was  in  danger,  as  could
not  fail  to  keep  alive  their  fears.  In  the  end,  she  be-
sought them  to  save  her  the  infamy  and  the  pain  of
delivering  up  a  queen,  her  nearest  kinswoman,  to  pu-
nishment ;  and  to  consider  whether  it  might  not  still  be

K  2

132  SCOTLAND.  [1586.

possible  to  provide  for  the  public  security,  without
forcing  her  to  imbrue  her  hands  in  royal  blood.

The  true  meaning  of  this  reply  was  easily  understood*
The  lords  and  commons  renewed  their  former  request
with  additional  importunity,  which  was  far  from  being
either  unexpected  or  offensive.  Elizabeth  did  not  re-
turn any  answer  more  explicit ;  and  having  obtained
such  a  public  sanction  of  her  proceedings,  there  was  no
longer  any  reason  for  protracting  this  scene  of  dissimu-
lation; there  was  even  some  danger  that  her  feigned
difficulties  might  at  last  be  treated  as  real  ones ;  she
therefore  prorogued  the  parliament,  and  reserved  in  her
own  hands  the  sole  disposal  of  her  rival's  fate.x

All  the  princes  in  Europe  observed  the  pro-
France  in-  r  .  .*  r

terposes  cecdmgs  against  Mary  with  astonishment  and
b^iaifof  horror;  and  even  Henry  III.,  notwithstanding
Mary.  j^g  known  aversion  to  the  house  of  Guise,  was
obliged  to  interpose  on  her  behalf,  and  to  appear  in  de-
fence of  the  common  rights  of  royalty.  Aubespine,  his
resident  ambassador,  and  Bellievre,  who  was  sent  with
an  extraordinary  commission  to  the  same  purpose,  in-
terceded for  Mury  with  great  appearance  of  warmth.
They  employed  all  the  arguments  which  the  cause  na-
turally suggested ;  they  pleaded  from  justice,  from  gene-
rosity, and  humanity;  they  intermingled  reproaches  and
threats :  but  to  all  these  Elisabeth  continued  deaf  and
inexorable;  and  having  received  some  intimation  of
Henry's  real  unconcern  about  the  fate  of  the  Scottish
queen,  and  knowing  his  antipathy  to  all  the  race  of
Guise,  she  trusted  that  these  loud  remonstrances  would
be  followed  by  no  violent  resentment/
James  en-  slie  Paid  no  greater  regard  to  the  solicita-

9daevaevh"rl° tions  of  the  Scottisl1  king> which, as  they

mother's were  urged  with greater  sincerity,  merited

more  attention. Though  her  commissioners

had  been  extremely  careful  to  soothe  James,  by  publish-

*  Camd.  526. D'Ewes,  375.  y  Camd.  531.

1586.]  BOOK  VII.  133

ing  a  declaration  that  their  sentence  against  Mary  did,
in  no  degree,  derogate  from  his  honour,  or  invalidate
any  title  which  he  formerly  possessed ;  he  beheld  the
indignities  to  which  his  mother  had  been  exposed  with
filial  concern,  and  with  the  sentiments  which  became  a
king.  The  pride  of  the  Scottish  nation  was  roused  by
the  insult  offered  to  the  blood  of  their  monarchs,  and
called  upon  him  to  employ  the  most  vigorous  efforts,  in
order  to  prevent  or  to  revenge  the  queen's  death.

At  first,  he  could  hardly  believe  that  Elizabeth  would
venture  upon  an  action  so  unprecedented,  which  tended
so  visibly  to  render  the  persons  of  princes  less  sacred
in  the  eyes  of  the  people,  and  which  degraded  the  regal
dignity,  of  which,  at  other  times,  she  was  so  remark-
ably jealous.  But  as  soon  as  the  extraordinary  steps
which  she  took  discovered  her  intention,  he  dispatch-
ed Sir  William  Keith  to  London,  who,  together  with
Douglas,  his  ambassador  in  ordinary,  remonstrated,
in  the  strongest  terms,  against  the  injury  done  to  an
independent  queen,  in  subjecting  her  to  be  tried  like  a,
private  person,  and  by  laws  to  which  she  owed  no  obe-
dience; and  besought  Elizabeth  not  to  add  to  this
injury  by  suffering  a  sentence  unjust  in  itself,  as  well
as  dishonourable  to  the  king  of  Scots,  to  be  put  into
execution.2

Elizabeth  returning  no  answer  to  these  remonstrances
of  his  ambassador,  James  wrote  to  her  with  his  own
hand,  complaining  in  the  bitterest  terms  of  her  conduct,
not  without  threats  that  both  his  duty  and  his  honour
would  oblige  him  to  renounce  her  friendship,  and  to
act  as  became  a  son  when  called  to  revenge  his  mother's
wrongs.*  At  the  same  time  he  assembled  the  nobles,
who  promised  to  stand  by  him  in  so  good  a  cause.  He
appointed  ambassadors  to  France,  Spain,  and  Denmark,
in  order  to  implore  the  aid  of  these  courts ;  and  took

•  See  Append.  No.  XLIX. Murdin,  573,  &c.
»  Birch,  Mem.  i.  55,

Birch,  Meflj.

134  SCOTLAND.  [1586.

other  steps  towards  executing  his  threats  with  vigour.
The  high  strain  of  his  letter  enraged  Elizabeth  to  such
a  degree,  that  she  was  ready  to  dismiss  his  ambassadors
without  any  reply.  But  his  preparations  alarmed  and
embarrassed  her  ministers,  and  at  their  entreaty  she
returned  a  soft  and  evasive  answer,  promising  to  listen
to  any  overture  from  the  king,  that  tended  to  his  mother's
safety;  and  to  suspend  the  execution  of  the  sentence,
until  the  arrival  of  new  ambassadors  from  Scotland.5
Dec.  6.  Meanwhile,  she  commanded  the  sentence
tenceSen  against  Mary  to  be  published,  and  forgot  not
against  to  inform  the  people,  that  this  was  extorted

Mary  pub-
lished, from  her  by  the  repeated  entreaty  of  both  houses

of  parliament.  At  the  same  time,  she  dispatched  lord
Buckhurst  and  Beale  to  acquaint  Mary  with  the  sen-
tence, and  how  importunately  the  nation  demanded  the
execution  of  it;  and  though  she  had  not  hitherto  yielded
to  these  solicitations,  she  advised  her  to  prepare  for  an
event  which  might  become  necessary  for  securing  the
Protestant  religion,  as  well  as  quieting  the  minds  of  the
people.  Mary  received  the  message  not  only  without
symptoms  of  fear,  but  with  expressions  of  triumph.
"  No  wonder,"  said  she,  "  the  English  should  now
thirst  for  the  blood  of  a  foreign  prince,  they  have  often
offered  violence  to  their  own  monarch s.  But  after  so
many  sufferings,  death  comes  to  me  as  a  welcome  deli-
verer. I  am  proud  to  think  that  my  life  is  deemed  of
importance  to  the  Catholic  religion,  and  as  a  martyr
for  it  I  am  now  willing  to  die.'\

She  is  After  the  publication  of  the  sentence,  Mary
witMhe  was  stripPed  °f  every  remaining  mark  of  royal-
utmost  ty.  The  canopy  of  state  in  her  apartment  was
pulled  down ;  Paulet  entered  her  chamber,  and
approached  her  person  without  any  ceremony ;  and
even  appeared  covered  in  her  presence.  Shocked
with  these  indignities,  and  offended  at  this  gross

b  Spotsw.  551. Cald.  iv.  5.  '  Camd.528. Jebb,  291.

1586.]  BOOK VII.  135

familiarity,  to  which  she  had  never  been  accustomed,
Mary  once  more  complained  to  Elizabeth ;  and,
at  the  same  time,  as  her  last  request,  entreated
that  she  would  permit  her  servants  to  carry  her  dead  body
into  France,  to  be  laid  among  her  ancestors  in  hallowed
ground ;  that  some  of  her  domestics  might  be  present  at
her  death,  to  bear  witness  of  her  innocence,  and  firm
adherence  to  the  Catholic  faith ;  that  all  her  servants
might  be  suffered  to  leave  the  kingdom,  and  to  enjoy
those  small  legacies  which  she  should  bestow  on  them,
as  testimonies  of  her  affection ;  and  that,  in  the  mean
time,  her  almoner,  or  some  other  Catholic  priest,  might
be  allowed  to  attend  her,  and  to  assist  her  in  preparing
for  an  eternal  world.  She  besought  her,  in  the  name
of  Jesus,  by  the  soul  and  memory  of  Henry  VII.,  their
common  progenitor,  by  their  consanguinity,  and  the
royal  dignity  with  which  they  were  both  invested,  to
gratify  her  in  these  particulars,  and  to  indulge  her  so
far  as  to  signify  her  compliance  by  a  letter  under  her
own  hand.  Whether  Mary's  letter  was  ever  delivered
to  Elizabeth,  is  uncertain.  No  answer  was  returned,
and  no  regard  paid  to  her  requests.  She  was  offered
a  Protestant  bishop  or  dean  to  attend  her.  Them  she
rejected,  and  without  any  clergyman  to  direct  her  de-
votions, she  prepared,  in  great  tranquillity,  for  the  ap-
proach of  death,  which  she  now  believed  to  be  at  no
great  distance/

1587.  James,  without  losing  a  moment,  sent  new
news^his"  ambassadors  to  London.  These  were  the  mas-
soiicita-  ter  of  Gray,  and  Sir  Robert  Melvil.  In  order
her'behaif.  to  remove  Elizabeth's  fears,  they  offered  that
Jan*  *•  their  master  would  become  bound  that  no  con-
spiracy should  be  undertaken  against  her  person,  or  the
peace  of  the  kingdom,  with  Mary's  consent ;  and  for
the  faithful  performance  of  this,  would  deliver  some
of  the  most  considerable  of  the  Scottish  nobles  as  hos-

d  Camd.  528. Jcbb,  H.  295. "

SCOTLAND.  [1587.

tages. If  this  were  not  thought  sufficient,  they  pro-
posed that  Mary  should  resign  all  her  rights  and  pre-
tensions to  her  son,  from  whom  nothing  injurious  to
the  Protestant  religion,  or  inconsistent  with  Elizabeth's
safety,  could  be  feared.  The  former  proposal  Elizabeth
rejected  as  insecure;  the  latter,  as  dangerous. The
ambassadors  were  then  instructed  to  talk  in  a  higher
tone;  and  Melvil  executed  the  commission  with  fidelity
and  with  zeal. But  Gray,  with  his  usual  perfidy,  de-
ceived his  master,  who  trusted  him  with  a  negotiation
of  so  much  importance,  and  betrayed  the  queen  whom
he  was  employed  to  save. He  encouraged  and  urged
Elizabeth  to  execute  the  sentence  against  her  rival.  He
often  repeated  the  old  proverbial  sentence,  "The  dead
cannot  bite."  And  whatever  should  happen,  he  under-
took to  pacify  the  king's  rage,  or  at  least  to  prevent
any  violent  effects  of  his  resentment.6
Elizabeth's Elizabeth, meanwhile, discovered all the
d?sX8kSal"d  symptoms  of  the  most  violent  agitation  and
tion- disquietudeof  mind. She  shunned  society,  she
was  often  found  in  a  melancholy  and  .musing  posture,
and  repeating  with  much  emphasis  these  sentences,
which  she  borrowed  from  some  of  the  devices  then  in
vogue;  Autfer  autferi;  ne  feriare,  feri. Much,  no
doubt,  of  this  apparent  uneasiness  must  be  imputed
to  dissimulation  ;  it  was  impossible,  however,  that  a
princess,  naturally  so  cautious as Elizabeth,  should
venture  on  an  action,  which  might  expose  her  memory
to  infamy,  and  her  life  and  kingdom  to  danger,  with-
out reflecting  deeply,  and  hesitating  long. The  people
waited  her  determination  in  suspense  and  anxiety ;  and
lest  their  fear  or  their  zeal  should  subside,  rumours  of
danger  were  artfully  invented  and  propagated  with  the
utmost  industry. Aubespine,  the  French  ambassador,
was  accused  of  having  suborned  an  assassin  to  murder
the  queen. The  Spanish  fleet  was  said  by  some  to  be

*  Spotsw.  352. Murdin,  568. See  App.  No.  L.

1587.]  BOOK VII.  137

already  arrived  at  Milford-haven.  Others  affirmed  that
the  duke  of  Guise  had  landed  with  a  strong  army  in
Sussex.  Now,  it  was  reported  that  the  northern  coun-
ties were  up  in  arms ;  next  day,  that  the  Scots  had
entered  England  with  all  their  forces;  and  a  conspi-
racy, it  was  whispered,  was  on  foot,  for  seizing  the
queen  and  burning  the  city.  The  panic  grew  every  day
more  violent ;  and  the  people,  astonished  and  enraged,
called  for  the  execution  of  the  sentence  against  Mary,
as  the  only  thing  which  could  restore  tranquillity  to  the
kingdom/

While  these  sentiments  prevailed  among  her  sub-
jects, Elizabeth  thought  she  might  safely  venture  to
strike  the  blow  which  she  had  so  long  meditated.
Warrant  She  commanded  Davison,  one  of  the  secretaries
execution*  °f  state,  to  bring  to  her  the  fatal  warrant ;  and
FdtTi*  ner  behaviour  on  that  occasion  plainly  shewed,
that  it  is  not  to  humanity  that  we  must  ascribe
her  forbearance  hitherto.  At  the  very  moment  she  was
signing  the  writ  which  gaye  up  a  woman,  a  queen,  and
her  own  nearest  relation,  into  the  hands  of  the  execu-
tioner, she  was  capable  of  jesting.  "  Go,"  says  she  to
Davison,  "  and  tell  Walsingham  what  I  have  now  done,
though  I  am  afraid  he  will  die  for  grief  when  he  hears
it."  Her  chief  anxiety  was  how  to  secure  the  advan-
tages which  would  arise  from  Mary's  death,  without
appearing  to  have  given  her  consent  to  a  deed  so
odious.  She  often  hinted  to  Paulet  and  Drury,  as  well
as  to  some  other  courtiers,  that  now  was  the  time  to
discover  the  sincerity  of  their  concern  for  her  safety,
and  that  she  expected  their  zeal  would  extricate  her  out
of  her  present  perplexity.  But  they  were  wise  enough
to  seem  not  to  understand  her  meaning.  Even  after
the  warrant  was  signed,  she  commanded  a  letter  to  be
written  to  Paulet  in  less  ambiguous  terms,  complaining
of  his  remissness  in  sparing  so  long  the  life  of  her  ca-

f  Camb.  533,  534.

138  SCOTLAND.  [1587.

pital  enemy,  and  begging  him  to  remember  at  last  what
was  incumbent  on  him  as  an  affectionate  subject,  as
well  as  what  he  was  bound  to  do  by  the  oath  of  asso-
ciation, and  to  deliver  his  sovereign  from  continual
fear  and  danger,  by  shortening  the  days  of  his  prisoner.
Paulet,  though  rigorous  and  harsh,  and  often  brutal  in
the  discharge  of  what  he  thought  his  duty,  as  Mary's
keeper,  was  nevertheless  a  man  of  honour  and  inte-
grity. He  rejected  the  proposal  with  disdain;  and  la-
menting that  he  should  ever  have  been  deemed  capa-
ble of  acting  the  part  of  an  assassin,  he  declared  that
the  queen  might  dispose  of  his  life  at  her  pleasure,  but
that  he  would  never  stain  his  own  honour,  nor  leave
an  everlasting  mark  of  infamy  on  his  posterity,  by  lend-
ing his  hand  to  perpetrate  so  foul  a  crime.  On  the
receipt  of  this  letter,  Elizabeth  became  extremely  pee-
vish; and  calling  him  a  dainty  and.  precise  fellow,  who
would  promise  much  but  perform  nothing,  she  pro-
posed to  employ  one  Wingfield,  who  had  both  courage
and  inclination  to  strike  the  blow.8  But  Davison  re-
monstrating against  this,  as  a  deed  dishonourable  in
itself,  and  of  dangerous  example,  she  again  declared
her  intention  that  the  sentence  pronounced  by  the
commissioners  should  be  executed  according  to  law ;
and  as  she  had  already  signed  the  warrant,  she  begged
that  no  farther  application  might  be  made  to  her  on
that  head.  By  this,  the  privy- counsellors  thought  them-
selves sufficiently  authorized  to  proceed ;  and  prompt-
ed, as  they  pretended,  by  zeal  for  the  queen's  safety,  or
instigated,  as  is  more  probable,  by  the  apprehension  of
the  danger  to  which  they  would  themselves  be  exposed,
if  the  life  of  the  queen  of  Scots  were  spared,  they  as-
sembled in  the  council -chamber;  and  by  a  letter  under
all  their  hands,  empowered  the  earls  of  Shrewsbury  and
Kent,  together  with  the  high  sheriff  of  the  county,  to
see  the  sentence  put  in  execution.11

«  Biog.  Britan.  article  Davison.  >'  Camd.  534. Strype,  iii.  361.  364.

1587.]  BOOK VII.  139

On  Tuesday  the  7th  of  February,  the  two
havSurat  earls  arrived  at  Fotheringay,  and  demanded
access  to  the  queen,  read  in  her  presence  the
warrant  for  execution,  and  required  her  to  prepare  to
die  next  morning.  Mary  heard  them  to  the  end  with-
out emotion,  and  crossing  herself  in  the  name  of  the
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  That
soul,"  said  she,  "  is  not  worthy  the  joys  of  heaven,
which  repines  because  the  body  must  endure  the  stroke
of  the  executioner ;  and  though  I  did  not  expect  that
the  queen  of  England  would  set  the  first  example  of
violating  the  sacred  person  of  a  sovereign  prince,  I
willingly  submit  to  that  which  Providence  has  decreed
to  be  my  lot ; "  and  laying  her  hand  on  a  Bible,  which
happened  to  be  near  her,  she  solemnly  protested  that
she  was  innocent  of  that  conspiracy  which  Babington
had  carried  on  against  Elizabeth's  life.1  She  then  men-
tioned the  requests  contained  in  her  letter  to  Elizabeth,
but  obtained  no  satisfactory  answer.  She  entreated,
with  particular  earnestness,  that  now  in  her  last  mo-
ments her  almoner  might  be  suffered  to  attend  her,  and
that  she  might  enjoy  the  consolation  of  those  pious  in-
stitutions prescribed  by  her  religion.  Even  this  favour,
which  is  usually  granted  to  the  vilest  criminal,  was  ab-
solutely denied.

Her  attendants,  during  this  conversation,  were  bathed
in  tears,  and  though  overawed  by  the  presence  of  the
two  earls,  with  difficulty  suppressed  their  anguish ;  but
no  sooner  did  Kent  and  Shrewsbury  withdraw,  than
they  ran  to  their  mistress,  and  burst  out  into  the  most
passionate  expressions  of  tenderness  and  sorrow.  Mary,
however,  not  only  retained  perfect  composure  of  mind
herself,  but  endeavoured  to  moderate  their  excessive
grief;  and  falling  on  her  knees  with  all  her  domestics
round  her,  she  thanked  Heaven  that  her  sufferings  were
now  so  near  an  end,  and  prayed  that  she  might  be  en-

»Jebb,ii.  301.

140  SCOTLAND.  [1587.

abled  to  endure  what  still  remained  with  decency  and
with  fortitude.  The  greater  part  of  the  evening  she
employed  in  settling  her  worldly  affairs.  She  wrote
her  testament  with  her  own  hand.  Her  money,  her
jewels,  and  her  clothes,  she  distributed  among  her  ser-
vants, according  to  their  rank  or  merit.  She  wrote  a
short  letter  to  the  king  of  France,  and  another  to  the
duke  of  Guise,  full  of  tender  but  magnanimous  senti-
ments, and  recommended  her  soul  to  their  prayers,  and
her  afflicted  servants  to  their  protection.  At  supper
she  ate  temperately,  as  usual,  and  conversed  not  only
with  ease,  but  with  cheerfulness ;  she  drank  to  every
one  of  her  servants,  and  asked  their  forgiveness,  if  ever
she  had  failed  in  any  part  of  her  duty  towards  them.
At  her  wonted  time  she  went  to  bed,  and  slept  calmly
a  few  hours.  Early  in  the  morning  she  retired  into  her
closet,  and  employed  a  considerable  time  in  devotion.
At  eight  o'clock  the  high  sheriff  and  his  officers  entered
her  chamber,  and  found  her  still  kneeling  at  the  altar.
She  immediately  started  up,  and,  with  a  majestic  mien,
and  a  countenance  undismayed,  and  even  cheerful,
advanced  towards  the  place  of  execution,  leaning  on
two  of  Paulet's  attendants.  She  was  dressed  in  a
mourning  habit,  but  with  an  elegance  and  splendour
which  she  had  long  laid  aside,  except  on  a  few  festival
days.  An  Agnus  Dei  hung  by  a  pomander  chain  at
her  neck ;  her  beads  at  her  girdle;  and  in  her  hand  she
carried  a  crucifix  of  ivory.  At  the  bottom  of  the  stairs
the  two  earls,  attended  by  several  gentlemen  from  the
neighbouring  counties,  received  her;  and  there  Sir  An-
drew Melvil,  the  master  of  her  household,  who  had  been
secluded  for  some  weeks  from  her  presence,  was  per-
mitted to  take  his  last  farewell.  At  the  sight  of  a  mis-
tress whom  he  tenderly  loved,  in  such  a  situation,  he
melted  into  tears ;  and  as  he  was  bewailing  her  condi-
tion, and  complaining  of  his  own  hard  fate,  in  being
appointed  to  carry  the  account  of  such  a  mournful  event

1587.]  BOOK VII.  141

into  Scotland,  Mary  replied,  "  Weep  not,  good  Melvil,
there  is  at  present  great  cause  for  rejoicing.  Thou  shalt
this  day  see  Mary  Stewart  delivered  from  all  her  cares,
and  such  an  end  put  to  her  tedious  sufferings,  as  she
has  long  expected.  Bear  witness  that  I  die  constant
in  my  religion ;  firm  in  my  fidelity  towards  Scotland  ;
and  unchanged  in  my  affection  to  France.  Commend
me  to  my  son.  Tell  him  I  have  done  nothing  injurious
to  his  kingdom,  to  his  honour,  or  to  his  rights ;  and
God  forgive  all  those  who  have  thirsted,  without  cause,
for  my  blood."

With  much  difficulty,  and  after  many  entreaties,  she
prevailed  on  the  two  earls  to  allow  Melvil,  together
with  three  of  her  men  servants  and  two  of  her  maids,
to  attend  her  to  the  scaffold.  It  was  erected  in  the
same  hall  where  she  had  been  tried,  raised  a  little  above
the  floor,  and  covered,  as  well  as  a  chair,  the  cushion,
and  block,  with  black  cloth.  Mary  mounted  the  steps
with  alacrity,  beheld  all  this  apparatus  of  death  with
an  unaltered  countenance,  and  signing  herself  with  the
cross,  she  sat  down  in  the  chair.  Beale  read  the  war-
rant for  execution  with  a  loud  voice,  to  which  she  lis-
tened with  a  careless  air,  and  like  one  occupied  in  other
thoughts.  Then  the  dean  of  Peterborough  began  a
devout  discourse,  suitable  to  her  present  condition,  and
offered  up  prayers  to  Heaven  in  her  behalf;  but  she
declared  that  she  could  not  in  conscience  hearken  to
the  one,  nor  join  with  the  other ;  and  kneeling  down,
repeated  a  Latin  prayer.  When  the  dean  had  finished
his  devotions,  she,  with  an  audible  voice,  and  in  the
English  tongue,  recommended  unto  God  the  afflicted
state  of  the  church,  and  prayed  for  prosperity  to  her
son,  and  for  a  long  life  and  peaceable  reign  to  Eliza-
beth. She  declared  that  she  hoped  for  mercy  only
through  the  death  of  Christ,  at  the  foot  of  whose  image
she  now  willingly  shed  her  blood  ;  and  lifting  up  and
kissing  the  crucifix,  she  thus  addressed  it :  "As  thy

]42  SCOTLAND.  [1587.

arms,  O  Jesus,  were  extended  on  the  cross ;  so  with
the  outstretched  arms  of  thy  mercy  receive  me,  and
forgive  my  sins."

She  then  prepared  for  the  block,  by  taking  off  her
veil  and  upper  garments  ;  and  one  of  the  executioners
rudely  endeavouring  to  assist,  she  gently  checked  him,
and  said  with  a  smile,  that  she  had  not  been  accustomed
to  undress  before  so  many  spectators,  nor  to  be  served
by  such  valets.  With  calm  but  undaunted  fortitude,
she  laid  her  neck  on  the  block ;  and  while  one  execu-
tioner held  her  hands,  the  other,  at  the  second  stroke,
cut  off  her  head,  which  falling  out  of  its  attire,  disco-
vered her  hair  already  grown  quite  gray  with  cares  and
sorrows.  The  executioner  held  it  up  still  streaming
with  blood,  and  the  dean  crying  out,  "  So  perish  all
queen  Elizabeth's  enemies,"  the  earl  of  Kent  alone  an^
swered  "  Amen."  The  rest  of  the  spectators  continued
silent,  and  drowned  in  tears ;  being  incapable,  at  that
moment,  of  any  other  sentiments  but  those  of  pity  or
admiration.k

sentiments  Such  was  the  tragical  death  of  Mary,  queen
con±lngs  of  Scots,  after  a  life  of  forty-four  years  and  two
her-  months,  almost  nineteen  years  of  which  she

passed  in  captivity.  The  political  parties  which  were
formed  in  the  kingdom,  during  her  reign,  have  subsisted
under  various  denominations  ever  since  that  time.  The
rancour  with  which  they  were  at  first  animated,  hath
descended  to  succeeding  ages,  and  their  prejudices,  as
well  as  their  rage,  have  been  perpetuated,  and  even
augmented.  Among  historians,  who  were  under  the
dominion  of  all  these  passions,  and  who  have  either
ascribed  to  her  every  virtuous  and  amiable  quality,  or
have  imputed  to  her  all  the  vices  of  which  the  human
heart  is  susceptible,  we  search  in  vain  for  Mary's  real
character.  She  neither  merited  the  exaggerated  praises

k  Camd.  534. Spotsw.  355. Jebb,  ii.  300. Strype,  iii.  383. See  Append.
No.  LI.

1587.]  BOOK VII.  143

of  the  one,  nor  the  undistinguished  censure  of  the
other.

Her  cha-  To  all  the  charms  of  beauty,  and  the  utmost
racter.  elegance  of  external  form,  she  added  those  ac-
complishments which  render  their  impression  irresisti-
ble. Polite,  affable,  insinuating,  sprightly,  and  capa-
ble of  speaking  and  of  writing  with  equal  ease  and
dignity.  Sudden,  however,  and  violent  in  all  her  at-
tachments ;  because  her  heart  was  warm  and  unsuspi-
cious. Impatient  of  contradiction;  because  she  had
been  accustomed  from  her  infancy  to  be  treated  as  a
queen.  No  stranger,  on  some  occasions,  to  dissimula-
tion ;  which,  in  that  perfidious  court  where  she  received
her  education,  was  reckoned  among  the  necessary  arts
of  government.  Not  insensible  of  flattery,  or  uncon-
scious of  that  pleasure  with  which  almost  every  woman
beholds  the  influence  of  her  own  beauty.  Formed  with
the  qualities  which  we  love.,  not  with  the  talents  that
we  admire ;  she  was  an  agreeable  woman,  rather  than
an  illustrious  queen.  The  vivacity  of  her  spirit,  not
sufficiently  tempered  with  sound  judgment,  and  the
warmth  of  her  heart,  which  was  not  at  all  times  under
the  restraint  of  discretion,  betrayed  her  both  into  errors
and  into  crimes.  To  say  that  she  was  always  unfortu-
nate, will  not  account  for  that  long  and  almost  uninter-
rupted succession  of  calamities  which  befel  her ;  we
must  likewise  add,  that  she  was  often  imprudent.  Her
passion  for  Darnley  was  rash,  youthful,  and  excessive ;
and  though  the  sudden  transition  to  the  opposite  ex-
treme, was  the  natural  effect  of  her  ill-requited  love,
and  of  his  ingratitude,  insolence,  and  brutality;  yet
neither  these,  nor  Bothwell's  artful  address  and  impor-
tant services,  can  justify  her  attachment  to  that  noble-
man. Even  the  manners  of  the  age,  licentious  as  they
were,  are  no  apology  for  this  unhappy  passion;  nor  can
they  induce  us  to  look  on  that  tragical  and  infamous
scene  which  followed  upon  it  with  less  abhorrence.

144  SCOTLAND.  [1587.

Humanity  will  draw  a  veil  over  this  part  of  her  character
which  it  cannot  approve,  and  may,  perhaps,  prompt  some
to  impute  some  of  her  actions  to  her  situation,  more  than
to  her  dispositions ;  and  to  lament  the  unhappiness  of
the  former,  rather  than  accuse  the  perverseness  of  the
latter.  Mary's  sufferings  exceed,  both,  in  degree  and
in  duration,  those  tragical  distresses  which  fancy  has
feigned  to  excite  sorrow  and  commiseration;  and  while
we  survey  them,  we  are  apt  altogether  to  forget  her
frailties,  we  think  of  her  faults  with  less  indignation,
and  approve  of  our  tears,  as  if  they  were  shed  for  a
person  who  had  attained  much  nearer  to  pure  virtue.

With  regard  to  the  queen's  person,  a  circumstance
not  to  be  omitted  in  writing  the  history  of  a  female
reign,  all  contemporary  authors  agree  in  ascribing  to
Mary  the  utmost  beauty  of  countenance,  and  elegance
of  shape,  of  which  the  human  form  is  capable.  Her
hair  was  black,  though,  according  to  the  fashion  of  that
age,  she  frequently  wore  borrowed  locks,  and  of  dif-
ferent colours.  Her  eyes  were  a  dark  gray ;  her'com-
plexion  was  exquisitely  fine ;  and  her  hands  and  arms
remarkably  delicate,  both  as  to  shape  and  colour.  Her
stature  was  of  an  height  that  rose  to  the  majestic.  She
danced,  she  walked,  and  rode  with  equal  grace.  Her
taste  for  music  was  just,  and  she  both  sung  and  played
upon  the  lute  with  uncommon  skill.  Towards  the  end
of  her  life,  long  confinement,  and  the  coldness  of  the
houses  in  which  she  had  been  imprisoned,  brought  on
a  rheumatism,  which  often  deprived  her  of  the  use  of
her  limbs.  No  man,  says  Brantome,  ever  beheld  her
person  without  admiration  and  love,  or  will  read  her
history  without  sorrow.

None  of  her  women  were  suffered  to  come  near  her
dead  body,  which  was  carried  into  a  room  adjoining  to
the  place  of  execution,  where  it  lay  for  some  days,
covered  with  a  coarse  cloth  torn  from  a  billiard-table.
The  block,  the  scaffold,  the  aprons  of  the  executioners,

1587.]

BOOK VII.

145

and  every  thing  stained  with  her  blood,  were  reduced
to  ashes.  Not  long  after,  Elizabeth  appointed  her  body
to  be  buried  in  the  cathedral  of  Peterborough  with
royal  magnificence.  But  this  vulgar  artifice  was  em-
ployed in  vain;  the  pageantry  of  a  pompous  funeral
did  not  efface  the  memory  of  those  injuries  which  laid
Mary  in  her  grave.  James,  soon  after  his  accession  to
the  English  throne,  ordered  her  body  to  be  removed  to
Westminster-abbey,  and  to  be  deposited  among  the
monarchs  of  England.

Elizabeth  Elizabeth  affected  to  receive  the  accounts  of
affects  to  Mary's  death  with  the  most  violent  emotions  of

lament  •.  ,  -,. ,  ,

Mary's  surprise  and  concern.  Sighs,  tears,  lamenta-
tions, and  mourning,  were  all  employed  to  dis-
play the  reality  and  greatness  of  her  sorrow.  Evident
marks  of  dissimulation  and  artifice  may  be  traced  through
every  period  of  Elizabeth's  proceedings  against  the  life
of  the  Scottish  queen.  The  commission  for  bringing
Mary  to  a  public  trial  was  seemingly  extorted  from  her
by  the  entreaties  of  her  privy-counsellors.  She  delayed
publishing  the  sentence  against  her.  till  she  was  twice
solicited  by  both  houses  of  parliament.  Nor  did  she
sign  the  warrant  for  execution  without  the  utmost  ap-
parent reluctance.  One  scene  more  of  the  boldest  and
most  solemn  deceit  remained  to  be  exhibited.  She  un-
dertook to  make  the  world  believe  that  Mary  had  been
put  to  death  without  her  knowledge,  and  against  her
will.  Davison,  who  neither  suspected  her  intention  nor
his  own  danger,  was  her  instrument  in  carrying  on  this
artifice,  and  fell  a  victim  to  it.

It  was  his  duty,  as  secretary  of  state,  to  lay  before
her  the  warrant  for  execution,  in  order  to  be  signed ;
and,  by  her  command,  he  carried  it  to  the  great  seal.
She  pretended,  however,  that  she  had  charged  him  not
to  communicate  what  she  had  done  to  any  person,  nor
to  suffer  the  warrant  to  go  out  of  his  hands,  without
her  express  permission ;  that,  in  contempt  of  this  order,

VOL.  II.  L

146  SCOTLAND.  [1587.

he  had  not  only  revealed  the  matter  to  several  of  her
ministers,  but  had,  in  concert  with  them,  assembled  her
privy-counsellors,  by  whom,  without  her  consent  or
knowledge,  the  warrant  was  issued,  and  the  earls  of
Shrewsbury  and  Kent  empowered  to  put  it  in  execu-
tion. Though  Davison  denied  all  this,  and  with  cir-
cumstances which  bear  the  strongest  marks  of  truth
and  credibility ;  though  it  can  scarcely  be  conceived
that  her  privy-council,  composed  of  the  persons  in
whom  she  most  confided,  of  her  ministers  and  favour-
ites, would  assemble  within  the  walls  of  her  palace,  and
venture  to  transact  a  matter  of  so  much  importance
without  her  privity,  and  contrary  to  her  inclination;
yet  so  far  did  she  carry  her  dissimulation,  that  with  all
the  signs  of  displeasure  and  of  rage,  she  banished  most
of  her  counsellors  out  of  her  presence ;  and  treated
Burleigh,  in  particular,  so  harshly,  and  with  such  marks
of  disgust,  that  he  gave  himself  up  for  lost,  and  in  the
deepest  affliction  wrote  to  the  queen,  begging  leave  to
resign  all  his  places,  that  he  might  retire  to  his  own
estate.  Davison  she  instantly  deprived  of  his  office,  and

committed  him  a  close  prisoner  to  the  Tower.

He  was  soon  after  brought  to  a  solemn  trial  in
the  star-chamber,  condemned  to  pay  a  fine  of  ten  thou-
sand pounds,  and  to  be  imprisoned  during  the  queen's
pleasure.  He  languished  several  years  in  confinement,
and  never  recovered  any  degree  of  favour  or  of  power.
As  her  jealousy  and  fear  had  bereaved  the  queen  of
Scots  of  life,  in  order  to  palliate  this  part  of  her  con-
duct, Elizabeth  made  no  scruple  of  sacrificing  the  re-
putation and  happiness  of  one  of  the  most  virtuous  and
able  men  in  her  kingdom.1

Elizabeth  This  solemn  farce,  for  it  deserves  no.  better
to  soothe™  name,  furnished  Elizabeth,  however,  with  an
James.  apology  to  the  king  of  Scots.  As  the  prospect
of  his  mother's  danger  had  excited  the  king's  filial  care

1  Camd.  536. Strype,  Hi.  370. See  Append,  No.  LIT. Cabbala,  229,  &c.

1587.]  BOOK VII.  147

and  concern,  the  account  of  her  death  filled  him  with
grief  and  resentment.  His  subjects  felt  the  dishonour
done  to  him  and  to  the  nation.  In  order  to  soothe  both,
Elizabeth  instantly  dispatched  Robert  Cary,  one  of  lord
Hunsdon's  sons,  with  a  letter  expressing  her  extreme
affliction  on  account  of  that  miserable  accident,  which,
as  she  pretended,  had  happened  far  contrary  to  her  ap-
pointment or  intention.  James  would  not  permit  her
messenger  to  enter  Scotland,  and  with  some  difficulty
received  a  memorial  which  he  sent  from  Berwick.  It
contained  the  tale  concerning  Davison,  dressed  up  with
all  the  circumstances  which  tended  to  exculpate  Eliza-
beth, and  to  throw  the  whole  blame  on  his  rashness  or
treachery.  Such  a  defence  gave  little  satisfaction,  and
was  considered  as  mockery  added  to  insult;  and  many
of  the  nobles,  as  well  as  the  king,  breathed  nothing  but
revenge.  Elizabeth  was  extremely  solicitous  to  pacify
them,  and  she  wanted  neither  able  instruments  nor
plausible  reasons,  in  order  to  accomplish  this.  Leices-
ter wrote  to  the  king,  and  Walsingham  to  secretary
Maitland.  They  represented  the  certain  destruction  to
which  James  would  expose  himself,  if,  with  the  forces
of  Scotland  alone,  he  should  venture  to  attack  a  king-
dom so  far  superior  in  power ;  that  the  history  of  past
ages,  as  well  as  his  mother's  sad  experience,  might  con-
vince him,  that  nothing  could  be  more  dangerous,  or
deceitful,  than  dependence  on  foreign  aid;  that  the  king
of  France  would  never  wish  to  see  the  British  kingdoms
united  under  one  monarch,  nor  contribute  to  invest  a
prince  so  nearly  allied  to  the  house  of  Guise  with  such
formidable  power ;  that  Philip  might  be  a  more  active
ally,  but  would  certainly  prove  a  more  dangerous  one;
and,  under  pretence  of  assisting  him,  would  assert  his
own  right  to  the  English  crown,  which  he  already  be-
gan openly  to  claim ;  that  the  same  statute,  on  which
the  sentence  of  death  against  his  mother  had  been
founded,  would  justify  the  excluding  him  from  the  suc-

L  2

148  SCOTLAND.  [1587,

cession  to  the  crown ;  that  the  English,  naturally  averse
from  the  dominion  of  strangers,  would  not  fail,  if  ex-
asperated by  his  hostilities,  to  apply  it  in  that  manner ;
that  Elizabeth  was  disposed  to  repair  the  wrongs  which
the  mother  had  suffered,  by  her  tenderness  and  affection
towards  the  son ;  and  that,  by  engaging  in  a  fruitless
war,  he  would  deprive  himself  of  a  noble  inheritance,
which,  by  cultivating  her  friendship,  he  must  infallibly
obtain.  These  representations,  added  to  the  conscious-
ness of  his  own  weakness,  to  the  smallness  of  his  reve-
nues, to  the  mutinous  spirit  of  some  of  the  nobles,  to
the  dubious  fidelity  of  others,  and  to  the  influence  of
that  faction  which  was  entirely  at  Elizabeth's  devotion,
convinced  James  that  a  war  with  England,  however
just,  would  in  the  present  juncture  be  altogether  impo-
litical.  All  these  considerations  induced  him  to  stifle
his  resentment ;  to  appear  satisfied  with  the  punishment
inflicted  on  Davis'on  ;  and  to  preserve  all  the  semblances
of  friendship  with  the  English  court.111  In  this  manner
did  the  cloud  which  threatened  such  a  storm  pass  away.
Mary's  death,  like  that  of  a  common  criminal,  remained
unavenged  by  any  prince ;  and,  whatever  infamy  Eliza-
beth might  incur,  she  was  exposed  to  no  new  danger  on
that  account.

Disgrace  Mary's  death,  however,  proved  fatal  to  the
roarer  of  master  °f  Gray,  and  lost  him  the  king's  favour,
Gray-  which  he  had  for  some  time  possessed.  He  was
become  as  odious  to  the  nation,  as  favourites,  who
acquire  power  without  merit,  and  exercise  it  without
discretion,  usually  are.  The  treacherous  part  which
he  had  acted  during  his  late  embassy  was  no  secret,
and  filled  James,  who  at  length  came  to  the  knowledge
of  it,  with  astonishment.  The  courtiers  observed  the
symptoms  of  disgust  arising  in  the  king's  mind,  his  ene-
mies seized  the  opportunity,  and  Sir  William  Stewart,
in  revenge  of  the  perfidy  with  which  Gray  had  betrayed

m  Spotsw.  362. Cald.  iv.  13, 14. Strype,  377.

1587.]  BOOK  VII.  149

his  brother  captain  James,  publicly  accused  him
before  a  convention  of  nobles,  not  only  of  hav-
ing contributed,  by  his  advice  and  suggestions,  to  take
away  the  life  of  the  queen,  but  of  holding  correspond-
ence with  Popish  princes,  in  order  to  subvert  the  reli-
gion established  in  the  kingdom.  Gray,  unsupported
by  the  king,  deserted  by  all,  and  conscious  of  his  own
guilt,  made  a  feeble  defence.  He  was  condemned  to
perpetual  banishment,  a  punishment  very  unequal  to
his  crimes.  But  the  king  was  unwilling  to  abandon
one  whom  he  had  once  favoured  so  highly,  to  the  rigour
of  justice,  and  lord  Hamilton,  his  near  relation,  and  the
other  nobles  who  had  lately  returned  from  exile,  in
gratitude  for  the  zeal  with  which  he  had  served  them,
interceded  warmly  in  his  behalf.

Having  thus  accomplished  the  destruction  of  one  of
his  enemies,  captain  James  Stewart  thought  the  junc-
ture favourable  for  prosecuting  his  revenge  on  them  all.
He  singled  out  secretary  Maitland,  the  most  eminent
both  for  abilities  and  enmity  to  him ;  and  offered  to
prove  that  he  was  no  less  accessary  than  Gray  to  the
queen's  death,  and  had  even  formed  a  design  of  deli-
vering up  the  king  himself  into  the  hands  of  the  Eng-
lish. But  time  and  absence  had,  in  a  great  measure,
extinguished  the  king's  affection  for  a  minion  who  so
little  deserved  it.  All  the  courtiers  combined  against
him  as  a  common  enemy ;  and,  instead  of  gaining  his
point,  he  had  the  mortification  to  see  the  office  of  chan-
cellor conferred  upon  Maitland,  who,  together  with
that  dignity,  enjoyed  all  the  power  and  influence  of  a
prime  minister.

In  the  assembly  of  the  church,  which  met  this  year,
the  same  hatred  to  the  order  of  bishops,  and  the  same
jealousy  and  fear  of  their  encroachments,  appeared.  But
as  the  king  was  now  of  full  age,  and  a  parliament  was
summoned  on  that  occasion,  the  clergy  remained  satis-
fied with  appointing  some  of  their  number  to  represent

150  SCOTLAND.  [1587.

their  grievances  to  that  court,  from  which  great  things
were  expected.

The  king  Previous  to  this  meeting  of  parliament,  James
toSte8  attempted  a  work  worthy  of  a  king.  The  deadly
the  nobles.  feu(js  which  subsisted  between  many  of  the
great  families,  and  which  were  transmitted  from  one
generation  to  another,  weakened  the  strength  of  the
kingdom ;  contributed,  more  than  any  other  circum-
stance, to  preserve  a  fierce  and  barbarous  spirit  among
the  nobles  ;  and  proved  the  occasion  of  many  disasters
to  themselves  and  to  their  country.  After  many  pre-
paratory negotiations,  he  invited  the  contending  parties
to  a  royal  entertainment  in  the  palace  of  Holyrood-
house ;  and  partly  by  his  authority,  partly  by  his  en-
treaties, obtained  their  promise  to  bury  their  dissensions
in  perpetual  oblivion.  From  thence  he  conducted
them,  in  solemn  procession,  through  the  streets  of  Edin-
burgh, marching  by  pairs,  each  hand  in  hand  with  his
enemy.  A  collation  of  wine  and  sweetmeats  was  pre-
pared at  the  public  cross,  and  there  they  drank  to  each
other  with  all  the  signs  of  reciprocal  forgiveness  and
of  future  friendship.  The  people,  who  were  present
at  a  spectacle  so  unusual,  conceived  the  most  sanguine
hopes  of  seeing  concord  and  tranquillity  established  in
every  part  of  the  kingdom,  and  testified  their  satisfaction
by  repeated  acclamations.11  Unhappily,  the  effects  of
this  reconciliation  were  not  correspondent  either  to  the
pious  endeavours  of  the  king,  or  to  the  fond  wishes  of
the  people.

The  first  care  of  the  parliament  was  the  security  of
the  Protestant  religion.  All  the  laws  passed  in  its  fa-
vour, since  the  Reformation,  were  ratified  ;  and  a  new
and  severe  one  was  enacted  against  seminary  priests
and  Jesuits,  whose  restless  industry  in  making  prose-
lytes, brought  many  of  them  into  Scotland  about  this
time.  Two  acts  of  this  parliament  deserve  more  par-

n  Spotsw.  164. C'ald.iv.  13.

General

church

1587.]  BOOK  VII.  151

ticular  notice  on  account  of  the  consequences  with
which  they  were  followed.

The  one  respected  the  lands  of  the  church.
^s  ^ie  Puklic  revenues  were  not  sufficient  for
defraying  the  king's  ordinary  charges  ;  as  the
administration  of  the  government  became  more
complicated  and  more  expensive  ;  as  James  was  natu-
rally profuse,  and  a  stranger  to  economy  ;  it  was  ne-
cessary, on  all  these  accounts,  to  provide  some  fund
proportioned  to  his  exigencies. But  no  considerable
sum  could  be  levied  on  the  commons,  who  did  not
enjoy  the  benefit  of  an  extensive  commerce. The  no-
bles were  unaccustomed  to  bear  the  burden  of  heavy
taxes. The  revenues  of  the  church  were  the  only  source
whence  a  proper  supply  could  be  drawn. Notwith-
standing all  the  depredations  of  the  laity  since  the
Reformation,  and  the  various  devices  which  they  had
employed  to  seize  the  church-lands,  some  considerable
portion  of  them  remained  still  unalienated,  and  were
held  either  by  the  bishops  who  possessed  the  benefices,
or  were  granted  to  laymen  during  pleasure. All  these
lands  were,  in  this  parliament,  annexed,  by  one  general
law,0  to  the  crown,  and  the  king  was  empowered  to
apply  the  rents  of  them  to  his  own  use. The  tithes
alone  were  reserved  for  the  maintenance  of  the  persons
who  served  the  cure,  and  the  principal  mansion-house,
with  a  few  acres  of  land,  by  way  of  glebe,  allotted  for
their  residence. By  this  great  accession  of  property,
it  is  natural  to  conclude  that  the  king  must  have  acquired
a  vast  increase  of  power,  and  the  influence  of  the  nobles
have  suffered  a  proportional  diminution. The  very
reverse  of  this  seems,  however,  to  have  been  the  case.
Almost  all  grants  of  church-lands,  prior  to  this  act,  were
thereby  confirmed  ; and  titles,  which  were  formerly
reckoned  precarious,  derived  thence  the  sanction  of
parliamentary  authority. James  was  likewise  autho-

o  Parl.  11.  Jac.  VI.  c.  29.

152  SCOTLAND.  [1587.

rized,  during  a  limited  time,  to  make  new  alienations  ;
and  such  was  the  facility  of  his  temper,  ever  ready  to
yield  to  the  solicitations  of  his  servants,  and  to  gratify
their  most  extravagant  demands,  that  not  only  during
the  time  limited,  but  throughout  his  whole  reign,  he
was  continually  employed  in  bestowing,  and  his  par-
liament in  ratifying,  (grants  of  this  kind  to  his  nobles  ;
hence  little  advantage  accrued  to  the  crown  from  that
which  might  have  been  so  valuable  an  addition  to  its
revenues.  The  bishops,  however,  were  great  sufferers
by  the  law.  But  at  this  juncture  neither  the  king  nor
his  ministers  were  solicitous  about  the  interests  of  an
order  of  men,  odious  to  the  people,  and  persecuted  by
the  clergy.  Their  enemies  promoted  the  law  with  the
utmost  zeal.  The  prospect  of  sharing  in  their  spoils
induced  all  parties  to  consent  to  it  ;  and  after  a  step  so
fatal  to  the  wealth  and  power  of  the  dignified  clergy,
it  was  no  difficult  matter  to  introduce  that  change  in
the  government  of  the  church  which  soon  after  took
place.p
Lesser  ba-  The  change  which  the  other  statute  produced

rons  ad- in  fae  c  jv  jj  constitution  was  no  less  remarkable.

mitted  into

parliament  Under  the  feudal  system,  every  freeholder,  or
-  immediate  vassal  of  the  crown,  had  a  right  to
ke  present  m  parliament.  These  freeholders
were  originally  few  in  number,  but  possessed  of  great
and  extensive  property.  By  degrees  these  vast  pos-
sessions were  divided  by  the  proprietors  themselves,  or
parcelled  out  by  the  prince,  or  split  by  other  accidents.
The  number  of  freeholders  became  greater,  and  their
condition  more  unequal  ;  besides  the  ancient  barons,
who  preserved  their  estates  and  their  power  unim-
paired, there  arose  another  order,  whose  rights  were
the  same,  though  their  wealth  and  influence  were  far
inferior.  But,  in  rude  ages,  when  the  art  of  govern-
ment was  extremely  imperfect,  when  parliaments  were

P  Spotsw.  365.

1587.]  BOOK VII.  153

seldom  assembled,  and  deliberated  on  matters  little
interesting  to  a  martial  people,  few  of  the  lesser  barons
took  their  seats,  and  the  whole  parliamentary  juris-
diction was  exercised  by  the  greater  barons,  in  con-
junction with  the  ecclesiastical  order.  James  I.,  fond
of  imitating  the  forms  of  the  English  constitution,  to
which  he  had  been  long  accustomed,  and  desirous  of
providing  a  counterpoise  to  the  power  of  the  great
nobles,  procured  an  act  in  the  year  1427,  dispensing
with  the  personal  attendance  of  the  lesser  barons,  and
empowering  those  in  each  county  to  choose  two  com-
missioners to  represent  them  in  parliament.  This  law,
like  many  other  regulations  of  that  wise  prince,  pro-
duced little  effect.  All  the  king's  vassals  continued,
as  formerly,  possessed  of  a  right  to  be  present  in  par-
liament ;  but,  unless  in  some  extraordinary  conjunc-
tures, the  greater  barons  alone  attended.  But,  by
means  of  the  Reformation,  the  constitution  had  under-
gone a  great  change.  The  aristocratical  power  of  the
nobles  had  been  much  increased,  and  the  influence  of  the
ecclesiastical  order,  which  the  crown  usually  employed
to  check  their  usurpation,  and  to  balance  their  au-
thority, had  diminished  in  proportion.  Many  of  the
abbeys  and  priories  had  been  erected  into  temporal
peerages  ;  and  the  Protestant  bishops,  an  indigent  race
of  men,  and  odious  to  the  nation,  were  far  from  pos-
sessing the  weight  and  credit  which  their  predecessors
derived  from  their  own  exorbitant  wealth  and  the  su-
perstitious reverence  of  the  people.  In  this  situation,
the  king  had  recourse  to  the  expedient  employed  by
James  I.,  and  obtained  a  law  reviving  the  statute  of
1427  ;  and  from  that  time  the  commons  of  Scotland
have  sent  their  representatives  to  parliament.  An  act,
which  tended  so  visibly  to  abridge  their  authority,  did
not  pass  without  opposition  from  many  of  the  nobles.
But  as  the  king  had  a  right  to  summon  the  lesser  barons
to  attend  in  person,  others  were  apprehensive  of  seeing

154  SCOTLAND.  [1588.

the  house  filled  with  a  multitude  of  his  dependants,
and  consented  the  more  willingly  to  a  law  which  laid
them  under  the  restriction  of  appearing  only  by  their
representatives.

The  year  1588  began  with  a  universal  ex-
Zof  pectation  throughout  all  Europe,  that  it  was  to
^e  distinguished  by  wonderful  events  and  revo-
mada. lutions. Several  astrologers,  according  to  the
accounts  of  contemporary  historians,  had  predicted
this ;  and  the  situation  of  affairs  in  the  two  principal
kingdoms  of  Europe  was  such,  that  a  sagacious  ob-
server, without  any  supernatural  intelligence,  might
have  hazarded  the  prediction,  and  have  foreseen  the
approach  of  some  grand  crisis. In  France,  it  was
evident,  from,  the  astonishing  progress  of  the  league,
conducted  by  a  leader  whose  ambition  was  restrained
by  no  scruples,  and  whose  genius  had  hitherto  sur-
mounted all  difficulties;  as  well  as  from  the  timid,
variable,  and  impolitic  counsels  of  Henry  III.,  that
either  that  monarch  must  submit  to  abandon  the  throne,
of  which  he  was  unworthy,  or  by  some  sudden  and
daring  blow  cut  off  his  formidable  rival. Accordingly,
in  the  beginning  of  the  year,  the  duke  of  Guise  drove
his  master  out  of  his  capital  city,  and  forced  him  to
conclude  a  peace,  which  left  him  only  the  shadow  of
royalty  ;  and  before  the  year  expired,  he  himself  fell  a
victim  to  the  resentment  and  fear  of  Henry,  and  to  his
own  security. In  Spain  the  operations  were  such  as
promised  something  still  more  uncommon. During
three  years  Philip  had  employed  all  the  power  of  his
European  dominions,  and  exhausted  the  treasures  of
the  Indies,  in  vast  preparations  for  war. A  fleet,  the
greatest  that  had  ever  appeared  in  the  ocean,  was  ready
to  sail  from  Lisbon,  and  a  numerous  land  army  was
assembled  to  embark  on  board  of  it. Its  destination
was  still  unknown,  though  many  circumstances  made
it  probable  that  the  blow  was  aimed,  in  the  first  placej

1588.]  BOOK VII.  155

against  England.  Elizabeth  had  long  given  secret  aid
to  the  revolted  provinces  in  the  Low  Countries^and
now  openly  afforded  them  her  protection.  A  numerous
body  of  her  troops  was  in  their  service ;  the  earl  of
Leicester  commanded  their  armies  ;  she  had  great  sway
in  the  civil  government  of  the  republic ;  and  some  of
its  most  considerable  towns  were  in  her  possession.
Her  fleets  had  insulted  the  coasts  of  Spain,  intercepted
the  galleons  from  the  West  Indies,  and  threatened  the
colonies  there.  Roused  by  so  many  injuries,  allured
by  views  of  ambition,  and  animated  by  a  superstitious
zeal  for  propagating  the  Romish  religion,  Philip  re-
solved not  only  to  invade,  but  to  conquer  England,  to
which  his  descent  from  the  house  of  Lancaster,  and  the
donation  of  pope  Sixtus  V.  gave  him  in  his  own  opinion
a  double  title.

Conduct  of  Elizabeth  saw  the  danger  approach,  and  pre-
th^cca-  Pare^  to  encounter  it.  The  measures  for  the
sion.  defence  of  her  kingdom  were  concerted  and  car-
ried on  with  the  wisdom  and  vigour  which  distinguished
her  reign.  Her  chief  care  was  to  secure  the  friendship
of  the  king  of  Scots.  She  had  treated  the  queen  his
mother  with  a  rigour  unknown  among  princes;  she
had  often  used  himself  harshly,  and  with  contempt;
and  though  he  had  hitherto  prudently  suppressed  his
resentment  of  these  injuries,  she  did  not  believe  it  to
be  altogether  extinguished,  and  was  afraid  that,  in  her
present  situation,  it  might  burst  out  with  fatal  violence.
Philip,  sensible  how  much  an  alliance  with  Scotland
would  facilitate  his  enterprise,  courted  James  with  the
utmost  assiduity.  He  excited  him  to  revenge  his  mo-
ther's wrong ;  he  flattered  him  with  the  hope  of  sharing
his  conquests ;  and  offered  him  in  marriage  his  daugh-
ter the  Infanta  Isabella.  At  the  same  time  Scotland
swarmed  with  priests,  his  emissaries,  who  seduced  some
of  the  nobles  to  Popery,  and  corrupted  others  with
bribes  and  promises.  Huntly,  Errol,  Crawford,  were

156  SCOTLAND.  [1588.

the  heads  of  a  faction  which  openly  espoused  the  in-
terest of  Spain.  Lord  Maxwell,  arriving  from  that
court,  began  to  assemble  his  followers,  and  to  take
arms  that  he  might  be  ready  to  join  the  Spaniards.  In
order  to  counterbalance  all  these,  Elizabeth  made  the
warmest  professions  of  friendship  to  the  king ;  and
Ashby,  her  ambassador,  entertained  him  with  magni-
ficent hopes  and  promises.  He  assured  him,  that  his
right  of  succession  to  the  crown  should  be  publicly
acknowledged  in  England ;  that  he  should  be  created
a  duke  in  that  kingdom  ;  and  -he  should  be  admitted
to  some  share  in  the  government ;  and  receive  a  con-
siderable pension  annually.  James,  it  is  probable,  was
too  well  acquainted  with  Elizabeth's  arts,  to  rely  en-
tirely on  these  promises.  But  he  understood  his  own
interest  in  the  present  juncture,  and  pursued  it  with
much  steadiness.  He  rejected  an  alliance  with  Spain,
as  dangerous.  He  refused  to  admit  into  his  presence
an  ambassador  from  the  pope.  He  seized  colonel  Sem-
ple,  an  agent  of  the  prince  of  Parma.  He  drove  many
of  the  seminary  priests  out  of  the  kingdom.  He  marched
suddenly  to  Dumfries,  dispersed  Maxwell's  followers,
and  took  him  prisoner.  In  a  convention  of  the  nobles,
he  declared  his  resolution  to  adhere  inviolably  to  the
league  with  England ;  and  without  listening  to  the
suggestions  of  revenge,  determined  to  act  in  concert
with  Elizabeth,  against  the  common  enemy  of  the
Protestant  faith.  He  put  the  kingdom  in  a  posture  of
defence,  and  levied  troops  to  obstruct  the  landing  of
the  Spaniards.  He  offered  to  send  an  army  to  Eliza-
beth's assistance,  and  told  her  ambassador  that  he  ex-
pected no  other  favour  from  the  king  of  Spain,  but
that  which  Polyphemus  had  promised  to  Ulysses,  that
when  he  had  devoured  all  his  companions,  he  would
make  him  his  last  morsel.q

The  zeal  of  the  people ,_  on  this  occasion,  was  not  in-

i  Camd.  544. Johust.  139. Spotsw.  369.

1588.]  BOOK VII.  157

A  national  ferior  to  that  of  the  king ;  and  the  extraordi-
in^efence  nary  danger  w^tn  which  they  were  threatened,
of  religion,  suggested  tothem  an  extraordinary  expedient  for
their  security.  A  bond  was  framed  for  the  maintenance
of  true  religion,  as  well  as  the  defence  of  the  king's
person  and  government,  in  opposition  to  all  enemies,
foreign  and  domestic.  This  contained  a  confession  of
the  Protestant  faith,  a  particular  renunciation  of  the
errors  of  Popery,  and  the  most  solemn  promises,  in  the
name,  and  through  the  strength  of  God,  of  adhering  to
each  other  in  supporting  the  former,  and  contending
against  the  latter,  to  the  utmost  of  their  power/  The
king,  the  nobles,  the  clergy,  and  the  people,  subscribed
with  equal  alacrity.  Strange  or  uncommon  as  such  a
combination  may  now  appear,  many  circumstances  con-
tributed at  that  time  to  recommend  it,  and  to  render
the  idea  familiar  to  the  Scots.  When  roused  by  an  ex-
traordinary event,  or  alarmed  by  any  public  danger,  the
people  of  Israel  were  accustomed  to  bind  themselves,
by  a  solemn  covenant,  to  adhere  to  that  religion  which
the  Almighty  had  established  among  them ;  this  the
Scots  considered  as  a  sacred  precedent,  which  it  be-
came them  to  imitate.  In  that  age,  no  considerable
enterprise  was  undertaken  in  Scotland,  without  a  bond
of  mutual  defence,  which  all  concerned  reckoned  ne-
cessary for  their  security.  The  form  of  this  religious
confederacy  is  plainly  borrowed  from  those  political
ones,  of  which  so  many  instances  have  occurred ;  the
articles,  stipulations,  and  peculiar  modes  of  expression,
are  exactly  the  same  in  both.  Almost  all  the  consi-
derable Popish  princes  were  then  joined  in  a  league  for
extirpating  the  reformed  religion,  and  nothing  could
be  more  natural,  or  seemed  more  efficacious,  than  to
enter  into  a  counter-association,  in  order  to  oppose
the  progress  of  that  formidable  conspiracy.  To  these
causes  did  the  covenant,  which  is  become  so  famous  in

r  Dunlop's  Collect,  of  Confess,  vol.  ii.  108.

158  SCOTLAND.  [1588.

history,  owe  its  origin.  It  was  renewed  at  different
times  during  the  reign  of  James.8  It  was  revived  with
great  solemnity,  though  with  considerable  alterations,
in  the  year  1638.  It  was  adopted  by  the  English  in
the  year  1643,  and  enforced  by  the  civil  and  ecclesi-
astical authority  of  both  kingdoms.  The  political  pur-
poses to  which  it  was  then  made  subservient,  and  the
violent  and  unconstitutional  measures  which  it  was  then
employed  to  promote,  it  is  not  our  province  to  explain.
But  at  the  juncture  in  which  it  was  first  introduced,  we
may  pronounce  it  to  have  been  a  prudent  and  laudable
device  for  the  defence  of  the  religion  and  liberties  of
the  nation  ;  nor  were  the  terms  in  which  it  was  con-
ceived, other  than  might  have  been  expected  from  men
alarmed  with  the  impending  danger  of  Popery,  and
threatened  with  an  invasion  by  the  most  bigotted  and
most  powerful  prince  in  Europe.

Philip's  eagerness  to  conquer  England  did  not  in-
spire him  either  with  the  vigour  or  dispatch  necessary
to  ensure  the  success  of  so  mighty  an  enterprise.  His
fleet,  which  ought  to  have  sailed  in  April,  did  not  enter
the  English  channel  till  the  middle  of  July.  It  hovered
many  days  on  the  coast,  in  expectation  of  being  joined
by  the  prince  of  Parma,  who  was  blocked  up  in  the
ports  of  Flanders  by  a  Dutch  squadron.  Con-
-  tinual  disasters  pursued  the  Spaniards  during

that  time  ;  successive  storms  and  battles,  which
are  well  known,  conspired  with  their  own  ill-conduct
to  disappoint  their  enterprise.  And,  by  the  blessing  of
Providence,  which  watched  with  remarkable  care  over
the  Protestant  religion  and  the  liberties  of  Britain,  the
English  valour  scattered  and  destroyed  the  armada,  on
which  Philip  had  arrogantly  bestowed  the  name  of  in-
vincible. After  being  driven  out  of  the  English  seas,
their  shattered  ships  were  forced  to  steer  their  course
towards  Spain,  round  Scotland  and  Ireland.  Many  of

8  Cald.  iv.  129.

1588.]  BOOK  VII.  159

them  suffered  shipwreck  on  these  dangerous  and  un-
known coasts.  Though  James  kept  his  subjects  under
arms,  to  watch  the  motions  of  the  Spaniards,  and  to
prevent  their  landing  in  a  hostile  manner,  he  received
with  great  humanity  seven  hundred  who  were  forced
ashore  by  a  tempest,  and,  after  supplying  them  with
necessaries,  permitted  them  to  return  into  their  own
country.

On  the  retreat  of  the  Spaniards,  Elizabeth  sent  an
ambassador  to  congratulate  with  James,  and  to  compli-
ment him  on  the  firmness  and  generosity  he  had  disco-
vered during  a  conjuncture  so  dangerous.  But  none  of
Ashby's  promises  were  any  longer  remembered ;  that
minister  was  even  accused  of  having  exceeded  his
powers,  by  his  too  liberal  offers ;  and  conscious  of  his
own  falsehood,  or  ashamed  of  being  disowned  by  his
court,  he  withdrew  secretly  out  of  Scotland.4

1589>  Philip,  convinced  by  fatal  experience  of  his
tribes 'in""  own  ras^ness  *n  attempting  the  conquest  of
Scotland.  England,  by  a  naval  armament,  equipped  at  so
great  a  distance,  and  subjected,  in  all  its  operations,  to
the  delays,  and  dangers,  and  uncertainties,  arising  from
seas  and  wind,  resolved  to  make  his  attack  in  another
form,  and  to  adopt  the  plan  which  the  princes  of  Lor-
rain  had  long  meditated,  of  invading  England  through
Scotland.  A  body  of  his  troops,  he  imagined,  might
be  easily  wafted  over  from  the  Low  Countries  to  that
kingdom,  and  if  they  could  once  obtain  footing,  or
procure  assistance  there,  the  frontier  of  England  was
open  and  defenceless,  and  the  northern  counties  full  of
Roman  Catholics,  who  would  receive  them  with  open
arms.  Meanwhile  a  descent  might  be  threatened  on
the  southern  coast,  which  would  divide  the  English
army,  distract  their  counsels,  and  throw  the  whole  king-
dom into  terrible  convulsions.  In  order  to  prepare  the
way  for  the  execution  of  this  design,  he  remitted  a

*  Johnst.  134. Carad.  548. Murdin,  635.  788.

160  SCOTLAND.  [1589.

considerable  sum  of  money  to  Bruce,  a  seminary  priest
in  Scotland,  and  employed  him,  together  with  Hay,
Crichton,  and  Tyrie,  Scottish  Jesuits,  to  gain  over  as
many  persons  of  distinction  as  possible  to  his  interest.
PO  ishno  ^ea^  f°r  P°Pery5  an^  the  artful  insinuations  of
biescon-  these  emissaries,  induced  several  noblemen  to
gahfst  the  favour  a  measure  which  tended  so  manifestly  to

the  destruction  of  their  country.  Huntly,  though
the  king  had  lately  given  him  in  marriage  the  daughter
of  his  favourite  the  duke  of  Lennox,  continued  warmly
attached  to  the  Romish  church.  Crawford  and  Errol
were  animated  with  the  zeal  of  new  converts.  They  all
engaged  in  a  correspondence  with  the  prince  of  Parma,
and,  in  their  letters  to  him,  offered  their  service  to  the
king  of  Spain,  and  undertook,  with  the  aid  of  six  thou-
sand men,  to  render  him  master  of  Scotland,  and  to
bring  so  many  of  their  vassals  into  the  field,  that  he
should  be  able  to  enter  England  with  a  numerous
army.  Francis  Stewart,  grandson  of  James  V.,u  whom
the  king  had  created  earl  of  Bothwell,  though  in-
fluenced by  no  motive  of  religion,  for  he  still  adhered  to
the  Protestant  faith,  was  prompted  merely  by  caprice,
and  the  restlessness  of  his  nature,  to  join  in  this  treason-
able correspondence.

All  these  letters  were  intercepted  in  England.

Elizabeth,  alarmed  at  the  danger  which  threat-
ened her  own  kingdom,  sent  them  immediately  to  the
king,  and,  reproaching  him  with  his  former  lenity  to-
wards the  Popish  party,  called  upon  him  to  check  this
The  king's  formidable  conspiracy  by  a  proper  severity.  But
wizard  James,  though  firmly  attached  to  the  Protestant
to  Popery,  religion,  though  profoundly  versed  in  the  theo-
logical controversies  between  the  reformers  and  the
church  of  Rome,  though  he  had  employed  himself,  at
that  early  period  of  life,  in  writing  a  commentary  on  the
Revelations,  in  which  he  laboured  to  prove  the  pope  to

tt  He  was  the  son  of  John,  prior  of  Coldingharo,  one  of  James's  natural  children.

1589.]  BOOK VII.  101

be  antichrist,  had  nevertheless  adopted  already  those
maxims  concerning  the  treatment  of  the  Roman  Catho-
lics, to  which  he  adhered  through  the  rest  of  his  life.
The  Roman  Catholics  were  at  that  time  a  powerful  and
active  party  in  England ;  they  were  far  from  being  an
inconsiderable  faction  in  his  own  kingdom.  The  pope
and  the  king  of  Spain  were  ready  to  take  part  in  all  their
machinations,  and  to  second  every  effort  of  their  bigotry.
The  opposition  of  such  a  body  to  his  succession  to  the
crown  of  England,  added  to  the  averseness  of  the  Eng-
lish from  the  government  of  strangers,  might  create  him
many  difficulties.  In  order  to  avoid  these,  he  thought
it  necessary  to  soothe  rather  than  to  irritate  the  Roman
Catholics,  and  to  reconcile  them  to  his  succession,  by
the  hopes  of  gentler  treatment,  and  some  mitigation  of
the  rigour  of  those  laws,  which  were  now  in  force  against
them.  This  attempt  to  gain  one  party  by  promises  of
indulgence  and  acts  of  clemency,  while  he  adhered  with
all  the  obstinacy  of  a  disputant  to  the  doctrines  and
tenets  of  the  other,  has  given  an  air  of  mystery,  and  even
of  contradiction,  to  this  part  of  the  king's  character.
The  Papists,  with  the  credulity  of  a  sect  struggling
to  obtain  power,  believed  his  heart  to  be  wholly
theirs ;  and  the  Protestants,  with  the  jealousy,  insepa-
rable from  those  who  are  already  in  possession  of
power,  viewed  every  act  of  lenity  as  a  mark  of  indif-
ference, or  a  symptom  of  apostacy.  In  order  to  please
both,  James  often  aimed  at  an  excessive  refinement,
mingled  with  dissimulation,  in  which  he  imagined
the  perfection  of  government  and  of  king-craft  to
consist.

His  exces-  His  behaviour  on  this  occasion  was  agreeable
tTthe  con-  to  tnese  general  maxims.  Notwithstanding  the
spirators.  solicitations  of  the  queen  of  England,  enforced
by  the  zealous  remonstrances  of  his  own  clergy,  a  short
imprisonment  was  the  only  punishment  he  inflicted  upon

VOL.  II.  M

162  SCOTLAND.  [1589.

Huntiy  and  his  associates.  But  he  soon  had  reason  to
repent  an  act  of  clemency  so  inconsistent  with  the  dig-
nity of  government.  The  first  use  which  the  conspira-
tors made  of  their  liberty  was  to  assemble  their  follow-
ers, and  under  pretence  of  removing  chancellor  Mait-
land,  an  able  minister,  but  warmly  devoted  to  the  Eng-
lish interest,  from  the  king's  council  and  presence,  they
attempted  to  seize  James  himself.  This  attempt  being
defeated,  partly  by  Maitland's  vigilance,  and  partly  by
their  own  ill  conduct,  they  were  forced  to  retire  to  the
north,  where  they  openly  erected  the  standard  of  rebel-
lion. But  as  the  king's  government  was  not  generally
unpopular,  or  his  ministers  odious,  their  own  vassals
joined  them  slowly,  and  discovered  no  zeal  in  the  cause.
The  king,  in  person,  advancing  against  them  with  such
forces  as  he  could  suddenly  levy,  they  durst  not  rely  so
much  on  the  fidelity  of  the  troops,  which,  though  supe-
rior in  number,  followed  them  with  reluctance,  as  to
hazard  a  battle;  but  suffering  them  to  disperse,  they
surrendered  to  the  king,  and  threw  themselves  on  his
mercy.  Huntiy,  Errol,  Crawford,  and  Bothwell,  were
all  brought  to  a  public  trial.  Repeated  acts  of  treason
were  easily  proved  against  them.  The  king,  however,
did  not  permit  any  sentence  to  be  pronounced;  and
after  keeping  them  a  few  months  in  confinement,
he  took  occasion,  amidst  the  public  festivity  and  re-
joicings at  the  approach  of  his  marriage,  to  set  them  at
liberty/

The  king's  ^s  James  was  tne  onty  descendant  of  the  an-
marriage  cient  monarchs  of  Scotland  in  the  direct  line ;

with  Anne

of  Den-  as  all  hopes  of  uniting  the  crowns  01  the  two
kingdoms  would  have  expired  with  him ;  as  the
earl  of  Arran,  the  presumptive  heir  to  the  throne,  was
lunatic  ;  the  king's  marriage  was,  on  all  these  accounts,
an  event  which  the  nation  wished  for  with  the  utmost

x  Spotsw.  373. Cald.  iv.  103—130.

1589.]  BOOK VII.  163

ardour.  He  himself  was  no  less  desirous  of  accomplish-
ing it ;  and  had  made  overtures  for  that  purpose  to  the
eldest  daughter  of  Frederick  II.  king  of  Denmark.  But
Elizabeth,  jealous  of  every  thing  that  would  render  the
accession  of  the  house  of  Stewart  more  acceptable  to  the
English,  endeavoured  to  perplex  James,  in  the  same
manner  she  had  done  Mary ;  and  employed  as  many
artifices  to  defeat  or  to  retard  his  marriage.  His  minis-
ters, gained  by  bribes  and  promises,  seconded  her  in-
tention ;  and  though  several  different  ambassadors  were
sent  from  Scotland  to  Denmark,  they  produced  powers
so  limited,  or  insisted  on  conditions  so  extravagant,  that
Frederick  could  not  believe  the  king  to  be  in  earnest ;
and  suspecting  that  there  was  some  design  to  deceive
or  amuse  him,  gave  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  the  duke
of  Brunswick.  Not  discouraged  by  this  disappointment,
which  he  imputed  entirely  to  the  conduct  of  his  own
ministers,  James  made  addresses  to  the  princess  Anne,
Frederick's  second  daughter.  Though  Elizabeth  en-
deavoured to  divert  him  from  this  by  recommending
Catherine,  the  king  of  Navarre's  sister,  as  a  more  ad-
vantageous match ;  though  she  prevailed  on  the  privy-
council  of  Scotland  to  declare  against  the  alliance  with
Denmark,  he  persisted  in  his  choice ;  and  despairing  of
overcoming  the  obstinacy  of  his  own  ministers  in  any
other  manner,  he  secretly  encouraged  the  citizens  of
Edinburgh  to  take  arms.  They  threatened  to  tear  in
pieces  the  chancellor,  whom  they  accused  as  the  person
whose  artifices  had  hitherto  disappointed  the  wishes  of
the  king  and  the  expectations  of  his  people.  In  conse-
quence of  this,  the  earl  Marischal  was  sent  into  Den-
mark at  the  head  of  a  splendid  embassy.  He  received
ample  powers  and  instructions,  drawn  with  the  king's
own  hand.  The  marriage  articles  were  quickly  agreed
upon,  and  the  young  queen  set  sail  towards  Scotland.
James  made  great  preparations  for  her  reception,  and

x.2

164  SCOTLAND.  [1589.

waited  her  landing  with  all  the  impatience  of  a  lover,
when  the  unwelcome  account  arrived,  that  a  violent
tempest  had  arisen,  which  drove  back  her  fleet  to  Nor-
way, in  a  condition  so  shattered,  that  there  was  little
hope  of  its  putting  again  to  sea  before  the  spring.  This
unexpected  disappointment  he  felt  with  the  utmost  sen-
sibility. He  instantly  fitted  out  some  ships,  and,  with-
out communicating  his  intention  to  any  of  his  council,
sailed  in  person,  attended  by  the  chancellor,  several
noblemen,  and  a  train  of  three  hundred  persons,  in  quest
of  his  bride.  He  arrived  safely  in  a  small  har-
bour near  Upslo,  where  the  queen  then  resided.
NOV.  24.  There  the  marriage  was  solemnized ;  and  as  it
would  have  been  rash  to  trust  those  boisterous  seas  in
the  winter  season,  James  accepted  the  invitation  of  the
court  of  Denmark,  and  repairing  to  Copenhagen,  passed
several  months  there,  amidst  continual  feasting  and
amusements,  in  which  both  the  queen  and  himself  had
great  delight/

No  event  in  the  king's  life  appears  to  be  a  wider  de-
viation from  his  general  character  than  this  sudden  sally.
His  son  Charles  I.  was  capable  of  that  excessive  admira-
tion of  the  other  sex,  which  arises  from  great  sensibility
of  heart,  heightened  by  elegance  of  taste ;  and  the  ro-
mantic air  of  his  journey  to  Spain  suited  such  a  dispo-
sition. But  James  was  not  susceptible  of  any  refined
gallantry,  and  always  expressed  that  contempt  for  the
female  character  which  a  pedantic  erudition,  unac-
quainted with  politeness,  is  apt  to  inspire.  He  was
exasperated,  however,  and  rendered  impatient  by  the
many  obstacles  which  had  been  laid  in  his  way.  He  was
anxious  to  secure  the  political  advantages  which  he  ex-
pected from  marriage ;  and  fearing  that  a  delay  might
afford  Elizabeth  and  his  own  ministers  an  opportunity
of  thwarting  him  by  new  intrigues,  he  suddenly  took

y  Melvil,  352. Spotsw.  377. Murdin,637.

1589.]  BOOK  VII.  165

the  resolution  of  preventing  them,  by  a  voyage  from
which  he  expected  to  return  in  a  few  weeks.  The  nation
seemed  to  applaud  his  conduct,  and  to  be  pleased  with
this  appearance  of  amorous  ardour  in  a  young  prince.
Notwithstanding  his  absence  so  long  beyond  the  time
he  expected,  the  nobles,  the  clergy,  and  the  people,  vied
with  one  another  in  loyalty  and  obedience;  and  no
period  of  the  king's  reign  was  more  remarkable  for
tranquillity,  or  more  free  from  any  eruption  of  those
factions  which  so  often  disturbed  the  kingdom.

THE

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND.

BOOK  VIII.

1590.  ON  the  1st  of  May  the  king  and  queen  arrived
Ind  kueL  at  Le^tnj anc^  were  received  by  their  subjects  with
arrive  in  every  possible  expression  of  joy.  The  solem-
nity of  the  queen's  coronation  was  conducted
with  great  magnificence ;  but  so  low  had  the  order  of
bishops  fallen  in  the  opinion  of  the  public,  that  none  of
them  were  present  on  that  occasion ;  and  Mr.  Robert
Bruce,  a  presbyterian  minister  of  great  reputation,  set
the  crown  on  her  head,  administered  the  sacred  unction,
and  performed  the  other  customary  ceremonies.

The  zeal  and  success  with  which  many  of  the  clergy
had  contributed  towards  preserving  peace  and  order  in
the  kingdom,  during  his  absence,  reconciled  James,  in
a  great  degree,  to  their  persons,  and  even  to  the  pres-
byterian form  of  government. In  presence  of

August  4. J  _  , ,  . ,  ,  .  , r , ,  . ,

an  assembly  which  met  this  year,  he  made  high
encomiums  on  the  discipline  as  well  as  the  doctrine  of
the  church,  promised  to  adhere  inviolably  to  both,  and
permitted  the  assembly  to  frame  such  acts  as  gradually
abolished  all  the  remains  of  episcopal  jurisdiction,  and
paved  the  way  for  a  full  and  legal  establishment  of  the
presbyterian  model.*

i An  event  happened  soon  after,  which  afforded
the  clergy  no  small  triumph.  Archbishop  Adam-
son,  their  ancient  opponent,  having  fallen  under  the
king's  displeasure,  having  been  deprived  of  the  revenues

a  Cald.  iv.  204.

1591.]  BOOK VIII.  167

of  his  see  in  consequence  of  the  act  of  annexation,  and
being  oppressed  with  age,  with  poverty,  and  diseases,
made  the  meanest  submission  to  the  clergy,  and  deli-
vered to  the  assembly  a  formal  recantation  of  all  his
opinions  concerning  church  government,  which  had
been  matter  of  offence  to  the  presbyterians. Such  a
confession,  from  the  most  learned  person  of  the  epis-
copal order,  was  considered  as  a  testimony  which  the
force  of  truth  had  extorted  from  an  adversary.5
Disorders Meanwhile,  the  king's  excessive  clemency  to-
kinthdom war(^s  offenders  multiplied  crimes  of  all  kinds,
and  encouraged  such  acts  of  violence,  as  brought
his  government  under  contempt,  and  proved  fatal  to
many  of  his  subjects. The  history  of  several  years,
about  this  time,  is  filled  with  accounts  of  the  deadly
quarrels  between  the  great  families,  and  of  murders
and  assassinations  perpetrated  in  the  most  audacious
manner,  and  with  circumstances  of  the  utmost  barba-
rity. All  the  defects  in  the  feudal  aristocracy  were
now  felt  more  sensibly,  perhaps,  than  at  any  other  pe-
riod in  the  history  of  Scotland,  and  universal  licence
and  anarchy  prevailed  to  a  degree  scarce  consistent
with  the  preservation  of  society :  while  the  king,  too
gentle  to  punish,  or  too  feeble  to  act  with  vigour,  suf-
fered all  these  enormities  to  pass  with  impunity.
An  attempt But  though  James  connived  at  real  crimes,
we^' witchcraft,  which  is  commonly  an  imaginary
against  the  one,  engrossed  his  attention,  and  those  sus-
pected of  it  felt  the  whole  weight  of  his  autho-
rity. Many  persons,  neither  extremely  old  nor  wretch-
edly poor,  which  were  usually  held  to  be  certain  indi-
cations of  this  crime,  but  masters  of  families,  and  ma-
trons of  a  decent  rank,  and  in  the  middle  age  of  life,
were  seized  and  tortured. Though  their  confessions
contained  the  most  absurd  and  incredible  circumstances,
the  king's  prejudices,  those  of  the  clergy  and  of  the

b  Spotsw.  385. Cald.  iv.  214.

168  SCOTLAND.  [1591.

people,  conspired  in  believing  their  extravagances
without  hesitation,  and  in  punishing  their  persons  with-
out mercy.  Some  of  these  unhappy  sufferers  accused
Bothwell  of  having  consulted  them,  in  order  to  know
the  time  of  the  king's  death,  and  of  having  employed
their  art  to  raise  the  storms  which  had  endangered  the
queen's  life,  and  had  detained  James  so  long  in  Den-
mark. Upon  this  evidence  that  nobleman  was  com-
mitted to  prison.  His  turbulent  and  haughty  spirit
could  neither  submit  to  the  restraint,  nor  brook  such
an  indignity.  Having  gained  his  keepers,  he  made  his
escape,  and  imputing  the  accusation  to  the  artifices  of
his  enemy  the  chancellor,  he  assembled  his  followers,
under  pretence  of  driving  him  from  the  king's  councils.
Being  favoured  by  some  of  the  king's  attendants,  he
was  admitted  by  a  secret  passage,  under  cloud  of  night,
into  the  court  of  the  palace  of  Holyrood-house.  He
advanced  directly  towards  the  royal  apartment,  but
happily  before  he  entered,  the  alarm  was  taken,  and
the  doors  shut.  While  he  attempted  to  burst
open  some  of  them,  and  set  fire  to  others,  the
citizens  of  Edinburgh  had  time  to  run  to  their  arms,
and  he  escaped  with  the  utmost  difficulty ;  owing  his
safety  to  the  darkness  of  the  night,  and  the  precipi-
tancy with  which  he  fled.0

He  retired  towards  the  north,  and  the  king

1592.

having  unadvisedly  given  a  commission  to  the
earl  of  Huntly  to  pursue  him  and  his  followers  with
fire  and  sword,  he,  under  colour  of  executing  that  com-
mission, gratified  his  private  revenge,  and  surrounded
the  house  of  the  earl  of  Murray,  burnt  it  to  the  ground,
and  slew  Murray  himself. The  murder  of  a
young  nobleman  of  such  promising  virtues,  and
the  heir  of  the  regent  Murray,  the  darling  of  the  people,
excited  universal  indignation. The  citizens  of  Edin-
burgh rose  in  a  tumultuous  manner ;  and,  though  they

«  Melv.  388. Spotsw.  386.

1592.]  BOOK  VIIL  169

were  restrained  by  the  care  of  the  magistrates  from  any
act  of  violence,  they  threw  aside  all  respect  for  the  king
and  his  ministers,  and  openly  insulted  and  threatened
both. While  this  mutinous  spirit  continued,  James
thought  it  prudent  to  withdraw  from  the  city,  and  fixed
his  residence  for  some  time  at  Glasgow. There  Huntly
surrendered  himself  to  justice ;  and,  notwithstanding
the  atrociousness  of  his  crime,  and  the  clamours  of  the
people,  the  power  of  the  chancellor,  with  whom  he  was
now  closely  confederated,  and  the  king's  regard  for  the
memory  of  the  duke  of  Lennox,  whose  daughter  he  had
married,  not  only  protected  him  from  the  sentence  which
such  an  odious  action  merited,  but  exempted  him  even
from  the  formality  of  a  public  trial.d
Presby- A  step  of  much  importance  was  taken  soon
Sob.  go-  after  with  regard  to  the  government  of  the
IsTbTshed  church' The  clergy  had  long  complained  of
by  law. the  encroachments  made  upon  their  privileges
and  jurisdiction  by  the  acts  of  the  parliament  1584,
and  though  these  laws  had  now  lost  much  of  their
force,  they  resolved  to  petition  the  parliament,  which
was  approaching,  to  repeal  them  in  form. The  junc-
ture for  pushing  such  a  measure  was  well  chosen. The
king  had  lost  much  of  the  public  favour  by  his  lenity
towards  the  Popish  faction,  and  still  more  by  his  re-
missness  in  pursuing  the  murderers  of  the  earl  of  Mur-
ray. The  chancellor  had  not  only  a  powerful  party  of
the  courtiers  combined  against  him,  but  was  become
odious  to  the  people,  who  imputed  to  him  every  false
step  in  the  king's  conduct. Both  well  still  lurked  in
the  kingdom,  and  being  secretly  supported  by  all  the
enemies  of  Maitland's  administration,  was  ready  every
moment  to  renew  his  audacious  enterprises. James,
for  all  these  reasons,  was  extremely  willing  to  indulge
the  clergy  in  their  request,  and  not  only  consented  to
a  law,  whereby  the  acts  of  1584  were  rescinded  or  ex-

d  Spotsw.  387.

170  .SCOTLAND.  [1592.

plained,  but  he  carried  his  complaisance  still  farther,
and  permitted  the  parliament  to  establish  the  presby-
terian  government,  in  its  general  assemblies,  provincial
synods,  presbyteries,  and  kirk  sessions,  with  all  the  dif-
ferent branches  of  their  discipline  and  jurisdiction,  in
the  most  ample  manner. All  the  zeal  and  authority  of
the  clergy,  even  under  the  administration  of  regents,
from  whom  they  might  have  expected  the  most  partial
favour,  could  not  obtain  the  sanction  of  law,  in  con-
firmation of  their  mode  of  ecclesiastical  government.
No  prince  was  ever  less  disposed  than  James  to  ap-
prove a  system,  the  republican  genius  of  which  inspired
a  passion  for  liberty  extremely  repugnant  to  his  exalted
notions  of  royal  prerogative. Nor  could  any  aversion
be  more  inveterate  than  his,  to  the  austere  and  uncom-
plying character  of  the  presbyterian  clergy  in  that  age;
who,  more  eminent  for  zeal  than  for  policy,  often  con-
tradicted his  opinions,  and  censured  his  conduct,  with
a  freedom  equally  offensive  to  his  dogmatism  as  a  theo^
logian,  and  to  his  pride  as  a  king. His  situation,  how-
ever, obliged  him  frequently  to  conceal,  or  to  dissem-
ble, his  sentiments ;  and,  as  he  often  disgusted  his  sub-
jects, by  indulging  the  Popish  faction  more  than  they
approved,  he  endeavoured  to  atone  for  this  by  conces-
sions to  the  presbyterian  clergy,  more  liberal  than  he
himself  would  otherwise  have  chosen  to  grant.6

In  this  parliament,  Bothwell  and  all  his  adherents
were  attainted.  But  he  soon  made  a  new  attempt  to
seize  the  king  at  Falkland ;  and  James,  betrayed  by  some
of  his  courtiers,  and  feebly  defended  by  others,  who
wished  well  to  Bothwell,  as  the  chancellor's  avowed
enemy,  owed  his  safety  to  the  fidelity  and  vigilance  of
Sir  Robert  Melvil,  and  to  the  irresolution  of  BothweU's
associates/

A  new  con- Scarcely  was  this  danger  over,  when  the  na-
tion was  alarmed  with  the  discovery  of  a  new  and

•  Cald.  iv.  248.  252. Spotsw,  388.  f  MeJv.  402.

1592.]

BOOK VIII.

171

the  Popish  more  formidable  conspiracy.  George  Ker,  the
lord  Newbottle's  brother,  being  seized  as  he  was
ready  to  set  sail  for  Spain,  many  suspicious  papers  were
found  in  his  custody,  and  among  these  several  blanks
signed  by  the  earls  of  Angus,  Huntly,  and  Errol.  By
this  extraordinary  precaution  they  hoped  to  escape  any
danger  of  discovery.  But  Ker's  resolution  shrinking
when  torture  was  threatened,  he  confessed  that  he  was
employed  by  these  noblemen  to  carry  on  a  negotiation
with  the  king  of  Spain ;  that  the  blanks  subscribed  with
their  names  were  to  be  filled  up  by  Crichton  and  Tyrie ;
that  they  were  instructed  to  offer  the  faithful  service  of
the  three  earls  to  that  monarch ;  and  to  solicit  him  to
land  a  body  of  his  troops,  either  in  Galloway,  or  at  the
mouth  of  Clyde,  with  which  they  undertook,  in  the  first
place,  to  establish  the  Roman  Catholic  religion  in  Scot-
land, and  then  to  invade  England  with  the  whole  forces
of  the  kingdom.  David  Graham  of  Fintry,  and  Barclay
of  Ladyland,  whom  he  accused  of  being  privy  to  the
conspiracy,  were  taken  into  custody,  and  confirmed  all
the  circumstances  of  his  confession.8

1593 The  nation  having  been  kept  for  some  time
Zeal  of  the  in  continual  terror  and  agitation  by  so  many

people,  .  .  i -,.  A ,  T

successive  conspiracies,  the  discovery  of  this
new  danger  completed  the  panic.  All  ranks  of  men,
as  if  the  enemy  had  already  been  at  their  gates,  thought
themselves  called  upon  to  stand  forth  in  defence  of  their
country.  The  ministers  of  Edinburgh,  without  waiting
for  any  warrant  from  the  king,  who  happened  at  that
time  to  be  absent  from  the  capital,  and  without  having
received  any  legal  commission,  assembled  a  consider-
able number  of  peers  and  barons,  in  order  to  provide
an  instant  security  against  the  impending  danger.  They
seized  the  earl  of  Angus,  and  committed  him  to  the
castle;  they  examined  Ker;  and  prepared  a  remon-
strance to  be  laid  before  the  king,  concerning  the  state

S  Bymer,  xvi.  190.

172  SCOTLAND.  [1593.

of  the  nation,  and  the  necessity  of  prosecuting  the  con-
and  ro-  spirators  with  becoming  vigour.  James,  though
ceedings  of  jealous  of  every  encroachment  on  his  preroga-
against8  tive,  and  offended  with  his  subjects,  who,  in-
stead of  petitioning,  seemed  to  prescribe  to
him,  found  it  necessary,  during  the  violence  of  the  fer-
ment, not  only  to  adopt  their  plan,  but  even  to  declare
that  no  consideration  should  ever  induce  him  to  pardon
such  as  had  been  guilty  of  so  odious  a  treason.  He
summoned  the  earls  of  Huntly  and  Errol  to  surrender
themselves  to  justice.  Graham  of  Fintry,  whom
his  peers  pronounced  to  be  guilty  of  treason,  he
commanded  to  be  publicly  beheaded ;  and  marching
into  the  north  at  the  head  of  an  army,  the  two  earls,
together  with  Angus,  who  had  escaped  out  of  prison,
retired  to  the  mountains.  He  placed  garrisons  in  the
castles  which  belonged  to  them  ;  compelled  their  vas-
sals, and  the  barons  in  the  adjacent  countries,  to  sub-
scribe a  bond,  containing  professions  of  their  loyalty
towards  him,  and  of  their  firm  adherence  to  the  Protes-
tant faith ;  and  the  better  to  secure  the  tranquillity  of
that  part  of  the  kingdom,  constituted  the  earls  of  Athol
and  Marischal  his  lieutenants  there.h
March  is.  Having  finished  this  expedition,  James  re-
turned  to  Edinburgh,  where  he  found  lord  Bor-
with  rougn>  an  extraordinary  ambassador  from  the
rigour.  court  of  England.  Elizabeth,  alarmed  at  the
discovery  of  a  conspiracy  which  she  considered  as  no
less  formidable  to  her  own  kingdom  than  to  Scotland,
reproached  James  with  his  former  remissness,  and
urged  him,  as  he  regarded  the  preservation  of  the  Pro-
testant religion,  or  the  dignity  of  his  own  crown,  to
punish  this  repeated  treason  with  rigour;  and  if  he
could  not  apprehend  the  persons,  at  least  to  confiscate
the  estates,  of  such  audacious  rebels.  She  weakened,
however,  the  force  of  these  requests,  by  interceding  at

h  Spotsw.  301. Cald.  iv.  291.

1593.]  BOOK VIII.  173

the  same  time  in  behalf  of  Bothwell,  whom,  according
to  her  usual  policy,  in  nourishing  a  factious  spirit
among  the  Scottish  nobles,  she  had  taken  under  her
protection.  James  absolutely  refused  to  listen  to  any
intercession  in  favour  of  one  who  had  so  often,  and  with
so  much  outrage,  insulted  both  his  government  and  his
person.  With  regard  to  the  Popish  conspirators,  he
declared  his  resolution  to  prosecute  them  with  vigour ;
but  that  he  might  be  the  better  able  to  do  so,  he  de-
manded a  small  sum  of  money  from  Elizabeth,  which
she,  distrustful  perhaps  of  the  manner  in  which  he  might
apply  it,  shewed  no  inclination  to  grant.  The  zeal,
however,  and  importunity  of  his  own  subjects,  obliged
him  to  call  a  parliament,  in  order  to  pass  an  act  of
attainder  against  the  three  earls.  But  before  it  met,
Ker  made  his  escape  out  of  prison ;  and,  on  pretence
that  legal  evidence  of  their  guilt  could  not  be  produced,
nothing  was  concluded  against  them.  The  king  him-
self was  universally  suspected  of  having  contrived  this
artifice,  on  purpose  to  elude  the  requests  of  the  queen
of  England,  and  to  disappoint  the  wishes  of  his  own
people;  and  therefore,  in  order  to  soothe  the  clergy,
who  exclaimed  loudly  against  his  conduct,  he  gave  way
to  the  passing  of  an  act,  which  ordained  such  as  obsti-
nately contemned  the  censures  of  the  church  to  be
declared  outlaws.1

Bothweii  While  the  terror  excited  by  the  Popish  con-
surprises  spiracy  possessed  the  nation,  the  court  had  been

the  king. ,..•,,,  . , « .  ,  . ,  , ,

divided  by  two  rival  factions,  which  contended
for  the  chief  direction  of  affairs.  At  the  head  of  one
was  the  chancellor,  in  whom  the  king  reposed  entire
confidence.  For  that  very  reason,  perhaps,  he  had
fallen  early  under  the  queen's  displeasure.  The  duke
of  Lennox,  the  earl  of  Athol,  lord  Ochiltree,  and  all  the
name  of  Stewart,  espoused  her  quarrel,  and  widened

*  Cald.  ir.  343. Spotsw.  393. Parl.  13  Jac.  VI.  c.  164.

174  SCOTLAND.  [1593.

the  breach.  James,  fond  no  less  of  domestic  tranquil-
lity than  of  public  peace,  advised  his  favourite  to  retire,
for  some  time,  in  hopes  that  the  queen's  resentment
would  subside.  But  as  he  stood  in  need,  in  the  present
juncture,  of  the  assistance  of  an  able  minister,  he  had
recalled  him  to  court.  In  order  to  prevent  him  from
recovering  his  former  power,  the  Stewarts  had  recourse

to  an  expedient  no  less  illegal  than  desperate.

Having  combined  with  Bothwell,  who  was  of
the  same  name,  they  brought  him  back  secretly  into
Scotland ;  and  seizing  the  gates  of  the  palace,  intro-
duced him  into  the  royal  apartment  with  a  numerous
train  of  armed  followers.  James,  though  deserted  by
all  his  courtiers,  and  incapable  of  resistance,  discovered
more  indignation  than  fear,  and  reproaching  them  for
their  treachery,  called  on  the  earl  to  finish  his  treasons,
by  piercing  his  sovereign  to  the  heart.  But  Bothwell
fell  on  his  knees,  and  implored  pardon.  The  king  was
not  in  a  condition  to  refuse  his  demands.  A  few  days
after  he  signed  a  capitulation  with  this  successful  trai-
tor, to  whom  he  was  really  a  prisoner,  whereby  he  bound
himself  to  grant  him  a  remission  for  all  past  offences,
and  to  procure  the  ratification  of  it  in  parliament ;  and
in  the  mean  time  to  dismiss  the  chancellor,  the  master
of  Glamis,  lord  Home,  and  Sir  George  Home,  from  his
councils  and  presence.  Bothwell,  on  his  part,  con-
sented to  remove  from  court,  though  he  left  there  as
many  of  his  associates  as  he  thought  sufficient  to  pre-
vent the  return  of  the  adverse  faction.
He  reco-  But  it  was  now  no  easy  matter  to  keep  the
bertyhish~  king  under  the  same  kind  of  bondage  to  which
Sept.  7.  he  nad  been  often  subject  during  his  minority.
He  discovered  so  much  impatience  to  shake  off  his  fet-
ters, that  those  who  had  imposed,  durst  not  continue
the  restraint.  They  permitted  him  to  call  a  convention
of  the  nobles  at  Stirling,  and  to  repair  thither  himself.

1593.]  BOOK VIII.  175

All  Bothwell's  enemies,  and  all  who  were  desirous  of
gaining  the  king's  favour  by  appearing  to  be  so,  obeyed
the  summons.  They  pronounced  the  insult  offered  to
the  king's  person  and  authority  to  be  high-treason,  and
declared  him  absolved  from  any  obligation  to  observe
conditions  extorted  by  force,  and  which  violated  so  es-
sentially his  royal  prerogative:  James,  however,  still
proffered  him  a  pardon,  provided  he  would  sue  for  it  as
an  act  of  mercy,  and  promise  to  retire  out  of  the  king-
dom. These  conditions  Bothwell  rejected  with  disdain,
and,  betaking  himself  once  more  to  arms,  attempted  to
surprise  the  king ;  but  finding  him  on  his  guard,  fled  to
the  borders.k

Suspected  The  king's  ardour  against  Bothwell,  compared
?4ftoeUpo-  with  his  slow  and  evasive  proceedings  against
pish  lords,  the  Popish  lords,  occasioned  a  general  disgust
among  his  subjects :  and  was  imputed  either  to  an  ex-
cessive attachment  to  the  persons  of  those  conspirators,
or  to  a  secret  partiality  towards  their  opinions;  both
which  gave  rise  to  no  unreasonable  fears.  The  clergy,
as  the  immediate  guardians  of  the  Protestant  religion,
thought  themselves  bound,  in  such  a  juncture,  to  take  ex-
traordinary steps  for  its  preservation.  The  pro-
vincial synod  of  Fife  happening  to  meet  at  that
time,  a  motion  was  made  to  excommunicate  all  con-
.cerned  in  the  late  conspiracy,  as  obstinate  and  irre-
claimable Papists ;  and,  though  none  of  the  conspira-
tors resided  within  the  bounds  of  the  synod,  or  were
subject  to  its  jurisdiction,  such  was  the  zeal  of  the  mem-
bers, that,  overlooking  this  irregularity,  they  pronoun-
ced against  them  the  sentence  of  excommunication,  to
which  the  act  of  last  parliament  added  new  terrors.
Lest  this  should  be  imputed  to  a  few  men,  and  account-
ed the  act  of  a  small  part  of  the  church,  deputies  were
appointed  to  attend  the  adjacent  synods,  and  to  desire
their  approbation  and  concurrence.

k  Cald.  iv.  326. Spotsw.  395,

176  SCOTLAND.  [1593.

His  lenity  An  event  happened  a  few  weeks  after,  which
fhlra^8  increased  the  people's  suspicions  of  the  king.
Oct.  17.  As  he  was  marching  on  an  expedition  against
the  borderers,  the  three  Popish  earls  coming  suddenly
into  his  presence,  offered  to  submit  themselves  to  a
legal  trial;  and  James,  without  committing  them  to  cus-
tody, appointed  a  day  for  that  purpose.  They  prepared
to  appear  with  a  formidable  train  of  their  friends  and
vassals.  But  in  the  mean  time  the  clergy,  together  with
many  peers  and  barons,  assembled  at  Edinburgh,  re-
monstrated against  the  king's  extreme  indulgence,  with
great  boldness,  and  demanded  of  him,  according  to  the
regular  course  of  justice,  to  commit  to  sure  custody  per-
sons charged  with  the  highest  acts  of  treason,  who  could
not  be  brought  to  a  legal  trial,  until  they  were  absolved
from  the  censures  of  the  church;  and  to  call  a  conven-
tion of  estates,  to  deliberate  concerning  the  method  of
proceeding  against  them.  At  the  same  time  they  offered
to  accompany  him  in  arms  to  the  place  of  trial,,  lest  such
audacious  and  powerful  criminals  should  overawe  jus-
tice, and  dictate  to  the  judges,  to  whom  they  pretended
to  submit.  James,  though  extremely  offended,  both
with  the  irregularity  of  their  proceedings,  and  the  pre-
sumption of  their  demands,  found  it  expedient  to  put
off  the  day  of  trial,  and  to  call  a  convention  of  estates,
in  order  to  quiet  the  fears  and  jealousies  of  the  people.
By  being  humoured  in  this  point,  their  suspicions  be-
gan gradually  to  abate,  and  the  chancellor  managed
the  convention  so  artfully,  that  he  himself,  together  with
a  few  other  members,  were  empowered  to  pronounce  a
final  sentence  upon  the  conspirators.  After

Nov.  26.  i t vi  -i  i-ii

much  deliberation  they  ordained,  that  the  three
earls  and  their  associates  should  be  exempted  from  all
farther  inquiry  or  prosecution,  on  account  of  their  cor-
respondence with  Spain;  that,  before  the  first  day  of
February,  they  should  either  submit  to  the  church,  and
publicly  renounce  the  errors  of  Popery,  or  remove  out

1594.

1593.]  BOOK VIII.  177

of  the  kingdom;  that,  before  the  1st  of  January,  they
should  declare  which  of  these  alternatives  they  would
embrace;  that  they  should  find  surety  for  their  peace-
able demeanour  for  the  future ;  and  that  if  they  failed  to
signify  their  choice  in  due  time,  they  should  lose  the
benefit  of  this  act  of  abolition,  and  remain  exposed  to  all
the  pains  of  law.1

By  this  lenity  towards  the  conspirators,  James

incurred  much  reproach,  and  gained  no  advan-
tage. Devoted  to  the  Popish  superstition,  submissive
to  all  the  dictates  of  their  priests,  and  buoyed  up  with
hopes  and  promises  of  foreign  aid,  the  three  earls  re-
fused to  accept  of  the  conditions,  and  continued  their

treasonable  correspondence  with  the  court  of

Jan.  18.  ,

Spain.  A  convention  of  estates  pronounced
them  to  have  forfeited  the  benefit  of  the  articles  which
were  offered;  and  the  king  required  them,  by  proclama-
tion, to  surrender  themselves  to  justice.  The  presence
of  the  English  ambassador  contributed,  perhaps,  to  the
vigour  of  these  proceedings.  Elizabeth,  ever  attentive
to  James's  motions,  and  imputing  his  reluctance  to
punish  the  Popish  lords  to  a  secret  approbation  of
their  designs,  had  sent  lord  Zouche  to  represent,  once
more,  the  danger  to  which  he  exposed  himself,  by
this  false  moderation;  and  to  require  him  to  exercise
that  rigour  which  their  crimes,  as  well-  as  the  posture
of  affairs,  rendered  necessary.  Though  the  steps  now
taken  by  the  king  silenced  all  complaints  on  that  head,
yet  Zouche,  forgetful  of  his  character  as  an  ambassa-
dor, entered  into  private  negotiations  with  such  of  the
Scottish  nobles  as  disapproved  of  the  king's  measures,
and  held  almost  an  open  correspondence  with  Both-
well,  who,  according  to  the  usual  artifice  of  malecon-
tents,  pretended  much  solicitude  for  reforming  the  dis-
orders of  the  commonwealth;  and  covered  his  own  am-
bition with  the  specious  veil  of  zeal  against  those  coun-

1  Cald.  iv.  330. Spotsw.  397.
VOL.  II.  N

J78  SCOTLAND.  [1594.

sellers  who  restrained  the  king  from  pursuing  the
avowed  enemies  of  the  Protestant  faith.  Zouche  en-
couraged him,  in  the  name  of  his  mistress,  to  take  arms
against  his  sovereign.

Meanwhile,  the  king  and  the  clergy  were

A.  new  at-

tempt  of  filled  with  mutual  distrust  of  each  other.  They
''  were  jealous,  perhaps,  to  excess,  that  James's
affections  leaned  too  much  towards  the  Popish  faction ;
he  suspected  them,  without  good  reason,  of  prompting
Both  well  to  rebellion,  and  even  of  supplying  him  with
money  for  that  purpose.  Little  instigation,  indeed,  was
wanting  to  rouse  such  a  turbulent  spirit  as  Bothwell's
to  any  daring  enterprise.  He  appeared  suddenly  within
a  mile  of  Edinburgh,  at  the  head  of  four  hundred  horse.
The  pretences,  by  which  he  endeavoured  to  justify  this
insurrection,  were  extremely  popular ;  zeal  for  religion,
enmity  to  Popery,  concern  for  the  king's  honour,  and
for  the  liberties  of  the  nation.  James  was  totally  un-
provided for  his  own  defence ;  he  had  no  infantry,  and
was  accompanied  only  with  a  few  horsemen  of  lord
Home's  train.  In  this  extremity,  he  implored  the  aid
of  the  citizens  of  Edinburgh,  and,  in  order  to  encou-
rage them  to  act  with  zeal,  he  promised  to  proceed
against  the  Popish  lords  with  the  utmost  rigour  of  law.
Animated  by  their  ministers,  the  citizens  ran  cheer-
fully to  their  arms,  and  advanced,  with  the  king  at  their
head,  against  Bothwell ;  but  he,  notwithstanding  his
success  in  putting  to  flight  lord  Home,  who  had  rashly
charged  him  with  a  far  inferior  number  of  cavalry,  re-
tired to  Dalkeith  without  daring  to  attack  the  king.
His  followers  abandoned  him  soon  after,  and  discou-
raged by  so  many  successive  disappointments,  could
never  afterward  be  brought  to  venture  into  the  field.
He  betook  himself  to  his  usual  lurking  places  in  the
north  of  England;  but  Elizabeth,  in  compliance  with  the
king's  remonstrances,  obliged  him  to  quit  his  retreat.10

M  Spotsw.  403. Cald.  iv.  359.

1594.]

BOOK  VMI.

179

June  8.

Fresh  No  sooner  was  the  king  delivered  from  one

fronfthe  danger,  than  he  was  called  to  attend  to  another.
brdslsh  ^ne  Popish  lords,  in  consequence  of  their  ne-
Aprii  s.  gotiations  with  Spain,  received,  in  the  spring,
a  supply  of  money  from  Philip.  What  bold  designs
this  might  inspire,  it  was  no  easy  matter  to  conjecture.
From  men  under  the  dominion  of  bigotry,  and  whom
indulgence  could  not  reclaim,  the  most  desperate  ac-
tions were  to  be  dreaded.  The  assembly  of  the  church
immediately  took  the  alarm ;  remonstrated  against  them
with  more  bitterness  than  ever;  and  unanimously  rati-
fied the  sentence  of  excommunication  pronounced  by
the  synod  of  Fife.  James  himself,  provoked  by  their
obstinacy  and  ingratitude,  and  afraid  that  his  long  for-
bearance would  not  only  be  generally  displeasing  to
his  own  subjects,  but  give  rise  to  unfavourable  suspi-
cions among  the  English,  exerted  himself  with  unusual
vigour.  He  called  a  parliament;  laid  before  it
all  the  circumstances  and  aggravations  of  the
conspiracy;  and  though  there  were  but  few  members
present,  and  several  of  these  connected  with  the  con-
spirators, by  blood  or  friendship,  he  prevailed  on  them,
by  his  influence  and  importunity,  to  pronounce  -the
most  rigorous  sentence  which  the  law  can  inflict.  They
were  declared  to  be  guilty  of  high-treason,  and  their
estates  and  honours  forfeited.  At  the  same  time,  sta-
tutes, more  severe  than  ever,  were;  enacted  against  the
professors  of  the  Popish  religion.
Battle  of  How  to  put  this  sentence  in  execution,  was
Gieniivat.  a  matter  of  great  difficulty.  Three  powerful
barons,  cantoned  in  a  part  of  the  country  of  difficult
access,  surrounded  with  numerous  vassals,  and  sup-
ported by  aid  from  a  foreign  prince,  were  more  than
an  overmatch  for  a  Scottish  monarch.  No  entreaty
could  prevail  on  Elizabeth  to  advance  the  money,  ne-
cessary for  defraying  the  expenses  of  an  expedition
against  them.  To  attack  them  in  person,  with  his  own

N  2

180  SCOTLAND.  [1594.

forces  alone,  might  have  exposed  James  both  to  dis-
grace and  to  danger.  He  had  recourse  to  the  only
expedient  which  remained  in  such  a  situation,  for  aid-
ing the  impotence  of  sovereign  authority ;  he  delegated
his  authority  to  the  earl  of  Argyle  and  lord  Forbes,
the  leaders  of  two  clans  at  enmity  with  the  conspira-
tors ;  and  gave  them  a  commission  to  invade  their
lands,  and  to  seize  the  castles  which  belonged  to  them.
Both  well,  notwithstanding  all  his  high  pretensions  of
zeal  for  the  Protestant  religion,  having  now  entered
into  a  close  confederacy  with  them,  the  danger  be-
came every  day  more  urging.  Argyle,  solicited  by
the  king,  and  roused  by  the  clergy,  took  the  field  at
the  head  of  seven  thousand  men.  Huntly  and  Errol
met  him  at  Glenlivat,  with  an  army  far  inferior  in
number,  but  composed  chiefly  of  gentlemen  of  the  low
countries,  mounted  on  horseback,  and  who  brought
Qct  along  with  them  a  train  of  field-pieces.  They
encountered  each  other  with  all  the  fury  which
hereditary  enmity  and  ancient  rivalship  add  to  undis-
ciplined  courage.  But  the  Highlanders,  dis-
concerted by  the  first  discharge  of  the  cannon,
to  which  they  were  little  accustomed,  and  unable  to
resist  the  impression  of  cavalry,  were  soon  put  to
flight ;  and  Argyle,  a  gallant  young  man  of  eighteen,
was  carried  by  his  friends  out  of  the  field,  weeping
with  indignation  at  their  disgrace,  and  calling  on  them
to  stand,  and  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  their  name.n

On  the  first  intelligence  of  this  defeat,  James,  though
obliged  to  pawn  his  jewels  in  order  to  raise  money,0
assembled  a  small  body  of  troops,  and  marched  to-
wards the  north.  He  was  joined  by  the  Irvines,  Keiths,
Leslys,  Forbeses,  and  other  clans  at  enmity  with  Huntly
and  Errol,  who  having  lost  several  of  their  principal
followers  at  Glenlivat,  and  others  refusing  to  bear  arms
against  the  king  in  person,  were  obliged  to  retire  to

n  Cald.  iv.  408.  o  Birch,  Mem.  i.  186.

1595.]  BOOK VIII.  181

the  mountains.  James  wasted  their  lands ;  put  gar-
risons in  some  of  their  castles ;  burnt  others  ;  and  left
the  duke  of  Lennox  as  his  lieutenant  in  that  part  of
the  kingdom,  with  a  body  of  men  sufficient  to  restrain
them  from  gathering  to  any  head  there,  or  from  infest-
Popish  *ng  the  l°w  country.  Reduced  at  last  to  ex-
vein  out  of  treme  distress  by  the  rigour  of  the  season,  and
the  king-  the  desertion  of  their  followers,  they  obtained

the  king's  permission  to  go  beyond  seas,  and
gave  security  that  they  should  neither  return  without
his  licence,  nor  engage  in  any  new  intrigues  against
the  Protestant  religion,  or  the  peace  of  the  kingdom.1*

By  their  exile,  tranquillity  was  re-established  in  the
north  of  Scotland ;  and  the  firmness  and  vigour  which
James  had  displayed  in  his  last  proceedings  against
them,  regained  him,  in  a  great  degree,  the  confidence
of  his  Protestant  subjects.  But  he  sunk  in  the  same
proportion,  and  for  the  same  reason,  in  the  esteem  of  the
The  HO-  Roman  Catholics.  They  had  asserted  his  mo-
-  ther's  right  -to  the  crown  of  England  with  so

much  warmth,  that  they  could  not,  with  any
James.  decency,  reject  his  ;  and  the  indulgence,  with
which  he  affected  to  treat  the  professors  of  the  Popish
religion,  inspired  them  with  such  hopes,  that  they
viewed  his  accession  to  the  throne  as  no  undesirable
event.  But  the  rigour  with  which  the  king  had  lately
pursued  the  conspirators,  and  the  severe  statutes  against
Popery  to  which  he  had  given  his  consent,  convinced
them  now  that  these  hopes, were  visionary;  and  they
began  to  look  about  in  quest  of  some  new  successor,
whose  rights  they  might  oppose  to  his.  The  Papists
who  resided  in  England,  turned  their  eyes  towards  the
earl  of  Essex,  whose  generous  mind,  though  firmly
established  in  the  Protestant  faith,  abhorred  the  seve-
rities inflicted  in  that  age  on  account  of  religious  opi-
nions, Those  of  the  same  sect,  who  were  in  exile,

P  Spotsw,  404, Cald.  373,  &c.

182  SCOTLAND.  [1595.

formed  a  bolder  scheme,  and  one  more  suitable  to  their
situation.  They  advanced  the  claim  of  the  infanta  of
Spain ;  and  Parsons  the  Jesuit  published  a  book,  in
which,  by  false  quotations  from  history,  by  fabulous
genealogies,  and  absurd  arguments,  intermingled  with
bitter  invectives  against  the  king  of  Scots,  he  endea-
voured to  prove  the  infanta's  title  to  the  English  crown
to  be  preferable  to  his.  Philip,  though  involved  al-
ready in  a  war  both  with  France  and  England,  and
scarce  able  to  defend  the  remains  of  the  Burgundian
provinces  against  the  Dutch  commonwealth,  eagerly
grasped  at  this  airy  project.  The  dread  of  a  Spanish
pretender  to  the  crown,  and  the  opposition  which  the
Papists  began  to  form  against  the  king's  succession,
contributed  not  a  little  to  remove  the  prejudices  of  the
Protestants,  and  to  prepare  the  way  for  that  event.
Bothweii  Bothwell,  whose  name  has  been  so  often
mentioned  as  the  disturber  of  the  king's  tran-
quillity,  and  of  the  peace  of  the  kingdom,  was
now  in  a  wretched  condition.  Abandoned  by  the
queen  of  England,  on  account  of  his  confederacy  with
the  Popish  lords ;  excommunicated  by  the  church  for
the  same  reason ;  and  deserted,  in  his  distress,  by  his
own  followers;  he  was  obliged  to  fly  for  safety  to
France,  and  thence  to  Spain  and  Italy,  where,  after
renouncing  the  Protestant -faith,  he  led  many  years
an  obscure  and  indigent  life,  remarkable  only  for  a
low  and  infamous  debauchery.  The  king,  though  ex-
tremely ready  to  sacrifice  the  strongest  resentment  to
the  slightest  acknowledgments,  could  never  be  softened
by  his  submission,  nor  be  induced  to  listen  to  any  in-
tercession in  his  behalf.q

This  year  the  king  lost  chancellor  Maitland,  an  able
minister,  on  whom  he  had  long  devolved  the  whole
weight  of  public  affairs.  As  James  loved  him  while
alive,  he  wrote  in  honour  of  his  memory,  a  copy  of

<J  Wiiiw.  Mem.  i. Spotsw.  410.

1595.]  BOOK VIII.  183

verses,  which,  when  compared  with  the  compositions
of  that  age,  are  far  from  being  inelegant/
A  change Soon  after  his  death,  a  considerable  change
rainiTtra- was  made  in  the  administration. At  that  time,
tion< the  annual  charges  of  government  far  exceed-
ed the  king's  revenues.  The  queen  was  fond  of  expen-
sive amusements. James  himself  was  a  stranger  to
economy. It  became  necessary,  for  all  these  reasons,
to  levy  the  public  revenues  with  greater  order  and  ri-
gour, and  to  husband  them  with  more  care. This  im-
portant trust  was  committed  to  eight  gentlemen  of  the
law,s  who,  from  their  number,  were  called  Octavians.
The  powers  vested  in  them  were  ample,  and  almost
unlimited. The  king  bound  himself  neither  to  add  to
their  number,  nor  to  supply  any  vacancy  that  might
happen,  without  their  consent :  and,  knowing  the  fa-
cility of  his  own  temper,  agreed  that  no  alienation  of
his  revenue,  no  grant  of  a  pension,  or  order  on  the
treasury,  should  be  held  valid,  unless  it  were  ratified
by  the  subscription  of  five  of  the  commissioners  ;  all
their  acts  and  decisions  were  declared  to  be  of  equal
force  with  the  sentence  of  judges  in  civil  courts ;  and
in  consequence  of  them,  and  without  any  other  warrant,
any  person  might  be  arrested,  or  their  goods'  seized.
Such  extensive  jurisdiction,  together  with  the  absolute
disposal  of  the  public  money,  drew  the  whole  execu-
tive  part  of  government  into their hands. United
among  themselves  they  gradually  undermined  the  rest
of  the  king's  ministers,  and  seized  on  every  lucrative
or  honourable office. The  ancient servants of  the
crown  repined  at  being  obliged  to  quit  their  stations
to  new  men. The  favourites  and  young  cour-
tiers murmured  at  seeing  the  king's  liberality
stinted  by  their  prescriptions. And  the  clergy  ex-

r  Spotsw.  411.

Alexander  Seaton  president  of  the  session,  Walter  Stewart  coraraendator  of
Blantyre,  lord  privy  seal,  David  Carnegy,  John  Lindsay,  James  Elphingstone,
Thomas  Hamilton,  John  Skene  clerk  register,  and  Peter  Young  elemosynar.

184  SCOTLAND.  [1596.

claimed  against  some  of  them  as  known  apostates  to
Popery,  and  suspected  others  of  secretly  favouring  it.
They  retained  their  power,  however,  notwithstanding
this  general  combination  against  them  ;  and  they  owed
it  entirely  to  the  order  and  economy  which  they  in-
troduced into  the  administration  of  the  finances,  by
which  the  necessary  expenses  of  government  were
more  easily  defrayed  than  in  any  other  period  of  the
king's  reign.*
Violence  of  The  rumour  of  vast  preparations  which  Phi-

a'ainstthe ^P  W£LS  S3^  tO ^6 Cariying °n a

Popish filled  both  England  and  Scotland  with  the
dread  of  a  new  invasion. James  took  proper
measures  for  the  defence  of  his  kingdom. But  these
did  not  satisfy  the  zeal  of  the  clergy,  whose  suspicions
of  the  king's  sincerity  began  to  revive  ;  and  as  he  had
permitted  the  wives  of  the  banished  peers  to  levy  the
rents  of  their  estates,  and  to  live  in  their  houses,  they
charged  him  with  rendering  the  act  of  forfeiture  in-
effectual,  by  supporting  the  avowed  enemies  of  the
March  24 ^$^N#  faith. The  assembly  of  the  church
took  under  consideration  the  state  of  the  king-
dom, and  having  appointed  a  day  of  public  fasting,
they  solemnly  renewed  the  covenant  by  which  the  na-
tion was  bound  to  adhere  to  the  Protestant  faith,  and
to  defend  it  against  all  aggressors. A  committee,  con-
sisting of  the  most  eminent  clergymen,  and  of  many
barons  and  gentlemen  of  distinction,  waited  on  the
king,  and  laid  before  him  a  plan  for  the  security  of  the
kingdom,  and  the  preservation  of  religion.  They  urged
him  to  appropriate  the  estates  of  the  banished  lords
as  a  fund  for  the  maintenance  of  soldiers  ;  to  take  the
strictest  precautions  for  preventing  the  return  of  such
turbulent  subjects  into  the  country  ; and  to  pursue  all
who  were  suspected  of  being  their  adherents  with  the
utmost  rigour.

*  Spotsw.  413.  435.

1596.']  BOOK  VIII.  185

The  king's Nothing  could  be  more  repugnant  to  the

schemes, or more  disagreeable  to  his

with  re-  &  P  .

gardto inclination,  than  these  propositions. Averse,
through  his  whole  life,  to  any  course  where  he
expected  opposition  or  danger  ;  and  fond  of  attaining
his  ends  with  the  character  of  moderation,  and  by  the
arts  of  policy,  he  observed  with  concern  the  prejudices
against  him  which  were  growing  among  the  Roman
Catholics,  and  resolved  to  make  some  atonement  for
that  part  of  his  conduct  which  had  drawn  upon  him
their  indignation. Elizabeth  was  now  well  advanced
in  years  ;  her  life  had  lately  been  in  danger  ;  if  any
Popish  competitor  should  arise  to  dispute  his  right  of
succession,  a  faction  so  powerful  as  that  of  the  banished
lords  might  be  extremely  formidable  ;  and  any  division
among  his  own  subjects  might  prove  fatal  at  a  juncture
which  would  require  their  united  and  most  vigorous
efforts. Instead,  therefore,  of  the  additional  severities
which  the  assembly  proposed,  James  had  thoughts  of
mitigating  the  punishment  which  they  already  suffered.
And  as  they  were  surrounded,  during  their  residence
in  foreign  parts.,  by  Philip's  emissaries;  as  resentment
might  dispose  them  to  listen  more  favourably  than  ever
to  their  suggestions  ;  as  despair  might  drive  them  to
still  more  atrocious  actions  ;  he  resolved  to  recall  them,
under certain  conditions, into  their  native  country.
Encouraged  by  these  sentiments  of  the  king  in  their
favour,  of  which  they  did  not  want  intelligence,  and
wearied  already  of  the  dependent  and  anxious  life  of
exiles,  they  ventured  to  return  secretly  into  Scotland.
Soon  after,  they  presented  a  petition  to  the  king,  beg-
ging his  permission  to  reside  at  their  own  houses,  and
offering  to  give  security  for  their  peaceable  and  dutiful
behaviour. James  called  a  convention  of  estates  to
deliberate  on  a  matter  of  such  importance,  and  by  their
advice  he  granted  the  petition.
The  members  of  a  committee  appointed  by  the  last

186  SCOTLAND.  [1596.

general  assembly,  as  soon  as  they  were  informed

The  rash &.  ^  ' .  J .  ,

proceed-  of  this,  met  at  Jbdmburgh,  and  with  all  the  pre-
S!rgyfand  cipitancy  of  fear  and  of  zeal,  took  such  reso-
peopie.  lutions  as  they  thought  necessary  for  the  safety
of  the  kingdom.  They  wrote  circular  letters  to  all  the
presbyteries  in  Scotland  ;  they  warned  them  of  the  ap-
proaching danger ;  they  exhorted  them  to  stir  up  their
people  to  the  defence  of  their  just  rights ;  they  com-
manded them  to  publish,  in  all  their  pulpits,  the  act
excommunicating  the  Popish  lords ;  and  enjoined  them
to  lay  all  those  who  were  suspected  of  favouring  Popery
under  the  same  censure  by  a  summary  sentence,  and
without  observing  the  usual  formalities  of  trial.  As
the  danger  seemed  too  pressing  to  wait  for  the  stated
meetings  of  the  judicatories  of  the  church,  they  made
choice  of  the  most  eminent  clergymen  in  different  cor-
ners of  the  kingdom,  appointed  them  to  reside  con-
stantly at  Edinburgh,  and  to  meet  every  day  with  the
ministers  of  that  city,  under  the  name  of  the  standing
council  of  the  church,  and  vested  in  this  body  the  su-
preme authority,  by  enjoining  it,  in  imitation  of  the
ancient  Roman  form,  to  take  care  that  the  church  should
receive  no  detriment.

These  proceedings,  no  less  unconstitutional  than  un-
precedented, were  manifest  encroachments  on  the  royal
prerogative,  and  bold  steps  towards  open  rebellion.
The  king's  conduct,  however,  justified  in  some  degree
such  excesses.  His  lenity  towards  the  Papists,  so  re-
pugnant to  the  principles  of  that  age ;  his  pardoning
the  conspirators,  notwithstanding  repeated  promises  to
the  contrary ;  the  respect  he  paid  to  lady  Huntly,  who
was  attached  to  the  Romish  religion  no  less  than  her
husband  ;  his  committing  the  care  of  his  daughter,  the
princess  Elizabeth,  to  lady  Levingston,  who  was  infected
with  the  same  superstition ;  the  contempt  with  which
he  talked  on  all  occasions,  both  of  the  character  of  mi-
nisters, and  of  their  function,  were  circumstances  which

1596.]  BOOK VIII.  187

might  have  filled  minds,  not  prone  by  nature  to  jealousy,
with  some  suspicions ;  and  might  have  precipitated
into  rash  counsels  those  who  were  far  removed  from
intemperate  zeal.  But,  however  powerful  the  motives
might  be  which  influenced  the  clergy,  or  however
laudable  the  end  they  had  in  view,  they  conducted
their  measures  with  no  address,  and  even  with  little
prudence.  James  discovered  a  strong  inclination  to
avoid  a  rupture  with  the  church,  and,  jealous  as  he  was
of  his  prerogative,  would  willingly  have  made  many
concessions  for  the  sake  of  peace.  By  his  command,
some  of  the  privy-counsellors  had  an  interview  with  the
more  moderate  among  the  clergy,  and  inquired  whe-
ther Huntly  and  his  associates  might  not,  upon  making
proper  acknowledgments,  be  again  received  into  the
bosom  of  the  church,  and  be  exempted  from  any  farther
punishment  on  account  of  their  past  apostacy  and  trea-
sons. They  replied,  that  though  the  gate  of  mercy
stood  always  open  for  those  who  repented  and  returned,
yet  as  these  noblemen  had  been  guilty  of  idolatry,  a
crime  deserving  death  both  by  the  law  of  God  and  of
man,  the  civil  magistrate  could  not  legally  grant  them
a  pardon ;  and  even  though  the  church  should  absolve
them,  it  was  his  duty  to  inflict  punishment  upon  them.
This  inflexibility  in  those  who  were  reckoned  the  most
compliant  of  the  order,  filled  the  king  with  indignation,
which  the  imprudence  and  obstinacy  of  a  private  cler-
gyman heightened  into  rage.

seditious  Mr.  David  Black,  minister  of  St  Andrew's,
ta°uCghTby  discoursing  in  one  of  his  sermons,  according  to
Black.  custom,  concerning  the  state  of  the  nation,  af-
firmed that  the  king  had  permitted  the  Popish  lords  to
return  into  Scotland,  and  by  that  action  had  discovered
the  treachery  of  his  own  heart ;  that  all  kings  were  the
devil's  children ;  that  Satan  had  now  the  guidance  of
the  court ;  that  the  queen  of  England  was  an  atheist ;
that  the  judges  were  miscreants  and  bribers ;  the  nobi-

188  SCOTLAND.  [1596.

lity  godless  and  degenerate ;  the  privy-counsellors  cor-
morants and  men  of  no  religion ;  and  in  his  prayer
for  the  queen  he  used  these  words,  We  must  pray  for
her  for  fashion-sake,  but  we  have  no  cause,  she  will
never  do  us  good.  James  commanded  him  to

Nov.  10.  &

The  clergy  be  summoned  before  the  privy-council,  to  answer
hisPde-e  for  such  seditious  expressions ;  and  the  clergy,
fence.  instead  of  abandoning  him  to  the  punishment
which  such  a  petulant  and  criminal  attack  on  his  su-
periors deserved,  were  so  imprudent  as  to  espouse  his
cause,  as  if  it  had  been  the  common  one  of  the  whole
order.  The  controversy  concerning  the  immunities  of
the  pulpit,  and  the  rights  of  the  clergy  to  testify  against
vices  of  every  kind,  which  had  been  agitated  in  1584,
was  now  revived.  It  was  pretended  that,  with  regard
to  their  sacred  function,  ministers  were  subject  to  the
church  alone ;  that  it  belonged  only  to  their  ecclesias-
tical superiors  to  judge  of  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  doc-
trines delivered  in  the  pulpit ;  that  if,  upon  any  pre-
tence whatever,  the  king  usurped  this  jurisdiction,  the
church  would  from  that  moment,  sink  under  servitude
to  the  civil  magistrate ;  that,  instead  of  reproving  vice
with  that  honest  boldness  which  had  often  been  of  ad-
vantage to  individuals,  and  salutary  to  the  kingdom,  the
clergy  would  learn  to  flatter  the  passions  of  the  prince,
and  to  connive  at  the  vice-s  of  others ;  that  the  king's
eagerness  to  punish  the  indiscretion  of  a  Protestant
minister,  while  he  was  so  ready  to  pardon  the  crimes
of  Popish  conspirators,  called  on  them  to  stand  upon
their  guard,  and  that  now  was  the  time  to  contend  for
their  privileges,  and  to  prevent  any  encroachment  on
those  rights,  of  which  the  church  had  been  in  posses-
sion ever  since  the  Reformation.  Influenced  by  these
considerations,  the  council  of  the  church  enjoined  Black
to  decline  the  jurisdiction  of  the  privy-council.  Proud
of  such  an  opportunity  to  display  his  zeal,  he  presented
a  paper  to  that  purpose,  and' with  the  utmost  firmness

1596.]  BOOK  VIII.  189

refused  to  plead,  or  to  answer  the  questions  which  were
put  to  him.  In  order  to  add  greater  weight  to  these
proceedings,  the  council  of  the  church  transmitted  the
declinature  to  all  the  presbyteries  throughout  the  king-
dom, and  enjoined  every  minister  to  subscribe  it  in  tes-
timony of  his  approbation.

James  defended  his  rights  with  no  less  vigour  than
they  were  attacked.  Sensible  of  the  contempt  under
which  his  authority  must  fall,  if  the  clergy  should  be
permitted  publicly,  and  with  impunity,  to  calumniate
his  ministers,  and  even  to  censure  himself;  and  know-
ing, by  former  examples,  what  unequal  reparation  for
such  offences  he  might  expect  from  the  judicatories  of
the  church,  he  urged  on  the  inquiry  into  Black's  con-
duct, and  issued  a  proclamation,  commanding  the  mem-
bers of  the  council  of  the  church  to  leave  Edinburgh,
and  to  return  to  their  own  parishes.  Black,  instead  of
submitting,  renewed  his  declinature  ;  and  the  members
of  the  council,  in  defiance  of  the  proclamation,  declared,
that  as  they  met  by  the  authority  of  the  church,  obe-
dience to  it  was  a  duty  still  more  sacred  than  that  which
they  owed  to  the  king  himself.  The  privy-council,  not-
withstanding Black's  refusing  to  plead,  proceeded  in
the  trial ;  and,  after  a  solemn  inquiry,  pronounced  him
guilty  of  the  crimes  of  which  he  had  been  accused;
but  referred  it  to  the  king  to  appoint  what  punishment
he  should  suffer.  i\tti.

Meanwhile,  many  endeavours  were  used  to  bring
matters  to  accommodation.  Almost  every  day  pro-
duced some  new  scheme  of  reconcilement;  but,  through
the  king's  fickleness,  the  obstinacy  of  the  clergy,  or  the
intrigues  of  the  courtiers,  they  all  proved  ineffectual.
Both  parties  appealed  to  the  people,  and  by  reciprocal
and  exaggerated  accusations  endeavoured  to  render
each  other  odious.  Insolence,  sedition,  treason,  were
the  crimes  with  which  James  charged  the  clergy ;  while
they  made  the  pulpits  resound  with  complaints  of  his

190  SCOTLAND.  [1596.

excessive  lenity  towards  Papists,  and  of  the  no  less  ex-
cessive rigour  with  which  he  oppressed  the  established
church.  Exasperated  by  their  bold  invectives,  he,  at
last,  sentenced  Black  to  retire  beyond  the  river  Spey,
and  to  reside  there  during  his  pleasure;  and  once  more
commanding  the  members  of  the  standing  council  to
depart  from  Edinburgh,  he  required  all  the  ministers
of  the  kingdom  to  subscribe  a  bond,  obliging  them-
selves to  submit,  in  the  same  manner  as  other  subjects,
to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  civil  courts  in  matters  of  a
civil  nature.

A  tumult  in  This  decisive  measure  excited  all  the  violent
3urgh'  passions  which  possess  disappointed  factions ;
and  deeds  no  less  violent  immediately  followed.  These
must  be  imputed  in  part  to  the  artifices  of  some  courtiers
who  expected  to  reap  advantage  from  the  calamities  of
their  country,  or  who  hoped  to  lessen  the  authority  of
the  Octavians,  by  engaging  them  in  hostilities  with  the
church.  On  one  hand,  they  informed  the  king  that  the
citizens  of  Edinburgh  were  under  arms  every  night,
and  had  planted  a  strong  guard  round  the  houses  of
their  ministers.  James,  in  order  to  put  a  stop  to  this
imaginary  insult  on  his  government,  issued  a  procla-
mation, commanding  twenty-four  of  the  principal  citi-
zens to  leave  the  town  within  six  hours.  On  the  other
hand,  they  wrote  to  the  ministers,  advising  them  to
look  to  their  own  safety,  as  Huntly  had  been  secretly
admitted  to  an  interview  with  the  king,  and  had  been
the  author  of  the  severe  proclamation  against  the  citi-
zens of  Edinburgh."  They  doubted  no  more  of  the
truth  of  this  intelligence,  than  the  king  had  done  of
that  which  he  received,  and  fell  as  blindly  into  the
snare.  The  letter  came  to  their  hands  just  as  one  of

u  Though  matters  were  industriously  aggravated  by  persons  who  wished  both
parties  to  pursue  violent  measures,  neither  of  these  reports  was  altogether  destitute
of  foundation.  As  their  ministers  were  supposed  to  be  in  danger,  some  of  the  more
zealous  citizens  had  determined  to  defend  them  by  force  of  arras.  Birch,  Mem.  ii.
250.  Huntly  had  been  privately  in  Edinburgh,  where  he  had  an  interview,  if  not
with  the  king,  at  least  with  some  of  his  ministers.  Birch.  Ibid.  230.

Dec.  17.

1596,]  BOOK VIII.  191

their  number  was  going  to  mount  the  pulpit.  They
resolved  that  he  should  acquaint  the  people  of  their
danger;  and  he  painted  it  with  all  the  strong
colours  which  men  naturally  employ  in  describ-
ing any  dreadful  and  instant  calamity.  When  the  ser-
mon was  over,  he  desired  the  nobles  and  gentlemen  to
assemble  in  the  Little  Church.  The  whole  multitude,
terrified  at  what  they  had  heard,  crowded  thither;  they
promised  and  vowed  to  stand  by  the  clergy ;  they  drew
up  a  petition  to  the  king,  craving  the  redress  of  those
grievances,  of  which  the  church  complained,  and  be-
seeching him  to  deliver  them  from  all  future  apprehen-
sions of  danger,  by  removing  such  of  his  counsellors  as
were  known  to  be  enemies  of  the  Protestant  religion.
Two  peers,  two  gentlemen,  two  burgesses,  and  two
The  king  ministers,  were  appointed  to  present  it.  The
in  danger.  king  happened  to  be  in  the  great  hall  of  the

Tolbooth,  where  the  court  of  session  was  sitting.  The
manner  in  which  the  petition  was  delivered,  as  well  as
its  contents,  offended  him.  He  gave  a  haughty  reply;
the  petitioners  insisted  with  warmth;  and  a  promis-
cuous multitude  pressing  into  the  room,  James  retired
abruptly  into  another  apartment,  and  commanded  the
gates  to  be  shut  behind  him.  The  deputies  returned
to  the  multitude,  who  were  still  assembled,  and  to  whom
a  minister  had  been  reading,  in  their  absence,  the  story
of  Haman.  When  they  reported  that  the  king  had  re-
fused to  listen  to  their  petitions,  the  church  was  filled
in  a  moment  with  noise,  threatenings,  execrations,  and
all  the  outrage  and  confusion  of  a  popular  tumult.
Some  called  for  their  arms,  some  to  bring  out  the
wicked  Haman;  others  cried,  the  sword  of  the  Lord
and  of  Gideon';  and  rushing  out  with  the  most  furious
impetuosity,  surrounded  the  Tolbooth,  threatening  the
king  himself,  and  demanding  some  of  his  counsellors,
whom  they  named,  that  they  might  tear  them  in  pieces.
The  magistrates  of  the  city,  partly  by  authority,  partly

192  SCOTLAND,  [1596.

by  force,  endeavoured  to  quell  the  tumult;  the  king
attempted  to  soothe  the  malecontents,  by  promising  to
receive  their  petitions,  when  presented  in  a  regular
manner;  the  ministers,  sensible  of  their  own  rashness
in  kindling  such  a  flame,  seconded  both  ;  and  the  rage
of  the  populace  subsiding  as  suddenly  as  it  had  risen,
they  all  dispersed,  and  the  king  returned  to  the  palace;
happy  in  having  escaped  from  an  insurrection,  which,
through  the  instantaneous  and  unconcerted  effect  of
popular  fury,  had  exposed  his  life  to  imminent  danger,
and  was  considered  by  him  as  an  unpardonable  affront
to  his  authority.1

As  soon  as  he  retired,  the  leaders  of  the  malecontents
assembled,  in  order  to  prepare  their  petition.  The
punishment  of  the  Popish  lords;  the  removal  of  those
counsellors  who  were  suspected  of  favouring  their  per-
sons or  opinions;  the  repeal  of  all  the  late  acts  of  coun-
cil, subversive  of  the  authority  of  the  church  ;  together
with  an  act  approving  the  proceedings  of  the  standing
council  ;  were  the  chief  of  their  demands.  But  the
king's  indignation  was  still  so  high,  that  the  deputies,
chosen  for  this  purpose,  durst  not  venture  that  night  to
present  requests  which  could  not  fail  of  kindling  his
He  leaves  rage  anew.  Before  next  morning,  James,  with
a11  his  attendants,  withdrew  to  Linlithgow;
with  the  session,  and  other  courts  of  justice,  were

'  J  '

severity  .  .

against  the  required  to  leave  a  city  where  it  was  no  longer
consistent  either  with  their  safety,  or  their
dignity,  to  remain  ;  and  the  noblemen  and  barons  were
commanded  to  return  to  their  own  houses,  and  not  to
reassemble  without  the  king's  permission.  The  vigour
with  which  the  king  acted,  struck  a  damp  upon  the
spirits  of  his  adversaries.  The  citizens,  sensible  how
much  they  would  suffer  by  his  absence,  and  the  re-
moval of  the  courts  of  justice,  repented  already  of
their  conduct.  The  ministers  alone  resolved  to  main-

*  Spotsw.  41.7,  &c. Cald.  v.  54,  &c. Birch,  Mem.  n.  235.

1596.]

BOOK  VIII.

193

1597.

tain  the  contest.  They  endeavoured  to  prevent  the
nobles  from  dispersing ;  they  inflamed  the  people  by
violent  invectives  against  the  king ;  they  laboured  to
procure  subscriptions  to  an  association  for  their  mutual
defence;  and  conscious  what  lustre  and  power  the
junction  of  some  of  the  greater  nobles  would  add  to
their  cause,  the  ministers  of  Edinburgh  wrote  to  lord
Hamilton,  that  the  people,  moved  by  the  word  of  God,
and  provoked  by  the  injuries  offered  to  the  church,
had  taken  arms;  that  many  of  the  nobles  had  deter-
mined to  protect  the  Protestant  religion,  which  owed
its  establishment  to  the  piety  and  valour  of  their  an-
cestors ;  that  they  wanted  only  a  leader  to  unite  them,
and  to  inspire  them  with  vigour;  that  his  zeal  for  the
good  cause,  no  less  than  his  noble  birth,  entitled  him
to  that  honour  :  they  conjured  him,  therefore,  not  to
disappoint  their  hopes  and  wishes,  nor  to  refuse  the
suffering  church  that  aid  which  she  so  much
needed.  Lord  Hamilton,  instead  of  comply-
ing with  their  desire,  carried  the  letter  directly  to  the
king,  whom  this  new  insult  irritated  to  such  a  degree,
that  he  commanded  the  magistrates  of  Edinburgh  in-
stantly to  seize  their  ministers,  as  manifest  incendiaries,
and  encouragers  of  rebellion.  The  magistrates,  in
order  to  regain  the  king's  favour,  were  preparing  to
obey;  and  the  ministers,  who  saw  no  other  hope  of
safety,  fled  towards  England.7

The  king  This  unsuccessful  insurrection,  instead  of
howerieofbe  overturning?  established  the  king's  authority,
the  church.  Those  concerned  in  it  were  confounded  and
dispersed.  The  rest  of  James's  subjects,  in
order  to  avoid  suspicion,  or  to  gain  his  favour,  con-
tended who  should  be  most  forward  to  execute  his
vengeance.  A  convention  of  estates  being  called,
pronounced  the  late  insurrection  to  be  high-treason;
ordained  every  minister  to  subscribe  a  declaration  of

y  Spotsw.  451. Culd.  v.  126.
VOL. II.  O

194  SCOTLAND.  [1597.

his  submission  to  the  king's  jurisdiction,  in  all  matters
civil  and  criminal  ;  empowered  magistrates  to  commit,
instantly,  to  prison,  any  minister,  who,  in  his  sermons,
should  utter  any  indecent  reflections  on  the  king's  con-
duct ;  prohibited  any  ecclesiastical  judicatory  to  meet
without  the  king's  licence  ;  commanded  that  no  person
should  be  elected  a  magistrate  of  Edinburgh,  for  the
future,  without  the  king's  approbation;  and  that,  in
the  mean  time,  the  present  magistrates  should  either
discover  and  inflict  condign  punishment  on  the  authors
of  the  late  tumult,  or  the  city  itself  should  be  subjected
to  all  the  penalties  of  that  treasonable  action/
Abridges  Armed  with  the  authority  of  these  decrees,
ieCes  of  '  ^ames  resolved  to  crush  entirely  the  mutinous
the  citi-  spirit  of  his  subjects.  As  the  clergy  had,  hi-
Ed?n-°  therto,  derived  their  chief  credit  and  strength

burgh.  £,om  ^e  favour  an(j  zea]  Of  the  citizens  of  Edin-
burgh, his  first  care  was  to  humble  them.  Though  the
magistrates  submitted  to  him  in  the  most  abject  terms  ;
though  they  vindicated  themselves,  and  their  fellow-
citizens,  from  the  most  distant  intention  of  violating  his
royal  person  or  authority  ;  though,  after  the  strictest
scrutiny,  no  circumstances  that  could  fix  on  them  the
suspicion  of  premeditated  rebellion  had  been  discovered  ;
though  many  of  the  nobles,  and  such  of  the  clergy  as
still  retained  any  degree  of  favour,  interceded  in  their
behalf;  neither  acknowledgments  nor  intercessions

Feb  28  Were  °^  ^e  *east  ava^'a  T*16  kiag  continued
inexorable  ;  the  city  was  declared  to  have  for-
feited its  privileges  as  a  corporation,  and  to  be  liable  to
all  the  penalties  of  treason.  The  capital  of  the  king-
dom, deprived  of  magistrates,  deserted  by  its  ministers,
abandoned  by  the  courts  of  justice,  and  proscribed
by  the  king,  remained  in  desolation  and  despair.  The
courtiers  even  threatened  to  rase  the  city  to  the  foun-
dation, and  to  erect  a  pillar  where  it  stood,  as  an  ever-

z  Cald.  v.  147.  a  ibid.  v.  149.

1597,]  BOOK VIII.  105

lasting  monument  of  the  king's  vengeance,  and  of  the
guilt  of  its  inhabitants. At  last,  in  compliance  with
Elizabeth,  who  interposed  in  their  favour,  and  moved
by  the  continual  solicitations  of  the  nobles,

March  21. J  .  .  '

James  absolved  the  citizens  irom  the  penalties
of  law,  but  at  the  same  time  he  stripped  them  of
their  most  important  privileges  ;  they  were  neither  al-
lowed to  elect  their  own  magistrates  nor  their  own
ministers  ;  many  new  burdens  were  imposed  on  them  ;
and  a  considerable  sum  of  money  was  exacted  by  way
of  peace-offering.b

James  was, meanwhile, equally  assiduous,
no  ^ess  successful>  *n  circumscribing  the
gard  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  church. Experience  had

discovered,  that  to  attempt  this  by  acts  of  par-
liament, and  sentences  of  privy-council,  was  both  in-
effectual and  odious.  He  had  recourse  now  to  an  ex-
pedient more  artful,  and  better  calculated  for  obtaining
his  end.  The  ecclesiastical  judicatories  were  composed
of  many  members  ;  the  majority  of  the  clergy  were  ex-
tremely indigent,  and  unprovided  of  legal  stipends;  the
ministers  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Edinburgh,  notwith-
standing the  parity  established  by  the  presbyterian  go-
vernment, had  assumed  a  leading  in  the  church,  which
filled  their  brethren  with  envy;  every  numerous  body
of  men  is  susceptible  of  sudden  and  strong  impressions,
and  liable  to  be  influenced,  corrupted,  or  overawed.
Induced  by  these  considerations,  James  thought  it  pos-
sible to  gain  the  clergy,  whom  he  had  in  vain  attempt-
ed to  subdue.  Proper  agents  were  set  to  work  all  over
the  kingdom  ;  promises,  flattery,  and  threats  were  em-
ployed ;  the  usurpations  of  the  brethren  near  the  capi-
tal were  aggravated  ;  the  jealousy  of  their  power,  which
was  growing  in  the  distant  provinces,  was  augmented  ;
and  two  different  general  assemblies  were  held,  in  both
which,  notwithstanding  the  zeal  and  boldness  where-

b  Spotsw.  434.  444.

o  2

196  SCOTLAND.  [1597.

with  a  few  leading  clergymen  defending  the  privileges
of  the  church,  a  majority  declared  in  favour  of  those
measures  which  were  agreeable  to  the  king.  Many
practices,  which  had  continued  since  the  Reformation,
were  condemned  ;  many  points  of  discipline,  which  had
hitherto  been  reckoned  sacred  and  uncontroverted,  were
given  up  ;  the  licence  with  which  ministers  discoursed
of  political  matters  was  restrained ;  the  freedom  with
which  they  inveighed  against  particular  persons  was
censured ;  sentences  of  summary  excommunication  were
declared  unlawful ;  the  convoking  a  general  assembly,
without  the  king's  permission,  was  prohibited ;  and  the
right  of  nominating  ministers  to  the  principal  towns,
was  vested  in  the  crown.  Thus,  the  clergy  themselves
surrendered  privileges,  which  it  would  have  been  dan-
gerous to  invade,  and  voluntarily  submitted  to  a  yoke
more  intolerable  than  any  James  would  have  ventured
to  impose  by  force ;  while  such  as  continued  to  oppose
his  measures,  instead  of  their  former  popular  topic  of
the  king's  violent  encroachments  on  a  jurisdiction  which
did  not  belong  to  him,  were  obliged  to  turn  their  out-
cries against  the  corruptions  of  their  own  order.0
Popish  By  the  authority  of  these  general  assemblies,
doned?81"  the  Popish  earls  were  allowed  to  make  a  public
recantation  of  their  errors ;  were  absolved  from  the  sen-
tence of  excommunication ;  and  received  into  the  bosom
of  the  church.  But,  not  many  years  after,  they  relapsed
into  their  former  errors,  were  again  reconciled  to  the
church  of  Rome,  and  by  their  apostacy  justified,  in  some
degree,  the  fears  and  scruples  of  the  clergy  with  regard
to  their  absolution.

The  ministers  of  Edinburgh  owed  to  the  intercession
of  these  assemblies  the  liberty  of  returning  to  their
charges  in  the  city.  But  this  liberty  was  clogged  in
such  a  manner  as  greatly  abridged  their  power.  The
city  was  divided  into  distinct  parishes ;  the  number  of

c  Spotsw.  433. Cald.  v.  189.  253.

1597.]

BOOK VIII.

197

ministers  doubled  ;  persons  on  whose  fidelity  the  king
could  rely  were  fixed  in  the  new  parishes  ;  and  these
circumstances,  added  to  the  authority  of  the  late  decrees
of  the  church,  contributed  to  confirm  that  absolute  do-
minion in  ecclesiastical  affairs,  which  James  possessed
during  the  remainder  of  his  reign.

The  king  was  so  intent  on  new  modelling  the  church,
that  the  other  transactions  of  this  period  scarce  deserve
to  be  remembered.  The  Octavians,  envied  by  the  other
courtiers,  and  splitting  into  factions  among  themselves,
resigned  their  commission;  and  the  administration  of
the  revenue,  returning  into  its  former  channel,  both  the
king  and  the  nation  were  deprived  of  the  benefit  of  their
regular  and  frugal  economy.

Towards  the  end  of  the  year,  a  parliament
was  held  in  order  to  restore  Huntly  and  his  as-
sociates to  their  estates  and  honours,  by  repealing  the
act  of  forfeiture  passed  against  them.  The  authority  of
this  supreme  court  was  likewise  employed  to  introduce
a  farther  innovation  into  the  church  ;  but,  conformable
to  the  system  which  the  king  had  now  adopted,  the
motion  for  this  purpose  took  its  rise  from  the  clergy
themselves.  As  the  act  of  general  annexation,
tnat  establishing  the  presbyterian  govern-

Dec.  19.

a  seat  in ment,  had  reduced  the  few  bishops,  who  still

parlia-  .

survived,  to  poverty  and  contempt;  as  those  who

possessed  the  abbeys  and  priories  were  mere  laymen,  and
many  of  them  temporal  peers,  few  or  none  of  the  eccle-
siastical order  remained  to  vote  in  parliament,  and  by
means  of  that,  the  influence  of  the  crown  was  consider-
ably diminished  there,  and  a  proper  balance  to  the
power  and  number  of  the  nobles  was  wanting.  But
the  prejudices  which  the  nation  had  conceived  against
the  name  and  character  of  bishops  were  so  violent,  that
James  was  obliged,  with  the  utmost  care,  to  avoid  the
appearance  of  a  design  to  revive  that  order.  He  pre-
vailed, therefore,  on  the  commission  appointed  by  the  last

198  SCOTLAND.  [1598.

general  assembly  to  complain  to  the  parliament,  that
the  church  was  the  only  body  in  the  kingdom  destitute
of  its  representatives  in  that  supreme  court,  where  it  so
nearly  concerned  every  order  to  have  some  who  were
bound  to  defend  its  rights  ;  and  to  crave  that  a  compe-
tent number  of  the  clergy  should  be  admitted,  accord-
ing to  ancient  custom,  to  a  seat  there.  In  compliance
with  this  request,  an  act  was  passed,  by  which  those
ministers  on  whom  the  king  should  confer  the  vacant
bishoprics  and  abbeys,  were  entitled  to  a  vote  in  parlia-
ment ;  and  that  the  clergy  might  conceive  no  jealousy
of  any  encroachment  upon  their  privileges,  it  was  remit-
ted to  the  general  assembly,  to  determine  what  spiritual
jurisdiction  or  authority  in  the  government  of  the  church
these  persons  should  possess .d

The  king,  however,  found  it  no  easy  matter  to  obtain
the  concurrence  of  the  ecclesiastical  judicatories,  in
which  the  act  of  parliament  met  with  a  fierce  opposition.
Though  the  clergy  perceived  how  much  lustre  this  new
privilege  would  reflect  upon  their  order ;  though  they
were  not  insensible  of  the  great  accession  of  personal
power  and  dignity  which  many  of  them  would  acquire,
by  being  admitted  into  the  supreme  council  of  the  nation,
their  abhorrence  of  episcopacy  was  extreme  ;  and  to
that  they  sacrificed  every  consideration  of  interest  or
ambition.  All  the  king's  professions  of  regard  for  the
present  constitution  of  the  church  did  not  convince
them  of  his  sincerity ;  all  the  devices  that  could  be  in-
vented for  restraining  and  circumscribing  the  jurisdic-
tion of  such  as  were  to  be  raised  to  this  new  honour,
did  not  diminish  their  jealousy  and  fear.  Their  own
experience  had  taught  them,  with  what  insinuating  pro-
gress the  hierarchy  advances,  and  though  admitted  at
first  with  moderate  authority,  and  under  specious  pre-
tences, how  rapidly  it  extends  its  dominion.  "  Varnish
over  this  scheme,"  said  one  of  the  leading  clergymen,

d  Spotsw.  450.  Farl.  15th  Jac.  VI.  c.  235.

1598.]  BOOK VIII.  199

"  with  what  colours  you  please ;  deck  the  intruder  with
the  utmost  art ;  under  all  this  disguise,  I  see  the  horns
of  his  mitre."  The  same  sentiments  prevailed  among
many  of  his  brethren,  and  induced  them  to  reject  power
and  honours  with  as  much  zeal  as  ever  those  of  their
order  courted  them.  Many,  however,  were  allured  by
the  hopes  of  preferment;  the  king  himself  and  his
ministers  employed  the  same  arts  which  they  had  tried
so  successfully  last  year  :  and,  after  long  debates,  and
much  opposition,  the  general  assembly  declared  that  it
was  lawful  for  ministers  to  accept  of  a  seat  in  parlia-
ment :  that  it  would  be  highly  beneficial  to  the

March  7.  '  & J .

church,  to  have  its  representatives  m  that  su-
preme court ;  and  that  fifty-one  persons,  a  number  near-
ly equal  to  that  of  the  ecclesiastics  who  were  anciently
called  to  parliament,  should  be  chosen  from  among  the
clergy  for  that  purpose.  The  manner  of  their  election,
together  with  the  powers  to  be  vested  in  them,  were
left  undecided  for  the  present,  and  furnished  matter  of
future  deliberation.6

1599<  As  the  prospect  of  succeeding  to  the  crown
°^  England  drew  nearer,  James  multiplied  pre-
cautions  in  order  to  render  it  certain.  As  he
was  allied  to  many  of  the  princes  of  Germany
England,  j^  j^  marriage?  he  sent  ambassadors  extra-
ordinary to  their  several  courts,  in  order  to  explain  the
justness  of  his  title  to  the  English  throne,  and  to  desire
their  assistance,  if  any  competitor  should  arise  to  dis-
pute his  undoubted  rights.  These  princes  readily  ac-
knowledged the  equity  of  his  claim ;  but  the  aid  which
they  could  afford  him  was  distant  and  feeble.  At  the
same  time,  Edward  Bruce,  abbot  of  Kinloss,  his  am-
bassador at  the  English  court,  solicited  Elizabeth,  with
the  utmost  warmth,  to  recognise  his  title  by  some  pub-
lic deed,  and  to  deliver  her  own  subjects  from  the  cala-
mities which  are  occasioned  by  an  uncertain  or  dis-

e  Spotsw.  450- Cald.  v.  278.

200  SCOTLAND.

puted  succession.  But  age  had  strengthened  all  the
passions  which  had  hitherto  induced  Elizabeth  to  keep
this  great  question  obscure  and  undecided ;  and  a
general  and  evasive  answer  was  all  that  James  could
obtain.  As  no  impression  could  be  made  on  the  queen,
the  ambassador  was  commanded  to  sound  the  disposi-
tion of  her  subjects,  and  to  try  what  progress  he  could
make  in  gaining  them.  Bruce  possessed  all  the  talents
of  secrecy,  judgment,  and  address,  requisite  for  con-
ducting a  negotiation  no  less  delicate  than  important.
A  minister  of  this  character  was  entitled  to  the  confi-
dence of  the  English.  Many  of  the  highest  rank  un-
bosomed themselves  to  him  without  reserve,  and  gave
him  repeated  assurances  of  their  resolution  to  assert  his
master's  right,  in  opposition  to  every  pretender/  As
several  pamphlets  were  dispersed,  at  this  time,  in  Eng-
land, containing  objections  to  his  title,  James  employed
some  learned  men  in  his  kingdom  to  answer  these  ca-
villers, and  to  explain  the  advantages  which  would
result  to  both  kingdoms  by  the  union  of  the  crowns.
These  books  were  eagerly  read,  and  contributed  not  a
little  to  reconcile  the  English  to  that  event.  A  book
published  this  year  by  the  king  himself,  produced  an
effect  still  more  favourable.  It  was  entitled  Easilicon
Doron,  and  contained  precepts  concerning  the  art  of
government,  addressed  to  prince  Henry  his  son.  Not-
withstanding the  great  alterations  and  refinements  in
national  taste  since  that  time,  we  must  allow  this  to  be
no  contemptible  performance,  and  not  to  be  inferior  to
the  works  of  most  contemporary  writers,  either  iii  purity
of  style  or  justness  of  composition.  Even  the  vain  pa-
rade of  erudition  with  which  it  abounds,  and  which  now
disgusts  us,  raised  the  admiration  of  that  age ;  and  as
it  was  filled  with  those  general  rules  which  speculative
authors  deliver  for  rendering  a  nation  happy,  and  of
which  James  could  discourse  with  great  plausibility,

'  Johnst.  242,

1599.]  BOOK VIII.  201

though  often  incapable  of  putting  them  in  practice,  the
English  conceived  a  high  opinion  of  his  abilities,  and
expected  an  increase  of  national  honour  and  prospe-
rity, under  a  prince  so  profoundly  skilled  in  politics,
and  who  gave  such  a  specimen  both  of  his  wisdom  and
of  his  love  to  his  peopled

The  queen  of  England's  sentiments  concerning  James
were  very  different  from  those  of  her  subjects.  His
excessive  indulgence  towards  the  Popish  lords ;  the
facility  with  which  he  pardoned  their  repeated  treasons  ;
his  restoring  Beaton,  the  Popish  archbishop  of  Glasgow,
who  had  fled  out  of  Scotland  at  the  time  of  the  Refor-
mation, to  the  possession  of  the  temporalities  of  that
benefice;  the  appointing  him  his  ambassador  at  the
court  of  France ;  the  applause  he  bestowed,  in  the  Ba-
silicon  Doron,  on  those  who  adhered  to  the  queen  his
mother ;  Elizabeth  considered  as  so  many  indications
of  a  mind  alienated  from  the  Protestant  religion ;  and
suspected  that  he  would  soon  revolt  from  the  profession
Accuses  °^  **•  These  suspicions  seemed  to  be  fully
him  of  cor-  confirmed  by  a  discovery  which  came  from  the
wHh°theing  master  of  Gray,  who  resided  at  that  time  in
pope>  Italy,  and  who,  rather  than  suffer  his  intriguing
spirit  to  be  idle,  demeaned  himself  so  far  as  to  act  as  a
spy  for  the  English  court.  He  conveyed  to  Elizabeth
the  copy  of  a  letter  written  by  James  to  pope  Clement
VIII.,  in  which  the  king,  after  many  expressions  of  re-
gard for  that  pontiff,  and  of  gratitude  for  his  favours,
declared  his  firm  resolution  to  treat  the  Roman  Catho-
lics with  indulgence ;  and,  in  order  to  render  the  inter-
course between  the  courts  of  Rome  and  Scotland  more
frequent  and  familiar,  he  solicited  the  pope  to  promote
Drummond,  bishop  of  Vaison,  a  Scotsman,  to  the  dig-
nity of  a  cardinal.11  Elizabeth,  who  had  received  by
another  channel1  some  imperfect  intelligence  of  this
correspondence,  was  filled  with  just  surprise,  and  im-

g  Camd.  Spotsw.  457.  h  Cald.  333.  *  Winw.  Mem.  vol.  i.  37.  52.

202  SCOTLAND.  [1599.

mediately  dispatched  Bowes  into  Scotland,  to  inquire
more  fully  into  the  truth  of  the  matter,  and  to  reproach
James  for  an  action  so  unbecoming  a  Protestant  prince.
He  was  astonished  at  the  accusation,  and  with  a  confi-
dence which  nothing  but  the  consciousness  of  inno-
cence could  inspire,  affirmed  the  whole  to  be  a  mere
calumny,  and  the  letter  itself  to  be  forged  by  his  ene-
mies, on  purpose  to  bring  his  sincerity  in  religion  to  be
suspected.  Elphingston,  the  secretary  of  state,  denied
the  matter  with  equal  solemnity.  It  came,  however,  to
be  known  by  a  very  singular  accident,  which  happened
some  years  after,  that  the  information  which  Elizabeth
had  received  was  well-founded,  though  at  the  same
time  the  king's  declarations  of  his  own  innocence  were
perfectly  consistent  with  truth.  Cardinal  Bellarmine,
in  a  reply  which  he  published  to  a  controversial  trea-
tise, of  which  the  king  was  the  author,  accused  him  of
having  abandoned  the  favourable  sentiments  which  he
had  once  entertained  of  the  Roman  Catholic  religion,
and,  as  a  proof  of  this,  quoted  his  letter  to  Clement  VIII.
It  was  impossible,  any  longer,  to  believe  this  to  be  a
fiction ;  and  it  was  a  matter  too  delicate  to  be  passed
over  without  strict  inquiry.  James  immediately  ex-
amined Elphingston,  and  his  confession  unravelled  the
whole  mystery.  He  acknowledged  that  he  had  shuffled
in  this  letter  among  other -papers  which  he  had  laid
before  the  king  to  be  signed,  who  suspecting  no  such
deceit,  subscribed  it  together  with  the  rest,  and  without
knowing  what  it  contained ;  that  he  had  no  other  motive,
however,  to  this  action,  but  zeal  for  his  majesty's  ser-
vice ;  and,  by  flattering  the  Roman  Catholics  with  hopes
of  indulgence  under  the  king's  government,  he  ima-
gined that  he  was  paving  the  way  for  his  more  easy
accession  to  the  English  throne.  The  privy-council  of
England  entertained  very  different  sentiments  of  the
secretary's  conduct.  In  their  opinion,  not  only  the
king's  reputation  had  been  exposed  to  reproach,  but  his

1599.]  BOOK VIII.  203

life  to  danger,  by  this  rash  imposture  ;  they  even  im-
puted the  gunpowder  treason  to  the  rage  and  disap-
pointment of  the  Papists,  upon  finding  that  the  hopes
which  this  letter  inspired  were  frustrated.  The  se-
cretary was  sent  a  prisoner  into  Scotland,  to  be  tried
for  high- treason.  His  peers  found  him  guilty ;  but,
by  the  queen's  intercession,  he  obtained  a  pardon.k

According  to  the  account  of  other  historians,  James
himself  was  no  stranger  to  this  correspondence  with  the
pope ;  and  if  we  believe  them,  Elphingston,  being  inti-
midated by  the  threats  of  the  English  council,  and  de-
ceived by  the  artifices  of  the  earl  of  Dunbar,  concealed
some  circumstances  in  his  narrative  of  this  transaction,
and  falsified  others ;  and  at  the  expense  of  his  own
fame,  and  with  the  danger  of  his  life,  endeavoured  to
draw  a  veil  over  this  part  of  his  master's  conduct.1
James  at  But  whether  we  impute  the  writing  of  this
great  pains  letter  to  the  secretary's  officious  zeal,  or  to  the
Ionian  B  kitfg's  command,  it  is  certain,  that,  about  this
1CS'  time,  James  was  at  the  utmost  pains  to  gain
the  friendship  of  the  Roman  Catholic  princes,  as  a
necessary  precaution  towards  facilitating  his  accession
to  the  English  throne.  Lord  Home,  who  was  himself
a  Papist,  was  intrusted  with  a  secret  commission  to  the
pope  ;m  the  archbishop  of  Glasgow  was  an  active  in-
strument with  those  of  his  own  religion.0  The  pope
expressed  such  favourable  sentiments  both  of  the  king,
and  of  his  rights  to  the  crown  of  England,  that  James
thought  himself  bound,  some  years  after,  to  acknow-
ledge the  obligation  in  a  public  manner.0  Sir  James
Lindsay  made  great  progress  in  gaining  the  English
Papists  to  acknowledge  his  majesty's  title.  Of  all  these
intrigues  Elizabeth  received  obscure  hints  from  dif-
ferent quarters.  The  more  imperfectly  she  knew,  the

k  State  Trials,  vol.  i.  429. Spotsw.  456.  507. Jolmst.  448.

1  Cald.  vol.  v.  322;  vi.  147. m  Winw.  Mem.  <rol.  ii.  57. «  Cald.  vol.  vi.  147.

«  Ibid.  vol.  v.  604.

204  SCOTLAND.  [1599.

more  violently  she  suspected  the  king's  designs ;  and  the
natural  jealousy  of  her  temper  increasing  with  age,  she
observed  his  conduct  with  greater  solicitude  than  ever.
1600.  The  questions  with  regard  to  the  election
i^regut-  and  power  of  the  representatives  of  the  church,
re°ardWtoh  were  ^na^y  decided  this  year  by  the  general
the  church,  assembly,  which  met  at  Montrose.  That  place
was  chosen  as  most  convenient  for  the  ministers  of  the
north,  among  whom  the  king's  influence  chiefly  lay.
Although  great  numbers  resorted  from  the  northern
provinces,  and  the  king  employed  his  whole  interest,
and  the  authority  of  his  own  presence,  to  gain  a  ma^
jority,  the  following  regulations  were  with  difficulty
agreed  on.  That  the  general  assembly  shall  recom-
mend six  persons  to  every  vacant  benefice  which  gave
a  title  to  a  seat  in  parliament,  out  of  whom  the  king
shall  nominate  one ;  that  the  person  so  elected,  after
obtaining  his  seat  in  parliament,  shall  neither  propose
nor  consent  to  any  thing  there,  that  may  affect  the  in-
terest of  the  church,  without  special  instructions  to  that
purpose ;  that  he  shall  be  answerable  for  his  conduct
to  every  general  assembly,  and  submit  to  its  censure,
without  appeal,  upon  pain  of  infamy  and  excommuni-
cation ;  that  he  shall  discharge  the  duties  of  a  pastor
in  a  particular  congregation ;  that  he  shall  not  usurp
any  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction  superior  to  that  of  his
other  brethren ;  that  if  the  church  inflict  on  him  the
censure  of  deprivation,  he  shall  thereby  forfeit  his  seat
in  parliament ;  that  he  shall  annually  resign  his  com-
mission to  the  general  assembly,  which  may  be  restored
to  him,  or  not,  as  the  assembly,  with  the  king's  appro-
bation, shall  judge  most  expedient  for  the  good  of  the
church.p  Nothing  could  be  more  repugnant  to  the  idea
of  episcopal  government  than  these  regulations.  It
was  not  in  consequence  of  rights  derived  from  their
office,  but  of  powers  conferred  by  a  commission,  that

P  Spotsw.  453.  457. Cald.  vol.  v.  368.

1600.]  BOOK  VIII.  205

the  ecclesiastical  persons  were  to  be  admitted  to  a  seat
in  parliament ;  they  were  the  representatives,  not  the
superiors,  of  the  clergy.  Destitute  of  all  spiritual  autho-
rity, even  their  civil  jurisdiction  was  temporary.  James,
however,  flattered  himself  that  they  would  soon  be  able
to  shake  off  these  fetters,  and  gradually  acquire  all  the
privileges  which  belonged  to  the  episcopal  order.  The
clergy  dreaded  the  same  thing ;  and  of  course  he  con-
tended for  the  nomination  of  these  commissioners,  and
they  opposed  it,  not  so  much  on  account  of  the  powers
then  vested  in  them,  as  of  those  to  which  it  was  believed
they  would  soon  attaint

Gowrie's  -During  this.summer  the  kingdom  enjoyed  an
conspiracy,  unusual  tranquillity.  The  clergy,  after  many
struggles,  were  brought  under  great  subjection ;  the
Popish  earls  were  restored  to  their  estates  and  honours,
by  the  authority  of  parliament,  and  with  the  consent  of
the  church;  the  rest  of  the  nobles  were  at  peace  among
themselves,  and  obedient  to  the  royal  authority;  when,
in  the  midst  of  this  security,  the  king's  life  was  exposed
to  the  utmost  danger,  by  a  conspiracy  altogether  unex-
pected, and  almost  inexplicable.  The  authors  of  it
were  John  Ruthven,  earl  of  Gowrie,  and  his  brother
Alexander,  the  sons  of  that  earl  who  was  beheaded  in
the  year  1584.  Nature  had  adorned  both  these  young
men,  especially  the  elder  brother,  with  many  accom-
plishments, to  which  education  had  added  its  most
elegant  improvements.  More  learned  than  is  usual
among  persons  of  their  rank ;  more  religious  than  is
common  at  their  age  of  life ;  generous,  brave,  popu-
lar ;  their  countrymen,  far  from  thinking  them  capable
of  any  atrocious  crime,  conceived  the  most  sanguine
hopes  of  their  early  virtues.  Notwithstanding  all  these
noble  qualities,  some  unknown  motive  engaged  them  in
a  conspiracy,  which,  if  we  adhere  to  the  account  com-
monly received,  must  be  transmitted  to  posterity  as  one

i  Spotsw.  454.

206  SCOTLAND.  [1600.

of  the  most  wicked,  as  well  as  one  of  the  worst  con-
certed, of  which  history  makes  any  mention.

On  the  5th  of  August,  as  the  king,  who  resided  dur-
ing the  hunting  season  in  his  palace  of  Falkland,  was
going  out  to  his  sport  early  in  the  morning,  he  was
accosted  by  Mr.  Alexander  Ruthven,  who,  with  an  air
of  great  importance,  told  the  king,  that  the  evening
before  he  had  met  an  unknown  man,  of  a  suspicious
aspect,  walking  alone  in  a  by-path  near  his  brother's
house  at  Perth ;  and  on  searching  him  had  found,  un-
der his  cloak,  a  pot  filled  with  a  great  quantity  of  foreign
gold ;  that  he  had  immediately  seized  both  him  and  his
treasure,  and  without  communicating  the  matter  to  any
person,  had  kept  him  confined  and  bound  in  a  solitary
house ;  and  that  he  thought  it  his  duty  to  impart  such
a  singular  event  first  of  all  to  his  majesty.  James  im-
mediately suspected  this  unknown  person  to  be  a  semi-
nary priest,  supplied  with  foreign  coin,  in  order  to  ex-
cite new  commotions  in  the  kingdom ;  and  resolved  to
empower  the  magistrates  of  Perth  to  call  the  person
before  them,  and  inquire  into  all  the  circumstances  of
the  story.  Ruthven  violently  opposed  this  resolution,
and  with  many  arguments  urged  the  king  to  ride  di-
rectly to  Perth,  and  to  examine  the  matter  in  person.
Meanwhile  the  chase  began ;  and  James,  notwithstand-
ing his  passion  for  that  amusement,  could  not  help
ruminating  upon  the  strangeness  of  the  tale,  and  on
Ruthven's  importunity.  At  last  he  called  him,  and
promised  when  the  sport  was  over  to  set  out  for  Perth.
The  chase,  however,  continued  long;  and  Ruthven,  who
all  the  while  kept  close  by  the  king,  was  still  urging
him  to  make  haste.  At  the  death  of  the  buck  he  would
not  allow  James  to  stay  till  a  fresh  horse  was  brought
him;  and  observing  the  duke  of  Lennox  and  the  earl  of
Mar  preparing  to  accompany  the  king,  he  entreated
him  to  countermand  them.  This  James  refused ;  and
though  Ruthven's  impatience  and  anxiety,  as  well  as

1600.]  BOOK VIII.  207

the  apparent  perturbation  in  his  whole  behaviour,  raised
some  suspicions  in  his  mind,  yet  his  own  curiosity,
and  Ruthven's  solicitations,  prevailed  on  him  to  set  out
for  Perth.  When  within  a  mile  of  the  town,  Ruthven
rode  forward  to  inform  his  brother  of  the  king's  arrival,
though  he  had  already  dispatched  two  messengers  for
that  purpose.  At  a  little  distance  from  the  town,  the
earl,  attended  by  several  of  the  citizens,  met  the  king,
who  had  only  twenty  persons  in  his  train.  No  prepa-
rations were  made  for  the  king's  entertainment;  the
earl  appeared  pensive  and  embarrassed,  and  was  at  no
pains  to  atone,  by  his  courtesy  or  hospitality,  for  the
bad  fare  with  which  he  treated  his  guests.  When  the
king's  repast  was  over,  his  attendants  were  led  to  dine
in  another  room,  and  he  being  left  almost  alone,  Ruth-
ven whispered  him,  that  now  was  the  time  to  go  to  the
chamber  where  the  unknown  person  was  kept.  James
commanded  him  to  bring  Sir  Thomas  Erskine  along
with  them ;  but  instead  of  that,  Ruthven  ordered  him
not  to  follow;  and  conducting  the  king  up  a  staircase,
and  then  through  several  apartments,  the  doors  of
which  he  locked  behind  him,  led  him  at  last  into  a
small  study,  in  which  there  stood  a  man  clad  in  armour,
with  a  sword  and  dagger  by  his  side.  The  king,  who
expected  to  have  found  one  disarmed  and  bound,  started
at  the  sight,  and  inquired  if  this  was  the  person ;  but
Ruthven  snatching  the  dagger  from  the  girdle  of  the
man  in  armour,  and  holding  it  to  the  king's  breast,
"  Remember,"  said  he,  "  how  unjustly  my  father  suf-
fered by  your  command ;  you  are  now  my  prisoner ;
submit  to  my  disposal  without  resistance  or  outcry;  or
this  dagger  shall  instantly  avenge  his  blood."  James
expostulated  with  Ruthven,  entreated,  and  flattered  him.
The  man  whom  he  found  in  the  study  stood,  all  the
while,  trembling  and  dismayed,  without  courage  either
to  aid  the  king,  or  to  second  his  aggressor.  Ruthven
protested,  that  if  the  king  raised  no  outcry,  his  life

208  SCOTLAND.  [1600.

should  be  safe ;  and,  moved  by  some  unknown  reason,
retired  in  order  to  call  his  brother,  leaving  to  the  man
in  armour  the  care  of  the  king,  whom  he  bound  by  oath
not  to  make  any  noise  during  his  absence.

While  the  king  was  in  this  dangerous  situation,  his  ,
attendants  growing  impatient  to  know  whither  he  had
retired,  one  of  Cowrie's  domestics  entered  the  room
hastily,  and  told  them  that  the  king  had  just  rode  away
towards  Falkland.  All  of  them  rushed  out  into  the
streets;  and  the  earl,  in  the  utmost  hurry,  called  for  their
horses.  But  by  this  time  his  brother  had  returned  to
the  king,  and  swearing  that  now  there  was  no  remedy,
he  must  die,  offered  to  bind  his  hands.  Unarmed  as
James  was,  he  scorned  to  submit  to  that  indignity ,-  and
closing  with  the  assassin,  a  fierce  struggle  ensued.  The
man  in  armour  stood,  as  formerly,  amazed  and  motion-
less ;  and  the  king,  dragging  Ruthven  towards  a  win-
dow, which  during  his  absence  he  had  persuaded  the
person  with  whom  he  was  left  to  open,  cried  with  a  wild
and  affrighted  voice,  "  Treason !  Treason !  Help  !  I  am
murdered  ! "  His  attendants  heard,  and  knew  the  voice,
and  saw  at  the  window  a  hand  which  grasped  the  king's
neck  with  violence.  They  flew  with  precipitation  to  his
assistance.  Lennox  and  Mar,  with  the  greater  number,
ran  up  the  principal  staircase,  where  they  found  all  the
doors  shut,  which  they  battered  with  the  utmost  fury,
endeavouring  to  burst  them  open.  But  Sir  John  Ram-
say, entering  by  a  back-stair  which  led  to  the  apart-
ment where  the  king  was,  found  the  door  open ;  and
rushing  upon  Ruthven,  who  was  still  struggling  with
the  king,  struck  him  twice  with  his  dagger,  and  thrust
him  towards  the  staircase,  where  Sir  Thomas  Erskine
and  Sir  Hugh  Herries  met  and  killed  him ;  he  crying
with  his  last  breath,  "  Alas  !  I  am  not  to  blame  for  this
action."  During  this  scuffle  the  man  who  had  been
concealed  in  the  study  escaped  unobserved.  Together
with  Ramsay,  Erskine,  and  Herries,  one  Wilson,  a  foot-

1600.]  BOOK VIII.  209

man,  entered  the  room  where  the  king  was,  and  before
they  had  time  to  shut  the  door,  Gowrie  rushed  in  with
a  drawn  sword  in  each  hand,  followed  by  seven  of  his
attendants  well  armed,  and  with  a  loud  voice  threatened
them  all  with  instant  death.  They  immediately  thrust
the  king  into  the  little  study,  and  shutting  the  door
upon  him,  encountered  the  earl.  Notwithstanding  the
inequality  of  numbers,  Sir  John  Ramsay  pierced  Gowrie
through  the  heart,  and  he  fell  down  dead  without  ut-
tering a  word ;  his  followers  having  received  several
wounds,  immediately  fled.  Three  of  the  king's  defend-
ers were  likewise  hurt  in  the  conflict.  A  dreadful  noise
continued  still  at  the  opposite  door,  where  many  per-
sons laboured  in  vain  to  force  a  passage ;  and  the  king
being  assured  that  they  were  Lennox,  Mar,  and  his
other  friends,  it  was  opened  on  the  inside.  They  ran
to  the  king,  whom  they  unexpectedly  found  safe,  with
transports  of  congratulation ;  and  he,  falling  on  his
knees,  with  all  his  attendants  around  him,  offered  so-
lemn thanks  to  God  for  such  a  wonderful  deliverance.
The  danger,  however,  was  not  yet  over.  The  inhabi-
tants of  the  town,  whose  provost  Gowrie  was,  and  by
whom  he  was  extremely  beloved,  hearing  the  fate  of
the  two  brothers,  ran  to  their  arms,  and  surrounded  the
house,  threatening  revenge,  with  many  insolent  and
opprobrious  speeches  against  the  king.  James  endea-
voured to  pacify  the  enraged  multitude,  by  speaking  to
them  from  the  window  ;  he  admitted  their  magistrates

'  9

into  the  house ;  related  to  them  all  the  circumstances
of  the  fact ;  and  their  fury  subsiding  by  degrees,  they
dispersed.  On  searching  the  earl's  pockets  for  papers
that  might  discover  his  designs  and  accomplices,  no-
thing was  found  but  a  small  parchment  bag,  full  of
magical  characters  and  words  of  enchantment ;  and,  if
we  may  believe  the  account  of  the  conspiracy  published
by  the  king,  "  while  these  were  about  him  the  wound
of  which  he  died  bled  not;  but  as  soon  as  they  were
VOL.  jj.  P

210  SCOTLAND.  [1600.

taken  away,  the  blood  gushed  out  in  great  abundance."
After  all  the  dangerous  adventures  of  this  busy  day,  the
king  returned  in  the  evening  to  Falkland,  having  com-
mitted the  dead  bodies  of  the  two  brothers  to  the  cus-
tody of  the  magistrates  of  Perth.

The  mo-  Notwithstanding  the  minute  detail  which
consp?fa-he  tne  king  gave  of  all  the  circumstances  of  this
easSiiU°ex  conspiracy  against  his  life,  the  motives  which
plained,  induced  the  two  brothers  to  attempt  an  action
so  detestable,  the  end  they  had  in  view,  and  the  ac-
complices on  whose  aid  they  depended,  were  altoge-
ther unknown.  The  words  of  Ruthven  to  the  king
gave  some  grounds  to  think  that  the  desire  of  revenging
their  father's  death  had  instigated  them  to  this  attempt.
But,  whatever  injuries  their  father  had  suffered,  it  is
scarcely  probable  that  they  could  impute  them  to  the
king,  whose  youth,  as  well  as  his  subjection  at  that  time
to  the  violence  of  a  faction,  exempted  him  from  being
the  object  of  resentment,  on  account  of  actions  which
were  not  done  by  his  command.  James  had  even  en-
deavoured to  repair  the  wrongs  which  the  father  had
suffered,  by  benefits  to  his  children ;  and  Gowrie  him-
self, sensible  of  his  favour,  had  acknowledged  it  with
the  warmest  expressions  of  gratitude.  Three  of  the
earl's  attendants,  being  convicted  of  assisting  him  in
this  assault  on  .the  king's  servants,  were  executed  at
Perth;  but  they  could  give  no  light  into  the  motives
which  had  prompted  their  master  to  an  action  so  re-
pugnant to  these  acknowledgments.  Diligent  search
was  made  for  the  person  concealed  in  the  study,  and
from  him  great  discoveries  were  expected.  But  An-
drew Henderson,  the  earl's  steward,  who,  upon  a  pro-
mise of  pardon,  confessed  himself  to  be  the  man,  was
as  much  a  stranger  to  his  master's  design  as  the  rest;
and  though  placed  in  the  study  by  Gowrie's  command,
he  did  not  even  know  for  what  end  that  station  had
been  assigned  him.  The  whole  transaction  remained

1600,]

BOOK  VIII.

211

as  impenetrably  dark  as  ever;  and  the  two  brothers,  it
was  concluded,  had  concerted  their  scheme  without
either  confidant  or  accomplice,  with  unexampled  se-
crecy as  well  as  wickedness.

Sprot's  An  accident  no  less  strange  than  the  other

concert  circumstances  of  the  story,  and  which  happen-
ing it.  e(j  njne  years  after,  discovered  that  this  opi-
nion, however  plausible,  was  ill-founded ;  and  that  the
two  brothers  had  not  carried  on  their  machinations  all
alone.  One  Sprot,  a  notary,  having  whispered  among
several  persons  that  he  knew  some  secrets  relating  to
Gowrie's  conspiracy,  the  privy-council  thought  the
matter  worthy  of  their  attention,  and  ordered  him  to
be  seized.  His  confession  was  partly  voluntary,  and
partly  forced  from  him  by  torture.  According  to  his
account,  Logan  of  Restalrig,  a  gentleman  of  an  opulent
fortune,  but  of  dissolute  morals,  was  privy  to  all  Gow-
rie's intentions,  and  an  accomplice  in  his  crimes.  Mr.
Ruthven,  he  said,  had  frequent  interviews  with  Logan
in  order  to  concert  the  plan  of  their  operations ;  the
earl  had  corresponded  with  him  to  the  same  purpose;
and  one  Bour,  Logan's  confidant,  was  trusted  with  the
secret,  and  carried  the  letters  between  them.  Both
Logan  and  Bour  were  now  dead.  But  Sprot  affirmed
that  he  had  read  letters  written  both  by  Gowrie  and
Logan,  on  that  occasion;  and  in  confirmation  of  his  tes-
timony, several  of  Logan's  letters,  which  a  curiosity
fatal  to  himself  had  prompted  Sprot  to  steal  from  among
Bour's  papers,  were  produced/  These  were  compared,

r  Logan's  letters  were  five  in  number.  One  to  Bour,  another  to  Gowrie,  and  three  of
them  without  any  direction  ;  nor  could  Sprot  discover  the  name  of  the  person  to  whom
they  were  written.  Logan  gives  him  the  appellation  of  right  honourable.  It  appears
from  this,  however,  and  from  other  words  in  the  letter,  Croiu.  95.  that  there  were
several  persons  privy  to  the  conspiracy.  The  date  of  the  first  letter  is  July  18th.
Mr.  Ruthven  had  communicated  the  matter  to  Logan  only  five  days  before.  Ibid.
It  appears  from  the  original  summons  offorfaulture  against  Logan's  heirs,  that  Bour,
though  he  had  letters  addressed  to  him  with  regard  to  a  conspiracy  equally  danger-
ous and  important,  was  so  illiterate  that  he  could  not  read.  "  Jacobus  Bour,  lite-
rarum  prorsus  ignarus,  dicti  Georgii  opera  in  legendis  omnibus  icriptis  ad  eum  mis-
sis, vel  pertinentibus  utebatur."  This  is  altogether  strange ;  and  nothing  but  the
capricious  character  of  Logan  can  account  for  bis  choosing  such  a  confidant.

p2

212  SCOTLAND.  [1600.

by  the  privy-council,  with  papers  of  Logan's  hand-
writing, and  the  resemblance  was  manifest.  Persons
of  undoubted  credit,  and  well  qualified  to  judge  of  the
matter,  examined  them,  and  swore  to  their  authenti-
city. Death  itself  did  not  exempt  Logan  from  prose-
cution ;  his  bones  were  dug  up  and  tried  for  high-trea-
son, and,  by  a  sentence,  equally  odious  and  illegal,3
his  lands  were  forfeited,  and  his  posterity  declared  in-
famous. Sprot  was  condemned  to  be  hanged  for  mis-
prision  of  treason.  He  adhered  to  his  confession  to  the
last,  and  having  promised  on  the  scaffold,  to  give  the
spectators  a  sign  in  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  what
he  had  deposed,  he  thrice  clapped  his  hands  after  he
was  thrown  oif  the  ladder  by  the  executioner.*

8  By  the  Roman  law,  persons  guilty  of  the  crime  of  high-treason  might  be  tried
even  after  death.  This  practice  was  adopted  by  the  Scots  without  any  limitation,
Parl.  1540,  c.  69.  But  the  unlimited  exercise  of  this  power  was  soon  conceived  to
be  dangerous ;  and  the  crown  was  laid  under  proper  restrictions,  by  an  act  A.  D.
1542,  which  has  never  been  printed.  The  words  of  it  are,  "  And  because  the  said
lords  (i.  e.  the  lords  of  articles)  think  the  said  act  (viz,  in  1540)  too  general,  and.
prejudicial  to  the  barons  in  the  realm,  therefore  statutes  and  ordains  that  the  said  act
shall  have  no  place  in  time  coming,  but  against  the  heirs  of  them  that  notoriously
commit  or  shall  commit  lese  majesty  against  the  king's  person,  against  the  realm  for
averting  the  same,  and  against  them  that  shall  happen  to  betray  the  king's  army
allenarly,  and  being  notoriously  known  in  their  time  :  and  the  heirs  of  these  persons
to  be  called  and  judged  within  five  years  after  the  decease  of  the  said  persons  com-
mitters  of.the  said  crimes ;  and  the  said  time  being  by-past,  the  said  heirs  never  to
be  pursued  for  the  same."  The  sentence  against  Logan  violated  this  statute  in  two
particulars.  He  was  not  notoriously  known  during  his  life  to  be  an  accomplice  in
the  crime  for  which  he  was  tried  ;  and  his  heir  was  called  in  question  more  than  five
years  after  his  death.  It  is  remarkable  that  this  statute  seems  not  to  have  been  at-
tended to  in  the  parliament  which  forfeited  Lpgan.  Another  singular  circumstance
deserves  notice.  As  it  is  a  maxim  of  justice  that  no  person  can  be  tried  in  absence  ;
and  as  lawyers  are  always  tenacious  of  their  forms,  and  often  absurd  in  their  de-
vices for  preserving  them,  they  contrived  that,  in  any  process  against  a  dead  person,
his  corpse  or  bones  shall  be  presented  at  the  bar.  Examples  of  this  occur  frequent-1
ly  in  the  Scottish  history.  After  the  battle  of  Corrichie,  the  dead  body  of  the  earl
of  Huntly  was  presented  in  parliament,  before  sentence  of  forfaulture  was  pro-
nounced against  him.  For  the  same  reason  the  bodies  of  Gowrie  and  his  brother,
•were  preserved,  in  order  that  they  might  be  produced  in  parliament.  Logan's  bones,
in  compliance  with  the  same  rule,  were  due  up.  Mackenz.  Crim.  Law,  Book  i.
tit.  6.  $.  22.

*  It  appears  that  archbishop  Spotswood  was  present  at  the  execution  of  Sprot,
Crom.  115.  and  yet  he  seems  to  have  given  no  credit  to  his  discoveries.  The  man-
ner in  which  he  speaks  of  him  is  remarkable  :  "  Whether  or  not  1  should  mention
the  arraignment  and  execution  of  George  Sprot,  who  suffered  at  Edinburgh,  I  am
doubtful;  his  confession, though  voluntary  and  constant,  carrying  small  probability.
The  man  deposed,  &c.  It  seemed  to  be  a  very  fiction,  and  a  mere  invention  of  the
man's  own  brain,  for  neither  did  he  shew  the  letter,  nor  could  any  wise  man  think
that  Gowrie,  who  went  about  the  treason  so  secretly,  would  have  communicated  the
matter  to  such  a  man  as  Logan  was  known  to  be,"  p.  508.  Spotswood  could  not  be
ignorant  of  the  solemnity  with  which  Logan  had  been  tried,  and  of  the  proof
brought  of  the  authenticity  of  his  letters.  He  himself  was  probably  present  in  par-

1*600.]  BOOK VIII.  213

But  though  it  be  thus  unexpectedly  discovered  that
Gowrie  did  not  act  without  associates,  little  additional
light  is  thrown,  by  this  discovery,  on  the  motives  and
intentions  of  his  conduct.  It  appears  almost  incredible
that  two  young  men  of  such  distinguished  virtue  should
revolt  all  at  once  from  their  duty,  and  attempt  a  crime
so  atrocious  as  the  murder  of  their  sovereign.  It
appears  still  more  improbable,  that  they  should  have
concerted  their  undertaking  with  so  little  foresight
and  prudence.  If  they  intended  that  the  deed  should
have  remained  concealed,  they  could  not  have  chosen
a  more  improper  scene  for  executing  it,  than  their  own
house.  If  they  intended  that  Henderson  should  have
struck  the  blow,  they  could  not  have  pitched  on  a  man
more  destitute  of  the  courage  that  must  direct  the  hand
of  an  assassin ;  nor  could  they  expect  that  he,  unsoli-
cited, and  unacquainted  with  their  purpose,  would  ven-
ture on  such  a  desperate  action.  If  Ruthven  meant  to
stab  the  king  with  his  own  hand,  why  did  he  withdraw
the  dagger,  after  it  was  pointed  at  his  breast?  How
could  he  leave  the  king  after  such  a  plain  declaration
of  his  intention  ?  Was  it  not  preposterous  to  commit
him  to  the  keeping  of  such  a  timid  associate  as  Hen-
derson ?  For  what  purpose  did  he  waste  time  in  bind-
ing the  hands  of  an  unarmed  man,  whom  he  might  ea-
sily have  dispatched  with  his  sword  ?  Had  Providence
permitted  them  to  imbrue  their  hands  in  the  blood  of
their  sovereign,  what  advantage  could  have  accrued  to

liament  at  the  trial.  The  earl  of  Dunbar,of  whom  he  always  speaks  with  the  highest
respect,  was  the  person  who  directed  the  process  against  Logan.  Such  a  peremptory
declaration  against  the  truth  of  Sprot's  evidence,  notwithstanding  all  these  circum-
stances, is  surprising.  Sir  Thomas  Hamilton,  the  king's  advocate  at  that  time,  and
afterward  earl  of  Haddington,  represents  the  proof  produced  at  Logan's  trial  as  ex-
tremely convincing  ;  and  in  an  original  letter  of  his  to  the  king,  the  21st  of  June,
1609  (in  Bibl.  Facult.  Jurid.),  after  mentioning  the  manner  in  which  the  trial  had
been  conducted,  he  thus  goes  on :

"  When  the  probation  of  the  summons  was  referred  to  the  lords  of  articles'  votes,
they  found  uniformly,  all  in  one  voice,  the  said  summons  to  be  so  clearly  proved,
that  they  seemed  to  contend  who  should  be  able  most  zealously  to  express  the  .sa-
tisfaction of  his  heart,  not  only  by  the  most  pithy  words,  but  by  tears  of  joy  ;  diverse
of  the  best  rank  confessing,*lhat,  that  whereof  they  doubted  at  their  entry  into  the
house  was  now  so  manifest,  that  they  behoved  to  esteem  them  traitors  who  should
any  longer  refuse  to  declare  their  assured  resolution  of  the  truth  of  that  treason."

214  SCOTLAND.  [1600.

them  by  his  death  ?  And  what  claims  or  pretensions
could  they  have  opposed  to  the  rights  of  his  children?1"
Inevitable  and  instant  vengeance,  together  with  perpe-
tual infamy,  were  the  only  consequences  they  could  ex-
pect to  follow  such  a  crime.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  impossible  to  believe  that
the  king  had  formed  any  design  against  the  life  of  the
two  brothers.  They  had  not  incurred  his  indignation
by  any  crime  ;  and  were  in  no  degree  the  objects  of  his
jealousy  or  hatred  ;x  nor  was  he  of  a  spirit  so  sangui-
nary, or  so  noted  for  rash  and  desperate  valour,  as  to
have  attempted  to  murder  them  in  their  own  house,  where
they  were  surrounded  with  many  domestics,  he  only  with
a  slender  and  unarmed  train ;  where  they  could  call  to
their  assistance  the  inhabitants  of  a  city,  at  the  devotion
of  their  family,  while  he  was  at  a  distance  from  all  aid ;
and  least  of  all  would  he  have  chosen  for  his  asso-
ciates in  such  an  enterprise,  the  earl  of  Mar  and  the

u  It  has  been  asserted,  that,  in  consequence  of  the  king's  death,  the  earl  of
Cowrie  might  have  pretended  to  the  crown  of  England,  as  the  son  of  Dorothea
Stewart,  daughter  of  lord  Methven,  by  Margaret  of  England,  who,  after  her  divorce
from  the  earl  of  Angus,  took  that  nobleman  for  her  third  husband.  Burnet,  Hist,
of  his  own  Times.  But  this  assertion  is  ill-founded.  It  appears,  from  undoubted
evidence,  that  lord  Methven  had  only  one  child  by  queen  Margaret,  which  died  in
its  infancy,  and  Dorothea  lady  Ruthven  was  notlhe  daughter  of  queen  Margaret,
but  of  Janet  Stewart,  lord  Methven's  second  wife,  a  daughter  of  John  earl  of  Athol.
Crawf.  Peer.  329.  And  though  Gowrie  had  really  been  descended  from  the  blood
royal  of  England,  the  king  at  that  time  had  a  son  and  a  daughter ;  and  besides-
them,  lady  Arabella  Stewart,  daughter  of  Charles  earl  of  Lennox,  had  a  preferable
title  to  the  crown  of  England.

x  Sir  Henry  Neville,  in  a  letter  to  Sir  Ralph  Winwood,  iraputesrthe  death  of  the
two  brothers  to  a  cause  not  mentioned  by  any  of  our  historians.  "  Out  of  Scotland
we  hear  that  there  is  no  good  agreement,  but  rather  an  open  diffidence,  betwixt  the
king  and  his  wife,  and  many  are  of  opinion  that  the  discovery  of  some  affection
between  her  and  the  earl  of  Gowrie's  brother  (who  was  killed  with  him)  was  the
truest  cause  and  motive  of  that  tragedy."  Winw.  Merc.  voj.  i.  274.  Whether  the
following  passages  in  Nicholson's  letter  be  any  confirmation  of  that  suspicion,  is
submitted  to  the  reader.  In  his  letter,  Sept.  22,  1602,  he  mentions  the  return  of
Gowrie's  two  younger  brothers  into  Scotland,  and  adds,  "  The  coming  in  of  these
two,  and  the  queen  of  Scots  dealing  with  them,  and  sending  away  and  furnishing
Mrs.  Beatrix  [their  sister]  with  such  information  as  Sir  Thomas  Erskine  has  given,
hath  bred  great  suspicion  in  the  king  of  Scots  that  they  come  not  in  but  upon  some
dangerous  plot."  In  another  letter,  January  1,  1603,  "  The  day  of  writing  my
last,  Mrs.  Beatrix  Ruthven  was  brought  by  the  lady  Paisley,  and  Blrs.  of  Angus,
as  one  of  their  gentlewomen,  into  the  court  in  the  evening,  and  stowed  in  a  chamber
prepared  for  her  by  the  queen's  direction,  where  the  queen  had  much  time  and  con-
ference with  her.  Of  this  the  king  got  notice,  and  shewed  his  dislike  thereof  to  the
queen,  gently  reproving  her  for  it,  and  examining  quietly  of  the  queen's  servants  of
the  same,  and  of  other  matters  thereunto  belonging,  with  such  discretion  and  se-
crecy as  requires  such  a  matter."

1600.]  BOOK VIII.  215

duke  of  Lennox,  the  former  connected  in  close  friend-
ship with  the  house  of  Gowrie,  and  the  latter  married
to  one  of  the  earl's  sisters.

A  conjee-  Whichsoever  of  these  opposite  systems  we
ture  con-  embrace ;  whether  we  impute  the  intention  of
the  inten-  murder  to  Gowrie,  or  to  the  king ;  insuperable
conspira-6  difficulties  arise,  and  we  are  involved  in  dark-
ness, mystery,  and  contradictions.  Perhaps  the
source  of  the  whole  conspiracy  ought  to  be  searched
for  deeper,  and  by  deriving  it  from  a  more  remote
cause,  we  may  discover  it  to  be  less  criminal.

To  keep  the  king  of  Scots  in  continual  dependence,
was  one  great  object  of  Elizabeth's  policy.  In  order
to  this,  she  sometimes  soothed  him,  and  sometimes
bribed  his  ministers  and  favourites ;  and  when  she
failed  of  attaining  her  end  by  these  means,  she  encou-
raged the  clergy  to  render  any  administration  which
she  distrusted  unpopular,  by  decrying  it,  or  stirred  up
some  faction  of  the  nobles  to  oppose  and  to  overturn  it.
In  that  fierce  age,  men  little  acquainted  with  the  arts
of  undermining  a  ministry  by  intrigue,  had  recourse  to
the  ruder  practice  of  rendering  themselves  masters  of
the  king's  person,  that  they  might  thereby  obtain  the
direction  of  his  counsels.  Those  nobles  who  seized  the
king  at  the  Raid  of  Ruthven,  were  instigated  and  sup-
ported by  Elizabeth.  Bothwell,  in  all  his  wild  attempts,
enjoyed  her  protection,  and  when  they  miscarried,  he
was  secure  of  a  retreat  in  her  dominions.  The  con-
nexions which  James  had  been  forming  of  late  with
the  Roman  Catholic  princes,  his  secret  negotiations  in
England  with  her  subjects,  and  the  maxims  by  which
he  governed  his  own  kingdom,  all  contributed  to  excite
her  jealousy.  She  dreaded  some  great  revolution  in
Scotland  to  be  approaching,  and  it  was  her  interest  to
prevent  it.  The  earl  of  Gowrie  was  one  of  the  most
powerful  of  the  Scottish  nobles,  and  descended  from
ancestors  warmly  attached  to  the  English  interest.  He

216  SCOTLAND.  [1600.

had  adopted  the  same  system,  and  believed  the  welfare
of  his  country  to  be  inseparably  connected  with  the
subsistence  of  the  alliance  between  the  two  kingdoms.
During  his  residence  at  Paris,  he  had  contracted  an  in-
timate friendship  with  Sir  Henry  Neville,  the  queen's
ambassador  there,  and  was  recommended  by  him  to
his  court  as  a  person  of  whom  great  use  might  be  made.y
Elizabeth  received  him  as  he  passed  through  England
with  distinguished  marks  of  respect  and  favour.  From
all  these  circumstances  a  suspicion  may  arise,  that  the
plan  of  the  conspiracy  against  the  king  was  formed  at
that  time  in  concert  with  her.  Such  a  suspicion  pre-
vailed in  that  age,  and  from  the  letters  of  Nicholson^
Elizabeth's  agent  in  Scotland,  it  appears  not  to  be  des-
titute of  foundation.  An  English  ship  was  observed
hovering  for  some  time  in  the  mouth  of  the  frith  of
Forth.  The  earl's  two  younger  brothers  fled  into  Eng-
land after  the  ill  success  of  the  conspiracy,  and  were
protected  by  Elizabeth.  James  himself,  though  he
prudently  concealed  it,  took  great  umbrage  at  her
behaviour.  None,  however,  of  Elizabeth's  intrigues  in
Scotland  tended  to  hurt  the  king's  person,  but  only  to
circumscribe  his  authority,  and  to  thwart  his  schemes.
His  life  was  the  surest  safeguard  of  her  own,  and  re-
strained the  Popish  pretenders  to  her  crown,  and  their
abettors,  from  desperate  attempts,  to  which  their  impa-
tience and  bigotry  might,  otherwise,  have  urged  them
on.  To  have  encouraged  Gowrie  to  murder  his  sove-
reign, would,  on  her  part,  have  been  an  act  of  the  ut-
most imprudence.  Nor  does  this  seem  to  have  been
the  intention  of  the  two  brothers.  Mr.  Ruthven,  first
of  all,  endeavoured  to  decoy  the  king  to  Perth,  without
any  attendants.  When  these  proved  more  numerous
than  was  expected,  the  earl  employed  a  stratagem  in
order  to  separate  them  from  the  king,  by  pretending
that  he  had  rode  away  towards  Falkland,  and  by  call-

y  Wiuw.  i.  156.

1600.]  BOOK VIII.  217

ing  hastily  for  their  horses,  that  they  might  follow  him.
By  their  shutting  James  up,  meanwhile,  in  a  distant
corner  of  the  house,  and  by  attempting  to  bind  his
hands,  their  designs  seem  to  have  been  rather  to  seize
than  to  assassinate  him.  Though  Gowrie  had  not  col-
lected his  followers  in  such  numbers  as  to  have  been
able  to  detain  him  long  a  prisoner,  in  that  part  of  the
kingdom,  by  open  force,  he  might  soon  have  been  con-
veyed aboard  the  English  ship,  which  waited,  perhaps,
to  receive  him ;  and  he  might  have  been  landed  at  Fast-
castle,  a  house  of  Logan's,  in  which,  according  to  many
obscure  hints  in  his  letters,  some  rendezvous  of  the  con-
spirators was  to  be  held.  Amidst  the  surprise  and
terror  into  which  the  king  must  have  been  thrown  by
the  violence  offered  to  him,  it  was  extremely  natural
for  him  to  conclude  that  his  life  was  sought.  It  was
the  interest  of  all  his  followers  to  confirm  him  in  this
belief,  and  to  magnify  his  danger,  in  order  to  add  to
the  importance  and  merit  of  their  own  services.  Thus
his  fear,  and  their  vanity,  aided  by  the  credulity  and
wonder  which  the  contemplation  of  any  great  and  tra-
gical event,  when  not  fully  understood,  is  apt  to  inspire,
augmented  the  whole  transaction.  On  the  other  hand,
the  extravagance  and  improbability  of  the  circumstances
which  were  added,  detracted  from  the  credit  of  those
which  really  happened ;  and  even  furnished  pretences
for  calling  in  question  the  truth  of  the  whole  conspiracy.
Many  dis-  The  account  of  what  had  happened  at  Perth
reached  Edinburgh  next  morning.  The  privy-
council  commanded  the  ministers  of  that  city
king-  instantly  to  assemble  their  people ;  and,  after
relating  to  them  the  circumstances  of  the  conspiracy
formed  against  the  king's  life,  to  return  public  thanks  to
God  for  the  protection  which  he  had  so  visibly  afforded
him.  But  as  the  first  accounts  transmitted  to  Edinburgh,
written  in  a  hurry,  and  while  the  circumstances  of  the
conspiracy  were  but  imperfectly  known,  and  the  pas-

218  SCOTLAND.  [1600.

sions  which  it  excited  strongly  felt,  were  indistinct,  ex-
aggerated, and  contradictory,  the  ministers  laid  hold  of
this ;  and  though  they  offered  to  give  public  thanks
to  God  for  the  king's  safety,  they  "refused  to  enter
into  any  detail  of  particulars,  or  to  utter  from  the
chair  of  truth  what  appeared  to  be  still  dubious  and
uncertain.

A  few  days  after,  the  king  returned  to  Edinburgh ;
and,  though  Galloway,  the  minister  of  his  own  chapel,
made  a  harangue  to  the  people  at  the  public  cross,  in
which  he  recited  all  the  circumstances  of  the  conspiracy ;
though  James  himself,  in  their  hearing,  confirmed  his
account;  though  he  commanded  a  narrative  of  the
whole  transaction.to  be  published  ;  the  ministers  of  that
city,  as  well  as  many  of  their  brethren,  still  continued
incredulous  and  unconvinced.  Their  high  esteem  of
Gowrie,  their  jealousy  of  every  part  of  the  king's  con-
duct, added  to  some  false  and  many  improbable  circum-
stances in  the  narrative,  not  only  led  them  to  suspect  the
whole,  but  gave  their  suspicions  an  air  of  credibility.
But  at  length,  the  king,  partly  by  arguments,  partly  by
threats,  prevailed  on  all  of  them,  except  Mr.  Robert
Bruce,  to  own  that  they  were  convinced  of  the  truth  of
the  conspiracy.  He  could  be  brought  no  farther  than
to  declare,  that  he  reverenced  the  king's  account  of  the
trans  action,  but  could  not  sa  that  he  himself  was  per-
suaded of  the  truth  of  it.  The  scruples  or  obstinacy
of  a  single  man  would  have  been  little  regarded ;  but
as  the  same  spirit  of  incredulity  began  to  spread  among
the  people,  the  example  of  one  in  so  high  reputation
for  integrity  and  abilities,  was  extremely  dangerous.
The  king  was  at  the  utmost  pains  to  convince  and  to
gain  Bruce,  but  finding  it  impossible  to  remove  his
doubts,  he  deprived  him  of  his  benefice,  and  after  re-
peated delays,  and  many  attempts  towards  a  reconcile-
ment, banished  him  the  kingdom.2

z  Spotsw.  461,  &c. Cald.  v.  389,  &c.

I600.J  BOOK VIII.  219

Proceed-  The  proceedings  of  parliament  were  not  re-
iinamenftpar"  tarded  by  any  scruples  of  this  sort.  The  dead
against  the  bodies  of  the  two  brothers  were  produced  there,

conspira-
tors, according  to  law ;  an  indictment  for  high-trea-
son was  preferred  against  them ;  witnesses  were  ex-
amined; and,  by  a  unanimous  sentence,  their  estates  and
honours  were  forfeited  ;  the  punishment  due  to  traitors
was  inflicted  on  their  dead  bodies ;  and,  as  if  the  pu-
nishment hitherto  in  use  did  not  express  sufficient  de-
testation of  their  crimes,  the  parliament  enacted  that
the  surname  of  Ruthven  should  be  abolished;  and,  in
order  to  preserve  the  memory  of  the  king's  miraculous
escape,  and  to  declare  the  sense  which  the  nation  had
of  the  divine  goodness,  to  all  future  ages,  appointed  the
5th  of  August  to  be  observed  annually,  as  a  day  of  pub-
lic thanksgiving.*

a  A  few  weeks  after  the  death  of  the  two  brothers,  the  king  published  a  discourse
of  their  vile  and  unnatural  conspiracy  against  his  life.  In  the  year  1713,  George
earl  of  Croraartie  published  an  "  Historical  Account  of  the  Conspiracy  by  the  Earl
of  Gowrie  and  Robert  Logan  of  Restalrig,  against  King  James  VI."  He  seems  not
to  have  seen  the  account  which  the  king  himself  had  given  of  that  matter,  and  bor-
rows the  whole  historical  part  from  Spotswood  and  other  authors  ;  but  he  has  ex-
tracted from  the  public  records  the  depositions  of  the  witnesses  produced  by  the
king's  council,  in  order  to  make  good  the  charge  against  the  two  brothers,  and  Logan
their  associate.  From  these  two  treatises  our  knowledge  of  all  the  material  circum-
stances of  the  conspiracy  is  derived.  The  evidence  which  they  contain,  one  would
expect  to  be  authentic  and  decisive.  An  account  of  a  fact  still  recent,  published  by
royal  authority,  and  the  original  depositions  of  persons  examined  in  presence  of  the
highest  court  in  the  nation,  ought  to  convey  a  degree  of  evidence  seldom  attained  in
historical  relations,  and  to  exclude  all  remaining  doubt  and  uncertainty.  But  as
every  thing  with  regard  to  this  transaction  is  dark  and  problematical,  the  king's  ac-
count and  the  depositions  of  the  witnesses  not  only  vary,  but  contradict  each  other
in  so  many  circumstances,  that  much  room  is  still  left  for  hesitation  and  historical
scepticism.  The  testimony  of  Henderson  is  the  fullest  and  most  important,  but  in
several  particulars  the  king's  account  and  his  are  contradictory.  I.  According  to  the
king's  account,  while  Mr.  Ruthven  was  holding  the  dagger  at  his  breast,  "  the  fel-
low in  the  study  stood  quaking  and  trembling."  Disc.  17.  But  Henderson  says,
that  he  himself  wrested  the  dagger  out  of  Mr.  Ruthven's  hands.  Disc.  53.  Crom.

50.  Henderson  likewise  beasted  to  his  wife,  that  he  had  that  day  twice  saved  the
king  from  being  stabbed. Disc.  54.  Crorn.  53. II.  The  king  asserts  that  Hender-
son opened  the  window  during  Mr.  Ruthven's  absence. Disc.  23. Henderson  de-
poses that  he  was  only  attempting  to  open  it  when  Mr.  Ruthven  returned,  and  that
during  the  struggle  between  the  king  and  him,  he  opened  it. Disc.  53,  54.  Crom.

51,  52. III.  If  we  may  believe  the  king,  the  fellow  in  the  study  stood,  during  the
struggle,  behind  the  king's  back,  inactive  and  trembling  all  the  time. Disc.  27. But
Henderson  affirms,  that  he  snatched  away  the  garter  with  which  Mr.  Ruthven  at-
tempted to  bind  the  king ;  that  he  pulled  back  Mr.  Ruthven's  hand,  while  he  was
endeavouring  to  stop  the  king's  mouth,  and  that  he  opened  the  window. Disc.  54.
Crom.  52. IV.  By  the  king's  account,  Mr.  Ruthven  left  him  in  the  study,  and
went  away  in  order  to  meet  with  his  brother,  and  the  earl  came  up  the  stairs  for  the
same  purpose. Disc.  23. Henderson  deposes,  that  when  Mr.  Ruthven  left  the

220  SCOTLAND.  [1601.

1601  Though  Gowrie's  conspiracy  occasioned  a

Essex's sudden  and  a  great  alarm,  it  was  followed  by  no

conspiracy  <*  •  T  i • i

against  consequences  of  importance ;  and  having  been
Ehzabeth.  concertec[  ^y  ^ne  two  brothers,  either  without  any
associates,  or  with  such  as  were  unknown,  the  danger
was  over  as  soon  as  discovered.  But  not  long  after,  a
conspiracy  broke  out  in  England  against  Elizabeth,
which,  though  the  first  danger  was  instantly  dispelled,
produced  tragical  effects,  that  rendered  the  close  of  that
queen's  reign  dismal  and  unhappy.  As  James  was
deeply  interested  in  that  event,  it  merits  our  particular
notice.

king,  "he believes  that  he  did  not  pass  from  the  door."  Crom.  51.  It  is  apparent
both  from  the  situation  of  the  house,  and  from  other  circumstances,  that  there  could
not  possibly  have  been  any  interview  between  the  brothers  at  this  time.  Disc.  23.

Henderson  was  twice  examined,  first  at  Falkland  before  the  privy-council  in
August,  and  next  at  Edinburgh  before  the  parliament  in  November.  Not  to  men-
tion some  lesser  variations  between  these  depositions,  we  shall  point  out  two  which
are  remarkable.  In  his  first  deposition,  Mr.  Henderson  relates  the  most  material
circumstance  of  the  whole  in  these  words  :  "  Mr.  Ruthven  pulled  out  the  deponent's
dagger,  and  held  the  same  to  his  majesty's  breast,  saying,  Remember  you  of  my
father's  murder;  you  shall  now  die  for  it:  and  pointing  to  his  highness's  heart  with
the  dagger,  the  deponent  threw  the  same  out  of  Mr.  Ruthven's  hands,  and  swore,
as  God  should  judge  his  soul,  that  if  Mr.  Ruthven  had  retained  the  dagger  in  his
hand,  the  space  a  man  may  go  six  steps,  he  would  have  stricken  the  king  to  the
hilts  with  it."  Disc.  52.  But  at  his  second  examination  he  varied  from  this  in  two
material  circumstances.  First,  the  words  he  at  that  time  put  in  Mr.  Ruthven's  mouth
while  he  held  the  dagger  at  the  king's  breast  are,  "  Sir,  you  must  be  my  prisoner ;
remember  on  my  father's  death."  Secondly,  when  he  threatened  him  with  death,  it
•was  only  to  deter  him  from  making  any  noise.  "  Hold  your  tongue,  or  by  Christ  you
shall  die."  2.  In  his  first  deposition,  the  words  of  Mr.  Ruthven,  when  he  returned
to  the  chamber  where  he  had  left  the  king,  are,  "  There  is  no  remedy,  by  God  you  must
die."  But  in  his  second  deposition,  *'  By  God  there  is  no  remedy,  and  offered  to
bind  his  majesty's  hands."  Crom.  51.  The  material  words  you  must  die  are  omitted.
The  first  deposition  seems  plainly  to  intimate  that  it  was  Ruthven's  intention  to
murder  the  king.  The  second  would  lead  us  to  conclude  that  he  had  no  other  de-
sign than  to  detain  him  as  a  prisoner.

There  are  likewise  some  remarkable  contradictions  in  the  testimonies  of  the  other
witnesses.  1.  In  the  discourse  published  by  authority,  it  is  insinuated  that  the  tu-
mult of  the  inhabitants  was  raised  against  the  king,  and  that  it  required  some  art  to
pacify  them.  Disc.  32.  The  duke  of  Lennox  confirms  this  in  his  deposition.
Crom.  44.  An  act  of  privy-council  summoning  the  magistrates  of  Perth  to  answer
for  that  riot  is  still  extant.  And  yet  Andrew  Roy,  one  of  the  bailies  of  the  town,
deposes,  that  he  himself  raised  the  people,  and  that  they  took  arms  in  order  to  assist
the  king.  Crom.  66.  2.  Henderson  deposes,  that  he  gave  an  evasive  answer  to  Mr.
John  Moncrief,  who  inquired  where  he  had  been  that  morning,  because  the  earl  had
commanded  him  not  to  let  any  man  know  that  he  had  been  at  Falkland.  Disc.  54.
Moncrief  deposes  to  the  same  purpose.  Crom.  64.  And  yet  George  Hay,  after-
ward lord  Kinnoul,  and  the  chancellor  of  Scotland,  and  Peter  Hay,  depose,  that  the
earl,  in  their  presence,  asked  Henderson,  "  Whom  he  found  with  the  king  at  Falk-
land ?"  Crom.  70,  71.  Which  question  seems  to  prove  that  he  did  not  aim  at
keeping  that  journey  a  secret.  In  the  collection  of  criminal  trials,  published  by
Mr.  Arnot  in  1785,  the  evidence  against  the  two  brothers  has  been  considered  with
great  attention.  P.  20,  &c.

1601.]

BOOK VIII.

221

The  court  of  England  was  at  this  time  divided  be-
tween two  powerful  factions,  which  contended  for  the
supreme  direction  of  affairs.  The  leader  of  the  one
was  Robert  D'Evreux  earl  of  Essex ;  Sir  Robert  Cecil,
the  son  of  lord-treasurer  Burleigh,  was  at  the  head  of
the  other.  The  former  was  the  most  accomplished  and
the  most  popular  of  all  the  English  nobles  ;  brave,  ge-
nerous, affable ;  though  impetuous,  yet  willing  to  listen
to  the  counsels  of  those  whom  he  loved ;  an  avowed,
but  not  an  implacable  enemy ;  a  friend  no  less  con-
stant than  warm ;  incapable  of  disguising  his  own  sen-
timents, or  of  misrepresenting  those  of  others ;  better
fitted  for  a  camp  than  for  a  court;  of  a  genius  that
qualified  him  for  the  first  place  in  the  administration,
with  a  spirit  which  scorned  the  second  as  below  his
merit.  He  was  soon  distinguished  by  the  queen,  who,
with  a  profusion  uncommon  to  her,  conferred  on  him,
even  in  his  earliest  youth,  the  highest  honours.  Nor
did  this  diminish  the  esteem  and  affection  of  his  coun-
trymen ;  but,  by  a  rare  felicity,  he  was  at  once  the  fa-
vourite of  his  sovereign,  and  the  darling  of  the  people.
Cecil,  on  the  other  hand,  educated  in  a  court,  and
trained  under  a  father  deeply  skilled  in  all  its  arts,
was  crafty,  insinuating,  industrious ;  and  though  pos-
sessed of  talents  which  fitted  him  for  the  highest  of-
fices, he  did  not  rely  upon  his  merit  alone  for  attaining
them,  but  availed,  himself  of  every  advantage,  which
his  own  address,  or  the  mistakes  of  others,  afforded
him.  Two  such  men  were  formed  to  be  rivals  and
enemies.  Essex  despised  the  arts  of  Cecil  as  low  and
base.  To  Cecil,  the  earl's  magnanimity  appeared  to
be  presumption  and  folly.  All  the  military  men,  ex-
cept Raleigh,  favoured  Essex.  Most  of  the  courtiers
adhered  to  Cecil,  whose  manners  more  nearly  resem-
bled their  own.

As  Elizabeth  advanced  in  years,  the  struggle  between
these  factions  became  more  violent. Essex,  in  order

222  SCOTLAND. [1601.

His  cor  to  strengtnen  himself,  had  early courted  the

respond-  friendship  of  the  king  of  Scots,  for  whose  right

the  Scot-  of  succession  he  was  a  zealous  advocate,  and

tish  kmg.  ^e|^  a  c}ose  correspondence  both  with  him  and
with  his  principal  ministers. Cecil, devoted  to  the
queen  alone,  rose  daily  to  new  honours,  by  the  assi-
duity of  his  services,  and  the  patience  with  which  he
expected  the  reward  of  them  ; while  the  earl's  high
spirit  and  impetuosity  sometimes  exposed  him  to  checks
from  a  mistress,  who,  though  partial  in  her  affection  to-
wards him,  could  not  easily  bear  contradiction,  and  who
conferred  favours  often  unwillingly,  and  always  slowly.
His  own  solicitations,  however,  seconded  maliciously
by  his  enemies,  who  wished  to  remove  him  at  a  dis-
tance from  court,  advanced  him  to  the  command  of  the
army  employed  in  Ireland  against  Tyronne,  and  to  the
office  of  lord-lieutenant  of  that  kingdom,  with  a  com-
mission almost  unlimited. His  success  in  that  expedi-
tion did  not  equal  either  his  own  promises,  or  the  ex-
pectations of  Elizabeth. The  queen,  peevish  from  her
disappointment,  and  exasperated  against  Essex  by  the
artifices  of  his  enemies,  wrote  him  a  harsh  letter,  full
of  accusations  and  reproaches. These  his  impatient
spirit  could  not  bear,  and  in  the  first  transports  of  his
resentment,  he  proposed  to  carry  over  a  part  of  his
army  into  England,  and,  by  driving  his  enemies  from
the  queen's  presence,  to  reinstate  himself  in  favour  and
in  power. But,  upon  more  mature  thoughts,  he  aban-
doned this  rash  design,  and  setting  sail  with  a  few  of-
ficers devoted  to  his  person,  landed  in  England,  and
posted  directly  to  court. Elizabeth  received  him  with-
out any  symptom  either  of  aifection  or  of  displeasure.
By  proper  compliances  and  acknowledgments,  he  might
have  regained  his  former  ascendant  over  the  queen.
But  he  thought  himself  too  deeply  injured  to  submit
to  these. Elizabeth,  on  the  other  hand,  determined  to
subdue  his  haughty  temper  ;  and,  though  her  severity

1601.]  BOOK  VIII.  223

drew  from  him  the  most  humble  letters,  she  confined
him  to  the  lord-keeper's  house,  and  appointed  com-
missioners to  try  him,  both  for  his  conduct  during  his
government  of  Ireland,  and  for  leaving  that  kingdom
without  her  permission.  By  their  sentence,  he  was
suspended  from  all  his  offices,  except  that  of  master  of
the  horse,  and  continued  a  prisoner  during  the  queen's
pleasure.  Satisfied  with  having  mortified  his  pride
thus  far,  Elizabeth  did  not  suifer  the  sentence  to  be  re-
corded, and  soon  after  allowed  him  to  retire  to  his  own
house.  During  these  transactions,  which  occupied  se-
veral months,  Essex  fluctuated  between  the  allegiance
he  owed  to  his  sovereign,  and  the  desire  of  revenge ;
and  sometimes  leaned  to  the  one,  and  sometimes  to
the  other.  In  one  of  the  intervals,  when  the  latter
prevailed,  he  sent  a  messenger  into  Scotland,  to  en-
courage the  king  to  assert  his  own  right  to  the  succes-
sion by  the  force  of  arms,  and  to  promise  that,  besides
the  assistance  of  the  earl  and  all  his  friends  in  Eng-
land, lord  Mountjoy,  now  lord-lieutenant  of  Ireland,
would  join  him  with  five  thousand  men,  from  that  king-
dom. But  James  did  not  choose  to  hazard  the
losing  of  a  kingdom,  of  which  he  was  just  about
to  obtain  possession,  by  a  premature  attempt  to
seize  it.  Mountjoy,  too,  declined  the  enterprise,  and
Essex  adopted  more  dutiful  schemes ;  all  thoughts  of
ambition  appearing  to  be  totally  effaced  out  of  his
mind.

This  moderation,  which  was  merely  the  ef-

The  wild  7  .  J

attempts feet  of  disgust  and  disappointment,  was  not  of

of  Essex. !  "!f  .fj  \ •

long  continuance ;  and  the  queen,  having  not
only  refused  to  renew  a  lucrative  grant,  which  she  had
formerly  bestowed,  but  even  to  admit  him  into  her  pre-
sence, that  new  injury  drove  a  temper,  naturally  impa-
tient, and  now  much  fretted,  to  absolute  despair.  His
friends,  instead  of  soothing  his  rage,  or  restraining  his
impetuosity,  added  to  both  by  their  imprudent  and  in-
terested zeal.  After  many  anxious  consultations,  he

James's
cautious
conduct.

224  SCOTLAND.  [1601.

determined  to  attempt  to  redress  his  wrongs  by  vio-
lence. But  being  conscious  how  unpopular  such  an.
enterprise  would  be,  if  it  appeared  to  proceed  from
motives  of  private  revenge  alone,  he  endeavoured  to
give  it  the  semblance  of  public  utility,  by  mingling  the
king  of  Scotland's  interest  with  his  own.  He  wrote  to
James,  that  the  faction  which  now  predominated  in  the
English  court  had  resolved  to  support  the  pretensions
of  the  infanta  of  Spain  to  the  crown ;  that  the  places
of  the  greatest  importance  in  the  kingdom  were  put
into  the  hands  of  his  avowed  enemies ;  and  that  unless
he  sent  ambassadors,  without  delay,  to  insist  on  the
immediate  declaration  of  his  right  of  succession,  their
measures  were  so  well  concerted  that  all  his  hopes
would  be  desperate.  James,  who  knew  how  disagree-
able such  a  proposal  would  be  to  the  queen  of  Eng-
land, was  not  willing  rashly  to  expose  himself  to  her
displeasure.  Essex,  nevertheless,  blinded  by  resent-
ment, and  impatient  for  revenge,  abandoned  himself
to  these  passions,  and  acted  like  a  man  guided  by
frenzy  or  despair.  With  two  or  three  hundred  fol-
lowers incompletely  armed,  he  attempted  to  assault  a
throne  the  best  established  in  Europe.  Sallying  at
their  head  out  of  his  own  house,  he  called  on  the  citi-
zens of  London,  if  they  either  valued  his  life,  or  wished
to  preserve  the  kingdom,  from  the  dominion  of  the
Spaniards,  to  take  arms,  and  to  follow  his  standard.
He  advanced  towards  the  palace  with  an  intention  to.
drive  Cecil  and  his  faction  out  of  the  queen's  presence,
and  to  obtain,  a  declaration  of  the  Scottish  king's  right
of  succession.6  But,  though  almost  adored  by  the
citizens,  not  a  man  would  join  him  in  this  wild  enter-
prise. Dispirited  by  their  indifference,  deserted  by
some  of  his  own  attendants,  and  almost  surrounded
by  the  troops  which  marched  against  him  under  dif-
ferent leaders  into  the  city,  he  retreated  to  his  own
house;  and  without  any  bold  effort,  suitable  to  his

b  Birch, Mem.  ii.  477.

1601.]  BOOK  VIII.  225

present  condition,  or  worthy  of  his  former  reputation
for  courage,  he  surrendered  to  his  enemies.

As  soon  as  James  heard  of  Essex's  ill  success,  he
appointed  the  earl  of  Mar,  and  Bruce,  abbot  of  Kin-
loss,  to  repair  as  his  ambassadors  to  the  court  of  Eng-
land. The  former  of  these  was  the  person  by  whose
means  Essex  had  carried  on  his  correspondence  with
the  king.  He  was  a  passionate  admirer  of  the  earl's
character,  and  disposed  to  attempt  every  thing  that
could  contribute  to  his  safety.  Bruce,  united  in  a
close  friendship  with  Mar,  was  ready  to  second  him
with  equal  zeal.  Nor  was  the  purpose  of  the  embassy
less  friendly  to  Essex,  than  the  choice  of  his  ambassa-
dors ;  they  were  commanded  to  solicit,  in  the  warmest
manner,  for  the  earl's  life,  and  if  they  found  that  the
king,  by  avowing  his  friends,  could  either  promote
their  designs,  or  contribute  to  their  safety,  they  were
empowered  to  lay  aside  all  disguise,  and  to  promise
that  he  would  put  himself  at  their  head,  and  claim
what  was  due  to  him  by  force  of  arms.c  But
before  the  ambassadors  could  reach  London,
Essex  had  suffered  the  punishment  which  he  merited
by  his  treason.  Perhaps  the  fear  of  their  interposing,
in  order  to  obtain  his  pardon,  hastened  his  death.
Elizabeth  continued,  for  some  time,  irresolute  con-
cerning his  fate,  and  could  not  bring  herself  to  con-
sign into  the  hands  of  the  executioner,  a  man  who  had
once  possessed  her  favour  so  entirely,  without  a  pain-
ful struggle  between  her  resentment  against  his  late
misconduct,  and  her  ancient  affection  towards  him.
The  distress  to  which  she  was  now  reduced,  tended
naturally  to  soften  the  former,  while  it  revived  the  lat-
ter with  new  tenderness ;  and  the  intercession  of  one
faithful  friend,  who  had  interest  with  the  queen,  might
perhaps  have  saved  his  life,  and  have  procured  him  a
remission,  which,  of  herself,  she  was  ashamed  to  grant.

c  Johnst.  289. Birch,  Mem.  ii.  510.
VOL.  II.  Q

226  SCOTLAND.  [1601.

But  this  generous  nobleman  had  at  that  time  no  such
friend.  Elizabeth,  solicited  incessantly  by  her  minis-
ters, and  offended  with  the  haughtiness  of  Essex,  who,
as  she  imagined,  scorned  to  sue  for  pardon,  at  last
commanded  the  sentence  to  be  put  in  execution.  No
sooner  was  the  blow  struck,  than  she  repented  of  her
own  rashness,  and  bewailed  his  death  with  the  deepest
sorrow.  James  always  considered  him  as  one  who  had
fallen  a  martyr  to  his  service,  and,  after  his  accession
to  the  English  throne,  restored  his  son  to  his  honours,
as  well  as  all  his  associates  in  the  conspiracy,  and  dis-
tinguished them  with  his  favour.d
James  ^Q  Scottish  ambassadors,  finding  that  they

continues  had  arrived  too  late  to  execute  the  chief  busi-
trigues  in  ness  committed  to  their  charge,  not  only  con-
England.  cea]e(j  ti^  part  of  their  instructions  with  the
utmost  care;  but  congratulated  the  queen,  in  their
master's  name,  on  her  happy  escape  from  such  an  au-
dacious conspiracy.  Elizabeth,  though  no  stranger  to
the  king's  correspondence  with  Essex,  or  to  that  noble-
man's intentions  of  asserting  James's  right  to  the  crown,
was  not  willing  that  these  should  be  known  to  the
people,  and,  for  that  reason,  received  the  congratula-
tions of  the  Scottish  ambassadors  with  all  possible
marks  of  credit  and  good-will ;  and  in  order  to  soothe
James,  and  to  preserve  the  appearances  of  union  be-
tween the  two  courts,  increased  the  subsidy  which  she
paid  him  annually.  The  ambassadors  resided  for  some
time  in  England,  and  were  employed  with  great  suc-
cess, in  renewing  and  extending  the  intrigues,  which
Bruce  had  formerly  entered  into  with,,  the  English  no-
bles. As  Elizabeth  advanced  in  years,  the  English
turned  their  eyes  more  and  more  towards  Scotland,
and  were  eager  to  prevent  each  other  in  courting  the
favour  of  their  future  monarch.  Assurances  of  attach-
ment, professions  of  regard,  and  promises  of  support,

d  Carad. Spotsw.  464.

1601.]  BOOK VIII.  227

were  offered  to  James  from  every  corner  of  the  king-
dom. Cecil  himself,  perceiving  what  hopes  Essex  had
founded  on  the  friendship  of  the  Scottish  king,  and
what  advantages  he  might  have  derived  from  it,  thought
it  prudent  to  stand  no  longer  at  a  distance  from  a  prince,
who  might  so  soon  become  his  master.  But  being  sen-
sible at  the  same  time  how  dangerous  such  an  inter-
course might  prove,  under  a  mistress  naturally  jealous,
and  whose  jealousy  grew  stronger  with  old  age;  though
he  entered  into  a  correspondence  with  him,  he  carried
it  on  with  all  the  secrecy  and  caution  necessary  in  his
situation,  and  peculiar  to  his  character .A  James  having
gained  the  man  whose  opposition  and  influence  he  had
hitherto  chiefly  dreaded,  waited,  in  perfect  security,
till  that  event  should  happen  which  would  open  his
way  to  the  throne  of  England.6  It  was  with  some  dif-
ficulty that  he  restrained  within  proper  bounds  his  ad-
herents in  that  kingdom,  who,  labouring  to  distinguish
themselves  by  that  officious  zeal,  with  which  a  prince,
who  has  a  near  prospect  of  mounting  the  throne,  is
always  served,  urged  him  to  allow  a  motion  to  be  made
in  parliament  for  declaring  his  right  of  succession  to
the  crown.  James  prudently  discouraged  that  design;
but  it  was  with  no  small  satisfaction  that  he  observed
the  ascendant  he  was  acquiring  in  a  court,  the  dictates
of  which  he  had  been  so  long  obliged  to  obey ;  and
which  had  either  prescribed  or  thwarted  every  step  he
had  taken  during  the  whole  course  of  his  reign/

1602.  Notwithstanding  the  violent  struggles  of  the
to  dvmze  political  factions  which  divided  the  court,  and
iand?rsgh"  the  frequent  revolutions  which  had  happened

a  See  Appendix,  No.  LIII.

*  Dr.  Birch,  in  his  life  of  prince  Henry,  p.  232,  has  given  some  account  of  the
mysterious  mode  in  which  this  correspondence  was  carried  on,  and  how  the  letters
were  conveyed  from  London  to  Dublin,  and  from  thence  to  Scotland.  Notwith-
standing the  solicitude  which  Cecil  repeatedly  discovers  that  his  letters  should  be
destroyed  as  soon  as  the  king  had  read  them,  a  considerable  number  of  them  has
been  preserved,  and  published  by  Sir  David  Dalrymple  in  the  year  1766.  They
were  written  by  lord  Henry  Howard,  under  the  inspection  of  Cecil,  in  a  style  af-
fectedly obscure.  The  whole  correspondence  is  more  curious  than  instructive.
f  Spotsw.  467.  471.  Birch,  Mem.  ii.  514.

Q2

228  SCOTLAND.  [1602,

there,  since  the  king  first  took  the  reins  of  government
into  his  own  hands,  Scotland  had  enjoyed  unusual
tranquillity,  being  undisturbed  by  any  foreign  enemy,
and  free  from  any  intestine  commotion  of  long  conti-
nuance. During  this  period,  James  endeavoured  to  civi-
lize the  Highlands  and  the  Isles,  a  part  of  his  dominions
too  much  neglected  by  former  monarchs,  though  the
reformation  of  it  was  an  object  highly  worthy  of  their
care.  The  long  peace  with  England  had  afforded  an
opportunity  of  subduing  the  licentious  spirit  of  the
borderers,  and  of  restraining  their  depredations,  often
no  less  ruinous  to  their  countrymen  than  to  their  ene-
mies. The  inhabitants  of  the  low  country  began,  gra-
dually, to  forget  the  use  of  arms,  and  to  become  atten-
tive to  the  arts  of  peace.  But  the  Highlanders,  retain-
ing their  natural  fierceness,  averse  from  labour,  and
inured  to  rapine,  infested  their  more  industrious  neigh-
bours by  their  continual  incursions.  James,  being  so-
licitous not  only  to  repress  their  inroads,  but  to  render
them  useful  subjects,5  had  at  different  times  enacted
many  wise  laws  extremely  conducive  to  these  ends.
All  landlords,  or  chiefs  of  clans,  were  enjoined  to  permit
no  persons  to  reside  in  their  estates  who  could  not  find
sufficient  surety  for  their  good  behaviour ;  they  were
required  to  make  a  list  of  all  suspicious  persons  under
their  jurisdiction,  to  bind  themselves  to  deliver  them
to  justice,  and  to  indemnify  those  who  should  suffer  by
their  robberies ;  and,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  faithful
performance  of  these  articles,  the  chiefs  themselves
were  obliged  to  give  hostages  to  the  king,  or  to  put
pledges  in  his  hands.  Three  towns,  which  might  serve
as  a  retreat  for  the  industrious,  and  a  nursery  for  arts
and  commerce,  were  appointed  to  be  built  in  different
parts  of  the  Highlands ;  one  in  Cantire,  another  in
Lochaber,  and  a  third  in  the  isle  of  Lewis ;  and,  in
order  to  draw  inhabitants  thither,  all  the  privileges  of

*  Basil.  Dor.  139.

1602.]  BOOK VIII.  229

royal  boroughs  were  to  be  conferred  upon  them.  Find-
ing it,  however,  to  be  no  easy  matter  to  inspire  the  natives
of  those  countries  with  the  love  of  industry,  a  resolution
was  taken  to  plant  among  them  colonies  of  people  from
the  more  industrious  counties.  The  first  experiment
was  made  on  the  isle  of  Lewis ;  and  as  it  was  advan-
tageously situated  for  the  fishing  trade,  a  source  from
which  Scotland  ought  naturally  to  derive  great  wealth,
the  colony  transported  thither  was  drawn  out  of  Fife,
the  inhabitants  of  which  were  well  skilled  in  that  branch
of  commerce.  But  before  they  had  remained  there  long
enough  to  manifest  the  good  effects  of  this  institution,
the  islanders,  enraged  at  seeing  their  country  occupied
by  those  intruders,  took  arms,  and  surprising  them  in
the  night-time,  murdered  some  of  them,  and  compelled
the  rest  to  abandon  the  settlement.  The  king's  atten-
tion being  soon  after  turned  to  other  objects,  we  hear
no  more  of  this  salutary  project.  Though  James  did
not  pursue  the  design  with  that  steady  application  and
perseverance,  without  which  it  is  impossible  to  change
the  manners  of  a  whole  people,  he  had  the  glory,  how-
ever, not  only  of  having  first  conceived  the  thought,  but
of  having  first  pointed  out  the  proper  method  of  intro-
ducing the  civil  arts  of  life  into  that  part  of  the  island.11
Enza.  After  having  long  enjoyed  a  good  state  of

mness'and  nea^tn'  ^e  effect  °f  a  sound  constitution,  and
death.  the  reward  of  uncommon  regularity  and  tem-
perance, Elizabeth  began  this  winter  to  feel  her  vigour
decrease,  and  to  be  sensible  of  the  infirmities  of  old
age.  Having  removed  on  a  very  stormy  day  from
lees.  Westminster  to  Richmond,  whither  she  was  im-
jan.  31.  patient  to  retire,  her  complaints  increased.  She
had  no  formed  fever ;  her  pulse  was  good  ;  but  she  ate
little  and  could  not  sleep.  Her  distemper  seemed  to
proceed  from  a  deep  melancholy,  which  appeared  both
in  her  countenance  and  behaviour.  She  delighted  in

h  Parl.  1587.  1594.  1597. Spotsw.  468.

230  SCOTLAND.  [1603.

solitude,  she  sat  constantly  in  the  dark ;  and  was  often
drowned  in  tears.

No  sooner  was  the  queen's  indisposition  known,  than
persons  of  all  ranks,  and  of  all  different  sects  and  par-
ties, redoubled  their  applications  to  the  king  of  Scots,
and  vied  with  each  other  in  professions  of  attach-
ment to  his  person,  and  in  promises  of  submission  to
his  government.  Even  some  of  Elizabeth's  own  ser-
vants, weary  of  the  length  of  her  reign,  fond  of  novelty,
impatient  to  get  rid  of  the  burden  of  gratitude  for  past
benefits,  and  expecting  to  share  in  the  liberality  of  a
new  prince,  began  to  desert  her  :  and  crowds  of  people
hurried  towards  Scotland,  eager  to  pre-occupy  the  fa-
vour of  the  successor,  or  afraid  of  being  too  late  in  pay-
ing homage  to  him.

Meanwhile,  the  queen's  disease  increased,  and  her
melancholy  appeared  to  be  settled  and  incurable.  Va-
rious conjectures  were  formed  concerning  the  causes  of
a  disorder,  from  which  she  seemed  to  be  exempted  by
the  natural  cheerfulness  of  her  temper.  Some  imputed
it  to  her  being  forced,  contrary  to  her  inclination,  to
pardon  the  earl  of  Tyronne,  whose  rebellion  had  for
many  years  created  her  much  trouble.  Others  ima-
gined that  it  arose  from  observing  the  ingratitude  of
her  courtiers,  and  the  levity  of  her  people,  who  beheld
her  health  declining  with  most  indecent  indifference,
and  looked  forward  to  the  accession  of  the  Scottish
king,  with  an  impatience  which  they  could  not  conceal.
The  most  common  opinion,  at  that  time,  and  perhaps
the  most  probable,  was,  that  it  flowed  from  grief  for  the
earl  of  Essex.  She  retained  an  extraordinary  regard
for  the  memory  of  that  unfortunate  nobleman ;  and
though  she  often  complained  of  his  obstinacy,  seldom
mentioned  his  name  without  tears.1  An  accident  hap-
pened soon  after  her  retiring  to  Richmond,  which  re-
vived her  affection  with  new  tenderness,  and  imbittered

1  Birch,  Mem.  ii.  505.

1603.]  BOOK VIII.  231

her  sorrows.  The  countess  of  Nottingham,  being  on  her
death-bed,  desired  to  see  the  queen,  in  order  to  reveal
something  to  her,  without  discovering  which,  she  could
not  die  in  peace.  When  the  queen  came  into  her  cham-
ber, she  told  her,  that  while  Essex  lay  under  sentence  of
death,  he  was  desirous  of  imploring  pardon  in  the  manner
which  the  queen  herself  had  prescribed,  by  returning  a
ring,  which  during  the  height  of  his  favour  she  had
given  him,  with  a  promise  that  if,  in  any  future  distress,
he  sent  that  back  to  her  as  a  token,  it  should  entitle  him
to  her  protection ;  that  lady  Scrope  was  the  person  he
intended  to  employ  in  order  to  present  it;  that,  by  a
mistake,  it  was  put  into  her  hands  instead  of  lady
Scrope's ;  and,  that  she  having  communicated  the  mat-
ter to  her  husband,  one  of  Essex's  most  implacable  ene-
mies, he  had  forbid  her  either  to  carry  the  ring  to  the
queen,  or  to  return  it  to  the  earl.  The  countess  having
thus  disclosed  her  secret,  begged  the  queen's  forgive-
ness :  but  Elizabeth,  who  now  saw  both  the  malice  of
the  earl's  enemies,  and  how  unjustly  she  had  suspected
him  of  inflexible  obstinacy,  replied,  "  God  may  forgive
you,  but  I  never  can ;"  and  left  the  room  in  great  emo-
tion.1" From  that  moment,  her  spirit  sunk  entirely ;  she
could  scarce  taste  food ;  she  refused  all  the  medicines
prescribed  by  her  physicians ;  declaring  that  she  wished
to  die,  and  would  live  no  longer.  No  entreaty  could

k  This  anecdote  concerning  Elizabeth  was  first  published  by  Osborne,  Mem.  of
Eliz.  p.  23  j  is  confirmed  by  the  testimony  of  De  Maurier,  Mem.  260,  and  by  the
traditional  evidence  of  lady  Elizabeth  Spelman,  published  by  Dr.  Birch,  Negoc.
106.  Camden  mentions  the  queen's  grief  for  Essex's  death  as  one  of  the  causes  of
her  melancholy.  Some  original  papers  remain,  which  prove  that  this  was  commonly
believed  at  the  time.  Birch,  Mem.  ii.  506.  Essex,  however,  had  been  beheaded
two  years  before  her  death,  and  there  seems  to  have  been  no  other  reason,  but  that
which  we  have  assigned,  why  her  sorrows  should  revive  with  so  much  violence  at  so
great  a  distance  of  time.  As  the  death  of  the  countess  of  Nottingham  happened
about  a  fortnight  before  the  queen's  death,  the  coincidence  of  these  events,  to-
gether with  the  other  evidence  mentioned,  adds  so  much  probability  to  the  story  re-
lated by  Osborne,  as  will  entitle  it  to  a  place  in  history.  The  only  objection  to  the
account  we  have  given  of  Elizabeth's  attachment  to  Essex,  arises  from  her  great  age.
At  the  age  of  68,  the  amorous  passions  are  commonly  abundantly  cool,  and  the  vio-
lence of  all  the  passions,  except  one,  is  much  abated.  But  the  force  of  this  objec-
tion is  entirely  removed  by  an  author  who  has  illustrated  many  passages  in  the
English  History,  and  adorned  more.  Catalogue  of  Royal  and  Noble  Authors,
Article  Essex.

232  SCOTLAND.  [1603.

prevail  on  her  to  go  to  bed ;  she  sat  on  cushions,  dur-
ing ten  days  and  nights,  pensive  and  silent,  holding  her
finger  almost  continually  in  her  mouth,  with  her  eyes
open,  and  fixed  on  the  ground.  The  only  thing  to
which  she  seemed  to  give  any  attention,  was  the  acts
of  devotion  performed  in  her  apartment  by  the  arch-
bishop of  Canterbury ;  and  in  these  she  joined  with
great  appearance  of  fervour.  Wasted,  at  last,  as  well
by  anguish  of  mind,  as  by  long  abstinence,  she  expired,
without  a  struggle,  on  Thursday,  the  24th  day  of  March,
in  the  seventieth  year  of  her  age,  and  in  the  forty-fifth
of  her  reign.1

Hercha-  Foreigners  often  accuse  the  English  of  indif-
racter.  ference  and  disrespect  towards  their  princes;
but  without  reason.  No  people  are  more  grateful  than
they  to  those  monarchs  who  merit  their  gratitude.  The
names  of  Edward  III.  and  Henry  V.  are  mentioned  by
the  English  of  this  age  with  the  same  warmth  as  they
were  by  those  who  shared  in  the  blessings  and  splen-
dour of  their  reigns.  The  memory  of  Elizabeth  is  still
adored  in  England.  The  historians  of  that  kingdom,
after  celebrating  her  love  of  her  people  ;  her  sagacity
in  discerning  their  true  interest;  her  steadiness  in  pur-
suing it ;  her  wisdom  in  the  choice  of  her  ministers ;
the  glory  she  acquired  by  arms ;  the  tranquillity  she
secured  to  her  subjects ;  and  the  increase  of  fame,  of
riches,  and  of  commerce,  which  were  the  fruits  of  all
these;  justly  rank  her  among  the  most  illustrious
princes.  Even  the  defects  in  her  character,  they  observe,
were  not  of  a  kind  pernicious  to  her  people.  Her  ex-
cessive frugality  was  not  accompanied  with  the  love  of
hoarding ;  and,  though  it  prevented  some  great  under-
takings, and  rendered  the  success  of  others  incomplete,
it  introduced  economy  into  her  administration,  and  ex-
empted the  nation  from  many  burdens,  which  a  monarch,
more  profuse  or  more  enterprising,  must  have  imposed.

1  Camd.  Birch,  Mem.  ii.  506. Birch,  Negoc.  206. Strype,  iv.  373.

1603.]

BOOK V11I.

233

Her  slowness  in  rewarding  her  servants  sometimes  dis-
couraged useful  merit;  but  it  prevented  the  undeserving
from  acquiring  power  and  wealth,  to  which  they  had
no  title.  Her  extreme  jealousy  of  those  princes  who
pretended  to  dispute  her  right  to  the  crown,  led  her  to
take  such  precautions,  as  tended  no  less  to  the  public
safety,  than  to  her  own ;  and  to  court  the  affections  of
her  people,  as  the  firmest  support  of  her  throne.  Such  is
the  picture  which  the  English  draw  of  this  great  queen.
Whoever  undertakes  to  write  the  history  of  Scotland,
finds  himself  obliged,  frequently,  to  view  her  in  a  very
different,  and  in  a  less  amiable  light.  Her  authority  in
that  kingdom,  during  the  greater  part  of  her  reign,  was
little  inferior  to  that  which  she  possessed  in  her  own.
But  this  authority,  acquired  at  first  by  a  service  of  great
importance  to  the  nation,  she  exercised  in  a  manner
extremely  pernicious  to  its  happiness.  By  her  industry
in  fomenting  the  rage  of  the  two  contending  factions ;
by  supplying  the  one  with  partial  aid ;  by  feeding  the
other  with  false  hopes  ;  by  balancing  their  power  so
artfully,  that  each  of  them  was  able  to  distress,  and
neither  of  them  to  subdue  the  other  ;  she  rendered  Scot-
land long  the  seat  of  discord,  confusion,  and  bloodshed;
and  her  craft  and  intrigues,  effecting  what  the  valour  of  her
ancestors  could  not  accomplish,  reduced  that  kingdom
to  a  state  of  dependence  on  England.  The  maxims  of
policy,  often  little  consonant  to  those  of  morality,  may,
perhaps,  justify  this  conduct.  But  no  apology  can  be
offered  for  her  behaviour  to  queen  Mary ;  a  scene  of
dissimulation  without  necessity ;  and  of  severity  beyond
example.  In  almost  all  her  other  actions,  Elizabeth  is  the
object  of  our  highest  admiration ;  in  this  we  must  allow
that  she  not  only  laid  aside  the  magnanimity  which  be-
came a  queen,  but  the  feelings  natural  to  a  woman.
James  pro-  Though  Elizabeth  would  never  permit  the

claimed  ..  ,T  • -> . n

king  of question  concerning  the  right  of  succession  to
England. ^e  crown  to  be  determined  in  parliament ;  nor

234  ,  SCOTLAND.  [1603.

declare  her  own  sentiments  concerning  a  point  which  she
wished  to  remain  an  impenetrable  mystery ;  she  had,
however,  formed  no  design  of  excluding  the  Scottish
king  from  an  inheritance  to  which  his  title  was  un-
doubted. A  short  time  before  her  death,  she  broke  the
silence  which  she  had  so  long  preserved  on  that  sub-
ject, and  told  Cecil  and  the  lord  admiral,  "  That  her
throne  was  the  throne  of  kings  ;  that  she  would  have
no  mean  person  to  ascend  it,  and  that  her  cousin  the
king  of  Scots  should  be  her  successor."  This  she  con-
firmed on  her  death-bed.  As  soon  as  she  breathed  her
last,  the  lords  of  the  privy-council  proclaimed  James
king  of  England.  All  the  intrigues  carried  on  by  fo-
reigners in  favour  of  the  infanta,  all  the  cabals  formed
within  the  kingdom  to  support  the  titles  of  lady  Ara-
bella and  the  earl  of  Hartford,  disappeared  in  a  moment';
the  nobles  and  people,  forgetting  their  ancient  hostili-
ties with  Scotland,  and  their  aversion  for  the  dominion
of  strangers,  testified  their  satisfaction  with  louder  ac-
clamations than  were  usual  at  the  accession  of  their
native  princes.  Amidst  this  tumult  of  joy,  a  motion
made  by  a  few  patriots,  who  proposed  to  prescribe  some
conditions  to  the  successor,  and  to  exact  from  him  the
redress  of  some  grievances,  before  they  called  him  to
the  throne,  was  scarcely  heard ;  and  Cecil,  by  stifling
it,  added  to  his  stock  of  merit  with  his  new  master.  Sir
Charles  Percy,  brother  of  the  earl  of  Northumberland,
and  Thomas  Somerset,  the  earl  of  Worcester's  son,  were
dispatched  to  Scotland,  with  a  letter  to  the  king,  signed
by  all  the  peers  and  privy-counsellors  then  in  London ;
informing  him  of  the  queen's  death,  of  his  accession  to
the  throne,  of  their  care  to  recognise  his  title,  and  of
the  universal  applause  with  which  the  public  proclama-
tion of  it  had  been  attended.  They  made  the  utmost
haste  to  deliver  this  welcome  message  ;  but  were  pre-
vented by  the  zeal  of  Sir  Robert  Carey,  lord  Hunsdon's
youngest  son,  who,  setting  out  a  few  hours  after  Eliza-

1603.]

BOOK  VIII.

235

betli's  death,  arrived  at  Edinburgh  on  Saturday  night,
just  as  the  king  had  gone  to  bed.  He  was  immedi-
ately admitted  into  the  royal  apartment,  and  kneeling
by  the  king's  bed,  acquainted  him  with  the  death  of
Elizabeth,  saluted  him  king  of  England,  Scotland,
France,  and  Ireland ;  and  as  a  token  of  the  truth  of  the
intelligence  which  he  brought,  presented  him  a  ring,
which  his  sister,  lady  Scrope,  had  taken  from  the  queen's
finger  after  her  death.  James  heard  him  with  a  decent
composure.  But  as  Carey  was  only  a  private  messen-
ger, the  information  which  he  brought  was  not  made
public,  and  the  king  kept  his  apartment  till  the  arrival
of  Percy  and  Somerset.  Then  his  titles  were  solemnly
proclaimed ;  and  his  own  subjects  expressed  no  less
joy,  than  the  English,  at  this  increase  of  his  dignity.
As  his  presence  was  absolutely  necessary  in  England,
where  the  people  were  extremely  impatient  to  see  their
new  sovereign,  he  prepared  to  set  out  for  that  kingdom
without  delay.  He  appointed  his  queen  to  follow  him
within  a  few  weeks.  He  committed  the  government  of
Scotland  to  his  privy-council.  He  intrusted  the  care
of  his  children  to  different  noblemen.  On  the  Sunday
before  his  departure,  he  repaired  to  the  church  of  St.
Giles,  and  after  hearing  a  sermon,  in  which  the  preacher
displayed  the  greatness  of  the  divine  goodness  in  rais-
ing him  to  the  throne  of  such  a  powerful  kingdom  with-
out opposition  or  bloodshed,  and  exhorted  him  to  ex-
press his  gratitude,  by  promoting,  to  the  utmost,  the
happiness  and  prosperity  of  his  subjects ;  the  king  rose
up,  and  addressing  himself  to  the  people,  made  many
professions  of  unalterable  affection  towards  them;  pro-
mised to  visit  Scotland  frequently ;  assured  them  that
his  Scottish  subjects,  notwithstanding  his  absence,
should  feel  that  he  was  their  native  prince,  no  less
than  when  he  resided  among  them ;  and  might  still  trust
that  his  ears  should  be  always  open  to  their  petitions,
which  he  would  answer  with  the  alacrity  and  love  of  a

236  SCOTLAND.  [1603.

parent.  His  words  were  often  interrupted  by  the  tears
of  the  whole  audience ;  who,  though  they  exulted  at
the  king's  prosperity,  were  melted  into  sorrow  by  these
tender  declarations.133

Takes  os-  ®u  tne  ^th.  of  April  he  began  his  journey,
session  of  with  a  splendid,  but  not  a  numerous  train ;  and

the  throne.  A ,  i -n  • i  ITTI  i

next  day  he  entered  Berwick.  Wherever  he
came,  immense  multitudes  were  assembled  to  welcome
him ;  and  the  principal  persons  in  the  different  counties
through  which  he  passed,  displayed  all  their  wealth
and  magnificence  in  entertainments  prepared  for  him
at  their  houses.  Elizabeth  had  reigned  so  long  in
England,  that  most  of  her  subjects  remembered  no  other
court  but  hers,  and  their  notions  of  the  manners  and
decorums  suitable  to  a  prince  were  formed  upon  what
they  had  observed  there.  It  was  natural  to  apply  this
standard  to  the  behaviour  and  actions  of  their  new
monarch,  and  to  compare  him,  at  first  sight,  with  the
queen,  on  whose  throne  he  was  to  be  placed.  James,
whose  manners  were  extremely  different  from  hers,
suffered  by  the  comparison.  He  had  not  that  flowing'
affability,  by  which  Elizabeth  captivated  the  hearts  of
her  people;  and,  though  easy  among  a  few  whom  he
loved,  his  indolence  could  not  bear  the  fatigue  of  ren-
dering himself  agreeable  to  a  mixed  multitude.  He
was  no  less  a  stranger  to  that  dignity  with  which  Eliza-
beth tempered  her  familiarity.  And,  instead  of  that
well-judged  frugality  with  which  she  conferred  titles
of  honour,  he  bestowed  them  with  an  undistinguishing
profusion,  that  rendered  them  no  longer  marks  of  dis-
tinction, or  rewards  of  merit.  But  these  were  the  re-
flections of  the  few  alone;  the  multitude  continued
their  acclamations;  and,  amidst  these,  James  entered
London  on  the  7th  of  May,  and  took  peaceable  pos-
session of  the  throne  of  England.
Conclusion.  Thus  were  united  two  kingdoms,  divided

m  Spotsw.  476.

1603.]

BOOK VIII.

237

from  the  earliest  accounts  of  time,  but  destined,  by
their  situation,  to  form  one  great  monarchy.  By  this
junction  of  its  whole  native  force,  Great ,  Britain  hath
risen  to  an  eminence  and  authority  in  Europe,  which
England  and  Scotland,  while  separate,  could  never
have  attained.

The Scots  had so  long considered  their
i-  monarchs  as  next  heirs  to  the  English  throne,
that  they  had  full  leisure  to  reflect  OH  all  the
of  Scotland  consequences  of  their  being  advanced  to  that

since  the  °  . .

accession  of  dignity.  But,  dazzled  with  the  glory  of  giving
a  sovereign  to  their  powerful  enemy,  relying
on  the  partiality  of  their  native  prince,  and  in  full  ex-
pectation of  sharing  liberally  in  the  wealth  and  honours
which  he  would  now  be  able  to  bestow,  they  attended
little  to  the  most  obvious  consequences  of  that  great
event,  and  rejoiced  at  his  accession  to  the  throne  of
England,  as  if  it  had  been  no  less  beneficial  to  the
kingdom,  than  honourable  to  the  king.  They  soon  had
reason,  however,  to  adopt  very  different  sentiments;  and
from  that  period  we  may  date  a  total  alteration  in  the
political  constitution  of  Scotland.

The  feudal  aristocracy,  which  had  been  subverted
in  most  nations  of  Europe  by  the  policy  of  their  princes,
or  had  been  undermined  by  the  progress  of  commerce,
still  subsisted  with  full  force  in  Scotland.  Many  causes
had  contributed  gradually  to  augment  the  power  of  the
Scottish  nobles ;  and  even  the  Reformation,  which,  in
every  other  country  where  it  prevailed,  added  to  the
authority  of  the  monarch,  had  increased  their  wealth
and  influence.  A  king  possessed  of  a  small  revenue,
with  a  prerogative  extremely  limited,  and  unsupported
by  a  standing  army,  could  not  exercise  much  authority
over  such  potent  subjects.  He  was  obliged  to  govern
by  expedients ;  and  the  laws  derived  their  force  not
from  his  power  to  execute  them,  but  from  the  voluntary
submission  of  the  nobles.  But  though  this  produced

"233  SCOTLAND,

a  species  of  government  extremely  feeble  and  irregular;
though  Scotland,  under  the  name,  and  with  all  the  out-
ward ensigns  of  a  monarchy,  was  really  subject  to  an
aristocracy,  the  people  were  not  altogether  unhappy ;
and,  even  in  this  wild  form  of  a  constitution,  there  were
principles  which  tended  to  their  security  and  advantage.
The  king,  checked  and  overawed  by  the  nobles,  durst
venture  upon  no  act  of  arbitrary  power.  The  nobles,
jealous  of  the  king,  whose  claims  and  pretensions  were
many,  though  his  power  was  small,  were  afraid  of
irritating  their  dependants  by  unreasonable  exactions,
and  tempered  the  rigour  of  aristocratical  tyranny,  with
a  mildness  and  equality  to  which  it  is  naturally  a
stranger.  As  long  as  the  military  genius  of  the  feudal
government  remained  in  vigour,  the  vassals  both  of  the
crown  and  of  the  barons  were  generally  not  only  free
from  oppression,  but  were  courted  by  their  superiors,
whose  power  and  importance  were  founded  on  their
attachment  and  love.

But,  by  his  accession  to  the  throne  of  England,
James  acquired  such  an  immense  accession  of  wealth,
of  power,  and  of  splendour,  that  the  nobles,  astonished
and  intimidated,  thought  it  vain  to  struggle  for  pri-
vileges which  they  were  now  unable  to  defend.  Nor
was  it  from  fear  alone  that  they  submitted  to  the  yoke ;
James,  partial  to  his  countrymen,  and  willing  that  they
should  partake  in  his  good  fortune,  loaded  them  with
riches  and  honours ;  and  the  hope  of  his  favour  con-
curred with  the  dread  of  his  power,  in  taming  their
fierce  and  independent  spirits.  The  will  of  the  prince
became  the  supreme  law  in  Scotland ;  and  the  nobles
strove,  with  emulation,  who  should  most  implicitly
obey  commands  which  they  had  formerly  been  accus-
tomed to  contemn.  Satisfied  with  having  subjected  the
nobles  to  the  crown,  the  king  left  them  in  full  posses-
sion of  their  ancient  jurisdiction  over  their  own  vassals.
The  extensive  rights,  vested  in  a  feudal  chief,  became

BOOK  VIII.

239

in  their  hands  dreadful  instruments  of  oppression,  and
the  military  ideas,  on  which  these  rights  were  founded,
being  gradually  lost  or  disregarded,  nothing  remained
to  correct  or  to  mitigate  the  rigour  with  which  they
were  exercised.  The  nobles,  exhausting  their  fortunes
by  the  expense  of  frequent  attendance  upon  the  English
court,  and  by  attempts  to  imitate  the  manners  and
luxury  of  their  more  wealthy  neighbours,  multiplied
exactions  upon  the  people,  who  durst  hardly  utter  com-
plaints which  they  knew  would  never  reach  the  ear
of  their  sovereign,  nor  move  him  to  grant  them  any  re-
dress. From  the  union  of  the  crowns  to  the  revolution
in  1688,  Scotland  was  placed  in  a  political  situation,
of  all  others  the  most  singular  and  the  most  unhappy;
subjected  at  once  to  the  absolute  will  of  a  monarch,
and  to  the  oppressive  jurisdiction  of  an  aristocracy,  it
suffered  all  the  miseries  peculiar  to  both  these  forms  of
government.  Its  kings  were  despotic;  its  nobles  were
slaves  and  tyrants;  and  the  people  groaned  under  the
rigorous  domination  of  both.

During  this  period,  the  nobles,  it  is  true,  made  one
effort  to  shake  off  the  yoke,  and  to  regain  their  ancient
independence.  After  the  death  of  James,  the  Scottish
nation  was  no  longer  viewed  by  our  monarchs  with
any  partial  affection.  Charles  I.,  educated  among  the
English,  discovered  no  peculiar  attachment  to  the  king-
dom of  which  he  was  a  native.  The  nobles,  perceiv-
ing the  sceptre  to  be  now  in  hands  less  friendly,  and
swayed  by  a  prince  with  whom  they  had  little  con-
nexion, and  over  whose  counsels  they  had  little  influence,
no  longer  submitted  with  the  same  implicit  obedience.
Provoked  by  some  encroachments  of  the  king  on  their
order,  and  apprehensive  of  others,  the  remains  of  their
ancient  spirit  began  to  appear.  They  complained  and
remonstrated.  The  people  being,  at  the  same  time,
violently  disgusted  at  the  innovations  in  religion,  the
nobles  secretly  heightened  this  disgust;  and  their  arti-

240  SCOTLAND.

fices,  together  with  the  ill-conduct  of  the  court,  raised
such  a  spirit,  that  the  whole  nation  took  arms  against
their  sovereign,  with  a  union  and  animosity  of  which
there  had  formerly  been  no  example.  Charles  brought
against  them  the  forces  of  England,  and,  notwithstand-
ing their  own  union,  and  the  zeal  of  the  people,  the
nobles  must  have  sunk  in  the  struggle.  But  the  dis-
affection which  was  growing  among  his  English  sub-
jects prevented  the  king  from  acting  with  vigour.  A
civil  war  broke  out  in  both  kingdoms;  and  after  many
battles  and  revolutions,  which  are  well  known,  the
Scottish  nobles,  who  first  began  the  war,  were  involved
in  the  same  ruin  with  the  throne.  At  the  restoration,
Charles  II.  regained  full  possession  of  the  royal  pre-
rogative in  Scotland;  and  the  nobles,  whose  estates
were  wasted,  or  their  spirit  broken,  by  the  calamities  to
which  they  had  been  exposed,  were  less  able  and  less
willing  than  ever  to  resist  the  power  of  the  crown.
During  his  reign,  and  that  of  James  VII.  the  dictates
of  the  monarch  were  received  in  Scotland  with  the  most
abject  submission.  The  poverty  to  which  many  of  the
nobles  were  reduced,  rendered  them  meaner  slaves  and
more  intolerable  tyrants  than  ever.  The  people,  always
neglected,  were  now  odious,  and  loaded  with  every
injury,  on  account  of  their  attachment  to  religious
and  political  principles,  extremely  repugnant  to  those
adopted  by  their  princes.

The  revolution  introduced  other  maxims  into  the
government  of  Scotland.  To  increase  the  authority  of
the  prince,  or  to  secure  the  privileges  of  the  nobles,  had
hitherto  been  almost  the  sole  object  of  our  laws.  The
rights  of  the  people  were  hardly  ever  mentioned,  were
disregarded,  or  unknown.  Attention  began,  hencefor-
ward, to  be  paid  to  the  welfare  of  the  people.  By  the
claim  of  right,  their  liberties  were  secured ;  and  the
number  of  their  representatives  being  increased,  they
gradually  acquired  new  weight  and  consideration  in

BOOK VIII.

241

parliament.  As  they  came  to  enjoy  more  security,  and
greater  power,  their  minds  began  to  open,  and  to  form
more  extensive  plans  of  commerce,  of  industry,  and  of
police.  But  the  aristocratical  spirit,  which  still  pre-
dominated, together  with  many  other  accidents,  retarded
the  improvement  and  happiness  of  the  nation.

Another  great  event  completed  what  the  Revolution
had  begun.  The  political  power  of  the  nobles,  already
broken  by  the  union  of  the  two  crowns,  was  almost
annihilated  by  the  union  of  the  two  kingdoms.  Instead
of  making  a  part,  as  formerly,  of  the  supreme  assembly
of  the  nation,  instead  of  bearing  the  most  considerable
sway  there,  the  peers  of  Scotland  are  admitted  into  the
British  parliament  by  their  representatives  only,  and
form  but  an  inconsiderable  part  of  one  of  those  bodies
in  which  the  legislative  authority  is  vested.  They  them-
selves are  excluded  absolutely  from  the  house  of  com-
mons, and  even  their  eldest  sons  are  not  permitted  to
represent  their  countrymen  in  that  august  assembly.
Nor  have  their  feudal  privileges  remained,  to  compen-
sate for  this  extinction  of  their  political  authority.  As
commerce  advanced  in  its  progress,  and  government
attained  nearer  to  perfection,  these  were  insensibly  cir-
cumscribed, and  at  last,  by  laws  no  less  salutary  to  the
public  than  fatal  to  the  nobles,  they  have  been  almost
totally  abolished.  As  the  nobles  were  deprived  of  power,
the  people  acquired  liberty.  Exempted  from  burdens,
to  which  they  were  formerly  subject,  screened  from  op-
pression to  which  they  had  been  long  exposed,  and
adopted  into  a  constitution,  whose  genius  and  laws
were  more  liberal  than  their  own,  they  have  extended
their  commerce,  refined  their  manners,  made  improve-
ments in  the  elegances  of  life,  and  cultivated  the  arts
and  sciences.

This  survey  of  the  political  state  of  Scotland,  in
which  events  and  their  causes  have  been  mentioned
rather  than  developed,  enables  us  to  point  out  three

VOL.  II.  R

242  SCOTLAND.

eras,  from  each  of  which  we  may  date  some  great  altera-
tion in  one  or  other  of  the  three  different  members  of
which  the  supreme  legislative  assembly  in  our  constitu-
tion is  composed.  At  their  accession  to  the  throne  of
England,  the  kings  of  Scotland,  once  the  most  limited,
became,  in  an  instant,  the  most  absolute  princes  in
Europe,  and  exercised  a  despotic  authority,  which  their
parliaments  were  unable  to  control,  or  their  nobles  to
resist.  At  the  union  of  the  two  kingdoms,  the  feudal
aristocracy,  which  had  subsisted  so  many  ages,  and
with  power  so  exorbitant,  was  overturned,  and  the
Scottish  nobles,  having  surrendered  rights  and  pre-
eminences peculiar  to  their  order,  reduced  themselves
to  a  condition,  which  is  no  longer  the  terror  and  envy
of  other  subjects.  Since  the  union,  the  commons,  an-
ciently neglected  by  their  kings,  and  seldom  courted
by  the  nobles,  have  emerged  into  dignity ;  and,  being
admitted  to  a  participation  of  all  the  privileges  which
the  English  had  purchased  at  the  expense  of  so  much
blood,  must  now  be  deemed  a  body  not  less  consider-
able in  the  one  kingdom,  than  they  have  long  been  in
the  other.

The  church  felt  the  effects  of  the  absolute  power
which  the  king  acquired  by  his  accession  ;  and  its  re-
volutions, too,  are  worthy  of  notice.  James,  during
the  latter  years  of  his  administration  in  Scotland,  had
revived  the  name  and  office  of  bishops.  But  they  pos-
sessed no  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction  or  pre-eminence  ;
their  revenues  were  inconsiderable,  and  they  were
scarcely  distinguished  by  any  thing  but  by  their  seat
in  parliament,  and  by  being  the  object  of  the  clergy's
jealousy,  and  the  people's  hatred.  The  king,  delighted
with  the  splendour  and  authority  which  the  English
bishops  enjoyed,  and  eager  to  effect  a  union  in  the
ecclesiastical  policy,  which  he  had,  in  vain,  attempted
in  the  civil  government  of  the  two  kingdoms,  resolved
to  bring  both  churches  to  an  exact  conformity  with

BOOK VIII.  243

each  other.  Three  Scotsmen  were  consecrated  bishops
at  London.  From  them  their  brethren  were  com-
manded to  receive  orders.  Ceremonies  unknown  in
Scotland  were  imposed ;  and  though  the  clergy,  less
obsequious  than  the  nobles,  boldly  opposed  these  inno-
vations, James,  long  practised  and  well-skilled  in  the
arts  of  managing  them,  obtained  at  length  their  com-
pliance. But  Charles  L,  a  superstitious  prince,  unac-
quainted with  the  genius  of  the  Scots,  imprudent  and
precipitant  in  all  the  measures  he  pursued  in  that  king-
dom, pressing  too  eagerly  the  reception  of  the  English
liturgy,  and  indiscreetly  attempting  a  resumption  of
church  lands,  kindled  the  flames  of  civil  war ;  and  the
people  being  left  at  liberty  to  indulge  their  own  wishes,
the  episcopal  church  was  overturned,  and  the  presby-
terian  government  and  discipline  were  re-established
with  new  vigour.  Together  with  monarchy,  episcopacy
was  restored  in  Scotland.  A  form  of  government,  so
odious  to  the  people,  required  force  to  uphold  it ;  and
though  not  only  the  whole  rigour  of  authority,  but  all
the  barbarity  of  persecution,  were  employed  in  its
support,  the  aversion  of  the  nation  was  insurmountable,
and  it  subsisted  with  difficulty.  At  the  Revolution,  the
inclinations  of  the  people  were  thought  worthy  the  at-
tention of  the  legislature,  the  presbyterian  government
was  again  established,  and,  being  ratified  by  the  union,
is  still  maintained  in  the  kingdom.

Nor  did  the  influence  of  the  accession  extend  to  the
civil  and  ecclesiastical  constitutions  alone  ;  the  genius
of  the  nation,  its  taste  and  spirit,  things  of  a  nature
still  more  delicate,  were  sensibly  affected  by  that  event.
When  learning  revived  in  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth
centuries,  all  the  modern  languages  were  in  a  state  ex-
tremely barbarous,  devoid  of  elegance,  of  vigour,  and
even  of  perspicuity.  No  author  thought  of  writing  in
language  so  ill  adapted  to  express  and  embellish  his
sentiments,  or  of  erecting  a  work  for  immortality  with

R  2

244  SCOTLAND.

such  rude  and  perishable  materials.  As  the  spirit,  which
prevailed  at  that  time,  did  not  .owe  its  rise  to  any  ori-
ginal effort  of  the  human  mind,  but  was  excited  chiefly
by  admiration  of  the  ancients,  which  began  then  to  be
studied  with  attention  in  every  part  of  Europe,  their
compositions  were  deemed  not  only  the  standards  of
taste  and  of  sentiment,  but  of  style  ;  and  even  the  lan-
guages in  which  they  wrote  were  thought  to  be  pecu-
liar, and  almost  consecrated  to  learning  and  the  muses.
Not  only  the  manner  of  the  ancients  was  imitated,  but
their  language  was  adopted ;  and  extravagant  as  the
attempt  may  appear  to  write  in  a  dead  tongue,  in  which
men  were  not  accustomed  to  think,  and  which  they
could  not  speak,  or  even  pronounce,  the  success  of  it
was  astonishing.  As  they  formed  their  style  upon  the
purest  models ;  as  they  were  uninfected  with  those
barbarisms,  which  the  inaccuracy  of  familiar  conversa-
tion, the  affectation  of  courts,  intercourse  with  strangers,
and  a  thousand  other  causes,  introduce  into  living  lan-
guages ;  many  moderns  have  attained  to  a  degree  of
elegance  in  their  Latin  compositions,  which  the  Romans
themselves  scarce  possessed  beyond  the  limits  of  the
Augustan  age.  While  this  was  almost  the  only  species
of  composition,  and  all  authors,  by  using  one  common
language,  could  be  brought  to  a  nearer  comparison,  the
Scottish  writers  were  not  inferior  to  those  of  any  other
nation.  The  happy  genius  of  Buchanan,  equally  formed
to  excel  in  prose  and  in  verse,  more  various,  more  ori-
ginal, and  more  elegant,  than  that  of  almost  any  other
modern  who  writes  in  Latin,  reflects,  with 'regard  to
this  particular,  the  greatest  lustre  on  his  country.

But  the  labour  attending  the  study  of  a  dead  tongue
was  irksome ;  the  unequal  return  for  their  industry
which  authors  met  with,  who  could  be  read  and  ad-
mired only  within  the  narrow  circle  of  the  learned,  was
mortifying ;  and  men,  instead  of  wasting  half  their  lives
in  learning  the  language  of  the  Romans,  began  to  re-

BOOK VIII.

245

line  and  to  polish  their  own.  The  modern  tongues
were  found  to  be  susceptible  of  beauties  and  graces,
which,  if  not  equal  to  those  of  the  ancient  ones,  were
at  least  more  attainable.  The  Italians  having  first  set
the  example,  Latin  was  no  longer  used  in  works  of
taste ;  it  was  confined  to  books  of  science ;  and  the
politer  nations  have  banished  it  even  from  these.  The
Scots,  we  may  presume,  would  have  had  no  cause  to
regret  this  change  in  the  public  taste,  and  would  still
have  been  able  to  maintain  some  equality  with  other
nations,  in  their  pursuit  of  literary  honour.  The  English
and  Scottish  languages,  derived  from  the  same  sources,
were,  at  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century,  in  a  state
nearly  similar,  differing  from  one  another  somewhat  in
orthography,  though  not  only  the  words,  but  the  idioms,
were  much  the  same.  The  letters  of  several  Scottish
statesmen  of  that  age  are  not  inferior  in  elegance,  or  in
purity,  to  those  of  the  English  ministers  with  whom
they  corresponded.  James  himself  was  master  of  a
style  far  from  contemptible ;  and  by  his  example  and
encouragement,  the  Scottish  language  might  have  kept
pace  with  the  English  in  refinement.  Scotland  might
have  had  a  series  of  authors  in  its  own,  as  well  as  in
the  Latin  language,  to  boast  of ;  and  the  improvements
in  taste,  in  the  arts,  and  in  the  sciences,  which  spread
over  the  other  polished  nations  of  Europe,  would  not
have  been  unknown  there.

But,  at  the  very  time  when  other  nations  were  be-
ginning to  drop  the  use  of  Latin  in  works  of  taste,  and
to  make  trial  of  the  strength  and  compass  of  their  own
languages,  Scotland  ceased  to  be  a  kingdom.  The
transports  of  joy,  which  the  accession  at  first  occa-
sioned, were  soon  over ;  and  the  Scots,  being  at  once
deprived  of  all  the  objects  that  refine  or  animate  a
people ;  of  the  presence  of  their  prince,  of  the  con-
course of  nobles,  of  the  splendour  and  elegance  of  a
court,  a  universal  dejection  of  spirit  seems  to  have

246  SCOTLAND.

seized  the  nation.  The  court  being  withdrawn,  no  do-
mestic standard  of  propriety  and  correctness  of  speech
remained;  the  few  compositions  that  Scotland  pro-
duced were  tried  by  the  English  standard,  and  every
word  or  phrase  that  varied  in  the  least  from  that,  was
condemned  as  barbarous ;  whereas,  if  the  two  nations
had  continued  distinct,  each  might  have  retained  idioms
and  forms  of  speech  peculiar  to  itself;  and  these,  ren-
dered fashionable  by  the  example  of  a  court,  and  sup-
ported by  the  authority  of  writers  of  reputation,  might
have  been  viewed  in  the  same  light  with  the  varieties
occasioned  by  the  different  dialects  in  the  Greek
tongue;  they  even  might  have  been  considered  as
beauties ;  and,  in  many  cases,  might  have  been  used
promiscuously  by  the  authors  of  both  nations.  But,  by
the  accession,  the  English  naturally  became  the  sole
judges  and  lawgivers  in  language,  and  rejected  as
solecisms  every  form  of  speech  to  which  their  ear  was
not  accustomed.  Nor  did  the  Scots,  while  the  inter-
course between  the  two  nations  was  inconsiderable,0
and  ancient  prejudices  were  still  so  violent  as  to  pre-
vent imitation,  possess  the  means  of  refining  their  own
tongue  according  to  the  purity  of  the  English  standard.
On  the  contrary,  new  corruptions  flowed  into  it  from
every  different  source.  The  clergy  of  Scotland,  in  that
age,  were  more  eminent  "for  piety  than  for  learning;
and  though  there  did  not  arise  many  authors  among
them,  yet  being  in  possession  of  the  privilege  of  dis-
coursing publicly  to  the  people,  and  their  sermons  be-
ing too  long,  and  perhaps  too  frequent,  such  hasty  pro-

n  A  remarkable  proof  of  the  little  intercourse  between  the  English  and  Scots
before  the  union  of  the  crowns,  is  to  be  found  in  two  curious  papers,  one  published
by  Haynes,  the  other  by  Strype.  In  the  year  1567,  Elizabeth  commanded  the
bishop  of  London  to  take  a  survey  of  all  the  strangers  within  the  cities  of  London
and  Westminster.  By  this  report,  which  is  very  minute,  it  appears  that  the  whole
number  of  Scots  at  that  time  was  fifty-eight.  Haynes,  455.  A  survey  of  the  same
kind  was  made  by  Sir  Thomas  Row,  lord-mayor,  A.  D.  1568.  The  number  of  Scots
had  then  increased  to  eighty-eight.  Strype,  iv.  Supplement,  No.  I.  On  the  accession
of  James,  a  considerable  number  of  Scots,  especially  of  the  higher  rank,  resorted  to
England  ;  but  it  was  not  till  the  union  that  the  intercourse  between  the  two  kingdoms
became  great.

BOOK VIII.  247

ductions  could  not  be  elegant,  and  many  slovenly  and
incorrect  modes  of  expression  may  be  traced  back  to
that  original.  The  pleadings  of  lawyers  were  equally
loose  and  inaccurate,  and  that  profession  having  fur-
nished more  authors,  and  the  matters  of  which  they
treat  mingling  daily  in  common  discourse  and  business,
many  of  those  vicious  forms  of  speech,  which  are  de-
nominated Scotticisms,  have  been  introduced  by  them
into  the  language.  Nor  did  either  the  language  or
public  taste  receive  any  improvement  in  parliament,
where  a  more  liberal  and  more  correct  eloquence  might
have  been  expected.  All  business  was  transacted  there
by  the  lords  of  articles,  and  they  were  so  servilely  de-
voted to  the  court,  that  few  debates  arose,  and,  prior
to  the  Revolution,  none  were  conducted  with  the  spirit
and  vigour  natural  to  a-  popular  assembly.

Thus,  during  the  whole  seventeenth  century,  the  Eng-
lish were  gradually  refining  their  language  and  their
taste ;  in  Scotland  the  former  was  much  debased,  and
the  latter  almost  entirely  lost.  In  the  beginning  of  that
period,  both  nations  were  emerging  out  of  barbarity ;
but  the  distance  between  them,  which  was  then  incon-
siderable, became,  before  the  end  of  it,  immense.  Even
after  science  had  once  dawned  upon  them,  the  Scots
seemed  to  be  sinking  back  into  ignorance  and  obscu-
rity ;  and  active  and  intelligent  as  they  naturally  are,
they  continued,  while  other  nations  were  eager  in  the
pursuit  of  fame  and  knowledge,  in  a  state  of  languor.
This,  however,  must  be  imputed  to  the  unhappiness  of
their  political  situation,  not  to  any  defect  of  genius;
for  no  sooner  was  the  one  removed  in  any  degree,  than
the  other  began  to  display  itself.  The  act  abolishing
the  power  of  the  lords  of  articles,  and  other  salutary
laws  passed  at  the  Revolution,  having  introduced  free-
dom of  debate  into  the  Scottish  parliament,  eloquence,
with  all  the  arts  that  accompany  or  perfect  it,  became
immediate  objects  of  attention;  and  the  example  of

248  SCOTLAND.

Fletcher  of  Sal  ton  alone  is  sufficient  to  shew  that  the
Scots  were  still  capable  of  generous  sentiments,  and,
notwithstanding  some  peculiar  idioms,  were  able  to
express  themselves  with  energy  and  with  elegance.

At  length  the  union  having  incorporated  the  two
nations,  and  rendered  them  one  people,  the  distinctions
which  had  subsisted  for  many  ages  gradually  wear
away;  peculiarities  disappear;  the  same  manners  pre-
vail in  both  parts  of  the  island;  the  same  authors  are
read  and  admired;  the  same  entertainments  are  fre-
quented by  the  elegant  and  polite;  and  the  same
standard  of  taste  and  of  purity  in  language,  is  esta-
blished. The  Scots,  after  being  placed,  during  a  whole
century,  in  a  situation  no  less  fatal  to  the  liberty  than
to  the  taste  and  genius  of  the  nation,  were  at  once  put
in  possession  of  privileges  more  valuable  than  those
which  their  ancestors  had  formerly  enjoyed ;  and  every
obstruction  that  had  retarded  their  pursuit,  or  prevented
their  acquisition,  of  literary  fame,  was  totally  removed.

A

CRITICAL  DISSERTATION

CONCERNING

THE  MURDER  OF  KING  HENRY,

THE GENUINENESS OF  THE  QUEEN'S LETTERS
TO  BOTHWELL.

IT  is  not  my  intention  to  engage  in  all  the  controversies
to  which  the  murder  of  king  Henry,  or  the  letters  from
queen  Mary  to  Bothwell,  have  given  rise ;  far  less  to
appear  as  an  adversary  to  any  particular  author,  who
hath  treated  of  them.  To  repeat  and  to  expose  all  the
ill-founded  assertions,  with  regard  to  these  points,  which
have  flowed  from  inattention,  from  prejudice,  from  par-
tiality, from  malevolence,  and  from  dishonesty,  would
be  no  less  irksome  to  myself,  than  unacceptable  to  most
of  my  readers.  All  I  propose  is,  to  assist  others  in
forming  some  judgment  concerning  the  facts  in  dispute,
by  stating  the  proofs  produced  on  each  side,  with  as
much  brevity  as  the  case  will  admit,  and  with  the  same
attention  and  impartiality  which  I  have  endeavoured  to
exercise  in  examining  other  controverted  points  in  the
Scottish  history.

In  order  to  account  for  the  king's  murder,  two  dif-
ferent systems  have  been  formed.  The  one  supposes
Bothwell  to  have  contrived  and  executed  this  crime.
The  other  imputes  it  to  the  earls  of  Murray,  Morton,
and  their  party.

The  decision  of  many  controverted  facts  in  history,
is  a  matter  rather  of  curiosity  than  of  use.  They  stand
detached ;  and  whatever  we  determine  with  regard  to

250  DISSERTATION ON

them,  the  fabric  of  the  story  remains  untouched.  But
the  fact  under  dispute  in  this  place  is  a  fundamental
and  essential  one,  and  according  to  the  opinion  which
an  historian  adopts  with  regard  to  it,  he  must  vary  and
dispose  the  whole  of  his  subsequent  narration.  An
historical  system  may  be  tried  in  two  different  ways,
whether  it  be  consistent  with  probability,  and  whether
it  be  supported  by  proper  evidence.

Those  who  charge  the  king's  murder  upon  Bothwell,
argue  in  the  following  manner ;  and,  though  their  rea-
sonings have  been  mentioned  already  in  different  parts
of  the  narrative,  it  is  necessary  to  repeat  them  here.
Mary's  love  for  Darnley,  say  they,  was  a  sudden  and
youthful  passion.  The  beauty  of  his  person,  set  off  by
some  external  frivolous  accomplishments,  was  his  chief
merit,  and  gained  her  affections.  His  capricious  temper
soon  raised  in  the  queen  a  disgust,  which  broke  out  on
different  occasions.  His  engaging  in  the  conspiracy
against  Rizio,  converted  this  disgust  into  an  antipathy,
which  she  was  at  no  pains  to  conceal.  This  breach  was,
perhaps,  in  its  own  nature  irreparable;  the  king  cer-
tainly wanted  that  art  and  condescension  which  alone
could  have  repaired  it.  It  widened  every  day,  and  a
deep  and  settled  hatred  effaced  all  remains  of  affection.
Bothwell  observed  this,  and  was  prompted  by  ambition,
and  perhaps  by  love,  to  found  upon  it  a  scheme,  which
proved  fatal  both  to  the  queen  and  to  himself.  He  had
served  Mary  at  different  times  with  fidelity  and  success.
He  insinuated  himself  into  her  favour,  by  address  and
by  flattery.  By  degrees  he  gained  her  heart.  In  order
to  gratify  his  love,  or  at  least  his  ambition,  it  was  ne-
cessary to  get  rid  of  the  king.  Mary  had  rejected  the
proposal  which,  it  is  said,  had  been  made  to  her  for  ob-
taining a  divorce.  The  king  was  equally  hated  by  the
partisans  of  the  house  of  Hamilton,  a  considerable  party
in  the  kingdom ;  by  Murray,  one  of  the  most  powerful
and  popular  persons  in  his  country  ;  by  Morton  and  his

KING  HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c. 251

associates,  whom  he  had  deceived,  and  whom  Bothwell
had  bound  to  his  interest  by  a  recent  favour.  Among
the  people  Darnley  was  fallen  under  extreme  contempt
Bothwell  might  expect,  for  all  these  reasons,  that  the
murder  of  the  king  would  pass  without  any  inquiry,  and
might  trust  to  Mary's  love,  and  to  his  own  address  and
good  fortune,  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  rest  of  his
wishes.  What  Bothwell  expected  really  came  to  pass.
Mary,  if  not  privy  herself  to  the  design,  connived  at  an
action  which  rid  her  of  a  man  whom  she  had  such  good
reason  to  detest.  A  few  months  after  the  murder  of  her
husband,  she  married  the  person  who  was  both  suspected
and  accused  of  having  perpetrated  that  odious  crime.

Those  who  charge  the  guilt  upon  Murray  and  his
party,  reason  in  this  manner :  Murray,  they  say,  was  a
man  of  boundless  ambition.  Notwithstanding  the  ille-
gitimacy of  his  birth,  he  had  early  formed  a  design  of
usurping  the  crown.  On  the  queen's  return  into  Scot-
land, he  insinuated  himself  into  her  favour,  and  en-
grossed the  whole  power  into  his  own  hands.  He  set
himself  against  every  proposal  of  marriage  which  was
made  to  her,  lest  his  own  chance  of  succeeding  to  the
crown  should  be  destroyed.  He  hated  Darnley,  and
was  no  less  hated  by  him.  In  order  to  be  revenged
on  him,  he  entered  into  a  sudden  friendship  with  Both-
well,  his  ancient  and  mortal  enemy.  He  encouraged
him  to  assassinate  Henry,  by  giving  him  hopes  of  marry-
ing the  queen.  All  this  was  done  with  a  design  to
throw  upon  the  queen  herself  the  imputation  of  being
accessary  to  the  murder,  and,  under  that  pretext,  to  de-
stroy Bothwell,  to  depose  and  imprison  her,  and  to  seize
the  sceptre  which  he  had  wrested  out  of  her  hands.

The  former  of  these  systems  has  an  air  of  probability,
is  consistent  with  itself,  and  solves  appearances.  In  the
latter,  some  assertions  are  false,  some  links  are  wanting
in  the  chain,  and  effects  appear,  of  which  no  sufficient
cause  is  produced.  Murray,  on  the  queen's  return  into

252  DISSERTATION ON

Scotland,  served  her  with  great  fidelity,  and  by  his  pru-
dent administration  rendered  her  so  popular,  and  so
powerful,  as  enabled  her  with  ease  to  quash  a  formid-
able insurrection  raised  by  the  party  of  which  he  was
the  leader  in  the  year  1565. What  motive  could  in-
duce Murray  to  murder  a  prince  without  capacity,  with-
out followers,  without  influence  over  the  nobles,  whom
the  queen,  by  her  neglect,  had  reduced  to  the  lowest  state
of  contempt,  and  who,  after  a  long  disgrace,  had  regained
(according  to  the  most  favourable  supposition)  the  pre-
carious possession  of  her  favour  only  a  few  days  before
his  death  ? It  is  difficult  to  conceive  what  Murray  had
to  fear  from  the  king's  life. It  is  still  a  more  difficult
matter  to  guess  what  he  could  gain  by  his  death. If
we  suppose  that  the  queen  had  no  previous  attachment
to  Bothwell,  nothing  can  appear  more  chimerical  than
a  scheme  to  persuade  her  to  marry  a  man,  whose  wife
was  still  alive,  and  who  was  not  only  suspected,  but
accused,  of  murdering  her  former  husband. But  that
such  a  scheme  should  really  succeed  is  still  more  ex-
traordinary.— If  Murray  had  instigated Bothwell  to
commit  the  crime,  or  had  himself  been  accessary  to  the
commission  of  it,  what  hopes  were  there  that  Bothwell
would  silently  bear  from  a  fellow-criminal  all  the  pro-
secutions which  he  suffered,  without  ever  retorting  upon
him  the  accusation,  or  revealing  the  whole  scene  of  ini-
quity ? An  ancient  and  deadly  feud  had  subsisted  be-
tween Murray  and  Bothwell ;  the  queen  with  difficulty
had  brought  them  to  some  terms  of  agreement. But,  is
it  probable,  that  Murray  would  choose  an  enemy,  to
whom  he  had  been  so  lately  reconciled,  for  his  confi-
dant in  the  commission  of  such  an  atrocious  crime  ? Or,
on  the  other  hand,  would  it  ever  enter  into  the  imagina-
tion of  a  wise  man,  first  to  raise  his  rival  to  supreme
power,  in  hopes  that  afterward  he  might  render  him
odious,  by  accusing  him  of  crimes  which  he  had  not
committed,  and,  in  consequence  of  this  unjust  charge,

KING HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c.  253

should  be  enabled  to  deprive  him  of  that  power  ?  The
most  adventurous  politician  never  hazarded  such  a  dan-
gerous experiment.  The  most  credulous  folly  never
trusted  such  an  uncertain  chance.

How  strong  soever  these  general  reasonings  may  ap-
pear to  be,  it  is  not  upon  them  alone  that  we  must  decide,
but  according  to  the  particular  evidence  that  is  pro-
duced. This  we  now  proceed  to  examine.

That  Bothwell  was  guilty  of  the  king's  murder,  ap-
pears, 1 .  From  the  concurring  testimony  of  all  the  con-
temporary historians.  2.  From  the  confession  of  those
persons  who  suifered  for  assisting  at  the  commission  of
the  crime,  and  who  entered  into  a  minute  detail  of  all
its  circumstances.  Anders,  ii.  165.  3.  From  the  ac-
knowledgment of  Mary's  own  commissioners,  who  allow
Bothwell  to  have  been  one  of  those  who  were  guilty  of
this  crime.  Good.  ii.  213.  4.  From  the  express  testi-
mony of  Lesly  bishop  of  Ross,  to  the  same  effect  with
.the  former.  Def.  of  Q.  Mary's  Hon.  And.  i.  76.  Id.  iii.
p.  31.  5.  Morton,  at  his  death,  declared  that  Bothwell
had  solicited  him,  at  different  times,  to  concur  in  the
conspiracy  formed  against  the  life  of  the  king ;  and  that
he  was  informed  by  Archibald  Douglas,  one  of  the  con-
spirators, that  Bothwell  was  present  at  the  murder.
Crawf.  Mem.  App.  4.  The  letter  from  Douglas  to  the
queen,  which  I  have  published  in  the  Appendix,  Vol.
II.  No.  XLVIL,  confirms  Morton's  testimony.  6.  Lord
Herries  promises,  in  his  own  name,  and  in  the  name  of
the  nobles  who  adhered  to  the  queen,  that  they  would
concur  in  punishing  Bothwell  as  the  murderer  of  the
king.  Append.  Vol.  II.  No.  XXIV.

The  most  direct  charge  ever  brought  against  Mur-
ray is  in  these  words  of  bishop  Lesly  :  "  Is  it  unknown,"
addressing  himself  to  the  earl  of  Murray,  "  what  the
lord  Herries  said  to  your  face  openly,  even  at  your
own  table,  a  few  days  after  the  murder  was  committed?
Did  he  not  charge  you  with  the  foreknowledge  of  the

254  DISSERTATION ON

same  murder  ?  Did  he  not,  nulla  circutione  usus,  flatly
and  plainly  burden  you,  that  riding  in  Fife,  and  com-
ing* with  one  of  your  most  assured  and  trusty  servants
the  same  day  whereon  you  departed  from  Edinburgh,
said  to  him,  among  other  talk,  This  night,  ere  morn-
ing, lord  Darnley  shall  lose  his  life  ?"  Defence  of  Q.
Mary,  Anders,  ii.  75.  But  the  assertion  of  a  man  so
heated  with  faction  as  Lesly,  unless  it  were  supported
by  proper. evidence,  is  of  little  weight.  The  servant  to
whom  Murray  is  said  to  have  spoken  these  words,  is
not  named ;  nor  the  manner  in  which  this  secret  con-
versation was  brought  to  light  mentioned.  Lord  Her-
ries  was  one  of  the  most  zealous  advocates  for  Mary,
and  it  is  remarkable  that,  in  all  his  negotiations  at  the
court  of  England,  he  never  once  repeated  this  accusa-
tion of  Murray.  In  answering  the  challenge  given
him  by  lord  Lindsay,  Herries  had  a  fair  opportunity
of  mentioning  Murray's  knowledge  of  the  murder  ;  but
though  he  openly  accuses  of  that  crime  some  of  those
who  adhered  to  Murray,  he  industriously  avoids  any
insinuation  against  Murray  himself.  Keith,  Pref.  xii.
Mary  herself,  in  conversation  with  Sir  Francis  Knolles,
accused  Morton  and  Maitland  of  being  privy  to  the
murder,  but  does  not  mention  Murray.  And.  iv.  55.
When  the  bishop  of  Ross  and  lord  Herries  appeared
before  the  English  council,  January  11,  1569,  they  de-
clared themselves  ready,  in  obedience  to  the  queen's
command,  to  accuse  Murray  and  his  associates  of  being
accessary  to  the  murder,  but  "  they  being  also  required,
whether  they,  or  any  of  them,  as  of  themselves,  would
accuse  the  said  earl  in  special,  or  any  of  his  adherents,
or  thought  them 'guilty  thereof,"  they  answered,  "  that
they  took  God  to  witness  that  none  of  them  did  ever
know  any  thing  of  the  conspiracy  of  that  murder,  or
were  in  counsel  and  foreknowledge  thereof;  neither
who  were  devisors,  inventors,  and  executors  of  the
same,  till  it  was  publicly  discovered  long  thereafter

KING HENRY'S MURDER,  &c.  255

by  some  of  the  assassins,  who  suffered  death  on  that
account."  Good.  ii.  308.  These  words  are  taken  out
of  a  register  kept  by  Ross  and  Herries  themselves,  and
seem  to  be  a  direct  confutation  of  the  bishop's  assertion.
The  earls  of  Huntly  and  Argyle,  in  their  Protestation
touching  the  murder  of  the  King  of  Scots,  after  men-
tioning the  conference  at  Craigmillar  concerning  a  di-
vorce, add,  "  So  after  these  premises,  the  murder  of
the  king  following,  we  judge,  in  our  consciences,  and
hold  for  certain  and  truth,  that  the  earl  of  Murray  and
secretary  Lethington  were  authors,  inventors,  counsel-
lors, and  causers  of  the  same  murder,  in  what  manner,
or  by  whatsoever  persons  the  same  was  executed."
Anders,  iv.  188.  But,  1.  This  is  nothing  more  than
the  private  opinion  or  personal  affirmation  of  these  two
noblemen.  2.  The  conclusion  which  they  make  has
no  connexion  with  the  premises  on  which  they  found
it.  Because  Murray  proposed  to  obtain  for  the  queen
a  divorce  from  her  husband  with  her  own  consent,  it
does  not  follow  that  therefore  he  committed  the  mur-
der without  her  knowledge.  3.  Huntly  and  Argyle
were  at  that  time  the  leaders  of  that  party  opposite  to
Murray,  and  animated  with  all  the  rage  of  faction.

4.  Both  of  them were  Murray's personal enemies.
Huntly,  on  account  of  the  treatment  which  his  family
and  clan  had  received  from  that  nobleman. Argyle
was  desirous  of  being  divorced  from  his  wife,  with
whom  he  lived  on  no  good  terms,  Knox,  328,  and  by
whom  he  had  no  children. Crawf.  Peer.  19. She  was
Murray's  sister,  and  by  his  interest  Argyle's  design  was
obstructed. Keith,  551. These  circumstances  would
go  far  towards  invalidating  a  positive  testimony ;  they
more  than  counterbalance  an  indeterminate  suspicion.

5.  Jt  is  altogether  uncertain  whether  Huntly  and  Ar-
gyle ever  subscribed  this  protestation. A  copy  of  such
a  protestation  as  the  queen  thought  would  be  of  ad-
vantage to  her  cause,  was  transmitted  to  them  by  her.

256  DISSERTATION ON

Anders,  iv.  b.  ii.  186.  The  protestation  itself,  pub-
lished by  Anderson,  is  taken  from  an  unsubscribed
copy,  with  blanks  for  the  date  and  place  of  subscrib-
ing. On  the  back  of  this  copy,  there  is  pasted,  in-
deed, a  paper,  which  Cecil  has  marked,  "  Answer  of
the  Earl  of  Murray  to  a  writing  of  the  Earls  of  Huntly
and  Argyle."  Anders.  194,  195.  «  But  it  can  hardly
be  deemed  a  reply  to  the  above-mentioned  protesta-
tion. Murray's  answer  bears  date  at  London,  Jan.  19,
1568.  The  queen's  letter,  in  which  she  enclosed  the
copy  of  the  protestation,  bears  date  at  Bowton,  Jan.  5,
1568.  Now  it  is  scarce  to  be  supposed  that  the  copy
could  be  sent  into  Scotland,  be  subscribed  by  the  two
earls,  and  be  seen  and  answered  by  Murray  within  so
short  a  time.  Murray's  reply  seems  intended  only  to
prevent  the  impression  which  the  vague  and  uncertain
accusations  of  his  enemies  might  make  in  his  absence.
Cecil  had  got  the  original  of  the  queen's  letter  into  his
custody.  Anders,  iv.  185.  This  naturally  leads  us  to
conjecture  that  the  letter  itself,  together  with  the  en-
closed protestation,  were  intercepted  before  they  came
to  the  hands  of  Huntly  and  Argyle.  Nor  is  this  mere
conjecture  alone.  The  letter  to  Huntly,  in  which  the
protestation  was  enclosed,  is  to  be  found,  Cott.  Lib.
Cal.  C.  1.  fol.  280,  and  is  an  original  subscribed  by
Mary,  though  not  written  by  her  own  hand,  because
she  seldom  chose  to  write  in  the  English  language.
The  protestation  is  in  the  same  volume,  fol.  282,  and
is  manifestly  written  by  the  same  person  who  wrote  the
queen's  letter.  This  seems  to  jender  it  highly  proba-
ble that  both  were  intercepted.  So  that  much  has  been
founded  on  a  paper  not  subscribed  by  the  two  earls,
and  probably  never  seen  by  them.  Besides,  this  me-
thod which  the  queen  took  of  sending  a  copy  to  the
two  earls,  of  what  was  proper  for  them  to  declare  with
regard  to  a  conference  held  in  their  own  presence,  ap-
pears somewhat  suspicious.  It  would  have  been  more

KING HENRY'S MURDER,  &c.  257

natural,  and  not  so  liable  to  any  misinterpretation,  to
have  desired  them  to  write  the  most  exaot  account,
which  they  could  recollect,  of  what  had  passed  at  the
conversation  at  Craigmillar.  6.  But  even  if  all  this
reasoning  should  be  set  aside,  and  the  authenticity  of
the  protestation  should  be  admitted  in  its  fullest  extent,
it  may  still  be  a  question,  what  degree  of  credit  should
be  given  to  the  assertion  of  the  two  earls,  who  were  not
only  present  in  the  first  parliament  held  by  Murray  as
regent  in  December,  1567,  in  which  the  one  carried  the
sceptre,  and  the  other  the  sword  of  state,  Spotsw.  241,
but  were  both  members  of  the  committee  of  lords  of
articles,  and  in  that  capacity  assisted  in  framing  all  the
acts  by  which  the  queen  was  deprived  of  the  crown,
and  her  son  seated  on  the  throne ;  and  in  particular
concurred  in  the  act  by  which  it  was  declared,  that
whatever  had  befallen  the  queen  "  was  in  her  awin  de-
fault, in  sa  far  as,  be  divers  hir  previe  letters  written
halelie  with  hir  awin  hand,  and  send  by  hir  to  James
sometyme  earle  of  Bothwell,  cheif  executour  of  the
said  horribill  murthour,  as  weill  befoir  the  committing
thairof  as  thairaftir :  and  be  hir  ungodlie  and  disho-
nourabill  proceeding  to  ane  pretendit  marriage  with
him,  suddainlie  and  unprovisitlie  thairaftir,  it  is  maist
certane  that  sche  was  previe,  airt  and  pairt,  of  the
actual  devise  and  deid  of  the  foirnamit  murthour  of  the
king  her  lauchful  husband,  and  thairfoir  justlie  deservis
quhatsumever  hes  bene  done  to  hir  in  ony  tyme  by-
game,  or  that  sal  be  usit  towards  hir,  for  the  said
cause."  Anders,  ii.  221.

The  queen's  commissioners  at  the  conferences  in  Eng-
land accused  Murray  and  his  associates  of  having  mur-
dered the  king.  Good.  ii.  281.  But  this  charge  is  to
be  considered  as  a  recrimination,  extorted  by  the  accu-
sation preferred  against  the  queen,  and  contains  no-
thing more  than  loose  and  general  affirmations,  with-
out descending  to  such  particular  circumstances  as  ei-

VOL.  ii.  s

258  DISSERTATION ON

ther  ascertain  their  truth,  or  discover  their  falsehood.
The  same  accusation  is  repeated  by  the  nobles  assem-
bled at  Dumbarton,  Sept.  1568.  Good.  ii.  359.  And
the  same  observation  may  be  made  concerning  it.

All  the  queen's  advocates  have  endeavoured  to  ac-
count for  Murray's  murdering  of  the  king  by  supposing
that  it  was  done  on  purpose  that  he  might  have  the
pretence  of  disturbing  the  queen's  administration,  and
thereby  rendering  ineffectual  her  general  revocation  of
crown  lands,  which  would  have  deprived  him  and  his
associates  of  the  best  part  of  their  estates.  Lesly,  Def.
of  Mary's  Hon.  p.  73.  Anders,  iv.  part  ii.  130.  But
whoever  considers  the  limited  powers  of  a  Scottish
monarch,  will  see  that  such  a  revocation  could  not  be
very  formidable  to  the  nobles.  Every  king  of  Scotland
began  his  reign  with  such  a  revocation  ;  and  as  often
as  it  was  renewed,  the  power  of  the  nobles  rendered  it
ineffectual.  The  best  vindication  of  Murray  and  his
party  from  this  accusation,  is  that  which  they  presented
to  the  queen  of  England,  and  which  hath  never  hitherto
been  published.

Paper  Answers  to  the  Objections  and  Alledgance  of  the
Office-  Queen,  alledging  the  Earl  of  Murray,  Lord

Regent,  the  Earl  of  Morton,  Marr,  Glencairn,  Hume,

Ruthven,  8$c.  to  have  been  moved  to  armour,  for  that

tfiey  abhorred  and  might  not  abide  her  Revocation  of

the  Alienation  made  of  her  Property.

It  is  answered,  that  is,  alledged,  but  [i.  e.  without]
all  appearance,  and  it  appears  God  has  bereft  the  al-
ledgance  of  all  wit  and  good  remembrance,  for  thir
reasons  following  :

Imprimis,  as  to  my  lord  regent,  he  never  had  occa-
sion to  grudge  thereat,  in  respect  the  queen  made  him
privy  to  the  same,  and  took  resolution  with  him  for  the
execution  thereof,  letting  his  lordship  know  she  would
assuredly  in  the  samine  except  all  things  she  had  given
to  him,  and  ratefy  them  in  the  next  parliament  as  she

KING HENRY'S MURDER,  &c.  259

did  indeed  ;  and  for  that  cause  wished  my  lord  to  leave
behind  him  master  John  Wood,  to  attend  upon  the  same,
to  whom  she  declared,  that  als  well  in  that  as  in  all
other  her  grants  it  should  be  provided,  yea,  of  free  will
did  promise  and  offer  before  ever  he  demanded,  as  it
came  to  pass  without  any  let  or  impediment;  for  all
was  ratified  by  her  command,  and  hand-write,  at  the
parliament,  but  [i.  e.  without]  any  difficulty.

Item,  as  to  my  lord  of  Morton,  he  could  not  grudge
thereat  quha  never  had  of  her  property  worth  twenty
dollars  that  ever  I  knew  of.

Item,  the  same  may  I  say  of  my  lord  Glencairn.

Item,  the  same  I  may  say  of  my  lord  Hume.

Item,  the  same  I  may  say  of  my  lord  Ruthven.

Item,  the  same  I  may  say  of  my  lord  Lindsay.

Only  my  lord  of  Mar r,  had  ane  little  thing  of  the  pro-
perty quilk  alsua  was  gladly  and  liberally  confirmed  to
him,  in  the  said  parliament  preceding  a  year;  was  never
ane  had  any  cause  of  miscontent  of  that  revocation,  far
less  to  have  put  their  lives  and  heritage  to  so  open  and
manifest  ane  danger  as  they  did  for  sic  ane  frivole  cause.

Gyf  ever  any  did  make  evill  countenance,  and  show
any  miscontentment  of  the  said  revocation,  it  was  my
lord  of  Argyll  in  special,  quha  spak  largely  in  the  time
of  parliament  thairanents  to  the  queen  herself,  and  did
complain  of  the  manifest  corruption  of  ane  act  of  par-
liament past  upon  her  majesty's  return,  and  sa  did  lett
any  revocation  at  that  time  ;  but  the  armour  for  revenge
of  the  king's  deid  was  not  till  twa  months  after,  at  quhat
time  there  was  no  occasion  given  thereof,  nor  never  a
man  had  mind  thereof.

Having  thus  examined  the  evidence  which  has  been
produced  against  the  earls  of  Murray  and  Both  well ;
we  shall  next  proceed  to  inquire  whether  the  queen  her-
self was  accessary  to  the  murder  of  her  husband.

No  sooner  was  the  violent  death  of  Darnley  known,

s  2

260  DISSERTATION ON

than  strong  suspicion  arose,  among  some  of  her  subjects,
that  Mary  had  given  her  consent  to  the  commission  of
that  crime.  Anders,  ii.  156.  We  are  informed,  by  her
own  ambassador  in  France,  the  archbishop  of  Glasgow,
that  the  sentiments  of  foreigners,  on  this  head,  were  no
less  unfavourable  to  her.  Keith,  Pref.  ix.  Many  of
her  nobles  loudly  accused  her  of  that  crime,  and  a  great
part  of  the  nation,  by  supporting  them,  seem  to  have
allowed  the  accusation  to  be  well  founded.

Some  crimes,  however,  are  of  such  a  nature,  that  they
hardly  admit  of  a  positive  or  direct  proof.  Deeds  of
darkness  can  seldom  be  brought  perfectly  to  light.
Where  persons  are  accused  not  of  being  principals,  but
only  of  being  accessaries  in  the  commission  of  a  crime ;
not  of  having  perpetrated  it  themselves,  but  only  of  giv-
ing consent  to  the  commission  of  it  by  others ;  the  proof
becomes  still  more  difficult :  and  unless  when  some  ac-
complice betrays  the  secret,  a  proof  by  circumstances,
or  presumptive  evidence,  is  all  that  can  be  attained.
Even  in  judicial  trials,  such  evidence  is  sometimes
held  to  be  sufficient  for  condemning  criminals.  The
degree  of  conviction  which  such  evidence  carries  along
with  it,  is  often  not  inferior  to  that  which  arises  from
positive  testimony  ;  and  a  concurring  series  of  circum-
stances satisfies  the  understanding  no  less  than  the  ex-
press declaration  of  witnesses.

Evidence  of  both  these  kinds  has  been  produced
against  Mary.  We  shall  first  consider  that  which  is
founded  upon  circumstances  alone.

Some  of  these  suspicious  circumstances  preceded  the
king's  death ;  others  were  subsequent  to  it.  With  re-
gard to  the  former,  we  may  observe  that  the  queen's
violent  love  of  Darnley  was  soon  converted  into  an  aver-
sion to  him  no  less  violent;  and  that  his  own  ill  conduct
and  excesses  of  every  kind,  were  such,  that  if  they  did
not  justify,  at  least  they  account  for  this  sudden  change
of  her  disposition  towards  him.  The  rise  and  progress

KING HENRY'S MURDER, &c.  261

of  this  domestic  rupture,  I  have  traced  with  great  care
in  the  history,  and  to  the  proofs  of  it  which  may  be
found  in  papers  published  by  other  authors,  I  have
added  those  contained  in  App.  No.  XVI.  and  XVII.
Le  Croc,  the  French  ambassador,  who  was  an  eye-
witness of  what  he  describes,  not  only  represents  her
aversion  to  Darnley  to  be  extreme,  but  declares  that  there
could  be  no  hopes  of  a  reconcilement  between  them.
Dec.  12.  "  The  queen  is  in  the  hands  of  physicians,  and
1566t  I  do  assure  you  is  not  at  all  well ;  and  do  be-
lieve the  principal  part  of  her  disease  to  consist  in  deep
grief  and  sorrow ;  nor  does  it  seem  possible  to  make
her  forget  the  same.  Still  she  repeats  these  words,
/  could  wish  to  be  dead.  You  know  very  well  that  the
injury  she  has  received  is  exceeding  great,  and  her  ma-
jesty will  never  forget  it.— To  speak  my  mind  freely  to
you,  I  do  not  expect,  upon  several  accounts,  any  good
understanding  between  them  [i.  e.  the  king  and  queen],
unless  God  effectually  put  to  his  hand. — His

Dec.  23

bad  deportment  is  incurable ;  nor  can  there  ever
be  any  good  expected  from  him,  for  several  reasons,
which  I  might  tell  you  was  I  present  with  you.  I  can-
not pretend  to  foretel  how  all  may  turn,  but  I  will  say,
that  matters  cannot  subsist  long  as  they  are,  without
being  accompanied  with  sundry  bad  consequences."
Keith,  Pref.  vii.  Had  Henry  died  a  natural  death  at
this  juncture,  it  must  have  been  considered  as  a  very
fortunate  event  to  the  queen,  and  as  a  seasonable  de-
liverance from  a  husband  who  had  become  altogether
odious  to  her.  Now  as  Henry  was  murdered  a  few
weeks  afterward,  and  as  nothing  had  happened  to  ren-
der the  queen's  aversion  to  him  less  violent,  the  opinion
of  those  who  consider  Mary  as  the  author  of  an  event
which  was  manifestly  so  agreeable  to  her,  will  appear
perhaps  to  some  of  our  readers  to  be  neither  unnatural
nor  over  refined.  If  we  add  to  this,  what  has  been  ob-
served in  the  history,  that  in  proportion  to  the  increase

262  DISSERTATION ON

of  Mary's  hatred  of  her  husband,  Bothwell  seems  to
have  made  progress  in  her  favour,  and  that  he  became
the  object  not  only  of  her  confidence  but  her  attachment,
that  opinion  acquires  new  strength. It  is  easy  to  ob-
serve many  advantages  which  might  redound  to  Mary
as  well  as  to  Bothwell  from  the  king's  death ;  but  ex-
cepting them,  nov  person,  and  no  party  in  the  kingdom,
could  derive  the  least  benefit  from  that  event. Both-
well,  accordingly,  murdered  the  king,  and  it  was,  in
that  age,  thought  no  unwarranted  imputation  on  Mary's
character,  to  suppose  that  she  had  consented  to  the  deed.
The  steps  which  the  queen  took  after  her  husband's
death  add  strength  to  that  supposition. 1.  Melvil,  who
was  in  Edinburgh  at  the  time  of  the  king's  death,  asserts
that  "  every  body  suspected  the  earl  of  Bothwell ;  and
those  who  durst  speak  freely  to  others,  said  plainly  that
it  was  he,"  p.  155. 2.  Mary  having  issued  a  procla-
mation, on  the  12th  of  February,  offering  a  reward  to
any  person  who  should  discover  those  who  had  mur-
dered her  husband, And.  i.  36 ;  a  paper  in  conse-
quence of  this  was  affixed  to  the  gates  of  the  Tolbooth,
February  16,  in  which  Bothwell  was  named  as  the  chief
person  guilty  of  that  crime,  and  the  queen  herself  was
accused  of  having  given  her  consent  to  it. And.  ii.  1 56.
3.  Soon  after,  February  20,  the  earl  of  Lennox,  the
king's  father,  wrote  to  Mary,  conjuring  her,  by  every
motive,  to  prosecute  the  murderers  with  the  utmost  ri-
gour. He  plainly  declared  his  own  suspicions  of  Both-
well,  and  pointed  out  a  method  of  proceeding  against
him,  and  of  discovering  the  authors  of  that  crime,  no
less  obvious  than  equitable. He  advised  her  to  seize,
and  to  commit  to  sure  custody,  Bothwell  himself,  and
such  as  were  already  named  as  his  accomplices;  to  call
an  assembly  of  the  nobles  ;  to  issue  a  proclamation,
inviting  Both  well's  accusers  to  appear ;  and  if,  on  that
encouragement,  no  person  appeared  to  accuse  them,  to
hold  them  as  innocent,  and  to  dismiss  them  without

KING HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c.  233

farther  trial. And.  i.  40. 4.  Archbishop  Beatoun,  her
ambassador  in  France,  in  a  letter  to  Mary,  March  9th,
employs  arguments  of  the  utmost  weight  to  persuade
her  to  prosecute  the  murderers  with  the  greatest  seve-
rity. "  I  can  conclude  nathing  (says  he)  by  quhat  zour
majesty  writes  to  me  zourself,  that  sen  it  has  plesit  God
to  conserve  zow  to  make  a  rigorous  vengeance  thereof,
that  rather  than  it  be  not  actually  taine,  it  appears  to  me
better  in  this  warld  that  ze  had  lost  life  and  all. I  ask
your  majestic  pardon,  that  I  writ  sa  far,  for  I  can  heir
must nathing  to  zour  prejudise,  but  I  man  constrainedly
writ  the  samin,  that  all  may  come  to  zour  knawledge ;
for  the  better  remede  may  be  put  therto. Heir  it  is
needfull  that  ze  forth  shaw  now  rather  than  ever  of
before,  the  greite  vertue,  magnanimitie,  and  Constance
that  God  has  grantit  zow,  be  quhais  grace,  I  hope  ze
sail  overcome  this  most  heavy  envie  and  displesir  of
the  committing  therof,  and  conserve  that  reputation  in
all  godliness,  ze  have  conquist  of  lang,  quhich  can  ap-
such pear  na  wayis  mair  clearie,  than  that  zou  do  sick
whole justice  that  the  haill  world  may  declare  zour  in-
nocence, and  give  testimony  for  ever  of  thair  treason
without that  has  committed  (but  fear  of  God  or  man)  so
cruel  and  ungodlie a  murther,  quhairof  there is  sa
much meikle  ill  spoken,  that  I  am  constrainit  to  ask
zow  mercy,  that  neither  can  I  or  will  I  make  the  re-
too hearsal  thereof,  which  is  owr  odious. But  alas  !
madame,  all  over  Europe  this  day,  there  is  na  purpose
in  head  sa  frequent  as  of  zour  majestie,  and  of  the  pre-
sent state  of  zour  realm,  quhilk  is  in  the  most  part  in-
terpretit  sinisterly." Keith,  Pref.  ix. 5.  Elizabeth,  as
appears  from  Append.  Vol.  II.  No.  XIX.,  urged  the
same  thing  in  strong  terms. 6.  The  circumstances  of
the  case  itself,  no  less  than  these  solicitations  and  re-
monstrances, called  for  the  utmost  vigour  in  her  pro
ceedings. Her  husband  had  been  murdered  in  a  cruel
manner,  almost  in  her  own  presence. Her  subjeqts

264  DISSERTATION ON

were  filled  with  the  utmost  horror  at  the  crime.  Both-
well,  one  of  her  principal  favourites,  had  been  publicly
accused  as  the  author  of  it.  Reflections,  extremely  dis-
honourable to  herself,  had  been  thrown  out.  If  indig-
nation, and  the  love  of  justice,  did  not  prompt  her  to
pursue  the  murderers  with  ardour,  decency,  at  least,
and  concern  for  vindicating  her  own  character,  should
have  induced  her  to  avoid  any  appearance  of  remissness
or  want  of  zeal.

But  instead  of  this,  Mary  continued  to  discover,  in
all  her  actions,  the  utmost  partiality  towards  Both  well.
On  the  15th  of  February,  five  days  after  the  murder,
she  bestowed  on  him  the  reversion  of  the  superiority
of  the  town  of  Leith,  which,  in  the  year  1565,  she  had
mortgaged  to  the  citizens  of  Edinburgh.  This  grant
was  of  much  importance,  as  it  gave  him  not  only  the
command  of  the  principal  port  in  the  kingdom,  but  a
great  ascendant  over  the  citizens  of  Edinburgh,  who
wished  much  to  keep  possession  of  it.a  2.  Bothwell

a  Copy,  from  the  original  in  the  Charter-house  of  the  City  of  Edinburgh,  of  an  Assig-
nation to  the  reversion  of  the  superiority  of  Leith  by  Queen  Mary,  to  the  Earl  of
Bothwell.

Maria,  Dei  gratia  Regina  Scotorum,  omnibus  probis  hominibus  suis  ad  quos  pra&-
sentes  litene  pervenerint,  salutem.  Sciatis,  quod  nos  ad  memoriara  reducentes  mul-
tiplex bonum,verum,  et  fidele  servitium,  non  tantum  quondam  nostraecharissimae  matrr
Mariae,  Reginai  regni  nostri  pro  tempore  in  nostra  minoritate  factum  et  impensum,
verum  etiam  nobismet  ipsis,  tarn  inlra  partes  Galliae  quam  intra  hoc  nostrum  regnum,
ad  extentionem  nostri  honoris  et  auctoritatis  in  punitione  furum,  malefactorum,  et
transgressorum  infra  idem,  per  nostrum  -confisum  consanguineum  et  consiliarium
Jacobum  comitem  Bothuile,  dominum  Halis,  Creighton,  et  Liddisdale,  magnum  ad-
mirallum  regni  nostri,  commissioned!  et  onerationem  ad  hunc  effectum  habentem,
per  quas  ipse  suum  corpus  et  vitara  in  magno  periculo  posuit;  ac  etiam,  in  perfor-
matione  et  extentione  nostri  dicti  servitii,  suam  hereditatem,  supra  summam  viginti
millium  mercarum  hujus  nostri  regni,  alienavit  ac  laesit.  Et  nos  cogitantes  quod,
ex  nostra  principal!,  honore  et  devoria,  dictum  nostrum  confisum  consanguineum  efc
consiliarium  cum  quodam  accidente  et  gratitudine  recompensare  et  gratificare  in-
cumbit,  quae  nos  commode  sibi  concedere  poterimus,  unde  ipse  magis  habilis  omnibus
affuturis  temporibus  esse  poterit,  et  ad  hujusmodi  performandum  in  omnibus  causis
seu  eventibus;  In  recompensationem  quorum  prasmissorum,  ac  pro  diversis  aliis
nostris  rationabilibus  causis  et  considerationibus  nos  moventibus,  Fecimus,  &c.  dictum
Jacobum  comitem  Bothuile,  &c.  ac  suos  hseredes  masculosquoscumque  nostroslegi-
limos,  &c.  assignatos  in  et  ad  literas  reversionis  factas,  &c.  per  Symonem  Preston  de
eodem  militem,  praepositum,  balivos,  consules,  et  coramunitatem  bujus  nostri  burgi
de  Edinburgh,  pro  seipsis  ac  suis  successoribus,  &c.  nobis,  nostrisque  heredibus,
successoribus,  et  assignatis,  pro  redemptione,  &c.  superioritatis  totius  villaede  Leith,
&c.  impignoratas  per  nos  dictis  praeposito,  &c.  sub  reversione  alienatae  continentis
summam  decem  millium  mercarum  roonetae  pra2scripla3,  numerandum  etcalculandum
in  parochiali  ecclesia  de  Edinburgh,  super  premonitione  quadriginta  dierum,  utmoris
est,  veluti  in  dictis  reversionis  literis,  &c.  de  data  8vo.  Octcb,  1565,  &c.  (The  rest

KING HENRY'S MURDER, &c.

265

being  extremely  desirous  to  obtain  the  command  of  the
castle  of  Edinburgh,  the  queen,  in  order  to  prevail  on
the  earl  of  Mar  to  surrender  the  government  of  it,  of-
fered to  commit  the  young  prince  to  his  custody. Mai-
consented  ;  and  she  instantly  appointed  Bothwell  go-
vernor of  the  castle. And.  i. Pref.  64. Keith,  379,
note  (<f). 3.  The  inquiry  into  the  murder,  previous  to
Bothwell's  trial,  seems  to  have  been  conducted  with  the
utmost  remissness. Buchanan  exclaims  loudly  against
this. And.  ii.  24. Nor  was  it  without  reason  that  he
did  so,  as  is  evident  from  a  circumstance  in  the  affida-
vit of  Thomas  Nelson,  one  of  the  king's  servants,  who
was  in  the  house  when  his  master  was  murdered,  and
was  dug  up  alive  out  of  the  rubbish. Being  examined
on  the  Monday  after  the  king's  death,  "  This  deponar
schew  that  Bonkle  had  the  key  of  the  sellare,  and  the
queenis  servandis  the  keyis  of  her  shalmir. Quhilk  the
laird  of  Tillibardin  hearing,  said,  Hald  thair,  here  is
ane  ground. Efter  quhilk  words  spokin,  thai  left  of,
and  procedit  na  farther  in  the  inquisition." And.  iv.  p.
2.  167. Had  there  been  any  intention  to  search  into
the  bottom  of  the  matter,  a  circumstance  of  so  much
importance  merited  the  most  careful  inquiry. 4.  Not-
withstanding Lennox's  repeated  solicitations,  notwith-
standing the  reasonableness  of  his  demands,  and  the
necessity  of  complying  with  them,  in  order  to  encourage
any  accuser  to  appear  against  Bothwell,  she  not  only
refused  to  commit  him  to  custody,  or  even  to  remove
him  from  her  presence  and  councils,  And.  i.  42.  48 ;
but  by  the  grants  which  we  have  mentioned,  and  by
other  circumstances,  discovered  an  increase  of  attach-
ment to  him. 5.  She  could  not  avoid  bringing  Both-
well  to  a  public  trial ;  but  she  permitted  him  to  sit  as

is  form,  and  contains  a  clause  of  absolute  warrandice.)  IN  cujus  REI  TESTIMO-
NIUM  prsesentibus  magnum  sigillum  nostrum  apponi  fecimus.  Apud  Edinburgh,
decimo  quinto  die  mensis  Februarii,anno  Domini  millesimo  quingentesimo  sexsige-
simo  sexto,  et  regni  nostri  vicesimo  quinto.

The  great  seal  entire.

266  DISSERTATION ON

a  member  in  that  meeting  of  the  privy-council  which
directed  his  own  trial ;  and  the  trial  itself  was  carried
on  with  such  unnecessary  precipitancy,  and  with  so
many  other  suspicious  circumstances,  as  to  render  his
acquittal  rather  an  argument  of  his  guilt  than  a  proof
of  his  innocence. These  circumstances  have  all  been
mentioned  at  length  in  Book  IV.  and  therefore  are  not
repeated  in  this  place. 6.  Two  days  after  the  trial,
Mary  gave  a  public  proof  of  her  regard  for  Bothwell,
by  appointing  him  to  carry  the  sceptre  before  her  at  the
meeting  of  parliament. Keith,  378. 7.  In  that  par-
liament, she  granted  him  a  ratification  of  all  the  great
possessions  and  honours  which  she  had  conferred  upon
him,  in  which  was  contained  an  ample  enumeration  of
all  the  services  he  had  performed. And.  i.  117. 8.
Though  Melvil,  who  foresaw  that  her  attachment  to
Bothwell  would  at  length  induce  her  to  marry  him,
warned  her  of  the  infamy  and  danger  which  would  at-
tend that  action,  she  not  only  disregarded  this  salutary  ad-
monition, but  discovered  what  had  passed  between  them
to  Bothwell,  which  exposed  Melvil  to  his  resentment.
Melv.  156. 9.  Bothwell  seized  Mary  as  she  returned
from  Stirling,  April  24. If  he  had  done  this  without
her  knowledge  and  consent,  such  an  insult  could  not
have  failed  to  have  filled  her  with  the  most  violent  in-
dignation.  But  according  to  the  account  of  an  old  MS.
"  The  friendly  love  was  so  highly  contracted  between
this  great  princess  and  her  enormous  subject,  that  there
was  no  end  thereof  (for  it  was constantly  esteemed
by  all  men,  that  either  of  them  loved  other  carnally),
so  that  she  suffered  patiently  to  be  led  where  the  lover
list,  and  all  the  way  neither  made  obstacle,  impediment,
clamour,  or  resistance,  as  in  such  accidents  use  to  be,
or  that  she  might  have  done  by  her  princely  authority,
being  accompanied  with  the  noble  earl  of  Huntly  and
secretary  Maitland  of  Lethington." Keith,  383. Mel-
vil, who  was  present,  confirms  this  account,  and  tells  us

KING HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c.  267

that  the  officer,  by  whom  he  was  seized,  informed  him
that  nothing  was  done  without  the  queen's  consent.
Melv.  158. 10.  On  the  12th  of  May,  a  few  days  be-
fore her  marriage,  Mary  declared  that  she  was  then  at
full  liberty,  and  that  though  Bothwell  had  offended  her
by  seizing  her  person,  she  was  so  much  satisfied  with
his  dutiful  behaviour  since  that  time,  and  so  indebted
to  him  for  past  services,  that  she  not  only  forgave  that
offence,  but  resolved  to  promote  him  to  higher  honours.
And.  i.  87. .11.  Even  after  the  confederate  nobles  had
driven  Bothwell  from  the  queen's  presence,  and  though
she  saw  that  he  was  considered  as  the  murderer  of  her
former  husband  by  so  great  a  part  of  her  subjects,  her
affection  did  not  in  the  least  abate,  and  she  continued
to  express  the  most  unalterable  attachment  to  him. "  I
can  perceive  (says  Sir  N.  Throkmorton)  that  the  rigour
with  which  the  queen  is  kept  proceedeth  by  order  from
these  men,  because  that  the  queen  will  not  by  any  means
be  induced  to  lend  her  authority  to  prosecute  the  mur-
derer ;  nor  will  not  consent  by  any  persuasion  to  aban-
don the  lord  Bothwell  for  her  husband,  but  avoweth
constantly  that  she  will  live  and  die  with  him ;  and
saith,  that  if  it  were  put  to  her  choice  to  relinquish  her
crown  and  kingdom,  or  the  lord  Bothwell,  she  would
leave  her  kingdom  and  dignity  to  go  a  simple  damsel
with  him,  and  that  she  will  never  consent  that  he  shall
fare  worse,  or  have  more  harm  than  herself." Append.
Vol.  II.  No.  XXII. In  all their  negotiations  with
Throkmorton,  the  confederates  mention  this  unalterable
attachment  of  the  queen  to  Bothwell  as  a  sufficient  rea-
son for  rejecting  his  proposals  of  an  accommodation
with  their  sovereign. Keith,  419  449. This  assertion
they  renewed  in  the  conferences  at  York. Anders,  iv.
part  ii.  p.  66. Murray,  in  his  interview  with  Mary  in
Lochlevin,  charged  her  with  persisting  in  her  inordinate
affection  to  Bothwell. Keith,  446. All  these,  however,
may  be  considered  merely  as  accusations  brought  by

268  DISSERTATION ON

the  confederates,  in  order  to  vindicate  their  rigour  to-
wards the  queen.  But  Throkmorton,  who,  by  his
residence  in  Edinburgh,  and  by  his  intercourse  with
the  queen's  partisans,  as  well  as  with  her  enemies,  had
many  opportunities  of  discovering  whether  or  not  Mary
had  expressed  herself  in  such  terms,  and  who  was  dis-
posed to  view  her  actions  in  the  most  favourable  light,
appears,  by  the  passage  which  I  have  quoted  from  his
letter  of  the  14th  of  July,  to  be  persuaded  that  the  con-
federates had  not  misrepresented  her  sentiments.  He
had  soon  an  opportunity  of  being  confirmed  with  greater
certainty  in  this  opinion.  Although  the  confederates
had  refused  him  access  to  the  captive  queen,  he  found
means  of  holding  a  secret  correspondence  with  her,  and
endeavoured  to  persuade  her  to  give  her  consent  to  have
her  marriage  with  Bothwell  dissolved  by  a  sentence  of
divorce,  as  the  most  probable  means  of  regaining  her
liberty.  "  She  hath  sent  me  word  that  she  will  in  no  wise
consent  unto  that,  but  rather  die."  Append.  Vol.  II.
No.  XXII.  There  is  evidence  of  the  continuance  of
Mary's  attachment  still  more  explicit.  Lord  Herries,
in  the  parliament  held  the  15th  of  December,  1567,
acknowledged  the  queen's  inordinate  affection  to  that
wicked  man,  and  that  she  could  not  be  induced  by
persuasion  to  leave  him ;  and  that  in  sequestering  her
within  Lochlevin,  the  confederates  had  done  the  duty
of  noblemen.  Append.  Vol.  II.  No.  XXIV.  In  the
year  1571,  a  conference  was  held  by  some  deputies
from  a  convention  of  clergy,  with  the  duke  of  Chatel-
herault,  secretary  Maitland,  Sir  James  Balfour?  and
Kirkaldy ;  and  an  account  of  it  written  by  Mr.  Craig,
one  of  the  ministers  of  Edinburgh,  is  extant  in  Cal-
derwood's  MSS.  Hist.  ii.  244.  In  presence  of  all
these  persons,  most  of  whom  were  in  Edinburgh  when
the  queen  was  taken  at  Carberry,  Maitland,  who  was
now  an  avowed  partisan  of  Mary,  declares,  that  on  the
same  night  she  was  brought  to  Edinburgh,  he  himself

KING HENRY'S MURDER,  &c.

'269

had  offered,  that  if  she  would  abandon  Both  well,  she
should  have  as  thankful  obedience  as  ever  she  had  since
she  came  to  Scotland.  But  in  no  wise  would  she  con-
sent to  leave  Both  well.  According  to  Sir  James  Melvil,
the  queen  found  means  of  writing  a  letter  to  Bothwell
on  the  evening  of  that  day,  when  she  was  conducted  as
a  prisoner  to  Edinburgh,  in  which  she  declared  her  af-
fection to  him  in  the  most  tender  expressions,  and  her
resolution  never  to  abandon  him.  This  letter,  he  says,
was  intercepted  by  the  confederates,  and  determined
them  to  confine  Mary  in  the  castle  of  Lochlevin.  But
as  neither  Buchanan  nor  Knox,  both  abundantly  dis-
posed to  avail  themselves  of  every  fact  and  report  that
could  be  employed  in  order  to  represent  Mary's  con-
duct as  improper  and  criminal,  mention  this  letter;  and
as  the  confederates  themselves  in  their  negotiation  with
Throkmorton,  as  well  as  in  their  accusations  of  the
queen  before  the  English  commissioners  at  York  and
Westminster,  maintain  the  same  silence  with  regard  to
it,  I  am  satisfied  that  Melvil,  who  wrote  his  memoirs
for  the  information  of  his  son  in  his  old  age,  and  long
after  the  events  which  he  records  happened,  has  been
mistaken  with  regard  to  this  particular.  From  this  long
enumeration  of  circumstances,  we  may, without  violence,
draw  the  following  conclusion :  Had  Mary  really  been
accessary  to  the  murder  of  her  husband ;  had  Bothwell
perpetrated  the  crime  with  her  consent,  or  at  her  com-
mand ;  and  had  she  intended  to  stifle  the  evidence
against  him,  and  to  prevent  the  discovery  of  his  guilt,
she  could  scarcely  have  taken  any  other  steps  than
those  which  she  took,  nor  could  her  conduct  have
been  more  repugnant  to  all  the  maxims  of  prudence
and  of  decency.

The  positive  evidence  produced  against  Mary  may
be  classed  under  two  heads.

1.  The  depositions  of  some  persons  who  were  em-
ployed in  committing  the  murder,  particularly  of  Nicho-

270  DISSERTATION ON

las  Hubert,  who,  in  the  writings  of  that  age,  is  called
French  Paris. This  person,  who  was  BothwelFs  ser-
vant, and  much  trusted  by  him,  was  twice  examined,
and  the  original  of  one  of  his  depositions,  and  a  copy
of  the  other,  are  still  extant. It  is  pretended  that  both
these  are  notorious  forgeries. But  they  are  remarkable
for  a  simplicity  and  naivete  which  it  is  almost  impossi-
ble to  imitate;  they  abound  with  a  number  of  minute
facts  and  particularities, which the  most  dexterous
forger  could  not  have  easily  assembled  and  connected
together  with  any  appearance  of  probability ;  and  they
are  filled  with  circumstances  which  can  scarcely  be
supposed  to  have  entered  the  imagination  of  any  man
but  one  of  Paris's  rank  and  character. But,  at  the
same  time,  it  must  be  acknowledged,  that  his  deposi-
tions  contain some  improbable  circumstances. He
seems  to  have  been  a  foolish  talkative  fellow ;  the  fear
of  death,  the  violence  of  torture,  and  the  desire  of
pleasing  those  in  whose  power  he  was,  tempted  him,
perhaps,  to  feign  some  circumstances,  and  to  exaggerate
others. To  say  that  some  circumstances  in  an  affidavit
are  improbable  or  false,  is  very  different  from  saying
that  the  whole  is  forged. I  suspect  the  former  to  be
the  case  here;  but  I  see  no  appearance  of  the  latter.
Be  that  as  it  will,  some  of  the  most  material  facts  in
Paris's  affidavits  rest  upon-  his  single  testimony;  and
for  that  reason,  I  have  not  in  the  history,  nor  shall  I
in  this  place,  lay  any  stress  upon  them.

2.  The  letters  said  to  be  written  by  Mary  to  Both-
well.  These  have  been  frequently  published.  The
accident  by  which  the  queen's  enemies  got  them  into
their  possession,  is  related  in  Book  V.  When  the
authenticity  of  any  ancient  paper  is  dubious  or  contested,
it  may  be  ascertained  either  by  external  or  internal
evidence.  Both  these  have  been  produced  in  the  pre-
sent case.

I.  External  proofs  of  the  genuineness  of  Mary's  let-

KING HENRY'S MURDER,  &c. 271

ters.  1.  Murray,  and  the  nobles  who  adhered  to  him,
affirm  upon  their  word  and  honour,  that  the  letters  were
written  with  the  queen's  own  hand,  with  which  they
were  well  acquainted.  Good.  ii.  64.  92.  2.  The  let-
ters were  publicly  produced  in  the  parliament  of  Scot-
land, December,  1567;  and  were  so  far  considered  as
genuine,  that  they  are  mentioned  in  the  act  against
Mary,  as  one  chief  argument  of  her  guilt.  Good.  ii.
66,  67.  3.  They  were  shewn  privately  to  the  duke
of  Norfolk,  the  earl  of  Sussex,  and  Sir  Ralph  Sadler,
Elizabeth's  commissioners  at  York.  In  the  account
which  they  gave  of  this  matter  to  their  mistress,  they
seem  to  consider  the  letters  as  genuine,  and  express  no
suspicion  of  any  forgery;  they  particularly  observe,
"  that  the  matter  contained  in  them  is  such,  that  it
could  hardly  be  invented  and  devised  by  any  other  than
herself;  for  that  they  discourse  of  some  things,  which
were  unknown  to  any  other  than  to  herself  and  Both-
well;  and  as  it  is  hard  to  counterfeit  so  many,  so  the
matter  of  them,  and  the  manner  how  these  men  came
by  them  is  such,  as  it  seemeth  that  God,  in  whose  sight
murder  and  bloodshed  of  the  innocent  is  abominable,
would  not  permit  the  same  to  be  hid  or  concealed."
Good.  ii.  142.  They  seem  to  have  made  such  an  im-
pression on  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  that  in  a  subsequent
letter  to  Pembroke,  Leicester,  and  Cecil,  he  has  these
words  :  "  If  the  matter  shall  be  thought  as  detestable
and  manifest  to  you,  as  for  ought  we  can  perceive  it
seemeth  here  to  us. '  Good.  ii.  154.  Nor  did  Norfolk
declare  these  to  be  his  sentiments'only  in  public  official
letters,  he  expressed  himself  in  the  same  manner  to  his
most  confidential  friends.  In  a  secret  conference  with
the  bishop  of  Ross  at  York,  the  duke  informed  him
that  he  had  seen  the  letters,  &c.  which  the  regent  had
to  produce  against  the  queen,  whereby  there  would  be
such  matter  proved  against  her,  as  would  dishonour
her  for  ever.  State  Trials,  edition  of  Hargrave,  i.  91.

272  DISSERTATION ON

Murdin,  52.  The  bishop  of  Ross,  if  he  had  known  the
letters  to  be  a  notorious  forgery,  must  have  been  na-
turally led,  in  consequence  of  this  declaration,  to  un-
deceive the  duke,  and  to  expose  the  imposture.  But,
instead  of  this,  the  duke,  and  he,  and  Lethington,  after
consulting  together,  agreed,  that  the  bishop  should
write  to  Mary,  then  at  Bolton,  and  instruct  her  to  make
such  a  proposal  to  Elizabeth,  as  might  prevent  the
public  production  of  the  letters  and  other  evidence.
State  Trials,  i.  94.  Murdin,  45.  Indeed,  the  whole
of  this  secret  conference  seems  to  imply,  that  Lething-
ton, Ross,  and  Norfolk,  were  conscious  of  some  defect
in  Mary's  cause,  and  therefore  exerted  all  their  in-
genuity in  order  to  avoid  a  public  accusation.  Mur-
din, 52,  53.  To  Banister,  whom  the  duke  seems  to
have  trusted  more  entirely  than  any  other  of  his  ser-
vants, he  expressed  himself  in  similar  terms  with  respect
to  the  queen  of  Scots.  State  Trials,  i.  98.  The  words
of  Banister's  evidence  are  remarkabe  :  "  I  confess  that
I,  waiting  of  my  lord  and  master,  when  the  earl  of
Sussex  and  Mr.  Chancellor  of  the  duchy  that  now  is,
were  in  commission  at  York,  did  hear  his  grace  say,
that  upon  examination  of  the  matter  of  the  murder,  it
did  appear  that  the  queen  of  Scots  was  guilty  and  privy
to  the  murder  of  lord  Darnley,  whereby  I  verily  thought
that  his  grace  would  never  join  in  marriage  with  her."
Murdin,  134.  Elizabeth,  in  her  instructions  to  the
earl  of  Shrewsbury  and  Beale,  in  1583,  asserts,  that
both  the  duke  and  earl  of  Arundel  did  declare  to  her-
self, that  the  proof,  by  the  view  of  her  letters,  did  fall
out  sufficient  against  the  queen  of  Scots ;  however,  they
were  after  drawn  to  cover  her  faults  and  pronounce  her
innocency.  MS.  Advoc.  Library,  A.  iii.  28.  p.  314,
from  Cot.  Lib.  Calig.  9.  4.  A  similar  impression  was
made  upon  other  contemporaries  of  Mary  by  the  pro-
duction of  the  letters,  which  implies  a  full  belief  of
their  being  genuine.  Cecil,  in  his  correspondence  with

KING HENRY'S MURDER,  &c.

273

Sir  Henry  Norris,  the  English  ambassador  in  France,
relates  this  transaction  in  terms  which  leave  no  room
to  doubt  with  respect  to  his  own  private  opinion.  In
his  letter,  December  14th,  1568,  the  very  day  on  which
the  letters,  &c.  were  laid  before  the  meeting  of  privy-
counsellors  and  peers,  he  informs  him,  "  That  the  re-
gent was  driven,  from  his  defence,  to  disclose  a  full
fardel  of  the  naughty  matter,  tending  to  convince  the
queen  as  adviser  of  the  murther,  and  the  earl  of  Both-
well  as  her  executour;  and  now  the  queen's  party,  so
great,  refuse  to  make  any  answer,  and  press  that  their
mistress  may  come  in  person  to  answer  the  matter  her-
self before  the  queen's  majesty,  which  is  thought  not
fit  to  be  granted  until  the  great  blot  of  the  marriage
with  her  husband's  murtherer,  and  the  evident  charges,
by  letters  of  her  own,  to  be  deviser  of  the  murther,  be
somewhat  razed  out  or  recovered  ;  for  that  as  the  mat-
ters are  exhibited  against  her,  it  is  far  unseemly  for
any  prince,  or  for  chaste  ears,  to  be  annoyed  with  the
filthy  noise  thereof;  and  yet,  as  being  a  commissioner,
I  must  and  will  forbear  to  pronounce  any  thing  herein
certainly,  though  as  a  private  person  I  cannot  but  with
horrour  and  trembling  think  thereof."  Cabala,  156.
5.  From  the  correspondence  of  Bowes,  the  English  re-
sident in  Scotland,  with  Walsingham,  in  the  year  1582,
published  towards  the  close  of  this  dissertation,  it  is
manifest  that  both  in  England  and  Scotland,  both  by
Elizabeth  and  James,  both  by  the  duke  of  Lennox  and
earl  of  Gowrie,  the  letters  were  deemed  to  be  genuine.
The  eagerness  on  one  side  to  obtain,  and  on  the  other
to  keep,  possession  of  the  casket  and  letters,  implies
that  this  was  the  belief  of  both.  These  sentiments  of
contemporaries,  who  were  in  a  situation  to  be  thoroughly
informed,  and  who  had  abilities  to  judge  with  discern-
ment, will,  in  the  opinion  of  many  of  my  readers,  far
outweigh  theories,  suppositions,  and  conjectures,  formed
at  the  distance  of  two  centuries.  6.  The  letters  were

VOL. II.  T

274  DISSERTATION ON

subjected  to  a  solemn  and  judicial  examination  with
respect  to  their  authenticity,  as  far  as  that  could  be  as-
certained by  resemblance  of  character  and  fashion  of
writing  :  for,  after  the  conferences  at  York  and  West-
minster were  finished,  Elizabeth,  as  I  have  related,  as-
sembled her  privy-counsellors,  and  joining  to  them
several  of  the  most  eminent  noblemen  in  her  kingdom,
laid  before  them  all  the  proceedings  against  the  Scot-
tish queen,  and  particularly  ordered,  that  "  the  letters
and  writings  exhibited  by  the  regent,  as  the  queen  of
Scots'  letters  and  writings,  should  also  be  showed,  and
conference  [i.  e.  comparison]  thereof  made  in  their  sight,
with  the  letters  of  the  said  queen's,  being  extant,  and
heretofore  written  with  her  own  hand,  and  sent  to  the
queen's  majesty;  whereby  may  be  searched  and  ex-
amined what  difference  is  betwixt  them."  Good.  ii.
252.  They  assembled  accordingly,  at  Hampton-court,
December  14  and  15,  1568;  and,  "  The  originals  of
the  letters  supposed  to  be  written  with  the  queen  of
Scots'  own  hand,  were  then  also  presently  produced
and  perused ;  and,  being  read,  were  duly  conferred  and
compared,  for  the  manner  of  writing,  and  fashion  of
orthography,  with  sundry  other  letters  long  since  here-
tofore written,  and  sent  by  the  said  queen  of  Scots  to
the  queen's  majesty.  In  collation  whereof  no  difference
was  found."  Good.  ii.  256..  7.  Mary  having  written
an  apologetical  letterb  for  her  conduct  to  the  countess

b  Mary's  letter  has  never  been  published,  and  ought  to  have  a  place  here,  where
evidence  on  all  sides  is  fairly  produced.  "  Madam,  if  the  wrang  and  false  reportis
of  rebellis,  enemeis  weill  knawin  for  traitouris  to  zow,  and  alace  to  muche  trusted  of
me  by  zoure  advice,  had  not  so  far  sturred  you  aganis  my  innocency  (and  I  must
say  aganis  all  kyndness,  that  zow  have  not  onelie  as  it  were  condempnit  me  wrang-
fullie,  bot  so  hated  me,  as  some  wordis  and  open  deidcis  has  testifeit  to  all  the
warlde,  a  manyfest  mislyking  in  zow  aganis  zoure  awn  blude),  I  wold  not  have
r>mittit  thus  lang  my  dewtie  in  wryting  to  zow  excusing  me  of  those  untrew  re-
porteis  made  of  me.  But  hoping  with  Godis  grace  and  tyme  to  have  my  innocency
knawn  to  zow,  as  I  trust  it  is  already  to  the  maist  pairt  of  all  indifferent  personis,  I
thocht  it  best  not  to  trouble  zow  for  a  tyme  till  that  such  a  matter  is  moved  that
tuichis  us  bayth,  quhilk  is  the  transporting  zoure  littil  son,  and  my  onelie  child  in
this  countrey.  To  the  quhilk  albeit  I  be  never  sa  willing,  I  wald  be  glaid  to  have
zoure  advyse  therein,  as  in  all  uther  thingis  tuiching  him.  I  have  born  him,  and
God  knawis  with  quhat  daunger  to  him  and  me  boith ;  and  of  zow  he  is  descendit.
So  I  meane  not  to  forzet  my  dewtie  to  zow,  in  schewin  herein  any  unkyndness  to

\

KING  HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c.  275

of  Lennox,  July  10th,  1570,  she  transmitted  it  to  her
husband  then  in  Scotland;  and  he  returned  to  the
countess  the  following  answer  :  "  Seeing  you  have  re-
mittit  to  me,  to  answer  the  queen  the  king's  mother's
letters  sent  to  you,  what  can  I  say  but  that  I  do  not
marvell  to  see  hir  writ  the  best  she  can  for  hirself,  to
seame  to  purge  her  of  that,  quhairof  many  besyde  me
are  certainly  persuadit  of  the  contrary,  and  I  not  only
assurit  by  my  a  win  knawledge,  but  by  her  handwr.it,
the  confessions  of  men  gone  to  the  death,  and  uther  in-
fallibil  experience.  It  wull  be  lang  tyme  that  is  hable
to  put  a  mattir  so  notorious  in  oblivion,  to  mak  black
quhyte,  or  innocency  to  appear  quhair  the  contrary  is
sa  weill  knawin.  The  maist  indifferent,  I  trust,  doubtis
not  of  the  equitie  of  zoure  and  my  cause,  and  of  the
just  occasioun  of  our  mislyking.  Her  richt  dewtie  to
zow  and  me,  being  the  parteis  interest,  were  hir  trew
confessioun  and  unfeyned  repentance  of  that  lamentable
fact,  odious  for  hir  to  be  reportit,  and  sorrowfull  for  us
to  think  of.  God  is  just,  and  will  not  in  the  end  be
abused;  but  as  he  has  manifested  he  trewth,  so  will  he
puneise  the  iniquity."  Lennox's  Orig.  Regist.  of  Let-
ters. In  their  public  papers,  the  queen's  enemies  may
be  suspected  of  advancing  what  would  be  most  sub-
servient to  their  cause,  not  what  was  agreeable  to  truth,
or  what  flowed  from  their  own  inward  conviction.  But
in  a  private  letter  to  his  own  wife,  Lennox  had  no  oc-
casion to  dissemble;  and  it  is  plain,  that  he  not  only
thought  the  queen  guilty,  but  believed  the  authenticity
of  her  letters  to  Both  well.  8.  In  opposition  to  all  these

zow,  how  unkyndlie  that  ever  ze  have  delt  with  me,  bot  will  love  zow  as  my  awnt,
and  respect  zow  as  my  moder  in  law.  And  gif  ye  pies  to  knaw  farther  of  my
mynde  in  that  and  all  uther  thingis  betwixt  us,  my  ambassador  the  bishop  of  Ross
sail  be  ready  to  confer  with  zow.  And  so  after  my  hairtlie  commendationis,  re-
mitting me  to  my  saide  ambassador,  and  zour  better  consideratioun,  I  commit  zow
to  the  protectioun  of  Almyghty  God,  quhom  I  pray  to  preserve  zow  and  my  brother
Charles,  and  caus  zow  to  knaw  my  pairt  better  nor  ze  do.  From  Chatisworth  this
x  of  July  1570.

"  To  my  ladie  Lennox  "  Your  natural  gude  nice  and

my  moder  in  law.  lovynge  dochter."

T2

276  DISSERTATION ON

reasons  for  believing  the  letters,  &c.  to  be  authentic,
the  conduct  of  the  nobles  confederated  against  Mary,
in  not  producing  them  directly  as  evidence  against  her,
has  been  represented  as  an  irrefragable  proof  of  their
being  forged.  According  to  the  account  of  the  con-
federates themselves,  the  casket  containing  the  letters
was  seized  by  them  on  the  20th  of  June  1567  ;  but  the
first  time  that  they  were  judicially  stated  as  evidence
against  the  queen  was  in  a  meeting  of  the  regent's
privy-council,  December  4th,  and  they  afterward  served
as  the  foundation  of  the  acts  made  against  her  in  the
parliament  held  on  the  15th  of  the  same  month.  If
the  letters  had  been  genuine,  it  is  contended,  that  the
obtaining  possession  of  them  must  have  afforded  such
matter  of  triumph  to  the  confederates,  that  they  would
instantly  have  proclaimed  it  to  the  whole  world ;  and
in  their  negotiations  with  the  English  and  French
ministers,  or  with  such  of  their  fellow-subjects  as  con-
demned their  proceedings,  they  would  have  silenced,
at  once,  every  advocate  for  the  queen,  by  exhibiting
this  convincing  proof  of  her  guilt.  But  in  this  reason-
ing sufficient  attention  is  not  paid  to  the  delicate  and
perilous  situation  of  the  confederates  at  that  juncture.
They  had  taken  arms  against  their  sovereign,  had  seized
her  person  at  Carberry-hill,  and  had  confined  her  a
prisoner  at  Lochlevin.  A  considerable  number,  how-
ever, of  their  fellow-subjects,  headed  by  some  of  the
most  powerful  noblemen  in  the  kingdom,  was  combined
against  them.  This  combination,  they  soon  perceived,
they  could  not  hope  to  break  or  to  vanquish  without
aid  either  from  France  or  England.  In  the  former
kingdom,  Mary's  uncles,  the  duke  of  Guise  and  cardinal
of  Lorrain,  were,  at  that  period,  all  powerful,  and  the
king  himself  was  devotedly  attached  to  her.  If  the
confederates  confined  their  views  to  the  dissolution  of
the  marriage  of  the  queen  with  Bothwell,  and  to  the
exclusion  of  him  for  ever  from  her  presence,  they  might

KING HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c. 277

hope,  perhaps,  to  be  countenanced  by  Charles  IX.  and
his  ministers,  who  had  sent  an  envoy  into  Scotland  of
purpose  to  dissuade  Mary  from  that  ill-fated  match ;
Append.  No.  XXII.;  whereas  the  loading  her  publicly
with  the  imputation  of  being  accessary  to  the  murder
of  her  husband,  would  be  deemed  such  an  inexpiable
crime  by  the  court  of  France,  as  must  cut  off  every  hope
of  countenance  or  aid  from  that  quarter.  From  England,
with  which  the  principal  confederates  had  been  long
and  intimately  connected,  they  had  many  reasons  to
expect  more  effectual  support;  but  to  their  astonish-
ment, Elizabeth  condemned  their  proceedings  with
asperity,  warmly  espoused  the  cause  of  the  captive
queen,  and  was  extremely  solicitous  to  obtain  her
release  and  restoration.  Nor  was  this  only  one  of
the  artifices  which  Elizabeth  often  employed  in  her
transactions  with  Scotland.  Though  her  most  saga-
cious ministers  considered  it  as  the  wisest  policy  to
support  the  confederate  lords  rather  than  the  queen
of  Scots,  Elizabeth  disregarded  their  counsel.0  Her
high  notions  of  royal  authority,  and  of  the  submission
due  by  subjects,  induced  her,  on  this  occasion,  to  exert
herself  in  behalf  of  Mary,  not  only  with  sincerity  but
with  zeal;  she  negotiated,  she  solicited,  she  threat-
ened. ,  Finding  the  confederates  inflexible,  she  en-
deavoured to  procure  Mary's  release  by  means  of
that  party  in  Scotland  which  continued  faithful  to  her,
and  instructed  Throkmorton  to  correspond  with  the
leaders  of  it,  and  to  make  overtures  to  that  effect.
Keith,  451.  Append.  No.  XXIII.  She  even  went  so

c  This  was  the  opinion  of  Throkmorton,  as  appears  from  an  extract  of  his  letter
of  July  llth,  published  in  the  Append.  No.  XXII.  The  same  were  the  sentiments
of  Cecil,  in  his  letter  of  Aug.  19th,  1565,  to  Sir  Henry  Norris,  Elizabeth's  ambas-
sador to  France:  "  You  shall  perceive,"  says  he,  "  by  the  queen's  letter  to  you,  at
this  present,  how  earnestly  she  is  bent  in  favour  of  the  queen  of  Scots,  and  truly
since  the  beginning  she  hath  bren  greatly  offended  with  the  lords;  and,  how-
soever her  majesty  might  make  her  profit  by  bearing  with  the  lords  in  this  action,
yet  no  counsel  can  stay  her  majesty  from  manifesting  her  misliking  of  them."
Cabala,  140.  And  in  his  letter  of  Sept.  3d,  "  The  queen's  majesty,  our  sovereign,
remained!  still  offended  with  the  lords  for  the  queen;  the  example  moveth  her,"
Ib.  141.  Digges's  Corap.  Amb.  14.

278  DISSERTATION ON

far  as  to  direct  her  ambassador  at  Paris  to  concert
measures  with  the  French  king  how  they,  by  their  joint
efforts,  might  persuade  or  compel  the  Scots  to  "  ac-
knowledge the  queen  her  good  sister  to  be  their  sove-
reign lady  and  queen,  and  renounce  their  obedience
to  her  son."  Keith,  462,  3,  4.  From  all  these  cir-
cumstances, the  confederates  had  every  reason  to  ap-
prehend that  Mary  would  soon  obtain  liberty,  and  by
some  accommodation  be  restored  to  the  whole,  or  at
least  to  a  considerable  portion  of  her  authority  as  sove-
reign. In  that  event  they  foresaw,  that  if  they  should
venture  to  accuse  her  publicly  of  a  crime  so  atrocious
as  the  murder  of  her  husband,  they  must  not  only  be
excluded  for  ever  from  power  and  favour,  but  from  any
hope  of  personal  safety.  On  this  account  they  long
confined  themselves  to  that  which  was  originally  de-
clared to  be  the  reason  of  their  taking  arms;  the  aveng-
ing the  king's  death,  the  dissolving  the  marriage  with
Bothwell,  the  inflicting  on  him  condign  punishment,
or  banishing  him  for  ever  from  the  queen's  presence.
It  appears  from  the  letters  of  Throkmorton,  published
by  bishop  Keith,  and  in  my  Appendix,  that  his  sagacity
early  discovered  that  this  would  be  the  tenor  of  their
conduct.  In  his  letter  from  Edinburgh,  dated  July
14th,  he  observes,  that  "  they  do  not  forget  their  own
peril  conjoined  with  the  da-nger  of  the  prince,  but,  as
far  as  I  perceive,  they  intend  not  to  touch  the  queen
either  in  surety  or  in  honour;  for  they  speak  of  her
with  respect  and  reverence,  and  do  affirm,  as  I  do  learn,
that,  the  condition  aforesaid  accomplished  [i.  e.  the
separation  from  Bothwell],  they  will  both  put  her  to
liberty,  and  restore  her  to  her  estate."  Append.  No.
XXII.  His  letter  of  August  22d,  contains  a  declara-
tion made  to  him  by  Lethington,  in  name  and  in  pre-
sence of  his  associates,  "  that  they  never  meant  harm
neither  to  the  queen's  person  nor  to  her  honour — that
they  have  been  contented  hitherto  to  be  condemned,  as

1 :

KING HENRY'S MURDER,  &c. 279

it  were,  of  all  princes,  strangers,  and,  namely,  of  the
queen  of  England,  being  charged  of  grievous  and  in-
famous titles,  as  to  be  noted  rebels,  traitors,  seditious,
ingrate,  and  cruel,  all  which  they  suffer  and  bear  upon
their  backs,  because  they  will  not  justify  themselves,
nor  proceed  in  any  thing  that  may  touch  their  sove-
reign's honour.  But  in  case  they  be  with  these  defa-
mations continually  oppressed,  or  with  the  force,  aid,
and  practices  of  other  princes,  and  namely  of  the  queen
of  England,  put  in  danger,  or  to  an  extremity,  they  shall
be  compelled  to  deal  otherwise  with  the  queen  than
they  intend,  or  than  they  desire;  for,  added  he,  you
may  be  sure  we  will  not  lose  our  lives,  have  our  lands
forfeited,  and  be  reputed  rebels  through  the  world,
seeing  we  have  the  means  to  justify  ourselves."  Keith,
448.  From  this  view  of  the  slippery  ground  on  which
they  stood  at  that  time,  their  conduct  in  not  producing
the  letters  for  several  months,  appears  not  only  to  have
been  prudent,  but  essential  to  their  own  safety.

But,  at  a  subsequent  period,  when  the  confederates
found  it  necessary  to  have  the  form  of  government,
which  tjiey  had  established,  confirmed  by  authority  of
parliament,  a  different  mode  of  proceeding  became  re-
quisite. All  that  had  hitherto  been  done  with  respect
to  the  queen's  dismission,  the  seating  the  young  king
upon  the  throne,  and  the  appointment  of  the  regent,  was
in  reality  nothing  more  than  the  deed  of  private  men.
It  required  the  exhibition  of  some  legal  evidence  to  pro-
cure a  constitutional  act  giving  the  sanction  of  its  ap-
probation to  such  violent  measures,  and  to  obtain  "  a
perfect  law  and  security  for  all  them  that  either  by  deed,
counsel,  or  subscription,  had  entered  into  that  cause
since  the  beginning."  Haynes,  453.  This  prevailed
with  the  regent  and  his  secret  council,  after  long  deli-
beration, to  agree  to  produce  all  the  evidence  of  which
they  were  possessed  ;  and  upon  that  production  parlia-
ment passed  the  acts  which  were  required.  Such  a

-280  DISSERTATION  ON

change  had  happened  in  the  stale  of  the  kingdom  as  in-
duced the  confederates  to  venture  upon  this  change  in
their  conduct.  In  June,  a  powerful  combination  was
forming  against  them,  under  the  leading  of  the  Hamil-
tons.  In  December,  that  combination  was  broken ;  most
of  the  members  of  it  had  acknowledged  the  king  as  their
lawful  sovereign,  and  had  submitted  to  the  regent's  go-
vernment. Huntly,  Argyle,  Herries,  the  most  powerful
noblemen  of  that  party,  were  present  in  the  parliament,
and  concurred  in  all  its  acts.  Edinburgh,  D unbar,
Dumbarton,  and  all  the  chief  strong-holds  in  the  king-
dom were  now  in  the  hands  of  the  regent ;  the  arms  of
France  had  full  occupation  in  its  civil  war  with  the
Hugonots.  The  ardour  of  Elizabeth's  zeal  in  behalf  of
the  captive  queen  seems  to  have  abated.  A  step  that
would  have  been  followed  with  ruin  to  the  confederates
in  June,  was  attended  with  little  danger  in  December.
From  this  long  deduction  it  appears,  that  no  proof  of
the  letters  being  forged  can  be  drawn  from  the  circum-
stances of  their  not  having  been  produced  immediately
after  the  20th  of  June ;  but  though  no  public  accusation
was  brought  instantly  against  the  queen,  in  consequence
of  seizing  the  casket,  hints  were  given  by  the  confe-
derates, that  they  possessed  evidence  sufficient  to  con-
vict her.  This  is  plainly  implied  in  a  letter  of  Throk-
morton,  July  21,  Keith,  Pref.  p.  xii.  and  more  clearly
in  the  passage  which  I  have  quoted  from  his  letter  of
August  22.  In  his  letter  of  July  25,  the  papers  con-
tained in  the  casket  are  still  more  plainly  pointed  out.
"  They  [i.  e.  the  confederates]  say,  that  they  have  as
apparent  proof  against  her  as  may  be,  as  well  by  the
testimony  of  her  own  hand-writing,  which  they  have  re-
covered, as  also  by  sufficient  witnesses."  Keith,  426.

II.  With  regard  to  the  internal  proofs  of  the  genuine-
ness of  the  queen's  letters  to  Bothwell,  we  may  observe,
1.  That  whenever  a  paper  is  forged  with  a  particular
intention,  the  eagerness  of  the  forger  to  establish  the

KING HENRY'S MURDER,  &c.  281

point  in  view,  his  solicitude  to  cut  off  all  doubts  and
cavils,  and  to  avoid  any  appearance  of  uncertainty,  sel-
dom fail  of  prompting  him  to  use  expressions  the  most
explicit  and  full  to  his  purpose.  The  passages  foisted
into  ancient  authors  by  heretics  in  different  ages ;  the
legendary  miracles  of  the  Romish  saints ;  the  supposi-
titious deeds  in  their  own  favour  produced  by  monas-
teries ;  the  false  charters  of  homage  mentioned  Vol.  I.
p.  3,  are  so  many  proofs  of  this  assertion.  No  maxim
seems  to  be  more  certain  than  this,  that  a  forger  is  often
apt  to  prove  too  much,  but  seldom  falls  into  the  error  of
proving  too  little.  The  point  which  the  queen's  ene-
mies had  to  establish  was,  "  that  as  the  earl  of  Both  well
was  chief  executor  of  the  horrible  and  unworthy  murder
perpetrated,  &c.  so  was  she  of  the  foreknowledge,  coun-
cil, devise,  persuader,  and  commander  of  the  said  mur-
der to  be  done."  Good.  ii.  207.  But  of  this  there  are
only  imperfect  hints,  obscure  intimations,  and  dark  ex-
pressions in  the  letters,  which,  however  convincing  evi-
dence they  might  furnish  if  found  in  real  letters,  bear
no  resemblance  to  that  glare  and  superfluity  of  evidence
which  forgeries  commonly  contain.  All  the  advocates
for  Mary's  innocence  in  her  own  age,  contend  that  there
is  nothing  in  the  letters  which  can  serve  as  a  proof  of
her  guilt.  Lesly,  Blackwood,  Turner,  &c.  abound  with
passages  to  this  purpose ;  nor  are  the  sentiments  of  those
in  the  present  age  different.  "  Yet  still  it  might  have
been  expected  (says  one  of  her  ablest  defenders),  that
some  one  or  other  of  the  points  or  articles  of  the  accu-
sation should  be  made  out  clearly  by  the  proof.  But
nothing  of  that  is  to  be  seen  in  the  present  case.  There
is  nothing  in  the  letters  that  could  plainly  shew  the
writer  to  have  been  in  the  foreknowledge,  counsel,  or
device  of  any  murder,  far  less  to  have  persuaded  or
commanded  it ;  and  as  little  is  there  about  maintaining
or  justifying  any  murders."  Good.  i.  76.  How  ill
advised  were  Mary's  adversaries,  to  contract  so  much

282  DISSERTATION ON

guilt,  and  to  practise  so  many  artifices,  in  order  to
forge  letters,  which  are  so  ill  contrived  for  establishing
the  conclusion  they  had  in  view  !  Had  they  been  so
base  as  to  have  recourse  to  forgery,  is  it  not  natural  to
think  that  they  would  have  produced  something  more
explicit  and  decisive  ?  2.  It  is  almost  impossible  to  in-
vent a  long  narration  of  fictitious  events,  consisting  of
various  minute  particulars,  and  to  connect  these  in  such
a  manner  with  real  facts,  that  no  mark  of  fraud  shall
appear.  For  this  reason,  skilful  forgers  avoid  any  long
detail  of  circumstances,  especially  of  foreign  and  super-
fluous ones,  well  knowing  that  the  more  these  are  mul-
tiplied, the  more  are  the  chances  of  detection  increased.
Now  Mary's  letters,  especially  the  first,  are  filled  with
a  multiplicity  of  circumstances,  extremely  natural  in  a
real  correspondence,  but  altogether  foreign  to  the  pur-
pose of  the  queen's  enemies,  and  which  it  would  have
been  extreme  folly  to  have  inserted,  if  they  had  been
altogether  imaginary,  and  without  foundation.  3.  The
truth  and  reality  of  several  circumstances  in  the  letters,
and  these,  too,  of  no  very  public  nature,  are  confirmed
by  undoubted  collateral  evidence.  Lett.  i.  Good.  ii.
p.  1.  The  queen  is  said  to  have  met  one  of  Lennox's
gentlemen,  and  to  have  had  some  conversation  with
him.  Thomas  Crawford,  who  was  the  person,  appeared
before  Elizabeth's  commissioners,  and  confirmed,  upon
oath,  the  truth  of  this  circumstance.  He  likewise  de-
clared, that  during  the  queen's  stay  at  Glasgow,  the  king
repeated  to  him,  every  night,  whatever  had  passed
through  the  day,  between  her  majesty  and  him ;  and
that  the  account  given  of  these  conversations  in  the  first
letter,  is  nearly  the  same  with  what  the  king  communi-
cated to  him.  Good.  ii.  245.  According  to  the  same
letter  there  was  much  discourse  between  the  king  and
queen  concerning  Mynto,  Hiegait,  and  Walcar.  Good,
ii.  8.  10,  11.  What  this  might  be,  was  altogether  un-
known, until  a  letter  of  Mary's,  preserved  in  the  Scot-

KING HENRY'S MURDER,  &c.  283

tish  college  at  Paris,  and  published,  Keith,  Pref.  vii.
discovered  it  to  be  an  affair  of  so  much  importance  as
merited  all  the  attention  she  paid  to  it  at  that  time.  It
appears  by  a  letter  from  the  French  ambassador,  that
Mary  was  subject  to  a  violent  pain  in  her  side.  Keith,
ibid.  This  circumstance  is  mentioned,  Lett.  i.  p.  30,  in
a  manner  so  natural  as  can  scarcely  belong  to  any  but
a  genuine  production.  4.  If  we  shall  still  think  it  pro-
bable to  suppose  that  so  many  real  circumstances  were
artfully  introduced  into  the  letters  by  the  forgers,  in
order  to  give  an  air  of  authenticity  to  their  production  ;
it  will  hardly  be  possible  to  hold  the  same  opinion  con-
cerning the  following  particular.  Before  the  queen
began  her  first  letter  to  Both  well,  she,  as  usual  among
those  who  write  long  letters  containing  a  variety  of  sub-
jects, made  notes  or  memorandums  of  the  particulars  she
wished  to  remember ;  but  as  she  sat  up  writing  during
a  great  part  of  the  night,  and  after  her  attendants  were
asleep,  her  paper  failed  her,  and  she  continued  her  let-
ter  upon  the  same  sheet  on  which  she  had  formerly  made
her  memorandum.  This  she  herself  takes  notice  of,  and
makes  an  apology  for  it :  "  It  is  late ;  I  desire  never  to
cease  from  writing  unto  you,  yet  now,  after  the  kissing
of  your  hands,  I  will  end  my  letter.  Excuse  my  evil
writing,  and  read  it  twice  over.  Excuse  that  thing  that
is  scriblit,  for  I  had  na  paper  zesterday,  quhenv  I  wraite
that  of  the  memorial."  Good.  ii.  28.  These  memoran-
dums still  appear  in  the  middle  of  the  letter ;  and  what
we  have  said  seems  naturally  to  account  for  the  manner
how  they  might  find  their  way  into  a  real  letter.  It  is
scarce  to  be  supposed,  however,  that  any  forger  would
think  of  placing  memorandums  in  the  middle  of  a  letter,
where,  at  first  sight,  they  make  so  absurd  and  so  unna-
tural an  appearance.  But  if  any  shall  still  carry  their
refinement  to  such  a  length,  as  to  suppose  that  the  for-
gers were  so  artful  as  to  throw  in  this  circumstance,  in
order  to  preserve  the  appearance  of  genuineness,  they

284  DISSERTATION ON

must  at  least  allow  that  the  queen's  enemies,  who  em-
ployed these  forgers,  could  not  be  ignorant  of  the  design
and  meaning  of  these  short  notes  and  memorandums ;
but  we  find  them  mistaking  them  so  far  as  to  imagine
that  they  were  the  credit  of  the  bearer,  i.  e.  points  con-
cerning which  the  queen  had  given  him  verbal  instruc-
tions. Good.  ii.  152.  This  they  cannot  possibly  be  ;
for  the  queen  herself  writes  with  so  much  exactness  con-
cerning the  different  points  in  the  memorandums,  that
there  was  no  need  of  giving  any  credit  or  instructions
to  the  bearer  concerning  them.  The  memorandums  are
indeed  the  contents  of  the  letter.  5.  Mary,  mentioning
her  conversation  with  the  king,  about  the  affair  of
Mynto,  Hiegait,  &c.  says,  "  The  morne  [i.  e.  to-mor-
row] I  will  speik  to  him  upon  that  point;"  and  then
adds,  "  As  to  the  rest  of  Willie  Hiegait's,  he  confessit
it;  but  it  was  the  morne  [i.  e.  the  morning]  after  my
coming  or  he  did  it."  Good.  ii.  9.  This  addition,
which  could  not  have  been  made  till  after  the  conversa-
tion happened,  seems  either  to  have  been  inserted  by
the  queen  into  the  body  of  the  letter,  or,  perhaps,  she
having  written  it  on  the  margin,  it  was  taken  thence
into  the  text.  If  we  suppose  the  letter  to  be  a  real  one,
and  written  at  different  times,  as  it  plainly  bears,  this
circumstance  appears  to  be  very  natural :  but  no  reason
could  have  induced  a  forger  to  have  ventured  upon  such
an  anachronism,  for  which  there  was  no  necessity.  An
addition  perfectly  similar  to  this,  made  to  a  genuine
paper,  may  be  found,  Good.  ii.  282.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  Mary  herself,  and  the  advo-
cates for  her  innocence,  have  contended,  that  these
letters  were  forged  by  her  enemies,  on  purpose  to  blast
her  reputation,  and  to  justify  their  own  rebellion.  It
is  not  necessary  to  take  notice  of  the  arguments  which
were  produced,  in  her  own  age  in  support  of  this
opinion ;  the  observations  which  we  have  already  made,
contain  a  full  reply  to  them.  An  author,  who  has  in-

KING HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c. 285

quired  into  the  affairs  of  that  period  with  great  industry,
and  who  has  acquired  much  knowledge  of  them,  has
published  (as  he  affirms)  a  demonstration  of  the  forgery
of  Mary's  letters.  This  demonstration  he  founds  upon
evidence  both  internal  and  external.  With  regard  to
the  former,  he  observes  that  the  French  copy  of  the
queen's  letters  is  plainly  a  translation  of  Buchanan's
Latin  copy ;  which  Latin  copy  is  only  a  translation  of
the  Scottish  copy  ;  and,  by  consequence,  the  assertion
of  the  queen's  enemies,  that  she  wrote  them  originally
in  French,  is  altogether  groundless,  and  the  whole  letters
are  gross  forgeries.  He  accounts  for  this  strange  suc-
cession of  translations,  by  supposing  that  when  the  for-
gery was  projected,  no  person  could  be  found  capable
of  writing  originally  in  the  French  language  letters
which  would  pass  for  the  queen's  ;  for  that  reason  they
were  first  composed  in  Scottish;  but  unluckily  the  French
interpreter,  as  he  conjectures,  did  not  understand  that
language ;  and  therefore  Buchanan  translated  them
into  Latin,  and  from  this  Latin  they  were  rendered  into
French.  Good.  i.  79,  80.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  observe,  that  no  proof  what-
ever is  produced  of  any  of  these  suppositions.  The
manner  of  the  Scots  in  that  age,  when  almost  every
man  of  rank  spent  a  part  of  his  youth  in  France,  and
the  intercourse  between  the  two  nations  was  great,  ren-
ders it  altogether  improbable  that  so  many  complicated
operations  should  be  necessary  in  order  to  procure  a
few  letters  to  be  written  in  the  French  language.

But  without  insisting  farther  on  this,  we  may  observe,
that  all  this  author's  premises  may  be  granted,  and  yet
his  conclusion  will  not  follow,  unless  he  likewise  prove
that  the  French  letters,  as  we  now  have  them,  are  a  true
copy  of  those  which  were  produced  by  Murray  and  his
party  in  the  Scottish  parliament,  and  at  York  and  at
Westminster.  But  this  he  has  not  attempted ;  and  if
we  attend  to  the  history  of  the  letters,  such  an  attempt,
it  is  obvious,  must  have  been  unsuccessful.  The  letters

286  DISSERTATION ON

were  first  published  at  the  end  of  Buchanan's  Detection.
The  first  edition  of  this  treatise  was  in  Latin,  in  which
language  three  of  the  queen's  letters  were  subjoined  to
it;  this  Latin  edition  was  printed  A.  D.  1571.  Soon
after,  a  Scottish  translation  of  it  was  published,  and  at
the  end  of  it  were  printed,  likewise  in  Scottish,  the  three
letters  which  had  formerly  appeared  in  Latin,  and  five
other  letters  in  Scottish,  which  were  not  in  the  Latin
edition.  Next  appeared  a  French  translation  of  the  De-
tection, and  of  seven  of  the  letters ;  this  bears  to  have
been  printed  at  Edinburgh  by  Thomas  Waltem,  1572.
The  name  of  the  place,  as  well  as  the  printer,  is  allowed
by  all  parties  to  be  a  manifest  imposture.  Our  author,
from  observing  the  day  of  the  month,  from  which  the
printing  is  said  to  have  been  finished,  has  asserted  that
this  edition  was  printed  at  London  ;  but  no  stress  can
be  laid  upon  a  date  found  in  a  book,  where  every  other
circumstance  with  regard  to  the  printing  is  allowed  to  be
false.  Blackwood,  who  (next  to  Lesly)  was  the  best
informed  of  all  Mary's  advocates  in  that  age,  affirms,
that  the  French  edition  of  the  Detection  was  published
in  France  :  "  II  [Buchanan]  a  depuis  adjouste  a  cette
declamation  un  petit  libelle  du  pretendu  mariage  du
Due  de  Norfolk,  et  de  la  fa^on  de  son  proces,  et  la  tout
envoye  aux  freres  a  la  Rochelle,  lesquels  voyants  qu'il
pouvoit  servir  &  la  cause,  1'ont  traduit  en  Francois,  et
iceluy  fut  imprim6e  h  Edinbourg,  c'est  a  dire  &
Rochelle  par  Thomas  Waltem,  nom  aposte  et  fait  &
plaisir.  Martyre  de  Marie.  Jebb  ii:  256."  The  author
of  the  Innocence  de  Marie  goes  farther,  and  names  the
French  translator  of  the  detection.  "  Et  icelui  pre-
mierement  compost  (comme  il  semble)  par  George
Buchanan  Escossoys,  et  dupuis  traduit  en  langue
Fran^oise  par  un  Hugonot,  Poiteven  (advocat  de  voca-
tion) Camuz.  soy  disant  gentilhomme,  et  un  de  plus
remarquez  seditieuz  de  France.  Jebb,  i.  425.  443."  The
concurring  testimony  of  two  contemporary  authors,
whose  residence  in  France  afforded  them  sufficient

KING HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c. 287

means  of  information,  must  outweigh  a  slight  conjec-
ture. The  French  translator  does  not  pretend  to  publish
the  original  French  letters  as  written  by  the  queen  her-
self; he  expressly  declares  that  he  translated  them
from  the  Latin.  Good.  i.  103.  Had  our  author  at-
tended to  all  these  circumstances,  he  might  have  saved
himself  the  labour  of  so  many  criticisms  to  prove  that
the  present  French  copy  of  the  letters  is  a  translation
from  the  Latin.  The  French  editor  himself  acknowledges
it,  and,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  person  ever  denied  it.

We  may  observe  that  the  French  translator  was  so
ignorant  as  to  affirm  that  Mary  had  written  these  letters,
partly  in  French,  partly  in  Scottish.  Good.  i.  103.  Had
this  translation  been  published  at  London  by  Cecil,  or
had  it  been  made  by  his  direction,  so  gross  an  error
would  not  have  been  admitted  into  it.  This  error,  how-
ever, was  owing  to  an  odd  circumstance.  In  the  Scot-
tish translation  of  the  Detection,  two  or  three  sentences
of  the  original  French  were  prefixed  to  each  letter,  which
breaking  off  with  an  &c.  the  Scottish  translation  of  the
whole  letter  followed.  This  method  of  printing  trans-
lations was  not  uncommon  in  that  age.  The  French
editor  observing  this,  foolishly  concluded  that  the  letters
had  been  written  partly  in  French,  partly  in  Scottish.

If  we  carefully  consider  those  few  French  sentences
of  each  letter,  which  still  remain,  and  apply  to  them
that  species  of  criticism,  by  which  our  author  has  ex-
amined the  whole,  a  clear  proof  will  arise,  that  there  was
a  French  copy  not  translated  from  the  Latin,  but  which
was  itself  the  original  from  which  both  the  Latin  and
Scottish  have  been  translated.  This  minute  criticism
must  necessarily  be  disagreeable  to  many  readers  ;  but
luckily  a  few  sentences  only  are  to  be  examined,  which
will  render  it  extremely  short.

In  the  first  letter,  the  French  sentence  prefixed  to  it
ends  with  these  words,  y  faisoit  bon.  It  is  plain  this
expression,  veu  ce  que  peut  un  corps  sans  cceur,  is  by  no

288  DISSERTATION ON

means  a  translation  of  cum  plane  perinde  assem  atque
corpus  sine  corde.  The  whole  sentence  has  a  spirit  and
elegance  in  the  French,  which  neither  the  Latin  nor
Scottish  have  retained.  Jusques  a  la  dinee  is  not  a
translation  of  toto  prandii  tempore ;  the  Scottish  trans-
lation, quhile  denner-time,  expresses  the  sense  of  the
French, more  properly;  for  anciently  quhile  signified
until  as  well  as  during.  Je  ri*ay  pas  tenu  grand  promos
is  not  justly  rendered  neque  contulerim  sermonem  cum
quoquam  ;  the  phrase  used  in  the  French  copy  is  one
peculiar  to  that  language,  and  gives  a  more  probable
account  of  her  behaviour  than  the  other.  Jugeant  bien
quil  riy  faisoit  bon  is  not  a  translation  of  ut  qui  judi-
carent  id  non  esse  ex  usu.  The  French  sentence  pre-
fixed to  lett.  2.  ends  with  apprendre.  It  is  evident  that
both  the  Latin  and  Scottish  translations  have  omitted
altogether  these  words,  et  toutefoisje  ne  puts  apprendre.
The  French  sentence  prefixed  to  lett.  3.  ends  with  pre-
senter. J^aye  veille  plus  tard  la  haut  is  plainly  no  trans-
lation oidiutius  illic  morata  sum;  the  sense  of  the  French
is  better  expressed  by  the  Scottish,  /  have  walkit  later
there  up.  Again,  Pour  excuser  vostre  affaire  is  very
different  from  ad  excmandam  nostra  negotia.  The  five
remaining  letters  never  appeared  in  Latin ;  nor  is  there
any  proof  of  their  being  ever  translated  into  that  lan-
guage. Four  of  them,  however,  are  published  in  French.
This  entirely  overturns  our  author's  hypothesis  concern-
ing the  necessity  of  a  translation  into  Latin.

In  the  Scottish  edition  of  the  Detection,  the  whole
sonnet  is  printed  in  French  as  well  as  in  Scottish.  It
is  not  possible  to  believe  that  this  Scottish  copy  could
be  the  original  from  which  the  French  was  translated.
The  French  consists  of  verses  which  hath  both  measure
and  rhyme,  and  which,  in  many  places,  are  far  from
being  inelegant.  The  Scottish  consists  of  an  equal
number  of  lines,  but  without  measure  or  rhyme.  Now
no  man  could  ever  think  of  a  thing  so  absurd  and  im-

KING  HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c. 289

practicable,  as  to  require  one  to  translate  a  certain  given
number  of  lines  in  prose,  into  an  equal  number  of  verses
where  both  measure  and  rhyme  were  to  be  observed.
The  Scottish,  on  the  contrary,  appears  manifestly  to  be
a  translation  of  the  French ;  the  phrases,  the  idioms,
and  many  of  the  words  are  French,  and  not  Scottish.
Besides,  the  Scottish  translator  has,  in  several  instances,
mistaken  the  sense  of  the  French,  and  in  many  more
expresses  the  sense  imperfectly.  Had  the  sonnet  been
forged,  this  could  not  have  happened.  The  directors
of  the  fraud  would  have  understood  their  own  work.
I  shall  satisfy  myself  with  one  example,  in  which
there  is  a  proof  of  both  my  assertions.  Stanza  viii.
ver.  9.

Pour  luy  j'attendz  toute  bonne  fortune,
Pour  luy  je  veux  garder  sante  et  vie,
Pour  luy  tout  vertu  de  suivre  j'ay  envie.

For  him  I  attend  all  good  fortune,
For  him  I  will  conserve  helthe  and  life,
For  him  I  desire  to  ensue  courage.

Attend  in  the  first  line  is  not  a  Scottish,  but  a  French
phrase ;  the  two  other  lines  do  not  express  the  sense  of
the  French,  and  the  last  is  absolute  nonsense.

The  eighth  letter  was  never  translated  into  French.
It  contains  much  refined  mysticism  about  devices,  a  folly
of  that  age,  of  which  Mary  was  very  fond,  as  appears
from  several  other  circumstances,  particularly  from  a
letter  concerning  impresas  by  Drummond  of  Hawthorn-
den.  If  Mary's  adversaries  forged  her  letters,  they
were  certainly  employed  very  idly  when  they  produced
this.

From  these  observations  it  seems  to  be  evident  that
there  was  a  French  copy  of  Mary's  letters,  of  which  the
Latin  and  Scottish  were  only  translations.  Nothing
now  remains  of  this  copy  but  those  few  sentences  which
are,  prefixed  to  the  Scottish  translation.  The  French

VOL. II.  U

290  DISSERTATION ON

editor  laid  hold  of  these  sentences,  and  tacked  his  own
translation  to  them,  which,  so  far  as  it  is  his  work,  is  a
servile  and  a  very  wretched  translation  of  Buchanan's
Latin;  whereas,  in  those  introductory  sentences,  we
have  discovered  strong  marks  of  their  being  originals,
and  certain  proofs  that  they  are  not  translated  from
the  Latin.

It  is  apparent,  too,  from  comparing  the  Latin  and
Scottish  translations  with  these  sentences,  that  the
Scottish  translator  has  more  perfectly  attained  the  sense
and  spirit  of  the  French  than  the  Latin.  And  as  it  ap-
pears, that  the  letters  were  very  early  translated  into
Scottish,  Good.  ii.  76.  it  is  probable  that  Buchanan
made  his  translation,  not  from  the  French  but  from  the
Scottish  copy.  Were  it  necessary,  several  critical
proofs  of  this  might  be  produced.  One  that  has  been
already  mentioned  seems  decisive.  Diutius  illic  morata
sum  bears  not  the  least  resemblance  to  fay  veill6  plus
tard  la  haut ;  but  if,  instead  of  / walkit  [i.e.  watched]
laiter  thairup,  we  suppose  that  Buchanan  read  /  ivaitit,
&c.  this  mistake,  into  which  he  might  so  easily  have
fallen,  accounts  for  the  error  in  his  translation.

These  criticisms,  however  minute,  appear  to  be  well-
founded.  But  whatever  opinion  may  be  formed  con-
cerning them,  the  other  arguments,  with  regard  to  the
internal  evidence,  remain  in  full  force.

The  external  proofs  of  the  forgery  of  the  queen's  let-
ters, which  our  author  has  produced,  appear  at  first
sight  to  be  specious,  but  are  not  more  solid  than  that
which  we  have  already  examined.  These  proofs  may
be  classed  under  two  heads.  1 .  The  erroneous  and
contradictory  accounts  which  are  said  to  be  given  of
the  letters  upon  the  first  judicial  production  of  them.
In  the  secret  council  held  December  4,  1567,  they  are
described  "  as  her  privie  letters  written  and  subscrivit
with  her  awin  hand."  Haynes,  454.  Good.  ii.  64.  In
the  act  of  parliament,  passed  on  the  15th  of  the  same

KING HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c.  291

month,  they  are  described  as  "  her  privie  letters  written
halelie  with  her  awin  hand."  Good.  ib.  67. This  di-
versity of  description  has  been  considered  as  a  strong
presumption  of  forgery. The  manner  in  which  Mr.
Hume  accounts  for  this  is  natural  and  plausible,  vol.  v.
p.  498. And  several  ingenious  remarks,  tending  to
confirm  his  observations,  are  made  in  a  pamphlet  lately
published,  entitled,  Miscellaneous  Remarks  on  the  En-
quiry into  the  Evidence  against  Mary  Queen  of  Scots.
To  what  they  have  observed  it  may  be  added,  that  the
original  act  of  secret  council  does  not  now  exist ;  we
have  only  a  copy  of  it  found  among  Cecil's  papers,  and
the  transcriber  has  been  manifestly  so  ignorant,  or  so
careless,  that  an  argument  founded  entirely  upon  the
supposition  of  his  accuracy  is  of  little  force. Several
errors  into  which  he  has  fallen,  we  are  enabled  to  point
out,  by  comparing  his  copy  of  the  act  of  secret  council,
with  the  act  of  parliament  passed  in  consequence  of  it.
The  former  contains  a  petition  to  parliament ;  in  the
latter  the  real  petition  is  resumed  verbatim,  and  con-
verted into  a  law. In  the  copy,  the  queen's  marriage
with  Bothwell  is  called  "  a  priveit  marriage,"  which  it
certainly  was  not ;  for  it  was  celebrated,  after  proclama-
tion of  banns,  in  St.  Giles's  church  three  several  days,
and  with  public  solemnity ;  but  in  the  act  it  is  denomi-
nated "  ane  pretendit  marriage,"  which  is  the  proper
description  of  it,  according  to  the  ideas  of  the  party.
In  the  copy,  the  queen  is  said  to  be  "  so  thrall  and
bludy  affectionat  to  the  privat  appetite  of  that  tyran,"
which  is  nonsense,  but  in  the  act  it  is  "  blindly  affec-
tionat."  In  the  copy  it  is  said,  "  all  nobill  and  virtuous
men  abhorring  their  traine  and  company." In  the  act,
"  their  tyrannic  and  companie,"  which  is  evidently  the
true  reading,  as  the  other  has  either  no  meaning,  or  is
a  mere  tautology. 2.  The  other  proof  of  the  forgery
of  the  letters,  is  founded  upon  the  impossibility  of  re-
conciling the  account,  given  of  the  time  when,  and  the

u2

292  DISSERTATION ON

places  from  which,  the  letters  are  supposed  to  have  been
written,  with  what  is  certainly  known  concerning  the
queen's  motions.  According  to  the  paper  published,
Anders,  ii.  269,  which  has  been  called  Murray's  Diary,
and  which  is  formed  upon  the  authority  of  the  letters,
Mary  set  out  from  Edinburgh  to  Glasgow,  January  21,
1567  ;  she  arrived  there  on  the  23rd;  left  that  place  on
the  27th ;  she,  together  with  the  king,  reached  Linlith-
gow  on  the  28th,  stayed  in  that  town  only  one  night,
and  returned  to  Edinburgh  before  the  end  of  the  month.
But,  according  to  Mr.  Goodall,  the  queen  did  not  leave
Edinburgh  until  Friday,  January  24th ;  as  she  stayed  a
night  at  Callendar,  she  could  not  reach  Glasgow  sooner
than  the  evening  of  Saturday  the  25th,  and  she  returned
to  Linlithgow  on  Tuesday  the  28th.  By  consequence,
the  first  letter,  which  supposes  the  queen  to  have  been
at  least  four  days  in  Glasgow,  as  well  as  the  second
letter,  which  bears  date  at  Glasgow,  Saturday  morning,
whereas  she  did  not  arrive  there  until  the  evening,  must
be  forgeries.  That  the  queen  did  not  set  out  from
Edinburgh  sooner  than  the  24th  of  January,  is  evident
(as  he  contends)  from  the  public  records,  which  con-
tain a  Precept  of  a  confirmation  of  a  life-rent  by  James
Boyd  to  Margaret  Chalmers,  granted  by  the  queen,  on
the  24th  of  January,  at  Edinburgh ;  and  likewise  a  let-
ter of  the  queen's,  dated  at  Edinburgh  on  the  same  day,
appointing  James  Inglis,  taylor  to  the  prince,  her  son.
That  the  king  and  queen  had  returned  to  Linlithgow
on  the  28th,  appears  from  a  deed,  in  which  they  ap-
point Andrew  Ferrier,  keeper  of  their  palace  there,
dated  at  Linlithgow,  January  28.  Good.  i.  118.

This  has  been  represented  to  be  not  only  a  convinc-
ing, but  a  legal  proof  of  the  forgery  of  the  letters  said
to  be  written  by  Mary ;  but  how  far  it  falls  short  of
this,  will  appear  from  the  following  considerations  :

1.  It  is  evident  from  a  declaration  or  confession
made  by  the  bishop  of  Ross,  that  before  the  confe-

KING  HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c.  293

rences  at  York,  which  were  opened  in  the  beginning  of
October,  1568,  Mary  had,  by  an  artifice  of  Maitland's,
got  into  her  hands  a  copy  of  those  letters  which  her
subjects  accused  her  of  having  written  to  Bothwell.
Brown's  Trial  of  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  31.  36.  It  is
highly  probable  that  the  bishop  of  Ross  had  seen  the
letters  before  he  wrote  the  defence  of  queen  Mary's
honour  in  1570.  They  were  published  to  all  the
world,  together  with  Buchanan's  Detection,  A.D.  1571.
Now,  if  they  had  contained  an  error  so  gross,  and,  at
that  time,  so  obvious  to  discovery,  as  the  supposing
the  queen  to  have  passed  several  days  at  Glasgow,
while  she  was  really  at  Edinburgh ;  had  they  con-
tained a  letter  dated  at  Glasgow,  Saturday  morning,
though  she  did  not  arrive  there  till  the  evening ;  is  it
possible  that  she  herself,  who  knew  her  own  motions,
or  the  able  and  zealous  advocates  who  appeared  for
her  in  that  age,  should  not  have  published  and  ex-
posed this  contradiction,  and,  by  so  doing,  have  blasted
at  once  the  credit  of  such  an  imposture  ?  In  disquisi-
tions which  are  naturally  abstruse  and  intricate,  the  in-
genuity of  the  latest  author  may  discover  many  things
which  have  escaped  the  attention,  or  baffled  the  saga-
city, of  those  who  have  formerly  considered  the  same
subject.  But  when  a  matter  of  fact  lay  so  obvious  to
view,  this  circumstance  of  its  being  unobserved  by  the
queen  herself,  or  by  any  of  her  adherents,  is  almost  a
demonstration  that  there  is  some  mistake  or  fallacy  in
our  author's  arguments.  So  far  are  any,  either  of  our
historians,  or  of  Mary's  defenders,  from  calling  in
question  the  common  account  concerning  the  time  of
the  queen's  setting  out  to  Glasgow,  and  her  returning
from  it,  that  there  is  not  the  least  appearance  of  any
difference  among  them  with  regard  to  this  point.  But
farther,

2.  Those  papers  in  the  public  records,  on  which  our
author  rests  the  proof  of  his  assertion  concerning  the

294  DISSERTATION  ON

queen's  motions,  are  not  the  originals  subscribed  by  the
queen,  but  copies  only,  or  translations  of  copies  of
those  originals.  It  is  not  necessary,  nor  would  it  be
very  easy,  to  render  this  intelligible  to  persons  unac-
quainted with  the  forms  of  law  in  Scotland  ;  but  every
Scotsman  conversant  in  business  will  understand  me
when. I  say,  that  the  precept  of  confirmation  of  the  life-
rent  to  Boyd  is  only  a  Latin  copy  or  note  of  a  precept,
which  was  sealed  with  the  privy-seal,  on  a  warrant
from  the  signet-office,  proceeding  on  a  signature  which
bore  date  at  Edinburgh,  the  24th  of  January ;  and  that
the  deed  in  favour  of  James  Inglis  is  the  copy  of  a  let-
ter, sealed  with  the  privy-seal,  proceeding  on  a  signa-
ture which  bore  date  at  Edinburgh,  January  24.  From
all  this  we  may  argue  with  some  degree  of  reason,  that
a  proof  founded  on  papers  which  are  so  many  removes
distant  from  the  originals,  cannot  but  be  very  lame
and  uncertain.

3.  At  that  time  all  public  papers  were  issued  in  the
name  both  of  the  king  and  queen ;  by  law,  the  king's
subscription  was  no  less  requisite  to  any  paper  than  the
queen's ;  and  therefore,  unless  the  original  signatures
be  produced,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  particular  day
when  each  of  them  signed,  or  to  prove  that  it  was
signed  only  by  one  of  them,  the legal  proof  aris-
ing from  these  papers  would  be,  that  both  the  king
and  queen  signed  them  at  Edinburgh  on  the  24th  of
January.

4.  The  dates  of  the  warrants  or  precepts  issued  by
the  sovereign  in  that  age,  seem  to  have  been  in  a  great
measure  arbitrary,  and  affixed  at  the  pleasure  of  the
writer ;  and  of  consequence,  these  dates  were  seldom
accurate,  are  often  false,  and  can  never  be  relied  upon.
This  abuse  became  so  frequent,  and  was  found  to  be
so  pernicious,  that  an  act  of  parliament,  A.D.  1592,
declared  the  fixing  a  false  date  to  a  signature  to  be
high-treason.

KING HENRY'S MURDER,  &c.  295

5.  There  still  remain,  in  the  public  records,  a  great
number  of  papers,  which  prove  the  necessity  of  this
law,  as  well  as  the  fallacy  of  our  author's  arguments.
And  though  it  be  no  easy  matter,  at  the  distance  of
two  centuries,  to  prove  any  particular  date  to  be
false,  yet  surprising  instances  of  this  kind  shall  be  pro-
duced. Nothing  is  more  certain  from  history,  than
that  the  king  was  at  Glasgow,  24th  January,  .1567,
and  yet  the  record  of  signatures  from  1565  to  1582,
fol.  16th,  contains  the  copy  of  a  signature  to  Archi-
bald Edmonston,  said  to  have  been  subscribed  by  our
sovereigns,  i.  e,  the  king  and  queen,  at  Edinburgh,
January  24,  1 567 ;  so  that  if  we  were  to  rely  impli-
citly upon  the  dates  in  the  records  of  that  age,  or  to
hold  our  author's  argument  to  be  good,  it  would  prove
that  not  only  the  queen,  but  the  king  too  was  at  Edin-
burgh on  the  24th  of  January.

It  appears  from  an  original  letter  of  the  bishop  of
Ross,  that  on  the  25th  of  October,  1566,  Mary  lay  at
the  point  of  death ;  Keith,  App.  134 ;  and  yet  a  deed
is  to  be  found  in  the  public  records,  which  bears  that
it  was  signed  by  the  queen  that  day.  Privy  seal,  lib.
35.  fol.  89.  Ouchterlony*

Bothwell  seized  the  queen,  as  she  returned  from
Stirling,  April  24,  1567,  and  (according  to  her  own
account)  conducted  her  to  Dunbar  with  all  diligence.
And.  i.  95.  But  our  author,  relying  on  the  dates  of
some  papers  which  he  found  in  the  records,  supposes
that  Bothwell  allowed  her  to  stop  at  Edinburgh,  and
to  transact  business  there.  Nothing  can  be  more  impro-
bable than  this  supposition.  We  may  therefore  rank  the
date  of  the  deed  to  Wright,  Privy  seal,  lib.  36.  fol.  43,
and  which  is  mentioned  by  our  author,  vol.  i.  124,

d  N.B.  In  some  of  the  earlier  editions  of  this  Dissertation,  another  instance  of  the
same  nature  with  those  which  go  before  and  follow  was  mentioned;  but  that,  as  has
since  been  discovered,  was  founded  on  a  mistake  of  the  person  employed  to  search
the  records,  and  is  therefore  omitted  in  this  edition.  The  reasoning,  however,  in
the  Dissertation,  stands  still  in  force,  notwithstanding  this  omission.

296  DISSERTATION  ON

among  the  instances  of  the  false  dates  of  papers  which
were  issued  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business  in  that
age.  Our  author  has  mistaken  the  date  of  the  other
paper  to  Forbes,  ibid.;  it  is  signed  April  14th,  not
April  24th.

If  there  be  any  point  agreed  upon  in  Mary's  history,
it  is  that  she  remained  at  Dunbar  from  the  time  that
Bothwell  carried  her  thither,  till  she  returned  to  Edin-
burgh along  with  him  in  the  beginning  of  May. Our
author  himself  allows that  she  resided  twelve  days
there,  vol.  i.  367. Now,  though  there  are  deeds  in  the
records  which  bear  that  they  were  signed  by  the  queen
at  Dunbar  during  that  time,  yet  there  are  others  which
bear  that  they  were  signed  at  Edinburgh ;  e.  g.  there  is
one  at  Edinburgh,  April  27th,  Privy  seal,  lib.  36.  fol.
97. There  are  others  said  to  be  signed  at  Dunbar  on
that  day. Lib.  31. Chart.  No.  524.  526. Ib.  lib.  32.
.  No.  154.  157. There  are  some  signed  at  Dunbar,  April
28th. Others  at  Edinburgh,  April  30th,  lib.  32. Chart.
No.  492. Others  at  Dunbar,  May  1st. Id.  ibid.  No.
158. These  different  charters  suppose  the  queen  to
have  made  so  many  unknown,  improbable,  and  incon-
sistent journeys,  that  they  afford  the  clearest  demon-
stration that  the  dates  in  these  records  ought  not  to  be
depended  on.

This  becomes  more  evident  from  the  date  of  the
charter  said  to  be  signed  April  27th,  which  happened
that  year  to  be  a  Sunday,  which  was  not,  at  that  time,
a  day  of  business  in  Scotland,  as  appears  from  the  books
of  sederunt,  then  kept  by  the  lords  of  session.

From  this  short  review  of  our  author's  proof  of  the
forgery  of  the  letters  to  Bothwell,  it  is  evident,  that  his
arguments  are  far  from  amounting  to  demonstration.*

e  The  uncertainty  of  any  conclusion  formed  merely  on  the  date  of  public  papers
in  that  age,  especially  with  respect  to  the  king,  is  confirmed  and  illustrated  by  a
discovery  which  was  made  lately.  Mr.  Davidson  (to  whom  I  was  indebted  for  much
information  when  I  composed  this  Dissertation  thirty-three  years  ago)  has,  in  the
course  of  his  researches  into  the  antiquities  of  his  country,  found  an  original  paper

KING  HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c.  297

Another  argument  against  the  genuineness  of  these
letters  is  founded  on  the  style  and  composition,  which
are  said  to  be  altogether  unworthy  of  the  queen,  and
unlike  her  real  productions.  It  is  plain,  both  from  the
great  accuracy  of  composition  in  most  of  Mary  letters,
and  even  from  her  solicitude  to  write  them  in  a  fair
hand,  that  she  valued  herself  on  those  accomplishments,
and  was  desirous  of  being  esteemed  an  elegant  writer.
But  when  she  wrote  at  any  time  in  a  hurry,  then  many
marks  of  inaccuracy  appear.  A  remarkable  instance
of  this  may  be  found  in  a  paper  published,  Good.  ii.
301.  Mary's  letters  to  Both  well  were  written  in  the
utmost  hurry ;  and  yet  under  all  the  disadvantages  of  a
translation,  they  are  not  destitute  either  of  spirit  or
energy.  The  manner  in  which  she  expresses  her  love
to  Bothwell  has  been  pronounced  indecent  and  even
shocking.  But  Mary's  temper  led  her  to  warm  ex-
pressions of  her  regard ;  those  refinements  of  delicacy,
which  now  appear  in  all  the  commerce  between  the
sexes,  were,  in  that  age,  but  little  known,  even  among
persons  of  the  highest  rank.  Among  the  earl  of  Hard-
wicke's  papers,  there  is  a  series  of  letters  from  Mary
to  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  copied  from  the  Harleian  li-
brary, p.  37.  b.  9.  fol.  88,  in  which  Mary  declares  her
love  to  that  nobleman  in  language  which  would  now
be  reckoned  extremely  indelicate  ;  Hard.  State  Papers,
i.  189,  &c.

Some  of  Mary's  letters  to  Bothwell  were  written  be-

which  must  appear  curious  to  Scottish  antiquaries.  Buchanan  asserts,  that  on  ac-
count of  the  king's  frequent  absence,  occasioned  by  his  dissipation  and  love  of  field-
sports,  a  cachette,  or  stamp  cut  in  metal,  was  made,  with  which  his  name  was  affixed
to  public  deeds,  as  if  he  had  been  present.  Hist.  lib.  xvii.  p.  343.  edit.  Ruddira.
Knox  relates  the  same  thing,  Hist.  p.  393.  How  much  this  may  have  divested  the
king  of  the  consequence  which  he  derived  from  having  his  name  conjoined  with  that
of  the  queen  in  all  public  deeds,  as  the  affixing  of  his  name  was  thereby  put  entirely
in  the  power  of  the  person  who  had  the  custody  of  the  cachette,  is  manifest.  The
keeping  of  it,  as  both  Buchanan  and  Knox  affirm,  was  committed  to  Rizio.  A  late
defender  of  queen  Mary  calls  in  question  what  they  relate,  and  seems  to  consider  it
as  one  of  their  aspersions.  Goodall,  vol.  i.  p.  238.  The  truth  of  their  assertion,
however,  is  now  fully  established,  by  the  original  deed  which  I  have  mentioned.
This  I  have  seen  and  examined  with  attention.  It  is  now  lodged  by  Mr.  Davidson
in  the  signet-office.  In  it  the  subscription  of  the  king's  name  Las  evidently  been
made  by  a  cachette  with  printer's  ink.

298  DISSERTATION ON

fore  the  murder  of  her  husband ;  some  of  them  after
that  event,  and  before  her  marriage  to  Both  well.  Those
which  are  prior  to  the  death  of  her  husband  abound
with  the  fondest  expressions  of  her  love  to  Bothwell,
and  excite  something  more  than  a  suspicion  that  their
familiarity  had  been  extremely  criminal.  We  find  in
them  too,  some  dark  expressions,  which  her  enemies
employed  to  prove  that  she  was  no  stranger  to  the
schemes  which  were  formed  against  her  husband's  life.
Of  this  kind  are  the  following  passages:  "  Alace!  I
never  dissavit  ony  body ;  but  I  remit  me  altogidder  to
zour  will.  Send  me  advertisement  quhat  I  sail  do,
and  quhatsaever  thing  come  thereof,  I  sail  obey  zow.
Advise  to  with  zourself,  gif  ze  can  find  out  ony  mair
secret  inventioun  by  medicine,  for  he  suld  tak  medi-
cine and  the  bath  at  Craigmillar."  Good.  ii.  22.  "  See
not  hir  quhais  fenzeit  teiris  suld  not  be  sa  meikle
praisit  and  estemit,  as  the  trew  and  faithfull  travellis
quhilk  I  sustene  for  to  merit  hir  place.  For  obtaining
of  the  quhilk,  againis  my  natural,  I  betrayis  thame  that
may  impesche  me.  God  forgive  me,"  &c.  Ibid.  27.  "  I
have  walkit  later  thairup,  than  I  wald  have  done,  gif
it  had  not  been  to  draw  something  out  of  him,  quhilk
this  berer  will  schaw  zow,  quhilk  is  the  fairest  commo-
dity that  can  be  offerit  to  excuse  zour  affairs."  Ibid.  32.
From  the  letters  posterior  to  the  death  of  her  husband,
it  is  evident  that  the  scheme  of  Bothwell's  seizing
Mary  by  force,  and  carrying  her  along  with  him,  was
contrived  in  concert  with  herself,  and  with  her  ap-
probation/

f  That  letters  of  so  much  importance  as  those  of  Mary  to  Bothwell  should  have
been  entirely  lost,  appears  to  many  altogether  unaccountable.  After  being  pro-
duced in  England  before  Elizabeth's  commissioners,  they  were  delivered  back  by
them  to  the  earl  of  Murray.  Good.  ii.  235.  He  seems  to  have  kept  them  in  his
possession  during  life.  After  his  death,  they  fell  into  the  hands  of  Lennox  his  suc-
cessor, who  restored  them  to  the  earl  of  Morton.  Good.  ii.  91.  Though  it  be  not
necessarily  connected  with  any  of  the  questions  which  gave  occasion  to  this  Disser-
tation, it  may  perhaps  satisfy  the  curiosity  of  some  of  my  readers  to  inform  them,
that,  after  a  very  diligent  search,  which  has  lately  been  made,  no  copy  of  Mary's
letters  to  Bothwell  can  be  found  in  any  of  the  public  libraries  in  Great  Britain.
The  only  certain  intelligence  concerning  them,  since  the  time  of  their  being  deli-
vered to  Morton,  was  communicated  bv  the  accurate  Dr.  Birch.

KING  HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c. 299

With  respect  to  the  sonnets,  Sir  David  Dalrymple
has  proved  clearly,  that  they  must  have  been  written

Extract  of  the  letters  of  Robert  Bowes,  esq.  ambassador  from  queen  Elizabeth  to
the  king  of  Scotland,  written  to  Sir  Francis  Walsingham,  secretary  of  state,  from  the
original  register  book  of  Mr.  Bowes's  letters,  from  15th  of  August,  1582,  to  28th
September,  1583,  in  the  possession  of  Christopher  Hunter,  M.D.  of  Durham.

1582,  8th  November,  from  Edinburgh.

Albeit  I  have  been  borne  in  hand,  That  the  coffer  wherein  were  the  originals  of
letters  between  the  Scottish  queen  and  the  earl  of  Bothwell,  had  been  delivered  to
sundry  hands,  and  thereby  was  at  present  wanting,  and  unknown  where  it  rested,  yet
I  have  learned  certainly  by  the  prior  of  Pluscardyne's  means,  that  both  the  coffer
and  also  the  writings  are  come,  and  now  remain  with  the  earl  of  Gowrie,  who,  1
perceive,  will  be  hardly  entreated  to  make  delivery  to  her  majesty,  according  to  her
majesty's  desire.

This  time  past  I  have  expended  in  searching  where  the  coffer  and  writings  were,
wherein,  without  the  help  of  the  prior,  I  should  have  found  great  difficulty ;  now  I
will  essay  Gowrie,  and  of  my  success  you  shall  be  shortly  advertised.

12th  of  November,  1582,  from  Edinburgh.

Because  I  had  both  learned,  that  the  casket  and  letters  mentioned  in  my  last,
before  these  were  come  to  the  possession  of  the  earl  of  Gowrie,  and  also  found  that
no  mean  might  prevail  to  win  the  same  out  of  his  hands  without  his  own  consent  and
privity ;  in  which  behalf  I  had  employed  fit  instruments,  that  nevertheless  profiting
nothing;  therefore  I  attempted  to  essay  himself,  letting  him  know  that  the  said
casket  and  letters  should  have  been  brought  to  her  majesty  by  the  offer  and  good
means  of  good  friends,  promising  to  have  delivered  them  to  her  majesty  before  they
came  into  his  hands  and  custody,  and  knowing  that  he  did  bear  the  like  affection,
and  was  ready  to  pleasure  her  majesty  in  all  things,  and  chiefly  in  this  that  had
been  thus  far  tendered  to  her  majesty,  and  which  thereby  should  be  well  accepted
and  with  princely  thanks  and  gratuity  be  requited  to  his  comfort  and  contentment ;  I
moved  him  that  they  might  be  a  present  to  be  sent  to  her  majesty  from  him,  and  that
I  might  cause  the  same  to  be  conveyed  to  her  majesty,  adding  hereunto  such  words
and  arguments  as  might  both  stir  up  a  hope  of  liberality,  and  also  best  effect  the
purpose.  At  the  first  he  was  loth  to  agree  that  they  were  in  his  possession  ;  but  I
let  him  plainly  know  that  I  was  certainly  informed  that  they  were  delivered  to  him
by  Saunders  Jardin ;  whereupon  he  pressed  to  know  who  did  so  inform  me,  inquir-
ing whether  the  sons  of  the  earl  of  Morton  had  done  it,  or  no.  I  did  not  otherwise
in  plain  terms  deny  or  answer  thereunto,  but  that  he  might  think  that  he  had  told
me  as  the  prior  is  ready  to  avouch,  and  well  pleased  that  I  shall  give  him  to  be  the
author  thereof;  after  he  had  said  [though]  all  these  letters  were  in  his  keeping
(which  he  would  neither  grant  nor  deny),  yet  he  might  not  deliver  them  to  any
person  without  the  consents  and  privities,  as  well  of  the  king,  that  had  interest
therein,  as  also  of  the  rest  of  the  noblemen  enterprisers  of  the  action  against  the  king's
mother,  and  that  would  have  them  kept  as  an  evidence  to  warrant  and  make  good
that  action.  And  albeit  I  replied,  that  their  action  in  that  part  touching  the  assig-
nation of  the  crown  to  the  king  by  his  mother,  had  received  such  establishment,
confirmation,  and  strength,  by  acts  of  parliaments  and  other  public  authority  and
instruments,  as  neither  should  that  case  be  suffered  to  come  in  debate  or  question,
nor  such  scrolls  and  papers  ought  to  be  shewed  for  the  strengthening  thereof,  so  as
these  might  well  be  left  and  be  rendered  to  the  hands  of  her  majesty,  to  whom  they
were  destined  before  they  fell  in  his  keeping ;  yet  he  would  not  be  removed  or
satisfied  ;  concluding,  after  much  reasoning,  that  the  earl  of  Morton,  nor  any  other
that  had  the  charge  and  keeping  thereof,  durst  at  any  time  make  delivery;  and  be-
cause it  was  the  first  time  that  I  had  moved  him  therein,  and  that  he  would  gladly
both  answer  her  majesty's  good  expectation  in  him,  and  also  perform  his  duty  due
to  his  sovereign  and  associates  in  the  action  aforesaid  ;  therefore  he  would  seek  out
the  said  casket  and  letters,  at  his  return  to  his  house,  which  he  thought  should  be
within  a  short  time;  and  upon  finding  of  the  same,  and  better  advice  and  consi-
deration had  of  the  cause,  he  would  give  farther  answer.  This  resolution  I  have
received  as  to  the  thing ;  and  for  the  present  I  could  not  better,  leaving  him  to  give
her  majesty  such  testimony  of  his  good  will  towards  her,  by  his  frank  dealing
herein,  as  she  may  have  cause  to  confirm  her  highness's  good  opinion  conceived
already  of  him,  and  be  thereby  drawn  to  greater  goodness  towards  him.  I  shall  still

300  DISSERTATION  ON

after  the  murder  of  the  king  and  prior  to  Mary's  mar-
riage with  Bothwell. But  as  hardly  any  part  of  my

labour  him  both  by  myself  and  also  by  all  other  means :  but  I  greatly  distrust  the
desired  success  herein.

24th  of  November,  1582,  from  Edinburgh.

For  the  recovery  of  the  letters  in  the  coffer,  come  to  the  hands  of  the  earl  of
Gowrie,  I  have  lately  moved  him  earnestly  therein,  letting  him  know  the  purpose
of  the  Scottish  queen,  both  by  giving  out  that  the  letters  are  counterfeited  by  our
rebels,  and  also  seeking  thereon  to  have  them  delivered  to  her  or  defaced,  and  that
the  means  which  she  shall  make  in  this  behalf  shall  be  so  great  and  effectual,  as  these
writings  cannot  be  safely  kept  in  that  realm  without  dangerous  offence  of  him  that
hath  the  custody  thereof,  neither  shall  he  that  is  once  known  to  have  them  be  suf-
fered to  hold  them  in  his  hands.  Herewith  I  have  at  large  opened  the  perils  likely
to  fall  to  that  action,  and  the  parties  therein,  and  particularly  to  himself  that  is  now
openly  known  to  have  the  possession  of  these  writings,  and  I  have  lettin  him  see
what  surety  it  shall  bring  to  the  said  cause  and  all  the  parties  therein,  and  to  him-
self, that  these  writings  may  be  with  secrecy  and  good  order  committed  to  the  keep-
ing of  her  majesty,  that  will  have  them  ready  whensoever  any  use  shall  be  for  them,
and  by  her  highness's  countenance  defend  them  and  the  parties  from  such  wrongful
objections  as  shall  be  laid  against  them,  offering  at  length  to  him,  that  if  he  be  not
fully  satisfied  therein,  or  doubt  that  the  rest  of  the  associates  shall  not  like  of  the
delivery  of  them  to  her  majesty  in  this  good  manner,  and  for  the  interest  rehearsed,
that  I  shall  readily,  upon  meeting  and  conference  with  them,  procure  their  assent
in  this  part  (a  matter  more  easy  to  offer  than  to  perform)  ;  and  lastly,  moving  him
that  (for  the  secrecy  and  benefit  of  the  cause,  and  that  her  majesty's  good  opinion
towards  himself  may  be  firmly  settled  and  confirmed  by  his  acceptable  forwardness
therein)  he  would,  without  needless  scruple,  frankly  commit  these  writings  to  her
majesty's  good  custody  for  the  good  uses  received.  After  long  debate  he  resolved,
and  said,  that  he  would  unfeignedly  shew  and  do  to  her  majesty  all  the  pleasure  that
he  might  without  offence  to  the  king  his  sovereign,  and  prejudice  to  the  associates  in
the  action,  and  therefore  he  would  first  make  search  and  view  the  said  letters,  and
herein  take  advice  what  he  might  do,  and  how  far  he  might  satisfy  and  content  her
majesty;  promising  thereon  to  give  more  resolute  answer;  and  he  concluded  flatly
that  after  he  had  found  and  seen  the  writings,  that  he  might  not  make  delivery  of
them  without  the  privity  of  the  king.  Albeit  I  stood  along  with  him  against  his
resolution  in  this  point,  to  acquaint  the  king  with  this  matter  before  the  letters  were
in  the  hands  of  her  majesty,  letting  him  see  that  his  doings  there  should  admit
great  danger  to  the  cause  ;  yet  I  could  not  remove  him  from  it.  It  may  be  that
he  meaneth  to  put  over  the  matter  from  himself  to  the  king,  upon  sight  whereof  I
shall  travel  effectually  to  obtain  the  king's  consent,  that  the  letters  may  be  committed
to  her  majesty's  keeping,  thinking  it  more  easy  to  prevail  herein  with  the  king,  in  the
present  love  and  affection  that  he  beareth  to  her  highness,  than  to  win  any  thing  atthe
hands  of  the  associates  in  the  action,  whereof  some  principal  of  them  now  come  and
remain  at  the  devotion  of  the  king's  mother;  in  this  I  shall  still  call  on  Gowrie,  to
search  out  the  coffer,  according  to  his  promise  ;  and  as  1  shall  find  him  minded  to
do  therein,  so  shall  I  do  my  best  and  whole  endeavour  to  effect  the  success  to  her
majesty's  best  contentment.

2d  December,  1582,  from  Edinburgh.

Because  I  saw  good  opportunity  offered  to  renew  the  matter  to  the  earl  of  Gowrie
for  recovery  of  the  letters  in  the  coffer  in  his  hands,  therefore  I  put  him  in  mind
thereof ;  whereupon  he  told  me  that  the  duke  of  Lennox  had  sought  earnestly  to
have  had  those  letters,  and  that  the  king  did  know  where  they  were,  so  as  they  could
not  be  delivered  to  her  majesty  without  the  king's  privity  and  consent,  and  he  pre-
tended to  be  still  willing  to  pleasure  her  majesty  in  the  same,  so  far  as  he  may  with
his  duty  to  the  king  and  to  the  rest  of  the  associates  in  that  action ;  but  I  greatly  dis-
trust to  effect  this  to  her  majesty's  pleasure,  wherein,  nevertheless,  I  shall  do  my
utmost  endeavours.

Whether  James  VI.,  who  put  the  earl  of  Gowrie  to  death,  A.D.  1584,  and  seized
all  his  effects,  took  care  to  destroy  his  mother's  letters,  for  whose  honour  he  was  at
that  time  extremely  zealous ;  whether  they  have  perished  by  some  unknown  acci-
dent ;  or  whether  they  may  not  still  remain  unobserved  among  the  archives  of  some
of  our  great  families,  it  is  impossible  to  determine.

KING HENRY'S  MURDER,  &c.  301

narrative  is  founded  upon  what  is  contained  in  the
sonnets,  and  as  in  this  Dissertation  I  have  been  con-
strained to  dwell  longer  upon  minute  and  verbal  criti-
cisms, than  may  be  interesting  or  agreeable  to  many  of
my  readers,  I  shall  rest  satisfied  with  referring,  for  in-
formation concerning  every  particular  relative  to  the  son-
nets, to  Remarks  on  the  History  of  Scotland.,  Chap.  XI.

Having  thus  stated  the  proof  on  both  sides ;  having
examined  at  so  great  a  length  the  different  systems  with
regard  to  the  facts  in  controversy ;  it  may  be  expected
that  I  should  now  pronounce  sentence.  In  my  opinion,
there  are  only  two  conclusions,  which  can  be  drawn
from  the  facts  which  have  been  enumerated.

One,  that  Bothwell,  prompted  by  his  ambition  or
love,  encouraged  by  the  queen's  known  aversion  to  her
husband,  and  presuming  on  her  attachment  to  himself,
struck  the  blow  without  having  concerted  with  her  the
manner  or  circumstances  of  perpetrating  that  crime.
That  Mary,  instead  of  testifying  much  indignation  at
the  deed,  or  discovering  any  resentment  against  Both-
well,  who  was  accused  of  having  committed  it,  conti-
nued to  load  him  with  marks  of  her  regard,  conducted
his  trial  in  such  a  manner  as  rendered  it  impossible  to
discover  his  guilt,  and  soon  after,  in  opposition  to  all
the  maxims  of  decency  or  of  prudence,  voluntarily
agreed  to  a  marriage  with  him,  which  every  considera-
tion should  have  induced  her  to  detest.  By  this  ver-
dict, Mary  is  not  pronounced  guilty  of  having  contrived
the  murder  of  her  husband,  or  even  of  having  previously
given  her  consent  to  his  death  ;  but  she  is  not  acquitted
of  having  discovered  her  approbation  of  the  deed,  by
her  behaviour  towards  him  who  was  the  author  of  it.

The  other  conclusion  is  that  which  Murray  and  his
adherents  laboured  to  establish,  "  That  James,  some-
tymme  earl  of  Bothwile,  was  the  chiefe  executor  of  the
horribill  and  unworthy  murder,  perpetrate  in  the  person
of  umquhile  king  Henry  of  gude  memory,  fader  to  our

302  DISSERTATION, &c.

soveraine  lord,  and  the  queenis  lauchfull  husband ;  sa
was  she  of  the  foreknowledge,  counsall,  devise,  per-
swadar,  and  command  of  the  said  murder  to  be  done."
Good.  ii.  207.

Which  of  these  conclusions  is  most  agreeable  to  the
evidence  that  has  been  produced,  I  leave  my  readers
to  determine.

APPENDIX.

fol.  i?
From  a

crePtary
Cecil's
hand.

No.  I. (Vol.  I.  p.  172.)

A  Memorial  of  certain  points  meet  for  the  restoring  the  realm  of
Scotland  to  the  antient  weak.

IMPRIMIS,  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  the  best  worldly  felicity

5tn  August  .  '  *

1559,  Cot-  that  Scotland  can  have,  is  either  to  continue  in  a  perpetual
ton.  Lib.  peace  with  the  kingdom  of  England,  or  to  be  made  one
'  monarchy  with  England,  as  they  both  make  but  one
island,  divided  from  the  rest  of  the  world.

If  the  first  is  sought,  that  is,  to  be  in  perpetual  peace
with  England,  then  must  it  necessarily  be  provided,  that
Scotland  be  not  so  subject  to  the  appointments  of  France
as  is  presently,  which,  being  an  ancient  enemy  to  England,  seeketh
always  to  make  Scotland  an  instrument,  to  exercise,  thereby,  their
malice  upon  England,  and  to  make  a  footstool  thereof  to  look  over
England  as  they  may.

Therefore,  when  Scotland  shall  come  into  the  hands  of  a  mere
Scottish  man  in  blood,  then  may  there  be  hope  of  such  accord  ;
but  as  long  as  it  is  at  the  commandment  of  the  French,  there  is  no
hope  to  have  accord  long  between  these  two  realms.

Therefore,  seeing  it  is  at  the  French  king's  commandment  by
reason  of  his  wife,  it  is  to  be  considered  for  the  weale  of  Scotland,
that  until  she  have  children,  and  during  her  absence  out  of  the
realm,  the  next  heirs  to  the  crown,  being  the  house  of  the  Hamil-
tons,  should  have  regard  hereto,  and  to  see  that  neither  the  crown
be  imposed  nor  wasted  ;  and,  on  the  other  side,  the  nobility  and
commonalty  ought  to  force  that  the  laws  and  the  old  customs  of
the  realm  be  not  altered,  neither  that  the  country  be  not  impove-
rished by  taxes,  emprest,  or  new  imposts,  after  the  manner  of  France  ;
for  provision  wherein,  both  by  the  law  of  God  and  man,  the  French
king  and  his  wife  may  be  moved  to  reform  their  misgovernance  of
the  land.

And  for  this  purpose  it  were  good  that  the  nobility  and  commons
joined  with  the  next  heir  to  the  crown,  to  seek  due  reformation  of
such  great  abuses  as  tend  to  the  ruin  of  their  country,  which  must
be  done  before  the  French  grow  too  strong  and  insolent.

First,  that  it  may  be  provided  by  the  consent  of  the  three  estates
of  the  land,  that  the  land  maybe  free  from  idolatry  like  as  England

304  SCOTLAND.

is ;  for  justification  whereof,  if  any  free  general  council  may  be
had  where  the  pope  of  Rome  have  not  the  seat  of  judgment,  they
may  offer  to  shew  their  cause  to  be  the  most  agreeable  to  Christ's
religion.

Next,  to  provide  that  Scotland  might  be  governed,  in  all  rules
and  offices,  by  the  ancient  blood  of  the  realm,  without  either  cap-
tains, lieutenants,  or  soldiers,  as  all  other  princes  govern  their  coun-
tries, and  especially  that  the  forts  might  be  in  the  hands  of  mere
Scottish  men.

Thirdly,  that  they  might  never  be  occasioned  to  enter  into  the
wars  against  England,  except  England  should  give  the  first  cause
to  Scotland.

Fourthly,  that  no  nobleman  of  Scotland  should  receive  pension
of  France,  except  it  were  whilst  he  did  serve  in  France,  for  other-
wise thereby  the  French  would  shortly  corrupt  many  to  betray  their
own  country.

Fifthly,  that  no  office,  abbey,  living,  or  commodity,  be  given  to
any  but  mere  Scottish  men,  by  the  assent  of  the  three  estates  of  the
realm.

Sixthly,  that  there  be  a  council  in  Scotland  appointed  in  the
queen's  absence,  to  govern  the  whole  realm,  and  in  those  cases
not  to  be  directed  by  the  French.

Seventhly,  that  it  be  by  the  said  three  estates  appointed  how  the
queen's  revenue  of  the  realm  shall  be  expended,  how  much  the
queen  shall  have  for  her  portion  and  estate  during  her  absence,
how  much  shall  be  limited  to  the  governance  and  defence  of  the
realm,  how  much  yearly  appointed  to  be  kept  in  treasure.

In  these,  and  such  like  points,  if  the  French  king  and  the  queen
be  found  unwilling,  and  will  withstand  these  provisions  for  the
weale  of  the  land,  then  hath  the  three  estates  of  the  realm  authority,
forthwith  to  intimate  to  the  said  king  and  queen  their  humble  re-
quests ;  and  if  the  same  be  not '  effectually  granted,  then  humbly
they  may  commit  the  governance  thereof  to  the  next  heir  of  the
crown,  binding  the  same  also  to  observe  the  laws  and  ancient  rights
of  the  realm.

Finally,  if  the  queen  shall  be  unwilling  to  this,  as  it  is  likely  she
will,  in  respect  of  the  greedy  and  tyrannous  affection  of  France,
then  it  is  apparent  that  Almighty  God  is  pleased  to  transfer  from
her  the  rule  of  the  kingdom  for  the  weale  of  it,  and  this  time  must
be  used  with  great  circumspection  to  avoid  the  decepts  and  trornpe-
ries  of  the  French.

And  then  may  the  realm  of  Scotland  consider,  being  once  made
free,  what  means  may  be  devised  by  God's  goodness,  to  accord  the
two  realms,  to  endure  for  time  to  come  at  the  pleasure  of  Almighty
God,  in  whose  hands  the  hearts  of  all  princes  be.

APPENDIX.  305'

No.  II.  (Vol.  I.  p.  179.)

A  Letter  of  Maitland  of  Lethingtons,  thus  directed:—
To  my  loving  friend  James. Be  this  delivered  at  London.

20th  Ja-  I  UNDERSTAND  by  the  last  letter  I  received  from  yow,
nuary,  that  discoursing  with  zour  countrymen  upon  the  matter  of
Con9  Lib.  Scotland,  and  comoditeys  may  ensew  to  that  realm  here-
Cal.  B.  ix.  after,  ziff  ze  presently  assist  ws  with  zour  forces,  ze  find
n  a  nombl>e  of  the  contrary  advise,  douting  that  we  sail  not

his  own  at  length  be  found  trusty  frends,  nor  mean  to  contynew  in
constant  ametye,  albeit  we  promise,  but  only  for  avoyding
the  present  danger  make  zow  to  serve  our  turne,  and  after  being
delivered,  becum  enemies  as  of  before.  For  *profe  quhareof,  they
alledge  things  that  have  past  betwixt  ws  heretofore,  and  a  few  pre-
sumptiones  tending  to  the  sam  end,  all  grounded  upon  mistrust  ;
quhilks,  at  the  first  sicht,  have  some  shewe  of  apparence,  gif  men
wey  not  the  circumstances  of  the  matter;  but  gif  they  will  confer
the  tyme  past  with  the  present,  consider  the  nature  of  this  caus,
and  estate  of  our  contrey,  I  doubt  not  but  jugement  sal  be  able  to
banish  mistrust.  And  first,  I  wad  wish  ze  should  examyne  the
causes  off  the  old  inmitye  betwixt  the  realms  of  England  and  Scot-
land, and  quhat  moved  our  ancestours  to  enter  into  ligue  with  the
Frenche  ;  quhilka  by  our  storeys  and  registres  of  antiquiteys  appear
to  be  these.  The  princes  of  England,  some  tyme,  alledging  a  cer-
tain kynde  of  soveraintye  over  this  realm  ;  some  tyme  upon  hye
courage,  or  incited  by  incursions  off  our  bordourares,  and  semblable
occasions,  mony  times  enterprised  the  conquest  of  ws,  and  sa  far  furth
preist  it  by  force  off  armes,  that  we  wer  dryven  to  great  extramiteys,
by  loss  of  our  princes,  our  noblemen,  and  a  good  part  of  our  coun-
trey,  sa  that  experience  taught  ws  that  our  owne  strength  was  scarse
sufficient  to  withstand  the  force  of  England.  The  Frenche  zour
auncient  enemyes,  considering  well  how  nature  had  sa  placed  ws  in
a  iland  with  zow,  that  na  nation  was  able  sa  to  annoye  England  as  we
being  enemyes,  soucht  to  joine  ws  to  them  in  ligue,  tending  by  that
meane  to  detourne  zour  armyes  from  the  invasion  of  France,  and
occupy  zow  in  the  defence  off  zour  country  at  hame,  offering  for
that  effect  to  bestowe  some  charges  upon  ws,  and  for  compassing
off  theyr  purpos,  choysed  a  tyme  to  propone  the  matter,  quhen  the
fresche  memory  off  injuris  lately  receaved  at  zour  hands,  was  sa
depely  prented  on  our  hartes,  that  all  our  myndes  were  occupied
how  to  be  revenged,  and  arme  ourselfes  with  the  power  off  a  forayne
prince  against  zour  enterprises  thereafter.

This  wes  the  beginning  off  our  confederacy  with  France. At
quhilk  time,  our  cronicles  maks  mention,  that  some  off  the  wyse&t

VOL. II.  X

306  SCOTLAND.

foresaw  the  perril,  and  small  frute  should  redound  to  ws  thereof  at
lenth :  zit  had  affection  sa  blinded  jugement,  that  the  advise  of  the
maist  part  owercame  the  best.  The  maist  part  of  all  querells  betwixt
ws  since  that  tyme,  at  least  quhen  the  provocation  came  on  our  syde,
hes  ever  fallen  out  by  theyr  procurement  rather  than  any  one  caus
off  ourselfes :  and  quhensaever  we  brack  the  peace,  it  come  partly
by  theyr  intysements,  partly  to  eschew  the  conquest  intended  by
that  realm. But  now  hes  God's  providence  sa  altered  the  case,  zea
changed  it  to  the  plat  contrary,  that  now  hes  the  Frenche  taken
zour  place,  and  we,  off  very  jugement,  becum  desyrous  to  have  zow
in  theyr  rowme. Our  eyes  are  opened,  we  espy  how  uncareful  they
have  been  of  our  weile  at  all  tymes,  how  they  made  ws  ever  to  serve
theyr  turne,  drew  us  in  maist  dangerous  weys  for  theyr  commodite,
and  nevertheless  wad  not  styck,  oft  tymes,  against  the  natour  of
the  ligue,  to  contrak  peace,  leaving  ws  in  weyr. We  see  that  their
support,  off  late  zeres,  wes  not  grantit  for  any  affection  they  bare
to  ws,  for  pytie  they  had  off  our  estate,  for  recompense  off  the  lyke
friendship  schawin  to  them  in  tyme  off  theyr  afflictiones,  but  for
ambition,  and  insaciable  cupidite  to  reygne,  and  to  mak  Scotland
ane  accessory  to  the  crown  of  France. This  was  na  friendly  office,
but  mercenary,  craving  hy re  farre  exceeding  the  proportion  of  theyr
deserving ;  a  hale  realm  for  the  defence  of  a  part. We  see  theym
manifestly  attempt  the  thing  we  suspected  off  zow;  we  feared  ze  ment
the  conquest  off  Scotland,  and  they  are  planely  fallen  to  that  work  ;
we  hated  zow  for  doubt  we  had  ze  ment  evill  towards  ws,  and  sail  we
love  theym,  quhilks  bearing  the  name  off  frends,  go  about  to  bring
ws  in  maist  vile  servitude  ? Gif  by  zour  frendly  support  at  this
tyme,  ze  sail  declare  that  not  only  sute  ze  not  the  ruyne  off  our
country,  but  will  preserve  the  libertie  thereof  from  conquest  by
strangears,  sail  not  the  occasion  off  all  inimitie  with  zow,  and  ligue
with  theym,  be  taken  away  ? The  causes  being  removed,  how  sail
the  effectes  remane? The  fear  of  conquest  made  ws  to  hate  zow
and  love  theym,  the  cais  changed,  quhen  we  see  theym  planely
attempt  conquest,  and  zow  schaw  ws  frendship,  sail  we  not  hate
them,  and  favour  zow  ? Gif  we  have  schawne  sa  great  Constance,
continuing  sa  mony  zeares  in  amity  with  theym,  off  quhome  we  had
sa  small  commodite,  quhat  sail  move  us  to  breake  with  zow,  that
off  all  nationes  may  do  ws  greatest  plesour  ?

But  ze  will  say,  this  mater  may  be  reconcyled,  and  then  frends
as  off  before.  I  think  weill  peace  is  the  end  of  all  weyr,  but  off
this  ze  maybe  assured,  we  will  never  sa  far  trust  that  reconciliation,
that  we  will  be  content  to  forgo  the  ametye  of  England,  nor  do  any
thing  may  bring  ws  in  suspicion  with  zow.  Giff  we  wold  at  any
tyme  to  please  them,  break  with  zow,  should  we  not,  besydes  the
losse  off  estimation  and  discrediting  of  ourselfes,  perpetually  ex-

APPENDIX.  307

pone  our  common  weill  to  a  maist  manifest  danger,  and  becuin  a
pray  to  theyr  tyranny  ?  Quhais  aid  could  we  implore,  being  desti-
tute of  zour  frendship,  giff  they  off  new  wald  attempt  theyr  formar
enterprise?  Quhat  nation  myght  help  ws  gifF  they  wald,  or  wald
giff  they  might?  and  it  is  lyke  eneuch,  they  will  not  stick  hereafter
to  tak  theyr  time  off  ws,  quhen  displesour  and  grudge  lies  taken
depe  rute  on  baith  sydes,  seeing  ambition  has  sa  impyrit  ower  theyr
reason,  that  before  we  had  ever  done  any  thing  myght  offend  theym,
but  by  the  contrary  pleased  theym  by  right  and  wrang,  they  did  not
stick  to  attempte  the  subversion  of  our  hale  state.  I  wald  ze  should
not  esteeme  ws  sa  barayne  of  jugement,  that  we  cannot  forese  our
awne  perril ;  or  sa  foolische,  that  we  will  not  study  by  all  gode  means
to  entertayne  that  thing  may  be  our  safetye ;  quhilk  consistes  all  in
the  relaying  of  zour  frendships.  I  pray  zow  consider  in  lyke  case,
when,  in  the  days  of  zour  princes  off  maist  noble  memory,  king
Henry  the  VIII.  and  king  Edward  the  VI.  meanes  wer  opened  off
amytye  betwixt  baith  realms ;  was  not  at  all  tymes  the  difference
of  religion  the  onley  stay  they  wer  not  embraced  ?  Did  not  the
craft  of  our  clergy  and  power  of  theyr  adherents  subvert  the  de-
vises of  the  better  sort  ?  But  now  has  God  off  his  mercy  removed
that  block  furth  of  the  way  ;  now  is  not  theyr  practise  lyke  to  tak
place  any  mare,  when  we  ar  comme  to  a  conformity  off  doctrine,
and  profes  the  same  religion  with  zow,  quhilk  I  take  to  be  the
straytest  knot  off  amitye  can  be  devised.  Giff  it  may  be  alledged
that  some  off  our  countrymen,  at  ony  tyme  violated  theyr  promis,
giff  ze  liff  to  way  the  circumstances,  ze  sail  fynd  the  promis  is  rather
brought  on  by  necessite,  after  a  great  owerthraw  off  our  men,  then
comme  off  fre  will,  and  tending  ever  to  our  great  incommodite  and
decay  off  our  haill  state,  at  leist  sa  taken.  But  in  this  case,  sail  the
preservation  off  our  libertie  be  inseperably  joined  with  the  keping
off  promesse,  and  the  violation  off  our  fayth  cast  ws  in  maist  miser-
able servitude.  Sa  that  giff  neyther  the  feare  off  God,  reverence  off
man,  religion,  othe,  promise,  nor  warldly  honestye  wes  sufficient  to
bynd  ws,  yet  sail  the  zeale  off  our  native  co.untrey,  the  maintenance
off  our  owne  state,  the  safety  of  our  wyffes  and  childrene  from  sla-
very, compell  ws  to  kepe  promisse.  I.  am  assured,  it  is  trewly  and
sincerely  ment  on  our  part  to  continew  in  perpetual  ainetye  with
zow,  it  sail  be  uttered  by  our  proceedings.  Giff  ze  be  as  desirous
of  it  as  we  ar,  assurances  may  be  devysed,  quharby  all  partyes  will
be  out  of  doubte.  There  be  gode  meanes  to  do  it,  fit  instruments
for  the  purpos,  tyme  serves  weill,  the  inhabitants  of  baith  realms
wish  it..  God  hes  wrought  in  the  people's  hartes  on  bayth  parties
a  certaine  still  agreement  upon  it,  never  did,  any  tyme,  so  mony
things  concurre  at  ones  io  knyt  it  up,  the  disposition  off  a  few,
quhais  harts  are  in  Godis  hands,  may  mak  up  the  hale.  I  hope  he

x  2

308  SCOTLAND.

quha  hes  begun  this  work,  and  mainteyned  it  quhile  now,  by  the
expectation  of  man,  sale  perfyte  it.

I  pray  zow,  let  not  zour  men  dryve  time  in  consultation,  quhether
ze  sail  support  ws  or  no, Seying  the  mater  speaketh  for  itself,  that
ze  mon  take  upon  zow  the  defence  off  our  caus,  giff  ze  have  any
respect  for  zour  awne  weill. Their  preparatives  in  France,  and
levying  of  men  in  Germany  (quheyroff  I  am  lately  advertised),  ar
not  altogydder  ordeyned  for  us,  ze  ar  the  mark  they  shote  at ;  they
seke  ourrealme,  but  for  ane  entrey  to  zours. Giff  they  should  di-
rectly schaw  hostilite  to  zow,  they  kna w  zow  wald mak  redy  for  theyme,
therefor  they  do,  by  indirect  meanes,  to  blind  zow,  the  thing  they
dare  not  as  zit  planely  attempte. They  seme  to  invade  us  to  th'
end,  that  having  assembled  theyr  hale  forces  sa  nere  zour  bordours,
they  may  unlock  it  to  attack  zow :  It  is  ane  off  their  aid  fetches,
making  a  schew  to  one  place,  to  lyght  on  ane  other. Remember
how  covertly  zour  places  about  Boulougne  were  assaizeit,  and  car-
ryed  away,  ze  being  in  peace  as  now. How  the  enterprise  of  Calais
was  fynely  dissembled,  I  think  ze  have  not  sa  sone  forgotten.
Beware  of  the  third,  prevent  theyr  policy  by  prudence. Giff  ze  se
not  the  lyke  disposition  presently  in  theym,  ze  se  nathing. It  is  a
grosse  ignorance  to  misknaw,  what  all  nations  planely  speks  off.
Tak  heed  ze  say  not  hereafter,  "  Had  I  wist ;"  ane  uncomely  sen-
tence to  procede  off  a  wyse  man's  mouth. That  is  onwares  chanced
on  to  zow,  quhilk  zow  commonly  wissed,  that  this  countrey  might
be  divorsed  from  the  Frensche,  and  is  sa  comme  to  pass  as  was
maist  expedient  for  zow. For  giff  by  your  intysement  we  had  taken
the  matter  in  hand,  ze  myght  have  suspected  we  would  have  been
ontrusty  frends,  and  na  langer  continued  stedfaste,  then  perril  had
appeared. But  now,  quhen  off  our  self,  we  have  conceyved  the
hatered,  provoked  by  private  injuries,  and  that  theyr  evil  dealing
with  ws  hes  deserved  our  inimitye,  let  no  man  doubte  but  they  sail
fynd  ws  ennemyes  in  ernest,  tha't  sa  ungently  hes  demeyned  our
countrey,  and  at  quhais  hands  we  look  for  nathing  but  all  extre-
mitye,  giff  ever  they  may  get  the  upper  hand. Let  not  this  occa-
sion, sa  happely  offered,  escape  zow :  giff  ze  do,  neglecting  the
present  opportunite,  and  hoping  to  have  ever  gode  luk,  comme
sleaping  upon  zow,  it  is  to  be  feared  zour  enemye  waxe  so  great,
and  sa  strang,  that  afterwards  quhen  ze  wald,  ze  sail  not  be  able  to
put  him  down ;  and  then,  to  zour  smart,  after  the  tyme  ze  will  ac-
knowledge zour  error. Ze  have  felt,  by  experience,  quhat  harme
cometh  off  oversight,  and  trusting  to  zour  enemyes  promesse. We
offer  zow  the  occasion,  quheyrby  zour  former  losses  may  be  re-
payred. Quhilk  gif  ze  let  over  slyde,  suffering  ws  to  be  owerrun,
quha  then,  I  pray  zow,  sail  stay  the  Frensche,  that  they  sail  not
invade  zow  in  zour  own boundes, sic is  their  lust to reygne,

APPENDIX.  309

that  they  can  neyther  be  content  with  theyr  fortune  present,
nor  rest  and  be  satisfied  when  they  have  gode  luk,  but  will  still
follow  on,  having  in  theyr  awne  brayne  conceaved  the  image  of  sa.
great  a  conquest,  quhat  think  ye  sal  be  the  end  ?  Is  ther  any  of  sa
small  jugement,  that  he  doth  not  foresee  already,  that  theyr  hail
force  sail  then  be  bent  against  zow?

It  sal  not  be  amiss,  now  to  consider  in  quhat  case  the  Frensche
be  presently.  Theyr  estate  is  not  always  sa  calme  at  hame  as  every
man  thinketh.  And  trewly  it  wes  not  theyr  great  redines  for  weyr
made  theym  to  tak  this  mater  on  hand,  at  this  tyme,  but  rather  a
vayne  trust  in  their  awne  policy,  thinking  to  have  found  na  resist-
ance, theyr  opinion  hes  deceaved  them,  and  that  makes  them  now
amased.  The  estates  off  the  empire  (as  I  heare)  has  suted  restitu-
tion off  th'  imperial  towns  Metz,  Toull,  and  Verdun,  quhilk  may
grow  to  some  besynes  ;  and  all  thing  is  not  a  calme  within  their
awne  countrey,  the  les  fit  they  be  presently  for  weyr,  the  mare  opor-
tune  esteme  ye  the  tyme  for  zow.  Giff  the  lyke  occasion  wer  of-
fered to  the  Frensche  against  zow,  wey,  how  gladly  would  they
embrace  it.  Are  ze  not  eschamed  of  your  sleuth,  to  spare  theym
that  hes  already  compassed  your  destruction,  giff  they  wer  able?
Consider  with  your  self  quhilk  is  to  be  choysed?  To  weyr  against
them  outwith  zour  realme  or  within?  GifFquhill  ze  sleape,  we  sal
be  overthrowne,  then  sail  they  not  fayle  to  fyte  zow  in  zour  owne
countrey,  and  use  ws  as  a  fote-stole  to  overloke  zow.  But  some  will
say,  perhaps,  they  meane  it  not.  It  is  foly  to  think  they  wald  not
giff  they  wer  able,  quhen  before  hand  they  stick  not  to  giff  zour
armes,  and  usurpe  the  style  of  zour  crown.  Then  quhat  difference
there  is  to  camp  within  zowr  awne  bounds  or  without,  it  is  manifest.
Giff  twa  armyes  should  camp  in  your  countrey,  but  a  moneth ;  albeit
ye  receaved  na  other  harme,  zit  should  zowr  losse  be  greatar,  nor
all  the  charge  ze  will  nede  to  bestow  on  our  support  will  draw  to,
besydes  the  dishonour.

Let  not  men,  that  ey ther  lack  gode  advise,  or  ar  not  for  perticu-
lar  respects  weill  affected  to  the  caus,  move  zow  to  subtract  zour
helping  hand,  by  alleging  things  not  apparent,  for  that  they  be  pos-
sible. It  is  not,  I  grant,  unpossible  that  we  may  receave  condi-
tiones  of  peace  ;  but  I  see  little  likelyhode  that  our  ennemyes  will
offer  ws  sik  as  will  remove  all  mistrust,  and  giff  we  wald  have  ac-
cepted others,  the  mater  had  bene  lang  or  now  compounded.  Let
zow  not  be  moved  for  that  they  terme  ws  rebelles,  and  diffames  our
just  quereli  with  the  name  of  conspiracy  against  our  soverayne.  It
is  hir  hyenes  ryght  we  manetayne.  It  is  the  liberty  of  hir  realme
we  study  to  preserve  with  the  hazard  of  our  lyves.  We  are  not
(God  knaweth)  comme  to  this  poynt  for  wantones,  as  men  impa-
cient  of  rewll,  or  willing  to  schake  of  the  zoke  of  government,  but

310  SCOTLAND.

ar  drawne  to  it  by  necessite,  to  avoyde  the  tyranny  of  strangeares,
seaking  to  defraude  ws  off  lawful  government.  Giff  we  should
suffer  strangeares  to  plant  themselffes  peaceably  in  all  the  strenthes
of  our  realme,  fortify  the  sey-portes,  and  maist  important  places,
as  ane  entre  to  a  plain  conquest,  now  in  the  minorite  of  our  so-
verane,  beyng  furth  of  the  realme,  should  we  not  be  thought  on-
careful  of  the  common  weill,  betrayers  of  our  native  countrey,  and
evill  subjects  to  her  majeste?  Quhat  other  opinion  could  sche
have  off  ws  ?  Might  she  not  justly  hereafter  call  ws  to  accompt,
as  negligent  ministeres  ?  Giff  strangeares  should  be  thus  suffered
to  broke  the  chefe  offices,  beare  the  hail  rewll,  alter  and  pervert
our  lawes  and  liberty  at  theyr  plesour ;  myght  not  the  people  esteem
our  noblemen  unworthy  the  place  of  counsalours  ?  We  mean  na
wyse  to  subtrak  our  obedience  from  our  soverane,  to  defraud  hir
hyenes  of  her  dew  reverence,  rents  and  revenues  off  hir  crown.  We
seke  nathing  but  that  Scotland  may  remane,  as  of  before,  a  fre
realme,  rewlit  by  hir  hyenes  and  hir  ministeres  borne  men  of  the
sam ;  and  that  the  succession  of  the  crown  may  reraane  with  the
lawful  blode.

I  wald  not  ze  sould  not  sa  lyttill  esteme  the  friendship  of  Scot-
land, that  ze  judged  it  not  worthy  to  be  embraced.  It  sail  be  na
small  commodite  for  zow  to  be  delivered  off  the  anoyance  of  so  neir
a  nyghtbour,  quhais  inimitye  may  more  trouble  zow,  then  off  any
other  nation  albeit  twyss  as  puissant,  not  lyeng  dry  marche  with
zow.  Besydes  that  ze  sail  not  nede  to  feare  the  invasion  of  any
prince  lackyng  the  commodite  to  invade  zow  by  land,  on  our  hand.
Consider  quhat  superfluous  charges  ze  bestowe  on  the  fortification
and  keping  of  Barwick  :  quhilk  ze  may  reduce  to  a  mean  sowme,
having  ws  to  frendes.  The  realme  of  Ireland  being  of  natour  a
gode  and  fertill  countrey,  by  reason  of  the  continewalld  unquietnes
and  lak  of  policy,  ze  knaw  to  be  rather  a  burthen  unto  zow  than
great  advantage  ;  and  giff  it  were  peaceable  may  be  very  commo-
dious. For  pacification  quhayroff,  it  is  not  unknowne  to  zow  quhat
service  we  ar  abill  to  do.  Refuse  not  theyr  commoditeys,  besides
mony  ma  quhen  they  are  offred.  Quhilks  albeit  I  study  not  to
amplify  and  dilate,  yet  is  na  other  countrey  able  to  offer  zow  the
lyke,  and  are  the  rather  to  be  embraced,  for  that  zour  auncestors,
by  all  meanes,  maist  earnestly  suted  our  amity,  and  yet  it  was  not
theyr  hap  to  come  by  it.  The  mater  hes  almaist  carryed  me  be-
yond the  boundes  off  a  lettre,  quharfor  I  will  leave  to  trouble  zow
after  I  have  geven  you  this  note.  I  wald  wiss  that  ze,  and  they
that  ar  learned,  sould  rede  the  twa  former  orations  of  Demosthenes,
called  Olynthiacse,  and  considere  quhat  counsall  that  wyse  oratour
gave  to  the  Athenians,  his  countrymen,  in  a  lyke  case ;  quhilk  hes
so  great  affinite  with  this  cause  of  ours,  that  every  word  thereoff

APPENDIX.

311

myght  be  applyed  to  our  purpos.  There  may  ze  learne  of  him
quhat  advise  is  to  be  followed,  when  your  nyghbour's  hous  is  on
fyre.  Thus  I  bid  zow  hartely  fareweill.  From  Sant  Andrews,
the  20th  of  January,  1559.

No.  III. (Vol.  I.  p.  186.)

Part  of  a  letter  from  Tho.  Randolph  to  Sir  William  Cecil,  from  the
camp  before  Leith,  29th  of  April,  1560.

An  ori-  I  WILL  only,  for  this  time,  discharge  myself  of  my  pro-
file* Paper  mise  to  ^e  ear*  of  Huntly,  who  so  desyreth  to  be  recom-
Office.  mended  to  you,  as  one,  who,  with  all  his  heart,  favoureth
this  cause,  to  the  uttermost  of  his  power.  Half  the  words  that
come  of  his  mouth  were  able  to  persuade  an  unexperienced  man  to
speak  farther  in  his  behalf,  than  I  dare  be  bold  to  write.  I  leave
it  to  your  honour  to  judge  of  him,  as  of  a  man  not  unknown  to
you,  and  will  myself  always  measure  my  thoughts,  as  he  shall  de-
serve to  be  spoken  of.  With  much  difficulty,  and  great  persua-
sion, he  hath  subscribed  with  the  rest  of  the  lords  to  join  with
them  in  this  action  ;  whatsomever  he  can  invent  to  the  furtherance
of  this  cause,  he  hath  promised  to  do  with  solemn  protestation  and
many  words ;  he  trusteth  to  adjoin  many  to  this  cause  ;  and  saith
surely  that  no  man  shall  lie  where  he  taketh  part.  He  hath  this
day  subscribed  a  bond  between  England  and  this  nation  ;  he  saitht
that  there  was  never  thing  that  liked  him  better.

No.  IV. (Vol.  I.  p.  197.)

Randolph  to  Cecil,  Wth  August,  1560. From  Edinburgh.

An  origi.  SIN  CE  the  29th  of  July,  at  what  time  I  wrote  last  to  your
Paper  Of-  honour,  I  have  heard  of  nothing  worth  the  reporting.  At
fice.  this  present  it  may  please  you  to  know,  that  the  most  part
of  the  nobles  are  here  arrived,  as  your  honour  shall  receive  their
names  in  writing.  The  earl  of  Huntly  excuseth  himself  by  an  in-
firmity in  his  leg.  His  lieutenant  for  this  time  is  the  lord  of  Lid-
ington,  chosen  speaker  of  the  parliament,  or  harangue-maker,  as
these  men  term  it.  The  first  day  of  their  sitting  in  parliament  will
be  on  Thursday  next.  Hitherto  as  many  as  have  been  present  of
the  lords  have  communed  and  devised  of  certain  heads  then  to  be
propounded,  as,  who  shall  be  sent  into  France,  who  into  England.
It  is  much  easier  to  find  them  than  the  other.  It  seemeth  almost
to  be  resolved  upon  that  for  England  the  master  of  Maxwell,  and
laird  of  Lidington.  For  France,  Pittarow  and  the  justice-clerk.
Also  they  have  consulted  whom  they  think  meetest  to  name  for  the
XXIV.  of  the  which  the  XII.  counsellors  must  be  chosen.  They

312  SCOTLAND.

intend  very  shortly  to  send  away  Dingwall  the  herald  into  France,
with  the  names  of  those  they  shall  chuse ;  and  also  to  require  the
king  and  queen's  consent  unto  this  parliament.  They  have  devised
how  to  have  the  contract  with  England  confirmed  by  authority  of
parliament;  how  also  to  have  the  articles  of  the  agreement  between
them  and  their  king  and  queen  ratified.  These  things  yet  have
only  been  had  in  communication.  For  the  confirmation  of  the  con-
tract with  England  I  have  no  doubt;  for  that  I  hear  many  men
very  well  like  the  same,  as  the  earl  of  Athol,  the  earl  of  Sutherland,
the  L.  Glamis,  who  dined  yesterday  with  the  L.  James.  The  lord
James  requested  me  this  present  day  to  bring  the  contract  unto
him.  I  intend,  also,  this  day,  to  speak  unto  the  L.  Gray,  in  our  L.
Gray's  name,  for  that  he  promised  in  my  hearing  to  subscribe,  and
then  presently  would  have  done  it,  if  the  contract  could,  have  been
had.  For  the  more  assurance  against  all  inconvenients,  I  would,
besides  that,  that  I  trust  it  shall  be  ratified  in  parliament,  that  every
nobleman  in  Scotland  had  put  his  hand  and  set  his  seal,  which
may  always  remain  as  a  notable  monument,  tho'  the  act  of  parlia-
ment be  hereafter  disannulled.  If  it  might,  therefore,  stand  with
your  advice,  that  the  lords  might  be  written  unto,  now  that  they
are  here  present,  to  that  effect,  or  that  I  might  receive  from  your
honr.  some  earnest  charge  to  travel  herein,  I  doubt  not  but  it  would
serve  to  good  purpose.  If  it  might  be  also  known  with  what  sub-
stantial and  effectious  words  or  charge  you  desire  to  have  it  con-
firmed, I  think  no  great  difficulty  would  be  made.  The  earl  mar-
shall  has  often  been  moved  to  subscribe,  he  useth  mo  delays  than
men  judged  he  would.  His  son  told  me  yesterday,  that  he  would
speak  with  me  at  leisure,  so  did  also  Drumlanrick ;  I  know  not  to
what  purpose  :  I  have  caused  L.  James  to  be  the  earnester  with  the
L.  Marshall,  for  his  authority's  sake,  when  of  late  it  was  in  consulta-
tion by  what  means  it  might  be  wrought,  that  the  amity  between '
these  two  realms  might  be  perpetual  ;  and  among  diverse  men's
opinion,  one  said  that  he  knew  of  no  other,  but  by  making  them
both  one,  and  that  in  hope  of  that  mo  things  were  done,  than
would  otherwise  have  ever  been  granted  :  the  earl  of  Argyll  ad-
vised him  earnestly  to  stick  unto  that  that  he  had  promised,  that  it
should  pass  his  power  and  all  the  crafty  knaves  of  his  counsel  (1
am  bold  to  use  unto  your  h.  his  own  words),  to  break  so  godly  a
purpose.  This  talk  liked  well  the  assisters,  howsornever  it  pleased
him  to  whom  it  was  spoken  unto.  The  barons,  who  in  time  past
have  been  of  the  parliament,  had  yesterday  a  convention  among
themselves  in  the  church,  in  very  honest  and  quiet  sort;  they
thought  it  good  to  require  to  be  restored  unto  their  ancient  liberty,
to  have  voice  in  parliament.  They  presented  that  day  a  bill  unto
the  lords  to  that  effect,  a  copy  whereof  shall  be  sent  as  soon  as  it

APPENDIX.

313

can  be  had.  It  was  answered  unto  gently,  and  taken  in  good  part.
It  was  referred  unto  the  lords  of  the  articles,  when  they  are  chosen.,
to  resolve  thereupon.—1 — Here  follows  a  long  paragraph  concerning

the  fortifications  ofDunbar,  &c. This  present  morning,  viz.  the

9th,  I  understood,  that  the  lords  intended  to  be  at  the  parliament,
which  caused  me  somewhat  to  stay  my  letter,  to  see  what  I  could
hear  or  learn  worth  the  reporting  unto  your  honr.  The  lords,  at
ten  of  the  clock,  assembled  themselves  at  the  palace,  where  the
duke  lieth  ;  from  whence  they  departed  towards  the  Tolbooth,  as
they  were  in  dignity.  Each  one  being  set  in  his  seat,  in  such  order
as  your  h.  shall  receive  them  in  this  scroll.  The  crown,  the  mace,
the  sword,  were  laid  in  the  queen's  seat.  Silence  being  com-
manded, the  L.  of  Lidington  began  his  oration.  He  excused  his
insufficiency  to  occupy  that  place.  He  made  a  brief  discourse  of
things  past,  and  of  what  necessity  men  were  forced  unto  for  the
defence  of  their  country,  what  remedy  and 'support  it  pleased  God
to  send  them  in  the  time  of  their  necessity,  how  much  they  were
bound  heartily  to  acknowledge  it,  and  to  require  it.  He  took
away  the  persuasion  that  was  in  many  men's  mind  that  lay  back,
that  misdeemed  other  things  to  be  meant  than  was  attempted.  He
advised  all  estates  to  lay  all  particulars  apart,  and  to  bend  them-
selves wholly  to  the  true  service  of  God  and  of  their  country.  He
willed  them  to  remember  in  what  state  it  had  been  of  long  time
for  lack  of  government,  and  exercise  of  justice.  In  the  end,  he
exhorted  them  to  mutual  amity  and  hearty  friendship,  and  to  live

with  one  another  as  members  all  of  one  body. He  prayed  God

long  to  maintain  this  peace  and  amity  with  all  princes,  especially
betwixt  the  realms  of  England  and  Scotland,  in  the  fear  of  God,
and  so  ended. The  clerk  of  register  immediately  stood  up,  and
asked  them  to  what  matter  they  would  proceed :  it  was  thought
necessary,  that  the  articles  of  the  peace  should  be  confirmed  with
the  common  consent,  for  that  it  was  thought  necessary  to  send  them
away  with  speed  into  France,  and  to  receive  the  ratification  of  them
as  soon  as  might  be. The  articles  being  read,  were  immediately
agreed  unto :  a  day  was  appointed  to  have  certain  of  the  nobles
subscribe  unto  them,  and  to  put  to  their  seals,  to  be  sent  away  by
a  herald,  who  shall  also  bring  the  ratification  again  with  him.  The
barons,  of  whom  I  have  above  written,  required  an  answer  to  their
request ;  somewhat  was said  unto  the  contrary. The  barons  al  •
leged  for  them  custom  and  authority. It  was  in  the  end  resolved,
that  there  should  be  chosen  six  to  join  with  the  lords  of  the  arti-
cles, and  that  if  they,  after  good  advisement,  should  find  it  right
and  necessary  for  the  commonwealth,  it  should  be  ratified  at  this
parliament  for  a  perpetual  law. The-  lords  proceeded  immediately
hereupon,  to  the  chusing  of  the  lords  of  the  articles. The  order  is,

314

SCOTLAND.

that  the  lords  spiritual  chuse  the  temporal,  and  the  temporal  the
spiritual,  and  the  burgesses  their  own.  There  were  chosen  as  in
this  other  paper  I  have  written.  This  being  done,  the  lords  de-
parted and  accompanied  the  duke,  all  as  far  as  the  bow  (which  is
the  gate  going  out  of  the  high  street),  and  many  down  into  the
palace  where  he  lieth.  The  town  all  in  armour,  the  trumpets
sounding,  and  other  music  such  as  they  have.  Thus  much  I  re-
port unto  your  honour  of  that  I  did  both  hear  and  see.  Other  so-
lemnities have  not  been  used,  saving  in  times  long  past  the  lords
have  had  parliament  robes,  which  are  now  with  them  wholly  out
of  use.

The  names  of  as  many  earls  and  lords  spiritual  and  temporal  as
are  assembled  at  this  parliament.

The  duke  of  Chatelherault.

Lords  spiritual.
St.  Andrews.
Dunkeld.
Athens.

The  bishop  of  the  Isles.
Abbots and priors, I
know  not  how  many.

Earls.  Lords.

Arran.  Erskine.

Argyll.  Ruthven.

Athole.  Lindsay.

Crawford.  Somerville.

Cassils.  Cathcart.

Marshall.  Hume.

Morton.  Livinston.

Glencairn.  Innermerth.

Sutherland,  Boyd.

Caithness.  Ogilvy.

Rothes.  Fleming.

Monteith.  Glamis.

Gray.

Ochiltre.

Gordon.

The  lords  of  the  articles.
Spiritual.  Temporal.  Barons  elected  to  be  of

the  articles.

Athens.  The  duke.  Maxwell.

Isles.  Argyll.  Tillibardine.

Lord  James.  Marshall.  Cunninghamhead.

Arbroath.  Athole.  Lochenvar.

Newbottle.  * Morton.  Pittarow.

Lindoris.  Glencairn.  Luudy.

Cowpar.  Ruthven.  Ten  provosts  of  the  chief

Kinross.  Erskine.  towns,  which  also  are

Kilwinning.  Boyd.  of  the  articles.

Lindsay.
So  that,  with  the  subprior  of  St.  Andrews,  the  whole  is  36.

APPENDIX.  3Io

It  were  too  long  for  me  to  rehearse  particularly  the  disposition,
and  chiefly  the  affections  of  these  men,  that  are  at  this  time  chosen
lord  of  the  articles.  May  it  satisfy  your  honr.  for  this  time  to  know
that,  by  the  common  opinion  of  men,  there  was  not  a  substantialler
or  more  sufficient  number  of  all  sorts  of  men  chosen  in  Scotland
these  many  years,  nor  of  whom  men  had  greater  hope  of  good  to
ensue.  This  present  morning,  viz.  the  10th,  the  L.  of  Lidingtort
made  me  privy  unto  your  letter  ;  he  intendeth,  as  much  as  may  be,
to  follow  your  advice.  Some  hard  points  there  are.  He  himself
is  determined  not  to  go  into  France.  He  allegeth  many  reasons,
but  speeketh  least  of  that,  that  moveth  him  most,  which  is  the  ex-
ample of  the  last,  that  went  on  a  more  grateful  message  than  he
shall  carry,  and  stood  on  other  terms  with  their  prince  than  he
doth,  and  yet  your  honour  knoweth  what  the  whole  world  judgeth.

Petition  of  the  Lesser  Barons  to  the  Parliament,  held  Aug.  1560.

Inclosed  MY  lords,  unto  your  lordships,  humbly  means,  and
dolph'T  shows,  we  the  barons  and  freeholders  of  this  realm,  your
letter  to  brethren  in  Christ,  That  whereas  the  causes  of  true  reli-

t  &*on>  an(*  common  we^  °f  tn*s  realm>  are?  in  this  present
J560.  '  parliament,  to  be  treated,  ordered,  and  established,  to  the
glory  of  God,  and  maintenance  of  the  commonwealth  ;  and  we
being  the  greatest  number  in  proportion,  where  the  said  causes
concern,  and  has  been,  and  yet  are  ready  to  bear  the  greatest  part
of  the  charge  thereuntil,  as  well  in  peace  as  in  war,  both  with  our
bodies  and  with  our  goods  ;  and  seeing  there  is  no  place  where  we
may  do  better  service  now  than  in  general  councils  and  parliament,
in  giving  our  best  advice  and  reason,  vote  and  councell  for  the
furtherance  thereof,  for  the  maintenance  of  virtue  and  punishment
of  vice,  as  use  and  custom  had  been  of  old  by  ancient  acts  of  par-
liament observed  in  this  realm  ;  and  whereby  we  understand  that
we  ought  to  be  heard  to  reason  and  vote  in  all  causes  concerning
the  commonwealth,  as  well  in  councils  as  in  parliament  ;  otherwise
we  think  that  whatsomever  ordinances  and  statutes  be  made  con-
cerning us  and  our  estate,  we  not  being  required  and  suffered  to
reason  and  vote  at  the  making  thereof,  that  the  same  should  not
oblige  us  to  stand  thereto.  Therefore  it  will  please  your  lordships
to  take  consideration  thereof,  and  of  the  charge  born,  and  to  be
born  by  us,  since  we  are  willing  to  serve  truly  to  the  common  well
of  this  realm,  after  our  estate,  that  ye  will,  in  this  present  parlia-
ment, and  all  counsells,  where  the  common  well  of  the  realm  is  to
be  treated,  take  our  advice,  counsell  and  vote,  so  that  without  the
same,  your  lordships  would  suffer  nothing  to  be  passed  and  con-
cluded in  parliament  or  councils  aforesaid  ;  and  that  all  acts  of  par-

316  SCOTLAND.

liament  made,  in  times  past,  concerning  us  for  our  place  and  estate,
and  in  our  favour,  be  at  this  present  parliament  confirmed,  approved,
and  ratified,  and  act  of  parliament  made  thereupon.  And  your
lordships  answer  humbly  beseeches.

Of  the  success  of  this  petition,  the  following  account  is  given  by
Randolph;  Lett,  to  Cecil,  19^  Aug.  1560.  The  matters  concluded
and  past  by  common  consent  on  Saturday  last,  in  such  solemn  sort
as  the  first  day  that  they  assembled,  are  these:  First,  that  the
barons  according  to  an  old  act  of  parliament,  made  in  the  time  of
James  I.,  in  the  year  of  God  1427,  shall  have  free  voice  in  parlia-
ment, this  act  passed  without  any  contradiction.

No.  V. (Vol.  I.  p.  206.)

•  A  Letter  of  Thomas  Randolph,  the  English  Resident,  to  the  Right
Worshipful  Sir  William  Cecil,  Knt.  principal  Secretary  to  the
Queens  Majesty.

I  HAVE  received  your  honour's  letters  of  the  first  of
1561? Cott.  this  month,  written  at  Osyes  in  Essex  ;  and  also  a  letter
Liln  B.  10.  unto  the  lord  James,  from  his  kinsman  St.  Come  out  of
France ;  in  this  they  agree  both  that  the  queen  of  Scot-
land is  nothing  changed  of  her  purpose  in  home  coming.  I  assure
your  honour  that  will  be  a  stout  adventure  for  a  sick  crazed  woman,
that  may  be  doubted  as  well  what  may  happen  unto  her  upon  the
seas,  as  also  how  heartily  she  may  be  received  when  she  cometh  to
land  of  a  great  number,  who  are  utterly  persuaded  that  she  in-
tendeth  their  utter  ruin,  come  when  she  will ;  the  preparance  is
very  small  whensoever  that  she  arrive,  scarcely  any  man  can  be
persuaded  that  she  hath  any  such  thought  in  her  head.  I  have
shewn  your  honour's  letter  unto  the  lord  James,  lord  Morton,  lord
Lidington;  they  wish,  as  your  honour  doth,  that  she  might  be
stayed  yet  for  a  space,  and  if  it  were  not  for  their  obedience  sake,
some  of  them  care  not  tho'  they  never  saw  her  face.  They
travel  what  they  can  to  prevent  the  wicked  devices  of  those  mis-
chievous purposes  of  her  ministers,  but  I  fear  that  that  will  always
be  found  that  filij  hujus  seculi,  they  do  what  they  can  to  stand  with
the  religion,  and  to  maintain  amity  with  their  neighbours ;  they  have
also  need  to  look  unto  themselves,  for  their  hazard  is  great,  and
that  they  see  there  is  no  remedy  nor  safety  for  themselves,  but  to
repose  themselves  upon  the  queen's  majesty,  our  sovereign's  favour
and  support.  Friends  abroad  they  have  none,  nor  many  in  whom
they  may  trust  at  home.  There  are  in  mind  shortly  to  try  what
they  may  be  assured  at  of  the  queen's  majesty,  and  what  they  may
assuredly  perform  of  that  intend  to  offer  for  their  parties.  This  the
queen  of  Scotland  above  all  other  things  doubteth ;  this  she  seeketh
by  all  means  to  prevent;  and  hath  caused  St.  Come,  in  her  name-,

APPENDIX.  317

earnestly  to  write  to  charge  him  that  no  such  things  be  attempted
before  her  coming  home  ;  for  that  it  is  said,  that  they  too  already
arrived  here  out  of  England  for  the  purpose,  what  semblance  som-
ever  the  noblemen  do  make,  that  they  are  grieved  with  their  queen's
refusal,  that  cometh  far  from  their  hearts. They  intend  to  expos-
tulate with me  hereupon. I  have  my  answer  ready  enough  fo
them. If  she  thrust  Englishmen  all  out  of  this  country,  I  doubt
not  but  there  will  be  some  of  her  own  that  will  bear  us  some
kindness. Of  me  she  shall  be  quit,  so  soon  as  it  pleaseth  the
queen's majesty,  my  mistress,  no  longer  to  use  my  service in
this  place. By  such  talk,  as  I  have  of  late  had  with  the  lord
James  and  lord  of  Lidington,  I  perceive  that  they  are  of  mind
that  immediately  of  the  next  convention,  I  shall  repair  towards
you  with  their  determinations,  and  resolutions,  in  all  purposes,
wherein  your  honour's  advice  is  earnestly  required,  and  shortly
looked for. Whatsomever I desire myself, I  know my  will
ought  to  be  subject  unto  the  queen  my  sovereign's pleasure,  but
to  content  myself,  would  God  I  were  so  happy  as  to  serve  her  ma-
jesty in  as  mean  a  state  as  ever  poor  gentleman  did,  to  be  quit  of
this  place  ; not  that  I  do  in  my  heart  wax  weary  of  her  majesty's
service,  but  because  my  time  and  years  require  some  place  of  more
repose  and  quietness  than  I  find  in  this  country. I  doubt  also  my
insufficience  when  other  troubles  in  this  country  arise,  or  ought
shall  be  required  of  me  to  the  advancement  of  her  majesty's  ser-
vice, that  either  my  will  is  not  able  to  compass,  or  my  credit  suffi-
cient to  work  to  that  effect,  as  perchance  shall  be  looked  for  at  my
hands. As  your  honour  hath  been  a  means  of  my  continuance  in
this  room,  so  I  trust  that  I  shall  find  that  continual  favour  at  your
hands,  that  so  soon  as  it  shall  stand  with  the  queen's  majesty's  plea-
sure, I  may  give  this  place  unto  some  far  worthier  than  I  am  my-
self, and  in  the  mean  season  have  my  course  directed  by  your  good
advice  how  I  may  by  my  contrivance  do  some  such  service  as  may
be  agreeable  to  her  majesty's  will  and  pleasure.

These  few  words,  I  am  bold  to  write  unto  your  honour  of  myself.
For  the  rest,  where  that  is  wished  that  the  lords  will  stoutly  conti-
nue yet  for  one  month,  I  assure  your  honour  that  there  is  yet  no-
thing omitted  of  their  old  and  accustomed  manner  of  doing,  and
seeing  that  they  have  brought  that  unto  this  point,  and  should  now
prevail,  they  were  unworthy  of  their  lives.

I  find  not  that  they  are  purposed  so  to  leave  the  matter.  I  doubt
more  her  money  than  I  do  her  fair  words  ;  and  yet  can  I  not  con-
ceive what  great  things  can  be  wrought  with  forty  thousand  crowns,
and  treasure  of  her  own  here  I  know  there  is  no  sure  or  ready  means
to  get  it.  The  lord  of  Lidington  leaveth  nothing  at  this  time  un-
written, that  he  thinketb  may  be  able  to  satisfye  your  desire,  in

318  SCOTLAND.

knowledge  of  the  present  state  of  things  here.  Whatsomever
cometh  of  that,  he  findeth  it  ever  best,  that  she  come  not ;  but  if
she  do  come,  to  let  her  know,  at  the  first,  what  she  shall  find,  which
is  due  obedience,  and  willing  service,  if  she  embrace  Christ,  and
desire  to  live  in  peace  with  her  neighbours.  By  such  letters  as  you
have  last  received,  your  honour  somewhat  understandeth  of  Mr.
Knox  himself,  and  also  of  others,  what  is  determined,  he  himself
to  abide  the  uttermost,  and  other  never  to  leave  him  until  God  have
taken  his  life,  and  thus  together  with  what  comfort  somever  it  will
please  you  to  give  him  by  your  letters,  that  the  queen's  majesty
doth  not  utterly  condemn  him,  or  at  the  least  in  that  point,  that  he
is  so  sore  charged  with  by  his  own  queen,  that  her  majesty  will  not
allow  her  doing,  I  doubt  not  but  it  will  be  a  great  comfort  unto
him,  and  will  content  many  others  :  his  daily  prayer  is  for  the  main-
tenance of  unity  with  England,  and  that  God  will  never  suffer  men
to  be  so  ungrate,  as  by  any  persuasion  to  run  headlong  unto  the
destruction  of  them  that  have  saved  their  lives,  and  restored  their
country  to  liberty.  I  leave  farther,  at  this  time,  to  trouble  your
honour,  desiring  God  to  send  such  an  amity  between  these  two
realms,  that  God  may  be  glorified  to  them  of  this  world. — At  Eden-
bourgh,  the  9th  of  August,  1561.

No.  VI. (Vol.  I.  p.  214.)

A  Letter  of  Queen  Elizabeth  to  Queen  Mary.*

To  the  right  excellent,  right  high,  and  mighty  Princesse,  our  right

dear  and  well-beloved  sister  and  cousin  the  Queen  of  Scotland.
16th f  RIGHT  excellent,  right  high,  and  mighty  princesse,  our

Aug.  1561.  right  dear  and  right  well-beloved  sister  and  cousin,  we
Paper  Of-  greet  you  well.  The  lord  of  St.  Cosme  brought  to  us
a°copy°.m  y°ur  letters,  dated  the  8th  of  this  present  at  Abbeville,
whereby  ye  signify,  that  although  by  the  answer  brought
to  you  by  Monsieur  Doyzell,  ye  might  have  had  occasion  to  have
entered  into  some  doubt  of  our  amity,  yet  after  certain  purposes
passed  betwixt  you  and  our  ambassador,  you  would  assure  us  of
your  good  meaning  to  live  with  us  in  amity,  and  for  your  purpose
therein  ye  require  us  to  give  credit  to  the  said  St.  Cosme.  We  have
thereunto  thought  good  to  answer  as  followeth:  The  same  St.  Cosme
hath  made  like  declaration  unto  us  on  your  part,  for  your  excuse  in
not  ratifying  the  treaty,  as  yourself  made  to  our  ambassador,  and  we
have  briefly  answered  to  every  the  same  points,  as  he  can  shew  you:

*  This  is  the  complete  paper  of  which  that  industrious  and  impartial  collector,
Bishop  Keith,  has  published  a  fragment,  from  what  he  calls  his  shattered  MS.  154.
note  (a)  181.

-

APPENDIX.  319

and  if  he  shall  not  so  do,  yet  lest  in  the  mean  season  you  might
be  induced  to  think  that  your  reasons  had  satisfied  us,  somerally
we  assure  you,  that  to  our  requests  your  answer  cannot  be  reputed
for  a  satisfaction. For  we  require  no  benefit  of  you,  but  that  you
will  perform  your  promise  whereunto  you  are  bound  by  your  seal
and  your  hand,  for  the  refusal  whereof  we  see  no  reason  alledged
can  serve. Neither  covet  we  any  thing,  but  that  which  is  in  your
own  power  as  queen  of  Scotland,  that  which  yourself  in  words  and
speech  doth  confess, that  which  your  late  husband's  our  good
brother's  ambassadors  and  you  concluded,  that  which  your  own
nobility  and  people  were  made  privy  unto,  that  which  indeed  made
peace  and  quietness  betwixt  us,  yea,  that  without  which  no  perfect
amity  can  continue  betwixt  us,  as  if  it  be  indifferently  weighed,  we
doubt  not  but  that  ye  will  perceive,  allow,  and  accomplish. Never-
theless, perceiving,  by  the  report  of  the  bringer,  that  you  mean
furthwith  upon  your  coming  home,  to  follow  herein  the  advice  of
your  council  in  Scotland,  we  are  content  to  suspend  our  conceipt
of  all  unkindness,  and  do  assure  you  that  we  be  fully  resolved,  upon
this  being  performed,  to  unite  a  sure  band  of  amity,  and  to  live  in
neighbourhood  with  you  as  quietly,  friendly,  yea,  as  assuredly  in
the  knot  of  friendship,  as  we  be  in  the  knot  of  nature  and  blood.
And  herein  we  be  so  earnestly  determined,  that  the  world  should
see  if  the  contrary  should  follow  (which  God  forbid !)  the  very  occa-
sion to  be  in  you  and  not  in  us;  as  the  story  witnesseth  the  like  of
the  king  your  father,  our  uncle,  with  whom  our  father  sought  to
have  knitt  a  perpetual  bond  by  inviting  to  come  in  this  realm  to
York ;  of  which  matter  we  know  there  remain  with  us,  and  we  think
with  you,  sundry  witnesses  of  our  father's  earnest  good  meaning,
and  of  the  error  whereunto  divers  evil  councillors  induced  your
father ;  or  finally  where  it  seemeth  that  report  hath  been  made  unto
you,  that  we  had  sent  our  admiral  to  the  seas  with  our  navy  to  em-
peache  your  passage,  both  your  servants  do  well  understand  how
false  that  is,  knowing  for  a  truth  that  we  have  not  any  more  than
two  or  three  small  barks  upon  the  seas,  to  apprehend  certain  pirates,
being  thereto  entreated,  and  almost  compelled,  by  the  earnest  com-
plaint of  the  ambassador  of  our  good  brother  the  king  of  Spain,
made  of  certaine  Scottishmen  haunting  our  seas  as  pirates,  under
pretence  of  letters  of  marque,  of  which  matter  also  we  earnestly
require  you,  at  your  coming  to  your  realme,  to  have  some  good
consideration,  and  the  rather  for  respect  that  ought  to  be  betwixt
your  realme  and  the  countries  of  us,  of  France,  of  Spain,  and  of  the
house  of  Burgundy. And  so,  right  excellent,  right  high,  and  mighty
princess,  we  recommend  us  to  you  with  most  earnest  request,  not  to
neglect  these  our  friendly  and  sisterly  offers  of  friendship,  which,
before  God,  we  mean  and  intend  to  accomplish. Given  under  our

320  SCOTLAND.

signet  at  Henyngham,  the  16tb  of  August,  in  the  third  year  of  our
reign.

No.  VII. (Vol.  I.  p.  241.)

A  Letter  of  Randolph  to  the  Right  Honourable  Sir  William  Cecil,
Knight,  Principal  Secretary  to  the  Queen's  Majesty.

15th  of  ^F  ^ate»  untl^  ^e  arrival  °f  Monsieur  Le  Croch,  I  had
May,  nothing  worth  the  writing  unto  your  honour. — Before  his

156X JTa~  coming  we  had  so  little  to  hint  upon  that  we  did  nothing

per  Office,  .  .

from  the but  pass  our  time  in  feasts,  banquettmg,  masking,  and

original,  running  at  the  ring,  and  such  like.  He  brought  with  him
such  a  number  of  letters,  and  such  abundance  of  news,  that,  for  the
space  of  three  days,  we  gave  ourselves  to  nothing  else  but  to  read-
ing of  writings,  and  hearing  of  tales,  many  so  truly  reported,  that
they  might  be  compared  to  any  that  ever  Luciane  did  write  de  veris
narrationibus.  Among  all  his  tidings,  for  the  most  assured,  I  send
this  unto  your  honour  as  an  undoubted  truth,  which  is,  that  the
cardinal  of  Lorraine,  at  his  being  with  the  emperor,  moved  a  mar-
riage between  his  youngest  son,  the  duke  of  Austruche,  and  this
queen ;  wherein  he  hath  so  far  travailed,  that  it  hath  already  come
unto  this  point,  that  if  she  find  it  good,  the  said  duke  will  out  of
hand  send  hither  his  ambassador,  and  farther  proceed  to  the  con-
summation hereof,  with  as  convenient  speed  as  may  be ;  and  to  the
intent  her  mind  may  be  the  better  known,  Le  Croch  is  sent  unto
her  with  this  message  from  the  cardinal,  who  hath  promised  unto
the  emperor,  to  have  word  again  before  the  end  of  May ;  and  for
this  cause  Le  Croch  is  ready  for  his  departure,  and  his  letters  writ-
ing both  day  and  night.  This  queen  being  before  advertised  of  his
towardness,  by  many  means  hath  sought  far  off,  to  know  my  lord
of  Murray's  mind  herein,  but  would  never  so  plainly  deal  with  him,
that  he  could  learn  what  her  meaning  is,  or  how  she  is  bent.  She
useth  no  man's  council  but  only  this  man's  that  last  arrived,  and
assuredly  until  the  L.  of  Lidington's  return,  she  will  do  what  she  can
to  keep  that  secret;  and  because  resolution  in  his  absence  cannot
be  taken,  she  will,  for  this  time,  return  Le  Croch  with  request,  to
have  longer  time  to  devise ;  and  after,  with  the  most  speed  she  can,
she  fully  purposeth  to  advertise  him,  I  mean,  her  uncle  the  cardi-
nal, of  her  mind.  Of  this  matter  the  L.  of  Lidington  is  made  privy.
I  know  not  whether  by  some  intelligence  that  he  had  before  his  de-
parture, or  since  his  arrival  in  France,  divers  letters  have  passed
between  her  grace  and  him,  whereof  as  much  as  it  imported  not
greatly  the  knowledge  of,  was  communicated  to  some,  as  much  as
was  written  in  sypher  is  kept  unto  themselves.  Whether  also  the
L.  of  Lidington  hath  had  conference  with  the  Spanish  ambassador

APPENDIX.  321

in  England  of  this  matter  or  any  like,  I  leave  it  unto  your  honour's
good  means  to  get  true  knowledge  thereof.  Guesses  or  surmizes
in  so  grave  matters,  I  would  be  loth  to  write  for  verities.  This
also  your  honour  may  take  for  truth,  that  the  emperor  hath  offered
with  his  son,  for  this  queen's  dower,  the  county  of  Tyroll,  which  is
said  to  be  worth  30,000  franks  by  year.  Of  this  matter  also  the
rhingrave  wrote  a  letter  unto  this  queen,  out  of  France  not  long
since.  This  is  all  that  presently  I  can  write  unto  your  honour
hereof;  as  I  can  come  by  farther  knowledge,  your  honour  shall  be
informed.

I  have  received  your  honour's  writings  by  the  Scottish  man  that
last  came  into  these  parts ;  he  brought  also  letters  unto  this  queen
from  the  L.  of  Lidington ;  their  date  was  old,  and  contained  only
the  news  of  France.  I  perceive  divers  ways,  that  Newhaven  is
sorre  closed,  but  I  am  not  so  ignorant  of  their  nature,  but  that  I
know  they  will  say  as  much  as  they  dare  do,  I  will  not  say  as  the
proverb  doth  *  canis  timidus  fortius  latrat.'  From  hence  I  do  as-
sure them,  what  means  somever  they  make,  or  how  pitiful  somever
their  mone  be,  they  are  like  to  receive  but  small  comfort  for  all
their  long  allie.  We  stand  daily  in  doubt  what  friendship  we  shall
need  ourself,  except  we  put  better  order  into  our  misruled  Papists
than  yet  we  do,  or  know  how  to  bring  to  pass  that  we  may  be  void
of  their  comber.

To-morrow,  the  15th  of  this  instant,  the  queen  departeth  of  this
town,  towards  Edenborough.  If  my  hap  be  good,  you  shall  tho-
roughly hear  some  merry  tidings  of  the  Bp.  of  St.  Andrews  ;  upon
Wednesday  next  he  shall  be  arreigned,  and  five  other  priests,  for
their  massing  at  Easter  last.  Thus  most  humbly  I  take  my  leave ;
at  St.  Andrews  the  15th  of  May,  1563.

No.  VIII. (Vol.  I.  p.  249.)

Letter  of  Randolph to the Right  Honourable Sir William Cecil,
Knight,  Principal  Secretary  to  the  Queen's  Majesty.

10th  of  MAY  it  please  your  honour,  the  7th  of  this  instant,
April,  Rowlet,  this  queen's  secretary,  arrived  here ;  he  reporteth
per  Office,  very  honestly  of  his  good  usage,  he  brought  with  him
from  the  many  letters  unto  the  queen  that  came  out  of  France,  full
hisg'own  n  of  lamentation  and  sorrow.  She  received  from  the  queen-
hand,  mother  two  letters,  the  one  contained  only  the  rehearsal
of  her  griefs,  the  other  signify  the  state  of  France,  as  then  it  was,  as
in  what  sort  things  were  accorded,  and  what  farther  was  intended
for  the  appeasing  of  the  discords  there,  not  mistrusting  but  that  if
reason  could  not  be  had  at  the  queen  of  England's  hands,  but  that
VOL.  n.  Y

322  SCOTLAND.

the  realm  of  France  should  find  her  ready  and  willing  to  support
and  defend  the  right  thereof,  as  byv  friendship  and  old  alliance
between  the  two  realms  she  is  bound.

How  well  these  words  do  agree  with  her  doings  your  honour  can
well  consider,  and  by  her  writings  in  this  sort  unto  this  queen
(which  I  assure  your  honour  is  true),  you  may  assuredly  know
that  nothing  shall  be  left  undone  of  her  part,  that  may  move  debate
or  controversie  between  this  queen  and  our  sovereign.

It  was  much  mused  by  the  queen  herself,  how  this  new  kindness
came  about,  that  at  this  time  she  received  two  long  letters  written
all  with  her  own  hand,  saying,  all  the  time  since  her  return  she
never  received  half  so  many  lines  as  were  in  one  of  the  letters,
which  I  can  myself  testify  by  the  queen's  own  saying,  and  other
good  assurance,  where  hitherto  I  have  not  been  deceived.  I  can
also  farther  assure  your  honour,  that  this  queen  hath  sayed  that  she
knoweth  now,  that  the  friendship  of  the  queen's  majesty  my  sove-
reign may  stand  her  more  in  stead,  than  that  of  her  good  mother  in
France,  and  as  she  is  desirous  of  them  both,  so  will  she  not  lose  the
one  for  the  other.  I  may  also  farther  assure  your  honour,  that
whatsomever  the  occasion  is,  this  queen  hath  somewhat  in  her
heart  that  will  burst  out  in  time,  which  will  manifest  that  some  un-
kindness  hath  passed  between  them,  that  will  not  be  easy  forgot-
ten. In  talk  sometimes  with  myself,  she  saith  that  the  queen-
mother  might  have  used  the  matter  otherwise  than  she  hath  done,
and  doth  much  doubt  what  shall  be  the  success  of  her  great  desire
to  govern  alone,  in  all  things  to  have  her  will.  Seeing  then  that
presently  they  stand  in  such  terms  one  with  the  other,  I  tho'tit  bet-
ter to  confirm  her  in  that  mind  (this  queen  I  mean),  than  to  speak
any  word  that  might  cause  her  to  conceive  better  of  the  other.
And  yet  I  am  assured  she  shall  receive  as  friendly  letters,  and  as
many  good  words  from  this  queen,  as  the  other  did  write  unto  her.
Whether  the  queen-mother  will  speak  any  thing  unto  the  L.  of  Lid-
ington  of  that  purpose  she  did  write  unto  this  queen  of,  I  know
not ;  but  if  she  do,  I  think  it  hard  if  your  honour  can  get  no  favour
thereof,  at  his  return,  or  I  perchance  by  some  means  here.  It  may
perchance  be  written  only  by  that  queen,  to  try  what  answer  this
queen  will  give,  or  understand  what  mind  she  beareth  unto  the
queen's  majesty  our  sovereign.  The  queen  knoweth  now  that  the
earl  Bothwell  is  sent  for  to  London.  She  caused  a  gentleman  of
hers  to  inquire  the  cause ;  I  answered  that  I  knew  none  other,  but
that  his  takers  were  in  controversy  who  took  him,  and  that  it  should
be  judged  there.  I  know  that  she  thinketh  much  that  he  is  not
sent  into  Scotland.  It  is  yet  greatly  doubted  that  if  he  were  here,
he  would  be  reserved  for  an  evil  instrument.  If  the  lord  of  Liding-
ton  have  not  been  plain  with  your  honour  herein,  he  is  in  the  wrong

APPENDIX.  323

to  those  who  are  his  friends  here,  but  most  of  all  to  himself.  There
comes  a  vulture  in  this  realm,  if  ever  that  man  come  again  into
credit.

No.  IX.  (Vol.  I.  p.  256.)

The  Oration  made  by  William  Maitland  of  Lethington,  younger  secre-
tary for  the  time,  in  the  parliament  holden  by  our  sovereign  the
King's  mother,  Queen  of  this  realm  for  the  time,  the  time  of  the  re-
stitution ofUmquile  Matthew  Earl  of  Lenox.

MY  lords,  and  others  here  convened.  Albeit,  be  that  it  has
pleased  her  majesty  most  graciously  to  utter  unto  you,  by  her  own
mouth,  ye  may  have  sufficiently  conceived  the  cause  of  this  your
present  assembly;  yet  having  her  majesty's  commandment  to
supply  my  lord  Chancellor's  place,  being  presently  as  ye  see  de-
ceased, I  am  willed  to  express  the  same  somewhat  more  at  large.

Notour  it  is,  how,  in  her  highness's  minority,  a  process  of  for-
faltour  was  decreed  against  my  lord  of  Lennox,  for  certain  offences
alledged  committed  by  him ;  specified  in  the  dome  and  censement
of  parliament  given  thereupon ;  by  reason  whereof  he  has  this  long
time  been  exiled,  and  absent  forth  of  his  native  country ;  how
grievous  the  same  has  been  unto  him,  it  has  well  appeared  by  divers
his  suites,  sundry  ways  brought  unto  her  majesty's  knowledge,  not
only  containing  most  humble  and  due  submission,  but  always  bear-
ing witness  of  his  good  devotion  to  her  majesty,  his  natural  princess,
and  earnest  affection  he  had  to  her  highness  most  humble  service,
if  it  should  please  her  majesty  of  her  clemency  to  make  him  able  to
enjoy  the  benefit  of  a  subject ;  many  respects  might  have  moved  her
highness  favourably  to  incline  to  his  request,  as  the  anciency  of  his
house,  and  the  sirname  he  bears,  the  honour  he  has  to  appertain  to
her  majesty  by  affinity,  by  reason  of  my  lady  Margaret  her  high-
ness's  aunt,  and  divers  other  his  good  considerations,  as  also  the
affectuous  request  of  her  good  sister  the  queen's  majesty  of  England,
whose  earnest  commendation  was  not  of  least  moment,  besides  that
of  her  own  natural,  her  majesty  has  a  certain  inclination  to  pity  the
decay  of  noble  houses,  and  as  we  heard,  by  her  own  report,  has  a
great  deal  more  pleasure  to  be  the  instrument  of  the  uphold,  main-
tenance, and  advancement  of  the  ancient  blood,  than  to  have  matter
ministered  of  the  decay  or  overthrow  of  any  good  race.  Upon  this
occasion,  her  majesty  the  more  tenderly  looked  upon  his  request,
and  her  good  sister  the  queen  of  England's  favourable  letter,  written
for  recommendation  of  his  cause,  in  consideration  whereof  not  only
has  she  granted  unto  him  her  letter  of  restitution,  by  way  of  grace,
but  also  licensed  him  to  pursue,  by  way  of  reduction,  the  remedies
provided  by  the  law  for  such  as  think  themselves  grieved  by  any

Y  2

324  SCOTLAND.

judgment,  unorderly  led,  and  to  have  the  process  reversed;  for  exa-
mination whereof,  it  has  pleased  her  majesty  presently  to  assemble
you  the  three  estates  of  this  her  realme,  by  whose  advice,  delibera-
tion, and  decision  at  her  majesty's  mind,  to  proceed  forward  upon
his  complaints,  as  the  merits  of  the  cause,  laws  of  the  realm,  and
practice  observed  in  such  cases,  will  bear  out.  The  sum  of  all  your
proceedings  at  this  time,  being  by  that  we  have  heard,  thus1  as  it
were  pointed  out,  I  might  here  end,  if  the  matter  we  have  in  hand
gave  me  not  occasion  to  say  a  few  more  words,  not  far  different
from  the  same  subject,  wherein  I  would  extend  the  circumstances
more  largely,  if  I  feared  not  to  offend  her  highness,  whose  presence
and  modest  nature  abhors  long  speaking  and  adulation,  and  so  will
compel  me  to  speak  such  things,  as  may  seem  to  tend  to  any  good
and  perfect  point;  and  lest  it  should  be  compted  to  me,  as  that  I
were  oblivious,  if  I  should  omit  to  put  you  in  remembrance,  in  what
part  we  may  accept  this,  and  the  like  demonstrations  of  her  gentill
nature ;  whose  gracious  behaviour  towards  all  her  subjects,  in  gene-
ral, may  serve  for  a  good  proof  of  that  felicity,  we  may  look  for
under  her  happy  government  so  long  as  it  shall  please  God  to  grant
her  unto  us ;  for  a  good  harmony  to  be  had  in  the  common  weill,
the  offices  between  the  prince  and  the  subjects  must  be  reciproque,
as  by  her  majesty's  prudence  we  enjoy  this  present  peace  with  all
foreign  nations,  and  quietness  among  yourselves,  in  such  sort,  that
I  think  justly  it  may  be  affirmed  Scotland,  in  no  man's  age,  that  pre-
sently lives,  was  in  greater  tranquillity ;  so  is  it  the  duty  of  all  us
her  loving  subjects  to  acknowledge  the  same  as  a  most  high  benefit,
proceeding  from  the  good  government  of  her  majesty,  declaring
ourselves  thankful  for  the  same,  and  rendering  to  her  majesty  such
due  obedience,  as  a  just  prince  may  look  for  at  the  hands  of  faith-
ful and  obedient  subjects.  I  mean  no  forced  nor  unwilling  obedi-
ence, which  I  know  her  nature  does  detest,  but  such  as  proceeds
from  the  contemplation  of  her  mod-est  kind  of  regiment,  will  for  love
and  duty  sake  produce  the  fruits  thereof.  A  good  proof  have  we
all  in  general  had  of  hfer  majesty's  benignity  these  three  years,  that
she  has  lived  in  the  government  over  you,  and  many  of  you  have
largely  tasted  of  her  large  liberality  and  frank  dealing:  on  the
other  part  her  highness  has  had  large  appearance  of  your  dutiful
obedience,  so  it  becomes  you  to  continue,  as  we  have  begun,  in  con-
sideration of  the  many  notable  examples  of  her  clemency  above
others  her  good  qualities,  and  to  abhor  and  detest  all  false  bruites
and  rumours,  which  are  the  most  pestilent  evils  that  can  be,  in  any
common  weil,  and  the  sowers  and  inventors  thereof.  Then  may  we
be  well  assured  to  have  of  her  an  most  gracious  princesse,  and  she
most  faithful  and  loving  subjects ;  and  so  both  the  head  and  the
members,  being  encouraged  to  maintain  the  harmony  and  accord  of

APPENDIX.  325

the  politic  bodies,  whereof  I  made  mention  before,  as  the  glory
thereof  shall  partly  appertain  to  her  majesty,  so  shall  no  small  praise
and  unspeakable  commodity  redound  therethrough  to  you  all  uni-
versally her  subjects.

No.  X. (Vol.  I.  p.  264.)

The  perils  and  troubles  that  may  presently  ensue,  and  in  time  to  come
follow,  to  the  Queen's  Majesty  of  England  and  state  of  this  realm,
upon  the  marriage  of  the  Queen  of  Scots  to  the  Lord  Darnley.

FIRST,  the  minds  of  such  as  be  affected  to  the  queen  of  Scots,
either  for  herself,  or  for  the  opinion  of  her  pretence  to  this  crown,
or  for  the  desire  to  have  change  of  the  forme  of  religion  in  this
realm,  or  for  the  discontentation  they  have  of  the  queen's  majesty,
or  her  succession,  or  of  the  succession  of  any  other  beside  the  queen
of  Scotts,  shall  be,  by  this  marriage  erected,  comforted,  and  induced
to  devise  and  labour  how  to  bring  their  desires  to  pass :  and  to
make  some  estimate  what  persons  those  are,  to  the  intent  the  quan-
tity of  the  danger  may  be  weighed;  the  same  may  be  compassed
in  those  sorts  either  within  the  realm  or  without.

The  first  are  such  as  are  specially  devoted  to  the  queen  of  Scotts,
or  to  the  lord  Darnley,  by  bond  of  blood  and  alliance  ;  as  first,  all
the  house  of  Lorrain  and  Guise  for  her  part,  and  the  earl  of  Lennox
and  his  wife,  all  such  in  Scotland  as  be  of  their  blood,  and  have  re-
ceived displeasures  by  the  duke  of  Chatelherault  and  the  Hamiltons.
The  second  are  all  manner  of  persons,  both  in  this  realm  and  other
countries,  that  are  devoted  to  the  authority  of  Rome,  and  mislike
of  the  religion  now  received;  and  in  these  two  sorts  are  the  sub-
stance of  them  comprehended,  that  shall  take  comfort  in  this  mar-
riage.

Next  therefore  to  be  considered  what  perils  and  troubles  these
kind  of  men  shall  intend  to  this  realm.

First,  the  general  scope  and  mark  of  all  their  desires  is,  and
always  shall  be,  to  bring  the  queen  of  Scotts  to  have  the  royal  crown
of  this  realm  ;  and  therefore,  though  the  devisees  may  vary  among
themselves  for  the  compassing  hereof,  according  to  the  accidents  of
the  times,  and  according  to  the  impediments  which  they  shall  find
by  means  of  the  queen's  majesty's  actions  and  governments,  yet  all
their  purposes,  drifts,  devises,  and  practices,  shall  wholly  and  only
tend  to  make  the  queen  of  Scotts  queen  of  this  realm,  and  to  deprive
our  sovereign  lady  thereof ;  and  in  their  proceedings,  there  are  two
manners  to  be  considered,  whereof  the  one  is  far  worse  than  the
other ;  the  one  is  intended  by  them,  that  either  from  malicious
blindness  in  religion,  or  for  natural  affection  to  the  queen  of  Scotts,
or  the  lord  Darnley,  do  persuade  themselves  that  the  said  queen  of

326  SCOTLAND.

Scotts  hath  presently  more  right  to  the  crown  than  our  sovereign
lady  the  queen,  of  which  sort  be  all  their  kindred  on  both  sides,  and
all  such  as  are  devoted  to  Popery,  either  in  England,  Scotland,
Ireland,  or  elsewhere;  the  other  is  meant  by  them,  which,  with  less
malice  are  persuaded  that  the  queen  of  Scotts  hath  only  right  to  be
the  next  heir  to  succeed  the  queen's  majesty  and  her  issue,  of  which
sort  few  are  without  the  realm,  but  here  within,  and  yet  of  them,
not  so  many  as  are  of  the  contrary,  and  from  these  two  sorts  shall
the  peril,  devises,  and  practices  proceed.  From  the  first,  which
imagine  the  queen  of  Scotts  to  have  perpetually  right  are  to  be
looked  for  these  perils.  First,  is  it  to  be  doubted  the  devil  will  in-
fect some  of  them  to  imagine  the  hurt  of  the  life  of  our  dear  sove-
reign lady,  by  such  means  as  the  devil  shall  suggest  to  them,
although  it  is  to  be  assuredly  hoped,  that  Almighty  God  will,  as  he
has  hitherto  graciously  protect  and  preserve  her  from  such  dangers  ?
Secondly,  there  will  be  attempted,  by  persuasions,  by  bruites,  by
rumours,  and  such  like,  to  alienate  the  minds  of  good  subjects  from
the  queen's  majesty,  and  to  counciliate  them  to  the  queen  of  Scotts,
and  on  this  behalf  the  frontiers  and  the  north  will  be  much  solicited
and  laboured.  Thirdly,  there  will  be  attempted  causes  of  some
tumults  and  rebellions,  especially  in  the  north  toward  Scotland,  so
as  thereupon  may  follow  some  open  enterprise  set  by  violence.
Fourthly,  there  will  be,  by  the  said  queen's  council  and  friends,  a
new  league  made  with  France,  or  Spain,  that  shall  be  offensive  to
this  realm,  and  a  furtherance  to  their  title.  And  as  it  is  also  very
likely,  that  they  will  set  a  foot  as  many  practices  as  they  can,  both
upon  the  frontiers  and  in  Ireland,  to  occasion  the  queen's  majesty
to  increase  and  continue  her  charge  thereby,  to  retain  her  from
being  mighty  or  potent,  and  for  the  attempting  of  all  these  things,
many  devises  will  be  imagined  from  time  to  time,  and  no  negligence
will  therein  appear.

From  the  second  sort,  which  mean  no  other  favour  to  the  queen
of  Scotts,  but  that  she  should 'succeed  in  title  to  the  queen's  majesty,
is  not  much  to  be  feared,  but  that  they  will  content  themselves  to
see  not  only  the  queen's  majesty  not  to  marry,  and  so  to  impeach  it,
but  to  hope,  that  the  queen  of  Scotts  shall  have  issue,  which  they
will  think  to  be  more  pleasable  to  all  men,  because  thereby  the
crowns  of  England  and  Scotland  shall  be  united  in  one,  and  thereby
the  occasion  of  war  shall  cease ;  with  which  persuasion  many  people
may  be  seduced,  and  abused  to  incline  themselves  to  the  part  of  the
queen  of  Scotts.

The  remedies  against  these  perils.

APPENDIX.  327

A  Duplicat.

4ih  of d  summary  of  the  consultation  and  advice  given  by  the  Lords
June,  1565. anci  others  of  the  Privy  Council. Collected  out  of  the  sun-
Cal.  B.  10. ary  and  se>C€ral  speeches  of  the  said  cousellors.
fol.  290.

Lord  Keeper,  Mr.  Comptroller,

Lord  Treasurer,  Mr.  Vice  Chamberlain,

f  Derby,  Mr.  Secretary,
Earls  of  -?  Bedford,  Cave,

( Leicester,  Peter,

Lord  Admiral,  Mason.

Lord  Chamberlain,

Questions  propounded  were  these  two  :

1.  First  what  perils might ensue  to  the  queen's  majesty,  or
this  realm,  of  the  marriage  betwixt  the  queen  of  Scotts  and  the  lord
Darnley.

2.  What  were  meet  to  be  done,  to  avoid  or  remedy  the  same.

To  the  First.

The  perils  being  sundry,  and  very  many,  were  reduced  by  some
counsellors  into  only  one.

1.  First,  That  by  this  marriage,  the  queen  of  Scotts  (being  not
married),  a  great  number  in  this  realm,  not  of  the  worst  subjects,
might  be  alienated  in  their  minds  from  their  natural  duties  to  her
majesty,  to  depend  upon  the  success  of  this  marriage  of  Scotland,
as  a  mean  to  establish  the  succession  of  both  the  crowns  in  the  issue
of  the  same  marriage,  and  so  favour  all  devises  and  practices,  that
should  tend  to  the  advancement  of  the  queen  of  Scotts.

2.  Secondly,  That,  considering  the  chief  foundation  of  them,
which  furthered  the  marriage  of  lord  Darnley,  was  laid  upon  the  trust
of  such  as  were  Papists,  as  the  only  means  left  to  restore  the  religion  of
Rome,  it  was  plainly  to  be  seen,  that,  both  in  this  realm  and  Scotland,
the  Papists  would  most  favour,  maintain,  and  fortify  this  marriage
of  the  lord  Darley,  and  would,  for  furtherance  of  faction  in  religion,
devise  all  means  and  practices  that  could  be  within  this  realm,  to
disturb  the  estate  of  the  queen's  majesty,  and  the  peace  of  the  realm,
and  consequently  to  atchieve  their  purposes  by  force  rather  than  fail.
By  some  other,  these  perils  having  indeed  many  branches,  were  re-
duced, though  somewhat  otherwise,  into  two  sorts,  and  these  were
in  nature  such  as  they  could  not  be  easily  severed  the  one  from  the
other,  but  were  knit  and  linked  together,  naturally  for  maintaining
the  one  with  the  other.  The  first  of  these  sort  of  perils  was,  that,

328  SCOTLAND.

by  this  marriage  with  the  lord  Darnley,  there  was  a  plain  intention
to  further  the  pretended  title  of  the  queen  of  Scotts,  not  only  to  suc-
ceed the  queen's  majesty,  as  in  her  best  amity  she  had  professed,
but  that  to  occupy  the  queen's  estate,  as  when  she  was  in  power
she  did  manifestly  declare.

The  second  was,  that  hereby  the  Romish  religion  should  be
erected,  and  increased  daily  in  tnis  realm,  and  these  two  were  thus
knit  together,  that  the  furtherance  arid  maintenance  of  the  title
staid  in  furthering  of  the  religion  of  Rome  within  this  realm ;  and
in  like  manner  the  furtherance  of  the  same  religion  stood  by  the
title,  for  otherwise  the  title  had  no  foundation.

Proves  of  the  first.)  And  to  prove  that  the  intention  to  advance,
the  title  to  disturb  the  queen's  majesty  must  needs  ensue,  was  con-
sidered that  always  the  intention  and  will  of  any  person  is  most
manifest,when  their  power  is  greatest,  and  contrary  when  their  power
is  small ;  then  the  intention  and  will  of  every  person  is  covered  and
less  seen.  So  as  when  the  queen  of  Scotts  power  was  greatest,  by
her  marriage  with  the  dauphin  of  France,  being  afterwards  French
king,  it  manifestly  appeared  of  what  mind  she  and  all  her  friends
were ;  using  then  manifestly  all  the  means  that  could  be  devised
to  impeach  and  dispossess  the  queen's  majesty,  first  by  writing  and
publishing  herself  in  all  countries  queen  of  England  ;  by  granting
charters,  patents,  and  commissions,  with  that  style,  and  with  the
arms  of  England,  both  the  French  and  Scotts,  which  charters  re-
main still  undefaced  ;  and  to  prosecute  it  with  effect,  it  is  known
what  preparations  of  war  were  made,  and  sent  into  Scotland  ;  and
what  other  forces  were  assembled  in  foreign  countries ;  yea,  in
what  manner  a  shameful  peace  was  made  by  the  French  with  king
Philip,  to  employ  all  the  forces  of  France  to  pursue  all  the  matters
by  force,  which  by  God's  providence  and  the  queen's  majesty  con-
trary power,  were  repelled  ;  and  afterwards,  by  her  husband's
death,  her  fortune  and  power  being  changed,  the  intention  began
to  hide  itself,  and  although  by  the  Scottish  queen's  commissaries
an  accord  was  made  at  Edenbrough,  to  reform  all  those  titles,  and
claims,  and  pretences,  yet  to  this  day,  by  delays  and  cavillations,
the  ratification  of  that  treaty  has  been  deferred.  And  so  now,  as
soon  as  she  shall  feel  her  power,  she  will  set  the  same  again  abroad,
and  by  considering  of  such  errors  as  were  committed  in  the  first,
her  friends  and  allies  will  amend  the  same,  and  proceed  substan-
tially to  her  purpose.  By  some  it  was  thought  plainly,  that  the
peril  was  greater  of  this  marriage  with  the  lord  Darnley,  being  a
subject  of  this  realm,  than  with  the  mightiest  prince  abroad,  for  by
this,  he  being  of  this  realm,  and  having  for  the  cause  of  religion,
and  other  respects,  made  a  party  here,  should  encrease  by  force
with  diminution  of  the  power  of  the  realm ;  in  that  whatsoever

APPENDIX.  329

power  he  could  make  by  the  faction  of  the  Papist,  and  other  dis-
contented persons  here,  should  it  be  as  it  were  deducted  out  of  the
power  of  this  realm  ;  and  by  the  marriage  of  a  stranger,  she  could
not  be  assured  of  any  part  here  ;  so  as  by  this  marriage  she  should
have  a  portion  of  her  own  power  to  serve  her  turn,  and  a  small
portion  of  adversaries  at  home  in  our  own  bowels,  always  seem
more  dangerous  than  treble  the  like  abroad,  whereof  the  examples
are  in  our  own  stories  many,  that  foreign  powers  never  prevailed  in
this  realm,  but  with  the  help  of  some  at  home.  It  was  also  re-
membered, that  seeing  how  before  this  attempt  of  marriage,  it  is
found,  and  manifestly  seen,  that  in  every  corner  of  the  realm,  the
faction  that  most  favoureth  the  Scottish  title,  is  grown  stout  and
bold,  yea  seen  manifestly  in  this  court,  both  in  hall  and  chamber,
it  could  not  be  but  (except  good  heed  were  speedily  given  to  it)  by
this  marriage,  and  by  the  practice  of  the  fautors  thereof,  the  same
faction  would  shortly  increase,  and  grow  so  great  and  dangerous,
as  the  redress  thereof  would  be  almost  desperate.  And  to  this
purpose  it  was  remembered,  how  of  late  in  perusing  of  the  sub-
stance of  the  justices  of  the  peace,  in  all  the  countries  of  the  realm,
scantly  a  third  was  found  fully  assured  to  be  trusted  in  the  matter
of  religion,  upon  which  only  string  the  queen  of  Scotts  title  doth
hang,  and  some  doubt  might  be,  that  the  friends  of  the  earl  of
Lennox  and  his  had  more  knowledge  hereof  than  was  thought,  and
thereby  made  avant  now  in  Scotland,  and  their  party  was  so  great
in  England  as  the  queen's  majesty  durst  not  attempt  to  contrary
his  marriage.  And  in  this  sort,  was  the  sum  of  the  perils  declared,
being  notwithstanding  more  largely  and  plainly  set  out,  and  made
so  apparent  by  many  sure  arguments,  as  no  one  of  the  council
could  deny  them  to  be  but  many  and  very  dangerous.

Second  Question.

The  question  of  this  consultation  was  what  were  meet  to  be  done
to  avoid  these  perils,  or  else  to  divert  the  force  thereof  from  hurting
the  realm ;  wherein  there  were  a  great  number  of  particular  de-
vises propounded,  and  yet  the  more  part  of  them  was  reduced  by
some  into  three  heads.

1.  The  first  thought  necessary  by  all  persons,  as  the  only  thing
of  the  most  moment  and  efficacy,  to  remedy  all  these  perills,  and
many  others,  and  such  as  without  it,  no  other  remedy  could  be
found  sufficient,  and  that  was  to  obtain  that  the  queen's  majesty
would  marry,  and  make  therein  no  long  delay.

2.  The  second  was,  to  advance,  establish,  and  fortify  indeed  the
profession  of  religion,  both  in  Scotland  and  in  England,  and  to  di-
minish, weaken,  and  feeble  the  contrary.

3.  The  third  was,  to  proceed  in  sundry  things,  either  to  disap-

330  SCOTLAND.

point  and  break  this  intended  marriage,  or,  at  the  least,  thereby  to
procure  the  same  not  to  be  so  hurtful  to  this  realm  as  otherwise  it
will  be.

The  first  of  these  three  hath  no  particular  rights  in  it,  but  an
earnest  and  unfeigned  desire  and  suite,  with  all  humbleness,  by
prayer  to  Almighty  God,  and  advice  and  council  to  the  queen's
majesty,  thaf  she  would  defer  no  more  time  from  marriage,  whereby
the  good  subjects  of  the  realm  might  stay  their  hearts,  to  depend
upon  her  majesty,  and  the  issue  of  her  body,  without  which  no
surety  can  be  devised  to  ascertain  any  person  of  continuance  of
their  families  or  posterities,  to  enjoy  that  which  otherwise  should
come  to  them.

Second,  concerning  the  matters  of  religion,  wherein  both  truth
and  policy  were  joined  together,  had  these  particulars.

First,  whereas  of  late  the  adversaries  of  religion,  in  the  realm,
have  taken  occasion  to  comfort  and  increase  their  faction,  both  in
England,  Scotland,  and  abroad,  with  a  rumour  and  expectation
that  the  religion  shall  be  shortly  changed  in  this  realm,  by  means
that  the  bishops,  by  the  queen's  majesty's  commandment,  have  of
late  dealt  streightly  with  some  persons  of  good  religion,  because
they  had  forborn  to  wear  certain  apparel,  and  such  like  things ;
being  more  of  form  and  accidents,  than  of  any  substance,  for  that
it  is  well  known  that  her  majesty  had  no  meaning  to  comfort  the
adversaries,  but  only  to  maintain  an  uniformity  as  well  in  things
external,  as  in  the  substance,  nor  yet  hath  any  intention  to  make
any  change  of  the  religion,  as  it  is  established  by  laws. It  was
thought  by  all  men  very  necessary,  for  the  suppressing  of  the  pride
and  arrogancy  of  the  adversaries,  indirectly  hereby  to  notify,  by
her  special  letters  to  the  two  archbishops,  that  her  former  com-
mandment was  only  to  retain  an  uniformity,  and  not  to  give  any
occasion  to  any  person  to  misjudge  of  her  majesty,  in  the  change
of  any  part  of  religion,  but  that  slie  did  determine  firmly  to  main-
tain the  form  of  her  religion,  as  it  was  established,  and  to  punish
such  as  did  therein  violate  her  laws. And  in  these  points,  some
also  wished  that  it  might  please  her  archbishops,  that  if  they
should  see  that  the  adversaries  continued  in  taking  occasion  to  for-
tify their  faction,  that  in  that  case  they  should  use  a  moderation
therein,  until  the  next  parliament,  at  which  time,  some  good,  uni-
form, and  decent  order  might  be  devised,  and  established,  for  such
ceremonies,  so  as  both  uniformity  and  gravity  might  be  retained
amongst  the  clergy.

The  second  means  was,  that  the  quondam  bishops,  and  others,
which  had  refused  to  acknowledge  the  queen's  majesty's  power
over  them,  according  to  the  law,  and  were  of  late  dispersed  in  the
plague  time  to  sundry  places  abroad,  where  it  is  known  they  cease

APPENDIX.  331

not  to  advance  their  faction,  might  be  returned  to  the  Tower,  or
some  other  prison,  where  they  might  not  have  such  liberty  to  se-
duce and  inveigle  the  queen's  majesty's  subjects,  as  they  daily  do.

The  third  means  was,  that  where  the  bishops  do  complain  that
they  dare  not  execute  the  ecclesiastical  laws,  to  the  furtherance  of
religion,  for  fear  of  the  premunire  wherewith  the  judges  and  law-
yers of  the  realm,  being  not  best  affected  in  religion,  do  threaten
them,  and  in  many  cases  lett  not  to  pinch  and  deface  them,  that
upon  such  cases  opened,  some  convenient  authority  might  be  given
them,  from  the  queen's  majesty,  to  continue  during  her  pleasure.

The  fourth  was,  that  there  were  daily  lewd,  injudicious,  and  un-
lawful books  in  English,  brought  from  beyond  seas,  and  are  boldly
received,  read,  and  kept,  and  especially  in  the  north,  seducing  of
great  numbers  of  good  subjects,  the  like  boldness  whereof  was  never
suffered  in  any  other  princess's  time,  that  some  streight  order  might
be  given  to  avoid  the  same,  and  that  it  might  be  considered  by  the
judges,  what  manner  of  crime  the  same  is,  to  maintain  such  books,
made  directly  against  her  majesty's  authority,  and  maintaining  a
foreign  power,  contrary  to  the  laws  of  the  realm.

The  fifth  was,  that  where  a  great  number  of  monks,  fryars,  and
such  lewd  persons,  are  fled  out  of  Scotland,  and  do  serve  in  Eng-
land, especially  in  the  north,  as  curates  of  churches,  and  all  such  of
them  as  are  not  found  honest  and  conformable,  may  be  banished  out
of  the  realm,  for  that  it  appeareth  they  do  sow  sedition  in  the  realm,
in  many  places,  and  now  will  increase  their  doings.

The  sixth,  where  sundry  having  ecclesiastical  livings,  are  on  the
other  side  the  sea,  and  from  thence  maintain  sedition  in  the  realm ;
that  livings  may  be  better  bestowed  to  the  commodity  of  the  realm,
upon  good  subjects.

The  seventh  is,  that  the  judges  of  the  realm,  having  no  small
authority  in  this  realm,  in  governance  of  all  property  of  the  realm,
might  be  sworn  to  the  queen's  majesty,  according  to  the  laws  of  the
realm,  and  so  thereby  they  should  for  conscience  sake  maintain  the
queen's  majesty's  authority.

The  particulars  of  the  third  intention  to  break  and  avoid  this
marriage,  or  to  divert  the  perils.

First,  to  break  this  marriage,  considering  nothing  can  likely  do
it,  but  force,  or  fear  of  force,  it  is  thought  by  some  that  these
means  following  might  occasion  the  breach  of  the  marriage.

1 .  That  the  earl  of  Bedford  repair  to  his  charge.

2.  That  the  works  at  Berwick  be  more  advanced.

3.  That  the  garrison  be  there  increased.

4.  That  all  the  wardens  put  their  frontiers  in  order  with  speed,
to  be  ready  at  an  hour's  warning.

332  SCOTLAND.

5.  That  some  noble  person,  as  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  or  the  earl
of  Salop,  or  such  other,  be  sent  into  Yorkshire,  to  be  lieutenant-
general  in  the  north.

6.  That  preparations  be  made  of  a  power,  to"  be  in  readiness  to
serve,  either  at  Berwick,  or  to  invade  Scotland.

7.  That  presently  lady  Lennox  be  committed  to  some  place,
where  she  may  be  kept  from  giving  or  receiving  of  intelligence.

9.  That  the  earl  of  Lennox  and  his  son  may  be-  sent  for,  and  re-
quired to  be  sent  home  by  the  queen  of  Scotts,  according  to  the
treaty ;  and  if  they  shall  not  come,  then  to  denounce  to  the  queen
of  Scotts  the  breach  of  the  treaty,  and  thereupon  to  enter  with  hos-
tility; by  which  proceeding,  hope  is  conceived  (so  the  same  be  done
in  deeds  and  not  in  shews)  that  the  marriage  will  be  avoided,  or  at
the  least  that  it  may  be  qualified  from  many  perils ;  and  whatsoever
is  to  be  done  herein,  is  to  be  executed  with  speed,  whilst  she  has
a  party  in  Scotland  that  favoureth  not  the  marriage,  and  before  any
league  made  by  the  queen  of  Scotts  with  France  or  Spain.

Some  other  allows  well  of  all  these  proceedings,  saving  of  pro-
ceeding to  hostility,  but  all  do  agree  in  the  rest,  and  also  to  these
particularities  following.

10.  That  the  earl's  lands  upon  his  refusal,  or  his  son's  refusing,
should  be  seized,  and  bestowed  in  gift  or  custody,  as  shall  please
her  majesty,  upon  good  subjects.

1 1 .  That  all  manifest  favourers  of  the  earl,  in  the  north,  or  else-
where, be  inquired  for,  and  that  they  be,  by  sundry  means,  well
looked  to.

12.  That  inquiry  be  made  in  the  north,  who  have  the  steward-
ship of  the  queen's  majesty's  lands  there,  and  that  no  person,  de-
serving mistrust,  be  suffered  to  have  governance  or  rule  of  any  of
her  subjects  or  lands  in  the  north,  but  only  to  retain  their  fees,  and
more  trusty  persons  have  rule  of  the  same  people's  lands.

13.  That  all  frequent  passages  into  this  realm,  to  and  from  Scot-
land, be  restrained  to  all  Scottish  men,  saving  such  as  have  safe
conduct,  or  be  especially  recommended  from  Mr.  Randolph,  as
favourers  of  the  realm.

14.  That  some  intelligence  be  used  with  such  in  Scotland,  as
favour  not  the  marriage,  and  they  comforted  from  time  to  time.

15.  That  the  queen's  majesty's  household,  chamber,  and  pen-
sioners, be  better  seen  unto,  to  avoid  broad  and  uncomely  speech
used  by  sundry  against  the  state  of  the  realm.

16.  That  the  younger  son  of  the  earl  of  Lennox,  Mr.  Charles,  be
removed  to  some  place  where  he  may  be  forthcoming.

17.  That  considering  the  faction  and  title  of  the  queen  of  Scotts,
hath  now  of  long  time  received  great  favour,  and  continued,  by  the
queen's  majesty's  favour  herein  to  the  queen  of  Scotts  and  her  mi-

APPENDIX.  333

nisters,  and  the  lady  Catharine,  whom  the  said  queen  of  Scotts  ac-
compted  as  a  competitor  unto  her  in  pretence  of  title,  it  may  please
the  queen's  majesty,  by  some  exterior  act  to  shew  some  remission
of  her  displeasure  to  the  lady,  and  to  the  earl  of  Hartford,  that  the
queen  of  Scotts  thereby  may  find  some  change,  and  her  friends  put
in  doubt  of  further  proceeding  therein.

18.  That  whosoever  shall  be  lieutenant  in  the  north,  Sir  Ralph
Sadler  may  accompany  him.

19.  That  with  speed  the  realm  of  Ireland  may  be  committed  to  a
new  governor.

20.  Finally,  that  these  advices  being  considered  by  her  majesty,
it  may  please  her  to  choose  which  of  them  she  liketh,  and  to  put
them  in  execution  in  deeds,  and  not  to  pass  them  over  in  consulta-
tions and  speeches.

For  it  is  to  be  assured,  that  her  adversaries  will  use  all  means  to
put  their  intention  in  execution.  Some  by  practice,  some  by  force,
when  time  shall  serve,  and  no  time  can  serve  so  well  the  queen's
majesty  to  interrupt  the  perils  as  now  at  the  first,  before  the  queen
of  Scott's  purposes  be  fully  settled.

No.  XL  (Vol.  I.  p.  273.)

Randolph  to  the  Earl  of  Leicester,  from  Edinburgh,
the  31  st  of  July,  1565.

Cott.  Lib.  MAY  it  please  your  lordship,  I  have  received  your  lord-
Cal.^b.  ix.  ship's  letter  by  my  servant,  sufficient  testimony  of  your
Ariorigi-  lordship's  favour  towards  me,  whereof  I  think  myself  al-
nal.  ways  so  assured,  that  what  other  mishap  soever  befal  me,

I  have  enough  to  comfort  myself  with ;  though  I  have  not  at  this
time  received  neither  according  to  the  need  I  stand,  nor  the  neces-
sity of  the  service  that  I  am  employed  in,  I  will  rather  pass  it,  as  I
may  with  patience,  than  trouble  your  lordship  to  be  further  suiter
for  me,  when  there  is  so  little  hope  that  any  good  will  be  done  for
me.  I  doubt  not  but  your  lordship  hath  heard  by  such  information
as  I  have  given  from  hence,  what  the  present  state  of  this  country
is,  how  this  queen  is  now  become  a  married  wife,  and  her  husband,
the  self-same  day  of  his  marriage,  made  a  king.  In  their  desires,
hitherto,  they  have  found  so  much  to  their  contentment,  that  if  the
rest  succeed  and  prosper  accordingly,  they  may  think  themselves
much  happier,  than  there  is  appearance  that  they  shall  be;  so
many  discontented  minds,  so  much  misliking  of  the  subjects  to  have
these  matters  thus  ordered,  and  in  this  sort  to  be  brought  to  pass,
I  never  heard  of  any  marriage ;  so  little  hope,  so  little  comfort  as
men  do  talk  was  never  seen,  at  any  time,  when  men  shonld  most
have  shewed  themselves  to  rejoice,  if  that  consideration  of  her  own

334  SCOTLAND.

honour  and  well  of  her  country  had  been  had  as  appertained  in  so
weighty  a  case.  This  is  now  their  fear,  the  overthrow  of  religion,
the  breach  of  amitie  with  the  queen's  majesty,  and  the  destruction
of  as  many  of  the  nobility  as  she  hath  misliking  of,  or  that  he  liketh
to  pitch  a  quarrel  unto.  To  see  all  these  inconveniencys  approach-
ing, there  are  a  good  number  that  may  sooner  lament  with  them-
selves and  complain  to  their  neighbours,  than  be  able  to  find  re-
medie  to  help  them,  some  attempt  with  all  the  force  they  have,  but
are  too  weak  to  do  any  good,  what  is  required  otherways,  or  what
means  there  is  made  your  lordship  knoweth ;  what  will  be  answered,
or  what  will  be  done,  therein,  we  are  in  great  doubt,  and  though
your  intent  be  never  so  good  unto  us,  yet  do  we  so  much  fear  your
delay,  that  our  ruin  shall  prevent  your  support  when  council  is  once
taken.  Nothing  so  needful,  as  speedy  execution.  Upon  the  queen's
majesty,  we  wholly  depend,  in  her  majesty's  hands  it  standeth  to
save  our  lives,  or  to  suffer  us  to  perish ;  greater  honour  her  ma-
jesty cannot  have,  than  in  that  which  lieth  in  her  majesty's  power  to
do  for  us,  the  suras  are  not  great,  the  numbers  of  men  are  not  many
that  we  desire ;  many  will  dayly  be  found,  tho'  this  will  be  some
charge;  men  grow  dayly,  though,  at  this  time,  I  think  her  majesty
shall  lose  but  few :  her  friends  here  being  once  taken  away,  where
will  her  majesty  find  the  like?  I  speak  least  of  that  which  I  think  is
most  earnestly  intended  by  this  queen,  and  her  husband,  when  by
him  it  was  lately  said,  that  he  cared  more  for  the  Papists  in  Eng-
land, than  he  did  for  the  Protestants  in  Scotland ;  if  therefore  his
hopes  be  so  great  in  the  Papists  of  England,  what  may  your  lord-
ship believe  that  he  thinketh  of  the  Protestants  there;  for  his  birth,
for  his  nurritour,  for  the  honour  he  hath  to  be  of  kine  to  the  queen
my  mistress,  if  in  preferring  those  that  are  the  queen's  majesty's
worst  subjects  to  those  that  are  her  best,  he  declareth  what  mind
he  beareth  to  the  queen's  majesty's  self,  any  man  may  say  it  is
slenderly  rewarded,  and  his  duty  evil  forgotten ;  he  would  now  seem
to  be  indifferent  to  both  the  religions,  she  to  use  her  mass,  and  he
to  come  sometimes  to  the  preaching ;  they  were  married  with  all  the
solemnities  of  the  Popish  time,  saving  that  he  heard  not  the  mass ;
his  speech  and  talk  argueth  his  mind,  and  yet  would  he  fain  seem
to  the  world  that  he  were  of  some  religion ;  his  words  to  all  men,
against  whom  he  conceiveth  any  displeasure  how  unjust  soever  it
be,  so  proud  and  spiteful,  that  rather  he  seemeth  a  monarch  of  the
world,  than  he  that,  not  long  since,  we  have  seen  and  known  the
lord  Darnley;  he  looketh  now  for  reverence  of  many  that  have
little  will  to  give  it  him ;  and  some  there  are  that  do  give  it,  that
think  him  little  worth  of  it.  All  honour  that  may  be  attributed  unto
any  man  by  a  wife,  he  hath  it  wholly  and  fully ;  all  praises  that
may  be  spoken  of  him  he  lacketh  not  from  herself;  all  dignities  that

APPENDIX.

335

she  can  endue  him  with,  which  are  already  given  and  granted  ;  no
man  pleaseth  her  that  contenteth  not  him ;  and  what  may  I  say
more,  she  hath  given  over  to  him  her  whole  will,  to  be  ruled  and
guided  as  himself  best  liketh ;  she  can  as  much  prevail  with  him,
in  any  thing  that  is  against  his  will,  as  your  lordship  may  with  me
to  persuade  that  I  should  hang  myself;  this  last  dignity  out  of  hand
to  have  been  proclaimed  king,  she  would  have  it  deferred  untill  it
were  agreed  by  parliament,  or  he  had  been  himself  21  years  of  age,
that  things  done  in  his  name  might  have  the  better  authority. He
would,  in  no  case,  have  it  deferred  one  day,  and  either  then  or
never ;  whereupon  this  doubt  has  risen  amongst  our  men  of  law
whether  she  being  clad  with  a  husband, and  her  husband  not
twenty-one  years,  any  thing  without  parliament  can  be  of  strength,
that  is  done  between  them ;  upon  Saturday  at  afternoon  these  mat-
ters were  long  in  debating. And  before  they  were  well  resolved
upon,  at  nine  hours  at  night,  by  three  heralds,  at  sound  of  the
trumpet  he  was  proclaimed  king. This  was  the  night  before  the
marriage ;  this  day,  Monday  at  twelve  of  the  clock,  the  lords,  all
that  were  in  the  toun,  were  present  at  the  proclaiming  of  him  again,
where  no  man  said  so  much  as  amen,  saving  his  father,  that  cried
out  aloud  God  save  his  queen ! The  manner  of  the  marriage  was  in
this  sort ;  upon  Sunday  in  the  morning  between  five  and  six,  she
was  conveyed  by  divers  of  her  nobles  to  the  chapell ;  she  had  upon
her  back  the  great  mourning  gown  of  black,  with  the  great  wide
mourning  hood,  not  unlike  unto  that  which  she  wore  the  doulfull
day  of  the  burial  of  her  husband  :  she  was  led  into  the  chapell,  by
the  earl  of  Lennox  and  Athol,  and  there  was  she  left  untill  her  hus-
band came,  who  also  was  conveyed  by  the  same  lords,  the  minister
priests,  two,  do  there  receive  them,  the  bands  are  asked  the  third
time,  and  an  instrument  taken  by  a  notour  that  no  man  said  against
them,  or  alledged  any  cause  why  the  marriage  might  not  proceed.
The  words  were  spoken,  the  rings  which  were  three,  the  middle  a
rich  diamond,  were  put  upon  her  finger ;  they  kneel  together,  and
many  prayers  said  over  them,  she  tarrieth  out  the  mass,  and  he
taketh  a  kiss,  and  leaveth  her  there,  and  went  to  her  chamber,
whither  within  a  space  she  followeth ;  and  being  required,  accord-
ing to  the  solemnity,  to  cast  off  her  cares,  and  leave  aside  those
sorrowful  garments,  and  give  herself  to  a  more  pleasant  life,  after
some  pretty  refusall,  more  I  believe  for  manner  sake  than  grief  of
heart,  she  suffered  them  that  stood  by,  every  man  that  could  ap-
proach, to  take  out  a  pin ;  and  so  being  committed  to  her  ladies,
changed  her  garments,  but  went  not  to  bed,  to  signify  to  the  world
that  it  was  not  lust  that  moved  them  to  marry,  but  only  the  neces-
sity of  her  country,  not,  if  God  will,  long  to  leave  it  destitute  of  an
heir. Suspicious  men,  or  such  as  are  given  of  all  things  to  make

336  SCOTLAND.

the  worst,  would  that  it  should  be  believed,  that  they  knew  each
other  before  that  they  came  their ;  I  would  not  your  lordship  should
so  believe  it,  the  likelihoods  are  so  great  to  the  contrary,  that  if  it
were  possible  to  see  such  an  act  done,  I  would  not  believe  it.  After
the  marriage  followeth  commonly  great  cheer  and  dancing :  to  their
dinner  they  were  conveyed  by  the  whole  nobility ;  the  trumpets
sound ;  a  largess  cried ;  money  thrown  about  the  house  in  great
abundance,  to  such  as  were  happy  to  get  any  part ;  they  dine  both
at  one  table,  she  upon  the  upper  hand,  there  serve  her  these  earls,
Athole  sewer,  Morton  carver,  Craufoord  cup-bearer ;  these  serve
him  in  like  offices,  Earls  Eglington,  Cassels,  and  Glencairu ;  after
dinner  they  danced  awhile,  and  then  retired  themselves  till  the  hour
of  supper  ;  and  as  they  dined  so  do  they  sup,  some  dancing  there
was,  and  so  they  go  to  bed  ;  of  all  this  I  have  written  to  your  lord-
ship I  am  not  oculatus  testis,  to  this,  but  of  the  verity  your  lordship
shall  not  need  to  doubt,  howsoever  I  came  by  it ;  I  was  sent  for  to
have  been  at  the  supper,  but  like  a  currish  or  uncourtly  earle  I  re-
fused to  be  there ;  and  yet  that  which  your  lordship  may  think  might
move  me  much,  to  have  had  the  sight  of  my  mistress,  of  whom  these
eighteen  days  by  just  account  I  got  not  a  sight,  I  am  my  lord  taken
by  all  that  sort  as  a  very  evil  person,  which  in  my  heart  I  do  well
allow,  and  like  of  myself  the  better,  for  yet  can  I  not  find  either
honest  or  good  that  liketh  their  doings.  I  leave  at  this  time  further
to  trouble  your  lordship,  craving  pardon  for  my  long  silence,  I  have
more  ado  than  I  am  able  to  discharge,  I  walk  now  more  abroad  by
night  than  by  day,  and  the  day  too  little  to  discharge  myself  of  that
which  I  conceive,  or  receive  in  the  night.  As  your  lordship,  I  am
sure,  is  partaker  of  such  letters  as  I  write  to  Mr.  Secretary,  so  that
I  trust  that  he  shall  be  to  this,  to  save  me  of  a  little  labour,  to  write
the  same  again,  most  humbly  I  take  my  leave  at  Edinburgh,  the
last  day  of  July,  1565.

No.  XII. (Vol.  I.  p.  276.)

Letter  of  the  Earl  of  Bedford  to  the  Honourable  Sir  William  Cecil,
Knt.  her  Majesty's  Principal  Secretary,  and  one  of  her  Highnesses
Privy  Council.

2d  of  Sept.  AFTER  my  hearty  commendations,  this  day  at  noon
156Offi>a"  caP*am  Brickwell  came  hither,  who  brought  with  him  the
from  the  '  queen's  majesty's  letters  containing  her  full  resolution,
original.  an(j  pleasure  for  an  things  he  had  in  charge  to  give  in-
formation of,  saving  that  for  the  aid  of  the  lords  of  the  congregation
there  is  nothing  determined,  or  at  the  least  expressed  in  the  same
letters,  and  for  that  purpose  received  I  this  morning,  a  letter  sub-
scribed by  the  duke,  the  earl  of  Murray,  Glencarne,  and  others,

APPENDIX.  337

craving  to  be  holpen  with  300  harquebusyers  out  of  this  garrison,
for  their  better  defence.  And  albeit  I  know  right  well  the  good-
ness of  their  cause,  and  the  queen's  majesty  our  sovereign's  good
will  and  care  towards  them  ;  and  do  also  understand  that  it  were
very  requisite  to  have  them  holpen,  for  that  now  their  cause  is  to  be
in  this  manner  decided,  and  that  it  now  standeth  upon  their  utter
overthrow  and  undoing,  since  the  queen's  party  is  at  the  least  5000,
and  they  not  much  above  1000 ;  besides  that  the  queen  hath
harquebusyers,  and  they  have  none,  and  do  yet  want  the  power  that
the  earl  of  Arguyle  should  bring  to  them,  who  is  not  yet  joined  with
theirs ;  I  have  thereupon  thought  good  to  pray  you  to  be  a  means
to  learn  her  majesty's  pleasure  in  this  behalf,  what,  and  how,  I
shall  answer  them,  or  otherwise  deal  in  this  matter,  now  at  this
their  extreme  necessity.  For,  on  the  one  side,  lyeth  thereupon
their  utter  ruin  and  overthrow,  and  the  miserable  subversion  of  re-
ligion there ;  and,  on  the  other  side,  to  adventure  so  great  and
weighty  a  matter  as  this  is,  (albeit  it  be  but  of  a  few  soldiers,  for  a
small  time,)  without  good  warraunte,  and  thereby  to  bring,  perad-
venture,  upon  our  heads  some  wilful  warrs,  and  in  the  mean  time
to  leave  the  place  unfurnished,  (having  in  the  whole  but  800,)  with-
out any  grant  of  new  supply  for  the  same ;  and  by  that  means  also
to  leave  the  marches  here  the  more  subject  to  invasion,  while  in  the
mean  season  new  helps  are  preparing ;  to  this  know  not  I  what  to
say  or  how  to  do.  And  so  much  more  I  marvel  thereof,  as  that
having  so  many  times  written  touching  this  matter,  no  resolute  de-
termination cometh.  And  so  between  the  writing  and  looking  for
answer,  the  occasion  cannot  pass,  but  must  needs  proceed  and  have
success.  God  turn  it  to  his  glory;  but  surely  all  men's  reason
hath  great  cause  to  fear  it.  Such  a  push  it  is  now  come  unto,  as
this  little  supply  would  do  much  good  to  advance  God's  honour,  to
continue  her  majesty's  great  and  careful  memory  of  them,  and  to
preserve  a  great  many  noblemen  and  gentlemen.  If  it  be  not  now
helpen  it  is  gone  for  ever.  Your  good  will  and  affection  that  way
I  do  nothing  mistrust,  and  herein  shall  take  such  good  advice  as  by
any  means  I  can.  I  received  from  these  lords  two  papers  inclosed,
the  effect  whereof  shall  appear  unto  you.  For  those  matters  that
captain  Brickw.ell  brought,  I  shall  answer  you  by  my  next,  and
herewith  send  you  two  letters  from  Mr.  Randolph,  both  received
this  day.  By  him  you  shall  hear  that  the  Protestants  are  retired
from  Edenborough,  further  off.  So  I  hope  your  resolution  for  their
aid  shall  come  in  time,  if  it  come  with  speed,  for  that  they  will  not
now  so  presently  need  them ;  and  so  with  my  hearty  thanks  com-
mit you  to  God,  From  Berwick,  this  2d  of  Sept.  1565.

VOL.  II.

3,38  SCOTLAND.

No.  XIII. (Vol.  I.  p.  276.)

The  Queen  to  the  Earl  of  Bedford.

12  Se  t  UPON  the  advertisements  lately  received  from  you,  with
1566.  Pa-  such  other  things  as  came  also  from  the  lord  Scrope  and
per  Office,  fhomas  Randolph,  and  upon  the  whole  matter  well  consi-
dered, we  have  thus  determined.  We  will,  with  all  the  speed  that
we  can,  send  to  you  30001.  to  be  thus  used.  If  you  shall  certainly
understand  that  the  earl  of  Murray  hath  such  want  of  money,  as  the
impresting  to  him  of  10001.  might  stand  him  in  stead  for  the  help  to
defend  himself,  you  shall  presently  let  him  secretly  to  understand,
that  you  will,  as  of  yourself,  let  him  have  so  much,  and  so  we  will
that  you  let  him  have,  in  the  most  secret  sort  that  you  can,  when
the  said  sum  shall  come  to  you,  or  if  you  can,  by  any  good  means,
advance  him  some  part  thereof  beforehand.

The  other  20001.  you  shall  cause  to  be  kept  whole,  unspent,  if  it  be
not  that  you  shall  see  necessary  cause  to  imprest  some  part  thereof
to  the  now  numbers  of  the  600  footmen  and  100  horsemen;  or  to
the  casting  out  of  wages  of  such  workmen,  as  by  sickness,  or  other-
wise, ought  to  be  discharged.  And  where  we  perceive,  by  your
sundry  letters,  the  earnest  request  of  the  said  earl  of  Murray  and  his
associates,  that  they  might  have  at  the  least  300  of  our  soldiers  to
aid  them ;  and  that  you  also  write,  that  tho'  we  would  not  com-
mand you  to  give  them  aid,  yet  if  we  would  but  wink  at  your  doing
herein,  and  seem  to  blame  you  for  attempting  such  things,  as  you
with  the  help  of  others  should  bring  about,  you  doubt  not  but  things
would  do  well ;  you  shall  understand  for  a  truth,  that  we  have  no
intention,  for  many  respects,  to  maintain  any  other  prince's  sub-
jects to  take  arms  against  their  sovereign  ;  neither  would  we  will-
ingly do  any  thing  to  give  occasion  to  make  wars  betwixt  us  and
that  prince,  which  has  caused  us  to  forbear,  hitherto,  to  give  you
any  power  to  let  them  be  aided  with  any  men.  But  now,  consider-
ing we  take  it  that  they  are  pursued,  notwithstanding  their  humble
submission  and  offer  to  be  ordered  and  tried  by  law  and  justice,
which  being  refused  to  them,  they  are  retired  to  Dumfrese,  a  place
near  our  west  marches,  as  it  seemeth  there  to  defend  themselves,
and  adding  thereunto  the  good  intention  that  presently  the  French
king  pretendeth,  by  sending  one  of  his  to  join  with  some  one  of  ours,
and  jointly  to  treat  with  that  queen,  and  to  induce  her  to  forbear
this  manner  of  violent  and  rigorous  proceeding  against  her  sub-
jects, for  which  purpose  the  French  ambassador  here  with  us  has
lately  written  to  that  queen,  whereof  answer  is  daily  looked  for ;  to
the  intent  in  the  mean  time  the  said  lords  should  not  be  oppressed
and  ruined  for  lack  of  some  help  to  defend  them,  we  are  content

APPENDIX.  .339

and  do  authorize,  if  you  shall  see  it  necessary  for  their  defence,  to
let  them  (as  of  your  own  adventure,  and  without  notifying  that  you
have  any  direction  therein  from  us)  to  have  the  number  of  300  sol-
diers, to  be  taken,  either  in  whole  bands,  or  to  be  drawn  out  of  all
your  bands,  as  you  shall  see  cause.  And  to  cover  the  matter  the
better,  you  shall  send  these  numbers  to  Carlisle,  as  to  be  laid  there
in  garrison,  to  defend  that  march,  now  in  this  time  that  such  powers
are  on  the  other  part  drawing  to  those  frontiers,  and  so  from  thence,
as  you  shall  see  cause  to  direct  of,  the  same  numbers,  or  any  of
them,  may  most  covertly  repair  to  the  said  lords,  when  you  shall
expressly  advertize  that  you  send  them  that  aid  only  for  their  de-
fence, and  not  therewith  to  make  war  against  the  queen,  or  to  do
any  thing  that  may  offend  her  person ;  wherein  you  shall  so  pre-
cisely deal  with  them,  that  they  may  perceive  your  care  to  be  such
as,  if  it  should  otherwise  appear,  your  danger  should  be  so  great,
as  all  the  friends  you  have  could  not  be  able  to  save  you  towards
us.  And  so  we  assure  you  our  conscience  moveth  us  to  charge
you  so  to  proceed  with  them ;  for  otherwise  than  to  preserve  them
from  ruin,  we  do  not  yield  to  give  them  aid  of  money  or  men :
And  yet  we  would  not  that  either  of  these  were  known  to  be  our
act,  but  rather  to  be  covered  with  your  own  desire  and  attempt.

No.  XIV. (Vol.  I.  p.  284.)

Randolph  to  Cecil,  from  Edinburgh,  1th  Feb.  1 565-6.
An  ori-  MY  humble  duty  considered  ;  what  to  write  of  the  pre-

ginal.  sent  state  of  the  country  I  am  so  uncertain,  by  reason  of
the  daily  alterations  of  men's  minds,  that  it  makethjne  much  slower
than  otherwise  I  would.  Within  these  few  days  there  was  some
good  hope,  that  this  queen  would  have  shewed  some  favour  towards
the  lords,  and  that  Robert  Melvin  should  have  returned  unto  them
with  comfort  upon  some  conditions.  Since  that  time,  there  are
come  out  of  France  Clernau  by  land,  and  Thorneton  by  sea ;  the
one  from  the  cardinal,  the  other  from  the  bishop  of  Glasgow.  Since
whose  arrival  neither  can  there  be  good  word  gotten,  nor  appear-
ance of  any  good  intended  them,  except  that  they  be  able  to  per-
swade  the  queen's  majesty,  our  sovereign,  to  make  her  heir  appa-
rent to  the  croun  of  England.  I  write  of  this  nothing  less  than
1  know  that  she  hath  spoken.  And  by  all  means  that  she  thinketh
the  best  doth  travaile  to  bring  it  to  pass.  There  is  a  band  lately
devised,  in  which  the  late  pope,  the  emperor,  the  king  of  Spain,
the  duke  of  Savoy,  with  divers  princes  of  Italy,  and  the  queen-mo-
ther suspected  to  be  of  the  same  confederacy  to  maintain  Papistry
throughout  Christiandom  ;  this  band  was  sent  out  of  France  by
Thorneton,  and  is  subscribed  by  this  queen,  the  copy  thereof  re-
maining with  her,  and  the  principal  to  be  returned  very  shortlie,  as

z2

340  SCOTLAND.

I  hear,  by  Mr.  Stephen  Willson,  a  fit  minister  for  such  a  devilish
devise;  if  the  coppie  hereof  may  be  gotten,  that  shall  be  sent  as  I
conveniently  may.  Monsieur  Rambollet  came  to  this  toun  upon
Monday,  he  spoke  that  night  to  the  queen  and  her  husband,  but
not  long;  the  next  day  he  held  long  conferences  with  them  both,
but  nothing  came  to  the  knowledge  of  any  whereof  they  intreated.
I  cannot  speak  with  any  that  hath  any  hope  that  there  will  be  any
good  done  for  the  lords  by  him,  though  it  is  said  that  he  hath  very
good  will  to  do  so  to  the  uttermost  of  his  power.  He  is  lodged
near  to  the  court,  and  liveth  upon  the  queen's  charges.  Upon
Sunday  the  order  is  given,  whereat  means  made  to  many  to  be  pre-
sent that  day  at  the  mass.  Upon  Candlemas-day  there  carried
their  candles,  with  the  queen,  her  husband,  the  earle  of  Lennox,
and  earle  Athol;  divers  other  lords  have  been  called  together  and
required  to  be  at  the  mass  that  day,  some  have  promised,  as  Cassels,
Montgomerie,  Seton,  Cathness.  Others  have  refused,  as  Fleming,
Levingston,  Lindsay,  Huntly,  and  Bothel ;  and  of  them  all  Bothel
is  the  stoutest,  but  worst  thought  of;  it  was  moved  in  council  that
mass  should  have  been  in  St.  Giles  church,  which  I  believe  was  ra-
ther to  tempt  men's  minds,  than  intended  indeed  :  she  was  of  late
minded  again  to  send  Robert  Melvin  to  negotiate  with  such  as  she
trusteth  in  amongst  the  queen's  majesty's  subjects,  of  whose  good
willis  this  way  I  trust  that  the  bruit  is  greater  than  the  truth,  but  in
these  matters,  her  majesty  is  too  wise  not  in  time  to  be  ware,  and
provide  for  the  worst;  some  in  that  country  are  thought  to  be  privie
unto  the  bands  and  confederacie  of  which  I  have  written,  whereof  I
am  sure  there  is  some  things,  tho'  perchance  of  all  I  have  not  heard
the  truth ;  in  this  court  divers  quarles,  contentions,  and  debates,
nothing  so  much  sought  as  to  maintain  mischief  and  disorder.
David  yet  retaineth  still  his  place,  not  without  heart-grief  to  many,
that  see  their  sovereign  guided  chiefly  by  such  a  fellow ;  the  queen
hath  utterly  refused  to  do  any  good  to  my  lord  of  Argyll,  and  it  is
said  that  shall  be  the  first  voyage  that  she  will  make  after  she  is
delivered  of  being  with  child  ;  the  bruit  is  common  that  she  is,  but
hardly  believed  of  many,  and  of  this,  I  can  assure  you,  that  there
have  of  late  appeared  some  tokens  to  the  contrary.

No.  XV. (Vol.  I.  p.  291.)

Part  of  a  Letter  from  the  Earl  of  Bedford  and  Mr.  Tho.  Randolph  to
the  Lords  of  the  Council  of  England  from  Barivick,  27th  of  March
1566.  An  Original  in  the  Cotton.  Library,  Caligula,  b,  10.  foL
372.

May  it  please  your  honours,

27  March,  HERING  of  so  maynie  matters  as  we  do,  and  fyndinge
1556.  such  varietie  in  the  reports,  we  have  myche  ado  to  decerne

APPENDIX.

341

the  veritie ;  which  maketh  us  the  slower  and  loother  to  put  any
thing  in  wry  tinge  to  the  entente  we  wold  not  that  your  honours,  and
by  you  the  queen's  majestic,  our  sovereigne,  should  not  be  adver-
tised but  of  the  verie  trothe  as  we  can  possible.  To  this  end  we
thought  good  to  send  up  captain  Carewe,  who  was  in  Edinbourge
at  the  tyme  of  the  last  attemptate,  who  spoke  there  with  diverse,
and  after  that  with  the  queen's  self  and  her  husband,  conforme  to
that,  which  we  have  learned  by  others  and  know  by  this  reporte,
we  send  the  same,  confirmed  by  the  parties  self,  that  were  there
present  and  assysters  unto  these  that  were  executors  of  the  acte.

This  we  fynde  for  certain,  that  the  queen's  husband  being  entered
into  a  vehement  suspicion  of  David,  that  by  hym  some  thynge  was
committed,  which  was  most  agaynste  the  queen's  honour,  and  not
to  be  borne  of  his  perte,  fyrste  communicated  his  mynde  to  George
Duglas,  who  fynding  his  sorrowes  so  great  sought  all  the  means  he
coulde  to  put  some  remedie  to  his  grieff;  and  communicating  the
same  unto  my  lord  Ruthen  by  the  king's  commandment,  no  other
waye  coulde  be  found  then  that  David  should  be  taken  out  of  the
waye.  Wherein  he  was  so  earnest  and  daylye  pressed  the  same,
that  no  reste  could  be  had  untyll  it  was,put  in  execution.  To  this
that  was  found  good,  that  the  lord  Morton,  and  lord  Lindsaye  should
be  made  privie  to  th'  intente,  that  theie  might  have  their  friends  at
hande,  yf  neade  required;  which  caused  them  to  assemble  so  may-
ny,  as  theie  thought  sufficient  against  the  tyme,  that  this  determi-
nation of  theirs  should  be  put  in  executione;  which  was  determined
the  ixth  of  this  instante  3  daies  afore  the  parliament  should  begyne,
at  which  time  the  sayde  lordes  were  assured  that  the  erles  Argyle,
Morraye,  Rothes  and  their  complyces  sholde  have  been  forfeited,  yf
the  king  could  not  be  persuaded  through  this  means  to  be  their
friends  ;  who  for  the  desyre  he  hade  that  this  intent  should  take
effect  th'  one  waye  was  contente  to  yielde,  without  all  difficultie  to
t'other,  with  this  condition,  that  theie  should  give  their  consents,
that  he  might  have  the  crowne  matrimonial.  He  was  so  impatient
to  see  these  things  he  saw,  and  were  daylye  brought  to  his  eares,
that  he  dayly  pressed  the  said  Lord  Ruthen,  that  there  might  be  no
longer  delaye  ;  and  to  the  intent  that  myght  be  manifeste  unto  the
world  that  he  approved  the  acte,  was  content  to  be  at  the  doing  of
that  himself.

Upon  Saturdaye  at  night,  neire  unto  viii  of  the  clock,  the  king
conveyeth  himself,  the  lord  Ruthen,  George  Duglass,  and  two
others,  throwe  his  owne  chamber  by  the  privy  stayers  up  to  the
queen's  chamber,  going  to  which  there  is  a  cabinet  about  xii  foot
square ;  in  the  same  a  little  low  reposing  bed  and  a  table,  at  the
which  theyr  were  sitting  at  the  supper  the  queene,  the  lady  Argile,
and  David  with  his  capp  upon  his  head.  Into  the  cabinet  there

342  SCOTLAND.

coraeth  in  th§  king  and  lord  Ruthen,  who  willed  David  to  come
forth,  saying,  that  was  no  place  for  him.  The  queen  said,  that  it
was  her  will.  Her  howsband  answerede,  that  yl  was  against  her
honour.  The  lord  Ruthen  said,  that  he  should  lerne  better  his  du-
tie,  and  offering  to  have  taken  him  by  the  arm,  David  took  the
queen  by  the  blychtes  of  her  gown  and  put  himself  behind  the
queen  who  wolde  gladlee  have  saved  him;  but  the  king  having
loosed  his  hand,  and  holding  her  in  his  arms,  David  was  thrust  out
of  the  cabinet  throw  the  bed-chamber  into  the  chamber  of  presens,
whar  were  the  lord  Morton,  lord  Lindsey,  who  intending  that  night
to  have  reserved  him,  and  the  next  day  to  hang  him,  so  many
being  about  him,  that  bore  him  evil  will,  one  thrust  him  into  the
boddie  with  a  dagger,  and  after  him  a  great  many  others,  so  that  he
had  in  his  bodie  above  wonds.  It  is  told  for  certayne,  that  the
kinges  own  dagger  was  left  sticking  in  him.  Wheather  he  stuck
him  or  not  we  cannot  here  for  certayn.  He  was  not  slayne  in  the
queen's  presens,  as  was  said,  but  going  down  the  stayres  out  of  the
chamber  of  presens.

There  remained  a  long  tyme  with  the  queen  her  howsband  and
the  lord  Ruthen.  She  made,  as  we  here,  great  intercession  that  he
shold  have  no  harm.  She  blamed  greatlee  her  howsband  that  was
the  actor  of  so  foul  a  deed.  It  is  said  that  he  did  answer,  that
David  had  more  companie  of  her  boddie  then  he  for  the  space  of
two  months ;  and  therefore  for  her  honour  and  his  own  content-
ment he  gave  his  consent  that  he  should  be  taken  away.  "  It  is
not"  (saythe  she)  "  the  woman's  part  to  seek  the  husband,"  and
therefore  in  that  the  fault  was  his  own.  He  said  that  when  he
came,  she  either  wold  not  or  made  herself  sick.  "  Well,"  saythe
she,  "  you  have  taken  your  last  of  me  and  your  farewell."  Then
were  pity,  sayth  the  lord  Ruthen,  he  is  your  majesty's  husband
and  must  yield  dutie  to  each  other.  "  Why  may  I  not,"  saythe
she,  "  leave  him  as  well  as  your  wife  did  her  husband  ?  Other
have  done  the  like."  The  lord  Ruthen  said  that  she  was  lawfully
divorced  from  her  husband,  and  for  no  such  cause  as  the  king  found
himself  greve.  Besydes  this  man  was  mean,  basse,  enemie  to  the
nobility,  shame  to  her,  and  destruction  to  herself  and  country.
"  Well,"  saith  she,  "  that  shall  be  dear  blude  to  some  of  you,  yf
his  be  spylt."  God  forbid,  sayth  the  lord  Ruthen ;  for  the  more
your  grace  showe  yourself  offended,  the  world  will  judge  the
worse.

Her  husband  this  time  speaketh  litle,  herself  continually  weep-
eth.  The  lord  Ruthen  being  ill  at  ease  and  weak  calleth  for  a
drink,  and  saythe,  "  This  I  must  do  with  your  majesties  pardon,"
and  persuadeth  her  in  the  best  sort  lie  could,  that  she  would
pacify  herself.  Nothing  that  could  be  said  could  please  her.

APPENDIX.  343

In  this  mean  time  there  rose  a  nombre  in  the  court;  to  pacify
which  there  went  down  the  lord  Ruthen,  who  went  strayt  to  the
erles  Huntly,  Bothwell,  and  Atholl,  to  quiet  them,  and  to  assure
them  for  the  king  that  nothing-  was  intend  against  them.  These
notwithstanding  taking  fear,  when  theie  heard  that  my  lord  of  Mur-
ray would  be  there  the  next  day,  and  Argile  meet  them,  Huntly  and
Bothwell  both  get  out  of  a  window  and  so  depart.  Atholl  had  leave
of  the  king  with  Flysh  and  Glandores  (who  was  lately  called  Deys-
ley  the  person  of  Owne)  to  go  where  they  wold,  and  bring  concorde
out  of  the  court  by  the  lord  of  Lidington.  Theie  went  that  night
to  such  places  where  they  thought  themselves  in  most  sauftie.

Before  the  king  leaft  talk  with  the  queen,  in  the  hering  of  the
lord  Ruthen  she  was  contents  that  he  shold  lie  with  her  that  night.
We  know  not  how  he  *  *  himself,  but  came  not  at  her,  and  ex-
cused hymself  to  his  friends,  that  he  was  so  sleepie,  that  he  could
not  wake  in  due  season.

There  were  in  this  companie  two  that  came  in  with  the  king  ;
the  one  Andrewe  Car  of  Fawdenside,  whom  the  queen  sayth  would
have  stroken  her  with  a  dagger,  and  one  Patrick  Balentine,  bro-
ther to  the  justice-clerk,  who  also,  her  grace  sayth,  offered  a  dag
against  her  belly  with  the  cock  down.  We  have  been  earnestly  in
hand  with  the  lord  Ruthen  to  know  the  varitie ;  but  he  assoureth
us  of  the  contrarie.  There  were  in  the  queen's  chamber  the  lord
Robert,  Arthur  Arskin,  one  or  two  others.  They  at  the  first  offer-
ing to  make  a  defence,  the  lord  Ruthen  drawd  his  dagger,  and  4
mo  weapons  then,  that  were  not  drawn  nor  seen  in  her  presens,  as
we  are  by  this  lord  assured.

[The  letter  afterward  gives  an  account  of  the  flight  to  Dunbar
castle,  whither  resorted  unto  the  lords  Huntly^and  Bothwell  :  That
the  earl  of  Morton  and  lord  Ruthven  find  themselves  left  by  the
king  for  all  his  fair  promises,  bonds,  and  subscriptions.  That  he
had  protested  before  the  council,  that  he  was  never  consenting  to
the  death  of  David,  and  that  it  is  sore  against  his  will  :  "  That  of
the  great  substance  David  had  there  is  much  spoken,  some  say  in
gold  to  the  value  of  llm£.  His  apparel  was  very  good,  as  it  is
said,  28  pair  of  velvet  hose.  His  chamber  well  furnished,  armour,
dagger,  pystoletts,  harquebuses,  22  swords.  Of  all  this  nothing
spoyld  or  lacked  saving  2  or  3  daggers.  He  had  the  custody  of  all
the  queen's  letters,  which  all  were  delivered  unlocked  upon.  We
hear  of  a  juill,  that  he  had  hanging  about  his  neck  of  some  price,
that  cannot  be  heard  of.  He  had  upon  his  back  when  he  was  slayn,
a  night  gown  of  damask  furred,  with  a  satten  dublet,  a  hose  of  rus-
set velvet."]

344  SCOTLAND.

No.  XVI. (Vol.  I.  p.  298.)

Part  of  a  Letter  from  Randolph  to  Cecil,  Jan.  16,  1565-6.
-I  CANNOT  tell  what  misliking  of  late  there  hath  been  be-

tw  n  her  grace  and  her  husband,  he  presseth  earnestly  for  the
matrimonial  crown,  which  she  is  loth  hastily  to  grant,  but  willing
to  keep  somewhat  in  store,  until  she  know  how  well  he  is  worth  to
enjoy  such  a  sovereignty  ;  and  therefore  it  is  thought  that  the  par-
liament for  a  time  shall  be  deferred,  but  hereof  I  can  write  no  cer-
tainty.

From  Mr.  Randolph's  Letter  to  Secretary  Cecil.

4  April THE  justice-clerk  in  hard  terms,  more  for  his  bro-

per  Office.  tner's  cause  than  any  desert,  and  as  far  as  I  can  hear  the
From  the  king  of  all  other  in  worst,  for  neither  hath  the  queen  good
anginal,  opinion  of  him  for  attempting  of  any  thing  that  was  against
her  will,  nor  the  people  that  he  hath  denied  so  manifest  a  matter,
being  proved  to  be  done  by  his  commandment,  and  now  himself  to
be  the  accuser  and  pursuer  of  them  that  did  as  he  willed  them.
This  Scott,  that  was  executed,  and  Murray  that  was  yesterday  ar-
reigned,  were  both  accused  by  him.  It  is  written  to  me,  for  cer-
tain, by  one  that  upon  Monday  last  spoke  with  the  queen,  that  she
is  determined  that  the  house  of  Lennox  shall  be  as  poor  in  Scot-
land as  ever  it  was.  The  earl  continueth  sick,  sore  troubled  in
mind  ;  he  staith  in  the  abby,  his  son  has  been  once  with  him,  and
he  once  with  the  queen,  since  she  came  to  the  castle.  The  queen
hath  now  seen  all  the  covenants  and  bands  that  passed  between  the
king  and  the  lords,  and  now  findeth  that  his  declaration,  before
her  and  council,  of  his  innocency  of  the  death  of  David,  was  false ;
and  grievously  offended  that,  by  their  means,  he  should  seek  to
come  to  the  crown  matrimonial.  "

Part  of  a  Letter  from  Randolph  to  Cecil,  from  Berwick,  25M  April,

1566.

THERE  is  continually  very  much  speech  of  the  discord  between

the  queen  and  her  husband,  so  far  that,  that  is  commonly  said  and
believed  of  himself,  that  Mr.  James  Thornton  is  gone  to  Rome  to  sue
for  a  divorce  between  them.  It  is  very  certain  that  Malevasier  had
not  spoken  with  him  within  these  three  days.  He  is  neither  ac-
company'd  nor  looked  upon  of  any  nobleman  :  attended  upon  by
certain  of  his  own  servants,  and  six  or  seven  of  the  guard  ;  at  li-
berty to  do,  and  go  where  and  what  he  will,  they  have  no  hope
yet  among  themselves  of  quietness.

David's  brother, named  Joseph,  who  came  this  way  with

APPENDIX.  345

Malevasier,  unknown  to  any  man  here,  is  become  secretary  in  his
brother's  place.

No.  XVII. (Vol.  I.  p.  302.)

The  Earl  of  Bedford  to  Cecil,  3d  August,  1566.
THE  queen  and  her  husband  agree  after  the  old  manner,  or
rather  worse.  She  eateth  but  very  seldom  with  him,  lieth  not,  nor
keepeth  company  with  him,  nor  loveth  any  such  as  love  him.  He
is  so  far  out  of  her  books,  as  at  her  going  out  of  the  castle  of  Edin-
burgh, to  remove  abroad,  he  knew  nothing  thereof.  It  cannot  for
modesty,  nor  with  the  honour  of  a  queen,  be  reported  what  she
said  of  him.  One  Hickman,  an  English  merchant  there,  having  a
water  spaniel,  which  was  very  good,  gave  him  to  Mr.  James  Mel-
vil,  who  afterward,  for  the  pleasure  which  he  saw  the  king  have
in  such  kind  of  dogs,  gave  him  to  the  king.  The  queen  thereupon
fell  marvellously  out  with  Melvil,  and  called  him  dissembler  and
flatterer,  and  said  she  could  not  trust  one,  who  would  give  any
thing  to  such  a  one  as  she  loved  not.

The  Earl  of  Bedford  to  Cecil,  Aug.  8.

THE  disagreement  between  the  queen  and  her  husband  conti-
nueth,  or  rather  increaseth.  Robert  Melvill  drawing  homewards,
within  twelve  miles  of  Edinburgh,  could  not  tell  where  to  find  the
queen ;  sith  which  time  she  is  come  to  Edinburgh,  and  had  not
twelve  horses  attending  on  her.  There  was  not  then,  nor  that  I
can  hear  of  since,  any  lord,  baron,  or  other  nobleman  in  her  com-
pany. The  king  her  husband  is  gone  to  Dumfermling,  and  passeth
his  time  as  well  as  he  may ;  having  at  his  farewell  such  counte-
nance as  would  make  a  husband  heavy  at  the  heart.

Sir  John  Forster  to  Cecil,  Sth  Sept.  from  Berwick.
THE  queen  hath  her  husband  in  small  estimation,  and  the  earl  of
Lennox  came  not  in  the  queen's  sight  since  the  death  of  Davy.

Sir  John  Forster  to  Cecil,  \\th  Dec.

THE  earl  of  Bothwell  is  appointed  to  receive  the  ambassadors,  and
all  things  for  the  christening  are  at  his  lordship's  appointment,  and
the  same  is  scarcely  well  liked  of  the  nobility,  as  is  said.  The  king
and  queen  is  presently  at  Craigmillar,  but  in  little  greater  familiarity
than  he  was  all  the  while  past.

Advertisements  out  of  Scotland  from  the  Earl  of  Bedford.
August  . THAT  the  king  and  queen  agreed  well  together  two  days

1566.  Pa-  after  her  coming  from ,  and  after  my  lord  of  Murray's

Fromthe6 commg  to  Edinburgh,  some  new  discord  has  happened,
original. The  queen  hath  declared  to  my  lord  of  Murray  that  the

346  SCOTLAND.

king  bears  him  evil  will,  and  has  said  to  her  that  he  is  determined
to  kill  him,  finding  fault  that  she  doth  bear  him  so  much  company :
and  in  like  manner  hath  willed  my  lord  of  Murray  to  spiere  it  at  the
king,  which  he  did  a  few  nights  since  in  the  queen's  presence,  and
in  the  hearing  of  divers.  The  king  confessed,  that  reports  were
made  to  him,  that  my  lord  of  Murray  was  notiiis  friend,  which  made
him  speak  that  thing  he  repented ;  and  the  queen  affirmed,  that  the
king  had  spoken  such  words  unto  her,  and  confessed  before  the
whole  house,  that  she  could  not  be  content  that  either  he  or  any
other  should  be  unfriend  to  my  lord  of  Murray.  My  lord  of  Mur-
ray enquired  the  same  stoutly,  and  used  his  speech  very  modestly,
in  the  mean  time  the  king  departed  very  grieved ;  he  cannot  bear
that  the  queen  should  use  familiarity  either  with  man  or  woman,  and
especially  the  ladies  of  Arguile,  Murray,  and  Marre,  who  keep
most  company  with  her.  My  lord  of  Murray  and  Bothwell  have
been  at  evil  words  for  the  L.  of  Ledington,  before  the  queen,  for  he
and  Sir  James  Balfoure  had  new  come  from  Ledington,  with  his
answer  upon  such  heads  or  articles  as  Bothwell  and  he  should
agree  upon,  which  being  reported  to  the  said  earl  in  the  queen's
presence,  made  answer,  that  ere  he  parted  with  such  lands  as  was
desired,  he  should  part  with  his  life.  My  lord  of  Murray  said
stoutly  to  him,  that  twenty  as  honest  men  as  he  should  lose  their
lives  ere  he  reafte  Ledington.  The  queen  spake  nothing,  but  heard
both ;  in  these  terms  they  parted,  and  since,  .that  I  hear  of,  have
not  met.  The  queen  after  her  hunting  came  to  Edinburgh,  and  car-
ryeth  the  prince  thence  to  Stirling  with  her.  This  last  Saturday  was
executed  a  servant  of  the  lord  Ruthven's,  who  confessed  that  he
was  in  the  cabinet,  but  not  of  council  of  the  fact.  The  queen  hath
also  opened  to  my  lord  of  Murray,  that  money  was  sent  from  the
pope,  how  much  it  was,  and  by  whom,  and  for  what  purpose  itwas
brought.

No.  XVIII. (Vol.  I.  p.  314.)

Part  of  a  Letter  from  Elizabeth  to  Mary,  Feb.  20,  1569.  A  copy
interlined  by  Cecil.  It  contains  an  answer  to  a  complaining  Letter  of
Mary's  upon  the  imprisoning  of  the  Bishop  of  Ross.

AFTER  this  [i.  e.  Mary's  landing  in  Scotland]  how  patiently

did  I  bear  with  many  vain  delays  in  not  ratifying  the  treaty  accorded
by  your  own  commissioners,  whereby  I  received  no  small  unkind-
ness,  besides  the  manifold  causes  of  suspicion  that  I  might  not
hereafter  trust  to  any  writings.  Then  followed  a  hard  manner  of
dealing  with  me,  to  intice  my  subject  and  near  kinsman,  the  lord
Darnly,  under  colour  of  private  suits  for  land,  to  come  into  the
realm,  to  proceed  in  treaty  of  marriage  with  him  without  my  know-
ledge, yea  to  conclude  the  same  without  my  assent  or  liking.  And

APPENDIX.  347

how  many  unkind  parts  accompany'd  that  fact,  by  receiving  of  my
subjects  that  were  base  runnagates  and  offenders  at  home,  and  en-
hansing  them  to  places  of  credit  against  my  will,  with  many  such
like,  I  will  leave,  for  that  the  remembrance  of  the  same  cannot  but
be  noysome  to  you.  And  yet  all  these  did  I  as  it  were  suppress  and
overcome  with  my  natural  inclination  of  love  towards  you  ;  and  did
afterward  gladly,  as  you  know,  christen  your  SOD,  the  child  of  my
said  kinsman,  that  had  before  so  unloyally  offended  me,  both  in  mar-
riage of  you,  and  in  other  undutiful  usages  towards  me  his  sovereign.
How  friendly  also  dealt  I  by  messages  to  reconcile  him,  being  your
husband,  to  you,  when  others  nourished  discord  betwixt  you,  who
as  it  seemed  had  more  power  to  work  their  purposes,  being  evil  to
you  both,  than  I  had  to  do  you  good,  in  respect  of  the  evil  I  had
received.  Well  I  will  overpass  your  hard  accidents  that  followed
for  lack  of  following  my  council.  And  then  in  your  most  extremity,
when  you  was  a  prisoner  indeed  and  in  danger  of  your  life  from
your  notorious  evil  willers,  how  far  from  my  mind  was  the  remem-
brance of  any  former  unkindness  you  had  shewed  me.  Nay,  how
void  was  I  of  respect  to  the  designs  which  the  world  had  seen  at-
tempted by  you  to  my  crown,  and  the  security  that  might  have  en-
sued to  my  state  by  your  death,  when  I  finding  your  calamity  to  be
great,  that  you  were  at  the  pit's  brink  to  have  miserably  lost  your
life,  did  not  only  intreat  for  your  life,  but  so  threatned  some  as  were
irritated  against  you,  that  I  only  may  say  it,  even  I  was  the  princi-
pal cause  to  save  your  life.

No.  XIX. (Vol.  I.  p.  329.)

Letter  of  Q.  Elizabeth  to  Q.  of  Scots.  Thus  marked  on  the  back  with
Cecil's  hand. — Copia  Literarum  Regice  Majestatis  ad  Reginam  Scoto-
rum  VIII0  Aprilis.

paper  MADAME,  vous  ayant  trop  molest6  par  M.  de  Crocq,  je

Office.  n'eusse  eu  si  peu  de  consideration  de  vous  fascher  de  cette
lettre,  si  les  liens  de  charite  vers  les  ruinez,  et  les  prieres  des  mise-
rables  ne  m'y  contraignassent.  Je  entens  que  un  edit  a  ete  divulgu6
de  par  vous,  madame,  que  uug  chascun,  que  veult  justifier  que  ons
este  les  meurtriers  de  votre  feu  mari,  et  mon  feu  cousin,  viennent  a
le  faire  le  xume  de  ce  mois.  La  quelle  chose,  comme  c'est  plus
honorable  et  necessaire,  qui  en  tel  cas  se  pourra  faire,  ne  y  estant
cache  quelque  mistere  ou  finesse,  ainsi  le  pere  et  amis  du  mortgen-
telhomme  m'ont  humblement  requis,  que  je  vous  priasse  de  prolon-
gue  le  jour,  pour  ce  qu'ilz  cognoissent  que  les  iniques  se  sont  com-
bines par  force  de  faire  ce  que  par  droict  ils  ne  pourront  pas  faire ;
partant,  je  ne  puis  mais  sinon  pour  1'amour  de  vous  meme,  a  qui  il
louche  le  plus,  et  pour  la  consolation  des  innocens,  de  vous  exhorter

348  SCOTLAND.

le  leur  conceder  cettq  requeste,  laquelle,  si  elle  les  seroit  nie,  vous
tourneroit  grandement  en  soupcon,  de  plus  que  j'espere  ne  pensez,
et  qui  ne  voudriez  volontiers  ouyr.  Pour  1'amour  de  Dieu,  ina-
dame,  usez  de  telle  sincerite  &  prudence  en  ce  cas  qui  vos  touch©
de  si  pres,  qui  tout  le  monde  aye  raison,  de  vous  livrer  comme  in-
nocente  d'ung  crime  si  enorme,  chose  que  si  ne  fistes,  seriez  digne-
ment  esbloye  hors  de  rancz  de  princesses,  &  non  sans  cause  faite
opprobre  du  vulgaire,  et  plutot  que  cela  vous  avienne,  je  vous  sou-
haiterois  une  sepulture  honorable,  qu'une  vie  maculee"  ;  vous  voiez
madame,  qui  je  vous  traite  comme  ma  fille,  et  vous  promets,  que  si
j'en  eusse,  ne  luy  souhaiterois  mieulx,  que  je  vous  desire,  comme  le
seigneur  Dieu  me  porte  tesmoignage,  a  qui  je  prie  de  bon  coeur  de
vous  inspirer  a  faire  ce  qui  vous  sera  plus  a  honneur,  et  a  vos  amis
plus  de  consolation,  avec  mes  tres  cordialles  recommendations
comme  a  icelle  a  qui  se  souhaite  le  plus  de  bien,  qui  vous  pourra
en  ce  monde  avenir.  De  Wesk  ce  8  jour  de  Janvier  b  en  haste.

No.  XX. (Vol.  I.  p.  340.)

Account  of  the  sentence  of  divorce  between  the  Earl  of  Bothwell  and
Lady  Jean  Gordon  his  wife.  From  a  manuscript  belonging  to  Mr.
David  Falconer,  advocate.  Fol.  455.

UPOUN  the  29  of  Apryle  1567,  before  the  richt  hon.  Mr.  Robert
Maitland,  dean  of  Aberdene,  Mr.  Edward  Henryson,  doctor  in  the
laws,  two  of  the  senators  of  the  college  of  justice,  Mr.  Clement  Lit-
tle, and  Mr.  Alexander  Syme,  advocattis,  commissers  of  Edinr ;
compeered  Mr.  Henry  Kinrosse,  procurator  for  Jean  Gourdoune
countess  of  Bothwell,  constitute  be  her  for  pursewing  of  ane  proces
of  divorcement  intendit  by  her  contra  James  erle  Bothwel  her  hus-
band for  adultry,  committed  be  him  with  Bessie  Crawfurde,  the
pursuer's  servant  for  the  time ;  and  sicklyke,  for  the  said  erle,  com-
peared  Mr.  Edmond  Hay,  who  efter  he  had  pursued  and  craved
the  pursuer's  procurator's  oath  de  calumnia,  if  he  had  just  caus  to
pursew  the  said  action,  and  obtained  it,  denyed  the  libell,  and  the
said  Mr.  Harrie  took  the  morne,  the  last  day  of  Apryle,  to  prove
the  same  pro  prima.  The  quhilk  day,  having  produced  some  wit-
nesses, he  took  the  next  day,  being  the  1  of  May,  to  do  farther  di-
ligence. Upon  the  quhilk  1  of  May,  he  produced  some  moe  wit-
nesses, and  renounced  farther  probatioune.  After  quhilk,  he  de-
sired a  term  to  be  assigned  to  pronounce  sentence.  To  whom  the
said  commissars  assigned  Satterday  next,  the  3  of  May,  to  pro-
nounce sentence  therein,  secundum  alegata  et  probata,  quilk  ac-
cordingly was  given  that  day  in  favour  of  the  pursewar.

b  A  mistake  in  the  date  corrected  with  Cecil's  hand  VIII0  Aprilis,

APPENDIX.

341)

At  the  same  time  there  was  another  proces  intendit  be  the  erl
of  Both  well  contr  his  lady,  for  to  have  their  marriage  declared  nul,
as  being  contracted  against  the  canons,  without  a  dispensation,  and
he  and  his  lady  being  within  degrees  defendand,  viz.  ferdis  a  kin,
and  that  wyse  for  expeding  of  this  proces,  there  was  a  commis-
sioune  grantit  to  the  archbishop  of  St.  Androis  to  cognosce  and  de-
termine it,  and  Ro^  bishop  of  Dunkeld,  William  bishop  of  Dun-
blane, Mr.  Andro  Craufurd  chanon  in  Glasgow  and  parson  of  Egel-
shame,  Mr.  Alexander  Creichtoun,  and  Mr.  George  Cooke,  chan-
cellor of  Dunkeld,  and  to  Mr.  Johne  Manderstoune,  chanon  in  Dun-
bar  and  prebendar  of  Beltoune,  or  any  ane  of  them.  This  commis-
sione  is  datit  27th  Aprile  1567,  was  presented  to  two  of  the  saids
commissioners,  viz.  Mr.  Andr.  Crawfurd  and  Mr.  John  Manders-
toune on  Satterday  3  May,  by  Mr.  Thomas  Hepburne  parson  of
Auldhamstocks,  procurator  for  the  erle  of  Bothwell,  who  accepted
the  delegatioune,  and  gave  out  their  citation  by  precept,  directed
Decano  Christianitatis  de  Hadingtoune,  nee  non  vicario  seu  curato
eccle.  parochiae  de  Creichtoune,  seu  cuicunq ;  alteri  cappellano  de-
biti  requisitis,  for  summoning,  at  the  said  erle's  instance,  both  of
the  lady  personally  if  she  could  be  had,  or  otherways  at  the  parosche
kerk  of  Creichtoune  the  time  of  service,  or  at  her  dwelling  place
before  witnesses,  primo,  secundo,  tertio  et  peremptorie,  unico  tamen
contextu  protuplice  edicto.  And  likeways  to  be  witnesses  in  the
said  matter,  Alex,  bishop  of  Galloway,  who  did  marry  the  said  erle
and  his  lady  in  Halerud-hous  kirk,  in  Feb.  1565,  sir  John  Ban-
natyne  of  Auchnole,  justice  clerk,  Mr.  Robert  Creichtoun  of  Elliok,
the  queen's  advocate,  Mr.  David  Chalmers,  provost  of  Creichtoun
and  chancellor  of  Ross,  Michael  — — ,  abbot  of  Melross,  and  to  com-
pear  before  the  said  judges  or  any  one  of  them  in  St.  Geil's  kirk  in
Edr  on  Monday  the  5  of  May,  be  thamselves,  or  their  procurators.
Upon  the  said  5  day,  Mr.  John  Manderstoun,  one  of  the  judge's
delegat  only  being  present,  compeared  ihe  same  procurators  for
both  the  parties  that  were  in  the  former  proces,  Mr.  Edmund  Hay
Two  words  (  articulatlie  )  and  some  of  the  witnesses

renthesis1  summoned  produced,  and  received  for  proving  the  same,
illegible.  The  said  procurator  renounced  farder  probatioune,  and  the
judge  assigned  the  morne,  the  6th  of  May,  ad  publicandum  pro-
ducta,  nempe  depositiones  ipsorum  testium.  The  quhilk  day,  post
publicatas,  depositiones  prsedictas,  Mr.  Hen.  Kinrosse,  procurator
for  the  lady  instanter  objecit  objectiones  juris  generaliter,  contra
producta,  insuper  renunciavit  ulteriori  defensioni ;  proinde  conclusa
de  consensu  procuratorum  hinc  inde  causa,  judex  prsedictus  statuit
crastinum  diem  pro  termina,  ad  pronunciandum  suam  sententiam
definitivam,  ex  deductis  coram  eo,  in  praesenti  causa  et  processu.
Conform  hereunto,  on  Wednesday  the  7th  of  May,  the  said  judge

350  SCOTLAND.

gave  out  his  sentence  in  favour  of  the  erle,  declaring  the  marriage
to  be,  and  to  have  been  null  from  the  beginning,  in  respect  of  their
contingence  in  blood,  which  hindered  their  lawful  marriage  without
a  dispensation  obtained  of  befoir.

No.  XXI. (Vol.  I.  p.  343.)

A  Letter  from  England  concerning  the  Murder  of  King  Henry  Darnley.

E.  of  Mor- HAVING  the  commodity  of  this  bearer  Mr.  Clark,  I
tho't  good  to  write  a  few  words  unto  you. 1  have  recd

Bundle  B.  some  writs  from  you,  and  some  I  have  seen  lately  sent  to
No.  25.  others  from  you,  as  namely  to  the  earl  of  Bedford  of
the  16th  of  May.  I  have  participat  the  contents  thereof  to  such
as  I  thought  meet,  this  mekle  I  can  assure  you  ;  the  intelligence
given  hithere  by  the  French  was  untrue,  for  there  was  not  one  Pa-
pist nor  Protestant  which  did  not  consent  that  justice  should  be
done,  be  the  queen  my  sovns  aid  and  support,  against  such  as  had
committed  that  abominable  ill  murder  in  your  country  ;  but  to  say
truth,  the  lack  and  coldness  did  not  rise  from  such  as  were  called
to  council,  but  from  such  as  should  give  life  and  execution  there-
unto. And  further.  I  assure  you,  I  never  knew  no  matter  of  estate
proponed  which  had  so  many  favourers  of  all  sorts  of  nations  as
this  had  :  yea,  I  can  say  unto  you,  no  man  promoted  the  matter
with  greater  affection,  than  the  Spanish  ambassador.  And  sure  I
am  that  no  man  dare  openly  be  of  any  other  mind,  but  to  affirm  that
whosoever  is  guilty  of  this  murder,  handfasted  with  advoutre,  is  un-
worthy to  live.  I  shall  not  need  to  tell  you,  which  be  our  letts,  and
stayes  from  all  good  things  here.  You  are  acquainted  with  them
as  well  as  I.  Neds  I  must  confess,  that  howsoever  we  omit  occa-
sions of  benefit,  honour,  and  surety  ;  it  behoveth  your  whole  nobi-
lity, and  namely  such  as  before  and  after  the  murder  were  deemed
to  allow  of  Bodwell,  to  prosecute  with  sword  and  justice  the  punish-
ment of  those  abominable  acts,  though  we  lend  you  but  a  cold  aid,
and  albeit  you,  and  divers  others,  both  honourable  and  honest,  be
well  known  to  me,  and  sundry  others  here,  to  be  justifiable  in  all
their  actions  and  doings  ;  yet  think  not  the  contrary  but  your  whole
nation  is  blemished  and  infamit  by  these  doings  which  lately
passed  among  you.  What  we  shall  do  I  know  not,  neither  do  I
write  unto  you  assuredly,  for  we  be  subject  unto  many  mutations,
and  yet  I  think  we  shall  either  aid  you,  or  continue  in  the  defence
and  safeguard  of  your  priricq,  so  as  it  appear  to  us  that  you  mean
his  safeguard  indeed,  and  not  to  run  the  fortune  of  France,  which
will  be  your  own  destruction  if  you  be  unadvised.  I  know  not  one,
no  not  one  of  any  quality  or  estate  in  this  country,  which  does
allow  of  the  queen  your  sovereign,  but  would  gladly  the  world  were

APPENDIX.  351

rid  of  her,  so  as  the  same  were  done  without  farther  slander,  that  is
to  say  by  ordinary  justice. This  I  send  the  23d  of  May.

No.  XXII. (Vol.  I.  p.  350.)

Part  of  a  Letter  from  Sir  Nicolas  Tkrokmorton  to  Cecil,  llth  of  July

,  from  Berwick.

An  original.  —  SIR,  your  letter  of  the  6th  of  July,  I  received  the  10th
ficeT*  "  at  Berwick.  I  am  sorry  to  see  that  the  queen's  majesty's
disposition  altereth  not  towards  the  lords,  for  when  all  is
done,  it  is  they  which  must  stand  her  more  in  stead,  than  the  queen
her  cousin,  and  will  be  better  instruments  to  work  some  benefite
and  quietness  to  her  majesty  and  her  realm,  than  the  queen  of
Scotland  which  is  void  of  good  fame.

/

A  Letter  from  Sir  Nicolas  Tkrokmorton  to  Cecil,  from  Fastcastle,
12th  of  July  1567.

Paper  Of-  SIR,  as  yow  might  perceive  by  my  letter  of  the  llth
fice*  July,  I  lodged  at  Fastcastle  that  night  accompanyed  with
the  lord  Hume,  the  lord  of  Ledington,  and  James  Melvin,  where
I  was  entreated  very  well  according  to  the  state  of  the  place,  which
is  fitter  to  lodge  prisoners  than  folks  at  liberty,  as  it  is  very  little,
so  it  is  very  strong.  By  the  conference  I  have  had  with  the  lord
of  Ledington,  I  find  the  lords  his  associates  and  he  hath  left  nothing
unthought  of,  which  may  be  either  to  thir  danger  or  work  them
suerty,  wherein  they  do  not  forget  what  good  and  harme  France  may
do  them,  and  likewise  they  consider  the  same  of  England  ;  but  as
farr  as  I  can  perceive,  to  be  plain  with  yow,  they  find  more  perril  to
grow  unto  them  through  the  queen's  majesty's  dealing  than  either
they  do  by  the  French,  or  by  any  contrary  faction  amongest  them-
selves, for  they  assure  themselves  the  queen  will  leave  them  in  the
bryers  if  they  run  her  fortoun,  and  though  they  do  acknowledge
great  benefit  as  well  to  them,  as  to  the  realm  of  England  by  her
majesty's  doings  at  Leith,  whereof  they  say  mutually  her  majesty
and  both  the  realms  have  received  great  fruit  :  yet  upon  other  ac-
cidents which  have  chanced  since,  they  have  observed  such  things
in  her  majesty's  doings  as  have  ended  to  the  danger  of  such  as
she  hath  dealt  withal,  to  the  overthrow  of  your  own  designments,
and  little  to  the  suerty  of  any  party  :  and  upon  these  considerations
and  discourses  at  length,  methinketh  I  find  a  disposition  in  them,
that  either  they  mind  to  make  their  bargain  with  France,  or  else  do
deal  neither  with  France  nor  yow,  but  to  do  what  they  shall  think
meet  for  their  state  and  suerty,  and  to  use  their  remedy  s  as^occa-
tion  shall  move  them  ;  meaning  neither  to  irritate  France  nor  Eng-

352  SCOTLAND.

land,  untill  such  time  as  they  have  made  their  bargain  assuredly
with  one  of  yow;  for  they  think  it  convenient  to  proceed  with  yow
both  for  a  while  pari  passu,  for  that  was  my  lord  of  Ledington's
terms.  I  do  perceave  they  take  the  matter  very  unkindly,  that  no
better  answer  is  made  to  the  letter,  which  the  lords  did  send  to
her  majesty,  and  likewise  that  they  hear  nothing  from  yow  to  their
satisfaction,  lhave  answered  as  well  as  I  can,  and  have  alledged  their
own  proceedings  so  obscurely  with  the  queen,  and  their  uncertainty
hath  occationed  this  that  is  yet  happened,  and  therefore  her  ma-
jesty hath  sent  me  to  the  end  I  may  inform  her  throughly  of  the
state  of  the  matters,  and  upon  the  declaration  of  their  minds  and
intents  to  such  purposes  as  shall  be  by  me  proposed  on  her  majesty's
behalf  unto  them,  they  shall  be  reasonably  and  resolutely  answered.
At  these  things  the  lord  of  Ledington  smiled  and  shook  his  head,
and  said  it  were  better  for  us  yow  would  let  us  alone,  than  neither
to  do  us  nor  yourselves  good,  as  I  fear  me  in  the  end  that  will
prove  :  Sr,  if  there  be  any  truth  in  Ledington,  Le  Crocq  is  gone  to
procure  Ramboilet  his  coming  hither,  or  a  man  of  like  quality,  and
to  deliver  them  of  their  queen  for  ever,  who  shall  lead  her  life  in
France  in  an  abbey  reclused,  the  prince  at  the  French  devotion,  the
realm  governed  by  a  council  of  their  election  of  the  Scottish  nation,
the  forts  committed  to  the  custody  of  such  as  shall  be  chosen
amongst  themselves.  As  yet  I  find  no  great  likelihood  that  I  shall
have  access  to  the  queen  :  it  is  objected  they  may  not  so  displease
the  French  king,  unless  they  were  sure  to  find  the  queen  of  England
a  good  friend  ;  and  when  they  once  by  my  access  to  the  queen  have
offended  the  French,  then  they  say  yow  will  make  your  profit
thereof  to  their  undoing ;  and  as  to  the  queen's  liberty,  which  was
the  first  head  that  I  proposed,  they  said  that  thereby  they  did  per-
ceive that  the  queen  wants  their  undoing,  for  as  for  the  rest  of  the
matters  it  was  but  folly  to  talk  of  them,  the  liberty  going  before ;
but  said  they,  if  you  will  do  us  no  good,  do  us  no  harm,  and  we
will  provide  for  ourselves.  In  the  end  they  said,  we  shall  refuse
our  own  commodity,  before  they  concluded  with  any  other,  which
I  should  hear  of  at  my  coming  to  Edinr. ;  by  my  next  I  hope  to  send
yow  the  band  concluded  by  Hamiltons,  Argyll,  Huntly,  and  that
faction,  not  so  much  to  the  prejudice  of  the  lords  of  Edinr,  as  that
which  was  sent  into  France.  Thus  having  no  more  leisure,  but  com-
pelled to  leap  on  horseback  with  the  lords  to  go  to  Edinr,  I  humbly
take  my  leave  of  from  Fastcastle  the  12th  July  1567.

APPENDIX.  353

To  Sir  Nicolas  Throkmorton  being  in  Scotland. By  the  Queen,  the
Uth  July  1567.

TRUSTY  and  well-beloved  we  greet  you  well;  though
ficaePer  "  we  think  that  the  causes  will  often  change  upon  variety
of  accidents,  yet  we  think  for  sundry  respects,  not  amiss,
that  as  yow  shall  deal  with  the  lords  having  charge  of  the  young
prince  for  the  committing  of  him  into  our  realm,  so  shall  yow  also
do  well,  in  treaty  with  the  queen,  to  offer  her  that  where  her  realm
appeareth  to  be  subject  to  sundry  troubles  from  time  to  time,  and
thereby  (as  it  is  manifest)  her  son  cannot  be  free,  if  she  shall  be
contented  that  her  son  may  enjoy  suerty  and  quietness,  within  this
our  realm,  being  so  near  as  she  knows  it  is  ;  we  shall  not  faill  to
yield  her  as  good  suerty  therein  for  her  child,  as  can  be  devised  for
any  that  might  be  our  child  born  of  our  own  body,  and  shall  be
glad  to  shew  to  her  therein  the  trew  effect  of  nature ;  and  herein
she  may  be  by  yow  remembred  how  much  good  may  ensue  to  her
son  to  be  nourished  and  acquainted  with  our  country :  and  there-
fore, all  things  considered,  this  occation  for  her  child,  were  rather
to  be  sought  by  her  and  the  friends  of  him,  than  offered  by  us ;
and  to  this  end,  we  mean  that  yow  shall  so  deal  with  her,  both  to
stay  her  indeed  from  inclining  to  the  French  practise,  which  is  to
us  notorious,  to  convey  her  and  the  prince  into  France,  and  also  to
avoid  any  just  offence  that  she  might  hereafter  conceive,  if  she
should  hear  that  we  should  deal  with  the  lords  for  the  prince.

Sir  Nicolas  Throkmorton  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  \bth  July  1567,  from

Edinburgh.

An  Origi-  IT  may  please  your  majesty  to  be  advertized,  I  did  sig-
nal. Pa-  nifie  unto  Mr.  Secretary,  by  my  letters  of  the  llth  and
per  Office.  12th  of  juiy>  the  day  of  mine  entry  into  Scotland,  the
causes  of  my  stay,  my  lodging  at  Fastcastle,  a  place  of  the  lord
Hume's  where  I  was  met  by  the  said  lord  and  by  the  lord  Liding-
ton,  and  what  had  passed  in  conference  betwixt  us,  whilest  I  was  at
the  said  Fastcastle.  Since  which  time,  accompanyed  with  the  lords
aforesaid,  and  with  400  horses  by  their  appointment  for  my  better
conduct,  I  came  to  Edinrthe  12th  of  this  present.  The  13th  being
Sunday  appointed  for  a  solemne  communion  in  this  town,  and  also
a  solemne  fast  being  published,  I  could  not  have  conference  with
the  lords  which  be  assembled  within  this  town,  as  I  desired,  that  is
to  say,  the  earls  of  Athole  and  Morton,  the  lord  Hume,  the  lord  of
Lidington,  Sir  James  Balfour,  captain  of  the  castle,  Mr.  James
M'Gill,  and  the  president  of  the  session.

Nevertheless  I  made  means  by  the  lord  of  Lidington  that  they
VOL.  ii.  2  A

354  SCOTLAND.

would  use  no  protracte  of  time  in  mine  audience,  so  did  I  likewise
to  the  earle  of  Morton,  whom  I  met  by  chance  ;  I  was  answered  by
them  both,  that  albeit  the  day  were  destined  to  sacred  exercises,
such  as  were  there  of  the  council  would  consult  upon  any  moyen
touching  my  access  unto  them  and  my  conference  with  them,  and
said  also,  that  in  the  afternoon  either  they  would  come  to  me,  or  I
should  hear  from  them. About  4  of  the  clock  in  the  afternoon,
the  said  13th  day,  the  lord  of  Lidington  came  to  my  lodgings,  and
declared  unto  me,  on  the  behalf  of  the  lords  and  others,  that  they
required  me  to  have  patience,  though  they  had  defferred  my  con-
ference with  them,  which  was  grounded  principally  upon  the  ab-
sence of  the  carles  of  Mar  and  Glencairn,  the  lords  Semple,  Crigh-
ton,  and  others  of  the  council,  saying  also  that  they  did  consider
the  matters  which  I  was  on  your  behalf  to  treate  with  them  of,
were  of  great  importance,  as  they  could  not  satisfy  nor  conveniently
treate  with  me,  nor  give me  answer  without  the  advice  of  the
lords,  and  others  their  associates ;  the  lord  of  Lidington  also  said
unto  me,  that  where  he  perceived,  by  his  private  conference  with
me  in  my  journy  hitherwards,  that  I  pressed  greatly  to  have  speedy
access  to  the  queen  their  sovereign,  he  perceived  by  the  lords  and
others  which  were  here,  that  in  that  matter  there  was  great  diffi-
culty for  many  respects,  but  specially  because  they  had  refused  to
the  French  ambassador  the  like  access,  which  being  granted  unto
me,  might  greatly  offend  the  French,  a  matter  which  they  desired
and  intended  to  eschew ;  for  they  did  not  find  by  your  majesty's
dealings  with  them  hitherto,  that  it  behoved  them  to  irritate  the
French  king,  and  to  lose  his  favour  and  good  intelligence  with
him. I  answered,  that  as  to  their  refusal  made  unto  the  French
ambassador, Monsieur  de  Ville Roye  was  dispatched  forth of
France  before  these  accidents  here  happened,  and  his  special  errand
was  to  impeach  the  queen's  marriage  with  the  earle  of  Bothel  (for
so  indeed  since  my  coming  hither -I  learned  his  commission  tended
to  that  end,  and  to  make  offer  to  the  queen  of  another  marriage) ;
and  as  to  Monsieur  de  Crocq,  he  could  have  no  order  forth  of
France  concerning  these  matters,  since  they  happened ;  and  there-
fore they  might  very  well  hold  them  suspected  to  have  conference
with  the  queen,  least  they  might  treate  of  matters  in  this  time  with-
out instructions,  and  so  rather  do  harm  then  good  ;  but  your  ma-
jesty being  advertized  of  all  things  which  had  chanced,  had  sent
me  hither  to  treat  with  them,  for  the  well  of  the  realm ;  for  the  con-
versation of  their  honors  and  credit,  and  for  their  suerty ;  and  I
might  boldly  say  unto  him,  that  your  majesty  had  better  deserved
than  the  French  had. He  said,  for  his  own  part,  he  was  much
bound  unto  your  majesty,  and  had  always  found  great  favour  and
courtesy  in  England ;  but  to  be  plain  with  you,  Sir,  sayed  he,  there

APPENDIX.

355

is  not  many  of  this  assembly  that  have  found  so  great  obligation
at  the  queen  your  sovereigns  hands,  as  at  the  French  kings,  for  the
earles  of  Morton  and  Glencairn  be  the  only  persons  which  took
benefit  by  the  queens  majestys  aid  at  Leith,  the  rest  of  the  noble-
men were  not  in  the  action ;  and  we  think,  said  he,  the  queens
majesty  your  sovereign,  by  the  opinion  of  her  own  council,  and  all
the  world,  took  as  great  benefit  by  that  charge  as  the  realm  of
Scotland,  or  any  particular  person  ;  and  not  to  talk  with  yow  as  an
ambassador,  but  with  Sir  Nicholas  Throkmorton,  my  lord  Morton,
and  such  as  were  in  pain  for  the  death  of  Davie,  found  but  cold
favour  at  the  queens  majestys  hands,  when  they  were  banish'd  forth
of  their  own  country ;  but  I  would  all  our  whole  company  were  as
well  willing  to  accomplish  the  queen  your  sovereigns  intents  and  de-
sires as  I  am ;  for  mine  own  part,  I  am  but  one,  and  that  of  the
meanest  sort,  and  they  be  many  noblemen,  and  such  as  have  great
interest  in  the  matter ;  mary,  yow  shall  be  assured  I  will  imploy
myself  to  imploy  my  credit,  and  all  that  I  may  do,  to  satisfie  the
queen  your  mistress,  as  much  as  lyeth  in  me,  and  for  your  own
part  you  have  a  great  many  friends  in  this  assembly ;  with  many
other  good  words.  But  for  conclusion  I  must  take  this  for  an  an-
swer, to  stay  untill  the  other  lords  were  come,  and  thereupon  I
thought  meet  to  advertize  your  majesty  what  hath  passed,  and  how
far  forth  I  have  proceeded :  your  expectation  being  great  to  hear
from  hence.

And  now  to  advertize  your  majesty  of  the  state  of  all  things,  as
I  have  learned  since  my  coming  hither,  it  may  please  your  majesty
to  understand  as  followeth.

The  queen  of  Scotland  remaineth  in  good  health  in  the  castle  of
Lochlevin,  guarded  by  the  lord  Linsay  and  Lochleven,  the  owner  of
the  house ;  for  the  lord  Ruthven  is  imployed  in  another  commission,
because  he  began  to  show  great  favour  to  the  queen,  and  to  give
her  intelligence.  She  is  waited  on  with  5  or  6  ladys,  4  or  5  gentle-
women, and  2  chamberers,  whereof  one  is  a  Frencl)  woman.  The
earle  of  Buchan,  the  earle  Murray's  brother,  hath  also  liberty  to
come  to  her  at  his  pleasure ;  the  lords  aforesaid,  which  have  her  in
guard,  doe  keep  her  very  straitly,  and,  as  far  as  I  can  perceive,  their
rigour  proceedeth  by  their  order  from  these  men,  because  that  the
queen  will  not  by  any  means  be  induced  to  lend  her  authority  to
prosecute  the  murder,  nor  will  not  consent  by  any  perswasion  to
abandon  the  lord  Bothell  for  her  husband,  but  avoweth  constantly
that  she  will  live  and  die  with  him ;  and  saith,  that  if  it  were  put  to
her  choice  to  relinquish  her  crown  and  kingdom,  or  the  lord  Bothell,
she  would  leave  her  kingdom  and  dignity,  to  go  as  a  simple  damsell
with  him,  and  that  she  will  never  consent  that  he  shall  fare  worse
or  have  more  harm  than  herself.

2  A  2

356  SCOTLAND.

And,  as  far  as  I  can  perceive,  the  principall  cause  of  her  detention
is,  for  that  these  lords  do  see  the  queen  being  of  so  fervent  affection
towards  the  earle  Bothell  as. she  is,  and  being  put  at,  as  they  should
be  compelled  to  be  in  continuall  arms,  and  to  have  occasion  of  many
battles,  he  being  with  manifest  evidence  notoriously  detected  to  be
the  principall  murderer,  and  the  lords  meaning  prosecution  of  jus-
tice against  him  according  to  his  merits.

The  lords  mean  also  a  divorce  betwixt  the  queen  and  him,  as  a
marriage  not  to  be  suffered  for  many  respects,  which  separation
cannot  take  place  if  the  queen  be  at  liberty,  and  have  power  in  her
hands.

They  do  not  also  forget  their  own  perill,  conjoin'd  with  the  dan-
ger of  the  prince,  but  as  far  as  I  can  perceave,  they  intend  not
either  to  touch  the  queen  in  suerty  or  in  honor,  for  they  do  speak
of  her  with  respect  and  reverence,  and  do  affirm,  as  I  do  learn,  that
the  conditions  aforesaid  accomplished,  they  will  both  put  her  to
liberty,  and  restore  her  to  her  estate.

These  lords  have  for  the  guard  of  their  town  450  harqubushers
which  be  in  very  good  order,  for  the  entertainment  of  which  com-
panys,  untill  all  matters  be  compounded,  they  did  sue  unto  your
majesty  to  aid  them  with  such  sum  of  money  as  hath  been  men-
tioned to  Mr.  Secretary  by  the  lord  of  Lidingtons  writting,  amount-
ing as  I  perceive  to  ten  or  twelve  thousand  crouns  of  the

They  were  lately  advertized  that  the  French  king  doth  mind  to
send  hither  Monsieur  de  la  Chapell  des  Ursine,  a  knight  of  the
French  order,  and  always  well  affectionate  to  the  house  of  Guyse ;
and  howsoever  La  Forest,  Villaroy,  and  Du  Crocq  have  used  lan-
guage in  the  queens  favour  and  to  these  lords  disadvantage  there,
to  your  majesty ;  La  Crocq  doth  carry  with  him  such  matter  as
shall  be  little  to  the  queen's  advantage;  so  as  it  is  thought  the
French  king,  upon  his  coming  to  his  presence,  will  rather  satisfie
the  lords  than  pleasure  the  queen ;  for  they  have  their  party  so  well
made,  as  the  French  will  rather  make  their  profit  by  them,  than  any
other  way.

Herewith  I  send  your  majesty  the  last  bond  agreed  on,  and  signed
by  the  Hamiltons,  the  earl  of  Argyll,  Huntly,  and  sundry  others,  at
Dumbarton.

Nevertheless,  since  my  coming  to  this  town,  the  Hamiltons  have
sent  unto  me  a  gentleman  of  their  surname,  named  Robert  Hamil-
ton, with  a  letter  from  the  bishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  and  the  abbot
of  Arbroth,  the  copy  whereof  I  send  your  majesty,  and  mine  answer
unto  them,  referring  to  the  bearer  the  declaration  of  some  things  as
these  did  by  him  unto  me.

The  earle  of  Argyll  hath,  in  like  manner,  sent  another  unto  me
with  a  letter  and  credit;  I  have  used  him  as  I  did  the  others,  the

APPENDIX.

357

coppy  of  both  which  letters  I  send  your  majesty  also.  The  lord
Harrys  hath  also  sent  unto  me  but  not  written,  and  I  have  returned
unto  him  in  like  sort.

Against  the  20th  day  of  this  month  there  is  a  generall  assembly
of  all  the  churches,  shires,  and  boroughs  towns  of  this  realm,  namely
of  such  as  be  contented  to  repair  to  these  lords  of  this  town,  where
it  is  thought  the  whole  state  of  this  matter  will  be  handeled,  and
I  fear  me  much  to  the  queen's  disadvantage  and  danger ;  unless
the  lord  of  Lidington  and  some  others  which  be  best  affected  unto
her  do  provide  some  remedy ;  for  I  perceave  the  great  number,  and
in  manner  all,  but  chiefly  the  common  people,  which  have  assisted
in  these  doings,  do  greatly  dishonour  the  queen,  and  mind  seriously
either  her  deprivation,  or  her  destruction ;  1  used  the  best  means
I  can  (considering  the  furie  of  the  world  here)  to  prorogue  this  as-
sembly, for  that  appeareth  to  me  to  be  the  best  remedy ;  I  may  not
speak  of  dissolution  of  it,  for  that  may  not  be  abiden,  and  I  should
thereby  bring  my  self  into  great  hatred  and  peril.  The  chiefest  of
the  lords  which  be  here  present  at  this  time  dare  not  show  so  much
lenity  to  the  queen  as  I  think  they  could  be  contented,  for  fear  of
the  rage  of  the  people.  The  women  be  most  furious  and  impudent
against  the  queen,  and  yet  the  men  be  mad  enough ;  so  as  a  stranger
over  busie  may  soon  be  made  a  sacrifice  amongst  them.

There  was  a  great  bruit  that,  the  Hamiltons  with  their  adherents
would  put  their  force  into  the  fields  against  the  24th  of  this  month,
but  I  do  not  find  that  intent  so  true  as  the  common  bruit  goeth.

The  earle  of  Argyll  is  in  the  Highlands,  where  there  is  trouble
among  his  own  countrymen.

The  earle  of  Lennox  is  by  these  lords  much  desired  here,  and  I
do  believe  your  majesty  may  so  use  him,  and  direct  him,  as  he  shall
be  able  to  promote  your  purpose  with  these  men.

The  earle  of  Argyll,  the  Hamiltons  and  he  be  incompatible.

I  do  find  amongst  the  Hamiltons,  Argyll,  and  the  company,  two
strange  and  sundry  humours.

Hamiltons  do  make  shew  of  the  liberty  of  the  queen,  and  prose-
cute that  with  great  earnestness,  because  they  would  have  these
lords  destroy  her,  rather  than  she  should  be  recovered  from  them
by  violence ;  another  time  they  seem  to  desire  her  liberty  and  Both-
well's  destruction,  because  they  would  compass  a  marriage  betwixt
the  queen  and  the  lord  of  Arbroth.

The  earle  of  Argyll  doth  affect  her  liberty,  and  Bothwell's  de-
struction, because  he  would  marry  the  queen  to  his  brother.

And  yet  neither  of  them,  notwithstanding  their  open  concurance
(as  appeareth  by  their  bond),  doth  discover  their  minds  to  each
other,  nor  mind  one  end.  Knox  is  not  here,  but  in  the  west  parts:

358  SCOTLAND.

he  and  the  rest  of  the  ministers  will  be  here  at  the  great  assembly,
whos  austerity  against  the  queen  I  fear  as  much  as  any  man's.

By  some  conference  which  I  had  with  some  of  this  councill,  me
thinketh  that  they  have  intelligence  that  there  is  a  disposition  in  the
queen  of  Scotland  to  leave  this  realm,  and  to  retire  herself  either
into  England  or  into  France,  but  most  willingly  into  England,  for

such and  mislikings  as  she  knoweth  hath  been,  and  is  meant

unto  her  in  France,  leaving  the  regiment  either  to  a  number  of  per-
sons deleagued  and  authorized  by  her,  or  to  some  one  or  more.

And  it  may  please  your  majesty,  I  think  it  not  amiss  to  put  yow
in  remembrance,  that  in  case  the  said  queen  come  into  England  by
your  allowance,  without  the  French  king's  consent,  she  shall  loose
her  dowery  in  France,  and  have  little  or  nothing  from  hence  to  en-
tertain her ;  and  in  case  she  do  go  into  France  with  the  king's  con-
tentment, she  may  be  an  instrument  (if  she  can  recover  favour,  as
time  will  help  to  cancell  her  disgrace)  either  by  matching  with  some
husband  of  good  quality,  or  by  some  other  devise,  to  work  new
unquietness  to  her  own  country,  and  so  consequently  to  your  ma-
jesty's.

Therefore  it  may  please  your  majesty  to  consider  of  this  matter,
and  to  let  me  know  your  pleasure  with  convenient  speed,  how  I
shall  answer  the  same,  if  it  be  propounded  unto  me,  either  by  the
queen  or  by  the  councill,  as  a  piece  of  the  end  and  composition.
For  I  am  sure,  of  late,  she  hath  seemed  very  desirous  to  have  the
matter  brought  to  pass  that  she  might  go  into  England,  retaining
her  estate  and  jurisdiction  in  herself,  though  she  do  not  exercise  it;
and  likewise  I  understand  that  some  of  this  council  which  be  least
affected  to  her  safety  do  think  there  is  no  other  way  to  save  her.
Thus  Almighty  God  preserve  your  majesty  in  health,  honour,  and
all  felicity.  At  Edinr.  the  14th  July  1567.

Sir  Nicholas  Throkmorton  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  the  ISthofJuly  1567,
from  Edinburgh.

An  ori-  IT  may  please  your  majesty,  yow  might  perceave  by

ginal.  Pa-  my  letters  of  the  16th,  how  far  I  had  proceeded  with
'*  these  lords,  and  what  was  their  answer ;  since  which
time  I  have  spoken  particularly  with  the  earle  Morton,  the  lord  of
Lidington,  and  Sir  James  Balfour  captain  of  this  castle ;  at  whose
hands  I  cannot  perceave  that  as  yet  access  to  the  queen  to  Loch-
leven  will  be  granted  me,  staying  themselves  still  by  the  absence
of  the  lords  and  others  their  associates,  which  (they  say)  they  look
for  within  two  days ;  and  for  that  I  find,  by  likelihood  and  apparent
presumptions,  that  mine  access  to  the  queen  will  hardly  be  granted,

APPENDIX.

359

I  have  thought  good  not  to  defer  this  dispatch  untill  I  have  a  reso-
lute answer  in  that  matter.

May  it  therefore  please  your  majesty,  to  understand,  Robert  Mel-
vin  returned  from  the  queen  in  Lochleven,  to  this  town,  the  6th  of
July,  and  brought  a  letter  from  her  written  of  her  own  hand  to  these
lords,  which  doth  contain,  as  I  understand,  matter  as  folio weth. —
A  request  unto  them  to  have  consideration  of  her  health,  and  if
they  will  not  put  her  to  liberty,  to  change  the  place  of  restraint  to
the  castle  of  Stirling,  to  the  end  she  might  have  the  comfort  and
company  of  her  son,  and  if  they  will  not  change  her  from  Lochle-
ven, she  required  to  have  some  other  gentlewomen  about  her,  nam-
ing none.

To  have  her  apothecary,  to  have  some  modest  minister.- — -To
have  an  imbroiderer  to  draw  forth  such  work  as  she  would  be  oc-
cupied about,  and  to  have  a  varlet  of  the  chamber. Touching

the  government  of  the  realm  she  maketh  two  offers,  which  are  but
generally  touched  in  her  letter,  the  particularitys  be  not  specified,
,but  refered  to  Robert  Melvin's  credit,  the  one  is  to  commit  it  only
and  wholly  to  the  earle  of  Murray,  the  other  is  to  the  lords  whose
names  ensue,  assisted  with  such  others  as  they  shall  call  unto  them,
that  is  to  say,  the  duke  of  Chattelrault,  the  earls  of  Morton,  Mur-
ray, Marr,  and  Glencairn.

She  hath  written  unto  them  that  I  might  have  access  unto  her.

She  requireth  further,  that  if  they  will  not  treat  her  and  regard

her  as  their  queen,  yet  to  use  her  as  the  king  their  sovereign's
daughter  (whom  many  of  them  knew)  and  as  their  prince's  mother.
— -She  will  by  no  means  yield  to  abandon  Bothell  for  her  husband,
nor  relinquish  him  ;  which  matter  will  do  her  most  harm  of  all,  and
hardeneth  these  lords  to  great  severity  against  her.

She  yieldeth  in  words  to  the  prosecution  of  the  murder.

I  have  the  means  to  let  her  know  that  your  majesty  hath  sent  me
hither  for  her  relief.

I  have  also  persuaded  her  to  conform  herself  to  renounce  Bothell
for  her  husband,  and  to  be  contented  to  suffer  a  divorce  to  pass
betwixt  them  ;  she  hath  sent  me  word  that  she  will  in  noways  con-
sent  unto  that,  but  rather  die  ;  grounding  herself  upon  this  reason,
taking  herself  to  be  seven  weeks  gone  with  child,  by  renouncing
Bothell,  she  should  acknowledge  herself  to  be  with  child  of  a  bastard,
and  to  have  forfeited  her  honour,  which  she  will  not  do  to  die  for  it;
I  have  perswaded  her  to  save  her  own  life  and  her  child,  to  choose
the  least  hard  condition.

Mr.  Knox  arrived  here  in  this  town  the  6th  of  this  month,  with
whom  1  have  had  some  conference,  and  with  Mr.  Craig  also,  the
other  minister  of  this  town.

I  have  perswaded  with  them  to  preach  and  perswad  lenity. I

360  SCOTLAND.

find  them  both  very  austere  in  this  conference  ;  what  they  shall  do
hereafter  I  know  not;  they  are  furnished  with  many  arguments,  some
forth  of  the  Scripture,  some  forth  of  histories,  some  grounded  (as
they  say)  upon  the  laws  of  this  realm,  some  upon  practices  used  in
this  realm,  and  some  upon  the  conditions  and  oth  made  by  their
prince  at  her  coronation.

The  bishop  of  Galloway,  uncle  to  the  earle  of  Huntley,  hath  sent
hither  to  these  lords,  that  his  nephew  the  earle  and  some  others  of
that  side  may,  at  Linlithgow,  or  at  Stirling,  have  some  communica-
tion with  some  appointed  on  this  side,  assuring  them  that  there  is  a
good  disposition  in  the  lords  of  the  other  party  to  concurre  with
these,  assuring  further  that  they  will  not  dissent  for  triffles  or  unne-
cessary things,  and  (as  I  am  given  to  understand)  they  can  be
pleased  the  queen's  restraint  be  continu'd  untill  the  murder  be  pur-
sued in  all  persons,  whereby  the  separation  of  the  queen  and  Bothell
is  implyed,  the  preservation  of  the  prince,  the  security  for  all  men,
and  a  good  order  taken  for  the  governance  of  the  realm  in  tranquillity.

Captain  Clerk,  which  hath  so  long  served  in  Denmark,  and  served
at  Newhaven,  did  the  16th  of  this  month  (accompanyed  with  one
of  his  soldiers,  or  rather  the  soldier  as  the  greater  fame  goeth)  kill
one  Wilson  a  seaman,  and  such  a  one  as  had  great  estimation  with
these  lords,  both  for  his  skill,  his  hardyness,  honesty,  and  willing-
ness in  this  action ;  whereupon  Clerk  hath  retired  himself;  their
quarrel  was  about  the  ship  which  took  Blacketer,  which  ship  was  ap-
pointed by  these  lords  to  go  to  the  north  of  Scotland  to  impeach
the  passage  of  the  earle  Bothell,  in  case  he  went  either  to  the  isles,
or  to  any  other  place  ;  by  the  death  of  this  man  this  enterprize  was
dashed.

The  bishop  of  Galloway  is  come  to  Linlithgow,  and  doth  desire
to  speak  with  the  lord  of  Lidington.

The  abbot  of  Killwinning  hath  sent  for  Sir  James  Balfour,  cap-
tain of  the  castle,  to  have  conference  with  him.

As  I  wrote  unto  your  majesty  in  my  last,  the  Hamiltons  now  find
no  matter  to  disever  these  lords  and  them  asunder,  but  would  con-
curr  in  all  things  (yea  in  any  extremity  against  the  queen)  so  as
that  they  might  be  assured  the  prince  of  Scotland  were  crouned
king,  and  should  die  without  issue,  that  the  earle  of  Lenox's  son
living  should  not  inherit  the  croun  of  this  realm,  as  next  heir  to
his  nephew.

And  although  the  lords  and  councelors  speak  reverently,  mildly,
and  charitably  of  their  queen,  so  as  I  cannot  gather  by  their  speech
any  intention  to  cruelty  or  violence,  yet  I  do  find  by  intelligence,
that  the  queen  is  in  very  great  peril  of  her  life,  by  reason  that  the
people  assembled  at  this  convention  do  mind  vehemently  the  de-
struction of  her.

APPENDIX.

It  is  a  public  speech  among  all  the  people,  and  amongst  all
estates  (saving  of  the  counselors)  that  their  queen  hath  no  more
liberty  nor  privilege  to  commit  murder  nor  adultery,  than  any  other
private  person,  neither  by  God's  laws,  nor  by  the  laws  of  the
realm.

The  earl  of  Bothell,  and  all  his  adherents  and  associates,  be  put
to  the  horn  by  the  ordinary  justice  of  this  town,  named  the  lords
of  the  session;  and  commandment  given  to  all  shirriffs,  and  all  other
officers,  to  apprehend  him,  and  all  other  his  followers  and  receip-
tors.— The  earl  of  Bothell's  porter,  and  one  of  his  other  servitors
of  his  chamber,  being  apprehended,  have  confessed  such  sundry
circumstances,  as  it  appeareth  evidently,  that  he,  the  said  earl,  was
one  of  the  principal  executors  of  the  murder,  in  his  one  person,  ac-
companyed  with  sundry  others,  of  which  number  I  cannot  yet  cer-
tainly learn  the  names  but  of  three  of  them,  that  is  to  say,  two  of
the  Ormistons  of  Tivotdall,  and  one  Hayborn  of  Bolton ;  the  lords
would  be  glad  that  none  of  the  murderers  should  have  any  favour
or  receipt  in  England,  and  hereof  their  desire  is,  that  the  officers
upon  the  border  may  be  warned ;  Bothell  doth  still  remain  in  the
north  parts,  but  the  lord  Seaton  and  Fleming,  which  have  been
there,  have  utterly  abandoned  him,  and  do  repair  hitherwards. —
The  intelligence  doth  grow  daily  betwixt  these  lords,  and  those
which  held  of;  and  notwithstanding  these  lords  have  sent  a  hun-
dred and  fifty  harqubushers  to  Stirling,  to  keep  the  town  and  pas-
sage from  surprise;  and  so  have  they  done  in  like  manner  to  St.
Johnston,  which  be  the  two  passages  from  the  north  and  west  to
this  town,  I  do  understand  the  captain  of  Dunbar  is  much  busied
in  fortifying  that  place;  I  do  mervile  the  carriages  be  not  impeached
otherwise  than  they  be.

Of  late  this  queen  hath  written  a  letter  to  the  captain  of  the  said
castle,  which  hath  been  surprised ;  and  thereby  matter  is  discovered
which  maketh  little  to  the  queen's  advantage.

Thus  having  none  other  matter  worthy  your  majesty's  knowledge,
I  beseech  God  to  prosper  your  majesty  with  long  life,  perfect
health,  and  prosperous  felicity.  At  Edinburgh  the  18th  of  July,
1567.

Letter  of  Sir  Nicholas  Trokmorton  to  the  Right  Honourable  the  Earl  of
Leicester,  Knight  of  the  Order,  and  one  of  the  Lords  of  her  Majesty's
most  Honourable  Privy  Council.

24th  of  BY  my  former  dispatches  sent  to  her  majesty,  and

July,  1567.  Mr.  Secretary,  since  the  12th  of  July,  your  lordship
fice!"  From  might  have  perceived  the  state  of  this  country,  and  to
the  original,  what  end  these  matters  be  like  to  come.  So  as  not  to
trouble  your  lordship  with  many  words ;  this  queen  is  like  very

362  SCOTLAND.

shortly  to  be  deprived  of  her  royal  estate,  her  son  to  be  crowned
king,  and  she  detained  in  prison  within  this  realm,  and  the
same  to  be  governed  in  the-  young  king's  name,  by  a  councel,  con-
sisting of  certain  of  the  nobility,  and  other  wise  men  of  this  realm;
so  as  it  is  easy  to  be  seen  that  the  power  and  ability  to  do  any  thing
to  the  commodity  of  the  queen's  majesty,  and  the  realm  of  England,
will  chiefly,  and  in  manner  wholly,  rest  in  the  hands  of  these  lords,
and  others  their  associates,  assembled  at  Edinburgh.  Now  if  the
queen's  majesty  will  still  persist  in  her  former  opinion  towards  the
queen  of  Scotland  (unto  whom  she  shall  be  able  to  do  no  good),  then
I  do  plainly  see  that  these  lords  and  all  their  accomplices  will  be-
come as  good  French,  as  the  French  king  can  wish,  to  all  intents
and  purposes.  And  as  for  the  Hamiltons,  the  earls  of  Arguile,
Huntlye,and  that  faction,  they  be  already  so  far  inchanted  that  way,
as  there  needeth  little  devise  to  draw  them  to  the  French  devotion.
Then  this  is  the  state  of  things  so  come  to  pass  of  this  country,  that
France  has  Scotland  now  as  much  conjoined  unto  them,  to  all  pur-
poses, as  ever  it  was ;  and  what  an  instrument,  the  young  prince
will  prove,  to  unquiet  England,  I  report  me  to  your  lordship's
wisdom  ;  and  therefore  considering  the  weight  of  the  matter,  and
all  the  circumstances,  I  trust  your  lordship  will  well  bethink  you
in  time  (for  'tis  high  time)  how  to  advise  her  majesty,  to  leave  no-
thing undone  that  may  bring  the  prince  of  Scotland  to  be  in  her
possession,  or,  at  the  least,  to  be  at  her  devotion.  And  amongst
other  things  that  I  can  imagine,  for  the  first  degree  nothing  is  more
meet  to  bring  this  to  effect,  than  to  allure  this  company  here  as-
sembled, to  bear  her  majesty  their  favour.  Some  talk  hath  passed
between  the  lord  of  Lidington  and  me,  in  certain  conferences  about
this  matter.  By  him  I  find,  that  when  her  majesty  shall  have  won
these  men  to  her  devotion,  the  principal  point  that  will  make  them
conformable  to  deliver  their  prince  into  England,  will  rest  upon  the
queen,  and  the  realm's  enabling  him  to  the  succession  of  the  crown
of  England,  for  fault  of  issue  of  the  queen's  majesty's  body ;  some
other  things  will  also  be  required,  as  the  charge  of  the  said  prince
and  his  train  to  be  at  the  charge  of  England.  I  do  well  perceive
that  these  men  will  never  be  brought  to  deliver  their  prince  into
England  without  the  former  condition,  for  the  succession  of  Eng-
land; for  (saith  Lidington)  that  taking  place,  the  prince  shall  be  as
dear  to  the  people  of  England  as  to  the  people  of  Scotland ;  arid
the  one  will  be  as  careful  of  his  preservation  as  the  other.  Other-
wise, he  saith,  all  things  considered,  it  will  be  reported  that  the
Scottishmen  have  put  their  prince  to  be  kept  in  safety,  as  those
which  commit  the  sheep  to  be  kept  by  the  wolves.  So  as  for  con-
clusion, your  lordship  may  perceive  here  will  be  the  scope  of  this
matter.  As  unto  the  delivering  of  him  upon  hostages,  he  sayeth,

APPENDIX.

303

let  no  man  think,  that  the  condition  of  the  succession  not  being  ac-
complished, the  nobility  and  the  gentry  will  never  consent  to  leave
-themselves  destitute  of  their  sovereign  upon  any  hostages,  neither
upon  any  promises,  nor  likelihood  of  good  to  issue  in  time  to  come.
It  were  not  good  for  yourselves  (saith  he)  that  the  matter  were  so
handled  ;  for  then  you  should  adventure  all  your  goods  in  one  ship,
which  might  have  a  dangerous  effect,  considering  the  unwillingness
of  the  queen  your  sovereign  to  consent  to  establishing  any  suc-
cessor to  the  crown.  And  then,  how  unmete  were  it,  that  her  ma-
jesty having  in  her  possession  already  all  such  persons  as  do  pre-
tend to  it,  or  be  inheritable  to  the  crown,  to  have  our  prince  also  in
her  custody.  For  so  there  might  follow,  without  good  capitula-
tions, a  strange  and  dangerous  issue,  tho'  the  queen  your  mistress
do  think  that  such  imaginations  could  not  proceed  but  from  busy
heads,  as  you  have  uttered  unto  us  on  her  behalf.  What  is  come
to  pass  since  my  last  dispatch,  and  how  far  forth  things  are  pro-
ceeded, I  refer  your  lordship  to  be  informed  by  my  letters  sent  unto
her  majesty,  at  this  time.  And  so  1  pray  Almighty  God,  preserve
your  lordship  in  much  honour  and  felicity.  At  Edenburgh  this
24th  of  July,  1567.

It  may  please  your  good  lordship  to  make  my  lord  Stuard  part-
ner of  this  letter.

6th  Aug.
1567.

The  Queen  to  Sir  Nicolas  Throkmorton.
Ey  the  Queen.

TRUSTY  and  right  well-beloved,  we  greet  you  well,  for
as  much  as  we  do  consider  that  you  have  now  a  longtime
remained  in  those  parts  without  expedition  in  the  charge  committed
unto  you,  we  think  it  not  meet,  seeing  there  hath  not  followed  the
good  acceptation  and  fruit  of  our  well  meaning  towards  that  state,
which  good  reason  would  have  required,  that  you  should  continue
there  any  longer;  our  pleasure,  therefore,  is,  that  you  shall,  imme-
diately upon  the  receipt  hereof,  send  your  servant  Middlemore  unto
the  lords  and  estates  of  that  realm,  that  are  assembled  together,
willing  him  to  declare  unto  them,  that  it  cannot  but  seem  very
strange  unto  us,  that  you  having  been  sent  from  us,  of  such  good
intent,  to  deal  with  them,  in  matters  tending  so  much  to  their  own
quiet,  and  to  the  benefit  of  the  whole  estate  of  their  country,  they
have  so  far  forgotten  themselves,  and  so  slightly  regarded  us  and
our  good  meaning,  not  only  in  delaying  to  hear  you,  and  deferring
your  access  to  the  queen  their  sovereign,  but  also,  which  is  strangest
of  all,  in  not  vouchsafing  to  make  any  answer  unto  us.  And  al-
tho'  these  dealings  be  such,  indeed,  as  were  not  to  be  looked  for  at
their  hands,  yet  do  we  find  their  usage  and  proceeding  towards  their

364  SCOTLAND.

sovereign  and  queen,  to  overpass  all  the  rest  in  so  strange  a  de-
gree, as  we  for  our  part,  and  we  suppose  the  whole  world  besides,
cannot  but  think  them  to  have  therein  gone  so  far  beyond  the  duty
of  subjects,  as  must  needs  remain  to  their  perpetual  tauche  for  ever.
And  therefore  ye  shall  say,  that  we  have  tho't  good,  without  con-
suming any  longer  time  in  vain,  to  revoke  you  to  our  presence,  re-
quiring them  to  grant  you  liscence  and  pasport  so  to  do,  which
when  you  shall  have  obtained,  we  will  that  you  make  your  repair
hither,  unto  us,  with  as  convenient  speed  as  you  may.  Given,  &c.
Indorsed  6th  August,  1567.

Throkmorton  to  the  Right  Honourable  Sir  William  Cecil,  Knight,  one
of  her  Majesty's  Privy  Council  and  Principal  Secretary,  give  these.

SIR,

12th  Aug.  WHAT  I  have  learned,  since  the  arrival  of  my  lord  of
^foffke"  Murray,  an(*  Mons.  de  Linnerol,  you  shall  understand  by
From  the*  my  letter  to  her  majesty,  at  this  time.  The  French  do,  in
original.  thejr  negotiations,  as  they  do  in  their  drink,  put  water  to
their  wine.  As  I  am  able  to  see  into  their  doings,  they  take  it  not
greatly  to  the  heart  how  the  queen  sleep,  whether  she  live  or  die,
whether  she  be  at  liberty  or  in  prizon.  The  mark  they  shoot  at,  is,
to  renew  their  old  league ;  and  can  be  as  well  contented  to  take  it
of  this  little  king  (howsoever  his  title  be),  and  the  same  by  the
order  of  these  lords,  as  otherwise.  Lyneroll  came  but  yesterday,
and  methinketh  he  will  not  tarry  long ;  you  may  guess  how  the
French  will  seek  to  displease  these  lords,  when  they  changed  the
coming  of  la  Chapelle  des  Oursins  for  this  man,  because  they
doubted  that  de  la  Chapelle  should  not  be  grateful  to  them,  being
a  Papist.  Sir,  to  speak  more  plainly  to  you  than  I  will  do  other-
wise, methinketh  the  earl  of  Murray  will  run  the  course  that  those
men  do,  and  be  partaker  of  their  fortune.  I  hear  no  man  speak
more  bitterly  against  the  tragedy,  and  the  players  therein,  than  he,
so  little  like  he  hath  to  horrible  sins.  I  hear  an  inkling  that  Led-
ington  is  to  go  into  France,  which  I  do  as  much  mislike,  as  any
thing,  for  our  purpose.  I  can  assure  you  the  whole  Protestants  of
France  will  live  and  die  in  these  mens  quarrels ;  and,  where  there
is  bruit  amongst  you,  that  aid  should  be  sent  to  the  adverse  party,
and  that  Martigues  should  come  hither  with  some  force;  Mons.
Baudelot  hath  assured  me  of  his  honour,  that  instead  of  Martigues
coming  against  them,  he  will  come  with  as  good  a  force  to  succour
them :  and  if  that  be  sent  under  meaner  conduct,  Robert  Stuart
shall  come  with  as  many  to  fortify  them.  But  the  constable  hath
assured  these  lords,  that  the  king  meaneth  no  way  to  offend  them.
Sir,  I  pray  you  find  my  revocation  convenient,  and  speed  you  to
further  it,  for  I  am  here  now  to  no  purpose,  unless  it  be  to  kindle

APPENDIX.  365

these  lords  more  against  us. Thus  I  do  humbly  take  my  leave  of
you,  from  Edenburgh  the  12th  of  August,  1567.

Yours  to  use  and  command.

The  Queen  to  Nicholas  Throkmorton.

TRUSTY  and  well-beloved,  we  greet  you  well.  We  have,  within
these  two  days,  received  three  sundry  letters  of  yours,  of  the  20th,
22d,  and  23d,  of  this  month,  having  not  before  those  received  any
seven  days  before;  and  do  find,  by  these  your  letters,  that  you
have  very  diligently  and  largely  advertized  us  of  all  the  hasty  and
peremptory  proceedings  there ;  which  as  we  nothing  like,  so  we
trust  in  time  to  see  them  wax  colder,  and  to  receive  some  reforma-
tion. For  we  cannot  perceive,  that  they  with  whom  you  have  dealt
can  answer  the  doubts  moved  by  the  Hamiltons,  who  howsoever
they  may  be  carried  for  their  private  respects,  yet  those  things
which  they  move,  will  be  allowed  by  all  reasonable  persons.  For
if  they  may  not,  being  noblemen  of  the  realm,  be  suffered  to  hear
the  queen  their  sovereign  declare  her  mind  concerning  the  reports
which  are  made  of  her,  by  such  as  keep  her  in  captivity,  how  should
they  believe  the  reports,  or  obey  them  which  do  report  it?  And
therefore  our  meaning  is,  you  shall  let  the  Hamiltons  plainly  under-
stand that  we  do  well  allow  of  their  proceedings  (as  far  forth  as  the
same  doth  concern  the  queen  their  sovereign  for  her  relief),  and  in
such  things  as  shall  appear  reasonable  for  us  therein  to  do,  for  the
queen  our  sister^  we  will  be  ready  to  perform  the  same.  And  where
it  is  so  required,  that  upon  your  coming  thence,  the  lord  Scroope
should  deal  with  the  lord  Herris  to  impart  their  meanings  to  us,  and
ours  to  them,  we  are  well  pleased  therewith,  and  we  require  you  to
advertize  the  lord  Scroope  hereof  by  your  letters,  and  to  will  him
to  shew  himself  favourable  to  them  in  their  actions,  that  may  appeal-
plainly  to  tend  to  the  relief  of  the  queen,  and  maintenance  of  her
authority.  And  as  we  willed  our  secretary  to  write  unto  you,  that
upon  your  message  done  to  the  earl  of  Murray,  you  might  return,
so  our  meaning  is  you  shall.  And  if  these  our  letters  shall  meet
you  on  the  way,  yet  we  will  have  you  advertize  both  the  lord  Scroope
and  the  Hamiltons  of  our  meaning.
Indorsed  29  Aug.  1567.

No.  XXIII. (Vol.  I.  p.  355.)

Sir  Nicholas  Throkmorton  to  the  Archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's  and  the
Abbot  of  Arbrothe.

13th  Aug. AFTER my  good  commendations  to  your  good  lord-

1567.  Pa-  ships,  this  shall  be  to  advertize  you.  that  the  queen's  ma-
per  Office.  .  ...  1-11  i

From  ft Jesty»  my  sovereign,  having  sent  me  hither  her  ambassador

366  SCOTLAND.

copy  to  the  queen  her  sister  your  sovereign,  to  communicate
Nicholas"  unto  ^er  suc^  natter  as  she  thought  meet,  considering
sent  to  the  the  good  amity  and  intelligence  betwixt  them,  who  being
queen.  detained  in  captivity  (as  your  lordships  know)  contrary  to
the  duty  of  all  good  subjects,  for  the  enlargement  of  whose  person,
and  the  restitution  of  her  to  her  dignity,  her  majesty  gave  me  in
charge  to  treat  with  these  lords,  assembled  at  Edenburgh,  offering
them  all  reasonable  conditions  and  means  as  might  be,  for  the  safe-
guard of  the  young  prince,  the  punishment  of  the  late  horrible
murder,  the  dissolution  of  the  marriage  betwixt  the  queen  and  the
earl  of  Bodwell,  and  lastly  for  their  own  sureties.  In  the  negotia-
tion of  which  matters  I  have  (as  your  lordships  well  know)  spent  a
long  time  to  no  purpose,  not  being  able  to  prevail  in  any  thing  with
those  lords  to  the  queen  my  sovereign's  satisfaction.  Of  which
strange  proceedings  towards  her  majesty,  and  undutiful  behaviour
towards  their  sovereign,  I  have  advertised  the  queen's  majesty,  she
(not  being  minded  to  bear  this  indignity)  hath  given  me  in  charge
to  declare  her  further  pleasure  unto  them,  in  such  sort  as  they  may
well  perceive  her  majesty  doth  disallow  of  their  proceedings,  and
thereupon  hath  revoked  me.  And  further  hath  given  me  in  charge
to  communicate  the  same  unto  your  lordships,  requiring  you  to  let
me  know,  before  my  departure  hence  (which  shall  be,  God  willing,
as  soon  as  I  have  received  answer  from  you),  what  you  and  your
confederates  will  assuredly  do,  to  set  the  queen  your  sovereign  at
liberty,  and  to  restore  her  to  her  former  dignity  by  force  or  other-
wise ;  seeing  these  lords  have  refused  all  other  mediation,  to  the
end  the  queen's  majesty  my  sovereign  may  concur  with  your  lord-
ships in  this  honourable  enterprize.

And  in  case,  through  the  dispersion  of  your  associates,  your  lord-
ships can  neither  communicate  this  matter  amongst  you,  nor  receive
resolution  of  them  all  by  that  time,  it  may  please  you  to  send  me
the  opinion  of  so  many  of  you  as  may  confer  together,  within  two
or  three  days,  so  as  I  may  have  your  answer  here  in  this  town  by
Monday  or  Tuesday  next  at  the  farthest,  being  the  19th  of  this
August;  for  I  intend  (God  willing)  to  .depart  towards  England,
upon  Wednesday  following.  Thus  I  most  humbly  take  my  leave  of
your  lordships,  at  Edenburgh,  the  13th  of  Aug.  1567.
Indorsed  the  13th  of  Aug.  1567.

Sir  Nicholas  Throkmorton  to  the  Lord  Herrys.

24th  Aug.  YOUR  good  lordship's  letter  of  the  13th  of  August  I
1567.  Pa-  have  received  the  19th  of  the  same.  For  answer  where-
Frora*06'  unto  it:  may  like  y°ur  lordship  to  understand,  that  I  will
c°py  signify  unto  you  plainly,  how  far  forth  I  am  already  tho-

APPENDIX.  3(J7

which  Sir  roughly  instructed  of  the  queen's  majesty  my  sovereign's
sent  tV'  pleasure  concerning  the  detention  of  the  queen  your  sove-
Secretary  reign,  and  concerning  her  relief.

To  the  first  her  majesty  hath  given  in  charge,  to  use  all
kinds  of  persuasion  in  her  name,  to  move  these  lords  assembled  at
Edinburgh  to  desist  from  this  violent  and  undutiful  behaviour,
which  they  use  towards  their  sovereign.  And  in  this  part,  besides
the  shew  of  many  reasons,  and  sundry  persuasions  of  amicable
treaty  with  them,  her  majesty  hath  willed  me  to  use  some  plain
and  severe  speech  unto  them,  tending  so  far  forth,  as  if  they  would
not  be  better  advised,  and  reform  these  their  outrageous  proceed-
ings exercised  against  their  sovereign,  that  then  they  might  be  as-
sured her  majesty  neither  would  nor  could  endure  such  an  indignity
to  be  done  to  the  queen,  her  good  cousin  and  neighbour.

And  notwithstanding  these  my  proceedings  with  them,  they  have
made  proof  to  be  little  moved  thereby ;  for  as  yet  neither  will  they
consent  to  the  enlargement,  neither  suffer  me  to  speak  with  her.
So  as  it  seemeth  to  me,  it  is  superfluous  to  treat  any  more  with  them
after  this  manner.  Whereupon  I  have  advertised  the  queen's  ma-
jesty my  sovereign,  expecting  daily  her  majesty's  further  order ;  and
as  I  shall  be  advertised  thereof,  so  will  not  fail  to  signify  the  same
to  your  good  lordship ;  and  in  the  mean  time  will  advertise  her  ma-
jesty also,  what  your  lordship  hath  written  unto  me.  Thus  with
my  due  commendations  to  your  good  lordship,  I  commit  the  same
to  Almighty  God,  resting  always  to  do  you  the  pleasure  and  service
that  I  can  lawfully.  At  Edenburgh.
Indorsed  24th  of  August,  1567.

No.  XXIV.  (Vol.  I.  p.  364.)

Account  of  Lord  Herreis's  behaviour  in  the  Parliament  held ;M;

December  15,  1567.

Paper  THE  lord  Herrys  made  a  notable  harangue  in  the  name

Office.  of  the  duke  and  himself,  their  friends  and  adherents  (the
duke  himself,  the  earl  of  Cassilles,  and  the  abbot  of  Kilwinning
being  also  present), -to  persuade  the  union  of  the  whole  realm  in  one
mind.  Wherein  he  did  not  spare  to  set  forth  solemnly  the  great
praise  that  part  of  this  nobility  did  deserve,  which  in  the  beginning
took  meanes  for  punishment  of  the  earl  Bothwell ;  as  also  seeing  the
queen's  inordinate  affection  to  that  wicked  man,  and  that  she  could
not  be  induced  by  their  persuasion  to  leave  him,  that  in  sequestring
her  person  within  Lochleven,  they  did  the  duty  of  noblemen.  That
their  honourable  doings,  which  had  not  spared  to  hazard  their  lives
and  lands,  to  avenge  their  native  country  from  the  slanderous  re-
ports that  were  spoken  of  it  among  other  nations,  had  well  deserved

368  SCOTLAND.

that  all  their  brethren  should  join  with  them  in  so  good  a  cause.
That  he  and  they,  in  whose  names  he  did  speak,  would  willingly,
and  without  any  compulsion,  enter  themselves  in  the  same  yoke,
and  put  their  lives  and  lands  in  the  like  hazard,  for  maintenance  of
our  cause.  And  if  the  queen  herself  were  in  Scotland,  accompa-
nied with  20,000  men,  they  will  be  of  the  same  mind,  and  fight  in
our  quarrel.  He  hoped  the  remainder  noblemen  of  their  party,
Huntly,  Arguile,  and  others,  which  had  not  as  yet  acknowledged
the  king,  would  come  to  the  same  conformity,  whereunto  he  would
also  earnestly  move  them.  And  if  they  will  remain  obstinate,  and
refuse  to  qualify  themselves,  then  will  the  duke,  he  and  their  friends,
join  with  us  to  correct  them,  that  otherwise  will  not  reform  them-
selves. So  plausible  an  oration,  and  more  advantageous  for  our
party,  none  of  ourselves  could  have  made.  He  did  not  forget  to
term  my  lord  regent  by  the  name  of  regent  (there  was  no  mention
at  all  of  the  earl  of  Murray),  and  to  call  him  grace  at  every  word,
when  his  speeches  were  directed  to  him,  accompanying  all  his  words
with  low  courtesies  after  his  manner.

No.  XXV. (Vol.  I.  p.  382.)

Queen  Mary  to  Queen  Elizabeth.
MADAM,

Cott.  Lib.  ALTHOUGH  the  necessity  of  my  cause  (which  maketh
Cal.  i.  me  to  be  importune  to  you)  do  make  you  to  judge  that  I

and°pS-  am  out  °^  ^e  way »  ye*  suc^  as  have  not  my  passion,  nor
bably  a  the  respects  whereof  you  are  persuaded,  will  think  that
translation,  j  (JQ  ag  my  cause  <j0th  require.  Madam,  I  have  not  ac-
cused you,  neither  in  words,  nor  in  thought,  to  have  used  yourself
evil  towards  me.  And  I  believe  that  you  have  no  want  of  good
understanding,  to  keep  you  from  perswasion  against  your  natural
good  inclination.  But  in  the  mean  time  I  can't  chuse  (having  my
senses)  but  perceive  very  evil  furtherance  in  my  matters,  since  my
coming  hither.  I  thought  that  I  had  sufficiently  discoursed  unto
you  the  discommodities  which  this  delay  bringeth  unto  me ;  and
especially  that  they  think  in  this  next  month  of  August,  to  hold  a
parliament  against  me  and  all  my  servants.  And  in  the  mean
time,  I  am  stayed  here,  and  yet  will  you,  that  I  should  put  myself
further  into  your  country  (without  seeing  you),  and  remove  me  fur-
ther from  mine ;  and  there  do  me  this  dishonour  at  the  request  of  my
rebels,  as  to  send  commissioners  to  hear  them  against  me,  as  you
wold  do  to  a  mere  subject,  and  not  hear  me  by  mouth.  Now,
madam,  I  have  promised  you  to  come  to  you,  and  having  there
made  my  moan  and  complaint  of  these  rebels,  and  they  coming
thither,  not  as  possessors,  but  as  subjects  to  answer,  I  would  have

APPENDIX.  3()9

besought  you  to  hear  my  justification  of  that  which  they  have  falsly
set  forth  against  me,  and  if  I  could  not  purge  myself  thereof,  you
might  then  discharge  your  hands  of  my  causes,  and  let  me  go  for
such  as  I  am.  But  to  do  as  you  say,  if  I  were  culpable,  I  would  be
better  advised;  but  being  not  so,  I  can't  accept  this  dishonour  at
their  hands,  that  being  in  possession  they  will  come  and  accuse  me
before  your  commissioners,  whereof  I  can't  like  :  and  seeing  you
think  it  to  be  against  your  honour  and  consignage  to  do  otherwise,
I  beseech  you  that  you  will  not  be  mine  enemy,  until  you  may  see
how  I  can  discharge  myself  every  way,  and  to  suffer  me  to  go  into
France,  where  I  have  a  dowry  to  maintain  me ;  or  at  least  to  go  into
Scotland,  with  assurance  that  if  there  come  any  strangers  thither,
I  will  bind  myself  for  their  return  without  any  prejudice  to  you,
or  if  it  pleis  you  not  to  do  thus,  I  protest  that  I  will  not  impute  it
to  falshood,  if  I  receive  strangers  in  my  country  without  making
you  any  other  discharge  for  it.  Do  with  my  body  as  you  will,  the
honour  or  blame  shall  be  yours.  For  I  had  rather  die  here,  and
that  my  faithful  servants  may  be  succoured  (tho'  you  would  not  so)
by  strangers,  than  to  suffer  them  to  be  utterly  undone,  upon  hope
to  receive  in  time  to  come,  particular  commodity.  There  be  many
things  to  move  me  to  fear  that  I  shall  have  to  do  in  this  country,  with
others  than  with  you.  But  forasmuch  as  nothing  hath  followed  upon
my  last  moan,  I  hold  my  peace,  happen  what  mayhap.  I  have  as  leef  to
endure  \  mJ  f°rtune>  as  to  seek  i<;>  and  not  find  li-  Further,  it  pleased
you  to  give  license  to  my  subjects  to  go  apd  come.  This  has  been
refused  by  my  lord  Scroop  and  Mr.  Knolls  (as  they  say)  by  you):
commandment,  because  I  would  not  depart  hence  to  your  charge,
untill  I  had  answer  of  this  letter,  tho*  I  shewed  them,  that  you  re-
quired my  answer  upon  the  two  points,  contained  in  your  letter.

The  one  is  to  let  you  briefly  understand,  I  am  come  to  you  to
make  my  moan  to  you,  the  which  being  heard,  I  would  declare  unto
you  mine  innocency,  and  then  require  your  aid,  and  for  lack  thereof,
I  can't  but  make  my  moan  and  complaint  to  God,  that  I  am  not
heard  in  my  just  quarrel,  and  to  appeal  to  other  princes  to  have
respect  thereunto  as  my  case  requireth  ;  and  to  you,  madam,  first
of  all  when  you  shall  have  examined  your  conscience  before  him,  and

have  him  for  witness. And  the  other,  which  is  to  come  further

into  your  country,  and  not  to  come  to  your  presence,  I  will  esteem,
that  as  no  favour,  but  will  take  it  for  the  contrary,  obeying  it  as  a
thing  forced.  In  the  mean  time,  I  beseech  you,  to  return  to  me
my  lord  Herries,  for  I  can't  be  without  him,  having  none  of  my
counsel  here,  and  also  to  suffer  me,  if  it  please  you,  without  further
delay,  to  depart  hence  whithersoever  it  be  out  of  this  country.  I
am  sure  you  will  not  deny  me  this  simple  request  for  your  honour's
sake,  seeing  it  doth  not  please  you  to  use  your  natural  goodness  to-

VOL. II.  2 B

370  SCOTLAND.

wards  me  otherwise,  and  seeing  that  of  mine  own  accord,  I  am
come  hither,  let  me  depart  again  with  yours.  And  if  God  permit
my  causes  to  succeed  well,  I  shall  be  bound  to  you  for  it ;  and  hap-
pening otherwise,  yet  I  can't  blame  you.  As  for  my  lord  Fleeming,
seeing  that  upon  my  credit  you  have  suffered  him  to  go  home  to
his  house,  I  warrant  you  he  shall  pass  no  further,  but  shall  return
perhaps  when  it  shall  please  you.  In  that  you  trust  me  I  will  not
f01"'  (to  die  for  it)  deceive  you.  But/row  Dumbarton!  I  answer

not,  when  my  L.  Fleeming  shall  be  in  the  Tower.  For  they  which
are  within  it,  will  not  forbear  to  receive  succour,  if  I  don't  assure
them  of  yours ;  no,  tho'  you  would  charge  me  withal,  for  I  have  left
them  in  charge,  to  have  more  respect  to  my  servants  and  to  my
estate,  than  to  my  life.  Good  sister,  be  of  another  mind,  win  the
heart,  and  all  shall  be  yours,  and  at  your  commandment.  I  thought
to  satisfy  you  wholly,  if  I  might  have  seen  you.  Alas !  do  not  as  the
serpent,  that  stoppeth  his  hearing,  for  I  am  no  enchanter,  but  your
sister,  and  natural  cousin.  If  Csesar  had  not  disdained  to  hear  or
read  the  complaint  of  an  advertiser,  he  had  not  so  died ;  why  should
princes  ears  be  stopped,  seeing  that  they  are  painted  so  long  ?  mean-
ing that  they  should  hear  all  and  be  well  advised,  before  they  an-
swer. I  am  not  of  the  nature  of  the  basilisk,  and  less  of  the  cha-
melion,  to  turn  you  to  my  likeness,  and  tho'  I  should  be  so  danger-
ous and  curs'd  as  men  say,  you  are  sufficiently  armed  with  con-
stancy and  with  justice,  which  I  require  of  God,  who  give  you  grace
to  use  it  well  with  long  and  happy  life,  From  Carlisle,  the  5th  of
July,  1568.

No.  XXVI. (Vol.  L  p.  383).

Part  of  a  letter  from  Sir  Francis  Knotty s  to  Cecil,  Stk  Aug.  1568,
from  Bolton.

An  original.  — BUT  surely  this  queen  doth  seem,  outwardly,  not  only
Paper  Of-  to  favour  the  form,  but  also  the  chief  article  of  the  reli-
gion of  the  gospel,  namely,  justification  by  faith  only;  and
she  heareth  the  faults  of  papestry  revealed  by  preaching  or  other-
wise, with  contented  ears,  and  with  gentle  and  weak  replys,  and
she  doth  not  seem  to  like  the  worse  of  religion  throw  me.

Part  of  a  letter  from  Sir  Francis  Knollys  to  Cecil,  21  Sept.  1568,
from  Bolton.

—  IT  came  to  this  queen's  ears  of  late  that  she  was  bruited  to  be
lately  turned  to  the  religion  of  the  gospell,  to  the  great  disliking  of
the  Papists,  hereabouts,  which  thing  she  herself  confessed  unto
me,  and  yesterday,  openly  in  the  great  chamber,  when  the  assembly
was  full,  and  some  Papists  present,  she  took  occasion  to  speak  of

APPENDIX.  371

religion,  and  then  openly  she  professed  herself  to  be  of  the  Papist
religion,  and  took  upon  her  to  patronize  the  same,  more  earnestly
than  she  had  done  a  great  while  afore,  altho'  her  defences  and  argu-
ments were  so  weak,  that  the  effect  of  her  speech  was  only  to  shew
her  zeal ;  and  afterwards  to  me  alone,  when  I  misliked  to  see  her
become  so  confidently  backward  in  religion,  Why,  said  she,  would
you  have  me  to  lose  France  and  Spain,  and  all  my  friends  in  other
places,  by  seeming  to  change  my  religion,  and  yet  I  am  not  assured
the  queen  iny  good  sister  will  be  my  assured  friend,  to  the  satisfac-
tion of  my  honour  and  expectation.

No.  XXVII. (Vol.  I.  p.  384.)

A  letter  from  my  Lord  Herries  to  my  Lord  Scroop  and  Sir  F.  Knollys,
Sept.Sd,  1568.

Cott.  Lib. MY  lords,  pleasit  your  honourable  lordships,  I  am  in-

Cal.  C. formed  by  James  Borthwick,  lately  come  from  the  queen's

An  original .  11-1-  -, ,  . . i

in  his  ownmaJesty  your  soverane,  that  his  schawm  to  her  highness

hand.  I  shuld  have  ridden  in  Crafurdmure,  sen  my  last  cuming
into  this  realm,  upon  the  earl  of  Murray's  dependants.  And  that  I
suld  have  causit,  or  been  of  counsall  to  Scottismen  to  have  ridden
in  Ingland,  to  slay  or  spulzie  her  majesty's  subjects.

My  lords,  I  thought  it  right  needful  because  your  lordships  is,
by  your  soverane,  commanded  to  attend  upon  the  queen's  majesty
my  mistress,  so  having  daily  access  in  thir  matters,  to  declare  upon
the  truth ;  humbly  desiring  that  your  lordships  will,  for  God's  cause,
certificate  the  queen  your  soverane  the  same.

As  God  lives,  I  have  neither  consented,  nor  any  wise  had  know-
ledge of  any  Scottisman's  riding  in  England,  to  do  the  subjects
thereof  hurt  in  bodies  or  .goods,  sene  the  siege  of  Leith ;  and  as  I
understand  it  shall  be  fund  true,  that  gif  ony  sic  open  hurt  be  done,
it  is  by  the  queen  my  sovereign's  disobedients,  and  that  1  have  not
ridden  nor  hurt  no  Scottishman,  nor  commanded  no  hurt  to  be  done
to  them,  sen  my  coming  from  the  queen's  majesty  of  England,  it  is
well  kend,  for  that  never  ane  will  complain  of  me.

I  have  done  more  good  to  Crawfurdmure  nor  ever  the  earl  of
Murray  has  done,  and  will  be  loatherto  do  them  any  harm  than  he
will.  Except  the  queen's  majesty  your  sovereign,  command  sic
false  reports  to  be  tryit,  quhereof  this  is  altogidder  an  inventit  leas-
ing, her  guace  sail  be  trublit,  and  tyne  the  hearts  of  true  men  here,
quhom  of  sic  report  sail  be  made,  that  baieth  would  serve  hir,  and
may,  better  than  they  unworthy  liars.

My  lords,  I  Understand  the  queen's  majesty  your  sovereign  is  not
contented  of  this  bruite,  that  there  should  ony  Frenchman  come  in

2  B  2

37-2  SCOTLAND.

this  realm,  with  the  duke  of  Chattelherault.  Truth  it  is,  I  am  no
manner  of  way  the  counsall  of  their  cuming,  nor  has  no  sic  cer-
tainty thereof,  as  I  hear  by  Borthwick's  report,  from  the  queen's
majesty  your  sovereign.  And  gif  I  might  as  well  say  it,  as  it  is
true  indeed,  her  grace's  self  is  all  the  wyitt,  and  the  counsall  that
will  never  let  her  take  order  with  my  maistress  cause.  For  that
our  sovereign  havand  her  majesty's  promise,  be  writing,  of  luff,
friendship,  and  assistance,  gif  need  had  so  requirit,  enterit  that
realm,  upon  the  16  day  of  May,  sen  that  time  the  queen's  majesty
has  commanded  me  diverse  times  to  declare  she  would  accept  her
cause,  and  do  for  her,  and  to  put  her  in  peaceable  possession  of  this
realme;  and  when  I  required  of  her  majesty,  in  my  maistress  name,
that  her  highness  would  either  do  for  her  (as  her  special  trust  was
she  wold),  according  to  her  former  promises,  or  otherwise  give  her
counsal,  wold  not  consent  (as  I  show  her  grace  I  fand  diverse  re-
pugnant), then  that  she  would  permit  her  to  pass  in  France,  or  to
some  other  prince  to  seek  support,  or  failing  hereof  (quhilk  was
agains  all  reason),  that  she  would  permit  her  to  return  in  her  awin
countrie,  in  sic  sempil  manner  as  she  came  out  of  it,  and  said  to  her
majesty  ane  of  thir,  for  her  honour,  would  not  be  refusit,  seeand
that  she  was  corned  in  her  realm  upon  her  writings  and  promises  of
friendship.  And  sicklike,  I  said  to  her  highness,  gif  my  maistress
had  the  like  promise  of  her  nobility  and  estates,  as  she  had  of  her-
self, I  should  have  reprovit  them  highly,  gif  they  had  not  conde-
scendit  to  one  of  thir  three ;  and  so  I  say,  and  so  L  write,  that  in  the
warld  it  shall  be  maist  reprehendable,  gif  this  promise  taketh  not
other  good  effect,  nor  yet  it  does.  Notwithstanding,  I  get  gud  an-
swer of  thir  promises  of  friendship  made  to  my  sovereign,  and  to
put  her  grace  in  this  her  awin  countrie  peaceably,  we  have  fund  the
contrary  working  by  Mr.  Middlemore  directit  from  her  highness  to
stay  the  army  that  cuist  down  our  houses.  And  alsua,  in  the  pro-
ceeding of  this  late  pretendit  parliament,  promised  twenty  days  be-
fore the  time  to  myself  to  have  caused  it  been  dischargit.  And  yet
contrary  to  this  promise,  have  they  made  their  pretendit  manner  of
forfaulture  of  31  men  of  guid  reputation,  bishops,  abbottis,  and  ba-
ronis,  obedient  subjects  to  our  sovereign,  only  for  her  cause.

They  have  also  disponit,  sen  our  sovereign's  cause  was  taken
upon  hand  be  the  queen's  majesty  of  that  realm,  an  hundred  thou-
sand pound  Scots  worth  of  her  awin  true  subjects  geir,  under  the
color  of  the  law,  groundit  upon  their  false,  treasonable,  stowin,  au-
thority.

The  murders,  the  oppressions,  the  burnings,  the  ravishing  of
women,  the  destruction  of  policy,  both  ecclesiastical  and  temporal,
in  this  mean  time,  as  in  my  former  writings  I  said  it  was  lamentable
to  ony  Christian  man  to  hear  of,  except  God  gif  grace,  the  profes-

APPENDIX.  373

sion  of  the  evangile  of  Jesus  Christ  professit  be  your  prince,  coun-
sall  and  realme,  be  mair  myndit,  nor  the  auld  inamity  that  has  stand
betwixt  the  realms,  many  of  my  countrymen  will  doubt  in  this  arti-
cle, and  their  proceedings  puttis  myself  in  Sanct  Thomas  belief.

Now,  my  lords,  gif  the  queen's  majesty  of  that  realm,  upon  quhais
promise  and  honour  my  maistress  came  there,  as  I  have  said,  will
leave  all  the  French  writings,  and  French  phrases  of  writings,
quhilks  amongis  them  is  over  meikle  on  baith  the  sides  unfit,  and
plainly,  according  to  the  auld  true  custom  of  Ingland  and  Scot-
land, quherein  be  a  word  promist  truth  was  observ'd,  promise,  in
the  name  of  the  eternal  God,  and  upon  the  high  honour  of  that
nobill  and  princely  blude  of  the  kings  of  Ingland,  quhereof  she
is  descendit,  and  presently  wears  the  diadem,  that  she  will  put  my
maistress  in  her  awin  country,  and  cause  her  as  queen  thereof  in  her
authority  and  strength  to  be  obeyit,  and  to  do  the  same  will  appoint
an  certain  day  within  two  months  at  the  farthest,  as  we  understand
this  to  be  our  weil,  sua  will  we,  or  the  maist  part  of  us  all,  follow
upon  it,  leaving  the  Frenchmen,  and  their  evil  French  phrases  to-
gidder.  And  therefore,  and  for  the  true  perpetual  friendship  of  that
realm,  will  condition,  and  for  our  part,  with  the  grace  of  Almighty
God,  keep  sic  heads  and  conditions  of  agreement,  as  noble  and  wise
men  can  condescend  upon,  for  the  weill  of  this  hail  island.  As  I
have  been  partlings  declaring  to  the  queen  your  sovereign,  quhilk
I  shew  to  your  lordships  selfis  both  in  religion,  in  the  punishment
of  the  earl  Bothwile,  for  the  queen's  last  husband's  slaughter,  and
for  a  mutual  band  of  amity  perpetually  to  remain  amangis  us.

Doubtless,  my  lords,  without  that,  we  may  find  sic  time  and
friendly  working,  as  may  give  us  occasion  baith  to  forgette  Mid-
dlemore  and  his  late  pretendit  Parliament,  we  will  turn  the  leaf,
leaving  our  sovereign  agains  our  will  to  rest  where  she  is,  under  the
promise  of  friendship,  as  I  have  baith  said,  and  will  ever  affirm,
made  by  your  sovereign,  quhilk  was  only  cause  of  her  grace's  coming
in  that  realm,  and  seek  the  help  and  moyen  of  French,  or  Spanish,
till  expulse  this  treasonable  and  false  pretendit  authority,  quhilk
means  to  reign  above  us.

My  lords,  I  desire  your  lordships  consider,  that  it  is  .he,  that
maist  desires  the  amity  betwixt  Ingland  and  Scotland  to  continue,
and  of  a  poor  man  best  cause  has,  that  writ  this.

My  brother,  the  laird  of  Skirling,  schaws  me,  that  in  your  lord-
ships communing  with  him,  it  appearit  to  him,  your  mind  was  we
shold  suffer  the  earl  of  Murray  to  work,  altho*  it  were  agains  reason
to  us,  and  complain  thereof  to  the  queen's  majesty,  and  her  high-
ness wald  see  it  reformit.  My  lords,  her  majesty  will  be  over  mei-
kle troublit  to  reform  the  wranges  we  have  sustainit  already.  For
I  am  sure,  gif  reason  and  justice  may  have  place,  our  maistress,  and

374  SCOTLAND.

we  her  subjects,  have  received  express  wrang,  far  above  two  hun-
dred thousand  pounds  sterling,  in  the  time  of  this  unhappy  go-
vernment, seeing  the  reformation  of  sa  great  causes,  comes,  now
a  days,  so  slowlie,  and  the  ungodly  law  of  oblivion  in  sic  matters
so  meikle  practis'd,  I  think,  nowther  for  the  queen's  honour,  nor
our  weill,  your  lordships  would  sua  mean,  nor  that  it  is  good  to  us  to
follow  it.  And  that  ye  will  give  your  sovereign  sic  advertisement
thereof,  as  your  good  wisdoms  shall  find  in  this  cause  meet.  It
will  be  true  and  frindful  working  for  us,  indeed,  and  nowther
French  phrases,  nor  boasting,  and  finding  little  other  effect,  that
will  cause  us  to  hold  away  the  Frenchmen.  This  is  plainly  writ-
ten, and  I  desire  your  lordships  plain  answer,  for  in  truth  and
plainness  langest  continues  gud  friendship,  quhilk  in  this  matter  I
pray  God  may  lang  continue,  and  have  your  lordships  in  his  keep-
ing. Off  Dumfreis,  the  3d  day  of  September,  1568.

Your  lordships  at  my  power
to  command  leifully

HERRIS.

Queen  Mary  to  Q.  Elizabeth.
1568. MADAME  ma  bonne  soeur, J'ay  resceu  de  vos  lettres,

t/ott.  Lib. i,  j A i»  p  •  «  -i

Cai.  i.  An  d  une  mesme  dete  ; 1  une, ou  vous  faites  mention de
original. 1'excuse  de  Monsr.  de  Murra  pour  tenir  son  pretendu  par-
lement,  qui  me  semble  bien  froid,  pour  obtenir  plus  de  tollerance
que  je  m'estois  persuadee  n'avoir  par  vostre  promesse,  quant  a
n'osser  donner  commission  de  venir  sans un  parlement  pour  leur
peu  de  nombre  de  noblesse  alors,  je  vous  respons,  qu'ils  n'ont  que
trois  ou  quatre  d'avantage,  qui  eussent  aussi  bien  dit  leur  opinion
hors  de  parlement,  qui  n'a  este  tenu  tant  pour  cette  effect,  mais
pour  faire  ce  qu'expressement  nous  avions  requis  estre  empesches,
qui  est  la  forfalture  de  mes  subjects  pour  m'avoir  estes  fidelles,  ce
que  je  m'assurois,  jusques  a  heir,  avoir  eu  en  promesse  de  vous,
par  la  lettre  ecrite  a  mi  lord  Scrup  e  maistre  Knoleis  vous  induire
a  ire  centre  eulx,  voire,  a  les  ensayre  resentir ;  tutefois  je  vois  que
je  Tay  mal  pris,  j'en  suis  plus  marrie,  pour  ce  que  sur  votre  lettre
qui'l  me  montrerent,  et  leur  parole,  je  Fay  si  divulguement  assuray
que  pour  vengeance  que  j'en  desirasse,  si  non  mettre  difference  en-
tre  leur  faux  deportemens,  et  les  miens  sinceres. Dans  vostre  let-
tre aussi  datee  du  10me  d'Aoust,  vous  metties  ces  mots. '*  I  think
your  adverse  party,  upon  my  sundry  former  advices,  will  hold  no
parliament  at  all ;  and  if  they  do,  it  shall  be  only  in  form  of  an
assembly  to  accord  whom  to  send  into  this  realm,  and  in  what  sort ;
for  otherwise,  if  they  shall  proceed  in  manner  of  a  parliament,
with  any  act  of  judgment  against  any  person,  I  shall  not,  in  any
wise,  allow  thereof;  and  if  they  shall  be  so  overseen,  then  you  may

APPENDIX.  375

think  the  same  to  be  of  no  other  moment,  than  the  former  proce-
dures ;  and  by  such  their  rash  manner  of  proceeding,  they  shall
most  prejudice  themselves  ;  and  be  assured  to  find  me  ready  to
condemn  them,  in  their  doings."  Sur  quoy,  j'ay  contremande  mes
serviteurs,  les  faissant  retirer,  souffrant  selon  vostre  commandement
d'etre  faussement  nommes  traitres,  par  ceulx,  qui  le  sont  de  vray;
et  encore  d'etre  provoques  par  escarmons  dies,  et  par  prinses  de
mes  gens  et  lettres,  et  au  contraire  vous  etes  informee  que  mes
subjects  ont  evahis  les  vostres,  madame,  qui  a  fait  ce  rapport  n'est
pas  homme  de  bien,  car  laird  de  Sesford  et  son  fils  sont  et  ont
estes  mes  rebelles  depuis  le  commencement ;  enquires  vous,  s'ils
n'estoient  a  Donfris  aveques  eulx,  j'avois  offri  respondre  de  la  fron-
tiere,  ce  que  me  fut  refuse,  ce  qui  m'en  devroit  asses  descharger ;
neanmoins,  pour  vous  faire  preuve  de  ma  fidelite,  et  de  leur  falcite,
s'il  vous  me  fayte  donner  le  nom  des  coulpables,  et  me  fortifier,  je
commanderay  mes  subjects  les  pour  suivre,  ou  si  vous  voules  que
ce  soit  les  vostres,  les  miens  leur  ayderont;  je  vous  prie  m'en
mander  vostre  volonte",  au  reste  mes  subjects  fidelles  seront  re-
sponsables  a  tout  ce  que  leur  sera  mis  su  les  contre  vous,  ni  les
vostres,  ni  les  rebelles,  despuis  que  me  conseillates  les  faire  retirer.
Quant  aux  Francois,  j'escrivis  que  Ton  m'en  fit  nulle  poursuite,
car  j'esperois  tant  en  vous,  que  je  n'en  aurois  besoign, — -je  ne  S£eu
si  le  diet  aura  en  mes  lettres,  mais  je  vous  jure  devant  Dieu  que  je
ne  scay  chose  du  monde  le  leur  venue,  que  ce  que  m'en  avez  man-
day,  ni  n'en  ai  oui  de  France  mot  du  monde,  et  ne  le  puis  croire
pour  cest  occasion,  et  si  ils  si  sont,  c'est  sans  mon  sceu  ni  consen-
tement.  Pourquoy  je  vous  supplie  ne  me  condamner  sans  m'ouire,
car  je  suis  pres  de  tenir  tout  ce  que  j'ay  offert  a  rnester  Knoleis,
et  vous  assure  que  vostre  amite,  qu'il  vous  plest  m'offrir,  sera  res-
cue avant  toutes  les  choses  du  monde,  quant  France  servit  la  pour
presser  leur  retour  a  ceste  condition,  que  prenies  mes  affaires  en
mein  en  soeur,  et  bonne  ami,  comme  ma  France  est  en  vous;  mais
une  chose  seule  me  rende  confuse,  j'ay  tant  d'enemis  qu'ont  votre
oreille,  la  quelle  ne  pouvant  avoir  par  parolle,  toutes  mes  actions
vous  sont  desguisees,  et  falsement  Faportees,  par  quoi  il  m'est  im-
possible de  m'assurer  de  vous,  pour  les  manteries  qu'on  vous  a
fait,  pour  destruire  vostre  bonne  volonte  de  moy  ;  par  quoy  je  de-
sirerois  bien  avoir  ce  bien  vous  faire  entendre  ma  sincere  et  bonne
affection,  laquelle  je  ne  puis  si  bien  descrire,  que  mes  enemis  a
tort  ne  la  decolore.  Ma  bonne  soeur,  gagnes  moy  ;  envoyes  moy
querir,  n'entres  en  jalousie  pour  faulx  raports  de  celle  que  ne  desire
que  votre  bonne  grace;  je  me  remettray  sur  mester  Knoleis  a  qui
je  me  suis  librement  descouverte,  et  apres  vous  avoir  baisee  les
mains,  je  prierai  Dieu  vous  donner  en  sante,  longue  et  heureuse
vie.  De  Boton,  ou  je  vous  promets,  je  n'espere  pertir  qu'aveques

376  -SCOTLAND.

vostre  bonne  grace,  quoyque  les  menteurs  mentent.  Ce  26
d'Aoust.

No.  XXVIII. (Vol.  I.  p.  385.)

Queen  Elizabeth  to  the  Earl  of  Murray.

Paper  Of-  RIGHT  trusty  and  right  well  beloved  cousin,  we  greet
From  a  you  we^«  Where  we  hear  say,  that  certain  reports  are
copy  cor-  made  in  sundry  parts  of  Scotland,  that  whatsoever  should
sTcretar  ^  ^a^  ou*  now  uPon  tne  hearing  of  the  queen  of  Scotts'
Cecil.  cause,  in  any  proof  to  convince  or  to  acquit  the  said
queen  concerning  the  horrible  murder  of  her  late  husband  our
cousin,  we  have  determined  to  restore  her  to  her  kingdom  and
government,  we  do  so  much  mislike  hereof,  as  we  cannot  indure
the  same  to  receive  any  credit :  and  therefore  we  have  thought
good  to  assure  you,  that  the  same  is  untruly  devised  by  the  au-
thors to  our  dishonour.  For  as  we  have  been  always  certified  from
our  said  sister,  both  by  her  letters  and  messages,  that  she  is  by  no
means  guilty  or  participant  of  that  murder,  which  we  wish  to  be
true,  so  surely  if  she  should  be  found  justly  to  be  guilt j  thereof
as  hath  been  reported  of  her,  whereof  we  would  be  very  sorry,  then,
indeed,  it  should  behoove  us  to  consider  otherwise  of  her  cause
than  to  satisfy  her  desire  in  restitution  of  her  to  the  government  of
that  kingdom.  And  so  we  would  have  you  and  all  others  to  think,
that  should  be  disposed  to  conceive  honourably  of  us  and  our  ac-
tions.

Indorsed  20  Sept.  1568.

No.  XXIX. (Vol.  I.  p.  390.)

Sir  Francis  Knollys  to  Cecil,  the  9th  of  October  1568,  from  York.

An  Origi-  My  lord's  grace  of  Norfolk  sending  for  me  to  Bolton,  to
Office.3^  attend  upon  him  here  Thursday  last,  I  made  my  repair  hither
accordingly,  meaning  to  stay  here  until  Munday  next ;  as
touching  the  matters  of  the  commission,  that  his  grace  and  the
rest  have  from  her  highness,  his  grace  hath  imparted  unto  me  of  all
things  thereunto  appertaining,  and  what  hath  hitherto  passed,  and
altho'  the  matters  be  too  weighty  for  my  weak  capacity,  to  presume
to  utter  any  opinion  of  mine  own  thereof,  yet  I  see  that  my  lord
Herris  for  his  parte  laboureth  a  reconciliation,  to  be  had  without
the  extremity  of  odious  accusations ;  my  lord  of  Ledington  also
saith  to  me,  that  he  could  wish  these  matters  to  be  ended  in  dulce
manner,  so  that  it  might  be  done  with  safety  ;  of  the  rest  you  can
conceive,  by  the  advertisements  and  writings,  sent  up  by  our  com-
missioners.

APPENDIX.

377

A  Letter  from  the  Bishop  of  Ross  to  the  Queen  of  Scots,  from  York,

October  1568.

Cott.  Lib. PLEIS  your  majesty  I  conferred  at  length  with  A.  ane
A  copy. J*  great  Part  °f  a  nig*11?  wh°  assurit  me  that  he  had  reasoned
with  B.  this  Saturday C.  on  the  field,who  determinate  to  him
that  it  was  the  D.  determinit  purpose  not  to  end  your  cause  at  this
time,  but  to  hold  the  same  in  suspence,  and  did  that  was  in  her  power
to  make  the  E.  pursue  extremity,  to  the  effect  F.  and  his  adhe-
rents might  utter  all  they  could  to  your  dishonour,  to  the  effect  to
cause  you  come  in  disdain  with  the  hail  subjects  of  this  realm,  that
ye  may  be  the  mair  unable  to  attempt  any  thing  to  her  disadvan-
tage. And  to  this  effect  is  all  her  intention,  and  when  they  have
produced  all  they  can  against  you,  D.  will  not  appoint  the  matter
instantly,  but  transport  you  up  in  the  country,  and  retain  you
there  till  she  think  time  to  shew  you  favour,  which  is  not  likely  to
be  hastily,  because  of  your  uncles  in  France,  and  the  fear  she  has
of  yourself  to  be her  unfriend.  • And  therefore  their  counsel  is,
that  ye  write  an  writing  to  the  D.  meaning  that  ye  are  informit
that  your  subjects  which  has  offendit  you. — This  in  effect  that  your
majesty  hearing  the  estate  of  your  affairs  as  they  proceed  in  York,
was  informed  that  her  majesty  was  informed  of  you,  that  you  could
not  gudely  remit  your  subjects  in  such  sort  as  they  might  credit
you  hereafter,  which  was  a  great  cause  of  the  stay  of  this  contro-
versy to  be  ended. And  therefore  persuading  her  D.  effectually
not  to  trust  any  who  had  made  such  narration. But  like  as  ye
had  rendered  you  in  her  hands,  as  most  tender  to  you  of  any  living,
so  prayit  her  to  take  na  opinion  of  you,  but  that  ye  wald  use  her
counsell  in  all  your  affairs,  and  wald  prefer  her  friendship  to  all
others,  as  well  uncles  as  others,  and  assure  her  to  keep  that  thing
ye  wald  promise  to  your  subjects  by  her  advice. And  if  D.  dis-
credit you,  ye  wald  be  glad  to  satisfy  her  in  that  point  be  re-
moving within  her  realm  in  secret  and  quiet  manner,  where  her
G.  pleased,  until  the  time  her  G.  were  fully  satisfied,  and  all  oc-
casion of  discredit  removed  from  her. So  that  in  the  mean  time
your  realm  were  holden  in  quietness,  and  your  true  subjects  re-
stored and  maintained  in  their  own  estate, and sic  other  things
tending  to  this  effect. And  affirms  that  they  believe  that  this  may
be  occasion  to  cause  her  credit  you  that  ye  offer  so  far ;  and  it
may  come  that  within  two  or  three  months  she  may  become  better-
minded  to  your  grace,  for  now  she  is  not  well-minded,  and  will  not
shew  you  any  pleasure  for  the  causes  aforesaid.

N.  B. The  title  of  this  paper  is  in  Cecil's  hand ;  the  following
key  is  added  in  another  hand.

A.  The  laird  of  Lethington.

378  SCOTLAND.

B.  The  duke  of  Norfolk.

C.  Was  the  day  he  rode  to  Cawood.

D.  The  queen  of  England.

E.  The  queen  of  Scots  commissioners.

F.  The  earl  of  Murray.

No.  XXX. (Vol.  I.  p.  400.)
Deliberation  of  Secretary  Cecil's  concerning  Scotland. Dec.  21, 1568.

THE  best  way  for  England,  but  not  the  easiest ;  that  the
Paper  Of- queen  of  Scots  might  remain  deprived  of  her  crown,  and
the  state  continue  as  it  is.

The  second  way  for  England  profitable,  and  not  so  hard. — That
the  queen  of  Scots  might  be  induced,  by  some  perswasions,  to  agree
that  her  son  might  continue  king,  because  he  is  crowned,  and  her-
self to  remain  also  queen ;  and  that  the  government  of  the  realm
might  be  committed  to  such  persons  as  the  queen  of  England  should
name,  so  as  for  the  nomination  of  them  it  might  be  ordered,  that  a
convenient  number  of  persons  of  Scotland  should  be  first  named  to
the  queen  of  England,  indifferently  for  the  queen  of  Scots,  and  for
her  son,  that  is  to  say,  the  one  half  by  the  queen  of  Scots,  and  the
other  by  the  earle  of  Lennox,  and  lady  Lennox,  parents  to  the  child ;
and  out  of  those,  the  queen's  majesty  of  England  to  make  choice  for
all  the  officers  of  the  realm,  that  are,  by  the  laws  of  Scotland,  dis-
posable by  the  king  or  queen  of  the  land.

That  untill  this  may  be  done  by  the  queen's  majesty,  the  govern-
ment remain  in  the  hands  of  the  earle  of  Murray  as  it  is,  providing
he  shall  not  dispose  of  any  offices  or  perpetuals  to  continue  any  longer
but  to  these  offered  of  the  premises.

That  a  parliament  be  summoned  in  Scotland  by  several  com-
mandments, both  of  the  queen  of  Scots  and  of  the  young  king.

That  hostages  be  delivered  unto  England  on  the  young

king's  behalf,  to  the  number  of  twelve  persons  of  the  earle  of  Mur-
ray's part,  as  the  queen  of  Scots  shall  name ;  and  likewise  on  the
queen's  behalf,  to  the  like  number  as  the  earle  of  Murray  shall  name;
the  same  not  to  be  any  that  have  by  inheritance  or  qffice  cause  to
be  in  this  parliament,  to  remain  from  the  beginning  of  the  summons
of  that  parliament,  untill  three  months  after  that  parliament ;  which
hostages  shall  be  pledges,  that  the  friends  of  either  part  shall  keep
the  peace  in  all  cases,  till  by  this  parliament  it  be  concluded,  that
the  ordinance  which  the  queen  of  England  shall  devise  for  the  go-
vernment of  the  realm  (being  not  to  the  hurt  of  the  crown  of  Scot-
land, nor  contrary  to  the  laws  of  Scotland  for  any  man's  inheritance,
as  the  same  was  before  the  parliament  at  Edinr.  the  DecenT.

APPENDIX.  379

1567)  shall  be  established  to  be  kept  and  obeyed,  under  pain  of  high
treason  for  the  breakers  thereof.

—  That  by  the  same  parliament  also  be  established  all  execu-
tions and  judgments  given  against  any  person  for  the  death  of  the
late  king.

That  by  the  same  parliament,  a  remission  be  made  univer-
sally from,  the  queen  of  Scots  to  any  her  contrarys,  and  also  from
every  one  subject  to  another,  saving  that  restitution  be  made  of
lands  and  houses,  and  all  other  things  heritable,  that  have  been  by
either  side  taken  from  them  which  were  the  owners  thereof  at  the
committing  of  the  queen  of  Scots  to  Lochleven.

That  by  the  same  parliament  it  be  declared  who  shall  be  succes-
sors to  the  crown  next  after  the  Q.  of  Scots  and  her  issue ;  or  else,
that  such  right  as  the  D.  of  Chatelherault  had,  at  the  marriage  of
the  Q.  of  Scots  with  the  lord  Darnley,  may  be  conserved  and  not
prejudized.

That  the  Q.  of  Scots  may  have  leave  of  the  queen's  majesty  of
England,  twelve  months  after  the  said  parliament,  and  that  she  shall
not  depart  out  of  England,  without  special  licence  of  the  queen's
majesty.

That  the  young  king  shall  be  nourished  and  brought  up  in  Eng-
land, till  he  be  years  of  age.

It  is  to  be  considered,  that  in  this  cause  the  composition  between
the  queen  and  her  subjects  may  be  made  with  certain  articles,  out-
wardly to  be  seen  to  the  world  for  her  honour,  as  though  all  the  parts
should  come  of  her,  and  yet  for  the  surety  of  contrarys,  that  certain
betwixt  her  and  the  queen's  majesty  are  to  be  conclnded.

No.  XXXI. (Vol.  I.  p.  402.)

The  Queen  to  Sir  Francis  Knolleys,  22d  January,  1568-9.

WE  greet  you  well.  We  mean  not,  at  this  point,  by  any
Paper  Of-  writing?  to  renew  that  which  it  hath  pleased  God  to  make
grievous  to  us  and  sorryful  to  yow ;  but  forbearing  the
same  as  unmeet  at  this  point,  having  occasion  to  command  yow  in
our  service,  and  you  also  whilest  you  are  to  serve  us.  We  require
yow  to  consider  of  this  that  followeth  with  like  consideration  and
diligence,  as  hitherto  yow  have  accustumate  in  our  servise  ;  at  the
time  of  our  last  letters  written  to  yow  the  14th  of  this  month  for  re-
moving of  the  queen  of  Scots,  we  had  understanding  out  of  Scot-
land of  certain  writings  sent  by  her  from  thence  into  Scotland,
amongst  the  which  one  is  found  to  contain  great  and  manifest  un-
truths touching  us  and  others  also,  as  shall  and  may  plainly  appear
unto  yow  by  the  copy  of  the  same,  which  likewise  we  send  you,  and
because  at  the  same  time  we  were  advertised,  that  it  should  be  shortly

380  SCOTLAND.

proclaimed  in  Scotland,  though  then  it  was  not,  we  thought  good
first  to  remove  the  queen,  before  we  would  disclose  the  same,  and
then  expect  the  issue  thereof;  and  now,  this  day,  by  letters  from
our  cousin  of  Hunsdon  we  are  ascertained,  that  since  that  time  the
same  matters  contained  in  the  writing,  are  published  in  diverse  parts
of  Scotland,  whereupon  we  have  thought  it  very  meet,  for  the  dis-
charge of  our  honour,  and  to  confound  the  falsehood  contained  in
that  writting,  not  only  to  have  the  same  reproved  by  open  procla-
mation upon  our  frontiers,  the  coppy  whereof  we  do  herewith  send
yow,  but  also  in  convenient  sort  to  charge  that  queen  therewith,  so
as  she  may  be  moved  to  declare  the  authors  thereof,  and  persuaders
of  her  to  write  in  such  slanderous  sort  such  untruths  of  us  ;  and  in
the  mean  season,  we  have  here  stayed  her  commissioners,  knowing
no  other  whom  we  may  more  probably  presume  to  be  parties  here-
unto, than  they,  untill  the  queen  shall  name  some  other,  and  acquit
them;  who  being  generally  charged,  without  expressing  to  them
any  particular,  do  use  all  manner  of  speeches  to  discharge  them-
selves ;  wherefore  our  pleasure  is,  that  ye  shall,  after  ye  have  well
perused  the  coppy  of  this  writing  sent  to  yow,  speedily  declare  unto
her,  that  we  have  good  understanding  given  us  of  diverse  letters  and
writtings,  sent  by  her  into  Scotland,  signed  by  her  own  hand,
amongst  which  one  such  writting  is  sent  with  her  commandment,
expressly  as  now  it  is  already  published,  as  we  are  much  troubled
in  mind  that  a  princess  as  she  is  having  a  cause  in  our  hands  so  im-
plicated with  difficultys  and  calamitys,  should  either  conceave  in  her
own  mind,  or  allow  of  them  that  should  devise  such  false,  untrue,
and  improbable  matters  against  us,  and  our  honour,  and  specially
to  have  the  aventure  to  have  the  same  being  known  so  untrue  to
be  published  ;  and  you  shall  also  say,  because  we  will  not  think  so
ill  of  her,  as  that  it  should  proceed  of  her  self*,  but  rather  she  hath
been  counselled  thereunto,  or  by  abuse  made  to  think  some  part
thereof  to  be  true,  we  require  her,  even  as  she  may  look  for  any  fa-
vour at  our  hands,  that  she  will  disburden  herself  as  much  as  truly
she  may  herein,  and  name  them  which  have  been  the  authors  and
perswaders  thereof,  and  so  she  shall  make  as  great  amends  to  us  as
the  case  may  require ;  after  you  have  thus  far  proceeded,  and  had
some  answer  of  her,  whether  she  shall  deny  the  writing  absolutely,
or  name  any  that  have  been  the  advisers  thereof,  you  shall  say  unto
her  that  we  have  stayed  her  commissioners  here,  untill  we  may  have
some  answer  hereof,  because  we  cannot  but  impute  to  them  some
part  of  this  evil  dealing,  untill  by  her  answer  the  authors  may  be
known ;  and  as  soon  as  you  can  have  direct  answers  from  her,  we
pray  you  to  return  us  the  same ;  for  as  the  case  standeth,  we  can-
not but  be  much  disquieted  with  it,  having  our  honour  so  deeply
touched  contrary  to  any  intention  in  us,  and  for  any  thing  we  know

APPENDIX.  381

in  our  judgment  the  earl  of  Murray  and  others  named  in  the  same
•writting,  void  of  thought  for  the  matters,  to  them  therein  imputed  ;
you  may  impart  to  the  queen  of  Scots  either  the  contents  of  the
slanderous  letter,  or  shew  her  the  copy  to  read  it,  and  you  may
also  impart  this  matter  to  the  lord  Scroop,  to  join  with  you  there  as
you  shall  think  meet.

Sir  Francis  Knolleys  to  Queen  Elizabeth,  from  Wetherby,  the  28M
January,  1568.

An  original. — ^  WILL  suppress  my  own  grieffs,  and  pass  them  over
Paper  Of-  with  silence,  for  the  present  learning  of  your  majesty — •
'  and  for  this  queen's  answer  to  the  coppie  of  her  supposed

letter  sent  unto  Scotland,  I  must  add  this  unto  my  brother's  letter,
sent  unto  Mr.  Secretary  yesternight  late ;  in  process  of  time  she
did  not  deny  but  that  the  first  lines  contained  in  the  same  copie,
was  agreeable  to  a  letter  that  she  had  sent  unto  Scotland,  which
touched  my  lord  of  Murray's  promise  to  deliver  her  son  into  your
majesty's  hands,  and  to  avoid  that  the  same  should  not  be  done
without  her  consent,  made  her,  she  saith,  to  write  in  that  behalf;
she  saith  also  that  she  wrote  that  they  should  cause  a  proclamation
to  be  made  to  stir  her  people  to  defend  my  lord  of  Murray's  intent
and  purpose,  for  delivering  of  her  said  son,  and  impunge  his  rebel-
lious government,  as  she  termed  it,  but  she  utterly  denyeth  to  have
written  any  of  the  other  slanderous  parts  of  the  said  letter  touching
your  majesty;  she  said  also,  that  she  suspected  that  a  Frenchman,
now  in  Scotland,  might  be  the  author  of  some  Scotch  letters  devised
in  her  name,  but  she  would  not  allow  me  to  write  this  for  any  part
of  her  answer.

No.  XXXII. (Vol.  I.  p.  409.)

Sir  Nicholas  ThroJcmorton  to  the  Right  Honourable  the  Lord  of

Liddington.

20th  of  YOUR  letter  of  the  3d  of  July,  I  have  received  the  15th
From  the9'  °^  ^e  same'  For  answer  whereunto  you  shall  understand
original,  that  friends  here  to  my  lord  regent  and  you  do  wish  such
a  concurrence  in  all  doings,  as  in  matter  and  circumstances  there
arise  no  dissension,  or  at  the  least,  no  more  nor  other  than  the  dif-
ference of  countries  doth  necessarily  require.  We  here  do  think
convenient  that  as  few  delays  be  used  as  may  be,  for  the  consum-
mation of  the  matter  in  hand,  which  principally  to  advance  your
allowance,  prosecution,  and  speedy  promotion  in  Scotland,  is  most
requisite,  for  you  are  so  wise,  and  well  acquainted  with  the  state  of
the  world,  and  with  all  our  humours,  as  you  know  that  some  do  allow
and  disallow  for  reason,,  some  for  respect  of  multitude,  some  for

382  SCOTLAND.

respect  of  persons,  and  so  the  cause  is  to  go  forward  as  men  do  like
to  set  it  forward. You  are  not  to  seek  that  some  will  use  cautions,
some  neutrality,  some  delays,  and  some  will  plainly  impunge  it.
And  yet  all  and  every  of  these  sorts  will  alter  their  doings,  when
they  shall  see  the  regent  and  his  favourers  accord  with  the  best  and
greatest  part  there,  and  agree  with  the  wisest  and  strongest  party
here. Tho'  the  matter  has  taken  its  beginning  here,  upon  deep  and
weighty  considerations,  for  the  weil  of  both  the  princes  and  their
realms,  as  well  presently  as  in  time  to  come,  yet  it  is  thought  most
expedient  that  the  regent,  and  realm  of  Scotland,  by  you,  should
propose  the  matter  to  the  queen  our  sovereign,  if  you  like  to  use
convenience,  good  order,  or  be  disposed  to  leave  but  a  scar,  and  no
wound  of  the  hurts  past. I  would  be  glad  that  this  my  letter  should
come  to  your  hands  before  the  convention,  whereat  it  seems  your
queen's  restoration  and  marriage  to  the  duke  of  Norfolk  shall  be
propounded,  either  to  wynne  in  them  both  allowance  or  rejection.
To  which  proceedings,  because  you  pray  me  to  write  frankly,  I  say
and  reason  thus,  me  thinketh  you  use  a  preposterous  order  to  de-
mand the  consent  of  such  persons,  in  such  matters,  as  their  minds
to  a  good  end  hath  rather  been  felt  or  prepared,  and  therefore
there  must  needs  follow  either  a  universal  refusal,  or  factious  divi-
sion amongst  you,  whereby  a  bloustering  intelligence  must  needs
come  to  queen  Elizabeth  of  the  intended  marriage  from  thence,
which  ought  to  have  been  secretly  and  advisedly  propounded  unto
her  highness  ;  hereby  you  see  then  the  meaning  is,  by  this  dealing,
her  majesty  shall  be  made  inexorable,  and  so  bring  the  matter  to
such  passe,  as  this  which  should  have  wrought  surety,  quietness,
and  a  stay  to  both  queens  and  their  realms,  shall  augment  your
calamity,  and  throw  us  your  best  friends  into  diverse  with  you,  and
into  unhappy  division  amongst  ourselves ;  for  you  may  not  conjec-
ture that  the  matter  is  now  in  deliberation,  but  expecteth  good  occa-
sion for  executing ;  sure  I  am  you  do  not  judge  so  slenderly  of  the
managing  of  this  matter,  as  to  think  we  have  not  cast  the  worst,  or
to  enter  therein  so  far  without  the  assistance  of  the  nobility,  the
ablest,  the  wisest,  and  the  mightiest  of  this  realm,  except  queen
Elizabeth  :  from  whom  it  hath  been  concealed  until  you,  as  the  fit-
test minister,  might  propound  it  to  her,  on  th»  behalf  of  the  regent,
and  the  nobility  of  Scotland. How  far  master  Woddes  defamations
do  carry  them  of  queen  Elizabeth's  affections, and  master  Secre-
tary's, to  assist  the  regent  and  to  suppress  the  queen  of  Scots,  I
know  not,  nor  it  is  not  material ;  but  I  do  assuredly  tjiink,  that  her
majesty  will  prefer  her  surety,  the  tranquillity  of  her  reign,  and  the
conversation  of  her  people,  before  any  device,  which  may  proceed
from  vain  discourse,  or  imperfections  of  passions  and  inconsiderate
affections. And  as  for  Mr.  Secretary,  you  are  not  to  learn  that  as

APPENDIX.

383

he  liketh  not  to  go  too  fast  afore,  so  he  coveteth  not  to  tarry  too  far
behind,  and  specially  when  the  reliques  be  of  no  great  value  nor
power.  If  I  could  as  well  assure  you  of  his  magnanimity,  and  con-
stancy, as  of  his  present  conformity,  I  would  say  confidently,  you
may  repose  as  well  of  him  in  this  matter,  as  of  the  duke  of  Norfolk,
the  earls  of  Arundel,  Pembroke,  Leicester,  Bedford,  Shrewsbury,
and  the  rest  of  the  nobility ;  all  which  do  embrace  and  proteste  the
accomplishment  of  this  case.  I  have,  according  to  your  advice,
written  presently  to  my  lord  regent,  with  the  same  zeal  and  care  of
his  well-doing  that  I  owe  to  him,  whom  I  love  and  honour.  Mr.  Secre-
tary hath  assured  unto  him  the  queen  of  Scotland's  favour  and  good
opinion,  wherewith  he  seemeth  to  be  well  satisfy 'd.  If  your  credit
be,  as  I  trust,  hasten  your  coming  hither,  for  it  is  very  necessary
that  you  were  here  presently.  Q.  Elizabeth  both  doth  write  to  my
lord  regent  in  such  sort,  as  he  may  perceive  Mr.  Wood's  discourses
of  her  majesty's  affection  to  be  vain,  and  Mr.  Secretary  otherwise
bent  than  he  conjectureth  of  him,  the  effect  of  which  her  majesty's
letter  you  shall  understand,  by  my  lord  Leicester's  letter  unto  you
at  this  dispatch.  At  the  court,  20th  July,  1569.

No.  XXXIII. (Vol.  I.  p.  410.)

Part  of  a  Letter  from  the  Earl  of  Murray  to  L.  B.
probably  Lord  Burleigh.

1569  — BECAUSE  I  see  that  great  advantage  is  taken  on  small
Harl.  Lib.  occasions,  and  that  the  mention  of  the  marriage  betwixt
37.  B.  9.  the  queen  my  sovereign's  mother,  and  the  D.  of  Norfolk
hath  this  while  past  been  very  frequent  in  both  the  realms,
and  then  I  myself  to  be  spoken  of  as  a  motioner,  which  I  perceive
is  at  the  last  come  to  her  majesty's  ears  ;  I  will,  for  satisfaction  of
her  highness,  and  the  discharge  of  my  duty  towards  her  majesty,
manifest  unto  you  my  interest,  and  medling  in  that  matter,  from
the  very  beginning,  knowing  whatsoever  is  prejudicial  to  her  high-
ness, cannot  but  be  hurtful  to  the  king  my  sovereign,  this  his  realm,
and  me.  What  conferences  was  betwixt  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  and
any  of  them  that  were  with  me  within  the  realm  of  England,  I  am
not  able  to  declare ;  but  I  am  no  wise  forgetful  of  any  thing  that
passed  betwixt  him  and  me,  either  at  that  time,  or  since.  And  to
the  end  her  majesty  may  understand  how  I  have  been  dealt  with  in
this  matter,  I  am  compelled  to  touch  some  circumstances,  before
there  was  any  mention  of  her  marriage.  In  York,  at  the  meeting
of  all  the  commissioners,  I  found  very  —  and  neutral  dealing  with
the  duke,  and  others  her  highness's  commissioners,  in  the  beginning
of  the  cause,  as  in  the  making  of  the  others  to  proceed  sincerely,
and  so  furth.  During  which  time,  I  entered  into  general  speech,

384  SCOTLAND.

sticking  at  our  just  defence  in  the  matters  that  were  objected  against
us,  by  the  said  queen's  commissioners,  looking  certainly  for  no
other  thing,  but  summary  cognition  in  the  cause  of  controversy,
with  a  final  declaration  to  have  followed.  Upon  a  certain  cla'y  the
lord  Lithington's  secretary  rode  with  the  duke  to  Howard,  what  pur-
pose they  had  I  cannot  say,  but  that  night  Lithington  returning,  and
entring  into  conferrence  with  me  upon  the  state  of  our  action,  I  was
advised  by  him  to  pass  to  the  duke,  and  require  familiar  confer-
rence, by  the  which  I  might  have  some  feeling  to  what  issue  pur
matters  would  tend.  According  to  which  advice,  having  gotten
time  and  place  convenient  in  the  gallery  of  the  house  where  the
duke  was  lodged,  after  renewing  of  our  first  acquaintance  made  at
Berwick,  the  time  before  the  assize  of  Leith,  and  some  speeches
passed  betwixt  us  ;  he  began  to  say  to  me,  how  he  in  England  had
favour  and  credit,  and  I  in  Scotland  had  will  and  friendship  of
many,  it  was  to  be  tho't  there  could  be  none  more  fit  instruments,
to  travel  for  the  continuance  of  the  amity  betwixt  the  realms,  than
we  two.  And  so  that  discourse  upon  the  present  state  of  both,
and  how  I  was  entered  in  that  action  tending  so  far  to  the  queen's
dishonour,  I  was  willed  by  him  to  consider  how  matters  stood  in
this,  what  honour  I  had  received  of  the  queen,  and  what  inconve-
niences her  defamation  in  the  matters  laid  to  her  charge  might
breed  to  her  posteiity.  Her  respect  was. not  little  to  the  crown  of
England,  there  was  but  one  heir.  The  Hamiltons,  my  unfriends,
had  the  next  respect,  and  that  I  should  esteem  the.  issue  of  her
body  would  be  the  more  affectionate  to  me  and  mine,  than  any  other
that  could  attain  to  that  crown.  And  so  it  should  be  meetest,  that
she  affirmed  her  dismission  made  in  Lochlevin,  and  we  to  abstract
the  letters  of  her  hand  write,  that  she  should  not  be  defamed  in
England.  My  reply  to  that  was,  how  the  matter  had  passed  in
parliament,  and  the  letters  seen  of  many,  so  that  the  abstracting  of
the  same  could  not  then  secure  h'er  to  any  purpose,  and  yet  should
we,  in  that  doing,  bring  the  ignominy  upon  us.  Affirming  it  would
not  be  fair  for  us  that  way  to  proceed,  seeing  the  queen's  majesty
of  England  was  not  made  privy  to  the  matter  as  she  ought  to  be,
in  respect  we  were  purposely  come  in  England  for  that  end,  and
for  the  —  of  the  grants  of  our  cause.  The  duke's  answer  was,  he
would  take  in  hand  to  handle  matters  well  enough  at  the  court.
After  this,  on  the  occasion  of  certain  articles,  that  were  required  to
be  resolved  on  before  we  entered  on  the  declaration  of  the  very
ground  of  our  action,  we  came  up  to  the  court;  where  some  new
commissioners  were  adjoined  to  the  former,  and  the  hearing  of  the
matter  ordained  to  be  in  the  parliament-house  at  Westminster,  in

presence  of  which  commissioners  of  the  said  queen, and  •

through  the rebuking  of  the  queen  of  England's  own  com

APPENDIX.

385

missioners,  we  uttered  the  whole  of  the  action,  and  produced
such  evidences,  letters,  and  probations,  as  we  had,  which  might
move  the  queen's  majesty  to  think  well  of  our  cause.  Where-
upon expecting  her  highness"  declaration,  and  seeing  no  great
likelihood  of  the  same  to  be  suddenly  given,  but  daily  motions
then  made  to  come  to  an  accord  with  the  said  queen,  our  mat*
ters  in  hand  in  Scotland,  in  the  mean  season,  standing  in  ha-
zard and  danger,  we  were  put  to  the  uttermost  point  off  our  wit,
to  imagine  whereunto  the  matters  would  tend,  tho'  albeit  we  had
left  nothing  undone  for  justification  of  our  causes,  yet  appeared  no
end,  but  continual  motions  made  to  come  to  some  accord  with  the
queen,  and  restore  her  to  whole  or  half  reign.  I  had  no  other
answer  to  give  them,  but  that  I  should  neither  do  against  conscience
or  honour  in  that  matter.  Notwithstanding  seeing  this  my  plain
answer  wrought  no  end,  nor  dispatch  to  us,  and  that  I  was  informed
that  the  duke  began  to  mislike  of  me,  and  to  speak  of  me,  as  that
Probably  I  had  reported  of  the  said  queen  irreverently,  calling  her

adulterer* an(j  murderer,  I  was  advised  to  pass  to  him,  and

give  him  good  words,  and  to  purge  myself  of  the  things  objected  to
me,  that  I  should  not  open  the  sudden  entry  of  his  evil  grace,  nor

have  him  to  our  enemy considering  his  greatness. It  being

therewithal  whispered  and  shewed  to  me,  that  if  I  departed,  he
standing  discontented  and  not  satisfied,  I  might  peradventure  find
such  trouble  in  my  way,  as  my  throat  might  be  cut  before  I  came
to  Berrick.  And  therefore,  since  it  might  well  enough  appear  to
her  marriage,  I  should  not  put  him  in  utter  despair,  that  my  good
will  could  not  be  had  therein.  So  few  days  before  my  departing,  I
came  to  the  park  in  Hampton-court,  where  the  duke  and  I  met  to-
gether, and  there  I  declared  unto  him  that  it  was  come  to  my  ears,
how  some  misreport  should  be  made  of  me  to  him,  as  that  I  should
speak  irreverently  and  rashly  of  the  said  queen  my  sovereign's  mo-

Probably tner» sucn  words  as  before  expressed,  that  he  might —

suspect,  thereby  ray  affection  to  be  so  alienate  from  her,  as  that  I
could  not  love  her,  nor  be  content  of  her  preferment,  howbeit  he
might  perswade  himself  of  the  contrary,  for  as  she  once  was  the
person  in  the  world  I  loved  best,  having  that  honour  to  be  so  near
unto  her,  and  having  received  such  advancement  and  honour  by
her,  I  was  not  so  ungrate  or  so  unnatural  ever  to  wish  her  body
harm,  or  to  speak  of  her  as  was  untruly  reported  of  me  (howsoever
the  truth  was  in  the  self),  and  as  to  the  preservation  of  her  son,  now
my  sovereign,  had  moved  me  to  enter  into  this  cause,  and  that  her
own  pressing  was  the  occasion  of  that  which  was  uttered  to  her

Probably whensoever  God  should  move  her  heart  to  repent

dishonour.  of  ner  bypast  behaviour  and  life,  and  after  her  known  re-
pentance, that  she  should  be  separate  from  that  ungodly  and  unlaw-

VOL. II.

2  c

386  SCOTLAND.

ful  marriage  that  she  was  entred  in,  and  then  after  were  joined  with
such  a  godly  and  honourable  a  personage,  as  were  affectioned  to
the  true  religion,  and  whom  we  might  trust,  I  could  find  in  my  heart
to  love  her,  and  to  shew  her  as  great  pleasure,  favour,  and  good  will,
as  ever  I  did  in  my  life ;  and  in  case  he  should  be  that  personage,

there  was  none  whom  I  could  better  like  of,  the  queen in

of  England  being  made  privy  to  the  matter,  and  she  allowing

thereof,  which  being  done,  I  should  labour  in  all  things  that  I  could,
to  her  honour  and  pleasure,  that  were  not  prejudicial  to  the  king
my  sovereign's  estate,  and  prayed  him  not  to  think  otherwise  of  me,
for  my  affection  was  rather  buried  and  hidden  within  me,  awaiting
until  God  should  direct  her  to  know  herself,  than  utterly  alienated
and  abstracted  from  her ;  which  he  seemed  to  accept  in  very  good
part,  saying,  earl  of  Murray,  thou  thinks  of  me  that  thing,  where-
unto  I  will  make  none  in  England  or  Scotland  privy,  and  thou  hast
Norfolk's  life  in  thy  hands.  So  departing,  I  came  to  my  lodging,
and  by  the  way  and  all  night,  I  was  in  continual  thought  and  agi-
tation of  mind,  how  to  behave  myself  in  that  weighty  matter,  first
imagining  whereunto  this  should  tend,  if  it  were  attempted  without
the  queen's  majesty  of  England's  knowledge  and  good  will,  this
realm  and  I  myself  in  particular  having  received  such  favour  and
comfort  at  her  highness's  hands,  and  this,  whole  isle  such  peace  and
quietness,  since  God  possessed  her  majesty  with  her  crown.  And
on  the  other  part,  seeing  the  duke  had  disclosed  him  to  me,  pro-
testing, none  other  were  or  should  be  privy  to  our  speech,  I  tho't  I
could  not  find  in  my  heart  to  utter  any  thing  that  might  endanger
him ;  moved  to  the  uttermost  with  these  cogitations,  and  all  desire
of  sleep  then  removed,  I  prayed  God  to  send  me  some  good  relief
and  outgate,  to  my  discharge  and  satisfaction  of  my  troubled  mind,
which  I  found  indeed ;  for  upon  the  morn,  or  within  a  day  or  two
thereafter,  I  entered  in  conversation  with  my  lord  of  Leicester,  in
his  chamber  at  the  court,  where  he  began  to  find  strange  with  me,
that  in  the  matter  I  made  so  difficult  to  him,  standing  so  precisely
on  conferrence,  and  how  when  I  had  in  my  communication  with  the

duke,  come  so  far and  there  he  made  some  discourse  with  me,

about  that  which  was  talke  betwixt  us,  I  perceiving  that  the  duke
Probably  na(l  — * —  tne  matter  to  my  lord  of  Leicester,  and  thinking
disclosed,  me  thereby  discharged  at  the  duke's  hands,  therefore  I  re-
peated the  same  communication  in  every  point  to  my  lord  of  Leices-
ter, who  desired  me  to  shew  the  same  to  the  queen's  majesty,  which
I  refused  to  do,  willing  him  if  he  tho't  it  might  import  her  highness
any  thing,  that  he  as  one by  her  majesty,  and  for  many  be-
nefits received  at  her  highness's  hands  is  obliged  to  wish  her  well,
should  make  declaration  of  the  same  to  her  majesty,  as  I  under-
stand by  some  speech  of  her  highness  to  me,  he  did.  This  my

APPENDIX.  .387

declaration  to  the  duke  was  the  only  cause,  that  staid  the  violence
and  trouble  prepared  for  me  unexecuted,  as  I  hare  divers  ways  un-
derstood. The  same  declaration  I  was  obliged  to  renew  since  in

writings  of sent  to  my  servant  John  Wood.  The  sum  whereof,

I  trust,  he  shewed  the  duke,  and  something  also  I  wrote  to  himself,
for  it  was  tho't  this  should  redeem  some  time,  that  the  duke  should
not  suddenly  declare  him  our  enemy,  for  his  greatness  was  oft  laid
before  me,  and  what  friendship  he  had  of  the  chief  of  the  nobility
in  England,  so  that  it  might  appear  to  the  queen's  majesty  of  Eng-
land  so  cold  to  wards  us,  and  doing  nothing  publicly  that  might

seem  favourable  for  us,  we  had  some  cause  to  suspect  that  her  high-
ness should  not  be  contrarious  to  the  marriage  when  it  should  be
proposed  to  her.  The  sharp  message  sent  by  her  majesty  with  the
lord  Boyd,  who  had  the  like  commission  from  the  duke  tending  so
far  to  the  said  queen's  preferment,  as  it  were  proposing  one  manner
of  conditions  from  both,  gave  us  to  think  that  her  highness  had  been
foreseen  in  the  duke's  design,  and  that  she  might  be  induced  to  allow
thereof.  But  howbeit  it  was  devised  in  England,  that  the  lord  of
Lethington  should  come  as  from  me,  and  break  the  matter  to  her
highness,  as  her  majesty  in  a  letter  declared  that  she  looked  for  his
coming,  yet  that  devise  proceeded  never  of  me,  nor  the  noblemen  at
the  convention  could  no  wise  accord  to  his  sending,  nor  allow  of  the
matter  motioned,  but  altogether  misliked  it,  as  bring  with  the  same
great  inconveniences  to  the  surety  and  quietness  of  this  whole  isle;
for  ourproceedings  have  declared  our  misliking  and  disallowance  of
the  purpose  from  the  beginning,  and  if  we  had  pleased  he  was  ready
for  the  journey.  And  in  likewise  it  was  devised  to  give  consent

Probably that  the  between  the  said  queen  and  Bothwell,

divorce.  should  be  suffered  to  proceed  in  this  realm,  as  it  was  de-
sired by  the  said  lord  Boyd,  by  reason  we  could  not  understand  what
was  the  queen's  majesty's  pleasure,  and  allowance  in  that  behalf

And  whereas  ye  mean,  that  her  highness  was  not  made  privy

of  any  such  intention,  the  fault  was  not  in  me.  The  first  motion
being  declared,  as  I  have  written,  to  my  lord  of  Leicester,  and  by
him  imparted  to  her  majesty,  so  far  as  I  could  perceive  by  some
speech  of  her  highness's  to  me,  before  my  departing.  Thus  I  have
plainly  declared  how  I  have  been  dealt  withal  for  this  marriage,  and
how  jfust  necessity  moved  me  not  to  require  directly,  that  which  the

duke  appeared  so unto. And  for  my  threatenings,  to  assent

to  the  same,  I  have  expressed  the  manner  ;  the  persons  that  laid  the
matter  before  me,  were  of  my  own  company.  But  the  duke  since
hath  spoken,  that  it  was  his  writing  which  saved  my  life  at  that  time.
In  conclusion  I  pray  you  persuade  her  majesty,  that  she  let  no
speeches  nor  any  other  thing  passed  and  objected  to  my  prejudice,
move  her  majesty  to  alter  her  favour  —  towards  me,  or  any  ways  to

2  c  2

388  .SCOTLAND.

doubt  of  my  assured  constancy  towards  her  highness;  for  in  any
thing  which  may  tend  to  her  honour  and  surety,  I  will,  while  I  live,
bestow  myself,  and  all  that  will  do  for  me,  notwithstanding  my
hazard  or  danger,  as  proof  shall  declare,  when  her  majesty  finds
time  to  employ  me.

No.  XXXIV. (Vol.  II.  p.  2.)

William  Maitland  of  Ledington,to  my  Lord  of  Leicester,  March  20M,
1570,  from  Ledington.

An  origi-  THE  great  desolation  threatened  to  this  whole  realm,  be
nal-  the  divisions  thereof  in  dangerous  factions,  doth  press  me

to  frame  my  letters  to  your  lordship,  in  other  sort,  than  were  be-
hovefull  for  me,  if  I  had  no  other  respect,  but  only  to  maintain  my
private  credit;  therefore  I  am  driven  to  furnish  them  with  matter,
which  I  know  not  to  be  plausible,  whereupon  by  misconstruing  my
meaning,  some  there  may  take  occasion  of  offence,  thinking  that  I
rather  utter  my  own  passions,  than  go  about  to  inform  your  lord-
ship truly  of  the  state ;  but  I  trust  my  plain  dealing  shall  bear  re-
cord to  the  sincerity  of  my  meaning ;  to  make  the  same  sensible,  I
will  lay  before  your  lordship's  eyes  the  plat  of  this  country;  which
first  is  divided  into  two  factions,  the  one  pretending  the  mainte-
nance of  the  king's  reign,  the  other  alledging  the  queen  to  have
been  cruelly  dealt  withall,  and  unjustly  deprived  of  her  state ;  the
former  is  composed  of  a  good  number  of  nobility,  gentlemen,  and
principal  burroughs  of  the  realme,  who  shall  have,  as  Mr.  Randolph
beareth  us  in  hand,  the  queen's  majesty  your  sovereign's  allowance
and  protection ;  the  other  hath  in  it  some  most  principall  of  the
nobility,  and  therewithall,  good  numbers  of  the  inferior  sort,
throughout  the  whole  realm,  which  also  look  assuredly  that  all
kings  do  allow  their  quarrel  and -will  aid  them  accordingly.  What
consequence  this  division  will  draw  after  it,  I  leave  it  to  your  lord-
ship's consideration ;  there  is  fallen  out  another  division,  acciden-
tally, by  my  lord  regent's  death,  which  is  like  to  change  the  state  of
the  other  two  factions,  to  increase  the  one,  and  diminish  the  other,
which  is  grounded  upon  the  regiment  of  the  realm.  Some  number
of  noblemen  aspire  to  the  government,  pretending  right  thereto  by
reason  of  the  queen's  demission  of  the  croun,  and  her  commission
granted  at  that  time  for  the  regiment  during  the  king's  minority ;
another  faction  doth  altogether  repine  against  that  division,  think-
ing it  neither  fit  nor  tolerable,  that  three  or  four  of  the  meanest  sort
amongst  the  earls,  shall  presume  to  challenge  to  themselves  a  rule
over  the  whole  realme,  the  next  of  the  blood,  the  first  in  rank,  the
greatest  alway  both  for  the  antientry  of  their  houses,  degree,  and
forces,  being  negleckted ;  this  order  they  think  preposterous,  that

APPENDIX.  389

the  meaner  sort  shall  be  placed  in  public  function  to  command,  and
the  greater  shall  continue  as  private  men  to  obey;  besides  that,
they  think  if  the  commission  had  in  the  beginning  been  valewable
(which  the  most  part  will  not  grant),  yet  can  it  not  be  extended  to
the  present,  for  that  the  conditions  thereunto  annexed  are  ceased,
and  so  the  effect  of  the  whole  void ;  the  latter  part  of  this  division
hath many  pretences,  for  besides  the  queen's  faction,  which  is
wholly  on  that  side,  a  great  number  of  these  that  have  heretofore
professed  the  king's  obedience,  do  favour  the  same,  and  will  not
yield  to  the  government  of  the  other,  whose  preferment  for  respects
they  mislike,  when  the  queen's  faction  shall  be  increased,  with  a
part  of  the  king's,  and  these  not  of  least  substance,  and  yow  may
judge  what  is  like  to  ensue  ;  another  incident  is  like  to  move  men
to  enter  in  further  discourses,  it  is  given  out  here  in  Scotland  that
the  queen's  majesty  is  setting  forth  some  forces  towards  the  border,
which  shall  enter  this  realm,  to  countenance  these  that  aspire  to  the
regiment,  and  suppress  the  contrary  faction,  and  bruits  are  spread,
that  the  same  shall  be  here  out  of  hand;  these  that  think  themselves
of  equal  force  with  their  contrary  faction  at  home,  or  rather  an  over-
match to  them,  yet  not  able  to  encounter  with  the  forces  of  another
prince,  rather  than  yield  to  their  inferiors,  will  I  fear,  take  advice  of
necessity,  and  evill  councillors,  and  seek  also  the  maintenance  of
some  foreign  prince,  whereby  her  majesty  (altho'  no  further  incon-
venient were  to  be  feared)  must  be  driven  to  excessive  charges,
and  it  would  appear  there  were  a  conspiracy  of  all  the  elements  at
one  time  to  set  us  together  by  the  ears,  for  now,  when  the  rumour  of
your  forces  coming  towards  the  border  is  spread  abroad,  even  at  the
same  time  is  arrived  at  Dumbarton,  a  galzeon  with  a  messenger  sent
expressly  from  the  king  of  France,  to  that  part  of  the  nobility  that
favours  the  queen,  to  learn  the  state  of  the  country,  and  what  sup-
port they  lack  or  desire,  either  for  furtherance  of  her  affairs,  or  for
their  own  safety ;  assuredly  this  message  will  be  well  received,  and
suffered  accordingly,  this  is  the  present  state  of  Scotland. Now,  if
your  lordship  would  also  know  my  opinion,  how  to  choice  the  best,
as  the  case  standeth ;  I  will  in  that  also  satisfie  your  lordship  I  am
required  from  them  to  deal  plainly,  and  your  lordship  shall  judge
wither  I  do  so  or  not;  for  I  think  it  plain  dealing,  when  I  simply  ut-
ter my  judgment,  and  go  not  about  to  disguise  my  intents. I  trust
the  queen's  majesty  hath  a  desire  to  retain  at  her  devotion  the  realme
of  Scotland,  which  she  hath  gone  about  to  purchase,  with  bestowing,
great  charges,  and  the  loss  of  some  of  her  people;  this  desire  is
honourable  for  her  highness,  profitable  for  both  the  countreys,  and
of  none  to  be  disallowed  ;  specially  if  it  be  (as  I  take  it)  to  have  the
amity  of  the  whole  realm,  for  it  is  not  a  portion  of  Scotland  .can
serve  her  turn,  nor  .will  it  prove  commodious  for  her  to  suit  the

390  SCOTLAND.

friendship  of  a  faction  of  Scotland,  for  in  so  doing,  in  gaining  the
best,  she  may  lose  the  more,  and  the  same  would  bring  all  her  ac-
tions with  us  in  suspicion,  if  she  should  go  about  to  nourish  factions
amongst  us,  which  meaning  I  am  sure  never  entered  into  her  majes-
ty's heart ;  then  if  it  be  the  friendship  of  the  whole  she  doth  demand,
let  her  not,  for  pleasure  of  one  part,  go  about  to  overthrow  the  rem-
nant, which  will  not  be  so  faisable,  as  some  may  give  her  to  under-
stand ;  but  rather  by  way  of  treaty,  let  her  go  about  to  pacify  the
whole  state,  bring  the  parties  to  an  accord,  reduce  us  all  by  good
means  to  an  uniformity,  so  shall  she  give  us  all  occasion  to  think
well  of  her  doings,  that  she  tendeth  our  wealth,  and  provoks  us
universally  to  wish  unto  her  majesty  a  most  prosperous  continuance;
by  the  contrary,  if,  for  the  pleasure  of  a  few,  she  will  send  forces  to
suppress  these  whom  theymislike,  and  so  consequently  offend  many ;
men  be  not  so  faint  hearted,  but  they  have  courage  to  provide  for
their  own  safty,  and  not  only  will  embrace  the  means  partly  offered,
but  will  also  procure  further,  at  the  hand  of  other  princes.  This
for  mine  own  part,  I  do  abhorr,  and  protest  I  desire  never  to
see  forces  of  strangers  to  set  foot  within  this  land,  yet  I  know  not
what  point  necessity  may  drive  men  into,  as  if  men  in  the  middle  of
the  sea  were  in  a  ship,  which  suddenly  should  be  set  on  fire,  the  fear
of  burning  would  make  them  leap  into  the  sea,  and  soon  after  the
fear  of  the  watter  would  drive  them  to  clieve  again  to  the  fired  ship,
so  for  avoiding  present  evil,  men  will  many  times  be  inforced  to  have
recourse  to  another,  no  less  dangerous.  Trust  me  forces  will  not
bring  forth  any  good  fruit  to  her  majesty's  behove,  it  must  be  some
way  of  treaty  shall  serve  the  turn,  wherein  by  my  former  letters  your
lordship  doth  know  already  what  is  my  judgement;  you  see  how
plainly  I  do  write,  without  consideration  in  what  part  my  letters  may
be  taken,  yet  my  hope  is  that  such  as  will  favourably  interpret  them,
shall  think  that  I  mean  as  well  to  her  majesty  and  that  realme,  as
these  that  will  utter  other  language.  I  wish  the  continuance  of  the
amity  betwixt  the  two  contrys,  without  other  respect,  and  will  not
conceal  from  her  majesty  any  thing,  to  my  knowledge,  tending  to
the  prejudice  thereof;  if  I  shall  perceave  her  majesty  taking  frank
dealings  in  evil  part,  I  shall  from  thenceforth  forbear ;  in  the  mean
season,  I  will  not  cease  to  trowble  your  lordship,  as  I  shall  have
occasion  to  write,  and  so  I  take  my  leave  of  your  lordship.

No.  XXXV.  (Vol.  II.  p.  7.)

Letter  of  Queen  Elizabeth  to  the  Earle  of  Sussefo,  July  2d,  1570.

c  RIGHT  trusty  and  well  beloved  cousin  we  greet  you

MS.  His- well ;  this  day  we  have  received  your  letters  of  '28  the  last

tory,  vol.  2.  month,  with  all  other  letters,  sent  from  Scotland,  and

mentioned  in  your  letters,  whereunto  answer  is  desired  to

APPENDIX.  391

be  given  before  the  10th  of  this  month  ;  which  is  a  very  short  time,
the  weigh tiness  of  the  matters,  and  the  distance  of  the  places  con-
sidered ;  nevertheless  we  have,  as  the  shortness  could  suffer  it,  re-
solved to  give  this  answer  following,  which  we  will  that  yow,  by
warrand  hereof,  shall  cause  to  be  given  in  our  name  to  the  earl  of
Lennox  and  the  rest  of  the  noblemen  conveend  with  him.  Where  it
is  by  them,  in  their  letters,  and  writings  alledg'd,  that  for  lack  of  our
resolute  answer,  concerning  the  establishing  of  the  regiment  of  the
realm,  under  their  young  king,  great  inconveniences  have  happned,
and  therefore  they  have  deferred  now  at  their  last  convention  to  de-
termine of  the  samine,  who  shall  have  the  place  of  governour,  until
the  21st  this  month,  before  which  time  they  require  to  have  our  ad-
vise, in  what  person  or  persons  the  government  of  that  realm  shall  be
established,  we  accept  very  thankfull  the  good  will  and  reputation
they  have  of  us,  in  yielding  so  frankly  to  require  and  follow  our  ad-
vise in  a  matter,  that  toucheth  the  state  of  their  king,  theirselves,  and
realm  so  near,  wherein  as  we  perceive  that  by  our  former  forbearing
to  intermeddle  therein,  they  have  taken  some  discomfort,  as  though
that  we  would  not  have  regard  to  their  state  and  suerty,  so  on  the
other  part,  they  of  their  wisdoms  ought  to  think  that  it  might  be  by
the  whole  world  evil  interpreted  in  us  to  appoint  them  a  form  of  go-
vernment, or  a  governour  by  name,  for  that  howsoever  we  should
mean  well  if  we  should  do  so,  yet  it  could  not  be  without  some  jea-
lousy in  the  heads  of  the  estate,  nobility,  and  community  of  that
realm,  that  the  government  thereof  should  be  by  me  specially
named,  and  ordain'd  ;  so  as  finding  difficulty  on  both  parts,  and  yet
misliking  most  that  they  should  take  any  discomfort  by  our  for-
bearing to  show  our  mind  therein,  we  have  thought  in  this  sort  for  to
proceed,  considering  with  ourselves  how  now  that  realm  had  been
a  good  space  of  time  ruled  in  the  name  of  their  king,  and  by  reason
of  his  base  age,  governed  heretofore  by  a  very  carefull  and  honour-
able person,  the  earle  of  Murray,  untill  that  by  a  mischievous  per-
son (an  evil  example),  he  was  murdered,  whereby  great  disorder
and  confusion  of  necessity  had,  and  will  more  follow,  if  determina-
tion be  not  made  of  some  other  speciall  person,  or  persons,  to  take
the  charge  of  governour,  or  superior  ruler  speciall,  for  administra-
tion of  law  and  justice,  we  cannot  but  very  well  allow  the  desite  of
these  lords  to  have  some  speciall  governour  to  be  chosen ;  and
therefore  being  well  assured,  that  their  own  understanding  of  all
others  is  best  to  consider  the  state  of  that  realm,  and  to  discern  the
abilities  and  qualities  of  every  person  meet  and  capable  for  such  a
charge,  we  shall  better  satisfie  ourselves,  whom  they  by  their  com-
mon consent  shall  first  choose,  and  appoint  to  that  purpose,  then  of
any  to  be  by  us  aforehand  uncertainly  named,  and  that  because  they
shall  perceave  that  we  have  care  of  the  person  of  their  king,

392  SCOTLAND.

who  by  nearness  of  blood,  and  in  respect  to  his  so  young  years,
ought  to  be  very  tender  and  dear  to  us,  we  shall  not  hide  our  opinion
from  them,  but  if  they  shall  all  accord  to  name  his  grandfather,  ouv
cousin,  the  earl  of  Lennox,  to  be  governor  alone,  or  jointly  with
others  (whom  we  hear  to  be  in  the  mean  time  by  their  common  con-
sent appointed  lieutenant-general),  reason  moveth  us  to  think  that
none  can  be  chosen  in  that  whole  realm,  that  shall  more  desire  the
preservation  of  the  king,  and  be  more  meet  to  have  the  government
for  his  safety,  being  next  to  him  in  blood  of  any  nobleman  of  that
realm,  or  elsewhere;  and  yet, hereby,  we  do  not  mean  to  prescribe
to  them  this  choice,  except  they  shall  of  themselves  fully  and  freely
allow  thereof;  furthermore  we  would  have  them  well  assured,  that
whatsoever  reports  of  devises  are,  or  shall  be  spread  or  invented,
that  we  have  already  yielded  our  mind  to  alter  the  state  of  the  king
or  government  of  that  realm,  the  same  are  without  just  cause  or
ground  by  us  given,  for  as  we  have  already  advertized  them,  that
although  we  have  yielded  to  hear,  which  in  honour  we  could  not  re-
fuse, what  the  queen  of  Scots  on  her  part  shall  say  and  offer,  not
only  for  her  own  assurance,  but  for  the  wealth  of  that  realm,  yet  not
knowing  what  the  same  will  be  that  shall  be  offered,  we  mean  not  to
break  the  order  of  law  and  justice,  by  advancing  her  cause,  or  pre-
judging her  contrary,  before  we  shall  deliberately  and  assuredly  see,
upon  the  hearing  of  the  whole,  some  place  necessary,  and  just  cause
to  do  ;  and  therefore  finding  that  realm  ruled  by  a  king,  and  the  same
affirmed  by  laws  of  that  realm,  and  thereof  invested  by  coronation
and  other  solemnities  used  and  requisite,  and  generally  so  received
by  the  whole  estates,  we  mean  not  by  yielding  to  hear  the  complaints
or  informations  of  the  queen  against  her  son,  to  do  any  act  whereby
td  make  conclusion  of  governments,  but  as  we  have  found  it,  so  to
suffer  the  same  to  continue,  yea,  not  to  suffer  it  to  be  altered  by  any
means  that  we  may  impeshe,  as  to  our  honour  it  doth  belong,  as  by
your  late  actions  hath  manifestly  appeared,  untill  by  some  justice
and  clear  cause,  we  shall  be  directly  induced  otherwise  to  declare
our  opinion  ;  and  this  we  would  have  them  to  know  to  be  our  de-
termination and  course  that  we  mean  to  hold,  whereon  we  trust  they
for  their  king  may  see  how  plainly  and  honourably  we  mean  to  pro-
ceed, and  how  little  cause  they  have  to  doubt  of  us,  whatsoever  to
the  contrary  they  have  or  shall  hear  ;  and  on  the  other  part,  we  pray
them  of  their  wisdoms  to  think  how  unhonourable,  and  contrary  to
all  human  order  it  were  for  us,  when  the  queen  of  Scotland  doth  so
many  ways  require  to  hear  her  cause,  and  doth  offer  to  be  ordered
be  us  in  the  same,  as  well  for  matters  betwixt  ourselves  and  her,  as
betwixt  herself  and  her  son  and  his  party  of  that  realm,  against
which  offers  no  reason  could  move  us  to  refuse  to  give  ear,  that  we
should  aforehand  openly  and  directly,  before  the  causes  be  heard

APPENDIX.  39;}

and  considered,  as  it  were,  give  a  judgment  or  sentence  either  for
ourselves  or  for  them  whom  she  maketh  to  be  her  contraries.
Finally  ye  shall  admonish  them,  that  they  ,do  not,  by  miscon-
ceiving our  good  meaning  toward  them,  or  by  indirect  assertions  of
their  adversary,  grounded  on  untruths,  hinder  or  weaken  their  own
cause,  in  such  sort,  that  our  good  meaning  towards  them  shall  not
take  such  effect  towards  them,  as  they  shall  desire,  or  themselves
have  need  of.  All  this  our  answer  ye  shall  cause  be  given  them,
and  let  them  know,  that  for  the  shortness  of  time,  this  being  the
end  of  the  second  of  this  month,  we  neither  could  make  any  longer
declaration  of  our  mind,  nor  yet  write  any  several  letters,  as  if  time
might  have  served  we  would  have  done.  2d  July,  1570.

No.  XXXVI. (Vol.  II.  p.  7.)

The  Bishop  of  Ross  to  Secretary  Lidingtonfrom  Chattisworth.

I  HAVE  received  your  letters  dated  the  26th  of  May,
here  at  Cliattis  worth,  the  10th  of  January,  but  on  the  re-
ceipt thereof  I  had  written  to  you  at  length,  like  as  the
queen  did  with  my  lord  Levingston,  by  which  you  will  be  resolved
of  many  points  contained  in  your  said  letter.  I  writ  to  you  that  I
received  your  letter  and  credit  from  Tho9.  Cowy  at  London,  and
sent  to  Leicester  to  know  the  queen  of  England's  mind,  whether  if
you  should  come  here  or  not.  He  sent  me  word  that  she  will  no
ways  have  you  come  as  one  of  the  commissioners,  because  she  is
yet  offended  with  you ;  and  therefore  it  appears  good  that  ye  come
not  hither,  but  remain  where  you  are,  to  use  your  wisdom  and  dili-
gence, as  may  best  advance  the  queen's  affairs,  for  I  perceive  your
weil  and  safety  depends  thereon,  in  respect  to  the  great  feid  and
enmity  born  against  you  by  your  Scots  people,  and  the  great  heir-
ship  taken  of  your  father's  landis  ;  both  were  sure  demonstrations
of  their  malice.  Yet  I  am  encouraged  by  your  stout  and  deliberate
mind.  Assure  yourself  no  deligence  shall  be  omitted  to  procure
supports  forth  off  all  parts  where  it  may  be  had.  We  will  not  re-
fuse the  aid  neither  of  Papist,  Jew,  nor  Gentil,  after  my  advice ;  and
to  this  end,  during  this  treaty,  let  all  things  be  well  prepared.  And
seeing  my  lord  Seaton  is  desirous  to  go  into  Flanders,  the  queen
thinks  it  very  necessary  that  he  so  do,  for  the  duke  D'Alva  has  got-
ten express  command  of  the  king  of  Spain  to  give  support,  and  I  am
sure  that  there  he  shall  have  aid  both  of  Flanders  and  the  pope,  for
it  abides  only  on  the  coming  of  some  men  of  countenance,  to  pro-
cure and  receive  the  same.  He  must  needs  tarry  there,  on  the  pre-
parations thereof,  during  this  treaty,  which  will  be  a  great  further-
ance to  the  same  here.  The  queen  has  already  written  to  the  duke
D'Alva  for  this  effect,  advertizing  of  his  coming  ;  there  is  certain

394  SCOTLAND.

sums  of  money  coming  for  support  of  the  Englishmen,  as  I  wrote
to  you  before,  from  the  pope.  Whereupon  I  would  he  had  a  gene-
ral commission  to  deal  for  them,  and  receive  such  sums  as  shall  be
given.  The  means  shall  be  found  to  cause  you  be  ansuerit  of  the
sums  you  writ  for,  to  be  dispoisit  upon  the  furnishing  of  the  castle  of
Edinburgh,  so  being  some  honest  and  true  man  were  sent  to  Flan-
ders to  receive  it,  as  said  is,  which  I  would  you  prepared  and  sent.
Orders  shall  be  taken  for  the  metals  as  you  writ  of.  We  have  pro-
poriityour  avyce  in  entring  to  treat  with  the  queen  of  England,  for
retiring  of  her  forces  puntyoally  for  lack  of  aid.  Your  answers  to  the
Englishmen  are  tho't  very  good,  but  above  all  keep  you  weill  out  of
their  hands,  in  that  case,  estote  prudentes  sicut  serpentes.  You
may  take  experience  with  the  hard  dealing  with  me,  how  ye  would
be  used  if  ye  were  here,  and  yet  I  am  not  forth  of  danger,  being  in
medio  nationis  pravse ;  alway  no  fear,"  with  God's  grace,  shall  make
me  shrink  from  her  majesty's  service.  Since  the  queen  of  England
has  refused  that  you  come  here,  it  appears  to  me  quod  nondum  est
sedata  malitia  amorreorum,  &c.;  and  therefore  if  Athol  orCathenes
might  by  any  means  be  procured  to  come,  they  were  the  most  fit
for  the  purpose,  Rothes  were  also  meet,  if  he  and  I  were  not  both  of
one  sirname;  so  the  treaty  would  get  the  less  credit  either  in  Scot-
land or  here.  Therefore  avys,  and  send  the  best  may  serve  the  turn,
and  fail  not  Robert  Melvil  come  with  them,  whoever  comes,  for  so
is  the  queen's  pleasure ;  in  my  last  packet,  with  James  Fogo,  to
you,  in  the  beginning  of  May,  I  sent  a  letter  of  the  queen's  own
handwriting  to  him,  which  I  trust  ye  received.  I  am  sorry  ye  come
not  for  the  great  relief  I  hoped  to  have  had  by  your  presence,  for  you
could  well  have  handled  the  queen  of  England,  after  her  humour,
as  you  were  wont  to  do.  The  rest  I  refer  to  your  good  wisdom,
praying  God  to  send  you  health.  From  Chattisworth  the  15th  of
January.

No.  XXXVII. (Vol.  II.  p.  25.)

The  declaration  of  John  Cais  to  the  Lords  of  Grange  and  Lethington
zoungare  upon  the  8th  day  of  Oct.  1571.

WHEREAS  you  desire  to  know  the  queen's  majesty's  pleasure,
what  she  will  do  for  appeasing  of  these  controversies,  and  therewith
has  offered  yourselves  to  be  at  her  commandment,  touching  the
common  tranquility  of  the  whole  isle,  and  the  amity  of  both  realms ;
her  pleasure  is  in  this  behalf,  that  ye  should  leave  off  the  mainte-
nance of  this  civil  discord,  and  give  your  obedience  to  the  king,
whom  she  will  maintain  to  the  utmost  of  her  power.

And  in  this  doing,  she  will  deal  with  the  regent  and  the  king's

APPENDIX.

395

party  to  receive  you  into  favour,  upon  reasonable  conditions  for  se-
curity of  life  and  livings.

Also  she  says  that  the  queen  of  Scotts,  for  that  she  has  practised
with  the  pope  and  other  princes,  and  also  with  her  own  subjects  in
England,  great  and  dangerous  treasons  against  the  state  of  her  own
country,  and  also  to  the  destruction  of  her  own  person,  that  she
shall  never  bear  authority,  nor  have  liberty  while  she  lives.

If  ye  refuse  these  gentle  offers,  now  offered  unto  you,  she  will
presently  aid  the  king's  party,  with  men,  ammunition,  and  all  ne-
cessary things,  to  be  had  against  you.

Whereupon  her  majesty  requires  your  answer  with  speed,  without
any  delay.

No.  XXXVIII. (Vol.  II.  p.  34.)

Articles  sent  by  Knox  to  the  General  Assembly,  August  5th,  1572.

FIRST,  desiring  a  new  act  to  be  made  ratifying  all  things

MS.  His- concerning  the  king  and  his  obedience  that  were  enacted

tory,  vol.  2.  of  before  without  any  change,  and  that  the  ministers  who

have  contraveend  the  former  acts  be  corrected  as  ac-

cordeth.

That  sute  be  made  to  the  regent's  grace  and  nobility  maintaining
the  king's  cause,  that  whatsoever  proceedeth  in  this  treaty  of  peace
they  be  mindful  the  kirk  be  notprejudg'd  thereby,  in  any  sort,  and
they  especially  of  the  ministers  that  have  been  robbed  of  their  pos-
sessions within  the  kirk  during  the  time  of  the  troubles,  or  otherwise
dung  and  injured,  may  be  restored.

To  sute  at  the  regent,  that  no  gift  of  any  bishoprick  or  other  be-
nefice be  given  to  any  person,  contrary  to  the  tenor  of  the  acts  made
in  the  time  of  the  first  regent  of  good  memory,  and  they  that  are
given  contrar  the  said  acts,  or  to  any  unqualified  person,  may  be
revoked  and  made  null  be  an  act  of  secret  council,  and  that  all  bi-
shopricks  so  vacand  may  be  presented,  and  qualified  persons  nomi-
nal thereunto,  within  a  year  after  the  vaking  thereof,  according  to
the  order  taken  in  Leith  be  the  commissioners  of  the  nobility  and  of
the  kirk  in  the  month  of  January  last,  and  in  special  to  complain
upon  the  giving  of  bishoprick  of  Ross  to  the  lord  Methven.

That  no  pentions  of  benefices,  great  or  small,  be  given  be  simple
donation  of  any  lord  regent,  without  consent  of  the  possessor  of  the
saids  benefices  having  tittle  thereto,  and  the  admission  of  the  super-
intendent or  commissioners  of  the  province  where  this  benefice  lyeth,
or  of  the  bishops  lawfully  elected  according  to  the  said  order  taken
at  Leith ;  and  desire  an  act  of  council  to  be  made  thereupon,  until
the  next  Parliament,  wherein  the  samine  may  be  specially  inacted,

396  SCOTLAND.

with  inhibition  to  the  lords  of  session  to  give  any  letters  or  decreets,
upon  such  simple  gifts  of  benefices  or  pensions  not  being  given  in
manner  above  rehearsed,  and  that  the  kirk  presently  assembled
declare  all  such  gifts  null  so  far  as  lyeth  in  their  power.

That  the  first  form  of  presentation  to  benefices,  which  were  in  the
first  and  second  regent's  time,  be  not  chang'd  as  now  it  is  com-
monly ;  but  that  this  clause  be  contained  in  the  presentation,  that
if  the  persons  presented  make  not  residence,  or  be  slandrous,  or
found  unworthy  either  in  life  or  doctrine  be  the  judgment  of  the
kirk  (to  which  alwise  he  shall  be  subject)  or  meet  to  be  transported
to  another  room  at  the  sight  of  the  kirk,  the  said  presentation  and
all  that  shall  fall  thereupon  shall  be  null  and  of  no  force  nor  effect ;
and  this  to  have  place  also  in  the  nomination  of  the  bishops.

That  an  act  be  made  in  this  assembly  that  all  things  done  in  pre-
judice of  the  kirk's  assumption  of  the  thirds,  either  by  Papists  or
others,  by  giving  of  fews,  liferents,  or  taks,  or  any  otherwise  dispon-
ing  the  said  assumed  thirds,  be  declared  null  with  a  solemn  pro-
testation the  whole  kirk  disasenteth  thereto.

That  an  act  be  made  decerning  and  ordaining  all  bishops,  admitted
to  the  order  of  the  kirk  now  received,  to  give  account  of  their  whole
rents,  and  intromissions  therewith  once  in  the  year,  as  the  kirk
shall  appoint,  for  such  causes  as  the  kirk  may  easily  consider  the
same  to  be  most  expedient  and  necessar.

Anent  the  jurisdiction  of  the  kirk,  that  the  same  be  determined
in  this  assembly,  because  this  article  hath  long  been  postpond  to
make  sute  to  the  regent  and  council  for  remedy  against  messengers
and  excommunicate  persons.

Last,  That  orders  be  taken  anent  the  procurers  of  the  kirk,  who
procure  against  ministers  and  ministry,  and  for  gutting  of  justice
of  the  kirk's  actions  in  the  session.

No.  XXXIX. (Vol.  II.  p.  39.)

Declaration  of  Henry  Killigrewe,  Esq.  upon  the  Peace  concluded  the
23d  Feb.  1572.

BE  it  known  to  all  men,  by  these  presents,  that  I,  Henry  Killi-
grewe,  esq.  ambassador  for  the  queen's  majesty  of  England,  Foras-
much as,  at  the  earnest  motion  and  solicitation  being  made  to  me,
on  her  highness's  behalf,  there  is  accord  and  pacification  of  the
public  troubles  and  civil  war  within  this  realm  of  Scotland  agreed
and  concluded,  and  the  same  favourably  extended  towards  the  right
honourable  George  earl  of  Huntly,  lord  Gordon  and  Baidzenoch,
and  the  lord  John  Hamilton,  son  to  the  duke's  grace  of  Chastel-
larault,  and  commendatour  of  the  abby  of  Abirbrothock;  for  the
surety  of  the  lives,  livings,  honours,  and  goods  of  them,  their  kin-.

APPENDIX.  397

folks,  friends,  servants,  and  partakers,  now  properly  depending  on
them  ;  in  treating  of  the  which  said  pacification,  the  murderers  of
the  late  earl  of  Murray  uncle,  and  the  earl  of  Levenax  grandfather,
late  regent  to  the  king's  majesty  of  Scotland  his  realm  and  lieges,
as  also  an  article  touching  the  discharge  for  the  fructis  or  move-
able  goods,  which  the  said  persons  have  taken  fra  personis  profess-
ing the  king's  obedience,  before  the  damages  done  or  committed  by
them,  since  the  15th  day  of  Junij,  1567,  and  before  the  penult  day
of  July  last  by  passed,  by  reason  of  the  common  cause  or  any
thing  depending  thereupon,  being  thought  by  the  king's  commisa-
ries  matteris  of  such  wecht  and  importance,  as  the  king's  present
regent  could  not  conveniently,  of  himself,  remit  or  discharge  the
same.  Yet  in  respect  of  the  necessity  of  the  present  pacification,
and  for  the  weil  of  the  king,  and  common  quietness  of  this  realm
and  lieges,  \t  is  accorded,  that  the  matters  of  remission  of  the  said
murderers,  and  of  the  discharge  of  the  said  fructis,  moveable  goods,
and  other  damages,  be  moved  by  the  persons  desiring  the  said  re-
missions and  discharge  to  the  queen's  majesty  my  sovereign,  as  to
the  princes  nearest  both  in  blood  and  habitation  to  the  king  of  Scots.
And  whatsoever  her  majesty  shall  advise  and  councel  touching  the
said  remission  and  discharge,  the  said  lord  regent,  for  the  weil  of
the  king  and  universal  quietness  of  the  realm  of  Scotland,  shall
perform,  observe,  and  fulfill  the  same.  And  in  likewise,  the  said
earl  Huntly,  and  commendatour  of  Abirbrothock,  being  urged  to
have  delivered  pledges  and  hostages  for  observation  of  the  con-
ditions of  the  said  accord  and  pacification,  hath  required  me  in  place
thereof,  in  her  majesty's  name,  by  virtue  of  my  commission,  to  pro-
mise for  them,  that  they  shall  truly  and  faithfully  observe  and  keep
the  said  pacification,  and  all  articles  and  conditions  thereof,  for  their
parts,  and  that  it  would  please  her  majesty  to  interpose  herself,  as  ,
surety  and  cautioner  for  them  to  that  effect,  to  the  king's  majesty  of
Scotland  their  sovereign  and  his  said  regent,  which  I  have  done,
and  promise  to  do,  by  virtue  of  her  majesty's  commission,  as  by  the
honourable  and  plain  dealing  of  the  said  earl  and  lord,  their  inten-
tion to  peace  well  appears,  the  same  being  most  agreeable  to  the
mind  of  the  queen's  majesty  my  sovereign,  which  so  long  by  her
ministers  hath  travelled  for  the  said  pacification,  and  in  the  end,  at
her  motion  and  solicitation,  the  same  is  accorded,  knowing  her  ma-
jesty's godly  desire,  that  the  same  may  continue  unviolate,  and
that  the  noblemen  and  others  now  returning  to  the  king's  obedience
shall  have  sufficient  surety  for  their  lives,  livings,  honours,  and
goods.  Therefore  in  her  majesty's  name,  and  by  virtue  of  my  com-
mission, I  promise  to  the  aforesaid  earl  Huntly  and  commendatour
of  Abirbrothock,  that  by  her  majesty's  good  means,  the  said  remis-
sion and  discharge  shall  be  purchased  and  obtained  to  them,  their

308  SCOTLAND.

kinfotks,  friends,  servants,  and  partakers,  now  properly  depending
upon  them  (the  persons  specified  in  the  first  abstinance  always  ex-
cepted),  as  also  that  the  said  pacification  shall  be  truly  observed
to  them,  and  that  her  majesty  shall  interpose  herself  as  conserva-
trix  thereof,  and  endeavour  herself  to  cause  the  same  to  be  truly
and  sincerely  kept  in  all  points  and  articles  thereof  accordingly.
In  witness  whereof  I  have  to  this  present  subscribed  with  my  hand,
and  sealed  the  same  with  mine  own  seal,  the  1 3th  day  of  Feb.  anno
Domini  1572.  And  this  to  be  performed  by  me,  betwixt  the  date
hereof,  and  the  parliament  which  shall  be  appointed  for  their  resti-
tution, or  at  the  furthest,  before  the  end  of  the  said  parliament.
Sic  subscribitur.

The  Bishop  of  Glasgow  s  note  concerning  the  Queen  of  Scotland' s  dowry.

1576  THE  queen  of  Scotland,  dowager  of  France,  had  for  her

Cott.  lib.  dowry,  besides  other  possessions,  the  dukedom  of  Turene,
Calig.B.4.  which  was  solemnly  contracted  and  given  to  her  by  the
king  and  estates  of  parliament;  which  dukedom  she  possessed
peacefully  till  1576,  and  then,  upon  the  pacification  betwixt  the
king  and  Mons.  his  brother,  to  augment  whose  appenage  this  dutchy
was  given,  to  which  the  queen  of  Scotland  yielded  upon  account  of
princes,  who  were  her  near  relations,  provided  the  equivalent  which
was  promised  her  should  be  faithfully  performed.  So  that  year,
after  a  great  many  sollicitations,  in  lieu  of  that  dutchy,  she  had
granted  her  the  county  of  Vermaudaise,  with  the  lands  and  baili-
wicks of  Seuley  and  Vetrey ;  tho'  'tis  known  that  county  and  the
other  lands  were  not  of  equal  value  with  Turene,  but  was  promised
to  have  an  addition  of  lands  in  the  neighbourhood  to  an  equal  value.
Upon  this  letters  patent  were  granted,  which  were  confirmed  in  the
courts  of  parliament,  chamber  of  accompts,  court  of  aids,  chamber
of  the  treasury,  and  others  necessary :  upon  which  she  entered  into
possession  of  that  county,  &c.  Afterwards,  by  a  valuation  of  the
commissioners  of  the  chamber  of  accompts,  it  was  found  that  the
revenue  of  that  county,  &c.  did  not  amount  to  those  of  Turene,  by
3000  livres.  But  instead  of  making  up  this  deficiency  according
to  justice,  some  of  the  privy  council,  viz.  M.  de  Cheverny,  the  pre-
sidents of  Bellievre,  Nicocholay,  and  St.  Bonet,  in  the  name  of  the
king,  notwithstanding  of  her  aforesaid  losses,  did  sell  and  alienate
the  lands  of  Senlis,  and  the  dutchy  of  Estaimpes,  to  Madam  de
Montpensier,  from  whom  the  king  received  money ;  of  which  sale
the  counsellors  aforesaid  obliged  themselves  to  be  guarantees,  which
hath  hindered  the  aforesaid  queen  to  have  justice  done  her.  So
that  Madam  de  Montpensier  hath  been  put  in  possession  of  these
lands  of  Senlis,  contrary  to  all  the  declaration,  protestation,  and

APPENDIX.  39<>

assurances  of  the  king  of  France  to  queen  Mary's  ambassadors.  So
that  the  queen  of  Scotland  is  dispossessed  of  her  dowry,  contrary
Jo  all  equity,  without  any  regard  to  her  quality.

No.  XL. (Vol.  II.  p.  43.)

A  Letter  from  the  Lord  of  Lochlevin  to  the  Regent  Mortoun.
3d  March, IT  will  please  your  grace,  I  received  your  grace's  letter,

Morto^n'f  and  has  considered  tlie  same- The  parson  of  Camsey  was
Archives,  here  at  me  before  the  receit  thereof,  directed  fra  my  lord
Bund.  B.  of  Mar,  and  the  master  anent  my  last  written,  which  was
the  answer  of  the  writing  that  the  master  sent  to  me,  which
I  send  to  your  grace,  desiring  me  to  come  to  Sterling  to  confer  with
them. I  had  given  my  answer  before  the  receit  of  your  grace's
letter,  that  I  behuiffit  to  be  besyd  Sanct  Androis,  at  one  friend's
tryst,  which  I  might  not  omit ;  I  understand  by  my  said  cousin,  that
the  king's  majesty  is  to  write  to  divers  of  the  nobility  to  come  there,
anent  your  lordship's  trial,  and  that  he  had  written  before  his  de-
parting to  my  lord  Monthrois. I  understand  likewise,  he  will  write
to  your  grace  to  come  there  for  the  same  effect,  which  I  tho't  good
to  make  your  grace  foreseen  of  the  same,  praying  your  grace,  for
the  love  of  God  Almighty,  to  look  upon  the  best,  and  not  to  sleep
in  security,  but  to  turn  you  with  unfeigned  heart  to  God,  and  to
consider  with  yourself,  that  when  the  king's  majesty  was  very  young,
God  made  him  the  instrument  to  divest  his  mother  from  her  autho-
rity, who  was  natural  princess,  for  offending  of  his  Divine  Majesty,
and  that  there  ran  no  vice  in  her,  but  that  the  same  is  as  largely  in
you,  except  that  your  grace  condescended  not  to  the  destruction  of
your  wife. For  as  to  harlotry  and  ambition,  I  think  your  grace  has
as  far  offended  God,  and  far  more  in  avaritiousness,  which  vycis
God  never  left  unplagued,  except  speedy  repentance,  which  I  pray
God  grant  to  your  grace,  for  otherwise  your  grace  can  never  have
the  love  of  God  nor  man. I  pray  your  grace  flatter  not  yourself;
for  if  your  grace  believes  that  ye  have  the  good-will  of  them  that
are  the  king's  good-willers  ye  deceive  yourself;  for  surely  I  see  per-
fectly that  your  own  particulars  are  not  contented,  lat  be  the  rest
and  that  most  principally  for  your  hard  dealing. I  pray  your  grace,
beir  with  me  that  I  am  thus  hamlie,  for  certainly  it  proceeds  from
no  grudge,  but  from  the  very  affection  of  my  heart  towards  your
grace,  which  has  continued  since  we  were  acquainted. And  now  I
see,  because  the  matter  stands  in  your  grace's  handling  with  the
king's  majesty,  for  certainly  if  your  grace  fall  forth  with  him  now,
I  see  not  how  ye  shall  meet  hereafter ;  pray  I  your  grace  to  call  to
God,  and  look  on  the  best,  and  cast  from  your  grace  both  your
vices,  to  wit,  ambition  and  avaritiousness. I  am  riding  this  day  to

400  SCOTLAND.

Sanct  Androis,  and  trust  to  return  on  Wednesday  at  the  farthest.
If  your  grace  will  command  me  in  any  offices  that  are  honest,  that
I  may  do  your  grace  pleasure  in  at  Sterling,  advertise  of  your  grace's
mind,  and  shall  do  to  my  power  and  knowledge,  and  this  with  my
heartlie,  &c.  &c.

To  our  trusty  Cousin  the  Lord  Lochleven.

From  the  TRUSTY  cousin,  after  our  most  hearty  commendations,
E."  ofMor-  we  received  your  letter  of  the  3d  of  March,  and  as  we  take
ton's  ar-  your  plainness  therein  in  good  part,  as  proceeding  from  a
Bund8  B.  friend  an<^  kinsman,  in  whose  good  affection  towards  us
No.  31.  we  never  doubted,  so  ye  may  not  think  it  strange  that  we
purge  ourselves  so  far  of  your  accusation,  as  in  conscience  we  find
not  ourselves  to  have  offended  in.  As  touching  our  offence  to  God,
we  intend  not  to  excuse  it,  but  to  submit  us  to  his  mercy ;  for  am-
bition surely  we  think  none  can  justly  accuse  us;  for  in  our  private
estate  we  could,  and  can  live  as  well  contented^  as  any  of  our  de-
gree in  Scotland,  without  further  aspiring.  The  bearing  too  the
charge  of  the  government  of  the  realm,  indeed,  mon  lead  us,  or  any
other  that  shall  occupy  that  place,  not  simply  to  respect  ourself,  but
his  majesty's  rowme,  which  we  supply,  and  therein  not  transcending
the  bounds  of  measure,  as  we  trust,  it  shall  not  be  found  we  have
done,  it  ought  not  to  be  attributed  to  any  ambition  in  us.  For  as
soon  as  ever  his  majesty  shall  think  himself  ready  and  able  for  his
own  government,  none  shall  more  willingly  agree  and  advance  the
same  nor  I,  since  I  think  never  to  set  my  face  against  him,  whose
honour,  safety,  and  preservation  has  been  so  dear  unto  me,  nor  I
will  never  believe  to  find  otherwise  at  his  hand  than  favour,  although
all  the  unfriends  I  have  in  the  earth  were  about  him,  to  persuade
him  to  the  contrary.  As  we  write  unto  you,  our  friendly  dealing
and  confidence  in  the  house  of  Mar  is  not  thankfully  acquit ;  as  we
trust  yourself  considers  ;  but  because  the  ambassadors  of  England,
my  lord  of  Angus,  the  chancellor,  treasurer,  and  some  noblemen
rides  west  this  day  to  see  the  king,  we  pray  you  heartily  address
yourself  to  be  there  as  soon  as  ye  can,  and  as  ye  shall  find  the  like-
lihood of  all  things,  let  us  be  advertised  thereof  with  your  own  ad-
vice, by  Alexr.  Hay,  whom  we  have  thought  good  to  send  west,
seeing  my  lord  of  Angus  from  Sterling  rides  to  Douglas.  And  so
we  commit  you  in  the  protection  of  God.  At  Holyrood-house,  the
4th  of  March,  1577.

For  the  avaritiousness  laid  to  our  charge,  indeed  it  lies  not  in  us
so  liberally  to  deal  the  king's  geare,  as  to  satisfy  all  cravers,  nor
never  shall  any  sovereign  and  native-born  prince,  let  be  any  officer,
eschew  the  disdains  of  such,  as  thinks  them  judges,  to  their  own
reward;  in  many  causes  I  doubt  not  to  find  the  assistance  of  my

APPENDIX.  401

friends,  but  where  my  actions  shall  appear  unhonest,  I  will  not  crave
their  assistance,  but  let  me  bear  my  own  burthen.

No.  XLI. (Vol.  II.  p.  66.)

Letter  of  Walsmgham's  to  Randolph,  February  3,  1580-1 .

Colt.  Lib.  SIR, — I  have  received  from  my  lord  lieutenant  the  copy
Calig.  C.  6.  of  your  letter  of  the  25th  of  the  last  directed  unto  his
lordship,  containing  a  report  of  your  negotiation  with  the  king  and
his  council,  in  your  second  audience,  wherewith  having  made  her
majesty  acquainted,  she  seemed  somewhat  to  mislike  that  you  should
so  long  defer  to  deal  for  the  enlargement  o/*Empedocles.  But  I  made
answer  in  your  behalf,  that  I  thought  you  were  directed  by  the  ad-
vice of  the  said  Empedocles's/Hmds,  in  the  soliciting  of  that  cause,
who  knew  what  time  was  fittest  for  you  to  take  to  deal  therein,  with
most  effect,  and  best  success,  with  which  answer,  her  majesty  did  in
the  end  rest  very  well  satisfied,  touching  that  point.

Your  putting  of  us  in  hope  that  D'Aubigny  might  easily  be  won
at  her  majesty's  devotion,  was  at  first  interpreted  to  have  been
ironic  spoke  by  you.  But  since  it  seemeth  you  insist  upon  it,  I
could  wish  you  were  otherwise  persuaded  of  the  man,  or  at  least
kept  that  opinion  to  yourself,  for  considering  the  end  and  purpose
of  his  coming  into  Scotland,  as  may  be  many  ways  sufficiently
proved,  was  only  to  advance  the  queen's  liberty,  and  reception  into
that  government,  to  overthrow  religion,  and  to  procure  a  foreign
match  with  Villenarius,  wherein  the  inclosed  copy,  which  you  may
use  to  good  purpose  there,  shall  partly  give  you  some  light ;  there
is  no  man  here  can  be  persuaded  that  he  will  change  his  purpose
for  so  small  advantage  as  he  is  likely  to  find  by  it,  and  therefore
you  shall  do  well  to  forbear  to  harp  any  more  upon  that  string,  as
I  have  already  written  to  you.  The  prince  of  Orange  sending,  I
fear  will  not  be  in  time  that  it  may  do  any  good ;  for  besides  that
these  people  are  in  themselves  slow  in  their  resolutions,  their  own
affairs  are,  at  present,  so  great,  their  state  so  confused,  and  the
prince's  authority  so  small,  that  he  cannot  so  soon  take  order  in  it ;
and  yet  for  my  own  part,  I  have  not  been  negligent  or  careless  in
the  matter,  having  more  than  three  weeks  past,  sent  one  about  it,
from  whom  nevertheless  I  do  yet  hear  nothing.  The  letters  you
desire  should  be  written  thither  by  the  French  ministers,  I  have
given  order  to  Mr.  Killingrew  to  procure,  who,  I  doubt  not,
will  carefully  perform  it,  so  that,  I  hope,  I  shall  have  them  to  send
you  by  the  next.  And  so  I  commit  you  to  God.  At  Whitehall,
the  3d  of  February  1580.

Your  very  loving  cousin  and  servant,

FRA.  WALSINGHAM.

VOL.  II.  2 D

402  SCOTLAND.

The  preceding  letter  is  an  original,  and  in  some  parts  of  it  wrote

in  cyphers,  and  explained  by  another  hand.  By  Empedocles

is understood Morton. By  Villenarius, the  king of  Scots.

D'Aubigney  is  marked  thus 0 I 0  .

3  Feb.  1580.

Sundry  notes  gathered  upon  good  diligence  given,  and  in  time  to  be
better  manifested,  being  now  thought  meet  to  be  in  convenient  sort
used  and  laid  against  D'Aubigny,  to  prove  him  abusing  the  king,  the
nobility,  and  that  state.

Cott.  Lib.  FIRST,  it  hath  been  informed  by  credible  means,  that
An  origi-  D'Aubigney  was  privy  and  acquainted  with  la  Nave  the
nal.  king's  mother's  secretary,  coming  into  Scotland,  and  of

his  errand  there,  tending  chiefly  to  persuade  the  king,  to  think  and
esteem  it  an  evil  president  for  princes  that  subjects  might  have
power  to  deprive  their  lawful  sovereigns,  as  they  did  his  mother,
who  was  not  minded,  by  any  mean,  to  defeat  him,  either  of  the
present  government  of  that  realm,  or  yet  of  the  possession  of  the
crown  and  inheritance  thereof,  but  rather  to  assure  the  same  to
him  :  arid  that  for  the  accomplishment  of  that  assurance,  the  king
should  have  been  advised  and  drawn  to  have  governed,  for  some
short  time,  as  prince,  calling  D'Aubigny  to  rule  as  governor  of
the  prince,  by  commission  from  the  queen  his  mother,  until  the
king's  enemies  were  suppressed;  after  which  time  D'Aubigny
should  have  power  given  to  establish  and  resign  that  kingdom  to
the  king,  by  his  mother's  voluntary  consent,  whereby  all  such,  as
had  before  been  in  action  against  the  queen  or  her  authority,
might  be  brought  to  stand  in  the  king's  mercy.  And  for  that  the
king  might  live  in  more  surety,  D'Aubigny  should  be  declared  both
second  person  in  succession  of  that  crown,  and  also  lieutenant  ge-
neral of  Scotland,  and  that  D'Aubigny  before  his  departure  out  of
France,  received  commission  from  the  king's  mother  to  the  effects
remembered,  or  near  the  same.  That  in  this  behalf  he  had  con-
ference with  the  bishops  of  Glasgow,  and  Ross,  and  with  Sir  James
Baford,  with  which  persons,  and  with  the  duke  of  Guise,  he  had
and  hath  frequent  intelligence,  and  by  Sir  James  Baford  he  was
advised  to  confer  with  the  lord  John  Hamilton  before  his  repair  into
Scotland,  whereunto  he  agreed,  and  yet  afterwards  he  sent  one
John  Hamilton  to  the  said  lord  John  to  excuse  him  in  this  part,
alledging,  that  he  did  forbear  to  come  to  him,  lest  thereby  he  should
marr  or  hinder  greater  effects  to  be  executed  by  him  in  Scotland.

That  before  his  coming  into  that  realm,  the  nobility  and  country
were  well  quieted  and  united  in  good  concord,  with  great  love
betwixt  the  king  and  nobility,  and  amongst  the  noblesse,  but  he

APPENDIX.  403

bath  both  drawn  the  king  against  sundry  of  the  chiefest  of  his
nobility,  that  have  been  most  ready,  and  have  expended  their
blood  and  possessions  to  preserve  religion,  and  defend  the  king's
person,  his  government  and  estate,  and  also  hath  given  occasions
of  great  suspicions  and  offence  to  be  engendered  betwixt  the
king  and  his  nobility,  and  especially  with  such  as  have  been  in
action  against  the  king's  mother,  and  her  authority,  who  by  force
and  means  of  the  said  commission  and  practice,  should  have
been  brought  into  most  dangerous  condition ;  and  who  also  may
find  themselves  in  no  small  perill  while  he  possesses  the  king's
ear,  abuseth  his  presence,  and  holdeth  such  of  the  principal  keys
and  ports  of  his  realm,  as  he  presently  enjoyeth.

That  he  hath  drawn  the  king  not  only  to  forget  the  great  bene-
fits done  to  him  and  his  realme,  by  the  queen's  majesty  of  Eng-
land, but  also  to  requite  the  same  with  sundry  signs  of  great  un-
thankfulness,  and  wounding  therewith  the  honour  of  her  majesty,
and  thereby  hath  adventured  to  shake  the  happy  amity  long  time
continued  betwixt  those  princes.

And  whereas  these  griefs  were  to  be  repaired  by  gentle  letters
and  good  offers,  to  have  passed  and  been  done  betwixt  them  :  in
which  respect  the  king  and  council  having  resolved  to  write  to
her  majesty,  for  her  highness  better  satisfaction  in  the  late  negotia-
tion of  Mr.  Alexander  Hume  of  Northberwick,  had  given  order  to
the  king's  secretary  to  frame  that  letter  :  He  minding  to  break  the
bond  of  amity  in  sunder,  willed  the  secretary  to  be  sure  that  no-
thing should  be  inserted  in  that  letter  whereby  the  king  should
crave  any  thing  at  her  hands,  seeking  thereby  to  cut  off  all  loving
courtesies  betwixt  them,  as  by  the  declaration  of  the  said  secre-
tary may  be  better  learned,  and  thereupon  further  approved.

That  under  the  hope  and  encouragement  of  D'Aubigny's  pro-
tection, Alexander  King  presumed  with  that  boldness  to  make  his
lewd  harangue,  and  by  his  means  hath  hitherto  escaped  chastise-
ment and  correction,  due  for  his  offence.

That  Sir  James  Baford,  condemned  of  the  slaughter  of  the  king's
father,  hath  been  called  into  the  realm  by  Lennox,  without  the  pri-
vity of  the  king.  And  whereas  the  said  Sir  James  found  in  a  green
velvet  desk,  late  the  earl  of  Bothwell's,  and  saw  and  had  in  his
hands  the  principal  band  of  the  conspirators  in  that  murder,  and
can  best  declare  and  witness  who  were  authors  and  executors  of
the  same  ;  he  is  drawn  by  Lennox  to  suppress  the  truth,  and  to
accuse  such  as  he  himself  knoweth  to  be  innocent;  and  as  by  order
of  law,  will  be  so  found,  if  they  may  have  due  trial,  which,  con-
trary to  all  justice,  is  by  Lennox  means  denied.

This  is  the  charge  against  D'Aubigny,  Mentioned  in  the  foregoing
letter  by  Wahingham  ;  but  by  Baford  they  mean  Sir  James  Balfour.

404  SCOTLAND.

No.  XLIL (Vol.  II.  p.  80.)

The  copy  of  the  King  of  France  his  directions  sent  to  Scotland  with
Seineur  de  la  MotteFenelon. Translated  out  of  the  French.

Caldem,  FIRST,  on  their  majestys  most  Christian  part,  he  shall
tory.vol.S.  ma^e  tne  m°st  honourable  salutation  and  visiting  to  the
p.  208.  most  serene  king  of  Scotland,  their  good  brother  and  lit-
tle son,  that  in  him  is  possable.

To  give  him  their  letters  that  are  closed,  such  and  such  like  as
they  have  written  to  him  with  their  hands,  arid  to  show  expressly
the  perfect  friendship  and  singular  affection,  that  their  majestys
bear  to  him,  and  to  bring  back  the  answer.

To  take  heed  to  the  things  which  touch  near  the  most  serene
king,  to  the  effect  that  his  person  may  be  in  no  danger,  but  that  it
may  be  most  surely  preserved.

And  that  he  be  not  hindred  in  the  honest  liberty  that  he  ought
to  have,  and  that  no  greater  or  straiter  guards  be  about  him  than
he  had  before.

And  such  like,  that  he  be  not  impeached  in  the  authority,  that
God  hath  given  to  him  of  king  and  prince  sovereign  above  his
subjects,  to  the  effect  he  may  as  freely  ordain  and  command  in  his
affairs,  and  in  the  affairs  of  his  country,  with  his  ordinary  council,
as  he  was  used  to  do  of  before.

That  his  nobility,  barons,  and  commonality  of  his  country  may
have  their  free  liberty  to  resorf  to  his  serene  majesty  without  sus-
picion of  greater  guards  or  more  armed  men  about  his  person  than
the  use  was,  that  they  be  not  affraid  and  hindered  to  resort ;  and
further  that  the  segnieur  de  la  Motte  Fenelon  sail  liberally  and
freely  speak  to  the  said  serene  king  and  council,  requiring  the  re-'
establishing  of  that  that  may  or  hath  been  changed  or  altered.

And  that  he  may  know  if  the  principalls  of  the  nobility  and  other
men  of  good  behaviour  of  the  towns  and  commonality  of  the  con-
try  conveens,  and  are  content  with  the  form  of  government  pre-
sently with  the  said  serene  king,  to  the  end  that  if  their  be  any
miscontent  he  may  travaile  to  agree  them  together,  and  that  he  re-
turn not  without  the  certainty  of  the  samine.

And  if  he  may  understand  that  there  be  any  who  have  not  used
them  so  reverently  towards  the  said  serene  king  their  sovereign
lord,  as  the  duty  of  their  obedience  required,  that  he  may  pray  on
this  behalf  of  his  majesty  most  Christian  the  said  serene  king  his
good  brother,  giving  him  councill  wholly  to  forget  the  same,  and
exhorting  them  to  do  their  duty  towards  his  majesty,  in  time  com-
ing, in  all  respects  with  , the  obedience  and  true  subjection  they
ought  him.

APPENDIX.

405

And  if  the  said  segnieur  de  la  Motte  perceves  the  said  serene
king  to  be  in  any  manner  constrained  of  his  person,  authority,  li-
berty, and  disposition  of  his  affairs,  than  he  used  to  be,  and  not
convenient  for  his  royal  dignity,  or  as  the  sovereignty  of  a  prince
doth  require,  that  he  use  all  moyen  lawful  and  honest  to  place  him
in  the  samine,  and  that  he  employ  as  much  as  the  credit  of  his
most  Christian  majesty  may  do  toward  the  nobility  and  subjects  of
that  contry,  and  as  much  as  may  his  name,  with  the  name  of  his
crown  towards  the  Scottish  nation,  the  which  he  loves  and  con-
fides in  as  much  as  they  were  proper  Frenchmen.

And  that  he  wittness  to  the  said  serene  king,  and  his  estates,  of
his  consent,  and  to  all  the  nobility  and  principall  personages  of
the  contry,  that  his  most  Christian  majestie  will  continue  on  his
part  in  the  most  ancient  alliance  and  confedracy,  which  he  hath
had  with  the  said  serene  king  his  good  brother,  praying  his  nobi-
lity and  contry,  with  his  principall  subjects,  to  persevere  in  the  sa-
mine, in  all  good  understanding  and  friendship  with  him  ;  the
which,  on  his  part,  he  shall  do,  observing  the  samine  most  invio-
lable.

Further  his  most  Christian  majesty  understanding  that  the  se-
rene king  his  good  brother  was  contented  with  the  duke  of  Lenox,
and  his  servise,  the  said  signieur  de  la  Motte  had  charge  to  pray
his  serene  majesty  that  he  might  remaine  beside  him  to  his  con-
tentment, believing  that  he  should  more  willing  intertain  the  points
of  love  and  confederace,  betwixt  their  majestys  and  their  contrys,
because  he  was  a  good  subject  to  them  both  ;  and  if  he  might  not
remain,  without  some  alteration  of  the  tranquility  of  his  estate,
that  he  might  retire  him  to  his  own  house  in  the  said  contry,  in
surenes,  or  if  he  pleased  to  return  to  France  that  he  might  surely

and  if  it  pleases  his  serene  majesty,  to  cause  cease  and  stay

the  impeachments,  that  are  made  of  new  upon  the  frontiers,  to  the
effect  that  the  natural  Frenchmen  may  enter  as  freely  into  the
contry,  as  they  were  wont  to  do  of  before,  \^  -\

And  that  there  may  be  no  purpose  of  diffamation,  nor  no  speech
but  honourable  of  the  most  Christian  king,  in  that  contry,  but
such  like  as  is  spoken  most  honourably  of  the  serene  king  of  Scot-
land in  France.

He  had  another  head  to  propone,  which  he  concealed  till  a  little
before  his  departure,  to  wit,  that  the  queen,  the  king's  mother,  was
content  to  receive  her  son  in  association  of  the  kingdom.

406  SCOTLAND.

No.  XLIII. (Vol.  II.  p.  94.)

Lord  Hunsdane  to  Sir  Francis  Walsingham,  the  14M  of  August,  1584r

from  Berwick.
SIR,

MS^H^  ACCORDING  to  my  former  letters,  touching  my  meet-
tory.vol.  3.  m»  w^^  tne  earl  of  Arran  upon  Wednesday  last,  there
p.  374.  came  hither  to  me  from  the  earle,  the  justice  clerk,  and
Sir  William  Stuart,  captain  of  Dumbarton,  both  of  the  king's  privie
council,  to  treat  with  me  about  the  order  of  our  meeting,  referring
wholly  to  me  to  appoint  the  hour,  and  the  number  we  should  meet
withal ;  so  as  we  concluded  the  place  to  be  Foulden,  the  hour  to
be  ten  o'clock,  and  the  number  with  ourselves  to  be  13  of  a  side  ;
and  the  rest  of  our  troops  to  stand  each  of  them  a  mile  from  the
town ;  the  one  on  the  one  side,  the  other  on  the  other  side,  so  as
our  troops  were  two  miles  asunder  ;  I  was  not  many  horsemen,
but  I  supplied  it  with  footmen,  where  I  had  100  shot  on  horse,  but
they  were  very  near  500  horse  well  appointed  :  According  to  which
appointment,  we  met  yesterday,  and  after  some  congratulations,
the  earle  fell  in  the  like  protestations  of  his  good  will  and  readiness
to  serve  the  queen's  majesty,  before  any  prince  in  the  world,  next
his  sovereign,  as  he  had  done  heretofore  by  his  letters,  and  rather
more ;  with  such  earnest  vows,  as  unless  he  be  worse  than  a
devil,  her  majesty  may  dispose  of  him  at  her  pleasure  ;  this  being
ended,  T  entered  with  him  touching  the  cause  I  had  to  deal  with
him,  and  so  near  as  I  could,  left  nothing  unrehearsed  that  I  had  to
charge  the  king  or  him  with  any  unkind  dealing  toward  her  ma-
jesty, according  to  my  instructions,  which  without  any  delay  he
answered  presently,  as  ye  shall  perceive  by  the  said  answers  sent
herewith ;  but  I  replying  unto  him  he  amplified  them  with  many
moe  circumstances,  but  to  this  effect.  Then  I  dealt  with  him
touching  the  point  of  her  majesty's  satisfaction,  for  the  uttering
such  practices  as  has  been  lately  set  on  foot  for  the  disquieting  of
her  majesty  and  her  estate,  who  thereof  made  sundry  discourses,
what  marriages  have  been  offered  to  his  majestic  by  sundrie  princes,
and  by  what  means  the  earle  has  sought  to  divert  them,  and  for
what  causes;  the  one,  for  that  be  marriage  with  Spain  or  France,
he  must  also  alter  his  religion,  which  as  he  is  sure  the  king  will
never  doe,  so  will  he  never  suffer  him  to  hearken  unto  it,  so  long
as  he  hath  any  credit  with  him ;  he  denys  not  but  the  king  has
been  dealt  withal  be  practices  to  deal  against  her  majesty,  which
he  has  so  far  denied  and  refused  to  enter  into,  as  they  have  left
dealing  therein,  but  whatsoever  the  king  or  he  knoweth  therein,
there  shall  be  nothing  hidden  from  her  majesty,  as  her  majesty

APPENDIX.  407

shall  know  very  shortly;  surely  it  seems  by  his  speeches,  that  if
the  king  would  have  yielded  thereunto  there  had  been  no  small
company  of  French  in  Scotland  ere  now  to  disquiet  her  majesty.

This  being  ended,  I  dealt  with  him  earnestly  for  the  stay  of

this  parliament,  which  now  approacheth ;  or  at  the  least  that  there
may  be  nothing  done  therein,  to  the  prejudice  of  these  noblemen
and  others  now  in  England,  for  the  forfaulting  of  their  livings  and
goods  :  hereupon  he  made  a  long  discourse  to  me,  first  of  the  earl
of  Angus  dealing  about  the  earl  of  Morton,  then  of  his  going  out,
notwithstanding  of  sundrie  gracious  offers  the  king  had  made  him,
then  of  the  road  of  Ruthven,  how  that  presently  after  they  had  the
king's  majesty  in  their  hands,  they  imprisoned  himself,  dealt  with
the  king  for  putting  of  the  duke  out  of  the  realme,  the  king  re-
fused so  to  do,  they  told  him  plainly  that  if  he  would  not  he  should
have  the  earl  of  Arran's  head  in  a  dish ;  the  king  asked  what  of-
fence the  earl  had  made  ?  and  they  answered  it  must  be  so,  and
should  be  so ;  hereupon  for  the  safeguard  of  Arran's  life,  the  king
was  content  to  send  away  the  duke,  and  yet  Arran  afterwards
sundrie  times  in  danger  of  his  life  ;  I  alledged  unto  him  the  king's
letter  to  the  queen's  majesty,  and  his  acts  in  council,  that  they
had  done  nothing  but  for  his  servise,  and  with  his  good  liking  and
contentment,  who  answered  me,  he  durst  do  no  otherwise,  nor
could  not  do  any  thing  but  that  which  pleased  them,  with  such  a
number  of  other  their  dealings  with  the  king  whitest  he  was  in  their
hands  as  are  too  long  to  be  written,  and  too  bad  if  they  were  true;
I  said  the  king  might  have  let  the  queen's  majesty's  ambassador
have  known  his  mind  secretly,  and  her  majesty  would  have  relieved
him  ;  he  answered,  that  the  king  was  not  ignorant  that  the  appre-
hensions in  that  manner  proceeded  from  Mr.  Bow's  practice,  and
thereby  durst  not  impart  so  much  to  him,  and  yet  the  king  was
content,  and  did  give  remission  to  as  many  as  would  acknowledge
their  faults,  and  ask  remission,  and  such  as  would  not,  he  thought
fit  to  banish,  to  try  their  further  loyalty,  in  which  time  they  con-
spired the  king's  second  apprehension,  and  the  killing  of  the  earle,
and  others,  and  seduced  the  ministers  to  their  faction,  and  yet  not
satisfied  with  these  conspiracies  and  treasonable  dealings  (as  he
terms  them),  are  entered  into  a  third,  being  in  England  under  her
majesty's  protection  to  dishonour  her  majesty  as  far  as  in  them
lieth,  or  at  least  to  cause  the  king  conceive  some  unkindness  in  her
majesty,  for  harbouring  of  them ;  I  wrote  to  you  what  the  conspi-
racy was,  the  taking  of  the  king,  the  killing  of  the  earle  of  Arran,
and  some  others,  the  taking  of  the  castle  of  Edinr,  and  bringing
home  the  carles  to  take  the  charge  of  the  king ;  all  which  (says  he)
is  by  Drummond  confessed,  and  by  the  provost  of  Glencudden  not
greatly  denied,  and  the  constable  of  the  castle  thereupon  fled ;  the

400  SCOTLAND.

earl  brought  Drummond  with  him  as  far  as  Langton,  where  he  lay,
to  have  confessed  the  conspiracy  before  me,  but  having  at  his
lighting  received  a  blow  on  his  leg  with  a  horse,  so  as  he  could
bring  him  no  further,  I  replied  that  I  thought  verily  they  would  not
work  any  such  practices  in  respect  of  the  queen's  majesty,  abiding
within  her  realme,  and  if  there  be  any  such  practices,  they  have
proceeded  from  others,  and  they  not  privie  unto  them  :  and  that  if
it  be  not  apparently  proved  against  them,  that  it  will  be  thought  to
be  some  practice  to  aggravate  the  fault,  and  to  make  them  the
more  odious to  the  king. He  answered  me,  that  it  should  be
proved  so  sufficiently,  that  they  should  not  be  able  with  truth  to
deny  it,  for  their  own  hands  is  to  be  showed  to  part  of  it,  and  there-
fore concluded,  that  if  her  majesty  should  so  press  the  king  for  them
at  this  time  that  would  rather  hinder  this  matter  of  amity,  nor  fur-
ther it,  and  that  since  they  seek  chiefly  his  life,  he  could  not,  in  any
reason,  seek  to  do  them  any  good  ;  and  besides  he  assured  me,  that
if  he  would,  he  dare  not,  this  last  matter  being  fallen  out  as  it  is;  and
surely  if  this  matter  had  not  fallen  out,  I  would  not  have  doubted
the  restoring  of  the  earl  of  Mar  very  shortly,  if  her  majesty  would
have  employed  me  therein,  but  for  the  earl  of  Angus,  I  perceive  the
king  is  persuaded  that  both  he,  and  the  rest  of  the  Douglasses,  have
conceived  so  mortall  an  hatred  against  him  and  the  earl  of  Arran,
about  the  death  of  the  earl  of  Morton,  as  if  they  were  at  home,  to-
morrow next,  they  would  not  leave  to  practise  and  conspire  the
death  of  them  both,  and  therefore  a  hard  matter  to  do  any  thing  for
him  ;  finally,  he  concluded  and  required  me  to  assure  her  majesty
from  the  king,  that  there  shall  nothing  be  hid  from  her,  nor  any
thing  left  undone  that  may  satisfie  her  majesty  with  reason,  and  that
the  king  shall  never  do  any  thing,  nor  consent  to  have  any  thing
done  in  her  prejudice,  so  long  as  he  had  any  credit  with  him,  or  au-
thority under  him. Having  this  far  proceeded,  he  desired  to  shew
me  his  commission,  which  is  under  the  great  seal,  to  himself  only,
which  is  as  large  as  may  be,  and  yet  sundrie  of  the  privie  councel
there  with  him,  but  not  one  in  commission,  nor  present,  nor  near  us
all  this  time,  having  spent  almost  five  hours  in  these  matters ;  he
presented  to  me  the  master  of  Gray,  who  delivered  to  me  a  letter
from  the  king  in  his  commendation,  whom  I  perceive  the  king  means
to  send  to  her  majesty,  and  therefore  requires  a  safe-conduct  for  his
passage,  which  I  pray  yow  procure,  and  to  send  it  so  soon  as  you
may. I  let  him  understand  of  the  lord  Seaton's  negociation  with
the  French  king. He  swore  to  me,  that  Seaton  was  but  a  knave,
and  that  it  was, partly  against  his  will,  that  he  should  be  sent  thither.
But  his  commission  and  instruction  being  of  no  great  importance,
he  yielded  the  sooner ;  and  if  Seaton  has  gone  beyond  his  instruc-
tions, which  Arran  drew  himself,  he  will  make  Seaton  smart  for  it.

.APPENDIX.  109

Touching  William  Newgate  and  Mark  Golgan,  he  protested  he
never  heard  of  any  such  ;  he  says  there  was  a  little  poor  soul,  with
a  black  beard,  come  thither  a-begging,  who  said  he  was  an  enemy
to  Desmond,  to  whom  he  gave  a  croun,  but  never  heard  of  him
since,  and  for  any  Scots  man  going  into  Ireland,  he  says  there  is  no
such  matter;  if  there  be,  there  maybe  some  few  raskals  that  he
knows  not  of ;  and  touching  the  coming  of  any  Jesuits  into  Scot-
land, he  says  itis  but  the  slanderous  devise  of  the  king's  enemy  s,  and
such  as  would  have  the  world  believe  the  king  were  ready  to  revolt
in  religion,  who  the  world  shall  well  see  will  continue  as  constant
therein,  as  what  prince  soever  professed  it  most;  and  the  earle  him-
self dos  protest  to  me,  that  to  his  knowledge,  he  never  saw  a  Jesuit
in  his  life,  and  did  assure  me  if  there  was  any  in  Scotland,  they
should  not  do  so  much  harm  in  Scotland,  as  their  ministers  would
do,  if  they  preach  such  doctrine  as  they  did  in  Scotland ;  and  touch-
ing one  Ballanden,  of  whom  I  wrote  to  yow,  I  heard  from  Mr.  Colvil,
the  earle  avows  constantly  that  he  knows  not,  nor  hath  not  heard  of
any  such  man,  but  he  would  inquire  at  the  justice  clerk,  and  would
inform  me  what  he  could  learn  of  that ;  thus  I  have  made  yow  as
short  a  discourse  as  I  can  of  so  many  matters,  so  long  discoursed
upon,  but  these  are  the  principal  points  of  all  our  talk,  so  near  as  I
can  remember  it,  and  for  this  time  I  commit  yow  to  the  Almighty.
At  Berwick  the  14th  of  August,  1584.
Thej  king  is  very  desirous  to  have
my  son  Robert  Carrie  to  come  to  him.
I  pray  you  know  her  Majesty's  pleasure.

A  iran's  Answers  to  the  griefs  or  articles  proponed  to  the  Lord  Hunsdane,
set  down  in  another  form.

As  to  the  strait  and  severe  persecution  of  all  such,  as  have  been
noted  to  have  been  well  affected  to  the  queen's  majesty,  it  cannot
appear  they  were  either  for  that  cause  punished,  or  hardly  dealt  with,
since  his  majesty  of  late  has  been  so  careful  and  diligent  to  choice
out  good  instruments  to  deal  betwixt  her  majesty  and  him,  as  his
majesty  has  done  in  electing  of  your  lordship  and  me ;  besides  that
in  all  their  accusations,  their  good  will  and  affection  born  to  her
majesty  was,  at  no  time,  laid  to  their  charge,  but  capital  actions  of
treason  many  way  tried  now  be  the  whole  three  estates,  and  more
than  manifest  to  the  world.

As  for  his  majesty  inhibiting,  by  public  proclamation,  such  as  were
banished,  not  to  repair  in  England ;  the  bruits  and  whisperings  that
came  to  his  majesty's  ears,  of  their  conspiracies  and  treasons,  which
since  syn  they  accomplished,  so  far  as  in  them  lay,  moved  his  ma-
jesty to  inhibit  them  to  repair  to  any  place,  so  near  his  majesty's
realm,  lest  they  should  have  attempted  these  things,  which  shortly

410  SCOTLAND.

they  did  attempt,  being  farther  off,  and  more  distant  both  by  sea  and
land.

As  for  reception  of  Jesuits,  and  others,  her  majesty's  fugitives,
and  not  delivering  them  according  to  his  promise,  as  your  lordship
propones,  his  majesty  would  be  most  glad,  that  so  it  might  fall  out
by  your  lordship's  traviles,  that  no  fugitive  of  either  realms  should
be  received  of  either,  and  when  so  shall  be,  it  shall  not  fail  on  his
majesty's  part,  albeit  in  very  deed  this  time  bygone  his  majesty  has
been  constrained  to  receipt  her  majesty's  mean  rebells  and  fugitives,
contrar  his  good  naturall,  since  her  majesty  hath  receipt,  in  effect,
the  whole  and  greatest  rebells  and  traitors  his  majesty  in  his  own
blood  ever  had ;  as  for  the  agreement  with  his  majesty's  mother
anent  their  association,  his  majesty  has,  commanded  me,  in  presence
of  your  lordship's  servant,  to  assure  her  majesty  and  your  lordship,
in  his  majesty's  name,  that  it  is  altogether  false,  and  an  untruth,  nor
any  such  like  matter  done  yet.

His  majesty  has  also  commanded  me  to  assure  your  lordship,  that
it  is  also  false  and  untrue,  that  his  majesty  has,  by  any  means  direct
or  indirect,  sent  any  message  to  the  pope,  or  received  any  from  him ;
or  that  his  majesty  has  dealt  with  Spain  or  any  foreigners,  to  harm
her  majesty  or  her  realm,  which  his  majesty  could  have  no  honour
to  do,  this  good  intelligence  taking  place,  as  I  hope  in  God  it  shall.

As  concerning  the  contemptuous  usage  of  her  majesty's  ministers
sent  unto  his  majesty,  his  majesty  used  none  of  them  so,  and  if  his
majesty  had,  sufficient  cause  was  given  by  them,  as  some  of  their
own  writs  do  yet  testify  ;  as  I  more  particularly  showed  your  lord-
ship at  Foulden  at  our  late  meeting.

No.  XLIV. (Vol.  II.  p.  98.)

The  Scottish  Queens  offers  upon  the  effect  of  her  liberty  propounded  by
her  Secretary  Nino,  November  1584.

Coit  Lib  THE  (lueen  my  mistress  being  once  wel1  assured  of  your
Calig.  C.  8.  majesty's  amity,

A  Copy.  i .  Will  declare  openly  that  she  will  (as  it  is  sincerely
her  meaning)  straitly  to  join  unto  your  majesty,  and  to  the  same  to
yield  and  bear  the  chief  honour  and  respect,  before  all  other  kings
and  princes  in  Christendom.

2.  She  will  swear,  and  protest  solemnly,  a  sincere  forgetfullness
of  all  wrongs  which  she  may  pretend  to  have  been  done  unto  her  in
this  realm,  and  will  never  in  any  sort  or  manner  whatsoever,  shew
offence  for  the  same.

3.  She  will  avow  and  acknowledge,  as  well  in  her  own  particular
name, as  also  for  her  heirs  and  others  descending  of  her  for  ever,
your  majesty,  for  just,  true,  and  lawful  queen  of  England.

APPENDIX.  411

4.  And  consequently,  will  renounce,  as  well  for  herself  as  for  her
said  heirs,  all  rights  and  pretences  which  she  may  claim  to  the  crown
of  England,  during  your  majesty's  life,  and  other  prejudice.

5.  She  will  revoke  all  acts  and  shews,  by  her  heretofore  made,  of
pretence  to  this  said  crown  to  the  prejudice  of  your  majesty,  as  may
be  the  taking  of  the  arms  and  stile  of  queen  of  England,  by  the  com-
mandment of  king  Francis  her  late  lord  and  husband.

6.  She  will  renounce  the  pope's  bull  for  so  much  as  may  be  ex-
pounded to  turn  in  her  favour,  or  for  her  behoof,  touching  the  de-
privation of  your  majesty,  and  will  declare  that  she  will  never  help
and  serve  herself  with  it.

7.  She  will  not  prosecute,  during  your  majesty's  life,  by  open  force
or  otherways,  any  public  declaration  of  her  right  in  the  succession
of  this  realm,  so  as  secret  assurance  be  given  unto  her,  or  at  the  least
public  promise,  that  no  deciding  thereof  shall  be  made  in  the  pre-
judice of  her,  or  of  the  king  her  son,  during  your  majesty's  life,  nor
after  your  decease,  untill  such  time  as  they  have  been  heard  there-
upon, in  publick,  free,  and  general  assembly  of  the  parliament  of  the
said  realm.

8.  She  will  not  practise,  directly  or  indirectly,  with  any  of  your  ma-
jesty's subjects,  neither  within  nor  out  of  your  realm,  any  thing  tend-
ing to  war,  civil  or  foreign,  against  your  majesty  and  your  estate,  be
it  under  pretext  of  religion,  or  for  civil  and  politick  government.

9.  She  will  not  maintain  or  support  any  of  your  subjects  declared
rebels,  and  convicted  of  treason  against  you.

10.  She  will  enter  into  the  association,  which  was  shewed  her  at
Wingfield  for  the  surety  of  your  majesty's  life,  so  as  there  be  mended
or  right  explicated  some  clauses  which  I  will  shew  to  your  majesty,
when  I  shall  have  the  copy  thereof,  as  I  have  before  time  required.

11.  She  will  not  treat  with  foreign  kings  and  princes,  for  any  war
or  trouble  against  this  state,  and  will  renounce,  from  this  time,  all  en-
terprises made  or  to  be  made  in  her  favour  for  that  respect.

12.  Furthermore,  this  realm  being  assailed  by  any  civil  or  foreign
war,  she  will  take  part  with  your  majesty,  and  will  assist  you  in  your
defence  with  all  her  forces  and  means,  depending  of  herself  and  with
all  her  friends  of  Christendom.

13.  And  to  that  effect,  for  the  mutual  defence  and  maintenance
of  your  majesty,  and  the  two  realms  of  this  isle,  she  will  enter  with
your  majesty  in  a  league  defensive  as  shall  be  more  particularly  ad-
vised, and  will  persuade  as  much  as  in  her,  the  king  her  son  to  do
the  like.  The  leagues  with  all  parts  abroad  remaining  firm,  and  espe-
cially the  antient  league  between  France  and  Scotland,  in  that  which
shall  not  be  against  this  present.

14.  She  will  enter  into  a  league  offensive,  having  good  assurance

412  SCOTLAND.

or  secret  declaration  and  acknowledgement  of  her  right  in  the  suc-
cession of  this  crown,  and  promise  that  happening  any  breach  betwixt
France  and  this  realm  (which  she  prayeth  God  never  to  happen),
the  just  value  of  her  dowry  shall  be  placed  for  her  in  lands  of  the
revenue  of  the  crown.

15.  For  assurance  of  her  promises  and  covenants,  she  doth  offer
to  abide  herself  in  this  realm  for  a  certain  time  (better  hostage  can
she  not  give  than  her  own  person),  to  which,  so  as  she  be  kept  in  the
liberty  here  before  propounded,  is  not  in  case  to  escape  secretly  out
of  this  country,  in  the  sickly  state  she  is  in,  and  with  the  good  order
which  your  majesty  can  take  therein.

16.  And  in  case  your  majesty  do  agree  to  her  full  and  whole  de-
liverance, to  retire  herself  at  her  will  out  of  this  realm,  the  said  queen
of  Scots  she  will  give  sufficient  hostage  for  such  time  as  will  be
advised.

17.  If  she  abide  in  this  realm,  she  will  promise  not  to  depart  out
of  it  without  your  licence,  so  as  it  be  promised  unto  her  that  her  state,
in  such  liberty  as  shall  be  accorded  unto  her,  shall  not  be  in  any  sort
altered,  untill  after  try  all  to  have  attempted  against  your  life,  or
other  trouble  of  your  estate.

18.  If  she  go  into  Scotland,  she  will  promise  to  alter  nothing  there
in  the  religion  which  is  now  used  there,  she  being  suffered  to  have
free  exercise  of  hers,  for  her  and  her  household,  as  it  was  at  her  re-
turn out  of  France ;  and  further,  to  pull  out  every  root  of  new  divi-
sion between  the  subjects,  that  none  of  the  subjects  of  Scotland  shall
be  sifted  for  his  conscience,  nor  constrained  to  go  to  the  service  of
the  contrary  religion.

19.  She  will  grant  a  general  abolition  of  all  offences,  done  against
her  in  Scotland,  and  things  shall  remain  there  as  they  are  at  this
present,  for  that  respect,  saving  that  which  hath  been  done  against
her  honour,  which  she  meaneth  to  have  revoked  and  annulled.

20.  She  will  travel  to  settle  a  sure  and  general  reconciliation  be-
tween the  nobility  of  the  country,  and  to  cause  to  be  appointed  about
the  king  her  son,  and  in  his  council,  such  as  shall  be  fit  for  the  en-
tertainment of  the  peace  and  quiet  of  the  country,  and  the  amity  of
the  realm.

21 .  She  will  do  her  best  to  content  your  majesty,  in  favour  of  the
Scots  lords  banished  and  refuged  hither,  upon  their  due  submission
to  their  princes,  and  your  majesty's  promise  to  assist  the  said  queen
and  king  of  Scotland  against  them,  if  they  happen  to  fall  into  their
former  faults.

22.  She  will  proceed  to  the  marriage  of  the  king  her  son,  with  the
advice  and  good  council  of  your  majesty.

23.  As  she  will  pass  nothing  without  the  king  her  son,  so  doth  she

APPENDIX.  413

desire  that  he  intervene  conjointly  with  her  in  this  treaty,  for  the
greater  and  perfecter  assurance  thereof;  for  otherwise  any  thing
can  hardly  be  established  to  be  sound  and  continue.

24.  The  said  Scotch  queen  trusteth,  that  the  French  king,  her  good
brother,  according  to  the  good  affection  which  hehath  always  shewed
her,  and  hath  been  afresh  testified  unto  me  by  Monsr.  de  Mannissiere
for  this  said  treaty,  will  very  willingly  intervene,  and  will  assist  her
for  the  surety  of  her  promises.

25.  And  so  will  the  princes  of  the  house  of  Lorrain,  following  the
will  of  the  said  king,  will  bind  themselves  thereunto.

26.  For  other  kings  and  princes  of  Christendom,  she  will  assay
to  obtain  the  like  of  them,  if  for  greater  solemnity  and  approbation
of  the  treaty  it  be  found  to  be  necessary.

27.  She  doth  desire  a  speedy  answer,  and  final  conclusion  of  the
premisses,  to  the  end  to  meet  in  time  with  all  inconveniences.

28.  And  in  the  mean  time,  the  more  to  strengthen  the  said  treaty,
as  made  by  her  of  a  pure  and  frank  will,  she  desireth  that  demon-
stration be  made  of  some  releasement  of  her  captivity.

Objections  against  the  Scottish  Queen,  under  Secretary  Walsinghame's
hand,  November  1584.

THE  queen  of  Scots  is  ambitious,  and  standeth  ill  affected  to  her
majesty,  and  therefore  it  cannot  be  but  that  her  liberty  should  bring
peril  unto  her  majesty.

That  her  enlargement  will  give  comfort  to  Papists,  and  other  ill
affected  subjects,  and  greatly  advance  the  opinion  had  of  her  title
as  successor.

That  as  long  as  she  shall  be  continued  in  her  majesty's  possession,
she  may  serve  as  it  were  a  gage  of  her  majesty's  surety,  for  that  her
friends,  for  fear  of  the  danger  she  may  be  thrown  into,  in  case  any
thing  should  be  done  in  her  favour,  dare  not  attempt  any  thing  in
the  offence  of  her  majesty.

November  C  What  course  were  Jit  to  be  taken  with  the  Queen  of  Scots,
1584. \  either  to  be  enlarged  or  not.

Cott.  Lib. THE  course  to  be  taken  with  the  said  queen  may  be  con-
"a  '  8* sidered  of  in  three  degrees  : either,

1.  To  continue  her  under  custody  in  that  state  she  now  is.

2.  To  restrain  her  of  the  present  liberty  she  now  hath.

3.  Or  to  set  her  at  liberty  upon  caution.

1.  Touching  the  first,  to  continue  her  under  custody  in  that  state
she  now  is  ;  it  is  to  be  considered,  that  the  princes  that  favour  that
queen,  upon  the  complaint  she  maketh  of  hard  usage,  are  greatly
moved  with  commiseration  towards  her,  and  promise  to  do  their

414  SCOTLAND.

endeavour  for  her  liberty,  for  which  purpose  her  ministers  solicit
them  daily.

And  to  move  them  the  more  to  pity  her  case,  she  acquainteth  them
with  her  offers  made  to  her  majesty,  which  appeared  to  be  no  less
profitable  than  reasonable  for  her  majesty,  so  as  the  refusal  and  re-
jecting giveth  her  friends  and  favourers  cause  to  think  her  hardly
dealt  withal,  and  therefore  may,  with  the  better  ground  and  reason,
attempt  somewhat  for  the  setting  of  her  at  liberty.

It  is  also  likely  that  the  said  queen,  upon  this  refusal,  finding  her
case  desperate,  will  continue  r^er  practice  under  hand,  both  at  home
and  abroad,  not  only  for  her  delivery,  but  to  obtain  to  the  present
possession  of  this  crown  upon  Her^pretended  title,  as  she  hath  hi-
therto done,  as  appeareth,  and  is  most  manifest  by  letters  and  plots
intercepted,  and  chiefly  by  that  late  alteration  of  Scotland,  which
hath  proceeded  altogether  by  her  direction,  'whereby  a  gap  is  laid
open  for  the  malice  of  all  her  majesty's  enemies,  so  as  it  appeareth
that  this  manner  of  keeping  her,  with  such  number  of  persons  as  she
now  hath  and  with  liberty  to  write  and  receive  letters  (being  duly
considered),  is  offensive  to  the  princes,  the  said  qeeen's  friends;
rather  chargeable  than  profitable  to  her  majesty ;  and  subject  to  all
such  practices  as  may  peril  her  majesty's  person  or  estate,  without
any  provision  for  her  majesty's  safety,  and  therefore  no  way  to  be
liked  of.

2.  Touching  the  second,  to  restrain  her  in  a  more  straighter  de-
gree of  the  liberty  she  hath  hitherto  enjoyed.

It  may  at  first  sight  be  thought  a  remedy  very  apt  to  stop  the
course  of  the  dangerous  practices  fostered  heretofore  by  her:  for
true  it  is,  that  this  remedy  might  prove  very  profitable,  if  the  realm
of  Scotland  stood  in  that  sort  devoted  to  her  majesty,  as  few  years
past  it  did ;.  and  if  the  king  of  that  realm  were  not  likely,  as  well  for
the  release  of  his  mother,  as  for.  the  advancement  of  both  their  pre-
tended titles,  to  attempt  somewhat  against  this  realm  and  her  ma-
jesty, wherein  he  should  neither  lack  foreign  assistance,  nor  a  party
here  within  this  realm :  but  the  king  and  that  realm  standing  af-
fected as  they  do,  this  restraint,  instead  of  remedying,  is  likely  to
breed  these  inconveniences  following :

First,  It  will  increase  the  offence  both  in  him,  and  in  the  rest  of
the  princes  her  friends,  that  misliked  of  her  restraint.

Secondly,  It  will  give  them  just  cause  to  take  some  way  of  redress.

Lastly,  It  is  to  be  doubted,  that  it  may  provoke  some  desperate
ill-disposed  person,  all  hope  of  her  liberty  removed,  to  attempt
somewhat  against  her  majesty's  own  person  (a  matter  above  all
others  to  be  weighed),  which  inconveniency  being  duly  considered,
it  will  appear  manifestly,  that  the  restraint,  in  a  straighter  degree,
is  likely  to  prove  a  remedy  subject  to  very  hard  events.

APPENDIX.

415

The  latter  degree,  whether  it  were  fit  to  set  the  said  queen  at
liberty,  ministereth  som§  cause  of  doubt,  touching  the  manner  of
the  liberty,  in  what  sort  the  same  is  to  be  performed,  whether  to  be
continued  here  within  the  realm,  or  to  be  restored  into  her  own
country.

But  first,  this  proposition,  before  the  particularities  be  weighed,
is  to  be  considered  in  generality.

For  it  is  very  hard  for  a  well-affected  subject,  that  tendreth  her
majesty's  surety,  and  weigheth  either  the  nature  of  the  Scottish
queen,  being  inclined  to  ambition  and  revenge,  or  her  former  ac-
tions, what  practices  she  hath  set  on  foot  most  dangerous  for  her
majesty  and  this  realm,  to  allow  of  her  liberty,  being  not  made  ac-
quainted with  such  causes,  as  time  hath  wrought,  to  make  it  less
perilous  than  it  hath  been,  nor  with  such  cautions  as  may,  in  some
sort,  be  devised  to  prevent  both  her  ambition  and  malice  ;  and  there-
fore, to  make  this  apparent,

It  is  to  be  considered,  that  the  danger  that  was  in  the  mother,  is
now  grown  to  be  in  the  son.  He  pretendeth  the  same  title  she
doth :  such  as  do  affect  her,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  do  affect
him  (and  he  is  the  more  dangerous  for  that  he  is  unmarried,  which
may  greatly  advance  his  fortune ;  and  that  he  is  a  man,  whereby  he
may  enter  into  action  in  his  own  person)  ;  where  she  is  restrained,
he  is  at  liberty ;  his  own  realm  is  now  altogether  at  his  devotion,
and  the  party  affected  to  this  crown  abased ;  so  as  the  matter  duly
considered,  neither  her  liberty  nor  restraint  doth  greatly  alter  the
case  for  perils  towards  her  majesty,  unless  by  such  promises  as
may  be  made  by  way  of  treaty  with  her,  the  danger  likely  to  grow
from  the  king  her  son  be  provided  for.

But  in  this  behalf  it  may  be  objected,  that  so  long  as  the  mother
remains  in  her  majesty's  hands,  the  king  will  attempt  nothing  for
fear  of  his  mother's  peril.

To  this  objection  it  may  be  answered,  first,  That  they  hope  that
her  majesty,  being  a  prince  of  justice,  and  inclined  to  mercy,  will
not  punish  the  mother  for  the  son's  offence,  unless  she  shall  be
found  by  good  proof,  culpable.  Secondarily,  That  men  will  not  be
over  hasty,  considering  in  what  predicament  the  king  standeth
touching  his  expectation  of  this  crown,  to  advise  any  thing  that  in
time  future  may  be  dangerous  to  the  giver  of  such  council  as  may
reach  to  his  mother's  peril.

And  lastly,  The  taking  away  of  his  mother,  he  being  strong  in
the  field  through  both  foreign  assistance,  and  a  party  here  within
the  realm,  will  appear  so  weak  a  remedy  (which  may  rather  exaspe-
rate both  him  and  her  party,  to  proceed  with  more  courage  and
heat  to  revenge,  if  any  such  hard  measure  should  be  offered  unto

410  SCOTLAND.

her),  as  they  will  suppose,  for  the  reason  above  specified,  that  no
such  extremity  will  be  used.

It  may  also  be  objected,  that  the  setting  of  her  at  liberty  will
greatly  encourage  the  Papists  both  at  home  and  abroad ;  but  herein,
if  the  provision  be  duly  considered,  that  may  be  made  by  Parlia-
ment both  here  and  there,  they  shall  rather  find  cause  of  discomfort
than  otherwise.

These  two  doubts  being  resolved,  and  the  perils  that  was  in  the
mother  appearing  most  manifestly  to  be  seen  in  the  son  accompa-
nied with  more  danger,  with  due  consideration  had  also  of  such  re-
medies as  may  be  provided  for  the  preventing  of  the  dangers,  that
her  liberty  may  minister  just  cause  to  doubt  of;  there  will  be  good
cause  of  hope  found,  that  the  same  will  rather  breed  benefit  than
perils.

Now  it  resteth,  in  what  sort  the  said  liberty  shall  be  performed ;
if  it  shall  be  thought  meet  she  shall  be  continued  within  the  realm
with  some  limitation,  especially  in  that  place  where  she  now  re-
sideth,  the  country  round  about  being  so  infected  in  religion  as  it
is,  it  is  greatly  to  be  doubted  that  will  very  much  increase  the  cor-
ruption, and  falling  away  in  that  behalf.  Besides,  she  should  have
commodity,  with  much  more  ease  and  speed,  to  entertain  practices
within  this  realm,  than  by  being  in  her  own  country.

If  abroad  freely  without  limitation  either  in  Scotland  or  France,
then  shall  her  majesty  lose  the  gages  of  her  safety,  then  shall  she
be  at  hand  to  give  advice  in  furtherance  of  such  practices,  as  have
been  laid  for  to  stir  trouble  in  this  realm,  wherein  she  hath  been  a
principal  party.

For  the  first,  it  is  answered  as  before,  that  the  respect  of  any
perils  that  may  befal  unto  her,  will  in  no  sort  restrain  her  son.  For
the  other,  if  it  be  considered  what  harm  her  advice  will  work  unto
herself,  in  respect  of  the  violation  of  the  treaty,  and  the  provision
that  may  be  made  in  parliament'  here,  it  is  to  be  thought,  that  she
will  then  be  well  advised,  before  she  attempt  any  such  matter,
which  now  she  may  do  without  perill.  Besides  such  princes,  as
have  interposed  their  faith  and  promise  for  her,  cannot  with  honour
assist  her,  wherein  the  French  king  will  not  be  found  very  forward,
who,  in  most  friendly  sort,  hath  lately  rejected  all  such  requests,
propounded  either  by  her,  or  her  son's  ministers,  that  might  any
way  offend  her  majesty.  And  so  to  conclude,  seeing  the  cause  of
her  grief  shall  be  taken  away ;  the  French  king  gratified,  who  is  a
mediator  for  her,  and  will  mislike,  that,  by  any  Spanish  practice,
she  should  be  drawn  to  violate  her  faith,  that  the  rest  of  the
princes  shall  have  no  just  cause  of  offence,  but  rather  to  think  ho-
nourably of  her  majesty,  considering  the  Scottish  queen's  carriage

APPENDIX.  417

towards  her,  which  hath  deserved  no  way  any  such  favour ;  the  no-
blemen of  Scotland  shall  be  restored,  who  will  be  a  good  stay  of
such  counsells  as  may  tend  to  the  troubling  of  this  realm,  espe-
cially having  so  good  a  ground  of  warrant  as  the  parliament  to
stand  unto;  the  charges  and  perills  which  her  practices  might  have
bred  to  this. realm  shall  be  avoided;  and  lastly,  the  hope  of  the
Papists  shall  be  taken  away,  by  such  good  provisions,  as  in  both
the  realms  may  be  made,  whereby  the  periils  that  might  fall  into
her  majesty's  own  person  (a  matter  of  all  others  to  be  weighed),
shall  be  avoided,  when  by  the  change  that  may  grow  by  any  such
wicked  and  ungodly  practice,  they  shall  see  their  case  no  way  re-
lieved in  point  of  religion.

Reasons  to  induce  her  Majesty  to  proceed  in  the  treaty  under
Secretary  Walsingham's  hand.

That  such  plots  as  have  of  late  years  been  devised  (tend-
Cal?  C.  8.'  inS  to  ^e  raismg  of  trouble  within  this  realm)  have  grown
from  the  Scot's  queen's  ministers  and  favourers,  not  with-
out her  allowance  and  seeking  :  Or,

That  the  means  used  by  the  said  ministers,  to  induce  princes  to
give  ear  to  the  said  plots,  is  principally  grounded  upon  some  com-
miseration had  of  her  restraint.

That  the  stay,  why  the  said  plots  have  not  been  put  in  execution,
hath  proceeded,  for  that  the  said  princes  have,  for  the  most  part
been  entertained  with  home  and  domestic  troubles.

That  it  is  greatly  to  be  doubted,  that  now  their  realms  begin  to
be  quiet,  that  somewhat  will  be  attempted  in  her  favours  by  the  said
princes.

That  it  is  also  to  be  doubted,  that  somewhat  may  be  attempted
by  some  of  her  fautors  in  an  extraordinary  sort,  to  the  perill  of  her
majesty.

That  for  the  preservation  thereof,  it  shall  be  convenient  for  her
majesty  to  proceed  to  the  finishing  of  the  treaty,  not  long  sithence
begun  between  her  and  the  said  queen.

V" ' .

No.  XLV. (Vol.  II.  p.  106.)

Letter  of  Q.  Mary  to  Q.  Elizabeth.

MADAME  MA  BONNE  SEUR,

M'ASSEURANT  que  vousavez  eu  communication  d'une
CoKB.1  lettre  de  Gray  que  vostre  homme  Semer  me  livra\  hier
VIII.  Fol.  Soubz  le  nom  de  mon  filz,  y  recongnoissant  quasi  de  raOt  a
*a  mot  niesmes  raisons  que  le  dit  Gray  m'escrivit  en  cliifre
extant  dernierementpres  de  vous  desmonstrantla  suffisance

VOL. II.  2  E

418  SCOTLAND.

&  bonne  intention  du  personage,  je  vous  prieray  settlement  suivant
ce  que  si  devant  je  vous  ay  tant  instantement  importune,  que  vous
me  permettiez  desclaircir  librement  &  ouvertement  ce  point  de  1'as-
sociation  d'entre  moy  &  mon  filz  &  me  dessier  les  mains  pour  pro-
ceder  avec  lui  comme  je  jugeray  estre  requis  pour  son  bien  &  le
mien.  Et  j'entreprendz  quoy  que  Ton  vous  die  &  puisse  en  rap-
porter  de  faire  mentir  ce  petit  brouillon,  qui  persuade  par  aucuns  de
vos  ministres  a  entepris  cette  separation  entre  moy  &  mon  enfant,
&  pour  y  commencer  je  vous  supplie  m'octroyer  qui  je  puisse  parler
a  ce  justice-clerk  qui  vous  a  este  nouvellement  envoye  pour  mander
par  luy  a  mon  filz  mon  intention  sur  cela,  ce  qui  je  me  promis  que
ne  me  refuserez,  quant  ce  ne  seroit  que  pour  demontrer  en  effect  la
bonne  intention  que  vous  m'avez  asseuree  avoir  a  Paccord  &  entre-
tien  de  naturel  devoir  entre  la  mere  &  1'enfant  qui  dit  en  bonnes
termes  estre  empesche  pour  vous  me  tenant  captive  en  un  desert  ce
que  vous  ne  pourrez  mieux  desmentir  &  faire  paroitre  vostre  bon
desir  a  notre  union  que  me  donnant  les  raoyens  d'y  proceder,  &  non
m'en  retenir  et  empescher  comme  aucune  des  vos  ministres  preten-
dent  a  fin  de  laisser  toujours  lieu  a  leur  mauvais  &  sinistres  prac-
tiques  entre  nous.  La  lettre  porte  que  1'association  n'est  pas  passee,
aussi  ne  luy  ai  je  jamais  dit,  bien  que  mon  filz  avoit  accepte ;  &  que
nous  en  avions  convenu  ensemble,  comme  1'acte  signe  de  sa  main,
&  ces  lettres  tant  a  moy,  que  en  France  en  font  foy,  ayant  donne
ce  meme  temoignage  de  sabouche  propre  a  plusieurs  ambassadeurs
&  personnes  de  credit,  s'excusant  de  ne  Toser  faire  publier  par  craint
de  vous  soulement,  demandant  forces  pour  vous  resister  d'avant  de
ce  declarer  si  ouvertement  estant  journellement  persuade  au  con-
traire  par  vos  ministres,  qui  luy  prometoyent  avecque  une  entreire  a
Yorck  le  faire  declairer  votre  heretier.  Au  surplus,  Madame,  quand
mon  enfant  seroit  si  malheureux  que  de  s'opiniastrer  en  cette  ex-
treme impiete  &  ingratitude  vers  moy,  je  ne  puis  penser  que  vous
non  plus  qu'aucun  aultre  prince  de  la  Chretiente,  le  voulissiez  eu
cela  applaudir  ou  meintenir  pour  luy  fayre  acquerir  ma  malediction
ains  que  plutos  introviendrez  pour  luy  faire  recongnoitre  la  raison
trop  juste  &  evidant  devant  Dieu  &  les  hommes.  Helas  &  encores
ne  lui  vouloier  j'en  ofter,  mays  donner  avec  droit  ce  qu'il  tient  par
usurpation.  Je  me  suis  du  tout  commise  a  vous,  &  fidelement
faites  si  il  vous  plest  que  je  ne  en  soye  pis  qu'aupravant,  &  que  le
faulsete  des  uns  ne  prevale  desvant  la  verite  des  vous,  pour  bien
recevant  mal,  &  la  plus  grande  affliction  que  me  scaurroit  arriver  a
scavoir  la  perte  de  mon  filz.  Je  vous  supplie  de  me  mander  en  cas
qu'il  persiste  en  cette  m'esconnoissance  de  son  devoir,  que  de  luy
ou  de  moy  il  vous  plaist  advouer  pour  legittime  roy  ou  royne
d'Ecosse,  &  si  vous  aves  agreable  de  poursuivre  avec  moy  a  part
la  traite  commence  entre  nous  de  quoy  je  vous  requiers  sans  plus

APPENDIX.

419

attendre  de  response  de  ce  mal  gouverne  enfant  vous  en  requerrant
avec  autant  d'affection  que  je  sens  mon  coeur  oppresse  d'ennuy.
Pour  Dieu  souvenez  vous  de  la  promesse  que  m'avez  faites  de  me
prendre  en  votre  protection  me  rapportant  de  tout  a  vous  &  sur  ce
prian  Dieu  qu'il  vous  viueille  preserver  de  touts  vos  ennemys  &
dissimulez  arays,  comme  je  le  desire  de  me  consoler  &  de  me  venger
de  ceulz  qui  pourchassent  un  tel  malheur  entre  la  mere  &  1'enfant.
Je  cesseray  de  vous  troubler,  mais  non  a  m'ennuier  que  je  ne  receive
quelque  consolation  de  vous,  &  de  Dieu  encore  un  coup  je  le  s«p-
plie  de  vous  garder  de  tout  peril.  Futhbery  xii  Mars.
Votre  fidelement  vouee  soeur

&  obeissant  cousine,

MARIE  Q.

A  la  Reyne  d'Angleterre,
Madame  ma  bonne  soeur  &

cousme.

No.  XLVI. (Vol.  II.  p.  106.)

A  Testament  by  Q.  Mary.

N.  B.  The  following  paper  was  transcribed  by  the  Revd.  Mr.  Craw-
ford, late  Regius  Professor  of  Church  History  in  the  University
of  Edinburgh.  Part  of  this  paper  according  to  him,  is  written  by
Naue,  Mary's  Secretary,  the  rest  with  the  Queen's  own  hand.
What  is  marked  "  is  in  the  Queen's  own  hand.

CONSIDERANT  par  ma  condition  presente  Festat  de  vie
Vespas!  humaine,  si  incertain,  que  personne  ne  s'en  peust,  ou  doibt
L- 16:  asseurer,  sinnon  soubs  la  grande  et  infinie  misericorde  de
p.4io.  Dieu  Et  me  voulant  prevaloir  d'icelle  centre  tous  les
dangers  et  accidens,  qui  me  pourroient  inopinement  survenir  en
cette  captivit6,  mesmes  a  cause  des  grandes  et  longues  maladies,
ou  j'ay  ere  detenue  jusques  a  present ;  j'ay  advise  tandis  que  j'ay  la
commodite,  ou  raison  en  jugement,  de  pourvoir  apres  ma  mort  la
salut  de  mon  ame,  enterrement  de  mon  corps,  et  disposition  de  mon
bien,  estat,  &  affaires,  par  ce  present  mon  testament  et  ordonnance
de  mon  dernier  volonte,  qui  s'ensuyt.

Au  nom  du  Pere,  du  Filz,  et  du  benoite  St.  Esprit.  Premiere-
ment,  me  recongnoissant  indigne  pecheresse  avec  plus  d'offences
envers  mon  Dieu,  que  de  satisfaction  par  toutes  les  adversites  que
j'aysouffert;  dont  jela  louesabonte.  Et  m'appuyant  sur  la  croix  de
mon  Sauveur  et  Redempteur  Jesus  Christ.  Je  recommende/mon  ame
a  la  benoiste  et  individueTrinite,  et  aux  prieresde  la  glorieuse  Vierge
Marie,  et  de  tous  les  anges  saincts  &  sainctes  de  paradis,  esperant
par  leur  merites  &  intercession,  estre  aydee  a  obtenir  de  estre  faicte

2  E  2

420  SCOTLAND.

partieipante  avec  eulx  de  felicite  eteiaelle.  Et  pour  m'y  acheminer
de  cueur  plus  net  et  entier  despouillant  des  a  present  tout  ressenti-
ment  des  injures,  calomnies,  rebellions,  et  aultres  offenses,  qui  me
pourroient  avoir  este  factes  durant  ma  vie,  par  mes  subjets  rebelles
et  aultres  ennemis ;  J'en  retriet  la  vengeance  a  Dieu,  &  le  supplie
leur  pardonner,  de  mesme  affection,  que  je  luy  requiers  pardons  a
rnes  faultes,  et  a  tous  ceuls  et  celles  que  je  puis  avoir  offense  de
faicts  ou  de  parolles.

Je  veulx  et  ordonne,  &c.  [The  two  following  paragraphs  contain
directions  concerning  the  place  and  circumstance  of  her  burial.]

Pour  ne  contrevenir  a  la  gloire,  honneur,  et  conservation  de
1'Eglise  catholique,  apostolique  et  Romaine,  en  la  quelle  je  veulx
vivre  et  mourir,  si  le  prince  d'Escosse  mon  filz  y  puest  etre  reduiet
contre  la  mauvaise  nourriture,  qu'il  a  prise  a  mon  tres  grand
regret  en  1'heresie  de  Calvin  entre  mes  rebelles,  je  le  laisse  seul  et
unique  heretier  de  mon  royaume  d'Escosse,  de  droict  que  je  pre-
tende  justement  en  la  couronne  d'Angleterre  et  pays  qui  en  depen-
dent, et  generallement  de  tous  et  cbacun  mes  meubles  et  immeubles
qui  resteront  apres  ma  mort,  et  execution  de  ce  present  testament.
Si  non,  et  que  mon  dit  filz  continue  a  vivre  en  la  dite  heresie,  Je
cede,  transporte,  et  faicte  don  "  de  touts  et  chacuns  mes  droicts,
que  je  pretende  &  puis  pretendre  a  la  couronne  d'Angleterre,  et
aultres  droicts,  seigneuries,  ou  royaulmes  en  dependantz,  au  roy
catholique,  ou  aultre  de  siens  qu'il  luy  plaira,  avesques  advis,  con-
sentement  de  sa  saintete ;  tant  pour  le  voyr  aujourdhuy  le  seul
seurs  appui  de  la  religion  cathplique,  que  pour  reconnoissance  de
gratuites  faveurs  que  moy,  et  les  miens  recommandez  par  moy,  ont
avons  receu  de  luy  en  ma  plus  grand  necessite  ;  et  resguard  aussi
au  droict  que  luy  mesme  peut  pretendre  a  ces  ditz  royaulmes  et
pays,  je  le  supplie  qu'n  recompence  il  preign  alliance,  de  la  maison
de  Lorraine,  et  si  il  ce  pleut  de  celle  de  Guise,  pour  memoire  de  la
race  de  laquelle  je  suis  sortie  au  -coste  de  mere,  n'a  ayant  de  celuy
de  mon  pere,  que  mon  seul  enfant,  lequel  estant  catholique  j'ay
tousjours  voue  pour  une  de  ses  filles,  si  il  luy  plaisoit  de  Taccepter,
ou  faillant  une  de  ses  niepces  mariee  comme  sa  fille.

"  Je  laysse  mon  filz  a  la  protection  du  roy,  de  prince,  et  dues
de  Lorrayne  et  de  Guise,  et  du  Mayne,  aux  quelz  je  recommende
et  son  estat  en  Escosse,  et  mon  droict ,  en  Angleterre,  si  il  est
cathoMque,  et  quelle  le  parlie  de  ceste  royne."

Je  faitz  don  au  "  compte  de  Lenox"  de  compte  de  Lenox  tenu
par  feu  son  pere,  et  commande  mon  filtz,  comme  mon  heretier  et
successeur,  d'obeyr  en  cest  en  droit  a  mon  volonte.

Je  veulx  et  ordonne  toutes  les  sommes  et  deniers,  qui  se  troveront
par  mays  deues,  tien  mis  cause  de  droict  estre  faits  "  a  Lohliven''
etre  promptement  payee  et  acquittes^et  tout  tort  et  griefs  repares

APPENDIX.  421

par  les  dits  executeurs  desquelz  J'en  charge  la  conscience.  Oultre,
&c.  (Follow  two  or  three  paragraphs  concerning  particular  legacies,
and  then  is  added)  Faict  au  manoir  de  Sheffeld  en  Angle terre  le  jour

de Mil  cinq  cens  soixant  &  dix  sept.

After  a  large  blank  page  follows  in  the  queen's  hand:

"  Si  mon  filz  meurt,  au  comte  de  Lenox,  au  Claude  Hamilton
lequel  se  montrera  le  plus  fidelle  vers  moy,  et  plus  constant  en

religion,  au  jugement  de dues  de  Lorraine  et  de  Guyse,  ou  je

le  rapport  sur  ce  de  ceulx  aque  j'auray  donnay  la  charge  de  trayter
avesque  eux  de  par  moy  et  ceulx,  a  condition  de  ce  marrier  ou  allier
en  la  dite  mayson  ou  par  leur  advis."

Follow  near  two  pages  of  particular  legacies.
"  Et  le  remets  ma  tante  de  Lenox  au  droict  quelle  peut  pretendre
a  la  conte  d'Angous  avant  1'acort  fait  par  mon  commandement
entre  ma  dite  tante  de  Lenox  et  le  comte  de  Morton,  veu  quil  a
este  fait  &  par  le  feu  roy  mon  Mary  et  moy,  sur  la  promesse  de  sa
fidelle  assistance,  si  luy  et  moy  encourions  dangier  et  besoing
d'ayde,  ce  qu'il  rompit,  s'entendant  secretement  au  les  nos  ennemis
rebelles,  qu'attemtprient  centre  sa  vie,  et  pour  cest  effect  pris  les
armes,  et  ont  por,te  les  banieres  desploiees,  contre  nous,  je  revoque
aussi  toute  autre  don  que  je  luy  ay  fait  de  conte  de  Morton  sur
promesses  de  ses  bons  services  a  advenir,  et  entends  que  la  dite
conte  soit  reunie  a  la  couronne,  si  ell  se  trouve  y  partenir,  comme
ses  trahisons  tant  en  la  mort  de  mon  feu  Mary,  que  en  mon
banissement,  et  poursuit  de  la  mieh  ne  Font  merite.  Et  defends
a  mon  filz  de  ce  jamays  servire  de  luy  pour  de  luy  pour  la  hayne
qu'il  aye  a  ses  parents,  la  quelle  je  crains  ne  s'estende  jusques  a
luy,  le  connoisant  du  tout  affectionne  aux  ennemis  de  mon  droite
en  ce  royaume,  du  quel  il  es  penconnaire.

"  Je  recommende  mon  nepveu  Francois  Stuart  a  mon  filz,  et  luy
commande  detenir  pres  de  luy  et  s'enservit,  et  je  luy  laisse  le  bien
du  conte  de  Boduel  son  oncle,  en  respect  qu'il  est  de  mon  sang,
mon  filleul,  et  ma  este  laisse  en  lutelle  par  son  pere.

"  Je  declare  que  mon  frere  bastard  Robert  Abbe  de  St.  Croix
n'a  en  que  par  circonvention  Orkenay,  et  que  le  ne  fut  jamays  mon
intention,  comme  il  apret  par  la  revocation  que  j'ay  fayte  depuys,
et  ete  aussi  faite  d'avant  la  asge  de  xxv  ans,  ce  que  j'aimois
deliberer  si  il  ne  m'eussent  prenner  par  prison  de  se  de  defayre
aulx  estats  je  veulx  done  que  Orkenay  soit  reune  a  la  couronne
comme  une  de  plus  necessaires  pour  mon  filz,  &  sans  mayson  ne
pourra  etre  bien  tenue.

"  Les  filles  de  Morra  ne  parvient  accessi  heriter,  ains  revient  la
conte  a  la  Couronne,  si  il  luy  plest  luy  donner  sa  ou  fille  en
marriasge,  et  il  nome  Ven  sienne  ligne."

422  SCOTLAND.

No.  XLVII. (Vol.  II.  p.  116.)

A  Letter  from  Mr.  Archibald  Douglas  to  the  Queen  of  Scotts.
April.-—  PLEASE  your  majesty,  I  received  your  letter  of  the
37*  B.  ^  date  of  the  12th  of  Nov.  and  in  like  manner  has  seen
fo.  126.  some  part  of  the  contents  of  one  other  of  the  same  date,
directed  to  Monsr.  de  Movisir,  ambassador  for  his  majesty  the
most  Christian  king,  both  which  are  agreeable  to  your  princely
dignity.  As  by  the  one  your  highness  desires  to  know  the  true
cause  of  my  banishment,  and  offers  unto  me  'all  favour  if  I  shall  be
innocent  of  the  heinous  facts  committed  in  the  person  of  your
husband  of  good  memory,  so  by  the  other  the  said  ambassador  is
willet  to  declare  unto  me,  if  your  husband's  murder  could  be  laid
justly  against  me,  that  you  could  not  sollicit  in  my  cause,  neither
yet  for  any  person  that  was  participant  of  that  execrable  fact,  but
would  seek  the  revenge  thereof,  when  you  should  have  any  means
to  do  it;  your  majesty's  offer,  if  I  be  innocent  of  that  crime,  is  most
favourable, .  and  your  desire  to  know  the  truth  of  the  same  is  most
equitable;  and  therefore  that  I  should  with  all  my  simplicity,
sincerity,  and  truth,  answer  thereunto,  is  most  reasonable,  to  the
end  that  your  princely  dignity  may  be  my  help,  if  my  innocence
shall  sufficiently  appear,  and  procure  my  condemnation  if  I  be
culpable  in  any  matter,  except  in  the  knowledge  of  the  evil
disposed  minds  of  the  most  part  of  your  nobility  against  your  said
husband,  and  not  revealing  of  it ;  which  I  am  assured  was  suffici-
ently known  to  himself,  and  to  all  that  had  judgment  never  so
little  in  that  realm  ;  which  also  I  was  constrained  to  understand,
as  he,  that  was  specially  employed  betwixt  the  earl  Morton,  and  a
good  number  of  your  nobility,  that  they  might  with  all  humility
intercede  at  your  majesty's  hand  for  his  relief,  in  such  matters  as
are  more  specially  contained  in  the  declaration  following,  which  I  am
constrained  for  my  own  justification,  by  this  letter  to  call  to  your  ma-
jesty's remembrance.  Notwithstanding  that  I  am  assured,  to  my  grief,
the  reading  thereof  will  not  smally  offend  your  princely  mind.  It  may
please  your  majesty  to  remember,  that  in  the  year  of  God  1566,  the
said  earl  of  Morton,  with  divers  other  nobility  and  gent,  were
declared  rebels  to  your  majesty,  and  banished  your  realm  for
insolent  murder  committed  in  your  majesty's  own  chamber,  which
they  alledged  was  done  by  command  of  your  husband,  who  notwith-
standing affirmed  that  he  was  compelled  by  them  to  subscribe  the
Warrant  given  for  that  effect,  howsoever  the  truth  of  that  matter
remains  among  them,  it  appertains  not  to  me  at  this  time  to  be
curious;  true  it  is  that  I  was  one  of  that  number,  that  heavily
offended  against  your  majesty,  and  passed  in  France  the  time  of
our  banishment,  at  the  desire  of  the  rest,  to  humbly  pray  your

APPENDIX.  423

brother,  the  most  Christian  king,  to  intercede  that  our  offences  might
be  pardoned,  and  your  majesty's  clemency  extended  towards  us,
albeit  divers  of  no  small  reputation, in that  realm, was  of  the
opinion,  that  the  said  fact  merited  neither  to  be  requisite  for,  nor
yet  pardoned. Always  such  was  the  careful  mind  of  his  majesty
towards  the  quietness  of  that  realm,  that  the  dealing  in  that  cause
was  committed  to  Monsr.  de  Movisir,  who  was  directed  at  that
time  to  go  into  Scotland,  to  congratulate  the  happy  birth  of  your
son,  whom  Almighty  God  of  his  goodness  may  long  preserve  in
happy  estate,  and  perpetual  felicity ;  the  careful  travail  of  the  said
de  Movisir  was  so  effectual,  and  your  majesty's  mind  so  inclined  to
mercy,  that  within  short  space  thereafter,  I  was  permitted  to  repair
in  Scotland,  to  deal  with  earls  Murray,  Athol,  Bodwel, Arguile,
and  secretary  Ledington,  in  the  name  and  behalf  of  the  said  earl
Morton,  lords  Reven,  Lindsay,  and  remanent  complesis,  that  they
might  make  offer  in  the  names  of  the  said  earl  of  any  matter  that
might  satisfy  your  majesty's  wrath,  and  procure  your  clemency  to
be  extended  in  their  favours  ;  at  my  coming  to  them,  after  I  had
opened  the  effect  of  my  message,  they  declared  that  the  marriage
betwixt  you  and  your  husband  had  been  the  occasion  already  of
great  evil  in  that  realm ;  and  if  your  husband  should  be  suffered  to
follow  the  appetite  and  mind  of  such  as  was  about  him,  that  kind
of  dealing  might  produce  with  time  worse  effects ;  for  helping  of
such  inconvenience  that  might  fall  out  by  that  kind  of  dealing,
they  had  thought  it  convenient  to  join  themselves  in  league  and
band  with  some  other  noblemen,  resolved  to  obey  your  majesty  as
their  natural  sovereign,  and  have  nothing  to  do  with  your  husband's
command  whatsoever,  if  the  said  earl  would  for  himself  enter  into
that  band  and  confederacy  with  them,  they  could  be  content  to
humbly  request  and  travel  by  all  means  with  your  majesty  for  his
pardon,  but,  before  they  could  any  farther  proceed,  they  desired  to
know  the  said  earl's  mind  herein ;  when  I  had  answered,  that  he
nor  his  friends,  at  my  departure,  could  not  know  that  any  such  like
matter  would  be  proponit,  and  therefore  was  not  instructed  what
to  answer  therein,  they  desired  that  I  should  return  sufficiently
instructed  in  this  matter  to  Sterling,  before  the  baptism  of  your
son,  whom  God  might  preserve ;  this  message  was  faithfully  de-
livered by  me  at  Newcastle  in  England,  where  the  said  earl  then
remained,  in  presence  of  his  friends  and  company,  where  they  all
condescended  to  have  no  farther  dealing  with  your  husband,  and
to  enter  into  the  said  band. With  this  deliberation  I  returned  to
Sterling,  where,  at  the  request  of  the  most  Christian  king  and  the
queen's  majesty  of  England,  by  their  ambassadors  present,  your
majesty's  gracious  pardon  was  granted  unto  them  all,  under  con-
dition always  that  they  should  remain  banished  forth  of  the  realm,

424  SCOTLAND.

the  space  of  two  years,  and  farther  during  your  majesty's  pleasure^
which  limitation  was  after  mitigated  at  the  humble  request  of  your
own  nobility,  so  that  immediately  after  the  said  earl  of  Morton  re*
paired  into  Scotland  to  Quhittingaime,  where  the  earl  of  Bodvell
and  secretary  Ledington  come  to  him  ;  what  speech  passed  there
amongst  them,  as  God  shall  be  my  judge,  I  knew  nothing  at  that
time,  but  at  their departure I was  requested  by  the  said  earl
Morton  to  accompany  the  earl  Bodvell  and  secretary  to  Edenburgh,
and  to  return  with  such  answer  as  they  should  obtain  of  your  ma-
jesty, which  being  given  to  me  by  the  said  persons,  as  God  shall
be  my  judge,  was  no  other  than  these  words,  "  Schaw  to  the  earl
Morton  that  the  queen  will  hear  no  speech  of  that  matter  appointed
unto  him :"  when  I  crafit  that  the  answer  might  be  made  more
sensible,  secretary  Ledington  said,  that  the  earl  would  sufficiently
understand  it,  albeit  few  or  none  at  that  time  understand  what
passed  amongst  them. It  is  known  to  all  men,  als  veill  be  railling
letters  passed  betwixt  the said  earl and  Ledington  when  they
become  in divers factions,  as  also  ane  buck  sett  forth  by  the
ministers,  wherein  they  affirm  that  the  earl  of  Morton  has  confessed
tti  them,  before  his  death,  that  the  earl  Bodvell  come  to  Quhitting-
aime to  prepoii  the  calling  away  off  the  king  your  husband,  to  the
which  proposition  the  said  earl  of  Morton  affirms  that  he  could
give  no  answer  unto  such  time  he  might  know  your  majesty's  mind
therein,  which  he  never  received. As  to  the  abominable  murder,  it
is  known  too  by  the  depositions  of  many  persons  that  were  executed
to  the  death  for  the  committing  thereof,  that  the  same  was  executed
by  them,  and  at  the  command  of  such  of  the  nobility  as  had  sub-
scrivit  band  for  that  effect ;  by  this unpleasant  declaration,  the
most  part  thereof  known  to  yourself,  and  the  remainder  may  be
understood  by  the  aforesaid  witnesses  that  was  examined  in  torture,
and  that  are  extant  in  the  custody  of  the  ordinary  judges  in  Scot-
land, my  innocency,  so  far  as  may  concern  any  fact,  does  appear
sufficiently  to  your  majesty. And  as  for  my  dealing  aforesaid, I
can  be  no  otherwise  charged  therein,  but  as  what  would  accuse  the
vessel  that  preserves  the  vine  from  harm,  for  the  intemperancy  of
such  as  immoderately  use  the  same. As  for  the  special  cause  of
my  banishment,  I  think  the  same  has  proceeded  upon  ane  opinion
conceived,  that  I  was  able  to  accuse  the  earl  of  Morton  of  so  much
matter  as  they  alledge  himself  to  have  confessed  before  he  died,
and  would  not  be  induced,  for  loss  of  reputation,  to  perform  any
part  thereof. If  this  be  the  occasion  of  my  trouble,  as  I  suppose
it  is,  what  punishment  I  should  deserve,  I  remit  me  to  your  ma-
jesty's  better  judgment,  who well knows  how careful  ever  ilk
gentlemen  should  be  of  his  fame,  reputation  and  honour,  and  how
far  ever  ilk  man  should  abhor  the  name  of  a  pultroun,  and  how

APPENDIX.

425

indecent  it  would  have  been  to  me  to  accuse  the  earl  of  Morton,
being  so  near  of  his  kin,  notwithstanding  all  the  injuries  I  was
constrained  to  receive  at  his  hand  all  the  time  of  his  government,
and  for  no  other  clause,  but  for  shewing  of  particular  friendship  to
particular  friends  in  the  time  of  the  last  cruel  troubles  in  Scotland.
Sorry  I  be  now  to  accuse  him  in  any  matter  being  dead,  and  more
sorry  that  being  on  lyff,  be  such  kind  of  dealing  obtained  that  name
of  Ingrate.  Always  for  my  own  part,  I  have  been  banished  my
native  country  those  three  years  and  four  months,  living  in  anxiety
of  mind,  my  holl  guds  in  Scotland,  which  were  not  small,  inter-
mittit  and  disponit  upon,  and  has  continually  since  the  time  I  was
relieved  out  of  my  last  troubles  at  the  desire  of  Monsr.  de
Movisir,  attended  to  know  your  majesty's  pleasure,  and  to  wait
upon  what  service  it  should  please  your  majesty  for  to  command.
Upon  the  8th  of  April  inst.  your  good  friend  secretary  Walsing-
hame  has  declared  unto  me,  that  her  highness  tho't  it  expedient
that  I  should  retire  myself  where  I  pleased,  I  declared  unto  him  I
had  no  means  whereby  I  might  perform  that  desire,  until  such  time
as  I  should  receive  it  from  your  majesty.  Neither  knew  I  where  it
would  please  your  highness  to  direct  me,  until  such  time  as  I  should
have  received  further  information  from  you.  Upon  this  occasion,
and  partly  by  permission,  I  have  taken  the  hardress  to  write  this
present  letter,  whereby  your  majesty  may  understand  any  part  of
my  troubles  past,  and  strait  present.  As  to  my  intention  future,
I  will  never  deny  that  I  am  fully  resolved  to  spend  the  rest  of  my
days  in  your  majesty's  service,  and  the  king  your  son's,  wheresoever
I  shall  be  directed  by  your  majesty,  and  for  the  better  performing
thereof,  it  so  shall  be  her  majesty's  pleasure,  to  recommend  the
tryal  of  my  innocency,  and  examination  of  the  verity  of  the  pre-
ceding narration,  to  the  king  your  son,  with  request  that  I  may  be
pardoned  for  such  offences  as  concerned  your  majesty's  service,
and  var  common  to  all  men  the  time  of  his  les  aige  and  perdonit  to
all,  except  to  me,  I  should  be  the  bearer  thereof  myself,  and  be
directed  in  whatsoever  service  it  should  please  your  majesty  for  to
command.  Most  humble  I  beseech  your  majesty  to  consider
thereof,  and  to  be  so  gracious  as  to  give  order,  that  I  may  have
means  to  serve  your  majesty  according  to  the  sincerity  of  my
meaning,  and  so  expecting  your  majesty's  answer,  after  the  kissing
your  hand  with  all  humility,  I  take  leave  from  London.

Sm,

No.  XLVIII. (Vol.  II.  p.  122.)

A  Letter  from  Sir  Amias  Pawlet.

I  DID  forbear,  according  to  your  direction  signified
Calfc!  9. in  your  letters  of  the  4th  of  this  present,  to  proceed

426  SCOTLAND.

to  the  execution  of  the  contents  of  Mr.  Waade's  letters  unto  you?
for  the  dispersing  of  this  lady's  unnecessary  servants,  and  for  the
ceasing  of  her  money,  wherein  I  was  bold  to  write  unto  you  ray
simple  opinion  (although  in  vain  as  it  now  fallet^  out)  by  my  letters
of  the  7th  of  this  instant,  which,  I  doubt  not,  are  with  you  before
this  time  ;  but  upon  the  receipt  of  your  letters  of  the  5th,  which
came  not  into  my  hands  until  the  8th  in  the  evening,  by  reason,  as
did  appear  by  indorsement,  that  they  had  been  mistaken,  and  were
sent  back  to  Windsor,  after  they  were  entered  into  the  way  towards
me,  I  considered  that  being  accompanied  only  with  m^  own  ser-
vants, it  might  be  thought  that  they  would  be  intreated  to  say  as  I
would  command  them  ;  and  therefore  I  thought  good,  for  my  bet-
ter discharge  in  these  money  matters,  to  crave  the  assistance  of
Mr.  Richard  Bagott,  who  repairing  unto  me  the  next  morning,  we
had  access  to  this  queen,  whom  we  found  in  her  bed,  troubled  after
the  old  manner  with  a  defluxion,  which  was  fallen  down  into  the
side  of  her  neck,  and  had  bereft  her  of  the  use  of  one  of  her  hands,
unto  whom  I  declared,  that  upon  occasion  of  her  former  practices,
doubting  lest  she  would  persist  therein  by  corrupting  underhand
some  bad  members  of  this  state,  I  was  expressly  commanded  to  take
her  money  into  my  hands,  and  to  rest  answerable  for  it,  when  it
shall  be  required ;  advising  her  to  deliver  the  said  money  unto  me
with  quietness.  After  many  denials,  many  exclamations,  and  many
bitter  words  against  you  (I  say  nothing  of  her  railing  against  my-
self), with  flat  affirmation  that  her  majesty  might  have  her  body,  but
her  heart  she  should  never  have,  refusing  to  deliver  the  key  of  the
cabinet,  I  called  my  servants,  and  sent  for  barrs  to  break  open  the
door,  whereupon  she  yielded,  and  causing  the  door  to  be  opened,  I
found  there  in  the  coffers,  mentioned  in  Mr.  Waade's  remembrance,
five  rolls  of  canvass,  containing  five  thousand  French  crowns,  and
two  leather  bags,  whereof  the  one  had,  in  gold,  one  hundred  and
four  pounds  two  shillings,  and  the  other  had  three  pounds  in  silver,
which  bag  of  silver  was  left  with  her,  affirming  that  she  had  no  more
money  in  this  house,  and  that  she  was  indebted  to  her  servants  for
p  their  wages.  Mr.  Waade's  note  maketh  mention  of  three

tell  you  the  r°^s  left  in  Curie's  chamber,  wherein,  no  doubt,  he  was
truth  of  this  misreckoned,  which  is  evident,  as  well  by  the  testimonies
and  oaths  of  diverse  persons,  as  also  by  probable  conjec-
tures ;  so  as  in  truth  we  found  only  two  rolls,  every  of  which  con-
taineth  one  thousand  crowns,  which  was  this  queen's  gifte  to  Curie's
wife  at  her  marriage.  There  is  found  in  Naw's  chamber,  in  a
cabinet,  a  chain  worth  by  estimation  one  hundred  pounds,  and  in
money,  in  one  bag  nine  hundred  pounds,  in  a  second  bag  two  hun-
dred fourscore  and  six  pounds  eighteen  shillings.  All  the  foresaid
parcels  of  money  are  bestowed  in  bags,  and  sealed  by  Mr.  Richard
Bagot,  saving  five  hundred  pounds  of  Naw's  money,  which  I  reserve

APPENDIX.

427

in  my  hands,  for  the  use  of  this  household,  and  may  be  repaid  at
London,  where  her  majesty  shall  appoint,  out  of  the  money  received
lately  by  one  of  my  servants,  out  of  the  exchequer.  I  feared  lest  the
people  might  have,  dispersed  this  money  in  all  this  time,  or  have
hidden  the  same  in  some  secret  corners ;  for  doubt  whereof  I  had
caused  all  this  queen's  family,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  to  be
guarded  in  the  several  places  where  I  found  them,  so  as  yff  I  had
not  found  the  money  with  quietness,  I  had  been  forced  to  have
searched  first  all  their  lodgings,  and  then  their  own  persons.  I
thank  God  with  all  my  heart,  as  for  a  singular  blessing,  that  that
falleth  out  so  well,  fearing  lest  a  contrary  success  might  have  moved
some  hard  conceits  in  her  majesty.

Touching  the  dispersing  of  this  queen's  servants,  I  trust  I  have
done  so  much,  as  may  suffice  to  satisfy  her  majesty  for  the  time,
wherein  I  could  not  take  any  absolute  course,  until  I  heard  again
from  you,  partly  because  her  majesty,  by  Mr.  Waade's  letter,  doth
refer  to  your  consideration  to  return  such  as  shall  be  discharged  to
their  several  dwellings  and  countries,  wherein,  as  it  seenieth,  you
have  forgotten  to  deliver  your  opinion  ;  partly,  forthatas  yet,  Ihave
received  no  answer  from  you  of  your  resolution,  upon  the  view  of  the
Scottish  family  sent  unto  you,  what  persons  you  will  appoint  to  be
dismist ;  only  this  I  have  done,  I  have  bestowed  all  such  as  are
mentioned  in  this  bill,  inclosed  in  three  or  four  several  rooms,  as  the
same  may  suffice  to  contain  them,  and  that  their  meat  and  drink
shall  be  brought  unto  them  by  my  servants.  It  may  please  you,  to
advertise  me  by  your  next  letters,  in  what  sort,  and  for  what  course,
I  shall  make  their  passports,  as  also,  if  they  shall  say  that  they  are
unpaid  of  their  wages,  what  I  shall  do  therein.  Yt  is  said
hath  !ood  tnat  tney  nave  keen  accustomed  to  be  paid  of  their  wages
store  of  at  Christmas,  for  the  whole  year.  Her  majesty's  charge

money  at j|j  ^e  somewhat  diminished  by  the  departure  of  this  peo-
presentm  J.  ti*

the  French  pie,  and  my  charge  by  this  occasion  will  be  the  more  easy.

ambassa- ]}uj.  the  persons,  all  save  Bastian,  are  such  silly  and  Sim-
dor's  hands. .  .  f .. .

pie  souls,  as  there  was  no  great  cause  to  fear  their  prac-
tices, and  upon  this  ground,  I  was  of  opinion,  in  my  former  letters,
that  all  this  dismissed  train  should  have  followed  their  mistress  until
the  next  remove,  and  there  to  have  been  discharged  upon  the  sud-
den, for  doubt  that  the  said  remove  might  be  delayed,  yf  she  did
fear,  or  expect  any  hard  measure.

Others  shall  excuse  their  foolish  pity  as  they  may  ;  but,  for  my
part,  I  renounce  my  part  of  the  joys  of  heaven,  yf  in  any  thing  that  I
have  said,  written,  or  done,  I  have  had  any  other  respect  than  the
furtherance  of  her  majesty's  service ;  and  so  I  shall  most  earnestly
pray  you  to  affirm  for  me,  as  likewise  for  the  not  seasing  of  the  mo-
ney by  Mr.  Manners,  the  other  commissioners,  and  myself.  I  trust

428  SCOTLAND.

Mr.  Waade  hath  answered,  in  all  humble  duties,  for  the  whole  com-
pany, that  no  one  of  us  did  so  much  as  think  that  our  commission
reaching  only  to  the  papers,  we  might  be  bold  to  touch  the  money,
so  as  there  was  no  speech  of  that  all  to  my  knowledge,  and  as  you
know  I  was  no  commissioner  in  this  search,  but  had  my  hands  full
at  Tyxall,  discreet  servants  are  not  hastily  to  deal  in  great  matters,
without  warrant,  and  especially  where  the  cause  is  such  as  the  de-
lay of  it  carrieth  no  danger.

Your  advertisement  of  that  happy  remove  hath  been  greatly  com-
fortable unto  me.  I  will  not  say,  in  respect  of  myself,  because  my
private  interest  hath  no  measure  of  comparison  with  her  majesty's
safety,  and  with  the  quiet  of  this  realm.  God  grant  a  happy  and
speedy  yssue  to  these  good  and  godly  counsels ;  and  so  I  commit
you  to  his  merciful  protection.  From  Chartley,  the  10th  of  Sep-
tember 1586.

No.  XLIX. (Vol.  II.  p.  133.)

Letter  from  the  King  of  Scots  to  Mr.  Archibald  Douglas  his  ambassa-
dor in  England^  October,  1586.

Cott  Lib  RESERVE  up  yourself  na  langer  in  the  earnest  dealing
Calig.  C.  9.  for  my  mother,  for  ye  have  done  it  too  long ;  and  think
An  original  not  that  any  your  travellis  can  do  goode  if  hir  lyfe  be
hancL  ^ §  takin,  for  then  adeu  with  my  dealing  with  thaime  that  are
the  special  instruments  thairof ;  and  theirfore,  gif  ye  looke
for  the  contineuance  of  my  favour  towartis  you,  spair  na  pains  nor
plainnes  in  this  cace,  but  reade  my  letter  wrettin  to  Williame
Keith,  and  conform  yourself  quhollie  to  the  contentis  thairof,  and  in
this  requeist  let  me  reap  the  fruictis  of  youre  great  credit  there,  ather
now  or  never.  Fairwell.  October  1586.

Letter  to  Sir  William  Keith,  ambassador  in  England,  probably  from

Secretary  Maitland. Nov.  27, 1586.

.  BY  your  letters  sent  by  this  bearer  (albeit  concerning
the  Collect,  no  pleasant  subject),  his  majesty  thinks  well  of  your  ear-
of  Sir  A.  nestness  and  fidelity  in  your  negotiations,  as  also  of  Mr.
A.'foL  219!  -Archibald's  activity  and  diligence,  whom  you  so  greatly
praise  and  recommend,  I  wish  the  issue  correspond  to
his  majesty's  opinion,  your  care  and  travell,  and  his  great  diligence
as  you  write.  His  majesty  takes  this  rigorous  proceeding  against
his  mother  deeply  in  heart,  as  a  matter  greatly  concerning  him  both
in  honour  and  otherwise.  His  highnesses  actions  and  behaviour
utter  plainly  not  only  how  far  nature  prevails,  but  also  how  he  ap-
prehends of  the  sequel  of  that  process,  and  of  what  moment  he  es-
teems it.  There  is  an  ambassade  shortly  to  be  directed,  wherein
will  be  employed  an  earl  and  two  counsellors,  on  whose  answer  will

APPENDIX.

429

depend  the  continuance  or  dissolution  of  the  amity  and  good  intel-
ligence between  the  princes  of  this  isle.  In  the  mean  season,  if
farther  extremity  be  used,  and  his  majesty's  suit  and  request  dis-
dained, his  highness  will  think  himself  dishonoured  and  contemned
far  besides  his  expectation  and  deserts.  Ye  may  perceive  his  ma-
jesty's disposition  by  his  letter  to  you,  which  you  shall  impart  to
Mr.  Archibald,  and  both  deal  according  thereto.  I  need  not  to
recommend  to  you  care,  concerning  your  master's  service  both  in
weill  and  in  honour.  As  you  and  your  colleague  shall  behave  your-
self in  this  behalf,  so  for  my  own  part  will  I  interpret  your  affection
to  your  master.  I  am  glad  of  that  I  hear  of  yourself,  and  I  do  fully
credit  that  .you  write  of  Mr.  Archibald,  whose  friends  here  make
great  account  of  his  professed  devotion  to  the  queen,  besides  the
duty  he  owes  to  the  king's  majesty  her  son.  Farther  I  am  con-
strained to  remit  to  next  occasion,  having  scarce  time  to  scribble
these  few  lines,  (which  of  themselves  may  bear  witness  of  my  haste.)
Wishing  you  a  prosperous  issue  of  your  negotiation,  1  commit  you,
&c.  Halyrudhouse,  Nov.  27th,  1586.

The  people,  and  all  estates  here  are  so  far  moved  by  the  rigorous
proceedings  against  the  queen,  that  his  majesty,  and  all  that  have
credit  are  importuned,  and  may  not  go  abroad  for  exclamations
against  them,  and  imprecations  against  the  queen  of  England.

No.  L. (Vol.  II.  p.  136.)

To  the  King's  Majesty,  from  Mr.  Archibald  Douglas.

16th  Oct PLEASE  your  majesty,  I  received  your  letter  of  the  date
1586. the  28th  of  September,  the  5th  of  October,  which  was

arTinann  tlle  same  ^  ^^  *  directed  Wm-  MurraY  towards
the  Collect.  your  highness ;  by  such  letters  as  he  carried,  and  others
of  Sir  A.  of  several  dates,  your  majesty  may  perceive  that  I  had
B.!Cfoi.  324.  omitted  nothing  so  far  as  my  travel  might  reach  unto,
anent  the  performing  of  the  two  chief  points  contained  in
the  said  letter  before  the  receipt  thereof,  which  by  these  presents  I
must  repeat  for  answering  of  the  saidis.  As  to  the  first,  so  far  as
may  concern  the  interceding  for  the  queen  your  majesty's  mother
her  life,  I  have  divers  times,  and  in  every  audience,  travelled  with
this  queen  in  that  matter,  specially  to  know  what  her  full  determina-
tion must  be  in  that  point,  and  could  never  bring  her  to  any  further
answer,  but  that  this  proceeding  against  her  by  order  of  justice  was
no  less  against  her  mind,  than  against  their  will  that  loved  her  best:
as  towards  her  life  she  could  give  no  answer  thereunto,  untill  such
time  as  the  law  hath  declared  whether  she  was  innocent  or  guilty.
Herewithal  it  was  her  pleasure  thus  far  to  inform  me,  that  it  was  a
number  of  the  associants  that  earnestly  pressed  her  that  the  law

430  SCOTLAND.

might  proceed  against  her,  giving  reasons  that  so  long  as  she  was
suffered  to  deal  in  matters,  so  long  would  never  this  realm  be  in
quiet,  neither  this  state  in  assurance,  and  in  the  end  they  used  this
protestation,  that  if  she  would  not  in  this  matter  follow  their  advice,
that  they  should  remain  without  all  blame  whatsoever  should  fall
out;  whereupon  she  had  granted  them  liberty  to  proceed,  lest  such
as  had  made  the  request  might  hereafter  have  charged  herself  with
inconvenience  if  any  should  happen.

And  by  myself  I  know  this  her  speech  to  be  true,  because  both
Papist  and  Protestant  has  behaved  them,  as  it  hath  been  her  plea-
sure to  declare,  but  upon  divers  respects,  the  one  to  avoid  suspicion
that  otherwise  was  conceived  against  them,  the  other  upon  zeal,  and
care  that  they  will  be  known  to  have  for  preservation  of  their  sove-
reign's life  and  state  in  this  perilous  time,  upon  consideration  where-
of, I  have  been  constrained  to  enter  into  some  dealing  with  both,
wherewith  I  made  her  majesty  acquainted;  the  Protestants,  and  such
as  in  other  matters  will  be  known  to  bear  no  small  favour  unto  your
majesty's  service,  hath  prayed  that  they  may  be  excused  from  any
dealing  in  the  contrary  of  that,  which  by  their  oath  they  have  avowed,
and  by  their  speech  to  their  sovereign  requested  for,  and  that  before
my  coming  in  this  country ;  if  they  should  now  otherwise  do,  it
would  produce  no  better  effect  but  to  make  them  subject  to  the  ac-
cusation of  their  sovereign,  when  it  should  please  her  to  do  it,  of
their  inconstancy,  in  giving  councell  whereby  they  might  incur  the
danger  of  ill  councellors,  and  be  consequent  worthy  of  punishment.
Such  of  the  Papists  as  I  did  deal  with,  went  immediately,  and  told
her  majesty  what  I  had  spoken  to  them,  who  albeit  she  understood
the  matter  of  before,  sent  for  me,  and  declared  tome  my  own  speech
that  I  had  uttered  to  them,  willing  me  for  the  weil  of  my  maister's
service  to  abstain  from  dealing*  with  such,  as  were  not  yet  sufficiently
moved  to  think  of  my  master  as  she  did.  I  craved  leave  of  her  ma-
jesty, that  I  might  inform  them  of  your  majesty's  late  behaviour  to-
wards her,  and  the  state  of  this  realm,  whereunto  with  some  diffi-
culty she  gave  her  consent.  At  my  late  departure  from  court,
which  "was  upon  the  5th  of  this  instant,  and  the  day  after  that  the
lords  of  this  grand  jury  had  taken  their  leaves  of  her  majesty  to  go
northward  to  Fothringham,  it  was  her  pleasure  to  promise  to  have
further  speech  in  this  matter  at  the  returning  of  the  said  lords,  and
to  give  full  answer  according  to  your  majesty's  contentment  to  the
remainder  matters,  that  I  had  proponit  in  name  of  your  majesty.  As
to  the  2d  part  concerning  the  association,  and  desire  that  the  promise
made  to  the  master  of  Gray  concerning  your  majesty's  title  may  be
fulfilled  ;  it  appears  by  the  said  letter,  that  the  very  point  where-
upon the  question  that  may  bring  your  majesty's  title  in  doubt,  hath
not  been  rightly  at  the  writing  of  the  said  letter  considered,  which  I

APPENDIX.  431

take  to  have  proceeded  for  lack  of  reading  of  the  act  of  parliament,
wherein  is  fulfilled  all  the  promise  made  by  the  queen  to  the  said
master,  and  nothing  may  now  cause  any  doubt  to  arise  against  your
said  title,  except  that  an  opinion  should  be  conceived  by  these  lords
of  this  parliament  that  are  so  vehement  at  this  time  against  the
queen  your  majesty's  mother,  that  your  majesty  is,  or  may  be  proved
hereafter  assenting  to  her  proceedings,  and  some  that  love  your
majesty's  service  were  of  that  opinion  that  too  earnest  request  might
move  a  ground  whereupon  suspicions  might  grow  in  men  so  ill  af-
fected in  that  matter,  which  I  tho't  might  be  helped  by  obtaining  of
a  declaration  in  parliament  of  your  majesty's  innocence  at  this  time,
and  by  reason  that  good  nature  and  public  honesty  would  constrain
you  to  intercede  for  the  queen  your  mother,  which  would  carry  with
itself,  without  any  further,  some  suspicion  that  might  move  ill  affect-
ed men  to  doubt.  In  my  former  letters  I  humbly  craved  of  your
majesty  that  some  learned  men  in  the  laws  might  be  moved  to  ad-
vise with  the  words  of  the  association,  and  the  mitigation  contained
in  the  act  of  parliament,  and  withall  to  advise  what  suspicious  effects
your  majesty's  request  might  work  in  these  choleric  men  at  this
time,  and  how  their  minds  might  be  best  moved  to  receive  reason ;
and  upon  all  these  considerations  they  might  have  formed  the  words
of  a  declarator  of  your  majesty's  innocence  to  be  obtained  in  this
parliament,  and  failing  thereof,  the  very  words  of  a  protestation  for
the  same  effect  that  might  best  serve  for  your  majesty's  service,  and
for  my  better  information.  Albeit  this  was  my  simple  opinion,  I
shall  be  contented  to  follow  any  direction  it  shall  please  your  ma-
jesty to  give;  I  have  already  opened  the  substance  hereof  to  the
queen  of  this  realm,  who  seems  not  to  be  offended  herewith,  and
hath  granted  liberty  to  deal  therein  with  such  of  the  parliament  as
may  remain  in  any  doubt  of  mind.  This  being  the  sum  of  my  pro-
ceedings in  this  matter,  besides  the  remainder,  contained  in  other
letters  of  several  dates,  I  am  constrained  to  lay  the  whole  open  be-
fore your  majesty,  and  to  humbly  pray  that  full  information  may  be
sent  unto  me  what  further  to  do  therein  ;  in  this  middle  time,  while
I  shall  receive  more  ample  direction  I  shall  proceed  and  be  doing
according  to  such  direction  as  I  have  already  received.  And  so,
most  gracious  sovereign,  wishing  unto  your  majesty  all  happy  suc-
cess in  your  affairs,  I  humbly  take  my  leave  from  London,  this  16th
of  October,  1586.  Your  majesty's  most  humble  subject  and  obe-
dient servant.

A  Memorial  for  His  Majesty  by  the  Master  of  Gray.

12th  Jan. IT  will  please  your  majesty  I  have  tho't  meeter  to  set

1586.  An  down  au  thincrS  as  they  occur,  and  all  advertisements  as
original  in  . . , . ,

his  own they  came  to  my  ears,  then  jointly  in  a  lettre.

432  SCOTLAND.

hand,  in  the I' came  to  Vare  the  24th  of  Dec.  arid  sent  to  Wm.
SirA.CDick.  Keith  and  Mr.  Archibald  Douglas  to  advertise  the  queen
Vol.  A.  fol.  of  it,  like  as  they  did  at  their  audience. She  promised
l22'  the  queen  your  majesty's  mother's  life  should  be  spared

till  we  were  heard.  The  27th  they  came  to  Vare  to  me,  the  which
day  Sir  Rob1,  came  to  Vare,  where  they  shewed  us  how  far  they
had  already  gone  in  their  negociation,  but  for  that  the  discourse  of
it  is  set  down  in  our  general  letter,  I  remit  me  to  it,  only  this  far  I
will  testify  unto  your  majesty  that  Wm.  Keith  hath  used  himself
right  honestly  and  wisely  till  our  coming,  respecting  all  circum-
stances, and  chiefly  his  colleague  his  dealing,  which  indeed  is  not
better  than  your  majesty  knows  already.

The  29th  day  of  Dec.  we  came  to  London,  where  we  were  no
ways  friendly  received,  nor  after  the  honest  sort  it  had  pleased
your  majesty  use  her  ambassadors ;  never  man  sent  to  welcome  or
convey  us.  The  same  day  we  understood  of  Mr.  de  Bellievre  his
leave  taking,  and  for  that  the  custom  permitted  not  we  sent  our
excuses  by  Mr.  George  Young.

The  1st  day  of  Jan.  Wm.  Keith  and  his  colleague  according
to  the  custom  sent  to  crave  our  audience.  We  received  the
answer  contained  in  the  general  letter,  and  could  not  have  answer
till  the  6th  day,  what  was  done  that  day  your  majesty  has  it  in  the
general,  yet  we  was  not  out  of  esperance  at  that  time,  albeit  we
received  hard  answers.

The  8th  day  we  speak  with  the.  earl  of  Leicester,  where  our  con-
ferrence  was,  as  is  set  down  in  the  general.  I  remarked  this,  that
lie  that  day  said  plainly  the  detaining  of  the  queen  of  Scotland
prisoner  was  for  that  she  pretended  a  succession  to  this  crown.
Judge  then  by  this  what  is  tho't  of  your  majesty,  as  ye  shall  hear
a  little  after.

The  9th  day  we  speak  with  the  French  ambassador,  whom  we
find  very  plain  in  making  to  us  a  wise  discourse  of  all  his  pro-
ceedings, and  Mr.  de  Bellievre  we  thanked  him  in  your  majesty's
name,  and  opened  such  things  as  we  had  to  treat  with  this  queen,
save  the  last  point,  as  more  largely  set  down  by  our  general.

It  is  tho't  here,  and  some  friends  of  your  majesty's  advised  me,
that  Bellievre  his  negociation  was  not  effectual,  and  that  the  re-
sident was  not  privy  to  it,  as  indeed  I  think  is  true,  for  since
Bellievre  his  pertmg,  there  is  a  talk  of  this  Chasteauneuf  his
servants  taken  with- his  whole  papers  and  pacquets,  which  he  was
sending  in  France,  for  that  they  charge  him  with  a  conspiracy  of
late  against  the  queen  here  her  life.  It  is  alledged  his  servant  has
confessed  the  matter,  but  whom  I  shall  trust  I  know  not,  but  till  I
see  proof  I  shall  account  him  an  honest  man,  for  indeed  so  he
appears,  and  one  (without  doubt)  who  hath  been  very  instant  in

-

APPENDIX.  433

this  matter.  I  shew  him  that  the  queen  and  earl  of  Leicester  had
desired  to  speak  with  me  in  private,  and  craved  his  opinion ;  he
gave  it  freely  that  he  tho't  it  meetest,  I  shew  him  the  reason  why
I  communicate  that  to  him,  for  that  I  had  been  suspected  by
some  of  her  majesty's  friends  in  France  to  have  done  evil  offices  in
her  service,  that  he  should  be  my  witness  that  my  earnest  dealing
in  this  should  be  a  sufficient  testimony  that  all  was  lies,  and  that
this  knave  Naue  who  now  had  betrayed  her,  had  in  that  done  evil
offices :  he  desired  me,  seeing  she  saw  only  with  other  folks  eyes,
that  I  should  no  ways  impute  it  to  her,  for  the  like  she  had  done
to  himself  by  Naue  his  persuasion.  I  answered  he  should  be  my
witness  in  that.

The  9th  day  we  sent  to  court  to  crave  audience,  which  we  got
the  10th  day ;  at  the  first,  she  said  a  thing  long  looked  for  should
be  welcome  when  it  comes,  I  would  now  see  your  master's  offers.
I  answered,  no  man  makes  offers  but  for  some  cause ;  we  would,
and  like  your  majesty,  first  know  the  cause  to  be  extant  for  which
we  offer,  and  likewise  that  it  be  extant  till  your  majesty  has  heard
us.  I  think  it  be  extant  yet,  but  I  will  not  promise  for  an  hour,
but  you  think  to  shift  in  that  sort.  I  answered,  we  mind  not  to
shift,  but  to  offer  from  our  sovereign  all  things  that  with  reason
may  be;  and  in  special,  we  offered  as  is  set  down  in  our  general,
all  was  refused,  and  tho't  nothing.  She  called  on  the  three  that
were  in  .the  house,  the  earl  of  Leicester,  my  lord  admiral,  and
chamberlain,  and  very  despitefully  repeated  all  our  offers  in  pre-
sence of  them  all.  I  opened  the  last  part,  and  said,  madam,  for
what  respect  is  it  that  men  deal  against  your  person  or  estate  for
her  cause?  She  answered,  because  they  think  she  shall  succeed
to  me,  and  for  that  she  is  a  Papist;  appearingly  said  I  both  the
causes  may  be  removed,  she  said  she  would  be  glad  to  understand
it.  If,  madam,  said  I,  all  that  she  has  of  right  of  succession  were
in  the  king  our  sovereign's  person,  were  not  all  hope  of  Papists
removed  ?  She  answered,  I  hope  so.  Then,  madam,  I  think  the
queen  his  mother  shall  willingly  demit  all  her  rights  in  his  person.
She  answered,  she  hath  no  right,  for  she  is  declared  unhabil.
Then  I  said,  if  she  have  no  right,  appearingly  the  hope  ceases
already,  so  that  it  is  not  to  be  feared  that  any  man  attempt  for  her.
The  queen  answered,  but  the  Papists  allow  not  our  declaration ;
then  let  it  fall,  says  I,  in  the  king's  person  by  her  assignation.
The  earl  of  Leicester  answered,  she  is  a  prisoner,,  how  can  she
demit?  I  answered,  the  demission  is  to  her  son,  by  the  advice  of
all  the  friends  she  has  in  Europe,  and  in  case,  as  God  forbid,  that
any  attempt  cuttis  the  queen  here  away,  who  shall  party  with  her
to  prove  the  demission  or  assignation  to  be  ineffectual,  her  son
being  opposite  party,  and  having  all  the  princes  her  friends  for

VOL.  II.

434  SCOTLAND.

him,  having  bonded  for  the  efficacy  of  it  with  his  majesty  of  before.
The  queen  made  as  she  could  not  comprehend  my  meaning,  and
Sir  Rob1,  opened  the  matter  again,  she  yet  made  as  tho'  she  un-
derstood not.  So  the  earl  of  Leicester  answered  that  our  meaning
was,  that  the  king  should  be  put  in  his  mother's  place.  Is  it  so,
the  queen  answered,  then  I  put  myself  in  a  worse  case  than  of
before :  by  God's  passion,  that  were  to  cut  my  own  throat,  and  for
a  dutchy  or  an  earldom  to  yourself,  you  or  such  as  you  would  cause
some  of  your  desperate  knaves  kill  me.  No,  by  God,  he  shall
never  be  in  that  place.  I  answered,  he  craves  nothing  of  your
majesty  but  only  of  his  mother.  The  earl  of  Leicester  answered,
that  were  to  make  him  party  to  the  queen  my  mistress.  I  said,  he
will  be  far  more  party,  if  he  be  in  her  place  through  her  death.
She  would  stay  no  longer,  but  said  she  would  not  have  a  worse  in
his  mother's  place.  And  said,  tell  your  king  what  good  I  have
done  for  him  in  holding  the  crown  on  his  head  since  he  was  born,
and  that  I  mind  to  keep  the  league  that  now  stands  between  us,
and  if  he  break  it  shall  be  a  double  fault,  and  with  this  minded  to
have  bidden  us  a  farewell ;  but  we  achevit  (i.  e.  finished  arguing
upon  this  point).  And  I  spake  craving  of  her  that  her  life  may  be
spared  for  15  days  ;  she  refused.  Sir  Rob*,  craved  for  only  eight
days ;  she  said,  not  for  an  hour ;  and  so  geid  her  away.  Your
majesty  sees  we  have  delivered  all  we  had  for  offers,  but  all  is  for
nothing,  for  she  and  her  councel  has  laid  a  determination  that  they
mind  to  follow  forth,  and  I  see  it  comes  rather  of  her  council  than
herself,  which  I  like  the  worse ;  for  without  doubt,  sir,  it  shall  cut
off  all  friendship  ye  had  here.  Altho'  it  were  that  once  they  had
meaned  well  to  your  majesty,  yet  remembering  themselves,  that
they  have  meddled  with  your  mother's  blood,  good  faith  they
cannot  hope  great  good  of  yourself,  a  thing  in  truth  I  am  sorry  for ;
further  your  majesty  may  perceive  by  this  last  discourse  of  that  I
proponit,  if  they  had  meaned  well  to  your  majesty,  they  had  used
it  otherwise  than  they  have  done,  for  reason  has  bound  them.
But  I  dare  not  write  all.  I  mind  something  to  speak  in  this
matter,  because  we  look  shurly  our  letters  shall  be  trussit  by
the  way.

For  that  I  see  private  credit  nor  no  means  can  alter  their  de-
termination, altho' the  queen  again  and  the  earl  of  Leicester  has
desired  to  speak  with  me  in  particular ;  I  mind  not  to  speak,  nor
shall  not ;  but  assuredly  shall  let  all  men  see  that  I  in  particular
was  no  ways  tyed  to  England,  but  for  the  respect  of  your  majesty's
service.  So  albeit,  at  this  time  I  could  not  effectuate  that  I  desired,
yet  my  upright  dealing  in  it  shall  be  manifested  to  the  world.  We
are,  God  willing,  then  to  crave  audience,  where  we  mind  to  use
sharply  our  instructions,  which  hitherto  we  have  used  very  calmly ;

APPENDIX.  435

for  we  can,  for  your  honour's  cause,  say  no  less  for  your  majesty,
than  the  French  ambassador  has  said  for  his  master.

So  I  pray  your  majesty  consider  my  upright  dealing  in  your
service,  and  not  the  effect ;  for  had  it  been  doable  (i.  e.  possible  to
be  done)  by  any  I  might  have  here  had  credit ;  but  being  I  came
only  for  that  cause,  I  will  not  my  credit  shall  serve  here  to  any
further  purpose.  I  pray  God  preserve  your  majesty,  and  send  you
a  true  and  sincere  friendship.  From  London  this  12th  of  Jan.
1586.

I  understand  the  queen  is  to  send  one  of  her  own  to  your  majesty.

To  the  Right  Hon.  my  Lord  Vice-Chancellor  and  Secretary  to  His
Majesty,  from  the  Matfer  of  Gray.

12th  Jan.  My  lord,  I  send  you  these  lines  with  this  inclosed  to
origfrial  in"  ^s  majesty»  whereby  your  lordship  shall  understand  how
the  Col-  matters  goes  here.  And  before  all  things  I  pray  your
If  rSck"  l°rckhip  move  his  maJesty  to  respect  my  diligence,  and
Vol.  A.  not  the  effect  in  this  negotiation,  for  I  swear  if  it  had
fol.  179.  been  for  the  crown  of  England  to  myself  I  could  do  no
more,  and  let  not  unfriends  have  advantage  of  me,  for  the  world
shall  see  that  I  loved  England  for  his  majesty's  service  only.
I  look  shortly  to  find  your  lordship  friend  as  ye  made  promise,  and
by  God  I  shall  be  to  you  if  I  can.  Wm.  Keith  and  I  devyset,
if  matters  had  gone  well,  to  have  run  a  course  that  your  lordship
might  have  here  been  in  credit  and  others  disappointed,  but  now
I  will  do  for  you  as  for  myself;  which  is  to  care  for  no  credit  here,
for  in  conscience  they  mean  not  honesty  to  the  king  our  sovereign,
and  if  they  may,  he  will  go  the  get  his  mother  is  gone,  or  shortly
to  go,  therefore  my  lord,  without  all  kind  of  scruple  I  pray  you  to
advise  him  the  best  is  not  this  way.  They  say  here,  that  it  has
been  said  by  one  who  heard  it  from  you,  that  ye  desired  not  the
king  and  England  to  agree,  because  it  would  rack  the  noblemen,
and  gave  an  example  of  it  by  king  James  the  Fourth,  I  answered  in
your  name  that  I  was  assured  you  never  had  spoken  it.  Mr.
Archibald  is  the  speaker  of  it,  who  I  assure  your  lordship  has  been
a  poison  in  this  matter,  for  they  lean  very  mickle  to  his  opinion.
He  cares  not  he  says,  for  at  length  the  king  will  be  fain  to  deal
this  way,  either  by  fair  means  or  necessity,  so  that  when  he  deals
this  course  he  is  assured  to  be  welcome ;  to  set  down  all  that  is
past  of  the  like  purposes,  it  would  consume  more  paper  than  I  have
here,  so  I  defer  it  to  meeting.  There  is  a  new  conspiracy  alledged
against  the  queen  to  have  been  intended,  for  the  French  ambassador
resident  three  of  his  men  taken,  but  I  think  in  the  end  it  shall  prove
nothing.  Mr.  Stafford,  who  is  ambassador  for  this  queen  in  France,
is  touched  with  it,  his  brother  is  taken  here,  always  it  has  done  this

2  F  2

436  SCOTLAND.

harm  in  our  negotiation,  that  all  this  council  would  not  move  this
queen  to  medle  with  the  queen  of  Scotland's  blood,  till  this  inven-
tion was  found  forth.  I  remit  all  other  things  to  the  inclosed.
We  minded  to  have  sent  to  his  majesty  a  discourse,  which  we  have
set  down  of  all  our  proceedings  since  our  hither  coming,  but  we
are  surely  advertized  that  the  bearer  is  to  be  trussed  by  the  way
for  our  pacquets,  so  that  we  defer  it  till  our  own  coming;  this  I
have  put  in  a  privy  part  beside  the  pacquet.  We  shall,  1  think,
take  leave  on  Fryday  the  13th  day,  where  we  mind  exactly  to
follow  the  rigour  of  our  instructions,  for  it  cannot  stand  with  the
king's  honour  that  we  say  less  than  the  French  ambassador,  which
was,  le  roy  mon  maistre  ne  pault  moins  faire  que  se  resentir.  So
that  about  the  24th  I  think  we  shall,  God  willing,  be  at  home,
except  that  some  stay  come  which  we  look  not  for.  The  queen  and
the  earl  of  Leicester  has  desired  to  speak  with  me.  I  refused  save
in  presence  of  my  colleagues,  by  reason  I  see  a  determination
which  particular  credit  cannot  help,  and  I  crave  no  credit  but  for
that  cause.  It  will  please  your  lordship  retire  the  inclosed  from
his  majesty  and  keep  it.  So  after  my  service  commended  to
yourself  and  bedfellow,  I  commit  you  to  God.  From  London  the
12th  of  Jan.  1586.

To  the  Kings  Majesty, from  Sir  Robert  Melvil.
20th  Jan. IT  may  please  your  majesty,  since  the  direction  of  our
orHnal  in"  f°rmer  letters,  we  had  audience,  and  her  majesty  appeared
his  own to  take  our  overtures  in  good  part  in  presence  of  her

hand,  in council ; albeit  no  offers could  take  place  with them,

the  Collect,  .. .  _ .

of  Sir  A. having  taken  resolution  to  proceed  with  extremity,  not

Dick.  Vol.  the  less  it  pleased  her  majesty  to  desire  us  to  stay  for
81'  two  days  on  taking  our  leave,  until  she  had  advised  upon
our  propositions ;  since  which  time,  her  majesty  is  become  more
hard  by  some  letters  (as  we  are  informed)  has  come  from  Scotland,
making  some  hope  to  believe  that  your  majesty  takes  not  this
matter  to  heart,  as  we  know  the  contrary  in  effect,  and  had  of
before  removed  the  like  opinion  out  of  her  majesty's  mind,  which
by  sinister  information  was  credited,  their  reports  has  hindered  our
commission,  and  abused  this  queen;  fearing  in  the  like  manner  we
shall  be  stayed  until  answer  come  from  Scotland  by  such  persons
as  they  have  intelligence  of.  And  albeit  that  it  will  be  well  enough
known  to  all  men  how  heavily  your  majesty  takes  this  proceeding
to  heart,  the  truth  is,  that  they  have  by  this  occasion  so  persuaded
the  queen,  that  it  is  like  to  hinder  our  negotiation.  As  also
Alchinder  (i.  e.  Alexander)  Steward  is  to  be  directed  in  their
party,  by  our  knowledge,  who  has  awantyt  more  of  his  credit,  than
I  believe  he  may  perform,  and  we  willed  him  to  desist  from  this

APPENDIX.  437

dealing,  saying  it  does  harm,  and  he  is  not  meet  for  that  purpose,
remitting  to  your  majesty's  good  discretion  to  take  order  herein  as
we  shall  be  answerable  to  your  majesty  not  to  omit  any  point  we
have  in  charge,  as  the  truth  is,  the  master  of  Grhaye  has  behaved
himself  very  uprightly  and  discreetly  in  this  charge,  and  evil  tayne
with  be  divers  in  these  parts  who  were  of  before  his  friends.  We
have  been  behalding  to  the  menstrals  who  has  born  us  best  com-
pany, but  has  not  been  troubled  with  others.  Wylzeme  Kethe
hath  left  nothing  undone  that  he  had  in  charge.  As  for  master
Archibald  he  has  promised  at  all  times  to  do  his  dewoyr,  wherein
he  shall  find  true  report  made  to  your  majesty,  craving  pardon  of
your  majesty  that  I  have  been  so  tedious,  after  I  have  kissed  your
majesty's  hand  I  humbly  take  my  leave.  Praying  God  to  grant
your  majesty  many  good  days  and  happy,  in  whose  protection  I
commit  your  majesty  at  London,  the  20th  of  Jan.  1586.

SIR,

ALBEIT  master  George  has  not  been  in  commission,  he  is  not
inferior  in  his  service  to  any  of  us,  as  well  by  his  good  advice  and
diligent  care  he  takes  for  the  advancement  of  your  service,  wherein
we  have  not  been  a  little  furthered.

To  the  Kings  Majesty,  from  the  Master  of  Gray  and  Sir  Robert

Mehil.

2ist  Jan  PLEASE  it  your  majesty  in  the  last  audience  we  had,
1586.  An  since  our  last  advertisement  by  Wm.  Murray,  we  find  her
°jjigpa,1,in  majesty  at  the  resuming  our  offers  something  mitigated,
ofVir^0  and  inclined  to  consider  more  deeply  of  them,  before  we
Dick.  Vol.  gOt  our  leave,  at  our  reasoning,  certain  of  the  council,
A.  fol.  180.  namejyj  my  lord  of  Leicester,  Sir  Christopher  Hay  ton,  my
lord  Hunsdon,  and  my  lord  Hawart  being  present  in  the  chamber,
gave  little  show  of  any  great  contentment  to  have  her  from  her
former  resolution,  now  cassin  in  perplexitie  what  she  should  do
always  we  left  her  in  that  state,  and  since  have  daily  pressed  con-
ference with  the  whole  council,  which  to  this  hour  we  have  not  yet
obtained.  This  day  we  have  sent  down  to  crave  our  leave.  The
greatest  hinder  which  our  negotiation  has  found  hitherto  is  a  per-
suasion they  have  here  that  either  your  majesty  deals  superficially
in  this  matter,  or  that  with  time  ye  may  be  moved  to  digest  it,
which  when  with  great  difficulty  we  had  expugnit,  we  find  anew
that  certain  letters  written  to  them  of  late  from  Scotland  has  found
some  place  of  credit  with  them  in  our  contrare.  So  that  resolving
now  to  clear  them  of  that  doubt  by  a  special  message,  they  have
made  choice  of  Sir  Alexander  Stewart  to  try  your  highness's
meaning  in  it,  and  to  persuade  your  majesty  to  like  of  their  pro-
ceedings, wherefrom  no  terror  we  can  lay  out  unto  him  is  able  to

438  SCOTLAND.

divert  him,  he  has  given  out  that  he  has  credit  with  your  majesty,
and  that  he  doubts  not  to  help  this  matter  at  your  highness's  hand.
If  he  come  there  that  errand,  we  think  your  majesty  will  not  oversee
the  great  disgrace  that  his  attempts  shall  give  us  here,  if  he  be  not
tane  order  with  before  that  he  be  further  heard,  and  if  so  be  that
any  other  be  directed  (as  our  intelligence  gives  us  there  shall)  our
humble  suit  is  to  your  majesty,  that  it  may  please  your  highness  to
hear  of  us  what  we  find  here,  and  at  what  point  we  leave  this
matter  with  her  majesty,  before  that  they  find  accidence,  the  causes
whereof  remitting  to  our  private  letters.  We  commit  your  majesty
for  the  present  to  God's  eternal  protection.  From  London  this
21st  of  Jan.  1586.

No.  LI.  (Vol.  II.  p.  142.)

Copy  of  a  letter  from  the  Earls  of  Shrewsbury  and  Kent,  fyc.  touching
their  proceedings  with  regard  to  the  death  of  the  Scottish  Queen,  to
Her  Majesty's  council.

IT  may  please  your  Honble  good  lordships  to  be  advertized,  that,
on  Saturday  the  4th  of  this  present,  1  Robert  Beale  came  to  the

house  of  me  the  earl  of  Kent,  in  the  county  of ,  to  whom  your

lordship's  letter  and  message  was  delivered,  and  her  majesty's
commission  shewn ;  whereupon  I  the  earl  forthwith  sent  precepts
for  the  staying  of  such  hues  and  cries  as  had  troubled  the  country,
requiring  the  officers  to  make  stay  of  all  such  persons,  as  should
bring  any  such  warrants  without  names,  as  before  had  been  done,
and  to  bring  them  to  the  next  justice  of  peace,  to  the  intent  that
upon  their  examination,  the  occasion  and  causes  of  such  seditious
bruites  might  be  bolted  out  and  known.  It  was  also  resolved  that
I  the  said  earl  of  Kent  should,  on  the  Monday  following,  come  to
Lylford  to  Mr.  Elmes,  to  be  the  nearer  and  readier  to  confer  with
my  lord  of  Shrewsbury.  Sonday  at  night,  I  Robert  Beale  came
to  Fotheringay,  where  after  the  communicating  the  commission,
&c.  unto  us  Sir  Amice  Pawlet  uicl  Sir  Drue  Drury,  by  reason  that
Sir  A.  Pawlet  was  but  late  recovered  and  not  able  to  repair  to  the
earl  of  Shrewsbury,  being  then  at  Orton,  six  miles  offj  it  was
thought  good  that  we  Sir  Drue  Drury  and  Robert  Beale  should  go

unto  him,  which  we  did  on morning ;  and  together  with  the

delivery  of  her  majesty's  commission,  and  your  lordship's  letter  im-
parted unto  him  what  both  the  earl  of  Kent  and  we  thought  meet
to  be  done  in  the  cause,  praying  his  lordship  hither  the  day  follow-
ing, to  confer  with  me  the  said  earl,  concerning  the  same  ;  which
his  lordship  promised.  And  for  the  better  colouring  of  the  matter,
I  the  said  earl  of  Shrewsbury  sent  to  Mr.  Beale,  a  justice  of  peace
of  the  county  of  Huntingdon  next  adjoining,  to  whom  I  communi-

APPENDIX.

430

cated  that  warrant,  which  Robert  Beale  had  under  your  lordship's
hands,  for  the  staying  of  the  hues  and  cries,  requiring  him  to  give
notice  thereof  to  the  town  of  Peterborough,  and  especially  unto
the  justices  of  peace  of  Huntingdonshire,  and  to  cause  the  pursuers
and  bringers  of  such  warrants  to  be  stayed,  and  brought  to  the
next  justice  of  peace ;  and  to  bring  us  word  to  Fotheringay  castle
on  Wednesday  morning  what  he  had  done,  and  what  he  should  in
the  mean  time  understand  of  the  authors  of  such  bruites.  Which
like  order,  I  also  Sir  Amias  Pawlet  had  taken  on  Monday  morning
in  this  town,  and  other  places  adjoining.  The  same  night  the
sheriff  of  the  county  of  Northampton  upon  the  receipt  of  your  lord-
ship's letter  came  to  Arundel,  and  letters  were  sent  to  me  the  earl
of  Kent  of  the  earl  of  Shrewsbury's  intention  and  meeting  here  on
Tuesday  by  noon ;  and  other  letters  were  also  sent  with  their  lord-
ship's assent  to  Sir  Edward  Montagu,  Sir  Richard  Knightly,  Mr.
Tho.  Brudenell,  &c.  to  be  here  on  Wednesday  by  eight  of  the  clock
in  the  morning,  at  which  time  it  was  thought  meet  that  the  ex-
ecution should  be.  So  upon  Tuesday,  we  the  earls  came  hither,
where  the  sheriff  met  us  ;  and  upon  conference  between  us  it  was
resolved,  that  the  care  for  the  sending  for  the  surgeons,  and  other
necessary  provision  should  be  committed  unto  him  against  the
time.  And  we  forthwith  repaired  unto  her,  and  first  in  the
presence  of  herself  and  her  folks,  to  the  intent  that  they  might  see
and  report  hereafter  that  she  was  not  otherwise  proceeded  with
than  according  to  law,  and  the  form  of  the  statute  made  in  the
27th  year  of  her  majesty's  reign,  it  was  thought  convenient  that
her  majesty's  commission  should  be  read  unto  her,  and  afterwards
she  was  by  sundry  speeches  willed  to  prepare  herself  against  the
next  morning.  She  was  also  put  in  remembrance  of  her  fault,  the
honorable  manner  of  proceeding  with  her,  and  the  necessity  that
was  imposed  upon  her  majesty  to  proceed  to  execution,  for  that
otherwise  it  was  found  that  they  could  not  both  stand  together ;
and  however,  sithence  the  lord  Buckhurst's  his  being  here  new
conspiracies  were  attempted,  and  so  would  be  still ;  wherefore
since  she  had  now  a  good  while  since  warning,  by  the  said  lord
and  Robert  Beale,  to  think  upon  and  prepare  herself  to  die,  we
doubted  not  but  that  she  was,  before  this,  settled,  and  therefore
would  accept  this  message  in  good  part.  And  to  the  effect  that  no
Christian  duty  might  be  said  to  be  omitted,  that  might  be  for  her
comfort,  and  tend  to  the  salvation  both  of  her  body  and  soul  in  the
world  to  come,  we  offered  unto  her  that  if  it  would  please  her  to
confer  with  the  bishop  and  dean  of  Peterborough,  she  might;
which  dean,  we  had,  for  that  purpose,  appointed  to  be  lodged
within  one  mile  of  that  place.  Hereto  she  replied,  crossing  herself
in  the  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  saying

440  SCOTLAND.

that  she  was  ready  to  die  in  the  Catholic  Roman  faith,  which  her
ancestors  had  professed,  from  which  she  would  not  be  removed.
And  albeit  we  used  many  persuasions  to  the  contrary,  yet  we  pre-
vailed nothing  ;  and  therefore,  when  she  demanded  the  admittance
of  her  priest,  we  utterly  denied  that  unto  her.  Hereupon  she  de-
manded to  understand  what  answer  we  had  touching  her  former
petition  to  her  majesty,  concerning  her  papers  of  accounts,  and  the
bestowing  of  her  body.  To  the  first  we  had  none  other  answer  to
make,  but  that  we  thought  if  they  were  not  sent  before,  the  same
might  be  in  Mr.  Waade's  custody,  who  was  now  in  France,  and
seeing  her  papers  could  not  any  wise  pleasure  her  majesty,  we
doubted  not  but  that  the  same  would  be  delivered  unto  such  as  she
should  appoint.  For,  for  our  own  parts,  we  undoubtedly  thought
that  her  majesty  would  not  make  any  profit  of  her  things,  and
therefore  (in  our  opinions)  she  might  set  down  what  she  would
have  done,  and  the  same  should  be  imparted  unto  her  majesty,  of
whom  both  she  and  others  might  expect  all  courtesy.  Touching
her  body,  we  knew  not  her  majesty's  pleasure,  and  therefore  could
neither  say  that  her  petition  should  be  denied,  or  granted.  For
the  practice  of  Babington,  she  utterly  denied  it,  and  would  have
inferred  it  that  her  death  was  for  her  religion ;  whereunto  it  was
eftsoons  by  us  replied,  that  for  many  years  she  was  not  touched
for  religion,  nor  should  have  been  now,  but  that  this  proceeding
against  her  was  for  treason,  in  that  she  was  culpable  of  that  horrid
conspiracy  for  destroying  her  majesty's  person ;  which  she  again
denied,  adding  further  that  albeit  she  for  herself  forgave  them  that
were  the  procurers  of  her  death,  yet  she  doubted  not  but  that  God
would  take  vengeance  thereof.  And  being  charged  with  the  de-
positions of  Naue  and  Curie  to  prove  it  against  her,  she  replied,
that  she  accused  none,  but  that  hereafter  when  she  shall  be  dead,
and  they  remain  alive,  it  shall  be  seen  how  indifferently  she  had
been  dealt  with,  and  what  measure  had  been  used  unto  her  ;  and
asked  whether  it  had  been  heard  before  this,  that  servants  had
been  practised  to  accuse  their  mistress,  and  hereupon  also  required
what  was  become  of  them,  and  where  they  remained.

Upon  our  departure  from  her,  for  that  it  seemed  by  the  com-
mission, that  the  charge  of  her  was  in  the  disposition  of  us  the
earls,  we  required  S.  Amias  Pawlet  and  S.  Drue  Drurie,  to  receive
for  that  night  the  charge  which  they  had  before,  and  to  cause  the
whole  number  of  soldiers  to  watch  that  night,  and  that  her  folks
should  be  put  up,  and  take  order  that  only  four  of  them  should  be
at  the  execution,  remaining  aloof  of  and  guarded  with  certain  per-
sons, so  as  they  should  not  come  near  unto  her,  which  were  Melvil
her  steward,  the  physician,  surgeon,  and  apothecary.

Wednesday  morning,  after  that  we  the  earls  were  repaired  unto

APPENDIX.

441

the  castle,  and  the  sheriff  had  prepared  all  things  in  the  hall  for  the
execution,  he  was  commanded  to  go  into  the  chamber,  and  to
bring  her  down  to  the  place  where  were  present,  we  which  have
signed  this  letter,  Mr.  Henry  Talbot,  esq.,  Sir  Edward  Montague,
knt.,  his  son  and  heir  apparent,  and  William  Montague  his  brother,
Sir  Richard  Knichtly,  knt.,  Mr.  Thomas  Brudenell,  Mr.  Beuill,
Mr.  Robert  and  John  Wingefield,  Mr.  Forrest,  and  Rayner,
Benjamin  Piggot,  Mr.  Dean  of  Peterborough,  and  others.

At  the  stairfold,  she  paused  to  speak  to  Melvil  in  our  hearing,
which  was  to  this  effect,  "  Melvil,  as  thou  hast  been  an  honest
servant  to  me,  so  I  pray  thee  continue  to  my  son,  and  commend
me  unto  him.  I  have  not  impugn'd  his  religion,  nor  the  religion
of  others,  but  wish  him  well.  And  as  I  forgive  all  that  have
offended  me  in  Scotland,  so  I  would  that  he  should  also;  and
beseech  God,  that  he  would  send  him  his  Holy  Spirit,  and  illuminate
him."  Melvil's  answer  was,  that  he  would  so  do,  and  at  that
instant,  he  would  beseech  God  to  assist  him  with  his  Spirit.  Then
she  demanded  to  speak  with  her  priest,  which  was  denied  unto
her,  the  rather  for  that  she  came  with  a  superstitious  pair  of  beads
and  a  crucifix.  She  then  desired  to  have  her  woman  to  help  her,
and  upon  her  earnest  request,  and  saying  that  when  other  gentle-
women were  executed,  she  had  read  in  chronicles  that  they  had
women  allowed  unto  them,  it  was  permitted  that  she  should  have
two  named  by  herself,  which  were  Mrs.  Curie  and  Kennedy.
After  she  came  to  the  scaffold,  first  in  presence  of  them  all,  her
majestie's  commission  was  openly  read ;  and  afterwards  Mr.  Dean
of  Peterborough,  according  to  a  direction  which  he  had  received,
the  night  before,  from  us  the  earls,  wou'd  have  made  a  godly
admonition  to  her,  to  repent  and  die  well  in  the  fear  of  God  and
charity  to  the  world.  But  at  the  first  entry,  she  utterly  refused  it,
saying  that  she  was  a  Catholique,  and  that  it  were  a  folly  to  move
her  being  so  resolutely  minded,  and  that  our  prayers  would  little
avail  her.  Whereupon,  to  the  intent  it  might  appear  that  we,  and
the  whole  assembly,  had  a  Christian  desire  to  have  her  die  well,  a
godly  prayer,  conceived  by  Mr.  Dean,  was  read  and  pronounced  by
us  all.  "  That  it  would  please  Almighty  God  to  send  her  his  Holy
Spirit  and  grace,  and  also,  if  it  were  his  will,  tp  pardon  all  her
offences,  and  of  his  mercy  to  receive  her  into  his  heavenly  and
everlasting  kingdom,  and  finally  to  bless  her  majesty,  and  con-
found all  her  enemies ;"  whereof  Mr.  Dean,  minding  to  repair  up
shortly,  can  shew  your  lordship  a  copy.

This  done,  she  pronounced  a  prayer  upon  her  knees  to  this  effect,
"  to  beseech  God  to  send  her  his  Holy  Spirit,  and  that  she  trusted
to  receive  her  salvation  in  his  blood,  and  of  his  grace  to  be  received
into  his  kingdom,  besought  God  to  forgive  her  enemies,  as  she  for-

442  SCOTLAND.

gave  them ;  and  to  turn  his  wrath  from  this  land,  to  bless  the  queen's
majestic,  that  she  might  serve  him.  Likewise  to  be  merciful  to  her
son,  to  have  compassion  of  his  church,  and  altho'  she  was  not  wor-
thy to  be  heard,  yet  she  had  a  confidence  in  his  mercy,  and  prayed
all  the  saints  to  pray  unto  her  Saviour  to  receive  her."  After  this
(turning  towards  her  servants)  she  desired  them  to  pray  for  her,  that
her  Saviour  would  receive  her.  Then,  upon  petition  made  by  the
executioners,  she  pardoned  them ;  and  said,  she  was  glad  that  the
end  of  all  her  sorrows  was  so  near.  Then  she  misliked  the  whinning
and  weeping  of  her  women,  saying  that  they  rather  ought  to  thank
God  for  her  resolution,  and  kissing  them,  willed  them  to  depart
from  the  scaffold,  and  farewell.  And  so  resolutely  kneeled  down,
and  having  a  kerchief  banded  about  her  eyes,  laid  down  her  neck,
whereupon  the  executioner  proceeded.  Her  servants  were  inconti-
nently removed,  and  order  taken  that  none  should  approach  unto
her  corps,  but  that  it  should  be  embalmed  by  the  surgeon  appointed.
And  further  her  crosse,  apparel,  and  other  things  are  retained  here,
and  not  yielded  unto  the  executioner  for  inconveniencies  that
might  follow,  but  he  is  remitted  to  be  rewarded  by  such  as  sent  him
hither.

This  hath  been  the  manner  of  our  dealings  in  this  service,  where-
of we  have  thought  good  to  advertise  your  lordships,  as  particularly
as  we  could,  for  the  time,  and  further  have  thought  good  to  signify
unto  your  lordships  besides,  that  for  the  avoiding  of  all  sinister  and
slanderous  reports  that  may  be  raised  to  the  contrary,  we  have
caused  a  note  thereof  to  be  conceived  to  the  same  effect  in  writing,
which  we  the  said  lords  have  subscribed,  with  the  hands  of  such
other  there  the  knights  and  gentlemen  above  named  that  were  pre-
sent at  the  action.  And  so  beseeching  Almighty  God  long  to  bless
her  majesty  with  a  most  prosperous  reign,  and  to  confound  all  his,
and  her  enemies,  we  take  our  leaves.  From  Fotheringay-castle,
the  8th  of  February  1586,  in  hast.

Your  lordships  at  commandment.

N.  B.  This,  as  well  as  several  other  papers  in  this  Appendix,  is
taken  from  a  collection  made  by  Mr.  Crawfurd,  of  Drumsoy,
historiographer  to  queen  Anne,  now  in  the  library  of  the  faculty
of  advocates.  Mr.  Crawfurd's  transcriber  has  omitted  to  men-
tion the  book  in  the  Cott.  Lib.  where  it  is  to  be  found.

APPENDIX.  443

No.  LII. (Vol.  II.  p.  146.)

The  objections  against  Mr.  Damson,  in  the  cause  of  the  late  Scottish
Queen,  must  concern  things  done  either,  1 .  Before  her  trial  at  Fother-
ingay.  1.  During  that  session.  3.  After  the  same.

Cott.  Lib. *"  BEFORE  her  trial»  ne  neither  is,  nor  can  be  charged
Cal/C.  i.'  to  have  had  any  hand  at  all  in  the  cause  of  the  said
queen,  or  done  any  thing  whatsoever  concerning  the
same  directly  or  indirectly.

2.  During  that  session,  he  remained  at  court,  where  the  only  in-
terest he  had  therein,  was  as  her  majesty's  secretary,  to  receive  the
letters  from  the  commissioners,  impart  them  to  her  highness,  and
return  them  her  answers.

3.  After  the  return  thence,  of  the  said  commissioners,  it  is  well
known  to  all  her  council,

1 .  That  he  never  was  at  any  deliberation  or  meeting  whatsoever,
in  parliament,  or  council,  concerning  the  cause  of  the  said  queen,
till  the  sending  down  of  her  majesty's  warrant  unto  the  commis-
sioners, by  the  lords  and  others  of  her  council.

2.  That  he  was  no  party  in  signing  the  sentence  passed  against
her.

3.  That  he  never  penned  either  the  proclamation  publishing  the
same,  the  warrant  after  her  death,  nor  any  other  letter,  or  thing
whatsoever  concerning  the  same. And,

That  the  only  thing  which  can  be  specially  and  truly  imputed  to
him,  is  the  carrying  up  the  said  warrant  unto  her  majesty  to  be
signed.  She  sending  a  great  counsellor  unto  him,  with  her  pleasure
to  that  end,  and  carrying  it  to  the  great  seal  of  England,  by  her  own
special  direction  and  commandment

For  the  better  clearing  of  which  truth,  it  is  evident,

1.  That  the  letter,  being  penned  by  the  lord  treasurer,  was  de-
livered by  him  unto  Mr.  Davison,  with  her  majesty's  own  privity,  to
be  ready  for  to  sign  when  she  should  be  pleased  to  call  for  it.

2.  That  being  in  his  hands,  he  retained  it  at  the  least  for  five  or
six  weeks  unpresented,  nor  once  offering  to  carry  it  up,  till  she  sent
a  great  counsellor  unto  him  for  the  same,  and  was  sharply  reproved
therefore  by  a  great  peer,  in  her  majesty's  own  presence.

3.  That  having  signed  it,  she  gave  him  an  express  commandment,
to  carry  it  to  the  seal,  and  being  sealed  to  send  it  immediately  away
unto  the  commissioners,  according  to  the  direction. Herself  ap-
pointing the  hall  of  Fotheringay  for  the  place  of  execution,  mis-
liking  the  court-yard,  in  divers  respects,  and  in  conclusion  abso~
lutely  forbad  him  to  trouble  her  any  further,  or  let  her  hear  any  more

444  , SCOTLAND.

hereof,  till  it  was  done.  She,  for  her  part,  having  (as  she  said)  per-
formed all  that,  in  law  or  reason,  could  be  required  of  her.

4.  Which  directions  notwithstanding,  he  kept  the  warrant  sealed
all  that  night,  and  the  greatest  part  of  the  next  day  in  his  hands,
brought  it  back  with  him  to  the  court,  acquainted  her  majesty  withal,
and  finding  her  majesty  resolved  to  proceed  therein,  according  to
her  former  directions,  and  yet  desirous  to  carry  the  matter  so,  as  she
might  throw  the  burthen  from  herself,  he  absolutely  resolved  to  quit
his  hands  thereof.

5.  And  hereupon  went  over  unto  the  lord  treasurer's  chamber,
together  with  Mr.  vice-chamberlain  Hatton,  and  in  his  presence
restored  the  same  into  the  hands  of  the  said  lord  treasurer,  of  whom
he  had  before  received  it,  whom  from  thenceforth  kept  it,  till  him-
self and  the  rest  of  the  council  sent  it  away.

Which,  in  substance  and  truth,  is  all  the  part  and'  interest  the
said  Davison  had  in  this  cause,  whatsoever  is,  or  may  be  pretended
to  the  contrary.

.  Touching  the  sending  down  thereof  unto  the  commissioners,  that
it  was  the  general  act  of  her  majesty's  council  (as  is  before  men-
tioned) and  not  any  private  act  of  his,  may  appear  by,

1.  Their  own  confession.  2.  Their  own  letters  sent  down  there-
with to  the  commissioners.  3.  The  testimonies  of  the  lords  and
others  to  whom  they  were  directed.  As  also,  4.  of  Mr.  Beale,  by
whom  they  were  sent.  5.  The  tenor  of  her  majesty's  first  commis-
sion for  their  calling  to  the  star-chamber  for  the  same,  and  private
appearance  and  submission  afterward  instead  thereof  before  the  lord
chancellor  Bromley.  6.  The  confession  of  Mr.  attorney-general
in  open  court  affirmed.  7.  By  the  sentence  itself  upon  record.  8.
Besides  a  common  act  of  council,  containing  an  answer  to  be  ver-
bally delivered  to  the  Scottish  ambassador  then  remaining  here,
avowing  and  justifying  the  same.

Now  where  some  suppose  him  to  have  given  some  extraordinary
furtherance  thereunto,  the  contrary  may  evidently  appear  by,

1.  His  former  absolute  refusal  to  sign  the  band  of  association,
being  earnestly  pressed  thereunto  by  her  majesty's  self.

2.  His excusing  of  himself  from  being  used  as  a  commissioner,
in  the  examination  of  Babington  and  his  complices,  and  avoiding
the  same  by  a  journey  to  the  Bath.

3.  His  being  a  mean  to  stay  the  commissioners  from  pronouncing
of  the  sentence  at  Fotheringay,  and  deferring  it  till  they should
return  to  her  majesty's  presence.

4.  His  keeping  the  warrant  in  his  hands  six  weeks  unpresented,
without  once  offering  to  carry  it  up,  till  her  majesty  sent  expressly
for  the  same  to  sign.

APPENDIX.  445

5.  His  deferring  to  send  it  away  after  it  was  sealed  unto  the  com-
missioners, as  he  was  specially  commanded,  staying  it  all  that  night,
and  the  greatest  part  of  the  next  day  in  his  hands.

6.  And  finally,  his  restoring  thereof  into  the  hands  of  the  lord
treasurer,  of  whom  he  had  before  received  the  same.

Which  are  clear  and  evident  proofs,  that  the  said  Davison  did
nothing  in  this  cause  whatsoever,  contrary  to  the  duty  of  the  place
he  then  held  in  her  majesty's  service.

Cal.  C.  9.

This  seems  to  be  an  original. On  the  back  is  this  title,

The  innocency  of  Mr.  Davison  in  the  cause  of  the  late  Scottish
queen.

No.  LIII. (Vol.  II.  p.  227.)

Letter  from  0,  to  His  Majesty  King  James.b

From  the  MOST  worthy  prince,  the  depending  dangers  upon  your
Kbl^Fac  affectionates'  have  been  sucn»  as  hath  inforced  silence  in
Jur.Edin.  *"m>  w^°  *s  faithfully  devoted  to  your  person,  and  in  due
A.  i.  34.  time  of  trial,  will  undergo  all  hazards  of  fortune  for  the
°* 4t  maintenance  of  the  just  regal  rights,  that,  by  the  laws  di-
vine, of  nature  and  of  nations,  is  invested  in  your  royal  person.  Fall
not  then,  most  noble  and  renowned  prince,  from  him  whose  provi-
dence hath  in  many  dangers  preserved  you,  no  doubt  to  be  an  in-
strument of  his  glory,  and  the  good  of  his  people.  Some  secrets,  I
find,  have  been  revealed  to  your  prejudice,  which  must  proceed  from
some  ambitious  violent  spirited  person  near  your  majesty  in  council
and  favour;  no  man  in  particular  will  I  accuse,  but  I  am  sure  it
hath  no  foundation  from  any  with  whom,  for  your  service,  I  have
held  correspondence ;  otherwise  I  had,  long  since,  been  disabled
from  performance  of  those  duties,  that  the  thoughts  of  my  heart  en-
deavoureth;  being  only  known  to  this  worthy  nobleman  bearer
hereof,  one  noted  in  all  parts  of  Christendom  for  his  fidelity  to  your
person  and  state,  and  to  Mr.  David  Fowlis  your  most  loyal  servant,
my  first  and  faithful  correspondent ;  and  unto  James  Hudsone,
whom  I  have  found  in  all  things  that  concern  you,  most  secret  and
assured.  It  may,  therefore,  please  your  majesty,  at  the  humble
motion  of  0,  which  jargon  I  desire  to  be  the  indorsement  of  your
commands  unto  me,  that,  by  some  token  of  your  favour,  he  may  un-
derstand in  what  terms  you  regard  his  fidelity,  secrecy,  and  service.

b  In  the  former  editions,  I  printed  this  as  a  letter  from  Sir  Robert  Cecil,  but  am
now  satisfied  that  I  was  mistaken  in  forming  this  opinion.  See  Sir  D.  Dalrymple's
Bern,  on  the  Hist,  of  Scot.  p.  233.  As  the  letter  is  curious,  I  republish  it,  though  I
cannot  pretend  to  say  to  which  of  the  king's  numerous  correspondents  in  England  it
should  be  ascribed.

446  SCOTLAND.

My  passionate  affection  to  your  person  (not  as  you  are  a  king,  but
as  you  are  a  good  king,  and  have  just  title,  after  my  sovereign,  to
be  a  great  king)  doth  transport  me  to  presumption.  Condemn  not,
most  noble  prince,  the  motives  of  care  and  love,  altho'  mixed  with
defects  in  judgment.

1.  I,  therefore,  first  beseech  your  majesty,  that  for  the  good  of
those  whom  God,  by  divine  Providence,  hath  destined  to  your  charge,
that  you  will  be  pleased  to  have  an  extraordinary  care  of  all  prac-
ticers  or  practices,  against  your  person ;  for  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,
but  that  in  both  kingdoms,  either  out  of  ambition,  faction,  or  fear,
there  are  many  that  desire  to  have  their  sovereign  in  minority,  where-
by the  sovereignty  and  state  might  be  swayed  by  partiality  of  sub-
alternate  persons,  rather  than  by  true  rule  of  power  and  justice.
Preserve  your  person,  and  fear  not  the  practices  of  man  upon  the
point  of  your  right,  which  will  be  preserved  and  maintained  against
all  assaults  of  competition  whatever. Thus  I  leave  the  protection
of  your  person  and  royal  posterity  to  the  Almighty  God  of  heaven,
who  bless  and  preserve  you  and  all  yours,  in  all  regal  happiness  to
to  his  glory.

2.  Next  to  the  preservation  of  your  person,  is  the  conservation
and  secret  keeping  of  your  councells,  which,  as  I  have  said,  are
often  betrayed  and  discovered,  either  out  of  pretended  zeal  in  re-
ligion, turbulent  faction,  or  base  conception,  the  which  your  majes-
ty is  to  regard  with  all  circumspection,  as  a  matter  most  dangerous
to  your  person  and  state,  and  the  only  means  to  ruin  and  destroy
all  those  that  stand  faithfully  devoted  to  your  majesty's  service.
Some  particulars,  and  persons  of  this  nature,  I  make  no  doubt  have
been  discovered  by  the  endeavours  of  this  nobleman,  the  bearer
hereof,  of  whom  your  majesty  may  be  further  informed.

3.  The  third  point  considerable  is  that  your  majesty  by  all  means
possible,  secure  yourself  of  the  good  affection  of  the  French  king
and  states,  by  the  negotiation  of  some  faithful  secret  confident:  the
French  naturally  distasting  the  union  of  the  British  islands  under
one  monarch. In  Germany,  I  doubt  not,  but  you  have  many  allies
and  friends,  but  by  reason  of  their  remote  state  they  do  not  so  much
importe  this  affair,  which  must  be  guided  by  a  quick  and  sudden
motion.

4.  When  God,  by  whose  providence,  the  period  of  all  persons
and  times  is  determined,  shall  call  to  his  kingdom  of  glory  her  ma-
jesty (although  I  do  assuredly  hope  that  there  will  not  be  any  ques-
tion in  competition,  yet  for  that  I  hold  it  not  fitting  to  give  any
minute  entrance  into  a  cause  of  so  high  a  nature),  I  do  humbly  be-
seech your  majesty  to  design  a  secret,  faithful  and  experienced
confident  servant  of  yours,  being  of  an  approved  fidelity  and  judg-
ment, continually  to  be  here  resident,  whose  negotiation,  it  were

APPENDIX.  447

convenient  your  majesty  should  fortifie,  with  such  secret  trust  and
powers,  as  there  may  not  need  14  days  respite  to  post  for  authority,
in  a  cause,  that  cannot  endure  ten  hours  respite,  without  varieties  of
danger.  In  which  it  is  to  be  considered  that  all  such  as  pretend
least  good  to  your  establishment,  will  not  in  public  oppugn  your
title,  but  out  of  their  cunning  ambition  will  seek  to  gain  time  by
alledging  their  pretence  of  common  good  to  the  state,  in  propound-
ing of  good  conditions  for  disburthening  the  common  weale,  of  di-
vers hard  laws,  heavy  impositions,  corruptions,  oppressions,  &c.
which  is  a  main  point  to  lead  the  popular,  who  are  much  disgusted
with  many  particulars  of  this  nature.  It  were  therefore  convenient,
that  these  motives,  out  of  your  majesty's  providence  should  be  pre-
vented by  your  free  offer  in  these  points  following,  viz.

1.  That  your  majesty  would  be  pleased  to  abolish  purveyors
and  purveyance,  being  a  matter  infinitely  offensive  to  the  com-
mon people,  and  the  whole  kingdom,  and  not  profitable  to  the
prince.

2.  That  your  majesty  would  be  pleased  to  dissolve  the  court  of
wards,  being  the  ruin  of  all  the  noble  and  ancient  families  of  this
realm,  by  base  matches,  and  evil  education  of  their  children,  by
which  no  revenue  of  the  crown  will  be  defrayed.

3.  The  abrogating  the  multiplicity  of  penal  laws,  generally  re-
pined against  by  the  subject,  in  regard  of  their  uncertainty,  being
many  times  altered  from  their  true  meaning,  by  variety  of  inter-
pretation.

4.  That  your majesty  will  be  pleased  to  admit  free  outport
of  the  native  commodities  of  this  kingdom,  now  often  restrained  by
subalternate  persons  for  private  profit,  being  most  prejudicial  to
the  commerce  of  all  merchants,  and  a  plain  destruction  to  the  true
industry  and  manufacture  of  all  kingdoms,  and  against  the  profit  of
the  crown.

These,  being  by  your  majesty's  confidents  in  the  point  of  time  pro-
pounded, will  assuredly  confirm  unto  your  majesty  the  hearts  and
affections  of  the  whole  kingdom,  and  absolutely  prevent  all  insinu-
ations and  devices  of  designed  patriots,  that,  out  of  pretext  of
common  good,  would  seek  to  patronize  themselves  in  popular  opi-
nion and  power,  and  thereby  to  derogate  from  your  majesty's  bounty
and  free  favour  by  princely  merit  of  your  moderation,  judgment,  and
justice.

Your  majesty's  favour,  thus  granted  to  the  subject,  will  no  way
impeach  the  profits  of  the  crown  but  advance  them.  The  dispro-
portionate gain  of  some  chequer  officers,  with  the  base  and  mer-
cenary profits  of  the  idle  unnecessary  clerks  and  attendants,  will
only  suffer  some  detriment ;  but  infinite  will  be  the  good  unto  the

448  SCOTLAND.

kingdom,  which  will  confirm  unto  your  majesty  the  universal  love
and  affection  of  the  people,  and  establish  your  renown  in  the  high-
est esteem  to  all  posterity.

The  lord  preserve  your  majestic,  and  make  you  triumphant  over
all  your  enemies.

My  care  over  his  person,  whose  letters  pass  in  this  pacquet,  and
will  die  before  he  leave  to  be  yours,  shall  be  no  less  than  of  mine
own  life,  and  in  like  esteem  will  I  hold  all  your  faithful  confidents,
notwithstanding  I  will  hold  myself  reserved  from  being  known  unto
any  of  them  in  my  particular  devoted  affections  unto  your  majesty,
only  this  extraordinary  worthy  man,  whose  associate  I  am  in  his
misfortune,  doth  know  my  heart,  and  we  both  will  pray  for  you,  and
if  we  live  you  shall  find  us  together.

I  beseech  your  majesty  burn  this  letter,  and  the  others  ;  for  altho'
it  be  in  an  unusual  hand,  yet  it  may  be  discovered.
Your  majesty's  most  devoted,

and  humble  servant,

e.

INDEX

TO THE

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND.

N.  B. The  Numeral  letters  refer  to  the  Volume,  and  the
Figures  to  the  Pages.

ADAMSON,  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,
is  excommunicated  by  the  synod  of  Fife,
ii.  113.  He  excommunicated  his  oppo-
nents, 114.  Is  restored  by  the  general
assembly  upon  conditions,  ib.  His  mean
submission  to  the  general  assembly,  167.

Albany,  Alexander,  duke  of,  cabals  with
his  nobles  against  his  brother  king  James
III.  i.  45.  Is  made  prisoner,  but  escapes
to  France,  46.  Concludes  a  treaty  with
Edward  IV.  of  England,  ib.  Procures
assistance  to  invade  Scotland  on  mean
conditions,  ib.  Returns  to  Scotland,  and
is  restored  to  favour,  47.  Cabals  again,
but  is  forced  to  fly  to  France,  48.

,  duke  of,  made  regent  during

the  minority  of  king  James  V.  i.  29.  50.
After  several  unsuccessful  struggles  with
the  nobility,  he  is  forced  to  retire  to
France,  51.

AleiNjon,  duke  of,  queen  Elizabeth  long
amuses  the  court  of  France  by  carrying
on  a  treaty  of  marriage  with  him,  ii.  57.

Allen,  cardinal,  published  a  book  prov-
ing the  lawfulness  of  killing  excommuni-
cated princes,  ii.  102.

Alva,  duke  of,  his  intrigues  in  favour
of  qaeen  Mary,  ii.  22.  25.  36.  Is  re-
called from  his  government  of  the  Nether-
lands, 43.

Ambassadors,  their  office,  i,  70.

Andrew's,  St.,  the  archbishop  of,  re-
markably cured  of  a  dangerous  distemper,
i.  111.  The  motives  of  his  opposition  to
the  queen  regent,  129.  His  great  influ-
ence on  the  bench  of  bishops  and  weight
inparliament,  134.  Governed  the  church
win  great  moderation,  135.  Persecutes
the  reformers,  ib.  Is  imprisoned  for
celebrating  mass,  246.  Ruins  queen
Mary's  afl'airs  bv  his  imprudent  conduct,

VOL.  ii.

370.  Is  taVen  prisoner  in  Dumbarton
castle,  and  hanged,  ii.  14.

Andrew's,  St.,  the  castle  of,  demolished
by  the  French,  i.  95.

,  the prior of,  promotes  a

treaty  between  the  queen  regent  and  the
reformers,  i.  146.  Is  provoked  to  leave
the  court,  148.  Is  one  of  the  chief  pro-
moters of  the  Reformation,  1 60.  Some  ac-
count and  character  of  him,  161 .  Artful
endeavours  used  to  undermine  him,  ib.
Presumption  of  his  innocence  of  the  de-
signs charged  on  him,  162.  Is  sent  by
the  convention  to  invite  the  queen  to
Scotland,  206.  Is  received  by  her  with
confidence  and  affection,  207.  Restrains
the  turbulent  spirit  of  the  people  against
Popery,  219.  Is  sent  to  restrain  the  li-
centious practices  of  the  borderers,  223.
Executes  his  commission  with  vigour  and
prudence,  224.  A  conspiracy  against
him  discovered,  231.  Is  created  earl  of
Mar,  233.  Becomes  obnoxious  to  the
earl  of  Huntly,  234.  See  Mar  and  Mur-
ray.

Angus,  Gilbert  de  Umfraville,  earl  of,
was  the  only  man  who  asserted  the  inde-
pendence of  his  country,  i.  9,

,  Douglas,  earl  of,  assumes  the

regency  during  the  minority  of  king
James  V.,  i.  30.  51.  Is  unable  to  gain
his  affections,  ib.  Is  attainted  and  Hies
into  England,  52.  Obtains  leave  to  return
into  Scotland,  ii.  76.  Surrenders  himself
to  king  James  VI.,  85.  He  with  several
others  seize  the  castle  of  Stirling  to  op-
pose Arran,  88.  They  are  forced  to  fly
into  England  at  the  approach  of  the  king
with  an  army,  ib.  He  is  attainted  and
his  estate  forfeited,  94.  Is  concerned  in
a  plot  in  favour  of  Spain,  171.  Is  neized
2c

450

INDEX.

and  committed  prisoner  to  the  castle
of  Edinburgh,  ib.  Escapes  and  flies  to
the  mountains,  172.  Offers  to  submit  to
a  trial,  176.  Sentence  is  pronounced
against  him,  ib.  He  refuses  to  submit,
177.

Anjou,  duke  ofr  a  marriage  proposed
between  him  and  queen  Elizabeth,  ii.  20.
Anne,  a  princess  of  Denmark,  married
to  king  James  VI.,  ii.  164.  Her  arrival
in  Scotland  and  coronation,  166.  Heads
a  party  that  opposes  the  chancellor,  173.

Archbishops,  bishops,  deans,  and
chapters,  revived  in  Scotland  during  the
king's  minority,  ii.  33,  34.  This  gives
great  offence  to  many  of  the  clergj*,  ib.
An  act  of  assembly  against  these  offices,
71.  Bishops  made  subject  to  presby-
teries and  assemblies,  113.  A  great
stroke  given  to  their  authority,  151, 152.
None  of  them  present  at  the  queen's  coro-
nation, 166.

Argyle,  earl  of,  is  appointed  to  carry
the  crown  matrimonial  to  the  dauphin  of
France,  i.  134.  Uses  his  interest  with
the  reformers  to  make  a  treaty  with  the
queen  regent,  146.  Leaves  her  court  in
resentment  of  her  treachery,  148.  Re-
fuses to  accede  to  a  treaty  with  Murray
the  regent,  403.  Is  soon  after  forced  to
submit,  404.  Acts  as  lieutenant  to  the
queen  after  the  regent's  murder,  ii.  4.  Is
prevailed  on  to  join  the  king's  party,  17.
Quarrels  with  Athole,  46.  Confederates
with  him  against  Morton  the  regent  for
their  mutual  defence,  ib.  They  remon-
strate against  him  to  the  king,  49.  They
raise  forces  against  him,  54.  Negotiate
a  treaty  with  him  by  the  mediation  of
queen  Elizabeth,  ib.  Is  promoted  to  the
office  of  chancellor,  56.  The  king's  au-
thority delegated  to  him  and  lord  Forbes
against  the  Popish  lords,  180.  His  forces
are  defeated  in  an  engagement  with  them,
ib.

Aristocracy,  predominant  in  Scotland,
i.  216.

Armado,  Spanish,  preparations  for  it,
ii.  154, 155.  It  is  defeated,  158.

Arran,  earl,  is  appointed  regent  during
the  minority  of  queen  Mary,  i.  77.  His
character,  78.  Consents  to  the  schemes
of  England,  which  disgusts  the  public,  80.
Becomes  suspicions  of  the  earl  of  Len-
nox, 83.  Is  forced  to  renounce  the
friendship  with  England,  and  declare  for
France,  ib.  And  to  persecute  the  re-
formers, 85.  Publicly  abjures  the  doc-
trines of  the  reformers,  ib.  Is  contemned
by  one  half,  and  little  trusted  by  the  other
part  of  the  nation,  86.  Heads  the  par-
tisans of  France  and  defenders  of  Popery,
ib.  Attempts  in  vain  to  seize  the  mur-
derers of  cardinal  Beatoun,  92.  Is  forced
to  make  a  trace  with  the  conspirators,ib.

His  eldest  son  is  conditionally  excluded
all  right  of  succession,  96.  His  mean
concession  to  the  court  of  France,  102.
Gets  the  title  of  Chatelherault,  ib.  Is  un-
dermined by  the  queen  dowager,  108,
109.  Proposals  and  arguments  for  his
resignation,  110.  He  consents  to  it,  ib.
Retracts  by  the  influence  of  the  arch-
bishop of  St.  Andrew's,  111.  Is  at  last
prevailed  on,  and  gets  advantageous
terms,  112.  See  Chatelherault.

Arran,  eldest  son  of  the  duke  of  Chatel-
heranlt,  joins  in  an  association  with  the
reformers,  i.  159.  Narrowly  escapes  in-
tended ruin  at  the  court  of  France,  160.
Is  full  of  resentment  against  the  French
on  that  account,  ib.  The  congregation
.solicit  queen  Elizabeth  to  marry  him,  199.
His  great  imprudence  with  regard  la
queen  Mary,  225.  Discovers  a  con-
spiracy against  the  queen's  favourites,
231.  Loses  his  reason,  ii.  56.  Is  im-
prisoned by  Morton,  57.

,  late  capt.  Stewart,  gets  that  title

and  estate,  ii.  67.  Is  appointed  to  con-
duct Morton  from  Dumbarton  to  Edin-
burgh, ib.  His  infamous  marriage  with
the  countess  of  March,  69.  His  variance
with  Lennox,  ib.  Is  frustrated  in  an  at-
tempt to  rescue  the  king  at  Ruthven,  75.
Is  confined  prisoner  to  the  castle  of  Stir-
ling, 76.  Regains  his  liberty  and  the
king's  regard,.  82.  Resumes  his  power
and  arrogance,  ib.  Gels  the  Rulhvenv
conspirators  declared  guilty  of  high  trea-
son, 85.  Is  detested  as  author  of  a  per-
secution against  the  clergy,  90.  Is  gained
over  to  queen  Elizabeth's  interest,  93.
Gets  several  forfeited  estates,  94.  His
corruption  and  insolence,  100.  Is  made
chancellor,  and  has  unlimited  power,  ib.
His  venality  is  exceeded  by  lhat  of  his
wife,  101.  His  monstrous  tyranny  and
oppression,  ib.  His  power  undermined
•by  Wotton,  the  English  envoy,  110.  Is
confined  in  the  castle  of  St.  Andrew's,  but
soon  recovers  favour,  111.  His  interest
sinks  much,  112.  Is  stripped  of  his
honours  and  spoils,  and  reduced  to  bis-
original  station,  ib.

Articles,  lords  of,  their  origin  and  busi-
ness, i.  66.  By  whom  chosen,  67.  The
subsequent  variations  and  political  use
made  of  this  institution,  ib.

Arundel,  earl  of,  is  appointed  a  com-
missioner to  the  conference  at  Westmin-
ster, i.  395.

Ashby,  ambassador  from  queen  Eliza-
beth to  Scotland,  ii.  156.  His  great  pro-
raises  to  king  James,  ib.  His  promises
are  soon  forgot,  159.  He  is  ashamed,,
and  withdraws  privately  from  Scotland,,
ib.

Assassination,  the  frequency  of  it  in,
Scotland,  how  accounted  for,  i.  295.  Se-

INDEX.  451

veral  instances  of  it  in  France,  296.  A
stop  put  to  it  there  and  in  Scotland,  297.
Several  great  men  approve  of  it,  ib.
Prevailed  greatly  afterward,  ii.  167.

Assembly  of  tiie  church  of  Scotland,
the  first  but  feeble  and  irregular,  i.  205.
Another  assembly,  their  demands  from  the
convention,  225,  226.  Two  other  assem-
blies in  vain  solicit  an  augmentation  of
their  revenues,  240.  They  address  queen
Mary  in  high  strains  of  complaints,  278.
An  assembly  proceeds  at  Glasgow,  not-
withstanding the  king's  interdiction,  ii.
71,72.  Two  assemblies  yield  many  of
the  privileges  of  the  church  to  the  king,
195,  196.  Declare  it  lawful  for  ministers
to  sit  in  parliament,  199.  See  Clergy.

Association,  formed  in  defence  of  queen
Elizabeth  against  queen  Mary,  ii.  97.

Athole,  earl  of,  the  occasion  of  his
quarrel  with  the  earl  of  Argyle,  ii.  46.
Joins  with  him  in  opposing  Morion,  the
regent,  ib.  Dies  soon  after  an  entertain-
ment at  Morion's,  55.  Suspicions  of  his
being  poisoned,  ib.

Aubigne,  lord  de,  second  son  of  the
lord  Lennox,  arrives  in  Scotland  from
France,  ii.  58.  Becomes  soon  a  great  fa-
vourite of  king  James,  59.  High  titles
and  posts  bestowed  on  him,  ib.  Notes
against  him,  Appendix,  ii.  402.  See
Lennox.

Austrian  family,  their  origin  and  power,
i.  70.

BADINGTON,  Anthony,  some  account  of
him,  ii.  117.  The  rise  of  his  conspiracy
against  queen  Elizabeth,  ib.  The  names
and  scheme  of  operations  of  his  asso-
ciates, ib.  118.  They  are  betrayed,
seized,  and  executed,  119.

Bacon,  sir  Nicholas,  appointed  one  of
the  commissioners  to  the  confederates  at
Westminster,  i.  395.

Baliol,  John,  his  claim  to  the  crown  of
Scotland,  i.  8.  Is  preferred  by  Edward
I.,  9.  Soon  forced  by  him  to  resign,  10.

Ballard,  a  trafficking  priest,  solicits  an
invasion  of  England  from  Spain,  ii.  117.
Joins  in  a  conspiracy  to  murder  queen
Elizabeth,  ib.  Is  discovered,  and  taken
into  custody,  119.  And  executed,  ib.

Barons,  their  jurisdiction  very  exten-
sive, i.  17.  The  difference  between  the
greater  and  lesser,  whence,  63.  Three
hundred  of  them  remonstrate  against  the
conduct  of  the  queen  dowager,  124.  The
lesser  admitted  by  their  representatives
in  parliament,  ii.  153.  Petition  of  the  les-
ser barons  to  parliament,  Append,  ii.315.
See  Nobles.

Basilicon  Doron,  a  book  published  by
king  James  VI.,  strengthens  his  interest
in  England,  ii.  200.

Beatoun,  cardinal,  made  use  of  by  king

James  V.  lo  mortify  the  nobles,  i.  55.
His  pretensions  to  the  regency  on  the
death  of  that  prince,  77.  Forges  a  testa-
ment of  the  late  king,  ib.  His  views  how
disappointed,  ib.  His  character,  ib.  Op-
poses the  earl  of  Arran,  regent,  80.  Ex-
cites most  of  the  nation  against  the
English,  82.  Sei/es  the  young  queen
and  her  mother,  ib.  Cajoles  the  earl  of
Lennox,  83.  Obliges  the  regent  to  re-
nounce England,  and  declare  for  France,
ib.  And  to  persecute  the  reformers,  84.
Engrosses  the  chief  direction  of  affairs,
86.  His  double  dealing  wilh  the  earl  of
Lennox  resented,  ib.  87.  Is  murdered,
91.  His  death  fatal  to  the  Catholics,  92.
A  vain  attempt  lo  revenge  it,  ib.  Scan-
dalous  reports  concerning  him,  120.

Bedford,  earl  of,  comes  as  ambassador
from  queen  Elizabeth  to  witness  the  bap-
tism of  James  VI.,  i.  313.  His  instruc-
tions, 314.  His  letters  to  Sir  W.  Cecil,
Append,  ii.  336.  340.  345.

Bellendon,  Sir  Lewis,  justice  clerk,
king  James's  resident  at  London,  ii.  109.
Joins  in  promoting  queen  Elizabeth's  in-
terest in  Scotland,  ib.  Is  sent  with  her
envoy  into  that  country,  ib.

Black,  Mr.  David,  minister  of  St.
Andrew's,  his  ridiculous  and  seditious
expressions  in  the  pulpit,  ii.  187,  Being
supported  by  the  clergy,  he  declines  the
civil  jurisdiction,  188.  Is  condemned  by
the  privy  council,  189.  Is  sentenced  by
the  king  to  reside  beyond  Spey,  190.

Blackadder,  captain,  and  three  others,
executed  for  the  murder  of  Darnley ,  i.  351.

Boelhius,  Hector,  his  history  of  Scot-
land, some  account  of,  i.  4.

Bollon  Castle,  queen  Mary  confined  a
prisoner  there,  i.  382.

Bonot,  a  foreigner,  made  governor  of
Orkney,  i.  123.

Borderers,  an  attempt  to  restrain  their
licentious  practices,  i.  223.  Queen  Mary
visits  them,  306.  A  scuffle  there,  in
which  the  English  warden,  &c.  were  made
prisoners,  ii.  45.

Borthwick,  lord,  assists  the  queen  re-
gent in  defending  Leith,  i.  174.

Bothwell,  James  Hepburn,  earl  of,  in-
tercepts a  sum  of  money  from  England  to
the  congregation,  i.  173.  Favours  the
queen  regent,  but  resides  at  his  own
house,  174.  Is  by  the  earl  of  Mnrray
summoned  to  a  public  trial,  266.  Pre-
vents it  by  leaving  the  kingdom,  ib.  A
sentence  of  outlawry  against  him  pre-
vented by  the  queen,  ib.  Is  permitted  to
return,  274.  Escapes  with  her  after  the
murder  of  Rizio,  292.  Some  account  of
his  former  behaviour,  299,  300.  Com-
mences a  favourite  with  the  queen,  300.
She  reconciles  him  to  several  lords,  with
whom  he  was  at  variance,  301.  He
2  G  2

452

INDEX.

increases  in  favour  with  her,  302.  Cir-
cumstances concurring  in  this,  303.  He
is  wounded  in  attempting  to  seize  ope  of
the  borderers,  306.  The  queen's  extraor-
dinary regard  for  him  on  this  occasion,  ib.
To  secure  adherents  he  obtains  a  pardon
for  Morton  and  his  associates,  316.  Pro-
poses the  restoration  of  the  Popish  eccle-
siastical jurisdiction,  318.  His  views  in
this,  ib.  Is  suspected  the  author  of  Darn-
ley's  murder,  324.  Is  charged  with  it  by
Lennox,  326.  But  still  favoured  by  the
queen,  ib.  Appointed  governor  of  Edin-
burgh castle,  ib.  His  trial  is  hurried  on,
327.  Remarkable  partiality  in  his  fa-
vour, 328.  Lennox  accuses  him  openly,
.  ib.  Comes  to  his  trial  with  a  great  re-
tinue, 329.  Is  acquitted  by  a  jury,  330.
The  trial  universally  censured,  ib.  Chal-
lenges any  that  would  accuse  him,  331.
Several  acts  of  parliament  passed  in  his
favour,  ib.  He  procures  an  act  in  favour
of  the  Reformation,  332.  Prevails  on  se-
veral of  the  nobles  to  recommend  him  as
a  husband  to  the  queen,  335.  Seizes  the
queen  on  a  journey  from  Stirling,  and
carries  her  to  Dunbar,  338.  His  view  in
this,  ib.  Obtains  a  pardon  under  the  great
seal,  ib.  Procures  a  divorce  from  his
wife,  339.  Carries  the  queen  to  the  castle
of  Edinburgh,  340.  Is  created  Duke  of
Orkney,  ib.  And  married  to  the  queen,  ib.
Is  not  allowed  the  title  of  king,  341.  He
watches  the  queen  very  closely,  342.
Endeavours  to  get  the  prince  into  his
custody,  ib.  Is  alarmed  with  an  associa-
tion of  the  nobles  against  the  queen  and
him,  344.  Carries  the  queen  to  the  castle
of  Borthwick,  345.  Raises  forces  against
the  confederate  lords,  ib.  He  marches
against  them,  346.  Proposes  a  single
combat,  347.  This  how  prevented,  ib.
Takes  his  last  farewell  of  the  queen,  and
is  forced  to  fly,  348.  Sends  for  a  casket
of  letters  from  queen  Mary  to  him,  351.
They  are  intercepted  by  the  earl  of  Mor-
ton, 352.  His  miserable  fate,  362,  363.
Reflections  on  his  conduct,  ib.  Copy  of
his  divorce  from  lady  Jane  Gordon,  Ap-
pendix, ii.  348.

Bothwell,  Francis  Stuart,  created  earl
of  Bothwell,  ii.  160.  Is  imprisoned  for
consulting  witches,  168.  Escapes  and  at-
tempts to  break  into  the  king's  presence,
ib.  Retires  to  the  north,  ib.  He  and
his  adherents  are  attainted,  170.  Fails
in  an  attempt  to  seize  the  king,  ib.  Is
taken  under  protection  of  queen  Eliza-
beth, who  solicits  for  him,  173.  Seizes
the  king's  person,  174.  Forces  him  to
dismiss  the  chancellor,  and  his  other  fa-
vourites, ib.  And  to  grant  him  a  remis-
sion, ib.  His  bold  and  insolent  behaviour
afterward,  175.  Is  encouraged  by  the
English  ambassador,  178.  Makes  ano-

ther attempt  to  come  at  the  king,  ib.  Is
repulsed,  and  obliged  to  fly  to  the  north
of  England,  ib.  Is  abandoned  by  queen
Elizabeth,  and  forced  to  fly  into  Spain
and  Italy,  182.  Remains  in  indigent  ob-
scurity, and  is  never  after  reconciled  to
the  king,  ib.

Bothwell,  Adam,  bishop  of  Orkney,  per-
forms the  ceremony  of  marriage  of  queen
Mary  to  the  earl  of  Bothwell,  ii.  341.

Bothwellhaugh. See  Hamilton.

Boulogne,  wrested  by  the  French  out
of  the  bands  of  the  English,  i.  101.  They
consent  to  restore  it  and  its  dependencies
to  the  French,  103.

Bowes,  envoy  from  queen  Elizabeth,
accuses  Lennox  of  disturbing  the  peace,  ii.
61.  Is  refused  an  audience,  62.  Is  sent
to  encourage  the  conspirators  at  Ruth-
ven,  76.  To  inquire  aboat  king  James's
correspondence  with  the  pope,  202.

Boyd,  lord,  his  ambitious  views  in  the
time  of  king  James  III.  frustrated,  i.  29.

is  prevailed  on  to  join  the  king's

party  against  queen  Mary,  ii.  17.  Joins
the  Ruthven  conspirators,  74.

Brieiine,  count  de,  comes  an  ambassa-
dor from  France  to  witness  the  baptism  of
king  James  VI.  i.  313.

Bruce,  Robert,  his  claim  to  the  crown
of  Scotland,  i.  8.  His  grandson  asserts
his  right,  and  vindicates  the  honour  of
his  country,  10.  He  attempts  to  reduce
the  power  of  the  nobles,  37.

,  a  priest  employed  by  the  king  of

Spain  to  seduce  the  Scotch  nobles,  ii.  160.

,  Mr.  Robert,  a  presbyteriau  mi-
nister, performs  the  ceremony  of  the  co-
ronation of  king  James's  queen,  ii.  166.

,  Edward,  abbot  of  Kinloss,  ac-
quits himself  with  address  and  reputa-
tion, as  ambassador  at  the  court  of  Eng-
land, iii.  200.

,  Mr.  Robert,  a  minister,  his  re-
solution in  refusing  to  publish  the  king's
account  of  Cowrie's  conspiracy,  iii.  218.
Is  deprived  and  banished  on  that  ac-
count, ib.

Buchanan,  George,  his  history  of  Scot-
land, some  account  of,  i.  4.  Remarks  on
his  dialogue  De  Jure  Regis,  150.  Alone
accuses  queen  Mary  of  a  criminal  corre-
spondence with  Rizio,  289.  Approved  of
assassination.  297.  Attends  the  regent
into  England  when  called  on  to  accuse
queen  Mary,  385.  Was  one  of  the  pre-
ceptors of  king  James  VI.,  ii.  47.  Com-
mended for  his  great  genius,  244.
Bnrleigh,  See  Cecil.
Boroughs,  when  first  represented  in
parliament,  ii.  153.

CAIS,  John,  a  declaration  of  his  in  name
of  queen  Elizabeth  to  the  lords  of  Grange,
at  Lethington,  Appendix,  ii.  394.

INDEX.

453

Caithness,  earl  of,  bis  protest  at  the
trial  of  Bothwell  for  the  murder  of  Darn-
ley,  ii.  330.

Calvin,  the  patron  and  restorer  of  pres-
byterian  cbnrch  government,  i.  203.

Carnden,  some  mistakes  of  his,  ii.  314.
336.

Canongate,  near  Edinburgh,  a  parlia-
ment held  there,  ii.  15.

Cardan,  some  account  of  him,  i.  111.
His  remarkable  cure  of  the  bishop  of  St.
Andrew's,  ib.

Carey,  Sir  George,  sent  ambassador
from  queen  Elizabeth  to  encourage  the
conspirators  at  Ruthven,  ii.  76.

,  Robert,  sent  by  queen  Elizabeth

to  soothe  king  James  after  the  death  of
his  mother,  ii.  147.  Is  not  permitted  to
enter  Scotland,  ib.  Was  the  first  that
brought  king  James  intelligence  of  the
death  of  queen  Elizabeth,  235.

Casket  of  letters  from  queen  Mary  to
.  Botbwell,  seized  by  the  earl  of  Morion,  i.
352.  Her  enemies  avail  themselves  much
of  them,  ib.

Cassils,  earl  of,  joins  the  king's  party,
ii.  17.

Castelnau,  the  French  ambassador,  is
employed  to  procure  the  consent  of  his
court  to  queen  Mary's  marriage  with
Darnley,  i.  260.  He  endeavours  to  make
up  the  differences  between  the  queen  and
him,  302.  His  intercession  on  behalf  of
queen  Mary,  ii.  105.

Catherine  of  Medicis,  assumes  the  go-
vernment after  the  death  of  Francis  II.
her  son,  i.  201.  Her  harsh  treatment  of
queen  Mary,  ib.  Her  views  in  behaving
more  friendly  to  her,  249.  Bends  her
whole  endeavours  to  destroy  the  Protes-
tants, ii.  20.  Her  artful  conduct  with
that  view,  ib.

Cecil,  his  great  capacity  as  a  minister,
i.  189.  209.  Is  employed  to  negotiate  a
peace  with  France,  ib.  Over-reaches  the
French  ambassador  in  the  treaty  of  Edin-
burgh, ib.  A  letter  of  his  cited  to  shew
that  queen  Elizabeth  had  no  intention  to
intercept  queen  Mary,  in  her  return  to
Scotland,  215.  Is  appointed  a  commis-
sioner to  the  conference  at  Westminster,
395.  Is  sent  by  queen  Elizabeth  with
proposals  to  queen  Mary,  ii.  8.  Has  an
interview  with  her,  which  excites  queen
Elizabeth's  jealousy,  42.  Is  treated
harshly  by  queen  Elizabeth  for  consent-
ing to  queen  Mary's  death,  146.

,  Sir  Robert,  son  to  the  former,

heads  the  party  against  Essex,  ii.  221.
His  character,  ib.  His  great  assiduity,
222.  Enters  into  a  private  correspon-
dence with  king  James,  227.

Celibacy  of  the  popish  clergy,  a  chief
engine  of  their  policy,  i.  118. 141.

Charles  V.,  emperor,  his  great  power,

i.  70,  And  unlimited  ambition,  71.  Is
checked  by  Francis  I,  ib.

Charles,  king  of  France,  makes  a  league
Tvitli  queen  Elizabeth,  ii.  26.

Chatellierault,  duke  of,  that  title  con-
ferred on  the  earl  of  Arran,  regent  of
Scotland,  i.  102.  His  right  of  succes-
sion to  the  crown  of  Scotland  maintained,
129.  Enters  a  protestation  to  save  his
right,  132.  Joins  the  reformers,  in  endea-
vouring to  expel  the  French  army,  156.
Joins  in  association  with  them,  159.  Is
looked  on  as  the  bead  of  the  congrega-
tion, 160.  His  pusillanimity,  171.  Be-
comes obnoxious  to  queen  Mary,  225.
Deprived  of  his  French  pension,  249.  Is
alarmed  at  the  earl  of  Lennox's  return
to  Scotland,  255.  An  aocommodaticn
brought  about  by  the  queen's  influence,  ib.
Adheres  to  M  urray  in  opposing  the  queen's
marriage,  275.  Is  pardoned  on  his  hum-
ble application,  bat  forced  to  reside  in
France,  277.  His  partizans  grumble  at
Murray's  being  advanced  to  the  regency,
366.  Returns  from  France,  and  heads  the
queen's  adherents,  402.  Is  made  her  lieu-
tenant-general, ib.  His  resolution  waver-
ing, the  regent  commits  him  prisoner  to
the  castle  of  Edinburgh,  403.  Is  set  at  li-
berty by  Kirkaldy,  and  joins  the  queen's
party,  ii.  3.  Is  proclaimed  traitor  by
Lennox  the  new  regent,  7.  Is  reconciled
to  Morton  the  regent,  39.  Articles  of  a
treaty  between  them,ib.  His  death,  45.

Church  of  Scotland,  revolutions  in  it
after  the  union  of  the  crowns,  ii.  242,
243.  See  Assembly,  Clergy.

Church  lands  annexed  to  the  crown  by
parliament,  ii.  151.

Clans,  the  institution  and  nature  of,
i.  22.

Clergy,  popish,  their  great  riches  and
power,  i.  54. 115.  Were  made  use  of  by
king  James  V.  to  suppress  the  nobles,  55.
Made  a  considerable  body  in  parliament,

116.  Their  great  influence  over  the  laity,

117.  They  engrossed  learning,  ib. Aud
held  many  of  the  chief  employments, ib.

118.  Their  power  increased  by  celibacy,
ib.  They  seized  the  estates  of  the  intestate,
ib. And  tried  all  matrimonial  and  testa-
mentary causes,  119.  Become  obnoxious
to  the  laity,  ib.  Their  great  corruptions,
whence,  120.  Those  of  Scotland  particu-
larly dissolute,  ib.  Their  weak  defence  of
their  tenets,  121.  Try  in  vain  to  impose
false  miracles,  ib.  Their  impolitic  conduct
to  the  reformers,  137.

,  reformed,  try  in  vain  to  recover

the  revenues  of  the  church,  i.  205,  206.
Procure  a  demolition  of  all  relics  of  po-
pery, 207.  A  new  regulation  concerning
their  revenues,  206.  209.  They  are  no
gainers  by  it,  230.  Their  stipends,  what
in  those  days,  ib.  Are  offended  at  the  mo-

454  INDEX.

deration  of  their  leaders,  246.  Occasion
a  tumult  among  the  people,  247.  More
complaints  of  their  poverty,  256.  316.
Are  jealous  of  queen  Mary,  317.  The
small  allowances  appointed  to  support
them  all,  ib.  Their  application  for  pay-
ment of  their  stipends,  of  little  effect,  365.
Fresh  complaints  of  the  deficiency  of  the
funds  for  their  maintenance,  414.  Are
put  off  with  fair  words  and  promises,  ib.
Archbishops,  &c.  introduced  among  them
by  Morion,  ii.  33.  Their  grievances  un-
der his  administration,  44.  They  approve
of  the  Ruthven  conspirators,  77.  By  fa-
vouring them  they  provoke  the  king,  86.
Severe  laws  made  against  them,  89.  They
of  Edinburgh  fly  into  England,  90.  As  do
several  others  that  were  most  eminent,  ib.
More,  vigorous  measures  against  them,  95.
They  obtain  no  redress  on  the  restoration
of  the  exiled  lords,  113.  Represent  their
grievances  to  parliament,  145.  A  main-
tenance provided  for  them  by  parliament,
151.  They  prevail  to  get  presbyterian
government  established  by  law,  169.
Their  zeal  against  the  popish  lords,  175.
184.  Their  rash  proceedings,  186.  They
erect  a  standing  council  of  the  church,  ib.
Vindicate  one  of  their  number  who  de-
clined the  civil  jurisdiction,  188.  Their
standing  council  ordered  to  leave  Edin-
burgh, 189.  This  occasions  a  violent  tu-
mult there,  190,  191.  They  use  their  ut-
most efforts  to  spirit  the  people,  193.
Are  deserted,  and  fly  to  England,  ib.
Their  power  greatly  reduced,  194.  Are
prevailed  on  to  give  up  many  of  their  pri-
vileges, 195.  Are  restored  to  a  seat  in
parliament,  197.  This  violently  opposed
by  many  of  them,  198.  But  carried  in  their
general  assembly,  199.  Those  entitled  to
this  privilege  are  laid  under  many  regula-
tions and  restrictions,  204.  They  am
brought  under  great  subjection,  ib.  The
revolutions  among  them  since  the  union
of  the  crowns,  242,  243.

Clinton,  lord,  appointed  a  commissioner
at  the  conference  at  Westminster,  i.  395.

Cockburn,  of  Ormiston,  receives  a  sup-
ply of  money  from  the  English  to  the  con-
gregation, i.  173.  Is  intercepted  and  rob-
bed of  it,  ib.

Coin  in  Scotland,  some  account  of,  i.
168.  ii.  44.

Commissaries  appointed  to  try  causes
in  place  of  the  spiritual  court,  i.  1 96.  They
are  deprived  of  all  authority,  317.

Confession  of  faith  by  the  reformers
consented  to  by  parliament,  i.  195.

Congregation,  the  protestanls  distin-
guished by  that  name,  i.  143.  Their  lead-
ers enter  into  an  association,  ib.  Are  in-
volved in  difficulties,  17 1 .  Apply  to  queen
Elizabeth  for  assistance,  172.  Money  sent
them  by  her  intercepted,  173.  Make  a

rash  and  desperate  attempt  on  Leith,  and
are  repulsed,  ib.  Are  no  less  unfortunate
in  a  second  skirmish,  ib.  Are  quite  di-
spirited, and  retreat  to  Stirling,  174.  Are
joined  by  the  body  of  the  nobles,  ib.
Their  army  dwindles  away,  176.  Are  ani-
mated by  Knox,  ib.  They  apply  again  to
queen  Elizabeth,  ib.  Their  parties  harass
the  French,  181.  Are  assisted  by  a  fleet
from  England,  182.  Conclude  a  treaty  at
Berwick  with  the  duke  of  Norfolk,  ib.
The  design  and  substance  of  this  treaty,
183.  Negotiate  a  peace  with  France,  189.
Articles  of  the  treaty,  190,  191.  They
reap  advantages  from  it,  192.  See  Re-
formation.

Covenant,  national,  framed  in  defence
of  the  king  and  government,  ii.  157.  The
nature  and  reasonableness  of  it,  ib.  The
progress  of  it  since,  158.

Courtesy  of  Scotland,  what,  i.  130.

Craig,  a  minister,  boldly  testifies  against
queen  Mary's  marriage  with  Bothwell,
i.  341.

Crawford,  captain,  of  Jordan  Hill,  sur-
prises Dumbarton  Castle,  ii.  12.  The  dif-
ficulties of  that  enterprise,  13.

,  earl  of,  one  of  the  heads  of  the

Spanish  faction,  ii.  155.  160.  Offers  his
service  to  the  king  of  Spain,  160.  Joins
in  rebellion  against  the  king,  162.  Is
forced  to  submit  to  him,  ib.  And  impri-
soned a  short  time,  ib.

Crichton,  regent  during  the  minority  of
king  James  II.,  his  barbarous  policy,  i.  42.

,  a  Jesuit,  a  plot  against  queen

Elizabeth  discovered  by  his  means,  ii.  96.

Criminals,  a  remarkable  instance  of  the
difficulty  of  bringing  them  to  justice,  i.  17.

Croc,  Du,  the  French  ambassador,  re-
fused to  countenance  queen  Mary's  mar-
riage with  Both  well,  i.  341.  Attempts  in
vain  a  reconciliation  between  the  queen
and  the  confederate  lords,  346.  Medi-
ates a  truce  between  the  king  and  queen's
party  in  Scotland,  ii.  27.

Crown  matrimonial  of  Scotland,  rights
conveyed  by  the  grant  of,  i.  130.  Is
granted  by  parliament  to  the  dauphin  of
France,  13:2.  Deputies  appointed  to
carry  it,  but  are  prevented,  134.  Is  de-
manded by  Darnley,  286.

Cunningham,  Robert,  appears  at  the
trial  of  Bothweil  in  name  of  the  earl  of
Lennox,  i.  329.  Demands  a  delay,  which
is  refused,  330.

Curie,  one  of  queen  Mary's  secretaries,
is  seized,  and  carried  prisoner  to  London,
ii.  122.  Is  produced  an  evidence  against
her,  128.

DARKLE Y,  Henry  lord,  proposed  as  a
husband  to  queen  Mary,  i.  252.  His  right
of  succession  considered,  ib.  253.  Is  per-
mitted to  visit  the  court  of  Scotland,  258.

INDEX.

455

Arrives  there,  and  quickly  gains  the  favour,  146.  Objections  against  him  in
^queen's  heart,  259.  His  character,  261.  the  cause  of  the  Jafe  Scottish  queen,  Ap-
Disgusts  several  of  the  nobles,  parlicu-  pendix,  443.

larly  Murray,  ib.  Cultivates  a  familiarity  Desse,  Mons,  is  sent  with  a  supply
with  David  Rizio,  ib.  Is  despised  on  that  of  forces  to  assist  the  French  against  the
account,  262.  Grows  intolerably  insolent  English  in  Scotland,  i.  101.  His  success
and  haughty,  268.  Schemes  to  assassinate  there,  ib.

Murray,  270.  A  plot  to  seize  and  send  Discipline  in  the  church,  the  first  book
him  to  England,  prevented  by  the  queen,  of,  composed,  i.  205.  Why  objected
ib.  Evidences  of  this,  271.  His  marriage  against  in  a  convention  of  the  states,  ib.
with  the  queen  celebrated,  272.  Is  ho-  Another  attempt  in  favour  of  church  dis-
aoured  with  the  title  of  king  of  Scotland,  cipline  frustrated,  ii.  70.
ib.  Is  implacable  with  respect  to  the  Douglas,  the  power  and  property  of
exiled  nobles,  280.  Loses  the  queen's  that  family,  i.  28.  They  aspire  to  inde-
aff'ection  by  his  untoward  behaviour,  285.  pendency,  29.  William,  earl  of,  murdered
Demands  the  crown  matrimonial,  286.  by  king  James  II.,  42.  His  son  endea-
Becoines  suspicious  of  Rizio's  ill  offices  vours  to  resent  it,  43.  Is  forced  to  fly
with  the  queen,  ib.  His  resolution  to  be  into  England,  ib.

avenged  of  him  encouraged  by  the  nobles, ,  William,  queen  Mary  com-

288.  Articles  agreed  on  between  them  for mitted  a  prisoner  to  his  castle  of  Loch-
that  purpose,  289.  Heads  the  conspira- leven,  i.  351.

tors  who perpetrate the murder, 290. ,  George,  brother  to  the  above,

Confines  the  queen  after  if  is  committed, assists  the  queen  in  making  her  escape,
291.  Prohibits  the  meeting  of  the  parlia- *•  366,  367.

ment, ib. Makes his escape with the >  Archibald,  one  of  Darnley's

<jueen,  292.  Her  hatred  to  him  increases,  murderers,  ii.  115.  Undergoes  a  mock
298.  Is  neglected  by  her,  and  treated  trial  for  that  crime,  and  is  acquitted,  116.
with  little  respect  by  the  nobles,  302.  Is  8ent  ambassador  to  England,  ib.  Let-
Resolves  to  leave  Scotland,  304.  His  ter  from  him  to  the  queen  of  Scots,  Ap-
wayward  and  capricious  behaviour,  ib.  pendix,  422.  To  the  king,  429.
He  writes  the  reasons  of  his  conduct  to  Drury,  Sir  William,  enters  Scotland
the  queen,  305.  His  strange  behaviour  at  with  an  army  to  support  the  king's  party,
the  baptism  of  the  prince,  313.  A  false  "•  5.  They  join  him,  and  drive  off  the
reason  alleged  for  this  confuted,  314.  Re-  queen's,  ib.  He  procures  a  truce  between
tires  to  his  father  at  Glasgow,  316.  Falls  the  king  and  queen's  parties,  27.  Comes
sick  there,  318.  Conjectures  concerning  with  forces  to  assist  Morton  in  besieging
liis  distemper,  ib.  Is  neglected  by  the  the  castle  of  Edinburgh,  40.  Which  is

forced  to  surrender,  ib.

,  Sir  Drue,  is  appointed  one  of

queen  Mary's  keepers,  ii.  98.

Dudley,  lord  Robert,  recommended  by
queen  Elizabeth  as  a  husband  to  queen
Mary,  i.  249.  Why  a  favourite  of  queen
Elizabeth's,  250.  Is  highly  promoted  by
her,  ib.  His  situation  extremely  delicate,

queen,  319.  She  afterward  visits  and
expresses  affection  for  him,  320.  He  is
prevailed  on  by  her  to  come  to  Edin-
burgh, 321.  Is  lodged  in  a  separate  house,
ib.  He  is  murdered  there,  323.  His  cha-
racter, ib.  A  proclamation  issued  for  dis-
covering the  murderers,  324.  A  remiss
inquiry  made  into  it,  325.  Capt.  Black-
adder  and  three  others  executed  on  that
account,  351.  The  confession  of  Morton,
the  regent,  at  his  death,  concerning  the
murder,  ii.  68.  A  dissertation  concerning
his  murder,  249.  Paper  of  objections  of
the  court  of  England  against  his  marriage
with  queen  Mary,  Appendix,  325.

David  I.  king  of  Scotland,  his  profu-
sion to  the  church,  i.  115.

II.  troubles  during  his  mino-

251.  Becomes  suspicious  of  Cecil,  252.

Dumbarton  castle,  surprised  and  taken
in  the  king's  name  by  the  regent,  ii.  12
—  14.

Dury,  a  minister  of  Edinburgh,  ba-
nished from  his  charge  by  king  James  for
his  free  invectives  against  the  courtiers,
ii.  72.  After  being  restored,  he  is  driven
from  it  a  second  time,  for  approving  the
Raid  of  Ruthven,  86.

rity,  i.  27.

Davison,  sent  into  Scotland  by  queen  EDINBURGH,  is  taken  and  burnt  by  the

Elizabeth,  as  a  spy  on  the  French  ambas-  English,  i.  88.  A  great  fray  there  between

sador,  ii.  79.  Is  sent  to  gain  Arran's  in-  the  French  and  Scots,  105.  Is  seized  by

terest to  queen  Elizabeth,  9.3.  This  he  the  reformers,  151.  Its  inhabitants  are

soon  accomplishes,  ib.  Brings  the  war-  terribly  alarmed  by  the  French,  173.  A

rant  for  queen  Mary's  death  at  queen  Eli-  treaty  there  with  the  French  and  Eng-

zabeth's  desire,  137. Is  charged  by  her  lish,  189,  190. A  loan  demanded  of  it

with disobeying her orders, 145. Is  by  queen  Mary,  278.  Which  is  granted

imprisoned,  tried,  and  fined,  and  loses  all  for  the  superiority  of  Lcith.ib,  The  treaty

456  INDEX.

of,  insisted  on  by  queen  Elizabeth,  314.  vourites,  250.  Dissembles  with  queen

Is  possessed  by  the  queen's  party,  ii,  3.  Mary  about  her  marriage,  251.  And

And  fortified  by  them,  15.  The  city  and  likewise  with  regard  to  lord  Darnley,254.

castle  hold  out  against  the  king's  forces,  Affronts  queen  Mary  by  her  insinuation

25.  Are  reduced  to  great  straits  by  fa-  concerning  Lennox,  ib.  Is  perplexed

mine,  "26.  Are  relieved  by  a  truce,  ib.  about  the  marriage  of  the  Scottish  queen,

The  citizens  take  up  arms  to  promote  the  257,  258.  Permits  Darnley  to  visit  the

king's  marriage,  163.  They  rise  again,  court  of  Scotland,  258.  Affects  to  declare

and  insult  the  king  and  his  ministers  on  against  queen  Mary's  marriage  to  him,

the  murder  of  the  earl  of  Murray,  168.  £'63.  Her  reasons  for  this  conduct,  264.

Assist  the  king  against  Huntly,  178.  A  Her  great  dissimulation  in  that  affair,  269.

violent  tumult  there  on  account  of  the  Her  harsh  and  deceitful  behaviour  to

clergy,  189.  191.  They  are  severely  pu-  Murray  and  his  associates,  who  had  fled

nished  for  it  by  the  king,  192.  194.  Their  to  her,  276.  Is  struck  at  hearing  of  the

ministers  return  to  their  charges,  196.  birth  of  James  VI.,  301.  Consents  to  stand

Divided  into  parishes,  and  number  of  mi-  godmother  to  him,  302.  The  parliament

uisters  increased,  ib.  They  decline  pub-  address  her  to  settle  the  succession,  307.

lishitjg  the  account  of  Cowrie's  conspi-  This  greatly  embarrasses  her,  308.  She

racy,  218.  All  except  one,  who  is  ba-  soothes  and  gains  her  parliament,  310.

nished,  are  persuaded  by  the  king  to  do  Endeavours  to  accommodate  her  differ-

it,  ib.  ences  with  Mary,  315.  Writes  to  her  to

Edward  I.  of  England,  destroyed  the  delay  the  trial  of  Darnley's  murderers,

public  archives  of  Scotland,!.  3.  Is  made  329.  Interposes  in  her  behalf  when  a  pri-

urupire  between  Bruce  and  Baliol,  8.  Has  soner,  353.  Her  ambassador  is  refused

art  to  acquire  the  superiority  of  Scotland,  access  to  queen  Mary,  355.  She  offers

9.  His  wars  with  the  Scots  under  Robert  assistance  to  the  other  nobles,  ib.  Her

Bruce,  10.  37.  deliberations  concerning  the  disposal  of

Eglinton,  earl  of,  is  prevailed  on  to  queen  Mary  on  her  arrival  in  England,

join  the  king's  party,  ii.  17.  374.  Resolves  to  detain  her  there,  375.

Elizabeth,  her  peaceable  accession  to  Her  motives  to  this  conduct,  ib.  Sends

the  crown  of  England,  i.  134.  Supports  her  letters  of  condolence,  and  gives  or-

the  congregation  in  Scotland,  172.  Is  ders  to  watch  her  conduct,  376.  She

sparing  in  her  supplies,  ib.  Resolves  to  gladly  accepts  the  office  of  umpire  between

support  them  on  a  second  application,  her  and  her  subjects,  377.  Receives  a

177.  Her  good  conduct  in  matters  of  im-  very  pressing  letter  from  queen  Mary,

portance,  ib.  Motives  that  determined  her  380.  Her  precautions  against  her,  381.

to  assist  them,  ib.  178,  179.  Her  deli-  Appoints  commissioners  to  hear  queen

berate  and  resolute  conduct,  182.  Sends  Mary  and  her  accusers,  386.  Her  im-

a  strong  fleet  to  their  assistance,  ib.  Con-  portant  situation  on  that  occasion,  ib.

eludes  a  treaty  with  them,  ib.  183.  Her  Her  views  in  this  affair,  38.7.  Receives

right  to  the  crown  of  England  asserted  by  the  regent's  demands,  391.  Removes  the

Francis  and  Mary  in  France,  190.  Ob-  conference  to  Westminster,  392.  Her

tains  advantageous  terms  for  the  Scots,  mean  artifices  to  get  the  evidence  of

ib.  Is  solicited  by  the  parliament  of  Scot-  queen  Mary's  guilt  from  the  regent,  398.

land  to  marry  the  earl  of  Arrau,  199.  "Treats  her  with  great  rigour,  399.  Writes

This  she  declines,  200.  The  seeds  of  her  a  harsh  letter  to  queen  Mary,  ib.  She

discontent  with  queen  Mary,  208.  Her  dismisses  the  regent  without  approving

jealousy  of  the  succession,  210.  212.  or  condemning  him,  400.  But  secretly

Her  excessive  vanity,  and  jealousy  of  supports  his  party,  401.  Makes  propo-

IMary's  beauty,  213.  Her  dissimulation  sals  to  the  regent  in  her  favour,  404.  Nor-

to  her,  214.  Refuses  her  a  safe  conduct,  folk's  project  concealed  from  her,.  407.

ib.  Evidences  that  she  had  no  intention  to  Discovers  and  defeats  a  rebellion  in

molest  Mary  in  her  passage  to  Scotland,  queen  Mary's  favour,  412.  Resolves  to

215.  Sends  to  congratulate  her  arrival  in  deliver  her  up  to  the  regent,  414.  Her

Scotland,  221.  Refuses  a  concession  made  great  concern  at  his  death,  ii.  1.  Conti-

by  queen  Mary,  ib.  Her  jealousy  of  her  nues  to  encourage  factions  in  Scotland,

right  betrayed  her  into  mean  actions,  222.  2.  Her  political  conduct  with  regard  to

Pier  resemblance  to  Henry  VII.,  ib.  A  Lennox,  5 — 7.  Is  excommunicated,  and

personal  interview  with  queen  Mary  pro-  deprived  of  her  kingdom,  &c.  by  the

posed,  239.  She  artfully  declines  it,  240.  pope,  6.  Supports  the  king's  parly  in

Her  views  iu  regard  to  queen  Mary's  Scotland,  and  names  Lennox  to  be  regent,

marriage,  243.  Assumes  a  disagreeable  7.  Proposes  a  treaty  of  accommodation

authority,  244.  Names  one  for  a  bus-  between  queen  Mary  and  her  suhjecls,

band*  to  queen  Mary,  249.  The  differ-  8.  Procures  a  cessation  of  hostilities,  ib.

cut  qualifications  of  her  ministers  and  fa-  Sends  proposals  to  queen  Mary,  ib.  Her.

INDEX.

457

artifices  in  the  conduct  of  this  affair,  9.
.Appoints  commissioners  to  frame  a  treaty,
10.  Finds  a  pretence  to  render  their  meet-
ing fruitless,  11.  A  marriage  proposed
between  her  and  the  duke  of  Anjou,  20.
Declares  openly  against  the  queen's  party,
24.  Concludes  a  treaty  with  France,  26.
Her  motives  for  negotiating  a  peace  be-
tween the  two  parties  in  Scotland,  36.  Is
jealous  of  Cecil's  interview  with  queeu
Marj',  42.  Negotiates  a  treaty  between
Morton  and  his  adversaries,  51.  Her  an-
swer to  king  James's  demand  of  a  pos-
session of  an  estate  in  England,  55.  A
marriage  between  her  and  the  duke  of
Alen£on  proposed,  57.  Interposes  in  be-
half of  Morton,  61.  Her  measures  in  order
to  save  him,  63,  64.  Countenances  the
conspirators  at  Ruthven,  76.  Is  alarmed
at  a  conspiracy  against  her,  92.  The  de-
signs of  queen  Mary's  adherents  against
her,  92.  Endeavours  to  recover  her  inte-
rest in  Scotland,  and  gains  Arran  to  her
interest,  93.  Amuses  queen  Mary  with  a
fruitless  negotiation,  93.  A  new  conspi-
racy against  her,  96.  An  association
formed  for  her  defence,  97.  Her  suspi-
cions of  queen  Mary,  ib.  Her  life  endan-
gered by  a  conspiracy,  102.  This  how
discovered  and  prevented,  103.  Occa-
sions an  extraordinary  statute  for  her  pre-
servation, ib.  Is  in  a  dangerous  situation
from  the  progress  of  the  holy  league,  106.
Endeavours  to  form  a  confederacy  of  the
Protestant  princes,  108.  And  to  proceed
with  rigour  against  queen  Mary,  ib.  Ad-
vances her  interest  in  Scotland,  and  pro-
poses a  league  with  it,  109.  Settles  a
pension  upon  king  James,  110.  Concludes
a  treaty  with  Scotland,  114.  Account  of
Babington's  conspiracy  against  her,  116
— 119.  Her  dissimulation  after  queen
Mary's  conviction,  131.  Her  answer  to
king  James's  intercession  for  her,  134.
Her  farther  dissimulation  and  anxiety,

136.  Signs  the  warrant  for  her  execution,

137.  Her  speech  to  Davison  on  that  oc-
casion, ib.  Affects  to  lament  queen  Mary's
death,  145.  Several  marks  «>f  her  artifice
in  that affair, 146.  She endeavours  to
soothe king  James, 147. Provocations
given  by  her  to  Spain,  154.  Prepares  to
meet  its  resentment,  155.  Endeavours  to
secure  Scotland,  156.  Tries  to  prevent
king  James's  marriage,  163.  Solicits  him
to  treat  conspirators  against  him  with  ri-
gour, 172.  Evades  the  decision  of  king
James's  right  of  succession  to  the  crown
of  England,  200.  Is  disgusted  at  several
of  his  proceedings,  201.  Discovers  his
correspondence  with  the  pope,  ib.  Fresh
grounds  of  her  suspicion,  221:  Her  con-
duct with  regard  to  the  earl  of  Essex,
222.  225.  Her  irresolution  concerning  his
death,  ib. And  great  concern after  it,

226.  Receives  ambassadors  from  king
James  with  regard,  and  increases  his
subsidy,  ib.  Her  last  illness,  229.  Con-
jectures concerning  the  causes  of  her  me-
lancholy, 230,  231.  Her  death,  232.  And
character,  ib.  Declared  the  king  of  Scots
her  successor,  234.  Some  of  her  letters,
Appendix, 318. 338.  346,  347.  363.  368.
374.  376.  379.  390.

Elphinstou,  secretary  to  king  James  VI.
deceives  him  into  a  correspondence  with
the  pope,  ii.  202.  Is  tried  and  found  guil-
ty of  high  treason,  203.  And  pardoned  on
the  queen's  intercession,  ib.

England,  the  English  seize  and  detain
king  James  I.  of  Scotland  long  a  prisoner,
i.  28.  The  nobles  there  humbled,  31.  Had
early  two  houses  of  parliament,  65.  They
invade  Scotland,  87.  Their  depredations
there,  88.  A  peace  between  England,
France,  and  Scotland,  90.  Invade  Scot-
land again,  96.  Gain  a  great  victory,  97.
It  proves  of  little  advantage  to  them,  99.
They  force  the  Scots  into  a  closer  union
with  France,  100.  Conclude  a  peace,  103.
An  English  fleet  arrives  in  Scotland  to  as-
sist the  Congregation,  181.  A  peace  con-
cluded between  them,  183.  They  enter
Scotland,  and  t>esiege  the  French  in
Leith,  ib.  Are  several  times  repulsed,  1 85.
Causes  of  their  bad  success,  ib.  Articles
of  a  treaty  of  peace,  191.  They  quit  Scot-
land, 192.  Reflections  on  the  right  of  suc-
cession to  their  crown,  210—212.  The
parliament  favours  queen  Marj's  right  of
succession,  307.  A  league  between  Eng-
land and  France,  ii.  26.  Between  England
and  Scotland,  114.  The  national  covenant
adopted  in  England,  158.

Entails,  with  what  view  introduced,!.  18.

Episcopal  government  in  the  church,
some  account  of  it,  i.  202.  An  attempt  to
revive  it,  ii.  33.  It  is  abolished  by  the  as-
sembly, 71.  Jurisdiction  abolished,  169.
See  Archbishops.

Errol,  earl  of,  one  of  the  heads  of  the
Spanish  faction,  ii.  156.  His  offers  of  ser-
vice to  the  king  of  Spain,  160.  Appears
in  rebellion,  162.  Is  forced  to  submit  to
the  king,  ib.  Imprisoned  for  a  short  time,
ib.  Joins  in  another  conspiracy,  171.  Is
summoned  by  the  king  to  surrender,  172.
Offers  to  submit  to  a  trial,  176.  Sentence
pronounced  against  him,  ib.

Erskinc  of  Dun,  is  employed  by  the
queen-regent  to  deceive  the  Protestants,
i.  143.  His  resentment  of  this  usage,  144.

,  lord,  governor  of  Edinburgh-
castle,  acts  a  neutral  part  between  the
queen-regent  and  the  congregation,  i.  175.
Receives  the  que^n-regent  into  the  castle,
184.  Is  created  earl  of  Mar,  237.  See
Mar.

t  Alexander,  has  the  chief  di-
rection of  the  education  of  king  James  VI.,

458

INDEX.

ii.47.  Admits  some  of  ihe  nobles  to  make
complaints  to  him  against  Morton  the  re-
gent, 49.  Is  turned  out  of  Stirling-castle
by  his  nephew,  the  earl  of  Mar,  52.

Esneval,  the  French  envoy,  endeavours
to  obstruct  a  treaty  between  England  and
Scotland,  ii.  114.

Essex,  earl  of,  set  up  by  the  English
Papists  as  a  candidate  for  the  crown,  ii.
181.  Heads  a  parly  in  England,  221.  His
character,  ib.  Is  greatly  distinguished  by
the  queen,  ib.  Favours  the  king  of  Scots,
222.  Obtains  the  offices  of  lord-lieutenant
and  commander-in-chief  in  Ireland,  ib.  Is
unsuccessful  in  that  expedition,  ib.  Re-
ceives a  harsh  letter  from  the  queen,  ib.
Returns  to  England,  and  is  confined,  223.
Is  tried  and  censured,  ib.  Endeavours  to
spirit  up  king  James,  ib.  His  rash  and
frantic  conduct,  224.  Is  again  taken  into
custody,  225.  His  death,  ib.  His  son  and
associates  are  restored  to  their  honours
after  the  accession  of  king  James,  226.

Europe,  the  state  of,  at  the  beginning
of  the  sixteenth  century,  i.  68.

Excommunication,  a  terrible  engine  of
the  Popish  clergy,  i.  119.

FELTON,  an  Englishman,  fixes  the
pope's  excommunication  of  queen  Eliza-
beth on  the  gates  of  the  bishop  of  London's
palace,  ii.  6.

Fenelon,  M.  de  la  Motle,  sent  by  the
French  king  to  interpose  for  king  James
when  confined  by  the  Ruthven  conspira-
tors, ii.  79.  Is  forced  to  return  without
success,  ib.

Feudal  government,  its  origin  and  aris-
tocratical  genius,  i.  12, 13.  Causes  which
limited  the  power  of  feudal  monarchs,  14.
Feudal  vassals  liable  to  few  taxes,  ib.  A
remarkable  instance  of  the  feebleness  of
feudal  government,  17.  The  most  perfect
idea  of  the  feudal  system,  how  attained..
35.  State  of  it  in  England,  64.  And  in
Scotland,  62 — 66.

Fife,  a  populous  and  powerful  county,
much  devoted  to  the  Congregation,  i.  180.
Is  destroyed  and  plundered  by  the  French,
ib.  The  synod  of,  excommunicates  the
archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's  for  contuma-
cy, ii.  113.  They  excommunicate  the  Po-
pish lords,  175.

Flowden,  the  battle  of,  i.  50.

Forbes,  lord /with  the  earl  of  Argyle,  is
sent  against  the  Popish  lords,  ii.  180.  Are
defeated  by  them,  ib.

Fordun,  John  de,  his  history  of  Scot-
land, when  wrote,  i.  4.

Forster,  Sir  John,  warden  of  the  Eng-
lish border,  a  scuffle  between  him  and
Ihe  Scots,  ii.  110.

Fotheringay-castle,  queen  Mary's  im-
prisonment, trial,  and  death  there,  ii.  122
—143.

France, the  consequences  of  the  sub-
version of  the  feudal  government  there,
i.  68.  A  body  of  French  arrive  in  Scot-
land to  support  the  Catholics,  94.  They
reduce  the  castle  of  St.  Andrew's,  95.  An-
other party  of  them  arrive  there,  101.
Their  transactions  there,  ib.  Conclude  a
peace  with  England,  103.  Their  politic
conduct,  ib.  They  leave  Scotland,  104.
Their  artifices  in  a  treaty^  of  marriage  be-
tween the  dauphin  and  the  queen  of  Scots,
128,  129.  The  Protestants  endeavour  to
expel  the  French  out  of  Scotland,  156.
Another  party  of  them  arrive  there,  and
fortify  Leith,  162»  They  exasperate  the
people  by  their  insolence,  ib.  They  are
sent  against  the  Congregation,  180.  They
destroy  and  plunder  Fife,  and  are  much
harassed  by  parties  of  the  Congregation,
181.  Are  greatly  alarmed  by  the  arrival
of  the  English  fleet,  182.  They  return  to
Leilh,  greatly  harassed  and  exhausted,  ib.
Are  besieged  there  by  the  English  and  the
Congregation,  184.  They  gain  several  ad-
vantages, 185.  Their  motives  for  con-
cluding a  peace,  188.  Negotiations  for
that  purpose,  189.  Articles  of  the  treaty,
190,191.  They  leave  Scotland,  192.  The
French  advise  queen  Mary  to  mode-
rate measures,  206.  Their  proposals  by
an  ambassador  rejected,  207.  They  agree
to  queen  Mary's  marriage  with  lord  Darn-
ley,  260.  The  licentiousness  of  their  mo-
rals, 321.

,  king  of,  a  copy  of  his  direc-
tions sent  to  Scotland,  Appendix,  ii.  404.

Francis  I.  gives  a  check  to  the  ambi-
tious projects  of  Charles  V.,  i.  71.  His
fidelity  to  the  Scots,  90.  His  death,  94.

II.,  comes  to  the  crown  of

France,  i.  158.  His  character,  ib.  Is
guided  by  the  duke  of  Guise  and  cardinal
of  Lorrain,  200.  He  treats  the  Protestants
with  great  rigour,  188.  His  death,  200.

GIFFORDS,  Doctor  and  Gilbert,  their
notion  concerning  the  lawfulness  of  kill-
ing heretical  excommunicated  princes,  ii.
116.  They  join  in  a  conspiracy  to  kill
queen  Elizabeth,  ib.  Gilbert,  being  gain-
ed by  Walsingham,  betrays  his  associates,
118.  Is  employed  to  carry  on  a  foreign
correspondence  with  queen  Mary,  120.

Glatnis,  lady,  is  condemned  to  be  burnt
for  witchcraft,  i.  55.

,  lord-chancellor,  intimates  the

king's  order  to  Morton  to  surrender  the
regency,  ii.  49.  Is  killed  in  a  rencounter
at  Stirling,  51.

— ,  the  tutor  of,  joins  the  conspi-
rators of  Rulhven,  ii.74.  His  bold  speech
to  king  James,  75.  He,  with  the  other
conspirators,  seize  the  castle  of  Stirling,
and  erect  their  standard,  88.  He  is  at-
tainted, and  his  estate  forfeited,  94.

INDEX.

459

Glasgow,  bishop  of,  a  note  of  his  con-
cerning the  queen  of  Scotland's  dowry,
Appendix,  ii.  398.

Glencairn,  earl  of,  joins  the  Rulhven
conspirators,  ii.  74.

Glenlivat,  the  battle  of,  ii.  180.

Gordon,  Sir  John,  a  scuffle  in  the  streets
of  Edinburgh  between  him  and  lord  Ogil-
vy,  i.  234.  Being  confined  for  it,  he  makes
his  escape,  ib.  When  ordered  by  the  queen
to  surrender  himself,  he  takes  up  arms
against  her,  235,  236.  Is  defeated,  and,
together  with  his  brother,  made  prisoner,
238.  He  is  beheaded,  and  his  brother  par-
doned, ib.

,  lord,  set  at  liberty,  J.  273.

,  Sir  Adam,  exerts  himself  for

the  qneen's  interest  in  the  north,  ii.  25.
His  character  and  good  conduct  as  a  sol-
dier, 27.

Gowrie,  earl  of,  joins  in  a  conspiracy
to  seize  the  king  at  Ruthven,  ii.  74.  Is
visited  and  pardoned  by  the  king  after  his
escape,  82.  Becomes  suspected,  and  is
ordered  for  France,  87.  Delays  his  voy-
age, and  is  taken  into  custody,  88.  He  is
tried  and  executed,  ib.

,  John  and  Alexander,  sons  of

the  above,  their  character  and  conspiracy,
ii.  205.  The  surprising  circumstances  of
that  remarkable  transaction,  206 — 210.
Several  different  conjectures  concerning
it,  210—219.  Their  dead  bodies  brought
into  parliament  and  condemned,  219.
Their  estates  and  honours  forfeited,  and
name  abolished  for  ever,  ib.  Different  ac-
counts of  this  affair  published,  but  not  sa-
tisfactory, 219—221. — See  Ruthven.

Graham,  Sir  David,  of  Fintray,  accused
of  a  conspiracy  with  the  Popish  lords,  in
favour  of  Spain,  ii.  171.  Is  convicted  and
beheaded,  172.

Gray,  master  of,  some  account  of  him,
ii.  98.  He  becomes  a  favourite  of  king
James  VI.,  99.  Is  gained  to  queen  Eliza-
beth's interest,  ib.  Betrays  queen  Mary,
ib.  Persuades  king  James  to  write  a  harsh
and  undutiful  letter  to  her,  105.  Joins
with  others  in  promoting  queen  Elizabeth's
interest  in  Scotland,  111.  His  treachery
when  sent  to  intercede  for  queen  Mary,
136.  His  baseness  discovered,  he  is  dis-
graced, 148.  Acts  in  Italy  as  a  spy  from
the  court  of  England,  201.  A  memorial  of
his  for  his  majesty,  Appendix,  431.  To
the  secretary  of  state,  435.

Guise,  duke  of,  his  violent  counsels
with  regard  to  the  Scots,  i.  157.  Is  mur-
dered at  the  siege  of  Orleans,  242.

,  his  intrigues  against  queen  Eli-
zabeth, ii.  92.  Is  a  principal  promoter  of
the  holy  league,  107.  154.  Drives  the
French  king  out  of  his  capital,  ib.

HADDINGTOUN,  seized  and  fortiGed  by

the  English,  i.  100.  Is  relieved  by  the
French,  101.

Hamilton,  the  rise  of  that  family,  i.  29.
Arbitrary  proceedings  of  Morton  the  re-
gent against  it,  ii.  56.  See  Chatelherault.

of  Bothwellhaugh,  taken  pri-
soner at  the  battle  of  Langside,  i.381.  Is
tried  and  condemned  for  rebellion,  ib.
Obtains  a  pardon  from  Murray  the  regent,
by  the  intercession  of  Knox,  ib.  An  ac-
count of  his  murdering  Murray,  415, 416.
Makes  his  escape,  416.  Is  received  in
triumph  at  Hamilton,  ii.  1.

,  Mr.  Patrick,  the  first  who

suffered  in  Scotland  for  the  Protestant
religion,  i.  135.

Hatton,  vice-chamberlain  of  England,
the  argument  by  which  he  prevailed  on
queen  Mary  to  plead  at  her  trial,  ii.
125.

Henry  II.  of  France,  sends  forces  to
assist  the  Scots,  i.  94.  A  marriage  pro-
posed between  his  son  the  Dauphin  and
the  young  queen  of  Scots,  100,  101.  Ex-
cites the  Scots  to  invade  England,  125.
His  infamous  imposition  on  queen  Mary
in  the  treaty  of  marriage,  129.  Persuades
his  son  and  queen  Mary  to  assume  the
titles  of  king  and  queen  of  England,  139.
His  death,  157.

III.  degenerates  greatly  on  his

accession  to  the  crown  of  France,  ii.  106.
Enters  into  a  private  negotiation  with
queen  Elizabeth,  108.  Interposes  feebly
in  behalf  of  queen  Mary,  132.

VIII.  of  England,  by  his  system

of  reformation  becomes  formidable  both  to
Papists  and  Protestants,  i.  56.  Proposes
an  interview  with  king  James  V.,  57.  Is
disappointed  by  him,  and  declares  war
against  Scotland,  58.  Invades  it,  but  is
forced  to  retreat,  ib.  59.  His  importance
as  to  the  balance  of  power  in  Europe,  72.
His  influence  in  Scotland  how  obtained,
74.  His  schemes  with  regard  to  it  on  the
death  of  James  V.,  79.  Were  ill  conduct-
ed by  himself,  and  odious  to  the  Scots,  ib.
His  treacherous  seizure  of  Scots  ships
that  took  shelter  in  his  ports,  81.  At-
tempts to  gain  the  regent  by  great  pro-
mises, 83.  Invades  Scotland,  87.  This
being  ill-conducted  turns  to  no  account,
88.  Receives  and  rewards  the  earl  of
Lennox,  89.  Encourages  the  murderers  of
cardinal  Beatoun,  93.  His  death  and  cha-
racter, 94.  His  inconsistent  conduct,  138.
Excluded  the  Scotch  line  by  his  testa-
ment, ib.

Herries,  lord,  joins  Chalelherault  in  op-
posing the  regent,  i.  403.  Comes  to  a
treaty  with  him,  ib.  He  and  the  duke  are
committed  prisoners  to  the  castle  of  Edin-
burgh, 404.  Intimates  the  king's  order  to
Morton  to  resign  the  regency,  ii.  49.  Ac-
count of  his  behaviour  in  parliament,  Ap-

460

INDEX.

pendix,  367.  A letter  from  him to  lord  the  mountains,  172. Offers  to  submit  to

Scroop  and  Sir  F.  Knollis,  371.  trial,  176.  Sentence  pronounced  against

Hertford,  earl  of,  invades  Scotland  with  him,  ib.  Refuses  to  submit,  177.  Makes

an  English  army,  i.  87.  Instructions  of  another  desperate  attempt,  but  is  forced

the  privy  council  to,  88,  89.  Burns  Edin-  to  fly,  179, 180.
burgh  and Leith,  88.  Is  made  duke  of

Somerset,  and  protector  of  England,  96. JAMES  I.  was  detained  long  a  prisoner

See  Somerset.  in  England,  i.  28.  Troubles  in  Scotland

Hickford,  secretary  to  the  duke  of  Nor-  during  that  time,  ib.  Was  much  improved

folk,  betrays  him  by  discovering  his  in-  by  an  English  education,  38.  His  policy

trigues  with  queen  Mary,  ii.  22.  on  his  return  to  Scotland,  39.  His  cha-

Highlands  and  Isles,  an  attempt  to  ci-  racter,  40.  Suppresses  the  power  of  the
vilize  them  by  king  James  VI.,  ii.  228.  nobles,  ib.  They,  being  exasperated,  con-
Regulations  for  that  purpose,  ib.  Three  spire  against,  and  murder  him,  ib.  41.

towns  endued  with  the  privileges  of  royal II.,  troubles  in  Scotland  during

boroughs  ordered  to  be  built  there,  ib.  his  minority,  i.  28.  His  attempts  against

Hodgson, a  priest  of  Rheims,  main-  the  nobles, 42.  Murders  the  earl  of  Doug-

a  priest  of  Rheims,  main-
tained the  lawfulness  of  killing  heretical
excommunicated  princes,  ii.  116.

Home,  Alexander,  lord,  thwarts  the
measures  of  the  duke  of  Albany,  regent,  i.
29.

las,  43.  Procures  several  good  laws  to
be  passed,  ib.  44.  Reduces  the  power  of
the  nobles,  44.  His  death,  ib.

;  III.,  the  state  of  Scotland  dur-
ing his  minority,  i.  29.  His  impolitic  con-

,  lord,  sent  by  king  James  VI. duct,  45.  Kills  one  of  his  brothers,  and

with  a  secret  embassy  to  the  pope,  ii.  203. is  invaded  by  another,  46.  Is  greatly  in-

Howard.  See  Norfolk.  suited  by  his  nobles,  47.  His  despicable

Hunsdon,  lord,  governor  of  Berwick,  minions,  ib.  Was  the  first  that  appointed
his  interview  with  Arran,  ii.  94.  Letter  a  standing  guard  to  his  person,  48.  The
from  him,  Appendix,  406.  nobles  are  provoked  to  take  arms  against

Huntly,  earl,  though  a  Catholic,  joins him,  49.  Is  killed  in  a  battle  against  them,
the reformers in  opposing the French ib.  His  character,  ib.
army,  i.  156.  Assists  them  only  with  fair
promises,  174.  His  farther  concurrence
with  them,  186.  Some  account  of  that  fa-
mily, 232,  233.  His  enmity  against  the
young  queen's  ministers,  233. His  re-

sentment inflamed  by  an  accident,  234.
Appears  in  an  open  rebellion  against  the
queen,  236.  His  plot  against  her  ministers
disappointed,  ib.  Breaks  out  into  open
rebellion,  237.  Is  trodden  to  death  in

his  character,  i.  49.  Is
killed  in  a  battle  against  the  English  at
Flowden,  50.

V.,  his  minority  long  and  tur-
bulent, i.  29. Transactions during  that

time,  50,  51.  Assumes  the  government
while  very  young,  52.  His  character,  ib.
His  scheme  for  humbling  the  nobles,  53
— 56.  Is  diverted  from  it  by  the  clergy,
57,  58.  Takes  arms  for  the  defence  of  his

a  battle,  238.  His  family  prosecuted  with  kingdom,  58.  His  nobles  refusing  to  fol-

the  utmost  rigour,  ib.  Several  anecdotes  low  him,  throws  him  into  a  deep  melan-

and  conjectures  concerning  his  plot,  239.  choly,  59.  Which  is  increased  by  a  sur-

Is  attainted  by  parliament,  245.  The  at-  prising  defeat  of  his  forces,  60.  His  death,

tainder  repealed,  and  the  family  restored  61. Reflections  on  his  conduct,  ib. He

to  estate  and  honours,  331.  refused an alliance with the emperor

,  his  attachment  to  Both  well,  i.  Charles  V.,  73.

328.  335. Refuses  to  submit  to  the  regent, VI.,  his  birth,  i.  301 .  His  bap-

403.  Is  forced  to  do  it,  404.  Acts  as  tism,  313.  The  care  of  him  committed  to
lieutenant  to  the  queen  after  the  regent's  the  earl  of  Mar,  326.  Is  by  him  preserved
murder,  ii.  4.  Is  proclaimed  a  traitor  by  from  falling  into  the  hands  of  Bolhwell,
Lennox,  the  new  regent,  7.  Receives  some  342.  Is  crowned,  358.  The  nobles,  op-
money  and  promises  of  assistance  from  pressed  by  Morton  the  regent,  turn  their
Spain,  ib.  A'grees  to  a  treaty  with  Morton  eyes  to  .him  for  redress,  ii.  47.  His  edu-
the  regent,  39.  Is  one  of  the  heads  of  the  cation  and  dispositions,  ib.  48.  He  be-
Spanish  faction,  155.  Engages  to  the  comes  suspicious  of  the  Regent's  power,
prince  of  Parma  to  serve  the  king  of  ib.  Discovers  earlj  a  great  attachment  to
Spain,  160.  Is  imprisoned  for  a  short  favourites,  58.  Adopts  two  of  different
time,  161.  Erects  a  standard  of  rebellion,  dispositions,  59.  Enters  Edinburgh  with
162.  But  forced  to  submit  to  the  king,  great  solemnity,  60.  Is  by  his  favourites
ib.  Is  again  imprisoned,  ib.  Is  soon  set  engaged  in  unpopular  measeres,  73.  Is
at  liberty,  ib.  Receives  a  commission  seized  by  a  party  of  nobles  at  ivuthven,
from  the  king,  168.  His  barbarous  mur-  74.  And  forced  to  receive  complaints
der  of  the  earl  of  Murray,  ib.  Is  summon-  against  his  favourites,  75.  Dissembles
ed  to  surrender  to  justice,  169.  Flies  to  with  them,  and  banishes  Lennox,  76.  Is

INDEX.

461

brought  to  Stirling  and  Holjrood-house,
78.  His  concern  for  Lennox's  deutb,
and  regard  for  his  memory,  ib.  Receives
the  French  ambassador  with  great  respect,
80.  Makes  bis  escape  from  the  couspi-
rators,  ib.  Resolves  to  treat  them  with
moderation,  82.  Visits  Cowrie,  and  grants
him  a  pardon,  ib.  Renews  his  fondness
for  Arran,  ib.  Is  by  him  persuaded  to
violent  measures  against  the  conspirators,
83.  His  answer  to  a  haughty  letter  from
queen  Elizabeth  on  their  behalf,  ib.  Is  by
her  interposition  rendered  more  violent
against  them,  84.  Is  provoked  by  the
clergy,  86.  His  steps  to  humble  them,  89.
His  profusion  to  Arran,  94.  Sends  a  new
favourite  to  England  against  the  banished
lords,  98.  Devolves  the  whole  regal  au-
thority on  Arran,  100.  Writes  an  undutiful
letter  .to  his  mother,  105.  Is  threatened
to  be  disinherited  by  her,  ib.  Receives  a
pension  from  queen  Elizabeth,  110.  Is  re-
conciled to  the  exiled  lords,  112.  Be-
comes popular  by  concluding  a  treaty  with
England,  114.  His  scandalous  behaviour
with  regard  to  Archibald  Douglas,  115.
His  endeavours  to  save  his  mother's  life
after  long  condemnation,  132.  Is  greatly
incensed  at  her  death,  146.  Arguments
used  by  the  English  minister  to  pacify
him,  147.  Is  forced  to  stifle  his  resent-
ment, 148.  Attempts  to  unite  the  nobles,
150.  Is  courted  both  by  Spain  and  Eng-
land, 155.  Resolves  vigorously  to  adhere
to  the  latter,  156.  Takes  several  steps
with  that  view,  ib.  His  skill  in  the  Po-
pish controversy,  160.  Wrote  a  commen-
tary on  the  Revelations,  ib.  His  maxims
with  regard  to  Popery,  161.  His  exces-
sive lenity  to  conspirators  against  him,  ib.
Resolves  to  marry  the  princess  of  Den-
mark, 163.  Arts  used  to  prevent  it,  ib.
The  marriage  is  consummated  in  Norway,
164.  Passes  several  months  in  Denmark,
ib.  Reflections  on  his  conduct  there,  ib.
His  arrival  in  Scotland  with  his  queen,
166.  Indulges  the  Presbyterians,  ib.  The
ill  consequences  of  his  lenity,  167.  His
zeal  against  witchcraft,  ib.  Is  solicited  by
queen  Elizabeth  to  treat  the  conspirators
against  him  with  rigour,  172.  Is  suspect-
ed of  conniving  with  them,  173.  Is  sur-
prised and  seized  by  Bothwell,  174.  And
forced  to  comply  with  his  terms,  ib.  His
lenity  to  Bothwell  abused,  176.  Is  sus-
pected of  favouring  the  Popish  lords,  177.
Is  in  new  danger  from  them,  178.  Dele-
gates his  authority  to  Argyle  and  Forbes
against  them  ,180.  Goes  in  person  against
them,  ib.  Wastes  their  lands,  and  garri-
sons their  castles,  181.  His  right  of  the
succession  to  the  crown  of  England  op-
posed by  the  Papists,  ib.  His  lenity  to
them  incenses  the  clergy  and  people,  185.
Is  much  provoked  by  the  obstinacy  of  the

clergy,  187.  Gives  orders  against  them,
190.  Is  much  insulted,  and  in  great  dan-
ger at  Edinburgh,  191.  Leaves  Edin-
burgh, and  proceeds  with  severity  against
the  citizens,  192,193.  Acquires  absolute
dominion  in  ecclesiastical  affairs,  195, 196.
Strengthens  his  interest  iu  parliament  by
restoring  the  seats  of  the  ecclesiastics,
197,  198.  Endeavours  with  success  to
gain  a  party  in  England,  199.  Increases
his  reputation  by  publishing  his  Basilicon
Doron,  200.  Is  accused  by  queen  Eliza-
beth of  corresponding  with  the  pope,  201.
This  he  denies,  and  how  accounted  for,
202.  Other  reports  concerning  this,  203.
Is  at  great  pair\s  to  gain  the  Roman  Ca-
tholics, ib.  His  regulations  with  regard
to  the  church,  204.  The  mysterious  affair
of  Cowrie's  conspiracy,  205 — 220.  His
cautious  behaviour  in  regard  to  the  earl
of  Essex,  223.  Sends  ambassadors  to
save  him,  225.  They  arrive  too  late,  ib.
He  restores  his  son  and  associates  to
their  honours  after  his  accession,  226.
Continues  his  intrigues  in  England,  ib.
His  interest  greatly  strengthened  there,
227.  Endeavonrstocivilizethe  Highlands
and  Isles,  228.  Is  proclaimed  king  in
England  after  the  death  of  queen  Eliza-
beth, 234.  Is  proclaimed  likewise  in  Scot-
land, 235.  Prepares  for  his  journey  to
England,  ib.  Enters  London,  and  takes
possession  of  the  throne,  236.  His  cha-
racter how  different  from  that  of  queen
Elizabeth,  ib.  A  letter  from  him  to  Mr.
Archibald  Douglas,  Appendix,  428.  Cu-
rious letter  to  him  from  an  unknown  Eng-
lish correspondent,  445.

Inverness  castle,  refuses  to  surrender
to  queen  Mary,  i.  236.  It  is  forced,  aud
the  governor  punished,  237.

Italy,  the  liberty  of,  how  preserved,  i.
69.

KEITH,  Sir  William,  sent  to  intercede
for  queen  Mary  when  under  sentence,  ii.
133.

Kent,  earl  of,  appointed  to  see  Ihe  sen-
tence against  queen  Mary  executed,  ii.
138.

Ker,  of  Ferniherst,  ravages  England  on
the  murder  of  Murray  the  regent,  ii.  1.
His  design,  4.  Has  a  scuffle  with  the
English,  110.

,  George,  brother  to  lord  Newbattle,

is  discovered  when  ready  to  sail  to  pro-
mote a  plot  in  Spain,ii.  171.  His  scheme
opened,  ib.  Escapes  out  of  prison,  173.

Killigrew,  Henry,  his  declaration  on
the  peace,  Appendix,  ii.  396.

Kings,  feudal,  the  most  limited  of  all
princes,  i.  12.  General  causes  of  this,  13,
14.  Their  revenues  were  but  small,  14, 15.
Had  no  standing  armies,  15.  And  juris-
diction limited,  17.  Means  used  to  ex-

462

INDEX.

tend  the  royal  authority,  32.  Their  juris-
diction enlarged,  33.  The  extraordinary
influence  of  the  Scottish  kings  in  parlia-
ment, 66.  The  reason  of  this,  ib.

Kirkaldy  of  Grange,  one  of  the  mur-
derers of  Beatoun,  is  recalled  by  the  queen
dowager,  i.  127.  His  attainder  reversed
in  parliament,  245.  Offers  to  fight  Both-
well  in  single  combat,  347.  His  interview
with  queen  Mary,  in  the  name  of  the  con-
federate lords,  348.  Rescues  Mailland
from  confinement,  411.  Labours  to  sup-
port the  King's  authority,  and  restore
harmony  after  the  murder  of  the  regent,
ii.  2.  Accedes  to  the  queen's  party,  3.
provides  for  a  siege  by  increasing  his
garrison  and  fortifying  Edinburgh,  15.
Proclaims  Lennox's  authority  unlawful
and  usurped,  ib.  Attempts  in  vain  to  pre-
vent a  meeting  of  the  parliament,  ib.
Forms  a  scheme  for  surprising  the  king's
party,  18.  Is  at  first  successful,  but  af-
terward defeated,  ib.  Comes  near  to  an
agreement  with  Mar  the  regent,  31.  A
treaty  with  Morton  breaks  it  off,  37.  Fires
upon  Edinburgh  from  the  castle,  38.  Is
besieged  by  the  regent,  assisted  by  the
English  forces,  40.  Is  forced^  by  mutiny
of  the  garrison  to  capitulate,  ib.  Surren-
ders to  Drury  the  English  general,  ib.  Is,
l>y  order  of  queen  Elizabeth,  delivered  up
to  the  regent,  42.  He  and  his  brother  are
executed, ib.

Knollys,  Sir  Francis,  sent  by  queen
Elizabeth  with  letters  of  condolence  to
queen  Mary  on  her  arrival  in  England,  i.
376.  Some  of  his  letters,  Appendix,  ii.
370.  376.  381.

Knox,  John,  a  famous  reformer,  his
character,  i.  106.  After  being  some  time
abroad,  he  is  recalled  by  the  persecuted
Protestants,  144.  Inflames  the  multitude
at  Perth  with  rage  against  the  Papists,  ib.
His  notion  concerning  the  government  of
women  whence,  149.  His  residence  fixed
in  Edinburgh,  153.  Complains  of  the
lukewarmness  of  the  reformers,  166.
His  opinion  to  the  convention  of  reform-
ers that  it  is  lawful  to  resist  and  deprive
tyrannical  princes,  168.  Animates  and  re-
vives the  desponding  congregation,  176.
Complains  of  the  neglect  of  the  reform-
ers in  providing  maintenance  for  their
preachers,  197.  Recommends  the  Geneva
model  of  church  government,  203.  Pro-
poses superintendents  in  the  church,  204.
Composes  the  first  book  of  discipline,  205.
Renounces  friendship  with  the  ear!  of
Murray  for  his  moderation,  247.  Is  tried
for  encouraging  a  mutiny  among  the  peo-
ple, and  acquitted,  248.  Popish  judges
concur  in  this  decision,  ib.  Is  publicly
accused  by  Maitland  of  preaching  sedi-
tious doctrine  concerning  resistance,  257.
Character  of  the  two  disputants,  ib.  Ap-

proved of  several  instances  of  assassina-
tion, 297.  Agrees  to  some  regulations
concerning  the  election  of  bishops,  ii.  34.
His  death  and  character,  35.  His  eulo-
gium  by  Morton  the  regent,  36.  Articles
sent  by  him  to  the  general  assembly,  Ap-
pendix, 395.

LAXGSIDE,  the  battle  of,  i.  370.

Laurea,  cardinal,  is  sent  as  a  nuncio
from  the  pope  with  a  present  to  queen
Mary  of  Scotland,  i.  311.  Is  stopped  at
Paris,  312.

League,  holy,  a  confederacy  of  Roman
Catholics,  so  called,  ii.  107.  Was  univer-
sally agreed  to  by  them  all  over  Europe,
ib.

Learning,  the  revival  of,  promotes  the
Reformation,  i.  113.

Leicester,  ear!  of,  appointed  a  commis-
sioner to  the  conference  at  Westminster,
i.  395.

Leith  burnt  by  the  English,  i.  88.  For-
tified by  the  French,  162.  Besieged  by
the  English,  183.  Queen  Mary  lands  there
from  France,  215.  The  superiority  of  it
granted  by  her  to  Edinburgh,  278.  Is
seized  and  fortified  by  Morion  the  regent,
ii.  15.

Lennox,  earl  of,  arrives  in  Scotland
from  France,  i.  82.  Is  much  courted  by
cardinal  Beatoun,  83.  His  pretensions  to
the  succession  how  founded,  85.  Resents
Beatoun's  deceilfulness  to  him,  86.  Heads
the  reformers  and  the  advocates  for  the
English  alliance,  ib.  Surprises  the  re-
gent and  cardinal,  87.  Is  outwitted  by
the  cardinal,  ib.  Continues  alone  in  the
interest  of  England,  89.  Is  forced  to  fly
to  that  court,  where  he  is  rewarded,  ib.
Is  married  to  a  niece  of  king  Henry's,  by
which  he  became  father  to  a  race  of  kings,
ib.  His  claim  to  the  succession,  252.  Is
imprisoned  for  a  secret  correspondence
with  queen  Mary,  253.  Is  invited  secretly
by  her  to  return  to  Scotland,  254.  Arrives
in  Scotland,  and  is  received  with  great
familiarity  by  her,  255.  His  forfeiture  is
repealed,  and  he  is  restored  to  his  estate
and  honours  by  the  parliament,  256.  His
lady  sent  prisoner  to  the  tower  of  Lon-
don, 265.  And  treated  with  rigour,  269.
He  insists  on  the  prosecution  of  his  son
Darnley's  murderers,  325.  Charges  Both-
well  with  it,  326.  The  prosecution  is
hurried,  327.  He  craves  a  delay,  which
is  refused,  328.  He  is  left  alone  in  it,  ib.
Solicits  queeu  Elizabeth's  interest  to  ob-
tain a  delay,  329.  Insists  on  it  by  proxy
at  the  trial,  but  is  overruled,  330.  Be-
ing apprehensive  of  danger,  he  flies  to-
wards England, 331.  His  countessaccuses
queen  Mary  of  the  murder  to  queen  Eliza-
beth, 378.  He  appears  at  the  conference
at  Westminster,  and  accuses  queeu  Mary

INDEX.  463

of  the  murder  upon  oath,  396.  Returns
to  Scotland  protected  by  an  English  army,
ii.  5.  Is  elected  regent,  7.  His  progress
against  the  queen's  party,  ib.  Appoints
commissioners  to  frame  a  treaty  with
those  of  the  queen,  10.  Surprises  Duin-
barlon-castle,  12 — 14.  Joins  the  earl  of
Morton  at  Leith,  15.  Holds  a  parliament
in  the  Canongate,  ib.  Another  at  Stirling,
17.  He  is  surprised  and  killed  there,  19.
Lennox,  lord  Aubigny, his  character,  ii.
58.  Joins  with  the  king's  other  new
favourite  to  undermine  Morton,  60.  Re-
nounces Popery,  61.  Queen  Elizabeth  de-
mands him  to  be  removed  from  the  privy
council,  ib.  Is  accused  by  her  ambas-
sador, 64.  Arran  tries  in  vain  to  supplant
him,  69.  Is  commanded  by  king  James,
at  the  request  of  the  nobles,  to  leave  the
kingdom,  76.  Puts  off  his  departure  on
various  pretences,  ib.  77.  Returns  unwil-
lingly to  France,  where  he  soon  dies,  78.
His  memory  vindicated,  and  much  re-
garded by  the  king,  ib.  Died  a  Protes-
tant, ib.

•  ,  duke  of,  left  as  the  king's
lieutenant  in  the  north  after  dispersing
the  Popish  lords,  ii.  181.

Leslie,  Norman,  murders  cardinal  Bea-
toun,  i.  91.  He  and  his  associates  keep
possession  of  the  castle  of  St.  Andrew's,
92.  Makes  a  truce  with  the  regent,  ib.
Are  encouraged  by  Henry  VIII.,  93.

• ,  bishop  of  Ross,  is  sent  by  the

Catholics  in  Scotland  to  engage  queen
Mary  in  their  interest,  i.  206.  His  pro-
posals to  her  rejected,  ib.  His  negotia-
tions in  England  in  favour  of  queen  Mary,
ii.  21.  Is  confined  long  in  the  Tower,  and
afterward  is  banished  England,  23,  24.

Lindsay,  lord,  carries  the  proposal
from  the  confederates  to  queen  Mary,
that  she  should  resign  the  government,  i.
357.  Joins  the  Ruthven  conspirators,  ii.
74.

Lochlevin  castle,  queen  Mary  commit-
ted a  prisoner  there,  i.  351.  Her  escape
from  thence,  366.

,  lord,  letters  to  and  from  him,

Appendix,  ii.  399.

Logan  of  Restalrig,  an  alleged  accom-
plice in  Cowrie's  conspiracy,  ii.  211.  Is
tried,  and  his  estate  forfeited,  long  after
his  death,  212.

Lords,  confederates,  associate  against
Bothwell  and  queen  Mary,  i.  343.  "Raise
forces  against  them,  345.  Publish  the
motives  of  their  conduct,  ib.  Prevail  on
the  queen  to  surrender  to  them,  348.
Assume  the  title  of  lords  of  the  secret
council,  and  the  royal  authority,  351.

,  Popish,  conspire against king

James,  ii.  160.  Are  treated  by  him  with
great  lenity,  161.  Form  a  new  conspiracy,
171.  The  king  proceeds  against  them,

172.  More  of  his  lenity  to  them,  175.
Fresh  dangers  from  them,  179.  They
receive  money  from  Spain,  ib.  Zeal  of
the  clergy  against  them,  ib.  Are  declared
guilty  of  treason,  and  their  estates  for-
feited, ib.  Defeat  the  king's  army,  180.
Are  dispersed  on  the  king's  approach,  ib.
Go  abroad,  and  give  security  to  keep  the
peace,  181.  Return  to  Scotland,  and  peti-
tion for  leave  to  reside  in  their  own
houses,  185.  This  granted  by  a  conven-
tion of  estates,  ib.  Recant  their  errors,
and  are  absolved  from  excommunication,
196.  Relapse,  and  are  again  reconciled
to  the  church  of  Rome,  ib.  Are  restored
to  their  estates  and  honours,  197.

Lorrain,  cardinal,  gets  some  of  the  best
benefices  in  Scotland,  i.  133.

,  princes of, their ambitious

views,  i.  138.  Instigate  the  dauphin  and
queen  Mary  to  take  the  lilies  of  king  and
queen  of  England,  139.  Resolve  to  in-
vade England,  ib.  And  to  check  the  re-
formation in  Scotland,  140.  The  cardi-
nal's great  influence  over  the  young
king,  158.  Drives  the  queen-regent  of
Scotland  to  violent  measures,  164.  Their
violences  occasion  a  conspiracy  against
them,  188.  Are  forced  to  withdraw  their
troops  from  Scotland,  ib.  They  insult  the
Scottish  ambassador,  199.  Have  great
power  over  the  young  king  and  queen,
200.  Are  forced  to  contract  their  views
on  the  death  of  the  king,  201.

Luther,  a  bold  and  principal  promoter
of  the  Reformation,  i.  114.  The  rapid  pro-
gress of  his  doctrine,  ib.

Major,  John,  his  history  of  Scotland,
some  account  of,  i.  4.

Maitland  of  Lethington,  secretary  to
Mary  queen-regent,  leaves  her  service,
and  joins  the  congregation,  i.  175.  His
character,  ib.  Is  sent  by  them  ambassador
to  queen  Elizabeth,  176.  Sends  them  as-
surances of  her  protection,  180.  Is  sent
by  queen  Mary  to  the  court  of  England,
221.  Makes  a  concession  to  queen  Eliza-
beth, ib.  Accompanies  queen  Mary  in  a
progress  to  the  north,  235.  He  is  employ-
ed by  queen  Mary  to  desire  a  personal
interview  with  queen  Elizaheth,  239.
Publicly  accuses  Knox  of  preaching  sedi-
tious doctrine  concerning  resistance,  257.
Intimates  to  queen  Elizabeth  the  inten-
tions of  queen  Mary  to  marry  Darnley,
263.  Prudently  conceals  her  resentment
from  queen  Elizabeth,  265.  Proposes
moderate  measures  with  regard  to  queen
Mary  when  imprisoned,  356.  Attends  the
regent  when  called  on  to  accuse  her  in
England,  385.  He  disapproves  of  this
measure,  ib.  His  intrigue  with  the  duke
of  Norfolk,  389.  405.  Is  imprisoned  by
the  regent,  411.  Is  relieved  by  Kirkaldy,

464

INDEX.

and  secured  in  the  castle,  ib.  Proposes  a  Confers  several  offices  of  trust  upon  stratr
coalition  of  the  two  parlies  after  the  mur-  gers,123.  Proposes  to  lay  a  tax  upon  land-
der  of  the  regent,  ii.  2.  Accedes  to  the  124.  Is  forced  to  drop  it,  ib.  Tries  in
queen's  party,  3.  Is  deprived  of  bis  office  vain  to  excite  a  war  with  England,  125.
of  secretary,  and  proclaimed  traitor,  7.  The  nobles  vigorously  oppose  her  mea-
ls attainted  in  a  parliament  of  the  king's  sures,  126.  Treats  the  reformers  with
party,  15.  Agrees  with  Mar,  31.  His  great  respect,  127.  Obtains  a  concession
views  in  refusing  a  reconciliation  with  from  the  parliament  in  favour  of  the  dau-
Morton  the  regent,  37.  Rejects  overtures  phin,  132.  Her  artful  management  of  the
of  a  treat}'  with  him,  38.  Is  besieged  by  reformers,  ib.  133.  Bestows  the  vacant
him  in  the  castle  of  Edinburgh,  40.  Is  benefices  on  foreigners,  133.  She  alters
forced  to  capitulate  and  surrender  to  the  her  conduct  to  the  reformers,  137.  Re-
English  general,  ib.  To  avoid  the  regent's  monstrates  against  the  violent  measures
resentment  he  dispatches  himself,  42.  Se-  of  the  princes  of  Lorrain,  140.  Is  per-
veral  of  his  letters,  Appendix,  305.  323.  suaded  by  them  to  persecute  the  re-
388.  formers,  141.  Her  rash  answer  to  their

Maitland,  Sir  John,  is  made  secretary  remonstrance,  142.  Summons  their  preach-
for  Scotland,  ii.  109.  Concurs  with  others  ers  to  appear  before  her,  ib.  Breaks  a
in  promoting  queen  Elizabeth's  interest  promise  she  had  made  them,  143.  Marches
there,  ib.  Attempts  against  him  by  cap-  with  an  army  against  them,  145.  Con-
tain James  Stewart,  late  Arran,  149.  eludes  a  treaty  with  them,  146.  This  she
They  prove  abortive,  and  he  is  advanced  again  breaks,  147.  Her  severity  at  Perth,
to  be  chancellor,  ib.  An  attempt  to  re-  ib.  Her  scheme  .discovered,  ib.  She  goes
move  him  from  that  office  frustrated,  162.  to  attack  them,  148.  Has  again  recourse
His  death,  182.  A  copy  of  verses  in  ho-  to  negotiation,  149.  She  is  startled  at
noar  of  him  wrote  by  the  king,  ib.  their  demands,  and  gets  time  to  answer

Mar,  earl  of,  that  title  conferred  on  the  them,  150.  Violates  another  treaty,  151.
prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  i.  233.  Accompa-  Loses  Perth,  and  forced  to  abandon  Stir-
nies  the  queen  in  a  progress  to  the  north,  ling  and  Edinburgh,  she  retires  with
235.  He  and  his  associates  narrowly  precipitation  to  Dunbar,  ib.  Marches  to
escape  assassination,  236.  Is  created  earl  attack  the  reformers  at  Edinburgh,  154.
of  Murray,  237.  See  Murray.  Gains  time  by  her  artifice,  ib.  Makes

-  ,  the  title  is  conferred on  lord another  treaty  with  them,  155.  Her  ar-
Erskine,  i.  237.  The  person  of  the  young tifices  to  undermine  the  prior  of  St.  An-
prince  put  into  his hands,  326.  His  re- drew's,  161.  The  absurdity  of  her  scheme,
solution  in  preserving  him  from  Bothwell, ib.  Gets  a  reinforcement  of  French  troops,
342.  Is chosen regent,  ii.  19. Labours who  fortify  Leith,  162.  She  disregards  a
to  bring  about  a  general  peace,  31.  Is remonstrance of  the  reformers,  163.  Is
thwarted  by  Morton  and  his  associates,  ib. influenced by French counsellors, and
Dies  of  melancholy,  32.  His  character,  ib. persuaded to  violent  measures,  ib.  164.
His  merit  and  integrity  was  acknowledged Retires  to Leith  on  the  approach  of  the
by  both  parties,  ib.  reformers'  army,  165.  Her  prudent  and

-  ,  the  young  earl,  being  imposed artful conduct  there, ib. Her haughty
on  by  Morton,  turns out  his  uncle  from answer to a fresh remonstrance from
the  castle of  Stirling,  ii.  52.  Joins  the-  them,  166.  Is,  by a  convention  of  them,
Ruthven  conspirators,  74.  He  with  the deprived  of  her  office  of  regent,  168.  The
others seize Stirling-castle, and erect foundation  of  this  sentence,  ib.  Foments
their  standard,  88.  Is  attainted, and  bis differences  among  them,  171.  Is  deserted
estate  forfeited,  94.  Is  pardoned,  and  re- by  her  principal  secretary,  Maitland  of
stored  to  estate  and  honours,  112.  Lethington,  175. Sends  French  troops

March,  countess  of,  her  infamous  mar- against  the  reformers,  180.  Retires  into
riage  with  the  earl  of  Arran,  ii.  69.  the  castle  of  Edinburgh  on  the  approach

Mary  of  Guise,  queen-dowager  of  Scot- of  the  English,  184.  Her  death  and  cha-
lund, takes  a  considerable  share  in  the racter,  186. Repented of her violent
government,  i. 100.  Is much addicted measures,  187.  Listened  to  the  inslruc-
to the  French interest,  ib. Projects  a tions  of  a  reformed  preacher,  ib.
marriage  of  her  daughter  to  the  dauphin Mary,  queen of  England,  her  perse-
of  France,  ib.  101.  Becomes  instrumental cuting  reign,  i.  112.  Her  death,  134.
in  promoting  the  reformation,  108.  As- -  ,  queen  of  Scots,  born,  i.  76.  A
pires  to  the  office  of  regent,  ib.  Promotes proposal  to  marry  her  to  Edward  VI.,  79.
disaffection  to the  present  one,  and  fa- She  is  demanded by  Henry  VIII., ib.
vours  the reformers, 109. Visits the
court  of  France,  ib.  Returns  to  Scotland

to  take  possession  of  the regency,  111.
After  some  opposition  she  obtains  it,  112.

Her  marriage  to  the  dauphin  of  France
proposed,  100.  A  treaty  for  that  purpose
concluded,  101.  She  is  sent  to  be  edu-
cated  in  France,  102.  The  fatal  conse-

INDEX.  465

quence  of  this,  ib.  Is  imposed  on  by  the  She  recalls  Lennox,  253.  Is  affronted  at

artifices  of  the  French  in  the  treaty  of  a  letter  of  queen  Elizabeth's,  254.  Her

marriage,  128.  Her  marriage  celebrated  prejudice  against  the  Reformed,  and  zeal

with  great pomp,  129. They  take  the  for  the  Catholic  religion,  256.  Is  taken

title  of  king  and  queen  of  England,  139.  with  Darnley  at  first  sight, 259.  Is  greatly

She  makes  concessions  to  the  congregation,  moved at queen Elizabeth's insulting

190. Declares  queen Elizabeth's  right  craftiness, ib. Negotiations with the

to  the  crown  of  England,  ib.  She  acquires  court  of  Rome  for  a  dispensation  to  marry

an  entire  ascendant over  her  husband,  Darnley,  260.  And  the  consent  of  the  court

200.  She  is  overwhelmed  with  great  af-  of  France,  ib. Imposes  on  Randolph,  but
tiiction  on  his  death, and  retires  to  Rheims,  applies  to  queen  Elizabeth  for  consent  to

201.  She  is  invited  by  the  convention  to  her  marriage,  263. Which  she  affects  to
return  to  Scotland,  206.  An  emissary  from  refuse,  ib. In  resentment  she  proposes
the  Catholics  in  Scotland  proposed  violent  to  send  an  angry  message  to  Elizabeth,
measures  to  her,  ib.  She  is  determined  to  which  Maitland  prevents,  265. Justifies
moderation  by  the  French  and  the  Prior  her  conduct  to  the  English  ambassador,  ib.
of  St.  Andrew's,  207.  Is  prevailed  on  to  Endeavours  to  get  Murray's  consent,  267.
prepare  for  her  return  to  Scotland,  208.  Courts  the  pope's  protection,  and  receives
The  origin  of  the  discord  between  her  a  subsidy  from  him,  ib. Her  great  ad-
and  queen  Elizabeth,  ib.  209.  Her  preten-  dress  in  gaining  the  consent  of  her  sub-
sions  to  the  crown  of  England,  209.  Is  jects,  268,  269. Prevents  a  plot  against
envied  on  account  of  her  beauty,  213.  Darnley,  270.  Summons  her  vassals  to
Demands  safe  conduct  from  queen  Eliza-  take  arms  against  Murray,  271.  And  him
beth, which is refused, 214. Leaves  to  appear  before  her,  272.  Her  marriage
France  with  great  reluctance,  215. Lands  with  Darnley  celebrated,  ib.  She  confers
at  Leith,  216. Is  much  affected  by  the  the  title  of  king  of  Scots  upon  him,  ib.
change  of  her  situation,  ib.  Several  dis-  This  step  censured,  273. Her  resent-
advantages  attending  her  accession,  ib.  ment  against  the  malecontents,  ib. She
Some  circumstances  to her advantage,  marches  against  them,  274. Rejects  the
217.  Her  accomplishments  of  body  and  intercession  of  queen  Elizabeth  in  their
mind,  21 8.  The  servants  of  her  chapel  in-  behalf,  275.  Continues  her  inarch  against
suited,  ib.  Procures  the  free  exercise  of  the  rebels,  ib. Her  conduct  and  courage
her  religion,  219.  Issues  a  proclamation  on  that  occasion,  ib.  Drives  them  out  of
in  favour  of  the  Protestants,  220.  Em-  Scotland,  276. Her  farther  resentment
ploys  them  solely  in  the  administration,  against  them,  277.  Has  recourse  to  se-
ib.  Attempts  to  gain  queen  Elizabeth's  veral  devices  to  raise  money,  278.  Her
favour,  ib.  Makes  a  concession  to  her,  prosperity  promotes  her  religion,  279.
221.  Which  is  rejected,  222.  She  makes  Her  deliberations  concerning  the  exiled
her  public  entry  into  Edinburgh,  ib.  An  lords,  280.  Determines  to  treat  them  with
insult  offered  to  her  religion  on  that  oc-  lenity,  282*  Is  diverted  from  this  by  her
casion,  223.  Discourages  the  attempts  of  religion  and  French  influence,  ib.  This
the  Papists  to  gain  her  favour,  224.  Her  the  source  of  her  after  misfortunes,  284.
aversion  to  the  family  of  Hamilton,  ib.  Her  intention  to  restore  Popery,  ib.  Is
Makes  a  progress  into  the  North,  235.  disgusted  with  Darnley's  insolent  beha-
Her  ministers  narrowly  escape  assassiua-  viour,  285. Her  familiarity  with  Rizzio
tion,  236.  Is  refused  access  to  the  castle  offends  the  king,  286.  Vindicated  from
of  Inverness,  when  relieved  by  the  Monros  any  criminal  correspondence  with  Rizzio,
and other  clans,  ib. Her  forces  defeat  288,289.  Uses  her  utmost  endeavours  to
Huntly's  rebellion,  238.  She  desires  an  prevent  his  murder,  291.  She  is  confined
interview  with  queen  Elizabeth,  239.  Ne-  by  the  conspirators,  ib. She  gains  the
gotiations  concerning  her  marriage,  240.  king,  and  escapes  from  them,  292.  Is  re-
Is  solicited  by  different  princes,  241.  Her  conciled  to  the  exiled  nobles,  293.  Her
deliberations  concerning  it,  242.  Is  forced  hatred  to  Darnley  increases,  298.  And  fa-
to  bear  the authoritative  behaviour  of  vonr  for  Bothwell  commences,  299.  Ex-
queen  Elizabeth,  244.  To  please  her  sub-  tinguishes  some  domestic  feuds  among
jects  determines  against  a  foreign  alliance,  the  nobles,  301.  Is  delivered  of  her  son,
ib.  Determines  not  to  ratify  the  treaty  of  James  VI.,  in  the  castle  of  Edinburgh,  ib.
Edinburgh,  245,  Farther  negotiations  for  Invites  several  foreign  princes  to  his  bap-
her  marriage,  248.  Discovers  the  views  tism,  302.  Continues  to  treat  Darnley  with
of  Catherine  of  Medicis,  249.  Lord  Robert  neglect,  ib.  Her  attachment  to  Bolhwell
Dudley  recommended  to  her  as  a  bus-  increases,  ib.  Prevents  Darnley's  intended
band  by  queen Elizabeth,  ib. She is  flight,  305.  Visits  the  borders,  306.  An
highly  offended  at  this,  250.  Dissembles  instance  of  her  regard  for  Bothwell  on
with  queen Elizabeth,  252. Entertains  that  occasion,  ib.  How  she  rivalled  queen
thoughts  of  marrying  lord  Darnley,  ib.  Elizabeth,  307.  Her  right  of  succession

VOL.  ir,  2  H

466  INDEX.

favoured  by  tbe  English  parliament,  ib. by  the  confederates,  370.  Her  precipr-
Sbe  endeavours  to  avail  herself  of  that tate  flight  into  Galloway,  37i. Rashly
opportunity,  309.  She  takes  an  extraor- determines  to  retire  to  England, 372.  Goes
dinary  step in favour  of  Popery,  310. thither  against  the  advice  of  her  atlend-
Receives  a  present  from  the  pope,  but ants,  373.  Arrives  at  Carlisle,  ib.  Writes
stops  his  nuncio  at  Paris,  311.  Endea- to  queen  Elizabeth,  imploring  her  good
vours  to  procure  a  better  subsistence  for offices,  ib.  Receives  letters  of  condolence
the  reformed  clergy,  312.  Her  aversion from  her,  and  demands  admittance  into  her
to  the  king  excessive,  becomes  melan- presence,  376.  This  refused,  and  why,  ib.
choly,  ib.  Goes  to  Stirling  to  celebrate Offers  to  submit  her  cause  to  queen  Eli-
her  son's  baptism,  313. Is  greatly  of- zabetb,  377. Is  much  deceived  in her
fended  at  the  king's  behaviour  on  that expectation  from  this,  379.  And  offended
occasion,  314.  Restores  the  Popish  ec- on  discovering  the  artifices  of  queen  Eli-
clesiastical  jurisdiction,  317.  Her  neglect zabetb,  ib.  Earnestly  solicits  to  be  admit-
of  the  king  during  his  sickness,  319.  The ted  into  her  presence,  380.  She  is  carried
breach  between  them  becomes  irrepara- to  Bol ton-castle,  382.  Chagrined  at  fmd-
ble,  ib.  She  visits  him  at  Glasgow,  320. ing  herself  a  prisoner,  ib.  Agrees  to  an
The  motives  of  her  dissimulation  on  that inquiry  into  her  conduct,  383.  Her  dissi-
occasion,  ib. 321. Prevails  on  him  to mulation with regard to religion, ib.
come  to  Edinburgh,  322.  Her  suspicious Commissioners  appointed  to  appear  in  her
behaviour  to  him  there,  323.  Issues  a name,  385.  Her  chief  view  in  this  affair,
proclamation  for  discovering  his  murder- 386.  Consents  to  moving  the  conference
ers,  324.  Is  supposed  to  have  been  ac- to  Westminster,  392. She  is  carried  to
cessary  to  it,  ib. Is charged with  it Tuthbury  in  Staffordshire,  393. Is  much
abroad  as  well  as  at  home,  325.  Goes  to offended  at  the  regard  shewn  the  regent,
visit  her  son  at  Stirling,  337.  Is  met  on and  recalls  her  consent  to  the  conference,
her  return  by  Botbwell,  who  seizes  and 394. The  accusations  against  her  pro-
carries  her  to  Dunbar,  338.  This  sup- duced by  the  regent,  395. Is accused
posed  with  her  consent,  ib.  Is  conducted likewise  by  tbe  earl  of  Lennox,  396.  Her
to  Edinburgh,  340.  And  married  to  Both- commissioners  refuse  to  answer,  and  de-
well,  ib.  Sends  an  apology  to  the  courts mand  a  personal  interview,  397. They
of  France  and  England,  341.  Her  con- protest  against  future  proceedings,  ib. A
duct  causes  a  general  indignation  against suspicions  circumstance  against  her,  ib.
her  abroad,  342.  Is  alarmed  at  a  combi- Her  commissioners withdraw  from the
nation  of  the  nobles  against  her,  344. meeting,  398.  Her  resolute  answer  to  a
She  publishes  a  manifesto  to  vindicate  her harsh  proposal  of  queen  Elizabeth,  400.
conduct,  ib.  Is  conducted  to  the  castle  of  Avoids  any  farther  progress  in  tbe  in
Borth wick,  345.  Marches  with  Bothwell's quiry^ib.  Is  enraged  at  the  proceedings,
forces  against  the  confederate  lords,  346. and  proposes  desperate  measures,  401.
An  attempt  of  an  accommodation  proves Spreads  chimerical  conjectures  with  that
vain,  ib.  347.  Is  forced  to  surrender  to view,  ib.  Proposes  a  divorce  from  Both-
tbe  confederates,  348.  Is  insulted  by  the well,  404.  Is  influenced  by  the  duke  of
soldiers  and  mob,  ib.  Is  carried  to  Edin- Norforlk's schemes, 405. Exchanges
burgh,  where  many  abuses  are  offered many  letters  and  love-tokens  with  him,
her,  349.  Is  sent  a  prisoner  to  Lochlevin- ib.  Consents  to  proposals  from  the  Eng-
castle,  351.  Queen  Elizabeth  interposes lisb  nobles,  407. Their  views  in this
in  her  behalf,  352.  The  English  ambas- transaction,  ib.  408.  A  rebellion  by  her
sador  is  refused  access  to  her,  355.  Va- adherents  against  queen  Elizabeth,  411.
rions  proposals  among  the  confederates Is  removed  to  Coventry,  413.  Queen  Eli-
concerning  her,  ib.  They  oblige  her  to zabeth  thinks  of  delivering  her  up  to  the
resign the  government,  356. Different regent,  414.  This  project  how  disappuint-
reasonings  on  this  measure,  358 — 360. ed,415.  Accession  of  several  to  her  party
Is  much  moved  with  the  freedom  of  the after  the  murder  of  the  regent,  ii.  3.  They
earl  of  Murray,  361.  Her  party  among endeavour  to  foment  a  war  with  England,
the  nobles  becomes  dispirited,  363. Her 4. Her  authority  proclaimed  at  Linlith-
resignation  of  the  crown  accepted  by  the gow,  ib.  Her  parties  defeated  by  the  new
parliament,  and her  imprisonment  de- regent,  7.  She  answers  proposals  by  queen
clared  lawful,  365.  Her  letters  to  Both- Elizabeth,  8.  Attempts  in  vain  to* get  fo-
well  read,  and  she  declared  accessory  to reign assistance,  9. Appoints  commis-
Ihe king's  murder, ib. Escapes from sioners  to  frame  a  treaty  for  her  libera-
Lochlevin,  366.  Arrives  at  Hamilton,367. lion,  10. This  proving  fruitless,  she  is
Is  attended  by  many  nobles  and  a  name- more  strictly  confined,  11.  The  invalidity
rous  army,  ib.  An  association  signed  in of  her  resignation  declared  in  a  parliament
her  defence,  ib.  Her  imprudence  in  ha- held  by  her  adherents,  16.  Act  of  parlia-
zarding  a  battle,  369.  Her  army  defeated rnsnt  in  England  to  curb  her  and  her  party.

INDEX.

467

SO.  S\\e  looks  for  protection  from  the
king  of  Spain,  21.  Is  denied  the  privi-
lege of  an  ambassador  at  the  court  of  Eng-
land, 24.  Is  more  closely  confined  and
watched,  ib.  Proceedings  against  her  in
England,  27.  Her  interest  neglected  by
the  French,  28.  Is  hurt  by  the  massacre
at  Paris,  29.  Her  adherents  divided  into
two  factions,  37.  One  of  them  joins  with
Morion  the  regent,  39.  Review  of  the
characters  of  her  adherents  and  opponents,
41.  Her  forlorn  situation,  ib.  Is  carried
to  Buxton  Wells,  42.  Loses  several  of
her  friends  by  death,  44.  Sends  a  letter
and  presents  to  her  son,  57.  Her  messen-
ger, why  dismissed  without  seeing  him,
ib.  Her  uneasiness  at  his  confinement  by
the  Knth ven  conspirators,  78.  Complains
lo  queen  Elizabeth  of  her  hard  usage,  79.
And  begs  her  intercession  for  the  king  her
son,  ib.  Throgmorlon's  conspiracy  in  her
favour,  91,  92.  A  fruitless  negotiation
with  queen  Elizabeth,  95.  Is  alarmed  at
an  association  in  defence  of  queen  Eliza-
beth, 97.  Is  committed  to  more  severe
keepers,  98.  Betrayed  by  lord  Gray,  the
Scotch  ambassador,  99.  A  statute  for  the
preservation  of  queen  Elizabeth  proves
fatal  to  her,  103.  Is  more  rigorously
treated,  104.  Her  complaints  to  queen
Elizabeth  disregarded,  ib.  Is  by  the
French  ambassador's  interest  removed  to
Tuthbury,  105.  Is  undutifully  treated  by
the  king  her  son,  ib.  Her  passionate  com-
plaint to  the  French  ambassador  on  that
occasion,  ib.  Threatens  to  disinherit  him,
106.  Several  discoveries  alleged  against
her,  119.  She  is  guarded  with  unusual
vigilance,  122.  Her  domestics,  papers,
&c.  are  seized,  ib.  She  is  conveyed  to
Fotheringay-caslle,  ib.  Deliberation  con-
cerning the  method  of  proceeding  against
her,  ib.  123.  'Is  suspicions  of  poison  or
private  murder,  124.  Vindicates  herself
to  the  duke  of  Guise,  ib.  The  commis-
sioners for  trying  her  arrive  at  Fotherin-
gay-castle,  ib.  Her  spirited  speech  when
refusing  to  plead,  ib.  Is  at  length  pre-
vailed on,  125.  She  protests  against  the
authority  of  the  court,  126.  The  accusa-
tion against  her,  ib.  Her  defence,  ib.  127.
Her  sentence,  128.  Irregularities  in  her
trial,  129.  Her  sentence  is  confirmed  by
parliament,  130.  Who  demand  the  exe-
cution of  it,  ib.  France  interposes  feebly
in  her  behalf,  1 32.  The  sentence  against
her  published,  134.  She  is  treated  with
the  utmost  rigour,  ib.  Her  last  request  to
queen  Elizabeth,  135.  Refuses  the  assist-
ance of  a  Protestant  bishop  or  dean,  ib.
Artifices  used  to  inflame  the  people
against  her,  136.  Her  behaviour  at  her
death,  139 — 142.  Sentiments  of  historians
concerning  her,  142.  Her  character,  143.
Her  person  described,  144.  Is  buried  first

at  Peterborough,  and  afterward  in  West-
minster Abbey,  145.  Letters  from  her.
Appendix,  339.  368.374.  417.  Her  will,
419.  Objections  against  her  by  Walsing-
ham,  413.  What  course  lo  be  taken  with
her,  ib.  A  dissertation  on  the  genuineness
of  her  letters  to  Bothwell,  end  of  vol.  ii.

Maxwell,  lord,  arrives  from  Spain,  and
prepares  forces  to  join  the  Spaniards,  ii.
156.  His  followers  dispersed,  he  is  taken
prisoner,  ib.

Melvil  is  sent  by  the  French  king  to
observe  the  motions  of  the  queen  regent
and  her  adversaries,  i.  157.  Sent  to  make
up  a  difference  between  Elizabeth  and
Mary,  255.  Brings  about  an  appearance
of  friendship  between  them.ib.  Is  sent  to
inform  queen  Elizabeth  of  the  birth  of  king
James  VI.,  301.  Puts  a  letter  into  the
queen's  hand  against  her  marriage  with
Bothwell,  337.  Is  forced  to  fly  from  court,
ib.  Advises  king  James  to  moderate  mea-
sures upon  his  escape  from  the  Ruthven
conspirators,  ii.  82.

,  Mr.  Andrew,  a  clergyman,  his

character,  ii.  45.  Zealously  opposes  epis-
copacy, ib.  Declines  the  civil  jurisdiction
in  ecclesiastical  matters,  86.  Is  forced  to
fly  into  England  to  avoid  persecution,  87.

Melville,  Mr.  James,  minister  of  An-
struther,  his  encomium  on  the  eloquence
of  Knox  the  reformer,  ii.  35.

,  Sir  Robert,  sent  by  king  James

to  intercede  with  queen  Elizabeth  for
queen  Mary  while  under  sentence,  ii.  135.
Executes  his  commission  with  fidelity  and
zeal,  136.  A  memorial  of  his  to  the  king,
Appendix,  436.

,  Master  of  the  household  to

queen  Mary,  takes  his  last  farewell  of  her,
ii.  140.  Her  parting  speech  to  him,  141.

Mildmay,  Sir  Walter,  sent  by  queen
Elizabeth  with  proposals  to  queen  Mary,
ii.  8.

Monluc,  bishop  of  Valence,  employed
by  the  French  to  conclude  a  peace  with
England  and  Scotland,  i.  189.  Terms
agreed  to  by  him,  190, 191.

Montgomery  appointed  archbishop  of
Glasgow,  ii.  71.  Is  refused  and  excom-
municated by  the  general  assembly  for
his  immoral  life,  72.

Montmorency,  constable  of  France,  en  •
deavours  to  prevent  the  dauphin's  mar-
riage with  queen  Mary,  i.  128.  His  pru-
dent advice  to  Henry  II.,  ib.  Makes  a
slender  appearance  in  favour  of  queen
Mary,  ii.  28.

Morton,  earl  of,  his  irresolute  conduct
as  to  the  Reformation,  i.  175.  Accom-
panies queen  Mary  in  a  progress  to  the
north,  235.  Instigates  Darnley  to  be
avenged  of  Rizio,  288.  Takes  the  direc-
tion of  that  enterprise,  290.  Is  admitted
into  the  queen's  presence,  who  promises

INDEX.

him  a  pardon,  292.  Is  forced  to  fly  into
England,  293.  Obtains  bis  pardon  on
Botbwell's  intercession,  315.  Seizes  a
casket  with  letters  from  queen  Mary  to
Bolhwell,  352.  He  is  by  queeu  Elizabeth's
interposition,  in  favour  with  the  king's
parly  after  the  ra  order  of  the  regent,  ii.  3.
Appointed  one  of  the  commissioners  to
treat  with  the  queen's  party,  10.  His  de-
mands frustrate  the  meeting,  11.  Is  en-
tirely influenced  by  the  court  of  England,
17.  Commands  the  king's  forces  atLeith,
25.  Has  several  skirmishes  with  the
queen's  forces,  ib.  Closely  besieges  Edin-
burgh, and  commits  great  cruelties,  ib.  A
suspension  procured  by  the  English  and
French  ambassadors,  26.  A  coalition  of
parlies  prevented  by  him,  31.  He  is
chosen  regent,  32.  His  mercenary  ingrati-
tude to  the  earl  of  Northumberland,  ib.
Obtains  the  temporalities  of  the  arch-
bishopric of  St.  Andrew's,  33.  Labours  to
procure  a  peace  between  the  two  parties,
36.  Attempts  in  vain  to  gain  M aitland  aud
Kirkaldy,  37.  Makes  a  treaty  with  Cha-
telherault  and  Huntly,  38.  Gets  posses-
sion of  the  castle  of  Edinburgh,  40.  His
severity  to  Kirkaldy  and  his  brother,  42.
His  administration  becomes  odious,  43.
His  various  methods  of  gratifying  his
avarice,  ib.  44.  Connives  at  the  dispute
of  the  clergy,  45.  He  irritates  the  nobles,
46.  Argyle  and  Athol  refuse  to  answer  his
summons,  ib.  Makes  a  vain  attempt  against
lord  Claude  Hamilton,  47.  Discovers  the
designs  of  the  nobles  against  him,  and  pro-
poses to  resign  his  office,  49.  His  resig-
nation accepted  by  the  king  gives  univer-
sal joy,  ib.  Obtains  an  approbation  of  his
conduct,  and  a  pardon  in  ample  form,  50.
Continues  to  watch  the  motions  of  his  ad-
versaries, 51.  Is  forced  to  surrender  the
castle  of  Edinburgh,  ib.  Resumes  his
authority,  52.  Gains  the  castle  of  Stirling,
and  a  seat  in  the  privy- council,  53.  Pro-
cures a  meeting  of  the  parliament  at  Stir-
ling, ib.  His  security  ratified  in  it,  ib.
Forces  are  raised  for  and  against'him,  54.
He  is  reconciled  to  his  adversaries  by  the
intercession  of  queen  Elizabeth,  ib.  Is
suspected  of  foul  play  at  an  entertainment
at  his  own  house,  55.  His  illegal  pro-
ceedings against  the  family  of  Hamilton,
56,  The  king's  new  favourites  undermine
him,  59.  He  endeavours  to  prevent  them,
60.  Queen  Elizabeth  interposes  in  his  fa-
vour, 61.  Is  charged  with  being  accessary
to  the  late  king's  death,  62.  He  is  confined
in  different  prisons,  63.  Discourages  an
attempt  to  rescue  him,  ib.  All  his  friends
are  turned  out  of  oflice,  66.  He  is  tried
and  condemned,  67.  His  resolute  calm
behaviour  and  confession  before  and  at  his
death,  ib.  68.  His  body  is  treated  with
ignominy,  69.

Murray,  earl  of,  late  prior  of  St.
Andrew's,  goes  with  a  handful  of  men
against  Huntly,  i.  237.  By  his  great
skill  and  courage  he  gains  a  complete
victory,  238.  His  grant  is  confirmed  by
parliament,  245.  Cabals  against  him  by
Lennox  and  Darnley,  261.  His  aversion  to
Darnley  and  olher  court  favourites,  266.
Calls  Bothwell  to  stand  a  trial,  ib.  His
reasons  for  opposing  Darnley's  marriage
with  the  queen,  267.  He  and  his  asso-
ciates are  made  the  dupes  of  queen
Elizabeth's  policy,  269.  Concerts  to  seize
Darnley,  and  carry  him  to  England,
270.  This  prevented  by  the  queen,
ib.  Avoids  assassination  intended  him
by  Darnley,  ib.  Evidences  of  these
plots,  ib.  271.  The  queen's  vassals  are
called  to  arms  against  him,  271.  He  is
summoned  to  appear  before  her,  272.  Is
again  summoned  and  outlawed  on  bis
non-appearance,  273.  Is  forced  to  fly
with  his  associates  into  Argyleshire,  274.
They  are  interceded  for  by  queeu  Eliza-
beth, ib.  Are  pursued  by  the  queen,  and
obliged  to  fly  into  England,  276.  They
meet  with  unexpected  ill-treatment  from
queen  Elizabeth,  ib.  Courts  Rizto  to  in-
tercede with  the  queen  for  him,  281.
Many  of  his  old  friends  solicit  for  him,  ib.
The  queen's  favour  how  intercepted,  282.
A  parliament  is  called  to  attaint  them,  284.
This  how  prevented,  285.  He  and  his  as-
sociates arrive  at  Edinburgh,  291.  Are
graciously  received  by  the  king  and  queen,
ib.  Are  alarmed  at  the  queen's  escape,
but  soon  reconciled  to  ber,  292.  He  is
appointed  regent  during  the  minority  of
king  James  VI.,  361.  His  harsh  behaviour
in  a  visit  to  the  queen,  ib.  The  success  of
his  wise  administration,  363.  Procures
many  of  the  queen's  party  to  join  him,  ib.
Gets  the  places  of  strength  into  his  hands,
364.  His  office  of  regent  confirmed  by
parliament,  365.  His  severe  and  haughty
behaviour  disgusts  .several,  366.  His  ad-
herents in  great  consternation  at  the
queen's  escape  from  Lochlevin,  368.  His
prudent  conduct  on  that  occasion,  369.
Defeats  the  queen's  army  at  Langside,
370.  He  improves  this  victory,  381.  His
lenity  to  the  prisoners,  ib.  He  calls  a
parliament,  383.  Is  called  upon  by  queen
Elizabeth  to  vindicate  his  conduct,  384.
He  arrives  at  York,  386.  His  views  in
this  affair,  ib.  Complaints  of  the  queen's
commissioners  against  him,  388.  He
behaves  with  great  reserve  on  this  occa-
sion, ib.  This  partof  his  conduct  accounted
for,  389.  Intrigues  with  the  duke  of
Norfolk,  ib.  His  demands  from  the  Eng-
lish commissioners,  390.  Answer  to  the
complaints  of  the  queen's  commissioners
without  touching  on  the  murder,  392.
Agrees  to  have  the  conference  moved  to

INDEX.

469

Westminster,  ib.  Is  affectionately  received
bj  queen  Elizabeth,  which  offends  queen
Mary,  394.  Is  prevailed  on  by  Elizabeth
to  accuse  Mary  of  the  murder,  395.  Pro-
duces bis  evidences,  398.  Is  dismissed  by
queen  Elizabeth  without  approving  or
condemning  his  conduct,  400.  His  party
is  secretly  supported  by  her,  401.  Re-
turns to  Scotland,  and  by  bis  vigorous
conduct  breaks  the  queen's  party,  402.
He  receives  proposals  both  from  queen
Elizabeth  and  queen  Mary,  404.  He  dis-
appoints Norfolk,  409.  An  account  of  his
murder,  415,  416.  His  character,  417.
His  death  much  lamented  by  queen  Eliza-
beth and  the  king's  party,  ii.  1.  Much
anarchy  the  consequence  of  it,  ib.  Part  of
a  letter  of  his,  A  pp.  383.  His  heir  mur-
dered by  the  earl  of  Huntly,  168.

NAUE,  secretary  to  queen  Mary,  is  sent
by  her  with  a  letter  and  presents  to  her
son,  ii.  57.  Why  dismissed  without  seeing
him,  ib.  Is  sent  with  offers  of  humble  re-
signation to  queen  Elizabeth,  97.  Is  seized
and  sent  prisoner  to  London,  122.  Is  pro-
duced an  evidence  against  her,  128.

Nevil  discovers  and  prevents  Parry's
design  to  murder  queen  Elizabeth,  ii.  103.

Nobles,  their  extensive  power,  i.  18.
Become  turbulent  and  formidable,  19.
Their  power  greater  in  Scotland  than  in
any  other  kingdom,  20.  The  causes  of
this,  ib.  Their  power  of  long  duration,
31,  32.  It  becomes  intolerable  to  the
princes,  ib.  They  are  humbled  in  France
and  England,  ib.  But  continue  vigorous
in  Scotland,  ib.  Discords  among  them  en-
couraged, ib.  Their  jurisdiction  circum-
scribed, 33.  Are  greatly  mortified  by
king  James  V.,  53 — 56.  Are  disappointed
in  a  scheme  to  shew  their  resentment,  58.
Refuse  to  attend  the  king  into  England,
59.  They  seize  the  revenues  of  the  church,
196.  Refuse  to  part  with  them  to  the  re-
formed clergy,  197.  Dissensions  among
them,  230,  231.  A  convention  of  them
approve  the  queen's  marriage  to  Darnley,
268.  Several  of  them  recommend
Bothwell  as  a  husband  to  her,  335.  A
strange  combination  of  them  on  this  oc-
casion, 336.  A  body  of  them  associate
against  her  and  Bothwell,  343.  Their
different  views  in  this,  344.  A  party  of
them  favours  the  queen,  352.  They  are
much  dispirited  by  the  good  conduct  of
Murray,  363.  They  are  much  provoked  by
Morton  the  regent,  ii.  46.  Think  of  redress
from  the  king,  47.  Infuse  suspicion  of
the  regent's  power  into  him,  48.  A  meet-
ing of  them  by  him,  49.  A  party  of  them
conspire  against  the  king's  favourites,  74.
They  seize  his  person  and  drive  them  off,
75.  Their  neglect  of,  aud  ingratitude  to

the  clergy,  113.  The  king  attempts  to  re-
concile their  feuds  and  unite  them,  150.
See  Lords.

Norfolk,  duke  of,  appointed  a  com-
missioner to  hear  the  cause  between
queen  Mary  and  her  accusers,  i.  386.
Forms  a  scheme  of  mounting  the  throne  of
Scotland,  389.  Intrigues  with  the  regent
and  Maitland  with  that  view,  ib.  He  re-
presents the  demands  of  the  Scots  to
queen  Elizabeth,  391.  His  farther  ne-
gotiations with  respect  to  queen  Mary,
405.  Endeavours  to  conceal  his  design
from  queen  Elizabeth,  ib.  Is  imposed  on
by  the  artifice  of  the  regent,  406.  Gets
the  consent  of  many  of  the  English  nobles,
407.  His  project  approved  at  foreign
courts,  408.  Is  discovered  and  defeated
by  queen  Elizabeth,  409.  Flies  to  Nor-
folk, 410.  He  surrenders  on  a  second
summons,  and  is  sent  prisoner  to  the
tower,  ib.  Is  set  at  liberty,  and  continues
his  intrigues  with  queen  Mary,  ii.  21.  Is
betrayed  by  his  secretary,  22.  Is  seized
with  his  dependants,  and  accused  by  them,
23.  Is  executed,  ib.

Northumberland,  earl  of,  attempts  a  re-
bellion in  favour  of  queen  Mary,  i.  411.
His  scheme  defeated,  412.  He  is  seized
by  the  regent,  413.  Is  delivered  up  to  the
governor  of  Berwick,  and  put  to  death  at
York,  ii.  32.

Nottingham,  countess  of,  some  account
of  the  transactions  concerning  the  earl  of
Essex's  ring,  ii.  231.

OCT AVIANS,  their  institution  and  ex-
tensive powers,  ii.  183.  They  undermine
the  king's  ministers,  ib.  Become  odious,
and  a  combination  is  formed  against  them,
ib.  Being  split  into  factions,  and  envied
by  the  courtiers,  they  resign  their  com-
mission, 197.

Ogilvie,  lord,  has  a  scuffle  with  Sir
John  Gordon  in  the  streets  of  Edinburgh,
i.  234.

Oliphant,  master  of,  joins  the  Rnlhvcn
conspirators,  ii.  76.

Orange,  prince  of,  sends  an  agent  into
Scotland,  ii.  65.  His  instructions,  ib.
Is  assassinated,  107.

D'Oysel,  commander  of  the  French
troops  in  Scotland,  endeavours  to  pro-
mote a  war  with  England,  i.  126.  His
design  frustrated,  ib.  The  number  of
troops  under  his  command,  147.  Insti-
gates the  queen-regent  to  violent  mea-
sures against  the  reformers,  148.  Is
sent  by  queen  Mary  to  demand  a  safe-
conduct  from  queen  Elizabeth,  during  her
voyage  to  Scotland,  214.

PAISLEY,  abbot  of,  arrives  in  Scotland,
i.  83.  Creates  a  suspicion  of  the  earl  of

470

INDEX.

Lennox  in  the  enrl  of  Arran  regent,  ib.
Is  made  archbishop  of  St.  Andrews,  95.

Paris,  the  massacre  of,  ii.  28,  29.  Re-
joicings of  the  popish  party  on  account
of  il,  29.  The  consternation  and  horror
of  the  Protestants,  ib.

Parliament,  the  nature  of  their  original
constitution,  i.  62,  63.  Particularly  that
of  Scotland,  64—68. 192.  A  parliament
held  on  an  extraordinary  occasion,  193.
A  difficulty  started  and  answered,  194.
Their  proceedings  with  regard  to  religion,
ib.  195.  Condemn  the  popish  and  ap-
prove the  reformed  doctrines,  ib.  Seve-
ral other  regulations  of  the  same  ten-
dency, 196.  Their  validity  called  in
question,  197.  Exceed  their  powers,
198.  Their  proceedings  laid  before  the
king  and  queen,  ib.  A  parliament  in  fa-
vour of  Bothwell,  331.  Passes  an  act
in  favour  of  the  Reformation,  332.  Con-
firm the  proceedings  of  the  confederates,
364.  Parliaments  held  both  by  the  king's
and  queen's  parties,  ii.  15.  Another  of
the  queen's  adherents,  16.  Attaint  up-
wards of  two  hundred  of  their  opponents,
17.  A  parliament  at  Stirling  by  the
king's  party,  ib.  Surprised  by  the  queen's
adherents,  18.  Another  at  Stirling,  53.
One  at  Edinburgh,  60.  And  on  the
king's  being  of  age,  150.  Several  new
laws  made  there,  151—153.  The  lesser
barons  admitted  into  parliament,  153.

Pfcrry,  Doctor,  undertakes  to  murder
queen  Elizabeth,  ii.  102.  Is  encouraged
by  and  gets  absolution  from  the  pope,  ib.
His  design  how  prevented,  103.  Is  exe-
cuted, ib.

Parsons,  a  Jesuit,  publishes  a  book  in
favour  of  the  Infanta  of  Spain's  right  of
succession  to  the  crown  of  England,  ii.
182.

Pasquinades  and  Pictures,  accusing
Bothwell  of  Darnley's  murder,  i.  324.
A  law  made  against  them,  332.

Patten,  William,  his  account  of  the
Scottish  ancient  military  discipline,  i.  98,
99,  note.

Paulet,  Sir  Ainias,  is  appointed  one  of
queen  Mary's  keepers,  ii.  98.  His  rigid
severity  to  her,  104.  Discovers  her  fo-
reign correspondence,  120.  His  rude
treatment  of  her,  134.  Refuses  to  be
concerned  in  privately  assassinating  her,
137.  A  letter  from  him,  Appendix,  425.

Pellev6,  bishop  of  Amiens,  is  appointed
to  support  the  popish  interest  in  Scot-
land, i.  164.  Drives  the  queen-regent  to
violent  measures  against  the  Protestants,
ib.

Perth,  an  insurrection  of  the  reformers
there  against  the  Papists,  i.  144.  Its
inhabitants  are  severely  treated  by  the
queen-regent,  147.  A  French  garrison

placed  there,  ib.  Is  besieged  and  taker*
by  the  Protestants,  151.  A  great  tumult
there  on  account  of  Cowrie's  conspiracy
ii.  209.  .

Philip  II.  of  Spain,  married  to  Mary,
queen  of  England,  i.  112.  Reinforces
his  array  with  her  troops,  125.  His  great
power,  ii.  107.  Joins  in  the  holy  league,
ib.  Resolves  to  invade  and  conquer  Eng-
land, 155.  His  preparations  for  it  dila-
tory, 158.  His  design  frustrated,  ib.
Meditates  an  invasion  of  England  through
Scotland,  159.  Intrigues  with  some  Scot-
tish lords  with  that  view,  160.  Remits
money  to  them,  179.

Pinkey,  the  battle  of,  i.  97.

Pius  V.,  pope,  excommunicates  queen
Elizabeth,  deprives  her  of  her  kingdom,
and  absolves  her  subjects,  ii.  7.

Polly,  one  of  fiabington's  conspirators
against  queen  Elizabeth,  ii.  118.  Disco-
vers the  plot,  ib.

Poltrot,  a  frantic  zealot,  assassinates
the  duke  of  Guise  at  the  siege  of  Orleans,
i.  242.

Pont,  Mr.  Robert,  a  minister,  and  one
of  the  lords  of  session,  protests  against
laws  oppressive  to  the  church,  ii.  89.

Popery,  where  most  flourishing,  i.  115.
What  kind  prevailed  in  Scotland,  ib.
Was  partly  grafted  on  heathenism,  152.
Is  much  hurt  by  the  congregation,  194.
Their  doctrines  condemned  by  parliament,
195.  The  jurisdiction  of  their  courts
abolished,  196.  Their  worship  prohi-
bited, ib.  Attempt  in  vain  to  gain  queen
Mary's  favour,  224.  The  great  influence
of  popery,  283.

Power,  the  balance  of,  the  great  con-
sequence of  preserving  it,  i.  70.

Presbyterian  church  government  esta-
blished in  Scotland,  i.  202.  Is  confirmed
by  king  James  VI.,  ii.  169.

Protestants,  in  France,  violently  per-
secuted, i.  159.'  Are  moderate  on  queen
Mary's  arrival  from  France,  219.  Are
employed  by  her  in  the  administration,
220.  A  scheme  for  suppressing  them  all
over  Europe,  282.  A  league  formed  for
that  purpose,  ii.  107.  See  Reformation.

RAMSAY,  a  favourite  of  king  JamesIII.,
narrowly  escapes  being  hanged  with  his
associates,  i.  47.  Is  appointed  captain  of
the  king's  guard,  and  created  earl  of  Both-
well,  48.  See  Bothwell.

Randan,  Sieur  de,  employed  by  the
French  to  negotiate  a  peace  with  England
and  Scotland,  i.  189.  Terms  agreed  on  by
him,  190.

Randolph,  sent  to  encourage  the  con-
gregation, i.  172.  Congratulates  queen
Mary's  arrival  in  Scotland,  221.  Urges
the  ratification  of  the  treaty  of  Edinburgh,

INDEX.

471

ib.  Is  imposed  on  by  queen  Mary  in  the
affair  of  her  marriage  will)  Darnley,  263,
Sent  into  Scotland  on  the  murder  of  Mur-
ray, ii.  2.  Interposes  for  Morton,  64.
Plies  from  Scotland  in  the  night,  66.  Is
sent  again  there,  and  concludes  a  treaty
with  England,  114.  Several  of  his  let-
ters, App.  311,  316,  320, 321,  333, 339,
344.

Ratcliff.  See  Sussex.

Reformation,  its  progress  in  Scotland,
i.  105.  Account  of  its  first  preachers,  ib.
Is  much  influenced  by  England,  106.
Two  remarkable  instruments  of  promoting
it,  107,  108.  It  makes  great  progress,

112.  Causes  contributing  to  promote  it,

113.  Its  advantages  over  Popery,  121.
Is  favoured  by  the  queen-regent,  127.  An
instance  of  regard  for  it  in  Scotland,  135.
The  whole  party  not  chargeable  with  car-
dinal Beatoun's  murder, ib. A priest
burnt  for  embracing  it,  ib.  The  reformers
violently  persecuted  by  the  archbishop  of
St.  Andrew's,  ib. Are  protected  by  the
queen-regent,  136. Apply  in  vain  to  the
popish  clergy,  ib. A  persecution  against
them  pushed  on  by the  French  interest,
140.  The  preachers  summoned  before  the
regent,  142. They  are  deceived  and  de-
clared out-laws  by  her,  143. A  riotous
insurrection  of  them  at  Perth  against  the
Papists,  144. Prepare  to  defend  them-
selves against  the  queen,  145. Conclude
a  treaty  with her  which she presently
breaks,  146. They  take  arms  against  the
queen,  148. Insist  on  redressing  civil  as
well  as  religions  grievances,  149.  The  in-
fluence of  the  Reformation  on  liberty,  ib.
They  besiege  and  take  Perth,  151. They
seize  Stirling  and  Edinburgh,  ib.  Commit
great  violence  on  churches  and  monaste-
ries, ib.  Their  conduct  how  accounted  for,
152.  Aninstanceof  their  moderation,  153.
Fix  their  residence  at  Edinburgh,  ib.  The
queen prepares to attack them, 154.
Makes  another  treaty  with  her,  155. Are
forced  to  abandon  Edinburgh,  &c.  but  al-
lowed the  exercise  of  their  religion,  ib.
Demand  the expulsion of  the French
army,  ib.  Are  aware  of  their  danger  from
France,  159.  Their  party  strengthened,ib.
Remonstrate  against  the  French  fortify-
ing Leith,  163. Take  arms  in  their  own
defence,  165. Remonstrate  again  to  the
regent,  166. Are  highly  incensed  at  her
imperious  answer,  ib.  By  advice  of  a  con-
vention deprive  the  queen-dowager  of  the
office  of  regent,  168. The  foundations  of
this  conduct,  168 — 170.  Examination  of
the  different  principles  on  which  it  was
conducted  in  different  countries,202.  The
growth  of  it  encouraged  by  parliament,
365.  See  Congregation.

Regalities,  the  ample  jurisdiction  of,
i.  17.

Repledging,  the  privilege  of,  to  whom
belonging,  i.  17.

Revenge,  encouraged  both  by  custom
and  law,  i.  32.

Revenues  of  the  church,  proceedings  of
parliament  concerning  them,  i.  196.

Ridolphi,  an  agent  for  the  pope  at  Lon-
don negotiates  for  queen  Mary,  ii.  21.
His  arguments  with  the  duke  of  Nor-
folk, 22,

Rizio,  David,  some  account  of  him  and
his  rise,  i.  261.  Darnle/s  connexion  with
him,  262.  His  good  offices  courted  by
Murray,  281.  His  great  interest  and  fa-
miliarity with  the  queen,  286.  Incurs  the
hatred  of  Darnley,  ib.  And  of  the  friends
of  the  exiled  lords,  287.  Several  concur-
ring causes  of  this,  ib.  A  combination
formed  to  murder  him,  288.  He  is  mur-
dered in  the  queen's  palace,  290,  291.

Romans  invade  Britain,  i.  2.  Give  the
earliest  accounts  of  the  Scots,  ib.

Ross,  bishop  of,  /ealously  promotes
queen  Mary's  interest  at  London,  ii.  21,
22.  Is  confined  to  the  Tower,  and  threat-
ened with  capital  punishment,  23,  24.  Is
set  at  liberty,  and  banished  the  kingdom,
ib.  Some  letters  of  bis,  App.  i.  377.  393.

Rubay,  a  foreigner,  made  keeper  of  the
great  seal  of  Scotland,  i.  123.

Ruthven,lord,  the  murder  of  Rizio  pro-
posed to  him  by  Darnley,  i.  288.  Heads
the  conspirators  against  him,  290.  His
part  in  that  transaction,  ib.  291.  Is  ad-
mitted into  the  queen's  presence,  who
promises  him  a  pardon,  292.  Did  not  re-
pent of  it  at  his  death,  297.

,  created  earl  of  Gowrie,  he  and

his  associates  seize  the  king,  and  remon-
strate against  bis  favourites, ii.  74.  Drive
them  from  him,  75.  Their  conduct  ap-
proved in  an  assembly  of  the  slates,  77.
The  king  escapes  from  them,  80.  By  Ar-
ran's  influence  violent  measures  are  deter-
mined against  them,  83.  Queen  Elizabeth
intercedes  in  their  behalf,  ib.  Are  de-
clared guilty  of  high-treason,  85.  Take
refuge  in  foreign  countries,  ib.  Are
harshly  treated  by  queen  Elizabeth,  99.
A  reconciliation  with  her  brought  about,
110.  Return  to  Scotland,  and  are  recon-
ciled to  the  king,  111.  Their  moderation
on  being  restored  to  their  estates  and  ho-
nours, 112.  Their  neglect  of  their  friends
the  clergy,  113.

Ruthven,  that  name  abolished  by  par-
liament, ii.  219.  See  Gowrie.

Rulhven  raid,  what,  ii.  75.

SADLER,  Sir  Ralph,  his  representations
of  the  resentment  of  the  Scots,  for  the
seizure  of  their  ships  by  Henry  VIII.,  i.
82.  Appointed  a  commissioner  to  hear
the  cause  between  queen  Mary  and  her
accusers,  386.

472

INDEX.

Sandilands  of  Calder,  lord  St.  John,
sent  to  lay  the  proceedings  of  the  con-
gregation parliament  before  the  king  and
queen  in  France,  i.  198.  Is  coldly  re-
ceived, and  dismissed  without  a  ratifica-
tion by  them,  199.

Savage,  a  Spanish  officer,  his  desperate
resolution  to  kill  queen  Elizabeth,  ii.  116,
117.

Scotland  its  ancient  history  fabulous,
i.  1.  The  origin  of  the  Scots,  2.  Their
history  why  remarkably  obscure,  3.  Some
account  of  the  writers  of  it,  4.  Is  divided
into  four  periods,  ib.  A  review  of  the
third  era,  5.  Some  account  of  the  con-
troversy concerning  Its  independency,
6 — 9.  This  the  cause  of  great  animosities
and  much  bloodshed,  10.  The  state  of
Scotland  when  Bruce  began  his  reign,
11.  It  begins  to  have  an  influence  on  the
fate  of  distant  nations,  73.  Influence  as
to  the  balance  of  power,  74.  Stale  of
Scotland  at  the  birth  of  queen  Mary,  76.
Is  invaded  by  the  English,  and  several
places  burnt  and  plundered,  88.  Much
alienated  from  the  English,  ib.  89.  A  peace
concluded  between  England,  France,  and
Scotland,  90.  Computation  of  damages
done  by  the  English  in  Scotland,  ib.  A
new  breach  with  England,  95.  Is  invaded
by  a  great  English  army,  96.  The  Scots
are  defeated  with  great  slanghter,  97.
Their  manner  of  fighting  at  that  time,
98.  A  marriage  agreed  of  their  young
queen  and  the  dauphin  of  France,  101.
They  soon  repent  this  step,  104.  A  fray
at  Edinburgh  occasions  their  utter  aver-
sion to  the  French,  105.  This  inflamed
by  another  incident,  123.  They  decline  a
war  with  England,  125.  Send  represen-
tatives to  witness  queen  Mary's  marriage,
128.  Their  care  as  to  the  marriage  arti-
cles, ib.  They  refuse  consent  to  the  de-
mands of  the  French,  130.  Four  of  their
deputies  suspected  to  be  poisoned,  131.
Which  much  increases  the  aversion,  ib.
Grant  the  crown  matrimonial  to  the  dau-
phin, 132.  They  apply  to  the  English
for  assistance  against  the  French,  172.  An
English  fleet  arrives  for  that  purpose,  182.
Conclude  a  peace  with  England,  and  re-
ceive an  English  army,  ib.  183.  All
parties  agree  in  detesting  the  French,
186.  A  treaty  between  England,  France,
and  Scotland,  189.  Both  English  and
French  armies  leave  Scotland,  192.  They
rejoice  much  at  the  death  of  the  young
king  of  France,  201.  Send  to  invite  the
queen  to  Scotland,  206.  Reject  propo-
sals of  an  ambassador  from  France,  207.
State  of  Scotland  on  queen  Mary's  return
from  France,  216.  Great  zeal  of  the  na-
tion against  Popery,  219.  The  Scots
brought  into  contempt  by  queen  Mary's
conduct,  343.  In  a  miserable  condition

after  the  murder  of  Murray  the  regent,  ii.
16.  State  of  factions  at  that  time  in  it,
ib.  A  league  concluded  between  Scot-
land and  England.  114.  A  view  of
the  revolutions  of  Scotland  since  the  ac-
cession of  James  VI.,  237 — 248.  Of  the
policy  of  the  state,  237 — 242.  And  of  the
church,  242,  243.  Of  the  genius  and  taste
as  to  learning,  243—248.

Scott  of  Buccleugh,  enters  and  ravages
England  after  the  murder  of  Murray  the
regent,  ii.  1.  The  design  of  this,  4.

Scrope,  lord,  sent  to  condole  with,  and
watch  queen  Mary  on  her  arrival  in  En-
gland, i.  376.  She  is  committed  to  his
custody  at  Bolton-caslle,  382.  Why  his
fidelity  is  distrusted,  and  the  queen  re-
moved, 393.

Session,  lords  and  court  of,  by  whom
first  appointed,  i.  35.  The  president  and
one  half  of  their  number  of  the  clergy,
118.

Seton,  lord,  assists  the  queen-regent  in
defending  Leith,  i.  174.

Shrewsbury,  earl  of,  the  charge  of
queen  Mary's  person  committed  to  him,
i.  393.  Why  removed  from  that  office,
ii.  98.  Is  appointed  to  see  the  sentence
against  her  executed,  138.  Letter  from
him  and  the  earl  of  Kent,  concerning  her
death,  Appendix,  438.

Sinclair,  bishop  of  Ross,  a  zealous
Papist,  concurs  as  president  of  the  ses-
sion, in  acquitting  Knox  of  a  charge  of
treason,  i.  248.

Somerset,  duke  of,  enters  Scotland,
with  a  powerful  army,  i.  96.  Is  reduced
to  a  very  critical  situation,  97.  Defeats
the  Scots  with  great  slaughter,  98.  This
victory  why  of  little  advantage,  99.  Cabals
against  him  at  the  court  of  England  force
him  to  return,  ib.  Is  ruined  by  his  ene-
mies, 103.

Spain,  great  warlike  preparations  there,
'ii.  154.  See  Armado.  The  Infanta  of,
set  up  as  candidate  for  the  crown  of
England,  182.

Spanish  ambassadors  ordered  to  leave
England,  for  intriguing  in  favour  of  queen
Mary,  ii.  24.  93.

Sprot,  hie  discoveries  concerning  Cow-
rie's conspiracy,  ii.  211,  212.  Is  ex-
ecuted, ib.

Stewart,  James,  prior  of  St.  Andrews,
is  appointed  to  carry  the  crown  matrimo-
nial to  the  dauphin  of  France,  i.  134.  See
St.  Andrews.

,  Esrae,  lord  Aubigne,  his  ar-
rival in  Scotland,  ii.  58.  See  Aubigne.

,  Captain  James,  his  character,

ii.  59.  Becomes  a  favourite  of  king  James,
ib.  Accuses  Morton  of  the  murder  of  the
late  king,  62.  Is  created  earl  of  Arran.
See  Arran.

,  Col,  William,  commander  of

INDEX.

473

the  king's  guard,  contributes  to  his  escape
from  the  Ruthven  conspirators,  ii.  81.
Seizes  the  earl  of  Gowrie,  88.

Stewart,  Francis,  created  earl  of  Both-
well,  ii.  160.  Joins  in  a  treasonable
correspondence  with  the  popish  lords,  ib.
See  Bothwell.

,  all  of  that  name  combine  in

opposing  the  chancellor, ii.  173.

Stirling,  seized  by  the  reformers,  i.  15 1.
A  parliament  there  by  the  king's  party,  ii.
17.  Is  surprised  by  the  queen's  adhe-
rents, and  a  great  fray  ensues,  18.

Strozzi,  Leon,  commands  a  body  of
French  sent  into  Scotland,  i.  94.  Reduces
and  demolishes  the  castle  of  St.  Andrews,
95.  See  France.

Succession,  a  remarkable  statute  con-
cerning it,  1.  96.

Superintendanls  proposed  in  the  church
of  Scotland,  i.  204.  Their  business,  ib.

Sussex,  earl  of,  one  of  the  commission-
ers to  hear  the  cause  between  queen
Mary  and  her  accusers,!.  386.  Assembles
a  powerful  army  on  the  borders,  ii.  3.
He  and  Scrope  enter  and  ravage  Scot-
land, 4.

TAX  upon  land  first  proposed  in  Scot-
land, i.  124.

Throkmorton,  sir  Nicholas,  sent  ambas-
sador extraordinary  from  queen  Elizabeth
to  oppose  queen  [Mary's  marriage  with
Darnley,  i.  265.  His  intercession  for
the  exiled  lords  is  much  regarded,  281.
His  enmity  to  Cecil,  ib.  Is  sent  to  ne-
gotiate queen  Mary's  liberation,  353.  Is
refused  access  to  her  by  the  confederates,
355.  Some  letters  of  his,  Appendix,  ii.
351.353,354.365.381.

r-,  Francis,  is  charged  with

a  conspiracy  against  queen  Elizabeth,  ii.
91.  At  first  he  denies,  but  afterward
confesses  it,  ib.  Reflections  on  his  con-
fession, 92.  Is  executed,  ib.

Titchbourne  designs  to  assassinate  queen
Elizabeth,  ii.  117.

Treason,  persons  guilty  of  it,  tried  after
their  death  by  the  law  of  Scotland,  ii.
212.

VILMORT,  a  foreigner,  made  comp-
troller of  Scotland,  i.  123.

Union  of  Scotland  and  England,  the
advantages  of,  ii.  241.

WALLACE,  sir  William,  bravely  as-
serted the  liberty  of  his  country,  i.  10.

Walsingham,  secretary  to  queen  Eliza-
beth, sent  ambassador  to  king  James  VI.,
ii.  84.  Returns  without  success,  ib.
Makes  a  favourable  report  to  her  con-
cerning James,  ib.  Interposes  in  favour
of  queen  Mary,  98.  Discovers  Babing-
ton's  conspiracy,  118.  Why  a  deter-
mined and  inveterate  enemy  to  queen
Mary,  121.  A  letter  from  him,  Appen-
dix, 401.

Warwick,  earl  of,  succeeds  Somerset
in  the  government  of  England,  i.  103.

Westminster,  the  conferences  concern-
ing queen  Mary  there,  ii.  392.

Westmorland,  earl  of,  attempts  a  re-
bellion in  favour  of  queen  Mary,  i.  411.
His  schemes  discovered  and  defeated,
412,  413.  He  escapes  to  the  Nether-
lands, ib.

Withorn,  the  prior  of,  imprisoned  for
celebrating  mass,  i.  246.

Willox,  a  minister,  declares  for  resist-
ance and  deprivation  of  tyrannical  rulers,
i.  168.  Is  called  to  attend  the  queen-
dowager  on  her  death-bed,  187.

Wishart,  George,  his  illegal  execution
revenged,  i.  91.

Witchcraft,  vigorously  prosecuted  by
king  James  VI.  in  Scotland,  ii.  167.

Wotton,  dean  of  Canterbury,  employed
to  negotiate  a  peace  with  France,  i.  189.

,  Sir  Edward,  sent  by  queen

Elizabeth  into  Scotland,  ii.  109.  His
character,  ib.  Soon  gets  into  high  favour
with  king  James,  ib.  Procures  a  league
between  the  two  kingdoms,  ib.  Under-
mines Arran's  power,  110.  Forms  a
plot  on  king  James,  and  forced  to  with-
draw without  taking  leave,  111.

YORK,  the  conferences  there  concern-
ing queen  Mary,  i.  386.

ZOUCHE,  lord,  sent  ambassador  by
queen  Elizabeth  to  remonstrate  against
king  James's  lenity  to  the  popish  lords,  ii.
177.  His  treachery  on  that  occasion,  ib.

END OF VOL. II.

Printed  by  J.  F.  DOVE,  St.  John's  Square,

Robertson,  William
Works

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
