The Works of William Robertson, Vol. 7 (William Robertson, 1759)
==========================================================
Robertson's Works (1824, 9 vols.) - History of Scotland, Charles V, America, and the Historical Disquisition on India; Enlightenment historiography's great practitioner entire. Vol. 7 of 9.

WILLIAM  ROBERTSON,  D.D.

WITH  AN  ACCOUNT  OF

HIS  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS.

IN  NINE  VOLUMES.
VOL.  VII.

LONDON:

PRINTED  FORWHlTMORE  AND  FENN,  CHARING  CROSS  ;  J. HEARNE,  STRAND  ;

SMITH  AND  ELDER,  FENCHURCH  STREET;  II.  MOZLEY,  DERBY;

AND  M.  KEENE,  DUBLIN.

MDCCCXX1V.

THE

STANDARD  EDITION  OF  THE  HISTORIANS.

ROBERTSON'S  WORKS :

IN NINE VOLUMES.  VOL. VII.

AMERICA.

THE

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA.

BOOK IV. CONTINUED.

Political  IV.  r  rom  the  domestic  state  of  the  Ameri-
institutions.  canS)  the  transition  to  the  consideration  of
their  civil  government  and  political  institutions  is
natural.  In  every  inquiry  concerning  the  operations
of  men  when  united  together  in  society,  the  first  ob-
ject of  attention  should  be  their  mode  of  subsistence.
Accordingly  as  that  varies,  their  laws  and  policy  must
be  different.  The  institution  suited  to  the  ideas  and
exigencies  of  tribes,  which  subsist  chiefly  by  fishing
or  hunting,  and  which  have  as  yet  acquired  but  an
imperfect  conception  of  any  species  of  property,  will
be  much  more  simple  than  those  which  must  take
place  when  the  earth  is  cultivated  with  regular  in-
dustry ;  and  a  right  of  property,  not  only  in  its  pro-
ductions, but  in  the  soil  itself,  is  completely  ascer-
tained.

All  the  people  of  America,  now  under  re-
subsfst0-  view,  belong  to  the  former  class.  But  though
ence'  they  may  all  be  comprehended  under  the  ge-
neral denomination  of  savage,  the  advances  which
they  had  made  in  the  art  of  procuring  to  themselves
a  certain  and  plentiful  subsistence,  were  very  unequal.
On  the  extensive  plains  of  South  America,  man  ap-
pears in  one  of  the  rudest  states  in  which  he  has  been
ever  observed,  or,  perhaps,  can  exist.  Several  tribes
depend  entirely  upon  the  bounty  of  nature  for  sub-

VOL.  VII.  b

2  AMERICA.

sistence.  They  discover  no  solicitude,  they  employ
little  foresight,  they  scarcely  exert  any  industry,  to
secure  what  is  necessary  for  their  support.  The  7b-
payers  of  Brazil,  the  Cruaxeros  of  Tierra  Firme,  the
Caiguas,  the  Mo.vos,  and  several  other  people  of  Pa-
raguay, are  unacquainted  with  every  species  of  cul-
tivation. They  neither  sow  nor  plant.  Even  the
culture  of  the  manioc,  of  which  cassada  bread  is  made,
is  an  art  too  intricate  for  their  ingenuity,  or  too  fa-
tiguing to  their  indolence.  The  roots  which  the  earth
produces  spontaneously,  the  fruits,  the  berries,  and
the  seeds,  which  they  gather  in  the  woods,  together
with  lizards  and  other  reptiles,  which  multiply
amazingly  with  the  heat  of  the  climate  in  a  fat  soil,
moistened  by  frequent  rains,  supply  them  with  food
during  some  part  of  the  year.a At  other

Bj  fishing. .  & .  *T . .  _ * .

times  they  subsist  by  fishing;  and  nature
seems  to  have  indulged  the  laziness  of  the  South-
American  tribes  by  the  liberality  with  which  she
ministers,  in  this  way,  to  their  wants.  The  vast  rivers
of  that  region  in  America  abound  with  an  infinite
variety  of  the  most  delicate  fish.  The  lakes  and
marshes  formed  by  the  annual  overflowing  of  the
waters,  are  filled  with  all  the  different  species,  where
they  remain  shut  up,  as  in  natural  reservoirs,  for  the
use  of  the  inhabitants.  They  swarm  in  such  shoals,
that  in  some  places  they  are  catched  without  art  or
industry .b  In  others,  the  natives  have  discovered  a
method  of  infecting  the  water  with  the  juice  of  cer-
tain plants,  by  which  the  fish  are  so  intoxicated,  that
they  float  on  the  surface,  and  are  taken  with  the
hand.0  Some  tribes  have  ingenuity  enough  to  pre-
serve them  without  salt,  by  drying  or  smoking  them

a  Nieuhoff.  Hist,  of  Brasil.  Church.  Coll.  ii.  134.  Simon,  Conquista  de  Tierra
Firme,  p.  166.  Techo,  Account  of  Paraguay,  &c.  Church,  vi.  78.  Lettr.  Edif.
23.  384.  10.  190.  Lozano,  Descrip.  del  Gran  Chaco,  p.  81.  Ribas,  Histor.  de  los
Triumfos,  &c.  p.  7.

*>  See  \>.tc  1.  «--Sec  Note  If.

BOOK. IV.  3

upon  hurdles  over  a  slow  fire.a The  prolific  quality
of  the  rivers  in  South  America  induces  many  of  the
natives  to  resort  to  their  banks,  and  to  depend  almost
entirely  for  nourishment  on  what  their  waters  supply
with  such  profusion.6 In  this  part  of  the  globe,  hunt-
ing seems  not  to  have  been  the  first  employment  of
men,  or  the  first  effort  of  their  invention  and  labour
to  obtain  food. They  were  fishers  before  they  be-
came hunters ;  and  as  the  occupations  of  the  former
do  not  call  for  equal  exertions  of  activity,  or  talents,
with  those  of  the  latter  ;  people  in  that  state  appear
to  possess  neither  the  same  degree  of  enterprise  nor
of  ingenuity. The  petty  nations,  adjacent  to  the
Maragnon  and  Orinoco,  are  manifestly  the  most  in-
active and  least  intelligent  of  all  the  Americans.
By  hunt- None  but  tribes  contiguous  to  great  rivers
in8- can  sustain  themselves  in  this  manner. The
greater  part  of  the  American  nations,  dispersed  over
the  forests  with  which  their  country  is  covered,  do
not  procure  subsistence  with  the  same  facility. For
although  these  forests,  especially  in  the  southern  con-
tinent of  America,  are  stored  plentifully  with  game,'
considerable  efforts  of  activity  and  ingenuity  are  re-
quisite in  pursuit  of  it. Necessity  incited  the  natives
to  the  one,  and  taught  them  the  other. Hunting  be-
came their  principal  occupation  ; and  as  it  called
forth  strenuous  exertions  of  courage,  of  force,  and  of
invention, it  was  deemed  no  less  honourable  than
necessary. This  occupation  was  peculiar  to  the  men.
They  were  trained  to  it  from  their  earliest  youth. A
bold  and  dexterous  hunter  ranked  next  in  fame  to
the  distinguished  warrior,  and  an  alliance  with  the
former  is  often  courted  in  preference  to  one  with  the
latter.8 Hardly  any  device,  which  the  ingenuity  of

d  Condam.  159. Gurailla,  ii.  37. Lettr.  Edif.  14.  199.  23.  328. Acugna,  Relat.
de  la  Riv.  des  Annas.  138.  e  Barrere,  Pvelat.  de  Fr.  Equin.  p.  155.

f  P.  Martyr,  Decad.  p.  324. Gumilla,  ii.  4,  &c. Acugna,  i.  156.
s  Charlev.  Histoire  de  la  N.  France,  iii.  115.

b2

4  AM  E II I  C  A .

man  has  discovered  for  insnaring  or  destroying  wild
animals,  was  unknown  to  the  Americans.  While  en-
gaged in  this  favourite  exercise,  they  shake  off  the
indolence  peculiar  to  their  nature,  the  latent  powers
and  vigour  of  their  minds  are  roused,  and  they  be-
come active,  persevering,  and  indefatigable.  Their
sagacity  in  finding  their  prey,  and  their  address  in
killing  it,  are  equal.  Their  reason  and  their  senses
being  constantly  directed  towards  this  one  object,
the  former  displays  such  fertility  of  invention,  and
the  latter  acquire  such  a  degree  of  acuteness,  as  ap-
pear almost  incredible.  They  discern  the  footsteps
of  a  wild  beast,  which  escape  every  other  eye,  and
can  follow  them  with  certainty  through  the  pathless
forest.  If  they  attack  their  game  openly,  their  arrow
seldom  errs  from  the  mark  ;h  if  they  endeavour  to
circumvent  it  by  art,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  avoid
their  toils.  Among  several  tribes,  their  young  men
were  not  permitted  to  marry,  until  they  had  given
such  proofs  of  their  skill  in  hunting  as  put  it  beyond
doubt  that  they  were  capable  of  providing  for  a  fa-
mily. Their  ingenuity,  always  on  the  stretch,  and
sharpened  by  emulation,  as  well  as  necessity,  has
struck  out  many  inventions,  which  greatly  facilitate
success  in  the  chase.  The  most  singular  of  these  is
the  discovery  of  a  poison  in  which  they  clip  the  ar-
rows employed  in  hunting.  The  slightest  wound
with  those  envenomed  shafts  is  mortal.  If  they  only
pierce  the  skin,  the  blood  fixes  and  congeals  in  a
moment,  and  the  strongest  animal  falls  motionless  to
the  ground.  Nor  does  this  poison,  notwithstanding
its  violence  and  subtlety,  infect  the  flesh  of  the  animal
which  it  kills.  That  may  be  eaten  with  perfect  safety,
and  retain  its  native  relish  and  qualities.  All  the
nations  situated  upon  the  banks  of  the  Maragnon  and

b  B'u-t.  Voy.  de  Frai.cc  Equin.  357. Davies'  Discov.  of  the River  of  Amaz.
Purchas.  iv.  p.  1287.

BOOK IV.  5

Orinoco  are  acquainted  with  this  composition,  the
chief  ingredient  in  which  is  the  juice  extracted  from
the  root  of  the  curare,  a  species  of  withe.1  In  other
parts  of  America,  they  employ  the  juice  of  the  man-
chenille  for  the  same  purpose,  and  it  operates  with  no
less  fatal  activity.  To  people  possessed  of  those
secrets,  the  bow  is  a  more  destructive  weapon  than
the  musket,  and,  in  their  skilful  hands,  does  great  ex-
ecution among  the  birds  and  beasts  which  abound  in
the  forests  of  America.

BV  aerf-  But  tne  hfe  °f  a  hunter  gradually  leads  man
culture.  t0  a  state  more  advanced.  The  chase,  even
where  prey  is  abundant,  and  the  dexterity  of  the  hun-
ter much  improved,  affords  but  an  uncertain  main-
tenance, and  at  some  seasons  it  must  be  suspended
altogether.  If  a  savage  trusts  to  his  bow  alone  for
food,  he  and  his  family  will  be  often  reduced  to  ex-
treme distress. k  Hardly  any  region  of  the  earth  fur-
nishes man  spontaneously  with  what  his  wants  re-
quire. In  the  mildest  climates,  and  most  fertile  soils,
his  own  industry  and  foresight  must  be  exerted,  in
some  degree,  to  secure  a  regular  supply  of  food.
Their  experience  of  this  surmounts  the  abhorrence  of
labour  natural  to  savage  nations,  and  compels  them
to  have  recourse  to  culture,  as  subsidiary  to  hunting.
In  particular  situations,  some  small  tribes  may  sub-
sist by  fishing,  independent  of  any  production  of  the
earth,  raised  by  their  own  industry.  But  throughout
all  America,  we  scarcely  meet  with  any  nation  of
hunters,  which  does  not  practise  some  species  of  cul-
tivation.

The  van-  The  agriculture  of  the  Americans,  however,
cms  fruits jg  neitlier  extensive  nor  laborious. As 'game

of  their  °

culture,  and  fish  are  their  principal  food,  all  they  aim
at  by  cultivation,  is  to  supply  any  occasional  defect

'  Gumilla,  ii.  1,  &c. Condani.  208. Recherch.  Philos.  ii.  239. Bancroft's  Nat.
Hist,  of  Guiana,  281,  &c. .  k  See  Note  III.

6  AMERICA,

of  these.  In  the  southern  continent  of  America,  the
natives  confined  their  industry  to  rearing  a  few  plants,
which,  in  a  rich  soil  and  warm  climate,  were  easily-
trained  to  maturity.  The  chief  of  these  is  maize,  well
known  in  Europe  by  the  name  of  Turkey  or  Indian
wheat,  a  grain  extremely  prolific,  of  simple  culture,
agreeable  to  the  taste,  and  affording  a  strong  hearty
nourishment.  The  second  is  the  manioc,  which  grows
to  the  size  of  a  large  shrub,  or  small  tree,  and  pro-
duces roots  somewhat  resembling  parsnips.  After
carefully  squeezing  out  the  juice,  these  roots  are
grated  down  to  a  fine  powder,  and  formed  into  thin
cakes,  called  cassada  bread,  which,  though  insipid  to
the  taste,  proves  no  contemptible  food.1  As  the  juice
of  the  manioc  is  a  deadly  poison,  some  authors
have  celebrated  the  ingenuity  of  the  Americans,  in
converting  a  noxious  plant  into  wholesome  nourish-
ment. But  it  should  rather  be  considered  as  one
of  the  desperate  expedients  for  procuring  subsis-
tence, to  which  necessity  reduces  rude  nations  ;  or,
perhaps,  men  were  led  to  the  use  of  it  by  a  pro-
gress, in  which  there  is  nothing  marvellous.  One
species  of  manioc  is  altogether  free  of  any  poisonous
quality,  and  may  be  eaten  without  any  preparation
but  that  of  roasting  it  in  the  embers.  This,  it  is
probable,  was  first  used  by  the  Americans  as  food ;
and  necessity  having  gradually  taught  them  the  art
of  separating  its  pernicious  juice  from  the  other  spe-
cies, they  have  by  experience  found  it  to  be  more
prolific  as  well  as  more  nourishing. m  The  third  is  the
plantain,  which,  though  it  rises  to  the  height  of  a  tree,
is  of  such  quick  growth,  that  in  less  than  a  year  it  re-
wards the  industry  of  the  cultivator  with  its  fruit.

1  Sloane  Hist,  of  Jam.  Inlrod.  p.  18.  Labat.  i.  .°>94.  Acosta.  Hist.  Ind.  Occid.
Natur.  lib.  iv.  c.  17.  Llloa,  i.  62.  Aublet  Mem.  sur  le  Magnioc.  Hist,  des  Plantes,
torn.  ii.  p.  65,  &c.

■  Martyr,  Decad.  301,  Labat.  i.  4U.  Gumilla,  iii.  192.  Machucha,  Milic.
Indiana,  164. Sec  Note  IV.

BOOK IV.  7

This,  when  roasted,  supplies  the  place  of  bread,  and
is  both  palatable  and  nourishing.11  The  fourth  is  the
potatoe,  whose  culture  and  qualities  are  too  well  known
to  need  any  description.  The  fifth  is  pimento,  a  small
tree,  yielding'  a  strong  aromatic  spice.  The  Ameri-
cans, who,  like  other  inhabitants  of  warm  climates,
delight  in  whatever  is  hot  and  of  poignant  flavour,
deem  this  seasoning  a  necessary  of  life,  and  mingle  it
copiously  with  every  kind  of  food  they  take.0

Such  are  the  various  productions,  which  were  the
chief  object  of  culture  among  the  hunting  tribes  on
the  continent  of  America  ;  and  with  a  moderate  ex-
ertion of  active  and  provident  industry,  these  might
have  yielded  a  full  supply  to  the  wants  of  a  numerous
people.  But  men,  accustomed  to  the  free  and  va-
grant life  of  hunters,  are  incapable  of  regular  applica-
tion to  labour,  and  consider  agriculture  as  a  second-
ary and  inferior  occupation.  Accordingly,  the  pro-
vision for  subsistence,  arising  from  cultivation,  was
so  limited  and  scanty  among  the  Americans,  that,
upon  any  accidental  failure  of  their  usual  success  in
hunting,  they  were  often  reduced  to  extreme  dis-
tress.

In  the  islands,  the  mode  of  subsisting  was  consi-
derably different.  None  of  the  large  animals  which
abound  on  the  continent  were  known  there.  Only
four  species  of  quadrupeds,  besides  a  kind  of  small
dumb  dog,  existed  in  the  islands,  the  biggest  of
which  did  not  exceed  the  size  of  a  rabbit.1'  To  hunt
such  diminutive  prey,  was  an  occupation  which  re-
quired no  effort  either  of  activity  or  courage.  The
chief  employment  of  a  hunter  in  the  isles  was  to  kill
birds,  which  on  the  continent  are  deemed  ignoble
game,  and  left  chiefly  to  the  pursuit  of  boys.q This

n  See  Note  V.  °  Gumilla,  iii.  171. Acosta,  lib.  iv.  c.  20.

P  Oviedo,  lib.  xii.  in  proem,
i  Ribas  Hist,  de  los  Triumph,  p.  13. De  la  Potherie,  ii.  33.  iii.  20.

8  AMERICA.

want  of  animals,  as  well  as  their  peculiar  situation,
led  the  islanders  to  depend  principally  upon  fishing
for  their  subsistence/  Their  rivers,  and  the  sea  with
which  they  are  surrounded,  supplied  them  with  this
species  of  food.  At  some  particular  seasons,  turtle,
crabs,  and  other  shell-fish,  abounded  in  such  num-
bers, that  the  natives  could  support  themselves  with
a  facility  in  which  their  indolence  delighted.5  At
other  times  they  ate  lizards,  and  various  reptiles  of
odious  forms.'  To  fishing,  the  inhabitants  of  the
islands  added  some  degree  of  agriculture.  Maize,"
manioc,  and  other  plants,  were  cultivated  in  the  same
Their  ami-  manner  as  on  tne  continent.  But  all  the
culture  very  fruits  of  their  industry,  together  with  what

limited.  i  i.  i

their  soil  and  climate  produced  sponta-
neously, afforded  them  but  a  scanty  maintenance.
Though  their  demands  for  food  were  very  sparing,
they  hardly  raised  what  was  sufficient  for  their  own
consumption.  If  a  few  Spaniards  settled  in  any  dis-
trict, such  a  small  addition  of  supernumerary  mouths
soon  exhausted  their  scanty  stores,  and  brought  on
a  famine.

Two  circumstances, common  to  all  the

1  no  causes  .  p a  •

ofitsim-  savage  nations  of  America,  concurred  with
pei  those  which  I  have  already  mentioned,  not

only  in  rendering  their  agriculture  imperfect,  but  in
circumscribing  their  power  in  all  their  operations.
They  had  no  tame  animals ;  and  they  were  unac-
quainted with  the  useful  metals.

In  other  parts  of  the  globe,  man,  in  his

The  want  l  °. _ .

of  tame rudest  state,  appears  as  lord  ol  the  creation,

giving  law  to  various  tribes  of  animals,  which

he  has  tamed,  and  reduced  to  subjection. The  Tartar

follows  his  prey  on  the  horse  which  he  has  reared ;

r  Oviedo,  lib.  xiii.  c.  1. Gomara,  Hist.  Gener.  c.  23.

5  Gomara  Hist.  Gcner.  c.  9. Labat,  ii.  221,  &c.
1  Oviedo,  lib.  xiii.  c.  3.  ■  See  Note  VI.

BOOK IV.  9

or tends  his  numerous herds,  which  furnish him
both  with  food  and  clothing  :  the  Arab  has  rendered
the  camel  docile,  and  avails  himself  of  its  persevering
strength  :  the  Laplander  has  formed  the  rein- deer  to
be  subservient  to  his  will ;  and  even  the  people  of
Kamchatka  have  trained  their  dogs  to  labour. This
command  over  the  inferior  creatures  is  one  of  the
noblest  prerogatives  of  man,  and  among  the  greatest
efforts  of  his  wisdom  and  power. Without  this,  his
dominion  is  incomplete. He  is  a  monarch  who  has
no  subjects ;  a  master  without  servants,  and  must
perform  every  operation  by  the  strength  of  his  own
arm. Such  was  the  condition  of  all  the  rude  nations
in  America. Their  reason  was  so  little  improved,  or
their  union  so  incomplete,  that  they  seem  not  to  have
been  conscious  of  the  superiority  of  their  nature,  and
suffered  all  the  animal  creation  to  retain  its  liberty,
without  establishing  their  own  authority  over  any
one  species. Most  of  the  animals,  indeed,  which
have  been  rendered  domestic  in  our  continent,  do
not  exist  in  the  New  World  ;  but  those  peculiar  to
it  are  neither  so  tierce  nor  so  formidable,  as  to  have
exempted  them  from  servitude. There  are some
animals  of  the  same  species  in  both  continents. But
the  rein-deer,  which  has  been  tamed  and  broken  to
the  yoke  in  one  hemisphere,  runs  wild  in  the  other.
The  bison  of  America  is  manifestly  of  the  same  spe-
cies with  the  horned  cattle  of  the  other  hemisphere."
The  latter,  even  among  the  rudest  nations  in  our  con-
tinent, have  been  rendered  domestic ;  and,  in  conse-
quence of  his  dominion  over  them,  man  can  accom-
plish works  of  labour  with  greater  facility,  and  has
made  a  great  addition  to  his  means  of  subsistence.
The  inhabitants  of  many  regions  of  the  New  World,
where  the  bison  abounds,  might  have  derived  the
same  advantages  from  it. It  is  not  of  a  nature  so  in-

*  Buffon,  Artie.  Bison.

10  AMERICA.

docile,  but  that  it  might  have  been  trained  to  be  as
subservient  to  man  as  our  cattle.'  But  a  savage,  in
that  uncultivated  state  wherein  the  Americans  were
discovered,  is  the  enemy  of  the  other  animals,  not
their  superior.  He  wastes  and  destroys,  but  knows
not  how  to  multiply  or  to  govern  them/

This,  perhaps,  is  the  most  notable  distinction  be-
tween the  inhabitants  of  the  Ancient  and  New
Worlds,  and  a  high  pre-eminence  of  civilized  men
above  such  as  continue  rude.  The  greatest  opera-
tions of  man  in  changing  and  improving  the  face  of
nature,  as  well  as  his  most  considerable  efforts  in
cultivating  the  earth,  are  accomplished  by  means  of
the  aid  which  he  receives  from  the  animals  whom  he
has  tamed,  and  employs  in  labour.  It  is  by  their
strength  that  he  subdues  the  stubborn  soil,  and  con-
verts the  desert  or  marsh  into  a  fruitful  field.  But
man,  in  his  civilized  state,  is  so  accustomed  to  the
service  of  the  domestic  animals,  that  he  seldom  re-
flects upon  the  vast  benefits  which  he  derives  from
it.  If  we  were  to  suppose  him,  even  when  most  im-
proved, to  be  deprived  of  their  useful  ministry,  his
empire  over  nature  must  in  some  measure  cease,  and
he  would  remain  a  feeble  animal,  at  a  loss  how  to
subsist,  and  incapable  of  attempting  such  arduous
undertakings  as  their  assistance  enables  him  to  exe-
cute with  ease.

It  is  a  doubtful  point,  whether  the  domi-
the  useful  nion  of  man  over  the  animal  creation,  or  his
acquiring  the  useful  metals,  has  contributed
most  to  extend  his  power.  The  era  of  this  impor-
tant discovery  is  unknown,  and  in  our  hemisphere
very  remote.  It  is  only  by  tradition,  or  by  digging
up  some  rude  instruments  of  our  forefathers,  that  we
learn that  mankind  were  originally  unacquainted

v  Nouv.  Decouverte  par  Hennepin,  p.  192. Kalm.  i.  207.
z  Button  Hist.  Nat.  ix.  85. Hist.  Philos.  et  Polit.  ties  Etablisscm.  des  Europ.
dans  lesdeux  Indes,  vi.  364.

BOOK IV.  11

with  the  use  of  metals,  and  endeavoured  to  supply
the  want  of  them  by  employing  flints,  shells,  bones,
and  other  hard  substances,  for  the  same  purposes
which  metals  serve  among  polished  nations. Nature
completes  the  formation  of  some  metals. Gold,  sil-
ver, and  copper,  are  found  in  their  perfect  state  in
the  clefts  of  rocks,  in  the  sides  of  mountains,  or  the
channels  of  rivers. These  were  accordingly  the  me-
tals first  known,  and  first  applied  to  use. But  iron,
the  most  serviceable  of  all,  and  to  which  man  is  most
indebted,  is  never  discovered  in  its  perfect  form  ;  its
gross  and  stubborn  ore  must  feel  twice  the  force  of
fire,  and  go  through  two  laborious  processes,  before
it  become  fit  for  use. Man  was  long  acquainted  with
the  other  metals,  before  he  acquired  the  art  of  fabri-
cating iron,  or  attained  such  ingenuity  as  to  perfect
an  invention,  to  which  he  is  indebted  for  those  in-
struments wherewith  he  subdues  the  earth,  and  com-
mands all  its  inhabitants. But  in  this,  as  well  as  in
many  other  respects,  the  inferiority  of  the  Americans
was  conspicuous. All  the  savage  tribes,  scattered
over  the  continent  and  islands,  were  totally  unac-
quainted with  the  metals  which  their  soil  produces
in  great  abundance,  if  we  except  some  trifling  quan-
tity of  gold,  which  they  picked  up  in  the  torrents
that  descended  from  their  mountains,  and  formed
into  ornaments. Their  devices  to  supply  this  want
of  the  serviceable  metals,  were  extremely  rude  and
awkward. The  most  simple  operation  was  to  them
an  undertaking  of  immense  difficulty  and  labour. To
fell  a  tree  with  no  other  instruments  than  hatchets  of
stone,  was  employment  for  a  month. a To  form  a
canoe  into  shape,  and  to  hollow  it,  consumed  years;
and  it  frequently  began  to  rot  before  they  were  able
to  finish  it.b Their  operations  in  agriculture  were
equally  slow  and  defective. In  a  country  covered

a  Gumilla,  iii.  196.  b  Bordc  Relat.  des  Caraibes,  p.  22.

]«2  :KllICA.

with  woods  of  the  hardest  timber,  the  clearing  of  a
small  field  destined  for  culture  required  the  united
efforts  of  a  tribe,  and  was  a  work  of  much  time  and
great  toil.  lis  was  the  business  of  the  men,  and
their  indolence  was  satisfied  with  performing  it  in  a
very  slovenly  manner.  The  labour  of  cultivation
was  left  to  the  women,  who,  after  digging,  or  rather
stirring  the  field,  with  wooden  mattocks,  and  stakes
hardened  in  the  fire,  sowed  or  planted  it ;  but  they
were  more  indebted  for  the  increase  to  the  fertility
of  the  soil,  than  to  their  own  rude  industry.0

Agriculture,  even  when  the  strength  of  man  is
seconded  by  that  of  the  animals  which  he  has  sub-
jected to  the  yoke,  and  his  power  augmented  by  the
use  of  the  various  instruments  with  which  the  dis-
covery of  metals  has  furnished  him,  is  still  a  work
of  great  labour ;  and  it  is  with  the  sweat  of  his  brow
that  he  renders  the  earth  fertile.  It  is  not  wonder-
ful, then,  that  people  destitute  of  both  these  advan-
tages should  have  made  so  little  progress  in  cultiva-
tion, that  they  must  be  considered  as  depending  for
subsistence  on  fishing  and  hunting,  rather  than  on
the  fruits  of  their  own  labour.

From  this  description  of  the  mode  of  sub-
institutions  sisting  among  the  rude  American  tribes,  the
SThis  form  and  genius  of  their  political  institutions
state'  may  be  deduced,  and  we  are  enabled  to  trace
various  circumstances  of  distinction  between  them
and  more  civilized  nations.

,  .  . , 1 Thev  were  divided  into small inde-

1. Divided  J  ...

into  s.naii  pendent  communities.  While  hunting  is  the
tier1'  chief  source  of  subsistence,  a  vast  extent  of
territory  is  requisite  for  supporting  a  small  number
of  people.  In  proportion  as  men  multiply  and  unite,
the  wild  animals,  on  which  they  depend  for  food,
diminish,  or  fly  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  haunt>

■  Gumilla,  iii.  166,  &c. Lctlr.  Edif.  xii.  10.

BOOK IV.  13

of  their  enemy.  The  increase  of  a  society  in  this
state  is  limited  by  its  own  nature,  and  the  members
of  it  must  either  disperse,  like  the  game  which  they
pursue,  or  fall  upon  some  better  method  of  procuring
food  than  by  hunting.  Beasts  of  prey  are  by  nature
solitary  and  unsocial,  they  go  not  forth  to  the  chase
in  herds,  but  delight  in  those  recesses  of  the  forest
where  they  can  roam  and  destroy  undisturbed.  A
nation  of  hunters  resembles  them  both  in  occupation
and  in  genius.  They  cannot  form  into  large  com-
munities, because  it  would  be  impossible  to  find
subsistence;  and  they  must  drive  to  a  distance  every
rival  who  may  encroach  on  those  domains,  which
they  consider  as  their  own.  This  was  the  state  of
all  the  American  tribes,  the  numbers  m  each  were
inconsiderable,  though  scattered  over  countries  of
great  extent ;  they  were  far  removed  from  one  an-
other, and  engaged  in  perpetual  hostilities  or  rival-
ship.*  In  America,  the  word  nation  is  not  of  the
same  import  as  in  other  parts  of  the  globe.  It  is
applied  to  small  societies,  not  exceeding,  perhaps,
two  or  three  hundred  persons,  but  occupying  pro-
vinces greater  than  some  kingdoms  in  Europe.  The
country  of  Guiana,  though  of  larger  extent  than  the
kingdom  of  France,  and  divided  among  a  greater
number  of  nations,  did  not  contain  above  twenty-five
thousand  inhabitants.11  In  the  provinces  which  border
on  the  Orinoco,  one  may  travel  several  hundred  miles
in  different  directions  without  finding  a  single  hut,
or  observing  the  footsteps  of  a  human  creature.*  In
North  America,  where  the  climate  is  more  risforous,
and  the  soil  less  fertile,  the  desolation  is  still  greater.
There,  journeys  of  some  hundred  leagues  have  been
made  through  uninhabited  plains  and  forests. x As

1  Lozano  Descrip.  del  Gran  Chaco,  59.  62. Fernandez  Relac. Hist,  de  los
Chequit.  162.

u  Voyages  de  Marchais,  iv.  353.  w  Gumilla,  ii.  101.

x  M.  Fabry, quoted by Buffon,  iii.  448. Lafitau,  ii.  179. Bossu,  Travels
through  Louisiana,  i.  111. See  Note  VII.

14  AMERICA.

long  as  hunting  continues  to  be  the  chief  employ-
ment of  man,  to  which  he  trusts  for  subsistence,  he
can  hardly  be  said  to  have  occupied  the  earth.y
Unac  2.  Nations  which  depend  upon  hunting"  are,

quaimed  in  a  great  measure,  strangers  to  the  idea  of
idea  of  property.  As  the  animals  on  which  the  hunter
property.  feec|s  are  not  breci  under  his  inspection,  nor

nourished  by  his  care,  he  can  claim  no  right  to  them,
while  they  run  wild  in  the  forest.  Where  game  is
so  plentiful  that  it  may  be  catched  with  little  trouble,
men  never  dream  of  appropriating  what  is  of  small
value,  or  of  easy  acquisition.  Where  it  is  so  rare,
that  the  labour  or  danger  of  the  chase  requires  the
united  efforts  of  a  tribe,  or  village,  what  is  killed  is
a  common  stock,  belonging  equally  to  all,  who,  by
their  skill  or  their  courage,  have  contributed  to  the
success  of  the  excursion.  The  forest  or  hunting-
grounds,  are  deemed  the  property  of  the  tribe,  from
which  it  has  a  title  to  exclude  every  rival  nation.
But  no  individual  arrogates  a  right  to  any  district  of
these,  in  preference  to  his  fellow-citizens.  They
belong  alike  to  all ;  and  thither,  as  to  a  general  and
undivided  store,  all  repair  in  quest  of  sustenance.
The  same  principles  by  which  they  regulate  their
chief  occupation,  extend  to  that  which  is  subordi-
nate. Even  agriculture  has  not  introduced  among
them  a  complete  idea  of  property.  As  the  men
hunt,  the  women  labour  together,  and  after  they
have  shared  the  toils  of  the  seed  time,  they  enjoy
the  harvest  in  common.2  Among  some  tribes,  the
increase  of  their  cultivated  lands  is  deposited  in  a
public  granary,  and  divided  among  them  at  stated
times,  according  to  their  wants.'  Among  others,
though  they  lay  up  separate  stores,  they  do  not  ac-
quire such  an  exclusive  right  of  property,  that  they

J  See  Note  VIII.  '•  Dr.  Ferguson's  Essay,  125.

»  Gumilla,  i.  265. Brickcll,  Hist  of  N.  Carol.  327. See  Note  IX.

BOOK IV.  lo

can  enjoy  superfluity,  while  those  around  them  suffer
want.b  Thus  the  distinctions  arising  from  the  in-
equality of  possessions  are  unknown.  The  terms
rich  or  poor  enter  not  into  their  language,  and  being-
strangers  to  property,  they  are  unacquainted  with
what  is  the  great  object  of  laws  and  policy,  as  well
as  the  chief  motive  which  induced  mankind  to  esta-
blish the  various  arrangements  of  regular  govern-
ment.0

High  sense  3«  People  in  this  state  retain  a  high  sense
of  equality  0f  equality  and independence. Wherever

and  mde-  .  .

pendence.  the  idea  of  property  is  not  established,  there
can  be  no  distinction  among  men,  but  what  arises
from  personal  qualities.  These  can  be  conspicuous
only  on  such  occasions  as  call  them  forth  into  exer-
tion. In  times  of  danger,  or  in  affairs  of  intricacy,
the  wisdom  and  experience  of  age  are  consulted,
and  prescribe  the  measures  which  ought  to  be  pur-
sued. When  a  tribe  of  savages  takes  the  field  against
the  enemies  of  their  country,  the  warrior  of  most
approved  courage  leads  the  youth  to  the  combat.d
If  they  go  forth  in  a  body  to  the  chase,  the  most
expert  and  adventurous  hunter  is  foremost,  and  di-
rects their  motions.  But  during  seasons  of  tran-
quillity and  inaction,  when  there  is  no  occasion  to
display  those  talents,  all  pre-eminence  ceases.  Every
circumstance  indicates  that  all  the  members  of  the
community  are  on  a  level.  They  are  clothed  in  the
same  simple  garb.  They  feed  on  the  same  plain  fare.
Their  houses  and  furniture  are  exactly  similar.  No
distinction  can  arise  from  the  inequality  of  posses-
sions. Whatever  forms  dependence  on  one  part,  or
constitutes  superiority  on  the  other,  is  unknown.

b  Denys,  Hist.  Natur.  ii.  392,  393.

c  P.  Martyr,  Decad.  p.  45.  Veneg.  Hist,  of  Californ.  i.  66.  Lery,  Navig.  in
Brasil,  c.  17.

d  Acosta,  Hist.  lib.  vi.  c.  19.  Stadius,  Hist.  Brasil,  lib.  ii.  c.  13.  De  Bry,  iii.
p.  110. Biet.  361.

H>  AMERICA.

All  are  freemen,  all  feel  themselves  to  be  such,  and
assert  with  firmness  the  rights  which  belong  to  that
condition.  This  sentiment  of  independence  is  im-
printed so  deeply  in  their  nature,  that  no  change  of
condition  can  eradicate  it,  and  bend  their  minds  to
servitude.  Accustomed  to  be  absolute  masters  of
their  own  conduct,  they  disdain  to  execute  the  orders
of  another ;  and  having  never  known  control,  they
will  not  submit  to  correction.1  Many  of  the  Ameri-
cans, when  they  found  that  they  were  treated  as
slaves  by  the  Spaniards,  died  of  grief;  many  de-
stroyed themselves  in  despair.g
sense  <»f  4.  Among  people  in  this  state,  govern-
t!on  im'"a  ment  can  assume  little  authority,  and  the
perfect,  sense  of  civil  subordination  must  remain
very  imperfect.  While  the  idea  of  property  is  un-
known, or  incompletely  conceived ;  while  the  spon-
taneous productions  of  the  earth,  as  well  as  the
fruits  of  industry,  are  considered  as  belonging  to  the
public  stock,  there  can  hardly  be  any  such  subject
of  difference  or  discussion  among  the  members  of
the  same  community,  as  will  require  the  hand  of
authority  to  interpose  in  order  to  adjust  it.  Where
the  right  of  separate  and  exclusive  possession  is  not
introduced,  the  great  object  of  law  and  jurisdiction
does  not  exist.  When  the  members  of  a  tribe  are
called  into  the  field,  either  to  invade  the  territories
of  their  enemies,  or  to  repel  their  attacks,  when  they
are  engaged  together  in  the  toil  and  dangers  of  the
chase,  they  then  perceive  that  they  are  part  of  a
political  body.  They  are  conscious  of  their  own
connexion  with  the  companions  in  conjunction  with
whom  they  act ;  and  they  follow  and  reverence  such
as  excel  in  conduct  and  valour.  But,  during  the
intervals  between  such  common  efforts,  they  seem

<■•  Labat.  vi.  1 24. JSrickell,  Hist,  of  Carol.  310.  f  See  Note  X.

g  Oviedo,  lib.  iii.  c.  G.  p.  97. Vega  Conquist.  de  la  Florida,  i.  30.  ii.  416. La-
bat,  ii.  138. Jienzo.  Hist.  Nov.  Orb.  lib.  iv.  c.  25.

BOOK IV.  17

scarcely  to  feel  the  ties  of  political  union.*1  No  visible
form  of  government  is  established. The  names  of
magistrate  and  subject  are not  in  use. Every  one
seems  to  enjoy  his  natural  independence  almost  en-
tire. If  a  scheme  of  public  utility  be  proposed,  the
members  of  the  community  are  left  at  liberty  to
choose  whether  they  will  or  will  not  assist  in  carry-
ing it  into  execution.  No  statute  imposes  any  service
as  a  duty,  no  compulsory  laws  oblige  them  to  per-
form it. All their  resolutions  are  voluntary, and
flow  from  the  impulse  of  their  own  minds.1 The  first
step  towards  establishing  a  public  jurisdiction  has
not  been  taken  in  those  rude  societies. The  right  of
revenge  is  left  in  private  hands. k If  violence  is  com-
mitted, or  blood  is  shed,  the  community  does  not
assume  the  power  either  of  inflicting  or  of  moderating
the  punishment.  It  belongs  to  the  family  and  friends
of  the  person  injured  or  slain  to  avenge  the  wrong,
or  to  accept  of  the  reparation  offered  by  the  aggres-
sor. If  the  elders  interpose,  it  is  to  advise,  not  to
decide,  and  it  is  seldom  their  counsels  are  listened
to ;  for  as  it  is  deemed  pusillanimous  to  suffer  an
offender  to  escape  with  impunity,  resentment  is  im-
placable and  everlasting.1 The  object  of  government
among  savages  is  rather  foreign  than  domestic.  They
do  not  aim  at  maintaining  interior  order  and  police  by
public  regulations,  or  the  exertions  of  any  perma-
nent authority,  but  labour  to  preserve  such  union
among  the  members  of  their  tribe,  that  they  may
watch  the  motions  of  their  enemies,  and  act  against
them  with  concert  and  vigour.

Such  was  the  form  of  political  order  established

h  Lozano  Descr.  del  Gran  Chaco,  93.  Melendez  Teforos  Verdaderos,  ii.  25.
See  Note  XI.

■  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  France,  iii.  266.  268.  k  Herrera,  dec.  8.  lib.  iv.  c.  8.

»  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  France,  iii.  271,  272.  Lafit.  i.  486.  Cassini  Hist,  de  Nuevo
Reyno  de  Granada,  ?26.

VOL.  VII.  C

18  AMERICA.

T  wh among  the  greater  part  of  the  American  na-
peopie tions. In  this  state  were  almost  all  the  tribes

those  de-  ,  .  , .  ,

scriptions  spread  over  the  provinces  extending  eastward
appl'  of  the  Mississippi,  from  the  mouth  of  the  St.
Laurence  to  the  confines  of  Florida.  In  a  similar
condition  were  the  people  of  Brazil,  the  inhabitants
of  Chili,  several  tribes  in  Paraguay  and  Guiana,  and
in  the  countries  which  stretch  from  the  mouth  of  the
Orinoco  to  the  peninsula  of  Yucatan.  Among  such
an  infinite  number  of  petty  associations,  there  may
be  peculiarities  which  constitute  a  distinction,  and
mark  the  various  degrees  of  their  civilization  and  im-
provement. But  an  attempt  to  trace  and  enumerate
these  would  be  vain,  as  they  have  not  been  observed
by  persons  capable  of  discerning  the  minute  and  de-
licate circumstances  which  serve  to  discriminate  na-
tions resembling  one  another  in  their  general  cha-
racter and  features.  The  description  which  I  have
given  of  the  political  institutions  that  took  place
among  those  rude  tribes  in  America,  concerning
which  we  have  received  most  complete  information,
will  apply,  with  little  variation,  to  every  people,  both
in  its  northern  and  southern  division,  who  have  ad-
vanced no  farther  in  civilization,  than  to  add  some
slender  degree  of  agriculture  to  fishing  and  hunting.
Imperfect  as  those  institutions  may  appear,  several
tribes  were  not  so  far  advanced  in  their  political  pro-
gress. Among  all  those  petty  nations  which  trusted
for  subsistence  entirely  to  fishing  and  hunting  with-
out any  species  of  cultivation,  the  union  was  so  in-
complete, and  their  sense  of  mutual  dependence  so
feeble,  that  hardly  any  appearance  of  government  or
order  can  be  discerned  in  their  proceedings.  Their
wants  are  few,  their  objects  of  pursuit  simple,  they
form  into  separate  tribes,  and  act  together,  from  in-
stinct, habit,  or  conveniency,  rather  than  from  any

BOOK IV.  19

formal  concert  and  association.  To  this  class  belong
the  Californians,  several  of  the  small  nations  in  the
extensive  country  of  Paraguay,  some  of  the  people
on  the  banks  of  the  Orinoco,  and  on  the  river  St.
Magdalene,  in  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada."1

But  though  among  these  last-mentioned

Some  irre- .,'  i  1  ii  i i  r

guiar  aP-  tribes  there  was  hardly  any  shadow  of  regu-
pearance j^  gQyj^gng3^Ijj-j  an(j  even  among  those  which

I  first  described  its  authority  is  slender  and  confined
within  narrow  bounds,  there  were,  however,  some
places  in  America  where  government  was  carried  far
beyond  the  degree  of  perfection  which  seems  natural
to  rude  nations.  In  surveying  the  political  opera-
tions of  man,  either  in  his  savage  or  civilized  state,
we  discover  singular  and  eccentric  institutions,  which
start  as  it  were  from  their  station,  and  fly  off  so  wide,
that  we  labour  in  vain  to  bring  them  within  the  ge-
neral laws  of  any  system,  or  to  account  for  them  by
those  principles  which  influence  other  communities
in  a  similar  situation.  Some  instances  of  this  occur
among  those  people  of  America,  whom  I  have  in-
cluded under  the  common  denomination  of  savage.
These  are  so  curious  and  important  that  I  shall  de-
scribe them,  and  attempt  to  explain  their  origin.
Partku-  In  tne  New  World,  as  well  as  in  other

lariy  in parts  of  the  globe,  cold  or  temperate  coun-

sorae  of  the l .  °  L

warmer  tries  appear  to  be  the  favourite  seat  of  free-
dom and  independence.  There  the  mind,
like  the  body,  is  firm  and  vigorous.  There  men,
conscious  of  their  own  dignity,  and  capable  of  the
greatest  efforts  in  asserting  it,  aspire  to  indepen-
dence, and  their  stubborn  spirits  stoop  with  reluct-
ance to  the  yoke  of  servitude.  In  warmer  climates,
by  whose  influence  the  whole  frame  is  so  much  ener-
vated, that  present  pleasure  is  the  supreme  felicity,

m  Venegas,  i.  f>8. Lettr.  Edif.  ii.  176. Techo,  Hist  of  Parag.  Churchill,  vi.  76.
Hist.  Gen.  des  Voyages,  xiv.  74.

c  2

20  AMERTCA.

and  mere  repose  is  enjoyment,  men  acquiesce,  almost
without  a  struggle,  in  the  dominion  of  a  superior.
Accordingly,  if  we  proceed  from  north  to  south  along
the  continent  of  America,  we  shall  find  the  power  of
those  vested with authority gradually  increasing,
and  the  spirit  of  the  people  becoming  more  tame
and  passive. In  Florida,  the  authority  of  the  sa-
chems, caziques,  or  chiefs,  was  not  only  permanent,
but  hereditary. They  were  distinguished  by  pecu-
liar ornaments,  they  enjoyed  prerogatives  of  various
kinds,  and  were  treated  by  their  subjects  with  that
reverence  which  people  accustomed  to  subjection
Among  tiie  Pav  to  a  master." Among  the  Natchez,  a
Natchez, powerful  tribe  now  extinct,  formerly  situ-
ated on  the  banks  of  the  Mississippi,  a  difference  of
rank  took  place,  with  which  the  northern  tribes  were
altogether unacquainted. Some  families  were  re-
puted noble,  and  enjoyed  hereditary  dignity. The
body  of  the  people  was  considered  as  vile,  and  formed
only  for  subjection. This  distinction  was  marked
by  appellations  which  intimated  the  high  elevation
of  the  one  state,  and  the  ignominious  depression  of
the  other. The  former  were  called  Respectable;  the
latter,  the  Stinkards. The  great  chief,  in  whom  the
supreme  authority  was  vested,  is  reputed  to  be  a
being  of  superior  nature,  the  brother  of  the  sun,  the
sole  object  of  their  worship. They  approach  this
great  chief  with  religious  veneration,  and  honour  him
as  the  representative  of  their  deity. His  will  is  a
law  to  which  all  submit  with  implicit  obedience.
The  lives  of  his  subjects  are  so  absolutely  at  his  dis-
posal, that  if  any  one  has  incurred  his  displeasure,
the  offender  comes  with  profound  humility  and  offers
him  his  head. Nor  does  the  dominion  of  the  chiefs

B  Cardenas  y  Cano  Knsavo  Clirouol.  a  la  Hist,  tie  Florida,  p.  46.  Le  Moyne  de
Morgues  Icones  Florida;.  Ap.  de  Rry,  p.  1.  4,  &c.  Charier.  Hist.  N.  France,  iii.
467,468.

BOOK IV.  21

end  with  their  lives ;  their  principal  officers,  their
favourite  wives,  together  with  many  domestics  of
inferior  rank,  are  sacrificed  at  their  tombs,  that  they
may  be  attended  in  the  next  world  by  the  same  per-
sons who  served  them  in  this;  and  such  is  the  reve-
rence in  which  they  are  held,  that  those  victims  wel-
come death  with  exultation,  deeming  it  a  recompense
of  their  fidelity,  and  a  mark  of  distinction,  to  be  se-
lected to  accompany  their  deceased  master.0  Thus
a  perfect  despotism,  with  its  full  train  of  supersti-
tion, arrogance,  and  cruelty,  is  established  among
the  Natchez,  and  by  a  singular  fatality,  that  people
has  tasted  of  the  worst  calamities  incident  to  polish-
ed nations,  though  they  themselves  are  not  far  ad-
vanced beyond  the  tribes  around  them  in  civility  and
In  the  improvement.  In  Hispaniola,  Cuba,  and  the
islands,  larger  islands,  their  caziques  or  chiefs  pos-
sessed extensive  power.  The  dignity  was  trans-
mitted by  hereditary  right  from  father  to  son.  Its
honours  and  prerogatives  were  considerable.  Their
subjects  paid  great  respect  to  the  caziques,  and  exe-
cuted their  orders  without  hesitation  or  reserve.p
They  were  distinguished  by  peculiar  ornaments,  and
in  order  to  preserve  or  augment  the  veneration  of  the
people,  they  had  the  address  to  call  in  the  aid  of  su-
perstition to  uphold  their  authority.  They  delivered
their  mandates  as  the  oracles  of  heaven,  and  pre-
tended to  possess  the  power  of  regulating  the  seasons,
and  of  dispensing  rain  or  sunshine,  according  as  their
subjects  stood  in  need  of  them.

In  some  parts  of  the  southern  continent,

the  power  of  the  caziques  seems  to  have  been

as  extensive  as  in  the  isles. In  Bogota,  which  is  now

a  province  of  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada,  there

°  Dumont  Memoir.  Hist,  sur Louisiaue,  i.  176. Cliarlev.  Hist.  N.  France,  iii.
419,&c. Lettr.  Edif.  20.  106.  111.

P  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  i.  c.  16.  lib.  iii.  c  41.  p.  88. Life  of  Colurub.  ch.  32.

22  AMERICA.

was  settled  a  nation,  more  considerable  in  number,
and  more  improved  in  the  various  arts  of  life,  than
any  in  America  except  the  Mexicans  and  Peruvians.
The  people  of  Bogota  subsisted  chiefly  by  agricul-
ture. The  idea  of  property  was  introduced  among
them,  and  its  rights,  secured  by  laws,  handed  down
by  tradition,  and  observed  with  great  care.'1 They
lived  in  towns  which  may  be  termed  large  when
compared  with those  in other  parts of  America.
They  were  clothed  in  a  decent  manner,  and  their
houses  may  be  termed  commodious,  when  compared
with  those  of  the  small  tribes  around  them. The
effects  of  this  uncommon  civilization  were  conspi-
cuous. Government  had  assumed  a  regular  form.
A  jurisdiction  was  established,  which  took  cogni-
zance of  different  crimes, and  punished  them  with
rigour. A  distinction  of  ranks  was  known ;  their
chief,  to  whom  the  Spaniards  gave  the  title  of  mo-
narch, and  who  merited  that  name  on  account  of  his
splendour  as  well  as  power,  reigned  with  absolute
authority. He  was  attended  by  officers  of  various
conditions  ;  he  never  appeared  in  public  without  a
numerous  retinue ;  he  was  carried  in  a  sort  of  pa-
lanquin with  much  pomp,  and  harbingers  went  before
him  to  sweep  the  road  and  strew  it  with  flowers.
This  uncommon  pomp  was  supported  by  presents  or
taxes  received  from  his subjects, to  whom  their
prince  was  such  an  object  of  veneration,  that  none
of  them  presumed  to  look  him  directly  in  the  face,
or  ever  approached  him  but  with  an  averted  counte-
nance/ There  were  other  tribes  on  the  same  conti-
nent, among  which,  though  far  less  advanced  than
the  people  of  Bogota  in  their  progress  towards  re-
finement, the  freedom  and  independence,  natural  to

n  Piedrahita,  Hist,  de  las  Conquist.  del  N.  Raynn  de  Gran.  i>.  16.
r  llerrcra,  dec.  6.  lib.i.  c.  2.  lib.  v.  c.  56. Picdiahito,  c.  5.  |>.  85,  &c. Gomara,
Hist.  c.  72.

BOOK  IV.  23

man  in  his  savage  state,  was  much  abridged,  and
their  caziques  had  assumed  extensive  authority.
Causes  of  It  is  not  easy  to  point  out  the  circum-
gniar  ap-  stances,  or  to  discover  the  causes  which  con-
pearances.  tributed  to  introduce  and  establish  among
each  of  those  people  a  form  of  government  so  dif-
ferent from  that  of  the  tribes  around  them,  and  so
repugnant  to  the  genius  of  rude  nations.  If  the  per-
sons who  had  an  opportunity  of  observing  them  in
their  original  state  had  been  more  attentive  and  more
discerning,  we  might  have  received  information  from
their  conquerors  sufficient  to  guide  us  in  this  inquiry.
If  the  transactions  of  people,  unacquainted  with  the
use  of  letters,  were  not  involved  in  impenetrable
obscurity,  we  might  have  derived  some  information
from  this  domestic  source.  But  as  nothing  satisfac-
tory can  be  gathered  either  from  the  accounts  of  the
Spaniards,  or  from  their  own  traditions,  we  must  have
recourse  to  conjectures,  in  order  to  explain  the  irre-
gular appearances  in  the  political  state  of  the  people
whom  I  have  mentioned.  As  all  those  tribes  which
had  lost  their  native  liberty  and  independence  were
seated  in  the  Torrid  Zone,  or  in  countries  approach-
ing to  it,  the  climate  may  be  supposed  to  have  had
some  influence  in  forming  their  minds  to  that  servi-
tude, which  seems  to  be  the  destiny  of  man  in  those
regions  of  the  globe.  But  though  the  influence  of
climate,  more  powerful  than  that  of  any  other  natural
cause,  is  not  to  be  overlooked;  that  alone  cannot  be
admitted  as  a  solution  of  the  point  in  question.  The
operations  of  men  are  so  complex,  that  we  must  not
attribute  the  form  which  they  assume  to  the  force  of
a  single  principle  or  cause.  Although  despotism  be
confined  in  America  to  the  Torrid  Zone,  and  to  the
warm  regions  bordering  upon  it,  I  have  already  ob-
served that  these  countries  contain  various  tribes,
some  of  which  possess  a  high  degree  of  freedom,  and

'24  AMERICA.

others  are  altogether  unacquainted  with  the  restraints
of  government.  The  indolence  and  timidity  peculiar
to  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands,  render  them  so  in-
capable of  the  sentiments  or  efforts  necessary  for
maintaining  independence,  that  there  is  no  occasion
to  search  for  any  other  cause  of  their  tame  submis-
sion to  the  will  of  a  superior.  The  subjection  of  the
Natchez,  and  of  the  people  of  Bogota,  seems  to  have
been  the  consequence  of  a  difference  in  their  state
from  that  of  the  other  Americans.  They  were  settled
nations,  residing  constantly  in  one  place.  Hunting
was  not  the  chief  occupation  of  the  former,  and  the
latter  seem  hardly  to  have  trusted  to  it  for  any  part
of  their  subsistence.  Both  had  made  such  progress
in  agriculture  and  arts,  that  the  idea  of  property  was
introduced  in  some  degree  in  the  one  community,
and  fully  established  in  the  other.  Among  people  in
this  state,  avarice  and  ambition  have  acquired  objects,
and  have  begun  to  exert  their  power ;  views  of  in-
terest allure  the  selfish ;  the  desire  of  pre-eminence
excites  the  enterprising  ;  dominion  is  courted  by
both ;  and  passions  unknown  to  man  in  his  savage
state  prompt  the  interested  and  ambitious  to  en-
croach on  the  rights  of  their  fellow-citizens.  Motives,
with  which  rude  nations  are  equally  unacquainted,
induce  the  people  to  submit  tamely  to  the  usurped
authority  of  their  superiors.  But  even  among  nations
in  this  state,  the  spirit  of  subjects  could  not  have
been  rendered  so  obsequious,  or  the  power  of  rulers
so  unbounded,  without  the  intervention  of  super-
stition. By  its  fatal  influence,  the  human  mind,  in
every  stage  of  its  progress,  is  depressed,  and  its  na-
tive vigour  and  independence  subdued.  Whoever
can  acquire  the  direction  of  this  formidable  engine,
is  secure  of  dominion  over  his  species.  Unfortu-
nately for  the  people  whose  institutions  are  the  sub-
ject of  inquiry,  this  power  was  in  the  hands  of  their

BOOK  IV.  25

chiefs.  The  caziques  of  the  isles  could  put  what  re-
sponses they  pleased  into  the  mouths  of  their  Cemis
or  gods ;  and  it  was  by  their  interposition,  and  in
their  name,  that  they  imposed  any  tribute  or  burden
on  their  people.5  The  same  power  and  prerogative
was  exercised  by  the  great  chief  of  the  Natchez  as
the  principal  minister  as  well  as  the  representative  of
the  Sun,  their  deity.  The  respect  which  the  people
of  Bogota  paid  to  their  monarchs  was  likewise  in-
spired by  religion,  and  the  heir  apparent  of  the  king-
dom was  educated  in  the  innermost  recess  of  their
principal  temple,  under  such  austere  discipline,  and
with  such  peculiar  rites,  as  tended  to  fill  his  subjects
with  high  sentiments  concerning  the  sanctity  of  his
character,  and  the  dignity  of  his  station.'  Thus  su-
perstition, which,  in  the  rudest  period  of  society,  is
either  altogether  unknown,  or  wastes  its  force  in
childish  unmeaning  practices,  had  acquired  such  an
ascendant  over  those  people  of  America,  who  had
made  some  little  progress  towards  refinement,  that
it  became  the  chief  instrument  of  bending  their  minds
to  an  untimely  servitude,  and  subjected  them,  in  the
beginning  of  their  political  career,  to  a  despotism
hardly  less  rigorous  than  that  which  awaits  nations
in  the  last  stage  of  their  corruption  and  decline.
Their  art  V-  After  examining  the  political  institutions
of  war.  0f  tne  ruc}e  nations  in  America,  the  next  ob-
ject of  attention  is  their  art  of  war,  or  their  provision
for  public  security  and  defence.  The  small  tribes
dispersed  over  America  are  not  only  independent
and  unconnected,  but  engaged  in  perpetual  hostilities
with  one  another."  Though  mostly  strangers  to  the
idea  of  separate  property,  vested  in  any  individual,
the  rudest  of  the  American  nations  are  well  ac-
quainted with  the  rights  of  each  community  to  its

»  Hcrrcra,  dec.  1.  lib.  mil  -  c.  3.  *  Piedrahita,  p.  '27.

u  Ribas  Hist,  de  los  Triuuif.  p.  9.

26  AMERICA.

own  domains.  This  right  they  hold  to  be  perfect  and
exclusive,  entitling  the  possessor  to  oppose  the  en-
croachment of  neighbouring  tribes.  As  it  is  of  the
utmost  consequence  to  prevent  them  from  destroying
or  disturbing  the  game  in  their  hunting  grounds,  they
guard  this  national  property  with  a  jealous  attention.
But  as  their  territories  are  extensive,  and  the  boun-
daries of  them  not  exactly  ascertained,  innumerable
subjects  of  dispute  arise,  which  seldom  terminate
without  bloodshed.  Even  in  this  simple  and  pri-
mitive state  of  society,  interest  is  a  source  of  discord,
and  often  prompts  savage  tribes  to  take  arms,  in  order
to  repel  or  punish  such  as  encroach  on  the  forests  or
plains,  to  which  they  trust  for  subsistence,
rbeir  mo-  But  interest  is  not  either  the  most  frequent
en'aaoina  or  the  most  powerful  motive  of  the  incessant
'"  wan  hostilities  among  rude  nations.  These  must
be  imputed  to  the  passion  of  revenge,  which  rages
with  such  violence  in  the  breast  of  savages,  that
eagerness  to  gratify  it  may  be  considered  as  the  dis-
tinguishing characteristic  of  men  in  their  uncivilized
state.  Circumstances  of  powerful  influence,  both  in
the  interior  government  of  rude  tribes,  and  in  their  ex-
ternal operations  against  foreign  enemies,  concur  in
cherishing  and  adding  strength  to  a  passion  fatal  to
the  general  tranquillity.  When  the  right  of  redress-
ing his  own  wrongs  is  left  in  the  hands  of  every  in-
dividual, injuries  are  felt  with  exquisite  sensibility,
and  vengeance  exercised  with  unrelenting  rancour.
No  time  can  obliterate  the  memory  of  an  offence,  and
it  is  seldom  that  it  can  be  expiated  but  by  the  blood
of  the  offender.  In  carrying  on  their  public  wars.
savage  nations  are  influenced  by  the  same  ideas,  and
animated  with  the  same  spirit,  as  in  prosecuting  pri-
vate vengeance, in  small  communities,  every

From  ibe  &  . .  „  ~

spirit  of man  is  touched  with  the  injury  or  artront  of-
fered to  the  body  of  which  he  is  a  member.

BOOK  IV.  27

as  if  it  were  a  personal  attack  upon  his  own  ho-
nour or  safety. The  desire  of  revenge  is  communi-
cated from  breast  to  breast,  and  soon  kindles  into
rage. As  feeble  societies  can  take  the  field  only  in
small  parties,  each  warrior  is  conscious  of  the  im-
portance of  his  own  arm,  and  feels  that  to  it  is  com-
mitted a  considerable  portion  of  the  public  venge-
ance. War,  which  between  extensive  kingdoms  is
carried  on  with  little  animosity,  is  prosecuted  by
small  tribes  with  all  the  rancour  of  a  private  quarrel.
The  resentment  of  nations  is  as  implacable  as  that  of
individuals. It  may  be  dissembled  or  suppressed,
but  is  never  extinguished ;  and  often,  when
ferocity  cff  least  expected  or  dreaded,  it  bursts  out  with
their  wars,  ^^^^  fury  v When  poiished  nations  have

obtained  the  glory  of  victory, or  have  acquired  an
addition  of  territory,  they  may  terminate  a  war  with
honour. But  savages  are  not  satisfied  until  they  ex-
tirpate the  community  which  is  the  object  of  their
hatred. They  fight,  not  to  conquer,  but  to  destroy.
If  they  engage  in  hostilities,  it  is  with  a  resolution
never  to  see  the  face  of  the  enemy  in  peace,  but  to
prosecute  the  quarrel  with  immortal  enmity." The
desire  of  vengeance  is  the  first,  and  almost  the  only
principle,  which  a  savage  instils  into  the  minds  of  his
children/ This  grows  up  with  him  as  he  advances
in  life ;  and  as  his  attention  is  directed  to  few  ob-
jects, it  acquires  a  degree  of  force  unknown  among
men  whose  passions  are  dissipated  and  weakened  by
the  variety  of  their  occupations  and  pursuits. The
desire  of  vengeance,  which  takes  possession  of  the
heart  of  savages,  resembles  the  instinctive  rage  of  an
animal,  rather  than  the  passion  of  a  man. It  turns,

v  Boucher  Hist.  Nat.  de  N.  France,  p.  93.  Charlev.  Hist,  de  N.  France,  iii.
21.5.  251.  Lery  ap.  de  Bry,  iii.  204.  Creux.  Hist.  Canad.  p.  72.  Lozano  Descr.
de!  Gran  Cliaco,  '2.5. Hcnnep.  Mccurs  dcs  Sauv.  40.

w  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.  2.51. Colden,  i.  108.  ii.  126. Barrere,  p.  170.  173.

*  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.  326.  Lery  ap.  de  Brv,  iii.  236.  Lozano  Hist,  de
Taiag.  i.  144.

28  A  M  ERICA.

with  undiscerning  fury,  even  against  inanimate  ob-
jects. If  hurt  accidentally  by  a  stone,  they  often  seize
it  in  a  transport  of  anger,  and  endeavour  to  wreak
their  vengeance  upon  it.'  If  struck  with  an  arrow
in  a  battle,  they  will  tear  it  from  the  wound,  break
and  bite  it  with  their  teeth,  and  dash  it  on  the  ground/
With  respect  to  their  enemies,  the  rage  of  vengeance
knows  no  bounds.  When  under  the  dominion  of  this
passion,  man  becomes  the  most  cruel  of  all  animals.
lie  neither  pities,  nor  forgives,  nor  spares.

The  force  of  this  passion  is  so  well  understood  by
the  Americans  themselves,  that  they  always  apply  to
it,  in  order  to  excite  their  people  to  take  arms.  If
the  elders  of  any  tribe  attempt  to  rouse  their  youth
from  sloth,  if  a  chief  wishes  to  allure  a  band  of  war-
riors to  follow  him  in  invading  an  enemy's  country,
the  most  persuasive  topics  of  their  martial  eloquence
are  drawn  from  revenge.  "  The  bones  of  our  coun-
trymen," say  they,  "lie  uncovered;  their  bloody
bed  has  not  been  washed  clean.  Their  spirits  cry
against  us;  they  must  be  appeased.  Let  us  go  and
devour  the  people  by  whom  they  were  slain.  Sit  no
longer  inactive  upon  your  mats;  lift  the  hatchet,  con-
sole the  spirits  of  the  dead,  and  tell  them  that  they
shall  be  avenged. "H

And  their  Animated  with  such  exhortations,  the
Perpetuity.  y0Utn  snatch  their  arms  in  a  transport  of
fury,  raise  the  song  of  war,  and  burn  with  impatience
to  imbrue  their  hands  in  the  blood  of  their  enemies.
Private  chiefs  often  assemble  small  parties,  and  in-
vade a  hostile  tribe,  without  consulting  the  rulers  of
the  community.  A  single  warrior,  prompted  by  ca-
price or  revenge,  will  take  the  field  alone,  and  march
several  hundred  miles  to  surprise  and  cut  off  a  strag-

1  Lery  ap.  de  Bry,  iii.  190.
1  Lcrv  ap.  dc  Bry,  iii.  208. Herrera,  dec.  i.  lib.  vi.  c.  8.
»  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.  -.'16,217. Lcrv  ap.  dc  Bry,  iii.  '-'04.

BOOK  IV.  29

gling  enemy. b The  exploits  of  a  noted  warrior,  in
such  solitary  excursions,  often  form  the  chief  part  in
the  history  of  an  American  campaign  ;c and  their
elders  connive  at  such  irregular  sallies,  as  they  tend
to  cherish  a  martial  spirit,  and  accustom  their  people
to  enterprise  and  danger .d But  when  a  war  is  na-
tional, and  undertaken  by  public  authority,  the  de-
liberations are  formal  and  slow. The  elders  assem-
ble, they  deliver  their  opinion  in  solemn  speeches,
they  weigh  with  maturity  the  nature  of  the  enter-
prise, and  balance  its  beneficial  or  disadvantageous
consequences  with  no  inconsiderable  portion  of  poli-
tical discernment or sagacity. Their  priests  and
soothsayers  are  consulted,  and  sometimes  they  ask
the  advice  even  of  their  women.6 If  the  determina-
tion be  for  war,  they  prepare  for  it  with  much  cere-
mony. A  leader  offers  to  conduct  the  expedition,
and  is  accepted. But  no  man  is  constrained  to  fol-
low him  ;  the  resolution  of  the  community  to  com-
mence hostilities  imposes  no  obligation  upon  any
member  to  take  part  in  the  war. Each  individual
is  still  master  of  his  own  conduct,  and  his  engage-
ment in  the  service  is  perfectly  voluntary/
Mode  of The  maxims  by  which  they  regulate  their
carrying military  operations, though  extremely dif-
ferent from  those  which  take  place  among
more  civilized  and  populous  nations,  are  well  suited
to  their  own  political  state,  and  the  nature  of  the
country  in  which  they  act. They  never  take  the  field
in  numerous  bodies,  as  it  would  require  a  greater
effort  of  foresight  and  industry,  than  is  usual  among
savages,  to  provide  for  their  subsistence,  during  a
march  of  some  hundred  miles  through  dreary  forests,
or  during  a  long  voyage  upon  their  lakes  and  rivers.

>>  See  Note  XII.  <=  See  Note  XIII.

d  Bossu,  i.  140. Lerj  ap.  de  Bry,  215. Hennepin  Moeurs  des  Sauv.  41.  Lafitau,
ii.  169.  •  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  215.  268. Biet,  367.  380.

f  Charier.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  217,218.

30  AMERICA.

Their  armies  are  not  encumbered  with  baggage  or
military  stores.  Each  warrior,  besides  his  arms,
carries  a  mat  and  a  small  bag  of  pounded  maize,  and
with  these  is  completely  equipped  ibr  any  service.
While  at  a  distance  from  the  enemy's  frontier,  they
disperse  through  the  woods,  and  support  themselves
with  the  game  which  they  kill,  or  the  fish  which
they  catch.  As  they  approach  nearer  to  the  terri-
tories of  the  nation  which  they  intend  to  attack,  they
collect  their  troops,  and  advance  with  greater  cau-
tion. Even  in  their  hottest  and  most  active  wars,
they  proceed  wholly  by  stratagem  and  ambuscade.
They  place  not  their  glory  in  attacking  their  ene-
mies with  open  force.  To  surprise  and  destroy  is
the  greatest  merit  of  a  commander,  and  the  highest
pride  of  his  followers.  War  and  hunting  are  their
only  occupations,  and  they  conduct  both  with  the
same  spirit  and  the  same  arts.  They  follow  the
track  of  their  enemies  through  the  forest.  They  en-
deavour to  discover  their  haunts,  they  lurk  in  some
thicket  near  to  these,  and,  with  the  patience  of  a
sportsman  lying  in  wait  for  game,  will  continue  in
their  station  day  after  day,  until  they  can  rush  upon
their  prey  when  most  secure,  and  least  able  to  resist
them.  If  they  meet  no  straggling  party  of  the
enemy,  they  advance  towards  their  villages,  but  with
such  solicitude  to  conceal  their  own  approach,  that
they  often  creep  on  their  hands  and  feet  through  the
woods,  and  paint  their  skins  of  the  same  colour  with
the  withered  leaves,  in  order  to  avoid  detection.8  If
so  fortunate  as  to  remain  unobserved,  they  set  on  fire
the  enemies'  huts  in  the  dead  of  night,  and  massacre
the  inhabitants,  as  they  fly  naked  and  defenceless
from  the  flames.  If  they  hope  to  effect  a  retreat
without  being  pursued,  they  carry  off  some  prison-

*  Ch.-wlcv.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.  237,  238. Hcnnep.  Moeurs  des  Sauv.  p.  59.

BOOK  IV.  31

ers,  whom  they  reserve  for  a  more  dreadful  fate.  But
if,  notwithstanding  all  their  address  and  precautions,
they  find  that  their  motions  are  discovered,  that  the
enemy  has  taken  the  alarm,  and  is  prepared  to  op-
pose them,  they  usually  deem  it  most  prudent  to
retire.  They  regard  it  as  extreme  folly  to  meet  an
enemy  who  is  on  his  guard,  upon  equal  terms,  or  to
give  battle  in  an  open  field.  The  most  distinguished
success  is  a  disgrace  to  a  leader,  if  it  has  been  pur-
chased with  any  considerable  loss  of  his  followers,11
and  they  never  boast  of  a  victory,  if  stained  with  the
blood  of  their  own  countrymen.1  To  fall  in  battle,
instead  of  being  reckoned  an  honourable  death,  is  a
misfortune  which  subjects  the  memory  of  a  warrior
to  the  imputation  of  rashness  or  imprudence.1"
Not  owing  This  system  of  war  was  universal  in  Ame-
defcctof  rica;  and  the  small  uncivilized  tribes,  dis-
courage.  persed  through  all  its  different  regions  and
climates,  display  more  craft  than  boldness  in  carrying
on  their  hostilities.  Struck  with  this  conduct,  so
opposite  to  the  ideas  and  maxims  of  Europeans,  se-
veral authors  contend  that  it  flows  from  a  feeble  and
dastardly  spirit  peculiar  to  the  Americans,  which  is
incapable  of  any  generous  or  manly  exertion.1  But
when  we  reflect  that  many  of  these  tribes,  on  occa-
sions which  call  for  extraordinary  efforts,  not  only
defend  themselves  with  obstinate  resolution,  but  at-
tack their  enemies  with  the  most  daring  courage,
and  that  they  possess  fortitude  of  mind  superior  to
the  sense  of  danger  or  the  fear  of  death,  we  must
ascribe  their  habitual  caution  to  some  other  cause
than  constitutional  timidity.:n  The  number  of  men
in  each  tribe  is  so  small,  the  difficulty  of  rearing  new

h  See  Note  XIV.
1  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii. 238.  307. Biet,  381. Lafitau Mceurs des  Sauv.
ii.  248.  k  Charlev.  iii.  376. See  Note XV.

1  Recherches  Philos.  sur  les  Americ.  i.  115.  Voyage  de  March,  iv.  410.
»  Lafitau  Mceurs  des  Sauv.  ii.  248,  249. Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  307.

32  AMERICA.

members  amidst  the  hardships  and  dangers  of  savage
life  so  great,  that  the  life  of  a  citizen  is  extremely
precious,  and  the  preservation  of  it  becomes  a  capital
object  in  their  policy.  Had  the  point  of  honour  been
the  same  among  the  feeble  American  tribes  as  among
the  powerful  nations  of  Europe,  had  they  been  taught
to  court  fame  or  victory  in  contempt  of  danger  and
death,  they  must  have  been  ruined  by  maxims  so  ill
adapted  to  their  condition.  But  wherever  their
communities  are  more  populous,  so  that  they  can  act
with  considerable  force,  and  can  sustain  the  loss  of
several  of  their  members,  without  being  sensibly
weakened,  the  military  operations  of  the  Americans
more  nearly  resemble  those  of  other  nations.  The
Brazilians,  as  well  as  the  tribes  situated  upon  the
banks  of  the  river  De  la  Plata,  often  take  the  field  in
such  numerous  bodies,  as  deserve  the  name  of  ar-
mies." They  defy  their  enemies  to  the  combat,  en-
Sfaofe  in  regular  battles,  and  maintain  the  conflict  with
that  desperate  ferocity,  which  is  natural  to  men  who,
having  no  idea  of  war  but  that  of  exterminating  their
enemies,  never  give  or  take  quarter.0  In  the  powerful
empires  of  Mexico  and  Peru,  great  armies  were  as-
sembled, frequent  battles  were  fought,  and  the  theory
as  well  as  practice  of  war  were  different  from  what
took  place  in  those  petty  societies  which  assume  the
name  of  nations.

But  though  vigilance  and  attention  are  the

Incapable  i  • n  ••  i  i  ■  •

of  order  or  qualities  chiefly  requisite,  where  the  object

discipline. r  •  j  j  •  i

ot  war  is  to  deceive  and  to  surprise ;  and
though  the  Americans,  when  acting  singly,  display
an  amazing  degree  of  address  in  concealing  their  own
motions,  and  discovering  those  of  an  enemy,  yet  it  is
remarkable  that,  when  they  take  the  field  in  parties,
they  can  seldom  be  brought  to  observe  the  precau-
tions most  essential  to  their  own  security. Such  is

n  Fabri  Veriss.  Descript.  India:  ap.  de  Bry,  vii.  p.  42.  °  See  Note  XVI.

BOOK IV.  33

the  difficulty  of  accustoming  savages  to  subordina-
tion, or  to  act  in  concert ;  such  is  their  impatience  un-
der restraint,  and  such  their  caprice  and  presumption,
that  it  is  rarely  they  can  be  brought  to  conform  them-
selves to  the  counsels  and  directions  of  their  leaders.
They  never  station  sentinels  around  the  place  where
they  rest  at  night,  and  after  marching  some  hundred
miles  to  surprise  an  enemy,  are  often  surprised  them-
selves, and  cut  off,  while  sunk  in  as  profound  sleep
as  if  they  were  not  within  reach  of  danger.p

If,  notwithstanding  this  negligence  and  security,
which  often  frustrate  their  most  artful  schemes,  they
catch  the  enemy  unprepared,  they  rush  upon  them
with  the  utmost  ferocity,  and  tearing  off  the  scalps
of  all  those  who  fall  victims  to  their  rage,q  they  carry
home  those  strange  trophies  in  triumph.  These  they
preserve  as  monuments,  not  only  of  their  own  prow-
ess, but  of  the  vengeance  which  their  arm  has  in-
flicted upon  the  people  who  were  objects  of  public
resentment/  They  are  still  more  solicitous  to  seize
prisoners.  During  their  retreat,  if  they  hope  to  effect
it  unmolested,  the  prisoners  are  commonly  exempt
from  any  insult,  and  treated  with  some  degree  of
humanity,  though  guarded  with  the  most  strict  at-
tention.

But  after  this  temporary  suspension,  the

Treatment  L  • f.  r  .

ofpri-  rage  of  the  conquerors  rekindles  with  new
fury.  As  soon  as  they  approach  their  own
frontier,  some  of  their  number  are  dispatched  to  in-
form their  countrymen  with  respect  to  the  success  of
the  expedition.  Then  the  prisoners  begin  to  feel  the
wretchedness  of  their  condition.  The  women  of  the
village,  together  with  the  youth  who  have  not  at-
tained to  the  age  of  bearing  arms,  assemble,  and

P  Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  236,  237. Lettr.  Edif.  17.  308.  20.  130. Lafit.  Mceurs,
247. Lahontan,  ii.  176.

i  See  Note  XVII.  r  Lafitau  Moeurs,  ii.  256.

VOL.  VII.  D

34  AMERICA.

forming  themselves  into  two  lines,  through  which  the
prisoners  must  pass,  beat  and  bruise  them  with  sticks
or  stones  in  a  cruel  manner.3  After  this  first  grati-
fication of  their  rage  against  their  enemies,  follow
lamentations  for  the  loss  of  such  of  their  own  coun-
trymen as  have  fallen  in  the  service,  accompanied
with  words  and  actions  which  seem  to  express  the
utmost  anguish  and  grief.  But  in  a  moment,  upon
a  signal  given,  their  tears  cease ;  they  pass,  with  a
sudden  and  unaccountable  transition,  from  the  depths
of  sorrow  to  the  transports  of  joy ;  and  begin  to  cele-
brate their  victory  with  all  the  wild  exultation  of  a
barbarous  triumph.1  The  fate  of  the  prisoners  re-
mains still  undecided.  The  old  men  deliberate  con-
cerning it.  Some  are  destined  to  be  tortured  to
death,  in  order  to  satiate  the  revenge  of  the  conquer-
ors ;  some  to  replace  the  members  which  the  com-
munity has  lost  in  that  or  former  wars.  They  who
are  reserved  for  this  milder  fate,  are  led  to  the  huts
of  those  whose  friends  have  been  killed.  The  women
meet  them  at  the  door,  and  if  they  receive  them,
their  sufferings  are  at  an  end.  They  are  adopted  into
the  family,  and  according  to  their  phrase,  are  seated
upon  the  mat  of  the  deceased.  They  assume  his
name,  they  hold  the  same  rank,  and  are  treated
thenceforward  with  all  the  tenderness  due  to  a  father,
a  brother,  a  husband,  or  a  friend.  But  if,  either  from
caprice  or  an  unrelenting  desire  of  revenge,  the  wo-
men of  any  family  refuse  to  accept  of  the  prisoner
who  is  offered  to  them,  his  doom  is  fixed.  No  power
can  then  save  him  from  torture  and  death.
Their  in-  While  their  lot  is  in  suspense,  the  prisoners
cincemfng  themselves  appear  altogether  unconcerned
their  fate,  about  what  may  befall  them.  They  talk,  they
eat,  they  sleep,  as  if  they  were  perfectly  at  ease,  and
no  danger  impending. When  the  fatal  sentence  is

'  Lahontan,  ii.  184. «  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.  241. Lafitau,  Mceurs,  ii.  264.

BOOK IV.  35

intimated  to  them,  they  receive  it  with  an  unaltered
countenance,  raise  their  death-song,  and  prepare  to
.  . . . suffer  like  men. Their  conquerors  assemble

And  forti-  1 j

tude  under  as  to  a  solemn  festival,  resolved  to  put  the
fortitude  of  the  captive  to  the  utmost  proof.
A  scene  ensues,  the  bare  description  of  which  is
enough  to  chill  the  heart  with  horror,  wherever  men
have  been  accustomed,  by  milder  institutions,  to  re-
spect their  species,  and  to  melt  into  tenderness  at  the
sight  of  human  sufferings.  The  prisoners  are  tied
naked  to  a  stake,  but  so  as  to  be  at  liberty  to  move
round  it.  All  who  are  present,  men,  -women,  and
children,  rush  upon  them  like  furies.  Every  species
of  torture  is  applied  that  the  rancour  of  revenge  can
invent.  Some  burn  their  limbs  with  red-hot  irons,
some  mangle  their  bodies  with  knives,  others  tear
their  flesh  from  their  bones,  pluck  out  their  nails  by
the  roots,  and  rend  and  twist  their  sinews.  They
vie  with  one  another  in  refinement  of  torture.  No-
thing sets  bounds  to  their  rage  but  the  dread  of
abridging  the  duration  of  their  vengeance  by  hasten-
ing the  death  of  the  sufferers  ;  and  such  is  their  cruel
ingenuity  in  tormenting,  that,  by  avoiding  indus-
triously to  hurt  any  vital  part,  they  often  prolong  this
scene  of  anguish  for  several  days.  In  spite  of  all  that
they  suffer,  the  victims  continue  to  chant  their  death-
song  with  a  firm  voice,  they  boast  of  their  own  ex-
ploits, they  insult  their  tormentors  for  their  want  of
skill  in  avenging  their  friends  and  relations,  they
warn  them  of  the  vengeance  which  awaits  them  on
account  of  what  they  are  now  doing,  and  excite  their
ferocity  by  the  most  provoking  reproaches  and
threats.  To  display  undaunted  fortitude  in  such
dreadful  situations,  is  the  noblest  triumph  of  a  war-
rior. To  avoid  the  trial  by  a  voluntary  death,  or  to
shrink  under  it,  is  deemed  infamous  and  cowardly.
If  any  one  betray  symptoms  of  timidity,  his  tor-

d  2

30'  AMERICA.

mentors  often  dispatch  him  at  once  with  contempt,
as  unworthy  of  being  treated  like  a  man.u  Animated
with  those  ideas,  they  endure,  without  a  groan,  what
it  seems  almost  impossible  that  human  nature  should
sustain.  They  appear  to  be  not  only  insensible  of
pain,  but  to  court  it.  "  Forbear,*'  said  an  aged  chief
of  the  Iroquois,  when  his  insults  had  provoked  one
of  his  tormentors  to  wound  him  with  a  knife,  "  for-
bear these  stabs  of  your  knife,  and  rather  let  me  die
by  fire,  that  those  dogs,  your  allies,  from  beyond  the
sea,  may  learn  by  my  example  to  suffer  like  men/'w
This  magnanimity,  of  which  there  are  frequent  in-
stances among  the  American  warriors,  instead  of  ex-
citing admiration,  or  calling  forth  sympathy,  exaspe-
rates the  fierce  spirit  of  their  torturers  to  fresh  acts
of  cruelty/  Weary,  at  length,  of  contending  with
men,  whose  constancy  of  mind  they  cannot  vanquish,
some  chief,  in  a  rage,  puts  a  period  to  their  sufferings,
by  dispatching  them  with  his  dagger  or  club/

This  barbarous  scene  is  often  succeeded  bv

sometimes  ...  .  J

eat  their  one  no  less  shocking.  As  it  is  impossible  to
appease  the  fell  spirit  of  revenge  which  rages
in  the  heart  of  a  savage,  this  frequently  prompts  the
Americans  to  devour  those  unhappy  persons,  who
have  been  the  victims  of  their  cruelty.  In  the  an-
cient world,  tradition  has  preserved  the  memory  of
barbarous  nations  of  cannibals,  who  fed  on  human
flesh.  But  in  every  part  of  the  New  World  there
were  people  to  whom  this  custom  was  familiar.  It
prevailed  in  the  southern  continent/  in  several  of  the
islands,"  and  in  various  districts  of  North  America.1'

0  De  la  Potherie,  ii.  237.  iii.  48.  *  Colden,  Hist,  of  Five  Nations,  i.  200.

x  Voyages  dc  Lahont,  i.  256.

y  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fran.  iii.  243,  &c.  385.  LafitauMceurs,  ii.  265.  Crcuxij.  Hist.
Canad.  p.  73.  Hennep.  Moeurs  des  Sauv.  p.  64,  &c,  Lahont.  i.  233,  &c.  Tertre,
ii.  405. De  la  Potherie,  ii.  22,  &c.

*  Stadius  ap.  de  Bry,  iii.  123. Lery,  ibid.  210. Biet.  384. Lettr.  Edif.  23.
341. Piso,  8. Condam,  84.  97. Ribas,  Hist,  de  los  Triumph.  473.
:l  Life  of  Columb.  529. IMait.  Dec.  p.  18. Tertre,  ii.  405.

b  Dumont,  Mem.  i.  254.  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  i.  259.  ii.  14.  iii.  21.  De  la
Potherie,  iii.  50.

BOOK IV.  37

Even  in  those  parts,  where  circumstances,  with
which  we  are  unacquainted,  had  in  a  great  measure
abolished  this  practice,  it  seems  formerly  to  have
been  so  well  known,  that  it  is  incorporated  into  the
idiom  of  their  language.  Among  the  Iroquois,  the
phrase  by  which  they  express  their  resolution  of
making  war  against  an  enemy  is,  "  Let  us  go  and  eat
that  nation."  If  they  solicit  the  aid  of  a  neighbour-
ing tribe,  they  invite  it  to  "  eat  broth  made  of  the
flesh  of  their  enemies."0  Nor  was  the  practice  pecu-
liar to  rude  unpolished  tribes ;  the  principle  from
which  it  took  rise  is  so  deeply  rooted  in  the  minds
of  the  Americans,  that  it  subsisted  in  Mexico,  one  of
the  civilized  empires  in  the  New  World,  and  relics  of
it  may  be  discovered  among  the  more  mild  inhabi-
tants of  Peru.  It  was  not  scarcity  of  food,  as  some
authors  imagine,  and  the  importunate  cravings  of
hunger,  which  forced  the  Americans  to  those  horrid
repasts  on  their  fellow- creatures.  Human  flesh  was
never  used  as  common  food  in  any  country,  and  the
various  relations  concerning  people  who  reckoned  it
among  the  stated  means  of  subsistence,  flow  from  the
credulity  and  mistakes  of  travellers.  The  rancour  of
revenge  first  prompted  men  to  this  barbarous  action.d
The  fiercest  tribes  devoured  none  but  prisoners  taken
in  war,  or  such  as  they  regarded  as  enemies.6  Wo-
men and  children  who  were  not  the  objects  of  en-
mity, if  not  cut  off  in  the  fury  of  their  first  inroad
into  a  hostile  country,  seldom  suffered  by  the  deli-
berate effects  of  their  revenge/

The  people  of  South  America  gratify  their  revenge
in  a  manner  somewhat  different,  but  with  no  less  un-
relenting rancour. There,  prisoners,  after  meeting

c  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.  208,  209.  Lettr.  Edit".  23.  p.  277.  De  la  Potherie,
ii.  298. See  Note  XVIII.

d  Biet,  383.  Blanco,  Conversion  de  Piritu,  p.  28.  Bancroft,  Nat.  Hist,  of
Guiana,  p.  259,  &c.  e  See  Note  XIX.

f  Biet.  382.  Bandini,  Vita  di  Americoj  84.  Tertre,  405.  Fermin.  Descrip.  de
Surin.  i.  54.

38  AMERICA.

at  their  first  entrance  with  the  same  rough  reception
as  among  the  North  Americans/  are  not  only  exempt
from  injury,  but  treated  with  the  greatest  kindness.
They  are  feasted  and  caressed,  and  some  beautiful
young  women  are  appointed  to  attend  and  solace
them.  It  is  not  easy  to  account  for  this  part  of  their
conduct,  unless  we  impute  it  to  a  refinement  in
cruelty.  For,  while  they  seem  studious  to  attach
the  captives  to  life,  by  supplying  them  with  every
enjoyment  that  can  render  it  agreeable,  their  doom
is  irrevocably  fixed.  On  a  day  appointed,  the  vic-
torious tribe  assembles,  the  prisoner  is  brought  forth
with  great  solemnity,  he  views  the  preparations  for
the  sacrifice  with  as  much  indifference  as  if  he  him-
self were  not  the  victim,  and,  meeting  his  fate  with
undaunted  firmness,  is  dispatched  with  a  single  blow.
The  moment  he  falls,  the  women  seize  the  body,  and
dress  it  for  the  feast.  They  besmear  their  children
with  the  blood,  in  order  to  kindle  in  their  bosoms  a
hatred  of  their  enemies,  which  is  never  extinguished,
and  all  join  in  feeding  upon  the  flesh  with  amazing
greediness  and  exultation.11  To  devour  the  body  of
a  slaughtered  enemy,  they  deem  the  most  complete
and  exquisite  gratification  of  revenge.  Wherever
this  practice  prevails,  captives  never  escape  death,
but  they  are  not  tortured  with  the  same  cruelty  as
among  tribes  which  are  less  accustomed  to  such
horrid  feasts.1

As  the  constancy  of  every  American  warrior  may
be  put  to  such  severe  proof,  the  great  object  of  mili-
tary education  and  discipline  in  the  New  World  is  to
form  the  mind  to  sustain  it.  When  nations  carry  on
war  with  open  force,  defy  their  enemies  to  the  com-
bat, and  vanquish  them  by  the  superiority  of  their
skill  or  courage,  soldiers  are  trained  to  be  active,  vi-

s  Stadius  ap.  de  Bry,  iii.  p.  40.  123.
h  Ibid.  iii.  128,  &c. Lery.ibid.  210.  *  See  Note  XX.

BOOK IV.  39

gorous,  and  enterprising.  But  in  America,  where
the  genius  and  maxims  of  war  are  extremely  different,
passive  fortitude  is  the  quality  in  highest  estimation.
Accordingly,  it  is  early  the  study  of  the  Americans
to  acquire  sentiments  and  habits,  which  will  enable
them  to  behave  like  men,  when  their  resolution  shall
be  put  to  the  proof.  As  the  youth  of  other  nations
exercise  themselves  in  feats  of  activity  and  force,
those  of  America  vie  with  one  another  in  exhibitions
of  their  patience  under  sufferings.  They  harden
their  nerves  by  those  voluntary  trials,  and  gradually
accustom  themselves  to  endure  the  sharpest  pain
without  complaining.  A  boy  and  girl  will  bind  their
naked  arms  together,  and  place  a  burning  coal  be-
tween them,  in  order  to  try  who  first  discovers  such
impatience  as  to  shake  it  off.k  All  the  trials,  cus-
tomary in  America,  when  a  youth  is  admitted  into
the  class  of  warriors,  or  when  a  warrior  is  promoted
to  the  dignity  of  captain  or  chief,  are  accommodated  to
this  idea  of  manliness.  They  are  not  displays  of  va-
lour, but  of  patience;  they  are  not  exhibitions  of
their  ability  to  offend,  but  of  their  capacity  to  suffer.
Among  the  tribes  on  the  banks  of  the  Orinoco,  if  a
warrior  aspires  to  the  rank  of  captain,  his  probation
begins  with  a  long  fast,  more  rigid  than  any  ever  ob-  .
served  by  the  most  abstemious  hermit.  At  the  close
of  this  the  chiefs  assemble,  each  gives  him  three
lashes  with  a  large  whip,  applied  so  vigorously,  that
his  body  is  almost  flayed,  and  if  he  betrays  the  least
symptoms  of  impatience  or  even  sensibility,  he  is
disgraced  for  ever,  and  rejected  as  unworthy  of  the
honour  to  which  he  aspires.  After  some  interval,
the  constancy  of  the  candidate  is  proved  by  a  more
excruciating  trial.  He  is  laid  in  a  hammock  with  his
hands  bound  fast,  and  an  innumerable  multitude  of
venomous  ants,  whose  bite  occasions  exquisite  pain,

k  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.  307.

40  AMERICA.

and  produces  a  violent  inflammation, are  thrown
upon  him. The  judges  of  his  merit  stand  around  the
hammock,  and,  while  these  cruel  insects  fasten  upon
the  most  sensible  parts  of  his  body,  a  sigh,  a  groan,
an  involuntary  motion  expressive  of  what  he  suffers,
would  exclude  him  for  ever  from  the  rank  of  captain.
Even  after  this  evidence  of  his  fortitude,  it  is  not
deemed  to  be  completely  ascertained,  but  must  stand
another  test  more  dreadful  than  any  he  has  hitherto
undergone. He  is  again  suspended  in  his  hammock,
and  covered  with  leaves  of  the  palmetto. A  fire  of
stinking  herbs  is  kindled  underneath,  so  as  he  may
feel  its  heat,  and  be  involved  in  its  smoke. Though
scorched  and  almost  suffocated,  he  must  continue  to
endure  with  the  same  patient  insensibility. Many
perish  in  this  rude  essay  of  their  firmness  and  cou-
rage, but  such  as  go  through  it  with  applause,  receive
the  ensigns  of  their  new  dignity  with  much  solem-
nity, and  are  ever  after  regarded  as  leaders  of  ap-
proved resolution, whose  behaviour,  in  the  most
trying  situations,  will  do  honour  to  their  country.1
In  North  America,  the  previous  trial  of  a  warrior  is
neither so  formal,  nor so  severe. Though, even
there,  before  a  youth  is  permitted  to  bear  arms,  his
patience  and  fortitude  are  proved  by  blows,  by  fire,
and  by  insults,  more  intolerable  to  a  haughty  spirit
than  both.m

The  amazing  steadiness  with  which  the  Americans
endure  the  most  exquisite  torments,  has  induced
some  authors  to  suppose  that,  from  the  peculiar  fee-
bleness of  their  frame,  their  sensibility  is  not  so  acute
as  that  of  other  people ;  as  women,  and  persons  of  a
relaxed  habit,  are  observed  to  be  less  affected  with
pain  than  robust  men,  whose  nerves  are  more  firmly
braced.  But  the  constitution  of  the  Americans  is  not
so  different,  in  its  texture,  from  that  of  the  rest  of  the

1  Cutnilla,  ii.  286,  &c. Biet.  376,  &c.  ">  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.  219.

BOOK IV.  41

human  species,  as  to  account  for  this  diversity  in  their
behaviour.  It  flows  from  a  principle  of  honour,  in-
stilled early  and  cultivated  with  such  care,  as  to  in-
spire man  in  his  rudest  state  with  an  heroic  magna-
nimity, to  which  philosophy  hath  endeavoured,  in
vain,  to  form  him,  when  more  highly  improved  and
polished.  This  invincible  constancy  he  has  been
taught  to  consider  as  the  chief  distinction  of  a  man,
and  the  highest  attainment  of  a  warrior.  The  ideas
which  influence  his  conduct,  and  the  passions  which
take  possession  of  his  heart,  are  few.  They  operate
of  course  with  more  decisive  effect,  than  when  the
mind  is  crowded  with  a  multiplicity  of  objects,  or
distracted  by  the  variety  of  its  pursuits  ;  and  when
every  motive  that  acts  with  any  force  in  forming  the
sentiments  of  a  savage,  prompts  him  to  suffer  with
dignity,  he  will  bear  what  might  seem  to  be  impos-
sible for  human  patience  to  sustain.  But  wherever
the  fortitude  of  the  Americans  is  not  roused  to  exer-
tion by  their  ideas  of  honour,  their  feelings  of  pain
are  the  same  with  those  of  the  rest  of  mankind."  Nor
is  that  patience  under  sufferings  for  which  the  Ame-
ricans have  been  so  justly  celebrated,  a  universal
attainment.  The  constancy  of  many  of  the  victims
is  overcome  by  the  agonies  of  torture.  Their  weak-
ness and  lamentations  complete  the  triumph  of  their
enemies,  and  reflect  disgrace  upon  their  own  country.0
Wasted  by  The  perpetual  hostilities  carried  on  among
peTu'aP"  the  American  tribes  are  productive  of  very
wars-  fatal  effects.  Even  in  seasons  of  public  tran-
quillity, their  imperfect  industry  does  not  supply
them  with  any  superfluous  store  of  provisions  ;  but
when  the  irruption  of  an  enemy  desolates  their  cul-
tivated lands,  or  disturbs  them  in  their  hunting  ex-
cursions, such  a  calamity  reduces  a  community,  na-
turally improvident  and  destitute  of  resources,  to

•>  See  Note  XXI. °  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.  248.  385. De  la  Potherie,  iii.  48.

42  AMERICA.

extreme  want.  All  the  people  of  the  district  that  is
invaded,  are  frequently  forced  to  take  refuge  in  woods
or  mountains,  which  can  afford  them  little  subsist-
ence, and  where  many  of  them  perish.  Notwith-
standing- their  excessive  caution  in  conducting  their
military  operations,  and  the  solicitude  of  every  leader
to  preserve  the  lives  of  his  followers,  as  the  rude
tribes  in  America  seldom  enjoy  any  interval  of  peace,
the  loss  of  men  among  them  is  considerable  in  pro-
portion to  the  degree  of  population.  Thus  famine
and  the  sword  combine  in  thinning  their  numbers.
All  their  communities  are  feeble,  and  nothing  now
remains  of  several  nations,  which  were  once  consi-
derable, but  the  name.1"

Sensible  of  this  continual  decay,  there  are

llecruit  ,  \

their  num-  tribes  which  endeavour  to  recruit  their  na-
adopting  tional  force  when  exhausted,  by  adopting  pri-
pnsoners.  soners  taken  in  war,  and  by  this  expedient
prevent  their  total  extinction.  The  practice,  how-
ever, is  not  universally  received.  Resentment  ope-
rates more  powerfully  among  savages,  than  consi-
derations of  policy.  Far  the  greater  part  of  their
captives  was  anciently  sacrificed  to  their  vengeance,
and  it  is  only  since  their  numbers  began  to  decline
fast,  that  they  have  generally  adopted  milder  max-
ims. But  such  as  they  do  naturalize,  renounce  for
ever  their  native  tribe,  and  assume  the  manners  as
well  as  passions  of  the  people  by  whom  they  are
adopted, q  so  entirely,  that  they  often  join  them  in
expeditions  against  their  own  countrymen.  Such  a
sudden  transition,  and  so  repugnant  to  one  of  the
most  powerful  instincts  implanted  by  nature,  would
be  deemed  strange  among  many  people ;  but  among
the  members  of  small  communities,  where  national
enmity  is  violent  and  deep-rooted,  it  has  the  appear-

P  Charlcv.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.  202,  203.  429. Gumilla,  ii.  227,  &c.
1  Charlcv.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.  243,  &c. Lafit.  ii.  S08.

BOOK IV.  43

ance  of  being  still  more  unaccountable.  It  seems,
however,  to  result  naturally  from  the  principles  upon
which  war  is  carried  on  in  America.  "When  nations
aim  at  exterminating  their  enemies,  no  exchange  of
prisoners  can  ever  take  place.  From  the  moment  one
is  made  a  prisoner,  his  country  and  his  friends  con-
sider him  as  dead/  He  has  incurred  indelible  dis-
grace by  suffering  himself  to  be  surprised  or  to  be
taken  by  an  enemy  ;  and  were  he  to  return  home,
after  such  a  stain  upon  his  honour,  his  nearest  rela-
tions would  not  receive  or  even  acknowledge  that
they  knew  him.3  Some  tribes  were  still  more  rigid,
and  if  a  prisoner  returned,  the  infamy  which  he  had
brought  on  his  country  was  expiated,  by  putting  him
instantly  to  death.'  As  the  unfortunate  captive  is
thus  an  outcast  from  his  own  country,  and  the  ties
which  bound  him  to  it  are  irreparably  broken,  he
feels  less  reluctance  in  forming  a  new  connexion  with
people,  who,  as  an  evidence  of  their  friendly  senti-
ments, not  only  deliver  him  from  a  cruel  death,  but
offer  to  admit  him  to  all  the  rights  of  a  fellow-citizen.
The  perfect  similarity  of  manners  among  savage  na-
tions facilitates  and  completes  the  union,  and  induces
a  captive  to  transfer  not  only  his  allegiance,  but  his
affection,  to  the  community  into  the  bosom  of  which
he  is  received.

Their  in-  But  though  war  be  the  chief  occupation  of
feriorityin  men  jn  their  rude  state,  and  to  excel  in  it

war  to  po-  . .

lished  na-  their  highest  distinction  and  pride,  their  infe-
riority is  always  manifest  when  they  engage
in  competition  with  polished  nations.  Destitute  of
that  foresight  which  discerns  and  provides  for  remote
events,  strangers  to  the  union  and  mutual  confidence
requisite  in  forming  any  extensive  plan  of  operations,
and  incapable  of  the  subordination  no  less  requisite

*  See  Note  XXII.  s  Lahont,  i|,  155,  186.

1  Herrera,  dec.  iii.  lib.  iv.  c.  16.  p.  173.

44  AMERICA.

in  carrying  such  plans  into  execution,  savage  nations
may  astonish  a  disciplined  enemy  by  their  valour,
but  seldom  prove  formidable  to  him  by  their  conduct;
and  whenever  the  contest  is  of  long  continuance,
must  yield  to  superior  art.u  The  empires  of  Peru  and
Mexico,  though  their  progress  in  civilization,  when
measured  by  the  European  or  Asiatic  standards,  was
inconsiderable,  acquired  such  an  ascendancy  over  the
rude  tribes  around  them,  that  they  subjected  most  of
them  with  great  facility  to  their  power.  When  the
people  of  Europe  overran  the  various  provinces  of
America,  this  superiority  was  still  more  conspicuous.
Neither  the  courage  nor  number  of  the  natives  could
repel  a  handful  of  invaders.  The  alienation  and  en-
mity, prevalent  among  barbarians,  prevented  them
..  from  uniting  in  any  common  scheme  of  defence,  and
while  each  tribe  fought  separately,  all  were  subdued.
VI.  The  arts  of  rude  nations  unacquainted

Their  arts. . , .  „  i -i n

with  the  use  or  metals,  hardly  merit  any  atten-
tion on  their  own  account,  but  are  worthy  of  some
notice,  as  far  as  they  serve  to  display  the  genius  and
manners  of  man  in  this  stage  of  his  progress.  The
first  distress  a  savage  must  feel,  will  arise  from  the
maimer  in  which  his  body  is  affected,  by  the  heat,  or
cold,  or  moisture,  of  the  climate  under  which  he  lives;

Dress  and  anC^  ^1S  nrst  Care  WU^  De  t0  provide  SOllie  CO-
ornaments.  vering  for  his  own  defence.  In  the  warmer
and  more  mild  climates  of  America,  none  of  the  rude
tribes  were  clothed.  To  most  of  them  nature  had
not  even  suggested  any  idea  of  impropriety  in  being
altogether  uncovered."  As  under  a  mild  climate  there
was  little  need  of  any  defence  from  the  injuries  of
the  air,  and  their  extreme  indolence  shunned  every
species  of  labour  to  which  it  was  not  urged  by  abso-
lute necessity,  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  isles,  and  a

"  See  Note  XXII.
w  Lory  Navigat.  ap.  tie  Bry,  iii.  p.  164. Life  of  Columbus,  c. 24. Vcnrgas
Hist,  of  Californ.  p.  70.

BOOK IV.  45

considerable  part  of  the  people  on  the  continent,  re-
mained in  this  state  of  naked  simplicity.  Others
were  satisfied  with  some  slight  covering,  such  as
decency  required.  But  though  naked,  they  were  not
unadorned.  They  dressed  their  hair  in  many  dif-
ferent forms.  They  fastened  bits  of  gold,  or  shells,
or  shining  stones,  in  their  ears,  their  noses,  and
cheeks/  They  stained  their  skins  with  a  great  va-
riety of  figures  ;  and  they  spent  much  time,  and  sub-
mitted to  great  pain,  in  ornamenting  their  persons  in
this  fantastic  manner.  Vanity,  however,  which  finds
endless  occupation  for  ingenuity  and  invention,  in
nations  where  dress  has  become  a  complex  and  in-
tricate art,  is  circumscribed  within  so  narrow  bounds,
and  confined  to  so  few  articles  among  naked  savages,
that  they  are  not  satisfied  with  those  simple  deoo-
rations,  and  have  a  wonderful  propensity  to  alter  the
natural  form  of  their  bodies,  in  order  to  render  it  (as
they  imagine)  more  perfect  and  beautiful.  This  prac-
tice was  universal  among  the  rudest  of  the  American
tribes.  Their  operations  for  that  purpose  begin  as
soon  as  an  infant  is  born.  By  compressing  the  bones
of  the  skull,  while  still  soft  and  flexible,  some  flatten
the  crown  of  their  heads ;  some  squeeze  them  into
the  shape  of  a  cone ;  others  mould  them  as  much  as
possible  into  a  square  figure  ;y  and  they  often  endan-
ger the  lives  of  their  posterity  by  their  violent  and
absurd  efforts  to  derange  the  plan  of  nature,  or  to
improve  upon  her  designs.  But  in  all  their  attempts
either  to  adorn  or  to  new-model  their  persons,  it
seems  to  have  been  less  the  object  of  the  Americans
to  please,  or  to  appear  beautiful,  than  to  give  an  air
of  dignity  and  terror  to  their  aspect.  Their  attention
to  dress  had  more  reference  to  war  than  to  gallantry.

x  Lery  ap.  de  Bry,  iii.  p.  165.  Lettr.  Edifiantes,  20.223.
y  Oviedo  Hist.  lib.  iii.  c.  5. Ulloa,  i.  329. Voyage  de  Labat.  ii.  72. Charlev.
iii.  323. Guinilla,  i.  197,  &c. Acugna  Relat.  de  la  Riv.  des  Amaz.  ii.  83. Law-
sions  Voyage  to  Carolina,  p.  33.

46  AMERICA.

The  difference  in  rank  and  estimation  between  the
two sexes  was  so  great, as  seems  to  have  extin-
guished, in  some  measure,  their  solicitude  to  appear
mutually  amiable. The  man  deemed  it  beneath  him
to  adorn  his  person,  for  the  sake  of  one  on  whom  he
was  accustomed  to  look  down  as  a  slave. It  was
when  the  warrior  had  in  view  to  enter  the  council  of
his  nation,  or  to  take  the  field  against  its  enemies,
that  he  assumed  his  choicest  ornaments,  and  decked
his  person  with  the  nicest  care.2 The  decorations  of
the  women  were  few  and  simple  ;  whatever  was  pre-
cious or  splendid  was  reserved  for  the  men.  In  several
tribes  the  women  were  obliged  to  spend  a  consider-
able part  of  their  time  every  day  in  adorning  and
painting  their  husbands,  and  could  bestow  little  at-
tention upon  ornamenting  themselves. Among  a  race
of  men  so  haughty  as  to  despise,  or  so  cold  as  to  neg-
lect them,  the  women  naturally  became  careless  and
slovenly,  and  the  love  of  finery  and  show,  which  has
been  deemed  their  favourite  passion,  was  confined
chiefly  to  the  other  sex.a To  deck  his  person  was
the  distinction  of  a  warrior,  as  well  as  one  of  his  most
serious occupations. b In  one  part  of  their  dress,
which,  at  first  sight,  appears  the  most  singular  and
capricious,  the  Americans  have  discovered  consider-
able sagacity  in  providing  against  the  chief  incon-
veniences of  their  climate,  which  is  often  sultry  and
moist  to  excess. All  the  different  tribes,  which  re-
main unclothed,  are  accustomed  to  anoint  and  rub
their  bodies  with  the  grease  of  animals,  with  viscous
gums,  and  with  oils  of  different  kinds. By  this  they
check  that  profuse  perspiration,  which,  in  the  torrid
zone,  wastes  the  vigour  of  the  frame,  and  abridges

*  Wafer's  Voyage,  p.  142.  Lery  ap.  de  Bry,  iii.  167.  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fran.
Hi _  '216.  222.

■  Charlev.  Hist,  de  la  Nouv.  France,  iii.  278.  327.  Lafitau,  ii.  b3.  Halm's
Voyage,  iii.  273.  Lery'  ap.  de  Bry,  iii.  169,  170.  Porch.  Pilgr.  iv.  1287.  Ribas
Hist,  de  los  Triumph.  &c.  472.  b  See  Note  XXIV.

BOOK IV.  47

the  period  of  human  life.  By  this,  too,  they  provide
a  defence  against  the  extreme  moisture  during  the
rainy  season.0  They  likewise,  at  certain  seasons,
temper  paint  of  different  colours  with  those  unctuous
substances,  and  bedaub  themselves  plentifully  with
that  composition.  Sheathed  with  this  impenetrable
varnish,  their  skins  are  not  only  protected  from  the
penetrating  heat  of  the  sun,  but  as  all  the  innume-
rable tribes  of  insects  have  an  antipathy  to  the  smell
or  taste  of  that  mixture,  they  are  delivered  from
their  teasing  persecution,  which  amidst  forests  and
marshes,  especially  in  the  warmer  regions,  would
have  been  altogether  intolerable  in  a  state  of  perfect
nakedness. d

Habita_  The  next  object  to  dress  that  will  engage
tions.  the  attention  of  a  savage,  is  to  prepare  some
habitation  which  may  afford  him  shelter  by  day,  and
a  retreat  at  night.  Whatever  is  connected  with  his
ideas  of  personal  dignity,  whatever  bears  any  refer-
ence to  his  military  character,  the  savage  warrior
deems  an  object  of  importance.  Whatever  relates
only  to  peaceable  and  inactive  life,  he  views  with
indifference.  Hence,  though  finically  attentive  to
dress,  he  is  little  solicitous  about  the  elegance  or
disposition  of  his  habitation.  Savage  nations,  far
from  that  state  of  improvement,  in  which  the  mode
of  living  is  considered  as  a  mark  of  distinction,  and
unacquainted  with  those  wants,  which  require  a  va-
riety of  accommodation,  regulate  the  construction  of
their  houses  according  to  their  limited  ideas  of  neces-
sity. Some  of  the  American  tribes  were  so  extremely
rude,  and  had  advanced  so  little  beyond  the  primeval
simplicity  of  nature,  that  they  had  no  houses  at  all.
During  the  day,  they  take  shelter  from  the  scorching
rays  of  the  sun  under  thick  trees ;  at  night  they  form

«  See  Note  XXV.
d  Labat.  ii.  73. Gumilla,  i.  190.  202. Bancroft  Nat.  Hist,  of  Guiana,  81.  280.

48  AMERICA.

a  shed  with  their  branches  and  leaves.8  In  the  rainy-
season  they  retire  into  coves,  formed  by  the  hand  of
nature,  or  hollowed  out  by  their  own  industry/
Others,  who  have  no  fixed  abode,  and  roam  through
the  forest  in  quest  of  game,  sojourn  in  temporary
huts,  which  they  erect  with  little  labour,  and  aban-
don without  any  concern.  The  inhabitants  of  those
vast  plains,  which  are  deluged  by  the  overflowing  of
rivers  during  the  heavy  rains  that  fall  periodically
between  the  tropics,  raise  houses  upon  piles  fastened
in  the  ground,  or  place  them  among  the  boughs  of
trees,  and  are  thus  safe  amidst  that  wide  extended
inundation  which  surrounds  them.8  Such  were  the
first  essays  of  the  rudest  Americans  towards  pro-
viding themselves  with  habitations.  But  even  among
tribes  which  are  more  improved,  and  whose  resi-
dence is  become  altogether  fixed,  the  structure  of
their  houses  is  extremely  mean  and  simple.  They
are  wretched  huts,  sometimes  of  an  oblong  and  some-
times of  a  circular  form,  intended  merely  for  shelter,
with  no  view  to  elegance,  and  little  attention  to  con-
veniency.  The  doors  are  so  low  that  it  is  necessary
to  bend  or  to  creep  on  the  hands  and  feet  in  order  to
enter  them.  They  are  without  windows,  and  have
a  large  hole  in  the  middle  of  the  roof,  to  convey  out
the  smoke.  To  follow  travellers  in  other  minute
circumstances  of  their  descriptions,  is  not  only  be-
neath the  dignity  of  history,  but  would  be  foreign  to
the  object  of  my  researches.  One  circumstance  me-
rits attention,  as  it  is  singular,  and  illustrates  the
character  of  the  people.  Some  of  their  houses  are
so  large  as  to  contain  accommodation  for  fourscore
or  a  hundred  persons. These  are  built  for  the  re-

«  See  Note  XXVI.
f  Lettres  Edif.  v.  273. Venegas  Hist,  of  Califor.  i.  76. Lozano  Descrip.  del
Gran  Chaco,  p.  55. Lettres  Edif.  ii.  176. Gumilla,  i.  383. Bancroft  Nat.  Hist,
of  Guiana,  277.

I  Gumilla,  i.  225. Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  ix.  c.  6. Ovicdo  Somar.  p.  53.  C.

HOOK IV.  49

ception  of  different  families,  which  dwell  together
under  the  same  roof,11  and  often  around  a  common
fire,  without  separate  apartments,  or  any  kind  of
screen  or  partition  between  the  spaces  which  they
respectively  occupy.  As  soon  as  men  have  acquired
distinct  ideas  of  property;  or  when  they  are  so  much
attached  to  their  females,  as  to  watch  them  with
care  and  jealousy;  families  of  course  divide  and  set-
tle in  separate  houses,  where  they  can  secure  and
guard  whatever  they  wish  to  preserve.  This  sin-
gular mode  of  habitation  among  several  people  of
America,  may  therefore  be  considered  not  only  as
the  effect  of  their  imperfect  notions  concerning  pro-
perty, but  as  a  proof  of  inattention  and  indifference
towards  their  women.  If  they  had  not  been  ac-
customed to  perfect  equality,  such  an  arrangement
could  not  have  taken  place.  If  their  sensibility  had
been  apt  to  have  taken  alarm,  they  would  not  have
trusted  the  virtue  of  their  women  amidst  the  tempta-
tions and  opportunities  of  such  a  promiscuous  inter-
course. At  the  same  time,  the  perpetual  concord
which  reigns  in  habitations  where  so  many  families
are  crowded  together,  is  surprising,  and  affords  a
striking  evidence  that  they  must  be  people  of  either
a  very  gentle,  or  of  a  very  phlegmatic  temper,  who,
in  such  a  situation,  are  unacquainted  with  animosity,
brawling,  and  discord.1

Their  After  making  some  provision  for  his  dress

arms-  and  habitation,  a  savage  will  perceive  the  ne-
cessity of  preparing  proper  arms  with  which  to  as-
sault or  repel  an  enemy.  This,  accordingly,  has
early  exercised  the  ingenuity  and  invention  of  all
rude  nations.  The  first  offensive  weapons  were
doubtless  such  as  chance  presented,  and  the  first  ef-

h  See  Note  XXVII.
»  Journ.  de  Grillet  et  Bechamel  dans  la  Goyane,  p.  65. Lafitau  Mceurs,  ii.  4.
Torquera.  Monarq.  i.  247. Journal  Hist,  de  Joutal,217. Lery  Hist.  Brasil,  ap.  de
Bry,  iii.  238. Lozano  Descr.  del  Gran  Chaco,  67,

VOL.  VII.  E

50  AMERICA.

forts  of  art  to  improve  upon  these,  were  extremely
awkward  and  simple.  Clubs  made  of  some  heavy
wood,  stakes  hardened  in  the  fire,  lances  whose
heads  were  armed  with  flint  or  the  bones  of  some
animal,  are  weapons  known  to  the  rudest  nations.
All  these,  however,  were  of  use  only  in  close  en-
counter. But  men  wished  to  annoy  their  enemies
while  at  a  distance,  and  the  bow  and  arrow  is  the
most  early  invention  for  this  purpose.  This  weapon
is  in  the  hands  of  people,  whose  advances  in  im-
provement are  extremely  inconsiderable,  and  is  fa-
miliar to  the  inhabitants  of  every  quarter  of  the  globe.
It  is  remarkable,  however,  that  some  tribes  in  Ame-
rica were  so  destitute  of  art  and  ingenuity,  that  they
had  not  attained  to  the  discovery  of  this  simple  in-
vention/ and  seem  to  have  been  unacquainted  with
the  use  of  any  missive  weapon.  The  sling,  though
in  its  construction  not  more  complex  than  the  bow,
and  among  many  nations  of  equal  antiquity,  was
little  known  to  the  people  of  North  America,1  or  the
islands,  but  appears  to  have  been  used  by  a  few  tribes
in  the  southern  continent."1  The  people,  in  some
provinces  of  Chili,  and  those  of  Patagonia,  towards
the  southern  extremity  of  America,  use  a  weapon
peculiar  to  themselves.  They  fasten  stones,  about
the  size  of  a  fist,  to  each  end  of  a  leather  thong  of
eight  feet  in  length,  and  swinging  these  round  their
heads,  throw  them  with  such  dexterity,  that  they
seldom  miss  the  object  at  which  they  aim."

Among  people  who  had  hardly  any  occu-

domestic pation  but  war  or  hunting,  the  chief  exertions

of  their  invention,"  as  well  as  industry,  were

naturally  directed  towards  these  objects. With  re-

k  Piedraliita  Conq.  del  Nuevo  Reyno,  ix.  12.
1  Nauf.  <lc  Alv.  Nun.  Cabeca  de  Vaca,  c.  x.  p.  12.
"  Picdrah.  p.  16. See  Note  XXVIII.
"  Ovalle's  Relation  of  Chili. Church.  Collect,  iii.  82. Falkncr's  De  script,  of
Fatagon.  p.  130.  °  See  Note  XXIX.

BOOK IV.  51

spect  to  every  thing  else,  their  wants  and  desires
were  so  limited,  that  their  invention  was  not  upon
the  stretch.  As  their  food  and  habitations  are  per-
fectly simple,  their  domestic  utensils  are  few  and
rude.  Some  of  the  southern  tribes  had  discovered
the  art  of  forming  vessels  of  earthenware,  and  baking
them  in  the  sun,  so  as  they  could  endure  the  fire.  In
North  America,  they  hollowed  a  piece  of  hard  wood
into  the  form  of  a  kettle,  and  filling  it  with  water
brought  it  to  boil,  by  putting  red-hot  stones  into  it.p
Dressin-  These  vessels  they  used  in  preparing  part  of
their  food,  their  provisions;  and  this  may  be  considered
as  a  step  towards  refinement  and  luxury,  for  men  in
their  rudest  state  were  not  acquainted  with  any  me-
thod of  dressing  their  victuals  but  by  roasting  them
on  the  fire ;  and  among  several  tribes  in  America,
this  is  the  only  species  of  cookery  yet  known.q  But
the  masterpiece  of  art,  among  the  savages  of

Construe-  .  .  l ,  .  ,.,, •

tion  of  their  America,  is  the  construction  ol  their  canoes.
canoes.  ^n  Esquimaux,  shut  up  in  his  boat  of  whale-
bone, covered  with  the  skins  of  seals,  can  brave  that
stormy  ocean,  on  which  the  barrenness  of  his  coun-
try compels  him  to  depend  for  the  chief  part  of  his
subsistence/  The  people  of  Canada  venture  upon
their  rivers  and  lakes  in  boats  made  of  the  bark  of
trees,  and  so  light  that  two  men  can  carry  them,
wherever  shallows  or  cataracts  obstruct  the  naviga-
tion.3 In  these  frail  vessels  they  undertake  and  ac-
complish long  voyages.4  The  inhabitants  of  the  isles
and  of  the  southern  continent  form  their  canoes  by
hollowing  the  trunk  of  a  large  tree,  with  infinite  la-
bour ;  and  though  in  appearance  they  are  extremely
awkward  and  unwieldy,  they  paddle  and  steer  them
with  such  dexterity,  that  Europeans,  well  acquainted
with  all  the  improvements  in  the  science  of  naviga-

P  Charlev.  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.  332.  i  See  Note  XXX.

r  Ellis  Voy.  133.  s  See  Note  XXXI.  '  Lafitau  Moeurs,  &c.  ii.  213.

e2

52  AMERICA.

tion,  have  been  astonished  at  the  rapidity  of  their
motion,  and  the  quickness  of  their  evolutions.  Their
pirogues,  or  war-boats,  are  so  large  as  to  carry  forty
or  fifty  men  ;  their  canoes  employed  in  fishing  and  in
short  voyages  are  less  capacious."  The  form  as  well
as  materials  of  all  these  various  kinds  of  vessels,  is
well  adapted  to  the  service  for  which  they  are  des-
tined ;  and  the  more  minutely  they  are  examined,
the  mechanism  of  their  structure,  as  well  as  neatness
of  their  fabric,  will  appear  the  more  surprising.
Listiessness  But,  in  every  attempt  towards  industry
theyaphp]y  among  the  Americans,  one  striking  quality
to  labour.  m  their  character  is  conspicuous.  They  ap-
ply to  work  without  ardour,  carry  it  on  with  little
activity,  and,  like  children,  are  easily  diverted  from
it.  Even  in  operations  which  seem  the  most  inte-
resting, and  where  the  most  powerful  motives  urge
them  to  vigorous  exertions,  they  labour  with  a  lan-
guid listiessness.  Their  work  advances  under  their
hand  with  such  slowness,  that  an  eye-witness  com-
pares it  to  the  imperceptible  progress  of  vegetation."
They  will  spend  so  many  years  in  forming  a  canoe,
that  it  often  begins  to  rot  with  age  before  they  finish
it.  They  will  suffer  one  part  of  a  roof  to  decay  and
perish,  before  they  complete  the  other. w  The  slight-
est manual  operation  consumes  an  amazing  length  of
time,  and  what  in  polished  nations  would  hardly  be
an  effort  of  industry,  is  among  savages  an  arduous
undertaking.  This  slowness  of  the  Americans  in  ex-
ecuting works  of  every  kind  may  be  imputed  to
various  causes.  Among  savages,  who  do  not  depend
for  subsistence  upon  the  efforts  of  regular  industry,
time  is  of  so  little  importance,  that  they  set  no  value
upon  it ;  and  provided  they  can  finish  a  design,  they
never  regard  how  long  they  are  employed  about  it.

u  Labat.  Voyages,  ii.  91,&c.  131.  vGumilla,  ii.  297

"  Borde  Relat.  dcs  Caraibcs,  p.  22.

BOOK  IV.  53

The  tools  which  they  employ  are  so  awkward  and
defective,  that  every  work  in  which they  engage
must  necessarily  be  tedious. The  hand  of  the  most
industrious  and  skilful  artist,  were  it  furnished  with
no  better  instrument  than  a  stone  hatchet,  a  shell,
or  the  bone  of  some  animal,  would  find  it  difficult  to
perfect  the  most  simple  work. It  is  by  length  of  la-
bour that  he  must  endeavour  to  supply  his  defect  of
power. But  above  all,  the  cold  phlegmatic  temper
peculiar  to  the  Americans  renders  their  operations
languid. It  is  almost  impossible  to  rouse  them  from
that  habitual  indolence  to  which  they  are  sunk ;  and
unless  when  engaged  in  war  or  hunting,  they  seem
incapable  of  exerting  any  vigorous  effort. Their  ar-
dour of  application  is  not  so  great  as  to  call  forth  that
inventive  spirit  which  suggests  expedients  for  facili-
tating and  abridging  labour. They  will  return  to  a
task  day  after  day,  but  all  their  methods  of  executing
it  are  tedious  and  operose." Even  since  the  Euro-
peans have  communicated  to  them  the  knowledge  of
their  instruments,  and  taught  them  to  imitate  their
arts,  the  peculiar  genius  of  the  Americans  is  conspi-
cuous in  every  attempt  they  make. They  may  be
patient  and  assiduous  in  labour,  they  can  copy  with
a  servile  and  minute  accuracy,  but  discover  little  in-
vention and  no  talents  for  dispatch. In  spite of
instruction  and  example,  the  spirit  of  the  race  pre-
dominates.; their  motions  are  naturally  tardy,  and  it
is  in  vain  to  urge  them  to  quicken  their  pace.  Among
the  Spaniards  in  America,  the  work  of  mi  Indian  is  a
phrase  by  which  they  describe  any  thing,  in  the  exe-
cution of  which  an  immense  time  has  been  employed,
and  much  labour  wasted/

Their  re- VII.  No  circumstance  respecting  rude  na-
iigion. tions  has  been  the  object  of  greater  curiosity

*  See  Note  XX XII.
y  Voyages  de  Ulloa,  i.  335. Letlr.  Edif.  &c.  15.  348.

•54  AMERICA.

than  their  religious  tenets  and  rites ;  and  none,  per-
haps, has  been  so  imperfectly  understood,  or  repre-
Pccuiiar sented  with  so  little  fidelity. Priests  and

tlitliculties  ...  .  i l  i i

5n  thu  missionaries  are  the  persons  who  have  had
inquiry.  tjie  kesj.  opportunities  of  carrying  on  this  in-
quiry, among  the  most  uncivilized  of  the  American
tribes.  Their  minds,  engrossed  by  the  doctrines  of
their  own  religion,  and  habituated  to  its  institutions,
are  apt  to  discover  something  which  resembles  those
objects  of  their  veneration,  in  the  opinions  and  rites
of  every  people.  Whatever  they  contemplate,  they
view  through  one  medium,  and  draw  and  accommo-
date it  to  their  own  system.  They  study  to  reconcile
the  institutions,  which  fall  under  their  observation,
to  their  own  creed,  not  to  explain  them  according  to
the  rude  notions  of  the  people  themselves.  They
ascribe  to  them  ideas  which  they  are  incapable  of
forming,  and  suppose  them  to  be  acquainted  with
principles  and  facts,  which  it  is  impossible  that  they
should  know.  Hence,  some  missionaries  have  been
induced  to  believe,  that  even  among  the  most  barba-
rous nations  in  America,  they  had  discovered  traces,
no  less  distinct  than  amazing,  of  their 'acquaintance
with  the  sublime  mysteries  and  peculiar  institutions
of  Christianity.  From  their  own  interpretation  of
certain  expressions  and  ceremonies,  they  have  con-
cluded that  these  people  had  some  knowledge  of  the
doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  of  the  incarnation  of  the  Son
of  God,  of  his  expiatory  sacrifice,  of  the  virtue  of  the
cross,  and  of  the  efficacy  of  the  sacraments.2  In  such
unintelligent  and  credulous  guides,  we  can  place
little  confidence.

But,  even  when  we  make  our  choice  of  conductors
with  the  greatest  care,  we  must  not  follow  them  with
implicit  faith. An  inquiry  into  the  religious  notions

*  Vencgas,  i.  88.  92. Torquemada,  ii.  445. Garcia  Origcn,  122. Hcrrcra,  dec.
4.  lib.  ix.  c.  7.  dec.  5.  lib.  iv.  c.  7.

BOOK IV.  55

of  rude  nations  is  involved  in  peculiar  intricacies,  and
we  must  often  pause  in  order  to  separate  the  facts
which  our  informers  relate  from  the  reasonings  with
which  they  are  accompanied,  or  the  theories  which
they  build  upon  them.  Several  pious  writers,  more
attentive  to  the  importance  of  the  subject  than  to
the  condition  of  the  people  whose  sentiments  they
were  endeavouring  to  discover,  have  bestowed
much  unprofitable  labour  in  researches  of  this
nature.a
„  e , There  are  two  fundamental  doctrines,  upon

Confined  . ,  L

to  two  which  the  whole  system  of  religion,  as  far  as
it  can  be  discovered  by  the  light  of  nature,  is
established.  The  one  respects  the  being  of  a  God,
the  other  the  immortality  of  the  soul.  To  discover
the  ideas  of  the  uncultivated  nations  under  our  re-
view with  regard  to  those  important  points,  is  not
only  an  object  of  curiosity,  but  may  afford  instruc-
tion. To  these  two  articles  I  shall  confine  my  re-
searches, leaving  subordinate  opinions,  and  the  detail
of  local  superstitions,  to  more  minute  inquirers.
The  bein  Whoever  has  had  any  opportunity  of  examin-
0f  God.  mg  mto  the  religious  opinions  of  persons  in
the  inferior  ranks  of  life,  even  in  the  most  enlightened
and  civilized  nations,  will  find  that  their  system  of
belief  is  derived  from  instruction,  not  discovered  by
inquiry.  That  numerous  part  of  the  human  species,
whose  lot  is  labour,  whose  principal  and  almost  sole
occupation  is  to  secure  subsistence,  views  the  ar-
rangement and  operations  of  nature  with  little  reflec-
tion, and  has  neither  leisure  nor  capacity  for  entering
into  that  path  of  refined  and  intricate  speculation
which  conducts  to  the  knowledge  of  the  principles  of
natural  religion.  In  the  early  and  most  rude  periods
of  savage  life,  such  disquisitions  are  altogether  un-
known. When  the  intellectual  powers  are  just  be-
ginning to  unfold,  and  their  first  feeble  exertions  are

»  See  Note  XXXIII.

5(>  AMERICA.

directed  towards  a  few  objects  of  primary  necessity
and  use ;  when  the  faculties  of  the  mind  are  so  li-
mited, as  not  to  have  formed  abstract  or  general
ideas  ;  when  language  is  so  barren,  as  to  be  destitute
of  names  to  distinguish  any  thing  that  is  not  per-
ceived by  some  of  the  senses ;  it  is  preposterous  to
expect  that  man  should  be  capable  of  tracing  with
accuracy  the  relation  between  cause  and  effect ;  or
to  suppose  that  he  should  rise  from  the  contempla-
tion of  the  one  to  the  knowledge  of  the  other,  and
form  just  conceptions  of  a  Deity,  as  the  Creator  and
Governor  of  the  universe.  The  idea  of  creation  is
so  familiar  wherever  the  mind  is  enlarged  by  science,
and  illuminated  with  revelation,  that  we  seldom  re-
flect how  profound  and  abstruse  this  idea  is,  or  con
sider  what  progress  man  must  have  made  in  observa-
tion and  research,  before  he  could  arrive  at  any
knowledge  of  this  elementary  principle  in  religion.
Accordingly,  several  tribes  have  been  discovered  in
America,  which  have  no  idea  whatever  of  a  Supreme
Being,  and  no  rites  of  religious  worship.  Inatten-
tive to  that  magnificent  spectacle  of  beauty  and  order
presented  to  their  view,  unaccustomed  to  reflect
either  upon  what  they  themselves  are,  or  to  inquire
who  is  the  author  of  their  existence,  men,  in  their
savage  state,  pass  their  days  like  the  animals  round
them,  without  knowledge  or  veneration  of  any  supe-
rior power.  Some  rude  tribes  have  not  in  their
language  any  name  for  the  Deity,  nor  have  the  most
accurate  observers  been  able  to  discover  any  practice
or  institution  which  seemed  to  imply  that  they  re-
cognised his  authority,  or  were  solicitous  to  obtain
his  favour.1' It  is  however  only  among  men  in  the

b  Biet.  539. Lery  ap.  de  Bry,  iii.  221. Nieuhoff.  Church.  Coll.  ii.  132. Lettr.
Edif.  ^.  177. Id.  12, 13. Venegas,  i.  87. Lozano  Descript.  del  Gran  Chaco, 59.

Fernand.  Mission,  do  Chequit.  39.  Gurailla,  ii.  156.  Kociicfort  Hist  des  Antilles,
j).  468.  Margrave  Hist,  in  Append,  de  Chilieusibus,  286.  Ulloa  Notic.  Aineric.
335,  &c.  Barrere,  218,  219.  Ilarcourt  Voy.  to  Guiana,  Purch.  Pilgr.  iv.  p.  1273.
Account  of  Brasil,  by  a  Portuguese.  Ibid.  p.  1209.  Jones's  Journal,  p.  59.  See
Note  XXXIV.

BOOK IV.  57

most  uncultivated  state  of  nature,  and  while  their
intellectual  faculties  are  so  feeble  and  limited  as
hardly  to  elevate  them  above  the  irrational  creation,
that  we  discover  this  total  insensibility  to  the  im-
pressions of  any  invisible  power.

But  the  human  mind,  formed  for  religion,  soon
opens  to  the  reception  of  ideas,  which  are  destined,
when  corrected  and  refined,  to  be  the  great  source
of  consolation  amidst  the  calamities  of  life.  Among
some  of  the  American  tribes,  still  in  the  infancy  of
improvement,  we  discern  apprehensions  of  some  in-
visible and  powerful  beings.  These  apprehensions
are  originally  indistinct  and  perplexed,  and  seem  to
be  suggested  rather  by  the  dread  of  impending  evils,
than  to  flow  from  gratitude  for  blessings  received.
"While  Nature  holds  on  her  course  with  uniform  and
undisturbed  regularity,  men  enjoy  the  benefits  re-
sulting from  it,  without  inquiring  concerning  its
cause.  But  every  deviation  from  this  regular  course
rouses  and  astonishes  them.  When  they  behold
events  to  which  they  are  not  accustomed,  they  search
for  the  reasons  of  them  with  eager  curiosity.  Their
understanding  is  unable  to  penetrate  into  these  ;  but
imagination,  a  more  forward  and  ardent  faculty  of  the
mind,  decides,  without  hesitation.  It  ascribes  the
extraordinary  occurrences  in  nature  to  the  influence
of  invisible  beings,  and  supposes  that  the  thunder,
the  hurricane,  and  the  earthquake,  are  effects  of  their
interposition.  Some  such  confused  notion  of  spiritual
or  invisible  power,  superintending  over  those  natural
calamities  which  frequently  desolate  the  earth,  and
terrify  its  inhabitants,  may  be  traced  among  many
rude  nations.0  But  besides  this,  the  disasters  and
dangers  of  savage  life  are  so  many,  and  men  often
find  themselves  in  situations  so  formidable,  that  the
mind,  sensible  of  its  own  weakness,  has  no  resource

«  See  Note  XXXV.

58  AMERICA.

but  in  the  guidance  and  protection  of  wisdom  and
power  superior  to  what  is  human. Dejected  with
calamities  which  oppress  him,  and  exposed  to  dan-
gers which  he  cannot  repel,  the  savage  no  longer
relies  upon  himself;  he  feels  his  own  impotence,  and
sees  no  prospect  of  being  extricated,  but  by  the  in-
terposition of  some  unseen  arm. Hence,  in  all  unen-
lightened nations,  the  first  rites  or  practices  which
bear  any  resemblance  to  acts  of  religion,  have  it  for
their object to  avert evils which men suffer or
dread. The  Manitous  or  Okkis  of  the  North  Ameri-
cans were  amulets  or  charms,  which  they  imagined
to  be  of  such  virtue,  as  to  preserve  the  persons  who
reposed  confidence  in  them  from  every  disastrous
event,  or  they  were  considered  as  tutelary  spirits,
whose  aid  they  might  implore  in  circumstances  of
distress.'1 The  Cemis  of  the  islanders  were  reputed
by  them  to  be  the  authors  of  every  calamity  that
afflicts  the  human  race ;  they  were  represented  under
the  most  frightful  forms,  and  religious  homage  was
paid  to  them  with  no  other  view  than  to  appease
these  furious  deities/  Even  among  those  tribes  whose
religious  system  was  more  enlarged,  and  who  had
formed  some  conception  of  benevolent  beings,  which
delighted  in  conferring  benefits,  as  well  as  of  malicious
powers  prone  to  inflict  evil ;  superstition  still  appears
as  the  offspring  of  fear,  and  all  its  efforts  were  em-
ployed to  avert  calamities. They  were  persuaded
that  their  good  deities,  prompted  by  the  beneficence
of  their  nature,  would  bestow  every  blessing  in  their
power,  without  solicitation  or  acknowledgment;  and
their  only  anxiety  was  to  soothe  and  deprecate  the
wrath  of  the powers  whom  they  regarded  as  the
enemies  of  mankind/

<>  Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  343,  &c. Creuxii  Hist.  Canad.  p.  82,  &c.
«  Ovicdo,  lib.  iii.  c.  1.  p.  111. P.  Martyr,  decad.  p.  102,  &c.
f  Tertre,  ii.  365. Borde.p.  14. State  of  Virginia,  by  a  Native,  book  iii.  p.  32.
33. Dumont,  i.  165. Bancroft  Nat.  Hist,  of  Guiana,  309.

BOOK  IV.  59

Such  were  the  imperfect  conceptions  of  the  greater
part  of  the  Americans  with  respect  to  the  interposi-
tions of  invisible  agents,  and  such,  almost  universally,
was  the  mean  and  illiberal  object  of  their  supersti-
tions. Were  we  to  trace  back  the  ideas  of  other
nations  to  that  rude  state  in  which  history  first  pre-
sents them  to  our  view,  we  should  discover  a  surpris-
ing resemblance  in  their  tenets  and  practices ;  and
should  be  convinced,  that,  in  similar  circumstances,
the  faculties  of  the  human  mind  hold  nearly  the  same
course  in  their  progress,  and  arrive  at  almost  the  same
conclusions.  The  impressions  of  fear  are  conspicuous
in  all  the  systems  of  superstition  formed  in  this  situa-
tion. The  most  exalted  notions  of  men  rise  no  higher
than  to  a  perplexed  apprehension  of  certain  beings,
whose  power,  though  supernatural,  is  limited  as  well
as  partial.
Remark- But,  among  other  tribes,  which  have  been

able  diver- ■.  -^11  l  j

sity  in  longer  united,  or  have  made  greater  progress
their  reh- m improvement, we discern some feeble

gious  no-  I  '

tbns.  pointing  towards  more  just  and  adequate
conceptions  of  the  power  that  presides  in  nature.
They  seem  to  perceive  that  there  must  be  some  uni-
versal cause  to  whom  all  things  are  indebted  for  their
being.  If  we  may  judge  by  some  of  their  expressions,
they  appear  to  acknowledge  a  divine  power  to  be  the
maker  of  the  world,  and  the  disposer  of  all  events.
They  denominate  him  the  Great  Spirit*  But  these
ideas  are  faint  and  confused,  and  when  they  attempt
to  explain  them,  it  is  manifest,  that  among  them  the
word  spirit  has  a  meaning  very  different  from  that
in  which  we  employ  it,  and  that  they  have  no  con-
ception of  any  deity  but  what  is  corporeal.  They
believe  their  gods  to  be  of  the  human  form,  though
of  a  nature  more  excellent  than  man,  and  retail  such
wild  incoherent  fables  concerning  their  functions  and

B  Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  313. Sagard,  Voy.  du  Pays  des  Hurons,  226.

GO  AMERICA.

operations,  as  are  altogether  unworthy  of  a  place  in
history.  Even  among  these  tribes,  there  is  no  esta-
blished form  of  public  worship  ;  there  are  no  temples
erected  in  honour  of  their  deities  ;  and  no  ministers
peculiarly  consecrated  to  their  service.  They  have
the  knowledge,  however,  of  several  superstitious
ceremonies  and  practices  handed  down  to  them  by
tradition,  and  to  these  they  have  recourse  with  a
childish  credulity,  when  roused  by  any  emergence
from  their  usual  insensibility,  and  excited  to  acknow-
ledge the  power,  and  to  implore  the  protection  of
superior  beings.11

The  tribe  of  the  Natchez,  and  the  people

System  ill

of  the  of  Bogota,  had  advanced  beyond  the  other
uncultivated  nations  of  America  in  their  ideas
of  religion,  as  well  as  in  their  political  institutions ;
and  it  is  no  less  difficult  to  explain  the  cause  of  this
distinction  than  of  that  which  we  have  already  con-
sidered. The  sun  was  the  chief  object  of  religious
worship  among  the  Natchez.  In  their  temples,  which
were  constructed  with  some  magnificence,  and  de-
corated with  various  ornaments,  according  to  their
mode  of  architecture,  they  preserved  a  perpetual  fire,
as  the  purest  emblem  of  their  divinity.  Ministers
were  appointed  to  watch  and  feed  this  sacred  flame.
The  first  function  of  the  great  chief  of  the  nation,
every  morning,  was  an  act  of  obeisance  to  the  sun  ;
and  festivals  returned  at  stated  seasons,  which  were
celebrated  by  the  whole  community  with  solemn  but
unbloody  rites.1  This  is  the  most  refined  species  of
superstition  known  in  America,  and,  perhaps,  one  of
the  most  natural  as  well  as  most  seducing.  The  sun
is  the  apparent  source  of  the  joy,  fertility,  and  life,
diffused  through  nature  ;  and  while  the  human  mind,
in  its  earlier  essays  towards  inquiry,  contemplates

11  Charlcv.  N.  Fr.  iii.  345. Colden,  i.  17.
I  Duraont,  i.  153,  &c. Charlev.  IS'.  Fr.  iii.  417,  &c.  429. LaHtau.i.  167.

BOOK  IV.  61

and  admires  his  universal  and  animating  energy,  its
admiration  is  apt  to  stop  short  at  what  is  visible,
without  reaching  to  the  unseen  cause  ;  and  pays  that
adoration  to  the  most  glorious  and  beneficial  work
of  God,  which  is  due  only  to  him  who  formed  it.  As
fire  is  the  purest  and  most  active  of  the  elements,  and
in  some  of  its  qualities  and  effects  resembles  the  sun,
it  was,  not  improperly,  chosen  to  be  the  emblem  of
his  powerful  operation.  The  ancient  Persians,  a  peo-
ple far  superior,  in  every  respect,  to  that  rude  tribe
whose  rites  I  am  describing,  founded  their  religious
system  on  similar  principles,  and  established  a  form
of  public  worship,  less  gross  and  exceptionable  than
that  of  any  people  destitute  of  guidance  from  reve-
lation. This  surprising  coincidence  in  sentiment
between  two  nations,  in  such  different  states  of  im-
provement, is  one  of  the  many  singular  and  unac-
countable circumstances  which  occur  in  the  history
of  human  affairs.

Among  the  people  of  Begota.  the  sun  and  moon
were,  likewise,  the  chief  objects  of  veneration.  Their
system  of  religion  was  more  regular  and  complete,
though  less  pure,  than  that  of  the  Natchez.  They
had  temples,  altars,  priests,  sacrifices,  and  that  long
train  of  ceremonies,  which  superstition  introduces
wherever  she  has  fullv  established  her  dominion  over
the  minds  of  men.  But  the  rites  of  their  worship
were  cruel  and  bloody.  They  offered  human  victims
to  their  deities,  and  many  of  their  practices  nearly
resembled  the  barbarous  institutions  of  the  Mexicans,
the  genius  of  which  we  shall  have  an  opportunity  of
considering  more  attentively  in  its  proper  place.k
Their  ideas  With  respect  to  the  other  great  doctrine  of
concerning  religion,  concerning  the  immortality  of  the

the  im-  &  '  &  J

mortality soul,  the  sentiments  of  the  Americans  were
'  more  united  : the  human  mind,  even  when

k  Piedrahita,  Conq.  del  N.  Reyno,  p.  17. Herrera,  dec.  6.  lib.  v.  c.  6.

02  AMERICA.

least  improved  and  invigorated  by  culture,  shrinks
from  the  thoughts  of  annihilation,  and  looks  forward
with  hope  and  expectation  to  a  state  of  future  exist-
ence. This  sentiment,  resulting  from  a  secret  con-
sciousness of  its  own  dignity,  from  an  instinctive
longing  after  immortality,  is  universal,  and  may  be
deemed  natural.  Upon  this,  are  founded  the  most
exalted  hopes  of  man  in  his  highest  state  of  improve-
ment ;  nor  has  nature  withheld  from  him  this  sooth-
ing consolation,  in  the  most  early  and  rude  period  of
his  progress.  We  can  trace  this  opinion  from  one
extremity  of  America  to  the  other,  in  some  regions
more  faint  and  obscure,  in  others  more  perfectly
developed,  but  no  where  unknown.  The  most  un-
civilized of  its  savage  tribesdo  not  apprehend  death
as  the  extinction  of  being.  All  entertain  hopes  of  a
future  and  more  happy  state,  where  they  shall  be
for  ever  exempt  from  the  calamities  which  imbitter
human  life  in  its  present  condition.  This  future  state
they  conceive  to  be  a  delightful  country,  blessed  with
perpetual  spring,  whose  forests  abound  with  game,
whose  rivers  swarm  with  fish,  where  famine  is  never
felt,  and  uninterrupted  plenty  shall  be  enjoyed  with-
out labour  or  toil.  But  as  men,  in  forming  their  first
imperfect  ideas  concerning  the  invisible  world,  sup-
pose that  there  they  shall  continue  to  feel  the  same
desires,  and  to  be  engaged  in  the  same  occupations,
as  in  the  present  world  ;  they  naturally  ascribe  emi-
nence and  distinction,  in  that  state,  to  the  same  qua-
lities and  talents  which  are  here  the  object  of  their
esteem.  The  Americans,  accordingly,  allotted  the
highest  place,  in  their  country  of  spirits,  to  the  skilful
hunter,  to  the  adventurous  and  successful  warrior,
and  to  such  as  had  tortured  the  greatest  number  of
captives,  and  devoured  their  flesh.1 These  notions

1  Lery  ap.  de  Brv,  Hi.  222. Cliarlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  3M,  &c. De  la  Fotlierie,  ii.  45,
&c.  iii.  5.

BOOK  IV.  (33

were  so  prevalent,  that  they  gave  rise  to  a
them  to  universal  custom,  which  is,  at  once,  the
aSroA8'  strongest  evidence  that  the  Americans  be-
the  dead.  neve  -n  a  future  state)  and  the  best  illustra-
tion of  what  they  expect  there.  As  they  imagine,
that  departed  spirits  begin  their  career  anew  in  the
world  whither  they  are  gone,  that  their  friends  may
not  enter  upon  it  defenceless  and  unprovided,  they
bury  together  with  the  bodies  of  the  dead  their  bow,
their  arrows,  and  other  weapons  used  in  hunting  or
war  ;  they  deposit  in  their  tombs  the  skins  or  stuffs
of  which  they  make  garments,  Indian  corn,  manioc,
venison,  domestic  utensils,  and  whatever  is  reckoned
among  the  necessaries  in  their  simple  mode  of  life."1
In  some  provinces,  upon  the  decease  of  a  cazique  or
chief,  a  certain  number  of  his  wives,  of  his  favourites,
and  of  his  slaves,  were  put  to  death,  and  interred  to-
gether with  him,  that  he  might  appear  with  the  same
dignity  in  his  future  station,  and  be  waited  upon  by
the  same  attendants.11  This  persuasion  is  so  deep-
rooted,  that  many  of  the  deceased  persons  retainers
offer  themselves  as  voluntary  victims,  and  court  the
privilege  of  accompanying  their  departed  master,  as
a  high  distinction.  It  has  been  found  difficult,  on
some  occasions,  to  set  bounds  to  this  enthusiasm  of
affectionate  duty,  and  to  reduce  the  train  of  a  fa-
vourite leader  to  such  a  number  as  the  tribe  could
afford  to  spare.0

supersti- Among  the  Americans,  as  well  as  other  un-
tbn  con- civilized  nations,  many  of  the  rites  and  observ-

nected  ,  J

with  de- ances  which  bear  some  resemblance  to  acts  of
religion,  have  no  connexion  with  devotion,

m  Chronica  de  Ciecade  Leon,  c.  28.  Sagard,  288.  Creux.  Hist.  Canad.  p.  91.
Rochefort,  Hist,  des  Antilles,  568.  Biet.  391.  De  la  Potherie,  ii.  44.  iii.  8.  Blanco,
Convers.  de  Piritu,  p.  35.

»  Dumont  Louisiane,  i.  208,  &c.  Oviedo,  lib.  v.  c.  3.  Goraara  Hist.  Gen.  c.  28.
P.  Mart,  decad.  304.  Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  421.  Herrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  3.  P.  Mel-
chior  Hernandez  Memor.  de  Cherequi.  Coll.  Orig.  Papers,  i.  Chron.  de  Cieca  de
Leon,  c.  33.  °  See  Note  XXXVI.

(U  AMERICA.

but  proceed  from  a  fond  desire  of  prying  into  futu-
rity. The  human  mind  is  most  apt  to  feel,  and  to
discover  this  vain  curiosity,  when  its  own  powers
are  most  feeble  and  uninformed.  Astonished  with
occurrences,  of  which  it  is  unable  to  comprehend  the
cause,  it  naturally  fancies  that  there  is  something
mysterious  and  wonderful  in  their  origin.  Alarmed
at  events  of  which  it  cannot  discern  the  issue  or  the
consequences,  it  has  recourse  to  other  means  of  dis-
covering them,  than  the  exercise  of  its  own  sagacity.
Wherever  superstition  is  so  established  as  to  form  a
regular  system,  this  desire  of  penetrating  into  the
secrets  of  futurity  is  connected  with  it.  Divination
becomes  a  religious  act.  Priests,  as  the  ministers  of
heaven,  pretend  to  deliver  its  oracles  to  men.  They
are  the  only  soothsayers,  augurs,  and  magicians,  who
profess  the  sacred  and  important  art  of  disclosing
what  is  hid  from  other  eyes.

Thia  de.  But,  among  rude  nations,  who  pay  no  ve-
partment neration  to  any  superintending  power,  and

belongs  .

to  their who  have  no  established  rites  or  ministers  of

physicians. ...  ,, .  .,  ,.  ,

religion,  their  curiosity  to  discover  what  is
future  and  unknown,  is  cherished  by  a  different  prin-
ciple, and  derives  strength  from  another  alliance.  As
the  diseases  of  men,  in  the  savage  state,  are  (as  has
been  already  observed)  like  those  of  the  animal  crea-
tion, few  but  extremely  violent,  their  impatience
under  what  they  suffer,  and  solicitude  for  the  re-
covery of  health,  soon  inspired  them  with  extraor-
dinary reverence  for  such  as  pretended  to  understand
the  nature  of  their  maladies,  and  to  be  possessed  of
knowledge  sufficient  to  preserve  or  deliver  them  from
their  sudden  and  fatal  effects.  These  ignorant  pre-
tenders, however,  were  such  utter  strangers  to  the
structure  of  the  human  frame,  as  to  be  equally  un-
acquainted with  the  causes  of  its  disorders,  and  the
manner  in  which  they  will  terminate. Superstition,

BOOK  IV.  65

mingled  frequently  with  some  portion  of  craft,  sup-
plied what  they  wanted  in  science.  They  imputed
the  origin  of  diseases  to  supernatural  influence,  and
prescribed  or  performed  a  variety  of  mysterious  rites,
which  they  gave  out  to  be  of  such  efficacy  as  to  re-
move the  most  dangerous  and  inveterate  maladies.
The  credulity  and  love  of  the  marvellous,  natural  to
uninformed  men,  favoured  the  deception,  and  pre-
pared them  to  be  the  dupes  of  those  impostors.
Among  savages,  their  first  physicians  are  a  kind  of
conjurers  or  wizards,  who  boast  that  they  know  what
is  past,  and  can  foretell  what  is  to  come.  Incanta-
tions, sorcery,  and  mummeries  of  diverse  kinds,  no
less  strange  than  frivolous,  are  the  means  which  they
employ  to  expel  the  imaginary  causes  of  malignity  ;p
and,  relying  upon  the  efficacy  of  these,  they  predict
with  confidence  what  will  be  the  fate  of  their  deluded
patients.  Thus  superstition,  in  its  earliest  form,
flowed  from  the  solicitude  of  man  to  be  delivered
from  present  distress,  not  from  his  dread  of  evils
awaiting  him  in  a  future  life,  and  was  originally  in-
grafted on  medicine,  not  on  religion.  One  of  the  first
and  most  intelligent  historians  of  America,  was  struck
with  this  alliance  between  the  art  of  divination  and
that  of  physic,  among  the  people  of  Hispaniola/1  But
this  was  not  peculiar  to  them.  The  Alexis,  the  Piagas,
the  Autmoins,  or  whatever  was  the  distinguishing
name  of  their  diviners  and  charmers  in  other  parts  of
America,  were  all  the  physicians  of  their  respective
tribes,  in  the  same  manner  as  the  Bubitos  of  Hispa-
niola.  As  their  function  led  them  to  apply  to  the
human  mind  when  enfeebled  by  sickness,  and  as  they
found  it,  in  that  season  of  dejection,  prone  to  be
alarmed  with  imaginary  fears,  or  amused  with  vain
hopes,  they  easily  induced  it  to  rely  with  implicit

P  P.  Melch.  Hernandez,  Memorial  de  Cberiqui. Cojlect.  Orig.  Pap.  i.
1  Oviedo,  lib.  v.  c.  1.

VOL. VI T.  F

06  AMERICA.

confidence  on  the  virtue  of  their  spells,  and  the  cer-
tainty of  their  predictions.'

Gradually  Whenever  men  acknowledge  the  reality  of
extends,  supernatural  power  and  discernment  in  one
instance,  they  have  a  propensity  to  admit  it  in  others.
The  Americans  did  not  long  suppose  the  efficacy  of
conjuration  to  be  confined  to  one  subject.  They  had
recourse  to  it  in  every  situation  of  danger  or  distress.
When  the  events  of  war  were  peculiarly  disastrous,
when  they  met  with  unforeseen  disappointments  in
hunting,  when  inundations  or  drought  threatened
their  crops  with  destruction,  they  called  upon  their
conjurers  to  begin  their  incantations,  in  order  to  dis-
co ver  the  causes  of  those  calamities,  or  to  foretell  what
would  be  their  issue.3  Their  confidence  in  this  de-
lusive art  gradually  increased,  and  manifested  itself
in  all  the  occurrences  of  life.  When  involved  in  any
difficulty,  or  about  to  enter  upon  any  transaction  of
moment,  every  individual  regularly  consulted  the
sorcerer,  and  depended  upon  his  instructions  to  ex-
tricate him  from  the  former,  as  well  as  to  direct  his
conduct  in  the  latter.  Even  among  the  rudest  tribes
in  America,  superstition  appears  in  this  form,  and  di-
vination is  an  art  in  high  esteem.  Long  before  man
had  acquired  such  knowledge  of  a  deity  as  inspires
reverence,  and  leads  to  adoration,  we  observe  him
stretching  out  a  presumptuous  hand  to  draw  aside
that  veil  with  which  Providence  kindly  conceals  its
purposes  from  human  knowledge ;  and  we  find  him
labouring  with  fruitless  anxiety  to  penetrate  into  the
mysteries  of  the  divine  administration.  To  discern
and  to  worship  a  superintending  power,  is  an  evi-
dence of  the  enlargement  and  maturity  of  the  human

rHerrera,  dec.  1.  lib.  iii.  c.  4.  Osborne,  Coll.  ii.  860.  Dumont,  i.  169,  Sec.
Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  361.  364,  &c.  Lawsou,  N.  Carol.  214.  Kibas,  Triunif.  p.  17.
Biet,  386. Dela  Potherie,  ii.  35,  &c.

*  Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  3.  Dumont,  i.  i?3.  Fernand.  Rclac.  dc  Ios  Chequit.  p.  40.
Lozano,  84. Margrave,  '279.

BOOK IV.  67

understanding ;  a  vain  desire  of  prying  into  futurity,
is  the  error  of  its  infancy,  and  a  proof  of  its  weakness.
From  this  weakness  proceeded  likewise  the  faith  of
the  Americans  in  dreams,  their  observation  of  omens,
their  attention  to  the  chirping  of  birds,  and  the  cries
of  animals,  all  which  they  suppose  to  be  indications
of  future  events ;  and  if  any  one  of  these  prognostics
is  deemed  unfavourable,  they  instantly  abandon  the
pursuit  of  those  measures  on  which  they  are  most
eagerly  bent.1

Detached  VIII.  But  if  we  would  form  a  complete  idea
customs.  0f  the  uncultivated  nations  of  America,  we
must  not  pass  unobserved  some  singular  customs,
which,  though  universal  and  characteristic,  could  not
be  reduced,  with  propriety,  to  any  of  the  articles
into  which  I  have  divided  my  inquiry  concerning
their  manners.

Love  of  Among  savages,  in  every  part  of  the  globe,
dancing,  tae  \ove  0f  dancing  is  a  favourite  passion.  As,
during  a  great  part  of  their  time,  they  languish  in  a
state  of  inactivity  and  indolence,  without  any  occu-
pation to  rouse  or  interest  them,  they  delight  univer-
sally in  a  pastime  which  calls  forth  the  active  powers
of  their  nature  into  exercise.  The  Spaniards,  when
they  first  visited  iVmerica,  were  astonished,  at  the
fondness  of  the  natives  for  dancing,  and  beheld  with
wonder  a  people,  cold  and  unanimated  in  most  of  their
other  pursuits,  kindle  into  life,  and  exert  themselves
with  ardour,  as  often  as  this  favourite  amusement
recurred.  Among  them,  indeed,  dancing  ought  not
to  be  denominated  an  amusement.  It  is  a  serious
and  important  occupation,  which  mingles  in  every
occurrence  of  public  or  private  life.  If  any  inter-
course be  necessary  between  two  American  tribes,
the  ambassadors  of  the  one  approach  in  a  solemn

'Charlev. N.  Fr.  iii.  262.  355. Stadiusap.de  Bry,  iii.  120. Creuxj.  Hist.
Canad.  84. Techo  Hist,  of  Parag.  Church.  Coll.  vi.  37. De  la  Potherie,  iii.  6.

F2

(i8  AMERICA.

dance,  and  present  the  calumet  or  emblem  of  peace;
the  sachems  of  the  other  receive  it  with  the  same
ceremony."  If  war  is  denounced  against  an  enemy,
it  is  by  a  dance,  expressive  of  the  resentment  which
they  feel,  and  of  the  vengeance  which  they  meditate.*
If  the  wrath  of  their  gods  is  to  be  appeased,  or  their
beneficence  to  be  celebrated ;  if  they  rejoice  at  the
birth  of  a  child,  or  mourn  the  death  of  a  friend/  they
have  dances  appropriated  to  each  of  these  situations,
and  suited  to  the  different  sentiments  with  which
they  are  then  animated.  If  a  person  is  indisposed,  a
dance  is  prescribed  as  the  most  effectual  means  of
restoring  him  to  health  ;  and  if  he  himself  cannot  en-
dure the  fatigue  of  such  an  exercise,  the  physician  or
conjurer  performs  it  in  his  name,  as  if  the  virtue  of
his  activity  could  be  transferred  to  his  patient/

All  their  dances  are  imitations  of  some  action;
and  though  the  music  by  which  they  are  regulated  is
extremely  simple  and  tiresome  to  the  ear  by  its  dull
monotony,  some  of  their  dances  appear  wonderfully
expressive  and  animated.  The  war-dance  is,  per-
haps, the  most  striking.  It  is  the  representation  of
a  complete  American  campaign.  The  departure  of
the  warriors  from  their  village,  their  march  into  the
enemy's  country,  the  caution  with  which  they  en-
camp, the  address  with  which  they  station  some  of
their  party  in  ambush,  the  manner  of  surprising  the
enemy,  the  noise  and  ferocity  of  the  combat,  the
scalping  of  those  who  are  slain,  the  seizing  of  pri-
soners, the  triumphant  return  of  the  conquerors,  and
the  torture  of  the  victims,  are  successively  exhibited.
The  performers  enter  with  such  enthusiastic  ardour
into  their  several  parts ;  their  gestures,  their  counte-

u  De  la  Potherie  Hist.  ii.  17,  &c. Charier.  N.  Fr.  iii.  211.  297. La  Hontan,
i.  100.  137. Hennepin  Decou.  146,  &c.

w  Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  298. Lafitau,  i 523.

"  Joutel,  343. Gomara  Hist.  Gen.  c.  196.

r  Deny*  Hist.  Nat.  1 9. Brickell,  372. De  la  Potherie,  ii.  36.

BOOK IV.  69

nance,  their  voice,  are  so  wild  and  so  well  adapted
to  their  various  situations,  that  Europeans  can  hardly
believe  it  to  be  a  mimic  scene,  or  view  it  without
emotions  of  fear  and  horror.2

But  however  expressive  some  of  the  American
dances  may  be,  there  is  one  circumstance  in  them
remarkable,  and  connected  with  the  character  of  the
race.  The  songs,  the  dances,  the  amusements  of
other  nations,  expressive  of  the  sentiments  which
animate  their  hearts,  are  often  adapted  to  display  or
excite  that  sensibility  which  mutually  attaches  the
sexes.  Among  some  people,  such  is  the  ardour  of
this  passion,  that  love  is  almost  the  sole  object  of
festivity  and  joy;  and  as  rude  nations  are  strangers
to  delicacy,  and  unaccustomed  to  disguise  any  emo-
tion of  their  minds,  their  dances  are  often  extremely
wanton  and  indecent.  Such  is  the  Caletida,  of  which
the  natives  of  Africa  are  so  passionately  fond  ;a  and
such  the  feats  of  the  dancing  girls,  which  the  Asiatics
contemplate  with  so  much  avidity  of  desire.  But,
among  the  Americans,  more  cold  and  indifferent  to
their  females,  from  causes  which  I  have  already  ex-
plained, the  passion  of  love  mingles  but  little  with
their  festivals  and  pastimes.  Their  songs  and  dances
are  mostly  solemn  and  martial ;  they  are  connected
with  some  of  the  serious  and  important  affairs  of
life  ;b  and  having  no  relation  to  love  or  gallantry,  are
seldom  common  to  the  two  sexes,  but  executed  by
the  men  and  women  apart.0  If,  on  some  occasions,
the  women  are  permitted  to  join  in  the  festival,  the
character  of  the  entertainment  is  still  the  same,  and
no  movement  or  gesture  is  expressive  of  attachment,
or  encourages  familiarity/

*De  la  Potherie,  ii.  116. Cbarlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  297. Lafitau,  i.  523.
a  Adanson  Voyage  to  Senegal,  iii.  287. Labat  Voyages,  iv.  463. Sloane  Hist.
Nat.  of  Jam.  Introd.  p.  48. Fermin  Descript.  de  Snrin.  i.  139.

b  Descript.  of  N.  France. Osborne  Coll.  ii.  883. Charier.  N.  Fr.  iii.  84.
c  Wafer's  Account  of  Isthmus,  &c.  169. Lery  ap.  de  Bry,  iii.  177. Lozano
Hist,  de  Parag.  i  149. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.vii.  c.  8.  dec.  4.  lib.  x.  c.4. See  Note
XXXVII.  d  Barrere  Fr.  Equin.  p.  191.

70  AMERICA.

Passion  for  An  immoderate  love  of  play,  especially  at
gaming,  games  of  hazard,  which  seems  to  be  natural
to  all  people  unaccustomed  to  the  occupations  of
regular  industry,  is  likewise  universal  among  the
Americans.  The  same  causes,  which  so  often  prompt
persons  in  civilized  life,  who  are  at  their  ease,  to
have  recourse  to  this  pastime,  render  it  the  delight
of  the  savage.  The  former  are  independent  of  la-
bour, the  latter  do  not  feel  the  necessity  of  it ;  and
as  both  are  unemployed,  they  run  with  transport  to
whatever  is  interesting  enough  to  stir  and  to  agitate
their  minds.  Hence  the  Americans,  who  at  other
times  are  so  indifferent,  so  phlegmatic,  so  silent,  and
animated  with  so  few  desires,  as  soon  as  they  engage
in  play  become  rapacious,  impatient,  noisy,  and  al-
most frantic,  with  eagerness.  Their  furs,  their  do-
mestic utensils,  their  clothes,  their  arms,  are  staked
at  the  gaming-table,  and  when  all  is  lost,  high  as
their  sense  of  independence  is,  in  a  wild  emotion  of
despair  or  of  hope,  they  will  often  risk  their  personal
liberty  upon  a  single  cast.6  Among  several  tribes,
such  gaming  parties  frequently  recur,  and  become
their  most  acceptable  entertainment  at  every  great
festival.  Superstition,  which  is  apt  to  take  hold  of
those  passions  which  are  most  vigorous,  frequently
lends  its  aid  to  confirm  and  strengthen  this  favourite
inclination.  Their  conjurers  are  accustomed  to  pre-
scribe a  solemn  match  at  play,  as  one  of  the  most
efficacious  methods  of  appeasing  their  gods,  or  of
restoring  the  sick  to  health.*

And  for  From  causes  similar  to  those  which  render
drinking,  them  fond  of  play,  the  Americans  are  ex-
tremely addicted  to  drunkenness.  It  seems  to  have
been  one  of  the  first  exertions  of  human  ingenuity
to  discover  some  composition  of  an  intoxicating  qua-

p Charlcv. N. Fr. iii.  '261. 518. Lalilau, ii. 338,  ftc. Kibas  Triumf. 13.
Brickell.  3j3.  '  Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  262.

BOOK  IV.  71

iity ;  and  there  is  hardly  any  nation  so  rude,  or  so
destitute  of  invention,  as  not  to  have  succeeded  in
this  fatal  research. The  most  barbarous  of  the  Ame-
rican tribes  have  been  so  unfortunate  as  to  attain
this  art ;  and  even  those  which  are  so  deficient  in
knowledge,  as  to  be  unacquainted  with  the  method
of  giving  an  inebriating  strength  to  liquors  by  fer-
mentation, can  accomplish  the  same  end  by  other
means. The  people  of  the  islands  of  North  America,
and  of  California,  used,  for  this  purpose,  the  smoke
of  tobacco,  drawn  up  with  a  certain  instrument  into
the  nostrils,  the  fumes  of  which  ascending  to  the
brain,  they  felt  all  the  transports  and  frenzy  of  in-
toxication.8 In  almost  every  other  part  of  the  New
World,  the  natives  possessed  the  art  of  extracting
an  intoxicating  liquor  from maize  or  the  manioc
root,  the  same  substances  which  they  convert  into
bread. The  operation  by  which  they  effect  this,
nearly  resembles  the  common  one  of  brewing,  but
with  this  difference,  that  in  place  of  yeast,  they  use
a  nauseous  infusion  of  a  certain  quantity  of  maize  or
manioc  chewed  by  their  women. The  saliva  excites
a  vigorous  fermentation,  and  in  a  few  days  the  liquor
becomes  fit  for  drinking. It  is  not  disagreeable  to
the  taste,  and  when  swallowed  in  large  quantities,  is
of  an  intoxicating  quality.11 This  is  the  general  be-
verage of  the  Americans,  which  they  distinguish  by
various  names,  and  for  which  they  feel  such  a  violent
and  insatiable  desire,  as  it  is  not  easy  either  to  con-
ceive or  describe. Among  polished  nations,  where  a
succession of various functions and amusements
keeps  the  mind  in  continual  occupation,  the  desire
for  strong  drink  is  regulated  in  a  great  measure  by
the  climate,  and  increases  or  diminishes  according
to  the  variations  of  its  temperature. In  warm  re-

B  Oviedo  Hist.  ap.  Ramus,  iii.  113. Venegas,  i.  68. Naufrag.  de  Cabeca  de
Vaca,  cap.  26. See  Note  XXXVIII.

h  Stadius  ap.  de  Bry,  iii.  111. Lery,  ibid.  175,

72  AMERICA.

gions,  the  delicate  and  sensible  frame  of  the  inhabi-
tants does  not  require  the  stimulation  of  fermented
liquors. In  colder  countries,  the  constitution  of  the
natives,  more  robust  and  more  sluggish,  stands  in
need  of  generous  liquors  to  quicken  and  animate  it.
But  among  savages,  the  desire  of  something  that  is
of  power  to  intoxicate,  is  in  every  situation  the  same.
All  the  people  of  America,  if  we  except  some  small
tribes  near  the  straits  of  Magellan,  whether  natives
of  the  torrid  zone,  or  inhabitants  of  its  more  tempe-
rate regions,  or  placed  by  a  harder  fate  in  the  severe
climates  towards  its  northern  or  southern  extremity,
appear  to  be  equally  under  the  dominion  of  this  ap-
petite.1 Such  a  similarity  of  taste,  among  people  in
such  different  situations,  must  be  ascribed  to  the  in-
fluence of  some  moral  cause,  and  cannot  be  considered
as  the  effect  of  any  physical  or  constitutional  want.
While  engaged  in  war  or  in  the  chase,  the  savage  is
often  in  the  most  interesting  situations,  and  air  the
powers  of  his  nature  are  roused  to  the  most  vigorous
exertions.  But  those  animating  scenes  are  succeeded
by  long  intervals  of  repose,  during  which  the  war-
rior meets  with  nothing  that  he  deems  of  sufficient
dignity  or  importance  to  merit  his  attention. He
languishes  and  mopes  in  this  season  of  indolence.
The  posture  of  his  body  is  an  emblem  of  the  state  of
his  mind. In  one  climate,  cowering  over  the  fire  in
his  cabin  ;  in  another,  stretched  under  the  shade  of
some  tree,  he  dozes  away  his  time  in  sleep,  or  in  an
unthinking  joyless  inactivity,  not  far  removed  from
it. As  strong  liquors  awake  him  from  this  torpid
state,  give  a  brisker  motion  to  his  spirits,  and  enliven
him  more  thoroughly  than  either  dancing  or  gaming,
his  love  of  them  is  excessive. A  savage,  when  not
engaged  in  action,  is  a  pensive  melancholy  animal ;

'  Guniilla,  i.  257.  Lozano  Descrip.  del  Gran.  Chaco,  56.  103.  Kibas,  8.  Ulloa
i.  24'J.  337.  Marchais,  iv.  436.  Fernandez  Mission,  de  las  Cbecjuit.  35.  Bar-
r«ie,  p.  203. Blanco  Convcrs.  dc  Piritu,31.

BOOK  IV.  73

but  as  soon  as  he  tastes,  or  has  a  prospect  of  tasting,
the  intoxicating  draught,  he  becomes  gay  and  fro-
licksome.k  Whatever  be  the  occasion  or  pretext  on
which  the  Americans  assemble,  the  meeting  always
terminates  in  a  debauch.  Many  of  their  festivals
have  no  other  object,  and  they  welcome  the  return
of  them  with  transports  of  joy.  As  they  are  not  ac-
customed to  restrain  any  appetite,  they  set  no  bounds
to  this.  The  riot  often  continues  without  intermis-
sion several  days ;  and  whatever  may  be  the  fatal
effects  of  their  excess,  they  never  cease  from  drink-
ing as  long  as  one  drop  of  liquor  remains.  The  per-
sons of  greatest  eminence,  the  most  distinguished
warriors,  and  the  chiefs  most  renowned  for  their
wisdom,  have  no  greater  command  of  themselves
than  the  most  obscure  members  of  the  community.
Their  eagerness  for  present  enjoyment  renders  them
blind  to  its  fatal  consequences ;  and  those  very  men,
who  in  other  situations  seem  to  possess  a  force  of
mind  more  than  human,  are  in  this  instance  inferior
to  children,  in  foresight,  as  well  as  consideration,
and  mere  slaves  of  brutal  appetite.1  When  their
passions,  naturally  strong,  are  heightened  and  in-
flamed by  drink,  they  are  guilty  of  the  most  enor-
mous outrages,  and  the  festivity  seldom  concludes
without  deeds  of  violence  or  bloodshed.1"

But,  amidst  this  wild  debauch,  there  is  one  circum-
stance remarkable  ;  the  women,  in  most  of  the  Ame-
rican tribes,  are  not  permitted  to  partake  of  it.n  Their
province  is  to  prepare  the  liquor,  to  serve  it  about  to
the  guests,  and  to  take  care  of  their  husbands  and
friends,  when  their  reason  is  overpowered.  This  ex-
clusion of  the  women  from  an  enjoyment  so  highly
valued  by  savages,  may  be  justly  considered  as  a
mark  of  their  inferiority,  and  as  an  additional  evi

k  Melendez  Tesorez  Verdad.  iii.  369.  '  Ribas,  9. Ulloaj  i.  338.

m  Lettr.  Edif.  ii.  178. Torquemada  Mond. Ind.  i.  339.
,  °  See  Note  XXXIX.

74  AMI-:  RICA.

dence  of  that  contempt  with  which  they  were  treated
in  the  New  World.  The  people  of  North  America,
when  first  discovered,  were  not  acquainted  with  any
intoxicating  drink  ;  but  as  the  Europeans  early  found
it  their  interest  to  supply  them  with  spirituous  li-
quors, drunkenness  soon  became  as  universal  among
them  as  among  their  countrymen  to  the  south ;  and
their  women  having  acquired  this  new  taste,  indulge
it  with  as  little  decency  and  moderation  as  the  men."
rut  to  ^  were  endless  to  enumerate  all  the  de-

death  the  tached  customs  which  have  excited  the  won-

aged  and

incurable,  der  of  travellers  in  America;  but  I  cannot
omit  one  seemingly  as  singular  as  any  that  has  been
mentioned.  When  their  parents  and  other  relations
become  old,  or  labour  under  any  distemper  which
their  slender  knowledge  of  the  healing  art  cannot  re-
move, the  Americans  cut  short  their  days  with  a  vio-
lent hand,  in  order  to  be  relieved  from  the  burden  of
supporting  and  tending  them.  This  practice  pre-
vailed among  the  ruder  tribes  in  every  part  of  the
continent,  from  Hudson's  Bay  to  the  river  De  la  Plata;
and  however  shocking  it  may  be  to  those  sentiments
of  tenderness  and  attachment,  which,  in  civilized  life,
we  are  apt  to  consider  as  congenial  with  our  frame,
the  condition  of  man  in  the  savage  state  leads  and
reconciles  him  to  it.  The  same  hardships  and  dif-
ficulty of  procuring  subsistence,  which  deter  savages,
in  some  cases,  from  rearing  their  children,  prompt
them  to  destroy  the  aged  and  infirm.  The  declining
state  of  the  one  is  as  helpless  as  the  infancy  of  the
other.  The  former  are  no  less  unable  than  the  latter
to  perform  the  functions  that  belong  to  a  warrior  or
hunter,  or  to  endure  those  various  distresses  in  which
savages  are  so  often  involved,  by  their  own  want  of
foresight  and  industry.  Their  relations  feel  this ;  and,
incapable  of  attending  to  the  wants  or  weakness  of

°  Hutchinson  Kist.  of  Massachus.  469. Lafitau,  ii.  125. Saga rd,  146,

BOOK IV.  75

others,  their  impatience  under  an  additional  burden
prompts  them  to  extinguish  that  life  which  they  find
it  difficult  to  sustain.  This  is  not  regarded  as  a  deed
of  cruelty,  but  as  an  act  of  mercy. An  American,
broken  with  years  and  infirmities,  conscious  that  he
can  no  longer  depend  on  the  aid  of  those  around  him,
places  himself  contentedly  in  his  grave ;  and  it  is  by
the  hands  of  his  children  or  nearest  relations  that  the
thong  is  pulled,  or  the  blow  inflicted,  which  releases
him  for  ever  from  the  sorrows  of  life.p
General IX.  After  contemplating  the  rude  American
oftS tribes  in  such  various  lights ;  after  taking  a
character.  view  0f  their  customs  and  manners  from  so
many  different  stations,  nothing  remains  but  to  form
a  general  estimate  of  their  character,  compared  with
that  of  more  polished  nations. A  human  being,  as
he  comes  originally  from  the  hand  of  nature,  is  every-
where the  same. At  his  first  appearance  in  the  state
of  infancy,  whether  it  be  among  the  rudest  savages,
or  in  the  most  civilized  nation,  we  can  discern  no
quality  which  marks  any  distinction  or  superiority.
The  capacity  of  improvement  seems  to  be  the  same ;
and  the  talents  he  may  afterward  acquire,  as  well  as
the  virtues  he  may  be  rendered  capable  of  exercising,
depend,  in  a  great  measure,  upon  the  state  of  society
in  which  he  is  placed. To  this  state  his  mind  na-
turally accommodates  itself,  and  from  it  receives  dis-
cipline and  culture.  In  proportion  to  the  wants  which
it  accustoms  a  human  being  to  feel,  and  the  functions
in  which  these  engage  him,  his  intellectual  powers
are  called  forth. According  to  the  connexions  which
it  establishes  between  him  and  the  rest  of  his  species,
the  affections  of  his  heart  are  exerted. It  is  only  by
attending  to  this  great  principle,  that  we  can  dis-
cover what  is  the  character  of  man  in  every  different
period  of  his  progress.

P  Cassani  Histor.  de  N.  Rejno  de  Gran.  p.  300. Piso,  p.  6. Ellis  Voy. 191.
Guimlia,  i.  353.

76  AMERICA.

inteiiec-  ^  we  aPPty  ^  to  savage  life,  and  measure
tuai  Pow-  the  attainments  of  the  human  mind  in  that
state  by  this  standard,  we  shall  find,  accord-
ing to  an  observation  which  I  have  already  made,
that  the  intellectual  powers  of  man  must  be  ex-
tremely limited  in  their  operations.  They  are  con-
fined within  the  narrow  sphere  of  what  he  deems
necessary  for  supplying  his  own  wants.  Whatever
has  not  some  relation  to  these,  neither  attracts  his
attention,  nor  is  the  object  of  his  inquiries.  But  how-
ever narrow  the  bounds  may  be  within  which  the
knowledge  of  a  savage  is  circumscribed,  he  possesses
thoroughly  that  small  portion  which  he  has  attained.
It  was  not  communicated  to  him  by  formal  instruc-
tion ;  he  does  not  attend  to  it  as  a  matter  of  mere
speculation  and  curiosity  ;  it  is  the  result  of  his  own
observation,  the  fruit  of  his  own  experience,  and  ac-
commodated to  his  condition  and  exigencies.  While
employed  in  the  active  occupations  of  war  or  of  hunt-
ing, he  often  finds  himself  in  difficult  and  perilous
situations,  from  which  the  efforts  of  his  own  sagacity
must  extricate  him.  He  is  frequently  engaged  in
measures,  where  every  step  depends  upon  his  own
ability  to  decide,  where  he  must  rely  solely  upon
his  own  penetration  to  discern  the  dangers  to  which
he  is  exposed,  and  upon  his  own  wisdom  in  provid-
ing against  them.  In  consequence  of  this,  he  feels
the  knowledge  which  he  possesses,  and  the  efforts
which  he  makes,  and  either  in  deliberation  or  action
rests  on  himself  alone.

Political  As  tne  talents  of  individuals  are  exercised
talents.  an(j  improved  by  such  exertions,  much  poli-
tical wisdom  is  said  to  be  displayed  in  conducting
the  affairs  of  their  small  communities.  The  council
of  old  men  in  an  American  tribe,  deliberating  upon
its  interests,  and  determining  with  respect  to  peace
or  war,  has  been  compared  to  the  senate  in  more  po-

BOOK IV.  77

lished  republics. The  proceedings  of  the  former,  we
are  told,  are  often  no  less  formal  and  sagacious  than
those  of  the  latter. Great  political  wisdom  is  ex-
hibited in  pondering  the  various  measures  proposed,
and  in  balancing  their  probable  advantages,  against
the  evils  of  which  they  may  be  productive. Much
address  and  eloquence  are  employed  by  the  leaders,
who  aspire  at  acquiring  such  confidence  with  their
countrymen,  as  to  have  an  ascendant  in  those  assem-
blies.q But,  among  savage  tribes,  the  field  for  dis-
playing political  talents  cannot  be  extensive.  Where
the  idea  of  private  property  is  incomplete,  and  no
criminal  jurisdiction  is  established,  there  is  hardly
any  function of  internal  government to exercise.
Where  there  is  no  commerce,  and  scarcely  any  in-
tercourse among  separate  tribes  ;  where  enmity  is  im-
placable, and  hostilities  are  carried  on  almost  with-
out intermission  ;  there  will  be  few  points  of  public
concern  to  adjust  with  their  neighbours  ;  and  that  de-
partment of  their  affairs  which  may  be  denominated
foreign,  cannot  be  so  intricate  as  to  require  much  re-
fined policy  in  conducting  it. Where  individuals  are
so  thoughtless  and  improvident  as  seldom  to  take
effectual  precautions  for  self-preservation,  it  is  vain
to  expect  that  public  measures  and  deliberations  will
be  regulated  by  the  contemplation  of  remote  events.
It  is  the  genius  of  savages  to  act  from  the  impulse  of
present  passion. They  have  neither  foresight  nor
temper  to  form  complicated  arrangements  with  re-
spect to  their  future  conduct. The  consultations  of
the  Americans,  indeed,  are  so  frequent,  and  their
negotiations  are  so  many/  and  so  long  protracted,  as
to  give  their  proceedings  an  extraordinary  aspect  of
wisdom. But  this  is  not  owing  so  much  to  the  depth
of  their  schemes,  as  to  the  coldness  and  phlegm  of
their  temper,  which  render  them  slow  in  determin-

q  Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  269,  &c.  r  See  Note  XL.

78  AMERICA.

ing.s  If  we  except  the  celebrated  league,  that  united
the  Five  Nations  in  Canada  into  a  federal  republic,
which  shall  be  considered  in  its  proper  place,  we  can
discern  few  such  traces  of  political  wisdom,  among
the  rude  American  tribes,  as  discover  any  great  de-
gree of  foresight  or  extent  of  intellectual  abilities.
Even  among  them,  we  shall  find  public  measures
more  frequently  directed  by  the  impetuous  ferocity
of  their  youth,  than  regulated  by  the  experience  and
wisdom  of  their  old  men.

Degree  of  As  tne  condition  of  man  in  the  savage  state
affection.  js  unfavourable  to  the  progress  of  the  under-
standing, it  has  a  tendency  likewise,  in  some  re-
spects, to  check  the  exercise  of  affection,  and  to  ren-
der the  heart  contracted.  The  strongest  feeling  in
the  mind  of  a  savage  is  a  sense  of  his  own  indepen-
dence. He  has  sacrificed  so  small  a  portion  of  his
natural  liberty  by  becoming  a  member  of  society,
that  he  remains,  in  a  great  degree,  the  sole  master  of
his  own  actions.*  He  often  takes  his  resolutions  alone,
without  consulting,  or  feeling  any  connexion  with  the
persons  around  him.  In  many  of  his  operations,  he
stands  as  much  detached  from  the  rest  of  his  species,
as  if  he  had  formed  no  union  with  them.  Conscious
how  little  he  depends  upon  other  men,  he  is  apt  to
view  them  with  a  careless  indifference.  Even  the
force  of  his  mind  contributes  to  increase  this  uncon-
cern ;  and  as  he  looks  not  beyond  himself  in  deli-
berating with  respect  to  the  part  which  he  should
act,  his  solicitude  about  the  consequences  of  it  seldom
extends  farther.  He  pursues  his  own  career,  and  in-
dulges his  own  fancy,  without  inquiring  or  regarding
whether  what  he  does  be  agreeable  or  offensive  to
others,  whether  they  may  derive  benefit  or  receive
hurt  from  it. Hence  the  ungovernable  caprice  of

•  Charier.  N.  Fr.  iii.  271.
Fernandez  Mission,  dc  los  Chcquit. 33.

BOOK IV.  79

savages,  their  impatience  under  any  species  of  re-
straint, their  inability  to  suppress  or  moderate  any
inclination,  the  scorn  or  neglect  with  which  they  re-
ceive advice,  their  high  estimation  of  themselves,  and
their  contempt  of  other  men.  Among  them,  the  pride
of  independence  produces  almost  the  same  effects
with  interestedness  in  a  more  advanced  state  of  so-
ciety ;  it  refers  every  thing  to  a  man  himself,  it  leads
him  to  be  indifferent  about  the  manner  in  which  his
actions  may  affect  other  men,  and  renders  the  gra-
tification of  his  own  wishes  the  measure  and  end  of
conduct.

Hardness  To  the  same  cause  may  be  imputed  the  hard-
of  heart.  ness  0f  heart,  and  insensibility,  remarkable
in  all  savage  nations.  Their  minds,  roused  only  by
strong  emotions,  are  little  susceptible  of  gentle,  deli-
cate, or  tender  affections."  Their  union  is  so  incom-
plete, that  each  individual  acts  as  if  he  retained  all  his
natural  rights  entire  and  undiminished.  If  a  favour
is  conferred  upon  him,  or  any  beneficial  service  is  per-
formed on  his  account,  he  receives  it  with  much  satis-
faction, because  it  contributes  to  his  enjoyment;  but
this  sentiment  extends  not  beyond  himself,  it  excites
no  sense  of  obligation,  he  neither  feels  gratitude,  nor
thinks  of  making  any  return. w  Even  among  persons
the  most  closely  connected,  the  exchange  of  those
good  offices  which  strengthen  attachment,  mollify
the  heart,  and  sweeten  the  intercourse  of  life,  is  not
frequent.  The  high  ideas  of  independence  among
the  Americans  nourish  a  sullen  reserve,  which  keeps
them  at  a  distance  from  each  other.  The  nearest  re-
lations are  mutually  afraid  to  make  any  demand,  or
to  solicit  any  service/  lest  it  should  be  considered
by  the  other  as  imposing  a  burden,  or  laying  a  re-
straint upon  his  will.

Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  309. w  Oviedo,  Hist.  lib.  xvi.  c.  2. See  Note  XLI.
x  De  la  Potherie,  iii.  28.

80  AMERICA.

insensi-  I  have  already  remarked  the  influence  of
biHtJ-  this  hard  unfeeling  temper  upon  domestic  life,
with  respect  to  the  connexion  between  husband  and
wife,  as  well  as  that  between  parents  and  children.
Its  effects  are  no  less  conspicuous,  in  the  performance
of  those  mutual  offices  of  tenderness  which  the  in-
firmities of  our  nature  frequently  exact.  Among
some  tribes,  when  any  of  their  number  are  seized
with  any  violent  disease,  they  are  generally  aban-
doned by  all  around  them,  who,  careless  of  their  re-
covery, fly  in  the  utmost  consternation  from  the  sup-
posed danger  of  infection/  But  even  where  they  are
not  thus  deserted,  the  cold  indifference  with  which
they  are  attended  can  afford  them  little  consolation.
No  look  of  sympathy,  no  soothing  expressions,  no
officious  services,  contribute  to  alleviate  the  distress
of  the  sufferers,  or  to  make  them  forget  what  they
endure.2  Their  nearest  relations  will  often  refuse  to
submit  to  the  smallest  inconveniency,  or  to  part  with
the  least  trifle,  however  much  it  may  tend  to  their
accommodation  or  relief."  So  little  is  the  breast
of  a  savage  susceptible  of  those  sentiments  which
prompt  men  to  that  feeling  attention  which  mitigates
the  calamities  of  human  life,  that,  in  some  provinces
of  America,  the  Spaniards  have  found  it  necessary  to
enforce  the  common  duties  of  humanity  by  positive
laws,  and  to  oblige  husbands  and  wives,  parents  and
children,  under  severe  penalties,  to  take  care  of  each
other  during  their  sickness.1'  The  same  harshness  of
temper  is  still  more  conspicuous  in  their  treatment  of
the  animal  creation.  Prior  to  their  intercourse  with
the  people  of  Europe,  the  North  Americans  had  some
tame  dogs,  which  accompanied  them  in  their  hunting

y  Lettre  de  P.  Cataneo  ap.  Muratori  Christian,  i.  309.  Tertre,  ii.  410.  Lozano,
100.  Hcrrcra,  dec.  4.  iib.  viii.  c.  5.  dec.  .i.  lib.  iv.  c.  ii.  Falkncr's  Descript.  of  Pa-
tagonia, 98.  z  Gumilla,  i.  329. Lozano,  100.

a  Garcia  Origen,  &c.  90. Herrera,  dec.  4.  lib.  viii.  c.  5.
b  CogulJudo  Hist,  de  Yucathan,  p.  300.

BOOK IV.  81

excursions,  and  served  them  with  all  the  ardour  and
fidelity  peculiar  to  the  species.  But,  instead  of  that
fond  attachment  which  the  hunter  naturally  feels  to-
wards those  useful  companions  of  his  toils,  they  re-
quite their  services  with  neglect,  seldom  feed,  and
never  caress  them.c  In  other  provinces  the  Ame-
ricans have  become  acquainted  with  the  domestic
animals  of  Europe,  and  avail  themselves  of  their  ser-
vice ;  but  it  is  universally  observed  that  they  always
treat  them  harshly/  and  never  employ  any  method,
either  for  breaking  or  managing  them,  but  force  and
cruelty.  In  every  part  of  the  deportment  of  man  in
his  savage  state,  whether  towards  his  equals  of  the
human  species,  or  towards  the  animals  below  him,
we  recognise  the  same  character,  and  trace  the  ope-
rations of  a  mind  intent  on  its  own  gratifications,  and
regulated  by  its  own  caprice,  with  little  attention  or
sensibility  to  the  sentiments  and  feelings  of  the  beings
around  him.

Taci_  After  explaining  how  unfavourable  the  sa-

tumhy.  vage  state  js  t0  the  cultivation  of  the  under-
standing, and  to  the  improvement  of  the  heart,  I
should  not  have  thought  it  necessary  to  mention  what
may  be  deemed  its  lesser  defects,  if  the  character  of
nations,  as  well  as  of  individuals,  were  not  often  more
distinctly  marked  by  circumstances  apparently  trivial
than  by  those  of  greater  moment.  A  savage,  fre-
quently placed  in  situations  of  danger  and  distress,
depending  on  himself  alone,  and  wrapped  up  in  his
own  thoughts  and  schemes,  is  a  serious  melancholy
animal.  His  attention  to  others  is  small.  The  range
of  his  own  ideas  is  narrow.  Hence  that  taciturnity
which  is  so  disgusting  to  men  accustomed  to  the  open
intercourse  of  social  conversation.  When  they  are
not  engaged  in  action,  the  Americans  often  sit  whole

e  Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  119.  337.  *  Ulloa  Nolic  American.  312.

VOL.  VII.  G

83  AMERICA.

days  in  one  posture,  without  opening  their  lips.'
When  they  go  forth  to  war,  or  to  the  chase,  they
usually  march  in  a  line  at  some  distance  from  one
another,  and  without  exchanging  a  word.  The  same
profound  silence  is  observed  when  they  row  together
in  a  canoe/  It  is  only  when  they  are  animated  by
intoxicating  liquors,  or  roused  by  the  jollity  of  the
festival  and  dance,  that  they  become  gay  and  con-
versible.
_ .  To  the  same  causes  may  be  imputed  the

Cunning.  .  ,  .  "  1

refined  cunning  with  which  they  form  and
execute  their  schemes. Men  who  are  not  habituated
to  a  liberal  communication  of  their  own  sentiments
and  wishes,  are  apt  to  be  so  distrustful,  as  to  place
little  confidence  in  others,  and  to  have  recourse  to  an
insiduous  craft  in  accomplishing  their  own  purposes.
In  civilized  life,  those  persons,  who,  by  their  situa-
tions, have  but  a  few  objects  of  pursuit  on  which  their
minds  incessantly  dwell,  are  most  remarkable  for  low
artifice  in  carrying  on  their  little  projects. Among
savages,  whose  views  are  equally  confined,  and  their
attention  no  less  persevering,  those  circumstances
must  operate  still  more  powerfully,  and  gradually  ac-
custom them  to  a  disingenuous  subtlety  in  all  their
transactions. The  force  of  this  is  increased  by  habits
which  they  acquire  in  carrying  on  the  two  most  in-
teresting operations  wherein  they  are  engaged.  With
them  war  is  a  system  of  craft,  in  which  they  trust
for  success  to  stratagem  more  than  to  open  force,  and
have  their  invention  continually  on  the  stretch  to  cir-
cumvent and  surprise  their  enemies. As  hunters,  it
is  their  constant  object  to  insnare,  in  order  that  they
may  destroy. Accordingly,  art  and  cunning  have
been  universally  observed  as  distinguishing  charac-
teristics of  all  savages. The  people  of  the  rude  tribes
of  America  are  remarkable  for  their  artifice  and  du-

'•  Voyage  tie  Bourgnor,  102.  f  Charlev.  iii.  340.

BOOK IV.  83

plicity.  Impenetrably  secret  in  forming  their  mea-
sures, they  pursue  them  with  a  patient  undeviating
attention,  and  there  is  no  refinement  of  dissimulation
which  they  cannot  employ,  in  order  to  ensure  suc-
cess. The  natives  of  Peru  were  engaged  above  thirty
years,  in  concerting  the  plan  of  that  insurrection
which  took  place  under  the  viceroyalty  of  the  mar-
quis de  Villa  Garcia ;  and  though  it  was  •  communi-
cated to  a  great  number  of  persons,  in  all  different
ranks,  no  indication  of  it  ever  transpired  during  that
long  period;  no  man  betrayed  his  trust,  or  by  an  un-
guarded look,  or  rash  word,  gave  rise  to  any  suspicion
of  what  was  intended."  The  dissimulation  and  craft
of  individuals  is  no  less  remarkable  than  that  of
nations.  When  set  upon  deceiving,  they  wrap
themselves  up  so  artificially,  that  it  is  impossible  to
penetrate  into  their  intentions,  or  to  detect  their  de-

signs.11

virtues  ^ut  ^  there  be  defects  or  vices  peculiar  to
the  savage  state,  there  are  likewise  virtues
which  it  inspires,  and  good  qualities,  to  the  exercise
independ-  of  which  it  is  friendly.  The  bonds  of  society
ent  spirit.  sit  so  loose  upon  the  members  of  the  more
rude  American  tribes,  that  they  hardly  feel  any  re-
straint. Hence  the  spirit  of  independence,  which  is
the  pride  of  a  savage,  and  which  he  considers  as  the
unalienable  prerogative  of  man.  Incapable  of  con-
trol, and  disdaining  to  acknowledge  any  superior,  his
mind,  though  limited  in  its  powers,  and  erring  in
many  of  its  pursuits,  acquires  such  elevation  by  the
consciousness  of  its  own  freedom,  that  he  acts  on
some  occasions  with  astonishing  force,  and  per-
severance, and  dignity.

As  independence  nourishes  this  high  spirit

Fortitude.  1  .  ,  •  i  • i

among  savages,  the  perpetual  wars  in  which
they  are  engaged  call  it  forth  into  action. Such  long

S  Voyage  de  Ulloa,  ii.  309.  '•  Gumilla,  i.  152. Charier.

G  2

84  AMERICA.

intervals  of  tranquillity  as  are  frequent  in  polished
societies  are  unknown  in  the  savage  state. Their
enmities,  as  I  have  observed,  are  implacable  and  im-
mortal. The  valour  of  the  young  men  is  never  allowed
to  rust  in  inaction. The  hatchet  is  always  in  their
hand,  either  for  attack  or  defence. Even  in  their
hunting  excursions, they  must  be  on  their  guard
against  surprise  from  the  hostile  tribes  by  which  they
are  surrounded. Accustomed  to  continual  alarms,
they  grow  familiar  with  danger ;  courage  becomes  an
habitual  virtue,  resulting  naturally  from  their  situa-
tion, and  strengthened  by  constant  exertions. The
mode  of  displaying  fortitude  may  not  be  the  same  in
small  and  rude  communities,  as  in  more  powerful  and
civilized  states. Their  system  of  war,  and  standard
of  valour,  may  be  formed  upon  different  principles,
but  in  no  situation  does  the  human  mind  rise  more
superior  to  the  sense  of  danger,  or  the  dread  of  death,
than  in  its  most  simple  and  uncultivated  state.
Attach- Another  virtue  remarkable  among  savages,
tiiScom-  is  attachment  to  the  community  of  which  they
munity. are  members. From  the  nature  of  their  poli-
tical union,  one  might  expect  this  tie  to  be  extremely
feeble. But  there  are  circumstances  which  render
the  influence,  even  of  their  loose  mode  of  association,
very  powerful.  The  American  tribes  are  small ;  com-
bined against  their  neighbours,  in  prosecution  of  an-
cient enmities,  or  in  avenging  recent  injuries,  their
interests  and  operations  are  neither  numerous  nor
complex. These  are  objects,  which  the  uncultivated
understanding  of  a  savage  can  comprehend. His
heart  is  capable  of  forming  connexions,  which  are  so
little  diffused. He  assents  with  warmth  to  public
measures,  dictated  by  passions  similar  to  those  which
direct  his  own  conduct. Hence  the  ardour  with
which  individuals  undertake  the  most  perilous  ser-
vice, when  the  community  deems  it  necessary.  Hence

BOOK IV.  85

their  fierce  and  deep-rooted  antipathy  to  the  public
enemies.  Hence  their  zeal  for  the  honour  of  their
tribe,  and  that  love  of  their  country,  which  prompts
them  to  brave  danger  that  it  may  triumph,  and  to
endure  the  most  exquisite  torments,  without  a  groan,
that  it  may  not  be  disgraced.

Satisfaction  Thus,  in  every  situation  where  a  human
own  am"  being  can  be  placed,  even  in  the  most  unfa-
tihion.  vourable,  there  are  virtues  which  peculiarly
belong  to  it ;  there  are  affections  which  it  calls  forth;
there  is  a  species  of  happiness  which  it  yields.  Na-
ture, with  most  beneficent  intention,  conciliates  and
forms  the  mind  to  its  condition  ;  the  ideas  and  wishes
of  man  extend  not  beyond  that  state  Of  society  to
which  he  is  habituated.  What  it  presents  as  objects
of  contemplation  or  enjoyment,  fills  and  satisfies  his
mind,  and  he  can  hardly  conceive  any  other  mode  of
life  to  be  pleasant,  or  even  tolerable.  The  Tartar,
accustomed  to  roam  over  extensive  plains,  and  to
subsist  on  the  product  of  his  herds,  imprecates  upon
his  enemy,  as  the  greatest  of  all  curses,  that  he  may
be  condemned  to  reside  in  one  place,  and  to  be
nourished  with  the  top  of  a  weed.  The  rude  Ame-
ricans, fond  of  their  own  pursuits,  and  satisfied  with
their  own  lot,  are  equally  unable  to  comprehend  the
intention  or  utility  of  the  various  accommodations,
which,  in  more  polished  society,  are  deemed  essential
to  the  comfort  of  life.  Far  from  complaining  of  their
own  situation,  or  viewing  that  of  men  in  a  more  im-
proved state  with  admiration  or  envy,  they  regard
themselves  as  the  standard  of  excellence,  as  beings
the  best  entitled,  as  well  as  the  most  perfectly  quali-
fied, to  enjoy  real  happiness.  Unaccustomed  to  any
restraint  upon  their  will  or  their  actions,  they  behold
with  amazement  the  inequality  of  rank,  and  the  sub-
ordination which  takes  place  in  civilized  life,  and  con-
sider the  voluntary  submission  of  one  man  to  another,

86  AMERICA.

as  a  renunciation,  no  less  base  than  unaccountable,
of  the  first  distinction  of  humanity.  Void  of  foresight,
as  well  as  free  from  care  themselves,  and  delighted
with  that  state  of  indolent  security,  they  wonder  at
the  axious  precautions,  the  unceasing  industry,  and
complicated  arrangements  of  Europeans,  in  guarding
against  distaat  evils,  or  providing  for  future  wants  ;
and  they  often  exclaim  against  their  preposterous
folly,  in  thus  multiplying  the  troubles,  and  increasing
the  labours  of  life.1  This  preference  of  their  own  man-
ners is  conspicuous  on  every  occasion.  Even  the
names,  by  which  the  various  nations  wish  to  be  dis-
tinguished, are  assumed  from  this  idea  of  their  own
pre-eminence.  The  appellation  which  the  Iroquois
give  to  themselves  is,  the  chief  of  men}  Caraibc,  the
original  name  of  the  fierce  inhabitants  of  the  Wind-
ward Islands,  signifies,  the  warlike  people}  The  Che-
rokees,  from  an  idea  of  their  own  superiority,  call
the  Europeans  Nothings,  or  the  accursed  race,  and
assume  to  themselves  the  name  of  the  beloved  people.™
The  same  principle  regulated  the  notions  of  the
other  Americans  concerning  the  Europeans ;  for  al-
though, at  first,  they  were  filled  with  astonishment
at  their  arts,  and  with  dread  of  their  power,  they
soon  came  to  abate  their  estimation  of  men,  whose
maxims  of  life  were  so  different  from  their  own.
Hence  they  called  them  the  froth  of  the  sea,  men
without  father  or  mother.  They  supposed,  that  either
they  had  no  country  of  their  own,  and  therefore  in-
vaded that  which  belonged  to  others  ;n  or  that  being
destitute  of  the  necessaries  of  life  at  home,  they  were
obliged  to  roam  over  the  ocean,  in  order  to  rob  such
as  were  more  amply  provided.

Men,  thus  satisfied  with  their  condition,  are  far
from  any  inclination  to  relinquish  their  own  habits,

1  C.liarlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  338. Laliontan,  ii.  97.  k  Coklan,  i.  3.

IRochefort.  Hist,  des  Antilles,  *55. m  Adair  Hist,  of  Anicr.  Indians,  p.  32.
n  Bcnzon.  Hist.  Novi.  Orbis,lib.  iii.  c.  21.

BOOK IV.  87

or  to  adopt  those  of  civilized  life.  The  transition  is
too  violent  to  be  suddenly  made.  Even  where  en-
deavours have  been  used  to  wean  a  savage  from  his
own  customs,  and  to  render  the  accommodations  of
polished  society  familiar  to  him  ;  even  where  he  has
been  allowed  to  taste  of  those  pleasures,  and  has
been  honoured  with  those  distinctions,  which  are  the
chief  objects  of  our  desire,  he  droops  and  languishes
under  the  restraint  of  laws  and  forms,  he  seizes  the
first  opportunity  of  breaking  loose  from  them,  and
returns  with  transport  to  the  forest  or  the  wild,  where
he  can  enjoy  a  careless  and  uncontrolled  freedom.0

Thus  I  have  finished  a  laborious  delineation  of  the
character  and  manners  of  the  uncivilized  tribes  scat-
tered over  the  vast  continent  of  America.  In  this,  I
aspire  not  at  rivalling  the  great  masters  who  have
painted  and  adorned  savage  life,  either  in  boldness  of
design,  or  in  the  glow  and  beauty  of  their  colouring.
I  am  satisfied  with  the  more  humble  merit  of  having
persisted  with  patient  industry,  in  viewing  my  sub-
ject in  many  various  lights,  and  collecting  from  the
most  accurate  observers  such  detached,  and  often
minute  features,  as  might  enable  me  to  exhibit  a  por-
trait that  resembles  the  original.
General  Before  I  close  this  part  of  my  work,  one
S!th  re-  observation  more  is  necessary,  in  order  to
spectto ;ustify  the  conclusions  which  I  have  formed,

fins  in- J  J  w  .  ,

quiry.  or  to  prevent  the  mistakes  into  which  such  as
examine  them  may  fall.  In  contemplating  the  inha-
bitants of  a  country  so  widely  extended  as  America,
great  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  diversity  of
climates  under  which  they  are  placed.  The  influence
of  this  I  have  pointed  out  with  respect  to  several  im-
portant particulars,  which  have  been  the  object  of
research ;  but  even  where  it  has  not  been  mentioned,
it  ought  not  to  be  overlooked. The  provinces  of

o  Charlev.  N.  Fr.  iii.  322.

80  AMERICA.

America  are  of  such  different  temperament,  that  this
alone  is  sufficient  to  constitute  a  distinction  between
their  inhabitants. In  every  part  of  the  earth  where
man  exists,  the  power  of  climate  operates,  with  de-
cisive influence,  upon  his  condition  and character.
In  those  countries  which  approach  near  to  the  ex-
tremes of  heat  or cold, this influence  is  so  con-
spicuous as  to  strike  every  eye. Whether  we  con-
sider man  merely  as  an  animal,  or  as  being  endowed
with  rational  powers  which  fit  him  for  activity  and
speculation,  we  shall  find  that  he  has  uniformly  at-
tained the  greatest  perfection  of  which  his  nature  is
capable,  in  the  temperate  regions  of  the  globe.  There
his  constitution  is  most  vigorous,  his  organs  most
acute,  and  his  form  most  beautiful. There,  too,  he
possesses  a  superior  extent  of  capacity,  greater  fer-
tility of  imagination,  more  enterprising  courage,  and
a  sensibility  of  heart  which  gives  birth  to  desires,
not  only  ardent,  but  persevering. In  this  favourite
situation  he  has  displayed  the  utmost  efforts  of  his
genius,  in  literature,  in  policy,  in  commerce,  in  war,
and  in  all  the  arts  which  improve  or  embellish  life.p
This  powerful  operation  of  climate  is  felt  most  sen-
sibly by  rude  nations,  and  produces  greater  effects
than  in  societies  more  improved. The  talents  of
civilized  men  are  continually  exerted  in  rendering
their  own  condition  more  comfortable  ;  and  by  their
ingenuity  and  inventions,  they  can,  in  a  great  mea-
sure, supply  the  defects,  and  guard  against  the  in-
conveniences of  any  climate. But  the  improvident
savage  is  affected  by  every  circumstance  peculiar  to
his  situation. He  takes  no  precaution  either  to  miti-
gate or  to  improve  it. Like  a  plant,  or  an  animal,  he
is  formed  by  the  climate  under  which  he  is  placed,
and  feels  the  full  force  of  its  influence.

In  surveying  the  rude  nations  of  America,  this  na-

P  Dr.  Ferguson's  Essay  nn  the  Hist  of  Civil  Society,  part  iii.  c.  1.

BOOK IV.  89

tural  distinction  between  the  inhabitants  of  the  tem-
perate and  torrid  zones  is  very  remarkable.  They
may,  accordingly,  be  divided  into  two  great  classes.
The  one  comprehends  all  the  North  Americans,  from
the  river  St.  Laurence  to  the  gulf  of  Mexico,  together
with  the  people  of  Chili,  and  a  few  small  tribes  to-
wards the  extremity  of  the  southern  continent.  To
the  other  belong  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  islands,
and  those  settled  in  the  various  provinces  which  ex-
tend from  the  isthmus  of  Darien  almost  to  the  south-
ern confines  of  Brazil,  along  the  east  side  of  the
Andes.  In  the  former,  which  comprehends  all  the
regions  of  the  temperate  zone  that  in  America  are  in-
habited, the  human  species  appears  manifestly  to  be
more  perfect.  The  natives  are  more  robust,  more
active,  more  intelligent,  and  more  courageous.  They
possess,  in  the  most  eminent  degree,  that  force  of
mind,  and  love  of  independence,  which  I  have  pointed
out  as  the  chief  virtues  of  man  in  his  savage  state.
They  have  defended  their  liberty  with  persevering
fortitude  against  the  Europeans,  who  subdued  the
other  rude  nations  of  America  with  the  greatest  ease.
The  natives  of  the  temperate  zone  are  the  only  people
in  the  New  World  who  are  indebted  for  their  freedom
to  their  own  valour.  The  North  Americans,  though
long  encompassed  by  three  formidable  European
powers,  still  retain  part  of  their  original  possessions,
and  continue  to  exist  as  independent  nations.  The
people  of  Chili,  though  early  invaded,  still  maintain
a  gallant  contest  with  the  Spaniards,  and  have  set
bounds  to  their  encroachments ;  whereas,  in  the
warmer  regions,  men  are  more  feeble  in  their  frame,
less  vigorous  in  the  efforts  of  their  minds,  of  a  gentle
but  dastardly  spirit,  more  enslaved  by  pleasure,  and
more  sunk  in  indolence.  Accordingly,  it  is  in  the  tor-
rid zone  that  the  Europeans  have  most  completely
established  their  dominion  over  America;  the  most

DO  AMERICA.

fertile  and  desirable  provinces  in  it  are  subjected  to
their  yoke ;  and  if  several  tribes  there  still  enjoy  in-
dependence, it  is  either  because  they  have  never  been
attacked  by  an  enemy  already  satiated  with  conquest,
and  possessed  of  larger  territories  than  he  was  able  to
occupy,  or  because  they  have  been  saved  from  op-
pression by  their  remote  and  inaccessible  situation.

Conspicuous  as  this  distinction  may  appear  be-
tween the  inhabitants  of  those  different  regions,  it  is
not,  however,  universal.  Moral  and  political  causes,
as  I  have  formerly  observed,  affect  the  disposition
and  character  of  individuals,  as  well  as  nations,  still
more  powerfully  than  the  influence  of  climate.  There
are,  accordingly,  some  tribes,  in  various  parts  of  the
torrid  zone,  possessed  of  courage,  high  spirit,  and  the
love  of  independence,  in  a  degree  hardly  inferior  to  the
natives  of  more  temperate  climates.  We  are  too  little
acquainted  with  the  history  of  those  people,  to  be
able  to  trace  the  several  circumstances  in  their  pro-
gress and  condition,  to  which  they  are  indebted  for
this  remarkable  pre-eminence.  The  fact,  neverthe-
less, is  certain.  As  early  as  the  first  voyage  of  Co-
lumbus, he  received  information  that  several  of  the
islands  were  inhabited  by  the  Caribbees,  a  fierce  race
of  men,  nowise  resembling  their  feeble  and  timid
neighbours.  In  his  second  expedition  to  the  New
World,  he  found  this  information  to  be  just,  and  was
himself  a  witness  of  their  intrepid  valour.*1  The  same
character  they  have  maintained  invariably  in  all  sub-
sequent contests  with  the  people  of  Europe  ;r  and,
even  in  our  own  times,  we  have  seen  them  make  a
gallant  stand  in  defence  of  the  last  territory  which
the  rapacity  of  their  invaders  had  left  in  their  pos-
session.3 Some  nations  in  Brazil  were  no  less  emi-
nent for  vigour  of  mind  and  bravery  in  war.' The

1  Life  of  Columbus,  c.  47,  18. Sec  Note  XLII.

'  Rochefort  Hist,  des  Antilles,  531.  6  Sec  Note  XLIII.

1  Lery  ap.  de  13rv,  iii.  '207,  &c.

BOOK IV.  91

people  of  the  isthmus  of  Darien  boldly  met  the  Spa-
niards in  the  field,  and  frequently  repelled^  those
formidable  invaders."  Other  instances  might  be  pro-
duced. It  is  not  by  attending  to  any  single  cause
or  principle,  how  powerful  and  extensive  soever  its
influence  may  appear,  that  we  can  explain  the  actions,
or  account  for  the  character  of  men.  Even  the  law
of  climate,  more  universal,  perhaps,  in  its  operation
than  any  that  affects  the  human  species,  cannot  be
applied,  in  judging  of  their  conduct,  without  many
exceptions.

u  Hen-era,  dec.  1.  lib.  x.  c.  15,  &c. ;  dec.  2. passim.

the

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA

1J18.

BOOK  V.

When  Grijalva  returned  to  Cuba,  he  found
Jon?"? "  the  armament  destined  to  attempt  the  con-
Veiasquez  quest  of  that  rich  country  which  he  had  dis-

for  invad- A  i  iv

ingNew  covered,  almost  complete.  Not  only  ambi-
tion, but  avarice,  had  urged  Velasquez  to
hasten  his  preparations  ;  and  having  such  a  prospect
of  gratifying  both,  he  had  advanced  considerable
sums  out  of  his  private  fortune  towards  defraying  the
expenses  of  the  expedition.  At  the  same  time,  he
exerted  his  influence  as  governor,  in  engaging  the
most  distinguished  persons  in  the  colony  to  under-
take the  service."  At  a  time  when  the  spirit  of  the
Spanish  nation  was  adventurous  to  excess,  a  number
of  soldiers,  eager  to  embark  in  any  daring  enterprise,
soon  appeared.  But  it  was  not  so  easy  to  find  a  per-
son qualified  to  take  the  command  in  an  expedition
of  so  much  importance  ;  and  the  character  of  Velas-
quez, who  had  the  right  of  nomination,  greatly  in-
creased the  difficulty  of  the  choice.  Though  of  most
aspiring  ambition,  and  not  destitute  of  talents  for
government,  he  possessed  neither  such  courage  nor
such  vigour  and  activity  of  mind,  as  to  undertake  in
person  the  conduct  of  the  armament  which  he  was
preparing.  In  this  embarrassing  situation,  he  formed
the  chimerical  scheme,  not  only  of  achieving  great  ex-

*  See  Note  X  LI V.

1518.]  BOOK V.  93

ploits  by  a  deputy,  but  of  securing  to  himself  the
glory  of  conquests  which  were  to  be  made  by  an-
other. In  the  execution  of  this  plan,  he  fondly  aimed
at  reconciling  contradictions. He  was  solicitous  to
choose  a  commander  of  intrepid  resolution,  and  of
superior  abilities,  because  he  knew  these  to  be  re-
quisite in  order  to  ensure  success ;  but,  at  the  same
time,  from  the  jealousy  natural  to  little  minds,  he
wished  this  person  to  be  of  a  spirit  so  tame  and  ob-
sequious, as  to  be  entirely  dependent  on  his  will.
But  when  he  came  to  apply  those  ideas  in  forming
an  opinion  concerning  the  several  officers  who  oc-
curred to  his  thoughts  as  worthy  of  being  intrusted
with  the  command,  he  soon  perceived  that  it  was  im-
possible to  find  such  incompatible  qualities  united  in
one  character. Such  as  were  distinguished  for  cou-
rage and  talents  were  too  high-spirited  to  be  passive
instruments  in  his  hands. Those  who  appeared  more
gentle  and  tractable,  were  destitute  of  capacity,  and
unequal  to  the  charge. This  augmented  his  per-
plexity and  his  fears. He  deliberated  long,  and  with
much  solicitude,  and  was  still  wavering  in  his  choice,
when  Amador  de  Lares,  the  royal  treasurer  in  Cuba,
and  Andres  Duero,  his  own  secretary,  the  two  per-
sons in  whom  he  chiefly  confided,  were  encouraged
by  this  irresolution  to  propose  a  new  candidate,  and
they  supported  their  recommendation  with  such  as-
siduity and  address,  that,  no  less  fatally  for  Velasquez
than  happily  for  their  country,  it  proved  successful. b
He  aP- The  man  whom  they  pointed  out  to  him  was
points Fernando  Cortes. He  was  born  at  Medellin,
command  a  small  town  in  Estremadura,  in the  year
1485,  and  descended  from  a  family  of  noble
blood,  but  of  very  moderate  fortune. Being  origi-
nally destined  by  his  parents  to  the  study  of  law,
as  the  most  likely  method  of  bettering  his  condition,

b  B.  Diaz.  c.  19. Gomara  Cron.  c.  7. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  iii.  c.  11.

94  AMERICA.  [1518.

he  was  sent  early  to  the  university  of  Salamanca,
where  he  imbibed  some  tincture  of  learning-.  But  he
was  soon  disgusted  with  an  academic  life,  which  did
not  suit  his  ardent  and  restless  genius,  and  retired  to
Medellin,  where  he  gave  himself  up  entirely  to  active
sports  and  martial  exercises.  At  this  period  of  life,
he  was  so  impetuous,  so  overbearing,  and  so  dissi-
pated, that  his  father  was  glad  to  comply  with  his
inclination,  and  sent  him  abroad  as  an  adventurer  in
arms.  There  were  in  that  age  two  conspicuous  thea-
tres, on  which  such  of  the  Spanish  youth  as  courted
military  glory  might  display  their  valour;  one  in
Italy,  under  the  command  of  the  Great  Captain  5  the
other  in  the  New  World.  Cortes  preferred  the  for-
mer, but  was  prevented  by  indisposition  from  em-
barking with  a  reinforcement  of  troops  sent  to  Naples.
Upon  this  disappointment  he  turned  his  views  to-
wards America,  whither  he  was  allured  by  the  pros-
pect of  the  advantages  which  he  might  derive  from
the  patronage  of  Ovando,c  the  governor  of  Hispa-
niola,  who  was  his  kinsman.  When  he  landed  at
St.  Domingo,  in  1504,  his  reception  was  such  as
equalled  his  most  sanguine  hopes,  and  he  was  em-
ployed by  the  governor  in  several  honourable  and
lucrative  stations.  These,  however,  did  not  satisfy
his  ambition  ;  and  in  the  year  1511,  he  obtained  per-
mission to  accompany  Diego  Velasquez  in  his  expe-
dition to  Cuba.  In  this  service  he  distinguished  him-
self so  much,  that  notwithstanding  some  violent  con-
tests with  Velasquez,  occasioned  by  trivial  events,
unworthy  of  remembrance,  he  was  at  length  taken
into  favour,  and  received  an  ample  concession  of
lands  and  of  Indians,  the  recompense  usually  be-
stowed upon  adventurers  in  the  New  World. d

Though  Cortes  had  not  hitherto  acted  in  high  com-
mand,  he had  displayed  such  qualities  in several

«  See  Note  XLV.  d  Gomara  Cron.  c.  1— .1.

1518.]  BOOK  V.  95

scenes  of  difficulty  and  danger,  as  raised  universal
expectation,  and  turned  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen
towards  him,  as  one  capable  of  performing  great
things.  The  turbulence  of  youth,  as  soon  as  he  found
objects  and  occupations  suited  to  the  ardour  of  his
mind,  gradually  subsided,  and  settled  into  a  habit  of
regular  indefatigable  activity.  The  impetuosity  of
his  temper,  when  he  came  to  act  with  his  equals,
insensibly  abated,  by  being  kept  under  restraint,  and
mellowed  into  a  cordial  soldierly  frankness.  These
qualities  were  accompanied  with  calm  prudence  in
concerting  his  schemes,  with  persevering  vigour  in
executing  them,  and  with  what  is  peculiar  to  superior
genius,  the  art  of  gaining  the  confidence  and  govern-
ing  the  minds  of  men.  To  all  which  were  added  the
inferior  accomplishments  that  strike  the  vulgar,  and
command  their  respect;  a  graceful  person,  a  win-
ning aspect,  extraordinary  address  in  martial  exer-
cises, and  a  constitution  of  such  vigour  as  to  be  ca-
pable of  enduring  any  fatigue.

As  soon  as  Cortes  was  mentioned  to  Velasquez  by
his  two  confidants,  he  flattered  himself  that  he  had  at
length  found  what  he  had  hitherto  sought  in  vain,  a
man  with  talents  for  command,  but  not  an  object  for
jealousy.  Neither  the  rank  nor  the  fortune  of  Cortes,
as  he  imagined,  were  such  that  he  could  aspire  at  in-
dependence. He  had  reason  to  believe  that  by  his  own
readiness  to  bury  ancient  animosities  in  oblivion,  as
well  as  his  liberality  in  conferring  several  recent  fa-
vours, he  had  already  gained  the  good-will  of  Cortes,
and  hoped,  by  this  new  and  unexpected  mark  of  confi-
dence, that  he  might  attach  him  for  ever  to  his  interest.
Cortes,  receiving  his  commission  with  the

Soon  be-  '  o

comes  jea-  warmest  expressions  of  respect  and  grati-
him.  tude  to  the  governor,  immediately  erected
Oct.  23.  kig  standard  before  his  own  house,  appeared
in  a  military  dress,  and  assumed  all  the  ensigns  of

06  AMERICA.  [1518.

his  new  dignity.  His  utmost  influence  and  activity
were  exerted  in  persuading  many  of  his  friends  to
engage  in  the  service,  and  in  urging  forward  the  pre-
parations for  the  voyage.  All  his  own  funds,  toge-
ther with  what  money  he  could  raise  by  mortgaging
his  lands  and  Indians,  were  expended  in  purchasing
military  stores  and  provisions,  or  in  supplying  the
wants  of  such  of  his  officers  as  were  unable  to  equip
themselves  in  a  mariner  suited  to  their  rank.e  Inof-
fensive, and  even  laudable  as  this  conduct  was,  his
disappointed  competitors  were  malicious  enough  to
give  it  a  turn  to  his  disadvantage.  They  represented
him  as  aiming  already,  with  little  disguise,  at  esta-
blishing an  independent  authority  over  his  troops,
and  endeavouring  to  secure  their  respect  or  love  by
his  ostentatious  and  interested  liberality.  They  re-
minded Velasquez  of  his  former  dissensions  with  the
man  whom  he  now  reposed  so  much  confidence,  and
foretold  that  Cortes  would  be  more  apt  to  avail  him-
self of  the  power,  which  the  governor  was  inconsider-
ately putting  in  his  hands  to  avenge  past  injuries,
than  to  requite  recent  obligations.  These  insinua-
tions made  such  impression  upon  the  suspicious
mind  of  Velasquez,  that  Cortes  soon  observed  some
symptoms  of  a  growing  alienation  and  distrust  in  his
behaviour,  and  was  advised  by  Lares  and  Duero,  to
hasten  his  departure,  before  these  should  become  so
confirmed,  as  to  break  out  with  open  violence.  Fully
sensible  of  this  danger,  he  urged  forward  his  prepara-
tions with  such  rapidity,  that  he  set  sail  from  St.  Jago
de  Cuba  on  the  18th  of  November,  Velasquez  ac-
companying him  to  the  shore,  and  taking  leave  of  him
with  an  appearance  of  perfect  friendship  and  confi-
dence, though  he  had  secretly  given  it  in  charge  to
some  of  Cortes's  officers,  to  keep  a  watchful  eye  upon
every  part  of  their  commanders  conduct/

e  See  Note  XI A' I.  f  GomaraCJiron.  c.  7. B.  Diaz.  c.  20.

bin)  of  his
co  in  m  is
sion.

1518.]  BOOK V.  97

Endea- Cortes  proceeded  to  Trinidad,  a  small  set-
deprive0 tlement  on  the  same  side  of  the  island,  where
he  was  joined  by  several  adventurers,  and  re-
ceived a  supply  of  provisions  and  military
stores,  of  which  his  stock  was  still  very  incomplete.
He  had  hardly  left  St.  Jago,  when  the  jealousy  which
had  been  working  in  the  breast  of  Velasquez,  grew
so  violent,  that  it  was  impossible  to  suppress  it.
The  armament  was  no  longer  under  his  own  eye  and
direction ; and  he  felt,  that  as  his  power over it
ceased,  that  of  Cortes  would  become  more  absolute.
Imagination now  aggravated  every circumstance,
which  had  formerly  excited  suspicion  :  the  rivals  of
Cortes  industriously  threw  in  reflections  which  in-
creased his  fears ;  and  with  no  less  art  than  malice
they  called  superstition  to  their  aid,  employing  the
predictions  of  an  astrologer  in  order  to  complete  the
alarm. All  these, by  their  united  operation,  pro-
duced the  desired  effect. Velasquez  repented  bit-
terly of  his  own  imprudence,  in  having  committed  a
trust  of  so  much  importance  to  a  person  whose  fidelity
appeared  so  doubtful,  and  hastily  dispatched  instruc-
tions to  Trinidad, empowering  Verdugo,  the  chief
magistrate  there,  to  deprive  Cortes  of  his  commission.
But  Cortes  had  already  made  such  progress  in  gain-
ing the  esteem  and  confidence  of  his  troops, that,
finding  officers  as  well  as  soldiers  equally  zealous  to
support  his  authority,  he  soothed  or  intimidated  Ver-
dugo,  and  was  permitted  to  depart  from  Trinidad
without  molestation.
i ' , From  Trinidad  Cortes  sailed  for  the  Havana,

And  to  lay  .

him  under  in  order  to  raise  more  soldiers,  and  to  com-
plete the  victualling  of  his  fleet.  There  se-
veral persons  of  distinction  entered  into  the  service,
and  engaged  to  supply  what  provisions  were  still
wanting  ;  but  as  it  was  necessary  to  allow  them  some
time  for  performing  what  they  had  promised,  Velas-

VOL.  VII.  H

98  A M  ERICA.  [1518.

quez,  sensible  that  he  ought  no  longer  to  rely  on  a
man  of  whom  he  had  so  openly  discovered  his  dis-
trust, availed  himself  of  the  interval  which  this  un-
avoidable delay  afforded,  in  order  to  make  one  at-
tempt more  to  wrest  the  command  out  of  the  hands
of  Cortes.  He  loudly  complained  of  Verdugo's  con-
duct, accusing  him  either  of  childish  facility,  or  of
manifest  treachery,  in  suffering  Cortes  to  escape  from
Trinidad.  Anxious  to  guard  against  a  second  dis-
appointment, he  sent  a  person  of  confidence  to  the
Havana,  with  peremptory  injunctions  to  Pedro  Barba,
his  lieutenant-governor  in  that  colony,  instantly  to
arrest  Cortes,  to  send  him  prisoner  to  St.  Jago  under
a  strong  guard,  and  to  countermand  the  sailing  of  the
armament  until  he  should  receive  farther  orders.  He
wrote  likewise  to  the  principal  officers,  requiring
them  to  assist  Barba  in  executing  what  he  had  given
him  in  charge.  But  before  the  arrival  of  this  mes-
senger, a  Franciscan  friar  of  St.  Jago  had  secretly
conveyed  an  account  of  this  interesting  transaction
to  Bartholomew  de  Olmedo,  a  monk  of  the  same  or-
der, who  acted  as  chaplain  to  the  expedition.
Cones  de-  Cortes,  forewarned  of  the  danger,  had  time
feats  his t0  take  precautions  for  his  own  safety. His

schemes,  Jr  J

and  comi-  first  step  was  to  find  some  pretext  for  re-
prepa-  moving  from  the  Havana  Diego  de  Ordaz,  an
officer  of  great  merit,  but  in  whom,  on  ac-
count of  his  known  attachment  to  Velasquez,  he  could
not  confide  in  this  trying  and  delicate  juncture.  He
gave  him  the  command  of  a  vessel,  destined  to  take
on  board  some  provisions  in  a  small  harbour  beyond
Cape  Antonio,  and  thus  made  sure  of  his  absence,
without  seeming  to  suspect  his  fidelity.  When  he
was  gone,  Cortes  no  longer  concealed  the  intentions
of  Velasquez  from  his  troops ;  and  as  officers  and  sol-
diers were  equally  impatient  to  set  out  on  an  expe-
dition, in  preparing  for  which  most  of  them  had  ex-

1518.]  BOOK V.  99

pended  all  their  fortunes,  they  expressed  their  asto-
nishment and  indignation  at  that  illiberal  jealousy,
to  which  the  governor  was  about  to  sacrifice,  not
only  the  honour  of  their  general,  but  all  their  san-
guine hopes  of  glory  and  wealth.  With  one  voice
they  entreated  that  he  would  not  abandon  the  im-
portant station  to  which  he  had  such  a  good  title.
They  conjured  him  not  to  deprive  them  of  a  leader
whom  they  followed  with  such  well-founded  confi-
dence, and  offered  to  shed  the  last  drop  of  their  blood
in  maintaining  his  authority.  Cortes  was  easily  in-
duced to  comply  with  what  he  himself  so  ardently
desired.  He  swore  that  he  would  never  desert  sol-
diers who  had  given  him  such  a  signal  proof  of  their
attachment,  and  promised  instantly  to  conduct  them
to  that  rich  country,  which  had  been  so  long  the  ob-
ject of  their  thoughts  and  wishes.  This  declaration
was  received  with  transports  of  military  applause,
accompanied  with  threats  and  imprecations  against
all  who  should  presume  to  call  in  question  the  juris-
diction of  their  general,  or  to  obstruct  the  execution
of  his  designs.

Every  thing  was  now  ready  for  their  de-
amount  of  parture;  but  though  this  expedition  was  fitted
"  out  by  the  united  effort  of  the  Spanish  power
in  Cuba ;  though  every  settlement  had  contributed
its  quota  of  men  and  provisions ;  though  the  gover-
nor had  laid  out  considerable  sums  and  each  adven-
turer had  exhausted  his  stock,  or  strained  his  credit,
the  poverty  of  the  preparations  was  such  as  must
astonish  the  present  age,  and  bore,  indeed,  no  re-
semblance to  an  armament  destined  for  the  conquest
of  a  great  empire.  The  fleet  consisted  of  eleven  ves-
sels ;  the  largest  of  a  hundred  tons,  which  was  dig-
nified by  the  name  of  Admiral ;  three  of  seventy  or
eighty  tons,  and  the  rest  small  open  barks.  On  board
of  these  were  six  hundred  and  seventeen  men ;  of

h2

J  00  AMERICA.  [1518.

which  live  hundred  and  eight  belonged  to  the  land
service,  and  a  hundred  and  nine  were  seamen  or  arti-
ficers. The  soldiers  were  divided  into  eleven  com-
panies, according  to  the  number  of  the  ships  ;  to  each
of  which  Cortes  appointed  a  captain,  and  committed
to  him  the  command  of  the  vessel  while  at  sea,  and
of  the  men  when  on  shore.8  As  the  use  of  fire-arms
among  the  nations  of  Europe  was  hitherto  confined
to  a  few  battalions  of  regularly  disciplined  infantry,
only  thirteen  soldiers  were  armed  with  muskets,
thirty-two  were  cross-bowmen,  and  the  rest  had
swords  and  spears.  Instead  of  the  usual  defensive
armour,  which  must  have  been  cumbersome  in  a  hot
climate,  the  soldiers  wore  jackets  quilted  with  cotton,
which  experience  had  taught  the  Spaniards  to  be  a
sufficient  protection  against  the  weapons  of  the  Ame-
ricans. They  had  only  sixteen  horses,  ten  small
field-pieces,  and  four  falconets.1'
Feb  10.  With  this  slender  and  ill-provided  train  did

i5i9. Cortes  set  sail,  to  make  war  upon  a  monarch

His  depar-  ...  *  .

turefrom  whose  dominions  were  more  extensive  than
all  the  kingdoms  subject  to  the  Spanish
crown.  As  religious  enthusiasm  always  mingled  with
the  spirit  of  adventure  in  the  New  World,  and,  by  a
combination  still  more  strange,  united  with  avarice,
in  prompting  the  Spaniards  to  all  their  enterprises,  a
large  cross  was  displayed  in  their  standards,  with
this  inscription,  Let  us  follow  the  cross,  for  under  this
sign  we  shall  conquer.

So  powerfully  were  Cortes  and  his  followers  ani-
mated with  both  these  passions,  that  no  less  eager
to  plunder  the  opulent  country  whither  they  were
bound,  than  zealous  to  propagate  the  Christian  faith
among  its  inhabitants,  they  set  out,  not  with  the
solicitude  natural  to  men  going  upon  dangerous
services, but with that confidence which arises

s  Sec  Note  XLVII.  >'  B.  Diaz.  c.  19.

1519.]  BOOK V.  101

from  security  of  success,  and  certainty  of  the  divine
protection.

Touches  at As  Cortes  had  determined  to  touch  at  every
Cozumei; place  which  Grijalva  had  visited,  he  steered
directly  towards  the  island  of  Cozumei;  there  he  had
the  good  fortune  to  redeem  Jerome  de  Aguilar,  a
Spaniard,  who  had  been  eight  years  a  prisoner  among
the  Indians. This  man  was  perfectly  acquainted
with  a  dialect  of  their  language,  understood  through
a  large  extent  of  country,  and,  possessing  besides  a
considerable  share  of  prudence  and  sagacity,  proved
March extremely  useful  as  an  interpreter. From
And  at  Ta- Cozumei,  Cortes  proceeded  to  the  river  of
Tabasco,  in  hopes  of  a  reception  as  friendly
as  Grijalva  had  met  with  there,  and  of  finding  gold
in  the  same  abundance ;  but  the  disposition  of  the
natives, from some unknown cause, was totally
changed. After  repeated  endeavours  to  conciliate
their  good-will,  he  was  constrained  to  have  recourse
to  violence. Though  the  forces  of  the  enemy  were
numerous,  and  advanced  with  extraordinary  courage,
they  were  routed  with  great  slaughter,  in  several
successive  actions. The  loss  which  they  sustained,
and  still  more  the  astonishment  and  terror  excited
by  the  destructive  effect  of  the  fire-arms,  and  the
dreadful  appearance  of  the  horses,  humbled  their
fierce  spirits,  and  induced them  to  sue  for  peace.
They  acknowledged  the  king  of  Castile  as  their  sove-
reign, and  granted  Cortes  a  supply  of  provisions,
with  a  present  of  cotton  garments,  some  gold,  and
twenty  female  slaves.'

Cortes  continued  his  course  to  the  west-

st.  Juan  de  ward,  keeping  as  near  the  shore  as  possible,

in  order  to  observe  the  country  ;  but  could

discover  no  proper  place  for  landing,  until  he  arrived

"  See  Note  XLVUI.

102  AMERICA.  [1519.

at  St.  Juan  de  Ulua.k As  he  entered  this  har-
bour, a  large  canoe  lull  of  people,  among  whom
were  two  who  seemed  to  be  persons  of  distinction,  ap-
proached his  ship  with  signs  of  peace  and  amity.  They
came  on  board  without  fear  or  distrust,  and  addressed
him  in  a  most  respectful  manner,  but  in  a  language
altogether  unknown  to  Aguilar. Cortes  was  in  the
utmost  perplexity  and  distress,  at  an  event  of  which
he  instantly  foresaw  all  the  consequences,  and  already
felt  the  hesitation  and uncertainty  with  which  he
should  carry  on  the  great  schemes  which  he  medi-
tated, if,  in  his  transactions  with  the  natives,  he  must
depend  entirely  upon  such  an  imperfect,  ambiguous,
and  conjectural  mode  of  communication,  as  the  use
of  signs. But  he  did  not  remain  long  in  his  embar-
rassing situation; a  fortunate accident  extricated
him,  when  his  own  sagacity  could  have  contributed
little  towards  his  relief. One  of  the  female  slaves,
whom  he  had  received  from  the  cazique  of  Tabasco,
happened  to  be  present  at  the  first  interview  between
Cortes  and  his  new  guests. She  perceived  his  dis-
tress, as  well  as  the  confusion  of  Aguilar ;  and  as  she
perfectly  understood  the  Mexican  language,  she  ex-
plained what  they  had  said  in  the  Yucatan  tongue,  with
which  Aguilar  was  acquainted. This  woman,  known
afterward  by  the  name  of  Donna  Marina,  and  who
makes  a  conspicuous  figure  in  the  history  of  the  New
World,  where  great  revolutions  were  brought  about
by  small  causes  and  inconsiderable  instruments,  was
born  in  one  of  the  provinces  of  the  Mexican  empire.
Having  been  sold  as  a  slave  in  the  early  part  of  her
life,  after  a  variety  of  adventures  she  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  Tabascans,  and  had  resided  Ion?  enough
among  them  to  acquire  their  language,  without  losing
the  use  of  her  own. Though  it  was  both  tedious  and
troublesome  to  converse  by  the  intervention  of  two

*  B.  Diai.  o.  31—36.  Gomara  Cron.  c.  18—23.  Herrera,  dec.  '.'.  lib.  iv.c.  11,  &c.

1519.]  BOOK V.  103

different  interpreters,  Cortes  was  so  highly  pleased
with  having  discovered  this  method  of  carrying  on
some  intercourse  with  the  people  of  a  country  into
which  he  was  determined  to  penetrate,  that  in  the
transports  of  his  joy  he  considered  it  as  a  visible  in-
terposition of  Providence  in  his  favour.1
Lands  his  He  now  learned,  that  the  two  persons  whom
troops.  jie  j^  receive(j  on  board  of  his  ship  were  de-
puties from  Teutile  and  Pilpatoe,  two  officers  in-
trusted with  the  government  of  that  province,  by  a
great  monarch,  whom  they  called  Montezuma ;  and
that  they  were  sent  to  inquire  what  his  intentions
were  in  visiting  their  coast,  and  to  offer  him  what  as-
sistance he  might  need,  in  order  to  continue  his  voy-
age. Cortes,  struck  with  the  appearance  of  those
people,  as  well  as  the  tenor  of  the  message,  assured
them,  in  respectful  terms,  that  he  approached  their
country  with  most  friendly  sentiments,  and  came  to
propose  matters  of  great  importance  to  the  welfare  of
their  prince  and  his  kingdom,  which  he  would  unfold
more  fully,  in  person,  to  the  governor  and  the  general.
Next  morning,  without  waiting  for  any  answer,  he
landed  his  troops,  his  horses,  and  artillery  ;  and  hav-
ing chosen  proper  ground,  began  to  erect  huts  for
his  men,  and  to  fortify  his  camp.  The  natives,  in-
stead of  opposing  the  entrance  of  those  fatal  guests
into  their  country,  assisted  them  in  all  their  opera-
tions, with  an  alacrity  of  which  they  had  ere  long
good  reason  to  repent.

His  first  Next  day  Teutile  and  Pilpatoe  entered  the
vitTthT  Spanish  camp  with  a  numerous  retinue,  and
Mexicans.  cortes  considering  them  as  the  ministers  of  a
great  monarch,  entitled  to  a  degree  of  attention  very
different  from  that  which  the  Spaniards  were  accus-
tomed to  pay  the  petty  caziques,  with  whom  they
had  intercourse  in  the  isles,  received  them  with  much

I  B.  Diaz.  c.  37 — 39. Gomara  Cron.  c.  25,  26. Herrera,  dec  2.  lib.  v.  e.  4.

104  AMERICA.  [1519.

formal  ceremony.  He  informed  them,  that  he  came
as  ambassador  from  Don  Carlos  of  Austria,  king  of
Castile,  the  greatest  monarch  of  the  East,  and  was  in-
trusted with  propositions  of  such  moment,  that  he
could  impart  them  to  none  but  the  emperor  Monte-
zuma himself,  and  therefore  required  them  to  con-
duct him,  without  loss  of  time,  into  the  presence  of
their  master.  The  Mexican  officers  could  not  conceal
their  uneasiness  at  a  request,  which  they  knew  would
be  disagreeable,  and  which  they  foresaw  might  prove
extremely  embarrassing  to  their  sovereign,  whose
mind  had  been  filled  with  many  disquieting  appre-
hensions, ever  since  the  former  appearance  of  the
Spaniards  on  his  coasts.  But  before  they  attempted
to  dissuade  Cortes  from  insisting  on  his  demand,
they  endeavoured  to  conciliate  his  good-will  by  en-
treating him  to  accept  of  certain  presents,  which,  as
humble  slaves  of  Montezuma,  they  laid  at  his  feet.
These  were  introduced  with  great  parade,  and  con-
sisted of  fine  cotton  cloth,  of  plumes  of  various  co-
lours, and  of  ornaments  of  gold  and  silver  to  a  con-
siderable value  ;  the  workmanship  of  which  appeared
to  be  as  curious  as  the  materials  were  rich.  The  dis-
play of  these  produced  an  effect  very  different  from
what  the  Mexicans  intended.  Instead  of  satisfying,
it  increased  the  avidity  of  the  Spaniards,  and  ren-
dered them  so  eager  and  impatient  to  become  mas-
ters of  a  country  which  abounded  with  such  precious
productions,  that  Cortes  could  hardly  listen  with  pa-
tience to  the  arguments  which  Pilpatoe  and  Teutile
employed  to  dissuade  him  from  visiting  the  capital,
and  in  a  haughty  determined  tone  he  insisted  on  his
demand,  of  being  admitted  to  a  personal  audience  of
their  sovereign.  During  this  interview,  some  paint-
ers, in  the  train  of  the  Mexican  chiefs,  had  been  dili-
gently employed  in  delineating,  upon  white  cotton
cloths,  figures  of  the  ships,  the  horses,  the  artillery,

1519.]  BOOK V.  105

the  soldiers,  and  whatever  else  attracted  their  eyes,
as  singular. When  Cortes  observed  this,  and  was
informed  that  these  pictures  were  to  be  sent  to  Mon-
tezuma, in  order  to  convey  to  him  a  more  lively  idea
of  the  strange  and  wonderful  objects  now  presented
to  their  view,  than  any  words  could  communicate,
he  resolved  to  render  the  representation  still  more
animating  and  interesting,  by  exhibiting  such  a  spec-
tacle as  might  give  both  them  and  their  monarch  an
awful  impression  of  the  extraordinary  prowess  of  his
followers,  and  the  irresistible  force  of  their  arms.  The
trumpets,  by  his  order,  sounded  an  alarm ;  the  troops,
in  a  moment,  formed  in  order  of  battle,  the  infantry
performed  such  martial  exercises  as  were  best  suited
to  display  the  effect  of  their  different  weapons  ;  the
horse,  in  various  evolutions,  gave  a  specimen  of  their
agility  and  strength ;  the  artillery  pointed  towards
the  thick  woods  which  surrounded  the  camp,  were
fired,  and  made  dreadful  havoc  among  the  trees.
The  Mexicans  looked  on  with  that  silent  amazement
which  is  natural  when  the  mind  is  struck  with  ob-
jects, which  are  both  awful  and  above  its  compre-
hension. But,  at  the  (Explosion  of  the  cannon,  many
of  them  fled,  some  fell  to  the  ground,  and  all  were  so
much  confounded  at  the  sight  of  men  whose  power
so  nearly  resembled  that  of  the  gods,  that  Cortes
found  it  difficult  to  compose  and  reassure  them.  The
painters  had  now  many  new objects  on  which  to
exercise  their  art,  and  they  put  their  fancy  on  the
stretch  in  order  to  invent  figures  and  symbols  to  re-
present the extraordinary  things which  they  had
seen.

Negotia-  Messengers  were  immediately  dispatched
Monte-th  t0  Montezuma  with  those  pictures,  and  a  full
zuma.  account  of  every  thing  that  had  passed  since
the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards,  and  by  them  Cortes  sent
a  present  of  some  European  curiosities  to  Monte-

106  AMERICA.  [1519.

zuma,  which,  though  of  no  great  value,  he  believed
would  be  acceptable  on  account  of  their  novelty.
The  Mexican  monarchs,  in  order  to  obtain  early  in-
formation of  every  occurrence  in  ail  the  corners  of
their  extensive  empire,  had  introduced  a  refinement
in  police,  unknown,  at  that  time,  in  Europe. They
had  couriers  posted  at  proper  stations  along  the  prin-
cipal roads ;  and  as  these  were  trained  to  agility  by
a  regular  education,  and  relieved  one  another  at  mo-
derate distances, they  conveyed  intelligence  with
surprising  rapidity. Though  the  capital  in  which
Montezuma  resided  was  above  a  hundred  and  eighty
miles  from  St.  Juan  de  Ulua,  Cortes's  presents  were
carried  thither,  and  an  answer  to  his  demands  was
received  in  a  few  days. The  same  officers  who  had
hitherto  treated  with  the  Spaniards,  were  employed
to  deliver  this  answer ;  but  as  they  knew  how  re-
pugnant the  determination  of  their  master  was  to  all
the  schemes  and  wishes  of  the  Spanish  commander,
they  would  not  venture  to  make  it  known  until  they
had  previously  endeavoured  to  soothe  and  mollify
His  pre- him. For  this  purpose  they  renewed  their  ne-
gotiation, by  introducing  a  train  of  a  hundred
Indians,  loaded  with  presents  sent  to  him  by  Monte-
zuma. The  magnificence  of  these  was  such  as  be-
came a  great  monarch,  and  far  exceeded  any  idea
which the Spaniards had hitherto  formed  of  his
wealth. They  were  placed  on  mats  spread  on  the
ground,  in  such  order  as  shewed  them  to  the  greatest
advantage. Cortes  and  his  officers  viewed,  with  ad-
miration, the  various  manufactures  of  the  country,
cotton  stuffs  so  fine,  and  of  such  delicate  texture,  as
to  resemble  silk ;  pictures  of  animals,  trees,  and  other
natural  objects,  formed  with  feathers  of  different  co-
lours, disposed  and  mingled  with  such  skill  and  ele-
gance, as  to  rival  the  works  of  the  pencil  in  truth  and
beauty  of  imitation. But  what  chiefly attracted

1519.]  BOOK  V.  107

their  eyes,  were  two  large  plates  of  a  circular  form,
one  of  massive  gold  representing  the  sun,  the  other
of  silver,  an  emblem  of  the  moon."1 These  were  ac-
companied with  bracelets,  collars,  rings,  and  other
trinkets  of  gold;  and  that  nothing  might  be  wanting
which  could  give  the  Spaniards  a  complete  idea  of
what  the  country  afforded,  with  some  boxes  filled
with  pearls,  precious  stones,  and  grains  of  gold  un-
wrought,  as  they  had  been  found  in  the  mines  or
rivers. Cortes  received  all  these  with  an  appearance
of  profound  veneration  for  the  monarch  by  whom
Forbids they  were  bestowed.  But  when  the  Mexicans,
approach presuming  upon  this,  informed  him,  that  their
his  capital,  master,  though  he  desired  him  to  accept  of
what  he  had  sent  as  a  token  of  regard  for  that  monarch
whom  Cortes  represented,  would  not  give  his  con-
sent that  foreign  troops  should  approach  nearer  to
his  capital,  or  even  allow  them  to  continue  longer  in
his  dominions,  the  Spanish  general  declared,  in  a
manner  more  resolute  and  peremptory  than  formerly,
that  he  must  insist  on  his  first  demand,  as  he  could
not,  without  dishonour,  return  to  his  own  country,
until  he  was  admitted  into  the  presence  of  the  prince
whom  he  was  appointed  to  visit  in  the  name  of  his
sovereign. The  Mexicans,  astonished  at  seeing  any
man  dare  to  oppose  that  will,  which  they  were  ac-
customed to  consider  as  supreme and  irresistible,
yet  afraid  of  precipitating  their  country  into  an  open
rupture  with  such  formidable  enemies,  prevailed  with
Cortes  to  promise,  that  he  would  not  move  from  his
present  camp,  until  the  return  of  a  messenger,  whom
they  sent  to  Montezuma  for  farther  instructions."
state  of The  firmness  with  which  Cortes  adhered  to
theMexi- his  original  proposal,  should  naturally  have

csn  empire  .

at  that  Pe-  brought  the  negotiation  between  him and
Montezuma  to  a  speedy  issue,  as  it  seemed

■"  See  Note  XLIX.
n  B.  Diaz.  c.  39. Gomara  Cron.  c.  27. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib,  v.  c.  5,  6.

100  AMERICA.  [1519.

to  leave  the  Mexican  monarch  no  choice,  but  either
to  receive  him  with  confidence  as  a  friend,  or  to  op-
pose him  openly  as  an  enemy. The  latter  was  what
might  have  been  expected  from  a  haughty  prince  in
possession  of  extensive  power. The  Mexican  em-
pire, at  this  period,  was  at  a  pitch  of  grandeur  to
which  no  society  ever  attained  in  so  short  a  period.
Though  it  had  subsisted,  according  to  their  own  tra-
ditions, only  a  hundred  and  thirty  years,  its  dominion
extended  from  the  North  to  the  South  sea, over
territories  stretching,  with  some  small  interruption,
above  five  hundred  leagues  from  east  to  west,  and
more  than  two  hundred  from  north  to  south,  compre-
hending provinces  not  inferior  in  fertility,  population,
and  opulence,  to  any  in  the  torrid  zone. The  people
were  warlike  and  enterprising ;  the  authority  of  the
monarch  unbounded,  and  his  revenues  considerable.
If,  with  the  forces  which  might  have  been  suddenly
assembled  in,  such  an  empire,  Montezuma  had  fallen
upon  the  Spaniards  while  encamped  on  a  barren  un-
healthy coast,  unsupported  by  any  ally,  without  a
place  of  retreat,  and  destitute  of  provisions,  it  seems
to  be  impossible,  even  with  all  the  advantages  of  their
superior  discipline  and  arms,  that  they  could  have
stood  the  shock,  and  they  must  either  have  perished
in  such  an  unequal  contest,  or  have  abandoned  the
enterprise.
r,,  As  the  power  of  Montezuma  enabled  him

Character  *

of  the  mo-  to  take  this  spirited  part,  his  own  dispositions

narch.  ,  -  ..

were  such  as  seemed  naturally  to  prompt  him
to  it.  Of  all  the  princes  who  had  swayed  the  Mexi-
can sceptre,  he  was  the  most  haughty,  the  most  vio-
lent, and  the  most  impatient  of  control.  His  sub-
jects looked  up  to  him  with  awe,  and  his  enemies
with  terror.  The  former  he  governed  with  unex-
ampled rigour ;  but  they  were  impressed  with  such
an  opinion  of  his  capacity,  as  commanded  their  re-

1519.]  BOOK V.  109

spect ;  and,  by  many  victories  over  the  latter,  he  had
spread  far  the  dread  of  his  arms,  and  had  added  se-
veral considerable  provinces  to  his  dominions.  But
though  his  talents  might  be  suited  to  the  trans-
actions of  a  state  so  imperfectly  polished  as  the  Mexi-
can empire,  and  sufficient  to  conduct  them  while  in
their  accustomed  course,  they  were  altogether  inade-
quate to  a  conjuncture  so  extraordinary,  and  did  not
qualify  him  either  to  judge  with  the  discernment,
or  to  act  with  the  decision  requisite  in  such  a  trying

emergence.

„.  From  the  moment  that  the  Spaniards  ap-

His  per-  a  *

piexity  peared  on  his  coast,  he  discovered  symptoms
upon  the  of  timidity  and  embarrassment.  Instead  of
the  sapa°-f  taking  such  resolutions  as  the  consciousness
niards.  0f  his  0wn  power,  or  the  memory  of  his  former
exploits,  might  have  inspired,  he  deliberated  with  an
anxiety  and  hesitation  which  did  not  escape  the  notice
of  his  meanest  courtiers.  The  perplexity  and  dis-
composure of  Montezuma's  mind  upon  this  occasion,
as  well  as  the  general  dismay  of  his  subjects,  were
not  owing  wholly  to  the  impression  which  the  Spa-
niards had  made  by  the  novelty  of  their  appearance
and  the  terror  of  their  arms.  Its  origin  maybe  traced
up  to  a  more  remote  source.  There  was  an  opinion,
if  we  may  believe  the  earliest  and  most  authentic
Spanish  historians,  almost  universal  amongst  the
Americans,  that  some  dreadful  calamity  was  impend-
ing over  their  heads,  from  a  race  of  formidable  in-
vaders, who  should  come  from  regions  towards  the
rising  sun,  to  overrun  and  desolate  their  country.
Whether  this  disquieting  apprehension  flowed  from
the  memory  of  some  natural  calamity  which  had  af-
flicted that  part  of  the  globe,  and  impressed  the  minds
of  the  inhabitants  with  superstitious  fears  and  fore-
bodings, or  whether  it  was  an  imagination  accident-
ally suggested  by  the  astonishment  which  the  first

110  AMERICA.  [1519.

sight  of  a  new  race  of  men  occasioned,  it  is  impossi-
ble to  determine.  But  as  the  Mexicans  were  more
prone  to  superstition  than  any  people  in  the  New
World,  they  were  more  deeply  affected  by  the  ap-
pearance of  the  Spaniards,  whom  their  credulity  in-
stantly represented  as  the  instrument  destined  to
bring-  about  this  fatal  revolution  which  they  dreaded.
Under  those  circumstances,  it  ceases  to  be  incredi-
ble that  a  handful  of  adventurers  should  alarm  the
monarch  of  a  great  empire,  and  all  his  subjects.0
r ..  Notwithstanding  the  influence  of  this  im-

Continues  o

to  nego- pression,  when  the  messenger  arrived  from

tiate.  \  \

the  Spanish  camp  with  an  account  that  the
leader  of  the  strangers,  adhering  to  his  original  de-
mand, refused  to  obey  the  order  enjoining  him  to
leave  the  country,  Montezuma  assumed  some  degree
of  resolution,  and,  in  a  transport  of  rage  natural  to  a
fierce  prince  unaccustomed  to  meet  with  any  oppo-
sition to  his  will,  he  threatened  to  sacrifice  those  pre-
sumptuous men  to  his  gods.  But  his  doubts  and
fears  quickly  returned,  and  instead  of  issuing  orders
to  carry  his  threats  into  execution,  he  again  called
his  ministers  to  confer  and  offer  their  advice.  Feeble
and  temporising  measures  will  always  be  the  result
when  men  assemble  to  deliberate  in  a  situation  where
they  ought  to  act.  The  Mexican  counsellors  took  no
effectual  measure  for  expelling  such  troublesome  in-
truders, and  were  satisfied  with  issuing  a  more  posi-
tive injunction,  requiring  them  to  leave  the  country ;
but  this  they  preposterously  accompanied  with  a
present  of  such  value,  as  proved  fresh  inducement  to
remain  there.

Anxiety Meanwhile  the  Spaniards  were  not  without
and  appre-  solieitude  or  a  variety  of  sentiments,  in  deli-

liensions  *

of  the berating  concerning  their  own  future  conduct.
From  what  they  had  already  seen,  many  of

°  Cortes  Relatione  Seconda,  ap.  Ramus,  iii.  234,  235. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  iii.
c.  1.  lib.  v.  e.  11.  lib.  vii.  c.  6. Goniara  Chron.  c.  66.  92.  144.

1519.]  BOOK  V.  Ill

them  formed  such  extravagant  ideas  concerning  the
opulence  of  the  country,  that,  despising  danger  or
hardships,  when  they  had  in  view  treasures  which
appeared  to  be  inexhaustible,  they  were  eager  to  at-
tempt the  conquest. Others,  estimating  the  power
of  the  Mexican  empire  by  its  wealth,  and  enumerat-
ing the  various  proofs  which  had  occurred  of  its  being
under  a  well  regulated  administration,  contended,
that  it  would  be  an  act  of  the  wildest  frenzy  to  at-
tack such  a  state  with  a  small  body  of  men,  in  want
of  provisions,  unconnected  with  any  ally,  and  already
enfeebled  by  the  diseases  peculiar  to  the  climate,
and  the  loss  of  several  of  their  number. p Cortes  se-
cretly applauded  the  advocates  for  bold  measures,
and  cherished  their  romantic  hopes, as  such  ideas
corresponded  with  his  own,  and  favoured  the  execu-
tion of  the  schemes  which  he  had  formed. From  the
time  that  the  suspicions  of  Velasquez  broke  out  with
open  violence  in  the  attempts  to  deprive  him  of  the
schemes command, Cortes  saw  the  necessity  of  dis-
ci ones.  soivjng  a  connexion  which  would obstruct
and  embarrass  all  his  operations,  and  watched  for  a
proper  opportunity  of  coming  to  a  final  rupture  with
him. Having  this  in  view,  he  had  laboured  by  every
art  to  secure  the  esteem  and  affection  of  his  soldiers.
With  his  abilities  for  command,  it  was  easy  to  gain
their  esteem;  and  his  followers  were  quickly  satisfied
that  they  might  rely,  with  perfect  confidence,  on  the
conduct  and  courage  of  their  leader. Nor  was  it
more  difficult  to  acquire  their  affection. Among  ad-
venturers, nearly  of  the  same  rank,  and  serving  at
their  own  expense,  the  dignity  of  command  did  not
elevate  a  general  above  mingling  with  those  who
acted  under  him. Cortes  availed  himself  of  this  free-
dom of  intercourse,  to  insinuate  himself  into  their
favour,  and  by  his  affable  manners,  by  well-timed

p  B.  Diaz.  c.  40.

112  AMERICA.  (1519.

acts  of  liberality  to  some,  by  inspiring  all  with  vast
hopes,  and  by  allowing  them  to  trade  privately  with
the  natives, q  he  attached  the  greater  part  of  his  sol-
diers so  firmly  to  himself,  that  they  almost  forgot
that  the  armament  had  been  fitted  out  by  the  autho-
rity, and  at  the  expense  of  another.
His  ad-  During  those  intrigues,  Teutile  arrived  with
canning  tne  present  from  Montezuma,  and,  together
them  on.  with  it,  delivered  the  ultimate  order  of  that
monarch  to  depart  instantly  out  of  his  dominions  ;
and  when  Cortes,  instead  of  complying,  renewed  his
request  of  an  audience,  the  Mexican  turned  from  him
abruptly,  and  quitted  the  camp  with  looks  and  ges-
tures which  strongly  expressed  his  surprise  and  re-
sentment. Next  morning,  none  of  the  natives,  who
used  to  frequent  the  camp  in  great  numbers,  in  order
to  barter  with  the  soldiers,  and  to  bring  in  provi-
sions, appeared.  All  friendly  correspondence  seemed
now  to  be  at  an  end,  and  it  was  expected  every  mo-
ment that  hostilities  would  commence.  This,  though
an  event  that  might  have  been  foreseen,  occasioned
a  sudden  consternation  among  the  Spaniards,  which
imboldened  the  adherents  of  Velasquez  not  only  to
murmur  and  cabal  against  their  general,  but  to  ap-
point one  of  their  number  to  remonstrate  openly
against  his  imprudence  in  attempting  the  conquest  of
a  mighty  empire  with  such  inadequate  force,  and  to
urge  the  necessity  of  returning  to  Cuba,  in  order  to
refit  the  fleet  and  augment  the  army.  Diego  de  Or-
daz,  one  of  his  principal  officers,  whom  the  male-
contents  charged  with  this  commission,  delivered  it
with  a  soldierly  freedom  and  bluntness,  assuring
Cortes  that  he  spoke  the  sentiments  of  the  whole
army.  He  listened  to  this  remonstrance  without  any
appearance  of  emotion,  and  as  he  well  knew  the  tem-
per and  wishes  of  his  soldiers,  and  foresaw  how  they

i  See  Note  L.

1519.]  BOOK V.  JJ3

would  receive  a  proposition  fatal  at  once  to  all  the
splendid  hopes  and  schemes  which  they  had  been
forming  with  such  complacency,  he  carried  his  dis-
simulation so  far  as  to  seem  to  relinquish  his  own
measures  in  compliance  with  the  request  of  Ordaz,
and  issued  orders  that  the  army  should  be  in  readi-
ness next  day  to  re-embark  for  Cuba.  As  soon  as  this
was  known,  the  disappointed  adventurers  exclaimed
and  threatened ;  the  emissaries  of  Cortes,  mingling
with  them,  inflamed  their  rage  ;  the  ferment  became
general ;  the  whole  camp  was  almost  in  open  mutiny ;
all  demanding  with  eagerness  to  see  their  commander.
Cortes  was  not  slow  in  appearing ;  when,  with  one
voice,  officers  and  soldiers  expressed  their  astonish-
ment and  indignation  at  the  orders  which  they  had
received.  It  was  unworthy,  they  cried,  of  the  Cas-
tilian  courage,  to  be  daunted  at  the  first  aspect  of
danger,  and  infamous  to  fly  before  any  enemy  ap-
peared. For  their  parts,  they  were  determined  not
to  relinquish  an  enterprise,  that  had  hitherto  been
successful,  and  which  tended  so  visibly  to  spread  the
knowledge  of  true  religion,  and  to  advance  the  glory
and  interest  of  their  country.  Happy  under  his  com-
mand, they  would  follow  him  with  alacrity  through
every  danger,  in  quest  of  those  settlements  and  trea-
sures which  he  had  so  long  held  out  to  their  view ;
but  if  he  chose  rather  to  return  to  Cuba,  and  tamely
give  up  all  his  hopes  of  distinction  and  opulence  to  an
envious  rival,  they  would  instantly  choose  another
general  to  conduct  them  in  that  path  of  glory,  which
he  had  not  spirit  to  enter.

Cortes,  delighted  with  their  ardour,  took  no  offence
at  the  boldness  with  which  it  was  uttered,  The  sen-
timents were  what  he  himself  had  inspired,  and  the
warmth  of  expression  satisfied  him  that  his  followers
had  imbibed  them  thoroughly.  He  affected,  however,
to  be  surprised  at  what  he  heard,  declaring  that  his

VOL  VII.  i

114  AMERICA.  [1519.

orders  to  prepare  for  embarking  were  issued  from  a
persuasion  that  this  was  agreeable  to  his  troops ;  that,
from  deference  to  what  he  had  been  informed  was
their  inclination,  he  had  sacrificed  his  own  private
opinion,  which  was  firmly  bent  on  establishing  im-
mediately a  settlement  on  the  sea-coast,  and  then  on
endeavouring  to  penetrate  into  the  interior  part  of  the
country  ;  that  now  he  was  convinced  of  his  error ;
and  as  he  perceived  that  they  were  animated  with  the
generous  spirit  which  breathed  in  every  true  Spa-
niard, he  would  resume,  with  fresh  ardour,  his  origi-
nal plan  of  operation,  and  doubted  not  to  conduct
them,  in  the  career  of  victory,  to  such  independent
fortunes  as  their  valour  merited.  Upon  this  decla-
ration, shouts  of  applause  testified  the  excess  of  their
joy.  The  measure  seemed  to  be  taken  with  unani-
mous consent ;  such  as  secretly  condemned  it  being
obliged  to  join  in  the  acclamations,  partly  to  conceal
their  disaffection  from  their  general,  and  partly  to
avoid  the  imputation  of  cowardice  from  their  fellow-
soldiers/

Esta  Without  allowing  his  men  time  to  cool  or

wishes  a  to  reflect,  Cortes  set  about  carrying  his  design
civil  go-  into  execution.  In  order  to  give  a  beginning
vemment.  ^Q  a  co\onyt  }ie  assembled  the  principal  per-
sons in  his  army,  and  by  their  suffrage  elected  a
council  and  magistrates  in  whom  the  government  was
to  be  vested.  As  men  naturally  transplant  the  insti-
tutions and  forms  of  the  mother-country  into  their
new  settlements,  this  was  framed  upon  the  model  of
a  Spanish  corporation.  The  magistrates  were  distin-
guished by  the  same  names  and  ensigns  of  office,  and
were  to  exercise  a  similar  jurisdiction.  All  the  per-
sons chosen  were  most  firmly  devoted  to  Cortes,  and
the  instrument  of  their  election  was  framed  in  the
king's  name,  without  any  mention  of  their  depend-

r  B.  Diaz.  c.  40—42. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  v.  c.  6,  7.

1519.]  BOOK V.  115

ence  on  Velasquez.  The  two  principles  of  avarice
and  enthusiasm,  which  prompted  the  Spaniards  to
all  their  enterprises  in  the  New  World,  seem  to  have
concurred  in  suggesting  the  name  which  Cortes  be-
stowed on  his  infant  settlement.  He  called  it,  The
rich  town  of  the  true  Cross.3
n  . , . The  first  meeting  of  the  new  council  was

Resigns  his  .  °

commis-  distinguished  by  a  transaction  of  great  mo-
ment. As  soon  as  it  assembled,  Cortes  ap-
plied for  leave  to  enter  ;  and  approaching  with  many
marks  of  profound  respect,  which  added  dignity  to
the  tribunal,  and  set  an  example  of  reverence  for  its
authority,  he  began  a  long  harangue,  in  which,  with
much  art,  and  in  terms  extremely  flattering  to  per-
sons just  entering  upon  their  new  function,  he  ob-
served, that  as  the  supreme  jurisdiction  over  the
colony  which  they  had  planted  was  now  vested  in
this  court,  he  considered  them  as  clothed  with  the
authority,  and  representing  the  person  of  their  sove-
reign; that  accordingly  he  would  communicate  to
them  what  he  deemed  essential  to  the  public  safety,
with  the  same  dutiful  fidelity  as  if  he  were  address-
ing his  royal  master ;  that  the  security  of  a  colony
settled  in  a  great  empire,  whose  sovereign  had  al-
ready discovered  his  hostile  intentions,  depended
upon  arms,  and  the  efficacy  of  these  upon  the  subor-
dination and  discipline  preserved  among  the  troops;
that  his  right  to  command  was  derived  from  a  com-
mission granted  by  the  governor  of  Cuba;  and  as  that
had  been  long  since  revoked,  the  lawfulness  of  his
jurisdiction  might  well  be  questioned;  that  he  might
be  thought  to  act  upon  a  defective,  or  even  a  dubious
title  ;  nor  could  they  trust  an  army  which  might  dis-
pute the  powers  of  its  general,  at  a  juncture  when
it  ought  implicitly  to  obey  his  orders;  that,  moved
by  these  considerations,  he now  resigned  all  his

s  Villa  rica  do  la  vera  Cruz.

i  2

J  l(j  AM  ERICA.  [1519.

authority  to  them,  that  they,  having  both  right  to
choose,  and  power  to  confer  full  jurisdiction,  might
appoint  one  in  the  king's  name,  to  command  the  army
in  its  future  operations  ;  and  as  for  his  own  part,
such  was  his  zeal  for  the  service  in  which  they  were
engaged,  that  he  would  most  cheerfully  take  up  a
pike  with  the  same  hand  that  laid  down  the  general's
truncheon,  and  convince  his  fellow- soldiers,  that
though  accustomed  to  command,  he  had  not  for-
gotten how  to  obey.  Having  finished  his  discourse,
he  laid  the  commission  from  Velasquez  upon  the
table,  and  after  kissing  his  truncheon,  delivered  it  to
the  chief  magistrate,  and  withdrew.
And  is  The  deliberations  of  the  council  were  not

cMef-jns-  l°ng>  &s  Cortes  had  concerted  this  important
tice  and measur6  with  his  confidants,  and  had  prepared

captain-  '  J. r

general,  the  other  members  with  great  address,  for  the
part  which  he  wished  them  to  take.  His  resignation
was  accepted ;  and  as  the  uninterrupted  tenor  of
their  prosperity  under  his  conduct  afforded  the  most
satisfying  evidence  of  his  abilities  for  command,  they,
by  their  unanimous  suffrage,  elected  him  chief-justice
of  the  colony,  and  captain-general  of  its  army,  and
appointed  his  commission  to  be  made  out  in  the  king's
name,  with  most  ample  powers,  which  were  to  con-
tinue in  force  until  the  royal  pleasure  should  be  far-
ther known.  That  this  deed  might  not  be  deemed  the
machination  of  a  junto,  the  council  called  together
the  troops,  and  acquainted  them  with  what  had  been
resolved.  The  soldiers,  with  eager  applause,  ratified
the  choice  which  the  council  had  made ;  the  air  re-
sounded with  the  name  of  Cortes,  and  all  vowed  to
shed  their  blood  in  support  of  his  authority.
Asserts  his  Cortes  having  now  brought  his  intrigues  to
«ith°vi-J  ^ie  desired  issue,  and  shaken  off  his  mortify  -
gour.  nig  dependence  on  the  governor  of  Cuba,  ac-
cepted of  the  commission,  which  vested  in  him  su-

1519.]  BOOK V.  J17

preme  jurisdiction,  civil  as  well  as  military,  over  the
colony,  with  many  professions  of  respect  to  the  coun-
cil, and  gratitude  to  the  army.  Together  with  this
new  command,  he  assumed  greater  dignity,  and  be-
gan to  exercise  more  extensive  powers.  Formerly
he  had  felt  himself  to  be  only  the  deputy  of  a  sub-
ject ;  now  he  acted  as  the  representative  of  his  so-
vereign. The  adherents  of  Velasquez,  fully  aware  of
what  would  be  the  effect  of  this  change  in  the  situa-
tion of  Cortes,  could  no  longer  continue  silent  and
passive  spectators  of  his  actions.  They  exclaimed
openly  against  the  proceedings  of  the  council  as
illegal,  and  against  those  of  the  army  as  mutinous.
Cortes,  instantly  perceiving  the  necessity  of  giving  a
timely  check  to  such  seditious  discourse  by  some
vigorous  measure,  arrested  Ordaz,  Escudero,  and
Valasquez  de  Leon,  the  ringleaders  of  this  faction,
and  sent  them  prisoners  aboard  the  fleet,  loaded  with
chains.  Their  dependants,  astonished  and  over-awed,
remained  quiet ;  and  Cortes,  more  desirous  to  reclaim
than  to  punish  his  prisoners,  who  were  officers  of
great  merit,  courted  their  friendship  with  such  assi-
duity and  address,  that  the  reconciliation  was  per-
fectly cordial;  and  on  the  most  trying  occasions,
neither  their  connexion  with  the  governor  of  Cuba,
nor  the  memory  of  the  indignity  with  which  they  had.
been  treated,  tempted  them  to  swerve  from  an  in-
violable attachment  to  his  interest.1  In  this,  as  well
as  his  other  negotiations  at  this  critical  conjuncture,
which  decided  with  respect  to  his  future  fame  and
fortune,  Cortes  owed  much  of  his  success  to  the
Mexican  gold,  which  he  distributed  with  a  liberal
hand  both  among  his  friends  and  his  opponents."
His  friend-  Cortes,  having  thus  rendered  the  union  be-
sbip  court-  tween  himself  and  his  army  indissoluble,  by

*  B.  Diaz.  c.  42,  43. Gomara  Cron.  c.  30,  31. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  ▼.  c.  7,

u  B.  Diaz.  c.  44.

118  AMERICA.  [1519.

ed  by  the  engaging  it  to  join  him  in  disclaiming  any
laT'  dependence  on  the  governor  of  Cuba,  and
in  repeated  acts  of  disobedience  to  his  authority,
thought  he  might  now  venture  to  quit  the  camp  in
which  he  had  hitherto  remained,  and  advance  into
the  country.  To  this  he  was  encouraged  by  an
event  no  less  fortunate  than  seasonable.  Some  In-
dians having  approached  his  camp  in  a  mysterious
manner,  were  introduced  into  his  presence.  He
found  that  they  were  sent  with  a  proffer  of  friendship
from  the  cazique  of  Zempoalla,  a  considerable  town
at  no  great  distance ;  and  from  their  answers  to  a
variety  of  questions  which  he  put  to  them,  accord-
ing to  his  usual  practice  in  every  interview  with  the
people  of  the  country,  he  gathered,  that  their  mas-
ter, though  subject  to  the  Mexican  empire,  was  im-
patient of  the  yoke,  and  filled  with  such  dread  and
hatred  of  Montezuma,  that  nothing  could  be  more
acceptable  to  him  than  any  prospect  of  deliverance
from  the  oppression  under  which  he  groaned.  On
hearing  this,  a  ray  of  light  and  hope  broke  in  upon
the  mind  of  Cortes.  He  saw  that  the  great  empire
which  he  intended  to  attack  was  neither  perfectly
united,  nor  its  sovereign  universally  beloved.  He
concluded,  that  the  causes  of  disaffection  could  not
be  confined  to  one  province,  but  that  in  other  cor-
ners there  must  be  malecontents,  so  weary  of  sub-
jection, or  so  desirous  of  change,  as  to  be  ready  to
follow  the  standard  of  any  protector.  Full  of  those
ideas,  on  which  he  began  to  form  a  scheme,  that
time,  and  more  perfect  information  concerning  the
state  of  the  country,  enabled  him  to  mature,  he  gave
a  most  gracious  reception  to  the  Zempoallans,  and
promised  soon  to  visit  their  cazique/
Marches  In  order  to  perform  this  promise,  it  was
poaiS?" n°t  necessary  to  vary  the  route  which  he  had

*  13.  Diaz.  c.  41. Gomara  Cron<  c.  28.

1519.]  BOOK  V.  119

already  fixed  for  his  march. Some  officers,  whom
he  had  employed  to  survey  the  coast,  having  disco-
vered a  village  named  Quiabislan,  about  forty  miles
to  the  northward,  which,  both  on  account  of  the  fer-
tility of  the  soil,  and  commodiousness  of  the  harbour,
seemed  to  be  a  more  proper  station  for  a  settlement
than  that  where  he  was  encamped,  Cortes  deter-
mined to  remove  thither. Zempoalla  lay  in  his  way,
where  the  cazique  received  him  in  the  manner  which
he  had  reason  to  expect ; with  gifts  and  caresses,
like  a  man  solicitous  to  gain  his  good-will ;  with  re-
spect approaching  almost  to  adoration,  like  one  who
looked  up  to  him  as  a  deliverer. From  him  he  learn-
ed many  particulars  with  respect  to  the  character  of
Montezuma,  and  the  circumstances  which  rendered
his  dominion  odious. He  was  a  tyrant,  as  the  ca-
zique told  him  with  tears,  haughty,  cruel,  and  suspi-
cious ;  who  treated  his  own  subjects  with  arrogance,
ruined  the  conquered  provinces  by  excessive  exac-
tions, and  often  tore  their  sons  and  daughters  from
them  by  violence  ; the  former  to  be  offered  as  vic-
tims to  his  gods ; the  latter,  to  be  reserved  as  con-
cubines for  himself  or  favourites. Cortes,  in  reply
to  him,  artfully  insinuated,  that  one  great  object  of
the  Spaniards  in  visiting  a  country  so  remote  from
their  own,  was  to  redress,  grievances,  and  to  relieve
the  oppressed ;  and  having  encouraged  him  to  hope
for  this  interposition  in  due  time,  he  continued  his
march  to  Quiabislan.

Builds  a  The  spot  which  his  officers  had  recom-
fort-  mended  as  a  proper  situation,  appeared  to  him
to  be  so  well  chosen,  that  he  immediately  marked
out  ground  for  a  town.  The  houses  to  be  erected
were  only  huts ;  but  these  were  to  be  surrounded
with  fortifications,  of  sufficient  strength  to  resist  the
assaults  of  an  Indian  army.  As  the  finishing  of  those
fortifications  was  essential  to  the  existence  of  a  co=

120  AIM  ERICA.  [1519.

lony,  and  of  no  less  importance  in  prosecitting  the
designs  which  the  leader  and  his  followers  meditated,
both  in  order  to  secure  a  place  of  retreat,  and  to  pre-
serve their  communication  with  the  sea,  every  man
in  the  army,  officers  as  well  as  soldiers,  put  his  hand
to  the  work,  Cortes  himself  setting  them  an  example
of  activity  and  perseverance  in  labour. The  Indians
of  Zempoalla  and  Quiabislan  lent  their  aid  ;  and  this
petty  station,  the  parent  of  so  many  mighty  settle-
ments, was  soon  in  a  state  of  defences
Concludes While engaged in this necessary work,
aina™e' Cortes  had  several  interviews with  the  ca-
jjth  seve-  ziqlies  of Zempoalla and Quiabislan ; and
ziques. availing  himself  of  their  wonder  and asto-
nishment at  the  new  objects  which  they  daily  beheld,
he  gradually  inspired  them  with such  a  high  opi-
nion of  the  Spaniards,  as  beings  of  a  superior  order,
and  irresistible  in  arms,  that,  relying  on  their  pro-
tection, they  ventured  to  insult  the  Mexican  power,
at  the  very  name  of  which  they  were  accustomed  to
tremble. Some  of  Montezuma's  officers  having  ap-
peared to  levy  the  usual  tribute,  and  to  demand  a
certain  number  of  human  victims,  as  an  expiation
for  their  guilt  in  presuming  to  hold  intercourse  with
those  strangers  whom  the  emperor  had  commanded
to  leave  his  dominions,  instead  of  obeying  the  order,
the  cazicpies  made  them  prisoners,  treated  them  with
great  indignity,  and  as  their  superstition  was  no  less
barbarous  than  that  of  the  Mexicans,  they  prepared
to  sacrifice  them  to  their  gods. From  this  last  dan-
ger they  were  delivered  by  the  interposition  of  Cor-
tes, who  manifested  the  utmost  horror  at  the  mention
of  such  a  deed. The  two  caziques  having  now  been
pushed  to  an  act  of  such  open  rebellion,  as  left  them
no  hope  of  safety  but  in  attaching  themselves  inviola-

y  B.  Diaz.  c.  45,  46.  48. Goraara  Cron.  c.  32, 33. 37. Hcrrera,  dec.  ° lib  v
C  8,9.

1519.]  BOORV.  121

bly  to  the  Spaniards,  they  soon  completed  their  union
with  them,  by  formally  acknowledging  themselves  to
be  vassals  of  the  same  monarch.  Their  example  was
followed  by  the  Totonaques,  a  fierce  people  who  in-
habited the  mountainous  part  of  the  country.  They
willingly  subjected  themselves  to  the  crown  of  Cas-
tile, and  offered  to  accompany  Cortes,  with  all  their
forces,  in  his  march  towards  Mexico.2
His  mea-  Cortes  had  now  been  above  three  months
procure.a  in  New  Spain ;  and  though  this  period  had
confirma- not  been  distinguished  by  martial  exploits,

tion  of  °  J  . x

hisautho-  every  moment  had  been  employed  in  ope-
Sng/  * e  rations,  which,  though  less  splendid,  were
more  important.  By  his  address  in  conducting  his
intrigues  with  his  own  army,  as  well  as  his  sagacity
in  carrying  on  his  negotiations  with  the  natives,  he
had  already  laid  the  foundations  of  his  future  suc-
cess. But  whatever  confidence  he  might  place  in
the  plan  which  he  had  formed,  he  could  not  but  per-
ceive, that  as  his  title  to  command  was  derived  from
a  doubtful  authority,  he  held  it  by  a  precarious
tenure.  The  injuries  which  Velasquez  had  received,
were  such  as  would  natufally  prompt  him  to  apply
for  redress  to  their  common  sovereign ;  and  such  a
representation,  he  foresaw,  might  be  given  of  his
conduct,  that  he  had  reason  to  apprehend,  not  only
that  he  might  be  degraded  from  his  present  rank,
but  subjected  to  punishment.  Before  he  began  his
march,  it  was  necessary  to  take  the  most  effectual
precautions  against  this  impending  danger.  With
this  view  he  persuaded  the  magistrates  of  the  colony
at  Vera  Cruz  to  address  a  letter  to  the  king,  the  chief
object  of  which  was  to  justify  their  own  conduct  in
establishing  a  colony  independent  on  the  jurisdiction
of  Velasquez.  In  order  to  accomplish  this,  they  en-
deavoured to  detract  from  his  merit,  in  fitting  out

*B.  Diaz.  c.  47. Gomara  Cron.  35,  36. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  v.  c.  9 — 11.

122  AMERICA.  [1519.

the  two  former  armaments  under  Cordova  and  Gri-
jalva,  affirming  that  these  had  been  equipped  by  the
adventurers  who  engaged  in  the  expeditions,  and
not  by  the  governor.  They  contended  that  the  sole
object  of  Velasquez  was  to  trade  or  barter  with  the
natives,  not  to  attempt  the  conquest  of  New  Spain,
or  to  settle  a  colony  there.  They  asserted  that  Cortes
and  the  officers  who  served  under  him  had  de-
frayed the  greater  part  of  the  expense  in  fitting  out
the  armament.  On  this  account,  they  humbly  re-
quested their  sovereign  to  ratify  what  they  had  done
in  his  name,  and  to  confirm  Cortes  in  the  supreme
command  by  his  royal  commission.  That  Charles
might  be  induced  to  grant  more  readily  what  they
demanded,  they  gave  him  a  pompous  description  of
the  country  which  they  had  discovered  ;  of  its  riches,
the  number  of  its  inhabitants,  their  civilization  and
arts ;  they  related  the  progress  which  they  had
already  made  in  annexing  some  parts  of  the  country
situated  on  the  sea-coast  to  the  crown  of  Castile :
and  mentioned  the  schemes  which  they  had  formed,
as  well  as  the  hopes  which  they  entertained,  of  re-
ducing the  whole  to  subjection.3  Cortes  himself  wrote
in  a  similar  strain  ;  and  as  he  knew  that  the  Spanish
court,  accustomed  to  the  exaggerated  representations
of  every  new  country  by  its  discoverers,  would  give
little  credit  to  their  splendid  accounts  of  New  Spain,
if  these  were  not  accompanied  with  such  a  specimen
of  what  it  contained,  as  would  excite  a  high  idea
of  its  opulence,  he  solicited  his  soldiers  to  relinquish
what  they  might  claim  as  their  part  of  the  treasures

a  In  this  letter  it  is  asserted,  that  though  a  considerable  number  of  Spaniards
have  been  wounded  in  their  various  encounters  with  the  people  of  Tabasco,  not  one
of  them  died,  and  all  had  recovered  in  a  very  short  time.  This  seems  to  confirm
what  I  observe  in  p.  299,  concerning  the  imperfection  of  the  offensive  weapons  used
by  the  Americans.  In  this  letter,  the  human  sacrifices  offered  by  the  Mexicans  to
their  deities  are  described  minutely,  and  with  great  horror  ;  some  of  the  Spaniards,
it  is  said,  had  been  eye-witnesses  of  those  barbarous  rites.  To  tiie  letter  is  subjoined
a  catalogue  and  description  of  the  presents  sent  to  the  emperor.  That  published  by
Goiuara,  Cron.  c.  29,  seems  to  have  been  copied  from  it.  Pet.  Martyr  describes
many  of  the  articles  in  his  treatise  '  De  Insulisnupcr  inventis,"  p.  obi,  &c.

1519.]  BOOKV.  123

which  had  hitherto  been  collected,  in  order  that  the
whole  might  be  sent  to  the  king.  Such  was  the  as-
cendant which  he  had  acquired  over  their  minds,
and  such  their  own  romantic  expectations  of  future
wealth,  that  an  army  of  indigent  and  rapacious  ad-
venturers was  capable  of  this  generous  effort,  and
offered  to  their  sovereign  the  richest  present  that  had
hitherto  been  transmitted  from  the  New  World.b
Portocarrero  and  Montejo,  the  chief  magistrates  of
the  colony,  were  appointed  to  carry  this  present  to
Castile,  with  express  orders  not  to  touch  at  Cuba  in
their  passage  thither .c

a  conspi-  While  a  vessel  was  preparing  for  their  de-
Tafnst  parture,  an  unexpected  event  occasioned  a
Cortes,  general  alarm.  Some  soldiers  and  sailors  se-
cretly attached  to  Velasquez,  or  intimidated  at  the
prospect  of  the  dangers  unavoidable  in  attempting  to
penetrate  into  the  heart  of  a  great  empire  with  such
unequal  force,  formed  the  design  of  seizing  one  of  the
brigantines,  and  making  their  escape  to  Cuba,  in
order  to  give  the  governor  such  intelligence  as  might
enable  him  to  intercept  the  ship  which  was  to  carry
the  treasure  and  dispatches  to  Spain.  This  conspi-
racy, though  formed  by  persons  of  low  rank,  was
conducted  with  profound  secrecy ;  but  at  the  mo-
ment when  every  thing  was  ready  for  execution,
they  were  betrayed  by  one  of  their  associates.

Though  the  good  fortune  of  Cortes  inter-
s troys  his  posed  so  seasonably  on  this  occasion,  the  de-
fleet'  tection  of  this  conspiracy  filled  his  mind  with
most  disquieting  apprehensions,  and  prompted  him  to
execute  a  scheme  which  he  had  long  revolved.  He
perceived  that  the  spirit  of  disaffection  still  lurked
among  his  troops  ;  that  though  hitherto  checked  by
the  uniform  success  of  his  schemes,  or  suppressed  by
the  hand  of  authority,  various  events  might  occur

b  See  NOTE  LI.  c  B.  Diaz.  c.  54. Gouiara  Cron.  c.  40.

124  AMERICA.  [1519.

which  would  encourage  and  call  it  forth.  He  ob-
served, that  many  of  his  men,  weary  of  the  fatigue  of
service,  longed  to  revisit  their  settlements  in  Cuba  ;
and  that  upon  any  appearance  of  extraordinary  dan-
ger, or  any  reverse  of  fortune,  it  would  be  impossible
to  restrain  them  from  returning  thither.  He  was
sensible  that  his  forces,  already  too  feeble,  could  bear
no  diminution,  and  that  a  very  small  defection  of  his
followers  would  oblige  him  to  abandon  the  enter-
prise. After  ruminating  often,  and  with  much  solici-
tude, upon  those  particulars,  he  saw  no  hope  of  suc-
cess, but  in  cutting  off  all  possibility  of  retreat,  and
in  reducing  his  men  to  the  necessity  of  adopting  the
same  resolution  with  which  he  himself  was  animated,
either  to  conquer  or  to  perish.  With  this  view,  he
determined  to  destroy  his  fleet ;  but  as  he  durst  not
venture  to  execute  such  a  bold  resolution  by  his  sin-
gle authority,  he  laboured  to  bring  his  soldiers  to
adopt  his  ideas  with  respect  to  the  propriety  of  this
measure.  His  address  in  accomplishing  this  was  not
inferior  to  the  arduous  occasion  in  which  it  was  em-
ployed. He  persuaded  some,  that  the  ships  had  suf-
fered so  much  by  having  been  long  at  sea,  as  to  be
altogether  unfit  for  service  ;  to  others  he  pointed  out
what  a  seasonable  reinforcement  of  strength  they
would  derive  from  the  junction  of  a  hundred  men,
now  unprofitably  employed  as  sailors ;  and  to  all  he
represented  the  necessity  of  fixing  their  eyes  and
wishes  upon  wrhat  was  before  them,  without  allow-
ing the  idea  of  a  retreat  once  to  enter  their  thoughts.
With  universal  consent  the  ships  were  drawn  ashore,
and  after  stripping  them  of  their  sails,  rigging,  iron
works,  and  whatever  else  might  be  of  use,  they  were
broke  in  pieces.  Thus,  from  an  effort  of  magnanimity,
to  which  there  is  nothing  parallel  in  history,  five  hun-
dred men  voluntarily  consented  to  be  shut  up  in  a
hostile  country,  filled  with  powerful  and  unknown

1519.]  BOOK V.  125

nations;  and  having  precluded  every  means  of  escape,
left  themselves  without  any  resource  but  their  own
valour  and  perseverance.*1

Nothing  now  retarded  Cortes  ;  the  alacrity  """of  his
troops  and  the  disposition  of  his  allies  were  equally
favourable. All  the  advantages, however,  derived
from  the  latter,  though  procured  by  much  assiduity
and  address,  were  well  nigh  lost  in  a  moment,  by  an
indiscreet  sally  of  religious  zeal,  which,  on  many  oc-
casions, precipitated  Cortes  into  actions  inconsistent
with  the  prudence  that  distinguishes  his  character.
Though  hitherto  he  had  neither  time  nor  opportunity
to  explain  to  the  natives  the  errors  of  their  own  su-
perstition, or  to  instruct  them  in  the  principles  of  the
Christian  faith,  he  commanded  his  soldiers  to  over-
turn the  altars  and  to  destroy  the  idols  in  the  chief  tem-
ple of  Zempoalla,  and  in  their  place  to  erect  a  crucifix
and  an  image  of  the  Virgin  Mary. The  people  beheld
this  with  astonishment  and  horror ;  the  priests  excited
them  to  arms  ;  but  such  was  the  authority  of  Cortes,
and  so  great  the  ascendant  which  the  Spaniards  had
acquired,  that  the  commotion  was  appeased  without
bloodshed,  and  concord  perfectly  re-established.6
Ad  -an  e Cortes  began  his  march  from  Zempoalla,
into  the on  the 16th  of  August, with  five  hundred
men,  fifteen  horse,  and  six  field-pieces. The
rest  of  his  troops,  consisting  chiefly  of  such  as  from
age  or  infirmity  were  less  fit  for  active  service,  he  left
as  a  garrison  in  Villa  Rica,  under  the  command  of
Escalante,  an  officer  of  merit,  and  warmly  attached
to  his  interest. The  cazique  of  Zempoalla  supplied
him  with  provisions,  and  with  two  hundred  of  those
Indians  called  Tamemes,  whose  office,  in  a  country
where  tame  animals  were  unknown,  was  to  carry  bur-
dens, and  to  perform  all  servile  labour. They  were

d  Relat. di  Cortes. Ramus,  iii.  225. B.  Diaz. c.  57,  58. Herrera,  dec.  2.
lib.  v.  c.  14.  e  B.  Diaz.  c.  41,  42. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  v.  c.  3,  4.

126  AMERICA.  [1519.

a  great  relief  to  the  Spanish  soldiers,  who  hitherto
had  been  obliged,  not  only  to  carry  their  own  bag-
gage, but  to  drag  along  the  artillery  by  main  force.
He  offered  likewise  a  considerable  body  of  his  troops,
but  Cortes  was  satisfied  with  four  hundred  ;  taking
care,  however,  to  choose  persons  of  such  note,  as
might  prove  hostages  for  the  fidelity  of  their  master.
Nothing  memorable  happened  in  his  progress,  until
he  arrived  on  the  confines  of  Tlascala.  The  inhabi-
tants of  that  province,  a  warlike  people,  were  impla-
cable enemies  of  the  Mexicans,  and  had  been  united
in  an  ancient  alliance  with  the  caziques  of  Zempo-
alla.  Though  less  civilized  than  the  subjects  of  Monte-
zuma, they  were  advanced  in  improvement  far  be-
yond the  rude  nations  of  America,  whose  manners
we  have  described.  They  had  made  considerable
progress  in  agriculture  ;  they  dwelt  in  large  towns ;
they  were  not  strangers  to  some  species  of  commerce;
and  in  the  imperfect  accounts  of  their  institutions
and  laws,  transmitted  to  us  by  the  early  Spanish
writers,  we  discern  traces  both  of  distributive  jus-
tice and  of  criminal  jurisdiction  in  their  interior
police.  But  still,  as  the  degree  of  their  civilization
was  incomplete,  and  as  they  depended  for  subsistence
not  on  agriculture  alone,  but  trusted  for  it  in  a  great
measure  to  hunting,  they  retained  many  of  the  qua-
lities natural  to  men  in  this  state.  Like  them,  they
were  fierce  and  revengeful ;  like  them,  too,  they
were  high-spirited  and  independent.  In  consequence
of  the  former,  they  were  involved  in  perpetual  hos-
tilities, and  had  but  a  slender  and  occasional  inter-
course with  neighbouring  states.  The  latter  inspired
them  with  such  detestation  of  servitude,  that  they
not  only  refused  to  stoop  to  a  foreign  yoke,  and  main-
tained an  obstinate  and  successful  contest  in  defence
of  their  liberty  against  the  superior  power  of  the
Mexican  empire,  but  they  guarded  with  equal  solici-

1519.]  BOOK V.  127

tude  against  domestic  tyranny ;  and  disdaining  to
acknowledge  any  master,  they  lived  under  the  mild
and  limited  jurisdiction  of  a  council  elected  by  their
several  tribes.
„.  Cortes,  though  he  had  received  informa-

His  war  o

with  the  tion  concerning  the  martial  character  of  this
people,  flattered  himself  that  his  professions
of  delivering  the  oppressed  from  the  tyranny  of
Montezuma,  their  inveterate  enmity  to  the  Mexicans,
and  the  example  of  their  ancient  allies  the  Zempoal-
lans,  might  induce  the  Tlascalans  to  grant  him  a
friendly  reception.  In  order  to  dispose  them  to  this,
four  Zempoallans,  of  great  eminence  were  sent  am-
bassadors, to  request,  in  his  name,  and  in  that  of
their  cazique,  that  they  would  permit  the  Spaniards
to  pass  through  the  territories  of  the  republic,  in  their
way  to  Mexico.  But  instead  of  the  favourable  answer
which  was  expected,  the  Tlascalans  seized  the  am-
bassadors, and  without  any  regard  to  their  public
character,  made  preparations  for  sacrificing  them  to
their  gods.  At  the  same  time,  they  assembled  their
troops,  in  order  to  oppose  those  unknown  invaders,
if  they  should  attempt  to  make  their  passage  good
by  force  of  arms.  Various  motives  concurred  in  preci-
pitating the  Tlascalans  into  this  resolution.  A  fierce
people,  shut  up  within  its  own  narrow  precincts,
and  little  accustomed  to  any  intercourse  with  foreign-
ers, is  apt  to  consider  every  stranger  as  an  enemy,
and  is  easily  excited  to  arms.  They  concluded,  from
Cortes's  proposal  of  visiting  Montezuma  in  his  capital,
that,  notwithstanding  all  his  professions,  he  courted
the  friendship  of  a  monarch  whom  they  both  hated  and
feared.  The  imprudent  zeal  of  Cortes  in  violating
the  temples  in  Zempoalla,  filled  the  Tlascalans  with
horror ;  and  as  they  were  no  less  attached  to  their
superstition  than  the  other  nations  of  New  Spain,
they  were  impatient  to  avenge  their  injured  gods,

128  AMERICA.  [1519.

and  to  acquire  the  merit  of  offering  up  to  them  as
victims,  those  impious  men  who  had  dared  to  pro-
fane their  altars  ;  they  contemned  the  small  number
of  the  Spaniards,  as  they  had  not  yet  measured  their
own  strength  with  that  of  these  new  enemies,  and
had  no  idea  of  the  superiority  which  they  derived
from  their  arms  and  discipline.

Cortes,  after  waiting  some  days,  in  vain,
Success  of  for  the  return  of  his  ambassadors,  advanced
into  the  Tlascalan  territories.  As  the  resolu-
tions of  people  who  delight  in  war  are  executed  with
no  less  promptitude  than  they  are  formed,  he  found
troops  in  the  field  ready  to  oppose  him.  They  at-
tacked him  with  great  intrepidity,  and,  in  the  first
encounter,  wounded  some  of  the  Spaniards,  and
killed  two  horses  ;  a  loss,  in  their  situation,  of  great
moment,  because  it  was  irreparable.  From  this  spe-
cimen of  their  courage,  Cortes  saw  the  necessity  of
proceeding  with  caution.  His  army  marched  in  close
order ;  he  chose  the  stations  where  he  halted,  with
attention,  and  fortified  every  camp  with  extraordi-
nary care.  During  fourteen  days  he  was  exposed  to
almost  uninterrupted  assaults,  the  Tlascalans  advanc-
ing with  numerous  armies,  and  renewing  the  attack
in  various  forms,  with  a  degree  of  valour  and  perse-
verance to  which  the  Spaniards  had  seen  nothing
parallel  in  the  New  World.  The  Spanish  historians
describe  those  successive  battles  with  great  pomp,
and  enter  into  a  minute  detail  of  particulars,  mingling
many  exaggerated  and  incredible  circumstances/
with  such  as  are  real  and  marvellous.  But  no  power
of  words  can  render  the  recital  of  a  combat  interest-
ing, where  there  is  no  equality  of  danger ;  and  when
the  narrative  closes  with  an  account  of  thousands
slain  on  the  one  side,  while  not  a  single  person  falls
on  the  other,  the  most  laboured  descriptions  of  the

f  See  Note  UI.

1519.]  BOOK  V.  129

previous  disposition  of  the  troops,  or  of  the  various
vicissitudes  in  the  engagement,  command  no  at-
tention.

some  There  are  some  circumstances,  however,  in

singular this  war,  which  are  memorable,  and  merit  no-

circum-  ,  •  i  l

stances  in  tice,  as  they  throw  light  upon  the  character
both  of  the  people  of  New  Spain,  and  of  their
conquerors.  Though  theTlascalans  brought  into  the
field  such  numerous  armies  as  appear  sufficient  to
have  overwhelmed  the  Spaniards,  they  were  never
able  to  make  any  impression  upon  their  small  batta-
lion. Singular  as  this  may  seem,  it  is  not  inexplica-
ble. The  Tlascalans,  though  addicted  to  war,  were,
like  all  unpolished  nations,  strangers  to  military  or-
der and  discipline,  and  lost  in  a  great  measure  the
advantage  which  they  might  have  derived  from  their
numbers.,  and  the  impetuosity  of  their  attack,  by  their
constant  solicitude  to  carry  off  the  dead  and  wound-
ed. This  point  of  honour,  founded  on  a  sentiment  of
tenderness  natural  to  the  human  mind,  and  strength-
ened by  anxiety  to  preserve  the  bodies  of  their  coun-
trymen from  being  devoured  by  their  enemies,  was
universal  among  the  people  of  New  Spain.  Attention
to  this  pious  office  occupied  them  even  during  the
heat  of  combat,3  broke  their  union,  and  diminished
the  force  of  the  impression  which  they  might  have
made  by  a  joint  effort.

Not  only  was  their  superiority  in  number  of  little
avail,  but  the  imperfection  of  their  military  weapons
rendered  their  valour  in  a  great  measure  inoffensive.
After  three  battles,  and  many  skirmishes  and  as-
saults, not  one  Spaniard  was  killed  in  the  field.  Ar-
rows and  spears,  headed  with  flint  or  the  bones  of
fishes,  stakes  hardened  in  the  fire,  and  wooden
swords,  though  destructive  weapons  among  naked

«  B.  Diaz.  c.  65.
VOL. VII.  K

130  AMERICA.  [1519.

Indians,  were  easily  turned  aside  by  the  Spanish
bucklers,  and  could  hardly  penetrate  the  escaupiles,
or  quilted  jackets,  which  the  soldiers  wore.  The
Tlascalans  advanced  boldly  to  the  charge,  and  often
fought  hand  to  hand.  Many  of  the  Spaniards  were
wounded,  though  all  slightly,  which  cannot  be  im-
puted to  any  want  of  courage  or  strength  in  their
enemies,  but  to  the  defect  of  the  arms  with  which
they  assailed  them.

Notwithstanding  the  fury  with  which  the  Tlascalans
attacked  the  Spaniards,  they  seemed  to  have  con-
ducted their  hostilities  with  some  degree  of  barba-
rous generosity.  They  gave  the  Spaniards  warning
of  their  hostile  intentions,  and  as  they  knew  that
their  invaders  wanted  provisions,  and  imagined,  per-
haps, like  the  other  Americans,  that  they  had  left
their  own  country  because  it  did  not  afford  them
subsistence,  they  sent  to  their  camp  a  large  supply
of  poultry  and  maize,  desiring  them  to  eat  plenti-
fully, because  they  scorned  to  attack  an  enemy  en-
feebled by  hunger,  and  it  would  be  an  affront  to  their
gods  to  offer  them  famished  victims,  as  well  as  dis-
agreeable to  themselves  to  feed  on  such  emaciated
prey.h

When  they  were  taught  by  the  first  encounter
with  their  new  enemies,  that  it  was  not  easy  to  exe-
cute this  threat ;  when  they  perceived,  in  the  sub-
sequent engagements,  that  notwithstanding  all  the
efforts  of  their  own  valour,  of  which  they  had  a  very
high  opinion,  not  one  of  the  Spaniards  was  slain  or
taken,  they  began  to  conceive  them  to  be  a  superior
order  of  beings,  against  whom  human  power  could
not  avail.  In  this  extremity  they  had  recourse  to
their  priests,  requiring  them  to  reveal  the  mysterious
causes  of  such  extraordinary  events,  and  to  declare
what  new  means  they  should  employ  in  order  to  re-

h  Herrera,  dec.  "2.  lib.  vi.  c.  6. Goiuara  Cron.  c.  47.

1519.]  BOOK V.  ,  131

pulse  those  formidable  invaders.  The  priests,  after
many  sacrifices  and  incantations,  delivered  this  re-
sponse. That  these  strangers  were  the  offspring  of
the  sun,  procreated  by  his  animating  energy  in  the
regions  of  the  east ;  that,  by  day,  while  cherished
with  the  influence  of  his  parental  beams,  they  were
invincible ;  but  by  night,  when  his  reviving  heat  was
withdrawn,  their  vigour  declined  and  faded  like  the
herbs  in  the  field,  and  they  dwindled  down  into  mor-
tal men.1  Theories  less  plausible  have  gained  credit
with  more  enlightened  nations,  and  have  influenced
their  conduct.  In  consequence  of  this,  the  Tlascalans,
with  the  implicit  confidence  of  men  who  fancy  them-
selves to  be  under  the  guidance  of  Heaven,  acted  in
contradiction  to  one  of  their  most  established  maxims
in  war,  and  ventured  to  attack  the  enemy,  with  a
strong  body,  in  the  night-time,  in  hopes  of  destroy-
ing them  when  enfeebled  and  surprised.  But  Cor-
tes had  greater  vigilance  and  discernment  than  to  be
deceived  by  the  rude  stratagems  of  an  Indian  army.
The  sentinels  at  his  out-posts,  observing  some  extra-
ordinary movement  among  the  Tlascalans,  gave  the
alarm.  In  a  moment  the  troops  were  under  arms,  and
sallying  out,  dispersed  the  party  with  great  slaugh-
ter, without  allowing  it  to  approach  the  camp.  The
Tlascalans,  convinced  by  sad  experience  that  their
priests  had  deluded  them,  and  satisfied  that  they
attempted  in  vain,  either  to  deceive  or  to  vanquish
their  enemies,  their  fierceness  abated,  and  they  be-
gan to  incline  seriously  to  peace.
The  Tias- They  were  at  a  loss,  however,  in  what  man-

1  A  *

posTdto'5  ner  t0  address  the  strangers,  what  idea  to
peace.  form  of  their  character,  and  whether  to  con-
sider them  as  beings  of  a  gentle  or  of  a  malevolent
nature.  There  were  circumstances  in  their  conduct
which  seemed  to  favour  each  opinion. On  the  one

'B.Diaz,  c.  66.

k2

132  AMERICA.  [1519.

hand,  as  the  Spaniards  constantly  dismissed  the  pri-
soners whom  they  took,  not  only  without  injury,  but
often  with  presents  of  European  toys,  and  renewed
their  offers  of  peace  after  every  victory ;  this  lenity
amazed  people,  who,  according  to  the  exterminating
system  of  war  known  in  America,  were  accustomed
to  sacrifice  and  devour  without  mercy  all  the  captives
taken  in  battle,  and  disposed  them  to  entertain  favour-
able sentiments  of  the  humanity  of  their  new  ene-
mies. But,  on  the  other  hand,  as  Cortes  had  seized
fifty  of  their  countrymen  who  brought  provisions  to
his  camp, and,  supposing  them  to  be  spies,  had  cut
off  their  hands  ;k  this  bloody  spectacle,  added  to  the
terror  occasioned  by  the  fire-arms  and  horses,  filled
them  with  dreadful  impressions  of  the  ferocity  of
their  invaders.1 This  uncertainty  was  apparent  in
the  mode  of  addressing  the  Spaniards. "  If,"  said
they,  "  you  are  divinities  of  a  cruel  and  savage  nature,
we  present  to  you  five  slaves,  that  you  may  drink
their  blood  and  eat  their  flesh. If  you  are  mild
deities,  accept  an  offering  of  incense  and  variegated
plumes. If  you  are  men,  here  is  meat,  and  bread,  and
fruit  to  nourish  you.'m  The  peace  which  both  parties
■ , now  desired  with  equal  ardour,  was  soon  con-

Concluded.  L

eluded.  I  he  Ilascalans  yielded  themselves
as  vassals  to  the  crown  of  Castile,  and  engaged  to  as-
sist  Cortes  in  all  his  future  operations.  He  took  the
republic  under  his  protection,  and  promised  to  defend
their  persons  and  possessions  from  injury  or  violence.
Advan-  This  treaty  was  concluded  at  a  seasonable
Sthe°fit  juncture  for  the  Spaniards.  The  fatigue  of
Spaniards,  service  among  a  small  body  of  men,  surround-
ed by  such  a  multitude  of  enemies,  was  incredible.
Half  the  army  was  on  duty  every  night,  and  even  they
whose  turn  it  was  to  rest,  slept  always  upon  their

k  Cortes  Relat.  Ramus,  iii.  ','28.  C Gomara  Cron.  c.  48.  '  See  NOTE  LIU.

m  B.  Diaz.  C.  70. Gomara  Cron.  c.  47. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  vi.  c.  7.

1519.]  BOOK  V.  133

arms,  that  they  might  be  ready  to  run  to  their  posts  on
a  moment's  warning.  Many  of  them  were  wounded;
a  good  number,  and  among  these  Cortes  himself,  la-
boured under  the  distempers  prevalent  in  hot  cli-
mates, and  several  had  died  since  they  set  out  from
Vera  Cruz.  Notwithstanding  the  supplies  which
they  had  received  from  theTlascalans,  they  were  often
in  want  of  provisions,  and  so  destitute  of  the  ne-
cessaries most  requisite  in  dangerous  service,  that
they  had  no  salve  to  dress  their  wounds,  but  what
was  composed  with  the  fat  of  the  Indians,  whom  they
had  slain."  Worn  out  with  such  intolerable  toil  and
hardships,  many  of  the  soldiers  began  to  murmur,
and,  when  they  reflected  on  the  multitude  and  bold-
ness of  their  enemies,  more  were  ready  to  despair.
It  required  the  utmost  exertion  of  Cortes's  authority
and  address  to  check  this  spirit  of  despondency  in  its
progress,  and  to  reanimate  his  followers  with  their
wonted  sense  of  their  own  superiority  over  the  ene-
mies with  whom  they  had  to  contend.0  The  sub-
mission of  the  Tlascalans,  and  their  own  triumphant
entry  into  the  capital  city,  where  they  were  received
with  the  reverence  paid  to  beings  of  a  superior  order,
banished,  at  once,  from  the  minds  of  the  Spaniards,
all  memory  of  past  sufferings,  dispelled  every  anx-
ious thought  with  respect  to  their  future  operations,
and  fully  satisfied  them  that  there  was  not  now  any
power  in  America  able  to  withstand  their  arms.p
Cortes  so-  Cortes  remained  twenty  days  in  Tlascala,  in
lichous  to  orcier  to  allow  his  troops  a  short  interval  of

gain  their  1

confidence,  repose  after  such  hard  service.  During  that
time  he  was  employed  in  transactions  and  inquiries
of  great  moment  with  respect  to  his  future  schemes.
In  his  daily  conferences  with  the  Tlascalan  chiefs,  he
received  information  concerning  every  particular  re-

n  B.  Diaz.  c.  62.  65.  °  Cortes  Relat.  Ramus,  iii.  229. B.  Diaz.  c.  69.

Gornara  Crou.  c.  51.  P  Cortes  Relat.  Ramus,  iii.  230. B.  Diaz.  c.  72.'

134  AMERICA.  [1519.

lative  to  the  state  of  the  Mexican  empire,  or  to  the
qualities  of  its  sovereign,  which  could  be  of  use  in  re-
gulating his  conduct,  whether  he  should  be  obliged
to  act  as  a  friend  or  as  an  enemy.  As  he  found  that
the  antipathy  of  his  new  allies  to  the  Mexican  nation
was  no  less  implacable  than  had  been  represented,
and  perceived  what  benefit  he  might  derive  from  the
aid  of  such  powerful  confederates,  he  employed  all
his  powers  of  insinuation  in  order  to  gain  their  confi-
dence. Nor  was  any  extraordinary  exertion  of  these
necessary.  The  Tlascalans,  with  the  levity  of  mind
natural  to  unpolished  men,  were,  of  their  own  accord,
disposed  to  run  from  the  extreme  of  hatred  to  that
of  fondness.  Every  thing  in  the  appearance  and
conduct  of  their  guests,  was  to  them  matter  of  won-
der. q  They  gazed  with  admiration  at  whatever  the
Spaniards  did,  and  fancying  them  to  be  of  heavenly
origin,  were  eager  not  only  to  comply  with  their  de-
mands, but  to  anticipate  their  wishes.  They  offered,
accordingly,  to  accompany  Cortes  in  his  march  t<
Mexico,  with  all  the  forces  of  the  republic,  under  the
command  of  their  most  experienced  captains.
which  he  But,  after  bestowing  so  much  pains  on  ce-
bstbyTu  menting  this  union,  all  the  beneficial  fruits
rash  zeal.  0f  it  were  on  the  point  of  being  lost,  by  a  new
effusion  of  that  intemperate  religious  zeal  with  which
Cortes  was  animated,  no  less  than  the  other  adven-
turers of  the  age.  They  all  considered  themselves  as
instruments  employed  by  Heaven  to  propagate  1
Christian  faith,  and  the  less  they  were  qualified,
either  by  their  knowledge  or  morals,  for  such  a  func-
tion, they  were  more  eager  to  discharge  it.  The
profound  veneration  of  the  Tlascalans  for  the  Spa-
niards, having  encouraged  Cortes  to  explain  to  some
of  their  chiefs  the  doctrines  of  the  Christian  religion,
and  to  insist  that  they  should  abandon  their  own

1  See  Note  LIV.

1519.]  BOOK  V.  135

superstitions,  and  embrace  the  faith  of  their  new
friends,  they,  according  to  an  idea  universal  among
barbarous  nations,  readily  acknowledged  the  truth
and  excellence  of  what  he  taught  j  but  contended,
that  the  Teules  of  Tlascala  were  divinities  no  less  than
the  god  in  whom  the  Spaniards  believed  ;  and  as  that
being  was  entitled  to  the  homage  of  Europeans,  so
they  were  bound  to  revere  the  same  powers  which
their  ancestors  had  worshipped.  Cortes  continued,
nevertheless,  to  urge  his  demand  in  a  tone  of  autho-
rity, mingling  threats  with  his  arguments,  until  the
Tlascalans  could  bear  it  no  longer,  and  conjured  him
never  to  mention  this  again,  lest  the  gods  should
avenge  on  their  heads  the  guilt  of  having  listened  to
such  a  proposition.  Cortes,  astonished  and  enraged
at  their  obstinacy,  prepared  to  execute  by  force,  what
he  could  not  accomplish  by  persuasion,  and  was
going  to  overturn  their  altars,  and  cast  down  their
idols  with  the  same  violent  hand  as  at  Zempoalla,  if
father  Bartholomew  de  Olmedo,  chaplain  to  the  ex-
pedition, had  not  checked  his  inconsiderate  impe-
tuosity. He  represented  the  imprudence  of  such  an
attempt  in  a  large  city  newly  reconciled,  and  filled
with  people  no  less  superstitious  than  warlike  ;  he  de-
clared, that  the  proceeding  at  Zempoalla  had  always
appeared  to  him  precipitate  and  unjust;  that  religion
was  not  to  be  propagated  by  the  sword,  or  infidels
to  be  converted  by  violence ;  that  other  weapons  were
to  be  employed  in  this  ministry ;  patient  instruction
must  enlighten  the  understanding,  and  pious  exam-
ple captivate  the  heart,  before  men  could  be  induced
to  abandon  error,  and  embrace  the  truth.'  Amidst
scenes,  where  a  narrow-minded  bigotry  appears  in
such  close  union  with  oppression  and  cruelty,  senti-
ments so  liberal  and  humane  soothe  the  mind  with
unexpected  pleasure ;  and  at  a  time  when  the  rights

'B.  Dias.  c.  77.  p.  54.  c.  83.  p.  61.

136  AMERICA.  [1519.

of  conscience  were  little  understood  in  the  Christian
world,  and  the  idea  of  toleration  unknown,  one  is
astonished  to  find  a  Spanish  monk  of  the  sixteeth
century  among  the  first  advocates  against  persecu-
tion, and  in  behalf  of  religious  liberty.  The  remon-
strances of  an  ecclesiastic,  no  less  respectable  for
wisdom  than  virtue,  had  their  proper  weight  with
Cortes.  He  left  the  Tlascalans  in  the  undisturbed
exercise  of  their  own  rites,  requiring  only  that  they
should  desist  from  their  horrid  practice  of  offering
human  victims  in  sacrifice.

Advances  Cortes,  as  soon  as  his  troops  were  fit  for
toChoiuia.  service,  resolved  to  continue  his  march  to-
wards Mexico,  notwithstanding  the  earnest  dissua-
sives  of  the  Tlascalans,  who  represented  his  destruc-
tion as  unavoidable,  if  he  put  himself  in  the  power
of  a  prince  so  faithless  and  cruel  as  Montezuma.  As
he  was  accompanied  by  six  thousand  Tlascalans,  he
had  now  the  command  of  forces  which  resembled  a
regular  army.  They  directed  their  course  to-
wards Cholula;  Montezuma,  who  had  at
length  consented  to  admit  the  Spaniards  into  his
presence,  having  informed  Cortes,  that  he  had  given
orders  for  his  friendly  reception  there.  Cholula  was
a  considerable  town,  and  though  only  five  leagues
distant  from  Tlascala,  was  formerly  an  independent
state,  but  had  been  lately  subjected  to  the  Mexican
empire.  This  was  considered  by  all  the  people  of
New  Spain  as  a  holy  place,  the  sanctuary  and  chief
seat  of  their  gods,  to  which  pilgrims  resorted  from
every  province,  and  a  greater  number  of  human  vic-
tims were  offered  in  its  principal  temple  than  even
in  that  of  Mexico."  Montezuma  seems  to  have  in-
vited the  Spaniards  thither,  either  from  some  super-
stitious hope that the gods  would  not  suffer  this

»  Torquemada  Monar.  Ind.  i.  281,  28?.  ii.  291. Gomara  Cron.  c.  61. Herrera,
dec.  2.  lib.  vii.  c.  V.

1519.]  BOOK  V.  137

sacred  mansion  to  be  denied,  without  pouring  down
their  wrath  upon  those  impious  strangers,  who  ven-
tured to  insult  their  power  in  the  place  of  its  peculiar
residence ;  or  from  a  belief  that  he  himself  might
there  attempt  to  cut  them  off  with  more  certain
success,  under  the  immediate  protection  of  his  divi-
nities.

The  seve- Cortes  had  been  warned  by  the  Tlascalans,
procedure  before  he  set  out  on  his  march,  to  keep  a
there. watchful  eye  over  the  Cholulans. He  himself,
though  received  into  the  town  with  much  seeming
respect and cordiality, observed several circum-
stances in  their  conduct  which  excited suspicion.
Two  of  the  Tlascalans,  who  were  encamped  at  some
distance  from  the  town,  as  the  Cholulans  refused  to
admit  their  ancient enemies within its  precincts,
having  found  means  to  enter  in  disguise,  acquainted
Cortes,  that  they  observed  the  women  and  children
of  the  principal  citizens  retiring  in  great  hurry  every
night ;  and  that  six  children  had  been  sacrificed  in
the  chief  temple,  a  rite  which  indicated  the  execu-
tion of  some  warlike  enterprise  to  be  approaching.
At  the  same  time,  Marina  the  interpreter  received
information  from  an  Indian  woman  of  distinction,
whose  confidence  she  had  gained,  that  the  destruc-
tion of  her  friends  was  concerted ;  that  a  body  of
Mexican  troops  lay  concealed  near  the  town ;  that
some  of  the  streets  were  barricaded,  and  in  others,
pits  or  deep  trenches  were  dug,  and  slightly  covered
over,  as  traps  into  which  the  horses  might  fall ;  that
stones  or  missive  weapons  were  collected  on  the  tops
of  the  temples,  with  which  to  overwhelm  the  infantry;
that  the  fatal  hour  was  now  at  hand,  and  their  ruin
unavoidable. Cortes,  alarmed  at  this  concurring  evi-
dence, secretly  arrested  three  of  the  chief  priests,
and  extorted  from  them  a  confession,  that  confirmed
the  intelligence  which  he  had received. As  not  a

138  AMERICA.  [1519.

moment  was  to  be  lost,  he  instantly  resolved  to  pre-
vent his  enemies,  and  to  inflict  on  them  such  dread-
ful vengeance  as  might  strike  Montezuma  and  his
subjects  with  terror.  For  this  purpose,  the  Spaniards
and  Zempoallans  were  drawn  up  in  a  large  court,
which  had  been  allotted  for  their  quarters  near  the
centre  of  the  town  ;  the  Tlascalans  had  orders  to  ad-
vance ;  the  magistrates,  and  several  of  the  chief  citi-
zens were  sent  for,  under  various  pretexts,  and  seized.
On  a  signal  given,  the  troops  rushed  out,  and  fell
upon  the  multitude,  destitute  of  leaders,  and  so  much
astonished,  that  the  weapons  dropping  from  their
hands,  they  stood  motionless,  and  incapable  of  de-
fence. While  the  Spaniards  pressed  them  in  front,
the  Tlascalans  attacked  them  in  the  rear.  The  streets
were  filled  with  bloodshed  and  death.  The  temples,
which  afforded  a  retreat  to  the  priests  and  some  of
the  leading  men,  were  set  on  fire,  and  they  perished
in  the  flames.  This  scene  of  horror  continued  two
days ;  during  which,  the  wretched  inhabitants  suf-
fered all  that  the  destructive  rage  of  the  Spaniards,
or  the  implacable  revenge  of  their  Indian  allies,  could
inflict.  At  length  the  carnage  ceased,  after  the
slaughter  of  six  thousand  Cholulans,  without  the  loss
of  a  single  Spaniard.  Cortes  then  released  the  ma-
gistrates, and  reproaching  them  bitterly  for  their  in-
tended treachery,  declared,  that  as  justice  was  now
appeased,  he  forgave  the  offence,  but  required  them
to  recall  the  citizens  who  had  fled,  and  re-establish
order  in  the  town.  Such  was  the  ascendant  which
the  Spaniards  had  acquired  over  this  superstitious
race  of  men,  and  so  deeply  were  they  impressed  with
an  opinion  of  their  superior  discernment,  as  well  as
power,  that,  in  obedience  to  this  command,  the  city
was  in  a  few  days  filled  again  with  people,  who.
amidst  the  ruins  of  their  sacred  buildings,  yielded  re-
spectful service  to  men  whose  hands  were  stained

1519.]  BOOK V.  139

with the blood  of  their relations  and  fellow -citi-
zens.*

Oct.  29.  From  Cholula,  Cortes  advanced  directly  to-
tow^d?8  wards  Mexico,  which  was  only  twenty  leagues
Mexico,  distant.  In  every  place  through  which  he
passed,  he  was  received  as  a  person  possessed  of  suf-
ficient power  to  deliver  the  empire  from  the  oppres-
sion under  which  it  groaned;  and  the  caziques  or
governors  communicated  to  him  all  the  grievances
which  they  felt  under  the  tyrannical  government  of
Montezuma,  with  that  unreserved  confidence  which
men  naturally  repose  in  superior  beings.  When
Cortes  first  observed  the  seeds  of  discontent  in  the
remote  provinces  of  the  empire,  hope  dawned  upon
his  mind  ;  but  when  he  now  discovered  such  symp-
toms of  alienation  from  their  monarch  near  the  seat
of  government,  he  concluded  that  the  vital  parts  of
the  constitution  were  affected,  and  conceived  the
most  sanguine  expectations  of  overturning  a  state,
whose  natural  strength  was  thus  divided  and  im-
paired.  V/hile  those  reflections  encouraged  the
general  to  persist  in  his  arduous  undertaking,  the
soldiers  were  no  less  animated  by  observations  more
obvious  to  their  capacity.  In  descending  from  the
mountains  of  Chalco,  across  which  the  road  lay,  the
First  view  vast  plain  of  Mexico  opened  gradually  to  their
of  ,t-  view.  When  they  first  beheld  this  prospect,
one  of  the  most  striking  and  beautiful  on  the  face  of
the  earth ;  when  they  observed  fertile  and  cultivated
fields,  stretching  farther  than  the  eye  could  reach ;
when  they  saw  a  lake  resembling  the  sea  in  extent,
encompassed  with  large  towns,  and  discovered  the
capital  city  rising  upon  an  island  in  the  middle,
adorned  with  its  temples,  and  turrets  ;  the  scene  so
far  exceeded  their  imagination,  that  some  believed

1  Cortes  Relat.  Raraus.  iii.  231. B.  Diaz.  c.  83. Gomara  Cron.  c.  64. Herrera,
dec.  2.  lib.  vii.  c.  t,  2. See  Note  LV.

140  AMERICA.  [1519.

the  fanciful  descriptions  of  romance  were  realized,
and  that  its  enchanted  palaces  and  gilded  domes  were
presented  to  their  sight ;  others  could  hardly  per-
suade themselves  that  this  wonderful  spectacle  was
any  thing  more  than  a  dream."  As  they  advanced,
their  doubts  were  removed,  but  their  amazement
increased.  They  were  now  fully  satisfied  that  the
country  was  rich  beyond  any  conception  which  they
had  formed  of  it,  and  flattered  themselves  that  at
length  they  should  obtain  an  ample  recompense  for
all  their  services  and  sufferings.
The  irre-  Hitherto  they  had  met  with  no  enemy  to
o?  Monte-  oppose  their  progress,  though  several  circum-
zuraa.  stances  occurred  which  led  them  to  suspect
that  some  design  was  formed  to  surprise  and  cut
them  off.  Many  messengers  arrived  successively
from  Montezuma,  permitting  them  one  day  to  ad-
vance, requiring  them  on  the  next  to  retire,  as  his
hopes  or  fears  alternately  prevailed;  and  so  won-
derful was  this  infatuation,  which  seems  to  be  unac-
countable on  any  supposition  but  that  of  a  super-
stitious dread  of  the  Spaniards,  as  beings  of  a  superior
nature,  that  Cortes  was  almost  at  the  gates  of  the
capital,  before  the  monarch  had  determined  whether
to  receive  him  as  a  friend,  or  to  oppose  him  as  an
enemy.  But  as  no  sign  of  open  hostility  appeared,
the  Spaniards,  without  regarding  the  fluctuations  of
Montezuma's  sentiments,  continued  their  march
along  the  causeway  which  led  to  Mexico  through
the  lake,  with  great  circumspection  and  the  strictest
discipline,  though  without  seeming  to  suspect  the
prince  whom  they  were  about  to  visit.
iiis  first  When  they  drew  near  the  city,  about  a
with'tiie  thousand  persons,  who  appeared  to  be  of  dis-
Spamards.  tinction,  came  forth  to  meet  them,  adorned
with  plumes, and  clad  in  mantles of  fine  cotton.

<■  See  Note  LVI.

1519.]  BOOK V.  141

Each  of  these,  in  his  order,  passed  by  Cortes,  and
saluted  him  according  to  the  mode  deemed  most  re-
spectful and  submissive  in  their  country. They  an-
nounced the  approach  of  Montezuma  himself,  and
soon  after  his  harbingers  came  in  sight. There  ap-
peared first  two  hundred  persons  in  a  uniform  dress,
with  large  plumes  of  feathers,  alike  in  fashion,  march-
ing  two  and  two,  in  deep  silence,  barefooted,  with
their  eyes  fixed  on  the  ground. These  were  followed
by  a  company  of  higher  rank,  in  their  most  showy
apparel,  in  the  midst  of  whom  was  Montezuma,  in  a
chair  or  litter  richly  ornamented  with  gold,  and  fea-
thers of  various  colours.  Four  of  his  principal  favour-
ites carried  him  on  their  shoulders,  others  supported
a  canopy  of  curious  workmanship  over  his  head.
Before  him  marched  three  officers  with  rods  of  gold
in  their  hands,  which  they  lifted  up  on  high  at  cer-
tain intervals,  and  at  that  signal  all  the  people  bowed
their  heads,  and  hid  their  faces,  as  unworthy  to  look
on  so  great  a  monarch. When  he  drew  near,  Cortes
dismounted,  advancing  towards  him  with  officious
haste,  and  in  a  respectful  posture. At  the  same  time
Montezuma  alighted  from  his  chair,  and  leaning  on
the  arms  of  two  of  his  near  relations,  approached
with  a  slow  and  stately  pace,  his  attendants  covering
the  street  with  cotton  cloths,  that  he  might  not  touch
the  ground. Cortes  accosted  him  with  profound  re-
verence,  after  the  European  fashion. He  returned
the  salutation,  according  to  the  mode  of  his  country,
by  touching  the  earth  with  his  hand,  and  then  kissing
it. This  ceremony,  the  customary  expression  of  ve-
neration from  inferiors  towards  those  who  were  above
them  in  rank,  appeared  such  amazing  condescension
in  a  proud  monarch,  who  scarcely  deigned  to  con-
sider the  rest  of  mankind  as  of  the  same  species  with
himself,  that  all  his  subjects  firmly  believed  those
persons,  before  whom  he  humbled  himself  in  this

142  AMERICA.  [1519.

manner,  to  be  something  more  than  human.  Accord-
ingly as  they  marched  through  the  crowd,  the  Spa-
niards frequently,  and  with  much  satisfaction,  heard
themselves  denominated  Teules,  or  divinities. No-
thing material  passed  in  this  first  interview. Mon-
tezuma conducted  Cortes  to  the  quarters  which  he
had  prepared  for  his  reception,  and  immediately  took
leave  of  him,  with  a  politeness  not  unworthy  of  a
court  more  refined. "  You  are  now,"  says  he,  "  with
your  brothers  in  your  own  house  ;  refresh  yourselves
after  your  fatigue,  and  be  happy  until  I  return,"*
The  place  allotted  to  the  Spaniards  for  their  lodging
was  a  house  built  by  the  father  of  Montezuma. It
was  surrounded  by  a  stone  wall,  with  towers  at  pro-
per distances,  which  served  for  defence  as  well  as  for
ornament,  and  its  apartments  and  courts  were  so  large,
as  to  accommodate  both  the  Spaniards  and  their  In-
dian allies. The  first  care  of  Cortes  was  to  take  pre-
cautions for  his  security,  by  planting  the  artillery  so
as  to  command  the  different  avenues  which  led  to  it,
by  appointing  a  large  division  of  his  troops  to  be  al-
ways on  guard,  and  by  posting  sentinels  at  proper
stations,  with  injunctions  to  observe  the  same  vigi-
lant discipline  as  if  they  were  within  sight  of  an  ene-
my's camp.

ins  idea  of ^n  tne  evenmg>  Montezuma  returned  to  vi-
the  spa- sit  his  guests  with  the  same  pomp  as  in  their

niards.  .  l  n't

first  interview,  and  brought  presents  of  such
value,  not  only  to  Cortes  and  to  his  officers,  but  even
to  the  private  men,  as  proved  the  liberality  of  the
monarch  to  be  suitable  to  the  opulence  of  his  kingdom
A  long  conference  ensued,  in  which  Cortes  learned
what  was  the  opinion  of  Montezuma  with  respect  to
the  Spaniards.  It  was  an  established  tradition,  he
told  him,  among  the  Mexicans,  that  their  ancestors

»  Cortes  Relat. Ram.  iii.  232— 235. B.  Diaz.  c.  8.5— 88. Gomara  Cron.
c.  64,  6.5. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  vii.  c.  3 — 5.

1519.]  BOOK V.  143

came  originally  from  a  remote  region,  and  conquered
the  provinces  now  subject  to  his  dominion ; that
after  they  were  settled  there,  the  great  captain  who
conducted  this  colony  returned  to  his  own  country,
promising  that  at  some  future  period  his  descend-
ants should  visit  them,  assume  the  government,  and
reform  their  constitution  and  laws  ; that  from  what
he  had  heard  and  seen  of  Cortes  and  his  followers,  he
was  convinced  that  they  were  the  very  persons  whose
appearance  the  Mexican  traditions  and  prophecies
taught  them  to  expect ;  that  accordingly  he  had  re-
ceived them,  not  as  strangers,  but  as  relations  of  the
same  blood  and  parentage,  and desired  that  they
might  consider  themselves  as  masters  in  his  domi-
nions, for  both  himself  and  his  subjects  should  be
ready  to  comply  with  their  will,  and  even  to  prevent
their  wishes. Cortes  made  a  reply  in  his  usual  style,
with  respect  to  the  dignity  and  power  of  his  sove-
reign, and  his  intention  in  sending  him  into  that  coun-
try ;  artfully  endeavouring  so  to  frame  his  discourse,
that  it  might  coincide  as  much  as  possible  with  the
idea  which  Montezuma  had  formed  concerning  the
origin  of  the  Spaniards. Next  morning,  Cortes  and
some  of  his  principal  attendants  were  admitted  to  a
public  audience  of  the  emperor. The  three  subse-
quent days  were  employed  in  viewing  the  city ; the
appearance  of  which,  so  far  superior  in  the  order  of
its  buildings  and  the  number  of  its  inhabitants  to  any
place  the  Spaniards  had  beheld  in  America,  and  yet
so  little  resembling  the  structure  of  a  European  city,
filled  them  with  surprise  and  admiration.

Mexico,  or  Tenuchtitlan,  as  it  was  anciently  called
by  the  natives,  is  situated  in  a  large  plain,  environed
by  mountains  of  such  height,  that,  though  within  the
torrid  zone,  the  temperature  of  its  climate  is  mild  and
healthful.  All  the  moisture  which  descends  from  the
high  grounds  is  collected  in  several  lakes,  the  two

144  AMERICA.  [1519.

largest  of  which,  of  about  ninety  miles  in  circuit,
communicate  with  each  other.  The  waters  of  the
one  are  fresh,  those  of  the  other  brackish.  On  the
banks  of  the  latter,  and  on  some  small  islands  adjoin-
ing to  them,  the  capital  of  Montezuma's  empire  was
built.  The  access  to  the  city  was  by  artificial  cause-
ways or  streets  formed  of  stones  and  earth,  about
thirty  feet  in  breadth.  As  the  waters  of  the  lake
during  the  rainy  season  overflowed  the  flat  country,
these  causeways  were  of  considerable  length.  That
of  Tacuba,  on  the  west,  extended  a  mile  and  a  half;
that  of  Tepeaca,x  on  the  north-west,  three  miles ;  that
of  Cuoyacan,  towards  the  south,  six  miles.  On  the
east  there  was  no  causeway,  and  the  city  could  be
approached  only  by  canoes.y  In  each  of  these  cause-
ways were  openings  at  proper  intervals,  through
which  the  waters  flowed,  and  over  these  beams  of
timber  were  laid,  which  being  covered  with  earth,
the  causeway  or  street  had  every  where  a  uniform
appearance.  As  the  approaches  to  the  city  were  sin-
gular, its  construction  was  remarkable.  Not  only
the  temples  of  their  gods,  but  the  houses  belonging
to  the  monarch,  and  to  persons  of  distinction,  were
of  such  dimensions,  that,  in  comparison  with  any
other  buildings  which  had  been  hitherto  discovered
in  America,  they  might  be  termed  magnificent.  The
habitations  of  the  common  people  were  mean,  resem-
bling the  huts  of  other  Indians.  But  they  were  all
placed  in  a  regular  manner,  on  the  banks  of  the  canals
which  passed  through  the  city,  in  some  of  its  districts,
or  on  the  sides  of  the  streets  which  intersected  it  in
other  quarters. In  several  places  were  large  open-

x  I  am  indebted  to  M.  Clavigero  for  correcting  an  error  of  importance  in  my  de-
scription of  Mexico.  From  the  east,  where  Tezeuco  was  situated,  there  was  no  cause-
way, as  I  have  observed,  and  yet  by  some  inattention  on  my  part,  or  on  that  of  the
printer,  in  all  the  former  editions  one  of  the  causeways  was  said  to  lead  to  Tezeuco.
M.  Clavigero's  measurement  of  the  length  of  these  causeways  differs  somewhat  from
that  which  I  have  adopted  from  F.  Torribio. Clavig.  ii.  p.  72.

J  F.  Torribio  MS.

1519.]  BOOK  V.  145

ings  or  squares,  one  of  which,  allotted  for  the  great
market,  is  said  to  have  been  so  spacious,  that  forty
or  fifty  thousand  persons  carried  on  traffic  there.  In
this  city,  the  pride  of  the  New  World,  and  the  no-
blest monument  of  the  industry  and  art  of  man,  while
unacquainted  with  the  use  of  iron,  and  destitute  of
aid  from  any  domestic  animal,  the  Spaniards,  who
are  most  moderate  in  their  computations,  reckon  that
there  were  at  least  sixty  thousand  inhabitants.2
m  .  , But  how  much  soever  the  novelty  of  those

1  heir  dan-  • i i ci  • j

gerous  objects  might  amuse  or  astonish  the  Spaniards,
they  felt  the  utmost  solicitude  with  respect  to
their  own  situation.  From  a  concurrence  of  circum-
stances, no  less  unexpected  than  favourable  to  their
progress,  they  had  been  allowed  to  penetrate  into  the
heart  of  a  powerful  kingdom,  and  were  now  lodged
in  its  capital  without  having  once  met  with  open  op-
position from  its  monarch.  The  Tlascalans,  however,
had  earnestly  dissuaded  them  from  placing  such  con-
fidence in  Montezuma,  as  to  enter  a  city  of  such  pe-
culiar situation  as  Mexico,  where  that  prince  would
have  them  at  mercy,  shut  up  as  it  were  in  a  snare,
from  which  it  was  impossible  to  escape.  They  as-
sured them  that  the  Mexican  priests  had,  in  the  name
of  the  gods,  counselled  their  sovereign  to  admit  the
Spaniards  into  the  capital,  that  he  might  cut  them
off  there  at  one  blow  with  perfect  security.8  They
now  perceived  too  plainly,  that  the  apprehensions  of
their  allies  were  not  destitute  of  foundation  ;  that,  by
breaking  the  bridges  placed  at  certain  intervals  on
the  causeways,  or  by  destroying  part  of  the  cause-
ways themselves,  their  retreat  would  be  rendered
impracticable,  and  they  must  remain  cooped  up  in
the  centre  of  a  hostile  city,  surrounded  by  multi-
tudes sufficient  to  overwhelm  them,  and  without  a

1  Cortes  Relat. Ram-  Hi. 239.  D. Relat.  della  gran  Citta  de  Mexico,  par  ub
Gentelhuomo  del  Cortese. Ram.  ibid.  304.  E. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  vii.  c.  14-,  &c.

'  B.  Diai.  c.  85,  86.
VOL. VII.  L

146*  AMERICA.  [1519.

possibility  of  receiving  aid  from  their  allies.  Monte-
zuma had,  indeed,  received  them  with  distinguished
respect.  But  ought  they  to  reckon  upon  this  as  real,
or  to  consider  it  as  feigned  ?  Even  if  it  were  sincere,
could  they  promise  on  its  continuance  ?  Their  safety
depended  upon  the  will  of  a  monarch  in  whose  at-
tachment they  had  no  reason  to  confide  ;  and  an
order  flowing  from  his  caprice,  or  a  word  uttered  by
him  in  passion,  might  decide  irrevocably  concerning
their  fate.1'

Solicitude  These  reflections,  so  obvious  as  to  occur  to
piii'tTof  tne  meanest  soldier,  did  not  escape  the  vigi-
Cortcs.  jant  sagacity  of  their  general.  Before  he  set
out  from  Cholula,  Cortes  had  received  advice  from
Villa  Rica,c  that  Qualpopoca,  one  of  the  Mexican  ge-
nerals on  the  frontiers,  having  assembled  an  army  in
order  to  attack  some  of  the  people  whom  the  Spa-
niards had  encouraged  to  throw  off  the  Mexican  yoke,
Escalante  had  marched  out  with  part  of  the  garrison
to  support  his  allies  ;  that  an  engagement  had  ensued,
in  which,  though  the  Spaniards  were  victorious,  Es-
calante, with  seven  of  his  men,  had  been  mortally
wounded,  his  horse  killed,  and  one  Spaniard  had  been
surrounded  by  the  enemy  and  taken  alive ;  that  the
head  of  this  unfortunate  captive,  after  being  carried
in  triumph  to  different  cities,  in  order  to  convince  the
people  that  their  invaders  were  not  immortal,  had
been  sent  to  Mexico.'1  Cortes,  though  alarmed  with
this  intelligence,  as  an  indication  of  Montezuma's
hostile  intentions,  had  continued  his  march.  But
as  soon  as  he  entered  Mexico,  he  became  sensible,
that,  from  an  excess  of  confidence  in  the  superior
valour  and  discipline  of  his  troops,  as  well  as  from
the  disadvantage  of  having  nothing  to  guide  him  in
an  unknown  country,  but  the  defective  intelligence

b  B.  Diaz.  c.  94.  c  Cortes  Relat.  Ram.  iii.  235.  C

J  B.  Diaz.  c.  93,  94. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  viii.  c.  1.

1519.]  BOOK V.  147

which  he  had  received  from  people  with  whom  his
mode  of  communication  was  very  imperfect,  he  had
pushed  forward  into  a  situation,  where  it  was  difficult
to  continue,  and  from  which  it  was  dangerous  to  re-
tire. Disgrace,  and  perhaps  ruin,  was  the  certain  con-
sequence of  attempting  the  latter.  The  success  of  his
enterprise  depended  upon  supporting  the  high  opi-
nion which  the  people  of  New  Spain  had  formed
with  respect  to  the  irresistible  power  of  his  arms.
Upon  the  first  symptom  of  timidity  on  his  part,  their
veneration  would  cease,  and  Montezuma,  whom  fear
alone  restrained  at  present,  would  let  loose  upon  him
the  whole  force  of  his  empire.  At  the  same  time,  he
knew  that  the  countenance  of  his  own  sovereign  was
to  be  obtained  only  by  a  series  of  victories,  and  that
nothing  but  the  merit  of  extraordinary  success  could
screen  his  conduct  from  the  censure  of  irregularity.
From  all  these  considerations,  it  was  necessary  to
maintain  his  station,  and  to  extricate  himself  out  of
the  difficulties  in  which  one  bold  step  had  involved
him,  by  venturing  upon  another  still  bolder.  The
situation  was  trying,  but  his  mind  was  equal  to  it ;
and  after  revolving  the  matter  with  deep  attention,
he  fixed  upon  a  plan  no  less  extraordinary  than
- , daring. He  determined  to  seize  Montezuma

Resolves  to  _  _  °

seize  Mob-  in  his  palace,  and  to  carry  him  as  a  prisoner
to  the  Spanish  quarters.  From  the  super-
stitious veneration  of  the  Mexicans  for  the  person  of
their  monarch,  as  well  as  their  implicit  submission
to  his  will,  he  hoped,  by  having  Montezuma  in  his
power,  to  acquire  the  supreme  direction  of  their  affairs ;
or,  at  least,  with  such  a  sacred  pledge  in  his  hands,
he  made  no  doubt  of  being  secure  from  any  effort  of
their  violence.

His  man-  This  he  immediately  proposed  to  his  officers.
cutingexe "The  timid  startled  at  a  measure  so  audacious,
thls- and  raised  objections. The  more  intelligent

l2

148  AMERICA.  [ISW.

and  resolute,  conscious  that  it  was  the  only  resource
in  which  there  appeared  any  prospect  of  safety,
warmly  approved  of  it,  and  brought  over  their  com-
panions so  cordially  to  the  same  opinion,  that  it  was
agreed  instantly  to  make  the  attempt.  At  his  usual
hour  of  visiting  Montezuma,  Cortes  went  to  the  pa-
lace, accompanied  by  Alvarado,  Sandoval,  Lugo,
Velasquez  de  Leon,  and  Davila,  five  of  his  principal
officers,  and  as  many  trusty  soldiers.  Thirty  chosen
men  followed,  not  in  regular  order,  but  sauntering  at
some  distance,  as  if  they  had  no  object  but  curiosity ;
small  parties  were  posted  at  proper  intervals,  in  all
the  streets  leading  from  the  Spanish  quarters  to  the
court ;  and  the  remainder  of  his  troops,  with  the
Tlascalan  allies,  were  under  arms  ready  to  sally  out
on  the  first  alarm.  Cortes  and  his  attendants  were
admitted  without  suspicion  ;  the  Mexicans  retiring,
as  usual,  out  of  respect.  He  addressed  the  monarch
in  a  tone  very  different  from  that  which  he  had  em-
ployed in  former  conferences,  reproaching  him  bit-
terly as  the  author  of  the  violent  assault  made  upon
the  Spaniards  by  one  of  his  officers,  and  demanded
public  reparation  for  the  loss  which  they  had  sus-
tained by  the  death  of  some  of  their  companions,  as
well  as  for  the  insult  offered  to  the  great  prince  whose
servants  they  were.  Montezuma,  confounded  at  this
unexpected  accusation,  and  changing  colour,  either
from  consciousness  of  guilt,  or  from  feeling  the  in-
dignity with  which  he  was  treated,  asserted  his  own
innocence  with  great  earnestness,  and,  as  a  proof  of
it,  gave  orders  instantly  to  bring  Qualpopoca  and  his
accomplices  prisoners  to  Mexico.  Cortes  replied,
with  seeming  complaisance,  that  a  declaration  so  re-
spectable left  no  doubt  remaining  in  his  own  mind,  but
that  something  more  was  requisite  to  satisfy  his  fol-
lowers, who  would  never  be  convinced  that  Mon-
tezuma did not  harbour hostile  intentions  against

1519.]  BOOK V.  14.9

them,  unless,  as  an  evidence  of  his  confidence  and
attachment,  he  removed  from  his  own  palace,  and
took  up  his  residence  in  the  Spanish  quarters,  where
he  should  be  served  and  honoured  as  became  a  great
monarch.  The  first  mention  of  so  strange  a  proposal
bereaved  Montezuma  of  speech,  and  almost  of  motion.
At  length,  indignation  gave  him  utterance,  and  he
haughtily  answered,  "  That  persons  of  his  rank  were
not  accustomed  voluntarily  to  give  up  themselves  as
prisoners  ;  and  were  he  mean  enough  to  do  so,  his
subjects  would  not  permit  such  an  affront  to  be  of-
fered to  their  sovereign."  Cortes,  unwilling  to  employ
force,  endeavoured  alternately  to  soothe  and  to  in-
timidate him.  The  altercation  became  warm  ;  and
having  continued  above  three  hours,  Velasquez  de-
Leon,  an  impetuous  and  gallant  young  man,  ex-
claimed with  impatience,  "  Why  waste  more  time  in
vain  ?  Let  us  either  seize  him  instantly,  or  stab  him
to  the  heart."  The  threatening  voice  and  fierce  ges-
tures with  which  these  words  were  uttered,  struck
Montezuma.  The  Spaniards,  he  was  sensible,  had
now  proceeded  so  far,  as  left  him  no  hope  that  they
would  recede.  His  own  danger  was  imminent,  the
necessity  unavoidable.  He  saw  both,  and  abandon-
ing himself  to  his  fate,  complied  with  their  request.
His  officers were  called. He  communi-

Montezu-

ma  carried  cated  to  them  his  resolution.  Though  asto-
Spanish  nished  and  afflicted,  they  presumed  not  to
quarters.  qUestion  the  will  of  their  master,  but  carried
him  in  silent  pomp,  all  bathed  in  tears,  to  the  Spanish
quarters.  When  it  was  known  that  the  strangers
were  conveying  away  the  emperor,  the  people  broke
out  into  the  wildest  transports  of  grief  and  rage,
threatening  the  Spaniards  with  immediate  destruc-
tion, as  the  punishment  justly  due  to  their  impious
audacity.  But  as  soon  as  Montezuma  appeared  with
a  seeming  gaiety  of  countenance,  and  waved  his  hand,

150  AMERICA.  [1519-

the  tumult  was  hushed,  and  upon  his  declaring  it  to
be  of  his  own  choice  that  he  went  to  reside  for  some
time  among  his  new  friends,  the  multitude,  taught  to
revere  every  intimation  of  their  sovereign's  pleasure,
quietly  dispersed.'

Thus  was  a  powerful  prince  seized  by  a  few  stran-
gers in  the  midst  of  his  capital,  at  noonday,  and  car-
ried off  as  a  prisoner  without  opposition  or  blood-
shed .  History  contains  nothing  parallel  to  this  event,
either  with  respect  to  the  temerity  of  the  attempt,
or  the  success  of  the  execution  ;  and  were  not  all  the
circumstances  of  this  extraordinary  transaction  au-
thenticated by  the  most  unquestionable  evidence,
they  would  appear  so  wild  and  extravagant,  as  to  go
far  beyond  the  bounds  of  that  probability  which  must
be  preserved  even  in  fictitious  narrations.
Received  Montezuma  was  received  in  the  Spanish
rentre-P*  quarters  with  all  the  ceremonious  respect
spect.  which  Cortes  had  promised.  He  was  at-
tended by  his  own  domestics,  and  served  with  his
usual  state.  His  principal  officers  had  free  access
to  him,  and  he  carried  on  every  function  of  govern-
ment as  if  he  had  been  at  perfect  liberty.  The  Spa-
niards, however,  watched  him  with  the  scrupulous
vigilance  which  was  natural  in  guarding  such  an  im-
portant prize,1  endeavouring  at  the  same  time  to
soothe  and  reconcile  him  to  his  situation,  by  every
external  demonstration  of  regard  and  attachment.
But  from  captive  princes  the  hour  of  humiliation
'  . , and  suffering  is  never  far  distant. Qualpo-

Subjected  °  . . . _ *

to  cmei poca,  his  son,  and  five  of  the  principal  officers

indignities. i  l  l  1  •  i  1  *

who  served  under  him, were brought  pri-
soners to  the  capital,  in  consequence  of  the  orders
which  Montezuma  had  issued. The  emperor

Dec.  4.  '

gave  them  up  to  Cortes, that  he  might  in-

f-  B.  Diaz.  c.  9S. Goniara  Cron.  c.  8j. Cortes Relat.  Ram.  iii.  p,  235,  236-
Ilenera,  dec.  2.  lib.  viii.  c.  2,  3.  f  See  Note  LV11.

1519.]  BOOK  V.  151

quire  into  the  nature  of  their  crime,  and  determine
their  punishment.  They  were  formally  tried  by  a
Spanish  court-martial ;  and  though  they  had  acted
no  other  part  than  what  became  loyal  subjects  and
brave  men,  in  obeying  the  orders  of  their  lawful
sovereign,  and  in  opposing  the  invaders  of  their  coun-
try, they  were  condemned  to  be  burnt  alive.  The
execution  of  such  atrocious  deeds  is  seldom  long  sus-
pended. The  unhappy  victims  were  instantly  led
forth.  The  pile  on  which  they  were  laid  was  com-
posed of  the  weapons  collected  in  the  royal  magazine
for  the  public  defence.  An  innumerable  multitude  of
Mexicans  beheld,  in  silent  astonishment,  the  double
insult  offered  to  the  majesty  of  their  empire,  an  officer
of  distinction  committed  to  the  flames  by  the  autho-
rity of  strangers,  for  having  done  what  he  owed  in
duty  to  his  natural  sovereign  ;  and  the  arms  provided
by  the  foresight  of  their  ancestors  for  avenging  public
wrongs,  consumed  before  their  eyes.

But  these  were  not  the  most  shocking  indignities
which  the  Mexicans  had  to  bear.  The  Spaniards,
convinced  that  Qualpopoca  would  not  have  ventured
to  attack  Escalante  without  orders  from  his  master,
were  not  satisfied  with  inflicting  vengeance  on  the
instrument  employed  in  committing  that  crime,  while
the  author  of  it  escaped  with  impunity.  Just  before
Qualpopoca  was  led  out  to  suffer,  Cortes  entered  the
apartment  of  Montezuma,  followed  by  some  of  his
officers,  and  a  soldier  carrying  a  pair  of  fetters  ;  and
approaching  the  monarch  with  a  stern  countenance
told  him,  that  as  the  persons  who  were  now  to  undergo
the  punishment  which  they  merited,  had  charged  him
as  the  cause  of  the  outrage  committed,  it  was  neces-
sary that  he  likewise  should  make  atonement  for  that
guilt ;  then  turning  away  abruptly,  without  waiting
for  a  reply,  commanded  the  soldiers  to  clap  the  fetters
on  his  legs. The  orders  were  instantly  executed.

1.5-2  AMERICA.  [1519.

The  disconsolate  monarch,  trained  up  with  an  idea
that  his  person  was  sacred  and  inviolable,  and  con-
sidering this  profanation  of  it  as  the  prelude  of  im-
mediate death,  broke  out  into  loud  lamentations  and
complaints.  His  attendants,  speechless  with  horror,
fell  at  his  feet,  bathing  them  with  their  tears  ;  and  bear-
ing up  the  fetters  in  their  hands,  endeavoured  with
officious  tenderness  to  lighten  their  pressure.  Nor
did  their  grief  and  despondency  abate,  until  Cortes
returned  from  the  execution,  and  with  a  cheerful
countenance  ordered  the  fetters  to  be  taken  off.  As
Montezuma's  spirits  had  sunk  with  unmanly  dejec-
tion, they  now  rose  into  indecent  joy;  and  with  an
unbecoming  transition,  he  passed  at  once  from  the
anguish  of  despair  to  transports  of  gratitude  and  ex-
pressions of  fondness  towards  his  deliverer.

In  those  transactions,  as  represented  by  the

Reasons  of  .  .  .  * .  • r  i

Cones's  Spanish  historians,  we  search  in  vain  lor  the
qualities  which  distinguish  other  parts  of
Cortes's  conduct.  To  usurp  a  jurisdiction  which
could  not  belong  to  a  stranger,  who  assumed  no
higher  character  than  that  of  an  ambassador  from  a
foreign  prince,  and  under  colour  of  it,  to  inflict  a
capital  punishment  on  men  whose  conduct  entitled
them  to  esteem,  appears  an  act  of  barbarous  cruelty.
To  put  the  monarch  of  a  great  kingdom  in  irons,  and,
after  such  ignominious  treatment,  suddenly  to  release
him,  seems  to  be  a  display  of  power  no  less  incon-
siderate than  wanton.  According  to  the  common
relation  no  account  can  be  given  either  of  the  one
action  or  the  other,  but  that  Cortes,  intoxicated  with
success,  and  presuming  on  the  ascendant  which  he
had  acquired  over  the  minds  of  the  Mexicans,  thought
nothing  too  bold  for  him  to  undertake,  or  too  danger-
ous to  execute.  But,  in  one  view,  these  proceedings,
however  repugnant  to  justice  and  humanity,  may
have  flowed  from  that  artful  policy  which  regulated

1.520.]  BOOK V.  153

every  part  of  Cortes's  behaviour  towards  the  Mexi-
cans. They  had  conceived  the  Spaniards  to  be  an
order  of  beings  superior  to  men.  It  was  of  the  utmost
consequence  to  cherish  this  illusion,  and  to  keep  up
the  veneration  which  it  inspired.  Cortes  wished
that  shedding  the  blood  of  a  Spaniard  should  be
deemed  the  most  heinous  of  all  crimes ;  and  nothing
appeared  better  calculated  to  establish  this  opinion,
than  to  condemn  the  first  Mexicans  who  had  ven-
tured to  commit  it  to  a  cruel  death,  and  to  oblige
their  monarch  himself  to  submit  to  a  mortifying  in-
dignity, as  an  expiation  for  being  accessory  to  a  deed
so  atrocious.15

The  rigour  with  which  Cortes  punished  the
The  power  unhappy  persons  who  first  presumed  to  lay
Cortes  ac-  violent  hands  upon  his  followers,  seems  ac-
quired'  cordingly  to  have  made  all  the  impression  that
he  desired.  The  spirit  of  Montezuma  was  not  only
overawed,  but  subdued.  During  six  months  that
Cortes  remained  in  Mexico,  the  monarch  continued
in  the  Spanish  quarters,  with  an  appearance  of  as
entire  satisfaction  and  tranquillity,  as  if  he  had  re-
sided there,  not  from  constraint,  but  through  choice.
His  ministers  and  officers  attended  him  as  usual.  He
took  cognizance  of  all  affairs ;  every  order  was  issued
in  his  name.  The  external  aspect  of  government  ap-
pearing the  same,  and  all  its  ancient  forms  being  scru-
pulously observed,  the  people  were  so  little  sensible
of  any  change,  that  they  obeyed  the  mandates  of  their
monarch  with  the  same  submissive  reverence  as  ever.
Such  was  the  dread  which  both  Montezuma  and  his
subjects  had  of  the  Spaniards,  or  such  the  veneration
in  which  they  held  them,  that  no  attempt  was  made
to  deliver  their  sovereign  from  confinement ;  and
though  Cortes,  relying  on  this  ascendant  which  he
had  acquired  over  their  minds,  permitted  him  not

«Se€  Note  LVIU.

154  AMERICA.  [15-20.

only  to  visit  his  temples,  but  to  make  hunting  excur-
sions beyond  the  lake,  a  guard  of  a  few  Spaniards
carried  with  it  such  a  terror  as  to  intimidate  the  mul-
titude, and  secure  the  captive  monarch.1'

Thus,  by  the  fortunate  temerity  of  Cortes  in  seizing
Montezuma,  the  Spaniards  at  once  secured  to  them-
selves more  extensive  authority  in  the  Mexican  em-
pire than  it  was  possible  to  have  acquired  in  a  long
course  of  time  by  open  force ;  and  they  exercised
more  absolute  sway  in  the  name  of  another  than  they
could  have  done  in  their  own.  The  arts  of  polished
nations,  in  subjecting  such  as  are  less  improved,  have
been  nearly  the  same  in  every  period.  The  system
of  screening  a  foreign  usurpation,  under  the  sanction
of  authority  derived  from  the  natural  rulers  of  a  coun-
try, the  device  of  employing  the  magistrates  and
forms  already  established  as  instruments  to  introduce
a  new  dominion,  of  which  we  are  apt  to  boast  as
sublime  refinements  in  policy  peculiar  to  the  present
age,  were  inventions  of  a  more  early  period,  and  had
been  tried  with  success  in  the  West,  long  before  they
were  practised  in  the  East.

Cortes  availed  himself  to  the  utmost  of  the

Use  "Inch

lie  makes  power  which  he  possessed  by  being  able  to
act  in  the  name  of  Montezuma.  He  sent  some
Spaniards,  whom  he  judged  best  qualified  for  such
commissions,  into  different  parts  of  the  empire,  ac-
companied by  persons  of  distinction,  whom  Monte-
zuma appointed  to  attend  them  both  as  guides  and
protectors.  They  visited  most  of  the  provinces,
viewed  their  soil  and  productions,  surveyed  with
particular  care  the  districts  which  yielded  gold  or
silver,  pitched  upon  several  places  as  proper  sta-
tions for  future  colonies,  and  endeavoured  to  pre-
pare the  minds  of  the  people  for  submitting  to  the
Spanish  yoke. While  they  were thus  employed,

11  Corlcs  Relat.  p.  236.  E. B.  Diaz.  c.  97—99.

1520]  BOOK V.  155

Cortes,  in  the  name  and  by  the  authority  of  Monte-
zuma, degraded  some  of  the  principal  officers  in  the
empire,  whose  abilities  or  independent  spirit  excited
his  jealousy,  and  substituted  in  their  place  persons
less  capable  or  more  obsequious.

One  thing  still  was  wanting  to  complete  his  se-
curity. He  wished  to  have  such  command  of  the
lake  as  might  ensure  a  retreat  if  either  from  levity  or
disgust,  the  Mexicans  should  take  arms  against  him,
and  break  down  the  bridges  or  causeways.  This,
too,  his  own  address,  and  the  facility  of  Montezuma,
enabled  him  to  accomplish.  Having  frequently  en-
tertained his  prisoner  with  pompous  accounts  of  the
European  marine  and  art  of  navigation,  he  awakened
his  curiosity  to  see  those  moving  palaces  which  made
their  way  through  the  water  without  oars.  Under
pretext  of  gratifying  this  desire,  Cortes  persuaded
Montezuma  to  appoint  some  of  his  subjects  to
fetch  part  of  the  naval  stores  which  the  Spaniards
had  deposited  at  Vera  Cruz  to  Mexico,  and  to  em-
ploy others  in  cutting  down  and  preparing  timber.
With  their  assistance,  the  Spanish  carpenters  soon
completed  two  brigantines,  which  afforded  a  frivolous
amusement  to  the  monarch,  and  were  considered  by
Cortes  as  a  certain  resource,  if  he  should  be  obliged
to  retire.

Monte-  Encouraged  by  so  many  instances  of  the
zuma  ac- monarch's  tame  submission  to  his  will,  Cortes

know*

ledges  ventured  to  put  it  to  a  proof  still  more  trying.
vaTsS  of  He  urged  Montezuma  to  acknowledge  himself
Spain. a  vassai  0f  the  kmg  0f  Castile, to  hold  his

crown  of  him  as  superior,  and  to  subject  his  domi-
nions to  the  payment  of  an  annual  tribute.  With  this
requisition,  the  last  and  most  humbling  that  can  be
made  to  one  possessed  of  sovereign  authority,  Mon-
tezuma was  so  obsequious  as  to  comply.  He  called
together  the  chief  men  of  his  empire,  and  in  a  solemn

156  AMERICA.  [1520.

harangue,  reminding  them  of  the  traditions  and  pro-
phecies which  led  them  to  expect  the  arrival  of  a
people  sprung  from  the  same  stock  with  themselves,
in  order  to  take  possession  of  the  supreme  power,  he
declared  his  belief  that  the  Spaniards  were  this  pro-
mised race ;  that  therefore  he  recognised  the  right
of  their  monarch  to  govern  the  Mexican  empire;  that
he  would  lay  his  crown  at  his  feet,  and  obey  him  as
a  tributary.  While  uttering  these  words,  Montezuma
discovered  how  deeply  he  was  affected  in  making-
such  a  sacrifice.  Tears  and  groans  frequently  inter-
rupted his  discourse.  Overawed  and  broken  as  his
spirit  was,  it  still  retained  such  a  sense  of  dignity,
as  to  feel  that  pang  which  pierces  the  heart  of  princes
when  constrained  to  resign  independent  power.  The
first  mention  of  such  a  resolution  struck  the  assem-
bly dumb  with  astonishment.  This  was  followed  by
a  sudden  murmur  of  sorrow,  mingled  with  indigna-
tion, which  indicated  some  violent  eruption  of  rage
to  be  near  at  hand.  This  Cortes  foresaw,  and  sea-
sonably interposed  to  prevent  it,  by  declaring  that
his  master  had  no  intention  to  deprive  Montezuma
of  the  royal  dignity,  or  to  make  any  innovation  upon
the  constitution  and  laws  of  the  Mexican  empire.
This  assurance  added  to  their  dread  of  the  Spanish
power,  and  to  the  authority  of  their  monarch's  ex-
ample, extorted  a  reluctant  consent  from  the  assem-
bly.1 The  act  of  submission  and  homage  was  exe-
cuted with  all  the  formalities  which  the  Spaniards
were  pleased  to  prescribe.11
The  Montezuma,  at  the  desire  of  Cortes,  accom-

theTrel  °f  Pamec^  tn*s  Professi°n  °f  fealty  and  homage

mre  coi- with  a  magnificent  present  to  his  new  sove-

theSua-^ reign;  and after his  example,  his subjects

brought  in  very  liberal  contributions. The

•SeeNoteLlX.  k  Cortes  Relat.  23H.  D. B.  Diaz.  C.  101. Gomara

Crou.  C,  92. Herrera,  dec.  -'.  lib.  x.  c.  4.

1520.]  BOOR V.  157

Spaniards  now  collected  all  the  treasure  which  had
been  either  voluntarily  bestowed  upon  them  at  dif-
ferent times  by  Montezuma,  or  had  been  extorted
from  his  people  under  various  pretexts;  and  having
melted  the  gold  and  silver,  the  value  of  these,  with-
out including  jewels  and  ornaments  of  various  kinds,
which  were  preserved  on  account  of  their  curious
workmanship,  amounted  to  six  hundred  thou  sand  pesos.
The  soldiers  were  impatient  to  have  it  divided,  and
Cortes  complied  with  their  desire.  A  fifth  of  the  whole
Division  of  was  first  set  apart  as  the  tax  due  to  the  king.
discontenrit  Another  fifth  was  allotted  to  Cortes  as  cora-
occasioned.  mander_jn_ chief.  The  sums  advanced  by  Ve-
lasquez, by  Cortes,  and  by  some  of  the  officers,  towards
defraying  the  expense  of  fitting  out  the  armament,
were  then  deducted.  The  remainder  was  divided
among  the  army,  including  the  garrison  of  Vera  Cruz,
in  proportion  to  their  different  ranks.  After  so  many
defalcations,  the  share  of  a  private  man  did  not  ex-
ceed a  hundred  pesos.  This  sum  fell  so  far  below
their  sanguine  expectations,  that  some  soldiers  re-
jected it  with  scorn,  and  others  murmured  so  loudly
at  this  cruel  disappointment  of  their  hopes,  that  it
required  all  the  address  of  Cortes,  and  no  small  ex-
ertion of  his  liberality,  to  appease  them.  The  com-
plaints of  the  army  were  not  altogether  destitute  of
foundation.  As  the  crown  had  contributed  nothing
towards  the  equipment  or  success  of  the  armament,
it  was  not  without  regret  that  the  soldiers  beheld  it
sweep  away  so  great  a  proportion  of  the  treasure  pur-
chased by  their  blood  and  toil.  What  fell  to  the  share
of  the  general  appeared,  according  to  the  ideas  of
wealth  in  the  sixteenth  century,  an  enormous  sum.
Some  of  Cortes's  favourites  had  secretly  appropriated
to  their  own  use  several  ornaments  of  gold,  which
neither  paid  the  royal  fifth,  nor  were  brought  into
account  as  part  of  the  common  stock. It  was,  how-

158  AMERICA.  [I6<20.

ever,  so  manifestly  the  interest  of  Cortes  at  this  period
to  make  a  large  remittance  to  the  king,  that  it  is
highly  probable  those  concealments  were  not  of  great
consequence.

Reasons  The  total  sum  amassed  by  the  Spaniards
waffonnd  hears  no  proportion  to  the  ideas  which  might
smaiT''  ^e  formed,  either  by  reflecting  on  the  descrip-
quanthies.  tions  given  by  historians  of  the  ancient  splen-
dour of  Mexico,  or  by  considering  the  productions
of  its  mines  in  modern  times.  But  among  the  ancient
Mexicans,  gold  and  silver  were  not  the  standards  by
which  the  worth  of  other  commodities  was  estimated ;
and  destitute  of  the  artificial  value  derived  from  this
circumstance,  were  no  farther  in  request  than  as
they  furnished  materials  for  ornaments  and  trinkets.
These  were  either  consecrated  to  the  gods  in  their
temples,  or  were  worn  as  marks  of  distinction  by  their
princes  and  some  of  their  most  eminent  chiefs.  As
the  consumption  of  the  precious  metals  was  inconsi-
derable, the  demand  for  them  was  not  such  as  to  put
either  the  ingenuity  or  industry  of  the  Mexicans  on
the  stretch,  in  order  to  augment  their  store.  They
were  altogether  unacquainted  with  the  art  of  work-
ing the  rich  mines  with  which  their  country  abound-
ed. What  gold  they  had  was  gathered  in  the  beds
of  rivers,  native,  and  ripened  into  a  pure  metallic
state.1  The  utmost  effort  of  their  labour  in  search  of
it  was  to  wash  the  earth  carried  down  by  torrents
from  the  mountains,  and  to  pick  out  the  grains  of  gold
which  subsided  ;  and  even  this  simple  operation,  ac-
cording to  the  report  of  the  persons  whom  Cortes
appointed  to  survey  the  provinces  where  there  was
a  prospect  of  finding  mines,  they  performed  very  un-
skilfully.'"  From  all  those  causes,  the  whole  mass  of
gold  in  possession  of  the  Mexicans  was  not  great.
As  silver  is  rarely  found  pure,  and  the  Mexican  art

1  Coi  tes  Relat.  p.  236.  F.  Diaz,  c.  102, 103.  Gomara  Cron.  c.  90. m  Diaa.  c.  103.

1520.]  BOOK V.  159

was  too  rude  to  conduct  the  process  for  refining  it
in  a  proper  manner,  the  quantity  of  this  metal  was
still  less  considerable."  Thus,  though  the  Spaniards
had  exerted  all  the  power  which  they  possessed  in
Mexico,  and  often  with  indecent  rapacity,  in  order  to
gratify  their  predominant  passion,  and  though  Mon-
tezuma had  fondly  exhausted  his  treasures,  in  hopes
of  satiating  their  thirst  for  gold,  the  product  of  both,
which  probably  included  a  great  part  of  the  bullion
in  the  empire,  did  not  rise  in  value  above  what  has
been  mentioned.0

Monte-  But  however  pliant  Montezuma  might  be  in
flexible"  other  matters,  with  respect  to  one  point  he
TpecYto  was  inflexible.  Though  Cortes  often  urged
religion,  him,  with  the  importunate  zeal  of  a  mission-
ary, to  renounce  his  false  gods,  and  to  embrace  the
Christian  faith,  he  always  rejected  the  proposition,
with  horror.  Superstition,  among  the  Mexicans,
was  formed  into  such  a  regular  and  complete  system,
that  its  institutions  naturally  took  fast  hold  of  the
mind ;  and  while  the  rude  tribes  in  other  parts  of
America  were  easily  induced  to  relinquish  a  few
notions  and  rites,  so  loose  and  arbitrary  as  hardly  to
merit  the  name  of  a  public  religion,  the  Mexicans
adhered  tenaciously  to  their  mode  of  worship,  which,
however  barbarous,  was  accompanied  with  such
order  and  solemnity  as  to  render  it  an  object  of  the
highest  veneration.  Cortes,  finding  all  his  attempts
ineffectual  to  shake  the  constancy  of  Montezuma,
was  so  much  enraged  at  his  obstinacy,  that  in  a  trans-
port of  zeal  he  led  out  his  soldiers  to  throw  down  the
idols  in  the  great  temple  by  force.  But  the  priests
taking  arms  in  defence  of  their  altars,  and  the  people
crowding  with  great  ardour  to  support  them,  Cortes  s
prudence  overruled  his  zeal,  and  induced  him  to  desist
from  his  rash  attempt,  after  dislodging  the  idols  from

n  Herrera,  dec.  ?.  lib.  ix.  c.  4.  °  See  Note  LX.

1(;()  AMERICA.  [1520.

one  of  the  shrines,  and  placing  in  their  stead  an  image
of  the  Virgin  Mary.p

Schemes  of From  that  moment  the  Mexicans,  who  had
the  Mm], permitted  the  imprisonment  of  their  sove-

cans  to  de- l .  |

stroy  the  reign,  and  suffered  the  exactions  of  strangers
without  a  struggle,  began  to  meditate  how
they  might  expel  or  destroy  the  Spaniards,  and
thought  themselves  called  upon  to  avenge  their  in-
sulted deities.  The  priests  and  leading  men  held
frequent  consultations  with  Montezuma  for  this  pur-
pose. But  as  it  might  prove  fatal  to  the  captive
monarch  to  attempt  either  the  one  or  the  other  by
violence,  he  was  willing  to  try  more  gentle  means.
Having  called  Cortes  into  his  presence,  he  observed,
that  now,  as  all  the  purposes  of  his  embassy  were
fully  accomplished,  the  gods  had  declared  their  will,
and  the  people  signified  their  desire,  that  he  and  his
followers  should  instantly  depart  out  of  the  empire.
With  this  he  required  them  to  comply,  or  unavoida-
ble destruction  would  fall  suddenly  on  their  heads.
The  tenor  of  this  unexpected  requisition,  as  well  as
the  determined  tone  in  which  it  was  uttered,  left
Cortes  no  room  to  doubt  that  it  was  the  result  of
some  deep  scheme  concerted  between  Montezuma  and
his  subjects.  He  quickly  perceived  that  he  might
derive  more  advantage  from  a  seeming  compliance
with  the  monarch's  inclination,  than  from  an  ill-
timed  attempt  to  change  or  to  oppose  it ;  and  replied,
with  great  composure,  that  he  had  already  begun  to  pre-
pare for  returning  to  his  own  country  ;  but  as  he  had
destroyed  the  vessels  in  which  he  arrived,  sometime
was  requisite  for  building  other  ships.  This  appeared
reasonable.  A  number  of  Mexicans  were  sent  to
Vera  Cruz  to  cut  down  timber,  and  some  Spanish
carpenters  were  appointed  to  superintend  the  work.
Cortes  flattered  himself  that  during  this  interval  he

«  See  Note LXI.

1520.]  BOOK V.  161

might  either  find  means  to  avert  the  threatened  dan-
ger, or  receive  such  reinforcements,  as  would  enable
him  to  despise  it.
i .  Almost  nine  months were elapsed since

Anxiety  M  L

and  danger  Portocarrero  and  Montejo  had  sailed  with
his  dispatches  to  Spain ;  and  he  daily  ex-
pected their  return  with  a  confirmation  of  his  autho-
rity from  the  king.  Without  this,  his  condition  was
insecure  and  precarious  ;  and  after  all  the  great  things
which  he  had  done,  it  might  be  his  doom  to  bear  the
name  and  suffer  the  punishment  of  a  traitor.  Rapid
and  extensive  as  his  progress  had  been,  he  could  not
hope  to  complete  the  reduction  of  a  great  empire
with  so  small  a  body  of  men,  which  by  this  time  dis-
eases of  various  kinds  had  considerably  thinned  ;  nor
could  he  apply  for  recruits  to  the  Spanish  settle-
ments in  the  islands,  until  he  received  the  royal  ap-
probation of  his  proceedings.

While  he  remained  in  this  cruel  situation,

The  arrival  .  .

of  a-aew  anxious  about  what  was  past,  uncertain  with
armament,  regpect  to  the  future>  and  by  the  late  decla-
ration of  Montezuma,  oppressed  with  a  new  addition
of  cares,  a  Mexican  courier  arrived  with  an  account
of  some  ships  having  appeared  on  the  coast.  Cortes,
with  fond  credulity,  imagining  that  his  messengers
were  returned  from  Spain,  and  that  the  completion
of  all  his  wishes  and  hopes  was  at  hand,  imparted  the
glad  tidings  to  his  companions,  who  received  them
with  transports  of  mutual  gratulation.  Their  joy  was
not  of  long  continuance.  A  courier  from  Sandoval,
whom  Cortes  had  appointed  to  succeed  Escalante
in  command,  at  Vera  Cruz,  brought  certain  informa-
tion that  the  armament  was  fitted  out  by  Velasquez,
governor  of  Cuba,  and  instead  of  bringing  the  aid
which  they  expected,  threatened  them  with  imme-
diate destruction.

The  motives  which  prompted  Velasquez  to  this

VOL.  VII.  m

102  AMERICA.  [1520.

violent  measure  are  obvious. From  the  cir-

titted  out  .

by  Veias-  cumstances  of  Cortes's  departure,  it  was  im-
possible not  to  suspect  his  intention  of  throw-
ing otf  all  dependence  upon  him. His  neglecting  to
transmit  any  account of  his operations  to  Cuba,
strengthened  this  suspicion,  which  was  at  last  con-
firmed  beyond  doubt, by the indiscretion  of  the
officers  whom  Cortes  sent  to  Spain. They,  from
some  motive  which  is  not  clearly  explained  by  the
contemporary  historians,  touched  at  the  island  of
Cuba,  contrary  to  the  peremptory  orders  of  their
general. q By  this  means  Velasquez  not  only  learned
that  Cortes  and  his  followers,  after  formally  renounc-
ing all  connexion  with  him,  had  established  an  inde-
pendent colony  in  New  Spain,  and  were  soliciting
the  king  to  confirm  their  proceedings  by  his  autho-
rity ;  but  he  obtained  particular  information  con-
cerning the  opulence  of  the  country,  the  valuable
presents  which  Cortes  had  received,  and  the  inviting
prospects  of  success  that  opened  to  his  view.  Every
passion  which  can  agitate  an  ambitious  mind ;  shame,
at  having  been  so  grossly  over-reached  ;  indignation,
at  being  betrayed  by  the  man  whom  he  had  selected
as  the  object  of  his  favour  and  confidence ; grief,  for
having  wasted  his  fortune  to  aggrandize  an  enemy ;
and  despair  of  recovering  so  fair  an  opportunity  of
establishing  his  fame  and  extending  his  power,  now
raged  in  the  bosom  of  Velasquez. All  these,  with
united  force,  excited  him  to  make  an  extraordinary
effort  in  order  to  be  avenged  on  the  author  of  his
wrongs,  and  to  wrest  from  him  his  usurped  authority
and  conquests. Nor  did  he  want  the  appearance  of
a  good  title  to  justify  such  an  attempt. The  agent
whom  he  sent  to  Spain  with  an  account  of  Grijalva's
voyage,  had  met  with  a  most  favourable  reception  ;
and  from  the  specimens  which  he  produced,  such

n  B.  Diaz. c.  54,  53. Herrera,  dee.  2.  lib.  v.  c.  14. Gomara  Croa.  c.  9ti.

1520.]  BOOK V.  16.3

high  expectations  were  formed  concerning  the  opu-
lence of  New  Spain,  that  Velasquez  was  authorized
to  prosecute  the  discovery  of  the  country,  and  ap-
pointed governor  of  it  during  life,  with  more  exten-
sive power  and  privileges  than  had  been  granted  to
any  adventurer  from  the  time  of  Columbus/  Elated
bv  this  distinguished  mark  of  favour,  and  warranted
to  consider  Cortes  not  only  as  intruding  upon  his  ju-
risdiction, but  as  disobedient  to  the  royal  mandate,
he  determined  to  vindicate  his  own  rights,  and  the
honour  of  his  sovereign,  by  force  of  arms.3  His
ardour  in  carrying  on  his  preparations  was

Under  the  J ©  I r

command such  as  might  have  been  expected  from  the
arvatv.  vi0]ence  0f  ^ne  passions  with  which  he  was

animated ;  and  in  a  short  time  an  armament  was
completed,  consisting  of  eighteen  ships,  which  had
on  board  fourscore  horsemen,  eight  hundred  foot  sol-
diers, of  which  eighty  were  musketeers,  and  a  hun-
dred and  twenty  crossbow  men,  together  with  a  train
of  twelve  pieces  of  cannon.  As  Velasquez's  experi-
ence of  the  fatal  consequence  of  committing  to  an-
other what  he  ought  to  have  executed  himself,  had
not  rendered  him  more  enterprising,  he  vested  the
command  of  this  formidable  body,  which,  in  the  in-
fancy of  the  Spanish  power  in  America,  merits  the
appellation  of  an  army,  in  Pamphilo  de  Narvaez,  with
instructions  to  seize  Cortes  and  his  principal  officers,
to  send  them  prisoners  to  him,  and  then  to  complete
the  discovery  and  conquest  of  the  country  in  his
name.

Tho  pro-  After  a  prosperous  voyage,  Narvaez  landed
NarvaS.0  his  men  without  opposition  near  St.  Juan  de
APril-  Ulua.  Three  soldiers,  whom  Cortes  had  sent
to  search  for  mines  in  that  district,  immediately  joined
him.  By  this  accident  he  not  only  received  informa-
tion concerning  the  progress  and  situation  of  Cortes,

r  HerrEra,  dec.  2.  lib.  Hi.  c.  11.  "See  Note  LXII.

m2

164  AMERICA.  [1520.

but  as  these  soldiers  had  made  some  progress  in  the
knowledge  of  the  Mexican  language,  he  acquired  in-
terpreters, by  whose  means  he  was  enabled  to  hold
some  intercourse  with  the  people  of  the  country.
But,  according  to  the  low  cunning  of  deserters,  they
framed  their  intelligence  with  more  attention  to  what
they  thought  would  be  agreeable,  than  to  what  they
knew  to  be  true ;  and  represented  the  situation  of
Cortes  to  be  so  desperate,  and  the  disaffection  of  his
followers  to  be  so  general,  as  increased  the  natural
confidence  and  presumption  of  Narvaez.  His  first
operation,  however,  might  have  taught  him  not  to
rely  on  their  partial  accounts.  Having  sent  to  sum-
mon the  governor  of  Vera  Cruz  to  surrender,  Gue-
vara, a  priest  whom  he  employed  in  that  service,  made
the  requisition  with  such  insolence,  that  Sandoval,  an
officer  of  high  spirit,  and  zealously  attached  to  Cortes,
instead  of  complying  with  his  demands,  seized  him
and  his  attendants,  and  sent  them  in  chains  to  Mexico.
Cortes  received  them  not  like  enemies,  but

Cortes

deeply  as  friends,  and  condemning  the  severity  of  San-
doval, set  them  immediately  at  liberty.  By
this  well-timed  clemency,  seconded  by  caresses  and
presents,  he  gained  their  confidence,  and  drew  from
them  such  particulars  concerning  the  force  and  inten-
tions of  Narvaez,  as  gave  him  a  view  of  the  impend-
ing danger  in  its  full  extent.  He  had  not  to  contend
now  with  half-naked  Indians,  no  match  for  him  in  war,
and  still  more  inferior  in  the  arts  of  policy,  but  to  take
the  field  against  an  army  in  courage  and  martial  dis-
cipline equal  to  his  own,  in  number  far  superior,  act-
ing under  the  sanction  of  royal  authority,  and  com-
manded by  an  officer  of  known  bravery.  He  was  in-
formed that  Narvaez,  more  solicitous  to  gratify  the
resentment  of  Velasquez,  than  attentive  to  the  honour
or  interest  of  his  country,  had  begun  his  intercourse
with  the  natives,  by  representing  him  and  his  follow-

1520.]  BOOK V.  105

ers  as  fugitives  and  outlaws,  guilty  of  rebellion  against
their  own  sovereign,  and  of  injustice  in  invading  the
Mexican  empire  ;  and  had  declared  that  his  chief  ob-
ject in  visiting  the  country  was  to  punish  the  Spa-
niards who  had  committed  these  crimes,  and  to  rescue
the  Mexicans  from  oppression.  He  soon  perceived
that  the  same  unfavourable  representations  of  his  cha-
racter and  actions  had  been  conveyed  to  Montezuma,
and  that  Narvaez  had  found  means  to  assure  him,  that
as  the  conduct  of  those  who  kept  him  under  restraint
was  highly  displeasing  to  the  king  his  master,  he  had
it  in  charge  not  only  to  rescue  an  injured  monarch
from  confinement,  but  to  reinstate  him  in  the  posses-
sion of  his  ancient  power  and  independence.  Animat-
ed with  this  prospect  of  being  set  free  from  subjection
to  strangers,  the  Mexicans  in  several  provinces  began
openly  to  revolt  from  Cortes,  and  to  regard  Narvaez
as  a  deliverer  no  less  able  than  willing  to  save  them.
Montezuma  himself  kept  up  a  secret  intercourse  with
the  new  commander,  and  seemed  to  court  him  as  a
person  superior  in  power  and  dignity  to  those  Spa-
niards whom  he  had  hitherto  revered  as  the  first  of
men.a

His  deii-  Such  were  the  various  aspects  of  danger
concern-5  aQd  difficulty  which  presented  themselves  to

inghis  ^g  view  0f  Cortes.  No  situation  can  be  con-
own  con-
duct, ceived  more  trying  to  the  capacity  and  firm-
ness of  a  general,  or  where  the  choice  of  the  plan
which  ought  to  be  adopted  was  more  difficult.  If  he
should  wait  the  approach  of  Narvaez  in  Mexico,  de-
struction seemed  to  be  unavoidable ;  for  while  the
Spaniards  pressed  him  from  without,  the  inhabitants,
whose  turbulent  spirit  he  could  hardly  restrain  with
all  his  authority  and  attention,  would  eagerly  lay  hold
on  such  a  favourable  opportunity  of  avenging  all  their
wrongs. If  he  should  abandon  the  capital,  set  the

■  See  Note  LXI1I.

Hid  AMERICA  [1520.

captive  monarch  at  liberty,  and  march  out  to  meet
the  enemy ;  lie  must  at  once  forego  the  fruits  of  all
his  toils  and  victories,  and  relinquish  advantages
which  could  not  be  recovered  without  extraordinary
efforts  and  infinite  danger.  If,  instead  of  employing
force,  lie  should  have  recourse  to  conciliating  mea-
sures, and  attempt  an  accommodation  with  Narvaez;
the  natural  haughtiness  of  that  officer,  augmented  by
consciousness  of  his  present  superiority,  forbade  him
to  cherish  any  sanguine  hope  of  success.  After  re-
volving every  scheme  with  deep  attention,  Cortes
fixed  upon  that  which  in  execution  was  most  ha-
zardous, but,  if  successful,  would  prove  most  benefi-
cial to  himself  and  to  his  country;  and  with  the  de-
cisive intrepidity  suited  to  desperate  situations,  de-
termined to  make  one  bold  effort  for  victory  under
every  disadvantage,  rather  than  sacrifice  his  own  con-
quests and  the  Spanish  interests  in  Mexico,
nisneeoti-  But  though  he  foresaw  that  the  contest
ationsvdth must  be  terminated  finally  by  arms,  it  would

the  follow-  .  J J  >

ers  of  Nar-  have  been  not  only  indecent,  but  criminal,  to
have  marched  against  his  countrymen,  with-
out attempting  to  adjust  matters  by  an  amicable  ne-
gotiation. In  this  service  he  employed  Olmedo,  his
chaplain,  to  whose  character  the  function  was  well
suited,  and  who  possessed,  besides,  such  prudence
and  address  as  qualified  him  to  carry  on  the  secret
intrigues  in  which  Cortes  placed  his  chief  confidence.
Narvaez  rejected,  with  scorn,  every  scheme  of  ac-
commodation that  Olmedo  proposed,  and  was  with
difficulty  restrained  from  laying  violent  hands  on  him
and  his  attendants.  He  met,  however,  with  a  more
favourable  reception  among  the  followers  of  Narvaez,
to  many  of  whom  he  delivered  letters,  either  from
Cortes  or  his  officers,  their  ancient  friends  and  com-
panions. Cortes  artfully  accompanied  these  with  pre-
sents of  rings,  chains  of  gold,  and  other  trinkets  of

1520.]  BOOK V.  167

value,  which  inspired  those  needy  adventurers  with
high  ideas  of  the  wealth  that  he  had  acquired,  and
with  envy  of  their  good  fortune  who  were  engaged  in
his  service.  Some,  from  hopes  of  becoming  sharers
in  those  rich  spoils,  declared  for  an  immediate  accom-
modation with  Cortes.  Others,  from  public  spirit,  la-
boured to  prevent  a  civil  war,  which,  whatever  party
should  prevail,  must  shake,  and  perhaps  subvert  the
Spanish  power,  in  a  country  where  it  was  so  imper-
fectly established.  Narvaez  disregarded  both,  and
by  a  public  proclamation  denounced  Cortes  and  his
adherents  rebels  and  enemies  to  their  country.  Cortes,
it  is  probable,  was  not  much  surprised  at  the  untract-
able  arrogance  of  Narvaez ;  and,  after  having  given
such  a  proof  of  his  own  pacific  disposition  as  might
justify  his  recourse  to  other  means,  he  determined  to
advance  towards  an  enemy  whom  he  had  laboured  in
vain  to  appease.

Marches  He  left  a  hundred  and  fifty  men  in  the  ca-
hfm.nst  pital,  under  the  command  of  Pedro  de  Alva-
May-  rado,  an  officer  of  distinguished  courage,  for
whom  the  Mexicans  had  conceived  a  singular  degree
of  respect.  To  the  custody  of  this  slender  garrison
he  committed  a  great  city,  with  all  the  wealth  he  had
amassed,  and,  what  was  still  of  greater  importance,
the  person  of  the  imprisoned  monarch.  His  utmost
art  was  employed  in  concealing  from  Montezuma  the
real  cause  of  his  march.  He  laboured  to  persuade
him,  that  the  strangers  who  had  lately  arrived  were
his  friends  and  fellow-subjects ;  and  that,  after  a  short
interview  with  them,  they  would  depart  together,  and
return  to  their  own  country.  The  captive  prince,  un-
able to  comprehend  the  designs  of  the  Spaniard,  or
to  reconcile  what  he  now  heard  with  the  declarations
of  Narvaez,  and  afraid  to  discover  any  symptom  of  sus-
picion or  distrust  of  Cortes,  promised  to  remain  quietly
in  the  Spanish  quarters,  and  to  cultivate  the  same

108  AMERICA.  [1520.

friendship  with  Alvarado  which  he  had  uniformly  main-
tained with  him.  Cortes,  with  seeming  confidence
in  this  promise,  but  relying  principally  upon  the  in-
junctions which  he  had  given  Alvarado  to  guard  his
prisoner  with  the  most  scrupulous  vigilance,  set  out
from  Mexico.

Number  of  His  strength,  even  after  it  was  reinforced
ins  troops,  ky  t|ie  junction  0f  Sandoval  and  the  garrison

of  Vera  Cruz,  did  not  exceed  two  hundred  and  fifty
men.  As  he  hoped  for  success  chiefly  from  the  ra-
pidity of  his  motions,  his  troops  were  not  encumbered
either  with  baggage  or  artillery.  But  as  he  dreaded
extremely  the  impression  which  the  enemy  might
make  with  their  cavalry,  he  had  provided  against  this
danger  with  the  foresight  and  sagacity  which  distin-
guish a  great  commander.  Having  observed  that  the
Indians  in  the  province  of  Chinantla  used  spears  of
extraordinary  length  and  force,  he  armed  his  soldiers
with  these,  and  accustomed  them  to  that  deep  and
compact  arrangement  which  the  use  of  this  formida-
ble weapon,  the  best  perhaps  that  ever  was  invented
for  defence,  enabled  them  to  assume.
Continues  With  this  small  but  firm  battalion,  Cortes
tiatefTbe  advanced  towards  Zempoalla,  of  which  Nar-
advanced.  vaez  naci  taken  possession.  During  his  march,
he  made  repeated  attempts  towards  some  accommo-
dation with  his  opponent.  But  Narvaez  requiring
that  Cortes  and  his  followers  should  instantly  recog-
nise his  title  to  be  governor  of  New  Spain,  in  virtue
of  the  powers  which  he  derived  from  Velasquez;  and
Cortes  refusing  to  submit  to  any  authority  which  was
not  founded  on  a  commission  from  the  emperor  him-
self, under  whose  immediate  protection  he  and  his
adherents  had  placed  their  infant  colony ;  all  these
attempts  proved  fruitless.  The  intercourse,  however,
which  this  occasioned  between  the  two  parties,  proved
of  no  small  advantage  to  Cortes,  as  it  afforded  him  an

1520.]  BOOK V.  J 69

opportunity  of  gaining  some  of  Narvaez's  officers  by-
liberal  presents,  of  softening  others  by  a  semblance
of  moderation,  and  of  dazzling  all  by  the  appearance
of  wealth  among  his  troops,  most  of  his  soldiers  hav-
ing converted  their  share  of  the  Mexican  gold  into
chains,  bracelets,  and  other  ornaments,  which  they
displayed  with  military  ostentation. Narvaez  and  a
little  junto  of  his  creatures  excepted,  all  the  army
leaned  towards  an  accommodation  with  their  coun-
trymen. This  discovery  of  their  inclination  irritated
his  violent  temper  almost  to  madness.  In  a  transport
of  rage,  he  set  a  price  upon  the  head  of  Cortes,  and
of  his  principal  officers ;  and  having  learned  that  he
was  now  advanced  within  a  league  of  Zempoalla  with
his  small  body  of  men,  he  considered  this  as  an  insult
which  merited  immediate  chastisement,  and  marched
out  with  all  his  troops  to  offer  him  battle.
Attacks -^ut  Cortes  was  a  leader  of  greater  abilities
Narvaez  in  and  experience  than,  on  equal  ground,  to  fight
an  enemy  so  far  superior  in- number,  and  so
much  better  appointed. Having  taken  his  station  on
the  opposite  bank  of  the  river  de  Canoas,  where  he
knew  that  he  could  not  be  attacked,  he  beheld  the
approach  of  the  enemy  without  concern,  and  disre-
garded this  vain  bravade. It  was  then  the  beginning
of  the  wet  season,6  and  the  rain  had  poured  down,
during  a  great  part  of  the  day,  with  the  violence  pe-
culiar to  the  torrid  zone. The  followers  of  Narvaez,
unaccustomed  to  the  hardships  of  military  service,
murmured  so  much  at  being  thus  fruitlessly  exposed,
that,  from  their  unsoldier-like  impatience,  as  well  as
his  own  contempt  of  his  adversary,  their  general  per-
mitted them  to  retire  to  Zempoalla. The  very  cir-
cumstance which  induced  them  to  quit  the  field,  en-
couraged Cortes  to  form  a  scheme,  by  which  he  hoped
at  once  to  terminate  the  war. He  observed,  that  his

b  Hackluj't,  vol.  Hi.  467.  Dc  Laet  Descr.  Iud.  Occid.  221.

I/O  AMERICA.  [1520.

hardy  veterans,  though  standing  under  the  torrents
which  continued  to  fall,  without  a  single  tent  or  any
shelter  whatsoever  to  cover  them,  were  so  far  from
repining  at  hardships  which  were  become  familiar  to
them,  that  they  were  still  fresh  and  alert  for  service.
He  foresaw  that  the  enemy  would  naturally  give  them-
selves up  to  repose  after  their  fatigue,  and  that,  judg-
ing of  the  conduct  of  others  by  their  own  effeminacy,
they  would  deem  themselves  perfectly  secure  at  a
season  so  unfit  for  action.  He  resolved,  therefore,
to  fall  upon  them  in  the  dead  of  night,  when  the
surprise  and  terror  of  this  unexpected  attack  might
more  than  compensate  the  inferiority  of  his  numbers.
His  soldiers,  sensible  that  no  resource  remained  but
in  some  desperate  effort  of  courage,  approved  of  the
measure  with  such  warmth,  that  Cortes,  in  a  military
oration  which  he  addressed  to  them  before  they  began
their  march,  was  more  solicitous  to  temper  than  to
inflame  their  ardour.  He  divided  them  into  three
parties.  At  the  head  of  the  first  he  placed  Sandoval ;
intrusting  this  gallant  officer  with  the  most  dangerous
and  important  service,  that  of  seizing  the  enemy's  ar-
tillery, which  was  planted  before  the  principal  tower
of  the  temple  where  Narvaez  had  fixed  his  head-
quarters. Christoval  de  Olid  commanded  the  second,
with  orders  to  assault  the  tower,  and  lay  hold  on  the
general.  Cortes  himself  conducted  the  third  and
smallest  division,  which  was  to  act  as  a  body  of  re-
serve, and  to  support  the  other  two  as  there  should
be  occasion.  Having  passed  the  river  de  Canoas,
which  was  much  swelled  with  the  rains,  not  without
difficulty,  the  water  reaching  almost  to  their  chins,
they  advanced  in  profound  silence,  without  beat  of
drum,  or  sound  of  any  warlike  instrument;  each  man
armed  with  his  sword,  his  dagger,  and  his  Chinan-
tlan  spear.  jNarvacz,  remiss  in  proportion  to  his  se-
curity, had  posted  only  two  sentinels  to  watch  the

1520.]  BOOK V.  171

motions  of  an  enemy  whom  he  had  such  good  cause
to  dread.  One  of  these  was  seized  by  the  advanced
guard  of  Cortes's  troops,  the  other  made  his  escape,
and  hurrying  to  the  town  with  all  the  precipitation
of  fear  and  zeal,  gave  such  timely  notice  of  the  ene-
my's approach,  that  there  was  full  leisure  to  have  pre-
pared for  their  reception.  But>  through  the  arrogance
and  infatuation  of  Narvaez,  this  important  interval
was  lost.  He  imputed  this  alarm  to  the  cowardice
of  the  sentinel,  and  treated  with  derision  the  idea  of
being  attacked  by  forces  so  unequal  to  his  own.  The
shouts  of  Cortes's  soldiers,  rushing  on  to  the  assault,
convinced  him  at  last  that  the  danger  which  he  de-
spised was  real.  The  rapidity  with  which  they  ad-
vanced was  such,  that  only  one  cannon  could  be  fired,
before  Sandoval's  party  closed  with  the  enemy,  drove
them  from  their  guns,  and  began  to  force  their  way
up  the  steps  of  the  tower.  Narvaez,  no  less  brave  in
action  than  presumptuous  in  conduct,  armed  himself
in  haste,  and  by  his  voice  and  example  animated  his
men  to  the  combat.  Olid  advanced  to  sustain  his
companions  ;  and  Cortes  himself  rushing  to  the  front,
conducted  and  added  new  vigour  to  the  attack.  The
compact  order  in  which  this  small  body  pressed  on,
and  the  impenetrable  front  which  they  presented  with
And  over- their  long  spears,  bore  down  all  opposition

comes  hin, before  ft They  ^  nQw  reached the  ^^

and  were  struggling  to  burst  it  open,  when  a  soldier
having  set  fire  to  the  reeds  with  which  the  tower  was
covered,  compelled  Narvaez  to  sally  out.  In  the  first
encounter  he  was  wounded  in  the  eye  with  a  spear,
and,  falling  to  the  ground,  was  dragged  down  the
steps,  and  in  a  moment  clapped  in  fetters.  The  cry  of
victory  resounded  among  the  troops  of  Cortes.  Those
who  had  sallied  out  with  their  leader  now  maintained
the  conflict  feebly,  and  began  to  surrender.  Among
the  remainder  of  his  soldiers,  stationed  in  two  smaller

172  AMERICA.  [1520.

towers  of  the  temple,  terror  and  confusion  prevailed.
The  darkness  was  so  great,  that  they  could  not  dis-
tinguish between  their  friends  and  foes.  Their  own
artillery  was  pointed  against  them.  Wherever  they
turned  their  eyes,  they  beheld  lights  gleaming  through
the  obscurity  of  night,  which,  though  proceeding  only
from  a  variety  of  shining  insects,  that  abound  in  moist
and  sultry  climates,  their  affrighted  imaginations  re-
presented as  numerous  bands  of  musketeers  advancing
with  kindled  matches  to  the  attack.  After  a  short  re-
sistance, the  soldiers  compelled  their  officers  to  capi-
tulate, and  before  morning  all  laid  down  their  arms,
and  submitted  quietly  to  their  conquerors.

This  complete  victory  proved  more  accept-
of  this  vie-  able,  as  it  was  gained  almost  without  blood-
shed,  only  two  soldiers  being  killed  on  the  side
of  Cortes,  and  two  officers,  with  fifteen  private  men,
of  the  adverse  faction.  Cortes  treated  the  vanquished
not  like  enemies,  but  as  countrymen  and  friends,  and
offered  either  to  send  them  back  directly  to  Cuba,  or
to  take  them  into  his  service,  as  partners  in  his  for-
tune, on  equal  terms  with  his  own  soldiers.  This
latter  proposition,  seconded  by  a  seasonable  distri-
bution of  some  presents  from  Cortes,  and  liberal  pro-
mises of  more,  opened  prospects  so  agreeable  to  the
romantic  expectations  which  had  invited  them  to  en-
gage in  this  service,  that  all,  a  few  partisans  of  Nar-
vaez  excepted,  closed  with  it,  and  vied  with  each
other  in  professions  of  fidelity  and  attachment  to  a
general,  whose  recent  success  had  given  them  such  a
striking  proof  of  his  abilities  for  command.  Thus,  by
a  series  of  events  no  less  fortunate  than  uncommon,
Cortes  not  only  escaped  from  perdition  which  seemed
inevitable,  but,  when  he  had  least  reason  to  expect
it,  was  placed  at  the  head  of  a  thousand  Spaniards,
ready  to  follow  wherever  he  should  lead  them.  Who-
ever reflects  upon  the  facility  with  which  this  victory

1520.]  BOOK V.  173

was  obtained,  or  considers  with  what  sudden  and
unanimous  transition  the  followers  of  Narvaez  ranged
themselves  under  the  standard  of  his  rival,  will  be  apt
to  ascribe  both  events  as  much  to  the  intrigues  as  to
the  arms  of  Cortes,  and  cannot  but  suspect  that  the
ruin  of  Narvaez  was  occasioned  no  less  by  the  trea-
chery of  his  own  followers,  than  by  the  valour  of  the
enemy.0

The  Mexi-  But,  m  one  Pomt>  tne  prudent  conduct  and
cans  take  good  fortune  of  Cortes  were  equally  conspi-
agaiLt  the  cuous.  If,  by  the  rapidity  of  his  operations
Spaniards.  after  he  began  his  march,  he  had  not  brought

matters  to  such  a  speedy  issue,  even  this  decisive
victory  would  have  come  too  late  to  have  saved  his
companions  whom  he  left  in  Mexico.  A  few  days
after  the  discomfiture  of  Narvaez,  a  courier  arrived
with  an  account  that  the  Mexicans  had  taken  arms,
and  having  seized  and  destroyed  the  two  brigantines,
which  Cortes  had  built  in  order  to  secure  the  com-
mand of  the  lake,  and  attacked  the  Spaniards  in  their
quarters,  had  killed  several  of  them,  and  wounded
more,  had  reduced  to  ashes  their  magazine  of  pro-
visions, and  carried  on  hostilities  with  such  fury,  that
though  Alvarado  and  his  men  defended  themselves
with  undaunted  resolution,  they  must  either  be  soon
cut  off  by  famine,  or  sink  under  the  multitude  of  their
enemies.  This  revolt  was  excited  by  motives  which
rendered  it  still  more  alarming.  On  the  departure  of
Cortes  for  Zempoalla,  the  Mexicans  flattered  them-
selves, that  the  long  expected  opportunity  of  restor-
ing their  sovereign  to  liberty,  and  of  vindicating  their
country  from  the  odious  dominion  of  strangers,  was
at  length  arrived  ;  that  while  the  forces  of  their  op-
pressors were  divided,  and  the  arms  of  one  party
turned  against  the  other,  they  might  triumph  with

«  Cortes  Relat.  242.  D. B.  Dia*.  c.  110—125. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  is.  c.  18,
&c. Goruara  Cron.  c.  97,  kc.

174  AM  ERICA.  [1520.

greater  facility  over  both.  Consultations  were  held,
and  schemes  formed  with  this  intention.  The  Spa-
niards in  Mexico,  conscious  of  their  own  feebleness,
suspected  and  dreaded  those  machinations.  Alva-
rado,  though  a  gallant  officer,  possessed  neither  that
extent  of  capacity,  nor  dignity  of  manners  by  which
Cortes  had  acquired  such  an  ascendant  over  the
minds  of  the  Mexicans,  as  never  allowed  them  to
form  a  just  estimate  of  his  weakness  or  of  their  own
strength.  Alvarado  knew  no  mode  of  supporting  his
authority  but  force.  Instead  of  employing  address
to  disconcert  the  plans,  or  to  soothe  the  spirits  of  the
Mexicans,  he  waited  the  return  of  one  of  their  solemn
festivals,  when  the  principal  persons  in  the  empire
were  dancing,  according  to  custom,  in  the  court  of
the  great  temple ;  he  seized  all  the  avenues  which
led  to  it,  and,  allured  partly  by  the  rich  ornaments
which  they  wore  in  honour  of  their  gods,  and  partly
by  the  facility  of  cutting  off  at  once  the  authors  of
that  conspiracy  which  he  dreaded,  he  fell  upon  them,
unarmed  and  unsuspicious  of  any  danger,  and  mas-
sacred a  great  number,  none  escaping  but  such  as
made  their  way  over  the  battlements  of  the  temple.
An  action  so  cruel  and  treacherous  filled  not  only  the
city,  but  the  whole  empire  with  indignation  and  rage.
All  called  aloud  for  vengeance  ;  and  regardless  of  the
safety  of  their  monarch,  whose  life  was  at  the  mercy
of  the  Spaniards,  or  of  their  own  danger  in  assaulting
an  enemy  who  had  been  so  long  the  object  of  their
terror,  they  committed  all  those  acts  of  violence  of
which  Cortes  received  an  account.
He  To  him  the  danger  appeared  so  imminent,

budfto  the  as  to  admit  neither  of  deliberation  nor  delay.
capital.  He  set  out  instantly  with  all  his  forces,  and
returned  from  Zempoalla  with  no  less  rapidity  than
he  had  advanced  thither.  At  Tlascala  he  was  joined
by  two  thousand  chosen  warriors. On  entering  the

1520.]  BOOK  V.  175

Mexican  territories  he  found  that  disaffection  to  the
Spaniards  was  not  confined  to  the  capital. The  prin-
cipal inhabitants  had deserted  the  towns  through
which  he  passed ;  no  person  of  note  appearing  to
meet  him  with  the  usual  respect ;  no  provision  was
made  for  the  subsistence  of  his  troops ;  and  though
he  was  permitted  to  advance  without  opposition,  the
solitude  and  silence  which  reigned  in  every  place,
and  the  horror  with  which  the  people  avoided  all  in-
tercourse with  him.  discovered  a  deep-rooted  anti-
pathy, that  excited  the  most  just  alarm. But  impla-
cable as  the  enmity  of  the  Mexicans  was,  they  were
so  unacquainted  with  the  science  of  war,  that  they
knew  not  how  to  take  the  proper  measures,  either  for
their  own  safety  or  the  destruction  of  the  Spaniards.
Uninstructed  by  their  former  error  in  admitting  a
formidable  enemy  into  their  capital,  instead  of  break-
ing down  the  causeways  and  bridges,  by  which  they
might  have  enclosed  Alvarado  and  his  party,
June  u. ^^  \mve  effectually  stopped  the  career  of
Cortes,  they  again  suffered  him  to  march  into  the  city
without  molestation,  and  to  take  quiet  possession  of
his  ancient  station.

The  transports  of  joy  with  which  Alvarado

Improper  \  J J

conduct  of  and  his  soldiers  received  their  companions
cannot  be  expressed.  Both  parties  were  so
much  elated,  the  one  with  their  seasonable  deliver-
ance, and  the  other  with  the  great  exploits  which
they  had  achieved,  that  this  intoxication  of  success
seems  to  have  reached  Cortes  himself;  and  he  be-
haved on  this  occasion  neither  with  his  usual  sagacity
nor  attention.  He  not  only  neglected  to  visit  Mon-
tezuma, but  imbittered  the  insult  by  expressions  full
of  contempt  for  that  unfortunate  prince  and  his  peo-
ple. The  forces  of  which  he  had  now  the  command,
appeared  to  him  so  irresistible,  that  he  might  assume
a  higher  tone,  and  lay  aside  the  mask  of  modera-

170  AMERICA.  [1520.

tion,  under  which  he  had  hitherto  concealed  his  de-
signs. Some  Mexicans,  who  understood  the  Spanish
language,  heard  the  contemptuous  words  which
Cortes  uttered,  and  reporting  them  to  their  country-
men, kindled  their  rage  anew.  They  were  now  con-
vinced that  the  intentions  of  the  general  were  equally
bloody  with  those  of  Alvarado,  and  that  his  original
purpose  in  visiting  their  country,  had  not  been,  as  he
pretended,  to  court  the  alliance  of  their  sovereign,
but  to  attempt  the  conquest  of  his  dominions.  They
Tbe  resumed  their  arms  with  the  additional  fury

hoS  of  wmcn  tl"s  discovery  inspired,  attacked  a  con-
the  Mexi-  siderable  body  of  Spaniards  who  were  march-
ing towards  the  great  square  in  which  the
public  market  was  held,  and  compelled  them  to  re-
tire with  some  loss.  Imboldened  by  this  success,
and  delighted  to  find  that  their  oppressors  were  not
invincible,  they  advanced  next  day  with  extraor-
dinary martial  pomp  to  assault  the  Spaniards  in  their
quarters.  Their  number  was  formidable,  and  their
undaunted  courage  still  more  so.  Though  the  ar-
tillery pointed  against  their  numerous  battalions,
crowded  together  in  narrow  streets,  swept  off  mul-
titudes at  every  discharge;  though  every  blow  of  the
Spanish  weapons  fell  with  mortal  effect  upon  their
naked  bodies,  the  impetuosity  of  the  assault  did  not
abate.  Fresh  men  rushed  forward  to  occupy  the
places  of  the  slain,  and  meeting  with  the  same  fate,
were  succeeded  by  others  no  less  intrepid  and  ea«-er
for  vengeance.  The  utmost  efforts  of  Cortes's  abi-
lities and  experience,  seconded  by  the  disciplined
valour  of  his  troops,  were  hardly  sufficient  to  defend
the  fortifications,  that  surrounded  the  post  where
the  Spaniards  were  stationed,  into  which  the  enemy
were  more  than  once  on  the  point  of  forcing  their  way.
Distress  of  Cortes  beheld,  with  wonder,  the  implaca-
wardf* ble  ferocity  of  a  people  who  seemed  at  first

1520.]  BOOK V.  177

to  submit  tamely  to  the  yoke,  and  had  continued
so  long  passive  under  it.  The  soldiers  of  Narvaez,
who  fondly  imagined  that  they  followed  Cortes  to
share  in  the  spoils  of  a  conquered  empire,  were
astonished  to  find  that  they  were  involved  in  a  dan-
gerous war,  with  an  enemy  whose  vigour  was  still  un-
broken, and  loudly  execrated  their  own  weakness,  in
giving  such  easy  credit  to  the  delusive  promises  of
their  new  leader/  But  surprise  and  complaints  were
of  no  avail.  Some  immediate  and  extraordinary  effort
was  requisite  to  extricate  themselves  out  of  their  pre-
sent situation.  As  soon  as  the  approach  of  evening-
induced  the  Mexicans  to  retire,  in  compliance  with
their  national  custom  of  ceasing  from  hostilities  with
the  setting  sun,  Cortes  began  to  prepare  for  a  sally,
next  day,  with  such  a  considerable  force,  as  might
either  drive  the  enemy  out  of  the  city,  or  compel
them  to  listen  to  terms  of  accommodation.
Cortes  at-  He  conducted,  in  person,  the  troops  des-
wTthouV6"  tined  for  this  important  service.  Every  in-
success.  vention  known  in  the  European  art  of  war,
as  well  as  every  precaution,  suggested  by  his  long  ac-
quaintance with  the  Indian  mode  of  fighting,  were
employed  to  ensure  success.  But  he  found  an  en-
emy prepared  and  determined  to  oppose  him.  The
force  of  the  Mexicans  was  greatly  augmented  by  fresh
troops,  which  poured  in  continually  from  the  coun-
try, and  their  animosity  was  in  no  degree  abated.
They  were  led  by  their  nobles,  inflamed  by  the  ex-
hortations of  their  priests,  and  fought  in  defence  of
their  temples  and-  families,  under  the  eye  of  their
gods,  and  in  presence  of  their  wives  and  children.
Notwithstanding  their  numbers,  and  enthusiastic  con-
tempt of  danger  and  death,  wherever  the  Spaniards
could  close  with  them,  the  superiority  of  their  dis-
cipline and  arms  obliged  the  Mexicans  to  give  way.

i  B.  Diaz.  c.  126.
VOL. VII.  N

178  AMERICA.  [1520.

But  in  narrow  streets,  and  where  many  of  the  bridges
of  communication  were  broken  down,  the  Spaniards
could  seldom  come  to  a  fair  rencounter  with  the  en-
emy, and  as  they  advanced,  were  exposed  to  showers
of  arrows  and  stones  from  the  tops  of  houses.  After
a  day  of  incessant  exertion,  though  vast  numbers  of
the  Mexicans  fell,  and  part  of  the  city  was  burnt,  the
Spaniards,  weary  with  the  slaughter,  and  harassed  by
multitudes  which  successively  relieved  each  other,
were  obliged  at  length  to  retire,  with  the  mortifica-
tion of  having  accomplished  nothing  so  decisive  as  to
compensate  the  unusual  calamity  of  having  twelve
soldiers  killed,  and  above  sixty  wounded.  Another
sally,  made  with  greater  force,  was  not  more  effec-
tual, and  in  it  the  general  himself  was  wounded  in
the  hand.

Monte-  Cortes  now  perceived,  too  late,  the  fatal

*uma  slain,  error  into  which  he  had  been  betrayed  by  his
own  contempt  of  the  Mexicans,  and  was  satisfied
that  he  could  neither  maintain  his  present  station  in
the  centre  of  a  hostile  city,  nor  retire  from  it  with-
out the  most  imminent  danger.  One  resource  still
remained,  to  try  what  effect  the  interposition  of  Mon-
tezuma might  have  to  soothe  or  overawe  his  subjects.
When  the  Mexicans  approached  next  morning  to  re-
new the  assault,  that  unfortunate  prince,  at  the  mercy
of  the  Spaniards,  and  reduced  to  the  sad  necessity
of  becoming  the  instrument  of  his  own  disgrace,  and
of  the  slavery  of  his  people,6  advanced  to  the  battle-
ments in  his  royal  robes,  and  with  all  the  pomp  in
which  he  used  to  appear  on  solemn  occasions.  At
sight  of  their  sovereign,  whom  they  had  long  been
accustomed  to  honour,  and  almost  to  revere  as  a  god,
the  weapons  dropped  from  their  hands,  every  tongue
was  silent,  all  bowed  their  heads,  and  many  pros-
trated themselves  on  the  ground. Montezuma  ad-

c.See  Note  LXIV.

1520.]  BOOK  V.  179

dressed  them  with  every  argument  that  could  miti-
gate their  rage,  or  persuade  them  to  cease  from  hos-
tilities. When  he  ended  his  discourse,  a  sullen  mur-
mur of  disapprobation run  through  the  ranks ; to
this  succeeded  reproaches  and  threats;  and  the  fury
of  the  multitude  rising  in  a  moment  above  every  re-
straint of  decency  or  respect,  flights  of  arrows  and
volleys  of  stones  poured  in  so  violently  upon  the  ram-
parts, that  before  the  Spanish  soldiers,  appointed  to
cover  Montezuma  with  their  bucklers,  had  time  to
lift  them  in  his  defence,  two  arrows  wounded  the
unhappy  monarch,  and  the  blow  of  a  stone  on  his
temple  struck  him  to  the  ground. On seeing  him
fall,  the  Mexicans  were  so  much  astonished, that
with  a  transition  not  uncommon  in  popular  tumults,
they  passed  in  a  moment  from  one  extreme  to  the
other,  remorse  succeeded  to  insult,  and  they  fled  with
horror,  as  if  the  vengeance  of  Heaven  were  pursuing
the  crime  which  they  had  committed. The  Spa-
niards  without  molestation  carried  Montezuma  to
his  apartments,  and  Cortes  hastened  thither  to  con-
sole him  under  his  misfortune. But  the  unhappy
monarch  now  perceived  how  low  he  was  sunk,  and
the  haughty  spirit  which  seemed  to  have  been  so
long  extinct,  returning,  he  scorned  to  survive  this  last
humiliation,  and  to  protract  an  ignominious  life,  not
only  as  the  prisoner  and  tool  of  his  enemies,  but  as
the  object  of  contempt  or  detestation  among  his  sub-
jects. In  a  transport  of  rage  he  tore  the  bandages
from  his  wounds,  and  refused,  with  such  obstinacy,
to  take  any  nourishment,  that  he  soon  ended  his
wretched  days,  rejecting  with  disdain  all  the  solicita-
tions of  the  Spaniards  to  embrace  the  Christian  faith.
New  con- Upon  the  death  of  Montezuma,  Cortes  hav-
flicts. jng  jost  au  h0pe  0f  bringing  the  Mexicans  to

an  accommodation,  saw  no  prospect  of  safety  but  in

n  2

180  AMERICA.  [1520.

attempting  a  retreat,  and  began  to  prepare  for  it.
But  a  sudden  motion  of  the  Mexicans  engaged  him
in  new  conflicts.  They  took  possession  of  a  high
tower  in  the  great  temple  which  overlooked  the  Spa-
nish quarters,  and  placing  there  a  garrison  of  their
principal  warriors,  not  a  Spaniard  could  stir  without
being  exposed  to  their  missile  weapons.  From  this
post  it  was  necessary  to  dislodge  them  at  any  risk ;
and  Juan  de  Escobar,  with  a  numerous  detachment
of  chosen  soldiers,  was  ordered  to  make  the  attack.
But  Escobar,  though  a  gallant  officer,  and  at  the  head
of  troops  accustomed  to  conquer,  and  who  now  fought
under  the  eyes  of  their  countrymen,  was  thrice  re-
pulsed. Cortes,  sensible  that  not  only  the  reputa-
tion, but  the  safety  of  his  army  depended  on  the  suc-
cess of  this  assault,  ordered  a  buckler  to  be  tied  to
his  arm,  as  he  could  not  manage  it  with  his  wounded
hand,  and  rushed  withhis  drawn  sword  into  the  thickest
of  the  combatants.  Encouraged  by  the  presence  of
their  general,  the  Spaniards  returned  to  the  charge  with
such  vigour,  that  they  gradually  forced  their  way  up
the  steps,  and  drove  the  Mexicans  to  the  platform  at
the  top  of  the  tower.  There  a  dreadful  carnage  began,
when  two  young  Mexicans  of  high  rank,  observing
Cortes  as  he  animated  his  soldiers  by  his  voice  and
example,  resolved  to  sacrifice  their  own  lives  in  order
to  cut  ofT  the  author  of  all  the  calamities  which  de-
solated their  country.  They  approached  him  in  a
supplicant  posture,  as  if  they  had  intended  to  lay
down  their  arms,  and  seizing  him  in  a  moment,  hur-
ried him  towards  the  battlements,  over  which  they
threw  themselves  headlong,  in  hopes  of  dragging  him
along  to  be  dashed  in  pieces  by  the  same  fall.  But
Cortes,  by  his  strength  and  agility,  broke  loose  from
their  grasp,  and  the  gallant  youths  perished  in  this
generous  though  unsuccessful  attempt  to  save  their

1520.]  BOOK V.  181

country/  As  soon  as  the  Spaniards  became  masters
of  the  tower,  they  set  fire  to  it,  and,  without  farther
molestation,  continued  the  preparations  for  their  re-
treat.

The  spa-  This  became  the  more  necessary,  as  the
Ibandon  Mexicans  were  so  much  astonished  at  the
the  city.  jast  effort  of  the  Spanish  valour,  that  they
began  to  change  their  whole  system  of  hostility,  and,
instead  of  incessant  attacks,  endeavoured,  by  barri-
cading the  streets,  and  breaking  down  the  causeways,
to  cut  off  the  communication  of  the  Spaniards  with
the  continent,  and  thus  to  starve  an  enemy  whom
they  could  not  subdue.  The  first  point  to  be  deter-
mined bv  Cortes  and  his  followers,  was,  whether
they  should  march  out  openly  in  the  face  of  day,
when  they  could  discern  every  danger,  and  see  how
to  regulate  their  own  motions,  as  well  as  how  to  re-
sist the  assaults  of  the  enemy ;  or,  whether  they
should  endeavour  to  retire  secretly  in  the  night?
The  latter  was  preferred,  partly  from  hopes  that  their
national  superstition  would  restrain  the  Mexicans  from
venturing  to  attack  them  in  the  night,  and  partly  from
their  own  fond  belief  in  the  predictions  of  a  private
soldier,  who,  having  acquired  universal  credit  by  a
smattering  of  learning,  and  his  pretensions  to  astro-
logy, boldly  assured  his  countrymen  of  success,  if
they  made  their  retreat  in  this  manner.  They  began
to  move,  towards  midnight,  in  three  divisions.  San-
doval led  the  van ;  Pedro  Alvarado,  and  Velasquez
de  Leon,  had  the  conduct  of  the  rear ;  and  Cortes
commanded  in  the  centre,  where  he  placed  the  pri-
soners, among  whom  were  a  son  and  two  daughters
of  Montezuma,  together  with  several  Mexicans  of

f  M.  Clavigero  has  censured  me  with  asperity  for  relating  this  gallant  action  of
the  two  Mexicans,  and  for  supposing  that  there  were  battlements  round  the  temple
of  Mexico.  I  related  the  attempt  to  destroy  Cortes  on  the  authority  of  Her.  dec.
'2.  lib.  x.  c.  9.  and  of  Torquemado,  lib.  4.  c.  69.  I  followed  them  likewise  in  sup-
posing the  uppermost  platform  of  the  temple  to  be  encompassed  by  a  battlement
or  rail.

»82  AMERICA.  [1520.

distinction,  the  artillery,  the  baggage,  and  a  portable
bridge  of  timber,  intended  to  be  laid  over  the  breaches
in  the  causeway.  They  marched  in  profound  silence
along  the  causeway  which  led  to  Tacuba,  because  it
was  shorter  than  any  of  the  rest,  and,  lying  most  re-
mote from  the  road  towards  Tlascala  and  the  sea-
coast,  had  been  left  more  entire  by  the  Mexicans.
They  reached  the  first  breach  in  it  without  molesta-
tion, hoping  that  their  retreat  was  undiscovered.

Attack  d  ^ut  tne  ^exicans>  unperceived,  had  not
by  the  only  watched  all  their  motions  with  atten-
tion,  but  had  made  proper  dispositions  for  a
most  formidable  attack.  While  the  Spaniards  were
intent  upon  placing  their  bridge  in  the  breach,  and
occupied  in  conducting  their  horses  and  artillery
along  it,  they  were  suddenly  alarmed  with  a  tre-
mendous sound  of  warlike  instruments,  and  a  general
shout  from  an  innumerable  multitude  of  enemies;  the
lake  was  covered  with  canoes;  flights  of  arrows,  and
showers  of  stones  poured  in  upon  them  from  every
quarter ;  the  Mexicans  rushing  forward  to  the  charge
with  fearless  impetuosity,  as  if  they  hoped  in  that
moment  to  be  avenged  for  all  their  wrongs.  Unfor-
tunately the  wooden  bridge,  by  the  weight  of  the  ar-
tillery, was  wedged  so  fast  into  the  stones  and  mud,
that  it  was  impossible  to  remove  it.  Dismayed  at
this  accident,  the  Spaniards  advanced  with  precipi-
tation towards  the  second  breach.  The  Mexicans
hemmed  them  in  on  every  side,  and  though  they
defended  themselves  with  their  usual  courage,  yet
crowded  together  as  they  were  on  a  narrow  cause-
way, their  discipline  and  military  skill  were  of  little
avail,  nor  did  the  obscurity  of  the  night  permit  them
to  derive  great  advantage  from  their  fire-arms,  or  the
superiority  of  their  other  weapons.  All  Mexico  was
now  in  arms,  and  so  eager  were  the  people  on  the
destruction  of  their  oppressors,  that  they  who  were

1620.]  BOOK V.  183

not  near  enough  to  annoy  them  in  person,  impatient  of
the  delay,  pressed  forward  with  such  ardour,  as  drove
on  their  countrymen  in  the  front  with  irresistible
violence.  Fresh  warriors  instantly  filled  the  place  of
such  as  fell.  The  Spaniards,  weary  with  slaughter,
and  unable  to  sustain  the  weight  of  the  torrent  that
poured  in  upon  them,  began  to  give  way.  In  a  moment
the  confusion  was  universal ;  horse  and  foot,  officers
and  soldiers,  friends  and  enemies,  were  mingled  toge-
ther ;  and  while  all  fought,  and  many  fell,  they  could
hardly  distinguish  from  what  hand  the  blow  came.
Their  dis-  Cortes,  with  about  a  hundred  foot  soldiers,
asters'  and  a  few  horse,  forced  his  way  over  the  two
remaining  breaches  in  the  causeway,  the  bodies  of
the  dead  serving  to  fill  up  the  chasms,  and  reached
the  main  land.  Having  formed  them  as  soon  as  they
arrived,  he  returned  with  such  as  were  yet  capable
of  service,  to  assist  his  friends  in  their  retreat,  and  to
encourage  them,  by.  his  presence  and  example,  to  per-
severe in  the  efforts  requisite  to  effect  it.  He  met
with  part  of  his  soldiers,  who  had  broke  through
the  enemy,  but  found  many  more  overwhelmed  by
the  multitude  of  their  aggressors,  or  perishing  in  the
lake ;  and  heard  the  piteous  lamentations  of  others,
whom  the  Mexicans,  having  taken  alive,  were  carry-
ing off  in  triumph  to  be  sacrificed  to  the  god  of  war.
Before  day,  all  who  had  escaped  assembled  atTacuba.
But  when  the  morning  dawned,  and  discovered  to  the
view  of  Cortes,  his  shattered  battalion,  reduced  to
less  than  half  its  number,  the  survivors  dejected,  and
most  of  them  covered  with  wounds,  the  thoughts  of
what  they  had  suffered,  and  the  remembrance  of  so
many  faithful  friends  and  gallant  followers  who  had
fallen  in  that  night  of  sorrow/  pierced  his  soul  with
such  anguish,  that  while  he  was  forming  their  ranks,
and  issuing  some  necessary  orders,  his  soldiers  ob-

sNoche  Triste  is  the  name  by  which  it  is  still  distinguished  in  New  Spain.,-

184  AMERICA.  [1520-

served  the  tears  trickling  from  his  eyes,  and  remark-
ed, with  much  satisfaction,  that  while  attentive  to  the
duties  of  a  general,  he  was  not  insensible  to  the  feel-
ings of  a  man.

In  this  fatal  retreat  many  officers  of  distinc-
tion perished,1'  and  among  these  Velasquez  de
Leon,  who  having  forsaken  the  party  of  his  kinsman,
the  governor  of  Cuba,  to  follow  the  fortune  of  his
companions,  was,  on  that  account,  as  well  as  for  his
superior  merit,  respected  by  them  as  the  second  per-
son in  the  army.  All  the  artillery,  ammunition,  and
baggage,  were  lost ;  the  greater  part  of  the  horses,
and  above  two  thousand  Tlascalans,  were  killed,  and
only  a  very  small  portion  of  the  treasure  which  tliey
had  amassed  was  saved.  This,  which  had  been  always
their  chief  object,  proved  a  great  cause  of  their  cala-
mity ;  for  many  of  the  soldiers  having  so  overloaded
themselves  with  bars  of  gold  as  rendered  them  unfit
for  action,  and  retarded  their  flight,  fell,  ignomini-
ously,  the  victims  of  their  own  inconsiderate  avarice.
Amidst  so  many  disasters,  it  was  some  consolation
to  find  that  Aguilar  and  Marina,  whose  function  as
interpreters  was  of  such  essential  importance,  had
made  their  escape.'

Difficult  The  first  care  of  Cortes  was  to  find  some
tTJ  s>-f  shelter  for  his  wearied  troops ;  for  as  the  Mexi-
niards.  cans  infested  them  on  every  side,  and  the  people
of  Tacuba  began  to  take  arms,  he  could  not  continue
in  his  present  station.  He  directed  his  march  towards
the  rising  ground,  and  having  fortunately  discovered
a  temple  situated  on  an  eminence,  took  possession  of
it.  There  he  found  not  only  the  shelter  for  which  he
wished,  but,  what  was  no  less  wanted,  some  provi-
sions to  refresh  his  men ;  and  though  the  enemy  did
not  intermit  their  attacks  throughout  the  day,  they

>'  See  Note  LXV.
►  Cortes Rflat.  p.  248. 11.  Diar.  c.  128. Gomara  Cron.  c. 109, Herrera
•tee.  2.  lib.  x.  c.  11,  li.

1520.]  BOOK V.  185

were  with  less  difficulty  prevented  from  making  any
impression.  During  this  time  Cortes  was  engaged  in
deep  consultation  with  his  officers,  concerning  the
route  which  they  ought  to  take  in  their  retreat.  They
were  now  on  the  west  side  of  the  lake. Tlascala,
the  only  place  where  they  could  hope  for  a  friendly
reception,  lay  about  sixty-four  miles  to  the  east  of
Mexico  ;k  so  that  they  were  obliged  to  go  round  the
north  end  of  the  lake  before  they  could  fall  into  the
road  which  led  thither. A  Tlascalan  soldier  under-
took to  be  their  guide,  and  conducted  them  through
a  country,  in  some  places  marshy,  in  others  moun-
tainous, in  all  ill-cultivated  and  thinly  peopled.  They
marched  for  six  days  with  little  respite,  and  under
continual  alarms,  numerous  bodies  of  the  Mexicans
hovering  around  them,  sometimes  harassing  them  at
a  distance  with  their  missile  weapons,  and  sometimes
attacking  them  closely  in  front,  in  rear,  in  flank,  with
great  boldness,  as  they  now  knew  that  they  were  not
invincible.  Nor  were  the  fatigue  and  danger  of  those
incessant  conflicts  the  worst  evils  to  which  they  were
exposed.  As  the  barren  country  through  which  they
passed  afforded  hardly  any  provisions,  they  were  re-
duced to  feed  on  berries,  roots,  and  the  stalks  of
green  maize ;  and  at  the  very  time  that  famine  was
depressing  their  spirits  and  wasting  their  strength,
their  situation  required  the  most  vigorous  and  unre-
mitting exertions  of  courage  and  activity. Amidst
those  complicated  distresses,  one  circumstance  sup-
ported and  animated the Spaniards. Their  com-
mander sustained  this  sad  reverse  of  fortune  with  un-
shaken magnanimity. His  presence  of  mind  never
forsook  him  ;  his  sagacity  foresaw  every  event,  and
his  vigilance  provided  for  it. He  was  foremost  in
every  danger,  and  endured  every  hardship  with  cheer-
fulness. The  difficulties  with  which  he  was  sur-

k  Villa  Semioi  Theaho  Americanos,  lib.  ii.  c.  11.

186  AMERICA.  [1520.

rounded  seemed  to  call  forth  new  talents  ;  and  his
soldiers,  though  despairing  themselves,  continued  to
follow  him  with  increasing  confidence  in  his  abilities.
Battle  of  On  the  sixth  day  they  arrived  near  to
otumba.  otumba,  not  far  from  the  road  between  Mex-
ico and  Tlascala.  Early  next  morning  they  began  to
advance  towards  it,  flying  parties  of  the  enemy  still
hanging  on  their  rear ;  and,  amidst  the  insults  with
which  they  accompanied  their  hostilities,  Marina  re-
marked that  they  often  exclaimed  with  exultation,
"  Go  on,  robbers;  go  to  the  place  where  you  shall
quickly  meet  the  vengeance  due  to  your  crimes."
The  meaning  of  this  threat  the  Spaniards  did  not  com-
prehend, until  they  reached  the  summit  of  an  emi-
nence before  them.  There  a  spacious  valley  opened
to  their  view,  covered  with  a  vast  army,  extending
as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach.  The  Mexicans,  while
with  one  body  of  their  troops  they  harassed  the  Spa-
niards in  their  retreat,  had  assembled  their  principal
force  on  the  other  side  of  the  lake ;  and  marching  along
the  road  which  led  directly  to  Tlascala,  posted  it  in  the
plain  of  Otumba,  through  which  they  knew  Cortes
must  pass.  At  the  sight  of  this  incredible  multitude,
which  they  could  survey  at  once  from  the  rising
ground,  the  Spaniards  were  astonished,  and  even  the
boldest  began  to  despair.  But  Cortes,  without
allowing  leisure  for  their  fears  to  acquire  strength  by
reflection,  after  warning  them  briefly  that  no  alter-
native now  remained  but  to  conquer  or  to  die,  led
them  instantly  to  the  charge.  The  Mexicans  waited
their  approach  with  unusual  fortitude.  Such,  how-
ever, was  the  superiority  of  the  Spanish  discipline
and  arms,  that  the  impression  of  this  small  body  was
irresistible  ;  and  which  ever  way  its  force  was  direct-
ed, it  penetrated  and  dispersed  the  most  numerous
battalions.  But  while  these  gave  way  in  one  quarter,
new  combatants  advanced  from  another,  and  the  Spa-

1520.]  BOOK V.  187

niards,  though  successful  in  every  attack,  were  ready
to  sink  under  those  repeated  efforts,  without  seeing
any  end  of  their  toil,  or  any  hope  of  victory.  At  that
time  Cortes  observed  the  great  standard  of  the  empire,
which  was  carried  before  the  Mexican  general,  ad-
vancing ;  and  fortunately  recollecting  to  have  heard,
that  on  the  fate  of  it  depended  the  event  of  every
battle,  he  assembled  a  few  of  his  bravest  officers,
whose  horses  were still capable of  service, and
placing  himself  at  their  head, pushed  forward  to-
wards the  standard  with  an  impetuosity  which  bore
down  every  thing  before  it.  A  chosen  body  of  nobles,
who  guarded  the  standard,  made  some  resistance,
but  were  soon  broken. Cortes,  with  a  stroke  of  his
lance,  wounded  the  Mexican  general,  and  threw  him
to  the  ground. One  of  the  Spanish  officers  alighting,
put  an  end  to  his  life,  and  laid  hold  of  the  imperial
standard. The  moment  that  their  leader  fell,  and  the
standard,  towards  which  all  directed  their  eyes,  dis-
appeared, a  universal  panic  struck  the  Mexicans,
and,  as  if  the  bond  which  held  them  together  had
been  dissolved,  every  ensign  was  lowered,  each  sol-
dier threw  away  his  weapons,  and  all  fled  with  pre-
cipitation to  the  mountains. The  Spaniards,  unable
to  pursue  them  far,  returned  to  collect  the  spoils  of
the  field, which  were so  valuable,  as  to  be  some
compensation  for  the  wealth  which  they  had  lost  in
Mexico  ;  for  in  the  enemy's  army  were  most  of  their
principal  warriors,  dressed  out  in  their  richest  orna-
ments, as  if  they  had  been  marching  to  assured  vic-
tory. Next  day,  to  their  great  joy,  they  en-
tered the  Tlascalan  territories.1
Reception But  amidst  their  satisfaction  in  having  got
niardeJpa beyond  the  precincts of  a  hostile  country,
Tiascaia. they  could  not  look  forward  without  solici-

1  Cortes  Relat.  p.  S19. 13.  Diaz.  c.  128. Goniara  Crun.  c 110. Herrera,  dec.  2.
Kb.  x.  c.  12,13.

188  AMERICA.  [1520.

tude,  as  they  were  still  uncertain  what  reception
they  might  meet  with  from  allies,  to  whom  they  re-
turned in  a  condition  very  different  from  that  in
which  they  had  lately  set  out  from  their  dominions.
Happily  for  them,  the  enmity  of  the  Tlascalans  to
the  Mexican  name  was  so  inveterate,  their  desire  to
avenge  the  death  of  their  countrymen  so  vehement,
and  the  ascendant  which  Cortes  had  acquired  over
the  chiefs  of  the  republic  so  complete,  that  far  from
entertaining  a  thought  of  taking  any  advantage  of  the
distressed  situation  in  which  they  beheld  the  Spa-
niards, they  received  them  with  a  tenderness  and
cordiality  which  quickly  dissipated  all  their  sus-
picions.
„ ,  ,. Some  interval  of  tranquillity  and  indulgence

New  deli-  n.  j  o

derations  was  now  absolutely  necessary ;  not  only  that
the  Spaniards  might  give  attention  to  the  cure
of  their  wounds,  which  had  been  too  long  neglected,
but  in  order  to  recruit  their  strength,  exhausted  by
such  a  long  succession  of  fatigue  and  hardships.
During  this,  Cortes  learned  that  he  and  his  com-
panions were  not  the  only  Spaniards  who  had  felt  the
effects  of  the  Mexican  enmity.  A  considerable  de-
tachment which  was  marching  from  Zempoalla  to-
wards the  capital,  had  been  cut  off  by  the  people  of
Tepeaca.  A  smaller  party,  returning  from  Tlascala
to  Vera  Cruz,  with  the  share  of  the  Mexican  gold
allotted  to  the  garrison,  had  been  surprised  and  de-
stroyed in  the  mountains.  At  a  juncture  when  the
life  of  every  Spaniard  was  of  importance,  such  losses
were  deeply  felt.  The  schemes  which  Cortes  was
meditating  rendered  them  peculiarly  afflictive  to  him.
While  his  enemies,  and  even  many  of  his  own  fol-
lowers, considered  the  disasters  which  had  befallen
him  as  fatal  to  the  progress  of  his  arms,  and  imagined
that  nothing  now  remained  but  speedily  to  abandon
a  country  which  he  had  invaded  with  unequal  force.

1520.]  BOOK  V.  189

his  mind,  as  eminent  for  perseverance  as  for  enter-
prise, was  still  bent  on  accomplishing  his  original
purpose,  of  subjecting  the  Mexican  empire  to  the
crown  of  Castile.  Severe  and  unexpected  as  the
check  was  which  he  had  received,  it  did  not  appear
to  him  a  sufficient  reason  for  relinquishing  the  con-
quests which  he  had  already  made,  or  against  re-
suming his  operations  with  better  hopes  of  success.
The  colony  at  Vera  Cruz  was  not  only  safe,  but  had
remained  unmolested.  The  people  of  Zempoalla  and
the  adjacent  districts  had  discovered  no  symptoms
of  defection.  The  Tlascalans  continued  faithful  to
their  alliance.  On  their  martial  spirit,  easily  roused
to  arms,  and  inflamed  with  implacable  hatred  of  the
Mexicans,  Cortes  depended  for  powerful  aid.  He
had  still  the  command  of  a  body  of  Spaniards,  equal
in  number  to  that  with  which  he  had  opened  his  way
into  the  centre  of  the  empire,  and  had  taken  posses-
sion of  the  capital;  so  that  with  the  benefit  of  greater
experience,  as  well  as  more  perfect  knowledge  of  the
country,  he  did  not  despair  of  quickly  recovering  all
that  he  had  been  deprived  of  by  untoward  events.

Full  of  this  idea,  he  courted  the  Tlascalan
sureshe  chiefs  with  such  attention,  and  distributed
among  them  so  liberally  the  rich  spoils  of
Otumba,  that  he  was  secure  of  obtaining  whatever
he  should  require  of  the  republic.  He  drew  a  small
supply  of  ammunition,  and  two  or  three  field-pieces,
from  his  stores  at  Vera  Cruz.  He  dispatched  an
officer  of  confidence  with  four  ships  of  Narvaez's  fleet
toHispaniola  and  Jamaica,  to  engage  adventurers,  and
to  purchase  horses,  gunpowder,  and  other  military
stores.  As  he  knew  that  it  would  be  vain  to  attempt
the  reduction  of  Mexico,  unless  he  could  secure  the
command  of  the  lake,  he  gave  orders  to  prepare,  in  the
mountains  of  Tlascala,  materials  for  building  twelve
brigantines,  so  as  they  might  be  carried  thither  in

190  AMERICA.  [1520.

pieces  ready  to  be  put  together,  and  launched  when

he  stood  in  need  of  their  service."'

,,  ,.  But  while,  with  provident  attention,  he  was

Mutinous  1

spirit  of  his  taking  those  necessary  steps  towards  the  exe-

troops.  • ■ j.  i  ■  i  i

cution  ot  his  measures,  an  obstacle  arose  in  a
quarter  where  it  was  least  expected,  but  most  formi-
dable. The  spirit  of  discontent  and  mutiny  broke
out  in  his  own  army. Many  of  Narvaez's  followers
were  planters  rather  than  soldiers,  and  had  accom-
panied him  to  New  Spain  with  sanguine  hopes  of  ob-
taining settlements, but  with  little inclination to
engage  in  the  hardships  and  dangers  of  war. As  the
same  motives  had  induced  them  to  enter  into  their
new  engagements  with  Cortes,  they  no  sooner  be-
came acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  service,  than
they  bitterly  repented  of  their  choice. Such  of  them
as  had  the  good  fortune  to  survive  the  perilous  ad-
ventures in  which  their  own  imprudence  had  involved
them,  happy  in  having  made  their  escape,  trembled
at  the  thoughts  of  being  exposed  a  second  time  to
similar  calamities. As  soon  as  they  discovered  the
intention  of  Cortes,  they  began  secretly  to  murmur
and  cabal, and  waxing  gradually  more  audacious,
they,  in  a  body,  offered  a  remonstrance  to  their  ge-
neral against  the  imprudence  of  attacking  a  powerful
empire  with  his  shattered  forces,  and  formally  re-
quired  him to  lead them  back  directly  to  Cuba.
Though  Cortes,  long  practised  in  the  arts of  com-
mand, employed  arguments,  entreaties,  and  presents
to  convince  or  to  soothe  them ;  though  his  own  sol-
diers, animated  with  the  spirit  of  their  leader,  warmly
seconded  his  endeavours ;  he  found  their  fears  too
violent  and  deep-rooted  to  be  removed,  and  the  ut-
most he  could  effect  was  to  prevail  with  them  to  defer
their  departure  for  some  time,  on  a  promise  that  he

»  Cortes  Rclat  p.  £5S,  E. Gomara  don.  Ci  117«

1520.]  BOOK V.  191

would,  at  a  more  proper  juncture,  dismiss  such  as
should  desire  it.

, That  the  malecontents  might  have  no  leisure

Means  he  o

employs  to  to  brood  over  the  causes  of  their  disaffection,

rev i vc

their  con  he  resolved  instantly  to  call  forth  his  troops
into  action.  He  proposed  to  chastise  the  peo-
ple of  Tepeaca  for  the  outrage  which  they  had  com-
mitted, and  as  the  detachment  which  they  had  cut  off
happened  to  be  composed  mostly  of  soldiers  who  had
served  under  Narvaez,  their  companions,  from  the  de-
sire of  vengeance,  engaged  the  more  willingly

August.  .  o  J

in  this  war. He  took  the  command  in  person
accompanied  by  a  numerous  body  of  Tlascalans,  and
in  the  space  of  a  few  weeks,  after  various  encounters,
with  great  slaughter  of  the  Tepeacans,  reduced  that
province  to  subjection. During  several  months,  while
he  waited  for  the  supplies  of  men  and  ammunition
which  he  expected,  and  was  carrying  on  his  prepa-
rations for  constructing  the  brigantines,  he  kept  his
troops  constantly  employed  in  various  expeditions
against  the adjacent  provinces, all  of  which  were
conducted  with  a uniform  tenor of  success. By
these,  his  men  became  again  accustomed  to  victory,
and  resumed  their  wonted  sense  of  superiority ;  the
Mexican  power  was  weakened  ;  the  Tlascalan  war-
riors acquired  the  habit  of  acting  in  conjunction  with
the  Spaniards ;  and  the  chiefs  of  the  republic  delighted
to  see  their  country  enriched  with  the  spoils  of  all  the
people  around  them,  and  astonished  every  day  with
fresh  discoveries  of  the  irresistible  prowess  of  their  al-
lies, they  declined  no  effort  requisite  to  support  them.
All  those  preparatory  arrangements,  how-
ened  by ever,  though  the  most  prudent  and  efficacious
reinforce-  which  the  situation  of  Cortes  allowed  him  to
peats. make>  would  have  been  of  little  avail,  without
a  reinforcement  of  Spanish  soldiers. Of  this  he  was
so  deeply  sensible,  that  it  was  the  chief  object  of  his

192  AMERICA.  [1520.

thoughts  and  wishes  ;  and  yet  his  only  prospect  of
obtaining  it  from  the  return  of  the  officer  whom  he
had  sent  to  the  isles  to  solicit  aid,  was  both  distant
and  uncertain.  But  what  neither  his  own  sagacity
nor  power  could  have  procured,  he  owed  to  a  series
of  fortunate  and  unforeseen  incidents.  The  governor
of  Cuba,  to  whom  the  success  of  Narvaez  appeared
an  event  of  infallible  certainty,  having  sent  two  small
ships  after  him  with  new  instructions,  and  a  supply
of  men  and  military  stores,  the  officer  whom  Cortes
had  appointed  to  command  on  the  coast,  artfully  de-
coyed them  into  the  harbour  of  Vera  Cruz,  seized
the  vessels,  and  easily  persuaded  the  soldiers  to  fol-
low the  standard  of  a  more  able  leader  than  him  whom
they  were  destined  to  join."  Soon  after,  three  ships
of  more  considerable  force  came  into  the  harbour
separately.  These  belonged  to  an  armament  fitted
out  by  Francisco  de  Garay,  governor  of  Jamaica,
who,  being  possessed  with  the  rage  of  discovery  and
conquest  which  animated  every  Spaniard  settled  in
America,  had  long  aimed  at  intruding  into  some  dis-
trict of  New  Spain,  and  dividing  with  Cortes  the
glory  and  gain  of  annexing  that  empire  to  the  crown
of  Castile.  They  unadvisedly  made  their  attempt  on
the  northern  provinces,  where  the  country  was  poor,
and  the  people  fierce  and  warlike  ;  and  after  a  cruel
succession  of  disasters,  famine  compelled  them  to
venture  into  Vera  Cruz,  and  cast  themselves  upon  the
mercy  of  their  countrymen.  Their  fidelity
was  not  proof  against  the  splendid  hopes  and
promises  which  had  seduced  other  adventurers,  and,
as  if  the  spirit  of  revolt  had  been  contagious  in  New
Spain,  they  likewise  abandoned  the  master  whom
they  were  bound  to  serve,  and  enlisted  under  Cortes.0
Nor  was  it  America  alone  that  furnished  such  unex-

"  B.  Diaz.  c.  1:31.
o  Cortes  Relat.  253.  F. 15.  Diaz.  e.  133.

1520.]  BOOK V.  U).'$

pected  aid ;  a  ship  arrived  from  Spain,  freighted  by
some  private  merchants  with  military  stores,  in  hopes
of  a  profitable  market  in  a  country,  the  fame  of  whose
opulence  began  to  spread  over  Europe.  Cortes  ea-
gerly purchased  a  cargo  which  to  him  was  invalu-
able, and  the  crew,  following  the  general  example,
joined  him  at  Tlascala.p

From  those  various  quarters,  the  army  of  Cortes
was  augmented  with  a  hundred  and  eighty  men,
and  twenty  horses,  a  reinforcement  too  inconsidera-
ble to  produce  any  consequence  which  would  entitle
it  to  have  been  mentioned  in  the  history  of  other
parts  of  the  globe.  But  in  that  of  America,  where
g-reat  revolutions  were  brought  about  by  causes  which
seemed  to  bear  no  proportion  to  their  effects,  such
small  events  rise  into  importance,  because  they  were
sufficient  to  decide  with  respect  to  the  fate  of  king-
doms. Nor  is  it  the  least  remarkable  instance  of  the
singular  felicity  conspicuous  in  many  passages  of
Cortes's  story,  that  the  two  persons  chiefly  instru-
mental in  furnishing  him  with  those  seasonable  sup-
plies, should  be  an  avowed  enemy  who  aimed  at  his
destruction,  and  an  envious  rival  who  wished  to  sup-
plant him.

Nutuberof  The  first  effect  of  the  junction  with  his  new
hk  forces,  followers  was  to  enable  him  to  dismiss  such
of  Narvaez's  soldiers  as  remained  with  reluctance  in
his  service.  After  their  departure,  he  still  mustered
five  hundred  and  fifty  infantry,  of  which  fourscore
were  armed  with  muskets  or  cross-bows,  forty  horse-
men, and  a  train  of  nine  field-pieces.'1  At  the  head  of
these,  accompanied  by  ten  thousand  Tlascalans  and
other  friendly  Indians,  Cortes  began  his  march  to-
wards Mexico,  on  the  28th  of  December,  six  months
after  his  disastrous  retreat  from  that  city.r

!'  Cork's  Rclat.  c.  136.
<i  Ibid.  255.  E.  '  ibid  *3tf.  A. B.  Diaz.  c.  137.

VOL.  VII.  O

194  AMERICA.  [1520.

Prepara-  Nor  did  he  advance  to  attack  an  enemy  un-
tbTiviexi-  prepared  to  receive  him.  Upon  the  death  of
cans  for Montezuma,  the  Mexican  chiefs,  in  whom  the

their  de-
fence, right  of  electing  the  emperor  was  vested,  had

instantly  raised  his  brother  Quetlavaca  to  the  throne.
His  avowed  and  inveterate  enmity  to  the  Spaniards
would  have  been  sufficient  to  gain  their  suffrages,
although  he  had  been  less  distinguished  for  courage
and  capacity.  He  had  an  immediate  opportunity  of
shewing  that  he  was  worthy  of  their  choice,  by  con-
ducting, in  person,  those  fierce  attacks  which  com-
pelled the  Spaniards  to  abandon  his  capital ;  and  as
soon  as  their  retreat  afforded  him  any  respite  from
action,  he  took  measures  for  preventing  their  return
to  Mexico,  with  prudence  equal  to  the  spirit  which
he  had  displayed  in  driving  them  out  of  it.  As  from
the  vicinity  of  Tlascala,  he  could  not  be  unacquainted
with  the  motions  and  intentions  of  Cortes,  he  ob-
served the  storm  that  was  gathering,  and  began  early
to  provide  against  it.  He  repaired  what  the  Spa-
niards had  ruined  in  the  city,  and  strengthened  it
with  such  new  fortifications  as  the  skill  of  his  subjects
was  capable  of  erecting.  Besides  filling  his  maga-
zines with  the  usual  weapons  of  war,  he  gave  direc-
tions to  make  long  spears  headed  with  the  swords
and  daggers  taken  from  the  Spaniards,  in  order  to
annoy  the  cavalry.  He  summoned  the  people  in
every  province  of  the  empire  to  take  arms  against
their  oppressors,  and  as  an  encouragement  to  exert
themselves  with  vigour,  he  promised  them  exemption
from  all  the  taxes  which  his  predecessors  had  imposed.5
But  what  he  laboured  with  the  greatest  earnestness
was,  to  deprive  the  Spaniards  of  the  advantages  which
they  derived  from  the  friendship  of  the  Tlascalans,  by
endeavouring  to  persuade  that  people  to  renounce  all
connexion  with  men,  who  were  not  only  avowed  ene-

*  Cortes  Relat.  p.  253.  E.  254.  A. B.  Diaz.  c.  140.

1520.]  BOOK V.  195

mies  of  the  gods,  whom  they  worshipped,  but  who
would  not  fail  to  subject  them  at  last  to  the  same
yoke,  which  they  were  now  inconsiderately  lending
their  aid  to  impose  upon  others.  These  representa-
tions, no  less  striking  than  well  founded,  were  urged
so  forcibly  by  his  ambassadors,  that  it  required  all
the  address  of  Cortes  to  prevent  their  making  a  dan-
gerous impression.1

But  while  Quetlavaca  was  arranging  his  plan  of
defence,  with  a  degree  of  foresight  uncommon  in  an
American,  his  days  were  cut  short  by  the  small-pox.
This  distemper,  which  raged  at  that  time  in  New
Spain  with  fatal  malignity,  was  unknown  in  that
quarter  of  the  globe,  until  it  was  introduced  by  the
Europeans,  and  may  be  reckoned  among  the  greatest
calamities  brought  upon  them  by  their  invaders.  In
his  stead  the  Mexicans  raised  to  the  throne  Guatimo-
zin,  nephew  and  son-in-law  of  Montezuma,  a  young
man  of  such  high  reputation  for  abilities  and  valour,
that  in  this  dangerous  crisis,  his  countrymen,  with
once  voice,  called  him  to  the  supreme  command."

1521  As  soon  as  Cortes  entered  the  enemy's  ter-
Cortes  ad-  ritories,  he  discovered  various  preparations  to
wards obstruct  his  progress. But  his  troops  forced

Mexico. tjiejr  way  w-t|1  j-ttje  difficulty,  an(J  t00k  p0g.

session  of  Tezeuco,  the  second  city  of  the  empire,
situated  on  the  banks  of  the  lake  about  twenty  miles
from  Mexico. w  Here  he  determined  to  establish  his
head-quarters,  as  the  most  proper  station  for  launch-
ing his  brigantines,  as  well  as  for  making  his  ap-
proaches to  the  capital.  In  order  to  render  his  resi-
dence there  more  secure,  he  deposed  the  cazique  or
chief,  who  was  at  the  head  of  that  community,  under
pretext  of  some  defect  in  his  title,  and  substituted
in  his  place  a  person  whom  a  faction  of  the  nobles

.'  B.  Diaz.  c.  129. Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  x.  c.  14.  19.  u  B,  Diaz.  c.  130.,

*  Villa  SenorTheatro  Americano,  i.  156.

o  2

UH)  AMERICA.  [1521.

pointed  out  as  the  right  heir  of  that  dignity.  At-
tached to  him  by  this  benefit,  the  new  cazique  and
his  adherents  served  the  Spaniards  with  inviolable
fidelity/1

His  opera-  As  the  preparations  for  constructing  the  bri-
ni.Tcau-'  gantines  advanced  slowly  under  the  unskilful
tk>Us.  hands  of  soldiers  and  Indians,  whom  Cortes
was  obliged  to  employ  in  assisting  three  or  four  car-
penters who  happened  fortunately  to  be  in  his  ser-
vice, and  as  he  had  not  yet  received  the  reinforcement
which  he  expected  from  Hispaniola,  he  was  not  in  a
condition  to  turn  his  arms  directly  against  the  capital.
To  have  attacked,  at  this  period,  a  city  so  populous,
so  well  prepared  for  defence,  and  in  a  situation  of
such  peculiar  strength,  must  have  exposed  his  troops
to  inevitable  destruction.  Three  months  elapsed  be-
fore the  materials  for  the  brigantines  were  finished,
and  before  he  heard  any  thing  with  respect  to  the  suc-
cess of  the  officer  whom  he  had  sent  to  Hispaniola.
This,  however,  was  not  a  season  of  inaction  to  Cortes.
He  attacked  successively  several  of  the  towns  si-
tuated around  the  lake  ;  and  though  all  the  Mexican
power  was  exerted  to  obstruct  his  operations,  he
either  compelled  them  to  submit  to  the  Spanish
crown,  or  reduced  them  to  ruins.  The  inhabitants
of  other  towns  he  endeavoured  to  conciliate  by  more
gentle  means,  and  though  he  could  not  hold  any  in-
tercourse with  them  but  by  the  intervention  of  inter-
preters, yet,  under  all  the  disadvantage  of  that  tedious
and  imperfect  mode  of  communication  he  had  ac-
quired such  thorough  know  ledge  of  the  state  of  the
country,  as  well  as  of  the  dispositions  of  the  people,
that  he  conducted  his  negotiations  and  intrigues  with
astonishing  dexterity  and  success.  Most  of  the  cities
adjacent  to  Mexico  were  originally  the  capitals  of

*  Cortes  Relat.  256,  &c. B.  Diaz.  c.  137. Gomara  Cron.  c.  121. Herrera,
dec.  3.c.  1.

1521.]  BOOK V.  197

small  independent  states ;  and  some  of  them  having
been  but  lately  annexed  to  the  Mexican  empire,  still
retained  the  remembrance  of  their  ancient  liberty,
and  bore  with  impatience  the  rigorous  yoke  of  their
new  masters.  Cortes  having  early  observed  symp-
toms of  their  disaffection,  availed  himself  of  this
knowledge  to  gain  their  confidence  and  friendship.
By  offering  with  confidence,  to  deliver  them  from  the
odious  dominion  of  the  Mexicans,  and  by  liberal  pro-
mises of  more  indulgent  treatment,  if  they  would
unite  with  him  against  their  oppressors,  he  prevailed
on  the  people  of  several  considerable  districts,  not
only  to  acknowledge  the  king  of  Castile  as  their  sove-
reign, but  to  supply  the  Spanish  camp  with  pro-
visions, and  to  strengthen  his  army  with  auxiliary
troops.  Guatimozin,  on  the  first  appearance  of  de-
fection among  his  subjects,  exerted  himself  with
vigour  to  prevent  or  to  punish  their  revolt;  but  in
spite  of  his  efforts,  the  spirit  continued  to  spread.
The  Spaniards  gradually  acquired  new  allies,  and
with  deep  concern  he  beheld  Cortes  arming  against
his  empire  those  very  hands  which  ought  to  have
been  active  in  its  defence ;  and  ready  to  advance
against  the  capital  at  the  head  of  a  numerous  body
of  his  own  subjects.y

While,  by  those  various  methods,  Cortes  was  gra-
dually circumscribing  the  Mexican  power  in  such  a
manner  that  his  prospect  of  overturning  it  seemed
neither  to  be  uncertain  nor  remote,  all  his  schemes
were  well  nigh  defeated  by  a  conspiracy  no  less  un-
expected than  dangerous.  The  soldiers  of  Narvaez
had  never  united  perfectly  with  the  original  compa-
nions of  Cortes,  nor  did  they  enter  into  his  measures
with  the  same  cordial  zeal.  Upon  every  occasion
that  required  any  extraordinary  effort  of  courage  or

y  Cortes  Relat.  256—260. B.  Diaz.  c.  137— 140. Goniara  Cron.  c.  122,  123.
Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  i.  c  1,  2.

19B  AMKR1CA.  [1521.

of  patience,  their  spirits  were  apt  to  sink;  and  now,
on  a  near  view  of  what  they  had  to  encounter,  in  at-
tempting to  reduce  a  city  so  inaccessible  as  Mexico,
and  defended  by  a  numerous  army,  the  resolution
even  of  those  among  them  who  had  adhered  to  Cortes
when  he  was  deserted  by  their  associates,  began  to
fail. Their  fears  led  them  to  presumptuous  and  un-
soldier-like  discussions  concerning  the  propriety  of
their  general's  measures,  and  the  improbability  of
their  success. From  these  they  proceeded  to  censure
and  invectives,  and  at  last  began  to  deliberate  how
they  might  provide  for  their  own  safety,  of  which
thev  deemed  their  commander  to  be  totally  negli-
gent.  Antonia  Villefagna,  a  private  soldier,  but  bold,
intriguing,  and  strongly  attached  to  Velasquez,  art-
fully fomented  this  growing  spirit  of  disaffection.
His  quarters  became  the  rendezvous  of  the  malecon-
tents,  where,  after  many  consultations,  they  could
discover  no  method  of  checking  Cortes  in  his  career,
but  by  assassinating  him  and  his  most  considerable
officers,  and  conferring  the  command  upon  some  per-
son who  would  relinquish  his  wild  plans,  and  adopt
measures  more  consistent  with  the  general  security.
Despair  inspired  them  with  courage. The  hour  for
perpetrating  the  crime,  the  persons  whom  they  des-
tined as  victims,  the  officers  to  succeed  them  in  com-
mand, were  all  named; and  the  conspirators  signed
an  association,  by  which  they  bound  themselves  with
most  solemn  oaths  to  mutual  fidelity. But  on  the
evening  before  the  appointed  day,  one  of  Cortes's
ancient  followers,  who had  been  seduced  into  the
conspiracy,  touched  with  compunction  at  the  immi-
nent danger  of  a  man  whom  he  had  long  been  accus-
tomed to  revere,  or  struck  with  horror  at  his  own
treachery,  went  privately  to  his  general,  and  revealed
to  him  all  that  he  knew. Cortes,  though  deeply
alarmed,  discerned  at  once  what  conduct  was  proper

1521.]  BOOK  V.  1<)9

in  a  situation  so  critical.  He  repaired  instantly  to
Villefagna's  quarters,  accompanied  by  some  of  his
most  trusty  officers.  The  astonishment  and  confusion
of  the  man  at  this  unexpected  visit  anticipated  the
confession  of  his  guilt.  Cortes,  while  his  attendants
seized  the  traitor,  snatched  from  his  bosom  a  paper
containing  the  association,  signed  by  the  conspira-
tors. Impatient  to  know  how  far  the  defection  ex-
tended, he  retired  to  read  it,  and  found  there  names
which  filled  him  with  surprise  and  sorrow.  But
aware  how  dangerous  a  strict  scrutiny  might  prove
at  such  a  juncture,  he  confined  his  judicial  inquiries
to  Villefagna  alone.  As  the  proofs  of  his  guilt  were
manifest,  he  was  condemned  after  a  short  trial,  and
next  morning  he  was  seen  hanging  before  the  door
of  the  house  in  which  he  had  lodged.  Cortes  called
his  troops  together,  and  having  explained  to  them
the  atrocious  purpose  of  the  conspirators,  as  well  as
the  justice  of  the  punishment  inflicted  on  Villefagna,
he  added,  with  an  appearance  of  satisfaction,  that  he
was  entirely  ignorant  with  respect  to  all  the  circum-
stances of  this  dark  transaction,  as  the  traitor,  when
arrested,  had  suddenly  torn  and  swallowed  a  paper
which  probably  contained  an  account  of  it,  and  un-
der the  severest  tortures  possessed  such  constancy
as  to  conceal  the  names  of  his  accomplices.  This
artful  declaration  restored  tranquillity  to  many  a
breast  that  was  throbbing,  while  he  spoke,  with  con
sciousness  of  guilt  and  dread  of  detection ;  and  by
this  prudent  moderation,  Cortes  had  the  advantage
of  having  discovered,  and  of  being  able  to  observe
such  of  his  followers  as  were  disaffected;  while
they,  nattering  themselves  that  their  past  crime
was  unknown,  endeavoured  to  avert  any  suspicion
of  it,  by  redoubling  their  activity  and  zeal  in  his
service.2

*  Cwtes  Relat.  283.  C. B.  Diaz.  c.  146. Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  i.  c  1.

J (I  AMERICA.  [1.5-21.

His  s  Cortes  did  not  allow  them  leisure  to  rumi-

raiiJnVior  n*te  on  what  had  happened  :  and  as  the  most
Jjjjj*  effectual  means  of  preventing  the  return  of  a
tine5.  mutinous  spirit,  he  determined  to  call  forth
his  troops  immediately  to  action.  Fortunately,  a
proper  occasion  for  this  occurred  without  his  seem-
ing to  court  it.  He  received  intelligence  that  the
materials  for  building-  the  brigantines  were  at  length
completely  finished,  and  waited  only  for  a  body  of
Spaniards  to  conduct  them  to  Tezeuco.  The  com-
mand of  this  convoy,  consisting-  of  two  hundred  foot
soldiers,  fifteen  horsemen,  and  two  field-pieces,  he
gave  to  Sandoval,  who.  by  the  vigilance,  activity,
and  courage  which  he  manifested  on  every  occasion,
was  growing  daily  in  his  confidence,  and  in  the  esti-
mation of  his  fellow-soldiers.  The  service  was  no  less
singular  than  important :  the  beams,  the  planks,  the
masts,  the  cordage,  the  sails,  the  iron-work,  and  all
the  infinite  variety  of  articles  requisite  for  the  con-
struction of  thirteen  brigantines,  were  to  be  carried
sixty  miles  over  land,  through  a  mountainous  coun-
try, by  people  who  were  unacquainted  with  the  mi-
nistry of  domestic  animals,  or  the  aid  of  machines  to
facilitate  any  work  of  labour.  The  Tlascalans  fur-
nished eight  thousand  Turnout,  an  inferior  order  of
men  destined  for  servile  tasks,  to  carrv  the  materials
on  their  shoulders,  and  appointed  fifteen  thousand
warriors  to  accompany  and  defend  them.  Sandoval
made  the  disposition  for  their  progress  with  great
propriety,  placing  the  Tamenes  in  the  centre,  one
body  of  warriors  in  the  front,  another  in  the  rear,
w  th  considerable  parties  to  cover  the  flanks.  To
each  of  these  he  joined  some  Spaniards,  not  only  to
assist  them  in  danger,  but  to  accustom  them  to  regu-
laritv  and  subordination.  A  body  so  numerous,  and
so  much  encumbered,  advanced  leisurely,  but  in  ex
lent  order;  and  in  some  places,  where  it  was  con

1521.]  BOOK V.  201

fined  by  the  woods  or  mountains,  the  line  of  march
extended  above  six  miles.  Parties  of  Mexicans  fre-
quently appeared  hovering  around  them  on  the  high
grounds ;  but  perceiving  no  prospect  of  success  in
attacking  an  enemy  continually  on  his  guard,  and
prepared  to  receive  them,  they  did  not  venture  to
molest  him;  and  Sandoval  had  the  glory  of  con-
ducting safely  to  Tezeuco,  a  convoy  on  which  all  the
future  operations  of  his  countrymen  depended/
& .  This  was  followed  by  another  event  of  no

Receives  a  "J  .  .

new  rein-  less  moment.  Four  ships  arrived  at  Vera
Cruz  from  Hispaniola,  with  two  hundred  sol-
diers, eighty  horses,  two  battering  cannon,  and  a  con-
siderable supply  of  ammunition  and  arms.b  Elevated
with  observing  that  all  his  preparatory  schemes,
either  for  recruiting  his  own  army,  or  impairing  the
force  of  the  enemy,  had  now  produced  their  full  effect,
Cortes,  impatient  to  begin  the  siege  in  form,  has-
tened the  launching  of  the  brigan tines.  To  facilitate
this  he  had  employed  a  vast  number  of  Indians,  for
two  months,  in  deepening  the  small  rivulet  which
runs  by  Tezeuco  into  the  lake,  and  in  forming  it  into
a  canal  near  two  miles  in  length  ;c  and  though  the
Mexicans,  aware  of  his  intentions,  as  well  as  of  the
danger  which  threatened  them,  endeavoured  fre-
quently to  interrupt  the  labourers,  or  to  burn  the
brigantines,  the  work  was  at  last  completed.1'  On
the  28th  of  April,  all  the  Spanish  troops,  to-
gantines  gether  with  the  auxiliary  Indians,  were  drawn
launched.  on  ^  kanks  0f  the  canal ;  and  with  extra-
ordinary military  pomp,  rendered  more  solemn  by
the  celebration  of  the  most  sacred  rites  of  religion,
the  brigantines  were  launched.  As  they  fell  down
the  canal  in  order,  father  Olmedo  blessed  them,  and
gave  each  its  name. Every  eye  followed  them  with

a  Cortes  Relat.  260.  C  E. B.  Diaz.  c.  1  10. ^  Cortes  Kelat.  259.  F.  262.  D.
Gotnara  Ctun.  c.  129.  c  See  Note  LXV1.  A  B.  Diaz.  c.  140.

•202  AMERICA.  [1521.

wonder  and  hope,  until  they  entered  the  lake,  when
they  hoisted  their  sails,  and  bore  away  before  the
wind.  A  general  shout  of  joy  was  raised ;  all  ad-
miring that  bold  inventive  genius,  which,  by  means
so  extraordinary  that  their  success  almost  exceeded
belief,  had  acquired  the  command  of  a  fleet,  without
the  aid  of  which  Mexico  would  have  continued  to  set
the  Spanish  power  and  arms  at  defiance.6

Cortes  determined  to  attack  the  city  from

i)

ISpOSl-

tions  for  three  different  quarters  ;  from  Tepeaca  on  the
north  side  of  the  lake,  from  Tacuba  on  the  west,
and  from  Cuyocan  towards  the  south.  Those  towns
were  situated  on  the  principal  causeways  which  led
to  the  capital,  and  intended  for  their  defence.  He
appointed  Sandoval  to  command  in  the  first,  Pedro
de  Alvarado  in  the  second,  and  Christoval  de  Olid  in
the  third ;  allotting  to  each  a  numerous  body  of  In-
dian auxiliaries,  together  with  an  equal  division  of
Spaniards,  who,  by  the  junction  of  the  troops  from
Hispaniola,  amounted  now  to  eighty-six  horsemen,
and  eight  hundred  and  eighteen  foot  soldiers;  of
whom  one  hundred  and  eighteen  were  armed  with
muskets  or  cross-bows.  The  train  of  artillery  con-
sisted of  three  battering  cannon,  and  fifteen  field-
pieces.1  He  reserved  for  himself,  as  the  station  of
greatest  importance  and  danger,  the  conduct  of  the
brigantines,  each  armed  with  one  of  his  small  can-
non, and  manned  with  twenty-five  Spaniards.

As  Alvarado  and  Olid  proceeded  towards

May  10.  •  i i

the  posts  assigned  them,  they  broke  down  the
aqueducts  which  the  ingenuity  of  the  Mexicans  had
erected  for  conveying  water  into  the  capital,  and  by
the  distress  to  which  this  reduced  the  inhabitants,
gave  a  beginning  to  the  calamities  which  they  were
destined  to  suffer.* Alvarado  and Olid  found  the

«  Cortes  Relat.  '266.  C. Herrera,  dec.  ;>.  lib.  i.  c.  5. Goroara  Cron.  t.  129.

1  Cortes  Relat.  266.  C.
I  Ibid.  267.  B.  B.  Diaz.  c.  1  JO. Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  i.  c.  13.

1.521  J  BOOK  V.  203

towns  of  which  they  were  ordered  to  take  possession
deserted  by  their  inhabitants,  who  had  fled  for  safety
to  the  capital,  where  Guatimozin  had  collected  the
chief  force  of  his  empire,  as  there  alone  he  could  hope
to  make  a  successful  stand  against  the  formidable
enemies  who  were  approaching  to  assault  him.
Mexicans  The  first  effort  of  the  Mexicans  was  to  de-
brigCan-the  stroy  the  fleet  of  brigantines,  the  fatal  effects
tines.  of  whose  operations  they  foresaw  and  dreaded.
Though  the  brigantines,  after  all  the  labour  and  merit
of  Cortes  in  forming  them,  were  of  inconsiderable
bulk,  rudely  constructed,  and  manned  chiefly  with
landsmen,  hardly  possessed  of  skill  enough  to  con-
duct them,  they  must  have  been  objects  of  terror  to
a  people  unacquainted  with  any  navigation  but  that
of  their  lake,  and  possessed  of  no  vessel  larger  than
a  canoe.  Necessity,  however,  urged  Guatimozin  to
hazard  the  attack ;  and  hoping  to  supply  by  num-
bers what  he  wanted  in  force,  he  assembled  such  a
multitude  of  canoes  as  covered  the  face  of  the  lake.
They  rowed  on  boldly  to  the  charge,  while  the  bri-
gantines, retarded  by  a  dead  calm,  could  scarcely  ad-
vance to  meet  them. But  as  the  enemy  drew

Repulsed.  .

near,  a  breeze  suddenly  sprung  up  ;  in  a  mo-
ment the  sails  were  spread,  the  brigantines,  with  the
utmost  ease,  broke  through  their  feeble  opponents,
overset  many  canoes,  and  dissipated  the  whole  arma-
ment with  such  slaughter,  as  convinced  the  Mexi-
cans, that  the  progress  of  the  Europeans  in  know-
ledge and  arts  rendered  their  superiority  greater  on
this  new  element,  than  they  had  hitherto  found  it  by
land.h

singular From  that  time  Cortes  remained  master  of
plan  of t]ie  ]ake  an(j  the  brigantines  not  only  pre-

conduct-  '  .  .  ,  i  ci

ing  the served  a  communication between  the  Spa-
niards in  their  different  stations,  though  at

h  Cortes  Relat.  267.  C B.  Diaz.  c.  150. Gomara  Cron.  c.  131. Ilerrera,  dec.  3.
lib.  i.  c.  17.

•204  AMERICA.  [1521.

considerable  distance  from  each  other,  but  were  em-
ployed to  cover  the  causeways  on  each  side,  and
keep  off  the  canoes,  when  they  attempted  to  annoy
the  troops  as  they  advanced  towards  the  city.  Cortes
formed  the  brigantines  in  three  divisions,  appointing
one  to  cover  each  of  the  stations  from  which  an  attack
was  to  be  carried  on  against  the  city,  with  orders  to
second  the  operations  of  the  officer  who  commanded
there.  From  all  the  three  stations  he  pushed  on  the
attack  against  the  city  with  equal  vigour ;  but  in  a
manner  so  very  different  from  the  conduct  of  sieges
in  regular  war,  that  he  himself  seems  afraid  it  would
appear  no  less  improper  than  singular,  to  persons  un-
acquainted with  his  situation.'  Each  morning  his
troops  assaulted  the  barricades  which  the  enemy  had
erected  on  the  causeways,  forced  their  way  over  the
trenches  which  they  had  dug,  and  through  the  canals
where  the  bridges  were  broken  down,  and  endea-
voured to  penetrate  into  the  heart  of  the  city,  in  hopes
of  obtaining  some  decisive  advantage,  which  might
force  the  enemy  to  surrender,  and  terminate  the  war
at  once  ;  but  when  the  obstinate  valour  of  the  Mexi-
cans rendered  the  efforts  of  the  day  ineffectual,  the
Spaniards  retired  in  the  evening  to  their  former  quar-
ters. Thus  their  toil  and  danger  were,  in  some  mea-
sure, continually  renewed ;  the  Mexicans  repairing
in  the  night  what  the  Spaniards  had  destroyed
through  the  day,  and  recovering  the  posts  from  which
they  had  driven  them.  But  necessity  prescribed  this
slow  and  untoward  mode  of  operation.  The  number
of  his  troops  was  so  small,  that  Cortes  durst  not,
with  a  handful  of  men,  attempt  to  make  a  lodgment
in  a  city  where  he  might  be  surrounded  and  annoyed
by  such  a  multitude  of  enemies.  The  remembrance
of  what  he  had  already  suffered  by  the  ill-judged  con-
fidence with  which  he  had  ventured  into  such  a  dan-

'Corto  Relat  270.  I  .

1521.]  BOOK V.  205

gerous  situation,  was  still  fresh  in  his  mind.  The
Spaniards,  exhausted  with  fatigue,  were  unable  to
guard  the  various  posts  whieh  they  daily  gained ;  and
though  their  camp  was  filled  with  Indian  auxiliaries,
they  durst  not  devolve  this  charge  upon  them,  because
they  were  so  little  accustomed  to  discipline,  that  no
confidence  could  be  placed  in  their  vigilance.  Be-
sides this,  Cortes  was  extremely  solicitous  to  pre-
serve the  city  as  much  as  possible  from  being  de-
stroyed, both  because  he  destined  it  to  be  the  capital
of  his  conquests,  and  wished  that  it  might  remain  as
a  monument  of  his  glory.  From  all  these  considera-
tions, he  adhered  obstinately,  for  a  month  after  the
siege  was  opened,  to  the  system  which  he  had  adopt-
ed. The  Mexicans,  in  their  own  defence,  displayed
valour  which  was  hardly  inferior  to  that  with  which
the  Spaniards  attacked  them.  On  land,  on  water,
by  night  and  by  day,  one  furious  conflict  succeeded
to  another.  Several  Spaniards  were  killed,  more
wounded,  and  all  were  ready  to  sink  under  the  toils
of  unintermitting  service,  which  were  rendered  more
intolerable  by  the  injuries  of  the  season,  the  periodi-
cal rains  being  now  set  in  with  their  usual  violence.1"
Endea-  Astonished  and  disconcerted  with  the  length
vours  to an(i  difficulties  of  the  siege,  Cortes  determined

take  the  ~, ■  .

city  by  to  make  one  great  effort  to  get  possession  of
storni"  the  city,  before  he  relinquished  the  plan  which
he  had  hitherto  followed,  and  had  recourse  to  any
other  mode  of  attack.  With  this  view,  he  sent  in-
structions to  Alvaradp  and  Sandoval  to  advance  with
their  divisions  to  a  general  assault,  and  took  the  com-
mand in  person  of  that  posted  on  the  causeway  of
Cuyocan.  Animated  by  his  presence,  and  the
u  y  °*  expectation  of  some  decisive  event,  the  Spa-
niards pushed  forward  with  irresistible  impetuosity.
They  broke  through  one  barricade  after another,

"B.  Diaz.  c.  151.

206  AMERICA.  [1521.

forced  their  way  over  the  ditches  and  canals,  and
having  entered  the  city,  gained  ground  incessantly,
in  spite  of  the  multitude  and  ferocity  of  their  oppo-
nents. Cortes,  though  delighted  with  the  rapidity
of  his  progress,  did  not  forget  that  he  might  still  find
it  necessary  to  retreat ;  and  in  order  to  secure  it,  ap-
pointed Julien  de  Alderete,  a  captain  of  chief  note  in
the  troops  which  he  had  received  from  Hispaniola,
to  fill  up  the  canals  and  gaps  in  the  causeway  as  the
main  body  advanced.  That  officer,  deeming  it  in-
glorious to  be  thus  employed,  while  his  companions
were  in  the  heat  of  action  and  the  career  of  victory,
neglected  the  important  charge  committed  to  him,
and  hurried  on,  inconsiderately,  to  mingle  with  the
combatants.  The  Mexicans,  whose  military  atten-
tion and  skill  were  daily  improving,  no  sooner  ob-
served this,  than  they  carried  an  account  of  it  to
their  monarch.
_ ,  J Guatimozin  instantly  discerned  the  conse-

Repulsed  i  • i

quence  of  the  error  which  the  Spaniards  had
committed,  and,  with  admirable  presence  of  mind,
prepared  to  take  advantage  of  it.  He  commanded
the  troops  posted  in  the  front  to  slacken  their
efforts,  in  order  to  allure  the  Spaniards  to  push
forward,  while  he  dispatched  a  large  body  of  chosen
warriors  through  different  streets,  some  by  land,
and  others  by  water,  towards  the  great  breach  in
the  causeway,  which  had  been  left  open.  On  a  sig-
nal which  he  gave,  the  priests  in  the  principal  temple
struck  the  great  drum  consecrated  to  the  god  of
war.  No  sooner  did  the  Mexicans  hear  its  doleful
solemn  sound,  calculated  to  inspire  them  with  con-
tempt of  death,  and  enthusiastic  ardour,  than  they
rushed  upon  the  enemy  with  frantic  rage.  The
Spaniards,  unable  to  resist  men  urged  on  no  less  by
religious  fury  than  hope  of  success,  began  to  retire,
at  first  leisurely,  and  with  a  good  countenance  ;  but

1521.]  BOOK V.  207

as  the  enemy  pressed  on,  and  their  own  impatience
to  escape  increased,  the  terror  and  confusion  became
so  general,  that  when  they  arrived  at  the  gap  in  the
causeway,  Spaniards  and  Tlascalans,  horsemen  and
infantry,  plunged  in  promiscuously,  while  the  Mexi-
cans rushed  upon  them  fiercely  from  every  side,
their  light  canoes  carrying  them  through  shoals
which  the  brigantines  could  not  approach.  In  vain
did  Cortes  attempt  to  stop  and  rally  his  flying
troops;  fear  rendered  them  regardless  of  his  en-
treaties or  commands.  Finding  all  his  endeavours
to  renew  the  combat  fruitless,  his  next  care  was  to
save  some  of  those  who  had  thrown  themselves  into
the  water ;  but  while  thus  employed,  with  more
attention  to  their  situation  than  to  his  own,  six
Mexican  captains  suddenly  laid  hold  of  him,  and
were  hurrying  him  off  in  triumph  ;  and  though  two
of  his  officers  rescued  him  at  the  expense  of  their
own  lives,  he  received  several  dangerous  wounds
before  he  could  break  loose. Above  sixty

With  con-  .ii-i  11

siderabie  Spaniards  perished  in  the  rout ;  and  what
loss"  rendered  the  disaster  more  afflicting,  forty  of
these  fell  alive  into  the  hands  of  an  enemy  never
known  to  shew  mercy  to  a  captive.1
Those  who  The  approach  of  night,  though  it  delivered
were  taken  fae  dejected  Spaniards  from  the  attacks  of  the
toCtheCgod  enemy,  ushered  in,  what  was  hardly  less  griev-
of  "ar*  ous,  the  noise  of  their  barbarous  triumph,  and
of  the  horrid  festival  with  which  they  celebrated  their
victory.  Every  quarter  of  the  city  was  illuminated  ;
the  great  temple  shone  with  such  peculiar  splendour,
that  the  Spaniards  could  plainly  see  the  people  in
motion,  and  the  priests  busy  in  hastening  the  pre-
parations for  the  death  of  the  prisoners.  Through
the  gloom,  they  fancied  that  they  discerned  their

1  Cortes  Relat.  p.  273. B.  Diaz.  c.  152. Gomara  Cron.  c.  138. Herrera,
dec.  3.  lib.  i.  c.  23.

208  AMERICA.  [1521.

companions  by  the  whiteness  of  their  skins,  as  they
were  stript  naked,  and  compelled  to  dance  before
the  image  of  the  god  to  whom  they  were  to  be
offered.  They  heard  the  shrieks  of  those  who  were
sacrificed,  and  thought  that  they  could  distinguish
each  unhappy  victim,  by  the  well-known  sound  of
his  voice.  Imagination  added  to  what  they  really
saw  or  heard,  and  augmented  its  horror.  The  most
unfeeling  melted  into  tears  of  compassion,  and  the
stoutest  heart  trembled  at  the  dreadful  spectacle
which  they  beheld."1

New  Cortes,  who, besides  all  that  he  felt  in

schemes common with his soldiers,  was oppressed

and  rftorta ,  p  „  .

of  the  with  the  additional  load  of  anxious  reflec-
tions  natural  to  a  general  on  such  an  un-
expected calamity,  could  not,  like  them,  relieve
his  mind  by  giving  vent  to  its  anguish.  He  was
obliged  to  assume  an  air  of  tranquillity,  in  order  to
revive  the  spirit  and  hopes  of  his  followers.  The
juncture,  indeed,  required  an  extraordinary  exertion
of  fortitude.  The  Mexicans,  elated  with  their  vic-
tory, sailed  out  next  morning  to  attack  him  in  his
quarters.  But  they  did  not  rely  on  the  efforts  of
their  own  arms  alone.  They  sent  the  heads  of  the
Spaniards  whom  they  had  sacrificed,  to  the  leading-
men  in  the  adjacent  provinces,  and  assured  them
that  the  god  of  war,  appeased  by  the  blood  of  their
invaders,  which  had  been  shed  so  plentifully  on  his
altars,  had  declared  with  an  audible  voice,  that  in
eight  days  time  those  hated  enemies  should  be  finally
destroyed,  and  peace  and  prosperity  re-established
in  the  empire.

Cortes  de- A  prediction  uttered  with  such  confidence,
serted  by an(j  m  terms  so  void  of  ambiguity,  gained

many  of  ,  ° J °

hiB  Indian  universal  credit among  a  people  prone to
superstition. The zeal of  the provinces,

»•  See  Note  LXVII.

1521.]  BOOK V.  209

which  had  already  declared  against  the  Spaniards,
augmented ;  and  several  which  had  hitherto  re-
mained inactive,  took  arms,  with  enthusiastic  ar-
dour, to  execute  the  decree  of  the  gods.  The  In-
dian auxiliaries  who  had  joined  Cortes,  accustomed
to  venerate  the  same  deities  with  the  Mexicans,
and  to  receive  the  responses  of  their  priests  with
the  same  implicit  faith,  abandoned  the  Spaniards
as  a  race  of  men  devoted  to  certain  destruction.
Even  the  fidelity  of  the  Tlascalans  was  shaken,
and  the  Spanish  troops  were  left  almost  alone  in
their  stations.  Cortes,  finding  that  he  attempted  in
vain  to  dispel  the  superstitious  fears  of  his  con-
federates by  argument,  took  advantage,  from  the  im-
prudence of  those  who  had  framed  the  prophecy,
in  fixing  its  accomplishment  so  near  at  hand,  to  give
a  striking  demonstration  of  its  falsity.  He  sus-
pended all  military  operations  during  the  period
marked  out  by  the  oracle.  Under  cover  of  the
brigantines,  which  kept  the  enemy  at  a  distance,  his
troops  lay  in  safety,  and  the  fatal  term  expired
without  any  disaster."

Many  of  his  allies,  ashamed  of  their  own

He  regains  _ J

their  credulity,  returned  to  their  station.  Other
,p' tribes,  judging  that  the  gods  who  had  now
deceived  the  Mexicans,  had  decreed  finally  to  with-
draw their  protection  from  them,  joined  his  stand-
ard ;  and  such  was  the  levity  of  a  simple  people,
moved  by  every  slight  impression,  that  in  a  short
time  after  such  a  -general  defection  of  his  confe-
derates, Cortes  saw  himself,  if  we  may  believe  his
own  account,  at  the  head  of  a  hundred  and  fiftv
And  adopts  thousand  Indians.  Even  with  such  a  nu-
temrfat-"  merous  army, 'he  found  it  necessary  to  adopt
tack.  a  new  ancl  more  wary  system  of  operation.
Instead  of  renewing  his  attempts  to  become  master

"  B.  Diaz.  c.  153. Gomara  Cron.  c.  138.
VOL. VII.  P

210  AMERICA.  [1521.

of  the  city  at  once,  by  such  bold  but  dangerous
efforts  of  valour  as  he  had  already  tried,  he  made
his  advances  gradually,  and  with  every  possible  pre-
caution against  exposing  his  men  to  any  calamity
similar  to  that  which  they  still  bewailed.  As  the
Spaniards  pushed  forward,  the  Indians  regularly
repaired  the  causeways  behind  them.  As  soon  as
they  got  possession  of  any  part  of  the  town,  the
houses  were  instantly  levelled  with  the  ground.
Day  by  day,  the  Mexicans,  forced  to  retire  as  their
enemies  gained  ground,  were  hemmed  in  within
more  narrow  limits.  Guatimozin,  though  unable  to
stop  the  career  of  the  enemy,  continued  to  defend
his  capital  with  obstinate  resolution,  and  disputed
every  inch  of  ground.  The  Spaniards  not  only
varied  their  mode  of  attack,  but,  by  orders  of  Cor-
tes, changed  the  weapons  with  which  they  fought.
They  were  again  armed  with  the  long  Chinantlan
spears,  which  they  had  employed  with  such  success
against  Narvaez ;  and,  by  the  firm  array  in  which
this  enabled  them  to  range  themselves,  they  re-
pelled, with  little  danger,  the  loose  assault  of  the
Mexicans ;  incredible  numbers  of  them  fell  in  the
conflicts  which  they  renewed  every  day.°  While
war  wasted  without,  famine  began  to  consume  them
within,  the  city.  The  Spanish  brigantines,  having
the  entire  command  of  the  lake,  rendered  it  almost
impossible  to  convey  to  the  besieged  any  supply  of
provisions  by  water.  The  immense  number  of  his
Indian  auxiliaries  enabled  Cortes  to  shut  up  the
avenues  to  the  city  by  land.  The  stores  which
Guatimozin  had  laid  up  were  exhausted  by  the  mul-
titudes which  had  crowded  into  the  capital  to  de-
fend their  sovereign  and  the  temples  of  their  gods.
Not  only  the  people,  but  persons  of  the  highest
rank, felt  the  utmost  distresses  of  famine. What

•  Cortes  Rclat.  p.  275.  C  276.  F. B.  Diaz.  c.  153.

1521.]  BOOK V.  211

they  suffered,  brought  on  infectious  and  mortal  dis-
tempers, the  last  calamity  that  visits  besieged  cities,
and  which  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  woes.p
Courage But,  under  the  pressure  of  so  many  and
and  con- sucn  various  evils,  the  spirit  of  Guatimozin

stancy  of  *

Guatimo-  remained  firm  and  unsubdued.  He  rejected,
with  scorn,  every  overture  of  peace  from
Cortes ;  and,  disdaining  the  idea  of  submitting  to
the  oppressors  of  his  country,  determined  not  to
survive  its  ruin.  The  Spaniards  continued  their
progress. At  length  all  the  three  divisions

July  27. l< °  , .  .  °  .

penetrated  into  the  great  scpiare  in  the  centre
of  the  city,  and  made  a  secure  lodgment  there.
Three-fourths  of  the  city  were  now  reduced,  and
laid  in  ruins.  The  remaining  quarter  was  so  closely
pressed,  that  it  could  not  long  withstand  assailants,
who  attacked  it  from  their  new  station  with  su-
perior advantage,  and  more  assured  expectation  of
success.  The  Mexican  nobles,  solicitous  to  save
the  life  of  a  monarch  whom  they  revered,  prevailed
on  Guatimozin  to  retire  from  a  place  where  resis-
tance was  now  vain,  that  he  might  rouse  the  more
distant  provinces  of  the  empire  to  arms,  and  main-
tain there  a  more  successful  struggle  with  the  public
enemy.  In  order  to  facilitate  the  execution  of  this
measure,  they  endeavoured  to  amuse  Cortes  with
overtures  of  submission,  that,  while  his  attention
was  employed  in  adjusting  the  articles  of  pacifica-
tion, Guatimozin  might  escape  unperceived.  But
they  made  this  attempt  upon  a  leader  of  greater
sagacity  and  discernment  than  to  be  deceived  by
their  arts.  Cortes,  suspecting  their  intention,  and
aware  of  what  moment  it  was  to  defeat  it,  appointed
Sandoval,  the  officer  on  whose  vigilance  he  could
most  perfectly  rely,  to  take  the  command  of  the
brigantines,  with  strict  injunctions  to  watch  every

p  Cortes  Relat.  276.  E.  277.  F. B.  Diaz.  155. Gomara  Cron.  c.  141.

p2

212  AMERICA.  [1521.

motion  of  the  enemy.  Sandoval,  attentive  to  the
charge,  observing  some  large  canoes  crowded  with
people  rowing  across  the  lake  with  extraordinary-
rapidity,  instantly  gave  the  signal  to  chase.  Garcia
Holguin,  who  commanded  the  swiftest-sailing  bri-
gantine,  soon  overtook  them,  and  was  preparing
to  fire  on  the  foremost  canoe,  which  seemed  to
carry  some  person  whom  all  the  rest  followed  and
ii.  .taken  obeyed.  At  once  the  rowers  dropped  their
prisoner.  0ars,  and  all  on  board,  throwing  down  their
arms,  conjured  him  with  cries  and  tears  to  forbear,
as  the  emperor  was  there.  Holguin  eagerly  seized
his  prize;  and  Guatimozin,  with  a  dignified  com-
posure, gave  himself  up  into  his  hands,  requesting
only  that  no  insult  might  be  offered  to  the  empress
or  his  children.  When  conducted  to  Cortes,  he
appeared  neither  with  the  sullen  fierceness  of  a
barbarian,  nor  with  the  dejection  of  a  supplicant.
"  I  have  done,"  said  he,  addressing  himself  to  the
Spanish  general,  "  what  became  a  monarch.  I  have
defended  my  people  to  the  last  extremity.  Nothing
now  remains  but  to  die.  Take  this  dagger,"  laying
his  hand  on  one  which  Cortes  wore,  "  plant  it  in
my  breast,  and  put  an  end  to  a  life  which  can  no
longer  be  of  use."q

Aug.  is.  As  soon  as  the  fate  of  their  sovereign  was
The  city,  known,  the  resistance  of  the  Mexicans  ceased  ;
and  Cortes  took  possession  of  that  small  part  of  the
capital  which  yet  remained  undestroyed.  Thus  ter-
minated the  siege  of  Mexico,  the  most  memorable
event  in  the  conquest  of  America.  It  continued
seventy-five  days,  hardly  one  of  which  passed  with-
out some  extraordinary  effort  of  one  party  in  the  at-
tack, or  of  the  other  in  the  defence  of  a  city,  on  the
fate  of  which  both  knew  that  the  fortune  of  the  em-

i  Cortes  Relat.  279. B.  Diaz,  c.  156. Gomara  Cron.  C.  142. Herrera,  dec.  3.
i  I),  ii.  c.  7.

?521.]  BOOK  V.  213

pire  depended.  As  the  struggle  here  was  most  obsti-
nate, it  was  likewise  more  equal,  than  any  between
the  inhabitants  of  the  Old  and  New  worlds.  The
great  abilities  of  Guatimozin,  the  number  of  his
troops,  the  peculiar  situation  of  his  capital,  so  far
counterbalanced  the  superiority  of  the  Spaniards  in
arms  and  discipline,  that  they  must  have  relinquished
the  enterprise,  if  they  had  trusted  for  success  to  them-
selves alone.  But  Mexico  was  overturned  by  the
jealousy  of  neighbours  who  dreaded  its  power,  and
by  the  revolt  of  subjects  impatient  to  shake  off  its
yoke.  By  their  effectual  aid,  Cortes  was  enabled  to
accomplish  what,  without  such  support,  he  would
hardly  have  ventured  to  attempt.  How  much  so-
ever this  account  of  the  reduction  of  Mexico  may  de-
tract, on  the  one  hand,  from  the  marvellous  relations
of  some  Spanish  writers,  by  ascribing  that  to  simple
and  obvious  causes  which  they  attribute  to  the  ro-
mantic valour  of  their  countrymen,  it  adds,  on  the
other,  to  the  merit  and  abilities  of  Cortes,  who,  under
every  disadvantage,  acquired  such  an  ascendant  over
unknown  nations,  as  to  render  them  instruments  to-
wards carrying  his  schemes  into  execution/
Smaiiness  The  exultation  of  the  Spaniards,  on  accom-
boot'6  and  plishing  this  arduous  enterprise,  was  at  first
disap- excessive. But  this  was  quickly  damped  by

pointment A,  it  •  p ,  i  •

of  the  the  cruel  disappointment  ol  those  sanguine
Spaniards.  h0peS)  WQicn  na(j  animated  them  amidst  so

many  hardships  and  dangers.  Instead  of  the  inex-
haustible wealth  which  they  expected  from  becoming
masters  of  Montezuma's  treasures,  and  the  ornaments
of  so  many  temples,  their  rapaciousness  could  only
collect  an  inconsiderable  booty  amidst  ruins  and  de-
solation.8 Guatimozin,  aware  of  his  impending  fate,

*  See  Note  LXVIII.
•  The gold  and  silver,  according  to Cortes, amounted  only  to  120,000  pesos,
(Relat.  283.  A.)  a  sum  much  inferior  to  that  which  the  Spaniards  had  formerly  di-
vided in  Mexico.

214  AMERICA.  [1521.

had  ordered  what  remained  of  the  riches  amassed
by  his  ancestors,  to  be  thrown  into  the  lake.  The
Indian  auxiliaries,  while  the  Spaniards  were  engaged
in  conflict  with  the  enemy,  had  carried  off  the  most
valuable  part  of  the  spoil.  The  sum  to  be  divided
among  the  conquerors  was  so  small,  that  many  of
them  disdained  to  accept  of  the  pittance  which  fell
to  their  share,  and  all  murmured  and  exclaimed;
some  against  Cortes  and  his  confidants,  whom  they
suspected  of  having  secretly  appropriated  to  their
own  use  a  large  portion  of  the  riches  which  should
have  been  brought  into  the  common  stock ;  others,
against  Guatimozin,  whom  they  accused  of  obstinacy,
in  refusing  to  discover  the  place  where  he  had  hidden
his  treasure.

Arguments,  entreaties,  and  promises  were
mozin  tor-  employed  in  order  to  soothe  them,  but  with
so  little  effect,  that  Cortes,  from  solicitude  to
check  this  growing  spirit  of  discontent,  gave  way  to
a  deed  which  stains  the  glory  of  all  his  great  actions.
Without  regarding  the  former  dignity  of  Guatimozin,
or  feeling  any  reverence  for  those  virtues  which  he
had  displayed,  he  subjected  the  unhappy  monarch,
together  with  his  chief  favourite,  to  torture,  in  order
to  force  from  them  a  discovery  of  the  royal  treasures,
which  it  was  supposed  they  had  concealed.  Guati-
mozin bore  whatever  the  refined  cruelty  of  his  tor-
mentors could  inflict,  with  the  invincible  fortitude  of
an  American  warrior.  His  fellow-sufferer,  overcome
by  the  violence  of  the  anguish,  turned  a  dejected  eye
towards  his  master,  which  seemed  to  implore  his  per-
mission to  reveal  all  that  he  knew.  But  the  high-
spirited  prince,  darting  on  him  a  look  of  authority
mingled  with  scorn,  checked  his  weakness  by  asking,
"  Am  I  now  reposing  on  a  bed  of  flowers  ?"  Over-
awed by  the  reproach,  the  favourite  persevered  in
his  dutiful  silence,  and  expired. Cortes,  ashamed  of

1521.]  BOOK  V.  215

a  scene  so  horrid,  rescued  the  royal  victim  from  the
hands  of  his  torturers,  and  prolonged  a  life  reserved
for  new  indignities  and  sufferings.1
41|  t]e  The  fate  of  the  capital,  as  both  parties  had

provinces  foreseen,  decided  that  of  the  empire. '  The
pire  sub"  provinces  submitted  one  after  another  to  the
m,t'  conquerors. Small  detachments  of  Spaniards

marching  through  them  without  interruption,  pene-
trated in  different  quarters  to  the  great  Southern
ocean,  which,  according  to  the  ideas  of  Columbus,
they  imagined  would  open  a  short  as  well  as  easy
passage  to  the  East  Indies,  and  secure  to  the  crown
of  Castile  all  the  envied  wealth  of  those  fertile  re-
Cortes  gions  ;u  and  the  active  mind  of  Cortes  began
forms already  to  form  schemes  for  attempting  this

schemes  of  .  J  l

new  disco-  important  discovery.'1

Sh  are  He  did  not  know,  that  during  the  progress
byULge?  °f  ^IS  victorious  arms  in  Mexico,  the  very
lan-  scheme  of  which  he  began  to  form  some  idea,

had  been  undertaken  and  accomplished.  As  this  is
one  of  the  most  splendid  events  in  the  history  of  the
Spanish  discoveries,  and  has  been  productive  of
effects  peculiarly  interesting  to  those  extensive  pro-
vinces which  Cortes  had  now  subjected  to  the  crown
of  Castile,  the  account  of  its  rise  and  progress  merits
a  particular  detail.

Ferdinand  Magalhaens,  or  Magellan,  a  Portuguese
gentleman  of  honourable  birth,  having  served  several
years  in  the  East  Indies,  with  distinguished  valour,
under  the  famous  Albuquerque,  demanded  the  re-
compense which  he  thought  due  to  his  services,  with
the  boldness  natural  to  a  high-spirited  soldier.  But
as  his  general  would  not  grant  his  suit,  and  he  ex-
pected greater  justice  from  his  sovereign,  whom  he

'  B.  Diaz,  c.  157. Gomara  Cron.  c.  146. Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  ii.  c.  8. Tor-
quem.  Mon.  Ind.  i.  574.

«  Cortes  Relat.  280.  D.  &c. B.  Diaz,  c.  157.
w  Herrera.  dec.  3.  lib.  ii.  c.  17. Gomara  Cron.  c.  149.

216  AMERICA.  [15-21.

knew  to  be  a  good  judge  and  a  generous  rewarder  of
merit,  lie  quitted India  abruptly,  and returned  to
Lisbon. In  order  to  induce  Emanuel  to  listen  more
favourably  to  his  claim,  he  not  only  stated  his  past
services,  but  offered  to  add  to  them  bv  conducting
his  countrymen  to the  Molucca  or  Spice  Islands,
by  holding  a  westerly  course  ; which  he  contended
would  be  both  shorter  and  less  hazardous  than  that
which  the  Portuguese  now  followed  by  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope,  through  the  immense  extent  of  the  East-
ern ocean. This  was  the  original  and  favourite  pro-
ject of  Columbus,  and  Magellan  founded  his  hopes  of
success  on  the  ideas  of  that  great  navigator,  confirmed
by  many  observations,  the  result  of  his  own  naval
experience,  as  well  as  that  of  his  countrymen,  in
their  intercourse  with  the East. But  though  the
Portuguese  monarchs  had  the  merit  of  having  first
awakened  and  encouraged  the  spirit  of  discovery  in
that  age,  it  was  their  destiny,  in  the  course  of  a  few
years,  to  reject  two  grand  schemes  fur  this  purpose,
the  execution  of  which  would  have  been  attended
with  a  great  accession  of  glory  to  themselves,  and  of
power  to  their  kingdom. In  consequence  of  some  ill-
founded  prejudice  against  Magellan,  or  of  some  dark
intrigue  which  contemporary  historians  have  not  ex-
plained, Emanuel  would  neither  bestow  the  recom-
pense which  he  claimed,  nor  approve  of  the  scheme
which  he  proposed ;  and  dismissed  him  with  a  dis-
dainful coldness  intolerable  to  a  man  conscious  of
what  he  deserved,  and  animated  with  the  sanguine
hopes  of  success  peculiar  to  those  who  are  capable
of  forming  or  of  conducting  new  and  great  under-
takings. In  a  transport  of  resentment,  Magellan  for-
mally renounced  his  allegiance  to  an  ungrate-
ful master,  and  fled  to  the  court  of  Castile,
where  he  expected  that  his  talents  would  be  more
justly  estimated. He  endeavoured  to recommend

1.521.]  BOOK V.  217

himself  by  offering  to  execute,  under  the  patronage
of  Spain,  that  scheme,  which  he  had  laid  before  the
court  of  Portugal,  the  accomplishment  of  which,  he
knew,  would  wound  the  monarch  against  whom  he
was  exasperated  in  the  most  tender  part.  In  order
to  establish  the  justness  of  his  theory,  he  produced
the  same  arguments  which  he  had  employed  at  Lis-
bon ;  acknowledging,  at  the  same  time,  that  the  un-
dertaking was  both  arduous  and  expensive,  as  it  could
not  be  attempted  but  with  a  squadron  of  considera-
ble force,  and  victualled  for  at  least  two  years.  For-
tunately, he  applied  to  a  minister  who  was  not  apt
to  be  deterred,  either  by  the  boldness  of  a  design,  or
the  expense  of  carrying  it  into  execution.  Cardinal
Ximenes,  who  at  that  time  directed  the  affairs  of
Spain,  discerning  at  once  what  an  increase  of  wealth
and  glory  would  accrue  to  his  country  by  the  suc-
cess of  Magellan's  proposal,  listened  to  it  with  a  most
favourable  ear.  Charles  V.,  on  his  arrival  in  his  Spa-
nish dominions,  entered  into  the  measure  with  no
less  ardour,  and  orders  were  issued  for  equipping  a
proper  squadron  at  the  public  charge,  of  which  the
command  was  given  to  Magellan,  whom  the  king
honoured  with  the  habit  of  St.  Jago  and  the  title  of
Captain- general/

HUvoy-  On  the  10th  of  August,  1519,  Magellan
ase-  sailed  from  Seville  with  five  ships,  which,
according  to  the  ideas  of  the  age,  were  deemed  to
be  of  considerable  force,  though  the  burden  of  the
largest  did  not  exceed  one  hundred  and  twenty  tons.
The  crews  of  the  whole  amounted  to  two  hundred
and  thirty-four  men,  among  whom  were  some  of  the
most  skilful  pilots  in  Spain,  and  several  Portuguese
sailors, in  whose experience, as  more  extensive,

x  Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  ii.  c.  19.  lib.  ir.  c.  9. Goraara  Hist.  c.  91. Dalrjraple'*
Collect,  of  Voyages  to  the  South  Pacific  Ocean,  vol.  i.  p.  1,  &c.

218  AMERICA.  [1521.

Magellan placed still greater confidence. After
touching  at  the  Canaries, he  stood  directly  south
towards  the  equinoctial  line  along  the  coast  of  Ame-
rica, but  was  so  long  retarded  by  tedious  calms,  and
spent  so  much  time  in  searching  every  bay  and  inlet
for  that  communication  with  the Southern  ocean,
which  he  wished  to  discover,  that  he  did  not  reach
1520# the  river  De  la  Plata  till  the  12th  of  January.
That  spacious  opening  through  which  its  vast
body  of  water  pours  into  the  Atlantic,  allured  him
to  enter;  but  after  sailing  up  it  for  some  days,  he
concluded,  from-  the  shallowness  of  the  stream,  and
the  freshness  of  the  water,  that  the  wished-for  strait
was  not  situated  there, and  continued  his  course
towards  the  south. On  the  31st  of  March  he  arrived
in  the  port  of  St.  Julian,  about  fortv-eidit  degrees
south  of  the  line,  where  he  resolved  to  winter. In
this  uncomfortable  station  he  lost  one  of  his  squa-
dron, and  the  Spaniards  suffered  so  much  from  the
excessive  rigour  of  the  climate,  that  the  crews  of
three  of  his  ships,  headed  by  their  officers,  rose  in
open  mutiny, and  insisted  on  relinquishing  the  vi-
sionary project  of  a  desperate  adventurer,  and  re-
turning directly  to  Spain. This  dangerous  insur-
rection Magellan  suppressed,  by  an  effort  of  courage
no  less  prompt  than  intrepid,  and  inflicted  exem-
plary punishment  on  the ringleaders. With the
remainder  of  his  followers,  overawed  but  not  recon-
ciled to  his  scheme,  he  continued  his  voyage  towards
the  south,  and  at  length  discovered,  near  the  fifty-
third  degree  of  latitude,  the  mouth  of  a  strait,  into
which  he  entered,  notwithstanding  the  murmurs  and
remonstrances  of  the  people  under  his  command.
After  sailing  twenty  days  in  that  winding,  dangerous
channel,  to  which  he  gave  his  own  name,  and  where
one  of  his  ships  deserted  him,  the  great  Southern

1521.]  BOOK V.  219

ocean  opened  to  his  view,  and  with  tears  of  joy
he  returned  thanks  to  Heaven  for  having  thus  far
crowned  his  endeavours  with  success/

But  he  was  still  at  a  greater  distance  than  he  ima-
gined from  the  object  of  his  wishes.  He  sailed
during  three  months  and  twenty  days  in  a  uniform
direction  towards  the  north-west,  without  discover-
ing land.  In  this  voyage,  the  longest  that  had  ever
been  made  in  the  unbounded  ocean,  he  suffered
incredible  distress.  His  stock  of  provisions  was
almost  exhausted,  the  water  became  putrid,  the  men
were  reduced  to  the  shortest  allowance  with  which
it  was  possible  to  sustain  life,  and  the  scurvy,  the
most  dreadful  of  all  the  maladies  with  which  sea-
faring people  are  afflicted,  began  to  spread  among
the  crew.  One  circumstance  alone  afforded  them
some  consolation;  they  enjoyed  an  uninterrupted
course  of  fair  weather,  with  such  favourable  winds,
that  Magellan  bestowed  on  that  ocean  the  name  of
Pacific,  which  it  still  retains.  When  reduced  to
such  extremity  that  they  must  have  sunk  under
their  sufferings,  they  fell  in  with  a  cluster  of

March  6.  o '  J

small  but  fertile  islands,  which  afforded  them
refreshments  in  such  abundance,  that  their  health
was  soon  re-established. From  these  isles,  which  he
called  De  los  Ladrones,  he  proceeded  on  his  voyage,
and  soon  made  a  more  important  discovery  of  the
islands  now  known  by  the  name  of  the  Philippines.
In  one  of  these  he  got  into  an  unfortunate  quarrel
with  the  natives,  who  attacked  him  with  a  nume-
rous body  of  troops  well  armed  ;  and  while  he  fought
at  the  head  of  his  men  with  his  usual  valour,  he
fell  by  the  hands  of  those  barbarians,  toge-
ther with  several  of  his  principal  officers.
The  expedition  was  prosecuted  under  other  com-

y  Herrera,  dec.  2.  lib.  iv.  c.  10.  lib.  ix.  c.  10,  &c. Goniara  Hist.  c.  92. Piga-
fetta  Viaggio  ap.  Ramus,  ii.  p.  352,  &c.

220  AMERICA.  [15=21'

manders.  After  visiting  many  of  the  smaller  isles
scattered  in  the  eastern  part  of  the  Indian
ocean,  they  touched  at  the  great  island  of
Borneo,  and  at  length  landed  in  Tidore,  one  of  the
Moluccas,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  Portuguese,
■who  could  not  comprehend  how  the  Spaniards,  by
.holding  a  westerly  course,  had  arrived  at  that  se-
questered seat  of  their  most  valuable  commerce,
which  they  themselves  had  discovered  by  sailing  in
an  opposite  direction.  There,  and  in  the  adjacent
isles,  the  Spaniards  found  a  people  acquainted  with
the  benefits  of  extensive  trade,  and  willing  to  open
an  intercourse  with  a  new  nation.  They  took  in  a
cargo  of  the  precious  spices,  which  are  the  distin-
guished production  of  these  islands  ;  and  with  that,
as  well  as  with  specimens  of  the  rich  commodities
yielded  by  the  other  countries  which  they  had  vi-
sited, the  Victory,  which,  of  the  two  ships  that
remained  of  the  squadron,  was  most  fit  for  a  long
1522.  voyage,  set  sail  for  Europe,  under  the  com-
Jan-  mand  of  Juan  Sebastian  del  Cano.  He  fol-
lowed the  course  of  the  Portuguese,  by  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope,  and  after  many  disasters  and  sufferings,
he  arrived  at  St.  Lucar  on  the  7th  of  September,
1522,  having  sailed  round  the  globe  in  the  space  of
three  years  and  twenty-eight  days.z

Though  an  untimely  fate  deprived  Magellan  of
the  satisfaction  of  accomplishing  this  great  under-
taking, his  contemporaries,  just  to  his  memory  and
talents,  ascribed  to  him  not  only  the  honour  of  having
formed  the  plan,  but  of  having  surmounted  almost
every  obstacle  to  the  completion  of  it ;  and  in  the
present  age  his  name  is  still  ranked  among  the
highest  in  the  roll  of  eminent  and  successful  navi-
gators. The  naval  glory  of  Spain  now  eclipsed  that

1  Hcrrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  i.  c.  S.  '.'•  lib.  iv.  c.  1. Gumara  Cron.  c.  93,  &c. Piga-
fctla  ap.  Ramus,  ii.  p.  361|  &c.

1522.]  BOOK V.  221

of  every  other  nation ;  and  by  a  singular  felicity  she
had  the  merit,  in  the  course  of  a  few  years,  of  disco-
vering a  new  continent  almost  as  large  as  that  part
of  the  earth  which  was  formerly  known,  and  of
ascertaining  by  experience  the  form  and  extent  of
the  whole  of  the  terraqueous  globe.

The  Spaniards  were  not  satisfied  with  the  glory
of  having first  encompassed the  earth ; they  ex-
pected to  derive  great  commercial  advantages  from
this  new  and  boldest  eifort  of  their  maritime  skill.
The  men  of  science  among  them  contended,  that
the  spice  islands,  and  several  of  the  richest  coun-
tries in  the  East,  were  so  situated  as  to  belong  of
right  to  the  crown  of  Castile,  in  consequence  of  the
partition  made  by  Alexander  VI. The  merchants,
without  attending  to  this  discussion,  engaged  eagerly
in  that  lucrative  and  alluring  commerce,  which  was
now  open  to  them. The  Portuguese, alarmed  at
the  intrusion  of  such  formidable  rivals,  remonstrated
and  negotiated  in  Europe,  while  in  Asia  they  ob-
structed the  trade  of  the  Spaniards  by  force  of  arms.
Charles  V.,  not  sufficiently  instructed  with  respect
to  the  importance  of  this  valuable  branch  of  com-
merce, or distracted by the multiplicity of  his
schemes  and  operations,  did  not  afford  his  subjects
proper  protection. At  last, the  low  state  of  his
finances,  exhausted by  the  efforts  of  his  arms  in
every  part  of  Europe,  together  with  the  dread  of
adding  a  new  war  with  Portugal  to  those  in  which
he  was  already  engaged,  induced  him  to  make  over
his  claim  of  the Moluccas  to  the  Portuguese  for
three  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  ducats. He  re-
served, however,  to  the  crown  of  Castile  the  right
of  reviving its  pretensions  on repayment  of  that
sum  ;  but  other  objects  engrossed  his  attention  and
that  of  his  successors  ;  and  Spain  was  finally  ex-

222  YMKUIC  A.  [1522.

eluded  from  a  branch  of  commerce  in  which  it  was
engaging  with  sanguine  expectations  of  profit."

Though  the  trade  with  the  Moluccas  was  relin-
quished, the  voyage  of  Magellan  was  followed  by-
commercial  effects  of  great  moment  to  Spain.  Philip
II.,  in  the  year  1564j  reduced  those  islands  which
he  discovered  in  the  Eastern  ocean  to  subjection,
and  established  settlements  there;  between  which
and  the  kingdom  of  New  Spain,  a  regular  inter-
course, the  nature  of  which  shall  be  explained  in  its
proper  place,  is  still  carried  on.  1  return  now  to  the
transactions  in  New  Spain.

An  order  At  the  time  that  Cortes  was  acquiring  such
sedePer  extensive  territories  for  his  native  country,
Cones,  an(j  preparing  the  way  for  future  conquests,
it  was  his  singular  fate  not  only  to  be  destitute  of
any  commission  or  authority  from  the  sovereign
whom  he  was  serving  with  such  successful  zeal,  but
to  be  regarded  as  an  undutiful  and  seditious  subject.
By  the  influence  of  Fonseca,  bishop  of  Burgos,  his
conduct  in  assuming  the  government  of  New  Spain
was  declared  to  be  an  irregular  usurpation,  in  con-
tempt of  the  royal  authority ;  and  Christoval  de
Tapia  received  a  commission,  empowering  him  to
supersede  Cortes,  to  seize  his  person,  to  confiscate
his  effects,  to  make  a  strict  scrutiny  into  his  pro-
ceedings, and  to  transmit  the  result  of  all  the  in-
quiries carried  on  in  New  Spain  to  the  council  of
the  Indies,  of  which  the  bishop  of  Burgos  was  pre-
sident. A  few  weeks  after  the  reduction  of  Mexico,
Tapia  landed  at  Vera  Cruz  with  the  royal  mandate
to  strip  its  conqueror  of  his  power,  and  treat  him  as
a  criminal.  But  Fonseca  had  chosen  a  very  impro-
per instrument  to  wreak  his  vengeance  on  Cortes.
Tapia  had  neither  the  reputation  nor  the  talents  that

*  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  vi.  c.  b,  &c.  dec.  4,  lib.  v.  c.  7,  &c.

1522.]  BOOK  V.  2'23

suited  the  high  command  to  which  he  was  appointed.
which  he  Cortes,  while  he  publicly  expressed  the  most
dudes,  respectful  veneration  for  the  emperor's  autho-
rity, secretly  took  measures  to  defeat  the  effect  of
his  commission ;  and  having  involved  Tapia  and  his
followers  in  a  multiplicity  of  negotiations  and  con-
ferences, in  which  he  sometimes  had  recourse  to
threats,  but  more  frequently  employed  bribes  and
promises,  he  at  length  prevailed  upon  that  weak
man  to  abandon  a  province  which  he  was  unworthy
of  governing.5

Applies  But  notwithstanding  the  fortunate  dexte-
Zcourt,  rity  with  which  he  had  eluded  this  danger,
May  15.  Cortes  was  so  sensible  of  the  precarious  te-
nure by  which  he  held  his  power,  that  he  dispatched
deputies  to  Spain,  with  a  pompous  account  of  the
success  of  his  arms,  with  farther  specimens  of  the
productions  of  the  country,  and  with  rich  presents
to  the  emperor,  as  the  earnest  of  future  contribu-
tions from  his  new  conquests ;  requesting,  in  recom-
pense for  all  his  services,  the  approbation  of  his
proceedings,  and  that  he  might  be  intrusted  with  the
government  of  those  dominions,  which  his  conduct,
and  the  valour  of  his  followers,  had  added  to  the
crown  of  Castile.  The  juncture  in  which  his  depu-
ties reached  the  court  was  favourable.  The  internal
commotions  in  Spain,  which  had  disquieted  the  be-
ginning of  Charles's  reign,  were  just  appeased.0  The
ministers  had  leisure  to  turn  their  attention  towards
foreign  affairs.  The  account  of  Cortes's  victories
rilled  his  countrymen  with  admiration.  The  extent
and  value  of  his  conquests  became  the  object  of  vast
and  interesting  hopes.  Whatever  stain  he  might
have  contracted,  by  the  irregularity  of  the  steps
which  he  took  in  order  to  attain  power,  was  so  fully

b  Herrern,  dec.  3.  lib.  iii.  c.  16. dec.  iv.  c. 1. Cortes  Relat.  281.  E. B.  Diai.
o.  158.  c  Hist,  of  Charles  V.  vol.  ii.  b.  iii.

*224  AMERICA.  [1522.

effaced  by  the  splendour  and  merit  of  the  great  ac-
tions which  this  had  enabled  him  to  perform,  that
every  heart  revolted  at  the  thought  of  inflicting  any
censure  on  a  man,  whose  services  entitled  him  to
the  highest  marks  of  distinction.  The  public  voice
declared  warmly  in  favour  of  his  pretensions  ;  and
Charles,  arriving  in  Spain  about  this  time,  adopted
the  sentiments  of  his  subjects  with  a  youthful  ardour.
Notwithstanding  the  claims  of  Velasquez,  and  the
And  is  ap-  partial  representations  of  the  bishop  of  Bur-
captain-  gos,  the  emperor  appointed  Cortes  captain-
fnd'gover- &eneral  and  governor  of  New  Spain,  judging
™*°(  that  no  person  was  so  capable  of  maintaining
Spain.  the  royal  authority,  or  of  establishing  good
order  both  among  his  Spanish  and  Indian  subjects,
as  the  victorious  leader  whom  the  former  had  Ions:
been  accustomed  to  obey,  and  the  latter  had  been
taught  to  fear  and  to  respect/

His  Even  before  his  jurisdiction  received  this

schemes Wal  sanction,  Cortes ventured  to  exercise

and  ar-  °

range-  all  the  powers  of  a  governor,  and,  by  vari-
ous arrangements,  endeavoured  to  render  his
conquests  a  secure  and  beneficial  acquisition  to  his
country.  He  determined  to  establish  the  seat  of  o-o-
vernment  in  its  ancient  station,  and  to  raise  Mexico
again  from  its  ruins  ;  and  having  conceived  high  ideas
concerning  the  future  grandeur  of  the  state  of  which
he  was  laying  the  foundation,  he  began  to  rebuild
its  capital  on  a  plan  which  hath  gradually  formed
the  most  magnificent  city  in  the  New  World.  At
the  same  time,  he  employed  skilful  persons  to  search
for  mines  in  different  parts  of  the  country,  and
opened  some  which  were  found  to  be  richer  than
any  which  the  Spaniards  had  hitherto  discovered
in  America.  He  detached  his  principal  officers  into
the  remote  provinces,  and  encouraged  them  to  set-

d  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  3. Goniaia  Crou.  c.  164,  165. B.  Diaz,  l(i?.  168.

1522.]  BOOK  V.  225

tie  there,  not  only  by  bestowing  upon  them  large
tracts  of  land,  but  by  granting  them  the  same  do-
minion over  the  Indians,  and  the  same  right  to  their
service,  which  the  Spaniards  had  assumed  in  the
islands.

insurrec-  ^  was  110^'  however,  without  difficulty,
th^Mxi  ^iat  ^ie  Mexican  empire  could  be  entirely
cans,  and  reduced  into  the  form  of  a  Spanish  colony.
IiieSpya-0  Enraged  and  rendered  desperate  by  oppres-
mards.  s[on^  the  natives  often  forgot  the  superiority
of  their  enemies,  and  ran  to  arms  in  defence  of  their
liberties.  In  every  contest,  however,  the  European
valour  and  discipline  prevailed.  But  fatally  for  the
honour  of  their  country,  the  Spaniards  sullied  the
glory  redounding  from  these  repeated  victories  by
their  mode  of  treating  the  vanquished  people.  After
taking  Guatimozin,  and  becoming  masters  of  his
capital,  they  supposed  that  the  king  of  Castile  en-
tered on  possession  of  all  the  rights  of  the  captive
monarch,  and  affected  to  consider  every  effort  of  the
Mexicans  to  assert  their  own  independence,  as  the
rebellion  of  vassals  against  their  sovereign,  or  the
mutiny  of  slaves  against  their  master.  Under  the
sanction  ofjhose  ill-founded  maxims,  they  violated
every  right  that  should  be  held  sacred  between  hos-
tile nations.  After  each  insurrection,  they  reduced
the  common  people,  in  the  provinces  which  they
subdued,  to  the  most  humiliating  of  all  conditions,
that  of  personal  servitude.  Their  chiefs,  supposed
to  be  more  criminal,  were  punished  with  greater  se-
verity, and  put  to  death  in  the  most  ignominious  or
the  most  excruciating  mode,  that  the  insolence  or
the  cruelty  of  their  conquerors  could  devise.  In
almost  every  district  of  the  Mexican  empire,  the
progress  of  the  Spanish  arms  is  marked  with  blood,
and  with  deeds  so  atrocious,  as  disgrace  the  enter-

VOL.  VII.  Q

226  AMERICA.  [1522

prising  valour  that  conducted  them  to  success. In
the  country  of  Panuco,  sixty  caziques or  leaders,
and  four  hundred  nobles,  were  burnt  at  one  time.
Nor  was  this  shocking  barbarity  perpetrated  in  any
sudden  sally  of  rage,  or  by  a  commander  of  inferior
note. It  was  the  act  of  Sandoval,  an  officer  whose
name  is  entitled  to  the  second  rank  in  the  annals  of
New  Spain,  and  executed  after  a  solemn  consulta-
tion with  Cortes  ;  and  to  complete  the  horror  of  the
scene,  the  children  and  relations  of  the  wretched  vic-
tims were  assembled,  and  compelled  to  be  specta-
tors of  their  dying  agonies.6 It  seems  hardly  pos-
sible to  exceed  in  horror  this  dreadful  example  of
severity ;  but  it  was  followed  by  another,  which  af-
fected the  Mexicans  still  more  sensibly,  as  it  gave
them  a  most  feeling  proof  of  their  own  degradation,
and  of  the  small  regard  which  their  haughty  mas-
ters retained  for  the  ancient  dignity  and  splendour
of  their state. On  a  slight suspicion, confirmed
by  very imperfect  evidence,  that  Guatimozin  had
formed  a  scheme  to  shake  off  the  yoke,  and  to  ex-
cite his  former  subjects  to  take  arms,  Cortes,  with-
out the  formality  of  a  trial, ordered  the  unhappy
monarch,  together  with  the  caziques  of  T.ezeuco  and
Tacuba,  the  two  persons  of  greatest  eminence  in  the
empire,  to  be  hanged ;  and  the  Mexicans,  with  as-
tonishment and  horror,  beheld  this  disgraceful  pu-
nishment inflicted  upon  persons,  to  whom  they  were
accustomed  to  look  up  with  reverence,  hardly  infe-
rior to  that  which  they  paid  to  the  gods  themselves/
The  example  of  Cortes  and  his  principal  officers  en-
couraged and  justified  persons  of  subordinate  rank
to  enture  upon  committing  greater  excesses.  Nuno
de  Guzman, in particular, stained an illustrious

'  Cortes  Relat.  291.  C. Gomara  Cron.  c.  155.
f  Goraara  Cron.  c.  170. B.  Diaz.  c. 177. Herrcra,  dec.  3.  lib.  viii.  c.  9. 5e«
Note  LXIX.

1522.]  BOOK V.  227

name  by  deeds  of  peculiar  enormity  and  rigour,  in
various  expeditions  which  he  conducted.8
First  ob-  One  circumstance,  however,  saved  the
Etry1"  Mexicans  from  farther  consumption,  perhaps
c™°qugcrthe  fr°m  one  as  complete  as  that  which  had  depo-
ors-  pulated  the  islands.  The  first  conquerors  did
not  attempt  to  search  for  the  precious  metals  in  the
bowels  of  the  earth.  They  were  neither  sufficiently
wealthy  to  carry  on  the  expensive  works,  which  are
requisite  for  opening  those  deep  recesses,  where  na-
ture has  concealed  the  veins  of  gold  and  silver,  nor
sufficiently  skilful  to  perform  the  ingenious  opera-
tions by  which  those  precious  metals  are  separated
from  their  respective  ores.  They  were  satisfied  with
the  more  simple  method,  practised  by  the  Indians,
of  washing  the  earth  carried  down  rivers  and  tor-
rents from  the  mountains,  and  collecting  the  grains
of  native  metal  deposited  there.  The  rich  mines  of
New  Spain,  which  have  poured  forth  their  trea-
sures with  such  profusion  on  every  quarter  of  the
globe,  were  not  discovered  for  several  years  after  the
1552  &c  conoiuest.h  By  that  time,  a  more  orderly  go-
vernment and  police  were  introduced  into  the
colony ;  experience,  derived  from  former  errors,  had
suggested  many  useful  and  humane  regulations  for
the  protection  and  preservation  of  the  Indians  ;  and
though  it  then  became  necessary  to  increase  the
number  of  those  employed  in  the  mines,  and  they
were  engaged  in  a  species  of  labour  more  pernicious
to  the  human  constitution,  they  suffered  less  hard-
ship or  diminution  than  from  the  ill-judged,  but  less
extensive,  schemes  of  the  first  conquerors.
Their  po-  While  it  was  the  lot  of  the  Indians  to  suf-
verty.  fer^  their  new  masters  seemed  not  to  have
derived  any  considerable  wealth  from  their  ill- con-
ducted researches. According  to  the  usual  fate  of

s  Henera,  dec.  4  &  5.  passim.  !l  Herrera,  dec.  8.  lib.  x.  c.  21.

Q  2

228  AMERICA.  [1522.

first  settlers  in  new  colonies,  it  was  their  lot  to  en-
counter danger,  and  to  struggle  with  difficulties  ;  the
fruits  of  their  victories  and  toils  were  reserved  for
times  of  tranquillity,  and  reaped  by  successors  of
greater  industry,  but  of  inferior  merit.  The  early
historians  of  America  abound  with  accounts  of  the
sufferings  and  of  the  poverty  of  its  conquerors.'
In  New  Spain,  their  condition  was  rendered  more
grievous  by  a  peculiar  arrangement.  When  Charles
V.  advanced  Cortes  to  the  government  of  that  coun-
try, he  at  the  same  time  appointed  certain  commis-
sioners to  receive  and  administer  the  royal  revenue
there,  with  independent  jurisdiction.15  These  men,
chosen  from  inferior  stations  in  various  departments
of  public  business  at  Madrid,  were  so  much  elevated
with  their  promotion,  that  they  thought  they  were
called  to  act  a  part  of  the  first  consequence.  But
being  accustomed  to  the  minute  formalities  of  office,
and  having  contracted  the  narrow  ideas  suited  to
the  sphere  in  which  they  had  hitherto  moved,  they
were  astonished  on  arriving  in  Mexico,  at  the

1524.  °  .

high  authority  which  Cortes  exercised,  and
could  not  conceive  that  the  mode  of  administration,  in
a  country  recently  subdued  and  settled,  must  be  dif-
ferent from  what  took  place  in  one  where  tranquil-
lity and  regular  government  had  been  long  esta-
blished. In  their  letters,  they  represented  Cortes  as  an
ambitious  tyrant,  who,  having  usurped  a  jurisdiction
superior  to  law,  aspired  at  independence,  and  by  his
exorbitant  wealth  and  extensive  influence  might  ac-
complish those  disloyal  schemes  which  he  appa-
rently meditated.1  These  insinuations  made  such
deep  impression  upon  the  Spanish  ministers,  most
of  whom  had  been  formed  to  business  under  the
jealous  and  rigid  administration  of  Ferdinand,  that,

I  Cortes  Relat.  283.  F. R.  Diaz.  c.  209.  ■<  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  ir.  c.  3.

1  Flerrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  vi.  c.  14.

1524.]  BOOK V.  229

unmindful  of  all  Cortes's  past  services,  and  regard-
less of  what  he  was  then  suffering  in  conducting  that
extraordinary  expedition,  in  which  he  advanced  from
the  lake  of  Mexico  to  the  western  extremities  of
Honduras,"1  they  infused  the  same  suspicions  into
the  mind  of  their  master,  and  prevailed  on  him  to
order  a  solemn  inquest  to  be  made  into  his  conduct,
with  powers  to  the  licentiate  Ponce  de  Leon,  in-
trusted with  that  commission,  to  seize  his

1525.

person,  if  he  should  find  that  expedient,  and
send  him  prisoner  to  Spain."

The  sudden  death  of  Ponce  de  Leon,  a  few

Cortes  re-
turns to  days  after  his  arrival  in  New  Spain,  pre-
vented the  execution  of  this  commission.
But  as  the  object  of  his  appointment  was  known,
the  mind  of  Cortes  was  deeply  wounded  with  this
unexpected  return  for  services,  which  far  exceeded
whatever  any  subject  of  Spain  had  rendered  to  his
sovereign.  He  endeavoured,  however,  to  maintain
his  station,  and  to  recover  the  confidence  of  the
court.  But  every  person  in  office,  who  had  arrived
from  Spain  since  the  conquest,  was  a  spy  upon  his
conduct,  and  with  malicious  ingenuity  gave  an  un-
favourable representation  of  all  his  actions.  The
apprehensions  of  Charles  and  his  ministers  increased.
A  new  commission  of  inquiry  was  issued,
with  more  extensive  powers,  and  various
precautions  were  taken  in  order  to  prevent  or  to
punish  him,  if  he  should  be  so  presumptuous  as  to
attempt  what  was  inconsistent  with  the  fidelity  of
a  subject.0  Cortes  beheld  the  approaching  crisis
of  his  fortune  with  all  the  violent  emotions  natural
to  a  haughty  mind,  conscious  of  high  desert,  and
receiving  unworthy  treatment.  But  though  some
of  his  desperate  followers  urged  him  to  assert  his

n>  See  Note  LXX.  n  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  viii.  c.  11,  15.

0  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  viii.  c.  15.  dec.  4.  lib.  ii.  c.  1.  lib.  iv.  c.  9,  10. B.  Dint.
c.  172.  196.  Gomara  Cron.  e.  166.

230  AMERICA.  [1528.

own  rights  against  his  ungrateful  country,  and  with
a  bold  hand  to  seize  that  power  which  the  courtiers
meanly  accused  him  of  coveting/  he  retained  such
self-command,  or  was  actuated  with  such  sentiments
of  loyalty,  as  to  reject  their  dangerous  counsels,  and
to  choose  the  only  course  in  which  he  could  secure
his  own  dignity,  without  departing  from  his  duty.
He  resolved  not  to  expose  himself  to  the  ignominy
of  a  trial,  in  that  country  which  had  been  the  scene
of  his  triumphs  ;  but,  without  waiting  for  the  arrival
of  his  judges,  to  repair  directly  to  Castile,  and  com-
mit himself  and  his  cause  to  the  justice  and  gene-
rosity of  his  sovereign.*1

His  recep-  Cortes  appeared  in  his  native  country  with
tion  there.  ^ie  splendour  that  suited  the  conqueror  of  a
mighty  kingdom.  He  brought  with  him  a  great
part  of  his  wealth,  many  jewels  and  ornaments  of
great  value,  several  curious  productions  of  the  coun-
try/ and  was  attended  by  some  Mexicans  of  the
first  rank,  as  well  as  by  the  most  considerable  of  his
own  officers.  His  arrival  in  Spain  removed  at  once
every  suspicion  and  fear  that  had  been  entertained
with  respect  to  his  intentions.  The  emperor,  having
now  nothing  to  apprehend  from  the  designs  of  Cor-
tes, received  him  like  a  person  whom  consciousness
of  his  own  innocence  had  brought  into  the  presence
of  his  master,  and  who  was  entitled,  by  the  emi-
nence of  his  services,  to  the  highest  marks  of  dis-
tinction and  respect.  The  order  of  St.  Jago,  the
title  of  Marquis  del  Valle  de  Guaxaca,  the  grant  of
an  ample  territory  in  New  Spain,  were  successively
bestowed  upon  him ;  and  as  his  manners  were  cor-
rect and  elegant,  although  he  had  passed  the  greater
part  of  his  life  among  rough  adventurers,  the  em-
peror admitted  him  to  the  same  familiar  intercourse

p  B.  Diaz.  c.  194.  i  Herrcra,  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  8.

r  Sec  Note  LXXI.

1530.]  BOOK V.  231

with  himself,  that  was  enjoyed  by  noblemen  of  the
first  rank.*

settlement  But,  amidst  those  external  proofs  of  re-
of— J°"  gard,  symptoms  of  remaining  distrust  ap-
inNew peared. Though  Cortes  earnestly  solicited

to  be  reinstated  in  the  government  of  New
Spain,  Charles,  too  sagacious  to  commit  such  an
important  charge  to  a  man  whom  he  had  once  sus-
pected, peremptorily  refused  to  invest  him  again
with  powers  which  he  might  find  it  impossible  to

control. Cortes,  though  dignified  with  new

titles,  returned  to  Mexico  with  diminished
authority.  The  military  department,  with  powers
to  attempt  new  discoveries,  was  left  in  his  hands ;
but  the  supreme  direction  of  civil  affairs  was  placed
in  a  board,  called  The  Audience  of  New  Spain.  At
a  subsequent  period,  when,  upon  the  increase  of
the  colony,  the  exertion  of  authority  more  united
and  extensive  became  necessary,  Antonio  de  Men-
doza,  a  nobleman  of  high  rank,  was  sent  thither  as
Viceroy,  to  take  the  government  into  his  hands.

This  division  of  power  in  New  Spain  proved,
schemes  of  as  was  unavoidable,  the  source  of  perpetual

dissension,  which  imbittered  the  life  of  Cor-
tes, and  thwarted  all  his  schemes.  As  he  had  now  no
opportunity  to  display  his  active  talents  but  in  at-
tempting new  discoveries,  he  formed  various  schemes
for  that  purpose,  all  of  which  bear  impressions  of  a
genius  that  delighted  in  what  was  bold  and  splendid.
He  early  entertained  an  idea,  that,  either  by  steering-
through  the  gulf  of  Florida  along  the  east  coast  of
North  America,  some  strait  would  be  found  that  com-
municated with  the  western  ocean  ;  or  that,  by  ex-
amining the  isthmus  of  Darien,  some  passage  would
be  discovered  between  the  North  and  South  seas.1

•  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  iv.  c.  1.  lib.  vi.  c.  4. B.  Diaz,  c.  196. Gom.  Cron.  c.  192.
'  Cortes  Relat.  Ram.  iii.  294.  B.

2.32  AMERICA.  [1536.

But  having  been  disappointed  in  his  expectations
with  respect  to  both,  he  now  confined  his  views  to
such  voyages  of  discovery  as  he  could  make  from
the  ports  of  New  Spain  in  the  South  sea.  There
he  fitted  out  successively  several  small  squadrons,
which  either  perished  in  the  attempt,  or  returned
without  making  any  discovery  of  moment.  Cortes,
l5S6  weary  of  intrusting  the  conduct  of  his  opera-
tions to  others,  took  the  command  of  a  new
armament  in  person,  and,  after  enduring  incredible
hardships,  and  encountering  dangers  of  every  spe-
cies, he  discovered  the  large  peninsula  of  California,
and  surveyed  the  greater  part  of  the  gulf  which  se-
parates it  from  New  Spain.  The  discovery  of  a
country  of  such  extent  would  have  reflected  credit
on  a  common  adventurer ;  but  it  could  add  little
new  honour  to  the  name  of  Cortes,  and  was  far  from
satisfying  the  sanguine  expectations  which  he  had
formed."  Disgusted  with  ill  success,  to  which  he
had  not  been  accustomed,  and  weary  of  contesting
with  adversaries  to  whom  he  considered  it  as  a  dis-
grace to  be  opposed,  he  once  more  sought

1540. »  . ft1  /  O

lor  redress  in  his  native  country.
But  his  reception  there  was  very  different  from
that  which  gratitude,  and  even  decency,  ought  to
have  secured  for  him.  The  merit  of  his  ancient  ex-
ploits was  already,  in  a  great  measure,  forgotten,
or  eclipsed  by  the  fame  of  recent  and  more  valuable
conquests  in  another  quarter  of  America.  No  ser-
vice of  moment  was  now  expected  from  a  man  of
declining  years,  and  who  begun  to  be  unfortunate.
The  emperor  behaved  to  him  with  cold  civility;
his  ministers  treated  him  sometimes  with  neglect,
sometimes  with  insolence.  His  grievances  received
no  redress ;  his  claims  were  urged  without  effect ;

"  Hcrrcra,  dec.  5.  lib.  viii.  c.  9,  10.  dec.  8.  lib.  vi.  c.  14. Venegas  Hist,  of  Ca-
liforn.  i.  125. Lorenziana  Hist.  p.  3'J2,  &c.

1540.]  BOOK-  V.  233

and  after  several  years  spent  in  fruitless  application
to  ministers  and  judges,  an  occupation  the  most
irksome  and  mortifying  to  a  man  of  high  spirit,  who
had  moved  in  a  sphere  where  he  was  more  accus-
tomed to  command  than  to  solicit,  Cortes
ended  his  days  on  the  2d  of  December,  1547,
in  the  sixty-second  year  of  his  age.  His  fate  was  the
same  with  that  of  all  the  persons  who  distinguished
themselves  in  the  discovery  or  conquest  of  the  New
World.  Envied  by  his  contemporaries,  and  ill  re-
quited by  the  court  which  he  served,  he  has  been
admired  and  celebrated  by  succeeding  ages.  Which
has  formed  the  most  just  estimate  of  his  character,
an  impartial  consideration  of  his  actions  must  de-
termine.

THE

HISTORY  OF  AMERICA.

BOOK  VI.

1523.
Schemes

From  the  time  that  Nugnez  de  Balboa  dis-

fordis- covered  the great  Southern  ocean,  and  re-
covering. °  ,

Pen..  ceived  the  first  obscure  hints  concerning  the
opulent  countries  with  which  it  might  open  a  com-
munication, the  wishes  and  schemes  of  every  enter-
prising person  in  the  colonies  of  Darien  and  Panama
were  turned  towards  the  wealth  of  those  unknown
regions.  In  an  age  when  the  spirit  of  adventure
was  so  ardent  and  vigorous,  that  large  fortunes  were
wasted,  and  the  most  alarming  dangers  braved,  in
pursuit  of  discoveries  merely  possible,  the  faintest
ray  of  hope  was  followed  with  an  eager  expectation,
and  the  slightest  information  was  sufficient  to  in-
spire such  perfect  confidence,  as  conducted  men  to
the  most  arduous  undertakings.3
TT  Accordingly,  several  armaments  were  fitted

Unsuccess-  °  J

fui  for  out  in  order  to  explore  and  take  possession  of
'  the  countries  to  the  east  of  Panama,  but  under
the  conduct  of  leaders  whose  talents  and  resources
were  unequal  to  the  attempt.b  As  the  excursions  of
those  adventurers  did  not  extend  beyond  the  limits  of
the  province  to  which  the  Spaniards  have  given  the
name  of  Tierra  Firme,  a  mountainous  region  covered
with  woods,  thinly  inhabited,  and  extremely  un-
healthy, they  returned  with  dismal  accounts  con-

1  See  Note  LXXII.  b  Calancha  Coronica,  p.  100.

1524.]  BOOK VI.  235

cerning  the  distresses  to  which  they  had  been  ex-
posed, and  the  unpromising  aspect  of  the  places
which  they  had  visited.  Damped  by  these  tidings,
the  rage  for  discovery  in  that  direction  abated ;  and
it  became  the  general  opinion,  that  Balboa  had
founded  visionary  hopes,  on  the  tale  of  an  ignorant
Indian,  ill  understood,  or  calculated  to  deceive.

1524.  But  there  were  three  persons  settled  in
Stan  by  Panama,  on  whom  the  circumstances  which
Pizarro, deterred  others  made so  little  impression,

Almagro,  «_a  '

aud  Luque.  that  at  the  very  moment  when  all  considered
Balboa's  expectations  of  discovering  a  rich  country,
by  steering  towards the  east,  as  chimerical,  they
resolved  to  attempt  the  execution  of  his scheme.
The  names  of  those  extraordinary  men  were  Fran-
cisco Pizarro, Diego de  Almagro, and  Hernando
Luque. Pizarro  was  the  natural  son  of  a  gentle-
man of  an  honourable  family  by  a  very  low  woman,
and,  according  to  the  cruel  fate  which  often  attends
the  offspring  of  unlawful  love,  had  been  so  totally
neglected  in  his  youth  by  the  author  of  his  birth,
that  he  seems  to  have  destined  him  never  to  rise
beyond  the  condition  of  his  mother. In  consequence
of  this  ungenerous  idea,  he  set  him,  when  bordering
on  manhood,  to  keep  hogs. But  the  aspiring  mind
of  young  Pizarro  disdaining  that  ignoble  occupa-
tion, he  abruptly  abandoned  his  charge,  enlisted  as
a  soldier,  and,  after  serving some  years  in  Italy,
embarked  for  America,  which,  by  opening  such  a
boundless  range  to  active  talents,  allured  every  ad-
venturer, whose  fortune  was  not  equal  to  his  ambi-
tious thoughts. There  Pizarro  early  distinguished
himself. With  a  temper  of  mind  no  less  daring  than
the  constitution  of  his  body  was  robust,  he  was  fore-
most in  every  danger,  patient  under  the  greatest
hardships,  and  unsubdued  by  any  fatigue. Though
so  illiterate  that  he could  not  even  read,  he  was

23(3  AMERICA.  [1524.

soon  considered  as  a  man  formed  to  command.
Every  operation  committed  to  his  conduct  proved
successful,  as,  by  a  happy  but  rare  conjunction,  he
united  perseverance  with  ardour,  and  was  as  cau-
tious in  executing,  as  he  was  bold  in  forming  his
plans.  By  engaging  early  in  active  life,  without
any  resource  but  his  own  talents  and  industry,  and
by  depending  on  himself  alone  in  his  struggles  to
emerge  from  obscurity,  he  acquired  such  a  thorough
knowledge  of  affairs,  and  of  men,  that  he  was  fitted
to  assume  a  superior  part  in  conducting  the  former,
and  in  governing  the  latter/

Almagro  had  as  little  to  boast  of  his  descent  as
Pizarro.  The  one  was  a  bastard,  the  other  a  found-
ling. Bred,  like  his  companion,  in  the  camp,  he
yielded  not  to  him  in  any  of  the  soldierly  qualities
of  intrepid  valour,  indefatigable  activity,  or  insur-
mountable constancy  in  enduring  the  hardships  inse-
parable from  military  service  in  the  New  World.
But  in  Almagro  these  virtues  were  accompanied
with  the  openness,  generosity,  and  candour,  natural
to  men  whose  profession  is  arms;  in  Pizarro,  they
were  united  with  the  address,  the  craft,  and  the
dissimulation  of  a  politician,  with  the  art  of  con-
cealing his  own  purposes,  and  with  sagacity  to  pe-
netrate into  those  of  other  men.

Hernando  de  Luque  was  an  ecclesiastic,  who  acted
both  as  priest  and  schoolmaster  at  Panama,  and,  by
means  which  the  contemporary  writers  have  not  de-
scribed, had  amassed  riches  that  inspired  him  with
thoughts  of  rising  to  greater  eminence.
Terms  of  Such  were  the  men  destined  to  overturn
cialion550'  one  of  tne  most  extensive  empires  on  the
face  of  the  earth.  Their  confederacy  for  this
purpose  was  authorized  by  Pedrarias,  the  governor  of

«  Herrera,  dec.  1  &  2. passim,  dec. 4.  lib.  ti.  c. 107. domara Hist.  c.  144.
Zarate,  lib.  iv.  c.  9.

1524.  BOOK VI.  237

Panama.  Each  engaged  to  employ  his  whole  for-
tune in  the  adventure.  Pizarro,  the  least  wealthy
of  the  three,  as  he  could  not  throw  so  large  a  sum
as  his  associates  into  the  common  stock,  engaged  to
take  the  department  of  greatest  fatigue  and  danger,
and  to  command  in  person  the  armament  which  was
to  go  first  upon  discovery.  Almagro  offered  to  con-
duct the  supplies  of  provisions  and  reinforcements  of
troops,  of  which  Pizarro  might  stand  in  need.  Luque
was  to  remain  at  Panama  to  negotiate  with  the  go-
vernor, and  superintend  whatever  was  carrying  on
for  the  general  interest.  As  the  spirit  of  enthusiasm
uniformly  accompanied  that  of  adventure  in  the
New  World,  and  by  that  strange  union  both  ac-
quired an  increase  of  force,  this  confederacy,  formed
by  ambition  and  avarice,  was  confirmed  by  the  most
solemn  act  of  religion.  Luque  celebrated  mass,  di-
vided a  consecrated  host  into  three,  and  reserving
one  part  to  himself,  gave  the  other  two  to  his  asso-
ciates, of  which  they  partook  ;  and  thus,  in  the  name
of  the  Prince  of  Peace,  ratified  a  contract  of  which
plunder  and  bloodshed  were  the  objects.*1
Their  first  The  attempt  was  begun  with  a  force  more
attempt.  suited  to  the  humble  condition  of  the  three
associates,  than  to  the  greatness  of  the  enterprise  in
which  they  were  engaged.  Pizarro  set  sail
from  Panama  with  a  single  vessel,  of  small
burden,  and  a  hundred  and  twelve  men.  But  in
that  age,  so  little  were  the  Spaniards  acquainted
with  the  peculiarities  of  climate  in  America,  that  the
time  which  Pizarro  chose  for  his  departure  was  the
most  improper  in  the  whole  year ;  the  periodical
winds  which  were  then  set  in,  being  directly  adverse
to  the  course  which  he  proposed  to  steer.e  After
beating  about  for  seventy  days,  with  much  danger

d  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  vi.  c.  13. Zarate,  lib.  i.e.  1.
e  Herrera,  dec.  4.  lib.  ii.  c.  8. Xeiez,  p.  179.

238  AMERICA,  [1524.

and  incessant  fatigue,  Pizarro's  progress  towards  the
south-east  was  not  greater  than  what  a  skilful  navi-
gator will  now  make  in  as  many  hours.  He  touched
at  several  places  on  the  coast  of  Tierra  Firme,  but
found  everywhere  the  same  uninviting  country  which
former  adventurers  had  described  ;  the  low  grounds
converted  into  swamps  by  an  overflowing  of  rivers;
the  higher,  covered  with  impervious  woods  ;  few  in-
habitants, and  those  fierce  and  hostile.  Famine,
fatigue,  frequent  rencounters  with  the  natives,  and,
above  all,  the  distempers  of  a  moist,  sultry  climate,
combined  in  wasting  his  slender  band  of  followers.

, The  undaunted  resolution  of  their  leader  con-
Attended

with  little  tinued,  however,  for  some  time,  to  sustain
their  spirits,  although  no  sign  had  yet  ap-
peared of  discovering  those  golden  regions  to  which
he  had  promised  to  conduct  them.  At  length  he
was  obliged  to  abandon  that  inhospitable  coast,  and
retire  to  Chuchama,  opposite  to  the  pearl  islands,
where  he  hoped  to  receive  a  supply  of  provisions
and  troops  from  Panama.

But  Almagro  having  sailed  from  that  port  with
seventy  men,  stood  directly  towards  that  part  of  the
continent  where  he  hoped  to  meet  with  his  asso-
ciates. Not  finding  him  there,  he  landed  his  sol-
diers, who,  in  searching  for  their  companions,  under-
went the  same  distresses,  and  were  exposed  to  the
same  dangers,  which  had  driven  them  out  of  the
country.  Repulsed  at  length  by  the  Indians  in  a
sharp  conflict,  in  which  their  leader  lost  one  of  his
eyes  by  the  wound  of  an  arrow,  they  likewise  were
compelled  to  reimbark.  Chance  led  them  to  the
place  of  Pizarro's  retreat,  where  they  found  some
onsolation  in  recounting  to  each  other  their  adven-
tures, and  comparing  their  sufferings.  As
Almagro  had  advanced  as  far  as  the  river  St.
Juan,  in  the  province  of  Popayan,  where  both  the

1526.]  BOOK VI.  239

country  and  inhabitants  appeared  with  a  more  pro-
mising aspect,  that  dawn  of  better  fortune  was  suffi-
cient to  determine  such  sanguine  projectors  not  to
abandon  their  scheme,  notwithstanding  all  that  they
had  suffered  in  prosecuting  it/

1526i Almagro  repaired to  Panama,  in  hopes  of
They  re- recruiting;  their  shattered  troops. But  what

surae  the  °  *■

undertak-  he  and  Pizarro  had  suffered,  gave  his  coun-
trymen such  an  unfavourable  idea  of  the  ser-
vice, that  it  was  with  difficulty  he  could  levy  four-
score men.g  Feeble  as  this  reinforcement  was,  Al-
magro took  the  command  of  it,  and  having  joined
Pizarro,  they  did  not  hesitate  about  resuming  their
operations.  After  a  long  series  of  disasters  and  dis-
appointments, not  inferior  to  those  which  they  had
already  experienced,  part  of  the  armament  reached
the  bay  of  St.  Matthew,  on  the  coast  of  Quito,  and
landing  at  Tacamez,  to  the  south  of  the  river  of
Emeraulds,  they  beheld  a  country  more  champaign
and  fertile  than  any  they  had  yet  discovered  in
the  Southern  ocean,  the  natives  clad  in  garments  of
woollen  or  cotton  stuff,  and  adorned  with  several
trinkets  of  gold  and  silver.

But,  notwithstanding  those  favourable  appearances,
magnified  beyond  the  truth,  both  by  the  vanity  of  the
persons  who  brought  the  report  from  Tacamez,  and  by
the  fond  imagination  of  those  who  listened  to  them,  Pi-
zarro and  Almagro  durst  not  venture  to  invade  a  coun-
try so  populous  with  a  handful  of  men  enfeebled  by  fa-
tigue and  diseases.  They  retired  to  the  small  island  of
Gallo,  where  Pizarro  remained  with  part  of  the  troops,  and
his  associate  returned  to  Panama,  in  hopes  of  bringing
such  a  reinforcement  as  might  enable  them  to  take  pos-
session of  the  opulent  territories,  whose  existence  seemed
to  be  no  longer  doubtful/

>'  Herrera,  dec,  3.  lib.  viii.  c.  11, 12. See  Note  LXX1II.  tf  Zarate,  lib.  i.  c.  1.

h  Xerez,  181. Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  viii.  c,  13.

240  AMERICA.  [1526.

Pizarro  re-  ^u* some  of  the  ad  venturers,  less  enterprising-,
called  by or  leSs  hardy  than  their  leaders,  having:  secretly

the  gover-  ji  /.  i •  ri> •

nor  of  Pa-  conveyed  lamentable  accounts  of  their  sufferings
and  losses  to  their  friends  at  Panama,  Almagro
met  with  an  unfavourable  reception  from  Pedro  de  los
Rios,  who  had  succeeded  Pedrarias  in  the  government
of  that  settlement. After  weighing  the  matter  with  that

©  ©

cold  economical  prudence,  which  appears  the  first  of  all
virtues  to  persons  whose  limited  faculties  are  incapable
of  conceiving:  or  executing:  great  designs,  he  concluded

©  © ©  ©  7

an  expedition,  attended  with  such  certain  waste  of  men,
to  be  so  detrimental  to  an  infant  and  feeble  colony,  that
he  not  only  prohibited  the  raising  of  new  levies,  but
dispatched  a  vessel  to  bring  home  Pizarro  and  his  com-
panions from  the  island  of  Gallo.  Almagro  and  Luque,
though  deeply  affected  with  those  measures,  which  they
could  not  prevent,  and  durst  not  oppose,  found  means
of  communicating  their  sentiments  privately  to  Pizarro,
and  exhorted  him  not  to  relinquish  an  enterprise  that
was  the  foundation  of  all  their  hopes,  and  the  only  means
of  re-establishing  their  reputation  and  fortune,  which
were  both  on  the  decline.  Pizarro's  mind,  bent  with
inflexible  obstinacy  on  all  its  purposes,  needed  no  in-
Persistsin  centive  to  persist  in  the  scheme.  He  peremp-
hisde- torily  refused  to  obey  the  governor  of  Panama's

signs.  J  .

orders,  and  employed  all  his  address  and  elo-
quence in  persuading  his  men  not  to  abandon  him.
But  the  incredible  calamities  to  which  they  had  been
exposed  were  still  so  recent  in  their  memories,  and
the thoug-hts  of  revisiting:  their  families  and friends

©  ©

after  a  long  absence,  rushed  with  such  joy  into  their
minds,  that  when  Pizarro  drew  a  line  upon  the  sand
with  his  sword,  permitting  such  as  wished  to  return
home  to  pass  over  it,  only  thirteen  of  all  the  daring  vete-
rans in  his  service  had  resolution  to  remain  with  their
commander.'

iHerrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  x.  c.  2,  3. Zarate.lib.  i.e.  2. Xerez,  181.  Gomara,  c.  109.

1526.]  BOOK VL  241

This  small,  but  determined  band,  whose  names  the
Spanish  historians  record  'with  deserved  praise,  as  "the
persons  to  whose  persevering  fortitude  their  country  is
indebted  for  the  most  valuable  of  all  its  American  pos-
sessions, fixed  their  residence  in  the  island  of  Gorgona.
This,  as  it  was  farther  removed  from  the  coast  than  Gallo,
and  uninhabited,  they  considered  as  a  more  secure  re-
treat, where,  unmolested,  they  might  wait  for  supplies
from  Panama,  which  they  trusted  that  the  activity  of
their  associates  would  be  able  to  procure.  Almagro
and  Luque  were  not  inattentive  or  cold  solicitors,  and
their  incessant  importunity  was  seconded  by  the  general
voice  of  the  colony,  which  exclaimed  loudly  against  the
infamy  of  exposing  brave  men,  engaged  in  the  public
service,  and  chargeable  with  no  error,  but  what  flowed
from  an  excess  of  zeal  and  courage,  to  perish  like
the  most  odious  criminal  in  a  desert  island.  Over-
come by  those  entreaties  and  expostulations,  the  go-
vernor at  last  consented  to  send  a  small  vessel  to  their
relief.  But  that  he  might  not  seem  to  encourage  Pizarro
to  any  new  enterprise,  he  would  not  permit  one  landman
to  embark  on  board  of  it.

Hardshi  s  By  this  time,  Pizarro  and  his  companions  had
he  en-  remained  five  months  in  an  island,  infamous  for
the  most  unhealthy  climate  in  that  region  of
America.11  During  all  this  period,  their  eyes  were  turned
towards  Panama,  in  hopes  of  succour  from  their  coun-
trymen ;  but  worn  out  at  length  with  fruitless  expec-
tations, and  dispirited  with  suffering  hardships  of  which
they  saw  no  end,  they,-  in  despair,  came  to  a  resolution
of  committing  themselves  to  the  ocean  on  a  float,  rather
than  continue  in  that  detestable  abode.  But,  on  the  ar-
rival of  the  vessel  from  Panama,  they  were  transported
with  such  joy,  that  all  their  sufferings  were  forgotten.
Their  hopes  revived,  and,  with  a  rapid  transition,  not
unnatural  among  men  accustomed  by  their  mode  of  life

>  See  Note  LXXIV.
VOL.  VII.  K

•242  AMERICA.  [1526.

to  sudden  vicissitudes  of  fortune,  high  confidence  suc-
ceeding to  extreme  dejection,  Pizarro  easily  induced
not  only  his  own  followers,  but  the  crew  of  the  ves-
sel from  Panama,  to  resume  his former  scheme  with
fresh  ardour. Instead  of  returning  to  Panama,  they
stood  towards  the  south-east,  and  more  fortunate  in  this
than  in  any  of  their  past  efforts,  they,  on  the  twentieth
day after  their  departure  from  Gorgona,  discovered
the  coast  of  Peru. After  touching  at  several  villages
near  the  shore,  which  they found  to  be  nowise  in-
viting, they  landed  at  Tumbez,  a  [place  of  some  note,
about  three degrees  south  of  the  line,  distinguished
for  its  stately  temple,  and  a  palace  of  the  Incas  or  so-
vereigns of  the  country.1 There  the  Spaniards  feasted
their  eyes  with  the  first  view  of  the  opulence  and  civi-
lization of  the  Peruvian  empire. They  beheld  a  coun-
try fully  peopled,  and  cultivated  with  an  appearance  of
regular  industry  ;  the  natives  decently  clothed,  and  pos-
sessed of  ingenuity  so  far  surpassing  the  other  inha-
bitants of  the  New  World,  as  to  have  the  use  of  tame
domestic  animals. But  what  chiefly  attracted  their  no-
tice, was  such  a  show  of  gold  and  silver,  not  only  in  the
ornaments  of  their  persons  and  temples,  but  in  several
vessels  and  utensils  for  common  use,  formed  of  those  pre-
cious metals,  as  left  no  room  to  doubt  that  they  abounded
with  profusion  in  the  country. Pizarro  and  his  com-
panions seemed  now  to  have  attained  to  the  completion
of  their  most  sanguine  hopes,  and  fancied  that  all  their
wishes  and  dreams  of  rich  domains,  and  inexhaustible
treasures,  would  soon  be  realized.

Returns  to  But  with  the  slender  force  then  under  his
Panama,  command,  Pizarro  could  only  view  the  rich
country  of  which  he  hoped  hereafter  to  obtain  possession.
He  ranged,  however,  for  some  time  along  the  coast,
maintaining  every  where  a  peaceable  intercourse  with
the  natives,  no  less  astonished  at  their  new  visitants,  than

1  Calanclia,  p.  lOS.

1527.]  BOOK VI.  243

the  Spaniards  were  with  the  uniform  appearance  of  opu-
lence and  cultivation  which  they  beheld.  Having:

1527.

explored  the  country  so  far  as  was  requisite  to
ascertain  the  importance  of  the  discovery,  Pizarro  pro-
cured from  the  inhabitants  some  of  their  Llamas  or  tame
cattle,  to  which  the  Spaniards  gave  the  name  of  sheep,
some  vessels  of  gold  and  silver,  as  well  as  some  specimens
of  their  other  works  of  ingenuity,  and  two  young  men,
whom  he  proposed  to  instruct  in  the  Castilian  language,
that  they  might  serve  as  interpreters  in  the  expedition
which  he  meditated.  With  these  he  arrived  at  Panama,
towards  the  close  of  the  third  year  from  the  time  of  his
departure  thence.m  No  adventurer  of  the  age  suffered
hardships  or  encountered  dangers  which  equal  those  to
which  he  was  exposed  during  this  long  period.  The
patience  with  which  he  endured  the  one,  and  the  forti-
tude with  which  he  surmounted  the  other,  exceed  what-
ever is  recorded  in  the  history  of  the  New  World,  where
so  many  romantic  displays  of  those  virtues  occur.

1528.  Neither  the  splendid  relation  that  Pizarro

Nfw ,  grave  of  the  incredible  opulence  of  the  country

schemes  of •...■.,  ..  -,  r  .  .

theasso-  which  he  had  discovered,  nor  his  bitter  com-
plaints  on  account  of  that  unseasonable  recall  of
his  forces,  which  had  put  it  out  of  his  power  to  attempt
making  any  settlement  there,  could  move  the  governor
of  Panama  to  swerve  from  his  former  plan  of  conduct.
He  still  contended,  that  the  colony  was  not  in  a  condition
to  invade  such  a  mighty  empire,  and  refused  to  autho-
rize an  expedition  which  he  foresaw  would  be  so  alluring
that  it  might  ruin  the"  province  in  which  he  presided,
by  an  effort  beyond  its  strength.  His  coldness,  how-
ever, did  not  in  any  degree  abate  the  ardour  of  the  three
associates ;  but  they  perceived  that  they  could  not  carry
their  scheme  into  execution,  without  the  countenance  of
superior  authority,  and  must  solicit  their  sovereign  to

™  Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  x.  c.  3—6.  dec.  4.  lib.  ii.  c.  7,  8. Vega,  2.  lib.  i.  c.  10—14.
Zarnte,  lib.  i.  c.  2. Benzo  Hist.  Novi  Orbis,  lib.  iii.  c.  1.

R 2

•244  AMERICA.  [1528.

grant  that  permission  which  they  could  not  extort  from
his  delegate.  With  this  view,  after  adjusting  among
themselves,  that  Pizarro  should  claim  the  station  of  go-
vernor, Almagro  that  of  lieutenant-governor,  and  Laque
the  dignity  of  bishop  in  the  country  which  they  purposed
to  conquer,  they  sent  Pizarro  as  their  agent  to  Spain,
though  their  fortunes  were  now  so  much  exhausted  by
the  repeated  efforts  which  they  had  made,  that  they
found  some  difficulty  in  borrowing  the  small  sum  re-
quisite towards  equipping  him  for  the  voyage."
Pizarm  Pizarro  lost  no  time  in  repairing  to  court,  and

spain°to  new  as  the  scene  might  be  to  him,  he  appeared
negotiate,  before  the  emperor  with  the  unembarrassed  dig-
nity of  a  man  conscious  of  what  his  services  merited  ;
and  he  conducted  his  negotiations  with  an  insinuating
dexterity  of  address,  which  could  not  have  been  ex-
pected either  from  his  education  or  former  habits  of  life.
His  feeling  description  of  his  own  sufferings,  and  his
pompous  account  of  the  country  which  he  had  disco-
vered, confirmed  by  the  specimens  of  its  productions
which  he  exhibited,  made  such  an  impression  both  on
Charles  and  his  ministers,  that  they  not  only  approved
of  the  intended  expedition,  but  seemed  to  be  interested
in  the  success  of  its  leader.  Presuming  on  those  dis-
positions  in  his  favour,  Pizarro  paid  little  attention  to
Neglects  the  interest  of  his  associates.  As  the  pretensions
hisas- 0f  LUnue  did  not  interfere  with  his  own,  he  ob-

sociates.  .  L

tained  for  him  the  ecclesiastical  dignity  to  which
he  aspired.  For  Almagro,  he  claimed  only  the  command
of  the  fortress  which  should  be  erected  at  Tumbez.  To
himself  he  secured  whatever  his  boundless  ambition
July  26.  could  desire.  He  was  appointed  governor,  cap-
cu'res^he  tain-general,  and  adelantado  of  all  the  country
supreme which  he  had  discovered,  and  hoped  to  con-

commanu  _  ...

to  himself,  quer,  with  supreme  authority,  civil  as  well  as
military ;  and  with  full  right  to  all  the  privileges  and

n  Herreia,  dec.  4.  lib.  iii.  c.  t.  Vega,  2.  lib.  i.  e.  14.

1528.]  BOOK  VI.  245

emoluments  usually  granted  to  adventurers  in  the  New
World.  His  jurisdiction  was  declared  to  extend  two
hundred  leagues  along  the  coast  to  the  south  of  the  river
St.  Jago ;  to  be  independent  of  the  governor  of  Panama  ;
and  he  had  power  to  nominate  all  the  officers  who  were
to  serve  under  him.  In  return  for  those  concessions,
which  cost  the  court  of  Spain  nothing,  as  the  enjoyment
of  them  depended  upon  the  success  of  Pizarro's  own
efforts,  he  engaged  to  raise  two  hundred  and  fifty  men,
and  to  provide  the  ships,  arms,  and  warlike  stores  re-
quisite towards  subjecting  to  the  crown  of  Castile  the
country  of  which  the  government  was  allotted  to  him.
slender  Inconsiderable  as  the  body  of  men  was  which
force  he Pizarro  had  undertaken  to  raise,  his  funds  and

was  able

to  raise,  credit  were  so  low  that  he  could  hardly  com-
plete  half  the  number;  and  after  obtaining  his
patents  from  the  crown,  he  was  obliged  to  steal  pri-
vately out  of  the  port  of  Seville,  in  order  to  elude  the
scrutiny  of  the  officers  who  had  it  in  charge  to  examine,
whether  he  had  fulfilled  the  stipulations  in  his  con-
tract.0 Before  his  departure,  however,  he  received
some  supply  of  money  from  Cortes,  who  having  return-
ed to  Spain  about  this  time,  was  willing  to  contribute
his  aid  towards  enabling  an  ancient  companion,  with
whose  talents  and  courage  he  was  well  acquainted,  to
begin  a  career  of  glory  similar  to  that  which  he  himself
had  finished. p

He  landed  at  Nombre  de  Dios,  and  marched  across
the  isthmus  to  Panama,  accompanied  by  his  three  bro-
thers, Ferdinand,  Juan,  and  Gonzalo,  of  whom  the  first
was  born  in  lawful  wedlock,  the  two  latter,  like  himself,
were  of  illegitimate  birth,  and  by  Francisco  de  Alcan-
tara, his  mother's  brother.  They  were  all  in  the  prime
of  life,  and  of  such  abilities  and  courage,  as  fitted  them
to  take  a  distinguished  part  in  his  subsequent  trans-
actions.

°  Herrera,  dec.  4.  lib.  vii.  c.  9.  r  Ibid.  lib.  vii.  c.  10.

246  AMERICA.  [1530.

1530. ^n  ms  arrival  at  Panama,  Pizarro  found  Al-
iiis  recon.  mas:ro  so  much  exasperated  at  the  manner  in

filiation  Y

with  ai-  which  he  had  conducted  his  negotiation,  that
he  not  only  refused  to  act  any  longer  in  concert
with  a  man  by  whose  perfidy  he  had  been  excluded
from  the  power  and  honours  to  which  he  had  a  just
claim,  but  laboured  to  form  a  new  association,  in  or-
der to  thwart  or  to  rival  his  former  confederate  in  his
discoveries.  Pizarro,  however,  had  more  wisdom  and
address  than  to  suffer  a  rupture  so  fatal  to  all  his
schemes,  to  become  irreparable.  By  offering  volunta-
rily to  relinquish  the  office  of  adelantado,  and  promis-
ing to  concur  in  soliciting  that  title,  with  an  indepen-
dent government,  for  Almagro,  he  gradually  mitigated
the  rage  of  an  open-hearted  soldier,  which  had  been
violent,  but  was  not  implacable.  Luque,  highly  satis-
fied with  having  been  successful  in  all  his  own  preten-
sions, cordially  seconded  Pizarro's  endeavours.  A
reconciliation  was  effected,  and  the  confederacy  re-
newed on  its  original  terms,  that  the  enterprise  should
be  carried  on  at  the  common  expense  of  the  associates,
and  the  profits  accruing  from  it  should  be  equally  di-
vided among  them.q

Their  ar- Even  after  their  re-union,  and the  utmost
mamen  . enrorj.s  0f  i\ie\r  interest,  three  small  vessels,  with

a  hundred  and  eighty  soldiers,  thirty-six  of  whom  were
horsemen,  composed  the  armament  which  they  were
able  to  fit  out.  But  the  astonishing  progress  of  the
Spaniards  in  America  had  inspired  them  with  such
ideas  of  their  own  superiority,  that  Pizarro  did  not
i53i.  hesitate  to  sail  with  this  contemptible  force  to
"  ruary-  inva(]e  a  great  empire.  Almagro  was  left  at
Panama,  as  formerly,  to  follow  him  with  what  rein-
forcement of  men  he  should  be  able  to  muster.  As  the
season  for  embarking  was  properly  chosen,  and  the
course  of  navigation  between  Panama  and  Peru  was

i  Hcrrcra,  dec.  4.  lib.  vii.  c.  9. Zaratc,  lib.  i.  c.  3.  Vega,  2.  lib. i.e.  11.

1531.]  BOOK VI.  247

now  better  known,  Pizarro  completed  the  voyage  in
thirteen  days;  though  by  the  force  of  the  winds  and  cur-
rents, he  was  carried  above  a  hundred  leagues  to  the
north  of  Tumbez,  the  place  of  his  destination,  and  obliged
Lands  in to  land  his  troops  in  the  bay  of  St.  Matthew.

Without  losing  a  moment,  he  began  to  advance
towards  the  south,  taking  care,  however,  not  to  depart
far  from  the  sea-shore,  both  that  he  might  easily  effect
a  junction  with  the  supplies  which  he  expected  from
Panama,  and  secure  a  retreat  in  case  of  any  disaster,
by  keeping  as  near  as  possible  to  his  ships.  But  as
the  country  in  several  parts  on  the  coast  of  Peru  is  bar-
ren, unheal thful,  and  thinly  peopled;  as  the  Spaniards
had  to  pass  all  the  rivers  near  their  mouth,  where  the
body  of  water  is  greatest,  and  as  the  imprudence  of
Pizarro,  in  attacking  the  natives  when  he  should  have
studied  to  gain  their  confidence,  had  forced  them  to
abandon  their  habitations;  famine,  fatigue,  and  dis-
eases of  various  kinds,  brought  upon  him  and  his  fol-
lowers calamities  hardly  inferior  to  those  which  they
had  endured  in  their  former  expedition.  What  they
now  experienced  corresponded  so  ill  with  the  alluring-
description  of  the  country  given  by  Pizarro,  that  many
began  to  reproach  him,  and  every  soldier  must  have
become  cold  to  the  service,  if,  even  in  this  unfertile  re-
gion of  Peru,  they  had  not  met  with  some  appearances
of  wealth  and  cultivation,  which  seemed  to  justify  the

report  of  their  leader. At  length  they  reached

April  14. . v  .  _  _.  if-  -i

the  province  of  Coaque ;  and,  having  surprised
the  principal  settlement  of  the  natives,  they  seized  their
vessels  and  ornaments  of  gold  and  silver,  to  the  amount
of  thirty  thousand  pesos,  with  other  booty  of  such  va-
lue, as  dispelled  airtheir  doubts,  and  inspired  the  most
desponding  with  sanguine  hopes/
Hismea-  Pizarro  himself  was  so  much  delighted  with
obSiSng tms  r*cft  sP°ilj  which  he  considered  as  the  first

r  Herrera,  dec.  4.  lib.  vii.  c.  9.  lib.  ii.  c.  i. Xerez,  182.

248  AMERICA.  [1531.

a  reinforce-  fruits  of  a  land  abounding  with  treasure,  that
he  instantly  dispatched  one  of  his  ships  to  Pa-
nama with  a  large  remittance  to  Almagro;  and  another
to  Nicaragua  with  a  considerable  sum  to  several  per-
sons of  influence  in  that  province,  in  hopes  of  alluring
adventurers,  by  this  early  display  of  the  wealth  which
he  had  acquired.  Meanwhile,  he  continued  his  march
along  the  coast,  and  disdaining  to  employ  any  means
of  reducing-  the  natives  but  force,  he  attacked  them  with
such  violence  in  their  scattered  habitations,  as  com-
pelled them  either  to  retire  into  the  interior  country,
or  to  submit  to  his  yoke.  This  sudden  appearance  of
invaders,  whose  aspect  and  manners  were  so  strange,
and  whose  power  seemed  to  be  so  irresistible,  made  the
same  dreadful  impression  as  in  other  parts  of  America.
Pizarro  hardly  met  with  resistance  until  he  attacked
the  island  of  Puna  in  the  bay  of  Guayquil.  As  that
was  better  peopled  than  the  country  through  which  he
had  passed,  and  its  inhabitants  fiercer  and  less  civilized
than  those  of  the  continent,  they  defended  themselves
with  such  obstinate  valour,  that  Pizarro  spent  six  months
in  reducing  them  to  subjection.  From  Puna  he  pro-
ceeded to  Tumbez,  where  the  distempers  which  raged
among  his  men  compelled  him  to  remain  for  three
months  .s

Receives  While  he  was  thus  employed,  he  began  to
continues  reaP  advantage  from  his  attention  to  spread  the
toadvance.  fame  of  his  first  success  to  Coaque.  Two  dif-
ferent detachments  arrived  from  Nicaragua,  which,
though  neither  exceeded  thirty  men,  he  considered  as
a  reinforcement  of  great  consequence  to  his  feeble
band,  especially  as  the  one  was  under  the  command  of
Sebastian  Benalcazar,  and  the  other  of  Hernando

1532.

Soto,  officers  not  inferior  in  merit  and  reputa-
tion to  any  who  had  served  in  America. From  Tum-

•  P.  Sancho  ap.  Ramus,  ill-  u.  371.  F. Ilerrera,  dec.  4.  lib.  vii.  c.  18.  lib.  ix.  c.  i.
Zarale,  lib.  ii.  c.  2,  3. Xerez,  p.  182,  &c.

1532.]  BOOK  VI.  249

bez  he  proceeded  to  the  river  Piura,  and  in  an
ay ' advantageous  station  near  the  mouth  of  it,  he
established  the  first  Spanish  colony  in  Peru;  to  which
he  gave  the  name  of  St.  Michael.

As  Pizarro  continued  to  advance  towards  the  centre
of  the  Peruvian  empire,  he  gradually  received  more
full  information  concerning  its  extent  and  policy,  as
well  as  the  situation  of  its affairs  at  that  juncture.
Without  some  knowledge  of  these,  he  could  not  have
conducted  his  operations  with  propriety;  and  without
a  suitable  attention  to  them,  it  is  impossible  to  account
for  the  progress  which  the  Spaniards  had  already  made,
or  to  unfold  the  causes  of  their  subsequent  success.
state  of At  the  time  when  the Spaniards invaded
vianem-'  Peru,  the  dominions  of  its  sovereigns  extended
pire* in  length,  from  north  to south,  above  fifteen
hundred  miles  along  the  Pacific  ocean. Its  breadth,
from  east  to  west,  was  much  less  considerable;  being
uniformly  bounded  by  the  vast  ridge  of  the  Andes,
stretching  from  its  one  extremity  to  the  other. Peru,
like  the  rest  of  the  New  World,  was  originally  possessed
by  small  independent  tribes,  differing  from  each  other
in  manners,  and  in  their  forms  of  rude  policy. All,
however,  were  so  little  civilized,  that,  if  the  traditions
concerning  their  mode  of  life,  preserved  among  their
descendants,  deserve  credit,  they  must  be  classed  among
the  most  unimproved  savages  of  America. Strangers
to  every  species  of  cultivation  or  regular  industry,  with-
out any  fixed  residence,  and  unacquainted  with  those
sentiments  and  obligations  which  form  the  first  bond
of  social  union,  they  are  said  to  have  roamed  about
naked  in  the  forests,  with  which  the  country  was  then
covered,  more  like  wild  beasts  than  like  men. After
they  had  struggled  for  several  ages  with  the  hardships
and  calamities  which  are  inevitable  in  such  a  state,
and  when  no  circumstance  seemed  to  indicate  the  ap-
proach of  any  uncommon  effort  towards  improvement,

250  AMERICA.  [1532.

we  are  told  that  there  appeared,  on  the  banks  of  the
lakeTitiaca,a  man  and  woman  of  majestic  form,  clothed
in  decent  garments.  They  declared  themselves  to  be
children  of  the  Sun,  sent  by  their  beneficent  parent,
who  beheld  with  pity  the  miseries  of  the  human  race,  to
instruct  and  to  reclaim  them.  At  their  persuasion,  en-
forced by  reverence  for  the  divinity  in  whose  name  they
were  supposed  to  speak,  several  of  the  dispersed  sa-
vages united  together,  and  receiving  their  commands
as  heavenly  injunctions,  followed  them  to  Cuzco,  where
they  settled  and  began  to  lay  the  foundations  of  a  city.
Manco  Capac  and  Mama  Ocollo,  for  such  were  the
names  of  those  extraordinary  personages,  having  thus
collected  some  wandering  tribes,  formed  that  social
union,  which,  by  multiplying  the  desires,  and  uniting
the  efforts  of  the  human  species,  excites  industry,  and
leads  to  improvement.  Manco  Capac  instructed  the
men  in  agriculture,  and  other  useful  arts.  Mama
Ocollo  taught  the  women  to  spin  and  to  weave.  By
the  labour  of  the  one  sex,  subsistence  became  less  pre-
carious ;  by  that  of  the  other,  life  was  rendered  more
comfortable.  After  securing  the  objects  of  first  neces-
sity in  an  infant  state,  by  providing  food,  raiment,  and
habitations,  for  the  rude  people  of  whom  he  took
charge,  Manco  Capac  turned  his  attention  towards
introducing  such  laws  and  policy  as  might  perpetuate
their  happiness.  By  his  institutions,  which  shall  be
more  particularly  explained  hereafter,  the  various  rela-
tions in  private  life  were  established,  and  the  duties  re-
sulting from  them  prescribed  with  such  propriety,  as
gradually  formed  a  barbarous  people  to  decency  of
manners.  In  public  administration,  the  functions  of
persons  in  authority  were  so  precisely  defined,  and  the
subordination  of  those  under  their  jurisdiction  main-
tained with  such  a  steady  hand,  that  the  society  in
\  '  Ich  he  presided,  soon  assumed  the  aspect  of  a  regu-
lar and  well-governed  state.

1532.]  BOOK  VI.  25i

Thus,  according  to  the  Indian  tradition,  was  founded
the  empire  of  the  Incas  or  Lords  of  Peru.  At  first  its
extent  was  small.  The  territory  of  Manco  Oapac  did
not  reach  above  eight  leagues  from  Cuzco.  But  within
its  narrow  precincts  he  exercised  absolute  and  uncon-
trolled authority.  His  successors,  as  their  dominions
extended,  arrogated  a  similar  jurisdiction  over  the  new
subjects  which  they  acquired;  the  despotism  of  Asia
was  not  more  complete.  The  Incas  were  not  only
obeyed  as  monarchs,  but  revered  as  divinities.  Their
blood  was  held  to  be  sacred,  and,  by  prohibiting  inter-
marriages with  the  people,  was  never  contaminated  by
mixing  with  that  of  any  other  race.  The  family,  thus
separated  from  the  rest  of  the  nation,  was  distinguished
by  peculiarities  in  dress  and  ornaments,  which  it  was
unlawful  for  others  to  assume.  The  monarch  himself
appeared  with  ensigns  of  royalty  reserved  for  him
alone ;  and  received  from  his  subjects  marks  of  obse-
quious homage  and  respect,  which  approached  almost
to  adoration. .

But,  among  the  Peruvians,  this  unbounded  power  of
their  monarchs  seems  to  have  been  uniformly  accom-
panied with  attention  to  the  good  of  their  subjects.  It
was  not  the  rage  of  conquest,  if  we  may  believe  the
accounts  of  their  countrymen,  that  prompted  the  Incas
to  extend  their  dominions,  but  the  desire  of  diffusing
the  blessings  of  civilization,  and  the  knowledge  of  the
arts  which  they  possessed,  among  the  barbarous  people
whom  they  reduced.  .  During  a  succession  of  twelve
monarchs,  it  is  said  that  not  one  deviated  from  this
beneficent  character.4

When  the  Spaniards  first  visited  the  coast  of  Peru,
in  the  year  1526,  Huana  Capac,  the  twelfth  monarch
from  the  founder  of  the  state,  was  seated  on  the  throne.
He  is  represented  as  a  prince  distinguished  not  only
for  the  pacific  virtues  peculiar  to  the  race,  but  eminent

*  Cicca  de  Leon,  Chron.  c.  44. Hcrrera,  dec.  S.  lib.  x.  c.  4.  dec.  5.  lib.  ni.  c.  17.

252  AMERICA.  [1532.

for  his  martial  talents.  By  his  victorious  arms  the
kingdom  of  Quito  was  subjected,  a  conquest  of  such
extent  and  importance  as  almost  doubled  the  power  of
the  Peruvian  empire.  He  was  fond  of  residing  in  the
capital  of  tliat  valuable  province,  which  he  had  added
to  his  dominions  ;  and  notwithstanding;  the  ancient  and
fundamental  law  of  the  monarchy  against  polluting  the
royal  blood  by  any  foreign  alliance,  he  married  the
daughter  of  the  vanquished  monarch  of  Quito.  She
bore  him  a  son  named  Atahualpa,  whom,  on  his  death
at  Quito,  which  seems  to  have  happened  about  the  year
1529,  he  appointed  his  successor  in  that  kingdom,
leaving  the  rest  of  his  dominions  to  Huascar,  his  eldest
son,  by  another  of  the  royal  race.  Greatly  as  the  Pe-
ruvians revered  the  memory  of  a  monarch  who  had
reigned  with  greater  reputation  and  splendour  than
any  of  his  predecessors,  the  destination  of  Huana  Ca-
pac  concerning  the  succession  appeared  so  repugnant
to  a  maxim  coeval  with  the  empire,  and  founded  on
authority  deemed  sacred,  that  it  was  no  sooner  known
at  Cuzco  than  it  excited  general  disgust.  Encouraged
by  those  sentiments  of  his  subjects,  Huascar  required
his  brother  to  renounce  the  government  of  Quito,  and
to  acknowledge  him  as  his  lawful  superior.  But  it  had
been  the  first  care  of  Atahualpa  to  gain  a  large  body
of  troops  which  had  accompanied  his  father  to  Quito.
These  were  the  flower  of  the  Peruvian  warriors,  to
whose  valour  Huana  Capac  had  been  indebted  for  all
his  victories.  Relying  on  their  support,  Atahualpa
first  eluded  his  brothers  demand,  and  then  marched
against  him  in  hostile  array.

Thus  the  ambition  of  two  young  men,  the  title  of  the
one  founded  on  ancient  usage,  and  that  of  the  other  as-
serted by  the  veteran  troops,  involved  Peru  in  civil
war,  a  calamity  to  which,  under  a  succession  of  vir-
tuous princes,  it  had  hitherto  been  a  stranger.  In  such
a  contest  the  issue  was  obvious. The  force  of  arms

1532.]  BOOK VI.  253

triumphed  over  the  authority  of  laws.  Atahualpa  re-
mained victorious,  and  made  a  cruel  use  of  his  victory.
Conscious  of  the  defect  in  his  own  title  to  the  crown,
he  attempted  to  exterminate  the  royal  race,  by  putting
to  death  all  the  children  of  the  Sun  descended  from
Manco  Capac,  whom  he  could  seize  either  by  force  or
stratagem.  From  a  political  motive,  the  life  of  his  un-
fortunate rival  Huascar,  who  had  been  taken  prisoner
in  a  battle  which  decided  the  fate  of  the  empire,  was
prolonged  for  some  time,  that  by  issuing  orders  in  his
name  the  usurper  might  more  easily  establish  his  own
authority."

Favour-  When  Pizarro  landed  in  the  bay  of  St.  Mat-
progress  of  thew,  this  civil  war  raged  between  the  ttto
Pizarro.  brothers  in  its  greatest  fury.  Had  he  made
any  hostile  attempt  in  his  former  visit  to  Peru  in  the
year  1527,  he  must  then  have  encountered  the  force  of
a  powerful  state,  united  under  a  monarch,  possessed  of
capacity  as  well  as  courage,  and  unembarrassed  with
any  care  that  could  divert  him  from  opposing  his  pro-
gress. But  at  this  time,  the  two  competitors,  though
they  received  early  accounts  of  the  arrival  and  violent
proceedings  of  the  Spaniards,  were  so  intent  upon  the
operations  of  a  war,  which  they  deemed  more  interest-
ing, .that  they  paid  no  attention  to  the  motions  of  an
enemy,  too  inconsiderable  in  number  to  excite  any
great  alarm,  and  to  whom,  it  would  be  easy,  as  they
imagined,  to  give  a  check  when  more  at  leisure.
He  avails  By  this  fortunate  coincidence  of  events,
it  and  ad-  whereof  Pizarro  could  have  no  foresight,  and
vances.  0f  which,  from  his  defective  mode  of  intercourse
with  the  people  of  the  country,  he  remained  long  igno-
rant, he  was  permitted  to  carry  on  his  operations  unmo-
lested, and  advanced  to  the  centre  of  a  great  empire
before  one  effort  of  its  power  was  exerted  to  stop  his

u  Zarate,  lib.  i.  c.  15. Vega,  1.  lib.  is.  c.  12.  and  32—40. Herrera,  dec.  5.
lib.  i.  c.  2.  lib.  iii.  c.  17.

254  AMERICA.  [1532.

career.  During-  their  progress,  the  Spaniards  had  ac-
quired some  imperfect  knowledge  of  this  struggle  be-
tween the  two  contending  factions.  The  first  complete
information  with  respect  to  it,  they  received  from  mes-
sengers whomHuascar  sent  to  Pizarro,  in  order  to  solicit
his  aid  against  Atahualpa,  whom  he  represented  as  a
rebel  and  a  usurper."  Pizarro  perceived  at  once  the
importance  of  this  intelligence,  and  foresaw  so  clearly
all  the  advantages  which  might  be  derived  from  this
divided  state  of  the  kingdom,  which  he  had  invaded,
that  without  waiting  for  the  reinforcement  which  he
expected  from  Panama,  he  determined  to  push  forward,
while  intestine  discord  put  it  out  of  the  power  of  the
Peruvians  to  attack  him  with  their  whole-  force,  and
while,  by  taking  part,  as  circumstances  should  incline
him,  with  one  of  the  competitors,  he  might  be  enabled
with  greater  ease  to  crush  both.  Enterprising  as  the
Spaniards  of  that  age  were  in  all  their  operations
against  Americans,  and  distinguished  as  Pizarro  was
among  his  countrymen  for  daring  courage,  we  can
hardly  suppose,  that,  after  having  proceeded  hitherto
slowly,  and  with  much  caution,  he  would  have  changed
at  once  his  system  of  operation,  and  have  ventured
upon  a  measure  so  hazardous,  without  some  new  mo-
tive or  prospect  to  justify  it.

state  of  As  he  was  obliged  to  divide  his  troops,  in
his  forces.  or(jer  to  leave  a  garrison  in  St.  Michael,  suf-
ficient to  defend  a  station  of  equal  importance  as  a
place  of  retreat  in  case  of  any  disaster,  and  as  a  port
for  receiving  any  supplies  which  should  come  from
Panama,  he  began  his  march  with  a  very  slender  and
ill-accoutred  train  of  followers.  They  consisted  of
sixty-two  horsemen, x  and  a  hundred  and  two  foot-sol-
diers, of  whom  twenty  were  armed  with  cross-bows,
and  three  with  muskets.  He  directed  his  course  to-
wards Caxamalca,  a  small  town  at  the  distance  of

w  Zarale,  lib.  ii.  c.  3.  x  Sec  Note  LXXV.

1532.]  BOOK VI.  255

twelve  days'  march  from  St.  Michael,  where  Atahualpa
was  encamped  with  a  considerable  body  of  troops.
Before  he  had  proceeded  far,  an  officer  dispatched  by
the  Inca  met  him  with  a  valuable  present  from  that
prince,  accompanied  with  a  proffer  of  his  alliance,  and
assurances  of  a  friendly  reception  at  Caxamalca.  Pi-
zarro,  according  to  the  usual  artifice  of  his  countrymen
in  America,  pretended  to  come  as  the  ambassador  of  a
very  powerful  monarch,  and  declared  that  he  was  now
advancing  with  an  intention  to  offer  Atahualpa  his  aid
against  those  enemies  who  disputed  his  title  to  the
throne/

ideas  of As  the  object  of  the  Spaniards  in  entering
viLscon- their  country  was  altogether  incomprehensible

their "le-  *°  *^e  PeruviansJ  they  nad  formed  various  con-
signs- jectures  concerning  it,  without  being  able  to
decide  whether  they  should  consider  their  new  guests
as  beings  of  a  superior  nature,  who  had  visited  them
from  some  beneficent  motive,  or  as  formidable  avengers
of  their  crimes  and  enemies  to  their  repose  and  liberty.
The  continual  professions  of  the  Spaniards,  that  they
came  to  enlighten  them  with  the  knowledge  of  truth,
and  lead  them  in  the  way  of  happiness,  favoured  the
former  opinion  ;  the  outrages  which  they  committed,
their  rapaciousness  and  cruelty,  were  awful  confirma-
tions of  the  latter.  While  in  this  state  of  uncertainty,
Pizarro's  declaration  of  his  pacific  intentions  so  far  re-
moved all  the  Inca's  fears,  that  he  determined  to  give
him  a  friendly  reception.  In  consequence  of  this  re-
solution, the  Spaniards  were  allowed  to  march  in  tran-
quillity across  the  sandy  desert  between  St.  Michael
and  Motupe,  where  the  most  feeble  effort  of  an  enemy,
added  to  the  unavoidable  distresses  which  they  suf-
fered in  passing  through  that  comfortless  region,  must
have  proved  fatal  to  them.2  From  Motupe  they  ad-
vanced towards  the  mountains  which  encompassed  the

t  Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  i.  c.  3. Xerez,  p.  189.  »  See  Note  LXXVI.

•2oO  AMERICA.  [1532.

low  country  of  Peru,  and  passed  through  a  defile  so
narrow  and  inaccessible,  that  a  few  men  mm'ht  have
defended  it  against  a  numerous  army.  But  here  like-
wise, from  the  same  inconsiderate  credulity  of  the  Inca,
the  Spaniards  met  with  no  opposition,  and  took  quiet
possession  of  a  fort  erected  for  the  security  of  that
important  station.  As  they  now  approached  near  to
Caxamalca,  Atahualpa  renewed  his  professions  of
friendship  ;  and  as  an  evidence  of  their  sincerity,  sent
them  presents  of  greater  value  than  the  former.
.  .  On  entering  Caxamalca,  Pizarro  took  pos-

Arrive  at  °  .  *  .

Caxa-  session  of  a  large  court,  on  one  side  of  which
was  a  house  which  the  Spanish  historians  call
a  palace  of  the  Inca,  and  on  the  other  a  temple  of  the
Sun,  the  whole  surrounded  with  a  strong  rampart  or
wall  of  earth.  When  he  had  posted  his  troops  in  this
advantageous  station,  he  dispatched  his  brother  Ferdi-
nand and  Hernando  Soto  to  the  camp  of  Atahualpa,
which  was  about  a  league  distant  from  the  town.  He
instructed  them  to  confirm  the  declaration  which  he
had  formerly  made  of  his  pacific  disposition,  and  to
desire  an  interview  with  the  Inca,  that  he  might  ex-
plain more  fully  the  intention  of  the  Spaniards  in  visit-
ing his  country.  They  were  treated  with  all  the  re-
spectful hospitality  usual  among  the  Peruvians  in  the
reception  of  their  most  cordial  friends,  and  Atahualpa,
promised  to  visit  the  Spanish  commander  next  day  in
his  quarters.  The  decent  deportment  of  the  Peruvian
monarch,  the  order  of  his  court,  and  the  reverence  with
which  his  subjects  approached  his  person  and  obeyed
his  commands,  astonished  those  Spaniards,  who  had
never  met  in  America  with  any  thing  more  dignified
than  the  petty  cazique  of  a  barbarous  tribe.  But  their
eyes  were  still  more  powerfully  attracted  by  the  vast  pro-
fusion of  wealth  which  they  observed  in  the  Inca's  camp.
The  rich  ornaments  worn  by  him  and  his  attendants,
the  vessels  of  gold  and  silver  in  which  the  repast  of-

1532.]  BOOK VI.  257

fered  to  them  was  served  up,  the  multitude  of  utensils
of  every  kind  formed  of  those  precious  metals,  opened
prospects  far  exceeding  any  idea  of  opulence  that  a
European  of  the  sixteenth  century  could  form.

On  their  return  to  Caxamalca,  while  their

Perfidious  .,,.'.

scheme  of  minds  were  yet  warm  with  admiration  and  de-
sire of  the  wealth  which  they  had  beheld,  they
gave  such  a  description  of  it  to  their  countrymen,  as
confirmed  Pizarro,  in  a  resolution  which  he  had  already
taken.  From  his  own  observation  of  American  man-
ners during  his  long  service  in  the  New  World,  as  well
as  from  the  advantages  which  Cortes  had  derived  from
seizing  Montezuma,  he  knew  of  what  consequence  it
was  to  have  the  Inca  in  his  power.  For  this  purpose,
he  formed  a  plan  as  daring  as  it  was  perfidious.  Not-
withstanding the  character  that  he  had  assumed  of  an
ambassador  from  a  powerful  monarch,  who  courted
an  alliance  with  the  Inca,  and  in  violation  of  the  re-
peated offers  which  he  had  made  to  him  of  his  own
friendship  and  assistance,  he  determined  to  avail  him-
self of  the  unsuspicious  simplicity  with  which  Ata-
hualpa  relied  on  his  professions,  and  to  seize  the  per-
son of  the  Inca  during  the  interview  to  which  he  had
invited  him.  He  prepared  for  the  execution  of  his
scheme  with  the  same  deliberate  arrangement,  and
with  as  little  compunction,  as  if  it  had  reflected  no  dis-
grace on  himself  or  his  country.  He  divided  his  ca-
valry into  three  small  squadrons,  under  the  command
of  his  brother  Ferdinand,  Soto,  and  Benalcazar ;  his
infantry  were  formed  in  one  body,  except  twenty  of
most  tried  courage,  whom  he  kept  near  his  own  person
to  support  him  in  the  dangerous  service  which  he  re-
served for  himself;  the  artillery,  consisting  of  two
field-pieces,a  and  the  cross-bowmen,  were  placed  op-
posite to  the  avenue  by  which  Atahualpa  was  to  ap-
proach. All  were commanded  to  keep within  the

*  Xerez,  p.  194.
VOL. VII.  S

5W8  AMERICA.  [1532.

square,  and  not  to  move  until  the  signal  for  action  was

given.

Nov  J6 Early in  the  morning the Peruvian camp
visited  by  was  all  in  motion. But  as  Atahualpa  was  soli-

the  Inca. .  •  1 i  i -i  l

citous  to  appear  with  the  greatest  splendour  and
magnificence  in  his  first  interview  with  the  strangers,
the  preparations  for  this  were  so  tedious,  that  the  day
was  far  advanced  before  he  began  his  march.  Even
then,  lest  the  order  of  the  procession  should  be  de-
ranged, he  moved  so  slowly,  that  the  Spaniards  be-
came impatient,  and  apprehensive  that  some  suspicion
of  their  intention  might  be  the  cause  of  this  delay.  In
order  to  remove  this,  Pizarro  dispatched  one  of  his  of-
ficers with  fresh  assurances  of  his  friendly  disposition.
At  length  the  Inca  approached.  First  of  all  appeared
four  hundred  men,  in  a  uniform  dress,  as  harbingers
to  clear  the  way  before  him.  He  himself,  sitting  on  a
throne  or  couch  adorned  with  plumes  of  various  co-
lours, and  almost  covered  with  plates  of  gold  and  silver
enriched  with  precious  stones,  was  carried  on  the
shoulders  of  his  principal  attendants.  Behind  him
came  some  chief  officers  of  his  court,  carried  in  the
same  manner.  Several  bands  of  singers  and  dancers
accompanied  this  cavalcade  ;  and  the  whole  plain  was
covered  with  troops,  amounting  to  more  than  thirty
thousand  men.

strange  As  the  Inca  drew  near  the  Spanish  quarters,
Sjther  father  Vincent  Valverde,  chaplain  to  the  expe-
Vaiverde.  Jition,  advanced  with  a  crucifix  in  one  hand,
and  a  breviary  in  the  other,  and  in  a  long  discourse
explained  to  him  the  doctrine  of  the  creation,  the  fall
of  Adam,  the  incarnation,  the  sufferings  and  resurrec-
tion of  Jesus  Christ,  the  appointment  of  St.  Peter  as
God's  vicegerent  on  earth,  the  transmission  of  his  apo-
stolic power  by  succession  to  the  popes,  the  donation
made  to  the  king  of  Castile  by  pope  Alexander  of  all
the  regions  of  the  New  World. In  consequence  of  all

1532.]  BOOK VI.  25M

this,  he  required  Atahualpa  to  embrace  the  Christian
faith,  to  acknowledge  the  supreme  jurisdiction  of  the
pope,  and  to  submit  to  the  king  of  Castile  as  his  lawful
sovereign ;  promising,  if  he  complied  instantly  with
this  requisition,  that  the  Castilian  monarch  would  pro-
tect his  dominions,  and  permit  him  to  continue  in  the
exercise  of  his  royal  authority;  but  if  he  should  im-
piously refuse  to  obey  this  summons,  he  denounced
war  against  him  in  his  master's  name,  and  threatened
him  with  the  most  dreadful  effects  of  his  vengeance.
Reply  of  This  strange  harangue,  unfolding  deep  mys-
the  inca.  teries,  and  alluding  to  unknown  facts,  of  which
no  power  of  eloquence  could  have  conveyed  at  once  a
distinct  idea  to  an  American,  was  so  lamely  translated
by  an  unskilful  interpreter,  little  acquainted  with  the
idiom  of  the  Spanish  tongue,  and  incapable  of  ex-
pressing himself  with  propriety  in  the  language  of  the
Inca,  that  its  general  tenor  was  altogether  incompre-
hensible to  Atahualpa.  Some  parts  in  it,  of  more  ob-
vious meaning,  filled  him  with  astonishment  and  in-
dignation. His  reply,  however,  was  temperate.  He
began  with  observing,  that  he  was  lord  of  the  domi-
nions over  which  he  reigned  by  hereditary  succession ;
and  added,  that  he  could  not  conceive  how  a  foreign
priest  should  pretend  to  dispose  of  territories  which
did  not  belong  to  him  ;  that  if  such  a  preposterous
grant  had  been  made,  he,  who  was  the  rightful  pos-
sessor, refused  to  confirm  it :  that  he  had  no  inclina-
tion to  renounce  the  religious  institutions  established
by  his  ancestors ;  nor  would  he  forsake  the  service  of
the  Sun,  the  immortal  divinity  whom  he  and  his  people
revered,  in  order  to  worship  the  God  of  the  Spaniards,
who  was  subject  to  death ;  that  with  respect  to  other
matters  contained  in  his  discourse,  as  he  had  never
heard  of  them  before,  and  did  not  now  understand
their  meaning,  he  desired  to  know  where  the  priest  had
learned  things  so extraordinary. " In  this  book,"

s  2

2C0  AMERICA.  [1532.

answered  Valverde,  reaching  out  to  him  his  breviary.
The  Inca  opened  it  eagerly,  and  turning  over  the
leaves,  lifted  it  to  his  ear  :  "  This,"  says  he,  "  is  silent :
it  tells  me  nothing ;"  and  threw  it  with  disdain  to^the
ground.  The  enraged  monk,  running  towards  his
countrymen,  cried  out,  "  To  arms,  Christians,  to  arms  ;
the  word  of  God  is  insulted  ;  avenge  this  profanation
on  those  impious  dogs."b

Pizarro,  who,  during  this  long'  conference,

Pizarro  # • \rjK* ■*

attacks  the  had  with  difficulty  restrained  his  soldiers,  eager
s'  to  seize  the  rich  spoils  of  which  they  had  now
so  near  a  view,  immediately  gave  the  signal  of  assault.
At  once  the  martial  music  struck  up,  the  cannon  and
muskets  began  to  fire,  the  horse  sallied  out  fiercely  to
the  charge,  the  infantry  rushed  on  sword  in  hand.  The
Peruvians,  astonished  at  the  suddenness  of  an  attack
which  they  did  not  expect,  and  dismayed  with  the
destructive  effect  of  the  fire-arms,  and  the  irresistible
impression  of  the  cavalry,  fled  with  universal  conster-
nation on  every  side,  without  attempting  either  to
annoy  the  enemy,  or  to  defend  themselves.  Pizarro,  at
the  head  of  his  chosen  band,  advanced  directly  towards
the  Inca ;  and  though  his  nobles  advanced  around  him
with  officious  zeal,  and  fell  in  numbers  at  his  feet,  while
they  vied  one  with  another  in  sacrificing  their  own
lives,  that  they  might  cover  the  sacred  person  of  their
sovereign,  the  Spaniards  soon  penetrated  to  the  royal
And  seizes  seat  5  and  Pizarro,  seizing  the  Inca  by  the  arm,
the  inca.  dragged  him  to  the  ground,  and  carried  him  as
a  prisoner  to  his  quarters.  The  fate  of  the  monarch
increased  the  precipitate  flight  of  his  followers.  The
Spaniards  pursued  them  towards  every  quarter,  and
with  deliberate  and  unrelenting  barbarity  continued  to
slaughter  wretched  fugitives,  who  never  once  offered
to  resist.  The  carnage  did  not  cease  until  the  close  of
day. Above four  thousand Peruvians were killed.

*  See  Note  LXXVII.

1532.]  BOOK  VI.  261

Not  a  single  Spaniard  fell,  nor  was  one  wounded  but
Pizarro  himself,  whose  hand  was  slightly  hurt  by  one
of  his  own  soldiers,  while  struggling  eagerly  to  lay
hold  on  the  Inca.c

The  plunder  of  the  field  was  rich  beyond  any  idea
which  the  Spaniards  had  yet  formed  concerning  the
wealth  of  Peru,  and  they  were  so  transported  with  the
value  of  the  acquisition,  as  well  as  the  greatness  of  their
success,  that  they  passed  the  night  in  the  extravagant
exultation  natural  to  indigent  adventurers  on  such  an
extraordinary  change  of  fortune.
_  .  ,,. At  first  the  captive  monarch  could hardly

Dejection  ,  r  J

of  the  believe  a  calamity  which  he  so  little  expected
to  be  real.  But  he  soon  felt  all  the  misery  of
his  fate,  and  the  dejection  into  which  he  sunk  was  in
proportion  to  the  height  of  grandeur  from  which  he  had
fallen.  Pizarro,  afraid  of  losing  all  the  advantages
which  he  hoped  to  derive  from  the  possession  of  such
a  prisoner,  laboured  to  console  him  with  professions
of  kindness  and  respect,  that  corresponded  ill  with  his
actions.  By  residing  among  the  Spaniards,  the  Inca
quickly  discovered  their  ruling  passion,  which,  indeed
they  were  nowise  solicitous  to  conceal,  and  by  applying
to  that,  made  an  attempt  to  recover  his  liberty.  He
offered  as  a  ransom  what  astonished  the  Spa-
of  a  ran-  niards,  even  after  all  they  now  knew  concern-
ing the  opulence  of  his  kingdom.  The  apart-
ment in  which  he  was  confined  was  twenty-two  feet  in
length  and  sixteen  in  breadth ;  he  undertook  to  fill  it
with  vessels  of  gold  as  high  as  he  could  reach.  Pizarro
closed  eagerly  with  this  tempting  proposal,  and  a  line
was  drawn  upon  the  walls  of  the  chamber,  to  mark  the
stipulated  height  to  which  the  treasure  was  to  rise.

Atahualpa,  transported  with  having  obtained  some
prospect  of  liberty,  took  measures  instantly  for  fulfilling
his  part  of  the  agreement,  by  sending  messengers  to
Cuzco,  Quito,  and  other  places,  where  gold  had  been

«  See  Note  LXXVIII.

262  AMERICA.  [1532.

amassed  in  largest  quantities,  either  for  adorning  the
temples  of  the  gods,  or  the  houses  of  the  Inca,  to  bring
what  was  necessary  for  completing  his  ransom  directly
to  Caxamalca.  Though  Atahualpa  was  now  in  the  cus-
tody of  his  enemies,  yet  so  much  were  the  Peruvians
accustomed  to  respect  every  mandate  issued  by  their
sovereign,  that  his  orders  were  executed  with  the  great-
est alacrity.  Soothed  with  hopes  of  recovering  his  li-
berty by  this  means,  the  subjects  of  the  Inca  were  afraid
of  endangering  his  life  by  forming  any  other  scheme  for
his  relief;  and  though  the  force  of  the  empire  was  still
entire,  no  preparations  were  made,  and  no  army  assem-
bled to  avenge  their  own  wrongs  or  those  of  their
monarch.d  The  Spaniards  remained  in  Caxamalca
The  Spa-  tranquil  and  unmolested.  Small  detachments
different**  °f  tneir  number  marched  into  remote  provinces
provinces.  0f  the  empire,  and,  instead  of  meeting  with  any
opposition,  were  every  where  received  with  marks  of  the
most  submissive  respect.6

Inconsiderable  as  those  parties  were,  and  de-
auWef0  sirous  as  Pizarro  might  be  to  obtain  some  know-
inforce-8"  kdge  of  the  interior  state  of  the  country,  he  could
mem. not  have  ventured  upon  any  diminution  of  his

December. .  r  J

main  body,  it  he  had  not  about  this  time  re-
ceived an  account  of  Almagro's  having  landed  at  St.
Michael  with  such  a  reinforcement  as  would  almost
double  the  number  of  his  followers/  The  arrival  of
this  long-expected  succour  was  not  more  agreeable  to
the  Spaniards  than  alarming  to  the  Inca.  He  saw  the
power  of  his  enemies  increase  ;  and  as  he  knew  neither
the  source  whence  they  derived  their  supplies,  nor  the
means  by  which  they  were  conveyed  to  Peru,  he  could
not  foresee  to  what  a  height  the  inundation  that  poured
1533.  in  upon  his  dominions  might  rise.  While  dis-
quieted with  such  apprehensions,  he  learned  that
death- some  Spaniards,  in  their  way  to  Cuzco,  had

*  Xerez,  20.5.  «  Sec  Note  LXXIX.

'  Xerez,  204. Herrcra,  dec.  6.  lib.  iii.  c.  1,2.

Huajcar
put  to

1533.]  BOOK  VI.  263

visited  his  brother  Huascar  in  the  place  where  he  kept
him  confined,  and  that  the  captive  prince  had  repre-
sented to  them  the  justice  of  his  own  cause,  and  as  an
inducement  to  espouse  it,  had  promised  them  a  quantity
of  treasure  greatly  beyond  that  which  Atahualpa  had
engaged  to  pay  for  his  ransom.  If  the  Spaniards  should
listen  to  this  proposal,  Atahualpa  perceived  his  own
destruction  to  be  inevitable ;  and  suspecting  that  their
insatiable  thirst  for  gold  would  tempt  them  to  lend
a  favourable  ear  to  it,  he  determined  to  sacrifice  his
brother's  life,  that  he  might  save  his  own ;  and  his
orders  for  this  purpose  were  executed  like  all  his  other
commands,  with  scrupulous  punctuality.8
TheSpani-  Meanwhile,  Indians  daily  arrived  at  Caxa-
ards  make  maica  from  different  parts  of  the  kino-dom,  load-

a  division  *  o  '

of  the ed  with  treasure. A  great  part  of  the  stipulated

Spoil.  .  1  1 A 1  V

quantity  was  now  amassed,  and  Atahualpa  as-
sured the  Spaniards  that  the  only  thing  which  prevented
the  whole  from  being  brought  in,  was  the  remoteness  of
the  provinces  where  it  was  deposited.  But  such  vast
piles  of  gold  presented  continually  to  the  view  of  needy
soldiers,  had  so  inflamed  their  avarice,  that  it  was  impos-
sible any  longer  to  restrain  their  impatience  to  obtain
possession  of  this  rich  booty.  Orders  were  given  for
melting  down  the  whole,  except  some  pieces  of  curious
fabric,  reserved  as  a  present  for  the  emperor.  After
setting  apart  the  fifth  due  to  the  crown,  and  a  hundred
thousand  pesos  as  a  donative  to  the  soldiers  which  ar-
rived with  Almagro,  there  remained  one  million  five
hundred  and  twenty-eight  thousand  five  hundred  pesos
T ,  ot to  Pizarro  and  his  followers. The  festival  of

July  25.  ,

St.  James,  the  patron  saint  of  Spain,  was  the
day  chosen  for  the  partition  of  this  enormous  sum,  and
the  manner  of  conducting  it  strongly  marks  the  strange
alliance  of  fanaticism  with  avarice,  which  I  have  more
than  once  had  occasion  to  point  out  as  a  striking  feature

s  Zarate,  lib.  ii.  c.  6. Goraara  Hist.  c.  115. Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  iii.  c.  2.

«2(j4  AMERICA.  [1533.

in  the  character  of  the  conquerors  of  the  New  World.
Though  assembled  to  divide  the  spoils  of  an  innocent
people,  procured  by  deceit,  extortion,  and  cruelty,  the
transaction  began  with  a  solemn  invocation  of  the  name
of  God,h  as  if  they  could  have  expected  the  guidance  of
Heaven  in  distributing  those  wages  of  iniquity.  In  this
division  above  eight  thousand  pesos,  at  that  time  not
inferior  in  effective  value  to  as  many  pounds  sterling  in
the  present  century,  fell  to  the  share  of  each  horseman,
and  half  that  sum  to  each  foot-soldier.  Pizarro  him-
self and  his  officers,  received  dividends  in  proportion
to  the  dignity  of  their  rank.

The  effect There is  no  example  in  history  of  such  a
sudden  acquisition  of  wealth  by  military  ser-
vice, nor  was  ever  a  sum  so  great  divided  among  so  small
a  number  of  soldiers. Many  of  them  having  received  a
recompense  for  their  services  far  beyond  their  most  san-
guine hopes,  were  so  impatient  to  retire  from  fatigue  and
danger,  in  order  to  spend  the  remainder  of  their  days  in
their  native  country  in  ease  and  opulence,  that  they  de-
manded their  discharge  with  clamorous  importunity.
Pizarro,  sensible  that  from  such  men  he  could  expect
neither  enterprise  in  action  nor  fortitude  in  suffering,
and  persuaded  that  wherever  they  went  the  display
of  their  riches  would  allure  adventures,  less  opulent,
but  more  hardy,  to  his  standard,  granted  their  suit
without  reluctance,  and  permitted  above  sixty  of  them
to  accompany  his  brother  Ferdinand,  whom  he  sent  to
Spain  with  an  account  of  his  success,  and  the  present
destined  for  the  emperor.'

Ti.e  inca  The  Spaniards  having  divided  among  them
S?™iibcr*y  tne  treasure  amassed  for  the  Inca's  ransom,  he
in  vain,  insisted  with  them  to  fulfil  their  promise  of
setting  him  at  liberty.  But  nothing  was  farther  from
Pizarro's thoughts. During  his  long  service  in  the

h  Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  iii.  c.  3.
1  Hcrreia,  dec.  o.  lib.  iii.  c.  4. Vega,  p.  2.  lib  i.  c.  38.

1533.]  BOOK  VI.  265

New  World,  he  had  imbibed  those  ideas  and  maxims
of  his  fellow-soldiers,  which  led  them  to  consider  its
inhabitants  as  an  inferior  race,  neither  worthy  of  the
name,  nor  entitled  to  the  rights,  of  men. In  his  com-
pact with  Atahualpa,  he  had  no  other  object  than  to
amuse  his  captive  with  such  a  prospect  of  recovering
his  liberty,  as  might  induce  him  to  lend  all  the  aid  of
his  authority  towards  collecting  the  wealth  of  his  king-
dom. Having  now  accomplished  this,  he  no  longer
regarded  his  plighted  faith ;  and  at  the  very  time  when
the  credulous  prince  hoped  to  be  replaced  on  his  throne,
he  had  secretly  resolved  to  bereave  him  of  life. Many
circumstances  seem  to  have  concurred  in  prompting
him  to  this action,  the  most  criminal  and  atrocious
that  stains  the  Spanish  name,  amidst  all  the  deeds  of
violence  committed  in  carrying  on  the  conquests  of
the  New  World.

He  and Though  Pizarro  had  seized  the  Inca,  in
the  spa- imitation  of  Cortes's  conduct towards  the
tuaiiy  jea-  Mexican  monarch,  he  did  not  possess  talents
for  carrying  on  the  same  artful  plan  of  policy.
Destitute  of  the  temper  and  address  requisite  for
gaining  the confidence  of  his  prisoner, he  never
reaped  all  the  advantages  which  might  have  been
derived  from  being  master  of  his  person  and  autho-
rity. Atahualpa  was,  indeed,  a  prince  of  greater
abilities  and discernment than  Montezuma, and
seems  to  have  penetrated  more  thoroughly  into  the
character  and  intentions  of  the  Spaniards. Mutual
suspicion  and  distrust  accordingly  took  place  be-
tween them. The  strict  attention  with  which  it  was
necessary  to  guard  a  captive  of  such  importance,
greatly  increased  the  fatigue  of  military  duty. The
utility  of  keeping  him  appeared  inconsiderable ;  and
Pizarro  felt  him  as  an  encumbrance,  from  which  he
wished  to  be  delivered.1"

k  Herrera,  dec.  o.  lib.  iii.  c.  4.

266  AMERICA.  [1533.

Aimagro Almagro  and  his  followers  had  made  a  de-
and  ir.» mand  of  an  equal  share  in  the  Inca's  ransom ;

followers  »  '

demand  and  though  Pizarro  had  bestowed  upon  the
private  men  the  large  gratuity  which  I  have
mentioned,  and  endeavoured  to  soothe  their  leader
by  presents  of  great  value,  they  still  continued  dis-
satisfied. They  were  apprehensive,  that  as  long  as
Atahualpa  remained  a  prisoner,  Pizarro's  soldiers
would  apply  whatever  treasure  should  be  acquired,
to  make  up  what  was  wanting  of  the  quantity  sti-
pulated for  his  ransom,  and  under  that  pretext
exclude  them  from  any  part  of  it.  They  insisted
eagerly  on  putting  the  Inca  to  death,  that  all  the
adventurers  in  Peru  might  thereafter  be  on  an  equal
footing.1

Motives  Pizarro  himself  began  to  be  alarmed  with
ducC'd  p"  accounts  °f  forces  assembling  in  the  remote
zarroto  provinces  of  the  empire,  and  suspeGted  Ata-
hualpa of  having  issued  orders  for  that  pur-
pose. These  fears  and  suspicions  were  artfully
increased  by  Philippillo,  one  of  the  Indians,  whom
Pizarro  had  carried  off  from  Tumbez  in  the  year
1527,  and  whom  he  employed  as  an  interpreter.
The  function  which  he  performed  admitting  this
man  to  familiar  intercourse  with  the  captive  mo-
narch, he  presumed,  notwithstanding  the  meanness
of  his  birth,  to  raise  his  affections  to  a  Coya,  or  de-
scendant of  the  Sun,  one  of  Atahualpa' s  wives  ;  and
seeing  no  prospect  of  gratifying  that  passion  during
the  life  of  the  monarch,  he  endeavoured  to  fill  the
ears  of  the  Spaniards  with  such  accounts  of  the  Inca's
secret  designs  and  preparations,  as  might  awaken
their  jealousy,  and  incite  them  to  cut  him  off.

While  Almagro  and  his  followers  openly  demanded
the  life  of  the  Inca,  and  Philippillo  laboured  to  ruin
him  by  private  machinations,  that  unhappy  prince

1  Zarale,  lib.  ii.  c.  7. Vega,  p.  2.  lib.  i.  c.  7. Ilerrcra,  dec.  5.  lib.  iii.  c.  4.

1533.]  BOOK VI.  267

inadvertently  contributed  to  hasten  his  own  fate.
During  his  confinement  he  had  attached  himself
with  peculiar  affection  to  Ferdinand  Pizarro  and
Hernando  Soto ;  who,  as  they  were  persons  of  birth
and  education  superior  to  the  rough  adventurers
with  whom  they  served,  were  accustomed  to  behave
with  more  decency  and  attention  to  the  captive
monarch.  Soothed  with  this  respect  from  persons
of  such  high  rank,  he  delighted  in  their  society.
But  in  the  presence  of  the  governor  he  was  always
uneasy  and  overawed.  This  dread  soon  came  to  be
mingled  with  contempt.  Among  all  the  European
arts,  what  he  admired  most  was  that  of  reading  and
writing ;  and  he  long  deliberated  with  himself,  whe-
ther he  should  regard  it  as  a  natural  or  acquired
talent.  In  order  to  determine  this,  he  desired  one
of  the  soldiers,  who  guarded  him,  to  write  the  name
of  God  on  the  nail  of  his  thumb.  This  he  shewed
successively  to  several  Spaniards,  asking  its  mean-
ing; and  to  his  amazement,  they  all,  without  hesita-
tion, returned  the  same  answer.  At  length  Pizarro
entered ;  and,  on  presenting  it  to  him,  he  blushed,
and  with  some  confusion  was  obliged  to  acknow-
ledge his  ignorance.  From  that  moment  Atahualpa
considered  him  as  a  mean  person,  less  instructed
than  his  own  soldiers  ;  and  he  had  not  address
enough  to  conceal  the  sentiments  with  which  this
discovery  inspired  him.  To  be  the  object  of  a
barbarian's  scorn,  not  only  mortified  the  pride  of
Pizarro,  but  excited  such  resentment  in  his  breast,
as  added  force  to  all  the  other  considerations  which
prompted  him  to  put  the  Inca  to  death.™

But  in  order  to  give  some  colour  of  justice

to  this  violent  action, and  that  he  himself

might  be  exempted  from  standing  singly  responsible

for  the  commission  of  it,  Pizarro  resolved  to  try  the

m  Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  iii.  c.  4. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  i.  c.38.

268  AMERICA.  [1533.

Inca  with  all  the  formalities  observed  in  the  criminal
courts of  Spain. Pizarro himself, and  Almagro,
with  two  assistants,  were  appointed  judges,  with
full  power  to  acquit  or  to  condemn;  an  attorney-
general  was  named  to  carry  on  the  prosecution  in
the  kings  name  ;  counsellors  were  chosen  to  assist
the  prisoner  in  his  defence; and  clerks  were  or-
dained to  record  the  proceedings  of  court. Before
this  strange  tribunal,  a  charge  was  exhibited  still
more  amazing. It consisted of  various  articles ;
that  Atahualpa,  though  a  bastard,  had  dispossessed
the  rightful  owner  of  the  throne,  and  usurped  the
regal  power ;  that  he  had  put  his  brother  and  lawful
sovereign  to  death ;  that  he  was  an  idolater,  and
had  not  only  permitted,  but  commanded  the  offering
of  human  sacrifices ;  that  he  had  a  great  number  of
concubines  ; that  since  his  imprisonment  he  had
wasted  and  embezzled  the  royal  treasures,  which
now  belonged  of  right  to  the  conquerors ;  that  he
had  incited  his  subjects  to  take  arms  against  the
Spaniards. On  these  heads  of  accusation,  some  of
which  are  so  ludicrous,  others  so  absurd,  that  the
effrontery  of  Pizarro,  in  making  them  the  foundation
of  a  serious  procedure,  is  not  less  surprising  than
his  injustice,  did  this  strange  court  go  on  to  try  the
sovereign  of  a  great  empire,  over  whom  it  had  no
jurisdiction. With  respect  to  each  of  the  articles,
witnesses  were  examined ; but  as  they  delivered
their  evidence  in  their  native  tongue,  Philippillo  had
it  in  his  power  to  give  their  words  whatever  turn
best  suited  his  malevolent  intentions. To  judges
predetermined  in  their  opinion,  this  evidence  ap-
peared sufficient. They pronounced Atahualpa
He  is  con-  guilty*  ano^  condemned  him  to  be  burnt  alive,
demned, Friar  Valverde  prostituted  the  authority  of
his  sacred  function  to  confirm  this  sentence,  and  by
his  signature  warranted  it  to  be  just. Astonished

1533.]  BOOK VI.  269

at  his  fate,  Atahualpa  endeavoured  to  avert  it  by
tears,  by  promises,  and  by  entreaties,  that  he  might
be  sent  to  Spain,  where  a  monarch  would  be  the
arbiter  of  his  lot.  But  pity  never  touched  the  un-
feeling heart  of  Pizarro.  He  ordered  him  to  be  led
instantly  to  execution ;  and,  what  added  to  the  bit-
terness of  his  last  moments,  the  same  monk  who
had  just  ratified  his  doom,  offered  to  console,  and
attempted  to  convert  him.  The  most  powerful  ar-
gument Valverde  employed  to  prevail  with  him  to
embrace  the  Christian  faith,  was  a  promise  of  miti-
gation in  his  punishment.  The  dread  of  a  cruel
death  extorted  from  the  trembling  victim  a  desire
of  receiving  baptism.  The  ceremony  was  performed;
And  exe-  and  Atahualpa,  instead  of  being  burnt,  was
cuted.  strangled  at  the  stake."
several  Happily  for  the  credit  of  the  Spanish  na-
pKte'sT18  tion,  even  among  the  profligate  adventurers
against  it.  which  it  sent  forth  to  conquer  and  desolate
the  New  World,  there  were  persons  who  retained
some  tincture  of  the  Castilian  generosity  and  honour.
Though,  before  the  trial  of  Atahualpa,  Ferdinand
Pizarro  had  set  out  for  Spain,  and  Soto  was  sent  on
a  separate  command  at  a  distance  from  Caxamalca,
this  odious  transaction  was  not  carried  on  without
censure  and  opposition.  Several  officers,  and  among
those  some  of  the  greatest  reputation  and  most  re-
spectable families  in  the  service,  not  only  remon-
strated, but  protested  against  this  measure  of  their
general,  as  disgraceful  to  their  country,  as  repugnant
to  every  maxim  of  equity,  as  a  violation  of  public
faith,  and  a  usurpation  of  jurisdiction  over  an  inde-
pendent monarch,  to  which  they  had  no  title.  But
their  laudable  endeavours  were  vain.  Numbers,  and
the  opinion  of  such  as  held  every  thing  to  be  lawful

&  Zarate,  lib.  ii.  c.  7. Xerez,  p.  233. Vega,  p.  11,  lib.  i.  c.  36,  37. Gornara
Hist.  c.  117. Herrera,  dec.  3.  lib.  iii.  c  4.

1

270  AMERICA.  [1533.

which  they  deemed  advantageous,  prevailed.  His-
tory, however,  records  even  the  unsuccessful  exer-
tions of  virtue  with  applause;  and  the  Spanish
writers,  in  relating  events  where  the  valour  of  their
nation  is  more  conspicuous  than  its  humanity,  have
not  failed  to  preserve  the  names  of  those  who  made
this  laudable  effort  to  save  their  country  from  the
"nfamy  of  having  perpetrated  such  a  crime.0
Dbsoiu-  0n  ine  death  of  Atahualpa,  Pizarro  invested
vemment"  one  of  his  sons  with  the  ensigns  of  royalty,
and  order  hoping  that  a  young  man  without  experience
might  prove  a  more  passive  instrument  in
his  hands  than  an  ambitious  monarch,  who  had  been
accustomed  to  independent  command.  The  people
of  Cuzco,  and  the  adjacent  country,  acknowledged
Manco  Capac,  a  brother  of  Huascar,  as  Inca.1'  But
neither  possessed  the  authority  which  belonged  to
a  sovereign  of  Peru.  The  violent  convulsions  into
which  the  empire  had  been  thrown,  first  by  the  civil
war  between  the  two  brothers,  and  then  by  the  in-
vasion of  the  Spaniards,  had  not  only  deranged  the
order  of  the  Peruvian  government,  but  almost  dis-
solved its  frame.  When  they  beheld  their  monarch
a  captive  in  the  power  of  strangers,  and  at  last  suf-
fering an  ignominious  death,  the  people  in  several
provinces,  as  if  they  had  been  set  free  from  every
restraint  of  law  and  decency,  broke  out  into  the
most  licentious  excesses.0-  So  many  descendants  of
the  Sun,  after  being  treated  with  the  utmost  indig-
nity, had  been  cut  off  by  Atahualpa,  that  not  only
their  influence  in  the  state  diminished  with  their
number,  but  the  accustomed  reverence  for  that  sa-
cred race  sensibly  decreased.  In  consequence  of
this  state  of  things,  ambitious  men  in  different  parts
of  the  empire  aspired  to  independent  authority,  and

°  Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  i.  c.  .'.7. Xerez,  i.  235. Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  iii.  c.  5.
v  Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  ii.  c.  7.  t  Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  ii.  c.  12.  lib.  iii.  c.  5.

1533.]  BOOK VL  271

usurped  jurisdiction  to  which  they  had  no  title.
The  general  who  commanded  for  Atahualpa  in  Quito,
seized  the  brother  and  children  of  his  master,  put
them  to  a  cruel  death,  and  disclaiming  any  con-
nexion with  either  Inca,  endeavoured  to  establish  a
separate  kingdom  for  himself/
Pizatro  ^^e  Spaniards,  with  pleasure,  beheld  the
advances  spirit  of  discord  diffusing  itself,  and  the  vigour
of  government  relaxing  among  the  Peruvians.
They  considered  those  disorders  as  symptoms  of  a
state  hastening  towards  its  dissolution.  Pizarro  no
longer  hesitated  to  advance  towards  Cuzco,  and  he
had  received  such  considerable  reinforcements,  that
he  could  venture,  with  little  danger,  to  penetrate  so
far  into  the  interior  part  of  the  country.  The  ac-
count of  the  wealth  acquired  at  Caxamalca  operated
as  he  had  foreseen.  No  sooner  did  his  brother  Fer-
dinand, with  the  officers  and  soldiers  to  whom  he  had
given  their  discharge  after  the  partition  of  the  Inca's
ransom,  arrive  at  Panama,  and  display  their  riches  in
the  view  of  their  astonished  countrymen,  than  fame
spread  the  account  with  such  exaggeration  through
all  the  Spanish  settlements  on  the  South  sea,  that
the  governors  of  Guatimala,  Panama,  and  Nicaragua,
could  hardly  restrain  the  people  under  their  jurisdic-
tion, from  abandoning  their  possessions,  and  crowd-
ing to  that  inexhaustible  source  of  wealth  which
seemed  to  be  opened  in  Peru.8  In  spite  of  every
check  and  regulation,  such  numbers  resorted  thither,
that  Pizarro  began  his  march  at  the  head  of  five  hun-
dred men,  after  leaving  a  considerable  garrison  in
St.  Michael,  under  the  command  of  Benalcazar.  The
Peruvians  had  assembled  some  large  bodies  of  troops
to  oppose  his  progress.  Several  fierce  encounters
happened. But  they  terminated  like  all  the  actions

r  Zarate,  lib.  ii.  c.  8. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  ii.  c.  3,  4.
»  Goroara  Hist.  c.  125. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  ii.  c.  1. Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  iii.  c.  5.

272  AMERICA.  [1533.

in  America ;  a  few  Spaniards  were  killed  or  wounded ;
the  natives  were  put  to  flight  with  incredible  slaugh-
ter. At  length  Pizarro  forced  his  way  to  Cuzco,  and
took  quiet  possession  of  that  capital.  The  riches
found  there,  even  after  all  that  the  natives  had  car-
ried off  and  concealed,  either  from  a  superstitious
veneration  for  the  ornaments  of  their  temples,  or  out
of  hatred  to  their  rapacious  conquerors,  exceed  in
value  what  had  been  received  as  Atahualpa's  ransom.
But  as  the  Spaniards  were  now  accustomed  to  the
wealth  of  the  country,  and  it  came  to  be  parcelled
out  among  a  great  number  of  adventurers,  this  divi-
dend did  not  excite  the  same  surprise,  either  from
novelty,  or  the  largeness  of  the  sum  that  fell  to  the
share  of  each  individual.1

During  the  march  to  Cuzco,  that  son  of  Atahualpa
whom  Pizarro  treated  as  Inea,  died ;  and  as  the  Spa-
niards substituted  no  person  in  his  place,  the  title  of
Manco  Capac  seems  to  have  been  universally  re-
cognised."

Quito  con-  While  his  fellow-soldiers  were  thus  em-
iEu  by  pl°ye(i,  Benalcazar,  governor  of  St.  Michael,
cazar.  an  akie  an(j  enterprising  officer,  was  ashamed
of  remaining  inactive,  and  impatient  to  have  his
name  distinguished  among  the  discoverers  and  con-
querors of  the  New  World.  The  seasonable  arrival
of  a  fresh  body  of  recruits  from  Panama  and  Nica-
ragua, put  it  in  his  power  to  gratify  this  passion.
Leaving  a  sufficient  force  to  protect  the  infant  settle-
ment intrusted  to  his  care,  he  placed  himself  at  the
head  of  the  rest  and  set  out  to  attempt  the  reduction
of  Quito,  where,  according  to  the  report  of  the  na-
tives, Atahualpa  had  left  the  greatest  part  of  his  trea-
sure. Notwithstanding  the  distance  of  that  city  from
St. Michael,  the  difficulty  of  marching  through  a  moun-
tainous country  covered  with  woods,  and  the  frequent

•  See  Note  LXXX.  u  Herrera,  dec  .5.  lib.  v.  c.  2.

1533.]  BOOK VI.  273

and  fierce  attacks  of  the  best,  troops  in  Peru,  com-
manded by  a  skilful  leader,  the  valour,  good  conduct,
and  perseverance  of  Benalcazar  surmounted  every
obstacle,  and  he  entered  Quito  with"  his  victorious
troops.  But  they  met  with  a  cruel  mortification
there.  The  natives,  now  acquainted  to  their  sorrow
with  the  predominant  passion  of  their  invaders,  and
knowing  how  to  disappoint  it,  had  carried  off  all  those
treasures,  the  prospect  of  which  had  prompted  them
to  undertake  this  arduous  expedition,  and  had  sup-
ported them  under  all  the  dangers  and  hardships
wherewith  they  had  to  struggle  in  carrying  it  on.w
Aivarado's  Benalcazar  was  not  the  only  Spanish  leader
expedition.  who  attacke(i  the  kingdom  of  Quito. The

fame  of  its  riches  attracted  a  more  powerful  enemy.
Pedro  de  Alvarado,  who  had  distinguished  himself  so
eminently  in  the  conquest  of  Mexico,  having  obtained
the  government  of  Guatimala  as  a  recompense  for  his
valour,  soon  became  disgusted  with  a  life  of  uniform
tranquillity,  and  longed  to  be  again  engaged  in  the
bustle  of  military  service. The  glory  and  wealth  ac-
quired by  the  conquerors  of  Peru  heightened  this  pas-
sion, and  gave  it  a  determined  direction. Believing,
or  pretending  to  believe,  that  the  kingdom  of  Quito
did  not  lie  within  the  limits  of  the  province  allotted
to  Pizarro,  he  resolved  to  invade  it. The  high  re-
putation of  the  commander  allured  volunteers  from
every  quarter. He  embarked  with  five  hundred  men,
of  whom  above  two  hundred  were  of  such  distinction
as  to  serve  on  horseback.  He  landed  at  Puerto  Viejo,
and  without  sufficient  knowledge  of  the  country,  or
proper  guides  to  conduct  him,  attempted  to  march
directly  to  Quito,  by  following  the  course  of  the  river
Guayquil,  and  crossing  the  ridge  of  the  Andes  to-
wards its  head. But  in  this  route,  one  of  the  most

w  Zarate,  lib.  ii.  c.  9. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  ii.  c.  9. Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  iv.  c.  11,  12.
Jib.  v.  c.  2,5.  lib.  vi.  c.  3.

VOL.  VII.  T

274  AMERICA.  [1533.

impracticable  in  all  America,  his  troops  endured
such  fatigue  in  forcing  their  way  through  forests  and
marshes  on  the  low  grounds,  and  suffered  so  much
from  excessive  cold  when  they  began  to  ascend  the
mountains,  that  before  they  reached  the  plain  of
Quito,  a  fifth  part  of  the  men  and  half  their  horses
died,  and  the  rest  were  so  much  dispirited  and  worn
out,  as  to  be  almost  unfit  for  service.5"  There  they
met  with  a  body  not  of  Indians  but  of  Spaniards,
drawn  in  hostile  array  against  them.  Pizarro  having
received  an  account  of  Alvarado's  armament,  had  de-
tached Almagro  with  some  troops  to  oppose  this
formidable  invader  of  his  jurisdiction ;  and  these  were
joined  by  Benalcazar  and  his  victorious  party.  Al-
varado,  though  surprised  at  the  sight  of  enemies
whom  he  did  not  expect,  advanced  boldly  to  the
charge.  But,  by  the  interposition  of  some  moderate
men  in  each  party,  an  amicable  accommodation  took
place ;  and  the  fatal  period,  when  Spaniards  sus-
pended their  conquests  to  imbrue  their  hands  in  the
blood  of  their  countrymen,  was  postponed  a  few
years.  Alvarado  engaged  to  return  to  his  govern-
ment, upon  Almagro's  paying  him  a  hundred  thou-
sand pesos  to  defray  the  expense  of  his  armament.
Most  of  the  followers  remained  in  the  country;
and  an  expedition,  which  threatened  Pizarro  and
his  colony  with  ruin,  contributed  to  augment  its
strength/

1534.  By  this  time  Ferdinand  Pizarro  had  landed
coTtwred  m  Spain.  The  immense  quantities  of  gold  and
andPA7ma°-  su  ver  which  he  imported/  filled  the  kingdom
gr°.  with  no  less  astonishment  than  they  had  ex-

cited in  Panama  and  the  adjacent  provinces. Pi-
zarro was  received  by  the  emperor  with  the  attention

*  See  Note  LXXXI.
1  Zarate,  lib.  ii.  c.  10—13. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  ii.  c.  1,  2.  9,  &c. Gomara  Hist,
c.  126.  &c. Renicsal  Hist.  Guatimal.  lib.  iii.  c.  6. Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  vi.  c.  1>
a.  7,  8.  *  See  Note  LXXXI  I.

1534.]  BOOK Vf.  275

due  to  the  bearer  of  a  present  so  rich,  as  to  exceed
any  idea  which  the  Spaniards  had  formed  concerning
the  value  of  their  acquisitions  in  America,  even  after
they  had  been  ten  years  masters  of  Mexico.  In  re-
compense of  his  brother's  services,  his  authority
was  confirmed  with  new  powers  and  privileges,  and
the  addition  of  seventy  leagues,  extending  along  the
coast,  to  the  southward  of  the  territory  granted  in
his  former  patent.  Almagro  received  the  honours
which  he  had  so  long  desired.  The  title  of  adelan-
tado,  or  governor,  was  conferred  upon  him,  with
jurisdiction  over  two  hundred  leagues  of  country,
stretching  beyond  the  southern  limits  of  the  province
allotted  to  Pizarro.  Ferdinand  himself  did  not  go
unrewarded.  He  was  admitted  into  the  military  or-
der of  St.  Jago,  a  distinction  always  acceptable  to  a
Spanish  gentleman,  and  soon  set  out  on  his  return  to
Peru,  accompanied  by  many  persons  of  higher  rank
than  had  yet  served  in  that  country.*
Beginning  Some  account  of  his  negotiations  reached
Sons'be-  Peru  before  he  arrived  there  himself.  Alma-
tween  Pi- „Y0  n0  sooner  learned  that  he  had  obtained

zarro  and o

Aimagro.  the  royal  grant  of  an  independent  govern-
ment, than  pretending  that  Cuzco,  the  imperial  resi-
dence of  the  Incas,  lay  within  its  boundaries,  he  at-
tempted to  render  himself  master  of  that  important
station.  Juan  and  Gonzalez  Pizarro  prepared  to  op-
pose him.  Each  of  the  contending  parties  was  sup-
ported by  powerful  adherents,  and  the  dispute  was
on  the  point  of  being  terminated  by  the  sword,  when
Francis  Pizarro  arrived  in  the  capital.  The  recon-
ciliation between  him  and  Almagro  had  never  been
cordial.  The  treachery  of  Pizarro  in  engrossing  to
himself  all  the  honours  and  emoluments,  which  ought
to  have  been  divided  with  his  associate,  was  always
present  in  both  their  thoughts. The  former,  con-

a  Zarate.  lib.  Hi.  c.  3. Vega.,  p.  11.  lib.  ii.  c.  19. Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  vi.c.  13.

T  2

276  AMERICA.  [1534.

scious  of  his  own  perfidy,  did  not  expect  forgiveness  ;
the  latter,  feeling  that  he  had  been  deceived,  was  im-
patient to  be  avenged ;  and  though  avarice  and  am-
bition had  induced  them  not  only  to  dissemble  their
sentiments,  but  even  to  act  in  concert  while  in  pur-
suit of  wealth  and  power,  no  sooner  did  they  obtain
possession  of  these,  than  the  same  passions  which
had  formed  this  temporary  union,  gave  rise  to  jea-
lousy and  discord.  To  each  of  them  was  attached  a
small  band  of  interested  dependants,  who,  with  the
malicious  art  peculiar  to  such  men,  heightened  their
suspicions,  and  magnified  every  appearance  of  offence.
But  with  all  those  seeds  of  enmity  in  their  minds,  and
thus  assiduously  cherished,  each  was  so  thoroughly
acquainted  with  the  abilities  and  courage  of  his  rival,
that  they  equally  dreaded  the  consequences  of  an
open  rupture.  The  fortunate  arrival  of  Pizarro  at
Cuzco,  and  the  address  mingled  with  firmness  which
he  manifested  in  his  expostulations  with  Almagro
and  his  partisans,  averted  that  evil  for  the  present.
A  new  reconciliation  took  place  ;  the  chief  article  of
which  was,  that  Almagro  should  attempt  the  con-
quest of  Chili ;  and  if  he  did  not  find  in  that  province
an  establishment  adequate  to  his  merit  and  expec-
tations, Pizarro,  by  way  of  indemnification,  should
yield  up  to  him  a  part  of  Peru. This  new

June  12. J  l  .  ',  g.  i • , i

agreement,  though  confirmed  with  the  same
sacred  solemnities  as  their  first  contract,  was  ob-
served with  as  little  fidelity. b

R ia- Soon  after  he  concluded  this  important  transi-
tions of action,  Pizarro  marched  back  to  the  countries

.Pizarro.  .

on  the  sea-coast;  and  as  he  now  enjoyed  an  in-
terval of  tranquillity  undisturbed  by  any  enemy,  either
Spanish  or  Indian,  he  applied  himself  with  that  perse-
vering ardour,  which  distinguishes  his  character,  to  in-

b  Zarate,  lib.  ii.  c.  13. Vej;a,  p.  11.  lib.  ii.  c. 19. Benzo,  lib.  ill.  c.  6. Iler-
ri»ra,  dec.  5.  lib.  vii.  c.  3.

1534.]  BOOK VI.  277

troduce  a  form  of  regular  government  into  the  extensive
provinces  subject  to  his  authority.  Though  ill  quali-
fied by  his  education  to  enter  into  any  disquisition  con-
cerning the  principles  of  civil  policy,  and  little  accus-
tomed by  his  former  habits  of  life  to  attend  to  its
arrangements,  his  natural  sagacity  supplied  the  want
both  of  science  and  experience.  He  distributed  the
country  into  various  districts ;  he  appointed  proper  ma-
gistrates to  preside  in  each;  and  established  regula-
tions concerning  the  administration  of  justice,  the  col-
lection of  the  royal  revenue,  the  working  of  the  mines,
and  the  treatment  of  the  Indians,  extremely  simple,  but
well  calculated  to  promote  the  public  prosperity.  But,
though,  for  the  present,  he  adapted  his  plan  to  the  in-
fant state  of  his  colony,  his  aspiring  mind  looked  for-
Founda- war(i  to  ^s  future grandeur. He  considered

tiouof  himself  as  laving1  the  foundation  of  a  great  em-
Lima.  Jo  o

pire,  and  deliberated  long,  and  with  much  soli-
citude, in  what  place  he  should  fix  the  seat  of  govern-
ment. Cuzco,  the  imperial  city  of  the  Incas,  was  si-
tuated in  a  corner  of  the  empire,  above  four  hundred
miles  from  the  sea,  and  much  farther  from  Quito,  a
province  of  whose  value  he  had  formed  a  high  idea.
No  other  settlement  of  the  Peruvians  was  so  consider-
able as  to  merit  the  name  of  a  town,  or  to  allure  the  Spa-
niards to  fix  their  residence  in  it.  But  in  marching-
through  the  country,  Pizarro  had  been  struck  with  the
beauty  and  fertility  of  the  valley  of  Rimac,  one  of  the
most  extensive  and  best  cultivated  in  Peru.  There,  on
the  banks  of  a  small  river,  of  the  same  name  with  the
vale  which  it  waters  and  enriches,  at  the  distance  of  six
miles  from  Callao,  the  most  commodious  harbour  in  the
Pacific  ocean,  he  founded  a  city  which  he  destined  to
1535  be  the  capital  of  his  government.  He  gave  it
January the  name  of  Ciudad  de  los  Reyes,  either  from

the  circumstance  of  having  laid  the  first  stone,
at  that  season  when  the  church  celebrates  the  festival

278  AMERICA.  [1535.

of  the  Three  Kings,  or,  as  is  more  probable,  in  honour
of  Juana  and  Charles,  the  joint  sovereigns  of  Castile.
This  name  it  still  retains  among  the  Spaniards  in  all
legal  and  formal  deeds;  but  it  is  better  known  to  fo-
reigners by  that  of  Luna,  a  corruption  of  the  ancient
appellation  of  the  valley  in  which  it  is  situated.  Un-
der his  inspection,  the  buildings  advanced  with  such
rapidity,  that  it  soon  assumed  the  form  of  a  city,  which,
by  a  magnificent  palace  that  he  erected  for  himself,  and
by  the  stately  houses  built  by  several  of  his  officers,
gave,  even  in  its  infancy,  some  indication  of  its  subse-
quent grandeur.0

Aimagro ^n  consequence  of  what  had  been  agreed
invades viifa  Pizarro,  Aimagro  began  his  march  towards

Chili.  ,  to  °  ,

Chili ;  and  as  he  possessed  in  an  eminent  degree
the  virtues  most  admired  by  soldiers,  boundless  libera-
lity and  fearless  courage,  his  standard  was  followed  by
five  hundred  and  seventy  men,  the  greatest  body  of
Europeans  that  had  hitherto  been  assembled  in  Peru.
From  impatience  to  finish  the  expedition,  or  from  that
contempt  of  hardship  and  danger  acquired  by  all  the
Spaniards  who  had  served  long  in  America,  Aimagro,
instead  of  advancing  along  the  level  country  on  the
coast,  chose  to  march  across  the  mountains  by  a  route
that  was  shorter  indeed,  but  almost  impracticable. In
this  attempt  his  troops  were  exposed  to  every  calamity
which  men  can  suffer,  from  fatigue,  from  famine,  and
from  the  rigour  of  the  climate  in  those  elevated  regions
of  the  torrid  zone,  where  the  degree  of  cold  is  hardlv
inferior  to  what  is  felt  within  the  polar  circle. Many
of  them  perished; and the  survivors,  when  they  de-
scended into  the  fertile  plains  of  Chili,  had  new  diffi-
culties to  encounter. They  found  there  a  race  of  men
very  different  from  the  people  of  Peru,  intrepid,  hardy,
independent,  and  in  their  bodily  constitution,  as  well  as

'  Herrera,  dec.  5,  lib.  vi.  c.  12.  lib.  vii.  c.  13. Calancho,  Coronica,  lib.  i.  c.  3".
Barneuvo,  Lima  funduta.  ii.  294.

1535.]  BOOK VI.  279

vigour  of  spirit,  nearly  resembling  the  warlike  tribes  in
North  America.  Though  filled  with  wonder  at  the  first
appearance  of  the  Spaniard?,  and  still  more  astonished
at  the  operations  of  their  cavalry,  and  the  effects  of
their  fire-arms,  the  Chilese  soon  recovered  so  far  from
their  surprise,  as  not  only  to  defend  themselves  with
obstinacy,  but  to  attack  their  new  enemies  with  more
determined  fierceness  than  any  American  nation  had
hitherto  discovered.  The  Spaniards,  however,  conti-
nued to  penetrate  into  the  country,  and  collected  some
considerable  quantities  of  gold ;  but  were  so  far  from
thinking  of  making  any  settlement  amidst  such  formi-
dable neighbours,  that,  in  spite  of  all  the  experience
and  valour  of  their  leader,  the  final  issue  of  the  expedi-
tion still  remained  extremely  dubious,  when  they  were
recalled  from  it  by  an  unexpected  revolution  at  Peru.d
The  causes  of  this  important  event  I  shall  endeavour  to
trace  to  their  source.

Aninsur-  So  many  adventurers  had  flocked  to  Peru
thfpem-  from  every  Spanish  colony  in  America,  and  all
vians.  witli  such  high  expectations  of  accumulating
independent  fortunes  at  once,  that,  to  men  possessed
with  notions  so  extravagant,  any  mention  of  acquiring
wealth  gradually,  and  by  schemes  of  patient  industry,
would  have  been  not  only  a  disappointment,  but  an  in-
sult. In  order  to  find  occupation  for  men  who  could
not  with  safety  be  allowed  to  remain  inactive,  Pizarro
encouraged  some  of  the  most  distinguished  officers  who
had  lately  joined  him,. to  invade  different  provinces  of
the  empire,  which  the  Spaniards  had  not  hitherto  vi-
sited. Several  large  bodies  were  formed  for  this  pur-
pose ;  and  about  the  time  that  Almagro  set  out  for  Chili,
they  marched  into  remote  districts  of  the  country.
No  sooner  did  Manco  Capac,  the  Inca,  observe
the  inconsiderate  security  of  the  Spaniards  in

d  ZaTate.lib.  iii.  c.  1. Gomara  Hist.  c.  131. Vega,  p.  2.  lib.  ii.  c.  20. Ovale
Hist,  de  Chile,  lib.  iv.  c.  15,  &c. Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  vi.  c.  9.  lib.  x.  c.  l,&c.

280  AMERICA;  [lbZ5i

thus  dispersing  their  troops,  and  that  only  a  handful  of
soldiers  remained  in  Cuzco,  under  Juan  and  Gonzalez
Pi/.arro,  than  he  thought  that  the  happy  period  was  at
length  come  for  vindicating  his  own  rights,  for  avenging
the  wrongs  of  his  country,  and  extirpating  its  oppres-
sors. Though  strictly  watched  by  the  Spaniards,  who
allowed  him  to  reside  in  the  palace  of  his  ancestors  at
Cuzco,  he  found  means  of  communicating  his  scheme
to  the  persons  who  were  to  be  intrusted  with  the  exe-
cution of  it.  Among  people  accustomed  to  revere  their
sovereign  as  a  divinity,  every  hint  of  his  will  carries  the
authority  of  a  command ;  and  they  themselves  were  now
convinced,  by  the  daily  increase  in  the  number  of  their
invaders,  that  the  fond  hopes  which  they  had  long  en-
tertained of  their  voluntary  departure  were  altogether
vain.  All  perceived  that  a  vigorous  effort  of  the  whole
nation  was  requisite  to  expel  them,  and  the  preparations
for  it  were  carried  on  with  the  secrecy  and  silence  pe-
culiar to  Americans.

And  pro-  After  some  unsuccessful  attempts  of  the  Inea
sres>-  to  make  his  escape,  Ferdinand  Pizarro  happen-
ing to  arrive  at  that  time  in  Cuzco,  he  obtained
permission  from  him  to  attend  a  great  festival  wrhich
was  to  be  celebrated  a  few  leagues  from  the  ca-
pital.  Under  pretext  of  that  solemnity,  the  great  men
of  the  empire  were  assembled.  As  soon  as  the  Inca
joined  them,  the  standard  of  war  was  erected;  and  in  a
short  time  all  the  fio-htino-  men  from  the  confines  of
Quito  to  the  frontier  of  Chili  were  in  arms.  Manv
Spaniards,  living  securely  on  the  settlements  allotted
them,  were  massacred.  Several  detachments,  as  they
marched  carelessly  through  a  country  which  seemed  to
be  tamely  submissive  to  their  dominion,  were  cut  off  to
a  man.  An  army  amounting  (if  we  may  believe  the
Spanish  writers)  to  two  hundred  thousand  men,  attacked
Cuzco,  which  the  three  brothers  endeavoured  to  defend
with  only  one  hundred  and  seventy  Spaniards. An-

1536.]  BOOK VJ.  281

other  formidable body  invested  Lima,  and kept  the
governor  closely  shut  up. There  was  no  longer  any
communication  between  the  two  cities;  the  numerous
forces  of  the  Peruvians  spreading  over  the country,
intercepted every  messenger; and  as  the parties in
Cuzco  and  Lima  were  equally  unacquainted  with  the
fate  of  their  countrymen,  each  boded  the  worst  concern-
ing the  other,  and  imagined  that  they  themselves  were
the  only  persons  who  had  survived  the  general  extinc-
tion of  the  Spanish  name  in  Peru.6
Siege  of It  was  at  Cuzco,  where  the  Inca  commanded
in  person,  that  the  Peruvians  made  their  chief
effort. During  nine  months  they  carried  on  the  siege
with  incessant  ardour,  and  in  various  forms;  and  though
they  displayed  not  the  same  undaunted  ferocity  as  the
Mexican  warriors,  they  conducted  some  of  their  opera-
tions in  a  manner  which  discovered  greater  sagacity,
and  a  genius  more  susceptible  of  improvement  in  the  mi-
litary art.  They  not  only  observed  the  advantages  which
the  Spaniards  derived  from  their  discipline  and  their
weapons,  but  they  endeavoured  to  imitate  the  former,
and  turned  the  latter  against  them.  They  armed  a  con-
siderable body  of  their  bravest  warriors  with  the  swords,
the spears,  and  bucklers,  which  they  had  taken  from
the  Spanish  soldiers  whom  they  had  cut  off  in  different
parts  of  the  country. These  they  endeavoured  to  mar-
shal in  that  regular  compact  order,  to  which  experience
had  taught  them  that  the  Spaniards  were  indebted  for
their  irresistible  force  in  action.  Some  appeared  in  the
field  with  Spanish  muskets,  and  had  acquired  skill  and
resolution  enough  to  use  them. A  few  of  the  boldest,
among  whom  was  the  Inca  himself,  were  mounted  on
the  horses  which  they  had  taken,  and  advanced  briskly
to  the  charge  like  Spanish  cavaliers,  with  their  lances
in  the  rest. It  was  more  by  their  numbers,  however,

•  Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  ii.  c.  23. Zarate,  lib.  iii.  c.  5. Cieca  de  Leon,  c.  82. Go-
mara  Hist.  c.  135. Henera,  dec.  b.  lib.  viii.  c.  5.

282  AMERICA.  [1536.

than  by  those  imperfect  essays  to  imitate  European  arts
and  to  employ  European  arms,  that  the  Peruvians  an-
noyed the  Spaniards/  In  spite  of  the  valour,  heightened
by  despair,  with  which  the  three  brothers  defended
Cuzco,  Manco  Capac  recovered  possession  of  one  half
of  his  capital;  and  in  their  various  efforts  to  drive  him
out  of  it,  the  Spaniards  lost  Juan  Pizarro,  the  best  be-
loved of  all  the  brothers,  together  with  some  other
persons  of  note.  Worn  out  with  the  fatigue  of  inces-
sant duty,  distressed  with  want  of  provisions,  and  de-
spairing of  being  able  any  longer  to  resist  an  enemy
whose  numbers  daily  increased,  the  soldiers  became  im-
patient to  abandon  Cuzco,  in  hopes  either  of  joining
their  countrymen,  if  any  of  them  yet  survived,  or  of  forc-
ing their  way  to  the  sea,  and  finding  some  means  of
escaping  from  a  country  which  had  been  so  fatal  to  the
Spanish  name.g  While  they  were  brooding  over  those
desponding  thoughts,  which  their  officers  laboured  in
vain  to  dispel,  Almagro  appeared  suddenly  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Cuzco.

o

Arrival  of The  accounts  transmitted  to  Almagro  con-

Aimagro, cernino;  the  general  insurrection  of  the  Peru-
ana mo- t  °

fives  of  his  vians,  were  sucli  as  would  have  induced  him
without  hesitation,  to  relinquish  the  conquest
of  Chili,  and  hasten  to  the  aid  of  his  countrymen.
But  in  this  resolution  he  was  confirmed  by  a  motive
less  generous,  but  more  interesting.  By  the  same  mes-
senger who  brought  him  intelligence  of  the  Inca's  re-
volt,  he  received  the  royal  patent  creating  him  governor
of  Chili,  and  defining  the  limits  of  his  jurisdiction.
Upon  considering  the  tenor  of  it,  he  deemed  it  mani-
fest beyond  contradiction,  that  Cuzco  lay  within  the
boundaries  of  his  government,  and  he  was  equally  soli-
citous to  prevent  the  Peruvians  from  recovering  pos-
session of  their  capital,  and  to  wrest  it  out  of  the  hands
of  the  Pizarros. From  impatience  to  accomplish  both,

f  See  Note  LXXX1II.  t  Herrern,  dec.  .5.  lib.  viii.  c.  4.

1537.]  BOOR  VI.  283

he  ventured  to  return  by  a  new  route ;  and  in  marching
through  the  sandy  plains  on  the  coast,  he  suffered  from
heat  and  drought,  calamities  of  a  new  species,  hardly
inferior  to  those  in  which  he  had  been  involved  by  cold
and  famine  on  the  summits  of  the  Andes.

15  His  arrival  at  Cuzco  was  in  a  critical  rao-

His  opera- nient.  The  Spaniards  and  Peruvians  fixed
their  eyes  upon  him  with  equal  solicitude.  The
former,  as  he  did  not  study  to  conceal  his  pretensions,
were  at  a  loss  whether  to  welcome  him  as  a  deliverer,
or  to  take  precautions  against  him  as  an  enemy.  The
latter,  knowing  the  points  in  contest  between  him  and
his  countrymen,  flattered  themselves  that  they  had  more
to  hope  than  to  dread  from  his  operations.  Almagro
himself,  unacquainted  with  the  detail  of  the  events
which  had  happened  in  his  absence,  and  solicitous  to
learn  the  precise  posture  of  affairs,  advanced  towards
the  capital  slowly,  and  with  great  circumspection.
Various  negotiations  with  both  parties  were  set  on
foot.  The  Inca  conducted  them  on  his  part  with  much
address.  At  first  he  endeavoured  to  gain  the  friend-
ship of  Almagro ;  and  after  many  fruitless  overtures,
despairing  of  any  cordial  union  with  a  Spaniard,  he  at-
tacked him  by  surprise  with  a  numerous  body  of  chosen
troops.  But  the  Spanish  discipline  and  valour  main-
tained their  wonted  superiority.  The  Peruvians  were
repulsed  with  such  slaughter,  that  a  great  part  of  their
army  dispersed,  and  Almagro  proceeded  to  the  gates
of  Cuzco  without  interruption.

The  Pizarros,  as  they  had  no  longer  to  make
session  of  head  against  the  Peruvians,  directed  all  their
attention  towards  their  new  enemy,  and  took
measures  to  obstruct  his  entry  into  the  capital.  Pru-
dence, however,  restrained  both  parties  for  some  time
from  turning  their  arms  against  one  another,  while  sur-
rounded by  common  enemies,  who  would  rejoice  in  the

284  AMERICA.  [1537.

mutual  slaughter.  Different  schemes  of  accommoda-
tion were  proposed.  Each  endeavoured  to  deceive
the  other,  or  to  corrupt  his  followers.  The  generous,
open,  affable  temper  of  Almagro  gained  many  adhe-
rents of  the  Pizarros,  who  were  disgusted  with  their
harsh  domineering  manners.  Encouraged  by  this  de-
fection, he  advanced  towards  the  city  by  night,  sur-
prised the  sentinels,  or  was  admitted  by  them,  and  in-
vesting the  house  where  the  two  brothers  resided,
compelled  them,  after  an  obstinate  defence,  to  surren-
der at  discretion.  Almagro's  claim  of  jurisdiction  over
Cuzco  was  universally  acknowledged,  and  a  form  of  ad-
ministration established  in  his  name.1'
Civil «ar  Two  or  three  persons  only  were  killed  in
and  first ^'g  ^rst  ac^  0f  cjvj]  hostility  :  but  it  was  soon

success  ot  J 7

Almagro,  followed  by  scenes  more  bloody.  Francis
Pizarro  having  dispersed  the  Peruvians  who  had  in-
vested Lima,  and  received  some  considerable  reinforce-
ments from  Hispaniola  and  Nicaragua,  ordered  five
hundred  men,  under  the  command  of  Alonso  de  Alva-
rado,  to  march  to  Cuzco,  in  hopes  of  relieving  his
brothers,  if  they  and  their  garrison  were  not  already
cut  off  by  the  Peruvians.  This  body,  which  at  that
period  of  the  Spanish  power  in  America,  must  be
deemed  a  considerable  force,  advanced  near  to  the  ca-
pital before  they  knew  that  they  had  any  enemy  more
formidable  than  Indians  to  encounter.  It  was  with
astonishment  that  they  beheld  their  countrymen  posted
on  the  banks  of  the  river  Abancay  to  oppose  their  pro-
gress. .  Almagro,  however,  wished  rather  to  gain  than
to  conquer  them,  and  by  bribes  and  promises  endea-
voured to  seduce  their  leader.  The  fidelity  of  Alvarado
remained  unshaken ;  but  his  talents  for  war  were  not
equal  to  his  virtue.  Almagro  amused  him  with  various
movements,  of  which  he  did  not  comprehend  the  mean-

h  Zaratc,  lib.  iii.  c.  4. Vega,  p.  11. lib.  ii. c.  29.  31. Gomara  Hist.  c.  134.
Herrcra,  dec.  6.  lib.  ii.  c.  1 — 5.

1537.]  BOOK VI.  285

ino-  while  a  large  detachment  of  chosen  soldiers

July  12.  °  °

passed  the  river  by  night,  fell  upon  his  camp  by
surprise,  broke  his  troops  before  they  had  time  to  form,
and took him  prisoner, together  with  his  principal
officers.1
_ .  By  the  sudden  rout  of  this  body,  the  contest

But  does  J  J  '

uotim-  between  the  two  rivals  must  have  been  decided,
advan-  if  Almagro  had  known  as  well  how  to  improve
tages'  as  how  to  gain  a  victory.  Rodrigo  Orgognez,
an  officer  of  great  abilities,  who  having  served  under
the  constable  Bourbon,  when  he  led  the  imperial  army
to  Rome,  had  been  accustomed  to  bold  and  decisive
measures,  advised  him  instantly  to  issue  orders  for
putting  to  death  Ferdinand  and  Gonzalo  Pizarros,
Alvarado,  and  a  few  other  persons  whom  he  could  not
hope  to  gain,  and  to  march  directly  with  his  victorious
troops  to  Lima,  before  the  governor  had  time  to  pre-
pare for  his  defence.  But  Almagro,  though  he  dis-
cerned at  once  the  utility  of  the  counsel,  and  though  he
had  courage  to  have  carried  it  into  execution,  suffered
himself  to  be  influenced  by  sentiments  unlike  those  of
a  soldier  of  fortune  grown  old  in  service,  and  by
scruples  which  suited  not  the  chief  of  a  party  who  had
drawn  his  sword  in  civil  war.  Feelings  of  humanity
restrained  him  from  shedding  the  blood  of  his  oppo-
nents ;  and  the  dread  of  being  deemed  a  rebel,  de-
terred him  from  entering  a  province  which  the  king  had
allotted  to  another.  Though  he  knew  that  arms  must
terminate  the  dispute. between  him  and  Pizarro,  and
resolved  not  to  shun  that  mode  of  decision,  yet,  with  a
timid  delicacy  preposterous  at  such  a  juncture,  he  was
so  solicitous  that  his  rival  should  be  considered  as  the
aggressor,  that  he  marched  quietly  back  to  Cuzco,  to
wait  his  approach. k

|  Zarate,  lib.  iii.  c.  6. Gorn.  Hist.  c.  138. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  ii.  c.  32.  54. Her-
rera,  dec.  6.  lib.  ii.  c.  9.

k  Herrera,  dec.  6.  lib.  ii.  e.  10,  11.

286  AMERICA.  [1537.

Distress  of Pizarro  was  still  unacquainted  with  all  the
Pizarro. interesting  events which  had happened  near
Cuzco. Accounts  of  Almagro's  return,  of  the  loss  of
the  capital,  of  the  death  of  one  brother,  of  the  imprison-
ment of  the  other  two,  and  of  the  defeat  of  Alvarado,
were  brought  to  him  at  once. Such  a  tide  of  misfor-
tunes almost  overwhelmed  a  spirit  which  had  conti-
nued firm  and  erect  under  the  rudest  shocks  of  ad-
versity. But  the necessity  of  attending  to  his  own
safety,  as  well  as  the  desire  of  revenge,  preserved  him
His  artful  from  sinking  under  it. He  took  measures  for
conduct. \yQth  with  his  wonted  sagacity. As  he  had  the
command  of  the  sea-cost,  and  expected  considerable
supplies  both  of  men  and  military  stores,  it  was  no  less
his  interest  to  gain  time,  and  to  avoid  action,  than  it
was  that  of  Almagro  to  precipitate  operations,  and
bring  the  contest  to  a  speedy  issue. He  had  recourse
to  arts  which  he  had  formerly  practised  with  success  ;
and  Almagro  was  again  weak  enough  to  suffer  himself
to  be  amused  with  a  prospect  of  terminating  their  dif-
ferences by  some  amicable  accommodation. By  vary-
ing his  overtures,  and  shifting  his  ground  as  often  as  it
suited  his  purpose,  sometimes  seeming  to  yield  to  every
thing  which  his  rival  could  desire,  and  then  retracting
all  that  he  had  granted,  Pizarro  dexterously  protracted
the  negotiation  to  such  a  length,  that,  though  every  day
was  precious  to  Almagro,  several  months  elapsed  without
coming  to  any  final  agreement. While  the  attention  of
Almagro,  and  of  the  officers  with  whom  he  consulted,
was  occupied  in  detecting  and  eluding  the  fraudulent
intentions  of  the  governor,  Gonzalo  Pizarro  and  Alva-
rado found  means  to  corrupt  the  soldiers  to  whose  cus-
tody they  were  committed,  and  not  only made  their
escape  themselves,  but  persuaded  sixty  of  the  men  who
formerly guarded them to accompany their flight.1
Fortune  having  thus  delivered  one  of  his  brothers,  the

1  Zarate,  lib.  iii.  c.  8. Herrera,  dec.  6.  lib.  ii.  c.  11.

1537.]  BOOK VI.  287

governor  scrupled  not  at  one  act  of  perfidy  more  to  pro-
cure the  release  of  the  other.  He  proposed  that  every
point  in  controversy  between  Almagro  and  himself
should  be  submitted  to  the  decision  of  their  sovereign  ;
that  until  his  award  was  known,  each  should  retain
undisturbed  possession  of  whatever  part  of  the  country
he  now  occupied  ;  that  Ferdinand  Pizarro  should  be
set  at  liberty,  and  return  instantly  to  Spain,  together
with  the  officers,  whom  Almagro  purposed  to  send
thither  to  represent  the  justice  of  his  claims.  Obvious
as  the  design  of  Pizarro  was  in  those  propositions,  and
familiar  as  his  artifices  might  now  have  been  to  his  op-
ponent, Almagro,  with  a  credulity  approaching  to  in-
fatuation, relied  on  his  sincerity,  and  concluded  an
agreement  on  these  terms.m

The  moment  that  Ferdinand  Pizarro  reco-

His  pre-  1  „

parations  vered  his  liberty,  the  governor,  no  longer  let-
tered in  his  operations  by  anxiety  about  his
brother's  life,  threw  off  every  disguise  which  his  con-
cern for  it  had  obliged  him  to  assume.  The  treaty  was
forgotten;  pacific  and  conciliating  measures  were  no
more  mentioned ;  it  was  in  the  field  he  openly  declared,
and  not  in  the  cabinet ;  by  arms,  and  not  by  negotia-
tion ;  that  it  must  now  be  determined  who  should  be
master  of  Peru.  The  rapidity  of  his  preparations  suit-
ed such  a  decisive  resolution.  Seven  hundred  men
were  soon  ready  to  march  towards  Cuzco.  The
command  of  these  was  given  to  his  two  brothers,
in  whom  he  could  perfectly  confide  for  the  execution  of
his  most  violent  schemes,  as  they  were  urged  on,  not
only  by  the  enmity  flowing  from  the  rivalship  between
their  family  and  Almagro,  but  animated  with  the  desire
of  vengeance,  excited  by  recollection  of  their  own  recent
disgrace  and  sufferings.  After  an  unsuccessful  attempt
to  cross  the  mountains  in  the  direct  road  between  Lima

m  Herrera,  dec.  6.  lib.  iii.  c.  9. Zarate,  lib.  iii.  c.  9. Gomara  Hist.  c. 140.
Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  ii.  c.  35.

208  AMERICA.  [1538.

and  Cuzco,  they  marched  towards  the  south  along  the
coast  as  far  as  Nasca,  and  then  turning  to  the  left,  pe-
netrated through  the  defiles  in  that  branch  of  the  Andes
which  lay  between  them  and  the  capital.  Almagro,
instead  of  hearkening  to  some  of  his  officers,  who  ad-
vised him  to  attempt  the  defence  of  those  difficult
passes,  waited  the  approach  of  the  enemy  in  the  plain
of  Cuzco.  Two  reasons  seem  to  have  induced  him  to
take  this  resolution.  His  followers  amounted  hardly
to  five  hundred,  and  he  was  afraid  of  weakening  such
a  feeble  body  by  sending  any  detachment  towards  the
mountains.  His  cavalry  far  exceeded  that  of  the  ad-
verse party,  both  in  number  and  discipline,  and  it  was
only  in  an  open  country  that  he  could  avail  himself  of
that  advantage.

_..  The  Pizarros  advanced  without  any  obstrUC-

His  army t  J

marches  tion,  but  what  arose  from  the  nature  of  the
desert  and  horrid  regions  through  which  they
marched.  As  soon  as  they  reached  the  plain,  both
factions  were  equally  impatient  to  bring  this  long  pro-
tracted contest  to  an  issue.  Though  countrymen  and
friends,  the  subjects  of  the  same  sovereign,  and  each
with  the  royal  standard  displayed  ;  and  though  they
beheld  the  mountains  that  surrounded  the  plain  in
which  they  were  drawn  up,  covered  with  a  vast  multi-
tude of  Indians,  assembled  to  enjoy  the  spectacle  of
their  mutual  carnage,  and  prepared  to  attack  whatever
party  remained  master  of  the  field ;  so  fell  and  impla-
cable was  the  rancour  which  had  taken  possession  of
every  breast,  that  not  one  pacific  counsel,  not  a  single
overture  towards  accommodation,  proceeded  from  either
side.  Unfortunately  for  Almagro,  he  was  so  worn  out
with  the  fatio-ues  of  service,  to  which  his  advanced  aere
was  unequal,  that,  at  this  crisis  of  his  fate,  he  could
not  exert  his  wonted  activity ;  and  he  was  obliged  to
commit  the  leading  of  his  troops  to  Orgognez,  who,
though  an  officer  of  great  merit,  did  not  possess  the

1538.]  BOOK VI.  -2UU

same  ascendant  either  over  the  spirit  or  affections  of
the  soldiers,  as  the  chief  whom  they  had  long  been
accustomed  to  follow  and  revere.

.,  „  The  conflict  was  fierce,  and  maintained  by
Aimagro  each  party  with  equal  courage.  On  the  side  of
Aimagro,  were  more  veteran  soldiers,  and  a
larger  proportion  of  cavalry ;  but  these  were  counter-
balanced by  Pizarro's  superiority  in  numbers,  and  by
two  companies  of  well-disciplined  musketeers,  which,
on  receiving  an  account  of  the  insurrection  of  the  In-
dians, the  emperor  had  sent  from  Spain."  As  the  use
of  fire-arms  was  not  frequent  among  the  adventurers  in
America,"  hastily  equipped  for  service,  at  their  own
expense,  this  small  band  of  soldiers  regularly  trained
and  armed,  was  a  novelty  in  Peru,  and  decided  the
fate  of  the  day.  Wherever  it  advanced,  the  weight  of
a  heavy  and  well-sustained  fire  bore  down  horse  and
foot  before  it;  and  Orgognez,  while  lie  endeavoured
to  rally  and  animate  his  troops,  having  received  a  dan-
gerous wound,  the  route  became  general.  The  bar-
barity of  the  conquerors  stained  the  glory  which  they
acquired  by  this  complete  victory.  The  violence  of  ci-
vil rage  hurried  on  some  to  slaughter  their  countrymen
with  indiscriminate  cruelty;  the  meanness  of  private
revenge  instigated  others  to  single  out  individuals  as
the  objects  of  their  vengeance.  Orgognez  and  several
officers  of  distinction  were  massacred  in  cold  blood ;
above  a  hundred  and  forty  soldiers  fell  in  the  field ;  a
laro-e  proportion,  where  the  number  of  combatants  were
few,  and  the  heat  of  the  contest  soon  over.  Aimagro,
though  so  feeble  that  he  could  not  bear  the  motion  of  a
horse,  had  insisted  on  being  carried  in  a  litter  to  an
eminence  which  overlooked  the  field  of  battle.  From
thence,  in  the  utmost  agitation  of  mind,  he  viewed  the
various  movements  of  both  parties,  and  at  last  beheld
the  total  defeat  of  his  own  troops,  with  all  the  passionate

11  Herrera,  dec.  6.  lib.  Hi.  c.  8.  °  Zarate,  lib.  iii.  c.  8.

VOL.  VII.  U

AMERICA.  [15;

indignation  of  a  veteran  leader  long  accustomed  to
, ,  victory. He  endeavoured  to  save  himself  by

And  taken. .  "  .  . '

night, but  was  taken  prisoner,  and guarded
with  the  strictest  vigilance.1"

The Indians, instead of  executing the resolution
which  they  had  formed,  retired  quietly  after  the  battle
was  over;  and  in  the  history  of  the  New  World,  there
is  not  a  more  striking;  instance  of  the  wonderful  ascen-
dant  which  the  Spaniards  had  acquired  over  its  inha-
bitants, than  that,  after  seeing  one  of  the  contending
parties  ruined  and  dispersed,  and  the  other  weakened
and  fatigued,  they  had  not  courage  to  fall  upon  their
enemies,  when  fortune  presented  an  opportunity  of  at-
tacking; them  with  such  advantage.'1
New  cxpe- Cuzco  was  pillaged  by  the  victorious  troops,
ditions. wj1Q  foun(j  there  a  considerable  booty,  consist-
ing partly  of  the  gleanings  of  the  Indian  treasures,  and
partly  of  the  wealth  amassed  by  their  antagonists  from
the  spoils  of  Peru  and  Chili. But  so  far  did  this,  and
whatever  the  bounty  of  their  leader  could  add  to  it,  fall
below  the  high  ideas  of  the  recompense  which  they
conceived  to  be  due  to  their  merit,  that  Ferdinand  Pi-
zarro,  unable  to  gratify  such  extravagant  expectations,
had  recourse  to  the  same  expedient  which  his  brother
had  employed  on  a  similar  occasion,  and  endeavoured
to  find  occupation  for  this  turbulent  assuming  spirit,  in
order  to  prevent  it  from  breaking  out  into  open  mutiny.
With  this  view,  he  encouraged  his  most  active  officers
to  attempt  the  discovery  and  reduction  of  various  pro-
vinces which  had  not  hitherto  submitted  to  the  Spa-
niards. To  every  standard  erected  by  the  leaders  who
undertook  any  of  those  new  expeditions,  volunteers  re-
sorted with  the  ardour  and  hope  peculiar  to  the  age.
Several  of  Almagro's  soldiers  joined  them,  and  thus
Pizarro  had  the  satisfaction  of  being  delivered  both

p  Zarate,  lib.  Hi.  c.  11,  12. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  ii.  c.  36 — 38. Hcrrcra,  dec.  6.
iii.c.  10—12.  lib.  iv.  c.  1—6.

4  Zarate,  lib.  iii.  c.  11. Vega,  p.  11.  Jib.  ii.  c.  38.

1538.]  BOOK VI.  291

from  the  importunity  of  his  discontented  friends,  and
the  dread  of  his  ancient  enemies/

Aimasro  AlmaeTO  himself  remained  for  several  months
in  custody,  under  all  the  anguish  of  suspense.
For  although  his  doom  was  determined  by  the  Pizarros
from  the  moment  that  he  fell  into  their  hands,  prudence
constrained  them  to  defer  gratifying  their  vengeance,
until  the  soldiers  who  had  served  under  him,  as  well  as
several  of  their  own  followers  in  whom  they  could  not
perfectly  confide,  had  left  Cuzco.  As  soon  as  they  set
out  upon  their  different  expeditions,  Almagro  was  im-
Con-  peached  of  treason,  formally  tried,  and  con-
demned, c]emne(j  t0  foe.  The  sentence  astonished  him  ;
and  though  he  had  often  braved  death  with  undaunted
spirit  in  the  field,  its  approach  under  this  ignominious
form  appalled  him  so  much,  that  he  had  recourse  to
abject  supplications,  unworthy  of  his  former  fame.  He
besought  the  Pizarros  to  remember  the  ancient  friend-
ship between  their  brother  and  him,  and  how  much  he
had  contributed  to  the  prosperity  of  their  family ;  he
reminded  them  of  the  humanity  with  which,  in  opposi-
tion to  the  repeated  remonstrances  of  his  own  most  at-
tached friends,  he  had  spared  their  lives  when  he  had
them  in  his  power ;  he  conjured  them  to  pity  his  age
and  infirmities,  and  to  suffer  him  to  pass  the  wretched
remainder  of  his  days  in  bewailing  his  crimes,  and  in
making  his  peace  with  Heaven.  The  entreaties,  says
a  Spanish  historian,  of  a  man  so  much  beloved,  touched
many  an  unfeeling  heart,  and  drew  tears  from  many  a
stern  eye.  But  the  brothers  remained  inflexible.  As
soon  as  Almagro  knew  his  fate  to  be  inevitable,  he  met
it  with  the  dignity  and  fortitude  of  a  veteran.  He  was
And  put  strangled  in  prison,  and  afterward  publicly  be-
to  death.  ]iea(jeci.  j^e  suffered  in  the  seventy-fifth  year
of  his  age,  and  left  one  son  by  an  Indian  woman  of  Pa-
nama, whom,  though  at  that  time  a  prisoner  in  Lima,

>'  Zarate,  lib.  iii.  c.  12. Gomara  Hist.  c.  141. Herrera..  dec.  6.  lib.  iv.  c.  7.

u  2

292  AMERICA.  [1539.

he  named  as  successor  to  his  government,  pursuant  to
a  power  which  the  emperor  had  granted  him.s

1539.  As,  during  the  civil  dissensions  in  Peru,  all
tiwifof1  intercourse  with  Spain  was  suspended,  the  de-
the  court  tail  of  the  extraordinary  transactions  there  did
concern-  not  soon  reach  the  court.  Unfortunately  for
state  of  the  victorious  faction,  the  first  intelligence  was
rem.  brought  thither  by  some  of  Almagro's  officers,
who  left  the  country  upon  the  ruin  of  their  cause  ;  and
they  related  what  had  happened,  with  every  circum-
stance unfavourable  to  Pizarro  and  his  brothers.  Their
ambition,  their  breach  of  the  most  solemn  engagements,
their  violence  and  cruelty,  were  painted  with  all  the
malignity  and  exaggeration  of  party  hatred.  Ferdi-
nand Pizarro,  who  arrived  soon  after,  and  appeared  in
court  with  extraordinary  splendour,  endeavoured  to
efface  the  impression  which  their  accusations  had  made,
and  to  justify  his  brother  and  himself  by  representing
Alinagro  as  the  aggressor.  The  emperor  and  his  mi-
nisters, though  they  could  not  pronounce  which  of  the
contending  factions  was  most  criminal,  clearly  discerned
the  fatal  tendency  of  their  dissensions.  It  was  obvious,
that  while  the  leaders,  intrusted  with  the  conduct  of
two  infant  colonies,  employed  the  arms  which  should
have  been  turned  against  the  common  enemy,  in  de-
stroying one  another,  all  attention  to  the  public  good
must  cease,  and  there  was  reason  to  dread  that  the  In-
dians might  improve  the  advantage  which  the  disunion
of  the  Spaniards  presented  to  them,  and  extirpate  both
the  victors  and  vanquished.  But  the  evil  was  more
apparent  than  the  remedy.  Where  the  information
which  had  been  received  was  so  defective  and  suspi-
cious, and  the  scene  of  action  so  remote,  it  was  almost
impossible  to  chalk  out  the  line  of  conduct  that  ought
to  be  followed,  and  before  any  plan  that  should  be  ap-

5  Zarate,  lib.  iii.  c.  12. Goniara  Hist.  c.  141. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  ii.  c.  39. Her-
rera,  dec.  G.  lib.  iv.  c.  9.  lib.  v.  c.  1 .

1539.]  BOOK  VI.  293

proved  of  in  Spain  could  be  carried  into  execution,  the
situation  of  the  parties,  and  the  circumstances  of  affairs,
might  alter  so  entirely  as  to  render  its  effects  extremely
pernicious.

Vaca  de  Nothing  therefore  remained  but  to  send  a
Castro  person  to  Peru,  vested  with  extensive  and
thither  discretionary  power,  who,  after  viewing  de-
ampie  liberately  the  posture  of  affairs  with  his  own
powers'  eyes,  and  inquiring  upon  the  spot  into  the
conduct  of  the  different  leaders,  should  be  autho-
rized to  establish  the  government  in  that  form  which
he  deemed  most  conducive  to  the  interest  of  the
parent  state,  and  the  welfare  of  the  colony.  The
man  selected  for  this  important  charge  was  Christo-
val  Vaca  de  Castro,  a  judge  in  the  court  of  royal
audience  at  Valladolid ;  and  his  abilities,  integrity,
and  firmness,  justified  the  choice.  His  instructions,
though  ample,  were  not  such  as  to  fetter  him  in  his
operations.  According  to  the  different  aspect  of
affairs,  he  had  power  to  take  upon  him  different
characters.  If  he  found  the  governor  still  alive,  he
was  to  assume  only  the  title  of  judge,  to  maintain
the  appearance  of  acting  in  concert  with  him,  and
to  guard  against  giving  any  just  cause  of  offence  to
a  man  who  had  merited  so  highly  of  his  country.
But  if  Pizarro  were  dead,  he  was  intrusted  with  a
commission  that  he  might  then  produce,  by  which
he  was  appointed  his  successor  in  the  government
of  Peru.  This  attention  to  Pizarro,  however,  seems
to  have  flowed  rather  from  dread  of  his  power,  than
from  any  approbation  of  his  measures ;  for  at  the
very  time  that  the  court  seemed  so  solicitous  not  to
irritate  him,  his  brother  Ferdinand  was  arrested  at
Madrid,  and  confined  to  a  prison,  where  he  remained
above  twenty  years.'

1  Gomara  Hist  c.  112. Vega,  p.  11.  lib,  ii.  c.  40. Herrera,  dec. (3. lib. viii.
c.  10,  11.  lib,  x.  c.  1.

294  AMERICA.  [1540.

1540. While  Vaca  de  Castro  was  preparing  for
Pizurrodi-  }HS voyage, events of  great  moment  hap-

vides  Peru  J O  .»  O  ■  i •

among hia  pened  in  Peru.  The  governor,  considering
himself,  upon  the  death  of  Almagro,  as  the
unrivalled  possessor  of  that  vast  empire,  proceeded
to  parcel  out  its  territories  among  the  conquerors ;
and  had  this  division  been  made  with  any  degree  of
impartiality,  the  extent  of  country  which  he  had  to
bestow,  was  sufficient  to  have  gratified  his  friends,  and
to  have  gained  his  enemies.  But  Pizarro  conducted
this  transaction,  not  with  the  equity  and  candour  of
a  judge  attentive  to  discover  and  to  reward  merit,
but  with  the  illiberal  spirit  of  a  party-leader.  Large
districts,  in  parts  of  the  country  most  cultivated  and
populous,  were  set  apart  as  his  own  property,  or
granted  to  his  brothers,  his  adherents  and  favourites.
To  others,  lots  less  valuable  and  inviting  were  as-
signed. The  followers  of  Almagro,  amongst  whom
were  many  of  the  original  adventurers  to  whose
valour  and  perseverance  Pizarro  was  indebted  for
his  success,  were  totally  excluded  from  any  portion
in  those  lands,  towards  the  acquisition  of  which  they
had  contributed  so  largely.  As  the  vanity  of  every
individual  set  an  immoderate  value  upon  his  own
services,  and  the  idea  of  each  concerning  the  recom-
pense due  to  them  rose  gradually  to  a  more  exorbi-
tant height  in  proportion  as  their  conquests  ex-
tended, all  who  were  disappointed  in  their  expec-
tations exclaimed  loudly  against  the  rapaciousness
and  partiality  of  the  governor.  The  partisans  of  Al-
magro murmured  in  secret,  and  meditated  revenge."
Progress  Rapid  as  the  progress  of  the  Spaniards  in
spanhsii South  America  had  been  since  Pizarro  landed

arm."

in  Peru,  their  avidity  of  dominion  was  not
yet  satisfied.  The  officers  to  whom  Ferdinand  Pi-
zarro gave  the  command  of  different  detachments,

"  ^  cga)  P-  11-  ''to-  "'•  c-  -• Herrera,  dec.  6.  lib.  viii.  c. •

1540.]  BOOK VI.  295

penetrated  into  several  new  provinces,  and  thou  oh
some  of  them  were  exposed  to  great  hardships  in
the  cold  and  barren  regions  of  the  Andes,  and  others
suffered  distress  not  inferior  amidst  the  woods  and
marshes  of  the  plains,  they  made  discoveries  and
conquests  which  not  only  extended  their  knowledge
of  the  country,  but  added  considerably  to  the  terri-
tories of  Spain  in  the  New  World.  Pedro  de  Val-
divia  reassumed  Almagro's  scheme  of  invading  Chili,
and,  notwithstanding  the  fortitude  of  the  natives  in
defending  their  possessions,  made  such  progress  in
the  conquest  of  the  country,  that  he  founded  the
city  of  St.  Jago,  and  gave  a  beginning  to  the  esta-
blishment of  the  Spanish  dominion  in  that  provinces
Remark-  But  °f  a^  tne  enterprises  undertaken  about
abieexpe-  this  period,  that  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro  was  the

dition  of  *

Gonzaio  most  remarkable.  The  governor,  who  seems
to  have  resolved  that  no  person  in  Peru  should
possess  any  station  of  distinguished  eminence  or
authority  but  those  of  his  own  family,  had  deprived
Benalcazar,  the  conqueror  of  Quito,  of  his  command
in  that  kingdom,  and  appointed  his  brother  Gonzalo
to  take  the  government  of  it.  He  instructed  him  to
attempt  the  discovery  and  conquest  of  the  country
to  the  east  of  the  Andes,  which,  according  to  the
information  of  the  Indians,  abounded  with  cinnamon
and  other  valuable  spices.  Gonzalo,  not  inferior
to  any  of  his  brothers  in  courage,  and  no  less  ambi-
tious of  acquiring  distinction,  eagerly  engaged  in
this  difficult  service.  He  set  out  from  Quito  at  the
head  of  three  hundred  and  forty  soldiers,  near  one
half  of  whom  were  horsemen ;  with  four  thousand
Indians  to  carry  their  provisions.  In  forcing  their
way  through  the  defiles,  or  over  the  ridges  of  the
Andes,  excess  of  cold  and  fatigue,  to  neither  of
which  they  were  accustomed,  proved  fatal  to  the

"  Zarate,  lib.  iii.  c.  13. Ovallr,  lib.  ii.  c.  1,  &c.

296  AM  Kill  ('A.  [1540.

greater  part  of  their  wretched  attendants.  The  Spa-
Hardships  WW^j  though  more  robust,  and  inured  to
they a  variety  of  climates,  suffered  considerably,

endure.  M  J  *

and  lost  some  men ;  but  when  they  descended
into  the  low  country,  their  distress  increased.  During
two  months  it  rained  incessantly,  without  any  inter-
val of  fair  weather  long  enough  to  dry  their  clothes."
The  immense  plains  upon  which  they  were  now  en-
tering, either  altogether  without  inhabitants,  or  oc-
cupied by  the  rudest  and  least  industrious  tribes  in
the  New  World,  yielded  little  subsistence.  They
could  not  advance  a  step  but  as  they  cut  a  road
through  woods,  or  made  it  through  marshes.  Such
incessant  toil,  and  continual  scarcity  of  food,  seem
more  than  sufficient  to  have  exhausted  and  dispirited
any  troops.  But  the  fortitude  and  perseverance  of
the  Spaniards  in  the  sixteenth  century  were  insu-
perable. Allured  by  frequent  but  false  accounts  of
rich  countries  before  them,  they  persisted  in  strug-
gling on,  until  they  reached  the  banks  of  the  Coca
or  Napo,  one  of  the  large  rivers  whose  waters  pour
into  the  Maragnon,  and  contribute  to  its  grandeur.
There,  with  infinite  labour,  they  built  a  bark,  which
they  expected  would  prove  of  great  utility,  in  con-
veying them  over  rivers,  in  procuring  provisions,
and  in  exploring  the  country.  This  was  manned
with  fifty  soldiers,  under  the  command  of  Francis
Orellana,  the  officer  next  in  rank  to  Pizarro.  The
stream  carried  them  down  with  such  rapidity,  that
they  were  soon  far  a-head  of  their  countrymen,  who
followed  slowly  and  with  difficulty  by  land.

At  this  distance  from  his  commander.  Orel-

Deserted

by  Orel- lana,  a  young  man  of  an  aspiring  mind,  began

to  fancy  himself  independent,  and  transported

with  the  predominant  passion  of  the  age,  he  formed

the  scheme  of  distinguishing  himself  as  a  discoverer,

*  Zsrate,  lib.  iv.  o.  2.

1.540.]  HOOK VI.  '197

by  following  the  course  of  the  Maragnon,  until  it
joined  the  ocean,  and  by  surveying  the  vast  regions
through  which  it  flows.  This  scheme  of  Orellanas
was  as  bold  as  it  was  treacherous.  For,  if  he  be
chargeable  with  the  guilt  of  having  violated  his  duty
to  his  commander,  and  with  having  abandoned  his
fellow-soldiers  in  a  pathless  desert,  where  they  had
hardly  any  hopes  of  success,  or  even  of  safety,  but
what  were  founded  on  the  service  which  they  ex-
pected from  the  bark  ;  his  crime  is,  in  some  measure,
balanced  by  the  glory  of  having  ventured  upon  a
navigation  of  near  two  thousand  leagues,  through
unknown  nations,  in  a  vessel  hastily  constructed,
with  green  timber,  and  by  very  unskilful  hands,
without  provisions,  without  a  compass,  or  a  pilot.
But  his  courage  and  alacrity  supplied  every  defect.
,  , Committing  himself  fearlessly  to  the  guidance

Sails  down  °  T  " ,  .

the  aia-  of  the  stream,  the  Napo  bore  him  along  to
ragnon.  ^e  sovith,  until  he  reached  the  great  channel
of  the  Maragnon.  Turning  with  it  towards  the  coast,
he  held  on  his  course  in  that  direction.  He  made
frequent  descents  on  both  sides  of  the  river,  some-
times seizing  by  force  of  arms  the  provisions  of  the
fierce  savages  seated  on  its  banks ;  and  sometimes
procuring  a  supply  of  food  by  a  friendly  intercourse
with  more  gentle  tribes.  After  a  long  series  of  dan-
gers, which  he  encountered  with  amazing  fortitude,
and  of  distresses  which  he  supported  with  no  less
magnanimity,  he  reached  the  ocean/  where  new
perils  awaited  him.  These  he  likewise  surmounted,
and  got  safe  to  the  Spanish  settlement  in  the  island
Cubagua;  from  thence  he  sailed  to  Spain.  The
vanity  natural  to  travellers  who  visit  regions  un-
known to  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  the  art  of  an  ad-
venturer, solicitous  to  magnify  his  own  merit,  con-
curred in  prompting  him  to  mingle  an  extraordinary

y  See  NoleLXXXlV.

298  AMERICA.  [1540.

proportion  of  the  marvellous  in  the  narrative  of  his
voyage.  He  pretended  to  have  discovered  nations
so  rich,  that  the  roofs  of  their  temples  were  covered
with  plates  of  gold  ;  and  described  a  republic  of  wo-
men so  warlike  and  powerful,  as  to  have  extended
their  dominion  over  a  considerable  tract  of  the  fertile
plains  which  he  had  visited.  Extravagant  as  those
tales  were,  they  gave  rise  to  an  opinion,  that  a  re-
gion abounding  with  gold,  distinguished  by  the
name  of  El  Dorado,  and  a  community  of  Amazons,
were  to  be  found  in  this  part  of  the  New  World ;
and  such  is  the  propensity  of  mankind  to  believe
what  is  wonderful,  that  it  has  been  slowly  and  with
difficulty  that  reason  and  observation  have  exploded
those  fables.  The  voyage,  however,  even  when
stripped  of  every  romantic  embellishment,  deserves
to  be  recorded,  not  only  as  one  of  the  most  memora-
ble occurrences  in  that  adventurous  age,  but  as  the
first  event  which  led  to  any  certain  knowledge  of
the  extensive  countries  that  stretch  eastward  from
the  Andes  to  the  ocean.2

Distress  of  No  words  can  describe  the  consternation
Pizarro.  0f  pizarr0)  when  he  did  not  find  the  bark  at
the  confluence  of  the  Napo  and  Maragnon,  where
he  had  ordered  Orellana  to  wait  for  him.  He  would
not  allow  himself  to  suspect  that  a  man,  whom  he
had  intrusted  with  such  an  important  command,
could  be  so  base  and  so  unfeeling,  as  to  desert  him
at  such  a  juncture.  But  imputing  his  absence  from
the  place  of  rendezvous  to  some  unknown  accident,
he  advanced  above  fifty  leagues  along  the  banks  of
the  Maragnon,  expecting  every  moment  to  see  the
bark  appear  with  a  supply  of  provisions.  At
length  he  came  up  with  an  officer  whom  Orel-
lana had  left  to  perish  in  the  desert,  because  he  had

7  Znrate,  lib.  iv.  c.  4. Gomara  Hist.  c.  86. Vega,  p. 11.  lib.jii.  c.  4. Ilcr-
rera,  dec.  6.  lib.  xi.  c.  2 — 5. Jlodriguer  Kl  Maragnon  y  Amazon  as,  lib.  i.  c.  3.

1541.]  BOOK VI.  299

the  courage  to  remonstrate  against  his  perfidy.  From
him  he  learned  the  extent  of  Orellana's  crime,  and  his
followers  perceived  at  once  their  own  desperate  si-
tuation, when  deprived  of  their  only  resource.  The
spirit  of  the  stoutest-hearted  veteran  sunk  within  him,
and  all  demanded  to  be  led  back  instantly.  Pizarro,
though  he  assumed  an  appearance  of  tranquillity,  did
not  oppose  their  inclination.  But  he  was  now  twelve
hundred  miles  from  Quito  ;  and  in  that  long  march
the  Spaniards  encountered  hardships  greater  than
those  which  they  had  endured  in  their  progress  out-
ward, without  the  alluring  hopes  which  then  soothed
and  animated  them  under  their  sufferings.  Hunger
compelled  them  to  feed  on  roots,  and  berries,  to  eat
all  their  dogs  and  horses,  to  devour  the  most  loath-
some reptiles,  and  even  to  gnaw  the  leather  of  their
saddles  and  sword-belts.  Four  thousand  Indians,  and
two  hundred  and  ten  Spaniards,  perished  in  this  wild
disastrous  expedition,  which  continued  near  two
years;  and  as  fifty  men  were  aboard  the  bark  with
Orellana,  only  fourscore  got  back  to  Quito.  These
were  naked  like  savages,  and  so  emaciated  with  fa-
mine, or  worn  out  with  fatigue,  that  they  had  more
the  appearance  of  spectres  than  of  men.a
Number  of  But,  instead  of  returning  to  enjoy  the  re-
StsT1  Pose  which  his  condition  required,  Pizarro,
Peru.  on  entering  Quito*  received  accounts  of  a  fatal
event  that  threatened  calamities  more  dreadful  to
him  than  those  through  which  he  had  passed.  From
the  time  that  his  brother  made  that  partial  division
of  his  conquests  which  has  been  mentioned,  the  ad-
herents of  Almagro,  considering  themselves  as  pro-
scribed by  the  party  in  power,  no  longer  entertained
any  hope  of  bettering  their  condition.  Great  num-
bers in  despair  resorted  to  Lima,  where  the  house  of

a  Zarate,  lib.  iv.  c.  2 — 5.  Vrga,  p.  11.  lib.  iii.  c.  3 — 5.  11.  Herreira,  dec.  6.
lib.  viii.  c.  7,  8.  lib.  ix.  c.  2  —  ."■>.  dec.  7.  lib.  iii.  c.  14.  Pizar.  Varoues,  lllusir,
3-iP,  &c.

300  AMERICA.  [1541.

young  Almagro  was  always  open  to  them,  and  the
slender  portion  of  his  father's  fortune,  which  the  go-
vernor allowed  him  to  enjoy,  was  spent  in  affording
them  subsistence.  The  warm  attachment  with  which
every  person  who  had  served  under  the  elder  Alma-
gro devoted  himself  to  his  interests,  was  quickly
transferred  to  his  son,  who  was  now  grown  up  to  the
age  of  manhood,  and  possessed  all  the  qualities  which
„ ., captivate the affections of  soldiers. Of  a

Consider  l

joung  gracelul  appearance,  dexterous  at  all  martial
asE0  exercises,  bold,  open,  generous,  he  seemed  to
leader.  ke  formec]_  for  command  ;  and  as  his  father,
conscious  of  his  own  inferiority,  from  the  total  want
of  education,  and  been  extremely  attentive  to  have
him  instructed  in  every  science  becoming  a  gentle-
man ;  the  accomplishments  which  he  had  acquired
heightened  the  respect  of  his  followers,  as  they  gave
him  distinction  and  eminence  among  illiterate  adven-
turers. In  this  young  man  the  Almagrians  found  a
point  of  union  which  they  wanted,  and  looking  up  to
him  as  their  head,  were  ready  to  undertake  any  thing
for  his  advancement.  Nor  was  affection  for  Almagro
their  only  incitement ;  they  were  urged  on  by  their
own  distresses.  Many  of  them,  destitute  of  common
necessaries,b  and  weary  of  loitering  away  life,  a  bur-
den to  their  chief,  or  to  such  of  their  associates  as
had  saved  some  remnant  of  their  fortune  from  pillage
and  confiscation,  longed  impatiently  for  an  occasion
to  exert  their  activity  and  courage,  and  began  to  de-
liberate how  they  might  be  avenged  on  the  author
conspire  of  all  their  misery.  Their  frequent  cabals  did
HfeofStlhc not  pass  unobserved;  and  the  governor  was
Pizarro.  warned  to  be  on  his  guard  against  men  who
meditated  some  desperate  deed,  and  had  resolution
to  execute  it.  But  either  from  the  native  intrepidity
of  his  mind,  or  from  contempt  of  persons  whose  po-

«»  Sec  Note  LXXXV.

1541.  BOOK VI.  301

verty  seemed  to  render  their  machinations  of  little
consequence,  he  disregarded  the  admonitions  of  his
friends.  "  Be  in  no  pain,"  said  he  carelessly,  "  about
my  life ;  it  is  perfectly  safe,  as  long  as  every  man  in
Peru  knows  that  I  can  in  a  moment  cut  off  any  head
which  dares  to  harbour  a  thought  against  it."  This
security  gave  the  Almagrians  full  leisure  to  digest
and  ripen  every  part  of  their  scheme ;  and  Juan  de
Herrada,  an  officer  of  great  abilities,  who  had  the
charge  of  Almagro's  education,  took  the  direction  of
their  consultations,  with  all  the  zeal  which  this  con-
nexion inspired,  and  with  all  the  authority  which  the
ascendant  that  he  was  known  to  have  over  the  mind
of  his  pupil  gave  him.

On  Sunday  the  26th  of  June,  at  mid-day,  the  sea-
son of  tranquillity  and  repose  in  all  sultry  climates,
Herrada,  at  the  head  of  eighteen  of  the  most  deter-
mined conspirators,  sallied  out  of  Almagro's  house
in  complete  armour  ;  and,  drawing  their  swords,  as
they  advanced  hastily  towards  the  governor's  palace,
cried  out,  "  Long  live  the  king,  but  let  the  tyrant
die !"  Their  associates,  warned  of  their  motions  by
a  signal,  were  in  arms  at  different  stations  ready  to
support  them.  Though  Pizarro  was  usually  surrounded
by  such  a  numerous  train  of  attendants  as  suited  the
magnificence  of  the  most  opulent  subject  of  the 'age  in
which  he  lived,  yet  as  he  was  just  risen  from  table,  and
most  of  his  domestics  had  retired  to  their  own  apart-
ments, the  conspirators  passed  through  the  two  outer
courts  of  the  palace  unobserved.  They  were  at  the
bottom  of  the  staircase,  before  a  page  in  waiting  could
give  the  alarm  to  his  master,  who  was  conversing  with
a  few  friends  in  a  large  hall.  The  governor,  whose
steady  mind  no  form  of  danger  could  appal,  starting
up,  called  for  arms,  and  commanded  Francisco  de
Chaves  to  make  fast  the  door.  But  that  officer,  who
did  not  retain  so  much  presence  of  mind  as  to  obey

302  AMERICA.  [1541.

this  prudent  order,  running-  to  the  top  of  the  staircase,
wildly  asked  the  conspirators  what  they  meant,  and
whither  they  were  going?  Instead  of  answering,  they
stabbed  him  to  the  heart,  and  burst  into  the  hall.
Some  of  the  persons  who  were  there  threw  themselves
from  the  windows;  others  attempted  to  fly  ;  and  a  few
drawing  their  swords  followed  their  leader  into  an
inner  apartment.  The  conspirators,  animated  with
having  the  object  of  their  vengeance  now  in  view,
rushed  forward  after  them.  Pizarro,  with  no  other
arms  than  his  sword  and  buckler,  defended  the  entry  ;
and,  supported  by  his  half-brother  Alcantara,  and  his
little  knot  of  friends,  he  maintained  the  unequal  contest
with  intrepidity  worthy  of  his  past  exploits,  and  with
the  vigour  of  a  youthful  combatant.  i:  Courage,"
cried  he,  "  companions  !  we  are  yet  enow  to  make
those  traitors  repent  of  their  audacity."  But  the  armour
of  the  conspirators  protected  them,  while  every  thrust
they  made  took  effect.  Alcantara  fell  dead  at  his
brother's  feet  ;  his  other  defenders  were  mortally
wounded.  The  governor,  so  weary  that  he  could
hardly  wield  his  sword,  and  no  longer  able  to  parry
the  many  weapons  furiously  aimed  at  him,  received  a
deadly  thrust  full  in  his  throat,  sunk  to  the  ground,
and  expired.

Aimaero  ^s  soon  as  ne  was  s^amj  the  assassins  ran
acknow- out  into  the  streets,  and  waving  their  bloody

ledged  as  .  '  °  J

his  sue-  swords,  proclaimed  the  death  ot  the  tyrant.
Above  two  hundred  of  their  associates  having
joined  them,  they  conducted  young  Almagro  in  solemn
procession  through  the  city,  and  assembling  the  ma-
gistrates and  principal  citizens,  compelled  them  to
acknowledge  him  as  lawful  successor  to  his  father  in
his  government.  The  palace  of  Pizarro,  together  with
the  houses  of  several  of  his  adherents,  were  pillaged  by
the  soldiers,  who  had  the  satisfaction  at  once  of  being
avenged  on  their  enemies,  and  of  enriching  themselves

1541.]  BOOK VI.  303

by  the  spoils  of  those  through  whose  hands  all  the
wealth  of  Peru  had  passed.6

w  The  boldness  and  success  of  the  conspiracy,

pearances  as  well  as  the  name  and  popular  qualities  of

of  discord. .  ,  ,  ,  , .  1 .  ,

Alinagro,  drew  many  soldiers  to  Ins  standard.
Every  adventurer  of  desperate  fortune,  all  who  were
dissatisfied  with  Pizarro,  and  from  the  rapaciousness  of
his  government  in  the  latter  years  of  his  life  the  number
of  malecontents  was  considerable,  declared  without  he-
sitation in  favour  of  Almagro,  and  he  was  soon  at  the
head  of  eight  hundred  of  the  most  gallant  veterans  in
Peru.  As  his  youth  and  inexperience  disqualified  him
from  taking  the  command  of  them  himself,  he  appoint-
ed Herrada  to  act  as  general.  But  though  Almagro
speedily  collected  such  a  respectable  force,  the  acqui-
escence in  his  government  was  far  from  being  general.
Pizarro  had  left  many  friends  to  whom  his  memory  was
dear ;  the  barbarous  assassination  of  a  man  to  whom
his  country  was  so  highly  indebted,  filled  every  im-
partial person  with  horror.  The  ignominious  birth  of
Almagro,  as  well  as  the  doubtful  title  on  which  he
founded  his  pretensions,  led  others  to  consider  him  as
a  usurper.  The  officers  who  commanded  in  some
provinces  refused  to  recognise  his  authority,  until  it  was
confirmed  by  the  emperor.  In  others,  particularly  at
Cuzco,  the  royal  standard  was  erected,  and  prepara-
tions were  begun  in  order  to  revenge  the  murder  of
their  ancient  leader.

Arrival  of Those  seeds  •  of  discord,  which  could  not
vacade have  lain  long  dormant, acquired great  vi-

gour  and  activity,  when  the  arrival  ot  Vaca
de  Castro  was  known.  After  a  long  and  disastrous
voyage,  he  was  driven  by  stress  of  weather  into  a
small  harbour  in  the  province  of  Popayan ;  and
proceeding  from  thence  by  land,  after  a  journey  no

c Zarate,  lib.  iv.  c.  6 — 8. Gomara Hist.  c.  141,  14.5. Vega,  p.  11.  lib. iii.
c.5— 7. Herrera,  dec,  6.  lib.  x.c.  4— 7. Pizarro  Var.  Illust.  p.  183.

;304  AMERICA.  [1541.

less  tedious  than  difficult,  he  reached  Quito. In
his  way  he  received  accounts of  Pizarro's death,
who  as- and  of  the  events  which  followed  upon  it.
t!iieeoftho-  ^e  immediately  produced  the  royal  commis-
vemor. sion  appointing  him  governor  of  Peru,  with
the  same  privileges  and  authority ;  and  his  juris-
diction  was acknowledged  without hesitation by
Benalcazar,  adelantado  or  lieutenant-general  for  the
emperor  in  Popayan,  and  by  Pedro  de  Puelles,  who,
in  the  absence  of  Gonzalo Pizarro,  had  the  com-
mand of  the  troops  left  in  Quito. Vaca  de  Castro
not  only  assumed  the  supreme  authority,  but  shewed
that  he  possessed  the  talents  which  the  exercise  of
it  at  that  juncture  required. By  his  influence  and
address  he  soon  assembled  such  a  body  of  troops,
as  not  only  to  set  him  above  all  fear  of  being  ex-
posed to  any  insult  from  the  adverse  party,  but  en-
abled him  to  advance  from  Quito  with  the  dignity
that  became  his  character. By  dispatching  persons
of  confidence  to  the  different  settlements  in  Peru,
with  a  formal  notification  of  his  arrival  and  of  his
commission,  he  communicated  to  his  countrymen  the
royal  pleasure  with  respect  to  the  government  of
the country. By private  emissaries, he  excited
such  officers  as  had  discovered  their  disapprobation
of  Almagro's  proceedings,  to  manifest  their  duty  to
their  sovereign  by  supporting  the  person  honoured
with  his  commission. Those measures  were  pro-
ductive of  great  effects. Encouraged  by  the  ap-
proach of  the  new  governor,  or  prepared  by  his  ma-
chinations, the  loyal  were  confirmed  in  their  princi-
ples, and  avowed  them  with  greater  boldness  ;  the
timid  ventured  to  declare  their  sentiments ;  the  neu-
tral and  wavering,  finding  it  necessary  to  choose  a
side,  began  to  lean  to  that  which  now  appeared  to
be  the  safest,  as  well  as  the  most  just.'1

d  Benzon,  lib.  iii.  c.  9. Zaratc,  lib.  iv.  c.  11. Gomara,  c.  146,  14-7. Herrera,
dec.  6. lib.  >.  c.  1— 3.  7,  &c.

J 542.]  BOOK  VI.  .305

Conduct Almagro  observed  the  rapid progress  of
of  Aima- this  spirit  of  disaffection  to  his  cause,  and  in

gro.

order  to  give  an  effectual  check  to  it  before
the  arrival  of  Vaca  de  Castro,  he  set  out  at  the  head
of  his  troops  for  Cuzco,  where  the  most  con-
siderable body  of  opponents  had  erected  the
royal  standard,  under  the  command  of  Pedro  Alvarez
Holguin.  During  his  march  thither,  Herrada,  the
skilful  guide  of  his  youth,  and  of  his  counsels,  died;
and  from  that  time  his  measures  were  conspicuous
for  their  violence,  but  concerted  with  little  sagacity,
and  executed  with  no  address.  Holguin,  who,  with
forces  far  inferior  to  those  of  the  opposite  party,  was
descending  towards  the  coast  at  the  very  time  that
Almagro  was  on  his  way  to  Cuzco,  deceived  his  un-
experienced adversary  by  a  very  simple  stratagem,
avoided  an  engagement,  and  effected  a  junction
with  Alvarado,  an  officer  of  note,  who  had  been
the  first  to  declare  against  Almagro  as  a  usurper.
p  Soon  after,  Vaca  de  Castro  entered  their

Progress  '

of  vaca  de  camp  with  the  troops  which  he  brought  from
Quito,  and  erecting  the  royal  standard  be-
fore his  own  tent,  he  declared  that,  as  governor,  he
would  discharge  in  person  all  the  functions  of  gene-
ral of  their  combined  forces.  Though  formed  by  the
tenor  of  his  past  life  to  the  habits  of  a  sedentary  and
pacific  profession,  he  at  once  assumed  the  activity
and  discovered  the  decision  of  an  officer  long  ac-
customed to  command-.  Knowing  his  strength  to
be  now  far  superior  to  that  of  the  enemy,  he  was
impatient  to  terminate  the  contest  by  a  battle.  Nor
did  the  followers  of  Almagro,  who  had  no  hopes  of
obtaining  a  pardon  for  a  crime  so  atrocious  as  the
murder  of  the  governor,  decline  that  mode  of  deci-
Se  |  sion.  They  met  at  Chupaz,  about  two  hun-
dred miles  from  Cuzco,  and  fought  with  all
the  fierce  animosity  inspired  by  the  violence  of  civil

VOL.  VII.  x

300  AMERICA.  [1542.

rage,  the  rancour  of  private  enmity,  the  eagerness
of  revenge,  and  the  last  efforts  of  despair.  Victory,
Defeats  after  remaining  long  doubtful,  declared  at
Aimagro.  iast  for  Vaca  de  Castro.  The  superior  num-
ber of  his  troops,  his  own  intrepidity,  and  the  mar-
tial talents  of  Francisco  de  Carvajal,  a  veteran  officer
formed  under  the  Great  Captain  in  the  wars  of  Italy,
and  who  on  that  day  laid  the  foundation  of  his  future
fame  in  Peru,  triumphed  over  the  bravery  of  his  op-
ponents, though  led  on  by  young  Aimagro  with  a
gallant  spirit,  worthy  of  a  better  cause,  and  deserv-
ing another  fate.  The  carnage  was  great  in  pro-
portion to  the  number  of  the  combatants.  Many  of
the  vanquished,  especially  such  as  were  conscious
that  they  might  be  charged  with  being  accessary  to
the  assassination  of  Pizarro,  rushing  on  the  swords
of  the  enemy,  chose  to  fall  like  soldiers,  rather  than
wait  an  ignominious  doom.  Of  fourteen  hundred
men,  the  total  amount  of  combatants  on  both  sides,
five  hundred  lay  dead  on  the  field,  and  the  number
of  the  wounded  was  still  greater.6
SeTerity  If  the  military  talents  displayed  by  Vaca
of  his  pro-  (je  Castro,  both  in  the  council  and  in  the  field,

ceedings.

surprised  the  adventurers  in  Peru,  they  were
still  more  astonished  at  his  conduct  after  the  vic-
tory. As  he  was  by  nature  a  rigid  dispenser  of
justice,  and  persuaded  that  it  required  examples  of
extraordinary  severity  to  restrain  the  licentious
spirit  of  soldiers  so  far  removed  from  the  seat  of
government,  he  proceeded  directly  to  try  his  pri-
soners as  rebels.  Forty  were  condemned  to  suffer
the  death  of  traitors,  others  were  banished  from
Peru.  Their  leader,  who  made  his  escape  from  the
battle,  being  betrayed  by  some  of  his  officers,  was
publicly  beheaded  in  Cuzco  ;  and  in  him  the  name

■  Zarate,  lib.  iv.  c.  12 — 19. Gomara.  c.  148. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  iii.  c.  11—18.
Herrera,  dec.  7.  lib.  i.  c.  1—3.  lib.  iii.  c.  1 — 11.

1542.]  BOOK VI.  :}()7

of  Almagro, and  the  spirit  of  the  party,  was ex-
tinct.'

Consuita-  During  those  violent  convulsions  in  Peru,
theem-  the  emperor  and  his  ministers  were  intently
Sig°his  employed  in  preparing  regulations,  by  which
dominions  they  hoped,  not  only  to  re-establish  tranquil-
rica.  lity  there,  but  to  introduce  a  more  perfect
system  of  internal  policy  into  all  their  settlements
in  the  New  World.  It  is  manifest  from  all  the
events  recorded  in  the  history  of  America,  that,  rapid
and  extensive  as  the  Spanish  conquests  there  had
been,  they  were  not  carried  on  by  any  regular  exer-
tion of  the  national  force,  but  by  the  occasional
efforts  of  private  adventurers.  After  fitting  out  a
few  of  the  first  armaments  for  discovering  new  re-
gions, the  court  of  Spain,  during  the  busy  reigns  of
Ferdinand  and  of  Charles  V.,  the  former  the  most
intriguing  prince  of  the  age,  and  the  latter  the  most
ambitious,  was  encumbered  with  such  a  multiplicity
of  schemes,  and  involved  in  war  with  so  many  na-
tions of  Europe,  that  he  had  not  leisure  to  attend
to  distant  and  less  interesting  objects.  The  care  of
prosecuting  discovery,  or  of  attempting  conquest,
was  abandoned  to  individuals  ;  and  with  such  ardour
did  men  push  forward  in  this  new  career,  on  which
novelty,  the  spirit  of  adventure,  avarice,  ambition,
and  the  hope  of  meriting  heaven,  prompted  them
with  combined  influence  to  enter,  that  in  less  than
half  a  century  almost"  the  whole  of  that  extensive
empire  which  Spain  now  possesses  in  the  New
World,  was  subjected  to  its  dominion.  As  the  Spa-
nish court  contributed  nothing  towards  the  various
expeditions  undertaken  in  America,  it  was  not  en-
titled to  claim  much  from  their  success.  The  so-
vereignty of  the  conquered  provinces,  with  the  fifth
of  the  gold  and  silver,  was  reserved  for  the  crown ;

f  Zarate,  lib.  iv.  c.  21. Goniara,  c.  150. Herrera,  dec.  7.  lib.  iii.  c.  12.  lib.  vi.
c.  1.

x2

308  AMERICA.  [1542

every  thing  else  was  seized  by  the  associates  in  each
expedition  as  their  own  right.  The  plunder  of  the
countries  which  they  invaded  served  to  indemnify
them  for  what  they  had  expended  in  equipping
themselves  for  the  service,  and  the  conquered  terri-
tory was  divided  among  them,  according  to  rules
which  custom  had  introduced,  as  permanent  esta-
blishments which  their  successful  valour  merited.
In  the  infancy  of  those  settlements,  when  their  ex-
tent as  well  as  their  valour  were  unknown,  many
irregularities  escaped  observation,  and  it  was  found
necessary  to  connive  at  many  excesses.  The  con-
quered people  were  frequently  pillaged  with  de-
structive rapacity,  and  their  country  parcelled  out
among  its  new  masters  in  exorbitant  shares,  far  ex-
ceeding the  highest  recompense  due  to  their  ser-
vices. The  rude  conquerors  of  America,  incapable
of  forming  their  establishments  upon  any  general  or
extensive  plan  of  policy,  attentive  only  to  private  in-
terest, unwilling  to  forego  present  gain  from  the
prospect  of  remote  or  public  benefit,  seem  to  have
had  no  object  but  to  amass  sudden  wealth,  without
regarding  what  might  be  the  consequences  of  the
means  by  which  they  acquired  it.  But  when  time
at  length  discovered  to  the  Spanish  court  the  im-
portance of  its  American  possessions,  the  necessity
of  new-modelling  their  whole  frame  became  obvious,
and  in  place  of  the  maxims  and  practices,  prevalent
among  military  adventurers,  it  was  found  requisite
to  substitute  the  institutions  of  regular  government.
One  evil  in  particular  called  for  an  immediate  re-
medy. The  conquerors  of  Mexico  and  Peru  imitated
the  fatal  example  of  their  countrymen  settled  in  the
islands,  and  employed  themselves  in  searching  for
gold  and  silver  with  the  same  inconsiderate  eager-
ness. Similar  effects  followed.  The  natives  em-
ployed in  this  labour  by  masters,  who  in  imposing

1542.]  BOOK VL  .309

tasks  had  no  regard  either  to  what  they  felt  or  to
what  they  were  able  to  perform,  pined  away  and  pe-
rished so  fast,  that  there  was  reason  to  apprehend
that  Spain,  instead  of  possessing  countries  peopled
to  such  a  degree  as  to  be  susceptible  of  progressive
improvement,  would  soon  remain  proprietor  only  of
a  vast  uninhabited  desert.

The  emperor  and  his  ministers  were  so  sensible  of
this,  and  so  solicitous  to  prevent  the  extinction  of  the
Indian  race,  which  threatened  to  render  their  acquisitions
of  no  value,  that  from  time  to  time  various  laws,  which
I  have  mentioned,  had  been  made  for  securing  to  that
unhappy  people  more  gentle  and  equitable  treatment.
But  the  distance  of  America  from  the  seat  of  empire,
the  feebleness  of  government  in  the  new  colonies,  the
avarice  and  audacity  of  soldiers  unaccustomed  to  re-
straint, prevented  these  salutary  regulations  from  ope-
rating with  any  considerable  influence. The  evil  con-
tinued to  grow,  and  at  this  time  the  emperor  found  an
interval  of  leisure  from  the  affairs  of  Europe  to  take  it
The  per- into  attentive  consideration. He  consulted  not
whomhe only  with  his  ministers  and  the  members  of  the
advises. C0lincil  0f  the  Indies,  but  called  upon  several
persons  who  had  resided  long  in  the  New  World,  to  aid
them  with  the  result  of  their  experience  and  observation.
Fortunately  for  the  people  of  America,  among  these  was
Bartholomew  de  las  Casas,  who  happened  to  be  then  at
Madrid  on  a  mission  from  a  chapter  of  his  order  at
Chiapa.g Though  since  "the  miscarriage  of  his  former
schemes  for  the  relief  of  the  Indians,  he  had  continued
shut  up  in  his  cloister,  or  occupied  in  religious  func-
tions, his  zeal  in  behalf  of  the  former  objects  of  his  pity
was  so  far  from  abating,  that,  from  an  increased  know-
ledge of  their  sufferings,  its  ardour  had  augmented.  He
seized  eagerly  this  opportunity  of  reviving  his  favourite
maxims  concerning:  the  treatment  of  the  Indians. With
the  moving  eloquence  natural  to  a  man  on  whose  mind

f  Remesal  Hist,  de  Ghiapa,  p.  146.

:H0  AMERICA.  [1542.

the  scenes  which  he  had  beheld  had  made  a  deep  im-
pression, he  described  the  irreparable  waste  of  the  hu-
man species  in  the  New  World,  the  Indian  race  almost
totally  swept  away  in  the  islands  in  less  than  fifty  years,
and  hastening  to  extinction  on  the  continent  with  the
same rapid decay. With  the decisive  tone  of  one
strongly  prepossessed  with  the  truth  of  his  own  system,
he  imputed  all  this  to  a  single  cause,  to  the  exactions
and  cruelty  of  his  countrymen,  and  contended  that  no-
thing could  prevent  the  depopulation  of  America,  but
the  declaring  of  its  natives  to  be  freemen,  and  treating
them  as  subjects,  not  as  slaves. Nor  did  he  confide  for
the  success  of  this  proposal  in  the  powers  of  his  oratory
alone. In  order  to  enforce  them,  he  composed  his  fa-
mous treatise  concerning  the  destruction  of  America,11
in  which  he  relates,  with  many  horrid  circumstances,
but  with  apparent  marks  of  exaggerated  description,  the
devastation  of  every  province  which  had  been  visited  by
the  Spaniards.

His  solid- The  emperor  was  deeply  afflicted  with  the  re-
tude  to  in-  c[^\  of  so  many  actions  shocking;  to  humanity.

troduce  a  J  -iip-iii  c

general  re-  But  as  his  views  extended  far  beyond  those  ot
ofgovem- Las  Casas,  he  perceived  that  relieving  the  In-
uieilt' dians  from  oppression  was  but  one  step  towards
rendering  his  possessions  in  the  New  World  a  valuable
acquisition,  and  would  be  of  little  avail,  unless  he  could
circumscribe  the  power  and  usurpations  of  his  own  sub-
jects there. The  conquerors  of  America,  however  great
their  merit  hud  been  towards  their  country,  were  mostly
persons  of  such  mean  birth,  and  of  such  an  abject  rank
in  society,  as  gave  no  distinction  in  the  eye  of  a  monarch.
The  exorbitant  wealth  with  which  some  of  them  returned,
gave  umbrage  to  an  age  not  accustomed  to  see  men  in
inferior  condition  elevated  above  their  level,  and  rising
to  emulate  or  to  surpass  the  ancient  nobility  in  splendour.
The  territories  which  their  leaders  had  appropriated  to
themselves  were  of  such  enormous  extent,1  that  if  the

h  Rcmesal,  p.  192.  199.  '  See  Note  LXXXVI.

1542.]  BOOK VI.  311

country  should  ever  be  improved  in  proportion  to  the
fertility  of  the  soil,  they  must  grow  too  wealthy  and  too
powerful  for  subjects.  It  appeared  to  Charles  that  this
abuse  required  a  remedy  no  less  than  the  other,  and  that
the  regulations  concerning  both  must  be  enforced  by  a
mode  of  government  more  vigorous  than  had  yet  been
introduced  into  America.

New  regu-  With  this  view  he  framed  a  body  of  laws,  con-
tSspif"  fining  many  salutary  appointments  with  re-
pose, spect  to  the  constitution  and  powers  of  the  su-
preme council  of  the  Indies  ;  concerning  the  station  and
jurisdiction  of  the  royal  audiences  in  different  parts  of
America ;  the  administration  of  justice  ;  the  order  of
government,  both  ecclesiastical  and  civil.  These  were
approved  of  by  all  ranks  of  men.  But  together  with
them  were  issued  the  following  regulations,  which  ex-
cited universal  alarm,  and  occasioned  the  most  violent
convulsions  :  "  That  as  the  repart'miientos  or  shares  of
lands  seized  by  several  persons  appeared  to  be  excessive,
the  royal  audiences  are  empowered  to  reduce  them  to  a
moderate  extent :  that  upon  the  death  of  any  conqueror
or  planter,  the  lands  and  Indians  granted  to  him  shall
not  descend  to  his  widow  or  children,  but  return  to  the
crown  :  that  the  Indians  shall  henceforth  be  exempt  from
personal  service,  and  shall  not  be  compelled  to  carry  the
baggage  of  travellers,  to  labour  in  the  mines,  or  to  dive
in  the  pearl  fisheries  :  that  the  stated  tribute  due  by
them  to  their  superior  shall  be  ascertained,  and  they
shall  be  paid  as  servants  for  any  work  they  voluntarily
perform  :  that  all  persons  who  are  or  have  been  in  public
offices,  all  ecclesiastics  of  every  denomination,  all  hos-
pitals and  monasteries,  shall  be  deprived  of  the  lands
and  Indians  allotted  to  them,  and  these  be  annexed  to
the  crown  :  that  every  person  in  Peru,  who  had  any  cri-
minal concern  in  the  contests  between  Pizarro  and  Al-
magro,  should  forfeit  his  lands  and  Indians."11
His  minis-  All  the  Spanish  ministers  who  had  hitherto
ters  re- been  intrusted  with  the  direction  of  American

k  Herrera,  dec.  7,  lib.  vi.  c.  b. Fernandez  Hist.  lib.  i.  c.  1,  2.

312  AMERICA.  [1542.

monstratc  a^airs5  and  wno  were  best  acquainted  with  the
against state  of  the  country,remonstrated  against  those  re-

thera.  . J  . .  &  .

gulationsas  ruinous  to  their  infant  colonies,  ihey
represented,  that  the  number  of  Spaniards  who  had  hi-
therto emigrated  to  the  New  World  was  so  extremely
small,  that  nothing  could  be  expected  from  any  effort  of
theirs  towards  improving  the  vast  regions  over  which  they
were  scattered  •  that  the  success  of  every  scheme  for  this
purpose  must  depend  upon  the  ministry  and  service  of
the  Indians,  whose  native  indolence  and  aversion  to  la-
bour, no  prospect  of  benefit  or  promise  of  reward  could
surmount;  that  the  moment  the  right  of  imposing  a  task,
and  exacting  the  performance  of  it,  was  taken  from  their
masters,  every  work  of  industry  must  cease,  and  all  the
sources  from  which  wealth  began  to  pour  in  upon  Spain
must  be  stopped  for  ever.  But  Charles,  tenacious  at  all
times  of  his  own  opinions,  and  so  much  impressed  at
present  with  the  view  of  the  disorders  which  reigned  in
America,  that  he  was  willing  to  hazard  the  application
even  of  a  dangerous  remedy,  persisted  in  his  resolution
of  publishing  the  laws.  That  they  might  be  carried  into
execution  with  greater  vigour  and  authority,  he  au-
thorized Francisco  Tello  de  Sandoval  to  repair  to  Mexico
as  Visitador  or  superintendant  of  that  country,  and  to  co-
operate with  Antonia  de  Mendoza,  the  viceroy,  in  en-
1543.  forcing  them.  He  appointed  Blasco  Nugnez
ohS  Vela  to  be  governor  of  Peru,  with  the  title  of  vice-

A

PP

for  Pcm.  r0y .  anfj inordertostrengthenhis administration,
he  established  a  court  of  royal  audience  in  Lima,  in
which  four  lawyers  of  eminence  were  to  preside  as
judges.1

EiFecu  of  ^he  viccrov  and  superintendant  sailed  at  the
the  reguia-  same  time ;  and  an  account  of  the  laws  which
New  they  were  to  enforce  reached  America  before

Spam'  them.  The  entry  of  Sandoval  into  Mexico  was
viewed  as  the  prelude  of  general  ruin.  The  unlimited
grant  of  liberty  to  the  Indians  affected  every  Spaniard
in  America  without  distinction,  and  there  was  hardly

i  7.  u-atf ,  lil>.  iii.  c.  '.'1. Goroara.c.  151. Vega. p.  2. lib. iii. c.  20.

1543.]  BOOK VI.  313

one  who  might  not  on  some  pretext  be  included  under
the  other  regulations,  and  suffer  by  them.  But  the  co-
lony in  New  Spain  had  now  been  so  long  accustomed
to  the  restraints  of  law  and  authority  under  the  steady
and  prudent  administration  of  Mendoza,  that  how  much
soever  the  spirit  of  the  new  statutes  was  detested  and
dreaded,  no  attempt  was  made  to  obstruct  the  publi-
cation of  them  by  any  act  of  violence  unbecoming  sub-
jects. The  magistrates  and  principal  inhabitants,  how-
ever, presented  dutiful  addresses  to  the  viceroy  and  su-
perintendant,  representing  the  fatal  consequences  of  en-
forcing them.  Happily  for  them,  Mendoza,  by  long  re-
sidence in  the  country,  was  so  thoroughly  acquainted
with  its  state,  that  he  knew  what  was  for  its  interest  as
well  as  what  it  could  bear;  and  Sandoval,  though  new  in
office,  displayed  a  degree  of  moderation  seldom  possessed
by  persons  just  entering  upon  the  exercise  of  power.
They  engaged  to  suspend,  for  some  time,  the  execution
of  what  was  offensive  in  the  new  laws,  and  not  only  con-
sented that  a  deputation  of  citizens  should  be  sent  to
Europe  to  lay  before  the  emperor  the  apprehensions  of
his  subjects  in  New  Spain  with  respect  to  their  ten-
dency and  effects,  but  they  concurred  with  them  in  sup-
porting their  sentiments.  Charles,  moved  by  the  opi-
nion of  men  whose  abilities  and  integrity  entitled  them
to  decide  concerning  what  fell  immediately  under  their
own  view,  granted  such  a  relaxation  of  the  rigour  of
the  laws  as  re-established  the  colony  in  its  former  tran-
quillity."1

In  Peru  the  storm  gathered  with  an  aspect
still  more  fierce  and  threatening,  and  was  not
so  soon  dispelled.  The  conquerors  of  Peru,  of  a  rank
much  inferior  to  those  who  had  subjected  Mexico  to  the
Spanish  crown,  farther  removed  from  the  inspection  of
the  parent  state,  and  intoxicated  with  the  sudden  acqui-
sition of  wealth,  carried  on  all  their  operations  with

m  Fernandez  Hist,  lib.i.c.  3,  4,  5. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  iii.c.  21,22. Herrera,  dec.
7.  lib.  v.  c.  7.  lib.  vii.  c.  14,  15. Torquem.  Mond.  Ind.  lib.  v.c.  13.

314  AMERICA.  [1543.

greater  license  and  irregularity  than  any  body  of  adven-
turers in  the  New  World.  Amidst  the  general  sub-
version of  law  and  order,  occasioned  by  two  successive
civil  wars,  when  each  individual  was  at  liberty  to  decide
for  himself,  without  any  guide  but  his  own  interest  or
passions,  this  turbulent  spirit  rose  above  all  sense  of  sub-
ordination. To  men  thus  corrupted  by  anarchy,  the
introduction  of  regular  government,  the  power  of  a  vice-
roy, and  the  authority  of  a  respectable  court  of  judi-
cature, would  of  themselves  have  appeared  formidable
restraints,  to  which  they  would  have  submitted  with
reluctance.  But  they  revolted  with  indignation  against
the  idea  of  complying  with  laws,  by  which  they  were
to  be  stripped  at  once  of  all  they  had  earned  so  hardly
during  many  years  of  service  and  suffering.  As  the
account  of  the  new  laws  spread  successively  through  the
different  settlements,  the  inhabitants  ran  together,  the
women  in  tears,  and  the  men  exclaiming  against  the  in-
justice and  ingratitude  of  their  sovereign  in  depriving
them,  unheard  ;and  unconvicted,  of  their  possessions.
"  Is  this,"  erred  they,  "the  recompense  due  to  persons,
wlio,  without  public  aid,  at  their  own  expense,  and  by
their  own  valour,  have  subjected  to  the  crown  of  Castile
territories  of  such  immense  extent  and  opulence  ?  Are
these  the  rewards  bestowed  for  having  endured  unpa-
ralleled distress,  for  having  encountered  every  species
of  danger  in  the  service  of  their  country  ?  Whose  merit
is  so  great,  whose  conduct  has  been  so  irreproachable,
that  he  may  not  be  condemned  by  some  penal  clause  in
regulations,  conceived  in  terms  as  loose  and  compre-
hensive, as  if  it  had  been  intended  that  all  should  be  en-
tangled in  their  snare?  Every  Spaniard  of  note  in
Peru  has  held  some  public  office,  and  all,  without  dis-
tinction, have  been  constrained  to  take  an  active  part  in
the  contest  between  the  two  rival  chiefs.  Were  the
former  to  be  robbed  of  their  property  because  they  had
done  their  duty?  Were  the  latter  to  be  punished  on
account  of  what  they  could  not  avoid? Shall  the  con-

1543.]  BOOK VI.  315

querors  of  this  great  empire,  instead  of  receiving  marks
of  distinction,  be  deprived  of  the  natural  consolation  of
providing  for  their  widows  and  children,  and  leave  them
to  depend  for  subsistence  on  the  scanty  supply  they  can
extort  from  unfeeling  courtiers  ?n  We  are  not  able  now,
continued  they,  to  explore  unknown  regions  in  quest  of
more  secure  settlements  ;  our  constitutions  debilitated
with  age,  and  our  bodies  covered  with  wounds,  are  no
longer  fit  for  active  service ;  but  still  we  possess  vigour
sufficient  to  assert  our  just  rights,  and  we  will  not  tamely
suffer  them  to  be  wrested  from  us."°

By  discourses  of  this  sort,  uttered  with
rection  vehemence,  and  listened  to  with  universal
b^the  mo-  approbation,  their  passions  were  inflamed  to

of  Castro suc^  a  P*tch>  tnat  tney  were  prepared  for  the
most  violent  measures ;  and  began  to  hold

consultations  in  different  places,  how  they  might
oppose  the  entrance  of  the  viceroy  and  judges,  and
prevent  not  only  the  execution,  but  the  promulga-
tion of  the  new  laws.  From  this,  however,  they
were  diverted  by  the  address  of  Vaca  de  Castro,
who  flattered  them  with  hopes,  that,  as  soon  as  the
viceroy  and  judges  should  arrive,  and  had  leisure  to
examine  their  petitions  and  remonstrances,  they
would  concur  with  them  in  endeavouring  to  procure
some  mitigation  in  the  rigour  of  laws  which  had
been  framed  without  due  attention  either  to  the
state  of  the  country,  .or  to  the  sentiments  of  the
people.  A  great  degree  of  accommodation  to  these,
and  even  some  concessions  on  the  part  of  go-
vernment, were  now  become  requisite  to  compose
the  present  ferment,  and  to  soothe  the  colonists  into
submission,  by  inspiring  them  with  confidence  in
their  superiors.  But  without  profound  discernment,
conciliating  manners,  and  flexibility  of  temper,  such

n  Herrera,  dec.  7.  lib.vii.  c.  14,  15.
°  Gomara,  c.  152. Herrera,  dec.  7.  lib.  vi.  c.  10,  11. Vega,  p.  11 .  lib.  iii.  c.  20.
22.  lib.  iv.  c.  3,4.

.°)10  AMERICA.  [1543

j*

. . a  plan  could  not  be  carried  on. The  viceroy

The  spirit *

of  disaffec- possessed  none  of  these.  Of  all  the  qualities
creased ibythat  fit  men  for  high  command,  he  was  en-
tbe  vice- ^oweci  oniy  with  integrity  and  courage  ;  the

former harsh and uncomplying, the latter

bordering so  frequently  on  rashness  or  obstinacy,

that  in  his  situation  they  were  defects  rather

March  4.  .  "J

than  virtues, rrom the moment that he
landed  at  Tumbez,  Nugnez  Vela  seems  to  have  con-
sidered himself  merely  as  an  executive  officer,  with-
out  any  discretionary  power ; and, regardless  of
whatever  he  observed  or  heard  concerning  the  state
of  the  country,  he  adhered  to  the  letter  of  the  regu-
lations with  unrelenting  rigour. In  all  the  towns
through  which  he  passed,  the  natives  were  declared
to  be  free,  every  person  in  public  office  was  deprived
of  his  lands  and  servants  ;  and  as  an  example  of
obedience  to  others,  he  would  not  suffer  a  single  In-
dian to  be  employed  in  carrying  his  own  baggage  in
his  march  towards  Lima. Amazement  and  conster-
nation went  before  him  as  he  approached ;  and  so
little  solicitous  was  he  to  prevent  these  from  aug-
menting, that, on  entering  the  capital, he  openly
avowed  that  he  came  to  obey  the  orders  of  his  sove-
reign, not  to  dispense  with  his  laws. This  harsh
declaration  was  accompanied  with  what  rendered  it
still  more  intolerable,  haughtiness  in  deportment,  a
tone  of  arrogance  and  decision  in  discourse,  and  an
insolence  of  office  grievous  to  men  little  accustomed
to  hold  civil  authority  in  high  respect. Every  at-
tempt to  procure  a  suspension  or  mitigation  of  the
new  laws,  the  viceroy  considered  as  flowing  from  a
spirit  of  disaffection  that  tended  to  rebellion.  Several
persons  of  rank  were  confined, and some  put  to
death,  without  any  form  of  trial. Vaca  de  Castro
was  arrested,  and, notwithstanding  the  dignity  of
his  former  rank,  and  his  merit,  in  having  prevented

1543.]  BOOK VI.  :H7

a  general  insurrection  in  the  colony,  he  was  loaded
with  chains,  and  shut  up  in  the  common  jail.p
The  male- But  however  general  the  indignation  was
choS'8 a&amst  sucn  proceedings,  it  is  probable  the
Gonzab hand  of  authority  would  have been  stronar

Pizarro  to  ,  J  °

be  their  enough  to  suppress  it,  or  to  prevent  it  burst-
ing out  with  open  violence,  if  the  malecon-
tents  had  not  been  provided  with  a  leader  of  credit
and  eminence  to  unite  and  to  direct  their  efforts.
From  the  time  that  the  purport  of  the  new  regula-
tions was  known  in  Peru,  every  Spaniard  there
turned  his  eyes  towards  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  as  the  only
person  able  to  avert  the  ruin  with  which  they  threat-
ened the  colony.  From  all  quarters,  letters  and
addresses  were  sent  to  him,  conjuring  him  to  stand
forth  as  their  common  protector,  and  offering  to
support  him  in  the  attempt  with  their  lives  and  for-
tunes. Gonzalo,  though  inferior  in  talents  to  his
other  brothers,  was  equally  ambitious,  and  of  cou-
rage no  less  daring.  The  behaviour  of  an  ungrateful
court  towards  his  brothers  and  himself  dwelt  conti-
nually on  his  mind.  Ferdinand  a  state-prisoner  in
Europe,  the  children  of  the  governor  in  custody  of
the  viceroy,  and  sent  aboard  his  fleet,  himself  re-
duced to  the  condition  of  a  private  citizen  in  a  coun-
try, for  the  discovery  and  conquest  of  which  Spain
was  indebted  to  his  family.  These  thoughts  prompted
him  to  seek  for  vengeance,  and  to  assert  the  rights
of  his  family,  of  which  he  now  considered  himself  as
the  guardian  and  the  heir.  But  as  no  Spaniard  can
easily  surmount  that  veneration  for  his  sovereign
which  seems  to  be  interwoven  in  his  frame,  the  idea
of  marching  in  arms  against  the  royal  standard  filled
him  with  horror.  He  hesitated  long,  and  was  still
unresolved,  when  the  violence  of  the  viceroy,  the

p  Zarate,  lib.  iv.  c.  23— 25. Gomara,  c.  153—155. Vega, p.  11.  lib.  iv.  c.
4,  5. Fernandez,  lib.  i.  c.  6 — 10,

;U8  AMERICA.  [15-14.

universal  call  of  his  countrymen,  and  the  certainty
of  becoming  soon  a  victim  himself  to  the  severity  of
the  new  laws,  moved  him  to  quit  his  residence  at
Chuquisaca  de  la  Plata,  and  repair  to  Cuzco.  All
the  inhabitants  went  out  to  meet  him,  and  received
him  with  transports  of  joy  as  the  deliverer  of  the
colony.  In  the  fervour  of  their  zeal,  they  elected
him  procurator-general  of  the  Spanish  nation  in
Peru,  to  solicit  the  repeal  of  the  late  regulations.
They  empowered  him  to  lay  their  remonstrances
before  the  royal  audience  in  Lima,  and  upon  pretext
of  danger  from  the  Indians,  authorized  him

1544.

to  march  thither  in  arms.  Under  sanction
of  this  nomination,  Pizarro  took  possession  of  the
royal  treasure,  appointed  officers,  levied  soldiers,
seized  a  large  train  of  artillery,  which  Vaca  de  Cas-
tro had  deposited  in  Gumanga,  and  set  out  for  Lima,
as  if  he  had  been  advancing  against  a  public  enemy.
Disaffection  having  now  assumed  a  regular  form,
and  being  united  under  a  chief  of  such  distinguished
name,  many  persons  of  note  resorted  to  his  standard ;
and  a  considerable  part  of  the  troops,  raised  by  the
viceroy  to  oppose  his  progress,  deserted  to  him  in  a
body.q

Before  Pizarro  reached  Lima,  a  revolution  had
happened  there,  which  encouraged  him  to  proceed

with  almost  certainty  of  success. The  vio-

Dissen-

sionsofthclence  of  the  viceroy's  administration  was  not
IndTcLt  more  formidable  to  the  Spaniards  of  Peru,
of  audi- tnan  his  overbearing  haughtiness  was  odious

ence.  ©  ©

to  his  associates,  the  judges  of  the  royal  au-
dience. During  their  voyage  from  Spain,  some
symptoms  of  coldness  between  the  viceroy  and  them
began  to  appear/  But  as  soon  as  they  entered  upon
the  exercise  of  their  respective  offices,  both  parties

'!  Zarate,  lib.  v.  c.  1. Goniara,  c.  156,  157. Vega,  p.  Jl.  lib.  iv.  c.  4 — 12.
Fernandez,  lib.  i.  c.  12 — 17. Jlerrera,  dec.  7,  lib.  vii.  c.  18,  &c.  lib.  viii.  c.  1 — 5.

r  Goniara,  c.  171.

1544.J  BOOK VI.  319

were  so  much  exasperated  by  frequent  contests,
arising  from  interference  of  jurisdiction  and  contra-
riety of  opinion,  that  their  mutual  disgust  soon  grew
into  open  enmity.  The  judges  thwarted  the  viceroy
in  every  measure,  set  at  liberty  prisoners  whom  he
had  confined,  justified  the  malecontents,  and  ap-
plauded their  remonstrances.  At  a  time  when
both  departments  of  government  should  have  united
against  the  approaching  enemy,  they  were  contend-
ing with  each  other  for  superiority.  The  judges  at
Tbevice-  length  prevailed.  The  viceroy,  universally
™ned.pn"  odious,  and  abandoned  even  by  his  own
Sept.  is.  guar(jS)  was  seized  in  his  palace,  and  carried
to  a  desert  island  on  the  coast,  to  be  kept  there  until
he  could  be  sent  home  to  Spain,
views  of  The  judges,  in  consequence  of  this,  having
Pizarro.  assumed  the  supreme  direction  of  affairs  into
their  own  hands,  issued  a  proclamation  suspending  the
execution  of  the  obnoxious  laws,  and  sent  a  message
to  Pizarro,  requiring  him,  as  they  had  already  granted
whatever  he  could  request,  to  dismiss  his  troops,  and  to
repair  to  Lima  with  fifteen  or  twenty  attendants.  They
could  hardly  expect  that  a  man  so  daring  and  ambi-
tious would  tamely  comply  with  this  requisition.  It
was  made,  probably,  with  no  such  intention,  but  only
to  throw  a  decent  veil  over  their  own  conduct ;  for  Ce-
peda,  the  president  of  the  court  of  audience,  a  prag-
matical and  aspiring  lawyer,  seems  to  have  held  a  se-
cret correspondence  with  Pizarro,  and  had  already
formed  the  plan,  which  he  afterward  executed,  of  de-
voting himself  to  his  service.  The  imprisonment  of  the
viceroy,  the  usurpation  of  the  judges,  together  with  the
universal  confusion  and  anarchy  consequent  upon
events  so  singular  and  unexpected,  opened  new  and
vast  prospects  to  Pizarro.  He  now  beheld  the  supreme
power  within  his  reach.  Nor  did  he  want  courage  to
push  on  towards  the  object  which  fortune  presented  to

320  AMERICA.  [1544.

his  view.  Carvajal,  the  prompter  of  his  resolutions,
and  guide  of  all  his  actions,  had  long  fixed  his  eye
upon  it  as  the  only  end  at  which  Pizarro  ought  to  aim.
Instead  of  the  inferior  function  of  procurator  for  the
Spanish  settlements  in  Peru,  he  openly  demanded  to
be  governor  and  captain-general  of  the  whole  province,
and  required  the  court  of  audience  to  grant  him  a  com-
mission to  that  effect.  At  the  head  of  twelve  hundred
men,  within  a  mile  of  Lima,  where  there  was  neither
leader  nor  army  to  oppose  him,  such  a  request  carried
with  it  the  authority  of  a  command.  But  the  judges,
either  from  unwillingness  to  relinquish  power,  or  from
a  desire  of  preserving  some  attention  to  appearances,
hesitated,  or  seemed  to  hesitate,  about  complying  with
Heas.  what  he  demanded.  Carvajal,  impatient  of
sumesthe  delays  and  impetuous  in  all  his  operations,
ment.  marched  into  the  city  by  night,  seized  several
officers  of  distinction  obnoxious  to  Pizarro,  and  hano-ed
them  without  the  formality  of  a  trial.  Next  morning
the  court  of  audience  issued  a  commission  in  the  em-
peror's name,  appointing  Pizarro  governor  of  Peru,
with  full  powers,  civil  as  well  as  military,  and  he  en-
tered the  town  that  day  with  extraordinary  pomp,  to
take  possession  of  his  new  dignity.5
Oct.  28.  But  amidst  the  disorder  and  turbulence  which
rot  re-  accompanied  this  total  dissolution  of  the  frame
covers  his  0f  government, the  minds  of  men,  set  loose

liberty.  &

from  the  ordinary  restraints  of  law  and  autho-
rity, acted  with  such  capricious  irregularity,  that  events
no  less  extraordinary  than  unexpected  followed  in  a
rapid  succession.  Pizarro  had  scarcely  begun  to  exer-
cise the  new  powers  with  which  he  was  invested,  when
he  beheld  formidable  enemies  rise  up  to  oppose  him.
The  viceroy  having  been  put  on  board  a  vessel  by  the
judges  of  the  audience,  in  order  that  he  might  be  car-

*  Zamte,  lib.  v.  c.  8  —  10. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  iv.  r.  13—19. Gomara,  c.  159—
163. Fernandez,  lib.  i.  c.  18 — 25. Herrcra,  dec.  7.  lib.  viii.  c.  10-20.

1544.]  BOOK VI.  321

ried  to  Spain  under  custody  of  Juan  Alvarez  one  of
their  own  number;  as  soon  as  they  were  out  at  sea,
Alvarez,  either  touched  with  remorse,  or  moved  by
fear,  kneeled  down  to  his  prisoner,  declaring  him  from
that  moment  to  be  free,  and  that  he  himself,  and  every
person  in  the  ship,  would  obey  him  as  the  legal  repre-
sentative of  their  sovereign.  Nugnez  Vela  ordered  the
pilot  of  the  vessel  to  shape  his  course  towards  Tumbez.
and  as  soon  as  he  landed  there,  erected  the  royal
standard,  and  resumed  his  functions  of  viceroy.  Seve-
ral persons  of  note,  to  whom  the  contagion  of  the  sedi-
tious spirit  which  reigned  at  Cuzco  and  Lima  had  not
reached,  instantly  avowed  their  resolution  to  support
his  authority.'  The  violence  of  Pizarro's  government,
who  observed  every  individual  with  the  jealousy  natural
to  usurpers,  and  who  punished  every  appearance  of
disaffection  with  unforgiving  severity,  soon  augmented
the  number  of  the  viceroy's  adherents,  as  it  forced
some  leading  men  in  the  colony  to  fly  to  him  for  re-
fuge. While  he  was  gathering  such  strength  at  Tum-
bez, that  his  forces  began  to  assume  the  appearance  of
what  was  considered  as  an  army  in  America,  Diego
Centeno,  a  bold  and  active  officer,  exasperated  by  the
cruelty  and  oppression  of  Pizarro's  lieutenant-governor
in  the  province  of  Charcas,  formed  a  conspiracy  against
his  life,  cut  him  off,  and  declared  for  the  viceroy."

Pizarro,  though  alarmed  with  those  appear-
Pizarro  ances  of  hostility  in  the  opposite  extremes  of
Shut'  the  empire,  was  not  disconcerted.  He  prepared
him-  to  assert  the  authority  to  which  he  had  attained,
with  the  spirit  and  conduct  of  an  officer  accustomed  to
command,  and  marched  directly  against  the  viceroy  as
the  enemy  who  was  nearest  as  well  as  most  formidable.
As  he  was  master  of  the  public  revenues  in  Peru,  and
most  of  the  military  men  were  attached  to  his  family,

*  Zarate,  lib.  5.  c.  9. Goraara,  c.  165. Fernandez,  lib.  i.  c.  23. Herrera,  dec.  7.
lib.  viii.  c.  15.

u  Zarate,  lib.  v.  c.  18. Gomara,  c.  169. Herrera,  dec.  7.  lib.  ix.  c.27.

VOL.  VII.  Y

322  AMERICA.  [1545.

his  troops  were  so  numerous,  that  the  viceroy,  unable
to  face  them,  retreated  towards  Quito.  Pizarro  fol-
lowed him ;  and  in  that  long  march,  through  a  wild
mountainous  country,  suffered  hardships  and  encoun-
tered difficulties,  which  no  troops  but  those  accus-
tomed to  serve  in  America  could  have  endured  or  sur-
mounted/ The  viceroy  had  scarcely  reached  Quito,
when  the  vanguard  of  Pizarro's  forces  appeared,  led
by  Carvajal,  who,  though  near  fourscore,  was  as  hardy
and  active  as  any  young  soldier  under  his  command.
Nugnez  Vela  instantly  abandoned  a  town  incapable  of
defence,  and  with  rapidity  more  resembling  a  flight
than  a  retreat,  marched  into  the  province  of  Popayan.
Pizarro  continued  to  pursue  ;  but  finding  it  impossible
to  overtake  him,  returned  to  Quito.  From  thence  he
dispatched  Carvajal  to  oppose  Centeno,  who  was  grow-
ing formidable  in  the  southern  provinces  of  the  empire,
and  he  himself  remained  there  to  make  head  against
the  viceroy/

By  his  own  activity,  and  the  assistance  of

Ihevice-  ^  ir i

roy  de-  Benalcazar,  Nugnez  Vela  soon  assembled  four
hundred  men  in  Popayan.  As  he  retained,
amidst  all  his  disasters,  the  same  elevation  of  mind,
and  the  same  high  sense  of  his  own  dignity,  he  rejected
with  disdain  the  advice  of  some  of  his  followers  who
urged  him  to  make  overtures  of  accommodation  to  Pi-
zarro, declaring  that  it  was  only  by  the  sword  that  a  con-
.... test  with  rebels  could  be  decided. With  this  in-

lo4o.

tention  he  marched  back  to  Quito.  Pizarro,  relying
on  the  superior  number,  and  still  more  on  the  discipline
and  valour  of  his  troops,  advanced  resolutely  to
meet  him.  The  battle  was  fierce  and  bloody,
both  parties  fighting  like  men  who  knew  that  the  pos-
session of  a  great  empire,  the  fate  of  their  leaders,  and
their  own  future  fortune,  depended  upon  the  issue  of

w  See  Note  LXXXVII.

*  Zarate,  lib.  v.  c.  15,  16 — 24. Gomara,  c.  167. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  iv.  c.  25 28.

Fernandez,  lib.  i.  c.  34.  40. Herrera,  dec.  7.  lib.  viii.  c.  16.  20 — 27.

1546.]  BOOK  VI.  323

that  day.  But  Pizarro's  veterans  rushed  forward  with
such  regular  and  well-directed  force,  that  they  soon
began  to  make  impression  on  their  enemies.  The  vice-
roy, by  extraordinary  exertions,  in  which  the  abilities
of  a  commander  and  the  courage  of  a  soldier  were
equally  displayed,  held  victory  for  some  time

And  slain.  . n  J  r J. '  J  .

in  suspense.  At  length  he  tell,  pierced  with
many  wounds ;  and  the  rout  of  his  followers  became
general.  They  were  hotly  pursued.  His  head  was
cut  off,  and  placed  on  the  public  gibbet  in  Quito,
which  Pizarro  entered  in  triumph.  The  troops  assem-
bled by  Centeno  were  dispersed  soon  after  by  Carva-
jal,  and  he  himself  compelled  to  fly  to  the  mountains,
where  he  remained  for  several  months  concealed  in  a
cave.  Every  person  in  Peru,  from  the  frontiers  of
Popayan  to  those  of  Chili,  submitted  to  Pizarro;  and
by  his  fleet,  under  Pedro  de  Hinojosa,  he  had  not  only
the  unrivalled  command  of  the  South  sea,  but  had  taken
possession  of  Panama,  and  placed  a  garrison  in  Nombre
de  Dios,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  isthmus,  which  ren-
dered him  master  of  the  only  avenue  of  communication
between  Spain  and  Peru,  that  was  used  at  that  period/
Pizarro  After  this  decisive  victory,  Pizarro  and  his

^u^the followers  remained  for  some  time  at  Quito,  and
soye- during; the  first  transports  of  their  exultation,

reigntyof  ~  *  .  7

Peru;  they  ran  into  every  excess  of  licentious  indul-
gence, with  the  riotous  spirit  usual  among  low  ad-
venturers upon  extraordinary  success.  But  amidst
this  dissipation,  their  chief  and  his  confidants  were
obliged  to  turn  their  thoughts  to  what  was  serious,  and
deliberated  with  much  solicitude  concerning  the  part
that  he  ought  now  to  take.  Carvajal,  no  less  bold  and
decisive  in  council  than  in  the  field,  had  from  the  be-
ginning warned  Pizarro,  that  in  the  career  on  which  he
was  entering,  it  was  vain  to  think  of  holding  a  middle

J  Zarate,  lib.  v.  c.  31,  32.  Gomara,  c.  170.  Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  iv.  c.  33,  34.
Fernandez,  lib.  i.  c.  51 — 54.  Herrera,  dec.  7.  lib.  x.  c.  12.  19—22.  dec.  8.  lib.  i.
c.  1 — 3. Benzo,  lib.iii.  c.  12.

Y  2

324  AMERICA.  [1546.

course;  that  he  must  either  boldly  aim  at  all,  or  at-
tempt nothing.  From  the  time  that  Pizarro  obtained
possession  of  the  government  of  Peru,  he  inculcated
the  same  maxim  with  greater  earnestness.  Upon  re-
ceiving an  account  of  the  victory  at  Quito,  he  remon-
strated with  him  in  a  tone  still  more  peremptory.
"  You  have  usurped,"  said  he,  in  a  letter  written  to
Pizarro  on  that  occasion,  "  the  supreme  power  in  this
country,  in  contempt  of  the  emperor's  commission  to
the  viceroy.  You  have  marched  in  hostile  array  against
the  royal  standard ;  you  have  attacked  the  representa-
tive of  your  sovereign  in  the  field,  have  defeated  him,
and  cut  off  his  head.  Think  not  that  ever  a  monarch
will  forgive  such  insults  on  his  dignity,  or  that  any  re-
conciliation with  him  can  be  cordial  or  sincere.  De-
pend no  longer  on  the  precarious  favour  of  another.
Assume  yourself  the  sovereignty  over  a  country,  to  the
dominion  of  which  your  family  has  a  title  founded  on
the  rights  both  of  discovery  and  conquest.  It  is  in  your
power  to  attach  every  Spaniard  in  Peru  of  any  conse-
quence inviolably  to  your  interest  by  liberal  grants  of
lands  and  of  Indians,  or  by  instituting  ranks  of  nobility,
and  creating  titles  of  honour  similar  to  those  which
are  courted  with  so  much  eagerness  in  Europe.  By
establishing  orders  of  knighthood,  with  privileges  and
distinctions  resembling  those  in  Spain,  you  may  bestow
a  gratification  upon  the  officers  in  your  service,  suited
to  the  ideas  of  military  men.  Nor  is  it  to  your  coun-
trymen only  that  you  ought  to  attend  ;  endeavour  to
gain  the  natives.  By  marrying  the  coya,  or  daughter
of  the  sun  next  in  succession  to  the  crown,  you  will  in-
duce the  Indians,  out  of  veneration  for  the  blood  of
their  ancient  princes,  to  unite  with  the  Spaniards  in
support  of  your  authority. — Thus,  at  the  head  of  the
ancient  inhabitants  of  Peru,  as  well  as  of  the  new  settlers
there,  you  may  set  at  defiance  the  power  of  Spain,  and
repel  with  ease  any  feeble  force  which  it  can  send  at

1546.]  BOOK VI.  325

such  a  distance."  Cepeda,  the  lawyer,  who  was  now
Pizarro's  confidential  counsellor,  warmly  seconded  Car-
vajal's  exhortations,  and  employed  whatever  learning
he  possessed  in  demonstrating,  that  all  the  founders  of
great  monarchies  had  been  raised  to  pre-eminence,  not
by  the  antiquity  of  their  lineage,  or  the  validity  of  their
rights,  but  by  their  own  aspiring  valour  and  personal
merit.2

But  chooses Pizarro listened attentively  to  both, and
SthTetlate  could  not  conceal  the  satisfaction  with  which
court  of he  contemplated  the  object  that  they  presented
to  his  view. But  happily  for  the  tranquillity
of  the  world,  few  men  possess  that  superior  strength  of
mind,  and  extent  of  abilities,  which  are  capable  of  form-
ing and  executing  such  daring  schemes,  as  cannot  be
accomplished  without  overturning  the  established  order
of  society,  and  violating  those  maxims  of  duty  which
men  are  accustomed  to  hold  sacred . The  mediocrity
of  Pizarro's  talents  circumscribed  his  ambition  within
more  narrow  limits. Instead  of  aspiring  at  independ-
ent power,  he  confined  his  views  to  the  obtaining  from
the  court  of  Spain  a  confirmation  of  the  authority  which
he  now  possessed  ;  and  for  that  purpose,  he  sent  an  of-
ficer of  distinction  thither,  to  give  such  a  representation
of  his  conduct,  and  of  the  state  of  the  country,  as  might
induce  the  emperor  and  his  ministers,  either  from  in-
clination or  from  necessity,  to  continue  him  in  his  pre-
sent station.

Consuita-  While  Pizarro  was  deliberating  with  respect
Spanish  Li-  to  tne  Part  which  he  should  take,  consultations
msters.  were  held  in  Spain  with  no  less  solicitude  con-
cerning the  measures  which  ought  to  be  pursued  in
order  to  re-establish  the  emperor's  authority  in  Peru.
Though  unacquainted  with  the  last  excesses  of  outrage
to  which  the  malecontents  had  proceeded  in  that  coun-
try, the  court  had  received  an  account  of  the  insurrec-

*  Vega  p.  11.  lib.  iv.  c.  40. Fernandez,  lib.  i.  c.  34.  lib.  ii.  c.  1.  49. Herrera,
dec.  8.  lib.  ii.  c.  10.

326  AMERICA.  [15  46

tion  against  the  viceroy,  of  his  imprisonment,  and  the
usurpation  of  the  government  by  Pizarro. A  revolution
so  alarming  called  for  an  immediate  interposition  of  the
emperor's  abilities  and  authority. But  as  he  was  fully
occupied  at  that  time  in  Germany,  in  conducting  the
war  against  the  famous  league  of  Smalkalde,  one  of  the
most  interesting  and  arduous  enterprises  in  his  reign,
the  care  of  providing  a  remedy  for  the  disorders  in  Peru
devolved  upon  his  son  Philip,  and  the  counsellors  whom
Charles  had  appointed  to  assist  him  in  the  government
of  Spain  during  his  absence. At  first  view,  the  actions
of  Pizarro  and  his  adherents  appeared  so  repugnant  to
the  duty  of  subjects  towards  their  sovereign,  that  the
greater  part  of  the  ministers  insisted  on  declaring  them
instantly  to  be  guilty  of  rebellion,  and  on  proceeding
to  punish  them  with  exemplary  rigour. But  when  the
fervour  of  their  zeal  and  indignation  began  to  abate,
innumerable  obstacles  to  the  execution  of  this  measure
presented  themselves. The  veteran  bands  of  infantry,
the  strength  and  glory  of  the  Spanish  armies,  were  then
employed  in  Germany. Spain,  exhausted  of  men  and
money  by  a  long  series  of  wars,  in  which  she  had  been
involved  by  the  restless  ambition  of  two  successive  mo-
narchs,  could  not  easily  equip  an  armament  of  sufficient
force  to  reduce  Pizarro. To  transport  any  respectable
body  of  troops  to  a  country  so  remote  as  Peru,  appeared
almost  impossible. While  Pizarro  continued  master  of
the  South  sea,  the  direct  route  by  Nombre  de  Dios  and
Panama  was  impracticable. An  attempt  to  march  to
Quito  by  land  through  the  new  kingdom  of  Granada,
and  the  province  of  Popayan,  across  regions  of  prodi-
gious extent,  desolate,  unhealthy,  or  inhabited  by  fierce
and  hostile  tribes,  would  be  attended  with  unsurmount-
able  dangers  and  hardships. The  passage  to  the  South
sea  by  the  straits  of  Magellan  was  so  tedious,  so  un-
certain, and  so  little  known  in  that  age,  that  no  confi-
dence could  be  placed in  any  effort  carried  on in  a

1546.]  BOOK  VI.  327

course  of  navigation  so  remote  and  precarious.  No-
thing then  remained  but  to  relinquish  the  system  which
the  ardour  of  their  loyalty  had  first  suggested,  and  to
attempt  by  lenient  measures  what  could  not  be  effected
by  force.  It  was  manifest  from  Pizarro's  solicitude  to
represent  his  conduct  in  a  favourable  light  to  the  em-
peror, that  notwithstanding  the  excesses  of  which  he
had  been  guilty,  he  still  retained  sentiments  of  venera-
tion for  his  sovereign.  By  a  proper  application  to  these,
together  with  some  such  concessions  as  should  discover
a  spirit  of  moderation  and  forbearance  in  government,
there  was  still  room  to  hope  that  he  might  be  yet  re-
claimed, or  the  ideas  of  loyalty  natural  to  Spaniards
might  so  far  revive  among  his  followers,  that  they
would  no  longer  lend  their  aid  to  uphold  his  usurped
authority.
„  The  success,  however,  of  this  negotiation,  no

Gasca  ap-  '  '  ©  '

pointed  to  less  delicate  than  it  was  important,  depended
PePruiras°  entirely  on  the  abilities  and  address  of  the  per-
president. ^  fcQ  whom  ft  shouid  be  committed. After

weighing  with  much  attention  the  comparative  merit  of
various  persons,  the  Spanish  ministers  fixed  with  unani-
mity of  choice  upon  Pedro  de  la  Gasca,  a  priest  in  no
higher  station  than  that  of  counsellor  to  the  inquisition.
Though  in  no  public  office,  he  had  been  occasionally
employed  by  government  in  affairs  of  trust  and  conse-
quence, and  had  conducted  them  with  no  less  skill  than
success ;  displaying  a  gentle  and  insinuating  temper,
accompanied  with  much  firmness ;  probity,  superior  to
any  feeling  of  private  interest ;  and  a  cautious  circum-
spection in  concerting  measures,  followed  by  such  vi-
gour in  executing  them,  as  is  rarely  found  in  alliance
with  the  other.  These  qualities  marked  him  out  for
the  function  to  which  he  was  destined.  The  emperor,
to  whom  Gasca  was  not  unknown,  warmly  approved  of
the  choice,  and  communicated  it  to  him  in  a  letter,  con-
taining expressions  of  good-will  and  confidence,  no  less

328  AMERICA.  [1546.

honourable  to  the  prince  who  wrote,  than  to  the  sub-
ject who  received  it.  Gasca,  notwithstanding  his  ad-
vanced age  and  feeble  constitution,  and  though,  from
the  apprehensions  natural  to  a  man,  who,  during  the
course  of  his  life,  had  never  been  out  of  his  own  coun-
try, he  dreaded  the  effects  of  a  long  voyage,  and  of  an
unhealthy  climate/1  did  not  hesitate  a  moment  about
complying  with  the  will  of  his  sovereign.  But  as  a
His  mode-  proof  that  it  was  from  this  principle  alone  he
ration-  acted,  he  refused  a  bishopric  which  was  offered
to  him,  in  order  that  he.  might  appear  in  Peru  with  a
more  dignified  character;  he  would  accept  of  no  higher
title  than  that  of  president  of  the  court  of  audience  in
Lima ;  and  declared  that  he  would  receive  no  salary  on
account  of  his  discharging  the  duties  of  that  office.  All
he  required  was,  that  the  expense  of  supporting  his  fa-
mily should  be  defrayed  by  the  public,  and  as  he  was
to  go  like  a  minister  of  peace  with  his  gown  and  bre-
viary, and  without  any  retinue  but  a  few  domestics,  this
would  not  load  the  revenue  with  any  enormous  burden.5
But  while  he  discovered  such  disinterested

I  he  powers  1  i j

committed  moderation  with  respect  to  whatever  related
personally  to  himself,  he  demanded  his  official
powers  in  a  very  different  tone.  He  insisted,  as  he  was
to  be  employed  in  a  country  so  remote  from  the  seat  of
government,  where  he  could  not  have  recourse  to  his
sovereign  for  new  instructions  on  every  emergence ;  and
as  the  whole  success  of  his  negotiations  must  depend
upon  the  confidence  which  the  people  with  whom  he  had
to  treat  could  place  in  the  extent  of  his  powers,  that  he
oudit  to  be  invested  with  unlimited  authority ;  that  his
jurisdiction  must  reach  to  all  persons  and  to  all  causes;
that  he  must  be  empowered  to  pardon,  to  punish,  or  to
reward,  as  circumstances  and  the  behaviour  of  different
men  might  require  ;  that  in  case  of  resistance  from  the

a  Fernandez,  lib.  2.  c.  17.
b  Zarate,  lib.  vi.  c.  6. Gomara,  c.  174. Fernandez,  lib. ii.  c.  1-1 — 16. Vega,
p.  Hi  lib.  v.  c.  1. Herrera,  dec*  8.  lib.  1.  c.  4,  &c.

1546.]  BOOK VI.  329

malecontents,  he  might  be  authorized  to  reduce  them  to
obedience  by  force  of  arms,  to  levy  troops  for  that  pur-
pose, and  to  call  for  assistance  from-the  governors  of  all
the  Spanish  settlements  in  America.  These  powers,
though  manifestly  conducive  to  the  great  objects  of  his
mission,  appeared  to  the  Spanish  ministers  to  be  in-
alienable prerogatives  of  royalty,  which  ought  not  to  be
delegated  to  a  subject,  and  they  refused  to  grant  them.
But  the  emperor's  views  were  more  enlarged.  As  from
the  nature  of  his  employment,  Gasca  must  be  intrusted
with  discretionary  power  in  several  points,  and  all  his
efforts  might  prove  ineffectual  if  he  was  circumscribed
in  any  one  particular,  Charles  scrupled  not  to  invest  him
with  authority  to  the  full  extent  that  he  demanded.
Highly  satisfied  with  this  fresh  proof  of  his  master's
confidence,  Gasca  hastened  his  departure,  and,  without
either  money  or  troops,  set  out  to  quell  a  formidable
rebellion.0
T  , _.,  On  his  arrival  at  Nombre  de  Dios,  he  found

July  27.

His  arrival  Herman  Mexia,  an  officer  of  note,  posted  there,
by  order  of  Pizarro,  with  a  considerable  body
of  men,  to  oppose  the  landing  of  any  hostile  forces.
But  Gasca  appeared  in  such  pacific  guise,  with  a  train
so  little  formidable,  and  with  a  title  of  no  such  dignity
as  to  excite  terror,  that  he  was  received  with  much  re-
spect. From  Nombre  de  Dios  he  advanced  to  Panama,
and  met  with  a  similar  reception  from  Hinojosa,  whom
Pizarro  had  intrusted  with  the  government  of  that  town,
and  the  command  of  his  fleet  stationed  there.  In  both
places  he  held  the  same  language,  declaring  that  he  was
sent  by  their  sovereign  as  a  messenger  of  peace,  not  as  a
minister  of  vengeance  ;  that  he  came  to  redress  all  their
grievances,  to  revoke  the  laws  which  had  excited  alarm,
to  pardon  past  offences,  and  to  re-establish  order  and
justice  in  the  government  of  Peru.  His  mild  deport-
ment, the  simplicity  of  his  manners,  the  sanctity  of  his

c  Fernandez,  lib.  ii.  c.  16—18.

330  AMERICA.  [1546.

profession,  and  a  winning  appearance  of  candour,
gained  credit  to  his  declarations.  The  veneration  due
to  a  person  clothed, with  legal  authority,  and  acting  in
virtue  of  a  royal  commission,  began  to  revive  among
men  accustomed  for  some  time  to  nothing  more  re-
spectable  than  a  usurped  jurisdiction.  Hinojosa,
Mexia,  and  several  other  officers  of  distinction,  to  each
of  whom  Gasca  applied  separately,  were  gained  over  to
his  interest,  and  waited  only  for  some  decent  occasion
of  declaring  openly  in  his  favour/1
Violent  This  the  violence  of  Pizarro  soon  afforded

ingsTf "  them.  As  soon  as  he  heard  of  Gasca's  arrival
p«zarro.  a^  panama,  though  he  received,  at  the  same
time,  an  account  of  the  nature  of  his  commission,  and
was  informed  of  his  offers  not  only  to  render  every
Spaniard  in  Peru  easy  concerning  what  was  past,  by  an
act  of  general  oblivion  ;  but  secure  with  respect  to  the
future  by  repealing  the  obnoxious  laws  ;  instead  of  ac-
cepting with  gratitude  his  sovereign's  gracious  con-
cessions, he  was  so  much  exasperated  on  finding  that
he  was  not  to  be  continued  in  his  station  as  governor
of  the  country,  that  he  instantly  resolved  to  oppose  the
president's  entry  into  Peru,  and  to  prevent  his  exercising
any  jurisdiction  there.  To  this  desperate  ]  esolution  he
added  another  highly  preposterous.  He  sent  a  new  de-
putation to  Spain  to  justify  this  conduct,  and  to  insist,
in  the  name  of  all  the  communities  in  Peru,  for  a  con-
firmation of  the  government  to  himself  during  life,  as
the  only  means  of  preserving  tranquillity  there.  The
persons  intrusted  with  this  strange  commission,  inti-
mated the  intention  of  Pizarro  to  the  president,  and  re-
quired him,  in  his  name,  to  depart  from  Panama  and  re-
turn to  Spain.  They  carried  likewise  secret  instructions
to  Hinojosa,  directing  him  to  offer  Gasca  a  present  of
fifty  thousand  pesos,  if  he  would  comply  voluntarily  with

d  Fernandez,  lib.  ii.  c.  21,  &c. Zarate,  lib.  vi.  c.  6,  7. Goniara,  c.  175. Vega,
p.  11.  lib.  v.  c.  3.

1546.]  BOOK VI.  331

what  was  demanded  of  him ;  and  if  he  should  continue  ob-
stinate, to  cut  him  off,  either  by  assassination  or  poison.8
Gasca  Many  circumstances concurred in  pushing

gains  his  on  Pizarro  to  those  wild  measures.  Having
been  once  accustomed  to  supreme  command,
he  could  not  bear  the  thoughts  of  descending  to  a  pri-
vate station.  Conscious  of  his  own  demerit,  he  suspected
that  the  emperor  studied  only  to  deceive  him,  and  would
never  pardon  the  outrages  which  he  had  committed.
His  chief  confidants,  no  less  guilty,  entertained  the  same
apprehensions.  The  approach  of  Gasca  without  any  mili-
tary force  excited  no  terror.  There  were  now  above
six  thousand  Spaniards  settled  in  Peru;f  and  at  the
head  of  these  he  doubted  not  to  maintain  his  own  in-
dependence, if  the  court  of  Spain  should  refuse  to
grant  what  he  required.  But  he  knew  not  that  a  spirit
of  defection  had  already  begun  to  spread  among  those
whom  he  trusted  most.  Hinojosa,  amazed  at  Pizarro's
precipitate  resolution  of  setting  himself  in  opposition
to  the  emperor's  commission,  and  disdaining  to  be  his
instrument  in  perpetrating  the  odious  crimes  pointed
out  in  his  secret  instructions,  publicly  recognised  the
title  of  the  president  to  the  supreme  authority  in  Peru.
The  officers  under  his  command  did  the  same.  Such
was  the  contagious  influence  of  the  example,  that  it
reached  even  the  deputies  who  had  been  sent  from
Peru  ;  and  at  the  time  when  Pizarro  expected  to  hear
either  of  Gasca's  return  to  Spain,  or  of  his  death,  he
received  an  account  of  his  being  master  of  the  fleet,
of  Panama,  and  of  the  troops  stationed  there.
1547. Irritated  almost  to  madness  by  events  so  un-

Pizarro  re-  -, ■,  ■,  ^ n  , .

solves  on expected,  he  openly  prepared  tor  war ;  and  in

war" order  to  give  some  colour  of  justice  to  his  arms,

he  appointed  the  court  of  audience  in  Lima  to  proceed

'  to  the  trial  of  Gasca,  for  the  crimes  of  having  seized

e  Zarate,  lib.  vi.  c.  3. Fernandez,  lib.  ii.  c.  33,  34.  Herrera,  dec.  8.  lib.  2.  c.  9, 10.
s  Herrera,  dec.  8.  lib.  iii.c.  1.

332  AMERICA.  [1547.

his  ships,  seduced  his  officers,  and  prevented  his  de-
puties from  proceeding  in  their  voyage  to  Spain.
Cepeda,  though  acting  as  a  judge  in  virtue  of  the  royal
commission,  did  not  scruple  to  prostitute  the  dignity
of  his  function  by  finding  Gasca  guilty  of  treason,  and
condemning  him  to  death  on  that  account.5  Wild,  and
even  ridiculous  as  this  proceeding  was,  it  imposed  on
the  low  illiterate  adventurers,  with  whom  Peru  was
filled,  by  the  semblance  of  a  legal  sanction  warranting
Pizarro  to  carry  on  hostilities  against  a  convicted  traitor.
Soldiers  accordingly  resorted  from  every  quarter  to  his
standard,  and  he  was  soon  at  the  head  of  a  thousand
men,  the  best  equipped  that  had  ever  taken  the  field  in
Peru.

Prepare-  Gasca,  on  his  part,  perceiving  that  force
tions  of must  be  employed  in  order  to  accomplish  the

Gasca.  r «/  x

purpose  of  his  mission,  was  no  less  assiduous
in  collecting  troops  from  Nicaragua,  Carthagena,  and
other  settlements  on  the  continent ;  and  with  such  suc-
cess, that  he  was  soon  in  a  condition  to  detach  a  squa-
dron of  his  fleet,  with  a  considerable  body  of  soldiers,
to  the  coast  of  Peru.  Their  appearance  excited
a  dreadful  alarm:  and  though  they  did  not  at-
tempt for  some  time  to  make  any  descent,  they  did  more
effectual  service  by  setting  ashore  in  different  places
persons  who  dispersed  copies  of  the  act  of  general  in-
demnity, and  the  revocation  of  the  late  edicts;  and  who
made  known  every  where  the  pacific  intentions,  as  well
as  mild  temper,  of  the  president.  The  effect  of  spreading
this  information  was  wonderful.  All  who  were  dissatis-
fied with  Pizarro's  violent  administration,  all  who  re-
tained any  sentiments  of  fidelity  to  their  sovereign,  began
to  meditate  revolt.  Some  openly  deserted  a  cause  which
insurrec-  tney  now  deemed  to  be  unjust.  Centeno,  leav-
tionof mg  t]ie  cave  m  which  he  lay  concealed,  assem-

Centeno,  °  , . . '

bled about  fifty  of  his former  adherents,  and

-  Fernandez,  lib.  ii.  c.  55.  Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  v.  c.  7. Herrera,  dec.  8.  lib.  iii.  c.  6.

3  547.]  BOOK VI.  333

with  this  feeble  half-armed  band  advanced  boldly  to
Cuzco.  By  a  sudden  attack  in  the  night-time,  in  which
he  displayed  no  less  military  skill  than  valour,  he
rendered  himself  master  of  that  capital,  though  de-
fended by  a  garrison  of  five  hundred  men.  Most  of
these  having  ranged  themselves  under  his  banners,  he
had  soon  the  command  of  a  respectable  body  of  troops.h
Against Pizarro,  though  astonished  at  beholding:  one

u  TV  *  O  O

zarro enemy approaching  by sea, and another  by
marches, j^^  at  a  tjme  w|ien  ne  trusted  to  the  union

of  all  Peru  in  his  favour,  was  of  a  spirit  more  un-
daunted, and  more  accustomed  to  the  vicissitudes  of
fortune,  than  to  be  disconcerted  or  appalled.  As  the
danger  from  Centeno's  operations  was  the  most  urgent,
he  instantly  set  out  to  oppose  him.  Having  provided
horses  for  all  his  soldiers,  he  marched  with  amazing-
rapidity.  But  every  morning  he  found  his  force  dimi-
nished, by  numbers  who  had  left  him  during  the  night ;
and  though  he  became  suspicious  to  excess,  and  punish-
ed without  mercy  all  whom  he  suspected,  the  rage  of
desertion  was  too  violent  to  be  checked.  Before  he  got
within  sight  of  the  enemy  at  Huarina,  near  the  lake
Titiaca,  he  could  not  muster  more  than  four  hundred
soldiers.  But  these  he  justly  considered  as  men  of  tried
attachment,  on  whom  he  might  depend.  They  were  in-
deed the  boldest  and  most  desperate  of  his  followers,
conscious,  like  himself,  of  crimes  for  which  they  could
hardly  expect  forgiveness,  and  without  any  hope  but  in
the  success  of  their  arms.  With  these  he  did
not  hesitate  to  attack  Centeno's  troops,  though
double  to  his  own  in  number.  The  royalists  did  not  de-
cline the  combat.  It  was  the  most  obstinate  and  bloody
Andde-  that  na(^  hitherto  been  fought  in  Peru.  At
feats  him.  length  the  intrepid  valour  of  Pizarro,  and  the
superiority  of  Carvajal's  military  talents,  triumphed
over  numbers,  and  obtained  a  complete  victory. The

''Zarate,  lib.  vi.c.  13—16.  Gomara,  c.  180,181.  Fernandez,  lib.  ii.c.  28.  64,&c.

3S4  AMERICA.  [1547.

booty  was  immense/  and  the  treatment  of  the  vanquished
cruel.  By  this  signal  success  the  reputation  of  Pizarro
was  re-established,  and  being  now  deemed  invincible  in
the  field,  his  army  increased  daily  in  number.k

But  events  happened  in  other  parts  of  Peru,  which
more  than  counterbalanced  the  splendid  victory  at
Huarina.  Pizarro  had  scarcely  left  Lima,  when  the
citizens,  weary  of  his  oppressive  dominion,  erected  the
royal  standard,  and  Aldana,  with  a  detachment  of  sol-
diers from  the  fleet,  took  possession  of  the  town.  About
Gasca  tne  same  time,1  Gasca  landed  at  Tumbez  with
lands  at  five  hundred  men.  Encouraged  by  his  presence,
every  settlement  in  the  low  country  declared
for  the  king.  The  situation  of  the  two  parties  was
now  perfectly  reversed  ;  Cuzco  and  the  adjacent  pro-
vinces were  possessed  by  Pizarro  ;  all  the  rest  of  the
empire,  from  Quito  southward,  acknowledged  the  juris-
diction of  the  president.  As  his  numbers  augmented
fast,  Gasca  advanced  into  the  interior  part  of  the  country.
His  behaviour  still  continued  to  be  gentle  and  unas-
suming; he  expressed,  on  every  occasion  his  ardent
wish  of  terminating  the  contest  without  bloodshed.
More  solicitous  to  reclaim  than  to  punish,  he  upbraided
no  man  for  past  offences,  but  received  them  as  a  father
receives  penitent  children  returning  to  a  sense  of  their
duty.  Though  desirous  of  peace,  he  did  not  slacken
his  preparations  for  war.  He  appointed  the  general
rendezvous  of  his  troops  in  the  fertile  valley  of  Xauxa,
on  the  road  to  Cuzco.m  There  he  remained  for
some  months,  not  only  that  he  might  have  time  to
make  another  attempt  towards  an  accommodation  with
Pizarro,  but  that  he  might  train  his  new  soldiers  to  the
use  of  arms,  and  accustom  them  to  the  discipline  of  a
camp,  before  he  led  them  against  a  body  of  victorious

'  See  Note  LXXXVIII.
k  Zarate,  lib.  Tii.  c.  2,  3. Gomara.c.  181. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  b.  c.  18,  kc. Fer-
nandez, lib.  ii.  c.  79. Herrera,  dec.  8.  lib.  iv.  c.  1,  2.

1  Zarate,  lib.  vi.  c.  17.  »  Zarate,  lib.  vii.  c.  9. Fernandez,  lib.  ii.  c.  77.  8  J.

1548.]  BOOK VI.  335

veterans.  Pizarro,  intoxicated  with  the  success  which
had  hitherto  accompanied  his  arms,  and  elated  with
having  again  near  a  thousand  men  under  his  command,
refuse  to  listen  to  any  terms,  although  Cepeda,  to-
gether with  several  of  his  officers,  and  even  Carvajal
himself,"  gave  it  as  their  advice  to  close  with  the  pre-
sident's offer  of  general  indemnity,  and  the  revocation
of  the  obnoxious  laws.0  Gasca  having  tried  in  vain
every  expedient  to  avoid  imbruing  his  hands  in  the
blood  of  his  countrymen,  began  to  move  towards  Cuzco,
at  the  head  of  sixteen  hundred  men.
Both  par-  Pizarro,  confident  of  victory,  suffered  the
ties  pre- royalists  to  pass  all  the  rivers  which  lie  be-

pare  for  J  *  »*

battle.  tween  Guamanga  and  Cuzco  without  opposi-
tion, and  to  advance  within  four  leagues  of
that  capital,  flattering  himself  that  a  defeat  in  such  a
situation  as  rendered  escape  impracticable  would  at
once  terminate  the  war.  He  then  marched  out  to
meet  the  enemy,  and  Carvajal  chose  his  ground,  and
made  the  disposition  of  the  troops,  with  the  discerning
eye,  and  profound  knowledge  in  the  art  of  war  con-
a  rii  9  spicuous  m  an"  its  operations.  As  the  two
armies  moved  forwards  slowly  to  the  charge,
the  appearance  of  each  was  singular.  In  that  of
Pizarro,  composed  of  men  enriched  with  the  spoils  of
the  most  opulent  country  in  America,  every  officer,
and  almost  all  the  private  men,  were  clothed  in  stuffs
of  silk,  or  brocade,  embroidered  with  gold  and  silver ;
and  their  horses,  their  arms,  their  standards,  were
adorned  with  all  the  pride  of  military  pomp.p  That  of
Gasca,  though  not  so  splendid,  exhibited  what  was  no
less  striking.  He  himself,  accompanied  by  the  arch-
bishop of  Lima,  the  bishops  of  Quito  and  Cuzco,  and
a  great  number  of  ecclesiastics,  marching  along  the

■  See  Note  LXXXIX.  •  Zarate,  Kb.  vii.  c.  6. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  r.  c.  27.

p  Zarate,  lib.  \i.  c.  11.

336  AMERICA.  [1548.

lines,  blessing-  the  men,  and  encouraging  them  to  a  re-
solute discharge  of  their  duty.

Pizarro  When  both  armies  were  just  ready  to  engage,

byTi-  Cepeda  set  spurs  to  his  horse,  galloped  off,
troops.  an(j  surrendered  himself  to  the  president.  Gar-
cilasso  de  la  Vega,  and  other  officers  of  note,  followed
his  example.  The  revolt  of  persons  in  such  high  rank
struck  all  with  amazement.  The  mutual  confidence  on
which  the  union  and  strength  of  armies  depend,  ceased
at  once.  Distrust  and  consternation  spread  from  rank
to  rank.  Some  silently  slipped  away,  others  threw
down  their  arms,  the  greatest  number  went  over  to  the
royalists.  Pizarro,  Carvajal,  and  some  leaders,  em-
ployed authority,  threats,  and  entreaties,  to  stop  them,
but  in  vain.  In  less  than  half  an  hour,  a  body  of  men,
which  might  have  decided  the  fate  of  the  Peruvian
empire,  was  totally  dispersed.  Pizarro,  seeing  all  irre-
trievably lost,  cried  out  in  amazement  to  a  few  officers
who  still  faithfully  adhered  to  him,  "  What  remains  for
us  to  do?" — "  Let  us- rush,"  replied  one  of  them,  "  upon
the  enemy's  firmest  battalion,  and  die  like  Romans."
Dejected  with  such  a  reverse  of  fortune,  he  had  not
spirit  to  follow  this  soldierly  counsel,  and  with  a  tame-
ness  disgraceful  to  his  former  fame,  he  surren-

Taken

dered  to  one  of  Gasca's  officers.  Carvajal,
endeavouring  to  escape,  was  overtaken  and  seized.
And  put  to  Gasca,  happy  in  this  bloodless  victory,  did
death.  n0^  stam  ft  with  cruelty.  Pizarro,  Carvajal,
and  a  small  number  of  the  most  distinguished  or  noto-
rious  offenders,  were  punished  capitally.  Pizarro  was
beheaded  on  the  day  after  he  surrendered.  He  sub-
mitted to  his  fate  with  a  composed  dignity,  and  seemed
desirous  to  atone  by  repentance  for  the  crimes  which
he  had  committed.  The  end  of  Carvajal  was  suitable
to  his  life.  On  his  trial  he  offered  no  defence.  When
the  sentence  adjudging  him  to  be  hanged  was  pro-

1548.]  BOOK VI.  337

nounced,  he  carelessly  replied,  "  One  can  die  but
once."  During-  the  interval  between  the  sentence  and
execution,  he  discovered  no  sign  either  of  remorse  for
the  past,  or  of  solicitude  about  the  future ;  scoffing  at
all  who  visited  him  in  his  usual  sarcastic  vein  of  mirth,
with  the  same  quickness  of  repartee  and  gross  plea-
santry as  at  any  other  period  of  his  life.  Cepeda,
more  criminal  than  either,  ought  to  have  shared  the
same  fate ;  but  the  merit  of  having  deserted  his  asso-
ciates at  such  a  critical  moment,  and  with  such  decisive
effect,  saved  him  from  immediate  punishment.  He  was
sent,  however,  as  a  prisoner  to  Spain,  and  died  in  con-
finement.'1

In  the  minute  detail  which  the  contemporary  histo-
rians have  given  of  the  civil  dissensions  that  raged  in
Peru,  with  little  interruption  during  ten  years,  many
circumstances  occur  so  striking,  and  which  indicate
such  an  uncommon  state  of  manners,  as  to  merit  parti-
cular attention.

No  merce-  Though  the  Spaniards  who  first  invaded  Peru
nary  sol- were  of  the  lowest  order  in  society,  and  the

diersin  the  -i

civil  wars  greater  part  ot  those  who  afterward  joined  them
were  persons  of  desperate  fortune,  yet  in  all  the
bodies  of  troops  brought  into  the  field  by  the  dif-
ferent leaders  who  contended  for  superiority,  not  one
man  acted  as  a  hired  soldier,  that  follows  his  standard
for  pay.  Every  adventurer  in  Peru  considered  him-
self as  a  conqueror,  entitled,  by  his  services,  to  an  esta-
blishment in  that  country  which  had  been  acquired  by
his  valour.  In  the  contests  between  the  rival  chiefs,
each  chose  his  side  as  he  was  directed  by  his  own
judgment  or  affections.  He  joined  his  commander  as
a  companion  of  his  fortune,  and  disdained  to  degrade
himself  by  receiving  the  wages  of  a  mercenary.  It
was  to  their  sword,  not  to  pre-eminence  in  office,  or

q  Zarate,  lib.  vii.  c.  6 — 8. Gomara,  c.  185,  186. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  v.  c.  30,  &c.
Fernandez,  lib.  ii.  c.  86,  &c. Herrera,  dec.  8.  lib.  iv.  c.  14,  &c.

VOL. VII.  Z

;;38  AMI.  IMC  A.  [1S48.

nobility  of  birth,  that  most  of  the  leaders  whom  they

followed  were  indebted  for  their  elevation ;  and  each

of  their  adherents  hoped,  by  the  same  means,  to  open

a  way for  himself  to  the possession of  power  and

wealth.'

. .  But  though  the  troops  in  Peru  served  with-

Arnm's  ~  L  .  .

inimenseij  out  any  regular  pay,  they  were  raised  at  1111-
'mense  expense.  Among;  men  accustomed  to
divide  the  spoils  of  an  opulent  country,  the  desire  of
obtaining'  wealth  acquired  incredible  force.  The  ar-
dour of  pursuit  augmented  in  proportion  to  the  hope
of  success.  Where  all  were  intent  on  the  same  object,
and  under  the  dominion  of  the  same  passion,  there  was
but  one  mode  of  gaining  men,  or  of  securing  their  at-
tachment. Officers  of  name  and  influence,  besides  the
promise  of  future  establishments,  received  in  hand
large  gratuities  from  the  chief  with  whom  they  en-
oaoed.  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  in  order  to  raise  a  thousand
men,  advanced  five  hundred  thousand  pesos.5  Gasca
expended  in  levying  the  troops  which  he  led  against
Pizarro  nine  hundred  thousand  pesos.1  The  distribu-
tion of  property,  bestowed  as  the  reward  of  services,
And  im-  was  stiH  more  exorbitant.  Cepeda,  as  the  re-
mcnsc  re-  compense  of  his  perfidy  and  address,  in  per-
indivi-  suading  the  court  of  royal  audience  to  give  the
sanction  of  its  authority  to  the  usurped  juris-
diction of  Pizarro,  received  a  grant  of  lands  which
yielded  an  annual  income  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  thou-
sand pesos."  Hinojosa,  who,  by  his  early  defection
from  Pizarro,  and  surrender  of  the  fleet  to  Gasca,  de-
cided the  fate  of  Peru,  obtained  a  district  of  country
affording  two  hundred  thousand  pesos  of  yearly  value. w
While  such  rewards  were  dealt  out  to  the  principal
officers,  with more than royal munificence,  propor-

r  Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  iv.  c.  38.  41.  s  Fernandez,  lib.  ii.  c.  54.

'  Ziirate,  lib.  vii.  c.  10. Herrera,  dec.  8.  lib.  v.  c.  7.
u  Gomara,  c.  164.  " Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  vi.  c.  .'>.

1548.]  BOOK  Vf.  339

tional  shares  were conferred  upon  those  of  inferior
rank.

.  Such  a  rapid change  of  fortune  produced

fusion  and  its  natural  effects.  It  gave  birth  to  new  wants,
and  new  desires.  Veterans,  long  accustomed
to  hardship  and  toil,  acquired  of  a  sudden  a  taste  for
profuse  and  inconsiderate  dissipation,  and  indulged  in
all  the  excesses  of  military  licentiousness.  The  riot
of  low  debauchery  occupied  some ;  a  relish  for  expen-
sive luxuries  spread  among  others. x  The  meanest
soldier  in  Peru  would  have  thought  himself  degraded
by  marching  on  foot ;  and  at  a  time  when  the  prices
of  horses  in  that  country  were  exorbitant,  each  in-
sisted on  being  furnished  with  one  before  he  would
take  the  field.  But  though  less  patient  under  the  fa-
tigue and  hardships  of  service,  they  were  ready  to
face  danger  and  death  with  as  much  intrepidity  as
ever ;  and  animated  by  the  hope  of  new  rewards,  they
never  failed,  on  the  day  of  battle,  to  display  all  their
ancient  valour.

Ferocity Together  with  their  courage,  they  retained
vith  which  a]}  tne  ferocitv  bv  which  they  were  originally

their  con-  ,.  „  ...  .

tests  were  distinguished.  Civil  discord  never  raged  with
'a  more  fell  spirit  than  among  the  Spaniards
in  Peru.  To  all  the  passions  which  usually  envenom
contests  among  countrymen,  avarice  was  added,  and
rendered  their  enmity  more  rancorous.  Eagerness
to  seize  the  valuable  forfeitures  expected  upon  the
death  of  every  opponent,  shut  the  door  against  mercy.
To  be  wealthy,  was  of  itself  sufficient  to  expose  a  man
to  accusation,  or  to  subject  him  to  punishment.  On
the  slightest  suspicions,  Pizarro  condemned  many  of
the  most  opulent  inhabitants  in  Peru  to  death.  Car-
vajal,  without  searching  for  any  pretext  to  justify  his
cruelty,  cut  off  many  more.  The  number  of  those  who
suffered  by  the  hands  of  the  executioner,  was  not  much

1  Herrera,  dec.  5.  lih.  ii.  c.  3.  dec.  8,  lib.  viii.  c.  10.

z  2

JiO  AMERICA.  [1548:

inferior  to  what  fell  in  the  field  ;y  and  the  greater  part
was  condemned  without  the  formality  of  any  legal
trial.

And  want The violence with which the contending
of  faith. partjes  treated  their  opponents  was  not  accom-
panied with  its  usual  attendants,  attachment  and  fide-
lity to those  with whom they acted. The ties  of
honour,  which  ought  to  be  held  sacred  among  soldiers,
and  the  principle  of  integrity,  interwoven  as  thoroughly
in  the  Spanish  character  as  in  that  of  any  nation,  seem
to  have  been  equally  forgotten. Even  regard  for  de-
cency, and  the  sense  of  shame,  were  totally  lost. Dur-
ing their  dissensions,  there  was  hardly  a  Spaniard  in
Peru  who  did  not  abandon  the  party  which  he  had  ori-
ginally espoused,  betray  the  associates  with  whom  he
had  united,  and  violate  the  engagements  under  which
he  had  come. The  viceroy  Nugnez  Vela  was  ruined
by  the  treachery  of  Cepeda  and  the  other  judges  of
the  royal  audience,  who  were  bound  by  the  duties  of
their  function  to  have  supported  his  authority. The
chief  advisers  and companions  of  Gonzalo Pizarro's
revolt  were  the  first  to  forsake  him,  and  submit  to  his
enemies. His  fleet  was  given  up  to  Gasca  by  the  man
whom  he  had  singled  out  among  his  officers  to  intrust
with  that  important  command. On  the  day  that  was
to  decide  his  fate,  an  army  of  veterans,  in  sight  of  the
enemy,  threw  down  their  arms  without  striking  a  blow,
and  deserted  a  leader  who  had  often  conducted  them
to  victory. Instances  of  such  general  and  avowed  con-
tempt of  the  principles  and  obligations  which  attach
man  to  man, and  bind  them  together  in  social  union,
rarely  occur  in  history. It  is  only  where  men  are  far
removed  from  the  seat  of  government,  where  the  re-
straints of  law  and  order  are  little  felt,  where  the  pros-
pect of  gain  is  unbounded,  and  where  immense  wealth
may  cover  the  crimes  by  which  it  is  acquired,  that  we

>  See  Note  XC.

1548.]  BOOK  VI.  341

can  find  any  parallel  to  the  levity,  the  rapaciousriess,
the  perfidy  and  corruption  prevalent  among  the  Spa-
niards in  Peru.

Gasca  de-  ^n  ^ie  death  °f  Pizarro,  the  malecontents  in
vises  em-  every  corner  of  Peru  laid  down  their  arms,
for  i»is  sol-  and  tranquillity  seemed  to  be  perfectly  re-esta-
blished. But  two  very  interesting  objects  still
remained  to  occupy  the  president's  attention.  The
one  was  to  find  immediately  such  employment  for  a
multitude  of  turbulent  and  daring  adventurers  with
which  the  country  was  filled,  as  might  prevent  them
from  exciting  new  commotions.  The  other,  to  bestow
proper  gratifications  upon  those  to  whose  loyalty  and
valour  he  had  been  indebted  for  his  success.  The
former  of  these  was  in  some  measure  accomplished,
by  appointing  Pedro  de  Valdivia  to  prosecute  the  con-
quest of  Chili;  and  by  empowering  Diego  Centeno  to
undertake  the  discovery  of  the  vast  regions  bordering
on  the  river  De  la  Plata.  The  reputation  of  those
leaders,  together  with  the  hopes  of  acquiring  wealth,
and  of  rising  to  consequence  in  some  unexplored
country,  alluring  many  of  the  most  indigent  and  des-
perate soldiers  to  follow  their  standards,  drained  off  no
inconsiderable  portion  of  that  mutinous  spirit  which
Gasca  dreaded.

His  divi-  ^ne  latter  was  an  affair  of  greater  difficulty,
sion  of  the  and  to  be  adjusted  with  a  more  attentive  and

country  t  "

among  his  delicate  hand.  -The  repartimientos,  or  allot-
ments of  lands  and  Indians  which  fell  to  be
distributed,  in  consequence  of  the  death  or  forfeiture
of  the  former  possessors,  exceeded  two  millions  of
pesos  of  yearly  rent.2  Gasca,  when  now  absolute  master
of  this  immense  property,  retained  the  same  disinte-
rested sentiments  which  he  had  originally  professed,
and  refused  to  reserve  the  smallest  portion  of  it  for

1  Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  vi.  c.  4.

;3-12  AMKIUCA.  [1548.

himself.  But  the  number  of  claimants  was  great;
and  whilst  the  vanity  or  avarice  of  every  individual
fixed  the  value  of  his  own  services,  and  estimated  the
recompense  which  he  thought  due  to  him,  the  preten-
sions of  each  were  so  extravagant,  that  it  was  impossi-
ble to  satisfy  all.  Gasca  listened  to  them  one  by  one,
with  the  most  patient  attention  ;  and  that  he  might
have  leisure  to  weigh  the  comparative  merit  of  their
several  claims  with  accuracy,  he  retired,  with  the  arch-
bishop of  Lima  and  a  single  secretary,  to  a  village
twelve  leagues  from  Cuzco.  There  he  spent  several
days  in  allotting  to  each  a  district  of  lands  and  number
of  Indians,  in  proportion  to  his  idea  of  their  past  ser-
vices and  future  importance.  But  that  he  might  get
beyond  the  reach  of  the  fierce  storm  of  clamour  and
rage  which  he  foresaw  would  burst  out  on  the  publi-
cation of  his  decree,  notwithstanding  the  impartial
equity  with  which  he  had  framed  it,  he  set  out  for
Lima,  leaving  the  instrument  of  partition  sealed  up,
with  orders  not  to  open  it  for  some  days  after  his
departure.

Aug.  24.  The  indignation  excited  by  publishing  the
contents  decree  of  partition  was  not  less  than  Gasca  had
occasions.  eXpected.  Vanity,  avarice,  emulation,  envy,
shame,  rage,  and  all  the  other  passions  which  most
vehemently  agitate  the  minds  of  men  when  both  their
honour  and  their  interest  are  deeply  affected,  con-
spired in  adding  to  its  violence.  It  broke  out  with  all
the  fury  of  military  insolence.  Calumny,  threats,  and
curses,  were  poured  out  openly  upon  the  president.  He
was  accused  of  ingratitude,  of  partiality,  and  of  injus-
tice. Among  soldiers  prompt  to  action,  such  seditious
discourse  would  have  been  soon  followed  by  deeds  no
less  violent,  and  they  already  began  to  turn  their  eyes
towards  some  discontented  leaders,  expecting  them
to  stand  forth  in redress  of  their  wrongs. By  some

1549.]  BOOK  VI.  .343

vigorous  interpositions  of  government,  a  timely  check
was  given  to  this  mutinous  spirit,  and  the  danger  of
another  civil  war  was  averted  for  the  present.*

1549.  Gasca,  however,  perceiving  that  the  flame
Wishes aor-  was  suppressed  rather  than  extinguished,  la-
der  and koured  with  the  utmost  assiduity  to  soothe  the

govern-  J

rae,u- malecontents,  by  bestowing  large  gratuities  on
some,  by  promising  repartimientos,  when they  fell  va-
cant, to  others, and  by  caressing  and  flattering  all.
But  that  the  public  security  might  rest  on  a  foundation
more  stable  than  their  good  affection,  he  endeavoured
to  strengthen  the  hands  of  his  sucessors  in  office,  by
re-establishing  the  regular  administration  of  justice  in
every  part  of  the  empire. He  introduced  order  and
simplicity  into  the  mode  of  collecting  the  royal  reve-
nue. He  issued  regulations  concerning  the  treatment
of  the  Indians,  well  calculated  to  protect  them  from
oppression,  and  to  provide  for  their  instruction  in  the
principles  of  religion,  without  depriving  the  Spaniards
of  the  benefit accruing  from  their  labour. Having
now  accomplished  every  object  of  his  mission,
Gasca,  longing  to  return  again  to  a  private
station, committed the government of  Peru to  the
Feb.  i. court  of  audience,  and  set  out  for  Spain. As,
AlJdfsets during  the  anarchy  and  turbulence  of  the  four
Spain, last  years,  there  had  been  no  remittance  made  of
the  royal  revenue,  he  carried  with  him  thirteen  hun-
dred thousand  pesos  of  public  money,  which  the  eco-
nomy and  order  of  his  administration  enabled  him  to
save,  after  paying  all- the  expenses  of  the  war.
u.  He  was  received  in  his  native  country  with

His  recep-  *

tion  there,  universal  admiration  of  his  abilities,  and  of  his
virtue.  Both  were,  indeed,  highly  conspicuous.  With-
out army,  or  fleet,  or  public  funds  ;  with  a  train  so
simple,  that  only  three  thousand  ducats  were  expended

a  Zarate,  lib.  vii.  c.  9. Gomara,  c.  187. Vega,  p.  11.  lib.  vii.  c.  1,  &c Fer-
nandez, p.  11.  lib.  1.  c.  1,  &c. Herrera,  dec.  8.  lib.  iv.  c.  17,  &c.

344  AMERICA.  [1550

in  equipping  him,b  he  set  out  to  oppose  a  formidable
rebellion. By  his  address  and  talents  he  supplied  all
those  defects,  and  seemed  to  create  instruments for
executing his designs. He acquired such  a  naval
force, as gave  him the command  of  the  sea. He
raised  a  body  of  men  able  to  cope  with  the  veteran
bands  which  gave  law  to  Peru. He  vanquished  their
leader,  on  whose  arms  victory  had  hitherto  attended,
and  in  place  of  anarchy  and  usurpation,  he  established
the  government  of  laws,  and  the  authority  of  the  right-
ful sovereign. But  the  praise  bestowed  on  his  abili-
ties was  exceeded  by  that  which  his  virtue  merited.
After  residing  in  a  country  where  wealth  presented  al-
lurements which  had  seduced  every  person  who  had
hitherto  possessed  power  there,  he  returned  from  that
trying  station  with  integrity,  not  only  untainted  but
unsuspected. After  distributing  among  his  country-
men possessions  of  greater  extent  and  value  than  had
ever  been  in  the  disposal  of  a  subject  in  any  age  or
nation,  he  himself  remained  in  his  original  state  of  po-
verty ;  and  at  the  very  time  when  he  brought  such  a
large  recruit  to  the  royal  treasury,  he  was  obliged  to
apply  by  petition  for  a  small  sum  to  discharge  some
petty  debts  which  he  had  contracted  during  the  course
of  his  service.0 Charles  was  not  insensible  to  such
disinterested  merit. Gasca  was  received  by  him  with
the  most  distinguishing  marks  of  esteem,  and  being-
promoted  to  the  bishopric  of  Palencia,  he  passed  the
remainder  of  his  days  in  the  tranquillity  of  retirement,
respected  by  his  country,  honoured  by  his  sovereign,
and  beloved  by  all.

Notwithstanding  all  Gasca's  wise  regulations,  the
tranquillity  of  Peru  was  not  of  long  continuance.  In
a  country  where  the  authority  of  government  had  been
almost  forgotten  during  the  long  prevalence  of  anarchy
and  misrule, where  there  were  disappointed  leaders

h  Fernandez,  lib.  ii.  c.  18.  «  MS.  penes  me.

1550.]  BOOK VI.  345

ripe  for  revolt,  and  seditious  soldiers  ready  to  follow
them,  it  was  not  difficult  to  raise  combustion.  Several
successive  insurrections  desolated  the  country  for
some  years.  But  as  those,  though  fierce,  were  only
transient  storms,  excited  rather  by  the  ambition  and
turbulence  of  particular  men,  than  by  general  or  pub-
lic motives,  the  detail  of  them  is  not  the  object  of  this
history.  These  commotions  in  Peru,  like  every  thing
of  extreme  violence  either  in  the  natural  or  political
body,  were  not  of  long  duration,  and  by  carrying  off
the  corrupted  humours  which  had  given  rise  to  the
disorders,  they  contributed  in  the  end  to  strengthen
the  society  which  at  first  they  threatened  to  destroy.
During  their  fierce  contests,  several  of  the  first  inva-
ders of  Peru,  and  many  of  those  licentious  adventurers
whom  the  fame  of  their  success  had  allured  thither,
fell  by  each  other's  hands.  Each  of  the  parties,  as
they  alternately  prevailed  in  the  struggle,  gradually
cleared  the  country  of  a  number  of  turbulent  spirits,  by
executing,  proscribing,  or  banishing  their  opponents.
Men  less  enterprising,  less  desperate,  and  more  ac-
customed to  move  in  the  path  of  sober  and  peaceable
industry,  settled  in  Peru  ;  and  the  royal  authority  was
gradually  established  as  firmly  there  as  in  the  other
Spanish  colonies.

NOTES

AND

ILLUSTRATIONS

Note  I.  p.  2.

The  number  of  the  fish  in  the  rivers  of  South  America  is  so  ex-
traordinary, as  to  merit  particular  notice.  "  In  the  Maragnon
(says  P.  Acugna)  fish  are  so  plentiful,  that  without  any  art,  they
may  take  them  with  the  hands."  p.  138.  "  In  the  Orinoco  (says
P.  Gumilla),  besides  an  infinite  variety  of  other  fish,  tortoise  or
turtle  abound  in  such  numbers,  that  I  cannot  find  words  to  express
it.  I  doubt  not  but  that  such  as  read  my  account  will  accuse  me
of  exaggeration  :  but  I  can  affirm  that  it  is  as  difficult  to  count
them,  as  to  count  the  sands  on  the  banks  of  that  river.  One  may
judge  of  their  number  by  the  amazing  consumption  of  them  ;  for
all  the  nations  contiguous  to  the  river,  and  even  many  who  are  at  a
distance,  flock  thither  at  the  season  of  breeding,  and  not  only  find
sustenance  during  that  time,  but  carry  off  great  numbers  both  of
the  turtles  and  of  their  eggs,"  &c.  Hist,  de  l'Orenoque,  ii.  c.  22.
p.  59. M.  de  la  Condamine  confirms  their  accounts,  p.  159.

Note  II.  p.  2.

Piso  describes  two  of  these  plants,  the  Cururuape,  and  the  Gua-
jana-Timbo.  It  is  remarkable,  that  though  they  have  this  fatal  ef-
fect upon  fishes,  they  are  so  far  from  being  noxious  to  the  human
species,  that  they  are  used  in  medicine  with  success.  Piso,  lib.  iv.
c.  88.  Bancroft  mentions  another,  the  Hiarree,  a  small  quantity  of
which  is  sufficient  to  inebriate  all  the  fish  to  a  considerable  distance,
so  that  in  a  few  minutes,  they  float  motionless  on  the  surface  of  the
water,  and  are  taken  with  ease. Nat.  Hist,  of  Guiana,  p.  106.

Note  III.  p.  5.

Remarkable  instances  occur  of  the  calamities  which  rude  na-
tions suffer  by  famine. Alvar  Nugnez  Cabeca  de  Vaca,  one  of  the

348  NOTES AND

most  gallant  and  virtuous  of  the  Spanish  adventurers,  resided  al-
most nine  years  among  the  savages  of  Florida.  They  were  unac-
quainted with  every  species  of  agriculture.  Their  subsistence  was
poor  and  precarious.  "  They  live  chiefly  (says  he)  upon  roots  of
different  plants,  which  they  procure  with  great  difficulty,  wandering
from  place  to  place  in  search  of  them.  Sometimes  they  kill  game,
sometimes  they  catch  fish,  but  in  such  small  quantities,  that  their
hunger  is  so  extreme  as  compels  them  to  eat  spiders,  the  eggs  of
ants,  worms,  lizards,  serpents,  a  kind  of  unctuous  earth,  and  I  am
persuaded,  that  if  in  this  country  there  were  any  stones,  they  would
swallow  these.  They  preserve  the  bones  of  fishes  and  serpents,
which  they  grind  into  powder,  and  eat.  The  only  season  when
they  do  not  suffer  much  from  famine,  is  when  a  certain  fruit,  which
he  calls  Tunas,  is  ripe.  This  is  the  same  with  the  Opuntia,  or  prickly
pear,  of  a  reddish  and  yellow  colour,  with  a  sweet  insipid  taste.
They  are  sometimes  obliged  to  travel  far  from  their  usual  place  of
residence,  in  order  to  find  them."  Naufragias,  c.  xviii.  p.  20,  21,
22.  In  another  place,  he  observes  that  they  are  frequently  re-
duced to  pass  two  or  three  days  without  food,  c.  xxiv.  p.  27.

Note  IV.  p.  6.

M.  Fermin  has  given  an  accurate  description  of  the  two  species
of  manioc,  with  an  account  of  its  culture,  to  which  he  has  added
some  experiments,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  poisonous  qualities
of  the  juice  extracted  from  that  species  which  he  calls  the  bitter
cassava.  Among  the  Spaniards,  it  is  known  by  the  name  of  Yuca
braxa. Descr.  de  Surin.tom.  i.  p.  66.

Note  V.  p.  7.

The  plantain  is  found  in  Asia  and  Africa,  as  well  as  in  America.
Oviedo  contends,  that  it  is  not  an  indigenous  plant  of  the  New
World,  but  was  introduced  into  the  island  of  Hispaniola,  in  the
year  1516,  by  father  Thomas  de  Berlanga,  and  that  he  transplanted
it  from  the  Canary  Islands,  whither  the  original  slips  had  been
brought  from  the  East  Indies.  Oviedo,  lib.  viii.  c.  1.  But  the
opinion  of  Acosta  and  other  naturalists,  who  reckon  it  an  Ame-
rican plant,  seems  to  be  better  founded.  Acosta  Hist.  Nat.  lib.
iv.  21.  It  was  cultivated  by  rude  tribes  in  America,  who  had  little
intercourse  with  the  Spaniards,  and  who  were  destitute  of  that  in-
o-enuity,  which  disposes  men  to  borrow  what  is  useful  from  foreign
nations. Gumil.  iii.  186. Wafer's  Voyage,  p.  87.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  'Mil

Note  VI.  p.  8.

It  is  remarkable,  that  Acosta,  one  of  the  most  accurate  and
best  informed  writers  concerning  the  West  Indies,  affirms,  that
maize,  though  cultivated  in  the  continent,  was  not  known  in  the
islands,  the  inhabitants  of  which  had  none  but  cassada  bread.  Hist.
Nat.  lib.  iv.  c.  16.  But  P.  Martyr,  in  the  first  book  of  his  first
Decad,  which  was  written  in  the  year  1493,  upon  the  return  of
Columbus  from  his  first  voyage,  expressly  mentions  maize  as  a
plant  which  the  islanders  cultivated,  and  of  which  they  made
bread,  p.  7.  Gomara  likewise  asserts,  that  they  were  acquainted
with  the  culture  of  maize.  Histor.  Gener.  cap.  28.  Oviedo  de-
scribes maize  without  any  intimation  of  its  being  a  plant  that  was
not  natural  to  Hispaniola.  Lib.  vii.  c.  1,

Note  VII.  p.  13.

New  Holland,  a  country  which  formerly  was  only  known,  has
lately  been  visited  by  intelligent  observers.  It  lies  in  a  region  of
the  globe  where  it  must  enjoy  a  very  favourable  climate,  as  it
stretches  from  the  10th  to  the  38th  degree  of  northern  latitude.  It
is  of  great  extent,  and  from  its  square  form  must  be  much  more
than  equal  to  all  Europe.  The  people  who  inhabit  the  various  parts
of  it  appear  to  be  of  one  race.  They  are  evidently  ruder  than
most  of  the  Americans,  and  have  made  still  less  progress  in  im-
provement and  the  arts  of  life.  There  is  not  the  least  appearance
of  cultivation  in  any  part  of  this  vast  region.  The  inhabitants  are
extremely  few,  so  that  the  country  appears  almost  desolate.  Their
tribes  are  still  more  inconsiderable  than  those  of  America.  They
depend  for  subsistence  almost  entirely  on  fishing.  They  do  not
settle  in  one  place,  but  roam  about  in  quest  of  food.  Both  sexes
go  starknaked.  Their  habitations,  utensils,  &c.  are  more  simple
and  rude  than  those  of  the  Americans.  Voyages,  by  Hawkesworth,
iii.  622,  &c.  This,  perhaps,  is  the  country  where  man  has  been
discovered  in  the  earliest  stage  of  his  progress,  and  it  exhibits  a
miserable  specimen  of  his  condition  and  powers  in  that  uncultivated
state.  If  this  country  shall  be  more  fully  explored  by  future  navi-
gators, the  comparison  of  the  manners  of  its  inhabitants  with  those
of  the  Americans  will  prove  an  instructive  article  in  the  history  of
the  human  species.

Note  VIII.  p.  14.

P.  Gabriel-M arest,  who  travelled  from  his  station  among

the  Illinois  to Machillimakinac, thus describes the  face  of  the

»

350  NOTES  AND

country : — "  We  have  marched  twelve  days  without  meeting  a
single  human  creature.  Sometimes  we  found  ourselves  in  vast
meadows,  of  which  we  could  not  see  the  boundaries,  through  which
there  flowed  many  brooks  and  rivers,  but  without  any  path  to  con-
duct us.  Sometimes  we  were  obliged  to  open  a  passage  across
thick  forests,  through  bushes,  and  underwood  filled  with  briars  and
thorns.  Sometimes  we  had  to  pass  through  deep  marshes,  in
which  we  sunk  up  to  the  middle.  After  being  fatigued  through
the  day,  we  had  the  earth  for  our  bed,  or  a  few  leaves,  exposed  to
the  wind,  the  rain,  and  all  the  injuries  of  the  air."  Lettr.  Edifiantes,
ii.  360.  Dr.  Brickell,  in  an  excursion  from  North  Carolina  towards
the  mountains,  a.  d.  1730,  travelled  fifteen  days  without  meeting
with  a  human  creature,  Nat.  Hist,  of  North  Carolina,  389.  Diego
de  Ordas,  in  attempting  to  make  a  settlement  in  South  America,
a.  d.  153*2,  marched  fifty  days  through  a  country  without  one  in-
habitant. Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  1.  c.  11.

Note  IX.  p.  14.

I  strongly  suspect  that  a  community  of  goods,  and  an  undi-
vided store,  are  known  only  among  the  rudest  tribes  of  hunters ;
and  that  as  soon  as  any  species  of  agriculture  or  regular  industry  is
known,  the  idea  of  an  exclusive  right  of  property  to  the  fruits  of
them  is  introduced.  I  am  confirmed  in  this  opinion  by  accounts
which  I  have  received  concerning  the  state  of  property  among  the
Indians  in  very  different  regions  of  America.  "  The  idea  of  the
natives  of  Brazil  concerning  property  is,  that  if  any  person  culti-
vate a  field,  he  alone  ought  to  enjoy  the  produce  of  it,  and  no
other  has  a  title  to  pretend  to  it.  If  an  individual  or  family  go  a
hunting  or  fishing,  what  is  caught  belongs  to  the  individual  or  to
the  family,  and  they  communicate  no  part  of  it  to  any  but  to  their
cazique,  or  to  such  of  their  kindred  as  happen  to  be  indisposed.  If
any  person  in  the  village  come  to  their  hut,  he  may  sit  down  freely,
and  eat  without  asking  liberty.  But  this  is  the  consequence  of
their  general  principle  of  hospitality;  fori  never  observed  any
partition  of  the  increase  of  their  fields,  or  the  produce  of  the  chase,
which  I  could  consider  as  the  result  of  any  idea  concerning  a  com-
munity of  goods.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  so  much  attached  to
what  they  deem  to  be  their  property,  that  it  would  be  extremely
dangerous  to  encroach  upon  it.  As  far  as  I  have  seen  or  can  learn,
there  is  not  one  tribe  of  Indians  in  South  America,  among  whom
the  community  of  goods  which  has  been  so  highly  extolled  is
known.  The  circumstance  in  the  government  of  the  Jesuits,  most
irksome to the Indians of Paraguay, was the community of

ILLUSTRATIONS.  351

goods  which  those  fathers  introduced.  This  was  repugnant  to  the
original  ideas  of  the  Indians.  They  were  acquainted  with  the  rights
of  private  exclusive  property,  and  they  submitted  with  impatience
to  regulations  which  destroyed  them."  M.  le  Cheval.  de  Pinto,
MS.  penes  me.  "  Actual  possession  (says  a  missionary  who  resided
several  years  among  the  Indians  of  the  Five  Nations)  gives  a  right
to  the  soil,  but  whenever  a  possessor  sees  fit  to  quit  it,  another  has
as  good  right  to  take  it  as  he  who  left  it.  This  law,  or  custom,
respects  not  only  the  particular  spot  on  which  he  erects  his  house,
but  also  his  planting-ground.  If  a  man  has  prepared  a  particular
spot  of  ground,  on  which  he  designs  in  future  to  build  or  plant,  no
man  has  a  right  to  incommode  him,  much  less  to  the  fruit  of  his
labours,  until  it  appears  that  he  voluntarily  gives  up  his  views.
But  I  never  heard  of  any  formal  conveyance  from  one  Indian  to
another  in  their  natural  state.  The  limits  of  every  canton  are  cir-
cumscribed ;  that  is,  they  are  allowed  to  hunt  as  far  as  such  a  river
on  this  hand,  and  such  a  mountain  on  the  other.  This  area  is
occupied  and  improved  by  individuals  and  their  families.  Indivi-
duals, not  the  community,  have  the  use  and  profit  of*  their  own  la-
bours, or  success  in  hunting."  MS.  of  Mr.  Gideon  Hawley,  penes  me,

NoteX.  p.  16.

Tins  difference  of  temper  between  the  Americans  and  negroes
is  so  remarkable,  that  it  is  a  proverbial  saying  in  the  French  islands,
"  Regarder  un  sauvage  de  travers,  c'est  le  battre ;  le  battre,  cest
le  tuer  ;  battre  un  negre,  c'est  le  nourrir." Tertre,  ii.  490.

Note  XI.  p. 17.

The  description  of  the  political  state  of  the  people  of  Cinaloa
perfectly  resembles  that  of  the  inhabitants  of  North  America.  "  They
have  neither  laws  nor  kings  (says  a  missionary  who  resided  long
among  them)  to  punish  any  crime.  Nor  is  there  among  them  any
species  of  authority,  or  political  government,  to  restrain  them  in
any  part  of  their  conduct.  It  is  true,  that  they  acknowledge  cer-
tain caziques,  who  are  heads  of  their  families  or  villages,  but  their
authority  appears  chiefly  in  war,  and  the  expeditions  against  their
enemies.  This  authority  the  caziques  obtain  not  by  hereditary
right,  but  by  their  valour  in  war,  or  by  the  power  and  number  of
their  families  and  relations.  Sometimes  they  owe  their  pre-emi-
nence to  their  eloquence  in  displaying  their  own  exploits."  Ribas,
Histor.  delas  Triumph.  &c.  p.  11.  The  state  of  the  Chiquitos  in
South  America  is  nearly  the  same.  "  They  have  no  regular  form
of  government,  or  civil  life,  but  in  matters  of  public  concern  they

352  NOTES AND

listen  to  the  advice  of  their  old  men,  and  usually  follow  it.  The
dignity  of  cazique  is  not  hereditary,  but  conferred  according  to
merit,  as  the  reward  of  valour  in  war.  The  union  among  them  is
imperfect.  Their  society  resembles  a  republic  without  any  head,
in  which  every  man  is  master  of  himself,  and  upon  the  least  dis-
gust, separates  from  those  with  whom  he  seemed  to  be  connected."
Relacion  Historical  de  las  Missiones  de  los  Chiquitos,  por  P.  Juan
Patr.  Fernandez,  p.  32,  33.  Thus,  under  very  different  climates,
when  nations  are  in  a  similar  state  of  society,  their  institutions  and
civil  government  assume  the  same  form.

Note  XII.  p.  29.

"  I  have  known  the  Indians  (says  a  person  well  acquainted  with
their  mode  of  life)  to  go  a  thousand  miles  for  the  purpose  of  re-
venge, in  pathless  woods,  over  hills  and  mountains,  through  huge
cane-swamps,  exposed  to  the  extremities  of  heat  and  cold,  the
vicissitude  of  seasons,  to  hunger  and  thirst.  Such  is  their  over-
boiling revengeful  temper,  that  they  utterly  contemn  all  those  things
as  imaginary  trifles,  if  they  are  so  happy  as  to  get  the  scalp  of  the
murderer,  or  enemy,  to  satisfy  the  craving  ghosts  of  their  deceased
relations." Adair's  Hist,  of  Amer.  Indians,  p.  150.

Note  XIII.  p.  29

In  the  account  of  the  great  war  between  the  Algonquins  and
Iroquois,  the  achievements  of  Piskaret,  a  famous  chief  of  the  Al-
gonquins, performed  mostly  by  himself  alone,  or  with  one  or  two
companions,  make  a  capital  figure.  De  la  Potherie,  i.  297,  &c.
Colden's  Hist,  of  Five  Nations,  125,  &c.

Note  XIV.  p.  31.

The  life  of  an  unfortunate  leader  is  often  in  danger,  and  he  is
always  degraded  from  the  rank  which  he  had  acquired  by  his
former  exploits. Adair,  p.  388.

Note  XV.  p.  31.

As  the  ideas  of  the  North  Americans,  with  respect  to  the  mode
of  carrying  on  war,  are  generally  known,  I  have  founded  my  ob-
servations chiefly  upon  the  testimony  of  the  authors  who  describe
them.  But  the  same  maxims  took  place  among  other  nations  in
the  New  World.  A  judicious  missionary  has  given  a  view  of  the
military  operations  of  the  people  of  Gran  Chaco,  in  South  America,

I  L  L U  S  T  R  A TIONS.  3 :,:l

perfectly  similar  to  those  of  the  Iroquois.  "  They  are  much  ad-
dicted to  war  (says  he),  which  they  carry  on  frequently  among
themselves,  but  perpetually  against  the  Spaniards.  But  they  may
rather  be  called  thieves  than  soldiers,  for  they  never  make  head
against  the  Spaniards,  unless  when  they  can  assault  them  by  stealth,
or  have  guarded  against  any  mischance  by  spies,  who  may  be  called
indefatigable;  they  will  watch  the  settlements  of  the  Spaniards  for
one,  two,  or  three  years,  observing  by  night  every  thing  that  passes
with  the  utmost  solicitude,  whether  they  may  expect  resistance  or
not,  and  until  they  are  perfectly  secure  of  the  event,  they  will  not
venture  upon  an  attack ;  so  that  when  they  do  give  the  assault,
they  are  certain  of  success,  and  free  from  all  danger.  These  spies,
in  order  that  they  may  not  be  observed,  will  creep  on  all-four  like
cats  in  the  night;  but  if  they  are  discovered,  make  their  escape
with  much  dexterity.  But,  although  they  never  choose  to  face  the
Spaniards,  if  they  be  surrounded  in  any  place  whence  they  cannot
escape,  they  will  fight  with  desperate  valour,  and  sell  their  lives
very  dear." Descript.  del  Gran  Chaco,  p.  78.

Note  XVI.  p.  32.

Lery,  who  was  an  eye-witness  of  the  proceedings  of  the  Toupi-
nambos,  a  Brazilian  tribe,  in  a  war  against  a  powerful  nation  of  their
enemies,  describes  their  courage  and  ferocity  in  very  striking  terms.
Ego  cum  Gallo  altero,  paulo  curiosius,  magno  nostro  periculo  (si
enim  ab  hostibus  capti  aut  lesi  fuissemus,  devorationi  fuissemus
devoti),  barbaros  nostros  in  militiam  euntes  comitari  volui.  Hi,
numero  4000  capita,  cum  hostibus  ad  littus  decertarunt,  tanta  fero-
citate,  ut  vel  rabidos  et  furiosos  quosque  superarent.  Cum  primum
hostes  conspexere,  in  magnos  atque  editos  ululatus  perruperunt.
Haec  gens  adeo  fera  est  et  truculenta,  ut  tantisper  dum  virium  vel
tantillum  restat,  continuo  dimicent,  fugamque  nunquam  capessant.
Quod  a  natura  illis  inditum  esse  reor.  Testor  interea  me,  qui  non
semel,  turn  peditum  turn  equitum  copias  ingentes,  in  aciem  in-
structas  hie  conspexi,  tanta  nunquam  voluptate  videndis  peditum
legionibus  armis  fulgentibus,  quanta  turn  pugnantibus  istis  per-
cussum  fuisse.  Lery  Hist.  Navigat.  in  Brasil.  ap.  de  Bry,  iii.  207 —
209.

Note  XVII.  p.  33.

It  was  originally  the  practice  of  the  Americans,  as  well  as  of
other  savage  nations,  to  cut  off  the  heads  of  the  enemies  whom  they
slew,  and  to  carry  them  away  as  trophies.  But,  as  they  found
these  cumbersome  in  their  retreat,  which  they  always  make  very

VOL,  VII.  2  A

354  NOTES AND

rapidly,  and  often  through  a  vast  extent  of  country,  they  became
satisfied  with  tearing  off  their  scalps.  This  custom,  though  most
prevalent  in  North  America,  was  not  unknown  among  the  southern
tribes. Lozano,  p.  79.

Note  XVIII.  p.  37.

The  terms  of  the  war-song  seem  to  be  dictated  by  the  same
fierce  spirit  of  revenge.  "  I  go  to  war  to  revenge  the  death  of  my
brothers  ;  I  shall  kill  ;  I  shall  exterminate  ;  I  shall  burn  my  ene-
mies ;  I  shall  bring  away  slaves  ;  I  shall  devour  their  heart,  dry
their  flesh,  drink  their  blood  ;  I  shall  tear  off  their  scalps,  and  make
cups  of  their  skulls."  Bossu's  Travels  through  Louisiana,  vol.  i.
p.  102.  I  am  informed,  by  persons  on  whose  testimony  I  can  rely,
that  as  the  number  of  people,  in  the  Indian  tribes  has  decreased  so
much,  almost  none  of  their  prisoners  are  now  put  to  death.  It  is
considered  as  better  policy  to  spare  and  to  adopt  them.  Those
dreadful  scenes  which  I  have  described  occur  now  so  rarely,  that
missionaries  and  traders  who  have  resided  long  among  the  Indians,
never  were  witnesses  to  them.

Note  XIX.  p.  37.

All  the  travellers  who  have  visited  the  most  uncivilized  of  the
American  tribes,  agree  in  this.  It  is  confirmed  by  two  remarkable
circumstances,  which  occurred  in  the  conquest  of  different  provinces.
In  the  expedition  of  Narvaez  into  Florida  in  the  year  1528,  the
Spaniards  were  reduced  to  such  extreme  distress  by  famine,  that,
in  order  to  preserve  their  own  lives,  they  eat  such  of  their  compa-
nions as  happened  to  die.  This  appeared  so  shocking  to  the  natives,
who  were  accustomed  to  devour  none  but  prisoners,  that  it  filled
them  with  horror  pnd  indignation  against  the  Spaniards.  Torque-
rnada  Monarch.  Ind.  ii.  p.  5S4.  Naufragios  de  Alv.  Nugnez
Cabeca  de  Vaca,  c.  xiv.  p.  15.  During  the  siege  of  Mexico,
though  the  Mexicans  devoured  with  greediness  the  Spaniards  and
Tlascalans,  whom  they  took  prisoners,  the  utmost  rigour  of  the
famine  which  they  suffered  could  not  induce  them  to  touch  the  dead
bodies  of  their  own  countrymen.  Bern.  Diaz,  del  Castillo  Conquist.
de  la  N.  Espagna,  p.  156.

Note  XX.  p.  38.

Many  singular  circumstances  concerning  the  treatment  of  pri-
soners among  the  people  of  Brazil,  are  contained  in  the  narrative
of  Stadius,  a  German  officer  in  the  service  of  the  Portuguese,  pub-

ILLUSTRATIONS.  355

lished  in  the  year  1556.  He  was  taken  prisoner  by  the  Tovpinamhos,
and  remained  in  captivity  nine  years.  He  was  often  present  at
those  horrid  festivals  which  he  describes,  and  was  destined  himself  to
the  same  cruel  fate  with  other  prisoners.  But  he  saved  his  life  by  his
extraordinary  efforts  of  courage  and  address.  De  Bry,  iii.  p.  34,  &c.
M.  de  Lery,  who  accompanied  M.  de  Villagagnon  in  his  expedition
to  Brazil,  in  the  year  1556,  and  who  resided  some  time  in  that  coun-
try, agrees  with  Stadius  in  every  circumstance  of  importance.  He
was  frequently  an  eye-witness  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Brazilians
treated  their  prisoners.  De  Bry,  iii.  210.  Several  striking  par-
ticulars omitted  by  them,  are  mentioned  by  a  Portuguese  author.
Purch.  Pilgr.  iv.  1294,  &c.

Note  XXI.  p.  41.

Though  I  have  followed  that  opinion  concerning  the  apathy  of
the  Americans,  which  appeared  to  me  most  rational,  and  supported
by  the  authority  of  the  most  respectable  authors,  other  theories
have  been  formed  with  regard  to  it,  by  writers  of  great  eminence
D.  Ant.  Ulloa,  in  a  late  work,  contends  that  the  texture  of  the  skin
and  bodily  habit  of  the  Americans  is  such,  that  they  are  less  sensible
of  pain  than  the  rest  of  mankind.  He  produces  several  proofs  of
this,  from  the  manner  in  which  they  endure  the  most  cruel  chirur-
gical  operations,  &c.  Noticias  Americanas,  p.  313,  314.  The
same  observation  has  been  made  by  surgeons  in  Brazil.  An  Indian,
they  say,  never  complains  under  pain,  and  will  bear  the  amputation
of  a  leg  or  arm  without  uttering  a  single  groan. MS.  penes  me.

Note  XXII.  p.  43.

This  is  an  idea  natural  to  all  rude  nations.  Among  the  Romans,
in  the  early  periods  of  their  commonwealth,  it  was  a  maxim  that  a
prisoner,  "  turn  decessisse  videtur  cum  captus  est."  Digest,
lib.  xlix.  tit.  15.  c.  18.  And  afterward,  when  the  progress  of  re-
finement rendered  them  more  indulgent  with  respect  to  this  article,
they  were  obliged  to  employ  two  fictions  of  law  to  secure  the  pro-
perty, and  permit  the  return  of  a  captive,  the  one  by  the  Lex  Cor-
nelia, and  the  other  by  the  Jus  Postliminii,  Heinec.  Elem.  Jur.
Civ.  sec.  ord.  Pand.  ii.  p.  294.  Among  the  negroes  the  same
ideas  prevail.  No  ransom  was  ever  accepted  for  a  prisoner.  As
soon  as  one  is  taken  in  war,  he  is  reputed  to  be  dead  ;  and  he  is  so
in  effect  to  his  country  and  his  family.  Voy.  du  Cheval.  des  Mar-
chais,  i.  p.  369.

Note  XXIII.  p.  44.

The  people  of  Chili,  the  most  gallant  and high-spirited of  all

2a2

356  NOTES AND

the  Americans,  are  the  only  exception  to  this  observation.  They
attack  their  enemies  in  the  open  field  ;  their  troops  are  ranged  in
regular  order  ;  their  battalions  advance  to  the  charge  not  only  with
courage,  but  with  discipline.  The  North  Americans,  though  many
of  them  have  substituted  the  European  fire-arms  in  place  of  their
own  bows  and  arrows,  still  adhere  to  their  ancient  maxims  of  war,
and  carry  it  on  according  to  their  own  peculiar  system.  But  the
Chilese  nearly  resemble  the  warlike  nations  of  Europe  and  Asia  in
their  military  operations.  Ovallc's  Relation  of  Chili.  Church.  Coll.
iii.  p.  71. Lozano's  Hist.  Parag.  i.  144,  145.

Note  XXIV.  p.  46.

Herreiia  gives  a  remarkable  proof  of  this.  In  Yucatan,  the
men  are  so  solicitous  about  their  dress,  that  they  carry  about  with
them  mirrors,  probably  made  of  stone,  like  those  of  the  Mexicans,
Dec.  iv.  lib.  iii.  c.  8,  in  which  they  delight  to  view  themselves;
but  the  women  never  use  them.  Dec.  iv.  lib.  x.  c.  3.  He  takes
notice  that  among  the  fierce  tribe  of  the  Punches,  in  the  new  king-
dom of  Granada,  none  but  distinguished  warriors  are  permitted
either  to  pierce  their  lips  and  to  wear  green  stones  in  them,  or  to
adorn  their  heads  with  plumes  of  feathers.  Dec.  vii.  lib.  ix.  c.  4.
In  some  provinces  of  Peru,  though  that  empire  had  made  consi-
derable progress  in  civilization,  the  state  of  women  was  little  im-
proved. All  the  toil  of  cultivation  and  domestic  work  was  devolved
upon  them,  and  they  were  not  permitted  to  wear  bracelets,  or  other
ornaments,  with  which  the  men  were  fond  of  decking  themselves.
Zarate  Hist,  de  Peru,  i.  p.  15,  16.

Note  XXV.  p.  47.

I  have  ventured  to  call  this  mode  of  anointing  and  painting
their  bodies,  the  dress  of  the  Americans.  This  is  agreeable  to
their  own  idiom.  As  they  never  stir  abroad  if  they  are  not  com-
pletely anointed,  they  excuse  themselves  when  in  this  situation,  by
saying,  that  they  cannot  appear  because  they  are  naked.  Gumilla
Hist,  de  l'Orenoque,  i.  191.

Note  XXVI.  p.  48.

Some  tribes  in  the  forest  of  Cinaloa,  on  the  gulf  of  California,
seem  to  be  among  the  rudest  people  of  America  united  in  the  social
state.  They  neither  cultivate  nor  sow;  they  have  no  houses  in
which  they  reside.  Those  in  the  inland  country  subsist  by  hunting;
those  on  the  sea-coast  chiefly  by  fishing.  Both  depend  upon  the
spontaneous  productions  of  the  earth,  fruits,  plants,  and  roots  of

ILLUSTRATIONS.  357

various  kinds.  In  the  rainy  season,  as  they  have  no  habitations
to  afford  them  shelter,  they  gather  bundles  of  reeds,  or  strong  grass,
and  binding  them  together  at  one  end,  they  open  them  at  the
other,  and  fitting  them  to  their  heads,  they  are  covered  as  with  a
large  cap,  which  like  a  pent-house  throws  off  the  rain,  and  will
keep  them  dry  for  several  hours.  During  the  warm  season,  they
form  a  shed  with  the  branches  of  trees,  which  protects  them  from
the  sultry  rays  of  the  sun.  When  exposed  to  cold  they  make  large
fires,  round  which  they  sleep  in  the  open  air.  Historia  de  los
Triumphos  de  Neustra  Santa  Fe  entre  Gentes  las  mas  barbaras,
&c.  por  P.  And.  Perez  de  Ribas,  p.  7,  &c.

Note  XXVII.  p.  49.

These  houses  resemble  barns.  "  We  have  measured  some  which
were  a  hundred  and  fifty  paces  long,  and  twenty  paces  broad.
Above  a  hundred  persons  resided  in  some  of  them."  Wilson's  Ac-
count of  Guiana.  Purch.  Pilgr.  vol.  iv.  p.  1263.  Ibid.  1291.  "The
Indian  houses,"  says  Mr.  Barrere,  "have  a  most  wretched  appear-
ance, and  are  a  striking  image  of  the  rudeness  of  early  times.  Their
huts  are  commonly  built  on  some  rising  ground,  or  on  the  banks  of
a  river  huddled  sometimes  together,  sometimes  straggling,  and  al-
ways without  any  order.  Their  aspect  is  melancholy  and  disagree-
able. One  sees  nothing  but  what  is  hideous  and  savage.  The  un-
cultivated fields  have  no  gaiety.  The  silence  which  reigns  there,
unless  when  interrupted  by  the  disagreeable  notes  of  birds,  or  cries
of  wild  beasts,  is  extremely  dismal."  Relat.  de  la  France  Equin.
p.  146.

Note  XXVIII.  p.  50.

Some  tribe  in  South  America  can  send  their  arrows  to  a  great
distance,  and  with  considerable  force,  without  the  aid  of  the  bow.
They  make  use  of  a  hollow  reed,  about  nine  feet  long,  and  an  inch
thick,  which  is  called  a  Sarbacane.  In  it  they  lodge  a  small  arrow,
with  some  unspun  cotton  wound  about  its  great  end  ;  this  confines
the  air,  so  that  they  can  blow  it  with  astonishing  rapidity,  and  a  sure
aim,  to  the  distance  of  above  a  hundred  paces.  These  small  arrows
are  always  poisoned.  Fermin.  Descr.de  Surin.  i.  55.  Bancroft's
Hist,  of  Guiana,  p.  281,  &c.  The  Sarbacane  is  much  used  in  some
parts  of  the  East  Indies.

Note  XXIX.  p.  50.

I  might  produce  many  instances  of  this,  but  shall  satisfy  myself
with  one,  taken  from  the  Eskimaux. "  Their  greatest  ingenuity

358  NOTES AND

(says  Mr.  Ellis)  is  shewn  in  the  structure  of  their  bows,  made  com-
monly of  three  pieces  of  wood,  each  making  part  of  the  same  arch,
very  nicely  and  exactly  joined  together.  They  are  commonly  of  fir
or  larch  ;  and  as  this  wants  strength  and  elasticity,  they  supply  both
by  bracing  the  back  of  their  bow,  with  a  kind  of  thread,  or  line,
made  of  the  sinews  of  their  deer,  and  the  bowstring  of  the  same
materials.  To  make  them  draw  more  stiffly,  they  dip  them  into  water,
which  causes  both  the  back  of  the  bow  and  the  string  to  contract,
and  consequently  gives  it  the  greater  force ;  and  as  they  practise
from  their  youth,  they  shoot  with  very  great  dexterity."  Voyage  to
Hudson's  Bay,  p.  138.

Note  XXX.  p.  51.

Necessity  is  the  great  prompter  and  guide  of  mankind  in  their
inventions.  There  is,  however,  such  inecpiality  in  some  parts  of  their
progress,  and  some  nations  get  so  far  the  start  of  others  in  circum-
stances nearly  similar,  that  we  must  ascribe  this  to  some  events  in
their  story,  or  to  some  peculiarity  in  their  situation,  with  which  we
are  unacquainted.  The  people  in  the  island  of  Otaheite,  lately  dis-
covered in  the  .South  sea,  far  excel  most  of  the  Americans  in  the
knowledge  and  practice  of  the  arts  of  ingenuity,  and  yet  they  had
not  invented  any  method  of  boiling.water ;  and  having  no  vessel
that  could  bear  the  fire,  they  had  no  more  idea  that  water  could  be
made  hot,  than  that  it  could  be  made  solid.  Voyages  by  Hawkes-
worth,  i.  466.  484.

Note  XXXI.  p.  51.

One  of  these  boats,  which  could  carry  nine  men,  weighed  only
sixty  pounds.  Gosnol.  Relat.  des  Voy.  a  la  Virgin.  Rec.  de  Voy.  au
Nord,  torn.  v.  p.  403.

Note  XXXII.  p.  53.

A  ukmarkable  proof  of  this  is  produced  by  Udloa.  Inweaving
hammocks,  coverlets,  and  other  coarse  cloths,  which  they  are  ac-
customed to  manufacture,  their  industry  has  discovered  no  more
expeditious  method  than  to  take  up  thread  after  thread,  and  after
counting  and  sorting  them  each  time,  to  pass  the  woof  between  them,
so  that  in  finishing  a  small  piece  of  those  stuffs,  they  frequently
spend  more  than  two  years.  Voyage,  i.  336.  Bancroft  gives  the
same  description  of  the  Indians  of  Guiana,  p.  255. According  to

ILLUSTRATIONS.  359

Adair,  the  ingenuity  and  dispatch  of  the  North  American  Indians
are  not  greater,  p.  422.  From  one  of  the  engravings  of  the  Mexican
paintings  in  Purchas,  vol.  iii.  p.  1106.  I  think  it  probable  that  the
people  of  Mexico  were  acquainted  with  any  better  or  more  expedi-
tious mode  of  weaving.  A  loom  was  an  invention  beyond  the  in-
genuity of  the  most  improved  Americans.  In  all  their  works  they
advance  so  slowly,  that  one  of  their  artists  is  two  months  at  a  to-
bacco-pipe with  his  knife  before  he  finishes  it. Adair,  p.  423.

Note  XXXIII.  p.  55.

The  article  of  religion  in  P.  Lafitau's  Moeurs  des  Sauvages,  ex-
tends to  three  hundred  and  forty-seven  tedious  pages  in  quarto.

Note  XXXIV.  p.  56.

I  have  referred  the  reader  to  several  of  the  authors  who  describe
the  most  uncivilized  nations  in  America.  Their  testimony  is  uni-
form. That  of  P.  Ribas  concerning  the  people  of  Cinaloa,  coincides
with  the  rest.  "  I  was  extremely  attentive  (says  he),  during  the
years  I  resided  among  them,  to  ascertain  whether  they  were  to  be
considered  as  idolaters  ;  and  it  may  be  affirmed  with  the  most  per-
fect exactness,  that  though  among  some  of  them  there  may  be
traces  of  idolatry,  yet  others  have  not  the  least  knowledge  of  God,
or  even  of  any  false  deity,  nor  pay  any  formal  adoration  to  the  Su-
preme Being,  who  exercises  dominion  over  the  world  ;  nor  have  they
any  conception  of  the  providence  of  a  Creator  or  Governor,  from
whom  they  expect  in  the  next  life  the  reward  of  their  good,  or  the
punishment  of  their  evil  deeds.  Neither  do  they  publiclyjoin  in  any
act  of  divine  worship." Ribas  Triumphos,  &c.  p.  16.

Note  XXXV.  p.  57.

The  people  of  Brazil  were  so  much  affrighted  by  thunder,  which
is  frequent  and  awful  in  their  country,  as  well  as  in  other  parts  of
the  torrid  zone,  that  it  was  not  only  the  object  of  religious  reve-
rence; butthemost  expressive  name  in  their  language  for  the  Deity,
was  Toupan,  the  same  by  which  they  distinguished  thunder.  Piso
de  Medec.  Brasil,  p.  8. Nieuhoff.  Church.  Coll.  ii.  p.  132.

Note  XXXVI.  p.  63.

By  the  account  which  M.  Dumont,  an  eye-witness,  gives  of  the
funeral  of  the  great  chief  of  the  Natchez,  it  appears,  that  the  feel-

860  NOTES  AND

ings  of  the  persons  who  suffered  on  that  occasion  were  very  different.
Some  solicited  the  honour  with  eagerness;  others  laboured  to  avoid
their  doom,  and  several  saved  their  lives  by  flying  to  the  woods.  As
the  Indian  Brahmins  give  an  intoxicating  draught  to  the  women,
who  are  to  be  burnt  together  with  the  bodies  of  their  husbands,
which  renders  them  insensible  of  their  approaching  fate,  the  Natchez
obliged  their  victims  to  swallow  several  large  pills  of  tobacco,  which
produce  a  similar  effect. Mem.  de  Louis,  i.  227.

Note  XXXVII.  p.  69.

Ok  some  occasions,  particularly  in  dances  instituted  for  the  reco-
very of  persons  who  are  indisposed,  they  are  extremely  licentious
and  indecent.  De  la  Potherie  Hist.  &c.  ii.  p.  42.  Charlev.  N.  Fr.
iii.  p.  319.  But  the  nature  of  their  dances  is  commonly  such  as  I
have  described.

Note  XXXVIII.  p.  71.

The  Othamacoas,  a  tribe  seated  on  the  banks  of  the  Orinoco,  em-
ploy for  the  same  purpose  a  composition,  which  they  call  Yupa.  It
is  formed  of  the  seeds  of  an  unknown  plant  reduced  to  powder,  and
certain  shells  burnt  and  pulverised.  The  effects  of  this  when  drawn
up  into  the  nostrils,  are  so  violent,  that  they  resemble  madness  rather
than  intoxication. Gumilla,  i.  286.

Note  XXXIX.  p.  73.

Though  this  observation  holds  true  among  the  greater  part  of
the  southern  tribes,  there  are  some  in  which  the  intemperance  of  the
women  is  as  excessive  as  that  of  the  men.  Bancroft's  Nat.  Hist,
of  Guiana,  p.  275.

Note  XL.  p.  77.

Even  in  the  most  intelligent  writers  concerning  the  manners  of
the  Americans,  one  meets  with  inconsistent  and  inexplicable  circum-
stances. The  Jesuit  Charlevoix,  who,  in  consequence  of  the  con-
troversy between  his  order  and  that  of  the  Franciscans,  with  respect
to  the  talents  and  abilities  of  the  North  Americans,  is  disposed  to
represent  their  intellectual  as  well  as  moral  qualities  in  the  most  fa-
vourable light,  asserts,  that  they  are  engaged  in  continual  negotia-
tions with  their  neighbours,  and  conduct  these  with  the  most  refined
address. U  the  same  time  he  adds,  "  that  it  behoves  their  envoys

ILLUSTRATIONS.  361

plenipotentiaries  to  exert  their  abilities  and  eloquence,  for  if  the
terms  which  they  offer  are  not  accepted  of,  they  had  need  to  stand
on  their  guard.  It  frequently  happens,  that  a  blow  with  the  hatchet
is  the  only  return  given  to  their  propositions.  The  envoy  is  not  out
of  danger,  even  if  he  is  so  fortunate  as  to  avoid  the  stroke ;  he  may
expect  to  be  pursued,  and  if  taken,  to  be  burnt."  Hist.  N.  Fr.  iii.
251.  What  occurs,  vol.  ii.  p.  277,  concerning  the  manner  in  which
the  Tlascalans  treated  the  ambassadors  from  Zempoalla,  corre-
sponds with  the  fact  related  by  Charlevoix.  Men  capable  of  such
acts  of  violence,  seem  to  be  unacquainted  with  the  first  principles
upon  which  the  intercourse  between  nations  is  founded ;  and  instead
of  the  perpetual  negotiations  which  Charlevoix  mentions,  it  seems
almost  impossible  that  there  should  be  any  correspondence  whatever
among  them.

Note  XLI.  p.  79.

It  is  a  remark  of  Tacitus  concerning  the  Germans,  "  Gaudent
muneribus,  sed  nee  data  imputant,  nee  acceptis  obligantur."  C.  21.
An  author  who  had  a  good  opportunity  of  observing  the  principle
which  leads  savages  neither  to  express  gratitude  for  favours  which  they
had  received,  nor  to  expect  any  return  for  such  as  they  bestowed,
thus  explains  their  ideas  :  "  If,  say  they,  you  give  me  this,  it  is  be-
cause you  have  no  need  of  it  yourself ;  and  as  for  me,  I  never  part
with  that  which  I  think  necessary  to  me."  Memoir  surle  Galibis;
Hist,  des  Plantes  de  la  Guiane  Franchise  par  M.  Aublet,  torn.  ii.
p.  110.

Note  XLII.  p.  90.

And.  Bernaldes,  the  contemporary  and  friend  of  Columbus,
has  preserved  some  circumstances  concerning  the  bravery  of  the
Caribbees,  which  are  not  .mentioned  by"  Don  Ferdinand  Columbus,
or  the  other  historians  of  that  period,  whose  works  have  been  pub-
lished. A  Caribbean  canoe,  with  four  men,  two  women,  and  a  boy,
fell  in  unexpectedly  with  the  fleet  of  Columbus  in  his  second  voy-
age, as  it  was  steering  through  their  islands.  At  first  they  were
struck  almost  stupid  with  astonishment  at  such  a  strange  spectacle,
and  hardly  moved  from  the  spot  for  above  an  hour.  A  Spanish  bark,
with  twenty-five  men,  advanced  towards  them,  and  the  fleet  gra-
dually surrounded  them,  so  as  to  cut  off  their  communication  with
the  shore.  "  When  they  saw  that  it  was  impossible  to  escape  (says
the  historian),  they  seized  their  arms  with  undaunted  resolution,  and
began  the  attack.  I  use  the  expression,  with  undaunted  resolution,
for  they  were  few,  and  beheld  a  vast  number  ready  to  assault  them.

362  NOTES AND

They  wounded  several  of  the  Spaniards,  although  they  had  targets,
as  well  as  other  defensive  armour  ;  and  even  after  their  canoe  was
overset,  it  was  with  no  little  difficulty  and  danger  that  part  of  them
were  taken,  as  they  continued  to  defend  themselves,  and  to  use  their
bows  with  great  dexterity  while  swimming  in  the  sea."  Hist,  de  D.
Fern,  y  Ysab.  MSS.  c.  119.

Note  XL1II.  p.  90.

A  probable  conjecture  maybe  formed  with  respect  to  the  cause
of  this  distinction  in  character  between  the  Caribbees  and  the  inha-
bitants of  the  larger  islands. The  former  appear  manifestly  to  be
a  separate  race.  Their  language  is  totally  different  from  that  of  their
neighbours  in  the  large  islands. They  themselves  have  a  tradition,
that  their  ancestors  came  originally  from  some  part  of  the  continent,
and  having  conquered  and  exterminated  the  ancient  inhabitants,
took  possession  of  their  lands,  and  of  their  women.  Rochefort,  384.
Tertre,  360. Hence  they  call  themselves  Banarec,  which  signifies
a  man  come  from  beyond  sea. Labat.  vi.  131. Accordingly,  the
Caribbees  still  use  two  distinct  languages,  one  peculiar  to  the  men,
and  the  other  to  the  women.  Tertre,  361. The  language  of  the  men
has  nothing  common  with  that  spoken  in  the  large  islands. The
dialect  of  the  women  considerably  resembles  it. Labat.  129. This
strongly  confirms  the  tradition  which  I  have  mentioned. The  Ca-
ribbees themselves  imagine,  that  they  were  a  colony  from  the  Ga-
libis,  a  powerful  nation  of  Guiana,  in  South  America. Tertre,  361.
Rochefort,  348. But  as  their  fierce  manners  approach  nearer  to
those  of  the people  in  the  northern  continent,  than to  those of
the  natives  of  South  America ;  and  as  their  language  has  likewise
some  affinity  to  that  spoken  in  Florida,  their  origin  should  be  de-
duced rather  from  the  former  than  from  the  latter. Labat.  128,  &c.
Herrera,  dec.  i.  lib.  ix.  c.  4. In  their  wars,  they  still  observe  their
ancient  practice  of  destroying  all  the  males,  and  preserving the
women  either  for  servitude  or  for  breeding;.

-

Note  XLIV. p.  92.

Our  knowledge  of  the  events  which  happened  in  the  conquest
of  New  Spain,  is  derived  from  sources  of  information  more  original
and  authentic  than  that  of  any  transaction  in  the  history  of  America.
The  letters  of  Cortes  to  the  emperor  Charles  V.  are  an  historical
monument,  not  only  first  in  order  of  time,  but  of  the  greatest
authenticity  and  value.  As  Cortes  early  assumed  a  command
independent  of  Velasquez,  it  became  necessary  to  convey  such  an
account  of  his  operations  to  Madrid,  as  might  procure  him  the
approbation  of  his  sovereign.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  363

The  first  of  his  dispatches  has  never  been  made  public.  It  was
sent  from  Vera  Cruz,  July  16th,  1519.  As  I  imagined  that  it
might  not  reach  the  emperor,  until  he  arrived  in  Germany,  for
which  he  set  out  early  in  the  year  1520,  in  order  to  receive  the
imperial  crown  ;  I  made  diligent  search  for  a  copy  of  this  dispatch,
both  in  Spain  and  in  Germany,  but  without  success.  This,  however,
is  of  less  consequence,  as  it  could  not  contain  any  thing  very
material,  being  written  so  soon  after  Cortes  arrived  in  New  Spain.
But,  in  searching  for  the  letter  from  Cortes,  a  copy  of  one  from
the  colony  of  Vera  Cruz  to  the  emperor  has  been  discovered  in  the
imperial  library  at  Vienna.  Of  this  I  have  given  some  account  in
its  proper  place,  p.  288  of  this  volume.  The  second  dispatch,
dated  October  30th,  1520,  was  published  at  Seville,  a.  d.  1522,
and  the  third  and  fourth  soon  after  they  were  received.  A  Latin
translation  of  them  appeared  in  Germany,  a.  d.  1532.  Ramusio
soon  after  made  them  more  generally  known,  by  inserting  them  in
his  valuable  collection.  They  contain  a  regular  and  minute  history
of  the  expedition,  with  many  curious  particulars  concerning  the
policy  and  manners  of  the  Mexicans.  The  work  does  honour  to
Cortes ;  the  style  is  simple  and  perspicuous ;  but  as  it  was  mani-
festly his  interest  to  represent  his  own  actions  in  the  fairest  light,
his  victories  are  probably  exaggerated,  his  losses  diminished,  and
his  acts  of  rigour  and  violence  softened.

The  next  in  order  is  the  Cronica  de  la  Nueva  Espagna,  by
Francisco  Lopez  de  Gomara,  published  a.  d.  1554.  Gomara's
historical  merit  is  considerable.  His  mode  of  narration  is  clear,
flowing,  always  agreeable,  and  sometimes  elegant.  But  he  is  fre-
quently inaccurate  and  credulous  ;  and  as  he  was  the  domestic
chaplain  of  Cortes,  after  his  return  from  New  Spain,  and  probably
composed  his  work  at  his  desire,  it  is  manifest  that  he  labours  to
magnify  the  merit  of  his  hero,  and  to  conceal  or  extenuate  such
transactions  as  were  unfavourable  to  his  character.  Of  this  Herrera
accuses  him  in  one  instance,  Dec.  ii.  lib.  iii.  c.  2,  and  it  is  not  once
only  that  this  is  conspicuous.  He  writes,  however,  with  so  much
freedom  concerning  several  measures  of  the  Spanish  court,  that  the
copies  both  of  his  Historia  de  las  Indias,  and  of  his  Cronica,  were
called  in  by  a  decree  of  the  council  of  the  Indies,  and  they  were
long  considered  as  prohibited  books  in  Spain ;  it  is  only  of  late
that  licence  to  print  them  has  been  granted. Pinelo  Biblioth.  589.

The  Chronicle  of  Gomara  induced  Bernal  Diaz  del  Castillo  to
compose  his  Historia  Verdadera  de  la  Conquista  de  la  Nueva
Espagna.  He  had  been  an  adventurer  in  each  of  the  expeditions
to  New  Spain,  and  was  the  companion  of  Cortes  in  all  his  battles
and  perils.  When  he  found  that  neither  he  himself,  nor  many  of
his  fellow-soldiers,  were  once  mentioned  by  Gomara,  but  that  the

364  NOTES AND

fame  of  their  exploits  was  ascribed  to  Cortes,  the  gallant  veteran
laid  hold  of  his  pen  with  indignation,  and  composed  his  true  history.
It  contains  a  prolix,  minute,  confused  narrative  of  all  Cortes's
operations,  in  such  a  rude,  vulgar  style,  as  might,  be  expected  from
an  illiterate  soldier.  But  as  he  relates  transactions  of  which  he
was  witness,  and  in  which  he  performed  a  considerable  part,  his
account  bears  all  the  marks  of  authenticity,  and  is  accompanied
with  such  a  pleasant  naivete,  with  such  interesting  details,  with
such  amusing  vanity,  and  yet  so  pardonable  in  an  old  soldier,  who
had  been  (as  he  boasts)  in  a  hundred  and  nineteen  battles,  as
renders  his  book  one  of  the  most  singular  that  is  to  be  found  in
any  language.

Pet.  Martyr  ab  Angleria,  in  a  treatise  De  Insulis  nuper  inventis,
added  to  his  Decades  de  Rebus  Oceanicis  et  Novo  Orbe,  gives
some  account  of  Cortes's  expedition.  But  he  proceeds  no  farther
than  to  relate  what  happened  after  his  first  landing.  This  work,
which  is  brief  and  slight,  seems  to  contain  the  information  trans-
mitted by  Cortes  in  his  first  dispatches,  embellished  with  several
particulars  communicated  to  the  author  by  the  officers  who  brought
the  letters  from  Cortes.

But  the  book  to  which  the  greater  part  of  modern  historians
have  had  recourse  for  information  concerning  the  conquest  of  New
Spain,  is  Historia  de  la  Conquista  de  Mexico,  por  D.  Antonio  de
Solis,  first  published  a.  n.  1684.  I  know  no  author,  in  any  lan-
guage, whose  literary  fame  has  risen  so  far  beyond  his  real  merit.
De  Solis  is  reckoned  by  his  countrymen  one  of  the  purest  writers
in  the  Castilian  tongue  ;  and  if  a  foreigner  may  venture  to  give  his
opinion  concerning  a  matter  of  which  Spaniards  alone  are  qualified
to  judge,  he  is  entitled  to  that  praise.  But  though  his  language
be  correct,  his  taste  in  composition  is  far  from  being  just.  His
periods  are  so  much  laboured,  as  to  be  often  stiff,  and  sometimes
tumid  ;  the  figures  which  he  employs  by  way  of  ornament  are  fre-
quently trite  or  improper,  and  his  observations  superficial.  These
blemishes,  however,  might  easily  be  overlooked,  if  he  were  not
defective  with  respect  to  all  the  great  qualities  of  an  historian.
Destitute  of  that  patient  industry  in  research  which  conducts  to  the
knowledge  of  truth  ;  a  stranger  to  that  impartiality  which  weighs
evidence  with  cool  attention ;  and  ever  eager  to  establish  his  fa-
vourite system  of  exalting  the  character  of  Cortes  into  that  of  a
perfect  hero,  exempt  from  error,  and  adorned  with  every  virtue ;
lie  is  less  solicitous  to  discover  what  was  true,  than  to  relate  what
might  appear  splendid.  When  he  attempts  any  critical  discussion,
his  reasonings  arc  fallacious,  and  founded  upon  an  imperfect  view
of  facts.  Though  he  sometimes  quotes  the  dispatcJies  of  Cortes,
he  seems  not  to  have  consulted  them  ; and  though  he  sets  out  with

ILLUSTRATIONS.  3G5

some  censure  on  Gomara,  he  frequently  prefers  his  authority — the
most  doubtful  of  any — to  that  of  the  other  contemporary  historians.
But  of  all  the  Spanish  writers,  Herrera  furnishes  the  fullest  and
most  accurate  information  concerning  the  conquest  of  Mexico,  as
well  as  every  other  transaction  of  America.  The  industry  and
attention  with  which  he  consulted  not  only  the  books,  but  the  ori-
ginal papers  and  public  records,  which  tended  to  throw  any  light
upon  the  subject  of  his  inquiries,  were  so  great,  and  he  usually  judges
of  the  evidence  before  him  with  so  much  impartiality  and  candour,
that  his  Decads  may  be  ranked  among  the  most  judicious  and
useful  historical  collections.  If,  by  attempting  to  relate  the  various
occurrences  in  the  New  World  in  a  strict  chronological  order,  the
arrangements  of  events  in  his  work  had  not  been  rendered  so
perplexed,  disconnected,  and  obscure,  that  it  is  an  unpleasant  task
to  collect  from  different  parts  of  his  book,  and  piece  together  the
detached  shreds  of  a  story,  he  might  justly  have  been  ranked  among
the  most  eminent  historians  of  his  country.  He  gives  an  account
of  the  materials  from  which  he  composed  his  work,  Dec.  vi.
lib.  iii.  c.  19.

Note  XLV.  p.  94.

Cortes  purposed  to  have  gone  in  the  train  of  Ovando  when
he  set  out  for  his  government  in  the  year  1502,  but  was  detained
by  an  accident.  As  he  was  attempting  in  a  dark  night  to  scramble
up  to  the  window  of  a  lady's  bedchamber,  with  whom  he  carried  on
an  intrigue,  an  old  wall,  on  the  top  of  which  he  had  mounted,
gave  way,  and  he  was  so  much  bruised  by  the  fall  as  to  be  unfit
for  the  voyage. Gomara,  Cronica  de  la  Nueva  Espagna,  cap:  1 .

Note  XLVI.  p.  96.

Cortes  had  two  thousand  pesos  in  the  hands  of  Andrew  Duero,
and  he  borrowed  four  thousand.  These  sums  are  about  equal  in
value  to  fifteen  hundred  pounds  sterling  ;  but  as  the  price  of  every
thing  was  extremely  high  in  America,  they  made  but  a  scanty  stock
when  applied  towards  the  equipment  of  a  military  expedition.
Herrera,  dec.  ii.  lib.  iii.  c.  2. B.  Diaz,  c.  20.

Note  XLVII.  p.  100.

The  names  of  those  gallant  officers,  which  will  often  occur  in
the  subsequent  story,  were  Juan  Velasquez  de  Leon,  Alonso  Her-
nandez Portocarrero,  Francisco  de  Montejo,  Christoval  de  Olid,
Juan de Escalante, Francisco  de  Morla, Pedro  de  Alvarado,

,'3u'<>  NOTES AND

Francisco  de  Salceda,  Juan  de  Escobar,  Gines  de  Nortcs.  Cortes
himself  commanded  the  capitana,  or  admiral.  Francisco  de  Orozco,
an  officer  formed  in  the  wars  of  Italy,  had  the  command  of  the
artillery. The  experienced  Alaminos  acted  as  chief  pilot.

NoteXLVIII.  p.  101.

Iy  those  different  conflicts,  the  Spaniards  lost  only  two  men,
but  had  a  considerable  number  wounded.  Though  there  be  no
occasion  for  recourse  to  any  supernatural  cause  to  account  either
for  the  greatness  of  their  victories,  or  the  smallness  of  their  loss,
the  Spanish  historians  fail  not  to  ascribe  both  to  the  patronage  of
St.  Jago,  the  tutelar  saint  of  their  country,  who,  as  they  relate,
fought  at  the  head  of  their  countrymen,  and  by  his  prowess  gave  a
turn  to  the  fate  of  the  battle.  Gomara  is  the  first  who  mentions  this
apparition  of  St.  James.  It  is  amusing  to  observe  the  embarrass-
ment of  B.  Diaz  del  Castillo,  occasioned  by  the  struggle  between  his
superstition  and  his  veracity.  The  former  disposed  him  to  believe
this  miracle,  the  latter  restrained  him  from  attesting  it.  "  I  acknow-
ledge," says  he,  "  that  all  our  exploits  and  victories  are  owing  to
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  in  this  battle  there  was  such  a
number  of  Indians  to  every  one  of  us,  that  if  each  had  thrown  a
handful  of  earth  they  might  have  buried  us,  if  by  the  great  mercy
of  God  we  had  not  been  protected.  It  may  be  that  the  person
whom  Gomara  mentions  as  having  appeared  on  a  mottled  gray
horse,  was  the  glorious  apostle  Signor  San  Jago,  or  Signor  San
Pedro,  and  that  I,  as  being  a  sinner,  was  not  worthy  to  see  him.
This  I  know,  that  I  saw  Francisca  de  Morla  on  such  a  horse,  but
as  an  unworthy  transgressor,  did  not  deserve  to  see  any  of  the
holy  apostles.  It  may  have  been  the  will  of  God,  that  it  was  so
as  Gomara  relates,  but  until  I  read  his  Chronicle  I  never  heard
among  any  of  the  conquerors  that  such  a  thing  had  happened."
Cap.  34.

Note  XLIX.  p.  107.

Several  Spanish  historians  relate  this  occurrence  in  such  terms
as  if  they  wished  it  should  be  believed,  that  the  Indians,  loaded
with  the  presents,  had  carried  them  from  the  capital  in  the  same
short  space  of  time  that  the  couriers  performed  that  journey.  This
is  incredible,  and  Gomara  mentions  a  circumstance  which  shews,
that  nothing  extraordinary  happened  on  this  occasion.  This  rich
present  had  been  prepared  for  Grijalva,  when  he  touched  at  the
same  place  some  months  before,  and  was  now  ready  to  be  delivered,
as  soon  as  Montezuma  sent  orders  for  that  purpose.  Gomara
( 'hron.  c.  xxvii.  p.  28.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  367

According  to  13.  Diaz  del  Castillo,  the  value  of  the  silvev-plate
representing  the  moon,  was  alone  above  twenty  thousand  pesos,
about  five  thousand  pounds  sterling.

NoteL.  p.  112.

This  private  traffic  was  directly  contrary  to  the  instructions  of
Velasquez,  who  enjoined,  that  whatever  was  acquired  by  trade  should
be  thrown  into  the  common  stock.  But  it  appears,  that  the  soldiers
had  each  a  private  assortment  of  toys,  and  other  goods  proper  for
the  Indian  trade,  and  Cortes  gained  their  favour  by  encouraging
this  underhand  barter. B.  Diaz,  c.  41.

Note  LI.  p.  123.

Gomara  has  published  a  catalogue  of  the  various  articles  of
which  this  present  consisted.  Cron.  c.  49.  P.  Martyr  ab  Angleria,
who  saw  them  after  they  were  brought  to  Spain,  and  who  seems
to  have  examined  them  with  great  attention,  gives  a  description  of
each,  which  is  curious,  as  it  conveys  some  idea  of  the  progress
which  the  Mexicans  had  made  in  several  arts  of  elegance.  De
Insulis  nuper  inventis  Liber,  p.  354,  &c.

Note  LII.  p.  128.

There  is  no  circumstance  in  the  history  of  the  conquest  of
America  which  is  more  questionable  than  the  account  of  the
numerous  armies  brought  into  the  field  against  the  Spaniards.  As
the  war  with  the  republic  of  Tlascala,  though  of  short  duration,
was  one  of  the  most  considerable  which  the  Spaniards  waged  in
America,  the  account  given  of  the  Tlascalan  armies  merits  some
attention.  The  only  authentic  information  concerning  this  is  de-
rived from  three  authors.  Cortes,  in  his  second  dispatch  to  the
emperor,  dated  at  Segura  de  la  Frontera,  October  30,  1520,  thus
estimates  the  number  of  their  troops;  in  the  first  battle  6000  ;  in
the  second  battle  100,000;  in  the  third  battle  150,000.  Relat.  ap.
Ramus,  hi.  228.  Bernal  Diaz  del  Castillo,  who  was  an  eye-witness,
and  engaged  in  all  the  actions  of  this  war,  thus  reckons  their  num-
bers ;  in  the  first  battle  3000,  p.  43 ;  in  the  second  battle  6000,
ibid.  ;  in  the  third  battle  50,000,  p.  45.  Gomara,  who  was
Cortes's  chaplain  after  his  return  to  Spain,  and  published  his
Cronka  in  1552,  follows  the  computation  of  Cortes,  except  in  the
second  battle,  where  he  reckons  the  Tlascalans  at  80,000,  p.  49.
It  was  manifestly  the  interest  of  Cortes  to  magnify  his  own  dangers
and  exploits. For  it  was  only  by  the  merit  of  extraordinary  ser-

3GB  NOTES AND

vices,  that  he  could  hope  to  atone  for  his  irregular  conduct,  in
assuming  an  independent  command.  Bern.  Diaz,  though  abun-
dantly disposed  to  place  his  own  prowess,  and  that  of  his  fellow-
conquerors,  in  the  most  advantageous  point  of  light,  had  not  the
same  temptation  to  exaggerate  ;  and  it  is  probable  that  his  account
of  the  numbers  approaches  nearer  to  the  truth.  The  assembling
of  an  army  of  150,000  men  requires  many  previous  arrangements,
and  such  provisions  for  their  subsistence  as  seems  to  be  beyond
the  foresight  of  Americans.  The  degree  of  cultivation  in  Tlascala
does  not  seem  to  have  been  so  great,  as  to  have  furnished  such  a
vast  army  with  provisions.  Though  this  province  was  so  much
better  cultivated  than  other  regions  of  New  Spain,  that  it  was
called  the  country  of  bread ;  yet  the  Spaniards  in  their  march  suf-
fered such  want,  that  they  were  obliged  to  subsist  upon  Tunas,  a
species  of  fruit  which  grows  wild  in  the  fields.  Hen-era,  Dec.  ii.
lib.  vi.  c.  5.  p.  182.

Note  LIII.  p.  132.

These  unhappy  victims  are  said  to  be  persons  of  distinction.
It  seems  improbable  that  so  great  a  number  as  fifty  should  be  em-
ployed as  spies.  So  many  prisoners  had  been  taken  and  dismissed,
and  the  Tlascalans  had  sent  so  many  messages  to  the  Spanish
quarters,  that  there  appears  to  be  no  reason  for  hazarding  the  lives
of  so  many  considerable  people,  in  order  to  procure  information
about  the  position  and  state  of  their  camp.  The  barbarous  man-
ner in  which  Cortes  treated  a  people  unacquainted  with  the  laws  of
war  established  among  polished  nations,  appears  so  shocking  to  the
later  Spanish  writers,  that  they  diminish  the  number  of  those  whom
he  punished  so  cruelly.  Herrera  says,  that  he  cut  off  the  hands  of
seven,  and  the  thumbs  of  some  more.  Dec.  ii.  lib.  ii.  c.  8.  De
Solis  relates,  that,  the  hands  of  fourteen  or  fifteen  were  cut  off,  and
the  thumbs  of  all  the  rest.  Lib.  ii.  c.  20.  But  Cortes  himself,
Relat.  p.  228.  b.  and  after  him  Gomara,  c.  48,  affirm,  that  the
hands  of  all  the  fifty  were  cut  off.

Note  LIV.  p.  134.

The  horses  were  objects  of  the  greatest  astonishment  to  all  the
people  of  New  Spain.  At  first  they  imagined  the  horse  and  his
rider,  like  the  Centaurs  of  the  ancients,  to  be  some  monstrous
animal  of  a  terrible  form  ;  and  supposing  that  their  food  was  the
same  as  that  of  men,  brought  flesh  and  bread  to  nourish  them.
Even  after  they  discovered  their  mistake,  they  believed  the  horses
devoured  men  in  battle,  and  when  they  neighed,  thought  that  they

ILLUSTRATIONS.  3(59

were  demanding  their  prey. It  was  not  the  interest  of  the  Spaniards
to  undeceive  them. Herrera,  dec.  ii.  lib.  vi.  c.  11.

Note  LV.  p.  139.

According  to  Bart,  de  las  Casas,  there  was  no  reason  for  this
massacre,  and  it  was  an  act  of  wanton  cruelty,  perpetrated  merely
to  strike  terror  into  the  people  of  New  Spain.  Relac.  de  la  De-
struyc.  p.  17.  &c.  But  the  zeal  of  Las  Casas  often  leads  him  to
exaggerate.  In  opposition  to  him,  Bern.  Diaz,  c.  83,  asserts,  that
the  first  missionaries  sent  into  New  Spain  by  the  emperor  made  a
judicial  inquiry  into  this  transaction  ;  and  having  examined  the
priests  and  elders  of  Cholula,  found  that  there  was  a  real  con-
spiracy to  cut  off  the  Spaniards,  and  that  the  account  given  by
Cortes  was  exactly  true.  As  it  was  the  object  of  Cortes  at  that
time,  and  manifestly  his  interest,  to  gain  the  good-will  of  Mon-
tezuma, it  is  improbable  that  he  should  have  taken  a  step  which
tended  so  visibly  to  alienate  him  from  the  Spaniards,  if  he  had  not
believed  it  to  be  necessary  for  his  own  preservation.  At  the  same
lime  the  Spaniards  who  served  in  America  had  such  contempt  for
the  natives,  and  thought  them  so  little  entitled  to  the  common  rights
of  men,  that  Cortes  might  hold  the  Cholulans  to  be  guilty  upon
slight  and  imperfect  evidence.  The  severity  of  the  punishment  was
certainly  excessive  and  atrocious.

Note  LVI.  p.  140.

This  description  is  taken  almost  literally  from  Bernal  Diaz  del
Castillo,  who  was  so  unacquainted  with  the  art  of  composition,  as
to  be  incapable  of  embellishing  his  narrative.  He  relates  in  a
simple  and  rude  style  what  passed  in  his  own  mind,  and  that  of  his
fellow-soldiers,  on  that  occasion ;  "  and  let  it  not  be  thought
strange,"  says  he,  "  that  I  should  write  in  this  manner  of  what  then
happened,  for  it  ought  to  be  considered,  that  it  is  one  thing  to  re-
late, another  to  have  beheld  things  that  were  never  before  seen,  or
heard,  or  spoken  of  among  men." Cap.  86.  p.  64.  b.

Note  LVII.  p.  150.

B.  Diaz  del  Castillo  gives  us  some  idea  of  the  fatigue  and
hardships  they  underwent  in  performing  this,  and  other  parts  of
duty.  During  the  nine  months  that  they  remained  in  Mexico,
every  man,  without  any  distinction  between  officers  and  soldiers,
slept  on  his  arms  in  his  quilted  jacket  and  gorget.  They  lay  on
mats,  or  straw  spread  on  the  floor,  and  each  was  obliged  to  hold

VOL.  VII.  2  B

370  NOTES  AND

himself  as  alert  as  if  he  had  heeu  on  guard.  "  This,"  adds  he,
"  became  so  habitual  to  me,  that  even  now  in  my  advanced  age,  I
always  sleep  in  mv  clothes,  and  never  in  any  bed.  When  I  visit
my  Encomienda,  I  reckon  it  suitable  to  my  rank,  to  have  a  bed
carried  along  with  my  other  baggage,  but  1  never  go  into  it;  but,
according  to  custom,  1  lie  in  my  clothes,  and  walk  frequently
during  the  night  into  the  open  air,  to  view  the  stars,  as  I  was  wont
when  in  service." Cap.  108.

Note  LVIII.  p.  153.

Cortes  himself,  in  his  second  dispatch  to  the  emperor,  does
not  explain  the  motives  which  induced  him  either  to  condemn
Qualpopoca  to  the  flames,  or  to  put  Montezuma  in  irons.  Ramus,
iii.  236.  B.  Diaz  is  silent  with  respect  to  his  reasons  for  the
former ;  and  the  only  cause  he  assigns  for  the  latter  was,  that  he
might  meet  with  no  interruption  in  executing  the  sentence  pro-
nounced against  Qualpopoca,  c.  xcv.  p.  75.  But  as  Montezuma
was  his  prisoner,  and  absolutely  in  his  power,  he  had  no  reason  to
dread  him,  and  the  insult  offered  to  that  monarch  could  have  no
effect  but  to  irritate  him  unnecessarily.  Gomara  supposes,  that
Cortes  had  no  other  object  than  to  occupy  Montezuma  with  his  own
distress  and  sufferings,  that  he  might  give  less  attention  to  what
befel  Qualpopoca.  Cron.c.  89.  Herrera  adopts  the  same  opinion.
Dec.  ii.  lib.  viii.  c.  9.  But  it  seems  an  odd  expedient,  in  order  to
make  a  person  bear  one  injury,  to  load  him  with  another  that  is
greater.  De  Solis  imagines,  that  Cortes  had  nothing  else  in  view
than  to.  intimidate  Montezuma,  so  that  he  might  make  no  attempt
to  rescue  the  victims  from  their  fate  ;  but  the  spirit  of  that  monarch
was  so  submissive,  and  he  had  so  tamely  given  up  the  prisoners  to
the  disposal  of  Cortes,  that  he  had  no  cause  to  apprehend  any
opposition  from  him.  If  the  explanation  which  I  have  attempted
to  give  of  Cortes's  proceedings  on  this  occasion  be  not  admitted,  it
appears  to  me,  that  they  must  be  reckoned  among  the  wanton  and
barbarous  acts  of  oppression  which  occur  too  often  in  the  history
of  the  conquest  of  America.

NoteLIX.  p.  156.

De  Solis  asserts,  lib.  iv.  c.  3,  that  the  proposition  of  doing
homage  to  the  king  of  Spain  came  from  Montezuma  himself,  and
was  made  in  order  to  induce  the  Spaniards  to  depart  out  of  his
dominions.  He  describes  his  conduct  on  this  occasion  as  if  it  had
been  founded  upon  a  scheme  of  profound  policy,  and  executed  with
such  refined  address  as  to  deceive  Cortes  himself. But  there  is  no

ILLUSTRATIONS.  371

hint  or  circumstance  in  the  contemporary  historians,  Cortes,  Diaz,
or  Gomara,  to  justify  this  theory.  Montezuma,  on  other  occasions,
discovered  no  such  extent  of  art  and  abilities.  The  anguish  which
he  felt  in  performing  this  humbling  ceremony  is  natural,  if  we  sup-
pose it  to  have  been  involuntary.  But,  according  to  the  theory  of
De  Solis,  which  supposes  that  Montezuma  was  executing  what  he
himself  had  proposed,  to  have  assumed  an  appearance  of  sorrow,
would  have  been  preposterous  and  inconsistent  with  his  own  design
of  deceiving  the  Spaniards.

Note  LX.  p.  159.

In  several  of  the  provinces,  the  Spaniards,  with  all  their  industry
and  influence,  could  collect  no  gold.  In  others  they  procured  only
a  few  trinkets  of  small  value.  Montezuma  assured  Cortes,  that  the
present  which  he  offered  to  the  king  of  Castile,  after  doing  homage,
consisted  of  all  the  treasure  amassed  by  his  father;  and  told  him,
that  he  had  already  distributed  the  rest  of  his  gold  and  jewels
among  the  Spaniards.  B.  Diaz,  c.  104.  Gomara  relates,  that  all
the  silver  collected  amounted  to  500  marks.  Cron.  c.  93.  This
agrees  with  the  account  given  by  Cortes,  that  the  royal  fifth  of
silver  was  100  marks.  Relat.  239.  B.  So  that  the  sum  total  of
silver  was  only  4000  ounces,  at  the  rate  of  eight  ounces  a  mark,
which  demonstrates  the  proportion  of  silver  to  gold  to  have  been
exceedingly  small.

Note  LXI.  p.  160.

De  Solis,  lib.  iv.  c.  1,  calls  in  question  the  truth  of  this
transaction,  from  no  better  reason  than  that  it  was  inconsistent
with  that  prudence  which  distinguishes  the  character  of  Cortes.
But  he  ought  to  have  recollected  the  impetuosity  of  his  zeal
at  Tlascala,  which  was  no  less  imprudent.  He  asserts,  that  the
evidence  for  it  rests  upon  the  testimony  of  B.  Diaz  del  Castillo,  of
Gomara,  and  of  Herrera.  They  all  concur,  indeed,  in  mentioning
this  inconsiderate  step  which  Cortes  took ;  and  they  had  good
reason  to  do  so,  for  Cortes  himself  relates  this  exploit  in  his  second
dispatch  to  the  emperor,  and  seems  to  glory  in  it.  Cort.  Relat.
Ramus,  iii.  140.  D.  This  is  one  instance,  among  many,  ofDe
Solis's  having  consulted  with  little  attention  the  letters  of  Cortes  to
Charles  V.,  from  which  the  most  authentic  information  with  respect
to  his  operations  must  be  derived.

Note  LXII.  p.  163.

Herrera  and  De  Solis  suppose  that  Valasquez  was  encouraged
to  equip  this  armament  against  Cortes  by  the  accounts  which  he

2b2

37-2  NOTES AND

received  from  Spain  concerning  the  reception  of  the  agents  sent  by
the  colony  of  Vera  Cruz,  and  the  warmth with which Fonseca
bishop  of  Burgos  had  espoused  his  interest,  and  condemned  the
proceedings  of  Cortes. Herrera,  dec.  ii.  lib.  ix.  c.  18. De  Sohs,
lib.  iv.  c.  5. But  the  chronological  order  of  events  refutes  this
supposition. Portocarrero  and Montejo sailed from  Vera Cruz,
July  26,  1519. Herrera,  dec.  ii.  lib.  v.  c.  4. They  landed  at  St.
Lucar in  October,  according  to  Herrera,  ibid. But  P.  Martyr,
who  attended  the  court  at  that  time,  and  communicated  every  oc-
currence of  moment  to  his  correspondents  day  by  day,  mentions
the  arrival  of  these  agents  for  the  first  time  in  December,  and
speaks  of  it  as  a  recent  event. Epist.  650. All  the  historians
agree,  that  the  agents  of  Cortes  had  their  first  audience  of  the
emperor  at  Tordesillas,  when  he  went  to  that  town to  visit  his
mother  in  his  way  to  St.  Jago  de  Compostella. Herrera,  dec.  ii.
lib.  v.  c.  4. De  Solis,  lib.  iv.  c.  5. But  the  emperor  set  out  from
Valladolid  for  Tordesillas  on  the  11th  of  March,  1520;  and  P.
Martyr  mentions  his  having  seen  at  that  time  the  presents  made  to
Charles. Epist.  1665. The  armament  under  Narvaez  sailed  from
Cuba  in  April,  1520. It  is  manifest,  then,  that  Velasquez  could
not  receive  any  account  of  what  passed  in  this  interview  at  Torde-
sillas, previous  to  his  hostile  preparations  against  Cortes. His  real
motives  seem  to  be  those  which  I  have  mentioned. The  patent
appointing him  Adclantado of New  Spain,  with such extensive
powers,  bears  date  November  13.  1519. Herrera, dec.  ii.  lib.  hi.
c.  11. He  might  receive  it  about  the  beginning  of  January. Go-
mara  takes  notice,  that  as  soon  as  this  patent  was  delivered  to  him,
he  began  to  equip  a  fleet  and  levy  forces. Chron.  c.  96.

Note  LXIII.  p.  165.

De  Solis  contends,  that  as  Narvaez  had  no  interpreters,  he  could
hold  no  intercourse  with  the  people  of  the  provinces,  nor  converse
with  them  in  any  way  but  by  signs,  and  that  it  was  equally  impos-
sible for  him  to  carry  on  any  communication  with  Montezuma.
Liv.  iv.  c.  7.  But  it  is  upon  the  authority  of  Cortes  himself,  that  I
relate  all  the  particulars  of  Narvaez's  correspondence  both  with
Montezuma  and  with  his  subjects  in  the  maritime  provinces.  Relat.
Ramus,  mil.  244,  A.  C.  Cortes  affirms,  that  there  was  a  mode  of
intercourse  between  Narvaez  and  the  Mexicans,  but  does  not  ex-
plain how  it  was  carried  on.  Bernal  Diaz  supplies  this  defect,  and
informs  us,  that  the  three  deserters  who  joined  Narvaez  acted  as
interpreters,  having  acquired  a  competent  knowledge  of  the  lan-
guage, c.  110.  With  his  usual  minuteness,  he  mentions  their
names  and  characters,  and  relates,  in  chapter  122,  how  they  were

ILLUSTRATIONS.  373

punished  for  their  perfidy.  The  Spaniards  had  now  resided  above
a  year  among  the  Mexicans  ;  and  it  is  not  surprising,  that  several
among  them  should  have  made  some  proficiency  in  speaking  their
language.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  case.  Herrera,  dec.  2.
lib.  x.  c.  1.  Both  B.Diaz,  who  was  present,  and  Herrera,  the
most  accurate  and  best  informed  of  all  the  Spanish  writers,  agree
with  Cortes  in  his  account  of  the  secret  correspondence  carried  on
with  Montezuma.  Dec.  2.  lib.  x.  c.  18, 19.  De  Solis  seems  to
consider  it  as  a  discredit  to  Cortes, his  hero,  that  Montezuma  should
have  been  ready  to  engage  in  a  correspondence  with  Narvaez.  He
supposes  that  monarch  to  have  contracted  such  a  wonderful  affec-
tion for  the  Spaniards,  that  he  was  not  solicitous  to  be  delivered
from  them.  After  the  indignity  with  which  he  had  been  treated,
such  an  affection  is  incredible ;  and  even  De  Solis  is  obliged  to
acknowledge,  that  it  must  be  looked  upon  as  one  of  the  miracles
which  God  had  wrought  to  facilitate  the  conquest,  lib.  iv.  c.  7.
The  truth  is,  Montezuma,  however  much  overawed  by  his  dread  of
the  Spaniards,  was  extremely  impatient  to  recover  his  liberty.

Note  LXIV.  p.  178.

These  words  I  have  borrowed  from  the  anonymous  Account  of
the  European  Settlements  in  America,  published  by  Dodsley,  in
two  volumes  8vo. ;  a  work  of  so  much  merit,  that  I  should  think
there  is  hardly  any  writer  in  the  age  who  ought  to  be  ashamed  of
acknowledging  himself  to  be  the  author  of  it.

Note  LXV.  p.  184.

The  contemporary  historians  differ  considerably  with  respect  to
the  loss  of  the  Spaniards  on  this  occasion.  Cortes,  in  his  second
dispatch  to  the  emperor,  makes  the  number  only  150.  Relat.  ap.
Ramus,  iii.  p.  249.  A.  But  it  was  manifestly  his  interest,  at  that
juncture,  to  conceal  from  the  court  of  Spain  the  full  extent  of  the
loss  which  he  had  sustained.  De  Solis,  always  studious  to  dimi-
nish every  misfortune  that  befel  his  countrymen,  rates  their  loss  at
about  two  hundred  men.  Lib.  iv.  c.  19.  B.  Diaz  affirms,  that
they  lost  870  men,  and  that  only  440  escaped  from  Mexico,  c.  128.
p.  108.  B.  Palafox,  bishop  of  Los  Angeles,  who  seems  to  have
inquired  into  the  early  transactions  of  his  countrymen  in  New
Spain,  with  great  attention,  confirms  the  account  of  B.  Diaz,  with
respect  to  the  extent  of  their  loss.  Virtudes  del  Indio,  p.  22.  Go-
mara  states  their  loss  at  450  men.  Cron.  c.  109.  Some  months
afterward,  when  Cortes  had  received  several  reinforcements,  he
mustered  his  troops,  and  found  them  to  be  only  590. Relat.  ap.

374  NOTES AND

Ramus,  iii.  p.  255.  E.  Now,  as  Narvaez  brought  880  men  into
New  Spain,  and  about  400  of  Cortes's  soldiers  were  then  alive,  it
is  evident  that  his  loss,  in  the  retreat  from  Mexico,  must  have  been
much  more  considerable  than  what  he  mentions.  B.  Diaz,  solicit-
ous to  magnify  the  dangers  and  sufferings  to  which  he  and  his
fellow-conquerors  were  exposed,  may  have  exaggerated  their  loss  ;
but,  in  my  opinion,  it  cannot  well  be  estimated  at  less  than  600
men.

Note  LXVI.  p.  201.

Some  remains  of  this  great  work  are  still  visible,  and  the  spot
where  the  brigantines  were  built  and  launched,  is  still  pointed  out
to  strangers.  Torquemada  viewed  them.  Monarq.  Indiana,  vol.  i.
p.  531.

Note  LXVIL  p.  208.

The  station  of  Alvarado  on  the  causeway  of  Tacuba  was  the
nearest  to  the  city.  Cortes  observes,  that  there  they  could  dis-
tinctly observe  what  passed  when  their  countrymen  were  sacrificed.
Relat.  ap.  Ramus,  iii.  p.  273.  E.  B.  Diaz,  who  belonged  to  Alva-
rado's  division,  relates  what  he  beheld  with  his  own  eyes.  C.  152.
p.  148.b.  149.  a.  Like  a  man  whose  courage  was  so  clear  as  to  be
above  suspicion,  he  describes  with  his  usual  simplicity  the  impres-
sion which  this  spectacle  made  upon  him.  "  Before,"  says  he,
"  I  saw  the  breasts  of  my  companions  opened,  their  hearts  yet
fluttering,  offered  to  an  accursed  idol,  and  their  flesh  devoured  by
their  exulting  enemies  ;  I  was  accustomed  to  enter  a  battle  not  only
without  fear,  but  with  high  spirit.  But  from  that  time  I  never  ad-
vanced to  fight  the  Mexicans  without  a  secret  horror  and  anxiety ;
my  heart  trembled  at  the  thoughts  of  the  death  which  I  had  seen
them  suffer."  He  takes  care  to  add,  that  as  soon  as  the  combat
began,  his  terror  went  off;  and,  indeed,  his  adventurous  bravery
on  every  occasion  is  full  evidence  of  this. B.  Diaz,  c.  156.  p.  157.  a.

NoteLXVIII.  p.  213.

One  circumstance  in  this  siege  merits  particular  notice.  The
account  which  the  Spanish  writers  give  of  the  numerous  armies
employed  in  the  attack  or  defence  of  Mexico  seems  to  be  incre-
dible. According  to  Cortes  himself,  he  had  at  one  time  150,000
auxiliary  Indians  in  his  service.  Relat.  Ramus,  iii.  275.  E.  Go-
mara  asserts,  that  they  were  above  200,000.  Cron.  c.  136.  Herrera,
an  author  of  higher  authority,  says  they  were  about  200,000.
Dec.  3.  lib.  i.  c.  19. None  of  the  contemporary  writers ascertain

ILLUSTRATIONS.  375

explicitly  the  number  of  persons  in  Mexico  during  the  siege.  But
Cortes  on  several  occasions  mentions  the  number  of  Mexicans  who
were  slain,  or  who  perished  for  want  of  food  ;  and,  if  we  may  rely
on  those  circumstances,  it  is  probable  that  above  two  hundred  thou-
sand must  have  been  shut  up  in  the  town.  But  the  quantity  of
provisions  necessary  for  the  subsistence  of  such  vast  multitudes
assembled  in  one  place,  during  three  months,  is  so  great,  that  it
requires  so  much  foresight  and  arrangement  to  collect  these,  and
lay  them  up  in  magazines,  so  as  to  be  certain  of  a  regular  supply,
that  one  can  hardly  believe  that  this  could  be  accomplished  in  a
country  where  agriculture  was  so  imperfect  as  in  the  Mexican
empire,  where  there  were  no  tame  animals,  and  by  a  people  natu-
rally so  improvident,  and  so  incapable  of  executing  a  complicated
plan,  as  the  most  improved  Americans.  The  Spaniards  with  all
their  care  and  attention,  fared  very  poorly,  and  were  often  reduced
to  extreme  distress  for  want  of  provisions.  B.  Diaz,  p.  142.
Cortes  Relat.  271.  D.  Cortes  on  one  occasion  mentions  slightly
the  subsistence  of  his  army ;  and  after  acknowledging  that  they
were  often  in  great  want,  adds,  that  they  received  supplies  from
the  people  of  the  country,  offish,  and  of  some  fruit,  which  he  calls
the  cherries  of  the  country.  Ibid.  B.  Diaz  says,  that  they  had
cakes  of  maize,  and  serasas  de  la  tierra ;  and  when  the  season  of
these  was  over,  another  fruit,  which  he  calls  Tunas;  but  their
most  comfortable  subsistence  was  a  root  which  the  Indians  used
as  food,  to  which  he  gives  the  name  of  Quilites,  p.  142.  The
Indian  auxiliaries  had  one  means  of  subsistence  more  than  the
Spaniards.  They  fed  upon  the  bodies  of  the  Mexicans  whom  they
killed  in  battle.  Cort.  Relat.  176.  C.  B.Diaz  confirms  his  rela-
tion, and  adds,  that  when  the  Indians  returned  from  Mexico  to
their  own  country,  they  carried  with  them  large  quantities  of  the
flesh  of  the  Mexicans  salted  or  dried,  as  a  most  acceptable  present
to  their  friends,  that  they  might  have  the  pleasure  of  feeding  upon
the  bodies  of  their  enemies  in  their  festivals,  p.  157.  De  Solis,
who  seems  to  consider  it  as  an  imputation  of  discredit  to  his  coun-
trymen, that  they  should  act  in  concert  with  auxiliaries  who  fed
upon  human  flesh,  is  solicitous  to  prove  that  the  Spaniards  endea-
voured to  prevent  their  associates  from  eating  the  bodies  of  the
Mexicans,  lib.  v.  c.  24.  But  he  has  no  authority  for  this  from  the
original  historians.  Neither  Cortes  himself,  nor  B.  Diaz,  seem  to
have  had  any  such  scruple ;  and,  on  many  occasions,  mention  the
Indian  repasts,  which  were  become  familiar  to  them,  without  any
mark  of  abhorrence.  Even  with  this  additional  stock  of  food  for
the  Indians,  it  was  hardly  possible  to  procure  subsistence  for  armies
amounting  to  such  numbers  as  we  find  in  the  Spanish  writers.
Perhaps  the  best  solution  of  the  difficulty  is,  to  adopt  the  opinion

07H  X  OT  ES AN  D

of  B.  Diaz  del  Castillo,  the  most  artless  of  all  the  Historiadores
primitivos.  '•  When  Gomara  (says  he)  on  some  occasions  relates
that  there  were  so  many  thousand  Indians  our  auxiliaries,  and  on
others,  that  there  were  so  many  thousand  houses  in  this  or  that
town,  no  regard  is  to  be  paid  to  his  enumeration,  as  he  has  no
authority  for  it,  the  numbers  not  being  in  reality  the  fifth  of  what  he
relates.  If  we  add  together  the  different  numbers  which  he  men-
tions, that  country  would  contain  more  millions  than  there  are  in
Castile."  C.  129.  But  though  some  considerable  deduction  should
certainly  be  made  from  the  Spanish  accounts  of  the  Mexican  forces,
they  must  have  been  very  numerous ;  for  nothing  but  an  immense
superiority  in  number  could  have  enabled  them  to  withstand  a  body
of  nine  hundred  Spaniards,  conducted  by  a  leader  of  such  abilities
as  Cortes.

Note  LXIX.  p.  226.

In  relating  the  oppressive  and  cruel  proceedings  of  the  con-
querors of  New  Spain,  I  have  not  followed  B.  de  las  Casas  as  my
guide.  His  account  of  them,  Relat.  de  la  Destruyc.  p.  18,  &c.  is
manifestly  exaggerated.  It  is  from  the  testimony  of  Cortes  him-
self, and  of  Gomara,  who  wrote  under  his  eye,  that  I  have  taken
my  account  of  the  punishment  of  the  Panucans,  and  they  relate
it  without  any  disapprobation.  B.  Diaz,  contrary  to  his  usual  cus-
tom, mentions  it  only  in  general  terms,  c.  162,  Herrera,  solicitous
to  extenuate  this  barbarous  action  of  his  countrymen,  though  he
mentions  63  caziques,  and  400  men  of  note,  as  being  condemned
to  the  flames,  asserts,  that  thirty  only  were  burnt,  and  the  rest  par-
doned. Dec.  3.  lib.  v.  c.  7.  But  this  is  contrary  to  the  testimony
of  the  original  historians,  particularly  of  Gomara,  whom  it  appears
he  had  consulted,  as  he  adopts  several  of  his  expressions  in  this
passage.  The  punishment  of  Guatimozin  is  related  by  the  most
authentic  of  the  Spanish  writers.  Torquemada  has  extracted  from
a  history  of  Tezeuco,  composed  in  the  Mexican  tongue,  an  ac-
count of  this  transaction,  more  favourable  to  Guatimozin  than  that
of  the  Spanish  authors.  Mon.  Indiana,  i.  575.  According  to  the
Mexican  account,  Cortes  had  scarcely  a  shadow  of  evidence  to
justify  such  a  wanton  act  of  cruelty.  B.  Diaz  affirms,  that  Gua-
timozin and  his  fellow-sufferers  asserted  their  innocence  with  their
last  breath,  and  that  many  of  the  Spanish  soldiers  condemned
this  action  of  Cortes,  as  equally  unnecessary  and  unjust,  p.  200.
b.  201.  a.

I  J,  LUST  RATIONS.  .377

Note  LXX.  p.  229.

The  motive  for  undertaking  this  expedition  was,  to  punish  Chris-
toval  de  Olid,  one  of  his  officers  who  had  revolted  against  him,
and  aimed  at  establishing  an  independent  jurisdiction.  Cortes  re-
garded this  insurrection  as  of  such  dangerous  example,  and  dreaded
so  much  the  abilities  and  popularity  of  its  author,  that  in  person  he
led  the  body  of  troops  destined  to  suppress  it.  He  marched,  ac-
cording to  Gomara,  three  thousand  miles,  through  a  country  abound-
ing with  thick  forests,  rugged  mountains,  deep  rivers,  thinly  in-
habited, and  cultivated  only  in  a  few  places.  What  he  suffered
from  famine,  from  the  hostility  of  the  natives,  from  the  climate,  and
from  hardships  of  every  species,  has  nothing  in  history  parallel  to
it,  but  what  occurs  in  the  adventures  of  the  other  discoverers  and
conquerors  of  the  New  World.  Cortes  was  employed  in  this  dread-
ful service  above  two  years  ;  and  though  it  was  not  distinguished
by  any  splendid  event,  he  exhibited,  during  the  course  of  it,  greater
personal  courage,  more  fortitude  of  mind,  more  perseverance  and
patience,  than  in  any  other  period  or  scene  in  his  life.  Herrera,
dec.  3.  lib.vi.vii.  viii.  ix.  Gomara  Chron.  c.  163 — 177.  B.  Diaz,
174 — 190.  Cortes,  MS.  penes  me.  Were  one  to  write  a  life  of
Cortes,  the  account  of  this  expedition  should  occupy  a  splendid
place  in  it.  In  a  general  history  of  America,  as  the  expedition
was  productive  of  no  great  event,  the  mention  of  it  is  sufficient.

Note  LXXI.  p.  230.

According  to  Herrera,  the  treasure  which  Cortes  brought  with
him,  consisted  of  fifteen  hundred  marks  of  wrought  plate,  two  hun-
dred thousand  pesos  of  fine  gold,  and  ten  thousand  of  inferior
standard,  many  rich  jewels,  one  in  particular  worth  forty  thousand
pesos,  and  several  trinkets  and  ornaments  of  value.  Dec.  4.  lib.  iii.
c.  8.  lib.  iv.  c.  1.  He  afterward  engaged  to  give  a  portion  with  his
daughter  of  a  hundred  thousand  pesos.  Gomara  Cron.  c.  237.
The  fortune  which  he  left  .his  sons  was  very  considerable.  But  as
we  have  before  related,  the  sum  divided  among  the  conquerors,  on
the  first  reduction  of  Mexico,  was  very  small.  There  appears,  then,
to  be  some  reason  for  suspecting  that  the  accusations  of  Cortes's
enemies  were  not  altogether  destitute  of  foundation.  They  charged
him  with  having  applied  to  his  own  use  a  disproportionate  share  of
the  Mexican  spoils ;  with  having  concealed  the  royal  treasures  of
Montezuma  and  Guatimozin  ;  with  defrauding  the  king  of  his  fifth;
and  robbing  his  followers  of  what  was  due  to  them.  Herrera,
dec.  3.  lib.  viii.  c.  15.  dec.  4.  lib.  iii.  c.  8. Some  of  the  conquerors

.370  NOTES A  X  I)

themselves  entertained  suspicions  of  the  same  kind  with  respect  to
this  part  of  his  conduct. B.  Diaz,  c.  157.

Note  LXXII.  p.  234.

In  tracing  the  progress  of  the  Spanish  arms  in  New  Spain,  we
have  followed  Cortes  himself  as  our  most  certain  guide.  His  dis-
patches to  the  emperor  contain  a  minute  account  of  his  operations.
But  the  unlettered  conqueror  of  Peru  was  incapable  of  relating  his
own  exploits.  Our  information  with  respect  to  them,  and  other
transactions  in  Peru,  is  derived,  however,  from  contemporary  and
respectable  authors.

The  most  early  account  of  Pizarro's  transactions  in  Peru  was
published  by  Francisco  de  Xerez,  his  secretary.  It  is  a  simple  un-
adorned narrative,  carried  down  no  farther  than  the  death  of  Ata-
hualpa,  in  1533;  for  the  author  returned  to  Spain  in  1534;  and,
soon  after  he  landed,  printed  at  Seville  his  short  History  of  the
Conquest  of  Peru,  addressed  to  the  emperor.

Don  Pedro  Sancho,  an  officer  who  served  under  Pizarro,  drew  up
an  account  of  his  expedition,  which  was  translated  into  Italian  by
Ramusio,  and  inserted  in  his  valuable  collection,  but  has  never  been
published  in  its  original  language.  Sancho  returnedto  Spain  at  the
same  time  with  Xerez.  Great  credit  is  due  to  what  both  these  au-
thors relate  concerning  the  progress  and  operations  of  Pizarro  ;  but
the  residence  of  the  Spaniards  in  Peru  had  been  so  short,  at  the
time  when  they  left  it,  and  their  intercourse  with  the  natives  so
slender,  that  their  knowledge  of  the  Peruvian  manners  and  customs
is  very  imperfect.

The  next  contemporary  historian  is  Pedro  Cieza  de  Leon,  who
published  his  Cronica  del  Peru,  at  Seville  in  1553.  If  he  had
finished  all  that  he  proposes  in  the  general  division  of  his  work,  it
would  have  been  the  most  complete  history  which  had  been  pub-
lished of  any  region  in  the  New  World.  He  was  well  qualified  to
execute  it,  having  served  during  seventeen  years  in  America,  and
having  visited  in  person  most  of  the  provinces  concerning  which  he
had  occasion  to  write.  But  only  the  first  part  of  his  chronicle  has
been  printed.  It  contains  a  description  of  Peru,  and  several  of  the
adjacent  provinces,  with  an  account  of  the  institutions  and  customs
of  the  natives,  and  is  written  with  so  little  art,  and  such  an  apparent
regard  for  truth,  that  one  must  regret  the  loss  of  the  other  parts  of
his  work.

This  loss  is  amply  supplied  by  Don  Augustine  Zarate,  who  pub-
lished, in  1555,  his  Historia  del  Descubrimiento  y  Conquesta  dela
Provincia  del  Peru.  Zarate  was  a  man  of  rank  and  education,  and
employed in  Peru  as  comptroller-general  of  the  public  revenue.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  370

His  history,  whether  we  attend  to  its  matter  or  composition,  is  a
book  of  considerable  merit ;  as  he  had  an  opportunity  to  be  well
informed,  and  seems  to  have  been  inquisitive  with  respect  to  the
manners  and  transactions  of  the  Peruvians,  great  credit  is  due  to
his  testimony.

Don  Diego  Fernandez  published  his  Historia  del  Peru  in  1571.
His  sole  object  is  to  relate  the  dissensions  and  civil  wars  of  the
Spaniards  in  that  empire.  As  he  served  in  a  public  station  in  Peru,
and  was  well  acquainted  both  with  the  country,  and  with  the  prin-
cipal actors  in  those  singular  scenes  which  he  describes,  as  he  pos-
sessed sound  understanding  and  great  impartiality,  his  work  may
be  ranked  among  those  of  the  historians  most  distinguished  for
their  industry  in  research,  or  their  capacity  in  judging  with  respect
to  the  events  which  they  relate.

The  last  author  who  can  be  reckoned  among  the  contemporary
historians  of  the  conquest  of  Peru,  is  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  Inca.
For  though  the  first  part  of  his  work,  entitled  Commentaries  Reales
del  Origin  de  los  Incas  Reies  del  Peru,  was  not  published  sooner  than
the  year  1609,  seventy-six  years  after  the  death  of  Atahualpa,  the
last  emperor,  yet  as  he  was  born  in  Peru,  and  was  the  son  of  an
officer  of  distinction  among  the Spanish  conquerors,  by  a  Coy  a,  or
lady  of  the  royal  race,  on  account  of  which  he  always  took  the
name  of  Inca ;  as  he  was  master  of  the  language  spoken  by  the
Incas,  and  acquainted  with  the  traditions  of  his  countrymen,  his
authority  is  rated  very  high,  and  often  placed  above  that  of  all  the
other  historians. His  work,  however,  is  little  more  than  a  com-
mentary upon  the  Spanish  writers  of  the  Peruvian  story,  and  com-
posed of  quotations  taken  from  the  authors  whom  I  have  mentioned.
This  is  the  idea  which  he  himself  gives  of  it,  lib.  i.  c.  10. Nor  is
it  in  the  account  of  facts  only  that  he  follows  them  servilely. Even
in  explaining  the  institutions  and  rites  of  his  ancestors,  his  infor-
mation seems  not  to  be  more  perfect  than  theirs. His  explanation
of  the  Quipos  is  almost  the  same  with  that  of  Acosta. He  produces
no  specimen  of  Peruvian poetry,  but  that  wretched  one  which  he
borrows  from  Bias  Valera,  an  early  missionary,  whose  memoirs  have
never  been  published.  Lib.,  ii.  c.  15. As  for  composition,  arrange-
ment, or  a  capacity  of distinguishing  between  what  is  fabulous,
what  is  probable,  and  what  is  true,  one  searches  for  them  in  vain
in  the  commentaries  of  the  Inca. His  work,  however,  notwith-
standing its  great  defects,  is  not  altogether  destitute  of  use. Some
traditions  which  he  received  from  his  countrymen  are  preserved  in
it. His  knowledge  of  the  Peruvian  language  has  enabled  him  to
correct  some  errors  of  the  Spanish  writers,  and  he  has  inserted  in
it  some  curious  facts  taken  from  authors  whose  works  were  never
published,  and  are  now  lost.

380  NOTES  AND

Note  LXXIII.  p.  239.

One  may  form  an  idea  both  of  the  hardships  "which  they  endured,
and  of  the  unhealthful  climate  in  the  regions  which  they  visited,
from  the  extraordinary  mortality  that  prevailed  among  them.  Pizarro
carried  out  112  men,  Almagro  70.  In  less  than  nine  months  130  of
these  died.  Few  fell  by  the  sword  ;  most  of  them  were  cut  off  by
diseases. Xeres,  p.  180.

NoteLXXIV.  p.  241.

This  island,  says  Herrera,  is  rendered  so  uncomfortable  by  the
unwholesomeness  of  its  climate,  its  impenetrable  woods,  its  rugged
mountains,  and  the  multitude  of  insects  and  reptiles,  that  it  is  sel-
dom any  softer  epithet  than  that  of  infernal  is  employed  in  describ-
ing it.  The  sun  is  almost  never  seen  there,  and  throughout  the  year
it  hardly  ever  ceases  to  rain.  Dec.  3.  lib.  x.  c.  3.  Darapier  touched
at  this  island  in  the  year  1685  ;  and  his  account  of  the  climate  is
not  more  favourable.  Vol.  i.  p.  172.  He,  during  his  cruise  on  the
coast,  visited  most  of  the  places  where  Pizarro  landed,  and  his
description  of  them  throws  light  on  the  narrations  of  the  early
Spanish  historians.

Note  LXXV.  p.  254.

By  this  time  horses  had  multiplied  greatly  in  the  Spanish  settle-
ments on  the  continent.  When  Cortes  began  his  expedition  in  the
year  1618,  though  his  armament  was  more  considerable  than  that  of
Pizarro,  and  composed  of  persons  superior  in  rank  to  those  who
invaded  Peru,  he  could  procure  no  more  than  sixteen  horses.

Note  LXXVI.  p.  255.

In  the  year  1740,  D.  Ant.  Ulloa,  and  D.  George  Juan,  travelled
from  Guayquil  to  Motupe,  by  the  same  route  which  Pizarro  took.
From  the  description  of  their  journey,  one  may  form  an  idea  of
the  difficulty  of  his  march.  The  sandy  plains  between  St.  Michael
de  Pieur  and  Motupe  extend  90  miles,  without  water,  without  a
tree,  a  plant,  or  any  green  thing,  on  a  dreary  stretch  of  burning  saud.
Voyage,  torn.  i.  p.  399,  &c.

Note  LXXVII.  p.  260.

Tins  extravagant  and  unseasonable  discourse  of  Valverde  has
been  censured  by  all  historians,  and  with  justice. But  though  he

ILLUSTRATIONS.  .581

seems  to  have  been  an  illiterate  and  bigotted  monk,  nowise  re-
sembling the  good  Olmedo,  who  accompanied  Cortes ;  the  absurdity
of  his  address  to  Atahualpa  must  not  be  charged  wholly  upon  him.
His  harangue  is  evidently  a  translation  or  paraphrase  of  that  form,
concerted  by  a  junto  of  Spanish  divines  and  lawyers  in  the  year
1509,  for  explaining  the  right  of  their  king  to  the  sovereignty  of
the  New  World,  and  for  directing  the  officers  employed  in  America
how  they  should  take  possession  of  any  new  country. See  vol.  i.
note  xxiii. The  sentiments  contained  in  Valverde's  harangue  must
not  then  be  imputed  to  the  bigotted  imbecility  of  a  particular  man,
but  to  that  of  the  age. But  Gomara  and  Benzoni  relate  one  cir-
cumstance concerning  Valverde,  which,  if  authentic,  renders  him
an  object,  not  of  contempt  only,  but  of  horror. They  assert,  that
during  the  whole  action  Valverde  continued  to  excite  the  soldiers
to  slaughter,  calling  on  them  to  strike  the  enemy,  not  with  the
edge,  but  with  the  points  of  their  swords. Gom.  Chron.  c.  113.
Benz.  Histor.  Nov.  Orbis,  lib.  iii.  c.  3. Such  behaviour  was  very
different  from  that  of  the  Roman  Catholic  clergy  in  other  parts  of
America,  where  they  uniformly  exerted  their  influence  to  protect
the  Indians,  and  to  moderate  the  ferocity  of  their  countrymen.

NoteLXXVIII.  p.  261.

Two  different  systems  have  been  formed  concerning  the  conduct
of  Atahualpa.  The  Spanish  writers,  in  order  to  justify  the  violence
of  their  countrymen,  contend  that  all  the  Inca's  professions  of
friendship  were  feigned  ;  and  that  his  intention  in  agreeing  to  an
interview  with  Pizarro  at  Caxamalca,  was  to  cut  off  him  and  his
followers  at  one  blow ;  that  for  this  purpose  he  advanced  with
such  a  numerous  body  of  attendants,  who  had  arms  concealed  under
their  garments  to  execute  this  scheme.  This  is  the  account  given
by  Xerez  and  Zarate,  and  adopted  by  Herrera.  But  if  it  had  been
the  plan  of  the  Inca  to  destroy  the  Spaniards,  one  can  hardly
imagine  that  he  would  have  permitted  them  to  march  unmolested
through  the  desert  of  Motupe,  or  have  neglected  to  defend  the
passes  in  the  mountains,  where  they  might  have  been  attacked
with  so  much  advantage.  If  the  Peruvians  marched  to  Caxamalca
with  an  intention  to  fall  upon  the  Spaniards,  it  is  inconceivable
that  of  so  great  a  body  of  men,  prepared  for  action,  not  one  should
attempt  to  make  resistance,  but  all  tamely  suffer  themselves  to  be
butchered  by  an  enemy  whom  they  were  armed  to  attack.  Ata-
hualpa's  mode  of  advancing  to  the  interview  has  the  aspect  of  a
peaceable  procession,  not  of  a  military  enterprise.  He  himself,
and  his  followers,  were  in  their  habits  of  ceremony,  preceded,  as
on  days  of  solemnity, by unarmed  harbingers. Though  rude

383  N  O  T  E  S A  N  D

nations  are  frequently  cunning  and  false,  yet,  if  a  scheme  of  de-
ception and  treachery  must  be  imputed  either  to  a  monarch,  that
had  no  great  reason  to  be  alarmed  at  a  visit  from  strangers  who
solicited  admission  into  his  presence  as  friends,  or  to  an  adven-
turer so  daring,  and  so  little  scrupulous  as  Pizarro,  one  cannot
hesitate  in  determining  where  to  fix  the  presumption  of  guilt.
Even  amidst  the  endeavours  of  the  Spanish  writers  to  palliate  the
proceedings  of  Pizarro,  one  plainly  perceives  that  it  was  his  inten-
tion, as  well  as  his  interest,  to  seize  the  Inca,  and  that  he  had  taken
measures  for  that  purpose  previous  to  any  suspicion  of  that  mo-
narch's designs.

Garcilasso de  la  Vega,  extremely  solicitous to vindicate his
countrymen,  the  Peruvians,  from the crime of  having  concerted
the  destruction  of  Pizarro  and  his  followers,  and  no  less  afraid  to
charge  the  Spaniards  with  improper  conduct  towards  the  Inca,  has
framed  another  system. He  relates,  that  a  man  of  majestic  form,
with  a  long  beard,  and  garments reaching  to  the  ground,  having
appeared  in  a  vision  to  Viracocha,  the  eighth  Inca,  and  declared
that  he  was  a  child  of  the  Sun,  that  monarch  built  a  temple  in
honour  of  this  person,  and  erected  an  image  of  him,  resembling
as  nearly  as  possible  the  singular  form  in  which  he  had  exhibited
himself  to  his  view. In  this  temple divine  honours  were  paid  to
him,  by  the  name  of  Viracocha. P.  i.  lib.  iv.  c.  21.  lib.  v.  c.  22.
When  the  Spaniards  first  appeared  in  Peru,  the  length  of  their
beards,  and  the  dress  they  wore, struck  every  person  so  much
with  their  likeness  to  the  image  of  Viracocha,  that  they  supposed
them  to  be  children  of  the  Sun,  who  had  descended  from  heaven
to  earth. All  concluded,  that  the  fatal  period  of  the  Peruvian
empire  was  now  approaching,  and  that  the  throne  would  be  oc-
cupied by  new  possessors. Atahualpa  himself,  considering  the
Spaniards  as  messengers  from  heaven,  was  so  far  from  entertaining
any  thoughts  of  resisting  them,  that  he  determined  to  yield  implicit
obedience  to  their  commands. From  these  sentiments  flowed  his
professions  of  love  and  respect. To  those  were  owing  the  cordial
reception  of  Soto  and  Ferdinand  Pizarro  in  his  camp,  and  the
submissive  reverence  with  which  he  himself  advanced  to  visit  the
Spanish  general  in  his  quarters  ; but  from  the  gross  ignorance  of
Philipillo,  the  interpreter,  the  declaration  of  the  Spaniards,  and  his
answer  to  it,  were  so  ill  explained,  that  by  their  mutual  inability
to  comprehend  each  other's  intentions,  the  fatal  rencounter  at  Cax-
amalca,  with  all  its  dreadful  consequences,  was  occasioned.

It  is  remarkable,  that  no  traces  of  this  superstitious  veneration
of  the  Peruvians  for  the  Spaniards,  are  to  be  found  either  in  Xerez,
or  Sancho,  or  Zarate,  previous  to  the  interview  at  Caxamalca ;
and  yet  the  two  former  served  under  Pizarro  at  that  time,  and  the

I  LLUST  R  A  T  i  O'NS.  383

latter  visited  Peru  soon  after  the  conquest. If  either  the  Inca
himself,  or  his  messengers,  had  addressed  the  Spaniards  in  the
words  which  Garcilasso  puts  in  their  mouths,  they  must  have  been
struck  with  such  submissive  declarations ;  and  they  would  certainly
have  availed  themselves  of  them  to  accomplish  their  own  designs
with  greater  facility. Garcilasso  himself,  though  his  narrative  of
the  intercourse  between  the  Inca  and  Spaniards,  preceding  the
rencounter  at  Caxamalca,  is founded  on  the  supposition  of  his
believing  them  to  be  Viracochas,  or  divine  beings,  p.  ii.  lib.  i.  c.  17,
&c,  yet,  with  his  usual  inattention  and  inaccuracy,  he  admits,  in
another  place,  that  the  Peruvians  did  not  recollect  the  resemblance
between them  and  the  god  Viracocha,  until  the  fatal  disasters
subsequent  to  the  defeat  at  Caxamalca,  and  then  only  began  to
call  them  Viracochas. P.  i.  lib.  v.  c.  21. This  is  confirmed  by
Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  ii.  c.  12. In  many  different  parts  of  America,
if  we  may  believe  the  Spanish  writers,  their  countrymen  were  con-
sidered as  divine  beings  who  had  descended  from  heaven. But
in  this  instance,  as  in  many  which  occur  in  the  intercourse  between
nations  whose  progress  in  refinement  is  very  unequal,  the  ideas  of
those  who  used  the  expression  were  different  from  the  ideas  of  those
who  heard  it. For  such  is  the  idiom  of  the Indian  languages,  or
such  is  the  simplicity  of  those  who  speak  them,  that  when  they  see
any  thing  with  which  they  were  formerly  unacquainted,  and  of
which  they  do  not  know  the  origin,  they  say  that  it  came  down
from  heaven. Nugnez.  Ram.  iii.  327.  C.

The  account  which  I  have  given  of  the  sentiments  and  pro-
ceedings of  the  Peruvians,  appears  to  be  more  natural  and  con-
sistent than  either  of  the  two  preceding,  and  is  better  supported  by
the  facts  related  by  the  contemporary  historians.

According  to  Xerez,  p.  200,  two  thousand  Peruvians  were  killed.
Sancho  makes  the  number  of  the  slain  six  or  seven  thousand.
Ram.  iii.  274.  D.  By  Garcilasso's  account,  five  thousand  were
massacred.  P.  ii.  lib.  i.  c.  25.  The  number  which  I  have  mentioned,
being  the  medium  between  the  extremes,  may  probably  be  nearest
the  truth.  „

Note  LXXIX.  p.  262.

Nothing  can  be  a  more  striking  proof  of  this,  than  that  three
Spaniards  travelled  from  Caxamalca  to  Cuzco.  The  distance
between  them  is  six  hundred  miles.  In  every  place  throughout
this  great  extent  of  country,  they  were  treated  with  all  the  honours
which  the  Peruvians  paid  to  their  sovereigns,  and  even  to  their
divinities.  Under  pretext  of  amassing  what  was  wanting  for  the
ransom  of  the  Inca,  they  demanded  the  plates  of  gold  with  which

.384  N  O  T  E  S A  N  D

the  walls  of  the  Temple  of  the  Sun  in  Cuzco  were  adorned  ;  and
though  the  priests  were  unwilling  to  alienate  those  sacred  orna-
ments, and  the  people  refused  to  violate  the  shrine  of  their  god,
the  three  Spaniards,  with  their  own  hands,  robbed  the  temple  of
part  of  this  valuable  treasure ;  and  such  was  the  reverence  of  the
natives  for  their  persons,  that  though  they  beheld  this  act  of  sacri-
lege with  astonishment,  they  did  not  attempt  to  prevent  or  disturb
the  commission  of  it.  Zarate,  lib.  ii.  c.  6.  Sancho  ap.  Ramus,
iii.  375.  D.

Note  LXXX.  p.  272.

According  to  Herrera,  the  spoil  of  Cuzco,  after  setting  apart
the  king's  fifth,  was  divided  among  480  persons.  Each  received
4000  pesos.  This  amounts  to  1,920,000  pesos.  Dec.  v.  lib.  vi.
c.  3.  But  as  the  general,  and  other  officers,  were  entitled  to  a
share  far  greater  than  that  of  the  private  men,  the  sum  total  must
have  risen  much  beyond  what  I  have  mentioned.  Gomara,  c.  123.
and  Zarate,  lib.  ii.  c.  8,  satisfy  themselves  with  asserting  in  general,
that  the  plunder  of  Cuzco  was  of  greater  value  than  the  ransom
of  Atahualpa.

Note  LXXXI.  p.  274.

No  expedition  in  the  New  World  was  conducted  with  more
persevering  courage  than  that  of  Alvarado,  and  in  none  were
greater  hardships  endured.  Many  of  the  persons  engaged  in  it
were,  like  their  leader,  veterans  who  had  served  under  Cortes,
inured  to  all  the  rigour  of  American  war.  Such  of  my  readers  as
have  not  an  opportunity  of  perusing  the  striking  description  of
their  sufferings  by  Zarate  or  Herrera,  may  form  some  idea  of  the
nature  of  their  march  from  the  sea-coast  to  Quito,  by  consulting
the  account  which  D.  Ant.  Ulloa  gives  of  his  own  journey  in  1736,
nearly  in  the  same  route.  Voy.  torn.  i.  p.  178,  &c,  or  that  of  M.
Bouguer,  who  proceeded  from  Puerto  Viejo  to  Quito,  by  the  same
road  which  Alvarado  took.  He  compares  his  own  journey  with
that  of  the  Spanish  leader,  and  by  the  comparison  gives  a  most
striking  idea  of  the  boldness  and  patience  of  Alvarado,  in  forcing
his  way  through  so  many  obstacles. Voyage  du  Perou,  p.  28,  &c.

Note  LXXXII.  p.  274.

According  to  Herrera,  there  was  entered,  on  account  of  the
king,  in  gold  155,300  pesos,  and  5400  marks  (each  eight  ounces)
of  silver,  besides  several  vessels  and  ornaments,  some  of  gold,  and
others  of  silver ;  on  account  of  private  persons,  in  gold  499,000
pesos,  54,000  marks  of  silver. Dec.  5.  lib.  vi.  c.  13.

ILLUSTRATIONS.  ;J85

Note  LXXXIII.  p.  282.

The  Peruvians  not  only  imitated  the  military  arts  of  the  Spa-
niards, but  had  recourse  to  devices  of  their  own.  As  the  cavalry
were  the  chief  objects  of  their  terror,  they  endeavoured  to  ren-
der them  incapable  of  acting,  by  means  of  a  long  thong  with  a
stone  fastened  to  each  end.  This,  when  thrown  by  a  skilful  hand,
twisted  about  the  horse  and  its  rider,  and  entangled  them  so  as
to  obstruct  their  motions.  Herrera  mentions  this  as  an  invention
of  their  own.  Dec.  5.  lib.  viii.  c.  4.  But  as  I  have  observed,
vol.  vii.  p. 50,  this  weapon  is  common  among  several  barbarous  tribes
towards  the  extremity  of  South  America  ;  and  it  is  more  probable
that  the  Peruvians  had  observed  the  dexterity  with  which  they
used  it  in  hunting,  and  on  this  occasion  adopted  it  themselves.
The  Spaniards  were  considerably  annoyed  by  it ;  Herrera,  ibid.
Another  instance  of  the  ingenuity  of  the  Peruvians  deserves  men-
tion. By  turning  a  river  out  of  its  channel,  they  overflowed  a
valley,  in  which  a  body  of  the  enemy  was  posted,  so  suddenly,
that  it  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  the  Spaniards  made  their
escape. Herrera,  dec.  5.  lib.  viii.  c.  5.

Note  LXXXIV.  p.  297.

Herrera's  account  of  Orellana's  voyage  is  the  most  minute,  and
apparently  the  most  accurate.  It  was  probably  taken  from  the
journal  of  Orellana  himself.  But  the  dates  are  not  distinctly  marked.
His  navigation  down  the  Coca,  or  Napo,  begun  early  in  February
1541  ;  and  he  arrived  at  the  mouth  of  the  river  on  the  26th  of
August,  having  spent  near  seven  months  in  the  voyage.  M.  de
la  Condamine,  in  the  year  1743,  sailed  from  Cuenca  to  Para,  a  set-
tlement of  the  Portuguese  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  a  navigation
much  longer  that  that  of  Orellana,  in  less  than  four  months.  Voy-
age, p.  179.  But  the  two  adventurers  were  very  differently  provided
for  the  voyage.  This  hazardous  undertaking,  to  which  ambition
prompted  Orellana,  and  to  which  the  love  of  science  led  M.  de  la
Condamine,  was  undertaken  in  the  year  1769,  by  Madame  Godin
des  Odonais,  from  conjugal  affection.  The  narrative  of  the  hard-
ships which  she  suffered,  of  the  dangers  to  which  she  was  exposed,
and  of  the  disasters  which  befel  her,  is  one  of  the  most  singular
and  affecting  stories  in  any  language,  exhibiting  in  her  conduct  a
striking  picture  of  the  fortitude  which  distinguishes  the  one  sex,
mingled  with  the  sensibility  and  tenderness  peculiar  to  the  other.
Lettre  de  M.  Godin  a  M.  de  la  Condamine.

vol.  vii.  2  c

386  NOTES AND

Note  LXXXV.  p.  300.

Herrera  gives  a  striking;  picture  of  their  indigence.  Twelve  gen-
tlemen, who  had  been  officers  of  distinction  under  Almagro,  lodged
in  the  same  house,  and  having  but  one  cloak  among  them,  it  was
worn  alternately  by  him  who  had  occasion  to  appear  in  public,  while
the  rest,  from  the  want  of  a  decent  dress,  were  obliged  to  keep
within  doors.  Their  former  friends  and  companions  were  so  much
afraid  of  giving  offence  to  Pizarro,  that  they  durst  not  entertain  or
even  converse  with  them.  One  may  conceive  what  was  the  condi-
tion, and  what  the  indignation  of  men  once  accustomed  to  power
and  opulence,  when  they  felt  themselves  poor  and  despised,  without
a  roof  under  which  to  shelter  their  heads,  while  they  beheld  others,
whose  merit  and  services  were  not  equal  to  theirs,  living  in  splen-
dour in  sumptuous  edifices. Dec.  6.  lib.  viii.  c.  6.

NoteLXXXVI.  p.  310.

Herrera,  whose  accuracy  entitles  him  to  great  credit,  asserts,
that  Gonzalo  Pizarro  possessed  domains  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Chuquesaca  de  la  Plata,  which  yielded  him  an  annual  revenue
greater  than  that  of  the  archbishop  of  Toledo,  the  best  endowed  see
in  Europe. Dec.  7.  lib.  vi.  c.  3.

NoteLXXXVII.  p.  322.

All  the  Spanish  writers  describe  his  march,  and  the  distress  of
both  parties,  very  minutely.  Zarate  observes,  that  hardly  any  pa-
rallel to  it  occurs  in  history,  either  with  respect  to  the  length  of  the
retreat,  or  the  ardour  of  the  pursuit.  Pizarro,  according  to  his
computation,  followed  the  viceroy  upwards  of  three  thousand
miles. Lib.  v.  c.  16.  26.

Note  LXXXVIII.  p.  334.

It  amounted,  according  to  Fernandez,  the  best  informed  historian
of  that  period,  to  one  million  four  hundred  thousand  pesos.  Lib.
ii.  c.  79.

Note  LXXXIX.  p.  335.

Carvajal,  from  the  beginning,  had  been  an  advocate  for  an  ac-
commodation with  Gasca.  Finding  Pizarro  incapable  of  holding
that  bold  course  which  he  originally  suggested,  he  recommended  to

ILLUSTRATIONS.  387

him  a  timely  submission  to  his  sovereign  as  the  safest  measure.
When  the  president's  offers  were  first  communicated  to  Carvajal,
"  By  our  Lady  (says  he,  in  that  strain  of  buffoonery  which  was  fa-
miliar to  him)  the  priest  issues  gracious  bulls.  He  gives  them  both
good  and  cheap ;  let  us  not  only  accept  them,  but  wear  them  as
relics  about  our  necks." Fernandez,  lib.  ii.  c.  63.

Note  XC.  p.  340.

During  the  rebellion  of  Gonzalo  Pizarro,  seven  hundred  men
were  killed  in  battle,  and  three  hundred  and  eighty  were  hanged
or  beheaded.  Herrera,  dec.  8.  lib.  iv.c.  4.  Above  three  hundred  of
these  were  cut  off  by  Carvajal.  Fernandez,  lib.  ii.  c.  91.  Zarate
makes  the  number  of  those  put  to  a  violent  death  five  hundred.  Lib.
vii.  c.  1.

END OF VOL.  VII.

Printed  by  J.F.  Dove,  St.  John's  Square.

Jr

ft

t

ft

I

D
7

R7
1824

v.7

Robertson,  William
Works

■*#

,-■

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
