The Works of William Robertson, Vol. 1 (William Robertson, 1759)
==========================================================
Robertson's Works (1824, 9 vols.) - History of Scotland, Charles V, America, and the Historical Disquisition on India; Enlightenment historiography's great practitioner entire. Vol. 1 of 9.

WILLIAM ROBERTSON,  D.D.

WITH  AN  ACCOUNT  OF

HIS  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS.

IN  NINE  VOLUMES.

VOL.  I.

LONDON:

PRINTED  FOR  WHUMORE  AND  l-'ENN,  CHARING  CROSS;  J.HEARNE,  STRAND;

SMITH  AND  ELDER,  FENCHURCII  STREET;  H.  MOZLEY,  DERBY;

AND  M.  KEENE,  DUBLIN.

MDCCCXXIV.

THE

STANDARD EDITION

OF  THE

HISTORIANS.

SECTION  I.— COMPRISING

DR.  WM.  ROBERTSON'S  WORKS,

IN  NINE  VOLUMES. VOL.  I.

SCOTLAND.

THE  Proprietors  of  the  present  undertaking  respectfully  state,
that  their  object  is  to  supply  the  Public  with  a  STANDARD
EDITION  OF  THE  BEST  HISTORIANS  in  the  English  Language,
printed  in  a  superior  manner,  on  good  paper,  and  at  a  price
greatly  below  what  has  been  charged,  for  the  same  Works,  for  the
last  twenty  years.

As  this  Collection  will  be  uniform,  it  is  the  intention  of  the  Pub-
lishers to  make  a  fair  allowance  for  the  old  and  inferior  Editions  of
the  same  Authors,  to  those  who  may  wish  to  possess  these  improved
Works,  and  thereby  encourage,  what  has  for  a  long  time  been  an
important  DESIDERATUM,  both  with  the  Reader  and  Collector,  viz:

GOOD  BOOKS,  WELL  PRINTED,  AND  AT  LOW  PRICES.

THE

LIFE

DR.  ROBERTSON.

IF  the  laws  of  equity  are  to  be  observed  in  the  repub-
lic of  learning,  no  man  possesses  a  greater  claim  than
an  historian  to  have  his  life  carefully  recorded.  He  who
has  devoted  his  labour  and  ingenuity  to  the  task  of  de-
scribing the  exploits  of  others,  deserves  that  his  own
actions  should  not  be  forgotten  by  the  many  readers
whom  he  has  studied  to  please  and  enlighten.  In
the  instance,  therefore,  of  the  most  accomplished  of
British  historians,  it  would  be  totally  unpardonable  to
offer  any  edition  of  his  works  to  the  public,  without
endeavouring  to  present,  at  the  same  time,  an  accu-
rate relation  of  the  chief  incidents  of  his  life,  which
have  been  preserved  by  the  respect  and  affection  of  his
friends.*

William  Robertson,  the  historian,  descended  from  a

*  The  public  are  primarily  indebted  to  Dugald  Stewart,  esq.  for  the  biography
of  Dr.  Robertson.  In  this  gentleman's  "  Account  of  the  Life  and  Writings"  of  the
great  historian,  we  have  a  work  written  with  considerable  ability  and  elegance  j  but
it  is  by  far  too  diffuse  for  many  readers,  and  does  not  seem  to  be  arranged  in  the
most  clear  and  striking  method  of  which  it  was  susceptible.  In  the  present  sketch
it  has  been  attempted  to  give  a  succinct  and  connected  account  of  the  life  of  the  his-
toriographer, by  relating  all  that  is  important,  and  omitting  what  would  serve  only
to  accumulate  the  volume.

Dr.  Gleig,  bishop  of  the  Scotch  episcopal  church,  has  given  a  few  particulars  of
our  Author's  life,  in  addition  to  Mr.  Stewart's  account.

V  OL.  I.  b

ii  THE  LIFE OF

respectable  Scottish  family,  was  the  eldest  son  of  the
Rev.  W.  Robertson,  and  of  Eleanor,  the  daughter  of
David  Pitcairn,  esq.  of  Dreghorn.  He  was  born  on  the
8th  of  September,  1721,  at  Borthwick,  in  the  county  of
Mid-Lothian,  at  the  time  his  father  was  minister  of  that
parish.  The  elements  of  his  learned  education  were
acquired  at  Dalkeith,  under  Mr.  Leslie,  who  was  at
that  period,  with  regard  to  tuition,  considered  as  the
Quintilian  of  the  north.  In  1733,  when  his  father  was
appointed  to  one  of  the  churches  in  Edinburgh,  young
Robertson  became  an  inhabitant  of  the  capital ;  and  in
October  of  the  same  year  was  admitted  a  student  of
the  university  ;  where,  after  several  years  of  intense
study  and  application,  he,  by  his  writings,  created  a
new  era  in  the  literary  history  of  his  country.

Of  the  circumstances  of  Robertson's  youthful  days,
very  little  has  been  remembered.  No  feats  of  boyish
excellence,  no  remarks  betokening  an  early  depth  of
understanding,  and  no  sallies  presaging  an  unusual
brilliancy  of  imagination,  are  recorded  of  him.  His
abilities  seem  to  have  been  more  solid  than  ostentatious,
and  his  progress  more  steady  than  surprising.  His
early  application  might  be  inferred  from  the  extent  of
his  subsequent  labours.

Qui  studet  optatam  cursu  contingere  metam,
Multa  tuli  t  fecitque  puer,  sudavit  et  alsit,
Abstinuit  Venere  et  vino :  qui  Pythia  cantat
Tibicen,  didicitprius,  exthnuitque  magistrum.*

If  much  labour  is  necessary  to  attain  excellence  in
arts  and  bodily  accomplishments,  still  greater  toil  is
requisite  to  carry  off  the  palm  of  literary  distinction.
We  are  not,  however,  compelled  to  guess  merely  at  Ro-

*  Herat.  Ars  Poet.  v.  412-15.

DR. ROBERTSON.  iii

bertson's  industry.  The  practice  of  noting,  which  has
been  so  much  commended  by  some  learned  men,  that
they  affirm  no  one  can  become  an  eminent  scholar
without  it,*  was  early  adopted  by  our  author.  Some
of  his  common-place  books  compiled  in  1735,  1736,
and  1737,  are  said  to  be  remarkable  proofs  of  a  diligent
accumulation  of  knowledge.  To  each  of  them  are  pre-
fixed the  significant  words,  <(  Vita  sine  literis  mors  estf
a  motto  plainly  indicative  of  the  ruling  ambition  of  his
soul,  and  of  the  supreme  value  which  he  set  upon  in-
tellectual enjoyments.

With  the  view  of  improving  his  style,  he  undertook
the  exercise  of  translation ;  and  he  was  so  far  satisfied
with  his  proficiency  in  this  accomplishment,  as  to  have
serious  thoughts  of  giving  a  public  specimen  of  his  la-
bours in  a  version  of  Marcus  Antoninus.  He  was  di-
verted from  his  plan  by  the  work  suddenly  appearing,
executed  by  another  hand,  at  Glasgow.

He  did  not,  however,  intend  to  limit  his  desires  to
the  praise  of  eloquent  writing ;  but  aspired  to  the  ho-
nour of  instructing  and  delighting  others  by  his  tongue,
as  well  as  his  pen.  It  was  with  this  design,  that,  during
the  latter  years  of  his  education,  he  became  a  member
of  a  society  of  persons,  who  met  together  to  improve
themselves  in  the  habits  of  speaking.  Clubs  of  this
description,  when  they  are  composed  of  men  of  liberal
attainments,  and  governed  by  judicious  regulations,
very  greatly  facilitate  the  study  at  which  they  profess
to  aim ;  but  amongst  the  ignorant,  and  without  the  re^
straint  of  prudent  laws,  they  seldom  generate  any  thing
but  flippancy  and  impudence.  Robertson  had  the  good

*  See  '  An  Abridgment  of  the  Aurifodina  of  Drexclius,  by  Bishop  Home,'  in  the
Scholar  Armed,  vol.  2.

b2

iv  THE LIFE OF

fortune  to  become  associated  with  several  persons  of
eminent  ability;  a  collision  with  whom  would  necessa-
rily inspire  an  ardour  of  emulation,  and  give  a  lively
impulse  to  all  the  faculties  of  his  mind.  He  had  two
powerful  reasons  which  would  impel  him  to  cultivate
the  art  of  oratory :  these  were,  the  nature  of  his  intended
profession,  and  the  constitution  of  the  Scottish  church.
The  congregations,  which  he  was  hereafter  to  address,
had  not  been  accustomed  to  listen  to  preachers  who
read  their  compositions  from  the  pulpit ;  so  that  it  was
necessary,  if  he  wished  to  teach  either  with  facility  to
himself,  or  benefit  to  others,  that  he  should  acquire  a
habit  of  calm  self-possession,  and  a  power  of  quickly
arranging  his  thoughts,  together  with  a  copiousness  of
language  ready  at  a  moment  to  clothe  his  ideas  with
suitable  expressions.  The  popular  constitution  of  his
church  would  lead  him  also  to  consider  the  advantage
of  being  able  to  deliver  his  sentiments  with  promptness
and  vigour.  In  the  general  assembly  which  meets  every
year  at  Edinburgh,  and  which  consists  not  only  of  a
great  number  of  the  clerical  order,  but  also  of  many
eminent  laymen,  an  extensive  and  honourable  field  of
discussion  would  be  opened,  in  which  no  one  could
distinguish  himself  without  possessing  that  art,  to  which
a  great  tragic  poet*  attributes  a  sovereign  influence  in
the  affairs  of  men.

Thus  prepared  by  his  learning  and  accomplishments,
Mr.  Robertson  was  licensed  to  preach  by  the  presby-
tery of  Dalkeith  in  1741.  This  function,  which  is  per-

*  Ti  Jffira,  S-V«TO*  raXXa  fA.lv  /na&fyeaTct

MOp^&OtJ/XEV, W?  J^pn,  TTttVTa,  X.CU  fACta-TZVOfAtV ,

IlEi&w  SE,  TW  Tugavvov  a-vSptuirois  f^otmv,

OyJiv  TI  /uaXXov  I?  TEXoj  o-irovliafyfAEV,

MurSovq  SI&OVTEC,  /uav&av«v,  l'v»  irore

Ul'&liv,  a  Tig  gguXoiTo,  ?vy%a,vftv  fl'  af*et  j — Eurip.  Hec.  v.  802-7.

DR. ROBERTSON.  v

mitted  in  Scotland,  even  to  laymen,  he  exercised  before
he  had  attained  his  twentieth  year;  and  in  1743,  he
was  invested  with  the  full  authority  of  a  priest,  and
presented  by  the  earl  of  Hopetoun,  to  the  living  of
Gladsmuir,  in  the  county  of  East-Lothian.  -

Other  heavy  duties,  besides  those  peculiar  to  his  sa-
cred profession,  devolved  upon  him.  He  had  not  long
been  in  possession  of  his  preferment,  when,  by  the  de-
cease of  both  his  parents  (who  died  in  circumstances
not  at  all  affluent),  a  younger  brother  and  six  sisters
were  compelled  to  seek  from  him  all  the  aid  and  pro-
tection which  he  could  bestow.  In  this  painful  exi-
gence, he  acted  with  the  most  generous  affection  to  his
relations,  and  with  the  resolution  of  a  man  who  is  de-
termined to  sacrifice  all  considerations  of  interest  and
convenience  to  the  demands  of  duty.  Although  the
value  of  his  living  did  not  exceed  one  hundred  pounds,
he  did  not  hesitate  to  make  his  residence  at  Gladsmuir
the  home  for  the  entire  family;  nor  did  his  sisters  quit
his  roof,  until  other  respectable  abodes  were  provided
for  them.  This  generosity  was  the  more  commendable,
as  it  was  purchased  by  great  and  peculiar  self-denial
on  his  part.  He  had  long  wished  to  cement  the  most
tender  of  all  ties  and  relations ;  but  was  restrained  by
claims  which  he  thought  prior  in  obligation,  till  the
year  1751 ;  when  he  married  Miss  Mary  Nisbet,  a  lady
who  was  his  cousin,  and  daughter  of  one  of  the  clergy
of  Edinburgh.

At  Gladsmuir,  his  time  was  divided  between  his  ge-
neral studies  and  official  duties.  It  was  his  custom  to
rise  early,  devoting  the  "  sweet  hours  of  prime"  to  his
books  and  intellectual  pleasures,  and  allotting  the  re-
mainder of  the  day  to  his  parochial  engagements.  On

vi  THE LIFE  OF

Sundays  he  thought  it  incumbent  upon  him  to  under-
take the  task  of  catechizing,  as  well  as  preaching ;  be-
cause from  the  nature  of  a  mixed  congregation,  every
preacher  must  suppose  a  previous  knowledge  of  reli-
gious principles  in  the  mind  of  his  hearers ;  and  if  these
are  wanting,  he  must  talk  to  them  unintelligibly,  and
fail  of  producing  any  beneficial  impression.

When  the  great  rebellion  broke  out  in  Scotland,
upon  the  invasion  of  the  Pretender,  in  1745,  our  Author
shewed  that  he  possessed  no  small  share  of  energy  and
courage,  as  well  as  a  zealous  regard  for  the  constitu-
tional liberties  of  the  state.  Horace  has  ventured  to
declare  :*

Queni  tu  Melpomene  semel

Nascentem  placido  lumine  viderls,
Ilium  non  labor  Isthmius

Clarabit  pugilem,  non  equus  impiger
Cnrru  direct  Achaico

Victorem  ;  neque  res  bellica  Deliia
Ornatum  foliis  ducem,

Quod  regum  tumidas  contuderit  minus,
Ostendet  Capitolio.

Mr.  Robertson's  conduct  furnished  an  exception  to
the  physical  inactivity  of  learned  men  in  general.  "  On
one  occasion,"  says  Mr.  Stewart,  "  when  the  capital  of
Scotland  was  in  danger  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the
rebels,  the  state  of  public  affairs  appeared  so  critical,
that  he  thought  himself  justified  in  laying  aside,  for  a
time,  the  pacific  habits  of  his  profession,  and  in  quitting
his  parochial  residence  at  Gladsmuir,  to  join  the  volun-
teers of  Edinburgh ;  and,  when  at  last  it  was  determined
that  the  city  should  be  surrendered,  he  was  one  of  the
small  band  who  repaired  to  Haddington,  and  offered
their  services  to  the  commander  of  his  majesty's  forces."

The  church  of  Scotland,  at  the  period  when  Mr.  Ro-

*  Ode  3.  lib.  4.

DR. ROBERTSON.  vii

bertson  began  to  interfere  in  the  management  of  its  con-
cerns, was  in  a  state  of  much  confusion  and  insubordi-
nation ;  so  that  both  talent  and  intrepidity  were  required
in  the  person  who  should  attempt  to  reform  its  abuses.
The  disturbances  chiefly  originated  in  the  system  of  pa-
tronage; which,  after  many  changes  in  the  Scottish
church,  was  revived  in  the  tenth  year  of  the  reign  of
queen  Anne.  It  was  then  enacted,  that  the  patron  of  a
vacant  parish  had  a  right  to  present  some  person  to  the
presbytery,  who  were  bound  to  ratify  the  appointment,
unless  any  cogent  objection  could  be  urged  against  his
life  or  qualifications.  The  law  of  patronage  had  always
been  considered  such  an  odious  grievance  in  Scotland,
that  it  was  openly  resisted,  and  became  almost  nuga-
tory. The  people  had  gradually  assumed  to  them-
selves the  privilege  of  approving  their  pastors  before
they  were  inducted ;  and  the  popular  sanction  which
was  denominated  a  call,  was  regarded  as  indispensable,
and  possessing  more  authority  than  the  presentation  of
the  patron.  Thus  the  church  became  agitated  with  in-
testine tumults  :  the  majesty  of  the  law  was  disregarded ;
and  the  power  of  the  general  assembly,  which  ought  to
have  been  supreme,  was  overawed  by  the  factions  and
the  clamours  of  the  people.

Mr.  Robertson  determined  to  resist  these  dangerous
encroachments ;  to  maintain  the  law  of  patronage,  and
assert  the  necessity  of  obedience  to  ecclesiastical  rulers.
It  was  in  the  assembly  of  1751,  that  he  first  delivered
the  sentiments  which  he  held  respecting  the  polity  of
the  church.  The  contumacy  of  a  clergyman,  who  had
slighted  the  decree  of  a  former  assembly,  became  the
topic  of  debate:  when  Mr,  Robertson  argued  that  it
was  their  duty  to  vindicate  the  authority  of  the  court

viii  THE  LIFE OF

by  awarding  a  suitable  punishment  upon  the  offender.
Such,  however,  was  the  fear  which  restrained  them,  or
their  ignorance  of  the  first  principles  of  government,
that  his  motion  was  lost,  and  the  minority  that  voted
with  him  was  quite  insignificant.

The  commission*  which  met  in  March  of  1752,  gave
him  another  opportunity  of  reproving  the  pusillanimity
of  his  colleagues.  The  presbytery  of  Dunfermline  had
been  enjoined  by  the  commission  to  settle  Mr.  Richard-
son in  the  parish  of  Inverkeithing.  The  order  was
disregarded ;  and  although  this  was  the  second  instance
of  disobedience  in  the  same  persons,  it  was  allowed  to
pass  by  without  any  censure.  In  a  paper,  from  which
we  shall  presently  give  some  extracts,  Mr.  Robertson
and  a  few  of  his  friends,  seriously  protested  against
such  pernicious  lenity.

Not  discouraged  by  the  repulses  which  he  had  suf-
fered, he  renewed  his  arguments  in  the  general  assem-
bly of  1752.  On  this  occasion,  the  force  of  reasoning
was  completely  triumphant;  for  the  judgment  of  the
commission  was  rescinded,  and  one  of  the  presbyters
of  Dunfermline  disgraced  for  contempt  of  legal  au-
thority.

The  abstract  of  his  reasons  for  dissenting  from  the
resolution  of  the  commission,  may  be  here  subjoined.
— "  The  sentence  of  the  commission  was  inconsistent
with  the  nature  and  first  principles  of  society.  When
men  are  considered  as  individuals,  they  have  no  guide
but  their  own  understanding,  and  no  judge  but  their
own  conscience ;  but  as  members  of  society,  they  are
bound  in  many  instances  to  follow  the  judgment  of  the

*  The  assembly  has  its  sittings  only  for  ten  days  in  the  year;  but  a  committee  of
the  whole  house,  called  a  commission,  has  four  annual  meetings,  iu  order  to  undertake
•whatever  business  the  assembly  cannot  accomplish.

DR. ROBERTSON.  in

society.  By  joining  together  in  society,  we  enjoy  many
advantages  which  we  could  neither  purchase  nor  secure
in  a  disunited  state.  In  consideration  of  these,  we  con-
sent that  regulations  for  public  order  shall  be  establish-
ed; not  by  the  private  fancy  of  every  individual,  but  by
the  judgment  of  the  majority,  or  of  those  with  whom
the  society  has  consented  to  intrust  the  legislative
power.  Their  judgment  must  necessarily  be  absolute
and  final,  and  their  decisions  received  as  the  voice  and
instruction  of  the  whole.  As  long  as  a  man  continues
in  any  society,  professes  regard  for  it,  and  reaps  the
emoluments  of  it,  if  he  refuses  to  obey  its  laws,  he
manifestly  acts  both  a  disorderly  and  dishonest  part:
he  lays  claim  to  the  privileges  of  the  society,  while  he
contemns  the  authority  of  it,  and  by  all  principles  of
equity  and  reason  is  justly  subjected  to  its  censures.
They  who  maintain  that  such  disobedience  deserves  no
censure,  maintain,  in  effect,  that  there  should  be  no
such  thing  as  government  and  order.  They  deny  those
first  principles  by  which  men  are  united  in  society;
and  endeavour  to  establish  such  maxims  as  will  justify
not  only  licentiousness  in  ecclesiastical,  but  rebellion
and  disorder  in  civil,  government.

"  The  sentence  of  the  commission,  as  it  is  subversive
of  society  in  general,  so  it  is  absolutely  inconsistent
with  the  nature  and  preservation  of  ecclesiastical  so-
ciety in  particular.  We  admit  that  the  church  is  not
merely  a  voluntary  society,  but  a  society  formed  by  the
laws  of  Christ.  But  to  his  laws  we  conceive  it  to  be
most  agreeable,  that  order  should  be  preserved  in  the
external  administration  of  the  affairs  of  the  church.
And  we  contend,  in  the  words  of  our  confession  of  faith,
1  That  there  are  some  circumstances  concerning  the

x  THE LIFE OF

worship  of  God,  and  the  government  of  the  church,
common  to  human  actions  and  societies,  which  are  to
be  ordered  by  the  light  of  nature  and  Christian  pru-
dence, according  to  the  general  rules  of  the  word,
which  are  always  to  be  observed.'  It  is  very  evident
that  unless  the  church  was  supported  by  continual  mi-
racles, and  a  perpetual  and  extraordinary  interposition
of  heaven,  it  can  only  subsist  by  those  fundamental
maxims  by  which  all  society  subsists.  A  kingdom
divided  against  itself  cannot  stand.  There  can  be  no
union,  and  by  consequence  there  can  be  no  society,
where  there  is  no  subordination;  and  therefore,  since
miracles  are  now  ceased,  we  do  conceive  that  no  church
or  ecclesiastical  society  can  exist  without  obedience
required  from  its  members,  and  enforced  by  proper
sanctions.  Accordingly,  there  never  was  any  regularly
constituted  church  in  the  Christian  world,  where  there
was  not,  at  the  same  time,  some  exercise  of  discipline
and  authority.  If  a  judicature  which  is  appointed  to
be  the  guardian  and  defender  of  the  laws  and  orders  of
the  society,  shall  absolve  them  who  break  their  laws
from  all  censure,  and  by  such  a  deed  encourage  and
invite  them  to  future  disobedience,  we  conceive  that
they  have  exceeded  their  powers,  and  betrayed  their
trust  in  the  most  essential  instance."

"  Dr.  Robertson's  system,  with  respect  to  the  law  of
patronage,  proceeded  (as  we  are  informed  by  one  of
his  friends*)  upon  the  following  principles :  That  as
patronage  is  the  law  of  the  land,  the  courts  of  a  na-
tional church,  established  and  protected  by  law,  and
all  the  individual  ministers  of  that  church  are  bound,

*  Dr.  George  Hill,  principal  of  St.  Mary's  College,  in the  university  of  St.
Andrew's.

DR. ROBERTSON.  xi

in  as  far  as  it  depends  upon  exertions  arising  from  the
duties  of  their  place,  to  give  it  effect:  that  every  oppo-
sition to  the  legal  rights  of  patrons  tends  to  diminish
that  reverence,  which  all  the  subjects  of  a  free  govern-
ment ought  to  entertain  for  the  law;  and  that  it  is  dan-
gerous to  accustom  the  people  to  think  that  they  can
elude  the  law  or  defeat  its  operation,  because  success
in  one  instance  leads  to  greater  licentiousness. Upon
these  principles,  DT.  Robertson  thought  that  the  church
courts  betrayed  their  duty  to  the  constitution,  when  the
spirit  of  their  decisions,  or  negligence  in  enforcing  obe-
dience to  their  orders,  created  unnecessary  obstacles  to
the  right  of  patronage,  and  fostered  in  the  minds  of  the
people,  the  false  idea  that  they  have  a  right  to  choose
their  own  ministers,  or  even  a  negative  upon  the  nomi-
•  nation  of  the  patron. He  was  well  aware  that  the  sub-
jects of  Great  Britain  are  entitled  to  apply,  in  a  consti-
tutional manner,  for  the  repeal  of  every  law  which  they
consider  as  a  grievance. But  while  he  supported  pa-
tronage as  the  existing  law,  he  regarded  it  also  as  the
most  expedient  method  of  settling  vacant  parishes. It
did  not  appear  to  him  that  the  people  are  competent
judges  of  those  qualities  which  a  minister  should  pos-
sess, in  order  to  be  a  useful  teacher  either  of  the  doc-
trines of  pure  religion,  or  of  the  principles  of  sound
morality. He  suspected  that  if  the  probationers  of  the
church  were  taught  to  consider  their  success  in  obtain-
ing a  settlement,  as  depending  upon  a  popular  elec-
tion, many  of  them  would  be  tempted  to  adopt  a  man-
ner of  preaching  more  calculated  to  please  the  people,
than  to  promote  their  edification. He  thought  that
there  is  little  danger  to  be  apprehended  from  the  abuse
of  the  law  of  patronage,  because  the  presentee  must  be

xii  THE LIFE OF

chosen  from  amongst  those  whom  the  church  itself  had
approved  of,  and  had  licensed  as  qualified  for  the  of-
fice of  the  ministry;  because  a  presentee  cannot  be
admitted  to  the  benefice,  if  any  relevant  charge  as  to
his  life  or  doctrine  be  proved  against  him ;  and  because
after  ordination  and  admission,  he  is  liable  to  be  de-
prived for  improper  conduct.  When  every  possible
precaution  is  thus  taken  to  prevent  unqualified  persons
from  being  introduced  into  the  church,  or  those  who
afterward  prove  unworthy,  from  remaining  in  it,  the
occasional  evils  and  abuses  from  which  no  human  in-
stitution is  exempted,  could  not,  in  the  opinion  of  Dr.
Robertson,  be  fairly  urged  as  reasons  against  the  law
of  patronage."

Such  are  the  principles  by  which  our  Author  was
guided  in  ecclesiastical  affairs ;  and  by  the  wisdom  and
consistency  of  which  he  repelled  the  aggressions  of
popular  power,  banished  confusion,  and  gave  dignity
and  steadiness  to  the  counsels  of  the  church.

While  he  was  a  zealous  advocate  of  a  firm  and  re-
gular discipline,  he  shewed  himself  a  foe  to  that  puri-
tanical austerity,  which  censures  all  the  cheerful  amuse-
ments of  life,  and  disdains  every  polite  accomplishment
of  taste.  In  the  year  1757,  Mr.  John  Home,  the  mi-
nister of  Athelstonford,  published  the  well-known  tra-
gedy of  Douglas :  an  act  which  gave  as  much  offence
to  the  Scottish  clergy,  as  if  he  had  violated  one  of  the
great  commands  of  the  decalogue.  The  same  body,
who,  a  little  before,  could  patiently  submit  to  have  their
authority  opposed  and  derided,  thought  it  an  unpar-
donable offence  against  presbyterian  solemnity,  that
any  of  their  fraternity  should  give  countenance  to  the
amusements  of  the  stage.  Mr.  Robertson  displayed  all

DR. ROBERTSON.  xiii

his  zeal  and  eloquence  in  defending  Mr.  Home,  and
his  friends  who  had  ventured  to  be  present  at  the  per-
formance of  the  tragedy.  He  declared  that  he  saw  no-
thing repugnant  to  the  purity  of  Christianity  in  writing
a  play  that  was  not  the  vehicle  of  any  vicious  senti-
ments ;  and  although  he  had  never  entered,  nor  intended
to  enter,  a  theatre,  he  did  not  think  that  all  clergymen
were  bound  to  observe  the  same  rigid  self-denial.  It
is  to  be  observed,  that  our  Author  had  promised  his
father  never  to  be  present  at  any  theatrical  performance,
and  that  he  scrupulously  adhered  to  his  word.  This
circumstance  might  give  weight  to  his  arguments,  be-
cause it  was  obvious  that  in  exculpating  others,  he  was
not  contending  for  a  licence  which  he  wished  to  enjoy
himself.  Upon  the  whole,  it  is  believed  that  his  opi-
nion had  great  influence  in  softening  the  sentence  upon
the  offenders.  Mr.  Home  resigned  his  living;  and  as
to  the  gentlemen  who  accompanied  him  to  the  ob-
noxious amusement,  some  were  only  reproved,  and  one
or  two  suspended  for  a  short  time.

Although  Mr.  Robertson  had  many  religious  duties
to  perform,  and  although  he  never  debarred  himself
from  the  pleasures  of  society,  his  early  taste  for  litera-
ture had  not  been  permitted  to  languish.  The  first
performance,  by  which  he  aspired  to  the  fame  of  an
author,  was  the  history  of  his  own  country.  Some
circumstances  relative  to  the  progress  of  this  work
are  preserved  in  the  following  letters,  written  by  Mr.
Robertson : — *

*  Mr.  Stewart's  Appendix.

xir  THE  LIFE OF

To  SIR  DAVID  DALRYMPLE  (LORD  HAILES).

SIR, -  Gladsmuir,  Oct.  22, 1753.

I  INTEND  to  employ  some  of  the  idle  time  of  this  win-
ter in  making  a  more  diligent  inquiry  than  ever  I  have
done,  into  that  period  of  Scots  history  from  the  death  of
king  James  V.  to  the  death  of  queen  Mary.  I  have
the  more  common  histories  of  that  time,  such  as  Bu-
chanan, Spottiswood,  and  Knox,  but  there  are  several
collections  of  papers  by  Anderson,  Jebb,  Forbes,  and
others,  which  I  know  not  how  to  come  at.  I  am  per-
suaded you  have  most  of  these  books  in  your  library,
and  I  flatter  myself  you  will  be  so  good  as  to  allow  me
the  use  of  them.  You  know  better  what  books  to  send
me,  and  what  will  be  necessary  to  give  any  light  to  this
part  of  the  history,  than  I  do  what  to  ask ;  and  there-
fore I  leave  the  particular  books  to  your  own  choice,
which  you'll  please  order  to  be  given  to  my  servant.
Whatever  you  lend  me  shall  be  used  with  much  care,
and  returned  with  great  punctuality.  I  beg  you  may

forgive  this  trouble.

I  am,  with  great  respect,  &c.

To  THE  SAME.

. SIR,  Gladsmuir,  July  26, 1757.

I  HAVE  now  got  forward  to  the  year  1660,  and  as  it
will  be  impossible  for  me  to  steer  through  Gowrie's
conspiracy  without  your  guidance,  I  must  take  advan-
tage of  the  friendly  offer  you  was  pleased  to  make  me,
and  apply  to  you  for  such  books  and  papers  as  you  think
to  be  necessary  for  my  purpose.  I  would  wish  to  give
an  accurate  and  rational  account  of  the  matter,  but  not
very  minute.  I  have  in  my  possession  Calderwood's
MSS.  and  all  the  common  printed  histories  ;  but  I  have

DR.  ROBERTSON,  XT

neither  lord  Cromarty's  account,  nor  any  other  piece
particularly  relative  to  the  conspiracy.  I  beg  you  may
supply  me  with  as  many  as  you  can,  and  direct  me  to
any  thing  you  think  may  be  useful.  The  papers  you
are  pleased  to  communicate  to  me,  shall  be  shewn  to  no
human  creature,  and  no  farther  use  shall  be  made  of
them  than  you  permit.  My  servant  will  take  great  care
of  whatever  books  or  papers  you  give  him.  I  need  not
say  how  sensible  I  am  of  the  good- will  with  which  you
are  pleased  to  instruct  me  in  this  curious  point  of  history,
nor  how  much  I  expect  to  profit  by  it.

I  ever  am,  Sec.

To  THE  SAME.

SIR,  Edinburgh,  Nov.  8,  1758.

I  HAVE  taken  the  liberty  to  send  you  enclosed  a
preface  to  my  book,  which  I  have  just  now  written.  I
find  it  very  difficult  for  a  man  to  speak  of  himself  with
any  decency,  through  three  or  four  pages.  Unluckily,
I  have  been  obliged  to  write  it  in  the  utmost  hurry,  as
Strahan  is  "clamouring  for  it.  I  think  it  was  necessary
to  say  all  in  it  that  I  have  said,  and  yet  it  looks  too  like
a  puff.  I  send  it  to  you  not  only  that  you  may  do  me
the  favour  to  correct  any  inaccuracies  in  the  composi-
tion, but  because  there  is  a  paragraph  *  in  it  which  I
could  not  presume  to  publish  without  your  permission,
though  I  have  taken  care  to  word  it  so  modestly,  that  a
man  might  have  said  it  of  himself.  As  I  must  send  off
the  preface  by  to-morrow's  post,  I  must  beg  the  favour
that  you  will  return  it,  with  your  remarks,  to-morrow
morning.  I  would  wish,  if  possible,  that  I  had  time  to

shew  it  to  Blair.

I  am,  with  great  respect,  &c.

*  Respecting  Sir  David  Dairy  niple.

xvi  THE  JLIFE OF

The  History  of  Scotland  was  published  on  the  1st  of
February,  1759,  and  the  encomiums  which  were  be-
stowed upon  it,  were  prompt,  warm,  and  universal.  Dr.
Warburton,  who  was  too  acute  to  be  deceived,  and  too
proud  to  flatter,  wrote  in  the  following  terms  to  Millar,
the  publisher: — "I  have  received  and  read  with  great
pleasure  the  new  History  of  Scotland,  and  will  not  wait
for  the  judgment  of  the  public,  to  pronounce  it  a  very
excellent  work.  From  the  Author's  apparent  love  of
civil  and  religious  liberty,  I  suppose,  that  were  it  not
for  fear  of  offence  (which  every  wise  man  in  his  situation
would  fear  to  give),  he  would  have  spoken  with  much
more  freedom  of  the  hierarchical  principles  of  the  infant
church  of  Scotland."

Mr.  Horace  Walpole  wrote  to  the  Author  :  "  Having
finished  the  first  volume,  and  made  a  little  progress  in
the  second,  I  cannot  stay  till  I  have  finished  the  latter,
to  tell  you  how  exceedingly  I  admire  the  work.  Your
modesty  will  make  you,  perhaps,  suppose  these  are
words  of  compliment  and  of  course;  but  as  I  can  give
you  very  good  reasons  for  my  approbation,  you  may
believe  that  I  no  more  flatter  your  performance,  than
I  have  read  it  superficially,  hastily,  or  carelessly.  The
style  is  most  pure,  proper,  and  equal;  is  very  natural
and  easy,  except  now  and  then,  where,  as  I  may  justly
call  it,  you  are  forced  to  translate  from  bad  writers.
You  will  agree  with  me,  Sir,  that  an  historian  who  writes
from  other  authorities,  cannot  possibly  always  have  as
flowing  a  style,  as  an  author  whose  narrative  is  dictated
from  his  own  knowledge.  Your  perspicuity  is  most
beautiful,  your  relation  always  interesting,  never  lan-
guid ;  and  you  have  very  extraordinarily  united  two  merits
very  difficult  to  be  reconciled.  I  mean,  that  though  you

DR. ROBERTSON.  xvii

have  formed  your  history  into  pieces  of  information,
each  of  which  would  make  a  separate  memoir,  yet  the
whole  is  hurried  on  into  one  uninterrupted  story.  I
assure  you,  I  value  myself  on  the  first  distinction,  espe-
cially as  Mr.  Charles  Townshend  made  the  same  remark.
You  have  preserved  the  gravity  of  history  without  any
formality,  and  you  have,  at  the  same  time,  avoided  what
I  am  now  running  into,  antithesis  and  conceit:  in  short,
Sir,  I  don't  know  where  or  what  history  is  written  with
more  excellences;  and  when  I  say  this,  you  may  be
sure  I  do  not  forget  your  impartiality.  But,  Sir,  I  will
not  wound  your  bashfulness  with  encomiums ;  yet  the
public  will  force  you  to  hear  them .  I  never  knew  justice
so  rapidly  paid  to  a  work  of  so  deep  and  serious  a  kind ;
for  deep  it  is,  and  it  must  be  great  sense  that  could
penetrate  so  far  into  human  nature,  considering  how
little  you  have  been  conversant  with  the  world."

The  following  passages  are  from  the  letters  of  Mr.
David  Hume,  addressed  to  our  Author :  "  You  have
very  good  cause  to  be  satisfied  with  the  success  of  your
History,  as  far  as  it  can  be  judged  of  from  a  few  weeks'
publication.  I  have  not  heard  of  one  who  does  not
praise  it  warmly ;  and  were  I  to  enumerate  all  those
whose  suffrages  I  have  either  heard  in  its  favour,  or
been  told  of,  I  should  fill  my  letter  with  a  list  of  names.
Mallet  told  me  that  he  was  sure  there  was  no  English-
man capable  of  composing  such  a  work.  The  town
will  have  it  that  you  was  educated  at  Oxford,  thinking
it  impossible  for  a  mere  untravelled  Scotchman  to  pro-
duce such  language. — Since  you  will  hear  me  speak  on
this  subject,  I  cannot  help  it,  and  must  fatigue  your
ears  as  much  as  ours  are  in  this  place  by  endless,  and
repeated,  and  noisy  praises  of  the  History  of  Scotland.

VOL.  i.  c

xviii  THE LIFE OF

Dr.  Douglas  told  me  yesterday,  that  he  had  seen  the
bishop  of  Norwich,  who  had  just  bought  the  book  from
the  high  commendations  he  heard  of  it  from  Mr.  Legge.
Mallet  told  me  that  lord  Mansfield  is  at  a  loss  whether
he  shall  most  esteem  the  matter  or  the  style.  Elliot
told  me  that  being  in  company  with  George  Grenville,
that  gentleman  was  speaking  loud  in  the  same  key.  Our
friend  pretended  ignorance ;  said  he  knew  the  author,
and  if  he  thought  the  book  good  for  any  thing,  would
send  for  it  and  read  it.  Send  for  it  by  all  means  (said
Mr.  Grenville),  you  have  not  read  a  better  book  for  a
long  time.  But,  said  Elliot,  I  suppose,  although  the
matter  may  be  tolerable,  as  the  author  was  never  on  this
side  the  Tweed  till  he  wrote  it,  it  must  be  very  barbarous
in  the  expression.  By  no  means,  cried  Mr.  Grenville;
had  the  author  lived  all  his  life  in  London,  and  in  the
best  company,  he  could  not  have  expressed  himself  with
greater  elegance  and  purity."

In  short,  Mr.  Hume  declared  that  the  merit  of  the
work  was  so  great,  that  there  is  scarce  another  instance
of  a  first  performance  being  so  near  perfection.  The
praise  of  this  gentleman,  we  believe  to  have  been  given
with  sincerity :  for  though  he  had  occupied  the  field  of
historical  fame  before  our  Author,  there  seems  not  to
have  existed  any  bitterness  of  literary  envy  between  the
two  Writers.  Shortly  after  the  publication  of  the  first
work  of  Dr.  Robertson  (for  that  now  becomes  his  title),
Mr.  Hume  gave  to  the  world  his  History  of  the  House
of  Tudor,  comprising,  of  necessity,  an  account  of  Scot-
tish affairs  in  the  reign  of  queen  Mary ;  so  that  the  two
authors  exhibited  a  trial  of  strength  and  ability  on  the
same  topics  of  inquiry.  Dr.  Robertson  had  expressed
a  wish  that  Mr.  Hume  should  not  write  this  period ;

DR. ROBERTSON.  xix

but  the  latter  declared  that  he  could  not  comply  with
his  desire,  without  abandoning  the  scheme  of  English
history  in  which  he  had  proceeded  so  far :  subsequent-
ly, he  also  remarked,  for  their  mutual  consolation,  that
their  combat  was  not  likely  to  make  half  so  much  noise
as  that  between  Broughton  and  the  one-eyed  coachman.
Before  publishing,  he  said,  he  was  glad  to  find  that
they  would  agree  in  almost  all  the  material  parts  of  their
history ;  differing,  however,  in  some  points ;  such  as
the  violation  of  the  treaty  of  Perth  by  Mary  of  Guise,
and  the  innocency  of  Mary  with  regard  to  Babington's
conspiracy.*  In  history,  as  long  as  darkness  veils  the
past,  and  prejudice  and  passion  obscure  the  human
understanding,  there  will  remain  somevexattequtestiones,
some  interminable  subjects,  upon  which  writers  will
never  entirely  agree.  Without  attending  to  the  colli-
sion of  the  two  authors  upon  such  disputes,  we  may
venture  to  affirm,  that  in  any  of  the  excellences  of  a
great  historian,  Dr.  Robertson  need  not  fear  to  stand
the  comparison  with  his  countryman,  Mr.  Hume.

The  praises  of  the  History  of  Scotland  were  not  echo-
ed merely  by  the  voices  of  private  friends,  who  might
be  suspected  of  partiality :  the  public  fully  attested
their  opinion  of  its  merit.  A  second  edition  was  called
for,  within  a  month  after  the  publication  of  the  book ;
and  Dr.  Robertson  lived  to  see  no  less  than  fourteen
editions  committed  to  the  press.  The  rapidity  of  its
success  (he  declaredf)  surprised  no  man  more  than
the  Author.  He  did  not  affect  to  think  less  of  it  than
was  natural  for  him  who  made  it;  and  he  never  was
much  afraid  of  the  subject,  which  is  interesting  to  the

*  Mr.  Hume's  letters  to  Dr.  Robertson,  preserved  by  Mr.  Stewart,
t  Letter  to  Mr.  Strahan,

• c  2

xx  THE LIFE OF

English  as  well  as  Scots :  but  a  much  more  moderate
success  was  all  he  looked  for.  Since  the  success  had
so  far  exceeded  his  hopes,  he  enjoyed  it ;  especially  as
he  had  flattered  nobody  in  order  to  obtain  it,  and  had
not  spared  to  speak  truth  of  all  factions  and  sects.
.  Although  he  enjoyed  an  ample  share  of  that  pane-
gyric which  a  great  Athenian*  considered  the  most  de-
lightful of  all  sounds,  yet  in  his  humble  circumstances,
something  more  was  both  requisite  and  just.  While  his
Scotland  was  in  the  press  he  removed  to  Edinburgh,
and  became  minister  of  the  Old  Grey  Friars  church;
which  post  would  be  the  more  pleasing,  as  his  father

t  Vi,  also  had  possessed  it.  In  1759,  he  was  appointed  chap-
lain to  Stirling-castle,  and  the  following  year  chaplain
in  ordinary  to  his  majesty,  for  Scotland.  In  1762,  he
was  raised  to  the  dignity  of  principal  of  the  university
of  Edinburgh;  and  two  years  afterward,  the  office  of

\v  historiographer  to  his  majesty,  for  Scotland  (which  had
been  extinct  since  the  time  of  queen  Anne),  was  revived
in  his  favour,  and  a  salary  of  two  hundred  pounds  per
annum  affixed  to  it.

Although  his  circumstances  were  such,  as  in  a  pres-
byterian  clergyman  might  be  denominated  affluent,  yet
some  of  his  friends  wished  to  see  him  in  possession  of
far  richer  emoluments.  With  this  view,  Sir  Gilbert  El-
liot, Dr.  John  Blair,  and  Mr.  Hume,  suggested  to  him
the  plan  of  migrating  from  the  Scotch  to  the  English
church ;  as  the  latter  establishment  (although  in  gene-
ral offering  nothing  but  situations  of  genteel  indigence)
contains  a  few  dignities  sufficient  to  reward  the  bright-

*  Themistoclem  ilium,  summum  Athenis  virum  dixisse  aiunt,  cum  ex  eo  qu&reretur,
quod  acroama,  aut  cujus  vocem  libentissime  audiret:  Ejus,  a  quo  sua  virtus  optimeproe-
dicaretur.  Cic.  pro  Arch.

DR. ROBERTSON.  xxi

est  merit  and  the  loftiest  ambition.  From  the  notice
which  Dr.  Robertson's  fame  at  last  attracted,  there  is
little  doubt  that  his  secession  might  have  been  follow-
ed by  his  elevation  to  the  highest  ecclesiastical  honours ;
but  as  an  episcopal  and  presbyterian  church  are  essen-
tially different  in  government,  and  he  could  not  make
the  change  without  a  sacrifice  of  principle  and  consis-
tency, he  wisely  (and  it  is  believed  promptly)  declined
the  injudicious  scheme  of  his  friends.

He  was  content  to  aggrandize  himself  by  that  ho-
nourable species  of  labour,  which  had  been  the  origin  of
his  reputation ;  but  his  mind  was  for  some  time  perplex-
ed with  doubts  concerning  the  subject  which  should
next  employ  his  pen.  Several  were  proposed  by  his
friends,  or  suggested  by  his  own  judgment.  The  subject,
which  he  would  have  preferred  himself,  was  the  History
of  England;  and  it  is  reported  that  lord  Chesterfield  de-
clared that,  in  case  of  his  undertaking  it,  he  would  move
in  the  house  of  lords  that  public  encouragement  should
be  given  him.  He  was  deterred,  however,  from  enter-
ing upon  this  field  by  his  respect  for  Mr.  Hume,  as  he
did  not  think  such  rivalry  tobe  consistent  with  the  duties
of  friendship.  His  thoughts  seemed  to  have  been  direct-
ed to  the  Age  of  Leo  the  Tenth;  but  Mr.  Hume  remind-
ed him  of  the  necessity  of  being  versed  in  all  the  anec-
dotes of  the  Italian  literature,  and  of  the  difficulty  of
acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the  great  works  of  sculpture,
architecture,  and  painting,  by  which  that  age  was  chiefly
distinguished.  Mr.  Walpole,  among  other  subjects,
hinted  at  a  History  of  Learning;  and  the  History  of  the
Roman  Empire  under  Nerva,  Trajan,  Adrian,  and  the
two  Antonines,  which,  from  the  virtues  of  those  princes,
might  be  called  the  History  of  Humanity.  Mr.  Hume's
opinion,  which  is  of  far  greater  importance,  is  stated  in

xxii  THE LIFE OF

the  following  letter,  which  has  been  preserved  by  Mr.
Stewart.

"  I  have  frequently  thought  and  talked  with  our  com-
mon friends  upon  the  subject  of  your  letter.  There  al-
ways occurred  to  us  several  difficulties  with  regard  to
every  subject  we  could  propose.  The  ancient  Greek
History  has  several  recommendations,  particularly  the
good  authors  from  which  it  must  be  drawn;  but  this  cir-
cumstance becomes  an  objection  when  more  narrowly
considered,  for  what  can  you  do  in  most  places  with
those  authors  but  transcribe  and  translate  them?  No
letters  or  state  papers  from  which  you  could  correct
their  errors,  or  authenticate  their  narration,  or  supply
their  defects.  Besides,  Rollin  is  so  well  wrote  with  re-
spect to  style,  that  with  superficial  people  it  passes  for
sufficient.*  There  is  one  Dr.  Leland,  who  has  lately
wrote  the  Life  of  Philip  of  Macedon,  which  is  one  of
the  best  periods.  The  book,  they  tell  me,  is  perfectly
well  wrote ;  yet  it  has  such  small  sale,  and  has  so  little
excited  the  attention  of  the  public,  that  the  author  has
reason  to  think  his  labours  thrown  away.  I  have  not
read  the  book,  but  by  the  size  I  should  judge  it  to  be  too
particular.  It  is  a  pretty  large  quarto.  I  think  a  book
of  that  size  sufficient  for  the  whole  history  of  Greece  till
the  death  of  Philip,  and  I  doubt  not  but  such  a  work
would  be  successful,  notwithstanding  all  these  dis-
couraging circumstances.  The  subject  is  noble,  and
Rollin  is  by  no  means  equal  to  it.

"  I  own  I  like  still  less  your  project  of  the  age  of
Charles  the  Fifth. That  subject  is  disjointed,  and  your

*  Mr.  Hume  in  another  letter  observes,  that  Rollin  "  has  no  merit,  but  a  certain
facility  and  sweetness  of  narration,  but  has  loaded  his  work  with  fifty  puerilities."
This  censure  is  illiberal  and  unjust.  Many  parts  of  Rollin  are  written  in  a  manner
which  neither  Mr.  Hume  nor  any  historian  could  surpass.  The  Frenchman  has  his
blemishes  we  allow,  but  has  not  Mr.  Hume  a  share  of  faults  also  ?  Are  not  his  writ-
ings loaded  not  only  with  puerilities,  but  with  faults  much  more  offensive  ?

DR. ROBERTSON.  xxiii

hero,  who  is  the  sole  connexion,  is  not  very  interesting.
A  competent  knowledge  is  at  least  required  of  the  state
and  constitution  of  the  empire,  of  the  several  kingdoms
of  Spain,  of  Italy,  of  the  Low  Countries ;  which  it  would
be  the  work  of  half  a  life  to  acquire ;  and  though  some
parts  of  the  story  may  be  entertaining,  there  would  be
many  dry  and  barren,  and  the  whole  seems  not  to  have
any  great  charms.

"  But  I  would  not  willingly  start  objections  to  these
schemes,  unless  I  had  something  to  propose  which  would
be  plausible;  and  I  shall  mention  to  you  an  idea  which
has  sometimes  pleased  me,  and  which  I  had  once  en-
tertained thoughts  of  attempting.  You  may  observe
that  among  modern  readers  Plutarch  is  in  every  trans-
lation the  chief  favourite  of  the  ancients.  Numberless
translations  and  numberless  editions  have  been  made  of
him  in  all  languages,  and  no  translation  has  been  so  ill
done  as  not  to  be  successful.  Though  those  who  read
the  originals  never  put  them  in  comparison  either  with
Thucydides  or  Xenophon,  he  always  attaches  more  the
reader  in  the  translation;  a  proof  that  the  idea  and  exe-
cution of  his  work  is  in  the  main  happy.  Now  I  would
have  you  think  of  writing  modern  lives  somewhat  after
that  manner;  not  to  enter  into  a  detail  of  the  actions,
but  to  mark  the  manners  of  the  great  personages  by  do-
mestic stories,  by  remarkable  sayings,  and  by  a  general
sketch  of  their  lives  and  adventures.  You  see  that  in
Plutarch  the  life  of  Caesar  may  be  read  in  half  an  hour.
Were  you  to  write  the  life  of  Henry  the  Fourth  of  France
after  that  model,  you  might  pillage  all  the  pretty  stories
in  Sully,  and  speak  more  of  his  mistresses  than  of  his
battles.  In  short,  you  might  gather  the  flower  of  all
modern  history  in  this  manner.  The  remarkable  popes,
the  kings  of  Sweden,  the  great  discoverers  and  con-

xxiv  THE  LIFE OF

querors  of  the  New  World,  even  the  eminent  men  of
letters,  might  furnish  you  with  matter,  and  the  quick
dispatch  of  every  different  work  would  encourage  you
to  begin  a  new  one.  If  one  volume  were  successful,  you
might  compose  another  at  your  leisure,  and  the  field  is
inexhaustible.  There  are  persons  whom  you  might
meet  with  in  the  corners  of  history,  so  to  speak,  who
would  be  a  subject  of  entertainment  quite  unexpected,
and  as  long  as  you  live,  you  might  give  and  receive
amusement  by  such  a  work.  Even  your  son,  if  he  had
a  talent  for  history,  would  succeed  to  the  subject,  and
his  son  to  him.  I  shall  insist  no  farther  on  this  idea,
because,  if  it  strikes  your  fancy,  you  will  easily  per-
ceive all  its  advantages,  and  by  farther  thought  all  its
difficulties."

Dr.  Robertson  was  not  persuaded  to  adopt  this  tempt-
ing proposal,  although  it  is  certain  that  if  he  had  com-
plied, he  might,  by  his  great  talent  and  industry,  have
produced  many  volumes  more  full  of  engaging  variety
and  instruction  than  any  thing  which  we  possess  in  the
whole  sphere  of  literature.  The  subject  upon  which  he
at  last  determined,  was  the  History  of  Charles  the  Fifth,
which  comprises  the  most  grand  and  eventful  period  in
the  affairs  of  Modern  Europe.  In  the  choice  of  this
subject  he  was  certainly  not  attracted  by  its  facility,  for
nothing  can  be  more  difficult  than  to  write  profoundly,
and  at  the  same  time  with  accuracy,  upon  the  transac-
tions of  foreign  nations.  In  one  of  his  letters  he  ad-
verts to  the  time  and  labour  which  he  was  obliged  to
employ  in  teaching  himself  to  understand  manners,
laws,  and  forms,  which  he  was  to  explain  to  others;  to
the  pains  he  bestowed  in  studying  the  constitution,  the
manners,  and  the  commerce  of  Spanish  America ;  while
the  review  contained  in  the  first  volume  of  Charles  the

DR. ROBERTSON.  xxv

Fifth  was  founded  on  researches  still  more  laborious.
He  was  not,  however,  dismayed  by  the  prospect  of  lite-
rary toil ;  and  he  finally  shewed  himself  competent  to
overcome  every  difficulty  of  history,  which  can  be  sur-
mounted by  human  genius  and  perseverance.

When  he  had  finished  about  one  third  of  his  Charles
the  Fifth,  his  mind  was  diverted  by  some  powerful  so-
licitations to  undertake  a  History  of  England.  These
came  from  illustrious  persons,  whose  request  alone  was
a  flattering  distinction,  and  a  compliance  with  it  ap-
peared almost  a  duty.  Lord  Cathcart  wrote  to  assure
him  that  his  majesty  had  expressed  a  wish  to  see  a  His-
tory of  England  by  his  pen,  and  that  lord  Bute  had  pro-
mised that  every  source  of  information,  which  govern-
ment could  command,  would  be  opened  to  him;  and
that  great,  laborious,  and  extensive  as  the  work  must  be,
the  encouragement  should  be  proportioned.  The  pro-
posal was  very  agreeable  to  Dr.  Robertson's  inclina-
tions, and  his  scruples  about  interfering  in  Mr.  Hume's
province  seem  to  have  subsided.  He  considered  that
his  friend's  book  having  been  published  several  years
before  any  work  of  his  own  on  the  same  subject  could
appear,  would  already  have  assumed  its  due  station  in
the  literary  world.  Besides,  their  manner  of  viewing
the  same  topics  was  so  different  and  peculiar,  that  (as
was  the  case  in  their  last  books)  each  might  have  his
own  partisans,  and  maintain  his  own  rank,  without  in-
juring the  other.  Still  there  were  obstacles  opposing  a
scheme,  which  in  many  respects  appeared  most  desir-
able for  himself,  and  for  the  nation,  whose  annals  he
was  to  illustrate.  A  residence  in  London  (which  seemed
to  be  necessary)  was  in  his  habits  and  circumstances  not
at  all  consonant  to  his  own  wishes,  and  would  probably

xxvi  THE LIFE OF

be  accompanied  with  considerable  disadvantages  to  his
family ;  he  was  unwilling  also  to  relinquish  the  work
which  he  had  in  hand,  and  to  waste  so  much  labour  as
he  had  bestowed  upon  the  History  of  Charles  the  Fifth.
At  last,  for  reasons  which  have  not  been  precisely  as-
certained, the  intention  of  writing  the  English  History
was  abandoned.  Mr.  Stewart  conjectures,  that  some  of
the  causes  which  led  to  this  determination  might  be  the
departure  of  lord  Bute  out  of  office  in  1764,  which
made  it  necessary  to  open  an  arrangement  with  other
persons ;  the  delay  also  which  arose  in  the  completion
of  the  Spanish  History,  occasioned  by  his  duties  in  the
church,  his  avocations  as  principal  of  the  university,
and  the  deep  and  extensive  ramifications  of  inquiry
which  were  multiplied  upon  him  in  the  progress  of  the
Emperor's  Reign.

In  1769,  ten  years  after  the  publication  of  his  Scot-
land, appeared  the  History  of  Charles  the  Fifth,  with  a
dedication  to  the  king,  and  a  preliminary  volume,  con-
taining a  luminous  review  of  the  progress  of  society  in
Europe,  from  the  subversion  of  the  Roman  empire  to
the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century.  The  public
had  expected  this  work  with  the  most  intense  curiosity,
and  its  merit  was  found  perfectly  commensurate  to  the
expectations,  not  only  of  light  and  'superficial  readers,
but  also  of  the  most  learned  and  judicious.  The  cri-
tical journals  of  the  day  concurred  with  the  expressions
of  private  friendship  in  recording  its  excellence ;  and,
at  the  present  time,  when  the  fervour  of  surprise  is
abated,  and  there  is  nothing  to  give  any  bias  of  par-
tiality to  the  judgment,  it  will  bear  the  most  rigid  exa-
mination, and  be  pronounced  by  the  candid  as  equal
to  the  most  perfect  historical  productions,  in  grandeur

DR. ROBERTSON.  xxvii

of  design,  and  the  labour  and  skill  with  which  it  is
executed.

The  following  commendation  is  from  Mr.  Hume  :
"  I  got  yesterday  from  Strahan  about  thirty  sheets  of
your  History,  to  be  sent  over  to  Suard,  and  last  night
and  this  morning  have  run  them  over  with  great  avi-
dity. I  could  not  deny  myself  the  satisfaction  (which
I  hope  also  will  not  displease  you)  of  expressing  pre-
sently my  extreme  approbation  of  them.  To  say  only
they  are  very  well  written  is  by  far  too  faint  an  expres-
sion, and  much  inferior  to  the  sentiments  I  feel ;  they
are  composed  with  nobleness,  with  dignity,  with  ele-
gance, and  with  judgment,  to  which  there  are  few
equals.  They  even  excel,  and,  I  think,  in  a  sensible
degree,  your  History  of  Scotland.  I  propose  to  myself
great  pleasure  in  being  the  only  man  in  England,  during
some  months,  who  will  be  in  the  situation  of  doing  you
justice  ;  after  which  you  may  certainly  expect  that  my
voice  will  be  drowned  in  that  of  the  public."

In  another  letter  the  writer  of  the  History  of  England
observes  that  the  success  of  Charles  the  Fifth  had  an-
swered his  expectations;  that  he  who  conversed  with
the  great,  the  fair,  and  the  learned,  had  scarcely  heard
an  opposite  voice,  or  even  whisper,  to  the  general  sen-
timent.

A  letter  from  lord  Lyttleton  is  remarkable  for  recom-
mending to  Dr.  Robertson  the  same  plan  of  historical
labour  as  Mr.  Hume  had  formerly  proposed.  His  lord-
ship thus  writes  to  our  Author.

"  I  don't  wonder  that  your  sense  of  the  public  ex-
pectation gives  you  some  apprehensions ;  but  I  know
that  the  historian  of  Mary  queen  of  Scots  cannot  fail
to  do  justice  to  any  great  subject,  and  no  greater  can

xxviii  THE LIFE OF

be  found  in  the  records  of  mankind  than  this  you  have
now  chosen.  Go  on,  dear  Sir,  to  enrich  the  English
language  with  these  tracts  of  modern  history.  We  have
nothing  good  in  that  way,  except  what  relates  to  the
island  of  Great  Britain.  You  have  talents  and  youth
enough  to  undertake  the  agreeable  and  useful  task  of
giving  us  all  the  lives  of  the  most  illustrious  princes
who  have  flourished  since  the  age  of  Charles  the  Fifth
in  every  part  of  the  world,  and  comparing  them  toge-
ther, as  Plutarch  has  done  the  most  celebrated  heroes
of  Greece  and  Rome.  This  will  diffuse  your  glory  as
a  writer  farther  than  any  other  work.  All  nations  will
have  an  equal  interest  in  it,  and  feel  a  gratitude  to  the
stranger  who  takes  pains  to  immortalize  the  virtues  of
those  to  whom  he  is  only  related  by  the  general  sym-
pathy of  sentiment  and  esteem.  Plutarch  was  a  Greek,
which  made  him  less  impartial  between  his  countrymen
and  the  Romans,  in  weighing  their  comparative  merk,
than  you  would  be  in  contrasting  a  Frenchman  with  a
German,  or  an  Italian  with  a  Spaniard,  or  a  Dutchman
with  a  Swede.  Select,  therefore,  those  great  men  out
of  different  countries,  whose  characters  and  actions  may
be  best  compared  together,  and  present  them  to  our
view,  without  that  disguise  which  the  partiality  of  their
countrymen  or  the  malice  of  their  enemies  may  have
thrown  upon  them.  If  I  can  animate  you  to  this,  pos-
terity will  owe-  me  a  very  great  obligation."

The  publication  of  Charles  the  Fifth  was  in  every
respect  most  beneficial  to  Dr.  Robertson.  It  is  said
that  he  received  no  less  than  45QO/.  for  the  copyright ;
a  sum,  which  though  not  at  all  disproportioned  to  the
merit  of  the  work  and  the  labour  expended  upon  it,  is
still  a  great  proof  both  of  the  liberality  of  the  booksellers,

DR. ROBERTSON.  xxix

and  of  the  eminent  place  which  he  held  in  the  popular
esteem.  Many  a  writer  of  genius,  especially  amongst
the  unfortunate  race  of  poets,  has  scarcely  for  his  whole
works  received  a  quarter  of  the  sum  which  this  Author
obtained  for  one  of  his  histories.  He  enjoyed  a  great
accession  of  fame  as  well  as  emolument.  The  Reign
of  the  Emperor  appeared  at  Paris  almost  as  soon  as  at
London,  being  translated  by  M.  Suard,  a  gentleman
who  was  afterward  admitted  a  member  of  the  French
Academy,  and  who  has  given  a  version  of  several  pro-
ductions of  the  English  press.

The  epochs  in  a  hero's  life  are  his  battles  ;  the  dis-
tinctive marks  in  the  biography  of  a  great  author,  which
are  his  publications,  are  not  less  important  though  less
ostentatious.  In  1777,  Dr.  Robertson  had  completed
his  History  of  America,  which  may  be  considered  as  a
sequel  of  his  Reign  of  Charles  the  Fifth.  In  his  preface
to  the  last-named  work  he  had  remarked,  that  every  in-
telligent reader  would  observe  an  omission  in  his  plan ;
which  was  that  he  had  given  no  account  of  the  con-
quests of  Mexico  and  Peru,  or  of  the  establishment  of
the  Spanish  colonies,  in  the  continent  and  islands  of
America.  The  history  of  these  events  he  had  originally
intended  to  relate  at  considerable  length.  But,  upon
a  nearer  and  more  attentive  consideration  of  this  part
of  his  plan,  he  found  that  the  discovery  of  the  New
World,  the  state  of  society  among  its  ancient  inhabi-
tants, their  character,  manners,  and  arts,  the  genius  of
the  European  settlements  in  the  various  provinces,  to-
gether with  the  influence  of  these  upon  the  systems  of
policy  or  commerce  in  Europe,  were  subjects  so  splendid
and  important,  that  a  superficial  view  of  them  could
afford  little  satisfaction;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to

xxx  THE LIFE OF

treat  of  them  as  extensively  as  they  merited,  must  pro-
duce an  episode  disproportionate  to  the  principal  work.*
They  were  reserved  therefore  for  a  separate  perform-
ance, and  discussed  by  themselves  in  his  History  of
America.  -X:!

In  passing  judgment  upon  this,  as  upon  the  rest  of
Dr.  Robertson's  works,  the  criticism  of  the  most  emi-
nent men  has  been  exercised.  Our  Author  had  the
privilege  of  enjoying  the  friendship  of  many  of  the
greatest  literary  characters  of  the  day ;  and  the  praises
which  they  have  bestowed  upon  him,  will  doubtless  be
more  gratifying  to  the  reader,  than  any  remarks  from
persons  of  less  conspicuous  talents.  Nor  are  we  com-
pelled by  justice,  as  is  frequently  the  case,  to  make
large  deductions  from  the  eulogies  of  friends  and  con-
temporaries ;  since  the  merit  of  Dr.  Robertson  was  of
that  substantial  and  transcendent  nature,  that  those  who
praise  him  most  highly,  speak  of  him  with  most  truth.

For  the  encomiums  of  Mr.  Hume,  who  died  in  the
year  1776,  we  shall  substitute  those  of  the  writer  of  the
Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire.  "  When  I
ventured,"  says  Mr.  Gibbon,  in  a  letter  from  Paris,
"  to  assume  the  character  of  historian,  the  first,  the
most  natural,  but  at  the  same  time  the  most  ambitious
wish  which  I  entertained,  was  to  deserve  the  approba-
tion of  Dr.  Robertson  and  Mr.  Hume,  two  names  which
friendship  united,  and  which  posterity  will  never  sepa-
rate. I  shall  not,  therefore,  attempt  to  dissemble,
though  I  cannot  easily  express  the  honest  pleasure
which  I  received  from  your  obliging  letter,  as  well  as
from  the  intelligence  of  your  most  valuable  present.
The  satisfaction  which  I  should  otherwise  enjoy  in

*  Preface  to  Charles  the  Fifth.

DR. ROBERTSON.  xxxi

common  with  the  public,  will  now  be  heightened  by  a
sentiment  of  a  more  personal  and  flattering  nature ;  and
I  shall  often  whisper  to  myself,  that  I  have  in  some  de-
gree obtained  the  esteem  of  the  writer  whom  I  admire."

"  A  short  excursion  which  I  have  made  to  this  place
during  the  summer  months,  has  occasioned  some  delay
in  my  receiving  your  letter,  and  will  prevent  me  from
possessing,  till  my  return,  the  copy  of  your  History,
which  you  so  politely  desired  Mr.  Strahan  to  send  me.
But  I  have  already  gratified  the  eagerness  of  my  cu-
riosity and  impatience ;  and  though  I  was  obliged  to
return  the  book  much  sooner  than  I  could  have  wished,
I  have  seen  enough  to  convince  me  that  the  present
publication  will  support,  and,  if  possible,  extend  the
fame  of  the  author;  that  the  materials  are  collected
with  care,  and  arranged  with  skill ;  that  the  progress
of  discovery  is  displayed  with  learning  and  perspicuity ;
that  the  dangers,  the  achievements,  and  the  views  of
the  Spanish  adventurers,  are  related  with  a  temperate
spirit ;  and  that  the  most  original,  perhaps  the  most  curi-
ous portion  of  human  manners,  is  at  length  rescued  from
the  hands  of  sophists  and  declaimers.  Lord  Stormont,
and  the  few  in  this  capital  who  have  had  an  opportu-
nity of  perusing  the  History  of  America,  unanimously
concur  in  the  same  sentiments  :  your  work  is  already
become  a  favourite  subject  of  conversation,  and  M.
Suard  is  repeatedly  pressed,  in  my  hearing,  to  fix  the
time  when  his  translation  will  appear."

The  following  valuable  letter,  preserved  by  Mr.
Stewart,  is  from  the  eloquent  pen  of  the  celebrated  Mr.
Burke.

"  I  am  perfectly  sensible  of  the  very  flattering  dis-
tinction I  have  received,  in  your  thinking  me  worthy

xxxii  THE LIFE OF

of  so  noble  a  present  as  that  of  your  History  of  America.
I  have,  however,  suffered  my  gratitude  to  lie  under  some
suspicion,  by  delaying  my  acknowledgment  of  so  great
a  favour.  But  my  delay  was  only  to  render  my  obli-
gation to  you  more  complete,  and  my  thanks,  if  pos-
sible, more  merited.  The  close  of  the  session  brought
a  great  deal  of  very  troublesome,  though  not  important
business  on  me  at  once.  I  could  not  go  through  your
work  at  one  breath  at  that  time,  though  I  have  done  it
since.  I  am  now  enabled  to  thank  you,  not  only  for
the  honour  you  have  done  me,  but  for  the  great  satis-
faction, and  the  infinite  variety  and  compass  of  instruc-
tion, I  have  received  from  your  incomparable  work.
Every  thing  has  been  done  which  was  so  naturally  to
be  expected  from  the  author  of  the  History  of  Scotland,
and  of  the  Age  of  Charles  the  Fifth.  I  believe  few
books  have  done  more  than  this,  towards  clearing  up
dark  points,  correcting  errors,  and  removing  prejudices.
You  have  too  the  rare  secret  of  rekindling  an  interest
on  subjects  that  had  so  often  been  treated,  and  in  which
every  thing  which  could  feed  a  vital  flame  appeared  to
have  been  consumed.  I  am  sure  I  read  many  parts  of
your  History,  with  that  fresh  concern  and  anxiety  which
attend  those  who  are  not  previously  apprized  of  the
event.  You  have,  besides,  thrown  quite  a  new  light
on  the  present  state  of  the  Spanish  provinces,  and  fur-
nished both  materials  and  hints  for  a  rational  theory  of
what  may  be  expected  from  them  in  future.

"  The  part  which  I  read  with  the  greatest  pleasure
is,  the  discussion  on  the  manners  and  character  of  the
inhabitants  of  the  New  World.  I  have  always  thought
with  you,  that  we  possess  at  this  time  very  great  ad-
vantages towards  the  knowledge  of  human  nature.  We

DR. ROBERTSON.  xxxiti

need  no  longer  go  to  history  to  trace  it  in  all  its  stages
and  periods.  History,  from  its  comparative  youth,  is
but  a  poor  instructor.  When  the  Egyptians  called  the
Greeks  children  in  antiquities,  we  may  call  them  chil-
dren ;  and  so  we  may  call  all  those  nations  which  were
able  to  trace  the  progress  of  society  only  within  their
own  limits.  But  now,  the  great  map  of  mankind  is
unrolled  at  once,  and  there  is  no  state  or  gradation  of
barbarism,  and  no  mode  of  refinement,  which  we  have
not  at  the  same  moment  under  our  view :  the  very  dif-
ferent civility  of  Europe  and  China ;  the  barbarism  of
Persia,  and  of  Abyssinia ;  the  erratick  manners  of  Tar-
tary,  and  of  Arabia ;  the  savage  state  of  North  Ame-
rica, and  of  New  Zealand.  Indeed,  you  have  made  a
noble  use  of  the  advantages  you  have  had.  You  have
employed  philosophy  to  judge  on  manners,  and  from
manners  you  have  drawn  new  resources  for  philosophy.
I  only  think,  that  in  one  or  two  points,  you  have  hardly
done  justice  to  the  savage  character."

The  History  of  America,  as  well  as  the  Age  of
Charles  V.,  was  translated  into  the  French  language,
by  M.  Suard ;  and  Dr.  Robertson's  works  being  disse-
minated abroad,  obtained  for  him  several  honourable
notices  from  foreign  nations.  The  Spanish  people,  as
being  principally  indebted  to  his  talents  and  candour,
led  the  way.  "  On  the  8th  of  August,  1777,  he  was
unanimously  elected  a  member  of  the  Royal  Academy
of  History  at  Madrid ;  in  testimony  of  their  approbation
of  the  industry  and  care  with  which  he  has  applied  to
the  study  of  Spanish  history,  and  as  a  recompense  for
his  merit,  in  having  contributed  so  much  to  illustrate
and  spread  the  knowledge  of  it  in  foreign  countries."
In  1781,  a  similar  honour  was  conferred  upon  him  by

VOL.  i.  d

xxxiv  THE LIFE OF

the  Academy  of  Sciences  at  Padua;  and  the  example
was  followed  in  1783,  by  the  Imperial  Academy  of
Sciences  at  St.  Petersburgh.  The  empress  Catherine
of  Russia  concurred  with  these  learned  bodies,  and
testified  her  warm  admiration  of  the  Historian's  great
merit.  The  following  intelligence,  communicated  by
his  friend  Dr.  Rogerson,  must  have  been  gratifying  to
the  pride  of  any  author.

"  Your  History  of  America  was  received  and  perused
by  her  imperial  majesty,  with  singular  marks  of  appro-
bation. All  your  historical  productions  have  been  ever
favourite  parts  of  her  reading.  Not  long  ago,  doing
me  the  honour  to  converse  with  me  upon  historical
composition,  she  mentioned  you  with  particular  dis-
tinction, and  with  much  admiration  of  that  sagacity
and  discernment  displayed  by  you  in  painting  the  hu-
man mind  and  character,  as  diversified  by  the  various
causes  that  operate  upon  it,  in  those  eras  and  states  of
society  on  which  your  subject  led  you  to  treat.  She
assigned  you  the  place  of  first  model  in  that  species  of
composition.  As  to  the  History  of  Charles  V.,  she  was
pleased  to  add,  '  C'est  le  compagnon  constant  de  tous  mes
voyages  ;  je  ne  me  lassejamais  a  le  lire,  et  particular  e-
ment  le  premier  volume.'

"  She  then  presented  a  very  handsome  gold  enamel-
led snuff-box,  richly  set  with  diamonds,  ordering  me  to
transmit  it  to  you,  and  to  desire  your  acceptance  of  it,
as  a  mark  of  her  esteem ;  observing  at  the  same  time,
that  a  person,  whose  labours  had  afforded  her  so  much
satisfaction,  merited  some  attention  from  her."

Dr.  Robertson  had  intended  to  comprise  in  his  History
of  America,  not  only  an  account  of  the  Spanish  Con-
quests and  settlements  there,  but  also  of  the  establish-

DR. ROBERTSON.  xxxv

ments  which  other  European  people  made  in  the  West-
ern World.  The  completion  of  his  design  was  first  de-
layed, and  finally  frustrated,  by  the  breaking  out  of  the
disastrous  American  war.  He  considered,  that  while
the  colonies  were  engaged  in  civil  dissension  with  Great
Britain,  inquiries  and  speculations  concerning  their
earliest  forms  of  policy  and  laws,  which  existed  no
longer,  could  not  be  interesting.  He  thought  it  neces-
sary to  wait  for  times  of  greater  tranquillity,  when  he
could  write,  and  the  public  read,  with  greater  impar-
tiality and  better  information  :  and  his  principal  friends
confirmed  him  in  the  resolution  of  making  a  pause  for
a  little,  until  it  should  be  known  in  what  manner  the
colonial  ferment  would  subside.  He,  indeed,  congra-
tulated himself  that  his  American  History  was  not
finished  before  the  rupture ;  as  many  plausible  theories
which  he  would  have  been  entitled  to  form,  must  have
been  contradicted  by  subsequent  events.*  He  proceed-
ed so  far  in  his  original  plan,  as  to  digest  at  his  leisure
the  History  of  Virginia  to  the  year  1688,  and  the  His-
tory of  New  England  to  the  year  1652.  These  were
found  among  his  papers  after  his  death;  and  being
judged  equal  to  any  of  his  preceding  works,  were  pub-
lished by  his  son.

Although  the  progress  of  his  American  researches
was  checked,  he  had  no  disposition  to  be  entirely  idle;
and  his  friends  were  forward  in  suggesting  new  sub-
jects to  occupy  his  talents.  It  was  recommended  to  him
by  many  persons,  to  write  the  History  of  Great  Britain,
from  the  Revolution  to  the  Accession  of  the  House  of
Hanover ;  and  in  a  letter  written  in  1778,  he  seems  at
that  period  seriously  to  have  contemplated  the  design,

*  Letters.

d2

xxxvi  THE  LIFE  OF

and  to  have  thought  upon  his  materials.  The  following
year,  however,  his  resolution  was  altered,  and  Mr.
Gibbon  hinted  at  another  subject.  "  I  remember,"  says
the  author  of  the  Decline  and  Fall,  "  a  kind  of  engage-
ment you  had  contracted,  to  repeat  your  visit  to  Lon-
don every  second  year,  and  I  look  forward  with  plea-
sure to  next  spring,  when  your  bond  will  naturally
become  due,  I  should  almost  hope  that  you  would
bring  with  you  some  fruits  of  your  leisure,  had  I  not
been  informed  that  you  had  totally  relinquished  your
design,  of  continuing  Mr.  Hume's  History  of  England.
Notwithstanding  the  just  and  deep  sense  I  must  enter-
tain (if  the  intelligence  be  true)  of  our  public  loss,  I
have  scarcely  courage  enough  to  blame  you.  The  want
of  materials,  and  the  danger  of  offence,  are  two  formi-
dable obstacles  for  an  historian  who  wishes  to  instruct,
and  who  is  determined  not  to  betray  his  readers.  But
if  you  leave  the  narrow  limits  of  our  island,  there  still
remain,  without  returning  to  the  troubled  scene  of  Ame-
rica, many  subjects  not  unworthy  of  your  genius.  Will
you  give  me  leave,  as  a  vague  and  indigested  hint,  to
suggest  the  History  of  the  Protestants  in  France :  the
events  are  important  in  themselves,  and  intimately
connected  with  the  great  revolutions  of  Europe ;  some
of  the  boldest  or  most  amiable  characters  of  modern
times,  the  Admiral  Coligny,  Henry  IV.,  &c.  would  be
your  peculiar  heroes ;  the  materials  are  copious  and
authentic,  and  accessible ;  and  the  objects  appear  to
stand  at  that  just  distance  which  excites  curiosity,  with-
out inspiring  passion.  Excuse  the  freedom,  and  weigh
the  merits  (if  any)  of  this  proposal."

Mr.  Gibbon's  suggestion  was  not  adopted  :  and,  in-
deed, all  literary  projects  seem  for  a  considerable  pe-

DR. ROBEKTSON.  xxxvii

riod  to  have  been  excluded  from  the  mind  of  our  Au-
thor. He  preferred  devoting  his  hours  to  professional
duties,  and  to  the  intellectual  delights  of  reading  and
conversation.  He  might  justly  consider  himself  entitled
to  a  respite  from  the  toil  of  the  press,  on  account  of  the
extent  of  his  former  labours,  the  ease  of  his  circum-
stances, the  establishment  of  his  fame,  and  the  recrea-
tion, which  a  constitution  at  sixty  would  require,  after
severe  efforts  of  mental  labour.  He  gave,  however,  one
more  proof  before  his  death  of  the  vigour  of  his  talents,
and  the  depth  of  his  research.  In  1791,  he  appeared
before  the  public  for  the  last  time,  concluding  his  his-
torical career  with  a  Disquisition  concerning  Ancient
India.  His  own  account  of  the  origin  of  this  work  is,
that  he  was  induced  to  undertake  it  "  from  the  perusal
of  Major  Rennell's  Memoir  for  illustrating  his  map  of
Indostan.  This  suggested  to  him  the  idea  of  examin-
ing, more  fully  than  he  had  done  in  the  introductory
book  to  his  History  of  America,  into  the  knowledge
which  the  ancients  had  of  that  country,  and  of  consi-
dering what  is  certain,  what  is  obscure,  and  what  is  fa-
bulous, in  the  accounts  of  it  which  they  have  handed
down  to  us.  In  undertaking  this  inquiry,  he  had  ori-
ginally no  other  object  than  his  own  amusement  and
instruction ;  but  in  carrying  it  on,  and  consulting  with
care  the  authors  of  antiquity,  some  facts  hitherto  unob-
served, and  many  which  had  not  been  examined  with
proper  attention,  occurred  ;  new  views  opened,  his
ideas  gradually  extended,  and  became  more  interesting;
till  at  length  he  imagined,  that  the  result  of  his  re-
searches might  prove  amusing  and  instructive  toothers."
The  learned  geographer,  whose  work  gave  rise  to
Dr.  Robertson's  Disquisition,  liberally  acknowledged'

xxxviii  THE LIFE  OF

his  sentiments  of  approbation,  with  which  our  Author
was  much  gratified.

PART  OF  A  LETTER  FROM  MAJOR  RENNELL
TO  DR.  ROBERTSON.

London,  July  2, 1791.

"  AFTER  reading  your  book  twice,  I  may  with  truth
say,  that  I  was  never  more  instructed  or  amused  than
by  the  perusal  of  it ;  for  although  a  great  part  of  its
subject  had  long  been  revolving  in  my  mind,  yet  I  had
not  been  able  to  concentrate  the  matter  in  the  manner
you  have  done,  or  to  make  the  different  parts  bear  on
each  other.

"  The  subject  of  the  Appendix  was  what  interested
the  public  greatly,  and  was  only  to  be  acquired  (if  at
all)  by  the  study  or  perusal  of  a  great  number  of  dif-
ferent tracts ;  a  task  not  to  be  accomplished  by  ordi-
nary readers.  It  gives  me  unfeigned  pleasure  to  have
been  the  instrument  of  suggesting  such  a  task  to  you  ;
and  I  shall  reflect  with  pleasure,  during  my  life,  that  I
shall  travel  down  to  posterity  with  you ;  you,  in  your
place,  in  the  great  road  of  history,  whilst  I  keep  the
side-path  of  geography."

Dr.  Robertson  was  excited  not  only  by  the  curiosity
of  the  investigation  concerning  India,  but  also  by  moral
motives  of  a  far  superior  nature,  which  were  suitable
to  his  age  and  the  sanctity  of  his  functions,  and  which
ought  from  their  justice  to  influence  the  sentiments  of
his  countrymen.  At  the  end  of  the  Appendix  to  his
learned  Disquisition,  he  assures  us,  that  he  had  all
along  kept  in  view  an  object  more  interesting,  as  well
as  of  greater  importance,  than  to  describe  the  civil  po-
lity, the  arts,  the  sciences,  and  the  religious  institutions
of  one  of  the  most  ancient  and  most  numerous  races  of

DR. ROBERTSON.  xxxix

men.  He  entertained  hopes,  that  should  the  account
which  he  gave  of  the  early  and  high  civilization  of
India,  and  of  the  wonderful  progress  of  its  inhabitants
in  elegant  arts  and  useful  science,  be  received  as  just
and  well  established,  it  might  have  some  influence  upon
the  behaviour  of  Europeans  towards  that  people.  If
his  description  of  their  manners  and  institutions  contri-
buted, in  the  smallest  degree,  to  render  their  character
more  respectable,  and  their  condition  more  happy,  he
should  close  his  literary  labours  with  the  satisfaction  of
thinking  that  he  had  not  lived  or  written  in  vain.  This
luminous  inquiry  respecting  India,  was  begun  (Mr.
Stewart  informs  us)  in  the  sixty-eighth  year  of  the  Au-
thor's age,  and  brought  to  a  conclusion  in  twelve  months.
The  sketch  of  Dr.  Robertson's  labours  in  the  charac-
ter of  an  author  being  finished,  there  remain  only  one
or  two  incidents  of  a  general  nature  which  deserve  to
be  recorded.  In  February  of  1779,  his  life  was  endan-
gered by  the  fury  of  a  mob,  who  in  order  to  express
their  abhorrence  of  bigotry,  committed  some  of  the
most  outrageous  acts  which  render  bigotry  odious.
Incensed  by  a  proposal  to  grant  Some  relief  to  the  Pa-
pists of  Scotland,  the  populace  of  Edinburgh  were
guilty  of  the  most  tumultuous  violence.  As  Dr.  Ro-
bertson had  approved  of  the  proposed  concessions,  he
became  an  object  of  the  animosity  of  the  multitude;
whom  nothing  but  a  military  force  deterred  from  vio-
lent aggression  on  his  property  and  life.  This  unjust
outrage  he  bore  with  cool  resolution  and  fortitude;  and
part  of  a  speech,  which  he  made  in  the  following  as-
sembly, gives  us  a  very  favourable  opinion  of  the  libe-
rality and  moderation  which  governed  his  sentiments
at  this  juncture.

xl  THE  LIFE OF

"  The  first  intimation,"  he  declared,  "  I  had  of  any
intention  to  grant  relief  to  Papists  from  the  rigour  of
the  penal  statutes,  was  in  the  newspapers.  Though  I
had  observed  with  pleasure  the  rapid  progress  of  libe-
ral sentiments  in  this  enlightened  age ;  though  I  knew
that  science  and  philosophy  had  diffused  the  spirit  of
toleration  through  almost  every  part  of  Europe;  yet  I
was  so  well  acquainted  with  the  deep-rooted  aversion
of  Britons  to  the  doctrines  and  spirit  of  Popery,  that  I
suspected  this  motion  for  giving  relief  to  Papists  to  be
premature.  I  was  afraid,  on  the  one  hand,  that  the
liberal  sentiments  of  those  by  whom  it  was  made,
might  induce  them  to  grant  too  much.  I  dreaded,  on
the  other,  that  past  offences  might  be  imputed  to  the
Catholics  of  the  present  age,  and  exclude  them  from
that  degree  of  indulgence,  which  I  considered  as  no
less  beneficial  to  the  nation,  than  suitable  to  the  spirit
of  the  gospel.  But  when  I  observed  the  uncommon
unanimity  with  which  the  bill  was  carried  through  both
houses;  when  I  saw  ministers  and  opposition  vying
with  each  other  in  activity  to  forward  it ;  when  I  beheld
that  respectable  body  who  assume  to  themselves  the
distinguishing  appellation  of  Old  Whigs,  taking  the
lead  avowedly  in  supporting  it;  when  I  observed  a
bench  of  bishops,  of  whom  I  may  justly  say,  that  in
learning,  in  decency  of  manners,  and  in  zeal  for  the
Protestant  religion,  they  are  not  inferior  to  any  of  their
predecessors,  co-operating  heartily  with  the  other  pro-
moters of  that  bill,  my  curiosity  to  know  precisely  the
nature  and  extent  of  the  indulgence  granted,  became
very  great.  Upon  perusing  the  bill  itself,  all  my  ap-
prehensions vanished;  the  relief  given  to  Papists,  ap-
peared neither  too  great  nor  too  little.  By  the  statute

DR. ROBERTSON.  xli

of  last  session,  no  political  power  is  conferred  on  Pa-
pists. They  are  not  entitled  to  hold  any  public  office.
They  can  neither  elect,  nor  be  elected,  members  of  any
corporation;  far  less  can  they  choose,  or  be  chosen,
members  of  the  house  of  commons.  In  consequence
of  this  statute,  an  English  Papist  has  not  acquired  the
privileges  of  a  citizen ;  he  is  restored  only  to  the  rights
of  a  man.  By  a  law  passed  in  a  season  of  jealousy,
alarm,  and  faction,  Papists  were  rendered  incapable  of
inheriting  property  by  succession  or  conveyance,  of
transmitting  it  to  others,  or  of  acquiring  it  by  purchase;
and  the  ecclesiastics  of  that  religion,  who  should  take
upon  them  the  education  of  youth,  were  to  be  punished
with  perpetual  imprisonment.  It  is  from  these  penal-
ties and  disabilities  alone,  that  they  are  now  relieved.
They  may  now  inherit,  they  may  devise,  they  may  pur-
chase. Formerly  they  were  in  a  state  of  proscription
and  incapacity;  now  they  are  rendered  what  the  law
calls  personce;  capable  of  legal  functions  in  the  posses-
sion and  disposal  of  their  own  property.  Nor  are  these
concessions  gratuitous.  Before  a  Papist  can  enjoy  the
benefit  of  them,  he  must  swear  allegiance  to  our  gra-
cious sovereign;  he  must  abjure  the  pretender;  he  must
reject  as  an  impious  position,  that  it  is  lawful  to  mur-
der or  destroy  any  person,  under  the  pretence  of  their
being  heretics;  he  must  declare  it  to  be  an  unchristian
principle,  that  faith  is  not  to  be  kept  with  heretics ;  he
must  disclaim  the  power  of  the  pope  to  dispense  with
the  obligation  of  an  oath ;  he  must  swear,  that  it  is  no
article  of  his  faith  that  a  pope  or  council  can  either  de-
pose princes,  or  exercise  any  civil  or  temporal  jurisdic-
tion within  this  realm:  in  short,  he  must  give  every
security  that  the  most  scrupulous  anxiety  could  devise,

xlii  THE LIFE OF

to  demean  himself  as  a  loyal  and  peaceable  subject.
These  slender  rights,  the  lowest  a  man  can  claim  or
enjoy  in  a  social  state,  are  the  amount  of  all  the
mighty  and  dreaded  acquisitions  made  by  Papists  in
^  virtue  of  this  law.  I  rejoiced  in  the  temperate  wisdom
of  the  legislature,  and  foresaw,  that  a  wealthy  body  of
subjects  in  England,  and  a  very  numerous  one  in  Ire-
land, would,  instead  of  continuing  adverse  to  a  govern-
ment which  treated  them  with  rigour,  become  attached
to  their  king  and  country,  by  the  most  powerful  of  all
ties,  gratitude  for  favours  received,  and  desire  of  se-
curing the  continuance  of  favour,  by  dutiful  conduct.
With  such  views  of  the  salutary  effects  of  the  repeal,  it
was  impossible  not  to  wish  that  the  benefit  of  it  might
be  extended  to  the  Roman  Catholics  in  Scotland.

"  As  soon,  however,  as  I  perceived  the  extent  and
violence  of  the  flame  which  the  discussion  of  this  sub-
ject had  kindled  in  Scotland,  my  ideas  concerning  the
expedience  at  this  juncture  of  the  measure  in  question
began  to  alter.  For  although  I  did  think,  and  I  do  still
believe,  that  if  the  Protestants  in  this  country  had  ac-
/  quiesced  in  the  repeal  as  quietly  as  our  brethren  in
I  England  and  Ireland,  a  fatal  blow  would  have  been
given  to  Popery  in  the  British  dominions ;  I  knew,  that
in  legislation,  the  sentiments  and  dispositions  of  the
people  for  whom  laws  are  made,  should  be  attended  to
with  care.  I  remembered  that  one  of  the  wisest  men
of  antiquity  declared,  that  he  had  framed  for  his  fel-
low-citizens, not  the  best  laws,  but  the  best  laws  which
they  could  bear.  I  recollected  with  reverence,  that  the
Divine  Legislator  himself,  accommodating  his  dispensa-
tions to  the  frailty  of  his  subjects,  had  given  the  Israel-
ites, for  a  season,  statutes  which  were  not  good.  Even

DR. ROBERTSON.  xliii

the  prejudices  of  the  people  are,  in  my  opinion,  respect-
able ;  and  an  indulgent  legislature  ought  not  unneces-
sarily to  run  counter  to  them. It  appeared  manifestly
to  be  sound  policy,  in  the  present  temper  of  the  peo-
ple, to  soothe  rather  than  to  irritate  them;  and,  how-
ever ill-founded  their  apprehensions  might  be,  some
concession  was  now  requisite,  in  order  to  remove  them.
In  every  argument  against  the  repeal  of  the  penal  laws,
what  seemed  chiefly  to  alarm  my  brethren  who  were
averse  to  it  was  the  liberty  which,  as  they  supposed,
was  given,  by  the  act  of  last  session,  to  Popish  ecclesi-
astics to  open  schools  and  to  take  upon  them  the  pub-
lic instruction  of  youth. In  order  to  quiet  their  fears
with  respect  to  this,  I  applied  to  his  majesty's  advocate
and  solicitor-general,  and  by  their  permission,  I  pro-
posed to  a  respectable  minister  and  elder  of  this  church,
who  deservedly  possess  much  credit  with  the  opposers
of  this  repeal,  that  such  provisos  should  be  inserted  in
the  bill  which  was to be  moved  in  parliament,  for
restraining  the  Popish  clergy  in  this  point,  as  would
obviate  every  danger  apprehended. These  gentlemen
fairly  told  me,  that,  if  such  a  proposition  had  been
made  more  early,  they  did  not  doubt  that  it  might  have
produced  good  effects ;  but  now  matters  were  gone  so
far,  that  they  were  persuaded  nothing  less  would  satisfy
the  people,  than  a  resolution  to  drop  the  bill  altogether.
Persuaded  of  the  truth  of  what  they  represented,  see-
ing the  alarm  spread  rapidly  in  every  quarter,  and
knowing  well how  imperfectly  transactions in this
country  are  understood  in  the  other  part  of  the  island,
I  considered  it  as  my  duty  to  lay  before  his  majesty's
servants  in  London,  a  fair  state  of  the  sentiments  of  the
people  in  Scotland.  My  station  in  the  church,  I  thought,

xliv  THE LIFE OF

entitled  me  to  take  this  liberty  in  a  matter  purely  ec-
clesiastical. I  flattered  myself,  that  my  avowed  appro-
bation and  strenuous  support  of  a  measure,  which  had
been  unhappily  so  much  misunderstood,  might  give
some  weight  to  my  representations.  I  informed  them,
that  the  design  of  extending  the  repeal  of  the  penal
statutes  of  king  William  to  Scotland,  had  excited  a
very  general  alarm :  that  the  spirit  of  opposition  to  this
measure  spread  among  the  king's  most  loyal  and  at-
tached subjects  in  this  country:  that  nothing  would
calm  and  appease  them,  but  the  relinquishing  all
thoughts  of  such  a  bill :  that  the  procuring  of  the  in-
tended relaxation  for  a  handful  of  Catholics,  was  not
an  advantage  to  be  put  in  competition  with  the  impru-
dence of  irritating  so  great  a  body  of  well-affected  sub-
jects :  that  if  the  measure  were  persisted  in,  fatal  effects
would  follow,  and  no  man,  how  great  soever  his  saga-
city might  be,  could  venture  to  foretell  what  would  be
the  extent  of  the  danger,  and  what  the  violent  opera-
tions of  an  incensed  populace :  that  groundless  as  the
fears  of  the  people  might  be,  it  was  prudent  to  quiet
them:  and  that  the  same  wisdom  and  moderation  which
had  induced  government  some  years  ago  to  repeal  the
act  for  naturalizing  the  Jews,  in  consequence  of  an
alarm,  as  ill-grounded,  in  the  southern  parts  of  the
island,  ought  now  to  make  a  similar  concession,  from
indulgence  to  the  prejudice  of  the  people  on  this  side
of  the  Tweed.

"  Such  has  been  the  tenor  of  my  conduct.  While  I
thought  a  repeal  of  the  penal  statutes  would  produce
good  effects,  I  supported  it  openly:  when  I  foresaw
bad  consequences  from  persisting  in  a  measure  which
I  had  warmly  approved,  I  preferred  the  public  good  to

DR. ROBERTSON.  xlv

my  own  private  sentiments;  I  honestly  remonstrated
against  it;  and  I  have  the  satisfaction  to  think,  that  I
am  the  only  private  person  (as  far  as  I  know)  in  Scot-
land, who  applied  to  those  in  power,  in  order  to  pre-
vent this  much  dreaded  repeal,  which  has  been  repre-
sented as  the  subversion  of  every  sacred  right  for  which
our  ancestors  contended  and  suffered."

He  made  only  one  appearance  more  in  the  assembly,
subsequent  to  his  delivery  of  this  speech.  After  May,
1780,  he  thought  proper  to  withdraw  from  a  meeting,
whose  counsels  he  had  guided  for  a  multitude  of  years,
with  unrivalled  skill,  moderation,  and  firmness.  His
reasons  for  retiring  (says  one  of  his  friends*)  were  not
suggested  by  age,  for  he  was  then  only  fifty-nine;  nor
by  any  diminution  of  his  influence,  for,  in  the  appre-
hension of  the  public,  it  was  at  that  time  as  great  as  it
had  ever  been.  Probably  he  anticipated  a  day,  when
a  new  leader  might  come  forward ;  and  thought  it  bet-
ter to  retire  while  his  influence  was  undiminished,  than
to  run  the  risk,  in  the  decline  of  his  life,  of  a  struggle
with  younger  men,  who  might  be  as  successful  as  him-
self had  been.  He  had  met  with  reproaches  from  the
more  violent  men  of  his  party,  for  not  adopting
stronger  measures  than  his  moderation  could  approve.
He  had  yielded  to  them  many  points  against  his  own
judgment,  but  they  were  not  satisfied :  he  was  plagued
with  letters  of  reproach  and  remonstrance  on  a  variety
of  topics,  and  complained  of  the  petulance  and  acri-
mony with  which  they  were  written.  There  was  one
subject  which  had  become  particularly  uneasy  to  him ;
the  scheme  into  which  his  friends  had  zealously  en-
tered, for  abolishing  subscription  to  the  confession  of
faith  and  formula.  This  he  expressly  declared  his  re-

*  Letter  of  the  Rev.  Sir  H.  M.  Wellwood,  bart.

xlvi  THE LIFE OF

solution  to  resist  in  every  form;  and  he  claimed  to  him-
self the  merit  of  having  prevented  the  controversy  from
being  agitated  in  the  assemblies.  He  was,  however,
so  much  harassed  with  remonstrances  on  the  subject,
that  he  mentioned  them  as  having  confirmed  his  reso-
lution to  retire.

The  latter  years  of  his  life  were  spent  in  anxious  at-
tention to  his  pastoral  and  academical  duties,  and  in
enjoying  the  stores  of  a  contemplative  and  richly  cul-
tivated mind.  His  constitution,  which  had  firmly  sup-
ported him  under  severe  labours,  and  the  sedentary  ha-
bits of  a  studious  life,  exhibited  visible  symptoms  of
decay  at  the  close  of  the  year  1791.  His  malady  was
a  jaundice,  which,  by  lingering  attacks,  succeeded  in
destroying  the  vigour  of  a  frame  which  age  had  al-
ready weakened.  The  slow  progress  of  his  disorder
gave  him  an  opportunity  of  deliberately  contemplating
death;  and  he  was  enabled,  by  the  strength  of  those
Christian  virtues,  which  had  distinguished  his  days,  to
view  the  solemn  prospect  with  firmness  and  resigna-
tion. A  short  time  before  his  decease,  he  was  removed
to  Grange  House,  situated  in  the  vicinity  of  Edinburgh,
but  possessing  more  healthful  advantages  than  the  me-
tropolis can  boast.  On  the  4th  of  June,  1793,  Mr.  Stew-
art saw  him  (for  the  last  time)  by  the  invalid's  own  de-
sire. He  was  then  confined  to  his  bed,  and  his  articula-
tion was  failing.  He  requested  from  Mr.  Stewart,  a  last
token  of  his  regard;  which  that  gentleman  faithfully  and
affectionately  paid,  by  communicating  to  the  world,  his
Account  of  the  Life  and  Writings  of  Dr.  Robertson.  This
great  historian  died  on  the  1 1th  of  June,  leaving  a  numer-
ous family  in  circumstances  both  of  affluence  and  honour.

The  Life  of  Dr.  Robertson  exhibits  a  rare  combina-
tion of  the  most  exalted  genius  and  virtue.  He  is  one

DR. ROBERTSON.  xlvii

of  those  great  luminaries,  which,  though  they  may  be
surveyed  on  every  side,  present  nothing  but  brilliancy,
and  strike  the  beholder  with  unmingled  admiration.  His
talents,  though  of  the  highest  order,  did  not  betray  him
into  any  of  those  eccentricities  which  often  disgrace  men
of  genius;  he  never  wandered  into  extravagance  and
paradox,  and  was  never  elated  into  arrogance  and  con-
ceit. A  calm  and  discriminating  judgment  controlled
all  his  sentiments,  and  guided  his  conduct  with  so
much  success,  that  he  was  able,  in  defiance  of  many
disadvantages  of  birth  and  situation,  to  obtain  an  ho-
nourable eminence  in  life,  and  one  of  the  most  splendid
elevations  in  the  paths  of  learning.

Although  the  requisites  of  a  great  historian  are  very
numerous,  it  may  be  affirmed,  that  he  is  not  deficient
in  a  single  qualification. He  is  diligent  in  collecting
his  materials,  patient  in  searching  out  the  truth,  and
judicious  in  discriminating  it  amidst  error  and  contra-
diction. His  relations  are  given  to  the  reader  in  a  full
and  perspicuous  manner,  without  omissions  or  redun-
dancy; they  are  connected  together  with  admirable  skill,
and  possess  such  accurate  delineation,  and  such  rich-
ness of  colouring,  that  the  imagination  is  forcibly  seized,
and  hurried  along  with  unabated  eagerness. In  the
moral  requisites  of  an  historian,  he  is  unrivalled. He
had  no  private  theories  to  advance,  and  he  was  too  in-
dependent to  flatter  any  sect  or  party. Although  we
may  not  agree  with  him  upon  some  perplexing  topics,
and  though  subsequent  researches  may,  in  small  mat-
ters, convict  him  of  error,  we  are  satisfied  that  he  wrote
with  impartiality,  and  never  attempted  to  deceive  his
readers,  with  the  misrepresentations  of  bigotry  or  male-
volence.

xlviii  THE LIFE OF

His  style  deserves  as  much  commendation  as  his
matter.  It  possesses  a  surprising  mixture  of  strength
and  elegance,  of  force  and  harmony.  The  great  cha-
racteristic is  its  dignity;  in  his  pages  the  Muse  of  His-
tory is  always  grave,  disdaining  to  speak  in  terms  of
colloquial  freedom,  yet  seldom  employ  ing  language  that
is  turgid  and  unnatural.  It  increases  our  admiration

o

of  his  style,  when  we  reflect,  that  he  attained  a  con-
summate skill  in  the  English  language,  before  he  had
ever  been  out  of  Scotland.  All  his  power  and  beauty
of  expression  were  to  be  acquired  by  careful  study,  and
judicious  observation  of  other  writers ;  and  the  diffi-
culty of  success  under  such  disadvantages  can  be  ap-
preciated, only  by  those  who  know  what  care  it  re-
quires, to  write  in  a  different  idiom  and  phraseology
from  that  which  they  are  accustomed  to  hear  and  speak.
We  are  informed*  that  he  studied  with  attention  the
writings  of  Swift  and  Johnson.  Avoiding  their  ble-
mishes, he  has  been  able  to  attain  their  characteristic
excellences;  he  is  nervous,  but  more  harmonious  than
Swift;  at  the  same  time,  he  is  polished,  but  less  tumid
than  Johnson.

In  perusing  the  works  of  Dr.  Robertson,  it  is  impos-
sible not  to  be  struck  with  their  amazing  variety  and
extent.  Escaping  from  the  narrow  limits  of  his  own
island,  he  traverses  all  Europe,  surveying  the  polity
and  relations  of  its  greatest  people ;  he  next  transports
us  to  the  New  World,  explaining  its  productions,  its
grand  natural  features,  and  the  manners  of  its  inhabi-
tants; and,  lastly,  he  entertains  us  with  a  learned  in-
vestigation concerning  the  ancient  refinement  and  in-
genuity of  the  people  of  India.  Thus,  of  four  parts  of

*  Letter  of  Mr.  Hume,  and  Boswell's  Life  of  Johnson.

DR. ROBERTSON.  xlix

the  globe,  three  have  been  illustrated  by  his  pen,  and
each  with  masterly  judgment  and  eloquence.  In  the
depth  and  extent  of  his  historical  labours,  he  has  been
surpassed  by  no  writer,  ancient  or  modern.  As  to  those
who,  in  conjunction  with  him,  have  most  distinguished
this  island,  Mr.  Gibbon  comes  nearest  to  him  in  re-
search; whilst  Mr.  Hume,  in  this  particular,  is  far  in-
ferior to  both.  In  other  respects  also,  the  first  rank  ap-
pears due  to  Dr.  Robertson  in  the  "triumvirate  of  British
historians.''  His  style,  though  sufficiently  dignified,  is
free  from  that  swollen  and  affected  pomp,  which  ob-
scures the  pages  of  Gibbon;  and  though  it  is  less  easy
than  that  of  Hume,  it  possesses  no  elevation,  which  is
unsuitable  to  the  grave  character  of  history.  In  can-
dour and  impartiality,  he  far  exceeds  both  the  author
of  the  English  History  y  and  the  author  of  the  Decline
and  Fall.  If  we  consider  also  the  advantages  which
Mr.  Gibbon  possessed,  as  a  native  of  England,  arid  the
benefit  which  both  he  and  Mr.  Hume  derived  from  fo-
reign travels,  and  then  reflect  upon  the  situation  of  Dr.
Robertson,  and  the  multitude  of  business  which  con-
stantly interfered  to  delay  his  studies,  the  efforts  of  the
latter  will  appear  gigantic  in  comparison  with  those  of
either  of  his  competitors.

His  public  intimacy  with  th^se  two  gentlemen,  both
of  whom  were  notorious  for  their  sceptical  opinions,  is
a  circumstance  in  his  life,  which  candour  may  desire  to
extenuate,  but  which  rigid  propriety  cannot  approve.
His  difference  with  Mr.  Hume  and  Mr.  Gibbon,  was
not  upon  those  minor  points  of  speculation,  in  which
mutual  forbearance  is  a  virtue : — it  was  a  difference  so
wide  and  important,  that  he  must  (if  he  had  reasoned
calmly  and  consistently)  have  considered  them  as  the

VOL.  j.  e

1  THE LIFE OF

bitterest  enemies  of  the  peace  of  man,  and  the  welfare
of  society.  Their  dangerous  opinions  had  not  been
confined  within  their  own  bosoms,  nor  even  within  the
range  of  their  private  circle :  they  had  given  them  all
the  publicity  in  their  power,  and  disseminated  their
poison  wherever  their  writings  were  perused.  As  their
hostility  against  religion  was  open  and  bitter,  was  it  be-
coming that  a  believer  and  a  teacher  of  Christianity,
whose  name  possessed  influence  with  his  countrymen,
should  allow  himself  to  be  considered  as  the  intimate
friend  of  avowed  infidels  ?  Some  persons  may  be  found,
who  will  commend  such  behaviour,  as  an  instance  of
liberality ;  but  true  liberality,  which  tolerates  only  what
is  venial  in  theory  and  conduct,  should  be  distinguished
from  that  laxity  of  principle  which  regards  all  opinions,
sound  or  pernicious,  with  equal  indifference.  The  best
excuse  which  can  be  made  for  our  Author  is,  the  temp-
tation which  the  society  of  Mr.  Hume  and  Mr.  Gibbon
presented.  It  was  difficult  for  a  person  of  his  habits,
to  forego  the  pleasure  which  was  offered,  from  an  inter-
course with  scholars  of  such  similar  taste  and  attain-
ments in  literature ;  and  as  their  lives  were  regular,  and
free  from  the  extravagance  which  characterized  their
opinions,  he  might  hope  to  be  permitted  to  enjoy  their
society  as  a  man  of  letters,  while  he  reprobated  their
theories,  as  a  friend  of  Christianity.

Passing  from  this  circumstance,  which  is  the  greatest
blemish  in  his  life,  we  view  with  pleasure  and  admira-
tion the  many  accomplishments  for  which  he  was  emi-
nent. It  was  not  from  the  labours  of  the  study  only
that  he  earned  a  bright  reputation.  He  could  make  the
boast  of  the  great  Roman  orator  :*  cceteros  pudeat,  si  qui

*  ProArchia.

DR. ROBERTSON.  H

ita  se  literis  abdiderunt,  ut  nihil  possint  ex  his  neque  ad
communem  ajferre  fructum,  neque  in  aspectum  lucemque
proferre.  Me  autem  quidpudeat,  qui  tot  annos  ita  vivo,
ut  ab  nullius  unquam  me  tempore,  aut  commodum,  aut
otium  meum  abstraxerit,  aut  voluptas  avocarit,  aut  de-
nique  somnus  retardarit?  If  Dr.  Robertson  had  ap-
peared in  no  other  character,  he  would  deserve  to  have
his  memory  cherished  by  his  countrymen,  for  his  wis-
dom and  firmness  as  an  ecclesiastical  leader.  He  came
forward  at  a  time  when  the  church  of  his  country  was
in  imminent  danger,  from  the  weakness  and  indecision
of  her  counsels.  Applying  his  talents  to  remedy  in-
veterate evils,  he  resolutely  pursued  his  plans  in  con-
tempt of  prejudice  and  popular  clamour ;  and  such  was
the  ascendancy  which  he  attained,  that  the  period  from
the  time  he  became  principal  of  the  university,  until  he
retired  from  the  assembly,  was  known  by  the  title  of
Dr.  Robertson's  administration.  This  distinction  was,
of  all  others,  the  most  honourable,  because  it  was  con-
ceded to  him,  not  on  account  of  any  rewards  and  emo-
luments which  cupidity  might  expect  at  his  hand,  but
solely  from  the  deference  which  his  talents  and  princi-
ples commanded.  His  conduct  in  the  assembly  is  highly
extolled  by  Dr.  Erskine,  whose  praise  is  the  more  sin-
cere and  valuable,  as  he  was  the  leader  of  a  party  which
opposed  the  Principal's  ecclesiastical  measures.

Dr.  Robertson's  "  speeches  in  church  courts*  were
admired  by  those  whom  they  did  not  convince,  and
acquired  and  preserved  him  an  influence  over  a  majo-
rity in  them,  which  none  before  him  enjoyed ;  though
his  measures  were  sometimes  new,  and  warmly,  and
with  great  strength  of  argument,  opposed,  both  from

*  Discourses  on  several  occasions,  by  John  Erskine,  D.D. Vol.  I.  p.  371.

e  2

Hi  THE LIFE OF

the  press,  and  in  the  general  assembly. To  this  influ-
ence, many  causes  contributed;  his  firm  adherence  to
the  general  principles  of  church  policy,  which  he  early
adopted;  his  sagacity  in  forming  plans;  his  steadiness
in  executing  them ;  his  quick  discernment  of  whatever
might  hinder  or  promote  his  designs ;  his  boldness  in
encountering  difficulties ;  his  presence  of  mind  in  im-
proving every  occasional  advantage;  the  address,  with
which,  when  he  saw  it  necessary,  he  could  make  an
honourable  retreat;  and  his  skill  in  stating  a  vote,  and
seizing  the  favourable  moment  for  ending  a  debate,  and
urging  a  decision. He  guided  and  governed  others,
without  seeming  to  assume  any  superiority  over  them :
and  fixed  and  strengthened  his power,  by  often,  in
matters  of  form  and  expediency,  preferring  the  opi-
nions of  those  with  whom  he  acted  to  his  own. In  for-
mer times,  hardly  any  rose  up  to  speak  in  the  general
assembly,  till  called  upon  by  the  moderator,  unless  men
advanced  in  years,  of  high  rank,  or  of  established  cha-
racters. His  example  and  influence  encouraged  young
men  of  abilities  to  take  their  share  of  public  business ;
and  thus  deprived  moderators  of  an  engine  for  prevent-
ing causes  being  fairly  and  impartially  discussed.  The
power  of  others,  who  formerly  had  in  some  measure
guided  ecclesiastical  affairs,  was  derived  from  ministers
of  state,  and  expired  with  their  fall. His  remained  un-
hurt, amidst  frequent  changes  of  administration.  Great
men  in  office  were  always  ready  to  cpuntenance  him,
to  co-operate  with  him,  and  to  avail  themselves  of  his
aid. But  he  judged  for  himself,  and  scorned  to  be
their  slave,  or  to  submit  to  receive  their  instructions.
Hence  his  influence,  not  confined  to  men  of  mercenary
views,  extended  to  many  of  a  free  and  independent

DR. ROBERTSON.  liii

spirit,  who  supported,  because  they  approved  his  mea-
sures ;  which  others,  from  the  same  independent  spirit,
thought  it  their  duty  steadily  to  oppose.

"  Deliberate  in  forming  his  judgment,  but  when
formed,  not  easily  moved  to  renounce  it,  he  some-
times viewed  the  altered  plans  of  others  with  too  sus-
picious an  eye.  Hence,  there  were  able  and  worthy
men,  of  whom  he  expressed  himself  less  favourably,
and  whose  latter  appearances  in  church  judicatories  he
censured,  as  inconsistent  with  principles  which  they
had  formerly  professed :  while  they  maintained,  that  the
system  of  managing  church  aifairs  was  changed,  not
their  opinions  and  conduct.  Still  however,  keen  and
determined  opposition  to  his  schemes  of  ecclesiastical
policy,  neither  extinguished  his  esteem,  nor  forfeited
his  friendly  offices,  when  he  saw  opposition  carried  on
without  rancour,  and  when  he  believed  that  it  origi-
nated from  conscience  and  principle,  not  from  private
animosity,  envy,  or  ambition."

This  panegyric  leads  us  to  concur  in  the  opinion  of
Mr.  Stewart,  that  Dr.  Robertson  was  formed  for  action,
no  less  than  speculation.  Mr.  Walpole  also,, in  one  of
his  letters,  lamented  that  he  -could  only  stimulate  him
to  write;  that  he  could  not  make  him  what  he  ought
to  be,  a  minister  of  state.  It  seems  unquestionable,  that
Dr.  Robertson  would,  by  his  transactions  in  the  assem-
bly, be  much  aided  in  acquiring  that  insight  into  men,
and  that  knowledge  of  the  world,  which  enabled  him
to  write  with  the  sagacity  of  an  acute  historian.  Nor
should  it  excite  very  great  surprise,  that  he  could  learn
so  much  in  so  narrow  a  sphere.  Genius,  from  the
depth  of  reflection  and  the  shrewdness  of  observation
which  it  possesses,  can  be  satisfied  with  a  small  field,

JiF  THE LIFE OF

in  order  to  exercise  its  remarks.  Dr.  Robertson  in  his
study,  and  in  a  Scottish  assembly,  penetrated  more
deeply  into  human  nature,  than  thousands  of  frivolous
observers,  who  have  visited  all  the  kingdoms,  and  pa-
raded in  all  the  courts,  of  Europe.

In  presiding  over  the  university,  he  was  punctually
attentive  to  all  the  duties  of  his  station,  and  preserved
such  peaceful  order,  as  remarkably  proves  his  able  and
temperate  government.  When  we  consider  the  incura-
ble disagreement  of  men  upon  all  topics,  we  are  led  to
admire  the  extraordinary  prudence  and  authority  of
Dr.  Robertson,  by  which  he  secured  for  the  period  of
thirty  years,  a  perfect  unanimity  of  opinion  on  all
questions  discussed  in  the  meetings  of  the  university.
Vigilant  for  the  welfare  of  the  learned  body  which  he
governed,  he  actively  promoted  every  measure  which
could  give  lustre  to  its  character,  and  quicken  the  dif-
fusion of  learning.  Many  of  the  societies  which  distin-
guish the  metropolis  of  Scotland,  were  either  planned
by  him,  or  improved  under  his  superintendence ;  and
the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh  is  totally  indebted  to
him  for  the  first  conception  of  its  establishment,  and
the  vigorous  zeal  with  which  he  carried  the  design  into
execution.

If  with  his  great  literary  and  academical  labours,  we
connect  his  sedulous  care  in  the  discharge  of  his  pas-
toral duties,  we  are  surprised  to  think,  how  much  a
person  of  talents  can  accomplish,  by  a  careful  economy
and  exact  distribution  of  time.  He  was  in  the  habit  of
preaching  every  Sunday,  until  illness  incapacitated
him,  and  it  was  not  till  within  a  short  time  before  his
death,  that  he  totally  desisted  from  the  practice.  He
was  not  able  to  acquire  that  elegance  in  the  delivery  of

DR. ROBERTSON.  h

English,  which  he  obtained  in  the  writing  of  it :  his
pronunciation  was  perfectly  Scottish,  although  this
would  be  considered  no  defect  by  the  congregations
which  it  was  his  lot  to  address.  "  His  discourses,"  says
Dr.  Erskine,  who  heard  him  for  many  years,  "  were
so  plain,  that  the  most  illiterate  might  easily  understand
them,  and  yet  so  correct  and  elegant,  that  they  could
not  incur  their  censure,  whose  taste  was  more  refined.
For  several  years  before  his  death,  he  seldom  wrote  his
sermons  fully,  or  exactly  committed  his  older  sermons
to  memory;  though  had  I  not  learned  this  from  himself,
I  should  not  have  suspected  it;  such  was  the  variety
and  fitness  of  his  illustrations,  the  accuracy  of  his  me-
thod, and  the  propriety  of  his  style."  Of  the  discourses
thus  commended,  we  have  unfortunately  no  specimens
preserved.  The  only  sermon  from  the  Author's  pen
which  is  extant,  is,  upon  The  situation  of  the  world  at
the  time  of  Christ's  appearance,  and  its  connexion  with
the  success  of  his  religion  ;  preached  before  the  Society  in
Scotland,  for  propagating  Christian  Knowledge,  January
6,  1755.  The  public  might  have  been  put  in  posses-
sion of  many  other  religious  compositions  of  the  great
historian,  but  for  an  accident  by  which  a  volume  of
his  sermons,  that  had  been  carefully  composed,  was
lost  before  he  removed  from  the  living  of  Gladsmuir.

Viewing  Dr.  Robertson  lastly  in  his  private  charac-
ter, we  are  not  compelled  to  lower  the  tone  of  our  pa-
negyric. Free  from  any  tincture  of  puritanical  asperity,
he  was  always  agreeable  to  his  friends,  and  affection-
ate in  the  most  tender  relations  of  life.  Wit  he  seldom
attempted,  and  accordingly,  we  have  not  a  single  bon
mot  or  lively  saying  recorded  of  him.  In  his  freest
hours  he  could,  however,  exhibit  a  playfulness  of  hu-

Ivi . LIFE OF DR. ROBERTSON.

mour;  and  on  serious  topics  of  conversation,  his  rich
fund  of  miscellaneous  knowledge,  which  he  could  pour
forth  in  diction  almost  as  elegant  as  his  written  lan-
guage, made  his  colloquial  powers  as  much  admired  as
his  other  accomplishments.  We  cannot  adorn  his  cha-
racter with  a  greater  eulogy,  than  that  which  has  been
paid  him  by  Dr.  Erskine. "  He  enjoyed  the  bounties
of  Providence,  without  running  into  riot;  was  tempe-
rate,  without  austerity; condescending and affable,
without  meanness ;  and  in  expense,  neither  sordid  nor
prodigal. He  could  feel  an  injury,  and  yet  bridle  his
passion;  was  grave,  not  sullen;  steady,  not  obstinate;
friendly,  not  officious;  prudent  and  cautious, not  timid."
Such  was  Dr.  Robertson. Few  men  have  surpassed
him,  either  singly  in  the  attainments  of  learning,  or  in
the  purity  of  virtue:  none  have  ever  combined  in  more
perfect  union,  the  talents  of  an  author,  with  skill  in
transacting  the  business,  and  exemplary  attention  in
discharging  the  duties,  of  life.

THE

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS  OF

QUEEN  MARY AND OF  KING JAMES VI.

TILL HIS

x!tt£00ion  to  ttjf  OfroUm  of

WITH

A  REVIEW  OF  THE  SCOTTISH  HISTORY  PREVIOUS  TO  THAT  PERIOD;

AND

AN  APPENDIX  CONTAINING  ORIGINAL  PAPERS.

PREFACE

TO

THE FIRST  EDITION.

I  DELIVER  this  book  to  the  world  with  all  the  diffi-
dence and  anxiety  natural  to  an  author  on  publishing
his  first  performance.  The  time  I  have  employed,  and
the  pains  I  have  taken,  in  order  to  render  it  worthy  of
the  public  approbation,  it  is,  perhaps,  prudent  to  con-
ceal, until  it  be  known  whether  that  approbation  shall
ever  be  bestowed  upon  it.

But  as  I  have  departed,  in  many  instances,  from
former  historians,  as  I  have  placed  facts  in  a  different
light,  and  have  drawn  characters  with  new  colours,  I
ought  to  account  for  this  conduct  to  my  readers  ;  and
to  produce  the  evidence,  on  which,  at  the  distance  of
two  centuries,  I  presume  to  contradict  the  testimony  of
less  remote,  or  even  of  contemporary  historians.

The  transactions  of  Mary's  reign  gave  rise  to  two
parties,  which  were  animated  against  each  other  with
the  fiercest  political  hatred,  imbittered  by  religious
zeal.  Each  of  these  produced  historians  of  conside-
rable merit,  who  adopted  all  their  sentiments,  and  de-
fended all  their  actions.  Truth  was  not  the  sole  ob-
ject of  these  authors.  Blinded  by  prejudices,  and
heated  by  the  part  which  they  themselves  had  acted  in
the  scenes  they  describe,  they  wrote  an  apology  for  a
faction,  rather  than  the  history  of  their  country.  Suc-
ceeding historians  have  followed  these  guides  almost
implicitly,  and  have  repeated  their  errors  and  misrepre-
sentations. But  as  the  same  passions  which  inflamed
parties  in  that  age  have  descended  to  their  posterity ;

Ix  PREFACE.

as  almost  every  event  in  Mary's  reign  has  become
the  object  of  doubt  or  of  dispute  ;  the  eager  spirit  of
controversy  soon  discovered,  that  without  some  evi-
dence more  authentic  and  more  impartial  than  that  of
such  historians,  none  of  the  points  in  question  could
be  decided  with  certainty.  Records  have  therefore
been  searched,  original  papers  have  been  produced,
and  public  archives,  as  well  as  the  repositories  of  pri-
vate men,  have  been  ransacked  by  the  zeal  and  curio-
sity of  writers  of  different  parties.  The  attention  of
Cecil  to  collect  whatever  related  to  that  period,  in
which  he  acted  so  conspicuous  a  part,  hath  provided
such  an  immense  store  of  original  papers  for  illustrat-
ing this  part  of  the  English  and  Scottish  History,  as
are  almost  sufficient  to  satisfy  the  utmost  avidity  of  an
antiquary.  Sir  Robert  Cotton  (whose  library  is  now
the  property  of  the  public)  made  great  and  valuable
additions  to  Cecil's  collection;  and  from  this  magazine,
Digges,  the  compilers  of  the  Caballa,  Anderson,  Keith,
Haynes,  Forbes,  have  drawn  most  of  the  papers  which
they  have  printed.  No  History  of  Scotland,  that  me-
rits any  degree  of  attention,  has  appeared  since  these
collections  were  published.  By  consulting  them,  I  have
been  enabled,  in  many  instances,  to  correct  the  inaccu-
racies of  former  historians,  to  avoid  their  mistakes,  and
to  detect  their  misrepresentations.

But  many  important  papers  have  escaped  the  notice
of  those  industrious  collectors  ;  and,  after  all  they  have
produced  to  light,  much  still  remained  in  darkness,
unobserved  or  unpublished.  It  was  my  duty  to  search
for  these;  and  I  found  this  unpleasant  task  attended
with  considerable  utility.

The  library  of  the  Faculty  of  Advocates  at  Edinburgh
contains  not  only  a  large  collection  of  original  papers
relating  to  the  affairs  of  Scotland,  but  copies  of  others
no  less  curious,  which  have  been  preserved  by  Sir  Ro-
bert Cotton,  or  are  extant  in  the  public  offices  in  England.

PREFACE.  Ixi

Of  all  these  the  curators  of  that  library  were  pleased  to
allow  me  the  perusal.

Though  the  British  Museum  be  not  yet  open  to  the
public,  Dr.  Birch,  whose  obliging  disposition  is  well
known,  procured  me  access  to  that  noble  collection,
which  is  worthy  the  magnificence  of  a  great  and  po-
lished nation.

That  vast  and  curious  collection  of  papers  relating  to
the  reign  of  Elizabeth,  which  was  made  by  Dr.  Forbes,
and  of  which  he  published  only  two  volumes,  having
been  purchased  since  his  death  by  the  lord  viscount
Royston,  his  lordship  was  so  good  as  to  allow  me  the
use  of  fourteen  volumes  in  quarto,  containing  that  part
of  them  which  is  connected  with  my  subject.

Sir  Alexander  Dick  communicated  to  me  a  very  valu-
able collection  of  original  papers,  in  two  large  volumes.
They  relate  chiefly  to  the  reign  of  James.  Many  of
them  are  marked  with  archbishop  Spotiswood's  hand  ;
and  it  appears  from  several  passages  in  his  history,  that
he  had  perused  them  with  great  attention.

Mr.  Calderwood,  an  eminent  presbyterian  clergy-
man of  the  last  century,  compiled  a  History  of  Scot-
land from  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  James  V.  to
the  death  of  James  VI.  in  six  large  volumes ;  wherein
he  has  inserted  many  papers  of  consequence,  which
are  nowhere  else  to  be  found.  This  History  has  not
been  published,  but  a  copy  of  it,  which  still  remains  in
manuscript,  in  the  possession  of  the  church  of  Scotland,
was  put  into  my  hands  by  my  worthy  friend  the  Reve-
rend Dr.  George  Wishart,  principal  Clerk  of  the  Church.
Sir  David  Dalrymple  not  only  communicated  to  me
the  papers  which  he  has  collected  relating  to  Gowrie's
conspiracy  ;  but,  by  explaining  to  me  his  sentiments
with  regard  to  that  problematical  passage  in  the  Scot-
tish history,  has  enabled  me  to  place  that  transaction  in
a  light  which  dispels  much  of  the  darkness  and  confu-
sion in  which  it  has  been  hitherto  involved.

Ixii  PREFACE.

Mr.  Goodall,  though  he  knew  my  sentiments  with
regard  to  the  conduct  and  character  of  queen  Mary  to
be  extremely  different  from  his  own,  communicated  to
me  a  volume  of  manuscripts  in  his  possession,  which
contains  a  great  number  of  valuable  papers  copied  from
the  originals  in  the  Cottonian  Library  and  Paper  Office,
by  the  late  Reverend  Mr.  Crawford,  Regius  Professor  of
Church  History  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  I  like-
wise received  from  him  the  original  register  of  letters
kept  by  the  regent  Lennox  during  his  administration.

I  have  consulted  all  these  papers,  as  far  as  I  thought
they  could  be  of  any  use  towards  illustrating  that  pe-
riod of  which  I  wrote  the  history.  With  what  success
I  have  employed  them  to  confirm  what  was  already
known,  to  ascertain  what  was  dubious,  or  to  determine
what  was  controverted,  the  public  must  judge.

I  might  easily  have  drawn,  from  the  different  reposi-
tories to  which  I  had  access,  as  many  papers  as  would
have  rendered  my  Appendix  equal  in  size  to  the  most
bulky  collection  of  my  predecessors.  But  I  have  satis-
fied myself  with  publishing  a  few  of  the  most  curious
among  them,  to  which  I  found  it  necessary  to  appeal
as  vouchers  for  my  own  veracity.  None  of  these,  as
far  as  I  can  recollect,  ever  appeared  in  any  former  col-
lection.

I  have  added  a  Critical  Dissertation  concerning  the
murder  of  King  Henry,  and  the  genuineness  of  the  Queen's
letters  to  Eothwell.  The  facts  and  observations  which
relate  to  Mary's  letters,  I  owe  to  my  friend  Mr.  John
Davidson,  one  of  the  Clerks  of  the  Signet,  who  hath  exa-
mined this  point  with  his  usual  acuteness  and  industry.

PREFACE

THE  ELEVENTH  EDITION

IT  is  now  twenty-eight  years  since  I  published  the
History  of  Scotland.  During  that  time  I  have  been
favoured  by  my  friends  with  several  remarks  upon  it;
and  various  strictures  have  been  made  by  persons,  who
entertained  sentiments  different  from  mine,  with  respect
to  the  transactions  in  the  reign  of  queen  Mary.  From
whatever  quarter  information  came,  in  whatever  mode
it  has  been  communicated,  I  have  considered  it  calmly
and  with  attention.  Wherever  I  perceived  that  I  had
erred,  either  in  relating  events,  or  in  delineating
characters,  I  have,  without  hesitation,  corrected  those
errors. — Wherever  I  am  satisfied  that  my  original  ideas
were  just  and  well-founded,  I  adhere  to  them;  and,
resting  upon  their  conformity  to  evidence  already  pro-
duced, I  enter  into  no  discussion  or  controversy  in  order
to  support  them.  Wherever  the  opportunity  of  con-
sulting original  papers,  either  in  print  or  in  manuscript,
to  which  I  had  not  formerly  access,  has  enabled  me  to
throw  new  light  upon  any  part  of  the  History,  I  have
made  alterations  and  additions,  which,  I  flatter  myself,
will  be  found  to  be  of  some  importance.

COLLEGE  OF  EDINBURGH,
March  5th,  1787.

THE

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND.

BOOK  I.

Containing  a  Review  of  the  Scottish  History
previous  to  the  Death  of  James  V.

The  origin  THE  first  ages  of  the  Scottish  History  are  dark
fab"  km™  anc^  fakulous.  Nations,  as  well  as  men,  arrive
and  ob-  at  maturity  by  degrees,  and  the  events  which
happened  during  their  infancy  or  early  youth,
cannot  be  recollected,  and  deserve  not  to  be  remem-
bered. The  gross  ignorance  which  anciently  covered
all  the  north  of  Europe,  the  continual  migrations  of  its
inhabitants,  and  the  frequent  and  destructive  revolu-
tions which  these  occasioned,  render  it  impossible  to
give  any  authentic  account  of  the  origin  of  the  dif-
ferent kingdoms  now  established  there.  Every  thing
beyond  that  short  period  to  which  well-attested  annals
reach,  is  obscure;  an  immense  space  is  left  for  inven-
tion to  occupy ;  each  nation,  with  a  vanity  inseparable
from  human  nature,  hath  filled  that  void  with  events
calculated  to  display  its  own  antiquity  and  lustre.
History,  which  ought  to  record  truth  and  to  teach  wis-
dom, often  sets  out  with  retailing  fictions  and  ab-
surdities.

origin  of  The  Scots  carry  their  pretensions  to  antiquity
ots<  as  high  as  any  of  their  neighbours.  Relying
upon  uncertain  legends,  and  the  traditions  of  their
bards,  still  more  uncertain,  they  reckon  up  a  series  of
kings  several  ages  before  the  birth  of  Christ;  and  give

VOL.  I.  B

2  SCOTLAND.

a  particular  detail  of  the  occurrences  which  happened
in  their  reigns.  But  with  regard  to  the  Scots,  as  well
as  the  other  northern  nations,  we  receive  the  earliest
accounts  on  which  we  can  depend,  not  from  their  own,
A  but  from  the  Roman  authors.  When  the  Ro-

mans, under  Agricola,  first  carried  their  arms
into  the  northern  parts  of  Britain,  they  found  it  pos-
sessed by  the  Caledonians,  a  fierce  and  warlike  people ;
and  having  repulsed,  rather  than  conquered  them,  they
erected  a  strong  wall  between  the  friths  of  Forth  and
Clyde,  and  there  fixed  the  boundaries  of  their  empire.
Adrian,  on  account  of  the  difficulty  of  defending  such
A  D  121  a  Distant  frontier,  contracted  the  limits  of  the
Roman  province  in  Britain,  by  building  a  se-
cond wall,  which  ran  between  Newcastle  and  Carlisle.
The  ambition  of  succeeding  emperors  endeavoured  to
recover  what  Adrian  had  abandoned ;  and  the  country
between  the  two  walls  was  alternately  under  the  domi-
nion of  the  Romans  and  that  of  the  Caledonians.  About
the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century,  the  inroads  of  the
Goths  and  other  barbarians  obliged  the  Romans,  in  or-
der to  defend  the  centre  of  their  empire,  to  recall  those
legions  which  guarded  the  frontier  provinces;  and  at
that  time  they  quitted  all  their  conquests  in  Britain.

Their  long  residence  in  the  island  had  po-
lished, in  some  degree,  the  rude  inhabitants,
and  the  Britons  were  indebted  to  their  intercourse  with
the  Romans,  for  the  art  of  writing,  and  the  use  of
numbers,  without  which  it  is  impossible  long  to  pre-
serve the  memory  of  past  events.

North  Britain  was,  by  their  retreat,  left  under  the
dominion  of  the  Scots  and  Picts.  The  former,  who
are  not  mentioned  by  any  Roman  author  before  the
end  of  the  fourth  century,  were  probably  a  colony  of  the
Celtae  or  Gauls :  their  affinity  to  whom  appears  from
their  language,  their  manners,  and  religious  rites ;  cir-
cumstances more  decisive  with  regard  to  the  origin  of

BOOK I.  3

nations,  than  either  fabulous  traditions,  or  the  tales  of
ill-informed  and  credulous  annalists.  The  Scots,  if  we
may  believe  the  common  accounts,  settled  at  first  in
Ireland ;  and,  extending  themselves  by  degrees,  landed
at  last  on  the  coast  opposite  to  that  island,  and  fixed
their  habitations  there.  Fierce  and  bloody  wars  were,
during  several  ages,  carried  on  between  them  and  the
Picts.  At  length,  Kenneth  II.,  the  sixty-ninth
king  of  the  Scots  (according  to  their  own  fabu-
lous authors),  obtained  a  complete  victory  over  the
Picts,  and  united  under  one  monarchy,  all  the  coun-
try, from  the  wall  of  Adrian  to  the  northern  ocean.
The  kingdom,  henceforward,  became  known  by  its
present  name,  which  is  derived  from  a  people  who  at
first  settled  there  as  strangers,  and  remained  long  ob-
scure and  inconsiderable.

History  of  From  this  period  the  History  of  Scotland
peculiarly  would  merit  some  attention,  were  it  accom-
obscure.  panie(j  with  any  certainty.  But  as  our  remote
antiquities  are  involved  in  the  same  darkness  with
those  of  other  nations,  a  calamity  peculiar  to  ourselves
has  thrown  almost  an  equal  obscurity  over  our  more
recent  transactions.  This  was  occasioned  by  the  mali-
cious policy  of  Edward  I.  of  England.  Towards  the
end  of  the  thirteenth  century,  this  monarch  called  in
question  the  independence  of  Scotland;  pretending  that
the  kingdom  was  held  as  a  fief  of  the  crown  of  Eng-
land, and  subjected  to  all  the  conditions  of  a  feudal
tenure.  In  order  to  establish  his  claim,  he  seized  the
public  archives,  he  ransacked  churches  and  monas-
teries, and  getting  possession,  by  force  or  fraud,  of
many  historical  monuments,  which  tended  to  prove
the  antiquity  or  freedom  of  the  kingdom,  he  carried
some  of  them  into  England,  and  commanded  the  rest
to  be  burned.a  A  universal  oblivion  of  past  transac-
tions might  have  been  the  eifect  of  this  fatal  event,  but

a  Innes,  Essay  552.
B  2

4  SCOTLAND.

some  imperfect  chronicles  had  escaped  the  rage  of
Edward ;  foreign  writers  had  recorded  some  important
facts  relating  to  Scotland ;  and  the  traditions  concern-
ing recent  occurrences  were  fresh  and  worthy  of  credit.
These  broken  fragments  John  de  Fordun,  who  lived  in
the  fourteenth  century,  collected  with  a  pious  indus-
try, and  from  them  gleaned  materials  which  he  formed
into  a  regular  history.  His  work  was  received  by  his
countrymen  with  applause :  and,  as  no  recourse  could
be  had  to  more  ancient  records,  it  supplied  the  place  of
the  authentic  annals  of  the  kingdom.  It  was  copied
in  many  monasteries,  and  the  thread  of  the  narrative
was  continued  by  different  monks  through  the  subse-
quent reigns.  In  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury, John  Major  and  Hector  Boethius  published  their
histories  of  Scotland  ;  the  former  a  succinct  and  dry
writer,  the  latter  a  copious  and  florid  one,  and  both
equally  credulous.  Not  many  years  after,  Buchanan
undertook  the  same  work;  and  if  his  accuracy  and
impartiality  had  been,  in  any  degree,  equal  to  the  ele-
gance of  his  taste,  and  to  the  purity  and  vigour  of  his
style,  his  history  might  be  placed  on  a  level  with  the
most  admired  compositions  of  the  ancients.  But,  in-
stead of  rejecting  the  improbable  tales  of  chronicle-
writers,  he  was  at  the  utmost  pains  to  adorn  them ;  and
hath  clothed,  with  all  the  beauties  and  graces  of  fic-
tion, those  legends  which  formerly  had  only  its  wild-
ness  and  extravagance.

Four  re-  The  History  of  Scotland  may  properly  be
markabie  divided  into  four  periods.  The  first  reaches

eras  in  the  r

Scottish  from  the  origin  of  the  monarchy  to  the  reign  of
Kenneth  II.  The  second,  from  Kenneth's
conquest  of  the  Picts  to  the  death  of  Alexander  III.
The  third  extends  to  the  death  of  James  V.  The  last,
from  thence  to  the  accession  of  James  VI.  to  the  crown
of  England.

The  first  period  is  the  region  of  pure  fable  and  con-

BOOK I.  5

jecture,  and  ought  to  be  totally  neglected,  or  abandoned
to  the  industry  and  credulity  of  antiquaries.  Truth
begins  to  dawn  in  the  second  period,  with  a  light,
feeble  at  first,  but  gradually  increasing;  and  the  events
which  then  happened  may  be  slightly  touched,  but
merit  no  particular  or  laborious  inquiry.  In  the  third
period,  the  History  of  Scotland,  chiefly  by  means  of
records  preserved  in  England,  becomes  more  authentic :
not  only  are  events  related,  but  their  causes  and  effects
explained ;  the  characters  of  the  actors  are  displayed ;
the  manners  of  the  age  described;  the  revolutions  in
the  constitution  pointed  out :  and  here  every  Scotsman
should  begin  not  to  read  only,  but  to  study  the  history
of  his  country.  During  the  fourth  period,  the  affairs
of  Scotland  were  so  mingled  with  those  of  other  na-
tions, its  situation  in  the  political  state  of  Europe  was
so  important,  its  influence  on  the  operations  of  the
neighbouring  kingdoms  was  so  visible,  that  its  history
becomes  an  object  of  attention  to  foreigners ;  and  with-
out some  knowledge  of  the  various  and  extraordinary
revolutions  which  happened  there,  they  cannot  form  a
just  notion  with  respect  either  to  the  most  illustrious
events,  or  to  the  characters  of  the  most  distinguished
personages,  in  the  sixteenth  century.
A  review  The  following  History  is  confined  to  the  last
°^  ^ese  Pel>i°ds :  to  give  a  view  of  the  political
state  of  the  kingdom  during  that  which  imme-
diately preceded  it,  is  the  design  of  this  preliminary
Book.  The  imperfect  knowledge  which  strangers
have  of  the  affairs  of  Scotland,  and  the  prejudices
Scotsmen  themselves  have  imbibed  with  regard  to
the  various  revolutions  in  the  government  of  their
country,  render  such  an  introduction  equally  necessary
to  both.

The  period  from  the  death  of  Alexander  III.  to  the
death  of  James  V.  contains  upwards  of  two  centuries
and  a  half,  from  the  year  1286  to  the  year  1542.

6  SCOTLAND.

Rise  of  the ^  °Pens  w*tn  tne  famous  controversy  con-
controversy  ceraing  the  independence  of  Scotland. Be-

coocerning «  i  •  /» i  1-1

the  inde-  tore  the  union  of  the  two  kingdoms,  this  was
of  Scotland.  a  question  of  much  importance.  If  the  one
crown  had  been  considered  not  as  imperial
and  independent,  but  as  feudatory  to  the  other,  a  treaty
of  union  could  not  have  been  concluded  on  equal
terms,  and  every  advantage  which  the  dependent  king-
dom procured,  must  have  been  deemed  the  concession
of  a  sovereign  to  his  vassal.  Accordingly,  about  the
beginning  of  the  present  century,  and  while  a  treaty  of
union  between  the  two  kingdoms  was  negotiating,  this
controversy  was  agitated  with  all  the  heat  which  na-
tional animosities  naturally  inspire.  What  was  then
the  subject  of  serious  concern,  the  union  of  the  two
kingdoms  has  rendered  a  matter  of  mere  curiosity.
But  though  the  objects  which  at  that  time  warmed  and
interested  both  nations  exist  no  longer,  a  question
which  appeared  so  momentous  to  our  ancestors  cannot
be  altogether  indifferent  or  uninstructive  to  us.

Some  of  the  northern  counties  of  England  were  early
in  the  hands  of  the  Scottish  kings,  who,  as  far  back  as
the  feudal  customs  can  be  traced,  held  these  posses-
sions of  the  kings  of  England,  and  did  homage  to
them  on  that  account.  This  homage,  due  only  for  the
territories  which  they  held  in  England,  was  in  nowise
derogatory  from  their  royal  dignity.  Nothing  is  more
suitable  to  feudal  ideas,  than  that  the  same  person
should  be  both  a  lord  and  a  vassal,  independent  in  one
capacity,  and  dependent  in  another.5  The  crown  of
England  was,  without  doubt,  imperial  and  indepen-

b  A  very  singular  proof  of  this  occurs  in  the  French  history.  Arpin  sold  the  vi-
comt6  of  the  city  of  Bourges  to  Philip  I.  who  did  homage  to  the  count  of  Sancerre
for  a  part  of  these  lands,  which  he  held  of  that  nobleman,  A.  D.  1100.  I  believe  that
no  example,  of  a  king's  doing  homage  to  one  of  his  own  subjects,  is  to  be  met  with
in  the  histories  either  of  England  or  Scotland.  Philip  le  Bel  abolished  this  practice
in  France,  A.  D.  1302.  Renault  Abregt  Chronol.  Somewhat  similar  to  this,  is  a
charter  of  the  abbot  of  Melross,  A.  D.  1535,  constituting  James  V.  the  bailiff  or
steward  of  that  abbey,  vesting  in  him  all  the  powers  which  pertained  to  that  office,
and  requiring  him  to  be  answerable  to  the  abbot  for  his  exercise  of  the  same.
Archiv.  publ.  Edin.

BOOK  I.  7

dent,  though  the  princes  who  wore  it  were,  for  many
ages,  the  vassals  of  the  kings  of  France ;  and,  in  conse-
quence of  their  possessions  in  that  kingdom,  bound  to
perform  all  the  services  which  a  feudal  sovereign  has
a  title  to  exact.  The  same  was  the  condition  of  the
monarchs  of  Scotland ;  free  and  independent  as  kings
of  their  own  country,  but,  as  possessing  English  terri-
tories, vassals  to  the  king  of  England.  The  English
monarchs,  satisfied  with  their  legal  and  uncontro verted
rights,  were,  during  a  long  period,  neither  capable,  nor
had  any  thoughts  of  usurping  more.  England,  when
conquered  by  the  Saxons,  being  divided  by  them  into
many  small  kingdoms,  was  in  no  condition  to  extend
its  dominion  over  Scotland,  united  at  that  time  under
one  monarch.  And  though  these  petty  principalities
were  gradually  formed  into  one  kingdom,  the  reigning
princes,  exposed  to  continual  invasions  of  the  Danes,
and  often  subjected  to  the  yoke  of  those  formidable  pi-
rates, seldom  turned  their  arms  towards  Scotland,  and
were  little  able  to  establish  new  rights  in  that  country.
The  first  kings  of  the  Norman  race,  busied  with  intro-
ducing their  own  laws  and  manners  into  the  kingdom
which  they  had  conquered,  or  with  maintaining  them-
selves on  the  throne  which  some  of  them  possessed  by
a  very  dubious  title,  were  as  little  solicitous  to  acquire
new  authority,  or  to  form  new  pretensions  in  Scotland.
An  unexpected  calamity  that  befel  one  of  the  Scottish
kings  first  encouraged  the  English  to  think  of  bring-
ing his  kingdom  under  dependence.  William,  sur-
named  the  Lion,  being  taken  prisoner  at  Alnwick,
Henry  II.,  as  the  price  of  his  liberty,  not  only  extorted
from  him  an  exorbitant  ransom,  and  a  promise  to  sur-
render the  places  of  greatest  strength  in  his  dominions,
but  compelled  him  to  do  homage  for  his  whole  king-
dom. Richard  I.,  a  generous  prince,  solemnly  re-
nounced this  claim  of  homage,  and  absolved  William
from  the  hard  conditions  which  Henry  had  imposed.

8  SCOTLAND.

Upon  the  death  of  Alexander  III.,  near  a  century  after,
Edward  I.,  availing  himself  of  the  situation  of  affairs
in  Scotland,  acquired  an  influence  in  that  kingdom,
which  no  English  monarch  before  him  ever  possessed,
and  imitating  the  interested  policy  of  Henry,  rather
than  the  magnanimity  of  Richard,  revived  the  claim  of
sovereignty  to  which  the  former  had  pretended.
Preten  Margaret  of  Norway,  grand-daughter  of  Alex-
sionsof  ander,  and  heir  to  his  crown,  did  not  long  sur-

Bruceand . -.  .  mi . -,  , *  , ,  -. ,

Baliol  ex-  vive  him.  1  he  right  ot  succession  belonged  to
ammed.  tke  descendants  of  David  earl  of  Huntingdon,
third  son  of  king  David  I.  Among  these,  Robert
Bruce  and  John  Baliol,  two  illustrious  competitors  for
the  crown,  appeared.  Bruce  was  the  son  of  Isabel,
earl  David's  second  daughter  ;  Baliol,  the  grandson  of
Margaret  the  eldest  daughter.  According  to  the  rules
of  succession  which  are  now  established,  the  right  of
Baliol  was  preferable;  and,  notwithstanding  Bruce's
plea  of  being  nearer  in  blood  to  earl  David,  Baliol's
claim,  as  the  representative  of  his  mother  and  grand-
mother, would  be  deemed  incontestable.  But  in  that
age  the  order  of  succession  was  not  ascertained  with
the  same  precision.  The  question  appeared  to  be  no
less  intricate  than  it  was  important.  Though  the  pre-
judices of  the  people,  and  perhaps  the  laws  of  the
kingdom,  favoured  Bruce,  each  of  the  rivals  was  sup-
ported by  a  powerful  faction.  Arms  alone,  it  was  fear-
ed, must  terminate  a  dispute  too  weighty  for  the  laws
to  decide.  But,  in  order  to  avoid  the  miseries  of  a  civil
war,  Edward  was  chosen  umpire,  and  both  parties
agreed  to  acquiesce  in  his  decree.  This  had  well  nigh
proved  fatal  to  the  independence  of  Scotland ;  and  the
nation,  by  its  eagerness  to  guard  against  a  civil  war,
was  not  only  exposed  to  that  calamity,  but  almost  sub-
jected to  a  foreign  yoke.  Edward  was  artful,  brave,
enterprising,  and  commanded  a  powerful  and  martial
people,  at  peace  with  the  whole  world.  The  anarchy

BOOK I.  9

which  prevailed  in  Scotland,  and  the  ambitiori  of  com-
petitors ready  to  sacrifice  their  country  in  order  to  ob-
tain even  a  dependent  crown,  invited  him  first  to  seize,
and  then  to  subject  the  kingdom. The  authority  of  an
umpire,  which  had  been  unwarily  bestowed  upon  him,
and  from  which  the  Scots  dreaded  no  dangerous  con-
sequences, enabled  him  to  execute  his  schemes  with  the
greater  facility.  Under  pretence  of  examining  the  ques-
tion with  the  utmost  solemnity,  he  summoned  all  the
Scottish  barons  to  Norham,  and  having  gained  some
and  intimidated  others,  he  prevailed  on  all  who  were
present,  not  excepting  Bruce  and  Baliol,  the  competi-
tors, to  acknowledge  Scotland  to  be  a  fief  of  the  Eng-
lish crown,  and  to  swear  fealty  to  him  as  their  sove-
reign or  liege  lord. This  step  led  to  another  still  more
important. As  it  was  vain  to  pronounce  a  sentence
which  he  had  not  power  to  execute,  Edward  demanded
possession  of  the  kingdom,  that  he  might  be  able  to  de-
liver it  to  him  whose  right  should  be  found  preferable  ;
and  such  was  the  pusillanimity  of  the  nobles,  and  the
impatient  ambition  of  the  competitors,  that  both  assent-
ed to  this  strange  demand,  and  Gilbert  de  Umfraville,
earl  of  Angus,  was  the  only  man  who  refused  to  sur-
render the  castles  in  his  custody  to  the  enemy  of  his
country. Edward,  finding  Baliol  the  most  obsequious
and  the  least  formidable  of  the  two  competitors,  soon
after  gave  judgment  in  his  favour. Baliol  once  more
professed  himself  the  vassal  of  England,  and  submitted
to  every  condition  which  the  sovereign  whom  he  had
now  acknowledged  was  pleased  to  prescribe.

Edward,  having  thus  placed  a  creature  of  his  own
upon  the  throne  of  Scotland,  and  compelled  the  nobles
to  renounce  the  ancient  liberties  and  independence  of
their  country,  had  reason  to  conclude  that  his  dominion
was  now  fully  established.  But  he  began  too  soon  to
assume  the  master ;  his  new  vassals,  fierce  and  inde-
pendent, bore  with  impatience  a  yoke,  to  which  they

10  SCOTLAND.

were  not  accustomed. Provoked  by  his  haughtiness,
even  the  passive  spirit  of  Baliol  began  to  mutiny. But
Edward,  who  had  no  longer  use  for  such  a  pageant
king,  forced  him  to  resign  the  crown,  and  openly  at-
tempted to  seize  it  as  fallen  to  himself  by  the  rebellion
of  his  vassal.  At  that  critical  period  arose  Sir  William
Wallace,  a  hero,  to  whom  the  fond  admiration  of  his
countrymen hath ascribed many  fabulous acts of
prowess,  though  his  real  valour,  as  well  as  integrity
and  wisdom,  are  such  as  need  not  the  heightenings  of
fiction. He,  almost  single,  ventured  to  take  arms  in
defence  of  the  kingdom,  and  his  boldness  revived  the
spirit  of  his  countrymen. At  last,  Robert  Bruce,  the
grandson  of  him  who  stood  in  competition  with  Ba-
liol, appeared  to  assert  his  own  rights,  and  to  vindicate
the  honour  of  his  country. The  nobles,  ashamed  of
their  former  baseness,  and  enraged  at  the  many  indig-
nities offered  to  the  nation,  crowded  to  his  standard.
In  order  to  crush  him  at  once,  the  English  monarch
entered  Scotland  at  the  head  of  a  mighty  army.  Many
battles  were  fought,  and  the  Scots,  though  often  van-
quished, were  not  subdued. The ardent  zeal  with
which  the  nobles  contended  for  the  independence  of  the
kingdom,  the  prudent  valour  of  Bruce,  and,  above  all,
a  national  enthusiasm  inspired  by  such  a  cause,  baf-
fled the  repeated  efforts  of  Edward,  and  counterba-
lanced all  the  advantages  which  he  derived  from  the
number  and  wealth  of  his  subjects. Though  the  war
continued  with  little  intermission  upwards  of  seventy
years,  Bruce  and  his  posterity  kept  possession  of  the
throne  of  Scotland,  and  reigned  with  an  authority  not
inferior  to  that  of  its  former  monarchs.

But  while  the  sword,  the  ultimate  judge  of  all  dis-
putes between  contending  nations,  was  employed  to
terminate  this  controversy,  neither  Edward  nor  the
Scots  seemed  to  distrust  the  justice  of  their  cause  ;  and
both  appealed  to  history  and  records,  and  from  these

BOOK I.  11

produced,  in  their  own  favour,  such  evidence  as  they
pretended  to  be  unanswerable.  The  letters  and  me-
morials addressed  by  each  party  to  the  pope,  who  was
then  reverenced  as  the  common  father,  and  often  ap-
pealed to  as  the  common  judge,  of  all  Christian  princes,
are  still  extant.  The  fabulous  tales  of  early  British
history ;  the  partial  testimony  of  ignorant  chroniclers ;
supposititious  treaties  and  charters ;  are  the  proofs  on
which  Edward  founded  his  title  to  the  sovereignty  of
Scotland;  and  the  homage  done  by  the  Scottish  mo-
narchs  for  their  lands  in  England,  is  preposterously
supposed  to  imply  the  subjection  of  their  whole  king-
dom.0 Ill-founded,  however,  as  their  right  was,  the
English  did  not  fail  to  revive  it,  in  all  the  subsequent
quarrels  between  the  two  kingdoms ;  while  the  Scots
disclaimed  it  with  the  utmost  indignation.  To  this  we
must  impute  the  fierce  and  implacable  hatred  to  each
other,  which  long  inflamed  both.  Their  national  anti-
pathies were  excited,  not  only  by  the  usual  circum-
stances of  frequent  hostilities  and  reciprocal  injuries,
but  the  English  considered  the  Scots  as  vassals  who  had
presumed  to  rebel,  and  the  Scots,  in  their  turn,  re-
garded the  English  as  usurpers  who  aimed  at  enslav-
ing their  country.

1306>  At  the  time  when  Robert  Bruce  began  his
Sr|atf  .of  reign  in  Scotland,  the  same  form  of  government
dom  when  was  established  in  all  the  kingdoms  of  Europe.

Bruce  be-  .r,,  .  . .  .-, ., . ,-,  . .. ,.

gan  his  1  his  surprising  similarity  in  their  constitution
and  laws  demonstrates  that  the  nations  which
overturned  the  Roman  empire,  and  erected  these  king-
doms, though  divided  into  different  tribes,  and  distin-
guished by  different  names,  were  either  derived  origi-
nally from  the  same  source,  or  had  been  placed  in  si-
milar situations.  When  we  take  a  view  of  the  feudal
system  of  laws  and  policy,  that  stupendous  and  singu-
lar fabric  erected  by  them,  the  first  object  that  strikes

c  Anderson's  Historical  Essay  concerning  the  Independency,  Sec.

12  SCOTLAND.

us  is  the  king.  And  when  we  are  told  that  he  is  the
sole  proprietor  of  all  the  lands  within  his  dominions,
that  all  his  subjects  derive  their  possessions  from  him,
and  in  return  consecrate  their  lives  to  his  service ;
when  we  hear  that  all  marks  of  distinction,  and  titles  of
dignity,  flow  from  him  as  the  only  fountain  of  honour ;
when  we  behold  the  most  potent  peers  on  their  bended
knees,  and  with  folded  hands,  swearing  fealty  at  his  feet,
and  acknowledging  him  to  be  their  sovereign  and  their
liege  lord;  we  are  apt  to  pronounce  him  a  powerful,
nay,  an  absolute  monarch.  No  conclusion,  however,
would  be  more  rash,  or  worse  founded.  The  genius  of
the  feudal  government  was  purely  aristocratical.  With
all  the  ensigns  of  royalty,  and  with  many  appearances
of  despotic  power,  a  feudal  king  was  the  most  limited
of  all  princes.

origin  of  Before  they  sallied  out  of  their  own  habita-
'ke  feudal  tions  to  conquer  the  world,  many  of  the  north-
ment,  and  era  nations  seemed  not  to  have  been  subject
craScai°  to  the  government  of  kings  ;d  and  even  where
gemus.  monarchical  government  was  established,  the
prince  possessed  but  little  authority.  A  general,  ra-
ther than  a  king,  his  military  command  was  extensive,
his  civil  jurisdiction  almost  nothing.6  The  army  which
he  led  was  not  composed  of  soldiers,  who  could  be
compelled  to  serve,  but  of  such  as  voluntarily  followed
his  standard/  These  ponquered,  not  for  their  leader,
but  for  themselves  ;  and  being  free  in  their  own  coun-
try, renounced  not  their  liberty  when  they  acquired  new
settlements.  They  did  not  exterminate  the  ancient
inhabitants  of  the  countries  which  they  subdued,  but,
seizing  the  greater  part  of  their  lands,  they  took  their
persons  under  protection.  The  difficulty  of  maintain-
ing a  new  conquest,  as  well  as  the  danger  of  being  at-
tacked by  new  invaders,  rendering  it  necessary  to  be
always  in  a  posture  of  defence,  the  form  of  government

d  Caes.  lib.  vi.  c.  23.  *  Tacit,  de  Mor.  Germ.  c.  7. 11.  f  CJES.  ibid.

BOOK  I.  13

which  they  established  was altogether  military,  and
nearly  resembled  that  to  which  they  had  been  accus-
tomed in  their  native country. Their general still
continuing  to  be  the  head  of  the  colony,  part  of  the
conquered  lands  were  allotted  to  him ;  the  remainder,
under  the  name  oibenefida  ovfafs,  was  divided  among
his  principal  officers. As  the  common  safety  required
that  these  officers  should,  upon  all  occasions,  be  ready
to  appear  in  arms,  for  the  common  defence,  and  should
continue  obedient  to  their  general,  they  bound  them-
selves to  take  the  field,  when  called,  and  to  serve  him
with  a  number  of  men,  in  proportion  to  the  extent  of
their  territory. These  great  officers  again  parcelled
out  their  lands  among  their  followers,  and  annexed  the
same  condition  to  the  grant. A  feudal  kingdom  was
properly  the  encampment  of  a  great  army ;  military
ideas  predominated,  military  subordination  was  esta-
blished, and  the  possession  of  land  was  the  pay  which
soldiers  received  for  their  personal  service. In  conse-
quence of  these  notions,  the  possession  of  land  was
granted  during  pleasure  only,  and  kings  were  elective.
In  other  words,  an  officer  disagreeable  to  his  general
was  deprived  of  his  pay,  and  the  person  who  was  most
capable  of  conducting  an  army  was  chosen  to  command
it. Such  were  the  first  rudiments  or  infancy  of  feudal

government.

But  long  before  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  cen-
tury, the  feudal  system  had  undergone  many  changes,
of  which  the  following  were  the  most  considerable.
Kings,  formerly  elective,  were  then  hereditary;  and
fiefs,  granted  at  first  during  pleasure,  descended  from
father  to  son,  and  were  become  perpetual.  These
changes,  not  less  advantageous  to  the  nobles  than  to
the  prince,  made  no  alteration  in  the  aristocratical  spirit
General  °^  ^6  feudal  constitution.  The  king,  who  at  a

causes distance  seemed  to  be  invested  with  majesty

which  li-  .  J J

the  and  power,  appears,  on  a  nearer  view,  to  pos-

14  SCOTLAND.

power  of sess  almost  none  of  those  advantages  which  be-
the  feudal  stow  on  monarchs  their  grandeur  and  authority.

monarchs.  111  i

His  revenues  were  scanty ;  he  had  not  a  stand-
ing army ;  and  the  jurisdiction  he  possessed  was  cir-
cumscribed within  very  narrow  limits.
Their  re-  At  a  time  when  pomp  and  splendour  were
we're"  ^ttle  known,  even  in  the  palaces  of  kings;
small.  when  the  officers  of  the  crown  received  scarcely
any  salary  besides  the  fees  and  perquisites  of  their
office ;  when  embassies  to  foreign  courts  were  rare ;
when  armies  were  composed  of  soldiers  who  served
without  pay  ;  it  was  not  necessary  that  a  king  should
possess  a  great  revenue,;  nor  did  the  condition  of  Eu-
rope, in  those  ages,  allow  its  princes  to  be  opulent.
Commerce  made  little  progress  in  the  kingdoms  where
the  feudal  government  was  established.  Institutions,
which  had  no  other  object  but  to  inspire  a  martial  spirit,
to  train  men  to  be  soldiers,  and  to  make  arms  the  only
honourable  profession,  naturally  discouraged  the  com-
mercial arts.  The  revenues,  arising  from  the  taxes,
imposed  on  the  different  branches  of  commerce,  were
by  consequence  inconsiderable ;  and  the  prince's  trea-
sury received  little  supply  from  a  source,  which,  among
a  trading  people,  flows  with  such  abundance,  as  is
almost  inexhaustible.  A  fixed  tax  was  not  levied  even
on  land  ;  such  a  burden  would  have  appeared  intole-
rable to  men  who  received  their  estates  as  the  reward
of  their  valour,  and  who  considered  their  service  in  the
field  as  a  full  retribution  for  what  they  possessed.  The
king's  demesnes,  or  the  portion  of  land  which  he  still
retained  in  his  own  hands  unalienated,  furnished  sub-
sistence to  his  court,  and  defrayed  the  ordinary  ex-
pense of  government^  The  only  stated  taxes  which
the  feudal  law  obliged  vassals  to  pay  to  the  king,  or  to
those  of  whom  they  held  their  lands,  were  three  :  one
when  his  eldest  son  was  made  a  knight;  another  when

9  Craig  de  Feud.  lib.  i.  dieg.  14. Du  Cange  Gloss,  voc.  Dominicum.

BOOK  I.  15

his  eldest  daughter  was  married  ;  and  a  third  in  order
to  ransom  him  if  he  should  happen  to  be  taken  pri-
soner. Besides  these,  the  king  received  the  feudal
casualties  of  the  ward,  marriage,  &c.  of  his  own  vas-
sals. And,  on  some  extraordinary  occasions,  his  sub-
jects granted  him  an  aid,  which  they  distinguished  by
the  name  of  a  benevolence,  in  order  to  declare  that  he
received  it  not  in  consequence  of  any  right,  but  as  a
gift,  flowing  from  their  good  will.h  All  these  added
together,  produced  a  revenue  so  scanty  and  precarious,
as  naturally  incited  a  feudal  monarch  to  aim  at  dimi-
nishing the  exorbitant  power  and  wealth  of  the  nobility,
but,  instead  of  enabling  him  to  carry  on  his  schemes
with  full  effect,  kept  him  in  continual  indigence,  anx-
iety, and  dependence.

The  had  ^or  cou^  tne  king  supply  the  defect  of  his
no  stand-  revenues  by  the  terror  of  his  arms.  Mercenary

ing  armies.  J i  j-  -  i

troops  and  standing  armies  were  unknown,
as  long  as  the  feudal  government  subsisted  in  vigour.
Europe  was  peopled  with  soldiers.  The  vassals  of  the
king,  and  the  sub-vassals  of  the  barons,  were  all  obliged
to  carry  arms.  While  the  poverty  of  princes  pre-
vented them  from  fortifying  their  frontier  towns,  while
a  campaign  continued  but  a  few  weeks,  and  while  a
fierce  and  impetuous  courage  was  impatient  to  bring
every  quarrel  to  the  decision  of  a  battle,  an  army,
without  pay,  and  with  little  discipline,  was  sufficient
for  all  the  purposes  both  of  the  security  and  of  the
glory  of  the  nation.  Such  an  army,  however,  far  from
being  an  engine  at  the  king's  disposal,  was  often  no  less
formidable  to  him  than  to  his  enemies.  The  more
warlike  any  people  were,  the  more  independent  they
became  ;  and  the  same  persons  being  both  soldiers  and
subjects,  civil  privileges  and  immunities  were  the  con-
sequence of  their  victories,  and  the  reward  of  their
martial  exploits.  Conquerors,  whom  mercenary  armies,

h  Du  Cange  voc.  Auxilium.

16  SCOTLAND.

under  our  present  forms  of  government,  often  render
the  tyrants  of  their  own  people,  as  well  as  the  scourges
of  mankind,  were  commonly,  under  the  feudal  consti-
tution, the  most  indulgent  of  all  princes  to  their  sub-
jects, because  they  stood  most  in  need  of  their  assist-
ance. A  prince,  whom  even  war  and  victories  did  not
render  the  master  of  his  own  army,  possessed  hardly
any  shadow  of  military  power  during  times  of  peace.
His  disbanded  soldiers  mingled  with  his  other  subjects;
not  a  single  man  received  pay  from  him ;  many  ages
elapsed  even  before  a  guard  was  appointed  to  defend
his  person  •  and  destitute  of  that  great  instrument  of
dominion,  a  standing  army,  the  authority  of  the  king
continued  always  feeble,  and  was  often  contemptible.
Their  ju-  Nor  were  these  the  only  circumstances  which
nsdiction  contriDUted  towards  depressing  the  regal  power,
mited.  j£y  tne  feu(jai  system,  as  has  been  already  ob-
served, the  king's  judicial  authority  was  extremely  cir-
cumscribed. At  first,  princes  seem  to  have  been  the
supreme  judges  of  their  people,  and,  in  person,  heard
and  determined  all  controversies  among  them.  The
multiplicity  of  causes  soon  made  it  necessary  to  ap-
point judges,  who,  in  the  king's  name,  decided  matters
that  belonged  to  the  royal  jurisdiction.  But  the  bar-
barians, who  overran  Europe,  having  destroyed  most
of  the  great  cities,  and  the  countries  which  they  seized
being  cantoned  out  among  powerful  chiefs,  who  were
blindly  followed  by  numerous  dependants,  whom,  in
return,  they  were  bound  to  protect  from  every  injury  ;
the  administration  of  justice  was  greatly  interrupted,
and  the  execution  of  any  legal  sentence  became  almost
impracticable.  Theft,  rapine,  murder,  and  disorder  of
all  kinds  prevailed  in  every  kingdom  of  Europe,  to  a
degree  almost  incredible,  and  scarcely  compatible  with
the  subsistence  of  civil  society.  Every  offender  shel-
tered himself  under  the  protection  of  some  powerful
chieftain,  who  screened  him  from  the  pursuits  of  justice.

BOOK  I.  17

To  apprehend,  and  to  punish  a  criminal,  often  required
the  union  and  effort  of  half  a  kingdom.1  In  order  to
remedy  these  evils,  many  persons  of  distinction  were
intrusted  with  the  administration  of  justice  within  their
own  territories.  But  what  we  may  presume  was,  at
first,  only  a  temporary  grant,  or  a  personal  privilege,
the  incroaching  spirit  of  the  nobles  gradually  converted
into  a  right,  and  rendered  hereditary.  The  lands  of
some  were,  in  process  of  time,  erected  into  baronies,
those  of  others  into  regalities.  The  jurisdiction  of  the
former  was  extensive ;  that  of  the  latter,  as  the  name
implies,  royal  and  almost  unbounded.  All  causes,
whether  civil  or  criminal,  were  tried  by  judges,  whom
the  lord  of  the  regality  appointed ;  and  if  the  king's
courts  called  any  person  within  his  territory  before
them,  the  lord  of  regality  might  put  a  stop  to  their
proceedings,  and  by  the  privilege  of  repledging,  remove
the  cause  to  his  own  court,  and  even  punish  his  vassal,
if  he  submitted  to  a  foreign  jurisdiction.1"  Thus  almost
every  question,  in  which  any  person  who  resided  on
the  lands  of  the  nobles  was  interested,  being  determined
by  judges  appointed  by  the  nobles  themselves,  their
vassals  were  hardly  sensible  of  being,  in  any  degree,
subject  to  the  crown.  A  feudal  kingdom  was  split  into
many  small  principalities,  almost  independent,  and  held
together  by  a  feeble  and  commonly  an  imperceptible

*  A  remarkable  instance  of  this  occurs  in  the  following  history,  so  late  as  the
year  1561.  Mary,  having  appointed  a  court  of  justice  to  be  held  on  the  borders,
the  inhabitants  of  no  less  than  eleven  counties  were  summoned  to  guard  the  person
who  was  to  act  as  judge,  and  to  enable  him  to  enforce  his  decisions.  The  words  of
a  proclamation,  which  afford  such  convincing  proof  of  the  feebleness  of  the  feudal
government,  deserve  our  notice — "  And  because  it  is  necessary  for  the  execution  of
her  highness'  commandments  and  service,  that  her  justice  be  well  accompanied,
and  her  authority  sufficiently  fortified,  by  the  concurrence  of  a  good  power  of  her
faithful  subjects — Therefore  commands  and  charges  all  and  sundry  earls,  lords,
barons,  freeholders,  landed-men,  and  other  gentlemen,  dwelling  within  the  said
Counties,  that  they,  and  every  one  of  them,  with  their  kin,  friends,  servants,  and
household-men,  well  bodin  in  feir  of  war  in  the  most  substantious  manner  [i.  e.
Completely  armed  and  provided],  and  with  twenty  days'  victuals,  to  meet  and  to
pass  forward  with  him  to  the  borough  of  Jedburgh,  and  there  to  remain  during  the
said  space  of  twenty  days,  and  to  receive  such  direction  and  commands  as  shall  be
given  by  him  to  them  in  our  sovereign  lady's  name,  for  quietness  of  the  country  :
and  to  put  the  same  in  execution  under  the  paiti  of  losing  their  life,  lands,  and
goods."  Keith's  Hist,  of  Scotland,  198.  k  Craig,  lib.  iii.  dieg.  7.

VOL. I.  C

18  SCOTLAND.

bond  of  union.  The  king  was  not  only  stripped  of  the
authority  annexed  to  the  person  of  a  supreme  judge,
but  his  revenue  suffered  no  small  diminution  by  the  loss
of  those  pecuniary  emoluments,  which  were,  in  that  age,
due  to  the  person  who  administered  justice.

In  the  same  proportion  that  the  king  sunk  in  power,
the  nobles  rose  towards  independence.  Not  satisfied
with  having  obtained  a  hereditary  right  to  their  fiefs,
which  they  formerly  held  during  pleasure,  their  ambi-
tion aimed  at  something  bolder,  and  by  introducing
entails,  endeavoured,  as  far  as  human  ingenuity  and
invention  can  reach  that  end,  to  render  their  possessions
unalienable  and  everlasting.  As  they  had  full  power
to  add  to  the  inheritance  transmitted  to  them  from  their
ancestors,  but  none  to  diminish  it,  time  alone,  by  means
of  marriages,  legacies,  and  other  accidents,  brought
continual  accessions  of  wealth  and  of  dignity ;  a  great
family,  like  a  river,  became  considerable  from  the
length  of  its  course,  and  as  it  rolled  on,  new  honours
and  new  property  flowed  successively  into  it.  What-
ever influence  is  derived  from  titles  of  honour,  the
feudal  barons  likewise  possessed  in  an  ample  manner.
These  marks  of  distinction  are  in  their  own  nature,  either
official  or  personal,  and  being  annexed  to  a  particular
charge,  or  bestowed  by  the  admiration  of  mankind  upon
illustrious  characters,  ought  to  be  appropriated  to  these.
But  the  son,  however  unworthy,  could  not  bear  to  be
stripped  of  that  appellation  by  which  his  father  had
been  distinguished.  His  presumption  claimed  what
his  virtue  did  not  merit ;  titles  of  honour  became  here-
ditary, and  added  new  lustre  to  nobles  already  in  pos-
session of  too  much  power.  Something  more  auda-
cious and  more  extravagant  still  remained.  The  su-
preme direction  of  all  affairs,  both  civil  and  military,
being  committed  to  the  great  officers  of  the  crown,  the
fame  and  safety  of  princes,  as  well  as  of  their  people,
depended  upon  the  fidelity  and  abilities  of  these  offi-

BOOK I.  19

cers.  But  such  was  the  preposterous  ambition  of  the
nobles,  and  so  successful  even  their  wildest  attempts
to  aggrandize  themselves,  that  in  all  the  kingdoms
where  the  feudal  institutions  prevailed,  most  of  the  chief
offices  of  state  were  annexed  to  great  families,  and
held,  like  fiefs,  by  hereditary  right.  A  person  whose
undutiful  behaviour  rendered  him  odious  to  his  prince,
or  whose  incapacity  exposed  him  to  the  contempt  of
the  people,  often  held  a  place  of  power  and  trust,  of  the
greatest  importance  to  both.  In  Scotland,  the  offices
of  lord  justice  general,  great  chamberlain,  high  steward,
high  constable,  earl  marshal,  and  high  admiral,  were
all  hereditary ;  and  in  many  counties,  the  office  of  she-
riff was  held  in  the  same  manner.

Nobles,  whose  property  was  so  extensive,  and  whose
power  was  so  great,  could  not  fail  of  being  turbulent
and  formidable.  Nor  did  they  want  instruments  for
executing  their  boldest  designs.  That  portion  of  their
lands,  which  they  parcelled  out  among  their  followers,
supplied  them  with  a  numerous  band  of  faithful  and
determined  vassals  ;  while  that  which  they  retained  in
their  own  hands,  enabled  them  to  live  with  a  princely
splendour.  The  great  hall  of  an  ambitious  baron  was
often  more  crowded  than  the  court  of  his  sovereign.
The  strong  castles,  in  which  they  resided,  afforded  a
secure  retreat  to  the  discontented  and  seditious.  A
great  part  of  their  revenue  was  spent  upon  multitudes
of  indigent  but  bold  retainers.  And  if  at  any  time  they
left  their  retreat  to  appear  in  the  court  of  their  sove-
reign, they  were  accompanied,  even  in  times  of  peace,
with  a  vast  train  of  armed  followers.  The  usual  reti-
nue of  William  the  sixth  earl  of  Douglas  consisted  of
two  thousand  horse.  Those  of  the  other  nobles  were
magnificent  and  formidable  in  proportion.  Impatient
of  subordination,  and  forgetting  their  proper  rank,  such
potent  and  haughty  barons  were  the  rivals  rather  than
the  subjects  of  their  prince.  They  often  despised  his

c  2

20  SCOTLAND.

orders,  insulted  his  person,  and  wrested  from  him  his
crown.  The  history  of  Europe,  during  several  ages,
contains  little  else  but  the  accounts  of  the  wars  and  re-
volutions occasioned  by  their  exorbitant  ambition.
Their  pow-  But,  if  the  authority  of  the  barons  far  ex-
in  Scotland  cceded  its  proper  bounds  in  the  other  nations
othe/king?  of  Europe,  we  may  affirm  that  the  balance
dom.  which  ought  to  be  preserved  between  a  king
and  his  nobles  was  almost  entirely  lost  in  Scotland.  The
Scottish  nobles  enjoyed,  in  common  with  those  of  other
nations,  all  the  means  for  extending  their  authority
which  arise  from  the  aristocratical  genius  of  the  feudal
government.  Besides  these,  they  possessed  advantages
peculiar  to  themselves  :  the  accidental  sources  of  their
power  were  considerable  ;  and  singular  circumstances
concurred  with  the  spirit  of  the  constitution  to  aggran-

The  parti-  ' To  enumerate  the  most  remarkable

cuiar  causes  of  these,  will  serve  both  to  explain  the  political

of  this.  P 1 i  • i  MI

state  ot  the  kingdom,  and  to  illustrate  many
important  occurrences,  in  the  period  now  under  our
review.

The  nature ^  ^e  nature  of  their  country  was  one  cause
of  the of  the  power  and  independence  of  the  Scottish

nobility.  Level  and  open  countries  are  formed
for  servitude.  The  authority  of  the  supreme  ma-
gistrate reaches  with  ease  to  the  most  distant  corners  ;
and  when  nature  has  erected  no  barrier,  and  affords  no
retreat,  the  guilty  or  obnoxious  are  soon  detected  and
punished.  Mountains,  and  fens,  and  rivers,  set  bounds
to  despotic  power,  and  amidst  these  is  the  natural  seat
of  freedom  and  independence.  In  such  places  did  the
Scottish  nobles  usually  fix  their  residence.  By  retiring
to  his  own  castle,  a  mutinous  baron  could  defy  the
power  of  his  sovereign,  it  being  almost  impracticable
to  lead  an  army,  through  a  barren  country,  to  places
of  difficult  access  to  a  single  man.  The  same  causes
which  checked  the  progress  of  the  Roman  arms,  and

BOOK  I.  21

rendered  all  the  efforts  of  Edward  I.  abortive,  often
protected  the  Scottish  nobles  from  the  vengeance  of
their  prince ;  and  they  owed  their  personal  indepen-
dence to  those  very  mountains  and  marshes  which  saved
their  country  from  being  conquered.

II.  The  want  of  great  cities  in  Scotland  con-

The  small  °

number  of  tributed  not  a  little  to  increase  the  power  ot
the  nobility,  and  to  weaken  that  of  the  prince.
Wherever  numbers  of  men  assemble  together,  order
must  be  established,  and  a  regular  form  of  government
instituted ;  the  authority  of  the  magistrate  must  be  re-
cognised, and  his  decisions  meet  with  prompt  and  full
obedience.  Laws  and  subordination  take  rise  in  cities ;
and  where  there  are  few  cities  as  in  Poland,  or  none  as
in  Tartary,  there  are  few  or  no  traces  of  a  well-arranged
police.  But  under  the  feudal  governments,  commerce,
the  chief  means  of  assembling  mankind,  was  neglected;
the  nobles,  in  order  to  strengthen  their  influence  over
their  vassals,  resided  among  them,  and  seldom  appeared
at  court,  where  they  found  a  superior,  or  dwelt  in  cities,
where  they  met  with  equals.  In  Scotland,  the  fertile
counties  in  the  south  lying  open  to  the  English,  no
town  situated  there  could  rise  to  be  great  or  populous
amidst  continual  inroads  and  alarms  ;  the  residence  of
our  monarchs  was  not  fixed  to  any  particular  place ;
many  parts  of  the  country  were  barren  and  unculti-
vated; and  in  consequence  of  these  peculiar  circum-
stances, added  to  the  general  causes  flowing  from  the
nature  of  the  feudal  institutions,  the  towns  in  Scotland
were  extremely  few,  and  very  inconsiderable.  The  vas-
sals of  every  baron  occupied  a  distinct  portion  of  the
kingdom,  and  formed  a  separate  and  almost  indepen-
dent society.  Instead  of  giving  aid  towards  reducing
to  obedience  their  seditious  chieftain,  or  any  whom  he
took  under  his  protection,  they  were  all  in  arms  for  his
defence,  and  obstructed  the  operations  of  justice  to  the
utmost.  The  prince  was  obliged  to  connive  at  criminals

22  SCOTLAND.

whom  he  could  not  reach ;  the  nobles,  conscious  of  this
advantage,  were  not  afraid  to  offend  ;  and  the  difficulty
of  punishing  almost  assured  them  of  impunity.
Theinsti. III.  The  division  of  the  country  into  clans
tution  of had  no  small  effect  in  rendering  the  nobles  con-

clcins

siderable.  The  nations  which  overran  Europe
were  originally  divided  into  many  small  tribes  ;  and
when  they  came  to  parcel  out  the  lands  which  they  had
conquered,  it  was  natural  for  every  chieftain  to  bestow
a  portion,  in  the  first  place,  upon  those  of  his  own  tribe
or  family.  These  all  held  their  lands  of  him;  and  as
the  safety  of  each  individual  depended  on  the  general
union,  these  small  societies  clung  together,  and  were
distinguished  by  some  common  appellation,  either  pa-
tronimical  or  local,  long  before  the  introduction  of  sur-
names, or  ensigns  armorial.  But  when  these  became
common,  the  descendants  and  relations  of  every  chief-
tain assumed  the  same  name  and  arms  with  him ;  other
vassals  were  proud  to  imitate  their  example,  and  by
degrees  they  were  communicated  to  all  those  who  held
of  the  same  superior.  Thus  clanships  were  formed;
and  in  a  generation  or  two,  that  consanguinity,  which
was  at  first  in  a  great  measure  imaginary,  was  believed
to  be  real.  An  artificial  union  was  converted  into  a
natural  one;  men  willingly  followed  a  leader,  whom
they  regarded  both  as  the  superior  of  their  lands,  and
the  chief  of  their  blood,  and  served  him  not  only  with
the  fidelity  of  vassals,  but  with  the  affection  of  friends.
In  the  other  feudal  kingdoms,  we  may  observe  such
unions  as  we  have  described  imperfectly  formed ;  but  in
Scotland,  whether  they  were  the  production  of  chance,
or  the  effect  of  policy,  or  introduced  by  the  Irish  co-
lony above-mentioned,  and  strengthened  by  carefully
preserving  their  genealogies  both  genuine  and  fabu-
lous, clanships  were  universal.  Such  a  confederacy
might  be  overcome,  it  could  not  be  broken ;  and  no
change  of  manners,  or  of  government,  has  been  able,  in

BOOK  I.  23

some  parts  of  the  kingdom,  to  dissolve  associations
which  are  founded  upon  prejudices  so  natural  to  the
human  mind.  How  formidable  were  nobles  at  the  head
of  followers,  who,  counting  that  cause  just  and  honour-
able which  their  chief  approved,  rushed  into  the  field
at  his  command,  ever  ready  to  sacrifice  their  lives  in  de-
fence of  his  person  or  of  his  fame;  against  such  men  a
king  contended  with  great  disadvantage ;  and  that  cold
service  which  money  purchases,  or  authority  extorts,
was  not  an  equal  match  for  their  ardour  and  zeal.
The  small  IV.  ^6  smalhiess  of  their  number  may  be
number  of  mentioned  among  the  causes  of  the  grandeur

the  nobles. „ . _. .  . to_  .  -.  ..  ,

of  the  Scottish  nobles.  Our  annals  reach  not
back  to  the  first  division  of  property  in  the  kingdom;
but  so  far  as  we  can  trace  the  matter,  the  original  pos-
sessions of  the  nobles  seem  to  have  been  extensive.
The  ancient  thanes  were  the  equals  and  the  rivals  of
their  prince.  Many  of  the  earls  and  barons,  who  suc-
ceeded them,  were  masters  of  territories  no  less  ample.
France  and  England,  countries  wide  and  fertile,  afforded
settlements  to  a  numerous  and  powerful  nobility.  Scot-
land, a  kingdom  neither  extensive  nor  rich,  could  not
contain  many  such  overgrown  proprietors.  But  the
power  of  an  aristocracy  always  diminishes,  in  propor-
tion to  the  increase  of  its  numbers ;  feeble  if  divided
among  a  multitude,  irresistible  if  centred  in  a  few.
When  nobles  are  numerous,  their  operations  nearly  re-
semble those  of  the  people ;  they  are  roused  only  by
what  they  feel,  not  by  what  they  apprehend ;  and  sub-
mit to  many  arbitrary  and  oppressive  acts,  before  they
take  arms  against  their  sovereign.  A  small  body,  on
the  contrary,  is  more  sensible,  and  more  impatient;
quick  in  discerning,  and  prompt  in  repelling  danger,  all
its  motions  are  as  sudden  as  those  of  the  other  are  slow.
Hence  proceeded  the  extreme  jealousy  with  which  the
Scottish  nobles  observed  their  monarchs,  and  the  fierce-
ness with  which  they  opposed  their  incroachments.

24  SCOTLAND.

Even  the  virtue  of  a  prince  did  not  render  them  less
vigilant,  or  less  eager  to  defend  their  rights ;  and  Robert
Bruce,  notwithstanding  the  splendour  of  his  victories,
and  the  glory  of  his  name,  was  upon  the  point  of  expe-
riencing the  vigour  of  their  resistance,  no  less  than  his
unpopular  descendant  James  III.  Besides  this,  the
near  alliance  of  the  great  families,  by  frequent  inter-
marriages, was  the  natural  consequence  of  their  small
number ;  and,  as  consanguinity  was,  in  those  ages,  a
powerful  bond  of  union,  all  the  kindred  of  a  nobleman
interested  themselves  in  his  quarrel,  as  a  common  cause;
and  every  contest  the  king  had,  though  with  a  single
baron,  soon  drew  upon  him  the  arms  of  a  whole  confe-
deracy.

Their  V.  Those  natural  connexions,  both  with  their

and  com  e(luals  an^  with  their  inferiors,  the  Scottish  no-
binations.  bles  strengthened  by  a  device,  which,  if  not
peculiar  to  themselves,  was  at  least  more  frequent
among  them  than  in  any  other  nation.  Even  in  times
of  profound  peace,  they  formed  associations,  which,
when  made  with  their  equals,  were  called  leagues  of
mutual  defence  ;  and  when  with  their  inferiors,  bonds  of
manrent.  By  the  former,  the  contracting  parties  bound
themselves  mutually  to  assist  each  other,  in  all  causes,
and  against  all  persons.  By  the  latter,  protection  was
stipulated  on  the  one  hand,  and  fidelity  and  personal
service  promised  on  the  other.1  Self-preservation,  it  is
probable,  forced  men  at  first  into  these  confederacies ;
and,  while  disorder  and  rapine  were  universal,  while
government  was  unsettled,  and  the  authority  of  laws
little  known  or  regarded,  near  neighbours  found  it  ne-
cessary to  unite  in  this  manner  for  their  security ;  and
the  weak  were  obliged  to  court  the  patronage  of  the
strong.  By  degrees,  these  associations  became  so  many
alliances  offensive  arid  defensive  against  the  throne;
and,  as  their  obligation  was  held  to  be  more  sacred

i  Act  30.  Parl.  1424. Act  43.  Parl.  1555.

BOOK I.  25

than  any  tie  whatever,  they  gave  much  umbrage  to  our
kings,  and  contributed  not  a  little  to  the  power  and
independence  of  the  nobility.  In  the  reign  of  James
II.,  William  the  eighth  earl  of  Douglas  entered  into  a
league  of  this  kind  with  the  earls,  of  Crawford,  Ross,
Murray,  Ormond,  the  lords  Hamilton,  Balveny,  and
other  powerful  barons ;  and  so  formidable  was  this  com-
bination to  the  king,  that  he  had  recourse  to  a  measure
no  less  violent  than  unjust,  in  order  to  dissolve  it.
Thefre-  VI.  The  frequent  wars  between  England
whhEn8™  anc^  Scotland  proved  another  cause  of  aug-
land.  menting  the  power  of  the  nobility.  Nature
has  placed  no  barrier  between  the  two  kingdoms  :  a  ri-
ver, almost  every  where  fordable,  divides  them  towards
the  east ;  on  the  west  they  are  separated  by  an  imagi*-
nary  line.  The  slender  revenues  of  our  kings  prevented
them  from  fortifying,  or  placing  garrisons  in  the  towns
on  the  frontier ;  nor  would  the  jealousy  of  their  sub-
jects have  permitted  such  a  method  of  defence.  The
barons,  whose  estates  lay  near  the  borders,  considered
themselves  as  bound,  both  in  honour  and  in  interest,  to
repel  the  enemy.  The  wardenships  of  the  different
marches,  offices  of  great  power  and  dignity,  were  gene-
rally bestowed  on  them.  This  gained  them  the  lead-
ing of  the  warlike  counties  in  the  south ;  and  their  vas-
sals, living  in  a  state  of  perpetual  hostility,  or  enjoying
at  best  an  insecure  peace,  became  more  inured  to  war
than  even  the  rest  of  their  countrymen,  and  more  will-
ing to  accompany  their  chieftain  in  his  most  hardy
and  dangerous  enterprises.  It  was  the  valour,  no  less
than  the  number  of  their  followers,  that  rendered  the
Douglases  great.  The  nobles  in  the  northern  and
midland  counties  were  often  dutiful  and  obsequious
to  the  crown,  but  our  monarchs  always  found  it
impracticable  to  subdue  the  mutinous  and  ungovern-
able spirit  of  the  borderers.  In  all  our  domestic  quar-
rels, those  who  could  draw  to  their  side  the  inhabitants

26  SCOTLAND.

of  the  southern  counties,  were  almost  sure  of  victory  :
and,  conscious  of  this  advantage,  the  lords  who  pos-
sessed authority  there,  were  apt  to  forget  the  duty
which  they  owed  their  sovereign,  and  to  aspire  beyond
the  rank  of  subjects.

Thefre-  VII.  The  calamities  which  befel  our  kings
norities01"  contributed  more  than  any  other  cause  to  dimi-
WenecMnP  u^  ^e  roJ^  authority.  Never  was  any  race
Scotland,  of  monarchs  so  unfortunate  as  the  Scottish.
Of  six  successive  princes,  from  Robert  III.  to  James
VI.,  not  one  died  a  natural  death :  and  the  minorities,
during  that  time,  were  longer,  and  more  frequent,  than
ever  happened  in  any  other  kingdom.  From  Robert
Bruce  to  James  VI.  we  reckon  ten  princes ;  and  seven
of  these  were  called  to  the  throne  while  they  were  mi-
nors, and  almost  infants.  Even  the  most  regular  and
best  established  governments  feel  sensibly  the  perni-
cious effects  of  a  minority,  and  either  become  languid
and  inactive,  or  are  thrown  into  violent  and  unnatural
convulsions.  But  under  the  imperfect  and  ill-adjusted
system  of  government  in  Scotland,  these  effects  were
still  more  fatal ;  the  fierce  and  mutinous  spirit  of  the
nobles,  unrestrained  by  the  authority  of  a  king,  scorn-
ed all  subjection  to  the  delegated  jurisdiction  of  a  re-
gent, or  to  the  feeble  commands  of  a  minor.  The
royal  authority  was  circumscribed  within  narrower
limits  than  ever ;  the  prerogatives  of  the  crown,  natu-
rally inconsiderable,  were  reduced  almost  to  nothing  ;
and  the  aristocratical  power  gradually  rose  upon  the
ruins  of  the  monarchical.  Lest  the  personal  power  of
a  regent  should  enable  him  to  act  with  too  much  vi-
gour, the  authority  annexed  to  that  office  was  some-
times rendered  inconsiderable  by  being  divided  ;  or,
if  a  single  regent  was  chosen,  the  greater  nobles,  and
the  heads  of  the  more  illustrious  families,  were  seldom
raised  to  that  dignity.  It  was  often  conferred  upon
men  who  possessed  little  influence,  and  excited  no  jea-

BOOK  I.  27

lousy.  They,  conscious  of  their  own  weakness,  were
obliged  to  overlook  some  irregularities,  and  to  permit
others ;  and,  in  order  to  support  their  authority,  which
was  destitute  of  real  strength,  they  endeavoured  to  gain
the  most  powerful  and  active  barons,  by  granting  them
possessions  and  immunities,  which  raised  them  to  still
greater  power.  When  the  king  himself  came  to  as-
sume the  reins  of  government,  he  found  his  revenues
wasted  or  alienated,  the  crown  lands  seized  or  given
away,  and  the  nobles  so  accustomed  to  independence,
that,  after  the  struggles  of  a  whole  reign,  he  was  seldom
able  to  reduce  them  to  the  same  state  in  which  they
had  been  at  the  beginning  of  his  minority,  or  to  wrest
from  them  what  they  had  usurped  during  that  time.
Review  of  If  we  take  a  view  of  what  happened  to  each  of

the  events  1-1  /»

favourable  our  kings,  who  was  so  unlortunate  as  to  be
noWes  dur-  placed  in  this  situation,  the  truth  and  import-
rafnorif  ance  °^  ^s  observation  will  fully  appear.

The  minority  of  David  II.  the  son  of  Robert

David  It. _.  i  • i -i  1 i  •  n  Ti  -i

Bruce,  was  disturbed  by  the  pretensions  ot  ha-
ward  Baliol,  who,  relying  on  the  aid  of  England,  and
on  the  support  of  some  disaffected  barons  among  the
Scots,  invaded  the  kingdom.  The  success  which  at
first  attended  his  arms,  obliged  the  young  king  to  re-
tire to  France;  and  Baliol  took  possession  of  the
throne.  A  small  body  of  thp  nobles,  however,  conti-
nuing faithful  to  their  exiled  prince,  drove  Baliol  out
of  Scotland ;  and  after  an  absence  of  nine  years,  David
returned  from  France,  and  took  the  government  of  the
kingdom  into  his  own  hands.  But  nobles,  who  were
thus  wasting  their  blood  and  treasure  in  defence  of  the
crown,  had  a  right  to  the  undisturbed  possession  of
their  ancient  privileges ;  and  even  some  title  to  arrogate

new  ones. It  seems  to  have  been  a  maxim  in

1529.

that  age,  that  every  leader  might  claim  as  his
own  the  territory  which  his  sword  had  won  from  the
enemy.  Great  acquisitions  were  gained  by  the  nobility

28  SCOTLAND.

in  that  way;  and  to  these  the  gratitude  and  liberality
of  David  added,  by  distributing  among  such  as  ad-
hered to  him,  the  vast  possessions  which  fell  to  the
crown  by  the  forfeiture  of  his  enemies.  The  family  of
Douglas,  which  began  to  rise  above  the  other  nobles
in  the  reign  of  his  father,  augmented  both  its  power
and  its  property  during  his  minority.

1405.  James  I.  was  seized  by  the  English  during
the  continuance  of  a  truce,  and  ungenerously  de-
tained a  prisoner  almost  nineteen  years.  During  that
period,  the  kingdom  was  governed,  first  by  his  uncle
Robert  duke  of  Albany,  and  then  by  Murdo,  the  son
of  Robert.  Both  these  noblemen  aspired  to  the  crown ;
and  their  unnatural  ambition,  if  we  may  believe  most
of  our  historians,  not  only  cut  short  the  days  of  prince
David,  the  king's  eldest  brother,  but  prolonged  the  cap-
tivity of  James.  They  flattered  themselves  that  they
might  step  with  less  opposition  into  a  throne,  when
almost  vacant ;  and,  dreading  the  king's  return  as  the
extinction  of  their  authority  and  the  end  of  their  hopes,
they  carried  on  the  negotiations  for  obtaining  his  li-
berty with  extreme  remissness.  At  the  same  time,  they
neglected  nothing  that  could  either  soothe  or  bribe  the
nobles  to  approve  of  their  scheme.  They  slackened
the  reins  of  government ;  they  allowed  the  prerogative
to  be  encroached  upon ;  they  suffered  the  most  irregu-
lar acts  of  power,  and  even  wanton  instances  of  oppres-
sion, to  pass  with  impunity ;  they  dealt  out  the  patri-
mony of  the  crown  among  those  whose  enmity  they
dreaded,  or  whose  favour  they  had  gained;  and  re-
duced the  royal  authority  to  a  state  of  imbecility,  from
which  succeeding monarchs  laboured  in  vain  to  raise  it.

1437.  During  the  minority  of  James  II.  the  admi-
james  ii.  nistration  of  affairs,  as  well  as  the  custody  of
the  king's  person,  were  committed  to  Sir  William
Crichton  and  Sir  Alexander  Livingston.  Jealousy  and
discord  were  the  effects  of  their  conjunct  authority,

BOOK  I.  29

and  each  of  them,  in  order  to  strengthen  himself,  be-
stowed new  power  and  privileges  upon  the  great  men
whose  aid  he  courted ;  while  the  young  earl  of  Douglas,
encouraged  by  their  divisions,  erected  a  sort  of  inde-
pendent principality  within  the  kingdom  ;  and,  forbid-
ding his  vassals  to  acknowledge  any  authority  but  his
own,  he  created  knights,  appointed  a  privy-council,
named  officers,  civil  and  military,  assumed  every  en-
sign of  royalty  but  the  title  of  king,  and  appeared  in
public  with  a  magnificence  more  than  royal.

i46o.  Eight  persons  were  chosen  to  govern  the
James  in.  kingdom  during  the  minority  of  James  III.
Lord  Boyd,  however,  by  seizing  the  person  of  the
young  king,  and  by  the  ascendant  which  he  acquired
over  him,  soon  engrossed  the  whole  authority.  He
formed  the  ambitious  project  of  raising  his  family  to
the  same  pitch  of  power  and  grandeur  with  those  of
the  prime  nobility ;  and  he  effected  it.  While  intent
on  this,  he  relaxed  the  vigour  of  government,  and  the
barons  became  accustomed,  once  more,  to  anarchy  and
independence.  The  power,  which  Boyd  had  been  at
so  much  pains  to  acquire,  was  of  no  long  continuance,
and  the  fall  of  his  family,  according  to  the  fate  of  fa-
vourites, was  sudden  and  destructive ;  but  upon  its
ruins  the  family  of  Hamilton  rose,  which  soon  attained
the  highest  rank  in  the  kingdom.

As  the  minority  of  James  V.  was  longer,  it
was  likewise  more  turbulent,  than  those  of  the
preceding  kings.  And  the  contending  nobles,  encou-
raged or  protected  either  by  the  king  of  France,  or  of
England,  formed  themselves  into  more  regular  factions,
and  disregarded  more  than  ever  the  restraints  of  order
and  authority.  The  French  had  the  advantage  of  seeing
one,  devoted  to  their  interest,  raised  to  be  regent.
This  was  the  duke  of  Albany,  a  native  of  France,  and
a  grandson  of  James  II.  But  Alexander  lord  Home,
the  most  eminent  of  all  the  Scottish  peers,  who  survived

30  SCOTLAND.

the  fatal  battle  of  Flodden,  thwarted  all  his  measures
during  the  first  years  of  his  administration ;  and  the
intrigues  of  the  queen-dowager,  sister  of  Henry  VIII.
rendered  the  latter  part  of  it  no  less  feeble.  Though
supported  by  French  auxiliaries,  the  nobles  despised
his  authority,  and,  regardless  either  of  his  threats  or
his  entreaties,  peremptorily  refused,  two  several  times,
to  enter  England,  to  the  borders  of  which  kingdom  he
had  led  them.  Provoked  by  these  repeated  instances
of  contempt,  the  regent  abandoned  his  troublesome
station,  and,  retiring  to  France,  preferred  the  tranquil-
lity of  a  private  life,  to  an  office  destitute  of  real  autho-
rity. Upon  his  retreat,  Douglas  earl  of  Angus  became
master  of  the  king's  person,  and  governed  the  kingdom
in  his  name.  Many  efforts  were  made  to  deprive  him
of  his  usurped  authority.  But  the  numerous  vassals
and  friends  of  his  family  adhered  to  him,  because  he
divided  with  them  the  power  and  emoluments  of  his
office;  the  people  reverenced  and  loved  the  name  of
Douglas;  he  exercised,  without  the  title  of  regent,
a  fuller  and  more  absolute  authority  than  any  who
had  enjoyed  that  dignity ;  and  the  ancient,  but  dan-
gerous pre-eminence  of  the  Douglases  seemed  to  be
restored.

To  these,  and  to  many  other  causes,  omitted  or  un-
observed by  us,  did  the  Scottish  nobility  owe  that  ex-
orbitant and  uncommon  power,  of  which  instances  oc-
cur so  frequently  in  our  history.  Nothing,  however,
demonstrates  so  fully  the  extent  of  their  power,  as  the
length  of  its  duration.  Many  years  after  the  declension
of  the  feudal  system  in  the  other  kingdoms  of  Europe,
and  when  the  arms  or  policy  of  princes  had,  every
where,  shaken,  or  laid  it  in  ruins,  the  foundations  of
that  ancient  fabric  remained,  in  a  great  measure,  firm
and  untouched  in  Scotland.

The  power ^he  P°wers  which  the  feudal  institutions
of  the  feu-  vested  in  the  nobles,  soon  became  intolerable

BOOK  I.  31

dai  nobles  to  all  the  princes  of  Europe,  wKo  longed  to
tolerable"1"  possess  something  more  than  a  nominal  and
to  prmces.  precarious  authority.  Their  impatience  to  ob-
tain this,  precipitated  Henry  III.  of  England,  Edward
II.  and  some  other  weak  princes,  into  rash  and  prema-
ture attempts  against  the  privileges  of  the  barons,  in
which  they  were  disappointed  or  perished.  Princes,
of  greater  abilities,  were  content  to  mitigate  evils
which  they  could  not  cure ;  they  sought  occupation  for
the  turbulent  spirit  of  their  nobles,  in  frequent  wars  ;
and  allowed  their  fiery  courage  to  evaporate  in  foreign
expeditions,  which,  if  they  brought  no  other  advantage,
secured  at  least  domestic  tranquillity.  B  ut  time  and  ac-
cidents ripened  the  feudal  governments  for  destruction.
Towards  the  end  of  the  fifteenth  century,  and

The  at-  PI-  i  •  /»

tempts  to  beginning  01  the  sixteenth,  all  the  princes  of
Europe  attacked,  as  if  by  concert,  the  power  of
^^  nobles-  Men  of  genius  then  undertook,
and  in  wjth  success,  what  their  unskilful  predecessors
had  attempted  in  vain.  Lewis  XI.  of  France,
the  most  profound  and  the  most  adventurous  genius  of
that  age,  began,  and  in  a  single  reign  almost  completed,
the  scheme  of  their  destruction.  The  sure  but  con-
cealed policy  of  Henry  VII.  of  England  produced  the
same  effect.  The  means,  indeed,  employed  by  these
monarchs  were  very  different.  The  blow  which  Lewis
struck  was  sudden  and  fatal.  The  artifices  of  Henry
resembled  those  slow  poisons,  which  waste  the  consti-
tution, but  become  not  mortal  till  some  distant  period.
Nor  did  they  produce  consequences  less  opposite.
Lewis  boldly  added  to  the  crown  whatever  he  wrested
from  the  nobles.  Henry  undermined  his  barons,  by
encouraging  them  to  sell  their  lands,  which  enriched
the  commons,  and  gave  them  a  weight  in  the  legisla-
But  the  *ure  unknown  to  their  predecessors.  But  while
nobles  these  great  revolutions  were  carrying  on  in

continue  t  • i r>« 1-1  >

togatber two  kingdoms  with  which  Scotland  was  intl-

32  SCOTLAND.

strength  in  mately  connected,  little  alteration  happened
3tland*  there;  our  kings  could  neither  extend  their
own  prerogative,  nor  enable  the  commons  to  encroach
upon  the  aristocracy ;  the  nobles  not  only  retained  most
of  their  ancient  privileges  and  possessions,  but  conti-
nued to  make  new  acquisitions.

Our  kings  This  was  not  owing  to  the  inattention  of  our
^"extJncT  princes,  or  to  their  want  of  ambition.  They
!mtho-yal  were  abundantly  sensible  of  the  exorbitant
tfty.  power  of  the  nobility,  and  extremely  solici-
tous to  humble  that  order.  They  did  not,  however,
possess  means  sufficient  for  accomplishing  this  end.
The  resources  of  our  monarchs  were  few,  and  the  pro-
gress which  they  made  was  of  course  inconsiderable.
General  But  as  the  number  of  their  followers,  and  the
™rilthisextent  °f  tneir  jurisdiction,  were  the  two  chief
«nd.  circumstances  which  rendered  the  nobles  for-
midable ;  in  order  to  counterbalance  the  one,  and  to  re-
strain the  other,  all  our  kings  had  recourse  to  nearly
the  same  expedients.

Encourage  I.  Among  nobles  of  a  fierce  courage,  and  of
among  the  unpolished  manners,  surrounded  with  vassals
nobles.  bold,  and  licentious,  whom  they  were  bound
by  interest  and  honour  to  protect,  the  causes  of  dis-
cord were  many  and  unavoidable.  As  the  contending
parties  could  seldom  agree  in  acknowledging  the  au-
thority of  any  common  superior  or  judge,  and  their
impatient  spirit  would  seldom  wait  the  slow  decisions
of  justice,  their  quarrels  were  usually  terminated  by  the
sword.  The  offended  baron  assembled  his  vassals,
and  wasted  the  lands,  or  shed  the  blood,  of  his  enemies.
To  forgive  an  injury  was  mean;  to  forbear  revenge,  in-
famous or  cowardly.10  Hence  quarrels  were  transmit-

m  The  spirit  of  revenge  was  encouraged,  not  only  by  the  manners,  but,  what  is
more  remarkable,  by  the  laws  of  those  ages.  If  any  person  thought  the  prosecution
of  an  injury  offered  to  his  family  too  troublesome,  or  too  dangerous,  the  Salique
laws  permitted  him  publicly  to  desist  from  demanding  vengeance  ;  but  the  same
laws,  m  order  to  punish  his  cowardice,  and  want  of  affection  to  his  family,  deprived
him  of  the  right  of  succession.  Renault  Abrege"  Chronol.  p.  81.  Among  the  Anglo-

BOOK I.  33

ted  from  father  to  son,  and  under  the  name  of  deadly
feuds,  subsisted  for  many  generations  with  unmitigated
rancour.  It  was  the  interest  of  the  crown  to  foment
rather  than  to  extinguish  these  quarrels ;  and  by  scat-
tering or  cherishing  the  seeds  of  discord  among  the
nobles,  that  union,  which  would  have  rendered  the
aristocracy  invincible,  and  which  must  at  once  have
annihilated  the  prerogative,  was  effectually  prevented.
To  the  same  cause,  our  kings  were  indebted  for  the
success  with  which  they  sometimes  attacked  the  most
powerful  chieftains.  They  employed  private  revenge
to  aid  the  impotence  of  public  laws,  and  arming  against
the  person  who  had  incurred  their  displeasure  those
rival  families  which  wished  his  fall,  they  rewarded
their  service  by  sharing  among  them  the  spoils  of  the
vanquished.  But  this  expedient,  though  it  served  to
humble  individuals,  did  not  weaken  the  body  of  the
nobility.  Those  who  were  now  the  instruments  of  their
prince's  vengeance  became,  in  a  short  time,  the  objects
of  his  fear.  Having  acquired  power  and  wealth  by
serving  the  crown,  they,  in  their  turn,  set  up  for  inde-
pendence :  and  though  there  might  be  a  fluctuation  of
power  and  of  property ;  though  old  families  fell,  and
new  ones  rose  upon  their  ruins ;  the  rights  of  the  aris-
tocracy remained  entire,  and  its  vigour  unbroken.
Extend  H-  As  the  administration  of  justice  is  one  of
die  juris-  the  most  powerful  ties  between  a  king  and  his

diction  of  r

the  king's  subjects,  all  our  monarchs  were  at  the  utmost

pains  to  circumscribe  the  jurisdiction  of  the

barons,  and  to  extend  that  of  the  crown. The  external

forms  of  subordination,  natural  to  the  feudal  system,

Saxons,  we  find  a  singular  institution  distinguished  by  the  name  of  sodalitium ;
a  voluntary  association,  the  object  whereof  was  the  personal  security  of  those  who
joined  in  it,  and  which  the  feebleness  of  government  at  that  time  rendered  necessary.
Among  other  regulations,  which  are  contained  in  one  of  these  still  extant,  the  fol-
lowing deserves  notice :  "  If  any  associate  shall  either  eat  or  drink  with  a  person
who  has  killed  any  member  of  the  sodalitium,  unless  in  the  presence  of  the  king,  the
bishop,  or  the  count,  and  unless  he  can  prove  that  he  did  not  know  the  person,  let
him  pay  a  great  fine."  Hicks  Dissert.  Epistolar.  apud  Thesaur.  Ling.  Septentr.  vol.
i.  p.  21.

VOL.  I.  D

34  SCOTLAND.

favoured  this  attempt  An  appeal  lay  from  the  judges
and  courts  of  the  barons,  to  those  of  the  king.  The
right,  however,  of  judging  in  the  first  instance  belonged
to  the  nobles,  and  they  easily  found  means  to  defeat
the  effects  of  appeals,  as  well  as  of  many  other  feudal
regulations.  The  royal  jurisdiction  was  almost  con-
fined within  the  narrow  limits  of  the  king's  demesnes,
beyond  which  his  judges  claimed  indeed  much  autho-
rity, but  possessed  next  to  none.  Our  kings  were
sensible  of  these  limitations,  and  bore  them  with  impa-
tience. But  it  was  impossible  to  overturn,  in  a  moment,
what  was  so  deeply  rooted  ;  or  to  strip  the  nobles,  at
once,  of  privileges  which  they  had  held  so  long,  and
which  were  wrought  almost  into  the  frame  of  the  feudal
constitution.  To  accomplish  this,  however,  was  an
object  of  uniform  and  anxious  attention  to  all  our
princes.  James  I.  led  the  way  here,  as  well  as  in  other
instances,  towards  a  more  regular  and  perfect  police.
He  made  choice,  among  the  estates  of  parliament,  of
a  certain  number  of  persons,  whom  he  distinguished
by  the  name  of  lords  of  session,  and  appointed  them  to
hold  courts  for  determining  civil  causes  three  times  in
the  year,  and  forty  days  at  a  time,  in  whatever  place  he
pleased  to  name.  Their  jurisdiction  extended  to  all
matters  which  formerly  came  under  the  cognizance  of
the  king's  council,  and  being  a  committee  of  parliament,
their  decisions  were  final.  James  III.  imposed  severe
penalties  upon  those  judges  appointed  by  the  barons,
whose  decisions  should  be  found  on  a  review  to  be
unjust ;  and,  by  many  other  regulations,  endeavoured
to  extend  the  authority  of  his  own  court.n  James  IV.
on  pretence  of  remedying  the  inconveniences  arising
from  the  short  terms  of  the  court  of  session,  appointed
other  judges  called  lords  of  daily  council.  The  ses-
sion was  an  ambulatory  court,  and  met  seldom;  the
daily  council  was  fixed,  and  sat  constantly  at  Edin-

n  Act  26.  p.  1469.  Act  94.  p.  1493.  Act  99.  p.  1487.

BOOK  I.  35

burgh ;  and  though  not  composed  of  members  of  par-
liament, the  same  powers  which  the  lords  of  session
enjoyed  were  vested  in  it. At  last  James  V.  erected  a
new  court  that  still  subsists,  and  which  he  named  the
college  of  justice,  the  judges  or  senators  of  which  were
called  lords  of  council  and  session. This  court  not
only  exercised  the  same  jurisdiction  which  formerly
belonged  to  the  session  and  daily  council,  but  new
rights  were  added. Privileges  of  great  importance
were  granted  to  its  members,  its  forms  were  prescribed,
its  terms  fixed,  and  regularity,  power,  and  splendour
conferred  upon  it.0 The  persons  constituted  judges  in
all  these  different  courts  had,  in  many  respects,  the  ad-
vantage of  those  who  presided  in  the  courts  of  the
barons ;  they  were  more  eminent  for  their  skill  in  law,
their  rules  of  proceeding  were  more  uniform,  and  their
decisions  more  consistent. Such  judicatories  became
the  objects  of  confidence,  and  of  veneration. Men
willingly  submitted  their property  to  their  determi-
nation, and  their  encroachments  on  the  jurisdictions  of
the  nobles  were  popular,  and  for  that  reason  successful.
By  devices  of  a  similar  nature,  the  jurisdiction  of  the
nobles  in  criminal  causes  was  restrained,  and  the  au-
thority of  the  court  of  justiciary  extended. The  crown,
in  this  particular,  gaining  insensibly  upon  the  nobles,
recovered  more  ample  authority ;  and  the  king,  whose
jurisdiction  once  resembled  that  of  a  baron,  rather  than
that  of  a  sovereign,1*  came  more  and  more  to  be  con-

0  Keith,  App.  74,  &c.

P  The  most  perfect  idea  of  the  feudal  system  of  government  may  be  attained
by  attending  to  the  state  of  Germany,  and  to  the  history  of  France.  In  the  for-
mer, the  feudal  institutions  still  subsist  with  great  vigour ;  and  though  altogether
abolished  in  the  latter,  the  public  records  have  been  so  carefully  preserved,  that  the
French  lawyers  and  antiquaries  have  been  enabled,  with  more  certainty  and  pre-
cision, than  those  of  any  other  country  in  Europe,  to  trace  its  rise,  its  progress,  and
great  revolutions.  In  Germany,  every  principality  may  be  considered  as  a  fief,  and  all
its  great  princes  as  vassals,  holding  of  the  emperor.  They  possess  all  the  feudal  pri-
vileges ;  their  fiefs  are  perpetual ;  their  jurisdictions  within  their  own  territories  sepa-
rate and  extensive ;  and  the  great  offices  of  the  empire  are  all  hereditary,  and  an-
nexed to  particular  families.  At  the  same  time  the  emperor  retains  many  of  the
prerogatives  of  the  feudal  monarchs.  Like  them  hip  claims  and  pretensions  are  in-
numerable, and  his  power  small :  his  jurisdiction  within  his  own  demesnes  or  here-
ditary countries  is  complete;  beyond  the  bounds  of  these  it  is  almost  nothing;

D  2

36  SCOTLAND.

sidered  as  the  head  of  the  community  and  the  supreme
dispenser  of  justice  to  his  people.  These  acquisitions
of  our  kings,  however,  though  comparatively  great,
were  in  reality  inconsiderable ;  and,  notwithstanding
all  their  efforts,  many  of  the  separate  jurisdictions  pos-
sessed by  the  nobles  remained  in  great  vigour;  and
their  final  abolition  was  reserved  to  a  distant  and  more
happy  period.

Each  of  But  besides  these  methods  of  defending  their
pursued^  prerogative  and  humbling  the  aristocracy,  which
of  humlan  may  ke  considered  as  common  to  all  our  princes,
biing  the  we  shall  find,  by  taking  a  view  of  their  reigns,
that  almost  every  one  of  our  kings,  from  Robert
Bruce  to  James  V.,  had  formed  some  particular  system
for  depressing  the  authority  of  the  nobles,  which  was
the  object  both  of  their  jealousy  and  terror.  This  con-
duct of  our  monarchs,  if  we  rest  satisfied  with  the  ac-
counts of  their  historians,  must  be  considered  as  flowing
entirely  from  their  resentment  against  particular  noble-
men ;  and  all  their  attempts  to  humble  them  must  be
viewed  as  the  sallies  of  private  passion,  not  as  the  con-
sequences of  any  general  plan  of  policy.  But,  though
some  of  their  actions  may  be  imputed  to  those  passions,
though  the  different  genius  of  the  men,  the  temper  of
the  times,  and  the  state  of  the  nation,  necessarily  occa-
This  proved  si°ne(l  great  variety  in  their  schemes ;  yet,
by  a  review  without  being  chargeable  with  excessive  re-

and  so  permanent  are  feudal  principles,  that  although  the  feudal  system  be  over-
turned in  almost  every  particular  state  in  Germany,  and  although  the  greater  part
of  its  princes  have  become  absolute,  the  original  feudal  constitution  of  the  empire
still  remains,  and  ideas  peculiar  to  that  form  of  government  direct  all  its  operations,
and  determine  the  rights  of  all  its  princes.  Our  observations  with  regard  to  the
limited  jurisdiction  of  kings  under  the  feudal  governments,  are  greatly  illustrated
by  what  happened  in  France.  The  feebleness  and  dotage  of  the  descendants  of
Charlemagne  encouraged  the  peers  to  usurp  an  independent  jurisdiction.  Nothing
remained  in  the  hands  of  the  crown  ;  all  was  seized  by  them.  When  Hugh  Capet
ascended  the  throne,  A.D.  987,  he  kept  possession  of  his  private  patrimony  the
Comt6  of  Paris  ;  and  all  the  jurisdiction  which  the  kings  his  successors  exercised  for
some  time,  was  within  its  territories.  There  were  only  four  towns  in  France,  where
he  could  establish  Grands  Baillis,  or  royal  judges ;  all  the  other  lands,  towns,  and
bailliages,  belonged  to  the  nobles.  The  methods  to  which  the  French  monarchs  had
recourse  for  extending  their  jurisdiction  were  exactly  similar  to  those  employed
by  our  princes.  Renault  AbregS,  p.  617,  &c.  De  1'Esprit  des  Loix,  liv.  xxx.
ch.  20,  &c.

BOOK I.  37

of  the finement,  we  may  affirm  that  their  end  was

A*«-AV«te it»  v

events  in

their  reigns,  uniformly  the  same  ;  and  that  the  project  of
reducing  the  power  of  the  aristocracy,  sometimes  avow-
ed, and  pursued  with  vigour;  sometimes  concealed,  or
seemingly  suspended ;  was  never  altogether  abandoned.
Robert  ^0  prince  was  ever  more  indebted  to  his
Bruce,  nobles  than  Robert  Bruce.  Their  valour  con-
quered the  kingdom,  and  placed  him  on  the  throne.
His  gratitude  and  generosity  bestowed  on  them  the
lands  of  the  vanquished.  Property  has  seldom  under-
gone greater  or  more  sudden  revolutions,  than  those
to  which  it  was  subject  at  that  time  in  Scotland.  Ed-
ward I.  having  forfeited  the  estates  of  most  of  the
ancient  Scottish  barons,  granted  them  to  his  English
subjects.  These  were  expelled  by  the  Scots,  and  their
lands  seized  by  new  masters.  Amidst  such  rapid
changes,  confusion  was  unavoidable  ;  and  many  pos-
sessed their  lands  by  titles  extremely  defective.  Dur-
ing one  of  those  truces  between  the  two  nations,  occa-
sioned rather  by  their  being  weary  of  war  than  desirous
of  peace,  Robert  formed  a  scheme  for  checking  the
growing  power  and  wealth  of  the  nobles.  He  sum-
moned them  to  appear  and  to  shew  by  what  rights  they
held  their  lands.  They  assembled  accordingly,  and
the  question  being  put,  they  started  up  at  once,  and
drew  their  swords,  "By  these,"  said  they,  "we  ac-
quired our  lands,  and  with  these  we  will  defend  them."
The  king,  intimidated  by  their  boldness,  prudently
dropped  the  project.  But  so  deeply  did  they  resent
this  attack  upon  their  order,  that,  notwithstanding  Ro-
bert's popular  and  splendid  virtues,  it  occasioned  a
dangerous  conspiracy  against  his  life.

David  his  son,  at  first  an  exile  in  France,

afterward  a  prisoner  in  England,  and  involved

in  continual  war  with  Edward  III.,  had  not  leisure  to

attend  to  the  internal  police  of  his  kingdom,  or  to

think  of  retrenching  the  privileges  of  the  nobility.

38  SCOTLAND.

Our  historians  have  been  more  careful  to  re-
Robert  ii.

late  the  military  than  the  civil  transactions  of
the  reign  of  Robert  II.  Skirmishes  and  inroads  of  little
consequence  they  describe  minutely ;  but  with  regard
to  every  thing  that  happened  during  several  years  of
tranquillity,  they  are  altogether  silent.

The  feeble  administration  of  Robert  III.  must
likewise  be  passed  over  slightly.  A  prince  of
a  mean  genius,  and  of  a  frail  and  sickly  constitution,
was  not  a  fit  person  to  enter  the  lists  with  active  and
martial  barons,  or  to  attempt  wresting  from  them  any
of  their  rights.

The  civil  transactions  in  Scotland  are  better
known  since  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of
James  I.,  and  a  complete  series  of  our  laws  supplies
the  defects  of  our  historians.  The  English  made  some
amends  for  their  injustice  in  detaining  that  prince  a
prisoner,  by  their  generous  care  of  his  education.  Dur-
ing his  long  residence  in  England,  he  had  an  oppor-
tunity of  observing  the  feudal  system  in  a  more  ad-
vanced state,  and  refined  from  many  of  the  imperfections
which  still  adhered  to  it  in  his  own  kingdom.  He  saw
there,  nobles  great,  but  not  independent ;  a  king,  pow-
erful, though  far  from  absolute  :  he  saw  a  regular  ad-
ministration of  government ;  wise  laws  enacted  ;  and  a
nation  flourishing  and  happy,  because  all  ranks  of  men
were  accustomed  to  obey  them.  Full  of  these  ideas
he  returned  into  his  native  country,  which  presented
to  him  a  very  different  scene.  The  royal  authority,
never  great,  was  now  contemptible,  by  having  been  so
long  delegated  to  regents.  The  ancient  patrimony  and
revenues  of  the  crown  were  almost  totally  alienated.
During  his  long  absence  the  name  of  king  was  little
known,  and  less  regarded.  The  licence  of  many  years
had  rendered  the  nobles  independent.  Universal  anar-
chy prevailed.  The  weak  were  exposed  to  the  rapine
and  oppression  of  the  strong.  In  every  corner  some

BOOK  I.  39

barbarous  chieftain  ruled  at  pleasure,  and  neither  feared
the  king,  nor  pitied  the  people.9

James  was  too  wise  a  prince  to  employ  open  force
to  correct  such  inveterate  evils. Neither  the  men  nor
the  times  would  have  borne  it. He  applied  the  gentler
and  less  offensive  remedy  of  laws  and  statutes. In  a
parliament  held  immediately  after  his  return,  he  gained
the  confidence  of  his  people,  by  many  wise  laws,  tend-
ing visibly  to  re-establish  order,  tranquillity,  and  justice,
in  the  kingdom. But,  at  the  same  time  that  he  endea-
voured to  secure  these  blessings  to  his  subjects,  he  dis-
covered his  intention  to  recover  those  possessions  of
which  the  crown  had  been  unjustly  bereaved ;  and  for
that  purpose  obtained  an  act,  by  which  he  was  empow-
ered to  summon  such  as  had  obtained  crown  lands
during  the  three  last  reigns,. to  produce  the  rights  by
which  they  held  them/ As  this  statute  threatened  the
property  of  the  nobles,  another  which  passed  in  a  sub-
sequent parliament  aimed  a  dreadful  blow  at  their
power. By  it  the  leagues  and  combinations  which  we
have  already  described,  and  which  rendered  the  nobles
so  formidable  to  the  crown,  were  declared  unlawful.5
Encouraged  by  this  success  in  the  beginning  of  his
enterprise,  James's  next  step  was  still  bolder  and  more
decisive. During  the  sitting  of  parliament,  he  seized,
at  once,  his  cousin  Murdo  duke  of  Albany,  and  his
sons ;  the  earls  of  Douglas,  Lennox,  Angus,  March,
and  above  twenty  other  barons  of  prime  rank. To  all
of  them,  however,  he  was  immediately  reconciled,  ex-
cept to  Albany  and  his  sons,  and  Lennox. These  were
tried  by  their  peers,  and  condemned  ;  for  what  crime
is  now  unknown. Their  execution  struck  the  whole
order  with  terror,  and  their  forfeiture  added  consider-

<i  A  contemporary  monkish  writer  describes  these  calamities  very  feelingly,  in  his
rude  Latin.  "  In  diebus  illis,  non  erat  lex  in  Scotia,  sed  quilibet  potentiorum  juniorera
oppressit ;  et  totum  regnum  fuit  unum  latrocinium ;  homicidia,  deprsedationes,  in-
cendia,  et  csetera  maleficia  remanserunt  impunita ;  et  justitia  relegata  extra  terrainos
regni  exulavit."  Chartular.  Morav.  apud  Innes  Essay,  vol.  i.  p.  272.

r  Act  9.  p.  1424.  •  Act  30.  p.  1424.

40  SCOTLAND.

able  possessions  to  the  crown.  He  seized,  likewise,
the  earldoms  of  Buchan  and  Strathern,  upon  different
pretexts ;  and  that  of  Mar  fell  to  him  by  inheritance.
The  patience  and  inactivity  of  the  nobles,  while  the
king  was  proceeding  so  rapidly  towards  aggrandizing
the  crown,  are  amazing.  The  only  obstruction  he  met
with  was  from  a  slight  insurrection  headed  by  the  duke
of  Albany's  youngest  son,  and  that  was  easily  sup-
pressed. The  splendour  and  presence  of  a  king,  to  which
the  great  men  had  been  long  unaccustomed,  inspired
reverence :  James  was  a  prince  of  great  abilities,  and
conducted  his  operations  with  much  prudence.  He
was  in  friendship  with  England,  and  closely  allied  with
the  French  king ;  he  was  adored  by  the  people,  who
enjoyed  unusual  security  and  happiness  under  his  ad-
ministration ;  and  all  his  acquisitions,  however  fatal  to
the  body  of  the  nobles,  had  been  gained  by  attacks  upon
individuals ;  were  obtained  by  decisions  of  law  ;  and,
being  founded  on  circumstances  peculiar  to  the  persons
who  suffered,  might  excite  murmurs  and  apprehensions,
but  afforded  no  colourable  pretext  for  a  general  rebel-
lion. It  was  not  so  with  the  next  attempt  which  the
king  made.  Encouraged  by  the  facility  with  which  he
had  hitherto  advanced,  he  ventured-  upon  a  measure
that  irritated  the  whole  body  of  the  nobility,  and  which
the  events  shew  either  to  have  been  entered  into  with
too  much  precipitancy,  or  to  have  been  carried  on  with
too  much  violence.  The  father  of  George  D unbar  earl
of  March,  had  taken  arms  against  Robert  III.,  the  king's
father ;  but  that  crime  had  been  pardoned,  and  his
lands  restored  by  Robert  duke  of  Albany.  James,  on
pretext  that  the  regent  had  exceeded  his  power,  and
that  it  was  the  prerogative  of  the  king  alone  to  pardon
treason,  or  to  alienate  lands  annexed  to  the  crown,  ob-
tained a  sentence,  declaring  the  pardon  to  be  void,  and
depriving  Dunbar  of  the  earldom.  Many  of  the  great
men  held  lands  by  no  other  right  than  what  they  de-

BOOK  I.  41

rived  from  the  grants  of  the  two  dukes  of  Albany.  Such
a  decision,  though  they  had  reason  to  expect  it  in  con-
sequence of  the  statute  which  the  king  had  obtained,
occasioned  a  general  alarm.  Though  Dunbar  was,  at
present,  the  only  sufferer,  the  precedent  might  be  ex-
tended, and  their  titles  to  possessions  which  they  con-
sidered as  the  rewards  of  their  valour,  might  be  sub-
jected to  the  review  of  courts  of  law,  whose  forms  of
proceeding,  and  jurisdiction,  were  in  a  martial  age
little  known,  and  extremely  odious.  Terror  and  dis-
content spread  fast  upon  this  discovery  of  the  king's
intentions ;  the  common  danger  called  on  the  whole
order  to  unite,  and  to  make  one  bold  stand,  before  they
were  stripped  successively  of  their  acquisitions,  and
reduced  to  a  state  of  poverty  and  insignificance.  The
prevalence  of  these  sentiments  among  the  nobles  en-
couraged a  few  desperate  men,  the  friends  or  followers
of  those  who  had  been  the  chief  sufferers  under  the
king's  administration,  to  form  a  conspiracy  against  his
life.  The  first  uncertain  intelligence  of  this  was  brought
him,  while  he  lay  in  his  camp  before  Roxburgh- castle.
He  durst  not  confide  in  nobles,  to  whom  he  had  given
so  many  causes  of  disgust,  but  instantly  dismissed
them  and  their  vassals,  and,  retiring  to  a  monastery
near  Perth,  was  soon  after  murdered  there  in  the  most
cruel  manner.  All  our  historians  mention  with  asto-
nishment this  circumstance,  of  the  king's  disbanding
his  army  at  a  time  when  it  was  so  necessary  for  his
preservation.  A  king,  say  they,  surrounded  with  his
barons,  is  secure  from  secret  treason,  and  may  defy
open  rebellion.  But  those  very  barons  were  the  per-
sons whom  he  chiefly  dreaded ;  and  it  is  evident  from
this  review  of  his  administration  that  he  had  greater
reason  to  apprehend  danger,  than  to  expect  defence,
from  their  hands.  It  was  the  misfortune  of  James,
that  his  maxims  and  manners  were  too  refined  for  the
age  in  which  he  lived.  Happy  !  had  he  reigned  in

42  SCOTLAND.

a  kingdom  more  civilized ;  his  love  of  peace,  of  jus-
tice, and  of  elegance,  would  have  rendered  his  schemes
successful;  and,  instead  of  perishing  because  he  had
attempted  too  much,  a  grateful  people  would  have
applauded  and  seconded  his  efforts  to  reform  and  im-
prove them.

Crichton,  the  most  able  man  of  those  who
"  had  the  direction  of  affairs  during  the  minority
of  James  II.  had  been  the  minister  of  James  I.,  and  well
acquainted  with  his  resolution  of  humbling  the  nobility.
He  did  not  relinquish  the  design,  and  he  endeavoured
to  inspire  his  pupil  with  the  same  sentiments.  But
what  James  had  attempted  to  effect  slowly,  and  by  legal
means,  his  son  and  Crichton  pursued  with  the  impe-
tuosity natural  to  Scotsmen,  and  with  the  fierceness
peculiar  to  that  age.  William  the  sixth  earl  of  Doug-
las was  the  first  victim  to  their  barbarous  policy.  That
young  nobleman  fas  we  have  already  observed),  con-
temning the  authority  of  an  infant  prince,  almost  openly
renounced  his  allegiance,  and  aspired  to  independence.
Crichton,  too  high-spirited  to  bear  such  an  insult,  but
too  weak  to  curb  or  to  bring  to  justice  so  powerful  an
offender,  decoyed  him  by  many  promises  to  an  interview
in  the  castle  of  Edinburgh,  and,  notwithstanding  these,
murdered  both  him  and  his  brother.  Crichton,  how-
ever, gained  little  by  this  act  of  treachery,  which  ren-
dered him  universally  odious.  William  the  eighth
earl  of  Douglas  was  no  less  powerful,  and  no  less  for-
midable to  the  ctown.  By  forming  the  league  which  we
already  mentioned  with  the  earl  of  Crawford  and  other
barons,  he  had  united  against  his  sovereign  almost  one
half  of  his  kingdom.  But  his  credulity  led  him  into
the  same  snare  which  had  been  fatal  to  the  former  earl.
Relying  on  the  king's  promises,  who  had  now  attained
to  the  years  of  manhood,  and  having  obtained  a  safe-
conduct  under  the  great  seal,  he  ventured  to  meet  him
in  Stirling-castle.  James  urged  him  to  dissolve  that

BOOK I.  43

dangerous  confederacy  into  which  he  had  entered;  the
earl  obstinately  refused ;  "  If  you  will  not,"  said  the
enraged  monarch,  drawing  his  dagger,  "  this  shall ;"
and  stabbed  him  to  the  heart.  An  action  so  unworthy
of  a  king  filled  the  nation  with  astonishment  and  with
horror.  The  earl's  vassals  ran  to  arms  with  the  utmost
fury,  and  dragging  the  safe-conduct,  which  the  king
had  granted  and  violated,  at  a  horse's  tail,  they
marched  towards  Stirling,  burnt  the  town,  and  threat-
ened to  besiege  the  castle.  An  accommodation,  how-
ever, ensued ;  on  what  terms  is  not  known.  But  the
king's  jealousy,  and  the  new  earl's  power  and  resent-
ment, prevented  it  from  being  of  long  continuance.
Both  took  the  field  at  the  head  of  their  armies,  and  met
near  Abercorn.  That  of  the  earl,  composed  chiefly  of
borderers,  was  far  superior  to  the  king's  both  in  number
and  in  valour ;  and  a  single  battle,  must,  in  all  proba-
bility, have  decided  whether  the  house  of  Stuart  or  of
Douglas  was  henceforth  to  possess  the  throne  of  Scot-
land. But,  while  his  troops  impatiently  expected  the
signal  to  engage,  the  earl  ordered  them  to  retire  to  their
camp ;  and  Sir  James  Hamilton  of  Cadyow,  the  person
in  whom  he  placed  the  greatest  confidence,  convinced
of  his  want  of  genius  to  improve  an  opportunity,  or  of
his  want  of  courage  to  seize  a  crown,  deserted  him  that
very  night.  This  example  was  followed  by  many;
and  the  earl,  despised  or  forsaken  by  all,  was  soon
driven  out  of  the  kingdom,  and  obliged  to  depend  for
his  subsistence  on  the  friendship  of  the  king  of  Eng-
land. The  ruin  of  this  great  family,  which  had  so  long
rivalled  and  overawed  the  crown,  and  the  terror  with
which  such  an  example  of  unsuccessful  ambition  filled
the  nobles,  secured  the  king,  for  some  time,  from  op-
position; and  the  royal  authority  remained  uncon-
trolled and  almost  absolute.  James  did  not  suffer  this
favourable  interval  to  pass  unimproved ;  he  procured
the  consent  of  parliament  to  laws  more  advantageous

44  SCOTLAND.

to  the  prerogative,  and  more  subversive  of  the  privi-
leges of  the  aristocracy,  than  were  ever  obtained  by
any  former  or  subsequent  monarch  of  Scotland.

By  one  of  these,  not  only  all  the  vast  possessions  of
the  earl  of  Douglas  were  annexed  to  the  crown,  but  all
prior  and  future  alienations  of  crown-lands  were  de-
clared to  be  void,  and  the  king  was  empowered  to  seize
them  at  pleasure,  without  any  process  or  form  of  law,
and  oblige  the  possessors  to  refund  whatever  they  had
received  from  them.*  A  dreadful  instrument  of  oppres-
sion in  the  hands  of  a  prince  !

Another  law  prohibited  the  wardenship  of  the
marches  to  be  granted  hereditarily ;  restrained,  in  se-
veral instances,  the  jurisdiction  of  that  office ;  and  ex-
tended the  authority  of  the  king's  courts."

By  a  third,  it  was  enacted  that  no  regality,  or  exclu-
sive right  of  administering  justice  within  a  man's  own
lands,  should  be  granted  in  time  to  come,  without  the
consent  of  parliament  ;x  a  condition  which  implied  al-
most an  express  prohibition.  Those  nobles  who  already
possessed  that  great  privilege,  would  naturally  be  so-
licitous to  prevent  it  from  becoming  common,  by  being
bestowed  on  many.  Those  who  had  not  themselves
attained  it,  would  envy  others  the  acquisition  of  such
a  flattering  distinction,  and  both  would  concur  in  re-
jecting the  claims  of  new  pretenders.

By  a  fourth  act,  all  new  grants  of  hereditary  offices
were  prohibited,  and  those  obtained  since  the  death  of
the  last  king  were  revoked/

Each  of  these  statutes  undermined  some  of  the  great
pillars  on  which  the  power  of  the  aristocracy  rested.
During  the  remainder  of  his  reign,  this  prince  pursued
the  plan  which  he  had  begun,  with  the  utmost  vigour ;
and  had  not  a  sudden  death,  occasioned  by  the  splinter
of  a  cannon  which  burst  near  him  at  the  siege  of  Rox-

'  Act  41.  p.  1455.  »  Ibid.  Act  42.

*  P.  1465,  Act  43.  y  Ibid.  Act  44.

BOOK  I.  45

burgh,  prevented  his  progress,  he  wanted  neither  ge-
nius nor  courage  to  perfect  it :  and  Scotland  might,  in
all  probability,  have  been  the  first  kingdom  in  Europe
which  would  have  seen  the  subversion  of  the  feudal
system.

James  III.  discovered  no  less  eagerness  than
his  father  or  grandfather  to  humble  the  nobi-
lity; but  far  inferior  to  either  of  them  in  abilities  and  ad-
dress, he  adopted  a  plan  extremely  impolitic,  and  his
reign  was  disastrous  as  well  as  his  end  tragical.  Under
the  feudal  governments,  the  nobles  were  not  only  the
king's  ministers,  and  possessed  of  all  the  great  offices
of  power  or  of  trust;  they  were  likewise  his  companions
and  favourites,  and  hardly  any  but  them  approached
his  person,  or  were  entitled  to  his  regard.  But  James,
who  both  feared  and  hated  his  nobles,  kept  them  at  an
unusual  distance,  and  bestowed  every  mark  of  confi-
dence and  affection  upon  a  few  mean  persons,  of  pro-
fessions so  dishonourable,  as  ought  to  have  rendered
them  unworthy  of  his  presence.  Shut  up  with  these  in
his  castle  of  Stirling,  he  seldom  appeared  in  public,  and
amused  himself  in  architecture,  music,  and  other  arts,
which  were  then  little  esteemed.  The  nobles  beheld
the  power  and  favour  of  these  minions  with  indignation.
Even  the  sanguinary  measures  of  his  father  provoked
them  less  than  his  neglect.  Individuals  alone  suffered
by  the  former ;  by  the  latter,  every  man  thought  him-
self injured,  because  all  were  contemned.  Their  dis-
content was  much  heightened  by  the  king's  recalling
all  rights  to  crown-lands,  hereditary  offices,  regalities,
and  every  other  concession  which  was  detrimental  to
his  prerogative,  and  which  had  been  extorted  during
his  minority.  Combinations  among  themselves,  secret
intrigues  with  England,  and  all  the  usual  preparatives
for  civil  war,  were  the  effects  of  their  resentment.
Alexander  duke  of  Albany,  and  John  earl  of  Mar,  the
king's  brothers,  two  young  men  of  turbulent  and  ambi-

46  SCOTLAND.

tious  spirits,  and  incensed  against  James,  who  treated
them  with  the  same  coldness,  as  he  did  the  other  great
men,  entered  deeply  into  all  their  cabals. The  king
detected  their  designs  before  they  were  ripe  for  execu-
tion, and  seizing  his  two  brothers,  committed  the  duke
of  Albany  to  Edinburgh-castle. The  earl  of  Mar,  hav-
ing remonstrated  with  too  much  boldness  against  the
king's  conduct,  was  murdered,  if  we  may  believe  our
historians,  by  his  command. Albany,  apprehensive  of
the  same  fate,  made  his  escape  out  of  the  castle,  and
fled  into  France. Concern  for  the  king's  honour,  or
indignation  at  his  measures,  were  perhaps  the  motives
which  first  induced  him  to  join  the  malcontents. But
James's  attachment  to  favourites  rendering  him  every
day  more  odious  to  the  nobles,  the  prospect  of  the  ad-
vantages which  might  be  derived  from  their  general
disaffection,  added  to  the  resentment  which  he  felt  on
account  of  his  brother's  death,  and  his  own  injuries,
soon  inspired  Albany  with  more  ambitious  and  crimi-
nal thoughts. He  concluded  a  treaty  with  Edward  IV.
of  England,  in  which  he  assumed  the  name  of  Alexan-
der king  of  Scots;  and  in  return  for  the  assistance
which  was  promised  him  towards  dethroning  his  bro-
ther, he  bound  himself,  as  soon  as  he  was  put  in  pos-
session of  the  kingdom,  to  swear  fealty  and  do  homage
to  the  English  monarch,  to  renounce  the  ancient  alli-
ance with  France,  to  contract  a  new  one  with  England,
and  to  surrender  some  of  the  strongest  castles  and  most
valuable  counties  in  Scotland.2 That  aid,  which  the
duke  so  basely  purchased  at  the  price  of  his  own  ho-
nour, and  the  independence  of  his  country,  was  punc-
tually granted  him,  and  the  duke  of  Gloucester  with  a
powerful  army  conducted  him  towards  Scotland. The
danger  of  a  foreign  invasion  obliged  James  to  implore
the  assistance  of  those  nobles  whom  he  had  so  long
treated  with  contempt. Some  of  them  were  in  close

2  Abercr.  Mart.  Atch.  vol.  ii.  p.  443.

BOOK  I.  47

confederacy  with  the  duke  of  Albany,  and  approved  of
all  his  pretensions.  Others  were  impatient  for  any
event  which  would  restore  their  order  to  its  ancient
pre-eminence.  They  seemed,  however,  to  enter  with
zeal  into  the  measures  of  their  sovereign  for  the  defence
of  the  kingdom  against  its  invaders,3  and  took  the  field,
at  the  head  of  a  powerful  army  of  their  followers,  but
with  a  stronger  disposition  to  redress  their  own  griev-
ances thanr  to  annoy  the  enemy ;  and  with  a  fixed  reso-
lution of  punishing  those  minions,  whose  insolence  they
could  no  longer  tolerate.  This  resolution  they  executed
in  the  camp  near  Lauder,  with  a  military  dispatch  and
rigour.  Having  previously  concerted  their  plan,  the
earls  of  Angus,  Huntly,  Lennox,  followed  by  almost  all
the  barons  of  chief  note  in  the  army,  forcibly  entered
the  apartment  of  their  sovereign,  seized  all  his  favourites
except  one  Ramsay,  whom  they  could  not  tear  from  the
king,  in  whose  arms  he  took  shelter,  and,  without  any
form  of  trial,  hanged  them  instantly  over  a  bridge.
Among  the  most  remarkable  of  those  who  had  engrossed
the  king's  affection,  were  Cochran  a  mason,  Hommil  a
taylor,  Leonard  a  smith,  Rogers  a  musician,  and  Torsi-
fan  a  fencing- master.  So  despicable  a  retinue  discovers
the  capriciousness  of  James's  character,  and  accounts
for  the  indignation  of  the  nobles,  when  they  beheld
the  favour  due  to  them  bestowed  on  such  unworthy
objects.

James  had  no  reason  to  confide  in  an  army  so  little
under  his  command,  and  dismissing  it,  shut  himself  up
in  the  castle  of  Edinburgh.  After  various  intrigues,
Albany's  lands  and  honours  were  at  length  restored  to
him,  and  he  seemed  even  to  have  regained  his  brother's
favour,  by  some  important  services.  But  their  friend-
ship was  not  of  long  duration.  James  abandoned  him-
self, once  more,  to  the  guidance  of  favourites ;  and  the
fate  of  those  who  had  suffered  at  Lauder  did  not  deter

a  Black  Acts,  fol.  65.

48  SCOTLAND.

others  from  courting  that  dangerous  pre-eminence.
Albany,  on  pretext  that  an  attempt  had  been  made  to
take  away  his  life  by  poison,  fled  from  court,  and,  re-
tiring to  his  castle  at  Dunbar,  drew  thither  a  greater
number  of  barons  than  attended  on  the  king  himself.
At  the  same  time  he  renewed  his  former  confederacy
with  Edward ;  the  earl  of  Angus  openly  negotiated  that
infamous  treaty ;  other  barons  were  ready  to  concur
with  it ;  and  if  the  sudden  death  of  Edward  had  not
prevented  Albany's  receiving  any  aid  from  England,  the
crown  of  Scotland  would  probably  have  been  the  re-
ward of  this  unworthy  combination  with  the  enemies  of
his  country.  But,  instead  of  any  hopes  of  reigning  in
Scotland,  he  found,  upon  the  death  of  Edward,  that  he
could  not  reside  there  in  safety ;  and,  flying  first  to
England  and  then  to  France,  he  seems  from  that  time
to  have  taken  no  part  in  the  affairs  of  his  native  coun-
try. Imboldened  by  his  retreat,  the  king  and  his  mi-
nisters multiplied  the  insults  which  they  offered  to  the
nobility.  A  standing  guard,  a  thing  unknown  under
the  feudal  governments,  and  inconsistent  with  the  fami-
liarity and  confidence  with  which  monarchs  then  lived
amidst  their  nobles,  was  raised  for  the  king's  defence,
and  the  command  of  it  given  to  Ramsay,  lately  created
earl  of  Both  well,  the  same  person  who  had  so  narrowly
escaped  when  his  companions  were  put  to  death  at
Lauder.  As  if  this  precaution  had  not  been  sufficient,
a  proclamation  was  issued,  forbidding  any  person  to
appear  in  arms  within  the  precincts  of  the  court;5  which,
at  a  time  when  no  man  of  rank  left  his  own  house  with-
out a  numerous  retinue  of  armed  followers,  was,  in  ef-
fect, debarring  the  nobles  from  all  access  to  the  king.
James,  at  the  same  time,  became  fonder  of  retirement
than  ever,  and,  sunk  in  indolence  or  superstition,  or  at-
tentive only  to  amusements,  devolved  his  whole  autho-
rity upon  his  favourites.  So  many  injuries  provoked

b  Ferrerius,  398.

BOOK I.  49

the  most  considerable  nobles  to  take  arms,  and  having
persuaded  or  obliged  the  duke  of  Rothesay,  the  king's
eldest  son,  a  youth  of  fifteen,  to  set  himself  at  their  head,
they  openly  declared  their  intention  of  depriving  James
of  a  crown,  of  which  he  had  discovered  himself  to  be
so  unworthy.  Roused  by  this  danger,  the  king  quitted
his  retirement,  took  the  field,  and  encountered  them
near  Bannockburn ;  but  the  valour  of  the  borderers,  of
whom  the  army  of  the  malcontents  was  chiefly  com-
posed, soon  put  his  troops  to  flight,  and  he  himself  was
slain  in  the  pursuit.  Suspicion,  indolence,  immoderate
attachment  to  favourites,  and  all  the  vices  of  a  feeble
mind,  are  visible  in  his  whole  conduct ;  but  the  cha-
racter of  a  cruel  and  unrelenting  tyrant  seems  to  be  un-
justly affixed  to  him  by  our  historians.  His  neglect  of
the  nobles  irritated,  but  did  not  weaken  them ;  and
their  discontent,  the  immoderate  ambition  of  his  two
brothers,  and  their  unnatural  confederacies  with  Eng-
land, were  sufficient  to  have  disturbed  a  more  vigorous
administration,  and  to  have  rendered  a  prince  of  supe-
rior talents  unhappy.

The  indignation  which  many  persons  of  rank  ex-
pressed against  the  conduct  of  the  conspirators,  toge-
ther with  the  terror  of  the  sentence  of  excommunication
which  the  pope  pronounced  against  them,  obliged  them
to  use  their  victory  with  great  moderation  and  huma-
nity. Being  conscious  how  detestable  the  crime  of  im-
bruing their  hands  in  the  blood  of  their  sovereign  ap-
peared, they  endeavoured  to  regain  the  good  opinion
of  their  countrymen,  and  to  atone  for  the  treatment  of
the  father,  by  their  loyalty  and  duty  towards  the  son.
They  placed  him  instantly  on  the  throne,  and  the
whole  kingdom  soon  united  in  acknowledging  his
authority.

James  IV.  was  naturally  generous  and  brave ;

he  felt,  in  a  high  degree,  all  the  passions  which

animate  a  young  and  noble  mind. He  loved  magnifi-

VOL.  i,  E

50  SCOTLAND.

cence,  he  delighted  in  war,  and  was  eager  to  obtain
fame.  During  his  reign,  the  ancient  and  hereditary
enmity  between  the  king  and  nobles  seems  almost  en-
tirely to  have  ceased.  He  envied  not  their  splendour,
because  it  contributed  to  the  ornament  of  his  court ;  nor
did  he  dread  their  power,  which  he  considered  as  the
security  of  his  kingdom,  not  as  an  object  of  terror  to
himself.  This  confidence  on  his  part  met  with  the  pro-
per return  of  duty  and  affection  on  theirs ;  and,  in  his
war  with  England,  he  experienced  how  much  a  king,
beloved  by  his  nobles,  is  able  to  perform.  Though  the
ardour  of  his  courage,  and  the  spirit  of  chivalry,  rather
than  the  prospect  of  any  national  advantage,  induced
him  to  declare  war  against  England,  such  was  the  zeal
of  his  subjects  for  the  king's  glory,  that  he  was  followed
by  as  gallant  an  army  as  ever  any  of  his  ancestors  had
led  upon  English  ground.  But  though  James  himself
formed  no  scheme  dangerous  or  detrimental  to  the
aristocracy,  his  reign  was  distinguished  by  an  event  ex-
tremely fatal  to  it ;  and  one  accidental  blow  humbled  it
more  than  all  the  premeditated  attacks  of  preceding
kings.  In  the  rash  and  unfortunate  battle  of  Flodden,
a  brave  nobility  chose  rather  to  die  than  to  desert  their
sovereign.  Twelve  earls,  thirteen  lords,  five  eldest  sons
of  noblemen,  and  an  incredible  number  of  barons,  fell
with  the  king.c  The  whole  body  of  the  nobles  long  and
sensibly  felt  this  disaster ;  and  if  a  prince  of  full  age
had  then  ascended  the  throne,  their  consternation  and
feebleness  would  have  afforded  him  advantages  which
no  former  monarch  ever  possessed.

But  James  V.  who  succeeded  his  father,  was
an  infant  of  a  year  old ;  and  though  the  office
of  regent  was  conferred  upon  his  cousin  the  duke  of
Albany,  a  man  of  genius  and  enterprise,  a  native  of
France,  and  accustomed  to  a  government  where  the
power  of  the  king  was  already  great ;  though  he  made

c  Aber.  ii.  540.  ..-•».=";•<

BOOK  I.  51

many  bold  attempts  to  extend  the  royal  authority ;
though  he  put  to  death  lord  Home,  and  banished  the
earl  of  Angus,  the  two  noblemen  of  greatest  influence
in  the  kingdom,  the  aristocracy  lost  no  ground  under
his  administration.  A  stranger  to  the  manners,  the
laws,  and  the  language  of  the  people  whom  he  was
called  to  rule,  he  acted,  on  some  occasions,  rather  like
a  viceroy  of  the  French  king  than  the  governor  of  Scot-
land ;  but  the  nobles  asserted  their  own  privileges,  and
contended  for  the  interest  of  their  country  with  a  bold-
ness which  convinced  him  of  their  independence,  and
of  the  impotence  of  his  own  authority.  After  several
unsuccessful  struggles,  he  voluntarily  retired  to  France ;
and  the  king  being  then  in  his  thirteenth  year,  the  no-
bles agreed  that  he  should  assume  the  government,  and
that  eight  persons  should  be  appointed  to  attend  him
by  turns,  and  to  advise  and  assist  him  in  the  adminis-
tration of  public  affairs.  The  earl  of  Angus,  who  was
one  of  that  number,  did  not  long  remain  satisfied  with
such  divided  power.  He  gained  some  of  his  colleagues,
removed  others,  and  intimidated  the  rest.  When  the
term  of  his  attendance  expired,  he  still  retained  autho-
rity, to  which  all  were  obliged  to  submit,  because  none
of  them  was  in  a  condition  to  dispute  it.  The  affection
of  the  young  king  was  the  only  thing  wanting  to  fix
and  perpetuate  his  power.  But  an  active  and  high-
spirited  prince  submitted,  with  great  impatience,  to  the
restraint  in  which  he  was  kept.  It  ill  suited  his  years,
or  disposition,  to  be  confined  as  a  prisoner  within  his
own  palace  ;  to  be  treated  with  no  respect,  and  to  be
deprived  of  all  power.  He  could  not,  on  some  occa-
sions, conceal  his  resentment  and  indignation.  Angus
foresaw  that  he  had  much  to  dread  from  these ;  and  as
he  could  not  gain  the  king's  heart,  he  resolved  to  make
sure  of  his  person.  James  was  continually  surrounded
by  the  earl's  spies  and  confidents;  many  eyes  watched

E2

52  /  SCOTLAND.

all  his  motions,  and  observed  every  step  he  took.  But
the  king's  eagerness  to  obtain  liberty  eluded  all  their
vigilance.  He  escaped  from  Falkland,  and  fled  to  the
castle  of  Stirling,  the  residence  of  the  queen  his  mother,
and  the  only  place  of  strength  in  the  kingdom  which
was  not  in  the  hand  of  the  Douglases.  The  nobles,  of
whom  some  were  influenced  by  their  hatred  to  Angus,
and  others  by  their  respect  for  the  king,  crowded  to
Stirling,  and  his  court  was  soon  filled  with  persons  of
the  greatest  distinction.  The  earl,  though  astonished
at  this  unexpected  revolution,  resolved  at  first  to  make
one  bold  push  for  recovering  his  authority,  by  marching
to  Stirling  at  the  head  of  his  followers  ;  but  he  wanted
either  courage  or  strength  to  execute  this  resolution.
In  a  parliament  held  soon  after,  he  and  his  adherents
were  attainted,  and,  after  escaping  from  many  dangers,
and  enduring  much  misery,  he  was  at  length  obliged
to  fly  into  England  for  refuge.

James  had  now  not  only  the  name,  but,  though  ex-
tremely young,  the  full  authority  of  a  king.  He  was
inferior  to  no  prince  of  that  age  in  gracefulness  of  per-
son, or  in  vigour  of  mind.  His  understanding  was
good,  and  his  heart  warm ;  the  former  capable  of  great
improvement,  and  the  latter  susceptible  of  the  best  im-
pressions. But,  according  to  the  usual  fate  of  princes
who  are  called  to  the  throne  in  their  infancy,  his  edu-
cation had  been  neglected.  His  private  preceptors
were  more  ready  to  flatter  than  to  instruct  him.  It  was
the  interest  of  those  who  governed  the  kingdom,  to  pre-
vent him  from  knowing  too  much.  The  earl  of  Angus,
in  order  to  divert  him  from  business,  gave  him  an  early
taste  for  such  pleasures  as  afterward  occupied  and  en-
grossed him  more  than  became  a  king.  Accordingly,
we  discover  in  James  all  the  features  of  a  great  but
uncultivated  spirit.  On  the  one  hand,  violent  passions,
implacable  resentment,  an  immoderate  desire  of  power,

BOOK I.  53

and  the  utmost  rage  at  disappointment.  On  the  other,
love  to  his  people,  zeal  for  the  punishment  of  private
oppressors,  confidence  in  his  favourites,  and  the  most
engaging  openness  and  affability  of  behaviour.

What  he  himself  had  suffered  from  the  exorbitant
power  of  the  nobles,  led  him  early  to  imitate  his  prede-
cessors in  their  attempts  to  humble  them.  The  plan
he  formed  for  that  purpose  was  more  profound,  more
systematic,  and  pursued  with  greater  constancy  and
steadiness,  than  that  of  any  of  his  ancestors  :  and  the
influence  of  the  events  in  his  reign  upon  those  of  the
subsequent  period  render  it  necessary  to  explain  his
conduct  at  greater  length,  and  to  enter  into  a  more  mi-
nute detail  of  his  actions.  He  had  penetration  enough
to  discover  those  defects  in  the  schemes  adopted  by
former  kings,  which  occasioned  their  miscarriage.  The
example  of  James  I.  had  taught  him,  that  wise  laws
operate  slowly  on  a  rude  people,  and  that  the  fierce
spirit  of  the  feudal  nobles  was  not  to  be  subdued  by
these  alone.  The  effects  of  the  violent  measures  of
James  II.  convinced  him,  that  the  oppression  of  one
great  family  is  apt  either  to  excite  the  suspicion  and
resentment  of  the  other  nobles,  or  to  enrich  with  its
spoils  some  new  family,  which  would  soon  adopt  the
same  sentiments,  and  become  equally  formidable  to  the
crown.  He  saw,  from  the  fatal  end  of  James  III.  that
neglect  was  still  more  intolerable  to  the  nobles  than
oppression,  and  that  the  ministry  of  new  men  and  fa-
vourites was  both  dishonourable  and  dangerous  to  a
prince.  At  the  same  time,  he  felt  that  the  authority  of
the  crown  was  not  sufficient  to  counterbalance  the
power  of  the  aristocracy,  and  that  without  some  new
accession  of  strength,  he  could  expect  no  better  success
in  the  struggle  than  his  ancestors.  In  this  extremity,
he  applied  himself  to  the  clergy,  hoping  that  they  would
both  relish  his  plan,  and  concur,  with  all  their  influence,
in  enabling  him  to  put  it  in  execution.  Under  the  feu-

54  SCOTLAND.

dal  government,  the  church,  being  reckoned  a  third
estate,  had  its  representatives  in  parliament ;  the  num-
ber of  these  was  considerable,  and  they  possessed  great
influence  in  that  assembly.  The  superstition  of  former
kings,  and  the  zeal  of  many  ages  of  ignorance,  had  be-
stowed on  ecclesiastics  a  great  proportion  of  the  national
wealth ;  and  the  authority  which  they  acquired  by  the
reverence  of  the  people,  was  superior  even  to  that  which
they  derived  from  their  riches.  This  powerful  body,
however,  depended  entirely  on  the  crown.  The  popes,
notwithstanding  their  attention  to  extend  their  usurpa-
tions, had  neglected  Scotland  as  a  distant  and  poor
kingdom,  and  permitted  its  kings  to  exercise  powers
which  they  disputed  with  more  considerable  princes.
The  Scottish  monarchs  had  the  sole  right  of  nomination
to  vacant  bishoprics  and  abbeys  ;d  and  James  naturally
concluded,  that  men  who  expected  preferment  from  his
favour,  would  be  willing  to  merit  it,  by  promoting  his
designs.  Happily  for  him,  the  nobles  had  not  yet  reco-
vered the  blow  which  fell  on  their  order  at  Flodden ;
and  if  we  may  judge  either  from  their  conduct,  or  from
the  character  given  of  them  by  Sir  Ralph  Sadler,  the
English  envoy  in  Scotland,  they  were  men  of  little  ge-
nius, of  no  experience  in  business,  and  incapable  of
acting  either  with  unanimity,  or  with  vigour.  Many
of  the  clergy,  on  the  other  hand,  were  distinguished  by
their  great  abilities,  and  no  less  by  their  ambition.  Va-
rious causes  of  disgust  subsisted  between  them  and  the
martial  nobles,  who  were  apt  to  view  the  pacific  charac-
ter of  ecclesiastics  with  some  degree  of  contempt,  and
who  envied  their  power  and  wealth.  By  acting  in  con-
cert with  the  king,  they  not  only  would  gratify  him,
but  avenge  themselves,  and  hoped  to  aggrandize  their
own  order,  by  depressing  those  who  were  their  sole
rivals.  Secure  of  so  powerful  a  concurrence,  James
ventured  to  proceed  with  greater  boldness.  In  the  first

*  Epist.  Reg.  Scot.  i.  197,  &c. Act  125.  p.  1540.

BOOK  I.  55

heat  of  resentment,  he  had  driven  the  earl  of  Angus  out
of  the  kingdom ;  and,  sensible  that  a  person  so  far  su-
perior to  the  other  nobles  in  abilities,  might  create
many  obstacles  which  would  retard  or  render  ineffectual
all  his  schemes,  he  solemnly  swore,  that  he  would  never
permit  him  to  return  into  Scotland ;  and,  notwithstand-
ing the  repeated  solicitations  of  the  king  of  England,
he  adhered  to  his  vow  with  unrelenting  obstinacy.  He
then  proceeded  to  repair  the  fortifications  of  Edinburgh,
Stirling,  and  other  castles,  and  to  fill  his  magazines
with  arms  and  ammunition.  Having  taken  these  pre-
cautions by  way  of  defence,  he  began  to  treat  the  no-
bility with  the  utmost  coolness  and  reserve.  Those
offices,  which  they  were  apt,  from  long  possession,  to
consider  as  appropriated  to  their  order,  were  now  be-
stowed oi>  ecclesiastics,  who  alone  possessed  the  king's
ear,  and,  together  with  a  few  gentlemen  of  inferior
rank,  to  whom  he  had  communicated  his  schemes,
were  intrusted  with  the  management  of  all  public  af-
fairs. These  ministers  were  chosen  with  judgment;
and  cardinal  Beatoun,  who  soon  became  the  most  emi-
nent among  them,  was  a  man  of  superior  genius.  These
served  the  king  with  fidelity ;  they  carried  on  his  mea-
sures with  vigour,  with  reputation,  and  with  success.
James  no  longer  concealed  his  distrust  of  the  nobles,
and  suffered  no  opportunity  of  mortifying  them  to  es-
cape. Slight  offences  were  aggravated  into  real  crimes,
and  punished  with  severity.  Every  accusation  against
persons  of  rank  was  heard  with  pleasure,  every  appear-
ance of  guilt  was  examined  with  rigour,  and  every  trial
proved  fatal  to  those  who  were  accused  :  the  banishing
Hepburn  earl  of  Bothwell  for  reasons  extremely  frivo-
lous, beheading  the  eldest  son  of  lord  Forbes  without
sufficient  evidence  of  his  guilt,  and  the  condemning
lady  Glamis,  a  sister  of  the  earl  of  Angus,  to  be  burnt
for  the  crime  of  witchcraft,  of  which  even  that  credu-
lous age  believed  her  innocent,  are  monuments  both  of

56  SCOTLAND.

the  king's  hatred  of  the  nobility,  of  the  severity  of  his
government,  and  of  the  stretches  he  made  towards  ab-
solute power.  By  these  acts  of  authority,  he  tried  the
spirit  of  the  nobles,  and  how  much  they  were  willing
to  bear.  Their  patience  increased  his  contempt  for
them,  and  added  to  the  ardour  and  boldness  with  which
he  pursued  his  plan.  Meanwhile  they  observed  the
tendency  of  his  schemes  with  concern,  and  with  resent-
ment; but  the  king's  sagacity,  the  vigilance  of  his  mi-
nisters, and  the  want  of  a  proper  leader,  made  it  dan-
gerous to  concert  any  measures  for  their  defence,  and
impossible  to  act  with  becoming  vigour.  James  and
his  counsellors,  by  a  false  step  which  they  took,  pre-
sented to  them,  at  length,  an  advantage  which  they  did
not  fail  to  improve.

Motives,  which  are  well  known,  had  prompted  Henry
VIII.  to  disclaim  the  pope's  authority,  and  to  seize  the
revenues  of  the  regular  clergy.  His  system  of  reforma-
tion satisfied  none  of  his  subjects.  Some  were  enraged
because  he  had  proceeded  so  far,  others  murmured  be-
cause he  proceeded  no  farther.  By  his  imperious  tem-
per, and  alternate  persecutions  of  the  zealots  for  Po-
pery, and  the  converts  to  the  Protestant  opinions,  he
was  equally  formidable  to  both.  Henry  was  afraid  that
this  general  dissatisfaction  of  his  people  might  encou-
rage his  enemiesvon  the  continent  to  invade  his  king-
dom. He  knew  that  both  the  pope  and  the  emperor
courted  the  friendship  of  the  king  of  Scots,  and  endea-
voured to  engage  him  in  an  alliance  against  England.
He  resolved,  therefore,  to  disappoint  the  effects  of  their
negotiations,  by  entering  into  a  closer  union  with  his
nephew.  In  order  to  accomplish  this,  he  transmitted
to  James  an  elaborate  memorial,  representing  the  nume-
rous encroachments  of  the  see  of  Rome  upon  the  rights
of  sovereigns  ;e  and  that  he  might  induce  him  more  cer-
tainly to  adopt  the  same  measures  for  abolishing  papal

«  Stripe,  Eccles.  Mem.  1.  App.  155.

BOOK  I.  57

usurpation,  which  had  proved  so  efficacious  in  England,
he  sent  ambassadors  into  Scotland  to  propose  a  personal
interview  with  him  at  York. It  was  plainly  James's
interest  to  accept  this  invitation  ;  the  assistance  of  so
powerful  an  ally,  the  high  honours  which  were  pro-
mised him,  and  the  liberal  subsidies  he  might  have  ob-
tained, would  have  added  no  little  dignity  to  his  domes-
tic government,  and  must  have  greatly  facilitated  the
execution  of  his  favourite  plan. On  the  other  hand,  a
war  with  England,  which  he  had  reason  to  apprehend
if  he  rejected  Henry's  offers  of  friendship,  was  incon-
sistent with  all  his  views. This  would  bring  him  to
depend  on  his  barons ;  an  army  could  not  be  raised
without  their  assistance :  to  call  nobles  incensed  against
their  prince  into  the  field,  was  to  unite  his  enemies,  to
make  them  sensible  of  their  own  strength,  and  to  afford
them  an  opportunity  of  revenging  their  wrongs.  James,
who  was  not  ignorant  that  all  these  consequences  might
follow  a  breach  with  England,  listened  at  first  to  Hen-
ry's proposal,  and  consented  to  the  interview  at  York.
But  the clergy  dreaded a  union,  which  must  have
been  established  on  the  ruins  of  the  church. Henry
had  taken  great  pains  to  infuse  into  his  nephew  his  own
sentiments  concerning  religion,  and  had  frequently  so-
licited him,  by  ambassadors,  to  renounce  the  usurped
dominion  of  the  pope,  which  was  no  less  dishonourable
to  princes  than  grievous  to  their  subjects. The  clergy
had  hitherto,  with  great  address,  diverted  the  king  from
regarding  these  solicitations. But  in  an  amicable  con-
ference, Henry  expected,  and  they  feared,  that  James
would  yield  to  his  entreaties,  or  be  convinced  by  his  ar-
guments. They  knew  that  the  revenues  of  the  church
were  an  alluring  object  to  a  prince  who  wanted  money,
and  who  loved  it ;  that  the  pride  and  ambition  of  eccle-
siastics raised  the  indignation  of  the  nobles;  that  their
indecent  lives  gave  offence  to  the  people ;  that  the  Pro-
testant opinions  were  spreading  fast  throughout  the

58  SCOTLAND.

nation;  and  that  a  universal  defection  from  the  esta-
blished church  would  be  the  consequence  of  giving  the
smallest  degree  of  encouragement  to  these  principles.
For  these  reasons,  they  employed  all  their  credit  with
the  king,  and  had  recourse  to  every  artifice  and  insinu-
ation, in  order  to  divert  him  from  a  journey,  which
must  have  been  so  fatal  to  their  interest.  They  endea-
voured to  inspire  him  with  fear,  by  magnifying  the
danger  to  which  he  would  expose  his  person  by  ven-
turing so  far  into  England,  without  any  security  but
the  word  of  a  prince,  who,  having  violated  every  thing
venerable  and  sacred  in  religion,  was  no  longer  to  be
trusted;  and  by  way  of  compensation  for  the  sums
which  he  might  have  received  from  Henry,  they  offered
an  annual  donative  of  fifty  thousand  crowns ;  they  pro-
mised to  contribute  liberally  towards  carrying  on  a  war
with  England,  and  flattered  him  with  the  prospect  of
immense  riches,  arising  from  the  forfeiture  of  persons
who  were  to  be  tried  and  condemned  as  heretics.  In-
fluenced by  these  considerations,  James  broke  his
agreement  with  Henry,  who,  in  expectation  of  meeting
him,  had  already  come  to  York ;  and  that  haughty  and
impatient  monarch  resented  the  affront,  by  declaring
war  against  Scotland.  His  army  was  soon  ready  to
invade  the  kingdom.  James  was  obliged  to  have  re-
course to  the  nobles  for  the  defence  of  his  dominions.
At  his  command,  they  assembled  their  followers,  but
with  the  same  dispositions  which  had  animated  their
ancestors  in  the  reign  of  James  III.,  and  with  a  full  re-
solution of  imitating  their  example,  by  punishing  those
to  whom  they  imputed  the  grievances  of  which  they
had  reason  to  complain ;  and  if  the  king's  ministers
had  not  been  men  of  abilities,  superior  to  those  of
James  III.,  and  of  considerable  interest  even  with  their
enemies,  who  could  not  agree  among  themselves  what
victims  to  sacrifice,  the  camp  of  Fala  would  have  been
as  remarkable  as  that  of  Lauder,  for  the  daring  en-

BOOK  I.  59

croachments  of  the  nobility  on  the  prerogative  of  the
prince.  But  though  his  ministers  were  saved  by  this
accident,  the  nobles  had  soon  another  opportunity  of
discovering  to  the  king  their  dissatisfaction  with  his
government,  and  their  contempt  of  his  authority.
Scarcity  of  provisions,  and  the  rigour  of  the  season,
having  obliged  the  English  army,  which  had  invaded
Scotland,  to  retire,  James  imagined  that  he  could  at-
tack them  with  great  advantage  in  their  retreat ;  but
the  principal  barons,  with  an  obstinacy  and  disdain
which  greatly  aggravated  their  disobedience,  refused
to  advance  a  step  beyond  the  limits  of  their  own  coun-
try. Provoked  by  this  insult  to  himself,  and  suspicious
of  a  new  conspiracy  against  his  ministers,  the  king  in-
stantly disbanded  an  army  which  paid  so  little  regard
to  his  orders,  and  returned  abruptly  into  the  heart  of
the  kingdom.

An  ambitious  and  high-spirited  prince  could  not
brook  such  a  mortifying  affront.  His  hopes  of  success
had  been  rash,  and  his  despair  upon  a  disappointment
was  excessive.  He  felt  himself  engaged  in  an  unne-
cessary war  with  England,  which,  instead  of  yielding
him  the  laurels  and  triumphs  that  he  expected,  had  be-
gun with  such  circumstances,  as  encouraged  the  inso-
lence of  his  subjects,  and  exposed  him  to  the  scorn  of
his  enemies.  He  saw  how  vain  and  ineffectual  all  his
projects  to  humble  the  nobles  had  been,  and  that  though
in  times  of  peace,  a  prince  may  endeavour  to  depress
them,  they  will  rise  during  war,  to  their  former  impor-
tance and  dignity.  Impatience,  resentment,  indigna-
tion, filled  his  bosom  by  turns.  The  violence  of  these
passions  altered  his  temper,  and,  perhaps,  impaired  his
reason.  He  became  pensive,  sullen  and  retired.  He
seemed,  through  the  day,  to  be  swallowed  up  in  pro-
found meditation,  and,  through  the  night,  he  was  dis-
turbed with  those  visionary  terrors  which  make  impres-
sion upon  a  weak  understanding  only,  or  a  disordered

60  SCOTLAND.

fancy.  In  order  to  revive  the  king's  spirits,  an  inroad
on  the  western  borders  was  concerted  by  his  ministers,
who  prevailed  upon  the  barons  in  the  neighbouring
provinces  to  raise  as  many  troops  as  were  thought  ne-
cessary, and  to  enter  the  enemy's  country.  But  nothing
could  remove  the  king's  aversion  to  his  nobility,  or  di-
minish his  jealousy  of  their  power.  He  would  not  even
intrust  them  with  the  command  of  the  forces  which  they
had  assembled ;  that  was  reserved  for  Oliver  Sinclair
his  favourite,  who  no  sooner  appeared  to  take  posses-
sion of  the  dignity  conferred  upon  him,  than  rage  and
indignation  occasioned  a  universal  mutiny  in  the  army.
Five  hundred  English,  who  happened  to  be  drawn  up
in  sight,  attacked  the  Scots  in  this  disorder.  Hatred
to  the  king,  and  contempt  of  their  general,  produced
an  effect  to  which  there  is  no  parallel  in  history.  They
overcame  the  fear  of  death,  and  the  love  of  liberty,  and
ten  thousand  men  fled  before  a  number  so  far  inferior,
without  striking  a  single  blow.  No  man  was  desirous
of  a  victory  which  would  have  been  acceptable  to  the
king,  and  to  his  favourite :  few  endeavoured  to  save
themselves  by  flight ;  the  English  had  the  choice  of
what  prisoners  they  pleased  to  take ;  and  almost  every
person  of  distinction,  who  was  engaged  in  the  expe-
dition, remained  in  their  hands/  This  astonishing
event  was  a  new  proof  to  the  king  of  the  general  dis-
affection of  the  nobility,  and  a  new  discovery  of  his
own  weakness  and  want  of  authority.  Incapable  of
bearing  these  repeated  insults,  he  found  himself  unable
to  revenge  them.  The  deepest  melancholy  and  despair
succeeded  to  the  furious  transports  of  rage,  which  the
first  account  of  the  rout  of  his  army  occasioned.  All
the  violent  passions,  which  are  the  enemies  of  life,
preyed  upon  his  mind,  and  wasted  and  consumed  a

f  According  to  an  account  of  this  event  in  the  Hamilton  MSS.  about  thirty  were
killed,  above  a  thousand  were  taken  prisoners ;  and  among  them,  a  hundred  and
fifty  persons  of  condition.  Vol.  ii.  286.  The  small  number  of  the  English  pre-
vented their  taking  more  prisoners.

BOOK I.  61

youthful  and  vigorous  constitution.  Some  authors  of
that  age  impute  his  untimely  death  to  poison  ;  but  the
diseases  of  the  mind,  when  they  rise  to  an  height,  are
often  mortal ;  and  the  known  effects  of  disappointment,
anger,  and  resentment,  upon  a  sanguine  and  impetuous
temper,  sufficiently  account  for  his  unhappy  fate.  "  His
death  (says  Drummond)  proveth  his  mind  to  have  been
raised  to  a  high  strain,  and  above  mediocrity ;  he
could  die,  but  could  not  digest  a  disaster."  Had  James
survived  this  misfortune,  one  of  two  things  must  have
happened  :  either  the  violence  of  his  temper  would
have  engaged  him  openly  to  attack  the  nobles,  wha
would  have  found  in  Henry  a  willing  and  powerful
protector,  and  have  derived  the  same  assistance  from
him,  which  the  malcontents,  in  the  succeeding  reign,
did  from  his  daughter  Elizabeth ;  in  that  case  a  dan-
gerous civil  war  must  have  been  the  certain  conse-
quence. Or,  perhaps,  necessity  might  have  obliged
him  to  accept  of  Henry's  offers,  and  be  reconciled  to
his  nobility.  In  that  event  the  chureh  would  have
fallen  a  sacrifice  to  their*  union ;  a  reformation,  upon
Henry's  plan,  would  have  been  established  by  law;  a
great  part  of  the  temporalities  of  the  church  would  have
been  seized;  and  the  friendship  of  the  king  and  barons
would  have  been  cemented  by  dividing  its  spoils.

Such  were  the  efforts  of  our  kings  towards  reducing
the  exorbitant  power  of  the  nobles.  If  they  were  not
attended  with  success,  we  must  not,  for  that  reason,
conclude  that  they  were  not  conducted  with  prudence.
Every  circumstance  seems  to  have  combined  against
the  crown.  Accidental  events  concurred  with  political
causes,  in  rendering  the  best- concerted  measures  abor-
tive. The  assassination  of  one  king,  the  sudden  death
of  another,  and  the  fatal  despair  of  a  third,  contributed
no  less  than  its  own  natural  strength,  to  preserve  the
aristocracy  from  ruin.

Amidst  these struggles, the  influence which  our

62  SCOTLAND.

Jrdlnaf  ra~  kings  possessed  in  their  parliaments,  is  a  cir-
influence  cumstance  seemingly  inexplicable,  and  which
Scottish  merits  particular  attention.  As  these  assemblies
parUa1-"  were  composed  chiefly  of  the  nobles,  they,  we
ment-  are  apt  to  imagine,  must  have  dictated  all  their
decisions ;  but  instead  of  this,  every  king  found  them
obsequious  to  his  will,  and  obtained  such  laws,  as  he
deemed  necessary  for  extending  his  authority.  All
things  were  conducted  there  with  dispatch  and  unani-
mity; and,  in  none  of  our  historians,  do  we  find  an
instance  of  any  opposition  formed  against  the  court  in
parliament,  or  mention  of  any  difficulty  in  carrying
through  the  measures  which  were  agreeable  to  the  king.
In  order  to  account  for  this  singular  fact,  it  is  neces-
sary to  inquire  into  the  origin  and  constitution  of
parliament.

The  rea-  The  genius  of  the  feudal  government,  uniform
sons  of  it.  jn  aii  fa  operations,  produced  the  same  effects
in  small,  as  in  great  societies ;  and  the  territory  of  a
baron  was,  in  miniature,  the  model  of  a  kingdom.  He
possessed  the  right  of  jurisdiction,  but  those  who  de-
pended on  him  being  freemen,  and  not  slaves,  could
be  tried  by  their  peers  only ;  and  therefore,  his  vassals
were  bound  to  attend  his  courts,  and  to  assist  both  in
passing  and  executing  his  sentences.  When  assembled
on  these  occasions,  they  established,  by  mutual  consent,
such  regulations  as  tended  to  the  welfare  of  their  small
society ;  and  often  granted,  voluntarily,  such  supplies
to  their  superior,  as  his  necessities  required.  Change
now  a  single  name;  in  place  of  baron,  substitute  king,
and  we  behold  a  parliament  in  its  first  rudiments,  and
observe  the  first  exertions  of  those  powers,  which  its
members  now  possess  as  judges,  as  legislators,  and  as
dispensers  of  the  public  revenues.  Suitable  to  this
idea,  are  the  appellations  of  the  king's  court*  and  of
the  king's  great  council,  by  which  parliaments  were

?  Du  Cange,  Voc.  Curia.

BOOK  I.  63

anciently  distinguished  ;  and  suitable  to  this,  likewise,
were  the  constituent  members  of  which  it  was  com-
posed In  all  the  feudal  kingdoms,  such  as  held  of  the
king  in  chief  were  bound,  by  the  constitution  of  their
tenure,  to  attend  and  to  assist  in  his  courts.  Nor  was
this  esteemed  a  privilege,  but  a  service.11  It  was  ex-
acted likewise  of  bishops,  abbots,  and  the  greater  ec-
clesiastics, who,  holding  vast  possessions  of  the  crown,
were  deemed  subject  to  the  same  burden.  Parliaments
did  not  continue  long  in  this  state.  Cities  gradually
acquired  wealth,  a  considerable  share  of  the  public
taxes  were  levied  on  them,  the  inhabitants  grew  into
estimation,  and,  being  enfranchised  by  the  sovereign,
a  place  in  parliament  was  the  consequence  of  their  li-
berty, and  of  their  importance.  But  as  it  would  have
been  absurd  to  confer  such  a  privilege,  or  to  impose
such  a  burden  on  a  whole  community,  every  borough
was  permitted  to  choose  one  or  two  of  its  citizens  to
appear  in  the  name  of  the  corporation ;  and  the  idea
of  representation  was  first  introduced  in  this  manner.
An  innovation,  still  more  important,  naturally  followed.
The  vassals  of  the  crown  were  originally  few  in  number,
and  extremely  powerful ;  but  as  it  is  impossible  to  ren-
der property  fixed  and  permanent,  many  of  their  pos-
sessions came,  gradually,  and  by  various  methods  of
alienation,  to  be  split  and  parcelled  out  into  different
hands.  Hence  arose  the  distinction  between  the  greater
and  the  lesser  barons.  The  former  were  those  who
retained  their  original  fiefs  undivided,  the  latter  were
the  new  and  less  potent  vassals  of  the  crown.  Both
were  bound,  however,  to  perform  all  feudal  services,
and,  of  consequence,  to  give  attendance  in  parliament.
To  the  lesser  barons,  who  formed  no  inconsiderable
body,  this  was  an  intolerable  grievance.  Barons  some-
times denied  their  tenure,  boroughs  renounced  their

h  Du  Cange,  Voc.  Placitum,  col.  519. Magna Charta,  art.  14. Act.  Jac.  I.
cap.  52.

(54  SCOTLAND.

right  of  electing,  charters  were  obtained  containing
an  exemption  from  attendance ;  and  the  anxiety  with
which  our  ancestors  endeavoured  to  get  free  from  the
obligation  of  sitting  in  parliament,  is  surpassed  by  that
only  with  which  their  posterity  solicit  to  be  admitted
there.  In  order  to  accommodate  both  parties,  at  once,
to  secure  to  the  king  a  sufficient  number  of  members
in  his  great  council,  and  to  save  his  vassals  from  an
unnecessary  burden,  an  easy  expedient  was  found  out.
The  obligation  to  personal  attendance  was  continued
upon  the  greater  barons,  from  which  the  lesser  barons
were  exempted,  on  condition  of  their  electing,  in  each
county,  a  certain  number  of  representatives,  to  appear
in  their  name.  Thus  a  parliament  became  complete  in
all  its  members,  and  was  composed  of  lords  spiritual
and  temporal,  of  knights  of  the  shires,  and  of  burgesses.
As  many  causes  contributed  to  bring  government  earlier
to  perfection  in  England  than  in  Scotland;  as  the
rigour  of  the  feudal  institutions  abated  sooner,  and  its
defects  were  supplied  with  greater  facility  in  the  one
kingdom  than  in  the  other,  England  led  the  way  in  all
these  changes,  and  burgesses  and  knights  of  the  shire
appeared  in  the  parliaments  of  that  nation,  before  they
were  heard  of  in  ours.  Burgesses  were  first  admitted
into  the  Scottish  parliaments  by  Robert  Bruce;1
A.D.  1326.  and  in  tte  preamkle  to  tne  ]aws  Of  Robert  III.,

they  are  ranked  among  the  constituent  members  of  that
assembly. The  lesser  barons  were  indebted  to
James  I.  for  a  statute  exempting  them  from
personal  attendance,  and  permitting  them  to  elect  re-
presentatives :  the  exemption  was  eagerly  laid  hold
on  :  but  the  privilege  was  so  little  valued,  that  except
one  or  two  instances,  it  lay  neglected  during  one  hun-
dred and  sixty  years  ;  and  James  VI.  first  obliged  them
to  send  representatives  regularly  to  parliament.15

1  Abercromby,  i.  635.
k  Essays  on  Brit.  Antiq.  Ess.  II.  Dalrymp.  Hist  of  Feud.  Prop.  cb.  8.

BOOK I.  65

A  Scottish  parliament,  then,  consisted  anciently  of
great  barons,  of  ecclesiastics,  and  a  few  representatives
of  boroughs.  Nor  were  these  divided,  as  in  England,
into  two  houses,  but  composed  one  assembly,  in  which
the  lord  chancellor  presided.1  In  rude  ages,  when  the
science  of  government  was  extremely  imperfect  among
a  martial  people,  unacquainted  with  the  arts  of  peace,
strangers  to  the  talents  which  make  a  figure  in  debate,
and  despising  them,  parliaments  were  not  held  in  the
same  estimation  as  at  present ;  nor  did  haughty  barons
love  those  courts,  in  which  they  appeared  with  such
evident  marks  of  inferiority.  Parliaments  were  often
hastily  assembled,  and  it  was,  probably,  in  the  king's
power,  by  the  manner  in  which  he  issued  his  writs  for
that  purpose,  to  exclude  such  as  were  averse  from  his
measures.  At  a  time  when  deeds  of  violence  were
common,  and  the  restraints  of  law  and  decency  were
little  regarded,  no  man  could  venture  with  safety  to
oppose  the  king  in  his  own  court.  The  great  barons,
or  lords  of  parliament,  were  extremely  few ;  even  so
late  as  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  James  VI.m  they
amounted  only  to  fifty-three.  The  ecclesiastics  equal-
led them  in  number,  and  being  devoted  implicitly  to
the  crown,  for  reasons  which  have  been  already  ex-
plained, rendered  all  hopes  of  victory  in  any  struggle
desperate.  Nor  were  the  nobles  themselves  so  anxious
as  might  be  imagined,  to  prevent  acts  of  parliament
favourable  to  the  royal  prerogative ;  conscious  of  their
own  strength,  and  of  the  king's  inability  to  carry  these
acts  into  execution  without  their  concurrence,  they

In  England,  the  peers  and  commons  seem  early  to  have  met  in  separate  houses  ;
and  James  I.,  who  was  fond  of  imitating  the  English  in  all  their  customs,  had  pro-
bably an  intention  of  introducing  some  considerable  distinction  between  the  greater
and  lesser  barons  in  Scotland  ;  at  least  he  determined  that  their  consultations  should
not  be  carried  on  under  the  direction  of  the  same  president;  for  by  his  law,  A.  D.
1327,  it  is  provided,  "  that  out  of  the  commissioners  of  all  the  shires  shall  be  chosen
a  wise  and  expert  man,  called  the  common  speaker  of  the  parliament,  who  shall
propose  all  and  sundry  needs  and  causes  pertaining  to  the  commons  in  the  parlia-
ment or  general  council."  No  such  speaker,  it  would  seem,  was  ever  chosen;  and
by  a  subsequent  law  the  chancellor  was  declared  perpetual  president  of  parliament,
m  And.  Coll.  vol.  i.  pref.  40.

VOL. I.  F

66  SCOTLAND.

trusted  that  they  might  either  elude  or  venture  to  con-
temn them ;  and  the  statute  revoking  the  king's  pro-
perty, and  annexing  alienated  jurisdictions  to  the  crown,
repeated  in  every  reign,  and  violated  and  despised  as
often,  is  a  standing  proof  of  the  impotence  of  laws,
when  opposed  to  power.  So  many  concurring  causes
are  sufficient,  perhaps,  to  account  for  the  ascendant
which  our  kings  acquired  in  parliament.  But,  without
having  recourse  to  any  of  these,  a  single  circumstance,
peculiar  to  the  constitution  of  the  Scottish  parliament,
the  mentioning  of  which  we  have  hitherto  avoided,  will
abundantly  explain  this  fact,  seemingly  so  repugnant
to  all  our  reasonings  concerning  the  weakness  of  the
king,  and  the  power  of  the  nobles.

As  far  back  as  bur  records  enable  us  to  trace  the
constitution  of  our  parliaments,  we  find  a  committee^
distinguished  by  the  name  of  lords  of  articles.  It  was
their  business  to  prepare  and  to  digest  all  matters  which
were  to  be  laid  before  the  parliament.  There  was  rarely
any  business  introduced  into  parliament,  but  what  had
passed  through  the  channel  of  this  committee ;  every
motion  for  a  new  law  was  first  made  there,  and  ap-
proved of,  or  rejected  by  the  members  of  it ;  what  they
approved  was  formed  into  a  bill,  and  presented  to  par-
liament ;  and  it  seems  probable,  that  what  they  rejected,
could  not  be  introduced  into  the  house.  This  com-
mittee owed  the  extraordinary  powers  vested  in  it,  to
the  military  genius  of  the  ancient  nobles ;  too  impatient
to  submit  to  the  drudgery  of  civil  business,  too  impe-
tuous to  observe  the  forms,  or  to  enter  into  the  details
necessary  in  conducting  it,  they  were  glad  to  lay  that
burden  upon  a  small  number,  while  they  themselves
had  no  other  labour  than  simply  to  give,  or  to  refuse,
their  assent  to  the  bills  which  were  presented  to  thenL
The  lords  of  articles,  then,  not  only  directed  all  the
proceedings  of  parliament,  but  possessed  a  negative
before  debate.  That  committee  was  chosen  and  con-

BOOK  I.  67

stituted  in  such  a  manner  as  put  this  valuable  privilege
entirely  in  the  king's  hands.  It  is  extremely  probable,
that  our  kings  once  had  the  sole  right  of  nominating  the
lords  of  articles.11  They  came  afterward  to  be  elected
by  the  parliament,  and  consisted  of  an  equal  number
out  of  each  estate,  and  most  commonly  of  eight  tem-
poral and  eight  spiritual  lords,  of  eight  representatives
of  boroughs,  and  of  the  eight  great  officers  of  the  crown.
Of  this  body,  the  eight  ecclesiastics,  together  with  the
officers  of  the  crown,  were  entirely  at  the  king's  devo-
tion, and  it  was  scarce  possible  that  the  choice  could
fall  on  such  temporal  lords  and  burgesses  as  would
unite  in  opposition  to  his  measures.  Capable  either  of
influencing  their  election,  or  of  gaining  them  when
elected,  the  king  commonly  found  the  lords  of  articles,
no  less  obsequious  to  his  will,  than  his  own  privy-coun-
cil ;  and  by  means  of  his  authority  with  them,  he  could
put  a  negative  upon  his  parliament  before  debate,  as
well  as  after  it ;  and  what  may  seem  altogether  incre-
dible, the  most  limited  prince  in  Europe  actually  pos-
sessed, in  one  instance,  a  prerogative  which  the  most
absolute  could  never  attain.0

n  It  appears  from  authentic  records,  that  a  parliament  was  appointed  to  be  held
March  12,  1566,  and  that  the  lords  of  articles  were  chosen  and  met  on  the  7th,  five
days  before  the  assembling  of  parliament.  If  they  could  be  regularly  elected  so
long  before  the  meeting  of  parliament,  it  is  natural  to  conclude,  that  the  prince  alone
possessed  the  right  of  electing  them.  There  are  two  different  accounts  of  the  man-
ner of  their  election  at  that  time,  one  by  Mary  herself,  in  a  letter  to  the  archbishop
of  Glasgow :  "  We,  accompanied  with  our  nobility  for  the  time,  past  to  the  Tol-
booth  of  Edinburgh,  for  holding  of  our  parliament  on  the  7th  day  of  this  instant,  and
elected  the  lords  articulars."  If  we  explain  these  words,  according  to  the  strict
grammar,  we  must  conclude  that  the  queen  herself  elected  them.  It  is,  however,
more  probable  that  Mary  meant  to  say,  that  the  nobles  then  present  with  her,  viz.
her  privy-counsellors,  and  others,  elected  the  lords  of  the  articles.  Keith's  Hist,  of
Scotland,  p.  331.  The  other  account  is  lord  Ruthven's,  who  expressly  affirms  that
the  queen  herself  elected  them.  Keith's  Append.  126.  Whether  we  embrace  the
one  or  other  of  these  opinions,  is  of  no  consequence.  If  the  privy- counsellors  and
nobles  attending  the  court  had  a  right  to  elect  the  lords  of  articles,  it  was  equally
advantageous  for  the  crown,  as  if  the  prince  had  had  the  sole  nomination  of  them.

0  Having  deduced  the  history  of  the  committee  of  lords  of  articles  as  low  as  the
subject  of  this  preliminary  book  required,  it  may  be  agreeable,  perhaps,  to  some  of
my  readers,  to  know  the  subsequent  variations  in  this  singular  institution,  and  the  politi-
cal use  which  our  kings  made  of  these.  When  parliaments  became  more  numerous,  and
more  considerable  by  the  admission  of  the  representatives  of  the  lesser  barons,  the
preserving  their  influence  over  the  lords  of  articles  became,  likewise,  an  object  of
greater  importance  to  our  kings.  James  VI.  on  pretence  that  the  lords  of  articles,
could  not  find  leisure  to  consider  the  great  multitude  of  affairs  laid  before  them,

F2

68  SCOTLAND.

To  this  account  of  the  internal  constitution
Europe  at  of  Scotland,  it  will  not  be  improper  to  add  a
n^ofthe  view  of  the  political  state  of  Europe  at  that  pe-
sixteenth  Y'IQ^  where  the  following  history  commences.
A  thorough  knowledge  of  that  general  system,
of  which  every  kingdom  in  Europe  forms  a  part,  is  not
less  requisite  towards  understanding  the  history  of  a
nation,  than  an  acquaintance  with  its  peculiar  govern-
ment and  laws.  The  latter  may  enable  us  to  compre-
hend domestic  occurrences  and  revolutions ;  but  with-
out the  former,  foreign  transactions  must  be  altogether
mysterious  and  unintelligible.  By  attending  to  this,
many  dark  passages  in  our  history  may  be  placed  in  a
clear  light ;  and  where  the  bulk  of  historians  have  seen
only  the  effect,  we  may  be  able  to  discover  the  cause.

The  subversion  of  the  feudal  government  in  France,
and  its  declension  in  the  neighbouring  kingdoms,  oc-

obtained  an  act,  appointing  four  persons  to  be  named  out  of  each  estate,  who  should
meet  twenty  days  before  the  commencement  of  parliament,*  to  receive  all  suppli-
cations, &c.  and  rejecting  what  they  thought  frivolous,  should  engross  in  a  book
what  they  thought  worthy  the  attention  of  the  lords  of  articles.  No  provision  is
made  in  the  act  for  the  choice  of  this  select  body,  and  the  king  would,  of  course,
have  claimed  that  privilege.  In  1633,  when  Charles  I.  was  beginning  to  introduce
those  innovations  which  gave  so  much  offence  to  the  nation,  he  dreaded  the  oppo-
sition of  his  parliament,  and  in  order  to  prevent  that,  an  artifice  was  made  use  of,  to
secure  the  lords  of  articles  for  the  crown.  The  temporal  peers  were  appointed  to
choose  eight  bishops,  and  the  bishops  eight  peers  ;  these  sixteen  met  together,  and
elected  eight  knights  of  the  shire,  and  eight  burgesses,  and  to  these  the  crown  officers
were  added  as  usual.  If  we  can  only  suppose  eight  persons  of  so  numerous  a  body,
as  the  peers  of  Scotland  were  become  by  that  time,  attached  to  the  court,  these,  it  is
obvious,  would  be  the  men  whom  the  bishops  would  choose,  and  of  consequence  the
whole  lords  of  articles  were  the  tools  and  creatures  of  the  king.  This  practice,  so
inconsistent  with  liberty,  was  abolished  during  the  civil  war;  and  the  statute  of
James  VI.  was  repealed.  After  the  restoration,  parliaments  became  more  servile
than  ever.  What  was  only  a  temporary  device,  in  the  reign  of  Charles  I.  was  then
converted  into  a  standing  law.  "  For  my  part,"  says  the  author  from  whom  I  have
borrowed  many  of  these  particulars,  "I  should  have  thought  it  less  criminal  in  our
restoration  parliament,  to  have  openly  bestowed  upon  the  king  a  negative  before
debate,  than,  in  such  an  underhand  artificial  manner,  to  betray  their  constituents,
and  the  nation.''  Essays  on  Brit.  Antiq.  55.  It  is  probable,  however,  from  a  letter
of  Randolph's  to  Cecil,  10  Aug.  1560,  printed  in  the  Appendix,  that  this  parlia-
ment had  some  appearance  of  ancient  precedent  to  justify  their  unworthy  conduct.
Various  questions  concerning  the  constituent  members  of  the  Scottish  parliament;
concerning  the  era  at  which  the  representatives  of  boroughs  were  introduced  into
that  assembly  ;  and  concerning  the  origin  and  power  of  the  committee  of  lords  of
articles,  occur,  and  have  been  agitated  with  great  warmth.  Since  the  first  publi-
cation of  this  work,  all  these  disputed  points  have  been  considered  with  calmness
and  accuracy  in  Mr.  Wight's  Inquiry  into  the  Kise  and  Progress  of  Parliament,  &c.
4to  edit.  p.  17,  &c.

*  Act  222.  p.  1594.

BOOK I.  69

casioned  a  remarkable  alteration  in  the  political  state
of  Europe.  Kingdoms,  which  were  inconsiderable
when  broken,  and  parcelled  out  among  nobles,  acquired
firmness  and  strength  by  being  united  into  a  regular
monarchy.  Kings  became  conscious  of  their  own  power
and  importance.  They  meditated  schemes  of  conquest,
and  engaged  in  wars  at  a  distance.  Numerous  armies
were  raised,  and  great  taxes  imposed  for  their  subsis-
tence. Considerable  bodies  of  infantry  were  kept  in
constant  pay ;  that  service  grew  to  be  honourable ;  and
cavalry,  in  which  the  strength  of  European  armies  had
hitherto  consisted,  though  proper  enough  for  the  short
and  voluntary  excursions  of  barons,  who  served  at
their  own  expense,  were  found  to  be  unfit  either  for
making  or  defending  any  important  conquest.

It  was  in  Italy,  that  the  powerful  monarchs  of  France
and  Spain  and  Germany,  first  appeared  to  make  a  trial
of  their  new  strength.  The  division  of  that  country
into  many  small  states,  the  luxury  of  the  people,  and
their  effeminate  aversion  to  arms,  invited  their  more
martial  neighbours  to  an  easy  prey.  The  Italians,  who
had  been  accustomed  to  mock  battles  only,  and  to  de-
cide their  interior  quarrels  by  innocent  and  bloodless
victories,  were  astonished,  when  the  French  invaded
their  country,  at  the  sight  of  real  war;  and,  as  they
could  not  resist  the  torrent,  they  suffered  it  to  take  its
course,  and  to  spend  its  rage.  Intrigue  and  policy
supplied  the  want  of  strength.  Necessity  and  self-
preservation  led  that  ingenious  people  to  the  great  se-
cret of  modern  politics,  by  teaching  them  how  to  ba-
lance the  power  of  one  prince,  by  throwing  that  of
another  into  the  opposite  scale.  By  this  happy  device,
the  liberty  of  Italy  was  long  preserved.  The  scales
were  poised  by  very  skilful  hands ;  the  smallest  varia-
tions were  attended  to,  and  no  prince  was  allowed  to
retain  any  superiority  that  could  be  dangerous.

A  system  of  conduct,  pursued  with  so  much  success

70  SCOTLAND.

in  Italy,  was  not  long  confined  to  that  country  of  poli-
tical refinement.  The  maxim  of  preserving  a  balance
of  power  is  founded  so  much  upon  obvious  reasoning,
and  the  situation  of  Europe  rendered  it  so  necessary,
that  it  soon  became  a  matter  of  chief  attention  to  all
wise  politicians.  Every  step  any  prince  took  was  ob-
served by  all  his  neighbours.  Ambassadors,  a  kind  of
honourable  spies,  authorized  by  the  mutual  jealousy
of  kings,  resided  almost  constantly  at  every  different
court,  and  had  it  in  charge  to  watch  all  its  motions.
Dangers  were  foreseen  at  a  greater  distance,  and  pre-
vented with  more  ease.  Confederacies  were  formed  to
humble  any  power  which  rose  above  its  due  proportion.
Revenge  or  self-defence  were  no  longer  the  only  causes
of  hostility ;  it  became  common  to  take  arms  out  of
policy ;  and  war,  both  in  its  commencement  and  in  its
operations,  was  more  an  exercise  of  the  judgment,  than
of  the  passions  of  men.  Almost  every  war  in  Europe
became  general,  and  the  most  inconsiderable  states
acquired  importance,  because  they  could  add  weight
to  either  scale,

Francis  L,  who  mounted  the  throne  of  France  in  the
year  1515,  and  Charles  V.,  who  obtained  the  imperial
crown  in  the  year  1519,  divided  between  them  the
strength  and  affections  of  all  Europe.  Their  perpe-
tual enmity  was  not  owing  solely  either  to  personal  jea-
lousy, or  to  the  caprice  of  private  passion,  but  was
founded  so  much  in  nature  and  true  policy,  that  it  sub-
sisted between  their  posterity  for  several  ages.  Charles
succeeded  to  all  the  dominions  of  the  house  of  Austria.
No  family  had  ever  gained  so  much  by  wise  and  for-
tunate marriages.  By  acquisitions  of  this  kind,  the
Austrian  princes  rose,  in  a  short  time,  from  obscure
counts  of  Hapsbourg,  to  be  archdukes  of  Austria  and
kings  of  Bohemia,  and  were  in  possession  of  the  impe-
rial dignity,  by  a  sort  of  hereditary  right.  Besides  these
territories  in  Germany,  Charles  was  heir  to  the  crown

BOOK I.  71

of  Spain,  and  to  all  the  dominions  which  belonged  to
the  house  of  Burgundy.  The  Burgundian  provinces
engrossed,  at  that  time,  the  riches  and  commerce  of
one-half  of  Europe ;  and  he  drew  from  them,  on  many
occasions,  those  immense  sums,  which  no  people  with-
out trade  and  liberty  are  able  to  contribute.  Spain
furnished  him  a  gallant  and  hardy  infantry,  to  whose
discipline  he  was  indebted  for  all  his  conquests.  At
the  same  time,  by  the  discovery  of  the  New  World,  a
vein  of  wealth  was  opened  to  him,  which  all  the  extra-
vagance of  ambition  could  not  exhaust.  These  ad-
vantages rendered  Charles  the  first  prince  in  Europe ;
but  he  wished  to  be  more,  and  openly  aspired  to  uni-
versal monarchy.  His  genius  was  of  that  kind,  which
ripens  slowly,  and  lies  long  concealed  ;  but  it  grew  up,
without  observation,  to  an  unexpected  height  and  vi-
gour. He  possessed,  in  an  eminent  degree,  the  cha-
racteristic virtues  of  all  the  different  races  of  princes  to,
whom  he  was  allied.  In  forming  his  schemes,  he  dis-
covered all  the  subtlety  and  penetration  of  Ferdinand,
his  grandfather ;  he  pursued  them  with  that  obstinate
and  inflexible  perseverance  which  has  ever  been  pecu-
liar to  the  Austrian  blood  ;  and,  in  executing  them,  h$
could  employ  the  magnanimity  and  boldness  of  his
Burgundian  ancestors.  His  abilities  were  equal  to  his
power,  and  neither  of  them  would  have  been  inferior  to
his  designs,  had  not  Providence,  in  pity  to  mankind,
and  in  order  to  preserve  them  from  the  worst  of  al}
evils,  universal  monarchy,  raised  up  Francis  I.  to  de-
fend the  liberty  of  Europe.  His  dominions  were  less
extensive,  but  more  united,  than  the  emperor's.  His
subjects  were  numerous,  active,  and  warlike,  lovers  of
glory,  and  lovers  of  their  king.  To  Charles,  power  was
the  only  object  of  desire,  and  he  pursued  it  with  an
unwearied  and  joyless  industry.  Francis  could  mingle
pleasure  and  elegance  with  his  ambition ;  and,  though
he  neglected  some  advantages,  which  a  more  phlegma-

72  SCOTLAND.

tic  or  more  frugal  prince  would  have  improved,  an  ac-
tive and  intrepid  courage  supplied  all  his  defects,  and
checked  or  defeated  many  of  the  emperor's  designs.

The  rest  of  Europe,  observed  all  the  motions  of  these
mighty  rivals  with  a  jealous  attention.  On  the  one
side,  the  Italians  saw  the  danger  which  threatened
Christendom,  and,  in  order  to  avert  it,  had  recourse  to
the  expedient  which  they  had  often  employed  with
success.  They  endeavoured  to  divide  the  power  of
the  two  contending  monarchs,  into  equal  scales,  and,
by  the  union  of  several  small  states,  to  counterpoise
him  whose  power  became  too  great.  But  what  they
concerted  with  much  wisdom,  they  were  able  to  ex-
ecute with  little  vigour ;  and  intrigue  and  refinement
were  feeble  fences  against  the  encroachments  of  mi-
litary power.

On  the  other  side,  Henry  VIII.  of  England,  held  the
balance  with  less  delicacy,  but  with  a  stronger  hand.
He  was  the  third  prince  of  the  age,  in  dignity  and  in
power ;  and  the  advantageous  situation  of  his  domi-
nions, his  domestic  tranquillity,  his  immense  wealth,  and
absolute  authority,  rendered  him  the  natural  guardian
of  the  liberty  of  Europe.  Each  of  the  rivals  courted
him  with  emulation ;  he  knew  it  to  be  his  interest  to
keep  the  balance  even,  and  to  restrain  both,  by  not
joining  entirely  with  either  of  them.  But  he  was  sel-
dom able  to  reduce  his  ideas  to  practice;  he  was  go-
verned by  caprice  more  than  by  principle;  and  the
passions  of  the  man  were  an  overmatch  for  the  maxims
of  the  king.  Vanity  and  resentment  were  the  great
springs  of  all  his  undertakings,  and  his  neighbours
easily  found  the  way,  by  touching  these,  to  force  him
upon  many  rash  and  inconsistent  enterprises.  His
reign  was  a  perpetual  series  of  blunders  in  politics ;
and  while  he  esteemed  himself  the  wisest  prince  in  Eu-
rope, he  was  a  constant  dupe  to  those  who  found  it  ne-
cessary, and  could  submit,  to  flatter  him.

BOOK  I.  73

In  this  situation  of  Europe,  Scotland,  which  had  hi-
therto wasted  her  strength  in  the  quarrels  between
France  and  England,  emerged  from  her  obscurity,
took  her  station  in  the  system,  and  began  to  have  some
influence  upon  the  fate  of  distant  nations.  Her  assist-
ance was  frequently  of  consequence  to  the  contending
parties,  and  the  balance  was  often  so  nicely  adjusted,
that  it  was  in  her  power  to  make  it  lean  to  either  side.
The  part  assigned  her,  at  this  juncture,  was  to  divert
Henry  from  carrying  his  arms  into  the  continent.
That  prince  having  routed  the  French  at  Guinegat  and
invested  Terouenne,  Francis  attempted  to  divide  his
forces,  by  engaging  James  IV.  in  that  unhappy  expe-
dition, which  ended  with  his  life.  For  the  same  rea-
son Francis  encouraged  and  assisted  the  duke  of
Albany  to  ruin  the  families  of  Angus  and  Home,  which
were  in  the  interest  of  England,  and  would  willingly
have  persuaded  the  Scots  to  revenge  the  death  of  their
king,  and  to  enter  into  a  new  war  with  that  kingdom.
Henry  and  Francis  having  united  not  long  after  against
the  emperor,  it  was  the  interest  of  both  kings,  that  the
Scots  should  continue  inactive  ;  and  a  long  tranquillity
was  the  effect  of  their  union.  Charles  endeavoured  to
break  this,  and  to  embarrass  Henry  by  another  inroad
of  the  Scots.  For  this  end  he  made  great  advances  to
James  V.,  flattering  the  vanity  of  the  young  monarch,
by  electing  him  a  knight  of  the  golden  fleece,  and  by
offering  him  a  match  in  the  imperial  family  ;  while,  in
return  for  these  empty  honours,  he  demanded  of  him
to  renounce  his  alliance  with  France,  and  to  declare
war  against  England.  But  James,  who  had  much  to
lose,  and  who  could  gain  little  by  closing  with  the  em-
peror's proposals,  rejected  them  with  decency,  and,
keeping  firm  to  his  ancient  allies,  left  Henry  at  full  li-
berty to  act  upon  the  continent  with  his  whole  strength.

Henry  himself  began  his  reign  by  imitating  the  ex-
ample of  his  ancestors  with  regard  to  Scotland. He

74  SCOTLAND.

held  its  power  in  such  extreme  contempt,  that  he  was
at  no  pains  to  gain  its  friendship ;  but,  on  the  contrary,
he  irritated  the  whole  nation,  by  reviving  the  antiquated
pretensions  of  the  crown  of  England  to  the  sovereignty
over  Scotland.  But  his  own  experience,  and  the  exam-
ples of  his  enemies,  gave  him  a  higher  idea  of  its  im-
portance. It  was  impossible  to  defend  an  open  and
extensive  frontier  against  the  incursions  of  an  active
and  martial  people.  During  any  war  on  the  continent,
this  obliged  him  to  divide  the  strength  of  his  kingdom.
It  was  necessary  to  maintain  a  kind  of  army  of  observa-
tion in  the  north  of  England ;  and,  after  all  precautions,
the  Scottish  borderers,  who  were  superior  to  all  man-
kind in  the  practice  of  irregular  war,  often  made  suc-
cessful inroads,  and  spread  terror  and  desolation  over
many  counties.  He  fell,  at  last,  upon  the  true  secret
of  policy,  with  respect  to  Scotland,  which  his  prede-
cessors had  too  little  penetration  to  discover,  or  too
much  pride  to  employ.  The  situation  of  the  country,
and  the  bravery  of  the  people,  made  the  conquest  of
Scotland  impossible ;  but  the  national  poverty,  and  the
violence  of  faction,  rendered  it  an  easy  matter  to  di-
vide, and  to  govern  it.  He  abandoned,  therefore,  the
former  design,  and  resolved  to  employ  his  utmost  ad-
dress in  executing  the  latter.  It  had  not  yet  become
honourable  for  one  prince  to  receive  pay  from  another,
under  the  more  decent  name  of  a  subsidy.  But,  in  all
ages,  the  same  arguments  have  been  good  in  courts,
and  of  weight  with  ministers,  factious  leaders,  and  fa-
vourites. What  were  the  arguments  by  which  Henry
brought  over  so  many  to  his  interest  during  the  mino-
rity of  James  V.  we  know  by  the  original  warrant  still
extant,p  for  remitting  considerable  sums  into  Scotland.
By  a  proper  distribution  of  these,  many  persons  of  note
were  gained  to  his  party,  and  a  faction,  which  held  se-
cret correspondence  with  England,  and  received  all  its

P  Burn.  Hist.  Ref.  vol.  i.  p.  7.

BOOK  I.  75

directions  from  thence,  appears  henceforward  in  our
domestic  contests.  In  the  sequel  of  the  history,  we
shall  find  Henry  labouring  to  extend  his  influence  in
Scotland.  His  successors  adopted  the  same  plan,  and
improved  upon  it.  The  affairs  of  the  two  kingdoms
became  interwoven,  and  their  interests  were  often  the
same.  Elizabeth  divided  her  attention  almost  equally
between  them,  and  the  authority  which  she  inherited
in  the  one,  was  not  greater  than  that  which  she  ac-
quired in  the  other.

THE

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND.

BOOK  II.

Birth  of MARY,  queen  of  Scots,  the  daughter  of  James
8,is42,an<i  V.  and  Mary  of  Guise,  was  born  a  few  days

before  the  death  of  her  father.  The  situation
in  which  he  left  the  kingdom  alarmed  all  ranks
of  men  with  the  prospect  of  a  turbulent  and  disastrous
reign.  A  war  against  England  had  been  undertaken
without  necessity,  and  carried  on  without  success.
Many  persons  of  the  first  rank  had  fallen  into  the  hands
of  the  English,  in  the  unfortunate  rout  near  the  frith
of  Solway,  and  were  still  prisoners  at  London.  Among
the  rest  of  the  nobles  there  was  little  union  either  in
their  views  or  in  their  affections;  and  the  religious  dis-
putes, occasioned  by  the  opinions  of  the  reformers,
growing  every  day  more  violent,  added  to  the  rage  of
those  factions  which  are  natural  to  a  form  of  govern-
ment nearly  aristocratical.

The  government  of  a  queen  was  unknown  in  Scot-
land, and  did  not  imprint  much  reverence  in  the  minds
of  a  martial  people.  The  government  of  an  infant
queen  was  still  more  destitute  of  real  authority  ;  and
the  prospect  of  a  long  and  feeble  minority  invited  to
faction  by  the  hope  of  impunity.  James  had  not  even
provided  the  common  remedy  against  the  disorders  of
a  minority,  by  committing  to  proper  persons  the  care
of  his  daughter's  education,  and  the  administration  of
affairs  in  her  name.  Though  he  saw  the  clouds  ga-
thering, and  foretold  that  they  would  quickly  burst  into

BOOK  II.  77

a  storm,  he  was  so  little  able  to  disperse  them,  or  to
defend  his  daughter  and  kingdom  against  the  imminent
calamities,  that,  in  mere  despair,  he  abandoned  them
both  to  the  mercy  of  fortune,  and  left  open  to  every
pretender  the  office  of  regent,  which  he  could  not  fix
to  his  own  satisfaction.
Preten  Cardinal  Beatoun,  who  had  for  many  years

of  been  considered  as  prime  minister,  was  the  first
Beatoun  that  claimed  that  high  dignity  ;  and,  in  support
regency.  °^  ^s  pretensions,  he  produced  a  testament,*
which  he  himself  had  forged  in  the  name  of  the
late  king;  and  without  any  other  right,  instantly  as-
sumed the  title  of  regent.  He  hoped,  by  the  assistance
of  the  clergy,  the  countenance  of  France,  the  conni-
vance of  the  queen-dowager,  and  the  support  of  the
whole  popish  faction,  to  hold  by  force  what  he  had
seized  on  by  fraud.  But  Beatoun  had  enjoyed  power
too  long  to  be  a  favourite  of  the  nation.  Those  among
the  nobles  who  wished  for  a  reformation  in  religion
dreaded  his  severity,  and  others  considered  the  eleva-
tion of  a  churchman  to  the  highest  office  in  the  king-
dom as  a  depression  of  themselves.  At  their  instiga-
tion, James  Hamilton  earl  of  Arran,  and  next  heir  to
the  queen,  roused  himself  from  his  inactivity,  and  was
prevailed  on  to  aspire  to  that  station  to  which  proximity
Earl  of  Ar-  of  blood  gave  him  a  natural  title.  The  nobles,
ran  chosen  ^Q  were  assembled  for  that  purpose,  unani-

mously conferred  on  him  the  office  of  regent  ;
and  the  public  voice  applauded  their  choice.b

No  two  men  ever  differed  more  widely  in  dis-
n.  position  and  character,  than  the  earl  of  Arran

and  cardinal  Beatoun.  The  cardinal  was  by
nature  of  immoderate  ambition  ;  by  long  experience  he
had  acquired  address  and  refinement  ;  and  insolence
grew  upon  him  from  continual  success.  His  high  sta-

a  Sadler's  Lett.  161. Haynes,  State  Papers,  486.
b  Epist.  Reg.  Scot.  voU  ii.  p.  308.

78  SCOTLAND.

tion  in  the  church  placed  him  in  the  way  of  great  civil
employments  ;  his  abilities  were  equal  to  the  greatest  of
these  ;  nor  did  he  reckon  any  of  them  to  be  above  his
merit.  As  his  own  eminence  was  founded  upon  the
power  of  the  church  of  Rome,  he  was  a  zealous  de-
fender of  that  superstition,  and  for  the  same  reason  an
avowed  enemy  to  the  doctrine  of  the  reformers.  Po-
litical motives  alone  determined  him  to  support  the
one,  or  to  oppose  the  other.  His  early  application  to
public  business  kept  him  unacquainted  with  the  learn-,
ing  and  controversies  of  the  age ;  he  gave  judgment,
however,  upon  all  points  in  dispute,  with  a  precipi-
tancy, violence,  and  rigour,  which  contemporary  his-
torians mention  with  indignation.

The  character  of  the  earl  of  Arran  was,  in  al-
'  most  every  thing,  the  reverse  of  Beatoun's.  He
Was  neither  infected  with  ambition,  nor  inclined  to
Cruelty  :  the  love  of  ease  extinguished  the  former,  the
gentleness  of  his  temper  preserved  him  from  the  latter.
Timidity  and  irresolution  were  his  predominant  fail-
ings, the  one  occasioned  by  his  natural  constitution,
and  the  other  arising  from  a  consciousness  that  his  abi-
lities were  not  equal  to  his  station.  With  these  dispo-
sitions he  might  have  enjoyed  and  adorned  private  life ;
but  his  public  conduct  was  without  courage,  or  dig-
nity, or  consistence ;  the  perpetual  slave  of  his  own
fears,  {and,  by  consequence,  the  perpetual  tool  of  those
who  found  their  advantage  in  practising  upon  them.
But,  as  no  other  person  could  be  set  in  opposition  to
the  cardinal,  with  any  probability  of  success,  the  na-
tion declared  in  his  favour  with  such  general  consent,
that  the  artifices  of  his  rival  could  not  withstand  its
united  strength.

Schemes The  earl  of  Arran  had  scarce  taken  possession

vmewfth  °f  kis  new  dignity,  when  a  negotiation  was

regard  to opened  with  England,  which  gave  birth to

events  of  the  most  fatal  consequences  to  him-

BOOK II.  79

self,  and  to  the  kingdom.  After  the  death  of  James,
Henry  VIII.  was  no  longer  afraid  of  any  interruption
from  Scotland  to  his  designs  against  France ;  and  imme-
diately conceived  hopes  of  rendering  this  security  per-
petual, by  the  marriage  of  Edward  his  only  son  with
the  young  queen  of  Scots.  He  communicated  his  in-
tentions to  the  prisoners  taken  at  Solway,  and  prevailed
on  them  to  favour  it,  by  the  promise  of  liberty,  as  the
reward  of  their  success.  In  the  mean  time  he  permit-
ted them  to  return  into  Scotland,  that,  by  their  pre-
sence in  the  parliament  which  the  regent  had  called,
they  might  be  the  better  able  to  persuade  their  coun-
trymen to  fall  in  with  his  proposals*  A  cause  intrusted
to  such  able  and  zealous  advocates,  could  not  well  miss
of  coming  to  a  happy  issue.  All  those  who  feared
the  cardinal,  or  who  desired  a  change  in  religion,  were
fond  of  an  alliance,  which  afforded  protection  to  the
doctrine  which  they  had  embraced,  as  well  as  to  their
own  persons,  against  the  rage  of  that  powerful  and
haughty  prelate.

in  con-  ^ut  Henry's  rough  and  impatient  temper  was
ducted  by  incapable  of  improving  this  favourable  conjune-

himself.  r , f  , .  .  . J .

ture.  Address  and  delicacy  in  managing  the
fears,  and  follies,  and  interests  of  men,  Were  arts  with
which  he  was  utterly  unacquainted.  The  designs  he
had  formed  upon  Scotland  were  obvious  from  the  mar-
riage which  he  had  proposed,  and  he  had  not  dexterity
enough  to  disguise  or  to  conceal  them.  Instead  of
yielding  to  the  fear  or  jealousy  of  the  Scots,  what  time
and  accident  would  soon  have  enabled  him  to  recover,
he  at  oncfe  alarmed  and  irritated  the  whole  nation,  by
demanding  that  the  queen's  person  should  be  imme-
diately committed  to  his  custody,  and  that  the  govern-
ment of  the  kingdom  should  be  put  into  his  hands
during  her  minority.

Odious  to  Henry  could  not  have  prescribed  more  igno-
the  scots,  minious  conditions  to  a  conquered  people,

80  SCOTLAND.

though  in  and  it  is  no  wonder  they  were  rejected,  with
ceptedCby  indignation,  by  men  who  scorned  to  purchase
them.  an  a]liance  -with  England  at  the  price  of  their
own  liberty.  The  parliament  of  Scotland,  however,
influenced  by  the  nobles  who  returned  from  England ;
desirous  of  peace  with  that  kingdom ;  and  delivered,  by
March  ig,  the  regent's  confining  the  cardinal  as  a  prisoner,
1543'  from  an  opposition  to  which  he  might  have
given  rise ;  consented  to  a  treaty  of  marriage  and  of
union,  but  upon  terms  somewhat  more  equal.  After
some  dark  and  unsuccessful  intrigues,  by  which  his  am-
bassador endeavoured  to  carry  off  the  young  queen
and  cardinal  Beatoun  into  England,  Henry  was  ob-
liged to  give  up  his  own  proposals,  and  to  accept  of
theirs.  On  his  side  he  consented  that  the  queen  should
continue  to  reside  in  Scotland,  and  himself  remain  ex-
cluded from  any  share  in  the  government  of  the  king-
dom. On  the  other  hand  the  Scots  agreed  to  send
their  sovereign  into  England  as  soon  as  she  attained
the  full  age  of  ten  years,  and  instantly  to  deliver  six
persons  of  the  first  rank  to  be  kept  as  hostages  by
Henry  till  the  queen's  arrival  at  his  court.

voured  The  treaty  was  still  so  manifestly  of  advan-
bythere-  tage  to  England,  that  the  regent  lost  much  of
the  public  confidence  by  consenting  to  it.  The
cardinal,  who  had  now  recovered  liberty,  watched  for
such  an  opportunity  of  regaining  credit,  and  he  did
not  fail  to  cultivate  and  improve  this  to  the  utmost.
Opposed  ^e  complained  loudly  that  the  regent  had  be-
tylhe  trayed  the  kingdom  to  its  most  inveterate  ene-

eardmal. .J  ?

mies,  and  sacrificed  its  honour  to  his  own  am-
bition. He  foretold  the  extinction  of  the  true  Catholic
religion,  under  the  tyranny  of  an  excommunicated  he-
retic ;  but,  above  all,  he  lamented  to  see  an  ancient
kingdom  consenting  to  its  own  servitude,  descending
into  the  ignominious  station  of  a  dependent  province  ;
and,  in  one  hour,  the  weakness  or  treachery  of  a  single

BOOK II.  81

man  surrendering  every  thing  for  which  the  Scottish
nation  had  struggled  and  fought  during  so  many  ages..
These  remonstrances  of  the  cardinal  were  not  without
effect.  They  were  addressed  to  prejudices  and  pas-
sions which  are  deeply  rooted  in  the  human  heart.
The  same  hatred  to  the  ancient  enemies  of  their  coun-
try, the  same  jealousy  of  national  honour,  and  pride  of
independence,  which,  at  the  beginning  of  the  present
century,  went  near  to  prevent  the  Scots  from  consent-
ing to  a  union  with  England,  upon  terms  of  great
advantage,  did,  at  that  time,  induce  the  whole  nation
to  declare  against  the  alliance  which  had  been  con-
cluded. In  the  one  period,  a  hundred  and  fifty  years
of  peace  between  the  two  nations,  the  habit  of  being
subjected  to  the  same  king,  and  governed  by  the  same
maxims,  had  considerably  abated  old  animosities,  and
prepared  both  people  for  incorporating.  In  the  other,
injuries  were  still  fresh,  the  wounds  on  both  sides  were
open,  and,  in  the  warmth  of  resentment,  it  was  natural
to  seek  revenge,  and  to  be  averse  from  reconcilement.
At  the  union,  in  1707,  the  wisdom  of  parliament  de-
spised the  groundless  murmurs  occasioned  by  anti-
quated prejudices;  but  in  1543,  the  complaints  of  the
nation  were  better  founded,  and  urged  with  a  zeal  and
unanimity,  which  it  is  neither  just  nor  safe  to  disregard.
A  rash  measure  of  the  English  monarch  added  greatly
to  the  violence  of  this  national  animosity.  The  Scots,
relying  on  the  treaty  of  marriage  and  union,  fitted  out
several  ships  for  France,  with  which  their  trade  had
been  interrupted  for  some  time.  These  were  driven  by
stress  of  weather  to  take  refuge  in  different  ports  of
England  ;  and  Henry,  under  pretext  that  they  were  car-
rying provisions  to  a  kingdom  with  which  he  was  at
war,  ordered  them  to  be  seized  and  condemned  as  law-
ful prizes.0  The  Scots,  astonished  at  this  proceeding
of  a  prince,  whose  interest  it  was  manifestly,  at  that

«  Keith,  32.  34. Epist.  Reg.  Scot.  ii.  App.  311. Hamilton  MSS.  yol.  i.  p.  389.
VOL.  I.  G

82  SCOTLAND.

juncture,  to  court  and  to  sooth  them,  felt  it  not  only
as  an  injury  but  as  an  insult,  and  expressed  all  the  re-
sentment natural  to  a  high-spirited  people. d  Their
rage  rose  to  such  an  height,  that  the  English  ambassa-
dor could  hardly  be  protected  from  it.  One  spirit
seemed  now  to  animate  all  orders  of  men.  The  clergy
offered  to  contribute  a  great  sum  towards  preserving
the  church  from  the  dominion  of  a  prince,  whose  sys-
tem of  reformation  was  so  fatal  to  their  power.  The
nobles,  after  having  mortified  the  cardinal  so  lately  in
such  a  cruel  manner,  were  now  ready  to  applaud  and
to  second  him,  as  the  defender  of  the  honour  and  li-
berty of  his  country.

Argyle,  Huntly,  Bothwell,  and  other  power-
He  excites  &J  111  IT.

almost  the  lui  barons,  declared  openly  against  the  alliance
Against  with  England.  By  their  assistance,  the  cardi-
na^  seized  on  the  persons  of  the  young  queen
and  her  mother,  and  added  to  his  party  the
splendour  and  authority  of  the  royal  name.6  He  re-
ceived, at  the  same  time,  a  more  real  accession  to  his
strength,  by  the  arrival  of  Matthew  Stuart,  earl  of  Len-
nox, whose  return  from  France  he  had  earnestly  soli-
cited. This  young  nobleman  was  the  hereditary  enemy
of  the  house  of  Hamilton.  He  had  many  claims  upon

d  In  the  MS.  collection  of  papers  belonging  to  the  duke  of  Hamilton,  Sir  Ralph
Sadler  describes  the  spirit  of  the  Scots  as  extremely  outrageous.  In  his  letter  from
Edinburgh,  Sept.  1,  1543,  he  says  :  "  The  stay  of  the  ships  has  brought  the  people
of  this  town,  both  men  and  women,  and  especially  the  merchants,  into  such  a  rage
and  fury,  that  the  whole  town  is  comraoved  against  me,;  and  swear  great  oaths,  that
if  their  ships  are  not  restored,  that  they  would  have  their  amends  of  me  and  mine,
and  that  they  would  set  my  house  here  on  fire  over  my  head,  so  that  one  of  us  should
not  escape  alive ;  and  also  it  hath  much  incensed  and  provoked  the  people  against
the  governor,  saying,  that  he  hath  coloured  a  peace  with  your  Majesty  only  to  undo
them.  This  is  the  unreasonableness  of  the  people  which  live  here  in  such  a  beastly
liberty,  that  they  neither  regard  God  nor  governor ;  nor  yet  justice,  or  any  good  po-
licy, doth  take  place  among  them ;  assuring  your  highness  that,  unless  the  ships  be
delivered,  there  will  be  none  abiding  here  for  me  without  danger."  Vol.  i.  451.  In
his  letter  of  Sept.  5,  he  writes  that  the  rage  of  the  people  still  continued  so  violent,
"  that  neither  I  nor  any  of  my  folks  dare  go  out  of  my  doors;  and  the  provost  of
the  town,  who  hath  much  ado  to  stay  them  from  assaulting  me  in  my  house,  and
keepeth  watch  therefore  nightly,  hath  sent  to  me  sundry  times,  and  prayed  me  to
keep  myself  and  my  folks  within,  for  it  is  scant  in  his  power  to  repress  or  resist  the
fury  of  the  people.  They  say  plainly,  I  shall  never  pass  out  of  the  town  alive,  ex-
cept they  have  their  ships  restored.  This  is  the  rage  and  beastliness  of  this  nation,
which  God  keep  all  honest  men  from."  Ib.  471.

e  Keith's  Hist,  of  Scotl.  30.

BOOK II.  83

the  regent,  and  pretended  a  right  to  exclude  him,  not
only  from  succeeding  to  the  crown,  but  to  deprive  him
of  the  possession  of  his  private  fortune.  The  cardinal
flattered  his  vanity  with  the  prospect  of  marrying  the
queen-dowager,  and  affected  to  treat  him  with  so  much
respect,  that  the  regent  became  jealous  of  him  as  a  rival
in  power.

This  suspicion  was  artfully  heightened  by  the  abbot
of  Paisley,  who  returned  into  Scotland  some  time  be-
fore the  earl  of  Lennox,  and  acted  in  concert  with  the
cardinal.  He  was  a  natural  brother  of  the  regent,  with
whom  he  had  great  credit ;  a  warm  partisan  of  France,
and  a  zealous  defender  of  the  established  religion.  He
took  hold  of  the  regent  by  the  proper  handle,  and  en-
deavoured to  bring  about  a  change  in  his  sentiments
by  working  upon  his  fears.  The  desertion  of  the  nobility,
the  disaffection  of  the  clergy,  and  the  rage  of  the  peo-
ple; the  resentment  of  France,  the  power  of  the  cardinal,
and  the  pretensions  of  Lennox,  were  all  represented  with
aggravation,  and  with  their  most  threatening  aspect.

Meanwhile  the  day  appointed  for  the  ratification  of
the  treaty  with  England,  and  the  delivery  of  the  hos-
tages, approached,  and  the  regent  was  still  undeter-
mined in  his  own  mind.  He  acted  to  the  last  with
that  irresolution  and  inconsistence  which  is  peculiar  to
weak  men  when  they  are  so  unfortunate  as  to  have
the  chief  part  in  the  conduct  of  difficult  affairs.  On
the  25th  of  August,  he  ratified  a  treaty  with  Henry/
and  proclaimed  the  cardinal,  who  still  continued  to
oppose  it,  an  enemy  to  his  country.  On  the
regent6 to *  third  of  September  he  secretly  withdrew  from
Edinburgh,  met  with  the  cardinal  at  Calendar,
enounced  the  friendship  of  England,  and  de-
clared for  the  interests  of  France.5
Henry,  in  order  to  gain  the  regent,  had  not  spared
the  most  magnificent  promises.  He  had  offered  to  give

f  Rymer,  Feed.  xv.  p.  4.
€  Sadler,  3.39.  356. Hamilton  MSS.  i.  470,  &c.

G2

84  SCOTLAND.

the  princess  Elizabeth  in  marriage  to  his  eldest  son,
and  to  constitute  him  king  of  that  part  of  Scotland
which  lies  beyond  the  ri*ver  Forth.  But,  upon  finding
his  interest  in  the  kingdom  to  be  less  considerable  than
he  had  imagined,  the  English  monarch  began  to  treat
him  with  little  respect  The  young  queen  was  now  in
the  custody  of  his  enemies,  who  grew  every  day  more
numerous  and  more  popular.  They  formed  a  separate
court  at  Stirling,  and  threatened  to  elect  another  regent.
The  French  king  was  ready  to  afford  them  his  protec-
tion, and  the  nation,  out  of  hatred  to  the  English,  would
have  united  in  their  defence.  In  this  situation,  the
regent  could  not  retain  his  authority,  without  a  sudden
change  of  his  measures ;  and  though  he  endeavoured,
by  ratifying  the  treaty,  to  preserve  the  appearances  of
good  faith  with  England,  he  was  obliged  to  throw  him-
self into  the  arms  of  the  party  which  adhered  to
France.

And  to  per-  Soon  after  this  sudden  revolution  in  his  po-
*ecut(B  the  Htical  principles,  the  regent  changed  his  sen-
timents concerning  religion.  The  spirit  of
controversy  was  then  new  and  warm ;  books  of  that
kind  were  ei  gerly  read  by  men  of  every  rank ;  the  love
of  novelty,  or  the  conviction  of  truth,  had  led  the  regent
to  express  great  esteem  for  the  writings  of  the  reformers,
and  having  been  powerfully  supported  by  those  who
had  embraced  their  opinions,  he,  in  order  to  gratify
them,  entertained,  in  his  own  family,  two  of  the  most
noted  preachers  of  the  Protestant  doctrine,  and,  in  his
first  parliament,  consented  to  an  act,  by  which  the  laity
were  permitted  to  read  the  scriptures  in  a  language
which  they  understood.11  Truth  needed  only  a  fair
hearing  to  be  an  over-match  for  error.  Absurdities,
which  had  long  imposed  on  the  ignorance  and  credu-
lity of  mankind,  were  detected  and  exposed  to  public
ridicule ;  and,  under  the  countenance  of  the  regent,

h  Keith,  p.  36,  37.

BOOK  II.  85

the  Reformation  made  great  advances. The  cardinal
observed  its  progress  with  concern,  and  was  at  the
utmost  pains  to  obstruct  it. He  represented  to  the
regent  his  great  imprudence  in  giving  encouragement
to  opinions  so  favourable  to  Lennox's  pretensions  ;  that
his  own  legitimacy  depended  upon  the  validity  of  a
sentence  of  divorce,  founded  on  the  pope's  authority ;
and  that  by  suffering  it  to  be  called  in  question,  he
weakened  his  own  title  to  the  succession,  and  furnished
his  rival  with  the  only  argument  by  which  it  could  be
rendered  doubtful.1 These  insinuations  made  a  deep
impression  on  the  regent's  timorous  spirit,  who,  at  the
prospect  of  such  imaginary  danger,  was  as  much  startled
as  the  cardinal  could  have  wished ;  and  his  zeal  for  the
Protestant  religion  was  not  long  proof  against  his  fear.
He  publicly  abjured  the  doctrine  of  the  reformers  in
the  Franciscan church  at  Stirling,  and  declared  not
only  for  the  political,  but  the  religious  opinions  of  his
new  confidents.

The  Protestant  doctrine  did  not  suffer  much  by  his
apostacy.  It  had  already  taken  so  deep  root  in  the
kingdom,  that  no  discouragement  or  severity  could
extirpate  it.  The  regent  indeed,  consented  to  every
thing  that  the  zeal  of  the  cardinal  thought  necessary  for
the  preservation  of  the  established  religion.  The  re-
formers were  persecuted  with  all  the  cruelty  which
superstition  inspires  into  a  barbarous  people.  Many
were  condemned  to  that  dreadful  death  which  the
church  has  appointed  for  the  punishment  of  its  enemies ;
but  they  suffered  with  a  spirit  so  nearly  resembling  the
patience  and  fortitude  of  the  primitive  martyrs,  that

1  The  pretensions  of  the  earl  of  Lennox  to  the  succession  were  thus  founded.
Mary,  the  daughter  of  James  II.  was  married  to  James  Lord  Hamilton,  whom
James  III.  created  earl  of  Arran  on  that  account.  Elizabeth,  a  daughter  of  that
marriage,  was  the  wife  of  Matthew  earl  of  Lennox,  and  the  present  earl  was  her
grandson.  The  regent  was  likewise  the  grandson  of  the  princess  Mary.  But  his
father  having  married  Janet  Beatouii  the  regent's  mother,  after  he  had  obtained  a
divorce  from  Elizabeth  Home  his  former  wife,  Lennox  pretended  that  the  sentence
of  divorce  was  unjust,  and  that  the  regent  being  born  while  Elizabeth  Home  was
still  alive,  ought  to  be  considered  as  illegitimate.  Crawf.  Peer.  192.

80  SCOTLAND.

more  were  converted  than  terrified  by  such  spec-
tacles.

Beatoun  ^G  car^^na^  however,  was  now  in  possession

engrosses  of  every  thing  his  ambition  could  desire  ;  and

direction  exercised  all  the  authority  of  a  regent,  without

of  affairs.  fae  envv  of  fae  name. He  had  nothing  to  fear

from  the  earl  of  Arran,  who  having  by  his  inconsistency
forfeited  the  public  esteem,  was  contemned  by  one  half
the  nation,  and  little  trusted  by  the  other.  The  preten-
sions of  the  earl  of  Lennox  were  the  only  thing  which
remained  to  embarrass  him.  He  had  very  successfully
made  use  of  that  nobleman  to  work  upon  the  regent's
jealousy  and  fear,  but  as  he  no  longer  stood  in  need  of
such  an  instrument,  he  was  willing  to  get  rid  of  him
with  decency.  Lennox  soon  began  to  suspect  his  in-
tention ;  promises,  flattery,  and  respect,  were  the  only
returns  he  had  hitherto  received  for  substantial  services ;
but  at  last  the  cardinal's  artifices  could  no  longer  be
concealed,  and  Lennox,  instead  of  attaining  power  and
dignity  himself,  saw  that  he  had  been  employed  only
to  procure  these  for  another.  Resentment  and  disap-
pointed ambition  urged  him  to  seek  revenge  on  that
cunning  prelate,  who,  by  sacrificing  his  interest,  had
so  ungenerously  purchased  the  earl  of  Arran's  friend-
ship. He  withdrew,  for  that  reason,  from  court,  and
declared  for  the  party  at  enmity  with  the  cardinal,
which,  with  open  arms,  received  a  .convert  who  added
so  much  lustre  to  their  cause.

The  two  factions  which  divided  the  kingdom  were
still  the  same,  without  any  alterations  in  their  views  or
principles ;  but,  by  one  of  those  strange  revolutions,
which  were  frequent  in  that  age,  they  had,  in  the
course  of  a  few  weeks,  changed  their  leaders.  The
regent  was  at  the  head  of  the  partisans  of  France  and
the  defenders  of  Popery,  and  Lennox  in  the  same  sta-
tion with  the  advocates  for  the  English  alliance,  and  a
reformation  in  religion.  The  one  laboured  to  pull  down

BOOK  II.  87

his  own  work,  which  the  other  upheld  with  the  same
hand  that  had  hitherto  endeavoured  to  destroy  it.

Lennox's  impatience  for  revenge  got  the  start  of  the
cardinal's  activity.  He  surprised  both  him  and  the
regent  by  a  sudden  march  to  Edinburgh  with  a  nume-
rous army ;  and  might  easily  have  crushed  them,  be-
fore they  could  prepare  for  their  defence.  But  he  was
weak  enough  to  listen  to  proposals  for  an  accommo-
dation ;  and  the  cardinal  amused  him  so  artfully,  and
spun  out  the  treaty  to  such  a  length,  that  the  greater
part  of  the  earl's  troops,  who  served,  as  is  usual  wherever
the  feudal  institutions  prevailed,  at  their  own  expense,
deserted  him ;  and  in  concluding  a  peace,  instead  of
giving  the  law,  he  was  obliged  to  receive  it.  A  second
attempt  to  retrieve  his  affairs  ended  yet  more  unfortu-
nately. One  body  of  his  troops  was  cut  to  pieces,
and  the  rest  dispersed ;  and  with  the  poor  remains  of  a
ruined  party,  he  must  either  have  submitted  to  the  con-
queror, or  have  fled  out  of  the  kingdom,  if  the  approach
of  an  English  army  had  not  brought  him  a  short
relief.

Henr  Henry  was  not  of  a  temper  to  bear  tamely  the

invades  indignity  with  which  he  had  been  treated,  both
by  the  regent  and  parliament  of  Scotland,  who,
at  the  time  when  they  renounced  their  alliance  with
him,  had  entered  into  a  new  and  stricter  confederacy
with  France.  The  rigour  of  the  season  retarded  for
some  time  the  execution  of  his  vengeance.  But,  in  the
spring,  a  considerable  body  of  infantry,  which  was
destined  for  France,  received  orders  to  sail  for  Scotland,
and  a  proper  number  of  cavalry  was  appointed  to  join
it  by  land.  The  regent  and  cardinal  little  expected
such  a  visit.  They  had  trusted  that  the  French  war
would  find  employment  for  all  Henry's  forces,  and,  from
an  unaccountable  security,  were  wholly  unprovided  for
the  defence  of  the  kingdom.  The  earl  of  Hertford,  a
leader  fatal  to  the  Scots  in  that  age,  commanded  his

88  SCOTLAND.

May  5,  armvj  an^  landed  it,  without  opposition,  a  few
1544.  miles  from  Leith.  He  was  quickly  master  of
that  place  ;  and  marching  directly  to  Edinburgh,  en-
tered it  with  the  same  ease.  After  plundering  the
adjacent  country,  the  richest  and  most  open  in  Scot-
land, he  set  on  fire  both  these  towns,  and  upon  the
approach  of  some  troops  gathered  together  by  the
regent,  put  his  booty  on  board  the  fleet,  and  with  his
land-forces  retired  safely  to  the  English  borders  ;  de-
livering the  kingdom  in  a  few  days  from  the  terror  of
an  invasion,  concerted  with  little  policy,  carried  on  at
great  expense,  and  attended  with  no  advantage.  If
Henry  aimed  at  the  conquest  of  Scotland,  he  gained
nothing  by  this  expedition;  if  the  marriage  he  had
proposed  was  still  in  his  view,  he  lost  a  great  deal.
Such  a  rough  courtship,  as  the  earl  of  Huntly  humour-
ously called  it,  disgusted  the  whole  nation  ;  their
aversion  for  the  match  grew  into  abhorrence  ;  and,
exasperated  by  so  many  indignities,  the  Scots  were
never  at  any  period  more  attached  to  France,  or  more
alienated  from  England.k

k  The  violence  of  national  hatred  between  the  English  and  Scots  in  the  sixteenth
century  was  such  as  can  hardly  be  conceived  by  their  posterity.  A  proof  of  the
fierce  resentment  of  the  Scots  is  contained  in  the  note  on  page  82.  The  instructions
of  the  privy  council  of  England  to  the  earl  of  Hertford,  who  commanded  the  fleet
and  army  which  invaded  Scotland,  A.  D.  1544,  are  dictated  by  a  national  animosity
no  less  excessive.  1  found  them  in  the  collection  of  papers  belonging  to  the  duke
of  Hamilton,  and  they  merit  publication,  as  they  exhibit  a  striking  picture  of  the
spirit  of  that  period.

The  lords  of  the  council  to  the  earl  of  Hertford,  lieutenant  in  Scotland,  April  10,  1544.

The  instruction  begins  with  observing,  that  the  king  had  originally  intended  to
fortify  Leith  and  keep  possession  of  it,  but,  after  mature  deliberation,  he  had  finally
determined  not  to  make  any  settlement  in  Scotland  at  present,  and  therefore  he  is
directed  not  to  make  any  fortification  at  Leith,  or  any  other  place  :

"  But  only  for  that  journey  to  put  all  to  fire  and  sword,  burn  Edinburgh  town,
so  used  and  defaced,  that  when  you  have  gotten  what  you  can  of  it,  it  may  remain
for  ever  a  perpetual  memory  of  the  vengeance  of  God  lightened  upon  it,  for  their
falsehood  and  disloyalty.  Do  what  you  can  out  of  hand,  and  without  long  tarrying
to  beat  down  or  overthrow  the  castle  ;  sack  houses  and  as  many  towns  and

villages  about  Edinburgh  as  ye  may  conveniently.  Sack  Leith,  and  subvert  it,  and
all  the  rest,  putting  man,  woman,  and  child,  to  fire  and  sword,  without  exception,
when  any  resistance  shall  be  made  against  you  ;  and  this  done,  pass  over  to  the
Fifeland,  and  extend  like  extremities  and  destruction  to  all  towns  and  villages
whereunto  you  may  reach  conveniently  ;  not  forgetting,  amongst  all  the  rest,  so  to
spoil  and  turn  upside  down  the  cardinal's  town  of  St.  Andrew's  as  the  upper  sort
may  be  the  nether,  and  not  one  stoke  stand  upon  another,  sparing  no  creature  alive
within  the  same,  specially  such  as  either  in  friendship  or  blood  be  allied  unto  the

BOOK II.  89

The  earl  of  Lennox  alone,  in  spite  of  the  regent  and
French  king,  continued  a  correspondence  with  Eng-
land, which  ruined  his  own  interest,  without  promoting
Henry's.1  Many  of  his  own  vassals,  preferring  their
duty  to  their  country  before  their  affection  to  him,  re-
fused to  concur  in  any  design  to  favour  the  public
enemy.  After  a  few  feeble  and  unsuccessful  attempts
to  disturb  the  regent's  administration,  he  was  obliged
to  fly  for  safety  to  the  court  of  England,  where  Henry
rewarded  services  which  he  had  the  inclination,  but
not  the  power  to  perform,  by  giving  him  in  marriage
his  niece  the  lady  Margaret  Douglas.  This  unhappy
exile,  however,  was  destined  to  be  the  father  of  a  race
of  kings.  He  saw  his  son  lord  Darnley  mount  the
throne  of  Scotland,  to  the  perpetual  exclusion  of  that
rival  who  now  triumphed  in  his  ruin.  From  that  time
his  posterity  have  held  the  sceptre  in  two  kingdoms,
by  one  of  which  he  was  cast  out  as  a  criminal,  and  by
the  other  received  as  a  fugitive.

A  peace  Meanwhile  hostilities  were  continued  by  both
'  nations,  but  with  little  vigour  on  either  side.
The  historians  of  that  age  relate  minutely  the  circum-
stances of  several  skirmishes  and  inroads  which,  as  they
did  not  produce  any  considerable  effect,  at  this  dis-
tance of  time  deserve  no  remembrance^  At  last  an

cardinal ;  and  if  you  see  any  likelyhood  to  win  the  castle,  give  some  stout  essay  to
the  same,  and  if  it  be  your  fortune  to  get  it,  rase  and  destroy  it  piece-meal;  and
after  this  sort,  spending  one  month  there,  spoiling  and  destroying  as  aforesaid,  with
the  wise  foresight  that  his  majesty  doubteth  not  ye  will  use  that  your  enemies  take
no  advantage  of  you,  and  that  you  enterprise  nothing  but  what  you  shall  see  may
be  easily  atchieved.  His  majesty  thinketh  verily,  and  so  all  we,  ye  shall  find  this
journey  succeedeth  this  way  most  to  his  majesty's  honour."

These  barbarous  orders  seem  to  have  been  executed  with  a  rigorous  and  unfeeling
exactness,  as  appears  from  a  series  of  letters  from  lord  Hertford,  in  the  same  collec-
tion, giving  a  full  account  of  all  his  operations  in  Scotland.  They  contain  several
curious  particulars,  not  mentioned  by  the  writers  of  that  age,  and  with  which  both
the  historians  of  the  city  of  Edinburgh  were  unacquainted  :  but  they  are  of  too  great
length  to  be  inserted  here.  l  Rymer,xv.  p.  22.

m  Though  this  war  was  distinguished  by  no  important  or  decisive  action,  it  was,
however,  extremely  ruinous  to  individuals.  There  still  remain  two  original  papers,
which  give  us  some  idea  of  the  miseries  to  which  some  of  the  most  fertile  counties  in
the  kingdom  were  exposed,  by  the  sudden  and  destructive  incursions  of  the  bor-
derers. The  first  seems  to  be  the  report  made  to  Henry  by  the  English  wardejis  of
the  marches  for  the  year  1J41,  and  contains  their  exploits  from  the  2d  of  July,  to

90  SCOTLAND.

end  was  put  to  this  languid  and  inactive  war,  by  a
peace,  in  which  England,  France,  and  Scotland  were
comprehended.  Henry  laboured  to  exclude  the  Scots
from  the  benefit  of  this  treaty,  and  to  reserve  them  for
that  vengeance  which  his  attention  to  the  affairs  of  the
continent  had  hitherto  delayed.  But  although  a  peace
with  England  was  of  the  last  consequence  to  Francis  I.,
whom  the  emperor  was  preparing  to  attack  with  all  his
forces,  he  was  too  generous  to  abandon  allies  who  had
served  him  with  fidelity,  and  he  chose  rather  to  pur-
chase Henry's  friendship  with  disadvantage  to  himself,
than  to  leave  them  exposed  to  danger.  By  yielding
some  things  to  the  interest,  and  more  to  the  vanity  of
that  haughty  prince  ;  by  submission,  flattery,  and  ad-
dress, he  at  length  prevailed  to  have  the  Scots  included
in  the  peace  agreed  upon.

The  raur-  An  event  which  happened  a  short  time  before
Beatoun.  tne  conclusion  of  this  peace,  rendered  it  more
acceptable  to  the  whole  nation.  Cardinal  Beatoun  had
not  used  his  power  with  moderation,  equal  to  the  pru-
dence by  which  he  attained  it.  Notwithstanding  his

the  17th  of  November.  The  account  it  gives  of  the  different  inroads,  or  f arrays,  as
they  are  called,  is  very  minute ;  and  in  conclusion,  the  sum  total  of  mischief  they
did  is  thus  computed :

Towns,  towers,  stedes,  barnekyns, parish-churches,  bastel-houses,

cast  down  or  burnt
Scots  slain
Prisoners  taken
Nolt,  i.  e.  horned  cattle,  taken
Sheep -

Nags  and  geldings
Goats  -

192

403

816

10.386

12,492

1,296

200

Bolls  of  corn -  ...  350

Insight  gear,  i.  e.  household  furniture,  not  reckoned.

Haynes's  State  Papers,  43.

The  other  contains  an  account  of  an  inroad  by  the  earl  of  Hertford,  between  the
8th  and  23d  of  September,  1545 ;  the  narrative  is  more  general,  but  it  appears  that
he  had  burnt,  rased,  and  destroyed,  in  the  counties  of  Berwick  and  Roxburgh  only,
Monasteries  and  friar-houses  - '  -  7

Castles,  towers,  and  piles  ...  ifi

Market  towns -  5

Villages  ....  243

Milns  ~  13

Hospitals  -  3

All  these  were  cast  down  or  burnt.  Haynes,  52.  As  the  Scots  were  no  less
skilful  in  the  practice  of  irregular  war,  we  may  conclude  that  the  damage  which  they
did  in  England  was  not  inconsiderable ;  and  that  their  raids  were  no  less  wasteful
than  iheforrays  of  the  English.

BOOK II.  91

great  abilities,  he  had  too  many  of  the  passions  and
prejudices  of  an  angry  leader  of  a  faction,  to  govern  a
divided  people  with  temper. His  resentment  against
one  party  of  the  nobility,  his  insolence  towards  the  rest,
his  severity  to  the  reformers,  and,  above  all,  the  bar-
barous and  illegal  execution  of  the famous  George
Wishart,  a  man  of  honourable  birth  and  of  primitive
sanctity,  wore  out  the  patience  of  a  fierce  age  ;  and
nothing  but  a  bold  hand  was  wanting  to  gratify  the
public  wish  by  his  destruction. Private  revenge,  in-
flamed  and sanctified  by  a false zeal  for  religion,
quickly  supplied  this  want. Norman  Lesly,  the  eldest
son  of  the  earl  of  Rothes,  had  been  treated  by  the  car-
dinal with  injustice  and  contempt. It  was  not  the
temper  of  the  man,  or  the  spirit  of  the  times,  quietly  to
digest  an  affront. As  the  profession  of  his  adversary
screened  him  from  the  effects  of  what  is  called  an  ho-
nourable resentment,  he  resolved  to  take  that  satisfac-
tion which he  could  not  demand. This resolution
deserves  as  much  censure,  as  the  singular  courage  and
conduct  with  which  he  put  it  in  execution  excite  wonder.
The  cardinal  at  that  time  resided  in  the  castle  of  St.
Andrew's,  which  he  had  fortified  at  great  expense,  and,
in  the  opinion  of  the  age,  had  rendered  it  impregnable.
His  retinue  was  numerous,  the  town  at  his  devotion,
and  the  neighbouring  country  full  of  his  dependents.
In  this  situation,  sixteen  persons  undertook  to  surprise
his  castle,  and  to  assassinate  himself;  and  their  success
May  20, was  equal  to  the  boldness  of  the  attempt.  Early
in  the  morning  they  seized  on  the  gate  of  the
castle,  which  was  set  open  to  the  workmen  who  were
employed  in  finishing  the  fortifications ;  and  having
placed  sentries  at  the  door  of  the  cardinal's  apartment,
they  awakened  his  numerous  domestics  one  by  one,  and
turning  them  out  of  the  castle,  they  without  noise  or
tumult,  or  violence  to  any  other  person,  delivered  their
country,  though  by  a  most  unjustifiable  action,  from

92  SCOTLAND.

an  ambitious  man,  whose  pride  was  insupportable  to
the  nobles,  as  his  cruelty  and  cunning  were  great
checks  to  the  Reformation.

The  re-  His  death  was  fatal  to  the  Catholic  religion,
tempts* in  and  to  the  French  interest  in  Scotland.  The
seize  the  same  zea^  ^or  both  continued  among  a  great
murderers,  party  in  the  nation,  but  when  deprived  of  the
genius  and  authority  of  so  skilful  a  leader,  operated
with  less  effect.  Nothing  can  equal  the  consternation,
which  a  blow  so  unexpected  occasioned  among  such  as
were  attached  to  him ;  while  the  regent  secretly  enjoyed
an  event,  which  removed  out  of  his  way  a  rival  who
had  not  only  eclipsed  his  greatness,  but  almost  extin-
guished his  power.  Decency,  however,  the  honour  of
the  church,  the  importunity  of  the  queen-dowager  and
her  adherents,  his  engagements  with  France,  and,
above  all  these,  the  desire  of  recovering  his  eldest  son,
whom  the  cardinal  had  detained  for  some  time  at  St.
Andrew's,  in  pledge  of  his  fidelity,  and  who,  together
with  the  castle,  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  con-
spirators, induced  him  to  take  arms,  in  order  to  revenge
the  death  of  a  man  whom  he  hated.

He  threatened  vengeance,  but  was  unable  to  execute
it.  One  part  of  military  science,  the  art  of  attacking
fortified  places,  was  then  imperfectly  understood  in
Scotland.  The  weapons,  the  discipline,  and  impe-
tuosity of  the  Scots,  rendered  their  armies  as  unfit  for
sieges,  as  they  were  active  in  the  field.  A  hundred
and  fifty  men,  which  was  the  greatest  number  the  con-
spirators ever  assembled,  resisted  all  the  efforts  of  the
regent  for  five  months,"  in  a  place  which  a  single  bat-
talion, with  a  few  battering  cannon,  would  now  reduce
in  a  few  hours.  This  tedious  siege  was  concluded  by
a  truce.  The  regent  undertook  to  procure  for  the  con-
spirators an  absolution  from  the  pope,  and  a  pardon
in  parliament;  and  upon  obtaining  these,  they  en-

n  Epist.  Reg.  Scot.  2,  379.

BOOK II-  93

gaged  to  surrender  the  castle,  and  to  set  his  son  at
liberty.

It  is  probable,  that  neither  of  them  were  sincere  in
this  treaty.  On  both  sides  they  sought  only  to  amuse,
and  to  gain  time.  The  regent  had  applied  to  France
for  assistance,  and  expected  soon  to  have  the  conspira-
tors at  mercy.  On  the  other  hand,  if  Lesly  and  his
associates  were  not  at  first  incited  by  Henry  to  murder
the  cardinal,  they  were,  in  the  sequel,  powerfully  sup-
ported by  him.  Notwithstanding  the  silence  of  con-
temporary historians,  there  are  violent  presumptions
of  the  former ;  of  the  latter  there  is  undoubted  certain-
ty.0 During  the  siege,  the  conspirators  had  received
from  England  supplies  both  of  money  and  provisions  ;
and  as  Henry  was  preparing  to  renew  his  proposals
concerning  the  marriage  and  the  union  he  had  pro-
jected, and  to  second  his  negotiations  with  a  numerous
army,  they  hoped,  by  concurring  with  him,  to  be  in  a
situation  in  which  they  would  no  longer  need  a  pardon,
but  might  claim  a  reward. p

0  Keith,  60.

P  In  the  first  edition  of  this  work,  I  expressed  my  suspicion  of  a  correspondence
between  the  murderers  of  cardinal  Beatoun  and  Henry  VIII. ,  prior  to  their  commit-
ting that  crime.  In  the  papers  of  duke  Hamilton  is  contained  the  clearest  evidence
of  this,  which  I  publish  not  only  to  establish  that  fact,  but  as  an  additional  confirma-
tion of  the  remarks  which  I  made  upon  the  frequency  of  assassination  in  that  age,
and  the  slight  opinion  which  men  entertained  concerning  it.

The  earl  of  Hertford  to  the  King's  majesty,  Newcastle,  April  17,  1544.
Pleaseth  your  highness  to  understand,  that  this  day  arrived  with  me  the  earl  of
Hertford,  a  Scottishman  called  Wishert,  and  brought  me  a  letter  from  the  lord  of
Brinstone  [i.  e.  Chrichton  laird  of  Brunstan],  which  I  send  your  highness  herewith,
and  according  to  his  request,  have  taken  order  for  the  repair  of  the  said  Wishert  to
your  majesty  by  post,  both  for  the  delivery  of  such  letters  as  he  hath  to  your  ma-
jesty from  the  said  Brinstone,  and  also  for  the  declaration  of  his  credence,  which  as
I  perceive  by  him  consisteth  in  two  points,  one  that  the  lord  of  Grange,  late  trea-
surer of  Scotland,  the  master  of  Rothes,  the  earl  of  Rothes'  eldest  son,  and  John
Charteris,  would  attempt  either  to  apprehend  or  slay  the  cardinal,  at  some  time
when  he  shall  pass  through  the  Fifeland,  as  he  doth  sundry  times  in  his  way  to  St.
Andrew's,  and  in  case  they  can  so  apprehend  him  will  deliver  him  unto  your  ma-
jesty, which  attemplate,  he  saith,  they  would  enterprise,  if  they  knew  your  majes-
ty's pleasure  therein,  and  what  supportation  and  maintainance  yonr  majesty  would
minister  unto  them,  after  the  execution  of  the  same,  in  case  they  should  be  pursued
by  any  of  their  enemies;  the  other  is,  that  in  case  your  majesty  would  grant  unto
tnem  a  convenient  entertainment  to  keep  one  thousand  or  fifteen  hundred  men  in
wages  for  a  month  or  two,  they  journeying  with  the  power  of  the  earl  marshal,  the
said  Mr  of  Rothes,  the  laird  of  Calder,  and  the  other  the  lord  friends,  will

take  upon  them,  at  such  time  as  your  majesty's  army  shall  be  in  Scotland,  to  destroy
the  abbey  and  town  of  Arbroath,  being  the  (

cardinal's,  and  all  the  other  bishops

94  SCOTLAND.

Jan.  28.  The  death  of  Henry  blasted  all  these  hopes.
1547*  It  happened  in  the  beginning  of  next  year,  after
a  reign  of  greater  splendour  than  true  glory ;  bustling,
rather  than  active ;  oppressive  in  domestic  government,
and  in  foreign  politics  wild  and  irregular.  But  the  vices
of  this  prince  were  more  beneficial  to  mankind,  than
the  virtues  of  others.  His  rapaciousness,  his  profusion,
and  even  his  tyranny,  by  depressing  the  ancient  nobi-
lity, and  by  adding  new  property  and  power  to  the
commons,  laid  or  strengthened  the  foundations  of  the
English  liberty.  His  other  passions  contributed  no  less
towards  the  downfall  of  Popery,  and  the  establishment
of  religious  freedom  in  the  nation.  His  resentment  led
him  to  abolish  the  power,  and  his  covetousness  to  seize
the  wealth,  of  the  church;  and,  by  withdrawing  these
supports,  made  it  easy,  in  the  following  reign,  to  over-
turn the  whole  fabric  of  superstition.

Francis  I.  did  not  long  survive  a  prince,  who  had
been  alternately  his  rival  and  his  friend;  but  his  suc-
cessor Henry  II.  was  not  neglectful  of  the  French  in-
Troo  sar-  terest  ^u  Scotland.  He  sent  a  considerable
rive  from  body  of  men,  under  the  command  of  Leon

France. n  •  i  »"".'•  T> i

otrozzi,  to  the  regents  assistance.  Joy  their
long  experience  in  the  Italian  and  German  wars,  the
French  had  become  as  dexterous  in  the  conduct  of
sieges  as  the  Scots  were  ignorant ;  and  as  the  boldness

houses  and  countries  on  that  side  of  the  water  thereabout,  and  to  apprehend  all  those
which  they  say  be  the  principal  impugnators  of  amity  between  England  and  Scot-
land ;  for  which  they  should  have  a  good  opportunity,  as  they  say,  when  the  power
of  the  said  bishops  and  abbots  shall  resort  towards  Edinburgh  to  resist  your  majes-
ty's army.  And  for  the  execution  of  these  things,  the  said  Wishert  saitli,  that  the
earl  marshal  aforenamed  and  others  will  capitulate  with  your  majesty  in  writing  un-
der their  hands  and  seals,  afore  they  shall  desire  any  suppJy  or  aid  of  money  at  your
majesty's  hands.  This  is  the  effect  of  his  credence,  with  sundry  other  advertise-
ments of  the  great  division  that  is  at  this  present  within  the  realm  of  Scotland,
which  we  doubt  not  he  will  declare  unto  your  majesty  at  good  length.  Hamilton
MSS.  vol.  iii.  p.  38.

N.B.  This  is  the  letter  of  which  Dr.  Mackenzie,  vol.  iii.  p.  18,  and  bishop  Keith,
Hist.  p.  44,  published  a  fragment.  It  does  not  authorize  us  to  conclude  that  Mr.
George  Wishart,  known  by  the  name  of  the  Martyr,  was  the  person  who  resorted  to
the  earl  of  Hertford.  It  was  more  probably  John  Wishart  of  Pitarrow,  the  chief  of
that  name,  a  man  of  abilities,  zealously  attached  to  the  reformed  doctrine,  and
deeply  engaged  in  all  the  intrigues  and  operations  of  that  busy  period.  Keith,  96.
117.  119.  315.

BOOK  II.  95

and  despair  of  the  conspirators  could  not  defend  them
against  the  superior  art  of  these  new  assailants,  they,
after  a  short  resistance,  surrendered  to  Strozzi,  who  en-
gaged, in  the  name  of  the  king  his  master,  for  the  secu-
rity of  their  lives ;  and,  as  his  prisoners,  transported
Force  the  them  into  France.  The  castle  itself,  the  monu-
casthMrf  ment  of  Beatoun's  power  and  vanity,  was  demo-
drew'sto  lished,  in  obedience  to  the  canon  law,  which,
"  with  admirable  policy,  denounces  its  anathemas
even  against  the  houses  in  which  the  sacred  blood  of  a
cardinal  happens  to  be  shed,  and  ordains  them  to  be
laid  in  ruins.q

The  archbishopric  of  St.  Andrew's  was  bestowed  by
the  regent  upon  his  natural  brother  John  Hamilton,
abbot  of  Paisley.

New  The  delay  of  a  few  weeks  would  have  saved

breach  with  the  conspirators.  Those  ministers  of  Henry
VIII.  who  had  the  chief  direction  of  affairs
during  the  minority  of  his  son  Edward  VI.  conducted
themselves,  with  regard  to  Scotland,  by  the  maxims  of
their  late  master,  and  resolved  to  frighten  the  Scots  into
a  treaty,  which  they  had  not  abilities  or  address  to  bring
about  by  any  other  method.

But  before  we  proceed  to  relate  the  events  which
their  invasion  of  Scotland  occasioned,  we  shall  stop  to
take  notice  of  a  circumstance  unobserved  by  contem-
porary historians,  but  extremely  remarkable  for  the  dis-
covery it  makes  of  the  sentiments  and  spirit  which  then
prevailed  among  the  Scots.  The  conspirators  against
cardinal  Beatoun  found  the  regent's  eldest  son  in  the
castle  of  St.  Andrews ;  and  as  they  needed  the  protec-
tion of  the  English,  it  was  to  be  feared  that  they  might
endeavour  to  purchase  it  by  delivering  to  them  this  im-
portant prize.  The  presumptive  heir  to  the  crown  in
the  hands  of  the  avowed  enemies  of  the  kingdom,  was
a  dreadful  prospect.  In  order  to  avoid  it,  the  parlia-

i  Burn.  Hist.  Ref.  1.  338,

96  ' SCOTLAND.

ment  fell  upon  a  very  extraordinary  expedient.  By  an
act  made  on  purpose,  they  excluded  "the  regent's  eldest
son  from  all  right  of  succession,  public  or  private,  so
long  as  he  should  be  detained  a  prisoner,  and  substi-
tuted in  his  place  his  other  brothers,  according  to  their
seniority,  and  in  failure  of  them,  those  who  were  next
heirs  to  the  regent. Vr  Succession  by  hereditary  right  is
an  idea  so  obvious  and  so  popular,  that  a  nation  seldom
ventures  to  make  a  breach  in  it  but  in  cases  of  extreme
necessity.  Such  a  necessity  did  the  parliament  disco-
ver in  the  present  situation.  Hatred  to  En  gland,  founded
on  the  memory  of  past  hostilities,  and  heightened  by
the  smart  of  recent  injuries,  was  the  national  passion.
This  dictated  that  uncommon  statute,  by  which  the
order  of  lineal  succession  was  so  remarkably  broken.
The  modern  theories,  which  represent  this  right  as  di-
vine and  unalienable,  and  that  ought  not  to  be  violated
upon  any  consideration  whatsoever,  seem  to  have  been
then  altogether  unknown.

Scotland  In  the  beginning  of  September,  the  earl  of
l>7thed  Hertford,  now  duke  of  Somerset,  and  protector
English.  Of  England,  entered  Scotland  at  the  head  of
eighteen  thousand  men ;  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  fleet
of  sixty  ships  appeared  on  the  coast  to  second  his  land
forces.  The  Scots  had  for  some  time  observed  this
storm  gathering,  and  were  prepared  for  it.  Their  army
was  almost  double  to  that  of  the  enemy,  and  posted  to
the  greatest  advantage  on  a  rising  ground  above  Mus-
selburgh,  not  far  from  the  banks  of  the  river  Eske.
Both  these  circumstances  alarmed  the  duke  of  Somer-
set, who  saw  his  danger,  and  would  willingly  have  ex-
tricated himself  out  of  it,  by  a  new  overture  of  peace,
on  conditions  extremely  reasonable.  But  this  modera-
tion being  imputed  to  fear,  his  proposals  were  rejected
with  the  scorn  which  the  confidence  of  success  inspires ;
and,  if  the  conduct  of  the  regent,  who  commanded  the

*  Epist.  Reg.  Scot.  2.  359.

BOOK II.  97

Scottish  army,  had  been,  in  any  degree,  equal  to  his
confidence,  the  destruction  of  the  English  must  have
been  inevitable.  They  were  in  a  situation  precisely  si-
milar to  that  of  their  countrymen  under  Oliver  Crom-
well in  the  following  century.  The  Scots  had  chosen
their  ground  so  well,  that  it  was  impossible  to  force
them  to  give  battle;  a  few  days  had  exhausted  the  fo-
rage and  provision  of  a  narrow  country  ;  the  fleet  could
only  furnish  a  scanty  and  precarious  subsistence;  a
retreat,  therefore,  was  necessary ;  but  disgrace,  and
perhaps  ruin,  were  the  consequences  of  retreating.

On  both  these  occasions,  the  national  heat  and  im-
petuosity of  the  Scots  saved  the  English,  and  precipi-
tated their  own  country  into  the  utmost  danger.  The
undisciplined  courage  of  the  private  men  became
impatient  at  the  sight  of  an  enemy.  The  general
Battle  of  was  afraid  of  nothing,  but  that  the  English
September  might  escape  from  him  by  flight;  and,  leaving
10, 1547.  his  strong  camp,  he  attacked  the  duke  of  So-
merset near  Pinkey,  with  no  better  success  than  his
rashness  deserved.  The  protector  had  drawn  up  his
troops  on  a  gentle  eminence,  and  had  now  the  advan-
tage of  ground  on  his  side.  The  Scottish  army  con-
sisted almost  entirely  of  infantry,  whose  chief  weapon
was  a  long  spear,  and  for  that  reason  their  files  were
very  deep,  and  their  ranks  close.  They  advanced  to-
wards the  enemy  in  three  great  bodies,  and,  as  they
passed  the  river,  were  considerably  exposed  to  the  fire
of  the  English  fleet,  which  lay  in  the  bay  of  Mussel-
burgh,  and  had  drawn  near  the  shore.  The  English
cavalry,  flushed  with  an  advantage  which  they  had
gained  in  a  skirmish  some  days  before,  began  the  at-
tack with  more  impetuosity  than  good  conduct.  A  body
so  firm  and  compact  as  the  Scots,  easily  resisted  the  im-
pression of  cavalry,  broke  them,  and  drove  them  off  the
field.  The  English  infantry,  however,  advanced ;  and
the  Scots  were  at  once  exposed  to  a  flight  of  arrows,  to
.  VOL.  i.  H

93  SCOTLAND,

a  fire  in  flank  from  four  hundred  foreign  fusileers,  who
served  the  enemy,  and  to  their  cannon,  which  were
planted  behind  the  infantry  on  the  highest  part  of  the
eminence.  The  depth  and  closeness  of  their  order
making  it  impossible  for  the  Scots  to  stand  long  in  this
situation,  the  earl  of  Angus,  who  commanded  the  van-
guard, endeavoured  to  change  his  ground,  and  to  retire
towards  the  main  body.  But  his  friends,  unhappily,
mistook  his  motion  for  a  flight,  and  fell  into  confusion.
At  that  very  instant,  the  broken  cavalry,  having  rallied,
returned  to  the  charge;  the  foot  pursued  the  advan-
tage they  had  gained;  the  prospect  of  victory  re-
doubled the  ardour  of  both  :  and,  in  a  moment,  the  rout
of  the  Scottish  army  became  universal  and  irretrievable.
The  encounter  in  the  field  was  not  long  nor  bloody ;
but,  in  the  pursuit,  the  English  discovered  all  the  rage
and  fierceness  which  national  antipathy,  kindled  by
long  emulation,  and  inflamed  by  reciprocal  injuries,  is
apt  to  inspire.  The  pursuit  was  continued  for  five
hours,  and  to  a  great  distance.  All  the  three  roads  by
which  the  Scots  fled,  were  strewed  with  spears,  and
swords,  and  targets,  and  covered  with  the  bodies  of  the
slain.  Above  ten  thousand  men  fell  on  this  day,  one  of
the  most  fatal  Scotland  had  ever  seen.  A  few  were
taken  prisoners,  and  among  these  some  persons  of  dis-
tinction. The  protector  had  it  now  in  his  power  to
become  master  of  a  kingdom,  out  of  which,  not  many
hours  before,  he  was  almost  obliged  to  retire  with
infamy.9

•  The  following  passage  in  a  curious  and  rare  journal  of  the  protector's  expedition
into  Scotland,  written  by  W.  Patten,  who  was  joined  in  commission  with  Cecil,  as
judge  martial  of  the  army,  and  printed  in  1548,  deserves  our  notice ;  as  it  gives  a
just  idea  of  the  military  discipline  of  the  Scots  at  that  time.  "  But  what  after  I
learned,  specially  touching  their  order,  their  armour,  and  their  manner  as  well  of
going  to  offend,  as  of  standing  to  defend,  I  have  thought  necessary  here  to  utter.
Hackbutters  have  they  few  or  none,  and  appoint  their  fight  most  commonly  always
a-foot.  They  come  to  the  field  well  furnished  all  with  jack  and  skull,  dagger  and
buckler,  and  swords  all  broad  and  thin,  of  exceeding  good  temper,  and  universally
so  made  to  slice,  that  as  I  never  saw  none  so  good,  so  I  think  it  hard  to  devise  the
better.  Hereto  every  man  his  pike,  and  a  great  kercher  wrapped  twice  or  thrice
about  his  neck,  not  for  cold,  but  for  cutting.  In  their  array  towards  joining  with
the  enemy,  they  cling  and  thrust  so  near  in  the  fore  rank,  shoulder  and  slioulder  to-

BOOK II.  £9

Their  vie- But  tk*8  victory?  however  great,  was  of  no
tpry  of  lit- real  utility,  for  want  of  skill  or  of  leisure  to

tie  benefit .  / _  . .

to  the  Eng-  improve  it.  Jbvery  new  injury  rendered  the
Scots  more  averse  from  a  union  with  Eng-
land; and  the  protector  neglected  the  only  measure
which  would  have  made  it  necessary  for  them  to  have
given  their  consent  to  it.  He  amused  himself  in  wast-
ing the  open  country,  and  in  taking  or  building  several
petty  castles ;  whereas,  by  fortifying  a  few  places  which
were  accessible  by  sea,  he  would  have  laid  the  kingdom
open  to  the  English,  and,  in  a  short  time,  the  Scots
must  either  have  accepted  of  his  terms,  or  have  submit-
ted to  his  power.  By  such  an  improvement  of  it,  the
victory  at  Dunbar  gave  Cromwell  the  command  of  Scot-
land. The  battle  of  Pinkey  had  no  other  effect  but  to
precipitate  the  Scots  into  new  engagements  with  France.
The  situation  of  the  English  court  may,  indeed,  be
pleaded  in  excuse  for  the  duke  of  Somerset's  conduct.
That  cabal  of  his  enemies,  which  occasioned  his  tragical
end,  was  already  formed ;  and  while  he  triumphed  in
Scotland,  they  secretly  undermined  his  power  and  cre-
dit at  home.  Self-preservation,  therefore,  obliged  him
to  prefer  his  safety  before  his  fame,  and  to  return  with-
out reaping  the  fruits  of  his  victory.  At  this  tfrne,
however,  the  cloud  blew  over  ;  the  conspiracy  by  which
he  fell  was  not  yet  ripe  for  execution  ;  and  his  presence
suspended  its  effects  for  some  tithe.  The  supreme
power  still  remaining  in  his  hands,  he  employed  it  to

gether,  with  their  pikes  in  both  their  hands  straight  afore  them,  and  their  followers
in  that  order  so  hard  at  their  backs,  laying  their  pikes  over  their  foregoers  shoulders,
that,  if  they  do  assail  undiscovered,  no  force  can  well  withstand  them.  Standing  at
defence  they  thrust  shoulders  likewise  so  nigh  together,  the  fore  ranks  well  nigh  to
kneeling,  stoop  low  before,  their  fellows  behind  holding  their  pikes  with  both  hands,
and  therewith  in  their  left  their  bucklers,  the  one  end  of  their  pike  against  their
right  foot,  and  the  other  against  the  enemy  breast-high ;  their  followers  crossing
their  pike  points  with  them  forward;  and  thus  each  with  other  so  nigh  as  space
and  place  will  suffer,  through  the  whole  ward,  so  thick,  that  as  easily  shall  a  bare
finger  pierce  through  the  skin  of  an  angry  hedge-hog,  as  any  encounter  the  front  of
their  pikes."  Other  curious  particulars  are  found  in  this  journal,  from  which  Sir
John  Hayward  h  s  borrowed  his  account  of  this  expedition.  Life  of  Edward  VI.
279,  &c.

The  length  of  the  Scotch  pike  or  spear  was  appointed  by  Act  44.  P.  1471,  to  be
six  ells  ;  i.  e.  eighteen  feet  six  inches.

H  2

100  SCOTLAND.

recover  the  opportunity  which  he  had  lost. A  body  of
troops,  by  his  command,  seized  and  fortified

April,  1548. TT /,.' f  ' ,  f

Haddmgton,  a  place  which,  on  account  of  its
distance  from  the  sea,  and  from  any  English  garrison,
could  not  be  defended  without  great  expense  and
danger.

Forces  the Meanwhile  the  French  gained  more  by  the
scots  into defeat  of  their  allies  than  the  English  by  their

a  closer  .  ..,  i i i r>  I*IT»

union  with  victory.  Alter  the  death  ot  cardinal  Beatoun,
lce*  Mary  of  Guise,  the  queen  dowager,  took  a  con-
siderable share  in  the  direction  of  affairs.  She  was
warmly  attached  by  blood,  and  by  inclination,  to  the
French  interest :  and,  in  order  to  promote  it,  improved
with  great  dexterity  every  event  which  occurred.  The
spirit  and  strength  of  the  Scots  were  broken  at  Pinkey ;
and  in  an  assembly  of  nobles  which  met  at  Stirling  to
consult  upon  the  situation  of  the  kingdom,  all  eyes  were
turned  towards  France,  no  prospect  of  safety  appearing
but  in  assistance  from  that  quarter.  But  Henry  II.
being  then  at  peace  with  England,  the  queen  repre-
sented that  they  could  not  expect  him  to  take  part  in
their  quarrel,  but  upon  views  of  personal  advantage ;
and  that  without  extraordinary  concessions  in  his  fa-
vour, no  assistance,  in  proportion  to  their  present  exi-
gences, could  be  obtained.  The  prejudices  of  the  na-
tion powerfully  seconded  these  representations  of  the
queen.  What  often  happens  to  individuals,  took  place
among  the  nobles  in  this  convention ;  they  were  swayed
entirely  by  their  passions  ;  and  in  order  to  gratify  them,
they  deserted  their  former  principles,  and  disregarded
their  true  interest.  In  the  violence  of  resentment,  they
forgot  that  zeal  for  the  independence  of  Scotland  which
had  prompted  them  to  reject  the  proposals  of  Henry
And  to  of-  VIII.;  and  by  offering,  voluntarily,  their  young
quVenTn  queen  in  marriage  to  the  dauphin,  eldest  son  of

marriage JJemy  JJ ; and,  which  Was Still more,  by  pro-
dauphin, posing  to  send  her  immediately  into  France  to

BOOK II.  101

be  educated  at  his  court,  they  granted,  from  a  thirst  of
vengeance,  what  formerly  they  would  not  yield  upon
any  consideration  of  their  own  safety.  To  gain  at  once
such  a  kingdom  as  Scotland,  was  a  matter  of  no  small
consequence  to  France.  Henry,  without  hesitation,
accepted  the  offers  of  the  Scottish  ambassadors,  and
prepared  for  the  vigorous  defence  of  his  new  acqui-
sition. Six  thousand  veteran  soldiers,  under  the  com-
mand of  Monsieur  Desse,  assisted  by  some  of  the  best
officers  who  were  formed  in  the  long  wars  of  Francis  I.
arrived  at  Leith.  They  served  two  campaigns  in  Scot-
land, with  a  spirit  equal  to  their  former  fame,  l^ut
their  exploits  were  not  considerable.  The  Scots  soon
becoming  jealous  of  their  designs,  neglected  to  support
them  with  proper  vigour.  The  caution  of  the  English,
in  acting  wholly  upon  the  defensive,  prevented  the
French  from  attempting  any  enterprise  of  consequence ;
and  obliged  them  to  exhaust  their  strength  in  tedious
sieges,  undertaken  under  many  disadvantages.  Their
efforts,  however,  were  not  without  some  benefit  to  the
Scots,  by  compelling  the  English  to  evacuate  Hadding-
ton,  and  to  surrender  several  small  forts  which  they
possessed  in  different  parts  of  the  kingdom.

But  the  effects  of  these  operations  of  his  troops  were
still  of  greater  importance  to  the  French  king.  The
diversion  which  they  occasioned  enabled  him  to  wrest
Boulogne  out  of  the  hands  of  the  English ;  and  the  in-
fluence of  his  army  in  Scotland  obtained  the  concurrence
of  parliament  with  the  overtures  which  had  been  made
to  him,  by  the  assembly  of  nobles  at  Stirling,  concerning
the  queen's  marriage  with  the  dauphin,  and  her  educa-
The  treaty  tion  in  the  court  of  France.  In  vain  did  a  few
p^rpote.  patriots  remonstrate  against  such  extravagant
concluded,  concessions,  by  which  Scotland  was  reduced  to
be  a  province  of  France;  and  Henry,  from  an  ally,
raised  to  be  master  of  the  kingdom ;  by  which  the  friend-
ship of  France  became  more  fatal  than  the  enmity  of

102  SCOTLAND.

England  ;  arid  every  thing  was  fondly  given  up  to  the
one,  that  had  been  bravely  defended  against  the  other.
A  point  of  so  much  consequence  was  hastily  decided  in
a  parliament  assembled  in  the  camp  before  Hadding-
ton  :  tne  intrigues  of  the  queen-dowager,  the
zeal  of  the  clergy,  and  resentment  against  Eng-
land, had  prepared  a  great  party  in  the  nation  for  such
a  step  ;  the  French  general  and  ambassador,  by  their
liberality  and  promises,  gained  over  many  more.  The
regent  himself  was  weak  enough  to  stoop  to  the  offer  of
a  pension  from  France,  together  with  the  title  of  duke
of  Chatelherault  in  that  kingdom.  A  considerable  ma-
jority declared  for  the  treaty,  and  the  interest  of  a  fac-
tion was  preferred  before  the  honour  of  the  nation.
Mary  sent  Having  hurried  the  Scots  into  this  rash  and
catedtn"  ?atal  resolution,  the  source  of  many  calamities
France.  to  themselves  and  to  their  sovereign,  the  French
allowed  them  no  time  for  reflection  or  repentance.  The
fleet  which  had  brought  over  their  forces  was  still  in
Scotland,  and  without  delay  convoyed  the  queen  into
France.  Mary  was  then  six  years  old,  and  by  her  edu-
cation in  that  court,  one  of  the  politest  but  most  cor-
rupted in  Europe,  she  acquired  every  accomplishment
that  could  add  to  her  charms  as  a  woman,  and  contracted
many  of  those  prejudices  which  occasioned  her  mis-
fortunes as  a  queen.

From  the  time  that  Mary  was  put  into  their  hands,
it  was  the  interest  of  the  French  to  suffer  war  in  Scot-
land to  languish.  The  recovery  of  the  Boulonnois  was
the  object  which  the  French  king  had  most  at  heart ;
but  a  slight  diversion  in  Britain  was  sufficient  to  divide
the  attention  and  strength  of  the  English,  whose  do-
mestic factions  deprived  both  their  arms  and  councils
of  their  accustomed  vigour.  The  government  of  Eng-
land had  undergone  a  great  revolution.  The  duke  of
Somerset's  power  had  been  acquired  with  too  much
violence,  and  was  exercised  with  too  little  moderation,

BOOK  II.  103  >

to  be  of  long  continuance.  Many  good  qualities,
added  to  great  love  of  his  country,  could  not  atone  for
his  ambition  in  usurping  the  sole  direction  of  affairs.
Some  of  the  most  eminent  courtiers  combined  against
him ;  and  the  earl  of  Warwick  their  leader,  no  less
ambitious  but  more  artful  than  Somerset,  conducted  his
measures  with  so  much  dexterity  as  to  raise  himself
upon  the  ruins  of  his  rival.  Without  the  invidious  name
of  protector,  he  succeeded  to  all  the  power  and  influ-
ence of  which  Somerset  was  deprived,  and  he  quickly
found  peace  to  be  necessary  for  the  establishment  of
his  new  authority,  and  the  execution  of  the  vast  designs
he  had  conceived.

Peace  Henry  was  no  stranger  to  Warwick's  situa-

conciuded.  j-jon>  an(j  improved  his  knowledge  of  it  to  good
purpose,  in  conducting  the  negotiations  for  a  general
peace.  He  prescribed  what  terms  he  pleased  to  the
English  minister,  who  scrupled  at  nothing,  however
advantageous  to  that  monarch  and  his  allies.  England
March  24,  consented  to  restore  Boulogne  and  its  depen-
1550..  dencies  to  France,  and  gave  up  all  pretensions
to  a  treaty  of  marriage  with  the  queen  of  Scots,  or  to
the  conquest  of  her  country.  A  few  small  forts,  of
which  the  English  troops  had  hitherto  kept  possession,
were  rased  ;  and  peace  between  the  two  kingdoms  was
established  on  its  ancient  foundation.

Both  the  British  nations  lost  power,  as  well  as  repu-
tation, by  this  unhappy  quarrel.  It  was  on  both  sides
a  war  of  emulation  and  resentment,  rather  than  of  in-
terest ;  and  was  carried  on  under  the  influence  of  na-
tional animosities,  which  were  blind  to  all  advantages.
The  French,  who  entered  into  it  with  greater  coolness,
conducted  it  with  more  skill;  and  by  dexterously
availing  themselves  of  every  circumstance  which  oc-
curred, recovered  possession  of  an  important  territory
which  they  had  lost,  and  added  to  their  monarchy  a
new  kingdom.  The  ambition  of  the  English  minister

104  SCOTLAND.

betrayed  to  them  the  former ;  the  inconsiderate  rage  of
the  Scots  against  their  ancient  enemies  bestowed  on
them  the  latter;  their  own  address  and  good  policy
merited  both.

The  Scots  Immediately  after  the  conclusion  of  the  peace,
jeTionlfof  the  French  forces  left  Scotland,  as  much  to
the  French.  tneir  own  satisfaction,  as  to  that  of  the  nation.
The  Scots  soon  found,  that  the  calling  to  their  assist-
ance a  people  more  powerful  than  themselves,  was  a
dangerous  expedient.  They  beheld,  with  the  utmost
impatience,  those  who  had  come  over  to  protect  the
kingdom,  taking  upon  them  to  command  in  it ;  and  on
many  occasions  they  repented  the  rash  invitation  which
they  had  given.  The  peculiar  genius  of  the  French
nation  heightened  this  disgust,  and  prepared  the  Scots
to  throw  off  the  yoke,  before  they  had  well  begun  to
feel  it.  The  French  were,  in  that  age,  what  they  are
in  the  present,  one  of  the  most  polished  nations  in  Eu-
rope. But  it  is  to  be  observed,  in  all  their  expeditions
into  foreign  countries,  whether  towards  the  south  or
north,  that  their  manners  have  been  remarkably  incom-
patible with  the  manners  of  every  other  people.  Bar-
barians are  tenacious  of  their  own  customs,  because
they  want  knowledge  and  taste  to  discover  the  reason-
ableness and  propriety  of  customs  which  differ  from
them.  Nations,  which  hold  the  first  rank  in  politeness,
are  frequently  no  less  tenacious  out  of  pride.  The
Greeks  were  so  in  the  ancient  world ;  and  the  French
are  the  same  in  the  modern.  Full  of  themselves  ;  flat-
tered by  the  imitation  of  their  neighbours ;  and  ac-
customed to  consider  their  own  modes  as  the  standards
of  elegance  ;  they  scorn  to  disguise,  or  to  lay  aside,  the
distinguishing  manners  of  their  own  nation,  or  to  make
any  allowance  for  what  may  differ  from  them  among
others.  For  this  reason,  the  behaviour  of  their  armies
has,  on  every  occasion,  been  insupportable  to  strangers,
and  has  always  exposed  them  to  hatred,  and  often  to

BOOK II.  105

destruction.  In  that  age,  they  overran  Italy  four  se-
veral times  by  their  valour,  and  lost  it  as  often  by  their
insolence.  The  Scots,  naturally  an  irascible  and  high-
spirited  people,  and  who,  of  all  nations,  can  least  bear
the  most  distant  insinuation  of  contempt,  were  not  of  a
temper  to  admit  all  the  pretensions  of  such  assuming
guests.  The  symptoms  of  alienation  were  soon  visible;
they  seconded  the  military  operations  of  the  French
troops  with  the  utmost  coldness ;  their  disgust  grew
insensibly  to  a  degree  of  indignation  that  could  hardly
be  restrained  ;  and  on  occasion  of  a  very  slight  acci-
dent, broke  out  with  fatal  violence.  A  private  French
soldier  engaging  in  an  idle  quarrel  with  a  citizen  of
Edinburgh,  both  nations  took  arms  with  equal  rage,  in
defence  of  their  countrymen.  The  provost  of  Edin-
burgh, his  son,  and  several  citizens  of  distinction,  were
killed  in  the  fray ;  and  the  French  were  obliged  to
avoid  the  fury  of  the  inhabitants,  by  retiring  out  of  the
city.  Notwithstanding  the  ancient  alliance  of  France
and  Scotland,  and  the  long  intercourse  of  good  offices
between  the  two  nations,  an  aversion  for  the  French
took  its  rise  at  this  time  among  the  Scots,  the  effects
whereof  were  deeply  felt,  and  operated  powerfully
through  the  subsequent  period.

Progress  From  the  death  of  cardinal  Beatoun,  nothing
of  the  Re-  has  been  said  of  the  state  of  religion.  While

formation.  .  111

the  war  with  England  continued,  the  clergy  had
no  leisure  to  molest  the  Protestants  ;  and  they  were  not
yet  considerable  enough  to  expect  any  thing  more  than
connivance  and  impunity.  The  new  doctrines  were
still  in  their  infancy ;  but  during  this  short  interval  of
tranquillity,  they  acquired  strength,  and  advanced  by
large  and  firm  steps  towards  a  full  establishment  in  the
kingdom.  The  first  preachers  against  Popery  in
Scotland,  of  whom  several  had  appeared  during  the
reign  of  James  V.,  were  more  eminent  for  zeal  and
piety,  than  for  learning.  Their  acquaintance  with

106  SCOTLAND.

the  principles  of  the  Reformation  was  partial,  and  at
second-hand ;  some  of  them  had  been  educated  in
England ;  all  of  them  had  borrowed  their  notions
from  the  books  published  there  ;  and  in  the  first  dawn
of  the  new  light,  they  did  not  venture  far  before  their
leaders.  But  in  a  short  time  the  doctrines  and
writings  of  the  foreign  reformers  became  generally
known ;  the  inquisitive  genius  of  the  age  pressed
forward  in  quest  of  truth;  the  discovery  of  one  error
opened  the  way  to  others ;  the  downfall  of  one  im-
posture drew  many  after  it;  the  whole  fabric,  which
ignorance  and  superstition  had  erected  in  times  of
darkness,  began  to  totter ;  and  nothing  was  wanting
to  complete  its  ruin,  but  a  daring  and  active  leader
to  direct  the  attack.  Such  was  the  famous  John
Knox,  who,  with  better  qualifications  of  learning,  and
more  extensive  views,  than  any  of  his  predecessors  in
Scotland,  possessed  a  ,  natural  intrepidity  of  mind,
which  set  him  above  fear.  He  began  his  public
ministry  at  St.  Andrew's,  in  the  year  1547,  with  that
success  which  always  accompanies  a  bold  and  popular
eloquence.  Instead  of  amusing  himself  with  lopping
the  branches,  he  struck  directly  at  the  root  of  Popery,
and  attacked  both  the  doctrine  and  discipline  of  the
established  church,  with  a  vehemence  peculiar  to  him-
self, but  admirably  suited  to  the  temper  and  wishes  of
the  age.

An  adversary  so  formidable  as  Knox,  would  not
have  easily  escaped  the  rage  of  the  clergy,  who  ob-
served the  tendency  and  progress  of  his  opinions  with
the  utmost  concern.  But,  at  first,  he  retired  for  safety
into  the  castle  of  St.  Andrew's,  and  while  the  con-
spirators kept  possession  of  it,  preached  publicly
under  their  protection.  The  great  revolution  in
England,  which  followed  upon  the  death  of  Henry
VIII.,  contributed  no  less  than  the  zeal  of  Knox  to-
wards demolishing  the  popish  church  in  Scotland.

BOOK  II.  107

Henry  had  loosened  the  chains,  and  lightened  the
yoke  of  Popery.  The  ministers  of  his  son,  Edward
VI.,  cast  them  off  altogether,  and  established  the
Protestant  religion  upon  almost  the  same  footing
whereon  it  now  stands  in  that  kingdom.  The  influ-
ence of  this  example  reached  Scotland,  and  the  happy
effects  of  ecclesiastical  liberty  in  one  nation,  inspired
the  other  with  an  equal  desire  of  recovering  it.  The
reformers  had,  hitherto,  been  obliged  to  conduct  them-
selves with  the  utmost  caution,  and  seldom  ventured
to  preach,  but  in  private  houses,  and  at  a  distance
from  court;  they  gained  credit,  as  happens  on  the
first  publication  of  every  new  religion,  chiefly  among
persons  in  the  lower  and  middle  rank  of  life.  But
several  noblemen,  of  the  greatest  distinction,  having,
about  this  time,  openly  espoused  their  principles,  they
were  no  longer  under  the  necessity  of  acting  with  the
same  reserve  ;  and,  with  more  security  and  encou-
ragement, they  had  likewise  greater  success.  The
means  of  acquiring  and  spreading  knowledge  became
more  common,  and  the  spirit  of  innovation,  peculiar
to  that  period,  grew  every  day  bolder  and  more  uni-
versal.

Happily  for  the  Reformation,  this  spirit  was  still
under  some  restraint.  It  had  not  yet  attained  firmness
and  vigour  sufficient  to  overturn  a  system  founded  on
the  deepest  policy,  and  supported  by  the  most  for-
midable power.  Under  the  present  circumstances,
any  attempt  towards  action,  must  have  been  fatal  to
the  Protestant  doctrines ;  and  it  is  no  small  proof  of
the  authority,  as  well  as  penetration  of  the  heads  of
the  party,  that  they  were  able  to  restrain  the  zeal  of  a
fiery  and  impetuous  people,  until  that  critical  and
mature  juncture,  when  every  step  they  took  was  de-
cisive and  successful.

Meanwhile  their  cause  received  reinforcement  from
two  different  quarters  whence  they  never  could  have

108  SCOTLAND.

expected  it.  The  ambition  of  the  house  of  Guise,  and
the  bigotry  of  Mary  of  England,  hastened  the  subver-
sion of  the  papal  throne  in  Scotland ;  and,  by  a  sin-
gular disposition  of  Providence,  the  persons  who
opposed  the  Reformation  in  every  other  part  of
Europe  with  the  fiercest  zeal,  were  made  instruments
for  advancing  it  in  that  kingdom.
The  ueen-  Mary  of  Guise  possessed  the  same  bold  and
dowager  aspiring  spirit  which  distinguished  her  family.
thlToffice  But  in  her  it  was  softened  by  the  female  cha-
Of  regent.  racter?  an(j  accompanied  with  great  temper  and
address.  Her  brothers,  in  order  to  attain  the  high
objects  at  which  they  aimed,  ventured  upon  such
daring  measures  as  suited  their  great  courage.  Her
designs  upon  the  supreme  power  were  concealed  with
the  utmost  care,  and  advanced  by  address  and  refine-
ments more  natural  to  her  sex.  By  a  dexterous  appli-
cation of  those  talents,  she  had  acquired  a  considerable
influence  on  the  councils  of  a  nation  hitherto  unac-
quainted with  the  government  of  women ;  and,  with-
out the  smallest  right  to  any  share  in  the  administra-
tion of  affairs,  had  engrossed  the  chief  direction  of
them  into  her  own  hands.  But  she  did  not  long  rest
satisfied  with  the  enjoyment  of  this  precarious  power,
which  the  fickleness  of  the  regent,  or  the  ambition  of
those  who  governed  him,  might  so  easily  disturb  ;  and
she  began  to  set  on  foot  new  intrigues,  with  a  design  of
undermining  him,  and  of  opening  to  herself  a  way  to
succeed  him  in  that  high  dignity.  Her  brothers  en-
tered warmly  into  this  scheme,  and  supported  it  with
all  their  credit  at  the  court  of  France.  The  French
king  willingly  concurred  in  a  measure,  by  which  he
hoped  to  bring  Scotland  entirely  under  management,
and,  in  any  future  broil  with  England,  to  turn  its  whole
force  against  that  kingdom.

In  order  to  arrive  at  the  desired  elevation,  the  queen-
dowager  had  only  one  of  two  ways  to  choose  ;  either

BOOK H.  109

violently  to  wrest  the  power  out  of  the  hands  of  the
regent,  or  to  obtain  it  by  his  consent.  Under  a  mi-
nority, and  among  a  warlike  and  factious  people,  the
former  was  a.  very  uncertain  and  dangerous  experi-
ment. The  latter  appeared  to  be  no  less  impractica-
ble. To  persuade  a  man  voluntarily  to  abdicate  the
supreme  power;  to  descend  to  a  level  with  those,
above  whom  he  was  raised ;  and  to  be  content  with
the  second  place  where  he  "hath  held  a  first,  may  well
pass  for  a  wild  and  chimerical  project.  This,  however,
the  queen  attempted  ;  and  the  prudence  of  the  attempt
was  sufficiently  justified  by  its  success.

The  regent's  inconstancy  and  irresolution,  together
with  the  calamities  which  had  befallen  the  kingdom
under  his  administration,  raised  the  prejudices  both
of  the  nobles  and  of  the  people  against  him,  to  a  great
height ;  and  the  queen  secretly  fomented  these  with
much  industry.  All  who  wished  for  a  change  mef
with  a  gracious  reception  in  her  court,  and  their
spirit  of  disaffection  was  nourished  by  such  hopes
and  promises,  as  in  every  age  impose  on  the  credulity
Courts  the  of  the  factious.  The  favourers  of  the  reforma-
refonners.  ^QU  fo^g  ^he  most  numerous  and  spreading
body  of  the  regent's  enemies,  she  applied  to  them
with  a  particular  attention  ;  and  the  gentleness  of
her  disposition,  and  seeming  indifference  to  the  reli-
gious points  in  dispute,  made  all  her  promises  of  pro-
tection pass  upon  them  for  sincere.  Finding  so  great
a  part  of  the  nation  willing  to  fall  in  with  her  measures,
the  queen  set  out  for  France,  under  pretence

Oct.  1550. _ * .  .  ,  , ,  r  .  .

of  visiting  her  daughter,  and  took  along  with
her  those  noblemen  who  possessed  the  greatest  power
and  credit  among  their  countrymen.  Softened  by  the
pleasures  of  an  elegant  court,  flattered  by  the  civilities
of  the  French  king,  and  the  caresses  of  the  house  of
Guise,  and  influenced  by  the  seasonable  distribution
of  a  few  favours,  and  the  liberal  promise  of  many

110  SCOTLAND.

more,  they  were  brought  to  approve  of  all  the  queen's
pretensions.

While  she  advanced  by  these  slow  but  sure  steps,
the  regent  either  did  not  foresee  the  danger  which
threatened  him,  or  neglected  to  provide  against  it.
The  first  discovery  of  the  train  which  was  laid,  came
from  two  of  his  own  confidants,  Carnegie  of  Kinnaird,
and  Panter,  bishop  of  Ross,  whom  the  queen  had
gained  over  to  her  interest,  and  then  employed  as
the  most  proper  instruments  for  obtaining  his  consent.
The  overture  was  made  to  him  in  the  name  of  the
French  king,  enforced  by  proper  threatenings,  in  order
to  work  upon  his  natural  timidity,  and  sweetened  by
every  promise  that  could  reconcile  him  to  a  proposal
so  disagreeable.  On  the  one  hand,  the  confirmation
of  his  French  title,  together  with  a  considerable
pension,  the  parliamentary  acknowledgment  of  his
right  of  succession  to  the  crown,  and  a  public  ratifi-
cation of  his  conduct  during  his  regency,  were  offered
him.  On  the  other  hand,  the  displeasure  of  the  French
king,  the  power  and  popularity  of  the  queen-dowager,
the  disaffection  of  the  nobles,  with  the  danger  of  an
after-reckoning,  were  represented  in  the  strongest
colours.

It  was  not  possible  to  agree  to  a  proposal  so  extra-
ordinary and  unexpected,  without  some  previous
struggle ;  and,  had  the  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's
been  present  to  fortify  the  irresolute  and  passive  spirit
of  the  regent,  he,  in  all  probability,  would  have  re-
jected it  with  disdain.  Happily  for  the  queen,  the
sagacity  and  ambition  of  that  prelate  could,  at  this
time,  be  no  obstruction  to  her  views.  He  was  lying
at  the  point  of  death,  and  in  his  absence  the  influence
of  the  queen's  agents  on  a  flexible  temper  counter-
balanced several  of  the  strongest  passions  of  the  human
mind,  and  obtained  his  consent  to  a  voluntary  surren-
der of  the  supreme  power.

BOOK II.  Ill

After  gaining  a  point  of  such  difficulty  with
so  much  ease,  the  queen  returned  into  Scotland,
in  full  expectation  of  taking  immediate  possession  of
her  new  dignity.  But  by  this  time  the  archbishop
of  St.  Andrew's  had  recovered  of  that  distemper,
which  the  ignorance  of  the  Scottish  physicians  had
pronounced  to  be  incurable.  This  he  owed  to  the
assistance  of  the  famous  Cardan,  one  of  those  irregular
adventurers  in  philosophy,  of  whom  Italy  produced
so  many  about  this  period.  A  bold  genius  led  him
to  some  useful  discoveries,  which  merit  the  esteem  of
a  more  discerning  age ;  a  wild  imagination  engaged
him  in  those  chimerical  sciences  which  drew  the  ad-
miration of  his  contemporaries.  As  a  pretender  to
astrology  and  magic,  he  was  revered  and  consulted
by  all  Europe ;  as  a  proficient  in  natural  philosophy,
he  was  but  little  known.  The  archbishop,  it  is  pro-
bable, considered  him  as  a  powerful  magician,  when
he  applied  to  him  for  relief;  but  it  was  his  knowledge  as
a  philosopher  which  enabled  him  to  cure  his  disease.*
Together  with  his  health,  the  archbishop  recovered
the  entire  government  of  the  regent,  and  quickly  per-
suaded him  to  recall  that  dishonourable  promise,  which
he  had  been  seduced  by  the  artifices  of  the  queen  to
grant.  However  great  her  surprise  and  indignation
were,  at  this  fresh  instance  of  his  inconstancy,  she
was  obliged  to  dissemble,  that  she  might  have  leisure
to  renew  her  intrigues  with  all  parties ;  with  the  Pro-
testants, whom  she  favoured  and  courted  more  than
ever ;  with  the  nobles,  to  whom  she  rendered  herself
agreeable  by  various  arts ;  and  with  the  regent  him-
self, in  order  to  gain  whom,  she  employed  every  argu-

1  Cardan  himself  was  more  desirous  of  being  considered  as  an  astrologer  than
a  philosopher  :  in  his  book  De  Gentians,  we  find  a  calculation  of  the  archbishop's
nativity,  from  which  he  pretends  both  to  have  predicted  his  disease,  and  to  have
effected  his  cure.  He  received  from  the  archbishop  a  reward  of  1800  crowns!  a
great  sura  in  that  age.  De  vita  sua.  p.  32.

112  SCOTLAND.

ment.  But,  whatever  impressions  her  emissaries
might  have  made  on  the  regent,  it  was  no  easy  matter
to  overreach  or  to  intimidate  the  archbishop.  Under
his  management,  the  negotiations  were  spun  out  to  a
great  length,  and  his  brother  maintained  his  station
with  that  address  and  firmness,  which  its  importance
so  well  merited.  The  universal  defection  of  the
nobility,  the  growing  power  of  the  Protestants,  who
all  adhered  to  the  queen  dowager,  the  reiterated
solicitations  of  the  French  king,  and,  above  all,  the
interposition  of  the  young  queen,  who  was  now
entering  the  twelfth  year  of  her  age,  and  claimed  a
right  of  nominating  whom  she  pleased  to  be  regent,"
Prevails  obliged  him  at  last  to  resign  that  high  office,
°enthteore"  which  he  had  held  many  years.  He  obtained,
resign  his  however,  the  same  advantageous  terms  for  him-
self, which  had  been  formerly  stipulated.

she  ob-  ^  was  *n  ^e  Pai*liament  which  met  on  the
tains  the  tenth  of  April,  1554,  that  the  earl  of  Arran  exe-
'ncy'  cuted  this  extraordinary  resignation  ;  and  at  the
same  time  Mary  of  Guise  was  raised,  to  that  dignity,
which  had  been  so  long  the  object  of  her  wishes.  Thus,
with  their  own  approbation,  a  woman  and  a  stranger  was
advanced  to  the  supreme  authority  over  a  fierce  and  tur-
bulent people,  who  seldom  submitted,  without  reluc-
tance, to  the  legal  ancient  government  of  their  native
monarchs.

Reforma-  While  the  queen-dowager  of  Scotland  con-
tion  con-  tributed  so  much  towards  the  progress  of  the

tiDues  to  A

make  great  Reformation  by  the  protection  which  she  af-
julfe?"  forded  it,  from  motives  of  ambition,  the  English
i5.->3.  queen,  by  her  indiscreet  zeal,  filled  the  kingdom
with  persons  active  in  promoting  the  same  cause.
Mary  ascended  the  throne  of  England  on  the  death  of
her  brother  Edward,  and  soon  after  married  Philip  II.

«  Leslej,  de  Reb.  Gest.  Scot.  ap.  Jeb.  1.  187.

BOOK  II.  113

of  Spain.  To  the  persecuting  spirit  of  the  Romish
superstition,  and  the  fierceness  of  that  age,  she  added
the  private  resentment  of  her  own  and  of  her  mother's
sufferings,  with  which  she  loaded  the  reformed  reli-
gion ;  and  the  peevishness  and  severity  of  her  natural
temper  carried  the  acrimony  of  all  these  passions  to
the  utmost  extreme.  The  cruelty  of  her  persecution
equalled  the  deeds  of  those  tyrants  who  have  been  the
greatest  reproach  to  human  nature.  The  bigotry  of
her  clergy  could  scarce  keep  pace  with  the  impe-
tuosity of  her  zeal.  Even  the  unrelenting  Philip  was
obliged,  on  some  occasions,  to  mitigate  the  rigour  of
her  proceedings.  Many  among  the  most  eminent  re-
formers suffered  for  the  doctrines  which  they  had
taught ;  others  fled  from  the  storm.  To  the  greater
part  of  these,  Switzerland  and  Germany  opened  a
secure  asylum ;  and  not  a  few,  out  of  choice  or  neces-
sity, fled  into  Scotland.  What  they  had  seen  and
felt  in  England,  did  not  abate  the  warmth  and  zeal  of
their  indignation  against  Popery.  Their  attacks  were
bolder  and  more  successful  than  ever ;  and  their  doc-
trines made  a  rapid  progress  among  all  ranks  of  men.
These  doctrines,  calculated  to  rectify  the  opinions,
and  to  reform  the  manners,  of  mankind,  had  hitherto
produced  no  other  effects ;  but  they  soon  began  to
operate  with  greater  violence,  and  proved  the  occasion,
not  only  of  subverting  the  established  religion,  but  of
A  view  of  shaking  the  throne  and  endangering  the  king-
the  poiiti-  donit  The  causes  which  facilitated  the  intro-

cal  causes  t  m

which  con-  duction  of  these  new  opinions  into  Scotland,
towards  and  which  disseminated  them  so  fast  through
the  nation,  merit,  on  that  account,  a  particular
and  careful  inquiry.  The  Reformation  is  one  of  the
greatest  events  in  the  history  of  mankind,  and,  in
whatever  point  of  light  we  view  it,  is  instructive  and
interesting.

The  revival  of  learning  in  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth
VOL.  i.  I

114  SCOTLAND.

centuries  roused  the  world  from  that  lethargy  in  which
it  had  been  sunk  for  many  ages.  The  human  mind
felt  its  own  strength,  broke  the  fetters  of  authority  by
which  it  had  been  so  long  restrained,  and,  ventur-
ing to  move  in  a  larger  sphere,  pushed  its  inquiries
into  every  subject,  with  great  boldness  and  surprising
success.

No  sooner  did  mankind  recover  the  capacity  of
exercising  their  reason,  than  religion  was  one  of  the
first  objects  which  drew  their  attention.  Long  before
Luther  published  his  famous  Theses,  which  shook  the
papal  throne,  science  and  philosophy  had  laid  open
to  many  of  the  Italians,  the  imposture  and  absurdity
of  the  established  superstition.  That  subtle  and  re-
fined people,  satisfied  with  enjoying  those  discoveries
in  secret,  were  little  disposed  to  assume  the  dangerous
character  of  reformers,  and  concluded  the  knowledge
of  truth  to  be  the  prerogative  of  the  wise,  while  vulgar
minds  must  be  overawed  and  governed  by  popular
errors.  But,  animated  with  a  more  noble  and  dis-
interested zeal,  the  German  theologian  boldly  erected
the  standard  of  truth,  and  upheld  it  with  an  un-
conquerable intrepidity,  which  merits  the  admiration
and  gratitude  of  all  succeeding  ages.

The  occasion  of  Luther's  being  first  disgusted  with
the  tenets  of  the  Romish  church,  and  how,  from  a
small  rupture,  the  quarrel  widened  into  an  irreparable
breach,  is  known  to  every  one  who  has  been  the  least
conversant  in  history.  From  the  heart  of  Germany
his  opinions  spread,  with  astonishing  rapidity,  all  over
Europe ;  and,  wherever  they  came,  endangered  or
overturned  the  ancient,  but  ill  founded  system.  The
vigilance  and  address  of  the  court  of  Rome,  co-ope-
rating with  the  power  and  bigotry  of  the  Austrian
family,  suppressed  these  notions  on  their  first  appear-
ance, in  the  southern  kingdoms  of  Europe.  But  the
fierce  spirit  of  the  north,  irritated  by  multiplied  impo-

BOOK  II.  115

sitions,  could  neither  be  mollified  by  the  same  arts,  nor
subdued  by  the  same  force ;  and,  encouraged  by  some
princes  from  piety,  and  by  others  out  of  avarice,  it
easily  bore  down  the  feeble  opposition  of  an  illiterate
and  immoral  clergy.

The  superstition  of  Popery  seems  to  have  grown  to
the  most  extravagant  height  in  those  countries  which
are  situated  towards  the  different  extremities  of  Europe.
The  vigour  of  imagination,  and  sensibility  of  frame,
peculiar  to  the  inhabitants  of  southern  climates,  ren-
dered them  susceptible  of  the  deepest  impressions  of
superstitious  terror  and  credulity.  Ignorance  and  bar-
barity were  no  less  favourable  to  the  progress  of  the
same  spirit  among  the  northern  nations.  They  knew
little,  and  were  disposed  to  believe  every  thing.  The
most  glaring  absurdities  did  not  shock  their  gross
understandings,  and  the  most  improbable  fictions  were
received  with  implicit  assent  and  admiration.

Accordingly,  that  form  of  Popery  which  prevailed
in  Scotland  was  of  the  most  bigotted  and  illiberal  kind.
Those  doctrines  which  are  most  apt  to  shock  the
human  understanding,  and  those  legends  which  farthest
exceed  belief,  were  proposed  to  the  people  without
any  attempt  to  palliate  or  disguise  them ;  nor  did  they
ever  call  in  question  the  reasonableness  of  the  one,  or
the  truth  of  the  other.

The  power  and  wealth  of  the  church  kept  pace  with
the  progress  of  superstition  ;  for  it  is  the  nature  of  that
spirit  to  observe  no  bounds  in  its  respect  and  liberality
towards  those  whose  character  it  esteems  sacred.  The
Scottish  kings  early  demonstrated  how  much  they
were  under  its  influence,  by  their  vast  additions  to  the
immunities  and  riches  of  the  clergy.  The  profuse
piety  of  David  I.,  who  acquired  on  that  account  the
name  of  Saint,  transferred  almost  the  whole  crown
lands,  which  were  at  that  time  of  great  extent,  into  the
hands  of  ecclesiastics.  The  example  of  that  virtuous

I  2

116  SCOTLAND.

prince  was  imitated  by  his  successors.  The  spirit
spread  among  all  orders  of  men,  who  daily  loaded  the
priesthood  with  new  possessions.  The  riches  of  the
church  all  over  Europe  were  exorbitant ;  but  Scotland
was  one  of  those  countries  wherein  they  had  farthest
exceeded  the  just  proportion.  The  Scottish  clergy
paid  one-half  of  every  tax  imposed  on  land ;  and  as
there  is  no  reason  to  think  that  in  that  age  they  would
be  loaded  with  any  unequal  share  of  the  burden,  we
may  conclude  that,  by  the  time  of  the  Reformation,
little  less  than  one-half  of  the  national  property  had
fallen  into  the  hands  of  a  society,  which  is  always
acquiring,  and  can  never  lose.

The  nature,  too,  of  a  considerable  part  of  their  pro-
perty extended  the  influence  of  the  clergy.  Many
estates  throughout  the  kingdom,  held  of  the  church ;
church  lands  were  let  in  lease  at  an  easy  rent,  and
were  possessed  by  the  younger  sons  and  descendants
of  the  best  families/  The  connexion  between  superior
and  vassal,  between  landlord  and  tenant,  created  de-
pendencies, and  gave  rise  to  a  union  of  great  advan-
tage to  the  church  ;  and  in  estimating  the  influence  of
the  Popish  ecclesiastics  over  the  nation,  these,  as  well
as  the  real  amount  of  their  revenues,  must  be  attended
to,  and  taken  into  the  account.

This  extraordinary  share  in  the  national  property
was  accompanied  with  proportionable  weight  in  the
supreme  council  of  the  kingdom.  At  a  time  when  the
number  of  the  temporal  peers  was  extremely  small,
and  when  the  lesser  barons  and  representatives  of
boroughs  seldom  attended  parliaments,  the  ecclesiastics
formed  a  considerable  body  there.  It  appears  from
the  ancient  rolls  of  parliament,  and  from  the  manner
of  choosing  the  lords  of  articles,  that  the  proceedings
of  that  high  court  must  have  been,  in  a  great  measure,
under  their  direction.7

*  Keith,  521.  Note  (b.)  y  Spots.  Hist,  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  449.

BOOK  II.  117

The  reverence  due  to  their  sacred  character,  which
was  often  carried  incredibly  far,  contributed  not  a
little  towards  the  growth  of  their  power.  The  dignity,
the  titles,  and  precedence  of  the  Popish  clergy,  are
remarkable,  both  as  causes  and  effects  of  that  dominion
which  they  had  acquired  over  the  rest  of  mankind.
They  were  regarded  by  the  credulous  laity  as  beings
of  a  superior  species  ;  they  were  neither  subject  to  the
same  laws,  nor  tried  by  the  same  judges.2  Every  guard
that  religion  could  supply,  was  placed  around  their
power,  their  possessions,  and  their  persons  ;  and  en-
deavours were  used,  not  without  success,  to  represent
them  all  as  equally  sacred.

The  reputation  for  learning,  which,  however  incon-
siderable, was  wholly  engrossed  by  the  clergy,  added
to  the  reverence  which  they  derived  from  religion.
The  principles  of  sound  philosophy,  and  of  a  just
taste,  were  altogether  unknown;  in  place  of  these
were  substituted  studies  barbarous  and  uninstructive ;
but  as  the  ecclesiastics  alone  were  conversant  in  them,
this  procured  them  esteem  ;  and  a  very  slender  portion
of  knowledge  drew  the  admiration  of  rude  ages,  which
knew  little.  War  was  the  sole  profession  of  the  nobles,
and  hunting  their  chief  amusement ;  they  divided  their
time  between  these :  unacquainted  with  the  arts,  and
unimproved  by  science,  they  disdained  any  employ-
ment foreign  from  military  affairs,  or  which  required
rather  penetration  and  address,  than  bodily  vigour.
Wherever  the  former  were  necessary,  the  clergy  were
intrusted ;  because  they  alone  were  properly  qualified  for
the  trust.  Almost  all  the  high  offices  in  civil  government

z  How  far  this  claim  of  the  clergy  to  exemption  from 'lay  jurisdiction  extended,
appears  from  a  remarkable  transaction  in  the  parliament  held  in  1546.  When  that
court  was  proceeding  to  the  forfeiture  of  the  murderers  of  cardinal  Beatoun,  and
were  about  to  include  a  priest,  who  was  one  of  the  assassins,  in  the  general  sentence
of  condemnation,  odious  as  the  crime  was  to  ecclesiastics,  a  delegate  appeared  in
name  of  the  clerical  courts,  and  repledged  or  claimed  exemption  of  him  from  the
judgment  of  parliament,  as  a  spiritual  man.  This  claim  was  sustained ;  and  his
name  is  not  inserted  in  the  act  of  forfeiture.  Epist.  Reg.  Scot.  ii.  350.  361.

118  SCOTLAND.

devolved,  on  this  account,  into  their  hands.  The  lord
chancellor  was  the  first  subject  in  the  kingdom,  both  in
dignity  and  in  power.  From  the  earliest  ages  of  the
monarchy,  to  the  death  of  cardinal  Beatoun,  fifty-four
persons  had  held  that  high  office ;  and  of  these  forty-
three  had  been  ecclesiastics.*  The  lords  of  session
were  supreme  judges  in  all  matters  of  civil  right;
and,  by  its  original  constitution,  the  president  and  one
half  of  the  senators  in  this  court  were  churchmen.

To  all  this  we  may  add,  that  the  clergy  being  sepa-
rated from  the  rest  of  mankind  by  the  law  of  celibacy,
and  undistracted  by  those  cares,  and  unincumbered
with  those  burdens,  which  occupy  and  oppress  other
men,  the  interest  of  their  order  became  their  only
object,  and  they  were  at  full  leisure  to  pursue  it.

The  nature  of  their  functions  gave  them  access  to
all  persons,  and  at  all  seasons.  They  could  employ
all  the  motives  of  fear  and  of  hope,  of  terror  and  of
consolation,  which  operate  most  powerfully  on  the
human  mind.  They  haunted  the  weak  and  the  credu-
lous ;  they  besieged  the  beds  of  the  sick  and  of  the
dying  ;  they  suffered  few  to  go  out  of  the  world  with-
out leaving  marks  of  their  liberality  to  the  church,  and
taught  them  to  compound  with  the  Almighty  for  their
sins,  by  bestowing  riches  upon  those  who  called  them-
selves his  servants.

When  their  own  industry,  or  the  superstition  of
mankind,  failed  of  producing  this  effect,  the  ecclesi-
astics had  influence  enough  to  call  in  the  aid  of  law.
When  a  person  died  intestate,  the  disposal  of  his  effects
was  vested  in  the  bishop  of  the  diocess,  after  paying
his  funeral  charges  and  debts,  and  distributing  among
his  kindred  the  sums  to  which  they  were  respectively
entitled ;  it  being  presumed  that  no  Christian  would
have  chosen  to  leave  the  world  without  destining  some

*  Crawf.  Offic.  of  State.

BOOK II.  Ill)

part  of  his  substance  to  pious  uses.b  As  men  are  apt
to  trust  to  the  continuance  of  life  with  a  fond  confi-
dence, and  childishly  shun  every  thing  that  forces  them
to  think  of  their  mortality,  many  die  without  settling
their  affairs  by  will ;  and  the  right  of  administration
in  that  event,  acquired  by  the  clergy,  must  have  proved
a  considerable  source  both  of  wealth  and  of  power  to
the  church.

At  the  same  time,  no  matrimonial  or  testamentary
cause  could  be  tried  but  in  the  spiritual  courts,  and
by  laws  which  the  clergy  themselves  had  framed.
The  penalty,  too,  by  which  the  decisions  of  these  courts
were  enforced,  added  to  their  authority.  A  sentence
of  excommunication  was  no  less  formidable  than  a
sentence  of  outlawry.  It  was  pronounced  on  many
occasions,  and  against  various  crimes  :  and,  besides
excluding  those,  upon  whom  it  fell,  from  Christian  pri-
vileges, it  deprived  them  of  all  their  rights  as  men,  or
as  citizens ;  and  the  aid  of  the  secular  power  concurred
with  the  superstition  of  mankind,  in  rendering  the  thun-
ders of  the  church  no  less  destructive  than  terrible.

To  these  general  causes  may  be  attributed  the  im-
mense growth  both  of  the  wealth  and  power  of  the
Popish  church ;  and,  without  entering  into  any  more
minute  detail,  this  may  serve  to  discover  the  founda-
tions on  which  a  structure  so  stupendous  was  erected.

But  though  the  laity  had  contributed,  by  their  own
superstition  and  profuseness,  to  raise  the  clergy  from
poverty  and  obscurity  to  riches  and  eminence,  they
began,  by  degrees,  to  feel  and  to  murmur  at  their
encroachments.  No  wonder  haughty  and  martial
barons  should  view  the  power  and  possessions  of  the
church  with  envy ;  and  regard  the  lazy  and  inactive
character  of  churchmen  with  the  utmost  contempt;
while,  at  the  same  time,  the  indecent  and  licentious

b  Essays  on  Brit.  Antiq.  174. Annals  of  Scotland,  by  Sir  David  Dalryraple,
vol.  i.  Append.  No.  ii.

120  SCOTLAND.

lives  of  the  clergy  gave  great  and  just  offence  to  the
people,  and  considerably  abated  the  veneration  which
they  were  accustomed  to  yield  to  that  order  of  men.

Immense  wealth,  extreme  indolence,  gross  igno-
rance, and,  above  all,  the  severe  injunction  of  celibacy,
had  concurred  to  introduce  this  corruption  of  morals
among  many  of  the  clergy,  who,  presuming  too  much
upon  the  submission  of  the  people,  were  at  no  pains
either  to  conceal  or  to  disguise  their  own  vices.  Ac-
cording to  the  accounts  of  the  reformers,  confirmed
by  several  Popish  writers,  the  most  open  and  scan-
dalous dissoluteness  of  manners  prevailed  among  the
Scottish  clergy.0  Cardinal  Beatoun,  with  the  same
public  pomp  which  is  due  to  a  legitimate  child,  cele-
brated the  marriage  of  his  natural  daughter  with  the
earl  of  Crawford's  son ; d  and,  if  we  may  believe  Knox,
he  publicly  continued  to  the  end  of  his  days  a  criminal
correspondence  with  her  mother,  who  was  a  woman  of
rank.  The  other  prelates  seem  not  to  have  been  more
regular  and  exemplary  than  their  primate.6

Men  of  such  characters  ought,  in  reason,  to  have
been  alarmed  at  the  first  clamours  raised  against  their
own  morals,  and  the  doctrines  of  the  church,  by  the
Protestant  preachers ;  but  the  Popish  ecclesiastics,
either  out  of  pride  or  ignorance,  neglected  the  proper
methods  for  silencing  them.  Instead  of  reforming  their
lives,  or  disguising  their  vices,  they  affected  to  despise
the  censures  of  the  people.  While  the  reformers,  by
their  mortifications  and  austerities,  endeavoured  to

c  Winzet.  ap.  Keith,  Append.  202.  205. Lesley  de  Reb.  Gest.  Scot.  232.

d  The  marriage  articles,  subscribed  with  his  own  hand,  in  which  he  calls  her  my
daughtef,  are  still  extant.  Keith,  p.  42.

e  A  remarkable  proof  of  the  dissolute  manners  of  the  clergy  is  found  in  the  public
records.  A  greater  number  of  letters  of  legitimation  was  granted  during  the  first
thirty  years  after  the  Reformation,  than  during  the  whole  period  that  has  elapsed
since  that  time.  These  were  obtained  by  the  sons  of  the  Popish  clergy.  The
ecclesiastics,  who  were  allowed  to  retain  their  benefices,  alienated  them  to  their
children ;  who,  when  they  acquired  wealth,  were  desirous  that  the  stain  of  illegiti-
macy might  no  longer  remain  upon  their  families.  In  Keith's  Catalogue  of  the
Scottish  Bishops,  we  find  several  instances  of  such  alienations  of  church  lands,  by  the
Popish  incumbents  to  their  natural  children.

BOOK  II.  121

resemble  the  first  propagators  of  Christianity,  the
Popish  clergy  were  compared  to  all  those  persons  who
are  most  infamous  in  history  for  the  enormity  and
scandal  of  their  crimes.

On  the  other  hand,  instead  of  mitigating  the  rigour,
or  colouring  over  the  absurdity  of  the  established  doc-
trines; instead  of  attempting  to  found  them  upon
Scripture,  or  to  reconcile  them  to  reason  ;  they  left
them  without  any  other  support  or  recommendation,
than  the  authority  of  the  church,  and  the  decrees  of
councils.  The  fables  concerning  purgatory,  the  virtues
of  pilgrimage,  and  the  merits  of  the  saints,  were  the
topics  on  which  they  insisted  in  their  discourses  to  the
people;  and  the  duty  of  preaching  being  left  wholly
to  monks  of  the  lowest  and  most  illiterate  orders,  their
compositions  were  still  more  wretched  and  contempti-
ble, than  the  subjects  on  which  they  insisted.  While
the  reformers  were  attended  by  crowded  and  admiring
audiences,  the  Popish  preachers  were  either  univer-
sally deserted,  or  listened  to  with  scorn.

The  only  device  which  they  employed  in  order  to
recover  their  declining  reputation,  or  to  confirm  the
wavering  faith  of  the  people,  was  equally  imprudent
and  unsuccessful.  As  many  doctrines  of  their  church
had  derived  their  credit  at  first  from  the  authority  of
false  miracles,  they  now  endeavoured  to  call  in  these
to  their  aid/  But  such  lying  wonders,  as  were  beheld
with  unsuspicious  admiration,  or  heard  with  implicit
faith,  in  times  of  darkness  and  of  ignorance,  met  with
a  very  different  reception  in  a  more  enlightened  period.
The  vigilance  of  the  reformers  detected  these  impos-
tures, and  exposed  not  only  them,  but  the  cause  which
needed  the  aid  of  such  artifices,  to  ridicule.

As  the  Popish  ecclesiastics  became  more  and  more
the  objects  of  hatred  and  of  contempt,  the  discourses
of  the  reformers  were  listened  to  as  so  many  calls  to

f  Spotswood,  69.

122  SCOTLAND.

liberty ;  and,  besides  the  pious  indignation  which  they
excited  against  those  corrupt  doctrines  which  had  per-
verted the  nature  of  true  Christianity;  besides  the
zeal  which  they  inspired  for  the  knowledge  of  truth
and  the  purity  of  religion  ;  they  gave  rise  also,  among
the  Scottish  nobles,  to  other  views  and  passions.  They
hoped  to  shake  off  the  yoke  of  ecclesiastical  dominion,
which  they  had  long  felt  to  be  oppressive,  and  which
they  now  discovered  to  be  unchristian.  They  expected
to  recover  possession  of  the  church  revenues,  which
they  were  now  taught  to  consider  as  alienations  made
by  their  ancestors,  with  a  profusion  no  less  undiscern-
ing  than  unbounded.  They  flattered  themselves,  that
a  check  would  be  given  to  the  pride  and  luxury  of  the
clergy,  who  would  be  obliged,  henceforward,  to  confine
themselves  within  the  sphere  peculiar  to  their  sacred
character.  An  aversion  from  the  established  church,
which  flowed  from  so  many  concurring  causes,  which
was  raised  by  considerations  of  religion,  heightened
by  motives  of  policy,  and  instigated  by  prospects  of
private  advantage,  spread  fast  through  the  nation,  and
excited  a  spirit  that  burst  out,  at  last,  with  irresistible
violence.

Religious  considerations  alone  were  sufficient  to
have  roused  this  spirit.  The  points  in  controversy
with  the  church  of  Rome  were  of  so  much  importance
to  the  happiness  of  mankind,  and  so  essential  to  Chris-
tianity, that  they  merited  all  the  zeal  with  which  the
reformers  contended  in  order  to  establish  them.  But
the  Reformation  having  been  represented  as  the  effect
of  some  wild  and  enthusiastic  frenzy  in  the  human
mind,  this  attempt  to  account  for  the  eagerness  and
zeal  with  which  our  ancestors  embraced  and  propa-
gated the  Protestant  doctrines,  by  taking  a  view  of  the
political  motives  alone  which  influenced  them,  and  by
shewing  how  naturally  these  prompted  them  to  act
with  so  much  ardour,  will  not,  perhaps,  be  deemed  an

BOOK  II.  123

unnecessary  digression. We  now  return  to  trie  course
of  the  history.

1554  The  queen's  elevation  to  the  office  of  regent
T^e  queen  seems  to  have  transported  her,  at  first,  beyond
gins  her  the  known  prudence  and  moderation  of  her
tration8"  character.  She  began  her  administration,  by
unpopular  conferring  upon  foreigners  several  offices  of
measures,  trust  and  of  dignity ;  a  step  which,  both  from
the  inability  of  strangers  to  discharge  these  offices
with  propriety,  and  from  the  envy  which  their  prefer-
ment excites  among  the  natives,  is  never  attended  with
good  consequences.  Vilmort  was  made  comptroller,
and  intrusted  with  the  management  of  the  public
revenues  ;  Bonot  was  appointed  governor  of  Orkney ;
and  Rubay  honoured  with  the  custody  of  the  great
seal,  and  the  title  of  vice-chancellor.8  It  was  with  the
highest  indignation,  that  the  Scots  beheld  offices  of
the  greatest  eminence  and  authority  dealt  out  among
strangers.11  By  these  promotions  they  conceived  the
queen  to  have  offered  an  insult  both  to  their  under-
standings and  to  their  courage;  to  the  former,  by
supposing  them  unfit  for  those  stations  which  their
ancestors  had  filled  with  so  much  dignity ;  to  the
latter,  by  imagining  that  they  were  tame  enough  not
to  complain  of  an  affront,  which,  in  no  former  age,
would  have  been  tolerated  with  impunity.

While  their  minds  were  in  this  disposition,  an  inci-
dent happened  which  inflamed  their  aversion  from
French  counsels  to  the  highest  degree.  Ever  since
the  famous  contest  between  the  houses  of  Valois  and
Plantagenet,  the  French  had  been  accustomed  to  em-
barrass the  English,  and  to  divide  their  strength  by
the  sudden  and  formidable  incursions  of  their  allies,
the  Scots.  But,  as  these  inroads  were  seldom  attended

e  Lesley  de  Reb.  Gest.  Scot.  189.

h  The  resentment  of  the  nation  against  the  French  rose  to  such  an  height,  that
an  act  of  parliament  was  passed  on  purpose  to  restrain  or  moderate  it.  Parl.  6.
Q.  Mary,  c.  60.

124  SCOTLAND.  [1554.

with  any  real  advantage  to  Scotland,  and  exposed  it
to  the  dangerous  resentment  of  a  powerful  neighbour,
the  Scots  began  to  grow  less  tractable  than  formerly,
and  scrupled  any  longer  to  serve  an  ambitious  ally  at
the  price  of  their  own  quiet  and  security.  The  change,
too,  which  was  daily  introducing  in  the  art  of  war,
rendered  the  assistance  of  the  Scottish  forces  of  less
importance  to  the  French  monarch.  For  these  reasons,
Henry  having  resolved  upon  a  war  with  Philip  II.  and
foreseeing  that  the  queen  of  England  would  take  part
in  her  husband's  quarrel,  was  extremely  solicitous  to
secure  in  Scotland  the  assistance  of  some  troops,  which
would  be  more  at  his  command  than  an  undisciplined
army,  led  by  chieftains  who  were  almost  independent.
In  prosecution  of  this  design,  but  under  pretence  of
relieving  the  nobles  from  the  expense  and  danger  of
1555.  defending  the  borders,  the  queen-regent  pro-
posed in  parliament,  to  register  the  value  of  lands
throughout  the  kingdom,  to  impose  on  them  a  small
tax,  and  to  apply  that  revenue  towards  maintaining  a
body  of  regular  troops  in  constant  pay.  A  fixed  tax
upon  land,  which  the  growing  expense  of  government
hath  introduced  into  almost  every  part  of  Europe,  was
unknown  at  that  time,  and  seemed  altogether  incon-
sistent with  the  genius  of  feudal  policy.  Nothing  could
be  more  shocking  to  a  generous  and  brave  nobility,
than  the  intrusting  to  mercenary  hands  the  defence  of
those  territories  which  had  been  acquired,  or  preserved,
by  the  blood  of  their  ancestors.  They  received  this
proposal  with  the  utmost  dissatisfaction.  About  three
hundred  of  the  lesser  barons  repaired  in  a  body  to  the
queen-regent,  and  represented  their  sense  of  the  in-
tended innovation,  with  that  manly  and  determined
boldness  which  is  natural  to  a  free  people  in  a  martial
age.  Alarmed  at  a  remonstrance  delivered  in  so  firm  a
tone,  and  supported  by  such  formidable  numbers,  the
queen  prudently  abandoned  a  scheme,  which  she  found

1555.]  BOOK  II.  125

to  be  universally  odious.  As  the  queen  herself  was
known  perfectly  to  understand  the  circumstances  and
temper  of  the  nation,  this  measure  was  imputed  wholly
to  the  suggestions  of  her  foreign  counsellors ;  and  the
Scots  were  ready  to  proceed  to  the  most  violent  ex-
tremities against  them.

Attempts  The  French,  instead  of  extinguishing,  added
theekfng^  fuel  to  tne  flame.  They  had  now  commenced
wa^with  hostilities  against  Spain,  and  Philip  had  pre-
Engiand.  vailed  on  the  queen  of  England  to  reinforce  his
army  with  a  considerable  body  of  her  troops.  In  order
to  deprive  him  of  this  aid,  Henry  had  recourse,  as  he
projected,  to  the  Scots  ;  and  attempted  to  excite  them
to  invade  England.  But  as  Scotland  had  nothing
to  dread  from  a  princess  of  Mary's  character,  who,  far
from  any  ambitious  scheme  of  disturbing  her  neigh-
bours, was  wholly  occupied  in  endeavouring  to  reclaim
her  heretical  subjects;  the  nobles,  who  were  assembled
by  the  queen-regent  at  Newbattle,  listened  to  the  soli-
citations of  the  French  monarch  with  extreme  coldness,
and  prudently  declined  engaging  the  kingdom  in  an
enterprise  so  dangerous  and  unnecessary.  What  she
could  not  obtain  by  persuasion,  the  queen-regent
brought  about  by  a  stratagem.  Notwithstanding  the
peace  which  subsisted  between  the  two  kingdoms,  she
commanded  her  French  soldiers  to  rebuild  a  small  fort
near  Berwick,  which  was  appointed,  by  the  last  treaty,
to  be  rased.  The  garrison  of  Berwick  sallied  out;
interrupted  the  work ;  and  ravaged  the  adjacent  coun-
try. This  insult  roused  the  fiery  spirit  of  the  Scots,
and  their  promptness  to  revenge  the  least  appearance
of  national  injury,  dissipated,  in  a  moment,  the  wise
and  pacific  resolutions  which  they  had  so  lately  formed.
War  was  determined,  and  orders  instantly  given  for
raising  a  numerous  army.  But  before  their  forces
could  assemble,  the  ardour  of  their  indignation  had
time  to  cool,  and  the  English  having  discovered  no

126  SCOTLAND.  [1556.

intention to  push  the  war  with vigour,  the  nobles
resumed  their  pacific  system,  and  resolved  to  stand
altogether  upon  the  defensive. They  marched
to  the  banks  of  the  Tweed,  they  prevented  the
incursions  of  the  enemy  ;  and  having  done  what  they
thought  sufficient  for  the  safety  and  honour  of  their
country,  the  queen  could  not  induce  them,  either  by
her  entreaties  or  her  artifices,  to  advance  another  step.
While  the  Scots  persisted  in  their  inactivity,  D'Oysel,
the  commander  of  the  French  troops,  who  possessed
entirely  the  confidence  of  the  queen-regent,  endea-
voured, with  her  connivance,  to  engage  the  two  na-
tions  in hostilities. Contrary  to the orders  of  the
Scottish  general,  he  marched  over  the  Tweed  with  his
own  soldiers,  and  invested  Werk-castle,  a  garrison  of
the English. The Scots,  instead  of  seconding  his
attempt,  were  enraged  at  his  presumption.  The  queen's
partiality  towards  France  had  long  been  suspected  ;
but  it  was  now  visible  that  she  wantonly  sacrificed  the
peace  and  safety  of  Scotland  to  the  interest  of  that
ambitious  and  assuming  ally. Under  the  feudal  go-
vernments, it  was  in  camps  that  subjects  were  accus-
tomed to  address  the  boldest  remonstrances  to  their
sovereigns. While  arms  were  in  their  hands,  they  felt
their  own  strength;  and  at  that  time  all  their  repre-
sentations of  grievances  carried  the  authority  of  com-
mands. On this occasion, the resentment of  the
nobles  broke  out  with  such  violence,  that  the  queen,
perceiving  all  attempts  to  engage  them  in  action  to  be
vain,  abruptly  dismissed  her  army,  and  retired  with
the  utmost  shame  and  disgust ;  having  discovered  the
impotence  of  her  own  authority,  without  effecting  any
thing  which  could  be  of  advantage  to  France.1

It  is  observable,  that  this  first  instance  of  contempt
for  the  regent's  authority  can,  in  no  degree,  be  im-
puted to  the  influence  of  the  new  opinions  in  religion.

*  Strype's  Memor.  Hi. Append.  274. Lesley,  196.

1556.]  BOOK II.  127

As  the  queen's  pretensions  to  the  regency  had  been
principally  supported  by  those  who  favoured  the  Re-
formation, and  as  she  still  needed  them  for  a  counter-
poise to  the  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  and  the
partisans  of  the  house  of  Hamilton ;  she  continued  to
treat  them  with  great  respect,  and  admitted  them  to
no  inconsiderable  share  in  her  favour  and  confidence.
Kirkaldy  of  Grange,  and  the  other  surviving  conspira-
tors against  cardinal  Beatoun,  were,  about  this  time,
recalled  by  her  from  banishment;  and,  through  her
connivance,  the  Protestant  preachers  enjoyed  an  inter-
val of  tranquillity,  which  was  of  great  advantage  to
their  cause.  Soothed  by  these  instances  of  the  queen's
moderation  and  humanity,  the  Protestants  left  to  others
the  office  of  remonstrating;  and  the  leaders  of  the
opposite  factions  set  them  the  first  example  of  disput-
ing the  will  of  their  sovereign.

As  the  queen-regent  felt  how  limited  and
queen's  precarious  her  authority  was,  while  it  depended
wiTh'the  on  tne  poise  of  these  contrary  factions,  she
dauphin,  endeavoured  to  establish  it  on  a  broader  and
more  secure  foundation,  by  hastening  the  conclusion
of  her  daughter's  marriage  with  the  dauphin.  Amia-
ble as  the  queen  of  Scots  then  was,  in  the  bloom  of
youth,  and  considerable  as  the  territories  were,  which
she  would  have  added  to  the  French  monarchy ;  rea-
sons were  not  wanting  to  dissuade  Henry  from  com-
pleting his  first  plan  of  marrying  her  to  his  son.  The
constable  Montmorency  had  employed  all  his  interest
to  defeat  an  alliance  which  reflected  so  much  lustre  on
the  princes  of  Lorrain.  He  had  represented  the  im-
possibility of  maintaining  order  and  tranquillity  among
a  turbulent  people,  during  the  absence  of  their  sove-
reign ;  and  for  that  reason  had  advised  Henry  to
bestow  the  young  queen  upon  one  of  the  princes  of
the  blood,  who,  by  residing  in  Scotland,  might  pre-
serve that  kingdom  a  useful  ally  to  France,  which,  by

128  SCOTLAND.  [1556.

a  nearer  union  to  the  crown,  would  become  a  mutinous
and  ungovernable  province.1"  But  at  this  time  the
constable  was  a  prisoner  in  the  hands  of  the  Spaniards ;
the  princes  of  Lorrain  were  at  the  height  of  their
power ;  and  their  influence,  seconded  by  the  charms  of
the  young  queen,  triumphed  over  the  prudent,  but
envious  remonstrances  of  their  rival.
Dec.  14,  The  French  king  accordingly  applied  to  the
1557.  parliament  of  Scotland,  which  appointed  eight
of  its  members l  to  represent  the  whole  body  of  the
nation,  at  the  marriage  of  the  queen.  Among  the
persons  on  whom  the  public  choice  conferred  this
honourable  character,  were  some  of  the  most  avowed
and  zealous  advocates  for  the  Reformation  ;  by  which
may  be  estimated  the  degree  of  respect  and  popularity
which  that  party  had  now  attained  in  the  kingdom.
The  instructions  of  the  parliament  to  those  commis-
sioners still  remain,"1  and  do  honour  to  the  wisdom
and  integrity  of  that  assembly.  At  the  same  time  that
they  manifested,  with  respect  to  the  articles  of  mar-
riage, a  laudable  concern  for  the  dignity  and  interest
of  their  sovereign,  they  employed  every  precaution
which  prudence  could  dictate,  for  preserving  the
liberty  and  independence  of  the  nation,  and  for  secur-
ing the  succession  of  the  crown  in  the  house  of
Hamilton.

Artifices  of  With  regard  to  each  of  these,  the  Scots
the  French  obtained  whatever  satisfaction  their  fear  or
marriage  jealousy  could  demand.  The  young  queen,
the  dauphin,  and  the  king  of  France,  ratified
every  article  with  the  most  solemn  oaths,  and  con-
firmed them  by  deeds  in  form  under  their  hands  and
seals.  But  on  the  part  of  France,  all  this  was  one
continued  scene  of  studied  and  elaborate  deceit.  Pre-

k  Melv.  Mem.  15.

1  Viz.  The  archbishop  of  Glasgow,  the  bishop  of  Ross,  the  bishop  of  Orkney,  the
earls  of  Rothes  and  Cassils,  lord  Fleming,  lord  Seton,  the  prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  and
John  Erskine  of  Dun.  TO  Keith,  Append.  13.

1557.]  BOOK II.  129

vious  to  these  public  transactions  with  the  Scottish
deputies,  Mary  had  been  persuaded  to  subscribe  pri-
vately three  deeds,  equally  unjust  and  invalid ;  by
which,  failing  the  heirs  of  her  own  body,  she  conferred
the  kingdom  of  Scotland,  with  whatever  inheritance  or
succession  might  accrue  to  it,  in  free  gift  upon  the
crown  of  France,  declaring  all  promises  to  the  con-
trary, which  the  necessity  of  her  affairs,  and  the  solici-
tations of  her  subjects,  had  extorted,  or  might  extort
from  her,  to  be  void  and  of  no  obligation.11  As  it  gives
us  a  proper  idea  of  the  character  of  the  French  court
under  Henry  II.,  we  may  observe  that  the  king  himself,
the  keeper  of  the  great  seals,  the  duke  of  Guise,  and
the  cardinal  of  Lorrain,  were  the  persons  engaged  in
conducting  this  perfidious  and  dishonourable  project.
The  queen  of  Scots  was  the  only  innocent  actor  in  that
scene  of  iniquity.  Her  youth,  her  inexperience,  her
education  in  a  foreign  country,  and  her  deference  to
the  will  of  her  uncles,  must  go  far  towards  vindicating
her,  in  the  judgment  of  every  impartial  person,  from
any  imputation  of  blame  on  that  account.

This  grant,  by  which  Mary  bestowed  the  inheritance
of  her  kingdom  upon  strangers,  was  concealed  with
the  utmost  care  from  her  subjects.  They  seem,  how-
ever, not  to  have  been  unacquainted  with  the  intention
of  the  French  to  overturn  the  settlement  of  the  succes-
sion in  favour  of  the  duke  of  Chatelherault.  The  zeal
with  which  the  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's  opposed
all  the  measures  of  the  queen-regent,  evidently  pro-
ceeded from  the  fears  and  suspicions  of  that  prudent
prelate  on  this  head.  °

April  14,  The  marriage,  however,  was  celebrated  with
1558.  great  pomp ;  and  the  French/ who  had  hitherto
affected  to  draw  a  veil  over  their  designs  upon  Scot-

n  Corps  Diplomat,  torn.  v.  21. Keith,  73.

0  About  this  time  the  French  seem  to  have  had  some  design  of  reviving  the  earl
of  Lennox's  pretensions  to  the  succession,  in  order  to  intimidate  and  alarm  the  duke
of  Chatelherault.  Haynes,  215.  219.  Forbes's  Collect,  vol.  i.  189.

VOL.  I.  K

130  SCOTLAND.  [1558.

land,  began  now  to  unfold  their  intentions  without
any  disguise.  In  the  treaty  of  marriage,  the  deputies
had  agreed  that  the  dauphin  should  assume  the  name
of  king  of  Scotland.  This  they  considered  only  as
an  honorary  title ;  but  the  French  laboured  to  annex  to
it  some  solid  privileges  and  power.  They  insisted  that
the  dauphin's  title  should  be  publicly  recognised  ;  that
the  crown  matrimonial  should  be  conferred  upon  him  ;
and  that  all  the  rights  pertaining  to  the  husband  of  a
queen  should  be  vested  in  his  person.  By  the  laws
of  Scotland,  a  person  who  married  an  heiress,  kept
possession  of  her  estate  during  his  own  life,  if  he  hap-
pened to  survive  her  and  the  children  born  of  the  mar-
riage.p  This  was  called  the  courtesy  of  Scotland.  The
French  aimed  at  applying  this  rule,  which  takes  place
in  private  inheritances,  to  the  succession  of  the  king-
dom ;  and  that  seems  to  be  implied  in  their  demand
of  the  crown  matrimonial,  a  phrase  peculiar  to  the
Scottish  historians,  and  which  they  have  neglected  to
explain.q  As  the  French  had  reason  to  expect  difficul-
ties in  carrying  through  this  measure,  they  began  with
sounding  the  deputies  who  were  then  at  Paris.  The
English,  in  their  marriage-articles  between  their  queen
and  Philip  of  Spain,  had  set  an  example  to  the  age,
of  that  prudent  jealousy  and  reserve,  with  which  a
foreigner  should  be  admitted  so  near  the  throne.
Full  of  the  same  ideas,  the  Scottish  deputies  had,  in
their  oath  of  allegiance  to  the  dauphin,  expressed

P  Reg.  Mag.  lib.  ii.  58. ,  . .

i  As  far  as  I  can  judge,  the  husband  of  a  queen,  by  the  grant  of  the  crown  ma-
trimonial, acquired  a  right  to  assume  the  title  of  king,  to  have  his  name  stamped
upon  the  current  coin,  and  to  sign  all  public  instruments  together  with  the  queen.
In  consequence  of  this,  the  subjects  took  an  oath  of  fidelity  to  him.  Keith,  Ap-
pend. 20,  His  authority  became,  in  some  measure,  co-ordinate  with  that  of  the
queen ;  and  without  his  concurrence,  manifested  by  signing  his  name,  no  public
deed  seems  to  have  been  considered  as  valid.  By  the  oath  of  fidelity  of  the  Scottish
commissioners  to  the  dauphin,  it  is  evident  that,  in  their  opinion,  the  rights  belong-
ing to  the  crown  matrimonial  subsisted  only  during  the  continuance  of  the  mar-
riage. Keith,  Append.  20.  But  the  conspirators  against  Rizio  bound  themselves
to  procure  a  grant  of  the  crown  matrimonial  to  Darnley,  during  all  the  days  of  his
life.  Keith,  Append.  120.  Good.  i.  227.

1558.]  BOOK II.

themselves  with  remarkable  caution/  Their  answer
was  in  the  same  spirit,  respectful,  but  firm ;  and  dis-
covered a  fixed  resolution  of  consenting  to  nothing
that  tended  to  introduce  any  alteration  in  the  order  of
succession  to  the  crown.

Four  of  the  deputies3  happening  to  die  before  they
returned  into  Scotland,  this  accident  was  universally
imputed  to  the  effects  of  poison,  which  was  supposed
to  have  been  given  them  by  the  emissaries  of  the  house
of  Guise. The  historians  of  all  nations  discover  an
amazing  credulity  with  respect  to  rumours  of  this  kind,
which  are  so  well  calculated  to  please  the  malignity
of  some  men,  and  to  gratify  the  love  of  the  marvellous
which  is  natural  to  all,  that  in  every  age  they  have
been  swallowed  without  examination, and believed
contrary  to reason. No  wonder the Scots  should
easily  give  credit  to  a  suspicion,  which  received  such
strong  colours  of  probability,  both  from  their  own  re-
sentment, and  from  the  known  character  of  the  princes
of  Lorrain,  so  little  scrupulous  about  the  justice  of  the
ends  which  they  pursued,  or  of  the  means  which  they
employed. For  the  honour  of  human  nature,  however,
it  must  be  observed,  that  as  we  can  discover  no  motive
which  could  induce any  man  to  perpetrate  such  a
crime,  so  there  appears  no  evidence  to  prove  that  it
was  committed. But  the  Scots  of  that  age,  influenced
by  national  animosities  and  prejudices,  were  incapable
of  examining  the  circumstances  of  the  case  with  calm-
ness, or  of  judging  concerning  them  with  candour.
All  parties  agreed  in  believing  the  French  to  have
been  guilty  of  this  detestable  action  ;  and  it  is  obvious
how  much  this  tended  to  increase  the  aversion  for
them,  which  was  growing  among  all  ranks  of  men.
There- Notwithstanding  the  cold  reception  which
gentpre-  their  proposal  concerning  the  crown  matrimo-

r  Keith,  Append.  20.

8  The  bishop  of Orkney,  the  earl  of  Rothes,  the  earl  of  Cassils, and  lord
Fleming.

K  2

132  SCOTLAND.  [1558.

vails  on  nial.  met  with  from  the  Scottish  deputies,  the
menuo"1"  French  ventured  to  move  it  in  parliament.  The
grant  it.  partisans  of  the  house  of  Hamilton,  suspicious

Nov.  29. r  .  .

ot  their  designs  upon  the  succession,  opposed
it  with  great  zeal.  But  a  party,  which  the  feeble  and
unsteady  conduct  of  their  leader  had  brought  under
much  disreputation,  was  little  able  to  withstand  the
influence  of  France,  and  the  address  of  the  queen
regent,  seconded,  on  this  occasion,  by  all  the  nume-
rous adherents  of  the  Reformation.  Besides,  that
artful  princess  dressed  out  the  French  demands  in  a
less  offensive  garb,  and  threw  in  so  many  limitations
as  seemed  to  render  them  of  small  consequence.
These  either  deceived  the  Scots,  or  removed  their
scruples ;  and  in  compliance  to  the  queen,  they  passed
an  act,  conferring  the  crown  matrimonial  on  the  dau-
phin ;  and  with  the  fondest  credulity,  trusted  to  the
frail  security  of  words  and  statutes,  against  the  dan-
gerous encroachments  of  power.*
Continues  The  concurrence  of  the  Protestants  with  the
thePro-  queen-regent,  in  promoting  a  measure  so  ac-
testants.  ceptable  to  France,  while  the  Popish  clergy,
under  the  influence  of  the  archbishop  of  St.  An-
drew's, opposed  it  with  so  much  violence,"  is  one
of  .those  singular  circumstances  in  the  conduct  of
parties,  for  which  this  period  is  so  remarkable.  It
may  be  ascribed,  in  some  degree,  to  the  dexterous
management  of  the  queen,  but  chiefly  to  the  modera-
tion of  those  who  favoured  the  Reformation.  The
Protestants  were  by  this  time  almost  equal  to  the  Ca-
tholics, both  in  power  and  in  number ;  and,  conscious
of  their  own  strength,  they  submitted  with  impatience

*  The  act  of  parliament  is  worded  with  the  utmost  care,  with  a  view  to  guard
against  any  breach  of  the  order  of  succession.  But  the  duke,  not  relying  on  this
alone,  entered  a  solemn  protestation  to  secure  his  own  right.  Keith,  76.  It  is
plain  that  he  suspected  the  French  of  having  some  intention  to  set  aside  his  right  of
succession ;  and,  indeed,  if  they  had  no  design  of  that  kind,  the  eagerness  with
which  they  urged  their  demand  was  childish.

u  Melv.  47.

1558.]  BOOK II.  133

to  that  tyrannical  authority,  with  which  the  ancient
laws  armed  the  ecclesiastics  against  them.  They
longed  to  be  exempted  from  this  oppressive  jurisdic-
tion, and  publicly  to  enjoy  the  liberty  of  professing
those  opinions,  and  of  exercising  that  worship,  which
so  great  a  part  of  the  nation  deemed  to  be  founded  in
truth,  and  to  be  acceptable  to  the  Deity.  This  in-
dulgence, to  which  the  whole  weight  of  priestly  au-
thority was  opposed,  there  were  only  two  ways  of
obtaining.  Either  violence  must  extort  it  from  the
reluctant  hand  of  their  sovereign,  or  by  prudent  com-
pliances they  might  expect  it  from  her  favour  or  her
gratitude.  The  former  is  an  expedient  for  the  redress
of  grievances,  to  which  no  nation  has  recourse  sud-
denly ;  and  subjects  seldom  venture  upon  resistance,
which  is  their  last  remedy,  but  in  cases  of  extreme  ne-
cessity. On  this  occasion  the  reformers  wisely  held
the  opposite  course,  and  by  their  zeal  in  forwarding
the  queen's  designs,  they  hoped  to  merit  her  protec-
tion. This  disposition  the  queen  encouraged  to  the
utmost,  and  amused  them  so  artfully  with  many  pro-
mises, and  some  concessions,  that,  by  their  assistance,
she  surmounted  in  parliament  the  force  of  a  national
and  laudable  jealousy,  which  would  otherwise  have
swayed  with  the  greater  number.

Another  circumstance  contributed  somewhat  to  ac-
quire the  regent  such  considerable  influence  in  this
parliament.  In  Scotland,  all  the  bishoprics,  and  those
abbeys  which  conferred  a  title  to  a  seat  in  parliament,
were  in  the  gift  of  the  crown.*  From  the  time  of  her
accession  to  the  regency,  the  queen  had  kept  in  her
own  hands  almost  all  those  which  became  vacant,
except  such  as  were,  to  the  great  disgust  of  the  nation,
bestowed  upon  foreigners.  Among  these,  her  brother,
the  cardinal  of  Lorrain,  had  obtained  the  abbeys  of
Kelso  and  Melross,  two  of  the  most  wealthy  founda-

*  See  Book  I.

134  SCOTLAND.  [1558.

tions  in  the  kingdom/  By  this  conduct  she  thinned
the  ecclesiastical  bench,2  which  was  entirely  under
the  influence  of  the  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  and
which,  by  its  numbers  and  authority,  usually  had  great
weight  in  the  house,  so  as  to  render  any  opposition  it
could  give  at  that  time  of  little  consequence.

The  earl  of  Argyle,  and  James  Stewart,  prior  of
St.  Andrew's,  one  the  most  powerful,  and  the  other
the  most  popular  leader  of  the  Protestants,  were  ap-
pointed to  carry  the  crown  and  other  ensigns  of  royalty
to  the  dauphin.  But  from  this  they  were  diverted
by  the  part  they  were  called  to  act  in  a  more  interest-
ing scene,  which  now  begins  to  open.
Elizabeth  Before  we  turn  towards  this,  it  is  necessary
succeeds  to  observe,  that  on  the  17th  of  November,  1558,
crown  of  Mary  of  England  finished  her  short  and  inglo-
rious reign.  Her  sister  Elizabeth  took  possession
of  the  throne  without  opposition ;  and  the  Protestant
religion  was,  once  more,  established  by  law  in  England.
The  accession  of  a  queen,  who,  under  very  difficult
circumstances,  had  given  strong  indications  of  those
eminent  qualities,  which,  in  the  sequel,  rendered  her
reign  so  illustrious,  attracted  the  eyes  of  all  Europe.
Among  the  Scots,  both  parties  observed  her  first
motions  with  the  utmost  solicitude,  as  they  easily
foresaw  that  she  would  not  long  remain  an  indifferent
spectator  of  their  transactions.

Under  many  discouragements  and  much  opposition,
the  Reformation  advanced  towards  a  full  establishment
in  Scotland.  All  the  low  country,  the  most  populous,
and  at  that  time  the  most  warlike,  part  of  the  kingdom,
was  deeply  tinctured  with  the  Protestant  opinions ;
and  if  the  same  impressions  were  not  made  in  the
more  distant  counties,  it  was  owing  to  no  want  of  the

y  Lesley,  202.

z  It  appears  from  the  rolls  of  this  parliament,  which  Lesley  calls  a  very  full  one,
that  only  seven  bishops  and  sixteen  abbots  were  present.

1558.]  BOOK II.  135

same  dispositions  among  the  people,  but  to  the  scarcity
of  preachers,  whose  most  indefatigable  zeal  could  not
satisfy  the  avidity  of  those  who  desired  their  instruc-
tions. Among  a  people  bred  to  arms,  and  as  prompt
as  the  Scots  to  act  with  violence;  and  in -an  age  when
religious  passions  had  taken  such  strong  possession  of
the  human  mind,  and  moved  and  agitated  it  with  so
much  violence,  the  peaceable  and  regular  demeanour
of  so  numerous  a  body  is  astonishing.  From  the  death
of  Mr.  Patrick  Hamilton,  the  first  who  suffered  in
Scotland  for  the  Protestant  religion,  thirty  years  had
elapsed,  and  during  so  long  a  period,  no  violation  of
public  order  or  tranquillity  had  proceeded  from  that
sect;a  and  though  roused  and  irritated  by  the  most
cruel  excesses  of  ecclesiastical  tyranny,  they  did,  in
no  instance,  transgress  those  bounds  of  duty  which
the  law  prescribes  to  subjects.  Besides  the  prudence
of  their  own  leaders,  and  the  protection  which  the
queen-regent,  from  political  motives,  afforded  them,
the  moderation  of  the  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's
encouraged  this  pacific  disposition.  That  prelate,
whose  private  life  contemporary  writers  tax  with  great
irregularities,5  governed  the  church,  for  some  years,
with  a  temper  and  prudence  of  which  there  are  few
examples  in  that  age.  But  some  time  before  the
meeting  of  the  last  parliament,  the  archbishop  departed
from  those  humane  maxims  by  which  he  had  hitherto
regulated  his  conduct ;  and,  whether  in  spite  to  the
queen,  who  had  entered  into  so  close  a  union  with
the  Protestants,  or  in  compliance  with  the  importu-
nities of  his  clergy,  he  let  loose  all  the  rage  of  per-
secution against  the  reformed;  sentenced  to  the
flames  an  aged  priest,  who  had  been  convicted  of  em-
bracing the  Protestant  opinions ;  and  summoned  seve-

a  The  murder  of  cardinal  Beatoun  was  occasioned  by  private  revenge :  and
being  contrived  and  executed  by  sixteen  persons  only,  cannot  with  justice  be  im-
puted to  the  whole  Protestant  party.

•>  Knox,  Buchanan,  Keith,  208.

136  SCOTLAND.  [1558.

ral  others,  suspected  of  the  same  crime,  to  appear  before
the  synod  of  the  clergy,  which  was  soon  to  convene  at
Edinburgh.

Nothing  could  equal  the  horror  of  the  Protestants
at  this  unexpected  and  barbarous  execution,  but  the
zeal  with  which  they  espoused  the  defence  of  a  cause
that  now  seemed  devoted  to  destruction.  They  had
immediate  recourse  to  the  queen-regent ;  and  as  her
success  in  the  parliament,  which  was  then  about  to
meet,  depended  on  their  concurrence,  she  not  only
sheltered  them  from  the  impending  storm,  but  per-
mitted them,  the  exercise  of  their  religion  with  more
freedom  than  they  had  hitherto  enjoyed.  Unsatis-
fied with  this  precarious  tenure  by  which  they  held
their  religious  liberty,  the  Protestants  laboured  to
render  their  possession  of  it  more  secure  and  inde-
pendent.

With  this  view  they  determined  to  petition  the
parliament  for  some  legal  protection  against  the  exor-
bitant and  oppressive  jurisdiction  of  the  ecclesiastical
courts,  which,  by  their  arbitrary  method  of  proceeding,
founded  in  the  canon  law,  were  led  to  sentences  the
most  shocking  to  humanity,  by  maxims  the  most  re-
pugnant to  justice.  But  the  queen,  who  dreaded  the
eifect  of  a  debate  on  this  delicate  subject,  which  could
not  fail  of  exciting  high  and  dangerous  passions,  pre-
vailed on  the  leaders  of  the  party,  by  new  and  more
solemn  promises  of  her  protection,  to  desist  from  any
application  to  parliament,  where  their  numbers  and  in-
fluence would,  in  all  probability,  have  procured  them,
if  not  entire  redress,  at  least  some  mitigation,  of  their
grievances.

They  applied  to  another  assembly,  to  a  convocation
of  the  Popish  clergy,  but  with  the  same  ill  success
which  hath  always  attended  every  proposal  for  refor-
mation, addressed  to  that  order  of  men.  To  abandon
usurped  power,  to  renounce  lucrative  error,  are  sacri-

1558.]  BOOK II.  137

fices,  which  the  virtue  of  individuals  has,  on  some  oc-
casions, offered  to  truth ;  but  from  any  society  of  men
no  such  effort  can  be  expected.  The  corruptions  of  a
society,  recommended  by  common  utility,  and  justified
by  universal  practice,  are  viewed  by  its  members
without  shame  or  horror ;  and  reformation  never  pro-
ceeds from  themselves,  but  is  always  forced  upon  them
by  some  foreign  hand.  Suitable  to  this  unfeeling  and
inflexible  spirit  was  the  behaviour  of  the  convocation
in  the  present  conjuncture.  All  the  demands  of  the
Protestants  were  rejected  with  contempt;  and  the
Popish  clergy,  far  from  endeavouring,  by  any  prudent
concessions  to  sooth  and  to  reconcile  such  a  numerous
body,  asserted  the  doctrines  of  their  church,  concerning
some  of  the  most  exceptionable  articles,  with  an  ill-
timed  rigour,  which  gave  new  offence.0

During  the  sitting  of  the  convocation,  the
Protestants  first  began  to  suspect  some  change
in  the  regent's  disposition  towards  them.  Though
joined  to  them  for  many  years  by  interest,  and  united,
as  they  conceived,  by  the  strongest  ties  of  affection  and
of  gratitude,  she  discovered,  on  this  occasion,  evident
symptoms,  not  only  of  coldness,  but  of  a  growing
disgust  and  aversion.  In  order  to  account  for  this,
our  historians  do  little  more  than  produce  the  trite  ob-
servations concerning  the  influence  of  prosperity  to
alter  the  character  and  to  corrupt  the  heart.  The
queen,  say  they,  having  reached  the  utmost  point  to
which  her  ambition  aspired,  no  longer  preserved  her
accustomed  moderation,  but,  with  an  insolence  usual
to  the  fortunate,  looked  down  upon  those  by  whose
assistance  she  had  been  enabled  to  rise  so  high.  But
it  is  neither  in  the  depravity  of  the  human  heart,  nor
in  the  ingratitude  of  the  queen's  disposition,  that  we
must  search  for  the  motives  of  her  present  conduct.
These  were  derived  from  another,  and  a  more  remote

«  Keith,  81.

138  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

source,  which,  in  order  to  clear  the  subsequent  trans-
actions, we  shall  endeavour  to  open  with  some  care.
Ambitious  The  ambition  of  the  princes  of  Lorrain
the  princes  nac*  been  no  less  successful  than  daring;
of  Lorrain.  kut  Q\\  their  schemes  were  distinguished  by
being  vast  and  unbounded.  Though  strangers  at
the  court  of  France,  their  eminent  qualities  had  raised
them,  in  a  short  time,  to  a  height  of  power  superior
to  that  of  all  other  subjects,  and  had  placed  them  on  a
level  even  with  the  princes  of  the  blood  themselves.
The  church,  the  army,  the  revenue,  were  under  their
direction.  Nothing  but  the  royal  dignity  remained
un attained,  and  they  were  elevated  to  a  near  alliance
with  it,  by  the  marriage  of  the  queen  of  Scots  to  the
dauphin.  In  order  to  gratify  their  own  vanity,  and  to
render  their  niece  more  worthy  the  heir  of  France,
they  set  on  foot  her  claim  to  the  crown  of  England,
which  was  founded  on  pretences  not  unplausible.

The  tragical  amours  and  marriages  of  Henry  VIII.,
are  known  to  all  the  world.  Moved  by  the  caprices
of  his  love,  or  of  his  resentment,  that  impatient  and
arbitrary  monarch  had  divorced  or  beheaded  four  of
the  six  queens  whom  he  married.  In  order  to  gratify
him,  both  his  daughters  had  been  declared  illegitimate
by  act  of  parliament ;  and  yet,  with  that  fantastic  in-
consistence  which  distinguishes  his  character,  he,  in
his  last  will,  whereby  he  was  empowered  to  settle  the
order  of  succession,  called  both  of  them  to  the  throne
upon  the  death  of  their  brother  Edward ;  and,  at  the
same  time,  passing  by  the  posterity  of  his  eldest  sister
Margaret,  queen  of  Scotland,  he  appointed  the  line  of
succession  to  continue  in  the  descendants  of  his  younger
sister,  the  duchess  of  Suffolk.  In  consequence  of  this
destination,  the  validity  whereof  was  admitted  by  the
English,  but  never  recognised  by  foreigners,  Mary
had  reigned  in  England  without  the  least  complaint
of  neighbouring  princes.  But  the  same  causes  which

1559.]  BOOK  II.  139

facilitated  her  accession  to  the  throne,  were  obstacles
to  the  elevation  of  her  sister  Elizabeth,  and  rendered
her  possession  of  it  precarious  and  insecure. Rome
trembled for  the  catholic  faith,  under  a  Protestant
queen  of  such  eminent  abilities. The  same  supersti-
tious fears  alarmed  the  court  of  Spain. France  beheld
with  concern  a  throne,  to  which  the  queen  of  Scots
could  form  so  many  pretensions,  occupied  by  a  rival,
whose  birth,  in  the  opinion  of  all  good  Catholics,  ex-
cluded her  from  any  legal  right  of  succession. The
impotent  hatred  of  the  Roman  pontiff, or  the  slow
councils  of  Philip  II.,  would  have  produced  no  sudden
or  formidable  effect. The  ardent  and  impetuous  am-
bition of  the  princes  of  Lorrain,  who  at  that  time  go-
verned the  court  of  France,  was  more  decisive,  and
They  per-  more to  be dreaded. Instigated  by  them,
ruatoea^a~  Henry,  soon after  the  death  of  Mary,  per-
sume  the suaded  his  daughter-in-law,  and  her  husband,
queen  of to assume  the title of  king and queen  of
England. England. They  affected  to  publish  this  to  all
Europe. They used that style and  appellation  in
public  papers,  some  of  which  still  remain.d The  arms
of  England  were  engraved  on  their  coin  and  plate,  and
borne  by  them  on all  occasions. No  preparations,
however, were  made  to  support  this impolitic  and
premature  claim. Elizabeth  was  already  seated  on
her  throne ;  she  possessed  all  the  intrepidity  of  spirit,
and  all  the  arts  of  policy  which  were  necessary  for
maintaining  that  station. England  was  growing  into
reputation  for  naval  power. The  marine  of  France
had  been  utterly  neglected ;  and  Scotland  remained
the  only  avenue  by  which  the  territories  of  Elizabeth
could  be  approached. It  was on that  side,

Resolve  .  ,

to  invade  therefore,  that  the  princes  ot  Lorrain  determined,
to  make  their  attack;6  and,  by  using  the  name

d  Anders.  Diplom.  Scot.  Nos.  68.  and  164.
e  Forbes's  Collect,  i.  253. 269.  279.  404.

140  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

and  pretensions  of  the  Scottish  queen,  they  hoped  to
rouse  the  English  Catholics,  formidable  at  that  time
by  their  zeal  and  numbers,  and  exasperated  to  the
utmost  against  Elizabeth,  on  account  of  the  change
which  she  had  made  in  the  national  religion,
in  order  to  ^  was  in  va^n  to  exPect  *ne  assistance  of  the
this,  neces-  Scottish  Protestants  to  dethrone  a  queen,  whom
check  the  all  Europe  began  to  consider  the  most  powerful
tion'm*"  guardian  and  defender  of  the  reformed  faith.
Scotland.  rpQ  kreak  the  power  and  reputation  of  that
party  in  Scotland,  became,  for  this  reason,  a  necessary
step  towards  the  invasion  of  England.  With  this  the
princes  of  Lorrain  resolved  to  open  their  scheme.
And  as  persecution  was  the  only  method  for  suppress-
ing religious  opinions  known  in  that  age,  or  dictated
by  the  despotic  and  sanguinary  spirit  of  the  Romish
superstition,  this,  in  its  utmost  violence,  they  deter-
mined to  employ.  The  earl  of  Argyle,  the  prior  of  St.
Andrew's,  and  other  leaders  of  the  party,  were  marked
out  by  them  for  immediate  destruction^  and  they
hoped,  by  punishing  them,  to  intimidate  their  fol-
lowers. Instructions  for  this  purpose  were  sent  from
France  to  the  queen-regent.  That  humane  and  saga-
cious princess  condemned  a  measure  which  was  equally
violent  and  impolitic.  By  long  residence  in  Scotland,
she  had  become  acquainted  with  the  eager  and  impa-
tient temper  of  the  nation ;  she  well  knew  the  power,
the  number,  and  popularity,  of  the  Protestant  leaders  ;
and  had  been  a  witness  to  the  intrepid  and  unconquer-
able resolution  which  religious  fervour  could  inspire.
What  then  could  be  gained  by  rousing  this  danger-
ous spirit,  which  hitherto  all  the  arts  of  policy  had
scarcely  been  able  to  restrain  ?  If  it  once  broke  loose,
the  authority  of  a  regent  would  be  little  capable  to
subdue,  or  even  to  moderate,  its  rage.  If,  in  order  to
quell  it,  foreign  forces  were  called  in,  this  would  give

f  Forbes's  Collect,  i.  152.

1559.]  BOOK II.  141

the  alarm  to  the  whole  nation,  irritated  already  at
the  excessive  power  which  the  French  possessed  in  the
kingdom,  and  suspicious  of  all  their  designs.  Amidst
the  shock  which  this  might  occasion,  far  from  hoping
to  exterminate  the  Protestant  doctrine,  it  would  be
well  if  the  whole  fabric  of  the  established  church  were
not  shaken,  and  perhaps  overturned  from  the  founda-
tion. These  prudent  remonstrances  made  no  impres-
sion on  her  brothers ;  precipitant,  but  inflexible  in  all
their  resolutions,  they  insisted  on  the  full  and  rigorous
execution  of  their  plan.  Mary,  passionately  devoted
to  the  interest  of  France,  and  ready,  on  all  occasions,
to  sacrifice  her  own  opinions  to  the  inclinations  of  her
brothers,  prepared  to  execute  their  commands  with  im-
plicit submission  ;g  and,  contrary  to  her  own  judgment,
and  to  all  the  rules  of  sound  policy,  she  became  the
instrument  of  exciting  civil  commotions  in  Scotland,
the  fatal  termination  of  which  she  foresaw  and  dreaded.
There-  From  the  time  of  the  queen's  competition
gent  alters  for  tne  regency  with  the  duke  of  Chatelherault,

her  con-  *

duct  with  the  Popish  clergy,  under  the  direction  of  the
theTpro-0  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  had  set  themselves
testants.  jn  OppOSition  to  all  her  measures.  Her  first
step  towards  the  execution  of  her  new  scheme,  was  to
regain  their  favour.  Nor  was  this  reconcilement  a
matter  of  difficulty.  The  Popish  ecclesiastics,  sepa-
rated from  the  rest  of  mankind  by  the  law  of  celibacy,
one  of  the  boldest  and  most  successful  efforts  of  human
policy  ;  and  combined  among  themselves  in  the  closest
and  most  sacred  union,  have  been  accustomed,  in
every  age,  to  sacrifice  all  private  and  particular  pas-
sions to  the  dignity  and  interest  of  their  order.  De-
lighted on  this  occasion  with  the  prospect  of  triumph-
ing over  a  faction,  the  encroachments  of  which  they
had  long  dreaded,  and  animated  with  the  hopes  of  re-
establishing their  declining  grandeur  on  a  firmer  basis,

»  Melv.  48. Mem.  de  Castlenau,  ap.  Jebb,  vol.  ii.  446.

142  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

they,  at  once,  cancelled  the  memory  of  the  past  inju-
ries, and  engaged  to  second  the  queen  in  all  her
attempts  to  check  the  progress  of  the  Reformation.
The  queen,  being  secure  of  their  assistance,  openly
approved  of  the  decrees  of  the  convocation,  by  which
the  principles  of  the  reformers  were  condemned  ;  and,
at  the  same  time,  she  issued  a  proclamation,  enjoining
all  persons  to  observe  the  approaching  festival  of
Easter  according  to  the  Romish  ritual.

As  it  was  no  longer  possible  to  mistake  the  queen's
intentions,  the  Protestants,  who  saw  the  danger  ap-
proach, in  order  to  avert  it,  employed  the  earl  of
Glencairn,  and  Sir  Hugh  Campbell  of  Loudon,  to  ex-
postulate with  her  concerning  this  change  towards
severity,  which  their  former  services  had  so  little  me-
rited, and  which  her  reiterated  promises  gave  them  no
reason  to  expect.  She,  without  disguise  or  apology,
avowed  to  them  her  resolution  of  extirpating  the  re-
formed religion  out  of  her  kingdom.  And,  upon  their
urging  her  former  engagements  with  an  uncourtly,
but  honest  boldness,  she  so  far  forgot  her  usual  mode-
ration, as  to  utter  a  sentiment,  which,  however  apt
those  of  royal  condition  may  be  to  entertain  it,  pru-
dence should  teach  them  to  conceal  as  much  as  pos-
sible. ."  The  promises  of  princes,"  says  she,  "  ought
not  to  be  too  carefully  remembered,  nor  the  perform-
ance of  them  exacted,  unless  it  suits  their  own  con-
veniency."
Summons  The  indignation  which  betrayed  the  queen

their into  this  rash  expression,  was  nothing  in  corn-
preachers .  -I -i-ii  •
to  appear  parison  of  that  with  which  she  was  animated,

r'  upon  hearing  that  the  public  exercise  of  the  re-
formed religion  had  been  introduced  into  the  town  of
Perth.  At  once  she  threw  off  the  mask,  and  issued  a
mandate,  summoning  all  the  Protestant  preachers  in
the  kingdom  to  a  court  of  justice,  which  was  to  be
held  at  Stirling,  on  the  10th  of  May.  The  Protes-

1559.]  BOOK II.  143

tants,  who,  from  their  union,  began,  about  this  time  to
be  distinguished  by  the  name  of  the  CONGREGATION,
were  alarmed,  but  not  intimidated  by  this  danger  ;  and
instantly  determined  not  to  abandon  the  men  to  whom
they  were  indebted  for  the  most  valuable  of  all  bless-
ings, the  knowledge  of  truth.  At  that  time  there
prevailed  in  Scotland,  with  respect  to  criminal  trials,
a  custom,  introduced  at  first  by  the  institution  of  vas-
salage and  clanship,  and  tolerated  afterward  under  a
feeble  government ;  persons  accused  of  any  crime  were
accompanied  to  the  place  of  trial  by  a  retinue  of  their
friends  and  adherents,  assembled  for  that  purpose  from
every  quarter  of  the  kingdom.  Authorized  by  this
ancient  practice,  the  reformed,  convened  in  great
numbers,  to  attend  their  pastors  to  Stirling.  The
queen  dreaded  their  approach  with  a  train  so  nu-
merous, though  unarmed ;  and,  in  order  to  prevent
them  from  advancing,  she  empowered  John  Erskine
of  Dun,  a  person  of  eminent  authority  with  the  party,
to  promise  in  her  name,  that  she  would  put  a  stop  to
the  intended  trial,  on  condition  the  preachers  and  their
retinue  advanced  no  nearer  to  Stirling.  Erskine,  being
convinced  himself  of  the  queen's  sincerity,  served  her
with  the  utmost  zeal ;  and  the  Protestants,  averse  from
proceeding  to  any  act  of  violence,  listened  with  plea-
sure to  so  pacific  a  proposition.  The  preachers,  with
a  few  leaders  of  the  party,  remained  at  Perth;  the
multitude  which  had  gathered  from  different  parts  of
the  kingdom  dispersed,  and  retired  to  their  own  habi-
tations.

Breaks  a  But,  notwithstanding  this  solemn  promise,
Si'the"  t^ie  <lueen>  on  ti16  10th  °f  May,  proceeded  to
Lad  relied,  call  to  trial  the  persons  who  had  been  sum-
moned, and,  upon  their  non-appearance,  the  rigour  of
justice  took  place,  and  they  were  pronounced  outlaws.
By  this  ignoble  artifice,  so  incompatible  with  regal
dignity,  and  so  inconsistent  with  that  integrity  which

144  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

should  prevail  in  all  transactions  between  sovereigns
and  their  subjects,  the  queen  forfeited  the  esteem  and
confidence  of  the  whole  nation.  The  Protestants,
shocked  no  less  at  the  indecency  with  which  she
violated  the  public  faith,  than  at  the  danger  which
threatened  themselves,  prepared  boldly  for  their  own
defence.  Erskine,  enraged  at  having  been  made  the
instrument  for  deceiving  his  party,  instantly  abandoned
Stirling,  and  repairing  to  Perth,  added  to  the  zeal  of
his  associates,  by  his  representations  of  the  queen's
inflexible  resolution  to  suppress  religion.11
This  occa-  ^he  popular  rhetoric  of  Knox  powerfully
sionsanin-  seconded  his  representations  :  he  having  been

surrection  , L  °

at  Perth,  carried  a  prisoner  into  France,  together  with
the  other  persons  taken  in  the  castle  of  St.  Andrew's,
soon  made  his  escape  out  of  that  country ;  and  resid-
ing sometimes  in  England,  sometimes  in  Scotland,  had
at  last  been  driven  out  of  both  kingdoms,  by  the  rage
of  the  Popish  clergy,  and  was  obliged  to  retire  to
Geneva.  Thence  he  was  called  by  the  leaders  of  the
Protestants  in  Scotland ;  and,  in  compliance  with  their
solicitations,  he  set  out  for  his  native  country,  where
he  arrived  a  few  days  before  the  trial  appointed  at
Stirling.  He  hurried  instantly  to  Perth,  to  share  with
his  brethren  in  the  common  danger,  or  to  assist  them
in  the  common  cause.  While  their  minds  were  in  that
ferment,  which  the  queen's  perfidiousness  and  their
own  danger  occasioned,  he  mounted  the  pulpit,  and,
by  a  vehement  harangue  against  idolatry,  inflamed  the
multitude  with  the  utmost  rage.  The  indiscretion  of
a  priest,  who,  immediately  after  Knox's  sermon,  was
preparing  to  celebrate  mass,  and  began  to  decorate  the
altar  for  that  purpose,  precipitated  them  into  immediate
action.  With  tumultuary,  but  irresistible  violence,  they
fell  upon  the  churches  in  that  city,  overturned  the
altars,  defaced  the  pictures,  broke  in  pieces  the  images;

h  Keith,  p.  84.

1559.]  BOOK II.  145

and  proceeding  next  to  the  monasteries,  they,  in  a  few-
hours  laid  those  sumptuous  fabrics  almost  level  with
the  ground.  This  riotous  insurrection  was  not  the
effect  of  any  concert,  or  previous  deliberation ;  cen-
sured by  the  reformed  preachers,  and  publicly  con-
demned by  persons  of  most  power  and  credit  with  the
party,  it  must  be  regarded  merely  as  an  accidental
eruption  of  popular  rage.1

But  to  the  queen-dowager  these  proceedings  ap-
peared in  a  very  different  light.  Besides  their  manifest
contempt  for  her  authority,  the  Protestants  had  violated
every  thing  in  religion  which  she  deemed  venerable  or
The  re-  holy  ;  and  on  both  these  accounts  she  deter-
marches  m^ne^  to  inflict  the  severest  vengeance  on  the
against  whole  party.  She  had  already  drawn  the
troops  in  French  pay  to  Stirling ;  with  these,
and  what  Scottish  forces  she  could  levy  of  a  sudden,
she  marched  directly  to  Perth,  in  hopes  of  surprising
the  Protestant  leaders  before  they  could  assemble  their
followers,  whom,  out  of  confidence  in  her  disingenuous
promises,  they  had  been  rashly  induced  to  dismiss.
Intelligence  of  these  preparations  and  menaces  was
soon  conveyed  to  Perth.  The  Protestants  would  gladly
have  soothed  the  queen,  by  addresses  both  to  herself
and  to  the  persons  of  greatest  credit  in  her  court ;  but,
finding  her  inexorable,  they,  with  great  vigour,  took
measures  for  their  own  defence.  Their  adherents,  ani-
mated with  zeal  for  religion,  and  eager  to  expose
themselves  in  so  good  a  cause,  flocked  in  such  num-
bers to  Perth,  that  they  not  only  secured  the  town  from
danger,  but  within  a  few  days  were  in  a  condition  to
take  the  field,  and  to  face  the  queen,  who  advanced
with  an  army  seven  thousand  strong.

Neither  party,  however,  was  impatient  to  engage.
The  queen  dreaded  the  event  of  a  battle  with  men
whom  the  fervour  of  religion  raised  above  the  seilse  of

1  Knox,  Hist.  127,  128.
VOL. I.  L

146  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

fear  or  danger. The  Protestants  beheld  with  regret
the  earl  of  Argyle,  the  prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  and  some
other  eminent  persons  of  their  party,  still  adhering  to
the  queen ; and,  destitute  of  their  aid  and  counsel,
declined  hazarding  an  action,  the  ill  success  of  which
might  have  proved  the  ruin  of  their  cause. The  pros-
pect of  an  accommodation  was  for  these  reasons  highly
acceptable  to  both  sides. Argyle  and  the  prior,  who
were  the  queen's commissioners for  conducting the
negotiation,  seem  to  have  been  sincerely  desirous  of
reconciling  the  contending  factions ;  and  the  earl  of
Glencairn  arriving  unexpectedly  with  a  powerful  rein-
forcement to  the  congregation,  augmented  the  queen's
A  treaty eagerness  for  peace. A  treaty  was  accordingly
concluded,  concluded,  in  which  it  was  stipulated  that  both
armies  should  be  disbanded,  and  the  gates  of  Perth
set open  to the  queen ; that  indemnity should be
granted  to  the  inhabitants  of  that  city,  and  to  all  others
concerned in  the  late  insurrection; that  no  French
garrison  should  be  left  in  Perth,  and  no  French  soldier
should  approach  within  three  miles  of  that  place ;  and
that  a  parliament  should  immediately  be  held,  in  order
to  compose  whatever  difference  might  still  remain.k

The  leaders  of  the  congregation,  distrustful
of  the  queen's  sincerity,  and  sensible  that  con-
cessions, flowing  not  from  inclination,  but  extorted  by
the  necessity  of  her  affairs,  could  not  long  remain  in
force,  entered  into  a  new  association,  by  which  they
bound  themselves,  on  the  first  infringement  of  the  pre-
sent treaty,  or  on  the  least  appearance  of  danger  to
their  religion,  to  re-assemble  their  followers,  and  to
take  arms  in  defence  of  what  they  deemed  the  cause
of  God  and  their  country.1

The  queen,  by  her  conduct, demonstrated

Broken  . J .

by  the these  precautions  to  be  the  result  of  no  ground-
less or  unnecessary  fear. No  sooner  were  the

k  Keith,  89.  »  Knox,  238.

1559.]  BOOK 11.  147

Protestant  forces  dismissed,  than  she  broke  every  arti-
cle in  the  treaty.  She  introduced  French  troops  into
Perth,  fined  some  of  the  inhabitants,  banished  others,
removed  the  magistrates  out  of  office,  and,  on  her
retiring  to  Stirling,  she  left  behind  her  a  garrison  of
six  hundred  men,  with  orders  to  allow  the  exercise  of
no  other  religion  than  the  Roman  Catholic.  The  si-
tuation of  Perth,  a  place  at  that  time  of  some  strength,
and  a  town  among  the  most  proper  of  any  in  the  king-
dom for  the  station  of  a  garrison,  seems  to  have  allured
the  queen  to  this  unjustifiable  and  ill-judged  breach  of
public  faith ;  which  she  endeavoured  to  colour,  by
alleging  that  the  body  of  men  left  at  Perth  was  entirely
composed  of  native  Scots,  though  kept  in  pay  by  the
king  of  France.

The  queen's  scheme  began  gradually  to  unfold  ;  it
was  now  apparent,  that  not  only  the  religion,  but  the
liberties  of  the  kingdom  were  threatened ;  and  that  the
French  troops  were  to  be  employed  as  instruments  for
subduing  the  Scots,  and  wreathing  the  yoke  about
their  necks.  Martial  as  the  genius  of  the  Scots  then
was,  the  poverty  of  their  country  made  it  impossible  to
keep  their  armies  long  assembled ;  and  even  a  very
small  body  of  regular  troops  might  have  proved  for-
midable to  the  nation,  though  consisting  wholly  of
soldiers.  But  what  number  of  French  forces  were
then  in  Scotland,  at  what  times,  and  under  what  pre-
text they  returned,  after  having  left  the  kingdom  in
1550,  we  cannot  with  any  certainty  determine.  Con-
temporary historians  often  select  with  little  judgment
the  circumstances  which  they  transmit  to  posterity ;
and  with  respect  to  matters  of  the  greatest  curiosity
and  importance,  leave  succeeding  ages  altogether  in
the  dark.  We  may  conjecture,  however,  from  some
passages  in  Buchanan,  that  the  French  and  Scots  in
French  pay,  amounted  at  least  to  three  thousand  men,
under  the  command  of  Monsieur  D'Oysel,  a  creature

L  2

148  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

of  the  house  of  Guise ;  and  they  were  soon  augmented
to  a  much  more  formidable  number.

The  queen,  encouraged  by  having  so  considerable
a  body  of  well-disciplined  troops  at  her  command,  and
instigated  by  the  violent  counsels  of  D'Oysel,  had  ven-
tured, as  we  have  observed,  to  violate  the  treaty  of
Perth,  and,  by  that  rash  action,  once  more  threw  the
nation  into  the  most  dangerous  convulsions.  The  earl
The  Pro-  of  Argyle  and  the  prior  of  St.  Andrew's  in-
iTgaTn  take  stantly  deserted  a  court  where  faith  and  honour
arms.  seemed  to  them  to  be  no  longer  regarded ;  and
joined  the  leaders  of  the  congregation,  who  had  re-
treated to  the  eastern  part  of  Fife.  The  barons  from
the  neighbouring  counties  repaired  to  them,  the  preach-
ers roused  the  people  to  arms,  and  wherever  they  came,
the  same  violent  operations  which  accident  had  occa-
sioned at  Perth,  were  now  encouraged  out  of  policy.
The  enraged  multitude  was  let  loose,  and  churches
and  monasteries,  the  monuments  of  ecclesiastic  pride
and  luxury,  were  sacrificed  to  their  zeal.

In  order  to  check  their  career,  the  queen,  without
losing  a  moment,  put  her  troops  in  motion;  but  the
zeal  of  the  congregation  got  the  start  once  more  of
her  vigilance  and  activity.  In  that  warlike  age,  when
all  men  were  accustomed  to  arms,  and  on  the  least
prospect  of  danger  were  ready  to  run  to  them,  the
leaders  of  the  Protestants  found  no  difficulty  to  raise
an  army.  Though  they  set  out  from  St.  Andrew's  with
a  slender  train  of  a  hundred  horse,  crowds  flocked  to
their  standards  from  every  corner  of  the  country  through
which  they  marched ;  and  before  they  reached  Falk-
land, a  village  only  ten  miles  distant,  they  were  able
to  meet  the  queen  with  superior  force. m

The  queen,  surprised  at  the  approach  of  so  formid-
able a  body,  which  was  drawn  up  by  its  leaders  in
such  a  manner  as  added  greatly  in  appearance  to  its

»  Knox,  141.

1559.]  BOOK  II.  149

numbers,  had  again  recourse  to  negotiation.  She
found,  however,  that  the  preservation  of  the  Protestant
religion,  their  zeal  for  which  had  at  first  roused  the
leaders  of  the  congregation  to  take  arms,  was  not  the
only  object  they  had  now  in  view.  They  were  ani-
mated with  the  warmest  love  of  civil  liberty,  which
they  conceived  to  be  in  imminent  danger  from  the  at-
tempts of  the  French  forces :  and  these  two  passions
mingling,  added  reciprocally  to  each  other's  strength.
They  aim  Together  with  more  enlarged  notions  of  reli-
gion,  the  Reformation  filled  the  human  mind
w^k  more  ^beral  and  generous  sentiments
grievances,  concerning  civil  government.  The  genius
of  Popery  is  extremely  favourable  to  the  power  of
princes.  The  implicit  submission  to  all  her  de-
crees, which  is  exacted  by  the  Romish  church,  pre-
pares and  breaks  the  mind  for  political  servitude ;  and
the  doctrines  of  the  reformers,  by  overturning  the
established  system  of  superstition,  weakened  the  firmest
foundations  of  civil  tyranny.  That  bold  spirit  of  in-
quiry, which  led  men  to  reject  theological  errors,  ac-
companied them  in  other  sciences,  and  discovered
every  where  the  same  manly  zeal  for  truth.  A  new
study,  introduced  at  the  same  time,  added  greater
force  to  the  spirit  of  liberty.  Men  became  more  ac-
quainted with  the  Greek  and  Roman  authors,  who  de-
scribed exquisite  models  of  free  government,  far  supe-
rior to  the  inaccurate  and  oppressive  system  established
by  the  feudal  law ;  and  produced  such  illustrious  ex-
amples of  public  virtue,  as  wonderfully  suited  both
the  circumstances  and  spirit  of  that  age.  Many  among
the  most  eminent  reformers  were  themselves  consider-
able masters  in  ancient  learning;  and  all  of  them
eagerly  adopted  the  maxims  and  spirit  of  the  ancients,
with  regard  to  government.11  The  most  ardent  love  of

n  The  excessive  admiration  of  ancient  policy  was  the  occasion  of  Knox's  famous
book  concerning  the  Government  of  Women,  wherein,  conformable  to  the  maxims  of

150  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

liberty  accompanied  the  Protestant  religion  throughout
all  its  progress ;  and  wherever  it  was  embraced,  it
roused  an  independent  spirit,  which  rendered  men  at-
tentive to  their  privileges  as  subjects,  and  jealous  of
the  encroachments  of  their  sovereigns.  Knox,  and  the
other  preachers  of  the  Reformation,  infused  generous
sentiments  concerning  government  into  the  minds  of
their  hearers  ;  and  the  Scottish  barons,  naturally  free
and  bold,  were  prompted  to  assert  their  rights  with
more  freedom  and  boldness  than  ever.  Instead  of
obeying  the  queen-regent,  who  had  enjoined  them  to
lay  down  their  arms,  they  demanded  not  only  the  re-
dress of  their  religious  grievances,  but,  as  a  preliminary
towards  settling  the  nation,  and  securing  its  liberties,
required  the  immediate  expulsion  of  the  French  troops
out  of  Scotland.  It  was  not  in  the  queen's  power  to
make  so  important  a  concession  without  the  concur-
rence of  the  French  monarch ;  and  as  some  time  was
requisite  in  order  to  obtain  that,  she  hoped,  during
this  interval,  to  receive  such  reinforcements  from
France  as  would  ensure  the  accomplishment  of  that
design,  which  she  had  twice  attempted  with  un-
equal strength.  Meanwhile,  she  agreed  to  a

June  13. ^ .  °  „ . ,  A '  ,\ c -

cessation  of  arms  for  eight  days,  and  before  the
expiration  of  these,  engaged  to  transport  the  French
troops  to  the  south  side  of  the  Forth ;  and  to  send
commissioners  to  St.  Andrew's,  who  should  labour  to
bring  all  differences  to  an  accommodation.  As  she
hoped,  by  means  of  the  French  troops,  to  overawe  the
Protestants  in  the  southern  counties,  the  former  article
in  the  treaty  was  punctually  executed ;  the  latter,  hav-
ing been  inserted  merely  to  amuse  the  congregation,
was  no  longer  remembered.

the  ancient  legislators,  which  modern  experience  has  proved  to  be  ill  founded,  he
pronounces  the  elevation  of  women  to  the  supreme  authority,  to  be  utterly  destruc-
tive of  good  government.  His  principles,  authorities,  and  examples,  were  all  drawn
from  ancient  writers.  The  same  observation  may  be  made  with  regard  to  Bucha-
nan's Dialogue,  De  htre  Regni  upud  Scotos.  It  is  founded,  not  on  the  maxims  of
feudal,  but  of  ancient  republican  government.

1559.]  BOOK  II.  151

By  these  reiterated  and  wanton  instances  of

A  second  /•  i i  -,  -,-,  ••. .  -, -,

treaty  vio-  perfidy,  the  queen  lost  all  credit  with  her  ad-
versaries ;  and  no  safety  appearing  in  any
other  cause,  they  again  took  arms  with  more  inflamed
resentment,  and  with  bolder  and  more  extensive  views.
The  removing  of  the  French  forces  had  laid  open  to
them  all  the  country  situated  between  Forth  and  Tay. '
The  inhabitants  of  Perth  alone  remaining  subjected  to
the  insolence  and  exactions  of  the  garrison  which  the
queen  had  left  there,  implored  the  assistance  of  the
congregation  for  their  relief.  Thither  they  marched,
and  having  without  effect  required  the  queen  to  eva-
cuate the  town  in  terms  of  the  former  treaty,  they
prepared  to  besiege  it  in  form.  The  queen  employed
the  earl  of  Huntly  and  lord  Erskine  to  divert  them
from  this  enterprise.  But  her  wonted  artifices  were
now  of  no  avail ;  repeated  so  often,  they  could  deceive
no  longer;  and,  without  listening  to  her  offers,  the
Protestants  continued  the  siege,  and  soon  obliged  the
garrison  to  capitulate.

After  the  loss  of  Perth,  the  queen  endeavoured  to
seize  Stirling,  a  place  of  some  strength,  and,  from  its
command  of  the  only  bridge  over  the  Forth,  of  great
importance.  But  the  leaders  of  the  congregation,
having  intelligence  of  her  design,  prevented  the  exe-
cution of  it,  by  a  hasty  march  thither  with  part  of
Ra  .d  their  forces.  The  inhabitants,  heartily  attached
march  and  to  the  cause,  set  open  to  them  the  gates  of
theVro-  their  town.  Thence  they  advanced,  with  the

nts*  same  rapidity,  towards  Edinburgh,  which  the
queen,  on  their  approach,  abandoned  with  precipita;-
tion,  and  retired  to  Dunbar.

The  Protestant  army,  wherever  it  came,  kindled  or
spread  the  ardour  of  reformation,  and  the  utmost  ex-
cesses of  violence  were  committed  upon  churches  and
monasteries.  The  former  were  spoiled  of  every  deco-
ration, which  was  then  esteemed  sacred  ;  the  latter

152  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

were  laid  in  ruins.  We  are  apt,  at  this  distance  of
time,  to  condemn  the  furious  zeal  of  the  reformers,  and
to  regret  the  overthrow  of  so  many  stately  fabrics,  the
monuments  of  our  ancestors'  magnificence,  and  among
the  noblest  ornaments  of  the  kingdom.  But  amidst
the  violence  of  a  reformation,  carried  on  in  opposition
to  legal  authority,  some  irregularities  were  unavoid-
able; and  perhaps  no  one  could  have  been  permitted
more  proper  to  allure  and  interest  the  multitude,  or
more  fatal  to  the  grandeur  of  the  established  church.
How  absurd  soever  and  ill  founded  the  speculative
errors  of  Popery  may  be,  some  inquiry  and  attention
are  requisite  towards  discovering  them.  The  abuses
and  corruptions  which  had  crept  into  the  public  wor-
ship of  that  church,  lay  more  open  to  observation,  and
by  striking  the  senses,  excited  more  universal  disgust.
Under  the  long  reign  of  heathenism,  superstition
seemed  to  have  exhausted  its  talent  of  invention,  so
that  when  a  superstitious  spirit  seized  Christians,  they
were  obliged  to  imitate  the  heathens  in  the  pomp  and
magnificence  of  their  ceremonies,  and  to  borrow  from
them  the  ornaments  and  decorations  of  their  temples.
To  the  pure  and  simple  worship  of  the  primitive
Christians,  there  succeeded  a  species  of  splendid  ido-
latry, nearly  resembling  those  pagan  originals  whence
it  had  been  copied.  The  contrariety  of  such  observ-
ances to  the  spirit  of  Christianity,  was  almost  the  first
thing,  in  the  Romish  system,  which  awakened  the  in-
dignation of  the  reformers,  who  applying  to  these  the
denunciations  in  the  Old  Testament  against  idolatry,
imagined  that  they  could  not  endeavour  at  suppressing
them  with  too  much  zeal.  No  task  could  be  more  ac-
ceptable to  the  multitude,  than  to  overturn  those  seats
of  superstition ;  they  ran  with  emulation  to  perform  it,
and  happy  was  the  man  whose  hand  was  most  adven-
turous and  successful  in  executing  a  work  deemed  so
pious.  Nor  did  their  leaders  labour  to  restrain  this

1559.]  BOOK  II.  153

impetuous  spirit  of  reformation.  Irregular  and  violent
as  its  sallies  were,  they  tended  directly  to  that  end
which  they  had  in  view  :  for,  by  demolishing  the  mo-
nasteries throughout  the  kingdom,  and  setting  at  li-
berty their  wretched  inhabitants,  they  hoped  to  ren-
der it  impossible  ever  to  rebuild  the  one,  or  to  re-
assemble the  other.

But  amidst  these  irregular  proceedings,  a  circum-
stance which  does  honour  to  the  conduct  and  huma-
nity of  the  leaders  of  the  congregation  deserves  notice.
They  so  far  restrained  the  rage  of  their  followers,  and
were  able  so  to  temper  their  heat  and  zeal,  that  few  of
the  Roman  Catholics  were  exposed  to  any  personal
insult,  and  not  a  single  man  suffered  death.0

At  the  same  time  we  discover,  by  the  facility  with
which  these  great  revolutions  were  effected,  how  vio-
lently the  current  of  national  favour  ran  towards  the
Reformation.  No  more  than  three  hundred  men  march-
ed out  of  Perth,  under  the  earl  of  Argyle  and  prior  of
St.  Andrew's  ;p  with  this  inconsiderable  force  they  ad-
vanced. But  wherever  they  came,  the  people  joined
them  in  a  body ;  their  army  was  seldom  less  numerous
than  five  thousand  men ;  the  gates  of  every  town  were
thrown  open  to  receive  them ;  and,  without  striking  a
single  blow,  they  took  possession  of  the  capital
of  the  kingdom.

This  rapid  and  astonishing  success  seems  to  have
encouraged  the  reformers  to  extend  their  views,  and
to  rise  in  their  demands.  Not  satisfied  with  their  first
claim  of  toleration  for  their  religion,  they  now  openly
aimed  at  establishing  the  Protestant  doctrine  on  the
ruins  of  Popery.  For  this  reason  they  determined  to
fix  their  residence  at  Edinburgh ;  and,  by  their  ap-
pointment, Knox,  and  some  other  preachers,  taking
possession  of  the  pulpits,  which  had  been  abandoned
by  the  affrightened  clergy,  declaimed  against  the  er-

0  Lesley,  ap.  Jebb,  vol.  i.  231.  *  Keith,  94.

154  SCOTLAND-  [1559.

rors  of  Popery  with  such  fervent  zeal  as  could  not  fail
of  gaming  many  proselytes.

In  the  mean  time,  the  queen,  who  had  prudently
given  way  to  a  torrent  which  she  could  not  resist,  ob-
served with  pleasure  that  it  now  began  to  subside.  The
leaders  of  the  congregation  had  been  above  two  months
in  arms,  and  by  the  expenses  of  a  campaign,  pro-
tracted so  long  beyond  the  usual  time  of  service  in
that  age,  had  exhausted  all  the  money  which  a  country
where  riches  did  not  abound,  had  been  able  to  supply.
The  multitude,  dazzled  with  their  success,  and  con-
cluding the  work  to  be  already  done,  retired  to  their
habitations.  A  few  only  of  the  more  zealous  or
wealthy  barons  remained  with  their  preachers  at  Edin-
burgh. As  intelligence  is  procured  in  civil  wars  with
little  difficulty,  whatever  was  transacted  at  Edinburgh
was  soon  known  at  Dunbar.  The  queen,  regulating
her  own  conduct  by  the  situation  of  her  adversaries,
artfully  amused  them  with  the  prospect  of  an  imme-
diate accommodation  ;  while,  at  the  same  time;  she  by
studied  delays  spun  out  the  negotiations  for  that  pur-
pose to  such  a  length,  that,  in  the  end,  the  party
dwindled  to  an  inconsiderable  number ;  and,  as  if
peace  had  been  already  re-established,  became  careless
of  military  discipline.  The  queen,  who  watched  for
such  an  opportunity,  advanced  unexpectedly,  by  a
sudden  march  in  the  night,  with  all  her  forces,  and
appearing  before  Edinburgh,  filled  that  city  with  the
utmost  consternation.  The  Protestants,  weakened  by
the  imprudent  dispersion  of  their  followers,  durst  not
encounter  the  French  troops  in  the  open  field ;  and
\vere  even  unable  to  defend  an  ill  fortified  town  against
their  assaults.  Unwilling,  however,  to  abandon  the
citizens  to  the  queen's  mercy,  they  endeavoured,  by
facing  the  enemy's  army,  to  gain  time  for  collecting
their  own  associates.  But  the  queen,  in  spite  of  all
their  resistance,  would  have  easily  forced  her  way  into

1559.]  BOOK  II.  155

the  town5  if  the  seasonable  conclusion  of  a  truce  had
not  procured  her  admission  without  the  effusion  of
blood.

A  third  Their  dangerous  situation  easily  induced  the
leaders  of  the  congregation  to  listen  to  any
overtures  of  peace  ;  and  as  the  queen  was  looking  daily
for  the  arrival  of  a  strong  reinforcement  from  France,
and  expected  great  advantages  from  a  cessation  of
arms,  she  also  agreed  to  it  upon  no  unequal  condi-
tions. Together  with  a  suspension  of  hostilities,  from
the  24th  of  July  to  the  10th  of  January,  it  was
stipulated  in  this  treaty,  that,  on  the  one  hand,  the
Protestants  should  open  the  gates  of  Edinburgh  next
morning  to  the  queen-regent ;  remain  in  dutiful  sub-
jection to  the  government ;  abstain  from  all  future  vio-
lation of  religious  houses  ;  and  give  no  interruption  to
the  established  clergy,  either  in  the  discharge  of  their
functions,  or  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  benefices.  On
the  other  hand,  the  queen  agreed  to  give  no  molesta-
tion to  the  preachers  or  professors  of  the  Protestant  re-
ligion ;  to  allow  the  citizens  of  Edinburgh,  during  the
cessation  of  hostilities,  to  enjoy  the  exercise  of  religi-
ous worship,  according  to  the  form  most  agreeable  to
the  conscience  of  each  individual :  and  to  permit  the
free  and  public  profession  of  the  Protestant  faith  in
every  part  of  the  kingdom.9  The  queen,  by  these  libe-
ral concessions  in  behalf  of  their  religion,  hoped  to
sooth  the  Protestants,  and  expected,  from  indulging
their  favourite  passion,  to  render  them  more  compliant
with  respect  to  other  articles,  particularly  the  expul-
sion of  the  French  troops  out  of  Scotland.  The  anx-
iety which  the  queen  expressed  for  retaining  this  body
of  men,  rendered  them  more  and  more  the  objects  of
national  jealousy  and  aversion.  The  immediate  ex-
pulsion of  them  was  therefore  demanded  anew,  and
with  greater  warmth  ;  but  the  queen,  taking  advantage

i  Keith,  98. Maitland,  Hist,  of  Edit).  16,  17.

J56  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

of  the  distress  of  the  adverse  party,  eluded  the  request,
and  would  consent  to  nothing  more,  than  that  a  French
garrison  should  not  be  introduced  into  Edinburgh.

The  desperate  state  of  their  affairs  imposed  on  the
congregation  the  necessity  of  agreeing  to  this  article,
which,  however,  was  very  far  from  giving  them  satis-
faction. Whatever  apprehensions  the  Scots  had  con-
ceived from  retaining  the  French  forces  in  the  king-
dom, were  abundantly  justified  during  the  late  commo-
tions. A  small  body  of  those  troops,  maintained  in
constant  pay,  and  rendered  formidable  by  regular  dis-
cipline, had  checked  the  progress  of  a  martial  people,
though  animated  with  zeal  both  for  religion  and  li-
berty. The  smallest  addition  to  their  number,  and  a
considerable  one  was  daily  expected,  might  prove  fatal
to  the  public  liberty,  and  Scotland  might  be  exposed
to  the  danger  of  being  reduced  from  an  independent
kingdom,  to  the  mean  condition  of  a  province,  annexed
to  the  dominions  of  its  powerful  ally.

In  order  to  provide  against  this  imminent  calamity,
the  duke  of  Chatelherault,  and  earl  of  Huntly,  imme-
diately after  concluding  the  truce,  desired  an  interview
with  the  chiefs  of  the  congregation.  These  two  noble-
men, the  most  potent  at  that  time  in  Scotland,  were  the
leaders  of  the  party  which  adhered  to  the  established
church.  They  had  followed  the  queen,  during  the  late
commotions,  and  having  access  to  observe  more  nar-
rowly the  dangerous  tendency  of  her  counsels,  their
abhorrence  of  the  yoke  which  was  preparing  for  their
country,  surmounted  all  other  considerations,  and  de-
termined them  rather  to  endanger  the  religion  which
they  professed,  than  to  give  their  aid  towards  the  exe-
cution of  her  pernicious  designs.  They  proceeded  far-
ther, and  promised  to  Argyle,  Glencairn,  and  the  prior
of  St.  Andrew's,  who  were  appointed  to  meet  them,
that  if  the  queen  should,  with  her  usual  insincerity,  vio-
late any  article  in  the  treaty  of  truce,  or  refuse  to  gra-

1559.]  BOOK II.  157

tify  the  wishes  of  the  whole  nation,  by  dismissing  her
French  troops,  they  would  then  instantly  join  with  their
countrymen  in  compelling  her  to  a  measure,  which  the
public  safety,  and  the  preservation  of  their  liberties,
rendered  necessary/

About  this  time,  died  Henry  II.  of  France  ;
July  s.  J

just  when  he  had  adopted  a  system  with  regard

to  the  affairs  of  Scotland,  which  would,  in  all  probabi-
lity, have  restored  union  and  tranquillity  to  that  king-
dom.3 Towards  the  close  of  his  reign,  the  princes  of
Lorrain  began  visibly  to  decline  in  favour,  and  the
constable  Montmorency,  by  the  assistance  of  the  du-
chess of  Valentinois,  recovered  that  ascendant  over  the
spirit  of  his  master,  which  his  great  experience,  and
his  faithful,  though  often  unfortunate,  services  seemed
justly  to  merit.  That  prudent  minister  imputed  the
insurrections  in  Scotland  wholly  to  the  duke  of  Guise
and  the  cardinal  of  Lorrain,  whose  violent  and  preci-
pitant councils  could  not  fail  of  transporting,  beyond
all  bounds  of  moderation,  men  whose  minds  were  pos-
sessed with  that  jealousy  which  is  inseparable  from  the
love  of  civil  liberty,  or  inflamed  with  that  ardour  which
accompanies  religious  zeal.  Montmorency,  in  order  to
convince  Henry  that  he  did  not  load  his  rivals  with  any
groundless  accusation,  prevailed  to  have  Melvil,*  a
Scottish  gentleman  of  his  retinue,  dispatched  into  his
native  country,  with  instructions  to  observe  the  mo-
tions both  of  the  regent  and  of  her  adversaries ;  and
the  king  agreed  to  regulate  his  future  proceedings  in
that  kingdom  by  Melvil's  report.

Did  history  indulge  herself  in  these  speculations,
it  would  be  amusing  to  inquire  what  a  different
direction  might  have  been  given  by  this  resolu-
tion to  the  national  spirit ;  and  to  what  a  different
issue  Melvil's  report,  which  would  have  set  the  conduct
of  the  malecontents  in  the  most/avourable  light,  might

r  Knox,  154.  •  Melv.  49  *  The  author  of  the  memoirs.

158  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

have  conducted  the  public  disorders.  Perhaps,  by  gen-
tle treatment,  and  artful  policy,  the  progress  of  the  Re-
formation might  have  been  checked,  and  Scotland
brought  to  depend  upon  France.  Perhaps,  by  gaming
possession  of  this  avenue,  the  French  might  have  made
their  way  into  England,  and,  under  colour  of  support-
ing Mary's  title  to  the  crown,  they  might  not  only  have
defeated  all  Elizabeth's  measures  in  favour  of  the  Re-
formation, but  have  established  the  Roman  Catholic
religion,  and  destroyed  the  liberties  of  that  kingdom.
But,  into  this  boundless  field  of  fancy  and  conjecture,
the  historian  must  make  no  excursions  ;  to  relate  real
occurrences,  and  to  explain  their  real  causes  and  effects,
is  his  peculiar  and  only  province.
Accession  The  tragical  and  untimely  death  of  the  French
of  Francis  monarch  put  an  end  to  all  moderate  and  pacific

II.  to  the

crown  of  measures  with  regard  to  Scotland.  The  duke
of  Guise,  and  the  cardinal  his  brother,  upon  the
accession  of  Francis  II.,  a  prince  void  of  genius,  and
without  experience,  assumed  the  chief  direction  of
French  affairs.  Allied  so  nearly  to  the  throne,  by  the
marriage  of  their  niece  the  queen  of  Scots  with  the
young  king,  they  now  wanted  but  little  of  regal  dig-
nity, and  nothing  of  regal  power.  This  power  did
not  long  remain  inactive  in  their  hands.  The
same  vast  schemes  of  ambition,  which  they  had
planned  out  under  the  former  reign,  were  again  re-
sumed ;  and  they  were  enabled,  by  possessing  such
ample  authority,  to  pursue  them  with  more  vigour  and
greater  probability  of  success.  They  beheld,  with  in-
finite regret,  the  progress  of  the  Protestant  religion  in
Scotland ;  and,  sensible  what  an  unsurmountable  obsta-
cle it  would  prove  to  their  designs,  they  bent  all  their
strength  to  check  its  growth,  before  it  rose  to  any
greater  height.  For  this  purpose  they  carried  on  their
preparations  with  all  possible  expedition,  and  encou-
raged the  queen  their  sister  to  expect,  in  a  short  time,

1559.]  BOOK II.  159

the  arrival  of  an  army,  so  powerful,  as  the  zeal  of  their
adversaries,  however  desperate,  would  not  venture  to
oppose.

Nor  were  the  lords  of  the  congregation  either  igno-
rant of  those  violent  counsels  which  prevailed  in  the
court  of  France  since  the  death  of  Henry,  or  careless
of  providing  against  the  danger  which  threatened  them
from  that  quarter. The  success  of  their  cause,  as  well
as  their  personal  safety,  depending  entirely  on  the  una-
nimity and  vigour  of  their  own  resolutions,  they  en-
deavoured to  guard  against  division,  and  to  cement  to-
gether more  closely,  by  entering  into  a  stricter  bond  of
confederacy  and  mutual  defence. Two  persons  con-
curred in  this  new  association,  who  brought  a  great
accession  both  of  reputation  and  of  power  to  the  party.
These  were  the  duke  of  Chatelherault,  and  his  eldest
son the earl of Arran. This young nobleman,
having  resided  some  years  in  France,  where  he  com-
manded the Scottish guards,  had  imbibed  the  Pro-
testant opinions  concerning  religion. Hurried  along
by  the  heat  of  youth  and  the  zeal  of  a  proselyte,  he  had
uttered  sentiments  with  respect  to  the  points  in  contro-
versy, which  did  not  suit  the  temper  of  a  bigotted
court,  intent  at  that  juncture  on  the  extinction  of  the
Protestant  religion  ;  in  order  to  accomplish  which,  the
greatest  excesses  of  violence  were  committed. The
church  was  suffered  to  wreak  its  utmost  fury  upon  all
who  were  suspected  of  heresy. Courts  were  erected  in
different  parts  of  France,  to  take  cognizance  of  this
crime,  and  by  their  sentences  several  persons  of  dis-
tinction were  condemned  to  the  flames.

But,  in  order  to  inspire  more  universal  terror,  the
princes  of  Lorrain  resolved  to  select,  for  a  sacrifice,
some  persons  whose  fall  might  convince  all  ranks  of
men,  that  neither  splendour  of  birth,  nor  eminence  in
station,  could  exempt  from  punishment  those  who
should  be  guilty  of  this  unpardonable  transgression.

160  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

The  earl  of  Arran  was  the  person  destined  to  be  the
unhappy  victim." As  he  was  allied  to  one  throne,  and
the  presumptive  heir  to  another ;  as  he  possessed  the
first  rank  in  his  own  country,  and  enjoyed  an  honour-
able station  in  France;  his  condemnation  could  not  fail
of  making  the  desired  impression  on  the  whole  king-
dom. But  the  cardinal  of  Lorrain  having  let  fall  some
expressions,  which  raised  Arran's  suspicions  of  the  de-
sign, he  escaped  the  intended  blow  by  a  timely  flight.
Indignation,  zeal,  resentment,  all  prompted  him  to  seek
revenge  upon  these  persecutors  of  himself  and  of  the
religion  which  he  professed ;  and  as  he  passed  through
England,  on  his  return  to  his  native  country,  Elizabeth,
by  hopes  and  promises,  inflamed  those  passions,  and
sent  him  back  into  Scotland,  animated  with  the  same
implacable  aversion  to  France,  which  possessed  a  great
Earl  of part  of  his  countrymen. He  quickly  commu-
th!Tpro?ms  nicated  these  sentiments  to  his  father  the  duke
testants. Q£  Chatelherault,  who  was  already  extremely
disgusted  with  the  measures  carrying  on  in  Scotland  ;
and  as  it  was  the  fate  of  that  nobleman  to  be  governed
in  every  instance  by  those  about  him,  he  now  suffered
himself  to  be  drawn  from  the  queen-regent ;  and,  having
joined  the  congregation,  was  considered,  from  that  time,
as  the  head  of  the  party.

But  with  respect  to  him,  this  distinction  was  merely
nominal.  James  Stewart,  prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  was  the
person  who  moved  and  actuated  the  whole  body  of  the
Protestants,  among  whom  he  possessed  that  unbound-
ed confidence,  which  his  strenuous  adherence  to  their
interest  and  his  great  abilities  so  justly  merited.  He
was  the  natural  son  of  James  V.,  by  a  daughter  of  lord
Erskine ;  and  as  that  amorous  monarch  had  left  seve-
ral others  a  burden  upon  the  crown,  they  were  all  des-
tined for  the  church,  where  they  could  be  placed  in
stations  of  dignity  and  affluence.  In  consequence  of

"  Thuan.  lib.  ixiv.  p.  462. Edit.  Francof.

1559.]  BOOK II.  161

this  resolution,  the  priory  of  St.  Andrew's  had  been
conferred  upon  James :  but,  during  so  busy  a  period,
he  soon  became  disgusted  with  the  indolence  and  re-
tirement of  a  monastic  life  ;  and  his  enterprising  genius
called  him  forth  to  act  a  principal  part  on  a  more  pub-
lic and  conspicuous  theatre.  The  scene  in  which  he
appeared  required  talents  of  different  kinds  :  military
virtue,  and  political  discernment,  were  equally  neces-
sary in  order  to  render  him  illustrious.  These  he  pos-
sessed in  an  eminent  degree.  To  the  most  unquestion-
able personal  bravery,  he  added  great  skill  in  the  art
of  war,  and  in  every  enterprise  his  arms  were  crowned
with  success.  His  sagacity  and  penetration  in  civil
affairs  enabled  him,  amidst  the  reeling  and  turbulence
of  factions,  to  hold  a  prosperous  course;  while  his  bold-
ness in  defence  of  the  Reformation,  together  with  the
decency,  and  even  severity,  of  his  manners,  secured
him  the  reputation  of  being  sincerely  attached  to  reli-
gion, without  which  it  was  impossible  in  that  age  to
gain  an  ascendant  over  mankind.

It  was  not  without  reason  that  the  queen  dreaded
the  enmity  of  a  man  so  capable  to  obstruct  her  designs.
As  she  could  npt,  with  all  her  address,  make  the  least
impression  on  his  fidelity  to  his  associates,  she  endea-
voured to  lessen  his  influence,  and  to  scatter  among
them  the  seeds  of  jealousy  and  distrust,  by  insinuating
that  the  ambition  of  the  prior  aspired  beyond  the  con-
dition of  a  subject,  and  aimed  at  nothing  less  than  the
crown  itself.

An  accusation  so  improbable  gained  but  little  credit.
Whatever  thoughts  of  this  kind  the  presumption  of
unexpected  success,  and  his  elevation  to  the  highest
dignity  in  the  kingdom,  may  be  alleged  to  have  in-
spired at  any  subsequent  period,  it  is  certain  that  at
this  juncture  he  could  form  no  such  vast  design.  To
dethrone  a  queen,  who  was  lineal  heir  to  an  ancient
race  of  monarchs  ;  who  had  been  guilty  of  no  action

VOL.  I.  M

162  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

by  which  she  could  forfeit  the  esteem  and  affection  of
her  subjects ;  who could  employ,  in  defence  of  her
rights,  the  forces  of  a  kingdom  much  more  powerful
than  her  own;  and  to  substitute,  in  her  place,  a  person
whom  the  illegitimacy  of  his  birth,  by  the  practice  of
all  civilized  nations,  rendered  incapable  of  any  inheri-
tance either  public  or  private ;  was  a  project  so  chime-
rical as  the  most  extravagant  ambition  would  hardly
entertain,  and  could  never  conceive  to  be  practicable.
The  promise  too,  which  the  prior  made  to  Melvil,  of
residing  constantly  in  France,  on  condition  the  public
grievances  were  redressed  ;x  the  confidence  reposed  in
him  by  the  duke  of  Chatelherault  and  his  son,  the  pre-
sumptive heirs  to  the  crown  ;  and  the  concurrence  of
almost  all  the  Scottish  nobles,  in  promoting  the  mea-
sures by  which  he  gave  offence  to  the  French  court ;  go
far  towards  his  vindication  from  those  illegal  and  cri-
minal designs,  with  the  imputation  of  which  the  queen
endeavoured  at  that  time  to  load  him.
Troops  ar- ^ne  an>ival  °f  a  thousand  French  soldiers
rive  from  compensated,  in  some  degree,  for  the  loss  which
andforti-  the  queen  sustained  by  the  defection  of  the
duke  of  Chatelherault. These  were  immedi-
ately commanded  to  fortify  Leith,  in  which  place,  on
account  of  its  commodious  harbour,  and  its  situation
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Edinburgh,  and  in  a  plentiful
country,  the  queen  resolved  to  fix  the  head-quarters  of
her  foreign  forces. This  unpopular  measure,  by  the
manner  of  executing  it,  was  rendered  still  more  unpo-
pular. In  order  to  bring  the  town  entirely  under  their
command,  the  French  turned  out  a  great  part  of  the
ancient  inhabitants, and, taking possession  of the
houses,  which  they  had  obliged  them  to  abandon,  pre-
sented to  the  view  of  the  Scots  two  objects  equally
irritating  and  offensive  ;  on  the  one  hand,  a  number  of
their countrymen expelled their  habitations  by  vio-

*  Melvil,  54.

1,559.]  BOOK II.  163

lence,  and  wandering  without  any  certain  abode ;  on
the  other,  a  colony  of  foreigners  settling  with  their
wives  and  children  in  the  heart  of  Scotland,  growing
into  strength  by  daily  reinforcements,  and  openly  pre-
paring a  yoke,  to  which,  without  some  timely  exertion
of  national  spirit,  the  whole  kingdom  must  of  necessity
submit.

The  Pro-  ft  was  w*tft  ^eeP  concern  that  the  lords  of
testants  re- the  congregation  beheld  this  bold  and  decisive

monstrate

against  step  taken  by  the  queen-regent :  nor  did  they
hesitate  a  moment,  whether  they  should  employ
their  whole  strength,  in  one  generous  effort,  to  rescue
their  religion  and  liberty  from  impending  destruction.
But,  in  order  to  justify  their  own  conduct,  and  to
throw  the  blame  entirely  on  their  adversaries,  they
resolved  to  preserve  the  appearances  of  decency  and
respect  towards  their  superiors,  and  to  have  no  recourse
to  arms  without  the  most  urgent  and  apparent  neces-
sity. They  joined,  with  this  view,  in  an  ad-

Sept.  29. J  i  .  . ,

dress  to  the  regent,  representing,  in  the  strong-
est terms,  their  dissatisfaction  with  the  measures  she
was  pursuing,  and  beseeching  her  to  quiet  the  fears
and  jealousies  of  the  nation  by  desisting  from  fortify-
ing Leith.  The  queen,  conscious  of  her  present  ad-
vantageous situation,  and  elated  with  the  hopes  of
fresh  succours,  was  in  no  disposition  for  listening  to
demands  utterly  inconsistent  with  her  views,  and
urged  with  that  bold  importunity  which  is  so  little
acceptable  to  princes/

There-  The  suggestions  of  her  French  counsellors
*en*dj«»-  contributed,  without  doubt,  to  alienate  her  still

gards  their

remon- farther  from  any  scheme of  accommodation.

strances. . .  1  ,,

As  the  queen  was  ready  on  all  occasions  to
discover  an  extraordinary  deference  for  the  opinions
of  her  countrymen,  her  brothers,  who  knew  her  secret
disapprobation  of  the  violent  measures  they  were  driv-

y  Haynes,  211.
M  2

164  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

ing  on,  took  care  to  place  near  her  such  persons  as
betrayed  her,  by  their  insinuations,  into  many  actions,
which  her  own  unbiassed  judgment  would  have  highly
condemned.  As  their  success  in  the  present  juncture,
when  all  things  were  hastening  towards  a  crisis,  de-
pended entirely  on  the  queen's  firmness,  the  princes  of
Lorrain  did  not  trust  wholly  to  the  influence  of  their
ordinary  agents ;  but,  in  order  to  add  the  greater
weight  to  their  counsels,  they  called  in  aid  the  minis-
ters of  religion ;  and,  by  the  authority  of  their  sacred
character,  they  hoped  effectually  to  recommend  to  their
sister  that  system  of  severity  which  they  had  espoused.2
With  this  view,  but  under  pretence  of  confounding  the
Protestants  by  the  skill  of  such  able  masters  in  contro-
versy, they  appointed  several  French  divines  to  reside
in  Scotland.  At  the  head  of  these,  and  with  the  cha-
racter of  legate  from  the  pope,  was  Pelleve,  bishop  of
Amiens,  and  afterward  archbishop  and  cardinal  of
Sens,  a  furious  bigot,a  servilely  devoted  to  the  house  of
Guise,  and  a  proper  instrument  for  recommending  or
executing  the  most  outrageous  measures.

Amidst  the  noise  and  danger  of  civil  arms,  these
doctors  had  little  opportunity  to  display  their  address
in  the  use  of  their  theological  weapons.  But  they  gave
no  small  offence  to  the  nation  by  one  of  their  actions.
They  persuaded  the  queen  to  seize  the  church  of  St.
Giles  in  Edinburgh,  which  had  remained,  ever  since
the  last  truce,  in  the  hands  of  the  Protestants  ;  and
having,  by  a  new  and  solemn  consecration,  purified
the  fabric  from  the  pollution  with  which  they  supposed
the  profane  ministrations  of  the  Protestants  to  have
defiled  it,  they,  in  direct  contradiction  to  one  article  in
the  late  treaty,  re-established  there  the  rights  of  the
Romish  church.  This,  added  to  the  indifference,  and
even  contempt,  with  which  the  queen  received  their
remonstrances,  convinced  the  lords  of  the  congrega-

1  Lesley,  215. Castlenau,  ap.  Jebb,  vol.  ii.  446.  473.  a  Davila,  Brantome.

1559.]  BOOK  II.  165

tion,  that  it  was  not  only  vain  to  expect  any  redress  of
their  grievances  at  her  hands,  but  absolutely  necessary
to  take  arms  in  their  own  defence.
They  take  The  eager  and  impetuous  spirit  of  the  nation,
their  own  as  weU  as  every  consideration  of  good  policy,
defence,  prompted  them  to  take  this  bold  step  without
delay.  It  was  but  a  small  part  of  the  French  auxilia-
ries which  had  as  yet  arrived.  The  fortifications  of
Leith,  though  advancing  fast,  were  still  far  from  being
complete.  Under  these  circumstances  of  disadvantage,
they  conceived  it  possible  to  surprise  the  queen's
party,  and,  by  one  sudden  and  decisive  blow,  to  pre-
vent all  future  bloodshed  and  contention.  Full

Oct.  16.

ot  these  expectations,  they  advanced  rapidly ,
towards  Edinburgh  with  a  numerous  army.  But  it
was  no  easy  matter  to  deceive  an  adversary  as  vigilant
and  attentive  as  the  queen-regent.  With  her  usual
sagacity,  she  both  foresaw  the  danger,  and  took  the
only  proper  course  to  avoid  it.  Instead  of  keeping
the  field  against  enemies  superior  in  number,  and  for-
midable on  a  day  of  battle  by  the  ardour  of  their
courage,  she  retired  into  Leith,  and  determined  pa-
tiently to  wait  the  arrival  of  new  reinforcements.
Slight  and  unfinished  as  the  fortifications  of  that  town
then  were,  she  did  not  dread  the  efforts  of  an  army^
provided  neither  with  heavy  cannon  nor  with  military
stores,  and  little  acquainted  with  the  method  of  at-
tacking any  place  fortified  with  more  art  than  those
ancient  towers  erected  all  over  the  kingdom  in  defence
of  private  property  against  the  incursions  of  banditti.

Nor  did  the  queen  meanwhile  neglect  to  have  re-
course to  those  arts  which  she  had  often  employed  to
weaken  or  divide  her  adversaries.  By  private  solici-
tations and  promises,  she  shook  the  fidelity,  or  abated
the  ardour,  of  some.  By  open  reproach  and  accusation
she  blasted  the  reputation,  and  diminished  the  autho-
rity, of  others.  Her  emissaries  were  every  where  at

SCOTLAND.

work,  and,  notwithstanding  the  zeal  for  religion  and
liberty  which  then  animated  the  nation,  they  seem  to
have  laboured  not  without  success.  We  find  Knox,
about  (his  period,  abounding  in  complaints  of  the
lukewarm  ami  languid  spirit  which  had  begun  to
spread  among  his  party. b  But  if  their  zeal  slackened
a  little,  and  suffered  a  momentary  intermission,  it  soon
blazed  up  with  fresh  vigour,  tad  rose  to  a  greater
height  than  ever.

H«n«w  The  queen  herself  gave  occasion  to  this,  by
rvraon.  ^*3  wpty  which  she  made  to  a  new  remon-
strance*; strance  from  the  lords  of  the  congregation.
Upon  their  arrival  at  Edinburgh,  they  onoe  more  re-
presented to  her  the  dangers  arising  from  the  increase
of  the  French  troops,  the  fortifying  of  Leith,  and  her
other  measures,  which  they  conceived  to  be  destructive
to  the  peace  and  liberty  of  the  kingdom  ;  and  in  this
address  they  spoke  in  a  firmer  tone,  and  avowed,  more
openly  than  ever,  their  resolution  of  proceeding  to  the
utmost  extremities,  in  order  to  put  a  stop  to  such  dan-
gerous encroachments.  To  a  remonstrance  of  this
nature,  and  urged  with  so  much  boldness,  the  queen
u.t  Km  reP^e(*  in  terms  no  less  vigorous  and  explicit.
out  *uc-*  She  pretended  that  she  was  not  accountable  to
the  confederate  lords  for  any  part  of  her  con-
duct ;  and  upon  no  representation  of  theirs  would  she
either  abandon  measures  which  she  deemed  necessary,
or  dismiss  forces  which  she  found  useful,  or  demolish
a  fortification  which  might  prove  of  advantage.  At
the  same  time  she  required  them,  on  pain  of  treason,
to  disband  the  forces  irhich  they  had  assembled.

This  haughty  and  imperious  style  sounded  harshly
to  Scottish  nobles,  impatient,  from  their  national  cha-
racter, of  the  slightest  appearance  of  injury ;  accus-
tomed, even  from  their  own  monarchs,  to  the  most
respectful  treatment ;  and  possessing,  under  an  aristo-

*  Knox,  180.

150  OK II.  Hi?

cralical  form  of  <.ovennnent,  Mich  a  share  of  powei
equalled  at  all tune ,  and  often controlled that  of the
sovereign. They  were  sensible  at  once,  of the  mdi •  •
nity  offered  to  themselves,  and  alarmed with  this  plain
declaration  of  the  (jiieen  s  intention ;  and  a.s  there  now
remained hut  one, step to  take,  they wanted neither
public  spirit  nor  re:;oliilion  to  take  it.

Mill,  that  they  mij'lit  not ,eem  to  depart  from
he established iorms  oi tin;  constitution,  lor

.vhieh,  even  amidst  their  most  violent  opera-
ought  to

tions,  men  alvva  ,1  reverence

tlicy  assenihlcd  ;ill tlie peer  ,, l>;iron  ,,  ;uid r<-j>i  <•  .<  n1;i

tives  of  boroughs,' who  adhered  to  their  party. These
formed  a  convention,  which  exceeded  in  num-

Oct.  21.  •

ber,  and  equalled  in  dignity,  the  usual  meeting
of  j);irli;i.inc.nt.  The  lenders  of  the  eon^n-'jiition  l;ud
before  them  the  declaration  which  the  queen  had  given
in  answer  to  their  remonstrance ;  represented  the  un-
avoidable ruin  which  the  measures  she  therein  avowed
•.Hid  justified  would  bring  upon  the  kingdom;  and,
requiring  their  direction  with  regard  to  the  obedience
due  to  an  administration  so  unjust  and  oppressive,  they
submitted  to  their  decision  a  question,  one  of  the  most
delicate  and  intere.stin^  thut  can  possibly  fall  under
the  consideration  of  subjects.

This  assembly  proceeded  to  decide  with  no  less  dis-
patch than  unanimity.  Strangers  to  those  forms  which
protract  business ;  unacquainted  with  the  arts  which
make  a  figure  in  debate ;  and  much  more  fitted  for
action  than  discourse ;  a  warlike  people  always  hasten
to  a  conclusion,  and  bring  their  deliberations  to  the
shortest  issue.  It  was  the  work  but  of  one  day,  to
examine  and  to  resolve  this  nice  problem,  concerning
the  behaviour  of  subjects  towards  a  ruler  who  abuses
lu  power.  Hut,  however  abrupt  their  proceedings  may
appear,  they  were,  not  destitute  of  solemnity.  As  the
determination  of  the  point  in  doubt  was  conceived  to

168  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

be  no  less  the  office  of  divines  than  of  laymen,  the
former  were  called  to  assist  with  their  opinion.  Knox
and  Willox  appeared  for  the  whole  order,  and  pro-
nounced, without  hesitation,  both  from  the  precepts
and  examples  in  Scripture,  that  it  was  lawful  for  sub-
jects not  only  to  resist  tyrannical  princes,  but  to  de-
prive them  of  that  authority,  which,  in  their  hands,
becomes  an  instrument  for  destroying  those  whom  the
Almighty  ordained  them  to  protect.  The  decision  of
persons  revered  so  highly  for  their  sacred  character,
but  more  for  their  zeal  and  their  piety,  had  great
weight  with  the  whole  assembly.  Not  satisfied  with
the  common  indiscriminate  manner  of  signifying  con-
sent, every  person  present  was  called  in  his  turn  to
declare  his  sentiments,  and  rising  up  in  order,  all  gave
They  de-  tne^r  suffrages,  without  one  dissenting  voice,
prive  the  for  depriving  the  queen  of  the  office  of  regent,

queen  of  r  &  .  *"_  .&

the  office which  she  exercised  so  much  to  the  detriment
rregent>  of  the  kingdom.8
The  mo- This  extraordinary  sentence  was  owing  no

their  con- ^eSS  tO  tQG  ^OV6  °^  ^Derty? tnan  to zea^ f°r

duct.  gion.  In  the  act  of  deprivation,  religious  griev-
ances are  slightly  mentioned  ;  and  the  dangerous  en-
croachments of  the  queen  upon  the  civil  constitution
are  produced,  by  the  lords  of  the  congregation,  in
order  to  prove  their  conduct  to  have  been  not  only
just  but  necessary.  The  introducing  foreign  troops
into  a  kingdom  at  peace  with  all  the  world  ;  the
seizing  and  fortifying  towns  in  different  parts  of  the
country  ;  the  promoting  strangers  to  offices  of  great
power  and  dignity  ;  the  debasing  the  current  coin  ;d

c  Knox,  184.

d  The  standard  of  money  in  Scotland  was  continually  varying.  In  the  16th  of
James  V.,  A.  D.  1529,  a  pound  weight  of  gold,  when  coined,  produced  108/.  of
current  money.  But  under  the  queen-regent's  administration,  A.  D.  1556,  a
pound  weight  of  gold,  although  the  quantity  of  alloy  was  considerably  increased,
produced  144J.  current  money.  In  1529,  a  pound  weight  of  silver,  when  coined,
produced  9/.  2s.  ;  but  in  1556,  it  produced  ±31.  current  money.  Ruddiman.
Praefat.  ad  Anders.  Diplomat.  Scotiae,  p.  80,  81,  from  which  it  appears,  that  this
complaint,  which  the  raaleconlents  often  repeated,  was  not  altogether  destitute  of
foundation.

1559].  BOOK II.  169

the  subverting  the  ancient  laws ;  the  imposing  of  new
and  burdensome  taxes ;  and  the  attempting  to  subdue
the  kingdom,  and  to  oppress  its  liberties,  by  open  and
repeated  acts  of  violence,  are  enumerated  at  great
length,  and  placed  in  the  strongest  light.  On  all
these  accounts,  the  congregation  maintained,  that  the
nobles,  as  counsellors  by  birthright  to  their  monarchs,
and  the  guardians  and  defenders  of  the  constitution,
had  a  right  to  interpose ;  and  therefore,  by  virtue  of
this  right,  in  the  name  of  the  king  and  queen,  and
with  many  expressions  of  duty  and  submission  towards
them,  they  deprived  the  queen-regent  of  her  office,
and  ordained  that,  for  the  future,  no  obedience  should
be  given  to  her  commands.6

Violent  as  this  action  may  appear,  there  wanted  not
principles  in  the  constitution,  nor  precedents  in  the
history,  of  Scotland,  to  justify  and to authorize  it.
Under  the  aristocratical  form  of  government  established
among  the  Scots,  the  power  of  the  sovereign  was  ex-
tremely limited. The  more  considerable  nobles  were
themselves  petty  princes,  possessing  extensive  juris-
dictions, almost  independent  of  the  crown,  and  fol-
lowed by  numerous  vassals,  who, in every  contest,
espoused  their  chieftain's  quarrel  in  opposition  to  the
king. Hence  the  many  instances  of  the  impotence  of
regal  authority  which  are  to  be  found  in  the  Scottish
history. In  every  age,  the  nobles  not  only  claimed,
but exercised, the right of controlling the king.
Jealous  of  their  privileges,  and  ever  ready  to  take  the
field  in  defence  of  them,  every  error  in  administration
was  observed,  every  encroachment  upon  the  rights  of
the  aristocracy  excited  indignation,  and  no  prince  ever
ventured  to  transgress  the  boundaries  which  the  law
had  prescribed  to  prerogative,  without  meeting  resist-

e  M.  Castlenau,  after  condemning  the  dangerous  counsels  of  the  princes  of
Lorrain,  with  regard  to  the  affairs  of  Scotland,  acknowledges,  with  his  usual
candour,  that  the  Scots  declared  war  against  the  queen-regent,  rather  from  a  desire
of  vindicating  their  civil  liberties,  than  from  any  motive  of  religion.  Mem.  446.

170  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

ance,  which  shook  or  overturned  his  throne.  Encou-
raged by  the  spirit  of  the  constitution,  and  counte-
nanced by  the  example  of  their  ancestors,  the  lords  of
the  congregation  thought  it  incumbent  on  them,  at  this
juncture,  to  inquire  into  the  maladministration  of  the
queen-regent,  and  to  preserve  their  country  from  being
enslaved  or  conquered,  by  depriving  her  of  the  power
to  execute  such  a  pernicious  scheme.

The  act  of  deprivation,  and  a  letter  from  the  lords
of  the  congregation  to  the  queen-regent,  are  still
extant/  They  discover  not  only  that  masculine  and
undaunted  spirit,  natural  to  men  capable  of  so  bold
a  resolution ;  but  are  remarkable  for  a  precision  and
vigour  of  expression,  which  we  are  surprised  to  meet
with  in  an  age  so  unpolished.  The  same  observation
may  be  made  with  respect  to  the  other  public  papers
of  that  period.  The  ignorance  or  bad  taste  of  an  age
may  render  the  compositions  of  authors  by  profession
obscure,  or  affected,  or  absurd ;  but  the  language  of
business  is  nearly  the  same  at  all  times  ;  and  wherever
men  think  clearly,  and  are  thoroughly  interested,  they
express  themselves  with  perspicuity  and  force.

'  Knox,  184.

THE

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND.

BOOK  III.

1559. 1  HE  lords  of  the  congregation  soon  found  that

The  con-  ° &

gregation  their  zeal  had  engaged  them  in  an  undertaking,
iTdSi-  which  it  was  beyond  their  utmost  ability  to
accomplish.  The  French  garrison,  despising
their  numerous,  but  irregular  forces,  refused  to  sur-
render Leith,  and  to  depart  out  of  the  kingdom ;  nor
were  these  sufficiently  skilful  in  the  art  of  war  to
reduce  the  place  by  force,  or  possessed  of  the  artillery,
or  magazines,  requisite  for  that  purpose;  and  their
followers,  though  of  undaunted  courage,  yet,  being
accustomed  to  decide  every  quarrel  by  a  battle,  were
strangers  to  the  fatigues  of  a  long  campaign,  and  soon
became  impatient  of  the  severe  and  constant  duty
which  a  siege  requires.  The  queen's  emissaries,  who
found  it  easy  to  mingle  with  their  countrymen,  were  at
the  utmost  pains  to  heighten  their  disgust,  which  dis-
covered itself  at  first  in  murmurs  and  complaints,  but,
on  occasion  of  the  want  of  money  for  paying  the
army,  broke  out  into  open  mutiny.  The  most  eminent
leaders  were  hardly  secure  from  the  unbridled  inso-
lence of  the  soldiers ;  while  some  of  inferior  rank,  in-
terposing too  rashly  in  order  to  quell  them,  fell  victims
to  their  rage.  Discord,  consternation,  and  perplexity,
reigned  in  the  camp  of  the  reformers.  The  duke,  their
general,  sunkj  with  his  usual  timidity,  under  the  terror
of  approaching  danger,  and  discovered  manifest  symp-

172  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

toms  of  repentance  for  his  rashness  in  espousing  such
a  desperate  cause.

Apply  to  In  this  situation  of  their  affairs,  the  congre-
forTssis*  gation  had  recourse  to  Elizabeth,  from  whose
ance.  protection  they  could  derive  their  only  reason-
able hope  of  success.  Some  of  their  more  sagacious
leaders,  having  foreseen  that  the  party  might  proba-
bly be  involved  in  great  difficulties,  had  early  endea-
voured to  secure  a  resource  in  any  such  exigency,  by
entering  into  a  secret  correspondence  with  the  court  of
England.1  Elizabeth,  aware  of  the  dangerous  designs
which  the  princes  of  Lorrain  had  formed  against  her
crown,  was  early  sensible  of  how  much  importance  it
would  be,  not  only  to  check  the  progress  of  the  French
in  Scotland,  but  to  extend  her  influence  in  that  king-
dom ;b  and  perceiving  how  effectually  the  present  in-
surrections would  contribute  to  retard  or  defeat  the
schemes  formed  against  England,  she  listened  with
pleasure  to  these  applications  of  the  malecontents,  and
gave  them  private  assurances  of  powerful  support  to
their  cause.  Randolph,0  an  agent  extremely  proper
for  conducting  any  dark  intrigue,  was  dispatched  into
Scotland,  and  residing  secretly  among  the  lords  of  the
congregation,  observed  and  quickened  their  motions.
Money  seemed  to  be  the  only  thing  they  wanted  at
that  time ;  and  it  was  owing  to  a  seasonable  remit-
tance from  England/  that  the  Scottish  nobles  had  been
enabled  to  take  the  field,  and  to  advance  towards
Leith.  But  as  Elizabeth  was  distrustful  of  the  Scots,
and  studious  to  preserve  appearances  with  France,  her
subsidies  were  bestowed  at  first  with  extreme  frugality.
The  subsistence  of  an  army,  and  the  expenses  of  a
siege,  soon  exhausted  this  penurious  supply,  to  which
the  lords  of  the  congregation  could  make  little  addi-

a  Burn.  Hist.  Ref.  3. Append.  278. Keith,  Append.  21.

b  See  Append.  No.  I.  c  Keith,,  Append.  29.

d  Knox,  214. Keith,  Append.  44.

1559.1  BOOK III.  J73

tion  from  their  own  funds ;  and  the  ruin  and  disper-
sion of  the  party  must  have  instantly  followed.
she  sends  In  order  to  prevent  this,  Cockburn  of  Or-
smlTisum  miston  was  sent,  with  the  utmost  expedition,
of  money,  to  ^g  governors  of  the  town  and  castle
of  Berwick.  As  Berwick  was  at  that  time  the  town
of  greatest  importance  on  the  Scottish  frontier,  Sir
Ralph  Sadler,  and  Sir  James  Crofts,  persons  of  con-
siderable figure,  were  employed  to  command  there,  and
were  intrusted  with  a  discretionary  power  of  supply-
ing the  Scottish  malecontents,  according  to  the  exi-
gency of  their  affairs.  From  them  Cockburn  received
four  thousand  crowns,  but  little  to  the  advantage  of
which  is  in-  his  associates.  The  earl  of  Bothwell,  by  the
tercepted.  queen's  instigation,  lay  in  wait  for  him  on  his
return,  dispersed  his  followers,  wounded  him,  and  car-
ried off  the  money.

This  unexpected  disappointment  proved  fatal  to  the
party.  In  mere  despair  some  of  the  more  zealous  at-
tempted to  assault  Leith ;  but  the  French  beat  them
back  with  disgrace,  seized  their  cannon,  and,  pursuing
them  to  the  gates  of  Edinburgh,  were  on  the  point  of
entering  along  with  them.  All  the  terror  and  confu-
sion which  the  prospect  of  pillage  or  massacre  can
excite  in  a  place  taken  by  storm,  filled  the  city  on  this
occasion.  The  inhabitants  fled  from  the  enemy  by  the
opposite  gate ;  the  forces  of  the  congregation  were  ir-
resolute and  dismayed  ;  and  the  queen's  partisans  in
the  town  openly  insulted  both.  At  last,  a  few  of  the
nobles  ventured  to  face  the  enemy,  who,  after  plunder-
ing some  houses  in  the  suburbs,  retired  with  their
booty,  and  delivered  the  city  from  this  dreadful  alarm.

A  second  skirmish,  which  happened  a  few  days
after,  was  no  less  unfortunate.  The  French  sent  out  a
detachment  to  intercept  a  convoy  of  provisions  which
was  designed  for  Edinburgh.  The  lords  of  the  con-
gregation, having  intelligence  of  this,  marched  in  all

174  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

haste  with  a  considerable  body  of  their  troops,  and
falling  upon  the  enemy  between  Restalrig  and  Leith,
with  more  gallantry  than  good  conduct,  were  almost
surrounded  by  a  second  party  of  the  French,  who  ad-
vanced in  order  to  support  their  own  men.  In  this
situation  a  retreat  was  the  only  thing  which  could
save  the  Scots ;  but  a  retreat  over  marshy  ground,  and
in  the  face  of  an  enemy  superior  in  number,  could
They  retire  not  long  be  conducted  with  order.  A  body
(n°coi!fu-th  °^  ^e  enemy  himg  upon  their  rear,  horse  and
sion.  foot  fell  into  the  utmost  confusion,  and  it  was
entirely  owing  to  the  over-caution  of  the  French,  that
any  of  the  party  escaped  being  cut  in  pieces.

On  this  second  blow,  the  hopes  and  spirits  of  the
congregation  sunk  altogether.  They  did  not  think
themselves  secure  even  within  the  walls  of  Edinburgh,
but  instantly  determined  to  retire  to  some  place  at
a  great  distance  from  the  enemy.  In  vain  did  the
prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  and  a  few  others,  oppose  this
cowardly  and  ignominious  flight.  The  dread  of  the
present  danger  prevailed  over  both  the  sense  of  ho-
nour and  zeal  for  the  cause.  At  midnight  they  set
out  from  Edinburgh  in  great  confusion,  and
marched  without  halting  till  they  arrived  at
Stirling.6

During  this  last  insurrection,  the  great  body  of  the
Scottish  nobility  joined  the  congregation.  The  lords
Seton  and  Bothwick  were  the  only  persons  of  rank
who  took  arms  for  the  queen,  and  assisted  her  in  de-
fending Leith/  Both  well  openly  favoured  her  cause,
but  resided  at  his  own  house.  The  earl  of  Huntly,
conformable  to  the  crafty  policy  which  distinguished
his  character,  amused  the  leaders  of  the  congregation,
whom  he  had  engaged  to  assist,  with  many  fair  pro-
mises, but  never  joined  them  with  a  single  man.g  The

*  Keith,  Append.  21—45.  f  Id.  ibid.  31,

*  Jd.  ibid.  33. Knos,  222.

1559.]  BOOK III.  175

earl  of  Morton,  a  member  of  the  congregation,  fluc-
tuated in  a  state  of  irresolution,  and  did  not  act  hear-
tily for  the  common  cause.  Lord  Erskine,  governor
of  Edinburgh-castle,  though  a  Protestant,  maintained
a  neutrality,  which  he  deemed  becoming  the  dignity
of  his  office  ;  and  having  been  intrusted  by  parliament
with  the  command  of  the  principal  fortress  in  the
kingdom,  he  resolved  that  neither  faction  should  get
it  into  their  hands.

Maitiand  ^  ^ew  ^Js  before  the  retreat  of  the  congre-
revoits  Cation,  the  queen  suffered  an  irreparable  loss,

from  the f  '  \.  • • i

queen- by the  defection  of  her principal secretary,
dowager. wmiam  Maitiand  of  Lethington. His zeal
for  the  reformed  religion,  together  with  his  warm  re-
monstrances against  the  violent  measures  which  the
queen  was  carrying  on,  exposed  him  so  much  to  her
resentment,  and  to  that  of  her  French  counsellors,  that
he,  suspecting  his  life  to  be  in  danger,  withdrew  se-
cretly from  Leith,  and  fled  to  the  lords  of  the  congre-
gation ;h  and  they  with  open  arms  received  a  convert,
whose  abilities  added  both  strength  and  reputation  to
their  cause. Maitiand  had  early  applied  to  public
business  admirable  natural  talents,  improved  by  an  ac-
quaintance with  the  liberal  arts  ;  and,  at  a  time  of  life
when  his  countrymen  of  the  same  quality  were  fol-
lowing the  pleasures  of  the  chase,  or  serving  as  adven-
turers in  the  armies  of  France,  he  was admitted  into
all  the  secrets  of  the  cabinet,  and  put  upon  a  level  with
persons  of  the  most  consummate  experience  in  the  ma-
nagement of  affairs. He possessed, in  an eminent
degree,  that  intrepid  spirit  which  delights  in  pursuing
bold  designs,  and  was  no  less  master  of  that  political
dexterity  which  is  necessary  for  carrying  them  on  with
success. But  these  qualities  were  deeply  tinctured
with  the  neighbouring  vices. His  address  sometimes
degenerated  into  cunning; his  acuteness bordered

h  Knox,  192.

176  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

upon  excess  ;  his  invention,  over-fertile,  suggested  to
him,  on  some  occasions,  chimerical  systems  of  po-
licy, too  refined  for  the  genius  of  his  age  or  country  ;
and  his  enterprising  spirit  engaged  him  in  projects  vast
and  splendid,  but  beyond  his  utmost  power  to  execute.
All  the  contemporary  writers,  to  whatever  faction  they
belong,  mention  him  with  an  admiration  which  nothing
could  have  excited  but  the  greatest  superiority  of  pe-
netration and  abilities.

The  precipitate  retreat  of  the  congregation  increased
to  such  a  degree  the  terror  and  confusion  which  had
seized  the  party  at  Edinburgh,  that,  before  the  army
reached  Stirling,  it  dwindled  to  an  inconsiderable
number.  The  spirit  of  Knox,  however,  still  remained
undaunted  and  erect,  and  having  mounted  the  pulpit,
he  addressed,  to  his  desponding  hearers,  an  exhorta-
tion, which  wonderfully  animated  and  revived  them.
The  heads  of  this  discourse  are  inserted  in  his  History,1
and  afford  a  striking  example  of  the  boldness  and
freedom  of  reproof  assumed  by  /the  first  reformers,  as
well  as  a  specimen  of  his  own  skill  in  choosing  the
topics  most  fitted  to  influence  and  rouse  his  audience.
The  lords  A  meeting  of  the  leaders  being  called,
"  to  consider  what  course  they  should  hold,

now  that  their  own  resources  were  all  ex-
beth  hausted,  and  their  destruction  appeared  to  be
unavoidable  without  foreign  aid,  they  turned  their
eyes  once  more  to  England,  and  resolved  to  implore
the  assistance  of  Elizabeth  towards  finishing  an  enter-
prise, in  which  they  had  so  fatally  experienced  their
own  weakness,  and  the  strength  of  their  adversaries.
Maitland,  as  the  most  able  negotiator  of  the  party,  was
employed  in  this  embassy.  In  his  absence,  and  during
the  inactive  season  of  the  year,  it  was  agreed  to  dismiss
their  followers,  worn  out  by  the  fatigues  of  a  campaign
which  had  so  far  exceeded  the  usual  time  of  service.

*  Knox,  193.

1559*]  BOOK III.  177

But,  in  order  to  preserve  the  counties  most  devoted
to  their  interest,  the  prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  with  part
of  the  leaders,  retired  into  Fife.  The  duke  of  Cha-
telherault,  with  the  rest,  fixed  his  residence  at  Hamil-
ton. There  was  little  need  of  Maitland's  address  or
eloquence  to  induce  Elizabeth  to  take  his  country
under  her  protection.  She  observed  the  prevalence  of
the  French  counsels,  and  the  progress  of  their  arms  in
Scotland,  with  great  concern  ;  and  as  she  well  foresaw
the  dangerous  tendency  of  their  schemes  in  that  king-
dom, she  had  already  come  to  a  resolution  with  regard
to  the  part  she  herself  would  act,  if  their  power  there
should  grow  still  more  formidable.
Motives  I*1  order  to  give  the  queen  and  her  privy-
which  de-  council  a  full  and  distinct  view  of  any  impor-

termined  »  •

her  to  as-  tant  matter  which  might  come  before  them,  it
seems  to  have  been  the  practice  of  Elizabeth's
ministers  to  prepare  memorials,  in  which  they  clearly
stated  the  point  under  deliberation,  laid  down  the
grounds  of  the  conduct  which  they  held  to  be  most
reasonable,  and  proposed  a  method  for  carrying  their
plan  into  execution.  Two  papers  of  this  kind,  written
by  Sir  William  Cecil,  with  his  own  hand,  and  submitted
by  the  queen  to  the  consideration  of  her  privy-council,
still  remain  ;k  they  are  entitled,  "  A  short  discussion
of  the  weighty  matter  of  Scotland,"  and  do  honour  to
the  industry  and  penetration  of  that  great  minister.
The  motives  which  determined  the  queen  to  espouse
so  warmly  the  defence  of  the  congregation,  are  repre-
sented with  perspicuity  and  force;  and  the  conse-
quences of  suffering  the  French  to  establish  themselves
in  Scotland,  are  predicted  with  great  accuracy  and
discernment.

He  lays  it  down  as  a  principle,  agreeably  to  the  laws
both  of  God  and  of  nature,  that  every  society  hath  a
right  to  defend  itself,  not  only  from  present  dangers,

k  Burn.  vol.  iii. Append.  283. Forbes,  i.  387,  &c. Keith,  Append.  24.
VOL.  I.  N

178  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

but  from  such  as  may  probably  ensue ;  to  which  he
adds,  that  nature  and  reason  teach  every  prince  to  de-
fend himself  by  the  same  means  which  his  adversaries
employ  to  distress  him. Upon  these  grounds  he  esta-
blishes the  right  of  England  to  interpose  in  the  affairs
of  Scotland,  and  to  prevent  the  conquest  of  that  king-
dom, at  which  the  French  openly  aimed. The  French,
he  observes,  are  the  ancient  and  implacable  enemies  of
England. Hostilities  had  subsisted  between  the  two
nations  for  many  centuries. No  treaty  of  peace  into
which  they  entered  had  ever  been  cordial  or  sincere.
No  good  effect  was  therefore  to  be  expected  from  the
peace  lately  agreed  upon,  which,  being  extorted  by
present  necessity,  would  be  negligently  observed,  and
broken  on  the  slightest  pretences. In a very  short
time,  France  would  recover  its  former  opulence ;  and
though  now  drained  of  men  and  money  by  a  tedious
and  unsuccessful  war,  it  would  quickly  be  in  a  condi-
tion for  acting,  and  the  restless  and  martial  genius  of
the  people  would  render  action  necessary. The  princes
of  Lorrain,  who  at  that  time  had  the  entire  direction  of
French  affairs,  were  animated  with  the  most  virulent
hatred  against  the  English  nation. They  openly  called
in  question  the  legitimacy  of  the  queen's  birth,  and,  by
advancing  the  title  and  pretensions  of  their  niece  the
queen  of  Scotland,  studied  to  deprive  Elizabeth  of  her
crown. With  this  view,  they  had  laboured  to  exclude
the  English  from  the  treaty  of  Chateau  en  Cambresis,
and  endeavoured  to  conclude  a  separate  peace  with
Spain. They  had  persuaded  Henry  II.  to  permit  his
daughter-in-law  to  assume  the  title  and  arms  of  queen
of  England ;  and  even  since  the  conclusion of  the
peace,  they  had  solicited  at  Rome,  and  obtained,  a  bull
declaring  Elizabeth's  birth  to  be  illegitimate. Though
the  wisdom  and  moderation  of  the  constable  Montmo-
rency,  had  for  some  time  checked  their  career,  yet  these
restraints  being  now  removed  by  the  death  of  Henry

1559.]  BOOK III.  179

II.  and  the  disgrace  of  his  minister,  the  utmost  excesses
of  violence  were  to  be  dreaded  from  their  furious  am-
bition, armed  with  sovereign  power.  Scotland  is  the
quarter  where  they  can  attack  England  with  most  ad-
vantage. A  war  on  the  borders  of  that  country,  ex-
poses France  to  no  danger,  but  one  unsuccessful  action
there  may  hazard  the  crown,  and  overturn  the  govern-
ment of  England.  In  political  conduct,  it  is  childish
to  wait  till  the  designs  of  an  enemy  be  ripe  for  execu-
tion. The  Scottish  nobles,  after  their  utmost  efforts,
have  been  obliged  to  quit  the  field ;  and,  far  from  ex-
pelling the  invaders  of  their  liberties,  they  behold  the
French  power  daily  increasing,  and  must  at  last  cease
from  struggling  any  longer  in  a  contest  so  unequal.
The  invading  of  England  will  immediately  follow  the
reduction  of  the  Scottish  malecontents,  by  the  abandon-
ing of  whom  to  the  mercy  of  the  French,  Elizabeth  will
open  a  way  for  her  enemies  into  the  heart  of  her  own
kingdom,  and  expose  it  to  the  calamities  of  war,  and
the  danger  of  conquest.  Nothing  therefore  remained
but  to  meet  the  enemy  while  yet  at  a  distance  from
England,  and,  by  supporting  the  congregation  with  a
powerful  army,  to  render  Scotland  the  theatre  of  the
war,  to  crush  the  designs  of  the  princes  of  Lorrain  in
their  infancy,  and  by  such  an  early  and  unexpected
effort,  to  expel  the  French  out  of  Britain  before  their
power  had  time  to  take  root  and  grow  up  to  any  for-
midable height.  But  as  the  matter  was  of  as  much
importance  as  any  which  could  fall  under  the  consider-
ation of  an  English  monarch,  wisdom  and  mature  coun-
sel were  necessary  in  the  first  place,  and  afterward
vigour  and  expedition  in  conduct ;  the  danger  was  ur-
gent, and,  by  losing  a  single  moment,  might  become
unavoidable.1

These  arguments  produced their  full  effect  upon

1  The  arguments  which  the  Scots  employed,  in  order  to  obtain  Elizabeth's  assist-
ance, are  urged  with  great  force,  in  a  paper  of  Maitland's. See  Append.  No.  II.

N2

180  SCOTLAND.  [1559.

Elizabeth,  who  was  jealous  in  an  extreme  degree  of
every  pretender  to  her  crown,  and  no  less  anxious  to
preserve  the  tranquillity  and  happiness  of  her  subjects.
From  these  motives  she  had  acted,  in  granting  the  con-
gregation an  early  supply  of  money ;  and  from  the  same
principles  she  determined,  in  their  present  exigency,  to
afford  them  more  effectual  aid.  One  of  Maitland's  at-
tendants was  instantly  dispatched  into  Scotland  with
the  strongest  assurances  of  her  protection,  and  the  lords
of  the  congregation  were  desired  to  send  commission-
ers into  England  to  conclude  a  treaty,  and  to  settle  the
operations  of  the  campaign  with  the  duke  of  Norfolk."1
Meanwhile  the  queen-regent,  from  whom  no

The  queen-  .  •  i  i i

dowager  motion  of  the  congregation  could  long  be  con-
cealed,  dreaded  the  success  of  this  negotiation
with  the  court  of  England,  and  foresaw  how
against  little  she  would  be  able  to  resist  the  united  ef-
forts of  the  two  kingdoms.  For  this  reason  she
determined,  if  possible,  to  get  the  start  of  Elizabeth ;
and  by  venturing,  notwithstanding  the  inclemency  of
the  winter  season,  to  attack  the  malecontents  in  their
present  dispersed  and  helpless  situation,  she  hoped  to
put  an  end  to  the  war  before  the  arrival  of  their  Eng-
lish allies.

A  considerable  body  of  her  French  forces,  who  were
augmented  about  this  time  by  the  arrival  of  the  count
de  Martigues,  with  a  thousand  veteran  foot,  and  some
cavalry,  were  commanded  to  march  to  Stirling.  Having
there  crossed  the  Forth,  they  proceeded  along  the  coast
of  Fife,  destroying  and  plundering,  with  excessive  out-
rage, the  houses  and  lands  of  those  whom  they  deemed
their  enemies.  Fife  was  the  most  populous  and  power-
ful county  in  the  kingdom,  and  most  devoted  to  the
congregation,  who  had  hitherto  drawn  from  thence  their
most  considerable  supplies,  both  of  men  and  provisions ;
and  therefore,  besides  punishing  the  disaffection  of  the

™  Keith,  114. Rymer,  xv.  p.  569.

1559.]  BOOK III.  181

inhabitants,  by  pillaging  the  country,  the  French  pro-
posed to  seize  and  fortify  St.  Andrew's,  and  to  leave  in
it  a  garrison  sufficient  to  bridle  the  mutinous  spirit  of
the  province,  and  to  keep  possession  of  a  port  situated
on  the  main  ocean.11

But  on  this  occasion,  the  prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  lord
Ruthven,  Kirkaldy  of  Grange,  and  a  few  of  the  most
active  leaders  of  the  congregation,  performed,  by  their
bravery  and  good  conduct,  a  service  of  the  utmost  im-
portance to  their  party.  Having  assembled  six  hun-
dred horse,  they  infested  the  French  with  continual  in-
cursions, beat  up  their  quarters,  intercepted  their  con-
voys of  provisions,  cut  off  their  straggling  parties,  and
so  harassed  them  with  perpetual  alarms,  that  they  pre-
vented them  for  more  than  three  weeks  from  advancing.0
At  last  the  prior,  with  his  feeble  party,  was
constrained  to  retire,  and  the  French  set  out
from  Kirkaldy,  and  began  to  move  along  the  coast  to-
wards St.  Andrew's.  They  had  advanced  but
a  few  miles,  when,  from  an  eminence,  they  de-
scried a  powerful  fleet  steering  its  course  up  the  frith
of  Forth.  As  they  knew  that  the  marquis  D'Elbeuf
was  at  that  time  preparing  to  sail  for  Scotland  with  a
numerous  army,  they  hastily  concluded  that  these  ships
belonged  to  them,  and  gave  way  to  the  most  immode-
rate transports  of  joy  on  the  prospect  of  this  long-
expected  succour.  Their  great  guns  were  already  fired
to  welcome  their  friends,  and  to  spread  the  tidings  and
terror  of  their  arrival  among  their  enemies,  when  a
small  boat  from  the  opposite  coast  landed,  and  blasted
their  premature  and  short-lived  triumph,  by  informing
them,  that  it  was  the  fleet  of  England  which  was  in
sight,  intended  for  the  aid  of  the  congregation,  and  was
soon  to  be  followed  by  a  formidable  land  army.p
The  Eng-  Throughout  her  whole  reign,  Elizabeth  was

fob fleet  X-  L J  * *  J 1_  1  X-A J

arrives  to cautious,  but  decisive ;  and,  by  her  promptitude

11  Hayncs,  221,  &c.  °  Knox,  202.  P  Ibid.  203.

182  SCOTLAND.  [1560.

their  as-  in  executing  her  resolutions,  joined  to  the  deli-
lce'  beration  with  which  she  formed  them,  her  admi-
nistration became  remarkable,  no  less  for  its  vigour  than
for  its  wisdom.  No  sooner  did  she  determine  to  afford
her  protection  to  the  lords  of  the  congregation,  than
they  experienced  the  activity  as  well  as  the  extent  of
her  power.  The  season  of  the  year  would  not  permit
her  land  army  to  take  the  field;  but  lest  the  French
should,  in  the  mean  time,  receive  new  reinforcements,
she  instantly  ordered  a  strong  squadron  to  cruise  in
the  frith  of  Forth.  She  seems,  by  her  instructions  to
Winter  her  admiral,  to  have  been  desirous  of  preserving
the  appearances  of  friendship  towards  the  French. q
But  these  were  only  appearances ;  if  any  French  fleet
should  attempt  to  land,  he  was  commanded  to  prevent
it,  by  every  act  of  hostility  and  violence.  It  was  the
sight  of  this  squadron,  which  occasioned  at  first  so
much  joy  among  the  French,  but  which  soon  inspired
them  with  such  terror  as  saved  Fife  from  the  effects  of
their  vengeance.  Apprehensive  of  being  cut  off  from
their  companions  on  the  opposite  shore,  they  retreated
towards  Stirling  with  the  utmost  precipitation,  and  in
a  dreadful  season,  and  through  roads  almost  impas-
sable, arrived  at  Leith,  harassed  and  exhausted  with
fatigue/

The  English  fleet  cast  anchor  in  the  road  of  Leith,
and  continuing  in  that  station  till  the  conclusion  of
peace,  both  prevented  the  garrison  of  Leith  from  receiv-
ing succours  of  any  kind,  and  considerably  facilitated
the  operations  of  their  own  forces  by  land.
They  con-  Soon  after  the  arrival  of  the  English  squa-
ciude  a  dron,  the  commissioners  of  the  congregation

treaty  with  111-11

England,  repaired  to  Berwick,  and  concluded  with  the
Feb* 27t  duke  of  Norfolk  a  treaty,  the  bond  of  that
union  with  Elizabeth,  which  was  of  so  great  advantage
to  the  cause.  To  give  a  check  to  the  dangerous  and

i  Keith,  Appendix,  45. Haynes,  231.  r  Knox,  203.

1560.]  BOOK IIJ.  183

rapid  progress  of  the  French  arms  in  Scotland,  was  the
professed  design  of  the  contracting  parties.  In  order
to  this,  the  Scots  engaged  never  to  suffer  any  closer
union  of  their  country  with  France;  and  to  defend
themselves  to  the  uttermost  against  all  attempts  of  con-
quest. Elizabeth,  on  her  part,  promised  to  employ  in
Scotland  a  powerful  army  for  their  assistance,  which
the  Scots  undertook  to  join  with  all  their  forces ;  no
place  in  Scotland  was  to  remain  in  the  hands  of  the
English ;  whatever  should  be  taken  from  the  enemy
was  either  to  be  rased,  or  kept  by  the  Scots,  at  their
choice ;  if  any  invasion  should  be  made  upon  England,
the  Scots  were  obliged  to  assist  Elizabeth  with  part  of
their  forces ;  and,  to  ascertain  their  faithful  observance
of  the  treaty,  they  bound  themselves  to  deliver  hostages
to  Elizabeth,  before  the  march  of  her  army  into  Scot-
land ;  in  conclusion,  the  Scots  made  many  protestations
of  obedience  and  loyalty  towards  their  own  queen,  in
every  thing  not  inconsistent  with  their  religion,  and  the
liberties  of  their  country.5

The  Eng-  The  English  army,  consisting  of  six  thousand
jisJi  army  foot  anc[  two  thousand  horse,  under  the  com-

lays  siege

to  Leith,  mand  of  lord  Gray  of  Wilton,  entered  Scotland
early  in  the  spring.  The  members  of  the  con-
gregation assembled  from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom  to
meet  their  new  allies ;  and  having  joined  them,  with
great  multitudes  of  their  followers,  they  advanced  to-
gether towards  Leith.  The  French  were  little  able  to
keep  the  field  against  an  enemy  so  much  superior  in
number.  A  strong  body  of  troops,  destined  for  their
relief,  had  been  scattered  by  a  violent  storm,  and  had
either  perished  on  the  coast  of  France,  or  with  diffi-
culty had  recovered  the  ports  of  that  kingdom.*  But
they  hoped  to  be  able  to  defend  Leith,  till  the  princes
of  Lorrain  should  make  good  the  magnificent  promises
of  assistance  with  which  they  daily  encouraged  them ;

s  Knox,  217.' Haynes,  253,  &c,  *  Mem.  de  Castel.  450.

184  SCOTLAND.  [1560.

or  till  scarcity  of  provisions  should  constrain  the  Eng-
lish to  retire  into  tneir  own  country.  In  order  to  hasten
this  latter  event,  they  did  not  neglect  the  usual,  though
barbarous,  precaution  for  distressing  an  invading  ene-
my, by  burning  and  laying  waste  all  the  adjacent
country."  The  zeal,  however,  of  the  nation  frustrated
their  designs  ;  eager  to  contribute  towards  removing
their  oppressors,  the  people  produced  their  hidden
stores  to  support  their  friends  ;  the  neighbouring  coun-
ties supplied  every  thing  necessary;  and,  far  from
wanting  subsistence,  the  English  found  in  their  camp
all  sorts  of  provisions  at  a  cheaper  rate  than  had  for
some  time  been  known  in  that  part  of  the  kingdom/

On  the  approach  of  the  English  army,  the  queen-
regent  retired  into  the  castle  of  Edinburgh.  Her
health  was  now  in  a  declining  state,  and  her  mind
broken  and  depressed  by  the  misfortunes  of  her  admi-
nistration. To  avoid  the  danger  and  fatigue  of  a  siege,
she  committed  herself  to  the  protection  of  lord  Erskine.
This  nobleman  still  preserved  his  neutrality,  and  by
his  integrity,  and  love  of  his  country,  merited  equally
the  esteem  of  both  parties.  He  received  the  queen
herself  with  the  utmost  honour  and  respect,  but  took
care  to  admit  no  such  retinue  as  might  endanger  his
command  of  the  castle.y

A  few  days  after  they  arrived  in  Scotland,
the  English  invested  Leith.  The  garrison  shut
up  within  the  town  was  almost  half  as  numerous  as  the
army  which  sat  down  before  it,  and  by  an  obstinate
defence  protracted  the  siege  to  a  great  length.  The
circumstances  of  this  siege,  related  by  contemporary
historians,  men  without  knowledge  or  experience  in
the  art  of  war,  are  often  obscure  and  imperfect,  and  at
this  distance  of  time  are  not  considerable  enough  to  be
entertaining.

u  Knox,  225.  *  Id.  ibid,

y  Forbes's  Collect,  vol.  i.  503. Keith,  122.

1560.]  BO  OK  III.  185

At  first  the  French  endeavoured  to  keep  pos-
April  15. .  :.:•••••  i f

session  ot  Hawk  Hill,  a  rising  ground  not  tar

distant  from  the  town,  but  were  beat  from  it  with  great
slaughter,  chiefly  by  the  furious  attack  of  the  Scottish
cavalry.  Within  a  few  days  the  French  had  their  full
revenge ;  having  sallied  out  with  a  strong  body,  they  en-
tered the  English  trenches,  broke  their  troops,  nailed  part
of  their  cannon,  and  killed  at  least  double  the  number
they  had  lost  in  the  former  skirmish  Nor  were  the  Eng-
lish more  fortunate  in  an  attempt  which  they  made  to
take  the  place  by  assault ;  they  were  met  with
equal  courage,  and  repulsed  with  considerable
loss.  From  the  detail  of  these  circumstances  by  the  writers
of  that  age,  it  is  easy  to  observe  the  different  characters
of  the  French  and  English  troops.  The  former^  trained
to  war,  during  the  active  reigns  of  Francis  I.  and  Henry
II.,  defended  themselves  not  only  with  the  bravery  but
with  the  skill  of  veterans.  The  latter,  who  had  been
more  accustomed  to  peace,  still  preserved  the  intrepid
and  desperate  valour  peculiar  to  the  nation,  but  dis-
covered few  marks  of  military  genius,  or  of  experience  in
the  practice  of  war.  Every  misfortune  or  disappoint-
ment during  the  siege  must  be  imputed  to  manifest
errors  in  conduct.  The  success  of  the  besieged  in  their
sally  was  owing  entirely  to  the  security  and  negligence
of  the  English ;  many  of  their  officers  were  absent ;
their  soldiers  had  left  their  stations  :  and  their  trenches
were  almost  without  a  guard.2  The  ladders,  which  had
been  provided  for  the  assault,  wanted  a  great  deal  of
the  necessary  length :  and  the  troops  employed  in  that
service  were  ill  supported.  The  trenches  were  opened
at  first  in  an  improper  place ;  and  as  it  was  found  expe-
dient to  change  the  ground,  both  time  and  labour  were
lost.  The  inability  of  their  own  generals,  no  less  than
the  strength  of  the  French  garrison,  rendered  the  pro-
gress of  the  English  wonderfully  slow.  The  long  con-

»  Haynes,  29-1.  298.  o05,  &c.

186  SCOTLAND.  [1560.

tinuance,  however,  of  the  siege,  and  the  loss  of  part  of
their  magazines  by  an  accidental  fire,  reduced  the  French
to  extreme  distress  for  want  of  provisions,  which  the  pros-
pect of  relief  made  them  bear  with  admirable  fortitude.
While  the  hopes  and  courage  of  the  French  pro-
tracted the  siege  so  far  beyond  expectation,  the  leaders
of  the  congregation  were  not  idle.  By  new  associa-
tions and  confederacies,  they  laboured  to  unite  their
party  more  perfectly.  By  publicly  ratifying  the  treaty
concluded  at  Berwick,  they  endeavoured  to  render  the
alliance  with  England  firm  and  indissoluble.  Among
the  subscribers  of  these  papers  we  find  the  earl  of
Huntly,  and  some  others,  who  had  not  hitherto  con-
curred with  the  congregation  in  any  of  their  measures.*
Several  of  these  lords,  particularly  the  earl  of  Huntly,
still  adhered  to  the  Popish  church ;  but,  on  this  occa-
sion, neither  their  religious  sentiments,  nor  their  former
cautious  maxims,  were  regarded;  the  torrent  of  national
resentment  and  indignation  against  the  French  hurried
them  on.b

Death  and  The  queen-regent,  the  instrument,  rather  than
of  Te er  the  cause  of  involving  Scotland  in  those  cala-
dowaeer  mities  under  which  it  groaned  at  that  time,  died
June  10.  during  the  heat  of  the  siege.  No  princess
ever  possessed  qualities  more  capable  of  rendering
her  administration  illustrious,  or  the  kingdom  happy.
Of  much  discernment,  and  no  less  address ;  of  great
intrepidity  and  equal  prudence ;  gentle  and  humane,
without  weakness ;  zealous  for  her  religion,  without
bigotry ;  a  lover  of  justice  without  rigour.  One  cir-
cumstance, however,  and  that  too  the  excess  of  a  virtue,

•  Burn.  vol.  iii.  287. Knox,  221. Haynes,  261.  263.

b  The  dread  of  the  French  power  did  on  many  occasions  surmount  the  zeal  which
the  Catholic  nobles  had  for  their  religion.  Besides  the  presumptive  evidence  for  this,
arising  from  the  memorial  mentioned  by  Burnet,  Hist,  of  the  Reformation,  vol.  iii.
281.  and  published  by  him,  App.  p.  278.;  the  instructions  of  Elizabeth  to  Ran-
dolph her  agent,  put  it  beyond  all  doubt,  that  many  zealous  papists  thought  the
alliance  with  England  to  be  necessary  for  preserving  the  liberty  and  independence
of  the  kingdom/  Keith,  158.  Huntly  himself  began  a  correspondence  with  Eli-
zabeth's ministers,  before  the  march  of  the  English  army  into  Scotland.  Hayncs's
Slate  Papers,  261.  263.  See  Append.  No.  III.

1560.]  BOOK III.  187

rather  than  any  vice,  poisoned  all  these  great  qualities,
and  rendered  her  government  unfortunate,  and  her
name  odious.  Devoted  to  the  interest  of  France,  her
native  country,  and  attached  to  the  princes  of  Lorrain,
her  brothers,  with  most  passionate  fondness,  she  de-
parted, in  order  to  gratify  them,  from  every  maxim
which  her  own  wisdom  or  humanity  would  have  ap-
proved. She  outlived,  in  a  great  measure,  that  repu-
tation and  popularity  which  had  smoothed  her  way  to
the  highest  station  in  the  kingdom ;  and  many  examples
of  falsehood,  and  some  of  severity,  in  the  latter  part  of
her  administration,  alienated  from  her  the  aifections  of
a  people  who  had  once  placed  in  her  an  unbounded
confidence.  But,  even  by  her  enemies,  these  unjusti-
fiable actions  were  imputed  to  the  facility,  not  to  the
malignity,  of  her  nature ;  and  while  they  taxed  her
brothers  and  the  French  counsellors  with  rashness  and
cruelty,  they  still  allowed  her  the  praise  of  prudence
and  of  lenity.0  A  few  days  before  her  death,  she  de-
sired an  interview  with  the  prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  the
earl  of  Argyle,  and  other  chiefs  of  the  congregation.
To  them  she  lamented  the  fatal  issue  of  those  violent
counsels  which  she  had  been  obliged  to  follow ;  and,
with  the  candour  natural  to  a  generous  mind,  confessed
the  errors  of  her  own  administration,  and  begged  for-
giveness of  those  to  whom  they  had  been  hurtful ;  but
at  the  same  time  she  warned  them,  amidst  their  strug-
gles for  liberty  and  the  shock  of  arms,  not  to  lose  sight
of  the  loyalty  and  subjection  which  was  due  to  their
sovereign/  The  remainder  of  her  time  she  employed
in  religious  meditations  and  exercises.  She  even  in-
vited the  attendance  of  Willox,  one  of  the  most  eminent
among  the  reformed  preachers,  listened  to  his  instruc-
tions with  reverence  and  attention,6  and  prepared  for
the  approach  of  death  with  a  decent  fortitude.

f  Buchanan,  324.  d  Lesley,  de  Rebus  Gest.  Scot.  222.  «  Knox,  208.

188  SCOTLAND.  [1560.

Motives  of  Nothing  could  now  save  the  French  troops
to  conclude  shut  up  in  Leith,  but  the  immediate  conclusion
a  peace.  Qf  a  peace?  or  the  arrival  of  a  powerful  army
from  the  continent.  The  princes  of  Lorrain  amused
their  party  in  Scotland  with  continual  expectations  of
the  latter,  and  had  thereby  kept  alive  their  hopes  and
their  courage  ;  but,  at  the  last,  the  situation  of  France,
rather  than  the  terror  of  the  English  arms,  or  the  re-
monstrances of  the  Scottish  malecontents,  constrained
them,  though  with  reluctance,  to  turn  their  thoughts
towards  pacific  counsels.  The  Protestants  in  France
were  at  that  time  a  party  formidable  by  their  number,
and  more  by  the  valour  and  enterprising  genius  of  their
leaders.  Francis  II.  had  treated  them  with  extreme
rigour,  and  discovered,  by  every  step  he  took,  a  settled
resolution  to  extirpate  their  religion,  and  to  ruin  those
who  professed  it.  At  the  prospect  of  this  danger  to
themselves  and  to  their  cause,  the  Protestants  were
alarmed,  but  not  terrified.  Animated  with  zeal,  and
inflamed  with  resentment,  they  not  only  prepared  for
their  own  defence,  but  resolved,  by  some  bold  action,
to  anticipate  the  schemes  of  their  enemies ;  and  as  the
princes  of  Lorrain  were  deemed  the  authors  of  all  the
king's  violent  measures,  they  marked  them  out  to  be
the  first  victims  of  their  indignation.  Hence,
'  and  not  from  disloyalty  to  the  king,  proceeded
the  famous  conspiracy  of  Amboise;  and  though  the
vigilance  and  good  fortune  of  the  princes  of  Lorrain
discovered  and  disappointed  that  design,  it  was  easy  to
observe  new  storms  gathering  in  every  province  of  the
kingdom,  and  ready  to  burst  out  with  all  the  fury
and  outrage  of  civil  war.  In  this  situation,  the  am-
bition of  the  house  of  Lorrain  was  called  off  from  the
thoughts  of  foreign  conquests,  to  defend  the  honour
and  dignity  of  the  French  crown ;  and,  instead  of
sending  new  reinforcements  into  Scotland,  it  became

1560.]  BOOK III.  189

necessary  to  withdraw  the  veteran  troops  already  em-
ployed in  that  kingdom/

The  nego-  In  order  to  conduct  an  affair  of  so  much  im-
thaat0pur-0rPortance  and  delicacy,  the  princes  of  Lorrain
P°se-  made  choice  of  Monluc  bishop  of  Valence,  and
of  the  Sieur  de  Randan.  As  both  these,  especially  the
former,  were  reckoned  inferior  to  no  persons  of  that
age  in  address  and  political  refinement,  Elizabeth  op-
posed to  them  ambassadors  of  equal  abilities ;  Cecil,
her  prime  minister,  a  man  perhaps  of  the  greatest  capa-
city who  had  ever  held  that  office  ;  and  Wotton  dean
of  Canterbury,  grown  old  in  the  art  of  negotiating
under  three  successive  monarchs.  The  interests  of  the
French  and  English  courts  were  soon  adjusted  by  men
of  so  great  dexterity  in  business  :  and  as  France  easily
consented  to  withdraw  those  forces  which  had  been  the
chief  occasion  of  the  war,  the  other  points  in  dispute
between  that  kingdom  and  England  were  not  matters
of  tedious  or  of  difficult  discussion.

The  grievances  of  the  congregation,  and  their  de-
mands upon  their  own  sovereigns  for  redress,  employed
longer  time,  and  required  to  be  treated  with  a  more
delicate  hand.  After  so  many  open  attempts,  carried
on  by  command  of  the  king  and  queen,  in  order  to
overturn  the  ancient  constitution,  and  to  suppress  the
religion  which  they  had  embraced,  the  Scottish  nobles
could  not  think  themselves  secure,  without  fixing  some
new  barrier  against  the  future  encroachments  of  regal
power.  But  the  legal  steps  towards  accomplishing
this  were  not  so  obvious.  The  French  ambassadors
considered  the  entering  into  any  treaty  with  subjects,
and  with  rebels,  as  a  condescension  unsuitable  to  the
dignity  of  a  sovereign ;  and  their  scruples  on  this  head
might  have  put  an  end  to  the  treaty,  if  the  impatience
of  both  parties  for  peace  had  not  suggested  an  expe-
dient, which  seemed  to  provide  for  the  security  of  the

f  Lesley,  224.

190  SCOTLAND.  [1560.

subject,  without  derogating  from  the  honour  of  the
Articles  of  prmce.  The  Scottish  nobles  agreed,  on  this
the  treaty,  occasion,  to  pass  from  the  point  of  right  and
privilege,  and  to  accept  the  redress  of  their  grievances
.as  a  matter  of  favour.  Whatever  additional  security
their  anxiety  for  personal  safety,  or  their  zeal  for  public
liberty,  prompted  them  to  demand,  was  granted  in  the
name  of  Francis  and  Mary,  as  acts  of  their  royal  favour
and  indulgence.  And  lest  concessions  of  this  kind
should  seem  precarious,  and  liable  to  be  retracted  by
the  same  power  which  had  made  them,  the  French
ambassador  agreed  to  insert  them  in  the  treaty  with
Elizabeth,  and  thereby  to  bind  the  king  and  queen  in-
violably to  observe  them.g

In  relating  this  transaction,  contemporary  historians
have  confounded  the  concessions  of  Francis  and  Mary
to  their  Scottish  subjects,  with  the  treaty  between
France  and  England ;  the  latter,  besides  the  ratifica-
tion of  former  treaties  between  the  two  kingdoms,  and
stipulations  with  regard  to  the  time  and  manner  of  re-
moving both  armies  out  of  Scotland,  contained  an  ar-
ticle to  which,  as  the  source  of  many  important  events,
we  shall  often  have  occasion  to  refer.  The  right  of
Elizabeth  to  her  crown  is  thereby  acknowledged  in  the
strongest  terms ;  and  Francis  and  Mary  solemnly  en-
gaged neither  to  assume  the  title,  nor  to  bear  the
arms,  of  king  and  queen  of  England  in  any  time  to

come.h

Honourable  as  this  article  was  for  Elizabeth
herself,  the  condition  she  obtained  for  her  allies
the  Scots  were  no  less  advantageous  to  them.  Monluc
and  Randan  consented,  in  the  name  of  Francis  and
Mary,  that  the  French  forces  in  Scotland  should  in-
stantly be  sent  back  into  their  own  country,  and  no  fo-
reign troops  be  hereafter  introduced  into  the  kingdom

8  Keith,  134,  &c.
h  Keith,  134. Ryraer,  xv.  p.  581.  591,  &c. Haynes,  325—364.

1560.]  BOOK  III.  191

without  the  knowledge  and  consent  of  parliament;
that  the  fortifications  of  Leith  and  D unbar  should  im-
mediately be  rased,  and  no  new  fort  be  erected  with-
out the  permission  of  parliament ;  that  a  parliament
should  be  held  on  the  1  st  day  of  August,  and  that  as-
sembly be  deemed  as  valid  in  all  respects  as  if  it  had
been  called  by  the  express  commandment  of  the  king
and  queen  ;  that,  conformable  to  the  ancient  laws  and
customs  of  the  country,  the  king  and  queen  should  not
declare  war  or  conclude  peace  without  the  concurrence
of  parliament ;  that,  during  the  queen's  absence,  the
administration  of  government  should  be  vested  in  a
council  of  twelve  persons,  to  be  chosen  out  of  twenty-
four  named  by  parliament,  seven  of  which  council  to
be  elected  by  the  queen,  and  five  by  parliament ;  that
hereafter  the  king  and  queen  should  not  advance  fo-
reigners to  places  of  trust  or  dignity  in  the  kingdom,
nor  confer  the  offices  of  treasurer  or  comptroller  of  the
revenues  upon  any  ecclesiastic ;  that  an  act  of  oblivion,
abolishing  the  guilt  and  memory  of  all  offences  com-
mitted since  the  6th  of  March,  1558,  should  be  passed  in
the  ensuing  parliament,  and  be  ratified  by  the  king  and
queen ;  that  the  king  and  queen  should  not,  under  the
colour  of  punishing  any  violation  of  their  authority  dur-
ing that  period,  seek  to  deprive  any  of  their  subjects  of
the  offices,  benefices,  or  estates,  which  they  now  held ;
that  the  redress  due  to  churchmen,  for  the  injuries  which
they  had  sustained  during  the  late  insurrections,  should
be  left  entirely  to  the  cognizance  of  parliament.  With
regard  to  religious  controversies,  the  ambassadors  de-
clared that  they  would  not  presume  to  decide,  but  per-
mitted the  parliament,  at  their  first  meeting,  to  exa-
mine the  points  in  difference,  and  to  represent  their
sense  of  them  to  the  king  and  queen.1
The  effects  ^°  suc^  a  memorable  period  did  the  lords
of  il-  of  the  congregation,  by  their  courage  and  per-

s  Keith,  137,  &c.

192  SCOTLAND.  [1560.

severance,  conduct  an  enterprise  which  at  first  pro-
mised a  very  different  issue.  From  beginnings  ex-
tremely feeble,  and  even  contemptible,  the  party  grew
by  degrees  to  great  power;  and,  being  favoured  by
many  fortunate  incidents,  baffled  all  the  efforts  of  their
own  queen,  aided  by  the  forces  of  a  more  considerable
kingdom.  The  sovereign  authority  was  by  this  treaty
transferred  wholly  into  the  hands  of  the  congregation;
that  limited  prerogative  which  the  crown  had  hitherto
possessed,  was  almost  entirely  annihilated;  and  the
aristocratical  power,  which  always  predominated  in
the  Scottish  government,  became  supreme  and  uncon-
trollable. By  this  treaty,  too,  the  influence  of  France,
which  had  long  been  of  much  weight  in  the  affairs  of
Scotland,  was  greatly  diminished ;  and  not  only  were
the  present  encroachments  of  that  ambitious  ally  re-
strained, but,  by  confederating  with  England,  protec-
tion was  provided  against  any  future  attempt  from  the
same  quarter.  At  the  same  time  the  controversies  in
religion  being  left  to  the  consideration  of  parliament,
the  Protestants  might  reckon  upon  obtaining  whatever
decision  was  most  favourable  to  the  opinions  which
they  professed.

A  few  days  after  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty,  both
the  French  and  English  armies  quitted  Scotland.
Apariia-  The  eyes  of  every  man  in  that  kingdom
mentheid.  were  turned  towards  the  approaching  parlia-
ment. A  meeting  summoned  in  a  manner  so  extraor-
dinary, at  such  a  critical  juncture,  and  to  deliberate
upon  matters  of  so  much  consequence,  was  expected
with  the  utmost  anxiety.

A  Scottish  parliament  suitable  to  the  aristocratical
genius  of  the  government,  was  properly  an  assembly
of  the  nobles.  It  was  composed  of  bishops,  abbots,
barons,  and  a  few  commissioners  of  boroughs,  who  met
altogether  in  one  house.  The  lesser  barons,  though
possessed  of  a  right  to  be  present,  either  in  person  or

1560.]  BOOK  III,  193

by  their  representatives,  seldom  exercised  it.  The  ex-
pense of  attending,  according  to  the  fashion  of  the
times,  with  a  numerous  train  of  vassals  and  depen-
dants ;  the  inattention  of  a  martial  age  to  the  forms  and
detail  of  civil  government ;  but,  above  all,  the  exorbi-
tant authority  of  the  greater  nobles,  who  had  drawn
the  whole  power  into  their  own  hands,  made  this  pri-
vilege of  so  little  value,  as  to  be  almost  neglected.  It
appears  from  the  ancient  rolls,  that,  during  times  of
tranquillity,  few  commissioners  of  boroughs,  and  al-
most none  of  the  lesser  barons,  appeared  in  parlia-
ment. The  ordinary  administration  of  government  was
abandoned,  without  scruple  or  jealousy,  to  the  king
and  to  the  greater  barons.  But  in  extraordinary  con-
junctures, when  the  struggle  for  liberty  was  violent,
and  the  spirit  of  opposition  to  the  crown  rose  to  an
height,  the  burgesses  and  lesser  barons  were  roused
from  their  inactivity,  and  stood  forth  to  vindicate  the
rights  of  their  country.  The  turbulent  reign  of  James
III.  affords  examples  in  proof  of  this  observation.*  The
public  indignation  against  the  rash  designs  of  that
weak  and  ill-advised  prince,  brought  into  parliament,
besides  the  greater  nobles  and  prelates,  a  considerable
number  of  the  lesser  barons.

The  same  causes  occasioned  the  unusual  confluence
of  all  orders  of  men  to  the  parliament,  which  met  on
the  1st  of  August.  The  universal  passion  for  liberty,
civil  and  religious,  which  had  seized  the  nation,  suf-
fered few  persons  to  remain  unconcerned  spectators  of
an  assembly,  whose  acts  were  likely  to  prove  decisive
with  respect  to  both.  From  all  corners  of  the  king-
dom men  flocked  in,  eager  and  determined  to  aid,
with  their  voices  in  the  senate,  the  same  cause  which
they  had  defended  with  their  swords  in  the  field.  Be-
sides a  full  convention  of  peers,  temporal  and  spiritual,
there  appeared  the  representatives  of  almost  all  the

"  Keith,  147.
VOL.  I.  O

194  SCOTLAND.  [1560.

boroughs,  and  above  a  hundred  barons,  who,  though
of  the  lesser  order,  were  gentlemen  of  the  first  rank  and
fortune  in  the  nation.1

The  parliament  was  ready  to  enter  on  business  with
the  utmost  zeal,  when  a  difficulty  was  started  concern-
ing the  lawfulness  of  the  meeting. No  commissioner
appeared  in  the  name  of  the  king  and  queen,  and  no
signification  of  their  consent  and  approbation  was  yet
received. These  were  deemed  by  many  essential  to
the  very  being  of  a  parliament But  in  opposition  to
this  sentiment,  the  express  words  of  the  treaty  of  Edin-
burgh were  urged,  by  which  this  assembly  was  de-
clared to  be  as  valid,  in  all  respects,  as  if  it  had  been
called  and  appointed  by  the  express  command  of  the
king  and  queen.  As  the  adherents  of  the  congregation
greatly  out- numbered  their  adversaries,  the  latter  opi-
nion prevailed. Their  boldest  leaders,  and  those  of
most  approved  zeal,  were  chosen  to  be  lords  of  the  ar-
ticles, who  formed  a  committee  of  ancient  use,  and  of
great  importance  in  the  Scottish  parliament.10 The  de-
liberations of  the  lords  of  the  articles  were  carried  on
with  the  most  unanimous  and  active  zeal. The  act  of
oblivion,  the  nomination  of  twenty-four  persons,  out  of
whom  the  council,  intrusted  with  supreme  authority,
was  to  be  elected ;  and  every  other  thing  prescribed  by
the  late  treaty,  or  which  seemed  necessary  to  render  it
its  pro- effectual,  passed  without  dispute  or  delay.
wlthTefard The  article  of  religion  employed  longer  time,
to  religion, g^  was  attended  with  greater  difficulty. It
was  brought  into  parliament  by  apetition  from  those  who
had  adopted  the  principles  of  the  Reformation. Many
doctrines  of  the  Popish  church  were  a  contradiction
to  reason,  and  a  disgrace  to  religion ;  its  discipline  had

1  Keith,  146.

m  From  an  original  letter  of  Hamilton,  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  it  appears,
that  the  lords  of  articles  were  chosen  in  the  manner  afterward  appointed  by  an  act
of  parliament,  1633.  Keith,  p.  487.  Spottiswood  seems  to  consider  this  to  have
been  the  common  practice.  Hist.  149.

1560.1  BOOK  III.  195

become  corrupt  and  oppressive ;  and  its  revenues  were
both  exorbitant  and  ill  applied.  Against  all  these  the
Protestants  remonstrated  with  the  utmost  asperity  of
style,  which  indignation  at  their  absurdity,  or  experi-
ence of  their  pernicious  tendency,  could  inspire ;  and,
encouraged  by  the  number  as  well  as  zeal  of  their
friends,  to  improve  such  a  favourable  juncture,  they
aimed  the  blow  at  the  whole  fabric  of  Popery ;  and
besought  the  parliament  to  interpose  its  authority  for
rectifying  these  multiplied  abuses  .n

Several  prelates,  zealously  attached  to  the  ancient  su-
perstition, were  present  in  this  parliament.  But  during
these  vigorous  proceedings  of  the  Protestants,  they
stood  confounded  and  at  gaze ;  and  persevered  in  a
silence  which  was  fatal  to  their  cause.  They  deemed
it  impossible  to  resist  or  divert  that  torrent  of  religious
zeal,  which  was  still  in  its  full  strength ;  they  dreaded
that  their  opposition  would  irritate  their  adversaries,
and  excite  them  to  new  acts  of  violence ;  they  hoped
that  the  king  and  queen  would  soon  be  at  leisure  to
put  a  stop  to  the  career  of  their  insolent  subjects,  and
that,  after  the  rage  and  havoc  of  the  present  storm,  the
former  tranquillity  and  order  would  be  restored  to  the
church  and  kingdom.  They  were  willing,  perhaps,  to
sacrifice  the  doctrine,  and  even  the  power  of  the  church,
in  order  to  ensure  the  safety  of  their  own  persons,  and
to  preserve  the  possession  of  those  revenues  which
were  still  in  their  hands.  From  whatever  motives  they
acted,  their  silence,  which  was  imputed  to  the  con-
sciousness of  a  bad  cause,  afforded  matter  of  great  tri-
umph to  the  Protestants,  and  encouraged  them  to  pro-
ceed with  more  boldness  and  alacrity.0

The  parliament  did  not  think  it  enough  to  condemn
those  doctrines  mentioned  in  the  petition  of  the  Protes-
tants ;  they  moreover  gave  the  sanction  of  their  ap-
probation to  a  confession  of  faith  presented  to  them

"Knox,23r  -Ibid.  253.

o  2

196  SCOTLAND.  [1560.

by  the  reformed  teachers  ;p  and  composed,  as  might
be  expected  from  such  a  performance  at  that  juncture,
on  purpose  to  expose  the  absurd  tenets  and  practices
of  the  Romish  church. By  another  act  the  jurisdiction
of  the ecclesiastical  courts  was  abolished, and the
causes  which  formerly  came  under  their  cognizance
were  transferred  to  the  decision  of  civil  judges.q By  a
third  statute,  the  exercise  of  religious  worship,  accord-
ing to  the  rites  of  the  Romish  church,  was  prohibited.
The  manner  in  which  the  parliament  enforced  the  ob-
servation of  this  law  discovers  the  zeal  of  that  assem-
bly ; the  first  transgression  subjected  the  offender  to
the  forfeiture  of  his  goods,  and  to  a  corporal  punish-
ment at  the  discretion  of  the  judge ;  banishment  was
the  penalty  of  the  second  violation  of  the  law ;  and  a
third  act  of  disobedience  was  declared  to  be  capital/
Such  strangers  were  men  at  that  time  to  the  spirit  of
toleration,  and  to  the  laws  of  humanity  ;  and  with  such
indecent  haste did  the  very  persons  who  had just
escaped  the  rigour  of  ecclesiastical  tyranny,  proceed
to  imitate  those  examples  of  severity  of  which  they
themselves  had  so  justly  complained,
with  re- The  vigorous  zeal  of  the  parliament  over-
revenuesof  turned in a few days the ancient system
the  church.  of  religion,  which had been  established  so
many  ages. In  reforming  the  doctrine  and  discipline
of  the  church,  the  nobles  kept  pace  with  the  ardour
and  expectations even  of  Knox  himself. But  their
proceedings  with  respect  to  these,  were  not  more  rapid
and  impetuous,  than  they  were  slow  and  dilatory  when
they  entered  on  the  consideration  of  ecclesiastical  re-
venues. Among  the  lay  members,  some  were  already
enriched  with  the  spoils  of  the  church,  and  others  de-
voured in  expectation  the  wealthy  benefices  which  still
remained  untouched. The  alteration  in  religion  had
afforded  many  of  the  dignified  ecclesiastics  themselves

P  Knox,  253.  1  Keith,  152.  *  Knox,  254.

1560.]  BOOK III.  197

an  opportunity  of  gratifying  their  avarice  or  ambition.
The  demolition  of  the  monasteries  having  set  the  monks
at  liberty  from  their  confinement,  they  instantly  dis-
persed all over  the  kingdom,  and  commonly  betook
themselves  to  some  secular  employment. The  abbot,
if  he  had  been  so  fortunate  as  to  embrace  the  principles
of  the  Reformation  from  conviction,  or  so  cunning  as  to
espouse  them  out  of  policy,  seized  the  whole  revenues
of  the  fraternity ;  and,  except  what  he  allowed  for  the
subsistence  of  a  few  superannuated  monks,  applied  them
entirely  to  his  own  use. The  proposal  made  by  the
reformed  teachers,  for  applying  these  revenues  towards
the  maintenance  of  ministers,  the  education  of  youth,
and  the  support  of  the  poor,  was  equally  dreaded  by
all  these  orders  of  men. They  opposed  it  with  the  ut-
most warmth,  and  by  their  numbers  and  authority  easily
prevailed  on  the  parliament  to  give  no  ear  to  such  a
disagreeable  demand.* Zealous  as  the  first  reformers
were,  and  animated  with  a  spirit  superior  to  the  low
considerations  of  interest,  they  beheld  these  early  symp-
toms of  selfishness  and  avarice  among  their  adherents
with  amazement  and  sorrow ;  and  we  find  Knox  ex-
pressing the  utmost  sensibility  of  that  contempt  with
which  they  were  treated  by  many  from  whom  he  ex-
pected a  more  generous  concern  for  the  success  of  reli-
gion and  the  honour  of  its,  ministers."
The  van- ^  difficulty  hath  been  started  with  regard  to
dity  of  this  the  acts  of  this  parliament  concerning  religion.

parliament  • T/Y- i  1-1  i T  •

called  in  This  difficulty,  which  at  such  a  distance  of  time
is  of  no  importance,  was  founded  on  the  words
of  the  treaty  of  Edinburgh.  By  that,  the  parliament
were  permitted  to  take  into  consideration  the  state  of
religion,  and  to  signify  their  sentiments  of  it  to  the  king
and  queen.  But,  instead  of  presenting  their  desires  to
their  sovereigns  in  the  humble  form  of  a  supplication
or  address,  the  parliament  converted  them  into  so  many

•  Keith,  496. App.  190, 191.  *  See  App.  No.  IV.  «  Knox,  239,  256.

198  SCOTLAND.  [1560.

acts  ;  which,  although  they  never  received  the  royal
assent,  obtained  all  over  the  kingdom  the  weight  and
authority  of  laws.  In  compliance  with  their  injunc-
tions, the  established  system  of  religion  was  every
where  overthrown,  and  that  recommended  by  the  re-
formers introduced  in  its  place.  The  partiality  and
zeal  of  the  people  overlooked  or  supplied  any  defect  in
the  form  of  these  acts  of  parliament,  and  rendered  the
observance  of  them  more  universal  than  ever  had  been
yielded  to  the  statutes  of  the  most  regular  or  constitu-
tional assembly.  By  those  proceedings,  it  must,  how-
ever, be  confessed,  that  the  parliament,  or  rather  the
nation,  violated  the  last  article  in  the  treaty  of  Edin-
burgh, and  even  exceeded  the  powers  which  belong  to
subjects.  But  when  once  men  have  been  accustomed
to  break  through  the  common  boundaries  of  subjection,
and  their  minds  are  inflamed  with  the  passions  which
civil  war  inspires,  it  is  mere  pedantry  or  ignorance  to
measure  their  conduct  by  those  rules  which  can  be  ap-
plied only  where  government  is  in  a  state  of  order  and
tranquillity.  A  nation,  when  obliged  to  employ  such
extraordinary  efforts  in  defence  of  its  liberties,  avails
itself  of  every  thing  which  can  promote  this  great  end  ;
and  the  necessity  of  the  case,  as  well  as  the  importance
of  the  object,  justify  any  departure  from  the  common
and  established  rules  of  the  constitution.
Ambassa-  ^n  consequence  of  the  treaty  of  Edinburgh,
as  We^  as  ^  ^  ordmary  forms  of  business,
it  became  necessary  to  lay  the  proceedings  of

parliament  before  the  king  and  queen.  For
this  purpose,  Sir  James  Sandilands  of  Calder,  lord
St.  John,  was  appointed  to  repair  to  the  court  of  France.
After  holding  a  course  so  irregular,  the  leaders  of  the
congregation  had  no  reason  to  flatter  themselves  that
Francis  and  Mary  would  ever  approve  their  conduct^
or  confirm  it  by  their  royal  assent.  The  reception  of
their  ambassador  was  no  other  than  they  might  have

1560.]  BOOK  III.  199

expected.  He  was  treated  by  the  king  and  queen  with
the  utipost  coldness,  and  dismissed  without  obtaining
the  ratification  of  the  parliament's  proceedings.  From
the  princes  of  Lorrain,  and  their  partisans,  he  endured
all  the  scorn  and  insult  which  it  was  natural  for  them
to  pour  upon  the  party  he  represented/
and  to  EH-  Though  the  earls  of  Morton,  Glencairn,  and
zabeth.  Maitland  of  Lethington,  the  ambassadors  of
the  parliament,  to  Elizabeth  their  protectress,  met  with
a  very  different  reception ;  they  were  not  more  success-
ful in  one  part  of  the  negotiation  intrusted  to  their
care.  The  Scots,  sensible  of  the  security  which  they
derived  from  their  union  with  England,  were  desirous
of  rendering  it  indissoluble.  With  this  view  they  em-
powered these  eminent  leaders  of  their  party  to  testify
to  Elizabeth  their  gratitude  for  that  seasonable  and  ef-
fectual aid  which  she  had  afforded  them,  and  at  the
same  time  to  beseech  her  to  render  the  friendship  be-
tween the  nations  perpetual,  by  condescending  to
marry  the  earl  of  Arran,  who,  though  a  subject,  was
nearly  allied  to  the  royal  family  of  Scotland,  and,  after
Mary,  the  undoubted  heir  to  the  crown.

To  the  former  part  of  this  commission  Elizabeth  lis-
tened with  the  utmost  satisfaction,  and  encouraged  the
Scots,  in  any  future  exigency,  to  hope  for  the  conti-
nuance of  her  good  offices;  with  regard  to  the  latter,
she  discovered  those  sentiments  to  which  she  adhered
throughout  her  whole  reign.  Averse  from  marriage,  as
some  maintain  through  choice,  but  more  probably  out
of  policy,  that  ambitious  princess  would  never  admit  any
partner  to  the  throne ;  but,  delighted  with  the  entire  and
uncontrolled  exercise  of  power,  she  sacrificed  to  the
enjoyment  of  that,  the  hopes  of  transmitting  her  crown
to  her  own  posterity.  The  marriage  with  the  earl  of
Arran  could  not  be  attended  with  any  such  extraordi-

*  Knox,  255. Buch.  327. State  Papers published  by  lord  Hardwicke,  vol.  i.
p.  125,  &c.

200  SCOTLAND.  [1660,

nary  advantage,  as  to  shake  this  resolution ;  she  de-
clined it  therefore,  but  with  many  expressions  of  good-
will towards  the  Scottish  nation,  and  of  respect  for
Arran  himself/

The  death  Towards  the  conclusion  of  this  year,  distin-
ds7in"  guisned  by  so  many  remarkable  events,  there
happened  one  of  great  importance.  On  the  4th
of  December  died  Francis  II.,  a  prince  of  a  feeble  con-
stitution, and  of  a  mean  understanding.  As  he  did  not
leave  any  issue  by  the  queen,  no  incident  could  have
been  more  fortunate  to  those  who,  during  the  late  com-
motions in  Scotland,  had  taken  part  with  the  congrega-
tion. Mary,  by  the  charms  of  her  beauty,  had  ac-
quired an  entire  ascendant  over  her  husband ;  and  as
she  transferred  all  her  influence  to  her  uncles  the  princes
of  Lorrain,  Francis  followed  them  implicitly  in  what-
ever track  they  were  pleased  to  lead  him.  The  power
of  France,  under  such  direction,  alarmed  the  Scottish
malecontents  with  apprehensions  of  danger,  no  less  for-
midable than  well  founded.  The  intestine  disorders
which  raged  in  France,  and  the  seasonable  interposi-
tion of  England  in  behalf  of  the  congregation,  had  hi-
therto prevented  the  princes  of  Lorrain  from  carrying
their  designs  upon  Scotland  into  execution.  But,  under
their  vigorous  and  decisive  administration,  it  was  im-
possible that  the  commotions  in  France  could  be  of
long  continuance,  and  many  things  might  fall  in  to  di-
vert Elizabeth's  attention,  for  the  future,  from  the  af-
fairs of  Scotland.  In  either  of  these  events,  the  Scots
would  stand  exposed  to  all  the  vengeance  which  the
resentment  of  the  French  court  could  inflict.  The
blow,  however  long  suspended,  was  unavoidable,  and
must  fall  at  last  with  redoubled  weight.  From  this
prospect  and  expectation  of  danger,  the  Scots  were  de-
livered by  the  death  of  Francis  ;  the  ancient  confede-
racy of  the  two  kingdoms  had  already  been  broken,

T  Burn.  3. Append,  308> Keith,  154,  fitc.

1560.]  BOOK  III.  201

and  by  this  event  the  chief  bond  of  union  which  re-
mained was  dissolved.  Catherine  of  Medicis,  who,
during  the  minority  of  Charles  IX.  her  second  son,
engrossed  the  entire  direction  of  the  French  councils,
was  far  from  any  thoughts  of  vindicating  the  Scottish
queen's  authority.  Catherine  and  Mary  had  been  rivals
in  power  during  the  reign  of  Francis  II.,  and  had  con-
tended for  the  government  of  that  weak  and  inexpe-
rienced prince ;  but  as  the  charms  of  the  wife  easily
triumphed  over  the  authority  of  the  mother,  Cathe-
rine could  never  forgive  such  a  disappointment  in  her
favourite  passion,  and  beheld  now,  with  secret  plea-
sure, the  difficult  and  perplexing  scene  on  which  her
daughter-in-law  was  about  to  enter.  Mary,  over-
whelmed with  all  the  sorrow  which  so  sad  a  reverse  of
fortune  could  occasion ;  slighted  by  the  queen-mo-
ther ;z  and  forsaken  by  the  tribe  of  courtiers,  who  ap-
re-  pear  only  in  the  sunshine  of  prosperity,  retired
to  Rheims,  and  there  in  solitude  indulged
of  France.  ]jer  grief,  or  hid  her  indignation.  Even  the
princes  of  Lorrain  were  obliged  to  contract  their  views ;
to  turn  them  from  foreign  to  domestic  objects  ;  and,
instead  of  forming  vast  projects  with  regard  to  Britain,
they  found  it  necessary  to  think  of  acquiring  and  esta-
blishing an  interest  with  the  new  administration.

It  is  impossible  to  describe  the  emotions  of  joy
which,  on  all  these  accounts,  the  death  of  the  French
monarch  excited  among  the  Scots.  They  regarded  it
as  the  only  event  which  could  give  firmness  and  stabi-
lity to  that  system  of  religion  and  government  which
was  now  introduced  ;  and  it  is  no  wonder  contempo-
rary historians  should  ascribe  it  to  the  immediate  care
of  Providence,  which,  by  unforeseen  expedients,  can
secure  the  peace  and  happiness  of  kingdoms,  in  those
situations  where  human  prudence  and  invention  would
utterly  despair.3

*  Renault,  340. Casleln,  454.  »  Knox,  259.

202  SCOTLAND.  [1560.

Establish- About  this  time  the  Protestant  church  of
Scotland  began  to  assume  a  regular  form. Its

urch  principles  had  obtained the  sanction  of  pub-
govern- r r  r

merit.  lie  authority,  and  some  fixed  external  po-
licy became  necessary  for  the  government  and  preser-
vation of  the  infant  society.  The  model  introduced  by
the  reformers  differed  extremely  from  that  which  had
been  long  established.  The  motives  which  induced
them  to  depart  so  far  from  the  ancient  system  deserve
to  be  explained.

The  licentious  lives  of  the  clergy,  as  has  been  already
observed,  seem  to  have  been  among  the  first  things  that
excited  any  suspicion  concerning  the  truth  of  the  doc-
trines which  they  taught,  and  roused  that  spirit  of  in-
quiry which  proved  fatal  to  the  Popish  system.  As  this
disgust  at  the  vices  of  ecclesiastics  was  soon  transfer-
red to  their  persons,  and  shifting  from  them,  by  no
violent  transition,  settled  at  last  upon  the  offices  which
they  enjoyed ;  the  effects  of  the  Reformation  would  na-
turally have  extended  not  only  to  the  doctrine,  but  to
the  form  of  government  in  the  Popish  church ;  and  the
same  spirit  which  abolished  the  former,  would  have
overturned  the  latter.  But  in  the  arrangements  which
took  place  in  the  different  kingdoms  and  states  of  Eu-
rope in  consequence  of  the  Reformation,  we  may  ob-
serve something  similar  to  what  happened  upon  the
first  establishment  of  Christianity  in  the  Roman  em-
pire. In  both  periods,  the  form  of  ecclesiastical  policy
was  modelled,  in  some  measure,  upon  that  of  the  civil
government.  When  the  Christian  church  was  patron-
ised and  established  by  the  state,  the  jurisdiction  of  the
various  orders  of  the  ecclesiastics,  distinguished  by  the
names  of  patriarchs,  archbishops,  and  bishops,  was
made  to  correspond  with  the  various  divisions  of  the
empire;  and  the  ecclesiastic  of  chief  eminence  in  each
of  these  possessed  authority,  more  or  less  extensive,  in
proportion  to  that  of  the  civil  magistrate  who  presided

1560.]  BOOK  III.  203

over  the  same  district.  When  the  Reformation  took
place,  the  episcopal  form  of  government,  with  its  va-
rious ranks  and  degrees  of  subordination,  appearing  to
be  most  consistent  with  the  genius  of  monarchy,  it  was
continued,  with  a  few  limitations,  in  several  provinces
of  Germany,  in  England,  and  in  the  northern  king-
doms. But  in  Switzerland  and  some  parts  of  the  Low
Countries,  where  the  popular  form  of  government  al-
lowed more  full  scope  to  the  innovating  genius  of  the
Reformation,  all  pre-eminence  of  order  in  the  church
was  destroyed,  and  an  equality  established  more  suita-
ble to  the  spirit  of  republican  policy.  As  the  model
of  episcopal  government  was  copied  from  that  of  the
Christian  church  as  established  in  the  Roman  empire,
the  situation  of  the  primitive  church,  prior  to  its  esta-
blishment by  civil  authority,  seems  to  have  suggested
the  idea,  and  furnished  the  model  of  the  latter  system,
which  has  since  been  denominated  Presbyterian.  The
first  Christians,  oppressed  by  continual  persecutions,
and  obliged  to  hold  their  religious  assemblies  by  stealth
and  in  corners,  were  contented  with  a  form  of  govern-
ment extremely  simple.  The  influence  of  religion  con-
curred with  the  sense  of  danger,  in  extinguishing
among  them  the  spirit  of  ambition,  and  in  preserving
a  parity  of  rank,  the  effect  of  their  sufferings,  and  the
cause  of  many  of  their  virtues.  Calvin,  whose  deci-
sions were  received  among  many  Protestants  of  that
age  with  incredible  submission,  was  the  patron  and
restorer  of  this  scheme  of  ecclesiastical  policy.  The
church  of  Geneva,  formed  under  his  eye  and  by  his
direction,  was  deemed  the  most  perfect  model  of  this
government ;  and  Knox,  who,  during  his  residence  in
that  city,  had  studied  and  admired  it,  warmly  recom-
mended it  to  the  imitation  of  his  countrymen.

Among  the  Scottish  nobility,  some  hated  the  per-
sons, and  others  coveted  the  wealth,  of  the  dignified
clergy.  By  abolishing  that  order  of  men,  the  former

204  SCOTLAND.  [1560,

indulged  their  resentment,  and  the  latter  hoped  to  gra-
tify their  avarice.  The  people,  inflamed  with  the  most
violent  aversion  to  Popery,  and  approving  of  every
scheme  that  departed  farthest  from  the  practice  of  the
Romish  church,  were  delighted  with  a  system  so  ad-
mirably suited  to  their  predominant  passion  :  while  the
friends  of  civil  liberty  beheld  with  pleasure  the  Protes-
tant clergy  pulling  down  with  their  own  hands  that
fabric  of  ecclesiastical  power  which  their  predecessors
had  reared  with  so  much  art  and  industry ;  and  flatter-
ed themselves  that,  by  lending  their  aid  to  strip  church-
men of  their  dignity  and  wealth,  they  might  entirely
deliver  the  nation  from  their  exorbitant  and  oppressive
jurisdiction.  The  new  mode  of  government  easily
made  its  way  among  men  thus  prepared,  by  their  va-
rious interests  and  passions,  for  its  reception.

But,  on  the  first  introduction  of  this  system,  Knox
did  not  deem  it  expedient  to  depart  altogether  from  the
ancient  form.b  Instead  of  bishops,  he  proposed  to  es-
tablish ten  or  twelve  superintendents  in  different  parts
of  the  kingdom.  These,  as  the  name  implies,  were
empowered  to  inspect  the  life  and  doctrine  of  the  other
clergy.  They  presided  in  the  inferior  judicatories  of
the  church,  and  performed  several  other  parts  of  the
episcopal  function.  Their  jurisdiction,  however,  ex-
tended to  sacred  things  only  ;  they  claimed  no  seat  in
parliament,  and  pretended  no  right  to  the  dignity  or
revenues  of  the  former  bishops.

The  number  of  inferior  clergy,  to  whom  the  care  of
parochial  duty  could  be  committed,  was  still  extremely
small ;  they  had  embraced  the  principles  of  the  Re-
formation at  different  times,  and  from  various  motives ;
during  the  public  commotions,  they  were  scattered,
merely  by  chance,  over  the  different  provinces  of  the
kingdom,  and  in  a  few  places  only  were  formed  into
regular  classes  or  societies.  The  first  general  assem-

b  Spotswood,  158.

1560.]  BOOK  III.  205

Dec  20  kly  of  the  church,  which  was  held  this  year,
bears  all  the  marks  of  an  infant  and  unformed
society.  The  members  were  but  few  in  number,  and
of  no  considerable  rank  ;  no  uniform  or  consistent  rule
seems  to  have  been  observed  in  electing  them.  From
a  great  part  of  the  kingdom  no  representatives  ap-
peared. In  the  name  of  some  entire  counties,  but  one
person  was  present;  while,  in  other  places,  a  single
town  or  church  sent  several  members.  A  convention,
so  feeble  and  irregular,  could  not  possess  extensive
authority ;  and,  conscious  of  their  own  weakness,  the
members  put  an  end  to  their  debates,  without  ventur-
ing upon  any  decision  of  much  importance.0

In  order  to  give  greater  strength  and  con-
sistence to  the  presbyterian  plan,  Knox,  with
the  assistance  of  his  brethren,  composed  the  first  book
of  discipline,  which  contains  the  model  or  platform  of  .
the  intended  policy .d They  presented  it  to  a  conven-
tion of  estates,  which  was  held  in  the  beginning
of  this  year. Whatever  regulations  were  pro-
posed  with  regard to ecclesiastical discipline and
jurisdiction,  would  have  easily  obtained  the  sanction
of  that  assembly;  but  a  design  to  recover  the  patri-
mony of  the  church,  which  is  there  insinuated,  met
with  a  very  different  reception.

In  vain  did  the  clergy  display  the  advantages  which
would  accrue  to  the  public,  by  a  proper  application  of
ecclesiastical  revenues.  In  vain  did  they  propose,  by
an  impartial  distribution  of  this  fund,  to  promote  true
religion,  to  encourage  learning,  and  to  support  the
poor.  In  vain  did  they  even  intermingle  threatenings
of  the  divine  displeasure  against  the  unjust  detainers
of  what  was  appropriated  to  a  sacred  use.  The  nobles
held  fast  the  prey  which  they  had  seized ;  and,  be-
stowing upon  the  proposal  the  name  of  a  devout  ima-
gination, they  affected  to  consider  it  as  a  project

•c  Keith,  498.  d  Spots.  152.

206  SCOTLAND.  [1561.

altogether  visionary,  and  treated  it  with  the  utmost
scorn.6

The  queen  This  convention  appointed  the  prior  of  St.
retarnfoto  Andrew's  to  repair  to  the  queen,  and  to  invite
Scotland.  jjer  ^o  return  into  her  native  country,  and  to
assume  the  reins  of  government,  which  had  been
too  long  committed  to  other  hands.  Though  -some  of
her  subjects  dreaded  her  return,  and  others  foresaw
dangerous  consequences  with  which  it  might  be  at-
tended/ the  bulk  of  them  desired  it  with  so  much
ardour,  that  the  invitation  was  given  with  the  greatest
appearance  of  unanimity.  But  the  zeal  of  the  Roman
Catholics  got  the  start  of  the  prior  in  paying  court  to
Mary ;  and  Lesly,  afterward  bishop  of  Ross,  who
was  commissioned  by  them,  arrived  before  him  at  the
place  of  her  residence^  Lesly  endeavoured  to  infuse
into  the  queen's  mind  suspicions  of  her  Protestant
subjects,  and  to  persuade  her  to  throw  herself  entirely
into  the  arms  of  those  who  adhered  to  her  own  reli-
gion. For  this  purpose,  he  insisted  that  she  should
land  at  Aberdeen ;  and,  as  the  Protestant  doctrines  had
made  no  considerable  progress  in  that  part  of  the
kingdom,  he  gave  her  assurance  of  being  joined,  in  a
few  days,  by  twenty  thousand  men ;  and  flattered  her
that,  with  such  an  army,  encouraged  by  her  presence
and  authority,  she  might  easily  overturn  the  reformed
church,  before  it  was  firmly  settled  on  its  foundations.
But,  at  this  juncture,  the  princes  of  Lorrain  were
not  disposed  to  listen  to  this  extravagant  and  danger-
ous proposal.  Intent  on  defending  themselves  against
Catherine  of  Medicis,  whose  insidious  policy  was  em-
ployed in  undermining  their  exorbitant  power,  they
had  no  leisure  to  attend  to  the  affairs  of  Scotland,  and
wished  their  niece  to  take  possession  of  her  kingdom
with  as  little  disturbance  as  possible.  The  French
officers  too,  who  had  served  in  Scotland,  dissuaded

e  Knox,  356.  f  See  Append.  No.  V.  *  Lesly,  227.

1561.]  BOOK  III.  207

Mary  from  all  violent  measures ;  and  by  representing
the  power  and  number  of  the  Protestants  to  be  irre-
sistible, determined  her  to  court  them  by  every  art ;
and  rather  to  employ  the  leading  men  of  that  party  as
ministers,  than  to  provoke  them,  by  a  fruitless  opposi-
tion, to  become  her  enemies. h  Hence  proceeded  the
confidence  and  affection  with  which  the  prior  of  St.
Andrew's  was  received  by  the  queen.  His  representa-
tion of  the  state  of  the  kingdom  gained  great  credit ;
and  Lesly  beheld  with  regret  the  new  channel  in  which
court  favour  was  likely  to  run.

Another  convention  of  estates  was  held  in  May.
The  arrival  of  an  ambassador  from  France  seems  to
have  been  the  occasion  of  this  meeting.  He  was  in-
structed to  solicit  the  Scots  to  renew  their  ancient
alliance  with  France,  to  break  their  new  confederacy
with  England,  and  to  restore  the  Popish  ecclesiastics
to  the  possession  of  their  revenues  and  the  exercise  of
their  functions.  It  is  no  easy  matter  to  form  any  con*
jecture  concerning  the  intentions  of  the  French  court
in  making  these  extraordinary  and  ill-timed  proposi-
tions. They  were  rejected  with  that  scorn  which
might  well  have  been  expected  from  the  temper  of  the
nation.1

In  this  convention,  the  Protestant  clergy  did  not
obtain  a  more  favourable  audience  than  formerly,  and
their  prospect  of  recovering  the  patrimony  of  the
church  still  remained  as  distant  and  uncertain  as  ever.
But  with  regard  to  another  point,  they  found  the  zeal
of  the  nobles  in  no  degree  abated.  The  book  of  dis-
cipline seemed  to  require  that  the  monuments  of
Popery,  which  still  remained  in  the  kingdom,  should
be  demolished  ;k  and,  though  neither  the  same  pretence
of  policy,  nor  the  same  ungovernable  rage  of  the
people,  remained  to  justify  or  excuse  this  barbarous
havoc,  the  convention,  considering  every  religious

h  Melv.  61.  *  Knox,  269.  273.  k  Spotswood,  153.

208  SCOTLAND.  [1561.

fabric,  as  a  relic  of  idolatry,  passed  sentence  upon
them  by  an  act  in  form  ;  and  persons  the  most  remark-
able for  the  activity  of  their  zeal  were  appointed  to  put
it  in  execution.  Abbeys,  cathedrals,  churches,  libraries,
records,  and  even  the  sepulchres  of  the  dead,  perished
in  one  common  ruin.  The  storm  of  popular  insurrec-
tion, though  impetuous  and  irresistible,  had  extended
only  to  a  few  counties,  and  soon  spent  its  rage ;  but
now  a  deliberate  and  universal  rapine  completed  the
devastation  of  every  thing  venerable  and  magnificent
which  had  escaped  its  violence.1

Mary  be-  In  the  meantime,  Mary  was  in  no  haste  to
p^are  return  into  Scotland.  Accustomed  to  the  ele-
for  it.  gance,  splendour,  and  gaiety  of  a  polite  court,
she  still  fondly  lingered  in  France,  the  scene  of
all  these  enjoyments,  and  contemplated  with  horror
the  barbarism  of  her  own  country,  and  the  turbulence
of  her  subjects,  which  presented  her  with  a  very  dif-
ferent face  of  things.  The  impatience,  however,  of
her  people,  the  persuasions  of  her  uncles,  but,  above
all,  the  studied  and  mortifying  neglect  with  which  she
was  treated  by  the  queen-mother,  forced  her  to  think
of  beginning  this  disagreeable  voyage."1  But  while
she  was  preparing  for  it,  there  were  sown  between  her
and  Elizabeth,  the  seeds  of  that  personal  jealousy  and
discord  which  imbittered  the  life,  and  shortened  the
days,  of  the  Scottish  queen.

The  ratification  of  the  late  treaty  of  Edin-

Ongin  of  J .

the  discord  burgh  was  the  immediate  occasion  of  this  fatal
he/and*  animosity ;  the  true  cause  of  it  lay  much
Elizabeth.  Deeper.  Almost  every  article  in  that  treaty
had  been  executed  by  both  parties  with  a  scrupulous
exactness.  The  fortifications  of  Leith  were  demo-
lished, and  the  armies  of  France  and  England  with-
drawn within  the  appointed  time.  The  grievances
of  the  Scottish  malecontents  were  redressed,  and  they

1  Spotswood,  174,  .'  7  ' *•  Brantome,  Jebb,  vol.  ii.  482.

1561.]  BOOK  III.  209

had  obtained  whatever  they  could  demand  for  their
future  security.  With  regard  to  all  these,  Mary  could
have  little  reason  to  decline,  or  Elizabeth  to  urge,  the
ratification  of  the  treaty.

The  sixth  article  remained  the  only  source  of  contest
and  difficulty.  No  minister  ever  entered  more  deeply
into  the  schemes  of  his  sovereign,  or  pursued  them
with  more  dexterity  and  success  than  Cecil.  In  the
conduct  of  the  negotiation  at  Edinburgh,  the  sound
understanding  of  this  able  politician  had  proved  greatly
an  overmatch  for  Monluc's  refinements  in  intrigue,  and
had  artfully  induced  the  French  ambassadors,  not  only
to  acknowledge  that  the  crowns  of  England  and  Ire-
land did  of  right  belong  to  Elizabeth  alone,  but  also  to
promise,  that  in  all  times  to  come  Mary  should  abstain
from  using  the  title,  or  bearing  the  arms,  of  those
kingdoms.

The  ratification  of  this  article  would  have  been  of
the  most  fatal  consequences  to  Mary.  The  crown  of
England  was  an  object  worthy  of  her  ambition.  Her
pretensions  to  it  gave  her  great  dignity  and  importance
in  the  eyes  of  all  Europe.  By  many,  her  title  was
esteemed  preferable  to  that  of  Elizabeth.  Among  the
English  then  selves,  the  Roman  Catholics,  who  formed
at  that  time  a  numerous  and  active  party,  openly
espoused  this  opinion  ;  and  even  the  Protestants,  who
supported  Elizabeth's  throne,  could  not  deny  the  queen
of  Scots  to  be  her  immediate  heir.  A  proper  oppor-
tunity to  avail  herself  of  all  these  advantages  could  not,
in  the  course  of  things,  be  far  distant,  and  many
incidents  might  fall  in,  to  bring  this  opportunity
nearer  than  was  expected.  In  these  circumstances,
Mary,  by  ratifying  the  article  in  dispute,  would  have
lost  the  rank  she  had  hitherto  held  among  neighbour-
ing princes ;  the  zeal  of  her  adherents  must  have
gradually  cooled ;  and  she  might  have  renounced,
VOL.  i.  p

210  SCOTLAND.  [1561.

from  that  moment,  all  hopes  of  ever  wearing  the  Eng-
lish crown.n

None  of  these  beneficial  consequences  escaped  the
penetrating  eye  of  Elizabeth,  who,  for  this  reason,  had
recourse  to  every  thing  by  which  she  could  hope  either
to  soothe  or  frighten  the  Scottish  queen  into  a  compli-
ance with  her  demands-;  and  if  that  princess  had  been
so  unadvised  as  to  ratify  the  rash  concessions  of  her
ambassadors,  Elizabeth,  by  that  deed,  would  have  ac-
quired an  advantage,  which,  under  her  management,
must  have  turned  to  great  account.  By  such  a  renun-
ciation,- the  question  with  regard  to  the  right  of  suc-
cession would  have  been  left  altogether  open  and
undecided ;  and,  by  means  of  that,  Elizabeth  might
either  have  kept  her  rival  in  perpetual  anxiety  and
dependence,  or,  by  the  authority  of  her  parliament,
she  might  have  broken  in  upon  the  order  of  lineal
succession,  and  transferred  the  crown  to  some  other
descendant  of  the  royal  blood.  The  former  conduct
she  observed  towards  James  VI.  whom,  during  his
whole  reign,  she  held  in  perpetual  fear  and  subjection.
The  latter  and  more  rigorous  method  of  proceeding
would,  in  all  probability,  have  been  employed  against
Mary,  whom,  for  many  reasons,  she  both  envied  and
hated.

Nor  was  this  step  beyond  her  power,  unprecedented
in  the  history,  or  inconsistent  with  the  constitution  of
England.  Though  succession  by  hereditary  right  be
an  idea  so  natural  and  so  popular,  that  it  has  been
established  in  almost  every  civilized  nation,  yet  England
affords  many  memorable  instances  of  deviations  from
that  rule.  The  crown  of  that  kingdom  having  once
been  seized  by  the  hand  of  a  conqueror,  this  invited
the  bold  and  enterprising  in  every  age  to  imitate  such
an  illustrious  example  of  fortunate  ambition.  From

n  Haynes,  373,  &c.

156K]  BOOK III.  211

the  time  of  William  the  Norman,  the  regular  course
of  descent  had  seldom  continued  through  three  suc-
cessive reigns.  Those  princes,  whose  intrigues  or
valour  opened  to  them  a  way  to  the  throne,  called  in
the  authority  of  the  great  council  of  the  nation  to
confirm  their  dubious  titles.  Hence  parliamentary  and
hereditary  right  became  in  England  of  equal  consi-
deration. That  great  assembly  claimed,  and  actually
possessed,  a  power  of  altering  the  order  of  regal  suc-
cession; and  even  so  -late  as  .Henry  VIII.  an  act  of
parliament  had  authorized  that  capricious  monarch  to
settle  the  order  of  succession  at  his  pleasure.  The
English,  jealous  of  their  religious  liberty,  and  averse
from  the  dominion  of  strangers,  would  have  eagerly
adopted  the  passions  of  their  sovereign,  and  might
have  been  easily,  induced  to  exclude  the  Scottish  line
from  the  right  of  succeeding  to  the  crown.  These
seem  to  have  been  the  views  of  both  queens,  and  these
were  the  difficulties  which  retarded  the  ratification  of
the  treaty  of  Edinburgh.

But,  if  the  sources  of  their  discord  were  to  be  traced
no  higher  than  this  treaty,  an  inconsiderable  alteration
in  the  words  of  it  might  have  brought  the  present
question  to  an  amicable  issue.  The  indefinite  and
ambiguous  expression  which  Cecil  had  inserted  into
the  treaty,  might  have  been  changed  into  one  more
limited  but  more  precise ;  and  Mary,  instead  of  pro-
mising to  abstain  from  bearing  the  title  of  queen  of
England,  in  all  times  to  come,  might  have  engaged
not  to  assume  that  title  during  the  life  of  Elizabeth,  or
the  lives  of  her  lawful  posterity.0

0  This  expedient  for  terminating  the  difference  between  Elizabeth  and  Mary
was  so  obvious,  that  it  could  not  fail  of  presenting  itself  to  the  view  of  the  English
ministers.  "There  hath  been  a  matter  secretly  thought  of  (saysCecil  in  a  letter  toThrok-
morton,  July  14,  1561),  which  I  dare  communicate  to  you,  although  I  mean  never
to  be  an  author  thereof;  and  that  is,  if  an  accord  might  be  made  betwixt  our  mis-
tress and  the  Scottish  queen,  that  this  should  by  parliament  in  Scotland,  &c.
surrender  unto  the  queen's  majesty  all  matters  of  claim,  and  unto  the  heirs  of  her
body  ;  and  in  consideration  thereof,  the  Scottish  queen's  interest  should  be  ac-
knowledged in  default  of  heirs  of  the  body  of  the  queen's  majesty.  Well,  God  send
our  mistress  a  husband,  and  by  time  a  son,  that  we  may  hope  our  posterity  shall

p  2

212  SCOTLAND.  [1561.

Such an  amendment,  however, did  not  suit  the
views  of  either  queen.  Though  Mary  had  been  obliged
to  suspend  for  some  time  the  prosecution  of  her  title
to  the  English  crown,  she  had  not  however  relin-
quished it. She  determined  to  revive  her  claim  on
the  first  prospect  of  success,  and  was  unwilling  to  bind
herself,  by  a  positive  engagement,  not  to  take  advan-
tage of  any  such  fortunate  occurrence. Nor  would
the  alteration  have  been  more  acceptable  to  Elizabeth,
who,  by  agreeing  to  it,  would  have  tacitly  recognised
the  right  of  her  rival  to  ascend  the  throne  after  her
decease. But  neither  the  Scottish  nor  English  queen
durst  avow  these  secret  sentiments of  their  hearts.
Any  open  discovery  of  an  inclination  to  disturb  the
tranquillity  of  England,  or  to  wrest  the  sceptre  out  of
Elizabeth's  hands,  might  have  proved  fatal  to  Mary's
pretensions. Any  suspicion  of  a  design  to  alter  the
order  of  succession,  and  to  set  aside  the  claim  of  the
Scottish  queen,  would  have  exposed  Elizabeth  to  much
and  deserved  censure,  and  have  raised  up  against  her
many  and  dangerous  enemies. These,  however  care-
fully concealed  or  artfully  disguised,  were,  in  all  pro-
bability, the  real  motives  which  determined  the  one
queen  to  solicit,  and  the  other  to  refuse,  the  ratification
of  the  treaty  in  its  original  form ;  while  neither  had
recourse  to  that  explication  of  it,  which,  to  a  heart
unwarped  by  political  interest,  and  sincerely  desirous
of  union  and  concord,  would  have  appeared  so  obvious
and  natural.

But,  though  considerations  of  interest  first  occasioned
this  rupture  between  the  British  queens,  rivalship  of
another  kind  contributed  to  widen  the  breach,  and

have  a  masculine  succession.  This  matter  is  too  big  for  weak  folks,  and  too  deep
for  simple.  The  queen's  majesty  knoweth  of  it."  Hardw.  State  Pap.  i.  174.  But
with  regard  to  every  point  relating  to  the  succession,  Elizabeth  was  so  jealous  and
so  apt  to  take  offence,  that  her  most  confidential  ministers  durst  not  urge  her  to
advance  one  step  farther  than  she  herself  chose  to  go.  Cecil,  mentioning  some
scheme  about  the  succession,  if  the  queen  should  not  marry  or  leave  issue,  adds,
with  his  usual  caution :  "  This  song  hath  many  parts  j  but,  for  my  part,  I  have  no
skill  but  in  plain  song."  Ibid.  178.

1561.]  BOOK  III.  213

female  jealousy  increased  the  violence  of  their  political
hatred.  Elizabeth,  with  all  those  extraordinary  qua-
lities by  which  she  equalled  or  surpassed  such  of  her
sex  as  have  merited  the  greatest  renown,  discovered
an  admiration  of  her  own  person,  to  a  degree  which
women  of  ordinary  understandings  either  do  not  en-
tertain, or  prudently  endeavour  to  conceal.  Her  at-
tention to  dress,  her  solicitude  to  display  her  charms,
her  love  of  flattery,  were  all  excessive.  Nor  were  these
weaknesses  confined  to  that  period  of  life  when  they
are  more  pardonable.  Even  in  very  advanced  years,
the  wisest  woman  of  that,  or  perhaps  of  any  other  age,
wore  the  garb,  and  affected  the  manners  of  a  girl.p
Though  Elizabeth  was  as  much  inferior  to  Mary  in
beauty  and  gracefulness  of  person,  as  she  excelled  her
in  political  abilities  and  in  the  arts  of  government,  she
was  weak  enough  to  compare  herself  with  the  Scottish
queen  ;q  and  as  it  was  impossible  she  could  be  alto-
gether ignorant  how  much  Mary  gained  by  the  com-
parison, she  envied  and  hated  her  as  a  rival  by  whom
she  was  eclipsed.  In  judging  of  the  conduct  of  princes,
we  are  apt  to  ascribe  too  much  to  political  motives,
and  too  little  to  the  passions  which  they  feel  in
common  with  the  rest  of  mankind.  In  order  to  ac-
count for  Elizabeth's  present,  as  well  as  subsequent,
conduct  towards  Mary,  we  must  not  always  consider
her  as  a  queen,  we  must  sometimes  regard  her  merely
as  a  woman.

Elizabeth,  though  no  stranger  to  Mary's  difficulties
with  respect  to  the  treaty,  continued  to  urge  her,  by
repeated  applications,  to  ratify  it.r  Mary,  under  va-
rious pretences,  still  contrived  to  gain  time,  and  to
elude  the  request.  But  while  the  one  queen  solicited
with  persevering  importunity,  and  the  other  evaded

P  Johnston,  Hist.  Rer.  Britan.  346,  347. Carte,  vol.  iii.  699. Catalogue  of
Royal  and  Noble  Authors,  article  Essex.

a  Melvil,  98.  r  Keith,  157. 160,  &c.

214  SCOTLAND.  [1561.

with  artful  delay,  they  both  studied  an  extreme  polite-
ness of  behaviour,  and  loaded  each  other  with  profes-
sions of  sisterly  love, with  reciprocal  declarations  of
unchangeable  esteem  and  amity.
Elizabeth ft  was  not  l°ng  before  Mary  was  convinced,

Ma-se  a  ^at  among  Prnices  these  expressions  of  friend-
safe-con-  ship  are  commonly  far  distant  from  the  heart,
In  sailing  from  France  to  Scotland,  the  course
lies  along  the  English  coast.  In  order  to  be  safe  fpom
the  insults  of  the  English  fleet,  or,  in  case  of  tem-
pestuous weather,  to  secure  retreat  in  the  harbours  of
that  kingdom,  Mary  sent  M.  D'Oysel  to  demand  of
Elizabeth  a  safe-conduct  during  her  voyage.  This
request,  which  decency  alone  obliged  one  prince  to
grant  to  another,  Elizabeth  rejected,  in  such  a  manner
as  gave  rise  to  no  slight  suspicion  of  a  design,  either
to  obstruct  the  passage,  or  to  intercept  the  person  of
the  Scottish  queen.3

Mary,  in  a  long  conference  with  Throkmorton,  the
English  ambassador  in  France,  explained  her  senti-
ments concerning  this  ungenerous  behaviour  of  his
mistress,  in  a  strain  of  dignified  expostulation,  which
conveys  an  idea  of  her  abilities,  address,  and  spirit,  as
advantageous  as  any  transaction  in  her  reign.  Mary
was  at  that  time  only  in  her  eighteenth  year  ;  and  as
Throkmorton's  account  of  what  passed  in  his  interview
with  her,  is  addressed  directly  to  Elizabeth,1  that  dex-
terous courtier,  we  may  be  well  assured,  did  not  em-
bellish the  discourse  of  the  Scottish  queen  with  any
colouring  too  favourable.

Whatever  resentment  Mary  mi^ht  feel,  it  did

Mary  be-  ' ,  ,  J °_  ~,

gins  her  not  retard  her  departure  from  r  ranee.  She
voyage.  ^^  accompanied  to  Calais,  the  place  where
she  embarked,  in  a  manner  suitable  to  her  dignity,  as
the  queen  of  two  powerful  kingdoms.  Six  princes  of

•  Keith,  171i Camden. See  Appendix,  No.  VI.
1  Cabbala,  p.  374. Keith,  170,  &c.

1561.]  BOOK  III.  215

Lorrain,  her  uncles,  with  many  of  the  most  eminent
among  the  French  nobles,  were  in  her  retinue.  Ca-
therine, who  secretly  rejoiced  at  her  departure,  graced
it  with  every  circumstance  of  magnificence  and  respect.
After  bidding  adieu  to  her  mourning  attendants,  with
a  sad  heart,  and  eyes  bathed  in  tears,  Mary  left  that
kingdom,  the  short  but  only  scene  of  her  life  in  which
fortune  smiled  upon  her.  While  the  French  coast
continued  in  sight,  she  intently  gazed  upon  it,  and
musing,  in  a  thoughtful  posture,  on  that  height  of
fortune  whence  she  had  fallen,  and  presaging,  perhaps,
the  disasters  and  calamities  which  imbittered  the  re-
mainder of  her  days,  she  sighed  often,  and  cried  out,
"  Farewell,  France !  Farewell,  beloved  country,  which
I  shall  never  more  behold  !"  Even  when  the  darkness
of  the  night  had  hid  the  land  from  her  view,  she  would
neither  retire  to  the  cabin,  nor  taste  food,  but  com-
manding a  couch  to  be  placed  on  the  deck,  she  there
waited  the  return  of  day  with  the  utmost  impatience.
Fortune  soothed  her  on  this  occasion  ;  the  galley  made
little  way  during  the  night.  In  the  morning,  the  coast
of  France  was  still  within  sight,  and  she  continued  to
feed  her  melancholy  with  the  prospect ;  and,  as  long
as  her  eyes  could  distinguish  it,  to  utter  the  same
tender  expressions  of  regret."  At  last  a  brisk  gale
arose,  by  the  favour  of  which  for  some  days,  and
afterward  under  the  cover  of  a  thick  fog,  Mary
escaped  the  English  fleet,  which,  as  she  apprehended,
lay  in  wait  in  order  to  intercept  her  ;x  and  on  the

u  Brantome,  483.  He  himself  was  in  the  same  galley  with  the  queen.
*  Goodal,  vol.  i.  175.  Camden  insinuates,  rather  than  affirms,  that  it  was  the
object  of  the  English  fleet  to  intercept  Mary.  This,  however,  seems  to  be  doubtful.
Elizabeth  positively  asserts  that,  at  the  request  of  the  king  of  Spain,  she  had  fitted
out  a  few  ships  of  slender  force,  in  order  to  clear  the  narrow  seas  of  pirates,  which
infested  them  ;  and  she  appeals  for  the  truth  of  this  to  Mary's  own  ministers.  App.
No.  VI.  Cecil,  in  a  letter  to  Throkraorton,  Aug.  26,  1561,  informs  him,  that  "  the
queen's  ships,  which  were  upon  the  seas  to  cleanse  them  of  pirates,  saw  her
[i.  e.  Mary],  and  saluted  her  galleys,  and  staying  her  ships,  examined  them  of
pirates,  and  dismissed  them  gently.  One  Scottish  ship  they  detained  as  vehemently
suspected  of  piracy."  Hard.  State  Papers,  i.  176.  Castelnau,  who  accompanied
Mary  in  this  voyage,  confirms  the  circumstance  of  her  galleys  being  in  sight  of  the
English  fleet.  Mem.  ap.  Jebb.  xi.  455.

216  SCOTLAND.  [1561.

19th  of  August,  after  an  absence  of  near  thirteen  years,
landed  safely  at  Leith  in  her  native  kingdom.
Arrives  in  Mary  was  received  by  her  subjects  with
Scotland.  snouts  and  acclamations  of  joy,  and  with  every
demonstration  of  welcome  and  regard.  But  as  her  arrival
was  unexpected,  and  no  suitable  preparation  had  been
made  for  it,  they  could  not,  with  all  their  efforts,  hide
from  her  the  poverty  of  the  country,  and  were  obliged
to  conduct  her  to  the  palace  of  Holyrood-house,  with
little  pomp.  The  queen,  accustomed  from  her  infancy
to  splendour  and  magnificence,  and  fond  of  them,  as
was  natural  at  her  age,  could  not  help  observing  the
change  in  her  situation,  and  seemed  to  be  deeply  af-
fected with  it.y

state  of  Never  did  any  prince  ascend  the  throne  at
J0emkiantg~  a  juncture  which  called  for  more  wisdom  in
this  time,  council,  or  more  courage  and  steadiness  in
action.  The  rage  of  religious  controversy  was  still
unabated.  The  memory  of  past  oppression  exaspe-
rated the  Protestants;  the  smart  of  ancient  injuries
rendered  the  Papists  desperate;  both  were  zealous,
fierce,  and  irreconcilable.  The  absence  of  their
sovereign  had  accustomed  the  nobles  to  independ-
ence ;  and,  during  the  late  commotions,  they  had  ac-
quired such  an  increase  of  wealth,  by  the  spoils  of  the
church,  as  threw  great  weight  into  the  scale  of  the
aristocracy,  which  stood  not  in  need  of  any  accession
of  power.  The  kingdom  had  long  been  under  the
government  of  regents,  who  exercised  a  delegated
jurisdiction,  attended  with  little  authority,  and  which
inspired  no  reverence.  A  state  of  pure  anarchy  had
prevailed  for  the  two  last  years,  without  a  regent,
without  a  supreme  council,  without  the  power,  or  even
the  form,  of  a  regular  government."  A  licentious
spirit,  unacquainted  with  subordination,  and  disdain-
ing the  restraints  of  law  and  justice,  had  spread  among

y  Brant.  484.  z  Keith,  Append.  92.

1561.]  BOOK  III.  217

all  ranks  of  men.  The  influence  of  France,  the  ancient
ally  of  the  kingdom,  was  withdrawn  or  despised.  The
English,  of  enemies  become  confederates,  had  grown
into  confidence  with  the  nation,  and  had  gained  an
ascendant  over  all  its  councils.  The  Scottish  monarchs
did  not  derive  more  splendour  or  power  from  the
friendship  of  the  former,  than  they  had  reason  to
dread  injury  and  diminution  from  the  interposition  of
the  latter.  Every  consideration,  whether  of  interest
or  of  self-preservation,  obliged  Elizabeth  to  depress
the  royal  authority  in  Scotland,  and  to  create  the
prince  perpetual  difficulties,  by  fomenting  the  spirit  of
dissatisfaction  among  the  people.

In  this  posture  were  the  affairs  of  Scotland,  when
the  administration  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  young
queen,  not  nineteen  years  of  age,  unacquainted  with
the  manners  and  laws  of  her  country,  a  stranger  to  her
subjects,  without  experience,  without  allies,  and  almost
without  a  friend.

On  the  other  hand,  in  Mary's  situation  we  find  some
circumstances,  which,  though  they  did  not  balance
these  disadvantages,  contributed,  however,  to  alleviate
them  ;  and,  with  skilful  management,  might  have  pro-
duced great  effects.  Her  subjects,  unaccustomed  so
long  to  the  residence  of  their  prince,  were  not  only
dazzled  by  the  novelty  and  splendour  of  the  royal  pre-
sence, but  inspired  with  awe  and  reverence.  Besides
the  places  of  power  and  profit  bestowed  by  the  favour
of  a  prince,  his  protection,  his  familiarity,  and  even
his  smiles,  confer  honour  and  win  the  hearts  of  men.
From  all  corners  of  the  kingdom,  the  nobles  crowded
to  testify  their  duty  and  affection  to  their  sovereign,
and  studied  by  every  art  to  wipe  out  the  memory  of  past
misconduct,  and  to  lay  in  a  stock  of  future  merit.  The
amusements  and  gaiety  of  her  court,  which  was  filled
with  the  most  accomplished  of  the  French  nobility,  who

218  SCOTLAND.  [1561.

had  attended  her,  began  to  soften  and  to  polish  the
rude  manners  of  the  nation.  Mary  herself  possessed
many  of  those  qualifications  which  raise  affection  and
procure  esteem.  The  beauty  and  gracefulness  of  her
person  drew  universal  admiration,  the  elegance  and
politeness  of  her  manners  commanded  general  respect.
To  all  the  charms  of  her  own  sex,  she  added  many  ac-
complishments of  the  other.  The  progress  she  had
made  in  all  the  arts  and  sciences,  which  were  then
deemed  necessary  or  ornamental,  was  far  beyond  what
is  commonly  attained  by  princes ;  and  all  her  other
qualities  were  rendered  more  agreeable  by  a  courteous
affability,  which,  without  lessening  the  dignity  of  a
prince,  steals  on  the  hearts  of  subjects  with  a  be-
witching insinuation.

From  these  circumstances,  notwithstanding  the
threatening  aspect  of  affairs  at  Mary's  return  into
Scotland  ;  notwithstanding  the  clouds  which  gathered
on  every  hand,  a  political  observer  would  have  pre-
dicted a  very  different  issue  of  her  reign  ;  and,  what-
ever sudden  gusts  of  faction  he  might  have  expected,
he  would  never  have  dreaded  the  destructive  violence
of  that  storm  which  followed.

While  all  parties  were  contending  who  should  dis-
cover the  most  dutiful  attachment  to  the  queen,  the
zealous  and  impatient  spirit  of  the  age  broke  out  in  a  re-
markable instance.  On  the  Sunday  after  her  arrival,  the
queen  commanded  mass  to  be  celebrated  in  the  chapel
of  her  palace.  The  first  rumour  of  this  occasioned  a
secret  murmuring  among  the  Protestants  who  attended
the  court ;  complaints  and  threatenings  soon  followed ;
the  servants  belonging  to  the  chapel  were  insulted  and
abused  ;  and,  if  the  prior  of  St.  Andrew's  had  not  sea-
sonably interposed,  the  rioters  might  have  proceeded
to  the  utmost  excesses.8

a  Knox,  284. Haynes,  372.

1561.]  BOOK  III.

It  is  impossible,  at  this  distance  of  time,  and  under
circumstances  so  very  different,  to  conceive  the  vio-
lence of  that  zeal  against  Popery,  which  then  possessed
the  nation.  Every  instance  of  condescension  to  the
Papists  was  deemed  an  act  of  apostacy,  and  the  tole-
ration of  a  single  mass  pronounced  to  be  more  formi-
dable to  the  nation  than  the  invasion  of  ten  thousand
armed  men.b  Under  the  influence  of  these  opinions,
many  Protestants  would  have  ventured  to  go  dangerous
lengths;  and,  without  attempting  to  convince  their
sovereign  by  argument,  or  to  reclaim  her  by  indul-
gence, would  have  abruptly  denied  her  the  liberty  of
worshipping  God  in  that  manner  which  alone  she
thought  acceptable  to  him.  But  the  prior  of  S.t.
Andrew's,  and  other  leaders  of  the  party,  not  only
restrained  this  impetuous  spirit,  but,  in  spite  of  the
murmurs  of  the  people  and  the  exclamation  of -the
preachers,  obtained  for  the  queen  and  her  domestics
the  undisturbed  exercise  of  the  Catholic  religion.
Near  a  hundred  years  after  this  period,  when  the
violence  of  religious  animosities  had  begun  to  subside,
when  time  and  the  progress  of  learning  had  enlarged
the  views  of  the  human  mind,  an  English  house  of
commons  refused  to  indulge  the  wife  of  their  sove-
reign in  the  private  use  of  the  mass.  The  Protestant
leaders  deserve,  on  this  occasion,  the  praise  both  of
wisdom  and  of  moderation  for  conduct  so  different.
But,  at  the  same  time,  whoever  reflects  upon  the  en-
croaching and  sanguinary  spirit  of  Popery  in  that  age,
will  be  far  from  treating  the  fears  and  caution  of  the
more  zealous  reformers  as  altogether  imaginary,  and
destitute  of  any  real  foundation.

The  leaders  of  the  Protestants,  however,  by  this
prudent  compliance  with  the  prejudices  of  their  sove-
reign, obtained  from  her  a  proclamation  highly  favour-
Aug.ss.  able  to  their  religion,  which  was  issued  six

»»  Knox,  287.

220  SCOTLAND.  [1561,

days  after  her  arrival  in  Scotland.  The  reformed
doctrine,  though  established  over  all  the  kingdom  by
the  parliament,  which  met  in  consequence  of  the  treaty
of  pacification,  had  never  received  the  countenance
or  sanction  of  royal  authority.  In  order  to  quiet
the  minds  of  those  who  had  embraced  that  doc-
trine, and  to  remove  any  dread  of  molestation  which
they  might  entertain,  Mary  declared,  "  that  until  she
should  take  final  orders  concerning  religion,  with
advice  of  parliament,  any  attempt  to  alter  or  subvert
the  religion  which  she  found  universally  practised  in
the  realm,  should  be  deemed  a  capital  crime."c  Next
year  a  second  proclamation  to  the  same  effect  was  pub-
lished.41

She  em-  The  queen,  conformably  to  the  plan  which
had.  been  concerted  in  France,  committed  the
administration  of  affairs  entirely  to  Protestants.
tion.  jjer  council  was  filled  with  the  most  eminent
persons  of  that  party ;  not  a  single  Papist  was  admit-
ted into  any  degree  of  confidence."  The  prior  of
St.  Andrew's  and  Maitland  of  Lethington  seemed
to  hold  the  first  place  in  the  queen's  affection,  and
possessed  all  the  power  as  well  as  reputation  of  fa-
vourite ministers.  Her  choice  could  not  have  fallen
upon  persons  more  acceptable  to  her  people ;  and,  by
their  prudent  advice,  Mary  conducted  herself  with  so
much  moderation,  and  deference  to  the  sentiments  of
the  nation,  as  could  not  fail  of  gaining  the  affection  of
her  subjects/  the  firmest  foundation  of  a  prince's
power,  and  the  only  genuine  source  of  his  happiness
and  glory.

Attempts  A  cordial  reconcilement  with  Elizabeth  was
Elizabeth's  anot^er  object  of  great  importance  to  Mary ;
favour.  and  though  she  seems  to  have  had  it  much  at
heart,  in  the  beginning  of  her  administration,  to  ac-
complish such  a  desirable  conjunction,  yet  many  events

'Keitli,504.  d  Ibid.  510.  e  Knox,  285.  f  Lesley,  235.

1561.]  BOOK  III.  221

occurred  to  widen,  rather  than  to  close,  the  breach.
The  formal  offices  of  friendship,  however,  are  seldom
neglected  among  princes ;  and  Elizabeth,  who  had
attempted  so  openly  to  obstruct  the  queen's  voyage  into
Scotland,  did  not  fail,  a  few  days  after  her  arrival,  to
command  Randolph  to  congratulate  her  safe  return.
Mary,  that  she  might  be  on  equal  terms  with  her,  sent
Maitland  to  the  English  court,  with  many  ceremonious
expressions  of  regard  for  Elizabeth.8  Both  the  ambas-
sadors were  received  with  the  utmost  civility ;  and  on
each  side  the  professions  of  kindness,  as  they  were
made  with  little  sincerity,  were  listened  to  with  pro-
portional credit.

Both  were  intrusted,  however,  with  something  more
than  mere  matter  of  ceremony.  Randolph  urged  Mary,
with  fresh  importunity,  to  ratify  the  treaty  of  Edin-
burgh. Maitland  endeavoured  to  amuse  Elizabeth,  by
apologizing  for  the  dilatory  conduct  of  his  mistress  with
regard  to  that  point.  The  multiplicity  of  public  affairs
since  her  arrival  in  Scotland,  the  importance  of  the
question  in  dispute,  and  the  absence  of  many  noblemen,
with  whom  she  was  obliged  in  decency  to  consult,  were
the  pretences  offered  in  excuse  for  her  conduct ;  the
real  causes  of  it  were  those  which  have  already  been
mentioned.  But,  in  order  to  extricate  herself  out  of
these  difficulties,  into  which  the  treaty  of  Edinburgh
had  led  her,  Mary  was  brought  to  yield  a  point,  which
formerly  she  seemed  determined  never  to  give  up.  She
instructed  Maitland  to  signify  her  willingness  to  dis-
claim any  right  to  the  crown  of  England,  during  the
life  of  Elizabeth,  and  the  lives  of  her  posterity ;  if,  in
failure  of  these,  she  were  declared  next  heir  by  an  act
of  parliament.11

Reasonable  as  this  proposal  might  appear  to  Mary,
who  thereby  precluded  herself  from  disturbing  Eliza-
beth's possession  of  the  throne,  nothing  could  be  more

*  Keith,  181,  &c.  h  Camden,  387. Buch.  329.

222  SCOTLAND.  [1561.

inconsistent  with  Elizabeth's  interest,  or  more  contra-
dictory to  a  passion  which  predominated  in  the  cha-
racter of  that  princess.  Notwithstanding  all  the  great
qualities  which  threw  such  lustre  on  her  reign,  we  may
observe,  that  she  was  tinctured  with  a  jealousy  of
her  right  to  the  crown,  which  often  betrayed  her  into
mean  and  ungenerous  actions.  The  peculiarity  of  her
situation  heightened,  no  doubt,  and  increased,  but  did
not  infuse,  this  passion.  It  descended  to  her  from
Henry  VII.  her  grandfather,  whom,  in  several  features
of  his  character,  she  nearly  resembled.  Like  him,  she
suffered  the  title  by  which  she  held  the  crown  to  remain
ambiguous  and  controverted,  rather  than  submit  it  to
parliamentary  discussion,  or  derive  any  addition  to  her
right  from  such  authority.  Like  him,  she  observed
every  pretender  to  the  succession,  not  only  with  that
attention  which  prudence  prescribes,  but  with  that
aversion  which  suspicion  inspires.  The  present  uncer-
tainty with- regard  to  the  right  of  succession  operated
for  Elizabeth's  advantage,  both  on  her  subjects  and  on
her  rivals.  Among  the  former,  every  lover  of  his
country  regarded  her  life  as  the  great  security  of  the
national  tranquillity ;  and  chose  rather  to  acknowledge
a  title  which  was  dubious,  than  to  search  after  one
that  was  unknown.  Tha  latter,  while  nothing  was
decided,  were  held  in  dependence,  and  obliged  to  court
her.  The  manner  in  which  she  received  this  ill-timed
proposal  of  the  Scottish  queen,  was  no  other  than
might  have  been  .expected.  She  rejected  it  in  a  pe-
remptory tone,  with  many  expressions  of  a  resolution
never  to  permit  a  point  of  so  much  delicacy  to  be
touched.

ge  t  About  this  time  the  queen  made  her  public

entry  into  Edinburgh  with  great  pomp.  Nothing
was  neglected  that  could  express  the  duty  and  affec-
tion of  the  citizens  towards  their  sovereign.  But,
amidst  these  demonstrations  of  regard,  the  genius  and

1561.]  BOOK  III.  223

sentiments  of  the  nation  discovered  themselves  in  a
circumstance,  which,  though  inconsiderable,  ought  not
to  be  overlooked.  As  it  was  the  mode  of  the  times  to
exhibit  many  pageants  at  every  public  solemnity,  most
of  these,  on  this  occasion,  were  contrived  to  be  repre-
sentations of  the  vengeance  which  the  Almighty  had
inflicted  upon  idolaters.1  Even  while  they  studied  to
amuse  and  to  flatter  the  queen,  her  subjects  could  not
refrain  from  testifying  their  abhorrence  of  that  religion
which  she  professed.

Restrains  To  restore  the  regular  administration  of jus-
onhebTr!  tice?  an(l  to  reform  the  internal  policy  of  the
derers.  .  country,  became  the  next  object  of  the  queen's
care..  The  laws  enacted  for  preservation  of  public
order,  and  the  security  of  private  property,  were  nearly
the  same  in  Scotland  as  in  every  other  civilized  coun-
try. But  the  nature  of  the  Scottish  constitution,  the
feebleness  of  regal  authority,  the  exorbitant  power  of
the  nobles,  the  violence  of  faction,  and  the  fierce  man-
ners of  the  people,  rendered  the  execution  of  these
laws  feeble,  irregular,  and  partial.  In  the  counties
which  border  on  England,  this  defect  was  most  appa-
rent ;  and  the  consequence  of  it  most  sensibly  felt.
The  inhabitants,  strangers  to  industry,  averse  from  la-
bour, and  unacquainted  with  the  arts  of  peace,  subsisted
chiefly  by  spoil  and  pillage ;  and,  being  confederated
in  septs  or  clans,  committed  these  excesses-  not  only
with  impunity,  but  even  with  honour.  During  the  un-
settled state  of  the  kingdom  from  the  death  of  James  V.,
this  dangerous  licence  had  grown  to  an  unusual  height ;
and  the  inroads  and  rapine  of  those  freebooters  were
become  no  less  intolerable  to  their  own  countrymen
than  to  the  English.  To  restrain  and  punish  these
outrages,  was  an  action  equally  popular  in  both  king-
doms. The  prior  of  St.  Andrew's  was  the  person
chosen  for  this  important  service,  and  extraordinary

*  Keith,  189.

224  SCOTLAND.  [1561.

powers,  together  with  the  title  of  the  queen's  lieutenant,
were  vested  in  him  for  that  purpose.

Nothing  can  be  more  surprising  to  men  accustomed
to  regular  government,  than  the  preparations  made  on
this  occasion.  They  were  such  as  might  be  expected
in  the  rudest  and  most  imperfect  state  of  society.  The
freeholders  of  eleven  several  counties,  with  all  their
followers  completely  armed,  were  summoned  to  assist
the  lieutenant  in  the  discharge  of  his  office.  Every
thing  resembled  a  military  expedition,  rather  than  the
progress  of  a  court  of  justice.1"  The  prior  executed  his
commission  with  such  vigour  and  prudence,  as  acquired
him  a  great  increase  of  reputation  and  popularity
among  his  countrymen.  Numbers  of  the  banditti  suf-
fered the  punishment  due  to  their  crimes  ;  and,  by  the
impartial  and  rigorous  administration  of  justice,  order
and  tranquillity  were  restored  to  that  part  of  the
kingdom.

The  Pa-  During  the  absence  of  the  prior  of  St.  An-
temptTin  drew's,  the  leaders  of  the  Popish  faction  seem
into  favour* to  ^ave  ta^en  some  steps  towards  insinuating
with  her.  themselves  into  the  queen's  favour  and  con-
fidence.1 But  the  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  the
most  remarkable  person  in  the  party  for  abilities  and
political  address,  was  received  with  little  favour  at
court ;  and,  whatever  secret  partiality  the  queen  might
have  towards  those  who  professed  the  same  religion
with  herself,  she  discovered  no  inclination  at  that  time
to  take  the  administration  of  affairs  out  of  the  hands  to
which  she  had  already  committed  it.

The  cold  reception  of  the  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's
was  owing  to  his  connexion  with  the  house  of  Hamil-
ton ;  from  which  the  queen  was  much  alienated.  The
duke  of  Guise  and  the  cardinal  could  never  forgive  the
zeal  with  which  the  duke  of  Chatelherault  and  his  son
the  earl  of  Arran  had  espoused  the  cause  of  the  con-

k  Keith,  198.  i  Ibid.  203.

1561.]  BOOK  III.  225

gregation.  Princes  seldom  view  their  successors  with-
out jealousy  and  distrust!  The  prior  of  St.  Andrew's,
perhaps,  dreaded  the  duke  as  a  rival  in  power.  All
these  causes  concurred  in  infusing  into  the  queen's
mind  an  aversion  for  that  family.  The  duke,  indulg-
ing his  love  of  retirement,  lived  at  a  distance  from  court,
without  taking  pains  to  insinuate  himself  into  favour ;
and,  though  the  earl  of ,Arran  openly  aspired  to  marry
the  queen,  he,  by  a  most  unpardonable  act  of  impru-
dence, was  the  only  nobleman  of  distinction  who  op-
posed Mary's  enjoying  the  exercise  of  her  religion ;
and,  by  rashly  entering  a  public  protestation  against  it,
entirely  forfeited  her  favour.™  At  the  same  time,  the
sordid  parsimony  of  his  father  obliged  him  either  to
hide  himself  in  some  retirement,  or  to  appear  in  a  man-
ner unbecoming  his  dignity  as  first  prince  of  the  blood,
or  his  high  pretensions  as  suitor  to  the  queen."  His
love,  inflamed  by  disappointment,  and  his  impatience
exasperated  by  neglect,  preyed  gradually  on  his  reason ;
and  after  many  extravagances,  broke  out  at  last  in
ungovernable  frenzy.

Towards  the  end  of  the  year,  a  convention  of
estates  was  held,  chiefly  on  account  of  eccle-
siastical affairs.  The  assembly  of  the  church,  which
sat  at  the  same  time,  presented  a  petition,  containing
many  demands  with  respect  to  the  suppressing  of  Po-
pery, the  encouraging  the  Protestant  religion,  and  the
providing  for  the  maintenance  of  the  clergy.0  The  last
was  a  matter  of  great  importance,  and  the  steps  taken
towards  it  deserve  to  be  traced.

A  new  re-  Though  the  number  of  Protestant  preachers
concernin  was  now  considerably  increased,  many  more
the  reve-  were  still  wanted,  in  every  corner  of  the  king-
church,  dom.  No  legal  provision  having  been  made
for  them,  they  had  hitherto  drawn  a  scanty  and

m  Keith,  201.  204. Knox,  286.
Keith,  196.  °  Ibid.  210.

VOL. I.

226  SCOTLAND.  [1561.

precarious  subsistence  from  the  benevolence  of  their
people.  To  suffer  the  ministers  of  an  established
church  to  continue  in  this  state  of  indigence  and  de-
pendence, was  an  indecency  equally  repugnant  to  the
principles  of  religion,  and  to  the  maxims  of  sound
policy ;  and  would  have  justified  all  the  imputations  of
avarice  with  which  the  Reformation  was  then  loaded
by  its  enemies.  The  revenues  of  the  Popish  church
were  the  only  fund  which  could  be  employed  for  their
relief;  but,  during  the  three  last  years,  the  state  of
these  was  greatly  altered.  A  great  majority  of  abbots,
priors,  and  other  heads  of  religious  houses,  had,  either
from  a  sense  of  duty,  or  from  views  of  interest,  re^
nounced  the  errors  of  Popery ;  and,  notwithstanding
this  change  in  their  sentiments,  they  retained  their
ancient  revenues.  Almost  the  whole  order  of  bishops,
and  several  of  the  other  dignitaries,  still  adhered  to  the
Romish  superstition  ;  and,  though  debarred  from  every
spiritual  function,  continued  to  enjoy  the  temporalities
of  their  benefices.  Some  laymen,  especially  those  who
had  been  active  in  promoting  the  Reformation,  had,
under  various  pretences,  and  amidst  the  licence  of  civil
wars,  got  into  their  hands  possessions  which  belonged
to  the  church.  Thus,  before  any  part  of  the  ancient
ecclesiastical  revenues  could  be  applied  towards  the
maintenance  of  the  Protestant  ministers,  many  different
interests  were  to  be  adjusted ;  many  claims  to  be  ex-
amined ;  and  the  prejudices  and  passions  of  the  two
contending  parties  required  the  application  of  a  delicate
hand.  After  much  contention,  the  following  plan  was
approved  by  a  majority  of  voices,  and  acquiesced  in  even
by  the  Popish  clergy  themselves.  An  exact  account  of
the  value  of  ecclesiastical  benefices  throughout  the
kingdom  was  appointed  to  be  taken.  The  present  in-
cumbents, to  whatever  party  they  adhered,  were  allowed
to  keep  possession  :  two-thirds  of  their  whole  revenue
were  reserved  for  their  own  use,  the  remainder  was

1561.]  BOOK  III.  227

annexed  to  the  crown ;  and  out  of  that  the  queen  under-
took to  assign  a  sufficient  maintenance  for  the  Pro-
testant clergy  ,p

As  most  of  the  bishops  and  several  of  the  other  dig-
nitaries were  still  firmly  attached  to  the  Popish  reli-
gion, the  extirpation  of  the  whole  order,  rather  than  an
act  of  such  extraordinary  indulgence,  might  have  been
expected  from  the  zeal  of  the  preachers,  and  from  the
spirit  which  had  hitherto  animated  the  nation.  But,
on  this  occasion,  other  principles  obstructed  the  opera-
tions of  such  as  were  purely  religious.  Zeal  for  liberty,
and  the  love  of  wealth,  two  passions  extremely  oppo-
site, concurred  in  determining  the  Protestant  leaders  to
fall  in  with  this  plan,  which  deviated  so  manifestly  from
the  maxims  by  which  they  had  hitherto  regulated  their
conduct.

If  the  reformers  had  been  allowed  to  act  without
control,  and  to  level  all  distinctions  in  the  church,
the  great  revenues  annexed  to  ecclesiastical  dignities
could  not,  with  any  colour  of  justice,  have  been  re-
tained by  those  in  whose  hands  they  now  were ;  but
must  either  have  been  distributed  amongst  the  Pro-
testant clergy,  who  performed  all  religious  offices,  or
must  have  fallen  to  the  queen,  from  the  bounty  of  whose
ancestors  the  greater  part  of  them  was  originally  de-
rived. The  former  scheme,  however  suitable  to  the
religious  spirit  of  many  among  the  people,  was  attend-
ed with  manifold  danger.  The  Popish  ecclesiastics
had  acquired  a  share  in  the  national  property,  which
far  exceeded  the  proportion  that  was  consistent  with
the  happiness  of  the  kingdom;  and  the  nobles  were  de-
termined to  guard  against  this  evil,  by  preventing  the
return  of  those  possessions  into  the  hands  of  the  church.
Nor  was  the  latter,  which  exposed  the  constitution  to
more  imminent  hazard,  to  be  avoided  with  less  care.
Even  that  circumscribed  prerogative,  which  the  Scot-

P  Keith,  Append.  175. Knox,  194.

Q2

228  SCOTLAND.  [15.61.

tish  kings  possessed,  was  the  object  of  jealousy  to  the
nobles.  If  they  had  allowed  the  crown  to  seize  the
spoils  of  the  church,  such  an  increase  of  power  must
have  followed  that  accession  of  property,  as  would
have  raised  the  royal  authority  above  control,  and
have  rendered  the  most  limited  prince  in  Europe  the
most  absolute  and  independent.  The  reign  of  Henry
VIII.  presented  a  recent  and  alarming  example  of  this
nature.  The  wealth  which  flowed  in  upon  that  prince,
from  the  suppression  of  the  monasteries,  not  only
changed  the  maxims  of  his  government,  but  the  temper
of  his  mind ;  and  he  who  had  formerly  submitted  to  his
parliaments,  and  courted  his  people,  dictated,  from  that
time,  to  the  former  with  intolerable  insolence,  and  ty-
rannized over  the  latter  with  unprecedented  severity.
And  if  his  policy  had  not  been  extremely  short-sighted,
if  he  had  not  squandered  what  he  acquired  with  a  pro-
fusion equal  to  his  rapaciousness,  and  which  defeated
his  ambition,  he  might  have  established  despotism  in
England,  on  a  basis  so  broad  and  strong  as  all  the  ef-
forts of  the  subjects  would  never  have  been  able  to
shake.  In  Scotland,  where  the  riches  of  the  clergy  bore
as  great  a  proportion  to  the  wealth  of  the  kingdom,  the
acquisition  of  church  lands  would  have  been  of  no  less
importance  to  the  crown,  and  no  less  fatal  to  the  aris-
tocracy. The  nobles,  for  this  reason,  guarded  against
such  an  increase  of  the  royal  power,  and  thereby  se-
cured their  own  independence.

Avarice  mingled  itself  with  their  concern  for  the  in-
terest of  their  order.  The  re-uniting  the  possessions  of
the  church  to  the  crown,  or  the  bestowing  them  on  the
Protestant  clergy,  would  have  been  a  fatal  blow  both
to  those  nobles  who  had,  by  fraud  or  violence,  seized
part  of  these  revenues,  and  to  those  abbots  and  priors
who  had  totally  renounced  their  ecclesiastical  charac-
ter. But  as  the  plan  which  was  proposed,  gave  some
sanction  to  their  usurpation,  they  promoted  it  with  their

1561.]  BOOK III.  229

utmost  influence. The  Popish  ecclesiastics,  though  the
lopping  off  a  third  of  their  revenues  was  by  no  means
agreeable  to  them,  consented,  under  their  present  cir-
cumstances, to  sacrifice  a  part  of  their  possessions,  in
order  to  purchase  the  secure  enjoyment  of  the  remain-
der ;  and,  after  deeming  the  whole  irrecoverably  lost,
they  considered  whatever  they  could  retrieve  as  so
much  gain. Many  of  the  ancient  dignitaries  were  men
of  noble  birth ;  and,  as  they  no  longer  entertained  hopes
of  restoring  the  Popish  religion,  they  wished  their  own
relations,  rather  than  the  crown,  or  the  Protestant  cler-
gy, to  be  enriched  with  the  spoils  of  the  church. They
connived,  for  this  reason,  at  the  encroachments  of  the
nobles  ;  they  even  aided  their  avarice  and  violence ;
they  dealt  out  the  patrimony  of  the  church  among  their
own  relations, and  by  granting  feus  and  perpetual
leases  of  lands  and  tithes,  gave,  to  the  utmost  of  their
power,  some  colour  of  legal  possession  to  what  was  for-
merly mere  usurpation. Many  vestiges  of  such  aliena-
tion still  remain. q The  nobles,  with  the  concurrence  of
the  incumbents,  daily  extended  their  encroachments,
and  gradually  stripped  the  ecclesiastics  of  their  richest
and  most  valuable  possessions. Even  that  third  part,
which  was  given  up  in  order  to  silence  the  clamours  of
the  Protestant  clergy,  and  to  be  some  equivalent  to  the
crown  for  its  claims,  amounted  to  no  considerable  sum.
The  thirds  due  by  the  more  powerful  nobles,  especially
by  such  as  had  embraced  the  Reformation,  were  almost
universally  remitted. Others,  by  producing  fraudulent
rentals ;  by  estimating  the  corn,  and  other  payments  in
kind,  at  an  undervalue ;  and  by  the  connivance  of  col-
lectors, greatly  diminished  the  charge  against  them-
selves :r  and  the  nobles  had  much  reason  to  be  satisfied
with  a  device  which?  at  so  small  expense,  secured  to
them  such  valuable  possessions.

Nor  were  the  Protestant  clergy  considerable  gainers

<i  Keith,  507. Spotsw.  175.  r  Keith,  Append.  188. Spotsw.  183.

230  SCOTLAND.  [1561.

The  Pro-  ^7  tn*s  new  regulation;  they  found  it  to  be  a
derantno  more  easy  matter  to  kindle  zeal  than  to  extin-
gainers  guish  avarice.  Those  very  men,  whom  formerly
they  had  swayed  with  absolute  authority,  were
now  deaf  to  all  their  remonstrances.  The  prior  of
St.  Andrew's,  the  earl  of  Argyle,  the  earl  of  Morton,
and  Maitland,  all  the  most  zealous  leaders  of  the  con-
gregation, were  appointed  to  assign,  or,  as  it  was  call-
ed, to  modify  their  stipends.  A  hundred  merks  Scot-
tish was  the  allowance  which  their  liberality  afforded  to
the  generality  of  ministers.  To  a  few  three  hundred
merks  were  granted.5  About  twenty-four  thousand
pounds  Scottish  appears  to  have  been  the  whole  sum
allotted  for  the  maintenance  of  a  national  church  esta-
blished by  law,  and  esteemed  throughout  the  kingdom
the  true  church  of  God.*  Even  this  sum  was  paid  with
little  exactness,  and  the  ministers  were  kept  in  the  same
poverty  and  dependence  as  formerly.
1562,  The  gentleness  of  the  queen's  administra-
tion,  and  the  elegance  of  her  court,  had  miti-
gated,  in  some  degree,  the  ferocity  of  the  no-
bles, and  accustomed  them  to  greater  mildness  and
humanity;  while,  at  the  same  time,  her  presence  and
authority  were  a  check  to  their  factious  and  tumultuary
spirit.  But,  as  a  state  of  order  and  tranquillity  was
not  natural  to  the  feudal  aristocracy,  it  could  not  be  of
long  continuance;  and  this  year  became  remarkable
for  the  most  violent  eruptions  of  intestine  discord  and
animosity.

Among  the  great  and  independent  nobility  of  Scot-
land, a  monarch  could  possess  little  authority,  and  ex-
ercise no  extensive  or  rigorous  jurisdiction.  The  inter-
fering of  interest,  the  unsettled  state  of  property,  the
frequency  of  public  commotions,  and  the  fierceness  of
their  own  manners,  sowed  among  the  great  families  the
seeds  of  many  quarrels  and  contentions.  These,  as  we

*  Knox,  301.  l  Keith,  Append.  188.,

1562.]  BOOK III.  231

have  already  observed,  were  frequently  decided  not  by
law,  but  by  violence.  The  offended  baron,  without
having  recourse  to  the  monarch,  or  acknowledging  his
superior  authority,  assembled  his  own  followers,  and
invaded  the  lands  of  his  rival  in  a  hostile  manner.
Together  with  his  estate  and  honours,  every  nobleman
transmitted  some  hereditary  feud  to  his  posterity,  who
were  bound  in  honour  to  adopt  and  to  prosecute  it
with  unabated  rancour.  4

Such  a  dissension  had  subsisted  between  the  house
of  Hamilton  and  the  earl  of  Both  well,  and  was  height-
ened by  mutual  injuries  during  the  late  commotions.11
The  earl  of  Arran  and  Bothwell  happening  to  attend
the  court  at  the  same  time,  their  followers  quarrelled

frequently  in  the  streets  of  Edinburgh,  and  ex-
February. . i -,  1-1

cited  dangerous  tumults  in  that  city. At  last,

the  mediation  of  their  friends,  particularly  of  Knox,
brought  about  a  reconcilement,  but  an  unfortunate  one
to  both  these  noblemen/

A  few  days  after,  Arran  came  to  Knox,  and,  with  the
utmost  terror  and  confusion,  confessed  first  to  him,  and
then  to  the  prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  that,  in  order  to  ob-
tain the  sole  direction  of  affairs,  Bothwell,  and  his
kinsmen  the  Hamiltons,  had  conspired  to  murder  the
prior,  Maitland,  and  the  other  favourites  of  the  queen.
The  duke  of  Chatelherault  regarded  the  prior  as  a
rival,  who  had  supplanted  him  in  the  queen's  favour,
and  who  filled  that  place  at  the  helm,  which  he  ima-
gined to  be  due  to  himself,  as  first  prince  of  the  blood.
Bothwell,  on  account  of  the  personal  injuries  which  he
had  received  from  the  prior  during  the  hostile  opera-
tions of  the  two  contending  parties,  was  no  less  exas-
perated against  him.  But  whether  he  and  the  Hamil-
tons had  agreed  to  cement  their  new  alliance  with  the
blood  of  their  common  enemy,  or  whether  the  conspi-
racy existed  only  in  the  frantic  and  disordered  imagi-

"  Keith,  215.  *  Knox,  305.

232  SCOTLAND.  [1562.

nation  of  the  earl  of  Arran,  it  is  impossible,  amidst  the
contradiction  of  historians  and  the  defectiveness  of  re-
cords, positively  to  determine.  Among  men  inflamed
with  resentment  and  impatient  for  revenge,  rash  ex-
pressions might  be  uttered,  and  violent  and  criminal
expedients  proposed  ;  and  on  that  foundation,  Arran's
distempered  fancy  might  rear  the  whole  superstructure
of  a  conspiracy.  All  the  persons  accused,  denied  their
guilt  with  the  utmost  confidence.  But  the  known  cha-
racters of  the  men,  and  the  violent  spirit  of  the  age,
added  greatly  to  the  probability  of  the  accusation,  and
abundantly  justify  the  conduct  of  the  queen's  ministers,
who  confined  Bothwell,  Arran,  and  a  few  of  the  ring-
leaders, in  separate  prisons,  and  obliged  the  duke  to
surrender  the  strong  castle  of  Dumbarton,  which  he  had
held  ever  since  the  time  of  his  resigning  the  office  of
regent/

The  eari  of The  designs  of  the  earl  of  Huntly  against
Huntij's the  prior  of  St.  Andrew's  were  deeper  laid.

enmity  to  r  ITT

the  queen's  and  produced  more  memorable  and  more  tra-
gical events.  George  Gordon  earl  of  Huntly,
having  been  one  of  the  nobles  who  conspired  against
James  III.,  and  who  raised  his  son  James  IV.  to  the
throne,  enjoyed  a  great  share  in  the  confidence  of  that
generous  prince.2  By  his  bounty,  great  accessions  of
wealth  and  power  were  added  to  a  family  already
opulent  and  powerful.  On  the  death  of  that  mo-
narch, Alexander  the  next  earl,  being  appointed  lord-
lieutenant  of  all  the  counties  beyond  Forth,  left  the
other  nobles  to  contend  for  offices  at  court;  and  retir-
ing to  the  north,  where  his  estate  and  influence  lay,
resided  there  in  a  kind  of  princely  independence.  The
chieftains  in  that  part  of  the  kingdom  dreaded  the
growing  dominion  of  such  a  dangerous  neighbour,  but
were  unable  to  prevent  his  encroachments.  Some  of
his  rivals  he  secretly  undermined,  others  he  subdued

y  Knox,  307,  308.  z  Crawf.  Officers  of  State,  56.

1562.]  BOOK  III.  233

by  open  force.  His  estate  far  exceeded  that  of  any
other  subject,  and  his  superiorities  and  jurisdictions
extended  over  many  of  the  northern  counties.  With
power  and  possessions  so  extensive,  under  two  long
and  feeble  minorities,  and  amidst  the  shock  of  civil
commotions,  the  earls  of  Huntly  might  have  indulged
the  most  elevated  hopes.  But  happily  for  the  crown,
an  active  and  enterprising  spirit  was  not  the  charac-
teristic of  that  family  ;  and,  whatever  object  their  am-
bition might  have  in  view,  they  chose  rather  to  acquire
it  by  political  address,  than  to  seize  it  openly  and  by
force  of  arms.

The  conduct  of  George  the  present  earl,  during  the
late  commotions,  had  been  perfectly  suitable  to  the
character  of  the  family  in  that  age,  dubious,  variable,
and  crafty.  While  the  success  of  the  lords  of  the  con-
gregation was  uncertain,  he  assisted  the  queen-regent
in  her  attempts  to  crush  them.  When  their  affairs  put
on  a  better  aspect,  he  pretended  to  join  them,  but  never
heartily  favoured  their  cause.  He  was  courted  and
feared  by  each  of  the  contending  parties ;  both  con-
nived at  his  encroachments  in  the  north ;  and,  by  arti-
fice and  force,  which  he  well  knew  how  to  employ  al-
ternately, and  in  their  proper  places,  he  added  every
day  to  the  exorbitant  power  and  wealth  which  he
possessed.

He  observed  the  growing  reputation  and  authority
of  the  prior  of  St.  Andrew's  with  the  greatest  jealousy
and  concern,  and  considered  him  as  a  rival  who  had
engrossed  that  share  in  the  queen's  confidence,  to
which  his  own  zeal  for  the  Popish  religion  seemed  to
give  him  a  preferable  title.  Personal  injuries  soon  in-
creased the  misunderstanding  occasioned  by  rivalship
in  power.  The  queen  having  determined  to  reward
the  services  of  the  prior  of  St.  Andrew's,  by  creating
him  an  earl,  she  made  choice  of  Mar,  as  the  place
whence  he  should  take  his  title ;  and,  that  he  might

234  SCOTLAND.  [1562.

be  better  able  to  support  his  new  honour,  bestowed
upon  him  at  the  same  time  the  lands  of  that  name.
These  were  part  of  the  royal  demesnes,51  but  the  earls
of  Huntly  had  been  permitted,  for  several  years,  to
keep  possession  of  them.b  On  this  occasion  the

Feb.  1.  f  r  .

earl  not  only  complained,  with  some  reason,
of  the  loss  which  he  sustained,  but  had  real  cause  to
be  alarmed  at  the  intrusion  of  a  formidable  neighbour
into  the  heart  of  his  territories,  who  might  be  able  to
rival  his  power,  and  excite  his  oppressed  vassals  to
shake  off  his  yoke.

An  incident  which  happened  soon  after,  in-
creased and  confirmed  Huntly 's  suspicions.  Sir
John  Gordon,  his  third  son,  and  lord  Ogilvie,  had  a
dispute  about  the  property  of  an  estate.  This  dispute
became  a  deadly  quarrel.  They  happened  unfortu-
nately to  meet  in  the  streets  of  Edinburgh,  and  being
both  attended  with  armed  followers,  a  scuffle  ensued,
in  which  lord  Ogilvie  was  dangerously  wounded  by
Sir  John.  The  magistrates  seized  both  the  offenders,
and  the  queen  commanded  them  to  be  strictly  con-
fined. Under  any  regular  government,  such  a  breach
of  public  peace  and  order  would  expose  the  person
offending  to  certain  punishment.  At  this  time  some
severity  was  necessary,  in  order  to  vindicate  the  queen's
authority  from  an  insult,  the  most  heinous  which  had
been  offered  to  it  since  her  return  into  Scotland.  But,
in  an  age  accustomed  to  licence  and  anarchy,  even
this  moderate  exercise  of  her  power,  in  ordering  them
to  be  kept  in  custody,  was  deemed  an  act  of  intolerable
rigour ;  and  the  friends  of  each  party  began  to  con-
vene their  vassals  and  dependants  in  order  to  overawe,
or  to  frustrate  the  decisions  of  justice.0  Meanwhile
Gordon  made  his  escape  out  of  prison,  and  flying  into
Aberdeenshire,  complained  loudly  of  the  indignity
with  which  he  had  been  treated ;  and  as  all  the  queen's

8  Crawf.  Peer.  297.  *>  Bnch.  331,  c  Keith,  223.

1562.]  BOOK  III.  235

actions  were  at  this  juncture  imputed  to  the  earl  of
Mar,  this  added  not  a  little  to  the  resentment  which
Huntly  had  conceived  against  that  nobleman.

At  the  very  time  when  these  passions  fer-

August.  -I •  -i 1  -i  • i  • i

mented  with  the  utmost  violence,  in  the  minds
of  the  earl  of  Huntly  and  his  family,  the  queen  hap-
pened to  set  out  on  a  progress  into  the  northern  parts
of  the  kingdom.  She  was  attended  by  the  earls  of
Mar  and  Morton,  Maitland,  and  other  leaders  of  that
party.  The  presence  of  the  queen,  in  a  country  where  no
name  greater  than  the  earl  of  Huntly 's  had  been  heard
of,  and  no  power  superior  to  his  had  been  exercised,
for  many  years,  was  an  event  of  itself  abundantly  mor-
tifying to  that  haughty  nobleman.  But  while  the  queen
was  entirely  under  the  direction  of  Mar,  all  her  actions
were  more  apt  to  be  misrepresented,  and  construed
into  injuries ;  and  a  thousand  circumstances  could  not
but  occur  to  awaken  Huntly 's  jealousy,  to  offend  his
pride,  and  to  inflame  his  resentment.  Amidst  the  agi-
tation of  so  many  violent  passions,  some  eruption  was
unavoidable.

On  Mary's  arrival  in  the  north,  Huntly  employed
his  wife,  a  woman  capable  of  executing  the  commis-
sion with  abundance  of  dexterity,  to  soothe  the  queen,
and  to  intercede  for  pardon  to  their  son.  But  the
queen  peremptorily  required  that  he  should  again  de-
liver himself  into  the  hands  of  justice,  and  rely  on  her
clemency.  Gordon  was  persuaded  to  do  so;  and
being  enjoined  by  the  queen  to  enter  himself  prisoner
in  the  castle  of  Stirling,  he  promised  likewise  to  obey
that  command.  Lord  Erskine,  Mar's  uncle,  was  at
that  time  governor  of  this  fort.  The  queen's  severity,
and  the  place  in  which  she  appointed  Gordon  to  be  con-
fined, were  interpreted  to  be  new  marks  of  Mar's  rancour,
and  augmented  the  hatred  of  the  Gordons  against  him.
ge  (  Meantime,  Sir  John  Gordon  set  out  towards

Stirling ;  but,  instead  of  performing  his  promise

236  SCOTLAND.  [1562.

to  the  queen,  made  his  escape  from  his  guards,  and  re-
turned to  take  the  command  of  his  followers,  who  were
rising  in  arms  all  over  the  north.  These  were  destined
to  second  and  improve  the  blow,  by  which  his  father
proposed  secretly  and  at  once,  to  cut  off  Mar,  Morton,
and  Maitland,  his  principal  adversaries.  The  time
and  place  for  perpetrating  this  horrid  deed  were  fre-
quently appointed ;  but  the  executing  of  it  was  won-
derfully prevented,  by  some  of  those  unforeseen  ac-
cidents, which  so  often  occur  to  disconcert  the  schemes,
and  to  intimidate  the  hearts,  of  assassins.d  Huntly's
o'wn  house,  at  Strathbogie,  was  the  last  and  most  con-
venient scene  appointed  for  committing  the  intended
violence.  But  on  her  journey  thither,  the  queen  heard
of  young  Gordon's  flight  and  rebellion,  and  refusing,
in  the  first  transports  of  her  indignation,  to  enter  under
the  father's  roof,  by  that  fortunate  expression  of  her  re-
sentment saved  her  ministers  from  unavoidable  de-
struction.6

Take  arms  The  ill  success  of  these  efforts  of  private
r£venge  precipitated  Huntly  into  open  rebel-
lion. As  the  queen  was  entirely  under  the
direction  of  his  rivals,  it  was  impossible  to  compass
their  ruin  without  violating  the  allegiance  which  he
owed  his  sovereign.  On  her  arrival  at  Inverness,  the
commanding  officer  in  the  castle,  by  Huntly's  orders,
shut  the  gates  against  her.  Mary  was  obliged  to
lodge  in  the  town,  which  was  open  and  defenceless;
but  this  too  was  quickly  surrounded  by  a  multitude  of
the  earl's  followers/  The  utmost  consternation  seized
the  queen,  who  was  attended  by  a  very  slender  train.
She  every  moment  expected  the  approach  of  the  re-
bels, and  some  ships  were  already  ordered  into  the
river  to  secure  her- escape.  The  loyalty  of  the  Mon-
roes, Frasers,  Mackintoshes,  and  some  neighbouring
clans,  who  took  arms  in  her  defence,  saved  her  from

d  Keith,  230.  e  Knox,  318.  f  Crawf.  Officers  of  State,  87,  88.

1562.]  BOOK  III.  237

this  danger.  By  their  assistance,  she  even  forced  the
castle  to  surrender,  and  inflicted  on  the  governor  the
punishment  which  his  insolence  deserved.

This  open  act  of  disobedience  was  the  occasion  of  a
measure  more  galling  to  Huntly  than  any  the  queen  had
hitherto  taken.  Lord  Erskine  having  pretended  a  right
to  the  earldom  of  Mar,  Stewart  resigned  it  in  his  fa-
vour ;  and  at  the  same  time  Mary  conferred  upon  him
the  title  of  earl  of  Murray,  with  the  estate  annexed  to
that  dignity,  which  had  been  in  the  possession  of  the
earl  of  Huntly  since  the  year  1548.g  From  this  encroach-
ment upon  his  domains  he  concluded  that  his  family
was  devoted  to  destruction ;  and,  dreading  to  be  strip-
ped gradually  of  those  possessions  which,  in  reward
of  their  services,  the  gratitude  of  the  crown  had  be-
stowed on  himself,  or  his  ancestors,  he  no  longer  dis-
guised his  intentions,  but,  in  defiance  of  the  queen's
proclamation,  openly  took  arms.  Instead  of  yielding
those  places  of  strength,  which  Mary  required  him  to
surrender,  his  followers  dispersed  or  cut  in  pieces  the
parties  which  she  dispatched  to  take  possession  of
them  ;h  and  he  himself  advancing  with  a  considerable
body  of  men  towards  Aberdeen,  to  which  place  the
queen  was  now  returned,  filled  her  small  court  with
consternation.  Murray  had  only  a  handful  of  men  in
whom  he  could  confide.1  In  order^to  form  the  appear-
ance of  an  army,  he  was  obliged  to  call  in  the  assist-
ance of  the  neighbouring  barons  ;  but  as  most  of  these
either  favoured  Huntly 's  designs,  or  stood  in  awe  of  his
power,  from  them  no  cordial  or  effectual  service  could
be  expected.

Oct  28  With  these  troops,  however,  Murray,  who
could  gain  nothing  by  delay,  marched  briskly
towards  the  enemy.  He  found  them  at  Corichie,  posted
to  great  advantage  ;  he  commanded  his  northern  asso-
ciates instantly  to  begin  the  attack ;  but,  on  the  first

s  Crawf.  Peer.  359.  »>  Knox,  319.  • *  Keith,  230.

238  SCOTLAND.  [1562.

motion  of  the  enemy,  they  treacherously  turned  their
backs;  and  Huntly's  followers,  throwing  aside  their
spears,  and  breaking  their  ranks,  drew  their  swords,
He  is  de-  and  rushed  forward  to  the  pursuit.  It  was
thfetd  of  then  that  Murray  gave  proof,  both  of  steady
Murray,  courage  and  of  prudent  conduct.  He  stood
immoveable  on  a  rising  ground,  with  the  small  but
trusty  body  of  his  adherents,  who,  presenting  their
spears  to  the  enemy,  received  them  with  a  determined
resolution,  which  they  little  expected.  The  Highland
broad  sword  is  not  a  weapon  fit  to  encounter  the  Scot-
tish spear.  In  every  civil  commotion,  the  superiority
of  the  latter  has  been  evident,  and  has  always  decided
the  contest.  On  this  occasion  the  irregular  attack  of
Huntly's  troops  was  easily  repulsed  by  Murray's  firm
battalion.  Before  they  recovered  the  confusion  occa-
sioned by  this  unforeseen  resistance,  Murray's  northern
troops,  who  had  fled  so  shamefully  in  the  beginning
of  the  action,  willing  to  regain  their  credit  with  the
victorious  party,  fell  upon  them,  and  completed  the
rout.  Huntly  himself,  who  was  extremely  corpulent,
was  trodden  to  death  in  the  pursuit.  His  sons,  Sir
John  and  Adam,  were  taken,  and  Murray  returned  in
in  triumph  to  Aberdeen  with  his  prisoners.

The  trial  of  men  taken  in  actual  rebellion  against
their  sovereign  was  extremely  short.  Three  days  after
the  battle,  Sir  John  Gordon  was  beheaded  at  Aberdeen.
His  brother  Adam  was  pardoned  on  account  of  his
youth.  Lord  Gordon  who  had  been  privy  to  his  fa-
ther's designs,  was  seized  in  the  south,  and  upon  trial
found  guilty  of  treason ;  but,  through  the  queen's  cle-
mency, the  punishment  was  remitted.  The  first  par-
liament proceeded  against  this  great  family  with  the
utmost  rigour  of  law,  and  reduced  their  power  and
fortune  to  the  lowest  ebb.k

k  This
rions  passages

is  conspiracy  of  the  earl  of  Huntly  is  one  of  the  most  intricate  and  rayste-
assages  in  the  Scottish  history.  As  it  was  a  transaction  purely  domestic,  and

1562.]  BOOK  III.  239

As  the  fall  'of  the  earl  of  Huntly  is  the  most  impor-
tant event  of  this  year,  it  would  have  been  improper  to
interrupt  the  narrative  by  taking  notice  of  lesser  trans-
actions, which  may  now  be  related  with  equal  propriety.
An  inter-  In  the  beginning  of  summer,  Mary,  who  was
tw^nEii-  desirous  of  entering  into  a  more  intimate  cor-
Mafh  ro-d  resPondence  and  familiarity  with  Elizabeth,
posed.  employed  Maitland  to  desire  a  personal  in-
terview with  her,  somewhere  in  the  north  of  Eng-
land. As  this  proposal  could  not  be  rejected  with  de-
cency, the  time,  the  place,  and  the  circumstances  of  the
meeting  were  instantly  agreed  upon.  But  Elizabeth

in  which  the  English  were  little  interested,  few  original  papers  concerning  it  have
been  found  in  Cecil's  Collections,  the  great  storehouse  of  evidence  and  information
with  regard  to  the  affairs  of  this  period.

Buchanan  supposes  Mary  to  have  formed  a  design  about  this  time  of  destroying
Murray,  and  of  employing  the  power  of  the  earl  of  Huntly  for  this  purpose.  But
his  account  of  this  whole  transaction  appears  to  be  so  void  of  truth,  and  even  of
probability,  as  to  deserve  no  serious  examination.  At  that  time  Mary  wanted  power,
and  seems  to  have  had  no  inclination  to  commit  any  act  of  violence  upon  her
brother.

Two  other  hypotheses  have  been  advanced,  in  order  to  explain  this  matter  j  but
they  appear  to  be  equally  removed  from  truth.

I.  It  cannot  well  be conceived,  that  the  queen's  journey  to  the  north  was  a
scheme  concerted  by  Murray,  in  order  to  ruin  the  earl  of  Huntly. 1.  Huntly  had
resided  at  court  almost  ever  since  the  queen's  return. Keith,  198.  Append.  175,
&c. This  was  the  proper  place  in  which  to  have  seized  him. To  attack  him  in
Aberdeenshire,  the  seat  of  his  power  and  in  the  midst  of  his  vassals,  was  a  project
equally  absurd  and  hazardous. 2.  The  queen  was  not  accompanied  with  a  body  of
troops,  capable  of  attempting  any  thing  against  Huntly  by  violence  :  her  train  was
not  more  numerous  than  was  usual  in  times  of  greatest  tranquillity. Keith,  230.
3.  There  remain  two  original  letters  with  regard  to  this  conspiracy ;  one  from  Randolph
the  English  resident,  and  another  from  Maitland,  both  directed  to  Cecil.  They  talk
of  Huntly 's  measures  as  notoriously  treasonable. Randolph  mentions  his  repeated
attempts  to  assassinate  Murray,  &c. No  hint  is  given  of  any  previous  resolution,
formed  by  Mary's  ministers,  to  ruin  Huntly  and  his  family. Had  any  such  design
ever  existed,  it  was  Randolph's  duty  to  have  discovered  it ;  nor  would  Maitland
have  laboured  to  conceal  it  from  the  English  secretary. Keith,  229,  232.

II.  To  suppose  that  the  earl  of  Huntly  had  laid  any  plan  for  seizing  the  queen
and  her  ministers,  seems  to  be  no  less  improbable. 1.  On  the  queen's  arrival  in  the
north,  he  laboured,  in  good  earnest,  to  gain  her  favour,  and  to  obtain  a  pardon  for
his  son. Knox,3l8. 2.  He  met  the  queen,  first  at  Aberdeen,  and  then  at  Rothe-
may,  whither  he  would  not  have  ventured  to  come,  had  he  harboured  any  such
treasonable  resolution. Knox,  318. 3.  His  conduct  was  irresolute  and  wavering,
like  that  of  a  man  disconcerted  by  an  unforeseen  danger,  not  like  one  executing  a
concerted  plan.  4.  The  most  considerable  persons  of  his  clan  submitted  to  the  queen,
and  found  surety  to  obey  her  commands. Keith,  226. Had  the  earl  been  previ-
ously determined  to  rise  in  arms  against  the  queen,  or  to  seize  her  ministers,  it  is
probable  he  would  have  imparted  it  to  his  principal  followers,  nor  would  they  have
deserted  him  in  this  manner.

For  these  reasons  I  have,  on  the  one  hand,  vindicated  the  earl  of  Murray  from  any
deliberate  intention  of  ruining  the  family  of  Gordon  ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  I  have
imputed  the  violent  conduct  of  the  earl  of  Huntly  to  a  sudden  start  of  resentment,
without  charging  him  with  any  premeditated  purpose  of  rebellion.

240  SCOTLAND.  [1562.

was  prudent  enough  not  to  admit  into  her  kingdom  a
rival  who  outshone  herself  so  far  in  beauty  and  grace-
fulness of  person  ;  and  who  excelled  so  eminently  in  all
the  arts  of  insinuation  and  address.  Under  pretence
of  being  confined  to  London,  by  the  attention  which
she  was  obliged  to  give  to  the  civil  wars  in  France,
she  put  off  the  interview  for  that  season,1  and  prevented
her  subjects  from  seeing  the  Scottish  queen,  the  charms
of  whose  appearance  and  behaviour  she  envied,  and
had  some  reason  to  dread.

June  2.  During  this  year,  the  assembly  of  the  church
Dec.  25.  met  twice.  In  both  these  meetings  were  exhi-
bited many  complaints  of  the  poverty  and  dependence
of  the  church  ;  and  many  murmurs  against  the  negli-
gence or  avarice  of  those  who  had  been  appointed  to
collect  and  to  distribute  the  small  fund,  appropriated
for  the  maintenance  of  preachers.™  A  petition,  craving
redress  of  their  grievances,  was  presented  to  the  queen ;
but  without  any  effect.  There  was  no  reason  to  expect
that  Mary  would  discover  any  forwardness  to  grant
the  request  of  such  supplicants.  As  her  ministers,
though  all  most  zealous  Protestants,  were  themselves
growing  rich  on  the  inheritance  of  the  church,  they
were  equally  regardless  of  the  indigence  and  demands
of  their  brethren.

1563. Mary  had  now  continued  above  two  years
in  a  state  of  widowhood. Her  gentle  admini-

the^neen's  strati°n  na(^  Secured  the  hearts  of  her  Sub-
marriage,  jects,  who  were  impatient  for  her  marriage,
and  wished  the  crown  to  descend  in  the  right  line
from  their  ancient  monarchs.  She  herself  was  the  most
amiable  woman  of  the  age,  and  the  fame  of  her  accom-
plishments, together  with  the  favourable  circumstance
of  her  having  one  kingdom  already  in  her  possession,
and  the  prospect  of  mounting  the  throne  of  another,
prompted  many  different  princes  to  solicit  an  alliance

1  Keith,  216.  »  Knox,  311.  323.

1563.]  BOOK III.  241

so  illustrious.  Scotland,  by  its  situation,  threw  so  much
weight  and  power  into  whatever  scale  it  fell,  that  all
Europe  waited  with  solicitude  for  Mary's  determina-
tion ;  and  no  event  in  that  age  excited  stronger  politi-
cal fears  and  jealousies  ;  none  interested  more  deeply
the  passions  of  several  princes,  or  gave  rise  to  more
contradictory  intrigues,  than  the  marriage  of  the  Scot-
tish queen.

She  is  soli-  The  princes  of  the  house  of  Austria  re-
diffedrebnyt  membered  what  vast  projects  the  French  had
princes,  founded  on  their  former  alliance  with  the  queen
of  Scots;  and  though  the  unexpected  death,  first  of
Henry  and  then  of  Francis,  had  hindered  these  from
taking  effect,  yet  if  Mary  should  again  make  choice  of
a  husband  among  the  French  princes,  the  same  designs
might  be  revived  and  prosecuted  with  better  success.
B  the  In  order  to  prevent  this,  the  emperor  entered
archduke  'mfo  a  negotiation  with  the  cardinal  of  Lorrain,

Charles.  ^  _  i «  •  ~i

who  had  proposed  to  marry  the  Scottish  queen
to  the  archduke  Charles,  Ferdinand's  third  son.  The
matter  was  communicated  to  Mary  ;  and  Melvil,  who
at  that  time  attended  the  elector  Palatine,  was  com
manded  to  inquire  into  the  character  and  situation  of
the  archduke.0

B  Don  Philip  II.  though  no  less  apprehensive  of
Carlos  -of  Mary's  falling  once  more  into  the  hands  of

France,  envied  his  uncle  Ferdinand  the  acquisi-
tion of  so  important  a  prize  ;  and,  as  his  own  insatiable
ambition  grasped  at  all  the  kingdoms  of  Europe,  he
employed  his  ambassador  at  the  French  court  to  solicit
the  princes  of  Lorrain  in  behalf  of  his  son  Don  Carlos,
at  that  time  the  heir  of  all  the  extensive  dominions
which  belonged  to  the  Spanish  monarchy.0

Catherine  of  Medicis,  on the  other  hand,

Anjou° dreaded  the  marriage  of  the Scottish  queen

n  Melv,  63.  65. Keith,  239. See  Append.  No.  VII.
o  Casteln.  461  . Addit.  a  Labour.  501.  503.

VOL. I.  R

concern0-"5

242  SCOTLAND.  [1563.

with  any  of  the  Austrian  princes,  which  would  have
added  so  much  to  the  power  and  pretensions  of  that
ambitious  race.  Her  jealousy  of  the  princes  of  Lor-
rain  rendered  her  no  less  averse  from  an  alliance
which,  by  securing  to  them  the  protection  of  the  em-
peror or  king  of  Spain,  would  give  new  boldness  to
their  enterprising  spirit,  and  enable  them  to  set  the
power  of  the  crown,  which  they  already  rivalled,  at
open  defiance  :  and  as  she  was  afraid  that  these  splen-
did proposals  of  the  Austrian  family  would  dazzle  the
young  queen,  she  instantly  dispatched  Castelnau  into
Scotland,  to  offer  her  in  marriage  the  duke  of  Anjou,
the  brother  of  her  former  husband,  who  soon  after
mounted  the  throne  of  France.p

de-  Mary  attentively  weighed  the  pretensions  of
so  many  rivals.  The  archduke  had  little  to
ing  it.  recommend  him  but  his  high  birth.  The
example  of  Henry  VIII.  was  a  warning  against
contracting  a  marriage  with  the  brother  of  her  former
husband  ;  and  she  could  not  bear  the  thoughts  of  ap-
pearing in  France,  in  a  rank  inferior  to  that  which  she
had  formerly  held  in  that  kingdom.  She  listened,
therefore,  with  partiality,  to  the  Spanish  propositions,
and  the  prospect  of  such  vast  power  and  dominions
flattered  the  ambition  of  a  young  and  aspiring  princess.

Three  several  circumstances,  however,  concurred  to
divert  Mary  from  any  thoughts  of  a  foreign  alliance.

The  first  of  these  was  the  murder  of  her  uncle  the
duke  of  Guise.  The  violence  and  ambition  of  that
nobleman  had  involved  his  country  in  a  civil  war  ;
which  was  conducted  with  furious  animosity  and  va-
rious success.  At  last  the  duke  laid  siege  to  Orleans,
the  bulwark  of  the  Protestant  cause  ;  and  he  had  re-
duced that  city  to  the  last  extremity,  when  he  was  as-
sassinated by  the  frantic  zeal  of  Poltrot.  This  blow
proved  fatal  to  the  queen  of  Scots.  The  young  duke

P  Castelnau,  461.

1563.]  BOOK  III.  2X43

was  a  minor  ;  and  the  cardinal  of  Lorrain,  though  sub-
tle and  intriguing,  wanted  that  undaunted  and  enter-
prising courage,  which  rendered  the  ambition  of  his
brother  so  formidable.  Catherine,  instead  of  encou-
raging the  ambition,  or  furthering  the  pretensions,  of
her  daughter-in-law,  took  pleasure  in  mortifying  the
one,  and  in  disappointing  the  other.  In  this  situation,
and  without  such  a  protector,  it  became  necessary  for
Mary  to  contract  her  views,  and  to  proceed  with  cau-
tion ;  and,  whatever  prospect  of  advantage  might  allure
her,  she  could  venture  upon  no  dangerous  or  doubtful
measure.

The  views  The  second  circumstance  which  weighed  with
of  Eliza-  Mary,  was  the  opinion  of  the  queen  of  Eng-
land. The  marriage  of  the  Scottish  queen  inte-
rested Elizabeth  more  deeply  than  any  other  prince;  and
she  observed  all  her  deliberations  concerning  it  with
the  most  anxious  attention.  She  herself  seems  early
to  have  formed  a  resolution  of  living  unmarried,  and
she  discovered  no  small  inclination  to  impose  the  same
law  on  the  queen  of  Scots.  She  had  already  expe-
rienced what  use  might  be  made  of  Mary's  power  and
pretensions  to  invade  her  dominions,  and  to  disturb
her  possession  of  the  crown.  The  death  of  Francis  II.
had  happily  delivered  her  from  this  danger,  which  she
determined  to  guard  against  for  the  future  with  the  ut-
most care.  As  the  restless  ambition  of  the  Austrian
princes,  the  avowed  and  bigotted  patrons  of  the  Catho-
lic superstition,  made  her,  in  a  particular  manner,  dread
their  neighbourhood,  she  instructed  Randolph  to  re-
monstrate, in  the  strongest  terms,  against  any  alliance
with  them;  and  to  acquaint  Mary,  that  as  she  herself
would  consider  such  a  match  to  be  a  breach  of  the
personal  friendship  in  which  they  were  so  happily
united  ;  so  the  English  nation  would  regard  it  as  the
dissolution  of  that  confederacy  which  now  subsisted
between  the  two  kingdoms;  that,  in  order  to  preserve

R  2

244  SCOTLAND.  [1563.

their  own  religion  and  liberties,  they  would,  in  all  pro-
bability, take  some  step  prejudicial  to  her  right  of  suc-
cession, which,  as  she  well  knew,  they  neither  wanted
power  nor  pretences  to  invalidate  and  set  aside.  This
threatening  was  accompanied  with  a  promise,  but  ex-
pressed in  very  ambiguous  terms,  that  if  Mary's  choice
of  a  husband  should  prove  agreeable  to  the  English
nation,  Elizabeth  would  appoint  proper  persons  to  ex-
amine her  title  to  the  succession,  and,  if  well-founded,
command  it  to  be  publicly  recognised.  She  observed
however  a  mysterious  silence  concerning  the  person  on
whom  she  wished  the  choice  of  the  Scottish  queen  to
fall.  The  revealing  of  the  secret  was  reserved  for  some
future  negotiation.  Meanwhile  she  threw  out  some
obscure  hints,  that  a  native  of  Britain,  or  one  not  of
princely  rank,  would  be  her  safest  and  most  inoffensive
choice.q  An  advice,  offered  with  such  an  air  of  supe-
riority and  command,  mortified,  no  doubt,  the  pride  of
the  Scottish  queen.  But,  under  her  present  circum-
stances, she  was  obliged  to  bear  this  indignity.  Des-
titute of  all  foreign  assistance,  and  intent  upon  the
English  succession,  the  great  object  of  her  wishes  and
ambition,  it  became  necessary  to  court  a  rival,  whom,
without  manifest  imprudence,  she  could  not  venture  to
offend.

The  senti-  The  inclination  of  her  own  subjects  was  an-
Serown  other,  and  not  the  least  considerable  circum-
subjects.  Stance3  which  called  for  Mary's  attention  at
this  conjuncture.  They  had  been  taught,  by  the  fatal
experiment  of  her  former  marriage,  to  dread  a  union
with  any  great  prince,  whose  power  might  be  employ-
ed to  oppress  their  religion  and  liberties.  They  trem-
bled at  the  thoughts  of  a  match  with  a  foreigner ;  and
if  the  crown  should  be  strengthened  by  new  domi-
nions or  alliances,  they  foresaw  that  the  royal  prero-
gative would  soon  be  stretched  beyond  its  ancient

i  Keith,  242.  245.

1563.]  BOOK  III.  245

and  legal  limits.  Their  eagerness  to  prevent  this
could  hardly  fail  of  throwing  them  once  more  into  the
arms  of  England.  Elizabeth  would  be  ready  to  afford
them  her  aid  towards  obstructing  a  measure  so  disa-
greeable to  herself.  It  was  easy  for  them  to  seize  the
person  of  the  sovereign.  By  the  assistance  of  the  Eng-
lish fleet,  they  could  render  it  difficult  for  any  foreign
prince  to  land  in  Scotland.  The  Roman  Catholics,
now  an  inconsiderable  party  in  the  kingdom,  and  dis-
pirited by  the  loss  of  the  earl  of  Huntly,  could  give  no
obstruction  to  their  designs.  To  what  violent  extremes
the  national  abhorrence  of  a  foreign  yoke  might  have
been  carried,  is  manifest  from  what  she  had  already
seen  and  experienced.

For  these  reasons  Mary  laid  aside,  at  that  time,  all
thoughts  of  a  foreign  alliance,  and  seemed  willing  to
sacrifice  her  own  ambition,  in  order  to  remove  the  jea-
lousies of  Elizabeth,  and  to  quiet  the  fears  of  her  own
subjects.

Apariia-  ^he  parliament  met  this  year,  for  the  first
5Jeant2h6eld>  time  since  the  queen's  return  into  Scotland.
Mary's  administration  had  hitherto  been  ex-
tremely popular.  Her  ministers  possessed  the  confi-
dence of  the  nation  ;  and  by  consequence,  the  proceed-
ings of  that  assembly  were  conducted  with  perfect  una-
nimity. The  grant  of  the  earldom  of  Murray  to  the
prior  of  St.  Andrew's  was  confirmed  :  the  earl  of  Hunt-
ly, and  several  of  his  vassals  and  dependants,  were  at-
tainted :  the  attainder  against  Kirkaldy  of  Grange,  and
some  of  his  accomplices  in  the  murder  of  cardinal
Beatoun,  was  reversed  :r  the  act  of  oblivion,  mentioned
in  the  treaty  of  Edinburgh,  received  the  royal  sanction.
But  Mary,  who  had  determined  never  to  ratify  that
treaty,  took  care  that  this  sanction  should  not  be  deem-
ed any  acknowledgment  of  its  validity  ;  she  granted  her
consent  merely  in  condescension  to  the  lords  in  parlia-

r  Knox,  330.

246  SCOTLAND.  [1563.

ment,  who,  on  their  knees,  besought  her  to  allay  the
jealousies  and  apprehensions  of  her  subjects,  by  such  a
gracious  law.8

Nothing  No  attempt  was  made  in  this  parliament,  to
edwlth  re  Procure  ^e  °j.ueen's  assent  to  the  laws  establish-
gard  to  re-  ing  the  Protestant  religion.  Her  ministers,  though
zealous  Protestants  themselves,  were  aware  that
this  could  not  be  urged  without  manifest  danger  and  im-
prudence. She  had  consented,  through  their  influence,
to  tolerate  and  protect  the  reformed  doctrine.  They
had  even  prevailed  on  her  to  imprison  and  prosecute  the
archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  and  prior  of  Withorn,  for
celebrating  mass  contrary  to  her  proclamation.1  Mary,
however,  was  still  passionately  devoted  to  the  Romish
church ;  and  though,  from  political  motives,  she  had
granted  a  temporary  protection  of  opinions  which  she
disapproved,  there  were  no  grounds  to  hope  that  she
would  agree  to  establish  them  for  perpetuity.  The
moderation  of  those  who  professed  it,  was  the  best
method  for  reconciling  the  queen  to  the  Protestant
religion.  Time  might  abate  her  bigotry.  Her  pre-
judices might  wear  off  gradually,  and  at  last  she  might
yield  to  the  wishes  of  her  people,  what  their  impor-
tunity or  their  violence  could  never  have  extorted.
Many  laws  of  importance  were  to  be  proposed  in
parliament ;  and  to  defeat  all  these,  by  such  a  fruitless
and  ill-timed  application  to  the  queen,  would  have
been  equally  injurious  to  individuals,  and  detrimental
to  the  public.

which  of-  ^e  zeal  °f  tne  Protestant  clergy  was  deaf
fends  the  to  all  these  considerations  of  prudence  or  po-
licy. Eager  and  impatient,  it  brooked  no  delay :
severe  and  inflexible,  it  would  condescend  to  no  com-
pliances. The  leading  men  of  that  order  insisted,  that
this  opportunity  of  establishing  religion  by  law  was  not
to  be  neglected.  They  pronounced  the  moderation

s  Parl.  9. Q.  Mary,  c.  67. Spotsw.  188.  t  Keith,  239.

1563.]  BOOK III.  247

of  the  courtiers,  apostacy ;  and  their  endeavours  to
gain  the  queen,  they  reckoned  criminal  and  servile.
Knox  solemnly  renounced  the  friendship  of  the  earl  of
Murray,  as  a  man  devoted  to  Mary,  and  so  blindly  zeal-
ous for  her  service,  as  to  become  regardless  of  those
objects  which  he  had  hitherto  esteemed  most  sacred.
This  rupture,  which  is  a  strong  proof  of  Murray's  sin-
cere attachment  to  the  queen  at  that  period,  continued
above  a  year  and  a  half.u

The  preachers  being  disappointed  by  the  men  in
whom  they  placed  the  greatest  confidence,  gave  vent
to  their  indignation  in  their  pulpits.  These  echoed
more  loudly  than  ever  with  declamations  against  ido-
latry; with  dismal  presages  concerning  the  queen's
marriage  with  a  foreigner ;  and  with  bitter  reproaches
against  those  who,  from  interested  motives,  had  de-
serted that  cause  which  they  once  reckoned  it  their
honour  to  support.  The  people,  inflamed  by  such
vehement  declamations,  which  were  dictated  by  a  zeal
more  sincere  than  prudent,  proceeded  to  rash  and  un-
and  occa-  justifiable  acts  of  violence.  During  the  queen's
tlTrauit  absence,  on  a  progress  into  the  west,  mass  con-
peno°pnilthe  tinued  to  be  celebrated  in  her  chapel  at  Holy-
August,  rood-house.  The  multitude  of  those  who  openly
resorted  thither,  gave  great  oifence  to  the  citizens  of  Edin-
burgh, who,  being  free  from  the  restraint  which  the  royal
presence  imposed,  assembled  in  a  riotous  manner,  in-
terrupted the  service,  and  filled  such  as  were  present
with  the  utmost  consternation.  Two  of  the  ringleaders
in  this  tumult  were  seized,  and  a  day  appointed  for
their  trial.x

Knox  tried Knox,  who  deemed  the  zeal  of  these  persons
on  that laudable,  and  their  conduct  meritorious,  consi-

account,

but  acquit-  dered  them  as  sufferers  in  a  good  cause ;  and

'  in  order  to  screen  them  from  danger,  he  issued

circular  letters,  requiring  all  who  professed  the  true

"Knox,  331.  *Ibid.  335.

248  SCOTLAND.  [1563.

religion,  or  were  concerned  for  the  preservation  of  it,
to  assemble  at  Edinburgh,  on  the  day  of  trial,  that  by
their  presence  they  might  comfort  and  assist  their  dis-
tressed brethren/  One  of  these  letters  fell  into  the
queen's  hands.  To  assemble  the  subjects  without  the
authority  of  the  sovereign,  was  construed  to  be  treason,
and  a  resolution  was  taken  to  prosecute  Knox  for  that
}  crime,  before  the  privy-council.  Happily  for
him,  his  judges  were  not  only  zealous  Protes-
tants, but  the  very  men  who,  during  the  late  commo-
tions, had  openly  resisted  and  set  at  defiance  the
queen's  authority.  It  was  under  precedents,  drawn
from  their  own  conduct,  that  Knox  endeavoured  to
shelter  himself.  Nor  would  it  have  been  an  easy
matter  for  these  counsellors  to  have  found  out  a  dis-
tinction, by  which  they  could  censure  him  without
condemning  themselves.  After  a  long  hearing,  to  the
astonishment  of  Lethington  and  the  other  courtiers,2
he  was  unanimously  acquitted.  Sinclair  bishop  of
Ross,  and  president  of  the  court  of  session,  a  zealous
Papist,  heartily  concurred  with  the  other  counsellors
in  this  decision  ;a  a  remarkable  fact,  which  shews  the
unsettled  state  of  government  in  that  age;  the  low
condition  to  which  regal  authority  was  then  sunk ;
and  the  impunity  with  which  subjects  might  invade
those  rights  of  the  crown  which  are  now  held  sacred.
1564  The  marriage  of  the  Scottish  queen  continued

Negotia- stiu  to  ke  the  object  of  attention  and  intrigue.

tjons  with  J  f  &

regard  Though  Elizabeth,  even  while  she  wished  to
queen's,  direct  Mary,  treated  her  with  a  disgustful  re-
•"age.  serve  .  though  she  kept  her,  without  necessity,
in  a  state  of  suspense ;  and  hinted  often  at  the  person
whom  she  destined  to  be  her  husband,  without  directly
mentioning  his  name  ;  yet  Mary  framed  all  her  actions
to  express  such  a  prudent  respect  for  the  English
queen,  that  foreign  princes  began  to  imagine  she  had

y  Knox,  336.  z  Calderw.  MS.  Hist.  i.  832.  a  Knox,  343.

1564.]  BOOK III.  249

given  herself  up  implicitly  to  her  direction. b  The
prospect  of  this  union  alarmed  Catherine  of  Medicis.
Though  Catherine  had  taken  pleasure  all  along  in
doing  ill  offices  to  the  queen  of  Scots ;  though  soon
after  the  duke  of  Guise's  death,  she  had  put  upon  her
a  most  mortifying  indignity,  by  stopping  the  payment
of  her  dowry,  by  depriving  her  subject,  the  duke  of
Chatelherault  of  his  pension,  and  by  bestowing  the
command  of  the  Scottish  guards  on  a  Frenchman  ;c
she  resolved,  however,  to  prevent  this  dangerous  con-
junction of  the  British  queens.  For  this  purpose,  she
now  employed  all  her  art  to  appease  Mary,d  to  whom
she  had  given  so  many  causes  of  offence.  The  arrears
of  her  dowry  were  instantly  paid ;  more  punctual  re-
mittances were  promised  for  the  future ;  and  offers
made,  not  only  to  restore  but  to  extend  the  privileges
of  the  Scottish  nation  in  France.  It  was  easy  for
Mary  to  penetrate  into  the  motives  of  this  sudden
change  ;  she  well  knew  the  character  of  her  mother-
in-law,  and  laid  little  stress  upon  professions  of  friend-
ship which  came  from  a  princess  of  such  a  false  and
unfeeling  heart.

The  negotiation  with  England,  relative  to  the  mar-
riage, suffered  no  interruption  from  this  application  of
the  French  queen.  As  Mary,  in  compliance  with  the
wishes  of  her  subjects,  and  pressed  by  the  strongest
motives  of  interest,  determined  speedily  to  marry,
Elizabeth  was  obliged  to  break  that  unaccountable
silence  which  she  had  hitherto  affected.  The  secret
March.  was  disclosed,  and  her  favourite,  lord  Robert
Elizabeth  Dudley,  afterward  earl  of  Leicester,  was  de-
mends  Lei-  clared  to  be  the  happy  man  whom  she  had
Serfota  chosen  to  be  the  husband  of  a  queen  courted
lmsband-  by  so  many  princes.6

Elizabeth's  wisdom  and  penetration  were  remarkable

«»  Keith,  248.  c  Ibid.  244.  *  See  Append.  No.  VIII.

«  Keith,  251.

250  SCOTLAND.  [1564.

in  the  choice  of  her  ministers ;  in  distinguishing  her
favourites,  those  great  qualities  were  less  conspicuous.
She  was  influenced  in  two  cases  so  opposite,  by  merit
of  very  different  kinds.  Their  capacity  for  business,
their  knowledge,  their  prudence,  were  the  talents  to
which  alone  she  attended  in  choosing  her  ministers  ;
whereas  beauty  and  gracefulness  of  person,  polished
manners,  and  courtly  address,  were  the  accomplish-
ments on  which  she  bestowed  her  favour.  She  acted
in  the  one  case  with  the  wisdom  of  a  queen,  in  the
other  she  discovered  the  weakness  of  a  woman.  To
this  Leicester  owed  his  grandeur.  Though  remarkable
neither  for  eminence  in  virtue  nor  superiority  of  abili-
ties, the  queen's  partiality  distinguished  him  on  every
occasion.  She  raised  him  to  the  highest  honours,  she
bestowed  on  him  the  most  important  employments,  and
manifested  an  affection  so  disproportionate  to  his
merit,  that,  in  the  opinion  of  that  age,  it  could  be  ac-
counted for  only  by  the  power  of  planetary  influence/
Mary  of-  ^ie  n^^  &&**&  °f  tne  Scottish  queen  could
fended  at  not  well  bear  the  first  overture  of  a  match  with

this.

a  subject.  Her  own  rank,  the  splendour  of  her
former  marriage,  and  the  solicitations  at  this  time  of
so  many  powerful  princes,  crowded  into  her  thoughts,
and  made  her  sensibly  feel  how  humbling  and  disre-
spectful Elizabeth's  proposal  was.  She  dissembled,
however,  with  the  English  resident ;  and  though  she
declared,  in  strong  terms,  what  a  degradation  she
would  deem  this  alliance,  which  brought  along  with
it  no  advantage  that  could  justify  such  neglect  of  her
own  dignity,  she  mentioned  the  earl  of  Leicester,  not-
withstanding, in  terms  full  of  respect.g
Elizabeth's  Elizabeth,  we  may  presume,  did  not  wish  that
recom"1  *ke  Pr°P°sal  should  be  received  in  any  other
mending  manner.  After  the  extraordinary  marks  she  had

given  of  her  own  attachment  to  Leicester,  and

fCamden,  549.  s  Keith,  252.

1564.]  BOOK  III.  251

while  he  was  still  in  the  very  height  of  favour,  it  is  not
probable  she  could  think  seriously  of  bestowing  him  upon
another.  It  was  not  her  aim  to  persuade,  but  only  to
amuse  Mary.11  Almost  three  years  were  elapsed  since
her  return  to  Scotland ;  and  though  solicited  by  her
subjects,  and  courted  by  the  greatest  princes  in  Europe,
she  had  hitherto  been  prevented  from  marrying,  chiefly
by  the  artifices  of  Elizabeth.  If  at  this  time  the  Eng-
lish queen  could  have  engaged  Mary  to  listen  to  her
proposal  in  favour  of  Leicester,  her  power  over  this
creature  of  her  own  would  have  enabled  her  to  protract
the  negotiation  at  pleasure ;  and,  by  keeping  her  rival
unmarried,  she  would  have  rendered  the  prospect  of
her  succession  less  acceptable  to  the  English.

Leicester's  own  situation  was  extremely  delicate  and
embarrassing.  To  gain  possession  of  the  most  amiable
woman  of  the  age,  to  carry  away  this  prize  from  so
many  contending  princes,  to  mount  the  throne  of  an
ancient  kingdom,  might  have  flattered  the  ambition  of
a  subject  much  more  considerable  than  him.  He  saw
all  these  advantages,  no  doubt ;  and,  in  secret,  they
made  their  full  impression  on  him.  But,  without  of-
fending Elizabeth,  he  durst  not  venture  on  the  most
distant  discovery  of  his  sentiments,  or  take  any  step
towards  facilitating  his  acquisition  of  objects  so  worthy
of  desire.

On  the  other  hand,  Elizabeth's  partiality  towards
him,  which  she  was  at  no  pains  to  conceal,1  might  in-
spire him  with  hopes  of  attaining  the  supreme  rank  in
a  kingdom  more  illustrious  than  Scotland.  Elizabeth
had  often  declared  that  nothing  but  her  resolution  to
lead  a  single  life,  and  his  being  born  her  own  subject,
would  have  hindered  her  from  choosing  the  earl  of
Leicester  for  a  husband.  Such  considerations  of  pru-
dence are,  however,  often  surmounted  by  love ;  and
Leicester  might  flatter  himself,  that  the  violence  of  her

h  Melv.  104,  105.  i  Ibid.  93,  94.

252  SCOTLAND.  [1564.

affections  would  at  length  triumph  both  over  the  maxims
t)f  policy  and  the  scruples  of  pride.  These  hopes  in-
duced him,  now  and  then,  to  conclude  the  proposal  of
his  marriage  with  the  Scottish  queen  to  be  a  project  for
his  destruction ;  and  he  imputed  it  to  the  malice  of
Cecil,  whoj  under  the  specious  pretence  of  doing  him
honour,  intended  to  ruin  him  in  the  good  opinion  both
of  Elizabeth  and  Mary.k

A  treaty  of  marriage,  proposed  by  one  queen,  who
dreaded  its  success ;  listened  to  by  another,  who  was
secretly  determined  against  it;  and  scarcely  desired
by  the  man  himself,  whose  interest  and  reputation  it
was  calculated,  in  appearance,  to  promote ;  could  not,
under  so  many  unfavourable  circumstances,  be  brought
to  a  fortunate  issue.  Both  Elizabeth  and  Mary  con-
tinued, however,  to  act  with  equal  dissimulation.  The
former,  notwithstanding  her  fears  of  losing  Leicester,
solicited  warmly  in  his  behalf.  The  latter,  though  she
began  about  this  time  to  cast  her  eyes  upon  another
subject  of  England,  did  not  at  once  venture  finally  to
reject  Elizabeth's  favourite.

Mary  en-  The  person  towards  whom  Mary  began  to
thoughts  turn  ner  thoughts,  was  Henry  Stewart  lord
i°nfraiordy~  Darnley,  eldest  son  of  the  earl  of  Lennox.  That
Damiey.  nobleman,  having  been  driven  out  of  Scotland,
under  the  regency  of  the  duke  of  Chatelherault,
had  lived  in  banishment  for  twenty  years.  His  wife,
lady  Margaret  Douglas,,  was  Mary's  most  dangerous
rival  in  her  claim  upon  the  English  succession.  She
was  the  daughter  of  Margaret,  the  eldest  sister  of
Henry  VIII.  by  the  earl  of  Angus,  whom  that  queen
married  after  the  death  of  her  husband  James  IV.  In
that  age,  the  right  and  order  of  succession  was  not  set-
tled with  the  same  accuracy  as  at  present.  Time,  and
the  decision  of  almost  every  case  that  can  possibly
happen,  have  at  last  introduced  certainty  into  a  matter,

k  Melv.  101.

1564.]  BOOK  III.  253

which  naturally  is  subject  to  all  the  variety  arising  from
the  caprice  of  lawyers,  guided  by  obscure,  and  often
imaginary  analogies.  The  countess  of  Lennox,  though
born  of  a  second  marriage,  was  one  degree  nearer  the
royal  blood  of  England  than  Mary.  She  was  the
daughter,  Mary  only  the  grand-daughter,  of  Margaret.
This  was  not  the  only  advantage  over  Mary  which  the
countess  of  Lennox  enjoyed.  She  was  born  in  Eng-
land, and,  by  a  maxim  of  law  in  that  country,  with
regard  to  private  inheritances,  "  whoever  is  not  born
in  England,  or  at  least  of  parents  who,  at  the  time  of
his  birth,  were  in  the  obedience  of  the  king  of  England,
cannot  enjoy  any  inheritance  in  the  kingdom."1  This
maxim,  Hales,  an  English  lawyer,  produced  in  a  trea-
tise which  he  published  at  this  time,  and  endeavoured
to  apply  it  to  the  right  of  succession  to  the  crown.  In
a  private  cause  these  pretexts  might  have  given  rise  to
a  long  and  doubtful  litigation ;  where  a  crown  was  at
stake,  such  nice  disputes  and  subtilties  were  to  be
avoided  with  the  utmost  care.  If  Darnley  should  hap-
pen to  contract  an  alliance  with  any  of  the  powerful
families  in  England,  or  should  publicly  profess  the
Protestant  religion,  these  plausible  and  popular  topics
might  be  so  urged,  as  to  prove  fatal  to  the  pretensions
of  a  foreigner  and  of  a  Papist.

Mary  was  aware  of  all  this ;  and  in  order  to  prevent
any  danger  from  that  quarter,  had  early  endeavoured
to  cultivate  a  friendly  correspondence  with  the  family  of
Lennox.  In  the  year  1 562, m  both  the  earl  and  the  lady
Margaret  were  taken  into  custody  by  Elizabeth's  orders,
on  account  of  their  holding  a  secret  correspondence
with  the  Scottish  queen.

Elizabeth  From  the  time  that  Mary  became  sensible  of
pSed7  the  difficulties  which  would  attend  her  marry-
withthis.  ing  a  foreign  prince,  she  entered  into  a  still
closer  connexion  with  the  earl  of  Lennox,"  and  in-

1  Carte,  Hist,  of  Eng.  vol.  Hi.  p.  422.  «  Carad.  389.  »  Ibid.  396.

254  SCOTLAND.  [1564.

vited  him  to  return  into  Scotland.  This  she  endea-
voured to  conceal  from  Elizabeth ;  but  a  transaction  of
so  much  importance  did  not  escape  the  notice  of  that
discerning  princess.  She  observed,  but  did  not  inter-
rupt it.  Nothing  could  fall  in  more  perfectly  with  her
views  concerning  Scottish  affairs.  She  was  pleased  to
see  the  pride  of  the  Scottish  queen  stoop  at  last  to  the
thoughts  of  taking  a  subject  to  her  bed.  Darnley  was
in  no  situation  to  excite  her  jealousy  or  her  fears.  His
father's  estate  lay  in  England,  and  by  means  of  this
pledge  she  hoped  to  keep  the  negotiation  entirely  in
her  own  hands,  to  play  the  same  game  of  artifice  and
delay,  which  she  had  planned  out,  if  her  recommen-
dation of  Leicester  had  been  more  favourably  received.

As,  before  the  union  of  the  two  crowns,  no  subject
of  one  kingdom  could  pass  into  the  other  without  the
permission  of  both  sovereigns ;  no  sooner  did  Lennox,
under  pretence  of  prosecuting  his  wife's  claim  upon  the
earldom  of  Angus,  apply  to  Elizabeth  for  her  licence
to  go  into  Scotland,  than  he  obtained  it.  Together
with  it,  she  gave  him  letters,  warmly  recommending
his  person  and  cause  to  Mary's  friendship  and  protec-
tion.0 But  at  the  same  time,  as  it  was  her  manner  to
involve  all  her  transactions  with  regard  to  Scotland  in
some  degree  of  perplexity  and  contradiction,  she  warned
Mary,  that  this  indulgence  of  Lennox  might  prove  fatal
to  herself,  as  his  return  could  not  fail  of  reviving  the
ancient  animosity  between  him  and  the  house  of  Ha-
,  milton.

This  admonition  gave  umbrage  to  Mary,  and  drew
from  her  an  angry  reply,  which  occasioned  for  some
time  a  total  interruption  of  all  correspondence  between
the  two  queens. p  Mary  was  not  a  little  alarmed  at
this ;  she  both  dreaded  the  effects  of  Elizabeth's  re-
sentment, and  felt  sensibly  the  disadvantage  of  be-
ing excluded  from  a  free  intercourse  with  England,

•  Keith,  255.  268.  v  Ibid.  253. MeJr.  83."

1564.]  BOOK  III.  255

where  her  ambassadors  had  all  along  carried  on,  with
some  success,  secret  negotiations,  which  increased  the
number  of  her  partisans,  and  paved  her  way  towards
the  throne.  In  order  to  remove  the  causes  of  the  pre-
sent difficulty,  Melvil  was  sent  express  to  the  court  of
England.  He  found  it  no  difficult  matter  to  bring-
about  a  reconcilement ;  and  soon  re-established  the
appearance,  but  not  the  confidence  of  friendship,  which
was  all  that  had  subsisted  for  some  time  between  the
two  queens.

During  this  negotiation,  Elizabeth's  professions  of
love  to  Mary,  and  Melvil's  replies  in  the  name  of  his
mistress,  were  made  in  the  language  of  the  warmest
and  most  cordial  friendship.  But  what  Melvil  truly
observes  with  respect  to  Elizabeth,  may  be  extended,
without  injustice,  to  both  queens.  "  There  was  nei-
ther plain-dealing,  nor  upright  meaning,  but  great  dis-
simulation, envy,  and  fear."q

Lennox  Lennox,  however,  in  consequence  of  the  li-
s"otiandn  cence  which  he  had  obtained,  set  out  for  Scot-
land, and  was  received  by  the  queen,  not  only
with  the  respect  due  to  a  nobleman  so  nearly  allied  to
the  royal  family,  but  treated  with  a  distinguished  fami-
liarity which  could  not  fail  of  inspiring  him  with  more
elevated  hopes.  The  rumour  of  his  son's  marriage  to
the  queen  began  to  spread  over  the  kingdom ;  and  the
eyes  of  all  Scotland  were  turned  upon  him  as  the  father
of  their  future  master.  The  duke  of  Chatelherault  was
the  first  to  take  the  alarm.  He  considered  Lennox  as
the  ancient  and  hereditary  enemy  of  the  house  of  Ha-
milton ;  and,  in  his  grandeur,  saw  the  ruin  of  himself
and  his  friends.  But  the  queen  interposed  her  autho-
rity to  prevent  any  violent  rupture,  and  employed  all
her  influence  to  bring  about  an  accommodation  of  the
differences/

The  powerful  family  of  Douglas  no  less  dreaded

i  Melv.  104.  r  Keith,  259.

256  SCOTLAND.  [1564.

Lennox's  return,  from  an  apprehension  that  he  would
wrest  the  earldom  of  Angus  out  of  their  hands.  But
the  queen  who  well  knew  how  dangerous  it  .would  be
to  irritate  Morton,  and  other  great  men  of  that  name,
prevailed  on  Lennox  to  purchase  their  friendship,  by
allowing  his  lady's  claim  upon  the  earldom  of  Angus  to
drop.3

After  these  preliminary  steps,  Mary  ventured

to  call  a  meeting  of  parliament. The  act  of

forfeiture  passed  against  Lennox  in  the  year  1545  was

repealed,  and  he  was  publicly  restored  to  the  honours

and  estates  of  his  ancestors.1

The  ecclesiastical  transactions  of  this  year

June  25.  *

Dec.  25.  were  not  considerable. In  the  assemblies  of  the
church,  the  same  complaints  of  the  increase  of

queen's  idolatry,  the  same  representations  concerning
seal  for  the  poverty  of  the  clergy,  were  renewed.  The
reply  which  the  queen  made  to  these,  and  her
promises  of  redress,  were  more  satisfying  to  the  Pro-
testants than  any  they  had  hitherto  obtained."  But,
notwithstanding  her  declarations  in  their  favour,  they
could  not  help  harbouring  many  suspicions  concerning
Mary's  designs  against  their  religion.  She  had  never
once  consented  to  hear  any  preacher  of  the  reformed
doctrine.  She  had  abated  nothing  of  her  bigotted  at-
tachment to  the  Romish  faith.  The  genius  of  that
superstition,  averse  at  all  times  from  toleration,  was  in
that  age  fierce  and  unrelenting.  Mary  had  given  her
friends  on  the  continent  repeated  assurances  of  her  re-
solution to  re-establish  the  Catholic  church.*  She  had
industriously  avoided  every  opportunity  of  ratifying
the  acts  of  parliament,  1560,  in  favour  of  the  Reforma-
tion. Even  the  protection  which,  ever  since  her  return,
she  had  afforded  the  Protestant  religion,  was  merely
temporary,  and  declared,  by  her  own  proclamation,  to

8  Keith,  268.  Note  (6.)-  *  See  Append,  No.  IX.

u  Keith,  533,  539.  x  Carte,  vol.  iii.  415.

1564.]  BOOK III.  257

be  of  force  only  "till  she  should  take  some  final  order
in  the  matter  of  religion. "y  The  vigilant  zeal  of  the
preachers  was  inattentive  to  none  of  these  circumstances.
The  coldness  of  thei?  principal  leaders,  who  were  at
this  time  entirely  devoted  to  the  court,  added  to  their
jealousies  and  fears.  These  they  uttered  to  the  people,
in  language  which  they  deemed  suitable  to  the  neces-
sity of  the  times,  and  which  the  queen  reckoned  dis-
respectful and  insolent.  In  a  meeting  of  the  general
assembly,  Maitland  publicly  accused  Knox  of  teaching
seditious  doctrine,  concerning  the  right  of  subjects  to
resist  those  sovereigns  who  trespass  against  the  duty
which  they  owe  to  the  people.  Knox  was  not  backward
to  justify  what  he  had  taught ;  and  upon  this  general
doctrine  of  resistance,  so  just  in  its  own  nature,  but  so
delicate  in  its  application  to  particular  cases,  there
ensued  a  debate,  which  admirably  displays  the  talents
and  character  of  both  the  disputants ;  the  acuteness
of  the  former,  embellished  with  learning,  but  prone
to  subtilty ;  the  vigorous  understanding  of  the  latter,
delighting  in  bold  sentiments,  and  superior  to  all
fear.2

1565.  Two  years  had  already  been  consumed  in
tu>nSbotha~  frui^688  negotiations  concerning  the  marriage
of  Eliza-  of  the  Scottish  queen.  Mary  had  full  leisure
Mary,  with  and  opportunity  to  discern  the  fallacy  and  de-
hl*mu-  ce^  °f  a^  Elizabeth's  proceedings  with  respect
riage.  to  it.  But,  in  order  to  set  the  real  intentions  of
the  English  queen  in  a  clear  light,  and  to  bring  her
to  some  explicit  declaration  of  her  sentiments,  Mary  at
last  intimated  to  Randolph,  that,  on  condition
her  right  of  succession  to  the  crown  of  England
were  publicly  acknowledged,  she  was  ready  to  yield  to
the  solicitations  of  his  mistress  in  behalf  of  Leicester.51
Nothing  could  be  farther  than  this  from  the  mind  and
intention  of  Elizabeth.  The  right  of  succession  was  a

y  Keith,  504.  510.  *  Knox,  349.  a  Keith,  269.

VOL.  I.  S

268  SCOTLAND.  [1565.

mystery,  which,  during  her  whole  reign,  her  jealousy
preserved  untouched  and  unexplained.  She  had  pro-
mised, however,  when  she  first  began  to  interest  herself
in  the  marriage  of  the  Scottish  queen,  all  that  was  now
demanded.  How  to  retreat  with  decency,  how  to
elude  her  former  offer,  was,  on  that  account,  not  a  little
perplexing.

The  facility  with  which  lord  Darnley  obtained  per-
mission to  visit  the  court  of  Scotland,  was  owing,  in
all  probability,  to  that  embarrassment.  From  the  time
of  Melvil's  embassy,  the  countess  of  Lennox  had
warmly  solicited  this  liberty  for  her  son.  Elizabeth
was  no  stranger  to  the  ambitious  hopes  with  which
that  young  nobleman  flattered  himself.  She  had  re-
ceived repeated  advices  from  her  ministers  of  the
sentiments  which  Mary  began  to  entertain  in  his  fa-
vour.b  It  was  entirely  in  her  power  to  prevent  his
stirring  out  of  London.  In  the  present  conjuncture,
however,  nothing  could  be  of  more  advantage  to  her
than  Darnley 's  journey  into  Scotland.  She  had  already
brought  one  actor  upon  the  stage,  who  under  her
management  had,  for  a  long  time,  amused  the  Scottish
qnaeen.  She  hoped,  no  less  absolutely,  to  direct  the
motions  of  Darnley,  who  was  likewise  her  subject ;  and
again  to  involve  Mary  in  all  the  tedious  intricacies  of
negotiation.  These  motives  determined  Elizabeth  and
her  ministers  to  yield  to  the  solicitations  of  the  coun-
tess of  Lennox.

But  this  deep-laid  scheme  was  in  a  moment
arrives  in  disconcerted.  Such  unexpected  events,  as  the
fancy  of  poets  ascribes  to  love,  are  sometimes
really  produced  by  that  passion.  An  aifair  which  had
been  the  object  of  so  many  political  intrigues,  and  had
moved  and  interested  so  many  princes,  was  at  last
decided  by  the  sudden  liking  of  two  young  persons.
Lord  Darnley  was  at  this  time  in  the  first  bloom  and

b  Keith,  259.  261.266.

1565.]  BOOK  III.  259

vigour  of  youth.  In  beauty  and  gracefulness  of  per-
son he  surpassed  all  his  contemporaries ;  he  excelled
eminently  in  such  arts  as  add  ease  and  elegance  to
external  form,  and  which  enabled  it  not  only  to  dazzle,
Gains  the  ^ut  to  P^ease-  Mary  was  of  an  age,  and  of  a
queen's  temper,  to  feel  the  full  power  of  these  accom-
plishments. The  impression  which  lord  Darnley
made  upon  her  was  visible  from  the  time  of  their  first
interview.  The  whole  business  of  the  court
was  to  amuse  and  entertain  this  illustrious
guest  ;c  and  in  all  those  scenes  of  gaiety,  Darnley,  whose
qualifications  were  altogether  superficial  and  showy,
appeared  to  great  advantage.  His  conquest  of  the
queen's  heart  became  complete  J  and  inclination  now
prompted  her  to  conclude  her  marriage,  the  first
thoughts  of  which  had  been  suggested  by  considera-
tions merely  political.

Elizabeth  contributed,  and  perhaps  not  without  de-
sign, to  increase  the  violence  of  this  passion.  Soon
after  Darnley 's  arrival  in  Scotland,  she,  in  return  to  that
message  whereby  Mary  had  signified  her  willingness
to  accept  of  Leicester,  gave  an  answer  in  such  terms
as  plainly  unravelled  her  original  intention  in  that
intrigue/  She  promised,  if  the  Scottish  queen's  mar-
riage with  Leicester  should  take  place,  to  advance  him
to  great  honours ;  but,  with  regard  to  Mary's  title  to
the  English  succession,  she  would  neither  suffer  any
legal  inquiry  to  be  made  concerning  it,  nor  permit  it
to  be  publicly  recognised,  until  she  herself  should'
declare  her  resolution  never  to  marry.  Notwithstand-
ing Elizabeth's  former  promises,  Mary  had  reason  to
expect  every  thing  contained  in  this  reply ;  her  high
spirit,  however,  could  not  bear  with  patience  such
a  cruel  discovery  of  the  contempt,  the  artifice,  and
mockery,  with  which,  under  the  veil  of  friendship,  she
had  been  so  long  abused.  She  burst  into  tears  of

c  Knox,369.  d  Keith,  270. App.  158.

s  2

260  SCOTLAND.  [1565

indignation,  and  expressed,  with  the  utmost  bitterness,
her  sense  of  that  disingenuous  craft  which  had  been
employed  to  deceive  her.6

The  natural  effect  of  this  indignation  was  to  add
to  the  impetuosity  with  which  she  pursued  her  own
scheme.  Blinded  by  resentment,  as  well  as  by  love,
she  observed  no  defects  in  the  man  whom  she  had
chosen  ;  and  began  to  take  the  necessary  steps  towards
accomplishing  her  design,  with  all  the  impatience  na-
tural to  those  passions.

As  Darnley  was  so  nearly  related  to  the  queen,  the
canon  law  made  it  necessary  to  obtain  the  pope's  dis-
pensation before  the  celebration  of  the  marriage.  For
this  purpose  she  early  set  on  foot  a  negotiation  with
the  court  of  Rome/
The  She  was  busy,  at  the  same  time,  in  procuring

French ^ne  consent  of  the  French  king  and  his  mother.

court  ap-

prove  of  Having  communicated  her  design,  and  the  mo-
'  tives  which  determined  her  choice,  to  Castelnau,
the  French  ambassador,  she  employed  him,  as  the
most  proper  person,  to  bring  his  court  to  fall  in  with
her  views.  Among  other  arguments  to  this  purpose,
Castelnau  mentioned  Mary's  attachment  to  Darnley,
which  he  represented  to  be  so  violent  and  deep-rooted,
that  it  was  no  longer  in  her  own  power  to  break  off
the  match.8  Nor  were  the  French  ministers  backward
in  encouraging  Mary's  passion.  Her  pride  would
never  stoop  to  an  alliance  with  a  subject  of  France.
By  this  choice  they  were  delivered  from  the  apprehen-
sion of  a  match  with  any  of  the  Austrian  princes,  as  well
as  the  danger  of  too  close  a  union  with  Elizabeth  ;  and
as  Darnley  professed  the  Roman  Catholic  religion,  this
suited  the  bigotted  schemes  which  that  court  adopted.
Darnley  While  Mary  was  endeavouring  to  reconcile
setlratof  foreign  courts  to  a  measure  which  she  had  so
thenobies,  mucn  at  heart,  Darnley  and  his  father,  by  their

e  .Keith,  Append.  J59.  f  Camd,  396.  s  Casteln.  464.

1565.]  BOOK  III.  261

behaviour,  were  raising  up  enemies  at  home  to  obstruct
it.  Lennox  had,  during  the  former  part  of  his  life,
discovered  no  great  compass  of  abilities  or  political
wisdom ;  and  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  a  weak
understanding  and  violent  passions.  Darnley  was  not
superior  to  his  father  in  understanding,  and  all  his
passions  were  still  more  impetuous.  h  To  these  he
added  that  insolence,  which  the  advantage  of  external
form,  when  accompanied  with  no  quality  more  valua-
ble, is  apt  to  inspire.  Intoxicated  with  the  queen's
favour,  he  began  already  to  assume  the  haughtiness  of
a  king,  and  to  put  on  that  imperious  air,  which  majesty
itself  can  scarcely  render  tolerable.
particularly  ^  was  ^y  the  advice,  or  at  least  with  the  con-
Murray.  sen^  of  Murray  and  his  party,  that  Lennox
had  been  invited  into  Scotland  ;x  and  yet,  no  sooner  did
he  acquire  a  firm  footing  in  that  kingdom,  than  he
began  to  enter  into  secret  cabals  vith  those  noblemen
who  were  known  to  be  avowed  enemies  to  Murray,
and,  with  regard  to  religion,  to  be  either  neutrals,  or
favourers  of  Popery .k  Darnley,  still  more  imprudent,
allowed  some  rash  expressions  concerning  those  favours
which  the  queen's  bounty  had  conferred  upon  Murray
to  escape  him.1

But,  above  all  these,  the  familiarity  which  Darnley
cultivated  with  David  Rizio,  contributed  to  increase
the  suspicion  and  disgust  of  the  nobles.
The  rise The  l°w  birth  and  indigent  condition  of  this
of  Rizio's  man,  placed  him  in  a  station  in  which  he  ought

favour.  7  r  -IT

naturally  to  have  remained  unknown  to  poste-
rity. But  what  fortune  called  him  to  act  and  to  suffer
in  Scotland,  obliges  history  to  descend  from  its  dignity,
and  to  record  his  adventures.  He  was  the  son  of  a  musi-
cian in  Turin,  and  having  accompanied  the  Piedmon-
tese  ambassador  into  Scotland,  gained  admission  into
the  queen's  family  by  his  skill  in  music.  As  his  de-

h  Keith,  272,  273. *  Knox,  367. Keith,  274. k  Ibid.  272. >  Ibid.  974.

SCOTLAND.  [1565.

pendent  condition  had  taught  him  suppleness  of  spirit
and  insinuating  manners,  he  quickly  crept  into  the
queen's  favour,  and  her  French  secretary  happening
to  return  at  that  time  into  his  own  country,  was  pre-
ferred by  her  to  that  office.  He  now  began  to  make  a
figure  in  court,  and  to  appear  as  a  man  of  consequence.
The  whole  train  of  suitors  and  expectants,  who  have
an  extreme  sagacity  in  discovering  the  paths  which
lead  most  directly  to  success,  applied  to  him.  His
recommendations  were  observed  to  have  great  influ-
ence over  the  queen,  and  he  grew  to  be  considered  not
only  as  a  favourite,  but  as  a  minister.  Nor  was  Rizio
careful  to  abate  that  envy  which  always  attends  such
an  extraordinary  and  rapid  change  of  fortune.  He
studied,  on  the  contrary,  to  display  the  whole  extent
of  his  favour.  He  affected  to  talk  often  and  familiarly
with  the  queen  in  public.  He  equalled  the  greatest  and
most  opulent  subjects  in  richness  of  dress,  and  in  the
number  of  his  attendants.  He  discovered,  in  all  his
behaviour,  that  assuming  insolence,  with  which  unme-
rited prosperity  inspires  an  ignoble  mind.  It  was
with  the  utmost  indignation  that  the  nobles  beheld  the
power,  it  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  that  they  tole-
rated the  arrogance,  of  this  unworthy  minion.  Even
in  the  queen's  presence  they  could  not  forbear  treating
him  with  marks  of  contempt.  Nor  was  it  his  exorbi-
tant power  alone  which  exasperated  the  Scots.  They
considered  him,  and  not  without  reason,  as  a  dangerous
enemy  to  the  Protestant  religion,  and  suspected  that
he  held,  for  this  purpose,  a  secret  correspondence  with
the  court  of  Rome.m

It  was  Darnley's  misfortune  to  fall  under  the

Darnley's  * •»  •  i in

connexion  management  of  this  man,  who,  by  flattery  and
him.  ,  easily  gained  on  his  vanity  and  inex-

perience. All  Rizio's  influence  with  the  queen  was
employed  in  his  behalf,  and  contributed,  without  doubt,

m  Buchan,  340. Melv.  107.

1565.]  BOOK III.  263

towards  establishing  him  more  firmly  in  her  affections.11
But  whatever  benefit  Darnley  might  reap  from  his  pa-
tronage, it  did  not  counterbalance  the  contempt,  and
even  infamy,  to  which  he  was  exposed,  on  account  of
his  familiarity  with  such  an  upstart.

Though  Darnley  daily  made  progress  in  the  queen's
affection,  she  conducted  herself,  however,  with  such
prudent  reserve,  as  to  impose  on  Randolph,  the  English
resident,  a  man  otherwise  shrewd  and  penetrating.  It
appears  from  his  letters  at  this  period,  that  he  enter-
tained not  the  least  suspicion  of  the  intrigue  which
was  carrying  on;  and  gave  his  court  repeated  as-
surances, that  the  Scottish  queen  had  no  design  of
marrying  Darnley.0  In  the  midst  of  this  security,  Mary
dispatched  Maitland  to  signify  her  intention  to  Eliza-
beth, and  to  solicit  her  consent  to  the  marriage  with
Darnley.  This  embassy  was  the  first  thing  which  opened
the  eyes  of  Randolph.

Elizabeth  affected  the  greatest  surprise  at
Elizabeth  this  sudden  resolution  of  the  Scottish  queen,
but  without  reason.  The  train  was  laid  by
^erse^>  and  she  had  no  cause  to  wonder  when
it  took  effect.  She  expressed  at  the  same  time
her  disapprobation  of  the  match  in  the  strongest
terms  ;  and  pretended  to  foresee  many  dangers  and  in-
conveniences arising  from  it,  to  both  kingdoms.  But
this  too  was  mere  affectation.  Mary  had  often  and
plainly  declared  her  resolution  to  marry.  It  was  im-
possible she  could  make  any  choice  more  inoffensive.
The  danger  of  introducing  a  foreign  interest  into
Britain,  which  Elizabeth  had  so  justly  dreaded,  was
entirely  avoided.  Darnley,  though  allied  to  both
crowns,  and  possessed  of  lands  in  both  kingdoms,
could  be  formidable  to  neither.  It  is  evident  from  all
these  circumstances,  that  Elizabeth's  apprehensions  of
danger  could  not  possibly  be  serious ;  and  that  in  all

n  Melv.  ill.  o  Keith,  273,  and  Append.  150.

264  SCOTLAND.  [1565

her  violent  declarations against  Darnley,  there  was
much  more  of  grimace  than  of  reality  .p

There  were  not  wanting,  however,  political  motives
of  much  weight,  to  induce  that  artful  princess  to  put
on  the  appearance  of  great  displeasure.  Mary,  intimi-
dated by  this,  might  perhaps  delay  her  marriage;
which  Elizabeth  desired  to  obstruct  with  a  weakness
that  little  suited  the  dignity  of  her  mind  and  the  eleva-
tion of  her  character.  Besides,  the  tranquillity  of  her
own  kingdom  was  the  great  object  of  Elizabeth's
policy ;  and,  by  declaring  her  dissatisfaction  with
Mary's  conduct,  she  hoped  to  alarm  that  party  in
Scotland  which  was  attached  to  the  English  interest,
and  to  encourage  such  of  the  nobles  as  secretly  disap-
proved the  match,  openly  to  oppose  it.  The  seeds  of
discord  would  by  this  means  be  scattered  through  that
kingdom.  Intestine  commotions  might  arise.  Amidst
these  Mary  could  form  none  of  those  dangerous
schemes  to  which  the  union  of  her  people  might  have
prompted  her.  Elizabeth  would  become  the  umpire
between  the  Scottish  queen  and  her  contending  sub-
jects; and  England  might  look  on  with  security,  while
a  storm  which  she  had  raised  wasted  the  only  kingdom
which  could  possibly  disturb  its  peace.

In  prosecution  of  this  scheme,  she  laid  before
her  privy-council  the  message  from  the  Scottish
queen,  and  consulted  them  with  regard  to  the  answer
she  should  return.  Their  determination,  it  is  easy
to  conceive,  was  perfectly  conformable  to  her  secret
views.  They  drew  up  a  remonstrance  against  the
intended  match,  full  of  the  imaginary  dangers  with
which  that  event  threatened  the  kingdom .q  Nor  did

P  Even  the  historians  of  that  age  acknowledge,  that  the  marriage  of  the  Scottish
queen  with  a  subject  was  far  from  being  disagreeable  to  Elizabeth.  Knox,  369.
373.  Buchan.  339.  Castelnau,  who  at  that  time  was  well  acquainted  with  the
intrigues  of  both  the  British  courts,  asserts,  upon  grounds  of  great  probability,  that
the  match  was  wholly  Elizabeth's  own  work  ;  Castelnau,  462.  and  that  she
rejoiced  at  the  accomplishment  of  it,  appears  from  the  letters  of  her  own  ambassa-
dors. Keith,  280.  288.  i  Keith,  274.  See  Append.  No.  X.

1565.]  BOOK III.  265

Sends  she  think  it  enough  to  signify  her  disapproba-
lnr°toT"tion  of  the  measure,  either  by  Maitland,  Mary's
struct  it.  ambassador,  or  by  Randolph,  her  own  resident
in  Scotland ;  in  order  to  add  more  dignity  to  the  farce
which  she  chose  to  act,  she  appointed  Sir  Nicholas
Throkmorton  her  ambassador  extraordinary.  She  com-
manded him  to  declare,  in  the  strongest  terms,  her
dissatisfaction  with  the  step  which  Mary  proposed  to
take  ;  and  at  the  same  time  to  produce  the  determina-
tion of  the  privy- council  as  an  evidence  that  the  senti-
ments of  the  nation  were  not  different  from  her  own.
Not  long  after,  she  confined  the  countess  of  Lennox
as  a  prisoner,  first  in  her  house,  and  then  sent  her  to
the  Tower/

Intelligence  of  all  this  reached  Scotland  before  the
arrival  of  the  English  ambassador.  In  the  first  trans-
ports of  her  indignation,  Mary  resolved  no  longer  to
keep  any  measures  with  Elizabeth  ;  and  sent  orders  to
Maitland,  who  accompanied  Throkmorton,  to  return
instantly  to  the  English  court,  and  in  her  name  to
declare  to  Elizabeth,  that,  after  having  been  amused  so
long  to  so  little  purpose ;  after  having  been  fooled,  and
imposed  on  so  grossly  by  her  artifices ;  she  was  now
resolved  to  gratify  her  o.wn  inclination,  and  to  ask  no
other  consent  but  that  of  her  own  subjects,  in  the  choice
of  a  husband.  Maitland,  with  his  usual  sagacity,  fore-
saw all  the  effects  of  such  a  rash  and  angry  mes-
sage, and  ventured  rather  to  incur  the  displeasure  of
his  mistress,  by  disobeying  her  commands,  than  to  be
made  the  instrument  of  tearing  asunder  so  violently
the  few  remaining  ties  which  still  linked  together  the
two  queens.5

Mary  herself  soon  became  sensible  of  her  error.  She
received  the  English  ambassador  with  respect ;  justi-
fied her  own  conduct  with  decency ;  and  though  unal-
terable in  her  resolution,  she  affected  a  wonderful

r  Keith,  Append.  161.  *  Ibid.  160.

266  SCOTLAND.  [1565.

solicitude  to  reconcile  Elizabeth  to  the  measure  ;  and
even  pretended,  out  of  complaisance  towards  her,  to
put  off  the  consummation  of  the  marriage  for  some
months.4  It  is  probable,  however,  that  the  want  of
the  pope's  dispensation,  and  the  prospect  of  gaining
the  consent  of  her  own  subjects,  were  the  real  motives
of  this  delay.

Murra  ,8 This  consent  Mary  laboured  with  the  utmost
aversion  to  industry  to  obtain. The  earl  of  Murray  was
the  person  in  the  kingdom  whose  concurrence
was  of  the  greatest  importance;  but  she  had  reason  to
fear  that  it  would  not  be  procured  without  extreme
difficulty. From  the time of Lennox's  return  into
Scotland,  Murray  perceived  that  the  queen's  affections
began  gradually  to  be  estranged  from  him. Darnley,
Athol,  Rizio,  all  the  court  favourites,  combined  against
him. His  ambitious  spirit  could  not  brook  this  dimi-
nution of  his  power,  which  his  former  services  had  so
little  merited. He  retired  into  the  country,  and  gave
way  to  rivals  with  whom  he  was  unable  to  contend. u
The  return  of  the  earl  of  Bothwell,  his  avowed  enemy,
who  had  been  accused  of  a  design  upon  his  life,  and
who  had  resided  for  some  time  in  foreign  countries,
obliged  him  to  attend  to  his  own  safety. No  entreaty
of  the  queen  could  persuade  him  to  a  reconcilement
with  that  nobleman.  He  insisted  on  having  him  brought
to  a  public  trial,  and  prevailed,  by  his  importunity,  to
have  a  day  fixed  for  it. Bothwell  durst  not  appear  in
opposition  to  a  man,  who  came  to  the  place  of  trial
attended  by  five  thousand  of  his  followers  on  horse-
back. He  was once  more  constrained  to  leave  the
kingdom ;  but,  by  the  queen's  command,  the  sentence
of  outlawry,  which  is incurred  by  non-appearance,
was  not  pronounced  against  him.x

Mary,  sensible,  at  the  same  time, of  how

IVlsv  o»  .. .  •  T

much  importance  it  was  to  gam  a  subject  so

1  Keith,  Append.  278. u  Keith,  272. 274.  Append.  159. x  Jbid.  Append.  160.

1565.]  BOOK  III.  267

powerful,  and  so  popular  as  the  earl  of  Murray,  invited
him  back  to  court,  and  received  him  with  many  de-
monstrations of  respect  and  confidence.  At  last  she
desired  him  to  set  an  example  to  her  other  subjects  by
subscribing  a  paper,  containing  a  formal  approbation
of  her  marriage  with  Darnley.  Murray  had  many
reasons  to  hesitate,  and  even  to  withhold  his  assent.
Darnley  had  not  only  undermined  his  credit  with  the
queen,  but  discovered,  on  every  occasion,  a  rooted
aversion  to  his  person.  By  consenting  to  his  elevation
to  the  throne,  he  would  give  him  such  an  accession  of
dignity  and  power,  as  no  man  willingly  bestows  on  an
enemy.  The  unhappy  consequences  which  might  fol-
low upon  a  breach  with  England,  were  likewise  of  con-
siderable weight  with  Murray.  He  had  always  openly
preferred  a  confederacy  with  England,  before  the  an-
cient alliance  with  France.  By  his  means,  chiefly,  this
change  in  the  system  of  national  politics  had  been
brought  about.  A  league  with  England  had  been  esta-
blished; and  he  could  not  think  of  sacrificing  to
a  rash  and  youthful  passion  an  alliance  of  so  much
utility  to  the  kingdom,  and  which  he  and  the  other
nobles  were  bound,  by  every  obligation,  to  maintain/
Nor  was  the  interest  of  religion  forgotten  on  this  oc-
casion. Mary,  though  surrounded  by  Protestant  coun-
sellors, had  found  means  to  hold  a  dangerous  correspon-
dence with  foreign  Catholics.  She  had  even  courted
the  pope's  protection,  who  had  sent  her  a  subsidy  of
eight  thousand  crowns.55  Though  Murray  had  hitherto
endeavoured  to  bridle  the  zeal  of  the  reformed  clergy,
and  to  set  the  queen's  conduct  in  the  most  favourable
light,  yet  her  obstinate  adherence  to  her  own  religion
could  not  fail  of  alarming  him,  and  by  her  resolution
to  marry  a  Papist,  the  hope  of  reclaiming  her,  by  a
union  with  a  Protestant,  was  for  ever  cut  off.a  Each-
of  these  considerations  had  its  influence  on  Murray,

y  Keith,  169.  *  Ibid.  293. Melv.  114.  a  Keith,  Append.  160.

268  SCOTLAND.  [1565.

and  all  of  them  determined  him  to  decline  complying
at  that  time  with  the  queen's  request.
May  14.  The  convention  of  nobles,  which  was  assem-
tton°of  the  kkd  a  few  days  after,  discovered  a  greater  dis-
nobies  ap-  position  to  gratify  the  queen.  Many  of  them,
theVniar°  without  hesitation,  expressed  their  approba-
tion of  the  intended  match  ;  but  as  others  were
startled  at  the  same  dangers  which  had  alarmed  Mur-
ray, or  were  influenced  by  his  example  to  refuse  their
consent,  another  convention  was  appointed  at  Perth,  in
order  to  deliberate  more  fully  concerning  this  matter.5
Meanwhile,  Mary  gave  a  public  evidence  of  her  own
inclination,  by  conferring  upon  Darnley  titles  of  honour
peculiar  to  the  royal  family.  The  opposition  she  had
hitherto  met  with,  and  the  many  contrivances  em-
ployed to  thwart  and  disappoint  her  inclination,  pro-
duced their  usual  effect  upon  her  heart ;  they  confirmed
her  passion,  and  increased  its  violence.  The  simpli-
city of  that  age  imputed  an  affection  so  excessive  to
the  influence  of  witchcraft.0  It  was  owing,  however,
to  no  other  charm  than  the  irresistible  power  of  youth
and  beauty  over  a  young  and  tender  heart.  Darnley
grew  giddy  with  his  prosperity.  Flattered  by  the  love  of
a  queen,  and  the  applause  of  many  among  her  subjects,
his  natural  haughtiness  and  insolence  became  insup-
portable, and  he  could  no  longer  bear  advice,  far  less
contradiction.  Lord  Ruthven,  happening  to  be  the
first  person  who  informed  him  that  Mary,  in  order  to
soothe  Elizabeth,  had  delayed  for  some  time  creating
him  duke  of  Albany,  he,  in  a  frenzy  of  rage,  drew  his
dagger,  and  attempted  to  stab  him.d  It  required  all
Mary's  attention  to  prevent  his  falling  under  that  con-
tempt to  which  such  behaviour  deservedly  exposed  him.
Mary's  ad-  In  no  scene  of  her  life  was  ever  Mary's  own
gafn'm^her  address  more  remarkably  displayed.  Love
subjects,  sharpened  her  invention,  and  made  her  study

b  Keith,  App.  283. Knox',  373,  *.  Keith,  283.  d  Ibid.  App.  160.

1565.]  BOOK  III.  269

every  method  of  gaining  her  subjects.  Many  of  the
nobles  she  won  by  her  address,  and  more  by  her  pro-
mises. On  some  she  bestowed  lands,  to  others  she  gave
new  titles  of  honour.6  She  even  condescended  to  court
the  Protestant  clergy ;  and  having  invited  three  of  their
superintendents  to  Stirling,  she  declared,  in  strong
terms,  her  resolution  to  protect  their  religion,  ex-
pressed her  willingness  to  be  present  at  a  conference
upon  the  points  in  doctrine  which  were  disputed  be-
tween the  Protestants  and  Papists,  and  went  so  far  as
to  shew  some  desire  to  hear  such  of  their  preachers  as
were  most  remarkable  for  their  moderation/  By  these
arts  the  queen  .gained  wonderfully  upon  the  people,
who,  unless  their  jealousy  be  raised  by  repeated  in-
juries, are  always  ready  to  view  the  actions  of  their
sovereign  with  an  indulgent  eye.

On  the  other  hand,  Murray  and  his  associates  were
plainly  the  dupes  of  Elizabeth's  policy.  She  talked  in
so  high  a  strain  of  her  displeasure  at  the  intended
match ;  she  treated  lady  Lennox  with  so  much  rigour ;
she  wrote  to  the  Scottish  queen  in  such  high  terms ;
she  recalled  the  earl  of  Lennox  and  his  son  in  such  a
peremptory  manner,  and  with  such  severe  denuncia-
tions of  her  vengeance  if  they  should  presume  to  dis-
obey ;g  that  all  these  expressions  of  aversion  fully  per-
suaded them  of  her  sincerity.  This  belief  fortified
their  scruples  with  respect  to  the  match,  and  encou-
raged them  to  oppose  it.  They  began  with  forming
among  themselves  bonds  of  confederacy  and  mutual
defence;  they  entered  into  a  secret  correspondence
with  the  English  resident,  in  order  to  secure  Eliza-
beth's assistance  when  it  should  become  needful  ;h  they
endeavoured  to  fill  the  nation  with  such  apprehensions
of  danger,  as  might  counterbalance  the  influence  of
those  arts  which  the  queen  had  employed.

Besides  these  intrigues,  there  were  secretly  carried

•  Keith,  283. 'Knox.373. s  Keith,  285,  286. *  Ibid.  289.  292.  298.

270  SCOTLAND.  [1565.

schemes on>  by  both  parties,  dark  designs  of  a  more
of  Damiey  criminal  nature,  and  more  suited  to  the  spirit

and  Mur-  '

ray  against  of  the  age.  Damiey,  impatient  of  that  op-
1  °ther*  position,  which  he  imputed  wholly  to  Murray,
and  resolving  at  any  rate  to  get  rid  of  such  a  power-
ful enemy,  formed  a  plot  to  assassinate  him,  during
the  meeting  of  the  convention  at  Perth.  Murray,  on
his  part,  despairing  of  preventing  the  marriage  by  any
other  means,  had,  together  with  the  duke  of  Cha-
telherault  and  the  earl  of  Argyle,  concerted  measures
for  seizing  Darnley,  and  carrying  him  a  prisoner  into
England.

If  either  of  these  conspiracies  had  taken  effect,  this
convention  might  have  been  attended  with  conse-
quences extremely  tragical ;  but  both  were  rendered
abortive,  by  the  vigilance  or  good  fortune  of  those
against  whom  they  were  formed.  Murray,  being
warned  of  his  danger  by  some  retainers  to  the  court,
who  still  favoured  his  interest,  avoided  the  blow  by
not  going  to  Perth.  Mary,  receiving  intelligence  of
Murray's  enterprise,  retired  with  the  utmost  expedi-
tion, along  with  Darnley,  to  the  other  side  of  Forth.
Conscious,  on  both  sides,  of  guilt,  and  inflamed  with
resentment,  it  was  impossible  they  could  either  forget
the  violence  which  themselves  had  meditated,  or  for-
give the  injuries  intended  against  them.  From  that
moment  all  hope  of  reconcilement  was  at  an  end,  and
their  mutual  enmity  burst  out  with  every  symptom  of
implacable  hatred.1

*  The  reality  of  these  two  opposite  conspiracies  has  given  occasion  to  many  dis-
putes and  much  contradiction.  Some  deny  that  any  design  was  formed  against  the
life  of  Murray ;  others  call  in  question  the  truth  of  the  conspiracy  against  Darnley.
There  seems,  however,  to  be  plausible  reasons  for  believing  that  there  is  some
foundation  for  what  has  been  asserted  with  regard  to  both ;  though  the  zeal  and
credulity  of  party-writers  have  added  to  each  many  exaggerated  circumstances.
The  following  arguments  render  it  probable  that  some  violence  was  intended  against
Murray : —

1.  This  is  positively  asserted  by  Buchanan,  341.  2.  The  English  resident
writes  to  Cecil,  that  Murray  was  assuredly  informed  that  a  design  was  formed
of  murdering  him  at  Perth,  and  mentions  circumstances  concerning  the  manner
in  which  the  crime  was  to  be  committed.  If  the  whole  had  been  a  fiction  of  his
own,  or  of  Murray,  it  is  impossible  that  he  could  have  written  in  this  strain  to  such

1565.]  BOOK  III.  271

Mary  sum-  On  Mary's  return  to  Edinburgh,  she  sum-
"amisto  moned  her  vassals  by  proclamation,  and  soli-
take  arms  C{IG^  them,  by  her  letters,  to  repair  thither  in

against  > J  >  r

Murray,  arms,  for  the  protection  of  her  person  against
her  foreign  and  domestic  enemies.1"  She  was  obeyed
with  all  the  promptness  and  alacrity  with  which  sub-

a  discerning  minister.  Keith,  287.  3.  Murray  himself  constantly  and  publicly
persisted  in  affirming  that  such  a  design  was  formed  against  his  life.  Keith,  App.
108.  He  was  required  by  the  queen  to  transmit  in  writing  an  account  of  the  con-
spiracy which  he  pretended  had  been  formed  against  his  life.  This  he  did  accord-
ingly ;  but  "  when  it  was  brought  to  her  Majesty  by  her  servants  sent  for  that  pur-
pose, it  appears  be  Her  Highness  and  her  council,  that  his  purgation  in  that  behalf
was  not  so  sufficient  as  the  matter  required."  Keith,  App.  109.  He  was  there-
fore summoned  to  appear  within  three  days  before  the  queen  in  Holyrood-house ;
and,  in  order  to  encourage  him  to  do  so,  a  safe-conduct  was  offered  to  him.  Ibid.
Though  he  had  once  consented  to  appear,  he  afterward  declined  to  do  so.  But
whoever  considers  Murray's  situation,  and  the  character  of  those  who  directed
Mary's  counsels  at  that  time,  will  hardly  deem  it  a  decisive  proof  of  his  guilt,  that
he  did  not  choose  to  risk  his  person  on  such  security.  4.  The  furious  passions  of
Darnley,  the  fierceness  of  his  resentment,  which  scrupled  at  no  violence,  and  the
manners  of  the  age,  render  the  imputations  of  such  a  crime  less  improbable.

II.  That  Murray  and  his  associates  had  resolved  to  seize  Darnley  in  his  return
from  Perth,  appears  with  still  greater  certainty ;  1.  From  the  express  testimony  of
Melvil,  112  ;  although  Buchanan,  p.  341,  and  Knox,  p.  377,  affect,  without  reason,
to  represent  this  as  an  idle  rumour.  2.  The  question  was  put  to  Randolph,  Whe-
ther the  governor  of  Berwick  would  receive  Lennox  and  his  son,  if  they  were  deli-
vered at  that  place  ?  His  answer  was,  "  that  they  would  not  refuse  their  own,  i.  e.
their  own  subjects,  in  whatsoever  sort  they  came  unto  us,  i.  e.  whether  they  returned
to  England  voluntarily,  as  they  had  been  required,  or  were  brought  thither  by  force."
This  plainly  shews,  that  some  such  design  was  in  hand,  and  Randolph  did  not  dis-
courage it  by  the  answer  which  he  gave.  Keith,  290.  3.  The  precipitation  with
which  the  queen  retired,  and  the  reason  she  gave  for  this  sudden  flight,  are  men-
tioned by  Randolph.  Keith,  291.  4.  A  great  part  of  the  Scottish  nobles,  and
among  these  the  earls  of  Argyle  and  Rothes,  who  were  themselves  privy  to  the  de-
sign, assert  the  reality  of  the  conspiracy.  Good.  vol.  ii.  358.

All  these  circumstances  rendered  the  truth  of  both  conspiracies  probable.  But  we
may  observe  how  far  this  proof,  though  drawn  from  public  records,  falls  short,  on
both  sides,  of  legal  and  formal  evidence.  Buchanan  and  Randolph,  in  their  ac-
counts of  the  conspiracy  against  Murray,  differ  widely  in  almost  every  circumstance.
The  accounts  of  the  attempt  upon  Darnley  are  not  more  consistent.  Melvil  alleges,
that  the  design  of  the  conspirators  was  to  carry  Darnley  a  prisoner  into  England  j
the  proposal  made  to  Randolph  agrees  with  this.  Randolph  says,  that  they  intended
to  carry  the  queen  to  St.  Andrew's  and  Darnley  to  Castle  Campbell.  The  lords,  in
their  declaration,  affirm  the  design  of  the  conspirators  to  have  been  to  murder
Darnley  and  his  father,  to  confine  the  queen  in  Lochleven  during  life,  and  to  usurp
the  government.  To  believe  implicitly  whatever  they  find  in  an  ancient  paper,  is
a  folly  to  which,  in  every  age,  antiquaries  are  extremely  prone.  Ancient  papers,
however,  often  contain  no  more  than  the  slanders  of  a  party,  and  the  lie  of  the  day.
The  declaration  of  the  nobles  referred  to,  is  of  this  kind ;  it  is  plainly  rancorous,  and
written  in  the  very  heat  of  faction.  Many  things  asserted  in  it  are  evidently  false
or  exaggerated.  Let  Murray  and  his  confederates  be  as  ambitious  as  we  can  sup-
pose, they  must  have  had  some  pretences,  and  plausible  ones  too,  before  they  could
venture  to  imprison  their  sovereign  for  life,  and  to  seize  the  reins  of  government ;
but,  at  that  time,  the  queen's  conduct  had  afforded  no  colourable  excuse  for  pro-
ceeding to  such  extremities.  It  is  likewise  remarkable,  that  in  all  the  proclamations
against  Murray,  of  which  so  many  are  published  in  Keith,  Appendix  108,  &c.  nei-
ther the  violent  attempt  upon  Darnley,  nor  that  which  he  is  alleged  to  have  formed
against  the  queen  herself,  are  ever  once  mentioned.

"Keith,  298.

272  SCOTLAND.  [1565.

jects  run  to  defend  a  mild  and  popular  administra-
tion. This  popularity,  however,  she  owed  in  a  great
measure  to  Murray,  who  had  directed  his  administra-
tion with  great  prudence.  But  the  crime  of  opposing
her  marriage  obliterated  the  memory  of  his  former  ser-
vices ;  and  Mary,  impatient  of  contradiction,  and  apt  to
consider  those  who  disputed  her  will,  as  enemies  to  her
person,  determined  to  let  him  feel  the  whole  weight
of  her  vengeance.  For  this  purpose  she  summoned  him
to  appear  before  her  upon  a  short  warning,  to  answer
to  such  things  as  should  be  laid  to  his  charge.1  At
this  very  time,  Murray,  and  the  lords  who  adhered
to  him,  were  assembled  at  Stirling  to  deliberate  what
course  they  should  hold  in  such  a  difficult  conjuncture.
But  the  current  of  popular  favour  ran  so  strongly
against  them,  and,  notwithstanding  some  fears  and
jealousies,  there  prevailed  in  the  nation  such  a  general
disposition  to  gratify  the  queen  in  a  matter  which  so
nearly  concerned  her,  that>  without  coming  to  any
other  conclusion,  than  to  implore  the  queen  of  Eng-
land's protection,  they  put  an  end  to  their  ineffectual
consultations,  and  returned  every  man  to  his  own  house.
Together  with  this  discovery  of  the  weakness  of  her
enemies,  the  confluence  of  her  subjects  from  all  cor-
ners of  the  kingdom  afforded  Mary  an  agreeable  proof
of  her  own  strength.  While  the  queen  was  in  this
prosperous  situation,  she  determined  to  bring  to  a  pe-
riod an  affair  which  had  so  long  engrossed  her  heart
Celebrates  and  occupied  her  attention.  On  the  29th  of
Juty  sne  married  lord  Darnley.  The  cere-
mony  was  performed  in  the  queen's  chapel,
according  to  the  rites  of  the  Romish  church;  the
pope's  bull  dispensing  with  their  marriage  having  been
previously  obtained.™  She  issued  at  the  same  time
proclamations,  conferring  the  title  of  king  of  the  Scots
upon  her  husband,  and  commanding  that  henceforth

Keith,  Append.  108.  *  Keith,  307.

1565.]  BOOK III.  273

all  writs  at  law  should  run  in  the  joint  names  of  king
and  queen.n  Nothing  can  be  a  stronger  proof  of  the  vio-
lence of  Mary's  love,  or  the  weakness  of  her  counsels,
than  this  last  step.  Whether  she  had  any  right  to?
choose  a  husband  without  the  consent  of  parliament,
was,  in  that  age,  a  matter  of  some  dispute ;°  that  she
had  no  right  to  confer  upon  him,  by  her  private  autho-
rity, the  title  and  dignity  of  king,  or  by  a  simple  pro-
clamation to  raise  her  husband  to  be  the  master  of  her
people,  seems  to  be  beyond  all  doubt.  Francis  II.,
indeed,  bore  the  same  title.  It  was  not,  however,  the
gift  of  the  queen,  but  of  the  nation ;  and  the  consent
of  parliament  was  obtained,  before  he  ventured  to  as-
sume it.  Darnley's  condition,  as  a  subject,  rendered  it
still  more  necessary  to  have  the  concurrence  of  the  su-
preme council  in  his  favour.  Such  a  violent  and  un-
precedented stretch  of  prerogative,  as  the  substituting
a  proclamation  in  place  of  an  act  of  parliament,  might
have  justly  alarmed  the  nation.  But  at  that  time  the
queen  possessed  so  entirely  the  confidence  of  her  sub-
jects, that,  notwithstanding  all  the  clamours  of  the
malecontents,  no  symptoms  of  general  discontent  ap-
peared on  that  account.

Even  amidst  that  scene  of  joy  which  always  accom-
panies successful  love,  Mary  did  not  suffer  the  course
of  her  vengeance  against  the  malecontent  nobles  to  be
interrupted.  Three  days  after  the  marriage,  Murray
was  again  summoned  to  court,  under  the  severest  pe-
nalties, and,  upon  his  non-appearance,  the  rigour  of
justice  took  place,  and  he  was  declared  an  outlaw .p
At  the  same  time  the  queen  set  at  liberty  lord  Gordon,
who,  ever  since  his  father's  insurrection  in  the  year
1562,  had  been  detained  a  prisoner;  she  recalled  the
earl  of  Sutherland,  who,  on  account  of  his  concern  in
that  conspiracy,  had  fled  into  Flanders;  and  she  per-

n  Anderson,  i.  33. See  Append.  No.  XI.  °  Buchan.  341.

P  Keith,  309,  310.

VOL.  I.  T

274  SCOTLAND.  [1565.

mitted  Both  well  to  return  again  into  Scotland.  The
first  and  last  of  these  were  among  the  most  powerful
subjects  in  the  kingdom,  and  all  of  them  animated
with  implacable  hatred  to  Murray,  whom  they  deemed
the  enemy  of  their  families  and  the  author  of  their
own  sufferings.  This  common  hatred  became  the
foundation  of  the  strictest  union  with  the  queen,  and
gained  them  an  ascendant  over  all  her  counsels.  Mur-
ray himself  considered  this  confederacy  with  his  avow-
ed enemies,  as  a  more  certain  indication  than  any  mea-
sure she  had  yet  taken,  of  her  inexorable  resentment.

Marches  ^ie  malecontents  na(^  not  vet  openly  taken
against  up  arms.q  But  the  queen  having  ordered  her
and")™  subjects  to  march  against  them,  they  were  driven
associates.  to  tbe  last  extremity>  They  found  themselves

unable  to  make  head  against  the  numerous  forces  which
Mary  had  assembled;  and  fled  into  Argyleshire,  in  ex-
pectation of  aid  from  Elizabeth,  to  whom  they  had  se-
cretly dispatched  a  messenger,  in  order  to  implore  her
immediate  assistance/

Elizabeth  Meanwhile  Elizabeth  endeavoured  to  embar-
in'their368  r&ss  Mary,  by  a  new  declaration  of  disgust  at
favour.  ker  conduct,  gne  blamed  both  her  choice  of  lord
Darnley,  and  the  precipitation  with  which  she  had
concluded  the  marriage.  She  required  Lennox  and
Darnley,  whom  she  still  called  her  subjects,  to  re-
turn into  England;  and  at  the  same  time  she  warmly
interceded  in  behalf  of  Murray,  whose  behaviour  she
represented  to  be  not  only  innocent  but  laudable.  This
message,  so  mortifying  to  the  pride  of  the  queen,  and
so  full  of  contempt  for  her  husband,  was  rendered  still
more  insupportable  by  the  petulant  and  saucy  demean-

q  After  their  fruitless  consultation  in  Stirling,  the  lords  retired  to  their  own  houses.
Keith,  304.  Murray  was  still  at  St.  Andrew's  on  July  22.  Keith,  306.  By  the
places  of  rendezvous,  appointed  for  the  inhabitants  of  the  different  counties,  August
4,  it  appears  that  the  queen's  intention  was  to  march  into  Fife,  the  county  in  which
Murray,  Rothes,  Kirkaldy,  and  other  chiefs  of  the  malecontents,  resided.  Keith,
310.  "Their  flight  into  the  west,  Keith,  312.  prevented  this  expedition,  and  the  for-
mer rendezvous  was  altered.  Keith,  310.

r  Keith,  312. Knox,  380.

1565.]  BOOK III.  275

our  of  Tamworth,  the  person  who  delivered  it.s  Mary
vindicated  her  own  conduct  with  warmth,  but  with
great  strength  of  reason;  and  rejected  the  intercession
in  behalf  of  Murray,  not  without  signs  of  resentment  at
Elizabeth's  pretending  to  intermeddle  in  the  internal
government  of  her  kingdom.*

She  did  not,  on  that  account,  intermit  in  the  least
the  ardour  with  which  she  pursued  Murray  and  his  ad-
herents." They  now  appeared  openly  in  arms;  and
having  received  a  small  supply  in  money  from  Eliza-
beth,x  were  endeavouring  to  raise  their  followers  in  the
western  counties.  But  Mary's  vigilance  hindered  them
from  assembling  in  any  considerable  body.  All  her
military  operations  at  that  time  were  concerted  with
wisdom,  executed  with  vigour,  and  attended  with  suc-
cess. In  order  to  encourage  her  troops,  she  herself
marched  along  with  them,  rode  with  loaded  pistols/
and  endured  all  the  fatigues  of  war  with  admirable  for-
titude. Her  alacrity  inspired  her  forces  with  an  invinci-
ble resolution,  which,  together  with  their  superiority  in
number,  deterred  the  malecontents  from  facing  them  in
the  field ;  but,  having  artfully  passed  the  queen's  army,
they  marched  with  great  rapidity  to  Edinburgh,  and
endeavoured  to  rouse  the  inhabitants  of  that  city  to
a  arms.  The  queen  did  not  suffer  them  to  re-
main long  unmolested ;  and,  on  her  approach,
they  were  forced  to  abandon  that  place,  and  retire  in
confusion  towards  the  western  borders.2
They  are  As  it  was  uncertain,  for  some  time,  what
retinfinto  route  they  had  taken,  Mary  employed  that  inter-
Engiand.  vaj  jn  providing  for  the  security  of  the  counties
in  the  heart  of  the  kingdom.  She  seized  the  places  of
strength  which  belonged  to  the  rebels ;  and  obliged  the

8  Camd.  398.  *  Keith,  Append.  99.

u  The  most  considerable  persons  who  joined  Murray  were,  the  duke  of  Chatel-
herault,  the  earls  of  Argyle,  Glencairn,  Rothes;  lords  Boyd  and  Ochiltree  j  the  lairds
of  Grange,  Cunninghatnhead,  Balcomie,  Carmylie,  Lawers,  Bar,  Dreghorn,  Pitar-
row,  Comptroller,  and  the  tutor  of  Pitcur.  Knox,  382.

*  Knox,  380.  r  Keith,  Append.  164.  *  Ibid.  315.

T 2

276  SCOTLAND.  [1565,

considerable  barons  in  those  shires  which  she  most  sus-
pected, to  join  in  associations  for  her  defence/  Having
thus  left  all  the  country  behind  her  in  tranquillity,  she,
with  an  army  eighteen  thousand  strong,  marched  towards
Dumfries,  where  the  rebels  then  were.  During  their  re-
treat they  had  sent  letters  to  the  queen,  from  almost
every  place  where  they  halted,  full  of  submission,  and
containing  various  overtures  towards  an  accommodation.
But  Mary,  who  determined  not  to  let  slip  such  a  favoura-
ble opportunity  of  crushing  the  mutinous  spirit  of  her
subjects,  rejected  them  with  disdain.  As  she  advanced,
the  malecontents  retired ;  and  having  received  no  eifec-
Qc  tual  aid  from  Elizabeth,5  they  despaired  of  any
other  means  of  safety,  fled  into  England,  and
put  themselves  under  the  protection  of  the  earl  of  Bed-
ford, warden  of  the  marches.

They  meet  Nothing  which  Bedford's  personal  friendship
-  f°r  Murray  could  supply,  was  wanting  to  ren-
H-  ^er  tne*r  retreat  agreeable.  But  Elizabeth  her-
zabeth.  self  treated  them  with  extreme  neglect.  She
had  fully  gained  her  end,  and,  by  their  means,  had
excited  such  discord  and  jealousies  among  the  Scots,
as  would,  in  all  probability,  long  distract  and  weaken
Mary's  counsels.  Her  business  now  was  to  save  ap-
pearances, and  to  justify  herself  to  the  ministers  of
France  and  Spain,  who  accused  her  of  fomenting  the
troubles  in  Scotland  by  her  intrigues.  The  expedient
she  contrived  for  her  vindication  strongly  displays  her
own  character,  and  the  wretched  condition  of  exiles,
who  are  obliged  to  depend  on  a  foreign  prince.  Mur-
ray, and  Hamilton  abbot  of  Kilwinning,  being  appoint-
ed by  the  other  fugitives  to  wait  on  Elizabeth,  instead
of  meeting  with  that  welcome  reception  which  was  due
to  men,  who,  out  of  confidence  in  her  promises,  and  in
order  to  forward  her  designs,  had  hazarded  their  lives
and  fortunes,  could  not  even  obtain  the  favour  of  an

»  Keith,  113. '..  b  See  Append.  No.  XII.  XIII. .

1565.]  BOOK III.  277

audience,  until  they  had  meanly  consented  to  acknow-
ledge, in  the  presence  of  the  French  and  Spanish  am-
bassadors, that  Elizabeth  had  given  them  no  encourage-
ment to  take  arms.  No  sooner  did  they  make  this  de-
claration, than  she  astonished  them  with  this  reply:
"  You  have  declared  the  truth;  I  am  far  from  setting
an  example  of  rebellion  to  my  own  subjects,  by  coun-
tenancing those  who  rebel  against  their  lawful  prince.
The  treason  of  which  you  have  been  guilty  is  detesta-
ble; and  as  traitors  I  banish  you  from  my  presence."0
Notwithstanding  this  scene  of  farce  and  of  falsehood,  so
dishonourable  to  all  the  persons  who  acted  a  part  in  it,
Elizabeth  permitted  the  malecontents  peaceably  to  re-
side in  her  dominions,  supplied  them  secretly  with
money,  and  renewed  her  intercession  with  the  Scottish
queen  in  their  favour.d

The  advantage  she  had  gained  over  them  did  not
satisfy  Mary ;  she  resolved  to  follow  the  blow,  and  to
prevent  a  party,  which  she  dreaded,  from  ever  recover-
ing any  footing  in  the  nation.  With  this  view,  she
called  a  meeting  of  parliament ;  and,  in  order  that  a
sentence  of  forfeiture  might  be  legally  pronounced
against  the  banished  lords,  she  summoned  them,  by-
public  proclamation,  to  appear  before  it.fi
Dec  i  The  duke  of  Chatelherault,  on  his  humble
application,  obtained  a  separate  pardon;  but
not  without  difficulty,  as  the  king  violently  opposed  it.
He  was  obliged,  however,  to  leave  the  kingdom,  and  to
reside  for  some  time  in  France/

The  numerous  forces  which  Mary  brought  into  the
field,  the  vigour  with  which  she  acted,  and  the  length
of  time  she  kept  them  in  arms,  resembled  the  efforts  of
a  prince  with  revenues  much  more  considerable  than
those  which  she  possessed.  But  armies  were  then
levied  and  maintained  by  princes  at  small  charge.  The
vassal  followed  his  superior,  and  the  superior  attended

*  M«lv.  112.  d  Knox,  389.  e  Keith,  320.  f  Knox,  389.

278  SCOTLAND.  [1565.

the  monarch,  at  his  own  expense.  Six  hundred  horse-
men, however,  and  three  companies  of  foot,  besides
her  guards,  received  regular  pay  from  the  queen.  This
extraordinary  charge,  together  with  the  disbursements
occasioned  by  her  marriage,  exhausted  a  treasury  which
was  far  from  being  rich.  In  this  exigency,  many  de-
vices were  fallen  upon  for  raising  money.  Fines  were
levied  on  the  towns  of  St.  Andrew's,  Perth,  and  Dun-
dee, which  were  suspected  of  favouring  the  malecon-
tents.  An  unusual  tax  was  imposed  on  the  boroughs
throughout  the  kingdom ;  and  a  great  sum  was  de-
manded of  the  citizens  of  Edinburgh  by  way  of  loan.
This  unprecedented  exaction  alarmed  the  citizens.  They
had  recourse  to  delays,  and  started  difficulties,  in  order
to  evade  it.  These  Mary  construed  to  be  acts  of  avowed
disobedience,  and  instantly  committed  several  of  them
to  prison.  But  this  severity  did  not  subdue  the  un-
daunted spirit  of  liberty  which  prevailed  among  the
inhabitants.  The  queen  was  obliged  to  mortgage  to
the  city  the  superiority  of  the  town  of  Leith,  by  which
she  obtained  a  considerable  sum  of  money.g  The
thirds  of  ecclesiastical  benefices  proved  another  source
whence  the  queen  derived  some  supply.  About  this
time  we  find  the  Protestant  clergy  complaining  more
bitterly  than  ever  of  their  poverty.  The  army,  it  is
probable,  exhausted  a  great  part  of  that  fund  which  was
appropriated  for  their  maintenance.11
Church  The  assemblies  of  the  church  were  not  un-
affairs*  concerned  spectators  of  the  commotions  of  this
turbulent  year.  In  the  meeting  held  the  24th  of  June,
previous  to  the  queen's  marriage,  several  of  the  male-
content  nobles  were  present,  and  seem  to  have  had
great  influence  on  its  decisions.  The  high  strain  in
which  the  assembly  addressed  the  queen,  can  be  im-
puted only  to  those  fears  and  jealousies  with  regard  to
religion,  which  they  endeavoured  to  infuse  into  the  na-
ff Knoir,  383.  386.  h  Haiti.  Hist,  of  Edinburgh,  27.

1565.]  BOOK III.  279

tion.  The  assembly  complained,  with  some  bitterness,
of  the  stop  which  had  been  put  to  the  progress  of  the
Reformation  by  the  queen's  arrival  in  Scotland ;  they
required  not  only  the  total  suppression  of  the  Popish
worship  throughout  the  kingdom,  but  even  in  the
queen's  own  chapel ;  and,  besides  the  legal  establish-
ment of  the  Protestant  religion,  they  demanded  that
Mary  herself  should  publicly  embrace  it.  The  queen,
after  some  deliberation,  replied,  that  neither  her  con-
science nor  her  interest  would  permit  her  to  take  such
a  step.  The  former  would  for  ever  reproach  her  for  a
change  which  proceeded  from  no  inward  conviction  ;
the  latter  would  suffer  by  the  offence  which  her  apos-
tacy  must  give  to  the  king  of  France,  and  her  other
allies  on  the  continent.'

It  is  remarkable,  that  the  prosperous  situation  of  the
queen's  affairs  during  this  year,  began  to  work  some
change  in  favour  of  her  religion.  The  earls  of  Lennox,
Athol,  and  Cassils,  openly  attended  mass ;  she  herself
afforded  the  Catholics  a  more  avowed  protection  than
formerly  \  .and,  by  her  permission,  some  of  the  ancient
monks  ventured  to  preach  publicly  to  the  people.11

*  Knox,  574.  376.  k  ibid.  389,  390.

THE

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND.

BOOK  IV.  .

1566.  As  the  day  appointed  for  the  meeting  of  par-
liberations*  liament  approached,  Mary  and  her  ministers
the  exiled8  were  employed  in  deliberating  concerning  the
nobles.  course  which  it  was  most  proper  to  hold  with
regard  to  the  exiled  nobles.  Many  motives  prompted
her  to  set  no  bounds  to  the  rigour  of  justice.  The
malecontents  had  laboured  to  defeat  a  scheme,  which
her  interest  conspired  with  her  passions  in  rendering
dear  to  her;  they  were  the  leaders  of  a  party,  whose
friendship  she  had  been  obliged  to  court,  while  she  held
their  principles  in  abhorrence ;  and  they  were  firmly
attached  to  a  rival,  whom  she  had  good  reason  both  to
fear  and  to  hate.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  several  weighty  considera-
tions might  be  urged.  The  noblemen,  whose  fate  was
in  suspense,  were  among  the  most  powerful  subjects  in
the  kingdom ;  their  wealth  great,  their  connexions  ex-
tensive, and  their  adherents  numerous.  They  were  now
at  mercy,  the  objects  of  compassion,  and  suing  for  par-
don with  the  most  humble  submission.

In  those  circumstances,  an  act  of  clemency  would
exalt  the  queen's  character,  and  appear  no  less  splendid
among  foreigners  than  acceptable  to  her  own  subjects.
Mary  herself,  though  highly  incensed  was  not  inexo-
rable; but  the  king's  rage  was  implacable  and  unre-
lenting. They  were  solicited  in  behalf  of  the  fugitives

1566.]  BOOK IV.  281

from  various  quarters. Morton,  Ruthven,  Maitland,
and  all  who  had  been  members  of  the  congregation,
were  .not  forgetful  of  their  ancient  union  with  Murray
and  his  fellow- sufferers;  nor  neglectful  of  their  safety,
which  they  deemed  of  great  importance  to  the  kingdom.
Melvil,  who  at  that  time  possessed  the  queen's  confi-
dence, seconded  their  solicitations. And  Murray  hav-
ing stooped  so  low  as  to  court  Rizio,  that  favourite,
who  was  desirous  of  securing  his  protection  against
the  king,  whose  displeasure  he  had  lately  incurred,  se-
conded the  intercessions  of  his  other  friends  with  the
whole  cif  his  influence.* The  interposition  of  Sir  Ni-
cholas Throkmorton,  who  had  lately  been  Elizabeth's
ambassador  in  Scotland,  in  behalf  of  the  exiles,  was  of
more  weight  than  all  these,  and  attended  with  more
success. Throkmorton,  out  of  enmity  to  Cecil,  had
embarked  deeply  in  all  the  intrigues  which  were  car-
ried on  at  the  English  court,  in  order  to  undermine  the
power  and  credit  of  that  minister. He  espoused,  for
this  reason,  the  cause  of  the  Scottish  queen,  towards
whose  title  and  pretensions  the  other  was  known  to
bear  little  favour;  and  ventured,  in  the  present  critical
juncture,  to  write  a  letter  to  Mary,  containing  the  most
salutary  advices  with  regard  to  her  conduct. He  re-
commended the  pardoning  of  the  earl  of  Murray  and
his  associates,  as  a  measure  no  less  prudent  than  popu-
lar. "  An  action  of  this  nature,"  says  he,  "  the  pure
effect of  your  majesty's  generosity,  will  spread  the
fame  of  your  lenity  and  moderation,  and  engage  the
English  to  look  towards  your  accession  to  the  throne,
not  only  without  prejudice,  but  with  desire: By  the
same  means,  a  perfect  harmony  will  be  restored  among
your  own  subjects,  who,  if  any  rupture  should  happen
with  England,  will  serve  you  with  that  grateful  zeal
which  your  clemency  cannot  fail  of  inspiring."5

These  prudent  remonstrances of  Throkmorton,  to

»  Melv.  125.  b  ibid.  119.

282  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

She  re-  which  his  reputation  for  wisdom,  and  known
solves  to  attachment  to  the  queen,  added  great  authority.

treat  them  . H .'  ,B  . .  „ J '

withcie-  made  a  deep  impression  on  her  spirit.  Her
;ncy'  courtiers  cultivated  this  happy  disposition,  and
prevailed  on  her,  notwithstanding  the  king's  inflexible
temper,  to  sacrifice  her  own  private  resentment  to  the
intercession  of  her  subjects  and  the  wishes  of  her
friends.0  With  this  view,  the  parliament,  which  had
been  called  to  meet  on  the  4th  of  February,  was  pro-
rogued to  the  7th  of  April  ;d  and  in  the  mean  time  she
was  busy  in  considering  the  manner  and  form  in  which
she  should  extend  her  favour  to  the  lords  who  were
under  disgrace.

is  diverted  Though  Mary  discovered  on  this  occasion  a
resSutfon  mnid  naturally  prone  to  humanity  and  capable
cuation8of"  °^  f°rgiving>  sne  wanted  firmness,  however,  to
France,  and  resist  the  influence  which  was  fatally  employed
Popery,  to  disappoint  the  effects  of  this  amiable  dispo-
Feb'3'  sition.  About  this  time,  and  at  no  great  dis-
tance from  each  other,  two  envoys  arrived  from  the
French  king.  The  former  was  intrusted  with  matters
of  mere  ceremony  alone ;  he  congratulated  the  queen
on  her  marriage,  and  invested  the  king  with  the  ensigns
of  the  order  of  St.  Michael.  The  instructions  of  the
latter  related  to  matters  of  more  importance,  and  pro-
duced greater  effects.6

An  interview  between  Charles  IX.  and  his  sister  the
queen  of  Spain  had  been  often  proposed;  and  after
many  obstacles  arising  from  the  opposition  of  political
interest,  was  at  last  appointed  at  Bayonne.  Catherine
of  Medicis  accompanied  her  son;  the  duke  of  Alva  at-
tended his  mistress.  Amidst  the  scenes  of  public  pomp
and  pleasure,  which  seemed  to  be  the  sole  occupation
of  both  courts,  a  scheme  was  formed,  and  measures
concerted,  for  exterminating  the  Hugonots  in  France,
the  Protestants  in  the  Low  Countries,  and  for  sup-

«  Melr.  125.  *  Good.  vol.  i.  224.  •  Keith,  325. Append.  167.

1566.]  BOOK  IV.  283

pressing  the  Reformation  throughout  all  Europe/  The
active  policy  of  pope  Pius  IV.  and  the  zeal  of  the  car-
dinal of  Lorrain,  confirmed  and  encouraged  disposi-
tions so  suitable  to  the  genius  of  the  Romish  religion,
and  so  beneficial  to  their  own  order.

It  was  an  account  of  this  holy  league  which  the  se-
cond French  envoy  brought  to  Mary,  conjuring  her  at
the  same  time,  in  the  name  of  the  king  of  France  and
the  cardinal  of  Lorrain,  not  to  restore  the  leaders  of
the  Protestants  in  her  kingdom  to  power  and  favour,  at
the  very  time  when  the  Catholic  princes  were  combined
to  destroy  that  sect  in  all  the  countries  of  Europe.g

Popery  is  a  species  of  false  religion,  remarkable  for
the  strong  possession  it  takes  of  the  heart.  Contrived
by  men  of  deep  insight  in  the  human  character,  and
improved  by  the  experience  and  observation  of  many
successive  ages,  it  arrived  at  last  to  a  degree  of  per-
fection which  no  former  system  of  superstition  had
ever  attained.  There  is  no  power  in  the  understand-
ing, and  no  passion  in  the  heart,  to  which  it  does  not
present  objects  adapted  to  rouse  and  to  interest  them.
Neither  the  love  of  pleasure  which  at  that  time  prevail-
ed in  the  court  of  France,  nor  the  pursuits  of  ambition
which  occupied  the  court  of  Spain,  had  secured  them
from  the  dominion  of  bigotry.  Laymen  and  courtiers
were  agitated  with  that  furious  and  unmerciful  zeal
which  is  commonly  considered  as  peculiar  to  eccle-
siastics ;  and  kings  and  ministers  thought  themselves
bound  in  conscience  to  extirpate  the  Protestant  doc-
trine. Mary  herself  was  deeply  tinctured  with  all  the
prejudices  of  Popery  ;  a  passionate  attachment  to  that
superstition  is  visible  in  every  part  of  her  character,
and  runs  through  all  the  scenes  of  her  life  :  she  was
devoted  too  with  the  utmost  submission  to  the  princes
of  Lorrain,  her  uncles  ;  and  had  been  accustomed  from
her  infancy  to  listen  to  all  their  advices  with  a  filial

f  Thuan.  lib.  3T.  s  Melv.  126.

284  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

respect.  The  prospect  of  restoring  the  public  exercise  of
her  own  religion,  the  pleasure  of  complying  with  her
uncles,  and  the  hopes  of  gratifying  the  French  monarch,
whom  the  present  situation  of  her  affairs  in  England  made
it  necessary  to  court,  counterbalanced  all  the  prudent
considerations  which  had  formerly  weighed  with  her.
She  instantly  joined  the  confederacy,  which  had  been
formed  for  the  destruction  of  the  Protestants,  and  al-
tered the  whole  plan  of  her  conduct  with  regard  to
Murray  and  his  adherents.11

To  this  fatal  resolution  may  be  imputed  all  the  sub-
sequent calamities  of  Mary's  life.  Ever  since  her
return  into  Scotland,  fortune  may  be  said  to  have  been
propitious  to  her  rather  than  adverse ;  and  if  her  pros-
perity did  not  rise  to  any  great  height,  it  had,  how-
ever, suffered  no  considerable  interruption.  A  thick
and  settled  cloud  of  adversity,  with  few  gleams  of
hope,  and  none  of  real  enjoyment,  covers  the  remainder
of  her  days.

A  pariia-  The  effects  of  the  new  system  which  Mary
called  to  had  adopted  were  soon  visible.  The  time  of
exS the  ^e  prorogation  of  parliament  was  shortened ;
nobles;  and  by  a  new  proclamation,  the  12th  of  March
was  fixed  for  its  meeting.1  Mary  resolved,  without
any  farther  delay,  to  proceed  to  the  attainder  of  the
rebel  lords,  and  at  the  same  time  determined  to  take
some  steps  towards  the  re-establishment  of  the  Romish
religion  in  Scotland.k  The  lords  of  the  articles  were

h  See  Append.  No.  XIV.  *  Keith,  326.

k  It  is  not  on  the  authority  of  Knox  alone,  that  we  charge  the  queen  with  the
design  of  re-establishing  the  Roman  Catholic  religion,  or  at  least  of  exempting  the
professors  of  it  from  the  rigour  of  those  penal  laws  to  which  they  were  subjected.
He  indeed  asserts  that  the  altars,  which  would  have  been  erected  in  the  church  of
St.  Giles,  were  already  provided,  394.  1.  Mary  herself,  in  a  letter  to  the  arch-
bishop of  Glasgow,  her  ambassador  in  France,  acknowledges,  "  that  in  that  parlia-
ment she  intended  to  have  done  some  good,  with  respect  to  restoring  the  old  reli-
gion." Keith,  331.  2.  The  spiritual  lords,  i.  e.  the  Popish  ecclesiastics,  had,  by
her  authority,  resumed  their  ancient  place  in  that  assembly.  Ibid.  3.  She  had
joined  the  confederacy  at  Bayonne.  Keith,  Append.  167.  4.  She  allowed  mass
to  be  celebrated  indifferent  parts  of  the  kingdom,  ibid.;  and  declared  that  she
would  have  mass  free  for  all  men  that  would  hear  it.  Good.  vol.  i.  274.  5»
Blackwood,  who  was  furnished  by  the  archbishop  of  Glasgow  with  materials  for

1566,]  BOOK IV.  285

chosen,  as  usual,  to  prepare  the  business  which  was
to  come  before  the  parliament.  They  were  all  persons
in  whom  the  queen  could  confide,  and  bent  to  promote
her  designs.  The  ruin  of  Murray  and  his  party  seemed
now  inevitable,  and  the  danger  of  the  reformed  church
imminent,  when  an  event  unexpectedly  happened
which  saved  both.  If  we  regard  either  the  barbarity
of  that  age,  when  such  acts  of  violence  were  common,
or  the  mean  condition  of  the  unhappy  person  who  suf-
And  Pre-  fered,  the  event  is  little  remarkable ;  but  if  we
the  con-y  reflect  upon  the  circumstances  with  which  it
aPahSt  wa&  amended,  or  upon  the  consequences  which
Rizio.  followed  it,  it  appears  extremely  memorable ;
and  the  rise  and  progress  of  it  deserve  to  be  traced
with  great  care.

Damiey  Darnley's  external  accomplishments  had  ex-
q°aSeen'se  cl^G^  tnat  sudden  and  violent  passion  which
affection.  raiseci  him  to  the  throne.  But  the  qualities
of  his  mind  corresponded  ill  with  the  beauty  of  his
person.  Of  a  weak  understanding,  and  without  ex-
perience, conceited,  at  the  same  time,  of  his  own
abilities,  and  ascribing  his  extraordinary  success  en-
tirely to  his  distinguished  merit ;  all  the  queen's  favour
made  no  impression  on  such  a  temper.  All  her  gen-
tleness could  not  bridle  his  imperious  and  ungovern-
able spirit.  All  her  attention  to  place  about  him
persons  capable  of  directing  his  conduct,  could  not
preserve  him  from  rash  and  imprudent  actions.1  Fond
of  all  the  amusements,  and  even  prone  to  all  the  vices
of  youth,  he  became  by  degrees  careless  of  her  person,
and  a  stranger  to  her  company.  To  a  woman,  and  a
queen,  such  behaviour  was  intolerable.  The  lower
she  had  stooped  in  order  to  raise  him,  his  behaviour

writing  his  Martyrs  de  Marie,  affirms,  that  the  queen  intended  to  have  procured,
in  this  parliament,  if  not  the  re-establishment  of  the  Catholic  religion,  at  least
something  for  the  ease  of  Catholics. Jebb,  vol.  ii.  204.
i  Good.  vol.  i.  222.

286  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

appeared  the  more  ungenerous  and  criminal ;  and  in
proportion  to  the  strength  of  her  first  affection,  was  the
violence  with  which  her  disappointed  passion  now
operated.  A  few  months  after  the  marriage,  their
domestic  quarrels  began  to  be  observed.  The  extra-
vagance of  Darnley's  ambition  gave  rise  to  these.  In-
stead of  being  satisfied  with  a  share  in  the  adminis-
tration of  government,  or  with  the  title  of  king,  which
Mary,  by  an  unprecedented  stretch  of  power,  had  con-
ferred on  him,  he  demanded  the  crown  matrimonial
with  most  insolent  importunity."1  Though  Mary  al-
leged that  this  gift  was  beyond  her  power,  and  that
the  authority  of  parliament  must  be  interposed  to
bestow  it,  he  wanted  either  understanding  to  com-
prehend, or  temper  to  admit,  so  just  a  defence ;  and
often  renewed  and  urged  his  request.
Suspects  Rizio,  whom  the  king  had  at  first  taken  into
5ec°ausebe great  confidence,  did  not  humour  him  in  these
of  it.  follies.  By  this  he  incurred  Henry's  displea-
sure ;  and  it  was  impossible  for  Mary  to  behave  to-
wards her  husband  with  the  same  affection  which
distinguished  the  first  and  happy  days  of  their  union,
he  imputed  this  coldness,  not  to  his  own  behaviour,
which  had  so  well  merited  it,  but  to  the  insinuations
of  Rizio.  Mary's  own  conduct  confirmed  and  strength-
ened these  suspicions.  She  treated  this  stranger  with
a  familiarity,  and  admitted  him  to  a  share  in  her
confidence,  to  which  neither  his  first  condition^  nor
the  office  she  had  lately  bestowed  on  him,  gave  him
any  title.  He  was  perpetually  in  her  presence,  inter-
meddled in  every  business,  and,  together  with  a  few
favourites,  was  the  companion  of  all  her  private
amusements.  The  haughty  spirit  of  Darnley  could  not
^  bear  the  intrusion  of  such  an  upstart ;  and  impatient

m  Keith,  329.  Id.  Ap.  165, 166.  Knox,  404.  The  eagerness  of  the  king  to  obtain
the  crown  matrimonial  is  pot  surprising,  when  the  extent  of  the  powers  which  that  title
conveyed,  as  explained  in  the  text  and  note,  p.  130,  is  taken  into  consideration.

1566.]  BOOK  IV.  287

of  any  delay,  and  unrestrained  by  any  scruple,  he  in-
stantly determined  to  get  rid  of  him  by  violence.

At  the  same  time  another  design,  which
took  its  rise  from  very  different  motives,  was
"  canTmg  on  against  the  life  of  Rizio.  Morton,
bles-  Ruthven,  Lindsay,  and  Maitland,  were  the  con-
trivers of  it.  In  all  former  commotions  they  had  been
strictly  united  with  Murray,  though  in  the  late  insur-
rection they  had  deserted  him,  for  various  reasons.
Morton  was  nearly  allied  to  the  family  of  Angus  ;  and,
during  the  minority  of  the  present  earl,  acted  as  chief
of  the  name  of  Douglas.  Ruthven  was  married  to  the
king's  aunt.  Lindsay's  wife  was  of  the  same  blood.
All  these  had  warmly  concurred  with  the  queen  in
promoting  a  marriage  which  did  so  much  honour  to
the  house  of  Douglas,  and  naturally  expected,  that,
under  a  king  of  their  own  blood,  the  chief  manage-
ment of  affairs  would  be  committed  to  them.  Mait-
land, with  his  usual  sagacity,  foresaw  that  Murray's
opposition  to  the  match  would  prove  dangerous  and
ineffectual;  but  whoever  ruled  at  court,  he  hoped,  by
his  dexterity  and  talents,  to  render  himself  necessary
and  of  importance.  They  were  all  equally  disap-
pointed in  their  expectations.  The  king's  headstrong
temper  rendered  him  incapable  of  advice.  The  queen
could  not  help  distrusting  men  who  had  been  so  long
and  so  intimately  connected  with  Murray,  and  gave
herself  up  entirely  to  such  counsellors  as  complied
with  all  her  inclinations.  The  return  of  that  noble-
man and  his  followers  was  therefore  the  only  event
which  could  restore  Morton,  Maitland,  and  their  asso-
ciates, to  their  former  ascendant  over  the  queen's
counsels.  For  this  reason,  nothing  could  be  more
mortifying  to  them,  than  the  resolution  which  Mary
had  taken  to  treat  the  exiles  with  rigour.  This  they
imputed  to  Rizio,  who,  after  he  had  engaged  to  aid
Murray  with  all  his  interest,  was  now  the  most  active

288  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

instrument  in  promoting  the  measures  which  were
concerted  for  the  ruin  of  that  nobleman.  This  officious
zeal  completed  the  disgust  which  they  had  conceived
against  him,  and  inspired  them  with  thoughts  of  ven-
geance, in  nowise  suitable  to  justice,  to  humanity,  or
to  their  own  dignity.

They  com-  While  they  were  ruminating  upon  their
bine  in  scheme,  the  kino;  communicated  his  resolution

order  to  °

murder  to  be  avenged  of  Rizio  to  lord  Ruthven,  and
implored  his  assistance,  and  that  of  his  friends,
towards  the  execution  of  this  design.  Nothing  could
be  more  acceptable  to  them  than  this  overture.  They
saw  at  once  all  the  advantages  they  would  reap,  by
the  concurrence  of  such  an  associate.  Their  own
private  revenge  upon  Rizio  would  pass,  they  hoped,
for  an  act  of  obedience  to  the  king ;  and  they  did  not
despair  of  obtaining  the  restoration  of  their  banished
friends,  and  security  for  the  Protestant  religion,  as  the
price  of  their  compliance  with  his  will.

But  as  Henry  was  no  less  fickle  than  rash,  they  hesi-
tated for  some  time,  and  determined  to  advance  no
farther,  without  taking  every  possible  precaution  for
their  own  safety.  They  did  not,  in  the  mean  time,
suffer  the  king's  resentment  to  abate.  Morton,  who
was  inferior  to  no  man  of  that  intriguing  age  in  all  the
arts  of  insinuation  and  address,  took  the  young  prince
under  his  management.  He  wrought  upon  his  ruling
passion,  ambition  to  obtain  the  matrimonial  crown.
He  represented  Rizio's  credit  with  the  queen  to  be  the
chief  and  only  obstacle  to  his  success  in  that  demand.
This  minion  alone,  he  said,  possessed  her  confidence ;
and  out  of  complaisance  to  him,  her  subjects,  her
nobility,  and  even  her  husband,  were  excluded  from
any  participation  of  her  secret  counsels.  Under  the
appearance  of  a  confidence  merely  political,  he  insi-
nuated, and  the  king  perhaps  believed,  that  a  famili-
arity of  a  quite  different  and  very  criminal  nature  might

1566.]  BOOK IV.  289

be  concealed."  Such  various  and  complicated  passions
raged  in  the  king's  bosom  with  the  utmost  fury.  He
became  more  impatient  than  ever  of  any  delay,  and
even  threatened  to  strike  the  intended  blow  with  his
own  hand.  At  last,  preliminaries  were  settled  on  both
sides,  and  articles  for  their  mutual  security  agreed
upon.  The  king  engaged  to  prevent  the  attainder  of
the  banished  lords,  to  consent  to  their  return  into
Scotland,  to  obtain  for  them  an  ample  remission  of  all
their  crimes,  and  to  support,  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,
the  religion  which  was  now  established  in  the  king-
dom. On  their  parts,  they  undertook  to  procure  the
crown  matrimonial  for  Henry,  to  secure  his  right  of
succession,  if  the  queen  should  die  before  him  without
issue,  and  to  defend  that  right  to  the  uttermost,  against
whatever  person  should  presume  to  dispute  it ;  and  if
either  Rizio,  or  any  other  person,  should  happen  to  be
killed  in  prosecuting  the  design,  the  king  promised  to
acknowledge  himself  to  be  the  author  of  the  enterprise,
and  to  protect  those  who  were  embarked  in  it.0
Perpetrate  Nothing  now  remained  but  to  concert  the
£athenme  plan  of  operation,  to  choose  the  actors,  and  to
qa?ace8  assign  them  their  parts  in  perpetrating  this

n  Of  all  our  historians,  Buchanan  alone  avowedly  accuses  Mary  of  a  criminal  love
for  Rizio,  340.  344.  Knox  slightly  insinuates  that  such  a  suspicion  was  entertained,
391.  Melvil,  in  a  conversation  with  the  queen,  intimates  that  he  was  afraid  her
familiarity  with  Rizio  might  be  liable  to  misconstruction,  110.  The  king  himself
seems,  both  by  MelviTs  account,  and  by  his  expostulation  with  the  queen,  which
Ruthveu  mentions,  to  have  given  credit  to  these  suspicions.  Melv.  127.  Keith,
Append.  123, 124.  That  the  king's  suspicions  were  strong,  is  likewise  evident  from
the  paper  published,  Append.  No.  XV.  But  in  opposition  to  these  suspicions,  and
they  are  nothing  more,  we  may  observe  that  Raulet,,  the  queen's  French  secretary,
was  dismissed  from  her  service,  and  Rizio  advanced  to  that  office,  in  December,
1564.  Keith,  268.  It  was  in  consequence  of  this  preferment,  that  he  acquired  his
great  credit  with  the  queen.  Melv..  107.  Darnley  arrived  in  Scotland  about  two
months  after.  Keith,  269.  The  queen  immediately  conceived  for  him  a  passion,
which  had  all  the  symptoms,  of  genuine  and  violent  love.  Rizio  aided  this*  passion,,
and  promoted  the  marriage  with  all  his  interest.  Melv.  111.  During  some  months
after  the  marriage,  the  q,ueen'&  fbndttess  for  Darnley  continued.  She  soo«  proved
with  child.  From  this  enumeration  of  circumstances,  it  appears  aJrnost.irupossible
that  the  queen,  unless  we  suppose'  her  to  have  been;  a  woman  utterly  abandoned*,
could  carry  on  any  criminal  intrigue  with  Rizio.  But  the  silence  of  Randolph,,  the
English  resident,  a  man  abundantly  ready  to  mention  and  to  aggravate  Mary's
faults,  and  who  does  not  once  insinuate  that  her  confidence  in  Rizio  concealed  any
thing  criminal,  is  in  itself  a  sufficient  vindication  of  her  innocence.
°  Good.  vol.  i.  266.

VOL. I.  U

290  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

detestable  crime.  Every  circumstance  here  paints
and  characterizes  the  manners  and  men  of  that  age,
and  fills  us  with  horror  at  both.  The  place  chosen  for
committing  such  a  deed  was  the  queen's  bedchamber.
Though  Mary  was  now  in  the  sixth  month  of  her
pregnancy,  and  though  Rizio  might  have  been  seized
elsewhere  without  any  difficulty,  the  king  pitched  upon
this  place,  that  he  might  enjoy  the  malicious  pleasure
of  reproaching  Rizio  with  his  crimes  before  the  queen's
face.  The  earl  of  Morton,  the  lord  high  chancellor  of
the  kingdom,  undertook  to  direct  an  enterprise,  carried
on  in  defiance  of  all  the  laws  of  which  he  was  bound
to  be  the  guardian.  The  lord  Ruthven,  who  had  been
confined  to  his  bed  for  three  months  by  a  very  danger-
ous distemper,  and  who  was  still  so  feeble  that  he  could
hardly  walk,  or  bear  the  weight  of  his  own  armour,
was  intrusted  with  the  executive  part;  and  while  he
himself  needed  to  be  supported  by  two  men,  he  came
abroad  to  commit  a  murder  in  the  presence  of  his
sovereign.

On  the  9th  of  March,  Morton  entered  the  court  of
the  palace  with  a  hundred  and  sixty  men ;  and  with-
out noise,  or  meeting  with  any  resistance,  seized  all
the  gates.  While  the  queen  was  at  supper  with  the
countess  of  Argyle,  Rizio,  and  a  few  other  persons,  the
king  suddenly  entered  the  apartment  by  a  private  pas-
sage. At  his  back  was  Ruthven,  clad  in  complete
armour,  and  with  that  ghastly  and  horrid  look  which
long  sickness  had  given  him.  Three  or  four  of  his
most  trusty  accomplices  followed  him.  Such  an  un-
usual appearance  alarmed  those  who  were  present.  Rizio
instantly  apprehended  that  he  was  the  victim  at  whom
the  blow  was  aimed ;  and  in  -the  utmost  consternation
retired  behind  the  queen,  of  whom  he  laid  hold,  hoping
that  the  reverence  due  to  her  person  might  prove  some
protection  to  him.  The  conspirators  had  proceeded
too  far  to  be  restrained  by  any  consideration  of  that

1566.]  BOOK IV.  291

kind.  Numbers  of  armed  men  rushed  into  the  cham-
ber. Ruthven  drew  his  dagger,  and  with  a  furious
mien  and  voice  commanded  Rizio  to  leave  a  place  of
which  he  was  unworthy,  and  which  he  had  occupied
too  long.  Mary  employed  tears,  and  entreaties,  and
threatenings,  to  save  her  favourite.  But,  notwithstand-
ing all  these,  he  was  torn  from  her  by  violence,  and
before  he  could  be  dragged  through  the  next  apart-
ment, the  rage  of  his  enemies  put  an  end  to  his  life,
piercing  his  body  with  fifty-six  wounds. p

Athol,  Huntly,  Bothwell,  and  other  confidants  of  the
queen,  who  had  apartments  in  the  palace,  were  alarmed
at  the  uproar,  and  filled  with  the  utmost  terror  on  their
own  account ;  but  either  no  violence  was  intended
against  them,  or  the  conspirators  durst  not  shed  the
noblest  blood  in  the  kingdom  in  the  same  illegal  man-
ner with  which  they  had  ventured  to  take  the  life  of  a
stranger.  Some  of  them  were  dismissed,  and  others
made  their  escape.

They  con-  The  conspirators,  in  the  mean  time,  kept
quee^Lr-  possession  of  the  palace,  and  guarded  the
self;  queen  with  the  utmost  care.  A  proclamation
was  published  by  the  king,  prohibiting  the  parliament
to  meet  on  the  day  appointed;  and  measures  were
taken  by  him  for  preventing  any  tumult  in  the  city,q
Murray,  Rothes,  and  their  followers,  being  informed
of  every  step  taken  against  Rizio,  arrived  at  Edinburgh
next  evening.  Murray  was  graciously  received  both
by  the  king  and  queen ;  by  the  former  on  account  of
the  articles  which  had  been  agreed  upon  between
them;  by  the  latter,  because  she  hoped  to  prevail  on
him,  by  gentle  treatment,  not  to  take  part  with  the
murderers  of  Rizio.  Their  power  she  still  felt  an'd
dreaded  ;  and  the  insult  which  they  had  offered  to  her
authority,  and  even  to  her  person,  so  far  exceeded  any
crime  she  could  impute  to  Murray,  that,  in  hopes  of

P  See  Appendix,  No.  XV.  1  Keith,  Appendix,  126.

u2

292  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

wreaking  her  vengeance  on  them,  she  became  ex-
tremely willing  to  be  reconciled  to  him.  The  obliga-
tions, however,  which  Murray  lay  under  to  men  who
had  hazarded  their  lives  on  his  account,  engaged  him
to  labour  for  their  safety.  The  queen,  who  scarce  had
the  liberty  of  choice  left,  was  persuaded  to  admit
Morton  and  Ruthven  into  her  presence,  and  to  grant
them  the  promise  of  pardon  in  whatever  terms  they
should  deem  necessary  for  their  own  security,
but  she  The  king,  meanwhile,  stood  astonished  at  the
gains  the  boldness  and  success  of  his  own  enterprise,  and

king,  and  .  r

makes  her  uncertain  what  course  to  hold. The  queen  ob-
served his  irresolution,  and  availed  herself  of
it. She  employed  all  her  art  to  disengage  him  from
his  new  associates. His  consciousness  of  the  insult
which  he  had  offered  to  so  illustrious  a  benefactress,
inspired  him  with  uncommon  facility and complai-
sance. In  spite  of  all  the  warnings  he  received  to
distrust  the  queen's  artifices,  she  prevailed  on  him  to
dismiss  the  guards  which  the  conspirators  had

March  11.  .

placed  on  her  person ;  and  that  same  night
he  made  his  escape  along  with  her,  attended  by  three
persons  only,  and  retired  to  Dunbar.  The  scheme  of
their  flight  had  been  communicated  to  Huntly  and
Bothwell,  and  they  were  quickly  joined  by  them  and
several  other  of  the  nobles..  Bothw ell's  estate  lay  in
that  corner  of  the  kingdom,  and  his  followers  crowded
to  their  chief  in  such  numbers,  as  soon  enabled  the
queen  to  set  the  power  of  the  conspirators  at  defiance,
is  recon-  This  sudden  flight  filled  them  with  inexpres-
exUed0no-e  sft>le  consternation.  They  had  obtained  a  pro-
bie*  'mise  of  pardon;  and  it  now  appeared  from
the  queen's  conduct,  that  nothing  more  was  intended
by  this  promise  than  to  amuse  them,  and  to  gain
time.  They  ventured,  however,  to  demand  the  ac-
complishment of  it ;  but  their  messenger  was  detained
a  prisoner,  and  the  queen  advancing  towards  Edin-

1566.]  BOOK IV.  293

burgh,  at  the  head  of  eight  thousand  men,  talked  in
the  highest  strain  of  resentment  and  revenge.  She
had  the  address,  at  the  same  time,  to  separate  Murray
and  his  associates  from  the  conspirators  against  Rizio.
Sensible  that  the  union  of  these  parties  would  form
a  confederacy  which  might  prove  formidable  to  the
crown,  she  expressed  great  willingness  to  receive  the
former  into  favour;  towards  the  latter  she  declared
herself  inexorable.  Murray  and  his  followers  were  no
less  willing  to  accept  a  pardon  on  her  terms.  The
March  10.  conspirators  against  Rizio,  deprived  of  every
splrators"  resource,  and  incapable  of  resistance,  fled  pre-
z?oTstinto  cipitately  to  Newcastle,  having  thus  changed
England,  situations  with  Murray  and  his  party,  who  left
that  place  a  few  days  before.

No  man  so  remarkable  for  wisdom,  and  even  for
cunning,  as  the  earl  of  Morton,  ever  engaged  in  a
more  unfortunate  enterprise.  Deserted  basely  by  the
king,  who  now  denied  his  knowledge  of  the  conspi-
racy by  public  proclamations,  and  abandoned  ungene-
rously by  Murray  and  his  party/  he  was  obliged  to
fly  from  his  native  country,  to  resign  the  highest
office,  and  to  part  with  one  of  the  most  opulent  for-
tunes in  the  kingdom.

On  her  return  to  Edinburgh,  Mary  began  to  proceed
against  those  concerned  in  the  murder  of  Rizio  with
the  utmost  rigour  of  law.  But,  in  praise  of  her  cle-
mency, it  must  be  observed,  that  only  two  persons,  and
these  of  no  considerable  rank,  suffered  for  this  crime.5

In  this  conspiracy,  there  is  one  circumstance  which,
though  somewhat  detached,  deserves  not  to  be  for-
gotten. In  the  confederacy  between  the  king  and  the
conspirators,  the  real  intention  of  which  was  assassi-
nation, the  preserving  of  the  reformed  church  is,  ne-
vertheless, one  of  the  most  considerable  articles;  and
the  same  men  who  were  preparing  to  violate  one  of  the

r  Melv.  ISO.  •  Keith,  Appendix,  130.  334.

294  SCOTLAND.  [1566-

first  duties  of  morality,  affected  the  highest  regard  for
religion.  History  relates  these  extravagances  of  the
human  mind,  without  pretending  to  justify,  or  even
to  account  for  them;  and,  regulating  her  own  opinions
by  the  eternal  and  immutable  laws  of  justice  and  of
virtue,  points  out  such  inconsistencies,  as  features  of
the  age  which  she  describes,  and  records  them  for  the
instruction  of  ages  to  come.

An  account  As  this  is  the  second  instance  of  delibe-
rate  assassination  which  has  occurred,  and  as
we  s^a^  hereafter  meet  with  many  other  in-
a§e-  stances  of  the  same  crime,  the  causes  which
gave  rise  to  a  practice  so  shocking  to  humanity  de-
serve our  particular  attention.  Resentment  is,  for
obvious  and  wise  reasons,  one  of  the  strongest  pas-
sions in  the  human  mind.  The  natural  demand  of
this  passion  is,  that  the  person  who  feels  the  injury
should  himself  inflict  the  vengeance  due  on  that  ac-
count. The  permitting  this,  however,  would  have  been
destructive  to  society;  and  punishment  would  have
known  no  bounds,  either  in  severity  or  in  dura-
tion. For  this  reason,  in  the  very  infancy  of  the
social  state,  the  sword  was  taken  out  of  private
hands,  and  committed  to  the  magistrate.  But,  at  first,
while  laws  aimed  at  restraining,  they  really  strength-
ened the  principle  of  revenge.  The  earliest  and  most
simple  punishment  for  crimes  was  retaliation ;  the
offender  forfeited  limb  for  limb,  and  life  for  life.  The
payment  of  a  compensation  to  the  person  injured,  suc-
ceeded to  the  rigour  of  the  former  institution.  In
both  these,  the  gratification  of  private  revenge  was  the
object  of  law ;  and  he  who  suffered  the  wrong  was
the  only  person  who  had  a  right  to  pursue,  to  exact,
or  to  remit  the  punishment.  While  laws  allowed  such
full  scope  to  the  revenge  of  one  party,  the  interests  of
the  other  were  not  neglected.  If  the  evidence  of  his
guilt  did  ut  amount  to  a  full  proof,  or  if  he  reckoned

1566.]  BOOK  IV.  295

himself  to  be  unjustly  accused,  the  person  to  whom  a
crime  was  imputed  had  a  right  to  challenge  his  ad-
versary to  single  combat,  and,  on  obtaining  the  vic-
tory, vindicated  his  own  honour.  In  almost  every
considerable  cause,  whether  civil  or  criminal,  arms
were  appealed  to,  in  defence,  either  of  the  innocence,
or  the  property,  of  the  parties.  Justice  had  seldom
occasion  to  use  her  balance ;  the  sword  alone  decided
every  contest.  The  passion  of  revenge  was  nourished
by  all  these  means,  and  grew,  by  daily  indulgence,  to
be  incredibly  strong.  Mankind  became  habituated  to
blood,  not  only  in  times  of  war,  but  of  peace ;  and
from  this,  as  well  as  other  causes,  contracted  an  amaz-
ing ferocity  of  temper  and  of  manners.  This  ferocity,
however,  made  it  necessary  to  discourage  the  trial  by
combat ;  to  abolish  the  payment  of  compensations  in
criminal  cases  ;  and  to  think  of  some  milder  method
of  terminating  disputes  concerning  civil  rights.  The
punishments  for  crimes  became  more  severe,  and  the
regulations  concerning  property  more  fixed ;  but  the
princes,  whose  province  it  was  to  inflict  the  one,  and
to  enforce  the  other,  possessed  little  power.  Great
offenders  despised  their  authority  ;  smaller  ones  shel-
tered themselves  under  the  jurisdiction  of  those  from
whose  protection  they  expected  impunity.  The  ad-
ministration of  justice  was  extremely  feeble  and  dila-
tory. An  attempt  to  punish  the  crimes  of  a  chieftain,
or  even  of  his  vassals,  often  excited  rebellions  and
civil  wars.  To  nobles,  haughty  and  independent,
among  whom  the  causes  of  discord  were  many  and
unavoidable,  who  were  quick  in  discerning  an  injury,
and  impatient  to  revenge  it ;  who  deemed  it  infamous
to  submit  to  an  enemy,  and  cowardly  to  forgive  him  ;
who  considered  the  right  of  punishing  those  who  had
injured  them,  as  a  privilege  of  their  order  and  a  mark
of  independence ;  such  slow  proceedings  were  ex-
tremely unsatisfactory.  The  blood  of  their  adversary

296  SCOTLAND.  [1566,

was,  in  their  opinion,  the  only  thing  which  could  wash
away  an  affront ;  where  that  was  not  shed,  their  re-
venge was  disappointed,  their  courage  became  sus-
pected, and  a  stain  was  left  on  their  honour.  That
vengeance,  which  the  impotent  hand  of  the  magistrate
could  not  inflict,  their  own  could  easily  execute.  Under
governments  so  feeble,  men  assumed,  as  in  a  state  of
nature,  the  right  of  judging  and  redressing  their  own
wrongs;  and  thus  assassination,  a  crime  of  all  others
the  most  destructive  to  society,  came  not  only  to  be
allowed,  but  to  be  reckoned  honourable.

The  history  of  Europe,  during  the  fourteenth  and
fifteenth  centuries,  abounds  with  detestable  instances
of  this  crime.  It  prevailed  chiefly  among  the  French
and  Scots,  between  whom  there  was  a  close  intercourse
at  that  time,  and  a  surprising  resemblance  in  their  na-
tional characters.  In  1407,  the  only  brother  of  the  king
of  France  was  murdered  publicly  in  the  streets  of  Paris  ;
and,  so  far  was  this  horrible  action  from  meeting  with
proper  punishment,  that  an  eminent  lawyer  was  al-
lowed to  plead  in  defence  of  it  before  the  peers  of
France,  and  avowedly  to  maintain  the  lawfulness
of  assassination.  In  1417,  it  required  all  the  elo-
quence and  authority  of  the  famous  Gerson,  to  prevail
on  the  council  of  Constance  to  condemn  this  proposi-
tion, "  That  there  are  some  cases  in  which  assassi-
nation is  a  virtue  more  meritorious  in  a  knight  than
in  a  squire,  and  more  meritorious  in  a  king  than  in  a
knight."1  The  number  of  eminent  persons  who  were
murdered  in  France  and  Scotland,  on  account  either
of  private,  or  political,  or  religious  quarrels,  during
the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  centuries,  is  almost  incre-
dible. Even  after  those  causes,  which  first  gave  rise
to  this  barbarous  practice,  were  removed  ;  after  the
jurisdiction  of  magistrates,  and  the  authority  of  laws,
were  better  established,  and  become  more  universal ;

f  L'Enfant,  Hist.  Cone,  de  Const.

1566.]  BOOK IV.  297

after  the  progress  of  learning  and  philosophy  had  po-
lished the  manners,  and  humanized  the  minds  of  men,
this  crime  continued  in  some  degree.  It  was  towards
the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century  before  it  disap-
peared in  France.  The  additional  vigour,  which  the
royal  authority  acquired  by  the  accession  of  James  VI.
to  the  throne  of  England,  seems  to  have  put  a  stop  to
it  in  Scotland.

The  influence,  however,  of  any  national  custom,
both  on  the  understanding  and  on  the  heart,  and  how
far  it  may  go  towards  perverting  or  extinguishing
moral  principles  of  the  greatest  importance,  is  remark-
able. The  authors  of  those  ages  have  perfectly  im-
bibed the  sentiments  of  their  contemporaries,  with  re-
gard to  assassination;  and  they  who  had  leisure  to
reflect  and  judge,  appear  to  be  no  more  shocked  at
this  crime,  than  the  persons  who  committed  it  during
the  heat  and  impetuosity  of  passion.  Buchanan  de-
scribes the  murder  of  cardinal  Beatoun  and  of  Rizio,
without  expressing  those  feelings  which  are  natural  to
a  man,  or  that  indignation  which  became  an  historian."
Knox,  whose  mind  was  fiercer  and  more  unpolished,
relates  the  death  of  Beatoun  and  of  the  duke  of  Guise,
not  only  without  censure,  but  with  the  utmost  exulta-
tion/ On  the  other  hand,  the  bishop  of  Ross  mentions
the  assassination  of  the  earl  of  Murray  with  some  de-
gree of  applause/  BlackwTood  dwells  upon  it  with
the  most  indecent  triumph,  and  ascribes  it  directly  to
the  hand  of  God.z  Lord  Ruthven,  the  principal  actor
in  the  conspiracy  against  Rizio,  wrote  an  account  of  it
some  short  time  before  his  own  death,  and  in  all  his
long  narrative  there  is  not  one  expression  of  regret,  or
one  symptom  of  compunction,  for  a  crime  no  less  dis-
honourable than  barbarous/  Morton,  equally  guilty
of  the  same  crime,  entertained  the  same  sentiments

u  Buchan.  295. 345.  *  Knox,  334.  J  Anders,  iii.  84.

z  Jebb,  ii.  263. a  Keith,  Append.  119.

298  SCOTLAND.  .  [1566.

concerning  it;  and  in  his  last  moments,  neither  he
himself,  nor  the  ministers  who  attended  him,  seem  to
have  considered  it  as  an  action  which  called  for  repent-
ance ;  even  then  he  talks  of  David's  slaughter  as  coolly
as  if  it  had  been  an  innocent  or  commendable  deed.b
The  vices  of  another  age  astonish  and  shock  us ;  the
vices  of  our  own  become  familiar,  and  excite  little
horror.0  I  return  from  this  digression  to  the  course  of
the  history.

The  queen's  The  charm  which  had  at  first  attached  the
queen  to  Darnley,  and  held  them  for  some
time  [n  a  happy  union,  was  now  entirely  dis-
solved; and  love  no  longer  covering  his  follies  and
vices  with  its  friendly  veil,  they  appeared  to  Mary
in  their  full  dimension  and  deformity .d  Though  Henry
published  a  proclamation,  disclaiming  any  knowledge
of  the  conspiracy  against  Rizio,  the  queen  was  fully
convinced,  that  he  was  not  only  accessary  to  the  con-
trivance, but  to  the  commission  of  that  odious  crime.6
That  very  power  which,  with  liberal  and  unsuspicious
fondness,  she  had  conferred  upon  him,  he  had  employed
to  insult  her  authority,  to  limit  her  prerogative,  and  to
endanger  her  person.  Such  an  outrage  it  was  impos-
sible any  woman  could  bear  or  forgive.  Gold  civilities,
secret  distrust,  frequent  quarrels,  succeeded  to  their
former  transports  of  affection  and  confidence.  The
queen's  favours  were  no  longer  conveyed  through  his
hands.  The  crowd  of  expectants  ceased  to  court  his
patronage,  which  they  found  to  avail  so  little.  Among

b  Crawf.  Mem.  Append.

.  c  In  the  first  accounts  of  Rizio's  murder  sent  to  England,  there  seem  to  have  been
mingled  (as  is  usual  in  relating  extraordinary  events)  some  circumstances,  which
afterward  appear  to  be  false  :  among  others,  that  a  friar  named  Black  had  been
slain  at  the  same  time  with  Rizio.  Packhurst,  bishop  of  Norwich,  in  communi-
cating this  intelligence  to  his  correspondent  Bullinger,  an  eminent  reformed  divine
of  Zurich,  expresses  no  condemnation  of  the  murder  of  Rizio,  and  exults  over  the
supposed  death  of  the  friar,  in  terms  which,  in  our  times  will  appear  as  shocking
as  they  are  puerile  :  "  Fraterculus  quidam,  nomine  Black,  papistarum  antesignanus,
eodem  tempore  in  aula  occiditur  :  Sic  niger  hie  nebulo,  nigra  quoque  morte  peremp-
tus,  invitus  nigrum  subito  descendit  in  Orcuin."  Burn.  Hist,  of  Reform,  iii.
App.  360.

«»  See  Appendix,  No.  XVI.  «  Keith,  350.

1566.]  .  BOOK IV.  290

the  nobles,  some  dreaded  his  furious  temper,  others
complained  of  his  perfidiousness ;  and  all  of  them
despised  the  weakness  of  his  understanding  and  the
inconstancy  of  his  heart.  The  people  themselves  ob-
served some  parts  of  his  conduct  which  little  suited
the  dignity  of  a  king.  Addicted  to  drunkenness,  be-
yond what  the  manners  of  that  age  could  bear,  and
indulging  irregular  passions,  which  even  the  licentious-
ness of  youth  could  not  excuse,  he,  by  his  indecent
behaviour,  provoked  the  queen  to  the  utmost ;  and  the
passions  which  it  occasioned  often  forced  tears  from
her  eyes,  both  in  public  and  private/  Her  aversion
for  him  increased  every  day,  and  could  be  no  longer
concealed.  He  was  often  absent  from  court,  appeared
there  with  little  splendour,  and  was  trusted  with  no
power.  Avoided  equally  by  those  who  endeavoured
to  please  the  queen,  who  favoured  Morton  and  his
associates,  or  who  adhered  to  the  house  of  Hamilton,
he  was  left  almost  alone  in  a  neglected  and  unpitied
solitude.8

The  rise  of  About  this  time  a  new  favourite  grew  into
Bothweii's  great  credit  with  the  queen,  and  soon  gained  an

favour.  ii-  i-i  11-

ascendant  over  her  heart,  which  encouraged  his
enterprising  genius  to  form  designs  that  proved  fatal
to  himself,  and  the  occasion  of  all  Mary's  subse-
quent misfortunes.  This  was  James  Hepburn,  earl  of
Bothwell,  the  head  of  an  ancient  family,  and,  by  his
extensive  possessions  and  numerous  vassals,  one  of
the  most  powerful  noblemen  in  the  kingdom.  Even
in  that  turbulent  age,  when  so  many  vast  projects  were
laid  open  to  an  aspiring  mind,  and  invited  it  to  action,
no  man's  ambition  was  more  daring  than  Bothweii's,
or  had  recourse  to  bolder  or  more  singular  expedients
for  obtaining  power. h  When  almost  every  person  of

f  Keith,  329.  s  Melv.  131,  &c.

h  The  enterprising  spirit  of  Bothwell  was  so  conspicuous  as  to  procure  him  several
marks  of  distinction  during  his  residence  in  France.  Hardwick's  State  Papers,
i.  143.  Throkmorton,  the  English  ambassador  at  Paris,  and  one  of  the  most  saga-
cious ministers  employed  by  Elizabeth,  points  him  out  as  a  person  who  was  to  be

300  SCOTLAND.  .  [1566.

distinction  in  the  kingdom,  whether  Papist  or  Protes-
tant, had  joined  the  congregation  in  opposing  the  dan-
gerous encroachments  of  the  French  upon  the  liberties
of  the  nation,  he,  though  an  avowed  Protestant,  adhered
to  the  queen-regent,  and  acted  with  vigour  on  her  side.
The  success  which  attended  the  arms  of  the  congrega-
tion having  obliged  him  to  retire  into  France,  he  was
taken  into  the  queen's  service,  and  continued  with  her
till  the  time  of  her  return  into  Scotland.1  From  that
period,  every  step  of  his  conduct  towards  Mary  was
remarkably  dutiful;  and,  amidst  all  the  shiftings  of
faction,  we  scarcely  ever  find  him  holding  any  course
which  could  be  offensive  to  her.  When  Murray's  pro-
ceedings with  regard  to  her  marriage  gave  umbrage  to
the  queen,  she  recalled  Bothwell  from  that  banishment
into  which  she  had  been  obliged  with  reluctance  to
drive  him,  and  considered  his  zeal  and  abilities  as  the
most  powerful  supports  of  her  authority.  When  the
conspirators  against  Rizio  seized  her  person,  he  became
the  chief  instrument  of  recovering  her  liberty,  and
served  her,  on  that  occasion,  with  so  much  fidelity  and
success,  as  made  the  deepest  impression  on  her  mind,
and  greatly  increased  the  confidence  which  she  had
hitherto  placed  in  him.k  Her  gratitude  loaded  him
with  marks  of  her  bounty ;  she  raised  him  to  offices  of
profit  and  trust,  and  transacted  no  matter  of  importance
without  his  advice.1  By  complaisance  and  assiduity
lie  confirmed  and  fortified  these  dispositions  of  the
queen  in  his  favour,  and  insensibly  paved  the  way
towards  that  vast  project,  which  his  immoderate  ambi-
tion had  perhaps  already  conceived,  and  which,  in
spite  of  many  difficulties,  and  at  the  expense  of  many
crimes,  he  at  last  accomplished.

dreaded  and  observed.  "  The  earl  of  Bothwell,"  says  he  in  a  letter,  Nov.  28, 1560'
"  is  departed  to  return  into  Scotland,  and  hath  made  boast  that  he  will  do  great
things,  and  live  in  Scotland  in  despite  of  all  men.  He  is  a  glorious,  rash,  and
hazardous  young  man  ;  and  therefore  it  were  meet  that  his  adversaries  should  both
have  an  eye  to  him,  and  also  keep  him  short."  Ibid.  p.  149.
*  Anders,  i.  90.  k  Ibid.  92,  93.  »  Melv.  133.  Knox,396.

1566.]  BOOK IV.  301

The  hour  of  the  queen's  delivery  now  approached.
As  her  palace  was  defended  only  by  a  slender  guard,
it  seemed  imprudent  to  expose  her  person,  at  this  time,
to  the  insults  she  might  suffer  in  a  kingdom  torn  by
factions  and  prone  to  mutiny.  For  this  reason  the
privy-council  advised  the  queen  to  fix  her  residence  in
the  castle  of  Edinburgh,  the  strongest  fortress  in  the
kingdom,  and  the  most  proper  place  for  the  security  of
her  person.111  In  order  to  render  this  security  more
perfect,  Mary  laboured  to  extinguish  the  domestic  feuds
which  divided  some  of  the  principal  nobles.  Murray
and  Argyle  were  exasperated  against  Huntly  and  Both-
well,  by  reciprocal  and  repeated  injuries.  The  queeny
by  her  authority  and  entreaties,  effected  a  reconcilement
among  them,  and  drew  from  them  a  promise  to  bury
their  discords  in  everlasting  oblivion.  This  reconcile-
ment Mary  had  so  much  at  heart,  that  she  made  it  the
condition  on  which  she  again  received  Murray  into
favour.11

Birth  of  On  the  19th  of  June,  Mary  was  delivered
James vi.  of  her  only  son  James,  a  prince  whose  birth
was  happy  for  the  whole  island,  and  unfortunate  to
her  alone.  His  accession  to  the  throne  of  England
united  the  two  divided  kingdoms  in  one  mighty  mo-
narchy, and  established  the  power  of  Great  Britain  on
a  firm  foundation ;  while  she,  torn  early  from  her  son
by  the  cruelty  of  her  fate,  was  never  allowed  to  indulge
those  tender  passions,  nor  to  taste  those  joys  which  fill
the  heart  of  a  mother.

Melvil  was  instantly  dispatched  to  London  with  an
account  of  this  event.  It  struck  Elizabeth,  at  first,  in
a  sensible  manner ;  and  the  advantage  and  superiority
which  her  rival  had  acquired  by  the  birth  of  a  sonr
forced  tears  from  her  eyes.  But  before  Melvil  was
admitted  to  an  audience,  she  had  so  far  recovered  the
command  of  herself,  as  to  receive  him  not  only  with

*»  Keith,  335.  ^ »  Ibid.  336. Append.  139.

302  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

decency  but  with  excessive  cheerfulness  ;  and  willingly
accepted  the  invitation  which  Mary  gave  her,  to  stand
godmother  to  her  son.0

As  Mary  loved  splendour  and  magnificence,  she  re-
solved to  celebrate  the  baptism  of  the  young  prince
with  great  pomp;  and  for  that  purpose  sent  invitations
of  the  same  kind  to  the  French  king,  and  to  the  duke
of  Savoy,  the  uncle  of  her  former  husband.
The  queen  The  queen,  on  her  recovery,  discovered  no
to  treat*  change  in  her  sentiments  with  respect  to  the
The  death  of  Rizio>  and  tlie

ference  nance  he  had  given  to  an  action  so  insolent  and
lect.  unjustifiable,  were  still  fresh  in  her  memory.
She  was  frequently  pensive  and  dejected.q  Though
Henry  sometimes  attended  at  court,  and  accompanied
her  in  her  progresses  through  different  parts  of  the
kingdom,  he  met  with  little  reverence  from  the  nobles,
while  Mary  treated  him  with  the  greatest  reserve,
and  did  not  suffer  him  to  possess  any  authority/  The
breach  between  them  became  every  day  more  appa-
rent.3 Attempts  were  made  towards  a  reconcilement,
particularly  by  Castelnau,  the  French  ambassador;
but,  after  such  a  violent  rupture,  it  was  found  no
easy  matter  to  bind  the  nuptial  knot  anew  ;  and,
though  he  prevailed  on  the  king  and  queen  to  pass
two  nights  together,*  we  may,  with  great  probability,
pronounce  this  appearance  of  union,  to  which  Castel-
nau trusted,  not  to  have  been  sincere  ;  we  know  with
certainty  that  it  was  not  lasting.

Herattach-  Bothweii,  all  this  while,  was  the  queen's
Bothweii  Prime  confidant.  Without  his  participation  na
increases,  business  was  concluded,  and  no  favour  bestow-
ed. Together  with  this  ascendant  over  her  counsels,
Bothweii,  if  we  may  believe  the  contemporary  histo*
rians,  acquired  no  less  sway  over  her  heart.  But  at

0  Melv.  138.  P  See  Append.  No.  XVII.  <i  Melv.  148.

r  Keith,  350. Melv.  132,  s  Keith,  Append.  169. «  Ibid.  169.

1566.]  BOOK  IV.  303

what  precise  time  this  ambitious  lord  first  allowed  the
sentiments  of  a  lover  to  occupy  the  place  of  that  duty
and  respect  which  a  subject  owes  his  sovereign;  or
when  Mary,  instead  of  gratitude  for  his  faithful  services,
felt  a  passion  of  another  nature  rising  in  her  bosom,  it
is  no  easy  matter  to  determine.  Such  delicate  transi-
tions of  passion  can  be  discerned  only  by  those  who
are  admitted  near  the  persons  of  the  parties,  an  5  who
can  view  the  secret  workings  of  the  heart  with  calm  and
acute  observation.  Neither  Knox  nor  Buchanan  en-
joyed these  advantages.  Their  humble  station  allowed
them  only  a  distant  access  to  the  queen  and  her  favour-
ite. And  the  ardour  of  their  zeal,  as  well  as  the  vio-
lence of  their  prejudices,  rendered  their  opinions  rash,
precipitate,  and  inaccurate.  It  is  by  the  effects  of  this
reciprocal  passion,  rather  than  by  their  accounts  of  it,
that  subsequent  historians  can  judge  of  it?  reality.

Adventurous  as  Bothwell's  project  to  gain  the  queen
may  appear,  it  was  formed  and  carried  on  under  very
favourable  circumstances.  Mary  was  young,  gay,  and
affable.  She  possessed  great  sensibility  of  temper,  and
was  capable  of  the  utmost  tenderness  of  affection.  She
had  placed  her  love  on  a  very  unworthy  object,  who  re-
quited it  with  ingratitude,  and  treated  her  with  neg-
lect, with  insolence,  and  with  brutality.  All  these  she
felt  and  resented.  In  this  situation,  the  attention  and
complaisance  of  a  man  who  had  vindicated  her  autho-
rity and  protected  her  person,  who  entered  into  all  her
views,  who  soothed  all  her  passions,  who  watched  and
improved  every  opportunity  of  insinuating  his  design
and  recommending  his  passion,"  could  hardly  fail  of
making  an  impression  on  a  heart  of  such  a  frame  as
Mary's.

The  king The  haughty  spirit  of  Darnley,  nursed  up

fSveTcot-  m  flattery,  and  accustomed  to  command,  could

not  bear  the  contempt  under  which  he  had  now

«  Anders,  i.  93,  94.

304  SCOTLAND.  |1566.

fallen,  and  the  state  of  insignificance  to  which  he
saw  himself  reduced.  But,  in  a  country  where  he  was
universally  hated  or  despised,  he  could  never  hope  to
form  a  party,  which  would  second  any  attempt  he  might
make  to  recover  power.  He  addressed  himself,  there-
fore, to  the  pope,  and  to  the  kings  of  France  and  Spain,
with  many  professions  of  his  own  zeal  for  the  Catholic
religion,  and  with  bitter  complaints  against  the  queen,
for  neglecting  to  promote  that  interest:31  and,  soon
after,  he  took  a  resolution,  equally  wild  and  desperate,
of  embarking  on  board  a  ship  which  he  provided,  and
of  flying  into  foreign  parts.  It  is  almost  impossible  to
form  any  satisfactory  conjecture  concerning  the  motives
which  influence  a  capricious  and  irregular  mind.  He
hoped,  perhaps,  to  recommend  himself  to  the  Catholic
princes  on  the  continent  by  his  zeal  for  religion,  and
that  they  would  employ  their  interest  towards  reinstat-
ing him  in  the  possession  of  that  power  which  he  had
lost.  Perhaps  he  expected  nothing  more  than  the  com-
fort of  hiding  the  disgrace  under  which  he  was  now
fallen,  among  strangers,  who  had  never  been  witnesses
of  his  former  prosperity.

His  ca  ri-  He  communicated  the  design  to  the  French
clous  beha-  ambassador,  Le  Croc,  and  to  his  father  the  earl
of  Lennox.  They  both  endeavoured  to  dis-
suade him  from  it,  but  without  success.  Lennox,  who
seems,  as  well  as  his  son,  to  have  lost  the  queen's  con-
fidence, and  who,  about  this  time,  was  seldom  at  court,
instantly  communicated  the  matter  to  her  by  a  letter.
Henry,  who  had  refused  to  accompany  the  queen  from
Stirling  to  Edinburgh,  was  likewise  absent  from  court.
He  arrived  there,  however,  on  the  same  day  she  received
the  account  of  his  intended  flight.  But  he  was  more
than  usually  wayward  and  peevish ;  and,  scrupling  to
enter  the  palace  unless  certain  lords  who  attended  the
queen  were  dismissed,  Mary  was  obliged  to  meet  him

*  Knox,  399.

1566.]  BOOK IV.  305

without  the  gates.  At  last  he  suffered  her  to  conduct
him  into  her  own  apartment.  She  endeavoured  to  draw
from  him  the  reasons  of  the  strange  resolution  which  he
had  taken,  and  to  divert  him  from  it.  In  spite,  how-
ever, of  all  her  arguments  and  entreaties,  he  remained
silent  and  inflexible.  Next  day  the  privy-council,  by
her  direction,  expostulated  with  him  on  the  same  head.
He  persisted,  notwithstanding,  in  his  sullenness  and
obstinacy ;  and  neither  deigned  to  explain  the  motives
of  his  conduct,  nor  signified  any  intention  of  altering  it.
As  he  left  the  apartment,  he  turned  towards  the  queen,
and  told  her  that  she  should  not  see  his  face  again  for  a
long  time.  A  few  days  after,  he  wrote  to  Mary,  and
mentioned  two  things  as  grounds  of  his  disgust.  She
herself,  he  said,  no  longer  admitted  him  into  any  con-
fidence, and  had  deprived  him  of  all  power ;  and  the
nobles,  after  her  example,  treated  him  with  open  neg-
lect, so  that  he  appeared  in  every  place  without  the  dig-
nity and  splendour  of  a  king.

Mary  en-  Nothing  could  be  more  mortifying  to  Mary,
?ea™vent  t^ian  ^s  intended  flight  of  the  king's,  which
his  intend- would  have  spread  the  infamy  of  their  domes-

18  '*  tic  quarrel  all  over  Europe.  Compassion  for
a  monarch  who  would  then  appear  to  be  forced  into
exile  by  her  neglect  and  ill  usage,  might  have  disposed
mankind  to  entertain  sentiments  concerning  the  causes
of  their  discord,  little  to  her  advantage.  In  order,
therefore,  to  prepossess  the  minds  of  her  allies,  and  to
screen  her  reputation  from  any  censure  with  which
Darnley  might  endeavour  to  load  it,  the  privy-council
transmitted  a  narrative  of  this  whole  transaction  both
to  the  king  and  to  the  queen-mother  of  France.  It  was
drawn  with  great  art,  and  sets  Mary's  conduct  in  the
most  favourable  point  of  view/

About  this  time  the  licence  of  the  borderers  called
for  redress;  and  Mary  resolving  to  hold  a  court  of  jus-

y  Keith,  345.  347.
VOL.  I.  X

306  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

tice  at  Jedburgh,  the  inhabitants  of  several  adjacent
counties  were  summoned  to  attend  their  sovereign  in
arms,  according  to  custom.15  Bothwell  was  at  that  time
lieutenant  or  warden  of  all  the  marches,  an  office  among
the  most  important  in  the  kingdom ;  and,  though  usual-
ly divided  into  three  distinct  governments,  bestowed
by  the  queen's  favour  upon  him  alone.  In  order  to  dis-
play his  own  valour  and  activity  in  the  discharge  of
this  trust,  he  attempted  to  seize  a  gang  of  banditti,  who,
lurking  among  the  marches  of  Liddesdale,  infested  the
rest  of  the  country.  But  while  he  was  laying

Oct.  16.  r.T_j  j  i_

hold  upon  one  of  those  desperadoes,  he  was
wounded  by  him  in  several  places,  so  that  his  followers
were  obliged  to  carry  him  to  Hermitage-castle.  Mary
instantly  flew  thither,  with  an  impatience  which  has
been  considered  as  marking  the  anxiety  of  a  lover,  but
little  suited  the  dignity  of  a  queen.a  Finding  that  Both-
well  was  threatened  with  no  dangerous  symptom,  she
returned  the  same  day  to  Jedburgh.  The  fatigue  of
such  a  journey,  added  to  the  anguish  of  mind  she  had
suffered  on  Bothwell's  account,  threw  her  next  morn-
ing into  a  violent  fever.b  Her  life  was  despaired  of,
but  her  youth,  and  the  vigour  of  her  constitution,  re-
sisted the  malignity  of  her  disease.  During  the  con-
tinuance of  the  queen's  illness,  the  king,  who  resided
at  Stirling,  never  came  near  Jedburgh;0  and
when  he  afterward  thought  fit  to  make  his  ap-
pearance there,  he  met  with  such  a  cold  reception,  as

z  Keith,  353. Good.  vol.  i.  302.

a  The  distance  between  Jedburgh  and  Hermitage  is  eighteen  Scottish  miles,
through  a  country  almost  impassable.  The  season  of  the  year  was  far  advanced.
Bothwell  seems  to  have  been  wounded  in  a  scuffle,  occasioned  by  the  despair  of  a
single  man,  rather  than  any  open  insurrection  of  the  borderers.  It  does  not  appear
that  the  queen  was  attended  by  any  considerable  train.  Had  any  military  opera-
tion been  necessary,  as  is  supposed,  Good,  vol.i.  304.,  it'would  have  been  extremely
improper  to  risk  the  queen's  person  in  an  expedition  against  thieves.  As  soon  as
the  queen  found  Bothwell  to  be  in  no  danger,  she  instantly  returned,  and  after  this
we  hear  no  more  of  the  insurrection,  nor  have  we  any  proof  that  the  rioters  took  re-
fuge in  England.  As  there  is  no  farther  evidence  with  respect  to  the  motives  of  this
extraordinary  journey,  the  reader  must  judge  what  degree  of  credit  is  due  to  Knox
and  Buchanan,  who  ascribe  it  to  the  queen's  love  of  Bothwell.

b  Keith,  351,  352.  c  Ibid.  Append.  133.

1566.]  BOOK IV.  307

did  not  encourage  him  to  make  any  long  stay.d  Mary
soon  recovered  strength  enough  to  return  along  the
eastern  borders  to  Dunbar.

While  she  resided  in  this  place,  her  attention  was
turned  towards  England.  Elizabeth,  notwithstanding
her  promise,  and  even  proclamations  to  the  contrary,
not  only  allowed,  but  encouraged,  Morton  and  his  as-
sociates to  remain  in  England.6  Mary,  on  the  other
hand,  offered  her  protection  to  several  English  fugitives.
Each  queen  watched  the  motions  of  the  other  with  a
jealous  attention,  and  secretly  countenanced  the  prac-
tices which Vere^carrying  on  to  disturb  the  administra-
tion of  her  rival.

The  Eng-  For  this  purpose  Mary's  ambassador,  Robert
Melvil,  and  her  other  emissaries,  were  extremely
active  and  successful.  We  may  ascribe,  in  a
pretensions  good  degree,  to  their  intrigues,  that  spirit
cession.  which  appeared  in  the  parliament  of  England,
and  which  raised  a  storm  that  threatened  Elizabeth's
domestic  tranquillity,  more  than  any  other  event  of
her  reign,  and  required  all  her  art  and  dexterity  to
allay  it.

Elizabeth  had  now  reigned  eight  years  without  dis-
covering the  least  intention  to  marry.  A  violent  dis-
temper with  which  she  had  lately  been  seized,  having
endangered  her  life,  and  alarmed  the  nation  with  the
prospect  of  all  those  calamities  which  are  occasioned
by  a  disputed  and  dubious  succession,  a  motion  was
made,  and  eagerly  listened  to  in  both  houses,  for  ad-
dressing the  queen  to  provide  against  any  such  danger
in  times  to  come,  either  by  signifying  her  own  resolu-
tion to  marry,  or  by  consenting  to  an  act,  establishing
the  order  of  succession  to  the  crown/  Her  love  to  her
subjects,  her  duty  to  the  public,  her  concern  for  pos-
terity, it  was  asserted,  not  only  called  upon,  but  obliged
her  to  take  one  of  these  steps.  The  insuperable  aver-

*  Kuox,  400.  e  Cald.  vol.  ii.  p.  15»  f  D'Ewes  Journ.  of  Parl.  105.

x2

308  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

sion  which  she  had  all  along  discovered  for  marriage,
made  it  improbable  that  she  would  choose  the  former ;
and  if  she  complied  with  the  latter  request,  no  title  to
the  crown  could,  with  any  colour  of  justice,  be  set  in
opposition  to  that  of  the  Scottish  queen.  Elizabeth
was  sagacious  enough  to  see  the  remotest  consequences
of  this  motion,  and  observed  them  with  the  greatest
•anxiety.  Mary,  by  refusing  so  often  to  ratify  the  treaty
of  Edinburgh,  had  plainly  intimated  a  design  of  em-
bracing the  first  promising  opportunity  for  prosecuting
her  right  to  the  English  crown ;  and,  by  her  secret
negotiations,  she  had  gained  many  to  favour  her  title.8
All  the  Roman  Catholics  ardently  wished  for  her  suc-
cession. Her  gentleness  and  humanity  had  removed
many  of  those  apprehensions  which  the  Protestants
entertained  on  account  of  her  religion.  The  court
faction,  which  envied  the  power  of  Cecil,  and  endea-
voured to  wrest  the  administration  out  of  his  hands,
advanced  the  pretensions  of  the  Scottish  queen  in  op-
position to  him.  The  union  of  the  two  kingdoms  was
a  desirable  object  to  all  wise  men  in  both  nations;  and
the  birth  of  the  young  prince  was  a  security  for  the
continuance  of  this  blessing,  and  gave  hopes  of  its
perpetuity.

Elizabeth's  Under  these  circumstances,  and  while  the
onThat1*7  nation  was  in  such  a  temper,  a  parliamentary
account,  declaration  of  Mary's  title  would  have  been
highly  detrimental  to  Elizabeth.  The  present  unsettled
state  of  the  succession  left  much  in  her  power.  Her  re-
sentment alone  might  have  gone  far  towards  excluding
any  of  the  competitors  from  the  crown ;  and  the  dread  of
this  had  hitherto  restrained  and  overawed  the  ambition
of  the  Scottish  queen.  But  if  this  check  should  be  re-
moved by  the  legal  acknowledgment  of  her  title,  Mary
would  be  more  at  liberty  to  pursue  her  dangerous  designs,
and  to  act  without  fear  or  reserve.  Her  partisans  were

e  Melv.  136.

1566.]  BOOK IV.  309

already  meditating  schemes  for  insurrections  in  different
parts  of  the  kingdom  ;h  and  an  act  of  parliament,  re-
cognising the  rights  of  that  princess,  whose  pretensions
they  favoured,  would  have  been  nothing  less  than  a
signal  to  arms  ;  and,  notwithstanding  Elizabeth's  just
title  to  the  affections  of  her  subjects,  might  have  shaken
and  endangered  her  throne.

Mary  en-  While  this  matter  remained  in  suspense  in
to*mToSve  koth  houses,  an  account  of  it  was  transmitted
this  oppor-  to  Mary  by  Melvil  her  ambassador.  As  she
did  not  want  advocates  for  her  right,  even
among  those  who  were  near  Elizabeth's  person,  she
endeavoured  to  cultivate  the  disposition  which  appeared
towards  settling  the  right  of  succession  in  her  favour,
by  a  letter  to  the  privy-counsellors  of  England.  She
expressed  in  it  a  grateful  sense  of  Elizabeth's  friend-
ship, which  she  ascribes  chiefly  to  their  good  offices
with  their  sovereign  in  her  behalf.  She  declared  her
resolution  to  live  in  perpetual  amity  with  England,
without  urging  or  pursuing  her  claim  upon  the  crown
any  farther  than  should  be  agreeable  to  the  queen.
But,  at  the  same  time,  as  her  right  of  succession  was
undoubted,  she  hoped  it  would  be  examined  with  can-
dour, and  judged  of  with  impartiality.  The  nobles
who  attended  her  wrote  to  the  English  privy-council  in
the  same  strain.1  Mary  artfully  gave  these  letters  the
air  of  being  nothing  more  than  a  declaration  of  her
own  and  of  her  subjects'  gratitude  towards  Elizabeth.
But,  as  she  could  not  be  ignorant  of  the  jealousy  and
fear  with  which  Elizabeth  observed  the  proceedings  of
parliament,  a  step  so  uncommon  as  this,  of  one  prince's
entering  into  public  correspondence  with  the  privy-
counsellors  of  another,  could  not  be  otherwise  construed
than  as  taken  with  an  intention  to  encourage  the  spirit
which  had  already  been  raised  among  the  English.  In
this  light  it  seems  to  have  appeared  to  Elizabeth  her-

h  Melv,  147.  !  Keith,  354. Append.  136.

310  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

self.k  But  the  disposition  of  her  people  rendering  it
necessary  to  treat  Mary's  person  with  great  decency,
and  her  title  with  much  regard,  she  mentioned  it  to  her
only  in  the  softest  language.

Elizabeth  Nothing,  however,  could  be  a  more  cruel
gains  teT  mortification  to  a  princess  of  Elizabeth's  cha-
pariiament.  racter?  fa^u  tne  temper  which  both  houses
of  parliament  discovered  on  this  occasion.  She  bent
all  her  policy  to  defeat  or  elude  the  motion.  After
allowing  the  first  heat  of  their  zeal  to  evaporate,  she
called  into  her  presence  a  certain  number  of  each  house.
She  soothed  and  caressed  them ;  she  threatened  and
promised ;  she  remitted  subsidies  which  were  due,  and
refused  those  which  were  offered ;  and,  in  the  end,
prevailed  to  have  this  formidable  motion  put  off  for
that  session.  Happily  for  her,  the  conduct  of  the  Scot-
tish queen,  and  the  misfortunes  which  befel  her,  pre-
vented the  revival  of  such  a  motion  in  any  future
parliament.1

Meantime,  in  order  to  preserve  the  reputation  of
impartiality,  and  that  she  might  not  drive  Mary  into
any  desperate  measure,  she  committed  to  the  Tower  one
Thornton,  who  had  published  something  derogatory  to
the  right  of  the  Scottish  line  ;m  and  signified  her  dis-
pleasure against  a  member  of  the  house  of  commons,
who  seemed,  by  some  words  in  a  speech,  to  glance  at
Mary.n

An  extra-  Amidst  all  her  other  cares,  Mary  was  ever
solicitous  to  promote  the  interest  of  that  religion
wnicn  sne  professed.  The  re- establishment  of
Popery,  the  Romish  doctrine  seems  to  have  been  her
favourite  passion ;  and  though  the  design  was  con-
cealed with  care  and  conducted  with  caution,  she
pursued  it  with  a  persevering  zeal.  At  this  time  she
ventured  to  lay  aside  somewhat  of  her  usual  reserve ;

k  Keith,  357.

1  D'Ewes'  Journ.  104—130. Camd.  399. Melv.  119. Haynes,  446.
»  Camd.  401.  n  Haynes,  449.

1566.]  BOOK IV.  311

and  the  aid  which  she  expected  from  the  Popish
princes,  who  had  engaged  in  the  league  of  Bayonne,
encouraged  her  to  take  a  step,  which,  if  we  consider
the  temper  of  the  nation,  appears  to  be  extremely  bold.
Having  formerly  held  a  secret  correspondence  with  the
court  of  Rome,  she  now  resolved  to  allow  a  nuncio
from  the  pope  publicly  to  enter  her  dominions.  Car-
dinal Laurea,  at  that  time  bishop  of  Mondovi,  was  the
person  on  whom  Pius  V.  conferred  this  office,  and
along  with  him  he  sent  the  queen  a  present  of  twenty
thousand  crowns.0  It  is  not  the  character  of  the  papal
court  to  open  its  treasury  upon  distant  or  imaginary
hopes.  The  business  of  the  nuncio  into  Scotland  could
be  no  other  than  to  attempt  a  reconciliation  of  that
kingdom  to  the  Romish  see.  Thus  Mary  herself  un-
derstood it ;  and,  in  her  answer  to  a  letter  which  she
received  from  the  pope,  after  expressing  her  grateful
sense  of  his  paternal  care  and  liberality,  she  promises
that  she  would  bend  her  whole  strength  towards  the
re-establishment  and  propagation  of  the  Catholic  faith ;
that  she  would  receive  the  nuncio  with  every  possible
demonstration  of  respect,  and  concur  with  the  utmost
vigour,  in  all  his  designs,  towards  promoting  the  honour
of  God,  and  restoring  peace  to  the  kingdom ;  that  she
would  celebrate  the  baptism  of  the  prince  according  to
the  ceremonies  which  the  Romish  ritual  prescribes,
hoping  that  her  subjects  would  be  taught,  by  this  ex-
ample, again  to  reverence  the  sacraments  of  the  church,
which  they  had  so  long  treated  with  contempt ;  and
that  she  would  be  careful  to  instil  early  into  her  son
the  principles  of  a  sincere  love  and  attachment  to  the
Catholic  faith  .p  But  though  the  nuncio  was  already
arrived  at  Paris,  and  had  sent  over  one  of  his  attendants
with  part  of  the  money,  the  queen  did  not  think  the
juncture  proper  for  his  reception.  Elizabeth  was  pre-

0  Vita  Card,  Laur.  ap.  Burn,  vol.  Hi.  p.  325.
P  Conaei  Vita  Marias,  ap.  Jebb.  vol.ii.  p.  51.

312  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

paring  to  send  a  magnificent  embassy  into  Scotland,
against  the  time  of  the  prince's  baptism,  and,  as  it
would  have  been  improper  to  offend  her,  she  wisely
contrived,  under  various  pretences,  to  detain  Laurea  at
Paris. q  The  convulsions  into  which  the  kingdom  was
thrown  soon  after,  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  pursue
his  journey  any  farther.

At  the  very  time  that  Mary  was  secretly  carrying  on
these  negotiations  for  subverting  the  reformed  church,
she  did  not  scruple  publicly  to  employ  her  authority
towards  obtaining  for  its  ministers  a  more  certain  and
comfortable  subsistence/  During  this  year,  'she  issued
several  proclamations  and  acts  of  council  for  that
purpose,  and  readily  approved  of  every  scheme  which
was  proposed  for  the  more  effectual  payment  of  their
stipends.  This  part  of  her  conduct  does  little  honour
to  Mary's  integrity ;  and,  though  justified  by  the  ex-
ample of  princes,  who  often  reckon  falsehood  and  deceit
among  the  necessary  acts  of  government,  and  even  au-
thorized by  the  pernicious  casuistry  of  the  Roman
church,  which  transfers  breach  of  faith  to  heretics  from
the  list  of  crimes  to  that  of  duties ;  such  dissimula-
tion, however,  must  be  numbered  among  those  ble-
mishes which  never  stain  a  truly  great  and  generous
character.

December.  As  neither  the  French  nor  Piedmontese  am-
rionfor'"  bassadors  were  yet  arrived,  the  baptism  of  the
the  king  prince  was  put  off  from  time  to  time.  Mean-
while, Mary  fixed  her  residence  at  Craigmillar.5
Such  a  retirement,  perhaps,  suited  the  present  temper
of  her  mind,  and  induced  her  to  prefer  it  before  her
own  palace  of  Holyrood-house.  Her  aversion  for
the  king  grew  every  day  more  confirmed,  and  was
become  altogether  incurable.  A  deep  melancholy
succeeded  to  that  gaiety  of  spirit  which  was  natural

1  Keitli ,  Append.  135.  r  Keith,  561,  562. Knox,  401.

•Keith,  355.

1566.]  BOOK IV.  313

to  her.  The  rashness  and  levity  of  her  own  choice,
and  the  king's  ingratitude  and  obstinacy,  filled  her
with  shame  and  with  despair.  A  variety  of  passions
preyed  at  once  on  a  mind,  all  whose  sensations  were
exquisite,  and  all  its  emotions  strong,  and  often  extorted
from  her  the  last  wish  of  the  unfortunate,  that  life
itself  might  come  to  an  end.*

But  as  the  earl of Bedford, and  the count de
Brienne,  the  English  and  French  ambassadors,  whom
she  had  long  expected,  arrived  about  this  time,  Mary
was  obliged  to  suppress  what  passed  in  her  bosom,
and  to  set  out  for  Stirling,  in  order  to  celebrate  the
baptism  of  her  son. Bedford  was  attended  by  a  nu-
merous and  splendid  train,  and  brought  presents  from
Elizabeth,  suitable  to  her  own  dignity,  and  the  respect
with  which  she  affected,  at  that  time,  to  treat  the  queen
of  Scots.  Great  preparations  had  been  made  by  Mary,
and  the  magnificence  displayed  by  her  on  this  occasion
exceeded  whatever  had  been  formerly  known  in  Scot-
land. The  ceremony  itself  was  performed  ac-
cording to  the  rites  of  the  Romish  church. But
neither  Bedford  nor  any  of  the  Scottish  nobles  who
professed  the  Protestant  religion,  entered  within  the
gates  of  the  chapel. u The  spirit  of  that  age,  firm  and
uncomplying,  would  not,  upon  any  inducement,  conde-
scend to  witness  an  action  which  it  deemed  idolatrous.
The  king's Henry 's  behaviour  at  this  juncture  perfectly
behavfour  discovers  the  excess  of  his  caprice,  as  well  as
Smof  the  of  nis  fo%- He  chose  to  reside  at  Stirling,
prince. but  confined  himself  to  his  own  apartment;
and,  as  the  queen  distrusted  every  nobleman  who  ven-
tured to  converse  with him,  he  was  left in abso-
lute solitude. Nothing  could  be  more  singular,  or
was  less  expected,  than  his  choosing  to  appear  in  a
manner  that  both  published  the  contempt  under  which

*  Keith,  Pref.  vii.  «  Ibidi  360.

314  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

he  had  fallen,  and,  by  exposing  the  queen's  domestic
unhappiness  to  the  observation  of  so  many  foreigners,
looked  like  a  step  taken  on  purpose  to  mortify  and  to
offend  her.  Mary  felt  this  insult  sensibly ;  and,  not-
withstanding all  her  efforts  to  assume  the  gaiety  which
suited  the  occasion,  and  which  was  necessary  for  the  po-
lite reception  of  her  guests,  she  was  sometimes  obliged
to  retire,  in  order  to  be  at  liberty  to  indulge  her  sor-
row, and  give  vent  to  her  tears/  The  king  still  persist-
ed in  his  design  of  retiring  into  foreign  parts,  and  daily
threatened  to  put  it  into  execution/
Elizabeth  The  ceremony  of  witnessing  the  prince's
to  accImU-rs  baptism  was  not  the  sole  business  of  Bedford's
differences  embassy.  His  instructions  contained  an  over-
with  Mary,  ture  which  ought  to  have  gone  far  towards  ex-
tinguishing those  jealousies  which  had  so  long  sub-
sisted between  the  two  queens.  The  treaty  of  Edin-
burgh, which  has  been  so  often  mentioned,  was  the
principal  occasion  of  these.  The  spirit,  however,  which

*  Keith,  Pref.  vii.

y  Camden  affirms,  401,  that  Bedford  was  commanded  by  Elizabeth  not  to  give
Darnley  the  title  of  king.  As  this  was  an  indignity  not  to  be  borne  either  by
Mary  or  her  husband,  it  hath  been  asserted  to  be  the  cause  of  the  king's  absence
from  the  ceremony  of  his  sou's  baptism.  Keith,  360.  Good.  319.  But,  1.  No
such  thing  is  to  be  found  among  Bedford's  instructions,  the  original  of  which  still
remains.  Keith,  356.  2.  Bedford's  advice  to  the  queen,  by  Melvil,  is  utterly  in-
consistent with  Camden's  assertion.  Melv.  153.  Melvil's  account  is  confirmed
by  Elizabeth's  instructions  to  Sir  Henry  Norris,  where  she  affirms  that  she  com-
manded Bedford  to  employ  his  best  offices  towards  reconciling  Mary  to  her  hus-
band, which  she  had  attempted  to  no  purpose.  Digges's  Compl.  Ambas.  p.  13.
A  paper  published,  Appendix  No.  XVIII.  proves  the  same  thing.  3.  Le  Croc,  the
French  resident,  mentions  the  king's  absence,  but  without  giving  that  reason  for  it,
which  has  been  founded  on  Camden's  words,  though,  if  that  had  been  the  real  one,  it
is  hardly  possible  to  conceive  that  he  should  have  neglected  to  mention  it.  Le  Croc's
first  letter  is  dated  December  2,  some  time  prior  to  the  arrival  ef  the  earl  of  Bed-
ford in  Scotland  ;  and  when  his  instructions,  either  public  or  secret,  could  hardly
be  known.  Le  Croc  plainly  supposes  that  the  discord  between  the  king  and
queen  was  the  cause  of  his  absence  from  the  baptism,  and  his  account  of  this
matter  is  that  which  I  have  followed.  Keith,  Pref.  vii.  4.  He  informs  his  court
that  on  account  of  the  difference  betwixt  the  king  and  the  queen,  he  had  refused  to
hold  any  farther  correspondence  with  the  former,  though  he  appears,  in  many  in-
stances, to  have  been  his  great  confidant.  Ibid.  5.  As  the  king  was  not  present
at  the  baptism,  he  seems  to  have  been  excluded  from  any  share  in  the  ordinary
administration  of  business.  Two  acts  of  privy-council,  one  on  the  20th,  and  the
other  on  the  21st  of  December,  are  found  in  Keith,  562.  They  both  run  in  the
queen's  name  alone.  The  king  seems  not  to  have  been  present.  This  could  not
be  owing  to  Elizabeth's  instructions  to  Bedford.

1566.]  BOOK IV.  315

had  risen  to  such  an  height  in  the  late  parliament,
the  power  of  the  party  which  favoured  the  Scottish
queen's  title,  the  number  and  activity  of  her  agents  in
different  parts  of  the  kingdom,  alarmed  Elizabeth,  and
induced  her  to  forego  any  advantage  which  the  ambi-
guous and  artful  expressions  in  that  treaty  might
afford  her.  Nothing  was  now  demanded  of  Mary,  but
to  renounce  any  title  to  the  crown  of  England  during
Elizabeth's  life  and  the  lives  of  her  posterity;  who,  on  the
other  hand,  engaged  to  take  no  step  which  might  prove
injurious  to  Mary's  claim  upon  the  succession.2

Mary  could  not,  with  decency,  reject  a  proposition
so  equitable;  she  insisted,  however,  that  Elizabeth
should  order  the  right  upon  which  she  claimed,  to  be
legally  examined  and  publicly  recognised,  and  parti-
cularly that  the  testament  of  Henry  VIII.,  whereby  he
had  excluded  the  descendants  of  his  eldest  sister,  the
queen  of  Scotland,  from  the  place  due  to  them  in  the
order  of  succession,  might  be  produced,  and  considered
by  the  English  nobility.  Mary's  ministers  had  credu-
lously embraced  an  opinion,  that  this  testament,  which
they  so  justly  conceived  to  be  injurious  to  their  mis-
tress, was  a  mere  forgery  ;  and,  on  different  occasions,
had  urged  Elizabeth  to  produce  it.  Mary  would  have
suffered  considerably  by  gaining  this  point.  The  ori-
ginal testament  is  still  extant,  and  not  the  least  doubt
can  be  entertained  of  its  genuineness  and  authenticity.
But  it  was  not  Elizabeth's  intention  to  weaken  or  to
set  aside  the  title  of  the  house  of  Stewart.  She  aimed
at  nothing  more,  than  to  keep  the  question  concerning
the  succession  perplexed  and  undecided,  and,  by  in-
dustriously eluding  this  request,  she  did,  in  one  respect,
real  service  to  Mary's  cause. a

A  few  days  after  the  baptism  of  the  prince,  Morton
and  all  the  other  conspirators  against  Rizio  obtained

*  Keith,  356.
a  Bymer,  xv.  p.  110. Keith,  358. Note  (c.) Murden,  368.

316  SCOTLAND.  [1566.

their  pardon,  and  leave  to  return  into  Scotland.  Mary,
who  had  hitherto  continued  inexorable  to  every  entreaty
in  their  behalf,  yielded  at  last  to  the  solicitations  of
Bothwell.b  He  could  hope  for  no  success  in  those
bold  designs  on  which  his  ambition  resolved  to  ven-
ture, without  drawing  aid  from  every  quarter.  By
procuring  a  favour  for  Morton  and  his  associates,  of
which  they  had  good  reason  to  despair,  he  expected  to
secure  a  band  of  faithful  and  determined  adherents.

The  king  still  remained  at  Stirling  in  solitude  and
under  contempt.  His  impatience  in  this  situation,  to-
gether with  the  alarm  given  him  by  the  rumour  of  a
design  to  seize  his  person,  and  confine  him  in  prison,0
was  the  occasion  of  his  leaving  that  place  in  an  abrupt
manner,  and  retiring  to  his  father  at  Glasgow.
June  25.  Two  assemblies  of  the  church  were  held
church'  during  this  year.  New  Complaints  were  made,
affairs.  anc[  UpOn  good  grounds,  of  the  poverty  and
contempt  under  which  the  Protestant  clergy  were  suf-
fered to  languish.  Penurious  as  the  allotment  for  their
subsistence  was,  they  had  not  received  the  least
part  of  what  was  due  for  the  preceding  year.d  No-
thing less  than  a  zeal,  ready  to  endure  and  to  suffer
every  thing  for  a  good  cause,  could  have  persuaded
men  to  adhere  to  a  church  so  indigent  and  so  neg-
lected. The  extraordinary  expenses  occasioned  by
the  prince's  baptism  had  exhausted  the  queen's  trea-
sury, and  the  sums  appropriated  for  the  subsistence  of
the  clergy  were  diverted  into  other  channels.  The
queen  was  therefore  obliged  to  prevent  the  just  remon-
strances of  the  assembly,  by  falling  on  some  new
method  for  the  relief  of  the  church.  Some  symptoms
of  liberality,  some  stretch  towards  munificence,  might
have  been  expected  in  an  assignment  which  was  made
with  an  intention  of  soothing  and  silencing  the  clergy.
But  both  the  queen  and  the  nobles  held  fast  the  riches

b  Good.  vol.  i.  140. Melv.  154.  «  Keith,  Pref.  viii. a  ibid.  562.

1566.]  BOOK IV.  317

of  the  church  which  they  had  seized.  A  sum  which,
at  the  highest  computation,  can  hardly  be  reckoned  at
nine  thousand  pounds  sterling,6  was  deemed  sufficient
for  the  maintenance  of  a  whole  national  church,  by
men  who  had  lately  seen  single  monasteries  possessed
of  revenues  far  superior  in  value.

The  ecclesiastics  in  that  age  bore  the  grievances
which  affected  themselves  alone  with  astonishing  pa-
tience ;  but,  wherever  the  reformed  religion  was  threat-
ened, they  were  extremely  apt  to  be  alarmed,  and  to
proclaim,  in  the  loudest  manner,  their  apprehensions
of  danger.  A  just  occasion  of  this  kind  was  given
them  a  short  time  before  the  meeting  of  the  assembly.
The  usurped  and  oppressive  jurisdiction  of  the  spiri-
tual courts  had  been  abolished  by  the  parliament,  in  the
year  1 560,  and  commissaries  were  appointed  to  hear
and  determine  the  causes  which  formerly  came  under
their  cognizance/  Among  the  few  acts  of  that  parlia-
ment to  which  Mary  had  paid  any  regard,  this  was
one.  She  had  confirmed  the  authority  of  the  com-
missaries, and  had  given  them  instructions  for  di-
recting their  proceedings/  which  are  still  of  great
authority  in  that  court.  From  the  time  of  their  first
appointment,  these  judges  had  continued  in  the  unin-
terrupted exercise  of  their  function,  when  of  a  sudden
the  queen  issued  a  proclamation,  restoring  the  arch-
bishop of  St.  Andrew's  to  his  ancient  jurisdiction,  and
depriving  the  commissaries  of  all  authority.h

A  motive,  which  cannot  be  justified,  rendered  the
queen  not  unwilling  to  venture  upon  this  rash  action.
She  had  been  contriving  for  some  time  how  to  re-esta-
blish the  Popish  religion;  and  the  restoring  the  ancient
ecclesiastics  to  their  former  jurisdiction  seemed  to  be  a
considerable  step  towards  that  end.  The  motive  which
prompted  Bothwell,  to  whose  influence  over  the  queen
this  action  must  be  chiefly  imputed/  was  still  more

*  Keith,  562. f  Ibid.  152. *  Ibid.  251. h  Knox,  403. »  Id.  ibid.

318  SCOTLANP.  [1566.

criminal.  His  enterprising  ambition,  had  already
formed  that  bold  design,  which  he  soon  after  put  in
execution ;  and  the  use  which  we  shall  hereafter  find
him  making  of  that  authority  which  the  Popish  eccle-
siastics regained,  discovers  the  reasons  of  his  present
conduct,  in  contributing  to  revive  their  power.  The
Protestant  clergy  were  not  unconcerned  spectators  of
an  event  which  threatened  their  religion  with  unavoid-
able destruction ;  but,  as  they  despaired  of  obtaining
the  proper  remedy  from  the  queen  herself,  they  ad-
dressed a  remonstrance  to  the  whole  body  of  the  Pro-
testant nobility,  full  of  that  ardent  zeal  for  religion,
which  the  danger  to  which  it  was  exposed  at  that  time,
seemed  to  required  What  effects  this  vehement  ex-
hortation might  have  produced,  we  have  no  opportu-
nity of  judging,  the  attention  of  the  nation  being
quickly  turned  towards  events  of  another  and  more
tragical  nature.

The  king  Immediately  upon  the  king's  leaving  Stir-
Gia8goCw.at  ling?  an(l  before  he  could  reach  Glasgow,  he
1567.  was  seize(i  wjth  a  dangerous  distemper.  The
symptoms  which  attended  it  were  violent  and  unusual,
and  in  that  age  it  was  commonly  imputed  to  the  effects
of  poison.1  It  is  impossible,  amidst  the  contradic-
tions of  historians,  to  decide  with  certainty  concerning
its  nature  or  its  cause.™  His  life  was  in  the  utmost
danger ;  but  after  lingering  for  some  weeks,  the  vigour
of  his  constitution  surmounted  the  malignity  of  his
disease.

k  Keith,  567.  1  Mel v.  154. Knox,  401.

m  Buchanan  and  Knox  are  positive  that  the  king  had  been  poisoned.  They
mention  the  black  and  putrid  pustules  which  broke  out  all  over  his  body.  Bucha-
nan adds,  that  Abernethy,  the  king's  physician,  plainly  declared  that  poison  was
the  cause  of  these  symptoms,  and  that  the  queen  refused  to  allow  her  own  physician
to  attend  him.  Buch.  349.  Knox,  401.  2.  Blackwood,  Causin,  &c.  Jebb,  vol.  ii.
59.  214.  assert,  that  the  small-pox  was  the  disease  with  which  the  king  was  seized.
He  is  called  a  pockish  man  in  the  queen's  letter.  Good.  vol.  ii.  15.  The  reason
given  by  French  Paris  for  lodging  the  king  at  the  Kirk  of  Field,  viz.  lest  the  young
prince  should  catch  the  infection  if  he  staid  in  the  palace,  seems  to  favour  this  opi-
nion. Anders,  vol.  ii.  193.  Carte  mentions  it  as  a  proof  of  Mary's  tenderness  to
her  husband,  that  though  she  never  had  the  small-pox  herself,  she  ventured  to
attend  him,  vol.  iii.  446.  This,  if  it  had  been  true,  would  have  afforded  a  good

1567.]  BOOK IV.  319

Neglected  Mary's  neglect  of  the  king  on  this  occasion
by  Mary.  Was  equa\  to  that  with  which  he  had  treated
her  during  her  illness  at  Jedburgh.  She  no  longer  felt
the  warmth  of  conjugal  affection  which  prompts  to  sym-
pathy, and  delights  in  all  those  tender  offices  which
soothe  and  alleviate  sickness  and  pain.  At  this  junc-
ture, she  did  not  even  put  on  the  appearance  of
this  passion.  Notwithstanding  the  king's  danger,  she
amused  herself  with  excursions  to  different  parts  of
the  country,  and  suffered  near  a  month  to  elapse  before
she  visited  him  at  Glasgow.  By  that  time  the  violence
of  the  distemper  was  over,  and  the  king,  though  weak
and  languishing,  was  out  of  all  danger.
The  breach  The  breach  between  Mary  and  her  husband
themTrre-  was  not  occasi°ne(l  by •  any  of  those  slight
parable,  disgusts  which  interrupt  the  domestic  union,
without  dissolving  it  altogether.  Almost  all  the
passions  which  operate  with  greatest  violence  on
a  female  mind,  and  drive  it  to  the  most  dangerous
extremes,  concurred  in  raising  and  fomenting  this  un-
happy quarrel.  Ingratitude  for  the  favours  she  had
bestowed,  contempt  of  her  person,  violations  of  the
marriage  vow,  encroachments  on  her  power,  conspira-
cies against  her  favourites,  jealousy,  insolence,  and
obstinacy,  were  the  injuries  of  which  Mary  had  great
reason  to  complain.  She  felt  them  with  the  utmost
sensibility  ;  and,  added  to  the  anguish  of  disappointed
love,  they  produced  those  symptoms  of  despair  which
we  have  already  described.  Her  resentment  against
the  king  seems  not  to  have  abated  from  the  time  of
his  leaving  Stirling.  In  a  letter  written  with  her  own
hand  to  her  ambassador  in  France,  on  the  day  before
she  set  out  for  Glasgow,  no  tokens  of  sudden  reconcile-

pretence  for  not  visiting  him  sooner :  but  Mary  had  the  small-pox  in  her  infancy.
Sadler's  Letters,  p.  330.  An  additional  proof  of  this  is  produced  from  a  poem  of
Adrian  Turnebus,  by  the  publisher  of  Ancient  Scottish  Poems,  p.  308.  3.  Bishop
Lesty  affirms,  that  the  king's  disease  was  the  French  pox.  Keith,  364.  Note  (ft).
In  that  age,  this  disease. was  esteemed  so  contagious,  that  persons  infected  with  it
were  removed  without  the  walls  of  cities.

320  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

ment  appear.  On  the  contrary,  she  mentions
with  some  bitterness,  the  king's  ingratitude,  the
jealousy  with  which  he  observed  her  actions,  and  the
inclination  he  discovered  to  disturb  her  government,
and  at  the  same  time  talks  of  all  his  attempts  with  the
utmost  scorn.n

Visits  the  After  this  discovery  of  Mary's  sentiments,  at
ting  at  the  time  of  her  departure  from  Edinburgh  to

Glasgow.  .. 1 i  .  i  • i i -i i

Glasgow,  a  visit  to  the  king,  which  had  been
neglected  when  his  situation  rendered  it  most  neces-
sary, appears  singular,  and  it  could  hardly  be  expected
that  any  thing  but  marks  of  jealousy  and  distrust  should
appear  in  such  an  interview.  This,  however,  was  far
from  being  the  case ;  she  not  only  visited  Henry,  but,
by  all  her  words  and  actions,  endeavoured  to  express
an  uncommon  affection  for  him ;  and  though  this  made
impression  on  the  credulous  spirit  of  her  husband,  no
less  flexible  on  some  occasions,  than  obstinate  on
others ;  yet  to  those  who  are  acquainted  with  the  human
heart,  and  who  know  how  seldom  and  how  slowly
such  wounds  in  domestic  happiness  are  healed,  this
sudden  transition  will  appear  with  a  very  suspicious
air,  and  will  be  considered  by  them  as  the  effect  of
artifice.

Her  dissi-  But  &  ig  not  on  suspicion  alone,  that  Mary
muiation.  [s  charged  with  dissimulation  in  this  part  of
her  conduct.  Two  of  her  famous  letters  to  Bothwell
were  written  during  her  stay  at  Glasgow,  and  fully
lay  open  this  scene  of  iniquity.  He  had  so  far  suc-
ceeded in  his  ambitious  and  criminal  design,  as  to
gain  an  absolute  ascendant  over  the  queen;  and,  in  a
situation  such  as  Mary's,  merit  not  so  conspicuous,  ser-
vices of  far  inferior  importance,  and  address  much
less  insinuating  than  Bothwell's,  may  be  supposed  to
steal  imperceptibly  on  a  female  heart,  and  entirely  to
overcome  it.  Unhappily,  among  those  in  the  higher

"  Keith,  Pref.  viii.

1567.]  BOOK  IV.  321

ranks  of  life,  scruples  with  regard  to  conjugal  fidelity
are  often  fneither  many  nor  strong;  nor  did  the
manners  of  that  court,  in  which  Mary  had  been  edu-
cated, contribute  to  increase  or  to  fortify  them.  The
amorous  turn  of  Francis  I.  and  Henry  II.,  the  licen-
tiousness of  the  military  character  in  that  age,  and
the  liberty  of  appearing  in  all  companies,  which  began
to  be  allowed  to  women,  who  had  not  yet  acquired
that  delicacy  of  sentiment,  and  those  polished  man-
ners, which  alone  can  render  this  liberty  innocent,
had  introduced,  among  the  French,  an  astonishing  re-
laxation in  domestic  morals.  Such  examples,  which
were  familiar  to  Mary  from  her  infancy,  could  hardly
fail  of  diminishing  that  horror  of  vice  which  is  natural
to  a  virtuous  mind.  The  king's  behaviour  would  ren-
der the  first  approach  of  forbidden  sentiments  less
shocking;  resentment,  and  disappointed  love,  would
be  apt  to  represent  whatever  soothed  her  revenge,  as
justifiable  on  that  account;  and  so  many  concurring
causes  might,  almost  imperceptibly,  kindle  a  new  pas-
sion in  her  heart.

The  mo-  But,  whatever  opinion  we  may  form  with  re-
fjt'  gard  to  the  rise  and  progress  of  this  passion,
the  letters  themselves  breathe  all  the  ardour  and  ten-
derness of  love.  The  affection  which  Mary  there  ex-
presses for  Both  well  fully  accounts  for  every  subse*
quent  part  of  her  conduct ;  which,  without  admitting
this  circumstance,  appears  altogether  mysterious,  in-
consistent, and  inexplicable.  That  reconcilement  with
her  husband,  of  which,  if  we  allow  it  to  be  genuine,
it  is  impossible  to  give  any  plausible  account,  is  dis-
covered, by  the  queen's  own  confession,  to  have  been
mere  artifice  and  deceit.  As  her  aversion  for  her  hus-
band, and  the  suspicious  attention  with  which  she  ob-
served his  conduct,  became  universally  known,  her  ears
were  officiously  filled,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases,  with
groundless  or  aggravated  accounts  of  his  actions.  By

VOL.  I.  Y

322  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

some  she  was  told,  that  the  king  intended  to  seize  the
person  of  the  prince  his  son,  and  in  his  name  to  usurp
the  government;  by  others  she  was  assured  that  he  re-
solved instantly  to  leave  the  kingdom; that  a  vessel
was  hired  for  this  purpose,  and  lay  in  the  river  Clyde
ready  to  receive him.0 The  last was what  Mary
chiefly  dreaded. Henry's  retiring  into  a  foreign  coun-
try must  have  been  highly  dishonourable  to  the  queen,
\J  and  would  have  entirely  disconcerted  Bothwell's  mea-
^  sures. While  he  resided  at  Glasgow,  at  a  distance
from  her,  and  in  that  part  of  the kingdom  where
the  interest  of  his  family  was  greatest,  he  might  with
more  facility  accomplish  his  designs. In  order,  there-
fore, to  prevent  his  executing  any  such  wild  scheme,
it  was necessary  to  bring  him  to  some  place  where
he  would  be  more  immediately  under  her  own  eye.
prevails For  this  purpose,  she  first  employed  all  her  art
come"toto to  regain his confidence,  and  then  proposed
Edinburgh.  to  remove  him  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Edin-
burgh, under  pretence  that  there  he  would  have  easier
access  to  the  advice  of  physicians,  and  that  she  herself
could  attend  him  without  being  absent  from  her  son.p
The  king  was  weak  enough  to  suffer  himself  to  be
persuaded;  and  being  still  feeble,  and incapable  of
bearing  fatigue,  was  carried  in  a  litter  to  Edinburgh.

The  place  prepared  for  his  reception  was  a  house
^>vbelonging  to  the  provost  of  a  collegiate  church,  called
Kirk  of  Field.  It  stood  almost  upon  the  same  spot
where  the  house  belonging  to  the  principal  of  the
university  now  stands.  Such  a  situation,  on  a  rising
ground,  and  at  that  time  in  an  ppen  field,  had  all  the
advantages  of  healthful  air  to  recommend  it ;  but,  on
the  other  hand,  the  solitude  of  the  place  rendered  it  ex-
tremely proper  for  the  commission  of  that  crime,  with  a
view  to  which  it  seems  manifestly  to  have  been  chosen.
Mary  continued  to  attend  the  king  with  the  most

•  Keith,  Pref.  viij.  P  Good.  vol.  ii.  8.

1567.]  BOOK IV.  323

He  is  mur-  assiduous  care. She  seldom  was  absent  from

dered  there,

twQ  njghts  jn

the  chamber  under  his  apartment.  She  heaped  on  him
so  many  marks  of  tenderness  and  confidence  as  in  a
great  measure  quieted  those  suspicions  which  had  so
long  disturbed  him.  But  while  he  was  fondly  in-
dulging in  dreams  of  the  return  of  his  former  happi-
ness, he  stood  on  the  very  brink  of  destruction.  On
Sunday  the  9th  of  February,  about  eleven  at  night,  the
queen  left  the  Kirk  of  Field,  in  order  to  be  present
at  a  masque  in  the  palace.  At  two  next  morning,  the
house  in  which  the  king  lay  was  blown  up  with  gun-
powder. The  noise  and  shock  which  this  sudden  ex-
plosion occasioned,  alarmed  the  whole  city.  The  in-
habitants ran  to  the  place  whence  it  came.  The  dead
body  of  the  king,  with  that  of  a  servant  who  slept  in
the  same  room,  were  found  lying  in  an  adjacent  garden
without  the  city  wall,  untouched  by  fire,  and  with  no
bruise  or  mark  of  violence.

His  cha-  Such  was  the  unhappy  fate  of  Henry  Stewart
racier.  jQr(j  j)arnieVj  [n  the  twenty-first  year  of  his  age.
The  indulgence  of  fortune,  and  his  own  external  ac-
complishments, without  any  other  merit,  had  raised
him  to  an  height  of  dignity  of  which  he  was  alto-
gether unworthy.  By  his  folly  and  ingratitude,  he
lost  the  heart  of  a  woman  who  doated  on  him  to  dis-
traction. His  insolence  and  inconstancy  alienated  from
him  such  of  the  nobles  as  had  contributed  most  zeal-
ously towards  his  elevation.  His  levity  and  caprice
exposed  him  to  the  scorn  of  the  people,  who  once  re-
vered him  as  the  descendant  of  their  ancient  kings  and
heroes.  Had  he  died  a  natural  death,  his  end  would
have  been  unlamented,  and  his  memory  have  been  for-
gotten ;  but  the  cruel  circumstances  of  his  murder,  and
the  shameful  remissness  in  neglecting  to  avenge  it,
have  made  his  name  to  be  remembered  with  regret,

y  2

324  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

and  have  rendered  him  the  object  of  pity,  to  which  he
had  otherwise  no  title.

Bothweii  Every  one's  imagination  was  at  work  to  guess
s-  who  had  contrived  and  executed  this  execrable
f  deed.  The  suspicion  fell,  with  almost  general
der.  consent,  on  Bothweii  ;q  and  some  reflections
were  thrown  out,  as  if  the  queen  herself  were  no
stranger  to  the  crime.  Of  Bothwell's  guilt  there  remains
the  fullest  evidence  that  the  nature  of  the  action  will
admit.  The  queen's  known  sentiments  with  regard  to
her  husband,  gave  a  great  appearance  of  probability
to  the  imputation  with  which  she  was  loaded/

Two  days  after  the  murder,  a  proclamation  was  issued
by  the  queen,  offering  a  considerable  reward  to  any
person  who  should  discover  those  who  had  been  guilty
of  such  a  horrid  and  detestable  crime  ;s  and  though
Bothweii  was  now  one  of  the  greatest  subjects  in
the  kingdom,  formidable  on  account  of  his  own  power,
and  protected  by  the  queen's  favour,  it  was  impost
sible  to  suppress  the  sentiments  and  indignation  of
the  people.  Papers  were  affixed  to  the  most  public
places  of  the  city,  accusing  him  of  the  murder,  and
naming  his  accomplices ;  pictures  appeared  to  the  same
purpose,  and  voices  were  heard  in  the  middle  of  the
night,  charging  him  with  that  barbarous  action.  But
the  authors  of  these  rumours  did  not  confine  their  ac-
cusations to  Bothweii  alone ;  they  insinuated  that  the
queen  herself  was  accessary  to  the  crime.*  This  bold
accusation,  which  so  directly  attacked  Mary's  reputa-
tion, drew  the  attention  of  her  council ;  and,  by  en-
gaging them  in  an  inquiry  after  the  authors  of  these
libels,  diverted  them  from  searching  for  the  murderers
of  the  king.u  It  could  scarce  be  expected  that  Mary

q  Melv.  155. Anders,  vol.  ii.  156.

r  See  Dissertation  concerning  the  murder  of  Henry  Darnley,  and  the  genuineness
of  Mary's  letters  to  Bothweii,  Appendix.

•  Anders,  vol.  i.  36.  *  Id.  vol.  ii.  156.  »  Id.  vol.  i.  38.

1567.]  BOOK  IV.  325

herself  would  be  extremely  solicitous  to  discover  those
who  had  rid  her  of  a  husband,  whom  she  had  so
violently  hated.  It  was  Bothwell's  interest,  who  had
the  supreme  direction  of  this,  as  well  as  of  all  other
affairs,  to  stifle  and  suppress  whatever  evidence  should
be  offered,  and  to  cover,  if  possible,  the  whole  transac-
tion under  the  veil  of  darkness  and  of  silence.  Some
inquiry*  however,  was  made,  and  some  persons  called
before  the  council ;  but  the  examination  was  conducted
with  the  most  indecent  remissness,  and  in  such  a  man-
ner as  to  let  in  no  light  upon  that  scene  of  guilt.x

It  was  not  her  own  subjects  alone  who  suspected
Mary  of  having  been  accessary  to  this  unnatural  crime ;
nor  did  an  opinion,  so  dishonourable  to  her  character,
owe  its  rise  and  progress  to  the  jealousy  and  malice  of
her  factious  nobles.  The  report  of  the  manner  and
circumstances  of  the  king's  murder  spread  quickly  over
all  Europe,  and,  even  in  that  age,  which  was  accustomed
to  deeds  of  violence,  it  excited  universal  horror.  As
her  unhappy  breach  with  her  husband  had  long  been
matter  of  public  discourse,  the  first  conjectures  which
were  formed  with  regard  to  his  death,  were  extremely
to  her  disadvantage.  Her  friends,  at  a  loss  what  apo-
logy to  offer  for  her  conduct,  called  on  her  to  prosecute
the  murderers  with  the  utmost  diligence,  and  expected
that  the  rigour  of  her  proceedings  would  prove  the
best  and  fullest  vindication  of  her  innocence.7
Lennox  Lennox  at  the  same  time  incited  Mary  to
Bothweii  vengeance  with  incessant  importunity.  This
oMhe  nobleman  had  shared  in  his  son's  disgrace,  and
murder,  being  treated  by  Mary  with  neglect,  usually
resided  at  a  distance  from  court.  Roused,  how-
ever, by  an  event  no  less  shocking  to  the  heart  of  a
father,  than  fatal  to  all  his  schemes  of  ambition,  he
ventured  to  write  to  the  queen,  and  to  offer  his
advice  with  respect  to  the  most  effectual  method

*  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  167, 168.  T  Keith,  Pref.  ix.

3'20  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

for  discovering  and  convicting  those  who  had  so  cruelly
deprived  him  of  a  son,  and  her  of  a  husband.  He
urged  her  to  prosecute  those  who  were  guilty  with
vigour,  and  to  bring  them  to  a  speedy  trial;  he  de-
clared his  own  suspicion  of  Bothwell,  and  of  those
who  were  named  as  his  accomplices ;  he  required  that,
out  of  regard  to  decency,  and  in  order  to  encourage
evidence  to  appear  against  them,  the  persons  accused
of  such  an  atrocious  crime  should  be  committed  to
custody,  or  at  least  excluded  from  her  court  and
presence.2

Mary  was  then  at  Seaton,  whither  she  had  retired
after  the  burial  of  the  king,  whose  body  was  deposited
among  the  monarchs  of  Scotland,  in  a  private  but
decent  manner .a  The  former  part  of  the  earl's  demand
could  not,  on  any  pretence,  be  eluded ;  and  it  was
resolved  to  bring  Bothwell  immediately  to  trial.  But,
instead  of  confining  him  to  any  prison,  Mary
°ton  admitted  him  into  all  her  counsels,  and  allowed
person?  universally  reputed  the  murderer  of
her  husband,  to  enjoy  all  the  security,  the  dignity,  and
the  power  of  a  favourite.b  The  offices  which  Bothwell
already  possessed,  gave  him  the  command  of  all  the
south  of  Scotland.  The  castle  of  Edinburgh,  however,
was  a  place  of  so  much  consequence,  that  he  wished
earnestly  to  have  it  in  his  own  power.  The  queen,  in
order  to  prevail  on  the  earl  of  Mar  to  surrender  it,
consented  to  put  the  person  of  the  young  prince  in  his
hands,  and  immediately  bestowed  the  govern-
ment of  that  important  fortress  upon  Bothwell.0
So  many  steps  in  her  conduct  inconsistent  with  all  the
rules  of  prudence  and  of  decency,  must  be  imputed  to
an  excess  either  of  folly  or  of  love.  Mary's  known
character  fully  vindicates  her  from  the  former ;  of  the
latter,  many  and  striking  proofs  soon  appeared.

7  Keith,  369,  &c.  a  Anders,  vol.  i.  23.  b  Ibid.  vol.  i.  40,  &c.

c  Ibid.  vol.  i.  Pref.  64. Keith,  579.

1567.]  BOOK IV.  327

Hastens  on  No  direct  evidence  had  yet  appeared  against
his  trial.  Bothweli;  but  as  time  ^ght  bring  to  light

the  circumstances  of  a  crime  in  which  so  many  ac-
complices were  concerned,  it  was  of  great  import-
ance to  hurry  over  the  trial,  while  nothing  more  than
general  suspicions,  and  uncertain  surmises,  could  be
produced  by  his  accusers.  For  this  reason,  in  a  meet-
ing of  privy-council,  held  on  the  28th  of  March,  the
12th  of  April  was  appointed  for  the  day  of  trial.
Though  the  law  allowed,  and  the  manner  in  which
criminal  causes  were  carried  on  in  that  age  required,
a  much  longer  interval,  it  appears  from  several  circum-
stances that  this  short  space  was  considerably  con-
tracted, and  that  Lennox  had  only  eleven  days'  warn-
ing to  prepare  for  accusing  a  person  so  far  superior  to
himself  both  in  power  and  in  favour .d  No  man  could
be  less  in  a  condition  to  contend  with  an  [antagonist
who  was  thus  supported.  Though  Lennox's  paternal
estate  had  been  restored  to  him  when  he  was  recalled
into  Scotland,  it  seems  to  have  been  considerably  im-
paired during  his  banishment.  His  vassals,  while  he
resided  in  England,  had  been  accustomed  to  some
degree  of  independence,  and  he  had  not  recovered  that
ascendant  over  them,  which  a  feudal  chief  usually
possessed.  He  had  no  reason  to  expect  the  concur-
rence of  any  of  those  factions  into  which  the  nobles
were  divided.  During  the  short  period  of  his  son's
prosperity,  he  had  taken  such  steps  as  gave  rise  to

d  The  act  of  privy-council,  appointing  the  day  of  Bothwell's  trial,  bears  date
March  the  28th,  which  happened  on  a  Thursday.  Anders,  vol.  i.  50.  The  queen's
warrant  to  the  messengers,  empowering  them  to  summon  Lennox  to  be  present,  is
dated  on  the  29th.  Anders,  vol.  ii.  97.  He  was  summoned  by  public  proclamation
at  the  cross  of  Edinburgh  on  the  same  day.  Tbid.  100.  He  was  summoned  at  his
dwelling-houses  in  Glasgow  and  Dumbarton  the  30th  of  March,  the  1st  and  2d  days
of  April.  Ibid.  101.  He  was  summoned  at  Perth,  April  1st.  Ibid.  102.  Though
Lennox  resided  at  that  time  forty  miles  from  Edinburgh,  the  citation  might  have
been  given  him  sooner.  Such  an  unnecessary  delay  affords  some  cause  for  suspi-
cion. It  is  true,  Mary,  in  her  letter,  March  24th,  invited  Lennox  to  come  to
Edinburgh  the  ensuing  week  ;  this  gave  him  warning  some  days  sooner,  that  she
intended  to  bring  on  the  trial  without  delay.  But  the  precise  time  could  not  be
legally  or  certainly  known  to  Lennox  sooner  than  ten  or  twelve  days  before  the  day
on  which  he  was  required  to  appear.  By  the  law  and  practice  of  Scotland,  at  that
time,  parties  were  summoned,  in  cases  of  treason,  forty  days  previous  to  the  trial.

328  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

an  open  breach  with  Murray  and  all  his  adherents.
The  partisans  of  the  house  of  Hamilton  were  his  here-
ditary and  mortal  enemies.  Huntly  was  linked  in  the
closest  confederacy  with  Both  well;  and  thus,  to  the
disgrace  of  the  nation,  Lennox  stood  alone  in  a  cause
where  both  honour  and  humanity  called  so  loudly  on
his  countrymen  to  second  him.

It  is  remarkable  too,  that  Both  well  himself  was
present,  and  sat  as  a  member  in  that  meeting  of  privy-
council,  which  gave  directions  with  regard  to  the  time
and  manner  of  his  own  trial  ;  and  he  still  enjoyed  not
only  full  liberty,  but  was  received  into  the  queen's
presence  with  the  same  distinguished  familiarity  as
formerly.6

Nothing  could  be  a  more  cruel  disappoint-
craves  a ment  to  the  wishes  and  resentment  of  a  father,

delay.  tkan  ^^  a  premature  trial;  every  step  to-
wards which  seemed  to  be  taken  by  directions  from
the  person  who  was  himself  accused  of  the  crime,  and
calculated  on  purpose  to  conceal  rather  than  to  de-
tect his  guilt.  Lennox  foresaw  what  would  be  the
issue  of  this  mock  inquiry,  and  with  how  little  safety
to  himself,  or  success  to  his  cause,  he  could  venture  to
appear  on  the  day  prefixed.  In  his  former  letters,
though  under  expressions  the  most  respectful,  some
symptoms  of  his  distrusting  the  queen  may  be  disco-
vered. He  spoke  out  now  in  plain  language.  He
complained  of  the  injury  done  him,  by  hurrying  on  the
trial  with  such  illegal  precipitation.  He  represented
once  more  the  indecency  of  allowing  Bothwell  not
only  to  enjoy  personal  liberty,  but  to  retain  his  former
influence  over  her  counsels.  He  again  required  her,
as  she  regarded  her  own  honour,  to  give  some  evidence
of  her  sincerity  in  prosecuting  the  murder,  by  confining
the  person  who  was  on  good  grounds  suspected  to  be
the  author  of  ft  ;  and,  till  that  were  done,  he  signified

«  Anders,  vol.  i.  50,  52.

1567.]  BOOK IV.  329

his  own  resolution  not  to  be  present  at  a  trial,  the
manner  and  circumstances  of  which  were  so  irregular
and  unsatisfactory/

Applies  for  He  seems,  however,  to  have  expected  little
poseto""  success  from  this  application  to  Mary;  and
Elizabeth,  therefore  at  the  same  time  besought  Elizabeth
to  interpose,  in  order  to  obtain  such  a  delay  as  he
demanded  .g  Nothing  can  be  a  stronger  proof  how
violently  he  suspected  the  one  queen,  than  his  submit-
ting to  implore  the  aid  of  the  other,  who  had  treated
his  son  with  the  utmost  contempt,  and  himself  and
family  with  the  greatest  rigour.  Elizabeth,  who  was
never  unwilling  to  interpose  in  the  affairs  of  Scotland,
wrote  instantly  to  Mary,  advised  her  to  delay  the  trial
for  some  time,  and  urged  in  such  strong  terms  the  same
arguments  which  Lennox  had  used,  as  might  have  con-
vinced her  to  what  an  unfavourable  construction  her
conduct  would  be  liable,  if  she  persisted  in  her  present
method  of  proceeding.11

The  trial  Neither  her  entreaties,  however,  nor  those  of
proceeds.  LennoXj  C0uld  prevail  to  have  the  trial  put  off.
On  the  day  appointed,  Bothwell  appeared,  but  with
such  a  formidable  retinue,  that  it  would  have  been
dangerous  to  condemn,  and  impossible  to  punish  him.
Besides  a  numerous  body  of  his  friends  and  vassals,
assembled,  according  to  custom,  from  different  parts  of
the  kingdom,  he  was  attended  by  a  band  of  hired
soldiers,  who  marched  with  flying  colours  along  the
streets  of  Edinburgh. i  A  court  of  justice  was  held
with  the  accustomed  formalities.  An  indictment  was
presented  against  Bothwell,  and  Lennox  was  called
upon  to  make  good  his  accusation.  In  his  name  ap-
peared Robert  Cunningham,  one  of  his  dependants.
He  excused  his  master's  absence,  on  account  of  the
shortness  of  the  time,  which  prevented  his  assembling

f  Anders,  vol.  i.  52.  8  Good,  vol.  ii.  352.

h  Anders.  Pref.  60. See  Appendix,  No.  XIX.  »  Anders,  vol.  i.  135.

330  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

his  friends  and  vassals,  without  whose  assistance  he
could  not  with  safety  venture  to  set  himself  in  opposi-
tion to  such  a  powerful  antagonist.  For  this  reason,
he  desired  the  court  to  stop  proceeding,  and  protested,
that  any  sentence  which  should  be  passed  at  that  time
ought  to  be  deemed  illegal  and  void.  Bothwell,  on  the
other  hand,  insisted  that  the  court  should  instantly
proceed  to  trial.  One  of  Lennox's  own  letters,  in  which
he  craved  of  the  queen  to  prosecute  the  murderers
without  delay,  was  produced.  Cunningham's  objec-
tions were  overruled  ;  and  the  jury,  consisting  of  peers
and  barons  of  the  first  rank,  found  Bothwell  not  guilty
of  the  crime.

Bothwell  ^°  Person  appeared  as  an  accuser,  not  a
is  acquit-  single  witness  was  examined,  nor  any  evidence
produced  against  him.  The  jury,  under  these
circumstances,  could  do  nothing  else  but  acquit  him.
Their  verdict,  however,  was  far  from  gratifying  the
wishes,  or  silencing  the  murmurs  of  the  people.  Every
circumstance  in  the  trial  gave  grounds  for  suspicion,
and  excited  indignation;  and  the  judgment  pronounc-
ed, instead  of  being  a  proof  of  Bothwell's  innocence,
was  esteemed  an  argument  of  his  guilt.  Pasquinades
and  libels  were  affixed  to  different  places,  expressing
the  sentiments  of  the  public  with  the  utmost  virulence
of  language.

The  jury  themselves  seem  to  have  been  aware  of  the
censure  to  which  their  proceedings  would  be  exposed  ;
and,  at  the  same  time  that  they  returned  their  verdict
acquitting  Bothwell,  the  earl  of  Caithness  protested,  in
their  name,  that  no  crime  should  be  imputed  to  them
on  that  account,  because  no  accuser  had  appeared,  and
no  proof  was  brought  of  the  indictment.  He  took  no-
tice likewise,  that  the  9th  instead  of  the  10th  of  Fe-
bruary was  mentioned  in  the  indictment,  as  the  day  on
which  the  murder  had  been  committed :  a  circumstance
which  discovers  the  extreme  inaccuracy  of  those  who

1567.]  BOOK IV.  331

prepared  the  indictment;  and  at  a  time  when  men  were
disposed,  and  not  without  reason,  to  be  suspicious  of
every  thing,  this  small  matter  contributed  to  confirm
and  to  increase  their  suspicions.11

EvenBothwell  himself  did  not  rely  on  the  judgment
which  he  had  obtained  in  his  favour  as  a  full  vindica-
tion of  his  innocence.  Immediately  after  his  acquittal,
he,  in  compliance  with  a  custom,  which  was  not  then
obsolete,  published  a  writing,  in  which  he  offered  to
fight  in  single  combat  any  gentleman  of  good  fame,
who  should  presume  to  accuse  him  of  being  accessary
to  the  murder  of  the  king.

Mary,  however,  continued  to  treat  him  as  if  he  had
been  cleared  by  the  most  unexceptionable  and  satis-
factory evidence.  The  ascendant  he  had  gained  over
her  heart,  as  well  as  over  her  counsels,  was  more  visi-
ble than  ever ;  and  Lennox,  who  could  not  expect  that
his  own  person  could  be  safe  in  a  country  where  the
murderer  of  his  son  had  been  absolved,  without  regard
to  justice,  and  loaded  with  honours,  in  contempt  of
decency,  fled  with  precipitation  towards  England.1

A arlia- '^WO  ^a^S  a^6r  ^e  *r^  a  Par^alTient  was  held,

merit  held,  at  the  opening  of  which  the  queen  distinguish-
ed Bothwell,  by  appointing  him  to  carry  the
sceptre  before  her.ra  Most  of  the  acts  passed  in  this  as-
sembly were  calculated  on  purpose  to  strengthen  his
party,  and  to  promote  his  designs.  He  obtained  the
ratification  of  all  the  possessions  and  honours  which
the  partiality  of  the  queen  had  conferred  upon  him;
and  the  act  to  that  effect  contained  the  strongest  de-
clarations of  his  faithful  services  to  the  crown  in  all
times  past.  The  surrender  of  the  castle  of  Edinburgh
by  Mar  was  confirmed.  The  law  of  attainder  against
Huntly  was  repealed,  and  he  and  his  adherents  were
restored  to  the  estates  and  honours  of  their  ancestors.

k  Bothw.  Trial,  Anders,  vol.  ii.  97,  &c.
1  Keith,  3f8.  Note  (d.)  »  Id,  Ibid.

332  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

Several  of  those  who  had  been  on  the  jury  which  ac-
quitted Bothwell  obtained  ratifications  of  the  grants
made  in  their  favour;  and  as  pasquinades  daily  multi-
plied, a  law  passed  whereby  those  into  whose  hands
any  paper  of  that  kind  fell,  were  commanded  instantly
to  destroy  it;  and  if,  through  their  neglect,  it  should
be  allowed  to  spread,  they  were  subjected  to  a  capital
punishment,  in  the  same  manner  as  if  they  had  been
the  original  authors."

Remark-  But  t^ie  absolute  dominion  which  Bothwell
able  law  in  nacl  acquired  over  Mary's  mind  appeared  in  the

favour  of,  *  ,  --.pnviTfc

the  Eefor-  clearest  manner,  by  an  act  m  lavour  ot  thePro-
mation.  testant  religion,  to  which  at  this  time  she  gave
her  assent.  Mary's  attachment  to  the  Romish  faith
was  uniform  and  superstitious;  she  had  never  laid  aside
the  design,  nor  lost  the  hopes,  of  restoring  it.  She  had
of  late  come  under  new  engagements  to  that  purpose,
and  in  consequence  of  these  had  ventured  upon  some
steps  more  public  and  vigorous  than  any  she  had  for-
merly taken.  But  though  none  of  these  circumstances
were  unknown  to  Bothwell,  there  were  powerful  mo-
tives which  prompted  him  at  this  juncture  to  conciliate
the  good-will  of  the  Protestants,  by  exerting  himself  in
order  to  procure  for  them  some  additional  security  in
the  exercise  of  their  religion.  That  which  they  en-
joyed at  present  was  very  precarious,  being  founded
entirely  on  the  royal  proclamation  issued  soon  after  the
arrival  of  the  queen  in  Scotland,  which  in  express  terms
was  declared  to  be  only  a  temporary  regulation.  From
that  period,  neither  the  solicitations  of  the  general  as-
semblies of  the  church,  nor  the  entreaties  of  her  peo-
ple, could  extort  from  Mary  any  concession  in  favour
of  the  Protestant  religion,  on  which  the  professors  might
rest  with  greater  confidence.  This,  however,  by  the
more  powerful  influence  of  Bothwell,  they  now  obtain-
ed. An  act  was  passed  in  this  parliament,  repealing

»  Keith,  380.

1567.]  BOOK IV.  333

all  the  laws,  canon,  civil,  and  municipal,  adverse  to  the
reformed  religion,  and  exempting  such  as  had  em-
braced it  from  the  penalties  to  which  they  might  have
been  subjected  by  these  laws,  either  on  account  of  their
past  conduct  or  present  profession ;  declaring,  at  the
same  time,  that  their  persons,  estates,  honours,  and
benefices,  were  taken  under  public  protection  against
every  court,  civil  or  ecclesiastical,  that  might  attempt
to  molest  them  on  account  of  their  religious  sentiments.
Thus  the  Protestants,  instead  of  holding  their  sacred
rights  by  no  better  tenure  than  a  declaration  of  royal
indulgence,  which  might  be  revoked  at  pleasure,  ob-
tained legal  and  parliamentary  protection  in  the  exer-
cise of  their  religion.  By  prevailing  on  the  queen  to
assent  to  this  law,  Bothwell  seems  to  have  flattered
himself  that  he  would  acquire  such  merit,  both  with  the
clergy  and  with  the  people,  as  might  induce  them  to
favour  his  ambitious  schemes,  and  to  connive  at  what
he  had  done,  or  might  do,  in  order  to  accomplish  them.
The  Protestants,  accordingly,  though  this  act  was  far
from  amounting  to  a  legal  establishment  of  the  reform-
ed faith,  seem  to  have  considered  it  as  an  additional
security  of  such  importance,  that  it  was  published
among  the  laws  enacted  in  a  parliament  held  towards
the  close  of  this  year,  under  very  different  leaders.0

0  I  am  indebted  to  the  accuracy  of  Sir  David  Dalrymple,  for  pointing  out  ('Re-
marks on  the  History  of  Scotland,  ch.  9.)  a  considerable  error  into  which  I  had
fallen  with  respect  to  this  act,  by  supposing  it  to  be  so  favourable  to  the  doctrine  of
the  Reformation,  that  the  parliament  which  met  December  15,  could  substitute  nothing
stronger  or  more  explicit  in  its  place,  and  thought  it  sufficient  to  ratify  it  word  for
word.  This  error  I  have  now  corrected ;  but,  after  considering  the  act  with  parti-
cular attention,  though  I  am  satisfied  that  it  neither  established  the  reformed  religion
or  the  religion  of  the  state,  nor  abolished  Popery,  yet  it  granted  such  new  and  legal
security  to  the  Protestants,  as  was  deemed,  in  that  age,  an  acquisition  of  great  value.
The  framers  of  the  law  seem  manifestly  to  have  viewed  it  in  that  light.  After  recit-
ing, "  that  the  queen,  since  her  arrival,  had  attempted  nothing  contrary  to  the  state
of  religion  which  she  found  publicly  and  universally  standing,  on  which  account  she
was  most  worthy  to  be  served,  honoured,  and  obeyed,"  &c. — the  act  goes  on,  "  that
as  she  intends  to  continue  the  same  goodness  and  government  in  all  times  coming,
the  professors  of  the  religion  aforesaid  may  and  shall  have  occasion  to  praise  God
for  her  happy  and  gracious  government,  6cc. ;  and  to  effect  thaf,  the  professors  of
the.religion  aforesaid  may  assure  themselves  to  be  in  full  surety  thereof,  and  of  their
land-,  lives,  &c.  and  may  with  the  better  will  jeopard  and  hazard  their  lives  and
goods  in  her  Highness's  service,  against  all  enemies  to  her,  and  to  the  commonweal
of  this  realm,  &c.  therefore  our  sovereign,  with  the  advice  of  the  whole  estates  in

334  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

Every  step  taken  by  Both  well  had  hitherto
prevails  on  been  attended  with  all  the  success  which  his

-8  most  sanguine  wishes  could  expect.  He  had  en-
tirely  gained  the  queen's  heart;  the  murder  of
band  to  the  king  had  excited  no  public  commotion ;  he

''  had  been  acquitted  by  his  peers  of  any  share
in  that  crime ;  and  their  decision  had  been  in  some  sort
ratified  in  parliament.  But  in  a  kingdom  where  the  regal
authority  was  so  extremely  limited,  and  the  power  of  the
nobles  so  formidable,  he  durst  not  venture  on  the  last

parliament,"  &c. ;  then  follow  the  statutory  clauses  mentioned  in  the  text.  The  in-
tention of  passing  the  act  is  apparent,  and  it  is  drawn  with  great  art.  This  art  is
peculiarly  manifest  in  the  concluding  clause.  In  her  first  proclamation,  the  queen
had  declared,  that  it  should  continue  in  force  only  until  she  should  take  final  order
concerning  religion  with  the  advice  of  parliament.  In  this  act,  the  intention  of
taking  farther  order  concerning  religion  is  mentioned,  probably  with  a  view  to  please
the  queen;  but  it  is  worded  with  such  studied  dexterity,  that  the  protection  granted
by  this  law  is  no  longer  to  be  regarded  as  temporary,  or  depending  upon  the  queen,
taking  such  final  order.  Parl.  1.  K.  Ja.  VI.  c.  31.  In  the  same  light  of  an  impor-
tant acquisition  of  security  to  the  reformed  religion,  this  act  is  represented  by  the
privy-council  in  a  proclamation  issued  May  23,  1567.  Keith,  571.  Mary's  prin-
cipal adherents,  in  a  paper  subscribed  by  them,  Sept.  12,  1568,  declare,  that  she,
"  by  the  advice  of  the  three  estates,  had  satisfied  the  desire  of  the  whole  nobility  in
an  act  concerning  all  the  points  of  religion  passed  in  the  parliament  held  April,
1567."  Goodall,  ii.  357.  The  same  is  asserted  to  be  the  intention  and  effect  of  this
act  in  another  public  paper  in  the  year  1570.  Haynes,  621.  This  act  is  perfectly
conformable  to  that  system  of  policy  by  which  Bothwell  seems  to  have  regulated  his
conduct,  both  before  and  after  this  time,  with  a  view  of  gaining  the  Protestants,  par-
ticularly the  clergy,  by  acts  of  indulgence  and  favour.  On  the  3d  of  October,  1566,
when  Bothwell's  credit  was  very  considerable,  the  queen,  in  a  meeting  of  privy-
council,  where  he  was  present,  took  measures  for  securing  to  the  Protestant  clergy
more  regular  payment  of  their  stipends;  and  on  the  20th  of  December  of  that  year,
granted  an  assignation  of  a  considerable  sum  to  be  applied  for  the  support  of  the
ministry.  Keith,  360 — 362.  In  a  meeting  of  privy-council,  January  10,  1567,
when  all  public  transactions  were  entirely  conducted  by  Bothwell,  an  act  was  pass-
ed in  order  to  provide  for  the  sustentation  of  ministers  in  boroughs,  and  Bothwell  is
named  as  one  of  the  commissioners  for  carrying  it  into  execution,  with  power  to  im-
pose a  tax  on  such  boroughs  as  had  no  ministers,  for  raising  a  stipend.  Keith,  570.
In  another  meeting  of  privy-council,  May  23, 1567,  the  queen,  after  mentioning  the
declaration  which  she  had  made  in  the  year  1561,  of  her  resolution  to  maintain  that
religion  which  she  found  established  in  the  kingdom,  and  after  taking  notice  of  what
additional  security  it  had  acquired  by  the  late  act  of  April  19th,  with  a  view  of  giv-
ing still  farther  satisfaction  to  the  Protestants,  she  declared,  that  all  licences  which
had  been  obtained  from  her  by  any  persons,  permitting  them  to  exercise  the  rites  of
Popish  worship,  were  now  revoked  and  annulled.  Keith,  570 — 572.  It  deserves
to  be  remarked,  that,  favourable  as  all  these  acts  were  to  the  Reformation,  some
bishops,  whose  ardent  zeal  for  the  old  doctrines  history  records,  were  present  in  those
meetings  of  privy-council  in  which  they  were  passed.  From  considering  all  these
particulars,  one  need  not  wonder  that  a  law  "  anent  cassing(as  its  title  bears),  annul-
ling, and  abrogating  of  all  laws,  acts,  and  constitutions,  canone,  civile,  and  munici-
pal, with  other  constitutions,  contrare  to  the  religion  now  professit  within  the  realme,"
confirmed  by  the  royal  assent  of  the  queen,  should  be  published  among  the  statutes
securing  the  Protestant  religion.  We  find  accordingly,  in  a  very  rare  edition  of  the
acts  of  parliament,  imprintit  at  Edinburgh  by  Robert  Lekprevik,  printar  to  the  King's
majestic,  6  day  of  April  1568,  the  act  of  April  19,  inserted  among  the  acts  of  the
regent's  parliament  in  December.

1567.]  BOOK IV.  335

action,  towards  which  all  his  ambitious  projects  tended,

without  their  approbation. In  order  to  secure  this,  he,

immediately  after  the  dissolution  of  parliament,

AprU  19. .  ,, *  .  ,

invited  all  the  nobles  who  were  present  to  an  en-
tertainment, Having  filled  the  house  with  his  friends
and  dependants,  and  surrounded  it  with  armed  men,p
he  opened  to  the  company  his  intention  of  marrying
the  queen,  whose  consent,  he  told  them,  he  had  already
obtained;  and  demanded  their  approbation  of  this
match,  which,  he  said,  was  no  less  acceptable  to  their
sovereign,  than  honourable  to  himself.01  Huntly  and
Seaton,  who  were  privy  to  all  BothwelFs  schemes,  pro-
moted them  with  the  utmost  zeal;  and  the  Popish  ec-
clesiastics, who  were  absolutely  devoted  to  the  queen,
and  ready  to  soothe  all  her  passions,  instantly  declared
their  satisfaction  with  what  he  had  proposed.  The  rest,
who  dreaded  the  exorbitant  power  which  Bothwell  had
acquired,  and  observed  the  queen's  growing  affection
towards  him  in  all  her  actions,  were  willing  to  make  a
merit  of  yielding  to  a  measure  which  they  could  nei-
ther oppose  nor  defeat.  Some  few  were  confounded
and  enraged.  But  in  the  end  Bothwell,  partly  by  pro-
mises and  flattery,  partly  by  terror  and  force,  prevailed
on  all  who  were  present  to  subscribe  a  paper,  which
leaves  a  deeper  stain  than  any  occurrence  in  that  age
on  the  honour  and  character  of  the  nation.

This  paper  contained  the  strongest  declarations  of
BothwelFs  innocence,  and  the  most  ample  acknow-
ledgment of  his  good  services  to  the  kingdom.  If  any
future  accusation  should  be  brought  against  him  on
account  of  the  king's  murder,  the  subscribers  promised
to  stand  by  him  as  one  man,  and  to  hazard  their  lives
and  fortunes  in  his  defence.  They  recommended  him
to  the  queen  as  the  most  proper  person  she  could
choose  for  a  husband ;  and  if  she  should  condescend  to
bestow  on  him  that  mark  of  her  regard,  they  undertook
to  promote  the  marriage,  and  to  join  him  with  all  their

P  Good.  vol.  i.  •  fl  Anders,  vol.  i.  94.

338  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

forces  in  opposing  any  person  who  endeavoured  to
obstruct  it.r Among  the  subscribers  of  this  paper  we
find  some  who  were  the  queen's  chief  confidants,  others
who  were  strangers  to  her  counsels,  and  obnoxious  to
her  displeasure ;  some  who  faithfully  adhered  to  her
through  all  the  vicissitudes  of  her  fortune,  and  others
who  became  the  principal  authors  of  her  sufferings ;  some
passionately  attached  to  the  Romish  superstition,  and
others  zealous  advocates  for  the  Protestant  faith.8 No
common  interest  can  be  supposed  to  have  united  men  of
such  opposite  principles  and  parties,  in  recommending
to  their  sovereign  a  step  so  injurious  to  her  honour,  and
so  fatal  to  her  peace. This  strange  coalition  was  the
effect  of  much  artifice,  and  must  be  considered  as  the
boldest  and  most  masterly  stroke  of  Both  well's  address.
It  is  observable,  that  amidst  all  the  altercations  and
mutual  reproaches  of  the  two  parties,  which  arose  in
the  kingdom, this unworthy transaction is seldom
mentioned. Conscious  on  both  sides,  that  in  this
particular  their  conduct  could  ill  bear  examination,
and  would  redound  little  to  their  fame,  they  always
touch  upon  it  unwillingly,  and  with  a  tender  hand,
seeming  desirous  that  it  should  remain  in  darkness,  or
be  buried  in  oblivion. But  as  so  many  persons  who,
both  at  that  time  and  ever  after,  possessed  the  queen's
favour,  subscribed  this  paper,  the  suspicion  becomes
strong,  that  Bothwell's  ambitious  hopes  were  neither
unknown  to  Mary,  nor  disapproved  by  her.*

*  Anders,  vol.  i.  177.  •  Keith,  382.

1  Of  all  the  different  systems  with  regard  to  this  transaction,  that  of  Camden
seems  to  be  the  least  accurate,  and  the  worst  founded.  He  supposes  that  Bolhwell
was  hated  by  Murray,  Morton,  &c.  who  had  been  his  associates  in  the  murder
of  the  king,  and  that  they  now  wanted  to  ruin  him.  He  affirms,  at  the  same  time,
that  the  subscriptions  to  this  paper  were  obtained  by  them  out  of  fear  that  Both-
well  might  sink  in  his  hopes,  and  betray  the  whole  bloody  secret,  404.  But  be-
sides the  absurdity  of  supposing  that  any  man's  enemies  would  contribute  towards
raising  him  to  such  high  dignity,  on  the  uncertain  hopes  of  being  able  afterward
to  deprive  him  of  it ;  besides  the  impossibility  of  accomplishing  such  a  marriage,
if  it  had  been  either  unknown  to  the  queen,  or  disagreeable  to  her ;  we  may  observe,
that  this  supposition  is  destroyed  by  the  direct  testimony  of  the  queen  herself,  who
ascribes  the  consent  of  the  nobles  to  Bothwell's  artifices,  who  purchased  it  by  giving
them  to  understand  that  we  were  content  therewith.  Anders,  vol.  i.  94.  99.  It  would
have  been  no  small  advantage  to  Mary,  if  she  could  have  represented  the  consent
of  the  nobles  to  have  been  their  own  voluntary  deed.  It  is  still  more  surprising  to

1567.]  BOOK IV.  337

These  suspicions  are  confirmed  by  the  most  direct
proof.  Melvil  at  that  time  enjoyed  a  considerable
share  in  her  favour.  He,  as  well  as  his  brother,  kept
a  secret  correspondence  in  England  with  those  who
favoured  her  pretensions  to  that  crown.  The  rumour
of  her  intended  marriage  with  Bothwell  having  spread
early  in  that  kingdom,  excited  universal  indignation  ;
and  Melvil  received  a  letter  from  thence,  which  repre-
sented, in  the  strongest  terms,  what  would  be  the
fatal  effects  of  such  an  imprudent  step.  He  put  this
letter  into  the  queen's  hands,  and  enforced  it  with  the
utmost  warmth.  She  not  only  disregarded  these  re-
monstrances, but  communicated  the  matter  to  Both-
well  ;  and  Melvil,  in  order  to  save  his  life,  was  obliged
to  fly  from  court,  whither  he  durst  not  return  till  the
earl's  rage  began  to  abate."  At  the  same  time  Eliza-
beth warned  Mary  of  the  danger  and  infamy  to  which
she  would  expose  herself  by  such  an  indecent  choice  :
but  an  advice  from  her  met  with  still  less  regard.x
Bothweii  Three  days  after  the  rising  of  parliament,
queenly6  Mary  went  from  Edinburgh  to  Stirling,  in  order
to  V1S^  ^6  rince  ner  son-  Bothwell  had  now

find  Lesley  ascribing  this  paper  to  Murray  and  his  faction.  Anders,  vol.  i.  26.
The  bishop  himself  was  one  of  the  persons  who  subscribed  it.  Keith,  383.  The
king's  commissioners,  at  the  conference  held  at  York,  1568,  pretended  that  none  of
the  nobles,  except  the  earl  of  Huntly,  would  subscribe  this  paper  till  a  warrant
from  the  queen  was  produced,  by  which  they  were  allowed  to  do  so  ;  this  warrant
they  had  in  their  custody,  and  exhibited.  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  2.  5.  This  differs
from  Buchanan's  account,  who  supposes  that  all  the  nobles  present  subscribed  the
paper  on  the  19th,  and  that  next  day  they  obtained  the  approbation  of  what  they
had  done,  by  way  of  security  to  themselves,  355.

u  Melv.  156.  According  to  Melvil,  lord  Herries  likewise  remonstrated  against
the  marriage,  and  conjured  the  queen,  on  his  knees,  to  lay  aside  all  thoughts  of
such  a  dishonourable  alliance,  156.  But  it  has  been  observed,  that  Herries  is  one
of  the  nobles  who  subscribed  the  bond,  April  19.  Keith,  383.  2.  That  he  is  one
of  the  witnesses  to  the  marriage  articles  between  the  queen  and  Bothwell,  May  14.
Good.  vol.  ii.  61.  3.  That  he  sat  in  council  with  Bothwell,  May  17.  Keith,  386.
But  this  remonstrance  of  lord  Herries  against  the  marriage  happened  before  those
made  by  Melvil  himself,  157.  Melvil's  remonstrance  must  have  happened  some
time  before  the  meeting  of  parliament;  for,  after  offending  Bothwell,  he  retired
from  court;  he  allowed  his  rage  time  to  subside,  and  had  again  joined  the  queen
when  she  was  seized,  April  24.  158.  The  time  which  must  have  elapsed  by  this
account  of  the  matter  was  perhaps  sufficient  to  have  gained  Herries  from  being  an
opposer  to  become  a  promoter  of  the  marriage.  Perhaps  Melvil  may  have  com-
mitted some  mistake  with  regard  to  this  fact,  so  far  as  relates  to  lord  Herries.  He
could  not  well  be  mistaken  with  regard  to  what  he  himself  did.
x  Anders,  vol.  i.  106.

VOL.  I.  Z

338  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

brought  his  schemes  to  full  maturity  and  every  pre-
caution being  taken  which  could  render  it  safe  to  enter
on  the  last  and  decisive  step,  the  natural  impetuosity
of  his  spirit  did  not  suffer  him  to  deliberate  any
longer.  Under  pretence  of  an  expedition  against
the  freebooters  on  the  borders,  he  assembled  his  fol-
lowers :  and  marching  out  of  Edinburgh  with  a  thou-
sand horse,  turned  suddenly  towards  Linlithgow,  met
the  queen  on  her  return  near  that  place,  dispersed  her
slender  train  without  resistance,  seized  on  her  person,  and
conducted  her,  together  with  a  few  of  her  courtiers,  as
a  prisoner  to  his  castle  of  Dunbar.  She  express-
ed neither  surprise,  nor  terror,  nor  indignation,
at  such  an  outrage  committed  on  her  person,  and  such
an  insult  offered  to  her  authority,  but  seemed  to  yield
without  struggle  or  regret/  Melvil  was  at  that  time
one  of  her  attendants :  and  the  officer  by  whom  he
was  seized  informed  him,  that  nothing  was  done  with-
out the  queen's  own  consent.2  If  we  may  rely  on  the
letters  published  in  Mary's  name,  the  scheme  had  been
communicated  to  her,  and  every  step  towards  it  was
taken  with  her  participation  and  advice.a

Both  the  queen  and  Bothwell  thought  it  of  advan-
tage to  employ  this  appearance  of  violence.  It  af-
forded her  a  decent  excuse  for  her  conduct;  and
while  she  could  plead  that  it  was  owing  to  force
rather  than  choice,  she  hoped  that  her  reputation,
among  foreigners  at  least,  would  escape  without  cen-
sure, or  be  exposed  to  less  reproach.  Bothwell  could
not  help  distrusting  all  the  methods  which  had  hitherto
been  used  for  vindicating  him  from  any  concern  in  the
murder  of  the  king.  Something  was  still  wanting  for
his  security,  and  for  quieting  his  guilty  fears.  This
was  a  pardon  under  the  great  seal.  By  the  laws  of
Scotland  the  most  heinous  crime  must  be  mentioned
by  name  in  a  pardon,  and  then  all  lesser  offences  are

y  Keith,  S83.  *  Mclv.  158.  *  Good.  vol.  ii.  37.

1567.]  BOOK  IV.  339

deemed  to  be  included  under  the  general  clause,  and
all  other  crimes  whatsoever*  To  seize  the  person  of
the  prince  is  high-treason ;  and  Bothwell  hoped  that
a  pardon  obtained  for  this  would  extend  to  every  thing
of  which  he  had  been  accused.0

is  divorced  Bothwell  having  now  got  the  queen's  person
from  his  into  his  hands,  it  would  have  been  unbecom-

own  wife.  _. . .  p n

mg  either  a  politician  or  a  man  ot  gallantry  to
have  delayed  consummating  his  schemes.  The  first
step  towards  this  was  to  have  his  marriage  with  lady
Jane  Gordon,  the  earl  of  Huntly's  sister,  dissolved.
In  order  to  accomplish  that,  in  a  manner  consistent
with  the  ideas  of  the  queen  on  one  hand,  and  with  the
sentiments  of  his  countrymen  on  the  other,  two  dif-
ferent processes  became  necessary ;  one  founded  on
the  maxims  of  the  canon  law,  the  other  accommodated
to  the  tenets  of  the  reformed  church.  Bothwell  ac-
cordingly commenced  a  suit,  in  his  own  name,  in  the
spiritual  court  of  the  archbishop  of  St.  Andrew's,  the
jurisdiction  of  which  the  queen  had  restored,

April  27. •;  . ,  . .  , f .  .

by  a  special  commission  granted  lor  this  pur-
pose, and  pleaded  that  lady  Jane  and  himself,  being
cousins  within  the  prohibited  degrees,  and  having
married  without  a  papal  dispensation,  their  union  was
null  from  the  beginning/  At  the  same  time  he  pre-
vailed with  lady  Jane  to  apply  to  the  Protestant  court
of  commissaries  for  a  divorce,  on  account  of  his  having

b  Parl.  6.  Jac.  IV.  c.  62.  c  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  61.

d  In  her  own  time  it  was  urged  as  an  aggravation  of  the  queen's  guilt,  that  she
gave  her  consent  to  marry  the  husband  of  another  woman  ;  and  the  charge  has  been
often  repeated  since.  But,  according  to  Mary's  own  ideas,  consonant  to  the  principles
of  her  religion,  the  marriage  of  Bothwell  with  lady  Jane  Gordon  was  unlawful  and
void,  and  she  considered  them  as  living  together  not  in  the  hallowed  bonds  of  matri-
mony, but  in  a  state  of  criminal  intercourse.  Bothwell's  addresses,  which  struck
her  Protestant  subjects  not  only  as  indecent,  but  flagitious,  could  not  appear  in  the
same  light  to  her;  and  this  may  be  pleaded  in  extenuation  of  the  crime  imputed
to  her  of  having  listened  to  them.  But  it  will  not  exempt  her  from  the  charge  of
great  imprudence  in  this  unfortunate  step.  Mary  was  well  acquainted  with  the
ideas  of  her  subjects,  and  knew  what  they  would  think  of  her  giving  ear  for  a  mo-
ment to  the  courtship  of  a  man  lately  married  under  her  own  eye,  in  the  church  of
her  palace.  Appendix,  No.  XX.  Every  consideration  should  have  restrained  her
from  forming  this  union,  which  to  her  people  must  have  appeared  odious  and  shock-
ing. Remarks  on  the  History  of  Scotland,  p.  199,  &c.

z2

340  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

been  guilty  of  adultery. The  influence  of  Bothwell
was  of  equal  weight  in  both  courts. In  the  course  of
four  days,  with  the  same  indecent  and  suspicious  pre-
cipitancy, the  one  declared  the  marriage  to  be  illegal
and  null,  the  other  pronounced  a  sentence  of  divorce.6
While  this  infamous  transaction  was  carrying  on,
the  queen  resided  at  Dunbar,  detained  as  a  prisoner,
but  treated  with  the greatest  respect. Soon
after,  Bothwell,  with  a  numerous  train  of  his
dependants, conducted her  to Edinburgh ;  but,  in-
stead of  lodging  her  in  the  palace  of  Holyrood-house,
he  conveyed  her  to  the  castle,  of  which  he  was  gover-
nor. The  discontent  of  the  nation  rendered  this  pre-
caution necessary. In  a  house  unfortified,  and  of
"^) easy  access,  the  queen  might  have  been  rescued  with-
out difficulty  out  of  his  hands. In  a  place  of  strength
she  was  secured  from  all  the  attempts  of  his  enemies.
One  small  difficulty  still  remained  to  be  surmounted.
As  the  queen  was  kept  in  a  sort  of  captivity  by  Both-
well,  a  marriage  concluded  in  that  condition  might  be
imputed  to  force,  and  be  held  invalid. In  order  to
obviate  this,  Mary  appeared  in  the  court  of  session,
and,  in  presence  of  the  chancellor,  and  other  judges,
\U  and  several  of  the  nobility,  declared  that  she  was  now
at  full  liberty ;  and  though  Bothwell's  violence  in  seiz-
ing her  person  had  at  first  excited  her  indignation,  yet
his  respectful  behaviour  since  that  time  had  not  only
appeased  her  resentment,  but  determined  her  to  raise
him  to  higher  honours/

is  married  What  these  were,  soon  became  public.  The
to  the  title  of  duke  of  Orkney  was  conferred  upon
Bothwell;  and  on  the  15th  of  May  his  mar-
riage with  the  queen,  which  had  so  long  been  the  ob-
ject of  his  wishes,  and  the  motive  of  his  crimes,  was
solemnized.  The  ceremony  was  performed  in  public,
according  to  the  rites  of  the  Protestant  church,  by

e  Anders,  i.  132. Append.  No.  XX.  f  And.  i.  87.

1567.]  BOOK IV.  341

Adam  Bothwell,  bishop  of  Orkney,  one  of  the  few
prelates  who  had  embraced  the  Reformation,  and  on
the  same  day  was  celebrated  in  private,  according  to
the  forms  prescribed  by  the  Popish  religion.6  The
boldness  with  which  Craig,  the  minister  who  was  com-
manded to  publish  the  banns,  testified  against  the  de-
sign ;  the  small  number  of  the  nobles  who  were  present
at  the  marriage ;  and  the  sullen  and  disrespectful  silence
of  the  people  when  the  queen  appeared  in  public,
were  manifest  symptoms  of  the  violent  and  general
dissatisfaction  of  her  own  subjects.  The  refusal  of  Du
Croc,  the  French  ambassador,  to  be  present  at  the
nuptial  ceremony  or  entertainment,  discovers  the  sen-
timents of  her  allies  with  regard  to  this  part  of  her
conduct ;  and,  although  every  other  action  in  Mary's
life  could  be  justified  by  the  rules  of  prudence,  or  re-
conciled to  the  principles  of  virtue,  this  fatal  marriage
would  remain  an  incontestable  proof  of  her  rashness,  if
not  of  her  guilt.

Mary's  first  care  was  to  offer  some  apology  for  her
conduct  to  the  courts  6f  France  and  England.  The
instructions  to  her  ambassadors  still  remain,  and  are
drawn  by  a  masterly  hand.  But,  under  all  the  arti-
ficial and  false  colouring  she  employs,  it  is  easy  to
discover,  not  only  that  many  of  the  steps  she  had  taken
were  unjustifiable,  but  that  she  herself  was  conscious
that  they  could  not  be  justified.11

The  title  of  king  was  the  only  thing  which  was  not
bestowed  upon  Bothwell.  Notwithstanding  her  attach-
ment to  him,  Mary  remembered  the  inconveniences
which  had  arisen  from  the  rash  advancement  of  her
former  husband  to  that  honour.  She  agreed,  how-
ever, that  he  should  sign,  in  token  of  consent,  all  the
public  writs  issued  in  her  name.1  But,  though  the
queen  withheld  from  him  the  title  of  king,  he  pos-
sessed, nevertheless,  regal  power  in  its  full  extent.

8  And.  i.  136.  ii.  276.  h  Ibid.  i.  89.  •  Good.  ii.  60.

342  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

The  queen's  person  was  in  his  hands  \  she  was  sur-
rounded more  closely  than  ever  by  his  creatures  ;  none
of  her  subjects  could  obtain  audience  without  his  per-
mission ;  and,  unless  in  his  own  presence,  none  but  his
confidants  were  permitted  to  converse  with  her.k  The
Scottish  monarchs  were  accustomed  to  live  among  their
subjects  as  fathers  or  as  equals,  without  distrust,  and
with  little  state  ;  armed  guards  standing  at  the  vdoors  of
the  royal  apartment,  difficulty  of  access,  distance  and
retirement,  were  things  unknown  and  unpopular.
Endea-  These  precautions  were  necessary  for  secur-
becoml0  *n»  to  Bothwell  the  power  which  he  had  ac-
master  quired.  But,  without  being  master  of  the  per-
prince's  son  of  the  young  prince,  he  esteemed  all  that
person.  ^  had  gained  to  be  precarious  and  uncertain.
The  queen  had  committed  her  son  to  the  care  of  the
earl  of  Mar,  The  fidelity  and  loyalty  of  that  noble-
man were  too  well  known  to  expect  that  he  would  be
willing  to  put  the  prince  into  the  hands  of  the  man
who  was  so  violently  suspected  of  having  murdered
his  father.  Bothwell,  however,  laboured  to  get  the
prince  into  bis  power,  with  an  anxiety  which  gave  rise
to  the  blackest  suspicions.  All  his  address,  as  well  as
authority,  were  employed  to  persuade,  or  to  force  Mar
into  a,  compliance  with  his  demands.1  And  it  is  no
slight  proof,  both  of  the  firmness  and  dexterity  of  that
nobleman,  that  he  preserved  a  life  of  so  much  impor-
tance to  the  nation,  from  being  in  the  power  of  a  man,
whom  fear  or  ambition  might  have  prompted  to  violent
attempts  against  it.

General  The  eyes  of  the  neighbouring  nations  were

at  that  time, upon  the great events

the  queen's  which  had  happened  in  Scotland  during  three

conduct  .  _  V  , i-ii

excited.  months  :  a  king  murdered  with  the  utmost
cruelty,  in  the  prime  of  his  days,  and  in  his  capital
city  ;  the  person  suspected  of  that  odious  crime  suf-

*And.  i.  136.  J  Melv.  160. Buch.  361.

1567.]  BOOK IV.  343

fered  not  only  to  appear  publicly  in  every  place,
but  admitted  into  the  presence  of  the  queen,  distin-
guished by  her  favour,  and  intrusted  with  the  chief
direction  of  her  affairs ;  subjected  to  a  trial  which  was
carried  on  with  most  shameless  partiality,  and  ac-
quitted by  a  sentence  which  served  only  to  confirm
the  suspicions  of  his  guilt ;  divorced  from  his  wife^  on
pretences  frivolous  or  indecent;  and,  after  all  this,  in-
stead of  meeting  with  the  ignominy  due  to  his  actions,
or  the  punishment  merited  by  his  crimes,  permitted
openly,  and  without  opposition,  to  marry  a  queen,  the
wife  of  the  prince  whom  he  had  assassinated,  and  the
guardian  of  those  laws  which  he  had  been  guilty  of
violating.  Such  a  quick  succession  of  incidents,  so
singular  and  so  detestable,  in  the  space  of  three
months,  is  not  to  be  found  in  any  other  history.  They
left,  in  the  opinion  of  foreigners,  a  mark  of  infamy  on
the  character  of  the  nation.  The  Scots  were  held  in
abhorrence  all  over  Europe ;  they  durst  hardly  appear
any  where  in  public;  and,  after  suffering  so  many
atrocious  deeds  to  pass  with  impunity,  they  were
universally  reproached  as  men  void  of  courage,  or  of
humanity,  as  equally  regardless  of  the  reputation  of
their  queen  and  the  honour  of  their  country."1
The  nobles  These  reproaches  roused  the  nobles,  who  had
rSnsther  keen  hitherto  amused  by  Bothwell's  artifices,
and  Both-  or  intimidated  by  his  power.  The  manner  in
which  he  exercised  the  authority  which  he  had
acquired,  his  repeated  attempts  to  become  master  of  the
prince's  person,  together  with  some  rash  threatenings
against  him,  which  he  let  fall,n  added  to  the  violence
and  promptitude  of  their  resolutions.  A  considerable
body  of  them  assembled  at  Stirling,  and  entered  into  an
association  for  the  defence  of  the  prince's  person.  Ar-
gyle,  Athol,  Mar,  Morton,  Glencairn,  Home,  Lindsay,

«  Anders,  vol.  i.  128.  134. Melv.  163. Sec  Appendix,  No.  XXI.
P  Melv.  161.

344  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

Boyd,  Murray  of  Tullibardin,  Kirkaldy  of  Grange,  and
Maitland  the  secretary,  were  the  heads  of  this  confede-
racy.0 Stewart  earl  of  Athol  was  remarkable  for  an
uniform  and  bigotted  attachment  to  Popery ;  but  his
indignation  on  account  of  the  murder  of  the  king,  to
whom  he  was  nearly  allied,  and  his  zeal  for  the  safety
of  the  prince,  overcame,  on  this  occasion,  all  conside-
rations of  religion,  and  united  him  with  the  most  zeal-
ous Protestants.  Several  of  the  other  nobles  acted,
without  question,  from  a  laudable  concern  for  the  safety
of  the  prince  and  the  honour  of  their  country.  But  the
spirit  which  some  of  them  discovered  during  the  sub-
sequent revolutions,  leaves  little  room  to  doubt,  that
ambition  or  resentment  were  the  real  motives  of  their
conduct;  and  that,  on  many  occasions,  while  they
were  pursuing  ends  just  and  necessary,  they  were
actuated  by  principles  and  passions  altogether  unjus-
tifiable.

The  first  accounts  of  this  league  filled  the  queen  and
Both  well  with  great  consternation.  They  were  no
strangers  to  the  sentiments  of  the  nation  with  respect
to  their  conduct ;  and  though  their  marriage  had  not
met  with  public  opposition,  they  knew  that  it  had  not
been  carried  on  without  the  secret  disgust  and  murmur-
ings  of  all  ranks  of  men.  They  foresaw  the  violence
with  which  this  indignation  would  burst  out,  after  hav-
ing been  so  long  suppressed ;  and,  in  order  to  prepare
for  the  storm,  Mary  issued  a  proclamation,  re-
quiring her  subjects  to  take  arms,  and  to  attend
her  husband  by  a  day  appointed.  At  the  same  time
she  published  a  sort  of  manifesto,  in  which  she  labour-
ed to  vindicate  her  government  from  those  imputations
with  which  it  had  been  loaded,  and  employed  the
strongest  terms  to  express  her  concern  for  the  safety
and  welfare  of  the  prince  her  son.  Neither  of  these
produced  any  considerable  effect.  Her  proclamation

0  Keith,  394.

1567.]  BOOK  IV.  345

was  ill obeyed,  and  her  manifesto met with little
credit.?

The  queen  The  confederate  lords  carried  on  their  pre-
wefi  retire  Para^ons  w^1  no  ^ess  activity,  and  with  much
toDunbar.  more  success.  Among  a  warlike  people,  men
of  so  much  power  and  popularity,  found  it  an  easy
matter  to  raise  an  army.  They  were  ready  to  march
before  the  queen  and  Bothwell  were  in  a  condition  to
resist  them.  The  castle  of  Edinburgh  was  the  place
whither  the  queen  ought  naturally  to  have  retired,  and
there  her  person  might  have  been  perfectly  safe.  But
the  confederates  had  fallen  on  means  to  shake  or  cor-
rupt the  fidelity  of  Sir  James  Balfour,  the  deputy-go-
vernor, and  Bothwell  durst  not  commit  to  him  such  an
important  trust.  He  conducted  the  queen  to
the  castle  of  Borthwick,  and  on  the  appearance
of  lord  Home,  with  a  body  of  his  followers,  before  that
place,  he  fled  with  precipitation  to  Dunbar,  and  was
followed  by  the  queen  disguised  in  men's  clothes.
The  confederates  advanced  towards  Edinburgh,  where
Huntly  endeavoured,  in  vain,  to  animate  the  inhabi-
tants to  defend  the  town  against  them.  They  entered
without  opposition,  and  were  instantly  joined  by  many
of  the  citizens,  whose  zeal  became  the  firmest  support
of  their  cause. q

In  order  to  set  their  own  conduct  in  the  most  favour-
able light,  and  to  rouse  the  public  indignation  against
Bothwell,  the  nobles  published  a  declaration  of  the
motives  which  had  induced  them  to  take  arms.  All
Both  well's  past  crimes  were  enumerated,  all  his  wicked
intentions  displayed  and  aggravated,  and  every  true
Scotsman  was  called  upon  to  join  them  in  avenging
the  one  and  preventing  the  other/

Meanwhile  Bothwell  assembled  his  forces  at  Dun-
bar;  and  as  he  had  many  dependants  in  that  corner,  he
soon  gathered  such  strength,  that  he  ventured  to  ad-

P  Keith,  387.  395,  396.  q  Ibid.  398.  r  Anders,  vol.  i.  128.

346  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

vance  towards  the  confederates.  Their  troops  were  not
numerous ;  the  suddenness  and  secrecy  of  their  enter-
prise gave  their  friends  at  a  distance  no  time  to  join
them ;  and,  as  it  does  not  appear  that  they  were  sup-
ported either  with  money  or  fed  with  hopes  by  the
queen  of  England,  they  could  not  have  kept  long  in  a
body.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  Bothwell  durst  not
risk  a  delay.8  His  army  followed  him  with  reluctance
in  this  quarrel,  and  served  him  with  no  cordial  affec-
tion ;  so  that  his  only  hope  of  success  was  in  surprising
the  enemy,  or  in  striking  the  blow  before  his  own
troops  had  leisure  to  recollect  themselves,  or  to  imbibe
the  same  .  unfavourable  opinion  of  his  actions,  which
had  spread  over  the  rest  of  the  nation.  These  motives
determined  the  queen  to  march  forward,  with  an  in-
considerate and  fatal  speed.

The  nobles  ^n  ^e  ^rs*  intelligence  of  her  approach,
march  the  confederates  advanced  to  meet  her.  They
them.8  found  her  forces  drawn  up  almost  on  the  same
Ju'j  is.  groun^  which  the  English  had  occupied  before
the  battle  of  Pinkie.  The  numbers  on  both  sides  were
nearly  equal ;  but  there  was  no  equality  in  point  of
discipline.  The  queen's  army  consisted  chiefly  of  a
multitude,  hastily  assembled,  without  courage  or  expe-
rience in  war.  The  troops  of  the  confederates  were
composed  of  gentlemen  of  rank  and  reputation,  followed
by  their  most  trusty  dependants,  who  were  no  less
brave  than  zealous.*
An  accom-  Le  Croc,  the  French  •  ambassador,  who  was

^tempted.  in  the  field>  laboure(i>  by  negotiating  both  with
the  queen  and  the  nobles,  to  put  an  end  to
the  quarrel  without  the  effusion  of  blood.  He  repre-
sented to  the  confederates  the  queen's  inclination  to-
wards peace,  and  her  willingness  to  pardon  the  offences
which  they  had  committed.  Morton  replied  with
warmth,  that  they  had  taken  arms  not.against  the  queen,

•  Keith,  401.  «  Cald.  vol.  ii .  48,  49.

1567,]  BOOK IV.  347

but  against  the  murderer  of  her  husband ;  and  if  he
were  given  up  to  justice,  or  banished  from  her  presence,
she  should  find  them  ready  to  yield  the  obedience
which  is  due  from  subjects  to  their  sovereign.  Glen-
cairn  added,  that  they  did  not  come  to  ask  pardon  for
any  offence,  but  to  punish  those  who  had  offended.
Such  haughty  answers  convinced  the  ambassador  that
his  mediation  would  be  ineffectual,  and  that  their  pas-
sions were  too  high  to  allow  them  to  listen  to  any  paci-
fic propositions,  or  to  think  of  retreating  after  having
proceeded  so  far."

The  queen's  army  was  posted  to  advantage,  on  a  ris-
ing ground.  The  confederates  advanced  to  the  attack
resolutely,  but  slowly,  and  with  the  caution  which  was
natural  on  that  unhappy  field.  Her  troops  were  alarmed
at  their  approach,  and  discovered  no  inclination  to
fight.  Mary  endeavoured  to  animate  them ;  she  wept,
she  threatened,  she  reproached  them  with  cowardice,
but  all  in  vain.  A  few  of  Bothwell's  immediate  at-
tendants were  eager  for  the  encounter ;  the  rest  stood
wavering  and  irresolute,  and  some  began  to  steal  out
of  the  field.  Bothwell  attempted  to  inspirit  them,  by
offering  to  decide  the  quarrel,  and  to  vindicate  his  own
innocence,  in  single  combat  with  any  of  his  adversa-
ries. Kirkaldy  of  Grange,  Murray  of  Tullibardin,  and
lord  Lindsay,  contended  for  the  honour  of  entering  the
lists  against  him.  But  this  challenge  proved  to  be  a
mere  bravado.  Either  the  consciousness  of  guilt  de-
prived Bothwell  of  his  wonted  courage,  or  the  queen,
by  her  authority,  forbade  the  combat/

After  the  symptoms  of  fear  discovered  by  her  fol-
lowers, Mary  would  have  been  inexcusable  had  she
hazarded  a  battle.  To  have  retreated  in  the  face  of  an
enemy  who  had  already  surrounded  the  hill  on  which
she  stood  with  part  of  their  cavalry,  was  utterly  imprac-
ticable. In  this  situation  she  was  under  the  cruel  ne-

u  Keith,  401.  *  Cald.  rol.  ii.  50.

348  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

cessity  of  putting  herself  into  the  hands  of  those  sub-
jects who  had  taken  arms  against  her.  She  demanded
an  interview  with  Kirkaldy,  a  brave  and  generous  man,
who  commanded  an  advanced  body  of  the  enemy.
He,  with  the  consent  and  in  the  name  of  the  leaders  of
the  party,  promised  that,  on  condition  she  would  dis-
miss Bothwell  from  her  presence,  and  govern  the  king-
dom by  the  advice  of  her  nobles,  they  would  honour
and  obey  her  as  their  sovereign.7
Bothweii  During  this  parley,  Bothwell  took  his  last
obliged  farewell  of  the  queen,  and  rode  off  the  field  with

a  few  followers.  This  dismal  reverse  happened
exactly  one  month  after  that  marriage  which  had  cost
him  so  many  crimes  to  accomplish,  and  which  leaves  so
foul  a  stain  on  Mary's  memory.

As  soon  as  Bothwell  retired,  Mary  surren-
renders  to dered  to  Kirkaldy,  who  conducted  her  towards

the  confederate  army,  the  leaders  of  which  re-
ceived her  with  much  respect ;  and  Morton,  in  their
name,  made  ample  professions  of  their  future  loyalty
and  obedience.2  But  she  was  treated  by  the  common
soldiers  with  the  utmost  insolence  and  indignity.  As
she  marched  along,  they  poured  upon  her  all  the  op-
probrious names  which  are  bestowed  only  on  the  lowest
and  most  infamous  criminals.  Wherever  she  turned
her  eyes,  they  held  up  before  her  a  standard,  on  which
was  painted  the  dead  body  of  the  late  king,  stretched
on  the  ground,  and  the  young  prince  kneeling  before
it,  and  uttering  these  words,  "  Judge  and  revenge  my
cause,  O  Lord  P  Mary  turned  with  horror  from  such
a  shocking  sight.  She  began  already  to  feel  the
wretched  condition  to  which  a  captive  prince  is  reduced.
She  uttered  the  most  bitter  complaints,  she  melted  into
tears,  and  could  hardly  be  kept  from  sinking  to  the
ground.  The  confederates  conducted  her  towards
Edinburgh ;  and,  in  spite  of  many  delays,  and  after

y  Good,  vol.  ii.  164. Melv.  165.  *  Good.  vol.  ii.  165.

1567.]  BOOK  IV.  349

looking,  with  the  fondness  and  credulity  natural  to  the
unfortunate,  for  some  extraordinary  relief,  she  arrived
there.  The  streets  were  covered  with  multitudes,  whom
zeal  or  curiosity  had  drawn  together,  to  behold  such
an  unusual  scene.  The  queen,  worn  out  with  fatigue,
covered  with  dust,  and  bedewed  with  tears,  was  ex-
posed as  a  spectacle  to  her  own  subjects,  and  led  to  the
provost's  house.  Notwithstanding  all  her  arguments
and  entreaties,  the  same  standard  was  carried  before
her,  and  the  same  insults  and  reproaches  repeated.*
A  woman,  young,  beautiful,  and  in  distress,  is  naturally
the  object  of  compassion.  The  comparison  of  their
present  misery  with  their  former  splendour,  usually
softens  us  in  favour  of  illustrious  sufferers.  But  the
people  beheld  the  deplorable  situation  of  their  sovereign
with  insensibility ;  and  so  strong  was  their  persuasion
of  her  guilt,  and  so  great  the  violence  of  their  indig-
nation, that  the  sufferings  of  their  queen  did  not,  in
any  degree,  mitigate  their  resentment,  or  procure  her
that  sympathy  which  is  seldom  denied  to  unfortunate
princes.

a  Melv.  166. Buch.  364.

THE

HISTORY  OF  SCOTLAND.

BOOK  V.

1567. 1  HE  confederate  lords  had  proceeded  to  such
tions  of extremities  against  their  sovereign,  that  it  now

became  almost  impossible  for  them  either  to
ing  the  stop  short,  or  to  pursue  a  course  less  violent.

Many  of  the  nobles  had  refused  to  concur  with
them  in  their  enterprise  ;  others  openly  condemned  it.
A  small  circumstance  might  abate  that  indignation  with
which  the  multitude  were  at  present  animated  against
the  queen,  and  deprive  them  of  that  popular  applause
which  was  the  chief  foundation  of  their  power.  These
considerations  inclined  some  of  them  to  treat  the  queen
with  great  lenity.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  Mary's  affection  for  Both-
well  continued  as  violent  as  ever  ;  she  obstinately  re-
fused to  hearken  to  any  proposal  for  dissolving  their
marriage,  and  determined  not  to  abandon  a  man,  for
whose  love  she  had  already  sacrificed  so  much.a  If
they  should  allow  her  to  recover  the  supreme  power,
the  first  exertion  of  it  would  be  to  recall  Both  well  ;  and
they  had  reason,  both  from  his  resentment,  from  her  con-
duct, and  from  their  own,  to  expect  the  severest  effects
of  her  vengeance.  These  considerations  surmounted
every  other  motive;  and,  reckoning  themselves  absolved
by  Mary's  incurable  attachment  to  Bothwell,  from  the
engagements  which  they  had  come  under  when  she
yielded  herself  a  prisoner,  they,  without  regarding  the

»  Keith,  419.  446.  449. Melv.  167. See  Append.  No.  XXII.

1567.]  BOOK V.  351

duty  which  they  owed  her  as  their  queen,  and  without
consulting  the  rest  of  the  nobles,  carried  her  next  even-
ing, under  a  strong  guard,  to  the  castle  of  Lochlevin,
and  signed  a  warrant  to  William  Douglas,  the  owner
They  im-  of  it,  to  detain  her  as  a  prisoner.  This  castle
FnTTch^  is  situated  in  a  small  island  in  the  middle  of  a
levin.  lake.  Douglas,  to  whom  it  belonged,  was  a
near  relation  of  Morton's,  and  had  married  the  earl  of
Murray's  mother.  In  this  place,  under  strict  custody,
with  a  few  attendants,  and  subjected  to  the  insults  of
a  haughty  woman,  who  boasted  daily  of  being  the
lawful  wife  of  James  V.,  Mary  suffered  all  the  rigour
and  miseries  of  captivity.b

Immediately  after  the  queen's  imprisonment  the  con-
federates were  at  the  utmost  pains  to  strengthen  their
party ;  they  entered  into  new  bonds  of  association  ;
they  assumed  the  title  of  lords  of  the  secret  council,  and
without  any  other  right,  arrogated  to  themselves  the
whole  regal  authority.  One  of  their  first  acts  of  power
was  to  search  the  city  of  Edinburgh  for  such  as  had
been  concerned  in  the  murder  of  the  king.  This  show
of  zeal  gained  reputation  to  themselves,  and  threw  an
oblique  reflection  on  the  queen  for  her  remissness.
Several  suspected  persons  were  seized.  Captain  Black-
adder  and  three  others  were  condemned  and  executed.
But  no  discovery  of  importance  was  made.  If  we  be-
lieve some  historians,  they  were  convicted  by  sufficient
evidence.  If  we  give  credit  to  others,  their  sentence
was  unjust,  and  they  denied,  with  their  last  breath,  any
knowledge  of  the  crime  for  which  they  suffered.0

An  unexpected  accident,  however,  put  into  the  hands
of  Mary's  enemies  what  they  deemed  the  fullest  evi-
dence of  her  guilt.  Bothwell  having  left  in  the  castle
of  Edinburgh  a  casket,  containing  several  sonnets  and
letters  written  with  the  queen's  own  hand ;  he  now  sent
one  of  his  confidants  to  bring  to  him  this  precious  de-

b  Keith,  403. Note  (6.)  e  Cald.  vol.  ii.  53. Crawf.  Mem.  35.

352  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

posite.  But  as  his  messenger  returned,  he  was  inter-
cepted, and  the  casket  seized  by  Morton.d  The  con-
tents of  it  were  always  produced  by  the  party  as  the
most  ample  justification  of  their  own  conduct ;  and  to
these  they  continually  appealed  as  the  most  unanswer-
able proof  of  their  not  having  loaded  their  sovereign
with  the  imputation  of  imaginary  crimes.6
Some  of  the  But  the  confederates,  notwithstanding  their
extraordinary  success,  were  still  far  from  be-
jng  perfectly  at  ease.  That  so  small  a  part
of  the  nobles  should  pretend  to  dispose  of  the  person
of  their  sovereign,  or  to  assume  the  authority  which
belonged  to  her,  without  the  concurrence  of  the  rest,
was  deemed  by  many  of  that  body  to  be  unprece-
dented and  presumptuous.  Several  of  these  were  now
assembled  at  Hamilton,  in  order  to  deliberate  what
course  they  should  hold  in  this  difficult  conjuncture.
The  confederates  made  some  attempts  towards  a  coa-
lition with  them,  but  without  effect.  They  employed
the  mediation  of  the  assembly  of  the  church,  to  draw
them  to  a  personal  interview  at  Edinburgh,  but  with
no  better  success.  That  party,  however,  though  its
numbers  were  formidable,  and  the  power  of  its  leaders
great,  soon  lost  reputation  by  the  want  of  unanimity  and
vigour;  all  its  consultations  evaporated  in  murmurs
and  complaints,  and  no  scheme  was  concerted  for  ob-
structing the  progress  of  the  confederates/
Elizabeth  There  appeared  some  prospect  of  danger
iuter^e-  fr°m  another  quarter.  This  great  revolution
half<  in  Scotland  had  been  carried  on  without  any
aid  from  Elizabeth,  and  even  without  her  knowledge. g
Though  she  was  far  from  being  displeased  at  seeing
the  affairs  of  that  kingdom  embroiled,  or  a  rival,  whom
she  hated,  reduced  to  distress ;  she  neither  wished  that
it  should  be  in  the  power  of  the  one  faction  entirely

d  Anders,  vol.  ii.  92. Good.  vol.  ii.  90.
«  See  Dissertation  at  the  end  of  the  Historv.  f  Keith,  407.  ?  Ibid.  415.

1567.]  BOOK V.  353

to  suppress  the  other,  nor  could  she  view  the  steps  taken
by  the  confederates  without  great  offence.  Notwith-
standing the  popular  maxims  by  which  she  governed
her  own  subjects,  her  notions  of  royal  prerogative  were
very  exalted.  The  confederates  had,  in  her  opinion,
encroached  on  the  authority  of  their  sovereign,  which
they  had  no  right  to  control,  and  had  offered  violence
to  her  person,  which  it  was  their  duty  to  esteem  sacred.
They  had  set  a  dangerous  example  to  other  subjects,  and
Mary's  cause  became  the  common  cause  of  princes.11
If  ever  Elizabeth  was  influenced  with  regard  to  the
affairs  of  Scotland  by  the  feelings  of  her  heart,  rather
than  by  considerations  of  interest,  it  was  on  this  occa-
sion. Mary,  in  her  present  condition,  degraded  from
her  throne,  and  covered  with  the  infamy  attending  an
accusation  of  such  atrocious  crimes,  could  be  no  longer
the  object  of  Elizabeth's  jealousy,  either  as  a  woman  or
as  a  queen.  Sympathy  with  a  sovereign  in  distress
seems,  for  a  moment,  to  have  touched  a  heart  not  very
susceptible  of  tender  sentiments ;  and,  while  these  were
yet  warm,  she  dispatched  Throkmorton  into
Scotland,  with  power  to  negotiate  both  with  the
queen  and  with  the  confederates.  In  his  instructions
there  appears  a  remarkable  solicitude  for  Mary's  liberty,
and  even  for  her  reputation  ;  and  the  terms  upon  Which
she  proposed  to  re-establish  concord  between  the  queen
and  her  subjects,  appear  to  be  so  reasonable  and  well
digested,  as  might  have  ensured  the  safety  and  happi-
ness of  both.  Zealous  as  Throkmorton  was  to  accom-
plish this,  all  his  endeavours  and  address  proved  inef-
fectual. He  found  not  only  the  confederate  nobles,  but
the  nation  in  general,  so  far  alienated  from  the  queen,
and  so  much  offended  with  the  indecent  precipitancy
of  her  marriage  with  the  reputed  murderer  of  her  former
husband,  as  to  be  incapable  of  listening  to  any  propo-
sition in  her  favour.

h  Keith,  412.  415.
VOL.  I.  2  A

354  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

During  the  state  of  anarchy  occasioned  by  the  im-
prisonment of  the  queen,  and  the  dissolution  of  the
established  government,  which  afforded  such  ample
scope  for  political  speculation,  four  different  schemes
had  been  proposed  for  the  settlement  of  the  nation.
One,  that  Mary  should  be  replaced  upon  the  throne,  but
under  various  and  strict  limitations.  The  second,  that
she  should  resign  the  crown  to  her  son,  and,  retiring  out
of  the  kingdom,  should  reside,  during  the  remainder  of
her  days,  either  in  England  or  in  France.  The  third,
that  Mary  should  be  brought  to  public  trial  for  her
crimes,  and  after  conviction,  of  which  no  doubt  was
entertained,  should  be  kept  in  perpetual  imprisonment.
The  fourth,  that,  after  trial  and  condemnation,  capital
punishment  should  be  inflicted  upon  her.  Throkmorton,
though  disposed,  as  well  by  his  own  inclination  as  in
conformity  to  the  spirit  of  his  instructions,  to  view
matters  in  the  light  most  favourable  to  Mary,  informed
his  court,  that  the  milder  schemes,  recommended  by
Maitland  alone,  would  undoubtedly  be  reprobated,  and
one  of  the  more  rigorous  carried  into  execution.

In  justification  of  this  rigour,  the  confederates  main-
tained that  Mary's  affection  for  Both  well  was  still  un-
abated, and  openly  avowed  by  her ;  that  she  rejected
with  disdain  every  proposal  for  dissolving  their  mar-
riage ;  and  declared  that  she  would  forego  every  com-
fort, and  endure  any  extremity,  rather  than  give  her
consent  to  that  measure.  While  these  were  her  senti-
ments, they  contended,  that  concern  for  the  public  wel-
fare, as  well  as  attention  to  their  own  safety,  rendered
it  necessary  to  put  it  out  of  the  queen's  power  to  restore
a  daring  man,  exasperated  by  recent  injuries,  to  his  for-
mer station,  which  must  needs  prove  fatal  to  both.  Not-
withstanding their  solicitude  to  conciliate  the  good-will
of  Elizabeth,  they  foresaw  clearly  what  would  be  the
effect,  at  this  juncture,  of  Throkmorton's  interposition
in  behalf  of  the  queen,  and  that  she,  elated  with  the

1567.]  BOOK V.  355

prospect  of  protection,  would  refuse  to  listen  to  the  over-
tures which  they  were  about  to  make  to  her.  For  this
reason  they  peremptorily  denied  Throkmorton  access
to  their  prisoner ;  and  what  propositions  he  made  to
them  in  her  behalf  they  either  refused  or  eluded.1
Schemes  of  Meanwhile  they  deliberated  with  the  utmost
derate"™-  anxiety  concerning  the  settlement  of  the  nation,
bles-  and  the  future  disposal  of  the  queen's  person.
Elizabeth  observing  that  Throkmorton  made  no  progress
in  his  negotiations  with  them,  and  that  they  would  listen
to  none  of  his  demands  in  Mary's  favour,  turned  towards
that  party  of  the  nobles  who  were  assembled  at  Hamil-
ton, incited  them  to  take  arms  in  order  to  restore  their
queen  to  liberty,  and  promised  to  assist  them  in  such  an
attempt  to  the  utmost  of  her  power.k  But  they  disco-
vered no  greater  union  and  vigour  than  formerly,  and,
behaving  like  men  who  had  given  up  all  concern  either
for  their  queen  or  their  country,  tamely  allowed  an  in-
considerable part  of  their  body,  whether  we  consider  it
with  respect  to  numbers  or  to  power,  to  settle  the  go-
vernment of  the  kingdom,  and  to  dispose  of  the  queen's
person  at  pleasure.  Many  consultations  were  held,  and
various  opinions  arose  with  regard  to  each  of  these.
Some  seemed  desirous  of  adhering  to  the  plan  on  which
the  confederacy  was  at  first  formed ;  and  after  punishing
the  murderers  of  the  king,  and  dissolving  the  marriage
with  Bothwell ;  after  providing  for  the  safety  of  the  young
prince,  and  the  security  of  the  Protestant  religion  ;  they
proposed  to  re-establish  the  queen  in  the  possession  of
her  legal  authority.  The  success  with  which  their  arms
had  been  accompanied,  inspired  others  with  bolder  and
more  desperate  thoughts,  and  nothing  less  would  satisfy
them  than  the  trial,  the  condemnation,  and  punishment
of  the  queen  herself,  as  the  principal  conspirator  against
the  life  of  her  husband  and  the  safety  of  her  son  :l  the

1  Keith,  417.  427.  *  See  Append.  No.  XXIII.

1  Keith,  420,  421,  422,  582.

2  A  2

356  SCOTLAND.  [1567

former  was  Maitland's  system,  and  breathed  too  much
of  a  pacific  and  moderate  spirit,  to  be  agreeable  to  the
temper  or  wishes  of  the  party.  The  latter  was  recom-
mended by  the  clergy,  and  warmly  adopted  by  many
laics ;  but  the  nobles  durst  not,  or  would  not,  venture
on  such  an  unprecedented  and  audacious  deed."1
The  obii  e  Both  parties  agreed  at  last  upon  a  scheme,
the  queen  neither  so  moderate  as  the  one,  nor  so  daring
the'govem-  as  the  other.  Mary  was  to  be  persuaded  or
forced  to  resign  the  crown  ;  the  young  prince
was  to  be  proclaimed  king,  and  the  earl  of  Murray  was
to  be  appointed  to  govern  the  kingdom,  during  his  mi-
nority, with  the  name  and  authority  of  regent.  With
regard  to  the  queen's  own  person,  nothing  was  deter-
mined. It  seems  to  have  been  the  intention  of  the  con-
federates to  keep  her  in  perpetual  imprisonment ;  but,
in  order  to  intimidate  herself,  and  to  overawe  her  par-
tisans, they  still  reserved  to  themselves  the  power  of
proceeding  to  more  violent  extremes.

It  was  obvious  to  foresee  difficulties  in  the  execution
of  this  plan.  Mary  was  young,  ambitious,  high-spirited,
and  accustomed  to  command.  To  induce  her  to  ac-
knowledge her  own  incapacity  for  governing,  to  re-
nounce the  dignity  and  power  which  she  was  born  to
enjoy,  to  become  dependent  on  her  own  subjects,  to
consent  to  her  own  bondage,  and  to  invest  those  persons
whom  she  considered  as  the  authors  of  all  her  calamities
with  that  honour  and  authority  of  which  she  herself  was
stripped,  were  points  hard  to  be  gained.  These,  how-
ever, the  confederates  attempted,  and  they  did  not  want
means  to  ensure  success.  Mary  had  endured  for  several
weeks,  all  the  hardships  and  terror  of  a  prison ;  no  pros-
pect of  liberty  appeared ;  none  of  her  subjects  had
either  taken  arms,  or  so  much  as  solicited  her  relief;11

m  The  intention  of  putting  the  queen  to  death  seems  to  have  been  carried  on  by
some  of  her  subjects  :  at  this  time  we  often  find  Elizabeth  boasting  that  Mary  owed
her  life  to  her  interposition.  Dicges's  Compl.  Arab.  14.  &c.  See  Append.  No.
XVIII.  »  Keith,  425.

1567.]  BOOK V.  357

no  person,  in  whom  she  could  confide,  was  admitted
into  her  presence ;  even  the  ambassadors  of  the  French
king,  and  queen  of  England,  were  refused  access  to  her.
In  this  solitary  state,  without  a  counsellor,  or  a  friend,
under  the  pressure  of  distress  and  the  apprehension  of
danger,  it  was  natural  for  a  woman  to  hearken  almost
to  any  overtures.  The  confederates  took  advantage  of
her  condition  and  of  her  fears.  They  employed  lord
Lindsay,  the  fiercest  zealot  in  the  party,  to  communicate
their  scheme  to  the  queen,  and  to  obtain  her  subscrip-
tion to  those  papers  which  were  necessary  for  rendering
it  effectual.  He  executed  his  commission  with  harsh-
ness and  brutality.  Certain  death  was  before  Mary's
eyes  if  she  refused  to  comply  with  his  demands.  At  the
same  time  she  was  informed  by  Sir  Robert  Melvil,  in
the  name  of  Athol,  Maitland,  and  Kirkaldy,  the  persons
among  the  confederates  who  were  most  attentive  to  her
interest,  that  a  resignation  extorted  by  fear,  and  granted
during  her  imprisonment,  was  void  in  law,  and  might
be  revoked  as  soon  as  she  recovered  liberty.  Throk-
morton,  by  a  note  which  he  found  means  of  conveying
to  her,  suggested  the  same  thing.0  Deference  to  their
opinion,  as  well  as  concern  for  her  own  safety,  obliged
her  to  yield  to  every  thing  which  was  required,  and  to
sign  all  the  papers  which  Lindsay  presented  to  her.  By
one  of  these  she  resigned  the  crown,  renounced  all  share
in  the  government  of  the  kingdom,  and  consented  to  the
coronation  of  the  young  king.  By  another,  she  ap-
pointed the  earl  of  Murray  regent,  and  conferred  upon
him  all  the  powers  and  privileges  of  that  high  office.
By  a  third,  she  substituted  some  other  nobleman  in
Murray's  place,  if  he  should  refuse  the  honour  which
was  designed  for  him.  Mary,  when  she  subscribed  these
deeds,  was  bathed  in  tears ;  and  while  she  gave  away,
as  it  were  with  her  own  hands,  the  sceptre  which  she
had  swayed  so  long,  she  felt  a  pang  of  grief  and  indig-

«  Keith,  425. Note  (ft). Melv.  169.

358  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

nation,  one  of  the  severest,  perhaps,  which  can  touch
the  human  heart.p

James  vi.  The  confederates  endeavoured  to  give  this
cro,w™d'  resignation  all  the  weight  and  validity  in  their

and  Mur-  3 .  J

ray  chosen  power,  by  proceeding  without  delay  to  crown
regem  ^e  young  prince.  The  ceremony  was  per-
formed at  Stirling,  on  the  29th  of  July,  with  much
solemnity,  in  presence  of  all  the  nobles  of  the  party,
a  considerable  number  of  lesser  barons,  and  a  great
assembly  of  the  people.  From  that  time,  all  public
writs  were  issued,  and  the  government  carried  on,  in
the  name  of  James  VI.q

No  revolution  so  great  was  ever  effected  with  more
ease,  or  by  means  so  unequal  to  the  end.  In  a  warlike
age,  and  in  less  time  than  two  months,  a  part  of  the
nobles,  who  neither  possessed  the  chief  power  nor  the
greatest  wealth  in  the  nation,  and  who  never  brought
three  thousand  men  into  the  field,  seized,  imprisoned,
and  dethroned  their  queen,  and,  without  shedding  a
single  drop  of  blood,  set  her  son,  an  infant  of  a  year
old,  on  the  throne.

Reasonin  s  Curing  this  rapid  progress  of  the  confede-
of  both  par- rates,  the  eyes  of  all  the  nation  were  turned
on  them  with  astonishment;  and  various  and
contradictory  opinions  were  formed  concerning  the  ex-
traordinary steps  which  they  had  taken.

Even  under  the  aristocratical  form  of  government
which  prevails  in  Scotland,  said  the  favourers  of  the
queen,  and  notwithstanding  the  exorbitant  privileges
of  the  nobles,  the  prince  possesses  considerable  power,
and  his  person  is  treated  with  great  veneration.  No
encroachments  should  be  made  on  the  former,  and  no
injury  offered  to  the  latter,  but  in  cases  where  the
liberty  and  happiness  of  the  nation  cannot  be  secured
by  any  other  means.  Such  cases  seldom  exist,  and  it
belongs  not  to  any  part,  but  to  the  whole,  or  at  least  to

P  Keith,  430. Crawf.  Mem.  38.  <i  Keith,  437.

1567.]  BOOK V.  359

a  majority  of  the  society,  to  judge  of  their  existence.
By  what  action  could  it  be  pretended  that  Mary  had
invaded  the  rights  or  property  of  her  subjects,  or  what
scheme  had  she  formed  against  the  liberty  and  consti-
tution of  the  kingdom  ?  Were  fears,  and  suspicions,
and  surmises,  enough  to  justify  the  imprisoning  and  the
deposing  a  queen,  to  whom  the  crown  descended  from
so  long  a  race  of  monarchs?  The  principal  author  of
whatever  was  reckoned  culpable  in  her  conduct,  was
now  driven  from  her  presence.  The  murderers  of  the
king  might  have  been  brought  to  condign  punishment,
the  safety  of  the  prince  have  been  secured,  and  the  Pro-
testant religion  have  been  established,  without  wresting
the  sceptre  out  of  her  hands,  or  condemning  her  to  per-
petual imprisonment.  Whatever  right  a  free  parliament
might  have  had  to  proceed  to  such  a  rigorous  conclu-
sion, or  whatever  name  its  determinations  might  have
merited,  a  sentence  of  this  nature,  passed  by  a  small
party  of  the  nobility,  without  acknowledging  or  con-
sulting the  rest  of  the  nation,  must  be  deemed  a  rebel-
lion against  the  government,  and  a  conspiracy  against
the  person  of  their  sovereign.

The  partisans  of  the  confederates  reasoned  very  dif-
ferently. It  is  evident,  said  they,  that  Mary  either
previously  gave  consent  to  the  king's  murder,  or  did
afterward  approve  of  that  horrid  action.  Her  attach-
ment to  Both  well,  the  power  and  honours  which  she
has  conferred  upon  him,  the  manner  in  which  she
suffered  his  trial  to  be  carried  on,  and  the  .indecent
speed  with  which  she  married  a  man  stained  with  so
many  crimes,  raise  strong  suspicions  of  the  former,  and
put  the  latter  beyond  all  doubt.  To  have  suffered  the
supreme  power  to  continue  in  the  hands  of  an  ambitious
man,  capable  of  the  most  atrocious  and  desperate  ac-
tions, would  have  been  disgraceful  to  the  nation,  dis-
honourable to  the  queen,  and  dangerous  to  the  prince.

360  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

Recourse  was  therefore  had  to  arms.  The  queen  had
been  compelled  to  abandon  a  husband  so  unworthy  of
herself.  But  her  affection  towards  him  still  continuing
unabated;  her  indignation  against  the  authors  of  this
separation  being  visible,  and  often  expressed  in  the
strongest  terms ;  they,  by  restoring  her  to  her  ancient
authority,  would  have  armed  her  with  power  to  destroy
themselves,  have  enabled  her  to  recall  Bothwell,  and
have  afforded  her  an  opportunity  of  pursuing  schemes
fatal  to  the  nation  with  greater  eagerness,  and  with  more
success.  Nothing  therefore  remained,  but  by  one  bold
action  to  deliver  themselves  and  their  country  from
all  future  fears.  The  expedient  they  had  chosen  was
no  less  respectful  to  the  royal  blood,  than  necessary
for  the  public  safety.  While  one  prince  was  set  aside
as  incapable  of  governing,  the  crown  was  placed  on
his  head  who  was  the  undoubted  representative  of  their
ancient  kings.

Whatever  opinion  posterity  may  form  on  comparing
the  arguments  of  the  two  contending  parties,  whatever
sentiments  we  may  entertain  concerning  the  justice  or
necessity  of  that  course  which  the  confederates  held,
it  cannot  be  denied  that  their  conduct,  so  far  as  re-
garded themselves,  was  extremely  prudent.  Other  ex-
pedients, less  rigorous  towards  Mary,  might  have  been
found  for  settling  the  nation ;  but,  after  the  injuries
which  they  had  already  offered  the  queen,  there  was
none  so  effectual  for  securing  their  own  safety,  or  per-
petuating their  own  power.

To  a  great  part  of  the  nation,  the  conduct  of  the
confederates  appeared  not  only  wise,  but  just.  The
king's  accession  to  the  throne  was  every  where  pro-
claimed, and  his  authority  submitted  to  without  oppo-
sition. Though  several  of  the  nobles  were  still  assem-
bled at  Hamilton,  and  seemed  to  be  entering  into  some
combination  against  his  government,  an  association  for

1567.]  BOOK  V.  361

supporting  it  was  formed,  and  signed  by  so  many  per-
sons of  power  and  influence  throughout  the  nation,  as
entirely  discouraged  the  attempt/
Murray  as-  The  return  of  the  earl  of  Murray,  about  this
govem-the  time>  added  strength  to  the  party,  and  gave  it
roent.  a  regular  and  finished  form.  Soon  after  the
murder  of  the  king,  this  nobleman  had  retired  into
France,  upon  what  pretence  historians  do  not  mention.
During  his  residence  there,  he  had  held  a  close  corre-
spondence with  the  chiefs  of  the  confederacy,  and,  at
their  desire,  he  now  returned.  He  seemed,  at  first,
unwilling  to  accept  the  office  of  regent.  This  hesita-
tion cannot  be  ascribed  to  the  scruples  either  of  diffi-
dence or  of  duty.  Murray  wanted  neither  the  abilities
nor  the  ambition  which  might  incite  him  to  aspire  to
this  high  dignity.  He  had  received  the  first  accounts
of  his  promotion  with  the  utmost  satisfaction  ;  but,  by
appearing  to  continue  for  some  days  in  suspense,  he
gained  time  to  view  with  attention  the  ground  on  which
he  was  to  act ;  to  balance  the  strength  and  resources  of
the  two  contending  factions,  and  to  examine  whether
the  foundation  on  which  his  future  fame  and -success
must  rest,  were  sound  and  firm.

Before  he  declared  his  final  resolution,  he  waited  on
Mary  at  Lochlevin.  This  visit,  to  a  sister,  and  a  queen,
in  a  prison,  from  which  he  had  neither  any  intention
to  relieve  her,  nor  to  mitigate  the  rigour  of  her  con-
finement, may  be  mentioned  among  the  circumstances
which  discover  the  great  want  of  delicacy  and  refine-
ment in  that  age.  Murray,  who  was  naturally  rough
and  uncourtly  in  his  manner,5  expostulated  so  warmly
with  the  queen  concerning  her  past  conduct,  and
charged  her  faults  so  home  upon  her,  that  Mary,  who
had  flattered  herself  with  more  gentle  and  brotherly
treatment  from  him,  melted  into  tears,  and  abandoned
herself  entirely  to  despair.*  This  interview,  from  which

r  Anders,  vol.  ii.  231.  •  Keith,  96.  4  Ibid.  445,  446.

362  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

Murray  could  reap  no  political  advantage,  and  wherein
he  discovered  a  spirit  so  severe  and  unrelenting,  may
be  reckoned  among  the  most  bitter  circumstances  in
Mary's  life,  and  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  unjustifia-
ble steps  in  his  conduct.

Soon  after  his  return  from  Lochlevin,  Murray

Auc  22.

accepted  the  office  of  regent,  and  began  to  act
in  that  character  without  opposition.
Fate  of  Amidst  so  many  great  and  unexpected  events,
Bothwell.  tne  fate  of  Bothwell,  the  chief  cause  of  them  all,
hath  been  almost  forgotten.  After  his  flight  from  the
confederates,  he  lurked  for  some  time  among  his  vassals
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Dunbar.  But  finding  it  im-
possible for  him  to  make  head  in  that  country  against
his  enemies,  or  even  to  secure  himself  from  their  pur-
suit, he  fled  for  shelter  to  his  kinsman  the  bishop  of
Murray ;  and  when  he,  overawed  by  the  confederates,
was  obliged  to  abandon  him,  he  retired  to  the  Orkney
isles.  Hunted  from  place  to  place,  deserted  by  his
friends,  and  accompanied  by  a  few  retainers,  as  despe-
rate as  himself,  he  suffered  at  once  the  miseries  of  in-
famy and  of  want.  His  indigence  forced  him  upon  a
course  which  added  to  his  infamy.  He  armed  a  few
small  ships,  which  had  accompanied  him  from  Dunbar,
and  attacking  every  vessel  which  fell  in  his  way,  endea-
voured to  procure  subsistence  for  himself  and  his  fol-
lowers by  piracy.  Kirkaldy  and  Murray  of  Tullibardin
were  sent  out  against  him  by  the  confederates ;  and,
surprising  him  while  he  rode  at  anchor,  scattered  his
small  fleet,  took  a  part  of  it,  and  obliged  him  to  fly
with  a  single  ship  towards  Norway.  On  that  coast  he
fell  in  with  a  vessel  richly  laden,  and  immediately  at-
tacked it;  the  Norwegians  sailed  with  armed  boats  to
its  assistance,  and,  after  a  desperate  fight,  Bothwell  and
all  his  crew  were  taken  prisoners.  His  name  and  qua-
lity were  both  unknown,  and  he  was  treated  at  first
with  all  the  indignity  and  rigour  which  the  odious

1567.]  BOOK V.  363

crime  of  piracy  merited.  His  real  character  was  soon
discovered,  and  though  it  saved  him  from  the  infamous
death  to  which  his  associates  were  condemned,  it  could
neither  procure  him  liberty,  nor  mitigate  the  hardships
of  his  imprisonment.  He  languished  ten  years  in  this
unhappy  condition ;  melancholy  and  despair  deprived
him  of  reason,  and  at  last  he  ended  his  days  unpitied
by  his  countrymen,  and  unassisted  by  strangers."  Few
men  ever  accomplished  their  ambitious  projects  by
worse  means,  or  reaped  from  them  less  satisfaction.
The  early  part  of  his  life  was  restless  and  enterprising,
full  of  danger  and  of  vicissitudes.  His  enjoyment  of
the  grandeur,  to  which  he  attained  by  so  many  crimes,
was  extremely  short,  imbittered  by  much,  anxiety,  and
disquieted  by  many  fears.  In  his  latter  years,  he  suf-
fered the  most  intolerable  calamities  to  which  the
wretched  are  subject,  and  from  which  persons  who  have
moved  in  so  high  a  sphere  are  commonly  exempted.
Success  of  The  good  effects  of  Murray's  accession  to
adSis-18  the  regency  were  quickly  felt.  The  party
tration.  forming  for  the  queen  was  weak,  irresolute,
and  disunited ;  and,  no  sooner  was  the  government  of
the  kingdom  in  the  hands  of  a  man  so  remarkable  both
for  his  abilities  and  popularity,  than  the  nobles,  of
whom  it  was  composed,  lost  all  hopes  of  gaining
ground,  and  began  to  treat  separately  with  the  regent.
So  many  of  them  were  brought  to  acknowledge  the
king's  authority,  that  scarce  any  appearance  of  oppo-
sition to  the  established  government  was  left  in  the
kingdom.  Had  they  adhered  to  the  queen  with  any
firmness,  it  is  probable,  from  Elizabeth's  disposition  at
that  time,  that  she  would  have  afforded  them  such  as-
sistance as  might  have  enabled  them  to  face  their  ene-
mies in  the  field.  But  there  appeared  so  little  vigour
or  harmony  in  their  counsels,  that  she  was  discouraged
from  espousing  their  cause;  and  the  regent,  taking  ad-

u  Melv.  168.

364  SCOTLAND.  [1567.

vantage  of  their  situation,  obliged  them  to  submit  to  his
government,  without  granting  any  terms,  either  to  them-
selves or  to  the  queen."

The  regent  was  no  less  successful  in  his  attempt  to
get  into  his  hands  the  places  of  strength  in  the  king-
dom. Balfour,  the  deputy-governor,  surrendered  the
castle  of  Edinburgh ;  and  as  the  reward  of  his  treachery,
in  deserting  Bothwell  his  patron,  obtained  terms  of  great
advantage  to  himself.  The  governor  of  Dunbar,  who  dis-
covered greater  fidelity,  was  soon  forced  to  capitulate:
some  other  small  forts  surrendered  without  resistance.
Apariia-  ^his  ^ace  °^  tranquillity  in  the  nation  en-
Dent'i5  courage(i  the  regent  to  call  a  meeting  of  par-
liament. Nothing  was  wanting  to  confirm
the  king's  authority,  and  the  proceedings  of  the  confe-
derates, except  the  approbation  of  this  supreme  court ;
and,  after  the  success  which  had  attended  all  their  mea-
sures, there  could  be  little  doubt  of  obtaining  it.  The
numbers  that  resorted  to  an  assembly,  which  was  called
to  deliberate  on  matters  of  so  much  importance,  were
great.  The  meeting  was  opened  with  the  utmost  so-
lemnity, and  all  its  acts  passed  with  much  unanimity.
Many,  however,  of  the  lords  who  had  discovered  the
warmest  attachment  to  the  queen,  were  present.  But
they  had  made  their  peace  with  the  regent.  Argyle,
Huntly,  and  Herries  acknowledged,  openly  in  parlia-
ment, that  their  behaviour  towards  the  king  had  been
undutiful  and  criminal/  Their  compliance,  in  this
manner,  with  the  measures  of  the  regent's  party,  was
either  the  condition  on  which  they  were  admitted  into
favour,  or  intended  as  a  proof  of  the  sincerity  of  their
reconcilement.

Confirms  The  parliament  granted  every  thing  the  con-
the  pro-  federates  could  demand,  either  for  the  safety  of

ceedings  of  ^

the  confe- their  own  persons,  or  the  security  of  that  form
of  government  which  they  had  established  in

*  Keith,  447.  450.  463.  ?  Anders,  vol.  iv.  153, See  Append.  No.  XXIV.

1567.]  BOOK V.  365

the  kingdom.  Mary's  resignation  of  the  crown  was
accepted,  and  declared  to  be  valid.  The  king's  autho-
rity, and  Murray's  election,  were  recognised  and  con-
firmed. The  imprisoning  the  queen,  and  all  the  other
proceedings  of  the  confederates,  were  pronounced  law-
ful. The  letters  which  Mary  had  written  to  Bothwell
were  produced,  and  she  was  declared  to  be  accessary
to  the  murder  of  the  king.2  At  the  same  time,  all  the
acts  of  parliament  of  the  year  1560,  in  favour  of  the
Protestant  religion,  were  publicly  ratified ;  new  statutes
to  the  same  purpose  were  enacted ;  and  nothing  that
could  contribute  to  root  out  the  remains  of  Popery,
or  to  encourage  the  growth  of  the  Reformation,  was
neglected.

It  is  observable,  however,  that  the  same  parsimonious
spirit  prevailed  in  this  parliament,  as  in  that  of  the  year
1560.  The  Protestant  clergy,  notwithstanding  many
discouragements,  and  their  extreme  poverty,  had,  for
seven  years,  performed  all  religious  offices  in  the  king-
dom. The  expedients  fallen  upon  for  their  subsistence
had  hitherto  proved  ineffectual,  or  were  intended  to  be
so.  But,  notwithstanding  their  known  indigence,  and
the  warm  remonstrances  of  the  assembly  of  the  church,
which  met  this  year,  the  parliament  did  nothing  more
for  their  relief  than  prescribe  some  new  regulations
concerning  the  payment  of  the  thirds  of  benefices,
which  did  not  produce  any  considerable  change  in  the
situation  of  the  clergy.

1568.  A  few  days  after  the  dissolution  of  parlia-
iary3'  ment,  four  of  Both  well's  dependants  were  con-
victed of  being  guilty  of  the  king's  murder,  and  suf-
fered death  as  traitors.  Their  confessions  brought  to
light  many  circumstances  relative  to  the  manner  of
committing  that  barbarous  crime ;  but  they  were  per-
sons of  low  rank,  and  seem  not  to  have  been  admitted
into  the  secrets  of  the  conspiracy.*

1  Good.  vol.  ii.  66. Anders,  vol.  ii.  206.  a  Ibid.  165.

366  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

Notwithstanding  the  universal  submission  to  the  re-
gent's authority,  there  still  abounded  in  the  kingdom
many  secret  murmurs  and  cabals.  The  partisans  of  the
house  of  Hamilton  reckoned  Murray's  promotion  an  in-
jury to  the  duke  of  Chatelherault,  who,  as  first  prince  of
the  blood,  had,  in  their  opinion,  an  undoubted  right  to
be  regent.  The  length  and  rigour  of  Mary's  sufferings
began  to  move  many  to  commiserate  her  case.  All
who  leaned  to  the  ancient  opinions  in  religion  dreaded
the  effects  of  Murray's  zeal.  And  he,  though  his  abi-
lities were  great,  did  not  possess  the  talents  requisite
for  soothing  the  rage  or  removing  the  jealousies  of
the  different  factions.  By  insinuation,  or  address,  he
might  have  gained  or  softened  many  who  had  opposed
him ;  but  he  was  a  stranger  to  these  gentle  arts.  His
virtues  were  severe  ;  and  his  deportment  towards  his
equals,  especially  after  his  elevation  to  the  regency,
distant  and  haughty.  This  behaviour  offended  some
of  the  nobles,  and  alarmed  others.  The  queen's  fac-
tion, which  had  been  so  easily  dispersed,  began  again
to  gather  and  to  unite,  and  was  secretly  favoured  by
some  who  had  hitherto  zealously  concurred  with  the
confederates.5

Such  was  the  favourable  disposition  of  the

Mary  es-  *

capes  from  nation  towards  the  queen,  when  she  recovered

Lochlevin. . ,.,  ,  ...,  ,  . .

her  liberty,  in  a  manner  no  less  surprising  to
her  friends  than  unexpected  by  her  enemies.  Several
attempts  had  been  made  to  procure  her  an  opportunity
of  escaping,  which  some  unforeseen  accident,  or  the
vigilance  of  her  keepers,  had  hitherto  disappointed.
At  last,  Mary  employed  all  her  art  to  gain  George
Douglas,  her  keeper's  brother,  a  youth  of  eighteen.
As  her  manners  were  naturally  affable  and  insinuating,
she  treated  him  with  the  most  flattering  distinction :
she  even  allowed  him  to  entertain  the  most  ambitious
hopes,  by  letting  fall  some  expressions,  as  if  she  would

b  Melv,  179.

1568.]  BOOK  V.  367

choose  him  for  her  husband.0  At  his  age,  and  in  such
circumstances,  it  was  impossible  to  resist  such  a  tempta-
tion. He  yielded,  and  drew  others  into  the  plot.  On
Sunday,  the  2d  of  May,  while  his  brother  sat  at  supper,
and  the  rest  of  the  family  were  retired  to  their  devo-
tions, one  of  his  accomplices  found  means  to  steal  the
keys  out  of  his  brother's  chamber,  and  opening  the
gates  to  the  queen  and  one  of  her  maids,  locked  them
behind  her,  and  then  threw  the  keys  into  the  lake.
Mary  ran  with  precipitation  to  the  boat  which  was
prepared  for  her,  and,  on  reaching  the  shore,  was  re-
ceived with  the  utmost  joy,  by  Douglas,  lord  Seaton,
and  Sir  James  Hamilton,  who,  with  a  few  attendants,
waited  for  her.  She  instantly  mounted  on  horseback^
and  rode  full  speed  towards  Niddrie,  lord  Seaton's  seat
in  West-Lothian.  She  arrived  there  that  night,  with-
out being  pursued  or  interrupted.  After  halting  three
hours,  she  set  out  for  Hamilton ;  and  travelling  at  the
same  pace,  she  reached  it  next  morning.

Arrives  at  ^n  ^e  ^rst  news  °f  Mary's  escape,  her
Hamilton,  friends,  whom,  in  their  present  disposition,  a

and  raises  111

a  numer-  much  smaller  accident  would  have  roused,  ran
to  arms.  In  a  few  days,  her  court  was  filled
with  a  great  and  splendid  train  of  nobles,  accompanied
by  such  numbers  of  followers,  as  formed  an  army  above
six  thousand  strong.  In  their  presence  she  declared
that  the  resignation  of  the  crown,  and  the  other  deeds
which  she  had  signed  during  her  imprisonment,  were
extorted  from  her  by  fear.  Sir  Robert  Melvil  confirmed
her  declaration ;  and  on  that,  as  well  as  on  other  ac-
counts, a  council  of  the  nobles  and  chief  men  of  her
party  pronounced  all  these  transactions  void  and  ille-
Ma  g  gal.  At  the  same  time,  an  association  was
formed  for  the  defence  of  her  person  and  au-
thority, and  subscribed  by  nine  earls,  nine  bishops,
eighteen  lords,  and  many  gentlemen  of  distinction/

«  Keith,  469.  481.  Note.  a  Ibid.  475.

368  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

Among  them  we  find  several  who  had  been  present  in
the  last  parliament,  and  who  had  signed  the  counter-
association  in  defence  of  the  king's  government;  but
such  sudden  changes  were  then  so  common,  as  to  be  no
matter  of  reproach.

Constema-  At  the  time  when  the  queen  made  her  es-
reg'lntWd-  cape,  the  regent  was  at  Glasgow,  holding  a
herents.  court  of  justice.  An  event  so  contrary  to  their
expectations,  and  so  fatal  to  their  schemes,  gave  a  great
shock  to  his  adherents.  Many  of  them  appeared  waver-
ing and  irresolute ;  others  began  to  carry  on  private  ne-
gotiations with  the  queen ;  and  some  openly  revolted
to  her  side.  In  so  difficult  a  juncture,  where  his  own
fame,  and  the  being  of  the  party,  depended  on  his
choice,  the  regent's  most  faithful  associates  were  divided
in  opinion.  Some  advised  him  to  retire,  without  loss
of  time,  to  Stirling.  The  queen's  army  was  already
strong,  and  only  eight  miles  distant ;  the  adjacent  coun-
try was  full  of  the  friends  and  dependants  of  the  house
of  Hamilton,  and  other  lords  of  the  queen's  faction ;
Glasgow  was  a  large  and  unfortified  town;  his  own
train  consisted  of  no  greater  number  than  was  usual  in
times  of  peace ;  all  these  reasons  pleaded  for  a  retreat.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  arguments  were  urged  of  no
inconsiderable  weight.  The  citizens  of  Glasgow  were
well  affected  to  the  cause ;  the  vassals  of  Glencairn,
Lennox,  and  Semple,  lay  near  at  hand,  and  were  both
numerous  and  full  of  zeal;  succours  might  arrive  from
other  parts  of  the  kingdom  in  a  few  days  ;  in  war,  suc-
cess depends  upon  reputation,  as  much  as  upon  num-
bers; reputation  is  gained  or  lost  by  the  first  step  one
takes;  on  all  these  considerations,  a  retreat  would  be
attended  with  all  the  ignominy  of  a  flight,  and  would
at  once  dispirit  his  friends,  and  inspire  his  enemies
His  prudent  with  boldness.  In  such  dangerous  exigencies
conduct.  ag  tjjis?  ^  superiority  of  Murray's  genius  ap-
peared, and  enabled  him  both  to  choose  with  wisdom

1568.]  BOOK V.  3a9

and  to  act  with  vigour.  He  declared  against  retreat-
ing, and  fixed  his  head-quarters  at  Glasgow.  And
while  he  amused  the  queen  for  some  days,  by  pretend-
ing to  hearken  to  some  overtures  which  she  made  for
accommodating  their  differences,  he  was  employed,
with  the  utmost  industry,  in  drawing  together  his  ad-
herents from  different  parts  of  the  kingdom.  He  was
soon  in  a  condition  to  take  the  field ;  and,  though  far
inferior  to  the  enemy  in  number,  he  confided  so  much
in  the  valour  of  his  troops  and  the  experience  of  his
officers,  that  he  broke  off  the  negotiation,  and  deter-
mined to  hazard  a  battle.6

At  the  same  time,  the  queen's  generals  had
commanded  her  army  to  move.  Their  intention
was,  to  conduct  her  to  Dumbarton-castle,  a  place  of
great  strength,  which  the  regent  had  not  been  able  to
wrest  out  of  the  hands  of  lord  Fleming  the  governor ;
but  if  the  enemy  should  endeavour  to  interrupt  their
march,  they  resolved  not  to  decline  an  engagement.
In  Mary's  situation,  no  resolution  could  be  more  im-
prudent. A  part  only  of  her  forces  was  assembled.
Huntly,  Ogilvie,  and  the  northern  clans  were  soon  ex-
pected ;  her  sufferings  had  removed  or  diminished  the
prejudices  of  many  among  her  subjects ;  the  address
with  which  she  surmounted  the  dangers  that  obstructed
her  escape  dazzled  and  interested  the  people;  the  sud-
den confluence  of  so  many  nobles  added  lustre  to  her
cause;  she  might  assuredly  depend  on  the  friendship
and  countenance  of  France ;  she  had  reason  to  expect
the  protection  of  England  ;  her  enemies  could  not  pos-
sibly look  for  support  from  that  quarter.  She  had
much  to  hope  from  pursuing  slow  and  cautious  mea-
sures ;  they  had  every  thing  to  fear.

But  Mary,  whose  hopes  were  naturally  sanguine,
and  her  passions  impetuous,  was  so  elevated  by  her
sudden  transition  from  the  depth  of  distress,  to  such

e  Buch.  369.
VOL.  I.  2  B

370  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

an  unusual  appearance  of  prosperity,  that  she  never
doubted  of  success.  Her  army,  which  was  almost
double  to  the  enemy  in  number,  consisted  chiefly  of  the
Hamiltons  and  their  dependants.  Of  these  the  arch-
bishop of  St.  Andrew's  had  the  chief  direction,  and
hoped,  by  a  victory,  not  only  to  crush  Murray,  the
ancient  enemy  of  his  house,  but  to  get  the  person  of
the  queen  into  his  hands,  and  to  oblige  her  either  to
marry  one  of  the  duke's  sons,  or  at  least  to  commit  the
chief  direction  of  her  affairs  to  himself.  His  ambition
proved  fatal  to  the  queen,  to  himself,  and  to  his  family/
Battle  of  Mary's  imprudence  in  resolving  to  fight,  was
Langside.  not  greater  than  the  ill  conduct  of  her  generals
in  the  battle.  Between  the  two  armies,  and  on  the
road  towards  Dumbarton,  there  was  an  eminence  called
Langside-hill.  This  the  regent  had  the  precaution  to
seize,  and  posted  his  troops  in  a  small  village,  and
among  some  gardens  and  enclosures  adjacent.  In  this
advantageous  situation  he  waited  the  approach  of  the
enemy,  whose  superiority  in  cavalry  could  be  of  no
benefit  to  them  on  such  broken  ground.  The  Hamil-
tons, who  composed  the  vanguard,  ran  so  eagerly  to
the  attack,  that  they  put  themselves  out  of  breath,  and
left  the  main  battle  far  behind.  The  encounter  of  the
spearmen  was  fierce  and  desperate ;  but  as  the  forces  of
the  Hamiltons  were  exposed,  on  the  one  flank,  to  a  con-
tinued fire  from  a  body  of  musketeers,  attacked  on  the
other  by  the  regent's  most  choice  troops,  and  not  sup-
Tbe queen's  Ported  by  the  rest  bf  the  queen's  army,  they
army  de-  were  soon  obliged  \to  give  ground,  and  the
rout  immediately  became  universal.  Few  vic-
tories in  a  civil  war,  and  among  a  fierce  people,  have
been  pursued  with  less  violence,  or  attended  with  less
bloodshed.  Three  hundred  fell  in  the  field  :  in  the
flight  almost  none  were  killed.  The  regent  and  his
principal  officers  rode  about,  beseeching  the  soldiers  to

f  Anders,  vol.  iv.  32. Melv.  181.

1568.]  BOOK V.  371

spare  their  countrymen.  The  number HDf  prisoners  was
great,  and  among  them  many  persons  of  distinction.
The  regent  marched  back  to  Glasgow,  and  returned
public  thanks  to  God  for  this  great,  and,  on  his  side,
almost  bloodless  victory.8

During  the  engagement,  Mary  stood  on  a
hill  at  no  great  distance,  and  beheld  all  that
passed  in  the  field,  with  such  emotions  of  mind  as  are
not  easily  described.  When  she  saw  the  army,  which
was  her  last  hope,  thrown  into  irretrievable  confusion,
her  spirit,  which  all  her  past  misfortunes  had  not  been
able  entirely  to  subdue,  sunk  altogether.  In  the  ut-
most consternation,  she  began  her  flight,  and,  so  lively
were  her  impressions  of  fear,  that  she  never  closed
her  eyes  till  she  reached  the  abbey  of  Dundrenan  in
Galloway,  full  sixty  Scottish  miles  from  the  place  of
battle.11  *

These  revolutions  in  Mary's  fortune  had  been  no
less  rapid  than  singular.  In  the  short  space  of  eleven
days  she  had  been  a  prisoner  at  the  mercy  of  her  most
inveterate  enemies ;  she  had  seen  a  powerful  army
under  her  command,  and  a  numerous  train  of  nobles
at  her  devotion :  and  now  she  was  obliged  to  fly,  in
the  utmost  danger  of  her  life,  and  to  lurk,  with  a  few
attendants,  in  a  corner  of  her  kingdom.  Not  thinking
herself  safe  even  in  that  retreat,  her  fears  impelled
her  to  an  action,  the  most  unadvised,  as  well  as  the
most  unfortunate,  in  her  whole  life.  This  was  her  re-
tiring into  England ;  a  step,  which,  on  many  accounts,
ought  to  have  appeared  to  her  rash  and  dangerous.
Resolves  Before  Mary's  arrival  in  Scotland,  mutual
int^En  "8  distrust  and  jealousies  had  arisen  between  her
land.  and  Elizabeth.  All  their  subsequent  transac-
tions had  contributed  to  exasperate  and  inflame  these
passions.  She  had  endeavoured,  by  secret  negotia-
tions and  intrigues,  to  disturb  the  tranquillity  of  Eliza-

g  Keith,  477,  h  Ibid.  481.

2  B2

372  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

beth's  government,  and  to  advance  her  own  preten-
sions to  the  English  crown.  Elizabeth,  who  possessed
great  power,  and  acted  with  less  reserve,  had  openly
supported  Mary's  rebellious  subjects,  and  fomented  all
the  dissensions  and  troubles  in  which  her  reign  had
been  involved.  The  maxims  of  policy  still  authorized
that  queen  to  pursue  the  same  course ;  as,  by  keeping
Scotland  in  confusion,  she  effectually  secured  the  peace
of  her  own  kingdom.  The  regent,  after  his  victory,
had  marched  to  Edinburgh,  and,  not  knowing  what
course  the  queen  had  taken,  it  was  several  days  before
he  thought  of  pursuing  her.1  She  might  have  been
concealed  in  that  retired  corner,  among  subjects  de-
voted to  her  interest,  until  her  party,  which  was  dis-
persed rather  than  broken  by  the  late  defeat,  should
gather  such  strength  that  she  could  again  appear  with
safety  at  their  head.  There  was  not  any  danger  which
she  ought  not  to  have  run,  rather  than  throw  herself
into  the  hands  of  an  enemy,  from  whom  she  had  al-
ready suffered  so  many  injuries,  and  who  was  prompted,
both  by  inclination  and  by  interest,  to  renew  them.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  during  Mary's  confinement,
Elizabeth  had  declared  against  the  proceedings  of  her
subjects,  and  solicited  for  her  liberty,  with  a  warmth  which
had  all  the  appearance  of  sincerity.  She  had  invited  her
to  take  refuge  in  England,  and  had  promised  to  meet  her
in  person,  and  to  give  her  such  a  reception  as  was  due  to
a  queen,  a  kinswoman,  and  an  ally.k  Whatever  appre-
hension Elizabeth  might  entertain  of  Mary's  designs
while  she  had  power  in  her  hands,  she  was,  at  present,
the  object,  not  of  fear,  but  of  pity ;  and  to  take  advan-
tage of  her  situation,  would  be  both  ungenerous  and
inhuman.  The  horrors  of  a  prison  were  fresh  in
Mary's  memory ;  and  if  she  should  fall  a  second  time
into  the  hands  of  her  subjects,  there  was  no  injury,  to

*  Crawf.  Mem.  59.
k  Camd.  489. Anders,  vol.  iv.  99.  120. Murdin,  369.

1568.]  BOOK V.  373

which  the  presumption  of  success  might  not  imbolden
them  to  proceed.  To  attempt  escaping  into  France,
was  dangerous ;  and,  in  her  situation,  almost  impos-
sible ;  nor  could  she  bear  the  thoughts  of  appearing  as
an  exile  and  a  fugitive  in  that  kingdom  where  she  had
once  enjoyed  all  the  splendour  of  a  queen.  England
remained  her  only  asylum ;  and,  in  spite  of  the  en-
treaties of  lord  Herries,  Fleming,  and  her  other  at-
tendants, who  conjured  her,  even  on  their  knees,  not  to
confide  in  Elizabeth's  promises  of  generosity,  her  infa-
tuation was  invincible,  and  she  resolved  to  fly  thither.
Herries,  by  her  command,  wrote  to  Lowther  the  de-
puty-governor of  Carlisle,  to  know  what  reception  he
Her  recep-  would  give  her ;  and  before  his  answer  could
CariSe.  return,  her  fear  and  impatience  were  so  great,
May  16.  that  she  got  into  a  fisher-boat,  and,  with  about
twenty  attendants,  landed  at  Wirkington  in  Cumber-
land, and  thence  she  was  conducted  with  many  marks
of  respect  to  Carlisle.1

Elizabeth  As  soon  as  Mary  arrived  in  England,  she
^ncTrnfiT  wrote  a  l°n&  letter  to  the  queen,  representing,
the  man-  in  the  strongest  terms,  the  injuries  which  she
Seating  had  suffered  from  her  own  subjects,  and  im-
ploring that  pity  and  assistance  which  her
present  situation  demanded.10  An  event  so  extraor-
dinary, and  the  conduct  which  might  be  proper  -in
consequence  of  it,  drew  the  attention,  and  employed
the  thoughts,  of  Elizabeth  and  her  council.  If  their
deliberations  had  been  influenced  by  considerations
of  justice  or  generosity  alone,  they  would  not  have
found  them  long  or  intricate.  A  queen  vanquished  by
her  own  subjects,  and  threatened  by  them  with  the
loss  of  her  liberty,  or  of  her  life,  had  fled  from  their
violence,  and  thrown  herself  into  the  arms  of  her
nearest  neighbour  and  ally,  from  whom  she  had  re-
ceived repeated  assurances  of  friendship  and  protec-

1  Keith,  483. Anders,  vol.  iv.  2.  *  Id.  29.

374  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

tion.  These  circumstances  entitled  her  to  respect  and
to  compassion,  and  required  that  she  should  either  be
restored  to  her  own  kingdom,  or  at  least  be  left  at  full
liberty  to  seek  aid  from  any  other  quarter.  But  with
Elizabeth  and  her  counsellors,  the  question  was  not,
what  was  most  just  or  generous,  but  what  was  most
beneficial  to  herself  and  to  the  English  nation.  Three
different  resolutions  might  have  been  taken,  with  re-
gard to  the  queen  of  Scots.  To  reinstate  her  in  her
throne,  was  one ;  to  allow  her  to  retire  into  France,
was  another ;  to  detain  her  in  England,  was  a  third.
Each  of  these  drew  consequences  after  it,  of  the  ut-
most importance,  which  were  examined,  as  appears
from  papers  still  extant,0  with  that  minute  accuracy
which  Elizabeth's  ministers  employed  in  all  their  con-
sultations upon  affairs  of  moment.

To  restore  Mary  to  the  full  exercise  of  the  royal
authority  in  Scotland,  they  observed,  would  render
her  more  powerful  than  ever.  The  nobles  who  were
most  firmly  attached  to  the  English  interest  would
quickly  feel  the  utmost  weight  of  her  resentment.  As
the  gratitude  of  princes  is  seldom  strong  or  lasting,
regard  to  her  own  interest  might  soon  efface  the  me-
mory of  her  obligations  to  Elizabeth,  and  prompt  her
to  renew  the  alliance  of  the  Scottish  nation  with
France,  and  revive  her  own  pretensions  to  the  English
crown.  Nor  was  it  possible  to  fetter  and  circumscribe
the  Scottish  queen,  by  any  conditions  that  would  pre-
vent these  dangers.  Her  party  in  Scotland  was  nu-
merous and  powerful.  Her  return,  even  without  any
support  from  England,  would  inspire  her  friends  with
new  zeal  and  courage ;  a  single  victory  might  give
them  the  superiority,  which  they  had  lost  by  a  single
defeat,  and  render  Mary  a  more  formidable  rival  than
ever  to  Elizabeth*

The  dangers  arising  from  suffering  Mary  to  return

»  Anders,  vol.  iv.  34.  99. 102.

1568.]  BOOK  V.  375

into  France,  were  no  less  obvious.  The  French  king
could  not  refuse  his  assistance  towards  restoring  his
sister  and  ally  to  her  throne.  Elizabeth  would,  once
more,  see  a  foreign  army  in  the  island,  overawing
the  Scots,  and  ready  to  enter  her  kingdom  ;  and,  if  the
commotions  in  France,  on  account  of  religion,  were
settled,  the  princes  of  Lorrain  might  resume  their  am-
bitious projects,  and  the  united  forces  of  France  and
Scotland  might  invade  England  where  it  is  weakest
and  most  defenceless.

Resolves  Nothing  therefore  remained  but  to  detain
h°erdintain  her  in  England ;  and  to  permit  her  either  to
England.  }jve  at  liberty  there,  or  to  confine  her  in  a  pri-
son. The  former  was  a  dangerous  experiment.  Her
court  would  become  a  place  of  resort  to  all  the  Roman
Catholics,  to  the  disaffected,  and  to  the  lovers  of  inno-
vation. Though  Elizabeth  affected  to  represent  Mary's
pretensions  to  the  English  crown  as  ill-founded,  she
was  not  ignorant  that  they  did  not  appear  in  that  light
to  the  nation,  and  that  many  thought  them  preferable
even  to  her  own  title.  If  the  activity  of  her  emissaries
had  gained  her  so  many  abettors,  her  own  personal
influence  was  much  more  to  be  dreaded ;  her  beauty,
her  address,  her  sufferings,  by  the  admiration  and  pity
which  they  would  excite,  could  not  fail  of  making
many  converts  to  her  party.0

It  was  indeed  to  be  apprehended,  that  the  treating
Mary  as  a  prisoner  would  excite  universal  indignation
against  Elizabeth,  and  that  by  this  unexampled  seve-
rity towards  a  queen,  who  implored,  and  to  whom  she
had  promised,  her  protection,  she  would  forfeit  the
praise  of  justice  and  humanity,  which  was  hitherto  due
to  her  administration.  But  the  English  monarchs  were
often  so  solicitous  to  secure  their  kingdom  against  the
Scots,  as  to  be  little  scrupulous  about  the  means  which
they  employed  for  that  purpose.  Henry  IV.  had

0  Anders,  vol.  iv.  56.  60.

376  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

'seized  the  heir  of  the  crown  of  Scotland, who  was
forced  by  the  violence  of  a  storm,  to  take  refuge  in  one
of  the  ports  of  his  kingdom ;  and,  in  contempt  of  the
rights of  hospitality, without  regarding his tender
age,  or  the  tears  and  entreaties  of  his  father,  detained
him  a  prisoner  for  many  years. This  action,  though
detested  by  posterity,  Elizabeth  resolved  now  to  imi-
tate. Her  virtue  was not  more  proof  than  that  of
Henry  had  been,  against  the  temptations  of  interest ;
and  the  possession  of  a  present  advantage  was  pre-
ferred to  the  prospect  of  future  fame. The  satisfac-
tion which  she  felt  in  mortifying  a  rival,  whose  beauty
and  accomplishments  she  envied,  had,  perhaps,  no  less
influence  than  political  considerations,  in  bringing  her
to  this  resolution. But,  at  the  same  time,  in  order  to
screen  herself  from  the  censure  which  this  conduct  me-
rited, and  to  make  her  treatment  of  the  Scottish  queen
look  like  the  effect  of  necessity  rather  than  of  choice,
she  determined  to  assume  the  appearance  of  concern  for
her  interest,  and  of  deep  sympathy  with  her  sufferings.
With  this  view,  she  instantly  dispatched  lord
Scrope,  warden  of  the  west  marches,  and  Sir
Francis  Knollys,  her  vice-chamberlain,  to  the  queen  of
Scots,  with  letters  full  of  expressions  of  kindness  and
condolence. But,  at  the  same  time,  they  had  private
instructions  to  watch  all  her  motions,  and  to  take  care
that  she  should  not  escape  into  her  own  kingdom.p On
Mary  de- their  arrival,  Mary  demanded  a  personal  inter-
"  view  with  the  queen,  that  she  might  lay  before
e-  ner  ^e  injuries  which  she  had  suffered,  and  re-
ceive  from  her  those  friendly  offices  which  she
had  been  encouraged  to  expect. They  answered,  that
it  was  with  reluctance  admission  into  the  presence  of
their  sovereign  was  at  present  denied  her ; that  while
she  lay  under  the  imputation  of  a  crime  so  horrid  as  the
murder  of  her  husband,  their  mistress,  to  whom  he  was

P  Anders,  vol.  iv.  36.  70.  92.

1568.]  BOOK V.  377

so  nearly  allied,  could  not,  without  bringing*  a  stain
upon  her  own  reputation,  admit  her  into  her  presence ;
but,  as  soon  as  she  had  cleared  herself  from  that  asper-
sion, they  promised  her  a  reception  suitable  to  her  dig-
nity, and  aid  proportioned  to  her  distress.q
she  offers  Nothing  could  be  more  artful  than  this  pre-
cateher"  tence;  and  it  was  the  occasion  of  leading  the
conduct.  queen  of  Scots  into  the  snare  in  which  Eliza-
beth and  her  ministers  wished  to  entangle  her.  Mary
expressed  the  utmost  surprise  at  this  unexpected  man-
ner of  evading  her  request;  but,  as  she  could  not  be-
lieve so  many  professions  of  friendship  to  be  void  of
sincerity,  she  frankly  offered  to  submit  her  cause  to  the
cognizance  of  Elizabeth,  and  undertook  to  produce
such  proofs  of  her  own  innocence,  and  of  the  falsehood
of  the  accusations  brought  against  her,  as  should  fully
remove  the  scruples,  and  satisfy  the  delicacy,  of  the
English  queen.  This  was  the  very  point  to  which  Eli-
Eiizabeth  zabeth  laboured  to  bring  the  matter.  In  con-
vantaaedof  secluence  °f  tnig  appeal  of  the  Scottish  queen,
this  offer.  sne  now  considered  herself  as  the  umpire  be-
tween her  and  her  subjects,  and*  foresaw  that  she
would  have  it  entirely  in  her  own  power  to  protract
the  inquiry  to  any  length,  and  to  perplex  and  in-
volve it  in  endless  difficulties.  In  the  mean  time,  she
was  furnished  with  a  plausible  reason  for  keeping  her
at  a  distance  from  court,  and  for  refusing  to  contribute
towards  replacing  her  on  the  throne.  As  Mary's  con-
duct had  been  extremely  incautious,  and  the  presump-
tions of  her  guilt  were  many  and  strong,  it  was  not  im-
possible her  subjects  might  make  good  their  charge
against  her ;  and  if  this  should  be  the  result  of  the  in-
quiry, she  would,  thenceforth,  cease  to  be  the  object  of
regard  or  of  compassion,  and  the  treating  her  with  cold-
ness and  neglect  would  merit  little  censure.  In  a  mat-
ter so  dark  and  mysterious,  there  was  no  probability

1  Anders,  vol.  iv.  8.  55.

378  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

that  Mary  could  bring  proofs  of  her  innocence,  so  in-
contested,  as  to  render  the  conduct  of  the  English  queen
altogether  culpable;  and,  perhaps,  impatience  under
restraint,  suspicion  of  Elizabeth's  partiality,  or  the  dis-
covery of  her  artifices,  might  engage  Mary  in  such  ca-
bals, as  would  justify  the  using  her  with  greater  rigour.
Elizabeth  early  perceived  many  advantages  which
would  arise  from  an  inquiry  into  the  conduct  of  the
Scottish  queen,  carried  on  under  her  direction.  There
was  some  danger,  however,  that  Mary  might  discover
her  secret  intentions  too  soon,  and  by  receding  from
the  offer  which  she  had  made,  endeavour  to  disappoint
them.  But,  even  in  that  event,  she  determined  not  to
drop  the  inquiry,  and  had  thought  of  several  different
expedients  for  carrying  it  on.  The  countess  of  Len-
nox, convinced  that  Mary  was  accessary  to  the  murder
of  her  son,  and  thirsting  for  that  vengeance  which  it
was  natural  for  a  mother  to  demand,  had  implored  Eli-
zabeth's justice,  and  solicited  her,  with  many  tears,  in
her  own  name,  and  in  her  husband's,  to  bring  the  Scot-
tish queen  to  a  trial  for  that  crime/  The  parents  of
the  unhappy  prince  had  a  just  right  to  prefer  this  ac-
cusation; nor  could  she,  who  was  their  nearest  kins-
woman, be  condemned  for  listening  to  so  equitable  a
demand.  Besides,  as  the  Scottish  nobles  openly  accused
Mary  of  the  same  crime,  and  pretended  to  be  able  to
confirm  their  charge  by  sufficient  proof,  it  would  be  no
difficult  matter  to  prevail  on  them  to  petition  the  queen
of  England  to  take  cognizance  of  their  proceedings
against  their  sovereign ;  and  it  was  the  opinion  of  the
English  council,  that  it  would  be  reasonable  to  comply
with  the  request.8  At  the  same  time,  the  obsolete
claim  of  the  superiority  of  England  over  Scotland  be-
gan to  be  talked  of;  and,  on  that  account,  it  was  pre-
tended that  the  decision  of  the  contest  between  Mary
and  her  subjects  belonged  of  right  to  Elizabeth.*  But,

T  Camd.  412. Ilaynes,  469.  •  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  i.  37.  l  Ibid.

1568.]  BOOK  V.  379

though  Elizabeth  revolved  all  these  expedients  in  her
mind,  and  kept  them  in  reserve  to  be  made  use  of  as
occasion  might  require,  she  wished  that  the  inquiry
into  Mary's  conduct  should  appear  to  be  undertaken
purely  in  compliance  with  her  own  demand,  and  in
order  to  vindicate  her  innocence;  and  so  long  as  that
appearance  could  be  preserved,  none  of  the  other  ex-
pedients were  to  be  employed.

,  When  Mary  consented  to  submit  her  cause  to  Eliza-
beth, she  was  far  from  suspecting  that  any  bad  conse-
quences could  follow,  or  that  any  dangerous  preten-
sions could  be  founded  on  her  offer.  She  expected  that
Elizabeth  herself  would  receive  and  examine  her  de-
fences ;u  she  meant  to  consider  her  as  an  equal,  for
whose  satisfaction  she  was  willing  to  explain  any  part
of  her  conduct  that  was  liable  to  censure,  not  to  ac-
knowledge her  as  a  superior,  before  whom  she  was
bound  to  plead  her  cause.  But  Elizabeth  put  a  very
different  sense  on  Mary's  offer.  She  considered  herself
as  chosen  to  be  judge  in  the  controversy  between  the
Scottish  queen  and  her  subjects,  and  began  to  act  in
that  capacity.  She  proposed  to  appoint  commission-
ers to  hear  the  pleadings  of  both  parties,  and  wrote  to
the  regent  of  Scotland  to  empower  proper  persons  to
appear  before  them  in  his  name,  and  to  produce  what
he  could  allege  in  vindication  of  his  proceedings
against  his  sovereign.

Mary  Mary  had,  hitherto,  relied  with  unaccounta-

fended  at"  kle  credulity  on  Elizabeth's  professions  of  re-
EHzabeth's  gard,  and  expected  that  so  many  kind  speeches

conduct.  i  -, .  i . i  • -i .  i

would,  at  last,  be  accompanied  with  some  suit-
able actions.  But  this  proposal  entirely  undeceived
her.  She  plainly  perceived  the  artifice  of  Elizabeth's
conduct,  and  saw  what  a  diminution  it  would  be  to  her
own  honour  to  appear  on  a  level  with  her  rebellious
subjects,  and  to  stand  together  with  them  at  the  bar  of

u  Anders,  vol.  iv.  10.

380  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

a  superior  and  a  judge.  She  retracted  the  offer  which
she  had  made,  and  which  had  been  perverted  to  a  pur-
pose so  contrary  to  her  intention.  She  demanded,
with  more  earnestness  than  ever,  to  be  admitted  into
Elizabeth's  presence;  and  wrote  to  her  in  a  strain
very  different  from  what  she  had  formerly  used,
and  which  fully  discovers  the  grief  and  indignation
that  preyed  on  her  heart.  "  In  my  present  situation,"
says  she,  "  I  neither  will  nor  can  reply  to  the  accusa-
tions of  my  subjects.  I  am  ready,  of  my  own  accord,
and  out  of  friendship  to  you,  to  satisfy  your  scruples,
and  to  vindicate  my  own  conduct.  My  subjects  are  not
my  equals ;  nor  will  I,  by  submitting  my  cause  to  a
judicial  trial,  acknowledge  them  to  be  so.  I  fled  into
your  arms,  as  into  those  of  my  nearest  relation  and  most
perfect  friend.  I  did  you  honour,  as'  I  imagined,  in
choosing  you,  preferably  to  any  other  prince,  to  be  the
restorer  of  an  injured  queen.  Was  it  ever  known  that  a
prince  was  blamed  for  hearing,  in  person,  the  complaints
of  those  who  appealed  to  his  justice,  against  the  false
accusations  of  their  enemies?  You  admitted  into  your
presence  my  bastard  brother,  who  had  been  guilty  of
rebellion ;  and  you  deny  me  that  honour !  God  forbid
that  I  should  be  the  occasion  of  bringing  any  stain
upon  your  reputation!  I  expected  that  your  manner
of  treating  me  would  have  added  lustre  to  it.  Suffer
me  either  to  implore  the  aid  of  other  princes,  whose
delicacy  on  this  head  will  be  less,  and  their  resentment
of  my  wrongs  greater;  or  let  me  receive  from  your
hands  that  assistance  which  it  becomes  you,  more
than  any  other  prince,  to  grant;  and,  by  that  benefit,
bind  me  to  yourself  in  the  indissoluble  ties  of  gra-
titude.""
June  20.  This  letter  somewhat  disconcerted  Eliza-

precauUons  betll'S Plan»  but did nOt div6rt heF fl<Oin the

against  her.  prosecution  of  it. She  laid  the  matter  before

x  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  i.  91.

1568.]  BOOK  V.  381

the  privy-council,  and  it  was  there  determined,  not-
withstanding the  entreaties  and  remonstrances  of  the
Scottish  queen,  to  go  on  with  the  inquiry  into  her  con-
duct, and,  until  that  were  finished,  it  was  agreed  that
Elizabeth  could  not,  consistently  with  her  own  honour,
or  with  the  safety  of  her  government,  either  give  her
the  assistance  which  she  demanded,  or  permit  her  to
retire  out  of  the  kingdom.  Lest  she  should  have  an
opportunity  of  escaping,  while  she  resided  so  near
Scotland,  it  was  thought  advisable  to  remove  her  to
some  place  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  borders/.
Proceed-  While  the  English  court  was  occupied  in
relent  *  these  deliberations,  the  regent  did  not  neglect
a?een*sthe  to  imProve  the  victory  at  Langside.  That
adherents,  event  was  of  the  utmost  importance  to  him.
It  not  only  drove  the  queen  herself  out  of  the  king-
dom, but  left  her  adherents,  dispersed  and  without
a  leader,  at  his  mercy.  He  seemed  resolved,  at  first,
to  proceed  against  them  with  the  utmost  rigour.  Six
persons  of  some  distinction,  who  had  been  taken  pri-
soners in  the  battle,  were  tried  and  condemned  to  death,
as  rebels  against  the  king's  government.  They  were
led  to  the  place  of  execution,  but,  by  the  powerful  in-
tercession of  Knox,  they  obtained  a  pardon.  Hamilton
of  Bothwelhaugh  was  one  of  the  number,  who  lived  to
give  both  the  regent  and  Knox  reason  to  repent  of  this
commendable  act  of  lenity.2

Soon  after,  the  regent  marched  with  an  army,  con-
sisting of  four  thousand  horse  and  one  thousand  foot,
towards  the  west  borders.  The  nobles  in  this  part  of
the  kingdom  were  all  the  queen's  adherents ;  but,  as
they  had  not  force  sufficient  to  obstruct  his  progress,  he
must  either  have  obliged  them  to  submit  to  the  king,  or
would  have  laid  waste  their  lands  with  fire  and  sword,
But  Elizabeth,  whose  interest  it  was  to  keep  Scotland
in  confusion,  by  preserving  the  balance  between  the

?  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  i.  102.  z  Cald.  vol.  ii.  99.

382  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

two  parties,  and  who  was  endeavouring  to  soothe  the
Scottish  queen  by  gentle  treatment,  interposed  at  her
desire.  After  keeping  the  field  two  weeks,  the  regent,
in  compliance  to  the  English  ambassador,  dismissed
his  forces ;  and  an  expedition  which  might  have  proved
fatal  to  his  opponents,  ended  with  a  few  acts  of  severity. a
Mary  car-  ^he  res°hition  of  the  English  privy-council,
ried  to  with  regard  to  Mary's  person,  was  soon  carried

Bolton. .  i .  i

into  execution ;  and,  without  regarding  her  re-
monstrances or  complaints,  she  was  conducted  to  Bol-
ton, a  castle  of  lord  Scrope's,  on  the  borders  of  York-
shire.1* In  this  place  her  correspondence  with
her  friends  in  Scotland  became  more  difficult,
and  any  prospect  of  making  her  escape  was  entirely  cut
off.  She  now  felt  herself  to  be  completely  in  Eliza-
beth's power,  and,  though  treated  as  yet  with  the  re-
spect due  to  a  queen,  her  real  condition  was  that  of  a
prisoner.  Mary  knew  what  it  was  to  be  deprived  of
liberty,  and  dreaded  it  as  the  worst  of  all  evils.  While
the  remembrance  of  her  late  imprisonment  was  still
lively,  and  the  terror  of  a  new  one  filled  her  mind,
•  -  0  Elizabeth  thought  it  a  proper  juncture  to  renew
her  former  proposition,  that  she  would  suffer
the  regent  and  his  adherents  to  be  called  into  England,
and  consent  to  their  being  heard  in  defence  of  their

o

own  conduct.  She  declared  it  to  be  far  from  her  in-
tention to  claim  any  right  of  judging  between  Mary
and  her  subjects,  or  of  degrading  her  so  far  as  to  re-
quire that  she  should  answer  to  their  accusations.  On
the  contrary,  Murray  and  his  associates  were  summoned
to  appear,  in  order  to  justify  their  conduct  in  treating
their  sovereign  so  harshly,  and  to  vindicate  themselves
from  those  crimes  with  which  she  had  charged  them.
On  her  part,  Elizabeth  promised,  whatever  should  be
the  issue  of  this  inquiry,  to  employ  all  her  power  and
influence  towards  replacing  Mary  on  her  throne,  under

a  Caid.  vol.  ii.  99.  »>  Anders,  vol.  iv.  14.  See  Appendix,  No.  XXV.

1568.]  BOOK V.  383

a  few  limitations,  by  no  means  unreasonable.  Mary,
deceived  by  this  seeming  attention  to  her  dignity  as  a
queen ;  soothed,  on  one  hand,  by  a  promise  more  flat-
Agrees  tering  than  any  which  she  had  hitherto  received
qSryaben"  from  Elizabeth,  and  urged,  on  the  other,  by
hwcon1*0  ^e  feelings  which  were  natural  on  being  con-
duct, ducted  into  a  more  interior  part  of  England,
and  kept  there  in  more  rigorous  confinement,  complied
at  length  with  what  Elizabeth  required,  and  promised
to  send  commissioners  to  the  conference  appointed  to
beheldatYork.c

Her  dissi-  ^n  order  to  persuade  Elizabeth  that  she  de-
muiation  sired  nothing  so  much  as  to  render  the  union
gard  to  between  them  as  close  as  possible,  she  shewed
a  disposition  to  relax  somewhat  in  one  point;
with  regard  to  which,  during  all  her  past  and  subse-
quent misfortunes,  she  was  uniformly  inflexible.  She
expressed  a  great  veneration  for  the  liturgy  of  the
church  of  England ;  she  was  often  present  at  religious
worship,  according  to  the  rites  of  the  reformed  church;
made  choice  of  a  Protestant  clergyman  to  be  her  chap-
lain ;  heard  him  preach  against  the  errors  of  Popery
with  attention  and  seeming  pleasure  ;  and  discovered
all  the  symptoms  of  an  approaching  conversion.6  Such
was  Mary's  known  and  bigotted  attachment  to  the
Popish  religion,  that  it  is  impossible  to  believe  her
sincere  in  this  part  of  her  conduct ;  nor  can  any  thing
mark  more  strongly  the  wretchedness  of  her  condition,
and  the  excess  of  her  fears,  than  that  they  betrayed  her
into  dissimulation,  in  a  matter  concerning  which  her
sentiments  were,  at  all  other  times,  scrupulously  delicate.
August  is.  At  this  time  the  regent  called  a  parliament,
me^Yin"  *n  order  to  proceed  to  the  forfeiture  of  those
Scotland.  ^Q  refuse(i  to  acknowledge  the  king's  autho-
rity. The  queen's  adherents  were  alarmed,  and  Ar-

c  Anders,  iv.  part  i.  p.  11, 12,  &c.  109,  &c. Haynes,  468,  &c. State  Trials,
Edit.  Hargrave,  i.  90.

d  Anders. vol.  iv.  parti.  113. Haynes,  509. See  Appendix,  No. XXVI.

384  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

gyle  and  Huntly,  whom  Mary  had  appointed  her  lieu-
tenants, the  one  in  the  south,  and  the  other  in  the  north
of  Scotland,  began  to  assemble  forces  to  obstruct  this
meeting.  Compassion  for  the  queen,  and  envy  at  those
who  governed  in  the  king's  name,  had  added  so  much
strength  to  the  party,  that  the  regent  would  have  found
it  difficult  to  withstand  its  efforts.  But  as  Mary  had
submitted  her  cause  to  Elizabeth,  she  could  not  refuse,
at  her  desire,  to  command  her  friends  to  lay  down  their
arms,  and  to  wait  patiently  until  matters  were  brought
to  a  decision  in  England.  By  procuring  this  cessa-
tion of  arms,  Elizabeth  afforded  as  seasonable  relief
to  the  regent's  faction,  as  she  had  formerly  given  to  the
queen's.6

The  regent,  however,  would  not  consent,  even  at
Elizabeth's  request,  to  put  off  the  meeting  of  parlia-
ment/ But  we  may  ascribe  to  her  influence,  as  well
as  to  the  eloquence  of  Maitland,  who  laboured  to  pre-
vent the  one-half  of  his  countrymen  from  exterminating
the  other,  any  appearances  of  moderation  which  this
parliament  discovered  in  its  proceedings.  The  most
violent  opponents  of  the  king's  government  were  forfeit-
ed ;  the  rest  were  allowed  still  to  hope  for  favour.g
Elizabeth  No  sooner  did  the  queen  of  Scots  submit
the°regent  her  cause  to  her  rival,  than  Elizabeth  required
Hsdcon-d  ^e  regent  to  send  to  York  deputies  properly
duct.  instructed  for  vindicating  his  conduct,  in  pre-
sence of  her  commissioners.  It  was  not  without  hesi-
tation and  anxiety  that  the  regent  consented  to  this
measure.  His  authority  was  already  established  in
Scotland,  and  confirmed  by  parliament.  To  suffer  its
validity  now  to  be  called  in  question,  and  subjected  to
a  foreign  jurisdiction,  was  extremely  mortifying.  To
accuse  his  sovereign  before  strangers,  the  ancient  ene-
mies of  the  Scottish  name,  was  an  odious  task.  To  fail
in  this  accusation  was  dangerous;  to  succeed  in  it  was

«  Anders,  vol.  iv.  125.  f  See  Appendix,  XXVII  «  Biich.  371 .

1568.]  BOOK  V.  385

disgraceful.  But  the  strength  of  the  adverse  faction
daily  increased.  He  dreaded  the  interposition  of  the
French  king  in  its  behalf.  In  his  situation,  and  in  a
matter  which  Elizabeth  had  so  much  at  heart,  her  com-
mands were  neither  to  be  disputed  nor  disobeyed.11
Both  the  The  necessity  of  repairing  in  person  to  York
hea6n  ohft  added  to  the  ignominy  of  the  step  which  he  was
commis-  obliged  to  take.  All  his  associates  declined

sioners.  i  «»'  i  -IT  i

the  omce ;  they  were  unwilling  to  expose  them-
selves to  the  odium  and  danger  with  which  it  was  easy
to  foresee  that  the  discharge  of  it  would  be  attended,
unless  he  himself  consented  to  share  these  in  common
with  them.  The  earl  of  Morton,  Bothwell
bishop  of  Orkney,  Pitcairn  commendator  of
Dunfermline,  and  lord  Lindsay,  were  joined  with  him
in  commission.  Macgill  of  Rankeilor,  and  Balnaves
of  Hallhill,  two  eminent  civilians,  George  Buchanan,
Murray's  faithful  adherent,  a  man  whose  genius  did
honour  to  the  age,  Maitland,  and  several  others,  were
appointed  to  attend  them  as  assistants.  Maitland
owed  this  distinction  to  the  regent's  fear,  rather  than  to
his  affection.  He  had  warmly  remonstrated  against
this  measure.  He  wished  his  country  to  continue  in
friendship  with  England,  but  not  to  become  dependent
on  that  nation.  He  was  desirous  of  re-establishing  the
queen  in  some  degree  of  power,  not  inconsistent  with
that  which  the  king  possessed ;  and  the  regent  could
not,  with  safety,  leave  behind  him  a  man,  whose  views
were  so  contrary  to  his  own,  and  who,  by  his  superior
abilities,  had  acquired  an  influence  in  the  nation,  equal
to  that  which  others  derived  from  the  antiquity  and
power  of  their  families.1

Mary  empowered  Lesly  bishop  of  Ross,  lord  Living-
ston, lord  Boyd,  lord  Herries,  Gavin  Hamilton  com-
mendator of  Kilwinning,  Sir  John  Gordon  of  Lochinvar,

h  Buch.  372. See  Appendix,  No.  XXVIII.
1  Buch,  371.  Anders,  vol.  iv.  35.  Melv.  186. 188.

VOL. I.  2 C

386  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

and  Sir  James  Cockburn  of  Stirling,  to  appear  in  her

name.k

Elizabeth  nominated  Thomas  Howard  duke  of  Nor-
folk, Thomas  Radcliff  earl  of  Sussex,  and  Sir  Ralph
Sadler,  her  commissioners  to  hear  both  parties.
The  con-  The  4th  of  October  was  the  day  fixed  for
ference  at  the  opening  of  the  conference.  The  great  abili-
ties of  the  deputies  on  both  sides,  the  dignity
of  the  judges  before  whom  they  were  to  appear,  the
high  rank  of  the  persons  whose  cause  was  to  be  heard,
and  the  importance  of  the  points  in  dispute,  rendered
the  whole  transaction  no  less  illustrious  than  it  was
singular.  The  situation  in  which  Elizabeth  appeared
on  this  occasion  strikes  us  with  an  air  of  magnificence.
Her  rival,  an  independent  queen,  and  the  heir  of  an
ancient  race  of  monarchs,  was  a  prisoner  in  her  hands,
and  appeared,  by  her  ambassadors,  before  her  tribunal.
The  regent  of  Scotland,  who  represented  the  majesty,
and  possessed  the  authority  of  a  king,  stood  in  person
at  her  bar.  And  the  fate  of  a  kingdom,  whose  power
her  ancestors  had  often  dreaded,  but  could  never  sub-
due, was  now  at  her  disposal.

views  of The  views,  however,  with  which  the  several
the  differ- parties  consented  to  this  conference,  and  the

ent  parties.  *  .  7

issue  to  which  they  expected  to  bring  it,  were
extremely  different.

Mary's  chief  object  was  the  recovering  of  her  former
authority.  This  induced  her  to  consent  to  a  measure
against  which  she  had  long  struggled.  Elizabeth's
promises  gave  her  ground  for  entertaining  hopes  of
being  restored  to  her  kingdom ;  in  order  to  which  she
would  have  willingly  made  many  concessions  to  the
king's  party ;  and  the  influence  of  the  English  queen,
as  well  as  her  own  impatience  under  her  present  situ-
ation, might  have  led  her  to  many  more.1  The  regent
aim.ed  at  nothing  but  securing  Elizabeth's  protection

k  Anders,  vol.  iv,  33.  !  Ibid.  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  33. Good.  vol.  ii.  337.

1568.]  BOOK V.  387

to  his  party,  and  seems  not  to  have  had  the  most  dis-
tant thoughts  of  coming  to  any  composition  with  Mary,
Elizabeth's  views  were  more  various,  and  her  schemes
more  intricate.  She  seemed  to  be  full  of  concern  for
Mary's  honour,  and  solicitous  that  she  should  wipe  off
the  aspersions  which  blemished  her  character.  This
she  pretended  to  be  the  intention  of  the  conference ;
amusing  Mary,  and  eluding  the  solicitations  of  the
French  and  Spanish  ambassadors  in  her  behalf,  by
repeated  promises  of  assisting  her,  as  soon  as  she  could
venture  to  do  so,  without  bringing  disgrace  upon  her-
self. But  under  this  veil  of  friendship  and  generosity,
Elizabeth  concealed  sentiments  of  a  different  nature.
She  expected  that  the  regent  would  accuse  Mary  of
being  accessary  to  the  murder  of  her  husband.  She
encouraged  him,  as  far  as  decency  would  permit,  to
take  this  desperate  step.m  And  as  this  accusation
might  terminate  in  two  different  ways,  she  had  con-
certed measures  for  her  future  conduct  suitable  to  each
of  these.  If  the  charge  against  Mary  should  appear
to  be  well-founded,  she  resolved  to  pronounce  her  un-
worthy of  wearing  a  crown,  and  to  declare  that  she
would  never  burden  her  own  conscience  with  the  guilt
of  an  action  so  detestable  as  the  restoring  her  to  her
kingdom.11  If  it  should  happen  that  what  her  ac-
cusers alleged  did  not  amount  to  a  proof  of  guilt,  but
only  of  maleadministration,  she  determined  to  set  on
foot  a  treaty  for  restoring  her,  but  on  such  conditions
as  would  render  her  hereafter  dependent,  not  only  upon
England,  but  upon  her  own  subjects.0  As  every  step
in  the  progress  of  the  conference,  as  well  as  the  final
result  of  it,  was  in  Elizabeth's  own  power,  she  would
still  be  at  liberty  to  choose  which  of  these  courses  she
should  hold ;  or  if  there  appeared  to  be  any  danger  or
inconveniency  in  pursuing  either  of  them,  she  might

m  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  11.  45. Haynes,  487.
n  Anders,  vol.  iv.  partii.  11.  °  Ibid.  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  16.

2  c  2

388  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

protract  the  whole  cause  by  endless  delays,  and  involve
it  in  inextricable  perplexity.

Complaint The  conference,  however,  was  opened  with
of  the much  solemnity. But  the  very  first  step  disco-

queen  s  *  *

vered  it  to»  be  Elizabeth's  intention  to  inflame,

against  the  rather  than  to  extinguish,  the  dissensions  and
regent,  animosities  among  the  Scots.  No  endeavours
were  used  to  reconcile  the  contending  parties,  or  to
mollify  the  fierceness  of  their  hatred,  by  bringing  the
queen  to  offer  pardon  for  what  was  past,  or  her  sub-
jects to  promise  more  dutiful  obedience  for  the  future.
On  the  contrary,  Mary's  commissioners  were
permitted  to  prefer  a  complaint  against  the
regent  and  his  party,  containing  an  enumeration  of
their  treasonable  actions,  of  their  seizing  her  person  by
force  of  arms,  committing  her  to  prison,  compelling  her
to  resign  the  crown,  and  making  use  of  her  son's  name
to  colour  their  usurpation  of  the  whole  royal  authority  ;
and  of  all  these  enormities  they  required  such  speedy  and
effectual  redress,  as  the  injuries  of  one  queen  demanded
from  the  justice  of  another  .p  It  was  then  expected  that
the  regent  would  have  disclosed  all  the  circumstances
of  that  unnatural  crime  to  which  he  pretended  the
queen  had  been  accessary,  and  would  have  produced
evidence  in  support  of  his  charge.  But,  far  from  ac-
cusing Mary,  the  regent  did  not  even  answer  the  com-
plaints brought  against  himself.  He  discovered  a  re-
luctance at  undertaking  that  office,  and  started  many
doubts  and  scruples,  with  regard  to  which  he  demanded
to  be  resolved  by  Elizabeth  herself.q  His  reserve  and
hesitation  were  no  less  surprising  to  the  greater  part  of
the  English  commissioners  than  to  his  own  associates.
They  knew  that  he  could  not  vindicate  his  own  con-
duct without  charging  the  murder  upon  the  queen,  and
he  had  not  hitherto  shewn  any  extraordinary  delicacy
on  that  head.  An  intrigue,  however,  had  been  secretly

P  Anders,  vol.  5v.  part  ii.  52.  1  Haynes,  478.

1568.]  BOOK  V.  389

carried  on,  since  his  arrival  at  York,  which  explains
this  mystery.

intrigues  The  duke  of  Norfolk  was,  at  that  time,  the
wf;th  thl°Ik  most  powerful  and  most  popular  man  in  Eng-
regent.  land.  His  wife  was  lately  dead ;  and  he  began
already  to  form  a  project,  which  he  afterward  more
openly  avowed,  of  mounting  the  throne  of  Scotland,
by  a  marriage  with  the  queen  of  Scots.  He  saw  the
infamy  which  would  be  the  consequence  of  a  public
accusation  against  Mary,  and  how  prejudicial  it  might
be  to  her  pretensions  to  the  English  succession.  In
order  to  save  her  from  this  cruel  mortification,  he  ap-
plied to  Maitland,  and  expressed  his  astonishment  at
seeing  a  man  of  so  much  reputation  for  wisdom,  con-
curring with  the  regent  in  a  measure  so  dishonourable
to  themselves,  to  their  queen,  and  to  their  country ;  sub-
mitting the  public  transactions  of  the  nation  to  the
judgment  of  foreigners ;  and  publishing  the  ignominy
and  exposing  the  faults  of  their  sovereign,  which  they
were  bound  in  good  policy,  as  well  as  in  duty,  to  con-
ceal and  to  cover.  It  was  easy  for  Maitland,  whose  sen-
timents were  the  same  with  the  duke's,  to  vindicate  his
own  conduct.  He  assured  him  that  he  had  employed
all  his  credit  to  dissuade  his  countrymen  from  this
measure  ;  and  would  still  contribute,  to  the  utmost  of
his  power,  to  div  er  them  from  it.  This  encouraged
Norfolk  to  communicate  the  matter  to  the  regent.  He
repeated  and  enforced  the  same  arguments  which  he
had  used  with  Maitland.  He  warned  him  of  the  dan-
ger to  which  he  must  expose  himself  by  such  a  violent
action  as  the  public  accusation  of  his  sovereign,  Mary
would  never  forgive  a  man  who  had  endeavoured  to
fix  such  a  brand  of  infamy  on  her  character.  If  she
ever  recovered  any  degree  of  power,  his  destruction
would  be  inevitable,  and  he  would  justly  merit  it  at
her  hands.  Nor  would  Elizabeth  screen  him  from  this,
by  a  public  approbation  of  his  conduct.  For,  what-

390  SCOTLAND,  [1568,

ever  evidence  of  Mary's  guilt  he  might  produce,  she
was  resolved  to  give  no  definitive  sentence  in  the  cause.
Let  him  only  demand  that  the  matter  should  be  brought
to  a  decision  immediately  after  hearing  the  proof,  and
he  would  be  fully  convinced  how  false  and  insidious
her  intentions  were,  and,  by  consequence,  how  impro-
per it  would  be  for  him  to  appear  as  the  accuser  of  his
own  sovereign/  The  candour  which  Norfolk  seemed
to  discover  in  these  remonstrances,  as  well  as  the  truth
which  they  contained,  made  a  deep  impression  on  the
regent.  He  daily  received  the  strongest  assurances  of
Mary's  willingness  to  be  reconciled  to  him,  if  he  ab-
stained from  accusing  her  of  such  an  odious  crime,
together  with  the  denunciations  of  her  irreconcilable
hatred,  if  he  acted  a  contrary  part.8  All  these  consi-
derations concurred  in  determining  him  to  alter  his
purpose,  and  to  make  trial  of  the  expedient  which  the
duke  had  suggested.

He  demanded,  therefore,  to  be  informed,  be-
fore he  proceeded  farther,  whether  the  English
commissioners  were  empowered  to  declare  the  queen
guilty,  by  a  judicial  act ;  whether  they  would  promise
to  pass  sentence,  without  delay;  whether  the  queen
should  be  kept  under  such  restraint,  as  to  prevent  her
from  disturbing  the  government  now  established  in
Scotland ;  and  whether  Elizabeth,  if  she  approved  of
the  proceedings  of  the  king's  party,  would  engage  to
protect  it  for  the  future  ?  *  The  paper  containing  these
demands  was  signed  by  himself  alone,  without  com-
municating it  to  any  of  his  attendants,  except  Maitland
tod  Melvil.u  But,  lest  so  many  precautions  should
excite  any  suspicion  of  their  proceedings,  from  some
consciousness  of  defect  in  the  evidence  which  he  had
'to  produce  against  his  sovereign,  Murray  empowered

r  Melv.  187. Haynes,  573.

s  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  77. Good.  vol.  ii.  157. See  Append.  No.  XXIX.

*  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  55. State  Trials,  i.  91,  &c.

u  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  56. Melv.  190.

1568.]  BOOK V.  391

Lethington,  Macgill,  and  Buchanan,  to  wait  upon  the
duke  of  Norfolk,  the  earl  of  Sussex,  and  Sir  Ralph
Sadler,  and  to  lay  before  them,  not  in  their  public
characters  as  commissioners,  but  as  private  persons,
Mary's  letters  to  Both  well,  her  sonnets,  and  all  the
other  papers  upon  which  was  founded  the  charge  of
her  being  accessary  to  the  murder  of  the  king,  and  to
declare  that  this  confidential  communication  was  made
to  them,  with  a  view  to  learn  whether  the  queen  of
England  would  consider  this  evidence  as  sufficient  to
establish  the  truth  of  the  accusation.  Nothing  could
be  more  natural  than  the  regent's  solicitude,  to  know
on  what  footing  he  stood.  To  have  ventured  on  a  step
so  uncommon  and  dangerous,  as  the  accusing  his
sovereign,  without  previously  ascertaining  that  he
might  take  it  with  safety,  would  have  been  unpardon-
able imprudence.  But  Elizabeth,  who  did  not  expect
that  he  would  have  moved  any  such  difficulty,  had  not
empowered  her  commissioners  to  give  him  that  satis-
faction which  he  demanded.  It  became  necessary  to
transmit  the  articles  to  herself ;  and  by  the  .light  in
which  Norfolk  placed  them,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  he
wished  that  they  should  make  no  slight  impression  on
Elizabeth  and  her  ministers.  "  Think  not  the  Scots,"
said  he,  "  over-scrupulous  or  precise.  Let  us  view  their
conduct  as  we  would  wish  our  own  to  be  viewed  in  a
like  situation.  The  game  they  play  is  deep;  their
estates,  their  lives,  their  honour,  are  at  stake.  It  is
now  in  their  own  power  to  be  reconciled  to  their
queen,  or  to  offend  her  irrecoverably;  and,  in  a  matter
of  so  much  importance,  the  utmost  degree  of  caution
is  not  excessive." x

While  the  English  commissioners  waited  for  fuller
instructions  with  regard  to  the  regent's  demands,  he
gave  in  an  answer  to  the  complaint  which  had  been
offered  in  the  name  of  the  Scottish  queen.  It  was  ex-

x  Anders,  vol.  iv.  77.

302  SCOTLAND.  [156*.

pressed  in  terms  perfectly  conformable  to  the  system
which  he  had  at  that  time  adopted.  It  contained  no
insinuation  of  the  queen's  being  accessary  to  the  mur-
der of  her  husband ;  the  bitterness  of  style  peculiar  to
the  age  was  considerably  abated ;  and  though  he
pleaded  that  the  infamy  of  the  marriage  with  Bothwell
made  it  necessary  to  take  arms  in  order  to  dissolve  it;
though  Mary's  attachment  to  a  man  so  odious  justified
the  keeping  her  for  some  time  under  restraint;  yet
nothing  more  was  said  on  these  subjects  than  was
barely  requisite  in  his  own  defence.  The  queen's  com-
missioners did  not  fail  to  reply.7  But  while

Oct.  17.  i

the  article  with  respect  to  the  murder  remained
untouched,  these  were  only  skirmishes  at  a  distance,  of
no  consequence  towards  ending  the  contest,  and  were
little  regarded  by  Elizabeth,  or  her  commissioners.
The  eon-  ^h6  conference  had,  hitherto,  been  conducted
ferencere- jn  a  manner  which  disappointed  Elizabeth's

moved  to  /» i

westmin-  views,  and  produced  none  of  those  discoveries
which  she  had  expected.  The  distance  between
York  and  London,  and  the  necessity  of  consulting  her
upon  every  difficulty  which  occurred,  consumed  much
time.  Norfolk's  negotiation  with  the  Scottish  regent,
however  secretly  carried  on,  was  not,  in  all  probability,
unknown  to  a  princess  so  remarkable  for  her  sagacity
in  penetrating  the  designs  of  her  enemies,  and  seeing
through  their  deepest  schemes.2  Instead,  therefore,  of
returning  any  answer  to  the  regent's  demands,  she
resolved  to  remove  the  conference  to  Westminster,  and
to  appoint  new  commissioners,  in  whom  she  could  more
absolutely  confide.  Both  the  queen  of  Scots  and  the
regent  were  brought,  without  difficulty,  to  approve  of
this  resolution.6

: We  often  find  Mary  boasting  of  the  superiority  in
argument  obtained  by  her  commissioners  during  the

Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  64.  80.  *  Good.  vol.  ii.  160.  Anders,  vol.  iii.  24.

a  Haynes,  484. Anders,  vol.  iv.  94.

1568.]  BOOK V.  393

conference  at  York,  and  how,  by  the  strength  of  their
reasons,  they  confounded  her  adversaries,  and  silenced
all  their  cavils.5  The  dispute  stood,  at  that  time,  on  a
footing  which  rendered  her  victory  not  only  apparent,
but  easy.  Her  participation  of  the  guilt  of  the  king's
murder  was  the  circumstance  upon  which  her  subjects
must  have  rested,  as  a  justification  of  their  violent  pro-
ceedings against  her  ;  and,  while  they  industriously
avoided  mentioning  that,  her  cause  gained  as  much  as
that  of  her  adversaries  lost  by  suppressing  this  capital
argument.

Elizabeth  resolved  that  Mary  should  not  enjoy  the
same  advantage  in  the  conference  to  be  held  at  West-
minster. She  deliberated  with  the  utmost  anxiety,  how
she  might  overcome  the  regent's  scruples,  and  persuade
him  to  accuse  the  queen.  She  considered  of  the  most
proper  method  for  bringing  Mary's  commissioners  to
answer  such  an  accusation;  and  as  she  foresaw  that
the  promises  with  which  it  was  necessary  to  allure  the
regent,  and  which  it  was  impossible  to  conceal  from
the  Scottish  queen,  would  naturally  exasperate  her  to
a  great  degree,  she  determined  to  guard  her  more  nar-
rowly than  ever ;  and,  though  lord  Scrope  had  given
her  no  reason  to  distrust  his  vigilance  or  fidelity,  yet,
because  he  was  the  duke  of  Norfolk's  brother-in-law,
she  thought  it  proper  to  remove  the  queen  as  soon  as
possible  to  Tuthbury  in  Staffordshire,  and  commit  her
to  the  keeping  of  the  earl  of  Shrewsbury,  to  whom  that
castle  belonged.0

Mary's  Mary  began  to  suspect  the  design  of  this
ofSJE]£r  secon(i  conference;  and,  notwithstanding  the
beth'sin-  satisfaction  she  expressed  at  seeing  her  cause

tentioris.  r

Oct.  21.  taken  more  immediately  under  the  queen's
own  eye,d  she  framed  her  instructions  to  her  commis-
sioners in  such  a  manner,  as  to  avoid  being  brought
under  the  necessity  of  answering  the  accusation  of  her

*  Good.  vol.  i.  186.  284.  350. e  Haynes,  487. A  Anders,  vol.  ir.  part.ii.  95.

394  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

subjects,  if  they  should  be  so  desperate  as  to  exhibit
one  against  her.e  These  suspicions  were  soon  con-
firmed by  a  circumstance  extremely  mortifying.  The
regent  having  arrived  at  London,  in  order  to  be  pre-
sent at  the  conference,  was  immediately  admitted  into
Elizabeth's  presence,  and  received  by  her,  not  only
with  respect,  but  with  affection.  This  Mary  justly
considered  as  an  open  declaration  of  that  queen's  par-
Nov.  22.  tiality  towards  her  adversaries.  In  the  first
claims  a  emotions  of  her  resentment,  she  wrote  to  her

personal  • „

audience  of  commissioners,  and  commanded  them  to  com-
plain, in  the  presence  of  the  English  nobles,
and  before  the  ambassadors  of  foreign  princes,  of  the
usage  she  had  hitherto  met  with,  and  the  additional
injuries  which  she  had  reason  to  apprehend.  Her
rebellious  subjects  were  allowed  access  to  the  queen,
she  was  excluded  from  her  presence ;  they  enjoyed  full
liberty,  she  languished  under  a  long  imprisonment;
they  were  encouraged  to  accuse  her,  in  defending  her-
self she  laboured  under  every  disadvantage.  For  these
reasons  she  once  more  renewed  her  demand,  of  being
admitted  into  the  queen's  presence ;  and  if  that  were
denied,  she  instructed  them  to  declare,  that  she  recalled
the  consent  which  she  had  given  to  the  conference  at
Westminster,  and  protested,  that  whatever  was  done
there,  should  be  held  to  be  null  and  invalid/

This,  perhaps,  was  the  most  prudent  resolution
Mary  could  have  taken.  The  pretences  on  which  she
declined  the  conference  were  plausible,  and  the  junc-
ture for  offering  them  well  chosen.  But  either  the
queen's  letter  did  not  reach  her  commissioners  in  due
time,  or  they  suffered  themselves  to  be  deceived  by
Elizabeth's  professions  of  regard  for  their  mistress,  and
consented  to  the  opening  of  the  conference^

To  the  commissioners  who  had  appeared  in
her  name  at  York,  Elizabeth  now  added  Sir

e  Good.  vol.  ii.  349.  f  Ibid.  vol.  ii.  184.  B  Anders,  vol.  iii.  25.

1*568.]  BOOK V.  395

Nicholas  Bacon,  keeper  of  the  great  seal,  the  earls  of
Arundel  and  Leicester,  lord  Clinton,  and  Sir  William
Cecil.11  The  difficulties  which  obstructed  the  proceed-
ings at  York  were  quickly  removed.  A  satisfying  an-
swer was  given  to  the  regent's  demands  ;  nor  was  he
so  much  disposed  to  hesitate,  and  raise  objections,
as  formerly.  His  negotiation  with  Norfolk  had  been
discovered  to  Morton  by  some  of  Mary's  attendants,
and  he  had  communicated  it  to  Cecil.1  His  personal
safety,  as  well  as  the  continuance  of  his  power,  de-
pended on  Elizabeth.  By  favouring  Mary,  she  might
at  any  time  ruin  him,  and  by  a  question  which  she  art-
fully started,  concerning  the  person  who  had  a  right,
by  the  law  of  Scotland,  to  govern  the  kingdom  during
a  minority,  she  let  him  see,  that  even  without  restoring
the  queen,  it  was  an  easy  matter  for  her  to  deprive
him  of  the  supreme  direction  of  affairs.k  These  con-
siderations, which  were  powerfully  seconded  by  most
of  his  attendants,  at  length  determined  the  regent  to
produce  his  accusation  against  the  queen.
The  re-  He  endeavoured  to  lessen  the  obloquy  with
w^cn  ne  was  sensible  this  action  would  be  at-
tended,  by  protesting  that  it  was  with  the  ut-

being  ac-  «  . .  i  i  T i  • T  11

cessaryto  most  reluctance  he  undertook  this  disagreeable
band's8  task  ;  that  his  party  had  long  suffered  their
murder.  con(}uct  to  be  misconstrued,  and  had  borne  the
worst  imputations  in  silence,  rather  than  expose  the
crimes  of  their  sovereign  to  the  eyes  of  strangers  ;  but
that  now  the  insolence  and  importunity  of  the  adverse
faction  forced  them  to  publish,  what  they  had  hitherto,
though  with  loss  to  themselves,  endeavoured  to  conceal.1
These  pretexts  are  decent;  and  the  considerations  which
he  mentions  had,  during  some  time,  a  real  influence
upon  the  conduct  of  the  party;  but,  since  the  meeting  of
parliament,  held  in  December,  they  had  discovered  so

h  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  99.  >  Mel  v.  191.  k  Haynes,  484.

1  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  115.

396  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

little  delicacy  and  reserve  with  respect  to  the  queen's
actions,  as  renders  it  impossible  to  give  credit  to  those
studied  professions.  The  regent  and  his  associates
were  drawn,  it  is  plain,  partly  by  the  necessity  of
their  affairs,  and  partly  by  Elizabeth's  artifices,  into  a
situation  where  no  liberty  of  choice  was  left  to  them  ;
and  they  were  obliged  either  to  acknowledge  them-
selves to  be  guilty  of  rebellion,  or  to  charge  Mary  with
having  been  accessary  to  the  commission  of  murder.

The  accusation  itself  was  conceived  in  the  strongest
terms.  Mary  was  charged,  not  only  with  having  con-
sented to  the  murder,  but  with  being  accessary  to  the
contrivance  and  execution  of  it.  Both  well,  it  was  pre-
tended, had  been  screened  from  the  pursuits  of  justice
by  her  favour;  and  she  had  formed  designs  no  less
dangerous  to  the  life  of  the  young  prince,  than  sub-
versive of  the  liberties  and  constitution  of  the  kingdom.
If  any  of  these  crimes  should  be  deniedj  an  offer  was
made  to  produce  the  most  ample  and  undoubted  evi-
dence in  confirmation  of  the  charge.01

At  the  next  meeting  of  the  commissioners,
the  earl  of  Lennox  appeared  before  them  ;  and
after  bewailing  the  tragical  and  unnatural  murder  of
his  son,  he  implored  Elizabeth's  justice  against  the
queen  of  Scots,  whom  he  accused,  upon  oath,  of  being
the  author  of  that  crime,  and  produced  papers,  which,
as  he  pretended,  would  make  good  what  he  alleged.
The  entrance  of  a  new  actor  on  the  stage  so  oppor-
tunely, and  at  a  juncture  so  critical,  can  scarce  be  im-
puted to  chance.  This  contrivance  was  manifestly
Elizabeth's,  in  order  to  increase,  by  this  additional  ac-
cusation, the  infamy  of  the  Scottish  queen."
Her  com-  Mary's  commissioners  expressed  the  utmost
surPr^se  an(^  indignation  at  the  regent's  pre-
sumption  in  loading  the  queen  with  calumnies,

which,  as  they  affirmed,  she  had  so  little  me-

m  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  119.  B  Id.  ibid.  122.

1568.]  BOOK  V.  397

rited. But, instead  of  attempting  to  vindicate  her
honour,  by  a  reply  to  the  charge,  they  had  recourse  to
an  article  in  their  instructions,  which  they  had  formerly
neglected  to  mention  in  its  proper  place. They  de-
manded an  audience  of  Elizabeth  ;  and  having  renewed
their  mistress's  request  of  a  personal  interview,  they
protested,  if  that  were  denied  her,  against  all  the  future
proceedings  of  the  commissioners.0 A  protestation  of
this  nature,  offered  just  at  the  critical  time  when  such
a  bold  accusation  had  been  preferred  against  Mary,
and  when  the  proofs  in  support  of  it  were  ready  to  be
examined,  gave  reason  to  suspect  that  she  dreaded  the
event  of  that  examination. This  suspicion  received
the  strongest  confirmation  from  another  circumstance ;
Ross  and  Herries,  before  they  were  introduced  to  Eli-
zabeth, in  order  to  make  this  protestation,  privately  ac-
quainted Leicester  and  Cecil,  that  as  their  mistress
had,  from  the  beginning,  discovered an inclination
towards  bringing  the  differences  between  herself  and
her  subjects  to  an  amicable  accommodation,  so  she  was
still  desirous,  notwithstanding  the  regent's  audacious  ac-
cusation, that  they  should  be  terminated  in  that  manner.p
Such  moderation seems hardly  to  be  compatible
with  the  strong  resentment  which  calumniated  inno-
cence naturally  feels ;  or  with  that  eagerness  to  vindi-
cate itself  which  it  always  discovers. In  Mary's  situa-
tion, an  offer  so  ill-timed  must  be  considered  as  a  con-
fession of  the  weakness  of  her  cause. The  known  cha-
racter of  her  commissioners  exempts  them  from  the  im-
putation of  folly,  or  the  suspicion  of  treachery. Some
secret  conviction,  that  the  conduct  of  their  mistress
could  not  bear  so  strict  a  scrutiny  as  must  be  made
into  it,  if  they  should reply  to  the  accusation  pre-
ferred by  Murray  against  her,  seems  to  be  the  most
probable  motive  of  this  imprudent  proposal,  by  which
they  endeavoured  to  avoid  it.

•  Anders,  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  133, 158,  &c.  *  Ibid.  iv.  134. Cabbala,  157.

398  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

It  appeared  in  this  light  to  Elizabeth,  and
afforded  her  a  pretence  for  rejecting  it.  She
represented  to  Mary's  commissioners,  that  in  the
present  juncture,  nothing  could  be  so  dishonourable
to  their  mistress  as  an  accommodation ;  and  that  the
matter  would  seem  to  be  huddled  up  in  this  manner,
merely  to  suppress  discoveries,  and  to  hide  her  shame  ;
nor  was  it  possible  that  Mary  could  be  admitted,  with
any  decency  into  her  presence,  while  she  lay  under  the
infamy  of  such  a  public  accusation.

Upon  this  repulse  Mary's  commissioners  withdrew ;
and  as  they  had  declined  answering,  there  seemed  now
to  be  no  farther  reason  for  the  regent's  producing  the
proofs  in  support  of  his  charge.  But  without  getting
these  into  her  hands,  Elizabeth's  schemes  were  incom-
plete ;  and  her  artifice  for  this  purpose  was  as  mean,
but  as  successful,  as  any  she  had  hitherto  employed.
She  commanded  her  commissioners  to  testify  her  in-
dignation and  displeasure  at  the  regent's  presumption
in  forgetting  so  far  the  duty  of  a  subject,  as  to  accuse
his  sovereign  of  such  atrocious  crimes.  He,  in  order
to  regain  the  good  opinion  of  such  a  powerful  protec-
tress, offered  to  shew  that  his  accusations  were  not
malicious  nor  ill-grounded.  Then  were  produced  and
submitted  to  the  inspection  of  the  English  commis-
sioners, the  acts  of  the  Scottish  parliament  in  confir-
mation of  the  regent's  authority,  and  of  the  queen's
resignation  ;  the  confessions  of  the  persons  executed
for  the  king's  murder ;  and  the  fatal  casket  which  con-
tained the  letters,  sonnets,  and  contracts,  that  have  been
so  often  mentioned.

Elizabeth  As  soon  as  Elizabeth  got  these  into  her  posses-
Mary  with  s*on?  sne  ^^  them  before  her  privy-council,  to
greater  which  she  ioined  on  this  occasion  several  noble-

rigour.  w

Dec.  14.  men  of  the  greatest  eminence  in  her  kingdom  ;
in  order  that  they  might  have  an  opportunity  of  con-
sidering the  mode  in  which  an  inquiry  of  such  public

1568.]  BOOK  V.  399

importance  had  been  hitherto  conducted,  as  well  as  the
amount  of  the  evidence  now  brought  against  a  person
who  claimed  a  preferable  right  of  succession  to  the
English  crown.  In  this  respectable  assembly  all  the
proceedings  in  the  conferences  at  York  and  Westmin-
ster were  reviewed,  and  the  evidence  produced  by  the
regent  of  Scotland  against  his  sovereign  was  examined
with  attention.  In  particular,  the  letters  and  other
papers  said  to  be  written  by  the  queen  of  Scots,  were
carefully  compared,  "  for  the  manner  of  writing  and
orthography,"  with  a  variety  of  letters  which  Elizabeth
had  received  at  different  times  from  the  Scottish  queen ;
and  as  the  result  of  a  most  accurate  collation,  the
members  of  the  privy-council,  and  noblemen  con*
joined  with  them,  declared  that  no  difference  between
these  could  be  discovered.11  Elizabeth  having  esta-
blished a  fact  so  unfavourable  to  her  rival,  began  to
lay  aside  the  expressions  of  friendship  and  respect
which  she  had  hitherto  used  in'  all  her  letters  to  the
Scottish  queen.  She  now  wrote  to  her  in  such  terms,  as
if  the  presumptions  of  her  guilt  had  amounted  almost
to  certainty ;  she  blamed  her  for  refusing  to  vindicate
herself  from  an  accusation  which  could  not  be  left  un-
answered, without  a  manifest  injury  to  her  character ;
and  plainly  intimated,  that  unless  that  were  done,  no
change  would  be  made  in  her  present  situation/  She
hoped  that  such  a  discovery  of  her  sentiments  wrould
intimidate  Mary,  who  was  hardly  recovered  from  the
shock  of  the  regent's  attack  on  her  reputation,  and
force  her  to  confirm  her  resignation  of  the  crown,  to
ratify  Murray's  authority  as  regent,  and  to  consent
that  both  herself  and  her  son  should  reside  in  England,
under  English  protection.  This  scheme  Elizabeth  had
much  at  heart ;  she  proposed  it  both  to  Mary  and  to
her  commissioners ;  and  neglected  no  argument,  nor

<1  Anders,  vol.  iv,  part  ii.  170,  &c.
r  Ibid.  vol.  iv.  part  ii.  179.  183. Good.  vol.  ii.  260.

400  SCOTLAND.  [1568.

artifice  that  could  possibly  recommend  it.  Mary  saw
how  fatal  this  would  prove  to  her  reputation,  to  her
pretensions,  and  even  to  her  personal  safety.  She  re-
jected it  without  hesitation.  "  Death,"  said  she,  "  is
less  dreadful  than  such  an  ignominious  step.  Rather
than  give  away,  with  my  own  hands,  the  crown  which
descended  to  me  from  my  ancestors,  I  will  part  with
life;  but  the  last  words  I  utter,  shall  be  those  of  a
queen  of  Scotland."8

At  the  same  time  she  seems  to  have  been  sensible
how  open  her  reputation  lay  to  censure,  while  she  suf-
fered such  a  public  accusation  to  remain  unanswered ;
and  though  the  conference  was  now  dissolved,  she
empowered  her  commissioners  to  present  a  reply  to
the  allegations  of  her  enemies,  in  which  she  denied,
in  the  strongest  terms,  the  crimes  imputed  to
her ;  and  recriminated  upon  the  regent  and  his
party,  by  accusing  them  of  having  devised  and  executed
the  murder  of  the  king.1  The  regent  and  his  associates
asserted  their  innocence  with  great  warmth.  Mary
continued  to  insist  on  a  personal  interview,  a  condition
which  she  knew  would  never  be  granted."  Elizabeth
urged  her  to  vindicate  her  own  honour.  But  it  is  evi-
dent from  the  delays,  the  evasions,  and  subterfuges,  to
which  both  queens  had  recourse  by  turns,  that  Mary
avoided,  and  Elizabeth  did  not  desire  to  make  any
farther  progress  in  the  inquiry.

The  regent  was  now  impatient  to  return  into
Feb.  2.'  Scotland,  where  his  adversaries  were  endeavour-
£e  regent  *ugy  *n  n^s  absence,  to  raise  some  commotions,
dthera  Before  he  set  out, he  was  called  into  the  privy-
proving  or  council,  to  receive  a  final  declaration  of  Eliza-
ing  his  beth's  sentiments.  Cecil  acquainted  him,  in
conduct;  j^  name>  that,  on  one  hand,  nothing  had  been
objected  to  his  conduct,  which  she  could  reckon  detri-

•  Haynes,  49T. See  App.  No.  XXX.  Good.  vol.  ii.  274.  301.

*  Good,  ii.  285.  u  Ibid.  28,3. Cabbala,  157.

1569.]  BOOK V.  401

mental  to  his  honour,  or  inconsistent  with  his  duty;
nor  had  he,  on  the  other  hand,  produced  any  thing
against  his  sovereign,  on  which  she  could  found  an
unfavourable  opinion  of  her  actions ;  and,  for  this  rea-
son, she  resolved  to  leave  all  the  affairs  of  Scotland  pre-
cisely in  the  same  situation  in  which  she  had  found  them
at  the  beginning  of  the  conference.  The  queen's  com-
missioners were  dismissed  much  in  the  eame  manner/
After  the  attention  of  both  nations  had  been  fixed
so  earnestly  on  this  conference  upwards  of  four  months,
such  a  conclusion  of  the  whole  appears,  at  first  sight,
trifling  and  ridiculous.  Nothing,  however,  could  be
more  favourable  to  Elizabeth's  future  schemes.

but  secret- •»-,-.,  TI  ••  • T

ij  supports  JN  otwithstandmg  her  seeming  impartiality,  she
arty*  had  no  thoughts  of  continuing  neuter ;  nor  was
she  at  any  loss  on  whom  to  bestow  her  protection.
Before  the  regent  left  London,  she  supplied  him  with
a  considerable  sum  of  money,  and  engaged  to  support
the  king's  authority  to  the  utmost  of  her  power/  Mary,
by  her  own  conduct,  fortified  this  resolution.  Enraged
at  the  repeated  instances  of  Elizabeth's  artifice  and
deceit,  which  she  had  discovered  during  the  progress
of  the  conference,  and  despairing  of  ever  obtaining  any
succour  from  her,  she  endeavoured  to  rouse  her  own
adherents  in  Scotland  to  arms,  by  imputing  such  de-
signs to  Elizabeth  and  Murray,  as  could  not  fail  to
inspire  every  Scotsman  with  indignation.  Murray,
she  pretended,  had  agreed  to  convey  the  prince  her
son  into  England ;  to  surrender  to  Elizabeth  the  places
of  greatest  strength  in  the  kingdom ;  and  to  acknow-
ledge the  dependence  of  the  Scottish  upon  the  English
nation.  In  return  for  this,  Murray  was  to  be  declared
the  lawful  heir  of  the  crown  of  Scotland  ;  and,  at  the
same  time,  the  question  with  regard  to  the  English
succession  was  to  be  decided  in  favour  of  the  earl  of
Hartford,  who  had  promised  to  marry  one  of  Cecil's

*  Good.  li.  315.  333.  *  Ibid.  313. Carte,  in,  478.

VOL.  I.  2  D

402  SCOTLAND.  [1569

daughters.  An  account  of  these  wild  and  chimerical
projects  was  spread  industriously  among  the  Scots.
Elizabeth,  perceiving  it  was  calculated  of  purpose  to
bring  her  government  into  disreputation,  laboured  to
destroy  its  effects  by  a  counter-proclamation,  and  became
more  disgusted  than  ever  with  the  Scottish  queen.2

The  regent,  on  his  return,  found  the  kingdom

Efforts  of .  7

Mary's  ad-  m  the  utmost  tranquillity.  But  the  rage  of  the
against*  queen's  adherents,  which  had  been  suspended
him'  in  expectation  that  the  conference  in  England
would  terminate  to  her  advantage,  was  now  ready  to
break  out  with  all  the  violence  of  civil  war.  They  were
encouraged  too  by  the  appearance  of  a  leader,  whose
high  quality  and  pretensions  entitled  him  to  great  au-
thority in  the  nation.  This  was  the  duke  of  Chatel-
herault,  who  had  resided  for  some  years  in  France,  and
was  now  sent  over  by  that  court  with  a  small  supply  of
money,  in  hopes  that  the  presence  of  the  first  nobleman
in  the  kingdom  would  strengthen  the  queen's  party.
Elizabeth  had  detained  him  in  England  for  some
months,  under  various  pretences,  but  was  obliged  at
last  to  suffer  him  to  proceed  on  his  journey.  Before
his  departure,  Mary  invested  him  with  the  high
dignity  of  her  lieutenant-general  in  Scotland,
together  with  the  fantastic  title  of  her  adopted  father.
His  vigor-  The  regent  did  not  give  him  time  to  form  his
duct^reaks  Partv  *nto  anv  regu^ar  body.  He  assembled  an
her  party,  army  with  his  usual  expedition,  and  marched
to  Glasgow.  The  followers  of  Argyle  and  Huntly,
who  composed  the  chief  part  of  the  queen's  faction,
being  seated  in  corners  of  the  kingdom  very  distant
from  each  other,  and  many  of  the  duke's  dependants
having  been  killed  or  taken  in  the  battle  of  Langside,
the  spirit  and  strength  of  his  adherents  were  totally
broken,  and  an  accommodation  with  the  regent  was
the  only  thing  which  could  prevent  the  ruin  of  his

»  Haynes,  500.  503. See  Append.  No.  XXXI.

1569.]  BOOK V.  403

estate  and  vassals.  This  was  effected  without  difficulty,
and  on  no  unreasonable  terms.  The  duke  promised  to  ,
acknowledge  the  authority  both  of  the  king  and  of  the
regent ;  and  to  claim  no  jurisdiction  in  consequence  of
the  commission  which  he  had  received  from  the  queen.
The  regent  bound  himself  to  repeal  the  act  which  had
passed  for  attainting  several  of  the  queen's  adherents ;
to  restore  all  who  would  submit  to  the  king's  govern-
ment, to  the  possession  of  their  estates  and  honours ;
and  to  hold  a  convention,  wherein  all  the  differences
between  the  two  parties  should  be  settled  by  mutual
consent.  The  duke  gave  hostages  for  his  faithful  per-
formance of  the  treaty ;  and,  in  token  of  their  sincerity,
he  and  lord  Herries  accompanied  the  regent  to  Stir-
ling, and  visited  the  young  king.  The  regent  set  at
liberty  the  prisoners  taken  at  Langside.a

Argyle  and  Huntly  refused  to  be  included  in  this
treaty.  A  secret  negotiation  was  carrying  on  in  Eng-
land in  favour  of  the  captive  queen,  with  so  much
success,  that  her  affairs  began  to  wear  a  better  aspect,
and  her  return  into  her  own  kingdom  seemed  to  be  an
event  not  very  distant.  The  French  king  had  lately
obtained  such  advantages  over  the  Hugonots,  that  the
extinction  of  that  party  appeared  to  be  inevitable,  and
France,  by  recovering  domestic  tranquillity,  would  be
no  longer  prevented  from  protecting  her  friends  in
Britain.  These  circumstances  not  only  influenced  Ar-
gyle and  Huntly,  but  made  so  deep  an  impression  on
the  duke,  that  he  appeared  to  be  wavering  and  irreso-
lute, and  plainly  discovered  that  he  wished  to  evade
the  accomplishment  of  the  treaty.  The  regent  saw  the
danger  of  allowing  the  duke  to  shake  himself  loose,  in
this  manner,  from  his  engagements;  and  instantly
formed  a  resolution  equally  bold  and  politic.  He  com-
manded his  guards  to  seize  Ghatelherault  in  his  own
house  in  Edinburgh,  whither  he  had  come  in  order  to

a  Cabbala,  161. Crawf.  Mem.  106.

2  D2

404  SCOTLAND.  [1569.

attend  the  convention  agreed  upon  ;  and,  regardless
either  of  his  dignity  as  the  first  nobleman  in  the  king-
dom, and  next  heir  to  the  crown,  or  of  the  promises  of
personal  security, on  which  he  had  relied,  committed  him
and  lord  Herries  prisoners  to  the  castle  of  Edinburgh.5
A  blow  so  fatal  and  unexpected,  dispirited  the  party.
Argyle  submitted  to  the  king's  government, and  made  his
peace  with  the  regent  on  very  easy  terms  ;  and  Huntly,
being  left  alone,was  at  last  obliged  to  lay  down  his  arms.
April  16.  Soon  after,  lord  Boyd  returned  into  Scot-
AUpyroposai  land,  and  brought  letters  to  the  regent,  both
of  M^r*  from  ^e  English  and  Scottish  queens.  A  con-
rejected,  vention  was  held  at  Perth,  in  order  to  consider
them.  Elizabeth's  letter  contained  three  different  pro-
posals with  regard  to  Mary ;  that  she  should  either  be
restored  to  the  full  possession  of  her  former  authority ;
or  be  admitted  to  reign  jointly  with  the  king  her  son ;
or  at  least  be  allowed  to  reside  in  Scotland  in  some
decent  retirement,  without  any  share  in  the  adminis-
tration of  government.  These  overtures  were  extorted
by  the  importunity  of  Fenelon  the  French  ambassador,
and  have  some  appearance  of  being  favourable  to  the
captive  queen.  They  were,  however,  perfectly  suitable
to  Elizabeth's  general  system  with  regard  to  Scottish
affairs.  Among  propositions  so  unequal  and  dispro-
portionate, she  easily  saw  where  the  choice  would  fall.
The  two  former  were  rejected ;  and  long  delays  must
necessarily  have  intervened,  and  many  difficulties  have
arisen,  before  every  circumstance  relative  to  the  last
could  be  finally  adjusted.0

Mary,  in  her  letter,  demanded  that  her  marriage  with
Bothwell  should  be  reviewed  by  the  proper  judges,
and  if  found  invalid,  should  be  dissolved  by  a  legal
sentence  of  divorce.  This  fatal  marriage  was  the  prin-
cipal source  of  all  the  calamities  she  had  endured  for
two  years ;  a  divorce  was  the  only  thing  which  could

b  Crawf.  Mem,  111. Melv.  202.  c  Spotswood,  230.

1569.]  BOOK V.  405

repair  the  injuries  her  reputation  had  suffered  by  that
step.  It  was  her  interest  to  have  proposed  it  early  ;
and  it  is  not  easy  to  account  for  her  long  silence  with
Norfolk's  respect  to  this  point.  Her  particular  motive
scheme  for  for  proposing  it  at  this  time  began  to  be  so  well

marrying  111  i  •

the  queen  known,  that  the  demand  was  rejected  by  the
convention  of  the  estates.*1  They  imputed  it  not
so  much  to  any  abhorrence  of  Bothwell,  as  to  her
eagerness  to  conclude  a  marriage  with  the  duke  of
Norfolk.

This  marriage  was  the  object  of  that  secret  negotia-
tion in  England,  which  I  have  already  mentioned.
The  fertile  and  projecting  genius  of  Maitland  first
conceived  this  scheme.  During  the  conference  at
York,  he  communicated  it  to  the  duke  himself,  and  to
the  bishop  of  Ross.  The  former  readily  closed  with
a  scheme  so  flattering  to  his  ambition.  The  latter  con-
sidered it  as  a  probable  device  for  restoring  his  mistress
to  liberty,  and  replacing  her  on  the  throne.  Nor  was
Mary,  with  whom  Norfolk  held  a  correspondence  by
means  of  his  sister  lady  Scrope,  averse  from  a  measure,
which  would  have  restored  her  to  her  kingdom  with  so
much  splendour.6  The  sudden  removal  of  the  con-
ference from  York  to  Westminster  suspended,  but  did
not  break  off  this  intrigue.  Maitland  and  Ross  were
still  the  duke's  prompters,  and  his  agents ;  and  many
letters  and  love-tokens  were  exchanged  between  him
and  the  queen  of  Scots.

Conceals  it  But  ^  ^e  cou^  no^  hope,  that  under  an  ad-
from  Eliza-. ministration  so  vigilant  as  Elizabeth's,  such  an
intrigue  could  be  kept  long  concealed,  he  at-
tempted to  deceive  her  by  the  appearance  of  openness
and  candour,  an  artifice  which  seldom  fails  of  success.
He  mentioned  to  her  the  rumour  that  was  spread  of  his

d  Spotsw.  231. In  a  privy -council,  held  July  30,  1569,  this  demand  was  con-
sidered ;  and,  of  fifty-one  members  present,  only  seven  voted  to  comply  with  the
queen's  request. Records  Priv.  Coun.  MS.  in  the  Lyon  Office,  p.  148.
e  Camd.  419. Haynes,  573. State  Trials,  i.  73.

406  SCOTLAND.  [1569.

marriage  with  the  Scottish  queen  ;  he  complained  of  it
as  a  groundless  calumny  ;  and  disclaimed  all  thoughts
of  that  kind,  with  many  expressions  full  of  contempt
both  for  Mary's  character  and  dominions.  Jealous  as
Elizabeth  was  of  every  thing  relative  to  the  queen  of
Scots,  she  seems  to  have  credited  these  professions/
But,  instead  of  discontinuing  the  negotiation,  he  re-
newed it  with  greater  vigour,  and  admitted  into  it  new
associates.  Among  these  was  the  regent  of  Scotland.
He  had  given  great  offence  to  Norfolk,  by  his  public
accusation  of  the  queen,  in  breach  of  the  concert  into
which  he  had  entered  at  York.  He  was  then  ready  to
return  into  Scotland.  The  influence  of  the  duke  in
the  north  of  England  was  great.  The  earls  of  Nor-
thumberland and  Westmoreland,  the  most  powerful
noblemen  in  that  part  of  the  kingdom,  threatened  to  re-
venge upon  the  regent  the  injuries  which  he  had  done
his  sovereign.  Murray,  in  order  to  secure  a  safe  return
into  Scotland,  addressed  himself  to  Norfolk,  and,  after
some  apology  for  his  past  conduct,  he  insinuated  that
the  duke's  scheme  of  marrying  the  queen  his  sister  was
no  less  acceptable  to  him  than  beneficial  to  both  king-
doms; and  that  he  would  concur  with  the  utmost
ardour  in  promoting  so  desirable  an  event.8  Norfolk
heard  him  with  the  credulity  natural  to  those  who  are
passionately  bent  upon  any  design.  He  wrote  to  the
two  earls  to  desist  from  any  hostile  attempt  against
Murray,  and  to  that  he  owed  his  passage  through  the
northern  counties  without  disturbance.
Gains  the  Encouraged  by  his  success  in  gaining  the
the  English  regent,  he  next  attempted  to  draw  the  English
nobles.  nobles  to  approve  his  design.  The  nation  be-
gan to  despair  of  Elizabeth's  marrying.  Her  jealousy
kept  the  question  with  regard  to  the  right  of  succession
undecided.  The  memory  of  the  civil  wars  which  had
desolated  England  for  more  than  a  century,  on  account

f  Haynes,  574. State  Trials,  i.  79,  80.  *  Anders,  iii.  34.

1569.]  BOOK V.  407

of  the  disputed  titles  of  the  houses  of  York  and  Lan-
caster, was  still  recent.  Almost  all  the  ancient  nobility
had  perished,  and  the  nation  itself  had  been  brought
to  the  brink  of  destruction  in  that  unhappy  contest.
The  Scottish  queen,  though  her  right  of  succession  was
generally  held  to  be  undoubted,  might  meet  with  for-
midable competitors.  She  might  marry  a  foreign  and
a  Popish  prince,  and  bring  both  liberty  and  religion
into  danger.  But,  by  marrying  her  to  an  Englishman,
a  zealous  Protestant,  the  most  powerful  and  most  uni-
versally beloved  of  all  the  nobility,  an  effectual  remedy
seemed  to  be  provided  against  all  these  evils.  The
greater  part  of  the  peers,  either  directly  or  tacitly,  ap-
proved of  it,  as  a  salutary  project.  The  earls  of  Arun-
del,  Pembroke,  Leicester,  and  lord  Lumley,  subscribed
a  letter  to  the  Scottish  queen,  written  with  Leicester's
hand,  in  which  they  warmly  recommended  the  match,
but  insisted,  by  way  of  preliminary ,  on  Mary's  promise,
that  she  should  attempt  nothing  in  consequence  of  her
pretensions  to  the  English  crown,  prejudicial  to  Eliza-
beth, or  to  her  posterity  ;  that  she  should  consent  to  a
league,  offensive  and  defensive,  between  the  two  king-
doms ;  that  she  should  confirm  the  present  establish-
ment of  religion  in  Scotland  ;  and  receive  into  favour
such  of  her  subjects  as  had  appeared  in  arms  against  her.
Upon  her  agreeing  to  the  marriage,  and  ratifying  these
articles,  they  engaged  that  the  English  nobles  would  not
only  concur  in  restoring  her  immediately  to  her  own
throne,  but  in  securing  to  her  that  of  England  in  rever-
sion. Mary  readily  consented  to  all  these  proposals,
except  the  second,  with  regard  to  which  she  demanded
some  time  for  consulting  her  ancient  ally  the  French
king.h

The  whole  of  this  negotiation  was  industriously  con-
cealed from  Elizabeth.  Her  jealousy  of  the  Scottish
queen  was  well  known,  nor  could  it  be  expected  that

h  Anders,  vol.  iii.  51. Camd.  420.

408  SCOTLAND.  [1569.

she  would  willingly  come  into  a  measure  which  tended
so  visibly  to  save  the  reputation,  and  to  increase  the
power  of  her  rival. But,  in  a  matter  of  so  much  con-
sequence to  the  nation,  the  taking  a  few  steps  without
her  knowledge  could  hardly  be  reckoned  criminal ;  and
while  every  person  concerned,  even  Mary  and  Norfolk
themselves,  declared,  that  nothing  should  be  concluded
without  obtaining  her  consent,  the  duty  and  allegiance
of  subjects  seemed  to  be  fully  preserved. The  greater
part  of  the  nobles  regarded  the  matter  in  this  light.
Those  who  conducted  the  intrigue,  had  farther  and
more  dangerous  views.  They  saw  the  advantages  which
Mary  would  obtain  by  this  treaty,  to  be  present  and
certain ;  and  the  execution  of  the  promises  which  she
came  under,  to  be  distant  and  uncertain. They  had
early  communicated  their  scheme  to  the  kings  of  France
and  Spain,  and  obtained  their  approbation.1 A  treaty
concerning  which  they  consulted  foreign  princes,  while
they  concealed  it  from  their  own  sovereign,  could  not
be  deemed  innocent. They  hoped,  however,  that  the
union  of  such  a  number  of  the  chief  persons  in  the
kingdom  would  render  it  necessary  for  Elizabeth  to
comply ;  they  flattered  themselves  that  a  combination
so  strong  would  be  altogether  irresistible;  and  such
was  their  confidence  of  success,  that  when  a  plan  was
concerted  in  the  north  of  England  for  rescuing  Mary
out  of  the  hands  of  her  keepers,  Norfolk,  who  was
afraid  that  if  she  recovered  her  liberty,  her  sentiments
in  his  favour  might  change,  used  all  his  interest  to  dis-
suade the  conspirators  from  attempting  it.k

In  this  situation  did  the  affair  remain,  "when  lord
Boyd  arrived  from  England ;  and,  besides  the  letters
which  he  produced  publicly,  brought  others  in  ciphers
from  Norfolk  and  Throkmorton,  to  the  regent  and
to  Maitland.  These  were  full  of  the  most  sanguine
hopes.  All  the  nobles  of  England  concurred,  said  they,

*  Anders,  vol.  Hi.  63.  k  Camd.  420.

1569.]  BOOK V.  409

in  favouring  the  design.  Every  preliminary  was  ad-
justed ;  nor  was  it  possible  that  a  scheme  so  deep  laid,
conducted  with  so  much  art,  and  supported  both  by
power  and  by  numbers,  could  miscarry,  or  be  defeated
in  the  execution.  Nothing  now  was  wanting  but  the
concluding  ceremony.  It  depended  on  the  regent  to
hasten  that,  by  procuring  a  sentence  of  divorce,  which
would  remove  the  only  obstacle  that  stood  in  the  way.
This  was  expected  of  him,  in  consequence  of  his  pro-
mise to  Norfolk ;  and  if  he  regarded  either  his  interest
or  his  fame,  or  even  his  safety,  he  would  not  fail  to  fulfil
these  engagements.1

But  the  regent  was  now  in  very  different  circum-
stances from  those  which  had  formerly  induced  him  to
affect  an  approbation  of  Norfolk's  schemes.  He  saw
that  the  downfall  of  his  own  power  must  be  the  first
consequence  of  the  duke's  success ;  and  if  the  queen,
who  considered  him  as  the  chief  author  of  all  her  mis-
fortunes, should  recover  her  ancient  authority,  he  could
never  expect  favour,  nor  scarce  hope  for  impunity.  No
wonder  he  declined  a  step  so  fatal  to  himself,  and  which
would  have  established  the  grandeur  of  another  on  the
ruins  of  his  own.  This  refusal  occasioned  a  delay.
But,  as  every  other  circumstance  was  settled,  the  bishop
of  Ross,  in  the  name  of  his  mistress,  and  the  duke,  in
person,  declared,  in  presence  of  the  French  ambassador,
their  mutual  consent  to  the  marriage,  and  a  contract  to
this  purpose  was  signed,  and  intrusted  to  the  keeping
of  the  ambassador.1"

AU  13  The  intrigue  was  now  in  so  many  hands,  that
Elizabeth  it  could  not  long  remain  a  secret.  It  began  to
the  duke's  be  whispered  at  court ;  and  Elizabeth,  calling
and8de-  the  duke  into  her  presence,  expressed  the  utmost
feats  it.  indignation  at  his  conduct,  and  charged  him  to
lay  aside  all  thoughts  of  prosecuting  such  a  dangerous

1  Haynes,  520. Spotsw.  230. See  Appendix,  No.  XXXII.
m  Carte,  vol.  Hi.  486.

410  SCOTLAND.  [1569.

design.  Soon  after  Leicester,  who  perhaps  had  coun-
tenanced the  project  with  no  other  intention,  revealed
all  the  circumstances  of  it  to  the  queen.  Pembroke,
Arundel,  Lumley,  and  Throkmorton,  were  confined  and
examined.  Mary  was  watched  more  narrowly  than
ever ;  and  Hastings  earl -of  Huntingdon,  who  pretended
to  dispute  with  the  Scottish  queen  her  right  to  the  suc-
cession, being  joined  in  commission  with  Shrewsbury,
rendered  her  imprisonment  more  intolerable  by  the  ex-
cess of  his  vigilance  and  rigour."  The  Scottish  regent,
threatened  with  Elizabeth's  displeasure,  meanly  betrayed
the  duke  ;  put  his  letters  into  her  hands,  and  furnished
all  the  intelligence  in  his  power.0  The  duke  himself
retired  first  to  Howard-house,  and  then,  in  contempt  of
the  summons  to  appear  before  the  privy-council,  fled  to
his  seat  in  Norfolk.  Intimidated  by  the  imprisonment
of  his  associates ;  coldly  received  by  his  friends  in  that
county;  unprepared  for  a  rebellion;  and  unwilling
perhaps  to  rebel ;  he  hesitated  for  some  days,  and  at  last
Oct  a  obeyed  a  second  call,  and  repaired  to  Windsor.
He  was  first  kept  as  a  prisoner  in  a  private  house,
and  then  sent  to  the  Tower.  After  being  confined  there
upwards  of  nine  months,  he  was  released  upon  his
humble  submission  to  Elizabeth,  giving  her  a  promise,
on  his  allegiance,  to  hold  no  farther  correspondence  with
the  queen  of  Scots.p  During  the  progress  of  Norfolk's
negotiations,  the  queen's  partisans  in  Scotland,  who
made  no  doubt  of  their  issuing  in  her  restoration  to  the
throne,  with  an  increase  of  authority,  were  wonderfully
Maitiand  elevated.  Maitland  was  the  soul  of  that  party,
eTby  the  an(^  tne  person  whose  activity  and  ability  the
regent.  .  regent  chiefly  dreaded.  He  had  laid  the  plan
of  that  intrigue  which  had  kindled  such  combustion  in
England.  He  continued  to  foment  the  spirit  of  disaf-
fection in  Scotland,  and  had  seduced  from  the  regent

»  Haynes,  525,  526.  550.  532.  •  See  Append.  No.  XXXIII.

P  Haynes,  525.  597.

1569.]  BOOK  V.  411

lord  Home,  Kirkaldy,  and  several  of  his  former  asso-
ciates. While  he  enjoyed  liberty,  the  regent  could
not  reckon  his  own  power  secure.  For  this  reason,
having  by  an  artifice  allured  Maitland  to  Stirling,  he
employed  captain  Crawford,  one  of  his  creatures,  to
accuse  him  of  being  accessary  to  the  murder  of  the
king ;  and  under  that  pretence  he  was  arrested  and
carried  as  a  prisoner  to  Edinburgh.  He  would  soon
have  been  brought  to  trial,  but  was  saved  by  the  friend-
ship of  Kirkaldy,  governor  of  the  castle,  who,  by  pre-
tending a  warrant  for  that  purpose  from  the  regent,  got
him  out  of  the  hands  of  the  person  to  whose  care  he
was  committed,  and  conducted  him  into  the  castle,
which  from  that  time  was  entirely  under  Maitland's
command/1  The  loss  of  a  place  of  so  much  im-
portance, and  the  defection  of  a  man  so  eminent  for
military  skill  as  Kirkaldy,  brought  the  regent  into
some  disreputation,  for  which,  however,  the  success
of  his  ally  Elizabeth,  about  this  time,  abundantly  com-
pensated.

The  intrigue  carried  on  for  restoring  the  Scot-

A  rebellion  1-1  i«

against tish  queen  to  liberty  having  been  discovered

Elizabeth  . /.  . J , J  ,  -

by  Mary's  and  disappointed,  an  attempt  was  made  to  the
adherents.  same  pUrpOse,  by  force  of  arms ;  but  the  issue
of  it  was  not  more  fortunate.  The  earls  of  Northum-
berland and  Westmoreland,  though  little  distinguished
by  their  personal  abilities,  were  two  of  the  most  ancient
and  powerful  of  the  English  peers.  Their  estates  in
the  northern  counties  were  great,  and  they  possessed
that  influence  over  the  inhabitants,  which  was  heredi-
tary in  the  popular  and  martial  families  of  Percy  and
of  Nevil.  They  were  both  attached  to  the  Popish  reli-
gion, and  discontented  with  the  court,  where  new  men
and  a  new  system  prevailed.  Ever  since  Mary's  arrival
in  England,  they  had  warmly  espoused  her  interest ;
and  zeal  for  Popery,  opposition  to  the  court,  and  com-

i  Spotsw.  232.

412  SCOTLAND.  [1569.

iniseration  of  her  sufferings,  had  engaged  them  in  dif-
ferent plots  for  her  relief.  Notwithstanding  the  vigi-
lance of  her  keeper,  they  held  a  close  correspondence
with  her,  and  communicated  to  her  all  their  designs/
They  were  privy  to  Norfolk's  schemes  ;  but  the  caution
with  which  he  proceeded  did  not  suit  their  ardour  and
impetuosity.  The  liberty  of  the  Scottish  queen  was
not  their  sole  object.  They  aimed  at  bringing  about  a
change  in  the  religion,  and  a  revolution  in  the  govern-
ment of  the  kingdom.  For  this  reason  they  solicited
the  aid  of  the  king  of  Spain,  the  avowed  and  zealous
patron  of  Popery  in  that  age.  Nothing  could  be  more
delightful  to  the  restless  spirit  of  Philip,  or  more  neces-
sary towards  facilitating  his  schemes  in  the  Netherlands,
than  the  involving  England  in  the  confusion  and  mise-
ries of  a  civil  war.  The  duke  of  Alva,  by  his  direction,
encouraged  the  two  earls,  and  promised,  as  soon  as  they
either  took  the  field  with  their  forces,  or  surprised  any
place  of  strength,  or  rescued  the  queen  of  Scots,  that
he  would  supply  them  both  with  money  and  a  strong
body  of  troops.  La  Mothe,  the  governor  of  Dunkirk,
in  the  disguise  of  a  sailor,  sounded  the  ports  where  it
would  be  most  proper  to  land.  And  Chiapini  Vitelli,
one  of  Alva's  ablest  officers,  was  dispatched  into  Eng-
land, on  pretence  of  settling  some  commercial  differ-
ences between  the  two  nations ;  but  in  reality  that  the
rebels  might  be  sure  of  a  leader  of  experience  as  soon
as  they  ventured  to  take  arms.8

The  conduct  of  this  negotiation  occasioned

Defeated.

many  meetings  and  messages  between  the  two
earls.  Elizabeth  was  informed  of  these ;  and  though
she  suspected  nothing  of  their  real  design,  she  con-
cluded that  they  were  among  the  number  of  Norfolk's
confidants.  They  were  summoned,  for  this  reason,  to
repair  to  court.  Conscious  of  guilt,  and  afraid  of  dis-

'  Haynes,  595.  Murdin,  44.  62,  &c.
8  Carte,  vol.  iii.  489,  490.  Camd.  421.

1569.]  BOOK V.  413

covery,  they  delayed  giving  obedience. A  se-

Nov.9.  j  j

cond,  and  more  peremptory  order  was  issued.
This  they  could  not  decline,  without  shaking  off  their
allegiance ;  and,  as  no  time  was  left  for  deliberation,
they  instantly  erected  their  standard  against  their  sove-
reign. The  re-establishing  the  Catholic  religion ;  the
settling  the  order  of  succession  to  the  crown ;  the  de-
fence of  the  ancient  nobility ;  were  the  motives  which
they  alleged  to  justify  their  rebellion.*  Many  of  the
lower  people  flocked  to  them  with  such  arms  as  they
could  procure  ;  and,  had  the  capacity  of  their  leaders
been  in  any  degree  equal  to  the  enterprise,  it  must
have  soon  grown  to  be  extremely  formidable.  Eliza-
beth acted  with  prudence  and  vigour,  and  was  served
by  her  subjects  with  fidelity  and  ardour.  On  the  first
rumour  of  an  insurrection,  Mary  was  removed  to  Co-
ventry, a  place  of  strength,  which  could  not  be  taken
without  a  regular  siege ;  a  detachment  of  the  rebels,
which  was  sent  to  rescue  her,  returned  without  success.
Troops  were  assembled  in  different  parts  of  the  king-
dom ;  as  they  advanced,  the  malecontents  retired.  In
their  retreat,  their  numbers  dwindled  away,  and  their
spirits  sunk.  Despair  and  uncertainty  whither  to  di-
rect their  flight,  kept  together  for  some  time  a  small
body  of  them  among  the  mountains  of  Northumberland;
but  they  were  at  length  obliged  to  disperse,  and  the
chiefs  took  refuge  among  the  Scottish  borderers.  The
two  earls,  together  with  the  countess  of  Northum-
berland, wandering  for  some  days  in  the  wastes
of  Liddisdale,  were  plundered  by  the  banditti,  exposed
to  the  rigour  of  the  season,  and  left  destitute  of  the
necessaries  of  life.  Westmoreland  was  concealed  by
Scott  of  Buccleugh  and  Ker  of  Ferniherst,  and  after-
ward conveyed  into  the  Netherlands.  Northumber-
land was  seized  by  the  regent,  who  had  marched  with
some  troops  towards  the  borders,  to  prevent  any  im-

1  Strype,  vol.  i.  547.

414  SCOTLAND.  [1569.

pression  the  rebels  might  make  on  those  mutinous  pro-
vinces."

Church  Amidst  so  many  surprising  events,  the  affairs
affairs.  of  the  church,  for  two  years,  have  almost  es-
caped our  notice.  Its  general  assemblies  were  held
regularly;  but  no  business  of  much  importance  em-
ployed their  attention.  As  the  number  of  the  Protestant
clergy  daily  increased,  the  deficiency  of  the  funds  set
apart  for  their  subsistence,  became  greater,  and  was
more  sensibly  felt.  Many  efforts  were  made  towards
recovering  the  ancient  patrimony  of  the  church,  or  at
least  as  much  of  it  as  was  possessed  by  the  Popish
incumbents,  a  race  of  men  who  were  now  not  only
useless  but  burdensome  to  the  nation.  But  though  the
manner  in  which  the  regent  received  the  addresses  and
complaints  of  the  general  assemblies,  was  very  different
from  that  to  which  they  had  been  accustomed,  no
effectual  remedy  was  provided;  and  while  they  suffered
intolerable  oppression,  and  groaned  under  extreme
poverty,  fair  words  and-  liberal  promises  were  all  they
were  able  to  obtain.x

1570 Elizabeth  now  began  to  be  weary  of  keeping
Elizabeth  sucn  a  prisoner  as  the  queen  of  Scots. During

resolves  to  L  A  .

give  up  the  former  year,  the  tranquillity  of  her  govern-
theTe-0  ment  had  been  disturbed,  first  by  a  secret  com-
gent.  bination  of  some  of  her  nobles,  then  by  the  re-
bellion of  others  ;  and  she  often  declared,  not  without
reason,  that  Mary  was  the  hidden  cause  of  both.  Many
of  her  own  subjects  favoured  or  pitied  the  captive
queen ;  the  Roman  Catholic  princes  on  the  continent
were  warmly  interested  in  her  cause.  The  detaining
her  any  longer  in  England,  she  foresaw,  would  be  made
the  pretext  or  occasion  of  perpetual  cabals  and  insur-
rections among  the  former ;  and  might  expose  her  to
the  hostile  attempts  of  the  latter.  She  resolved,  there-
lore,  to  give  up  Mary  into  the  hands  of  the  regent,

«  Cabbala,  171. Camd,  422,  *  Cald.  vol.  ii.  80,  &c.

1570.]  BOOK V.  415

after  stipulating  with  him,  not  only  that  her  days  should
not  be  cut  short,  either  by  a  judicial  sentence  or  by
secret  violence,  but  that  she  should  be  treated  in  a
manner  suited  to  her  rank ;  and,  in  order  to  secure  his
observance  of  this,  she  required  that  six  of  the  chief
noblemen  in  the  kingdom  should  be  sent  into  England
as  hostages/  With  respect  to  the  safe  custody  of  the
queen,  she  relied  on  Murray's  vigilance,  whose  secu-
rity, no  less  than  her  own,  depended  on  preventing
Mary  from  reascending  the  throne.  The  negotiation
for  this  purpose  was  carried  some  length,  when  it  was
discovered  by  the  vigilance  of  the  bishop  of  Ross,  who,
together  with  the  French  and  Spanish  ambassadors,
remonstrated  against  the  infamy  of  such  an  action,  and
represented  the  surrendering  the  queen  to  her  rebellious
subjects,  to  be  the  same  thing  as  if  Elizabeth  should,
by  her  own  authority,  condemn  her  to  instant  death.
This  procured  a  delay ;  and  the  murder  of  the  regent
prevented  the  revival  of  that  design. z
But  he  is  Hamilton  of  Bothwelhaugh  was  the  person
murdered.  wno  committed  this  barbarous  action.  He  had
been  condemned  to  death  soon  after  the  battle  of  Lang-
side,  as  I  have  already  related,  and  owed  his  life  to  the
regent's  clemency.  But  part  of  his  estate  had  been
bestowed  upon  one  of  the  regent's  favourites,  who
seized  his  house,  and  turned  out  his  wife  naked,  in  a
cold  night,  into  the  open  fields,  where,  before  next
morning,  she  became  furiously  mad.  This  injury  made  a
deeper  impression  upon  him  than  the  benefit  which  he
had  received,  and  from  that  moment  he  vowed  to  be
revenged  upon  the  regent.  Party-rage  strengthened
and  inflamed  his  private  resentment.  His  kinsmen,  the
Hamiltons,  applauded  the  enterprise.  The  maxims  of
that  age  justified  the  most  desperate  course  which  he
could  take  to  obtain  vengeance.  He  followed  the  regent

y  Haynes,  524.  z  Carte,  vol.  iii.  491. Anders,  vol.  iii.  84.

416  SCOTLAND.  [1570.

for  some  time,  and  watched  for  an  opportunity  to  strike
the  blow.  He  resolved  at  last  to  wait  till  his  enemy
should  arrive  at  Linlithgow,  through  which  he  was  to
pass  in  his  way  from  Stirling  to  Edinburgh.  He  took
his  stand  in  a  wooden  gallery,  which  had  a  window
towards  the  street ;  spread  a  feather-bed  on  the  floor,
to  hinder  the  noise  of  his  feet  from  being  heard ;  hung
up  a  black  cloth  behind  him,  that  his  shadow  might
not  be  observed  from  without ;  and  after  all  this  pre-
paration, calmly  expected  the  regent's  approach,  who
had  lodged  during  the  night  in  a  part  of  the  town  not
far  distant.  Some  indistinct  information  of  the  danger
which  threatened  him  had  been  conveyed  to  the  regent,
and  he  paid  so  much  regard  to  it,  that  he  resolved  to
return  by  the  same  gate  through  which  he  had  entered,
and  to  fetch  a  compass  round  the  town.  But  as  the  crowd
about  the  gate  was  great,  and  he  himself  unacquainted
with  fear,  he  proceeded  directly  along  the  street ;  and
the  throng  of  the  people  obliging  him  to  move  very
slowly,  gave  the  assassin  time  to  take  so  true  an  aim,
that  he  shot  him  with  a  single  bullet  through  the  lower
part  of  his  belly,  and  killed  the  horse  of  a  gentleman
who  rode  on  his  other  side.  His  followers  instantly
endeavoured  to  break  into  the  house  whence  the  blow
had  come,  but  they  found  the  door  strongly  barricaded;
and  before  it  could  be  forced  open,  Hamilton  had
mounted  a  fleet  horse,  which  stood  ready  for  him  at  a
back-passage,  and  was  got  far  beyond  their  reach.  The
regent  died  the  same  night  of  his  wound  ,a
His  cha-  There  is  no  person  in  that  age  about  whom
racter.  historians  have  been  more  divided,  or  whose
character  has  been  drawn  in  such  opposite  colours.
Personal  intrepidity,  military  skill,  sagacity,  and  vigour
in  the  administration  of  civil  affairs,  are  virtues,  which
even  his  enemies  allow  him  to  have  possessed  in  an

a  Buch.  385. Crawf.  Mem.  124. Cabbala,  171.

1570.]  BOOK V.  417

eminent  degree.  His  moral  qualities  are  more  dubious,
and  ought  neither  to  be  praised  nor  censured  without
great  reserve,  and  many  distinctions.  In  a  fierce  age
he  was  capable  of  using  victory  with  humanity,  and  of
treating  the  vanquished  with  moderation.  A  patron  of
learning,  which,  among  martial  nobles,  was  either  un-
known or  despised.  Zealous  for  religion,  to  a  degree
which  distinguished  him,  even  at  a  time  when  profes-
sions of  that  kind  were  not  uncommon.  His  confidence
in  his  friends  was  extreme,  and  inferior  only  to  his
liberality  towards  them,  which  knew  no  bounds.  A
disinterested  passion  for  the  liberty  of  his  country,
prompted  him  to  oppose  the  pernicious  system  which
the  princes  of  Lorrain  had  obliged  the  queen-mother
to  pursue.  On  Mary's  return  into  Scotland,  he  served
her  with  a  zeal  and  affection,  to  which  he  sacrificed  the
friendship  of  those  ^who  were  most  attached  to  his  per-
son. But,  on  the  other  hand,  his  ambition  was  immo-
derate ;  and  events  happened  that  opened  to  him  vast
projects,  which  allured  his  enterprising  genius,  and  led
him  to  actions  inconsistent  with  the  duty  of  a  subject.
His  treatment  of  the  queen,  to  whose  bounty  he  was  so
much  indebted,  was  unbrotherly  and  ungrateful.  The
dependence  on  Elizabeth,  under  which  he  brought
Scotland,  was  disgraceful  to  the  nation.  He  deceived
and  betrayed  Norfolk  with  a  baseness  unworthy  of  a
man  of  honour.  His  elevation  to  such  unexpected
dignity  inspired  him  with  new  passions,  with  haughti-
ness and  reserve ;  and  instead  of  his  natural  manner,
which  was  blunt  and  open,  he  affected  the  arts  of  dis-
simulation and  refinement.  Fond,  towards  the  end  of
his  life,  of  flattery,  and  impatient  of  advice,  his  crea-
tures, by  soothing  his  vanity,  led  him  astray,  while
his  ancient  friends  stood  at  a  distance,  and  predicted
his  approaching  fall.  But  amidst  the  turbulence
and  confusion  of  that  factious  period,  he  dispensed
justice  with  so  much  impartiality,  he  repressed  the
VOL.  i.  2  E

418  SCOTLAND.  [1570.

licentious  borderers  with  so  much  courage,  and  esta-
blished such  uncommon  order  and  tranquillity  in  the
country,  that  his  administration  was  extremely  popular,
and  he  was  long  and  affectionately  remembered  among
the  commons,  by  the  name  of  the  Good  Regent,

END OF VOL. I.

Printed  tyJ.  F.  DOVE,  St.  John's  Square-

D

7

R7

1824

v.l

Robertson,  William
Works

FOR  USE  IN
UBRftRY  ULY

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY

NOT  WANTED  IX  RBSC

SEEN  or

PRESERVATI"

SERVICES
