The Works of William Robertson, Vol. 5 (William Robertson, 1759)
==========================================================
Robertson's Works (1824, 9 vols.) - History of Scotland, Charles V, America, and the Historical Disquisition on India; Enlightenment historiography's great practitioner entire. Vol. 5 of 9.

WILLIAM  ROBERTSON,  D.D

WITH  AN ACCOUNT  OF

HIS  LIFE  AND  WRITINGS.

IN  NINE  VOLUMES.

VOL.  V.

LONDON:

PRINTED  FOR  WHITMORE  AND  FENN,  CHARING  CROSS;  J.  HEARNE,  STRAND;

SMITH  AND  ELDER,  FENCHURCH  STREET; H.  MOZLEY,  DERBY;

AND  M.  KEENE,  DUBLIN.

MDOCCXX1V.

THE

STANDARD  EDITION  OF  THE  HISTORIANS.

ROBERTSON'S  WORKS:

IN NINE VOLUMES. VOL. V.

CHARLES  V.

THE

OF  THE

BOOK  VII.

1541.  1  HE  calamities  which  the  emperor  suffered
S>estUHies°f  i*1  n*s  unfortunate  enterprise  against  Algiers
by  Francis,  were  great ;  and  the  account  of  these,  which

and  his  '  .  .  .  '

motives  augmented  in  proportion  as  it  spread  at  a
greater  distance  from  the  scene  of  his  disas-
ters, encouraged  Francis  to  begin  hostilities,  on  which
he  had  been  for  some  time  resolved.  But  he  did  not
think  it  prudent  to  produce,  as  the  motives  of  this  re-
solution, either  his  ancient  pretensions  to  the  duchy
of  Milan,  or  the  emperor's  disingenuity  in  violating  his
repeated  promises  with  regard  to  the  restitution  of  that
country.  The  former  might  have  been  a  good  reason
against  concluding  the  truce  of  Nice,  but  was  none  for
breaking  it ;  the  latter  could  not  be  urged  without  ex-
posing his  own  credulity  as  much  as  the  emperor's
want  of  integrity.  A  violent  and  unwarrantable  ac-
tion of  one  of  the  imperial  generals  furnished  him
with  a  reason  to  justify  his  taking  arms,  which  was  of
greater  weight  than  either  of  these,  and  such  as  would
have  roused  him,  if  he  had  been  as  desirous  of  peace
as  he  was  eager  for  war.  Francis,  by  signing  the
treaty  of  truce  at  Nice,  without  consulting  Solyman,
VOL.  v.  B

2  CHARLES V.  [1541.

gave  (as  he  foresaw)  great  offence  to  that  haughty  mo-
narch, who  considered  an  alliance  with  him  as  an  ho-
nour of  which  a  Christian prince  had  cause  to  be
proud.  The  friendly  interview  of  the  French  king  with
the  emperor  in  Provence, followed  by  such  extraor-
dinary appearances  of  union  and  confidence  which  dis-
tinguished the  reception  of  Charles  when  he  passed
through  the  dominions  of  Francis  to  the  Low  Countries,
induced  the  sultan  to  suspect  that  the  two  rivals  had
at  last  forgotten  their  ancient  enmity,  in  order  that
they  might  form  such  a  general  confederacy  against  the
Ottoman  power,  as  had  long  been  wished  for  in  Chris-
tendom, and  often  attempted  in  vain. Charles,  with
his  usual  art,  endeavoured  to  confirm  and  strengthen
these  suspicions,  by  instructing  his  emissaries  at  Con-
stantinople, as  well  as  in  those  courts  with  which  Soly-
man  held  any  intelligence,  to  represent  the  concord  be-
tween him  and  Francis  to  be  so  entire,  that  their  sen-
timents, views,  and  pursuits  would  be  the  same  for  the
future.* It  was  not  without  difficulty  that  Francis  ef-
faced these  impressions ;  but  the  address  of  Rincon,
the  French  ambassador  at  the  Porte,  together  with  the
manifest  advantage  of  carrying  on  hostilities  against
the  house  of  Austria  in  concert  with  France,  prevailed
at  length  on  the  sultan  not  only  to  banish  his  suspi-
cions, but  to  enter  into  a  closer  conjunction  with  Fran-
cis than  ever. Rincon  returned  into  France,  in  order
to  communicate  to  his  master  a  scheme  of  the  sultan's,
for  gaining  the  concurrence  of  the  Venetians  in  their
operations  against  the  common  enemy. Solyman  hav-
ing lately  concluded  a  peace  with  that  republic,  to
which  the  mediation  of  Francis  and  the  good  offices  of
Rincon  had  greatly  contributed,  thought  it  not  impos-
sible to  allure  the  senate  by  such  advantages,  as,  toge-
ther with  the  example  of  the  French  monarch,  might
overbalance  any  scruples  arising  either  from  decency  or

*  Mem.  de  Ribier,  torn,  i.  p.  502.

154L]  BOOK VH.  3

caution,  that  could  operate  on  the  other  side.  Francis,
warmly  approving  of  this  measure,  dispatched  Rincon
back  to  Constantinople,  and,  directing  him  to  go  by
Venice  along  with  Fregoso,  a  Genoese  exile,  whom  he
appointed  his  ambassador  to  that  republic,  empowered
them  to  negotiate  the  matter  with  the  senate,  to  whom
Solyman  had  sent  an  envoy  for  the  same  purpose.b
The  marquis  del  Guasto,  governor  of  the  Milanese,  an
officer  of  great  abilities,  but  capable  of  attempting  and
executing  the  most  atrocious  actions,  got  intelligence
of  the  motions  and  destination  of  these  ambassadors.
As  he  knew  how  much  his  master  wished  to  discover
the  intentions  of  the  French  king,  and  of  what  conse-
quence it  was  to  retard  the  execution  of  his  measures,
he  employed  some  soldiers  belonging  to  the  garrison
The  mur-  of  Pavia  to  lie  in  wait  for  Rincon  and  Fregoso
as  they  sailed  down  the  Po,  who  murdered

dors,  his them  and  most  of  their  attendants,  and  seized

pretext  for

Ais-  their  papers.  Upon  receiving  an  account  of
this  barbarous  outrage,  committed  during  the  subsist-
ence of  a  truce,  against  persons  held  sacred  by  the  most
uncivilized  nations,  Francis's  grief  for  the  unhappy  fate
of  two  servants  whom  he  loved  and  trusted,  his  uneasi-
ness at  the  interruption  of  his  schemes  by  their  death,
and  every  other  passion,  were  swallowed  up  and  lost
in  the  indignation  which  this  insult  on  the  honour  of
his  crown  excited.  He  exclaimed  loudly  against
Guasto,  who,  having  drawn  upon  himself  all  the  in-
famy of  assassination  without  making  any  discovery
of  importance,  as  the  ambassadors  had  left  their  in-
structions and  other  papers  of  consequence  behind
them,  now  boldly  denied  his  being  accessary  in  any
wise  to  the  crime.  He  sent  an  ambassador  to  the  em-
peror, to  demand  suitable  reparation  for  an  indignity,
which  no  prince,  how  inconsiderable  or  pusillanimous
soever,  could  tamely  endure  :  and  when  Charles,  impa-

b  Hist,  de  Venet.  de  Paruta,  iv.  125.
B 2

4  CHARLES V.  [1541.

tient  at  that  time  to  set  out  on  his  African  expedition,
endeavoured  to  put  him  off  with  an  evasive  answer,  he
appealed  to  all  the  courts  of  Europe,  setting  forth  the
heinousness  of  the  injury,  the  spirit  of  moderation  with
which  he  had  applied  for  redress,  and  the  iniquity  of
the  emperor  in  disregarding  this  just  request.

Notwithstanding  the  confidence  with  which  Guasto
asserted  his  own  innocence,  the  accusations  of  the
French  gained  greater  credit  than  all  his  protestations ;
and  Bellay,  the  French  commander  in  Piedmont,  pro-
cured, at  length,  by  his  industry  and  address,  such  a
minute  detail  of  the  transaction,  with  the  testimony  of
so  many  of  the  parties  concerned,  as  amounted  almost
to  a  legal  proof  of  the  marquis's  guilt.  In  consequence
of  this  opinion  of  the  public,  confirmed  by  such  strong
evidence,  Francis's  complaints  were  universally  allowed
to  be  well  founded,  and  the  steps  which  he  took  to-
wards renewing  hostilities  were  ascribed,  not  merely
to  ambition  or  resentment,  but  to  the  unavoidable  ne-
cessity of  vindicating  the  honour  of  his  crown.0

However  just  Francis  might  esteem  his  own  cause,
he  did  not  trust  so  much  to  that,  as  to  neglect  the  pro-
per precautions  for  gaining  other  allies  besides  the
sultan,  by  whose  aid  he  might  counterbalance  the  em-
peror's superior  power.  But  his  negotiations  to  this
effect  were  attended  with  very  little  success.  Henry
VIII.,  eagerly  bent  at  that  time  upon  schemes  against
Scotland,  which  he  knew  would  at  once  dissolve  his
union  with  France,  was  inclinable  rather  to  take  part
with  the  emperor,  than  to  contribute  in  any  degree  to-
wards favouring  the  operations  against  him.  The  pope
adhered  inviolably  to  his  ancient  system  of  neutrality.
The  Venetians,  notwithstanding  Solyman's  solicita-
tions, imitated  the  pope's  example.  The  Germans,  sa-
tisfied with  the  religious  liberty  which  they  enjoyed,,
found  it  more  their  interest  to  gratify  than  to  irritate

«  Bellay,  367,  &c- Jovii  Hist.  lib.  xl.  268.

1541.]  BOOK  VII.  5

the  emperor ;  so  that  the  kings  of  Denmark  and  Swe-
den, who  on  this  occasion  were  first  drawn  in  to  inte-
rest themselves  in  the  quarrels  of  the  more  potent  mo-
narchs  of  the  south,  and  the  duke  of  Cleves,  who  had
a  dispute  with  the  emperor  about  the  possession  of
Guelders,  were  the  only  confederates  whom  Francis
secured.  But  the  dominions  of  the  two  former  lay  at
such  a  distance,  and  the  power  of  the  latter  was  so  in-
considerable, that  he  gained  little  by  their  alliance.
Francis's  But  Francis  by  vigorous  efforts  of  his  own
preparing"  activity  supplied  every  defect.  Being  afflicted
for  war.  aj.  jnjs  time  with  a  distemper,  which  was  the
effect  of  his  irregular  pleasures,  and  which  prevented
his  pursuing  them  with  the  same  licentious  indulgence,
he  applied  to  business  with  more  than  his  usual  indus-
try. The  same  cause  which  occasioned  this  extraor-
dinary attention  to  his  affairs,  rendered  him  morose  and
dissatisfied  with  the  ministers  whom  he  had  hitherto  em-
ployed. This  accidental  peevishness  being  sharpened  by
reflecting  on  the  false  steps  into  which  he  had  lately  been
betrayed,  as  well  as  the  insults  to  which  he  had  been
exposed,  some  of  those  in  whom  he  had  usually  placed
the  greatest  confidence  felt  the  effects  of  this  change  in
his  temper  and  were  deprived  of  their  offices.  At  last
he  disgraced  Montmorency  himself,  who  had  long  di-
rected affairs,  as  well  civil  as  military,  with  all  the  au-
thority of  a  minister  no  less  beloved  than  trusted  by  his
master ;  ar-d  Francis  being  fond  of  shewing  that  the  fall
of  such  a  powerful  favourite  did  not  affect  the  vigour
or  prudence  of  his  administration,  this  was  a  new  mo-
tive to  redouble  his  diligence  in  preparing  to  open  the
war  by  some  splendid  and  extraordinary  effort.

.,542 He  accordingly  brought  into  the  field  five
He  brings  armies. One  to  act  in  Luxembourg  under  the

five  armies

into  the duke  of  Orleans,  accompanied  by  the  duke  of
Lorrain  as  his  instructor  in  the  art  of  war.  Ano-
ther commanded  by  the  dauphin  marched  towards  the

6  CHARLES V.  [1542.

frontiers  of  Spain.  A  third,  led  by  Van  Rossem,  the
marshal  of  Gu  elders,  and  composed  chiefly  of  the  troops
of  Cleves,  had  Brabant  allotted  for  the  theatre  of  its
operations.  A  fourth,  of  which  the  duke  of  Vendome
was  general,  hovered  on  the  borders  of  Flanders.  The
last,  consisting  of  the  forces  cantoned  in  Piedmont,  was
destined  for  the  admiral  Annebaut.  The  dauphin  and
his  brother  were  appointed  to  command  where  the  chief
exertions  were  intended,  and  the  greatest  honour  to  be
reaped ;  the  army  of  the  former  amounted  to  forty  thou-
sand, that  of  the  latter  to  thirty  thousand  men.  Nothing
appears  more  surprising  than  that  Francis  did  not  pour
with  these  numerous  and  irresistible  armies  into  the
Milanese,  which  had  so  long  been  the  object  of  his
wishes  as  well  as  enterprises ;  and  that  he  should  choose
rather  to  turn  almost  his  whole  strength  into  another
direction,  and  towards  new  conquests.  But  the  re-
membrance of  the  disasters  which  he  had  met  with  in
his  former  expeditions  into  Italy,  together  with  the  dif-
ficulty of  supporting  a  war  carried  on  at  such  a  distance
from  his  own  dominions,  had  gradually  abated  his  vio-
lent inclination  to  obtain  footing  in  that  country,  and
.  made  him  willing  to  try  the  fortune  of  his  arms  in  ano-
ther quarter.  At  the  same  time  he  expected  to  make
such  a  powerful  impression  on  the  frontier  of  Spain,
where  there  were  few  towns  of  any  strength,  and  no
army  assembled  to  oppose  him,  as  might  enable  him  to
recover  possession  of  the  country  of  Rousillon,  lately
dismembered  from  the  French  crown,  before  Charles
could  bring  into  the  field  any  force  able  to  obstruct  his
progress.  The  necessity  of  supporting  his  ally  the  duke
of  Cleves,  and  the  hope  of  drawing  a  considerable  body
of  soldiers  out  of  Germany  by  his  means,  determined
him  to  act  with  vigour  in  the  Low  Countries.

June  The  dauphin  and  duke  of  Orleans  opened

Their  ope-  the  campaign  much  about  the  same  time ;  the
former  laying  siege  to  Perpignan  the  capital

rations.

1542.]  BOOK If.  7

of  Rousillon,  and  the  latter  entering  Luxembourg.  The
duke  of  Orleans  pushed  his  operations  with  the  greatest
rapidity  and  success,  one  town  falling  after  another,
until  no  place  in  that  large  duchy  remained  in  the
emperor's  hands  but  Thionville.  Nor  could  he  have
failed  of  overrunning  the  adjacent  provinces  with  the
same  ease,  if  he  had  not  voluntarily  stopped  short  in  this
career  of  victory.  But  a  report  prevailing  that  the  em-
peror had  determined  to  hazard  a  battle  in  order  to  save
Perpignan,  on  a  sudden  the  duke,  prompted  by  youthful
ardour,  or  moved,  perhaps,  by  jealousy  of  his  brother,
whom  he  both  envied  and  hated,  abandoned  his  own
conquest,  and  hastened  towards  Rousillon,  in  order  to
divide  with  him  the  glory  of  the  victory.

On  his  departure  some  of  his  troops  were  disbanded,
others  deserted  their  colours,  and  the  rest,  cantoned  in
the  towns  which  he  had  taken,  remained  inactive.  By
this  conduct,  which  leaves  a  dishonourable  imputation
either  on  his  understanding  or  his  heart,  or  on  both,  he
not  only  renounced  whatever  he  could  have  hoped  from
such  a  promising  commencement  of  the  campaign,  but
gave  the  enemy  an  opportunity  of  recovering,  before
the  end  of  summer,  all  the  conquests  which  he  had
gained.  On  the  Spanish  frontier,  the  emperor  was  not
so  inconsiderate  as  to  venture  on  a  battle,  the  loss  of
which  might  have  endangered  his  kingdom.  Perpig-
nan, though  poorly  fortified,  and  briskly  attacked,  hav-
ing been  largely  supplied  with  ammunition  and  provi-
sions by  the  vigilance  of  Doria,d  was  defended  so  long
and  so  vigorously  by  the  duke  of  Alva,  the  persevering
obstinacy  of  whose  temper  fitted  him  admirably  for
such  a  service,  that  at  last  the  French,  after  a  siege  of
three  months,  wasted  by  diseases,  repulsed  in  several
assaults,  and  despairing  of  success,  relinquished  the
undertaking  and  retired  into  their  own  country.6  Thus
all  Francis's  mighty  preparations,  either  from  some  de-

d  Sigonii  Vita  A.  Doris,  p.  1191.  «  Sandov.  Hist.  torn.  ii.  315.

8  CHARLES V.  [1542.

feet  in  his  own  conduct,  or  from  the  superior  power  and
prudence  of  his  rival,  produced  no  eifects  which  bore
any  proportion  to  his  expense  and  efforts,  or  such  as
gratified,  in  any  degree,  his  own  hopes,  or  answered
the  expectation  of  Europe.  The  only  solid  advantage
of  the  campaign  was  the  acquisition  of  a  few  towns  in
Piedmont,  which  Bellay  gained  rather  by  stratagem  and
address,  than  by  force  of  arms/
1543  The  emperor  and  Francis,  though  both  con-
Prepara-  siderabl  v  exhausted  by  such  great  but  indecisive

tionsfor  •  .  J  . .  ,

another  efforts,  Qiscovermgno  abatement  in  their  mutual
campaign.  g^^g^  employed  all  their  attention,  tried
every  expedient,  and  turned  themselves  towards  every
quarter,  in  order  to  acquire  new  allies,  together  with  such
a  reinforcement  of  strength  as  would  give  them  the  su-
periority in  the  ensuing  campaign.  Charles,  taking
advantage  of  the  terror  and  resentment  of  the  Spaniards,
upon  the  sudden  invasion  of  their  country,  prevailed  on
the  cortes  of  the  several  kingdoms  to  grant  him  subsi-
dies with  a  more  liberal  hand  than  usual.  At  the  same
time  he  borrowed  a  large  sum  from  John  king  of  Por-
tugal, and  by  way  of  security  for  his  repayment,  put
him  in  possession  of  the  Molucca  isles  in  the  East  In-
dies, with  the  gainful  commerce  of  precious  spices,
which  that  sequestered  corner  of  the  globe  yields.  Not
satisfied  with  this,  he  negotiated  a  marriage  between
Philip  his  only  son,  now  in  his  sixteenth  year,  and  Mary
daughter  of  that  monarch,  with  whom  her  father,  the
most  opulent  prince  in  Europe,  gave  a  large  doWer ;
and  having  likewise  persuaded  the  cortes  of  Aragon
and  Valentia  to  recognise  Philip  as  the  heir  of  these
crowns,  he  obtained  from  them  the  donative  usual  on
such  occasions.8  These  extraordinary  supplies  enabled
him  to  make  such  additions  to  his  forces  in  Spain,  that
he  could  detach  a  great  body  into  the  Low  Countries,

f  Sandov.  Hist.  toiu.  ii.  318. Bdlay,  387,  &c. Ferrer,  ix.  237.
«  Ferreras,  ix.  238.  241. Jovii  Hi^t.  lib.  xlii.  298.  6.

J543.]  BOOK  II.  9

and  yet  reserve  as  many  as  were,  sufficient  for  the  de-
fence of  the  kingdom.  Having  thus  provided  for  the
security  of  Spain,  and  committed  the  government  of  it
to  his  son,  he  sailed  for  Italy,  in  his  way  to  Germany.
But  how  attentive  soever  to  raise  the  funds  for

May.  .  ,

carrying  on  the  war,  or  eager  to  grasp  at  any
new  expedient  for  that  purpose,  he  was  not  so  inconside-
rate as  to  accept  of  an  overture  which  Paul,  knowing  his
necessities,  artfully  threw  out  to  him.  That  ambitious
pontiff,  no  less  sagacious  to  discern,  than  watchful  to
seize,  opportunities  of  aggrandizing  his  family,  solicited
him  to  grant  Octavio  his  grandchild,  whom  the  emperor
had  admitted  to  the  honour  of  being  his  son-in-law,  the
investiture  of  the  duchy  of  Milan,  in  return  for  which
he  promised  such  a  sum  of  money  as  would  have  gone
far  towards  supplying  all  his  present  exigencies.  But
Charles,  as  well  from  unwillingness  to  alienate  a  pro-
vince of  so  much  value,  as  from  disgust  at  the  pope,
who  had  hitherto  refused  to  join  in  the  war  against
France,  rejected  the  proposal.  His  dissatisfaction  with
Paul  at  that  juncture  was  so  great,  that  he  even  refused
to  approve  his  alienating  Parma  and  Placentia  from  the
patrimony  of  St.  Peter,  and  settling  them  on  his  son
and  grandson  as  a  fief  to  be  held  of  the  holy  see.  As
no  other  expedient  for  raising  money  among  the  Italian
states  remained,  he  consented  to  withdraw  the  garri-
sons which  he  had  hitherto  kept  in  the  citadels  of  Flo-
rence and  Leghorn ;  in  consideration  for  which,  he  re-
ceived a  large  present  from.  Cosmo  de  Medici,  who  by
this  means  secured  his  own  independence,  and  got  pos-
session of  two  forts,  which  were  justly  called  the  fetters
of  Tuscany.11
The  em-  But  Charles,  while  he  seemed  to  have  turned

peror's  ne-  ^  wnole  attention  towards  raising  the  sums  ne-
gotiations f  o
with  Hen-  cessary  for  defraying  the  expenses  of  the  year,

had  not  been  negligent  of  objects  more  distant

h  Adrian!  Istoria,  K  19.T. Skid.  312. Jovii. Hist.  lib.  xliii.  p.  30] . Vita  di
Cos.  Medici  di  Baldini,  p.  34.

10  CHARLES V.  [1543.

though  no  less  important,  and  had  concluded  a  league
offensive  and  defensive  with  Henry  VIII.  from  which
he  derived,  in  the  end,  greater  advantage  than  from  all
his  other  preparations.  Several  slight  circumstances,
which  have  already  been  mentioned,  had  begun  to
alienate  the  affections  of  that  monarch  from  Francis,
with  whom  he  had  been  for  some  time  in  close  alliance ;
and  new  incidents  of  greater  moment  had  occurred  to
Henr  ,s  increase  his  disgust  and  animosity.  Henry,
rapture  desirous  of  establishing  a  uniformity  in  reli-
Franceand  gion  in  both  the  British  kingdoms,  as  well  as
Scotland.  £Qn(j  Q£  making  proselytes  to  his  own  opinions,

had  formed  a  scheme  of  persuading  his  nephew  the  king
of  Scots  to  renounce  the  pope's  supremacy,  and  to  adopt
the  same  system  of  reformation  which  he  had  introduced
into  England.  This  measure  he  pursued  with  his  usual
eagerness  and  impetuosity,  making  such  advantageous
offers  to  James,  whom  he  considered  as  not  over-scru-
pulously  attached  to  any  religious  tenets,  that  he  hardly
doubted  of  success.  His  propositions  were  accordingly
received  in  such  a  manner  that  he  flattered  himself  with
having  gained  his  point.  But  the  Scottish  ecclesiastics,
foreseeing  how  fatal  the  union  of  their  sovereign  with
England  must  prove  both  to  their  own  power,  and  to
the  established  system  of  religion ;  and  the  partisans
of  France,  no  less  convinced  that  it  would  put  an  end
to  the  influence  of  that  crown  upon  the  public  councils
of  Scotland  :  combined  together,  and  by  their  insinua-
tions defeated  Henry's  scheme  at  the  very  moment  when
he  expected  it  to  have  taken  effect.1  Too  haughty  to
brook  such  a  disappointment,  which  he  imputed  as
much  to  the  arts  of  the  French,  as  to  the  levity  of  the
Scottish  monarch,  he  took  arms  against  Scotland,  threat-
ening to  subdue  the  kingdom,  since  he  could  not  gain
the  friendship  of  its  king.  At  the  same  time,  his  re-
sentment against  Francis  quickened  his  negotiations
with  the  emperor,  an  alliance  with  whom  he  was  now

*  Hist,  of  Scot!.  Tol.  i.  p.  56,  &c.

1543.]  BOOK VII.  II

as  forward  to  accept  as  the  other  could  be  to  offer  it.
During  this  war  with  Scotland,  and  before  the  conclu-
sion of  his  negotiations  with  Charles,  James  V.  died,
leaving  his  crown  to  Mary  his  only  daughter,  an  infant
a  few  days  old.  Upon  this  event,  Henry  altered  at  once
his  whole  system  with  regard  to  Scotland,  and  abandon-
ing all  thoughts  of  conquering  it,  aimed  at  what  was  more
advantageous  as  well  as  more  practicable,  a  union  with
that  kingdom,  by  a  marriage  between  Edward  his  only
son  and  the  young  queen.  But  here,  too,  he  appre-
hended a  vigorous  opposition  from  the  French  faction
in  Scotland,  which  began  to  bestir  itself  in  order  to
thwart  the  measure.  The  necessity  of  crushing  this
party  among  the  Scots,  and  of  preventing  Francis  from
furnishing  them  any  effectual  aid,  confirmed  Henry's
resolution  of  breaking  with  France,  and  pushed  him  on
to  put  a  finishing  hand  to  the  treaty  of  confederacy
with  the  emperor.

Feb.  11. In  this  league  were  contained,  first  of  all,  ar-
f°r  securing  their  future  amity  and  mutual

Charles  .defence;  then  were  enumerated  the  demands
Henry,  which  they  were  respectively  to  make  upon
Francis  and  the  plan  of  their  operations  was  fixed,
if  he  should  refuse  to  grant  them  satisfaction.  They
agreed  to  require  that  Francis  should  not  only  re-
nounce his  alliance  with  Solyman,  which  had  been  the
source  of  infinite  calamities  to  Christendom,  but  also
that  he  should  make  reparation  for  the  damages  which
that  unnatural  union  had  occasioned;  that  he  should
restore  Burgundy  to  the  emperor  ;  that  he  should  de-
sist immediately  from  hostilities,  and  leave  Charles  at
leisure  to  oppose  the  common  enemy  of  the  Christian
faith;  and  that  he  should  immediately  pay  the  sums
due  to  Henry,  or  put  some  towns  in  his  hands  as  secu-
rity to  that  effect.  If,  within  forty  days,  he  did  not
comply  with  these  demands^  they  then  engaged  to  in-
vade France  each  with  twenty  thousand  foot  and  five

12  CHARLES  V.  [1543.

thousand  horse,  and  not  to  lay  down  their  arms  until
they  had  recovered  Burgundy,  together  with  the  towns
on  the  Somme,  for  the  emperor,  and  Normandy  and
Guienne,  or  even  the  whole  realm  of  France,  for  Henry.k
Their  heralds,  accordingly  set  out  with  these  haughty
requisitions;  and  though  they  were  not  permitted  to
enter  France,  the  two  monarchs  held  themselves  fully
entitled  to  execute  whatever  was  stipulated  in  their
treaty.

Francis's  Francis,  on  his  part,  was  not  less  diligent  in
Uon°wiUi  preparing  for  the  approaching  campaign.  Hav-
soiyman.  jng  early  observed  symptoms  of  Henry's  disgust
and  alienation,  and  finding  all  his  endeavours  to  soothe
and  reconcile  him  ineffectual,  he  knew  his  temper  too
well  not  to  expect  that  open  hostilities  would  quickly
follow  upon  this  cessation  of  friendship.  For  this  reason
he  redoubled  his  endeavours  to  obtain  from  Solyman
such  aid  as  might  counterbalance  the  great  accession
of  strength  which  the  emperor  would  receive  by  his
alliance  with  England.  In  order  to  supply  the  place
of  the  two  ambassadors  who  had  been  murdered  by
Guasto,  he  sent  as  his  envoy,  first  to  Venice,  and  then
to  Constantinople,  Paulin,  who,  though  in  no  higher
rank  than  a  captain  of  foot,  was  deemed  worthy  of  be-
ing raised  to  this  important  station,  to  which  he  was
recommended  by  Bellay,  who  had  trained  him  to  the
arts  of  negotiation,  and  made  trial  of  his  talents  and
address  on  several  occasions.  Nor  did  he  belie  the
opinion  conceived  of  his  courage  and  abilities.  Hasten-
ing to  Constantinople,  without  regarding  the  dangers
to  which  he  was  exposed,  he  urged  his  master's  de-
mands with  such  boldness,  and  availed  himself  of  every
circumstance  with  such  dexterity,  that  he  soon  remov-
ed all  the  sultan's  difficulties.  As  some  of  the  bashaws,
swayed  either  by  their  own  opinion,  or  influenced  by
the  emperor's  emissaries,  who  had  made  their  way
even  into  this  court,  had  declared  in  the  divan  against

"  Rym.  xiv.  768. Herb.  238.

154-3.]  BOOK  VII.  13

acting  in  concert  with  France,  he  found  means  either
to  convince  or  silence  them.k  At  last  he  obtained  or-
ders for  Barbarossa  to  sail  with  a  powerful  fleet,  and  to
regulate  all  his  operations  by  the  directions  of  the  French
king.  Francis  was  not  equally  successful  in  his  at-
tempts to  gain  the  princes  of  the  empire.  The  extra-
ordinary rigour  with  which  he  thought  it  necessary  to
punish  such  of  his  subjects  as  had  embraced  the  Protes-
tant opinions,  in  order  to  give  some  notable  evidence
of  his  own  zeal  for  the  Catholic  faith,  and  to  wipe  off
the  imputations  to  which  he  was  liable  from  his  con-
federacy with  the  Turks,  placed  an  insuperable  barrier
between  him  and  such  of  the  Germans  as  interest  or  in-
clination would  have  prompted  most  readily  to  join  him.1
His  chief  advantage,  however,  over  the  emperor,  he  de-
rived on  this,  as  on  other  occasions,  from  the  contiguity
of  his  dominions,  as  well  as  from  the  extent  of  the  royal
authority  in  France,  which  exempted  him  from  all  the
delays  and  disappointments  unavoidable  wherever  po-
pular assemblies  provide  for  the  expences  of  govern-
ment by  occasional  and  frugal  subsidies.  Hence  his
domestic  preparations  were  always  carried  on  with  vi-
gour and  rapidity,  while  those  of  the  emperor,  unless
when  quickened  by  some  foreign  supply,  or  some  tem-
porary expedient,  were  extremely  slow  and  dilatory.
Opera-  Long  before  any  army  was  in  readiness  to
tions  in  oppose  him.  Francis  took  the  field  in  the  Low

the  Low rjr

Countries.  Countries,  against  which  he  turned  the  whole
weight  of  the  war.  He  made  himself  master  of  Lan-
drecy,  which  he  determined  to  keep  as  the  key  to
the  whole  province  of  Hainault;  and  ordered  it  to  be
fortified  with  great  care.  Turning  from  thence  to  the
right,  he  enterred  the  duchy  of  Luxembourg,  and  found
it  in  the  same  defenceless  state  as  in  the  former  year.
While  he  was  thus  employed,  the  emperor  having

*•  Sandov.  Histor.  torn.  ii.  346. Jovii  Hist.  lib.  xli.  285,  &c.  300,  &c.  Brantome-
1  Sec.  lib.  iii.  403.

14  CHARLES  V.  [1543

drawn  together  an  army,  composed  of  all  the  different
nations  subject  to  his  government,  entered  the  territories
of  the  duke  of  Cleves,  on  whom  he  had  vowed  to  in-
flict exemplary  vengeance.  This  prince,  whose  con-
duct and  situation  were  similar  to  that  of  Robert  de  la
Mark  in  the  first  war  between  Charles  and  Francis,  re-
sembled him  likewise  in  his  fate.  Unable,  with  his  fee-
ble army,  to  face  the  emperor,  who  advanced  at  the
head  of  forty-four  thousand  men,  he  retired  at  his  ap-
proach ;  and  the  Imperialists  being  at  liberty  to  act  as

they  pleased,  immediately  invested  Duren.  That
perorbe-  town,  though  gallantly  defended,  was  taken  by
master  of  assault;  all  the  inhabitants  were  put  to  the

sword, and  the  place  itself  reduced  to  ashes.

of  cieves,  This  dreadful  example  of  severity  struck  the

August  24.  r  J

people  ot  the  country  with  such  general  terror,
that  all  the  other  towns,  even  such  as  were  capable  of
resistance,  sent  their  keys  to  the  emperor;  and  before
a  body  of  French,  detached  to  his  assistance,  could
come  up,  the  duke  himself  was  obliged  to  make  his  sub-
mission to  Charles  in  the  most  abject  manner.  Being
admitted  into  the  imperial  presence,  he  kneeled,  to-
gether with  eight  of  his  principal  subjects,  and  implored
mercy.  The  emperor  allowed  him  to  remain  in  that
ignominious  posture,  and  eyeing  him  with  a  haughty
and  severe  look,  without  deigning  to  answer  a  single
word,  remitted  him  to  his  ministers.  The  conditions,
however,  which  they  prescribed,  were  not  so  rigorous
as  he  had  reason  to  have  expected  after  such  a  recep-
tion. He  was  obliged  to  renounce  his  alliance
with  France  and  Denmark;  to  resign  all  his
pretensions  to  the  duchy  of  Gueldres;  to  enter  into
perpetual  amity  with  the  emperor  and  king  of  the  Ro-
mans. In  return  for  which,  all  his  hereditary  dominions
were  restored,  except  two  towns,  which  the  emperor
kept  as  pledges  of  the  duke's  fidelity  during  the  conti-
nuance of  the  war  ;  and  he  was  reinstated  in  his  privi

1543.]  BOOK VII.  15

leges  as  a  prince  of  the  empire.  Not  long  after,  Charles
as  a  proof  of  the  sincerity  of  his  reconcilement,  gave
him  in  marriage  one  of  the  daughters  of  his  brother
Ferdinand."1

Besieges  Having  thus  chastised  the  presumption  of
Landrecy.  fae  fafe  of  Cleves,  detached  one  of  his  allies
from  Francis,  and  annexed  to  his  own  dominions  in
the  Low  Countries  a  considerable  province  which  lay
contiguous  to  them,  Charles  advanced  towards  Hai-
nault,  and  laid  siege  to  Landrecy.  There,  as  the  first
fruits  of  his  alliance  with  Henry,  he  was  joined  by  six
thousand  English  under  Sir  John  Wallop.  The  gar-
rison, consisting  of  veteran  troops  commanded  by  De
la  Lande  and  Desse,  two  officers  of  reputation,  made  a
vigorous  resistance.  Francis  approached  with  all  his
forces  to  relieve  that  place ;  Charles  covered  the  siege ;
both  were  determined  to  hazard  an  engagement ;  and
all  Europe  expected  to  see  this  contest,  which  had  con-
tinued so  long,  decided  at  last  by  a  battle  between  two
great  armies,  led  by  their  respective  monarchs  in  per-
son. But  the  ground  which  separated  their  two  camps
was  such,  as  put  the  disadvantage  manifestly  on  his
side  who  should  venture  to  attack,  and  neither  of  them
chose  to  run  that  risk.  Amidst  a  variety  of  movements,
in  order  to  draw  the  enemy  into  the  snare,  or  to  avoid
it  themselves,  Francis,  with  admirable  conduct  and
equal  good  fortune,  threw  first  a  supply  of  fresh  troops,
and  then  a  convoy  of  provisions,  into  the  town,  so  that
the  emperor,  despairing  of  success,  withdrew  into  win-
ter-quarters," in  order  to  preserve  his  army  from  being
entirely  ruined  by  the  rigour  of  the  season.
Soiyman  During  this  campaign,  Solyman  fulfilled  his
Hungary,  engagements  to  the  French  king  with  great
November,  punctuality.  He  himself  marched  into  Hun-
gary with  a  numerous  army ;  and  as  the  princes  of  the

111  Haraei  Annal.  Brabant,  torn.  i.  628. Recueil  des  Traitez,  torn.  ii.  226.
»  Bellay,  405,  &c.

ItJ  CHARLES V.  [1543

of  the  empire  made  no  great  effort  to  save  a  country
which  Charles,  by  employing  his  own  force  against
Francis,  seemed  willing  to  sacrifice,  there  was  no  ap-
pearance of  any  body  of  troops  to  oppose  his  progress.
He  besieged,  one  after  another,  Quinque  Ecclesiae,  Alba,
and  Gran,  the  three  most  considerable  towns  in  the
kingdom,  of  which  Ferdinand  had  kept  possession.
The  first  was  taken  by  storm ;  the  other  two  surrendered ;
and  the  whole  kingdom,  a  small  corner  excepted,  was
subjected  to  the  Turkish  yoke.0  About  the

Barbaras-  *  •>

sa's  descent  same  time,  Barbarossa  sailed  with  a  fleet  of  a
hundred  and  ten  galleys,  and  coasting  along  the
shore  of  Calabria,  made  a  descent  at  Rheggio,  which
he  plundered  and  burnt ;  and  advancing  from  thence  to
the  mouth  of  the  Tiber,  he  stopped  there  to  water.
The  citizens  of  Rome,  ignorant  of  his  destination,  and
filled  with  terror,  began  to  fly  with  such  general pre-
cipitation, that  the  city  would  have  been  totally  de-
serted, if  they  had  not  resumed  courage  upon  letters
from  Paulin  the  French  envoy,  assuring  them  that  no
violence  or  injury  would  be  offered  by  the  Turks  to  any
state  in  alliance  with  the  king  his  master.p From  Ostia,
Barbarossa  sailed  to  Marseilles,  and  being  joined  by
the  French  fleet  with  a  body  of  land  forces  on  board,
under  the  count  d'Enguien,  a  gallant  young  prince  of
the  house of Bourbon,  they directed their course
towards  Nice,  the  sole  retreat  of  the  unfortunate  duke
of  Savoy. There,  to  the  astonishment  and  scandal  of
all  Christendom,  the  lilies  of  France  and  crescent  of
Mahomet  appeared  in  conjunction  against  a  fortress  on
which  the  cross  of  Savoy  was  displayed. The  town,
however,  was  bravely  defended  against  their  combined
force  by  Montfort  a  Savoyard  gentleman,  who  stood  a
general  assault,  and  repulsed  the  enemy  with  great  loss
before  he  retired  into  the  castle. That  fort,  situated

0  Istuanbaff.  Hist.  Hung.  lib.  xv.  167.
P  Jovii  Hist.  lib.  xliii.  S04,  &c. Pallavic.  160.

1543.]  BOOK VII.  17

upon  a  rock,  on  which  the  artillery  made  no  impres-
sion, and  which  could  not  be  undermined,  he  held  out
so  long,  that  Doria  had  time  to  approach  with  his  fleet,
and  the  marquis  del  Guasto  to  march  with  a  body  of
troops  from  Milan. Upon  intelligence  of  this,
the  French  and  Turks  raised  the  siege  ;q  and
Francis  had  not  even  the  consolation  of  success,  to
render  the  infamy  which  he  drew  on  himself  by  calling
in  such  an  auxiliary  more  pardonable.
Prepara- From  the  small  progress  of  either  party  dur-
ing  tnig  campaign,  it  was  obvious  to  what  a
length  the  war  might  be  drawn  out  between
two  princes,  whose  power  was  so  equally  balanced,  and
who,  by  their  own.  talents  or  activity,  could  so  vary  and
multiply  their  resources. The  trial  which  they  had
now  made  of  each  other's  strength  might  have  taught
them  the  imprudence  of  persisting  in  a  war,  wherein
there  was  greater  appearance  of  their  distressing  their
own  dominions  than  of  conquering  those  of  their  ad-
versary, and  should  have  disposed  both  to  wish  for
peace. If  Charles  and  Francis  had  been  influenced  by
considerations  of  interest  or  prudence  alone,  this,  with-
out doubt,  must  have  been  the  manner  in  which  they
would  have  reasoned. But  the  personal  animosity,
which  mingled  itself  in  all  their  quarrels,  had  grown  to
be  so  violent  and  implacable,  that,  for  the  pleasure  of
gratifying  it,  they  disregarded  every  thing  else;  and
were  infinitely  more  solicitous  how  to  hurt  each  other,
than  how  to  secure  what  would  be  of  advantage  to
themselves. No  sooner  then  did  the  season  force  them
to  suspend  hostilities,  than,  without  paying  any  atten-
tion to  the  pope's  repeated  endeavours  or  paternal  ex-
hortations to  re-establish  peace,  they  began  to  provide
for  the  operations  of  the  next  year  with  new  vigour,
and  an  activity  increasing  with  their  hatred. Charles
turned  his  chief  attention  towards  gaining  the  princes

i  Guichenon  Histoire  de  Savoye,  torn.  i.  p.  651. Bellay,  425,  &c
VOL. V.  C

18  CHARLES V.  [1543.

of  the  empire,  and  endeavoured  to  rouse  the  formidable
but  unweildy  strength  of  the  Germanic  body  against
Affairs  of  Francis.  In  order  to  understand  the  propriety
Germany.  Qf  tke  steps  which  he  took  for  that  purpose,  it
is  necessary  to  review  the  chief  transactions  in  that
country  since  the  diet  of  Ratisbon  in  the  year  1541.
Maurice  of  Much  about  the  time  that  assembly  broke
Saxony  up  Maurice  succeeded  his  father  Henrv  in  the

succeeds  *

his  father,  government  of  that  part  of  Saxony  which  be-
longed to  the  Albertine  branch  of  the  Saxon  family.
This  young  prince,  then  only  in  his  twentieth  year,  had,
even  at  that  early  period,  begun  to  discover  the  great
talents  which  qualified  him  for  acting  such  a  distin-
guished part  in  the  affairs  of  Germany.  As  soon  as
he  entered  upon  the  administration,  he  struck  out  into
such  a  new  and  singular  path,  as  shewed  that  he  aimed,
from  the  beginning,  at  something  great  and  uncommon.
The  views  Though  zealously  attached  to  the  Protestant
and  con-  opinions,  both  from  education  and  principle,

duct  of  this r  '  r  F '

young  he  refused  to  accede  to  the  league  ot  JSmalkalde,
being  determined,  as  he  said,  to  maintain  the
purity  of  religion,  which  was  the  original  object  of  that
confederacy,  but  not  to  entangle  himself  in  the  politi-
cal interests  or  combinations  to  which  it  had  given  rise.
At  the  same  time,  foreseeing  a  rupture  between  Charles
and  the  confederates  of  Smalkalde,  and  perceiving  which
of  them  was  most  likely  to  prevail  in  the  contest,  instead
of  that  jealousy  and  distrust  which  the  other  Protestants
expressed  of  all  the  emperor's  designs,  he  affected  to
place  in  him  an  unbounded  confidence ;  and  courted
his  favour  with  the  utmost  assiduity.  When  the  other
Protestants,  in  the  year  1542,  either  declined  assisting
Ferdinand  in  Hungary,  or  afforded  him  reluctant  and
feeble  aid,  Maurice  marched  thither  in  person,  and
rendered  himself  conspicuous  by  his  zeal  and  courage.
From  the  same  motive,  he  had  led  to  the  emperor's  as-
sistance, during  the  last  campaign,  a  body  of  his  own

1543.]  BOOK VII.  19

troops;  and  the  gracefulness  of  his  person,  his  dex-
terity in  all  military  exercises,  together  with  his  intre-
pidity, which  courted  and  delighted  in  danger,  did  not
distinguish  him  more  in  the  field,  than  his  great  abili-
ties and  insinuating  address  won  upon  the  emperor's
confidence  and  favour/  While  by  this  conduct,  which
appeared  extraordinary  to  those  who  held  the  same
opinions  with  him  concerning  religion,  Maurice  en-
deavoured to  pay  court  to  the  emperor,  he  began  to
discover  some  degree  of  jealousy  of  his  cousin  the
elector  of  Saxony.  This,  which  proved  in  the  sequel
so  fatal  to  the  elector,  had  almost  occasioned  an  open
rupture  between  them;  and  soon  after  Maurice's  ac-
cession to  the  government,  they  both  took  arms  with
equal  rage,  upon  account  of  a  dispute  about  the  right
of  jurisdiction  over  a  paltry  town  situated  on  the  Mol-
daw.  They  were  prevented,  however,  from  proceeding
to  action  by  the  mediation  of  the  landgrave  of  Hesse,
whose  daughter  Maurice  had  married,  as  well  as  by  the
powerful  and  authoritative  admonitions  of  Luther.*
The  pope  Amidst  these  transactions,  the  pope,  though
toToicfa  extremely  irritated  at  the  emperor's  concessions
general  fo  fae  Protestants  at  the  diet  of  Ratisbon,  was

council  at  '

Trent.  so  warmly  solicited  on  all  hands,  by  such  as
were  most  devoutly  attached  to  the  see  of  Rome,  no
less  than  by  those  whose  fidelity  or  designs  he  sus-
pected, to  summon  a  general  council,  that  he  found  it
impossible  to  avoid  any  longer  calling  that  assembly.
The  impatience  for  its  meeting,  and  the  expectations
of  great  effects  from  its  decisions,  seemed  to  grow  in
proportion  to  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  it.  He  still
adhered,  however,  to  his  original  resolution  of  holding
it  in  some  town  of  Italy,  where,  by  the  number  of  ec-
clesiastics, retainers  to  his  court,  and  depending  on  his
favour,  who  could  repair  to  it  without  difficulty  or  ex-

*  Sleid.  317. Seek.  1.  iii.  371.  386.  428.
»  Sleid.  292. Seek.  1.  iii.  403.

C 2

20  CHARLES  V.  [1543.

pense,  he  might  influence  and  even  direct  all  its  pro-
ceedings. This  proposition,  though  often  rejected  by
the  Germans,  he  instructed  his  nuncio  to  the  diet  held
at  Spires  in  the  year  1542,  to  renew  once  more;
and  if  he  found  it  gave  no  greater  satisfaction
than  formerly,  he  empowered  him,  as  a  last  conces-
sion, to  propose  for  the  place  of  meeting,  Trent,  a  city
in  the  Tyrol,  subject  to  the  king  of  the  Romans,  and
situated  on  the  confines  between  Germany  and  Italy.
The  Catholic  princes  in  the  diet,  after  giving  it  as
their  opinion  that  the  council  might  have  been  held
with  greater  advantage  in  Ratisbon,  Cologne,  or  some
of  the  great  cities  of  the  empire,  were  at  length  in-
duced to  approve  of  the  place  which  the  pope  had
named. The  Protestants  unanimously  expressed  their
dissatisfaction,  and  protested  that  they  would  pay  no
regard  to  a  council  held  beyond  the  precincts  of  the
empire,  called  by  the  pope's  authority,  and  in  which
he  assumed  the  right  of  presiding.*
May  22, The  pope,  without  taking  any  notice  of  their
Summons objections,  published  the  bull  of  intimation,
it  to  meet.  namecl  three  cardinals  to  preside  as  his  legates,
and  appointed  them  to  repair  to  Trent  before  the  1st  of
November,  the  day  he  had  fixed  for  opening  the  coun-
cil. But  if  Paul  had  desired  the  meeting  of  a  council
as  sincerely  as  he  pretended,  he  would  not  have  pitched
on  such  an  improper  time  for  calling  it. Instead  of
that  general  union  and  tranquillity,  without  which  the
deliberations  of  a  council  could  neither  be  conducted
with  security,  nor  attended  with  authority,  such  a  fierce
war  was  just  kindled  between  the  emperor  and  Francis,
as  rendered  it  impossible  for  the  ecclesiastics  from  many
parts  of  Europe  to  resort  thither  in  safety.  The  legates,
accordingly,  remained  several  months  in  Trent;  but
Obliged  to as  no  person  appeared  there,  except  a  few
prorogue  it.  prelates  from  the  ecclesiastical  state,  the  pope,

«  Sleid.  29J. Seek.  1.  iii.  285.

1543.]  BOOK VII.  421

in  order  to  avoid the  ridicule  and  contempt  which
this  drew  upon  him  from  the  enemies  of  the  church,
recalled  them  and  prorogued  the  council."
The  em- Unhappily  for  the  authority  of  the  papal  see,
peror ^t  the  very  time  that  the  German  Protestants

courts  the  ' '»  ~ n

Proies-  took  every  occasion  of  pouring  contempt  upon
it,  the  emperor  and  king  of  the  Romans  found
it  necessary  not  only  to  connive  at  their  conduct,  but
to  court  their  favour  by  repeated  acts  of  indulgence.
In  the  same  diet  of  Spires,  in  which  they  had  protested
in  the  most  disrespectful  terms  against  assembling  a
council  at  Trent,  Ferdinand,  who  depended  on  their
aid  for  the  defence  of  Hungary,  not  only  permitted
that  protestation  to  be  inserted  in  the  records  of  the
diet,  but  renewed  in  their  favour  all  the  emperor's  con-
cessions at  Ratisbon,  adding  to  them  whatever  they
demanded  for  their  farther  security.  Among  other
particulars,  he  granted  a  suspension  of  a  decree  of  the
imperial  chamber  against  the  city  of  Goslar  (one  of
those  which  had  entered  into  the  league  of  Smalkalde),
on  account  of  its  having  seized  the  ecclesiastical  re-
venues within  its  domains,  and  enjoined  Henry  duke
of  Brunswick  to  desist  from  his  attempts  to  carry  that
decree  into  execution.  But  Henry,  a  furious  bigot,
and  no  less  obstinate  than  rash  in  all  his  undertakings,
The'r  vi  o  continuing  to  disquiet  the  people  of  Goslar  by
rouspro-  his  incursions,  the  elector  of  Saxony  and  land-
grave of  Hesse,  that  they  might  not  suffer  any
member  of  the  Smalkaldic  body  to  be  oppressed,  as-
sembled their  forces,  declared  war  in  form  against
Henry,  and  in  the  space  of  a  few  weeks,  stripping  him
entirely  of  his  dominions,  drove  him  as  a  wretched
exile  to  take  refuge  in  the  court  of  Bavaria.  By  this
act  of  vengeance,  no  less  severe  than  sudden,  they
filled  all  Germany  with  dread  of  their  power,  and  the
confederates  of  Smalkalde,  appeared,  by  this  first  effort

»  F.  Paul,  p.  97. SIcid.  296.

22  CHARLES  V.  [154

of  their  arms,  to  be  as  ready  as  they  were  able  to  pro-
tect those  who  had  joined  the  association/

Imboldened  by  so  many  concessions  in  their  favour,
as  well  as  by  the  progress  which  their  opinions  daily
made,  the  princes  of  the  league  of  Smalkalde  took  a
solemn  protest  against  the  imperial  chamber,  and  de-
clined its  jurisdiction  for  the  future,  because  that  court
had  not  been  visited  or  reformed  according  to  the  de-
cree of  Ratisbon,  and  continued  to  discover  a  most  in-
decent partiality  in  all  its  proceedings.  Not  long  after
this,  they  ventured  a  step  farther;  and  protesting
against  the  recess  of  a  diet  held  at  Nuremberg,  which
provided  for  the  defence  of  Hungary,  refused  to  fur-
April  23,  n^s^  their  contingent  for  that  purpose,  unless
1543>  the  imperial  chamber  were  reformed,  and  full
security  were  granted  them  in  every  point  with  regard
to  religion/

D.  Such  were  the  lengths  to  which  the  Protes-

tants  had  proceeded,  and  such  their  confidence

.in  their  own  power,  when  the  emperor  returned
from  the  Low  Countries  to  hold  a  diet,  which  he  had
summoned  to  meet  at  Spires.  The  respect  due  to  the
emperor,  as  well  as  the  importance  of  the  affairs  which
were  to  be  laid  before  it,  rendered  this  assembly  ex-
tremely full.  All  the  electors,  a  great  number  of
princes,  ecclesiastical  and  secular,  with  the  deputies
of  most  of  the  cities,  were  present.  Charles  soon  per-
ceived that  this  was  not  a  time  to  offend  the  jealous
spirit  of  the  Protestants,  by  asserting  in  any  high
tone  the  authority  and  doctrines  of  the  church,  or  by
abridging,  in  the  smallest  article,  the  liberty  which
they  now  enjoyed  ;  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  if  he  ex-
pected any  support  from  them,  or  wished  to  preserve
Germany  from  intestine  disorders  while  he  was  en-
gaged in  a  foreign  war,  he  must  soothe  them  by  new

*  Sleid.  296.  Coraraemoratio  succincta  Causarum  Belli,  &c.  a  Sraalkaldicis  contra
Henr.  Bruns.  ab  iisdeni  edita  :  ap.  Scardium,  torn.  ii.  307.

y  Sleid.  304.  307. Seek.  1.  iii.  404.  416.

1544.]  BOOK VII.  23

concessions,  and  a  more  ample  extension  of  their  reli-
gious privileges.  He  began,  accordingly,  with  court-
ing the  elector  of  Saxony  and  landgrave  of  Hesse,  the
heads  of  the  Protestant  party,  and  by  giving  up  some
things  in  their  favour,  and  granting  liberal  promises
with  regard  to  others,  he  secured  himself  from  any
The  em-  danger  of  opposition  on  their  part.  Having
peror  so-  gained  this  capital  point,  he  then  ventured  to

licits  its ~

aid  against  address  the  diet  with  greater  freedom.  He
began  by  representing  his  own  zeal  and  un-
wearied efforts  with  regard  to  two  things  most  essen-
tial to  Christendom,  the  procuring  of  a  general  council
in  order  to  compose  the  religious  dissensions  which
had  unhappily  arisen  in  Germany,  and  the  providing
some  proper  means  for  checking  the  formidable  pro-
gress of  the  Turkish  arms.  But  he  observed,  with
deep  regret,  that  his  pious  endeavours  had  been  en-
tirely defeated  by  the  unjustifiable  ambition  of  the
French  king,  who  having  wantonly  kindled  the  flame
of  war  in  Europe,  which  had  been  so  lately  extin-
guished by  the  truce  of  Nice,  rendered  it  impossible
for  the  fathers  of  the  church  to  assemble  in  council,  or
to  deliberate  with  security ;  and  obliged  him  to  employ
those  forces  in  his  own  defence,  which,  with  greater
satisfaction  to  himself,  as  well  as  more  honour  to  Chris-
tendom, he  would  have  turned  against  the  infidels;
that  Francis,  not  thinking  it  enough  to  have  called
him  off  from  opposing  the  Mahometans,  had,  with  un-
exampled impiety,  invited  them  into  the  heart  of  Chris-
tendom, and  joining  his  arms  to  theirs,  had  openly  at-
tacked the  duke  of  Savoy,  a  member  of  the  empire :
that  Barbarossa's  fleet  was  now  in  one  of  the  ports  of
France,  waiting  only  the  return  of  spring  to  carry  ter-
ror and  desolation  to  the  coast  of  some  Christian  state :
that  in  such  a  situation  it  was  a  folly  to  think  of  dis-
tant expeditions  against  the  Turk,  or  of  marching  to
oppose  his  armies  in  Hungary,  while  such  a  powerful

24  CHARLES V.  [1544.

ally  received  him  into  the  centre  of  Europe,  and  gave
him  footing  there.  It  was  a  dictate  of  prudence,  he
added,  to  oppose  the  nearest  and  most  imminent  dan-
ger first  of  all,  and  by  humbling  the  power  of  France,
to  deprive  Solyman  of  the  advantages  which  he  de-
rived from  the  unnatural  confederacy  formed  between
him  and  a  monarch  who  still  arrogated  the  name  of
Most  Christian  :  that,  in  truth,  a  war  against  the  French
king  and  the  sultan  ought  to  be  considered  as  the  same
thing ;  and  that  every  advantage  gained  over  the  for-
mer, was  a  severe  and  sensible  blow  to  the  latter :  on
all  these  accounts,  he  concluded  with  demanding  their
aid  against  Francis,  not  merely  as  an  enemy  of  the  Ger-
manic body,  or  of  him  who  was  its  head,  but  as  an
avowed  ally  of  the  infidels,  and  a  public  enemy  to  the
Christian  name.

In  order  to  give  greater  weight  to  this  violent  invec-
tive of  the  emperor,  the  king  of  the  Romans  stood  up,
and  related  the  rapid  conquests  of  the  sultan  in  Hun-
gary, occasioned,  as  he  said,  by  the  fatal  necessity  im-
posed on  his  brother,  of  employing  his  arms  against
France.  When  he  had  finished,  the  ambassador  of
Savoy  gave  a  detail  of  Barbarossa's  operations  at  Nice,
and  of  the  ravages  which  he  had  committed  on  that
coast.  All  these,  added  to  the  general  indignation
which  Francis's  unprecedented  union  with  the  Turks
excited  in  Europe,  made  such  an  impression  on  the
diet  as  the  emperor  wished,  and  disposed  most  of  the
members  to  grant  him  such  effectual  aid  as  he  had  de-
manded. The  ambassadors  whom  Francis  had  sent  to
explain  the  motives  of  his  conduct,  were  not  permitted
to  enter  the  bounds  of  the  empire;  and  the  apology
which  they  published  for  their  master,  vindicating  his
alliance  with  Solyman,  by  examples  drawn  from  Scrip-
ture, and  the  practice  of  Christian  princes,  was  little
regarded  by  men  who  were  irritated  already,  or  preju-
diced against  him  to  such  a  degree  as  to  be  incapable

1544.]  BOOK VII.  25

of  allowing  their  proper  weight  to  any  arguments  in
his  behalf.

HIS  vast  Such  being  the  favourable  disposition  of  the
sionsfin  Germans,  Charles  perceived  that  nothing  could
order  to  now  obstruct  his  gaining  all  that  he  aimed  at,
Protes-  but  the  fears  and  jealousies  of  the  Protestants^
which  he  determined  to  quiet  by  granting  every
thing  that  the  utmost  solicitude  of  these  passions  could
desire  for  the  security  of  their  religion.  With  this  view,
he  consented  to  a  recess,  whereby  allthe  rigorous  edicts
hitherto  issued  against  the  Protestants  were  suspended ;
a  council  either  general  or  national  to  be  assembled  in
Germany  was  declared  necessary,  in  order  to  re-esta-
blish peace  in  the  church ;  until  one  of  these  should  be
held  (which  the  emperor  undertook  to  bring  about  as
soon  as  possible),  the  free  and  public  exercise  of  the
Protestant  religion  was  authorized  ;  the  imperial  cham-
ber was  enjoined  to  give  no  molestation  to  the  Protes-
tants ;  and  when  the  term  for  which  the  present  judges
in  that  court  were  elected,  should  expire,  persons  duly
qualified  were  then  to  be  admitted  as  members,  with-
Aid  rant  ou*  aiiy  Distinction  on  account  of  religion.  In
edbythe  return  for  these  extraordinary  acts  of  indul-
gence, the  Protestants  concurred  with  the  other
members  of  the  diet,  in  declaring  war  against  Francis
in  the  name  of  the  empire ;  in  voting  the  emperor  a
body  of  twenty  thousand  foot  and  four  thousand  horse,
to  be  maintained  at  the  public  expense  for  six  months,
to  be  employed  against  France ;  and  at  the  same  time
the  diet  proposed  a  poll-tax  to  be  levied  throughout  all
Germany  on  every  person  without  exception,  for  the
support  of  the  war  against  the  Turks.
Charles's  Charles,  while  he  gave  the  greatest  attention
negotia-  to  fljg  mmute  and  intricate  detail  of  particulars

tions  with  t  rf

Denmark  necessary  towards  conducting  the  deliberations
f^nd.  °8  of  a  numerous  and  divided  assembly  to  such  a
successful  period,  negotiated  a  separate  peace  with

26  CHARLES V,  [1544.

the  king  of  Denmark ;  who,  though  he  had  hither-
to performed  nothing  considerable  in  consequence  of
his  alliance  with  Francis,  had  it  in  his  power,  however,
to  make  a  troublesome  diversion  in  favour  of  that  mo-
narch.2 At  the  same  time,  he  did  not  neglect  proper
applications  to  the  king  of  England,  in  order  to  rouse
him  to  more  vigorous  efforts  against  their  common
enemy.  Little,  indeed,  was  wanting  to  accomplish  this;
for  such  events  had  happened  in  Scotland  as  inflamed
Henry  to  the  most  violent  pitch  of  resentment  against
Francis.  Having  concluded  with  the  parliament  of
Scotland  a  treaty  of  marriage  between  his  son  and  their
young  queen,  by  which  he  reckoned  himself  secure  of
effecting  the  union  of  the  two  kingdoms,  which  had  been
long  desired,  and  often  attempted  without  success  by
his  predecessors,  Mary  of  Guise  the  queen-mother,
cardinal  Beatoun,  and  other  partisans  of  France,  found
means  not  only  to  break  off  the  match,  but  to  alienate
the  Scottish  nation  entirely  from  the  friendship  of  Eng-
land, and  to  strengthen  its  ancient  attachment  to  France.
Henry,  however,  did  not  abandon  an  object  of  so  much
importance ;  and  as.  the  humbling  of  Francis,  besides
the  pleasure  of  taking  revenge  upon  an  enemy  who  had
disappointed  a  favourite  measure,  appeared  the  most
effectual  method  of  bringing  the  Scots  to  accept  once
more  of  the  treaty  which  they  had  relinquished,  he  was
so  eager  to  accomplish  this,  that  he  was  ready  to  second
whatever  the  emperor  could  propose  to  be  attempted
against  the  French  king.  The  plan,  accordingly,
which  they  concerted,  was  such,  if  it  had  been  punctu-
ally executed,  as  must  have  ruined  France  in  the  first
place,  and  would  have  augmented  so  prodigiously  the
emperor's  power  and  territories,  as  might  in  the  end
have  proved  fatal  to  the  liberties  of  Europe.  They
agreed  to  invade  France  each  with  an  army  of  twenty-
five  thousand  men,  and,  without  losing  time  in  besieg-

*  Dumout  Corps  Diplom.  t.  iv,  p.  ii.  p.  274.

1544.]  BOOK VII.  -27

ing  the  frontier  towns,  to  advance  directly  towards  the
interior  provinces,  and  to  join  their  forces  near  Paris.*
The  Francis  stood  alone  in  opposition  to  all  the

French enemies  whom  Charles  was  mustering  against

take  the .  •  .

field  in  him.  Solyman  had  been  the  only  ally  who  did
Piedmont.  .  (Jeserthim;  but  the  assistance  which  he  re-

ceived from  him  had  rendered  him  so  odious  to  all  Chris-
tendom, that  he  resolved  rather  to  forego  all  the  advan-
tages of  his  friendship,  than  to  become,  on  that  account,
the  object  of  general  detestation.  For  this  reason  he
dismissed  Barbarossa  as  soon  as  winter  was  over,  who,
after  ravaging  the  coast  of  Naples  and  Tuscany,  re-
turned to  Constantinople.  As  Francis  could  not  hope
to  equal  the  forces  of  so  many  powers  combined  against
him,  he  endeavoured  to  supply  that  defect  by  dispatch,
which  was  more  in  his  power,  and  to  get  the  start  of
them  in  taking  the  field.  Early  in  the  spring  the  count
invest  Ca-  d'Enguien  invested  Carignan,  a  town  in  Pied-
Hgnan.  mont,  which  the  marquis  del  Guasto,  the  impe-
rial general,  having  surprised  the  former  year,  con-
sidered as  of  so  much  importance,  that  he  had  fortified
it  at  great  expense.  The  count  pushed  the  siege  with
such  vigour,  that  Guasto,  fond  of  his  own  conquest,
and  seeing  no  other  way  of  saving  it  from  falling  into
the  hands  of  the  French,  resolved  to  hazard  a  battle
The  impe-  ^n  OI>der  to  relieve  it.  He  began  his  march
riaiists  from  Milan  for  this  purpose,  and  as  he  was  at

march  to  i  i  • •  •

relieve  it.  no  pains  to  conceal  his  intention,  it  was  soon
known  in  the  French  camp.  Enguien,  a  gallant  and
enterprising  young  man,  wished  passionately  to  try  the
fortune  of  a  battle  ;  his  troops  desired  it  with  no  less
ardour  ;  but  the  peremptory  injunction  of  the  king  not
to  venture  a  general  engagement,  flowing  from  a  prudent
attention  to  the  present  situation  of  affairs,  as  well  as
from  the  remembrance  of  former  disasters,  restrained
him  from  venturing  upon  it.  Unwilling,  however,  to

a  Herbert,  245. Bellay,  448.

28  CHARLES V.  [1544.

abandon  Carignan,  when  it  was  just  ready  to  yield,  and
eager  to  distinguish  his  command  by  some  memorable
action,  he  dispatched  Monluc  to  court,  in  order  to  lay
before  the  king  the  advantages  of  fighting  the  enemy,
and  the  hopes  which  he  had  of  victory.  The  king  re-
ferred the  matter  to  his  privy-council;  all  the  ministers
declared,  one  after  another,  against  fighting,  and  sup-
ported their  sentiments  by  reasons  extremely  plausible.
While  they  were  delivering  their  opinions,  Monluc,  who
was  permitted  to  be  present,  discovered  such  visible  and
extravagant  symptoms  of  impatience  to  speak,  as  well
as  such  dissatisfaction  with  what  he  heard,  that  Francis,
diverted  with  his  appearance,  called  on  him  to  declare
what  he  could  offer  in  reply  to  sentiments  which  seemed
to  be  as  just  as  they  were  general.  Upon  this,  Monluc,
a  plain  but  spirited  soldier,  and  of  known  courage,  re-
presented the  good  condition  of  the  troops,  their  eager-
ness to  meet  the  enemy  in  the  field,  their  confidence  in
their  officers,  together  with  the  everlasting  infamy  which
the  declining  of  a  battle  would  bring  on  the  French
arms;  and  he  urged  his  arguments  with  such  a  lively
impetuosity,  and  such  a  flow  of  military  eloquence,  as
gained  over  to  his  opinion  not  only  the  king,  naturally
fond  of  daring  actions,  but  several  of  the  council.  Fran-
cis, catching  the  same  enthusiasm  which  had  animated
his  troops,  suddenly  started  up,  and  having  lifted  his
hands  to  Heaven,  and  implored  the  divine  protection,
~he  then  addressed  himself  to  Monluc,  "  Go,"  says  he,
"  return  to  Piedmont,  and  fight  in  the  name  of  God."b
Battle  of  No  sooner  was  it  known  that  the  king  had
Cerisoies.  g{ven  Enguien  leave  to  fight  the  Imperialists,
than  such  was  the  martial  ardour  of  the  gallant  and
high-spirited  gentlemen  of  that  age,  that  the  court  was
quite  deserted,  every  person,  desirous  of  reputation,  or
capable  of  service,  hurrying  to  Piedmont,  in  order  to
share,  as  volunteers,  in  the  danger  and  glory  of  the  ac-

b  Memoires  de  Monluc.

1544.]  BOOK VII.  29

tion.  Encouraged  by  the  arrival  of  so  many  brave
officers,  Enguien  immediately  prepared  for  battle,  nor
did  Guasto  decline  the  combat.  The  number  of  cavalry
was  almost  equal,  but  the  imperial  infantry  exceeded
the  French  by  at  least  ten  thousand  men.  They

April  11.  J.  . .  ,  . , /

met  near  Censoles,  in  an  open  plain,  which  af-
forded to  neither  any  advantage  of  ground,  and  both
had  full  time  to  form  their  army  in  proper  order.  The
shock  was  such  as  might  have  been  expected  between
veteran  troops,  violent  and  obstinate.  The  French  ca-
valry, rushing  forward  to  the  charge  with  their  usual
vivacity,  bore  down  every  thing  that  opposed  them;
but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  steady  and  disciplined  valour
of  the  Spanish  infantry  having  forced  the  body  which
they  encountered  to  give  way,  victory  remained  in  sus-
pense, ready  to  declare  for  which  ever  general  could
make  the  best  use  of  that  critical  moment.  Guasto,
engaged  in  that  part  of  his  army  which  was  thrown
into  disorder,  and  afraid  of  falling  into  the  hands  of  the
French,  whose  vengeance  he  dreaded  on  account  of
the  murder  of  Rincon  and  Fregoso,  lost  his  presence
of  mind,  and  forgot  to  order  a  large  body  of  reserve
to  advance ;  whereas  Enguien,  with  admirable  courage
and  equal  conduct,  supported,  at  the  head  of  his
gens  d'armes,  such  of  his  battalions  as  began  to  yield ;
and  at  the  same  time  he  ordered  the  Swiss  in  his  ser-
vice, who  had  been  victorious  wherever  they  fought,  to
fall  upon  the  Spaniards.  This  motion  proved  decisive.
All  that  followed  was  confusion  and  slaughter.  The
marquis  del  Guasto,  wounded  in  the  thigh,  escaped
only  by  the  swiftness  of  his  horse.  The  victory  of  the
French  was  complete,  ten  thousand  of  the  Imperialists
being  slain,  and  a  considerable  number,  with  all  their
tents,  baggage,  and  artillery,  taken.  On  the  part  of
the  conquerors  their  joy  was  without  allay,  a  few  only
being  killed,  and  among  these  no  officer  of  distinction.'

c  Bellay,  429,  &c. Meraoires  de  Monluc. Jovii  Hist.  1.  xliv.  p.  327.  6.

30  CHARLES V.  [1544.

Effects  This  splendid  action,  besides  the  reputation
oflt  with  which  it  was  attended,  delivered  France
from  an  imminent  danger,  as  it  ruined  the  army  with
which  Guasto  had  intended  to  invade  the  country  be-
tween the  Rhone  and  Saone,  where  there  were  neither
fortified  towns  nor  regular  forces  to  oppose  his  pro-
gress. But  it  was  not  in  Francis's  power  to  pursue  the
victory  with  such  vigour  as  to  reap  all  the  advantages
which  it  might  have  yielded ;  for  though  the  Milanese
remained  now  almost  defenceless ;  though  the  inhabi-
tants, who  had  long  murmured  under  the  rigour  of  the
imperial  government,  were  ready  to  throw  off  the  yoke;
though  Enguien,  flushed  with  success,  urged  the  king
to  seize  this  happy  opportunity  of  recovering  a  country,
the  acquisition  of  which  had  been  long  his  favourite
object;  yet,  as  the  emperor  and  king  of  England  were
preparing  to  break  in  upon  the  opposite  frontier  of
France  with  numerous  armies,  it  became  necessary
to  sacrifice  all  thoughts  of  conquest  to  the  public
safety,  and  to  recall  twelve  thousand  of  Enguien's
best  troops  to  be  employed  in  defence  of  the  king-
dom. Enguien's  subsequent  operations  were,  of  con-
sequence, so  languid  and  inconsiderable,  that  the  re-
duction of  Carignan,  and  some  other  towns  in  Pied-
mont, was  all  that  he  gained  by  his  great  victory  at
Cerisoles.d

Opera-  The  emperor,  as  usual,  was  late  in  taking  the
th^Low  field,  but  he  appeared,  towards  the  beginning
Countries.  of  Junej  at  the  head  of  an  army  more  numerous
and  better  appointed  than  any  which  he  had  hitherto
led  against  France.  It  amounted  almost  to  fifty  thou-
sand men ;  and  part  of  it  having  reduced  Luxembourg
and  some  other  towns  in  the  Netherlands,  before  he
himself  joined  it,  he  now  marched  with  the  whole  to-
wards the  frontiers  of  Champagne.  Charles,

June.  ,.  ,  .

according  to  his  agreement  with  the  king  of

*  Bellay,  438,  &c.

1544.]  BOOK VII.  31

England,  ought  to  have  advanced  directly  towards
Paris;  and  the  Dauphin,  who  commanded  the  only
army  to  which  Francis  trusted  for  the  security  of  his
dominions  in  that  quarter,  was  in  no  condition  to  op-
pose him.  But  the  success  with  which  the  French  had
defended  Provence  in  the  year  1536,  had  taught  them
the  most  effectual  method  of  distressing  an  invading
enemy.  Champagne,  a  country  abounding  more^  in
vines  than  corn,  was  incapable  of  maintaining  a  great
army;  and,  before  the  emperor's  approach,  whatever
could  be  of  any  use  to  his  troops  had  been  carried  off
or  destroyed.  This  rendered  it  necessary  for  him  to  be
master  of  some  places  of  strength,  in  order  to  secure
the  convoys,  on  which  alone  he  now  perceived  that  he
must  depend  for  subsistence;  and  he  found  the  frontier
towns  so  ill  provided  for  defence,  that  he  hoped  it
would  not  be  a  work  either  of  much  time  or  difficulty
to  reduce  them.  Accordingly  Ligny  and  Commercy,
which  he  first  attacked,  surrendered  after  a  short  re-
Theem-  sistance.  He  then  invested  St.  Disier,  which,
Peror  though  it  commanded  an  important  pass  on  the

in»ests ,/^  , .

St.  Disier.  Marne,  was  destitute  01  every  thing  necessary
for  sustaining  a  siege.  But  the  count  de  San-
cerre  and  M.  de  la  Lande,  who  had  acquired  such  re-
putation by  the  defence  of  Landrecy,  generously  threw
themselves  into  the  town,  and  undertook  to  hold  it  out
to  the  last  extremity.  The  emperor  soon  found  how
capable  they  were  of  making  good  their  promise,  and  *
that  he  could  not  expect  to  take  the  town  without  be-
sieging it  in  form.  This  accordingly  he  undertook;
and  as  it  was  his  nature  never  to  abandon  any  enter-
prise in  which  he  had  once  engaged,  he  persisted  in  it
with  an  inconsiderate  obstinacy.

Henry  The  king  of  England's  preparations  for  the
-  campaign  were  complete  long  before  the  em-
peror's;  but  as  he  did  not  choose,  on  the  one
hand,  to  encounter  alone  the  whole  power  of  France,

32  CHARLES V.  [1544.

and  was  unwilling,  on  the  other,  that  his  troops  should
remain  inactive,  he  took  that  opportunity  of  chastising
the  Scots,  by  sending  his  fleet,  together  with  a  consi-
derable part  of  his  infantry,  under  the  earl  of  Hertford,
to  invade  their  country.  Hertford  executed  his  com-
mission with  vigour,  plundered  and  burned  Edinburgh
and  Leith,  laid  waste  the  adjacent  country,  and  re-
embarked  his  men  with  such  dispatch  that  they

July  14. . .  .  .  r  /

joined  their  sovereign  soon  alter  his  landing  in
France. d  When  Henry  arrived  in  that  kingdom,  he
found  the  emperor  engaged  in  the  siege  of  St.  Disier ;
an  ambassador,  however,  whom  he  sent  to  congratulate
the  English  monarch  on  his  safe  arrival  on  the  conti-
nent, solicited  him  to  march,  in  terms  of  the  treaty,  di-
rectly to  Paris.  But  Charles  had  set  his  ally  such  an
ill  example  of  fulfilling  the  conditions  of  their  confede-
racy with  exactness,  that  Henry,  observing  him  employ
his  time  and  forces  in  taking  towns  for  his  own  behoof,
saw  no  reason  why  he  should  not  attempt  the  reduc-
tion of  some  places  that  lay  conveniently  for  himself.
Without  paying  any  regard  to  the  emperor's  remon-
strances, he  immediately  invested  Boulogne,  and  com-
manded the  duke  of  Norfolk  to  press  the  siege  of  Mont-
reuil,  which  had  been  begun  before  his  arrival,  by  a
body  of  Flemings,  in  conjunction  with  some  English
troops.  While  Charles  and  Henry  shewed  such  atten-
tion each  to  his  own  interest,  they  both  neglected  the
common  cause.  Instead  of  the  union  and  confidence
requisite  towards  conducting  the  great  plan  that  they
had  formed,  they  early  discovered  a  mutual  jealousy  of
each  other,  which,  by  degrees,  begot  distrust,  and  ended
in  open  hatred.6

Gallant ^  ^s  time  Francis  had,  with  unwearied  in-
defence  of  dustry,  drawn  together  an  army,  capable,  as  well

St.  Disier. -  V  , J' r  „  , 3

trom  the  number  as  trom  the  valour  01  the  troops,
of  making  head  against  the  enemy.  But  the  dauphin,

*  Hist.  Scotland,  i.  88.  •  Herbert.

1544.]  BOOK VII.  33

who  still  acted  as  general,  prudently  declining  a  battle,
the  loss  of  which  would  have  endangered  the  kingdom,
satisfied  himself  with  harassing  the  emperor  with  his
light  troops,  cutting  off  his  convoys,  and  laying  waste
the  country  around  him.  Though  extremely  distressed
by  these  operations,  Charles  still  pressed  the  siege  of
St.  Disier,  which  Sancerre  defended  with  astonishing
fortitude  and  conduct.  He  stood  repeated  assaults,  re-
pulsing the  enemy  in  them  all ;  and  undismayed  even
by  the  death  of  his  brave  associate  De  la  Lande,  who
was  killed  by  a  cannon-ball,  he  continued  to  shew  the
same  bold  countenance  and  obstinate  resolution.  At
the  end  of  five  weeks,  he  was  still  in  a  condition  to  hold
out  some  time  longer,  when  an  artifice  of  Granvelle's  in-
duced him  to  surrender.  That  crafty  politician,  having
intercepted  the  key  to  the  cipher  which  the  duke  of
Guise  used  in  communicating  intelligence  to  Sancerre,
forged  a  letter  in  his  name,  authorizing  Sancerre  to  ca-
pitulate, as  the  king,  though  highly  satisfied  with  his
behaviour,  thought  it  imprudent  to  hazard  a  battle  for
his  relief.  This  letter  he  conveyed  into  the  town  in  a
manner  which  could  raise  no  suspicion,  and  the  gover-
nor fell  into  the  snare.  Even  then,  he  obtained  such
honourable  conditions  as  his  gallant  defence  merited,
and  among  others,  a  cessation  of  hostilities  for  eight
days,  at  the  expiration  of  which  he  bound  himself  to
open  the  gates,  if  Francis,  during  that  time,  did  not  at-
tack the  imperial  army,  and  throw  fresh  troops  into  the
town/  Thus  Sancerre,  by  detaining  the  emperor  so
long  before  an  inconsiderable  place,  afforded  his  sove-
reign full  time  to  assemble  all  his  forces,  and  what
rarely  falls  to  the  lot  of  an  officer  in  such  an  inferior
command,  acquired  the  glory  of  having  saved  his
country.

Aug.  1 7. As  soon  as St.Disier  surrendered,  the  emperor
peruke- advanced  into  the  heart  of  Champagne,  but  San-

f  Brantorae,  torn.  vi.  489.
VOL.  V.  D

34  CHARLES  V.  [1644.

netrates  ceiTe's  obstinate  resistance  had  damped  his  san-
beartof  guine  hopes  of  penetrating  to  Paris,  and  led  him
France,  seriously  to  reflect  on  what  he  might  expect  be-
fore towns  of  greater  strength,  and  defended  by  more
numerous  garrisons.  At  the  same  time,  the  procuring
subsistence  for  his  army  was  attended  with  great  dif-
ficulty, which  increased  in  proportion  as  he  withdrew
farther  from  his  own  frontier.  He  had  lost  a  great
number  of  his  best  troops  in  the  siege  of  St.  Disier,  and
many  fell  daily  in  the  skirmishes,  which  it  was  not  in
his  power  to  avoid,  though  they  wasted  his  army  insen-
sibly, without  leading  to  any  decisive  action.  The
season  advanced  apace,  and  he  had  not  yet  the  com-
mand either  of  a  sufficient  extent  of  territory,  or  of  any
such  considerable  town  as  rendered  it  safe  to  winter  in
the  enemy's  country.  Great  arrears,  too,  were  now
due  to  his  soldiers,  who  were  upon  the  point  of  muti-
nying for  their  pay,  while  he  knew  not  from  what  funds
to  satisfy  them.  All  these  considerations  induced  him
to  listen  to  the  overtures  of  peace,  which  a  Spanish  Do-
minican, the  confessor  of  his  sister  the  queen  of  France,
had  secretly  made  to  his  confessor,  a  monk  of  the  same
order.  In  consequence  of  this,  plenipotentiaries  were
named  on  both  sides,  and  began  their  conferences  in
Chausse,  a  small  village  near  Chalons.  At  the  same
time,  Charles,  either  from  a  desire  of  making  one  great
final  effort  against  France,  or  merely  to  gain  a  pretext
for  deserting  his  ally,  and  concluding  a  separate  peace*
sent  an  ambassador  formally  to  require  Henry,  accord-
ing to  the  stipulation  in  their  treaty,  to  advance  towards
Paris.  While  he  expected  a  return  from  him,  and
waited  the  issue  of  the  conferences  at  Chausse,  he  con-
tinued to  march  forward,  though  in  the  utmost  distress
from  scarcity  of  provisions.  But,  at  last,  by  a  fortunate
motion  on  his  part,  or  through  some  neglect  or  treachery
on  that  of  the  French,  he  surprised  first  Esperney,  and
then  Chateau  Thierry,  in  both  which  were  considerable

1544.]  BOOK  VII  35

magazines.  No  sooner  was  it  known  that  these  towns,
the  latter  of  which  is  not  two  days'  march  from  Paris,
were  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  than  that  great  capital,
defenceless,  and  susceptible  of  any  violent  alarm  in
proportion  to  its  greatness,  was  filled  with  consterna-
tion. The  inhabitants,  as  if  the  emperor  had  been  al-
ready at  their  gates,  fled  in  the  wildest  confusion  and
despair,  many  sending  their  wives  and  children  down
the  Seine  to  Rouen,  others  to  Orleans,  and  the  towns
upon  the  Loire.  Francis  himself,  more  afflicted  with
this  than  with  any  other  event  during  his  reign,  and
sensible  as  well  of  the  triumph  that  his  rival  would  enjoy
in  insulting  his  capital,  as  of  the  danger  to  which  the
kingdom  was  exposed,  could  not  refrain  from  crying
out,  in  the  first  emotion  of  his  surprise  and  sorrow,
"  How  dear,  O  my  God,  do  I  pay  for  this  crown,  which
I  thought  thou  hadst  granted  me  freely  !"g  But  reco-
vering, in  a  moment,  from  this  sudden  sally  of  peevish-
ness and  impatience,  he  devoutly  added,  "  Thy  will,
however,  be  done ;"  and  proceeded  to  issue  the  neces-
sary orders  for  opposing  the  enemy  with  his  usual  ac-
tivity and  presence  of  mind.  The  dauphin  detached
eight  thousand  men  to  Paris,  which  revived  the  courage
of  the  affrighted  citizens ;  he  threw  a  strong  garrison
into  Meaux,  and  by  a  forced  march  got  into  Ferte,  be-
tween the  Imperialists  and  the  capital.
Obliged  to  Upon  this,  the  emperor,  who  began  again  to
retire.  fee}  the  want  of  provisions,  perceiving  that  the
dauphin  still  prudently  declined  a  battle,  and  not  daring
to  attack  his  camp  with  forces  so  much  shattered  and
reduced  by  hard  service,  turned  suddenly  to  the  right,
and  began  to  fall  back  towards  Soissons.  Having,
about  this  time,  received  Henry's  answer,  whereby  he
refused  to  abandon  the  sieges  of  Boulogne  and  Mont-
reuil,  of  both  which  he  expected  every  moment  to  get

i  Brantome,  torn.  vi.  381.
D  2

36  CHARLES V.  [1544.

possession,  he  thought  himself  absolved  from  all  obli-
gations of  adhering  to  the  treaty  with  him,  and  at  full
liberty  to  consult  his  own  interest  in  what  manner  so-
ever he  pleased.  He  consented,  therefore,  to  renew  the
conference,  which  the  surprise  of  Esperney  had  broken
Peace  off.  To  conclude  a  peace  between  two  princes,
hhTand  one  of  whom  greatly  desired,  and  the  other
Included  greatly  needed  it,  did  not  require  a  long  nego-
at  Crespy.  tiation.  It  was  signed  at  Crespy,  a  small  town
near  Meaux,  on  the  18th  of  September.  The  chief  ar-
ticles of  it  were, — That  all  the  conquests  which  either
party  had  made  since  the  truce  of  Nice  shall  be  re-
stored ;  that  the  emperor  shall  give  in  marriage  to  the
duke  of  Orleans,  either  his  own  eldest  daughter,  or  the
second  daughter  of  his  brother  Ferdinand  ;  that  if  he
chose  to  bestow  on  him  his  own  daughter,  he  shall
settle  on  her  all  the  provinces  of  the  Low  Countries,  to
be  erected  into  an  independent  state,  which  shall  de-
scend to  the  male  issue  of  the  marriage  ;  that  if  he  de-
termined to  give  him  his  niece,  he  shall,  with  her,  grant
him  the  investiture  of  Milan  and  its  dependencies ;  that
he  shall,  within  four  months,  declare  which  of  these
two  princesses  he  had  pitched  upon,  and  fulfil  the  re-
spective conditions  upon  the  consummation  of  the  mar-
riage, which  shall  take  place  within  a  year  from  the
date  of  the  treaty  ;  that  as  soon  as  the  duke  of  Orleans
is  put  in  possession  either  of  the  Low  Countries  or  of
Milan,  Francis  shall  restore  to  the  duke  of  Savoy  all
that  he  now  possesses  of  his  territories,  except  Pignerol
and  Montmilian ;  that  Francis  shall  renounce  all  pre-
tensions to  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  or  to  the  sovereignty
of  Flanders  and  Artois,  and  Charles  shall  give  up  his
claim  to  the  duchy  of  Burgundy  and  country  of  Cha-
rolois;  that  Francis  shall  give  no  aid  to  the  exiled  king
of  Navarre ;  that  both  monarchs  shall  join  in  making
war  upon  the  Turks,  towards  which  the  king  shall  fur-

1544.]  BOOK VII.  37

nish,  when  required  by  the  emperor  and  empire,  six
hundred  men  at  arms  and  ten  thousand  foot.11
Motives  of  Besides  the  immediate  motives  to  this  peace,
concluding  arising  from  the  distress  of  his  army  through
want  of  provisions ;  from  the  difficulty  of  retreat-
ing out  of  France,  and  the  impossibility  of  securing
winter-quarters  there ;  the  emperor  was  influenced  by
other  considerations,  more  distant,  indeed,  but  not  less
weighty.  The  pope  was  offended  to  a  great  degree,
as  well  at  his  concessions  to  the  Protestants  in  the  late
diet,  as  at  his  consenting  to  call  a  council,  and  to  admit
of  public  disputations  in  Germany,  with  a  view  of  de-
termining the  doctrines  in  controversy.  Paul  consider-
ing both  these  steps  as  sacrilegious  encroachments  on
the  jurisdiction  as  well  as  privileges  of  the  holy  see,
had  addressed  to  the  emperor  a  remonstrance  rather
than  a  letter  on  this  subject,  written  with  such  acrimony
of  language,  and  in  a  style  of  such .  high  authority,  as
discovered  more  of  an  intention  to  draw  on  a  quarrel
than  of  a  desire  to  reclaim  him.  This  ill  humour  was
not  a  little  inflamed  by  the  emperor's  league  with  Henry
of  England,  which  being  contracted  with  an  heretic,
excommunicated  by  the  apostolic  see,  appeared  to  the
pope  a  profane  alliance,  and  was  not  less  dreaded  by
him  than  that  of  Francis  with  Solyman.  Paul's  son
and  grandson,  highly  incensed  at  the  emperor  for  having
refused  to  gratify  them  with  regard  to  the  alienation
of  Parma  and  Placentia,  contributed  by  their  sugges-
tions to  sour  and  disgust  him  still  more.  To  all  which
was  added  the  powerful  operation  of  the  flattery  and
promises  which  Francis  incessantly  employed  to  gain
him.  Though  from  his  desire  of  maintaining  a  neu-
trality, the  pope  had  hitherto  suppressed  his  own  re-
sentment, had  eluded  the  artifices  of  his  own  family,
and  resisted  the  solicitations  of  the  French  king,  it  was

h  Recueil  des  Traitez,  torn.  i.  227, Belius  de  Causis  Pacis  Crepiac.  in  Actis
Erudit. Lips.  1763.

38  CHARLES  V.  [1544.

not  safe  to  rely  much  on  the  steadiness  of  a  man  whom
his  passions,  his  friends,  and  his  interest  combined  to
shake.  The  union  of  the  pope  with  France,  Charles
well  knew,  would  instantly  expose  his  dominions  in
Italy  to  be  attacked.  The  Venetians,  he  foresaw,  would
probably  follow  the  example  of  a  pontiff,  who  was  con-
sidered as  a  model  of  political  wisdom  among  the  Ita-
lians ;  and  thus,  at  a  juncture  when  he  felt  himself
hardly  equal  to  the  burden  of  the  present  war,  he  would
be  overwhelmed  with  the  weight  of  a  new  confederacy
against  him.1  At  the  same  time,  the  Turks,  almost  un^
resisted,  made  such  progress  in  Hungary,  reducing  town
after  town,  that  they  approached  near  to  the  confines  of
the  Austrian  provinces.k  Above  all  these,  the  extraor-
dinary progress  of  the  Protestant  doctrines  in  Germany,
and  the  dangerous  combination  into  which  the  princes
of  that  profession  had  entered,  called  for  his  immediate
attention.  Almost  one  half  of  Germany  had  revolted
from  the  established  church ;  the  fidelity  of  the  rest  was
much  shaken  ;  the  nobility  of  Austria  had  demanded  of
Ferdinand  the  free  exercise  of  religion ;[  the  Bohemians,
among  whom  some  seeds  of  the  doctrines  of  Huss  still
remained,  openly  favoured  the  new  opinions ;  the  arch-
bishop of  Cologne,  with  a  zeal  which  is  seldom  found
among  ecclesiastics,  had  begun  the  reformation  of  his
diocese ;  nor  was  it  possible,  unless  some  timely  and
effectual  check  were  given  to  the  spirit  of  innovation,
to  foresee  where  it  would  end.  He  himself  had  been
a  witness,  in  the  late  diet,  to  the  peremptory  and  deci-
sive tone  which  the  Protestants  had  now  assumed.  He
had  seen  how,  from  confidence  in  their  number  and
union,  they  had  forgotten  the  humble  style  of  their  first
petitions,  and  had  grown  to  such  boldness  as  openly  to
despise  the  pope,  and  to  shew  no  great  reverence  for
the  imperial  dignity  itself.  If,  therefore,  he  wished  to

*  F.  Paul,  100. Pallavic.  163.  k  Istuanlmffii  Hist.  Hung.  177.

1  Sleid,  285.

1544.]  BOOK  VII.  39

maintain  either  the  ancient  religion  or  his  own  autho-
rity, and  would  not  choose  to  dwindle  into  a  mere  no-
minal head  of  the  empire,  some  vigorous  and  speedy
effort  was  requisite  on  his  part,  which  could  not  be
made  during  a  war  that  required  the  greatest  exertion
of  his  strength  against  a  foreign  and  powerful  enemy.
Such  being  the  emperor's  inducements  to  peace,  he
had  the  address  to  frame  the  treaty  of  Crespy  so  as  to
promote  all  the  ends  which  he  had  in  view.  By  coming
to  an  agreement  with  Francis,  he  took  from  the  pope
all  prospects  of  advantage  in  courting  the  friendship  of
that  monarch  in  preference  to  his.  By  the  proviso  with
regard  to  a  war  with  the  Turks,  he  not  only  deprived
Solyman  of  a  powerful  ally,  but  turned  the  arms  of  that
ally  against  him.  By  a  private  article,  not  inserted  in
the  treaty,  that  it  might  not  raise  any  unseasonable
alarm,  he  agreed  with  Francis  that  both  should  exert
all  their  influence  and  power  in  order  to  procure  a  ge-
neral council,  to  assert  its  authority,  and  to  exterminate
the  Protestant  heresy  out  of  their  dominions.  This  cut
off  all  chance  of  assistance  which  the  confederates  of
Smalkalde  might  expect  from  the  French  king  ;m  and
lest  their  solicitations,  or  his  jealousy  of  an  ancient
rival  should  hereafter  tempt  Francis  to  forget  this  en-
gagement, he  left  him  embarrassed  with  a  war  against
England,  which  would  put  it  out  of  his  power  to  take
any  considerable  part  in  the  affairs  of  Germany.
War  con-  Henry,  possessed  at  all  times  with  a  high
tween  *~  idea  of  his  own  power  and  importance,  felt,  in
and'&i  *ke  most  sensible  manner,  the  neglect  with  which
land.  the  emperor  had  treated  him  in  concluding
a  separate  peace.  But  the  situation  of  his  affairs  was
such  as  somewhat  alleviated  the  mortification  which
this  occasioned.  For  though  he  was  obliged  to
recall  the  duke  of  Norfolk  from  the  siege  of
Montreuil,  because  the  Flemish  troops  received  orders

™  Seek.  lib.  iii.  496.

40  CHARLES V.  [1544.

to  retire,  Boulogne  had  surrendered  before  the  nego-
tiations at  Crespy  were  brought  to  an  issue.  While
elated  with  vanity  on  account  of  this  conquest,  and  in-
flamed with  indignation  against  the  emperor,  the  am-
bassadors whom  Francis  sent  to  make  overtures  of
peace,  found  him  too  arrogant  to  grant  what  was  mo-
derate or  equitable.  His  demands  were  indeed  extra-
vagant, and  made  in  the  tone  of  a  conqueror;  that
Francis  should  renounce  his  alliance  with  Scotland,
and  not  only  pay  up  the  arrears  of  former  debts,  but
reimburse  the  money  which  Henry  had  expended  in
the  present  war.  Francis,  though  sincerely  desirous  of
peace,  and  willing  to  yield  a  great  deal  in  order  to  at-
tain it,  being  now  free  from  the  pressure  of  the  imperial
arms,  rejected  these  ignominious  propositions  with  dis-
dain ;  and  Henry  departing  for  England,  hostilities
continued  between  the  two  nations."
The  dau  ^e  treaty  °f  peace,  how  acceptable  soever
issa-  to  the  people  of  France,  whom  it  delivered  from

UM  peace  the  dread  of  an  enemy  who  had  penetrated  into
of  Crespy.  ^g  hear|;  of  the  kingdom,  was  loudly  complained
of  by  the  dauphin.  He  considered  it  as  a  manifest
proof  of  the  king  his  father's  extraordinary  partiality
towards  his  younger  brother,  now  duke  of  Orleans,  and
complained  that,  from  his  eagerness  to  gain  an  esta-
blishment for  a  favourite  son,  he  had  sacrificed  the  ho-
nour of  the  kingdom,  and  renounced  the  most  ancient
as  well  as  valuable  rights  of  the  crown.  But  as  he
durst  not  venture  to  offend  the  king  by  refusing  to  ra-
tify it,  though  extremely  desirous  at  the  same  time  of
securing  to  himself  the  privilege  of  reclaiming  what  was
now  alienated  so  much  to  his  detriment,  he  secretly
protested,  in  presence  of  some  of  his  adherents,  against
the  whole  transaction  ;  and  declared  whatever  he
should  be  obliged  to  do  in  order  to  confirm  it,  null  in
itself,  and  void  of  all  obligation.  The  parliament  of

n  Mem.  de  Ribier,  torn.  i.  p.  572. Herbert,  244.

1544.]  BOOK VII.  41

Thoulouse,  probably  by  the  instigation  of  his  partisans,
did  the  same.0  But  Francis,  highly  pleased  as  well
with  having  delivered  his  subjects  from  the  miseries  of
an  invasion,  as  with  the  prospect  of  acquiring  an  inde-
pendent settlement  for  his  son  at  no  greater  price  than
that  of  renouncing  conquests  to  which  he  had  no  just
claim  ;  titles  which  had  brought  so  much  expense  and
so  many  disasters  upon  the  nation ;  and  rights  grown
obsolete  and  of  no  value ;  ratified  the  treaty  with  great
joy.  Charles,  within  the  time  prescribed  by  the  treaty,
declared  his  intention  of  giving  Ferdinand's  daughter
in  marriage  to  the  duke  of  Orleans,  together  with  the
duchy  of  Milan  as  her  dowry .p  Every  circumstance
seemed  to  promise  the  continuance  of  peace.  The  em-
peror, cruelly  afflicted  with  the  gout,  appeared  to  be  in
no  condition  to  undertake  any  enterprise  where  great
activity  was  requisite,  or  much  fatigue  to  be  endured.
He  himself  felt  this,  or  wished  at  least  that  it  should  be
believed  ;  and  being  so  much  disabled  by  this  excru-
ciating distemper,  when  a  French  ambassador  followed
him  to  Brussels,  in  order  to  be  present  at  his  ratifica-
tion of  the  treaty  of  peace,  that  it  was  with  the  utmost
difficulty  that  he  signed  his  name,  he  observed,  that
there  was  no  great  danger  of  his  violating  these  arti-
cles, as  a  hand  that  could  hardly  hold  a  pen  was  little
able  to  brandish  a  lance.

The  em-  The  violence  of  his  disease  confined  the  em-
peror  several  months  in  Brussels,  and  was  the
aPParent  cause  of  putting  off  the  execution  of
Germany,  the  great  scheme  which  he  had  formed  in  order
to  humble  the  Protestant  party  in  Germany.  But  there
were  other  reasons  for  this  delay.  For,  however  pre-
valent the  motives  were  which  determined  him  to  un-
dertake this  enterprise,  the  nature  of  that  great  body
which  he  was  about  to  attack,  as  well  as  the  situation
of  his  own  affairs,  made  it  necessary  to  deliberate  long,

0  Recueil  des  Traitez,  torn.  ii.  235.  238.  P  Ibid.  torn.  ii.  238.

42  CHARLES  V.  [1544.

to  proceed  with  caution,  and  not  too  suddenly  to  throw
aside  the  veil  under  which  he  had  hitherto  concealed
his  real  sentiments  and  schemes.  He  was  sensible  that
the  Protestants,  conscious  of  their  own  strength,  but
under  continual  apprehensions  of  his  designs,  had  all
the  boldness  of  a  powerful  confederacy,  joined  to  the
jealousy  of  a  feeble  faction ;  and  were  no  less  quick-
sighted  to  discern  the  first  appearance  of  danger,  than
ready  to  take  arms  in  order  to  repel  it.  At  the  same
time,  he  still  continued  involved  in  a  Turkish  war ;  and
though  in  order  to  deliver  himself  from  this  encum-
brance, he  had  determined  to  send  an  envoy  to  the
Porte  with  most  advantageous  and  even  submissive
overtures  of  peace,  the  resolutions  of  that  haughty  court
were  so  uncertain,  that  before  these  were  known,  it
would  have  been  highly  imprudent  to  have  kindled  the
flames  of  civil  war  in  his  own  dominions.
The  pope  Upon  this  account,  he  appeared  dissatisfied
summons  a  with  a  bull  issued  by  the  pope  immediately  after
council  to  the  peace  of  Crespy,  summoning  the  council
Trent?  to  assemble  at  Trent  early  next  spring,  and  ex-
Nov.  19.  hc-rting  all  Christian  princes  to  embrace  the
opportunity  that  the  present  happy  interval  of  tran-
quillity afforded  them,  of  suppressing  those  j  heresies
which  threatened  to  subvert  whatever  was  sacred  or
venerable  among  Christians.  But  after  such  a  slight
expression  of  dislike,  as  was  necessary  in  order  to  cover
his  designs,  he  determined  to  countenance  the  council,
which  might  become  no  inconsiderable  instrument  to-
wards accomplishing  his  projects,  and  therefore  not  only
appointed  ambassadors  to  appear  there  in  his  name,
but  ordered  the  ecclesiastics  in  his  dominions  to  attend
at  the  time  prefixed.11

1545.  Such  were  the  emperor's  views,  when  the
Wotms,  imperial  diet,  after  several  prorogations,  was
March  24.  opened  at  Worms.  The  Protestants,  who  en-

<J  F.  Paul,  104.

1545.]  BOOK VII.  43

joyed  the  free  exercise  of  their  religion  by  a  very  pre-
carious tenure,  having  no  other  security  for  it  than  the
recess  of  the  last  diet,  which  was  to  continue  in  force
only  until  the  meeting  of  a  council,  wished  earnestly
to  establish  that  important  privilege  upon  some  firmer
basis,  and  to  hold  it  by  a  perpetual  not  a  temporary
title.  But  instead  of  offering  them  any  additional
security,  Ferdinand  opened  the  diet  with  observing,
that  there  were  two  points,  which  chiefly  required  con-
sideration, the  prosecution  of  the  war  against  the  Turks,
and  the  state  of  religion ;  that  the  former  was  the  most
urgent,  as  Solyman,  after  conquering  the  greatest  part
of  Hungary,  was  now  ready  to  fall  upon  the  Austrian
provinces;  that  the  emperor,  who,  from  the  beginning
of  his  reign,  had  neglected  no  opportunity  of  annoying
this  formidable  enemy,  and  with  the  hazard  of  his  own
person  had  resisted  his  attacks,  being  animated  still
with  the  same  zeal,  had  now  consented  to  stop  short  in
the  career  of  his  success  against  France,  that,  in  con-
junction with  his  ancient  rival,  he  might  turn  his  arms
with  greater  vigour  against  the  common  adversary  of
the  Christian  faith  ;  that  it  became  all  the  members  of
the  empire  to  second  those  pious  endeavours  of  its  head;
that,  therefore,  they  ought,  without  delay,  to  vote  him
such  effectual  aid,  as  not  only  their  duty  but  their  in-
terest called  upon  them  to  furnish ;  that  the  controver-
sies about  religion  were  so  intricate,  and  of  such  diffi-
cult discussion,  as  to  give  no  hope  of  its  being  possi-
ble to  bring  them  at  present  to  any  final  issue ;  that
Ferdinand  by  perseverance  and  repeated  solicitations,  the
Germans  to  emperor  had  at  length  prevailed  on  the  pope
ledTthe  *°  ca^  a  council>  f°r  which  they  had  so  often
council,  wished  and  petitioned ;  that  the  time  appointed
for  its  meeting  was  now  come,  and  both  parties  ought
to  wait  for  its  decrees,  and  submit  to  them  as  the  de-
cisions of  the  universal  church.

The  Popish  members  of  the  diet  received  this  decla-

44  CHARLES $.  [1545.

ration  with  great  applause,  and  signified  their  entire
acquiescence  in  every  particular  which  it  contained.
The  Protestants  expressed  great  surprise  at  propositions,
which  were  so  manifestly  repugnant  to  the  recess  of
the  former  diet ;  they  insisted  that  the  questions  with
regard  to  religion,  as  first  in  dignity  and  importance,
ought  to  come  first  under  deliberation ;  that,  alarming
as  the  progress  of  the  Turks  was  to  all  Germany,  the
securing  the  free  exercise  of  their  religion  touched  them
still  more  nearly,  nor  could  they  prosecute  a  foreign
war  with  spirit,  while  solicitous  and  uncertain  about
their  domestic  tranquillity ;  that  if  the  latter  were  once
rendered  firm  and  permanent,  they  would  concur  with
their  countrymen  in  pushing  the  former,  and  yield  to
none  of  them  in  activity  or  zeal.  But  if  the  danger
from  the  Turkish  arms  was  indeed  so  imminent,  as  not
to  admit  of  such  a  delay  as  would  be  occasioned  by  an
immediate  examination  of  the  controverted  points  in
religion,  they  required  that  a  diet  should  be  instantly
appointed,  to  which  the  final  settlement  of  their  reli-
gious disputes  should  be  referred ;  and  that  in  the  mean
time  the  decree  of  the  former  diet  concerning  religion
should  be  explained  in  a  point  which  they  deemed
essential.  By  the  recess  of  Spires  it  was  provided,  that
they  should  enjoy  unmolested  the  public  exercise  of
their  religion,  until  the  meeting  of  a  legal  council ;  but
as  the  pope  had  now  called  a  council,  to  which  Ferdi-
nand had  required  them  to  submit,  they  began  to  sus-
pect that  their  adversaries  might  take  advantage  of  an
ambiguity  in  the  terms  of  the  recess,  and  pretending
that  the  event  therein  mentioned  had  now  taken  place,
might  pronounce  them  to  be  no  longer  entitled  to  the
same  indulgence.  In  order  to  guard  against  this  in-
terpretation, they  renewed  their  former  remonstrances
against  a  council  called  to  meet  without  the  bounds
of  the  empire,  summoned  by  the  pope's  authority,  and
in  which  he  assumed  the  right  of  presiding;  and  de-

1545.]  BOOK VII.  45

dared  that,  notwithstanding  the  convocation  of  any
such  illegal  assembly,  they  still  held  the  recess  of  the
late  diet  to  be  in  full  force.

At  other  junctures,  when  the  emperor  thought
arrives  at  it  of  advantage  to  soothe  and  gain  the  Protes-
tants, he  had  devised  expedients  for  giving
them  satisfaction  with  regard  to  demands  seemingly
more  extravagant;  but  his  views  at  present  being  very
different,  Ferdinand,  by  his  command,  adhered  inflexi-
bly to  his  first  propositions,  and  would  make  no  con-
cessions which  had  the  most  remote  tendency  to  throw
discredit  on  the  council,  or  to  weaken  its  authority.
The  Protestants,  on  their  part,  were  no  less  inflexible  ;
and  after  much  time  spent  in  fruitless  endeavours  to
convince  each  other,  they  came  to  no  agreement.  Nor
did  the  presence  of  the  emperor,  who  upon  his
recovery  arrived  at  Worms,  contribute  in  any
degree  to  render  the  Protestants  more  compliant.  Fully
convinced  that  they  were  maintaining  the  cause  of  God
and  of  truth,  they  shewed  themselves  superior  to  the
allurements  of  interest,  or  the  suggestions  of  fear  ;  and
in  proportion  as  the  emperor  redoubled  his  solicitations,
or  discovered  his  designs,  their  boldness  seems  to  have
TheProtes-  increased.  At  last  they  openly  declared,  that
"  would  not  even  deign  to  vindicate  their

il
connexion tenets  in  presence  of  a  council,  assembled  not  to

•with  the  -  _  ,  iii

council  of  examine,  but  to  condemn  them;  and  that  they
would  pay  no  regard  to  an  assembly  held  under
the  influence  of  a  pope,  who  had  already  precluded  him-
self from  all  title  to  act  as  a  judge,  by  his  having  stigma-
tized their  opinions  with  the  name  of  heresy,  and  de-
nounced against  them  the  heaviest  censures,  which,  in
the  plenitude  of  his  usurped  power,  he  could  inflict/
Conduct  of  While  the  Protestants,  with  such  union  as
Maunceof  weu  as  firmness,  rejected  all  intercourse  with

Saxony  in  ' J

this  diet, the  council,  and  refused  their  assent  to  the  im-

r  Sleid.  343,  &c. Seek.  iii.  543,  &c. Thuan.  Histor.  lib.  ii.  p.  56.

46  CHARLES V.  [1545.

perial  demands  in  respect  to  the  Turkish  war,  Maurice
of  Saxony  alone  shewed  an  inclination  to  gratify  the
emperor  with  regard  to  both.  Though  he  professed
an  inviolable  regard  for  the  Protestant  religion,  he  as-
sumed an  appearance  of  moderation  peculiar  to  himself,
by  which  he  confirmed  the  favourable  sentiments  which
the  emperor  already  entertained  of  him,  and  gradually
paved  the  way  for  executing  the  ambitious  designs
which  always  occupied  his  active  and  enterprising
mind.s  His  example,  however,  had  little  influence  upon
such  as  agreed  with  him  in  their  religious  opinions ;
and  Charles  perceived  that  he  could  not  hope  either  to
procure  present  aid  from  the  Protestants  against  the
Turks,  or  to  quiet  their  fears  and  jealousies  on  account
of  their  religion.  But,  as  his  schemes  were  not  yet
ripe  for  execution,  nor  his  preparations  so  far  advanced
that  he  could  force  the  compliance  of  the  Protestants,
or  punish  their  obstinacy,  he  artfully  concealed  his  own
intentions.  That  he  might  augment  their  security,  he
appointed  a  diet  to  be  held  at  Ratisbon  early

August4. rr  .  .

next  year,  in  order  to  adjust  what  was  now  lett
undetermined;  and  previous  to  it,  he  agreed  that  a
certain  number  of  divines  of  each  party  should  meet,
in  order  to  confer  upon  the  points  in  dispute.*
The  Pro-  But)  how  far  soever  this  appearance  of  a  de-
testants  sire  to  maintain  the  present  tranquillity  might
suspect  the  have  imposed  upon  the  Protestants,  the  em-
peror was  incapable  of  such  uniform  and  tho-
rough dissimulation,  as  to  hide  altogether  from  their
view  the  dangerous  designs  which  he  was  meditating
against  them.  Herman  count  de  Wied,  archbishop  and
elector  of  Cologne,  a  prelate  conspicuous  for  his  virtue
and  primitive  simplicity  of  manners,  though  not  more
distinguished  for  learning  than  the  other  descendants
of  noble  families,  who  in  that  age  possessed  most  of
the  great  benefices  in  Germany,  having  become  a  pro-

•  Seek.  Hi.  571.  «•  Sleid.  351.

1545.]  BOOK VII.  47

selyte  to  the  doctrines  of  the  reformers,  had  begun  in
the  year  1543,  with  the  assistance  of  Melancthon  and
Bucer,  to  abolish  the  ancient  superstition  in  his  diocese,
and  to  introduce  in  its  place  the  rites  established  among
the  Protestants.  But  the  canons  of  his  cathedral,  who
were  not  possessed  with  the  same  spirit  of  innovation,
and  who  foresaw  how  fatal  the  levelling  genius  of  the
new  sect  would  prove  to  their  dignity  and  wealth,  op-
posed, from  the  beginning,  this  unprecedented  enter-
prise of  their  archbishop,  with  all  the  zeal  flowing  from
reverence  for  old  institutions,  heightened  by  concern
for  their  own  interest.  This  opposition,  which  the
archbishop  considered  only  as  a  new  argument  to  de-
monstrate the  necessity  of  a  reformation,  neither  shook
his  resolution,  nor  slackened  his  ardour  in  prosecuting
his  plan.  The  canons,  perceiving  all  their  endeavours
to  check  his  career  to  be  ineffectual,  solemnly  protested
against  his  proceedings,  and  appealed  for  redress  to  the
pope  and  emperor,  the  former  as  his  ecclesiastical,  the
latter  as  his  civil  superior.  This  appeal  being  laid  be-
fore the  emperor,  during  his  residence  in  Worms,  he
took  the  canons  of  Cologne  under  his  immediate  pro-
tection ;  enjoined  them  to  proceed  with  rigour  against
all  who  revolted  from  the  established  church ;  prohi-
bited the  archbishop  to  make  any  innovation  in  his
diocese ;  and  summoned  him  to  appear  at  Brussels
within  thirty  days,  to  answer  the  accusations  which
should  be  preferred  against  him."

To  this  clear  evidence  of  his  hostile  intentions  against
the  Protestant  party,  Charles  added  other  proofs  still
more  explicit.  In  his  hereditary  dominions  of  the  Low
Countries,  he  persecuted  all  who  were  suspected  of
Lutheranism  with  unrelenting  rigour.  As  soon  as  he
arrived  at  Worms,  he  silenced  the  Protestant  preachers
in  that  city.  He  allowed  an  Italian  monk  to  inveigh
against  the  Lutherans  from  the  pulpit  of  his  chapel,

«  Sleid.  310.  340  351. Seek.  Hi.  443.  553.

48  CHARLES V.  [1545.

and  to  call  upon  him,  as  he  regarded  the  favour  of  God,
to  exterminate  that  pestilent  heresy.  He  dispatched
the  embassy,  which  has  been  already  mentioned,  to
Constantinople,  with  overtures  of  peace,  that  he  might
be  free  from  any  apprehensions  of  danger  or  interrup-
tion from  that  quarter.  Nor  did  any  of  these  steps,  or
their  dangerous  tendency,  escape  the  jealous  observa-
tion of  the  Protestants,  or  fail  to  alarm  their  fears,  and
to  excite  their  solicitude  for  the  safety  of  their  sect.
Death  of  Meanwhile,  Charles's  good  fortune,  which
the  duke  predominated  on  all  occasions  over  that  of  his
rival  Francis,  extricated  him  out  of  a  difficulty,
from  which,  with  all  his  sagacity  and  address,  he  would
have  found  itno  easy  matter  to  have  disentangled  himself.
Just  about  the  time  when  the  duke  of  Orleans  should
have  received  Ferdinand's  daughter  in  marriage,
and  together  with  her  the  possession  of  the  Milanese,
he  died  of  a  malignant  fever.  By  this  event,  the  em-
peror was  freed  from  the  necessity  of  giving  up  a  valu-
able province  into  the  hands  of  an  enemy,  or  from  the
indecency  of  violating  a  recent  and  solemn  engagement,
which  must  have  occasioned  an  immediate  rupture  with
France.  He  affected,  however,  to  express  great  sorrow
for  the  untimely  death  of  a  young  prince,  who  was  to
have  been  so  nearly  allied  to  him;  but  he  carefully
avoided  entering  into  any  fresh  discussions  concerning
the  Milanese;  and  would  not  listen  to  a  proposal  which
came  from  Francis,  of  new- modelling  the  treaty  of
Crespy,  so  as  to  make  him  some  reparation  for  the  ad-
vantages which  he  had  lost  by  the  demise  of  his  son.
In  the  more  active  and  vigorous  part  of  Francis's  reign,
a  declaration  of  war  would  have  been  the  certain  and
instantaneous  consequence  of  such  a  flat  refusal  to  com-
ply with  a  demand  seemingly  so  equitable ;  but  the  de-
clining state  of  his  own  health,  the  exhausted  condition
of  his  kingdom,  together  with  the  burden  of  the  war
against  England,  obliged  him,  at  present,  to  dissemble

1545.]  BOOK VII.  49

his  resentment,  and  to  put  off  thoughts  of  revenge  to
some  other  juncture.  In  consequence  of  this  event,
the  unfortunate  duke  of  Savoy  lost  all  hope  of  obtain-
ing the  restitution  of  his  territories;  and  the  rights  or
claims  relinquished  by  the  treaty  of  Crespy,  returned
in  full  force  to  the  crown  of  France,  to  serve  as  pretexts
for  future  wars.*

The  pope Upon  the  first  intelligence  of  the  duke  of  Or-
duchiesof  leans's  death,  the  confederates  of  Smalkalde
pEnt™d  flattered  themselves  that  the  essential  alterations
to  his  son.  which  appeared  to  be  unavoidable  consequences
of  it,  could  hardly  fail  of  producing  a  rupture,  which
would  prove  the  means  of  their  safety. But  they  were
not  more  disappointed  with  regard  to  this,  than  in  their
expectations  from  an  event  which  seemed  to  be  the
certain  prelude  of  a  quarrel  between  the  emperor  and
the  pope. When  Paul,  whose  passion  for  aggrandizing
his  family  increased  as  he  advanced  in  years,  and  as  he
saw  the  dignity  and  power  which  they  derived  imme-
diately from  him  becoming  more  precarious,  found  that
he  could  not  bring  Charles  to  approve  of  his  ambitious
schemes,  he  ventured  to  grant  his  son  Peter  Lewis  the
investiture  of  Parma  and  Placentia,  though  at  the  risk
of  incurring  the  displeasure  of  the  emperor. At  a  time
when  a  great  part  of  Europe  inveighed  openly  against
the  corrupt  manners  and  exorbitant  power  of  ecclesias-
tics, and  when  a  council  was  summoned  to  reform  the
disorders  in  the  church,  this  indecent  grant  of  such  a
principality,  to  a  son,  of  whose  illegitimate  birth  the
pope  ought  to  have  been  ashamed,  and  whose  licentious
morals  all  good  men  detested,  gave  general  offence.
Some  cardinals  in  the  imperial  interest  remonstrated
against  such  an  unbecoming  alienation  of  the  patrimony
of  the  church;  the  Spanish  ambassador  would  not  be
present  at  the  solemnity  of  his  infeofment;  and  upon
pretext  that  these  cities  were  part  of  the  Milanese  state,

*  Belcarii  Comment.  769. Paruta,  Hist.  Venet.  iv.  p.  177,
VOL.  V.  E

50  CHARLES V.  [1545.

the  emperor  peremptorily  refused  to  confirm  the  deed
of  investiture.  But  both  the  emperor  and  pope  being
intent  upon  one  common  object  in  Germany,  they  sacri-
ficed their  particular  passions  to  that  public  cause,  and
suppressed  the  emotions  of  jealousy  or  resentment  which
were  rising  on  this  occasion,  that  they  might  jointly
pursue  what  each  deemed  to  be  of  greater  importance/
Henr  of  About  this  time  the  peace  of  Germany  was
Brunswick  disturbed  by  a  violent  but  short  irruption  of
war  in  Henry  duke  of  Brunswick.  This  prince,  though
iany>  still  stripped  of  his  dominions,  which  the  em-
peror held  in  sequestration,  until  his  differences  with
the  confederates  of  Smalkalde  should  be  adjusted,  pos-
sessed however  so  much  credit  in  Germany,  that  he
undertook  to  raise  for  the  French  king  a  considerable
body  of  troops  to  be  employed  in  the  war  against  Eng-
land. The  money  stipulated  for  this  purpose  was
duly  advanced  by  Francis;  the  troops  were  levied;  but
Henry,  instead  of  leading  them  towards  France,  sud-
denly entered  his  own  dominions  at  their  head,  in  hopes
of  recovering  possession  of  them  before  any  army  could
be  assembled  to  oppose  him.  The  confederates  were
not  more  surprised  at  this  unexpected  attack,  than  the
king  of  France  was  astonished  at  a  mean  thievish  fraud,
so  unbecoming  the  character  of  a  prince.  But  the  land-
grave of  Hesse,  with  incredible  expedition,  collected  as
many  men  as  put  a  stop  to  the  progress  of  Henry's  un-
disciplined forces,  and  being  joined  by  his  son-in-law,
Maurice,  and  by  some  troops  belonging  to  the  elector
of  Saxony,  he  gained  such  advantages  over  Henry,  who
was  rash  and  bold  in  forming  his  schemes,  but  feeble
and  undetermined  in  executing  them,  as  obliged  him  to
disband  his  army,  and  to  surrender  himself,  together
with  his  eldest  son,  prisoners  at  discretion.  He  was
kept  in  close  confinement,  until  a  new  reverse  of  affairs
procured  him  liberty.2

y  Paruta,  Hist.  Venet.  iv.  178. Pullavic.  180.  *  Sleid.  352. Seek.  iii.  567.

1545.]  BOOK VII.  51

There-  As  this  defeat  of  Henry's  wild  enterprise
oTSe^Pa-  a^ded  new  reputation  to  the  arms  of  the  Pro-
latinate.  testants,  the  establishment  of  the  Protestant
religion  in  the  Palatinate  brought  a  great  accession  of
strength  to  their  party.  Frederic,  who  succeeded  his
brother  Lewis  in  that  electorate,  had  long  been  suspected
of  a  secret  propensity  to  the  doctrines  of  the  reformers,
which,  upon  his  accession  to  the  principality,  he  openly
manifested.  But  as  he  expected  that  something  effec-
tual towards  a  general  and  legal  establishment  of  reli-
gion, would  be  the  fruit  of  so  many  diets,  conferences,
and  negotiations,  he  did  not,  at  first,  attempt  any  public
1546  innovation  in  his  dominions.  Finding  all  these
Jan.  10.  issue  in  nothing,  he  thought  himself  called,  at
length,  to  countenance  by  his  authority  the  system
which  he  approved  of,  and  to  gratify  the  wishes  of  his
subjects,  who,  by  their  intercourse  with  the  Protestant
states,  had  almost  universally  imbibed  their  opinions.
As  the  warmth  and  impetuosity  which  accompanied
the  spirit  of  reformation  in  its  first  efforts,  had  some-
what abated,  this  change  was  made  with  great  order
and  regularity ;  the  ancient  rites  were  abolished,  and
new  forms  introduced,  without  any  acts  of  violence  or
symptom  of  discontent.  Though  Frederic  adopted  the
religious  system  of  the  Protestants,  he  imitated  the  ex-
ample of  Maurice,  and  did  not  accede  to  the  league  of
Smalkalde.a

Thecoun-  A  few  weeks  before  this  revolution  in  the
Sfe^at111"  Palatinate,  the  general  council  was  opened  with
Trent.  the  accustomed  solemnities  at  Trent.  The  eyes
of  the  Catholic  states  were  turned  with  much  expecta^
tion  towards  an  assembly,  which  all  had  considered  as
capable  of  applying  an  effectual  remedy  for  the  disor-
ders of  the  church  when  they  first  broke  out,  though
many  were  afraid  that  it  was  now  too  late  to  hope  fat
great  benefit  from  it,  when  the  malady,  by  being  suf-r

»  Sleid.  556. Seek.  1.  iii.  616.

52  CHARLES V.  [1546.

fered  to  increase,  during  twenty-eight  years,  had  be-
come inveterate,  and  grown  to  such  extreme  violence.
The  pope,  by  his  last  bull  of  convocation,  had  appointed
the  first  meeting  to  be  held  in  March.  But  his  views
and  those  of  the  emperor  were  so  different,  that  almost
the  whole  year  was  spent  in  negotiations.  Charles,
who  foresaw  that  the  rigorous  decrees  of  the  council
against  the  Protestants  would  soon  drive  them,  in  self-
defence  as  well  as  from  resentment,  to  some  desperate
extreme,  laboured  to  put  off  its  meeting  until  his  war-
like preparations  were  so  far  advanced,  that  he  might
be  in  a  condition  to  second  its  decisions  by  the  force  of
his  arms.  The  pope,  who  had  early  sent  to  Trent  the
legates  who  were  to  preside  in  his  name,  knowing  to
what  contempt  it  would  expose  his  authority,  and  what
suspicions  it  would  beget  of  his  intentions,  if  the  fathers
of  the  council  should  remain  in  a  state  of  inactivity,
when  the  church  was  in  such  danger  as  to  require  their
immediate  and  vigorous  interposition,  insisted  either
upon  translating  the  council  to  some  city  in  Italy,  or
upon  suspending  altogether  its  proceedings  at  that
juncture,  or  upon  authorizing  it  to  begin  its  delibera-
tions immediately.  The  emperor  rejected  the  two
former  expedients  as  equally  offensive  to  the  Germans
of  every  denomination ;  but  finding  it  impossible  to
elude  the  latter,  he  proposed  that  the  council  should
begin  with  reforming  the  disorders  in  the  church,  be-
fore it  proceeded  to  examine  or  define  articles  of  faith.
This  was  the  very  thing  which  the  court  of  Rome
dreaded  most,  and  which  had  prompted  it  to  employ
so  many  artifices  in  order  to  prevent  the  meeting  of
such  a  dangerous  judicatory.  Paul,  though  more
compliant  than  some  of  his  predecessors  with  regard  to
calling  a  council,  was  no  less  jealous  than  they  had
been  of  its  jurisdiction,  and  saw  what  matter  of  triumph
such  a  method  of  proceeding  would  afford  the  heretics.
He  apprehended  consequences  not  only  humbling  but

1546.]  BOOK VII.  53

fatal  to  the  papal  see,  if  the  council  came  to  consider
an  inquest  into  abuses  as  their  only  business  ;  or  if  in-
ferior prelates  were  allowed  to  gratify  their  own  envy
and  peevishness,  by  prescribing  rules  to  those  who
were  exalted  above  them  in  dignity  and  power.  With-
out listening,  therefore,  to  this  insidious  proposal  of
the  emperor,  he  instructed  his  legates  to  open  the
council.  ,.

The  first  session  was  spent  in  matters  of  form.

Jan.  18.  t*.

its  pro-  In  a  subsequent  one,  it  was  agreed  that  the
framing  a  confession  of  faith,  wherein  should
be  contained  all  the  articles  which  the  church  required
its  members  to  believe,  ought  to  be  the  first  and  prin-
cipal business  of  the  council;  but  that,  at  the  same
time,  due  attention  should  be  given  to  what  was  ne-
cessary towards  the  reformation  of  manners  and  disci-
pline. From  this  first  symptom  of  the  spirit  with  which
the  council  was  animated,  from  the  high  tone  of  autho-
rity which  the  legates  who  presided  in  it  assumed,  and
from  the  implicit  deference  with  which  most  of  the
members  followed  their  directions,  the  Protestants  con-
jectured with  ease  what  decisions  they  might  expect.
It  astonished  them,  however,  to  see  forty  prelates  (for
no  greater  number  were  yet  assembled)  assume  autho-
rity as  representatives  of  the  universal  church,  and
proceed  to  determine  the  most  important  points  of  doc-
trine in  its  name.  Sensible  of  this  indecency,  as  well
as  of  the  ridicule  with  which  it  might  be  attended,  the
council  advanced  slowly  in  its  deliberations,  and  all  its
proceedings  were  for  some  time  languishing  and  feeble.b
As  soon  as  the  confederates  of  Smalkalde  received  in-
formation of  the  opening  of  the  council,  they  published
a  long  manifesto,  containing  a  renewal  of  their  protest
against  its  meeting,  together  with  the  reasons  which
induced  them  to  decline  its  jurisdiction.0  The  pope
and  emperor,  on  their  part,  were  so  little  solicitous  to

b  F.  Paul,  120,  &c. Pallavic.  p.  180,  &c.  c  Seek.  I.  iii.  602,  &c.

54  CHARLES  V.  [1546.

quicken  or  add  vigour  to  its  operations,  as  plainly  dis-
covered that  some  object  of  greater  importance  occu-
pied and  interested  them.

Apprehen-  The  Protestants  were  not  inattentive  or  un-
thTpro-  concerned  spectators  of  the  motions  of  the  sove-
testants.  reign  pontiff  and  of  Charles,  and  they  entertained
every  day  more  violent  suspicions  of  their  intentions,  in
consequence  of  intelligence  received  from  different
quarters  of  the  machinations  carrying  on  against  them.
The  king  of  England  informed  them,  that  the  emperor,
having  long  resolved  to  exterminate  their  opinions,
Would  not  fail  to  employ  this  interval  of  tranquillity
which  he  now  enjoyed,  as  the  most  favourable  juncture
for  carrying  his  design  into  execution.  The  merchants
of  Augsburg,  which  was  at  that  time  a  city  of  extensive
trade,  received  advice,  by  means  of  their  correspondents
in  Italy,  among  whom  were  some  who  secretly  favoured
the  Protestant  cause,d  that  a  dangerous  confederacy
against  it  was  forming  between  the  pope  and  emperor.
In  confirmation  of  this,  they  heard  from  the  Low  Coun-
tries that  Charles  had  issued  orders,  though  with  every
precaution  which  could  keep  the  measure  concealed,
for  raising  troops  both  there  and  in  other  parts  of  his
dominions.  Such  a  variety  of  information,  corrobo-
rating all  that  their  own  jealousy  or  observation  led
them  to  apprehend,  left  the  Protestants  little  reason  to
doubt  of  the  emperor's  hostile  intentions.  Under  this
Their  den-  impression,  the  deputies  of  the  confederates  of
berations.  Smalkalde  assembled  at  Francfort,  and  by  com-
municating their  intelligence  and  sentiments  to  each
other,  reciprocally  heightened  their  sense  of  the  impend-
ing danger.  But  their  union  was  not  such  as  their
situation  required,  or  the  preparations  of  their  enemies
rendered  necessary.  Their  league  had  now  subsisted
ten  years.  Among  so  many  members,  whose  territories
were  intermingled  with  each  other,  and  who,  according

rt  Seek,  1.  iii.  579.

1546.]  BOOK VII.  55

to  the  custom  of  Germany,  had  created  an  infinite  va-
riety of  mutual  rights  and  claims  by  intermarriages,
alliances,  and  contracts  of  different  kinds,  subjects  of
jealousy  and  discord  had  unavoidably  arisen. Some  of
the  confederates,  being  connected  with  the  duke  of
Brunswick,  were  highly  disgusted  with  the  landgrave,
on  account  of  the  rigour  with  which  he  had  treated  that
rash  and  unfortunate  prince. Others  taxed  the  elector
of  Saxony  and  landgrave,  the  heads  of  the  league,  with
having  involved  the  members  in  unnecessary  and  ex-
orbitant expenses  by  their  profuseness  or  want  of  eco-
nomy. The  views,  likewise,  and  temper  of  those  two
princes,  who,  by  their  superior  power  and  authority,
influenced  and  directed  the  whole  body,  being  ex-
tremely different,  rendered  all  its  motions  languid,  at  a
time  when  the  utmost  vigour  and  dispatch  were  requi-
site. The  landgrave,  of  a  violent  and  enterprising  tem-
per, but  not  forgetful,  amidst  his  zeal  for  religion,  of
the  usual  maxims  of  human  policy,  insisted  that,  as  the
danger  which  threatened  them  was  manifest  and  un-
avoidable, they  should  have  recourse  to  the  most  effec-
tual expedient  for  securing  their  own  safety,  by  court-
ing the  protection  of  the  kings  of  France  and  England,
or  by  joining  in  alliance  with  the  Protestant  cantons  of
Switzerland,  from  whom  they  might  expect  such  power-
ful and  present  assistance  as  their  situation  demanded.
The  elector,  on  the  other  hand,  with  the  most  upright
intentions  of  any  prince  in  that  age,  and  with  talents
which  might  have  qualified  him  abundantly  for  the  ad-
ministration of  government  in  any  tranquil  period,  was
possessed  with  such  superstitious  veneration  for  all  the
parts  of  the  Lutheran  system,  and  such  bigoted  attach-
ment to  all  its  tenets,  as  made  him  averse  to  a  union
with  those  who  differed  from  him  in  any  article  of  faith,
and  rendered  him  incapable  of  undertaking  its  defence
in  times  of  difficulty  and  danger. He  seemed  to  think,
that  the  concerns  of  religion  were  to  be  regulated  by

56  CHARLES  V.  [1546.

principles  and  maxims  totally  different  from  those  which
apply  to  the  common  affairs  of  life ;  and  being  swayed
too  much  by  the  opinions  of  Luther,  who  was  not  only
a  stranger  to  the  rules  of  political  conduct,  but  despised
them ;  he  often  discovered  an  uncomplying  spirit,  that
proved  of  the  greatest  detriment  to  the  cause  which  he
wished  to  support. Influenced,  on  this  occasion,  by
the  severe  and  rigid  notions  of  that  reformer,  he  refused
to  enter  into  any  confederacy  with  Francis,  because  he
was  a  persecutor  of  the  truth  ;  or  to  solicit  the  friend-
ship of  Henry,  because  he  was  no  less  impious  and
profane  than  the  pope  himself;  or  even  to  join  in  al-
liance with  the  Swiss,  because  they  differed  from  the
Germans  in  several  essential  articles  of  faith. This
dissension,  about  a  point  of  such  consequence,  pro-
duced its  natural  effects. Each  secretly  censured  and
reproached  the  other. The  landgrave  considered  the
elector  as  fettered  by  narrow  prejudices,  unworthy  of  a
prince  called  to  act  a  chief  part  in  a  scene  of  such  im-
portance. The  elector  suspected  the  landgrave  of  loose
principles  and  ambitious  views,  which  corresponded  ill
with  the  sacred  cause  wherein  they  were  engaged. But
though  the  elector's  scruples  prevented  their  timely
application  for  foreign  aid  ;  and  the  jealousy  or  discon-
tent of  the  other  princes  defeated  a  proposal  for  renew-
ing their  original  confederacy,  the  term  during  which
it  was  to  continue  in  force  being  on  the  point  of  expir-
ing ;  yet  the  sense  of  their  common  danger  induced
them  to  agree  with  regard  to  other  points,  particularly
that  they  would  never  acknowledge  the  assembly  of
Trent  as  a  lawful  council,  nor  suffer  the  archbishop  of
Cologne  to  be  oppressed  on  account  of  the  steps  which
he  had  taken  towards  the  reformation  of  his  diocese.6
Their  ne- The  landgrave,  about  this  time,  desirous  of
penetrating  to  the  bottom  of  the  emperor's  in-
tentions,  wrote  to  Granvelle,  whom  he  knew  to

e  Seek.  I.  iii.  566.  570.  613. SJcid.  355.

1546.]  BOOK  VII.  57

be  thoroughly  acquainted  with  all  his  master's  schemes,
informing  him  of  the  several  particulars  which  raised
the  suspicions  of  the  Protestants,  and  begging  an  ex-
plicit declaration  of  what  they  had  to  fear  or  to  hope.
Granvelle,  in  return,  assured  them,  that  the  intelligence
which  they  had  received  of  the  emperor's  military  pre-
parations was  exaggerated,  and  all  their  suspicions  des-
titute of  foundation  ;  that  though,  in  order  to  guard  his
frontiers  against  any  insult  of  the  French  or  English,
he  had  commanded  a  small  body  of  men  to  be  raised
in  the  Low  Countries,  he  was  as  solicitous  as  ever  to
maintain  tranquillity  in  Germany/

But  the  emperor's  actions  did  not  correspond  with
these  professions  of  his  minister.  For,  instead  of  ap-
pointing men  of  known  moderation  and  a  pacific  tem-
per to  appear  in  defence  of  the  Catholic  doctrines  at
the  conference  which  had  been  agreed  on,  he  made
choice  of  fierce  bigots,  attached  to  their  own  system
with  a  blind  obstinacy,  that  rendered  all  hope  of  recon-
cilement desperate.  Malvenda,  a  Spanish  divine,  who
took  upon  him  the  conduct  of  the  debate  on  the  part
of  the  Catholics,  managed  it  with  all  the  subtle  dex-
terity of  a  scholastic  metaphysician,  more  studious  to
perplex  his  adversaries  than  to  convince  them,  and
more  intent  on  palliating  error  than  on  discovering
truth.  The  Protestants,  filled  with  indignation,  as  well
at  his  sophistry  as  at  some  regulations  which  the  em-
peror endeavoured  to  impose  on  the  disputants,  broke
off  the  conference  abruptly,  being  now  fully  convinced
that,  in  all  his  late  measures,  the  emperor  could  have
no  other  view  than  to  amuse  them,  and  to  gain  time
for  ripening  his  own  schemes.8

f  Sleid.  356.  e  Ibid.  358. Seek.  1.  iii.  620.

THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

OF  THE

EMPEROR  CHARLES  V.

BOOK  VIII.

1546  HILE  appearances  of  danger  daily  increased,

Death  of  and  the  tempest  which  had  been  so  long  a  ga-

Luther" .1 •  J  1.  1 f U- •  11 •*

thermg  was  ready  to  break  forth  in  all  its  vio-
lence against  the  Protestant  church,  Luther  was  saved,
by  a  seasonable  death,  from  feeling  or  beholding  its
destructive  rage.  Having  gone,  though  in  a  declining
state  of  health,  and  during  a  rigorous  season,  to  his
native  city  of  Eysleben,  in  order  to  compose,  by  his

authority,  a  dissension  among;  the  counts  of

Feb.  18. _, r J.  ' .  • i •  i  • i  • a

Mansfield,  he  was  seized  with  a  violent  mtiam-
mation  in  his  stomach,  which,  in  a  few  days,  put  an
end  to  his  life,  in  the  sixty-third  year  of  his  age.  As
he  was  raised  up  by  Providence  to  be  the  author  of  one
of  the  greatest  and  most  interesting  revolutions  recorded
in  history,  there  is  not  any  person,  perhaps,  whose  cha-
racter has  been  drawn  with  such  opposite  colours.  In
his  own  age,  one  party,  struck  with  horror,  and  in-
flamed with  rage,  when  they  saw  with  what  a  daring
hand  he  overturned  every  thing  which  they  held  to  be
sacred,  or  valued  as  beneficial,  imputed  to  him  not
only  all  the  defects  and  vices  of  a  man,  but  the  quali-
ties of  a  demon.  The  other,  warmed  with  the  admira-

1546.]  BOOK VIII.  59

tion  and  gratitude  which  they  thought  he  merited  as
the  restorer  of  light  and  liberty  to  the  Christian  church,
ascribed  to  him  perfections  above  the  condition  of  hu-
manity, and  viewed  all  his  actions  with  a  veneration
bordering  on  that  which  should  be  paid  only  to  those
who  are  guided  by  the  immediate  inspiration  of  Heaven.
His  cha-  I*  *s  n*s  own  conduct,  not  the  undistinguishing
racter.  censure  or  the  exaggerated  praise  of  his  con-
temporaries, that  ought  to  regulate  the  opinions  of  the
present  age  concerning  him.  Zeal  for  what  he  re-
garded as  truth,  undaunted  intrepidity  to  maintain  his
own  system,  abilities,  both  natural  and  acquired,  to  de-
fend his  principles,  and  unwearied  industry  in  propa-
gating them,  are  virtues  which  shine  so  conspicuously
in  every  part  of  his  behaviour,  that  even  his  enemies
must  allow  him  to  have  possessed  them  in  an  eminent
degree.  To  these  may  be  added,  with  equal  justice,
such  purity  and  even  austerity  of  manners,  as  became
one  who  assumed  the  character  of  a  reformer;  such
sanctity  of  life  as  suited  the  doctrine  which  he  deli-
vered ;  and  such  perfect  disinterestedness  as  affords  no
slight  presumption  of  his  sincerity.  Superior  to  all
selfish  considerations,  a  stranger  to  the  elegancies  of
life,  and  despising  its  pleasures,  he  left  the  honours
and  emoluments  of  the  church  to  his  disciples,  remain-
ing satisfied  himself  in  his  original  state  of  professor
in  the  university,  and  pastor  of  the  town  of  Wittem-
berg,  with  the  moderate  appointments  annexed  to  these
offices.  His  extraordinary  qualities  were  allayed  with
no  inconsiderable  mixture  of  human  frailty  and  human
passions.  These,  however,  were  of  such  a  nature,  that
they  cannot  be  imputed  to  malevolence  or  corruption
of  heart,  but  seem  to  have  taken  their  rise  from  the
same  source  with  many  of  his  virtues.  His  mind,  for-
cible and  vehement  in  all  its  operations,  roused  by
great  objects,  or  agitated  by  violent  passions,  broke
out,  on  many  occasions,  with  an  impetuosity  which

60  CHARLESV.  [1546.

astonishes  men  of  feebler  spirits,  or  such  as  are  placed
in  a  more  tranquil  situation.  By  carrying  some  praise-
worthy dispositions  to  excess,  he  bordered  sometimes
on  what  was  culpable,  and  was  often  betrayed  into
actions  which  exposed  him  to  censure.  His  confi-
dence that  his  own  opinions  were  well  founded,  ap-
proached to  arrogance ;  his  courage  in  asserting  them,
to  rashness ;  his  firmness  in  adhering  to  them,  to  ob-
stinacy ;  and  his  zeal  in  confuting  his  adversaries,  to
rage  and  scurrility.  Accustomed  himself  to  consider
every  thing  as  subordinate  to  truth,  he  expected  the
same  deference  for  it  from  other  men;  and  without
making  any  allowances  for  their  timidity  or  prejudices,
he  poured  forth  against  such  as  disappointed  him  in
this  particular,  a  torrent  of  invective  mingled  with  con-
tempt. Regardless  of  any  distinction  of  rank  or  cha-
racter when  his  doctrines  were  attacked,  he  chastised
all  his  adversaries  indiscriminately,  with  the  same
rough  hand ;  neither  the  royal  dignity  of  Henry  VIII.,
nor  the  eminent  learning  and  abilities  of  Erasmus
screened  them  from  the  same  gross  abuse  with  which
he  treated  Tetzel  or  Eccius.

But  these  indecencies  of  which  Luther  was  guilty,
must  not  be  imputed  wholly  to  the  violence  of  his  tem-
per. They  ought  to  be  charged  in  part  on  the  man-
ners of  the  age.  Among  a  rude  people,  unacquainted
with  those  maxims  which,  by  putting  continual  re-
straint on  the  passions  of  individuals,  have  polished
society,  and  rendered  it  agreeable,  disputes  of  every
kind  were  managed  with  heat,  and  strong  emotions
were  uttered  in  their  natural  language,  without  reserve
or  delicacy.  At  the  same  time,  the  works  of  learned
men  were  all  composed  in  Latin,  and  they  were  not
only  authorized,  by  the  example  of  eminent  writers  in
that  language,  to  use  their  antagonists  with  the  most
illiberal  scurrility;  but,  in  a  dead  tongue,  indecencies
of  every  kind  appear  less  shocking  than  in  a  living  Ian-

1546.]  BOOK VIII.  61

guage,  whose  idioms  and  phrases  seem  gross,  because
they  are  familiar.

In  passing  judgment  upon  the  characters  of  men,  we
ought  to  try  them  by  the  principles  and  maxims  of  their
own  age,  not  by  those  of  another.  For,  although  virtue
and  vice  are  at  all  times  the  same,  manners  and  customs
vary  continually.  Some  parts  of  Luther's  behaviour
which  to  us  appear  most  culpable,  gave  no  disgust  to
his  contemporaries.  It  was  even  by  some  of  those
qualities,  which  we  are  now  apt  to  blame,  that  he  was
fitted  for  accomplishing  the  great  work  which  he  under-
took. To  rouse  mankind,  when  sunk  in  ignorance  or
superstition,  and  to  encounter  the  rage  of  bigotry  armed
with  power,  required  the  utmost  vehemence  of  zeal,  as
well  as  a  temper  daring  to  excess.  A  gentle  call  would
neither  have  reached,  nor  have  excited  those  to  whom
it  was  addressed.  A  spirit  more  amiable,  but  less  vi-
gorous than  Luther's  would  have  shrunk  back  from  the
dangers  which  he  braved  and  surmounted.  Towards
the  close  of  Luther's  life,  though  without  any  percep-
tible diminution  of  his  zeal  or  abilities,  the  infirmities
of  his  temper  increased  upon  him,  so  that  he  grew  daily
more  peevish,  more  irascible,  and  more  impatient  of
contradiction.  Having  lived  to  be  a  witness  of  his  own
amazing  success;  to  see  a  great  part  of  Europe  embrace
his  doctrines  ;  and  to  shake  the  foundation  of  the  papal
throne,  before  which  the  mightiest  monarchs  had  trem-
bled, he  discovered,  on  some  occasions,  symptoms  of
vanity  and  self- applause.  He  musthave  been,  indeed,
more  than  man,  if,  upon  contemplating  all  that  he  ac-
tually accomplished,  he  had  never  felt  any  sentiment  of
this  kind  rising  in  his  breast.a

*  A  remarkable  instance  of  this,  as  well  as  of  a  certain  singularity  and  elevation
of  sentiment,  is  found  in  his  last  will.  Though  the  effects  which  he  had  to  bequeath
were  very  inconsiderable,  he  thought  it  necessary  to  make  a  testament,  but  scorned
to  frame  it  with  the  usual  legal  formalities.  "  Notus  sum,"  says  he, "  in  caslo,  in  terra,
et  inferno,  et  auctoritatem  ad  hoc  sufficientem  habeo,  ut  mini  soli  credatur,  cum  Deus
mihi,  hornini  licet  damnabili,  et  miserabili  peccatori,  ex  paterna  misericordia  Evan-
gelium  filii  sui  crediderit,  dederitque  ut  in  eo  verax  et  fidelis  fuerim,  ha  ut  niulti  in

(52  CHARLES V.  [1546.

Some  time  before  his  death  he  felt  his  strength  de-
clining, his  constitution  being  worn  out  by  a  prodigious
multiplicity  of  business,  added  to  the  labour  of  discharg-
ing his  ministerial  function  with  unremitting  diligence,
to  the  fatigue  of  constant  study,  besides  the  composition
of  works  as  voluminous  as  if  he  had  enjoyed  uninter-
rupted leisure  and  retirement.  His  natural  intrepidity
did  not  forsake  him  at  the  approach  of  death ;  his  last
conversation  with  his  friends  was  concerning  the  hap-
piness reserved  for  good  men  in  a  future  life,  of  which
he  spoke  with  the  fervour  and  delight  natural  to  one
who  expected  and  wished  to  enter  soon  upon  the  enjoy-
ment of  it.a  The  account  of  his  death  filled  the  Roman
Catholic  party  with  excessive  as  well  as  indecent  joy,
and  damped  the  spirits  of  all  his  followers;  neither
party  sufficiently  considering  that  his  doctrines  were
now  so  firmly  rooted,  as  to  be  in  a  condition  to  flourish
independent  of  the  hand  which  had  first  planted  them.
His  funeral  was  celebrated  by  order  of  the  elector  of
Saxony  with  extraordinary  pomp.  He  left  several
children  by  his  wife  Catharine  a  Boria,  who  survived
him.  Towards  the  end  of  the  last  century,  there  were
in  Saxony  some  of  his  descendants  in  decent  and  honour-
able stations.6

The  emperor,  meanwhile,  pursued  the  plan
of  dissimulation  with  which  he  had  set  out,  em-

to^us™ Paying  every  art  to  amuse  the  Protestants,  and

Ste^the  to  clu^et  t^e^I>  ^ears  an(^  jealousies.  For  this
Protes-  purpose  he  contrived  to  have  an  interview  with

the  landgrave  of  Hesse,  the  most  active  of  all
the  confederates,  and  the  most  suspicious  of  his  designs.

To  him  he  made  such  warm  professions  of  his

March  28.  „ , .

concern  tor  the  happiness  of  Germany,  and  of

rnundo  illud  per  me  acceperint,  et  roe  pro  Doctore  veritatis  agnovcrint,  spreto  banno
Pap*,  Caesaris,  Kegum,  Principum,  et  sacerdotum,  imo  omnium  Dabinonum  odio.
Quidni,  igitur,  ad  dispositioneru  hanc,  in  re  exigua,  sufficiat,  si  adsit  manus  meae
testiraonium,  et  dici  po«sit,  Hajc  scripsit  D.  Martinus  Luther,  notarius  Dei,  et  testis
Kvangelii  ejus."  Sec.  1.  iii.  p.  651.

•Sled.362. Seek,  lib  iii.  632,  £c.  b  Ibid.  ].  iii.  651

1546.)  BOOK VIII.  63

his  aversion  to  all  violent  measures;  he  denied  in  such
express  terms  his  having  entered  into  any  league,  or
having  begun  any  military  preparations  which  should
give  any  just  cause  of  alarm  to  the  Protestants,  as  seem
to  have  dispelled  all  the  landgrave's  doubts  and  appre-
hensions, and  sent  him  away  fully  satisfied  of  his  pacific
intentions.  This  artifice  was  of  great  advantage,  and
effectually  answered  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  em-
ployed. The  landgrave,  upon  his  leaving  Spires,  where
he  had  been  admitted  to  this  interview,  went  to  Worms,
where  the  Smalkaldic  confederates  were  assembled,  and
gave  them  such  a  flattering  representation  of  the  empe-
ror's favourable  disposition  towards  them,  that  they,  who
were  too  apt,  as  well  from  the  temper  of  the  German
nation,  as  from  the  genius  of  all  great  associations  or
bodies  of  men,  to  be  slow,  and  dilatory,  and  indecisive
in  their  deliberations,  thought  there  was  no  necessity
of  taking  any  immediate  measures  against  danger,  which
appeared  to  be  distant  or  imaginary.0

Such  events,  however,  soon  occurred  as  stag--
Proceed-
ings  of  the  gered  the  credit  which  the  Protestants  had  given

to  tne  emperor's  declarations.  The  council  of
Trent,  though  still  composed  of  a  small  number
of  Italian  and  Spanish  prelates,  without  a  single
deputy  from  many  of  the  kingdoms  which  it  assumed  a
right  of  binding  by  its  decrees,  being  ashamed  of  its
long  inactivity,  proceeded  now  to  settle  articles  of  the
greatest  importance.  Having  begun  with  examining
the  first  and  chief  point  in  controversy  between  the
church  of  Rome  and  the  reformers,  concerning  the  rule
which  should  be  held  as  supreme  and  decisive  in  mat-
ters of  faith,  the  council,  by  its  infallible  authority,  de-
termined,  "  That  the  books  to  which  the  designa-
tion of  Apocryphal  hath  been  given,  are  of  equal
authority  with  those  which  were  received  by  the  Jews
and  primitive  Christians  into  the  sacred  canon;  that

'Sleid.  Hist.  367.  373.

Protes-
tants.

04  CHARLES  V.  [1546.

the  traditions  handed  down  from  the  apostolic  age,  and
preserved  in  the  church,  are  entitled  to  as  much  regard  as
the  doctrines  and  precepts  which  the  inspired  authors
have  committed  to  writing;  that  the  Latin  translation  of
the  Scriptures,  made  or  revised  by  St.  Jerome,  and  known
by  the  name  of  the  Vulgate  translation,  should  be  read
in  churches,  and  appealed  to  in  the  schools  as  authen-
tic and  canonical."  Against  all  who  disclaimed  the
truth  of  these  tenets,  anathemas  were  denounced  in  the
name  and  by  the  authority  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The
decision  of  these  points,  which  undermined  the  main
foundation  of  the  Lutheran  system,  was  a  plain  warning
to  the  Protestants  what  judgment  they  might  expect
when  the  council  should  have  leisure  to  take  into  con-
sideration the  particular  and  subordinate  articles  of  their
creed.d

This  discovery  of  the  council's  readiness  to  condemn
the  opinions  of  the  Protestants  was  soon  followed  by  a
striking  instance  of  the  pope's  resolution  to  punish  such
as  embraced  them.  The  appeal  of  the  canons  of  Cologne
against  their  archbishop  having  been  carried  to  Rome,
Paul  eagerly  seized  on  that  opportunity,  both  of  dis-
playing the  extent  of  his  own  authority,  and  of  teach-
ing the  German  ecclesiastics  the  danger  of  revolting
from  the  established  church.  As  no  person  appeared
in  behalf  of  the  archbishop,  he  was  held  to  be  convicted
of  the  crime  of  heresy,  and  a  papal  bull  was

April  16. .  . .  i

issued,  depriving  him  of  his  ecclesiastical  dig-
nity, inflicting  on  him  the  sentence  of  excommunica-
tion, and  absolving  his  subjects  from  the  oath  of  alle-
giance which  they  had  taken  to  him  as  their  civil  su-
perior. The  countenance  which  he  had  given  to  the
Lutheran  heresy  was  the  only  crime  imputed  to  him,  as
well  as  the  only  reason  assigned  to  justify  the  extra-
ordinary severity  of  this  decree.  The  Protestants  could
hardly  believe  that  Paul,  how  zealous  soever  he  mght

dF.  Paul,  141. Pallav.  206.

1546.]  BOOK VIII.  65

be  to  defend  the  established  system,  or  to  humble  those
who  invaded  it,  would  have  ventured  to  proceed  to
such  extremities  against  a  prince  and  elector  of  the  em-
pire, without  having  previously  secured  such  powerful
protection  as  would  render  his  censure  something  more
than  an  impotent  and  despicable  sally  of  resentment.
They  were,  of  course,  deeply  alarmed  at  this  sentence
against  the  archbishop,  considering  it  as  a  sure  indica-
tion of  the  malevolent  intentions,  not  only  of  the  pope,
but  of  the  emperor,  against  the  whole  party."
Charles  Upon  this  fresh  revival  of  their  fears,  with
about  to  such  violence  as  is  natural  to  men  roused  from

commence  .  .  r> i • i ' •  •

hostilities  a  false  security,  and  conscious  of  their  having
Pro™-  e  been  deceived,  Charles  saw  that  now  it  became

necessary  to  throw  aside  the  mask,  and  to  de-
clare openly  what  part  he  determined  to  act.  By  a  long
series  of  artifices  and  fallacy,  he  had  gained  so  much
time,  that  his  measures,  though  not  altogether  ripe  for
execution,  were  in  great  forwardness.  The  pope,  by
his  proceedings  against  the  elector  of  Cologne,  as  well
as  by  the  decree  of  the  council,  had  precipitated  mat-
ters into  such  a  situation,  as  rendered  a  breach  between
the  emperor  and  the  Protestants  almost  unavoidable.
Charles  had  therefore  no  choice  left  him,  but  either  to
take  part  with  them  in  overturning  what  the  see  of
Rome  had  determined,  or  to  support  the  authority  of

the  church  openly  by  force  of  arms.  Nor  did
tiates  with  the  pope  think  it  enough  to  have  brought  the

emperor  under  a  necessity  of  acting;  he  pressed
him  to  begin  his  operations  immediately,  and  to  carry
them  on  with  such  vigour  as  could  not  fail  of  securing
success.  Transported  by  his  zeal  against  heresy,  Paul
forgot  all  the  prudent  and  cautious  maxims  of  the  papal
see,  with  regard  to  the  danger  of  extending  the  impe-
rial authority  beyond  due  bounds;  and,  in  order  to
crush  the  Lutherans,  he  was  willing  to  contribute  to-

«  Sleid.  354. F.  Paul,  155. Pallavic.  224.
VOL.  V,  F

(J6  CHARLES V.  [1546,

wards  raising  up  a  master  that  might  one  day  prove
formidable  to  himself  as  well  as  to  the  rest  of  Italy.
Concludes  But,  besides  the  certain  expectation  of  assist-
*ittr,"ce  ance  from  the  pope,  Charles  was  now  secure
Soiyman.  from  any  danger  of  interruption  to  his  designs
by  the  Turkish  arms.  His  negotiations  at  the  Porte,
which  he  had  carried  on  with  great  assiduity  since  the
peace  of  Crespy,  were  on  the  point  of  being  terminated
in  such  a  manner  as  he  desired.  Soiyman,  partly  in
compliance  with  the  French  king,  who,  in  order  to
avoid  the  disagreeable  obligation  of  joining  the  empe-
ror against  his  ancient  ally,  laboured  with  great  zeal  to
bring  about  an  accommodation  between  them;  and
partly  from  its  being  necessary  to  turn  his  arms  towards
the  East,  where  the  Persians  threatened  to  invade  his
dominions,  consented  without  difficulty  to  a  truce  for
five  years.  The  chief  article  of  it  was,  that  each  should
retain  possession  of  what  he  now  held  in  Hungary ;  and
Ferdinand,  as  a  sacrifice  to  the  pride  of  the  sultan,  sub-
mitted to  pay  an  annual  tribute  of  fifty  thousand  crowns.6

Gains  ^u*  **  was  uPon  *ne  a^  an(^  concurrence  of

Mawice the  Germans  themselves  that  the  emperor  relied

and  other -11  r>  mi r^

princes  in  with  the  greatest  confidence,  ihe  Germanic
iany'  body,  he  knew,  was  of  such  vast  strength,  as  to
be  invincible  if  it  were  united,  and  that  it  was  only  by
employing  its  own  force  that  he  could  hope  to  subdue
it.  Happily  for  him,  the  union  of  the  several  members
in  this  great  system  was  so  feeble,  the  whole  frame  was
so  loosely  compacted,  and  its  different  parts  tended  so
violently  towards  separation  from  each  other,  that  it
was  almost  impossible  for  it,  on  any  important  emer-
gence, to  join  in  a  general  or  vigorous  effort.  In  the
present  juncture,  the  sources  of  discord  were  as  many,
and  as  various,  as  had  been  known  on  any  occasion.
The  Roman  Catholics,  animated  with  zeal  in  defence
of  their  religion  proportional  to  the  fierceness  with

e  Istuanhaffii  Hist.  Hun.  180. Mem.  de  Ribier,  torn.  1.  582.

1546.]  BOOK  VIII.  67

which  it  had  been  attacked,  were  eager  to  second  any
attempt  to  humble  those  innovators,  who  had  overturned
it  in  many  provinces,  and  endangered  it  in  more.  John
and  Albert  of  Brandenburg,  as  well  as  several  other
princes,  incensed  at  the  haughtiness  and  rigour  with
which  the  duke  of  Brunswick  had  been  treated  by  the
confederates  of  Smalkalde,  were  impatient  to  rescue
him,  and  to  be  revenged  on  them.  Charles  observed
with  satisfaction  the  working  of  those  passions  in  their
minds,  and  counting  on  them  as  sure  auxiliaries  when-
ever he  should  think  it  proper  to  act,  he  found  it,  in
the  mean  time,  more  necessary  to  moderate  than  to  in-
flame their  rage.

Such  was  the  situation  of  affairs,  such  the  dis-

Holds  a

diet  at  cernment  with  which  the  emperor  foresaw  and
provided  for  every  event,  when  the  diet  of  the
empire  met  at  JRatisbon.  Many  of  the  Roman  Catho-
lic members  appeared  there  in  person,  but  most  of  the
confederates  of  Smalkalde,  under  pretence  of  being  un-
able to  bear  the  expense  occasioned  by  the  late  unne-
cessary frequency  of  such  assemblies,  sent  only  depu-
ties. Their  jealousy  of  the  emperor,  together  with  an
apprehension  that  violence  might,  perhaps,  be  employed,
in  order  to  force  their  approbation  of  what  he  should
propose  in  the  diet,  was  the  true  cause  of  their  absence.
The  speech  with  which  the  emperor  opened  the  diet
was  extremely  artful.  After  professing,  in  common  form,
his  regard  for  the  prosperity  of  the  Germanic  body^  and
declaring,  that,  in  order  to  bestow  his  whole  attention
upon  the  reestablishment  of  its  order  and  tranquillity,
he  had  at  present  abandoned  all  other  cares,  rejected
the  most  pressing  solicitations  of  his  other  subjects  to
reside  among  them,  and  postponed  affairs  of  the  greatest
importance;  he  took  notice,  with  some  disapproba-
tion, that  his  disinterested  example  had  not  been  imi-
tated ;  many  members  of  chief  consideration  having  neg-
lected to  attend  an  assembly  to  which  he  had  repaired

F2

08  CHARLES V.  [1546.

with  such  manifest  inconvenience  to  himself.  He  then
mentioned  their  unhappy  dissensions  about  religion;
lamented  the  ill  success  of  his  past  endeavours  to  com-
pose them;  complained  of  the  abrupt  dissolution  of  the
late  conference,  and  craved  their  advice  with  regard  to
the  best  and  most  effectual  method  of  restoring  union
to  the  churches  of  Germany,  together  with  that  happy
agreement  in  articles  of  faith,  which  their  ancestors  had
found  to  be  of  no  less  advantage  to  their  civil  interest,
than  becoming  their  Christian  profession.

By  this  gracious  and  popular  method  of  consulting
the  members  of  the  diet,  rather  than  of  obtruding  upon
them  any  opinion  of  his  own,  besides  the  appearance
of  great  moderation,  and  the  merit  of  paying  much  re-
spect to  their  judgment,  the  emperor  dexterously  avoided
discovering  his  own  sentiments,  and  reserved  to  him-
self, as  his  only  part,  that  of  carrying  into  execution
what  they  should  recommend. Nor  was  he  less  secure
of  such  a  decision  as  he  wished  to  obtain,  by  referring
it  wholly  to  themselves.  The  Roman  Catholic  members,
prompted  by  their  own  zeal,  or  prepared  by  his  intrigues,
joined  immediately  in  representing  that  the  authority
of  the  council  now  met  at  Trent  ought  to  be  supreme
in  all  matters  of  controversy;  that  all  Christians  should
submit  to  its  decrees  as  the  infallible  rule  of  their  faith;
and  therefore  they  besought  him  to  exert  the  power,
with  which  he  was  invested  by  the  Almighty,  in  pro-
tecting that  assembly,  and  in  compelling  the  Protestants
to  acquiesce  in  its  determinations. The  Protestants,  on
the  other  hand,  presented  a  memorial,  in  which,  after
repeating  their  objections  to  the  council  of  Trent,  they
proposed,  as  the  only  effectual  method  of  deciding  the
points  in  dispute,  that  either  a  free  general  council
should  be  assembled  in  Germany,  or  a  national  council
of  the  empire  should  be  called,  or  a  select  number  of
divines  should  be  appointed  out  of  each  party  to  ex-
amine and  define  articles  of  faith. They  mentioned  the

1546.]  BOOK VIII.  69

recesses  of  several  diets  favourable  to  this  proposition,
and  which  had  afforded  them  the  prospect  of  termi-
nating all  their  differences  in  this  amicable  manner;
they  now  conjured  the  emperor  not  to  depart  from  his
former  plan,  and  by  offering  violence  to  their  con-
sciences, to  bring  calamities  upon  Germany,  the  very
thought  of  which  must  fill  every  lover  of  his  country
with  horror.  The  emperor,  receiving  this  paper  with  a
contemptuous  smile,  paid  no  farther  regard  to  it.  Hav-
ing already  taken  his  final  resolution,  and  perceiving
that  nothing  but  force  could  compel  them  to  acquiesce
_  in  it,  he  dispatched  the  cardinal  of  Trent  to

Rome,  in  order  to  conclude  an  alliance  with  the
pope,  the  terms  of  which  were  already  agreed  on ;  he
commanded  a  body  of  troops,  levied  on  purpose  in  the
Low  Countries,  to  advance  towards  Germany ;  he  gave
commissions  to  several  officers  for  raising  men  in  diffe-
rent parts  of  the  empire ;  he  warned  John  and  Albert  of
Brandenburg,  that  now  was  the  proper  time  of  exerting
themselves  in  order  to  rescue  their  ally,  Henry  of  Bruns-
wick, from  captivity/

The  Pro  ^  these  things  could  not  be  transacted  with-
testants  out  the  observation  and  knowledge  of  the  Pro-
testants. The  secret  was  now  in  many  hands;
under  whatever  veil  the  emperor  still  affected  to  con-
ceal his  designs,  his  officers  kept  no  such  mysterious
reserve;  and  his  allies  and  subjects  spoke  out  his  in-
tentions plainly.  Alarmed  with  reports  of  this  kind  from
every  quarter,  as  well  as  with  the  preparations  for  war
which  they  could  not  but  observe,  the  deputies  of  the
confederates  demanded  audience  of  the  emperor,  and,
in  the  name  of  their  masters,  required  to  know  whether
these  military  preparations  were  carried  on  by  his  com-
mand, and  for  what  end,  and  against  what  enemy?  To
a  question  put  in  such  a  tone,  and  at  a  time  when  facts
were  become  too  notorious  to  be  denied,  it  was  neces-

f  Sleid.  374. Seek.  iii.  658.

70  CHARLES V.  [1546.

sary  to  give  an  explicit  answer.  Charles  owned  the
orders  which  he  had  issued ;  and,  professing  his  pur-
pose not  to  molest,  on  account  of  religion,  those  who
should  act  as  dutiful  subjects ;  declared,  that  he  had
nothing  in  view  but  to  maintain  the  rights  and  prero-
gatives of  the  imperial  dignity ;  and,  by  punishing  some
factious  members,  to  preserve  the  ancient  constitution
of  the  empire  from  being  impaired  or  dissolved  by  their
irregular  and  licentious  conduct.  Though  the  emperor
did  not  name  the  persons  whom  he  charged  with  such
high  crimes,  and  destined  to  be  the  objects  of  his  ven-
geance, it  was  obvious  that  he  had  the  elector  of
Saxony  and  landgrave  of  Hesse  in  view.  Their  de-
puties considering  what  he  had  said  as  a  plain  decla-
ration of  his  hostile  intentions,  immediately  retired
from  Ratisbon.g

The  cmpe-  The  cardinal  of  Trent  found  it  no  difficult
ISil  !heaty  matter  to  treat  with  the  P°Pe>  who,  having  at
pop«-  length  brought  the  emperor  to  adopt  that  plan
which  he  had  long  recommended,  assented  with  eager-
ness to  every  article  that  he  proposed.  The  league
was  signed  a  few  days  after  the  cardinal's  ar-

July  26. .  °

rival  at  Rome.  The  pernicious  heresies  which
abounded  in  Germany,  the  obstinacy  of  the  Protestants
in  rejecting  the  holy  council  assembled  at  Trent,  and
the  necessity  of  maintaining  sound  doctrine,  together
with  good  order,  in  the  church,  are  mentioned  as  the
motives  of  this  union  between  the  contracting  parties.
In  order  to  check  the  growth  of  these  evils,  and  to
punish  such  as  had  impiously  contributed  to  spread
them,  the  emperor  having  long,  and  without  success,
made  trial  of  gentler  remedies,  engaged  instantly  to
take  the  field  with  a  sufficient  army,  that  he  might  com-
pel all  who  disowned  the  council,  or  had  apostatized
from  the  religion  of  their  forefathers,  to  return  into  the
bosom  of  the  church,  and  submit  with  due  obedience

*  Sleid.  376.

1546.]  BOOK  VIII.  71

to  the  holy  see.  He  likewise  bound  himself  not  to
conclude  a  peace  with  them  during  six  months  without
the  pope's  consent,  nor  without  assigning  him  his  share
in  any  conquests  which  should  be  made  upon  them;
and  that,  even  after  this  period,  he  should  not  agree  to
any  accommodation  which  might  be  detrimental  to  the
church,  or  to  the  interest  of  religion.  On  his  part,  the
pope  stipulated  to  deposit  a  large  sum  in  the  bank  of
Venice  towards  defraying  the  expense  of  the  war;  to
maintain,  at  his  own  charge,  during  the  space  of  six
months,  twelve  thousand  foot,  and  five  hundred  horse;
to  grant  the  emperor,  for  one  year,  half  of  the  ecclesi-
astical revenues  throughout  Spain;  to  authorize  him,
by  a  bull,  to  alienate  as  much  of  the  lands  belonging
to  religious  houses  in  that  country,  as  would  amount
to  the  sum  of  five  hundred  thousand  crowns;  and  to
employ  not  only  spiritual  censures,  but  military  force,
against  any  prince  who  should  attempt  to  interrupt  or
defeat  the  execution  of  this  treaty.11
Endea-  Notwithstanding  the  explicit  terms  in  which

vours  still the  extirpation  of  heresy  was  declared  to  be

to  conceal  _ A  *

his  inten-  the  object  of  the  war  which  was  to  follow  upon
the  p/otes-  this  treaty,  Charles  still  endeavoured  to  per-
suade the  Germans  that  he  had  no  design  to
abridge  their  religious  liberty,  but  that  he  aimed  only
at  vindicating  his  own  authority,  and  repressing  the
insolence  of  such  as  had  encroached  upon  it.  With
this  view,  he  wrote  circular  letters  in  the  same  strain
with  his  answer  to  the  deputies  at  Ratisbon,  to  most  of
the  free  cities,  and  to  several  of  the  princes  who  had
embraced  the  Protestant  doctrines.  In  these  he  com-
plained loudly,  but  in  general  terms,  of  the  contempt
into  which  the  imperial  dignity  had  fallen,  and  of  the
presumptuous  as  well  as  disorderly  behaviour  of  some
members  of  the  empire.  He  declared,  that  he  now
took  arms,  not  in  a  religious,  but  in  a  civil  quarrel;

h  Sleid.  381. Pallav.  25,5. Du  Mont  Corps  Diplom.  11.

72  CHARLES V.  [1546.

not  to  oppress  any  who  continued  to  behave  as  quiet
and  dutiful  subjects,  but  to  humble  the  arrogance  of
such  as  had  thrown  off  all  sense  of  that  subordination
in  which  they  were  placed  under  him  as  head  of  the
Germanic  body.  Gross  as  this  deception  was,  and
manifest  as  it  might  have  appeared,  to  all  who  con-
sidered the  emperor's  conduct  with  attention,  it  became
necessary  for  him  to  make  trial  of  its  effect;  and  such
was  the  confidence  and  dexterity  with  which  he  em-
ployed it,  that  he  derived  the  most  solid  advantages
from  this  artifice.  If  he  had  avowed  at  once  an  inten-
tion of  overturning  the  Protestant  church,  and  of  re-
ducing all  Germany  under  its  former  state  of  subjection
to  the  papal  see,  none  of  the  cities  or  princes  who  had
embraced  the  new  opinions  could  have  remained  neutral
after  such  a  declaration,  far  less  could  they  have  ven-
tured to  assist  the  emperor  in  such  an  enterprise.
Whereas,  by  concealing  and  even  disclaiming  any  in-
tention of  that  kind,  he  not  only  saved  himself  from  the
danger  of  being  overwhelmed  by  a  general  confederacy
of  all  the  Protestant  states,  but  he  furnished  the  timid
with  an  excuse  for  continuing  inactive,  and  the  design-
ing or  interested  with  a  pretext  for  joining  him  without
exposing  themselves  to  the  infamy  of  abandoning  their
own  principles,  or  taking  part  openly  in  suppressing
them.  At  the  same  time  the  emperor  well  knew,  that
if,  by  their  assistance,  he  were  enabled  to  break  the
power  of  the  elector  of  Saxony  and  the  landgrave,  he
might  afterward  prescribe  what  terms  he  pleased  to
the  feeble  remains  of  a  party  without  union,  and  des-
titute of  leaders,  who  would  then  regret,  too  late,  their
mistaken  confidence  in  him,  and  their  inconsiderate  de-
sertion of  their  associates.

The  pope The  P°pe,  by  a  sudden  and  unforeseen  dis-
disconceru  play  of  his  zeal,  had  well  nigh  disconcerted

his  plan. i  . i  i'ii

this  plan,  which  the  emperor  had  formed  with
so  much  care  and  art. Proud  of  having  been  the

1546.]  BOOK VIII.  73

author  of  such  a  formidable  league  against  the  Lutheran
heresy,  and  happy  in  thinking  that  the  glory  of  extir-
pating it  was  reserved  for  his  pontificate,  he  published
the  articles  of  his  treaty  with  the  emperor,  in  order  to
demonstrate  the  pious  intention  of  their  confederacy,  as
well  as  to  display  his  own  zeal,  which  prompted  him  to
make  such  extraordinary  efforts  for  maintaining  the
faith  in  its  purity.  Not  satisfied  with  this,  he  soon  after
issued  a  bull,  containing  most  liberal  promises  of  in-
dulgence to  all  who  should  engage  in  this  holy  enter-
prise, together  with  warm  exhortations  to  such  as  could
not  bear  a  part  in  it  themselves,  to  increase  the  fervour
of  their  prayers,  and  the  severity  of  their  mortifications,
that  they  might  draw  down  the  blessing  of  Heaven
upon  those  who  undertook  it.1  Nor  was  it  zeal  alone
which  pushed  the  pope  to  make  declarations  so  incon-
sistent with  the  account  which  the  emperor  himself
gave  of  his  motives  for  taking  arms.  He  was  much
scandalized  at  Charles's  dissimulation  in  such  a  cause ;
at  his  seeming  to  be  ashamed  of  owning  his  zeal  for
the  church,  and  at  his  endeavours  to  make  that  pass
for  a  political  contest,  which  he  ought  to  have  gloried
in  as  a  war  that  had  no  other  object  than  the  defence
of  religion.  With  as  much  solicitude,  therefore,  as  the
emperor  laboured  to  disguise  the  purpose  of  the  con-
federacy, did  the  pope  endeavour  to  publish  their  real
plan,  in  order  that  they  might  come  at  once  to  an  open
rupture  with  the  Protestants,  that  all  hopes  of  recon-
cilement might  be  cut  off,  and  that  Charles  might  be
under  fewer  temptations,  and  have  it  less  in  his  power
than  at  present,  to  betray  the  interests  of  the  church  by
any  accommodation  beneficial  to  himself.k

The  emperor,  though  not  a  little  offended  at  the  pope's
indiscretion  or  malice  in  making  this  discovery,  con-
tinued boldly  to  pursue  his  own  plan,  and  to  assert  his
intentions  to  be  no  other  than  what  he  had  originally

1  Du  Mont  Corps  Diplom.  k  F.  Paul,  188. Thuau.  Hist.  i.  61.

74  CHARLES V.  [1546.

avowed.  Several  of  the  Protestant  states,  whom  he  had
previously  gained,  thought  themselves  justified,  in  some
measure,  by  his  declaration,  for  abandoning  their  asso-
ciates, and  even  for  giving  assistance  to  him.
The  pro-  But  these  artifices  did  not  impose  on  the
uITprTtef-  greater  and  sounder  part  of  the  Protestant  con-
tantsfor  federates.  They  clearly  perceived  it  to  be

their  own  *  -,• •  i  i

defence,  against  the  reformed  religion  that  the  emperor
had  taken  arms,  and  that  not  only  the  suppression  of
it,  but  the  extinction  of  the  German  liberties,  would  be
the  certain  consequence  of  his  obtaining  such  an  entire
superiority  as  would  enable  him  to  execute  his  schemes
in  their  full  extent.  They  determined,  therefore,  to
prepare  for  their  own  defence,  and  neither  to  renounce
those  religious  truths,  to  the  knowledge  of  which  they
had  attained  by  means  so  wonderful,  nor  to  abandon
those  civil  rights  which  had  been  transmitted  to  them
by  their  ancestors.  In  order  to  give  the  necessary
directions  for  this  purpose,  their  deputies  met  at  Ulm,
soon  after  their  abrupt  departure  from  Ratisbon.  Their
deliberations  were  now  conducted  with  such  vigour
and  unanimity,  as  the  imminent  danger  which  threat-
ened them  required.  The  contingent  of  troops,  which
each  of  the  confederates  was  to  furnish,  having  been
fixed  by  the  original  treaty  of  union,  orders  were  given
for  bringing  them  immediately  into  the  field.  Being
sensible,  at  last,  that,  through  the  narrow  prejudices  of
some  of  their  members,  and  the  imprudent  security  of
others,  they  had  neglected  too  long  to  strengthen  them-
selves by  foreign  alliances,  they  now  applied  with  great
earnestness  to  the  Venetians  and  Swiss.
They  so-  To  the  Venetians  they  represented  the  empe-

licit  the  > • . . .  r  • ,1

aid  of  the  ror  s  intention  ot  overturning  the  present  system
Venetians.  of  Germany,  and  of  raising  himself  to  absolute
power  in  that  country  by  means  of  foreign  force  fur-
nished by  the  pope ;  they  warned  them  how  fatal  this
event  would  prove  to  the  liberties  of  Italy,  and  that  by

1546.]  BOOK  VIII.  75

suffering  Charles  to  acquire  unlimited  authority  in  the
one  country,  they  would  soon  feel  his  dominion  to  be
no  less  despotic  in  the  other;  they  besought  them,
therefore,  not  to  grant  a  passage  through  their  territo-
ries to  those  troops,  which  ought  to  be  treated  as  com-
mon enemies,  because  by  subduing  Germany  they  pre-
pared chains  for  the  rest  of  Europe.  These  reflections
had  not  escaped  the  sagacity  of  those  wise  republicans.
They  had  communicated  their  sentiments  to  the  pope,
and  had  endeavoured  to  divert  him  from  an  alliance,
which  tended  to  render  irresistible  the  power  of  a  po-
tentate, whose  ambition  he  already  knew  to  be  bound-
less. But  they  had  found  Paul  so  eager  in  the  prosecu-
tion of  his  own  plan,  that  he  disregarded  all  their  re-
monstrances.1 This  attempt  to  alarm  the  pope  having
proved  unsuccessful,  they  declined  doing  any  thing  more
towards  preventing  the'dangers  which  they  foresaw;  and
in  return  to  the  application  from  the  confederates  of
Smalkalde,  they  informed  them,  that  they  could  not
obstruct  the  march  of  the  pope's  troops  through  an
open  country,  but  by  levying  an  army  strong  enough
to  face  them  in  the  field;  and  that  this  would  draw
upon  themselves  the  whole  weight  of  his  as  well  as  of
the  emperor's  indignation.  For  the  same  reason  they
declined  lending  a  sum  of  money,  which  the  elector
of  Saxony  and  landgrave  proposed  to  borrow  of  them,
towards  carrying  on  the  war.m

Of  the  The  demands  of  the  confederates  upon  the
Swiss.  Swiss  were  not  confined  to  the  obstructing  of
the  entrance  of  foreigners  into  Germany ;  they  required
of  them,  as  the  nearest  neighbours  and  closest  allies
of  the  empire,  to  interpose  with  their  wonted  vigour
for  the  preservation  of  its  liberties,  and  not  to  stand  as
inactive  spectators,  while  their  brethren  were  oppressed
and  enslaved.  But  with  whatever  zeal  some  of  the

1  Adriani  Istoria  di  suoi  Tempi,  liv.  v.  p.  332.

m  Sleid.  381. Paruta Istor.  Venet.  toni.  iv.  180. Lambertus  Hortensius  de
Bello  Germanico,  apud  Scardiura,  vol.  ii.  p.  547.

76  CHARLES  V.  [1546.

cantons  might  have  been  disposed  to  act  when  the
cause  of  the  Reformation  was  in  danger,  the  Helvetic
body  was  so  divided  with  regard  to  religion,  as  to
render  it  unsafe  for  the  Protestants  to  take  any  step
without  consulting  their  Catholic  associates;  and  among
them  the  emissaries  of  the  pope  and  emperor  had  such
influence,  that  a  resolution  of  maintaining  an  exact  neu-
trality between  the  contending  parties,  was  the  utmost
which  could  be  procured."

or  Francis  Being  disappointed  in  both  these  applications,
Hen"4  tne  Protestants,  not  long  after,  had  recourse  to
VIIT-  the  kings  of  France  and  England  ;  the  approach
of  danger  either  overcoming  the  elector  of  Saxony's
scruples,  or  obliging  him  to  yield  to  the  importunities
of  his  associates.  The  situation  of  the  two  monarchs
flattered  them  with  hopes  of  success.  Though  hostili-
ties between  them  had  continued  for  some  time  after
the  peace  of  Crespy,  they  became  weary  at  last  of  a
war,  attended  with  no  glory  or  advantage  to  either,
and  had  lately  terminated  all  their  differences  by  a
peace  concluded  at  Campe  near  Ardres.  Francis  having
with  great  difficulty  procured  his  allies,  the  Scots,  to  be
included  in  the  treaty,  in  return  for  that  concession  he
engaged  to  pay  a  great  sum,  which  Henry  demanded
as  due  to  him  on  several  accounts,  and  he  left  Boulogne
in  the  hands  of  the  English,  as  a  pledge  for  his  faithful
performance  of  that  article.  But  though  the  re-esta-
blishment of  peace  seemed  to  leave  the  two  monarchs
at  liberty  to  turn  their  attention  towards  Germany,  so
unfortunate  were  the  Protestants,  that  they  derived  no
immediate  advantage  from  this  circumstance.  Henry
appeared  unwilling  to  enter  into  any  alliance  with  them,
but  on  such  conditions  as  would  render  him  not  only
the  head,  but  the  supreme  director  of  their  league ;  a
pre-eminence  which,  as  the  bonds  of  union  or  interest
between  them  were  but  feeble,  and  as  he  differed  from

.  •  Sleid,  392.

1546.]  BOOK  VIII.  77

them  so  widely  in  his  religious  sentiments,  they  had  no
inclination  to  admit.0  Francis,  more  powerfully  in-
clined by  political  considerations  to  afford  them  assist-
ance, found  his  kingdom  so  much  exhausted  by  a  long
war,  and  was  so  much  afraid  of  irritating  the  pope,  by
entering  into  close  union  with  excommunicated  heretics,
that  he  durst  not  undertake  the  protection  of  the  Smal-
kaldic  league.  By  this  ill-timed  caution,  or  by  a  super-
stitious deference  to  scruples,  to  which  at  other  times
he  was  not  much  addicted,  he  lost  the  most  promising
opportunity  of  mortifying  and  distressing  his  rival,
which  presented  itself  during  his  whole  reign.
Protes-  But,  notwithstanding  their  ill  success  in  their

tants  take negotiations  with  foreign  courts,  the  confede-

the  field  irr-i  i  • i

with  a,  rates  found  no  difficulty  at  home,  in  bringing  a
'rmy'  sufficient  force  into  the  field.  Germany  abound-
ed at  that  time  in  inhabitants ;  the  feudal  institutions,
which  subsisted  in  full  force,  enabled  the  nobles  to  call
out  their  numerous  vassals,  and  to  put  them  in  motion
on  the  shortest  warning ;  the  martial  spirit  of  the  Ger-
mans, not  broken  or  enervated  by  the  introduction  of
commerce  and  arts,  had  acquired  additional  vigour
during  the  continual  wars  in  which  they  had  been  em-
ployed, for  half  a  century,  either  in  the  pay  of  the  em-
perors or  the  kings  of  France.  Upon  every  opportu-
nity of  entering  into  service,  they  were  accustomed  to
run  eagerly  to  arms ;  and  to  every  standard  that  was
erected,  volunteers  flocked  from  all  quarters. p  Zeal
seconded,  on  this  occasion,  their  native  ardour.  Men
on  whom  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation  had  made
that  deep  impression  which  accompanies  truth  when
first  discovered,  prepared  to  maintain  it  with  propor-
tional vigour;  and  among  a  warlike  people,  it  appeared
infamous  to  remain  inactive,  when  the  defence  of  reli-
gion was  the  motive  for  taking  arms.  Accident  com-
bined with  all  these  circumstances  in  facilitating  the

0  Rymer,  xv.  93. Herbert,  258.  P  Seek.  1.  iii.  161.

78  CHARLES V.  [1546.

levy  of  soldiers  among  the  confederates.  A  considerable
number  of  Germans,  in  the  pay  of  France,  being  dis-
missed by  the  king  on  the  prospect  of  peace  with  Eng-
land, joined  in  a  body  the  standard  of  the  Protestants.q
By  such  a  concurrence  of  causes,  they  were  enabled  to
assemble  in  a  few  weeks  an  army  composed  of  seventy
thousand  foot  and  fifteen  thousand  horse,  provided  with
a  train  of  a  hundred  and  twenty  cannon,  eight  hundred
ammunition  waggons,  eight  thousand  beasts  of  burden,
and  six  thousand  pioneers/  This  army,  one  of  the  most
numerous,  and  undoubtedly  the  best  appointed,  of  any
which  had  been  levied  in  Europe  during  that  century,
did  not  require  the  united  effort  of  the  whole  Protestant
body  to  raise  it.  The  elector  of  Saxony,  the  landgrave
of  Hesse,  the  duke  of  Wurternberg,  the  princes  of  Anhalt,
and  the  imperial  cities  of  Ausbourg,  Ulm,  and  Strasburg,
were  the  only  powers  which  contributed  towards  this
great  armament :  the  electors  of  Cologne,  of  Branden-
burg, and  the  count  Palatine,  overawed  by  the  empe-
ror's threats,  or  deceived  by  his  professions,  remained
neuter.  John  marquis  of  Brandenburg  Bareith,  and
Albert  of  Brandenburg  Anspach,  though  both  early  con-
verts to  Lutheranism,  entered  openly  into  the  emperor's
service,  under  pretext  of  having  obtained  his  promise
for  the  security  of  the  Protestant  religion ;  and  Maurice
of  Saxony  soon  followed  their  example.
The  m-  The  number  of  their  troops,  as  well  as  the

equality  of amazing  rapidity  wherewith  they  had  assem-

the  enipe-  ~  J  J

ror's  forces  bled  them,  astonished  the  emperor,  and  filled
him  with  the  most  disquieting  apprehensions.
He  was,  indeed,  in  no  condition  to  resist  such  a  mighty
force.  Shut  up  in  Ratisbon,  a  town  of  no  great  strength,
whose  inhabitants,  being  mostly  Lutherans,  would  have
been  more  ready  to  betray  than  to  assist  him,  with  only
three  thousand  Spanish  foot,  who  had  served  in  Hun-

i  Tliuan.  1.  i.  68.

r  Ibid.  I.  i.  601. Ludovici  ab  Avila  et  Zuniga  Coinnientariorura  de  Bel.  Germ,
lib.  duo.  Antw.  1550.  K'uu.  p.  IS.  a.

1546.]  BOOK  VIII.  79

gary,  and  about  five  thousand  Germans,  who  had  joined
him  from  different  parts  of  the  empire,  he  must  have
been  overwhelmed  by  the  approach  of  such  a  formid-
able army,  which  he  could  not  fight,  nor  could  he  even
hope  to  retreat  from  it  in  safety.  The  pope's  troops,
though  in  full  march  to  his  relief,  had  hardly  reached
the  frontiers  of  Germany ;  the  forces  which  he  ex-
pected from  the  Low  Countries  had  not  yet  begun  to
move,  and  were  even  far  from  being  complete.3  His
situation,  however,  called  for  more  immediate  succour,
nor  did  it  seem  practicable  for  him  to  wait  for  such
distant  auxiliaries,  with  whom  his  junction  was  so
precarious.

They  im-  But  ^  happened  fortunately  for  Charles,  that
prudently  the  confederates  did  not  avail  themselves  of  the

negotiate  i«ii  *»  u • i • '«•  T

instead  of  advantage  which  lay  so  full  in  their  view.  In
civil  wars,  the  first  steps  are  commonly  taken
with  much  timidity  and  hesitation.  Men  are  solicit-
ous at  that  time,  to  put  on  the  semblance  of  moderation
and  equity;  they  strive  to  gain  partisans  by  seeming  to
adhere  strictly  to  known  forms ;  nor  can  they  be  brought,
at  once,  to  violate  those  established  institutions,  which
in  times  of  tranquillity  they  have  been  accustomed  to
reverence ;  hence  their  proceedings  are  often  feeble  or
dilatory,  when  they  ought  to  be  most  vigorous  and  de-
cisive. Influenced  by  those  considerations,  which,  hap-
pily, for  the  peace  of  society,  operate  powerfully  on  the
human  mind,  the  confederates  could  not  think  of  throw-
ing off  that  allegiance  which  they  owed  to  the  head  of
the  empire,  or  of  turning  their  arms  against  him,  with-
out one  solemn  appeal  more  to  his  candour,  and

July  15.

to  the  impartial  judgment  of  their  fellow-sub-
jects. For  this  purpose,  they  addressed  a  letter  to  the
emperor,  and  a  manifesto  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  Ger-
many. The  tenor  of  both  was  the  same.  They  repre-
sented their  own  conduct  with  respect  to  civil  affairs  as

•  Sleid.  389. Avila,  8,  a.

80  CHARLES V.  [1546.

dutiful  and  submissive :  they  mentioned  the  inviolable
union  in  which  they  had  lived  with  the  emperor,  as  well
as  the  many  and  recent  marks  of  his  good-will  and  grati-
tude wherewithal  they  had  been  honoured  ;  they  assert-
ed religion  to  be  the  sole  cause  of  the  violence  which
the  emperor  now  meditated  against  them ;  and  in  proof
of  this  produced  many  arguments  to  convince  those  who
were  so  weak  as  to  be  deceived  by  the  artifice  with
which  he  endeavoured  to  cover  his  real  intentions ;
they  declared  their  own  resolution  to  risk  every  thing
in  maintenance  of  their  religious  rights,  and  foretold
the  dissolution  of  the  German  constitution,  if  the  em-
peror should  finally  prevail  against  them.*
The  em.  Charles,  though  in  such  a  perilous  situation
puU  ^  might  have  inspired  him  with  moderate  sen-
timents,  appeared  as  inflexible  and  haughty  as
if  his  affairs  had  been  in  the  most  prosperous
JuJy  20.  state.  His  only  reply  to  the  address  and  ma-
nifesto of  the  Protestants,  was  to  publish  the  ban  of  the
empire  against  the  elector  of  Saxony  and  landgrave  of
Hesse,  their  leaders,  and  against  all  who  should  dare
to  assist  them.  By  this  sentence,  the  ultimate  and
most  rigorous  one  which  the  German  jurisprudence
has  provided  for  the  punishment  of  traitors,  or  enemies
to  their  country,  they  were  declared  rebels  and  out-
laws, and  deprived  of  every  privilege  which  they  en-
joyed as  members  of  the  Germanic  body ;  their  goods
were  confiscated;  their  subjects  absolved  from  their
oath  of  allegiance  ;  and  it  became  not  only  lawful  but
meritorious  to  invade  their  territories.  The  nobles,
and  free  cities,  who  framed  or  perfected  the  constitu-
tion of  the  German  government,  had  not  been  so  negli-
gent of  their  own  safety  and  privileges  as  to  trust  the
emperor  with  this  formidable  jurisdiction.  The  au-
thority of  a  diet  of  the  empire  ought  to  have  been  in-
terposed before  any  of  its  members  could  be  put  under

«  Slcid,  384.

1546.]  BOOK  VIII.  81

the  ban.  But  Charles  overlooked  that  formality,  well
knowing  that,  if  his  arms  were  crowned  with  success,
there  would  remain  none  who  would  have  either  power
or  courage  to  call  in  question  what  he  had  done."
The  emperor,  however,  did  not  found  his  sentence
against  the  elector  and  landgrave  on  their  revolt  from
the  established  church,  or  their  conduct  with  regard
to  religion ;  he  affected  to  assign  for  it  reasons  purely
civil,  and  those  too  expressed  in  such  general  and  am-
biguous terms,  without  specifying  the  nature  or  cir-
cumstances of  their  guilt,  as  rendered  it  more  like  an
act  of  despotic  power  than  of  a  legal  and  limited  juris-
diction. Nor  was  it  altogether  from  choice,  or  to  con-
ceal his  intentions,  that  Charles  had  recourse  to  the
ambiguity  of  general  expressions ;  but  he  durst  not
mention  too  particularly  the  causes  of  his  sentence,  as
every  action  which  he  could  have  charged  upon  the
elector  and  landgrave  as  a  crime,  might  have  been  em-
ployed with  equal  justice  to  condemn  many  of  the  Pro-
testants whom  he  still  pretended  to  consider  as  faithful
subjects,  and  whom  it  would  have  been  extremely  im-
prudent to  alarm  or  disgust.

The  confederates,  now  perceiving  all  hopes  of  ac-
commodation to  be  at  an  end,  had  only  to  choose  whe-
ther they  would  submit  without  reserve  to  the  empe-
ror's will,  or  proceed  to  open  hostilities.  They  were
not  destitute  either  of  public  spirit,  or  of  resolution  to
They  de-  make  the  proper  choice.  A  few  days  after  the
agaTnst"  ban  of  the  empire  was  published,  they,  accord-
Charles.  jng  to  the  custom  of  that  age,  sent  a  herald  to
the  imperial  camp,  with  a  solemn  declaration  of  war
against  Charles,  to  whom  they  no  longer  gave  any
other  title  than  that  of  pretended  emperor,  and  re-
nounced all  allegiance,  homage,  or  duty  which  he

«  Sleid.  386. Du  Mont  Corps  Diplom.  iv.  p.  11.  314. Pfefiel  Hist.  Abreg6  du
Droit  Publ.  168.  736.  158.

VOL. V.  G

82  , CHARLES  V.  [1546.

might  claim,  or  which  they  had  hitherto  yielded  to

him.  But  previous  to  this  formality,  partof  their  troops

had  begun  to  act.  The  command  of  a  consider-

Their  first  , . , .  r A

opera-  able  body  of  men,  raised  by  the  city  of  Augs-
burg, having  been  given  to  Sebastian  Schertel,
a  soldier  of  fortune,  who,  by  the  booty  that  he  got
when  the  Imperialists  plundered  Rome,  together  with
the  merit  of  long  service,  had  acquired  wealth  and  au-
•  thority  which  placed  him  on  a  level  with  the  chief  of
the  German  nobles  :  that  gallant  veteran  resolved,  be-
fore he  joined  the  main  body  of  the  confederates,  to  at-
tempt something  suitable  to  his  former  fame,  and  to
the  expectation  of  his  countrymen.  As  the  pope's
forces  were  hastening  towards  Tyrol,  in  order  to  pe-
netrate into  Germany  by  the  narrow  passes  through
the  mountains  which  run  across  that  country,  he  ad-
vanced thither  with  the  utmost  rapidity,  and  seized
Ehrenberg  and  Cuifstein,  two  strong  castles  which
commanded  the  principal  defiles.  Without  stopping
a  moment,  he  continued  his'  march  towards  Inspruck,
by  getting  possession  of  which  he  would  have  obliged
the  Italians  to  stop  short,  and  with  a  small  body  of
men  could  have  resisted  all  the  efforts  of  the  greatest
armies.  Castlealto,  the  governor  of  Trent,  knowing
what  a  fatal  blow  this  would  be  to  the  emperor,  all
whose  designs  must  have  proved  abortive  if  his  Italian
auxiliaries  had  been  intercepted,  raised  a  few  troops
with  the  utmost  dispatch,  and  threw  himself  into  the
town.  Schertel,  however,  did  not  abandon  the  enter-
prise, and  was  preparing  to  attack  the  place,  when  the
intelligence  of  the  approach  of  the  Italians,  and  an
order  from  the  elector  and  landgrave,  obliged  him  to
desist.  By  his  retreat  the  passes  were  left  open,  and
the  Italians  entered  Germany  without  any  opposi-
tion, but  from  the  garrisons  which  Schertel  had  placed
in  Ehrenberg  and  Cuffstein;  and  these,  having  no

1546.]  BOOK  VIII.  83

hopes  of  being  relieved,  surrendered  after  a  short
resistance/*

And  ill-  Nor  was  the  recalling  of  Schertel  the  only
conduct.  error  of  which  the  confederates  were  guilty.
As  the  supreme  command  of  their  army  was  commit-
ted, in  terms  of  the  league  ofSmalkalde,  to  the  elector
of  Saxony  and  landgrave  of  Hesse  with  equal  power,
all  the  inconveniences  arising  from  a  divided  and  co-
ordinate authority,  which  is  always  of  fatal  conse-
quence in  the  operations  of  war,  were  immediately
felt.  The  elector,  though  intrepid  in  his  own  person
to  excess,  and  most  ardently  zealous  in  the  cause,  was
slow  in  deliberating,  uncertain  as  well  as  irresolute  in
his  determinations,  and  constantly  preferred  measures
which  were  cautious  and  safe,  to  such  as  were  bold  or
decisive.  The  landgrave,  of  a  more  active  and  enter-
prising nature,  formed  all  his  resolutions  with  promp-
titude, wished  to  execute  them  with  spirit,  and  uni-
formly preferred  such  measures  as  tended  to  bring  the
contest  to  a  speedy  issue.  Thus  their  maxims,  with
regard  to  the  conduct  of  the  war,  differed  as  widely  as
those  by  which  they  were  influenced  in  preparing  for  it.
Such  perpetual  contrariety  in  their  sentiments  gave
rise,  imperceptibly,  to  jealousy  and  the  spirit  of  con-
tention. These  multiplied  the  dissensions  flowing  from
the  incompatibility  of  their  natural  tempers,  and  ren-
dered them  more  violent.  The  other  members  of  the
league  considering  themselves  as  independent,  and  sub-
ject to  the  elector  and  landgrave  only  in  consequence

x  Seckend.  lib.  ii.  70.  Adriani  Istoria  di  suoi  Tempi,  lib.  335.
*  SeckendorF,  the  industrious  author  of  the  '  Commentarius  Apologeticus  de  Luthe-
ranismo,'  whom  1  have  so  long  and  safely  followed  as  my  guide  in  German  affairs,
was  a  descendant  from  Schertel.  With  the  care  and  solicitude  of  a  German,  who
was  himself  of  noble  birth,  Seckendorf  has  published  a  long  digression  concerning
his  ancestor,  calculated  chiefly  to  shew  how  Schertel  was  ennobled,  and  his  poste-
rity allied  to  many  of  the  most  ancient  families  in  the  empire.  Among  other  curious
particulars,  he  gives  us  an  account  of  his  wealth,  the  chief  source  of  which  was  the
plunder  he  got  at  Rome.  His  landed  estate  alone  was  sold  by  his  grandson  for  six
hundred  thousand  florins.  By  this  we  may  form  some  idea  of  the  riches  amassed
by  the  Condottieri,  or  commanders  of  mercenary  bands  in  that  age.  At  the  taking
of  Rome  Schertel  was  only  a  captain.  Seckend.  lib.  ii.  73.

84  CHARLES  V.  {1546.

of  the  articles  of  a  voluntary  confederacy, did  not
long  retain  a' proper  veneration  for  commanders  who
proceeded  with  so  little  concord ;  and  the  numerous
army  of  the  Protestants,  like  a  vast  machine  whose
parts  are  ill  compacted,  and  which  is  destitute  of  any
power  sufficient  to  move  and  regulate  the  whole,  acted
with  no  consistency,  vigour,  or  effect.
The  pope's The  emperor,  who  was  afraid  that,  by  re-
^mining  at  Ratisbon,  he  might  render  it  im-
possible  for  the  pope's  forces to  join  him,
having  boldly  advanced  to  Landshut  on  the  Iser,  the
confederates  lost  some  days  in  deliberating  whether  it
was  proper  to  follow  him  into  the  territories  of  the
duke  of  Bavaria,  a  neutral  prince. When  at  last  they
surmounted  that  scruple,  and  began  to  move  towards
his  camp,  they  suddenly  abandoned  the  design,  and
hastened  to  attack  Ratisbon,  in  which  town  Charles
could  leave  only  a  small  garrison. By  this  time  the
papal  troops,  amounting  fully  to  that  number  which
Paul  had  stipulated  to  furnish,  had  reached  Landshut,
and  were  soon  followed  by  six  thousand  Spaniards  of
the  veteran  bands  stationed  in  Naples. The  confede-
rates, after  Schertel's  spirited  but  fruitless  expedition,
seem  to  have  permitted  these  forces  to  advance  unmo-
lested to  the  place  of  rendezvous,  without  any  attempt
to  attack  either  them  or  the  emperor  separately,  or  to
prevent  their  junction." The  imperial  army  amounted
now  to  thirty-six  thousand  men,  and  was  still  more
formidable  by  the  discipline  and  valour  of  the  troops
than  by  their  number. Avila,  commendador  of  Alcan-
tara, who  had  been  present  in  all  the  wars  carried  on
by  Charles,  and  served in  the  armies  which  gained
the memorable victory  at Pavia, which conquered
Tunis,  and  invaded  France,  gives  this  the  preference
to  any  military  force  he  had  ever  seen  assembled/
Octavio  Farnese,  the  pope's  grandson,  assisted  by  the

«  Adriani  Istoria  di  snoi  Tempi,  lib.  v.  340.  y  Avila,  18.

1546.]  BOOK VIII.  85

ablest  officers  formed  in  the  long  wars  between  Charles
and  Francis,  commanded  the  Italian  auxiliaries.  His
brother,  the  cardinal  Farnese,  accompanied  him  as  pa-
pal legate  ;  and  in  order  to  give  the  war  the  appearance
of  a  religious  enterprise,  he  proposed  to  march  at  the
head  of  the  army,  with  a  cross  carried  before  him,  and
to  publish  indulgences  wherever  he  came  to  all  who
should  give  them  any  assistance,  as  had  anciently  been
the  practice  in  the  crusades  against  the  infidels.  But
this  the  emperor  strictly  prohibited,  as  inconsistent  with
all  the  declarations  which  he  had  made  to  the  Ger-
mans of  his  own  party ;  and  the  legate  perceiving,  to
his  astonishment,  that  the  exercise  of  the  Protestant  re-
ligion, the  extirpation  of  which  he  considered  as  the
sole  object  of  the  war,  was  publicly  permitted  in  the
imperial  camp,  soon  returned  in  disgust  to  Italy .z

The  arrival  of  these  troops  enabled  the  emperor  to
send  such  a  reinforcement  to  the  garrison  at  Ratisbon,
that  the  confederates,  relinquishing  all  hopes  of  re-
ducing that  town,  marched  towards  Ingoldstadt  on  the
Danube,  near  to  which  Charles  was  now  encamped.
They  exclaimed  loudly  against  the  emperor's  notorious
violation  of  the  laws  and  constitution  •  of  the  empire,
in  having  called  in  foreigners  to  lay  waste  Germany,
and  to  oppress  its  liberties.  As  in  that  age,  the  dominion
of  the  Roman  see  was  so  odious  to  the  Protestants,  that
the  name  of  the  pope  alone  was  sufficient  to  inspire
them  with  horror  at  any  enterprise  which  he  counte-
nanced, and  to  raise  in  their  minds  the  blackest  suspi-
cions, it  came  to  be  universally  believed  among  them,
that  Paul,  not  satisfied  with  attacking  them  openly  by
force  of  arms,  had  dispersed  his  emissaries  all  over  Ger-
many, to  set  on  fire  their  towns  and  magazines,  and  to
poison  the  wells  and  fountains  of  water.  Nor  did  this
rumour,  which  was  extravagant  and  frightful  enough  to
make  a  deep  impression  on  the  credulity  of  the  vulgar,

*  F.Paul,  191.

80  CHARLES V.  [1546.

spread  among  them  only;  even  the  leaders  of  the  party,
blinded  by  their  prejudices,  published  a  declaration,  in
which  they  accused  the  pope  of  having  employed  such
antichristian  and  diabolical  arts  against  them.a  These
sentiments  of  the  confederates  were  confirmed,  in  some
measure,  by  the  behaviour  of  the  papal  troops,  who,
thinkino-  nothing  too  rigorous  towards  heretics  ana-
thematized by  the  church,  were  guilty  of  great  excesses
in  the  territories  of  the  Lutheran  states,  and  aggravated
the  calamities  of  war  by  mingling  with  it  all  the  cruelty
of  bigoted  zeal.

The  con-  The  first  operations  in  the  field,  however,  did
advance*  not  correspond  with  the  violence  of  those  pas-
*?w"ds  sions  which  animated  individuals.  The  em-

toe  impe-
rial army,  peror had  prudently  taken  the resolution of

avoiding  an  action  with  an  enemy  so  far  superior  in
number,b  especially  as  he  foresaw  that  nothing  could
keep  a  body  composed  of  so  many  and  such  dissimilar
members  from  falling  to  pieces,  but  the  pressing  to  at-
tack it  with  an  inconsiderate  precipitancy.  The  con-
federates, though  it  was  no  less  evident  that  to  them
every  moment's  delay  was  pernicious,  were,  still  pre-
vented by  the  weakness  or  division  of  their  leaders
from  exerting  that  vigour,  with  which  their  situation,
as  well  as  the  ardour  of  their  soldiers,  ought  to  have
inspired  them.  On  their  arrival  at  Ingold-

August29.  *1

stadt,  they  found  the  emperor  m  a  camp  not
remarkable  for  strength,  and  surrounded  only  by  a  slight
intrenchment.  Before  the  camp  lay  a  plain  of  such  ex-
tent, as  afforded  sufficient  space  for  drawing  out  their
whole  army,  and  bringing  it  to  act  at  once.  Every  con-
sideration should  have  determined  them  to  have  seized
this  opportunity  of  attacking  the  emperor;  and  their
great  superiority  in  numbers,  the  eagerness  of  their
troops,  together  with  the  stability  of  the  German  infan-
try in  pitched  battles,  afforded  them  the  most  probable

»  Sleid.  399.  o  Avila,  78,  a.

1546.]  BOOK VIII.  87

expectation  of  victory.  The  landgrave  urged  this  with
great  warmth,  declaring,  that  if  the  sole  command  were
vested  in  him,  he  would  terminate  the  war  on  that  oc-
casion, and  decide  by  one  general  action  the  fate  of
the  two  parties.  But  the  elector,  reflecting  on  the
valour  and  discipline  of  the  enemy's  forces,  animated
by  the  presence  of  the  emperor,  and  conducted  by  the
best  officers  of  the  age,  would  not  venture  upon  an  ac-
tion which  he  thought  to  be  so  doubtful,  as  the  attack-
ing such  a  body  of  veterans  on  ground  which  they
themselves  had  chosen,  and  while  covered  with  forti-
fications which,  though  imperfect,  would  afford  them
no  small  advantage  in  the  combat.  Notwithstanding
his  hesitation  and  remonstrances,  it  was  agreed  to  ad-
vance towards  the  enemy's  camp  in  battle  array,  in  order
to  make  a  trial  whether  by  that  insult,  and  by  a  furious
cannonade  which  they  began,  they  could  draw  the  Im-
The  em-  perialists  out  of  their  works.  But  the  emperor
Sines  •*•  kad  to°  much  sagacity  to  fall  into  this  snare.
battle.  He  adhered  to  his  own  system  with  inflexible
constancy;  and  drawing  up  his  soldiers  behind  their
trenches,  that  they  might  be  ready  to  receive  the  con-
federates if  they  should  venture  upon  an  assault,  calmly
waited  their  approach,  and  carefully  restrained  his  own
men  from  any  excursions  or  skirmishes  which  might
bring  on  a  general  engagement.  He  rode  along  the
lines,  and,  addressing  the  troops  of  the  different  nations
in  their  own  language,  encouraged  them  not  only  by
his  words,  but  by  the  cheerfulness  of  his  voice  and
countenance;  he  exposed  himself  in  places  of  greatest
danger,  and  amidst  the  warmest  fire  of  the  enemy's  ar-
tillery, the  mostnumerous  that  had  hitherto  been  brought
into  the  field  by  any  army.  Roused  by  his  example,
not  a  man  quitted  his  ranks;  it  was  thought  infamous
to  discover  any  symptom  of  fear  when  the  emperor  ap-
peared so  intrepid;  and  the  meanest  soldier  plainly
perceived,  that  their  declining  the  combat  at  present

88  CHARLES V.  [1546.

was  not  the  effect  of  timidity  in  their  general,  but  the
result  of  a  well-grounded  caution.  The  confederates,
after  firing  several  hours  on  the  Imperialists,  with  more
noise  and  terror  than  execution,  seeing  no  prospect  of
alluring  them  to  fight  on  equal  terms,  retired  to  their
own  camp.  The  emperor  employed  the  night  with  such
diligence  in  strengthening  his  works,  that  the  confede-
rates, returning  to  the  cannonade  next  day,  found  that,
though  they  had  now  been  willing  to  venture  upon
such  a  bold  experiment,  the  opportunity  of  making  an
attack  with  advantage  was  lost.c

The  Fiem-  After  such  a  discovery  of  the  feebleness  or
hb  troops  irresolution  of  their  leaders,  and  the  prudence

join  the  *

emperor.  ^  well  as  firmness  of  the  emperor's  conduct,
the  confederates  turned  their  whole  attention  towards
preventing  the  arrival  of  a  powerful  reinforcement  of
ten  thousand  foot  and  four  thousand  horse,  which  the
count  de  Buren  was  bringing  to  the  emperor  from  the
Low  Countries.  But  though  that  general  had  to  tra-
verse such  an  extent  of  country;  though  his  route  lay
through  the  territories  of  several  states  warmly  disposed
to  favour  the  confederates ;  though  they  were  apprized
of  his  approach,  and  by  their  superiority  in  numbers
might  easily  have  detached  a  force  sufficient  to  over-
power him,  he  advanced  with  such  rapidity,  and  by
such  well-concerted  movements,  while  they  opposed
him  with  such  remissness,  and  so  little  military

Sept.  10.  ii-ii

skill,  that  he  conducted  this  body  to  the  impe-
rial camp  without  any  loss.d

Upon  the  arrival  of  the  Flemings,  in  whom  he  placed
great  confidence,  the  emperor  altered,  in  some  degree,
his  plan  of  operations,  and  began  to  act  more  upon  the
offensive,  though  he  still  avoided  a  battle  with  the  ut-
most industry.  He  made  himself  master  of  Neuburg,
Dillingen,  and  Donawert,  on  the  Danube;  of  Nord-
lingen,  and  several  other  towns,  situated  on  the  most

*  Sleid.  395.  397. Avila,  27,  a. Lamb.  Hortens.  ap.  Scard.  ii.  <i  Sleict.  403.

1546.]  BOOK VIII.  89

considerable  streams  which  fall  into  that  mighty  river.
By  this  he  got  the  command  of  a  great  extent  of  coun-
try, though  not  without  being  obliged  to  engage  in
several  sharp  encounters,  of  which  the  success  was  vari-
ous, nor  without  being  exposed,  oftener  than  once,  to
the  danger  of  being  drawn  into  a  battle. In  this
both manner  the  whole  autumn  was  spent;  neither
party  gained  any  remarkable  superiority  over
the  other,  and  nothing  was  yet  done  towards  bringing
the  war  to  a  period. The  emperor  had  often  foretold,
with  confidence,  that  discord  and  the  want  of  money
would  compel  the  confederates  to  disperse  that  unwieldy
body,  which  they  had  neither  abilities  to  guide  nor
funds  to  support.6 Though  he  waited  with  impatience
for  the  accomplishment  of  his  prediction,  there  was  no
prospect  of  that  event  being  at  hand. But  he  himself
began  to  suffer  from  the  want  of  forage  and  provisions ;
even  the  Catholic  provinces  being  so  much  incensed  at
the  introduction  of  foreigners  into  the  empire,  that  they
furnished  them  with  reluctance,  while  the  camp  of  the
confederates  abounded  with  a  profusion  of  all  neces-
saries, which  the  zeal  of  their  friends  in  the  adjacent
countries  poured  in  with  the  utmost  liberality  and  good-
will. Great  numbers  of  the  Italians  and  Spaniards,  un-
accustomed to  the  climate  or  food  of  Germany,  were
become  unfit  for  service  through  sickness/ Consi-
derable arrears  were  now  due  to  the  troops,  who  had
scarcely  received  any  money  from  the  beginning  of  the
campaign;  the  emperor  experiencing  on  this,  as  well
as  on  former  occasions,  that  his  jurisdiction  was  more
extensive  than  his  revenues,  and  that  the  former  ena-
bled him  to  assemble  a  greater  number  of  soldiers  than
the  latter  were  sufficient  to  support. Upon  all  these
accounts,  he  found  it  difficult  to  keep  his  army  in  the
field;  some  of  his  ablest  generals,  and  even  the  duke
of  Alva  himself,  persevering  and  obstinate  as  he  usually

e  Belli  Snialkaldici  Cummcnlarius  Graeco  sermone  scriptus  a  Joacb.  Camerario, ap,
Freherum,  vol.  iiup.  479.  '  Camerar.  ap.  Freher.  483.

90  CHARLES  V.  [1546.

was  in  the  prosecution  of  every  measure,  advising  him
to  disperse  his  troops  into  winter-quarters.  But  as  the
arguments  urged  against  any  plan  which  he  had  adopt-
ed, rarely  made  much  impression  upon  the  emperor,  he
paid  no  regard  to  their  opinion,  and  determined  to
continue  his  efforts  in  order  to  weary  out  the  confede-
rates ;  being  well  assured  that  if  he  could  once  oblige
them  to  separate,  there  was  little  probability  of  their
uniting  again  in  a  body.8  Still,  however,  it  remained
a  doubtful  point,  whether  his  steadiness  was  most  likely
to  fail,  or  their  zeal  to  be  exhausted.  It  was  still  un-
certain which  party,  by  first  dividing  its  forces,  would
give  the  superiority  to  the  other  ;  when  an  unexpected
event  decided  the  contest,  and  occasioned  a  fatal  re-
verse in  the  affairs  of  the  confederates.

f Maurice  of  Saxony  having  insinuated  him-
self  into  the  emperor's  confidence,  by  the  arts

which  have  already  been  described,  no  sooner
saw  hostilities  ready  to  break  out  between  the  confede-
rates of  Smalkalde  and  that  monarch,  than  vast  pros-
pects of  ambition  began  to  open  upon  him.  That
portion  of  Saxony,  which  descended  to  him  from  his
ancestors,  was  far  from  satisfying  his  aspiring  mind  ;
and  he  perceived  with  pleasure  the  approach  of  civil
war,  as  amidst  the  revolutions  and  convulsions  occa-
sioned by  it,  opportunities  of  acquiring  additional
power  or  dignity,  which  at  other  times  are  sought  in
vain,  present  themselves  to  an  enterprising  spirit.  As
he  was  thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  state  of  the  two
contending  parties,  and  the  qualities  of  their  leaders,
he  did  not  hesitate  long  in  determining  on  which  side
the  greatest  advantages  were  to  be  expected.  Having
revolved  all  these  things  in  his  own  breast,  and  having
taken  his  final  resolution  of  joining  the  emperor,  he
prudently  determined  to  declare  early  in  his  favour  ;
that,  by  the  merit  of  this,  he  might  acquire  a  title  to  a

f  Tliuaii.  83.

1546.]  BOOK  VIII.  91

proportional  recompense. With  this  view,  he  had  re-
paired to  Ratisbon  in  the  month  of  May,  under  pretext
of  attending*  the  diet :  and  after  many  confer-

His  league  o  »  J

with  the ences  with  Charles  or  his  ministers,  he,  with  the

emperor.  .  111

most  mysterious  secrecy,  concluded  a  treaty,  in
which  he  engaged  to  concur  in  assisting  the  emperor  as
a  faithful  subject ;  and  Charles,  in  return,  stipulated  to
bestow  on  him  all  the  spoils  of  the  elector  of  Saxony,
his  dignities  as  well  as  territories.11  History  hardly
records  any  treaty  that  can  be  considered  as  a  more
manifest  violation'  of  the  most  powerful  principles  which
ought  to  influence  human  actions.  Maurice,  a  professed
Protestant,  at  a  time  when  the  belief  of  religion,  as  well
as  zeal  for  its  interests,  took  strong  possession  of  every
mind,  binds  himself  to  contribute  his  assistance  towards
carrying  on  a  war  which  had  manifestly  no  other  object
than  the  extirpation  of  the  Protestant  doctrines.  He
engages  to  take  arms  against  his  father-in-law,  and  to
strip  his  nearest  relation  of  his  honours  and  dominions,
He  joins  a  dubious  friend  against  a  known  benefactor,
to  whom  his  obligations  were  both  great  and  recent.
Nor  was  the  prince  who  ventured  upon  all  this,  one  of
those  audacious  politicians,  who,  provided  they  can  ac-
complish their  ends,  and  secure  their  interest,  avowedly
disregard  the  most  sacred  obligations,  and  glory  in  con-
temning whatever  is  honourable  or  decent.  Maurice's
conduct,  if  the  whole  must  be  ascribed  to  policy,  was
more  artful  and  masterly ;  he  executed  his  plan  in  all
its  parts,  and  yet  endeavoured  to  preserve,  in  every
step  which  he  took,  the  appearance  of  what  was  fair,
and  virtuous,  and  laudable.  It  is  probable,  from  his
subsequent  behaviour,  that,  with  regard  to  the  Protes-
tant religion  at  least,  his  intentions  were  upright,  that
he  fondly  trusted  to  the  emperor's  promises  for  its  se-
curity, but  that,  according  to  the  fate  of  all  who  refine
too  much  in  policy,  and  who  tread  in  dark  and  crooked

h  Haras!  Annal.  Brabant,  vol.  i.  638. Struvii  Corp.  1013.  Thuau.  84 .

92  CHARLES V.  [1546.

paths,  in  attempting  to  deceive  others,  he  himself  was,
in  some  degree,  deceived.

His  arti-  His  first  care,  however,  was  to  keep  the  en-
fices  in  gagements  into  which  he  had  entered  with  the
wnceai  his  emperor  closely  concealed :  and  so  perfect  a
intentions.  master  was  ne  in  the  art  of  dissimulation,  that

the  confederates,  notwithstanding  his  declining  all  con-
nexions with  them,  and  his  remarkable  assiduity  in
paying  court  to  the  emperor,  seemed  to  have  enter-
tained no  suspicion  of  his  designs.  Even  the  elector
of  Saxony,  when  he  marched  at  the  beginning  of  the
campaign  to  join  his  associates,  committed  his  domi-
nions to  Maurice's  protection,  which  he,  with  an  insi-
dious appearance  of  friendship',  readily  undertook.1  But
scarcely  had  the  elector  taken  the  field,  when  Maurice
began  to  consult  privately  with  the  king  of  the  Romans
how  to  invade  those  territories,  with  the  defence  of
which  he  was  intrusted.  Soon  after,  the  emperor  sent
him  a  copy  of  the  imperial  ban  denounced  against  the
elector  and  landgrave.  As  he  was  next  heir  to  the  former,
and  particularly  interested  in  preventing  strangers  from
getting  his  dominions  into  their  possession,  Charles  re-
quired him,  not  only  for  his  own  sake,  but  upon  the  al-
legiance and  duty  which  he  owed  to  the  head  of  the
empire,  instantly  to  seize  and  detain  in  his  hands  the
forfeited  estates  of  the  elector ;  warning  him,  at  the
same  time,  that  if  he  neglected  to  obey  these  commands,
he  should  be  held  as  accessory  to  the  crimes  of  his  kins-
man, and  be  liable  to  the  same  punishment.k

This  artifice,  which  it  is  probable  Maurice  himself
suggested,  was  employed  by  him  in  order  that  his
conduct  towards  the  elector  might  seem  a  matter  of  ne-
cessity but  not  of  choice,  an  act  of  obedience  to  his  su-
perior rather  than  a  voluntary  invasion  of  the  rights  of
his  kinsman  and  ally.  But  in  order  to  give  some  more
specious  appearance  to  this  thin  veil  with  which  he  en-

1  Struvii  Corp.  1046.  k  Sleid.  391. Thuan.  84.

1546.]  BOOK VIII.  93

deavoured  to  cover  his  ambition,  he,  soon  after  his  re-
turn from  Ratisbon,  had  called  together  the  states  of  his
country ;  and  representing  to  them  that  a  civil  war  be-
tween the  emperor  and  confederates  of  Smalkalde  was
now  become  unavoidable,  desired  their  advice  with  re-
gard to  the  part  which  he  should  act  in  that  event.  They
having  been  prepared,  no  doubt,  and  tutored  beforehand,
and  being  desirous  of  gratifying  their  prince,  whom  they
esteemed  as  well  as  loved,  gave  such  counsel  as  they
knew  would  be  most  agreeable ;  advising  him  to  offer
his  mediation  towards  reconciling  the  contending  par-
ties ;  but  if  that  were  rejected,  and  he  could  obtain  proper
security  for  the  Protestant  religion,  they  delivered  it  as
their  opinion,  that  in  all  other  points  he  ought  to  yield
obedience  to  the  emperor.  Upon  receiving  the  imperial
rescript,  together  with  the  ban  against  the  elector  and
landgrave,  Maurice  summoned  the  states  of  his  country
a  second  time ;  he  laid  before  them  the  orders  which
he  had  received,  and  mentioned  the  punishment  with
which  he  was  threatened  in  case  of  disobedience  ;  he
acquainted  them  that  the  confederates  had  refused  to
admit  of  his  mediation,  and  that  the  emperor  had  given
him  the  most  satisfactory  declarations  with  regard  to  re-
ligion ;  he  pointed  out  his  own  interest  in  securing  pos-
session of  the  electoral  dominions,  as  well  as  the  danger
of  allowing  strangers  to  obtain  an  establishment  in
Saxony ;  and  upon  the  whole,  as  the  point  under  de-
liberation respected  his  subjects  no  less  than  himself,
he  desired  to  know  their  sentiments,  how  he  should
steer  in  that  difficult  and  arduous  conjuncture.  The
states,  no  less  obsequious  and  complaisant  than  for-
merly, professing  their  own  reliance  on  the  emperor's
promises  as  a  perfect  security  for  their  religion,  pro-
posed that,  before  he  had  recourse  to  more  violent  me-
thods, they  would,  write  to  the  elector,  exhorting  him,
as  the  best  means,  not  only  of  appeasing  the  emperor,
but  of  preventing  his  dominions  from  being  seized  by

94  CHARLES V.  [1546.

foreign  or  hostile  powers,  to  give  his  consent  that
Maurice  should  take  possession  of  them  quietly  and
without  opposition.  Maurice  himself  seconded  their
arguments  in  a  letter  to  the  landgrave,  his  father-in-
law.  Such  an  extravagant  proposition  was  rejected
with  the  scorn  and  indignation  which  it  deserved.  The
landgrave,  in  return  to  Maurice,  taxed  him  with  his
treachery  and  ingratitude  towards  a  kinsman  to  whom
he  was  so  deeply  indebted  ;  he  treated  with  contempt
his  affectation  of  executing  the  imperial  ban,  which  he
could  not  but  know  to  be  altogether  void  by  the  uncon-
stitutional and  arbitrary  manner  in  which  it  had  been
issued  :  he  besousrht  him,  not  to  suffer  himself  to  be  so

o  '

far  blinded  by  ambition,  as  to  forget  the  obligations  of
honour  and  friendship,  or  to  betray  the  Protestant  re-
ligion, the  extirpation  of  which  out  of  Germany,  even
by  the  acknowledgment  of  the  pope  himself,  was  the
great  object  of  the  present  war.1
He  invades  But  Maurice  had  proceeded  too  far  to  be
ties  oftbe  diverted  from  pursuing  his  plan  by  reproaches
elector  of  or  argmments.  Nothing  now  remained  but  to

Saxony.

November,  execute  with  vigour,  what  he  had  hitherto
carried  on  by  artifice  and  dissimulation.  Nor  was
his  boldness  in  action  inferior  to  his  subtlety  in  con-
trivance. Having  assembled  about  twelve  thousand
men,  he  suddenly  invaded  one  part  of  the  electoral  pro-
vinces, while  Ferdinand,  with  an  army  composed  of
Bohemians  and  Hungarians,  overran  the  other.  Maurice,
in  two  sharp  encounters,  defeated  the  troops  which  the
elector  had  left  to  guard  his  country ;  and  improving
these  advantages  to  the  utmost,  made  himself  master
of  all  the  electorate,  except  Wittemberg,  Gotha,  Eise-
nach, which  being  places  of  considerable  strength,  and
defended  by  sufficient  garrisons,  refused  to  open  their
gates.  The  news  of  these  rapid  conquests  soon  reached
the  imperial  and  confederate  camps.  In  the  former,

1  Sleid.  405,  &c. Thuan.  85. Camerar.  484.

1546.]  BOOK VIII.  95

satisfaction  with  an  event,  which  it  was  foreseen  would
be  productive  of  the  most  important  consequences,  was
expressed  by  every  possible  demonstration  of  joy.  The
latter  was  filled  with  astonishment  and  terror.  The
name  of  Maurice  was  mentioned  with  execration,  as
an  apostate  from  religion,  a  betrayer  of  the  German
liberty,  and  a  contemner  of  the  most  sacred  and  natural
ties.  Every  thing  that  the  rage  or  invention  of  the
party  could  suggest,  in  order  to  blacken  and  render
him  odious;  invectives,  satires,  and  lampoons,  the
furious  declamations  of  their  preachers,  together  with
the  rude  wit  of  their  authors,  were  all  employed  against
him.  While  he,  confiding  in  the  arts  which  he  had  so
long  practised,  as  if  his  actions  could  have  admitted  of
any  serious  justification,  published  a  manifesto,  contain-
ing the  same  frivolous  reasons  for  his  conduct,  which
he  had  formerly  alleged  in  the  meeting  of  his  states,
and  in  his  letter  to  the  landgrave.1"
The  con-  The  elector,  upon  the  first  intelligence  of
federates  Maurice's  motions,  proposed  to  return  home

make  over-  ,  _

tures  of  ac-  with  his  troops  for  the  defence  of  Saxony.  But
tbn'tothe  the  deputies  of  the  league,  assembled  at  Ulm,
emperor;  prevailed  on  him,  at  that  time,  to  remain  with
the  army,  and  to  prefer  the  success  of  the  common  cause
before  the  security  of  his  own  dominions.  At  length
the  sufferings  and  complaints  of  his  subjects  increased
so  much,  that  he  discovered  the  utmost  impatience  to
set  out,  in  order  to  rescue  them  from  the  oppression  of
Maurice,  and  from  the  cruelty  of  the  Hungarians,  who,
having  been  accustomed  to  that  licentious  and  merciless
species  of  war  which  was  thought  lawful  against  the
Turks,  committed,  wherever  they  came,  the  wildest  acts
of  rapine  and  violence.  This  desire  of  the  elector  was
so  natural  and  so  warmly  urged,  that  the  deputies  at
Ulm,  though  fully  sensible  of  the  unhappy  consequences
of  dividing  their  army,  durst  not  refuse  their  consent,

» Sleid.  409,  410.

96  CHARLES  V.  [1546.

how  unwilling  soever  to  grant  it.  In  this  perplexity,
they  repaired  to  the  camp  of  the  confederates  at  Gien-
gen,  on  the  Brenz,  in  order  to  consult  their  constituents.
Nor  were  they  less  at  a  loss  what  to  determine  in  this
pressing  emergence.  But,  after  having  considered
seriously  the  open  desertion  of  some  of  their  allies;  the
scandalous  lukewarmness  of  others,  who  had  hitherto
contributed  nothing  towards  the  war;  the  intolerable
load  which  had  fallen  of  consequence  upon  such  mem-
bers as  were  most  zealous  for  the  cause,  or  most  faith-
ful to  their  engagements;  the  ill  success  of  all  their
endeavours  to  obtain  foreign  aid ;  the  unusual  length
of  the  campaign;  the  rigour  of  the  season;  together
with  the  great  number  of  soldiers,  and  even  officers,
who  had  quitted  the  service  on  that  account;  they  con-
cluded that  nothing  could  save  them,  but  either  the
bringing  the  contest  to  the  immediate  decision  of  a
battle,  by  attacking  the  imperial  army,  or  an  accom-
modation of  all  their  differences  with  Charles  by  a
treaty.  Such  was  the  despondency  and  dejection  which
now  oppressed  the  party,  that  of  these  two  they  chose
what  was  most  feeble  and  unmanly,  empowering  a
minister  of  the  elector  of  Brandenburg  to  propound
overtures  of  peace  in  their  name  to  the  emperor.
Which  he  No  sooner  did  Charles  perceive  this  haughty
rejects.  confederacy,  which  had  so  lately  threatened  to
drive  him  out  of  Germany,  condescending  to  make  the
first  advances  towards  an  agreement,  than  concluding
their  spirit  to  be  gone,  or  their  union  to  be  broken,  he
immediately  assumed  the  tone  of  a  conqueror;  and,  as
if  they  had  been  already  at  his  mercy,  would  not  hear
of  a  negotiation,  but  upon  condition  that  the  elector  of
Saxony  should  previously  give  up  himself  and  his  do-
minions absolutely  to  his  disposal."  .As  nothing  more
intolerable  or  ignominious  could  have  been  prescribed,
even  in  the  worst  situation  of  their  affairs,  it  is  no  won-

"  Horteiuius,  ap.  Scard.  ii.  485.

154^.]  BOOK VIII.  97

der  that  this  proposition  should  be  rejected  by  a  party,
which  was  rather  humbled  and  disconcerted  than  sub-
dued. But  though  they  refused  to  submit  tamely  to
the  emperor's  will,  they  wanted  spirit  to  pursue  the
only  plan  which  could  have  preserved  their  indepen-
dence ;  and  forgetting  that  it  was  the  union  of  their
troops  in  one  body  which  had  hitherto  rendered  the
confederacy  formidable,  and  had  more  than  once
obliged  the  Imperialists  to  think  of  quitting  the  field,
they  inconsiderately  abandoned  this  advantage,  which,
in  spite  of  the  diversion  in  Saxony,  would  still  have
kept  the  emperor  in  awe ;  and  yielding  to  the  elector's
The  troops  entreaties,  consented  to  his  proposal  of  divid-
fedwacy"  m£  *ne  arm7-  Nine  thousand  men  were  left
separate.  in  the  duchy  of  Wurtemberg,  in  order  to  pro-
tect that  province,  as  well  as  the  free  cities  of  Upper
Germany ;  a  considerable  body  marched  with  the  elec-
tor towards  Saxony;  but  the  greater  part  returned  with
their  respective  leaders  into  their  own  countries,  and
were  dispersed  there.0

Almost  ail  The  moment  that  the  troops  separated,  the
bens  "of™  confederacy  ceased  to  be  the  object  of  terror;
tSheerape-  an(*  tne  members  of  it,  who,  while  they  com-
ror-  posed  part  of  a  great  body,  had  felt  but  little

anxiety  about  their  own  security,  began  to  tremble  when
they  reflected  that  they  now  stood  exposed  singly  to
the  whole  weight  of  the  emperor's  vengeance.  Charles
did  not  allow  them  leisure  to  recover  from  their  con-
sternation, or  to  form  any  new  schemes  of  union.  As
soon  as  the  confederates  began  to  retire,  he  put  his
army  in  motion,  and  though  it  was  now  the  depth  of
winter,  he  resolved  to  keep  the  field,  in  order  to  make
the  most  of  that  favourable  juncture  for  which  he  had
waited  so  long.  Some  small  towns  in  which  the  Pro-
testants had  left  garrisons,  immediately  opened  their
gates.  Norlingen,  Rotenberg,  and  Hall,  imperial  cities,

0  Sleid.  411.
VOL. V.  H

<>8  CHARLES V.  [1546.

submitted  soon  after.  Though  Charles  could  not  pre-
vent the  elector  from  levying,  as  he  retreated,  large
contributions  upon  the  archbishop  of  Mentz,  the  abbot
of  Fulda,  and  other  ecclesiastics/  this  was  more  than
balanced  by  the  submission  of  Ulm,  one  of  the  chief
cities  of  Suabia,  highly  distinguished  by  its  zeal  for  the
Smalkaldic  league.  As  soon  as  an  example  was  set  of
deserting  the  common  cause,  the  rest  of  the  members
became  instantly  impatient  to  follow  it,  and  seemed
afraid  lest  others,  by  getting  the  start  of  them  in  re-
turning to  their  duty,  should,  on  that  account,  obtain
more  favourable  terms.  The  elector  palatine,  a  weak
prince,  who,  notwithstanding  his  professions  of  neutra-
lity, had,  very  preposterously,  sent  to  the  confederates
four  hundred  horse,  a  body  so  inconsiderable  as  to  be
scarcely  any  addition  to  their  strength,  but  great  enough
to  render  him  guilty  in  the  eyes  of  the  emperor,  made
his  acknowledgments  in  the  most  abject  manner.  The
inhabitants  of  Augsburg,  shaken  by  so  many  instances
of  apostacy,  expelled  the  brave  Schertel  out  of  their
city,  and  accepted  such  conditions  as  the  emperor  was
pleased  to  grant  them.

The  duke  of  Wurtemberg,  though  among  the  first
who  had  offered  to  submit,  was  obliged  to  sue  for  par-
don on  his  knees ;  and  even  after  this  mortifying  humi-
liation, obtained  it  with  difficulty .q  Memmingen
and  other  free  cities  in  the  circle  of  Suabia,  being
now  abandoned  by  all  their  former  associates,  found  it
necessary  to  provide  for  their  own  safety  by  throwing
themselves  on  the  emperor's  mercy.  Strasburg  and
Frankfort  on  the  Maine,  cities  far  removed  from  the
seat  of  danger,  discovered  no  greater  steadiness  than
those  which  lay  more  exposed.  Thus  a  confederacy,
lately  so  powerful  as  to  shake  the  imperial  throne,  fell
to  pieces*  and  was  dissolved  in  the  space  of  a  few
weeks ;  hardly  any  member  of  that  formidable  combi-

P  Thuan.  83.  q  Mem.  de  Ribier,  torn.  i.  589.

1547.]  BOOK  VIII.  99

nation  now  remaining  in  arms,  but  the  elector  and
landgrave,  to  whom  the  emperor,  having  from  the  be-
ginning marked  them  out  as  victims  of  his  vengeance,
The  rigor-  was  at  no  pains  to  offer  terms  of  reconciliation.
Nor  did  he  grant  those  who  submitted  to  him  a
generous  and  unconditional  pardon.  Conscious
peror.  of  his  own  superiority,  he  treated  them  both  with
haughtiness  and  rigour.  All  the  princes  in  person,
and  the  cities  by  their  deputies,  were  compelled  to  im-
plore mercy  in  the  humble  posture  of  supplicants.  As
the  emperor  laboured  under  great  difficulties  from  the
want  of  money,  he  imposed  heavy  fines  upon  them,
which  he  levied  with  most  rapacious  exactness.  The
duke  of  Wurtemberg  paid  three  hundred  thousand
crowns ;  the  city  of  Augsburg  a  hundred  and  fifty
thousand;  Ulm  a  hundred  thousand;  Frankfort  eighty
thousand;  Memmingen  fifty  thousand;  and  the  rest  in
proportion  to  their  abilities,  or  their  different  degrees
of  guilt.  They  were  obliged,  besides,  to  renounce  the
league  of  Smalkalde ;  to  furnish  assistance,  if  required,
towards  executing  the  imperial  ban  against  the  elector
and  landgrave ;  to  give  up  their  artillery  and  warlike
stores  to  the  emperor;  to  admit  garrisons  into  their
principal  cities  and  places  of  strength ;  and,  in  this  dis-
armed and  dependent  situation,  to  expect  the  final
award  which  the  emperor  should  think  proper  to  pro-
nounce when  the  war  came  to  an  issue/  But,  amidst
the  great  variety  of  articles  dictated  by  Charles  on  this
occasion,  he,  in  conformity  to  his  original  plan,  took
care  that  nothing  relating  to  religion  should  be  inserted;
and  to  such  a  degree  were  the  confederates  humbled  or
overawed,  that,  forgetting  the  zeal  which  had  so  long
animated  them,  they  were  solicitous  only  about  their
own  safety,  without  venturing  to  insist  on  a  point,  the
mention  of  which  they  saw  the  emperor  avoiding  with
so  much  industry.  The  inhabitants  of  Memmingen

r  Slcid.  411,  &c. Thuarr.  lib.  iv.  p.  125. Mem.  de  Ribier,  torn.  i.  606.
H  2

100  CHARLES V.  [1547.

alone  made  some  feeble  efforts  to  procure  a  promise  of
protection  in  the  exercise  of  their  religion,  but  were
checked  so  severely  by  the  imperial  ministers,  that  they
instantly  fell  from  their  demand.

The  elector  of  Cologne,  whom,  notwithstanding  the
sentence  of  excommunication  issued  against  him  by  the
pope,  Charles  had  hitherto  allowed  to  remain  in  pos-
session of  the  archiepiscopal  see,  being  now  required
by  the  emperor  to  submit  to  the  censures  of  the  church,
this  virtuous  and  disinterested  prelate,  unwilling  to  ex-
pose his  subjects  to  the  miseries  of  war  on  his  own  ac-
count, voluntarily  resigned  that  high  dignity.
With  a  moderation  becoming  his  age  and  cha-
racter, he  chose  to  enjoy  truth,  together  with  the  exer-
cise of  his  religion,  in  the  retirement  of  a  private  life,
rather  than  to  disturb  society  by  engaging  in  a  doubt-
ful and  violent  struggle  in  order  to  retain  his  office.8
The  eicc-  During  these  transactions,  the  elector  of  Sax-
Ts^on™  ony  reacned  *he  frontiers  of  his  country  unmo-
andreco-'lested.  As  Maurice  could  assemble  no  force
sewicmof  equal  to  the  army  which  accompanied  him,  he,
in  a  short  time,  not  only  recovered  possession
of  his  own  territories,  but  overran  Misnia,  and  stripped
his  rival  of  all  that  belonged  to  him,  except  Dresden
and  Leipsic,  which,  being  towns  of  some  strength,
could  not  be  suddenly  reduced.  Maurice,  obliged  to
quit  the  field,  and  to  shut  himself  up  in  his  capital,
dispatched  courier  after  courier  to  the  emperor,  repre-
senting his  dangerous  situation,  and  soliciting  him  with
the  most  earnest  importunity  to  march  immediately  to
his  relief.  But  Charles,  busy  at  that  time  in  prescrib-
ing terms  to  such  members  of  the  league  as  were  daily
returning  to  their  allegiance,  thought  it  sufficient  to  de-
tach Albert  marquis  of  Brandenburg-Anspach  with
three  thousand  men  to  his  assistance.  Albert,  though
an  enterprising  and  active  officer,  was  unexpectedly

•  Slcid.  418. Thuan.  lib.  iv.  128.

1547.]  BOOK VIII.  101

surprised  by  the  elector,  who  killed  many  of  his  troops,
dispersed the remainder, and took him prisoner.1
Maurice  continued  as  much  exposed  as  formerly ;  and
if  his  enemy  had  known  how  to  improve  the  opportu-
nity which  presented  itself,  his  ruin  must  have  been
immediate  and  unavoidable. But  the  elector,  no  less
slow  and  dilatory  when  invested  with  the  sole  com-
mand, than  he  had  been  formerly  when  joined  in  au-
thority with  a  partner,  never  gave  any  proof  of  military
activity  but  in  this  enterprise  against  Albert. Instead
of  marching  directly  towards  Maurice,  whom  the  de-
feat of  his  ally  had  greatly  alarmed,  he  inconsiderately
listened  to  overtures  of  accommodation,  which  his  art-
ful antagonist  proposed  with  no  other  intention  than  to
amuse  him,  and  to  slacken  the  vigour  of  his  operations.
The  em- Such,  indeed,  was  the  posture  of  the  empe-
peror  pre-  ror's  affairSj  that  he  could  not  march  instantly
from  at- to  the  relief  of  his  ally. Soon  after  the  separa-
dector8and  tion  of  the  confederate  army,  he,  in  order  to
landgrave.  eage  nimself  of  the  burden  of  maintaining  a  su-
perfluous number  of  troops,  had  dismissed  the  count  of
Buren  with  his  Flemings,"  imagining  that  the  Spaniards
and  Germans,  together  with  the  papal  forces,  would  be
fully  sufficient  to  crush  any  degree  of  vigour  that  yet
remained  among  the  members  of  the  league. But  Paul,
growing  wise  too  late,  began  now  to  discern  the  impru-
dence of  that  measure,  from  which  the  more  sagacious
Venetians  had  endeavoured  in  vain  to  dissuade  him.
The  rapid  progress  of  the  imperial  arms,  and  the  ease
with  which  they  had  broken  a  combination  that  ap-
peared no  less  firm  than  powerful,  opened  his  eyes  at
length,  and  made  him  not  only  forget  all  the  advan-
tages which  he  had  expected  from  such  a  complete  tri-
umph over  heresy,  but  placed  in  the  strongest  light  his
own  impolitic  conduct,  in  having  contributed  towards

*  Avila,  99.  6. Mem.  de  Ribicr,  torn.  i.  620.

u  Avila,  83.  6. Mem.  de  Ribier,  torn.  i.  592,  '

102  CHARLES V.  [1547.

acquiring  for  Charles  such  an  immense  increase  of
power,  as  would  enable  him,  after  oppressing  the  liber-
ties of  Germany,  to  give  law  with  absolute  authority  to
all  the  states  of  Italy.  The  moment  that  he  perceived
his  error,  he  endeavoured  to  correct  it.  Without

The  pope  .  <•!••,

recalls  his  giving  the  emperor  any  warning  01  his  inten-
tion, he  ordered  Farnese,  his  grandson,  to  return
instantly  to  Italy  with  all  the  troops  under  his  com-
mand, and  at  the  same  time  recalled  the  licence  which
he  had  granted  Charles,  of  appropriating  to  his  own
use  a  large  share  of  the  church  lands  in  Spain.  He
was  not  destitute  of  pretences  to  justify  this  abrupt  de-
sertion of  his  ally.  The  term  of  six  months,  during
which  the  stipulations  in  their  treaty  were  to  continue
in  force,  was  now  expired;  the  league,  in  opposition  to
which  their  alliance  had  been  framed,  seemed  to  be  en-
tirely dissipated;  Charles,  in  all  his  negotiations  with
the  princes  and  cities  which  had  submitted  to  his  will,
had  neither  consulted  the  pope,  nor  had  allotted  him
any  part  of  the  conquests  which  he  had  made,  nor  had
allowed  him  any  share  in  the  vast  contributions  which
he  had  raised.  He  had  not  even  made  any  provision
for  the  suppression  of  heresy,  or  the  re-establishment
of  the  Catholic  religion,  which  were  Paul's  chief  in-
ducements to  bestow  the  treasures  of  the  church  so
liberally  in  carrying  on  the  war.  These  colours,  how-
ever specious,  did  not  conceal  from  the  emperor  that
secret  jealousy  which  was  the  true  motive  of  the  pope's
conduct.  But,  as  Paul's  orders  with  regard  to  the
march  of  his  troops  were  no  less  peremptory  than  un-
expected, it  was  impossible  to  prevent  their  retreat.
Charles  exclaimed  loudly  against  nis  treachery,  in
abandoning  him  so  unseasonably,  while  he  was  prose-
cuting a  war  undertaken  in  obedience  to  the  papal  in-
junctions, and  from  which,  if  successful,  so  much  ho-
nour and  advantage  would  redound  to  the  church.  To
complaints  he  added  threats  and  expostulations.  But

1547.]  BOOK VIII.  103

Paul  remained  inflexible;  his  troops  continued  their
march  towards  the  ecclesiastical  state;  and  in  an  elabo-
rate memorial,  intended  as  an  apology  for  his  conduct,
he  discovered  new  and  more  manifest  symptoms  of
alienation  from  the  emperor,  together  with  a  deep-
rooted  dread  of  his  power/  Charles,  weakened  by  the
withdrawing  of  so  great  a  body  from  his  army,  which
was  already  much  diminished  by  the  number  of  garri-
sons that  he  had  been  obliged  to  throw  into  the  towns
which  had  capitulated,  found  it  necessary  to  recruit  his
forces  by  new  levies,  before  he  could  venture  to  march
in  person  towards  Saxony.

The  fame  and  splendour  of  his  success  could
racy  to not  have  failed  of  attracting  such  multitudes  of
m-  soldiers  into  his  service  from  all  the  extensive

Genoaf  territories  now  subject  to  his  authority,  as  must
have  soon  put  him  in  a  condition  of  taking  the
field  against  the  elector  ;  but  the  sudden  and  violent
eruption  of  a  conspiracy  at  Genoa,  as  well  as  the  great
revolutions  which  that  event,  extremely  mysterious  in
its  first  appearances,  seemed  to  portend,  obliged  him  to
avoid  entangling  himself  in  new  operations  in  Germany,
until  he  had  fully  discovered  its  source  and  tendency.
The  form  of  government  which  had  been  established  in
Genoa,  at  the  time  when  Andrew  Doria  restored  liberty
to  his  country,  though  calculated  to  obliterate  the  me-
mory of  former  dissensions,  and  received  at  first  with
eager  approbation,  did  not,  after  a  trial  of  near  twenty
years,  give  universal  satisfaction  to  those  turbulent  and
factious  republicans.  As  the  entire  administration  of
affairs  was  now  lodged  in  a  certain  number  of  noble
families,  many  envying  them  that  pre-eminence,

The  object .  '  J

of  the  con-  wished  lor  the  restitution  ot  a  popular  govern-

' ment  to  which  they  had  been  accustomed  ;  and

though  all  reverenced  the  disinterested  virtue  of  Doria,

and  admired  his  talents,  not  a  few  were  jealous  of  that

*  F.  Paul,  208. Pallavic.  par.  ii.  p.  5. Thuan.  126.

104  CHARLES V.  [1547.

ascendant  which  he  had  acquired  in  the  councils  of  the
commonwealth.  His  age,  however,  his  moderation,
and  his  love  of  liberty,  afforded  anlple  security  to  his
countrymen  that  he  would  not  abuse  his  power,  nor
stain  the  close  of  his  days  by  attempting  to  overturn  that
fabric,  which  it  had  been  the  labour  and  pride  of  his
life  to  erect.  But  the  authority  and  influence  which
in  his  hands  were  innocent,  they  easily  saw  would
prove  destructive,  if  usurped  by  any  citizen  of  greater
ambition  or  less  virtue.  A  citizen  of  this  dangerous
character  had  actually  formed  such  pretensions,  and
with  some  prospect  of  success.  Giannetino  Doria,
whom  his  grand-uncle  Andrew  destined  to  be  the  heir
of  his  private  fortune,  aimed  likewise  at  being  his  suc-
cessor in  power.  His  temper,  haughty,  insolent,  and
overbearing  to  such  a  degree  as  would  hardly  have  been
tolerated  in  one  born  to  reign,  was  altogether  insup-
portable in  the  citizen  of  a  free  state.  The  more  saga-
cious among  the  Genoese  already  feared  and  hated  him
as  the  enemy  of  those  liberties  for  which  they  were  in-
debted to  his  uncle.  While  Andrew  himself,  blinded
by  that  violent  and  undiscerning  affection  which  per-
sons in  advanced  age  often  contract  for  the  younger
members  of  their  family,  set  no  bounds  to  the  indul-
gence with  which  he  treated  him ;  seeming  less  solicitous
to  secure  and  perpetuate  the  freedom  of  the  common-
wealth, than  to  aggrandize  that  undeserving  kinsman.

But  whatever  suspicion  of  Doria's  designs,  or  what-
ever dissatisfaction  with  the  system  of  administration  in
the  commonwealth,  these  circumstances  might  have
occasioned,  they  would  have  ended,  it  is  probable,  in
nothing  more  than  murmurings  and  complaints,  if  John
Lewis  Fiesco  count  of  Lavagna,  observing  this  grow-
ing disgust,  had  not  been  encouraged  by  it  to  attempt
one  of  the  boldest  actions  recorded  in  history.  That
young  nobleman,  the  richest  and  most  illustri-

Jiesco  " ,.  . .  ...

count  of ous  subject  in  the  republic,  possessed,  in  an

1547.]  BOOK VIII.  105

Lavagna  eminent  degree,  all  the  qualities  which  win  upon
the  con- °f  the  human  heart,  which  command  respect,  or
spiracy.  secure  attachment.  He  was  graceful  and  ma-
jestic in  his  person  ;  magnificent  even  to  profusion  ;  of
a  generosity  that  anticipated  the  wishes  of  his  friends,
and  exceeded  the  expectations  of  strangers ;  of  an  in-
sinuating address,  gentle  manners,  and  a  flowing  affa-
bility. But  under  the  appearance  of  these  virtues,
which  seemed  to  form  him  for  enjoying  and  adorning
social  life,  he  concealed  all  the  dispositions  which  mark
men  out  for  taking  the  lead  in  the  most  dangerous  and
dark  conspiracies — an  insatiable  and  restless  ambition,
a  courage  unacquainted  with  fear,  and  a  mind  that  dis-
dained subordination.  Such  a  temper  could  ill  brook
that  station  of  inferiority,  wherein  he  was  placed  in  the
republic ;  and  as  he  envied  the  power  which  the  elder
Doria  had  acquired,  he  was  filled  with  indignation  at
the  thoughts  of  its  descending,  like  a  hereditary  pos-
session, to  Giannetino.  These  various  passions,  prey-
ing with  violence  on  his  turbulent  and  aspiring  mind,
determined  him  to  attempt  overturning  that  domination
to  which  he  could  not  submit,
intrigues  As  ^e  most  effectual  method  of  accomplish -

andprepa-m2r  this,  he  thought  at  first  of  forming:  a  con-
rations  of ° .  & .

the  con-  nexion  with  Francis,  and  even  proposed  it  to
the  French  ambassador  at  Rome ;  and  after
expelling  Doria,  together  with  the  imperial  faction,  by
his  assistance,  he  offered  to  put  the  republic  once  more
under  the  protection  of  that  monarch,  hoping  in  return
for  that  service  to  be  intrusted  with  the  principal  share
in  the  administration  of  government.  But  having  com-
municated his  scheme  to  a  few  chosen  confidants,  from
whom  he  kept  nothing  secret,  Verrina,  the  chief  of
them,  a  man  of  desperate  fortune,  capable  alike  of  ad-
vising and  executing  the  most  audacious  deeds,  remon-
strated with  earnestness  against  the  folly  of  exposing
himself  to  the  most  imminent  danger,  while  he  allowed

106  CHARLES  V.  [1547.

another  to  reap  all  the  fruits  of  his  success ;  and  ex-
horted him  warmly  to  aim  himself  at  that  pre-eminence
in  his  country,  to  which  he  was  destined  by  his  illus-
trious birth,  was  called  by  the  voice  of  his  fellow-citi-
zens, and  would  be  raised  by  the  zeal  of  his  friends.
This  discourse  opened  such  great  prospects  to  Fiesco,
and  so  suitable  to  his  genius,  that  abandoning  his  own
plan,  he  eagerly  adopted  that  of  Verrina.  The  other
persons  present,  though  sensible  of  the  hazardous  na-
ture of  the  undertaking,  did  not  choose  to  condemn
what  their  patron  had  so  warmly  approved.  It  was  in-
stantly resolved,  in  this  dark  cabal,  to  assassinate  the
two  Dorias,  as  well  as  the  principal  persons  of  their
party,  to  overturn  the  established  system  of  government,
and  to  place  Fiesco  on  the  ducal  throne  of  Genoa.
Time,  however,  and  preparations  were  requisite  to  ripen
such  a  design  for  execution ;  and  while  he  was  employed
in  carrying  on  these,  Fiesco  made  it  his  chief  care  to
guard  against  every  thing  that  might  betray  his  secret,
or  create  suspicion.  The  disguise  he  assumed,  was  of
all  others  the  most  impenetrable.  He  seemed  to  be
abandoned  entirely  to  pleasure  and  dissipation.  A
perpetual  gaiety,  diversified  by  the  pursuit  of  all  the
amusements  in  which  persons  of  his  age  and  rank  are
apt  to  delight,  engrossed,  in  appearance,  the  whole  of
his  time  and  thoughts.  But  amidst  this  hurry  of  dissi-
pation, he  prosecuted  his  plan  with  the  most  cool  at-
tention, neither  retarding  the  design  by  a  timid  hesita-
tion, nor  precipitating  the  execution  by  an  excess  of
impatience.  He  continued  his  correspondence  with  the
French  ambassador  at  Rome,  though  without  commu-
nicating to  him  his  real  intentions,  that  by  his  means  he
might  secure  the  protection  of  the  French  arms,  if  here-
after he  should  find  it  necessary  to  call  them  in  to  his
aid.  He  entered  into  a  close  confederacy  with  Farnese
duke  of  Parma,  who  being  disgusted  with  the  emperor
for  refusing  to  grant  him  the  investiture  of  that  duchy,

1547.]  BOOK VIII.  107

was  eager  to  promote  any  measure  that  tended  to  di-
mmish his  influence  in  Italy,  or  to  ruin  a  family  so  im-
plicitly devoted  to  him  as  that  of  Doria.  Being  sensi-
ble that,  in  a  maritime  state,  the  acquisition  of  naval
power  was  what  he  ought  chiefly  to  aim  at,  he  pur-
chased four  galleys  from  the  pope,  who  probably  was
not  unacquainted  with  the  design  which  he  had  formed,
and  did  not  disapprove  of  it.  Under  colour  of  fitting
out  one  of  these  galleys  to  sail  on  a  cruise  against  the
Turks,  he  not  only  assembled  a  good  number  of  his  own
vassals,  but  engaged  in  his  service  many  bold  adven-
turers, whom  the  truce  between  the  emperor  and  Soly-
man  Tiad  deprived  of  their  usual  occupation  and  sub-
sistence.

While  Fiesco  was  taking  these  important  steps,  he
preserved  so  admirably  his  usual  appearance  of  being
devoted  entirely  to  pleasure  and  amusement,  and  paid
court  with  such  artful  address  to  the  two  Dorias,  as  im-
posed not  only  on  the  generous  and  unsuspicious  mind
of  Andrew,  but  deceived  Giannetino,  who,  conscious
of  his  own  criminal  intentions,  was  more  apt  to  distrust
the  designs  of  others.  So  many  instruments  being  now
prepared,  nothing  remained  but  to  strike  the  blow.
Various  consultations  were  held  by  Fiesco  with  his
confidants,  in  order  to  settle  the  manner  of  doing  it
with  the  greatest  certainty  and  effect.  At  first,  they
proposed  to  murder  the  Dorias  and  their  chief  adherents,
during  the  celebration  of  high  mass  in  the  principal
church ;  but  as  Andrew  was  often  absent  from  religi-
ous solemnities,  on  account  of  his  great  age,  that  design
was  laid  aside.  It  was  then  concerted  that  Fiesco  should
invite  the  uncle  and  nephew,  with  all  their  friends  whom
he  had  marked  out  as  victims,  to  his  house ;  where  it
would  be  easy  to  cut  them  off  at  once  without  danger
or  resistance ;  but  as  Giannetino  was  obliged  to  leave
the  town  on  the  day  which  they  had  chosen,  it  became
necessary  likewise  to  alter  this  plan.  They  at  last  de-

108  CHARLES  V.  [1547.

termined  to  attempt  by  open  force,  what  they  found  dif-
ficult to  effect  by  stratagem,  and  fixed  on  the  night  be-
tween the  2d  and  3d  of  January,  for  the  execution  of
their  enterprise.  The  time  was  chosen  with  great  pro-
priety ;  for  as  the  doge  of  the  former  year  was  to  quit
his  office,  according  to  custom,  on  the  1st  of  the  month,
and  his  successor  could  not  be  elected  sooner  than  the
4th,  the  republic  remained  during  that  interval  in  a
sort  of  anarchy,  and  Fiesco  might  with  less  violence
take  possession  of  the  vacant  dignity.
The  con-  The  mornmg  °f  that  day  Fiesco  employed
spirators  jn  visiting  his  friends,  passing  some  hours  among
to  execute  them,  with  a  spirit  as  gay  and  unembarrassed  as
"'  at  other  times.  Towards  evening  he  paid  court
to  the  Dorias  with  his  usual  marks  of  respect,  and  sur-
veying their  countenance  and  behaviour  with  the  atten-
tion natural  in  his  situation,  was  happy  to  observe  the
perfect  security  in  which  they  remained,  without  the
least  foresight  or  dread  of  that  storm  which  had  been
so  long  a  gathering,  and  was  now  ready  to  burst  over
their  heads.  From  their  palace  he  hastened  to  his  own,
which  stood  by  itself  in  the  middle  of  a  large  court,
surrounded  by  a  high  wall.  The  gates  had  been  set
open  in  the  morning,  and  all  persons,  without  distinc-
tion, were  allowed  to  enter ;  but  strong  guards  posted
within  the  court,  suffered  no  one  to  return.  Verrina,
meanwhile,  and  a  few  persons  trusted  with  the  secret
of  the  conspiracy,  after  conducting  Fiesco's  vassals,  as
well  as  the  crews  of  his  galleys,  into  the  palace  in  small
bodies,  with  as  little  noise  as  possible,  dispersed  them-
selves through  the  city,  and,  in  the  name  of  their  pa-
tron, invited  to  an  entertainment  the  principal  citizens,
whom  they  knew  to  be  disgusted  with  the  administra-
tion of  the  Dorias,  and  to  have  inclination  as  well  as
courage  to  attempt  a  change  in  the  government.  Of  the
vast  number  of  persons  who  now  filled  the  palace,  a  few
only  knew  for  what  purpose  they  were  assembled;  the

1547.]  BOOR VIII.  109

rest,  astonished  at  finding,  instead  of  the  preparations
for  a  feast,  a  court  crowded  with  armed  men,  and  apart-
ments filled  with  the  instruments  of  war,  gazed  on  each
other  with  a  mixture  of  curiosity,  impatience,  and  terror.
Fiesco's While  their  minds  were  in  this  state  of  sus-
tkmTto" pense  and  agitation,  Fiesco  appeared. With  a
them. look  full  of  alacrity  and  confidence,  he  addressed
himself  to  the  persons  of  chief  distinction,  telling  them
that  they  were  not  now  called  to  partake  of  the  pleasure
of  an  entertainment,  but  to  join  in  a  deed  of  valour,
which  would  lead  them  to  liberty  and  immortal  renown.
He  set  before  their  eyes  the  exorbitant  as  well  as  into-
lerable authority  of  the  elder  Doria,  which  the  ambition
of  Giannetino,  and  the  partiality  of  the  emperor  to  a
family  more  devoted  to  him  than  to  their  country,  was
about  to  enlarge  and  to  render  perpetual. "  This  un-
righteous dominion,"  continued  he,  "  you  have  it  now
in  your  power  to  subvert,  and  to  establish  the  freedom
of  your  country  on  a  firm  basis. The  tyrants  must  be
cut  off. I  have  taken  the  most  effectual  measures  for
this  purpose. My  associates  are  numerous. I  can  de-
pend on  allies  and  protectors,  if  necessary. Happily,
the  tyrants  are  as  secure  as  I  have  been  provident.
Their  insolent  contempt  of  their  countrymen  has  ba-
nished the  suspicion  and  timidity  which  usually  render
the  guilty  quick-sighted  to  discern,  as  well  as  sagacious
to  guard  against,  the  vengeance  which  they  deserve.
They  will  now  feel  the  blow  before  they  suspect  any
hostile  hand  to  be  nigh. Let  us  then  sally  forth,  that
we  may  deliver  our  country  by  one  generous  effort,  al-
most unaccompanied  with  danger,  and  certain  of  suc-
cess." These  words  uttered  with  that  irresistible  fervour
which  animates  the  mind  when  roused  by  great  objects,
made  the  desired  impression  on  the  audience.  Fiesco's
vassals,  ready  to  execute  whatever  their  master  should
command,  received  his  discourse  with  murmurs  of  ap-
plause. To  many,  whose  fortunes  were  desperate,  the

HO  CHARLES V.  [1547.

licence  and  confusion  of  an  insurrection  afforded  an
agreeable  prospect.  Those  of  higher  rank,  and  more
virtuous  sentiments,  durst  not  discover  the  surprise  or
horror  with  which  they  were  struck,  at  the  proposal  of
an  enterprise  no  less  unexpected  than  atrocious ;  as
each  of  them  imagined  the  other  to  be  in  the  secret  of
the  conspiracy,  and  saw  himself  surrounded  by  persons
who  waited  only  a  signal  from  their  leader  to  perpetrate
the  greatest  crime.  With  one  voice,  then,  all  applauded,
or  feigned  to  applaud,  the  undertaking.

Fiesco,  having:  thus  fixed  and  encouraged  his

His  inter-  '  {  .  .

view  with  associates,  before  he  gave  them  his  last  orders,
he  hastened  for  a  moment  to  the  apartment  of
his  wife,  a  lady  of  the  noble  house  of  Cibo,  whom  he
loved  with  tender  affection,  and  whose  beauty  and  virtue
rendered  her  worthy  of  his  love.  The  noise  of  the  armed
men  who  crowded  the  court  and  palace,  having  long
before  this  reached  her  ears,  she  concluded  some  ha-
zardous enterprise  to  be  in  hand,  and  she  trembled  for
her  husband.  He  found  her  in  all  the  anguish  of  un-
certainty and  fear;  and  as  it  was  now  impossible  to
keep  his  design  concealed,  he  informed  her  of  what  he
had  undertaken.  The  prospect  of  a  scene  so  full  of
horror  as  well  as  danger  completed  her  agony ;  and
foreboding  immediately  in  her  mind  the  fatal  issue  of
it,  she  endeavoured,  by  her  tears,  her  entreaties,  and
her  despair,  to  divert  him  from  his  purpose.  Fiesco,
after  trying  in  vain  to  soothe  and  to  inspire  her  with
hope,  broke  from  a  situation  into  which  an  excess  of
tenderness  had  unwarily  seduced  him,  though  it  could
not  shake  his  resolution.  "  Farewell !"  he  cried,  as  he
quitted  the  apartment ;  "  you  shall  either  never  see  me
more,  or  you  shall  behold,  to-morrow,  every  thing  in
Genoa  subject  to  your  power."

They  at- ^s  soon  as  ne  rej<>med  his  companions,  he
tack  the allotted  each  his  proper  station  ;  some  were  ap-
pointed to  assault  and  seize  the  different  gates

1547.]  BOOK  VIII.  Ill

of  the  city ;  some  to  make  themselves  masters  of  the
principal  streets  or  places  of  strength  :  Fiesco  reserved
for  himself  the  attack  of  the  harbour,  where  Doria's
galleys  were  laid  up,  as  the  post  of  chief  importance,
and  of  greatest  danger. It  was  now  midnight,  and  the
citizens  slept  in  the  security  of  peace,  when  this  band
of  conspirators,  numerous,  desperate,  and  well  armed,
rushed  out  to  execute  their  plan.  They  surprised  some
of  the  gates  without  meeting  any  resistance. They  got
possession  of  others  after  a  sharp  conflict  with  the  sol-
diers on  guard. Verrina,  with  the  galley  which  had
been  fitted  out  against  the  Turks,  blocked  up  the  mouth
of  the  Darsena,  or  little  harbour,  where  Doria's  fleet
lay. All  possibility  of  escape  being  cut  off  by  this
precaution,  when  Fiesco  attempted  to  enter  the  galleys
from  the  shore,  to  which  they  were  made  fast,  they
were  in  no  condition  to  make  resistance,  as  they  were
not  only  unrigged  and  disarmed,  but  had  no"  crew  on
board,  except  the  slaves  chained  to  the  oar. Every
quarter  of  the  city  was  now  filled  with  noise  and  tumult,
all  the  streets  resounding  with  the  cry  of  Fiesco  and  li-
berty. At  that  name,  so  popular  and  beloved,  many
of  the  lower  rank  took  arms  and  joined  the  conspirators.
The  nobles  and  partisans  of  the  aristocracy,  astonished
or  affrighted,  shut  the  gates  of  their  houses,  and  thought
of  nothing  but  of  securing  them  from  pillage. At  last,
the  noise  excited  by  this  scene  of  violence  and  confu-
sion, reached  the  palace  of  Doria ;  Giannetino  started
immediately  from  his  bed,  and,  imagining  that  it  was
occasioned  by  some  mutiny  among  the  sailors,  rushed
out  with  a  few  attendants,  and  hurried  towards  the
harbour. The  gate  of  St.  Thomas,  through  which  he
had  to  pass,  was  already  in  possession  of  the  conspira-
tors, who,  the  moment  he  appeared,  fell  upon  him  with
the  utmost  fury,  and  murdered  him  on  the  spot. The
same  must  have  been  the  fate  of  the  elder  Doria,  if  Je-
rome de  Fiesco  had  executed  his  brother's  plan,  and

112  CHARLES V.  [1547.

had  proceeded  immediately  to  attack  him  in  his  palace ;
but  he,  from  the  sordid  consideration  of  preventing  its
being  plundered  amidst  the  confusion,  having  forbid
his  followers  to  advance,  Andrew  got  intelligence  of
his  nephew's  death,  as  well  as  of  his  own  danger ;  and
mounting  on  horseback,  saved  himself  by  flight.  Amidst
this  general  consternation,  a  few  senators  had  the  cou-
rage to  assemble  in  the  palace  of  the  republic/  At
first,  some  of  the  most  daring  among  them  attempted
to  rally  the  scattered  soldiers,  and  to  attack  a  body  of
the  conspirators  ;  but  being  repulsed  with  loss,  all
agreed  that  nothing  now  remained,  but  to  treat  with
the  party,  which  seemed  to  be  irresistible.  Deputies
were  accordingly  sent  to  learn  of  Fiesco  what  were  the
concessions  with  which  he  would  be  satisfied,  or  rather
to  submit  to  whatever  terms  he  should  please  to  pre-
scribe.

But  by  this time  Fiesco,  with  whom  they

Cause  of  J  ,  J

their  mis-  were  empowered  to  negotiate,  was  no  more.
Just  as  he  was  about  to  leave  the  harbour,
where  every  thing  had  succeeded  to  his  wish,  that  he
might  join  his  victorious  companions,  he  heard  some
extraordinary  uproar  on  board  the  admiral's  galley.
Alarmed  at  the  noise,  and  fearing  that  the  slaves  might
break  their  chains,  and  overpower  his  associates,  he
ran  thither ;  but  the  plank  which  reached  from  the  shore
to  the  vessel  happening  to  overturn,  he  fell  into  the
sea,  whilst  he  hurried  forward  too  precipitately.  Being
loaded  with  heavy  armour,  he  sunk  to  the  bottom,  and
perished  in  the  very  moment  when  he  must  have  taken
full  possession  of  every  thing  that  his  ambitious  heart
could  desire.  Verrina  was  the  first  who  discovered
this  fatal  accident,  and  foreseeing,  at  once,  all  its  con-
sequences, concealed  it  with  the  utmost  industry  from
every  one  but  a  few  leaders  of  the  conspiracy.  Nor
was  it  difficult,  amidst  the  darkness  and  confusion  of

i  II  palazza  dclla  Signoria.

1547.]  BOOK  VIII.  113

the  night,  to  have  kept  it  secret,  until  a  treaty  with  the
senators  should  have  put  the  city  in  the  power  of  the
conspirators.  All  their  hopes  of  this  were  disconcerted
by  the  imprudence  of  Jerome  Fiesco,  .who,  when  the
deputies  of  the  senate  inquired  for  his  brother,  the
count  of  Lavagna,  that  they  might  make  their  proposal
to  him,  replied  with  a  childish  vanity, — "  I  am  now
the  only  person  to  whom  that  title  belongs,  and  with
me  you  must  treat."  These  words  discovered  as  well
to  his  friends  as  to  his  enemies  what  had  happened,
and  made  the  impression  which  might  have  been  ex-
pected upon  both.  The  deputies,  encouraged  by  this
event,  the  only  one  which  could  occasion  such  a  sudden
revolution  as  might  turn  to  their  advantage,  assumed
instantly,  with  admirable  presence  of  mind,  a  new  tone
suitable  to  the  change  in  their  circumstances,  and  made
high  demands.  While  they  endeavoured  to  gain  time
by  protracting  the  negotiation,  the  rest  of  the  senators
were  busy  in  assembling  their  partisans,  and  in  forming
a  body  capable  of  defending  the  palace  of  the  republic.
On  the  other  hand,  the  conspirators,  astonished  at  the
death  of  a  man  whom  they  adored  and  trusted,  and
placing  no  confidence  in  Jerome,  a  giddy  youth,  felt
their  courage  die  away,  and  their  arms  fall  from  their
hands.  That  profound  and  amazing  secrecy  with  which
the  conspiracy  had  been  concerted,  and  which  had  con-
tributed hitherto  so  much  to  its  success,  proved  now
the  chief  cause  of  its  miscarriage.  The  leader  was
gone;  the  greater  part  of  those  who  acted  under  him,
knew  not  his  confidants,  and  were  strangers  to  the  ob-
ject at  which  he  aimed.  There  was  no  person  among
them  whose  authority  or  abilities  entitled  him  to  assume
Fiesco's  place,  or  to  finish  his  plan  ;  after  having  lost
the  spirit  which  animated  it,  life  and  activity  deserted
the  whole  body.  Many  of  the  conspirators  withdrew
to  their  houses,  hoping  that  amidst  the  darkness  of  the
night  they  had  passed  unobserved,  and  might  remain
VOL.  v.  i

H4  CHARLES V.  [1547.

unknown.  Others  sought  for  safety  by  a  timely  retreat ;
aiul  before  break  of  day,  most  of  them  fled  with  preci-
pitation from  a  city,  which,  but  a  few  hours  before,  was
ready  to  acknowledge  them  as  masters.
Tranquil-  Next  morning  every  thing  was  quiet  in
!!lJi!*^-sU"  Genoa;  not  an  enemy  was  to  be  seen:  few

hlished  in  '  *  7

Genoa.  marks  of  the  violence  of  the  former  night  ap-
peared, the  conspirators  having  conducted  their  enter-
prise with  more  noise  than  bloodshed,  and  gained  all
their  advantages  by  surprise,  rather  than  by  force  of
arms.  Towards  evening,  Andrew  Doria  returned  to
the  city,  being  met  by  all  the  inhabitants,  who  received
him  with  acclamations  of  joy.  Though  the  disgrace
as  well  as  danger  of  the  preceding  night  were  fresh  in
his  mind,  and  the  mangled  body  of  his  kinsman  still
before  his  eyes,  such  was  his  moderation  as  well  as
magnanimity,  that  the  decree  issued  by  the  senate  against
the  conspirators,  did  not  exceed  that  just  measure  of
severity  which  was  requisite  for  the  support  of  govern-
ment, and  was  dictated  neither  by  the  violence  of  re-
sentment, nor  the  rancour  of  revenge.2  *
The  empe-  After  taking  the  necessary  precautions  for
!  preventing  the  flame,  which  was  now  so  hap-
pfly  extinguished,  from  breaking  out  anew,  the
first  care  of  the  senate  was  to  send  an  ambassador  to
the  emperor,  to  give  him  a  particular  detail  of  what  had
happened,  and  to  beg  his  assistance  towards  the  re-
duction of  Montobbio,  a  strong  fort  on  the  hereditary
estate  of  the  Fiesci,  in  which  Jerome  had  shut  himself
up.  Charles  was  no  less  alarmed  than  astonished  at
an  event  so  strange  and  unexpected.  He  could  not  be-
lieve that  Fiesco,  how  bold  or  adventurous  soever,  durst

1  Thuan.  93.  Sigonii  Vita  Andreas  Doris,  1196.  La  Conjuration  du  Corapte  de
Fiesque,  par  Cardin.  de  Retz.  Adrian!  Istoria,  lib.  vi.  369.  Folietz  Conjuratio
Jo.  Lud.  Fiejci,  ap.  Gray.  Thes.  Ital.  i.  883.

*  It  is  remarkable,  that  cardinal  de  Retz,  at  the  age  of  eighteen,  composed  a
history  of  this  conspiracy,  containing  such  a  discovery  of  his  admiration  of  Fiesco
and  his  enterprise,  as  render  it  not  surprising  that  a  minister,  so  jealous  and  discern-
ing as  Richelieu,  should  be  led,  by  the  perusal  of  it,  to  predict  the  turbulent  and
dangerous  spirit  of  that  young  ecclesiastic.  Mem.  de  Retz,  torn.  i.  p.  13.

1547.]  BOOK VIII.  115

have  attempted  such  an  enterprise,  but  on  foreign  sug-
gestion, and  from  the  hope  of  foreign  aid.  Being  in-
formed that  the  duke  of  Parma  was  well  acquainted
with  the  plan  of  the  conspirators,  he  immediately  sup-
posed that  the  pope  could  not  be  ignorant  of  a  measure,
which  his  son  had  countenanced.  Proceeding  from
this  to  a  farther  conjecture,  which  Paul's  cautious
maxims  of  policy  in  other  instances  rendered  extremely
probable,  he  concluded,  that  the  French  king  must
have  known  and  approved  of  the  design ;  and  he  began
to  apprehend  that  this  spark  might  again  kindle  the
flame  of  war  which  had  raged  so  long  in  Italy.  As
Suspends  he  had  drained  his  Italian  territories  of  troops
his  opera-  on  account  of  the  German  war,  he  was  altogre-

tions  in  '

Germany,  ther  unprovided  for  resisting  any  hostile  attack
in  that  country ;  and  on  the  first  appearance  of  danger,
he  must  have  detached  thither  the  greatest  part  of  his
forces  for  its  defence.  In  this  situation  of  affairs,  it  would
have  been  altogether  imprudent  in  the  emperor  to  have
advanced  in  person  against  the  elector  until  he  should
learn  with  some  degree  of  certainty  whether  such  a
scene  were  not  about  to  open  in  Italy,  as  might  put  it
out  of  his  power  to  keep  the  field  with  an  army  suffi-
cient to  oppose  him.

i2

THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

OF  THE

EMPEROR  CHARLES  V.

BOOK  IX.

Francis THE  emperor's  dread  of  the  hostile  intentions
jealous  of  of  the  pope  and  French  king  did  not  proceed

the  empe- _  .  ..,  j i  • •

ror's power  from  any  imaginary  or  ill-grounded  suspicion.
eel'"'  Paul  had  already  given  the  strongest  proofs
both  of  his  jealousy  and  enmity.  Charles  could
not  hope  that  Francis,  after  a  rivalship  of  so  long  con-
tinuance, would  behold  the  great  advantages  which
he  had  gained  over  the  confederate  Protestants,  with-
out feeling  his  ancient  emulation  revive.  He  was  not
deceived  in  this  conjecture.  Francis  had  observed  the
rapid  progress  of  his  arms  with  deep  concern,  and
though  hitherto  prevented,  by  circumstances  which  have
been  mentioned,  from  interposing  in  order  to  check
them,  he  was  now  convinced  that,  if  he  did  not  make
some  extraordinary  and  timely  effort,  Charles  must  ac-
quire such  a  degree  of  power  as  would  enable  him  to
give  law  to  the  rest  of  Europe.  This  apprehension,
which  did  not  take  its  rise  from  the  jealousy  of  rivalship
alone,  but  was  entertained  by  the  wisest  politicians  of
the  age,  suggested  various  expedients  which  might
serve  to  retard  the  course  of  the  emperor's  victories,  and
to  form  by  degrees  such  a  combination  against  him  as
might  put  a  stop  to  his  dangerous  career.
Negotiates  With  this  view,  Francis  instructed  his  emis-
saries in  Germany  to  employ  all  their  address  in
order  to  revive  the  courage  of  the  confederates,

tanls.

1547.]  BOOK IX.  117

and  to  prevent  them  from  submitting  to  the  emperor.
He  made  liberal  offers  of  his  assistance  to  the  elector
arid  landgrave,  whom  he  knew  to  be  the  most  zealous
as  well  as  the  most  powerful  of  the  whole  body;  he  used
every  argument,  and  proposed  every  advantage,  which
could  either  confirm  their  dread  of  the  emperor's  designs,
or  determine  them not  to  imitate  the  inconsiderate
credulity  of  their  associates,  in  giving  up  their  religion
and  liberties  to  his  disposal. While  he  took  this  step
towards  continuing  the  civil  war  which  raged  in  Ger-
many, he  endeavoured  likewise  to  stir  up  foreign  enemies
With  Soiy-  agamst  the  emperor. He  solicited  Solyman  to
man; seize  this  favourable  opportunity  of  invading
Hungary,  which  had  been  drained  of  all  the  troops
necessary  for  its  defence,  in  order  to  form  the  army
against  the  confederates  of  Smalkalde.  He  exhorted  the
pope  to  repair,  by  a  vigorous  and  seasonable  effort,  the
error  of  which  he  had  been  guilty  in  contributing  to
raise  the  emperor  to  such  a  formidable  height  of  power,
with  the Finding  Paul,  both  from  the  consciousness  of
pope  and  njs  own  mistake,  and  his  dread  of  its  consequen-
ts ces,  abundantly  disposed  to  listen  to  what  he
suggested,  he  availed  himself  of  this  favourable  dispo-
sition which  the  pontiff  began  to  discover,  as  an  argu-
ment to  gain  the  Venetians. He  endeavoured  to  con-
vince them  that  nothing  could  save  Italy,  and  even  Eu-
rope, from  oppression  and  servitude,  but  their  joining
with  the  pope  and  him,  in  giving  the  firstbeginningtoa
general  confederacy,  in  order  to  humble  that  ambitious
potentate,  whom  they  had  all  equal  reason  to  dread.
with  the Having  set  on  foot  these  negotiations  in  the
kings  of southern  courts,  he  turned  his  attention  next  to-
anTEng-  wards  those  in  the  north  of  Europe. As  the
king  of  Denmark  had  particular  reasons  to  be
offended  with  the  emperor,  Francis  imagined  that  the
object  of  the  league  which  he  had  projected  would  be

118  CHARLES  V.  [1547.

highly  acceptable  to  him;  and  lest  considerations  of
caution  or  prudence  should  restrain  him  from  joining
in  it,  he  attempted  to  overcome  these,  by  offering  him
the  young  queen  of  Scots  in  marriage  to  his  son.a  As
the  ministers  who  governed  England  in  the  name  of
Edward  VI.  had  openly  declared  themselves  converts
to  the  opinions  of  the  reformers,  as  soon  as  it  became
safe  upon  Henry's  death  to  lay  aside  that  disguise  which
his  intolerant  bigotry  had  forced  them  to  assume,  Fran-
cis flattered  himself  that  their  zeal  would  not  allow  them
to  remain  inactive  spectators  of  the  overthrow  and  de-
struction of  those  who  professed  the  same  faith  with
themselves.  He  hoped  that,  notwithstanding  the  strug-
gles of  faction  incident  to  a  minority,  and  the  prospect
of  an  approaching  rupture  with  the  Scots,  he  might  pre-
vail on  them  likewise  to  take  part  in  the  common  cause.b
While  Francis  employed  such  a  variety  of  expedi-
ents, and  exerted  himself  with  such  extraordinary  ac-
tivity, to  rouse  the  different  states  of  Europe  against
his  rival,  he  did  not  neglect  what  depended  on  himself
alone.  He  levied  troops  in  all  parts  of  his  dominions ;
he  collected  military  stores;  he  contracted  with  the
Swiss  cantons  for  a  considerable  body  of  men ;  he  put
his  finances  in  admirable  order;  he  remitted  consider-
able sums  to  the  elector  and  landgrave ;  and  took  all  the
other  steps  necessary  towards  commencing  hostilities,
on  the  shortest  warning,  and  with  the  greatest  vigour.0
The  crape-  Operations  so  complicated,  and  which  requir-
L°JrSUy  6(^  ^e  Putti°g  so  many  instruments  in  motion,
did  not  escape  the  emperor's  observation.  He
was  early  informed  of  Francis's  intrigues  in  the  several
courts  of  Europe,  as  well  as  of  his  domestic  prepara-
tions ;  and  sensible  how  fatal  an  interruption  a  foreign
war  would  prove  to  his  designs  in  Germany,  he  trembled
at  the  prospect  of  that  event.  The  danger,  however,  ap-

•  Mem.  de  Ribier,  i.  600.  606.  «•  Ibid.  635.  elbid.  595.

1547.]  BOOK IX.  119

peared  to  him  as  unavoidable  as  it  was  great.  He  knew
the  insatiable  and  well-directed  ambition  of  Solyman,
and  that  he  always  chose  the  season  for  beginning  his
military  enterprises  with  prudence  equal  to  the  valour
with  which  he  conducted  them.  The  pope,  as  he  had
good  reason  to  believe,  wanted  not  pretexts  to  justify  a
rupture,  nor  inclination  to  begin  hostilities.  He  had
already  made  some  discovery  of  his  sentiments,  by  ex-
pressing a  joy  altogether  unbecoming  the  head  of  the
church,  upon  receiving  an  account  of  the  advantage
which  the  elector  of  Saxony  had  gained  over  Albert  of
Brandenburg;  and  as  he  was  now  secure  of  finding,
in  the  French  king,  an  ally  of  sufficient  power  to  sup-
port him,  he  was  at  no  pains  to  conceal  the  violence  and
extent  of  his  enmity .d  The  Venetians,  Charles  was
well  assured,  had  long  observed  the  growth  of  his  power
with  jealousy,  which,  added  to  the  solicitations  and
promises  of  France,  might  at  last  quicken  their  slow
councils,  and  overcome  their  natural  caution.  The
Danes  and  the  English,  it  was  evident,  had  both  pecu-
liar reason  to  be  disgusted,  as  well  as  strong  motives  to
act  against  him.  But  above  all,  he  dreaded  the  active
emulation  of  Francis  himself,  whom  he  considered  as
the  soul  and  mover  of  any  confederacy  that  could  be
formed  against  him ;  and,  as  that  monarch  had  afforded
protection  to  Verina,  who  sailed  directly  to  Marseilles
upon  the  miscarriage  of  Fiesco's  conspiracy,  Charles
expected  every  moment  to  see  the  commencement  of
those  hostile  operations  in  Italy,  of  which  he  conceived
the  insurrection  in  Genoa  to  have  been  only  the  prelude.
But  while  he  remained  in  this  state  of  sus-

Entertains  -. ,. . , , .

hope  from  pense  and  solicitude,  there  was  one  circumstance
which  afforded  him  some  prospect  of  escaping
^ie  danger.  The  French  king's  health  began  to
decline.  A  disease,  which  was  the  effect  of  his

d  Mem.  de  Ribier,  torn.  i.  637.

120  CHARLES V.  [1547.

inconsiderate  pursuit  of  pleasure,  preyed  gradually  on
his  constitution.  The  preparations  for  war,  as  well  as
the  negotiations  in  the  different  courts,  began  to  languish
together  with  the  monarch  who  gave  spirit  to  both.
The  Genoese,  during  that  interval,  reduced
Montobbio,  took  Jerome  Fiesco  prisoner,  and
putting  him  to  death,  together  with  his  chief  adherents,
extinguished  all  remains  of  the  conspiracy.  Several
of  the  imperial  cities  in  Germany,  despairing  of  timely
assistance  from  France,  submitted  to  the  emperor.  Even
the  landgrave  seemed  disposed  to  abandon  the  elector,
and  to  bring  matters  to  a  speedy  accommodation,  on  such
terms  as  he  could  obtain.  In  the  mean  time,  Charles
waited  with  impatience  the  issue  of  a  distemper,  which
was  to  decide  whether  he  must  relinquish  all  other
schemes,  in  order  to  prepare  for  resisting  a  combination
of  the  greater  part  of  Europe  against  him,  or  whether
he  might  proceed  to  invade  Saxony,  without  interrup-
tion or  fear  of  danger.

O

The  good  fortune,  so  remarkably  propitious  to  his
family,  that  some  historians  have  called  it  the  Star  of
the  House  of  Austria,  did  not  desert  him  on  this  occa-
Death  of  S*0n"  Francis  died  at  Rambouillet,  on  the  last
Francis;  day  of  March,  in  the  fifty- third  year  of  his  age,
tSJorfhis  anc*  the  thirty-third  of  his  reign.  During
tSnS-  twenty-eight  years  of  that  time,  an  avowed
ship  with  rivalship  subsisted  between  him  and  the  empe-

Charles.  ,  . , . . .

ror,  which  involved  not  only  their  own  domi-
nions, but  the  greater  part  of  Europe,  in  wars,  which
were  prosecuted  with  more  violent  animosity,  and  drawn
out  to  a  greater  length,  than  had  been  known  in  any
former  period.  Many  circumstances  contributed  to
this.  Their  animosity  was  founded  in  opposition  of
interest,  heightened  by  personal  emulation,  and  exas-
perated not  only  by  mutual  injuries,  but  by  reciprocal
insults.  At  the  same  time,  whatever  advantage  one

1547.]  BOOK VIII.  121

seemed  to  possess  towards  gaining  the  ascendant,  was
wonderfully  balanced  by  some  favourable  circumstance
peculiar  to  the  other.  The  emperor's  dominions  were
of  greater  extent,  the  French  king's 'lay  more  compact;
Francis  governed  his  kingdom  with  absolute  power ;
that  of  Charles  was  limited,  but  he  supplied  the  want
of  authority  by  address  ;  the  troops  of  the  former  were
more  impetuous  and  enterprising ;  those  of  the  latter
better  disciplined,  and  more  patient  of  fatigue.  The
talents  and  abilities  of  the  two  monarchs  were  as  dif-
ferent as  the  advantages  which  they  possessed,  and
contributed  no  less  to  prolong  the  contest  between  them.
Francis  took  his  resolutions  suddenly,  prosecuted  them
at  first  with  warmth,  and  pushed  them  into  execution
with  a  most  adventurous  courage  ;  but  being  destitute
of  the  perseverance  necessary  to  surmount  difficulties,
he  often  abandoned  his  designs,  or  relaxed  the  vigour
of  pursuit,  from  impatience,  and  sometimes  from  levity.
Charles  deliberated  long,  and  determined  with  coolness;
but  having  once  fixed  his  plan,  he  adhered  to  it  with
inflexible  obstinacy,  and  neither  danger  nor  discourage-
ment could  turn  him  aside  from  the  execution  of  it.
The  success  of  their  enterprises  was  suitable  to  the
diversity  of  their  characters,  and  was  uniformly  in-
fluenced by  it.  Francis,  by  his  impetuous  activity,
often  disconcerted  the  emperor's  best  laid  schemes;
Charles,  by  a  more  calm  but  steady  prosecution  of  his
designs,  checked  the  rapidity  of  his  rival's  career,  and
baffled  or  repulsed  his  most  vigorous  efforts.  The  for-
mer, at  the  opening  of  a  war  or  of  a  campaign,  broke
in  upon  his  enemy  with  the  violence  of  a  torrent,
and  carried  all  before  him;  the  latter,  waiting  until  he
saw  the  force  of  his  rival  begin  to  abate,  recovered  in
the  end  not  only  all  that  he  had  lost,  but  made  new
acquisitions.  Few  of  the  French  monarch's  attempts
towards  conquest,  whatever  promising  aspect  they  might
wear  at  first,  were  conducted  to  a  happy  issue ;  many

122  CHARLES V.  [1547.

of  the  emperor's  enterprises,  even  after  they  appeared
desperate  and  impracticable,  terminated  in  the  most
prosperous  manner.  Francis  was  dazzled  with  the
splendour  of  an  undertaking ;  Charles  was  allured  by
the  prospect  of  its  turning  to  his  advantage.

The  degree,  however,  of  their  comparative  merit  and
reputation  has  not  been  fixed  either  by  a  strict  scrutiny
into  their  abilities  for  government,  or  by  an  impartial
consideration  of  the  greatness  and  success  of  their  un-
dertakings ;  and  Francis  is  one  of  those  monarchs  who
occupies  a  higher  rank  in  the  temple  of  fame,  than
either  his  talents  or  performances  entitle  him  to  hold.
This  pre-eminence  he  owed  to  many  different  circum-
stances. The  superiority  which  Charles  acquired  by
the  victory  of  Pavia,  and  which  from  that  period  he
preserved  through  the  remainder  of  his  reign,  was  so
manifest,  that  Francis's  struggle  against  his  exorbitant
and  growing  dominion  was  viewed  by  most  of  the  other
powers,  not  only  with  the  partiality  which  naturally
arises  for  those  who  gallantly  maintain  an  unequal  con-
test, but  with  the  favour  due  to  one  who  was  resisting
a  common  enemy,  and  endeavouring  to  set  bounds  to
a  monarch  equally  formidable  to  them  all. The  cha-
racters of  princes,  too,  especially  among  their  contem-
poraries, depend  not  only  upon  their  talents  for  govern-
ment, but  upon  their  qualities  as  men. Francis,  not-
withstanding the  many  errors  conspicuous  in  his  foreign
policy  and  domestic  administration,  was  nevertheless
humane,  beneficent,  generous. He  possessed  dignity
without  pride; affability  free from meanness ; and
courtesy  exempt  from  deceit. All  who  had  access  to
him,  and  no  man  of  merit  was  ever  denied  that  privilege,
respected  and  loved  him. Captivated  with  his  personal
qualities,  his  subjects  forgot  his  defects  as  a  monarch,
and  admiring  him  as  the  most  accomplished  and  amia-
ble gentleman  in  his  dominions,  they  hardly  murmured
at  acts  of  male-administration,  which,  in  a  prince  of  less

1547.]  BOOK VIII.  123

engaging  dispositions,  would  have  been  deemed  un-
pardonable. This  admiration,  however,  must  have  been
temporary  only,  and  would  have  died  away  with  the
courtiers  who  bestowed  it ;  the  illusion  arising  from  his
private  virtues  must  have  ceased,  and  posterity  would
have  judged  of  his  public  conduct  with  its  usual  im-
partiality;  but  another  circumstance  prevented this,
and  his  name  hath  been  transmitted  to  posterity  with
increasing  reputation. Science  and  the  arts  had,  at
that  time,  made  little  progress  in  France. They  were
just  beginning  to  advance  beyond  the  limits  of  Italy,
where  they  had  revived,  and  which  had  hitherto  been
their  only  seat. Francis  took  them  immediately  under
his  protection,  and  vied  with  Leo  himself,  in  the  zeal
and  munificence  with  which  he  encouraged  them. He
invited  learned  men  to  his  court,  he  conversed  with
them  familiarly,  he  employed  them  in  business,  he  raised
them  to  offices  of  dignity,  and  honoured  them  with  his
confidence. That  order  of  men,  not  more  prone  to
complain  when  denied  the  respect  to  which  they  con-
ceive themselves  entitled,  than  apt  to  be  pleased  when
treated  with  the  distinction  which  they  consider  as  their
due,  thought  they  could  not  exceed  in  gratitude  to  such
a  benefactor,  and  strained  their  invention,  and  employed
all  their  ingenuity  in  panegyric. Succeeding  authors,
warmed  with their  descriptions  of  Francis's  bounty,
adopted  their  encomiums,  and  even  added  to  them.
The  appellation  of  Father  of  Letters  bestowed  upon
Francis,  hath  rendered  his  memory  sacred  among  his-
torians ;  and  they  seem  to  have  regarded  it  as  a  sort
of  impiety  to  uncover  his  infirmities,  or  to  point  out  his
defects. Thus Francis,  notwithstanding  his  inferior
abilities,  and  want  of  success,  hath  more  than  equalled
the  fame  of  Charles. The  good  qualities  which  he
possessed  as  a  man,  have  entitled  him  to  greater  ad-
miration and  praise  than  have  been  bestowed  upon  the

124  CHARLES V.  [1547.

extensive  genius  and  fortunate  arts  of  a  more  capable,
but  less  amiable  rival.

By  his  death  a  considerable  change  was

Effects  of  J .  „  -r,  ~, ,

Francis's  made  in  the  state  of  Europe.  Charles,  grown
old  in  the  arts  of  government  and  command,
had  now  to  contend  only  with  younger  monarchs,  who
could  not  be  regarded  as  worthy  to  enter  the  lists  with
him,  who  had  stood  so  many  encounters  with  Henry
VIII.  and  Francis  I.,  and  come  off  with  honour  in  all
those  different  struggles.  By  this  event,  he  was  eased
of  all  disquietude,  and  was  happy  to  find  that  he  might
begin  with  safety  those  operations  against  the  elector
of  Saxony,  which  he  had  hitherto  been  obliged  to  sus-
pend. He  knew  the  abilities  of  Henry  II.,  who  had
just  mounted  the  throne  of  France,  to  be  greatly  in-
ferior to  those  of  his  father,  and  foresaw  that  he  would
be  so  much  occupied  for  some  time  in  displacing  the
late  king's  ministers,  whom  he  hated,  and  in  gratifying
the  ambitious  demands  of  his  own  favourites,  that  he
had  nothing  to  dread,  either  from  his  personal  efforts,
or  from  any  confederacy  which  this  unexperienced
prince  could  form.

Charles  But  as  it  was  uncertain  how  long  such  an

interval  of  security  might  continue,  Charles
determined  instantly  to  improve  it;  and  as  soon
April  13.  as  he  heard  of  Francis's  demise,  he  began  his
march  from  Egra  on  the  borders  of  Bohemia.  But  the
departure  of  the  papal  troops,  together  with  the  retreat
of  the  Flemings,  had  so  much  diminished  his  army,
that  sixteen  thousand  men  were  all  he  could  assemble.
With  this  inconsiderable  body  he  set  out  on  an  expe-
dition, the  event  of  which  was  to  decide  what  degree
of  authority  he  should  possess  from  that  period  in  Ger-
many: but  as  this  little  army  consisted  chiefly  of  the
veteran  Spanish  and  Italian  bands,  he  did  not,  in  trust-
ing to  them,  commit  much  to  the  decision  of  chance;

1547.]  BOOK VIII.  125

and  even  with  so  small  a  force  he  had  reason  to  enter-
tain the  most  sanguine  hopes  of  success.  The  elector
had  levied  an  army  greatly  superior  in  number;  but
neither  the  experience  and  discipline  of  his  troops,  nor
the  abilities  of  his  officers,  were  to  be  compared  with
those  of  the  emperor.  The  elector,  besides,  had  already
been  guilty  of  an  error,  which  deprived  him  of  all  the
advantage  which  he  might  have  derived  from  his  supe-
riority in  number,  and  was  alone  sufficient  to  have  oc-
casioned his  ruin.  Instead  of  keeping  his  forces  united,
he  detached  one  great  body  towards  the  frontiers  of
Bohemia,  in  order  to  facilitate  his  junction  with  the
malecontents  of  that  kingdom,  and  cantoned  a  consi-
derable part  of  what  remained  in  different  places  of
Saxony,  where  he  expected  the  emperor  would  make
the  first  impression,  vainly  imagining  that  open  towns,
with  small  garrisons,  might  be  rendered  tenable  against
an  enemy.

Progress  of  The  emperor  entered  the  southern  frontier
his  arms.  of  Saxony,  and  attacked  Altorf  upon  the  Elster.
The  impropriety  of  the  measure  which  the  elector  had
taken  was  immediately  seen,  the  troops  posted  in  that
town  surrendering  without  resistance ;  and  those  in  all
the  other  places  between  that  and  the  Elbe,  either  imi-
tated their  example,  or  fled  as  the  Imperialists  ap-
proached. Charles,  that  they  might  not  recover  from
the  panic  with  which  they  seemed  to  be  struck,  ad-
vanced without  losing  a  moment.  The  elector,  who
had  fixed  his  head-quarters  at  Meissen,  continued  in
his  wonted  state  of  fluctuation  and  uncertainty.  He
even  became  more  undetermined,  in  proportion  as  the
danger  drew  near,  and  called  for  prompt  and  decisive
resolutions.  Sometimes  he  acted,  as  if  he  had  resolved
to  defend  the  banks  of  the  Elbe,  and  to  hazard  a  battle
with  the  enemy,  as  soon  as  the  detachments  which  he
had  called  in  were  able  to  join  him.  At  other  times,
he  abandoned  this  as  rash  and  perilous,  seeming  to

126  CHARLES V.  [1547.

adopt  the  more  prudent  counsels  of  those  who  advised
him  to  endeavour  at  protracting  the  war,  and  for  that
end  to  retire  under  the  fortifications  of  Wittemberg,
where  the  Imperialists  could  not  attack  him  without
manifest  disadvantage,  and  where  he  might  wait,  in
safety,  for  the  succours  which  he  expected  from  Meck-
lenburg, Pomerania,  and  the  Protestant  cities  on  the
Baltic.  Without  fixing  upon  either  of  these  plans,  he
broke  down  the  bridge  at  Meissen,  and  marched  along
the  east  bank  of  the  Elbe  to  Muhlberg.  There  he  de-
liberated anew ;  and,  after  much  hesitation,  adopted
one  of  those  middle  schemes,  which  are  always  accept-
able to  feeble  minds  incapable  of  deciding.  He  left  a
detachment  at  Muhlberg  to  oppose  the  Imperialists,  if
they  should  attempt  to  pass  at  that  place ;  and,  ad-
vancing a  few  miles  with  his  main  body,  encamped
there  in  expectation  of  the  event,  according  to  which
he  proposed  to  regulate  his  subsequent  motions.
Passes  the  Charles,  meanwhile,  pushing  forward  inces-
Eibe.  santly,  arrived  the  evening  of  the  23d  of  April
on  the  banks  of  the  Elbe,  opposite  to  Muhlberg.  The
river,  at  that  place,  was  three  hundred  paces  in  breadth,
above  four  feet  in  depth,  its  current  rapid,  and  the  bank
possessed  by  the  Saxons  was  higher  than  that  which
he  occupied.  Undismayed,  however,  by  all  these  ob-
stacles, he  called  together  his  general  officers,  and,
without  asking  their  opinions,  communicated  to  them
his  intention  of  attempting  next  morning  to  force  his
passage  over  the  river,  and  to  attack  the  enemy  wherever
he  could  come  up  with  them.  They  all  expressed  their
astonishment  at  such  a  bold  resolution;  and  even  the  duke
of  Alva,  though  naturally  daring  and  impetuous,  and
Maurice  of  Saxony,  notwithstanding  his  impatience  to
crush  his  rival  the  elector,  remonstrated  earnestly  against
it.  But  the  emperor,  confiding  in  his  own  judgment  or
good  fortune,  paid  no  regard  to  their  arguments,  and
gave  the  orders  necessary  for  executing  his  design.

1547.]  BOOK IX.  127

Early  in  the  morning  a  body  of  Spanish  and  Italian
foot  marched  towards  the  river,  and  began  an  incessant
fire  upon  the  enemy.  The  long  heavy  muskets  used
in  that  age  did  execution  on  the  opposite  bank,  and
many  of  the  soldiers,  hurried  on  by  a  martial  ardour  in
order  to  get  nearer  the  enemy,  rushed  into  the  stream,
and,  advancing  breast-high,  fired  with  a  more  certain
aim,  and  with  greater  effect.  Under  cover  of  their  fire,
a  bridge  of  boats  was  begun  to  be  laid  for  the  infantry ;
and  a  peasant  having  undertaken  to  conduct  the  cavalry
through  the  river  by  a  ford  with  which  he  was  well  ac-
quainted, they  also  were  put  in  motion.  The  Saxons
posted  in  Muhlberg  endeavoured  to  obstruct  these  ope-
rations, by  a  brisk  fire  from  a  battery  which  they  had
erected ;  but  as  a  thick  fog  covered  all  the  low  grounds
upon  the  river,  they  could  not  take  aim  with  any  cer-
tainty, and  the  Imperialists  suffered  very  little ;  at  the
same  time,  the  Saxons  being  much  galled  by  the
Spaniards  and  Italians,  set  on  fire  some  boats  which
had  been  collected  near  the  village,  and  prepared  to
retire.  The  Imperialists  perceiving  this,  ten  Spanish
soldiers  instantly  stripped  themselves,  and  holding  their
swords  with  their  teeth,  swam  across  the  river,  put  to
flight  such  of  the  Saxons  as  ventured  to  oppose  them,
saved  from  the  flames  as  many  boats  as  were  sufficient
to  complete  their  own  bridge,  and  by  this  spirited  and
successful  action,  encouraged  their  companions  no  less
than  they  intimidated  the  enemy.

By  this  time,  the  cavalry,  each  trooper  having  a  foot
soldier  behind  him,  began  to  enter  the  river,  the  light
horse  marching  in  the  front,  followed  by  the  men  at
arms,  whom  the  emperor  led  in  person,  mounted  on  a
Spanish  horse,  dressed  in  a  sumptuous  habit,  and  car-
rying a  javelin  in  his  hand.  Such  a  numerous  body
struggling  through  a  great  river,  in  which,  according
to  the  directions  of  their  guide,  they  were  obliged  to
make  several  turns,  sometimes  treading  on  a  firm  bot-

128  CHARLES V.  [1547.

torn,  sometimes  swimming,  presented  to  their  compa-
nions, whom  they  left  behind,  a  spectacle  equally  mag-
nificent and  interesting.41  Their  courage,  at  last,  sur-
mounted every  obstacle,  no  man  betraying  any  symptom
of  fear,  when  the  emperor  shared  in  the  danger  no  less
than  the  meanest  soldier.  The  moment  that  they  reached
the  opposite  side,  Charles,  without  waiting  the  arrival
of  the  rest  of  the  infantry,  advanced  towards  the  Saxons
with  the  troops  which  had  passed  along  with  him,  who,
flushed  with  their  good  fortune,  and  despising  an  ene-
my who  had  neglected  to  oppose  them,  when  it  might
have  been  done  with  such  advantage,  made  no  account
of  their  superior  numbers,  and  marched  on  as  to  a  cer-
tain victory.

During;  all  these  operations,  which  necessa-

111  conduct  r  .

of  the nly  consumed  much  time,  the  elector  remained

I  *

inactive  in  his  camp;  and  from  an  infatuation
which  appears  to  be  so  amazing,  that  the  best-informed
historians  impute  it  to  the  treacherous  arts  of  his  gene-
rals, who  deceived  him  by  false  intelligence,  he  would
not  believe  that  the  emperor  had  passed  the  river,  or
could  be  so  near  at  hand.6  Being  convinced,  at  last,
of  his  fatal  mistake,  by  the  concurring  testimony  of  eye-
witnesses, he  gave  orders  for  retreating  towards  Wit-
temberg.  But  a  German  army,  encumbered,  as  usual,
with  baggage  and  artillery,  could  not  be  put  suddenly
in  motion.  They  had  just  begun  to  march  when  the
light  troops  of  the  enemy  came  in  view,  and  the  elector
Battle  of  saw  an  engagement  to  be  unavoidable.  As  he
Muihau-  was  no  less  bold  in  action  than  irresolute  in

council,  he  made  the  disposition  for  battle  with
the  greatest  presence  of  mind,  and  in  the  most  proper
manner;  taking  advantage  of  a  great  forest  to  cover
his  wings,  so  as  to  prevent  his  being  surrounded  by  the
enemy's  cavalry,  which  were  far  more  numerous  than

d  Avila,  115,  a.
•  Camerar.  ap.  Freher.  iii.  493. Slruv.  Corp.  Hist.  Germ.  1047. 1049.

1547.]  BOOK IX.  129

his  own.  The  emperor,  likewise,  ranged  his  men  in
order  as  they  came  up,  and  riding  along  the  ranks,  ex-
horted them  with  few  but  efficacious  words  to  do  their
duty.  It  was  with  a  very  different  spirit  that  the  two
armies  advanced  to  the  charge.  As  the  day,  which
had  hitherto  been  dark  and  cloudy,  happened  to  clear
up  at  that  moment,  this  accidental  circumstance  made
an  impression  on  the  different  .parties  corresponding  to
the  tone  of  their  minds ;  the  Saxons,  surprised  .and  dis-
heartened, felt  pain  at  being  exposed  fully  to  the  view
of  the  enemy ;  the  Imperialists,  being  now  secure  that
the  Protestant  forces  could  not  escape  from  them,  re-
joiced at  the  return  of  sunshine,  as  a  certain  presage  of
victory.  The  shock  of  battle  would  not  have  been  long
doubtful,  if  the  personal  courage  which  the  elector  dis-
played, together  with  the  activity  which  he  exerted
from  the  moment  that  the  approach  of  the  enemy  ren-
dered an  engagement  certain,  and  cut  off  all  possibility
of  hesitation,  had  not  revived  in  some  degree  the  spirit
of  his  troops.  They  repulsed  the  Hungarian  light-
horse  who  began  the  attack,  and  received  with  firmness
the  men  at  arms  who  next  advanced  to  the  charge ;  but
as  these  were  the  flower  of  the  imperial  army,  were
commanded  by  experienced  officers,  and  fought  under
the  emperor's  eye,  the  Saxons  soon  began  to  give  way ;
and  the  light  troops  rallying  at  the  same  time  and  falling
Theeiec  on  *ne^r  flan^s?  the  flight  became  general.  A
tor  defeat-  small  body  of  chosen  soldiers,  among  whom  the
taken  pri-  elector  had  fought  in  person,  still  continued  to
soner.  defend  themselves,  and  endeavoured  to  save
their  master  by  retiring  into  the  forest ;  but  being  sur-
rounded on  every  side,  the  elector  wounded  in  the  face,
exhausted  with  fatigue,  and  perceiving  all  resistance  to
be  vain,  surrendered  himself  a  prisoner.  He  was  con-
ducted immediately  towards  the  emperor,  whom  he
found  just  returned  from  the  pursuit,  standing  on  the
field  of  battle  in  the  full  exultation  of  success,  and  re-
VOL.  v.  K

130  CHARLES V.  [1547.

ceiving  the  congratulations  of  his  officers  upon  this
complete  victory  obtained  by  his  valour  and  conduct.
Even  in  such  an  unfortunate  and  humbling  situation,
the  elector's  behaviour  was  equally  magnanimous  and
decent.  Sensible  of  his  condition,  he  approached  his
conqueror  without  any  of  the  sullenness  or  pride  which
would  have  been  improper  in  a  captive ;  and  conscious
of  his  own  dignity,  he  descended  to  no  mean  submis-
sion, unbecoming  the  high  station  which  he  held  among
the  German  princes.  "  The  fortune  of  war,"  said  he,
"  has  made  me  your  prisoner,  most  gracious  emperor,

His  harsh  and  I  hope  to  be  treated " Here,  Charles

byc  theem- harshly  interrupted  him:  "And  am  I  then,  at
P"0'-  last,  acknowledged  to  be  emperor  ?  Charles  of
Ghent  was  the  only  title  you  lately  allowed  me.  You
shall  be  treated  as  you  deserve."  At  these  words  he
turned  from  him  abruptly  with  a  haughty  air.  To
this  cruel  repulse,  the  king  of  the  Romans  added  re-
proaches in  his  own  name,  using  expressions  still  more
ungenerous  and  insulting.  The  elector  made  no  reply;
but,  with  an  unaltered  countenance,  which  discovered
neither  astonishment  nor  dejection,  accompanied  the
Spanish  soldiers  appointed  to  guard  him/
Charie»'s  This  decisive  victory  cost  the  Imperialists
aftef hfs*  only  fifty  men.  Twelve  hundred  of  the  Saxons
Tictory.  were  killed,  chiefly  in  the  pursuit,  and  a  greater
number  taken  prisoners.  About  four  hundred  kept  in
a  body,  and  escaped  to  Wittemberg,  together  with  the
electoral  prince,  who  had  likewise  been  wounded  in  the
action.  After  resting  two  days  in  the  field  of  battle,
partly  to  refresh  his  army,  and  partly  to  receive  the  de-
puties of  the  adjacent  towns,  which  were  impatient  to
secure  his  protection  by  submitting  to  his  will,  the  em-
peror began  to  move  towards  Wittemberg,  that  he  might
terminate  the  war  at  once,  by  the  reduction  of  that  city.

f  Sleid.  Hist.  426.  Thuan.  136.  Hortensius  de  Bello  German,  ap.  Scard.  vol.  ii.
498.  Deacript.  Pugnaj  Mnhlberg.  ibid.  p.  509.  P.  Heuter.  Her.  Austr.  lib.  xii.
c.  13.  p.  298.

1547.]  BOOK  IX.  131

The  unfortunate  elector  was  carried  along  in  a  sort  of
triumph,  and  exposed  every  where,  as  a  captive,  to  his
own  subjects;  a  spectacle  extremely  afflicting  to  them,
who  both  honoured  and  loved  him ;  though  the  insult
was  so  far  from  subduing  his  firm  spirit,  that  it  did  not
even  ruffle  the  wonted  tranquillity  and  composure  of
his  mind.

As  Wittemberg,  the  residence,  in  that  age,
wutem-  of  the  electoral  branch  of  the  Saxon  family,
was  one  of  the  strongest  cities  in  Germany,  and
could  not  be  taken,  if  properly  defended,  without  great
difficulty,  the  emperor  marched  thither  with  the  utmost
dispatch,  hoping  that  while  the  consternation  occasioned
by  his  victory  was  still  recent,  the  inhabitants  might
imitate  the  example  of  their  countrymen,  and  submit
to  his  power,  as  soon  as  he  appeared  before  their  walls.
But  Sybilla  of  Cleves,  the  elector's  wife,  a  woman  no
less  distinguished  by  her  abilities  than  her  virtue,  in-
stead of  abandoning  herself  to  tears  and  lamentations
upon  her  husband's  misfortune,  endeavoured,  by  her
example  as  well  as  exhortations,  to  animate  the  citizens.
She  inspired  them  with  such  resolution,  that,  when  sum-
moned to  surrender,  they  returned  a  vigorous  answer,
warning  the  emperor  to  behave  towards  their  sovereign
with  the  respect  due  to  his  rank,  as  they  were  deter-
mined to  treat  Albert  of  Brandenburg,  who  was  still  a
prisoner,  precisely  in  the  same  manner  that  he  treated  the
elector.  The  spirit  of  the  inhabitants,  no  less  than  the
strength  of  the  city,  seemed  now  to  render  a  siege  in
form  necessary.  After  such  a  signal  victory,  it  would
have  been  disgraceful  not  to  have  undertaken  it,  though
at  the  same  time  the  emperor  was  destitute  of  every
thing  requisite  for  carrying  it  on.  But  Maurice  re-
moved all  difficulties,  by  engaging  to  furnish  provisions,
artillery,  ammunition,  pioneers,  and  whatever  else  should
be  needed.  Trusting  to  this,  Charles  gave  orders  to
open  the  trenches  before  the  town,  It  quickly  ap-

K2

132  CHARLES  V.  [1547.

peared,  that  Maurice's  eagerness  to  reduce  the  capital
of  those  dominions,  which  he  expected  as  his  reward
for  taking  arms  against  his  kinsman,  and  deserting  the
Protestant  cause,  had  led  him  to  promise  what  exceeded
his  power  to  perform.  A  battering  train  was,  indeed,
carried  safely  down  the  Elbe  from  Dresden  to  Wittem-
berg ;  but  as  Maurice  had  not  sufficient  force  to  pre-
serve a  secure  communication  between  his  own  territo-
ries and  the  camp  of  the  besiegers,  count  Mansfeldt,
who  commanded  a  body  of  electoral  troops,  intercepted
and  destroyed  a  convoy  of  provisions  and  military  stores,
and  dispersed  a  band  of  pioneers  destined  for  the  service
of  the  Imperialists.  This  put  a  stop  to  the  progress  of
the  siege,  and  convinced  the  emperor,  that  as  he  could
not  rely  on  Maurice's  promises,  recourse  ought  to  be
had  to  some  more  expeditious  as  well  as  more  certain
method  of  getting  possession  of  the  town.
The  em-  The  unfortunate  elector  was  in  his  hands,
generous"  and  Charles  was  ungenerous  and  hard-hearted
onhlT111  enougn  to  take  advantage  of  this,  in  order  to
ekctor.  make  an  experiment  whether  he  might  not  bring
about  his  designs  by  working  upon  the  tenderness  of
a  wife  for  her  husband,  or  upon  the  piety  of  children
towards  their  parent.  With  this  view  he  summoned
Sybilla  a  second  time  to  open  the  gates,  letting  her
know  that  if  she  again  refused  to  comply,  the  elector
should  answer  with  his  head  for  her  obstinacy.  To
convince  her  that  this  was  not  an  empty  threat,  he
brought  his  prisoner  to  an  immediate  trial.  The  pro-
ceedings against  him  were  as  irregular  as  the  stratagem
was  barbarous.  Instead  of  consulting  the  states  of  the
empire,  or  remitting  the  cause  to  any  court,  which,  ac-
cording to  the  German  constitution,  might  have  legally
taken  cognizance  of  the  elector's  crime,  he  subjected
the  greatest  prince  in  the  empire  to  the  jurisdiction  of
a  court-martial,  composed  of  Spanish  and  Italian  of-
ficers, and  in  which  the  unrelenting  duke  of  Alva,  a

1547.]  BOOK IX.  133

fit  instrument  for  any  act  of  violence,  presided.

May  10.  .

This  strange  tribunal  founded  its  charge  upon
the  ban  of  the  empire,  which  had  been  issued  against
the  prisoner  by  the  sole  authority  of  the  emperor,  and
was  destitute  of  every  legal  formality  which  could  render
it  valid.  But  the  court-martial,  presuming  the  elector  to
be  thereby  manifestly  convicted  of  treason  and  rebellion,
condemned  him  to  suffer  death  by  being  beheaded.  This
decree  was  intimated  to  the  elector  while  he  was  amusing
himself  in  playing  at  chess  with  Ernest  of  Brunswick,  his
fellow-prisoner.  He  paused  fora  moment,  though  with-
out discovering  any  symptom  either  of  surprise  or  terror;
and  after  taking  notice  of  the  irregularity  as  well  as  in-
Theeiec  Jus^ce  °^  the  emperor's  proceedings : — "  It  is
tor's  mag-  easy,"continued  he, "  to  comprehend  his  scheme.
nu  y'  1  must  die,  because  Wittemberg  will  not  surren-
der ;  and  I  shall  lay  down  my  life  with  pleasure,  if,  by
that  sacrifice  I  can  preserve  the  dignity  of  my  house,  and
transmit  to  my  posterity  the  inheritance  which  belongs
to  them.  Would  to  God,  that  this  sentence  may  not
affect  my  wife  and  children  more  than  it  intimidates
me !  and  that  they,  for  the  sake  of  adding  a  few  days
to  a  life  already  too  long,  may  not  renounce  honours
and  territories  which  they  were  born  to  possess  !"g  He
then  turned  to  his  antagonist,  whom  he  challenged  to
continue  the  game.  He  played  with  his  usual  attention
and  ingenuity,  and  having  beat  Ernest,  expressed  all
the  satisfaction  which  is  commonly  felt  on  gaining  such
victories.  After  this,  he  withdrew  to  his  own  apart-
ment, that  he  might  employ  the  rest  of  his  time  in  such
religious  exercises  as  were  proper  in  his  situation.11

It  was  not  with  the  same  indifference  or  com-

The  dis-
tress of  his  posure,  that  the  account  of  the  elector's  danger

was  received  at  Wittemberg.  Sybilla,  who  had
supported  with  such  undaunted  fortitude  her  husband's
misfortunes,  while  she  imagined  that  they  could  reach

s  Thuan.  i.  142.  ;'  it  i  i I orpus,  1050.

134  CIIARLE^V.  [1547.

no  farther  than  to  diminish  his  power  or  territories,  felt
all  her  resolution  fail  as  soon  as  his  life  was  threatened.
Solicitous  to  save  that,  she  despised  every  other  consi-
deration ;  and  was  willing  to  make  any  sacrifice,  in
order  to  appease  an  incensed  conqueror.  At  the  same
time,  the  duke  of  Cleves,  the  elector  of  Brandenburg,
and  Maurice,  to  none  of  whom  Charles  had  communi-
cated the  true  motives  of  his  violent  proceedings  against
the  elector,  interceded  warmly  with  him  to  spare  his
life.  The  first  was  prompted  to  do  so  merely  by  com-
passion for  his  sister,  and  regard  for  his  brother-in-law.
The  two  others  dreaded  the  universal  reproach  that  they
would  incur,  if,  after  having  boasted  so  often  of  the
ample  security  which  the  emperor  had  promised  them
with  respect  to  their  religion,  the  first  effect  of  their
union  with  him  should  be  the  public  execution  of  a
prince,  who  was  justly  held  in  reverence  as  the  most
zealous  protector  of  the  Protestant  cause.  Maurice,  in
particular,  foresaw  that  he  must  become  the  object  of
detestation  to  the  Saxons,  and  could  never  hope  to  go-
vern them  with  tranquillity,  if  he  were  considered  by
them  as  accessary  to  the  death  of  his  nearest  kinsman,
in  order  that  he  might  obtain  possession  of  his  domi-
nions.

Hi*  trca-  While  they,  from  such  various  motives,  soli-
Siariti  b  cl^e^  Charles,  with  the  most  earnest  importunity,
which  he  not  to  execute  the  sentence  ;  Sybilla,  and  his
the  eicce- 8  children,  conjured  the  elector,  by  letters  as  well
as  messengers,  to  scruple  at  no  concession  that
would  extricate  him  out  of  the  present  danger,  and
deliver  them  from  their  fears  and  anguish  on  his  account.
The  emperor,  perceiving  that  the  expedient  which  he
had  tried  began  to  produce  the  effect  that  he  intended,
fell  by  degrees  from  his  former  rigour,  and  allowed
himself  to  soften  into  promises  of  clemency  and  for-
giveness, if  the  elector  would  shew  himself  worthy  of
his  favour  by  submitting  to  reasonable  terms.  The

1547.]  BOOK IX.  135

elector,  on  whom  the  consideration  of  what  he  might

suffer  himself  had  made  no  impression,  was  melted  by

the  tears  of  a  wife  whom  he  loved,  and  could  not  resist

the  entreaties  of  his  family.  In  compliance  with

May  19.  .  ,. . . J .

their  repeated  solicitations,  he  agreed  to  articles
of  accommodation,  which  he  would  otherwise  have  re-
jected with  disdain.  The  chief  of  them  were,  that  he
should  resign  the  electoral  dignity,  as  well  for  himself
as  for  his  posterity,  into  the  emperor's  hands,  to  be  dis-
posed of  entirely  at  his  pleasure ;  that  he  should  in-
stantly put  the  imperial  troops  in  possession  of  the
cities  of  Wittemberg  and  Gotha  ;  that  he  should  set
Albert  of  Brandenburg  at  liberty  without  ransom  ;  that
he  should  submit  to  the  decrees  of  the  imperial  cham-
ber, and  acquiesce  in  whatever  reformation  the  emperor
should  make  in  the  constitution  of  that  court ;  that  he
should  renounce  all  leagues  against  the  emperor  or  king
of  the  Romans,  and  enter  into  no  alliance  for  the  future,
in  which  they  were  not  comprehended.  In  return  for
these  important  concessions,  the  emperor  not  only  pro-
mised to  spare  his  life,  but  to  settle  on  him  and  his  pos-
terity the  city  of  Gotha  and  its  territories,  together  with
an  annual  pension  of  fifty  thousand  florins,  payable  out
of  the  revenues  of  the  electorate  ;  and  likewise  to  grant
him  a  sum  in  ready  money  to  be  applied  towards  the
And  re  discharge  of  his  debts.  Even  these  articles  of
main*  a  grace  were  clogged  with  the  mortifying  condi-

prisoner. .  „ ,  .  . .  ,  ,  .

tion  ot  his  remaining  the  emperors  prisoner
during  the  rest  of  his  life.1  To  the  whole,  Charles  had
subjoined,  tha.t  he  should  submit  to  the  decrees  of  the
pope  and  council  with  regard  to  the  controverted  points
in  religion  ;  but  the  elector,  though  he  had  been  per-
suaded to  sacrifice  all  the  objects  which  men  commonly
hold  to  be  the  dearest  and  tl\e  most  valuable,  was  in-
flexible with  regard  to  this  point ;  and  neither  threats
nor  entreaties  could  prevail  to  make  him  renounce  what

*  Sleid.  427. Tluian.  i.  142. Du  Mont,  Corps.  Diplom.  iv.  p.  11.  332.

J36  CHARLES V.  [1547.

he  deemed  to  be  truth,  or  persuade  him  to  act  in  oppo-
sition to  the  dictates  of  his  conscience.
Maurice As  soon  as  the  Saxon  garrison  marched  out
SmilPoT  of  Wittemberg,  the  emperor  fulfilled  his  en-
the  dec- o-agements  to  Maurice ;  and  in  reward  for  his

tora!  do- o t

minions,  merit  in  having  deserted  the  rrotestant  cause,
and  having  contributed  with  such  success  towards  the
dissolution  of  the  Smalkaldic  league,  he  gave  him  pos-
session of  that  city,  together  with  all  the  other  towns  in
the  electorate.  It  was  not  without  reluctance,  however,
that  he  made  such  a  sacrifice ;  the  extraordinary  suc-
cess of  his  arms  had  begun  to  operate,  in  its  usual
manner,  upon  his  ambitious  mind,  suggesting  new  and
vast  projects  for  the  aggrandizement  of  his  family,  to-
wards the  accomplishment  of  which  the  retaining  of
Saxony  would  have  been  of  the  utmost  consequence.
But  as  this  scheme  was  not  then  ripe  for  execution,  he
durst  not  yet  venture  to  disclose  it ;  nor  would  it  have
been  either  safe  or  prudent  to  offend  Maurice,  at  that
juncture,  by  such  a  manifest  violation  of  all  the  pro-
mises, which  had  seduced  him  to  abandon  his  natural
allies.

Ncgotia-  The  landgrave,  Maurice's  father-in-law,  was
Sand'-1  still  in  arms;  and  though  now  left  alone  to
grave.  maintain  the  Protestant  cause,  was  neither  a
feeble  nor  contemptible  enemy.  His  dominions  were
of  considerable  extent ;  his  subjects  animated  with  zeal
for  the  Reformation ;  and  if  he  could  have  held  the
Imperialists  at  bay  for  a  short  time,  he  had  much  to  hope
from  a  party  whose  strength  was  still  unbroken,  whose
union  as  well  as  vigour  might  return,  and  which  had
reason  to  depend,  with  certainty,  on  being  effectually
supported  by  the  king  of  France.  The  landgrave
thought  not  of  any  thing  so  bold  or  adventurous ;  but
being  seized  with  the  same  consternation  which
had  taken  possession  of  his  associates,  he  was  intent
only  on  the  means  of  procuring  favourable  terms  from

1547.]  BOOK  IX.  137

the  emperor,  whom  he  viewed  as  a  conqueror  to  whose
will  there  was  a  necessity  of  submitting.  Maurice  en-
couraged this  tame  and  pacific  spirit,  by  magnifying,
on  the  one  hand,  the  emperor's  power ;  by  boasting,  on
the  other,  of  his  own  interest  with  his  victorious  ally  ;
and  by  representing  the  advantageous  conditions  which
he  could  not  fail  of  obtaining  by  his  intercession  for
a  friend,  whom  he  was  so  solicitous  to  save.  Some-
times the  landgrave  was  induced  to  place  such  un-
bounded confidence  in  his  promises,  that  he  was  impa-
tient to  bring  matters  to  a  final  accommodation.  On
other  occasions,  the  emperor's  exorbitant  ambition,  re-
strained neither  by  the  scruples  of  decency,  nor  the
maxims  of  justice,  together  with  the  recent  and  shock-
ing proof  which  he  had  given  of  this  in  his  treatment
of  the  elector  of  Saxony,  came  so  full  into  his  thoughts,
and  made  such  a  lively  impression  on  them,  that  he
broke  off  abruptly  the  negotiations  which  he  had  be-
gun ;  seeming  to  be  convinced  that  it  was  more  pru-
dent to  depend  for  safety  on  his  own  arms,  than  to  con-
fide in  Charles's  generosity.  But  this  bold  resolution,
which  despair  had  suggested  to  an  impatient  spirit,
fretted  by  disappointments,  was  not  of  long  continu-
ance. Upon  a  more  deliberate  survey  of  the  enemy's
power,  as  well  as  his  own  weakness,  his  doubts  and
fears  returned  upon  him,  and  together  with  them  the
spirit  of  negotiating,  and  the  desire  of  accommodation.
The  condi-  ^  aurice,  and  the  elector  of  Brandenburg,
tions  Pte-  acted  as  mediators  between  him  and  the  em-

scribed  by  T r>  -MI  it*  11

the  em-  peror ;  and  after  all  that  the  former  had
vaunted  of  his  influence,  the  conditions  pre-
scribed to  the  landgrave  were  extremely  rigorous.  The
articles  with  regard  to  his  renouncing  the  league  of
Smalkalde,  acknowledging  the  emperor's  authority,
and  submitting  to  the  decrees  of  the  imperial  chamber,
were  the  same  which  had  been  imposed  on  the  elector
of  Saxony.  Besides  these,  he  was  required  to  surren-

138  CHARLES  V.  [1547.

der  his  person  and  territories  to  the  emperor ;  to  im-
plore for  pardon  on  his  knees ;  to  pay  a  hundred  and
fifty  thousand  crowns  towards  defraying  the  expenses
of  the  war;  to  demolish  the  fortifications  of  all  the
towns  in  his  dominions  except  one ;  to  oblige  the  gar-
rison which  he  placed  in  it  to  take  an  oath  of  fidelity
to  the  emperor ;  to  allow  a  free  passage  through  his
territories  to  the  imperial  troops  as  often  as  it  shall  be
demanded ;  to  deliver  up  all  his  artillery  and  ammuni-
tion to  the  emperor ;  to  set  at  liberty,  without  ransom,
Henry  of  Brunswick,  together  with  the  other  prisoners
whom  he  had  taken  during  the  war;  and  neither  to
take  arms  himself,  nor  to  permit  any  of  his  subjects  to
serve  against  the  emperor  or  his  allies  for  the  future. k
TO  which  The  landgrave  ratified  these  articles,  though
he  submits.  ^^  fae  utmost  reluctance,  as  they  contained
no  stipulation  with  regard  to  the  manner  in  which  he
was  to  be  treated,  and  left  him  entirely  at  the  empe-
ror's mercy.  Necessity,  however,  compelled  him  to
give  his  assent  to  them.  Charles,  who  had  assumed
the  haughty  and  imperious  tone  of  a  conqueror,  ever
since  the  reduction  of  Saxony,  insisted  on  uncondi-
tional submission,  and  would  permit  nothing  to  be
added  to  the  terms  which  he  had  prescribed,  that  could
in  any  degree  limit  the  fulness  of  his  power,  or  re-
strain him  from  behaving  as  he  saw  meet  towards  a
prince  whom  he  regarded  as  absolutely  at  his  disposal.
But  though  he  would  not  vouchsafe  to  negotiate  with
the  landgrave,  on  such  a  footing  of  equality,  as  to  suf-
fer any  article  to  be  inserted  among  those  which  he
had  dictated  to  him,  that  could  be  considered  as  a
formal  stipulation  for  the  security  and  freedom  of  his
person ;  he,  or  his  ministers  in  his  name,  gave  the
elector  of  Brandenburg  and  Maurice  such  full  satis-
faction with  regard  to  this  point,  that  they  assured  the
landgrave  that  Charles  would  behave  to  him  in  the

k  Sleid.  430. Thuan.  1.  iv.  146.

1547.]  BOOK  IX.  139

same  way  as  he  had  done  to  the  duke  of  Wurtemberg,
and  would  allow  him,  whenever  he  had  made  his  sub-
mission, to  return  to  his  own  territories.  Upon  finding
the  landgrave  to  be  still  possessed  with  the  former
suspicions  of  the  emperor's  intentions,  and  unwilling
to  trust  verbal  or  ambiguous  declarations,  in  a  matter
of  such  essential  concern  as  his  own  liberty,  they  sent
him  a  bond  signed  by  them  both,  containing  the  most
solemn  obligations,  that  if  any  violence  whatsoever  was
offered  to  his  person,  during  his  interview  with  the
emperor,  they  would  instantly  surrender  themselves  to
his  sons,  and  remain  in  their  hands  to  be  treated  by
them  in  flie  same  manner  as  the  emperor  should  treat
him.1

He  repairs  This,  together  with  the  indispensable  obli-
peria! l"  gations  of  performing  what  was  contained  in
court.  i^g  articles  of  which  he  had  accepted,  removed
his  doubts  and  scruples,  or  made  it  necessary  to  get
over  them.  He  repaired,  for  that  purpose,  to  the  im-
perial camp  at  Hall  in  Saxony,  where  a  circumstance
occurred  which  revived  his  suspicions  and  increased
his  fears.  Just  as  he  was  about  to  enter  the  chamber
of  presence,  in  order  to  make  his  public  submission  to  the
emperor,  a  copy  of  the  articles  which  he  had  approved
of  was  put  into  his  hands,  in  order  that  he  might  ra-
tify them  anew.  Upon  perusing  them,  he  perceived
that  the  imperial  ministers  had  added  two  new  articles ;
one  importing,  that  if  any  dispute  should  arise  con-
cerning the  meaning  of  the  former  conditions,  the  em-
peror should  have  the  right  of  putting  what  interpre-
tation upon  them  he  thought  most  reasonable ;  the
other,  that  the  landgrave  was  bound  to  submit  impli-
citly to  the  decisions  of  the  council  of  Trent.  This
unworthy  artifice,  calculated  to  surprise  him  into  an
approbation  of  the  articles,  to  which  he  had  not  the
most  distant  idea  of  assenting,  by  proposing  them  to

1  Uu  Mont.  Corps.  Diplom.  iv.  p.  1 1.  336,

140  CHARLES V.  [1547.

him  at  a  time  when  his  mind  was  engrossed  and  dis-
quieted with  the  thoughts  of  that  humiliating  cere-
mony which  he  had  to  perform,  filled  the  landgrave
with  indignation,  and  made  him  break  out  into  all
those  violent  expressions  of  rage  to  which  his  temper
was  prone.  With  some  difficulty  the  elector  of  Bran-
denburg and  Maurice  prevailed  at  length  on  the  em-
peror's ministers  to  drop  the  former  article  as  unjust,
and  to  explain  the  latter  in  such  a  manner,  that  he
could  agree  to  it,  without  openly  renouncing  the  Pro-
testant religion.

The  man-  This  obstacle  being  surmounted,  the  land-
"  Wch  the  grave  was  impatient  to  finish  a  ceremony  which,
emperor  now  mortifyine:  soever,  had  been  declared  ne-

received  J o

i"m.  cessary  towards  his  obtaining  pardon.  The  em-
peror was  seated  on  a  magnificent  throne,  with  all  the
ensigns  of  his  dignity,  surrounded  by  a  numerous  train
of  the  princes  of  the  empire,  among  whom  was  Henry  of
Brunswick,  lately  the  landgrave's  prisoner,  and  now,  by
a  sudden  reverse  of  fortune,  a  spectator  of  his  humilia-
tion. The  landgrave  was  introduced  with  great  so-
lemnity, and  advancing  towards  the  throne,  fell  upon
his  knees.  His  chancellor,  who  walked  behind  him,  im-
mediately read,  by  his  master's  command,  a  paper  which
contained  an  humble  confession  of  the  crime  whereof
he  had  been  guilty ;  an  acknowledgment  that  he  had
merited  on  that  account  the  most  severe  punishment;
an  absolute  resignation  of  himself  and  his  dominions
to  be  disposed  of  at  the  emperor's  pleasure;  a  submis-
sive petition  for  pardon,  his  hopes  of  which  were
founded  entirely  on  the  emperor's  clemency;  and  it
concluded  with  promises  of  behaving  for  the  future,
like  a  subject  whose  principles  of  loyalty  and  obedience
would  be  confirmed,  and  would  even  derive  new  force
from  the  sentiments  of  gratitude  which  must  hereafter
fill  and  animate  his  heart.  While  the  chancellor  was
reading  this  abject  declaration,  the  eyes  of  all  the  spec-

1547.]  BOOK IX.  141

tators  were  fixed  on  the  unfortunate  landgrave:  few

o

could  behold  a  prince,  so  powerful  as  well  as  high-
spirited,  suing  for  mercy  in  the  posture  of  a  supplicant,
without  being  touched  with  commiseration,  and  per-
ceiving serious  reflections  arise  in  their  minds  upon  the
instability  and  emptiness  of  human  grandeur.  The  em-
peror viewed  the  whole  transaction  with  a  haughty
unfeeling  composure;  and,  preserving  a  profound  si-
lence himself,  made  a  sign  to  one  of  his  secretaries  to
read  his  answer;  the  tenor  of  which  was,  that  though
he  might  have  justly  inflicted  on  him  the  grievous
punishment  which  his  crimes  deserved,  yet,  prompted
by  his  own  generosity,  moved  by  the  solicitations  of
several  princes  in  behalf  of  the  landgrave,  and  influ-
enced by  his  penitential  acknowledgments,  he  would
not  deal  with  him  according  to  the  rigour  of  justice,
and  would  subject  him  to  no  penalty  that  was  not  spe-
cified in  the  articles  which  he  had  already  subscribed.
The  moment  the  secretary  had  finished,  Charles  turned
away  abruptly,  without  deigning  to  give  the  unhappy
suppliant  any  sign  of  compassion  or  reconcilement.  He
did  not  even  desire  him  to  rise  from  his  knees;  which  the
landgrave  having  ventured  to  do  unbidden,  advanced
towards  the  emperor  with  an  intention  to  kiss  his  hand,
flattering  himself,  that  his  guilt  being  now  fully  ex-
piated, he  might  presume  to  take  that  liberty.  But  the
elector  of  Brandenburg,  perceiving  that  this  familiarity
would  be  offensive  to  the  emperor,  interposed,  and  de-
sired the  landgrave  to  go  along  with  him  and  Maurice
to  the  duke  of  Alva's  apartments  in  the  castle.
He  is  de-  ^e  was  receiye(i  and  entertained  by  that  no-
tained  a  bleman  with  the  respect  and  courtesy  due  to  such

prisonei.  -n c  IMI

a  guest,  but  alter  supper,  while  he  was  engaged
in  play,  the  duke  took  the  elector  and  Maurice  aside,
and  communicated  to  them  the  emperor's  orders,  that  the
landgrave  must  remain  a  prisoner  in  that  place  under
the  custody  of  a  Spanish  guard.  As  they  had  not  hi-
therto entertained  the  most  digtant  suspicion  of  the  em-

142  CHARLES V.  [1547.

peror's  sincerity  or  rectitude  of  intention,  their  surprise
was  excessive,  and  their  indignation  not  inferior  to  it,
on  discovering  how  greatly  they  had  been  deceived
themselves,  and  how  infamously  abused,  in  having  been
made  the  instruments  of  deceiving  and  ruining  their
friend.  They  had  recourse  to  complaints,  to  arguments,
and  to  entreaties,  in  order  to  save  themselves  from  that
disgrace,  and  to  extricate  him  out  of  the  wretched
situation  into  which  he  had  been  betrayed  by  too  great
confidence  in  them.  But  the  duke  of  Alva  remained
inflexible,  and  pleaded  the  necessity  of  executing  the
emperor's  commands.  By  this  time  it  grew  late,  and
the  landgrave,  who  knew  nothing  of  what  had  passed,
nor  dreaded  the  snare  in  which  he  was  entangled,  pre-
pared for  departing,  when  the  fatal  orders  were  inti-
mated to  him.  He  was  struck  dumb  at  first  with  asto-
nishment, but  after  being  silent  a  few  moments,  he  broke
out  into  all  the  violent  expressions  which  horror,  at  in-
justice accompanied  with  fraud,  naturally  suggests.
He  complained,  he  expostulated,  he  exclaimed ;  some-
times inveighing  against  the  emperor's  artifices  as
unworthy  of.  a  great  and  generous  prince;  sometimes
censuring  the  credulity  of  his  friends  in  trusting  to
Charles's  insidious  promises;  sometimes  charging  them
with  meanness  in  stooping  to  lend  their  assistance  to-
wards the  execution  of  such  a  perfidious  and  dishonour-
able scheme ;  and  in  the  end  he  required  them  to  re-
member their  engagements  to  his  children,  and  instantly
to  fulfil  them.  They,  after  giving  way  for  a  little  to  the
torrent  of  his  passion,  solemnly  asserted  their  own  in-
nocence and  upright  intention  in  the  whole  transaction,
and  encouraged  him  to  hope,  that  as  soon  as  they  saw
the  emperor,  they  would  obtain  redress  of  an  injury,
which  affected  their  own  honour,  no  less  than  it  did  his
liberty.  At  the  same  time,  in  order  to  soothe  his  rage
and  impatience,  Maurice  remained  with  him  during
the  night,  in  the  apartment  where  he  was  confined.™

»  Sleid.  433. Thuan.  1.  iv.  147. Struv.  Corp.  Hist.  Germ.  ii.  1052.

1547.]  BOOK IX.  143

The  eiec-  Next  morning  the  elector  and  Maurice  ap-
torofBran-  plied  jointly  to  the  emperor,  representing  the
and  Mau-  infamy  to  which  they  would  be  exposed  through-
invauVfor  out  Germany,  if  the  landgrave  were  detained  in
his  liberty.  custody ;  that  they  would  not  have  advised,  nor
would  he  himself  have  consented  to  an  interview,  if
they  had  suspected  that  the  loss  of  his  liberty  was  to
be  the  consequence  of  his  submission;  that  they  were
bound  to  procure  his  release,  having  plighted  their  faith
to  that  effect,  and  engaged  their  own  persons  as  sure-
ties for  his.  Charles  listened  to  their  earnest  remon-
strances with  the  utmost  coolness.  As  he  now  stood  no
longer  in  need  of  their  services,  they  had  the  mortifica-
tion to  find  that  their  former  obsequiousness  was  for-
gotten, and  little  regard  paid  to  their  intercession.  He
was  ignorant,  he  told  them,  of  their  particular  or  pri-
vate transactions  with  the  landgrave,  nor  was  his  con-
duct to  be  regulated  by  any  engagements  into  which
they  had  thought  fit  to  enter;  though  he  knew  well
what  he  himself  had  promised,  which  was  not  that  the
landgrave  should  be  exempt  from  all  restraint,  but  that
he  should  not  be  kept  a  prisoner  during  life."  Having
said  this  with  a  peremptory  and  decisive  tone,  he  put
an  end  to  the  conference;  and  they,  seeing  no  proba-
bility, at  that  time,  of  making  any  impression  upon  the
emperor,  who  seemed  to  have  taken  this  resolution  de-
liberately, and  to  be  obstinately  bent  on  adhering  to  it,
were  obliged  to  acquaint  the  unfortunate  prisoner  with

n  According  to  several  historians  of  great  name,  the  emperor,  in  his  treaty  with
the  landgrave,  stipulated  that  he  would  not  detain  him  iu  any  prison.  But  in  exe-
cuting the  deed,  which  was  written  in  the  German  tongue,  the  imperial  ministers
fraudulently  substituted  the  word  ewiger,  instead  of  einiger,  and  thus  the  treaty,  in
place  of  a  promise  that  he  should  not  be  detained  in  any  prison,  contained  only  an
engagement  that  he  should  not  be  detained  in  perpetual  imprisonment.  But  authors,
eminent  for  historical  knowledge  and  critical  accuracy,  have  called  in  question  the
truth  of  this  common  story.  The  silence  of  Sleiden  with  regard  to  it,  as  well  as  its
not  being  mentioned  in  the  various  memorials  which  he  has  published  concerning  the
landgrave's  imprisonment,  greatly  favour  this  opinion.  But  as  several  books  which
contain  the  information  necessary  towards  discussing  this  point  with  accuracy,  are
written  in  the  German  language,  which  I  do  not  understand,  1  cannot  pretend  to
inquire  into  this  matter  with  the  same  precision  wherewith  I  have  endeavoured  to
settle  some  other  controverted  facts  which  have  occurred  in  the  course  of  this  history.
See  Struv.  Corp.  1052.  Mosheim's  Eccles.  Hist.  vol.  ii.  p.  161, 162.  Eng.  edition.

144  CHARLES V.  [1547.

the  ill  success  of  their  endeavours  in  his  behalf.  The
disappointment  threw  him  into  a  new  and  more  violent
transport  of  rage,  so  that  to  prevent  his  proceeding  to
some  desperate  extremity,  the  elector  and  Maurice  pro-
mised that  they  would  not  quit  the  emperor  until,  by
the  frequency  and  fervour  of  their  intercessions,  they
had  extorted  his  consent  to  set  him  free.  They  accord-
ingly renewed  their  solicitations  a  few  days  afterward,
but  found  Charles  more  haughty  and  intractable  than
before,  and  were  warned  that  if  they  touched  again
upon  a  subject  so  disagreeable,  and  with  regard  to  which
he  had  determined  to  hear  nothing  farther,  he  would
instantly  give  orders  to  convey  the  prisoner  into  Spain.
Afraid  of  hurting  the  landgrave  by  an  officious  or  ill-
timed  zeal  to  serve  him,  they  not  only  desisted,  but  left
the  court,  and  as  they  did  not  choose  to  meet  the  first
sallies  of  the  landgrave's  rage  upon  his  learning  the
cause  of  their  departure,  they  informed  him  of  it  by  a
letter,  wherein  they  exhorted  him  to  fulfil  all  that  he
had  promised  to  the  emperor  as  the  most  certain  means
of  procuring  a  speedy  release.

His  impa-  Whatever  violent  emotions  their  abandoning
d'etre  ""  ^s  cause  in  this  manner  occasioned,  the  land-
straint.  grave's  impatience  to  recover  liberty  made  him
follow  their  advice.  He  paid  the  sum  which  had  been
imposed  on  him,  ordered  his  fortresses  to  be  rased,  and
renounced  all  alliances  which  could  give  offence.  This
prompt  compliance  with  the  will  of  the  conqueror  pro-
duced no  effect.  He  was  still  guarded  with  the  same
vigilant  severity ;  and  being  carried  about,  together
with  the  degraded  elector  of  Saxony,  wherever  the  em-
peror went,  their  disgrace  and  his  triumph  were  each
day  renewed.  The  fortitude,  as  well  as  equanimity,
with  which  the  elector  bore  these  repeated  insults,  were
not  more  remarkable  than  the  landgrave's  fretfulness
and  impatience.  His  active  impetuous  mind  could  ill
brook  restraint ;  and  reflection  upon  the  shameful  arti-

1547.]  BOOK IX.  145

fices,  by  which  he  had  been  decoyed  into  that  situation,
as  well  as  indignation  at  the  injustice  with  which  he
was  still  detained  in  it,  drove  him  often  to  the  wildest
excesses  of  passion.

The  rigour  The  people  of  the  different  cities,  to  whom
of  the  em-  Charles  thus  wantonly  exposed  those  illustrious

peror  s  ex- f  .

actions  in  prisoners  as  a  public  spectacle,  were  sensibly
touched  with  such  an  insult  offered  to  the  Ger-
manic body,  and  murmured  loudly  at  this  indecent
treatment  of  two  of  its  greatest  princes. They  had  soon
other  causes  of  complaint,  and  such  as  affected  them
move  nearly. Charles  proceeded  to  add  oppression  to
insult,  and  arrogating  to  himself  all  the  rights  of  a  con-
queror, exercised  them  with  the  utmost  rigour. He  or-
dered his  troops  to  seize  the  artillery  and  military  stores
belonging  to  such  as  had  been  members  of  the  Smal-
kaldic  league,  and  having  collected  upwards  of  five
hundred  pieces  of  cannon,  a  great  number  in  that  age,
he  sent  part  of  them  into  the  Low  Countries,  part  into
Italy,  and  part  into  Spain,  in  order  to  spread  by  this
means  the  fame  of  his  success,  and  that  they  might  serve
as  monuments  of  his  having  subdued  a  nation  hitherto
deemed  invincible. He  then  levied,  by  his  sole  autho-
rity, large  sums  of  money,  as  well  upon  those  who  had
served  him  with  fidelity  during  the  war,  as  upon  such
as  had  been  in  arms  against  him  ;  upon  the  former,  as
their  contingent  towards  a  war,  which,  having  been
undertaken,  as  he  pretended,  for  the  common  benefit,
ought  to  be  carried  on  at  the  common  charge ;  upon
the  latter,  as  a  fine  by  way  of  punishment  for  their  re-
bellion. By  these  exactions,  he  amassed  above  one
million  six  hundred  thousand  crowns,  a  sum  which  ap-
peared prodigious  in  the  sixteenth  century. But  so
general  was  the  consternation  which  had  seized  the
Germans  upon  his  rapid  success,  and  such  their  dread
of  his  victorious  troops,  that  all  implicitly  obeyed  his
commands  ;  though,  at  the  same  time,  these  extraordi-
v.  L

14(5  CHARLES  V.  [1547.

nary  stretches  of  power  greatly  alarmed  a  people  jealous
of  their  privileges,  and  habituated,  during  several  ages,
to  consider  the  imperial  authority  as  neither  extensive
nor  formidable.  This  discontent  and  resentment,  how
industriously  soever  they  concealed  them,  became  uni-
versal ;  and  the  more  these  passions  were  restrained
and  kept  down  for  the  present,  the  more  likely  were
they  to  burst  out  soon  with  additional  violence.

While  Charles  gave  law  to  the  Germans  like
njmd's  en-  a  conquered  people,  Ferdinand  treated  his  sub-
meDta  m  jects  *n  Bohemia  with  still  greater  rigour.  That
the  liber-  kingdom  possessed  privileges  and  immunities
Bohemian  as  extensive  as  those  of  any  nation  in  which  the
feudal  institutions  were  established. The  pre-
rogative of  their  kings  was  extremely  limited,  and  the
crown  itself  elective. Ferdinand,  when  raised  to  the
throne,  had  confirmed  their  liberties  with  every  solem-
nity prescribed  by  their  excessive  solicitude  for  the
security  of  a  constitution  of  government  to  which  they
were  extremely  attached. He  soon  began,  however,  to
be  weary  of  a  jurisdiction  so  much  circumscribed,  and
to  despise  a  sceptre  which  he  could  not  transmit  to  his
posterity ;  and  notwithstanding  all  his  former  engage-
ments, he  attempted  to  overturn  the  constitution  from
its  foundations ;  that,  instead  of  an  elective  kingdom,
he  might  render  it  hereditary. But  the  Bohemians
were  too  high-spirited  tamely  to  relinquish  privileges
which  they  had  long  enjoyed. At  the  same  time,  many
of  them  having  embraced  the  doctrines  of  the  refor-
mers, the  seeds  of  which  John  Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague
had  planted  in  their  country  about  the  beginning  of  the
preceding  century,  the  desire  of  acquiring  religious
liberty  mingled  itselfwith  their  zeal  for  their  civil  rights;
and  these  two  kindred  passions  heightening,  as  usual,
each  other's  force,  precipitated  them  immediately  into
violent  measures. They  had  not  only  refused  to  serve
their  sovereign  against  the  confederates  of  Smalkalde,

1547.]  BOOK IX.  147

but  having  entered  into  a  close  alliance  with  the  elector
of  Saxony,  they  had  bound  themselves,  by  a  solemn
association,  to  defend  their  ancient  constitution  ;  and
to  persist  until  they  should  obtain  such  additional  pri-
vileges as  they  thought  necessary  towards  perfecting
the  present  model  of  their  government,  or  rendering  it
more  permanent.  They  chose  Caspar  Phlug,  a  noble-
man of  distinction,  to  be  their  general ;  and  raised  an
army  of  thirty  thousand  men  to  enforce  their  petitions.
But  either  from  the  weakness  of  their  leader,  or  from
the  dissensions  in  a  great  unwieldy  body,  which,  having
united  hastily,  was  not  thoroughly  compacted,  or  from
some  other  unknown  cause,  the  subsequent  operations
of  the  Bohemians  bore  no  proportion  to  the  zeal  and
ardour  with  which  they  took  their  first  resolutions.
They  suffered  themselves  to  be  amused  so  long  with  ne-
gotiations and  overtures  of  different  kinds,  that  before
they  could  enter  Saxony,  the  battle  of  Muhlberg  was
fought,  the  elector  deprived  of  his  dignity  and  territo-
ries, the  landgrave  confined  to  close  custody,  and  the
league  of  Smalkalde  entirely  dissipated.  The  same
dread  of  the  emperor's  power  which  had  seized  the  rest
of  the  Germans,  reached  them.  As  soon  as  their  sove-
reign approached,  with  a  body  of  imperial  troops,  they
instantly  dispersed,  thinking  of  nothing  but  how  to
atone  for  their  past  guilt,  and  to  acquire  some  hope  of
forgiveness  by  a  prompt  submission.  But  Ferdinand,
who  entered  his  dominions  full  of  that  implacable  re-
sentment which  inflames  monarchs  whose  authority  has
been  despised,  was  not  to  be  mollified  by  the  late  re-
pentance and  involuntary  return  of  rebellious  subjects
to  their  duty.  He  even  heard  unmoved,  the  entreaties
and  tears  of  the  citizens  of  Prague,  who  appeared  be-
fore him  in  the  posture  of  suppliants,  and  implored  for
mercy.  The  sentence  which  he  pronounced  against
them  was  rigorous  to  extremity ;  he  abolished  many  of
their  privileges,  he  abridged  others,  and  new-modelled

1-2

148  CHARLES  V.  [1547.

the  constitution  according  to  his  pleasure.  He  con-
demned to  death  many  of  those  who  had  been  most
active  in  forming  the  late  association  against  him,  and
punished  still  a  greater  number  with  confiscation  of  their
goods,  or  perpetual  banishment.  He  obliged  all  his
subjects,  of  every  condition,  to  give  up  their  arms,  to
be  deposited  in  forts  where  he  planted  garrisons  ;  and
after  disarming  his  people,  he  loaded  them  with  new
and  exorbitant  taxes.  Thus,  by  an  ill-conducted  and
unsuccessful  effort  to  extend  their  privileges,  the  Bohe-
mians not  only  enlarged  the  sphere  of  the  royal  prero-
gative, when  they  intended  to  have  circumscribed  it,
but  they  almost  annihilated  those  liberties  which  they
aimed  at  establishing  on  a  broader  and  more  secure
foundation."

The  emperor,  having  now  humbled,  and,  as

Diet  held  .  .  r . '

atAugs-  he  imagined,  subdued  the  independent  and
stubborn  spirit  of  the  Germans  by  the  terror  of
arms  and  the  rigour  of  punishment,  held  a  diet  at  Augs-
burg, in  order  to  compose  finally  the  controversies  with
regard  to  religion,  which  had  so  long  disturbed  the
empire.  He  durst  not,  however,  trust  the  determina-
tion of  a  matter  so  interesting  to  the  free  suffrage  of  the
Germans,  broken  as  their  minds  now  were  to  subjection.
He  entered  the  city  at  the  head  of  his  Spanish  troops,
and  assigned  them  quarters  there.  The  rest  of  his  sol-
diers he  cantoned  in  the  adjacent  villages  ;  so  that  the
members  of  the  diet,  while  they  carried  on  their  deli-
berations, were  surrounded  by  the  same  army  which
had  overcome  their  countrymen.  Immediately  after  his
public  entry,  Charles  gave  a  proof  of  the  violence  with
which  he  intended  to  proceed.  He  took  possession  by
force  of  the  cathedral,  together  with  one  of  the  princi-
pal churches ;  and  his  priests  having,  by  various  cere-
monies, purified  them  from  the  pollution  with  which
they  supposed  the  unhallowed  ministrations  of  the  Pro-

*  Sleid.  408.  419. 434. Thuan.  1.  iv.  129. 150. Strur.  Corp.  ii.

1547.]  BOOK IX.  149

testants  to  have  defiled  them,  they  re-established  with
great  pomp  the  rites  of  the  Romish  worship.0
The  em-  The  concourse  of  members  to  this  diet  was
horts'them  extraordmary  ;  the  importance  of  the  affairs  con-
to  submit  cerning  which  it  was  to  deliberate,  added  to
general  the  fear  of  giving  offence  to  the  emperor  by
ounci1'  an  absence  which  lay  open  to  misconstruction,
brought  together  almost  all  the  princes,  nobles,  and  re-
presentatives of  cities  who  had  a  right  to  sit  in  that  as-
sembly. The  emperor,  in  the  speech  with  which  he
.opened  the  meeting,  called  their  attention  immediately
to  that  point,  which  seemed  chiefly  to  merit  it.  Hav-
ing mentioned  the  fatal  effects  of  the  religious  dissen-
sions which  had  arisen  in  Germany,  and  taken  notice
of  his  own  unwearied  endeavours  to  procure  a  general
council,  which  alone  could  provide  a  remedy  adequate
to  those  evils,  he  exhorted  them  to  recognise  its  autho-
rity, and  to  acquiesce  in  the  decisions  of  an  assembly
to  which  they  had  originally  appealed,  as  having  the
sole  right  of  judgment  in  the  case.
Various  ^u*  *ne  council,  to  which  Charles  wished  them
revoiu-  to  refer  all  their  controversies,  had,  by  this  time,

tions  in  _  -11  rr\i (*  i  •

thecoun-  undergone  a  violent  change.  1  he  tear  and  jea-
lousy, with  which  the  emperor's  first  successes
against  the  confederates  of  Smalkalde  had  inspired  the
pope,  continued  to  increase.  Not  satisfied  with  attempt-
ing to  retard  the  progress  of  the  imperial  arms,  by  the
sudden  recall  of  his  troops,  Paul  began  to  consider  the
emperor  as  an  enemy,  the  weight  of  whose  power  he
must  soon  feel,  and  agdinst  whom  he  could  not  be  too
hasty  in  taking  precautions.  He  foresaw  that  the  im-
mediate effect  of  the  emperor's  acquiring  absolute  power
in  Germany,  would  be  to  render  him  entirely  master  of
all  the  decisions  of  the  council,  if  it  should  continue  to
meet  in  Trent.  It  was  dangerous  to  allow  a  monarch,
so  ambitious,  to  get  the  command  of  this  formidable

•Slcid.435.  437:

150  CHARLES  V.  [1547.

engine,  which  he  might  employ  at  pleasure  to  limit  or
overturn  the  papal  authority.  As  the  only  method  of
preventing  this,  he  determined  to  remove  the  council
to  some  city  more  immediately  under  his  own  jurisdic-
tion, and  at  a  greater  distance  from  the  terror  of  the  em-
peror's arms,  or  the  reach  of  his  influence.  An  incident
fortunately  occurred,  which  gave  this  measure  the  ap-
pearance of  being  necessary.  One  or  two  of  the  fathers
of  the  council,  together  with  some  of  their  domestics
happening  to  die  suddenly,  the  physicians,  deceived  by
the  symptoms,  or  suborned  by  the  pope's  legates,  pro-
nounced the  distemper  to  be  infectious  and  pestilential.
Some  of  the  prelates,  struck  with  a  panic,  retired ;  others
were  impatient  to  be  gone;  and  after  a  short  consultation,
the  council  was  translated  to  Bologna,  a  city  subject  to
the  pope.  All  the  bishops  in  the  imperial  in-

March  11.  ; T  .

terest  warmly  opposed  this  resolution,  as  taken
without  necessity,  and  founded  on  false  or  frivolous
Translated  pretexts.  All  the  Spanish  prelates,  and  most  of
from  Trent  the  Neapolitan,  by  the  emperor's  express  com-
mand, remained  at  Trent;  the  rest,  to  the  num-
ber of  thirty -four,  accompanying  the  legates  to  Bologna.
Thus  a  schism  commenced  in  that  very  assembly,  which
had  been  called  to  heal  the  divisions  of  Christendom ;
the  fathers  of  Bologna  inveighed  against  those  who
staid  at  Trenf ,  as  contumacious  and  regardless  of  the

o

pope's  authority ;  while  the  other  accused  them  of  being
so  far  intimidated  by  the  fears  of  imaginary  danger,  as
to  remove  to  a  place  where  their  consultations  could
prove  of  no  service  towards  re-establishing  peace  and
order  in  Germany .q

The  emperor,  at  the  same  time,  employed  all

Symptom!)  -  . .  /.

of  disgust  his  interest  to  procure  the  return  of  the  council
to  Trent-  But  Paul>  who  higMy  applauded  his
own  sagacitv in  having  taken  a  step  which  put  it
out  of  Charles's  power  to  acquire  the  direction

i  F.  Paul,  «48,  kc.

1547.]  BOOK IX.  151

of  that  assembly,  paid  no  regard  to  a  request,  the  object
of  which  was  so  extremely  obvious.  The  summer  was
consumed  in  fruitless  negotiations  with  respect  to  this
point,  the  importunity  of  the  one  and  obstinacy  of  the
other  daily  increasing.  At  last  an  event  happened
which  widened  the  breach  irreparably,  and  rendered  the
pope  utterly  averse  from  listening  to  any  proposal  that
came  from  the  emperor.  Charles,  as  has  been  already
observed,  had  so  violently  exasperated  Peter  Lewis
Farnese,  the  pope's  son,  by  refusing  to  grant  him  the
investiture  of  Parma  and  Placentia,  that  he  had  watched
ever  since  that  time  with  all  the  vigilance  of  resent-
ment for  an  opportunity  of  revenging  that  injury.  He
had  endeavoured  to  precipitate  the  pope  into  open  hos-
tilities against  the  emperor,  and  had  earnestly  solicited
the  king  of  France  to  invade  Italy.  His  hatred  and  re-
sentment extended  to  all  those  whom  he  knew  that  the
emperor  favoured;  he  did  every  ill  office  in  his  power
to  Gonzaga,  governor  of  Milan,  and  had  encouraged
Fiesco  in  his  attempt  upon  the  life  of  Andrew  Doria,
because  both  Gonzaga  and  Doria  possessed  a  great
degree  of  the  emperor's  esteem  and  confidence.  His
malevolence  and  secret  intrigues  were  not  unknown  to
the  emperor,  who  could  not  be  more  desirous  to  take
vengeance  on  him,  than  Gonzaga  and  Doria  were  to
be  employed  as  his  instruments  in  inflicting  it.  Farnese,
by  the  profligacy  of  his  life,  and  by  enormities  of  every
kind,  equal  to  those  committed  by  the  worst  tyrants  who
have  disgraced  human  nature,  had  rendered  himself  so
odious,  that  it  was  thought  any  violence  whatever  might
be  lawfully  attempted  against  him.  Gonzaga  and
Doria  soon  found,  among  his  own  subjects,  persons
who  were  eager,  and  even  deemed  it  meritorious,  to
lend  their  hands  in  such  a  service.  As  Farnese,  ani-
mated with  the  jealousy  which  usually  possesses  petty
sovereigns,  had  employed  all  the  cruelty  and  fraud,
whereby  they  endeavour  to  supply  their  defect  of  power,

152  CHARLES  V.  [1647.

in  order  to  humble  and  extirpate  the  nobility  subject  to
his  government,  five  noblemen  of  the  greatest  distinc-
tion in  Placentia  combined  to  avenge  the  injuries  which
they  themselves  had  suffered,  as  well  as  those  which  he
had  offered  to  their  order.  They  formed  their  plan  in
conjunction  with  Gonzaga ;  but  it  remains  uncertain
whether  he  originally  suggested  the  scheme  to  them,
or  only  approved  of  what  they  proposed,  and  co-ope-
rated in  carrying  it  on.  They  concerted  all  the  pre-
vious steps  with  such  foresight,  conducted  their  intrigues
with  such  secrecy,  and  displayed  such  courage  in  the
execution  of  their  design,  that  it  may  be  ranked  among
the  most  audacious  deeds  of  that  nature  mentioned  in
history.  One  body  of  the  conspirators  surprised,
at  mid-day,  the  gates  of  the  citadel  of  Placentia,
The  assas-  where  Farnese  resided,  overpowered  his  guards,
t'he'poPl  and  murdered  him.  Another  party  of  them  made
son-  themselves  masters  of  the  town,  and  called  upon
their  fellow-citizens  to  take  arms,  in  order  to  recover
their  liberty.  The  multitude  ran  towards  the  citadel,
from  which  three  great  guns,  a  signal  concerted  with
Gonzaga,  had  been  fired  ;  and  before  they  could  guess
the  cause  or  the  authors  of  the  tumult,  they  saw  the
lifeless  body  of  the  tyrant  hanging  by  the  heels  from
one  of  the  windows  of  the  citadel.  But  so  universally
detestable  had  he  become,  that  not  one  expressed  any
sentiment  of  concern  at  such  a  sad  reverse  of  fortune
or  discovered  the  least  indignation  at  this  ignominious
treatment  of  a  sovereign  prince.  The  exultation  at  the
success  of  the  conspiracy  was  general,  and  all  applauded
the  actors  in  it,  as  the  deliverers  of  their  country.  The
body  was  tumbled  into  the  ditch  that  surrounded  the
citadel,  and  exposed  to  the  insults  of  the  rabble ;  the
rest  of  the  citizens  returned  to  their  usual  occupations,
as  if  nothing  extraordinary  had  happened.
The  impe-  Before  next  morning  a  body  of  troops  arriv-
ri.iti.op  ing  from  the  frontiers  of  the  Milanese,  where

1547.]  BOOK  IX.  153

take  pos-  they  had  been  posted  in  expectation  of  the  event,

session  of  A '  1  . . ,  ,

piacentia.  took  possession  of  the  city  in  the  emperors
name,  and  reinstated  the  inhabitants  in  the  possession
of  their  ancient  privileges. Parma,  which  the  Impe-
rialists attempted  likewise  to  surprise,  was  saved  by  the
vigilance  and  fidelity  of  the  officers  whom  Farnese  had
intrusted  with  the  command  of  the  garrison.  The  death
of  a  son  whom,  notwithstanding  his  infamous  vices,
Paul  loved  with  an  excess  of  parental  tenderness,  over-
whelmed him  with  the  deepest  affliction ;  and  the  loss
of  a  city  of  such  consequence  as  Piacentia,  greatly  im-
bittered  his  sorrow.  He  accused  Gonzaga,  in  open  con-
sistory, of  having  committed  a  cruel  murder,  in  order
to  prepare  the  way  for  an  unjust  usurpation,  and  imme-
diately demanded  of  the  emperor  satisfaction  for  both  ;
for  the  former,  by  the  punishment  of  Gonzaga ;  for  the
latter,  by  the  restitution  of  Piacentia  to  his  grandson
Octavia,  its  rightful  owner. But  Charles,  who,  rather
than  quit  a  prize  of  such  value,  was  willing,  not  only
to  expose  himself  to  the  imputation  of  being  accessary
to  the  crime  which  had  given  an  opportunity  of  seizing
it,  but  to  bear  the  infamy  of  defrauding  his  own  son-
in-law  of  the  inheritance  which  belonged  to  him,  eluded
all  his  solicitations,  and  determined  to  keep  possession
of  the  city,  together  with  its  territories.*1
The  pope This  resolution,  flowing  from  an  ambition  so
ain'nce'of  raPaci°us>  as  to  be  restrained  by  no  considera-
the  French  tion  either  of  decency  or  justice,  transported  the
the  Vene-  pope  so  far  beyond  his  usual  moderation  and
prudence,  that  he  was  eager  to  take  arms  against
the  emperor,  in  order  to  be  avenged  on  the  murderers
of  his  son,  and  to  recover  the  inheritance  wrested  from
his  family. Conscious,  however,  of  his  own  inability
to  contend  with  such  an  enemy,  he  warmly  solicited
the  French  king  and  the  republic  of  Venice  to  join  in

1  F.  Paul,  257. Pallavic.  41,  42. Thuan.  iv.  156. Mem.  de  Ribicr,  59,  67.
Natalis  Comitis  Histor.  lib.  iii.  j>.  64.

154  CHARLES  V.  [1547.

an  offensive  league  against  Charles.  But  Henry  was
intent  at  that  time  on  other  objects.  His  ancient  allies
the  Scots,  having  been  defeated  by  the  English,  in  one
of  the  greatest  battles  ever  fought  between  these  two
rival  nations,  he  was  about  to  send  a  numerous  body
of  veteran  troops  into  that  country,  as  well  to  preserve
it  from  being  conquered,  as  to  gain  the  acquisition  of
a  new  kingdom  to  the  French  monarchy,  by  marrying
his  son  the  dauphin  to  the  young  queen  of  Scotland.
An  undertaking  accompanied  with  such  manifest  ad-
vantages, the  success  of  which  appeared  to  be  so  cer-
tain, was  not  to  be  relinquished  for  the  remote  prospect
of  benefit  from  an  alliance  depending  upon  the  preca-
rious life  of  a  pope  of  fourscore,  who  had  nothing  at
heart  but  the  gratification  of  his  own  private  resentment.
Instead,  therefore,  of  rushing  headlong  into  the  alliance
proposed,  Henry  amused  the  pope  with  such  general
professions  and  promises,  as  might  keep  him  from  any
thoughts  of  endeavouring  to  accommodate  his  differences
with  the  emperor,  but  at  the  same  time  he  avoided  any
such  engagement  as  might  occasion  an  immediate  rup-
ture with  Charles,  or  precipitate  him  into  a  war  for  which
he  was  not  prepared.  The  Venetians,  though  much  alarm-
ed at  seeing  Placentia  in  the  hands  of  the  Imperialists,
imitated  the  wary  conduct  of  the  French  king,  as  it
nearly  resembled  the  spirit  which  usually  regulated
their  own  conduct/

The  diet But,  though  the  pope  found  that  it  was  not
i-  in  his  power  to  kindle  immediately  the  flames
w&r>  ne  ^^  no*  f°rget  *ae  injuries  which  he

of  the  was  obliged  for  the  present  to  endure  ;  resent-
Trcnt.  ment  settled  deeper  in  his  mind,  and  became
more  rancorous  in  proportion  as  he  felt  the  difficulty
of  gratifying  it.  It  was  while  these  sentiments  of  en-
mity were  in  full  force,  and  the  desire  of  vengeance  at

•  Mem.  de  Ribfer,  "•  63.  71.  78.  85.  95. ParuU  Istor.  di  Venez.  l'J9.  20."5.
Tbuan.  iv.  160.

1547.]  BOOK IX.  155

its  height,  that  the  diet  of  Augsburg,  by  the  emperor's
command,  petitioned  the  pope,  in  the  name  of  the  whole
Germanic  body,  to  enjoin  the  prelates  who  had  retired
to  Bologna  to  return  again  to  Trent,  and  to  renew  their
deliberations  in  that  place. Charles  had  been  at  great
pains  in  bringing  the  members  to  join  in  this  request.
Having  observed  a  considerable  variety  of  sentiments
among  the  Protestants  with  respect  to  the  submission
which  he  had  required  to  the  decrees  of  the  council,
some  of  them  being  altogether  intractable,  while  others
were  ready  to  acknowledge  its  right  of  jurisdiction  upon
certain  conditions,  he  employed  all  his  address  in  order
to  gain  or  to  divide  them.  He  threatened  and  overawed
the  elector  Palatine,  a  weak  prince,  and  afraid  that  the
emperor  might  inflict  on  him  the  punishment  to  which
he  had  made  himself  liable  by  the  assistance  that  he  had
given  to  the  confederates  of  Smalkalde. The  hope  of
procuring  liberty  for  the  landgrave,  together  with  the
formal  confirmation  of  his  own  electoral  dignity,  over-
came Maurice's  scruples,  or  prevented  him  from  op-
posing what  he  knew  would  be  agreeable  to  the  em-
peror. The  elector  of  Brandenburg,  less  influenced  by
religious  zeal  than  any  prince  of  that  age,  was  easily
induced  to  imitate  their  example,  in  assenting  to  all
that  the  emperor  required. The  deputies  of  the  cities
remained  still  to  be  brought  over. They  were  more
tenacious  of  their  principles  ;  and  though  every  thing
that  could  operate  either  on  their  hopes  or  fears  was
tried,  the  utmost  that  they  would  promise  was,  to  ac-
knowledge the  jurisdiction  of  the  council,  if  effectual
provision  were  made  for  securing  to  the  divines  of  all
parties  free  access  to  that  assembly,  with  entire  liberty
of  debate;  and  if  all  points  in  controversy  were  decided
according  to  Scripture  and  the  usage  of  the  primitive
church. But  when  the  memorial  containing  this  de-
claration was  presented  to  the  emperor,  he  ventured  to
put  in  practice  a  very  extraordinary  artifice. Without

156  CHARLES V.  [1547.

reading  the  paper,  or  taking  any  notice  of  the  conditions
on  which  they  had  insisted,  he  seemed  to  take  it  for
granted  that  they  had  complied  with  his  demand,  and
gave  thanks  to  the  deputies  for  their  full  and  un-
reserved submission  to  the  decrees  of  the  council.
The  deputies,  though  astonished  at  what  they  had  heard,
did  not  attempt  to  set  him  right,  both  parties  being  better
pleased  that  the  matter  should  remain  under  this  state
of  ambiguity,  than  to  push  for  an  explanation,  which
must  have  occasioned  a  dispute,  and  would  have  led,
perhaps,  to  a  rupture.3

Having  obtained  this  seeming  submission  from  the
members  of  the  diet  to  the  authority  of  the  council,
Charles  employed  that  as  an  argument  to  enforce  their
The  o  e  Potion  for  its  return  to  Trent.  But  the  pope,
eludes  the  from  the  satisfaction  which  he  felt  in  mortifying:

demand. ,  f  ,  .  J  . *

the  emperor,  as  well  as  trom  his  own  aversion
to  what  was  demanded,  resolved,  without  hesitation,
that  his  petition  should  not  be  granted,  though,  in  order
to  avoid  the  imputation  of  being  influenced  wholly  by
resentment,  he  had  the  address  to  throw  it  upon  the
fathers  at  Bologna,  to  put  a  direct  negative  upon  the
request.  With  this  view,  he  referred  to  their  conside-
ration the  petition  of  the  diet,  and  they,  ready  to  con-
firm by  their  assent  whatever  the  Wates  were

Dec.  20.

pleased  to  dictate,  declared  that  the  council
could  not,  consistently  with  its  dignity,  return  to  Trent,
unless  the  prelates  who,  by  remaining  there,  had  disco-
vered a  schismatic  spirit,  would  first  repair  to  Bologna,
and  join  their  brethren;  and  that,  even  after  their  junc-
tion, the  council  could  not  renew  its  consultations  with
any  prospect  of  benefit  to  the  church,  if  the  Germans
did  not  prove  their  intention  of  obeying  its  future  de-
crees to  be  sincere,  by  yielding  immediate  obedience  to
those  which  it  had  already  passed.4

•  F.  Paul,  259. Sleid.  440. Tliuan.  torn  i.  155.
I  F,  Paql,  250. Pallav.  ii.  49.

1547.]  BOOK IX.  157

The  erape-  ^his  ansvver  was  communicated  to  the  empe-
ror protests  ror  by  the  pope,  who  at  the  same  time  exhorted

against  the  •*  i

council  of  him  to  comply  with  demands  which  appeared  to
be  so  reasonable.  But  Charles  was  better  ac-
quainted with  the  duplicity  of  the  pope's  character  than
to  be  deceived  by  such  a  gross  artifice  ;  he  knew  that
the  prelates  of  Bologna  durst  utter  no  sentiment  but
what  Paul  inspired  ;  and,  therefore,  overlooking  them
as  mere  tools  in  the  hands  of  another,  he  considered
their  reply  as  a  full  discovery  of  the  pope's  intentions.
As  he  could  no  longer  hope  to  acquire  such  an  ascen-
dant in  the  council  as  to  render  it  subservient  to  his  own
plan,  he  saw  it  to  be  necessary  that  Paul  should  not
have  it  in  his  power  to  turn  against  him  the  autho-
1548.  rity  °f  so  venerable  an  ass'embly.  In  order  to
Jan.  i6.  prevent  this,  he  sent  two  Spanish  lawyers  to  Bo-
logna, who,  in  the  presence  of  the  legates,  protested,  that
the  translation  of  the  council  to  that  place  had  been  un-
necessary, and  founded  on  false  or  frivolous  pretexts  ;
that  while  it  continued  to  meet  there  it  ought  to  be
deemed  an  unlawful  and  schismatical  conventicle;  that
all  its  decisions  ought  of  course  to  be  held  as  null  and
invalid ;  and  that  since  the  pope,  together  with  the  cor-
rupt ecclesiastics  who  depended  on  him,  had  abandoned
the  care  of  the  church,  the  emperor,  as  its  protector,
would  employ  all  the  power  which  God  had  committed
to  him,  in  order  to  preserve  it  from  those  calamities  with
which  it  was  threatened.  A  few  days  after,  the

T  OO  •/

imperial  ambassador  at  Rome  demanded  an  au-
dience of  the  pope,  and,  in  presence  of  all  the  cardinals,
as  well  as  foreign  ministers,  protested  against  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  prelates  at  Bologna,  in  terms  equally
harsh  and  disrespectful."

The  em.  It  was  not  long  before  Charles  proceeded  to
Pa!«  T6  carry  these  threats,  which  greatly  alarmed  both
system,  to  the  pope  and  council  at  Bologna,  into  execu-

»  F.  Paul,  264. Pallav.  51. Sleid.  446. Gold.  Const.  Imperial,  i.  561.

138  CHARLES  V.  [1548.

as  a  tion.  He  let  the  diet  know  the  ill  success  of
his  endeavours  to  procure  a  favourable  answer
Germany.  to  faeiT  petition ;  and  that  the  pope,  equally
regardless  of  their  entreaties,  and  of  his  services  to  the
church,  had  refused  to  gratify  them  by  allowing  the
council  to  meet  again  at  Trent ;  that,  though  all  hope
of  holding  this  assembly  in  a  place  where  they  might
look  for  freedom  of  debate  and  judgment,  was  not  to
be  given  up,  the  prospect  of  it  was,  at  present,  distant
and  uncertain  ;  that,  in  the  mean  time,  Germany  was
torn  in  pieces  by  religious  dissensions,  the  purity  of
the  faith  corrupted,  and  the  minds  of  the  people  dis-
quieted with  a  multiplicity  of  new  opinions  and  con-
troversies, formerly  unknown  among  Christians  ;  that,
moved  by  the  duty  which  he  owed  to  them  as  their  so-
vereign, and  to  the  church,  as  its  protector,  he  had  em-
ployed some  divines,  of  known  abilities  and  learning,
to  prepare  a  system  of  doctrine,  to  which  all  should
conform,  until  a  council,  such  as  they  wished  for,  could
be  convocated.  This  system  was  compiled  by  Pflug,
Helding,  and  Agricola,  of  whom  the  two  former  were
dignitaries  in  the  Romish  church,  but  remarkable  for
their  pacific  and  healing  spirit ;  the  last  was  a  Protes-
tant divine,  suspected,  not  without  reason,  of  having
been  gained,  by  bribes  and  promises,  to  betray  or
mislead  his  party  on  this  occasion.  The  articles  pre-
sented to  the  diet  of  Ratisbon  in  the  year  1541,  in
order  to  reconcile  the  contending  parties,  served  as  a
model  for  the  present  work.  But  as  the  emperor's
situation  was  much  changed  since  that  time,  and  he
found  it  no  longer  necessary  to  manage  the  Protes-
tants with  the  same  delicacy  as  at  that  juncture,  the
concessions  in  their  favour  were  not  now  so  numerous,
nor  did  they  extend  to  points  of  so  much  consequence.
The  treatise  contained  a  complete  system  of  theology,
conformable  in  almost  every  article  to  the  tenets  of  the
Romish  church,  though  expressed,  for  the  most  part,

1548.]  BOOK IX.  159

in  the  softest  words,  or  in  scriptural  phrases,  or  in
terms  of  studied  ambiguity.  Every  doctrine,  however,
peculiar  to  Popery,  was  retained,  and  the  observation  of
all  the  rites  which  the  Protestants  condemned  as  inven-
tions of  men  introduced  into  the  worship  of  God,  was
enjoined.  With  regard  to  two  points  only,  some  relaxa-
tion in  the  rigour  of  opinion  as  well  as  some  latitude  in
practice  were  admitted.  Such  ecclesiastics  as  had  mar-
ried, and  would  not  put  away  their  wives,  were  allowed,
nevertheless,  to  perform  all  the  functions  of  their  sacred
office ;  and  those  provinces  which  had  been  accustomed
to  partake  of  the  cup  as  well  as  of  the  bread  in  the  sa-
crament of  the  Lord's  Supper,  were  still  indulged  in
the  privilege  of  receiving  both.  Even  these  were  de-
clared to  be  concessions  for  the  sake  of  peace,  and
granted  only  for  a  season,  in  compliance  with  the
weakness  or  prejudices  of  their  countrymen/

This  system  of  doctrine,  known  afterward  by
which  the  name  of  the  Interim,  because  it  contained
tJtwinte-  temporary  regulations,  which  were  to  continue
i"ys'  before  no  l°nger  in  force  than  until  a  free  general
the  diet,  council  could  be  held,  the  emperor  presented
to  the  diet,  with  a  pompous  declaration  of  his
sincere  intention  to  re-establish  tranquillity  and  order
in  the  church,  as  well  as  of  his  hopes  that  their  adopt-
ing these  regulations  would  contribute  greatly  to  bring
about  that  desirable  event.  It  was  read  in  presence  of
the  diet  according  to  form.  As  soon  as  it  was  finished,
the  archbishop  ofMentz,  president  of  the  electoral  col-
lege, rose  up  hastily,  and,  having,  thanked  the  empe-
ror for  his  unwearied  and  pious  endeavours  in  order  to
restore  peace  to  the  church,  he,  in  the  name  of  the
diet,  signified  their  approbation  of  the  system  of  doc-
trine which  had  been  read,  together  with  their  resolu-
tion of  conforming  to  it  in  every  particular.  The  whole

«  F.  Paul,  270. Pallav.  ii.  60. Sleid.  453.  457. Struv.  Corp.  1054. Goldast.
Constit.  Imper.  i.  518.

CHARLES V.  [1548.

assembly  was  amazed  at  a  declaration  so  unprecedented
and  unconstitutional,  as  well  as  at  the  elector's  pre-
sumption in  pretending  to  deliver  the  sense  of  the  diet,
upon  a  point  which  had  not  hitherto  been  the  subject
of  consultation  or  of  debate.  But  not  one  member  had
the  courage  to  contradict  what  the  elector  had  said  ;
some  being  overawed  by  fear,  others  remaining  silent
And  ex-  through  complaisance.  The  emperor  held  the
apprVba^  archbishop's  declaration  to  be  a  full  constitu-
tion of  it.  tional  ratification  of  the  Interim,  and  prepared
to  enforce  the  observance  of  it,  as  a  decree  of  the
empire/

New  and  During  this  diet,  the  wife  and  children  of
fruitless  the  landgrave,  warmly  seconded  by  Maurice  of

solicita-  *

for Saxony,  endeavoured  to  interest  the  members

grave'"  in  behalf  of  that  unhappy  prince,  who  still  lan-
'ertj'  guished  in  confinement.  But  Charles,  who  did
not  choose  to  be  brought  under  the  necessity  of  reject-
ing any  request  that  came  from  such  a  respectable
body,  in  order  to  prevent  their  representations,  laid
before  the  diet  an  account  of  his  transactions  with  the
landgrave,  together  with  the  motives  which  had  at
first  induced  him  to  detain  that  prince  in  custody,  and
which  rendered  it  prudent,  as  he  alleged,  to  keep  him
still  under  restraint.  It  was  no  easy  matter  to  give  any
good  reason  for  an  action,  incapable  of  being  justified.
But  he  thought  the  most  frivolous  pretexts  might  be
produced  in  an  assembly  the  members  of  which  were
willing  to  be  deceived,  and  afraid  of  nothing  so  much
as  of  discovering  that  they  saw  his  conduct  in  its  true
colours.  His  account  of  his  own  conduct  was  accord-
ingly admitted  to  be  fully  satisfactory,  and  after  some
feeble  entreaties  that  he  he  would  extend  his  clemency
to  his  unfortunate  prisoner,  the  landgrave's  concerns
were  no  more  mentioned.2

In  order  to  counterbalance  the  unfavourable  impres-

i  Sieid.  460. F.  Paul,  973. Pallav.  63.  »  Sleid.  441.

1548.]  BOOK  IX.  161

sion  which  this  inflexible  rigour  might  make,  Charles,
as  a  proof  that  his  gratitude  was  no  less  permanent
and  unchangeable  than  his  resentment,  invested  Mau-
rice in  the  electoral  dignity,  with  all  the  legal  formali-
ties. The  ceremony  was  performed  with  extraordinary
pomp,  in  an  open  court,  so  near  the  apartment  in  which
the  degraded  elector  was  kept  a  prisoner,  that  he  could
view  it  from  his  windows.  Even  this  insult  did  not
ruffle  his  usual  tranquillity ;  and  turning  his  eyes  that
way,  he  beheld  a  prosperous  rival  receiving  those  en-
signs of  dignity  of  which  he  had  been  stripped,  without
uttering  one  sentiment  unbecoming  the  fortitude  that  he
had  preserved  amidst  all  his  calamities.*
The  inte-  Immediately  after  the  dissolution  of  the  diet,
rim  equaiij  the  emperor  ordered  the  Interim  to  be  pub-

disap-  f  f

proved  of  lished  in  the  German  as  well  as  Latin  language,
tants'and  It  met  with  the  usual  reception  of  conciliating
Papists,  schemes,  when  proposed  to  men  heated  with
disputation ;  both  parties  declaimed  against  it  with
equal  violence.  The  Protestants  condemned  it  as  a
system  containing  the  grossest  errors  of  Popery,  dis-
guised with  so  little  art,  that  it  could  impose  only  on
the  most  ignorant,  or  on  those  who,  by  wilfully  shut-
ting their  eyes,  favoured  the  deception.  The  Papists
inveighed  against  it,  as  a  work  in  which  some  doctrines
of  the  church  were  impiously  given  up,  others  meanly
concealed,  and  all  of  them  delivered  in  terms  calculated
rather  to  deceive  the  unwary,  than  to  instruct  the  ig-
norant, or  to  reclaim  such  as  were  enemies  to  the  truth.
While  the  Lutheran  divines  fiercely  attacked  it  on  one
hand,  the  general  of  the  Dominicans  with  no  less  ve-
hemence impugned  it  on  the  other.  But  at  Rome,  as
soon  as  the  contents  of  the  Interim  came  to  be  known,
the  indignation  of  the  courtiers  and  ecclesiastics  rose  to
the  greatest  height.  They  exclaimed  against  the  em"

»  Thuan.  Hist.  lib.  v.  176. Struv.  Corp.  1054. Investiture  Mauritii,  a  Mamtne«
rano  Lucembergo  descripta,  ap.  Scardium,  ii.  508.

VOL.  V.  M

162  CHARLES V.  [1548.

peror's  profane  encroachment  on  the  sacerdotal  func-
tion, in  presuming,  with  the  concurrence  of  an  assem-
bly of  laymen,  to  define  articles  of  faith,  and  to  regu-
late modes  of  worship.  They  compared  this  rash  deed
to  that  of  Uzziah,  who,  with  an  unhallowed  hand,  had
touched  the  ark  of  God ;  or  to  the  bold  attempts  of
those  emperors  who  had  rendered  their  memory  detest-
able, by  endeavouring  to  model  the  Christian  church
according  to  their  pleasure.  They  even  affected  to
find  out  a  resemblance  between  the  emperor's  con-
duct and  that  of  Henry  VIII.,  and  expressed  their  fear
of  his  imitating  the  example  of  that  apostate,  by  usurp-
ing the  title  as  well  as  the  jurisdiction  belonging  to  the
head  of  the  church.  All,  therefore,  contended  with  one
voice,  that  as  the  foundations  of  ecclesiastical  autho-
rity were  now  shaken,  and  the  whole  fabric  ready  to
be  overturned  by  a  new  enemy,  some  powerful  method
of  defence  must  be  provided,  and  a  vigorous  resistance
must  be  made,  in  the  beginning,  before  he  grew  too
formidable  to  be  opposed.

Thesentu  The  pope,  whose  judgment  was  improved
^pe'whh6  by  longer  experience  in  great  transactions,  as
regard  to  it.  we\\  as  by  a  more  extensive  observation  of
human  affairs,  viewed  the  matter  with  mofe  acute  dis-
cernment, and  derived  comfort  from  the  very  circum-
stance which  filled  them  with  apprehension.  He  was
astonished  that  a  prince  of  such  superior  sagacity  as
the  emperor,  should  be  so  intoxicated  with  a  single
victory,  as  to  imagine  that  he  might  give  law  to  man-
kind, and  decide  even  in  those  matters,  with  regard  to
which  they  are  most  impatient  of  dominion.  He  saw
that,  by  joining  any  one  of  the  contending  parties  in
Germany,  Charles  might  have  had  it  in  his  power  to
have  oppressed  the  other,  but  that  the  presumption  of
success  had  now  inspired  him  with  the  vain  thought
of  his  being  able  to  domineer  over  both.  He  foretold
that  a  system  which  all  attacked,  and  none  defended,

1548.]  BOOK IX.  163

could  not  be  of  long  duration ;  and  that,  for  this  reason,
there  was  no  need  of  his  interposing  in  order  to  hasten
its  fall ;  for  as  soon  as  the  powerful  hand  which  now
upheld  it  was  withdrawn,  it  would  sink  of  its  own  ac-
cord, and  be  forgotten  for  ever.b

The  em  e  ^ne  emPeror>  fond  of  his  own  plan,  adhered
ror  enforces  to  his  resolution  of  carrying  it  into  full  execu-
w°ithPthe C  tion.  But  though  the  elector  palatine,  the  elec-
intenm.  £Or  Q£  Brande^u^  an(}  Maurice,  influenced

by  the  same  considerations  as  formerly,  seemed  ready
to  yield  implicit  obedience  to  whatever  he  should  enjoin,
he  met  not  every  where  with  a  like  obsequious  submis-
sion. John  marquis  of  Brandenburg  Anspach,  although
he  had  taken  part  with  great  zeal  in  the  war  against  the
confederates  of  Smalkalde,  refused  to  renounce  doc-
trines which  he  held  to  be  sacred  ;  and  reminding  the
emperor  of  the  repeated  promises  which  he  had  given
his  Protestant  allies,  of  allowing  them  the  free  exercise
of  their  religion,  he  claimed,  in  consequence  of  these,
to  be  exempted  from  receiving  the  Interim.  Some  other
princes,  also,  ventured  to  mention  the  same  scruples,
and  to  plead  the  same  indulgence.  But  on  this,  as  on
other  trying  occasions,  the  firmness  of  the  elector  of
Saxony  was  most  distinguished,  and  merited  the  highest
praise.  Charles,  well  knowing  the  authority  of  his
example  with  all  the  Protestant  party,  laboured  with
the  utmost  earnestness  to  gain  his  approbation  of  the
Interim,  and  by  employing  sometimes  promises  of  set-
ting him  at  liberty,  sometimes  threats  of  treating  him
with  greater  harshness,  attempted  alternately  to  work
upon  his  hopes  and  fears.  But  he  was  alike  regardless
of  both.  After  having  declared  his  fixed  belief  in  the
doctrines  of  the  Reformation,  "  I  cannot  now,"  said
he,  "  in  my  old  age,  abandon  the  principles,  for  which
I  early  contended  ;  nor,  in  order  to  procure  freedom
during  a  few  declining  years,  will  I  betray  that  good

«•  Sleid.  468. F.  Paul,  271.  277. Pallav.  ii.  64.
M 2

164  CHARLES V.  [1548.

cause,  on  account  of  which  I  have  suffered  so  much,
and  am  still  willing  to  suffer. Better  for  me  to  enjoy,
in  this  solitude,  the  esteem  of  virtuous  men,  together
with  the  approbation  of  my  own  conscience,  than  to
return  into  the  world,  with  the  imputation  and  guilt  of
apostacy,  to  disgrace  and  imbitter  the  remainder  of  my
days." By  this  magnanimous  resolution,  he  set  his
countrymen  a  pattern  of  conduct,  so  very  different  from
that  which  the  emperor  wished  him  to  have  exhibited
to  them,  that  it  drew  upon  him  fresh  marks  of  his  dis-
pleasure . The  rigour  of  h  is  confinement  was  increased ;
the  number  of  his  servants  abridged;  the Lutheran
clergymen,  who  had  hitherto  been  permitted  to  attend
him,  were  dismissed ;  and  even  the  books  of  devotion,
which  had  been  his  chief  consolation  during  a  tedious
imprisonment,  were  taken  from  him.c The  landgrave
of  Hesse,  his  companion  in  misfortune,  did  not  main-
tain the  same  constancy. His  patience  and  fortitude
were  both  so  much  exhausted  by  the  length  of  his  con-
finement, that,  willing  to  purchase  freedom  at  any  price,
he  wrote  to  the  emperor,  offering  not  only  to  approve
of  the  Interim,  but  to  yield  an  unreserved  submission
to  his  will  in  every  other  particular. But  Charles,  who
knew  that  whatever  course  the  landgrave  might  hold,
neither  his  example  nor  authority  would  prevail  on  his
children  or  subjects  to  receive  the  Interim,  paid  no  re-
gard to  his  offers. He  was  kept  confined  as  strictly  as
ever ;  and  while  he  suffered  the  cruel  mortification  of
having  his  conduct  set  in  contrast  to  that  of  the  elector,
he  derived  not  the  smallest  benefit  from  the  mean  step
which  exposed  him  to  much  deserved  censure.*1
The  free But  it  was  the  imperial  cities  that  Charles
cities  strug-  met  with  the  most  violent  opposition  to  the

gle  against T  .  .  111

receiving Interim. 1  hese small commonwealths,  the

n'  citizens  of  which  were  accustomed  to  liberty

and  independence,  had  embraced  the  doctrines  of  the

«  SJeid.  4€2.  *  Ibid.  46*.

1548.]  BOOK IX.  165

Reformation  when  they  were  first  published,  with  re-
markable eagerness  ;  the  bold  spirit  of  innovation  being
peculiarly  suited  to  the  genius  of  free  government.
Among  them,  the  Protestant  teachers  had  made  the
greatest  number  of  proselytes.  The  most  eminent
divines  of  the  party  were  settled  in  them  as  pastors.
By  having  the  direction  of  the  schools  and  other  semi-
naries of  learning,  they  had  trained  up  disciples,  who
were  as  well  instructed  in  the  articles  of  their  faith,  as
they  were  zealous  to  defend  them.  Such  persons  were
not  to  be  guided  by  example,  or  swayed  by  authority;
but  having  been  taught  to  employ  their  own  under-
standing in  examining  and  deciding  with  respect  to  the
points  in  controversy,  they  thought  that  they  were  both
qualified  and  entitled  to  judge  for  themselves.  As  soon
as  the  contents  of  the  Interim  were  known,  they,  with
one  voice,  joined  in  refusing  to  admit  it.  Augsburg,
Ulm,  Strasburg,  Constance,  Bremen,  Magdeburg,  toge-
ther with  many  other  towns  of  less  note,  presented  re-
monstrances to  the  emperor,  setting  forth  the  irregular
and  unconstitutional  manner  in  which  the  Interim  had
been  enacted,  and  beseeching  him  not  to  offer  such
violence  to  their  consciences,  as  to  require  their  assent
to  a  form  of  doctrine  and  worship,  which  appeared  to
them  repugnant  to  the  express  precepts  of  the  divine
law.  But  Charles  having  prevailed  on  so  many  princes
of  the  empire  to  approve  of  his  new  model,  was  not
much  moved  by  the  representations  of  those  cities,
which,  how  formidable  soever  they  might  have  proved,
if  they  could  have  been  formed  into  one  body,  lay  so
remote  from  each  other,  that  it  was  easy  to  oppress
them  separately,  before  it  was  possible  for  them  to  unite.
In  order  to  accomplish  this,  the  emperor  saw

Compelled .  . . . J  i i  i ,

by  violence  it  to  be  requisite  that  his  measures  should  be

BIt° vigorous,  and  executed  with  such  rapidity  as

to  allow  no  time  for  concerting  any  common  plan  of

opposition. Having  laid  down  this  maxim  as  the  rule

166  CHARLES V.  [1548^

of  his  proceedings,  his  first  attempt  was  upon  the  city
of  Augsburg,  which,  though  overawed  with  the  pre-
sence of  the  Spanish  troops,  he  knew  to  be  as  much
dissatisfied  with  the  Interim  as  any  in  the  empire.  He
ordered  one  body  of  these  troops  to  seize  the  gates ;
he  posted  the  rest  in  different  quarters  of  the  city ;  and
assembling  all  the  burgesses  in  the  town-hall,
he,  by  his  sole  absolute  authority,  published  a
decree  abolishing  their  present  form  of  government,
dissolving  all  their  corporations  and  fraternities,  and
nominating  a  small  number  of  persons  in  whom  he
vested  for  the  future  all  the  powers  of  government.
Each  of  the  persons,  thus  chosen,  took  an  oath  to  ob-
serve the  Interim.  An  act  of  power  so  unprecedented
as  well  as  arbitrary,  which  excluded  the  body  of  the
inhabitants  from  any  share  in  the  government  of  their
own  community,  and  subjected  them  to  men  who  had
no  other  merit  than  their  servile  devotion  to  the  empe-
ror's will,  gave  general  disgust ;  but  as  they  durst  not
venture  upon  resistance,  they  were  obliged  to  submit
in  silence.6  From  Augsburg,  in  which  he  left  a  gar-
rison, he  proceeded  to  Ulm,  and  new-modelling  its
government  with  the  same  violent  hand,  he  seized  such
of  their  pastors  as  refused  to  subscribe  the  Interim,
committed  them  to  prison,  and  at  his  departure  carried
them  along  with  him  in  chains/  By  this  severity  he
not  only  secured  the  reception  of  the  Interim  in  two  of
the  most  powerful  cities,  but  gave  warning  to  the  rest
what  such  as  continued  refractory  had  to  expect.  The
effect  of  the  example  was  as  great  as  he  could  have
wished  ;  and  many  towns,  in  order  to  save  themselves
from  the  like  treatment,  found  it  necessary  to  comply
with  what  he  enjoined.  This  obedience,  extorted  by
the  rigour  of  authority,  produced  no  change  in  the  sen-
timents of  the  Germans,  and  extended  no  farther  than
to  make  them  conform  so  far  to  what  he  required,  as

e  Sleid.  469.  «  Jbid.  472.

1548.]  BOOK  IX.  167

was  barely  sufficient  to  screen  them  from  punishment.
The  Protestant  preachers  accompanied  those  religious
rites,  the  observation  of  which  the  Interim  prescribed,
with  such  an  explication  of  their  tendency,  as  served
rather  to  confirm  than  to  remove  the  scruples  of  their
hearers  with  regard  to  them. The  people,  many  of
whom  had  grown  up  to  mature  years  since  the  establish-
ment of  the  reformed  religion,  and  had  never  known
any  other  form  of  public  worship,  beheld  the  pompous
pageantry  of  the  Popish  service  with  contempt  or  hor-
ror ;  and  in  most  places  the  Romish  ecclesiastics  who
returned  to  take  possession  of  their  churches,  could
hardly  be  protected  from  insult,  or  their  ministrations
from  interruption. Thus,  notwithstanding  the  apparent
compliance  of  so  many  cities,  the  inhabitants being-
accustomed  to  freedom,  submitted  with  reluctance  to
the  power  which  now  oppressed  them. Their  under-
standing as  well  as  inclination  revolted  against  the
doctrines  and  ceremonies  imposed  on  them;  and  though,
for  the  present,  they  concealed  their  disgust  and  resent-
ment, it  was  evident  that  these  passions  could  not  always
be  kept  under  restraint,  but  would  break  out  at  last  in
effects  proportional  to  their  violence.8
The  pope Charles,  however,  highly  pleased  with  having
-  bent  the  stubborn  spirit  of  the  Germans  to  such
general  submission,  departed  for  the  Low  Coun-
Boiogna. tries, fully  determined to  compel the  cities,
which  still  stood  out,  to  receive  the  Interim. He  car-
ried his  two  prisoners,  the  elector  of  Saxony  and  land-
grave of  Hesse,  along  with  him,  either  because  he  durst
not  leave  them  behind  him  in  Germany,  or  because  he
wished  to  give  his  countrymen  the  Flemings  this  illus-
trious proof  of  the  success  of  his  arms  and  the  extent  of
his  power. Before  Charles  arrived  at  Brussels  he  was
informed  that  the  pope's  legates  at  Bologna  had  dis-
missed the  council  by  an  indefinite  prorogation,  and

f  Mem.  de  Ribier,  ii.  218. Sleid.  491.

168  CHARLES V.  [1648.

that  the  prelates  assembled  there  had  returned  to  their
respective  countries. Necessity  had  driven  the  pope
into  this  measure. By  the  secession of  those  who
had  voted  against  the  translation,  together  with  the
departure  of  others,  who  grew  weary  of  continuing  in
a  place  where  they  were  not  suffered  to  proceed  to
business,  so few and such inconsiderable  members
remained, that  the  pompous  appellation  of  a  gene-
ral council  could  not,  with  decency,  be  bestowed  any
longer  upon  them. Paul  had  no  choice  but  to  dissolve
an  assembly  which  was  become  the  object  of  contempt,
and  exhibited  to  all  Christendom  a  most  glaring  proof
of  the  impotence  of  the  Romish  see. But  unavoidable
as  the  measure  was,  it  lay  open  to  be  unfavourably  in-
terpreted, and  had  the  appearance  of  withdrawing  the
remedy,  at  the  very  time  when  those  for  whose  recovery
it  was  provided,  were  prevailed  on  to  acknowledge  its
virtue,  and  to  make  trial  of  its  efficacy. Charles  did
not  fail  to  put  this  construction  on  the  conduct  of  the
pope;  and  by  an  artful  comparison  of  his  own  efforts  to
suppress  heresy,  with  Paul's  scandalous  inattention  to
a  point  so  essential,  he  endeavoured  to  render  the  pon-
tiff odious  to  all  zealous  Catholics. At  the  same  time
he  commanded  the  prelates  of  his  faction  to  remain  at
Trent,  that  the  council  might  still  appear  to  have  a
being,  and  might  be  ready  whenever  it  was  thought
expedient  to  resume  its  deliberations  for  the  good  of
the  church.11

The  em-  The  motive  of  Charles's  journey  to  the  Low
Countries,  beside  gratifying  his  favourite  pas-
LlS-  s*on  of  travelling  from  one  part  of  his  dominions
Countries.  t0  another,  was  to  receive  Philip,  his  only  son,
who  was  now  in  the  twenty-first  year  of  his  age,  and
whom  he  had  called  thither,  not  only  that  he  might  be
recognised  by  the  states  of  the  Netherlands  as  heir-ap-
parent, but  in  order  to  facilitate  the  execution  of  a  vast

h  P«llav.  p.  11.72.

1549.]  BOOK  IX.  169

scheme,  the  object  of  which,  and  the  reception  it  met
with,  shall  be  hereafter  explained.  Philip,  having  left
the  government  of  Spain  to  Maximilian,  Ferdinand's
eldest  son,  to  whom  the  emperor  had  given  the  princess
Mary  his  daughter  in  marriage,  embarked  for  Italy,  at-
tended by  a  numerous  retinue  of  Spanish  nobles.1  The
squadron  which  escorted  him,  was  commanded  by  An-
drew Doria,  who,  notwithstanding  his  advanced  age,
insisted  on  the  honour  of  performing,  in  person,  the
same  duty  to  the  son,  which  he  had  often  discharged
Nov.  25.  towards  the  father.  He  landed  safely  at  Ge-
1549.  noa;  from  thence  he  went  to  Milan,  and  pro-
Apnl  *'  ceeding  through  Germany,  arrived  at  the  impe-
rial court  in  Brussels.  The  states  of  Brabant,  in  the
first  place,  and  those  of  the  other  provinces  in  their
order,  acknowledged  his  right  of  succession  in  common
form,  and  he  took  the  customary  oath  to  preserve  all
their  privileges  inviolate.k  In  all  the  towns  of  the  Low
Countries  through  which  Philip  passed  he  was  received
with  extraordinary  pomp.  Nothing  that  could  either
express  the  respect  of  the  people,  or  contribute  to  his
amusement,  was  neglected  ;  pageants,  tournaments,  and
public  spectacles  of  every  kind,  were  exhibited  with
that  expensive  magnificence  which  commercial  nations
are  fond  of  displaying,  when,  on  any  occasion,  they  de-
part from  their  usual  maxims  of  frugality.  But  amidst
these  scenes  of  festivity  and  pleasure,  Philip's  natural
severity  of  temper  was  discernible.  Youth  itself  could
not  render  him  agreeable,  nor  his  being  a  candidate
for  power  form  him  to  courtesy.  He  maintained  a
haughty  reserve  in  his  behaviour,  and  discovered  such
manifest  partiality  towards  his  Spanish  attendants,  to-
gether with  such  an  avowed  preference  to  the  manners
of  their  country,  as  highly  disgusted  the  Flemings,  and
gave  rise  to  that  antipathy,  which  afterward  occa-

1  Ochoa,  Carolea,  362.  *  Haraei  Anna!.  Brabant.  652.

170  CHARLES V.  [1549.

sioned  a  revolution  fatal  to  him  in  that  part  of  his  do-

minions.1

Charles  was  long  detained  in  the  Netherlands  by  a
violent  attack  of  the  gout,  which  returned  upon  him  so
frequently,  and  with  such  increasing  violence,  that  it
had  broken,  to  a  great  degree,  the  vigour  of  his  consti-
tution. He  nevertheless  did  not  slacken  his  endeavours
to  enforce  the  Interim.  The  inhabitants  of  Strasburg,
after  a  long  struggle,  found  it  necessary  to  yield  obe-
dience; those  of  Constance,  who  had  taken  arms  in
their  own  defence,  were  compelled  not  only  to  conform
to  the  Interim,  but  to  renounce  their  privileges  as  a  free
city,  to  do  homage  to  Ferdinand  as  archduke  of  Austria,
and,,  as  his  vassals,  to  admit  an  Austrian  governor  and
garrison."1  Magdeburg,  Bremen,  Hamburg,  and  Lu-
beck,  were  the  only  imperial  cities  of  note  that  still
continued  refractory.

1  Mcni.  dc  Ribier,  ii.  29. L'Evesque  Mem.  de  Card.  Granvellc,  i.  21.
»  Slcid.  474.  491.

THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR  CHARLES  V.

BOOK  X.

TIj^5p09pe.s  VV  HILE  Charles  laboured,  with  such  unwearied
schemes  industry,  to  persuade  or  to  force  the  Protestants

against  the  i  • i_  •  i

emperor,  to  adopt  his  regulations  with  respect  to  reli-
gion, the  effects  of  his  steadiness  in  the  execution  of
his  plan  were  rendered  less  considerable  by  his  rupture
with  the  pope,  which  daily  increased.  The  firm  reso-
lution which  the  emperor  seemed  to  have  taken  against
restoring  Placentia,  together  with  his  repeated  en-
croachments on  the  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction,  not  only
by  the  regulations  contained  in  the  Interim,  but  by  his
attempt  to  reassemble  the  council  of  Trent,  exaspe-
rated Paul  to  the  utmost,  who,  with  the  weakness  inci-
dent to  old  age,  grew  more  attached  to  his  family,  and
more  jealous  of  his  authority,  as  he  advanced  in  years.
Pushed  on  by  these  passions,  he  made  new  efforts  to
draw  the  French  king  into  an  alliance  against  the  empe-
ror ;a  but  finding  that  monarch,  notwithstanding  the  he-
reditary enmity  between  him  and  Charles,  and  the  jea-
lousy with  which  he  viewed  the  successful  progress  of  the
imperial  arms,  as  unwilling  as  formerly  to  involve  him-
self in  immediate  hostilities,  he  was  obliged  to  contract
his  views,  and  to  think  of  preventing  future  encroach-
ments, since  it  was  not  in  his  power  to  inflict  venge-

a  Mem.  de  Ribier,  ii.  230.

172  CHARLES  V.  [1549.

ance  on  account  of  those  which  were  past.  For  this
purpose,  he  determined  to  recall  his  grant  of  Parma
and  Placentia,  and  after  declaring  them  to  be  reannexed
to  the  holy  see,  to  indemnify  his  grandson  Octavio  by
a  new  establishment  in  the  ecclesiastical  state.  By  this
expedient  he  hoped  to  gain  two  points  of  no  small  con-
sequence. He,  first  of  all,  rendered  his  possession  of
Parma  more  secure;  as  the  emperor  would  be  cautious
of  invading  the  patrimony  of  the  church,  though  he
might  seize,  without  scruple,  a  town  belonging  to  the
house  of  Farnese.  In  the  next  place,  he  would  acquire
a  better  chance  of  recovering  Placentia,  as  his  solicita-
tions to  that  effect  might  decently  be  urged  with  greater
importunity,  and  would  infallibly  be  attended  with
greater  effect,  when  he  was  considered  not  as  pleading
the  cause  of  his  own  family,  but  as  an  advocate  for  the
interest  of  the  holy  see.  But  while  Paul  was  priding
himself  on  this  device,  as  a  happy  refinement  in  policy,
Octavio,  an  ambitious  and  high-spirited  young  man,
who  could  not  bear  with  patience  to  be  spoiled  of  one-
half  of  his  territories  by  the  rapaciousness  of  his  father-
in-law,  and  to  be  deprived  of  the  other  by  the  artifices
of  his  grandfather,  took  measures  in  order  to  prevent
the  execution  of  a  plan  fatal  to  his  interest.  He  set  out
secretly  from  Rome,  and  having  first  endeavoured  to
surprise  Parma,  which  attempt  was  frustrated  by  the
fidelity  of  the  governor,  to  whom  the  pope  had  intrusted
the  defence  of  the  town,  he  made  overtures  to  the  em-
peror, of  renouncing  all  connexion  with  the  pope,  and
of  depending  entirely  on  him  for  his  future  fortune.
This  unexpected  defection  of  one  of  the  pope's  own
family,  to  an  enemy  whom  he  hated,  irritated,  almost
to  madness,  a  mind  peevish  with  old  age;  and  there
was  no  degree  of  severity,  to  which  Paul  might  not
have  proceeded  against  a  grandson  whom  he  reproached
as  an  unnatural  apostate.  But,  happily  for  Octavio,
death  prevented  his  carrying  into  execution  the  harsh

1550.]  BOOK  X.  173

resolutions  which  he  had  taken  with  respect  to  him,
and  put  an  end  to  his  pontificate  in  the  sixteenth  year
of  his  administration,  and  the  eighty-second  of  his  age.*
As  this  event  had  been  long  expected,  there  was  an
extraordinary  concourse  of  cardinals  at  Rome  ;  and  the
various  competitors  having  had  time  to  form  their  par-
ties, and  to  concert,  their  measures,  their  ambition  and
intrigues  protracted  the  conclave  to  a  great  length.  The
imperial  and  French  factions  strove,  with  emulation,  to
promote  one  of  their  own  number,  and  had,  by  turns,
the  prospect  of  success.  But  as  Paul,  during  a  long
pontificate,  had  raised  many  to  the  purple,  and  those

*  Among  many  instances  of  the  credulity  or  weakness  of  historians  in  attributing
the  death  of  illustrious  personages  to  extraordinary  causes,  this  is  one.  Almost  all
the  historians  of  the  sixteenth  century  affirm,  that  the  death  of  Paul  III.  was  occa-
sioned by  the  violent  passions  which  the  behaviour  of  his  grandson  excited ;  that  be-
ing informed,  while  he  was  refreshing  himself  in  one  of  his  'gardens  near  Rome,  of
Octavio's  attempt  on  Parma,  as  well  as  of  his  negotiations  with  the  emperor  by
means  of  Genzaga,  he  fainted  away,  continued  some  hours  in  a  swoon,  then  became
feverish,  and  died  within  three  days.  This  is  the  account  given  of  it  by  Thuanus,
lib.  vi.  211.  Adrian!  Istnr.  di  suoi  Tempi,  lib.  vii.  480;  and  by  father  Paul,  280.
Even  cardinal  Pallavicini,  better  informed  than  any  writer  with  regard  to  the  events
which  happened  in  the  papal  court,  and,  when  not  warped  by  prejudice  or  system,
more  accurate  in  relating  them,  agrees  with  their  narrative  in  its  chief  circumstances.
Pallav.  b.  ii.  74.  Paruta,  who  wrote  his  history  by  command  of  the  senate  of  Venice,
relates  it  in  the  same  manner.  Historici  Venez.  vol.iv.  212.  But  there  was  no
occasion  to  search  for  any  extraordinary  cause  to  account  for  the  death  of  an  old
man  of  eighty-two.  There  remains  an  authentic  account  of  this  event,  in  which  we
find  none  of  those  marvellous  circumstances  of  which  the  historians  are  so  fond.  The
cardinal  ofFerrara,  who  was  intrusted  with  the  affairs  of  France  at  the  court  of  Rome,
and  M.  d'Urf£,  Henry's  ambassador  in  ordinary  there,  wrote  an  account  to  that
monarch  of  the  affair  of  Parma,  and  of  the  pope's  death.  By  these  it  appears,  that
Octavio's  attempt  to  surprise  Parma,  was  made  on  the  20th  of  October:  that  next
day,  in  the  evening,  and  not  while  he  was  airing  himself  in  the  gardens  of  Monte-
Cavallo,  the  pope  received  intelligence  of  what  he  had  done;  that  he  was  seized
with  such  a  transport  of  passion,  and  cried  so  bitterly,  that  his  voice  was  heard  in
icveral  apartments  of  the  palace;  that  next  day,  however,  he  was  so  well  as  to  give
an  audience  to  the  cardinal  of  Ferrara,  and  to  go  through  business  of  different  kinds;
that  Octavio  wrote  a  letter  to  the  pope,  not  to  cardinal  Farnese  his  brother,  intimat-
ing his  resolution  of  throwing  himself  into  the  arms  of  the  emperor;  that  the  pope
received  this  on  the  21st  without  any  ncrw  symptoms  of  emotion,  and  returned  an
answer  to  it;  that  on  the22d  of  October,  the  day  on  which  the  cardinal  of  Ferrara's
letter  is  dated,  the  pope  was  in-his  usual  state  of  health.  Mem.  de  Ribier,  ii.  447.
By  a  letter  of  M.  d'Urf«,  November  5,  it  appears  that  the  pope  was  in  such  good
health,  that  on  the  3d  of  that  month  he  had  celebrated  the  anniversary  of  his  coro-
nation with  the  usual  solemnities.  Ibidem,  251.  By  another  letter  from  the  same
person,  we  learn  that,  on  the  6th  of  November,  a  catarrh  or  defluction  fell  down  on
the  pope's  lungs,  with  such  dangerous  symptoms,  that  his  life  was  immediately  de-
spaired of.  Ibid.  252.  And  by  a  third  letter  we  are  informed,  that  he  died  Novem-
ber the  10th.  In  none  of  these  letters  is  his  death  imputed  to  any  extraordinary
cause.  It  appears  that  more  than  twe'nty  days  elapsed  between  Octavio's  attempt  on
Parma,  and  the  death  of  his  grandfather,  and  that  the  disease  was  the  natural  effect
of  old  age,  not  one  of  those  occasioned  by  violence  of  passion.

174  CHARLES  V.  [1550.

chiefly  persons  of  eminent  abilities,  as  well  as  zealously
devoted  to  his  family,  cardinal  Farnese  had  the  com-
Feb.  ?th.  mand  of  a  powerful  and  united  squadron,  by
Uonofju-  whose  address  and  firmness  he  exalted  to  the
liiuiii.  papai  throne  the  cardinal  di  Monte,  whom  Paul
had  employed  as  his  principal  legate  in  the  council  of
Trent,  and  trusted  with  his  most  secret  intentions.  He
assumed  the  name  of  Julius  III.,  and,  in  order  to  ex-
press his  gratitude  towards  his  benefactor,  the  first  act
of  his  administration  was  to  put  Octavio  Farnese  in  pos-
session of  Parma.  When  the  injury  which  he  did  to
the  holy  see,  by  alienating  a  territory  of  such  value,
was  mentioned  by  some  of  the  cardinals,  he  briskly  re-
plied, "  That  he  would  rather  be  a  poor  pope  with  the
reputation  of  a  gentleman,  than  a  rich  one,  with  the  in-
famy of  having  forgotten  the  obligations  conferred  upon
him,  and  the  promises  which  he  had  made."6  But  all
the  lustre  of  this  candour  or  generosity  he  quickly  ef-
faced by  an  action  most  shockingly  indecent.  Accord-
His  cha-  inS  to  an  ancient  and  established  practice,  every
racter  and  pope  upon  his  election  considers  it  as  his  privi-

conduct f-  l  ill  i

lege  to  bestow,  on  whom  he  pleases,  the  cardi-
nal's hat,  which  falls  to  be  disposed  of  by  his  being
invested  with  the  triple  crown.  Julius,  to  the  astonish-
ment of  the  sacred  college,  conferred  this  mark  of  dis-
tinction, together  with  ample  ecclesiastical  revenues,
and  the  right  of  bearing  his  name  and  arms,  upon  one
Innocent,  a  youth  of  sixteen,  born  of  obscure  parents,
and  known  by  the  name  of  the  Ape,  from  his  having
been  trusted  with  the  care  of  an  animal  of  that  species,
in  the  cardinal  di  Monte's  family.  Such  a  prostitution
of  the  highest  dignity  in  the  church  would  have  given
offence,  even  in  these  dark  periods,  when  the  credulous
superstition  of  the  people  emboldened  ecclesiastics  to
venture  on  the  most  flagrant  violations  of  decorum.
But  in  an  enlightened  age,  when,  by  the  progress  of

"  Mem.  de  Ribier.

1550.]  BOOK  X.  175

knowledge  and  philosophy,  the  obligations  of  duty  and
decency  were  better  understood,  when  a  blind  venera-
tion for  the  pontifical  character  was  every  where  abated,
and  one-half  of  Christendom  in  open  rebellion  against
the  papal  see,  this  action  was  viewed  with  horror.
Rome  was  immediately  filled  with  libels  and  pasquin-
ades, which  imputed  the  pope's  extravagant  regard
for  such  an  unworthy  object  to  the  most  criminal  pas-
sions, The  Protestants  exclaimed  against  the  absurdity
of  supposing  that  the  infallible  spirit  of  divine  truth
could  dwell  in  a  breast  so  impure,  and  called  more
loudly  than  ever,  and  with  greater  appearance  of  jus-
tice, for  the  immediate  and  thorough  reformation  of
a  church,  the  head  of  which  was  a  disgrace  to  the
Christian  name.0  The  rest  of  the  pope's  conduct  was
of  a  piece  with  this  first  specimen  of  his  dispositions.
Having  now  reached  the  summit  of  ecclesiastical  am-
bition, he  seemed  eager  to  indemnify  himself  by  an  un-
restrained indulgence  of  his  desires,  for  the  self-denial
or  dissimulation  which  he  had  thought  it  prudent  to
practise  while  in  a  subordinate  station.  He  became
careless  to  so  great  a  degree,  of  all  serious  business,
that  he  could  seldom  be  brought  to  attend  to  it,  but  in
cases  of  extreme  necessity  ;  and  giving  up  himself  to
amusements  and  dissipation  of  every  kind,  he  imitated
the  luxurious  elegance  of  Leo  rather  than  the  severe
virtue  of  Adrian,  the  latter  of  which  it  was  necessary
to  display,  in  contending  with  a  sect  which  derived
great  credit  from  the  rigid  and  austere  manners  of  its
teachers/

His  views  The  pope,  however  ready  to  fulfil  his  engage-
and  pro-  ments  to  the  family  of  Farnese,  discovered  no

ceedings ...  .

with  re-  inclination  to  observe  the  oath,  which  each  car-
the  gene-  dinal  had  taken  when  he  entered  the  conclave,
rai  council.  that  [f  i}ie  choice  should  fall  on  him,  he  would

e  Sleid.  492. F.  Paul,  281. Pallaric.  ii.  76. Thuan.  lib.  vi.  215.
»  F.  Paul,  281.

176  CHARLES V.  [1550.

immediately  call  the  council  to  reassume  its  delibera-
tions. Julius  knew  by  experience,  how  difficult  it  was
to  confine  such  a  body  of  men  within  the  narrow  li-
mits which  it  was  the  interest  of  the  see  of  Rome  to
prescribe ;  and  how  easily  the  zeal  of  some  members,
the  rashness  of  others,  or  the  suggestions  of  the  princes
on  whom  they  depended,  might  precipitate  a  popular
and  ungovernable  assembly  into  forbidden  inquiries,  as
well  as  dangerous  decisions.  He  wished,  for  these
reasons,  to  have  eluded  the  obligation  of  his  oath,  and
gave  an  ambiguous  answer  to  the  first  proposals  which
were  made  to  him  by  the  emperor  with  regard  to  that
matter.  But  Charles,  either  from  his  natural  obstinacy
in  adhering  to  the  measures  which  he  had  once  adopted,
or  from  the  mere  pride  of  accomplishing  what  was  held
to  be  almost  impossible,  persisted  in  his  resolution  of
forcing  the  Protestants  to  return  into  the  bosom  of  the
church.  Having  persuaded  himself,  that  the  authori-
tative decisions  of  the  council  might  be  employed  with
efficacy  in  combating  their  prejudices,  he,  in  conse-
quence of  that  persuasion,  continued  to  solicit  earnestly
that  a  new  bull  of  convocation  might  be  issued  ;  and
the  pope  could  not,  with  decency,  reject  that  request.
When  Julius  found  that  he  could  not  prevent  the  calling
of  a  council,  he  endeavoured  to  take  to  himself  all  the
merit  of  having  procured  the  meeting  of  an  assembly,
which  was  the  object  of  such  general  desire  and  ex-
pectation. A  congregation  of  cardinals,  to  whom  he
referred  the  consideration  of  what  was  necessary  for  re-
storing peace  to  the  church,  recommended,  by  his  di-
rection, the  speedy  convocation  of  a  council,  as  the
most  effectual  expedient  for  that  purpose  ;  and  as  the
new  heresies  raged  with  the  greatest  violence  in  Ger-
many, they  proposed  Trent  as  the  place  of  its  meeting,
that,  by  a  near  inspection  of  the  evil,  the  remedy  might
be  applied  with  greater  discernment  and  certainty  of
success,  The  pope  warmly  approved  of  this  advice,

1550.]  BOOK X.  177

which  he  himself  had  dictated,  and  sent  nuncios  to  the
imperial  and  French  courts,  in  order  to  make  known
his  intentions.6

A  dietat  About  this  time,  the  emperor  had  summoned
Augsburg  a  new  diet  {O  meet  at  Augsburg:,  in  order  to  en-

to  enforce  ~  °  \

the  in-  force  the  observation  of  the  Interim,  and  to  pro-
cure a  more  authentic  act  of  the  supreme  court
in  the  empire,  acknowledging  the  jurisdiction  of  the
,  council,  as  well  as  an  explicit  promise  of  con-
forming to  its  decrees.  He  appeared  there  in
person,  together  with  his  son  the  prince  of  Spain.  Few
electors  were  present,  but  all  sent  deputies  in  their
name.  Charles,  notwithstanding  the  despotic  autho-
rity with  which  he  had  given  law  in  the  empire  during
two  years,  knew  that  the  spirit  of  independence  among
the  Germans  was  not  entirely  subdued,  and  for  that
reason  took  care  to  overawe  the  diet  by  a  considerable
body  of  Spanish  troops  which  escorted  him  thither.
The  first  point  submitted  to  the  consideration  of  the
diet,  was  the  necessity  of  holding  a  council.  All  the
Popish  members  agreed,  without  difficulty,  that  the
meeting  of  that  assembly  should  be  renewed  at  Trent,
and  promised  an  implicit  acquiescence  in  its  decrees.
The  Protestants,  intimidated  and  disunited,  must  have
followed  their  example,  and  the  resolution  of  the  diet
would  have  proved  unanimous,  if  Maurice  of  Saxony
had  not  begun  at  this  time  to  disclose  new  intentions,
and  to  act  a  part  very  different  from  that  which  he  had
so  long  assumed.

Maurice  By  an  artful  dissimulation  of  his  own  senti-
fonTde?.  nients ;  by  address  in  paying  court  to  the  em-
a^alnst  the  Peror  >  an^  by  the  seeming  zeal  with  which  he
emperor,  forwarded  all  his  ambitious  schemes,  Maurice
had  raised  himself  to  the  electoral  dignity ;  and  having
added  the  dominions  of  the  elder  branch  of  the  Saxon
family  to  his  own,  he  was  become  the  most  powerful

«  F.  Paul,  281. Pallav.  ii.  77.
VOL. V.  N

178  CHARLES  V.  [1550.

prince  in  Germany.  But  his  long  and  intimate  union
with  the  emperor  had  afforded  him  many  opportunities
of  observing  narrowly  the  dangerous  tendency  of  that
monarch's  schemes.  He  saw  the  yoke  that  was  preparing
for  his  country;  and  from  the  rapid  as  well  as  formida-
ble progress  of  the  imperial  power,  was  convinced  that
but  a  few  steps  more  remained  to  be  taken,  in  order  to
render  Charles  as  absolute  a  monarch  in  Germany  as  he
had  become  in  Spain.  The  more  eminent  the  condition
was  to  which  he  himself  had  been  exalted,  the  more  so-
licitous did  Maurice  naturally  become  to  maintain  all
its  rights  and  privileges,  and  the  more  did  he  dread
the  thoughts  of  descending  from  the  rank  of  a  prince
almost  independent,  to  that  of  a  vassal  subject  to  the
commands  of  a  master.  At  the  same  time,  he  perceived
that  Charles  was  bent  on  exacting  a  rigid  conformity  to
the  doctrines  and  rites  of  the  Romish  church,  instead
of  allowing  liberty  of  conscience,  the  promise  of  which
had  allured  several  Protestant  princes  to  assist  him  in
the  war  against  the  confederates  of  Smalkalde.  As
he  himself,  notwithstanding  all  the  compliances  which
he  had  made  from  motives  of  interest,  or  an  excess  of
confidence  in  the  emperor,  was  sincerely  attached  to
the  Lutheran  tenets,  he  determined  not  to  be  a  tame
spectator  of  the  overthrow  of  a  system  which  he  be-
lieved to  be  founded  in  truth.

The  poiiti-  This  resolution,  flowing  from  the  love  of  li-
cai  motives  berty  or  zeal  for  religion,  was  strengthened  by
fluenced  political  and  interested  considerations.  In  that
elevated  station  in  which  Maurice  was  now
placed,  new  and  more  extensive  prospects  opened  to
his  view.  His  rank  and  power  entitled  him  to  be  the
head  of  the  Protestants  in  the  empire.  His  predecessor,
the  degraded  elector,  with  inferior  abilities,  and  terri-
tories less  considerable,  had  acquired  such  an  ascendant
over  the  councils  of  the  party ;  and  Maurice  neither  want-
ed discernment  to  see  the  advantage  of  this  pre-eminence,

1550.]  BOOK X.  179

nor  ambition  to  aim  at  attaining  it.  But  he  found  himself
in  a  situation  which  rendered  the  attempt  no  less  diffi-
cult, than  the  object  of  it  was  important.  On  the  one
hand,  the  connexion  which  he  had  formed  with  the
emperor  was  so  intimate,  that  he  could  scarcely  hope
to  take  any  step  which  tended  to  dissolve  it,  without
alarming  his  jealousy,  and  drawing  on  himself  the
whole  weight  of  that  power,  which  had  crushed  the
greatest  confederacy  ever  formed  in  Germany.  On  the
other  hand,  the  calamities  which  he  had  brought  on
the  Protestant  party  were  so  recent,  as  well  as  great,
that  it  seemed  almost  impossible  to  regain  their  confi-
dence, or  to  rally  and  reanimate  a  body,  after  he  him-
self had  been  the  chief  instrument  in  breaking  its  union
and  vigour.  These  considerations  were  sufficient  to
have  discouraged  any  person  of  a  spirit  less  adven-
turous than  Maurice's.  But  to  him  the  grandeur  and
difficulty  of  the  enterprise  were  allurements ;  and  he
boldly  resolved  on  measures,  the  idea  of  which  a  ge-
nius of  inferior  order  could  not  have  conceived,  or
would  have  trembled  at  the  thoughts  of  the  danger  that
attended  the  execution  of  them.

The  pas- ^*s  P9-88!0118  concurred  with  his  interest  in
sions confirming  this  resolution ;  and  the  resentment

\vliicli  co*

operated  excited  by  an  injury,  which  he  sensibly  felt,
>e'  added  new  force  to  the  motives  for  opposing  the
emperor,  which  sound  policy  suggested.  Maurice,  by
his  authority,  had  prevailed  on  the  landgrave  of  Hesse
to  put  his  person  in  the  emperor's  power,  and  had  ob-
tained a  promise  from  the  imperial  ministers  that  he
should  not  be  detained  a  prisoner.  This  had  been  vio-
lated in  the  manner  already  related.  The  unhappy
landgrave  exclaimed  as  loudly  against  his  son-in-law
as  against  Charles.  The  princes  of  Hesse  required
Maurice  to  fulfil  his  engagements  to  their  father,  who
had  lost  his  liberty  by  trusting  to  him ;  and  all  Ger-
many suspected  him  of  having  betrayed,  to  an  implaca-

N  2

180  CHARLES V.  [1550.

ble  enemy,  the  friend  whom  he  was  most  bound  to  pro-
tect. Roused  by  these  solicitations  or  reproaches,  as
well  as  prompted  by  duty  and  affection  to  his  father-in-
law,  Maurice  had  employed  not  only  entreaties  but
remonstrances  in  order  to  procure  his  release.  All
these  Charles  had  disregarded  ;  and  the  shame  of  hav-
ing been  first  deceived,  and  then  slighted,  by  a  prince
whom  he  had  served  with  zeal  as  well  as  success,  which
merited  a  very  different  return,  made  such  a  deep  im-
pression on  Maurice,  that  he  waited  with  impatience
for  an  opportunity  of  being  revenged.
The  can-  The  utmost  caution  as  well  as  the  most  deli-
tion  and  caje  address  were  requisite  in  taking  every  step
with  xvhicii  towards  this  end ;  as  he  had  to  guard,  on  the
on  his  one  hand,  against  giving  a  premature  alarm  to
schemes.  ^  emperor .  while,  on  the  other,  something
considerable  and  explicit  was  necessary  to  be  done,  in
order  to  regain  the  confidence  of  the  Protestant  party.
Maurice  had  accordingly  applied  all  his  powers  of  art
and  dissimulation  to  attain  both  these  points.  As  he
knew  Charles  to  be  inflexible  with  regard  to  the  sub-
mission which  he  required  to  the  Interim,  he, did  not
hesitate  one  moment  whether  he  should  establish  that
form  of  doctrine  and  worship  in  his  dominions :  but
being  sensible  how  odious  it  was  to  his  subjects,  instead
of  violently  imposing  it  on  them  by  the  mere  terror  of
authority,  as  had  been  done  in  other  parts  of  Germany,
he  endeavoured  to  render  their  obedience  a  voluntary
He  en-  deed  of  their  own.  For  this  purpose,  he  had
inrte^mhin  assembled  the  clergy  of  his  country  at  Leipsic,
Saxony,  and  had  laid  the  Interim  before  them,  together
with  the  reasons  which  made  it  necessary  to  conform  to
it  He  had  gained  some  of  them  by  promises,  others
he  had  wrought  upon  by  threats,  and  all  were  intimi-
dated by  the  rigour  with  which  obedience  to  the  Inte-
rim was  extorted  in  the  neighbouring  provinces.  Even
Melancthon,  whose  merit  of  every  kind  entitled  him  to

1550.]  BOOK X.  181

the  first  place  among  the  Protestant  divines,  being  now
deprived  of  the  manly  counsels  of  Luther,  which  were
wont  to  inspire  him  with  fortitude,  and  to  preserve  him
steady  amidst  the  storms  and  dangers  that  threatened
the  church,  was  seduced  into  unwarrantable  conces-
sions, by  the  timidity  of  his  temper,  his  fond  desire  of
peace,  and  his  excessive  complaisance  towards  persons
of  high  rank.  By  his  arguments  and  authority,  no  less
than  by  Maurice's  address,  the  assembly  was  prevailed
on  to  declare,  "  that,  in  points  which  were  purely  indif-
ferent, obedience  was  due  to  the  commands  of  a  lawful
superior."  Founding  upon  this  maxim,  no  less  uncon-
trovertible  in  theory,  than  dangerous  when  carried  into
practice,  especially  in  religious  matters,  many  of  the
Protestant  ecclesiastics  whom  Maurice  consulted,  pro-
ceeded to  class,  among  the  number  of  things  indiffe-
rent, several  doctrines,  which  Luther  had  pointed  out
as  gross  and  pernicious  errors  in  the  Romish  creed ;
and  placing  in  the  same  rank  many  of  those  rites  which
distinguished  the  reformed  from  the  Popish  worship,
they  exhorted  their  people  to  comply  with  the  em-
peror's injunctions  concerning  these  particulars/

By  this  dexterous  conduct,  the  introduction
fessions  of  of  the  Interim  excited  none  of  those  violent  con-
the  Pro-  vulsions  in  Saxony  which  it  occasioned  in  other
reiMon  provinces.  But  though  the  Saxons  submitted,
the  more  zealous  Lutherans  exclaimed  against
Melancthon  and  his  associates,  as  false  brethren,  who
were  either  so  wicked  as  to  apostatize  from  the  truth
altogether ;  or  so  crafty  as  to  betray  it  by  subtile  dis-
tinctions ;  or  so  feeble-spirited  as  to  give  it  up  from
pusillanimity  and  criminal  complaisance  to  a  prince,
capable  of  sacrificing  to  his  political  interest  that  which
he  himself  regarded  as  most  sacred.  Maurice,  being
conscious  what  a  colour  of  probability  his  past  conduct

f  Sleid.  481.  485.  Jo.  Laur.  Mosberaii  Institutionera  Hist.  Ecclesiastics,  lib.  m
Helnist.  1755,  4to.  p.  748.  Jo.  And.  Scbmidii  Historia  Interimistica,  p.  70,  &c.
Helrost.  1730.

1&2  CHARLES V.  [1550.

gave  to  those  accusations,  as  well  as  afraid  of  losing
entirely  the  confidence  of  the  Protestants,  issued  a  de-
claration containing  professions  of  his  zealous  attach-
ment to  the  reformed  religion,  and  of  his  resolution  to
guard  against  all  the  errors  or  encroachments  of  the
papal  see.8

At  the  Having  gone  so  far  in  order  to  remove  the
courts'the  ^ears  anc^  jeal°usies  of  the  Protestants,  he  found
emperor.  ft  necessary  to  efface  the  impression  which  such
a  declaration  might  make  upon  the  emperor.  For  that
purpose,  he  not  only  renewed  his  professions  of  an  in-
violable adherence  to  his  alliance  with  him,  but  as  the
city  of  Magdeburg  still  persisted  in  rejecting  the  Inte-
rim, he  undertook  to  reduce  it  to  obedience,  and  in-
stantly set  about  levying  troops  to  be  employed  in  that
service.  This  damped  all  the  hopes  which  the  Pro-
testants began  to  conceive  of  Maurice,  in  consequence
of  his  declaration,  and  left  them  more  than  ever  at  a
loss  to  guess  at  his  real  intentions.  Their  former  sus-
picion and  distrust  of  him  revived,  and  the  divines  of
Magdeburg  filled  Germany  with  writings  in  which  they
represented  him  as  the  most  formidable  enemy  of  the
Protestant  religion,  who  treacherously  assumed  an  ap-
pearance of  zeal  for  its  interest,  that  he  might  more
effectually  execute  his  schemes  for  its  destruction.

This  charge,  supported  by  the  evidence  of

Protests  _  1 1  i i  •

against  the  recent  tacts,  as  well  as  by  his  present  dubious
conduct,  gained  such  universal  credit,  that
Maurice  was  obliged  to  take  a  vigorous  step  in
his  own  vindication.  As  soon  as  the  re- assem-
bling of  the  council  of  Trent  was  proposed  in  the  diet,
his  ambassadors  protested  that  their  master  would  not
acknowledge  his  authority,  unless  all  the  points  which
had  been  already  decided  there,  were  reviewed,  and
considered  as  still  undetermined ;  unless  the  Protestant
divines  had  a  full  hearing  granted  them,  and  were

*  Sleid.  485.

1550.]  BOOK X.  183

allowed  a  decisive  voice  in  the  council  ;  and  unless  the
pope  renounced  his  pretensions  to  preside  in  the  coun-
cil, engaged  to  submit  to  its  decrees,  and  to  absolve
the  bishops  from  their  oath  of  obedience,  that  they
might  deliver  their  sentiments  with  greater  freedom.
These  demands,  which  were  higher  than  any  that  the
reformers  had  ventured  to  make,  even  when  the  zeal  of
their  party  was  warmest,  or  their  affairs  most  prosper-
ous, counterbalanced,  in  some  degree,  the  impression
which  Maurice's  preparations  against  Magdeburg  had
made  upon  the  minds  of  the  Protestants,  and  kept  them
in  suspense  with  regard  to  his  designs.  At  the  same
time,  he  had  dexterity  enough  to  represent  this  part  of
his  conduct  in  such  a  light  to  the  emperor,  that  it  gave
him  no  offence,  and  occasioned  no  interruption  of  the
strict  confidence  which  subsisted  between  them.  What
the  pretexts  were  which  he  employed,  in  order  to  give
such  a  bold  declaration  an  innocent  appearance,  the
contemporary  historians  have  not  explained  ;  that  they
imposed  upon  Charles  is  certain,  for  he  still  continued
not  only  to  prosecute  his  plan,  as  well  concerning  the
Interim  as  the  council,  with  the  same  ardour,  but  to  place
the  same  confidence  in  Maurice,  with  regard  to  the
execution  of  both.

The  pope's  resolution  concerning  the  council

The  diet  , •  i  . '<.

resolve  to  not  being  yet  known  at  Augsburg,  the  cniei
<mthe"ity  business  of  the  diet  was  to  enforce  the  observa-

of  Magde-  ^[on  of  fae  Interim.  As  the  senate  of  Magde-
burg, notwithstanding  various  endeavours  to
frighten  or  to  soothe  them  into  compliance,  not  only
persevered  obstinately  in  their  opposition  to  the  Interim,
but  began  to  strengthen  the  fortifications  of  their  city,
and  to  levy  troops  in  their  own  defence,  Charles  re-
quired the  diet  to  assist  him  in  quelling  this  audacious
rebellion  against  a  decree  of  the  empire.  Had  the
members  of  the  diet  been  left  to  act  agreeably  to  their
own  inclination,  this  demand  would  have  been  rejected

184  CHARLES V.  [1550.

without  hesitation.  All  the  Germans  who  favoured,  in
any  degree,  the  new  opinions  in  religion,  and  many  who
were  influenced  by  no  other  consideration  than  jealousy
of  the  emperor's  growing  power,  regarded  this  effort  of
the  citizens  of  Magdeburg,  as  a  noble  stand  for  the  li-
berties of  their  country.  Even  such  as  had  not  reso-
lution to  exert  the  same  spirit,  admired  the  gallantry  of
their  enterprise,  and  wished  it  success.  But  the  pre-
sence of  the  Spanish  troops,  together  with  the  dread  of
the  emperor's  displeasure,  overawed  the  members  of  the
diet  to  such  a  degree,  that,  without  venturing  to  utter
their  own  sentiments,  they  tamely  ratified,  by  their  votes,
whatever  the  emperor  was  pleased  to  prescribe.  The
rigorous  decrees  which  Charles  had  issued  by  his  own
authority  against  the  Magdeburgers,  were  confirmed  ;
a  resolution  was  taken  to  raise  troops  in  order  to  besiege
the  city  in  form ;  and  persons  were  named  to  fix  the
contingent  in  men  or  money  to  be  furnished  by  each
state.  At  the  same  time,  the  diet  petitioned

Appoint  • i i •  -i-ii

Maurice  that  Maurice  might  be  intrusted  with  the  com-
mand of  that  army ;  to  which  Charles  gave  his
consent  with  great  alacrity,  and  with  high  encomiums
upon  the  wisdom  of  the  choice  which  they  had  made."1
As  Maurice  conducted  all  his  schemes  with  profound
and  impenetrable  secrecy,  it  is  probable  that  he  took  no
step  avowedly  in  order  to  obtain  this  charge.  The
recommendation  of  his  countrymen  was  either  purely
accidental,  or  flowed  from  the  opinion  generally  enter-
tained of  his  great  abilities  ;  and  neither  the  diet  had
any  foresight,  nor  the  emperor  any  dread,  of  the  con-
sequences which  followed  upon  this  nomination.  Mau-
rice accepted,  without  hesitation,  the  command  to  which
he  was  recommended,  instantly  discerning  the  impor-
tant advantages  which  he  might  derive  from  having  it
committed  to  him.

h  Sleid.  503.  512,

1550.]  BOOK X.  185

The  coun- Meanwhile,  Julius,  in  preparing  the  bull  for
ciisum- tne convocation  of  the  council,  observed  all
reassem- those  tedious  forms  which  the  court  of  Rome
Trent*. can  artfully  employ  to  retard  any  disagreeable
December.  measure. At  last,  however,  it  was  published,
and  the  council  was  summoned  to  meet  at  Trent  on  the
first  day  of  th,e  ensuing  month  of  May. As  he  knew
that  many  of  the  Germans  rejected  or  disputed  the
authority  and  jurisdiction  which  the  papal  see  claims
with  respect  to  general  councils,  he  took  care,  in  the
preamble  of  the  bull,  to  assert,  in  the  strongest  terms,
his  own  right,  not  only  to  call  and  preside  in  that  as-
sembly, but  to  direct  its  proceedings;  nor  would  he
soften  these  expressions,  in  any  degree,  in  compliance
with  the  repeated  solicitations  of  the  emperor,  who
foresaw  what  offence  they  would  give,  and  what  con-
struction might  be  put  on  them. They  were  censured
accordingly  with  great  severity  by  several  members  of
1551. ^6  diet  '•>  but  whatever  disgust  or  suspicion  they
Feb.  is. excited,  such  complete  influence  over  all  their
deliberations  had  the  emperor  acquired,  that  he  pro-
cured a  recess,  in  which  the  authority  of  the  council
was  recognised,  and  declared  to  be  the  proper  remedy
for  the  evils  which  at  that  time  afflicted  the  church  ;
all  the  princes  and  states  of  the  empire,  such  as  had
made  innovations  in  religion,  as  well  as  those  who  ad-
hered to  the  system  of  their  forefathers,  were  required
to  send  their  representatives  to  the  council ;  the  em-
peror engaged  to  grant  a  safe  conduct  to  such  as  de-
manded it,  and  to  secure  them  an  impartial  hearing  in
the  council ;  he  promised  to  fix  his  residence  in  some
city  of  the  empire,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Trent,  that
he  might  protect  the  members  of  the  council  by  his
presence,  and  take  care  that,  by  conducting  their  de-
liberations agreeably  to  Scripture  and  the  doctrine  of
the  fathers,  they  might  bring  them  to  a  desirable  issue.
In  this  recess,  the  observation  of  the  Interim  was  more

186  CHARLES V.  [1551.

strongly  enjoined  than  ever ;  and  the  emperor  threat-
ened all  who  had  hitherto  neglected  or  refused  to  con-
form to  it,  with  the  severest  effects  of  his  vengeance,  if
they  persisted  in  their  disobedience.1
Another  During  the  meeting  of  this  diet,  a  new  at-
fruitiess  tempt  was  made,  in  order  to  procure  liberty  to

attempt  to  '  J

procure the  landgrave. That  prince,  nowise  reconciled

the  land-  i  • . . .  • -i ,  •  j

grave  li- to  his  situation  by  time,  grew  every  day  more
berty< impatient  of  restraint. Having  often  applied
to  Maurice  and  the  elector  of  Brandenburg,  who  took
every  occasion  of  soliciting  the  emperor  in  his  behalf,
though  without  any  effect,  he  now  commanded  his
sons  to  summon  them, with  legal  formality,  to  per-
form what  was  contained  in  the  bond  which  they  had
granted  him, by  surrendering  themselves  into their
hands  to  be  treated  with  the  same  rigour  as  the  empe-
ror had  used  him. This  furnished  them  with  a  fresh
pretext  for  renewing  their  application  to  the  emperor,
together  with  an  additional  argument  to  enforce  it.
Charles  firmly  resolved  not  to  grant  their  request ;
though,  at  the  same  time,  being  extremely  desirous  to
be  delivered  from  their  incessant  importunity,  he  en-
deavoured to  prevail  on  the  landgrave  to  give  up  the
bond  which  he  had  received  from  the  two  electors.
But  that  prince  refusing  to  part  with  a  security  which
he  deemed  essential  to  his  safety,  the  emperor  boldly
cut  the  knot  which  he  could  not  untie ;  and  by  a  public
deed  annulled  the  bond  which  Maurice  and  the  elector
of  Brandenburg  had  granted,  absolving  them  from  all
their  engagements  to  the  landgrave. No  pretension
to  a  power  so  pernicious  to  society  as  that  of  abrogat-
ing at  pleasure  the  most  sacred  laws  of  honour,  and
most  formal  obligations  of  public  faith,  had  hitherto
been  formed  by  any  but  the  Roman  pontiffs,  who,  in
consequence  of  their  claim  of  supreme  power  on  earth,
arrogate  the  right  of  dispensing  with  precepts  and

•Skid.  5lf . Thuan.  lib.  vi.  2S3. Goldasti  Constit.  Imperiales,  vol.  ii.  340.

1551.]  BOOK X.  187

duties  of  every  kind.  All  Germany  was  filled  with
astonishment  when  Charles  assumed  the  same  prero-
gative. The  state  of  subjection,  to  which  the  empire
was  reduced,  appeared  to  be  more  rigorous,  as  well  as
intolerable,  than  that  of  the  most  wretched  and  en-
slaved nations,  if  the  emperor,  by  an  arbitrary  decree,
might  cancel  those  solemn  contracts,  which  are  the  foun-
dation of  that  mutual  confidence  whereby  men  are  held
together  in  social  union.  The  landgrave  himself  now
gave  up  all  hopes  of  recovering  his  liberty  by  the  em-
peror's consent,  and  endeavoured  to  procure  it  by  his
own  address.  But  the  plan  which  he  had  formed  to
deceive  his  guards  being  discovered,  such  of  his  at-
tendants as  he  had  gained  to  favour  his  escape,  were
put  to  death,  and  he  was  confined  in  the  citadel  of
Mechlin  more  closely  than  ever.k
Charles's  Another  transaction  was  carried  on  during
plan  of  this  diet,  with  respect  to  an  affair  more  nearly

procuring  _ *  •

interesting  to  the  emperor,  and  which  occa-

sioned  likewise  a  general  alarm  among  the
princes  of  the  empire.  Charles,  though  formed
with  talents  which  fitted  him  for  conceiving  and  con-
ducting great  designs,  was  not  capable,  as  has  been
often  observed,  of  bearing  extraordinary  success.  Its
operation  on  his  mind  was  so  violent  and  intoxicating,
that  it  elevated  him  beyond  what  was  moderate  or  at-
tainable, and  turned  his  whole  attention  to  the  pursuit
of  vast  but  chimerical  objects.  Such  had  been  the
effect  of  his  victory  over  the  confederates  of  Smalkalde.
He  did  not  long  rest  satisfied  with  the  substantial  and
certain  advantages  which  were  the  result  of  that  event,
but,  despising  these,  as  poor  or  inconsiderable  fruits
of  such  great  success,  he  aimed  at  nothing  less  than
at  bringing  all  Germany  to  a  uniformity  in  religion,
and  at  rendering  the  imperial  power  despotic.  These
were  objects  extremely  splendid  indeed,  and  alluring

k  Sleid.  504. Thuan.  I.  vi.  234,  255.

188  CHARLES V.  [1551.

to  an  ambitious  mind  ;  the  pursuit  of  them,  however,
was  attended  with  manifest  danger,  and  the  hope  of
attaining  them  very  uncertain.  But  the  steps  which
he  had  already  taken  towards  them  having  been  ac-
companied with  such  success,  his  imagination,  warmed
with  contemplating  this  alluring  object,  overlooked  or
despised  all  remaining  difficulties.  As  he  conceived
the  execution  of  his  plan  to  be  certain,  he  began  to  be
solicitous  how  he  might  render  the  possession  of  such
an  important  acquisition  perpetual  in  his  family,  by
transmitting  the  German  empire,  together  with  the
kingdoms  of  Spain,  and  his  dominions  in  Italy  and  the
Low  Countries  to  his  son.  Having  long  revolved  this
flattering  idea  in  his  mind,  without  communicating  it
even  to  those  ministers  whom  he  most  trusted,  he  had
called  Philip  out  of  Spain,  in  hopes  that  his  presence
would  facilitate  the  carrying  forward  the  scheme.
The  obsta-  Great  obstacles,  however,  and  such  as  would
stoocfin  its  have  deterred  any  ambition  less  accustomed  to
W8y-  overcome  difficulties,  were  to  be  surmounted.
He  had,  in  the  year  1530,  imprudently  assisted  in  pro-
curing his  brother  Ferdinand  the  dignity  of  king  of  the
Romans,  and  there  was  no  probability  that  this  prince,
who  was  still  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  had  a  son  grown
up  to  the  years  of  manhood,  would  relinquish,  in  fa-
vour of  his  nephew,  the  near  prospect  of  the  imperial
throne,  which  Charles's  infirmities  and  declining  state
of  health  opened  to  himself.  This  did  not  deter  the
emperor  from  venturing  to  make  the  proposition ;  and
when  Ferdinand,  notwithstanding  his  profound  reve-
rence for  his  brother,  and  obsequious  submission  to  his
will  in  other  instances,  rejected  it  in  a  peremptory  tone,
he  was  not  discouraged  by  one  repulse.  He  renewed
his  applications  to  him  by  his  sister,  Mary  queen  of
Hungary,  to  whom  Ferdinand  stood  indebted  for  the
crowns  both  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia,  and  who,  by
her  great  abilities,  tempered  with  extreme  gentleness

1551.]  BOOK X.  189

of  disposition,  had  acquired  an  extraordinary  influ-
ence over  both  the  brothers.  She  entered  warmly
into  a  measure,  which  tended  so  manifestly  to  ag-
grandize the  house  of  Austria  ;  and  flattering  herself
that  she  could  tempt  Ferdinand  to  renounce  the  rever-
sionary possession  of  the  imperial  dignity  for  an  imme-
diate establishment,  she  assured  him  that  the  emperor,
by  way  of  compensation  for  his  giving  up  his  chance
of  succession,  would  instantly  bestow  upon  him  terri-
tories of  very  considerable  value,  and  pointed  out  in
particular  those  of  the  duke  of  Wurtemberg,  which
might  be  confiscated  upon  different  pretexts.  But  nei-
ther by  her  address  nor  entreaties,  could  she  induce
Ferdinand  to  approve  of  a  plan,  which  would  not  only
have  degraded  him  from  the  highest  rank  among  the
mouarchs  of  Europe  to  that  of  a  subordinate  and  de-
pendent prince,  but  would  have  involved  both  him
and  his  posterity  in  perpetual  contests.  He  was,  at
the  same  time,  more  attached  to  his  children,  than  by
a  rash  concession  to  frustrate  all  the  high  hopes,  in
prospect  of  which  they  had  been  educated.

Notwithstanding the  immoveable  firmness

surmount  which  Ferdinand  discovered,  the  emperor  did
t116*6-  not  abandon  his  scheme.  He  flattered  himself
that  he  might  attain  the  object  in  view  by  another
channel,  and  that  it  was  not  impossible  to  prevail  on
the  electors  to  cancel  their  former  choice  of  Ferdinand,
or  at  least  to  elect  Philip  a  second  king  of  the  Romans,
substituting  him  as  next  in  succession  to  his  uncle.
With  this  view  he  took  Philip  along  with  him  to  the
diet,  that  the  Germans  might  have  an  opportunity  to
observe  and  become  acquainted  with  the  prince,  in
behalf  of  whom  he  courted  their  interest;  and  he  him-
self employed  all  the  arts  of  address  or  insinuation  to
gain  the  electors,  and  to  prepare  them  for  listening  with
a  favourable  ear  to  the  pfoposal.  But  no  sooner  did
lie  venture  upon  mentioning  it  to  them,  than  they,  at

190  CHARLES  V.  [1551.

once,  saw  and  trembled  at  the  consequences  with  which
it  would  be  attended.  They  had  long  felt  all  the  in-
conveniences of  having  placed  at  the  head  of  the  empire
a  prince  whose  power  and  dominions  were  so  extensive;
if  they  should  now  repeat  the  folly,  and  continue  the
imperial  crown,  like  an  hereditary  dignity,  in  the  same
family,  they  foresaw  that  they  would  give  the  son  an
opportunity  of  carrying  on  that  system  of  oppression
which  the  father  had  begun ;  and  would  put  it  in  his
power  to  overturn  whatever  was  yet  left  entire  in  the  an-
cient and  venerable  fabric  of  the  German  constitution.
_. ...  ,  The  character  of  the  prince,  in  whose  favour

Philip's

character  this  extraordinary  proposition  was  made,  ren-
abiegto6the  dered  it  still  less  agreeable.  Philip,  though
Germans.  pOSSesse(j  yfifa  an  insatiable  desire  of  power,
was  a  stranger  to  all  the  arts  of  conciliating  good-will.
Haughty,  reserved,  and  severe,  he,  instead  of  gaining
new  friends,  disgusted  the  ancient  and  most  devoted
partisans  of  the  Austrian  interest.  He  scorned  to  take
the  trouble  of  acquiring  the  language  of  the  country
to  the  government  of  which  he  aspired ;  nor  would  he
condescend  to  pay  the  Germans  the  compliment  of
accommodating  himself,  during  his  residence  among
them,  to  their  manners  and  customs.  He  allowed  the
electors  and  most  illustrious  princes  in  Germany  to  re-
main in  his  presence  uncovered,  affecting  a  stately  and
distant  demeanour  which  the  greatest  of  the  German
emperors,  and  even  Charles  himself,  amidst  the  pride
of  power  and  victory,  had  never  assumed.1  On  the
other  hand,  Ferdinand,  from  the  time  of  his  arrival  in
Germany,  had  studied  to  render  himself  acceptable  to
the  people,  by  a  conformity  to  their  manners,  which
seemed  to  flow  from  choice  ;  and  his  son  Maximilian,
who  was  bom  in  Germany,  possessed,  in  an  eminent
degree,  such  amiable  qualities  as  rendered  him  the

1  Frediman  Andre®  Zulich  DisserUtio  politico-historica  de  Naevis  politic!}  Carol!
V.  Lips.  1T06.  4to.  p.  81.

1551.]  BOOK  X.  191

darling  of  his  countrymen,  and  induced  them  to  look
forward  to  his  election  as  a  most  desirable  event.  Their
esteem  and  affection  for  him  fortified  the  resolution
which  sound  policy  had  suggested,  and  determined  the
Germans  to  prefer  the  popular  virtues  of  Ferdinand
and  his  son,  to  the  stubborn  austerity  of  Philip,  which
interest  could  not  soften,  nor  ambition  teach  him  to
Charles  disguise.  All  the  electors,  the  ecclesiastical  as
relinquish  wc^  as  secularj  concurred  in  expressing  such
this  scheme,  strong  disapprobation  of  the  measure,  that
Charles,  notwithstanding  the  reluctance  with  which  he
gave  up  any  point,  was  obliged  to  drop  the  scheme  as  im-
practicable. By  his  unseasonable  perseverance  in  push-
ing it,  he  had  not  only  filled  the  Germans  with  new
jealousy  of  his  ambitious  designs,  but  laid  the  foundation
of  rivalship  and  discord  in  the  Austrian  family,  and
forced  his  brother  Ferdinand,  in  self-defence,  to  court
the  electors,  particularly  Maurice  of  Saxony,  and  to
form  such  connexions  with  them  as  cut  off  all  prospect
of  renewing  the  proposal  with  success.  Philip,  soured
by  his  disappointment,  was  sent  back  to  Spain,  to  be
called  thence  when  any  new  scheme  of  ambition  should
render  his  presence  necessary."1

The  pope  Having  relinquished  this  plan  of  domestic
andempe-  ambition,  which  had  long;  occupied  and  en-

ror  forni  a  A

design  to  grossed  him,  Charles  imagined  that  he  would
Parma'and  now  have  leisure  to  turn  all  his  attention  to-
piacentia.  war(js  njs  grand  scheme  of  establishing  uni-
formity of  religion  in  the  empire,  by  forcing  all  the
contending  parties  to  acquiesce  in  the  decisions  of  the
council  of  Trent.  But  such  was  the  extent  of  his  do-
minions, the  variety  of  connexions  in  which  this  en-
tangled him,  and  the  multiplicity  of  events  to  which
these  gave  rise,  as  seldom  allowed  him  to  apply  his
whole  force  to  any  one  object  The  machine  which  he

m  Sleid.  505. Thuan.  180.  238. Memoir,  de  Ribier.ii.  219.281.  314. Adriani
Istot.  lib.  viii.  507.  520.

192  CHARLES V.  [1551.

had  to  conduct  was  so  great  and  complicated,  that  an
unforeseen  irregularity  or  obstruction  in  one  of  the  in-
ferior wheels  often  disconcerted  the  motion  of  the  whole,
and  prevented  his  deriving  from  them  all  the  beneficial
effects  which  he  expected.  Such  an  unlooked-for  oc-
currence happened  at  this  juncture,  and  created  new
obstacles  to  the  execution  of  his  schemes  with  regard
to  religion.  Julius  III.,  though  he  had  confirmed
Octavio  Farnese  in  the  possession  of  the  duchy  of
Parma,  during  the  first  effusions  of  his  joy  and  grati-
tude on  his  promotion  to  the  papal  throne,  soon  began
to  repent  of  his  own  generosity,  and  to  be  apprehen-
sive of  consequences  which  either  he  did  not  foresee,
or  had  disregarded,  while  the  sense  of  his  obligations
to  the  family  of  Farnese  was  recent.  The  emperor  still
retained  Placentia  in  his  hands,  and  had  not  relin-
quished his  pretensions  to  Parma  as  a  fief  of  the  empire.
Gonzaga,  the  governor  of  Milan,  having  by  the  part
which  he  took  in  the  murder  of  the  late  duke  Peter
Ludovico,  offered  an  insult  to  the  family  of  Farnese,
which  he  knew  could  never  be  forgiven,  had,  for  that
reason,  avowed  its  destruction,  and  employed  all  the
influence  which  his  great  abilities,  as  well  as  long  ser-
vices, gave  him  with  the  emperor,  in  persuading  him
to  seize  Parma  by  force  of  arms.  Charles,  in  com-
pliance with  his  solicitations,  and  that  he  might  gratify
his  own  desire  of  annexing  Parma  to  the  Milanese,
listened  to  the  proposal ;  and  Gonzaga,  ready  to  take
encouragement  from  the  slightest  appearance  of  appro-
bation, began  to  assemble  troops,  and  to  make  other
preparations  for  the  execution  of  his  scheme.
Octavio  Octavio,  who  saw  the  impending  danger,
Famese  found  it  necessary  for  his  own  safety,  to  in-

courts  the  J  ,  .  i i

assistance crease  the  garrison  of  his  capital,  and  to  levy

soldiers  for  defending  the  rest  of  the  country.

But  as  the  expense  of  such  an  effort  far  exceeded  his

scanty  revenues,  he  represented  his  situation  to  the

1551.]  ROOK X.  193

pope,  and  implored  that  protection  and  assistance  which
was  due  to  him  as  a  vassal  of  the  church.  The  impe-
rial minister,  however,  had  already  preoccupied  the
pope's  ear ;  and  by  discoursing  continually  concerning
the  danger  of  giving  offence  to  the  emperor,  as  well  as
the  imprudence  of  supporting  Octavio  in  a  usurpation
so  detrimental  to  the  holy  see,  had  totally  alienated
him  from  the  family  of  Farnese.  Octavio's  remon-
strance and  petition  met,  of  consequence,  with  a  cold
reception  ;  and  he,  despairing  of  any  assistance  from
Julius,  began  to  look  round  for  protection  from  some
other  quarter.  Henry  II.  of  France  was  the  only  prince
powerful  enough  to  afford  him  this  protection,  and  for-
tunately he  was  now  in  a  situation  which  allowed  him
to  grant  it.  He  had  brought  his  transactions  with  the
two  British  kingdoms,  which  had  hitherto  diverted  his
attention  from  the  affairs  of  the  continent,  to  such  an
issue  as  he  desired.  This  he  had  effected  partly  by
the  vigour  of  his  arms,  partly  by  his  dexterity  in  taking
advantage  of  the  political  factions  which  raged  in  both
kingdoms  to  such  a  degree,  as  rendered  the  councils  of
the  Scots  violent  and  precipitate,  and  the  operations
of  the  English  feeble  and  unsteady.  He  had  procured
from  the  English  favourable  conditions  of  peace  for  his
allies  the  Scots ;  he  had  prevailed  on  the  nobles  of
Scotland  not  only  to  affiance  their  young  queen  to  his
son  the  dauphin,  but  even  to  send  her  into  France,  that
she  might  be  educated  under  his  eye ;  and  had  recovered
Boulogne,  together  with  its  dependencies,  which  had
been  conquered  by  Henry  VIII.

The  French  king;  having  gained  points  of

Hisleague  p  r

with  Henry  so  much  consequence  to  his  crown,  and  dis-
engaged  himself  with  such  honour  from  the
burden  of  supporting  the  Scots,  and  maintaining  a  war
against  England,  was  now  at  full  leisure  to  pursue  the
measures  which  his  hereditary  jealousy  of  the  emperor's
power  naturally  suggested. He  listened,  accordingly,
VOL.  v.  o

194  CHARLES V.  [1551.

to  the  first  overtures  which  Octavio  Farnese  made  him ;
and  embracing  eagerly  an  opportunity  of  recovering
footing  in  Italy,  he  instantly  concluded  a  treaty,  in
which  he  bound  himself  to  espouse  his  cause,  and  to
furnish  him  all  the  assistance  which  he  desired.  This
transaction  could  not  long  be  kept  secret  from  the  pope,
who,  foreseeing  the  calamities  which  must  follow  if  war
were  rekindled  so  near  the  ecclesiastical  state,  imme-
diately issued  monitory  letters,  requiring  Octavio  to  re-
linquish his  new  alliance.  Upon  his  refusal  to  comply
with  the  requisition,  he  soon  after  pronounced  his  fief
to  be  forfeited,  and  declared  war  against  him  as  a  dis-
obedient and  rebellious  vassal.  But,  as  with  his  own
forces  alone,  he  could  not  hope  to  subdue  Octavio
while  supported  by  such  a  powerful  ally  as  the
king  of  France,  he  had  recourse  to  the  emperor,  who
being  extremely  solicitous  to  prevent  the  establish-
ment of  the  French  in  Parma,  ordered  Gonzaga  to
Occasions  second  Julius  with  all  his  troops.  Thus  the
the  renew-  Frencn  took  the  field  as  the  allies  of  Octavio  ;

al  of  hos-  . .

tiiitiesbe-  the  Imperialists  as  the  protectors  of  the  holy
Ch»!es  see ;  and  hostilities  commenced  between  them,
and  Henry.  while  Charles  and  Henry  themselves  still  af-
fected to  give  out  that  they  would  adhere  inviolably  to
the  peace  of  Crespy.  The  war  of  Parma  was  not  dis-
tinguished by  any  memorable  event.  Many  small  ren-
counters happened  with  alternate  success ;  the  French
ravaged  part  of  the  ecclesiastical  territories ;  the  Im-
perialists laid  waste  the  Parmesan;  and  the  latter,
after  having  begun  to  besiege  Parma  in  form,  were
obliged  to  abandon  the  enterprise  with  disgrace.0
Retards  But  the  motions  and  alarm  which  this  war,
ing  oTtL  or  tne  preparations  for  it,  occasioned  in  Italy,
council,  prevented  most  of  the  Italian  prelates  from  re-
pairing to  Trent  on  the  1st  of  May,  the  day  appointed

•  Adrian!  Istor.  lib.  viii.  505.  514. 524. Sleid.  513. Paruta,  p.  220. Lettcre
del  Caro  scritte  al  norae  del  Card.  Farnese,  tora.  ii.  p.  11,  &c.

155L]  BOOK  X.  J95

for  reassembling  the  council ;  and  though  the  papal
legates  and  nuncios  resorted  thither,  they  were  obliged
to  adjourn  the  council  to  the  1st  of  September,  hop-
ing such  a  number  of  prelates  might  then  assemble,
that  they  might  with  decency  begin  their  deliberations.
At  that  time  about  sixty  prelates,  mostly  from  the  ec-
clesiastical state,  or  from  Spain,  together  with  a  few
Henry  pro-  Germans,  convened.0  The  session  was  opened
w^h  the  accustomed  formalities,  and  the  fa-
thers  were  about  to  proceed  to  business,  when
the  abbot  of  Bellozane  appeared,  and  presenting  let-
ters of  credence  as  ambassador  from  the  king  of  France,
demanded  audience.  Having  obtained  it,  he  protested,
in  Henry's  name,  against  an  assembly  called  at  such
an  improper  juncture,  when  a  war,  wantonly  kindled
by  the  pope,  made  it  impossible  for  the  deputies  from
the  Gallican  church  to  resort  to  Trent  in  safety,  or  to
deliberate  concerning  articles  of  faith  and  discipline
with  the  requisite  tranquillity  ;  he  declared,  that  his
master  did  not  acknowledge  this  to  be  a  general  or
oecumenic  council,  but  must  consider,  and  would  treat
it  as  a  particular  and  partial  convention .p  The  legate
affected  to  despise  this  protest ;  and  the  prelates  pror
ceeded,  notwithstanding,  to  examine  and  decide  the
great  points  in  controversy  concerning  the  sacrament
of  the  Lord's  supper,  penance,  and  extreme  unction.
This  measure  of  the  French  monarch,  however,  gave  a
deep  wound  to  the  credit  of  the  council,  at  the  very
commencement  of  its  deliberations.  The  Germans
could  not  pay  much  regard  to  an  assembly,  the  autho-
rity of  which  the  second  prince  in  Christendom  had
formally  disclaimed,  or  feel  any  great  reverence  for  the
decisions  of  a  few  men,  who  arrogated  to  themselves
all  the  rights  belonging  to  the  representatives  of  the

0  F.  Paul,268.  P  Sleid.  518. Thuan.  282. F.  Paul,  301.

o2

of  the

peror

190  CHARLES  V.  [1551.

church  universal,  a  title  to  which  they  had  such  poor
pretensions.

Violence The emperor, nevertheless,  was straining
e  em-  nis  authority  to  the  utmost,  in  order  to  esta-

»  pro- ...  .  ,..,..  ,,,

blish  the  reputation  and  jurisdiction  ot  the
council.  He  had  prevailed  on  the  three  eccle-
siastical electors,  the  prelates  of  greatest  power
and  dignity  in  the  church  next  to  the  pope,  to  repair
thither  in  person.  He  had  obliged  several  German
bishops  of  inferior  rank,  to  go  to  Trent  themselves,  or
to  send  their  proxies.  He  granted  an  imperial  safe-
conduct  to  the  ambassadors  nominated  by  the  elector
of  Brandenburg,  the  duke  of  Wurtemburg,  and  other
Protestants,  to  attend  the  council  ;  and  exhorted  them
to  send  their  divines  thither,  in  order  to  propound,  ex-
plain, and  defend  their  doctrine.  At  the  same  time,
his  zeal  anticipated  the  decrees  of  the  council  ;  and  as
if  the  opinions  of  the  Protestants  had  already  been
condemned,  he  took  large  steps  towards  exterminating
them.  With  this  intention,  he  called  together  the
ministers  of  Augsburg;  and  after  interrogating  them
concerning  several  controverted  points,  enjoined  them
to  teach  nothing  with  respect  to  these,  contrary  to  the
tenets  of  the  Romish  church.  Upon  their  declining
to  comply  with  a  requisition  so  contrary  to  the  dictates
of  their  consciences,  he  commanded  them  to  leave  the
town  in  three  days,  without  revealing  to  any  person
the  cause  of  their  banishment;  he  prohibited  them  to
preach  for  the  future  in  any  province  of  the  empire  ;
and  obliged  them  to  take  an  oath  that  they  would
punctually  obey  these  injunctions.  They  were  not  the
only  victims  to  his  zeal.  The  Protestant  clergy,  in  most
of  the  cities  in  the  circle  of  Suabia,  were  ejected  with
the  same  violence;  and  in  many  places,  such  magis-
trates as  had  distinguished  themselves  by  their  attach-
ment to  the  new  opinions,  were  dismissed  with  the  most

1551.]  BOOK X.  197

abrupt  irregularity,  and  their  offices  filled,  in  conse-
quence of  the  emperor's  arbitrary  appointment,  with
the  most  bigotted  of  their  adversaries.  The  reformed
worship  was  almost  entirely  suppressed  throughout  that
extensive  province.  The  ancient  and  fundamental
privileges  of  the  free  cities  were  violated.  The  people
were  compelled  to  attend  the  ministration  of  priests
whom  they  regarded  with  horror,  as  idolaters  ;  and  to
submit  to  the  jurisdiction  of  magistrates,  whom  they
detested  as  usurpers."1

The  emperor,  after  this  discovery,  which  was

supporuhe  more  explicit  than  any  that  he  had  hitherto
council.  made,  of  his  intention  to  subvert  the  Ger-
man constitution,  as,  well  as  to  extirpate  the  Protes-
tant religion,  set  out  for  Inspruck  in  the  Tyrol.  He

fixed  his  residence  in  that  city,  as,  by  its  si-
November.  . .  i /•  rn

tuation  in  the  neighbourhood ot Irent,  and

on  the  confines  of  Italy,  it  appeared  a  commodious
station  whence  he  might  inspect  the  operations  of  the
council,  and  observe  the  progress  of  the  war  in  the
Parmesan,  without  losing  sight  of  such  occurrences  as
might  happen  in  Germany/

The  sie  During  these  transactions,  the  siege  of  Mag-
of  Magde-  deburg  was  carried  on  with  various  success.
At  the  time  when  Charles  proscribed  the  citi-
zens of  Magdeburg,  and  put  them  under  the  ban  of  the
empire,  he  had  exhorted  and  even  enjoined  all  the
neighbouring  states  to  take  arms  against  them,  as  rebels
and  common  enemies.  Encouraged  by  his  exhorta-
tions as  well  as  promises,  George  of  Mecklenburg,  a
younger  brother  of  the  reigning  duke,  an  active  and
ambitious  prince,  collected  a  considerable  number  of
those  soldiers  of  fortune  who  had  accompanied  Henry
of  Brunswick  in  all  his  wild  enterprises  ;  and  though
a  zealous  Lutheran  himself,  invaded  the  territories  of
the  Magdeburgers,  hoping  that,  by  the  merit  of  this

1  Sleid.  516.  528. Thuan.  276.  r  Sleid.  329.

1.08  CHARLES V.  [1551.

service,  he  might  procure  some  part  of  their  domains
to  be  allotted  to  him  as  an  establishment.  The  citi-
zens, unaccustomed  as  yet  to  endure  patiently  the  cala-
mities of  war,  could  not  be  restrained  from  sallying
out  in  order  to  save  their  lands  from  being  laid  waste.
They  attacked  the  duke  of  Mecklenburg  with  more
resolution  than  conduct,  and  were  repulsed  with  great
slaughter.  But  as  they  were  animated  with  that  un-
conquerable spirit,  which  flows  from  zeal  for  religion
co-operating  with  the  love  of  civil  liberty,  far  from
being  disheartened  by  their  misfortune,  they  prepared
to  defend  themselves  with  vigour.  Many  of  the  ve-
teran soldiers  who  had  served  in  the  long  wars  between
the  emperor  and  king  of  France,  crowding  to  their
standards  under  able  and  experienced  officers,  the
citizens  acquired  military  skill  by  degrees,  and  added
all  the  advantages  of  that  to  the  efforts  of  undaunted
courage.  The  duke  of  Mecklenburg,  notwithstand-
ing the  severe  blow  which  he  had  given  the  Magde-
burgers,  not  daring  to  invest  a  town  strongly  fortified
and  defended  by  such  a  garrison,  continued  to  ravage
the  open  country.

Maurice  -^s  the  hopes  of  booty  drew  many  adven-
takes  the  turers  to  the  camp  of  this  young  prince,  Maurice

command  ««i/»i

ofthear-  of  Saxony  began  to  be  jealous  of  the  power
™nied'on  which  he  possessed  by  being  at  the  head  of
the  siege.  _sucfa  a  numerous  body,  and  marching  towards
Magdeburg  with  his  own  troops,  assumed  the  supreme
command  of  the  whole  army,  an  honour  to  which  his
high  rank  and  great  abilities,  as  well  as  the  nomination
of  the  diet,  gave  him  an  indisputable  title.  With  this
united  force,  he  invested  the  town,  and  began  the  siege
in  form ;  claiming  great  merit  with  the  emperor  on  that
account,  as,  from  his  zeal  to  execute  the  imperial  decree,
he  was  exposing  himself  once  more  to  the  censures  and
maledictions  of  the  party  with  which  he  agreed  in  re-
ligious sentiments.  But  the  approaches  to  the  town

1551.]  BOOK X.  J99

went  on  slowly ;  the  garrison  interrupted  the  besiegers
by  frequent  sallies,  in  one  of  which  George  of  Meck-
lenburg was  taken  prisoner,  levelled  part  of  their  works,
and  cut  off  the  soldiers  in  their  advanced  posts.  While
the  citizens  of  Magdeburg,  animated  by  the  discourses
of  their  pastors,  and  the  soldiers,  encouraged  by  the
example  of  their  officers,  endured  all  the  hardships  of
a  siege  without  murmuring,  and  defended  themselves
with  the  same  ardour  which  they  had  at  first  discovered ;
the  troops  of  the  besiegers  acted  with  extreme  remiss-
ness,  repining  at  every  thing  that  they  suffered  in  a
service  which  they  disliked.  They  broke  out,  more
than  once,  into  open  mutiny,  demanded  the  arrears  of
their  pay,  which,  as  the  members  of  the  Germanic  body
sent  in  their  contributions  towards  defraying  the  ex-
penses of  the  war  sparingly  and  with  great  reluctance,
amounted  to  a  considerable  sum.8  Maurice,  too,  had
particular  motives,  though  such  as  he  durst  not  avow
at  that  juncture,  which  induced  him  not  to  push  the
siege  with  vigour,  and  made  him  choose  rather  to  con-
tinue at  the  head  of  an  army  exposed  to  all  the  impu-
tations which  his  dilatory  proceedings  drew  upon  him,
than  to  precipitate  a  conquest  that  might  have  brought
him  some  accession  of  reputation,  but  would  have  ren-
dered it  necessary  to  disband  his  forces.

At  last,  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  beginning
surrenders to  suffer  distress  from  want  of  provisions,  and
e'  Maurice,  finding  it  impossible  to  protract  mat-
ters any  longer  without  filling  the  emperor  with  such
suspicions  as  might  have  disconcerted  all  his  measures,
he  concluded  a  treaty  of  capitulation  with  the  city  upon
the  following  conditions : — That  the  Magde-
burgers  should  humbly  implore  pardon  of  the
emperor ;  that  they  should  not  for  the  future  take  arms,
or  enter  into  any  alliance  against  the  house  of  Austria ;

•  Thuan.  277. Slcid.  514.

200  CHARLES  V.  [1551.

that  they  should  submit  to  the  authority  of  the  imperial
chamber;  that  they  should  conform  to  the  decree  of
the  diet  at  Augsburg  with  respect  to  religion  ;  that  the
new  fortifications  added  to  the  town  should  be  de-
molished ;  that  they  should  pay  a  fine  of  fifty  thou-
sand crowns,  deliver  up  twelve  pieces  of  ordnance
to  the  emperor,  and  set  the  duke  of  Mecklenburg,  to-
gether with  their  other  prisoners,  at  liberty,  without
ransom.  Next  day  their  garrison  marched  out,  and
Maurice  took  possession  of  the  town  with  great  military
pomp.

Before  the  terms  of  capitulation  were  settled,
viewsatthis  Maurice  had  held  many  conferences  with  Albert
juncture.  c()unt  Mjmsfeidt,  who  had  the  chief  command

in  Magdeburg.  He  consulted  likewise  with  count
Heideck,  an  officer  who  had  served  with  great  reputa-
tion in  the  army  of  the  league  of  Smalkalde,  whom  the
emperor  had  proscribed  on  account  of  his  zeal  for  that
cause,  but  whom  Maurice  had,  notwithstanding,  secretly
engaged  in  his  service,  and  admitted  into  the  most  in-
timate confidence.  To  them  he  communicated  a  scheme,
which  he  had  long  revolved  in  his  mind,  for  procuring
liberty  to  his  father-in-law  the  landgrave,  for  vindicat-
ing the  privileges  of  the  Germanic  body,  and  setting
bounds  to  the  dangerous  encroachment  of  the  imperial
power.  Having  deliberated  with  them  concerning  the
measures  which  might  be  necessary  for  securing  the
success  of  such  an  arduous  enterprise,  he  gave  Mans-
feldt  secret  assurances  that  the  fortifications  of  Magde-
burg should  not  be  destroyed,  and  that  the  inhabitants
should  neither  be  disturbed  in  the  exercise  of  their  re-
ligion, nor  be  deprived  of  any  of  their  ancient  immu-
nities. In  order  to  engage  Maurice  more  thoroughly
from  considerations  of  interest  to  fulfil  these  engage-
ments, the  senate  of  Magdeburg  elected  him  their  bur-
grave,  a  dignity  which  had  formerly  belonged  to  the

1551.]  BOOK  X.  201

electoral  house  of  Saxony,  and  which  entitled  him  to  a

very  ample  jurisdiction  not  only  in  the  city  but  in  its

dependencies.1

Theadvan- Thus  the  citizens  of  Magdeburg,  after  en-

tageshede-  during-  a  siege  of  twelve  months,  and  Strugs-ling;

rived  from  to  &  .  7 .  °.°

hisnegotia-  for  their  liberties,  religious  and  civil,  with  an
tiwMagde-  invincible  fortitude,  worthy  of  the  cause  in
burgers.  wnich  it  was  exerted,  had  at  last  the  good  for-
tune to  conclude  a  treaty,  which  left  them  in  a  better
condition  than  the  rest  of  their  countrymen,  whom  their
timidity  or  want  of  public  spirit  had  betrayed  into  such
mean  submissions  to  the  emperor.  But  while  a  great
part  of  Germany  applauded  the  gallant  conduct  of  the
Magdeburgers,  and  rejoiced  in  their  having  escaped
the  destruction  with  which  they  had  been  threatened,
all  admired  Maurice's  address  in  the  conduct  of  his
negotiation  with  them,  as  well  as  the  dexterity  with
which  he  converted  every  event  to  his  own  advantage.
They  saw  with  amazement,  that  after  having  afflicted
the  Magdeburgers  during  many  months  with  all  the
calamities  of  war,  he  was  at  last,  by  their  voluntary
election,  advanced  to  the  station  of  highest  authority
in  that  city  which  he  had  so  lately  besieged  ;  that  after
having  been  so  long  the  object  of  their  satirical  invec-
tives as  an  apostate,  and  an  enemy  to  the  religion  which
he  professed,  they 'seemed  now  to  place  unbounded
confidence  in  his  zeal  and  good-will."  At  the  same
time  the  public  articles  in  the  treaty  of  capitulation  were
so  perfectly  conformable  to  those  which  the  emperor
had  granted  to  the  other  Protestant  cities,  and  Maurice
took  such  care  to  magnify  his  merit  in  having  reduced  a
place  which  had  defended  itself  with  so  much  obstinacy,
that  Charles,  far  from  suspecting  any  thing  fraudulent
or  collusive  in  the  terms  of  accommodation,  ratified
them  without  hesitation,  and  absolved  the  Magde-

*  Sleid.  528. Thuan.  276. Obsidionis  Magdeburgici  Descriptio  per  Sebast
Besselmeierum,  ap.  Scard.  ii.  518.

u  Arnold!  Vita  Maurit.  apud  Menken,  ii.  1227.

202  CHARLES V.  [1551.

burgers  from  the  sentence  of  ban  which  had  been  de-
nounced against  them.

Hi»  ex  e  ^ne  onty  point  that  now  remained  to  em-
dient  for  barrass  Maurice  was  how  to  keep  together  the
army  on*"  veteran  troops  which  had  served  under  him,  as
well  as  those  which  had  been  employed  in  the
defence  of  the  town.  For  this,  too,  he  found  an  expe-
dient with  singular  art  and  felicity.  His  schemes
against  the  emperor  were  not  yet  so  fully  ripened,  that
he  durst  venture  to  disclose  them,  and  proceed  openly
to  carry  them  into  execution.  The  winter  was  ap-
proaching, which  made  it  impossible  to  take  the  field
immediately.  He  was  afraid  that  it  would  give  a  pre-
mature alarm  to  the  emperor,  if  he  should  retain  such
a  considerable  body  in  his  pay  until  the  season  of  ac-
tion returned  in  the  spring.  As  soon,  then,  as  Magde-
burg opened  its  gates,  he  sent  home  his  Saxon  subjects,
whom  he  could  command  to  take  arms  and  reassemble
on  the  shortest  warning ;  and  at  the  same  time,  paying
part  of  the  arrears  due  to  the  mercenary  troops,  who
had  followed  his  standard,  as  well  as  to  the  soldiers
who  had  served  in  the  garrison,  he  absolved  them  from
their  respective  oaths  of  fidelity,  and  disbanded  them.
But  the  moment  he  gave  them  their  discharge,  George
of  Mecklenburg,  who  was  now  set  at  liberty,  offered  to
take  them  into  his  service,  and  to  become  surety  for  the
payment  of  what  was  still  owing  to  them.  As  such
adventurers  were  accustomed  often  to  change  masters,
they  instantly  accepted  the  offer.  Thus  these  troops
were  kept  united,  and  ready  to  march  wherever  Maurice
should  call  them,  while  the  emperor,  deceived  by  this
artifice,  and  imagining  that  George  of  Mecklenburg
had  hired  them  with  an  intention  to  assert  his  claim  to
a  part  of  his  brother's  territories  by  force  of  arms,  suf-
fered this  transaction  to  pass  without  observation,  as  if
it  had  been  a  matter  of  no  consequence."

*  Thuan.  278. Struv.  Corp.  Hist.  Germ.  1064. Arnoldi  Vita  Mauritii,  »pud
Menken,  ii.  1227.

1551.]  BOOK  X.  203

His  address  Having  ventured  to  take  these  steps,  which
Ing^hHn-  were  of  so  much  consequence  towards  the  exe-
fromthe  cution  of  his  schemes,  Maurice,  that  he  might
emperor,  divert  the  emperor  from  observing  their  ten-
dency too  narrowly,  and  prevent  the  suspicions  which
that  must  have  excited,  saw  the  necessity  of  employ-
ing some  new  artifice  in  order  to  engage  his  attention,
and  to  confirm  him  in  his  present  security.  As  he
knew  that  the  chief  object  of  the  emperor's  solicitude
at  this  juncture,  was  how  he  might  prevail  with  the
Protestant  states  of  Germany  to  recognise  the  au-
thority of  the  council  of  Trent,  and  to  send  thither
ambassadors  in  their  own  name,  as  well  as  deputies
from  their  respective  churches,  he  took  hold  of  this  pre-
dominating passion  in  order  to  amuse  and  to  deceive
him.  He  affected  a  wonderful  zeal  to  gratify  Charles
in  what  he  desired  with  regard  to  this  matter ;  he  no-
minated ambassadors  whom  he  empowered  to  attend
the  council ;  he  made  choice  of  Melancthon  and  some
of  the  most  eminent  among  his  brethren  to  prepare  a
confession  of  faith,  and  to  lay  it  before  that  assembly.
After  his  example,  and  probably  in  consequence  of  his
solicitations,  the  duke  of  Wurtemburg,  the  city  of
Strasburg,  and  other  Protestant  states,  appointed  am-
bassadors and  divines  to  attend  the  council.  They
all  applied  to  the  emperor  for  his  safe-conduct,  which
they  obtained  in  the  most  ample  form.  This  was
deemed  sufficient  for  the  security  of  the  ambassadors,
and  they  proceeded  accordingly  on  their  journey;  but
a  separate  safe-conduct  from  the  council  itself  was  de-
manded for  the  Protestant  divines.  The  fate  of  John
Huss  and  Jerome  of  Prague,  whom  the  council  of  Con-
stance, in  the  preceding  century,  had  condemned  to
the  flames  without  regarding  the  imperial  safe-conduct
which  had  been  granted  them,  rendered  this  precau-
tion prudent  and  necessary.  But  as  the  pope  was  no
less  unwilling  that  the  Protestants  should  be  admitted

204  CHARLES  V.  [1551.

to  a  hearing  in  the  council,  than  that  the  emperor
had  been  eager  in  bringing  them  to  demand  it,  the
legate  by  promises  and  threats  prevailed  on  the  fathers
of  the  council  to  decline  issuing  a  safe-conduct  in  the
same  form  with  that  which  the  council  of  Basil  had
granted  to  the  followers  of  Huss.  The  Protestants,  on
their  part,  insisted  upon  the  council's  copying  the  pre-
cise words  of  that  instrument.  The  imperial  ambas-
sadors interposed,  in  order  to  obtain  what  would  satisfy
them.  Alterations  in  the  form  of  the  writ  were  pro-
posed ;  expedients  were  suggested;  protests  and  coun-
ter protests  were  taken;  the  legate,  together  with  his
associates,  laboured  to  gain  their  point  by  artifice  and
chicane ;  the  Protestants  adhered  to  theirs  with  firm-
ness and  obstinacy.  An  account  of  every  thing  that
passed  in  Trent  was  transmitted  to  the  emperor  at
Inspruck,  who,  attempting,  from  an  excess  of  zeal,  or
of  confidence  in  his  own  address,  to  reconcile  the  con-
tending parties,  was  involved  in  a  labyrinth  of  inex-
tricable negotiations.  By  means  of  this,  however,
Maurice  gained  all  that  he  had  in  view;  the  em-
peror's time  was  wholly  engrossed,  and  his  atten-
tion diverted  ;  while  he  himself  had  leisure  to  mature
his  schemes,  to  carry  on  his  intrigues,  and  to  finish  his
preparations,  before  he  threw  off  the  mask,  and  struck
the  blow  which  he  had  so  long  meditated/
The  affairs  But  previous  to  entering  into  any  farther
of  Hungary.  fafaH  concerning  Maurice's  operations,  some
account  must  be  given  of  a  new  revolution  in  Hungary,
which  contributed  not  a  little  towards  their  producing
such  extraordinary  effects.  When  Solyman,  in  the
year  1541,  by  a  stratagem,  which  suited  the  base  and
insidious  policy  of  a  petty  usurper,  rather  than  the
magnanimity  of  a  mighty  conqueror,  deprived  the
young  king  of  Hungary  of  the  dominions  which  his  fa-
ther had  left  him,  he  had  granted  that  unfortunate  prince

»  Sleid.  526.  529. F.  Paul,  323. 338. Thuan.  286

1551.]  BOOK  X.  205

the  country  of  Transylvania,  a  province  of  his  paternal
kingdom.  The  government  of  this,  together  with  the
care  of  educating  the  young  king,  for  he  still  allowed
him  to  retain  that  title,  though  he  had  rendered  it  only
an  empty  name,  he  committed  to  the  queen  and  Mar-
tinuzzi  bishop  of  Waradin,  whom  the  late  king  had
appointed  joint  guardians  of  his  son,  and  regents  of
his  dominions,  at  a  time  when  those  offices  were  of
greater  importance.  This  co-ordinate  jurisdiction  oc-
casioned the  same  dissensions  in  a  small  principality
as  it  would  have  excited  in  a  great  kingdom;  an  am-
bitious young  queen,  possessed  with  a  high  opinion  of
her  own  capacity  for  governing,  and  a  high-spirited
prelate,  fond  of  power,  contending  who  should  engross
the  greatest  share  in  the  administration.  Each  had

o

their  partisans  among  the  nobles ;  but  as  Martinuzzi,  by
his  great  talents,  began  to  acquire  the  ascendant,  Isa-
bella turned  his  own  arts  against  him,  and  courted  the
protection  of  the  Turks.

The  neighbouring  bashaws,  jealous  of  the
bishop's  power  as  well  as  his  abilities,  readily
Promise(l  ner  the  aid  which  she  demanded,
kingdom,  and  would  soon  have  obliged  Martinuzzi  to
have  given  up  to  her  the  sole  direction  of  affairs,  if  his
ambition,  fertile  in  expedients,  had  not  suggested  to
him  a  new  measure,  and  one  that  tended  not  only  to
preserve  but  to  enlarge  his  authority.  Having  con-
cluded an  agreement  with  the  queen,  by  the  mediation
of  some  of  the  nobles,  who  were  solicitous  to  save  their
country  from  the  calamities  of  a  civil  war,  he  secretly
dispatched  one  of  his  confidants  to  Vienna,  and  entered
into  a  negotiation  with  Ferdinand.  As  it  was  no
difficult  matter  to  pursuade  Ferdinand,  that  the  same
man  whose  enmity  and  intrigues  had  driven  him  out  of
a  great  part  of  his  Hungarian  dominions,  might,  upon
a  reconciliation,  become  equally  instrumental  in  reco-
vering them,  he  listened  eagerly  to  the  first  overtures

CHARLES  V.  [1351.

of  a  union  with  that  prelate.  Martinuzzi  allured  him
by  such  prospects  of  advantage,  and  engaged,  with  so
much  confidence,  that  he  would  prevail  on  the  most
powerful  of  the  Hungarian  nobles  to  take  arms  in  his
favour,  that  Ferdinand,  notwithstanding  his  truce  with
Solyman,  agreed  to  invade  Transylvania.  The  com-
mand of  the  troops  destined  for  that  service,  consisting
of  veteran  Spanish  and  German  soldiers,  was  given  to
Castaldo  marquis  de  Piadena,  an  officer  formed  by  the
famous  marquis  de  Pescara,  whom  he  strongly  resem-
bled both  in  his  enterprising  genius  for  civil  business,
and  in  his  great  knowledge  in  the  art  of  war.  This
army,  more  formidable  by  the  discipline  of  the  sol-
diers, and  the  abilities  of  the  general,  than  by  its  num-
bers, was  powerfully  seconded  by  Martin  uzzi  and  his
faction  among  the  Hungarians.  As  the  Turkish  ba-
shaws, the  sultan  himself  being  at  the  head  of  his
army  on  the  frontiers  of  Persia,  could  not  aiford  the
queen  such  immediate  or  effectual  assistance  as  the
exigency  of  her  affairs  required,  she  quickly  lost  all
hopes  of  being  able  to  retain  any  longer  the  authority
which  she  possessed  as  regent,  and  even  began  to  de-
spair of  her  son's  safety.

Martinuzzi did  not  suffer  this favourable

The  success

of  hismea-  opportunity  of  accomplishing  his  own  designs
to  pass  unimproved ;  and  ventured,  while  she
was  in  this  state  of  dejection,  to  lay  before  her  a  propo-
sal, which  at  any  other  time  she  would  have  rejected
with  disdain.  He  represented  how  impossible  it  was
for  her  to  resist  Ferdinand's  victorious  arms ;  that  even
if  the  Turks  should  enable  her  to  make  head  against
them,  she  would  be  far  from  changing  her  condition  to
the  better,  and  could  not  consider  them  as  deliverers,
but  as  masters,  to  whose  commands  she  must  submit;
he  conjured  her,  therefore,  as  she  regarded  her  own
dignity,  the  safety  of  her  son,  or  the  security  of  Chris-
tendom, rather  to  give  up  Transylvania  to  Ferdinand,

1551.]  BOOK X.  207

and  to  make  over  to  him  her  son's  title  to  the  crown  of
Hungary,  than  to  allow  both  to  be  usurped  by  the  inve-
terate enemy  of  the  Christian  faith.  At  the  same  time
he  promised  her,  in  Ferdinand's  name,  a  compensation
for  herself,  as  well  as  for  her  son,  suitable  to  their  rank
and  proportional  to  the  value  of  what  they  were  to
sacrifice.  Isabella,  deserted  by  some  of  her  adherents
distrusting  others,  destitute  of  friends,  and  surrounded
by  Castaldo's  and  Martinuzzi's  troops,  subscribed  these
hard  conditions,  though  with  a  reluctant  hand.  Upon
this,  she  surrendered  such  places  of  strength  as  were
still  in  her  possession,  she  gave  up  all  the  ensigns  of
royalty,  particularly  a  crown  of  gold,  which,  as  the
Hungarians  believed,  had  descended  from  heaven,  and
conferred  on  him  who  wore  it  an  undoubted  right  to
the  throne.  As  she  could  not  bear  to  remain  a  private
person,  in  a  country  where  she  had  once  enjoyed  so-
vereign power,  she  instantly  set  out  with  her  son  for
Silesia,  in  order  to  take  possession  of  the  principalities
of  Oppelen  and  Ratibor,  the  investiture  of  which  Fer-
dinand had  engaged  to  grant  her  son,  and  likewise  to
bestow  one  of  his  daughters  upon  him  in  marriage.
Appointed  UPon  tne  resignation  of  the  young  king,
governor  of  Martinuzzi,  and  after  his  example  the  rest  of

that  part  of

Hungary the  Transylvanian  grandees,  swore  allegiance
to  Ferdinand  ;  who,  in  order  to  testify  his  grate-

Ferdmand.  success

which  that  prelate  had  served  him,  affected  to  distin-
guish him  by  every  possible  mark  of  favour  and  con-
fidence. He  appointed  him  governor  of  Transylvania,
with  almost  unlimited  authority  ;  he  publicly  ordered
Castaldo  to  pay  the  greatest  deference  to  his  opinion
and  commands  ;  he  increased  his  revenues,  which  were
already  very  great,  by  new  appointments  ;  he  nomi-
nated him  archbishop  of  Gran,  and  prevailed  on  the
pope  to  raise  him  to  the  dignity  of  a  cardinal.  All  this
ostentation  of  good-will,  however,  was  void  of  sincerity,

•208  CHARLES V.  [1551.

and  calculated  to  conceal  sentiments  the  most  perfectly
its  reverse.  Ferdinand  dreaded  Martinuzzi's  abilities  ;
distrusted  his  fidelity ;  and  foresaw,  that  as  his  exten-
sive authority  enabled  him  to  check  any  attempt  towards
circumscribing  or  abolishing  the  extensive  privileges
which  the  Hungarian  nobility  possessed,  he  would
stand  forth,  on  every  occasion,  the  guardian  of  the
liberties  of  his  country,  rather  than  act  the  part  of  a
viceroy  devoted  to  the  will  of  his  sovereign.
Ferdinand  For  this  reason,  he  secretly  gave  it  in  charge
foraTde-  to  Castaldo,  to  watch  his  motions,  to  guard
signs  against  his  designs,  and  to  thwart  his  measures.

against  o  .

him.  But  Martinuzzi,  either  because  he  did  not  per
ceive  that  Castaldo  was  placed  as  a  spy  on  his  actions,
or  because  he  despised  Ferdinand's  insidious  arts,  as-
sumed the  direction  of  the  war  against  the  Turks  with
his  usual  tone  of  authority,  and  conducted  it  with  great
magnanimity,  and  no  less  success.  He  recovered  some
places  of  which  the  infidels  had  taken  possession ;  he
rendered  their  attempts  to  reduce  others  abortive  ;  and
established  Ferdinand's  authority  not  only  in  Transyl-
vania, but  in  the  Bannat  of  Temeswar,  and  several  of
the  countries  adjacent.  In  carrying  on  these  opera-
tions, he  often  differed  in  sentiments  from  Castaldo  and
his  officers,  and  treated  the  Turkish  prisoners  with  a
degree  not  only  of  humanity,  but  even  of  generosity,
which  Castaldo  loudly  condemned.  This  was  repre-
sented at  Vienna  as  an  artful  method  of  courting  the
friendship  of  the  infidels,  that,  by  securing  their  pro-
tection, he  might  shake  off  all  dependence  upon  the
sovereign  whom  he  now  acknowledged.  Though  Mar-
tinuzzi, in  justification  of  his  own  conduct,  contended
that  it  was  impolitic  by  unnecessary  severities  to  exas-
perate an  enemy  prone  to  revenge,  Castaldo's  accusa-
tions gained  credit  with  Ferdinand,  prepossessed  already
against  Martinuzzi,  and  jealous  of  every  thing  that  could
endanger  his  own  authority  in  Hungary,  in  proportion

1551.]  BOOK  X.  209

as  he  knew  it  to  be  precarious  and  ill-established.  These
suspicions  Castaldo  confirmed  and  strengthened,  by  the
intelligence  which  he  transmitted  continually  to  his
confidants  at  Vienna.  By  misrepresenting  what  was
innocent,  and  putting  the  worst  construction  on  what
seemed  dubious  in  Martinuzzi's  conduct ;  by  imputing
to  him  designs  which  he  never  formed,  and  charging
him  with  actions  of  which  he  was  not  guilty ;  he  at  last
convinced  Ferdinand,  that,  in  order  to  preserve  his
Hungarian  crown,  he  must  cut  off  that  ambitious  prelate.
But  Ferdinand,  foreseeing  that  it  would  be  dangerous
to  proceed  in  the  regular  course  of  law  against  a  subject
of  such  exorbitant  power  as  might  enable  him  to  set  his
sovereign  at  defiance,  determined  to  employ  violence,
in  order  to  obtain  that  satisfaction  which  the  laws  were
too  feeble  to  afford  him.

He  is  as-  He  issued  his  orders  accordingly  to  Castaldo,
-  wno  willingly  undertook  that  infamous  service.
Having  communicated  the  design  to  some
Italian  and  Spanish  officers  whom  he  could  trust,  and
concerted  with  them  the  plan  of  executing  it ;  they  en-
tered Martinuzzi's  apartment,  early  one  morn-
Dec,  is.  r  '  .  J  ,

ing,  under  pretence  01  presenting  to  him  some
dispatches  which  were  to  be  sent  off  immediately  to
Vienna ;  and  while  he  perused  a  paper  with  attention,
one  of  their  number  struck  him  with  his  poniard  in
the  throat.  The  blow  was  not  mortal.  Martinuzzi
started  up  with  the  intrepidity  natural  to  him,  and
grappling  the  assassin,  threw  him  to  the  ground.  But
the  other  conspirators  rushing  in,  an  old  man,  unarmed,
and  alone,  was  unable  long  to  sustain  such  an  unequal
conflict,  and  sunk  under  the  wounds  which  he  received
from  so  many  hands.  The  Transylvanians  were  re-
strained by  dread  of  the  foreign  troops  stationed  in  their
country,  from  rising  in  arms,  in  order  to  take  vengeance
on  the  murderers  of  a  prelate  who  had  long  been  the
object  of  their  love  as  well  as  veneration.  They  spoke
VOL.  v,  p

210  CHARLES V.  [1551.

of  the  deed,  however,  with  horror  and  execra-

The  effect  ' .  .

of  thatTio-  tion  ;  and  exclaimed  against  rerdinand,  whom
"'  neither  gratitude  for  recent  and  important  ser-
vices, nor  reverence  for  a  character  considered  as  sacred
and  inviolable  among  Christians,  could  restrain  from
shedding  the  blood  of  a  man,  whose  only  crime  was
attachment  to  his  native  country.  The  nobles,  detest-
ing the  jealous  as  well  as  cruel  policy  of  a  court,  which,
upon  uncertain  and  improbable  surmises,  had  given  up
a  person,  no  less  conspicuous  for  his  merit  than  his
rank,  to  be  butchered  by  assassins,  either  retired  to
their  own  estates,  or  if  they  continued  with  the  Austrian
army,  grew  cold  to  the  service.  The  Turks,  encouraged
by  the  death  of  an  enemy,  whose  abilities  they  knew
and  dreaded,  prepared  to  renew  hostilities  early  in  the
spring ;  and  instead  of  the  security  which  Ferdinand
had  expected  from  the  removal  of  Martinuzzi,  it  was
evident  that  his  territories  in  Hungary  were  about  to
be  attacked  with  greater  vigour,  and  defended  with  less
zeal  than  ever.*

Maur'  "^  *^s  time,  Maurice  having  almost  finished

courts  the  his  intrigues  and  preparations,  was  on  the  point
Sf°tSU°  of  declaring  his  intentions  openly,  and  of  taking
French  the  field  against  the  emperor.  His  first  care,
after  he  came  to  this  resolution,  was  to  disclaim
that  narrow  .and  bigotted  maxim  of  the  confederates  of
Smalkalde,  which  had  led  them  to  shun  all  connexion
with  foreigners'.  He  had  observed  how  fatal  this  had
been  to  their  cause ;  and,  instructed  by  their  error,  he
was  as  eager  to  court  the  protection  of  Henry  II.  as
they  had  been  solicitous  to  prevent  the  interposition  of
Francis  I.  Happily  for  him,  he  found  Henry  in  a  dis-
position to  listen  to  the  first  overture  on  his  part,  and
in  a  situation  which  enabled  him  to  bring  the  whole
force  of  the  French  monarchy  into  action.  Henry  had

»  Sleid.  535. Thuan.  lib.  is.  309,  &c. Istuanhaffii  Hist.  Regn.  Hungarici,  lib.
xvi.  189,  &c. Mem.  de  ttibier,  ii.  871. Natalis  Comitis  Historia,  lib.  iv.  84,  &c.

1551.]  BOOK X.  211

long  observed  the  progress  of  the  emperor's  arms  with
jealousy,  and  wished  to  distinguish  himself  by  entering
the  lists  against  the  same  enemy,  whom  it  had  been
the  glory  of  his  father's  reign  to  oppose.  He  had  laid
hold  on  the  first  opportunity  in  his  power  of  thwarting
the  emperor's  designs,  by  taking  the  duke  of  Parma
under  his  protection ;  and  hostilities  were  already  begun,
not  only  in  that  duchy  but  in  Piedmont.  Having  ter-
minated the  war  with  England  by  a  peace,  no  less  ad-
vantageous to  himself  than  honourable  for  his  allies  the
Scots,  the  restless  and  enterprising  courage  of  his  nobles
was  impatient  to  display  itself  on  some  theatre  of  action
more  conspicuous  than  the  petty  operations  in  Parma
or  Piedmont  afforded  them.

His  treaty  John  de  Fienne,  bishop  of  Bayonne,  whom
with  him.  Henry  had  sent  into  Germany,  under  pretence
of  hiring  troops  to  be  employed  in  Italy,  was  empowered
to  conclude  a  treaty  in  form  with  Maurice  and  his  as-
sociates. As  it  would  have  been  very  indecent  in  a
king  of  France  to  have  undertaken  the  defence  of  the
Protestant  church,  the  interests  of  religion,  how  much
soever  they  might  be  affected  by  the  treaty,  were  not
once  mentioned  in  any  of  the  articles.  Religious  con-
cerns, they  pretended  to  commit  entirely  to  the  dispo-
sition of  Divine  Providence ;  the  only  motives  assigned
for  their  present  confederacy  against  Charles,  were  to
procure  the  landgrave  liberty,  and  to  prevent  the  sub-
version of  the  ancient  constitution  and  laws  of  the  Ger-
man empire.  In  order  to  accomplish  these  ends,  it  was
agreed  that  all  the  contracting  parties  should,  at  the
same  time,  declare  war  against  the  emperor ;  that  nei-
ther peace  nor  truce  should  be  made  but  by  common
consent,  nor  without  including  each  of  the  confederates ;
that,  in  order  to  guard  against  the  inconveniences  of
anarchy,  or  of  pretensions  to  joint  command,  Maurice
should  be  acknowledged  as  head  of  the  German  con-
federates, with  absolute  authority  in  all  military  affairs ;

p  2

212  CHARLES V.  [1551

that  Maurice  and  his  associates  should  bring  into  the
field  seven  thousand  horse,  with  a  proportional  number
of  infantry ;  that,  towards  the  subsistence  of  this  army,
during  the  first  three  months  of  the  war,  Henry  should
contribute  two  hundred  and  forty  thousand  crowns,  and
afterward  sixty  thousand  crowns  a  month,  as  long  as
they  continued  in  arms ;  that  Henry  should  attack  the
emperor  on  the  side  of  Lorrain  with  a  powerful  army ;
that  if  it  were  found  requisite  to  elect  a  new  emperor,
such  a  person  should  be  nominated  as  shall  be  agreeable
to  the  king  of  France.6  This  treaty  was  concluded  on
the  5th  of  October,  some  time  before  Magdeburg  sur-
rendered, and  the  preparatory  negotiations  were  con-
ducted with  such  profound  secrecy,  that,  of  all  the
princes  who  afterward  acceded  to  it,  Maurice  com-
municated what  he  was  carrying  on  to  two  only,  John
Albert,  the  reigning  duke  of  Mecklenburg,  and  William
of  Hesse,  the  landgrave's  eldest  son.  The  league  itself
was  no  less  anxiously  concealed,  and  with  such  fortunate
care,  that  no  rumour  concerning  it  reached  the  ears  of
the  emperor  or  his  ministers ;  nor  do  they  seem  to
have  conceived  the  most  distant  suspicion  of  such  a
transaction.

Solicits  the At  the  same  time,  with  a  solicitude  which  was
**d  ?(%d~  careful  to  draw  some  accession  of  strength  from

ward  VI.  c

ofEng-  every  quarter,  Maurice  applied  to  Edward  VI.
of  England,  and  requested  a  subsidy  of  four  hun-
dred thousand  crowns  for  the  support  of  a  confederacy
formed  in  defence  of  the  Protestant  religion.  But  the
factions  which  prevailed  in  the  English  court  during  the
minority  of  that  prince,  and  which  deprived  both  the
councils  and  arms  of  the  nation  of  their  wonted  vigour,
left  the  English  ministers  neither  time  nor  inclination
to  attend  to  foreign  affairs,  and  prevented  Maurice's
obtaining  that  aid,  which  their  zeal  for  the  Reformation
would  have  prompted  them  to  grant  him.0

b  Recueil  des  Traitez,  torn.  ii.  258. Thuan.  lib.  viii.  279.
c  Burnett  Hist,  of  the  Reform.  TO|.  ii.  Append.  37.

1551.]  BOOK  X.  213

Demands Maurice,  however,  having  secured  the  pro-
once  more  tection  of  such  a  powerful  monarch  as  Henry  II.

that  the  r  J

landgrave  proceeded  with  great  confidence,  but  with  equal

should  be  .  i  •• i  A i • i -i •,

set  at caution  to  execute  ms  plan. As  he  judged  it

liberty, necessary  to  make  one  effort  more,  in  order  to

obtain  the  emperor's  consent  that  the  landgrave  should

be  set  at  liberty,  he  sent  a  solemn  embassy,  in

December.  -, • •>  r«i  i  ••  *  *

his  own  name,  and  in  that  01  the  elector  ot
Brandenburg,  to  Inspruck.  After  resuming,  at  great
length,  all  the  facts  and  arguments  upon  which  they
founded  their  claim,  and  representing  in  the  strongest
terms,  the  peculiar  engagements  which  bound  them  to
be  so  assiduous  in  their  solicitations,  they  renewed  the
request  in  behalf  of  the  unfortunate  prisoner,  which  they
had  so  often  preferred  in  vain.  The  elector  palatine,
the  duke  of  Wurtemburg,  the  dukes  of  Mecklenburg,
the  duke  of  Deuxponts,  the  marquis  of  Brandenburg
Bareith,  and  the  marquis  of  Baden,  by  their  ambassa-
dors, concurred  with  them  in  their  suit.  Letters  were
likewise  delivered  to  the  same  effect  from  the  king  of
Denmark,  the  duke  of  Bavaria,  and  the  dukes  of  Lu-
nenburg.  Even  the  king  of  the  Romans  joined  in  this
application,  being  moved  with  compassion  towards  the
landgrave  in  his  wretched  situation,  or  influenced,  per-
haps, by  a  secret  jealousy  of  his  brother's  power  and
designs,  which,  since  his  attempt  to  alter  the  order  of
succession  in  the  empire,  he  had  come  to  view  with
other  eyes  than  formerly,  and  dreaded  to  a  great  degree.
But  Charles,  constant  to  his  own  system  with  regard
to  the  landgrave,  eluded  a  demand  urged  by  such
powerful  intercessors;  and  having  declared  that  he
would  communicate  his  resolution  concerning  the  mat-
ter to  Maurice  as  soon  as  he  arrived  at  Inspruck,  where
he  was  every  day  expected,  he  did  not  deign  to  descend
into  any  more  particular  explication  of  his  intentions.*1
This  application,  though  of  no  benefit  to  the  landgrave,

d  Sieid.  531. Tbuan.  lib.  viii.  280.

214  CHARLES  V.  [1551.

was  of  great  advantage  to  Maurice.  It  served  to  jus-
tify his  subsequent  proceedings,  and  to  demonstrate  the
necessity  of  employing  arms  in  order  to  extort  that
equitable  concession,  which  his  mediation  or  treaty
could  not  obtain.  It  was  of  use,  too,  to  confirm  the
emperor  in  his  security,  as  both  the  solemnity  of  the
application,  and  the  solicitude  with  which  so  many
princes  were  drawn  in  to  enforce  it,  led  him  to  conclude
that  they  placed  all  their  hopes  of  restoring  the  land-
grave to  liberty,  in  gaming  his  consent  to  dismiss  him.
Maurice  employed  artifices  still  more  refined
Maurke  to  conceal  his  machinations,  to  amuse  the  em-
peror,  and  to  gain  time.  He  affected  to  be  more

the  em- solicitous  than  ever  to  find  out  some  expedient

peror.

for  removing  the  difficulties  with  regard  to  the
safe-conduct  for  the  Protestant  divines  appointed  to
attend  the  council,  so  that  they  might  repair  thither
without  any  apprehension  of  danger.  His  ambassa-
dors at  Trent  had  frequent  conferences  concerning  this
matter  with  the  imperial  ambassadors  in  that  city,  and
laid  open  their  sentiments  to  them  with  the  appearance
of  the  most  unreserved  confidence.  He  was  willing-,
at  last,  to  have  it  believed,  that  he  thought  all  differ-
ences with  respect  to  this  preliminary  article  were  on
the  point  of  being  adjusted  ;  and  in  order  to  give  credit
to  this  opinion,  he  commanded  Melancthon,  together
with  his  brethren,  to  set  out  on  their  journey  to  Trent.
At  the  same  time,  he  held  a  close  correspondence  with
the  imperial  court  at  Inspruck,  and  renewed  on  every
occasion  his  professions  not  only  of  fidelity  but  of  at-
tachment to  the  emperor.  He  talked  continually  of  his
intention  of  going  to  Inspruck  in  person  ;  he  gave  or-
ders to  hire  a  house  for  him  in  that  city,  and  to  fit  it  up
with  the  greatest  dispatch  for  his  reception.6
The  em-  But,  profoundly  skilled  as  Maurice  was  in  the

Con"

e  Arnoldi  Vita  Maurit.  »p.  Menken.  5L  1229.

crives ar*s  °f  deceit,  and  impenetrable  as  he  thought

1552.]  BOOK X.  215

s-  the  veil  to  be,  under  which  he  concealed  his
S  designs,  there  were  several  things  in  his  conduct
intentions,  ^jgjj  alarmed  the  emperor  amidst  his  security,
and  tempted  him  frequently  to  suspect  that  he  was  me-
ditating something  extraordinary.  As  these  suspicions
took  their  rise  from  circumstances  inconsiderable  in
themselves,  or  of  an  ambiguous  as  well  as  uncertain
nature,  they  were  more  than  counterbalanced  by  Mau-
rice's address ;  and  the  emperor  would  not,  lightly,  give
up  his  confidence  in  a  man,  whom  he  had  once  trusted
and  loaded  with  favours.  One  particular  alone  seemed
to  be  of  such  consequence,  that  he  thought  it  necessary
to  demand  an  explanation  with  regard  to  it.  The  troops,
which  George  of  Mecklenburg  had  taken  into  pay  after
the  capitulation  of  Magdeburg,  having  fixed  their
quarters  in  Thuringia,  lived  at  discretion  on  the  lands
of  the  rich  ecclesiastics  in  their  neighbourhood.  Their
licence  and  rapaciousness  were  intolerable.  Such  as
felt  or  dreaded  their  exactions,  complained  loudly  to
the  emperor,  and  represented  them  as  a  body  of  men
kept  in  readiness  for  some  desperate  enterprise.  But
Maurice,  partly  by  extenuating  the  enormities  of  which
they  had  been  guilty,  partly  by  representing  the  impos-
sibility of  disbanding  these  troops,  or  of  keeping  them
to  regular  discipline,  unless  the  arrears  still  due  to  them
by  the  emperor  were  paid,  either  removed  the  appre-
hensions which  this  had  occasioned,  or,  as  Charles  was
not  in  a  condition  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  these  sol-
diers, obliged  him  to  be  silent  with  regard  to  the  matter/
The  time  of  action  was  now  approaching,
prepares  Maurice  had  privately  dispatched  Albert  of

lon'  Brandenburg  to  Paris,  in  order  to  confirm  his
league  with  Henry,  and  to  hasten  the  march  of  the
French  army.  He  had  taken  measures  to  bring  his  own
subjects  together  on  the  first  summons ;  he  had  pro-
vided for  the  security  of  Saxony,  while  he  should  be

f  Sleid.  549. Thuan.  330.

216  CHARLES V.  [1552.

absent  with  the  army ;  and  he  held  the  troops  in  Thu-
ringia,  on  which  he  chiefly  depended,  ready  to  advance
on  a  moment's  warning.  All  these  complicated  opera-
tions were  carried  on  without  being  discovered  by  the
court  at  Inspruck,  and  the  emperor  remained  there  in
perfect  tranquillity,  busied  entirely  in  counteracting  the
intrigues  of  the  pope's  legate  at  Trent,  and  in  settling
the  conditions  on  which  the  Protestant  divines  should
be  admitted  into  the  council,  as  if  there  had  not  been
any  transaction  of  greater  moment  in  agitation.

This  credulous  security  in  a  prince,  who,  by
*8  sagacity  in  observing  the  conduct  of  all
deceive  the  around  him,  was  commonly  led  to  an  excess  of
emperor,  distrust,  may  seem  unaccountable,  and  has  been
imputed  to  infatuation.  But  besides  the  exquisite  ad-
dress with  which  Maurice  concealed  his  intentions,  two
circumstances  contributed  to  the  delusion.  The  gout
had  returned  upon  Charles  soon  after  his  arrival  at
Inspruck,  with  an  increase  of  violence;  and  his  consti-
tution being  broken  by  such  frequent  attacks,  he  was
seldom  able  to  exert  his  natural  vigour  of  mind,  or  to
consider  affairs  with  his  usual  vigilance  and  penetra-
tion ;  and  Granvelle,  bishop  of  Arras,  his  prime  minis-
ter, though  one  of  the  most  subtle  statesmen  of  that  or
perhaps  of  any  age,  was  on  this  occasion  the  dupe  of
his  own  craft.  He  entertained  such  a  high  opinion  of
his  own  abilities,  and  held  the  political  talents  of  the
Germans  in  such  contempt,  that  he  despised  all  the  in-
And  his  timations  given  him  concerning  Maurice's  secret
ministers,  machinations,  or  the  dangerous  designs  which
he  was  carrying  on.  When  the  duke  of  Alva,  whose
dark  suspicious  mind  harboured  many  doubts  concern-
ing the  elector's  sincerity,  proposed  calling  him  imme-
diately to  court  to  answer  for  his  conduct,  Granvelle
replied  with  great  scorn,  that  these  apprehensions
were  groundless,  and  that  a  drunken  German  head  was
too  gross  to  form  any  scheme  which  he  could  not  easily

1552.]  BOOK X.  217

penetrate  and  baffle.  Nor  did  he  assume  this  peremp-
tory tone  merely  from  confidence  in  his  own  discern-
ment; he  had  bribed  two  of  Maurice's  ministers,  and
received  from  them  frequent  and  minute  information
concerning  all  their  master's  motions.  But  through
this  very  channel,  by  which  he  expected  to  gain  access
to  all  Maurice's  counsels,  and  even  to  his  thoughts,
such  intelligence  was  conveyed  to  him  as  completed
his  deception.  Maurice  fortunately  discovered  the
correspondence  of  the  two  traitors  with  Granvelle,  but
instead  of  punishing  them  for  their  crime,  he  dex-
terously availed  himself  of  their  fraud,  and  turned  his
own  arts  against  the  bishop.  He  affected  to  treat  these
ministers  with  greater  confidence  than  ever ;  he  admit-
ted them  to  his  consultations ;  he  seemed  to  lay  open
his  heart  to  them ;  and  taking  care  all  the  while  to  let
them  be  acquainted  with  nothing  but  what  it  was  his
interest  should  be  known,  they  transmitted  to  Inspruck
such  accounts  as  possessed  Granvelle  with  a  firm  belief
of  his  sincerity  as  well  as  good  intentions.g  The  em-
peror himself,  in  the  fulness  of  security,  was  so  little
moved  by  a  memorial,  in  the  name  of  the  ecclesiastical
electors,  admonishing  him  to  be  on  his  guard  against
Maurice,  that  he  made  light  of  this  intelligence ;  and
his  answer  to  them  abounds  with  declarations  of  his
entire  and  confident  reliance  on  the  fidelity  as  well  as
attachment  of  that  prince.11

Maurice  At  ^ast  Maurice's  preparations  were  corn-
takes  the  pleted,  and  he  had  the  satisfaction  to  find  that
against  the  his  intrigues  and  designs  were  still  unknown.
But,  though  now  ready  to  take  the  field,  he  did
not  lay  aside  the  arts  which  he  had  hitherto  employed;
and  by  one  piece  of  craft  more,  he  deceived  his  enemies
a  few  days  longer.  He  gave  out,  that  he  was  about  to
begin  that  journey  to  Inspruck  of  which  he  had  so  often
talked,  and  he  took  one  of  the  ministers  whom  Gran-

*  Mclvil's  Memoirs,  fol.  edit.  p.  12.  b  Sleid.  555.

218  CHARLES V.  [1552.

velie  had  bribed,  to  attend  him  thither.  After  travelling
post  a  few  stages,  he  pretended  to  be  indisposed  by  the
fatigue  of  the  journey,  and  dispatched  the  suspected
minister  to  make  his  apology  to  the  emperor  for  this
delay,  and  to  assure  him  that  he  would  be  at  Inspruck
within  a  few  days ;  he  mounted  on  horseback,  as  soon
as  this  spy  on  his  actions  was  gone,  rode  full  speed
towards  Thuringia,  joined  his  army,  which

March  18.  '^  J <• * J fi

amounted to  twenty  thousand  toot  and  five
thousand  horse,  and  put  it  immediately  in  motion.1
Publishes  a At  the  same  time  he  published  a  manifesto,
manifesto, containing  his  reasons  for  taking  arms. These

justifymg  3  .  °

bis  con-  were  three  in  number :  1  hat  he  might  secure
the  Protestant  religion,  which  was  threatened
with  immediate  destruction;  that  he  might  maintain
the  constitution  and  laws  of  the  empire,  and  save  Ger-
many from  being  subjected  to  the  dominion  of  an  abso-
lute monarch ;  that  he  might  deliver  the  landgrave  of
Hesse  from  the  miseries  of  a  long  and  unjust  imprison-
ment. By  the  first,  he  roused  all  the  favourers  of  a
reformation,  a  party  formidable  by  their  zeal  as  well  as
numbers,  and  rendered  desperate  by  oppression.  By
the  second,  he  interested  all  the  friends  of  liberty,  Ca-
tholics no  less  than  Protestants,  and  made  it  their  in-
terest to  unite  with  him  in  asserting  the  rights  and  pri-
vileges common  to  both.  The  third,  besides  the  glory
which  he  acquired  by  his  zeal  to  fulfil  his  engagements
to  the  unhappy  prisoner,  was  become  a  cause  of  gene-
ral concern,  not  only  from  the  compassion  which  the
landgrave's  sufferings  excited,  but  from  indignation  at
the  injustice  and  rigour  of  the  emperor's  proceedings
against  him.  Together  with  Maurice's  manifesto,  an-
other appeared  in  the  name  of  Albert  marquis  of  Bran-

1  Melv.  Mem.  p.  13.  These  circumstances  concerning  the  Saxon  ministers  whom
GranTelle  had  bribed,  are  not  mentioned  bj  the  German  historians ;  but  as  Sir
.1  aiues  Mclvil  received  bis  information  from  the  elector  palatine,  and  as  they  are
perfectly  agreeable  to  the  rest  of  Maurice's  conduct,  they  may  be  considered  a*
authentic.

1552.]  BOOK X.  -219

denburg  Culmbach,  who  had  joined  him  with  a  body
of  adventurers  whom  he  had  drawn  together.  The
same  grievances  which  Maurice  had  pointed  out  are
mentioned  in  it,  but  with  an  excess  of  virulence  and
animosity  suitable  to  the  character  of  the  prince  in
whose  name  it  was  published.

He  is  pow-  The  king  of  France  added  to  these  a  mani-
erfuiiy  sup-  festo  in  his  own  name :  in  which,  after  taking

ported  by  .  .  '

the  French  notice  oi  the  ancient  alliance  between  the
French  and  German  nations,  both  descended
from  the  same  ancestors ;  and  after  mentioning  the  ap-
plications, which,  in  consequence  of  this,  some  of  the
most  illustrious  among  the  German  princes  had  made
to  him  for  his  protection,  he  declared,  that  he  now  took
arms  to  re-establish  the  ancient  constitution  of  the  em-
pire, to  deliver  some  of  its  princes  from  captivity,  and
to  secure  the  privileges  and  independence  of  all  the
members  of  the  Germanic  body.  In  this  manifesto,
Henry  assumed  the  extraordinary  title  of  Protector  of
the  Liberties  of  Germany,  and  of  its  captive  Princes;  and
there  was  engraved  on  it  a  cap,  the  ancient  symbol  of
freedom,  placed  between  two  daggers,  in  order  to  inti-
mate to  the  Germans,  that  this  blessing  was  to  be  ac-
quired and  secured  by  force  of  arms.1

Maurice  had  now  to  act  a  part  entirely  new.

Maurice  s  _  r  J

operations but  his  flexible  genius  was  capable  of  accom-

in  the  field.  j ,.  ., -,c°  ., ,.  rru

modating  itselt  to  every  situation.  Ihe  mo-
ment he  took  arms,  he  was  as  bold  and  enterprising  in
the  field,  as  he  had  been  cautious  and  crafty  in  the
cabinet.  He  advanced  by  rapid  marches  towards  the
Upper  Germany.  All  the  towns  in  his  way  opened
their  gates  to  him.  He  reinstated  the  magistrates
whom  the  emperor  had  deposed,  and  gave  possession
of  the  churches  to  the  Protestant  ministers  whom  he
had  ejected.  He  directed  his  march  to  Augsburg,  and
as  the  imperial  garrison,  which  was  too  inconsiderable

»  Sleid.  549. Thuan.  lib.  x.  339. Mem.  de  Ribier,  ii.  371.

220  CHARLES V.  [1552.

to  think  of  defending  it,  retired  immediately,  he
took  possession  of  that  great  city,  and  made  the
same  changes  there  as  in  the  towns  through  which  he
had  passed.k

The  em- No  wor^s  can  express  the  emperor's  asto-
peror's nishment  and  consternation  at  events  so  unex-
ment  and  pected. He  saw  a  great  number  of  the  German
princes  in  arms  against  him,  and  the  rest  either
ready  to  join  them,  or  wishing  success  to  their  enter-
prise. He  beheld  a  powerful  monarch  united  with
them  in  close  league,  seconding  their  operations  in
person  at the  head  of  a  formidable  army,  while  he,
through  negligence  and  credulity,  which  exposed  him
no  less  to  scorn  than  to  danger,  had  neither  made,  nor
was  in  condition  to  make,  any  effectual  provision,  either
for  crushing  his  rebellious  subjects,  or  resisting  the
invasion  of  the  foreign  enemy. Part  of  his  Spanish
troops  had been  ordered into Hungary  against  the
Turks ;  the  rest  had  marched  back  to  Italy  upon  occa-
sion of  the  war  in  the  duchy  of  Parma. The  bands  of
veteran  Germans  had  been  dismissed,  because  he  was
not  able  to  pay  them ;  or  had  entered  into  Maurice's
service  after  the  siege  of  Magdeburg;  and  he  remained
at  Inspruck  with  a  body  of  soldiers  hardly  strong  enough
to  guard  his  own  person. His  treasury  was  as  much
exhausted,  as  his  army  was  reduced. He  had  received
no  remittances  for  some  time  from  the  New  World.
He  had  forfeited  all  credit  with  the  merchants  of  Genoa
and  Venice,  who  refused  to  lend  him  money,  though
tempted by the  offer of  exorbitant  interest. Thus
Charles, though  undoubtedly  the  most  considerable
potentate  in  Christendom,  and  capable  of  exerting  the
greatest  strength,  his  power,  notwithstanding  the  vio-
lent attack  made  upon  it,  being  still  unimpaired,  found
himself  in  a  situation  which  rendered  him  unable  to
make  such  a  sudden  and  vigorous  effort  as  the  juncture

k  Sleid.  555. Thuaii.  342.

1552.]  BOOK X.  221

required,  and  was  necessary  to  have  saved  him  from
the  present  danger.

Endeavours  In  this  situation,  the  emperor  placed  all  his
g™6  hopes  on  negotiating;  the  only  resource  of
SUch  as  are  conscious  of  their  own  weakness.
But  thinking  it  inconsistent  with  his  dignity  to  make
the  first  advances  to  subjects  who  were  in  arms  against
him,  he  avoided  that  indecorum  by  employing  the  me-
diation of  his  brother  Ferdinand.  Maurice,  confiding
in  his  own  talents  to  conduct  any  negotiation  in  such
a  manner  as  to  derive  advantage  from  it,  and  hoping
that,  by  the  appearance  of  facility  in  hearkening  to  the
first  overture  of  accommodation,  he  might  amuse  the
emperor,  and  tempt  him  to  slacken  the  activity  with
which  he  was  now  preparing  to  defend  himself,  readily
agreed  to  an  interview  with  Ferdinand  in  the  town  of
Lintz  in  Austria  ;  and  having  left  his  army  to  proceed
on  its  march  under  the  command  of  the  duke  of  Meck-
lenburg, he  repaired  thither.

Progress  of Meanwhile  the  king  of  France  punctually
the  French  fulfilled  his engagements  to  his allies. He

array.

took  the  field  early,  with  a  numerous  and
well-appointed  army ;  and  marching  directly  into  Lor-
rain,  Toul  and  Verdun  opened  their  gates  at  his  ap-
proach. His  forces  appeared  next  before  Metz,  and
that  city,  by  a  fraudulent  stratagem  of  the  constable
Montmorency,  who  having  obtained  permission  to  pass
through  it  with  a  small  guard,  introduced  as  many
troops  as  were  sufficient  to  overpower  the  garrison,
was  likewise  seized  without  bloodshed.  Henry  made  his
entry  into  all  these  towns  with  great  pomp  ;  he  obliged
the  inhabitants  to  swear  allegiance  to  him,  and  an-
nexed those  important  conquests  to  the  French  mo-
narchy. He  left  a  strong  garrison  in  Mentz.  From
thence  he  advanced  towards  Alsace,  in  order  to  attempt
new  conquests,  to  which  the  success  that  had  hitherto
attended  his  arms  invited  him.1

1  Thuan.  349.

222  CHARLES  V.  [1552.

The  negoti- The  conference  at  Lintz  did  not  produce  any
ations  be- accommodation.  Maurice,  when  he  consented

tween  the  i i  i  • • • i

emperor  to  it,  seems  to  have  had  nothing  m  view  but  to
rice  of  no"  amuse  the  emperor;  for  he  made  such  de-
eflect.  mands,  both  in  behalf  of  his  confederates  and
their  ally  the  French  king,  as  he  knew  would  not  be
accepted  by  a  prince,  too  haughty  to  submit,  at  once,
to  conditions  dictated  by  an  enemy.  But,  however
firmly  Maurice  adhered  during  the  negotiation  to  the
interests  of  his  associates,  or  how  steadily  soever  he
kept  in  view  the  objects  which  had  induced  him  to  take
arms,  he  often  professed  a  strong  inclination  to  ter-
minate the  differences  with  the  emperor  in  an  ami-
cable manner.  Encouraged  by  this  appearance  of  a
pacific  disposition,  Ferdinand  proposed  a  second  in-
terview at  Passau  on  the  26th  of  May,  and  that  a
truce  should  commence  on  that  day,  and  continue  to
the  10th  of  June,  in  order  to  give  them  leisure  for  ad-
justing all  points  in  dispute.
Maurice  Upon  this,  Maurice  rejoined  his  army  on  the

advances  to  Qth  of  May.  which  had  now  advanced  to  Gun-

Inspruck.  *  _  .

delnngen.  He  put  his  troops  m  motion  next
morning ;  and  as  sixteen  days  yet  remained  for  action
before  the  commencement  of  the  truce,  he  resolved,
during  that  period,  to  venture  upon  an  enterprise,  the
success  of  which  would  be  so  decisive,  as  to  render  the
negotiations  at  Passau  extremely  short,  and  entitle  him
to  treat  upon  his  own  terms.  He  foresaw  that  the
prospect  of  a  cessation  of  arms,  which  was  to  take  place
so  soon,  together  with  the  opinion  of  his  earnestness
to  re-establish  peace,  with  which  he  had  artfully  amused
Ferdinand,  could  hardly  fail  of  inspiring  the  emperor
with  such  false  hopes,  that  he  would  naturally  be-
come remiss,  and  relapse  into  some  degree  of  that
security  which  had  already  been  so  fatal  to  him.  Rely-
ing on  this  conjecture,  he  marched  directly  at  the  head
of  his  army  towards  Inspruck,  and  advanced  with  the
most  rapid  motion  that  could  be  given  to  soa  great  a

1552.]  BOOK  X.  223

body  of  troops.  On  the  18th,  he  arrived  at  Fiessen,  a
post  of  great  consequence,  at  the  entrance  into  the  Ty-
rolese.  There  he  found  a  body  of  eighteen  hundred
men,  whom  th<  emperor  had  assembled,  strongly  in-
trenched, in  order  to  oppose  his  progress.  He  at-
tacked them  instantly  with  such  violence  and  impetuo-
sity, that  they  abandoned  their  lines  precipitately,  and,
falling  back  on  a  second  body  posted  near  Ruten,
communicated  the  panic  terror  with  which  they  them-
selves had  been  seized,  to  those  troops;  so  that  they
likewise  took  to  flight  after  a  feeble  resistance.
Takes  the  Elated  with  this  success,  which  exceeded
castle  of  his  mOst  sanguine  hopes,  Maurice  pressed  for-

Ehrenberg.  fo  r

ward  to  .hhrenberg,  a  castle  situated  on  a
high  and  steep  precipice,  which  commanded  the  only
pass  through  the  mountains.  As  this  fort  had  been
surrendered  to  the  Protestants  at  the  beginning  of  the
Smalkaldic  war,  because  the  garrison  was  then  too
weak  to  defend  it,  the  emperor,  sensible  of  its  impor-
tance, had  taken  care,  at  this  juncture,  to  throw  into
it  a  body  of  troops  sufficient  to  maintain  it  against  the
greatest  army.  But  a  shepherd,  in  pursuing  a  goat
which  had  strayed  from  his  flock,  having  discovered
an  unknown  path  by  which  it  was  possible  to  ascend
to  the  top  of  the  rock,  came  with  this  seasonable  piece
of  intelligence  to  Maurice.  A  small  band  of  chosen  sol-
diers, under  the  command  of  George  of  Mecklenburg,
was  instantly  ordered  to  follow  this  guide.  They  set
out  in  the  evening,  and  clambering  up  the  rugged  track
with  infinite  fatigue  as  well  as  danger,  they  reached
the  summit  unperceived;  and  at  an  hour  which  had
been  agreed  on,  when  Maurice  began  the  assault  on
one  side  of  the  castle,  they  appeared  on  the  other,
ready  to  scale  the  walls,  which  were  feeble  in  that
place,  because  it  had  been  hitherto  deemed  inacces-
sible. The  garrison,  struck  with  terror  at  the  sight
of  an  enemy  on  a  quarter  where  they  had  thought

224  CHARLES  V.  [1552.

themselves  perfectly  secure,  immediately  threw  down
their  arms.  Maurice,  almost  without  bloodshed,  and
which  was  of  greater  consequence  to  him,  without
loss  of  time,  took  possession  of  a  place,  the  reduction
of  which  might  have  retarded  him  long,  and  have  re-
quired the  utmost  efforts  of  his  valour  and  skill.m
A  mutiny  Maurice  was  now  only  two  days'  march
reitardThir  ^rom  Inspruck,  and  without  losing  a  moment
march.  ne  ordered  his  infantry  to  advance  thither,
having  left  his  cavalry,  which  was  unserviceable  in  that
mountainous  country,  at  Fiessen,  to  guard  the  mouth
of  the  pass.  He  proposed  to  advance  with  such
rapidity  as  to  anticipate  any  accounts  of  the  loss  of
Ehrenberg,  and  to  surprise  the  emperor,  together  with
his  attendants,  in  an  open  town  incapable  of  defence.
But  just  as  his  troops  began  to  move,  a  battalion  of
mercenaries  mutinied,  declaring  that  they  would  not
stir  until  they  had  received  the  gratuity,  which,  ac-
cording to  the  custom  of  that  age,  they  claimed  as  the
recompense  due  to  them  for  having  taken  a  place  by
assault.  It  was  with  great  difficulty,  as  well  as  danger,
and  not  without  some  considerable  loss  of  time,  that
Maurice  quieted  this  insurrection,  and  prevailed  on
the  soldiers  to  follow  him  to  a  place  where  he  pro-
mised them  such  rich  booty  as  would  be  an  ample  re-
ward for  all  their  services.

Theempe- ^o  the  delay,  occasioned  by  this  unforeseen
rorHiesm accident,  the  emperor  owed  his  safety. He

confusion  '  *  •>

from  ins-  was  informed  of  the  approaching  danger  late
in  the  evening,  and  knowing  that  nothing
could  save  him  but  a  speedy  flight,  he  instantly  left
Inspruck,  without  regarding  the  darkness  of  the  night,
or  the  violence  of  the  rain  which  happened  to  fall
at  that  time ;  and  notwithstanding  the  debility  occa-
sioned by  the  gout,  which  rendered  him  unable  to
bear  any  motion  but  that  of  a  litter,  he  travelled  by  the

•»  Arnold!  rita  Mauri t.  1?3.

1552.]  BOOK X.  225

light  of  torches,  taking  his  way  over  the  Alps,  by  roads
almost  impassable.  His  courtiers  and  attendants  fol-
lowed him  with  equal  precipitation,  some  of  them  on
such  horses  as  they  could  hastily  procure,  many  of
them  on  foot,  and  all  in  the  utmost  confusion.  In  this
miserable  plight,  very  unlike  the  pomp  with  which
Charles  had  appeared  during  the  five  preceding  years
as  the  conqueror  of  Germany,  he  arrived,  at  length,
with  his  dejected  train,  at  Villach  in  Carinthia,  and
scarcely  thought  himself  secure  even  in  that  remote
inaccessible  corner.

Maurice  entered  Inspruck  a  few  hours  after

Maurice  r

enters  that  the  emperor  and  his  attendants  had  left  it ;  and,
enraged  that  the  prey  should  escape  out  of  his
hands  when  he  was  just  ready  to  seize  it,  he  pursued
them  some  miles ;  but  finding  it  impossible  to  overtake
persons,  to  whom  their  fear  gave  speed,  he  returned  to
the  town,  and  abandoned  all  the  emperor's  baggage,
together  with  that  of  his  ministers,  to  be  plundered  by
the  soldiers ;  while  he  preserved  untouched  every  thing
belonging  to  the  king  of  the  Romans,  either  because  he
had  formed  some  friendly  connexion  with  that  prince,
or  because  he  wished  to  have  it  believed  that  such  a
connexion  subsisted  between  them.  As  there  now  re-
mained only  three  days  to  the  commencement  of  the
truce  (with  such  nicety  had  Maurice  calculated  his
operations),  he  set  out  for  Passau,  that  he  might  meet
Ferdinand  on  the  day  appointed.
The  em  e-  Before  Charles  left  Inspruck,  he  withdrew
ror  sets  the  the  guards  placed  on  the  degraded  elector  of

elector  of  r  .

Saxony  at oaxony,  whom,  during  live  years,  he  had  car-

ierty' ried  about  with  him  as  a  prisoner ;  and  set  him

entirely  at  liberty,  either  with  an  intention  to  embarrass

Maurice  by  letting  loose  a  rival,  who  might  dispute  his

title  to  his  dominions  and  dignity,  or  from  a  sense  of

the  indecency  of  detaining  him  a  prisoner,  while  he

himself  run  the  risk  of  being  deprived  of  his  own  liberty.

VOL.  v.  Q

226  CHARLES  V.  [1552.

But  that  prince,  seeing  no  other  way  of  escaping  than
that  which  the  emperor  took,  and  abhorring  the  thoughts
of  falling  into  the  hands  of  a  kinsman,  whom  he  justly
considered  as  the  author  of  all  his  misfortunes,  chose
rather  to  accompany  Charles  in  his  flight,  and  to  expect
the  final  decision  of  his  fate  from  the  treaty  which  was
now  approaching.

These  were  not  the  only  effects  which  Mau-

The  council  ITT

of  Trent  rice's  operations  produced.  It  was  no  sooner
great  con."1  known  at  Trent  that  he  had  taken  arms,  than
stemation.  a  genera]  consternation  seized  the  fathers  of
the  council.  The  German  prelates  immediately  re-
turned home,  that  they  might  provide  for  the  safety  of
their  respective  territories.  The  rest  were  extremely
impatient  to  be  gone  ;  and  the  legate,  who  had  hitherto
disappointed  all  the  endeavours  of  the  imperial  ambas-
sadors to  procure  an  audience  in  the  council  for  the
Protestant  divines,  laid  hold,  with  joy,  on  such  a  plausi-
ble pretext  for  dismissing  an  assembly,  which  he  had
found  it  so  difficult  to  govern.  In  a  congregation  held
on  the  28th  of  April,  a  decree  was  issued,  proroguing
the  council  during  two  years,  and  appointing  it  to  meet
at  the  expiration  of  that  time,  if  peace  were  then  re-
established in  Europe.0  This  prorogation,  however,
continued  no  less  than  ten  years ;  and  the  proceed-
ings of  the  council,  when  reassembled  in  the  year
1562,  fall  not  within  the  period  prescribed  to  this
history.

The  effect  ^e  convocati°n  °f  this  assembly  had  been
of  its  de-  passionately  desired  by  all  the  states  and  princes
in  Christendom,  who,  from  the  wisdom  as  well
as  piety  of  prelates  representing  the  whole  body  of  the
faithful,  expected  some  charitable  and  efficacious  en-
deavours towards  composing  the  dissensions  which
unhappily  had  arisen  in  the  church.  But  the  several
popes  by  whose  authority  it  was  called,  had  other  ob-

•  F.  Paul,  35S.

1552.]  BOOK X.  227

jects  in  view.  They  exerted  all  their  power  or  policy
to  attain  these  ;  and,  by  the  abilities  as  well  as  address
of  their  legates,  by  the  ignorance  of  many  of  the  pre-
lates, and  by  the  servility  of  the  indigent  Italian  bishops,
acquired  such  influence  in  the  council,  that  they  dictated
all  its  decrees,  and  framed  them,  not  with  an  intention
to  restore  unity  and  concord  to  the  church,  but  to  esta-
blish their  own  dominion,  or  to  confirm  those  tenets,
upon  which  they  imagined  that  dominion  to  be  founded.
Doctrines,  which  had  hitherto  been  admitted  upon  the
credit  of  tradition  alone,  and  received  with  some  lati-
tude of  interpretation,  were  defined  with  a  scrupulous
nicety,  and  confirmed  by  the  sanction  of  authority.
Rites,  which  had  formerly  been  observed  only  in  de-
ference to  custom  supposed  to  be  ancient,  were  esta-
blished by  the  decrees  of  the  church,  and  declared  to
be  essential  parts  of  its  worship.  The  breach,  instead
of  being  closed,  was  widened,  and  made  irreparable.
In  place  of  any  attempt  to  reconcile  the  contending
parties,  a  line  was  drawn  with  such  studied  accuracy,
as  ascertained  and  marked  out  the  distinction  be-
tween them.  This  still  serves  to  keep  them  at  a  dis-
tance ;  and,  without  some  signal  interposition  of  Di-
vine Providence,  must  render  the  separation  per-
petual.

Character  Our  knowledge  of  the  proceedings  of  this
torian3hof"  assembly  is  derived  from  three  different  authors .
this  council.  Father  Paul  of  Venice  wrote  his  history  of  the
council  of  Trent,  while  the  memory  of  what  had  passed
there  was  recent,  and  some  who  had  been  members  of
it  were  still  alive.  He  has  exposed  the  intrigues  and
artifices  by  which  it  was  conducted  with  a  freedom  and
severity  which  have  given  a  deep  wound  to  the  credit
of  the  council.  He  has  described  its  deliberations,  and
explained  its  decrees,  with  such  perspicuity  and  depth
of  thought,  with  such  various  erudition,  and  such  force
of  reason,  as  have  justly  entitled  his  work  to  be  placed

Q  2

228  CHARLES V.  [1552,

among  the  most  admired  historical  compositions.  About
half  a  century  thereafter,  the  Jesuit  Pallavicini  pub-
lished his  history  of  the  council,  in  opposition  to  that
of  father  Paul,  and  by  employing  all  the  force  of  an
acute  and  refining  genius  to  invalidate  the  credit,  or  to
confute  the  reasonings  of  his  antagonist,  he  labours  to
prove,  by  artful  apologies  for  the  proceedings  of  the
council,  and  subtle  interpretations  of  its  decrees,  that
it  deliberated  with  impartiality,  and  decided  with  judg-
ment as  well  as  candour.  Vargas,  a  Spanish  doctor  of
laws,  who  was  appointed  to  attend  the  imperial  ambas-
sadors at  Trent,  sent  the  bishop  of  Arras  a  regular  ac-
count of  the  transactions  there,  explaining  all  the  arts
which  the  legate  employed  to  influence  or  overawe  the
council.  His  letters  have  been  published,  in  which  he
inveighs  against  the  papal  court  with  that  asperity  of
censure,  which  was  natural  to  a  man  whose  situation
enabled  him  to  observe  its  intrigues  thoroughly,  and
who  was  obliged  to  exert  all  his  attention  and  talents
in  order  to  disappoint  them.  But  whichsoever  of  these
authors  an  intelligent  person  takes  for  his  guide,  in
forming  a  judgment  concerning  the  spirit  of  the  council,
he  must  discover  so  much  ambition  as  well  as  artifice
among  some  of  the  members,  so  much  ignorance  and
corruption  among  others  ;  he  must  observe  such  a  large
infusion  of  human  policy  and  passions,  mingled  with
such  a  scanty  portion  of  that  simplicity  of  heart,  sanc-
tity of  manners,  and  love  of  truth,  which  alone  qualify
men  to  determine  what  doctrines  are  worthy  of  God,
and  what  worship  is  acceptable  to  him  ;  that  he  will
find  it  no  easy  matter  to  believe,  that  any  extraor-
dinary influence  of  the  Holy  Ghost  hovered  over  this
assembly,  and  dictated  its  decrees.
The  French  While  Maurice  was  employed  in  negotiating
totJprSe  with  the  kin£  of  the  Romans  at  Lintz,  or  in
suasburg;  making  war  on  the  emperor  in  the  Tyrol,  the
French  king  had  advanced  into  Alsace  as  far  as  Stras-

1552.]  BOOK  X.  229

burg ;  and  having  demanded  leave  of  the  senate  to
march  through  the  city,  he  hoped  that  by  repeating  the
same  fraud  which  he  had  practised  at  Metz,  he  might
render  himself  master  of  the  place,  and  by  that  means
secure  a  passage  over the  Rhine  into  the  heart  of
Germany. But  the  Strasburgers,  instructed  and  put  on
their  guard  by  the  credulity  and  misfortune  of  their
neighbours,  shut  their  gates ;  and  having  assembled  a
garrison  of  five  thousand  soldiers,  repaired  their  forti-
fications, rased  the  houses  in  their  suburbs,  and  deter-
mined to  defend  themselves  to  the  utmost. At  the  same
time  they  sent  a  deputation  of  their  most  respectable
citizens  to  the  king,  in  order  to  divert  him  from  making
any  hostile  attempt  upon  them. The  electors  of  Treves
and  Cologne,  the  duke  of  Cleves,  and  other  princes  in
the  neighbourhood,  interposed  in  their  behalf ;  beseech-
ing Henry  that  he  would  not  forget  so  soon  the  title
which  he  had  generously  assumed ;  and  instead  of  being
the  deliverer  of  Germany,  become  its  oppressor. The
Swiss  Cantons seconded them  with zeal,  soliciting
Henry  to  spare  a  city  which  had  long  been  connected
with  their  community  in  friendship  and  alliance.
But  without Powerful  as  this  united  intercession  was,  it
success. would  not  have  prevailed  on  Henry  to  forego  a
prize  of  so  much  value,  if  he  had  been  in  a  condition
to  have  seized  it. But,  in  that  age,  the  method  of  sub-
sisting numerous  armies  at  a  distance  from  the  frontiers
of  their  own  country,  was  imperfectly  understood,  and
neither  the  revenues  of  princes,  nor  their  experience  in
the  art  of  war,  were  equal  to  the  great  and  complicated
efforts  which  such  an  undertaking  required .  The  French,
though  not  far  removed  from  their  own  frontier,  began
already  to  suffer  from  scarcity  of  provisions,  and  had
no  sufficient  magazines  collected  to  support  them  during
a  siege,  which  must  necessarily  have  been  of  great
length.0 At  the  same  time,  the  queen  of  Hungary,

o  Thuan.  351,  353.

•230  CHARLES  V.  [1552.

governess  of  the  Low  Countries,  had  assembled  a  con-
siderable body  of  troops,  which,  under  the  command
of  Martin  de  Rossem,  laid  waste  Champagne,  and
threatened  the  adjacent  provinces  of  France.  These
concurring  circumstances  obliged  the  king,  though
with  reluctance,  to  abandon  the  enterprise.  But  be-
ing willing  to  acquire  some  merit  with  his  allies,  by
this  retreat  which  he  could  not  avoid,  he  pretended  to
the  Swiss  that  he  had  taken  the  resolution  merely  in
compliance  with  their  request;1*  and  then,  after  giving
orders  that  all  the  horses  in  his  army  should  be  led  to
drink  in  the  Rhine,  as  a  proof  of  his  having  pushed  his
conquest  so  far,  he  marched  back  towards  Cham-
pagne.

Theo  era-  While  the  French  king  and  the  main  army
tions  of  of  the  confederates  were  thus  employed,  Al-

Albert  of  /. i-» 11  •  i •  i i

Branden-  bert  ot  Brandenburg  was  intrusted  with  the
command  of  a  separate  body  of  eight  thou-
sand men,  consisting  chiefly  of  mercenaries  who  had
resorted  to  his  standard,  rather  from  the  hope  of  plun-
der, than  the  expectation  of  regular  pay.  That  prince,
seeing  himself  at  the  head  of  such  a  number  of  despe-
rate adventurers,  ready  to  follow  wherever  he  should
lead  them,  soon  began  to  disdain  a  state  of  subordina-
tion, and  to  form  such  extravagant  schemes  of  aggran-
dizing himself  as  seldom  occur,  even  to  ambitious
minds,  unless  when  civil  war  or  violent  factions  rouse
them  to  bold  exertions,  by  alluring  them  with  imme-
diate hopes  of  success.  Full  of  these  aspiring  thoughts,
Albert  made  war  in  a  manner  very  different  from  the
other  confederates.  He  endeavoured  to  spread  the  ter-
ror of  his  arms  by  the  rapidity  of  his  motions,  as  well
as  the  extent  and  rigour  of  his  devastations ;  he  ex-
acted contributions  wherever  he  came,  in  order  to
amass  such  a  sum  of  money,  as  would  put  it  in  his
power  to  keep  his  army  together ;  he  laboured  to  get

P  Sleid.  537. Brantome,  torn.  vii.  39.

1552.]  BOOK  X.  231

possession  of  Nuremberg,  Ulm,  or  some  other  of  the
free  cities  in  Upper  Germany,  in  which  as  a  capital,  he
might  fix  the  seat  of  his  power.  But,  finding  these
cities  on  their  guard,  and  in  a  condition  to  resist  his
attacks,  he  turned  all  his  rage  against  the  Popish  ec-
clesiastics, whose  territories  he  plundered  with  such
wanton  and  merciless  barbarity,  as  gave  them  a  very
unfavourable  impression  of  the  spirit  of  that  reforma-
tion in  religion,  with  zeal  for  which  he  pretended  to
be  animated.  The  bishops  of  Bamberg  and  Wurtz-
burg,  by  their  situation,  lay  particularly  exposed  to  his
ravages ;  he  obliged  the  former  to  transfer  to  him,  in
property,  almost  one  half  of  his  extensive  diocess ;  and
compelled  the  latter  to  advance  a  great  sum  of  money,
in  order  to  save  his  territories  from  ruin  and  desola-
tion. During  all  those  wild  sallies  Albert  paid  no  re-
gard either  to  Maurice's  orders,  whose  commands  as
generalissimo  of  the  league  he  had  engaged  to  obey,
or  to  the  remonstrances  of  the  other  confederates  ;  and
manifestly  discovered,  that  he  attended  only  to  his
own  private  emolument,  without  any  solicitude  about
the  common  cause,  or  the  general  objects  which  had
induced  them  to  take  arms.q

The  nego-  Maurice  having  ordered  his  army  to  march
peaoTat*  back  into  Bavaria,  and  having  published  a  pro-
Passau.  clamation  enjoining  the  Lutheran  clergy  and
instructors  of  youth,  to  resume  the  exercise  of  their
functions  in  all  the  cities,  schools,  and  universities
from  which  they  had  been  ejected,  met  Ferdinand  at
Passau  on  the  26th  day  of  May.  As  matters  of  the
greatest  consequence  to  the  future  peace  and  indepen-
dence of  the  empire  were  to  be  settled  in  this  congress,
the  eyes  of  all  Germany  were  fixed  upon  it.  Besides
Ferdinand  and  the  imperial  ambassadors,  the  duke  of
Bavaria,  the  bishops  of  Saltzburg  and  Aichstadt,  the
ministers  of  all  the  electors,  together  with  deputies

i  Sleid.  561. Thuan.  357.

232  CHARLES  V.  [1562.

from  most  of  the  considerable  princes,  and  free  cities,
resorted  to  Passau.  Maurice,  in  the  name  of  his  asso-
ciates, and  the  king  of  the  Romans  as  the  emperor's
representative,  opened  the  negotiation.  The  princes
who  were  present,  together  with  the  deputies  of  such
as  were  absent,  acted  as  intercessors  or  mediators  be-
tween them.

The  terms  Maurice,  in  a  long  discourse,  explained  the
Maurice  motives  of  his  own  conduct.  After  having
proposed,  enumerated  all  the  unconstitutional  and  op-
pressive acts  of  the  emperor's  administration,  he,  agree-
ably to  the  manifesto  which  he  had  published  when  he
took  arms  against  him,  limited  his  demands  to  three
articles  :  That  the  landgrave  of  Hesse  should  be  imme-
diately set  at  liberty ;  that  the  grievances  in  the  civil
government  of  the  empire  should  be  redressed;  and
that  the  Protestants  should  be  allowed  the  public  exer-
cise of  their  religion  without  molestation.  Ferdinand
and  the  imperial  ambassadors  discovering  their  unwill-
ingness to  gratify  him  with  regard  to  all  these  points,
the  mediators  wrote  a  joint  letter  to  the  emperor,  be-
seeching him  to  deliver  Germany  from  the  calamities
of  a  civil  war,  by  giving  such  satisfaction  to  Maurice
and  his  party  as  might  induce  them  to  lay  down  their
arms ;  and  at  the  same  time  they  prevailed  upon  Mau-
rice to  grant  a  prolongation  of  the  truce  for  a  short
time,  during  which  they  undertook  to  procure  the  em-
'peror's  final  answer  to  his  demands.
Powerfully  This  request  was  presented  to  the  emperor
byTbe "  in  the  name  of  all  the  princes  of  the  empire,
tphenecms-°f  P0Pish  as  well  as  Protestant,  in  the  name  of
Pire-  such  as  had  lent  a  helping  hand  to  forward  his
ambitious  schemes,  as  well  as  of  those  who  had  viewed
the  progress  of  his  power  with  jealousy  and  dread.
The  uncommon  and  cordial  unanimity  with  which  they
concurred  at  this  juncture  in  enforcing  Maurice's  de-
mands, and  in  recommending  peace,  flowed  from  dif-

1552.]  BOOK  X.  233

ferent  causes.  Such  as  were  most  attached  to  the  Ro-
man Catholic  church  could  not  help  observing,  that
the  Protestant  confederates  were  at  the  head  of  a  nu-
merous army,  while  the  emperor  was  but  just  begin-
ning to  provide  for  his  own  defence.  They  foresaw
that  great  efforts  would  be  required  of  them,  and  would
be  necessary  on  their  part,  in  order  to  cope  with  ene-
mies, who  had  been  allowed  to  get  the  start  so  far,  and  to
attain  such  formidable  power.  Experience  had  taught
them,  that  the  fruit  of  all  these  efforts  would  be  reaped
by  the  emperor  alone,  and  the  more  complete  any  vic-
tory proved  which  they  should  gain,  the  faster  would
they  bind  their  own  fetters,  and  render  them  the  more
intolerable.  These  reflections  made  them  cautious  how
they  contributed  a  second  time,  by  their  indiscreet
zeal,  to  put  the  emperor  in  possession  of  power  which
would  be  fatal  to  the  liberties  of  their  country.  Not-
withstanding the  intolerant  spirit  of  bigotry  in  that
age,  they  chose  rather  that  the  Protestants  should  ac-
quire that  security  for  their  religion  which  they  de-
manded, than  by  assisting  Charles  to  oppress  them,  to
give  such  additional  force  to  the  imperial  prerogative,
as  would  overturn  the  constitution  of  the  empire.  To
all  these  considerations,  the  dread  of  seeing  Germany
laid  waste  by  a  civil  war  added  new  force.  Many
states  of  the  empire  already  felt  the  destructive  rage  of
Albert's  arms,  others  dreaded  it,  and  all  wished  for  an
accommodation  between  the  emperor  and  Maurice,
which  they  hoped  would  save  them  from  that  cruel
scourge.

The  mo-  Such  were  the  reasons  that  induced  so  many
wWchin  Prmces>  notwithstanding  the  variety  of  their
fluenced  political  interests,  and  the  opposition  in  their
roratTiL  religious  sentiments,  to  unite  in  recommend-
juncture.  ^^  ^Q  ^  emperor  an  accommodation  with

Maurice,  not  only  as  a  salutary,  but  as  a  necessary
measure.  The  motive  which  prompted  Charles  to  de-

234  CHARLES  V.  [1552.

sire  it,  were  not  fewer  or  of  less  weight.  He  was  per-
fectly sensible  of  the  superiority  which  the  confederates
had  acquired  through  his  own  negligence ;  and  he  now
felt  the  insufficiency  of  his  own  resources  to  oppose
them.  His  Spanish  subjects,  disgusted  at  his  long  ab-
sence, and  weary  of  endless  wars,  which  were  of  little
benefit  to  their  country,  refused  to  furnish  him  any
considerable  supply  either  of  men  or  money  ;  and  al-
though by  his  address  or  importunity  he  might  have
hoped  to  draw  from  them  at  last  more  effectual  aid ;
that,  he  knew,  was  too  distant  to  be  of  any  service  in
the  present  exigency  of  his  affairs.  His  treasury  was
drained ;  his  veteran  forces  were  dispersed  or  disband-
ed, and  he  could  not  depend  much  either  on  the  fide-
lity or  courage  of  the  new-levied  soldiers  whom  he  was
collecting.  There  was  no  hope  of  repeating  with  suc-
cess the  same  artifices  which  had  weakened  and  ruined
the  Smalkaldic  league.  As  the  end  at  which  he  aimed
was  now  known,  he  could  no  longer  employ  the  spe-
cious pretexts  which  had  formerly  concealed  his  ambi-
tious designs.  Every  prince  in  Germany  was  alarmed
and  on  his  guard  ;  and  it  was  vain  to  think  of  blinding
them  a  second  time  to  such  a  degree,  as  to  make  one
part  of  them  instruments  to  enslave  the  other.  The
spirit  of  a  confederacy,  whereof  Maurice  was  the  head,
experience  had  taught  him  to  be  very  different  from
that  of  the  league  of  Smalkalde ;  and  from  what  he
had  already  felt,  he  had  no  reason  to  flatter  himself
that  its  councils  would  be  as  irresolute,  or  its  efforts  as
timid  and  feeble.  If  he  should  resolve  on  continuing
the  war,  he  might  be  assured,  that  the  most  consider-
able states  in  Germany  would  take  part  in  it  against
him ;  and  a  dubious  neutrality  was  the  utmost  he  could
expect  from  the  rest.  While  the  confederates  found
full  employment  for  his  arms  in  one  quarter,  the  king
of  France  would  seize  the  favourable  opportunity,  and
push  on  his  operations  in  another,  with  almost  certain

1552.]  BOOK X.  235

success.  That  monarch  had  already  made  conquests
in  the  empire,  which  Charles  was  no  less  eager  to  reco-
ver, than  impatient  to  be  revenged  on  him  for  aiding  his
malecontent  subjects.  Though  Henry  had  now  retired
from  the  banks  of  the  Rhine,  he  had  only  varied  the
scene  of  hostilities,  having  invaded  the  Low  Countries
with  all  his  forces.  The  Turks,  roused  by  the  solicita-
tions of  the  French  king,  as  well  as  stimulated  by  re-
sentment against  Ferdinand  for  having  violated  the
truce  in  Hungary,  had  prepared  a  powerful  fleet  to  ra-
vage the  coasts  of  Naples  and  Sicily,  which  he  had
left  almost  defenceless,  by  calling  thence  the  greatest
part  of  the  regular  troops  to  join  the  army  which  he
was  now  assembling.

Ferdinand  Ferdinand,  who  went  in  person  to  Villach,
zealous  to  in  order  to  lay  before  the  emperor  the  result  of
anaccom-  the  conferences  at  Passau,  had  likewise  reasons
inodation.  pecuiiar  to  himself  for  desiring  an  accommoda-
tion. These  prompted  him  to  second,  with  the  greatest
earnestness,  the  arguments  which  the  princes  assembled
there  had  employed  in  recommending  it.  He  had  ob-
served, not  without  secret  satisfaction,  the  fatal  blow
that  had  been  given  to  the  despotic  power  which  his
brother  had  usurped  in  the  empire.  He  was  extremely
solicitous  to  prevent  Charles  from  recovering  his  former
superiority,  as  he  foresaw  that  ambitious  prince  would
immediately  resume,  with  increased  eagerness,  and  with
a  better  chance  of  success,  his  favourite  scheme  of  trans-
mitting that  power  to  his  son,  by  excluding  his  brother
from  the  right  of  succession  to  the  imperial  throne.  On
this  account  he  was  willing  to  contribute  towards  cir-
cumscribing the  imperial  authority,  in  order  to  render
his  own  possession  of  it  certain.  Besides,  Solyman,
exasperated  at  the  loss  of  Transylvania,  and  still  more
at  the  fraudulent  arts  by  which  it  had  been  seized,  had
ordered  into  the  field  an  army  of  a  hundred  thousand
men,  which  having  defeated  a  great  body  of  Ferdinand's

236  CHARLES V.  [1552.

troops,  and  taken  several  places  of  importance,  threat-
ened not  only  to  complete  the  conquest  of  the  province,
but  to  drive  them  out  of  that  part  of  Hungary  which
was  still  subject  to  his  jurisdiction.  He  was  unable  to
resist  such  a  mighty  enemy ;  the  emperor,  while  en-
gaged in  a  domestic  war,  could  afford  him  no  aid ;  and
he  could  not  even  hope  to  draw  from  Germany  the  con-
tingent, either  of  troops  or  money,  usually  furnished  to
repel  the  invasions  of  the  infidels.  Maurice,  having
observed  Ferdinand's  perplexity  with  regard  to  this
last  point,  had  offered,  if  peace  were  re-established  on
a  secure  foundation,  that  he  would  march  in  person
with  his  troops  into  Hungary  against  the  Turks.  Such
was  the  effect  of  this  well-timed  proposal,  that  Ferdi-
nand, destitute  of  every  other  prospect  of  relief,  be-
came the  most  zealous  advocate  whom  the  confede-
rates could  have  employed  to  urge  their  claims,
and  there  was  hardly  any  thing  that  they  could  have
demanded  which  he  would  not  have  chosen  to  grant,
rather  than  have  retarded  a  pacification,  to  which
he  trusted  as  the  only  means  of  saving  his  Hunga-
rian crown.

When  so  many  causes  conspired  in  rendering
e-  an  accommodation  eligible,  it  might  have  been
taid  "•  expected  that  it  would  have  taken  place  imme-
diately. But  the  inflexibility  of  the  emperor's  temper,
together  with  his  unwillingness  at  once  to  relinquish
objects  which  he  had  long  pursued  with  such  earnest-
ness and  assiduity,  counterbalanced,  for  some  time,  the
force  of  all  the  motives  which  disposed  him  to  peace,
and  not  only  put  that  event  at  a  distance,  but  seemed
to  render  it  uncertain.  When  Maurice's  demands,  to-
gether with  the  letter  of  the  mediators  at  Passau,  were
presented  to  him,  he  peremptorily  refused  to  redress  the
grievances  which  were  pointed  out,  nor  would  he  agree
to  any  stipulation  for  the  immediate  security  of  the  Pro-
testant religion,  but  proposed  referring  both  these  to

1552.]  BOOK  X. .  237

the  determination  of  a  future  diet.  On  his  part,  he
required  that  instant  reparation  should  be  made  to  all
who,  during  the  present  war,  had  suffered  either  by  the
licentiousness  of  the  confederate  troops,  or  the  exactions
of  their  leaders.

Maurice,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  the

Maurice  s  *

vigorous  emperor's  arts,  immediately  concluded  that  he
fa^utate18  had  nothing  in  view  by  these  overtures  but  to

amuse  and  deceive;  and  therefore,  without  lis-
tening to  Ferdinand's  entreaties,  he  left  Passau  abruptly,
and  joining  his  troops,  which  were  encamped  at  Mer-
gentheim,  a  city  in  Franconia,  belonging  to  the  knights
of  the  Teutonic  order,  he  put  them  in  motion,  and  re-
newed hostilities.  As  three  thousand  men  in  the  em-
peror's pay  had  thrown  themselves  into  Frankfort  on
the  Maine,  and  might  from  thence  infest  the  neigh-
bouring country  of  Hesse,  he  marched  towards  that
city,  and  laid  siege  to  it  in  form.  The  briskness  of

this enterprise; and the  vigour  with  which

July  17. ,_  . '_  ,  .  & .

Maurice  carried  on  his  approaches  against  the
town,  gave  such  an  alarm  to  the  emperor,  as  disposed
him  to  lend  a  more  favourable  ear  to  Ferdinand's  argu-
ments in  behalf  of  an  accommodation.  Firm  and
haughty  as  his  nature  was,  he  found  it  necessary  to
bend,  and  signified  his  willingness  to  make  concessions
on  his  part,  if  Maurice,  in  return,  would  abate  somewhat
of  the  rigour  of  his  demands.  Ferdinand,  as  soon  as
he  perceived  that  his  brother  began  to  yield,  did  not
desist  from  his  importunities,  until  he  prevailed  on  him
to  declare  what  was  the  utmost  that  he  would  grant  for
the  security  of  the  confederates.  Having  gained  this
difficult  point,  he  instantly  dispatched  a  messenger  to
Maurice's  camp,  and  imparting  to  him  the  emperor's  final
resolution,  conjured  him  not  to  frustrate  his  endeavours
for  the  re-establishment  of  peace  ;  or,  by  an  unseason-
able obstinacy  on  his  side,  to  disappoint  the  wishes  of
all  Germany  for  that  salutary  event.

238  CHARLES V.  [1552.

Maurice  Maurice,  notwithstanding  the  prosperous  si-
-f  tuation  of  his  affairs,  was  strongly  inclined  to
listen  to  this  advice.  The  emperor,  though
overreached  and  surprised,  had  now  begun  to  assemble
troops,  and  however  slow  his  motions  might  be,  while
the  first  effects  of  his  consternation  remained,  he  was
sensible  that  Charles  must  at  last  act  with  vigour  pro-
portional to  the  extent  of  his  power  and  territories,  and
lead  into  Germany  an  army  formidable  by  its  numbers,
and  still  more  by  the  terror  of  his  name,  as  well  as  the
remembrance  of  his  past  victories.  He  could  scarcely
hope  that  a  confederacy,  composed  of  so  many  members,
would  continue  to  operate  with  union  and  perseverance
sufficient  to  resist  the  consistent  and  well-directed  ef-
forts of  an  army,  at  the  absolute  disposal  of  a  leader
accustomed  to  command  and  to  conquer.  He  felt  al-
ready, although  he  had  not  hitherto  experienced  the
shock  of  any  adverse  event,  that  he  himself  was  the
head  of  a  disjointed  body.  He  saw,  from  the  example
of  Albert  of  Brandenburg,  how  difficult  it  would  be,
with  all  his  address  and  credit,  to  prevent  any  particu-
lar member  from  detaching  himself  from  the  whole,  and
how  impossible  to  recall  him  to  his  proper  rank  and  su-
bordination. This  filled  him  with  apprehensions  for
the  common  cause.  Another  consideration  gave  him
no  less  disquiet  with  regard  to  his  own  particular  inte-
rests. By  setting  at  liberty  the  degraded  elector,  and
by  repealing  the  act  by  which  that  prince  was  deprived
of  his  hereditary  honours  and  dominions,  the  emperor
had  it  in  his  power  to  wound  him  in  the  most  tender
part.  The  efforts  of  a  prince  beloved  by  his  ancient
subjects,  and  revered  by  all  the  Protestant  party,  in  order
to  recover  what  had  been  unjustly  taken  from  him,  could
hardly  have  failed  of  exciting  commotions  in  Saxony,
which  would  endanger  all  that  he  had  acquired  at  the
expense  of  so  much  dissimulation  and  artifice.  It  was
no  less  in  the  emperor's  power  to  render  vain  all  the

1552.]  BOOK X.  239

solicitations  of  the  confederates  in  behalf  of  the  land-
grave. He  had  only  to  add  one  act  of  violence  more
to  the  injustice  and  rigour  with  which  he  had  already
treated  him ;  and  he  had  accordingly  threatened  the
sons  of  that  unfortunate  prince,  that  if  they  persisted
in  their  present  enterprise,  instead  of  seeing  their  father
restored  to  liberty,  they  should  hear  of  his  having  suf-
fered the  punishment  which  his  rebellion  had  merited/
The  peace  Having  deliberated  upon  all  these  points  with
n*s  ass°ciates,  Maurice  thought  it  more  prudent
to  accept  of  the  conditions  offered,  though  less
advantageous  than  those  which  he  had  proposed,  than
again  to  commit  all  to  the  doubtful  issue  of  war.3  He
repaired  forthwith  to  Passau,  and  signed  the

Aug.  2.

treaty  of  peace ;  of  which  the  chief  articles  were,
— That  before  the  12th  day  of  August,  the  confede-
rates shall  lay  down  their  arms,  and  disband  their
forces  ;  that  on  or  before  that  day  the  landgrave  shall
be  set  at  liberty,  and  conveyed  in  safety  to  his  castle
of  Rheinfels ;  that  a  diet  shall  be  held  within  six
months,  in  order  to  deliberate  concerning  the  most  pro-
per and  effectual  method  of  preventing  for  the  future
all  disputes  and  dissensions  about  religion ;  that,  in  the
mean  time,  neither  the  emperor  nor  any  other  prince,
shall,  upon  any  pretext  whatever,  offer  any  injury  or
violence  to  such  as  adhered  to  the  confession  of  Augs-
burg, but  allow  them  to  enjoy  the  free  and  undis-
turbed exercise  of  their  religion ;  that,  in  return,  the
Protestants  shall  not  molest  the  Catholics  either  in  the
exercise  of  their  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction,  or  in  per-
forming their  religious  ceremonies ;  that  the  imperial
chamber  shall  administer  justice  impartially  to  persons
of  both  parties,  and  Protestants  be  admitted  indiscri-
minately with  the  Catholics  to  sit  as  judges  in  that
court ;  that  if  the  next  diet  should  not  be  able  to  ter-

r  Sleid,  571. .  •  Sleld.  Hist.  563,  &c. Thuan.  lib.  x.  359,  &c.

240  CHARLES V.  [1552.

minate  the  disputes  with  regard  to  religion,  the  stipu-
lations in  the  present  treaty  in  behalf  of  the  Protestants
shall  continue  for  ever  in  full  force  and  vigour ;  that
none  of  the  confederates  shall  be  liable  to  any  action
on  account  of  what  had  happened  during  the  course  of
the  war ;  that  the  consideration  of  those  encroachments
which  had  been  made,  as  Maurice  pretended,  upon  the
constitution  and  liberties  of  the  empire,  shall  be  remit-
ted to  the  approaching  diet ;  that  Albert  of  Branden-
burg shall  be  comprehended  in  the  treaty,  provided  he
shall  accede  to  it,  and  disband  his  forces  before  the
12th  of  August.1

Keaections  Such  was  the  memorable  treaty  of  Passau,
peace,  and  that  overturned  the  vast  fabric,  in  erecting  which
craductof  Charles  had  employed  so  many  years,  and  had
Maurice,  exerted  the  utmost  efforts  of  his  power  and  po-
licy ;  that  annulled  all  his  regulations  with  regard  to
religion;  defeated  all  his  hopes  of  rendering  the
imperial  authority  absolute  and  hereditary  in  his  fa-
mily ;  and  established  the  Protestant  church,  which
had  hitherto  subsisted  precariously  in  Germany,  through
connivance,  or  by  expedients,  upon  a  firm  and  secure
basis.  Maurice  reaped  all  the  glory  of  having  con-
certed and  completed  this  unexpected  revolution.  It
is  a  singular  circumstance,  that  the  Reformation  should
be  indebted  for  its  security  and  full  establishment  in
Germany,  to  the  same  hand  which  had  brought  it  to
the  brink  of  destruction,  and  that  both  events  should
have  been  accomplished  by  the  same  arts  of  dissimula-
tion. The  ends,  however,  which  Maurice  had  in  view,
at  those  different  junctures,  seem  to  have  been  more
attended  to  than  the  means  by  which  he  attained  them ;
and  he  was  now  as  universally  extolled  for  his  zeal  and
public  spirit  as  he  had  lately  been  condemned  for  his
indifference  and  interested  policy.  It  is  no  less  worthy

*  Recueil  dea  Traitez,  ii.  264.

1552.]  BOOK X.  241

of  observation,  that  the  French  king,  a  monarch  zealous
for  the  Catholic  faith,  should  employ  his  power  in  or-
der to  protect  and  maintain  the  Reformation  in  the  em-
pire, at  the  very  time  when  he  was  persecuting  his  own
Protestant  subjects  with  all  the  fierceness  of  bigotry ;
and  that  the  league  for  this  purpose,  which  proved  so
fatal  to  the  Romish  church,  should  be  negotiated  and
signed  by  a  Roman  Catholic  bishop.  So  wonderfully
doth  the  wisdom  of  God  superintend  and  regulate  the
caprice  of  human  passions,  and  render  them  subser-
vient towards  the  accomplishment  of  his  own  pur-
poses.

Little  at-  Little  attention  was  paid  to  the  interests  of
pTilTtothethe  French  king  during  the  negotiations  at  Pas-
French  sau>  Maurice  and  his  associates,  having-  grained

king  in  ...

this  treaty,  what  they  had  in  view,  discovered  no  great  so-
licitude about  an  ally,  whom,  perhaps,  they  reckoned
to  be  overpaid  for  the  assistance  which  he  had  given
them,  by  his  acquisitions  in  Lorraine.  A  short  clause
which  they  procured  to  be  inserted  in  the  treaty,  im-
porting, that  the  king  of  France  might  communicate  to
the  confederates  his  particular  pretensions  or  causes  of
hostility,  which  they  would  lay  before  the  emperor,
was  the  only  sign  that  they  gave  of  their  remembering
how  much  they  had  been  indebted  to  him  for  their  suc-
cess. Henry  experienced  the  same  treatment,  which
every  prince  who  lends  his  aid  to  the  authors  of  a  civil
war  may  expect.  As  soon  as  the  rage  of  faction  began
to  subside,  and  any  prospect  of  accommodation  to  open,
his  services  were  forgotten,  and  his  associates  made  a
merit  with  their  sovereign  of  the  ingratitude  with
which  they  abandoned  their  protector.  But  how  much
soever  Henry  might  be  enraged  at  the  perfidy  of  his
allies,  or  at  the  impatience  with  which  they  hastened
to  make  their  peace  with  the  emperor,  at  his  expense,
he  was  perfectly  sensible  that  it  was  more  his  interest
VOL.  v.  R

242  CHARLES V.  [1552.

to  keep  well  witli  the  Germanic  body,  than  to  resent
the  indignities  offered  him  by  any  particular  members
of  it.  For  that  reason  he  dismissed  the  hostages,  which
he  had  received  from  Maurice  and  his  associates,  and
affected  to  talk  in  the  same  strain  as  formerly,  concern-
ing his  zeal  for  maintaining  the  ancient  constitution
and  liberties  of  the  empire.

THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR  CHARLES  V.

BOOK  XL

1552. _As  soon  as  the  treaty  of  Passau  was  signed.

Aug.  3.  .

Maurice  Maurice  in  consequence  ot  his  engagements
IntoHun-  with  Ferdinand,  marched  into  Hungary  at  the
sa]7nst  the  head  of  twenty  thousand  men.  But  the  great
Turks.  superiority  of  the  Turkish  armies,  the  frequent
mutinies  both  of  Spanish  and  German  soldiers,  occa-
sioned by  their  want  of  pay,  together  with  the  dissen-
sions between  Maurice  and  Castaldo,  who  was  piqued
at  being  obliged  to  resign  the  chief  command  to  him,
prevented  his  performing  any  thing  in  that  country
suitable  to  his  former  fame,  or  of  great  benefit  to  the
king  of  the  Romans/

When Maurice set  out  for Hungary,  the

The  land- _  .  .

grave  of  prince  of  Hesse  parted  from  him  with  the  forces
coven  his  under  his  command,  and  marched  back  into  his
liberty.  QWn  country?  that  he  might  be  ready  to  receive
his  father  upon  his  return,  and  give  up  to  him  the  reins
of  government  which  he  had  held  during  his  absence.
But  fortune  was  not  yet  weary  of  persecuting  the  land-
grave. A  battalion  of  mercenary  troops,  which  had
been  in  the  pay  of  Hesse,  being  seduced  by  Reifenberg
their  colonel,  a  soldier  of  fortune,  ready  to  engage  in
any  enterprise,  secretly  withdrew  from  the  young

1  Istuanhaffii  Hist.  Hurtgar.  288. Thuan.  lib.  x.  371.
R 2

244  CHARLES V.  [1552.

prince  as  he  was  marching  homewards,  and  joined  Al-
bert of  Brandenburg,  who  still  continued  in  arms
against  the  emperor,  refusing  to  be  included  in  the
treaty  of  Passau.  Unhappily  for  the  landgrave,  an
account  of  this  reached  the  Netherlands,  just  as  he  was
dismissed  from  the  citadel  of  Mechlin  where  he  had
been  confined,  but  before  he  had  got  beyond  the  fron-
tiers of  that  country.  The  queen  of  Hungary,  who
governed  there  in  her  brother's  name,  incensed  at  such
an  open  violation  of  the  treaty  to  which  he  owed  his
liberty,  issued  orders  to  arrest  him,  and  committed
him  again  to  the  custody  of  the  same  Spanish  captain
who  had  guarded  him  for  five  years  with  the  most  se-
vere vigilance.  Philip  beheld  all  the  horrors  of  his
imprisonment  renewed;  and  his  spirits  subsiding  in
the  same  proportion  as  they  had  risen  during  the  short
interval  in  which  he  had  enjoyed  liberty,  he  sunk  into
despair,  and  believed  himself  to  be  doomed  to  per-
petual captivity.  But  the  matter  being  so  explained
to  the  emperor,  as  fully  satisfied  him  that  the  revolt  of
Reifenberg's  mercenaries  could  be  imputed  neither  to
the  landgrave  nor  to  his  son,  he  gave  orders  for  his  re-
lease ;  and  Philip  at  last  obtained  the  liberty  for  which
he  had  so  long  languished.1*  But  though  he  recovered
his  freedom,  and  was  reinstated  in  his  dominions,  his
sufferings  seem  to  have  broken  the  vigour,  and  to  have
extinguished  the  activity  of  his  mind ;  from  being  the
boldest  as  well  as  most  enterprising  prince  in  the  em-
pire, he  became  the  most  timid  and  cautious,  and
passed  the  remainder  of  his  days  in  a  pacific  indolence.
Likewise  ^e  degraded  elector  of  Saxony  likewise  pro-
the  elector  cured  his  liberty  in  consequence  of  the  treaty  of
WDy<  Passau.  The  emperor  having  been  obliged  to
relinquish  all  his  schemes  for  extirpating  the  Protestant
religion,  had  no  longer  any  motive  for  detaining  him
a  prisoner;  and  being  extremely  solicitous,  at  that

b  Sleid.  573. Belcarii  Comment.  834.

1552.]  BOOK XI.  245

juncture,  to  recover  the  confidence  and  good-will  of  the
Germans,  whose  assistance  was  essential  to  the  success
of  the  enterprise  which  he  meditated  against  the  king
of  France,  he,  among  other  expedients  for  that  purpose,
thought  of  releasing  from  imprisonment  a  prince  whose
merit  entitled  him  no  less  to  esteem,  than  his  sufferings
rendered  him  the  object  of  compassion.  John  Frederic
took  possession  accordingly  of  that  part  of  his  territories
which  had  been  reserved  for  him,  when  Maurice  was
invested  with  the  electoral  dignity.  As  in  this  situa-
tion, he  continued  to  display  the  same  virtuous  mag-
nanimity for  which  he  had  been  conspicuous  in  a  more
prosperous  and  splendid  state,  and  which  he  had  re-
tained amidst  all  his  sufferings,  he  maintained  during
the  remainder  of  his  life  that  high  reputation  to  which
he  had  so  just  a  title.

The  em-  The  loss  of  Metz,  Toul,  and  Verdun,  had
niade  a  deep  impression  on  the  emperor.  Ac-
customed  to  terminate  all  his  operations  against
France.  France  with  advantage  to  himself,  he  thought
that  it  nearly  concerned  his  honour  not  to  allow  Henry
the  superiority  in  this  war,  or  to  suffer  his  own  adminis-
tration to  be  stained  with  the  infamy  of  having  per-
mitted territories  of  such  consequence  to  be  dismem-
bered from  the  empire.  This  was  no  less  a  point  of
interest  than  of  honour.  As  the  frontier  of  Champagne
was  more  naked,  and  lay  more  exposed  than  that  of
any  province  in  France,  Charles  had  frequently,  during
his  wars  with  that  kingdom,  made  inroads  upon  that
quarter  with  great  success  and  effect;  but  if  Henry
were  allowed  to  retain  his  late  conquests,  France  would
gain  such  a  formidable  barrier  on  that  side,  as  to  be
altogether  secure,  where  formerly  she  had  been  weakest.
On  the  other  hand,  the  empire  had  now  lost  as  much
in  point  of  security,  as  France  had  acquired ;  and  being
stripped  of  the  defence  which  those  cities  afforded  it,
lay  open  to  be  invaded  on  a  quarter,  where  all  the

246  CHARLES V.  [1552.

towns  having  been  hitherto  considered  as  interior,  and
remote  from  any  enemy,  were  but  slightly  fortified.
These  considerations  determined  Charles  to  attempt
recovering  the  three  towns  of  which  Henry  had  made
himself  master;  and  the  preparations  which  he  had
made  against  Maurice  and  his  associates,  enabled  him
to  carry  his  resolution  into  immediate  execution.
His  prepa-  As  soon,  then,  as  the  peace  was  concluded  at
this°nur-°r  Passau,  be  left  his  inglorious  retreat  at  Villach,
p°se-  and  advanced  to  Augsburg,  at  the  head  of  a
considerable  body  of  Germans  which  he  had  levied,
together  with  all  the  troops  which  he  had  drawn  out  of
Italy  and  Spain.  To  these  he  added  several  battalions,
which  having  been  in  the  pay  of  the  confederates,
entered  into  his  service  when  dismissed  by  them;  and
he  prevailed  likewise  on  some  princes  of  the  empire  to
join  him  with  their  vassals.  In  order  to  conceal  the
destination  of  this  formidable  army,  and  to  guard  against
alarming  the  French  king,  so  as  to  put  him  on  prepar-
ing for  the  defence  of  his  late  conquests,  he  gave  out
that  he  was  to  march  forthwith  into  Hungary,  in  order
to  second  Maurice  in  his  operations  against  the  infidels.
When  he  began  to  advance  towards  the  Rhine,  and
could  no  longer  employ  that  pretext,  he  tried  a  new
artifice,  and  spread  a  report,  that  he  took  this  route  in
order  to  chastise  Albert  of  Brandenburg,  whose  cruel
exactions  in  that  part  of  the  empire  called  loudly  for
his  interposition  to  check  them.

The  pre-  But  the  French  having  grown  acquainted,  at
the  French  last,  with  arts  by  which  they  had  been  so  often
fence^f c  deceived,  viewed  all  Charles's  motions  with  dis-
Meta-  trust.  Henry  immediately  discerned  the  true
object  of  his  vast  preparations,  and  resolved  to  defend
the  important  conquests  which  he  had  gained  with
vigour  equal  to  that  with  which  they  were  about  to  be
attacked.  As  he  foresaw  that  the  whole  weight  of  the
war  would  be  turned  against  Metz,  by  whose  fate  that

1552.]  BOOK XL  247

of  Toul  and  Verdun  would  be  determined,  he  nominated
The  duke  Francis  of  Lorrain,  duke  of  Guise,  to  take  the
appointed  command  in  that  city  during  the  siege,  the  issue
of  In™0'  °f  wnicn  would  equally  affect  the  honour  and
town.  interest  of  his  country.  His  choice  could  not
have  fallen  upon  any  person  more  worthy  of  that  trust.
The  duke  of  Guise  possessed,  in  a  high  degree,  all  the
talents  of  courage,  sagacity,  and  presence  of  mind,
which  render  men  eminent  in  military  command.  He
was  largely  endowed  with  that  magnanimity  of  soul
which  delights  in  bold  enterprises,  and  aspires  to  fame
by  splendid  and  extraordinary  actions.  He  repaired
with  joy  to  the  dangerous  station  assigned  him,  as  to
a  theatre  on  which  he  might  display  his  great  qualities
under  the  immediate  eye  of  his  countrymen,  all  ready
to  applaud  him.  The  martial  genius  of  the  French  no-
bility in  that  age,  which  considered  it  as  the  greatest
reproach  to  remain  inactive,  when  there  was  any  oppor-
tunity of  signalizing  their  courage,  prompted  great  num-
bers to  follow  a  leader  who  was  the  darling  as  well  as
the  pattern  of  every  one  that  courted  military  fame.
Several  princes  of  the  blood,  many  noblemen  of  the
highest  rank,  and  all  the  young  officers  who  could  ob-
tain the  king's  permission,  entered  Metz  as  volunteers.
By  their  presence  they  added  spirit  to  the  garrison,  and
enabled  the  duke  of  Guise  to  employ,  on  every  emer-
gency, persons  eager  to  distinguish  themselves,  and  fit
to  conduct  any  service.

Prepares  But  with  whatever  alacrity  the  duke  of  Guise
SsYe-80'"  undertook  the  defence  of  Metz,  he  found  every
fence.  thing,  upon  his  arrival  there,  in  such  a  situation,
as  might  have  induced  any  person  of  less  intrepid  cou-
rage to  despair  of  defending  it  with  success.  The  city
was  of  great  extent,  with  large  suburbs;  the  walls  were
in  many  places  feeble  and  without  ramparts;  the  ditch
narrow ;  and  the  old  towers,  which  projected  instead  of
bastions,  were  at  too  great  distance  from  each  other  to

248  CHARLES V.  [1552

defend  the  space  between  them. For  all  these  defects
he  endeavoured  to  provide  the  best  remedy  which  the
time  would  permit. He  ordered  the  suburbs,  without
sparing  the  monasteries  or  churches,  not  even  that  of
St.  Arnulph,  in  which  several  kings  of  France  had  been
buried,  to  be  levelled  with  the  ground ;  but  in  order  to
guard  against  the  imputation  of  impiety,  to  which  such
a  violation  of  so  many  sacred  edifices,  as  well  as  of  the
ashes  of  the  dead,  might  expose  him,  he  executed  this
with  much  religious  ceremony. Having  ordered  all  the
holy  vestments  and  utensils,  together  with  the  bones  of
the  kings,  and  other  persons  deposited  in  these  churches,
to  be  removed,  they  were  carried  in  solemn  procession
to  a  church  within  the  walls,  he  himself  walking  before
them  bareheaded,  with  a  torch  in  his  hand. He  then
pulled  down  such  houses  as  stood  near  the  walls,  cleared
and  enlarged  the  ditch,  repaired  the  ruinous  fortifica-
tions, and  erected  new  ones. As  it  was  necessary  that
all  these  works  should  be  finished  with  the  utmost  ex-
pedition, he  laboured  at  them  with  his  own  hands :  the
officers  and  volunteers  imitated  his  example,  and  the
soldiers  submitted  with  cheerfulness  to  the  most  severe
and  fatiguing  service,  when  they  saw  that  their  superiors
did  not  decline  to  bear  a  part  in  it. At  the  same  time
he  compelled  all  useless  persons  to  leave  the  place ;  he
filled  the  magazines  with  provisions  and  military  stores;
he  burnt  the  mills,  and  destroyed  the  corn  and  forage
for  several  miles  round  the  town. Such  were  his  popu-
lar talents,  as  well  as  his  arts  of  acquiring  an  ascendant
over  the  minds  of  men,  that  the  citizens  seconded  him
with  no  less  ardour  than  the  soldiers;  and  every  other
passion  being  swallowed  up  in  the  zeal  to  repulse  the
enemy,  with  which  he  inspired  them,  they  beheld  the
ruin  of  their  estates,  together  with  the  havoc  which  he
made  among  their  public  and  private  buildings,  with-
out any  emotion  of  resentment.*

«  Tlman.  xi.  387.

1552.]  BOOK  XI.  249

Charles  ad- Meantime  the  emperor,  having  collected  all
vances  to-  }jjs  forces  continued  his  march  towards  Metz.

•wards

As  he  passed  through  the  cities  on  the  Rhine,
he  saw  the  dismal  effects  of  that  licentious  and  wasteful
war  which  Albert  had  carried  on  in  these  parts.  Upon
his  approach,  that  prince,  though  at  the  head  of  twenty
thousand  men,  withdrew  into  Lorrain,  as  if  he  had  in-
tended to  join  the  French  king,  whose  arms  he  had
quartered  with  his  own  in  all  his  standards  and  en-
signs. Albert  was  not  in  a  condition  to  cope  with  the
imperial  troops,d  which  amounted  at  least  to  sixty
thousand  men,  forming  one  of  the  most  numerous  and
best  appointed  armies  which  had  been  brought  into
the  field  during  that  age,  in  any  of  the  wars  among
Christian  princes.

invests  the  The  chief  command,  under  the  emperor,  was
lown>  committed  to  the  duke  of  Alva,  assisted  by  the
marquis  de  Marignano,  together  with  the  most  ex-
perienced of  the  Italian  and  Spanish  generals.  As  it
was  now  towards  the  end  of  October,  these  intelligent
officers  represented  the  great  danger  of  beginning,  at
such  an  advanced  season,  a  siege  which  could  not
fail  to  prove  very  tedious.  But  Charles  adhered  to
his  own  opinion  with  his  usual  obstinacy,  and  being
confident  that  he  had  made  such  preparations,  and  taken
such  precautions  as  would  ensure  success,  he  ordered
the  city  to  be  invested.  As  soon  as  the  duke  of  Alva  ap-
peared, a  large  body  of  the  French  sallied  out,  and
attacked  his  vanguard  with  great  vigour,  put  it
in  confusion,  and  killed  or  took  prisoners  a
considerable  number  of  men.  By  this  early  specimen
which  they  gave  of  the  conduct  of  their  officers,  as
well  as  the  valour  of  their  troops,  they  shewed  the  Im-
perialists what  an  enemy  they  had  to  encounter,  and
how  dear  every  advantage  must  cost  them.  The  place,

d  Natal.  Comitis,  Hist.  127,

250  CHARLES V.  [1552.

however,  was  completely  invested,  the  trenches  were
opened,  and  the  other  works  begun.
Both  par-  The  attention  both  of  the  besiegers  and  be-
sieged  was  turned  for  some  time  towards  Al-
kert  of  Brandenburg,  and  they  strove  with
burg-  emulation  which  should  gain  that  prince,  who
still  hovered  in  the  neighbourhood,  fluctuating  in  all
the  uncertainty  of  irresolution,  natural  to  a  man,  who
being  swayed  by  no  principle,  was  allured  different
ways  by  contrary  views  of  interest.  The  French
tempted  him  with  offers  extremely  beneficial ;  the  Im-
perialists scrupled  at  no  promise  which  they  thought
might  allure  him.  After  much  hesitation  he  was  gained
by  the  emperor,  from  whom  he  expected  to  receive
advantages  which  were  both  more  immediate  and  more
permanent.  As  the  French  king,  who  began  to  suspect
his  intentions,  had  appointed  a  body  of  troops  under
the  duke  of  Aumale,  brother  to  the  duke  of  Guise,  to
watch  his  motions,  Albert  fell  upon  them  unexpectedly
with  such  vigour,  that  he  routed  them  entirely,  killed
many  of  the  officers,  wounded  Aumale  himself,  and
took  him  prisoner.  Immediately  after  this  vic-
tory, he  marched  in  triumph  to  Metz,  and  joined
his  army  to  that  of  the  emperor.  Charles,  in  reward
for  this  service,  and  the  great  accession  of  strength
which  he  brought  him,  granted  Albert  a  formal  pardon
of  all  past  offences,  and  confirmed  him  in  the  possession
of  the  territories  which  he  had  violently  usurped  dur-
ing the  war.'

The  gallant  The  duke  of  Guise,  though  deeply  affected
with  his  brother's  misfortune,  did  not  remit,  in
anv  Degree,  the  vigour  with  which  he  defended
garrison,  the  town.  He  harassed  the  besiegers  by  fre-
quent sallies,  in  which  his  officers  were  so  eager  to
distinguish  themselves,  that  his  authority  being  hardly

•  Sleid.  575. Thuan.  lib.  xi.  389.  392.

1552.]  BOOK  XL  251

sufficient  to  restrain  the  impetuosity  of  their  courage,
he  was  obliged  at  different  times  to  shut  the  gates,  and
to  conceal  the  keys,  in  order  to  prevent  the  princes  of
the  blood,  and  noblemen  of  the  first  rank,  from  ex-
posing themselves  to  danger  in  every  sally.  He  re-
paired in  the  night  what  the  enemy's  artillery  had  beat
down  during  the  day,  or  erected  behind  the  ruined
works  new  fortifications  of  almost  equal  strength.  The
Imperialists,  on  their  part,  pushed  on  the  attack  with
great  spirit,  and  carried  forward  at  once,  approaches
against  different  parts  of  the  town.  But  the  art  of  at-
tacking fortified  places  was  not  then  arrived  at  that
degree  of  perfection  to  which  it  was  carried  towards
the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century,  during  the  long  war
in  the  Netherlands.  The  besiegers,  after  the  unwea-
ried labour  of  many  weeks,  found  that  they  had  made
but  little  progress;  and  although  their  batteries  had
made  breaches  in  different  places,  they  saw,  to  their
'astonishment,  works  suddenly  appear,  in  demolishing
which  their  fatigues  and  dangers  would  be  renewed.
The  emperor,  enraged  at  the  obstinate  resistance  which
his  army  met  with,  left  Thionville,  where  he  had  been
confined  by  a  violent  fit  of  the  gout,  and  though  still
so  infirm  that  he  was  obliged  to  be  carried  in

Nov.  26.  ill.

a  litter,  he  repaired  to  the  camp ;  that  by  his
presence  he  might  animate  the  soldiers,  and  urge  on
the  attack  with  greater  spirit.  Upon  his  arrival,  new
batteries  were  erected,  and  new  efforts  were  made  with
redoubled  ardour.

Thedistress  But  by  this  time,  winter  had  set  in  with  great
periaT"1  rigour;  the  camp  was  alternately  deluged  with
army.  ra|n  or  COVered  with  snow ;  at  the  same  time
provisions  were  become  extremely  scarce,  as  a  body  of
French  cavalry  which  hovered  in  the  neighbourhood,
often  intercepted  the  convoys,  or  rendered  their  arrival
difficult  and  uncertain.  Diseases  began  to  spread
among  the  soldiers,  especially  among  the  Italians  and

252  CHARLES  V.  [1552.

Spaniards,  unaccustomed  to  such  inclement  weather ;
great  numbers  were  disabled  from  serving,  and  many
died.  At  length  such  breaches  were  made  as  seemed
practicable,  and  Charles  resolved  to  hazard  a  general
assault,  in  spite  of  all  the  remonstrances  of  his  generals
against  the  imprudence  of  attacking  a  numerous  gar-
rison, conducted  and  animated  by  the  most  gallant  of
the  French  nobility,  with  an  army  weakened  by  dis-
eases, and  disheartened  with  ill  success.  The  duke
of  Guise,  suspecting  the  emperor's  intentions  from  the
extraordinary  movements  which  he  observed  in  the
enemy's  camp,  ordered  all  his  troops  to  their  respec-
tive posts.  They  appeared  immediately  on  the  walls,
and  behind  the  breaches,  with  such  a  determined  coun-
tenance, so  eager  for  the  combat,  and  so  well  prepared
to  give  the  assailants  a  warm  reception,  that  the  Im-
peralists,  instead  of  advancing  to  the  charge  when  the
word  of  command  was  given,  stood  motionless  in  a
timid  dejected  silence.  The  emperor  perceiving  that
he  could  not  trust  troops  whose  spirits  were  so  much
broken,  retired  abruptly  to  his  quarters,  complaining
that  he  was  now  deserted  by  his  soldiers,  who  deserved
no  longer  the  name  of  men/

Theempe-  Deeply  as  this  behaviour  of  his  troops
£tS&  mortified  and  affected  Charles,  he  would  not
of  attack.  near  of  abandoning  the  siege,  though  he  saw
the  necessity  of  changing  the  method  of  attack.  He
suspended  the  fury  of  his  batteries,  and  proposed  to
proceed  by  the  more  secure  but  tedious  method  of
sapping.  But  as  it  still  continued  to  rain  or  to  snow
almost  incessantly,  such  as  were  employed  in  this
service  endured  incredible  hardships;  and  the  duke  of
Guise,  whose  industry  was  not  inferior  to  his  valour,
discovering  all  their  mines,  counter-worked  them,  and
prevented  their  effect.  At  last  Charles  finding  it  im-
possible to  contend  any  longer  with  the  severity  of  the

'  Tbuan.  397.

1552.]  BOOK  XI.  253

season,  and  with  enemies  whom  he  could  neither  over-
power by  force,  nor  subdue  by  art,  while  at  the  same
time  a  contagious  distemper  raged  among  his  troops,
and  cut  off  daily  great  numbers  of  officers  as  well  as
soldiers,  yielded  to  the  solicitations  of  his  generals,
who  conjured  him  to  save  the  remains  of  his  army  by
a  timely  retreat:  "Fortune,"  says  he,  "I  now  per-
ceive, resembles  other  females,  and  chooses  to  confer
her  favours  on  young  men,  while  she  turns  her  back
on  those  who  are  advanced  in  years."
Dec.  26. Upon  this,  he  gave orders  immediately  to
raise^fe*0  raige  the  siege,  and  submitted  to  the  disgrace
•iege. of  abandoning  the  enterprise,  after  having  con-
tinued fifty-six  days  before  the  town,  during  which
time  he  had  lost  upwards  of  thirty  thousand  men,  who
died  of  diseases,  or  were  killed  by  the  enemy. The
duke  of  Guise,  as  soon  as  he  perceived  the  intention
of  the  Imperialists,  sent  out  several  bodies  both  of  ca-
valry and  infantry  to  infest  their  rear,  to  pick  up  strag-
glers, and  to  seize  every  opportunity  of  attacking  them
with  advantage. Such  was  the  confusion  with  which
they  made  their  retreat,  that  the  French  might  have
harassed  them  in  the  most  cruel  manner. But  when
Ruin  of  the  they  sallied  out,  a  spectacle  presented  itself
army"and to  their  view,  which  extinguished  at  once  all
of  theDlty n°stile  rage,  and  melted  them  into  tenderness
French. an(J compassion. The imperial camp was
filled  with  the  sick  and  wounded,  with  the  dead  and
the  dying.  In  all  the  different  roads  by  which  the  army
retired,  numbers  were  found,  who  having  made an
effort  to  escape  beyond  their  strength,  were  left,  when
they  could  go  no  farther,  to  perish  without  assistance.
This  they  received  from  their  enemies,  and  were  in-,
debted  to  them  for  all  the  kind  offices  which their
friends  had  not  the  power  to  perform. The  duke  of
Guise immediately  ordered  proper  refreshments  for
such  as  were  dying  of  hunger;  he  appointed  surgeons

254  CHARLES V.  [155-2,

to  attend  the  sick  and  wounded  ;  he  removed  such  as
could  bear  it  into  the  adjacent  villages;  and  those
who  would  have  suffered  by  being  carried  so  far,  he
admitted  into  the  hospitals  which  he  had  fitted  up  in
the  city  for  his  own  soldiers.  As  soon  as  they  recovered,
he  sent  them  home  under  an  escort  of  soldiers,  and
with  money  to  bear  their  charges.  By  these  acts  of
humanity,  which  were  uncommon  in  that  age,  when
war  was  carried  on  with  greater  rancour  and  ferocity
than  at  present,  the  duke  of  Guise  completed  the  fame
which  he  had  acquired  by  his  gallant  and  successful
defence  of  Metz,  and  engaged  those  whom  he  had
vanquished  to  vie  with  his  own  countrymen  in  extolling
his  name.8

Bad  sitna-  ^°  ^ese  calamities  in  Germany,  were  added
tion  of  the  such  unfortunate  events  in  Italy,  as  rendered

emperor's T.I  •• .  . i  •>

affairs  in  this  the  most  disastrous  year  in  the  emperors
life.  During  his  residence  at  Villach,  Charles
had  applied  to  Cosmo  de  Medici  for  the  loan  of  two
hundred  thousand  crowns.  But  his  credit  at  that  time
was  so  low,  that  in  order  to  obtain  this  inconsiderable
sum,  he  was  obliged  to  put  him  in  possession  of  the
principality  of  Piombino,  and  by  giving  up  that,  he
lost  the  footing  which  he  had  hitherto  maintained  in
Tuscany,  and  enabled  Cosmo  to  assume,  for  the  future,
the  tone  and  deportment  of  a  prince  altogether  inde-
pendent. Much  about  the  time  that  his  indigence
constrained  him  to  part  with  this  valuable  territory,  he
lost  Siena,  which  was  of  still  greater  consequence,
through  the  ill-conduct  of  Don  Diego  de  Mendoza.11
The  revolt  Siena,  like  most  of  the  great  cities  in  Italy,
of  Siena.  na(j  long  enjoyed  a  republican  government,  un-
der the  protection  of  the  empire;  but  being  torn  in
pieces  by  the  dissensions  between  the  nobility  and  the

«  Sleid.  575. Thuan.  lib.  xi.  389,  &c. Pere  Daniel  Hist,  de  France,  torn.  iii.
592. Perc  Daniel's  account  of  this  siege  is  taken  from  the  journal  of  the  sieur  de
Salignac,  who  was  present. Natal.  Corait.  Hist.  129.
11  Thuan.  lib.  xi.  376.

1552.]  BOOK XL  255

people,  which  divided  all  the  Italian  commonwealths,
the  faction  of  the  people,  which  gained  the  ascendant,
besought  the  emperor  to  become  the  guardian  of  the
administration  which  they  had  established,  and  admit-
ted into  their  city  a  small  body  of  Spanish  soldiers,
whom  he  had  sent  to  countenance  the  execution  of  the
laws,  and  to  preserve  tranquillity  among  them. The
command  of  these  troops  was  given  to  Mendoza,  at
that  time  ambassador  for  the  emperor  at  Rome,  who
persuaded  the  credulous  multitude,  that  it  was  neces-
sary for  their  security  against  any  future  attempt  of  the
nobles,  to  allow  him  to  build  a  citadel  in  Siena ;  and
as  he  flattered  himself  that,  by  means  of  this  fortress,
he  might  render  the  emperor  master  of  the  city,  he
pushed  on  the  works  with  all  possible  dispatch. But
he  threw  off  the  mask  too  soon. Before  the  fortifica-
tions were  completed,  he  began  to  indulge  his  natural
haughtiness  and  severity  of  temper,  and  to  treat  the  ci-
tizens with  great  insolence. At  the  same  time  the  sol-
diers in  garrison  being  paid  as  irregularly  as  the  empe-
ror's troops  usually  were,  lived  almost  at  discretion
upon  the  inhabitants,  and  were  guilty  of  many  acts  of
licence  and  oppression.

TheSien-  These  injuries  awakened  the  Sienese  to  a
ese  court  sense  of  their  danger.  As  they  saw  the  neces-
ance  of  sity  of  exerting  themselves,  while  the  unfinished
France,  fortifications  of  the  citadel  left  them  any  hopes
of  success,  they  applied  to  the  French  ambassador  at
Rome,  who  readily  promised  them  his  master's  protec-
tion and  assistance.  At  the  same  time,  forgetting  their
domestic  animosities  when  such  a  mortal  blow  was
aimed  at  the  liberty  and  existence  of  the  republic,  they
sent  agents  to  the  exiled  nobles,  and  invited  them  to
concur  with  them  in  saving  their  country  from  the  ser-
vitude with  which  it  was  threatened.  As  there  was  not
a  moment  to  lose,  measures  were  concerted  speedily,
but  with  great  prudence ;  and  were  executed  with  equal

256  CHARLES V.  [1562.

vigour.  The  citizens  rose  suddenly  in  arms  ;  the  exiles
flocked  into  the  town  from  different  parts,  with  all  their
partisans,  and  what  troops  they  could  draw  together  ;
and  several  bodies  of  mercenaries  in  the  pay  of  France
appeared  to  support  them.  The  Spaniards,  though
surprised,  and  much  inferior  in  number,  defended  them-
selves with  great  courage  ;  but  seeing  no  prospect  of
relief,  and  having  no  hopes  of  maintaining  their  station
long  in  a  half-finished  fortress,  they  soon  gave  it  up.
The  Sienese,  with  the  utmost  alacrity,  levelled  it  with
the  ground,  that  no  monument  might  remain  of  that
odious  structure,  which  had  been  raised  in-  order  to  en-
slave them.  At  the  same  time,  renouncing  all  connexion
with  the  emperor,  they  sent  ambassadors  to  thank  the
king  of  France  as  the  restorer  of  their  liberty,  and  to
entreat  that  he  would  secure  to  them  the  perpetual  en-
joyment of  that  blessing,  by  continuing  his  protection
to  their  republic.1
Descent  of  To  t^ese  misfortunes,  one  still  more  fatal  had

the  Turks  almost  succeeded. The  severe  administration

in  the

kingdom  of  Don  Pedro  de  Toledo,  viceroy  of  Naples,
s'  having  filled  that  kingdom  with  murmuring  and
disaffection,  the  prince  of  Salerno,  the  head  of  the  male-
contents,  had  fled  to  the  court  of  France,  where  all  who
bore  ill-will  to  the  emperor  or  his  ministers  were  sure
of  finding  protection  and  assistance.  That  nobleman,
in  the  usual  style  of  exiles,  boasting  much  of  the  num-
ber and  power  of  his  partisans,  and  of  his  great  influ-
ence with  them,  prevailed  on  Henry  to  think  of  invading
Naples,  from  an  expectation  of  being  joined  by  all  those
with  whom  the  prince  of  Salerno  held  correspondence,
or  who  were  dissatisfied  with  Toledo's  government.
But  though  the  first  hint  of  this  enterprise  was  sug-
gested by  the  prince  of  Salerno,  Henry  did  not  choose
that  its  success  should  entirely  depend  upon  his  being

1  Pecci  Meniorie  de  Siena,  vol.  iii.  p.  230.  261. Thuan.  375.  377,  &c. Paruta,
Hist  Venet.  267. Mem.  de  Ribior,  424,  &c.

1552.]  BOOK XI.  257

able  to  fulfil  the  promises  which  he  had  made.  He  ap-
plied for  aid  to  Solyman,  whom  he  courted,  after  his
father's  example,  as  his  most  vigorous  auxiliary  against
the  emperor,  and  solicited  him  to  second  his  operations,
by  sending  a  powerful  fleet  into  the  Mediterranean.
It  was  not  difficult  to  obtain  what  he  requested  of  the
sultan,  who,  at  this  time,  was  highly  incensed  against
the  house  of  Austria  on  account  of  the  proceedings  in
Hungary.  He  ordered  a  hundred  and  fifty  ships  to
be  equipped,  that  they  might  sail  towards  the  coast
of  Naples,  at  whatever  time  Henry  should  name,
and  might  co-operate  with  the  French  troops  in  their
attempts  upon  that  kingdom.  The  command  of  this
fleet  was  given  to  the  corsair  Dragut,  an  officer  trained
up  under  Barbarossa,  and  scarcely  inferior  to  his  master
in  courage,  in  talents,  or  in  good  fortune.  He  appeared
on  the  coast  of  Calabria  at  the  time  which  had  been
agreed  on,  landed  at  several  places,  plundered  and
burnt  several  villages  ;  and,  at  last,  casting  anchor  in
the  bay  of  Naples,  filled  that  city  with  consternation.
But  as  the  French  fleet,  detained  by  some  accident,
which  the  contemporary  historians  have  not  explained,
did  not  join  the  Turks  according  to  concert,  they,  after
waiting  twenty  days,  without  hearing  any  tidings  of  it,
set  sail  for  Constantinople,  and  thus  delivered  the  vice-
roy of  Naples  from  the  terror  of  an  invasion  which  he
was  not  in  a  condition  to  have  resisted.15

1553 As  the  French  had  never  given  so  severe  a
The  em- check  to  the  emperor  in  any  former  campaign,
they  expressed  immoderate  joy  at  the  success  of

thetestaTelth  t^eir  arms'  Charles  himself,  accustomed  to  a
of  his  af-  long  series  of  prosperity,  felt  the  calamity  most
sensibly,  and  retired  from  Metz  into  the  Low
Countries,  much  dejected  with  the  cruel  reverse  of  for-
tune which  affected  him  in  his  declining  age,  when  the
violence  of  the  gout  had  increased  to  such  a  pitch,  as.

k  Thuan.  375.  380. Mera.  de  Ribier,  ii.  403. Gianone.
VOL.  V.  S

258  CHARLES  V.  [1553.

entirely  broke  the  vigour  of  his  constitution,  and  ren-
dered him  peevish,  difficult  of  access,  and  often  inca-
pable of  applying  to  business. But  whenever  he  en-
joyed any  interval  of  ease,  all  his  thoughts  were  bent  on
revenge ;  and  he  deliberated,  with  the  greatest  solici-
tude, concerning  the  most  proper  means  of  annoying
France,  and  of  effacing  the  stain  which  had  obscured
the  reputation  and  glory  of  his  arms. All  the  schemes
concerning  Germany,  which  had  engrossed  him  so  long,
being  disconcerted  by  the  peace  of  Passau,  the  affairs
of  the  empire  became  only  secondary  objects  of  atten-
tion; and  enmity  to  France  was  the  predominant  pas-
sion which  chiefly  occupied  his  mind.
The  vio- The  turbulent  ambition  of  Albert  of  Bran-
denburg  excited  violent commotions,  which
disturDed  the  empire  during  this  year. That
prince's  troops,  having  shared  in  the  calamities
of  the  siege  of  Metz,  were  greatly  reduced  in  number.
But  the  emperor,  prompted  by  gratitude  for  his  distin-
guished services  on  that  occasion,  or,  perhaps,  with  a
secret  view  of  fomenting  divisions  among  the  princes
of  the  empire,  having  paid  up  all  the  money  due  to  him,
he  was  enabled,  with  that  sum,  to  hire  so  many  of  the
soldiers  dismissed  from  the  imperial  army,  that  he  was
soon  at  the  head  of  a  body  of  men  as  numerous  as  ever.
The  bishops  of  Bamberg  and  Wurtzburg  having  soli-
cited the  imperial  chamber  to  annul,  by  its  authority,
the  iniquitous  conditions  which  Albert  had  compelled
them  to  sign,  that  court  unanimously  found  all  their  en-
gagements with  him  to  be  void  in  their  own  nature,  be-
cause they  had  been  extorted  by  force;  enjoined  Albert
to  renounce  all  claim  to  the  performance  of  them ;  and
if  he  should  persist  in  such  an  unjust  demand,  exhorted
all  the  princes  of  the  empire  to  take  arms  against  him
as  a  disturber  of  the  public  tranquillity. To  this  deci-
sion, Albert  opposed  the  confirmation  of  his  transac-
tions with  the  two  prelates,  which  the  emperor  had

1553.]  BOOK XI.  259

granted  him  as  the  reward  of  his  having  joined  the  im-
perial army  at  Metz  ;  and,  in  order  to  intimidate  his
antagonists,  as  well  as  to  convince  them  of  his  resolu-
tion not  to  relinquish  his  pretensions,  he  put  his  troops
in  motion,  tha.t  he  might  secure  the  territory  in  question.
Various  endeavours  were  employed,  and  many  expe-
dients proposed,  in  order  to  prevent  the  kindling  of  a
new  war  in  Germany.  But  the  same  warmth  of  temper
which  rendered  Albert  turbulent  and  enterprising,  in-
spiring him  with  the  most  sanguine  hopes  of  success,
even  in  his  wildest  undertakings,  he  disdainfully  re-
jected all  reasonable  overtures  of  accommodation.

Upon  this,  the  imperial  chamber  issued  its

He  is  con-  *

decree  against  him,  and  required  the  elector

imperial  of  Saxony,  together  with  several  other  princes
chamber.  mentione(j  by  name,  to  take  arms  in  order  to
carry  it  into  execution.  Maurice,  and  those  associated
with  him,  were  not  unwilling  to  undertake  this  service.
They  were  extremely  solicitous  to  maintain  public  order
by  supporting  the  authority  of  the  imperial  chamber,
and  saw  the  necessity  of  giving  a  timely  check  to  the
usurpations  of  an  ambitious  prince,  who  had  no  prin-
ciple of  action  but  regard  to  his  own  interest,  and  no
motive  to  direct  him  but  the  impulse  of  ungovernable
passions.  They  had  good  reason  to  suspect,  that  the
emperor  encouraged  Albert  in  his  extravagant  and  irre-
gular proceedings,  and  secretly  afforded  him  assistance,
that,  by  raising  him  up  to  rival  Maurice  in  power,  he
might,  in  any  future  broil,  make  use  of  his  assistance
to  counterbalance  and  control  the  authority  which  the
other  had  acquired  in  the  empire.1
April  2.  These  considerations  united  the  most  power-
deracnfe  ^  Princes  m  Germany  in  a  league  against  Al-
formed  bert,  of  which  Maurice  was  declared  Generalis-
him,  of  simo.  This  formidable  confederacy,  however,

1  Sleid.  585. Mem.  de  Ribier,  ii. 442. Arnoldi  Vita  Maurit.  ap.  Menken,
ii.  1242.

s2

260  CHARLES V.  [1553,

which wrought  no  change  in  Albert's  sentiments  ;  but

Maurice  °  °

was  head,  as  he  knew  that  he  could  not  resist  so  many
princes,  if  he  should  allow  them  time  to  assemble  their
forces,  he  endeavoured,  by  his  activity,  to  deprive  them
of  all  the  advantages  which  they  might  derive  from
their  united  power  and  numbers ;  and,  for  that  reason,
marched  directly  against  Maurice,  the  enemy  whom  he
dreaded  most.  It  was  happy  for  the  allies  that  the
conduct  of  their  affairs  was  committed  to  a  prince  of
such  abilities.  He,  by  his  authority  and  example,  had
inspired  them  with  vigour ;  and  having  carried  on  their
preparations  with  a  degree  of  rapidity  of  which  confe-
derate bodies  are  seldom  capable,  he  was  in  a  condi-
tion to  face  Albert  before  he  could  make  any  consider-
able progress.

He  attacks  Their  armies,  which  were  nearly  equal  in
Albert  number,  each  consisting  of  twenty-four  thou-
sand men,  met  at  Sieverhausen,  in  the  duchy  of  Lunen-
burg;  and  the  violent  animosity  against  each  other
which  possessed  the  two  leaders,  did  not  suffer  them
to  continue  long  inactive.  The  troops,  inflamed  with
the  same  hostile  rage,  marched  fiercely  to  the
combat;  they  fought  with  the  greatest  obsti-
nacy; and  as  both  generals  were  capable  of  availing
themselves  of  every  favourable  occurrence,  the  battle
remained  long  doubtful,  each  gaining  ground  upon
Anddefeats  the  other  alternately.  At  last  victory  declared
is  army  .•  for  Maurice,  who  was  superior  in  cavalry,  and
Albert's  army  fled  in  confusion,  leaving  four  thousand
dead  in  the  field,  and  their  camp,  baggage,  and  artil-
lery, in  the  hands  of  the  conquerors.  The  allies  bought
their  victory  dear,  their  best  troops  suffered  greatly,  two
sons  of  the  duke  of  Brunswick,  a  duke  of  Lunenburg,
and  many  other  persons  of  distinction,  were  among
the  number  of  the  slain.™  But  all  these  were  soon

m  Historia  Pugns  infelicis  inter  Maurit.  et  Albert.  Thorn.  Wintzero  auctore
aputi  Scard.  ii.  559.  Sleid.  583.  Ruscelli  Epistres  aux  Princes,  154.  Arnoldi
Vita  Maurit.  1245.

1553.]  BOOK XI.  261

But  is  kill- forgotten;  for  Maurice  himself,  as  he  led  up  to
battle. a  second  charge  a  body  of  horse  which  had  been
broken,  received  a  wound  with  a  pistol-bullet  in  the
belly,  of  which  he  died  two  days  after  the  battle,  in
the  thirty-second  year  of  his  age,  and  in  the  sixth  after
his  attaining  the  electoral  dignity.
His  cha- Of  all  the  personages  who  have  appeared  in
racter. ^  njstoly  of  this  active  age,  when  great  occur-
rences and  sudden  revolutions  called  forth  extraordi-
nary talents  to  view,  and  afforded  them  full  opportunity
to  display  themselves,  Maurice  may  justly  be  considered
as  the  most  remarkable.  If  his  exorbitant  ambition,  his
profound  dissimulation,  and  his  unwarrantable  usurpa-
tion of  his  kinsman's  honours  and  dominions,  exclude
him  from  being  praised  as  a  virtuous  man ;  his  prudence
in  concerting  his  measures,  his  vigour  in  executing
them,  and  the  uniform  success  with  which  they  were
attended,  entitle  him  to  the  appellation  of  a  great  prince.
At  an  age  when  impetuosity  of  spirit  commonly  predo-
minates over  political  wisdom,  when  the  highest  effort
even  of  a  genius  of  the  first  order  is  to  fix  on  a  bold
scheme,  and  to  execute  it  with  promptitude  and  cou-
rage, he  formed  and  conducted  an  intricate  plan  of  po-
licy, which  deceived  the  most  artful  monarch  in  Eu-
rope. At  the  very  juncture  when  the  emperor  had  at-
tained to  almost  unlimited  despotism,  Maurice,  with
power  seemingly  inadequate  to  such  an  undertaking,
compelled  him  to  relinquish  all  his  usurpations,  and
established  not  only  the  religious  but  civil  liberties  of
Germany  on  such  foundations  as  have  hitherto  remained
unshaken.  Although,  at  one  period  of  his  life,  his  con-
duct excited  the  jealousy  of  the  Protestants,  and  at  ano-
ther drew  on  him  the  resentment  of  the  Roman  Catho-
lics, such  was  his  masterly  address,  that  he  was  the  only
prince  of  the  age  who,  in  any  degree,  possessed  the  con-
fidence of  both,  and  whom  both  lamented  as  the  most

262  CHARLES V.  [1553.

able  as  well  as  faithful  guardian  of  the  constitution  and
laws  of  his  country.

\ibert  The  consternation  which  Maurice's  death  oc-
continues  casioned  among  his  troops,  prevented  them  from

the  war.  ,  .  ,  .  ,, , .

making  the  proper  improvement  01  the  victory
which  they  had  gained.  Albert,  whose  active  courage
and  profuse  liberality  rendered  him  the  darling  of  such
military  adventurers  as  were  little  solicitous  about  the
justice  of  his  cause,  soon  re-assembled  his  broken  forces,
and  made  fresh  levies  with  such  success,  that  he  was
quickly  at  the  head  of  fifteen  thousand  men,  and  re-
newed his  depredations  with  additional  fury.  But
Henry  of  Brunswick,  having  taken  the  command  of  the
allied  troops,  defeated  him  in  a  second  battle,  scarcely

less  bloody  than  the  former.  Even  then  his
Sept.  12.  r

courage  did  not  sink,  nor  were  his  resources

exhausted.  He  made  several  efforts,  and  some  of  them
very  vigorous,  to  retrieve  his  affairs :  but  being  laid
under  the  ban  of  the  empire  by  the  imperial  chamber ;
being  driven  by  degrees  out  of  all  his  hereditary  terri-
tories, as  well  as  those  which  he  had  usurped ;  being
forsaken  by  many  of  his  officers,  and  overpowered  by
the  number  of  his  enemies,  he  fled  for  refuge  into  France.
Heisdri-  After  having  been,  for  a  considerable  time,  the
venootof  terror  and  scourge  of  Germany,  he  lingered  out

Germany.  .  . ,.  : ,

some  years  in  an  indigent  and  dependant  state
of  exile,  the  miseries  of  which  his  restless  and  arrogant
Jan.  12,  spirit  endured  with  the  most  indignant  impa-
l57'  tience.  Upon  his  death  without  issue,  his  ter-
ritories, which  had  been  seized  by  the  princes  who  took
arms  against  him,  were  restored,  by  a  decree  of  the  em-
peror, to  his  collateral  heirs  of  the  house  of  Branden-
burg."

Maurice's  Maurice  having  left  only  one  daughter,  who
Augustus  was  afterward  married  to  William  prince  of

»  Sleid.  592.  594.  599. Struv.  Corp.  Hist.  Germ.  10T5.

1553.]  BOOK  XL

succeeds  Orange,  by  whom  she  had  a  son  who  bore  his
electoral'16  grandfather's  name,  and  inherited  the  great  ta-
digmty.  lents  for  which  he  was  conspicuous,  a  violent
dispute  arose  concerning  the  succession  to  his  honours
and  territories.  John  Frederic,  the  degraded  elector,
claimed  the  electoral  dignity,  and  that  part  of  his  pa-
trimonial estate,  of  which  he  had  been  violently  strip-
ped after  the  Smalkaldic  war.  Augustus,  Maurice's
only  brother,  pleaded  his  right  not  only  to  the  heredi-
tary possessions  of  their  family,  but  to  the  electoral
dignity,  and  to  the  territories  which  Maurice  had  ac-
quired. As  Augustus  was  a  prince  of  considerable
abilities,  as  well  as  of  great  candour  and  gentleness  of
manners,  the  states  of  Saxony,  forgetting  the  merits
and  sufferings  of  their  former  master,  declared  warmly
in  his  favour.  His  pretensions  were  powerfully  sup-
ported by  the  king  of  Denmark,  whose  daughter  he
had  married,  and  zealously  espoused  by  the  king  of
the  Romans,  out  of  regard  to  Maurice's  memory.  The
degraded  elector,  though  secretly  favoured  by  his  an-
cient enemy  the  emperor,  was  at  last  obliged  to  relin-
quish his  claim,  upon  obtaining  a  small  addition  to  the
territories  which  had  been  allotted  to  him,  together
with  a  stipulation,  securing  to  his  family  the  eventual
succession,  upon  a  failure  of  male  heirs  in  the  Albertine
line.  That  unfortunate  but  magnanimous  prince  died
next  year,  soon  after  ratifying  this  treaty  of  agreement;
and  the  electoral  dignity  is  still  possessed  by  the  de-
scendants of  Augustus.0

Hostilities  During  these  transactions  in  Germany,  war
in  the  LOW  was  carried  on  in  the  Low  Countries  with  con-

Coun  tries. .j ,r .  m-,

siderable  vigour.  1  he  emperor,  impatient  to
efface  the  stain  which  his  ignominious  repulse  at  Metz
left  upon  his  military  reputation,  had  an  army  early  in
the  field,  and  laid  siege  to  Terouane.  Though  the
town  was  of  such  importance,  that  Francis  used  to  call

°Sleid.  587. T huau.  409. StniT.  Corp.  Hist.  Germ.

264  CHARLES V.  [1553.

it  one  of  the  two  pillows  on  which  a  king  of  France
might  sleep  with  security,  the  fortifications  were  in  bad
repair ;  Henry,  trusting  to  what  had  happened  at  Metz,
thought  nothing  more  was  necessary  to  render  all  the
efforts  of  the  enemy  abortive,  than  to  reinforce  the  garri-
son with  a  considerable  number  of  the  young  nobility.
But  D'Esse,  a  veteran  officer  who  commanded  them,
being  killed,  and  the  Imperialists  pushing  the  siege  with
great  vigour  and  perseverance,  the  place  was  taken  by
assault.  That  it  might  not  fall  again  into  the
hands  of  the  French,  Charles  ordered  not  only
the  fortifications  but  the  town  itself  to  be  rased,  and  the
inhabitants  to  be  dispersed  in  the  adjacent  cities.  Elated
with  this  success,  the  Imperialists  immediately  invested
Hesden,  which,  though  defended  with  great  bravery,
was  likewise  taken  by  assault,  and  such  of  the  garrison
as  escaped  the  sword  were  made  prisoners.  The  em-
peror intrusted  the  conduct  of  this  siege  to  Emanuel
Philibert  of  Savoy,  prince  of  Piedmont,  who,  on  that
occasion,  gave  the  first  display  of  those  great  talents
for  military  command,  which  soon  entitled  him  to  be
ranked  among  the  first  generals  of  the  age,  and  facili-
tated his  re-establishment  in  his  hereditary  dominions,
the  greater  part  of  which,  having  been  overrun  by
Francis  in  his  expeditions  into  Italy,  were  still  retained
by  Henry .p

The  pro-  The  loss  of  these  towns,  together  with  so
fraSerfLthe  manv  Persons  of  distinction,  either  killed  or
istsdis-  taken  by  the  enemy,  was  no  inconsiderable
French  *  calamity  to  France,  and  Henry  felt  it  very
sensibly ;  but  he  was  still  more  mortified  at
the  emperor's  having  recovered  his  wonted  superiority
in  the  field  so  soon  after  the  blow  at  Metz,  which  the
French  had  represented  as  fatal  to  his  power.  He  was
ashamed,  too,  of  his  own  remissness  and  excessive  se-
curity at  the  opening  of  the  campaign;  and  in  order  to

f  Thuan.  411. Haraei  Annaics  Brabant.  669.

1553.]  BOOK  XI.  265

repair  that  error,  he  assembled  a  numerous  army,  and
led  it  into  the  Low  Countries.

Roused  at  the  approach  of  such  a  formidable  enemy,
Charles  left  Brussels,  where  he  had  been  shut  up  so
closely  during  seven  months,  that  it  came  to  be  be-
lieved in  many  parts  of  Europe  that  he  was  dead ;  and
though  he  was  so  much  debilitated  by  the  gout  that
he  could  hardly  bear  the  motion  of  a  litter,  he  hastened
to  join  his  army.  The  eyes  of  all  Europe  were  turned
with  expectation  towards  those  mighty  and  exasperated
rivals,  between  whom  a  decisive  battle  was  now  thought
unavoidable.  But  Charles  having  prudently  declined
to  hazard  a  general  engagement,  and  the  violence  of
the  autumnal  rains  rendering  it  impossible  for  the
French  to  undertake  any  siege,  they  retired,  without
having  performed  any  thing  suitable  to  the  great  pre-
parations which  they  had  made.q  *
The  irape-  The  imperial  arms  were  not  attended  with  the
successful"  same  success  in  Italy.  The  narrowness  of  the
m  Italy,  emperor's  finances  seldom  allowed  him  to  act
with  vigour  in  two  different  places  at  the  same  time ;
and  having  exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  in  order  to
make  a  great  effort  in  the  Low  Countries,  his  opera-
tions on  the  other  side  of  the  Alps  were  proportionally
feeble.  The  viceroy  of  Naples,  in  conjunction  with
Cosmo  de  Medici,  who  was  greatly  alarmed  at  the  in-
troduction of  French  troops  into  Siena,  endeavoured  to
become  master  of  that  city.  But,  instead  of  reducing
the  Sienese,  the  Imperialists  were  obliged  to  retire  ab-
ruptly, in  order  to  defend  their  own  country,  upon  the
appearance  of  the  Turkish  fleet,  which  threatened  the
coast  of  Naples ;  and  the  French  not  only  established
themselves  more  firmly  in  Tuscany,  but,  by  the  assist-
ance of  the  Turks,  conquered  a  great  part  of  the  island
of  Corsica,  subject  at  that  time  to  the  Genoese/

i  Harseus,  672. Thuan.  414.  r  Thuan.  417.

266  CHARLES  V.  [1553.

And  in  The  affairs  of  the  house  of  Austria  declined
Hungary.  no  jess  jn  Hungary  during  the  course  of  this
year.  As  the  troops  which  Ferdinand  kept  in  Tran-
sylvania received  their  pay  very  irregularly,  they  lived
almost  at  discretion  upon  the  inhabitants ;  and  their
insolence  and  rapaciousness  greatly  disgusted  all  ranks
of  men,  and  alienated  them  from  their  new  sovereign,
who,  instead  of  protecting,  plundered  his  subjects.
Their  indignation  at  this,  added  to  their  desire  of  re-
venging Martinuzzi's  death,  wrought  so  much  upon
a  turbulent  nobility  impatient  of  injury,  and  upon  a
fierce  people  prone  to  change,  that  they  were  ripe  for
a  revolt.  At  that  very  juncture,  their  late  queen  Isa-
bella, together  with  her  son,  appeared  in  Transylvania.
Her  ambitious  mind  could  not  bear  the  solitude  and  in-
activity of  a  private  life ;  and  repenting  quickly  of  the
cession  which  she  had  made  of  the  crown  in  the  year
1551,  she  left  the  place  of  her  retreat,  hoping  that  the
dissatisfaction  of  the  Hungarians  with  the  Austrian
government  would  prompt  them  once  more  to  recog-
nise her  son's  right  to  the  crown.  Some  noblemen  of
great  eminence  declared  immediately  in  his  favour.
The  bashaw  of  Belgrade,  by  Solyman's  order,  espoused
his  cause,  in  opposition  to  Ferdinand ;  the  Spanish  and
German  soldiers,  instead  of  advancing  against  the  ene-
my, mutinied  for  want  of  pay,  declaring  that  they  would
march  back  to  Vienna ;  so  that  Castaldo,  their  general,
Ferdinand  was  obliged  to  abandon  Transylvania  to  Isa-
obiiged  to  bella  and  the  Turks,  and  to  place  himself  at

abandon  i /• i  .  i •» '  "i  •

Trausyi- the  head  01  the  mutineers,  that  by  his  autho-
rity he  might  restrain  them  from  plundering
the  Austrian  territories  through  which  they  passed.5

Ferdinand's  attention  was  turned  so  entirely

Solyman  s  *

domestic towards  the  affairs  of  Germany,  and  his  trea-
sures so  much  exhausted  by  his  late  efforts  in

•  Thuao.  430.

1553.]  BOOK  XI.  267

Hungary,  that  he  made  no  attempt  to  recover  this  va-
luable province,  although  a  favourable  opportunity  for
that  purpose  presented  itself,  as  Solyman  was  then  en-
gaged in  war  with  Persia,  and  involved  besides  in  do-
mestic calamities  which  engrossed  and  disturbed  his
mind.  Solyman,  though  distinguished  by  many  ac-
complishments from  the  other  Ottoman  princes,  had
all  the  passions  peculiar  to  that  violent  and  haughty
race.  He  was  jealous  of  his  authority,  sudden  as"  well
as  furious  in  his  anger,  and  susceptible  of  all  that  rage
and  love  which  reigns  in  the  East,  and  often  produces
The  tragi-  the  wildest  and  most  tragical  effects.  His  fa-
cai  history  vourite  mistress  was  a  Circassian  slave  of  ex-

of  his  son

Mustapha.  quisite  beauty,  who  bore  him  a  son  called
Mustapha,  whom,  both  on  account  of  his  birthright
and  his  merit,  he  destined  to  be  the  heir  of  his  crown.
Roxalana,  a  Russian  captive,  soon  supplanted  the  Cir-
cassian, and  gained  the  sultan's  heart.  Having  the
address  to  retain  the  conquest  which  she  had  made,
she  kept  possession  of  his  love  without  any  rival  for
many  years,  during  which  she  brought  him  several
sons  and  one  daughter.  All  the  happiness,  however,
which  she  derived  from  the  unbounded  sway  that  she
had  acquired  over  a  monarch  whom  one  half  of  the
world  revered  or  dreaded,  was  imbittered  by  perpetual
reflections  on  Mustapha's  accession  to  the  throne,  and
the  certain  death  of  her  sons,  who,  she  foresaw,  would
be  immediately  sacrificed,  according  to  the  barbarous
jealousy  of  the  Turkish  policy,  to  the  safety  of  the  new
emperor.  By  dwelling  continually  on  this  melancholy
idea,  she  came  gradually  to  view  Mustapha  as  the
enemy  of  her  children,  and  to  hate  him  with  more  than
a  step-mother's  ill-will.  This  prompted  her  to  wish
his  destruction,  in  order  to  secure  for  one  of  her  own
sons  the  throne  which  was  destined  for  him.  Nor  did
she  want  either  ambition  to  attempt  such  a  high  enter-
prise, or  the  arts  requisite  for  carrying  it  into  execu-

268  CHARLES V.  [1553.

tion.  Having  prevailed  on  the  sultan  to  give  her  only
daughter  in  marriage  to  Rustan,  the  grand  vizier,  she
disclosed  her  scheme  to  that  crafty  minister,  who  per-
ceiving that  it  was  his  own  interest  to  co-operate  with
her,  readily  promised  his  assistance  towards  aggran-
dizing that  branch  of  the  royal  line  to  which  he  was
so  nearly  allied.

As  soon  as  Roxalana  had  concerted  her  measures
with  this  able  confidant,  she  began  to  affect  a  wonder-
ful zeal  for  the  Mahometan  religion,  to  which  Solyman
was  superstitiously  attached,  and  proposed  to  found
and  endow  a  royal  mosque,  a  work  of  great  expense,
but  deemed  by  the  Turks  meritorious  in  the  highest
degree.  The  mufti  whom  she  consulted,  approved
much  of  her  pious  intention;  but  having  been  gained
and  instructed  by  Rustan,  told  her,  that  she  being  a
slave,  could  derive  no  benefit  herself  from  that  holy
deed,  for  all  the  merit  of  it  would  accrue  to  Solyman,
the  master  whose  property  she  was.  Upon  this  she
seemed  to  be  overwhelmed  with  sorrow,  and  to  sink
into  the  deepest  melancholy,  as  if  she  had  been  dis-
gusted with  life  and  all  its  enjoyments.  Solyman,  who
was  absent  with  the  army,  being  informed  of  this  dejec-
tion of  mind,  and  of  the  cause  from  which  it  proceeded,
discovered  all  the  solicitude  of  a  lover  to  remove  it,  and
by  a  writing  under  his  hand  declared  her  a  free  woman.
Roxalana  having  gained  this  point,  proceeded  to  build
the  mosque,  and  re-assumed  her  usual  gaiety  of  spirit.
But  when  Solyman,  on  his  return  to  Constantinople,
sent  a  eunuch,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  seraglio,
to  bring  her  to  partake  of  his  bed,  she,  seemingly  with
deep  regret,  but  in  the  most  peremptory  manner,  de-
clined to  follow  the  eunuch,  declaring  that  what  had
been  an  honour  to  her  while  a  slave,  became  a  crime
as  she  was  now  a  free  woman,  and  that  she  would  not
involve  either  the  sultan  or  herself  in  the  guilt  that  must
be  contracted  by  such  an  open  violation  of  the  law  of

1553.]  BOOK  XL  209

their  prophet.  Solyman,  whose  passion  this  difficulty,
as  well  as  the  affected  delicacy  which  gave  rise  to  it,
heightened  and  inflamed,  had  recourse  immediately  to
the  mufti  for  his  direction.  He  replied,  agreeably  to
the  Koran,  that  Roxalana's  scruples  were  well  founded ;
but  added,  artfully,  in  words  which  Rustan  had  taught
him  to  use,  that  it  was  in  the  sultan's  power  to  remove
these  difficulties,  by  espousing  her  as  his  lawful  wife.
The  amorous  monarch  closed  eagerly  with  the  proposal,
and  solemnly  married  her,  according  to  the  form  of  the
Mahometan  ritual ;  though,  by  so  doing,  he  disregarded
a  maxim  of  policy  which  the  pride  of  the  Ottoman  blood
had  taught  all  the  sultans  since  Bajazet  I.  to  consider
as  inviolable.  From  this  time  none  of  the  Turkish  mo-
narchs  had  married,  because,  when  he  was  vanquished
and  taken  prisoner  by  Tamerlane,  his  wife  had  been
abused  with  barbarous  insolence  by  the  Tartars.  That
no  similar  calamity  might  again  subject  the  Ottoman  fa-
mily to  the  same  disgrace,  the  sultans  admitted  none  to
their  beds  but  slaves,  whose  dishonour  could  not  bring
any  such  stain  upon  their  house.

But  the  more  uncommon  the  step  was,  the  more  it
convinced  Roxalana  of  the  unbounded  influence  which
she  had  acquired  over  the  sultan's  heart;  andimbolden-
ed  her  to  prosecute,  with  greater  hope  of  success,  the
scheme  that  she  had  formed  in  order  to  destroy  Mus-
tapha.  This  young  prince  having  been  intrusted  by
his  father,  according  to  the  practice  of  the  sultans  in
that  age,  with  the  government  of  several  different  pro-
vinces, was  at  that  time  invested  with  the  administra-
tion in  Diarbequir,  the  ancient  Mesopotamia,  which  So-
lyman had  wrested  from  the  Persians,  and  added  to  his
empire.  In  all  these  different  commands,  Mustapha
had  conducted  himself  with  such  cautious  prudence  as
could  give  no  offence  to  his  father,  though,  at  the  same
time,  he  governed  with  so  much  moderation  as  well  as
justice,  and  displayed  such  valour  and  generosity,  as

270  CHARLES V.  [1553.

rendered  him  equally  the  favourite  of  the  people  and
the  darling  of  the  soldiery.

There  was  no  room  to  lay  any  folly  or  vice  to  his
charge,  that  could  impair  the  high  opinion  which  his
father  entertained  of  him. Roxalana's  malevolence  was
more  refined ;  she  turned  his  virtues  against  him,  and
made  use  of  these  as  engines  for  his  destruction. She
often  mentioned  in  Solyman's  presence,  the  splendid
qualities  of  his  son  ;  she  celebrated  his  courage,  his  li-
beiality,  his  popular  arts,  with  malicious  and  exagge-
rated praise. As  soon  as  she  perceived  that  the  sultan
heard  these  encomiums,  which  were  often  repeated,  with
uneasiness ;  that  suspicion  of  his  son  began  to  mingle
itself  with  his  former  esteem ;  and  that  by  degrees  he
came  to  view  him  with  jealousy  and  fear ;  she  intro-
duced, as  by  accident,  some  discourse  concerning  the
rebellion  of  his  father  Selim  against  Bajazet  his  grand-
father :  she  took  notice  of  the  bravery  of  the  veteran
troops  under  Mustapha's  command,  and  of  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Diarbequir  to  the  territories  of  the  Persian
Sophi,  Solyman's  mortal  enemy. By  these  arts,  what-
ever remained  of  paternal  tenderness  was  gradually  ex-
tinguished, and  such  passions  were  kindled  in  the  breast
of  the  sultan,  as  gave  all  Roxalana's  malignant  sugges-
tions the  colour  not  only  of  probability  but  of  truth.
His  suspicions  and  fear  of  Mustapha  settled  into  deep-
rooted  hatred. He  appointed  spies  to  observe  and  re-
port all  his  words  and  actions  ;  he  watched  and  stood
on  his  guard  against  him  as  his  most  dangerous  enemy.
Having  thus  alienated  the  sultan's  heart  from  Mus-
tapha, Roxalana  ventured  upon  another  step. She  en-
treated Solyman  to  allow  her  own  sons  the  liberty  of  ap-
pearing at  court,  hoping  that,  by  gaining  access  to  their
father,  they  might,  by  their  good  qualities,  and  dutiful  de-
portment, insinuate  themselves  into  that  place  in  his  af-
fections which  Mustapha  had  formerly  held ;  and,  though
what  she  demanded  was  contrary  to  the  practice  of  the

1553.]  BOOK  XI.  271

Ottoman  family  in  that  age,  the  uxorious  monarch  granted
her  request.  To  all  these  female  intrigues  Rustan  added
an  artifice  still  more  subtle,  which  completed  the  sultan's
delusion,  and  heightened  his  jealousy  and  fear. He
wrote  to  the  bashaws  of  the  provinces  adjacent  to  Diar-
bequir,  instructing  them  to  send  him  regular  intelli-
gence of  Mustapha's  proceedings  in  his  government,
and  to  each  of  them  he  gave  a  private  hint,  flowing  in
appearance  from  his  zeal  for  their  interest,  that  nothing
would  be  more  acceptable  to  the  sultan  than  to  receive
favourable  accounts  of  a  son  whom  he  destined  to
sustain  the  glory  of  the  Ottoman  name. The  bashaws,
ignorant  of  his  fraudulent  intention,  and  eager  to  pay
court  to  their  sovereign  at  such  an  easy  price,  filled
their  letters  with  studied  but  fatal  panegyrics  of  Mus-
tapha,  representing  him  as  a  prince  worthy  to  succeed
such  an  illustrious  father,  and  as  endowed  with  talents
which  might  enable  him  to  emulate,  perhaps  to  equal,
his  fame. These  letters  were  industriously  shewn  to
Solyman,  at  the  seasons  when  it  was  known  that  they
would  make  the  deepest  impression. Every  expres-
sion in  recommendation  of  his  own  son  wounded  him
to  the  heart; he  suspected  his  principal  officers  of
being  ready  to  favour  the  most  desperate  attempts  of
a  prince  whom  they  were  so  fond  of  praising;  and
fancying that  he  saw  them already assaulting his
throne  with  rebellious  arms,  he  determined,  while  it
was  yet  in  his  power,  to  anticipate  the  blow,  and  to
secure  his  own  safety  by  his  son's  death.

For  this  purpose,  though  under  pretence  of  renew-
ing the  war  against  Persia,  he  ordered  Rustan  to
march  towards  Diarbequir  at  the  head  of  a  numerous
army,  and  to  rid  him  of  a  son  whose  life  he  deemed
inconsistent  with  his  own  safety.  But  that  crafty  mi-
nister did  not  choose  to  be  loaded  with  the  odium  of
having  executed  this  crtfel  order.  As  soon  as  he  ar-
rived in  Syria,  he  wrote  to  Solyman,  that  the  danger

272  CHARLES V.  [1553.

was  so  imminent,  as  called  for  his  immediate  presence ;
that  the  camp  was  full  of  Mustapha's  emissaries  ;  and
that  many  of  the  soldiers  were  corrupted ;  that  the
affections  of  all  leaned  towards  him ;  that  he  had  dis-
covered a  negotiation  which  had  been  carried  on  with
the  sophi  of  Persia  in  order  to  marry  Mustapha  with
one  of  his  daughters ;  that  he  had  already  felt  his  own
talents  as  well  as  authority  to  be  inadequate  to  the
exigencies  of  such  an  arduous  conjuncture ;  that  the
sultan  alone  had  sagacity  to  discern  what  resolution
should  be  taken  in  those  circumstances,  and  power  to
carry  that  resolution  into  execution.

This  charge  of  courting  the  friendship  of  the  sophi,
Roxalana  and  Rustan  had  reserved  as  the  last  and  most
envenomed  of  all  their  calumnies.  It  operated  with
the  violence  which  they  expected  from  Solyman's  in-
veterate abhorrence  of  the  Persians,  and  threw  him
into  the  wildest  transports  of  rage.  He  set  out  in-
stantly for  Syria,  and  hastened  thither  with  all  the
precipitation  and  impatience  of  fear  and  revenge.  As
soon  as  he  joined  his  army  near  Aleppo,  and  had  con-
certed measures  with  Rustan,  he  sent  a  chiaus,  or  mes-
senger of  the  court,  to  his  son,  requiring  him  to  repair
immediately  to  his  presence.  Mustapha,  though  no
stranger  to  his  step-mother's  machinations,  or  to  Rus-
tan's  malice,  or  to  his  father's  violent  temper,  yet,  re-
lying on  his  own  innocence,  and  hoping  to  discredit
the  accusations  of  his  enemies  by  the  promptitude  of
his  obedience,  followed  the  messenger  without  delay
to  Aleppo.  The  moment  he  arrived  in  the  camp,  he
was  introduced  into  the  sultan's  tent.  As  he  entered
it,  he  observed  nothing  that  could  give  him  any  alarm ;
no  additional  crowd  of  attendants,  no  body  of  armed
guards,  but  the  same  order  and  silence  which  always
reign  in  the  sultan's  apartments.  In  a  few  minutes,
however,  several  mutes  appeared,  at  the  sight  of  whom
Mustapha,  knowing  what  was  his  doom,  cried  with  a

1553.]  BOOK  XI.  273

loud  voice,  "  Lo,  my  death  !"  and  attempted  to  fly.
The  mutes  rushed  forward  to  seize  him ;  he  resisted
and  struggled,  demanding  with  the  utmost  earnestness
to  see  the  sultan ;  and  despair,  together  with  the  hope
of  finding  protection  from  the  soldiers,  if  he  could
escape  out  of  the  tent,  animated  him  with  such  extra-
ordinary strength,  that,  for  some  time,  he  baffled  all  the
efforts  of  the  executioners,  Solyman  was  within  hear-
ing of  his  son's  cries,  as  well  as  of  the  noise  which  the
struggle  occasioned.  Impatient  of  this  delay  of  his
revenge,  and  struck  with  terror  at  the  thoughts  of
Mustapha's  escaping,  he  drew  aside  the  curtain  which
divided  the  tent,  and  thrusting  in  his  head,  darted  a
fierce  look  towards  the  mutes,  and  with  wild  and
threatening  gestures,  seemed  to  condemn  their  sloth  and
timidity.  At  the  sight  of  his  father's  furious  and  un-
relenting countenance,  Mustapha's  strength  failed,  and
his  courage  forsook  him ;  the  mutes  fastened  the  bow-
string about  his  neck,  and  in  a  moment  put  an  end  to
his  life.

The  dead  body  was  exposed  before  the  sultan's  tent.
The  soldiers  gathered  round  it,  and  contemplating  that
mournful  object  with  astonishment,  and  sorrow,  and
indignation,  were  ready,  if  a  leader  had  not  been
wanting,  to  have  broke  out  into  the  wildest  excesses  of
rage.  After  giving  vent  to  the  first  expressions  of  their
grief,  they  retired  each  man  to  his  tent,  and  shutting
themselves  up,  bewailed  in  secret  the  cruel  fate  of
their  favourite  ;  nor  was  there  one  of  them  who  tasted
food,  or  even  water,  during  the  remainder  of  that  day.
Next  morning,  the  same  solitude  and  silence  reigned
in  the  camp ;  and  Solyman  being  afraid  that  some
dreadful  storm  would  follow  this  sullen  calm,  in  order
to  appease  the  enraged  soldiers,  deprived  Rustan  of
the  seals,  ordered  him  to  leave  the  camp,  and  raised
Achmet,  a  gallant  officer,  much  beloved  in  the  army,
to  the  dignity  of  vizier.  This  change,  however,  was

VOL.  v.  T

•274  CHARLES V.  [1553.

made  in  concert  with  Rustan  himself;  the  crafty  mi-
nister suggesting  it  as  the  only  expedient  which  could
save  himself  or  his  master.  But  within  a  few  months,
when  the  resentment  of  the  soldiers  began  to  subside,
and  the  name  of  Mustapha  to  be  forgotten,  Achmet
was  strangled  by  the  sultan's  command,  and  Rustan  re-
instated in  the  office  of  vizier.  Together  with  his  for-
mer power,  he  reassumed  the  plan  for  exterminating
the  race  of  Mustapha  which  he  had  concerted  with
Roxalana  ;  and  as  they  were  afraid  that  an  only  son
whom  Mustapha  had  left,  might  grow  up  to  avenge
his  death,  they  redoubled  their  activity,  and  by  em-
ploying the  same  arts  against  him  which  they  had
practised  against  his  father,  they  inspired  Solyman
with  the  same  fears,  and  prevailed  on  him  to  issue
orders  for  putting  to  death  that  young  innocent  prince.
These  orders  were  executed  with  barbarous  zeal,  by  a
eunuch,  who  was  dispatched  to  Burso,  the  place  where
the  prince  resided  ;  and  no  rival  was  left  to  dispute
the  Ottoman  throne  with  the  sons  of  Roxalana.1
Charles  Such  tragical  scenes,  productive  of  so  deep

projects  a distress,  seldom  occur  but  in  the  history  of  the

marriage  f  *

between great  monarchies  of  the  East,  where  the  warmth
" of  the  climate  seems  to  give  every  motion  of

England.  ^e  ]jear|.  fa  greatest  force,  and  the  absolute
power  of  sovereigns  accustoms  and  enables  them  to
gratify  all  their  passions  without  control.  While  this
interesting  transaction  in  the  court  of  Solyman  engaged
his  whole  attention,  Charles  was  pursuing,  with  the
utmost  ardour,  a  new  scheme  for  aggrandizing  his  fa-
mily. About  this  time,  Edward  the  Sixth  of  England,
after  a  short  reign,  in  which  he  displayed  such  virtues
as  filled  his  subjects  with  sanguine  hopes  of  being
happy  under  his  government,  and  made  them  bear

1  Augerii  Gislenii  Busbequii  Legationis  Turctcaa  Epistul.-e  iv.  Franc.  1615.  p.
37.  Thuan.  lib.  xii.  p.  432.  Mem.  de  Ribier,  ii.  457.  Mauroceni  Histor.  Veneta,
lib.  vii.  p.  60.

1553.]  BOOK  XI.  275

with  patience  all  that  they  suffered  from  the  weak-
ness, the  dissensions,  and  the  ambition  of  the  ministers
who  assumed  the  administration  during  his  minority,
was  seized  with  a  lingering  distemper  which  threatened
his  life.  The  emperor  no  sooner  received  an  account
of  this,  than  his  ambition,  always  attentive  to  seize
every  opportunity  of  acquiring  an  increase  of  power
or  of  territories  to  his  son,  suggested  the  thought  of
adding  England  to  his  other  kingdoms,  by  the  mar-
riage of  Philip  with  the  princess  Mary,  the  heir  of
Edward's  crown.  Being  apprehensive,  however,  that
his  son,  who  was  then  in  Spain,  might  decline  a  match
with  a  princess  in  her  thirty-eighth  year,  and  eleven
years  older  than  himself;  Charles  determined,  not-
withstanding his  own  age  and  infirmities,  to  make
offer  of  himself  as  a  husband  to  his  cousin."

But  though  Mary  was  so  far  advanced  in
Philip  gives  years,  and  destitute  of  every  charm  either  of
'  person  or  manners  that  could  win  affection,
or  command  esteem,  Philip,  without  hesitation,  gave
his  consent  to  the  match  proposed  by  his  father,  and
was  willing,  according  to  the  usual  maxim  of  princes,
to  sacrifice  his  inclination  to  his  ambition.  In  order
to  ensure  the  success  of  his  scheme,  the  emperor,  even
before  Edward's  death,  began  to  take  such  steps  as
might  facilitate  it.  Upon  Edward's  demise,  Mary
mounted  the  throne  of  England;  the  pretensions  of
lady  Jane  Gray  proving  as  unfortunate  as  they  were
ill-founded. x  Charles  sent  immediately  a  pompous
embassy  to  London  to  congratulate  Mary  on  her  ac-
cession to  the  throne,  and  to  propose  the  alliance  with
The  senti-  his  son.  The  queen,  dazzled  with  the  prospect
Mary  and  °f  marrying  the  heir  of  the  greatest  monarch
rilh'^ith"8'  in  Europe ;  fond  of  uniting  more  closely  with
regard  to  it.  her  mother's  family,  to  which  she  had  been

u  Palav.  Hist.  Concil.  Trid.  v.  ii.  c.  13.  p.  150.
*  Carte's  Hist,  of  England,  iii.  287.

T  2

276  CHARLES V.  [1553.

always  warmly  attached ;  and  eager  to  secure  the  power-
ful aid  which  she  knew  would  be  necessary  towards
carrying  on  her  favourite  scheme  of  re-establishing  the
Romish  religion  in  England,  listened,  in  the  most  fa-
vourable manner  to  the  proposal.  Among  her  subjects
it  met  with  a  very  different  reception.  Philip,  it  was
well  known,  contended  for  all  the  tenets  of  the  church
of  Rome  with  a  sanguinary  zeal  which  exceeded  the
measure  even  of  Spanish  bigotry :  this  alarmed  all
the  numerous  partisans  of  the  Reformation.  The  Cas-
tilian  haughtiness  and  reserve  were  far  from  being
acceptable  to  the  English,  who  having  several  times
seen  their  throne  occupied  by  persons  who  were  born
subjects,  had  become  accustomed  to  an  unceremonious
and  familiar  intercourse  with  their  sovereigns.  They
could  not  think,  without  the  utmost  uneasiness,  of  ad-
mitting a  foreign  prince  to  that  influence  in  their  coun-
cils, which  the  husband  of  their  queen  would  na-
turally possess.  They  dreaded,  both  from  Philip's
overbearing  temper,  and  from  the  maxims  of  the  Spa-
nish monarchy  which  he  had  imbibed,  that  he  would
infuse  ideas  into  the  queen's  mind,  dangerous  to  the
liberties  of  the  nation,  and  would  introduce  foreign
troops  and  money  into  the  kingdom,  to  assist  her  in
any  attempt  against  them.

The  house  Full  °^  these  apprehensions,  the  house  of
ra0CTr  commons,  though  in  that  age  extremely  obse-
monstrate  quious  to  the  will  of  their  monarchs,  presented
a  warm  address  against  the  Spanish  match ;
many  pamphlets  were  published,  representing  the  dan-
gerous consequences  of  the  alliance  with  Spain,  and
describing  Philip's  bigotry  and  arrogance  in  the  most
odious  colours.  But  Mary,  inflexible  in  all  her  reso-
lutions, paid  no  regard  to  the  remonstrances  of  her
commons,  or  to  the  sentiments  of  the  people.  The
emperor,  having  secured,  by  various  arts,  the  ministers
whom  she  trusted  most,  they  approved  warmly  of  the

1553.]  BOOK XI.  277

match,  and  large  sums  were  remitted  by  him  in  order
to  gain  the  rest  of  the  council.  Cardinal  Pole,  whom
the  pope,  immediately  upon  Mary's  accession,  had  dis-
patched as  his  legate  into  England,  in  order  to  recon-
cile his  native  country  to  the  see  of  Rome,  was  detained
by  the  emperor's  command  at  Dillinghen  in  Germany,
lest  by  his  presence  he  should  thwart  Philip's  preten-
sions, and  employ  his  interest  in  favour  of  his  kinsman
Courtnay,  earl  of  Devonshire,  whom  the  English  ardently
wished  their  sovereign  to  choose  for  a  husband/

As  the  negotiation  did  not  admit  of  delay,

1  he  mar-  o  ^  ./ '

riage-treaty  it  was  carried  forward  with  the  greatest  rapi-

concluded. , .  ,  .  .  ,  ,

dity,  the  emperor  agreeing,  without  hesitation,
to  every  article  in  favour  of  England,  which  Mary's
ministers  either  represented  as  necessary  to  soothe  the
people,  and  reconcile  them  to  the  match,  or  that  was
suggested  by  their  own  fears  and  jealousy  of  a  foreign
1554  master.  The  chief  articles  were,  that  Philip,
Jan.  12.  during  his  marriage  with  the  queen,  should  bear
the  title  of  king  of  England,  but  the  entire  administra-
tion of  affairs,  as  well  as  the  sole  disposal  of  all  reve-
nues, offices,  and  benefices,  should  remain  with  the
queen;  that  the  heirs  of  the  marriage  should,  together
with  the  crown  of  England,  inherit  the  duchy  of  Bur-
gundy and  the  Low  Countries ;  that  if  prince  Charles,
Philip's  only  son  by  a  former  marriage,  should  die
without  issue,  his  children  by  flie  queen,  whether  male
or  female,  should  succeed  to  the  crown  of  Spain,  and
all  the  emperor's  hereditary  dominions ;  that,  before
the  consummation  of  the  marriage,  Philip  should  swear
solemnly,  that  he  would  retain  no  domestic  who  was
not  a  subject  of  the  queen,  and  would  bring  no  foreign-
ers into  the  kingdom  that  might  give  umbrage  to  the
English ;  that  he  would  make  no  alteration  in  the  con-
stitution or  laws  of  England  ;  that  he  would  not  carry
the  queen,  or  any  of  the  children  born  of  this  marriage^

J  Carte,  iii.  288.

278  CHARLES  V.  [1554.

out  of  the  kingdom ;  that  if  the  queen  should  die  before
him  without  issue,  he  would  immediately  leave  the
crown  to  the  lawful  heir,  without  claiming  any  right  of
administration  whatever ;  that  in  consequence  of  this
marriage,  England  should  not  be  engaged  in  any  war
subsisting  between  France  and  Spain;  and  that  the
alliance  between  France  and  England  should  remain  in
full  force.'

Discon-  But  this  treaty,  though  both  the  emperor  and
-  Mary's  ministers  employed  their  utmost  address
*n  framing  it  so  as  to  please  the  English,  was
far  from  quieting  their  fears  and  jealousies.
They  saw  that  words  and  promises  were  a  feeble  secu-
rity against  the  encroachments  of  an  ambitious  prince,
who,  as  soon  as  he  got  possession  of  the  power  and  ad-
vantages which  the  queen's  husband  must  necessarily
enjoy,  could  easily  evade  any  of  the  articles  which
either  limited  his  authority  or  obstructed  his  schemes.
They  were  convinced,  that  the  more  favourable  the  con-
ditions of  the  present  treaty  were  to  England,  the  more
Philip  would  be  tempted  hereafter  to  violate  them.
They  dreaded  that  England,  like  Naples,  Milan,  and
the  other  countries  annexed  to  Spain,  would  soon  feel
the  dominion  of  that  crown  to  be  intolerably  oppressive,
and  be  constrained,  as  they  had  been,  to  waste  its
wealth  and  vigour  in  wars  wherein  it  had  no  interest,
and  from  which  it  could  derive  no  advantage.  These
sentiments  prevailed  so  generally,  that  every  part  of  the
kingdom  was  filled  with  discontent  at  the  match,  and
Wyat's  in-  with  indignation  against  the  advisers  of  it.  Sir
surrection.  Thomas  Wyat,  a  gentleman  of  some  note,  and
of  good  intentions  towards  the  public,  took  advantage
of  this,  and  roused  the  inhabitants  of  Kent  to  arms,  in
order  to  save  their  country  from  a  foreign  yoke.  Great
numbers  resorted  in  a  short  time  to  his  standard ;  he
marched  to  London  with  such  rapidity,  and  the  queen

*  Ryraer's  Feed.  vol.  x*.  377.  393. Mem.  dc  Ribier,  ii.  498.

1554.]  BOOK XI.  279

was  so  utterly  unprovided  for  defence,  that  the  aspect
of  affairs  was  extremely  threatening ;  and  if  any  noble-
man of  distinction  had  joined  the  malecontents,  or  had
Wyat  possessed  talents  equal  in  any  degree  to  the  bold-
ness of  his  enterprise,  the  insurrection  must  have  proved
fatal  to  Mary's  power.  But  all  Wyat's  measures  were
concerted  with  so  little  prudence,  and  executed  with
such  irresolution,  that  many  of  his  followers  forsook
him ;  the  rest  were  dispersed  by  a  handful  of  soldiers ;
and  he  himself  was  taken  prisoner,  without  having  made
any  effort  worthy  of  the  cause  that  he  had  undertaken,
or  suitable  to  the  ardour  with  which  he  engaged  in  it.
He  suffered  the  punishment  due  to  his  rashness  and  re-
bellion. The  queen's  authority  was  confirmed  and  in-
creased by  her  success  in  defeating  this  inconsiderate
attempt  to  abridge  it.  The  lady  Jane  Gray,  whose  title
the  ambition  of  her  relations  had  set  up  in  opposition
to  that  of  the  queen,  was,  notwithstanding  her  youth
and  innocence,  brought  to  the  scaffold.  The  lady  Eli-
zabeth, the  queen's  sister,  was  observed  with  the  most
jealous  attention.  The  treaty  of  marriage  was  ratified
by  the  parliament.

The  mar  Philip  landed  in  England  with  a  magnificent
nage  ceie-  retinue,  celebrated  his  nuptials  with  great  solem-
nity ;  and  though  he  could  not  lay  aside  his  na-
tural severity  and  pride,  or  assume  gracious  and  popu-
lar manners,  he  endeavoured  to  conciliate  the  favour  of
the  English  nobility  by  his  extraordinary  liberality.
Lest  that  should  fail  of  acquiring  him  such  influence  in
the  government  of  the  kingdom  as  he  aimed  at  obtain-
ing, the  emperor  kept  a  body  of  twelve  thousand  men
on  the  coast  of  Flanders,  in  readiness  to  embark  for
England,  and  to  support  his  son  in  all  his  enterprises.
Imboldened  by  all  these  favourable  circum-
stances,  Mary  pursued  the  scheme  of  extirpating
turnThe  ^e  Protestant  religion  out  of  her  dominions
.Protestant  wjth  the  most  precipitate  zeal.  The  laws  of

280  CHARLES  V.  [1554.

religion  in  Ed  ward  the  Sixth,  in  favour  of  the  Reformation,
were  repealed  ;  the  Protestant  clergy  ejected ;
all  the  forms  and  rites  of  the  Popish  worship  were  re-
established ;  the  nation  was  solemnly  absolved  from  the
guilt  which  it  had  contracted  during  the  period  of  its
apostacy,  and  was  publicly  reconciled  to  the  church  of
Rome  by  cardinal  Pole,  who,  immediately  after  the
queen's  marriage,  was  permitted  to  continue  his  journey
to  England,  and  to  exercise  his  legatine  functions  with
the  most  ample  power.  Not  satisfied  with  having  over-
turned the  Protestant  church,  and  re-establishing  the
ancient  system  on  its  ruins,  Mary  insisted  that  all  her
subjects  should  conform  to  the  same  mode  of  worship
which  she  preferred ;  should  profess  their  faith  in  the
same  creed  which  she  had  approved ;  and  abjure  every
practice  or  opinion  that  was  deemed  repugnant  to  either
of  them.  Powers  altogether  unknown  in  the  English
constitution,  were  vested  in  certain  persons  appointed
to  take  cognizance  of  heresy,  and  they  proceeded  to
exercise  them  with  more  than  inquisitorial  severity.
The  prospect  of  danger,  however,  did  not  intimidate
the  principal  teachers  of  the  Protestant  doctrines,  who
believed  that  they  were  contending  for  truths  of  the  ut-
most consequence  to  the  happiness  of  mankind.  They
boldly  avowed  their  sentiments,  and  were  condemned
to  that  cruel  death  which  the  church  of  Rome  reserves
for  its  enemies.  This  shocking  punishment  was  in-
flicted with  that  barbarity  which  the  rancour  of  false
zeal  alone  can  inspire.  The  English,  who  are  inferior
in  humanity  to  no  people  in  Europe,  and  remarkable
for  the  mildness  of  their  public  executions,  beheld,
with  astonishment  and  horror,  persons  who  had  filled
the  most  respectable  stations  in  their  church,  and  who
were  venerable  on  account  of  their  age,  their  piety,  and
their  literature,  condemned  to  endure  torments  to  which
their  laws  did  not  subject  even  the  most  atrocious
criminals.

1554.]  BOOK XI.  281

The  ob- This  extreme  rigour  did  not  accomplish  the
stacks en(j  at  which  Mary  aimed. The  patience  and

which  she „.,  .  -, ,  .  /• i T\

had  to fortitude  with  which  these  martyrs  for  the  Re-
formation submitted  to  their  sufferings,  the  he-
roic contempt  of  death  expressed  by  persons  of  every
rank,  and  age,  and  sex,  confirmed  many  more  in  the
Protestant  faith,  than  the  threats  of  their  enraged  per-
secutors could  frighten  into  apostacy. The  business  of
such  as  were  intrusted  with  trying  heretics  multiplied
continually,  and  appeared  to  be  as  endless  as  it  was
odious. The  queen's  ablest  ministers  became  sensible
how  impolitic,  as  well  as  dangerous,  it  was  to  irritate
the  people  by  the  frequent  spectacle  of  public  execu-
tions, which  they  detested  as  no  less  unjust  than  cruel.
Even  Philip  was  so  thoroughly  convinced  of  her  having
run  to  an  excess  of  rigour,  that  on  this  occasion  he  as-
sumed a  part  to  which  he  was  little  accustomed,  be-
coming an  advocate  for  moderation  and  lenity .a
TheEng- But,  notwithstanding  this  attempt  to  ingra-
iousJofa tiate  himself  with  the  English,  they  discovered
Phihp. a  constant  jealousy  and  distrust  of  all  his  in-
tentions ; and  when some  members,  who  had  been
gained  by  the  court,  ventured  to  move  in  the  house  of
commons,  that  the  nation  ought  to  assist  the  emperor,
the  queen's  father-in-law,  in  his  war  against  France
the  proposal  was  rejected  with  general  dissatisfaction.
A  motion  which  was  made,  that  the  parliament  should
give  its  consent  that  Philip  might  be  publicly  crowned
as  the  queen's  husband,  met  with  such  a  cold  recep-
tion, that  it  was  instantly  withdrawn.1*

The  The  king  of  France  had  observed  the  pro-

French  /«•  1  »  • • • -ri i

king  alarm-  gress  ot  the  emperor  s  negotiation  in  England
nfatcVbe-  w*tn  much  uneasiness.  The  great  accession
PhJif  and  °^  territories  as  well  as  reputation  which  his
Mary.  enemy  would  acquire  by  the  marriage  of  his
son  with  the  queen  of  such  a  powerful  kingdom,

a  Godwin's  Annals  of  Q.  Mary,  ap.  Kennet,  v.  ii.  p.  329. Burnct's  Hisl.  of
Reform,  ii.  298.  303.

b  Carte's  Hist,  of  England,  iii.  314.

'282  CHARLES V.  [1554.

was  obvious  and  formidable.  He  easily  foresaw  that
the  English,  notwithstanding-  all  their  fears  and  pre-
cautions, would  be  soon  drawn  in  to  take  part  in  the
quarrels  on  the  continent,  and  be  compelled  to  act  in
subserviency  to  the  emperor's  ambitious  schemes.  For
this  reason,  Henry  had  given  it  in  charge  to  his  ambas-
sador at  the  court  of  London,  to  employ  all  his  address
in  order  to  defeat  or  retard  the  treaty  of  marriage ;  and,
as  there  was  not,  at  that  time,  any  prince  of  the  blood
in  France,  whom  he  could  propose  to  the  queen  as  a
husband,  he  instructed  him  to  co-operate  with  such  of
the  English  as  wished  their  sovereign  to  marry  one  of
her  own  subjects.  But  the  queen's  ardour  and  preci-
pitation in  closing  with  the  first  overtures  in  favour  of
Philip,  having  rendered  all  his  endeavours  ineffectual,
Henry  was  so  far  from  thinking  it  prudent  to  give  any
aid  to  the  English  malecontents,  though  earnestly  soli-
cited by  Wyat  and  their  other  leaders,  who  tempted
him  to  take  them  under  his  protection,  by  offers  of
great  advantage  to  France,  that  he  commanded  his
ambassador  to  congratulate  the  queen  in  the  warmest
terms  upon  the  suppression  of  the  insurrection.
His  jre-  Notwithstanding  these  external  professions,
parations  Henry  dreaded  so  much  the  consequence  of

for  a  vi-  *1  i  • i  i  r

gorous  this  alliance,  which  more  than  compensated  for
"'  all  the  emperor  had  lost  in  Germany,  that  he
determined  to  carry  on  his  military  operations  both  in
the  feow  Countries  and  in  Italy,  with  extraordinary
vigour,  in  order  that  he  might  compel  Charles  to  ac-
cept of  an  equitable  peace,  before  his  daughter-in-law
could  surmount  the  aversion  of  her  subjects  to  a  war
on  the  continent,  and  prevail  on  them  to  assist  the
emperor,  either  with  money  or  troops.  For  this  pur-
pose he  exerted  himself  to  the  utmost,  in  order  to  have
a  numerous  army  early  assembled  on  the  frontiers  of
the  Netherlands,  and  while  one  part  of  it  laid  waste
the  open  country  of  Artois,  the  main  body,  under  the
constable  Montmorency,  advanced  towards  the  pro-

1554.]  BOOK XI.  283

vinces  of  Liege  and  Hainault  by  the  forest  of  Ar-
dennes.

The  campaign  was  opened  with  the  siege  of
gress  of Mariemburg,  a  town  which  the  queen  of  Hun-
gary, the  governess  of  the  Low  Countries,  had
fortified  at  great  expense ;  but,  being  destitute  of  a  suf-
ficient garrison,  it  surrendered  in  six  days. Henry,
elated  with  this  success,  put  himself  at  the  head

June  28.  .  r  .  .

oi  his  army,  and  investing  Bouvmes,  took  it  by
assault,  after  a  short  resistance.  With  equal  facility
he  became  master  of  Dinant ;  and  then,  turning  to  the
left,  bent  his  march  towards  the  province  of  Artois.
The  em-  The  large  sums  which  the  emperor  had  remit-
ableto'ob-  ^e^  ^°  England  had  so  exhausted  his  trea-
structrt.  sury,  as  to  render  his  preparations,  at  this
juncture,  slower  and  more  dilatory  than  usual.  He  had
no  body  of  troops  to  make  head  against  the  French  at
their  first  entrance  into  his  territories  ;  and  though  he
drew  together  all  the  forces  in  the  country  in  the  ut-
most hurry,  and  gave  the  command  of  them  to  Emanuel
Philibert  of  Savoy,  they  were  in  no  condition  to  face
an  enemy  so  far  superior  in  number.  The  prince  of
Savoy,  however,  by  his  activity  and  good  conduct,
made  up  for  his  want  of  troops.  By  watching  all  the
motions  of  the  French  at  a  distance,  and  by  choosing
his  own  posts  with  skill,  he  put  it  out  of  their  power
either  to  form  any  siege  of  consequence,  or  to  attack
him.  Want  of  subsistence  soon  obliged  them  to  fall
back  towards  their  own  frontiers,  after  having  burnt
all  the  open  towns,  and  having  plundered  the  country
through  which  they  marched,  with  a  cruelty  and  licence
more  becoming  a  body  of  light  troops,  than  a  royal
army  led  by  a  great  monarch.

The  But  Henry,  that  he  might  not  dismiss  his

invest  army  without  attempting  some  conquest  ade-
Renti.  quate  to  the  great  preparations,  as  well  as  san-
guine hopes,  with  which  he  had  opened  the  campaign,

284  CHARLES  V.  [1554.

invested  Renti,  a  place  deemed,  in  that  age,  of  great
importance,  as,  by  its  situation  on  the  confines  of  Artois
and  the  Boulonnois,  it  covered  the  former  province,
and  protected  the  parties  which  made  incursions  into
the  latter.  The  town,  which  was  strongly  fortified,
and  provided  with  a  numerous  garrison,  made  a  gal-
lant defence ;  but,  being  warmly  pressed  by  a  powerful
army,  it  must  soon  have  yielded.  The  emperor,  who
at  that  time  enjoyed  a  short  interval  of  ease  from  the
gout,  was  so  solicitous  to  save  it,  that,  although  he
could  bear  no  other  motion  but  that  of  a  litter,  he  in-
stantly put  himself  at  the  head  of  his  army,  which,  hav-
ing received  several  reinforcements,  was  now  strong
enough  to  approach  the  enemy.  The  French  were
eager  to  decide  the  fate  of  Renti  by  a  battle,  and  ex-
pected it  from  the  emperor's  arrival  in  his  camp ;  but
Charles  avoided  a  general  action  with  great  industry ;
and,  as  he  had  nothing  in  view  but  to  save  the  town,  he
hoped  to  accomplish  that,  without  exposing  himself  to
the  consequences  of  such  a  dangerous  and  doubtful  event.
An  action  Notwithstanding  all  his  precautions,  a  dis-
between  pute  about  a  post  which  both  armies  endea-

the  two r  ,r

armies  voured  to  seize,  brought  on  an  engagement
which  proved  almost  general.  The  duke  of
Guise,  who  commanded  the  wing  of  the  French  which
stood  the  brunt  of  the  combat,  displayed  valour  and
conduct  worthy  of  the  defender  of  Metz;  the  Impe-
rialists, after  an  obstinate  struggle,  were  repulsed ;  the
French  remained  masters  of  the  post  in  dispute ;  and
if  the  constable,  either  from  his  natural  caution  and
slowness,  or  from  unwillingness  to  support  a  rival
whom  he  hated,  had  not  delayed  bringing  up  the  main
body  to  second  the  impression  which  Guise  had  made,
the  rout  of  the  enemy  must  have  been  complete.  The
emperor,  notwithstanding  the  loss  which  he  had  sus-
tained, continued  in  the  same  camp ;  and  the  French,
being  straitened  for  provisions,  and  finding  it  impos-

1554.]  BOOK XI.  285

sible  to  carry  on  the  siege  in  the  face  of  a  hostile  army,
quitted  their  intrenchments.  They  retired  openly,
courting  the  enemy  to  approach,  rather  than  shunning
an  engagement.

Theimpe-  But  Charles,  having  gained  his  end,  suffered
vade8tpi™~  them  to  march  off  unmolested.  As  soon  as  his
cardy.  troops  entered  their  own  country,  Henry  threw
garrisons  into  the  frontier  towns,  and  dismissed  the  rest
of  the  army.  This  encouraged  the  Imperialists  to  push
forward  with  a  considerable  body  of  troops  into  Picardy,
and  by  laying  waste  the  country  with  fire  and  sword,
they  endeavoured  to  revenge  themselves  for  the  ravages
which  the  French  had  committed  in  Hainault  and
Artois.0  But,  as  they  were  not  able  to  reduce  any
place  of  importance,  they  gained  nothing  more  than
the  enemy  had  done  by  this  cruel  and  inglorious  method
of  carrying  on  the  war.

Affairs  of  The  arms  of  France  were  still  more  unsuccess-
itaiy.  fui  in  Italy.  The  footing  which  the  French  had
acquired  in  Siena,  occasioned  much  uneasiness  to  Cos-
mo de  Medici,  the  most  sagacious  and  enterprising  of
all  the  Italian  princes.  He  dreaded  the  neighbourhood
of  a  powerful  people,  to  whom  all  who  favoured  the
ancient  republican  government  in  Florence  would  have
recourse,  as  to  their  natural  protectors,  against  that  ab-
solute authority  which  the  emperor  had  enabled  him  to
Cosmo  de  usurp ;  he  knew  how  odious  he  was  to  the
schemes8  French,  on  account  of  his  attachment  to  the
"I'd  to"  imPerial  Party,  and  ne  foresaw  that,  if  they
Siena.  were  permitted  to  gather  strength  in  Siena,
Tuscany  would  soon  feel  the  eifects  of  their  resentment.
For  these  reasons,  he  wished  with  the  utmost  solicitude
for  the  expulsion  of  the  French  out  of  the  Sienese,
before  they  had  time  to  establish  themselves  thoroughly
in  the  country,  or  to  receive  such  reinforcements  from
France  as  would  render.it  dangerous  to  attack  them.

c  Thuan,  160,  &c. Haraei  Ann.  Brab.  674.

CHARLES V.  [1554.

As  this,  however,  was  properly  the  emperor's  business,
who  was  called  by  his  interest  as  well  as  honour  to  dis-
lodge those  formidable  intruders  into  the  heart  of  his
dominions.  Cosmo  laboured  to  throw  the  whole  burden
of  the  enterprise  on  him;  and  on  that  account  had  given
no  assistance,  during  the  former  campaign,  but  by  ad-
vancing some  small  sums  of  money  towards  the  pay-
ment of  the  imperial  troops.

But  as  the  defence  of  the  Netherlands  en-
grossed  all  the  emperor's  attention,  and  his
peror.  remittances  into  England  had  drained  his
treasury,  it  was  obvious  that  his  operations  in  Italy
would  be  extremely  feeble ;  and  Cosmo  plainly  per-
ceived, that  if  he  himself  did  not  take  part  openly  in
the  war,  and  act  with  vigour,  the  French  would  scarcely
meet  with  any  annoyance.  As  his  situation  rendered
this  resolution  necessary  and  unavoidable,  his  next  care
was  to  execute  it  in  such  a  manner,  that  he  might  de-
rive from  it  some  other  advantage,  beside  that  of  driv-
ing the  French  out  of  his  neighbourhood.  With  this
view,  he  dispatched  an  envoy  to  Charles,  offering  to
declare  war  against  France,  and  to  reduce  Siena  at  his
own  charges,  on  condition  that  he  should  be  repaid
whatever  he  might  expend  in  the  enterprise,  and  be
permitted  to  retain  all  his  conquests  until  his  demands
were  fully  satisfied.  Charles,  to  whom,  at  this  juncture,
the  war  against  Siena  was  an  intolerable  burden,  and
who  had  neither  expedient  nor  resource  that  could  en-
able him  to  carry  it  on  with  proper  vigour,  closed
gladly  with  this  overture  ;  and  Cosmo,  well  acquainted
with  the  low  state  of  the  imperial  finances,  flattered
himself  that  the  emperor,  finding  it  impossible  to  reim-
burse him,  would  suffer  him  to  keep  quiet  possession
of  whatever  places  he  should  conquer.d

Enters  into ^u^  °^  t^iese  hopes,  he  made  great  prepara-

warwith tions  for  war, and  as the  French  king  had

turned  the  strength  of  his  arms  against  the  Ne-

d  Adrian!  Istoria  de  suoi  tempi,  vol.  i.  662.

1554.]  BOOK XI.  287

therlands,  he  did  not  despair  of  assembling  such  a  body
of  men  as  would  prove  more  than  a  sufficient  match  for
any  force  which  Henry  could  bring  into  the  field  in
Italy.  He  endeavoured,  by  giving  one  of  his  daugh-
ters to  the  pope's  nephew,  to  obtain  assistance  from  the
holy  see,  or  at  least  to  secure  his  remaining  neutral.
He  attempted  to  detach  the  duke  of  Orsini,  whose  fa-
mily had  been  long  attached  to  the  French  party,  from
his  ancient  confederates,  by  bestowing  on  him  another
of  his  daughters  ;  and  what  was  of  greater  consequence
than  either  of  these,  he  engaged  John  James

Gives  the  t  7  »"

command  Medechio,  marquis  of  Marignano,  to  take  the
to  Mede™y  command  of  his  army.6  This  officer,  from  a
very  low  condition  in  life,  had  raised  himself,
through  all  the  ranks  of  service,  to  high  command,  and
had  displayed  talents,  and  acquired  reputation  in  war,
which  entitled  him  to  be  placed  on  a  level  with  the
greatest  generals  in  that  martial  age.  Having  attained
a  station  of  eminence  so  disproportioned  to  his  birth,
he  laboured  with  a  fond  solicitude  to  conceal  his  ori-
ginal obscurity,  by  giving  out  that  he  was  descended
of  the  family  of  Medici,  to  which  honour  the  casual
resemblance  of  his  name  was  his  only  pretension.
Cosmo,  happy  that  he  could  gratify  him  at  such  an
easy  rate,  flattered  his  vanity  in  this  point,  acknow-
ledged him  as  a  relation,  and  permitted  him  to  assume
the  arms  of  his  family.  Medecino,  eager  to  serve  the
head  of  that  family  of  which  he  now  considered  himself
as  a  branch,  applied  with  wonderful  zeal  and  assiduity
to  raise  troops ;  and  as,  during  his  long  service,  he  had
acquired  great  credit  with  the  leaders  of  those  merce-
nary bands  which  formed  the  strength  of  Italian  armies,
he  engaged  the  most  eminent  of  them  to  follow  Cosmo's
standard.

Peter  To  oppose  this  able  general,  and  the  formid-

army  which  he  had  assembled,  the  king  of

e  Adriani  Istoria,  vol.  i.  p.  663.

288  CHARLES V.  [1554.

wiih  the France  made  choice  of  Peter  Strozzi,  a  Floren-

corninand .  iij •  j j  i  • -r»

of  the  tine  nobleman,  who  had  resided  long  in  r  ranee,
arni"Cin  as  an  exile,  and  who  had  risen  by  his  merit  to
Ita|y-  high  reputation  as  well  as  command  in  the
army.  He  was  the  son  of  Philip  Strozzi,  who,  in  the
year  1537,  had  concurred  with  such  ardour  in  the  at-
tempt to  expel  the  family  of  Medici  out  of  Florence,  in
order  to  re-establish  the  ancient  republican  form  of  go-
vernment ;  and  who  had  perished  in  the  undertaking.
The  son  inherited  the  implacable  aversion  to  the  Me-
dici, as  well  as  the  same  enthusiastic  zeal  for  the  liberty
of  Florence,  which  had  animated  his  father,  whose  death
he  was  impatient  to  revenge.  Henry  flattered  himself
that  his  army  would  make  rapid  progress  under  a  ge-
neral whose  zeal  to  promote  his  interest  was  roused  and
seconded  by  such  powerful  passions ;  especially  as  he
had  allotted  him,  for  the  scene  of  action,  his  native
country,  in  which  he  had  many  powerful  partisans,
ready  to  facilitate  all  his  operations.

But  how  specious  soever  the  motives  might
aPPear  which  induced  Henry  to  make  this
choice.  choice,  it  proved  fatal  to  the  interests  of  France
in  Italy.  Cosmo,  as  soon  as  he  heard  that  the  mortal
enemy  of  his  family  was  appointed  to  take  the  command
in  Tuscany,  concluded  that  the  king  of  France  aimed  at
something  more  than  the  protection  of  the  Sienese,  and
saw  the  necessity  of  making  extraordinary  efforts/  not
merely  to  reduce  Siena,  but  to  save  himself  from  destruc-
tion. At  the  same  time,  the  cardinal  of  Ferrara,  who  had
the  entire  direction  of  the  French  affairs  in  Italy,  consi-
dered Strozzi  as  a  formidable  rival  in  power,  and,  in
order  to  prevent  his  acquiring  any  increase  of  authority
from  success,  he  was  extremely  remiss  in  supplying
him  either  with  money  to  pay  his  troops,  or  with  pro-
visions to  support  them.  Strozzi  himself,  blinded  by
his  resentment  against  the  Medici,  pushed  on  his  ope-

f  Pecci  Memoric  di  Siena,  vol.  iv.  p.  103,  &c.

1554.]  BOOK XI.  289

rations  with  the  impetuosity  of  revenge,  rather  than
with  the  caution  and  prudence  becoming  a  great  ge-
neral.

At  first,  however,  he  attacked  several  towns

The  battle  ,  .  . '  .  .

of  Mar-  in  the  territory  ot  rlorence  with  such  vigour  as
obliged  Medecino,  in  order  to  check  his  pro-
gress, to  withdraw  the  greater  part  of  his  army  from
Siena,  which  he  had  invested  before  Strozzi's  arrival  in
Italy.  As  Cosmo  sustained  the  whole  burden  of  mili-
tary operations,  the  expense  of  which  must  soon  have
exhausted  his  revenues ;  as  neither  the  viceroy  of  Na-
ples nor  governor  of  Milan  were  in  condition  to  afford
him  any  effectual  aid  ;  and,  as  the  troops  which  Mede-
cino had  left  in  the  camp  before  Siena,  could  attempt
nothing  against  it  during  his  absence,  it  was  Strozzi's
business  to  have  protracted  the  war,  and  to  have  trans-
ferred the  seat  of  it  into  the  territories  of  Florence ;  but
the  hope  of  ruining  his  enemy  by  one  decisive  blow,
precipitated  him  into  a  general  engagement  not
far  from  Marciano.  The  armies  were  nearly
equal  in  number ;  but  a  body  of  Italian  cavalry,  in
which  Strozzi  placed  great  confidence,  having  fled  with-
out making  any  resistance,  either  through  the  treachery
in  which  or  cowardice  of  the  officers  who  commanded  it,
the  French  hjs  infantry  remained  exposed  to  the  attacks  of
feated.  all  Medecino's  troops.  Encouraged,  however,
by  Strozzi's  presence  and  example,  who,  after  receiving
a  dangerous  wound  in  endeavouring  to  rally  the  ca-
valry, placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  infantry,  and
manifested  an  admirable  presence  of  mind,  as  well  as
extraordinary  valour,  they  stood  their  ground  with  great
firmness,  and  repulsed  such  of  the  enemy  as  ventured
to  approach  them.  But  those  gallant  troops,  being
surrounded  at  last  on  every  side,  and  torn  in  pieces  by
a  battery  of  cannon,  which  Medecino  brought  to  bear
upon  them,  the  Florentine  cavalry  broke  in  on  their
flanks,  and  a  general  rout  ensued.  Strozzi,  faint  with
VOL,  v.  u

290  CHARLES V.  [1554.

the  loss  of  blood,  and  deeply  affected  with  the  fatal
consequences  of  his  own  rashness,  found  the  utmost
difficulty  in  making  his  escape  with  a  handful  of  men.8
Medccino  Medecino  returned  immediately  to  the  siege
besieges  of  Siena  with  his  victorious  forces:  and  as

Sienna,  '

Strozzi  could  not,  after  the  greatest  efforts  of
activity,  collect  as  many  men  as  to  form  the  appear-
ance of  a  regular  army,  he  had  leisure  to  carry  on
his  approaches  against  the  town  without  molesta-
tion. But  the  Sienese,  instead  of  sinking  into  de-
spair upon  this  cruel  disappointment  of  their  only  hope
of  obtaining  relief,  prepared  to  defend  themselves  to
Which  is  the  utmost  extremity,  with  that  undaunted  for-
titude  which  the  love  of  liberty  alone  can  in-
spire-  This  generous  resolution  was  warmly
seconded  by  Monluc,  who  commanded  the
French  garrison  in  the  town.  The  active  and  enter-
prising courage  which  he  had  displayed  on  many  oc-
casions, had  procured  him  this  command ;  and  as  he
had  ambition  which  aspired  at  the  highest  military
dignities,  without  any  pretensions  to  attain  them  but
what  he  could  derive  from  merit,  he  determined  to  dis-
tinguish his  defence  of  Siena  by  extraordinary  efforts
of  valour  and  perseverance.  For  this  purpose,  he  re-
paired and  strengthened  the  fortifications  with  unwea-
ried industry ;  he  trained  the  citizens  to  the  use  of
arms,  and  accustomed  them  to  go  through  the  fatigues
and  dangers  of  service  in  common  with  the  soldiers  ;
and,  as  the  enemy  were  extremely  strict  in  guarding  all
the  avenues  to  the  city,  he  husbanded  the  provisions
in  the  magazines  with  the  most  parsimonious  eco-
nomy, and  prevailed  on  the  soldiers,  as  well  as  the
citizens,  to  restrict  themselves  to  a  very  moderate  daily
allowance  for  their  subsistence.  Medecino,  though
his  army  was  not  numerous  enough  to  storm  the  town
by  open  force,  ventured  twice  to  assault  it  by  surprise ;

K  Pecci  Memorie  della  Siena,  vol.  iv.  p.  157.

1554.]  BOOK XI.  291

but  he  was  received  each  time  with  so  much  spirit,  and
repulsed  with  such  loss,  as  discouraged  him  from  re-
peating the  attempt,  and  left  him  no  hopes  of  reducing
the  town  but  by  famine.

With  this  view,  he  fortified  his  own  camp
into  a  with  great  care,  occupied  all  the  posts  of
blockade,  strength  round  the  place,  and  having  entirely
cut  off  the  besieged  from  any  communication  with
the  adjacent  country,  he  waited  patiently  until  ne-
cessity should  compel  them  to  open  their  gates.  But
their  enthusiastic  zeal  for  liberty  made  the  citizens  de-
spise the  distresses  occasioned  by  the  scarcity  of  pro-
visions, and  supported  them  long  under  all  the  mise-
ries of  famine.  Monluc,  by  his  example  and  exhorta-
tions, taught  his  soldiers  to  vie  with  them  in  patience
and  abstinence ;  and  it  was  not  until  they  had  with-
stood a  siege  of  ten  months,  until  they  had  eaten  up
all  the  horses,  dogs,  and  other  animals  in  the  place,
and  were  reduced  almost  to  their  last  morsel  of  bread,
that  they  proposed  a  capitulation.  Even  then  they
demanded  honourable  terms;  and  as  Cosmo,

1555.

though  no  stranger  to  the  extremity  of  their
condition,  was  afraid  that  despair  might  prompt  them
to  venture  upon  some  wild  enterprise,  he  immediately
granted  them  conditions  more  favourable  than  they
could  have  expected.

A  ril  22  The  capitulation  was  made  in  the  emperor's
The  town  name,  who  engaged  to  take  the  republic  of
fLmfne  to*  Siena  under  the  protection  of  the  empire ;  he
capitulate.  promise(j  to  maintain  the  ancient  liberties  of
the  city,  to  allow  the  magistrates  the  full  exercise  of
their  former  authority,  to  secure  the  citizens  in  the
undisturbed  possession  of  their  privileges  and  pro-
perty; he  granted  an  ample  and  unlimited  pardon  to
all  who  had  borne  arms  against  him;  he  reserved  to
himself  the  right  of  placing  a  garrison  in  the  town,  but
engaged  not  to  rebuild  the  citadel  without  the  consent

u  2

292  CHARLES V.  [1555

of  the  citizens. Monluc  and  his  Trench  garrison  were
allowed  to  march  out  with  all  the  honours  of  war.

Medecino  observed  the  articles  of  capitulation,  as
far  as  depended  on  him,  with great  exactness. No
violence  or  insult  whatever  was  offered  to  the  inhabi-
tants, and  the  French  garrison  was  treated  with  all  the
Many  of respect  due  to  their  spirit  and  bravery. But
retire  toCSe  manv  °f  tne  citizens  suspecting,  from  the  ex-
Mopi6 traordinary  facility  with  which  they  had  ob-
tained such  favourable  conditions,  that  the  em-
peror as  well as  Cosmo,  would  take  the  first  oppor-
tunity of  violating  them,  and  disdaining  to  possess  a
precarious  liberty,  which  depended  on  the  will  of  an-
other, abandoned  the  place  of  their  nativity,  and  ac-
companied the  French  to  Monte- Alcino,  Porto  Ercole,
and  other  small  towns  in  the  territory  of  the  republic.
And  esta- They  established,  in  Monte- Alcino,  the  same
JivemnS  model  of  government  to  which  they  had  been
there. accustomed  at  Siena,  and  appointing  magis-
trates with  the  same  titles  and  jurisdiction,  solaced
themselves  with  this  image  of  their  ancient  liberty.
Hardships The  fears  of  the  Sienese  concerning  the  fate
Ihe'chJem  of  their  country  were  not  imaginary,  or  their
wre'sub suspicion  of  the  emperor  and  Cosmo  ill-founded ;
jected. for  no  sooner  had  the  imperial  troops  taken  pos-
session of  the  town,  than  Cosmo,  without  regarding
the  articles  of  capitulation,  not  only  displaced  the  ma-
gistrates who  were  in  office,  and  nominated  new  ones
devoted  to  his  own  interest,  but  commanded  all  the
citizens  to  deliver  up  their  arms  to  persons  whom  he
appointed  to  receive  them. They  submitted  to  the
former  from  necessity,  though  with  all  the  reluctance
and  regret  which  men  accustomed  to  liberty  feel  in
obeying  the  first  commands  of  a  master. They  did
not  yield  the  same  tame  obedience  to  the  latter ;  and
many  persons  of  distinction,  rather  than  degrade  them-
selves from  the  rank  of  freemen  to  the  condition  of

1555.]  BOOK  XI.  293

slaves,  by  surrendering  their  arms,  fled  to  their  coun-
trymen at  Monte- Alcino,  and  chose  to  endure  all  the
hardships,  and  to  encounter  all  the  dangers,  which  they
had  reason  to  expect  in  that  new  station,  where  they
had  fixed  the  seat  of  their  republic.
Cosmo  at-  Cosmo,  not  reckoning  himself  secure  while
£  hlSre-  sucn  numbers  of  implacable  and  desperate  ene-
tired.  mies  were  settled  in  his  neighbourhood,  and
retained  any  degree  of  power,  solicited  Medecino
to  attack  them  in  their  different  places  of  retreat,  be-
fore they  had  time  to  recruit  their  strength  and  spirits,
after  the  many  calamities  which  they  had  suffered.  He
prevailed  on  him,  though  his  army  was  much  weakened
by  hard  duty  during  the  siege  of  Siena,  to  invest  Porto
Ercole ;  and  the  fortifications  being  both  slight  and
incomplete,  the  besieged  were  soon  compelled  to  open
their  gates.  An  unexpected  order,  which  Me-

June 13. , . &  • -i  f  f

decmo  received  from  the  emperor  to  detach  the
greater  part  of  his  troops  into  Piedmont,  prevented
farther  operations,  and  permitted  the  Sienese  exiles  to
reside  for  some  time  undisturbed  in  Monte-Alcino.
But  their  unhappy  countrymen  who  remained  at  Siena,
were  not  yet  at  the  end  of  their  sufferings ;  for  the  em-
peror, instead  of  adhering  to  the  articles  of  capitula-
tion, granted  his  son  Philip  the  investiture  of  that  city
and  all  its  dependencies ;  and  Francis  de  Toledo,  in
the  name  of  their  new  master,  proceeded  to  settle  the
civil  and  military  government,  treated  them  like  a  con-
quered people,  and  subjected  them  to  the  Spanish  yoke,
without  paying  any  regard  whatever  to  their  privileges
or  ancient  form  of  government.11

o  erations ^e  imPeria^  army  m  Piedmont  had  been  so
in  Pied- feeble  for  some  time,  and  its  commander  so  in-
active, that  the  emperor,  in  order  to  give  vigour
to  his  operations  in  that  quarter,  found  it  necessary  not

h  Sle'ul.  617.  Thuan.  lib.  xv.  526.  537.  Joan.  Camerarii  adnot.  rer.  prascipua-
rum  ab  anno  1550  ad  1561  ap.  Freherum,  vol.  iii.  p.  562.  Pecci  Mcntotre  delta
Siena,  iv.  64,  &c.

294  CHARLES V.  [1556.

only  to  recall  Medecino's  troops  from  Tuscany  while  in
the  career  of  conquest,  but  to  employ  in  Piedmont  a
general  of  such  reputation  and  abilities,  as  might  coun-
terbalance the  great  military  talents  of  the  marechal
Brissac,  who  was  at  the  head  of  the  French  forces  in
that  country.

Charles  He  pitched  on  the  duke  of  Alva  for  that  pur-
the  duke  Pose  >  but  that  choice  was  as  much  the  effect  of
Hs-  a  cour*  intrigue,  as  of  his  opinion  with  respect
there,  to  the  duke's  merit.  Alva  had  long  made  court
to  Philip  with  the  utmost  assiduity,  and  had  endea-
voured to  work  himself  into  his  confidence  by  all  the
insinuating  arts  of  which  his  haughty  and  inflexible  na-
ture was  capable.  As  he  nearly  resembled  that  prince
in  many  features  of  his  character,  he  began  to  gain
much  of  his  good- will.  Ruy  Gomez  de  Silva,  Philip's
favourite,  who  dreaded  the  progress  which  this  formi-
dable rival  made  in  his  master's  affections,  had  the  ad-
dress to  prevail  with  the  emperor  to  name  Alva  to  this
command.  The  duke,  though  sensible  that  he  owed
this  distinction  to  the  malicious  arts  of  an  enemy,  who
had  no  other  aim  than  to  remove  him  at  a  distance  from
court,  was  of  such  punctilious  honour,  that  he  would
not  decline  a  command  that  appeared  dangerous  and
difficult,  but  at  the  same  time  was  so  haughty,  that  he
would  not  accept  of  it  but  on  his  own  terms,  insisting
on  being  appointed  the  emperor's  vicar-general  in  Italy,
with  the  supreme  military  command  of  all  the  imperial
and  Spanish  territories  in  that  country.  Charles  granted
all  his  demands  ;  and  he  took  possession  of  his  new  dig-
nity with  almost  unlimited  authority.
His  opera-  His  first  operations,  however,  were  neither
inemidder-  proportioned  to  his  former  reputation  and  the
able-  extensive  powers  with  which  he  was  invested,
nor  did  they  come  up  to  the  emperor's  expectations.
Brissac  had  under  his  command  an  army  which,  though
inferior  in  number  to  the  Imperialists,  was  composed  of

1555.]  BOOK XL  295

chosen  troops,  which  having  grown  old  in  service  in
that  country,  where  every  town  was  fortified,  and  every
castle  capable  of  being  defended,  were  perfectly  ac-
quainted with  the  manner  of  carrying  on  war  there.
By  their  valour,  and  his  own  good  conduct,  Brissac
not  only  defeated  all  the  attempts  of  the  Imperialists,
but  added  new  conquests  to  the  territories  of  which  he
was  formerly  master.  Alva,  after  having  boasted,  with
his  usual  arrogance,  that  he  would  drive  the  French
out  of  Piedmont  in  a  few  weeks,  was  obliged  to  retire
into  winter-quarters,  with  the  mortification  of  being  un-
able to  preserve  entire  that  part  of  the  country  of  which
the  emperor  had  hitherto  kept  possession.1

As  the  operations  of  this  campaign  in  Piedmont  were
indecisive,  those  in  the  Netherlands  were  inconsider-
able, neither  the  emperor  nor  king  of  France  being  able
to  bring  into  the  field  an  army  strong  enough  to  under-
Acons  i-  take  any  enterprise  of  moment.  But  what  Charles
racy  to  be-  wanted  in  force,  he  endeavoured  to  supply  by  a

tray  Metz  J

to  the  im-  bold  stratagem,  the  success  of  which  would  have
lsts'  been  equal  to  that  of  the  most  vigorous  cam-
paign. During  the  siege  of  Metz,  Leonard,  father
guardian  of  a  convent  of  Franciscans  in  that  city,  had
insinuated  himself  far  into  the  esteem  and  favour  of  the
duke  of  Guise,  by  his  attachment  to  the  French.  Being
a  man  of  an  active  and  intriguing  spirit,  he  had  been
extremely  useful  both  in  animating  the  inhabitants  to
sustain  with  patience  all  the  hardships  of  the  siege,  and
in  procuring  intelligence  of  the  enemy's  designs  and
motions.  The  merit  of  those  important  services,  toge-
ther with  the  warm  recommendations  of  the  duke  of
Guise,  secured  him  such  high  confidence  with  Vielle-
ville,  who  was  appointed  governor  of  Metz  when  Guise
left  the  town,  that  he  was  permitted  to  converse  or  cor-
respond with  whatever  persons  he  thought  fit,  and  no-
thing that  he  did  created  any  suspicion.  This  monk,

1  Tliuan.  lib.  xv.  529. Guichenon  Hist,  de  Savoye,  torn.  i.  670.

296  CHARLES  V.  [1555.

from  the  levity  natural  to  bold  and  projecting  adven-
turers ;  or  from  resentment  against  the  French,  who  had
not  bestowed  on  him  such  rewards  ?.s  he  thought  due
to  his  own  merit ;  or  tempted  by  the  unlimited  confi-
fidence  which  was  placed  in  him,  to  imagine  that  he
might  carry  on  and  accomplish  any  scheme  with  per-
fect security,  formed  a  design  of  betraying  Metz  to  the
Imperialists.

The  plan He  communicated  his  intentions  to  the  queen-
oflt< dowager  of  Hungary,  who  governed  the  Low
Countries  in  the  name  of  her  brother. She  approving,
without  any  scruple,  any  act  of  treachery,  from  which
the  emperor  might  derive  such  signal  advantage,  as-
sisted the  father  guardian  in  concerting  the  most  proper
plan  for  insuring  its  success. They  agreed,  that  the
father  guardian  should  endeavour  to  gain  his  monks  to
concur  in  promoting  the  design ;  that  he  should  intro-
duce into  the  convent  a  certain  number  of  chosen  sol-
diers, disguised  in  the  habit  of  friars ;  that  when  every
thing  was  ripe  for  execution,  the  governor  of  Thionville
should  march  towards  Metz  in  the  night  with  a  consi-
derable body  of  troops,  and  attempt  to  scale  the  ram-
parts ;  that  while  the  garrison  was  employed  in  resist-
ing the  assailants,  the  monks  should  set  fire  to  the  town
in  different  places ;  that  the  soldiers  who  lay  concealed
should  sally  out  of  the  convent,  and  attack  those  who
defended  the  ramparts  in  the  rear. Amidst  the  univer-
sal terror  and  confusion  which  events  so  unexpected
would  occasion,  it  was  not  doubted  but  that  the  Impe-
rialists might  become  masters  of  the  town. As  a  recom-
pense for  this  service  the  father  guardian  stipulated  that
he  should  be  appointed  bishop  of  Metz,  and  ample  re-
wards were  promised  to  such  of  his  monks  as  should  be
most  active  in  co-operating  with  him.
its  pro- The  father  guardian  accomplished  what  he
grc"' had  undertaken  to  perform  with  great  secrecy
and  dispatch. By  his  authority  and  arguments,  as  well

1555.]  BOOK XL  297

as  by  the  prospect  of  wealth  and  honours  which  he  set
before  his  monks,  he  prevailed  on  all  of  them  to  enter
into  the  conspiracy.  He  introduced  into  the  convent,
without  being  suspected,  as  many  soldiers  as  were
thought  sufficient.  The  governor  of  Thionville,  ap-
prised in  due  time  of  the  design,  had  assembled  a
proper  number  of  troops  for  executing  it ;  and  the  mo-
ment approached,  which  probably  would  have  wrested
from  Henry  the  most  important  of  all  his  conquests,
is  dis-  But,  happily  for  France,  on  the  very  day  that
covered.  was  flxe(j  for  striking  the  blow,  Vielleville,  an
able  and  vigilant  officer,  received  information  from  a
spy  whom  he  entertained  at  Thionville,  that  certain
Franciscan  friars  resorted  frequently  thither,  and  were
admitted  to  many  private  conferences  with  the  governor,
who  was  carrying  on  preparations  for  some  military  en-
terprise with  great  dispatch,  but  with  a  most  mysterious
secrecy.  This  was  sufficient  to  awaken  Vielleville's
suspicions.  Without  communicating  these  to  any  per-
son, he  instantly  visited  the  convent  of  Franciscans;
detected  the  soldiers  who  were  concealed  there ;  and
forced  them  to  discover  as  much  as  they  knew  concern-
ing the  nature  of  the  enterprise.  The  father  guardian,
who  had  gone  to  Thionville  that  he  might  put  the  last
hand  to  his  machinations,  was  seized  at  the  gate  as  he
returned ;  and  he,  in  order  to  save  himself  from  the
rack,  revealed  all  the  circumstances  of  the  conspiracy.
A  body  of  Vielleville,  not  satisfied  with  having  seized
isTsPde-a  the  traitors,  and  having  frustrated  their  schemes,
feated.  was  solicitous  to  take  advantage  of  the  disco-
veries which  he  had  made,  so  as  to  be  revenged  on  the
Imperialists.  For  this  purpose  he  marched  out  with
the  best  troops  in  his  garrison,  and  placing  these  in
ambush  near  the  road,  by  which  the  father  guardian  had
informed  him  that  the  governor  of  Thionville  would
approach  Metz,  he  fell  upon  the  Imperialists  with  great
fury,  as  they  advanced  in  perfect  security,  without  sus-

298  CHARLES V.  [1555.

pecting  any  danger  to  be  near.  Confounded  at  this
sudden  attack,  by  an  enemy  whom  they  expected  to
surprise,  they  made  little  resistance  ;  and  a  great  part
of  the  troops  employed  in  this  service,  among  whom
were  many  persons  of  distinction,  was  killed  or  taken
prisoners.  Before  next  morning,  Vielleville  returned
to  Metz  in  triumph.

The  con-  ^°  res°lution  was  taken  for  some  time  con-
spirators cerning  the  fate  of  the  father  guardian  and  his

punished.  °  .  *-

monks,  the  iramers  and  conductors  of  this  dan-
gerous conspiracy.  Regard  for  the  honour  of  a  body
so  numerous  and  respectable  as  the  Franciscans,  and
unwillingness  to  afford  a  subject  of  triumph  to  the  ene-
mies of  the  Romish  church  by  their  disgrace,  seem  to
have  occasioned  this  delay.  But  at  length,  the  neces-
sity of  inflicting  exemplary  punishment  upon  them,  in
order  to  deter  others  from  venturing  to  commit  the  same
crime,  became  so  evident,  that  orders  were  issued  to
proceed  to  their  trial.  The  guilt  was  made  apparent
by  the  clearest  evidence;  and  sentence  of  death  was
passed  upon  the  father  guardian,  together  with  twenty
monks.  On  the  evening  previous  to  the  day  fixed  for
their  execution,  the  jailer  took  them  out  of  the  dun-
geons in  which  they  had  hitherto  been  confined  sepa-
rately, and  shut  them  all  up  in  one  great  room,  that
they  might  confess  their  sins  one  to  another,  and  join
together  in  preparing  for  a  future  state.  But  as  soon
as  they  were  left  alone,  instead  of  employing  themselves
in  the  religious  exercises  suitable  to  their  condition,
they  began  to  reproach  the  father  guardian,  and  four  of
the  senior  monks  who  had  been  most  active  in  seducing
them,  for  their  inordinate  ambition,  which  had  brought
such  misery  on  them,  and  such  disgrace  upon  their
order.  From  reproaches  they  proceeded  to  curses  and
execration,  and  at  last,  in  a  frenzy  of  rage  and  de-
spair, they  fell  upon  them  with  such  violence,  that  they
murdered  the  father  guardian  on  the  spot,  and  so  dis-

1555.]  BOOK XI.  299

abled  the  other  four,  that  it  became  necessary  to  carry
them  next  morning  in  a  cart,  together  with  the  dead
body  of  the  father  guardian,  to  the  place  of  execution.
Six  of  the  youngest  were  pardoned,  the  rest  suffered
the  punishment  which  their  crime  merited/
A  fruitless  Though  both  parties,  exhausted  by  the  length
of  the  war,  carried  it  on  in  this  languishing

establish  manner>  neither  of  them  shewed  any  disposi-
peace.  tion  to  listen  to  overtures  of  peace.  Cardinal
Pole,  indeed,  laboured  with  all  the  zeal  becoming  his
piety  and  humanity,  to  re-establish  concord  among  the
princes  of  Christendom.  He  had  not  only  persuaded
his  mistress,  the  queen  of  England,  to  enter  warmly
into  his  sentiments,  and  to  offer  her  mediation  to  the
contending  powers,  but  had  prevailed  both  on  the  em-
peror and  king  of  France  to  send  their  plenipotentiaries
to  a  village  between  Gravelines  and  Ardres.  He  him-
self, together  with  Gardiner  bishop  of  Winchester,  re-
paired thither  in  order  to  preside  as  mediators  in  the
conferences  which  were  to  be  held  for  adjusting  all  the
points  in  difference.  But  though  each  of  the  monarchs
committed  this  negotiation  to  some  of  their  ministers,
in  whom  they  placed  the  greatest  confidence,  it  was
soon  evident  that  they  came  together  with  no  sincere
desire  of  accommodation.  Each  proposed  ar-

May  21. . .  .  ,  »  Vi

tides  so  extravagant  that  they  could  have  no
hopes  of  their  being  accepted.  Pole,  after  exerting  in
vain  all  his  zeal  and  address,  in  order  to  persuade  them
to  relinquish  such  extravagant  demands,  and  to  con-
sent to  the  substitution  of  more  equal  conditions,  be-
came sensible  of  the  folly  of  wasting  time,  in  attempt-
ing to  re-establish  concord  between  those,  whom  their
obstinacy  rendered  irreconcilable,  broke  off  the  con-
ference, and  returned  to  England.1

k  Thuan.  lib.  xv.  p.  522. Belcar.  Com.  Rer.  Gal.  866. Memoirs  du  Mareclu
Vielleville,  par  M.  Charloix,  torn.  iii.  p.  219,  &c.  p.  347.  Par.  1757.

1  Thuan.  lib.  xv.  p.  523. Mem.  de  Kibbicr,  torn.  ii.  p.  613.

300  CHARLES V.  [1555,

Affairs  of  During  these  transactions  in  other  parts  of
lermany.  £uropej  Germany  enjoyed  such  profound  tran-
quillity, as  afforded  the  diet  full  leisure  to  deliberate,
and  to  establish  proper  regulations  concerning  a  point
of  the  greatest  consequence  to  the  internal  peace  of
the  empire.  By  the  treaty  of  Passau,  in  1552,  it  had
been  referred  to  the  next  diet  of  the  empire  to  confirm
and  perfect  the  plan  of  religious  pacification  which
was  then  agreed  upon.  The  terror  and  confusion  with
which  the  violent  commotions  excited  by  Albert  of
Brandenburg  had  filled  Germany,  as  well  as  the  con-
stant attention  which  Ferdinand  was  obliged  to  give
to  the  affairs  of  Hungary,  had  hitherto  prevented  the
holding  a  diet,  though  it  had  been  summoned,  soon
after  the  conclusion  of  the  treaty,  to  meet  at  Augsburg.
Diet  held  But  as  a  diet  was  now  necessary  on  many
atAugs-  accounts,  Ferdinand,  about  the  beginning:  of

burg,  and  .  '  °

this  year  had  repaired  to  Augsburg.  Though
few  of  the  princes  were  present  either  in  person
or  by  their  deputies,  he  opened  the  assembly
by  a  speech,  in  which  he  proposed  a  termination  of
the  dissensions  to  which  the  new  tenets  and  contro-
versies with  regard  to  religion  had  given  rise,  not  only
as  the  first  and  great  business  of  the  diet,  but  as  the
point  which  both  the  emperor  and  he  had  most  at
heart.  He  represented  the  innumerable  obstacles  which
the  emperor  had  to  surmount,  before  he  could  procure
the  convocation  of  a  general  council,  as  well  as  the
fatal  accidents  which  had  for  some  time  retarded,  and
had  at  last  suspended  the  consultations  of  that  assem-
bly. He  observed,  that  experience  had  already  taught
how  vain  it  was  to  expect  any  remedy  for  evils,  which
demanded  immediate  redress  from  a  general  council,
the  assembling  of  which  would  either  be  prevented,
or  its  deliberations  be  interrupted  by  the  dissensions
and  hostilities  of  the  princes  of  Christendom :  that  a
national  council  in  Germany,  which,  as  some  imagined,

in  it.

3555.]  BOOK  XI.  301

might  be  called  with  greater  ease,  and  deliberate  with
more  perfect  security,  was  an  assembly  of  an  unprece-
dented nature,  the  jurisdiction  of  which  was  uncertain
in  its  extent,  and  the  form  of  its  proceedings  unde-
fined :  that  in  his  opinion  there  remained  but  one  method
for  composing  their  unhappy  differences,  which,  though
it  had  been  often  tried  without  success,  yet  might  prove
effectual  if  it  were  attempted  with  a  better  and  more
pacific  spirit  than  had  appeared  on  former  occasions,
and  that  was  to  choose  a  few  men  of  learning,  abilities,
and  moderation,  who,  by  discussing  the  disputed  arti-
cles in  an  amicable  conference,  might  explain  them  in
.such  a  manner  as  to  bring  the  contending  parties  either
to  unite  in  sentiment  or  to  differ  with  charity.
Suspicions  This  speech  being  printed  in  common  form,
cftirePro-  and  dispersed  over  the  empire,  revived  the
testants.  fears  an(j  jealousies  of  the  Protestants  ;  Fer-
dinand, they  observed  with  much  surprise,  had  not  once
mentioned,  in  his  address  to  the  diet,  the  treaty  of
Passau,  the  stipulations  of  which  they  considered  as
the  great  security  of  their  religious  liberty.  The  sus-
picions to  which  this  gave  rise  were  confirmed  by  the
accounts  which  they  daily  received  of  the  extreme  se-
verity with  which  Ferdinand  treated  their  Protestant
brethren  in  his  hereditary  dominions  ;  and  as  it  was
natural  to  consider  his  actions  as  the  surest  indication
of  his  intentions,  this  diminished  their  confidence  in
those  pompous  professions  of  moderation  and  of  zeal
for  the  re-establishment  of  concord,  to  which  his  prac-
tice seemed  to  be  so  repugnant.

These  in- The  arrival  of  the  cardinal  Morone,  whom
creased  by  the  pope  had  appointed  to  attend  the  diet  as

the  arrival ...  .

of  a  nuncio  his  nuncio,  completed their  conviction,  and

pope  t0e  left  them  no  room  to  doubt  that  some  danger-
the  diet.  Qus  macamatiOn  was  forming  against  the  peace
and  safety  of  the  Protestant  church.  Julius,  elated  with
the  unexpected  return  of  the  English  nation  from  apos-

302  CHARLES V.  [1555.

tacy,  began  to  flatter  himself,  that  the  spirit  of  mutiny
and  revolt  having  now  spent  its  force,  the  happy  period
was  come  when  the  church  might  resume  its  ancient
authority,  and  be  obeyed  by  the  people  with  the  same
tame  submission  as  formerly.  Full  of  these  hopes  he
had  sent  Morone  to  Augsburg,  with  instructions  to
employ  his  eloquence  to  excite  the  Germans  to  imitate
the  laudable  example  of  the  English,  and  his  political
address  in  order  to  prevent  any  decree  of  the  diet  to
the  detriment  of  the  Catholic  faith.  As  Moroni  inhe-
rited from  his  father,  the  chancellor  of  Milan,  uncom-
mon talents  for  negotiation  and  intrigue,  he  could
hardly  have  failed  of  embarrassing  the  measures  of  the
Protestants  in  the  diet,  or  of  defeating  whatever  they
aimed  at  obtaining  in  it  for  their  farther  security.

But  an  unforeseen  event  delivered  them  from

The  death  i  . i T i i

of  Julius  all  the  danger  which  they  had  reason  to  appre-
hend from  Morone's  presence.  Julius,  by  aban-
doning himself  to  pleasures  and  amusements,  no  less
unbecoming  his  age  than  his  character,  having  con-
tracted such  habits  of  dissipation,  that  any  serious  oc-
cupation, especially  if  attended  with  difficulty,  be-
came an  intolerable  burden  to  him,  had  long  resisted
the  solicitations  of  his  nephew  to  hold  a  consistory,
because  he  expected  there  a  violent  opposition  to  his
schemes  in  favour  of  that  young  man.  But  when  all
the  pretexts  which  he  could  invent  for  eluding  this  re-
quest were  exhausted,  and  at  the  same  time  his  indo-
lent aversion  to  business  continued  to  grow  upon  him,
he  feigned  indisposition  rather  than  yield  to  his  ne-
phew's importunity ;  and  that  he  might  give  the  deceit
a  greater  colour  of  probability,  he  not  only  confined
himself  to  his  apartment,  but  changed  his  usual  diet
and  manner  of  life.  By  persisting  too  long  in  acting
this  ridiculous  part,  he  contracted  a  real  disease,  of
which  he  died  in  a  few  days,  leaving  his  in-
famous minion  the  cardinal  de  Mont  to  bear

1555.]  BOOK XL  303

his  name,  and  to  disgrace  the  dignity  which  he  had
conferred  upon  him."1 As  soon  as  Morone

The  nun-  i^i-iii

cio  sets  out  heard  01  his  death,  he  set  out  abruptly  from
Augsburg,  where  he  had  resided  only  a  few
days,  that  he  might  be  present  at  the  election  of  a  new
pontiff.
Ferdi-  ^ne  cause  °f  their  suspicions  and  fears  being

nand'srea-thus  removed,  the  Protestants  soon  became  sen-
sons  for

wishing  to  sible  that  their  conjectures  concerning  Ferdi-
Protest-10  nand's  intentions,  however  specious,  were  ill-
founded,  and  that  he  had  no  thoughts  of  vio-
lating the  articles  favourable  to  them  in  the  treaty  of
Passau.  Charles,  from  the  time  that  Maurice  had  de-
feated all  his  schemes  in  the  empire,  and  overturned
the  great  system  of  religious  and  civil  despotism,  which
he  had  almost  established  there,  gave  little  attention
to  the  internal  government  of  Germany,  and  permitted
his  brother  to  pursue  whatever  measures  he  judged
most  salutary  and  expedient.  Ferdinand,  less  ambi-
tious and  enterprising  than  the  emperor,  instead  of  re-
suming a  plan,  which  he,  with  power  and  resources  so
far  superior,  had  failed  of  accomplishing,  endeavoured
to  attach  the  princes  of  the  empire  to  his  family  by  an
administration  uniformly  moderate  and  equitable.  To
this  he  gave,  at  present,  particular  attention,  because  his
situation  at  this  juncture  rendered  it  necessary  to  court
their  favour  and  support  with  more  than  usual  assiduity.
Charles  Charles  had  again  resumed  his  favourite

^umeThis  project  of  acquiring  the  imperial  crown  for  his
altering  son  Ph^F* tne  prosecution  of  which,  the  recep-
the  sue-  tion  it  had  met  with  when  first  proposed  had

cession  to  .._...  i-i-i-i

the  empire,  obliged  him  to  suspend,  but  had  not  induced
him  to  relinquish.  This  led  him  warmly  to  renew  his
request  to  his  brother,  that  he  would  accept  of  some
compensation  for  his  prior  right  of  succession,  and  sa-
crifice that  to  the  grandeur  of  the  house  of  Austria.

m  Onuphr.  Panvinius  de  Vitis  Pontificum,  p.  3"2Q. Thuan.  lib.  xv.  517.

304  CHARLES V.  [1555.

Ferdinand,  who  was  as  little  disposed  as  formerly  to
give  such  an  extraordinary  proof  of  self-denial,  being
sensible  that  in  order  to  defeat  this  scheme,  not  only
the  most  inflexible  firmness  on  his  part,  but  a  vigorous
declaration  from  the  princes  of  the  empire  in  behalf  of
his  title,  were  requisite,  was  willing  to  purchase  their
favour  by  gratifying  them  in  every  point  that  they
deemed  interesting  or  essential.

The  Turks  At  the  same  time  he  stood  in  need  of  imme-
toe[nvadey  diate  and  extraordinary  aid  from  the  Germanic
Hungary,  body,  as  the  Turks,  after  having  wrested  from
him  great  part  of  his  Hungarian  territories  were  ready
to  attack  the  provinces  still  subject  to  his  authority  with
a  formidable  army,  against  which  he  could  bring  no
equal  force  into  the  field.  For  this  aid  from  Germany
he  could  not  hope,  if  the  internal  peace  of  the  empire
were  not  established  on  a  foundation  solid  in  itself,  and
which  should  appear,  even  to  the  Protestants,  so  secure
and  so  permanent,  as  might  not  only  allow  them  to  en-
gage in  a  distant  war  with  safety,  but  might  encourage
them  to  act  in  it  with  vigour.

He  is  A  step  taken  by  the  Protestants  themselves,

a  short  time  after  the  opening  of  the  diet,  ren-
dered  him  still  more  cautious  of  giving  them
testants.  any  new  cause  of  offence.  As  soon  as  the  pub-
lication of  Ferdinand's  speech  awakened  the  fears  and
suspicions  which  have  been  mentioned,  the  electors  of
Saxony  and  Brandenburg,  together  with  the  landgrave
of  Hesse,  met  at  Naumburg,  and  confirming  the  ancient
treaty  of  confraternity  which  had  long  united  their  fa-
milies, they  added  to  it  a  new  article,  by  which  the
contracting  parties  bound  themselves  to  adhere  to  the
confession  of  Augsburg,  and  to  maintain  the  doctrine
which  it  contained  in  their  respective  dominions."

Ferdinand,  influenced 'by  all  these  considera-

Ferdmand  *

.zealous  to  tioos,  employed  his  utmost  address  in  conduct-

P  Chvtrai  Saxonia,  480.

1555.]  BOOK XI.  305

promote fag  the  deliberations  of  the  diet,  so  as  not  to

an  accom- °  .

modation.  excite  the  jealousy  of  a  party  on  whose  friend-
ship he  depended,  and  whose  enmity,  as  they  had  not
only  taken  the  alarm,  but  had  begun  to  prepare  for
their  defence,  he  had  so  much  reason  to  dread.  The
members  of  the  diet  readily  agreed  to  Ferdinand's  pro-
posal of  taking  the  state  of  religion  into  consideration,
previous  to  any  other  business.  But,  as  soon  as  they
entered  upon  it,  both  parties  discovered  all  the  zeal  and
animosity  which  a  subject  so  interesting  naturally  en-
genders, and  which  the  rancour  of  controversy,  together
with  the  violence  of  civil  war,  had  inflamed  to  the  highest

'  O

pitch.

The  pre- The  Protestants  contended,  that  the  security

the  Catho-  which  they  claimed  in  consequence  of  the  treaty

Passau  should  extend,  without  limitation,  to
tants. all  who  had  hitherto  embraced  the  doctrine  of
Luther,  or  who  should  hereafter  embrace  it. The  Ca-
tholics, having  first  of  all  asserted  the  pope's  right  as
the  supreme  and  final  judge  with  respect  to  all  articles
of  faith,  declared,  that  though,  on  account  of  the  pre-
sent situation  of  the  empire,  and  for  the  sake  of  peace,
they  were  willing  to  confirm  the  toleration  granted  by
the  treaty  of  Passau,  to  such  as  had  already  adopted
the  new  opinions  ;  they  must  insist  that  this  indulgence
should  not  be  extended  either  to  those  cities  which  had
conformed  to  the  Interim,  or  to  such  ecclesiastics  as
should  for  the  future  apostatize from  the  church  of
Rome. It  was  no  easy  matter  to  reconcile  such  oppo-
site pretensions,  which  were  supported,  on  each  side,
by  the  most  elaborate  arguments,  and  the  greatest  acri-
mony of  expression,  that  the  abilities  or  zeal  of  theolo-
gians long  exercised  in  disputation  could  suggest.  Fer-
dinand, however,  by  his  address  and  perseverance  ;  by
softening  some  things  on  each  side  ;  by  putting  a  fa-
vourable meaning  upon  Others  ;  by  representing  inces-
VOL.  v.  x

306  CHARLES V.  [1555.

santly  the  necessity  as  well  as  the  advantages  of  con-
cord; and  by  threatening,  on  some  occasions,  when
all  other  considerations  are  disregarded,  to  dissolve  the
diet,  brought  them  at  length  to  a  conclusion  in  which
they  all  agreed.

Sept  «5. Conformably  to  this,  a  recess  was  framed,
of  KNgfon approved  of,  and  published  with  the  usual  for-
estabiished.  nialities. The  following  are  the  chief  articles
which  it  contained : — That  such  princes  and  cities  as
have  declared  their  approbation  of  the  confession  of
Augsburg,  shall  be  permitted  to  profess  the  doctrine,
and  exercise  the  worship  which  it  authorizes,  without
interruption  or  molestation  from  the  emperor,  the  king
of  the  Romans,  or  any  power  or  person  whatsoever ;
that  the  Protestants,  on  their  part,  shall  give  no  dis-
quiet to  the  princes  and  states  who  adhere  to  the  tenets
and  rites  of  the  church  of  Rome ;  that,  for  the  future,
no  attempt  shall  be  made  towards  terminating  religious
differences,  but  by  the  gentle  and  pacific  methods  of
persuasion  and  conference  ;  that  the  Popish  ecclesias-
tics shall  claim  no  spiritual  jurisdiction  in  such  states
as  receive  the  confession  of  Augsburg ;  that  such  as
had  seized  the  benefices  or  revenues  of  the  church,
previous  to  the  treaty  of  Passau,  shall  retain  possession
of  them,  and  be  liable  to  no  persecution  in  the  imperial
chamber  on  that  account ;  that  the  supreme  civil  power
in  every  state  shall  have  right  to  establish  what  form
of  doctrine  and  worship  it  shall  deem  proper,  and  if
any  of  its  subjects  refuse  to  conform  to  these,  shall
permit  them  to  remove  with  all  their  effects  whitherso-
ever they  shall  please  ;  that  if  any  prelate  or  ecclesias-
tic shall  hereafter  abandon  the  Romish  religion,  he  shall
instantly  relinquish  his  diocess  or  benefice,  and  it  shall
be  lawful  for  those  in  whom  the  right  of  nomination  is
vested,  to  proceed  immediately  to  an  election,  as  if  the
office  were  vacant  by  death  or  translation,  and  to  ap-

1555.]  BOOK  XL  307

point  a  successor  of  undoubted  attachment  to  the  an-
cient system.0

Reflec-  Such  are  the  capital  articles  in  this  famous

tjons  on  recess,  which  is  the  basis  of  religious  peace  in
gress  of  the  Germany,  and  the  bond  of  union  among  its  va-
o"  toiera-8  rious  states,  the  sentiments  of  which  are  so  ex-
tremely different  with  respect  to  points  the  most
interesting  as  well  as  important.  In  our  age  and  na-
tion, to  which  the  idea  of  toleration  is  familiar,  and  its
beneficial  effects  well  known,  it  may  seem  strange,  that
a  method  of  terminating  their  dissensions,  so  suitable
to  the  mild  and  charitable  spirit  of  the  Christian  reli-
gion, did  not  sooner  occur  to  the  contending  parties.
But  this  expedient,  however  salutary,  was  so  repug-
nant to  the  sentiments  and  practice  of  Christians  during
many  ages,  that  it  did  not  lie  obvious  to  discovery.
Among  the  ancient  heathens,  all  whose  deities  were
local  and  tutelary,  diversity  of  sentiments  concerning
the  object  or  rites  of  religious  worship  seems  to  have
been  no  source  of  animosity,  because  the  acknowledg-
ing veneration  to  be  due  to  any  one  god,  did  not  imply
denial  of  the  existence  or  the  power  of  any  other  god ;
nor  were  the  modes  and  rites  of  worship  established  in
one  country  incompatible  with  those  which  other  na-
tions approved  of  and  observed.  Thus  the  errors  in
their  system  of  theology  were  of  such  a  nature  as  to  be
productive  of  concord ;  and  notwithstanding  the  amaz-
ing number  of  their  deities,  as  well  as  the  infinite  variety
of  their  ceremonies,  a  sociable  and  tolerating  spirit  sub-
sisted almost  universally  in  the  pagan  world.

But  when  the  Christian  revelation  declared  one  Su-
preme Being  to  be  the  sole  object  of  religious  venera-
tion, and  prescribed  the  form  of  worship  most  accept-
able to  him,  whoever  admitted  the  truth  of  it  held,  of
consequence,  every  other  system  of  religion  as  a  de-
viation from  what  was  established  by  divine  authority,

»  Sleid.  620. F.  Paul,  368. Pailav.  p.  11.  161.

x2

308  CHARLES V.  [1555.

to  be  false  and  impious.  Hence  arose  the  zeal  of  the
first  converts  to  the  Christian  faith  in  propagating  its
doctrines,  and  the  ardour  with  which  they  laboured  to
overturn  every  other  form  of  worship.  They  employed,
however,  for  this  purpose  no  methods  but  such  as
suited  the  nature  of  religion.  By  the  force  of  power-
ful arguments,  they  convinced  the  understandings  of
men ;  by  the  charms  of  superior  virtue,  they  allured
and  captivated  their  hearts.  At  length  the  civil  power
declared  in  favour  of  Christianity  ;  and  though  num-
bers, imitating  the  example  of  their  superiors,  crowded
into  the  church,  many  still  adhered  to  their  ancient
superstitions.  Enraged  at  their  obstinacy,  the  minis-
ters of  religion,  whose  zeal  was  still  unabated,  though
their  sanctity  and  virtue  were  much  diminished,  forgot
so  far  the  nature  of  their  own  mission,  and  of  the  ar-
guments which  they  ought  to  have  employed,  that  they
armed  the  imperial  power  against  these  unhappy  men,
and  as  they  could  not  persuade,  they  tried  to  compel
them  to  believe.

At  the  same  time,  controversies  concerning  articles
of  faith  multiplied,  from  various  causes,  among  Chris-
tians themselves,  and  the  same  unhallowed  weapons
which  had  first  been  used  against  the  enemies  of  their
religion,  were  turned  against  each  other.  Every  zeal-
ous disputant  endeavoured  to  interest  the  civil  magis-
trate in  his  cause,  and  each  in  his  turn  employed  the
secular  arm  to  crush  or  to  exterminate  his  opponents.
Not  long  after,  the  bishops  of  Rome  put  in  their  claim
to  infallibility  in  explaining  articles  of  faith,  and  de-
ciding points  in  controversy ;  and,  bold  as  the  preten-
sion was,  they,  by  their  artifices  and  perseverance,  im-
posed on  the  credulity  of  mankind,  and  brought  them
to  recognise  it.  To  doubt  or  to  deny  any  doctrine  to
which  these  unerring  instructors  had  given  the  sanc-
tion of  their  approbation,  was  held  to  be  not  only  a
resisting  of  truth,  but  an  act  of  rebellion  against  their

1555.]  BOOK XI.  309

sacred  authority  :  and  the  secular  power,  of  which,  by
various  arts,  they  had  acquired  the  absolute  direction,
was  instantly  employed  to  avenge  both.

Thus  Europe  had  been  accustomed,  during  many
centuries,  to  see  speculative  opinions  propagated  or
defended  by  force ;  the  charity  and  mutual  forbearance
which  Christianity  recommends  with  so  much  warmth,
were  forgotten ;  the  sacred  rights  of  conscience  and  of
private  judgment  were  unheard  of;  and  not  only  the
idea  of  toleration,  but  even  the  word  itself,  in  the  sense
now  affixed  to  it,  was  unknown.  A  right  to  extirpate
error  by  force,  was  universally  allowed  to  be  the  pre-
rogative of  such  as  possessed  the  knowledge  of  truth ;
and  as  each  party  of  Christians  believed  that  they  had
got  possession  of  this  invaluable  attainment,  they  all
claimed  and  exercised,  as  far  as  they  were  able,  the
rights  which  it  was  supposed  to  convey.  The  Roman
Catholics,  as  their  system  rested  on  the  decisions  of  an
infallible  judge,  never  doubted  that  truth  was  on  their
side,  and  openly  called  on  the  civil  power  to  repel  the
impious  and  heretical  innovators  who  had  risen  up
against  it.  The  Protestants,  no  less  confident  that  their
doctrine  was  well  founded,  required,  with  equal  ar-
dour, the  princes  of  their  party  to  check  such  as  pre-
sumed to  impugn  it.  Luther,  Calvin,  Cranmer,  Knox,
the  founders  of  the  reformed  church  in  their  respective
countries,  as  far  as  they  had  power  and  opportunity,
inflicted  the  same  punishments  upon  such  as  called  in
question  any  article  in  their  creeds  which  were  de-
nounced against  their  own  disciples  by  the  church  of
Rome.  To  their  followers,  and  perhaps  to  their  oppo-
nents, it  would  have  appeared  a  symptom  of  diffidence
in  the  goodness  of  their  cause,  or  an  acknowledgment
that  it  was  not  well  founded,  if  they  had  not  employed
in  its  defence  all  those  means  which  it  was  supposed
truth  had  a  right  to  employ.

It  was  towards  the  close  of  the  seventeenth  century,

310  CHARLES V.  [1555.

before  toleration,  under  its  present  form,  was  admit-
ted first  into  the  republic  of  the  United  Provinces,  and
from  thence  introduced  into  England.  Long  experi-
ence of  the  calamities  flowing  from  mutual  persecution,
the  influence  of  free  government,  the  light  and  hu-
manity acquired  by  the  progress  of  science,  together
with  the  prudence  and  authority  of  the  civil  magistrate,
were  all  requisite  in  order  to  establish  a  regulation,  so
repugnant  to  the  ideas  which  all  the  different  sects  had
adopted,  from  mistaken  conceptions  concerning  the
nature  of  religion  and  the  rights  of  truth,  or  which  all
of  them  had  derived  from  the  erroneous  maxims  esta-
blished by  the  church  of  Rome.

Advan-  The  recess  of  Augsburg,  it  is  evident,  was

founded  on  no  such  liberal  and  enlarged  sen-
timents  concerning  freedom  of  religious  in-
quiry,  or  the  nature  of  toleration. It  was  no-
thing more  than  a  scheme  of  pacification,  which  poli-
tical considerations  alone  had  suggested  to  the  con-
tending parties,  and  regard  for  their  mutual  tranquil-
lity and  safety  had  rendered  necessary. Of  this  there
can  be  no  stronger  proof  than  an  article  in  the  recess
itself,  by  which  the  benefits  of  the  pacification  are  de-
clared to  extend  only  to  the  Catholics  on  the  one  side,
and  to  such  as  adhered  to  the  confession  of  Augsburg
on  the  other. The  followers  of  Zuinglius  and  Calvin
remained,  in  consequence  of  that  exclusion,  without
any  protection  from  the  rigour  of  the  laws  denounced
against  heretics. Nor  did  they  obtain  any  legal  secu-
rity, until  the  treaty  of  Westphalia, near  a  century
after  this  period,  provided,  that  they  should  be  admit-
ted to  enjoy,  in  as  ample  a  manner  as  the  Lutherans,
all  the  advantages  and  protection  which  the  recess  of
Augsburg  affords.

And  to  the  But  i^  the  followers  of  Luther  were  highly
Catholics,  pleased  with  the  security  which  they  acquired
by  this  recess,  such  as  adhered  to  the  ancient  system

1555.]  BOOK XL  311

had  no  less  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  that  article  in  it,
which  preserved  entire  to  the  Roman  Catholic  church
the  benefices  of  such  ecclesiastics  as  should  hereafter
renounce  its  doctrines.  This  article,  known  in  Ger-
many by  the  name  of  the  Ecclesiastical  Reservation,
was  apparently  so  conformable  to  the  idea  and  to  the
rights  of  an  established  church,  and  it  seemed  so  equit-
able to  prevent  revenues,  which  had  been  originally
appropriated  for  the  maintenance  of  persons  attached
to  a  certain  system,  from  being  alienated  to  any  other
purpose,  that  the  Protestants,  though  they  foresaw  its
consequences,  were  obliged  to  relinquish  their  opposi-
tion to  it.  As  the  Roman  Catholic  princes  of  the  em-
pire have  taken  care  to  see  this  article  exactly  observed
in  every  case  where  there  was  an  opportunity  of  put-
ting it  in  execution,  it  has  proved  the  great  barrier  of
the  Romish  church  in  Germany  against  the  Reforma-
tion ;  and  as,  from  this  period,  the  same  temptation  of
interest  did  not  allure  ecclesiastics  to  relinquish  the
established  system,  there  have  been  few  of  that  order,
who  have  loved  truth  with  such  disinterested  and  ar-
dent affection,  as  for  its  sake  to  abandon  the  rich  be-
nefices which  they  had  in  possession.

During  the  sitting  of  the  diet,  Marcellus  Cer-
vino,  cardinal  of  Santo  Croce,  was  elected  pope
April  9.  jn  room  Of  Julius.  He,  in  imitation  of  Adrian,
did  not  change  his  name  on  being  exalted  to  the  papal
His  cha-  chair.  As  he  equalled  that  pontiff  in  purity  of
racier.  intention,  while  he  excelled  him  much  in  the
arts  of  government,  and  still  more  in  knowledge  of  the
state  and  genius  of  the  papal  court ;  as  he  had  capacity
to  discern  what  reformation  it  needed,  as  well  as  what
it  could  bear ;  such  regulations  were  expected  from  his
virtue  and  wisdom,  as  would  have  removed  many  of  its
grossest  and  most  flagrant  corruptions,  and  have  con-
tributed towards  reconciling  to  the  church  such  as,
from  indignation  at  these  enormities,  had  abandoned

312  CHARLES V.  [1555.

its  communion. But  this  excellent  pontiff  was  only

shewn  to  the  church,  and  immediately  snatched  away.

The  confinement  in  the  conclave  had  impaired

His  death.  ..,._•  i i /• «  /» i  •

his  health,  and  the  fatigue  or  tedious  ceremonies
upon  his  accession,  together  with  too  intense  and  anx-
ious application  of  mind  to  the  schemes  of  improvement
which  he  meditated,  exhausted  so  entirely  the  vigour  of
his  feeble  constitution,  that  he  sickened  on  the  twelfth,
and  died  on  the  twentieth  day  after  his  election.11
Theeiec- ^  *^e  refinements  in  artifice  and  intrigue,
tionof peculiar  to  conclaves,  were  displayed  in  that
which  was  held  for  electing  a  successor  to  Mar-
cellus;  the  cardinals  of  the  imperial  and  French  fac-
tions labouring,  with  equal  ardour,  to  gain  the  neces-
sary number  of  suffrages  for  one  of  their  own  party.
But,  after  a  struggle  of  no  long  duration,  though  con-
ducted with  all  the  warmth  and  eagerness  natural  to
men  contending  for  so  great  an  object,  they
united  in  choosing  John  Peter  Caraffa,  the  eldest
member  of  the  sacred  college,  and  the  son  of  count
Montorio,  a  nobleman  of  an  illustrious  family  in  the
kingdom  of  Naples. The  address  and  influence  of  car-
dinal Farnese,  who  favoured  his  pretensions,  Caraffa's
own  merit,  and  perhaps  his  great  age,  which  soothed
all  the  disappointed  candidates  with  the  near  prospect
of  a  new  vacancy,  concurred  in  bringing  about  this
speedy  union  of  suffrages. In  order  to  testify  his  re-
spect for  the  memory  of  Paul  III.,  by  whom  he  had
been  created  cardinal,  as  well  as  his  gratitude  to  the  fa-
mily of  Farnese,  he  assumed  the  name  of  Paul  IV.
His  rise ^e  choice  of  a  prelate  of  such  a  singular
«ud  cha- character,  and  who  had  long  held  a  course  ex-
tremely different  from  that  which  usually  led  to
the  dignity  now  conferred  upon  him,  filled  the  Italians,
who  had  nearest  access  to  observe  his  manners  and  de-
portment, with  astonishment,  and  kept  them  in  sus-

P  Thuan.  520. F.  Paul,  365. Onuph.  Panviii.  321,  &c.

1555.]  BOOK XI.  313

pense  and  solicitude  with  regard  to  his  future  conduct.
Paul,  though  born  in  a  rank  of  life  which,  without  any
other  merit,  might  have  secured  to  him  the  highest
ecclesiastical  preferments,  had,  from  his  early  years,
applied  to  study  with  all  the  assiduity  of  a  man  who
had  nothing  but  his  personal  attainments  to  render  him
conspicuous.  By  means  of  this,  he  not  only  acquired
profound  skill  in  scholastic  theology,  but  added  to  that
a  considerable  knowledge  of  the  learned  languages  and
of  polite  literature,  the  study  of  which  had  been  lately
revived  in  Italy,  and  was  pursued  at  this  time  with
great  ardour.  His  mind,  however,  naturally  gloomy
and  severe,  was  more  formed  to  imbibe  the  sour  spirit
of  the  former,  than  to  receive  any  tincture  of  elegance
or  liberality  of  sentiment  from  the  latter;  so  that  he  ac-
quired rather  the  qualities  and  passions  of  a  recluse
ecclesiastic,  than  the  talents  necessary  for  the  conduct
of  great  affairs.  Accordingly,  when  he  entered  into
orders,  although  several  rich  benefices  were  bestowed
upon  him,  and  he  was  early  employed  as  a  nuncio  in
different  courts,  he  soon  became  disgusted  with  that
course  of  life,  and  languished  to  be  in  a  situation  more
suited  to  his  taste  and  temper.  With  this  view,  he  re-
signed at  once  all  his  ecclesiastical  preferments,  and
having  instituted  an  order  of  regular  priests,  whom  he
denominated  Theatines,  from  the  name  of  the  arch-
bishopric which  he  had  held,  he  associated  himself  as  a
member  of  their  fraternity,  conformed  to  all  the  rigor-
ous rules  to  which  he  had  subjected  them,  and  preferred
the  solitude  of  a  monastic  life,  with  the  honour  of  being
the  founder  of  a  new  order,  to  all  the  great  objects
which  the  court  of  Rome  presented  to  his  ambition.

In  this  retreat  he  remained  for  many  years,  until  Paul
III.,  induced  by  the  fame  of  his  sanctity  and  knowledge,
called  him  to  Rome,  in  order  to  consult  with  him  con-
cerning the  measures  which  might  be  the  most  proper
and  effectual  for  suppressing  heresy,  and  re-establishing

314  CHARLES  V.  [1555.

the  ancient  authority  of  the  church.  Having  thus  al-
lured him  from  his  solitude,  the  pope,  partly  by  his  en-
treaties, and  partly  by  his  authority,  prevailed  on  him
to  accept  of  a  cardinal's  hat,  to  reassume  the  benefices
which  he  had  resigned,  and  to  return  again  into  the
usual  path  of  ecclesiastical  ambition  which  he  seemed
to  have  relinquished.  But  during  two  successive  pon-
tificates, under  the  first 'of  which  the  court  of  Rome  was
the  most  artful  and  interested,  and  under  the  second
the  most  dissolute  of  any  in  Europe,  Caraffa  retained
his  monastic  austerity.  He  was  an  avowed  and  bitter
enemy  not  only  of  all  innovation  in  opinion,  but  of
every  irregularity  in  practice;  he  was  the  chief  instru-
ment in  establishing  the  formidable  and  odious  tribunal
of  the  inquisition  in  the  papal  territories ;  he  appeared
a  violent  advocate  on  all  occasions  for  the  jurisdiction
and  discipline  of  the  church,  and  a  severe  censurer  of
every  measure  which  seemed  to  flow  from  motives  of
policy  or  interest,  rather  than  from  zeal  for  the  honour
of  the  ecclesiastical  order  and  the  dignity  of  the  holy
see.  Under  a  prelate  of  such  a  character,  the  Roman
courtiers  expected  a  severe  and  violent  pontificate,
during  which  the  principles  of  sound  policy  would  be
sacrificed  to  the  narrow  prejudices  of  priestly  zeal;
while  the  people  of  Rome  were  apprehensive  of
seeing  the  sordid  and  forbidding  rigour  of  monastic
manners  substituted  in  place  of  the  magnificence  to
which  they  had  long  been  accustomed  in  the  papal
court.  These  apprehensions  Paul  was  extremely  soli-
The  fi«t  citous  to  remove.  At  his  first  entrance  upon
ldSidLhu  tne  administration,  he  laid  aside  that  austerity
tration.  which  had  hitherto  distinguished  his  person
and  family,  and  when  the  master  of  his  household  in-
quired in  what  manner  he  would  choose  to  live,  he
haughtily  replied,  "  As  becomes  a  great  prince."  He
ordered  the  ceremony  of  his  coronation  to  be  conducted
with  more  than  usual  pomp;  and- endeavoured  to  ren-

1555.]  BOOK  XI.  315

der  himself  popular  by  several  acts  of  liberality  and  in-
dulgence towards  the  inhabitants  of  Rome.p
The  excess ^s  na*ural severity  of  temper, however,
of  his  at- would  have  soon  returned  upon  him,  and  would
toCbisene- have  justified  the  conjectures  of  the  courtiers,
phews' as  well  as  the  fears  of  the  people,  if  he  had  not,
immediately  after  his  election,  called  to  Rome  two  of
his  nephews,  the  sons  of  his  brother  the  count  of  Mon-
torio. The  eldest  he  promoted  to  be  governor  of  Rome.
The  youngest,  who  had  hitherto  served  as  a  soldier  of
fortune  in  the  armies  of  Spain  or  France,  and  whose  dis-
position as  well  as  manners  were  still  more  foreign  from
the  clerical  character  than  his  profession,  he  created  a
cardinal,  and  appointed  him  legate  of  Bologna,  the
second  office  in  power  and  dignity  which  a  pope  can
bestow. These  marks  of  favour,  no  less  sudden  than
extravagant,  he  accompanied  with  the  most  unbounded
confidence  and  attachment;  and,  forgetting  all  his  for-
mer severe  maxims,  he  seemed  to  have  no  other  object
Their  am ^an  the  aggrandizing  of  his  nephews. Their
bitious ambition,  unfortunately  for  Paul,  was  too  as-
piring to  be  satisfied  with  any  moderate  acqui-
sition. They  had  seen  the  family  of  Medici  raised  by
the  interest  of  the  popes  of  that  house  to  supreme  power
in  Tuscany ;  Paul  III.  had,  by  his  abilities  and  address,
secured  the  duchies  of  Parma  and  Placentia  to  the
family  of  Farnese. They  aimed  at  some  establishment
for  themselves,  no  less  considerable  and  independent;
and  as  they  could  not  expect  that  the  pope  would  carry
his  indulgence  towards  them  so  far  as  to  secularize  any
part  of  the  patrimony  of  the  church,  they  had  no  pros-
pect of  attaining  what  they  wished,  but  by  dismember-
ing the  imperial  dominions  in  Italy,  in  hopes  of  seizing
some  portion  of  them. This  alone  they  would  have
deemed  a  sufficient  reason  for  sowing  the  seeds  of  dis-
cord between  their  uncle  and  the  emperor.

P  Platina,  p.  337. Castaldo  Vita  di  Paolo  IV.  Rom.  1615.  p.  70.

CHARLES V.  [1555.

Reasons  of ^u*  carc^nal  Caraffa  had,  besides,  private
their  dis- reasons  which  filled  him  with  hatred  and  en-

gust  with .  .  iTn  -11  •  • '  i

theempe-  mity  to  the  emperor.  While  he  served  in  the
Spanish  troops  he  had  not  received  such  marks
of  honour  and  distinction  as  he  thought  due  to  his  birth
and  merit.  Disgusted  with  this  ill-usage,  he  had  ab-
ruptly quitted  the  imperial  service;  and,  entering  into
that  of  France,  he  had  not  only  met  with  such  a  recep-
tion as  soothed  his  vanity,  and  attached  him  to  the
French  interest,  but  by  contracting  an  intimate  friend-
ship with  Strozzi,  who  commanded  the  French  army  in
Tuscany,  he  had  imbibed  a  mortal  antipathy  to  the  em-
peror as  the  great  enemy  to  the  liberty  and  indepen-
dence of  the  Italian  states.  Nor  was  the  pope  himself
indisposed  to  receive  impressions  unfavourable  to  the
emperor.  The  opposition  given  to  his  election  by
the  cardinals  of  the  imperial  faction,  left  in  his  mind
deep  resentment,  which  was  heightened  by  the  re-
membrance of  ancient  injuries  from  Charles  or  his  mi-
nisters.
They  en-  Of  this  his  nephews  took  advantage,  and  em-

deavour  to i  i  «  j  •  j

alienate ployed  various  devices,  in  order  to  exasperate

^m  Beyond  a  possibility  of  reconciliation.  They
emperor,  aggravated  every  circumstance  which  could  be
deemed  any  indication  of  the  emperor's  dissatisfaction
with  his  promotion  ;  they  read  to  him  an  intercepted
letter,  in  which  Charles  taxed  the  cardinals  of  his
party  with  negligence  or  incapacity  in  not  having  de-
feated Paul's  election  :  they  pretended,  at  one  time,
to  have  discovered  a  conspiracy  formed  by  the  impe-
rial minister  and  Cosmo  di  Medici  against  the  pope's
life  ;  they  alarmed  him,  at  another,  with  accounts  of  a
plot  for  assassinating  themselves.  By  these  artifices,
they  kept  his  mind,  which  was  naturally  violent,  and
become  suspicious  from  old  age,  in  such  perpetual  agi-
tation, as  precipitated  him  into  measures  which  other-
wise he  would  have  been  the  first  person  to  con-

1555.]  BOOK XL  317

dernn/  He  seized  some  of  the  cardinals  who  were  most
attached  to  the  emperor,  and  confined  them  in  the  cas-
tle of  St.  Angelo ;  he  persecuted  the  Colonnas  and  other
Roman  barons,  the  ancient  retainers  to  the  imperial  fac-
tion, with  the  utmost  severity  ;  and,  discovering  on  all
occasions  his  distrust,  fear,  or  hatred  of  the  emperor,  he
began  at  last  to  court  the  friendship  of  the  French  king,
and  seemed  willing  to  throw  himself  absolutely  upon
him  for  support  and  protection.

induce  W£LS  ^e  verv  P°^n*  *°  wnich  his  nephews

him  to  wished  to  bring  him  as  most  favourable  to  their
king  of  ambitious  schemes  ;  and  as  the  accomplishment
France.  Qf  faese  depended  on  their  uncle's  life,  whose
advanced  age  did  not  admit  of  losing  a  moment  unne-
cessarily in  negotiations,  instead  of  treating  at  second-
hand with  the  French  ambassador  at  Rome,  they  pre-
vailed on  the  pope  to  dispatch  a  person  of  confidence
directly  to  the  court  of  France,  with  such  overtures  on
his  part  as  they  hoped  would  not  be  rejected.  He  pro-
posed an  alliance  offensive  and  defensive  between
Henry  and  the  pope ;  that  they  should  attack  the  duchy
of  Tuscany  and  the  kingdom  of  Naples  with  their  united
forces ;  and  if  their  arms  should  prove  successful,  that
the  ancient  republican  form  of  government  should  be
re-established  in  the  former,  and  the  investiture  of  the
latter  should  be  granted  to  one  of  the  French  king's
sons,  after  reserving  a  certain  territory  which  should
be  annexed  to  the  patrimony  of  the  church,  together
with  an  independent  and  princely  establishment  for
each  of  the  pope's  nephews.

Constable  The  king,  allured  by  these  specious  projects,
Montmo-  o-ave  a  most  favourable  audience  to  the  envoy.

rency  op- jo  .  •

poses  the  But  when  the  matter  was  proposed  in  council,
withThe  the  constable  Montmorency,  whose  natural  cau-
pope>  tion  and  aversion  to  daring  enterprises  increased

'  Ripamontii  Hist.  Patrise,  lib.  iii.  1146.  ap.  Graev.  Thes.  vol.  ii. Mem.  de
Ribier,  ii.  615. Adrian!  Istor.  i.  906

318  CHARLES V.  [1555.

with  age  and  experience,  remonstrated  with  great  ve-
hemence against  the  alliance.  He  put  Henry  in  mind
how  fatal  to  France  every  expedition  into  Italy  had
been  during  three  successive  reigns,  and  if  such  an  en-
terprise had  proved  too  great  for  the  nation,  even  when
its  strength  and  finances  were  entire,  there  was  no  reason
to  hope  for  success,  if  it  should  be  attempted  now,  when
both  were  exhausted  by  extraordinary  efforts  during
wars,  which  had  lasted,  with  little  interruption,  almost
half  a  century.  He  represented  the  manifest  impru-
dence of  entering  into  engagements  with  a  pope  of
fourscore,  as  any  system  which  rested  on  no  better
foundation  than  his  life,  must  be  extremely  precarious,
and  upon  the  event  of  his  death,  which  could  not  be
distant,  the  face  of  things,  together  with  the  inclination
of  the  Italian  states,  must  instantly  change,  and  the
whole  weight  of  the  war  be  left  upon  the  king  alone.
To  these  considerations  he  added  the  near  prospect
which  they  now  had  of  a  final  accommodation  with  the
emperor,  who,  having  taken  the  resolution  of  retiring
from  the  world,  wished  to  transmit  his  kingdoms  in
peace  to  his  son ;  and  he  concluded  with  representing
the  absolute  certainty  of  drawing  the  arms  of  England
upon  France,  if  it  should  appear  that  the  re-establish-
ment of  tranquillity  in  Europe  was  prevented  by  the
ambition  of  its  monarch.

The  duke  These  arguments,  weighty  in  themselves,  and
of  Guise  urged  by  a  minister  of  great  authority,  would

favours  it. \ ,,  J ,  '. j ., ,  .  .  J , r

probably  have  determined  the  king  to  decline
any  connexion  with  the  pope.  But  the  duke  of  Guise,
and  his  brother  the  cardinal  of  Lorrain,  who  delighted
no  less  in  bold  and  dangerous  undertakings  than  Mont-
morency  shunned  them,  declared  warmly  for  an  alli-
ance with  the  pope.  The  cardinal  expected  to  be  in-
trusted with  the  conduct  of  the  negotiations  in  the
court  of  Rome  to  which  this  alliance  would  give  rise ;
the  duke  hoped  to  obtain  the  command  of  the  army

1555.]  BOOK  XL  319

which  would  be  appointed  to  invade  Naples ;  and  con-
sidering themselves  as  already  in  these  stations,  vast
projects  opened  to  their  aspiring  and  unbounded  ambi-
tion. Their  credit,  together  with  the  influence  of  the
king's  mistress,  the  famous  Diana  of  Poitiers,  who  was,
at  that  time,  entirely  devoted  to  the  interest  of  the  family
of  Guise,  more  than  counterbalanced  allMontmorency's
prudent  remonstrances,  and  prevailed  on  an  inconside-
rate prince  to  listen  to  the  overtures  of  the  pope's  envoy.
Cardinal  The  cardinal  of  Lorrain,  as  he  had  expected,
senVton"1-  was  immediately  sent  to  Rome  with  full  powers
wkhlL  *°  conclude  the  treaty,  and  to  concert  measures
pope.  for  carrying  it  into  execution.  Before  he  could
reach  that  city,  the  pope,  either  from  reflecting  on  the
danger  and  uncertain  issue  of  all  military  operations,  or
through  the  address  of  the  imperial  ambassador,  whohad
been  at  great  pains  to  soothe  him,  had  not  only  begun  to
lose  much  of  the  ardour  with  which  he  had  commenced
the  negotiation  with  France,  but  even  discovered  great
unwillingness  to  continue  it.  In  order  to  rouse  him
from  this  fit  of  despondency,  and  to  rekindle  his  former
rage,  his  nephews  had  recourse  to  the  arts  which  they
had  already  practised  with  so  much  success.  They
alarmed  him  with  new  representations  of  the  emperor's
hostile  intentions,  with  fresh  accounts  which  they  had
received  of  threats  uttered  against  him  by  the  imperial
ministers,  and  with  new  discoveries  which  they  pre-
tended to  have  made  of  conspiracies  formed,  and  just
ready  to  take  effect  against  his  life.
Paul  en-  But  these  artifices  having  been  formerly  tried,
raged  at  WOuld  not  have  operated  a  second  time  with  the

the  pro-  «  11-  • i

ceedingsof  same  force,  nor  have  made  the  impression  which
ofCAugs-  they  wished,  if  Paul  had  not  been  excited  by  an
burg>  offence  of  that  kind  which  he  was  least  able  to
bear.  He  received  advice  of  the  recess  of  the  diet  of
Augsburg,  and  of  the  toleration  which  was  thereby
granted  to  the  Protestants ;  and  this  threw  him  at  once

320  CHARLES V.  [1555.

into  such  transports  of  passion  against  the  emperor  and
king  of  the  Romans,  as  carried  him  headlong  into  all
the  violent  measures  of  his  nephews.  Full  of  high
ideas  with  respect  to  the  papal  prerogative,  and  ani-
mated with  the  fiercest  zeal  against  heresy,  he  con-
sidered the  liberty  of  deciding  concerning  religious
matters,  which  had  been  assumed  by  an  assembly  com-
posed chiefly  of  laymen,  as  a  presumptuous  and  unpar-
donable encroachment  on  that  jurisdiction  which  be-
longed to  him  alone ;  and  regarded  the  indulgence
which  had  been  given  to  the  Protestants  as  an  impious
act  of  that  power  which  the  diet  had  usurped.  He  com-
plained loudly  of  both  to  the  imperial  ambassador.  He
insisted  that  the  recess  of  the  diet  should  immediately  be
declared  illegal  and  void.  He  threatened  the  emperor
and  king  of  the  Romans,  in  case  they  should  either  re-
fuse or  delay  to  gratify  him  in  this  particular,  with  the
severest  effects  of  his  vengeance.  He  talked  in  a  tone
of  authority  and  command  which  might  have  suited  the
pontiff  of  the  twelfth  century,  when  a  papal  decree  was
sufficient  to  have  shaken,  or  to  have  overturned,  the
throne  of  the  greatest  monarch  in  Europe ;  but  which
was  altogether  improper  in  that  age,  especially  when
addressed  to  the  minister  of  a  prince  who  had  so  often
made  pontiffs  more  formidable  than  Paul  feel  the  weight
of  his  power.  The  ambassador,  however,  heard  all  his
extravagant  propositions  and  menaces  with  much  pa-
tience, and  endeavoured  to  soothe  him,  by  putting  him
in  mind  of  the  extreme  distress  to  which  the  emperor
had  been  reduced  at  Inspruck,  of  the  engagements
which  he  had  come  under  to  the  Protestants,  in  order
to  extricate  himself,  of  the  necessity  of  fulfilling  these,
and  of  accommodating  his  conduct  to  the  situation  of
his  affairs.  But  weighty  as  these  considerations  were,
they  made  no  impression  on  the  mind  of  the  haughty
and  bigotted  pontiff,  who  instantly  replied,  That  he
would  absolve  him  by  his  apostolic  authority  from  those

1555.]  . BOOK XI.  321

impious  engagements,  and  even  command  him  not  to
perform  them  ;  that  in  carrying  on  the  cause  of  God
and  of  the  church,  no  regard  ought  to  be  had  to  the
maxims  of  worldly  prudence  and  policy  ;  and  that  the
ill  success  of  the  emperor's  schemes  in  Germany  might
justly  be  deemed  a  mark  of  the  divine  displeasure
against  him,  on  account  of  his  having  paid  little  atten-
tion to  the  former,  while  he  regulated  his  conduct  en-
tirely by  the  latter.  Having  said  this,  he  turned  from
the  ambassador  abruptly  without  waiting  for  a  reply.
And  exas-  His  nephews  took  care  to  applaud  and  cherish
Msne?  by  tnese  sentiments,  and  easily  wrought  up  his  arro-
phews.  gant  mind,  fraught  with  all  the  monkish  ideas
concerning  the  extent  of  the  papal  supremacy,  to  such
a  pitch  of  resentment  against  the  house  of  Austria,  and
to  such  a  high  opinion  of  his  own  power,  that  he
talked  continually  of  his  being  the  successor  of  those
who  had  deposed  kings  and  emperors  ;  that  he  was  ex-
alted as  head  over  them  all,  and  would  trample  such
Dec  is  as  °PP°sed  him  under  his  feet.  In  this  dispo-
Conciudes  sition  the  cardinal  of  Lorrain  found  the  pope,
with  and  easily  persuaded  him  to  sign  a  treaty,  which

France. j^  ^ -^ ojjject tne  ru^n  Qf  a  princej  against

whom  he  was  so  highly  exasperated.  The  stipulations
in  the  treaty  were  much  the  same  as  had  been  proposed
by  the  pope's  envoy  at  Paris;  and  it  was  agreed  to
keep  the  whole  transaction  secret,  until  their  united
forces  should  be  ready  to  take  the  field.*
The  em-  During  the  negotiations  of  this  treaty  at  Rome
and  Paris,  an  event  happened  which  seemed  to

resign  his  rencier  the  fears  that  had  given  rise  to  it  vain,

hereditary  i  . i  r*  n

dominions,  and  the  operations  which  were  to  tollow  upon
it  unnecessary.  This  was  the  emperor's  resignation  of
his  hereditary  dominions  to  his  son  Philip;  together
with  his  resolution  to  withdraw  entirely  from  any  con-

•  Pallav.  lib.  xiii.  p.  163. F.  Pan!.  565. Thuan.  lib.  xv.  325.  lib.  xvi.  540.
JVfem  de  Ribier,  ii.  609,  &c.

VOL.  V.  Y

322  CHARLES V.  [1555.

cern  in  business  or  the  affairs  of  this  world,  in  order
that  he  might  spend  the  remainder  of  his  days  in  re-
tirement and  solitude. Though  it  requires  neither  deep
reflection  nor  extraordinary  discernment  to  discover
that  the  state  of  royalty  is  not  exempt  from  cares  and
disappointment ;  though  most  of  those  who  are  exalted
to  a  throne  find  solicitude,  and  satiety,  and  disgust,  to
be  their  perpetual  attendants  in  that  envied  pre-emi-
nence ;  yet  to  descend  voluntarily  from  the  supreme  to
a  subordinate  station,  and  to  relinquish  the  possession
of  power  in  order  to  attain  the  enjoyment  of  happiness,
seems  to  be  an  effort  too  great  for  the  human  mind.
Several  instances,  indeed,  occur  in  history,  of  monarchs
who  have  quitted  a  throne,  and  have  ended  their  days
in  retirement. But  they  were  either  weak  princes,  who
took  this  resolution  rashly,  and  repented  of  it  as  soon
as  it  was  taken;  or  unfortunate  princes,  from  .whose
hands  some  stronger  rival  had  wrested  their  sceptre,
and  compelled  them  to  descend  with  reluctance  into  a
private  station. Dioclesian  is  perhaps  the  only  prince
capable  of  holding  the  reins  of  government,  who  ever
resigned  them  from  deliberate  choice,,  and  who  con-
tinued during  many  years  to  enjoy  the  tranquillity  of
retirement  without  fetching  one  penitent  sigh,  or  cast-
ing back  one  look  of  desire,  towards  the  power  or  dig-
nity which  he  had  abandoned.

The  mo-  No  wonder,  then,  that  Charles's  resignation
thhSresig-  should  fill  all  Europe  with  astonishment,  and
nation.  g|ve  r'ise^  fafe  among  his  contemporaries,  and
among  the  historians  of  that  period,  to  various  conjec-
tures concerning  the  motives  which  determined  a  prince,
whose,  ruling  passion  had  been  uniformly  the  love  of
power,  at  the  age  of  fifty-six,  when  objects  of  ambition
continue  to  operate  with  full  force  on  the  mind,  and
are  pursued  with  the  greatest  ardour,  to  take  a  resolu-
tion so  singular  and  unexpected.  But  while  many  au-
thors have  imputed  it  to  motives  so  frivolous  and  fan-

1555.]  BOOK  XL  323

tastical  as  can  hardly  be  supposed  to  influence  finy
reasonable  mind ;  while  others  have  imagined  it  to  be
the  result  of  some  profound  scheme  of  policy;  histo-
rians more  intelligent,  and  better  informed,  neither  as-
cribe it  to  caprice,  nor  search  for  mysterious  secrets  of
state,  where  simple  and  obvious  causes  will  fully  ac-
count for  the  emperor's  conduct.  Charles  had  been
attacked  early  in  life  with  the  gout ;  and  notwithstand-
ing all  the  precautions  of  the  most  skilful  physicians,
the  violence  of  the  distemper  increased  as  he  advanced
in  age,  and  the  fits  became  every  year  more  frequent
as  well  as  more  severe.  Not  only  was  the  vigour  of
his  constitution  broken,  but  the  faculties  of  his  mind
were  impaired  by  the  excruciating  torments  which  he
endured.  During  the  continuance  of  the  fits,  he  was
altogether  incapable  of  applying  to  business,  and  even
when  they  began  to  abate,  as  it  was  only  at  intervals
that  he  could  attend  to  what  was  serious,  he  gave  up  a
great  part  of  his  time  to  trifling  and  even  childish  oc-
cupations, which  served  to  relieve  or  to  amuse  his  mind,
enfeebled  and  worn  out  with  excess  of  pain.  Under
these  circumstances,  the  conduct  of  such  affairs  as  oc-
curred of  course  in  governing  so  many  kingdoms,  was
a  burden  more  than  sufficient ;  but  to  push  forward  and
complete  the  vast  schemes,  which  the  ambition  of  his
more  active  years  had  formed,  or  to  keep  in  view  and
carry  on  the  same  great  system  of  policy,  extending  to
every  nation  in  Europe,  and  connected  with  the  opera-
tions of  every  different  court,  were  functions  which  so
far  exceeded  his  strength,  that  they  oppressed  and  over-
whelmed his  mind.  As  he  had  been  long  accustomed
to  view  the  business  of  every  department,  whether  civil
or  military,  or  ecclesiastical,  with  his  own  eyes,  and  to
decide  concerning  it  according  to  his  own  ideas,  it  gave  -
him  the  utmost  pain,  when  he  felt  his  infirmities  in-
crease so  fast  upon  him,  that  he  was  obliged  to  commit
the  conduct  of  all  affairs  to  his  ministers.  He  imputed

y  2

324  CHARLES V.  [1*55.

every  misfortune  which  befel  him,  and  every  miscar-
riage that  happened,  even  when  the  former  was  un-
avoidable, or  the  latter  accidental,  to  his  inability  to  take
the  inspection  of  business  himself.  He  complained  of
his  hard  fortune,  in  being  opposed,  in  his  declining
years,  to  a  rival,  who  was  in  the  full  vigour  of  life ;  and
that,  while  Henry  could  take  and  execute  all  his  resolu-
tions in  person,  he  should  now  be  reduced,  both  in
council  and  in  action,  to  rely  on  the  talents  and  exer-
tions of  other  men.  Having  thus  grown  old  before  his
time,  he  wisely  judged  it  more  decent  to  conceal  his
infirmities  in  some  solitude,  than  to  expose  them  any
longer  to  the  public  eye  ;  and  prudently  determined  not
to  forfeit  the  fame,  or  lose  the  acquisitions  of  his  better
years,  by  struggling,  with  a  vain  obstinacy,  to  retain
the  reins  of  government,  when  he  was  no  longer  able
to  hold  them  with  steadiness,  or  to  guide  them  with
address.*

But  though  Charles  had  revolved  this  scheme
n  his  mind  for  several  years,  and  had  commu-
it.  nicated  it  to  his  sisters  the  dowager  queens  of
France  and  Hungary,  who  not  only  approved  of  his  in-
tention, but  offered  to  accompany  him  to  whatever  place
of  retreat  he  should  choose  ;  several  things  had  hitherto

1  Don  Levesque,  in  his  memoirs  of  cardinal  Granvelle,  gives  a  reason  for  the  em-
peror's resignation,  which,  as  far  as  I  recollect,  is  not  mentioned  by  any  other  histo-
rian. He  says,  that  the  emperor  having  ceded  the  government  of  the  kingdom  of
Naples  and  the  duchy  of  Milan  to  his  son,  upon  his  marriage  with  the  queen  of  Eng-
land; Philip,  notwithstanding  the  advice  and  entreaties  of  his  father,  removed  roost
of  the  ministers  and  officers  whom  he  had  employed  in  those  countries,  and  appointed
creatures  of  his  own,  te  fill  the  places  which  they  held.  That  he  aspired  openly,
and  with  little  delicacy,  to  obtain  a  share  in  the  administration  of  affairs  in  the  Low
Countries.  That  he  endeavoured  to  thwart  the  emperor's  measures,  and  to  limit  his
authority,  behaving  towards  him  sometimes  with  inattention,  and  sometimes  with
haughtiness.  That  Charles,  finding  that  he  must  either  yield,  on  every  occasion,  to
his  son,  or  openly  contend  with  him,  in  order  to  avoid  either  of  these,  which  were
both  disagreeable  and  mortifying  to  a  father,  he  took  the  resolution  of  resigning  his
crowns,  and  of  retiring  from  the  world,  vol.  i.  p.  24,  &c.  Don  Levesque  derived  his
information  concerning  these  curious  facts,  which  he  relates  very  briefly,  from  the
original  papers  of  cardinal  Granvelle.  But  as  that  vast  collection  of  papers,  which
ha*  been,  preserved  and  arranged  by  M.  l'Abb<>  Boizut  of  Besancon,  though  one  of
the  most  valuable  historical  monuments  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  which  cannot
fail  of  throwing  much  light  on  the  transactions  of  Charles  V.,  is  not  published,  I
cannot  determine  what  degree  of  credit  should  be  given  to  this  account  of  Charles's
resignation.  I  have,  therefore,  taken  no  notice  of  it  in  relating  this  event.

1555.]  BOOK XL  325

prevented  his  carrying  it  into  execution.  He  could
not  think  of  loading  his  son  with  the  government  of  so
many  kingdoms,  until  he  should  attain  such  maturity  of
age,  and  of  abilities,  as  would  enable  him  to  sustain
that  weighty  burden.  But  as  Philip  had  now  reached
his  twenty-eighth  year,  and  had  been  early  accustomed
to  business,  for  which  he  discovered  both  inclination
and  capacity,  it  can  hardly  be  imputed  to  the  partiality
of  paternal  affection,  that  his  scruples  with  regard  tc
this  point,  were  entirely  removed ;  and  that  he  thought
he  might  place  his  son,  without  farther  hesitation  or  de-
lay, on  the  throne  which  he  himself  was  about  to  aban-
don. His  mother's  situation  had  been  another  obstruc-
tion in  his  way.  For  although  she  had  continued  al-
most fifty  years  in  confinement,  and  under  the  same
disorder  of  mind  which  concern  for  her  husband's  death
had  brought  upon  her,  yet  the  government  of  Spain  was
still  vested  in  her  jointly  with  the  emperor  ;  her  name
was  inserted,  together  with  his,  in  all  the  public  instru-
ments issued  in  that  kingdom ;  and  such  was  the  fond
attachment  of  the  Spaniards  to  her,  that  they  would
probably  have  scrupled  to  recognise  Philip  as  their  so-
vereign, unless  she  had  consented  to  assume  him  as  her
partner  on  the  throne.  Her  utter  incapacity  for  busi-
ness rendered  it  impossible  to  obtain  her  consent.  But
her  death,  which  happened  this  year,  removed  this  dif-
ficulty; and  as  Charles,  upon  that  event,  became  sole
monarch  of  Spain,  it  left  the  succession  open  to  his
son.  The  war  with  France  had  likewise  been  a  reason
for  retaining  the  administration  of  affairs  in  his  own
hand,  as  he  was  extremely  solicitous  to  have  terminated
it,  that  he  might  have  given  up  his  kingdoms  to  his  son
at  peace  with  all  the  world.  But  as  Henry  had  disco-
vered no  disposition  to  close  with  any  of  his  overtures,
and  had  even  rejected  proposals  of  peace  which  were
equal  and  moderate,  in  a  tone  that  seemed  to  indicate
a  fixed  purpose  of  continuing  hostilities,  he  saw  that

3-26  CHARLES V.  [1555.

it  was  vain  to  wait  longer  in  expectation  of  an  event,
which,  however  desirable,  was  altogether  uncertain.
The  forma-  As  this,  then,  appeared  to  be  the  proper  junc-
whtciThe  ture  for  executing  the  scheme  which  he  had  long
executed  it  me(jitated,  Charles  resolved  to  resign  his  king-
doms to  his  son,  with  a  solemnity  suitable  to  the  im-
portance of  the  transaction,  and  to  perform  this  last
act  of  sovereignty  with  such  formal  pomp,  as  might
leave  a  lasting  impression  on  the  minds  not  only  of
his  subjects  but  of  his  successor.  With  this  view  he
called  Philip  out  of  England,  where  the  peevish  temper
of  his  queen,  which  increased  with  her  despair  of  hav-
ing issue,  rendered  him  extremely  unhappy;  and  the
jealousy  of  the  English  left  him  no  hopes  of  obtaining
the  direction  of  their  affairs.  Having  assembled  the
states  of  the  Low  Countries  at  Brussels,  on  the  25th  of
October,  Charles  seated  himself,  for  the  last  time,  in
the  chair  of  state,  on  one  side  of  which  was  placed  his
son,  and  on  the  other  his  sister  the  queen  of  Hungary,
regent  of  the  Netherlands,  with  a  splendid  retinue  of
the  princes  of  the  empire  and  grandees  of  Spain  stand-
ing behind  him.  The  president  of  the  council  of
Flanders,  by  his  command,  explained  in  a  few  words
nis  intention  in  calling  this  extraordinary  meeting  of
the  states.  He  then  read  the  instrument  of  resignation,
by  which  Charles  surrendered  to  his  son  Philip  all  his
territories,  jurisdiction,  and  authority  in  the  Low  Coun-
tries, absolving  his  subjects  there  fronfthe  oath  of  alle-
giance to  him,  which  he  required  them  to  transfer  to
Philip  his  lawful  heir,  and  to  serve  him  with  the  same
loyalty  and  zeal  which  they  had  manifested,  during  so
long  a  course  of  years,  in  support  of  his  government.

Charles  then  rose  from  his  seat,  and  leaning  on  the
shoulder  of  the  prince  of  Orange,  because  he  was  un-
able to  stand  without  support,  he  addressed  himself  to
the  audience,  and  from  a  paper  which  he  held  in  his
hand,  in  order  to  assist  his  memory,  he  recounted,  with

1555.]  BOOK  XI.  327

dignity,  but  without  ostentation,  all  the  great  things
which  he  had  undertaken  and  performed  since  the  com-
mencement of  his  administration.  He  observed,  that,
from  the  seventeenth  year  of  his  age,  he  had  dedicated
all  his  thoughts  and  attention  to  public  objects,  re-
serving no  portion  of  his  time  for  the  indulgence  of  his
ease,  and  very  little  for  the  enjoyment  of  private  plea-
sure ;  that  either  in  a  pacific  or  hostile  manner,  he  had
visited  Germany  nine  times,  Spain  six  times,  France
four  times,  Italy  seven  times,  the  Low  Countries  ten
times,  England  twice,  Africa  as  often,  and  had  made
eleven  voyages  by  sea ;  that  while  his  health  permitted
him  to  discharge  his  duty,  and  the  vigour  of  his  con-
stitution was  equal,  in  any  degree,  to  the  arduous
office  of  governing  such  extensive  dominions,  he  had
never  shunned  labour,  nor  repined  under  fatigue ;  that
now,  when  his  health  was  broken,  and  his  vigour  ex-
hausted by  the  rage  of  an  incurable  distemper,  his
growing  infirmities  admonished  him  to  retire,  nor  was
he  so  fond  of  reigning,  as  to  retain  the  sceptre  in  an
impotent  hand,  which  was  no  longer  able  to  protect
his  subjects,  or  to  secure  to  them  the  happiness  which
he  wished  they  should  enjoy ;  that  instead  of  a  sovereign
worn  out  with  diseases,  and  scarcely  half  alive,  he  gave
them  one  in  the  prime  of  life,  accustomed  already  to
govern,  and  who  added  to  the  vigour  of  youth  all  the
attention  and  sagacity  of  maturer  years ;  that  if,  dur-
ing the  course  of  a  long  administration,  he  had  com-
mitted any  material  error  in  government,  or  if,  under
the  pressure  of  so  many  and  great  affairs,  and  amidst
the  attention  which  he  had  been  obliged  to  give  to
them,  he  had  either  neglected  or  injured^  any  of  his
subjects,  he  now  implored  their  forgiveness ;  that,  for
his  part,  he  should  ever  retain  a  grateful  sense  of
their  fidelity  and  attachment,  and  would  carry  the  re-
membrance of  it  along  with  him  to  the  place  of  his
retreat,  as  his  sweetest  consolation,  as  well  as  the  best

328  CHARLES V.  [1555.

reward  for  all  his  services,  and  in  his  last  prayers  to
Almighty  God  would  pour  forth  his  most  earnest  peti-
tions for  their  welfare.

Then  turning  towards  Philip,  who  fell  on  his  knees
and  kissed  his  father's  hand, — "  If,"  says  he,  "  I  had
left  you  by  my  death  this  rich  inheritance,  to  which  I
have  made  such  large  additions,  some  regard  would
have  been  justly  due  to  my  memory  on  that  account;
but  now  when  I  voluntarily  resign  to  you  what  I  might
have  still  retained,  I  may  well  expect  the  warmest  ex-
pression of  thanks  on  your  part.  With  these,  however,
I  dispense,  and  shall  consider  your  concern  for  the
welfare  of  your  subjects,  and  your  love  of  them,  as  the
best  and  most  acceptable  testimony  of  your  gratitude
to  me.  It  is  in  your  power  by  a  wise  and  virtuous
administration,  ta  justify  the  extraordinary  proof  which
I,  this  day,  give  of  my  paternal  affection,  and  to  de-
monstrate that  you  are  worthy  of  the  confidence  which
I  repose  in  you.  Preserve  an  inviolable  regard  for
religion ;  maintain  the  Catholic  faith  in  its  purity;  let
the  laws  of  your  country  be  sacred  in  your  eyes;  en-
croach not  on  the  rights  and  privileges  of  your  people ;
and  if  the  time  should  ever  come,  when  you  shall  wish
to  enjoy  the  tranquillity  of  private  life,  may  you  have
a  son  endowed  with  such  qualities,  that  you  can  resign
your  sceptre  to  him,  with  as  much  satisfaction  as  I  give
up  mine  to  you."

As  soon  as  Charles  had  finished  this  long  address  to
his  subjects  and  to  their  new  sovereign,  he  sunk  into
the  chair,  exhausted  and  ready  to  faint  with  the  fatigue
of  such  an  extraordinary  effort.  During  his  discourse,
the  whole  audience  melted  into  tears,  some  from  admi-
ration of  his  magnanimity,  others  softened  by  the  ex-
pressions of  tenderness  towards  his  son,  and  of  love  to
his  people ;  and  all  were  affected  with  the  deepest  sor-
row at  losing  a  sovereign,  who,  during  his  administra-
tion, had  distinguished  the  Netherlands,  his  native

1555.]  BOOK XI.  329

country,  with  particular  marks  of  his  regard  and  at-
tachment.

Philip  then  arose  from  his  knees,  and  after  returning
thanks  to  his  father,  with  a  low  and  submissive  voice,
for  the  royal  gift  which  his  unexampled  bounty  had
bestowed  upon  him,  he  addressed  the  assembly  of  the
states,  and  regretting  his  inability  to  speak  the  Flemish
language  with  such  facility  as  to  express  what  he  felt
on  this  interesting  occasion,  as  well  as  what  he  owed
to  his  good  subjects  in  the  Netherlands,  he  begged  that
they  would  permit  Granvelle,  bishop  of  Arras,  to  de-
liver what  he  had  given  him  in  charge  to  speak  in  his
name.  Granvelle,  in  a  long  discourse,  expatiated  on
the  zeal  with  which  Philip  was  animated  for  the  good
of  his  subjects,  on  his  resolution  to  devote  all  his  time
and  talents  to  the  promoting  of  their  happiness,  and
on  his  intention  to  imitate  his  father's  example  in  dis-
tinguishing the  Netherlands  with  peculiar  marks  of  his
regard.  Maes,  a  lawyer  of  great  eloquence,  replied  in
the  name  of  the  states,  with  large  professions  of  their
fidelity  and  affection  to  their  new  sovereign.

Then  Mary,  queen  dowager  of  Hungary,  resigned
the  regency  with  which  she  had  been  intrusted  by  her
brother  during  the  space  of  twenty-five  years.  Next

1556.  day  Philipj  iQ  presence  of  the  states,  took  the
January  6.  usual  oaths  to  maintain  the  rights  and  privileges
of  his  subjects;  and  all  the  members,  in  their  own
name,  and  in  that  of  their  constituents,  swore  allegiance
to  him.*

A  few  weeks  after  this  transaction,  Charles,  in  an
assembly  no  less  splendid,  and  with  a  ceremonial
equally  pompous,  resigned  to  his  son  the  crowns  of
Spain,  with  all  the  territories  depending  on  them,  both
in  the  old  and  in  the  new  world.  Of  all  these  vast
possessions,  he  reserved  nothing  for  himself  but  an

•  Godleveus  Relatio  Abdications  Car.  V.  ap.  Goldast.  Polit.  Imper.  p.  377.
Strada  dc  Bello  Belgico,  lib.  i.  p.  5.

330  CHARLES V.  [1556.

annual  pension  of  a  hundred  thousand  crowns,  to  defray
the  charges  of  his  family,  and  to  afford  him  a  small
sum  for  acts  of  beneficence  and  charity."
Resolves  to  As  he  had  fixed  on  a  place  of  retreat  in
deMeiT1  Spain,  hoping  that  the  dry  ness  and  the  warmth
Spain.  of  the  climate  in  that  country  might  mitigate
the  violence  of  his  disease,  which  had  been  much  in-
creased by  the  moisture  of  the  air  and  the  rigour  of  the
winters  in  the  Netherlands ;  he  was  extremely  impatient
to  embark  for  that  kingdom,  and  to  disengage  himself
entirely  from  business,  which  he  found  to  be  impos-
sible while  he  remained  in  Brussels.  But  his

Obliged  to

remain  for  physicians  remonstrated  so  strongly  against
liThe  Ne-  his  venturing  to  sea  at  that  cold  and  boister-
theriands.  oug  season  of  the  year,  that  he  consented,
though  with  reluctance,  to  put  off  his  voyage  for  some
months.

™  The  emperor's  resignation  is  an  event  not  only  of  such  importance,  but  of  such
a  nature,  that  the  precise  date  of  it,  one  would  expect,  should  have  been  ascertained
by  historians  with  the  greatest  accuracy.  There  is,  however,  an  amazing  and  un-
accountable diversity  among  them  with  regard  to  this  point.  All  agree,  that  the
deed  by  which  Charles  transferred  to  his  son  his  dominions  in  the  Netherlands,
bears  date  at  Brussels  the  25th  of  October.  Sandoval  fixes  on  the  28th  of  October,
as  the  day  on  which  the  ceremony  of  resignation  happened,  and  he  was  present  at
the  transaction,  vol.  ii.  p.  592.  Godleveus,  who  published  a  treatise  De  Abdications
Carol!  V.  fixes  the  public  ceremony,  as  well  as  the  date  of  the  instrument  of  resig-
nation, on  the  25th.  Pere  Barre,  I  know  not  on  what  authority,  fixes  it  on  the
24th  of  November,  Hist.  d'Alem.  viii.  976.  Herrera  agrees  with  Godleveus  in  his
account  of  this  matter,  torn.  i.  155.  As  likewise  does  Pallavicini,  whose  authority
with  respect  to  dates,  and  every  thing  where  a  minute  accuracy  b  requisite,  is  of
great  weight,  Hist.  lib.  xvi.  p.  168.  Historians  differ  no  less  with  regard  to  the
day  on  which  Charles  resigned  the  crown  of  Spain  to  his  son.  According  to  M.  de
Thou,  it  was  a  month  after  his  having  resigned  his  dominions  in  the  Netherlands,
i.  e.  about  the  '25th  of  November,  Thuan.  lib.  xvi.  p.  571.  According  to  Sandoval,
it  was  on  the  16th  of  January  1556,  Sand.  ii.  603.  Antonio  de  Vera  agrees  with
him,  Epitome  del  Vida  del  Car.  V.  p.  110.  According  to  Pallavicini,  it  was  on  the
17th,  Pal.  lib.  xvi.  p.  168,  and  with  him  Herrera  agrees";  Vida  del  D.  Felipe,  torn.  i.
p.  233.  But  Ferreras  fixes  it  on  the  first  day  of  January,  Hist.  Gener.  torn.  ix.  p.
371*  M.  de  Beaucaire  supposes  the  resignation  of  the  crown  of  Spain  to  have  been
executed  a  few  days  after  the  resignation  of  the  Netherlands,  Com.  de  Reb.  Gall.
p.  879.  It  is  remarkable,  that  in  the  treaty  of  truce  at  Vaucelles,  though  Charles
had  made  over  all  his  dominions  to  his  son  some  weeks  previous  to  the  conclusion
of  it,  all  the  stipulations  are,  in  the  emperor's  name,  and  Philip  is  only  styled  king
of  England  and  Naples.  It  is  certain  Philip  was  not  proclaimed  king  of  Castile,
&c.  at  Valladolid  sooner  than  the  24th  of  March,  Sandov.  ii.  p.  606,  and,  previous
to  that  ceremony,  be  did  not  choose,  it  should  seem,  to  assume  the  title  of  king  of
any  of  his  Spanish  kingdoms,  or  to  perform  any  act  of  royal  jurisdiction.  In  a  deed
annexed  to  the  treaty  of  truce,  dated  April  19,  he  assumes  the  title  of  king  of
Castile,  &c.  in  the  usual  style  of  the  Spanish  monarchs  in  that  age.  Corps  Dipt,
torn,  iv.  Append,  p.  85.

1556.]  BOOK  XL  331

promotes  By  yielding  to  their  entreaties,  he  had  the
IdoITfof"  satisfaction,  before  he  left  the  Low  Countries,
peace.  of  taking  a  considerable  step  towards  a  peace
with  France,  which  he  ardently  wished  for,  not  only
on  his  son's  account,  but  that  he  might  have  the  merit,
when  quitting  the  world,  of  re-establishing  that  tran-
quillity in  Europe,  which  he  had  banished  out  of  it
almost  from  the  time  that  he  assumed  the  administra-
tion of  affairs.  Previous  to  his  resignation,  commis-
sioners had  been  appointed  by  him  and  by  the  French
king,  in  order  to  treat  of  an  exchange  of  prisoners.  In
their  conferences  at  the  abbey  of  Vaucelles,  near  Cam-
bray,  an  expedient  was  accidentally  proposed  for  ter-
minating hostilities  between  the  contending  monarchs,
by  a  long  truce,  during  the  subsistence  of  which,  and
without  discussing  their  respective  claims,  each  should
retain  what  was  now  in  his  possession.  Charles,  sen-
sible how  much  his  kingdoms  were  exhausted  by  the
expensive  and  almost  continual  wars  in  which  his  am-
bition had  engaged  him,  and  eager  to  gain  for  his  son
a  short  interval  of  peace,  that  he  might  establish  himself
firmly  on  his  throne,  declared  warmly  for  closing  with
the  overture,  though  manifestly  dishonourable  as  well
as  disadvantageous ;  and  such  was  the  respect  due  to
his  wisdom  and  experience,  that  Philip,  notwithstand-
ing his  unwillingness  to  purchase  peace  by  such  con-
cessions, did  not  presume  to  urge  his  opinion  in  oppo-
sition to  that  of  his  father.

A  truce  Henry  could  not  have  hesitated  one  moment
concluded.  about  giving  his  consent  to  a  truce,  on  such
conditions  as  would  leave  him  in  quiet  possession  of
the  greater  part  of  the  duke  of  Savoy's  dominions,  to-
gether with  the  important  conquests  which  he  had
made  on  the  German  frontier.  But  it  was  no  easy
matter  to  reconcile  such  a  step  with  the  engagements
which  he  had  come  under  to  the  pope,  in  his  late  treaty
with  him.  The  constable  Montmorency,  however,  re-

332  CHARLES  V.  [1556.

presented  in  such  a  striking  light  the  imprudence  of
sacrificing  the  true  interests  of  his  kingdom  to  these
rash  obligations,  and  took  such  advantage  of  the  ab-
sence of  the  cardinal  of  Lorrain,  who  had  seduced  the
king  into  his  alliance  with  the  Caraffas,  that  Henry,
who  was  naturally  fluctuating  and  unsteady,  and  apt  to
be  influenced  by  the  advice  last  given  him,  authorized
his  ambassadors  to  sign  a  treaty  of  truce  with
the  emperor  for  five  years,  on  the  terms  which
had  been  proposed.  But  that  he  might  not  seem  to
have  altogether  forgotten  his  ally  the  pope,  who,  he
foresaw,  would  be  highly  exasperated,  he,  in  order  to
soothe  him,  took  care  that  he  should  be  expressly  in-
cluded in  the  truce."

Ratified  b  ^e  count  °f  Lalain  repaired  to  Blois,  and
both  mo-  the  admiral  Coligny  to  Brussels;  the  former
to  be  present  when  the  king  of  France,  and  the
latter  when  the  emperor  and  his  son,  ratified  the  treaty
and  bound  themselves  by  oath  to  observe  it.y  When
The  pope's  an  account  of  the  conferences  at  Vaucelles,  and
astonish-  of  ^ne  conditions  of  truce  which  had  been  pro-

ment and

distress,  posed  there,  were  first  carried  to  Rome,  it  gave
the  pope  no  manner  of  disquiet.  He  trusted  so  much
to  the  honour  of  the  French  monarch,  that  he  would
not  allow  himself  to  think  that  Henry  could  forget  so
soon,  or  violate  so  shamefully,  all  the  stipulations  in  his
league  with  him.  He  had  such  a  high  opinion  of  the
emperor's  wisdom,  that  he  made  no  doubt  of  his  re-
fusing his  consent  to  a  truce  on  such  unequal  terms;
and  on  both  these  accounts  he  confidently  pronounced
that  this,  like  many  preceding  negotiations,  would  ter-
minate in  nothing.  But  later  and  more  certain  intel-

*  Mem.  de  Ribier,  ii.  626.  Corps  Diplom.  torn.  iv.  App.  81.
i  One  of  admiral  de  Coligny's  attendants,  who  wrote  to  the  court  of  France  an
account  of  what  happened  while  they  resided  at  Brussels,  takes  notice,  as  an  instance
of  Philip's  impoliteness,  that  he  received  the  French  ambassador  in  an  apartment
hung  with  tapestry,  which  represented  the  battle  of  Pavia,  the  manner  in  which
Francis  I.  was  taken  prisoner,  his  voyage  to  Spain,  with  all  the  mortifying  circum-
stances of  his  captivity  and  imprisonment  at  Madrid.  Mem.  de  Ribier,  ii.  634..

1556.]  BOOK  XL  333

licence  soon  convinced  him  that  no  reasoning  in  poli-
tical affairs  is  more  fallacious,  than,  because  an  event
is  improbable,  to  conclude  that  it  will  not  happen.  The
sudden  and  unexpected  conclusion  of  the  truce  filled
Paul  with  astonishment  and  terror.  The  cardinal  of
Lorrain  durst  not  encounter  that  storm  of  indignation,
to  which  he  knew  that  he  should  be  exposed  from  the
haughty  pontiff,  who  had  so  good  reason  to  be  in-
censed ;  but  departing  abruptly  from  Rome,  he  left  to
the  cardinal  Tournon  the  difficult  task  of  attempting  to
soothe  Paul  and  his  nephews.  They  were  fully  sen-
sible of  the  perilous  situation  in  which  they  now  stood.
By  their  engagements  with  France,  which  were  no
longer  secret,  they  had  highly  irritated  Philip.  They
dreaded  the  violence  of  his  implacable  temper.  The
duke  of  Alva,  a  minister  fitted,  as  well  by  his  abilities
as  by  the  severity  of  his  nature,  for  executing  all  Philip's
rigorous  schemes,  had  advanced  from  Milan  to  Naples,
and  began  to  assemble  troops  on  the  frontiers  of  the
ecclesiastical  state ;  while  they,  if  deserted  by  France,
must  not  only  relinquish  all  the  hopes  of  dominion  and
sovereignty  to  which  their  ambition  aspired,  but  remain
exposed  to  the  resentment  of  the  Spanish  monarch,
without  one  ally  to  protect  them  against  an  enemy  with
whom  they  were  so  little  able  to  contend.
He  attempts  Under  these  circumstances,  Paul  had  re-
to  rekindle  COurse  to  the  arts  of  negotiation  and  intrigue ;
of  which  the  papal  court  knows  well  how  to
avail  itself  in  order  to  ward  off  any  calamity  threat-
ened by  an  enemy  superior  in  power.  He  affected  to
approve  highly  of  the  truce,  as  a  happy  expedient  for
putting  a  stop  to  the  effusion  of  Christian  blood.  He
expressed  his  warmest  wishes  that  it  might  prove  the
forerunner  of  a  definitive  peace.  He  exhorted  the
rival  princes  to  embrace  this  favourable  opportunity
jof  setting  on  foot  a  negotiation  for  that  purpose,  and
offered,  as  their  common  father,  to  be  mediator  Between

334  CHARLES V.  [1556,

them.  Under  this  pretext,  he  appointed  cardinal
Rebiba  his  nuncio  to  the  court  of  Brussels,  and  his  ne-
phew, cardinal  Caraffa  to  that  of  Paris.  The  public
instructions  given  to  both  were  the  same  ;  that  they
should  use  their  utmost  endeavours  to  prevail  with  the
two  monarchs  to  accept  of  the  pope's  mediation,  that,  by
means  of  it,  peace  might  be  re-established,  and  mea-
sures might  be  taken  for  assembling  a  general  council.
But  under  this  specious  appearance  of  zeal  for  attain-
ing objects  so  desirable  in  themselves,  and  so  becom-
ing his  sacred  character  to  pursue,  Paul  concealed  very
different  intentions.  Caraffa,  besides  his  public  in-
structions, received  a  private  commission  to  solicit  the
French  king  to  renounce  the  treaty  of  Truce,  and  to
renew  his  engagements  with  the  holy  see ;  and  he  was
empowered  to  spare  neither  entreaties,  nor  promises,
nor  bribes,  in  order  to  gain  that  point.  This  both  the
uncle  and  the  nephew  considered  as  the  real  end  of
the  embassy ;  while  the  other  served  to  amuse  the  vul-
gar, or  to  deceive  the  emperor  and  his  son.  The  car-
dinal, accordingly,  set  out  instantly  for  Paris,
and  travelled  with  the  greatest  expedition,
while  Rebiba  was  detained  some  weeks  at  Rome  ;  and
when  it  became  necessary  for  him  to  begin  his  jour-
ney, he  received  secret  orders  to  protract  it  as  much  as
possible,  that  the  issue  of  Caraffa's  negotiation  might
be  known  before  he  should  reach  Brussels,  and  accord-
ing to  that,  proper  directions  might  be  given  to  him
with  regard  to  the  tone  which  he  should  assume,  in
treating  with  the  emperor  and  his  son/
HU  negoti-  Caraffa  made  his  entry  into  Paris  with  ex-
thJTpu"  traordinary  pomp;  and  having  presented  a
pose.  consecrated  sword  to  Henry,  as  the  protector,
on  whose  aid  the  pope  relied  in  the  present  exigency,
he  besought  him  not  to  disregard  the  entreaties  of  a
parent  in  distress,  but  to  employ  that  weapon  which  he

*  Pallav.  lib.  xiii.  p.  169. Burnet  Hist,  of  Reform,  ii.  App.  309.

J556.]  BOOK XI.  335

gave  him  in  his  defence. This  he  represented  not  only
as  a  duty  of  filial  piety,  but  as  an  act  of  justice. As
the  pope,  from  confidence  in  the  assistance  and  sup-
port which  his  late  treaty  with  France  entitled  him  to
expect,  had  taken  such  steps  as  had  irritated  the  king
of  Spain,  he  conjured  Henry  not  to  suffer  Paul  and
his  family  to  be  crushed  under  the  weight  of  that  re-
sentment, which  they  had  drawn  on  themselves  merely
by  their  attachment  to  France. Together  with  this  ar-
gument addressed  to  his  generosity,  he  employed  an-
other which  he  hoped  would  work  on  his  ambition.  He
affirmed  that  now  was  the  time,  when,  with  the  most
certain  prospect  of  success,  he  might  attack  Philip's
dominions  in  Italy  ;  that  the  flower  of  the  veteran  Spa-
nish bands  had  perished  in  the  wars  of  Hungary,  Ger-
many, and  the  Low  Countries;  that  the  emperor  had
left  his son  an.  exhausted  treasury, and kingdoms
drained  of  men;  that he  had no  longer  to  contend
with  the  abilities,  the  experience,  and  good  fortune  of
Charles,  but  with  a  monarch  scarcely  seated  on  his
throne,  unpractised  in  command,  odious  to  many  of
the  Italian  states,  and  dreaded  by  all. He  promised
that  the  pope,  who  had  already  levied  soldiers,  would
bring  a  considerable  army  into  the  field,  which,  when
joined  by  a  sufficient  number  of  French  troops,  might,
by  one  brisk  and  sudden  effort,  drive  the  Spaniards  out
of  Naples,  and  add  to  the  crown  of  France  a  kingdom,
the  conquest  of  which  had  been  the  great  object  of  all
his  predecessors  during  half  a  century,  and  the  chief
motive  of  all  their  expeditions  into  Italy.
Their  effect. Every  word  Caraffa  spoke  made  a  deep  im-
juiysi. pression on Henry;  conscious, on  the  one
hand,  that  the  pope  had  just  cause  to  reproach  him
with  having  violated  the  laws  not  only  of  generosity
but  of  decency,  when  he  renounced  his  league  with
him,  and  had  agreed  to  the  truce  of  Vaucelles ;  and
eager,  on  the  other  hand,  not  only  to  distinguish  his

336  CHARLES  V.  [1556.

reign  by  a  conquest,  which  three  former  monarchs  had
attempted  without  success,  but  likewise  to  acquire  an
establishment  of  such  dignity  and  value  for  one  of  his
sons.  Reverence,  however,  for  the  oath,  by  which  he
had  so  lately  confirmed  the  truce  of  Vaucelles ;  the  ex-
treme old  age  of  the  pope,  whose  death  might  occa-
sion an  entire  revolution  in  the  political  system  of
Italy;  together  with  the  representations  of  Montmo-
rency,  who  repeated  all  the  arguments  he  had  used
against  the  first  league  with  Paul,  and  pointed  out  the
great  and  immediate  advantages  which  France  derived
from  the  truce,  kept  Henry  for  some  time  in  suspense,
and  might  possibly  have  outweighed  all  CarafiVs  argu-
ments. But  the  cardinal  was  not  such  a  novice  in  the
arts  of  intrigue  and  negotiation,  as  not  to  have  expe-
dients ready  for  removing  or  surmounting  all  these  ob-
stacles. To  obviate  the  king's  scruple  with  regard  to
his  oath,  he  produced  powers  from  the  pope  to  absolve
him  from  the  obligation  of  it.  By  way  of  security
against  any  danger  which  he  might  apprehend  from
the  pope's  death,  he  engaged  that  his  uncle  would
make  such  a  nomination  of  cardinals,  as  should  give
Henry  the  absolute  command  of  the  next  election  and
enable  him  to  place  in  the  papal  chair  a  person  entirely
devoted  to  his  interest.

In  order  to  counterbalance  the  effect  of  the  consta-
ble's opinion  and  influence,  he  employed  not  only  the
active  talents  of  the  duke  of  Guise,  and  the  eloquence
of  his  brother  the  cardinal  of  Lorrain,  but  the  address
of  the  queen,  aided  by  the  more  powerful  arts  of  Diana
of  Poitiers,  who,  unfortunately  for  France,  co-operated
with  Catherine  in  this  point,  though  she  took  pleasure
on  almost  every  other  occasion,  to  thwart  and  mortify
her.  They,  by  their  united  solicitations,  easily  swayed
the  king,  who  leaned,  of  his  own  accord,  to  that  side
towards  which  they  wished  him  to  incline.  All  Mont-
morency's  prudent  remonstrances  were  disregarded;  the

1556.]  BOOK XL  337

nuncio  absolved  Henry  from  his  oath ;  and  he  signed
a  new  league  with  the  pope,  which  rekindled  the  flames
of  war  both  in  Italy  and  in  the  Low  Countries.
July  31.  As  soon  as  Paul  was  informed  by  his  ne-
vio!eStPpero-  phew  that  there  was  a  fair  prospect  of  his  suc-
SgS5  ceeding  in  this  negotiation,  he  dispatched  a
Philip.  messenger  after  the  nuncio  Rebiba,  with  orders
to  return  to  Rome,  without  proceeding  to  Brussels.
As  it  was  now  no  longer  necessary  to  preserve  that
tone  of  moderation  which  suited  the  character  of  a  me-
diator, and  which  he  had  affected  to  assume,  or  to  put
any  farther  restraint  upon  his  resentment  against  Philip,
he  boldly  threw  off  the  mask,  and  took  such  violent
steps  as  rendered  a  rupture  unavoidable.  He  seized
and  imprisoned  the  Spanish  envoy  at  his  court.  He
excommunicated  the  Colonnas;  and  having  deprived
Mark  Antonio,  the  head  of  that  family,  of  the  duke-
dom of  Paliano,  he  granted  that  dignity,  together  with
the  territory  annexed  to  it,  to  his  nephew  the  count
of  Montorio.  He  ordered  a  legal  information  to  be
presented  in  the  consistory  of  cardinals  against  Philip,
setting  forth  that  he,  notwithstanding  the  fidelity  and
allegiance  due  by  him  to  the  holy  see,  of  which  he
held  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  had  not  only  afforded  a
retreat  in  his  dominions  to  the  Colonnas,  whom  the
pope  had  excommunicated  and  declared  rebels,  but
had  furnished  them  with  arms,  and  was  ready,  in  con-
junction with  them,  to  invade  the  ecclesiastical  state  in
a  hostile  manner;  that  such  conduct  in  a  vassal  was
to  be  deemed  treason  against  his  liege  lord,  the  pu-
nishment of  which  was  the  forfeiture  of  his  fief.  Upon
this,  the  consistorial  advocate  requested  the  pope  to
take  cognizance  of  the  cause,  and  to  appoint  a  day  for
hearing  of  it,  when  he  would  make  good  every  article  of
the  charge,  and  expect  from  his  justice  that  sentence,
which  the  heinousness  of  Philip's  crimes  merited.
Paul,  whose  pride  was  highly  flattered  with  the  idea
VOL.  v.  z

338  CHARLES V.  [1556.

July  27.  °f  trying  and  passing  judgment  on  so  great
a  king,  assenting  to  his  request,  and  as  if  it
had  been  no  less  easy  to  execute  than  to  pronounce
such  a  sentence,  declared  that  he  would  consult  with
the  cardinals  concerning  the  formalities  requisite  in
conducting  the  trial.*

But  while  Paul  allowed  his  pride  and  resent-

Philip'ssu-  - . .  .  .  .  . _ ..,

ment  to  drive  him  on  with  such  headlong  impe-

:mp  es.  ftjQgj^  pnilip  discovered  an  amazing  modera-
tion on  his  part.  He  had  been  taught  by  the  Spanish
ecclesiastics,  who  had  the  charge  of  his  education,  a
profound  veneration  for  the  holy  see.  This  sentiment,
which  had  been  early  infused,  grew  up  with  him  as  he
advanced  in  years,  and  took  full  possession  of  his  mind,
which  was  naturally  thoughtful,  serious,  and  prone  to
superstition.  When  he  foresaw  a  rupture  with  the  pope
approaching,  he  had  such  violent  scruples  with  respect
to  the  lawfulness  of  taking  arms  against  the  vicegerent
of  Christ,  and  the  common  father  of  all  Christians,  that
he  consulted  some  Spanish  divines  upon  that  point.
They,  with  the  usual  dexterity  of  casuists  in  accommo-
dating their  responses  to  the  circumstances  of  those  who
apply  to  them  for  direction,  assured  him  that,  after  em-
ploying prayers  and  remonstrances  in  order  to  bring
the  pope  to  reason,  he  had  full  right,  both  by  the  laws
of  nature  and  of  Christianity,  not  only  to  defend  himself
when  attacked,  but  to  begin  hostilities,  if  that  were
judged  the  most  proper  expedient  for  preventing  the
effects  of  Paul's  violence^  and  injustice.  Philip  never-
theless continued  to  deliberate  and  delay,  considering
it  as  a  most  cruel  misfortune,  that  his  administration
should  open  with  an  attack  upon  a  person,  whose  sacred
function  and  character  he  so  highly  respected.6

At  last  the  duke  of  Alva,  who,  in  compliance

The  duke .  . .  .  111

of  AIT* with  his  masters  scruples,  had  continued  to  ne-

•  Pallav.  lib.  xiii.  171.
h  Ferrer.  Hist,  de  Etpagne,  ix.  373. Herrera,  i.  308.

1556.]  BOOK XI.  330

takes  the  gotiate  long  after  he  should  have  begun  to  act,
against  the  finding  Paul  inexorable,  and  that  every  over-
pope.  ture  of  peacCj  anci  every  appearance  of  hesita-
tion on  his  part,  increased  the  pontiff's  natural  arro-
gance, took  the  field  and  entered  the  ecclesias-
tical territories.  His  army  did  not  exceed
twelve  thousand  men,  but  it  was  composed  of  veteran
soldiers,  and  commanded  chiefly  by  those  Roman  ba-
rons, whom  Paul's  violence  had  driven  into  exile.  The
valour  of  the  troops,  together  with  the  animosity  of  their
leaders,  who  fought  in  their  own  quarrel,  and  to  recover
their  own  estates,  supplied  the  want  of  numbers.  As
none  of  the  French  forces  were  yet  arrived,  Alva  soon
became  master  of  the  Campagna  Romana ;  some  cities
being  surrendered  through  the  cowardice  of  the  garri-
sons, which  consisted  of  raw  soldiers,  ill  disciplined  and
worse  commanded ;  the  gates  of  others  being  opened
by  the  inhabitants,  who  were  eager  to  receive  back  their
ancient  masters.  Alva,  that  he  might  not  be  taxed  with
impiety  in  seizing  the  patrimony  of  the  church,  took
possession  of  the  towns  which  capitulated,  in  the  name
of  the  college  of  cardinals,  to  which,  or  to  the  pope_that
should  be  chosen  to  succeed  Paul,  he  declared  that  he
would  immediately  restore  them.
A  truce  The  rapid  progress  of  the  Spaniards,  whose
thetw€oene  lignt  troops  made  excursions  even  to  the  gates
and  Philip,  of  Rome,  filled  that  city  with  consternation.
Paul,  though  inflexible  and  undaunted  himself,  was
obliged  to  give  way  so  far  to  the  fears  and  solicitations
of  the  cardinals,  as  to  send  deputies  to  Alva,  in  order
to  propose  a  cessation  of  arms.  The  pope  yielded  the
more  readily,  as  he  was  sensible  of  a  double  advantage
which  might  be  derived  from  obtaining  that  point  ft
would  deliver  the  inhabitants  of  Rome  from  their  pre-
sent terror,  and  would  afford  time  for  the  arrival  of  the
succours  which  he  expected  from  France.  Nor  was
Alva  unwilling  to  close  with  the  overture,  both  as  he

z  2

340  CHARLES  V.  [1556.

knew  how  desirous  his  master  was  to  terminate  a  war,
which  he  had  undertaken  with  reluctance,  and  as  his
army  was  so  much  weakened  by  garrisoning  the  great
number  of  towns  which  he  had  reduced,  that  it  was
hardly  in  a  condition  to  keep  the  field  without  fresh
recruits.  A  truce  was  accordingly  concluded

Nov.  19.

first  for  ten,  and  afterward  for  forty  days,  dur-
ing which,  various  schemes  of  peace  were  proposed,
and  perpetual  negotiations  were  carried  on,  but  with
no  sincerity  on  the  part  of  the  pope.  The  return  of  his
nephew,  the  cardinal,  to  Rome,  the  receipt  of  a  consi-
derable sum  remitted  by  the  king  of  France,  the  arrival
of  one  body  of  French  troops,  together  with  the  expec-
tation of  others  which  had  begun  their  march,  rendered
him  more  arrogant  than  ever,  and  banished  all  thoughts
from  his  mind  but  those  of  war  and  revenge.6

c  Pallav.  lib.  xiii.  177. Thuan.  lib.  xyii.  588. Mem.  de  Ribier,  ii.  664.

THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

OF  THE

BOOK  XII.

^  W  HILE  these  operations  or  intrigues  kept  the
new  at-  pope  and  Philip  busy  and  attentive,  the  em-
aiter  the  peror  disentangled  himself  finally  from  all  the

empire.  fog  retreat.  He  had  hitherto  retained  the  im-
perial dignity,  not  from  any  unwillingness  to  relinquish
it,  for,  after  having  resigned  the  real  and  extensive  au-
thority that  he  enjoyed  in  his  hereditary  dominions,  to
part  with  the  limited  and  often  ideal  jurisdiction  which
belongs  to  an  elective  crown,  was  no  great  sacrifice.
His  sole  motive  for  delay  was  to  gain  a  few  months,  for
making  one  trial  more,  in  order  to  accomplish  his  fa-
vourite scheme  in  behalf  of  his  son.  At  the  very  time
Charles  seemed  to  be  most  sensible  of  the  vanity  of
worldly  grandeur,  and  when  he  appeared  to  be  quitting
it  not  only  with  indifference,  but  with  contempt,  the
vast  schemes  of  ambition  which  had  so  long  occupied
and  engrossed  his  mind,  still  kept  possession  of  it.  He
could  not  think  of  leaving  his  son  in  a  rank  inferior  to
that  which  he  himself  had  held  among  the  princes  of
Europe.  As  he  had,  some  years  before,  made  a  fruit-
less attempt  to  secure  the  imperial  crown  to  Philip,  that
by  uniting  it  to  the  kingdoms  of  Spain,  and  the  domi-
nions of  the  house  of  Burgundy,  he  might  put  it  in  his
power  to  prosecute,  with  a  better  prospect  of  success,

those  great  plans,  which  his  own  infirmities  had  obliged

•

342  CHARLES  V.  [1556.

him  to  abandon,  he  was  still  unwilling  to  relinquish
this  flattering  project  as  chimerical  or  unattainable.

Notwithstanding  the  repulse  which  he  had
pn>Tes  un-  formerly  met  with  from  his  brother  Ferdinand,
ssfult  he  renewed  his  solicitations  with  fresh  impor-
tunity; and  during  the  summer,  had  tried  every  art,
and  employed  every  argument,  which  he  thought  could
induce  him  to  quit  the  imperial  throne  to  Philip,  and
to  accept  of  the  investiture  of  some  province,  either  in
Italy,  or  in  the  Low  Countries,  as  an  equivalent.* But
Ferdinand,  who  was  so  firm  and  inflexible  with  regard
to  this  point,  that  he  had  paid  no  regard  to  the  soli-
citations of  the  emperor, even  when  they  were  en-
forced with  all  the  weight  of  authority  which  accom-
panies supreme  power,  received  the  overture,  that  now
came  from  him  in  the  situation  to  which  he  had  de-
scended, with  great  indifference,  and  would  hardly
deign  to  listen  to  it. Charles  ashamed  of  his  own  cre-
dulity in  having  imagined  that  he  might  accomplish
that  now,  which  he  had  attempted  formerly  without
success,  desisted  finally  from  his  scheme. He  then  re-
signed the  government  of  the  empire,  and  having  trans-
ferred all  his  claims  of  obedience  and  allegiance  from
the  Germanic  body,  to  his  brother  the  king  of
the  Romans,  he  executed  a  deed  to  that  effect,
with  all  the  formalities  requisite  in  such  an  important
transaction. The  instrument  of  resignation  he  com-
mitted to  William  prince  of  Orange,  and  empowered
him  to  lay  it  before  the  college  of  electors.5
Charles Nothing  now  remained  to  detain  Charles  from
set*  out  for  that  retreat  for  which  he  languished. The  pre-
parations for  his  voyage  having  been  made  for
some  time,  he  set  out  for  Zuitburg  in  Zealand,  where
the  fleet  which  was  to  convoy  him  had  orders  to  as-
semble. In  his  way  thither  he  passed  through  Ghent,

»  Ambassades  dcs  Noailles,  torn.  v.  356.
fc  Goldait.  Cunstit.  Imper.  par.  i.  576.

1556.]  BOOK XII.  343

and  after  stopping  there  a  few  days,  to  indulge  that
tender  and  pleasing  melancholy,  which  arises  in  the
mind  of  every  man  in  the  decline  of  life,  on  visiting  the
place  of  his  nativity,  and  viewing  the  scenes  and  ob-
jects familiar  to  him  in  his  early  youth,  he  pursued  his
journey,  accompanied  by  his  son  Philip,  his  daughter
the  archduchess,  his  sisters  the  dowager-queens  of  France
and  Hungary,  Maximilian  his  son-in-law,  and  a  numer-
ous retinue  of  the  Flemish  nobility.  Before  he  went
on  board,  he  dismissed  them,  with  marks  of  his  atten-
tion or  regard,  and  taking  leave  of  Philip  with  all  the
tenderness  of  a  father  who  embraced  his  son  for  the  last
time,  he  set  sail  on  the  17th  of  September,  under  the
convoy  of  a  large  fleet  of  Spanish,  Flemish,  and  English
ships.  He  declined  a  pressing  invitation,  from  the
queen  of  England,  to  land  in  some  part  of  her  domi-
nions, in  order  to  refresh  himself,  and  that  she  might
have  the  comfort  of  seeing  him  once  more.  "  It  can-
not, surely,"  said  he,  "  be  agreeable  to  a  queen  to  re-
ceive a  visit  from  a  father-in-law,  who  is  now  nothing
more  than  a  private  gentleman."

His  voyage  was  prosperous,  and  he  arrived

His  arrival  T»  •

and  recep-  at  Laredo  in  Biscay  on  the  eleventh  day  after
he  left  Zealand.  As  soon  as  he  landed  he  fell
prostrate  on  the  ground ;  and  considering  himself  now
as  dead  to  the  world,  he  kissed  the  earth,  and  said,
"  Naked  came  I  out  of  my  mother's  womb,  and  naked
I  now  return  to  thee,  thou  common  mother  of  mankind."
From  Laredo  he  pursued  his  journey  to  Burgos,  carried
sometimes  in  a  chair  and  sometimes  in  a  horse-litter,
suffering  exquisite  pain  at  every  step,  and  advancing
with  the  greatest  difficulty.  Some  of  the  Spanish  no-
bility repaired  to  Burgos,  in  order  to  pay  court  to  him,
but  they  were  so  few  in  number,  and  their  attendance
was  so  negligent,  that  Charles  observed  it,  and  felt,  for
the  first  time,  that  he  was  no  longer  a  monarch.  Ac-
customed from  his  early  youth  to  the  dutiful  and  officious

344  CHARLES V.  [1556.

respect  with  which  those  who  possess  sovereign  power
are  attended,  he  had  received  it  with  the  credulity  com-
mon to  princes,  and  was  sensibly  mortified,  when  he
now  discovered,  that  he  had  been  indebted  to  his  rank
and  power  for  much  of  that  obsequious  regard  which
he  had  fondly  thought  was  paid  to  his  personal  quali-
ties. But  though  he  might  have  soon  learned  to  view
with  unconcern  the  levity  of  his  subjects,  or  to  have
despised  their  neglect,  he  was  more  deeply  afflicted
with  the  ingratitude  of  his  son,  who,  forgetting  already
how  much  he  owed  to  his  father's  bounty,  obliged  him
to  remain  some  weeks  at  Burgos,  before  he  paid  him
the  first  moiety  of  that  small  pension,  which  was  all
that  he  had  reserved  of  so  many  kingdoms.  As  with-
out this  sum,  Charles  could  not  dismiss  his  domes-
tics with  such  rewards  as  their  services  merited,  or
his  generosity  had  destined  for  them,  he  could  not  help
expressing  both  surprise  and  dissatisfaction.0  At  last
the  money  was  paid,  and  Charles  having  dismissed  a
great  number  of  his  domestics,  whose  attendance  he
thought  would  be  superfluous  or  cumbersome  in  his  re-
tirement, he  proceeded  to  Valladolid.  There  he  took
a  last  and  tender  leave  of  his  two  sisters,  whom  he
would  not  permit  to  accompany  him  to  his  solitude,
though  they  requested  him  with  tears,  not  only  that
they  might  have  the  consolation  of  contributing  by  their
attendance  and  care  to  mitigate  or  to  soothe  his  suffer-
ings, but  that  they'  might  reap  instruction  and  benefit
by  joining  with  him  in  those  pious  exercises,  to  which
he  had  consecrated  the  remainder  of  his  days.

1557.  From  Valladolid  he  continued  his  journey
ofhh«  re°e  *°  Plazencia  in  Estremadura.  He  had  passed
treat.  through  this  place  a  great  many  years  before,
and  having  been  struck  at  that  time  with  the  delightful
situation  of  the  monastery  of  St.  Justus,  belonging  to
the  order  of  St.  Jerome,  not  many  miles  distant  from  the

«  Strada  de  Bello  Belg.  lib.  i.  9.

1557.]  BOOK  XII.  345

town,  he  had  then  observed  to  some  of  his  attendants,
that  this  was  a  spot  to  which  Dioclesian  might  have
retired  with  pleasure.  The  impression  had  remained
so  strong  on  his  mind,  that  he  pitched  upon  it  as  the
place  of  his  own  retreat.  It  was  seated  in  a  vale  of
no  great  extent,  watered  by  a  small  brook,  and  sur-
rounded by  rising  grounds,  covered  with  lofty  trees ;
from  the  nature  of  the  soil,  as  well  as  the  temperature
of  the  climate,  it  was  esteemed  the  most  healthful  and
delicious  situation  in  Spain.  Some  months  before  his
resignation  he  had  sent  an  architect  thither,  to  add  a
new  apartment  to  the  monastery,  for  his  accommoda-
tion; but  he  gave  strict  orders  that  the  style  of  the
building  should  be  such  as  suited  his  present  station,
rather  than  his  former  dignity.  It  consisted  only  of  six
rooms,  four  of  them  in  the  form  of  friar's  cells,  with
naked  walls;  the  other  two,  each  twenty  feet  square,
were  hung  with  brown  cloth,  and  furnished  in  the  most
simple  manner.  They  were  all  on  a  level  with  the
ground;  with  a  door  on  one  side  into  a  garden,  of
which  Charles  himself  had  given  the  plan,  and  had
filled  it  with  various  plants  which  he  intended  to  culti-
vate with  his  own  hands.  On  the  other  side  they  com-
municated with  the  chapel  of  the  monastery,  in  which
he  was  to  perform  his  devotions.  Into  this  humble  re-
treat, hardly  sufficient  for  the  comfortable  accommoda-
tion of  a  private  gentleman,  did  Charles  enter,  with
twelve  domestics  only.  He  buried  there,  in  so-

Feb.  24. .  .  .  ...

litude  and  silence,  his  grandeur,  his  ambition,
together  with  all  those  vast  projects,  which,  during
almost  half  a  century,  had  alarmed  and  agitated  Eu-
rope, filling  every  kingdom  in  it,  by  turns,  with  the
terror  of  his  arms,  and  the  dread  of  being  subdued  by
his  power.d

Contrast The  contrast  between  Charles's  conduct  and
a-  that  of  the  pope  at  this  juncture,  was  so  ob-

*  Sandov.  ii.  607.  et  Zuniga,  100. Thuan.  lib.  xVti.  609.

346  CHARLES  V.  [1557.

vious,  that  it  struck  even  the  most  careless  ob-
servers ;  nor  was  the  comparison  which  they
made  to  the  advantage  of  Paul.  The  former,
a  conqueror,  bonji  to  reign,  long  accustomed  to  the
splendour  which  accompanies  supreme  power,  and  to
those  busy  and  interesting  scenes  in  which  an  active
ambition  had  engaged  him,  quitted  the  world  at  a  pe-
riod of  life  not  far  advanced,  that  he  might  close  the
evening  of  his  days  in  tranquillity,  and  secure  some  in-
terval for  sober  thought  and  serious  recollection.  The
latter,  a  priest,  who  had  passed  the  early  part  of  his  life
in  the  shade  of  the  schools,  and  in  the  study  of  the  spe-
culative sciences,  who  was  seemingly  so  detached  from
the  world,  that  he  had  shut  himself  up  for  many  years
in  the  solitude  of  a  cloister,  and  who  was  not  raised
to  the  papal  throne  until  he  had  reached  the  extremity
of  old  age,  discovered  at  once  all  the  impetuosity  of
youthful  ambition,  and  formed  extensive  schemes,  in
order  to  accomplish  which,  he  scrupled  not  to  scatter
the  seeds  of  discord,  and  to  kindle  the  flames  of  war,  in
every  corner  of  Europe.  But  Paul,  regardless  of  the
opinion  or  censures  of  mankind,  held  on  his  own  course
with  his  wonted  arrogance  and  violence.  These,  al-
though they  seemed  already  to  have  exceeded  all
bounds,  rose  to  a  still  greater  height,  upon  the  arrival
of  the  duke  of  Guise  in  Italy.

The  dnke  That  which  the  two  princes  of  Lorrain  fore-
°eadsUthe  saw  and  desirfid,  had  happened.  The  duke  of
French  Guise  was  intrusted  with  the  command  of  the

army  into

Ite|j'  army  appointed  to  march  to  the  pope's  assist-
ance. It  consisted  of  twenty  thousand  men  of  the  best
troops  in  the  service  of  France.  So  high  was  the  duke's
reputation,  and  such  the  general  expectation  of  behold-
ing some  extraordinary  exertion  of  his  courage  and  abi-
lities in  a  war  into  which  he  had  precipitated  his  coun-
try, chiefly  with  the  design  of  obtaining  a  field  where
he  might  display  his  OWE  talents,  that  many  of  the

1557.]  BOOK  XII.  347

French  nobility  who  had  no  command  in  the  troops
employed,  accompanied  him  as  volunteers.  This  army
passed  the  Alps  in  an  inclement  season,  and  advanced
towards  Rome  without  any  opposition  from  the  Spa-
niards, who,  as  they  were  not  strong  enough  to  act  in
different  parts,  had  collected  all  their  forces  into  one
body  on  the  frontiers  of  Naples,  for  the  defence  of  that
kingdom.

The  pope  Imboldened  by  the  approach  of  the  French
renews  the  pope  let  loose  all  the  fury  of  his  resent-

hostihties  r r  i  • i

against ment  against  Philip, which,  notwithstanding
the  natural  violence  of  his  temper,  prudential
considerations  had  hitherto  obliged  him  to  keep  under
somQ  restraint. He  named  commissioners,  whom  he
empowered  to  pass  judgment  in  the  suit  which  the  con-
sistorial  advocate  had  commenced  against  Philip,  in
order  to  prove  that  he  had  forfeited  the  crown
of  Naples,  by  taking  arms  against  the  holy  see,
of  which  he  was  a  vassal. He  recalled  all  the  nuncios
resident  in  the  courts  of  Charles  V.,  of  Philip,  or  of
any  of  their  allies. This  was  levelled  chiefly
against  cardinal  Pole,  the  papal  legate  in  the
court  of  England,  whose  great  merit,  in  having  contri-
buted so  successfully  to  reconcile  that  kingdom  to  the
church  of  Rome,  together  with  the  expectation  of  far-
ther services  which  he  might  perform,  was  not  suffi-
cient to  screen  him  from  the  resentment  that  he  had
incurred  by  his  zealous  endeavours  to  establish  peace
between  the  house  of  Austria  and  France. He  com-
manded an  addition  to  be  made  to  the  anathemas  an-
nually denounced  against  the  enemies  of  the  church
on  Maundy-Thursday,  whereby  he  inflicted  the  cen-
sure of  excommunication  on  the  authors  of  the  late  inva-
sion of  the  ecclesiastical  territories,  whatever  their  rank
or  dignity  might  be ;  and,  in  consequence  of  this,  the
usual  prayers  for  the  emperor  were  omitted  next  day
in  the  pope's  chapel.*

•  Pal.  lib.  xiii.  180. Mem.  de  Ribier,  ii.  6T8.

348  CHARLES V.  [1557.

His  raili. But  while  the  pope  indulged  himself  in  those

tary  pre- yfi\&  and  childish  sallies  of  rage,  either  he  nesr-

parations  ° 7

innde-  lected,  or  found  that  it  exceeded  his  power  to
take  such  measures  as  would  have  rendered  his
resentment  really  formidable,  and  fatal  to  his  enemies.
For  when  the  duke  of  Guise  entered  Rome,  where  he
was  received  with  a  triumphal  pomp,  which  would
have  been  more  suitable  if  he  had  been  returning  after
having  terminated  the  war  with  glory,  than  when  he
was  going  to  begin  it  with  a  doubtful  chance  of  suc-
cess, he  found  none  of  the  preparations  for  war  in  such
forwardness  as  cardinal  Caraffa  had  promised,  or  he
had  expected.  The  papal  troops  were  far  inferior  in
number  to  the  quota  stipulated  ;  no  magazines  sufficient
for  their  subsistence  were  formed  ;  nor  was  money  for
paying  them  provided.  The  Venetians,  agreeably  to
that  cautious  maxim  which  the  misfortunes  of  their
state  at  first  led  them  to  adopt,  and  which  was  now  be-
come a  fundamental  principle  in  their  policy,  declared
their  resolution  to  preserve  an  exact  neutrality,  without
taking  any  part  in  the  quarrels  of  princes,  so  far  supe-
rior to  themselves  in  power.  The  other  Italian  states
were  either  openly  united  in  league  with  Philip,  or
secretly  wished  success  to  his  arms  against  a  pontiff,
whose  inconsiderate  ambition  had  rendered  Italy  once
more  the  seat  of  war.

Duke  of ^e  duke  °f  Guise  perceived  that  the  whole
Guise's weight  of  the  war  would  devolve  on  the  French

operations.  . ,  .  '  ,  . .

troops  under  his  command  ;  and  became  sen-

sible, though  too  late,  how  imprudent  it  is  to  rely,  in

the  execution  of  great  enterprises,  on  the  aid  of  feeble

allies. Pushed  on,  however,  by  the  pope's  im-

Apnl  43.  .  nil-

patience  lor  action,  as  well  as  by  his  own  de-
sire of  performing  some  part  of  what  he  had  so  confi-
dently undertaken,  he  marched  towards  Naples,  and
began  his  operations.  But  the  success  of  these  fell
far  short  of  his  former  reputation,  of  what  the  world
expected,  and  of  what  he  himself  had  promised.  He

1557.]  BOOK XII.  349

opened  the  campaign  with  the  siege  of  Civitella,  a
town  of  some  importance  on  the  Neapolitan  frontier.
But  the  obstinacy  with  which  the  Spanish  governor
defended  it,  baffled  all  the  impetuous  efforts  of  the
French  valour,  and  obliged  the  duke  of  Guise,  after  a
siege  of  three  weeks,  to  retire  from  the  town  with  dis-
grace. He  endeavoured  to  wipe  off  that  stain,  by  ad-
vancing boldly  towards  the  duke  of  Alva's  camp,  and
offering  him  battle.  But  that  prudent  commander,  sen-
sible of  all  the  advantages  of  standing  on  the  defensive
before  an  invading  enemy,  declined  an  engagement,
and  kept  within  his  intrenchment ;  and,  adhering  to
his  plan  with  the  steadiness  of  a  Castilian,  eluded,  with
great  address,  all  the  duke  of  Guise's  stratagems  to
draw  him  into  action/  By  this  time  sickness  began
to  waste  the  French  army ;  violent  dissensions  had
arisen  between  the  duke  of  Guise  and  the  commander
of  the  pope's  forces ;  the  Spaniards  renewed  their  incur-
sions into  the  ecclesiastical  state ;  the  pope,  when  he
found,  instead  of  the  conquests  and  triumphs  which  he
had  fondly  expected,  that  he  could  not  secure  his  own
territories  from  depredation,  murmured,  complained,
and  began  to  talk  of  peace.  The  duke  of  Guise,  mor-
tified to  the  last  degree  with  having  acted  such  an  in-
glorious part,  not  only  solicited  his  court  either  to  re-
inforce his  army,  or  to  recall  him,  but  urged  Paul  to
fulfil  his  engagements ;  and  called  on  cardinal  CarafFa,
sometimes  with  reproaches,  sometimes  with  threats,  to
make  good  those  magnificent  promises,  from  a  rash
confidence  in  which  he  had  advised  his  master  to  re-
nounce the  truce  of  Vaucelles,  and  to  join  in  league
with  the  pope.8

But  while  the  French  affairs  in  Italy  were  in

Hostilities  .  J ,

in  the  LOW  this  wretched  situation,  an  unexpected  event
happened  in  the  Low  Countries,  which  called

'  Herrera  Vida  de  Felipe,  18t.
*  Thuau.  Jib.  xxtiii.  614. Pallav.  lib.  xiii.  181. Burn.  ii.  ap.  317.

350  CHARLES V.  [1557.

the  duke  of  Guise  from  a  station  wherein  he  could  ac-
quire no  honour,  to  the  most  dignified  and  important
charge  which  could  be  committed  to  a  subject.  As
soon  as  the  French  had  discovered  their  purpose  of
violating  the  truce  of  Vaucelles,  not  only  by  sending
an  army  into  Italy,  but  by  attempting  to  surprise  some
of  the  frontier  towns  in  Flanders,  Philip,  though  will-
ing to  have  avoided  a  rupture,  determined  to  prose-
cute the  war  with  such  spirit,  as  should  make  his  ene-
mies sensible  that  his  father  had  not  erred,  when  he
judged  him  to  be  so  capable  of  government,  that  he
had  given  up  the  reins  into  his  hands.  As  he  knew
that  Henry  had  been  at  great  expense  in  fitting  out  the
army  under  the  duke  of  Guise,  and  that  his  treasury
was  hardly  able  to  answer  the  exorbitant  and  endless
demands  of  a  distant  war,  he  foresaw  that  all  his  ope-
rations in  the  Low  Countries  must,  of  consequence,
prove  feeble,  and  be  considered  only  as  secondary
to  those  in  Italy.  For  that  reason,  he  prudently  re-
solved to  make  his  principal  effort  in  that  place  where
he  expected  the  French  to  be  weakest,  and  to  bend
his  chief  force  against  that  quarter  where  they  would
feel  a  blow  most  sensibly.  With  this  view  he  assem-
bled in  the  Low  Countries  an  army  of  about  fifty  thou-
sand men,  the  Flemings  serving  him  on  this  occasion
with  that  active  zeal  which  subjects  are  wont  to  exert
in  obeying  the  first  commands  of  a  new  sovereign.
But  Philip,  cautious  and  provident,  even  at  this  early
period  of  life,  did  not  rest  all  his  hopes  of  success  on
that  formidable  force  alone.

Philip  en- He  had  been  labouring  for  some  time  to  en-
tne  English  to  espouse  his  quarrel  ;  and

England  in  though  it  was  manifestly  the  interest  of  that
kingdom  to  maintain  a  strict  neutrality,  and
the  people  themselves  were  sensible  of  the  advantages
which  they  derived  from  it  ;  though  he  knew  how
odious  his  name  was  to  the  English,  and  how  averse

1557.]  BOOK  XII.  35 1

they  would  be  to  co-operate  with  him  in  any  measure,
he  nevertheless  did  not  despair  of  accomplishing  his
point.  He  relied  on  the  affection  with  which  the  queen
doated  on  him,  which  was  so  violent,  that  even  his
coldness  and  neglect  had  not  extinguished  it ;  he  knew
her  implicit  reverence  for  his  opinion,  and  her  fond
desire  of  gratifying  him  in  every  particular.  That  he
might  work  on  these  with  greater  facility  and  more
certain  success,  he  set  out  for  England.  The  queen,
who,  during  her  husband's  absence,  had  languished  in
perpetual  dejection,  resumed  fresh  spirits  on  his  arri-
val ;  and,  without  paying  the  least  attention  either  to
the  interest  or  to  the  inclinations  of  her  people,  entered
warmly  into  all  his  schemes.  In  vain  did  her  privy-
council  remonstrate  against  the  imprudence  as  well  as
danger  of  involving  the  nation  in  an  unnecessary  war ;
in  vain  did  they  put  her  in  mind  of  the  solemn  treaties
of  peace  subsisting  between  England  and  France,
which  the  conduct  of  that  nation  had  afforded  her  no
pretext  to  violate.  Mary,  soothed  by  Philip's  caresses,
or  intimidated  by  the  threats  which  his  ascendant  over
her  imboldened  him  at  some  times  to  throw  out,  was
deaf  to  every  thing  that  could  be  urged  in  opposition
to  his  sentiments,  and  insisted  with  the  greatest  vehe-
mence on  an  immediate  declaration  of  war  against
France.  The  council,  though  all  Philip's  address  and
Mary's  authority  were  employed  to  gain  or  overawe
them,  after  struggling  long,  yielded  at  last,  not  from  con-
viction, but  merely  from  deference  to  the  will  of  their
sovereign.  War  was  declared  against  France,

June  20. ,  ,  . ,  ., ,°,  . ,  . ,

the  only  one  perhaps  against  that  kingdom  into
which  the  English  ever  entered  with  reluctance.  As
Mary  knew  the  aversion  of  the  nation  to  this  measure,
she  durst  not  call  a  parliament  in  order  to  raise  money
for  carrying  on  the  war.  She  supplied  this  want,  how-
ever, by  a  stretch  of  royal  prerogative,  not  unusual  in
that  age ;  and  levied  large  sums  on  her  subjects  by  her

352  CHARLES V.  [1557-

own  authority.  This  enabled  her  to  assemble  a  suf-
ficient body  of  troops,  and  to  send  eight  thousand  men
under  the  conduct  of  the  earl  of  Pembroke  to  join
Philip's  army.h

Opera-  Philip,  who  was  not  ambitious  of  military
Philip's  gl°ry  j  gave  the  command  of  his  army  to  Ema-
thc'L'w  nuel  Philibert  duke  of  Savoy,  and  fixed  his
Countries.  own  residence  at  Cambray,  that  he  might  be  at
hand  to  receive  the  earliest  intelligence  of  his  motions,
and  to  aid  him  with  his  counsels.  The  duke  opened
the  campaign  with  a  masterly  stroke  of  address,  which
justified  Philip's  choice,  and  discovered  such  a  supe-
riority of  genius  over  the  French  generals,  as  almost
ensured  success  in  his  subsequent  operations.  He  ap-
pointed the  general  rendezvous  of  his  troops  at  a  place
considerably  distant  from  the  country  which  he  destined
to  be  the  scene  of  action;  and  having  kept  the  ene-
my in  suspense  for  a  good  time  with  regard  to  his
intentions,  he  at  last  deceived  them  so  effectually  by
the  variety  of  his  marches  and  countermarches,  as  led
them  to  conclude  that  he  meant  to  bend  all  his  force
against  the  province  of  Champagne,  and  would  attempt
to  penetrate  into  the  kingdom  on  that  side.  In  con-
sequence of  this  opinion,  they  drew  all  their  strength
towards  that  quarter,  and  reinforcing  the  garrison  there,
left  the  towns  on  other  parts  of  the  frontier  destitute  of
troops  sufficient  to  defend  them.

invests  SL  The  duke  of  Savoy,  as  soon  as  he  perceived
Quintin.  tliat  tnig  feint  had  itg  fu|j  effectj  turne(j  suddenly

to  the  right,  advanced  by  rapid  marches  into  Picardy,
and  sending  his  cavalry,  in  which  he  was  extremely
strong,  before  him,  invested  St.  Quintin.  This  was  a
town  deemed  in  that  age  of  considerable  strength,  and
of  great  importance,  as  there  were  few  fortified  cities
between  it  and  Paris.  The  fortifications,  however,  had
been  much  neglected;  the  garrison,  weakened  by

*  Carte,  Hi.  357.

1557.]  BOOK  XII.  353

draughts  sent  towards  Champagne,  did  not  amount  to
a  fifth  part  of  the  number  requisite  for  its  defence;  and
the  governor,  though  a  brave  officer,  was  neither  of
rank  nor  authority  equal  to  the  command  in  a  place  of
so  much  consequence,  besieged  by  such  a  formidable
army.  A  few  days  must  have  put  the  duke  of  Savoy
in  possession  of  the  town,  if  the  admiral  de  Coligny,
who  thought  it  concerned  his  honour  to  attempt  saving
a  place  of  such  importance  to  his  country,  and  which
lay  within  his  jurisdiction  as  governor  of  Picardy,  had
not  taken  the  gallant  resolution  of  throwing  himself
into  it,  with  such  a  body  of  men  as  he  could  collect  on
a  sudden.  This  resolution  he  executed  with  great  in-
trepidity, and  if  the  nature  of  the  enterprise  be  consi-
dered, with  no  contemptible  success;  for  though  one
half  of  his  small  body  of  troops  was  cut  off,  he,  with
the  other,  broke  through  the  enemy,  and  entered  the
town.  The  unexpected  arrival  of  an  officer  of  such
high  rank  and  reputation,  and  who  had  exposed  him-
self to  such  danger,  in  order  to  join  them,  inspired  the
desponding  garrison  with  courage.  Every  thing  that
the  admiral's  great  skill  and  experience  in  the  art  of  war
could  suggest,  for  annoying  the  enemy,  or  defending  the
town,  was  attempted;  and  the  citizens,  as  well  as  the
garrison,  seconding  his  zeal  with  equal  ardour,  seemed
to  be  determined  that  they  would  hold  out  to  the  last,
and  sacrifice  themselves  in  order  to  save  their  country.1
The  The  duke  of  Savoy,  whom  the  English,  under

French  en-  the  earl  of  Pembroke,  joined  about  this  time,
relieve  the  pushed  on  the  siege  with  the  greatest  vigour.
An  army  so  numerous,  and  so  well  supplied
with  every  thing  requisite,  carried  on  its  approaches
with  great  advantage  against  a  garrison  which  was
still  so  feeble  that  it  durst  seldom  venture  to  disturb  or
retard  the  enemy's  operations  by  sallies.  The  admiral,

1  Thuan.  lib.  xix.  647.
VOL. V.  2 A

354  CHARLES V.  [1557.

sensible  of  the  approaching  danger,  and  unable  to  avert
it,  acquainted  his  uncle  the  constable  Montmorency,
who  had  the  command  of  the  French  army,  with  his
situation,  and  pointed  out  to  him  a  method  by  which
he  might  throw  relief  into  the  town.  The  constable,
solicitous  to  save  a  town,  the  loss  of  which  would  open
a  passage  for  the  enemy  into  the  heart  of  France ;  and
eager  to  extricate  his  nephew  out  of  that  perilous  situa-
tion, in  which  zeal  for  the  public  had  engaged  him;
resolved,  though  aware  of  the  danger,  to  attempt  what
he  desired.  With  this  view,  he  marched  from  La  Fere
towards  St.  Quintin  at  the  head  of  his  army,  which  was
not  by  one  half  so  numerous  as  that  of  the  enemy,  and
having  given  the  command  of  a  body  of  chosen  men  to
Coligny's  brother,  Dandelot,  who  was  colonel-general
of  the  French  infantry,  he  ordered  him  to  force  his  way
into  the  town  by  that  avenue  which  the  admiral  had  re-
presented as  most  practicable,  while  he  himself,  with
the  main  army,  would  give  the  alarm  to  the  enemy's
camp  on  the  opposite  side,  and  endeavour  to  draw  all
their  attention  towards  that  quarter.  Dandelot  exe-
cuted his  orders  with  greater  intrepidity  than  conduct.
He  rushed  on  with  such  headlong  impetuosity,
that,  though  it  broke  the  first  body  of  the  enemy
which  stood  in  his  way,  it  threw  his  own  soldiers  into
the  utmost  confusion ;  and  as  they  were  attacked  in  that
situation  by  fresh  troops  which  closed  in  upon  them  on
every  side,  the  greater  part  of  them  were  cut  in  pieces;
Dandelot,  with  about  five  hundred  of  the  most  adven-
turous and  most  fortunate,  making  good  his  entrance
into  the  town.

Meanwhile  the  constable,  in  executing  his

1  he  battle

of  St. part  of  the  plan,  advanced  so  near  the  camp  of
the  besiegers,  as  rendered  it  impossible  to  re-
treat with  safety  in  the  face  of  an  enemy  so  much  supe-
rior in  number. The  duke  of  Savoy  instantly  perceived

1557.}  BOOK XII.  355

Montmorency's  error,  and  prepared,  with  the  presence
of  mind  and  abilities  of  a  great  general,  to  avail  him-
self of  it.  He  drew  up  his  army  in  order  of  battle,  with
the  greatest  expedition;  and,  watching  the  moment
when  the  French  began  to  file  off  towards  La  Fere,  he
detached  all  his  cavalry,  under  the  command  of  the
count  of  Egmont,  to  fall  on  their  rear,  while  he  himself ,
at  the  head  of  his  infantry,  advanced  to  support  him.
The  French  retired  at  first  in  perfect  order,  and  with  a
good  countenance;  but  when  they  saw  Egmont  draw
near  with  his  formidable  body  of  cavalry,  the  shock  of
which  they  were  conscious  that  they  could  not  with-
stand, the  prospect  of  imminent  danger,  added  to  dis-
trust of  their  general,  whose  imprudence  every  soldier
now  perceived,  struck  them  with  general  consternation.
They  began  insensibly  to  quicken  their  pace,  and  those
in  the  rear  pressed  so  violently  on  such  as  were  before
them,  that  in  a  short  time  their  march  resembled  a  flight
rather  than  a  retreat.  Egmont,  observing  their  confu-
sion, charged  them  with  the  greatest  fury,  and  in  a
moment  all  their  men  at  arms,  the  pride  and  strength
of  the  French  troops  in  that  age,  gave  way,  and  fled
with  precipitation.  The  infantry,  however,

Total  de-  .  -,

feat  of  the  whom  the  constable,  by  his  presence  and  autho-
rity, kept  to  their  colours,  still  continued  to  re-
treat in  good  order,  until  the  enemy  brought  some  pieces
of  cannon  to  bear  upon  their  centre,  which  threw  them
into  such  confusion,  that  the  Flemish  cavalry,  renewing
their  attack,  broke  in,  and  the  rout  became  universal.
About  four  thousand  of  the  French  fell  in  the  field,  and
among  these  the  duke  of  Anguien,  a  prince  of  the  blood,
together  with  six  hundred  gentlemen.  The  constable,
as  soon  as  he  perceived  the  fortune  of  the  day  to  be
irretrievable,  rushed  into  the.  thickest  of  the  enemy,
with  a  resolution  not  to  survive  the  calamity  which  his
ill  conduct  had  brought  upon  his  country ;  but  having

2  A  2

356  CHARLES  V.  [1557.

received  a  dangerous  wound,  and  being  wasted  with
the  loss  of  blood,  he  was  surrounded  by  some  Flemish
officers,  to  whom  he  was  known,  who  protected  him
from  the  violence  of  the  soldiers,  and  obliged  him  to
surrender.  Besides  the  constable,  the  dukes  of  Mont-
pensier  and  Longueville,  the  mareschal  of  St.  Andr£,
many  officers  of  distinction,  three  hundred  gentlemen,
and  near  four  thousand  private  soldiers,  were  taken
prisoners.  All  the  colours  belonging  to  the  infantry,
all  the  ammunition,  and  all  the  cannon,  two  pieces  ex-
cepted,  fell  into  the  enemy's  hands.  The  victorious
army  did  not  lose  above  fourscore  men.11

This  battle,  no  less  fatal  to  France  than  the
effects  ancient  victories  of  Crecy  and  Agincourt,  gain-
ed by  the  English  on  the  same  frontier,  bore  a
near  resemblance  to  those  disastrous  events,  in  the
suddenness  of  the  rout ;  in  the  ill  conduct  of  the  com-
mander-in-chief ;  in  the  number  of  persons  of  note  slain
or  taken ;  and  in  the  small  loss  sustained  by  the  enemy.
It  filled  France  with  equal  consternation.  Many  in-
habitants of  Paris,  with  the  same  precipitancy  and  tre-
pidation as  if  the  enemy  had  been  already  at  their  gates,
quitted  the  city,  and  retired  into  the  interior  provinces.
The  king,  by  his  presence  and  exhortations,  endea-
voured to  console  and  to  animate  such  as  remained,
and  applying  himself  with  the  greatest  diligence  to  re-
pair the  ruinous  fortifications  of  the  city,  prepared  to
defend  it  against  the  attack  which  he  instantly  expected.
But  happily  for  France,  Philip's  caution,  together  with
the  intrepid  firmness  of  the  admiral  de  Coligny,  not
only  saved  the  capital  from  the  danger  to  which  it  was
exposed,  but  gained  the  nation  a  short  interval,  during
which  the  people  recovered  from  the  terror  and  dejec-
tion occasioned  by  a  blow  no  less  severe  than  unex-
pected, and  Henry  had  leisure  to  take  measures  for  the

k  Tbuan.  650. Haerei  Anna!.  Brabant,  ii.  692. Herrera,  291. •

1557.]  BOOK XH.  357

public  security,  with  the  spirit  which  became  the  sove-
reign of  a  powerful  and  martial  people.

Philip,  immediately  after  the  battle,  visited

Philip  re- .  . ; *  .

pairs  to  the  camp  at  fe>t  Qumtm,  where  he  was  received
irmy>  with  all  the  exultation  of  military  triumph  ;  and
such  were  his  transports  of  joy  on  account  of  an  event
which  threw  so  much  lustre  on  the  beginning  of  his
reign,  that  they  softened  his  severe  and  haughty  temper
into  an  unusual  flow  of  courtesy.  When  the  duke  of
Savoy  approached,  and  was  kneeling  to  kiss  his  hands,
he  caught  him  in  his  arms,  and  embraced  him  with
warmth,  "  It  becomes  me,"  says  he,  "  rather  to  kiss  your
hands,  which  have  gained  me  such  a  glorious  and  al-
most bloodless  victory."

As  soon  as  the  rejoicings  and  congratulations
berations  on  Philip's  arrival  were  over,  a  council  of  war
^  prose*  was  held,  in  order  to  determine  how  they  might
c"ti°n  of  improve  their  victory  to  the  best  advantage.  The
duke  of  Savoy,  seconded  by  several  of  the  ablest
officers  formed  under  Charles  V.,  insisted  that  they
should  immediately  relinquish  the  siege  of  St.  Quintin,
the  reduction  of  which  was  now  an  object  below  their
attention,  and  advance  directly  towards  Paris ;  that  as
there  were  neither  troops  to  oppose,  nor  any  town  of
strength  to  retard  their  march,  they  might  reach  that
capital  while  under  the  full  impression  of  the  astonish-
ment and  terror  occasioned  by  the  rout  of  the  army,  and
take  possession  of  it  without  resistance.  But  Philip,
less  adventurous  or  more  prudent  than  his  generals,
preferred  a  moderate  but  certain  advantage,  to  an  en-
terprise of  greater  splendour,  but  of  more  doubtful  suc-
cess. He  represented  to  the  council  the  infinite  re-
sources of  a  kingdom  so  powerful  as  France ;  the  great
number  as  well  as  martial  spirit  of  its  nobles ;  their  at-
tachment to  their  sovereign ;  the  manifold  advantages
with  which  they  could  carry  on  war  in  their  own  terri-
tories ;  and  the  unavoidable  destruction  which  must  be

358  CHARLES V.  [1557.

the  consequence  of  their  penetrating  too  rashly  into  the
enemy's  country,  before  they  had  secured  such  a  com-
munication with  their  own  as  might  render  a  retreat
safe,  if,  upon  any  disastrous  event,  that  measure  should
become  necessary.  On  all  these  accounts,  he  advised
the  continuance  of  the  siege,  and  his  generals  acquiesced
the  more  readily  in  his  opinion,  as  they  made  no  doubt
of  being  masters  of  the  town  in  a  few  days,  a  loss  of
time  of  so  little  consequence  in  the  execution  of  their
plan,  that  they  might  easily  repair  it  by  their  subse-
quent activity.1
st.Quintin  The  weakness  of  the  fortifications,  and  the

sma^  number  of  the  garrison,  which  could  no
;  longer  hope  either  for  reinforcement  or  relief,
seemed  to  authorize  this  calculation  of  Philip's  gene-
rals. But,  in  making  it,  they  did  not  attend  sufficiently
to  the  character  of  admiral  de  Coligny,  who  commanded
in  the  town.  A  courage  undismayed,  and  tranquil
amidst  the  greatest  dangers,  an  invention  fruitful  in  re-
sources, a  genius  which  roused  and  seemed  to  acquire
new  force  upon  every  disaster,  a  talent  of  governing
the  minds  of  men,  together  with  a  capacity  of  main-
taining his  ascendant  over  them  even  under  circum-
stances the  most  adverse  and  distressful,  were  qualities
which  Coligny  possessed  in  a  degree  superior  to  any
general  of  that  age.  These  qualities  were  peculiarly
adapted  to  the  station  in  which  he  was  now  placed ;
and  as  he  knew  the  infinite  importance  to  his  country
of  every  hour  which  he  could  gain  at  this  juncture,  he
exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  in  contriving  how  to  pro-
tract the  siege,  and  to  detain  the  enemy  from  attempting
any  enterprise  more  dangerous  to  France.  Such  were

the  perseverance  and  skill  with  which  he  con-
taken  by ducted  the  defence,  and  such  the  fortitude  as

well  as  patience  with  which  he  animated  the
garrison,  that  though  the  Spaniards,  the  Flemings,  and

1  Belcar.  Commentar.  de  Reb.  Gallic.  901.

1557.]  BOOK XII.  359

the  English,  carried  on  the  attack  with  all  the  ardour
which  national  emulation  inspires,  he  held  out  the  town
Au  27  seventeen  days.  He  was  taken  prisoner,  at  last,

on  the  breach, overpowered  by  the  superior
number  of  the  enemy.

Henry's  Henry  availed  himself,  with  the  utmost  ac-
for  uie'dV  ^V^y»  °f  ^e  interval  which  the  admiral's  well-
fence  of  his  timed  obstinacy  had  afforded  him.  He  appointed

officers  to  collect  the  scattered  remains  of  the
constable's  army ;  he  issued  orders  for  levying  soldiers
in  every  part  of  the  kingdom ;  he  commanded  the  ban
and  arriere  ban  of  the  frontier  provinces  instantly  to
take  the  field,  and  to  join  the  duke  of  Nevers  at  Laon
in  Picardy;  he  recalled  the  greater  part  of  the  veteran
troops  which  served  under  the  mareschal  Brissac  in
Piedmont;  he  sent  courier  after  courier  to  the  duke  of
Guise,  requiring  him,  together  with  all  his  army,  to  re-
turn instantly  for  the  defence  of  their  country;  he  dis-1
patched  one  envoy  to  the  grand  seignior,  to  solicit  the
assistance  of  his  fleets,  and  the  loan  of  a  sum  of  money;
he  sent  another  into  Scotland,  to  incite  the  Scots  to  in-
vade the  north  of  England,  that,  by  drawing  Mary's
attention  to  that  quarter,  he  might  prevent  her  from  re-
inforcing her  troops  which  served  under  Philip. These
efforts  of  the  king  were  warmly  seconded  by  the  zeal  of
his  subjects. The  city  of  Paris  granted  him  a  free  gift
of  three  hundred  thousand  livres. The  other  great
towns  imitated  the  liberality  of  the  capital,  and  contri-
buted in  proportion. Several  noblemen  of  distinction
engaged,  at  their  own  expense,  to  garrison  and  defend
the  towns  which  lay  most  exposed  to  the  enemy. Nor
was  the  general  concern  for  the  public  confined  to  cor-
porate bodies  alone,  or  to  those  in  the  higher  sphere  of
life,  but  diffusing  itself  among  persons  of  every  rank,
each  individual  seemed  disposed  to  act  with  as  much
vigour  as  if  the  honour  of  the  king,  and  the  safety

360  CHARLES  V.  [1557.

of  the  state,  had  depended  solely  on  his  single  ef-
forts.1"

_ .  Philip,  who  was  no  stranger  either  to  the  pru-

tory  of  st .  dent  measures  taken  by  the  French  monarch
prod^tive  f°r  the  security  of  his  dominions,  or  to  the  spi-
rit with  which  his  subjects  prepared  to  defend
themselves,  perceived,  when  it  was  too  late,

quencea.  ,  .  .

that  he  had  lost  an  opportunity  which  could
never  be  recalled,  and  that  it  was  now  vain  to  think  of
penetrating  into  the  heart  of  France.  He  abandoned,
therefore,  without  much  reluctance,  a  scheme  which
was  too  bold  and  hazardous  to  be  perfectly  agreeable
to  his  cautious  temper ;  and  employed  his  army,  during
the  remainder  of  the  campaign,  in  the  sieges  of  Ham
and  Catelet.  Of  these,  he  soon  became  master;  and
the  reduction  of  two  such  petty  towns,  together  with
the  acquisition  of  St.  Quintin,  were  all  the  advantages
which  he  derived  from  one  of  the  most  decisive  victo-
ries gained  in  that  century.  Philip  himself,  however,
continued  in  high  exultation  on  account  of  his  success;
and  as  all  his  passions  were  tinged  with  superstition,
he,  in  memory  of  the  battle  of  St.  Quintin,  which  had
been  fought  on  the  day  consecrated  to  St.  Laurence,
vowed  to  build  a  church,  a  monastery,  and  a  palace,
in  honour  of  that  saint  and  martyr.  Before  the  expi-
ration of  the  year,  he  laid  the  foundation  of  an  edifice,  in
which  all  these  were  united,  at  the  Escurial  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Madrid ;  and  the  same  principle  which  dic-
tated the  vow,  directed  the  building.  For  the  plan  of  the
work  was  so  formed  as  to  resemble  a  gridiron,  which,  ac-
cording to  the  legendary  tale,  had  been  the  instrument
of  St.  Laurence's  martyrdom.  Notwithstanding  the
great  and  expensive  schemes  in  which  his  restless  am-
bition involved  him,  Philip  continued  the  building  with
such  perseverance  for  twenty-two  years,  and  reserved

»  Mem.  de  Ribier,  ii.  701.  703.

1557.]  BOOK  XII.  361

such  large  sums  for  this  monument  of  his  devotion  and
vanity,  that  the  monarchs  of  Spain  are  indebted  to  him
for  a  royal  residence,  which,  though  not  the  most  ele-
gant, is  certainly  the  most  sumptuous  and  magnificent
of  any  in  Europe."

The  The  first  account  of  that  fatal  blow  which  the

French  French  had  received  at  St.  Quintin  was  carried
called  out  to  Rome  by  the  courier  whom  Henry  had  sent
ta  y'  to  recall  the  duke  of  Guise.  As  Paul,  even  with
the  assistance  of  his  French  auxiliaries,  had  hardly  been
able  to  check  the  progress  of  the  Spanish  arms,  he  fore-
saw that,  as  soon  as  he  was  deprived  of  their  protec-
tion, his  territories  must  be  overrun  in  a  moment.  He
remonstrated  therefore  with  the  greatest  violence  against
the  departure  of  the  French  army,  reproaching  the  duke
of  Guise  for  his  ill  conduct,  which  had  brought  him
into  such  an  unhappy  situation;  and  complaining  of  the
king  for  deserting  him  so  ungenerously  under  such  cir-
cumstances. The  duke  of  Guise's  orders,  however,
were  peremptory.  Paul,  inflexible  as  he  was,  found  it
necessary  to  accommodate  his  conduct  to  the  exigency
of  his  affairs,  and  to  employ  the  mediation  of  the  Vene-
tians, and  of  Cosmo  di  Medici,  in  order  to  obtain  peace.
Philip,  who  had  been  forced  unwillingly  to  a  rupture
with  the  pope,  and  who,  even  while  success  crowned
his  arms,  doubted  so  much  the  justice  of  his  own  cause,
that  he  had  made  frequent  overtures  of  pacification,
listened  eagerly  to  the  first  proposals  of  this  nature
from  Paul,  and  discovered  such  moderation  in  his  de-
mands, as  could  hardly  have  been  expected  from  a
prince  elated  with  victory.

A  treat  The  ^uke  °f  Alva  on  the  part  of  Philip,  and

of  peace  the  cardinal  Caraifa  in  the  name  of  his  uncle,
the  pope  met  at  Cavi,  and  both  being  equally  disposed
and  Philip.  to  peacCj  tneVj  after  a  snort  conference,  ter-
minated the  war  by  a  treaty  on  the  following  terms: —

.;•-•.• »  Colraenar  Annales  d'Espagne,  torn.  ii.  p.  136.

362  CHARLES  V.  [1557.

That  Paul  should  renounce  his  league  with  France,  and
maintain  for  the  future  such  a  neutrality  as  became  the
common  father  of  Christendom;  that  Philip  should  in-
stantly restore  all  the  towns  of  the  ecclesiastical  terri-
tory of  which  he  had  taken  possession;  that  the  claims
of  the  Caraffas  to  the  duchy  of  Paliano,  and  other  de-
mesnes of  the  Colonnas,  should  be  preferred  to  the  de-
cision of  the  republic  of  Venice ;  that  the  duke  of  Alva
should  repair  in  person  to  Rome,  and  after  asking  par-
don of  Paul  in  his  own  name,  and  in  that  of  his  mas-
ter, for  having  invaded  the  patrimony  of  the  church,
should  receive  the  pope's  absolution  from  that  crime.
Thus,  Paul,  through  Philip's  scrupulous  timidity,  finish-
ed an  unprosperous  war  without  any  detriment  to  the
papal  see. The  conqueror  appeared  humble,  and  ac-
knowledged his  error;  while  he  who  had  been  van-
quished retained  his  usual  haughtiness,  and  was  treated
with  every  mark  of  superiority.0 The  duke  of  Alva,  in
terms  of  the  treaty,  repaired  to  Rome,  and  in  the  pos-
ture of  a  supplicant,  kissed  the  feet,  and  implored  the
forgiveness,  of  that  very  person  whom  his  arms  had  re-
duced to  the  last  extremity. Such  was  the  supersti-
tious veneration  of  the  Spaniards  for  the  papal  charac-
ter, that  Alva,  though  perhaps  the  proudest  man  of  the
age,  and  accustomed  from  his  infancy  to  a  familiar  in-
tercourse with  princes,  acknowledged  that  when  he
approached  the  pope,  he  was  so  much  overawed,  that
his  voice  failed,  and  his  presence  of  mind  forsook
him.p

Philip  re- But  though  this  war,  which at its  corn-
stores  Pia-  mencement  threatened  mighty  revolutions,  was

centia  to  i •  i  •

Octavio brought  to  an  end  without  occasioning  any
alteration  in  those  states  which  were  its  imme-
diate object,  it  had  produced  during  its  progress  ef-
fects of  considerable  consequence  in  other  parts of

°  Pallav.  lib.  xiii.  183. F.  Paul.  380. Herrera,  vol.  i.  310.
P  Pallav.  lib.  xiii.  185. Suinmonte  Istoria  di  Napoli,  iv.  286.

1557.]  BOOK  XII.  363

Italy.  As  Philip  was  extremely  solicitous  to  termi-
nate his  quarrel  with  Paul  as  speedily  as  possible,  he
was  willing  to  make  any  sacrifice  in  order  to  gain
those  princes,  who,  by  joining  their  troops  to  the  papal
and  French  army,  might  have  prolonged  the  war.
With  this  view,  he  entered  into  a  negotiation  with  Oc-
tavio  Farnese  duke  of  Parma,  and  in  order  to  seduce
him  from  his  alliance  with  France,  he  restored  to  him
the  city  of  Placentia,  with  the  territory  depending  on
it,  which  Charles  V.  had  seized  in  the  year  1547,  had
kept  from  that  time  in  his  possession,  and  had  trans-
mitted, together  with  his  other  dominions,  to  Philip.
Cosmo  di  This  step  made  such  a  discovery  of  Philip's
Medici's  character  and  views  to  Cosmo  di  Medici,  the

measures  m

for  obtain-  most  sagacious  as  well  as  provident  of  all  the
Italian  princes,  that  he  conceived  hopes  of  ac-
complishing his  favourite  scheme  of  adding  Siena  and
its  territories  to  his  dominions  in  Tuscany.  As  his
success  in  this  attempt  depended  entirely  on  the  deli-
cacy of  address  with  which  it  should  be  conducted,  he
employed  all  the  refinements  of  policy  in  the  negotia-
tion which  he  set  on  foot  for  this  purpose.  He  began
with  soliciting  Philip,  whose  treasury  he  knew  to  be
entirely  drained  by  the  expense  of  the  war,  to  repay
the  great  sums  which  he  had  advanced  to  the  emperor
during  the  siege  of  Siena.  When  Philip  endeavoured
to  elude  a  demand  which  he  was  unable  to  satisfy,
Cosmo  affected  to  be  extremely  disquieted,  and  making
no  secret  of  his  disgust,  instructed  his  ambassador  at
Rome  to  open  a  negotiation  with  the  pope,  which
seemed  to  be  the  effect  of  it.  The  ambassador  exe-
cuted his  commission  with  such  dexterity,  that  Paul,
imagining  Cosmo  to  be  entirely  alienated  from  the
Spanish  interest,  proposed  to  him  an  alliance  with
France,  which  should  be  cemented  by  the  marriage  of
his  eldest  son  to  one  of  Henry's  daughters.  Cosmo
received  the  overture  with  such  apparent  satisfaction,

364  CHARLES V.  [1557.

and  with  so  many  professions  of  gratitude  for  the  high
honour  of  which  he  had  the  prospect,  that  not  only  the
pope's  ministers,  but  the  French  envoy  at  Rome,  talked
confidently,  and  with  little  reserve,  of  the  accession  of
that  important  ally,  as  a  matter  certain  and  decided.
The  account  of  this  was  quickly  carried  to  Philip;  and
Cosmo,  who  foresaw  how  much  it  would  alarm  him,
had  dispatched  his  nephew  Ludovico  de  Toledo  into
the  Netherlands,  that  he  might  be  at  hand  to  observe
and  take  advantage  of  his  consternation,  before  the
first  impression  which  it  made  should  in  any  degree
abate.  Cosmo  was  extremely  fortunate  in  the  choice
of  the  instrument  whom  he  employed.  Toledo  waited
with  patience,  until  he  discovered  with  certainty,  that
Philip  had  received  such  intelligence  of  his  uncle's
negotiations  at  Rome,  as  must  have  filled  his  suspi-.
cious  mind  with  fear  and  jealousy ;  and  then  craving
an  audience,  he  required  payment  of  the  money  which
had  been  borrowed  by  the  emperor,  in  the  most  ear-
nest and  peremptory  terms.  In  urging  that  point,  he
artfully  threw  out  several  dark  hints  and  ambiguous
declarations,  concerning  the  extremities  to  which  Cosmo
might  be  driven  by  a  refusal  of  this  just  demand,  as
well  as  by  other  grievances  of  which  he  had  good  rea-
son to  complain.

Their  sue-  Philip,  astonished  at  an  address  in  such  a
cess.  strain,  from  a  prince  so  far  his  inferior  as  the
duke  of  Tuscany,  and  comparing  what  he  now  heard
with  the  information  which  he  had  received  from  Italy,
immediately  concluded  that  Cosmo  had  ventured  to
assume  this  bold  and  unusual  tone  on  the  prospect  of
his  union  with  France.  In  order  to  prevent  the  pope
and  Henry  from  acquiring  an  ally,  who,  by  his  abilities
as  well  as  the  situation  of  his  dominions,  would  have
added  both  reputation  and  strength  to  their  confede-
racy, he  offered  to  grant  Cosmo  the  investiture  of  Siena,
if  he  would  consent  to  accept  of  it  as  an  equivalent  for

1557.]  BOOK  XII.  365

the  sums  due  to  him,  and  engage  to  furnish  a  body  of
troops  towards  the  defence  of  Philip's  territories  in
Italy,  against  any  power  who  should  attack  them.  As
soon  as  Cosmo  had  brought  Philip  to  make  this  con-
cession, which  was  the  object  of  all  his  artifices  and  in-
trigues, he  did  not  protract  the  negotiation  by  any  un-
necessary delay,  or  any  excess  of  refinement,  but  closed
eagerly  with  the  proposal ;  and  Philip,  in  spite  of  the
remonstrances  of  his  ablest  counsellors,  signed  a  treaty
with  him  to  that  effect.q

As  no  prince  was  ever  more  tenacious  of  his  rights
than  Philip,  or  less  willing  to  relinquish  any  territory
which  he  possessed,  by  what  tenure  soever  .he  held  it,
these  unusual  concessions  to  the  dukes  of  Parma  and
Tuscany,  by  which  he  wantonly  gave  up  countries,  in
acquiring  or  defending  which  his  father  had  employed
many  years,  and  wasted  much  blood  and  treasure,
cannot  be  accounted  for  from  any  motive,  but  his
superstitious  desire  of  extricating  himself  out  of  the
war  which  he  had  been  forced  to  wage  against  the
pope.  By  these  treaties,  however,  the  balance  of  power
among  the  Italian  states  was  poised  with  greater  equa-
lity, and  rendered  less  variable  than  it  had  been  since
it  received  the  first  violent  shock  from  the  invasion  of
Charles  VIII.  of  France.  From  this  period  Italy
ceased  to  be  the  great  theatre  on  which  the  monarehs
of  Spain,  France,  and  Germany,  contended  for  power
or  for  fame.  Their  dissensions  and  hostilities,  though
as  frequent  and  violent  as  ever,  being  excited  by  new
objects,  stained  other  regions  of  Europe  with  blood,
and  rendered  them  miserable  in  their  turn,  by  the  de-
vastations of  war.

Sept.  29.  The  duke  of  Guise  left  Rome  on  the  same
The  duke  ^ay  tnat  his  adversary  the  duke  of  Alva  made

of  Guise's J  .  J  . .  TT

reception  his  humiliating  submission  to  the  pope. He
:'  was  received  in  France  as  the  guardian  angel

i  Thuan  lib.  xviii.  624. Herrera,  i.  263.  275. Pallav.  lib.  xiii.  180.

366  CHARLES  V.  [1557.

of  the  kingdom.  His  late  ill  success  in  Italy  seemed
to  be  forgotten,  while  his  former  services,  particularly
his  defence  of  Metz,  were  recounted  with  exaggerated
praise;  and  he  was  welcomed  in  every  city  through
which  he  passed,  as  the  restorer  of  public  security,
who,  after  having  set  bounds  by  his  conduct  and  va-
lour to  the  victorious  arms  of  Charles  V.,  returned  now,
at  the  call  of  his  country,  to  check  the  formidable  pro-
gress of  Philip's  power.  The  reception  which  he  met
with  from  Henry  was  no  less  cordial  and  honourable.
New  titles  were  invented,  and  new  dignities  created,
in  order  to  distinguish  him.  He  was  appointed  lieu-
tenant-general-in-chief  both  within  and  without  the
kingdom,  with  a  jurisdiction  almost  unlimited,  and
hardly  inferior  to  that  which  was  possessed  by  the
king  himself.  Thus,  through  the  singular  felicity  which
attended  the  princes  of  Lorrain,  the  miscarriage  of
their  own  schemes  contributed  to  aggrandise  them.
The  calamities  of  his  country,  and  the  ill  conduct  of
his  rival  the  constable,  exalted  the  duke  of  Guise  to  a
height  of  dignity  and  power  which  he  could  not  have
expected  to  attain  by  the  most  fortunate  and  most  com-
plete success  of  his  ambitious  projects.
Takes  the  The  duke  of  Guise,  eager  to  perform  some-
ofTh™3"  thing  suitable  to  the  high  expectations  of  his
army.  countrymen,  and  that  he  might  justify  the  ex-
traordinary confidence  which  the  king  had  reposed  in
him,  ordered  all  the  troops  which  could  be  got  toge-
ther to  assemble  at  Compeigne.  Though  the  winter
was  well  advanced,and  had  set  in  with  extreme  severity,
he  placed  himself  at  their  head,  and  took  the  field.  By
Henry's  activity  and  the  zeal  of  his  subjects,  so  many
soldiers  had  been  raised  in  the  kingdom,  and  such  con-
siderable reinforcements  had  been  drawn  from  Ger-
many and  Switzerland,  as  formed  an  army  respectable
even  in  the  eyes  of  a  victorious  enemy.  Philip,  alarmed
at  seeing  it  put  in  motion  at  such  an  uncommon  season,

1558.]  BOOK XII.  367

began  to  tremble  for  his  new  conquests,  particularly
St.  Quintin,  the  fortifications  of  which  were  hitherto
but  imperfectly  repaired.

He  invests But the duke  of  Guise  meditated  a  more
ai558 important enterprise ; and  after  amusing  the
Jan.  ist. enemy  with  threatening  successively  different
towns  on  the  frontiers  of  Flanders,  he  turned  suddenly
to  the  left,  and  invested  Calais  with  his  whole  army.
Calais  had  been  taken  by  the  English  under  Edward
III.,  and  was  the  fruit  of  that  monarch's  glorious  vic-
tory at  Crecy. Being  the  only  place  that  they  retained
of  their  ancient  and  extensive  territories  of  France,  and
which  opened  to  them,  at  all  times,  an  easy  and  secure
passage-  into  the  heart  of  that  kingdom,  their  keeping
possession  of  it  soothed  the  pride  of  the  one  nation  as
much  as  it  mortified  the  vanity  of  the  other. Its  situa-
tion was naturally  so strong, and its  fortifications
deemed  so  impregnable,  that  no  monarch  of  France,
how  adventurous  soever,  had  been  bold  enough  to  at-
tack it. Even  when  the  domestic  strength  of  England
was  broken  and  exhausted  by  the  bloody  wars  between
the  houses  of  York  and  Lancaster,  and  its  attention
entirely  diverted  from  foreign  objects,  Calais  had  re-
mained undisturbed  and  unthreatened. Mary  and  her
council,  composed  chiefly  of  ecclesiastics,  unacquainted
with  military  affairs,  and  whose  whole  attention  was
turned  towards  extirpating  heresy  out  of  the  kingdom,
had  not  only  neglected  to  take  any  precautions  for  the
safety  of  this  important  place,  but  seemed  to  think  that
the  reputation  of  its  strength  was  alone  sufficient  for
its  security. Full  of  this  opinion,  they  ventured,  even
after  the  declaration  of  war, to  continue  a  practice
which  the  low  state  of  the  queen's  finances  had  intro-
duced in  times  of  peace. As  the  country  adjacent  to
Calais  was overflowed during  the  winter, and the
marshes  around  it  became  impassable,  except  by  one
avenue,  which  the  forts  of  St.  Agatha  and  Newnham-

368  CHARLES  V.  [J558.

bridge  commanded,  it  had  been  the  custom  of  the  Eng-
lish to  dismiss  the  greater  part  of  the  garrison  towards
the  end  of  autumn,  and  to  replace  it  in  the  spring.  In
its  de-  va*n  ^^  ^orc^  Wentworth,  the  governor  of  Ca-
fenceiess  lais,  remonstrate  against  this  ill-timed  parsi-

state.

mony,  and  represent  the  possibility  ot  his  being
attacked  suddenly,  while  he  had  not  troops  sufficient
to  man  the  works.  The  privy- council  treated  these
remonstrances  with  scorn,  as  if  they  had  flowed  from
the  timidity  or  the  rapaciousness  of  the  governor ;  and
some  of  them,  with  that  confidence  which  is  the  com-
panion of  ignorance,  boasted  that  they  would  defend
Calais  with  their  white  rods  against  any  enemy  who
should  approach  it  during  winter/  In  vain  did  Phi-
lip, who  had  passed  through  Calais  as  he  returned
from  England  to  the  Netherlands,  warn  the  queen  of
the  danger  to  which  it  was  exposed ;  and,  acquainting
her  with  what  was  necessary  for  its  security,  in  vain
did  he  offer  to  reinforce  the  garrison  during  winter
with  a  detachment  of  his  own  troops.  Mary's  coun-
sellors, though  obsequious  to  her  in  all  points  wherein
religion  was  concerned,  distrusted,  as  much  as  the
rest  of  their  countrymen,  every  proposition  that  came
from  her  husband  ;  and  suspecting  this  to  be  an  arti-
fice of  Philip's,  in  order  to  gain  the  command  of  the
town,  they  neglected  his  intelligence,  declined  his
offer,  and  left  Calais  with  less  than  a  fourth  part  of  the
garrison  requisite  for  its  defence.
Guise  His  knowledge  of  this  encouraged  the  duke

pushes  the  Qf  QU[SQ  to  venture  on  an  enterprise,  that  sur-

siege  witn  •'«  i  i  •

vigour.  prised  his  own  countrymen  no  less  than  his
enemies.  As  he  knew  that  its  success  depended  on
conducting  his  operations  with  such  rapidity  as  would
afford  the  English  no  time  for  throwing  relief  into  the
town  by  sea,  and  prevent  Philip  from  giving  him  any
interruption  by  land,  he  pushed  the  attack  with  a  de-

r  Carte,  iii.  345.

*558.]  BOOK XU.  3t>9

gree  of  vigour  little  known  in  carrying  on  sieges  dur-
ing that  age.  He  drove  the  English  from  fort  St.
Agatha  at  the  first  assault.  He  obliged  them  to  aban-
don the  fort  of  Newnham-bridge,  after  defending  it  only
three  days.  He  took  the  castle  which  commanded
Takes  the  the  harbour  by  storm ;  and,  on  the  eighth  day
after  he  appeared  before  Calais,  compelled  the
governor  to  surrender;  as  his  feeble  garrison,  which
did  not  exceed  five  hundred  men,  was  worn  out  with
the  fatigue  of  sustaining  so  many  attacks,  and  defend-
ing such  extensive  works.

And  like-  The  duke  of  Guise,  without  allowing  the
Gdsnes  English  time  to  recover  from  the  consternation
and  occasioned  by  this  blow,  immediately  invested
Guisnes,  the  garrison  of  which,  though  more
numerous,  defended  itself  with  less  vigour,  and,  after
standing  one  brisk  assault,  gave  up  the  town.  The
castle  of  Hames  was  abandoned  by  the  troops  posted
there,  without  waiting  the  approach  of  the  enemy.
The  spien-  Thus,  in  a  few  days,  during  the  depth  of
dour  and  winter,  and  at  a  time  when  the  fatal  battle  of

effect  of  ' .

these  con-  St.  Quintm  had  so  depressed  the  sanguine
spirit  of  the  French,  that  their  utmost  aim  was
to  protect  their  own  country,  without  dreaming  of
making  conquests  on  the  enemy,  the  enterprising  va-
lour of  one  man  drove  the  English  out  of  Calais,  after
they  had  held  it  two  hundred  and  ten  years,  and  de-
prived them  of  every  foot  of  land  in  a  kingdom  where
their  dominions  had  been  once  very  extensive.  This
exploit,  at  the  same  time  that  it  gave  a  high  idea  of
the  power  and  resources  of  France  to  all  Europe,  set
the  duke  of  Guise,  in  the  opinion  of  his  countrymen,
far  above  all  the  generals  of  the  age.  They  celebrated
his  conquests  with  immoderate  transports  of  joy ;  while
the  English  gave  vent  to  all  the  passions  which  ani-
mate a  high-spirited  people,  when  any  great  national
calamity  is  manifestly  owing  to  the  ill  conduct  of  their
VOL.  v.  2  B

370  CHARLES  V.  [1558,

rulers.  Mary  and  her  ministers,  formerly  odious,  were
now  contemptible  in  their  eyes.  All  the  terrors  of  her
severe  and  arbitrary  administration  could  not  restrain
them  from  uttering  execrations  and  threats  against  those
who,  having  wantonly  involved  the  nation  in  a  quarrel
wherein  it  was  nowise  interested,  had,  by  their  negli-
gence or  incapacity,  brought  irreparable  disgrace  on
their  country,  and  lost  the  most  valuable  possession
belonging  to  the  English  crown.

The  king  of  France  imitated  the  conduct  of  its  for-
mer conqueror,  Edward  III.,  with  .regard  to  Calais.
He  commanded  all  the  English  inhabitants  to  quit  the
town;  and  giving  their  houses  to  his  own  subjects,
whom  he  allured  to  settle  there  by  granting  them  va-
rious immunities,  he  left  a  numerous  garrison,  under  an
experienced  governor,  for  their  defence.  After  this,
his  victorious  army  was  conducted  into  quarters  of  re-
freshment, and  the  usual  inaction  of  winter  returned.
Feb.  24.  During  these  various  operations,  Ferdinand
resign?-8  assembled  the  college  of  electors  at  Frankfort,
*n  or^er  to  la  before  them  the  instrument

whereby  Charles  V.  had  resigned  the  imperial
crown,  and  transferred  it  to  him.  This  he  had  hitherto
delayed,  on  account  of  some  difficulties  which  had
occurred  concerning  the  formalities  requisite  in  sup-
plying a  vacancy  occasioned  by  an  event,  to  which
there  was  no  parallel  in  the  annals  of  the  empire.
These  being  at  length  adjusted,  the  prince  of  Orange
executed  the  commission  with  which  he  had  been  in-
trusted by  Charles;  the  electors  accepted  of  his  resigna-
tion ;  declared  Ferdinand  his  lawful  successor  ;  and
put  him  in  possession  of  all  the  ensigns  of  the  imperial
dignity.

The  pope  But  when  the  new  emperor  sent  Gusman,  his
chancellor,  to  acquaint  the  pope  with  this  trans-
s"  acti°n>  to  testify  his  reverence  towards  the  holy
emperor,  see,  and  to  signify  that,  according  to  form,  he

*558.]  BOOK  XII.  371

would  soon  dispatch  an  ambassador  extraordinary  to
treat  with  his  holiness  concerning  his  coronation ;  Paul,
whom  neither  experience  nor  disappointments  could
teach  to  bring  down  his  lofty  ideas  of  the  papal  prero-
gative to  such  a  moderate  standard  as  suited  the  ge-
nius of  the  times,  refused  to  admit  the  envoy  into  his
presence,  and  declared  all  the  proceedings  at  Frank-
fort irregular  and  invalid. He contended  that  the
pope,  as  the  vicegerent  of  Christ,  was  intrusted  with
the  keys  both  of  spiritual  and  of  civil  government ;  that
from  him  the  imperial  jurisdiction  was  derived;  that
though  his  predecessors  had  authorized  the  electors  to
choose  an  emperor  whom  the  holy  see  confirmed,  this
privilege  was  confined,  to  those  cases  when  a  vacancy
was occasioned by  death ; that the  instrument of
Charles's  resignation  had  been  presented  in  an  impro-
per court,  as  it  belonged  to  the  pope  alone  to  reject  or
to  accept  of  it,  and  to  nominate  a  person  to  fill  the  im-
perial throne ;  that,  setting  aside  all  these  objections,
Ferdinand's  election  laboured  under  two  defects,  which
alone  were  sufficient  to  render  it  void,  for  the  Protes-
tant electors  had  been  admitted  to  vote,  though  by
their  apostacy  from  the  Catholic  faith,  they  had  for-
feited that  and  every  other  privilege  of  the  electoral
office ;  and  Ferdinand,  by  ratifying  the  concessions  of
several  diets  in  favour  of  heretics,  had  rendered  him-
self unworthy  of  the  imperial  dignity,  which  was  in-
stituted for  the  protection,  not  for  the  destruction,  of
the  church. But  after  thundering  out  these  extrava-
gant maxims,  he  added,  with  an  appearance  of  conde-
scension, that  if  Ferdinand  would  renounce  all  title  to
the  imperial  crown,  founded  on  the  election  at  Frank-
fort, make  profession  of  repentance  for  his  past  con-
duct, and  supplicate  him  with  due  humility  to  confirm
Charles's  resignation,  as  well  as  his  own  assumption
to  the  empire,  he  might  expect  every  mark  of  favour
from  his  paternal  clemency  and  goodness. Gusman,

372  CHARLES  V.

though  he  had  foreseen  considerable  -difficulties  in  his
negotiation  with  the  pope,  little  expected  that  he  would
have  revived  those  antiquated  and  wild  pretensions,
which  astonished  him  so  much,  that  he  hardly  knew
in  what  tone  he  ought  to  reply.  He  prudently  declined
entering  into  any  controversy  concerning  the  nature  or
extent  of  the  papal  jurisdiction,  and  confining  himself
to  the  political  considerations  which  should  determine
the  pope  to  recognise  an  emperor  already  in  posses-
sion, he  endeavoured  to  place  them  in  such  a  light  as
he  imagined  would  scarcely  fail  to  strike  Paul,  'if  he
were  not  altogether  blind  to  his  own  interest.  Philip
seconded  Gusman's  arguments  with  great  earnestness,
by  an  ambassador  whom  he  sent  to  Rome  on  purpose,
and  besought  the  pope  to  desist  from  claims  so  unsea-
sonable, as  might  not  only  irritate  and  alarm  Ferdinand
and  the  princes  of  the  empire,  but  furnish  the  enemies
of  the  holy  see  with  a  new  reason  for  representing  its
jurisdiction  as  incompatible  with  the  rights  of  princes,
and  subversive  of  all  civil  authority.  But  Paul,  who
deemed  it  a  crime  to  attend  to  any  consideration  sug-
gested by  human  prudence  or  policy,  when  he  thought
himself  called  upon  to  assert  the  prerogatives  of  the
papal  see,  remained  inflexible;  and,  during  his  pontifi-
cate, Ferdinand  was  not  acknowledged  emperor  by  the
court  of  Rome/

Henry  en-  While  Henry  was  intent  upon  his  prepara-
to  excite  tions  for  the  approaching  campaign,  he  received
the  Scots  accounts  of  the  issue  of  his  negotiations  in  Scot-

Bgainst

England,  land.  Long  experience  having  at  last  taught
the  Scots  the  imprudence  of  involving  their  country  in
every  quarrel  between  France  and  England,  neither  the
solicitations  of  the  French  ambassador,  nor  the  address
and  authority  of  the  queen-regent,  could  prevail  on
them  to  take  arms  against  a  kingdom  with  which  they

•Godleveusde  Abdicat  Car.  V.  ap.  Gold.  Polit.  Imper.  392. Pallav.  lib.  xiii.
189. RibiCT,  ii.  746.  759.

1558.]  BOOK  XII.  373

were  at  peace.  On  this  occasion  the  ardour  of  a  mar-
tial nobility  and  of  a  turbulent  people  was  restrained
by  regard  for  the  public  interest  and  tranquillity,  which-
in  former  deliberations  of  this  kind  had  been  seldom  at-
tended to  by  a  nation  always  prone  to  rush  into  every
new  war.  But  though  the  Scots  adhered  with  steadi-
ness to  their  pacific  system,  they  were  extremely  ready
to  gratify  the  French  king  in  another  particular,  which
he  had  given  in  charge  to  his  ambassador.

The  young  queen  of  Scots  had  been  affianced

dauphin  to  the  dauphin  in  the  year  1548,  and  having
queenrf  been  educated  since  that  time  in  the  court  of
Scots.  France,  she  had  grown  up  to  be  the  most  amia-
ble and  one  of  the  most  accomplished  princesses  of  that
age.  Henry  demanded  the  consent  of  her  subjects  to
the  celebration  of  the  marriage;  and  a  parliament,
which  was  held  for  that  purpose,  appointed  eight  com-
missioners to  represent  the  whole  body  of  the  nation  at
that  solemnity,  with  power  to  sign  such  deeds  as  might
be  requisite  before  it  was  concluded.  In  settling  the
articles  of  the  marriage,  the  Scots  took  every  precaution
that  prudence  could  dictate,  in  order  to  preserve  the
liberty  and  independence  of  their  country  ;  while  the
French  used  every  art  to  secure  to  the  dauphin  the  con-
duct of  affairs  during  the  queen's  life,  and  the  succes-
sion of  the  crown  on  the  event  of  her  demise.  The
marriage  was  celebrated  with  pomp  suitable  to
the  dignity  of  the  parties,  and  the  magnificence
of  a  court  at  that  time  the  most  splendid  in  Europe.1
Thus  Henry,  in  the  course  of  a  few  months,  had  th«
glory  of  recovering  an  important  possession  which  had
anciently  belonged  to  the  crown  of  France,  and  of
adding  to  it  the  acquisition  of  a  new  kingdom.  By  this
event,  too,  the  duke  of  Guise  acquired  new  considera-
tion and  importance  ;  the  marriage  of  his  niece  to  the
apparent  heir  of  the  crown,  raising  him  so  far  above  the

*  Keilh's  History  of  Scotland,  p.  73. Append.  13. Corps  Diplom.  f.  21.

374  CHARLES V.  [1558.

condition  of  other  subjects,  that  the  credit  which  he
had  gained  by  his  great  actions,  seemed  thereby  to  be
rendered  no  less  permanent  than  it  was  extensive.
The  cam- When  the  campaign  opened,  soon  after  the
dauphin's marriage, the  duke of  Guise  was

*

opened. _  /• i  •  i i

placed  at  the  head  01  the  army,  with  the  same
unlimited  powers  as  formerly.  Henry  had  received
such  liberal  supplies  from  his  subjects,  that  the  troops
under  his  command  were  both  numerous  and  well  ap-
pointed ;  while  Philip,  exhausted  by  the  extraordinary
efforts  of  the  preceding  year,  had  been  obliged  to  dis-
miss so  many  of  his  forces  during  the  winter,  that  he
could  not  bring  an  army  into  the  field  capable  of  mak-
ing head  against  the  enemy.  The  duke  of  Guise  did
not  lose  the  favourable  opportunity  which  his  supe-
riority afforded  him.  He  invested  Thionville  in  the
duchy  of  Luxemburg,  one  of  the  strongest  towns  on
the  frontier  of  the  Netherlands,  and  of  great  importance
to  France  by  its  neighbourhood  to  Metz  ;  and,  notwith-
standing the  obstinate  valour  with  which  it  was  de-

fended, he  forced  it  to  capitulate  after  a  siege

Jane  22.

or  three  weeks."

The  French  But  tne  success  of  this  enterprise,  which  it
feateddat  was  exPec*ed  would  lead  to  other  conquests,
Grave-  was  more  than  counterbalanced  by  an  event

that  happened  in  another  part  of  the  Low
Countries.  The  mareschal  de  Termes,  governor  of
Calais,  having  penetrated  into  Flanders  without  oppo-
sition, invested  Dunkirk  with  an  army  of  fourteen  thou-
sand men,  and  took  it  by  storm  on  the  fifth  day  of  the
siege.  Hence  he  advanced  towards  Nieuport,  which
must  have  soon  fallen  into  his  hands,  if  the  approach  of
the  count  of  Egmont  with  a  superior  army  had  not  made
it  prudent  to  retreat.  The  French  troops  were  so  much
encumbered  with  the  booty  which  they  had  got  at  Dun-
kirk, or  by  ravaging  the  open  country,  that  they  moved

«  Thuaii.  lib.  xx.  690.

1558.1  BOOK XII.  375

slowly ;  and  Egmont,  who  had  left  his  heavy  baggage
and  artillery  behind  him,  marched  with  such  rapidity,
that  he  came  up  with  them  near  Gravelines,  and  at-
tacked them  with  the  utmost  impetuosity.  De  Termes,
who  had  the  choice  of  the  ground,  having  posted  his
troops  to  advantage  in  the  angle  formed  by  the  mouth
of  the  river  Aa  and  the  sea,  received  him  with  great
firmness.  Victory  remained  for  some  time  in  suspense,
the  desperate  valour  of  the  French,  who  foresaw  the  un-
avoidable destruction  that  must  follow  upon  a  rout  in
an  enemy's  country,  counterbalancing  the  superior  num-
ber of  the  Flemings,  when  one  of  those  accidents  to
which  human  prudence  does  not  extend,  decided  the
contest  in  favour  of  the  latter.  A  squadron  of  English
ships  of  war,  which  was  cruising  on  the  coast,  being
drawn  by  the  noise  of  the  firing  towards  the  place  of
the  engagement,  entered  the  river  Aa,  and  turned  its
great  guns  against  the  right  wing  of  the  French,  with
such  effect,  as  immediately  broke  that  body,  and  spread
terror  and  confusion  through  the  whole  army.  The
Flemings,  to  whom  assistance,  so  unexpected  and  so
seasonable,  gave  fresh  spirit,  redoubled  their  efforts,
that  they  might  not  lose  the  advantage  which  fortune
had  presented  them,  or  give  the  enemy  time  to  recover
from  their  consternation,  and  the  rout  of  the  French
soon  became  universal.  Near  two  thousand  were  killed
on  the  spot;  a  greater  number  fell  by  the  hands  of  the
peasants,  who,  in  revenge  for  the  cruelty  with  which
their  country  had  been  plundered,  pursued  the  fugi-
tives, and  massacred  them  without  mercy ;  the  rest  were
taken  prisoners,  together  with  De  Termes  their  gene-
ral, and  many  officers  of  distinction.*

This  signal  victory,  for  which  the count

The  duke  oi  i  .11  j i_

Guise  op-  of  Egmont  was  afterward  so  ill  requited  by
vlctori-  Philip,  obliged  the  duke  of  Guise  to  relinquish
army.  all  o1ker  schemes,  and  to  hasten  towards  the

*  Thuan.  lib,  xx.  694.

,37d  CHARLES V.  [1568.

frontier  of  Picardy,  that  he  might  oppose  the  progress
of  the  enemy  in  that  province.  This  disaster,  however,
reflected  new  lustre  on  his  reputation,  and  once  more
turned  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen  towards  him,  as  the
only  general  on  whose  arms  victory  always  attended,
and  in  whose  conduct  as  well  as  good  fortune,  they
could  confide  in  every  danger.  Henry  reinforced  the
duke  of  Guise's  army  with  so  many  troops  drawn  from
the  adjacent  garrisons,  that  it  soon  amounted  to  forty
thousand  men.  That  of  the  enemy,  after  the  junction
of  Egmont  with  the  duke  of  Savoy,  was  not  inferior  in
number.  They  encamped  at  the  distance  of  a  few
leagues  from  one  another  ;  and  each  monarch  having
joined  his  respective  army,  it  was  expected,  after  the
vicissitudes  of  good  and  bad  success  during  this  and
the  former  campaign,  that  a  decisive  battle  would  at
last  determine,  which  of  the  rivals  should  take  the  as-
cendant for  the  future,  and  give  law  to  Europe.  But
though  both  had  it  in  their  power,  neither  of  them  dis-
covered any  inclination  to  bring  the  determination  of
such  an  important  point  to  depend  upon  the  uncertain
issue  of  a  single  battle.  The  fatal  engagements  at  St.
Quintin  and  Gravelines  were  too  recent  to  be  so  soon
forgotten,  and  the  prospect  of  encountering  the  same
troops,  commanded  by  the  same  generals  who  had  twice
triumphed  over  his  arms,  inspired  Henry  with  a  degree
of  caution  which  was  not  common  to  him.  Philip,  of
a  genius  averse  to  bold  operations  in  war,  naturally
leaned  to  cautious  measures,  and  was  not  disposed  to
hazard  any  thing  against  a  general  so  fortunate  and
successful  as  the  duke  of  Guise.  Both  monarchs,  as
if  by  agreement,  stood  on  the  defensive,  and  fortifying
their  camps  carefully,  avoided  every  skirmish  or  ren-
counter that  might  bring  on  a  general  engagement.
Both  mo-  While  the  armies  continued  in  this  inaction,
"^"to'de5-"  Peace  began  to  be  mentioned  in  each  camp,
sire  peace,  and  both  Henry  and  Philip  discovered  an  in-

1558.1  BOOK XII,  377

clination  to  listen  to  any  overture  that  tended  to  re-
establish it.  The  kingdoms  of  France  and  Spain  had
been  engaged  during  half  a  century  in  almost  continual
wars,  carried  on  at  a  great  expense,  and  productive  of
no  considerable  advantage  to  either.  Exhausted  by
extraordinary  and  unceasing  efforts,  which  far  exceeded
those  to  which  the  nations  of  Europe  had  been  accus-
tomed before  the  rivalship  between  Charles  V.  and
Francis  I.,  both  nations  longed  so  much  for  an  interval
of  repose,  in  order  to  recruit  their  strength,  that  their
sovereigns  drew  from  them  with  difficulty  the  supplies
necessary  for  carrying  on  hostilities.  The  private  in-
clinations of  both  the  kings  concurred  with  those  of
their  people.  Philip  was  prompted  to  wish  for  peace
by  his  fond  desire  of  returning  to  Spain.  Accustomed
from  his  infancy  to  the  climate  and  manners  of  that
country,  he  was  attached  to  it  with  such  extreme  pre-
dilection, that  he  never  felt  himself  at  ease  in  any  other
part  of  his  dominions.  But  as  he  could  not  quit  the
Low  Countries,  either  with  decency  or  safety,  and  ven-
ture on  a  voyage  to  Spain  during  the  continuance  of
war,  the  prospect  of  a  pacification,  which  would  put  it
in  his  power  to  execute  his  favourite  scheme,  was  highly
acceptable.  Henry  was  no  less  desirous  of  being  de-
livered from  the  burden  and  occupations  of  war,  that
he  might  have  leisure  to  turn  all  his  attention,  and  bend
the  whole  force  of  his  government,  towards  suppress-
ing the  opinions  of  the  reformers,  which  were  spread-
ing with  such  rapidity  in  Paris,  and  other  great  towns
of  France,  that  they  began  to  grow  formidable  to  the
established  church.
.  .  .  Besides  these  public  and  avowed  considera-

An  intrigue

in  the  court  tions,  arising  from  the  state  of  the  two  hostile
facilitates  kingdoms,  or  from  the  wishes  of  their  respective
monarchs,  there  was  a  secret  intrigue  carried
on  in  the  court  of  France,  which  contributed  as  much
as  either  of  the  other,  to  hasten  and  to  facilitate  the

378  CHARLES  V.  [1558.

negotiation  of  a  peace.  The  constable  Montmorency,
during  his  captivity,  beheld  the  rapid  success  and
growing  favour  of  the  duke  of  Guise  with  the  envy
natural  to  a  rival.  Every  advantage  gained  by  the
princes  of  Lorrain  he  considered  as  a  fresh  wound  to
his  own  reputation,  and  he  knew  with  what  malevolent
address  it  would  be  improved  to  diminish  his  credit
with  the  king,  and  to  augment  that  of  the  duke  of  Guise.
These  arts,  he  was  afraid,  might,  by  degrees,  work  on
the  easy  and  ductile  mind  of  Henry,  so  as  to  efface  all
remains  of  his  ancient  affection  towards  himself.  But
he  could  not  discover  any  remedy  for  this,  unless  he
were  allowed  to  return  home,  that  he  might  try  whether
by  his  presence  he  could  defeat  the  artifices  of  his  ene-
mies, and  revive  those  warm  and  tender  sentiments
which  had  long  attached  Henry  to  him,  with  a  confi-
dence so  entire,  as  resembled  rather  the  cordiality  of
private  friendship,  than  the  cold  and  selfish  connexion
between  a  monarch  and  one  of  his  courtiers.  While
Montmorency  was  forming  schemes  and  wishes  for  his
return  to  France  with  much  anxiety  of  mind,  but  with
little  hope  of  success,  an  unexpected  incident  prepared
the  way  for  it.  The  cardinal  of  Lorrain,  who  had  shared
with  his  brother  in  the  king's  favour,  and  participated
of  the  power  which  that  conferred,  did  not  bear  pros-
perity with  the  same  discretion  as  the  duke  of  Guise.
Intoxicated  with  their  good  fortune,  he  forgot  how  much
they  had  been  indebted  for  their  present  elevation  to
their  connexions  with  the  duchess  of  Valentinois,  and
vainly  ascribed  all  to  the  extraordinary  merit  of  their
family.  This  led  him  not  only  to  neglect  his  benefac-
tress, but  to  thwart  her  schemes,  and  to  talk  with  a
sarcastic  liberty  of  her  character  and  person.  That
singular  woman,  who,  if  we  may  believe  contemporary
writers,  retained  the  beauty  and  charms  of  youth  at  the
age  of  threescore,  and  on  whom  it  is  certain  that  Henry
still  doated  with  all  the  fondness  of  love,  felt  this  injury

1558.]  BOOK  XII.  37,9

with  sensibility,  and  set  herself  with  eagerness  to  inflict
the  vengeance  which  it  merited.  As  there  was  no
method  of  supplanting  the  princes  of  Lorrain  so  effec-
tually as  by  a  coalition  of  interests  with  the  constable,
she  proposed  the  marriage  of  her  grand-daughter  with
one  of  his  sons,  as  the  bond  of  their  future  union  ;  and
Montmorency  readily  gave  his  consent  to  the  match.
Having  thus  cemented  their  alliance,  the  duchess  em-
ployed all  her  influence  with  the  king,  in  order  to  con-
firm his  inclinations  towards  peace,  and  induce  him  to
take  the  steps  necessary  for  attaining  it.  She  insi-
nuated that  any  overture  of  that  kind  would  come  with
great  propriety  from  the  constable,  and  if  intrusted  to
the  conduct  of  his  prudence,  could  hardly  fail  of  success.
Henry  com-  Henry,  long  accustomed  to  commit  all  affairs
mitsthene-  of  importance  to  the  management  of  the  con-

gotiation  to ,  .  f  11-

Montmo-  stable,  and  needing  only  this  encouragement
to  return  to  his  ancient  habits,  wrote  to  him
immediately  with  his  usual  familiarity  and  affection,
empowering  him  at  the  same  time  to  take  the  first  op-
portunity of  sounding  Philip  and  his  ministers  with  re-
gard to  peace.  Montmorency  made  his  application  to
Philip  by  the  most  proper  channel.  He  opened  him-
self to  the  duke  of  Savoy,  who,  notwithstanding  the
high  command  to  which  he  had  been  raised,  and  the
military  glory  which  he  had  acquired  in  the  Spanish
service,  was  weary  of  remaining  in  exile,  and  languished
to  return  into  his  paternal  dominions.  As  there  was
no  prospect  of  his  recovering  possession  of  them  by
force  of  arms,  he  considered  a  definitive  treaty  of  peace
between  France  and  Spain,  as  the  only  event  by  which
he  could  hope  to  obtain  restitution.  Being  no  stranger
to  Philip's  private  wishes  with  regard  to  peace,  he  easily
prevailed  on  him  not  only  to  discover  a  disposition  on
his  part  towards  accommodation,  but  to  permit  Mont-
morency to  return  on  his  parole,  to  France,  that  he
might  confirm  hils  own  sovereign  in  his  pacific  senti-

380  CHARLES  V.  [1558.

ments.  Henry  received  the  constable  with  the  most
flattering  marks  of  regard  ;  absence,  instead  of  having
abated  or  extinguished  the  monarch's  friendship,  seemed
to  have  given  it  new  ardour.  Montmorency,  from  the
moment  of  his  appearance  in  court,  assumed,  if  pos-
sible, a  higher  place  than  ever  in  his  affection,  and  a
more  perfect  ascendant  over  his  mind.  The  cardinal
of  Lorrain  and  duke  of  Guise  prudently  gave  way  to  a
tide  of  favour  too  strong  for  them  to  oppose,  and  con-
fining themselves  to  their  proper  departments,  per-
mitted, without  any  struggle,  the  constable  and  duchess
of  Valentinois  to  direct  public  affairs  at  their  pleasure.
They  soon  prevailed  on  the  king  to  nominate  plenipo-
tentiaries to  treat  of  peace.  Philip  did  the  same.  The
abbey  of  Cercamp  was  fixed  on  as  the  place  of  con-
gress; and  all  military  operations  were  immediately
terminated  by  a  suspension  of  arms.
Death  of  While  these  preliminary  steps  were  taking
Charles  v.  towards  a  treaty  which  restored  tranquillity  to
Europe,  Charles  V.,  whose  ambition  had  so  long  dis-
turbed it,  ended  his  days  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Justus.
When  Charles  entered  this  retreat,  he  formed  such  a
plan  of  life  for  himself,  as  would  have  suited  the  con-
dition of  a  private  gentleman  of  a  moderate  fortune.
His  table  was  neat,  but  plain  ;  his  domestics  few ;  his
intercourse  with  them  familiar;  all  the  cumbersome
and  ceremonious  forms  of  attendance  on  his  person
were  entirely  abolished,  as  destructive  of  that  social
ease  and  tranquillity  which  he  courted,  in  order  to
soothe  the  remainder  of  his  days.  As  the  mildness  of
the  climate,  together  with  his  deliverance  from  the
burdens  and  cares  of  government,  procured  him,  at
first,  a  considerable  remission  from  the  acute  pains  with
which  he  had  been  long  tormented,  he  enjoyed,  per-
haps, more  complete  satisfaction  in  this  humble  solitude,
than  all  his  grandeur  had  ever  yielded  him.  The  am-
bitious thoughts  and  projects  which  had  so  long  en-

1558.]  BOOK XII.  381

grossed  and  disquieted  him,  were  quite  effaced  from
his  mind  :  far  from  taking  any  part  in  the  political
transactions  of  the  princes  of  Europe,  he  restrained  his
curiosity  even  from  any  inquiry  concerning  them ;  and
he  seemed  to  view  the  busy  scene  which  he  had  aban-
doned with  all  the  contempt  and  indifference  arising
from  his  thorough  experience  of  its  vanity,  as  well  as
from  the  pleasing  reflection  of  having  disentangled
himself  from  its  cares.

Other  amusements  and  other  objects  now

His  amuse-  • j i  •  ci  •  -i  •

mentsinhis  occupied  him.  sometimes  he  cultivated  the
plants  in  his  garden  with  his  own  hands;
sometimes  he  rode  out  to  the  neighbouring  wood  on  a
little  horse,  the  only  one  that  he  kept,  attended  by  a
single  servant  on  foot.  When  his  infirmities  confined
him  to  his  apartment,  which  often  happened,  and  de-
prived him  of  these  more  active  recreations,  he  either
admitted  a  few  gentlemen  who  resided  near  the  mo-
nastery to  visit  him,  and  entertained  them  familiarly  at
his  table ;  or  he  employed  himself  in  studying  mecha-
nical principles,  and  in  forming  curious  works  of  me-
chanism, of  which  he  had  always  been  remarkably  fond,
and  to  which  his  genius  was  peculiarly  turned.  With
this  view  he  had  engaged  Turriano,  one  of  the  most
ingenious  artists  of  that  age,  to  accompany  him  in
his  retreat.  He  laboured  together  with  him  in  fram-
ing models  of  the  most  useful  machines,  as  well  as  in
making  experiments  with  regard  to  their  respective
powers,  and  it  was  not  seldom  that  the  ideas  of  the
monarch  assisted  or  perfected  the  inventions  of  the
artist.  He  relieved  his  mind,  at  intervals,  with  slighter
and  more  fantastic  works  of  mechanism,  in  fashioning
puppets,  which,  by.  the  structure  of  internal  springs,
mimicked  the  gestures  and  actions  of  men,  to  the  as-
tonishment of  the  ignorant  monks,  who,  beholding
movements  which  they  could  not  comprehend,  some-
times distrusted  their  own  senses,  and  sometimes  sus-

382  CHARLES V.  [1558.

pected^Cbarles  and  Turriano  of  being  in  compact  with
invisible  powers.  He  was  particularly  curious  with
regard  to  the  construction  of  clocks  and  watches ;  and
having  found,  after  repeated  trials,  that  he  could  not
bring  any  two  of  them  to  go  exactly  alike,  he  reflected,
it  is  said,  with  a  mixture  of  surprise  as  well  as  regret,
on  his  own  folly,  in  having  bestowed  so  much  time
and  labour  on  the  more  vain  attempt  of  bringing  man-
kind to  a  precise  uniformity  of  sentiment  concerning
the  profound  and  mysterious  doctrines  of  religion.

But  in  what  manner  soever  Charles  disposed

His  more

serum*  oc-  ofthe  rest  of  his  time,  he  constantly  reserved  a
considerable  portion  of  it  for  religious  exercises.
He  regularly  attended  divine  service  in  the  chapel  of
the  monastery,  every  morning  and  evening;  he  took
great  pleasure  in  reading  books  of  devotion,  particu-
larly the  works  of  St.  Augustine  and  St.  Bernard ;  and
conversed  much  with  his  confessor,  and  the  prior  ofthe
monastery,  on  pious  subjects.  Thus  did  Charles  pass
the  first  year  of  his  retreat,  in  a  manner  not  unbecom-
ing a  man  perfectly  disengaged  from  the  affairs  of  the
present  life,  and  standing  on  the  confines  of  a  future
world ;  either  in  innocent  amusements,  which  soothed
his  pains,  and  relieved  a  mind  worn  out  with  excessive
application  to  business;  or  in  devout  occupations,
which  he  deemed  necessary  in  preparing  for  another
state.

But  about  six  months  before  his  death,  the

The  causes

of  his  gout,  after  a  longer  intermission  than  usual,
returned  with  a  proportional  increase  of  vio-
lence. His  shattered  constitution  had  not  vigour  enough
remaining  to  withstand  such  a  shock.  It  enfeebled  his
mind  as  much  as  his  body,  and  from  this  period  we
hardly  discern  any  traces  of  that  sound  and  masculine
understanding,  which  distinguished  Charles  among  his
contemporaries.  An  illiberal  and  timid  superstition
depressed  his  spirit.  He  had  no  relish  for  amusements

1558.]  BOOK XII.  383

of  any  kind. He  endeavoured  to  conform,  in  his  man-
ner of  living,  to  all  the  rigour  of  monastic  austerity.
He  desired  no  other  society  than  that  of  monks,  and
was  almost  continually  employed  with  them  in  chant-
ing the  hymns  of  the  Missal. As  an  expiation  for  his
sins,  he  gave  himself  the  discipline  in  secret  with  such
severity,  that  the  whip  of  cords  which  he  employed  as
the  instrument  of  his  punishment,  was  found  after  his
decease  tinged  with  his  blood. Nor  was  he  satisfied
with  these  acts  of  mortification,  which,  however  severe,
were  not  unexampled. The  timorous  and  distrustful
solicitude  which  always  accompanies  superstition,  still
continued  to  disquiet  him,  and,  depreciating  all  the
devout  exercises  in  which  he  had  hitherto  been  engaged,
prompted  him  to  aim  at  something  extraordinary,  at
some  new  and  singular  act  of  piety  that  would  display
his  zeal,  and  merit  the  favour  of  heaven. The  act  on
which  he  fixed  was  as  wild  and  uncommon  as  any  that
superstition  ever  suggested  to  a  weak  and  disordered
fancy. He  resolved  to  celebrate  his  own  obsequies  be-
fore his  death. He  ordered  his  tomb  to  be  erected  in
the  chapel  of  the  monastery. His  domestics  marched
thither  in  funeral  procession,  with  black  tapers  in  their
hands. He  himself  followed  in  his  shroud. He  was
laid  in  his  coffin,  with  much  solemnity. The  service
for  the  dead  was  chanted,  and  Charles  joined  in  the
prayers  which  were  offered  up  for  the  rest  of  his  soul,
mingling  his  tears  with  those  which  his  attendants  shed,
as  if  they  had  been  celebrating  a  real  funeral. The
ceremony  closed  with  sprinkling  holy  water  on  the  cof-
fin in  the  usual  form,  and  all  the  assistants  retiring,  the
doors  of  the  chapel  were  shut.  Then  Charles  rose  out  of
the  coffin,  and  withdrew  to  his  apartment,  full  of  those
awful  sentiments  which  such  a  singular  solemnity  was
calculated  to  inspire. But  either  the  fatiguing  length
of  the  ceremony,  or  the  impression  which  the  image  of
death  left  on  his  mind,  affected  him  so  much,  that  next

384  CHARLES  V.  [1558.

day  he  was  seized  with  a  fever.  His  feeble  frame  could
not  long  resist  its  violence,  and  he  expired  on  the  2 1st
of  September,  after  a  life  of  fifty-eight  years,  six  months,
and  twenty-five  days.y

His  dim-  As  Charles  was  the  first  prince  of  the  age
racier.  'm  rank  an(j  dignity,  the  part  which  he  acted,
whether  we  consider  the  greatness,  the  variety,  or  the
success  of  his  undertakings,  was  the  most  conspi-
cuous. It  is  from  an  attentive  observation  of  his  con-
duct, not  from  the  exaggerated  praises  of  the  Spanish
historians,  or  the  undistinguishing  censure  of  the  French,
that  a  just  idea  of  Charles's  genius  and  abilities  is  to
be  collected.  He  possessed  qualities  so  peculiar,  that
they  strongly  mark  his  character,  and  not  only  distin-
guish him  from  the  princes  who  were  his  contemporaries,
but  account  for  that  superiority  over  them  which  he  so
long  maintained.  In  forming  his  schemes,  he  was,  by
nature,  as  well  as  by  habit,  cautious  and  considerate.
Born  with  talents  which  unfolded  themselves  slowly,
and  were  late  in  attaining  maturity,  he  was  accustomed
to  ponder  every  subject  that  demanded  his  considera-
tion, with  a  careful  and  deliberate  attention.  He  bent
the  whole  force  of  his  mind  towards  it,  and  dwelling
upon  it  with  a  serious  application,  undiverted  by  plea-
sure, and  hardly  relaxed  by  any  amusement,  he  revolved
it,  in  silence,  in  his  own  breast.  He  then  communi-
cated the  matter  to  his  ministers,  and  after  hearing  their
opinions,  took  his  resolution  with  a  decisive  firmness,
which  seldom  follows  such  slow,  and  seemingly  hesitat-
ing consultations.  Of  consequence,  Charles's  measures,
instead  of  resembling  the  desultory  and  irregular  sallies
of  Henry  VIII.  or  Francis  I.,  had  the  appearance  of  a
consistent  system,  in  which  all  the  parts  were  arranged,
all  the  effects  were  foreseen,  and  even  every  accident
was  provided  for.  His  promptitude  in  execution  was

y  Strada  de  Bello  Belg.  lib.  i.  p. 11. Thuan.  72.3. Sandov.  ii.  609,  &c.
Miniana  Contin.  Mariana-,  vol.  iv.  216. Vera  y  Zuniga  Vid«  de  Carlos,  p.  111.

BOOK  XII.  385

no  less  remarkable  than  his  patience  in  deliberation.
He  did  not  discover  greater  sagacity  in  his  choice  of
the  measures  which  it  was  proper  to  pursue,  than  fer-
tility of  genius  in  finding  out  the  means  for  rendering
his  pursuit  of  them  successful. Though  he  had  natu-
rally so  little  of  the  martial  turn,  that,  during  the  most
ardent  and  bustling  period  of  life  he  remained  in  the
cabinet  inactive,  yet  when  he  chose  at  length  to  appear
at  the  head  of  his  armies,  his  mind  was  so  formed  for
vigorous  exertions  in  every  direction,  that  he  acquired
such  knowledge  in  the  art  of  war,  and  such  talents  for
command,  as  rendered  him  equal  in  reputation  and  suc-
cess to  the  most  able  generals  of  the  age. But  Charles -
possessed,  in  the  most  eminent  degree,  the  science  which
is  of  greatest  importance  to  a  monarch,  that  of  knowing
men,  and  of  adapting  their  talents  to  the  various  de-
partments which  he  allotted  to  them. From  the  death
of  Chievres  to  the  end  of  his  reign,  he  employed  no
general  in  the  field,  no  minister  in  the  cabinet,  no  am-
bassador to  a  foreign  court,  no  governor  of  a  province,
whose  abilities  were  inadequate  to  the  trust  which  he
reposed  in  them. Though  destitute  of  that  bewitching
affability  of  manners,  which  gained  Francis  the  hearts
of  all  who  approached  his  person,  he  was  no  stranger
to  the  virtues  which  secure  fidelity  and  attachment. He
placed  unbounded  confidence  in  his  generals ;  he  re-
warded their  services  with  munificence;  he  neither  en-
vied their  fame,  nor  discovered  any  jealousy  of  their
power. Almost  all  the  generals  who  conducted  his
armies,  may  be  placed  on  a  level  with  those  illustrious
personages  who  have  attained  the  highest  eminence
of  military  glory ;  and  his  advantages  over  his  rivals,
are  to  be  ascribed  so  manifestly  to  the  superior  abili-
ties of  the  commanders  whom  he  set  in  opposition
to  them,  that  this  might  seem  to  detract,  in  some  de-
gree, from  his  own  merit,  if  the  talent  of  discovering
and  steadiness  in  employing  such  instruments  were
VOL.  v.  2  c

386  CHARLES V.  [1558.

not  the  most  undoubted  proofs  of  a  capacity  for  govern-
ment.

There  were,  nevertheless,  defects  in  his  political  cha-
racter which  must  considerably  abate  the  admiration
due  to  his  extraordinary  talents.  Charles's  ambition
was  insatiable ;  and  though  there  seems  to  be  no  foun-
dation for  an  opinion  prevalent  in  his  own  age,  that  he
had  formed  the  chimerical  project  of  establishing  a
universal  monarchy  in  Europe,  it  is  certain  that  his  de-
sire of  being  distinguished  as  a  conqueror  involved  him
in  continual  wars,  which  not  only  exhausted  and  op-
pressed his  subjects,  but  left  him  little  leisure  for  giv-
ing attention  to  the  interior  police  and  improvement  of
his  kingdoms,  the  great  objects  of  every  prince  who
makes  the  happiness  of  his  people  the  end  of  his  go-
vernment. Charles,  at  a  very  early  period  of  life,  hav-
ing added  the  imperial  crown  to  the  kingdoms  of  Spain,
and  to  the  hereditary  dominions  of  the  houses  of  Austria
and  Burgundy,  this  opened  to  him  such  a  vast  field  of
enterprise,  and  engaged  him  in  schemes  so  complicated
as  well  as  arduous,  that,  feeling  his  power  to  be  unequal
to  the  execution  of  them,  he  had  often  recourse  to  low
artifices,  unbecoming  his  superior  talents,  and  some-
times ventured  on  such  deviations  from  integrity,  as
were  dishonourable  in  a  great  prince.  His  insidious
and  fraudulent  policy  appeared  more  conspicuous,  and
was  rendered  more  odious,  by  a  comparison  with  the
open  and  undesigning  character  of  his  contemporaries
Francis  I.  and  Henry  VIII.  This  difference,  though
occasioned  chiefly  by  the  diversity  of  their  tempers,
must  be  ascribed,  in  some  degree,  to  such  an  opposi-
tion in  the  principles  of  their  political  conduct,  as  af-
fords some  excuse  for  this  defect  in  Charles's  beha-
viour, though  it  cannot  serve  as  a  justification  of  it.
Francis  and  Henry  seldom  acted  but  from  the  impulse
of  their  passions,  and  rushed  headlong  towards  the  ob-
ject in  view.  Charles's  measures,  being  the  result  of

1558.]  BOOK XII.  387

cool  reflection,  were  disposed  into  a  regular  system,
and  carried  on  upon  a  concerted  plan.  Persons  who
act  in  the  former  manner,  naturally  pursue  the  end  in
view,  without  assuming  any  disguise,  or  displaying
much  address.  Such  as  hold  the  latter  course,  are  apt,
in  forming,  as  well  as  in  executing  their  designs,  to
employ  such  refinements  as  always  lead  to  artifice  in
conduct,  and  often  degenerate  into  deceit.

The  circumstances  transmitted  to  us  with  respect  to
Charles's  private  deportment  and  character,  are  fewer
and  less  interesting,  than  might  have  been  expected
from  the  great  number  of  authors  who  have  undertaken
to  write  an  account  of  his  life.  These  are  not  the
object  of  this  history,  which  aims  more  at  representing
the  great  transactions  of  the  reign  of  Charles  V.,  and
pointing  out  the  manner  in  which  they  affected  the  po-
litical state  of  Europe,  than  at  delineating  his  private
virtues  or  defects.

Conference  The  plenipotentiaries  of  France,  Spain,  and
m  order  to  England,  continued  their  conferences  at  Cer-
camp ;  and  though  each  of  them,  with  the  usual
art  of  negotiators,  made  at  first  very  high  demands  in
the  name  of  their  respective  courts,  yet  as  they  were
all  equally  desirous  of  peace,  they  would  have  con-
sented reciprocally  to  such  abatements  and  restrictions
of  their  claims,  as  must  have  removed  every  obstacle
to  an  accommodation.  The  death  of  Charles  V.  was
a  new  motive  with  Philip  to  hasten  the  conclusion  of  a
treaty,  as  it  increased  his  impatience  for  returning  into
Spain,  where  there  was  now  no  person  greater  or  more
illustrious  than  himself.  But,  in  spite  of  the  concur-
ring wishes  of  all  the  parties  interested,  an  event  hap-
pened which  occasioned  an  unavoidable  delay  in  their
Nov.  ir.  negotiations.  About  a  month  after  the  opening
Sir"  of  the  conferences  of  Cercamp,  Mary  of  Eng-
Engiand.  jan(j  en(je(j  ner  short  and  inglorious  reign,  and
Elizabeth,  her  sister,  was  immediately  proclaimed  queen

2  c2

388  CHARLES V.  [1558.

with  universal  joy.  As  the  powers  of  the  English  ple-
nipotentiaries expired  on  the  death  of  their  mistress,
they  could  not  proceed  until  they  received  a  commis-
sion and  instructions  from  their  new  sovereign.

Henry  and  Philip  beheld  Elizabeth's  eleva-

Henry  and .  *, f  l  i T • i  A

Philip  tion  to  the  throne  with  equal  solicitude.  As
Elizabeth,  during  Mary's  jealous  administration,  under
her  succes-  the  most  difficult  circumstances,  and  in  a  si-

sor.

tuation  extremely  delicate,  that  princess  had
conducted  herself  with  prudence  and  address  far  ex-
ceeding her  years,  they  had  conceived  a  high  idea
of  her  abilities,  and  already  formed  expectations  of  a
reign  very  different  from  that  of  her  sister.  Equally
sensible  of  the  importance  of  gaining  her  favour,  both
monarchs  set  themselves  with  emulation  to  court  it,
and  employed  every  art  in  order  to  insinuate  them-
selves into  her  confidence.  Each  of  them  had  some-
thing meritorious,  with  regard  to  Elizabeth,  to  plead  in
his  own  behalf.  Henry  had  offered  her  a  retreat  in  his
dominions,  if  the  dread  of  her  sister's  violence  should
force  her  to  fly  for  safety  out  of  England.  Philip,  by
his  powerful  intercession,  had  prevented  Mary  from
proceeding  to  the  most  fatal  extremities  against  her
sister.  Each  of  them  endeavoured  now  to  avail  himself
of  the  circumstances  in  his  favour.  Henry  wrote  to
Elizabeth  soon  after  her  accession,  with  the  warmest
expressions  of  regard  and  friendship.  He  represented
the  war  which  had  unhappily  been  kindled  between
their  kingdoms,  not  as  a  national  quarrel,  but  as  the
effect  of  Mary's  blind  partiality  to  her  husband,  and
fond  compliance  with  all  his  wishes.  He  entreated
her  to  disengage  herself  from  an  alliance  which  had
proved  so  unfortunate  to  England,  and  to  consent  to  a
separate  peace  with  him,  without  mingling  her  inte-
rests with  those  of  Spain,  from  which  they  ought  now
to  he  altogether  disjoined.  Philip,  on  the  other  hand,
unwilling  to  lose  his  connexion  with  England,  the  im-

BOOK XII.

portance  of  which,  during  a  rupture  with  France^  he
had  so  recently  experienced,  not  only  vied  with  Henry
in  declarations  of  esteem  for  Elizabeth,  and  in  profes-
sions of  his  resolution  to  cultivate  the  strictest  amity
with  her,  but  in  order  to  confirm  and  perpetuate  their
union  he  offered  himself  to  her  in  marriage,  and  under-
took to  procure  a  dispensation  from  the  pope  for  that
purpose.
Elizabeth's  Elizabeth  weighed  the  proposals  of  the  two

deliberation  -i  •• i  •, .  •> ,

concerning  monarcns  attentively,  and  with  that  provident
herconduct.  discernment  of  her  true  interest,  which  was
conspicuous  in  all  her  deliberations.  She  gave  some
encouragement  to  Henry's  overture  of  a  separate  nego-
tiation, because  it  opened  a  channel  of  correspondence
with  France,  which  she  might  find  to  be  of  great  ad-
vantage, if  Philip  should  not  discover  sufficient  zeal
and  solicitude  for  securing  to  her  proper  terms  in
the  joint  treaty.  But  she  ventured  on  this  step  with
the  most  cautious  reserve,  that  she  might  not  alarm
Philip's  suspicious  temper ;  and  lose  an  ally  in  at-
tempting to  gain  an  enemy.25  Henry  himself,  by  an
unpardonable  act  of  indiscretion,  prevented  her  from
carrying  her  intercourse  with  him  to  such  a  length  as
might  have  offended  or  alienated  Philip.  At  the  very
time  when  he  was  courting  Elizabeth's  friendship  with
the  greatest  assiduity,  he  yielded  with  an  inconside-
rate facility  to  the  solicitations  of  the  princess  of  Lor-
rain,  and  allowed  his  daughter-in-law,  the  queen  of
Scots,  to  assume  the  title  and  arms  of  queen  of  Eng-
land. This  ill-timed  pretension,  the  source  of  many
calamities  to  the  unfortunate  queen  of  Scots,  extin-
guished at  once  all  the  confidence  that  might  have
grown  between  Henry  and  Elizabeth,  and  left  in  its
place  distrust,  resentment,  and  antipathy.  Elizabeth
soon  found  that  she  must  unite  her  interests  closely

*  Forbes,  i.  p.  4.

390  CHARLES  V.  [1558.

with  Philip's,  and  expect  peace  only  from  negotiations
carried  on  in  conjunction  with  him.8
she  em-  As  she  had  granted  a  commission,  immedi-
ambassa-"  ately  after  her  accession,  to  the  same  plenipo-
treat  of  tentiai>ies  whom  her  sister  had  employed,  she
peace,  now  instructed  them  to  act  in  every  point  in
concert  with  the  plenipotentiaries  of  Spain,  and  to
take  no  step  until  they  had  previously  consulted  with
them.b  But  though  she  deemed  it  prudent  to  assume
this  appearance  of  confidence  in  the  Spanish  monarch,
she  knew  precisely  how  far  to  carry  it ;  and  discovered
no  inclination  to  accept  of  that  extraordinary  proposal
of  marriage  which  Philip  had  made  to  her.  The  Eng-
lish had  expressed  so  openly  their  detestation  of  her
sister's  choice  of  him,  that  it  would  have  been  highly
imprudent  to  have  exasperated  them  by  renewing  that
odious  alliance.  She  was  too  well  acquainted  with
Philip's  harsh  imperious  temper,  to  think  of  him  for
a  husband.  Nor  could  she  admit  a  dispensation  from
the  pope  to  be  sufficient  to  authorize  her  marrying  him,
without  condemning  her  father's  divorce  from  Catha-
rine of  Aragon,  and  acknowledging,  of  consequence,
that  her  mother's  marriage  was  null,  and  her  own  birth
illegitimate.  But  though  she  determined  not  to  yield
to  Philip's  addresses,  the  situation  of  her  affairs  ren-
dered it  dangerous  to  reject  them ;  she  returned  her
answer,  therefore,  in  terms  which  were  evasive,  but  so
tempered  with  respect,  that  though  they  gave  him  no
reason  to  be  secure  of  success,  they  did  not  altogether
extinguish  his  hopes.

Negotia-  By  this  artifice,  as  well  as  by  the  prudence
chateau-  wl^  which  she  concealed  her  sentiments  and
Cambresb.  intentions  concerning  religion,  for  some  time
after  her  accession,  she  so  far  gained  upon  Philip,  that

»  Strype's  Annals  of  the  Reformation,  i.  11. Carte's  Hist  of  England,  vol.  Hi.
p.  375.

b  Forbes's  Full  View,  i.p.  37. 40.

1559.]  BOOK  XII.  391

he  warmly  espoused  her  interest  in  the  conferences
which  were  renewed  at  Cercamp,  and  afterward  re-
1559.  moved  to  Chateau-Cambresis.  A  definitive
treaty,  which  was  to  adjust  the  claims  and
pretensions  of  so  many  princes,  required  the  examina-
tion of  such  a  variety  of  intricate  points,  and  led  to
such  infinite  and  minute  details,  as  drew  out  the  nego-
tiations to  a  great  length.  But  the  constable  Mont-
morency  exerted  himself  with  such  indefatigable  zeal
and  industry,  repairing  alternately  to  the  courts  of
Paris  and  Brussels  in  order  to  obviate  or  remove  every
difficulty,  that  all  points  in  dispute  were  adjusted  at
length  in  such  a  manner,  as  to  give  entire  satisfaction
in  every  particular  to  Henry  and  Philip ;  and  the  last
hand  was  ready  to  be  put  to  the  treaty  between  them.
Difficulties  The  claims  of  England  remained  as  the  only
twoittheegard  obstacle  to  retard  it.  Elizabeth  demanded  the
claims  of  restitution  of  Calais  in  the  most  peremptory

England.  ....  .  .r

tone,  as  an  essential  condition  ot  her  consent-
ing to  peace:  Henry  refused  to  give  up  that  impor-
tant conquest ;  and  both  seemed  to  have  taken  their
resolution  with  unalterable  firmness.  Philip  warmly
supported  Elizabeth's  pretensions  to  Calais,  not  merely
from  a  principle  of  equity  towards  the  English  nation,
that  he  might  appear  to  have  contributed  to  their  re-
covering what  they  had  lost  by  espousing  his  cause  ;
nor  solely  with  a  view  of  soothing  Elizabeth  by  this
manifestation  of  zeal  for  her  interest ;  but  in  order  to
render  France  less  formidable,  by  securing  to  her  an-
cient enemy  this  easy  access  into  the  heart  of  the  king-
dom. The  earnestness,  however,  with  which  he  se-
conded the  arguments  of  the  English  plenipotentiaries
soon  began  to  relax.  During  the  course  of  the  nego-
tiation, Elizabeth,  who  now  felt  herself  firmly  seated
on  her  throne,  began  to  '•  take  such  open  and  vigorous
measures,  not  only  for  overturning  all  that  her  sister
had  done  in  favour  of  Popery,  but  for  establishing  the

392  CHARLES  V.  [1559.

Protestant  church  on  a  firm  foundation,  as  convinced
Philip  that  his  hopes  of  a  union  with  her  had  been
from  the  beginning  vain,  and  were  now  desperate.
From  that  period  his  interpositions  in  her  favour  be-
came more  cold  and  formal,  flowing  merely  from  a
regard  to  decorum,  or  from  the  consideration  of  re-
mote political  interests.  Elizabeth,  having  reason  to
expect  such  an  alteration  in  his  conduct,  quickly  per-
ceived it.  But  as  nothing  would  have  been  of  greater
detriment  to  her  people,  or  more  inconsistent  with  her
schemes  of  domestic  administration,  than  the  continu-
ance of  war,  she  saw  the  necessity  of  submitting  to
such  conditions  as  the  situation  of  her  affairs  imposed,
and  that  she  must  reckon  upon  being  deserted  by  an
ally  who  was  now  united  to  her  by  a  very  feeble  tie,  if
she  did  not  speedily  reduce  her  demands  to  what  was
moderate  and  attainable.  She  accordingly  gave  new
instructions  to  her  ambassadors ;  and  Philip's  pleni-
potentiaries acting  as  mediators  between  the  French
and  them,0  an  expedient  was  fallen  upon,  which,  in
some  degree,  justified  Elizabeth's  departing  from  the
rigour  of  her  first  demand  with  regard  to  Calais.  All
lesser  articles  were  settled  without  much  discussion  or
delay.  Philip,  that  he  might  not  appear  to  have  aban-
doned the  English,  insisted  that  the  treaty  between
Henry  and  Elizabeth  should  be  concluded  in  form,
before  that  between  the  French  monarch  and  himself.
The  one  was  signed  on  the  second  day  of  April,  the
other  on  the  day  following.

Articles  of  The  treaty  of  peace  between  France  and
fwe^be  England  contained  no  articles  of  real  impor-
France  and  tance,  but  that  which  respected  Calais.  It
was  stipulated,  That  the  king  of  France  should
retain  possession  of  that  town,  with  all  its  dependencies,
during  eight  years ;  that,  at  the  expiration  of  that
term,  he  should  restore  it  to  England ;  that,  in  case  of

c  Forbes,  i.  59.

1559.]  BOOK  XII.  393

nonperformance,  he  should  forfeit  five  hundred  thou-
sand crowns,  for  the  payment  of  which  sum,  seven  or
eight  wealthy  merchants,  who  were  not  his  subjects,
should  grant  security ;  that  five  persons  of  distinction
should  be  given  as  hostages  until  that  security  were
provided ;  that,  although  the  forfeit  of  five  hundred
thousand  crowns  should  be  paid,  the  right  of  England
to  Calais  should  still  remain  entire,  in  the  same  man-
ner as  if  the  term  of  eight  years  were  expired ;  that
the  king  and  queen  of  Scotland  should  be  included  in
the  treaty;  that  if  they,  or  the  French  king,  should  vio-
late the  peace  by  any  hostile  action,  Henry  should  be
obliged  instantly  to  restore  Calais ;  that,  on  the  other
hand,  if  any  breach  of  the  treaty  proceeded  from  Eli-
zabeth, then  Henry  and  the  king  and  queen  of  Scots
were  absolved  from  all  the  engagements  which  they
had  come  under  by  this  treaty.

The  views  Notwithstanding  the  studied  attention  with
°l!ties  with  whicn  so  many  precautions  were  taken,  it  is
respect  to  evident  that  Henry  did  not  intend  the  restitu-

these

tion  of  Calais,  nor  is  it  probable  that  Eliza-
beth expected  it.  It  was  hardly  possible  that  she  could
maintain,  during  the  course  of  eight  years,  such  perfect
concord  both  with  France  and  Scotland,  as  not  to  afford
Henry  some  pretext  for  alleging  that  she  had  violated
the  treaty.  But  even  if  that  term  should  elapse  with-
out any  ground  for  complaint,  Henry  might  then  choose
to  pay  the  sum  stipulated,  and  Elizabeth  had  no  me-
thod of  asserting  her  right  but  by  force  of  arms.  How-
ever, by  throwing  the  articles  in  the  treaty  with  re-
gard to  Calais  into  this  form,  Elizabeth  satisfied  her
subjects  of  every  denomination;  she  gave  men  of  dis-
cernment a  striking  proof  of  her  address,  in  palliating
what  she  could  not  prevent ;  and  amused  the  multitude,
to  whom  the  cession  of  such  an  important  place  would
have  appeared  'altogether  infamous,  with  the  prospect
of  recovering  in  a  short  time  that  favourite  possession.

394  CHARLES V.  [1559.

expedient which Montmorency  era-

diomotelich  pl°ved>  *n  order  to  facilitate  the  conclusion  of
peace  he- peace  between  France  and  Spain, was the

twecn  .  .  „  .

France  and  negotiating  two  treaties  ot  marriage,  one  be-
Spain<  tween  Elizabeth,  Henry's  eldest  daughter,  and
Philip,  who  supplanted  his  son,  the  unfortunate  Don
Carlos,  to  whom  that  princess  had  been  promised  in
the  former  conferences  at  Cercamp  ;  the  other  between
Margaret,  Henry's  only  sister,  and  the  duke  of  Savoy.
For,  however  feeble  the  ties  of  blood  may  often  be
among  princes,  or  how  little  soever  they  may  regard
them  when  pushed  on  to  act  by  motives  of  ambition,
they  assume  on  other  occasions  the  appearance  of  be-
ing so  far  influenced  by  these  domestic  affections,  as  to
employ  them  to  justify  measures  and  concessions  which
they  find  to  be  necessary,  but  know  to  be  impolitic  or
dishonourable.  Such  was  the  use  Henry  made  of  the
two  marriages  to  which  he  gave  his  consent.  Having
secured  an  honourable  establishment  for  his  sister  and
his  daughter,  he,  in  consideration  of  these,  granted
terms  both  to  Philip  and  the  duke  of  Savoy,  of  which
he  would  not,  on  any  account,  have  ventured  to  ap-
prove.

The  principal  articles  in  the  treaty  between

The  terms _,  j  « •  rrn  j

of  pacifica-  Trance  and  fepam  were,  —  1  hat  sincere  and  per-
petual amity  should  be  established  between  the
two  crowns  and  their  respective  allies  ;  that  the  two  mo-
narchs  should  labour  in  concert  to  procure  the  convo-
cation of  a  general  council,  in  order  to  check  the  pro-
gress of  heresy,  and  restore  unity  and  concord  to  the
Christian  church  ;  that  all  conquests  made  by  either
party,  on  this  side  of  the  Alps,  since  the  commence-
ment of  the  war,  in  1551,  should  be  mutually  restored;
that  the  duchy  of  Savoy,  the  principality  of  Piedmont,
the  country  of  Bresse,  and  all  other  territories  formerly
subject  to  the  dukes  of  Savoy,  should  be  restored  to
Emanuel  Philibert,  immediately  after  the  celebration

1559.]  BOOK XII.  395

of  his  marriage  with  Margaret  of  France,  the  towns  of
Turin,  Quiers,  Pignerol,  Chivaz,  and  Villanova  ex-
cepted,  of  which  Henry  should  keep  possession  until
his  claims  to  these  places,  in  right  of  his  grandmother,
should  be  tried  and  decided  in  course  of  law  ;  that  as
long  as  Henry  retained  these  places  in  his  hands,
Philip  should  be  at  liberty  to  keep  garrisons  in  the
towns  of  Vercelli  and  Asti;  that  the  French  king
should  immediately  evacuate  all  the  places  which  he
held  in  Tuscany  and  the  Sienese,  and  renounce  all  fu-
ture pretensions  to  them ;  that  he  should  restore  the
marquisate  of  Montserrat  to  the  duke  of  Mantua;  that
he  should  receive  the  Genoese  into  favour,  and  give
up  to  them  the  towns  which  he  had  conquered  in  the
island  of  Corsica ;  that  none  of  the  princes  or  states  to
whom  these  cessions  were  made,  should  call  their  sub-
jects to  account  for  any  part  of  their  conduct  while
under  the  dominion  of  their  enemies,  but  should  bury
all  past  transactions  in  oblivion.  The  pope,  the  em-
peror, the  kings  of  Denmark,  Sweden,  Poland,  Portu-
gal, the  king  and  queen  of  Scots,  and  almost  every
prince  and  state  in  Christendom,  were  comprehended
in  this  pacification  as  the  allies  either  of  Henry  or
Philip.d

Which  re-  Thus,  by  this  famous  treaty,  peace  was  re-es-
ulnquimty  tablished  in  Europe.  All  the  causes  of  discord
in  Europe.  wnicn  na^  so  long  embroiled  the  powerful  mo-
narchs  of  France  and  Spain,  that  had  transmitted  he-
reditary quarrels  and  wars  from  Charles  to  Philip,
and  from  Francis  to  Henry,  seemed  to  be  wholly  re-
moved or  finally  terminated.  The  French  alone  com-
plained of  the  unequal  conditions  of  a  treaty,  into
which  an  ambitious  minister,  in  order  to  recover  his
liberty,  and  an  artful  mistress,  that  she  might  gratify
her  resentment,  had  seduced  their  too  easy  monarch.
They  exclaimed  loudly  against  the  folly  of  giving  up

«»  Recueil  des  Traites,  tpm.  ii.  287.

396  CHARLES V.  [1559.

to  the  enemies  of  France  a  hundred  and  eighty-nine
fortified  places,  in  the  Low  Countries  or  in  Italy,  in
return  for  the  three  insignificant  towns  of  St.  Quintin,
Ham,  and  Catelet.  They  considered  it  as  an  indelible
stain  upon  the  glory  of  the  nation,  to  renounce  in  one
day  territories  so  extensive,  and  so  capable  of  being
defended,  that  the  enemy  could  not  have  hoped  to
wrest  them  out  of  its  hands,  after  many  years  of  victory.
The  eace  ^u*  Henrv>  without  regarding  the  sentiments
between  of  his  people,  or  being  moved  by  the  remon-

Franceand  *, '  °  /

Spain  ran-  strances  ot  his  council,  ratihed  the  treaty,  and
executed  with  great  fidelity  whatever  he  had
stipulated  to  perform.  The  duke  of  Savoy  repaired
with  a  numerous  retinue  to  Paris,  in  order  to  celebrate
his  marriage  with  Henry's  sister.  The  duke  of  Alva
was  sent  to  the  same  capital,  at  the  head  of  a  splendid
embassy,  to  espouse  Elizabeth  in  the  name  of  his  mas-
ter. They  were  received  with  extraordinary  magni-
ficence by  the  French  court.  Amidst  the  rejoicings
Death  of  an(^  festivities  on  that  occasion,  Henry's  days
Henry.  were  cut  short  by  a  singular  and  tragical  acci-
dent. His  son  Francis  II.,  a  prince  under  age,
of  a  weak  constitution,  and  of  a  mind  still  more  fee-
ble, succeeded  him.  Soon  after,  Paul  ended  his  vio-
lent and  imperious  potificate,  at  enmity  with  all  the
world,  and  disgusted  even  with  his  own  nephews.
They,  persecuted  by  Philip,  and  deserted  by  the  suc-
ceeding pope,  whom  they  had  raised  by  their  influence
to  the  papal  throne,  were  condemned  to  the  punish-
ment which  their  crimes  and  ambition  had  merited,
and  their  death  was  as  infamous  as  their  lives  had  been
criminal.  Thus  most  of  the  personages,  who  had  long
sustained  the  principal  characters  on  the  great  theatre
of  Europe,  disappeared  about  the  same  time.  A  more
known  period  of  history  opens  at  this  era;  other  actors
enter  upon  the  stage,  with  different  views,  as  well
as  different  passions ;  new  contests  arose,  and  new

1559.]  BOOK  XII.  397

schemes  of  ambition  occupied  and  disquieted  man-
kind.

A  general Upon  reviewing  the  transactions  of  any  ac-
the'w^ole tive  period  in  the  history  of  civilized  nations,
penod. the  changes  which  are  accomplished  appear
wonderfully  disproportioned  to  the  efforts  which  have
been  exerted. Conquests are  never  very  extensive
or  rapid,  but  among  nations  whose  progress  in  im-
provement is  extremely  unequal. When  Alexander
the  Great,  at  the  head  of  a  gallant  people,  of  simple
manners,  and  formed  to  war  by  admirable  military  in-
stitutions, invaded  a  state  sunk  in  luxury,  and  ener-
vated by  excessive  refinement ;  when  Genchizcan  and
Tamerlane, with  their  armies  of  hardy  barbarians,
poured  in  upon  nations,  enfeebled  by  the  climate  in
which  they  lived,  or  by  the  arts  and  commerce  which
they  cultivated,  these  conquerors,  like  a  torrent,  swept
every  thing  before  them,  subduing  kingdoms  and  pro-
vinces in  as  short  a  space  of  time  as  was  requisite  to
march  through  them. But  when  nations  are  in  a  state
similar  to  each  other,  and  keep  equal  pace  in  their
advances  towards  refinement,  they  are  not  exposed  to
the  calamity  of  sudden  conquests. Their  acquisitions
of  knowledge,  their  progress  in  the  art  of  war,  their
political  sagacity  and  address  are  nearly  equal. The
fate  of  states  in  this  situation  depends  not  on  a  single
battle. Their  internal  resources  are  many  and  various.
Nor  are  they  themselves  alone  interested  in  their  own
defence. Other  states  interpose,  and  balance  any  tem-
porary advantage  which  either  party  may  have  ac-
quired. After  the  fiercest  and  most  lengthened  contest,
all  the  rival  nations  are  exhausted,  none  are  conquered.
At  length  they  find  it  necessary  to  conclude  a  peace,
which  restores  to  each  almost  the  same  power  and  the
same  territories  of  which  they  were  formerly  in  possession.
Such  was  the  state  of  Europe  during  the  reign
of  Charles  V. No  prince  was  so  much  superior

398  CHARLES  V.

Em-ope  in  to  the  rest  in  power,  as  to  render  his  efforts
state'd"-  irresistible,  and  his  conquests  easy.  No  nation
Ihfteenth  ^ad  m^Q  progress  in  improvement  so  far  be-
century.  yond  its  neighbours  as  to  have  acquired  a  very
manifest  pre-eminence.  Each  state  derived  some  ad-
vantage, or  was  subject  to  some  inconvenience  from  its
situation  or  its  climate ;  each  was  distinguished  by  some-
thing peculiar  in  the  genius  of  its  people,  or  the  con-
stitution of  its  government.  But  the  advantages  pos-
sessed by  one  state  were  counterbalanced  by  circum-
stances favourable  to  others;  and  this  prevented  any
from  attaining  such  superiority  as  might  have  been
fatal  to  all.  The  nations  of  Europe  in  that  age,  as  in  the
present,  were  like  one  great  family:  there  were  some
features  common  to  all,  which  fixed  a  resemblance;
there  were  certain  peculiarities  conspicuous  in  each,
which  marked  a  distinction.  But  there  was  not  among
them  that  wide  diversity  of  character  and  of  genius
which,  in  almost  every  period  of  history,  hath  exalted
the  Europeans  above  the  inhabitants  of  the  other  quar-
ters of  the  globe,  and  seems  to  have  destined  the  one
to  rule,  and  the  other  to  obey.

A  remark-  But  though  the  near  resemblance  and  equa-
fn'the'staf6  ^^  *n  imProvement  among  the  different  nations
of  Europe  of  Europe,  prevented  the  reign  of  Charles  V.
relgrnof  *  from  being  distinguished  by  such  sudden  and
Charles  v.  extensive  conquests  as  occur  in  some  other
periods  of  history,  yet,  during  the  course  of  his  admi-
nistration, all  the  considerable  states  in  Europe  suf-
fered a  remarkable  change  in  their  political  situation,
and  felt  the  influence  of  events,  which  have  not  hitherto
spent  their  force,  but  still  continue  to  operate  in  a
greater  or  in  a  less  degree.  It  was  during  his  reign,
and  in  consequence  of  the  perpetual  efforts  to  which
his  enterprising  ambition  roused  him,  that  the  different
kingdoms  of  Europe  acquired  internal  vigour;  that
they  discerned  the  resources  of  which  they  were  pop

BOOK  XII.  399

sessed;  that  they  came  both  to  feel  their  own  strength,
and  to  know  how  to  render  it  formidable  to  others.  It
was  during  his  reign,  too,  that  the  different  kingdoms
of  Europe,  which  in  former  times  seemed  frequently  to
act  as  if  they  had  been  single  and  disjoined,  became  so
thoroughly  acquainted,  and  so  intimately  connected
with  each  other,  as  to  form  one  great  political  system,
in  which  each  took  a  station,  wherein  it  has  remained
since  that  time  with  less  variation  than  could  have  been
expected  after  the  events  of  two  active  centuries.
The  pro-  The  progress,  however,  and  acquisitions  of
tKouse  ti16  house  of  Austria  were  not  only  greater  than
of  Austria,  those  of  any  other  power,  but  more  discernible
and  conspicuous.  I  have  already  enumerated  the  ex-
tensive territories  which  descended  to  Charles  from  his
Austrian,  Burgundian,  and  Spanish  ancestors.*  To
these  he  himself  added  the  imperial  dignity ;  and,  as  if
all  this  had  been  too  little,  the  bounds  of  the  habitable
globe  seemed  to  be  extended,  and  a  new  world  was
subjected  to  his  command.  Upon  his  resignation,  the
Burgundian  provinces,  and  the  Spanish  kingdoms  with
their  dependencies,  both  in  the  old  and  new  worlds,
devolved  to  Philip.  But  Charles  transmitted  his  do-
minions to  his  son,  in  a  condition  very  different  from
that  in  which  he  himself  had  received  them.  They
were  augmented  by  the  accession  of  new  provinces;
they  were  habituated  to  obey  an  administration  which
was  no  less  vigorous  than  steady;  they  were  accus-
tomed to  expensive  and  persevering  efforts,  which,
though  necessary  in  the  contests  between  civilized  na-
tions, had  been  little  known  in  Europe  before  .the  six-
teenth century.  The  provinces  of  Friesland,  Utrecht,
and  Overyssel,  which  he  acquired  by  purchase  from
their  former  proprietors,  and  the  duchy  of  Gueldres,  of
which  he  made  himself  master,  partly  by  force  of  arms,
partly  by  the  arts  of  negotiation,  were  additions  of  great

*  Sec  Book  I.

400  CHARLES V.

value  to  his  Burgundian  dominions.  Ferdinand  and
Isabella  had  transmitted  to  him  all  the  provinces  of
Spain,  from  the  bottom  of  the  Pyrenees  to  the  frontiers
of  Portugal ;  but  as  he  maintained  a  perpetual  peace
with  that  kingdom,  amidst  the  various  efforts  of  his  en-
terprising ambition,  he  made  no  acquisition  of  territory
in  that  quarter.

Particular-  Charles  had  gained,  however,  a  vast  acces-
ij  in  Spain.  sjon  of  pOWer  jn  tnjs  part  of  n js  dominions.

By  his  success  in  the  war  with  the  commons  of  Castile,
he  exalted  the  regal  prerogative  upon  the  ruins  of  the
privileges  which  formerly  belonged  to  the  people.
Though  he  allowed  the  name  of  the  cortes  to  remain,
and  the  formality  of  holding  it  to  be  continued,  he  re-
duced its  authority  and  jurisdiction  almost  to  nothing,
and  modelled  it  in  such  a  manner,  that  it  became  rather
a  junto  of  the  servants  of  the  crown,  than  an  assembly
of  the  representatives  of  the  people.  One  member  of
the  constitution  being  thus  lopped  off,  it  was  impossi-
ble but  that  the  other  must  feel  the  stroke,  and  suffer
by  it.  The  suppression  of  the  popular  power  render-
ed the  aristocratical  less  formidable.  The  grandees,
prompted  by  the  warlike  spirit  of  the  age,  or  allured
by  the  honours  which  they  enjoyed  in  a  court,  exhausted
their  fortunes  in  military  service,  or  in  attending  on  the
person  of  their  prince.  They  did  not  dread,  perhaps
did  not  observe,  the  dangerous  progress  of  the  royal
authority,  which  leaving  them  the  vain  distinction  of
being  covered  in  presence  of  their  sovereign,  stripped
them,  by  degrees,  of  that  real  power  which  they  pos-
sessed while  they  formed  one  body,  and  acted  in  con-
cert with  the  people.  Charles's  success  in  abolishing
the  privileges  of  the  commons,  and  in  breaking  the
power  of  the  nobles  of  Castile,  encouraged  Philip  to
invade  the  liberties  of  Aragon,  which  were  still  more
extensive.  The  Castilians,  accustomed  to  subjection
themselves,  assisted  in  imposing  the  yoke  on  their  more

BOOK XII.  401

happy  and  independent  neighbours.  The  will  of  the
sovereign  became  the  supreme  law  in  all  the  kingdoms
of  Spain ;  and  princes  who  were  not  checked  in  forming
their  plans  by  the  jealousy  of  the  people,  nor  controlled
in  executing  them  by  the  power  of  the  nobles,  could
both  aim  at  great  objects,  and  call  forth  the  whole
strength  of  the  monarchy  in  order  to  attain  them.
AIgo  in  As  Charles,  by  extending  the  royal  preroga-
other  parts  tive,  rendered  the  monarchs  of  Spain  masters  at

of  Europe.  111  T •

home,  he  added  new  dignity  and  power  to  their
crown  by  his  foreign  acquisitions.  He  secured  to  Spain
the  quiet  possession  of  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  which
Ferdinand  had  usurped  by  fraud,  and  held  with  diffi-
culty. He  united  the  duchy  of  Milan,  one  of  the  most
fertile  and  populous  Italian  provinces,  to  the  Spanish
crown;  and  left  his  successors,  even  without  taking
their  other  territories  into  the  account,  the  most  .consi-
derable princes  in  Italy,  which  had  been  long  the  thea-
tre of  contention  to  the  great  powers  of  Europe,  and  in
which  they  had  struggled  with  emulation  to  obtain  the
superiority.  When  the  French,  in  conformity  to  the
treaty  of  Chateau-Cambresis,  withdrew  their  forces  out
of  Italy,  and  finally  relinquished  all  their  schemes  of
conquest  on  that  side  of  the  Alps,  the  Spanish  domi-
nions then  rose  in  importance,  and  enabled  their  kings,
as  long  as  the  monarchy  retained  any  degree  of  vigour,
to  preserve  the  chief  sway  in  all  the  transactions  of  that
country.  But  whatever  accession,  either  of  interior
authority  or  of  foreign  dominion,  Charles  gained  for
the  monarchs  of  Spain  in  Europe,  was  inconsiderable
when  compared  with  his  acquisitions  in  the  new  world.
He  added  there,  not  provinces,  but  empires  to  his  crown.
He  conquered  territories  of  such  immense  extent;  he
discovered  such  inexhaustible  veins  of  wealth,  and
opened  such  boundless  prospects  of  every  kind,  as  must
have  roused  his  successor,  and  have  called  him  forth
to  action,  though  his  ambition  had  been  much  less  ar-
VOL.  v.  2  D

402  CHARLES V.

dent  than  that  of  Philip,  and  must  have  rendered  him
not  only  enterprising  but  formidable.
Progress  of While  the  elder  branch  of  the  Austrian  family
*' rose  to  such  pre-eminence  in  Spain,  the  younger,

^  wn*cn  Ferdinand  was  the  head,  grew  to  be
of  Austria,  considerable  in  Germany. The  ancient  here-
ditary dominions  of  the  house  of  Austria  in  Germany,
united  to  the  kingdom  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia,  which
Ferdinand  had  acquired  by  marriage,  formed  a  respec-
table power  ;  and  when  the  imperial  dignity  was  added
to  these,  Ferdinand  possessed  territories  more  exten-
sive than  had  belonged  to  any  prince,  Charles  V.  ex-
cepted,  who  had  been  at  the  head  of  the  empire  during
several  ages. Fortunately  for Europe,  the  disgust
which  Philip  conceived  on  account  of  Ferdinand's  re-
fusing to  relinquish  the  imperial  crown  in  his  favour,
not  only  prevented  for  some  time  the  separate  members
of  the  house  of  Austria  from  acting  in  concert,  but  oc-
casioned between  them  a  visible  alienation  and  rival-
ship. By  degrees,  however,  regard  to  the  interest  of
their  family extinguished  this  impolitical  animosity.
The  confidence  which  was  natural  returned;  the  ag-
grandising of  the  house  of  Austria  became  the  com-
mon object  of  all  their  schemes  ;  they  gave  and  received
assistance  alternately  towards  the  execution  of  them;
and  each  derived  consideration  and  importance  from
the  other's success. A  family  so  great  and  so  as-
piring, became  the  general  object  of  jealousy  and  terror.
All  the  power, as  well  as policy of  Europe,  were
exerted  during  a  century,  in  order  to  check  and  hum-
ble it. Nothing  can  give  a  more  striking  idea  of  the
ascendant  which  it  had  acquired,  than  that  after  its
vigour  was  spent  with  extraordinary  exertions  of  its
strength,  after  Spain  was  become  only  the  shadow  of  a
great  name,  and  its  monarchs  were  sunk  into  debility
and  dotage,  the  house  of  Austria  still  continued  to  be
formidable. The  nations  of  Europe  had  so  often  felt

BOOK XII.  403

its  superior  power,  and  had  been  so  constantly  employed
in  guarding  against  it,  that  the  dread  of  it  became  a
kind  of  political  habit,  the  influence  of  which  remained
when  the  causes  which  had  formed  it  ceased  to  exist.
Acquisi- While  the  house  of  Austria  went  on  with  such
takings success  in  enlarging  its  dominions,  France  made
durTnanthe  n°  consiclerable  acquisition  of  new  territory.
reign  of All  its  schemes  of  conquest  in  Italy  had  proved
1  v'  abortive;  it  had  hitherto  obtained  no  establish-
ment of  consequence  in  the  new  world ;  and  after  the
continued  and  vigorous  efforts  of  four  successive  reigns,
the  confines  of  the  kingdom  were  much  the  same  as
Louis  XL  had  left  them. But  though  France  made
not  such  large  strides  towards  dominion  as  the  house
of  Austria,  it  continued  to  advance  by  steps  which  were
more  secure,  because  they  were  gradual  and  less  ob-
served. The  conquest  of  Calais  put  it  out  of  the  power
of  the  English  to  invade  France  but  at  their  utmost
peril,  and  delivered  the  French  from  the  dread  of  their
ancient  enemies,  who,  previous  to  that  event,  could  at
any  time  penetrate  into  the  kingdom  by  that  avenue,
and  thereby  retard  or  defeat  the  execution  of  their  best
concerted  enterprises  against  any  foreign  power. The
important  acquisition  of  Metz  covered  that  part  of  their
frontier  which  formerly  was  most  feeble,  and  lay  most
exposed  to  insult. France,  from  the  time  of  its  obtain-
ing these  additional  securities  against  external  invasion,
must  be  deemed  the  most  powerful  kingdom  in  Europe,
and  is  more  fortunately  situated  than  any  on  the  conti-
nent, either  for  conquest  or  defence. From  the  con-
fines of  Artois  to  the  bottom  of  the  Pyrenees,  and  from
the  British  channel  to  the  frontiers  of  Savoy  and  the
Mediterranean,  its  territories  lay  compact  and  unming-
led  with  those  of  any  other  power. Several  of  the  con-
siderable provinces,  which  had  contracted  a  spirit  of
independence  by  their  having  been  long  subject  to  the
great  vassals  of  the  crown,  who  were  often  at  variance

2D2

404  CHARLES V.

or  at  war  with  their  master,  were  now  accustomed  to
recognise  and  to  obey  one  sovereign.  As  they  became
members  of  the  same  monarchy,  they  assumed  the  sen-
timents of  that  body  into  which  they  were  incorporated,
and  co-operated  with  zeal  towards  promoting  its  in-
terest and  honour.  The  power  and  influence  wrested
from  the  nobles  were  seized  by  the  crown.  The  peo-
ple were  not  admitted  to  share  in  these  spoils ;  they
gained  no  new  privilege;  they  acquired  no  additional
weight  in  the  legislature.  It  was  not  for  the  sake  of
the  people,  but  in  order  to  extend  their  own  preroga-
tive, that  the  monarchs  of  France  had  laboured  to  hum-
ble their  great  vassals.  Satisfied  with  having  brought
them  under  entire  subjection  to  the  crown,  they  dis-
covered no  solicitude  to  free  the  people  from  their  an-
cient dependence  on  the  nobles  of  whom  they  held,
and  by  whom  they  were  often  oppressed.

A  monarch  at  the  head  of  a  kingdom  thus
them  to  united  at  home,  and  secure  from  abroad,  was
Sghe?  *  entitled  to  form  great  designs,  because  he  felt
station  himself  in  a  condition  to  execute  them.  The

among  the

powers  of  foreign  wars  which  had  continued  with  little
interruption  from  the  accession  of  Charles  VIII.
had  not  only  cherished  and  augmented  the  martial  ge-
nius of  the  nation,  but,  by  inuring  the  troops  during
the  course  of  long  service,  to  the  fatigues  of  war,  and
accustoming  them  to  obedience,  had  added  the  force  of
discipline  to  their  natural  ardour.  A  gallant  and  ac-
tive body  of  nobles,  who  considered  themselves  as  idle
and  useless,  unless  when  they  were  in  the  field ;  who
were  hardly  acquainted  with  any  pastime  or  exercise
but  what  was  military ;  and  who  knew  no  road  to
power,  or  fame,  or  wealth,  but  war ;  would  not  have
suffered  their  sovereign  to  remain  long  in  inaction.
The  people,  little  acquainted  with  the  arts  of  peace,
and  always  ready  to  take  arms  at  the  command  of  their
superiors,  were  accustomed  by  the  expense  of  long

BOOK  XII.  405

wars  carried  on  in  distant  countries,  to  bear  imposi-
tions, which,  however  inconsiderable  they  may  seem
if  estimated  by  the  exorbitant  rate  of  modern  exactions,
appear  immense  when  compared  with  the  sums  levied
in  France,  or  in  any  other  country  of  Europe,  previous
to  the  reign  of  Louis  XL  As  all  the  members  of  which
the  state  was  composed  were  thus  impatient  for  action,
and  capable  of  great  efforts,  the  schemes  and  operations
of  France  must  have  been  no  less  formidable  to  Europe
than  those  of  Spain.  The  superior  advantages  of  its
situation,  the  contiguity  and  compactness  of  its  territo-
ries, together  with  the  peculiar  state  of  its  political  con-
stitution at  that  juncture,  must  have  rendered  its  enter-
prises still  more  alarming  and  more  decisive.  The  king
possessed  such  a  degree  of  power  as  gave  him  the  en-
tire command  of  his  subjects ;  the  people  were  stran-
gers to  those  occupations  and  habits  of  life  which  ren-
der men  averse  to  war,  or  unfit  for  it;  and  the  nobles,
though  reduced  to  the  subordination  necessary  in  a  re-
gular government,  still  retained  the  high J undaunted
spirit  which  was  the  effect  of  their  ancient  indepen-
dence. The  vigour  of  the  feudal  times  remained,  their
anarchy  was  at  an  end ;  and  the  kings  of  France  could
avail  themselves  of  the  martial  ardour  which  that  singu-
lar institution  had  kindled  or  kept  alive,  without  being
exposed  to  the  dangers  or  inconveniences  which  are
inseparable  from  it  when  in  entire  force.
Circum-  A  kingdom  in  such  a  state  is,  perhaps,  capa-
whkhpre-  ble  of  greater  military  efforts  than  at  any  other
immediate  PeriO(l  in  its  progress.  But  how  formidable  or
effects  of  how  fatal  soever  to  the  other  nations  of  Europe,
power.  the  power  of  such  a  monarchy  might  have  been,
the  civil  wars  which  broke  out  in  France  saved  them  at
that  juncture  from  feeling  its  effects.  These  wars,  of
which  religion  was  the  pretext  and  ambition  the  cause,
wherein  great  abilities  were  displayed  by  the  leaders
of  the  different  factions,  and  little  conduct  or  firmness

406  CHARLES  V.

were  manifested  by  the  crown  under  a  succession  of
weak  princes,  kept  France  occupied  and  embroiled  for
half  a  century.  During  these  commotions,  the  internal
strength  of  the  kingdom  was  much  wasted,  and  such  a
spirit  of  anarchy  was  spread  among  the  nobles,  to
whom  rebellion  was  familiar,  and  the  restraint  of  laws
unknown,  that  a  considerable  interval  became  requisite,
not  only  for  recruiting  the  internal  vigour  of  the  nation,
but  for  re-establishing  the  authority  of  the  prince ;  so
that  it  was  long  before  France  could  turn  her  whole  at-
tention towards  foreign  transactions,  or  act  with  her
proper  force  in  foreign  wars.  It  was  long  before  she
rose  to  that  ascendant  in  Europe  which  she  has  main-
tained since  the  administration  of  cardinal  Richlieu,  and
which  the  situation  as  well  as  extent  of  the  kingdom,
the  nature  of  her  government,  together  with  the  cha-
racter of  her  people,  entitle  her  to  maintain.
Progress  While  the  kingdoms  on  the  continent  grew
wMire?nd into  power  and  consequence,  England  likewise
?Pe.ct.to-  made  considerable  progress  towards  regular

its  interior

state.  government  and  interior  strength.  Henry  VI 1 1.,
probably  without  intention,  and  certainly  without  any
consistent  plan,  of  which  his  nature  was  incapable,
pursued  the  scheme  of  depressing  the  nobility,  which
the  policy  of  his  father  Henry  VII.  had  begun.  The
pride  and  caprice  of  his  temper  led  him  to  employ
chiefly  new  men  in  the  administration  of  affairs,  because
he  found  them  more  obsequious,  or  less  scrupulous ;
and  he  not  only  conferred  on  them  such  plenitude  of
power,  but  exalted  them  to  such  pre-eminence  in  dig-
nity, as  mortified  and  degraded  the  ancient  nobility.
By  the  alienation  or  sale  of  the  church-lands,  which
were  dissipated  with  a  profusion  not  inferior  to  the
rapaciousness  with  which  they  had  been  seized,  as  well
as  by  the  privilege  granted  to  the  ancient  landholders
of  selling  their  estates,  or  disposing  of  them  by  will,
an  immense  property  formerly  locked  up,  was  brought

BOOK  XII.  407

into  circulation.  This  put  the  spirit  of  industry  and
commerce  in  motion,  and  gave  it  some  considerable
degree  of  vigour.  The  road  to  power  and  to  opulence
became  open  to  persons  of  every  condition.  A  sudden
and  excessive  flow  of  wealth  from  the  West  Indies
proved  fatal  to  industry  in  Spain;  a  moderate  ac-
cession in  England  to  the  sum  in  circulation,  gave  life
to  commerce,  awakened  the  ingenuity  of  the  nation,
and  excited  it  to  useful  enterprise.  In  France,  what
the  nobles  lost,  the  crown  gained.  In  England,  the
commons  were  gainers  as  well  as  the  king.  Power
and  influence  accompanied,  of  course,  the  property
which  they  acquired.  They  rose  to  consideration
among  their  fellow-subjects ;  they  began  to  feel  their
own  importance  ;  and,  extending  their  influence  in  the
legislative  body  gradually,  and  often  when  neither
they  themselves  nor  others  foresaw  all  the  effects  of
their  claims  and  pretensions,  they  at  last  attained  that
high  authority  to  which  the  British  constitution  is  in-
debted for  the  existence,  and  must  owe  the  preservation
of  its  liberty.  At  the  same  time  that  the  English  con-
stitution advanced  towards  perfection,  several  circum-
stances brought  on  a  change  in  the  ancient  system  with
respect  to  foreign  powers,  and  introduced  another
more  beneficial  to  the  nation.  As  soon  as  Henry  dis-
claimed the  supremacy  of  the  papal  see,  and  broke  off
all  connexion  with  the  papal  court,  considerable  sums
were  saved  to  the  nation,  of  which  it  had  been  annually
drained  by  remittances  to  Rome  for  dispensations  and
indulgences,  by  the  expense  of  pilgrimages  into  foreign
countries,1*  or  by  payment  of  annates,  first-fruits,  and  a
thousand  other  taxes  which  that  artful  and  rapacious
court  levied  on  the  credulity  of  mankind.  The  exer-

b  The  loss  which  the  nation  sustained  by  the  most  of  these  articles  is  obvious,  and
must  have  been  great.  Even  that  by  pilgrimages  was  not  inconsiderable.  In  the
year  1428,  license  was  obtained  by  no  fewer  than  916  persons  to  visit  the  shrine  of
St.  James  of  Compostello  in  Spain.  Hyiner,  vol  s.  p.  .  In  1434,  the  number  of
pilgrims  to  the  same  place  was  2460.  Ibid.  p.  .  In  1445,  they  were  2100,  vol.
xi.  p.

406  CHARLES V.

cise  of  a  jurisdiction  different  from  that  of  the  civil
power,  and  claiming  not  only  to  be  independent  of  it,
but  superior  to  it,  a  wild  solecism  in  government,  apt
not  only  to  perplex  and  disquiet  weak  minds,  but  tend-
ing directly  to  disturb  society,  was  finally  abolished.
Government  became  more  simple  as  well  as  more  re-
spectable, when  no  rank  or  character  exempted  any  per-
son from  being  amenable  to  the  same  courts  as  other
subjects,  from  being  tried  by  the  same  judges,  and
from  being  acquitted  or  condemned  by  the  same  laws.
With  re-  ^7  the  loss  of  Calais  the  English  were  ex-
spect  to  eluded  from  the  continent.  All  schemes  for  in-

the  affairs

of  the  vading  France  became,  of  course,  as  chimerical
as  they  had  formerly  been  pernicious.  The
views  of  the  English  were  confined,  first  by  necessity,
and  afterward  from  choice,  within  their  own  island.
That  rage  for  conquest  which  had  possessed  the  nation
during  many  centuries,  and  wasted  its  strength  in  per-
petual and  fruitless  wars,  ceased  at  length.  Those  ac-
tive spirits  which  had  known  and  followed  no  profes-
sion but  war,  sought  for  occupation  in  the  arts  of  peace,
and  their  country  was  benefitted  as  much  by  the  one  as
it  had  suffered  by  the  other.  The  nation,  which  had
been  exhausted  by  frequent  expeditions  to  the  continent
recruited  its  numbers,  and  acquired  new  strength;  and
when  roused  by  any  extraordinary  exigency  to  take
part  in  foreign  operations,  the  vigour  of  its  efforts  was
proportionably  great,  because  they  were  only  occa-
sional, and  of  short  continuance.
With  re  ^e  same  principle  which  had  led  England
spect  to  to  adopt  this  new  system  with  regard  to  the

Scotland.  .  J  °

powers  on  the  continent,  occasioned  a  change
in  its  plan  of  conduct  with  respect  to  Scotland,  the  only
foreign  state  with  which,  on  account  of  its  situation  in
the  same  island,  the  English  had  such  a  close  con-
nexion as  demanded  their  perpetual  attention.  Instead
of  prosecuting  the  ancient  scheme  of  conquering  that

BOOK  XII.  409

kingdom,  which  the  nature  of  the  country,  defended  by
a  brave  and  hardy  people,  rendered  dangerous,  if  not
impracticable ;  it  appeared  more  eligible  to  endeavour
at  obtaining  such  influence  in  Scotland  as  might  exempt
England  from  any  danger  or  disquiet  from  that  quar-
ter. The  national  poverty  of  the  Scots,  together  with
the  violence  and  animosity  of  their  factions,  rendered
the  execution  of  this  plan  easy  to  a  people  far  superior
to  them  in  wealth.  The  leading  men  of  greatest  power
and  popularity  were  gained;  the  ministers  and  favou-
rites of  the  crown  were  corrupted  ;  and  such  absolute
direction  of  the  Scottish  councils  was  acquired,  as  ren-
dered the  operations  of  the  one  kingdom  dependent,  in
a  great  measure,  on  the  sovereign  of  the  other.  Such
perfect  external  security,  added  to  the  interior  advan-
tages which  England  now  possessed,  must  soon  have
raised  it  to  new  consideration  and  importance ;  the
long  reign  of  Elizabeth,  equally  conspicuous  for  wis-
dom, for  steadiness,  and  for  vigour,  accelerated  its  pro-
gress, and  carried  it  with  greater  rapidity  towards  that
elevated  station  which  it  hath  since  held  among  the
powers  of  Europe.

Chan  es  During  the  period  in  which  the  political  state
inthepo-  of  the  great  kingdoms  underwent  such  changes,

Htical  state

of  the  se-  revolutions  of  considerable  importance  happen-
powSn  ed  in  that  of  the  secondary  or  inferior  powers.
Europe.  Those  in  the  papal  court  are  most  obvious,  and
of  most  extensive  consequence.

The  most  In  the  preliminary  book,  I  have  mentioned
consider-  t^  j  f  fa^  spiritual  jurisdiction,  which  the

able  reTo-  «  •*  .  _  ,

lutionof  popes  claim  as  vicars  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  have
teenuT  traced  the  progress  of  that  authority  which  they
JheentSn  possess  as  temporal  princes.c  Previous  to  the
of  Rome.  reign  of  Charles  V.,  there  was  nothing  that  tend-
ed to  circumscribe  or  to  moderate  their  authority,  but
science  and  philosophy,  which  began  to  revive  and  to

'Vol.  iii.  p.l.  22,  &c.

410  CHARLES V.

be  cultivated.  The  progress  of  these,  however,  was
still  inconsiderable;  they  always  operate  slowly;  and
it  is  long  before  their  influence  reaches  the  people,  or
can  produce  any  sensible  effect  upon  them.  They  may,
perhaps,  gradually,  and  in  a  long  course  of  years,  un-
dermine and  shake  an  established  system  of  false  reli-
gion, but  there  is  no  instance  of  their  having  overturned
one.  The  battery  is  too  feeble  to  demolish  those  fa-
brics which  superstition  raises  on  deep  foundations,
and  can  strengthen  with  the  most  consummate  art.
The  gene-  Luther  had  attacked  the  papal  supremacy
againsuhe  w^n  °^er  weapons,  and  with  an  impetuosity
doctriiies  of  more  formidable.  The  time  and  manner  of

the  church  i •  i  i •

of  Rome,  his  attack  concurred  with  a  multitude  ot  cir-
pdwcr  of  cumstances,  which  have  been  explained,  in
the  popes,  giving  him  immediate  success.  The  charm
which  had  bound  mankind  for  so  many  ages,  was  bro-
ken at  once.  The  human  mind,  which  had  continued
long  as  tame  and  passive,  as  if  it  had  been  formed  to
believe  whatever  was  taught,  and  to  bear  whatever  was
imposed,  roused  of  a  sudden,  and  became  inquisitive,
mutinous,  and  disdainful  of  the  yoke  to  which  it  had
hitherto  submitted.  That  wonderful  ferment  and  agita-
tion of  mind,  which  at  this  distance  of  time,  appears
unaccountable,  or  is  condemned  as  extravagant,  was
so  general,  that  it  must  have  been  excited  by  causes
which  were  natural,  and  of  powerful  efficacy.  The
kingdoms  of  Denmark,  Sweden,  England,  and  Scot-
land, and  almost  one  half  of  Germany,  threw  off  their
allegiance  to  the  pope ;  abolished  his  jurisdiction  with-
in their  territories ;  and  gave  the  sanction  of  law  to
modes  of  discipline  and  systems  of  doctrine,  which
were  not  only  independent  of  his  power,  but  hostile  to
it.  Nor  was  this  spirit  of  innovation  confined  to  those
countries  which  openly  revolted  from  the  pope;  it  spread
through  all  Europe,  and  broke  out  in  every  part  of  it
with  various  degrees  of  violence.  •  It  penetrated  early

BOOK  XII.  411

into  France,  and  made  a  quick  progress  there. In  that
kingdom  the  number  of  converts  to  the  opinions  of  the
reformers  was  so  great,  their  zeal  so  enterprising,  and
the  abilities  of  their  leaders  so  distinguished,  that  they
soon  ventured  to  contend  for  superiority  with  the  es-
tablished church,  and  were  sometimes  on  the  point  of
obtaining  it. In  all  the  provinces  of  Germany  which
continued  to  acknowledge  the  papal  supremacy,  as  well
as  in  the  Low  Countries,  the  Protestant  doctrines  were
secretly  taught,  and  had  gained  so  many  proselytes,
that  they  were  ripe  for revolt,  and  were  restrained
merely  by  the  dread  of  their  rulers  from  imitating  the
example  of  their  neighbours,  and  asserting  their  inde-
pendence. Even  in  Spain  and  in  Italy,  symptoms  of  the
same  disposition  to  shake  off  the  yoke  appeared. The
pretensions  of  the  pope  to  infallible  knowledge  and  su-
preme power,  were  treated  by  many  persons  of  eminent
learning  and  abilities  with  such  scorn,  or  attacked  with
such  vehemence,  that  the  most  vigilant  attention  of  the
civil  magistrate,  the  highest  strains  of  pontifical  autho-
rity, and  all  the  rigour  of  inquisitorial  jurisdiction,
were  requisite  to  check  and  extinguish  it.
This  The  defection  of  so  many  opulent  and  power-

the'eftent  fol  kingdoms  from  the  papal  see,  was  a  fatal
°f  *f  ^  blow  to  its  grandeur  and  power.  It  abridged
minions ;  the  dominions  of  the  popes  in  extent,  it  dimi-
nished their  revenues,  and  left  them  fewer  rewards  to
bestow  on  the  ecclesiastics  of  various  denominations,
attached  to  them  by  vows  of  obedience  as  well  as  by
ties  of  interest,  and  whom  they  employed  as  instru-
ments to  establish  or  support  their  usurpations  in  every
part  of  Europe.  The  countries,  too,  which  now  dis-
claimed their  authority,  were  those  which  formerly  had
been  most  devoted  to  it.  The  empire  of  superstition
differs  from  every  other  species  of  dominion ;  its  power
is  often  greatest,  and  most  implicitly  obeyed  in  the
provinces  most  remote  from  the  seat  of  government ;

412  CHARLES  V.

while  such  as  are  situated  nearer  to  that,  are  more  apt
to  discern  the  artifices  by  which  it  is  upheld,  or  the  im-
postures on  which  it  is  founded. The  personal  frail-
ties or  vices  of  the  popes,  the  errors  as  well  as  corrup-
tion of  their  administration,  the  ambition,  venality,  and
deceit  which  reigned  in  their  courts,  fell  immediately
under  the  observation  of  the  Italians,  and  could  not  fail
of  diminishing  that  respect  which  begets  submission.
But  in  Germany,  England,  and  the  more  remote  parts
of  Europe,  these  were  either  altogether  unknown,  or
being  only  known  by  report,  made  a  slighter  impres-
sion. Veneration  for  the  papal  dignity  increased  ac-
cordingly in  these  countries  in  proportion  to  their  dis-
tance from  Rome ;  and  that  veneration  added  to  their
gross  ignorance,  rendered  them  equally  credulous  and
passive. In  tracing  the  progress  of  the  papal  domina-
tion, the  boldest  and  most  successful  instances  of  en-
croachment are  to  be  found  in  Germany and  other
countries  distant  from  Italy. In  these  its  impositions
were  heaviest, and  its  exactions  the  most  rapacious ;
so  that  in  estimating  the  diminution  of  power  which
the  court  of  Rome  suffered  in  consequence  of  the  Re-
formation, not  only  the  number,  but  the  character  of  the
people  who  revolted,  not  only  the  great  extent  of  terri-
tory, but  the  extraordinary  obsequiousness  of  the  sub-
jects which  it  lost,  must  be  taken  into  the  account.
And  ob- Nor  was  it  only  by  the  defection  of  so  many
ufchangeT  kingdoms and  states  which  the Reformation
the  spint occasioned,  that  it  contributed  to  diminish  the

of  their  go-
vernment, power  of  the  Roman  pontiffs. It  obliged  them

to  adopt  a  different  system  of  conduct  towards  the  na-
tions which  still  continued  to  recognise  their  jurisdic-
tion, and  to  govern  them  by  new  maxims  and  with  a
milder  spirit.  The  Reformation  taught  them,  by  a  fatal
example,  what  they  seem  not  before  to  have  appre-
hended, that  the  credulity  and  patience  of  mankind
might  be  overburdened  and  exhausted.  They  became

BOOK XII.  413

afraid  of  venturing  upon  any  such  exertion  of  their  au-
thority as  might  alarm  or  exasperate  their  subjects,  and
excite  them  to  a  new  revolt. They  saw  a  rival  church
established  in  many  countries  of  Europe,  the  members
of  which  were  on  the  watch  to  observe  any  errors  in
their  adminstration,  and  eager  to  expose  them. They
were  sensible  that  the  opinions,  adverse  to  their  power
and  usurpations,  were  not  adopted  by  their  enemies  alone,
but  had  spread  even  among  the  people  who  still  adhered
to  them.  Upon  all  these  accounts,  it  was  no  longer  pos-
sible to  lead  or  to  govern  their  flock  in  the  same  man-
ner as  in  those  dark  and  quiet  ages  when  faith  was  im-
plicit, when  submission  was  unreserved,  and  all  tamely
followed  and  obeyed  the  voice  of  their  pastor. From
the  era  of  the  Reformation,  the  popes  have  ruled  rather
by  address  and  management  than  by  authority.  Though
the  style  of  their  decrees  be  still  the  same,  the  effect  of
them  is  very  different. Those bulls and  interdicts
which,before  theReformation,  made  the  greatest  princes
tremble,  have  since  that  period  been  disregarded  or  de-
spised by  the  most  inconsiderable. Those  bold  de-
cisions and  acts  of  jurisdiction  which, during  many
ages,  not  only  passed  uncensured,  but  were  revered  as
the  awards  of  a  sacred  tribunal,  would,  since  Luther's
appearance,  be  treated  by  one  part  of  Europe  as  the
effect  of  folly  or  arrogance,  and  be  detested  by  the
other  as  impious  and  unjust. The  popes,  in  their  ad-
ministration, have  been  obliged  not  only  to  accommo-
date themselves  to  the  notions  of  their  adherents,  but
to  pay  some  regard  to  the  prejudices  of  their  enemies.
They  seldom  venture  to  claim  new  powers,  or  even  to
insist  obstinately  on  their  ancient  prerogatives,  lest  they
should  irritate  the  former ;  they  carefully  avoid  every
measure  that  may  either  excite  the  indignation  or  draw
on  them  the  derision  of  the  latter. The  policy  of  the
court  of  Rome  has  become  as  cautious,  circumspect,
and  timid,  as it  was  once  adventurous  and  violent;

414  CHARLES V.

and  though  their  pretensions  to  infallibility,  on  which
all  their  authority  is  founded,  does  not  allow  them  to
renounce  any  jurisdiction  which  they  have  at  any  time
claimed  or  exercised,  they  find  it  expedient  to  suffer
many  of  their  prerogatives  to  lie  dormant,  and  not  to
expose  themselves  to  the  risk  of  losing  that  remainder
of  power  which  they  still  enjoy,  by  ill-timed  attempts
towards  reviving  obsolete  pretensions.  Before  the  six-
teenth century,  the  popes  were  the  movers  and  direc-
tors in  every  considerable  enterprise ;  they  were  at
the  head  of  every  great  alliance ;  and  being  considered
as  arbiters  in  the  affairs  of  Christendom,  the  court  of
Rome  was  the  centre  of  political  negotiation  and  in-
trigue. Since  that  time,  the  greatest  operations  in
Europe  have  been  carried  on  independent  of  them ;
they  have  sunk  almost  to  a  level  with  the  other  petty
princes  of  Italy ;  they  continue  to  claim,  though  they
dare  not  exercise,  the  same  spiritual  jurisdiction,  but
hardly  retain  any  shadow  of  the  temporal  power  which
they  anciently  possessed.

The  Refer-  But  how  fatal  soever  the  Reformation  may
uTbutedto  nave  Deen  to  the  power  of  the  popes,  it  has  con-
iraprovethe  tributed  to  improve  the  church  of  Rome  both

church  both .  l  .  .

in  science  in  science  and  in  morals.  1  he  desire  ot  equal-
s'  ling  the  reformers  in  those  talents  which  had
procured  them  respect ;  the  necessity  of  acquiring  the
knowledge  requisite  for  defending  their  own  tenets,  or
refuting  the  arguments  of  their  opponents,  together
with  the  emulation  natural  between  two  rival  churches,
engaged  the  Roman  Catholic  clergy  to  apply  them-
selves to  the  study  of  useful  science,  which  they  culti-
vated with  such  assiduity  and  success,  that  they  have
gradually  become  as  eminent  in  literature,  as  they  were
in  some  periods  infamous.  The  same  principle  occasi-
oned a  change  no  less  considerable  in  the  morals  of  the
Romish  clergy.  Various  causes  which  have  formerly
been  enumerated,  had  concurred  in  introducing  great

BOOK XII.  415

irregularity,  and  even  dissolution  of  manners  among
the  Popish  clergy.  Luther  and  his  adherents  began
their  attack  on  the  church  with  such  vehement  invec-
tives againt  these,  that  in  order  to  remove  the  scandal,
and  silence  their  declamations,  greater  decency  of
conduct  became  necessary.  The  reformers  themselves
were  so  eminent  not  only  for  the  purity,  but  even  aus-
terity of  their  manners,  and  had  acquired  such  reputa-
tion among  the  people  on  that  account,  that  the  Roman
Catholic  clergy  must  have  soon  lost  all  credit,  if  they
had  not  endeavoured  to  conform  in  some  measure  to
their  standard.  They  knew  that  all  their  actions  fell
under  the  severe  inspection  of  the  Protestants,  whom
enmity  and  emulation  prompted  to  observe  every  vice
or  even  impropriety  in  their  conduct ;  to  censure  them
without  indulgence,  and  to  expose  them  without  mercy.
This  rendered  them,  of  .course,  not  only  cautious  to
avoid  such  enormities  as  might  give  offence,  but  stu-
dious to  acquire  the  virtues  which  might  merit  praise.
In  Spain  and  Portugal,  where  the  tyrannical  jurisdiction
of  the  inquisition  crushed  the  Protestant  faith  as  soon
as  it  appeared,  the  spirit  of  Popery  continues  invaria-
ble ;  science  has  made  small  progress,  and  the  charac-
ter of  ecclesiastics  has  undergone  little  change.  But  in
those  countries  where  the  members  of  the  two  churches
have  mingled  freely  with  each  other,  or  have  carried
on  any  considerable  intercourse,  either  commercial  or
literary,  an  extraordinary  alteration  in  the  ideas,  as
well  as  in  the  morals,  of  the  Popish  ecclesiastics,  is
manifest.  In  France,  the  manners  of  the  dignitaries
and  secular  clergy  have  become  decent  and  exemplary
in  a  high  degree.  Many  of  them  have  been  distin-
guished for  all  the  accomplishments  and  virtues  which
can  adorn  their  profession;  and  differ  greatly  from
their  predecessors  before  the  Reformation,  both  in  their
maxims  and  in  their  conduct.

41«  CHARLES  V.

The  effects  Nor  has  the  influence  of  the  Reformation
to  the'cha-  been  felt  only  by  the  inferior  members  of  the
the'po^s  R°man  Catholic  church ;  it  has  extended  to
themselves,  the  see  of  Rome,  to  the  sovereign  pontiffs
themselves.  Violations  of  decorum,  and  even  tres-
passes against  morality,  which  passed  without  censure
in  those  ages,  when  neither  the  power  of  the  popes,
nor  the  veneration  of  the  people  for  their  character,
had  any  bounds;  when  there  was  no  hostile  eye  to
observe  the  errors  in  their  conduct,  and  no  adversaries
zealous  to  inveigh  against  them  ;  would  be  liable  now
to  the  severest  animadversion,  and  excite  general  in-
dignation or  horror.  Instead  of  rivalling  the  courts  of
temporal  princes  in  gaiety,  and  surpassing  them  in
licentiousness,  the  popes  have  studied  to  assume  man-
ners more  severe  and  more  suitable  to  their  ecclesias-
tical character.  The  chair  of  St.  Peter  hath  not  been
polluted  during  two  centuries,  by  any  pontiff  that  re-
sembled Alexander  VI.,  or  several  of  his  predecessors,
who  were  a  disgrace  to  religion  and  to  human  nature.
Throughout  this  long  succession  of  popes,  a  wonder-
ful decorum  of  conduct,  compared  with  that  of  pre-
ceding ages,  is  observable.  Many  of  them,  especially
among  the  pontiffs  of  the  present  century,  have  been
conspicuous  for  all  the  virtues  becoming  their  high
station ;  and  by  their  humanity,  their  love  of  literature,
and  their  moderation,  have  made  some  atonement  to
mankind  for  the  crimes  of  their  predecessors.  Thus
the  beneficial  influences  of  the  Reformation  have  been
more  extensive  than  they  appear  on  a  superficial  view ;
and  this  great  division  in  the  Christian  church  hath
contributed,  in  some  measure,  to  increase  purity  of
manners,  to  diffuse  science,  and  to  inspire  humanity.
History  recites  such  a  number  of  shocking  events,  oc-
casioned by  religious  dissensions,, that  it  must  afford
peculiar  satisfaction  to  trace  any  one  salutary  or  bene-

BOOK XII.  417

ficial  effect  to  that  source  from  which  so  many  fatal
calamities  have  flowed.

state  of  the  ^e  rePublic  of  Venice,  which,  at  the  be-
repubiicof  ginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,  had  ap-
peared so  formidable,  that  almost  all  the  po-
tentates of  Europe  united  in  a  confederacy  for  its  de-
struction, declined  gradually  from  its  ancient  power
and  splendour.  The  Venetians  not  only  lost  a  great
part  of  their  territory  in  the  war  excited  by  the  league
of  Cambray,  but  the  revenues  as  well  as  vigour  of  the
state  were  exhausted  by  their  extraordinary  and  long
continued  efforts  in  their  own  defence ;  and  that  com-
merce by  which  they  had  acquired  their  wealth  and
power  began  to  decay,  without  any  hopes  of  its  reviv-
ing. All  the  fatal  consequences  to  their  republic,
which  the  sagacity  of  the  Venetian  senate  foresaw  on
the  first  discovery  of  a  passage  to  the  East  Indies  by  the
Cape  of  Good  Hope,  actually  took  place.  Their  en-
deavours to  prevent  the  Portuguese  from  establishing
themselves  in  the  East  Indies,  not  only  by  exciting  the
soldans  of  Egypt,  and  the  Ottoman  monarchs,  to  turn
their  arms  against  such  dangerous  intruders,  but  by
affording  secret  aid  to  the  infidels  in  order  to  ensure
their  success,2  proved  ineffectual.  The  activity  and
valour  of  the  Portuguese  surmounted  every  obstacle,
and  obtained  such  a  firm  footing  in  that  fertile  country,
as  secured  to  them  large  possessions,  together  with  an
influence  still  more  extensive.  Lisbon,  instead  of  Ve-
nice, became  the  staple  for  the  precious  commodities  of
the  East.  The  Venetians,  after  having  possessed  for
many  years  the  monopoly  of  that  beneficial  commerce,
had  the  mortification  to  be  excluded  from  almost  any
share  in  it.  The  discoveries  of  the  Spaniards  in  the
western  world,  proved  no  less  fatal  to  inferior  branches
of  their  commerce.  The  original  defects  which  were
formerly  pointed  out  in  the  constitution  of  the  Vene-

*  Freher.  Script.  Rer.  German,  vol.  u.  529.
VOL.  V.  2  E

418  CHARLES V.

tian  republic  still  continued,  and  the  disadvantages
with  which  it  undertook  any  great  enterprise,  in-
creased rather  than  diminished.  The  sources  from
which  it  derived  its  extraordinary  riches  and  power
being  dried  up,  the  interior  vigour  of  the  state  de-
clined, and,  of  course,  its  external  operations  became
less  formidable.  Long  before  the  middle  of  the  six-
teenth century,  Venice  ceased  to  be  one  of  the  prin-
cipal powers  of  Europe,  and  dwindled  into  a  secon-
dary and  subaltern  state.  But  as  the  senate  had  the
address  to  conceal  the  diminution  of  its  power,  under
the  veil  of  moderation  and  caution;  as  it  made  no
rash  effort  that  could  discover  its  weakness ;  as  the
symptoms  of  political  decay  in  states  are  not  soon  ob-
served, and  are  seldom  so  apparent  to  their  neighbours
as  to  occasion  any  sudden  alteration  in  their  conduct
towards  them,  Venice  continued  long  to  be  considered
and  respected.  She  was  treated  not  according  to  her
present  condition,  but  according  to  the  rank  which
she  had  formerly  held.  Charles  V.,  as  well  as  the
kings  of  France,  his  rivals,  courted  her  assistance  with
emulation  and  solicitude  in  all  their  enterprises.  Even
down  to  the  close  of  the  century,  Venice  remained  not
only  an  object  of  attention,  but  a  considerable  seat  of
political  negotiation  and  intrigue.

That  authority  which  the  first  Cosmo  di  Me-

OfTuscany. .. .  J

dici,  and  Lawrence,  his  grandson,  had  ac-
quired in  the  republic  of  Florence,  by  their  beneficence
and  abilities,  inspired  their  descendants  with  the  am-
bition of  usurping  the  sovereignty  in  their  country,  and
paved  their  way  towards  it.  Charles  V.  placed  Alex-
_  ander  di  Medici  at  the  head  of  the  republic,  and
to  the  natural  interest  and  power  of  the  family
added  the  weight  as  well  as  credit  of  the  imperial  pro-
tection. Of  these,  his  successor  Cosmo,  surnamed  the
Great,  availed  himself;  and  establishing  his  supreme
authority  on  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  republican  con-

BOOK  XII.  419

stitution,  he  transmitted  that,  together  with  the  title  of
grand  duke  of  Tuscany,  to  his  descendants.  Their
dominions  were  composed  of  the  territories  which  had
belonged  to  the  three  commonwealths  of  Florence,
Pisa,  and  Siena,  and  formed  one  of  the  most  respecta-
ble of  the  Italian  states.

or  the  ^e  dukes  °f  Savoy,  during  the  former  part
dukes  of  of  the  sixteenth  century,  possessed  territories
which  were  not  considerable  either  for  extent
or  value ;  and  the  French  having  seized  the  greater  part
of  them,  obliged  the  reigning  duke  to  retire  for  safety
to  the  strong  fortress  of  Nice,  where  he  shut  himself  up
for  several  years,  while  his  son,  the  prince  of  Piedmont,
endeavoured  to  better  his  fortune,  by  serving  as  an  ad-
venturer in  the  armies  of  Spain.  The  peace  of  Cha-
teau-Cambresis  restored  to  him  his  paternal  dominions.
As  these  are  environed  on  every  hand  by  powerful
neighbours,  all  whose  motions  the  dukes  of  Savoy
must  observe  with  the  greatest  attention,  in  order  not
only  to  guard  against  the  danger  of  being  surprised  and
overpowered,  but  that  they  may  choose  their  side  with
discernment  in  those  quarrels  wherein  it  is  impossible
for  them  to  avoid  taking  part,  this  peculiarity  of  their
situation  seems  to  have  had  no  inconsiderable  influ-
ence on  their  character.  By  rousing  them  to  perpe-
tual attention,  by  keeping  their  ingenuity  always  on
the  stretch,  and  engaging  them  in  almost  continual  ac-
tion, it  hath  formed  a  race  of  princes  more  sagacious
in  discovering  their  true  interests,  more  decisive  in
their  resolutions,  and  more  dexterous  in  availing  them-
selves of  every  occurrence  which  presented  itself,  than
any  perhaps  that  can  be  singled  out  in  the  history
of  Europe.  By  gradual  acquisitions  the  dukes  of  Savoy
have  added  to  their  territories,  as  well  as  to  their  own
importance  ,  and  aspiring  at  length  to  regal  dignity,
which  they  obtained  about  half  a  century  ago,  by  the

2E2

420  CHARLES V.

title  of  kings  of  Sardinia,  they  hold  now  no  inconsi-
derable rank  among  the  monarchs  of  Europe.
Ofthe The  territories  which  form  the  republic  of
United the  United  Netherlands,  were  lost  during  the

Provinces. .,  „ ,  .  -  ,

first  part  of  the  sixteenth  century,  among  the
numerous  provinces  subject  to  the  house  of  Austria ;
and  were  then  so  inconsiderable,  that  hardly  one  op-
portunity of  mentioning  them  hath  occurred  in  all  the
busy  period  of  this  history.  But  soon  after  the  peace
of  Chateau-Cambresis,  the  violent  and  bigoted  maxims
of  Philip's  government,  being  carried  into  execution
with  unrelenting  rigour  by  the  duke  of  Alva,  exaspe-
rated the  people  of  the  Low  Countries  to  such  a  de-
gree, that  they  threw  off  the  Spanish  yoke,  and  asserted
their  ancient  liberties  and  laws.  These  they  defended
with  a  persevering  valour,  which  gave  employment  to
the  arms  of  Spain  during  half  a  century,  exhausted  the
vigour,  ruined  the  reputation  of  that  monarchy,  and  at
last  constrained  their  ancient  masters  to  recognise  and
to  treat  with  them  as  a  free  and  independent  state.
This  state,  founded  on  liberty,  and  reared  by  industry
and  economy,  grew  into  great  reputation,  even  while
struggling  for  its  existence.  But  when  peace  and  se-
curity allowed  it  to  enlarge  its  views,  and  to  extend  its
commerce,  it  rose  to  be  one  of  the  most  respectable  as
well  as  enterprising  powers  in  Europe.

The  transactions  of  the  kingdoms  in  the  north  of
Europe,  have  been  seldom  attended  to  in  the  course  of
this  history.

Russia  remained  buried  in  that  barbarism  and

Of  Russia.  .  . .  n-ii  i

obscurity,  from  which  it  was  called  about  the
beginning  of  the  present  century  by  the  creative  genius
of  Peter  the  Great,  who  made  his  country  known  and
formidable  to  the  rest  of  Europe,
or  Den-  ^n  Denmark  and  Sweden,  during  the  reign  of
mark  and  Charles  V.,  great  revolutions  happened  in  their

Sweden.  8 .  i • *• i T

constitutions,  civil  as  well  as  ecclesiastical. In

BOOK  XII.  421

the  former  kingdom,  a  tyrant  being  degraded  from  the
throne,  and  expelled  the  country,  a  new  prince  was
called  by  the  voice  of  the  people  to  assume  the  reins
of  government.  In  the  latter,  a  fierce  people,  roused
to  arms  by  injuries  and  oppression,  shook  off  the  Da-
nish yoke,  and  conferred  the  regal  dignity  on  its  deli-
verer Gustavus  Ericson,  who  had  all  the  virtues  of  a
hero  and  of  a  patriot.  Denmark,  exhausted  by  foreign
wars,  or  weakened  by  the  dissensions  between  the  king
and  the  nobles,  became  incapable  of  such  efforts  as  were
requisite  in  order  to  recover  the  ascendant  which  it  had
long  possessed  in  the  north  of  Europe.  Sweden,  as
soon  as  it  was  freed  from  the  dominion  of  strangers,
began  to  recruit  its  strength,  and  acquired  in  a  short
time  such  internal  vigour,  that  it  became  the  first  king-
dom in  the  north.  Early  in  the  subsequent  century,  it
rose  to  such  a  high  rank  among  the  powers  of  Europe,
that  it  had  the  chief  merit  in  forming,  as  well  as  con-
ducting, that  powerful  league,  which  protected  not  only
the  Protestant  religion,  but  the  liberties  of  Germany,
against  the  bigotry  and  ambition  of  the  house  of
Austria.

INDEX

TO THE

HISTORY  OF  THE  REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

N.B. The  Roman  Numerals  direct  to  the  Volume,
and  the  Figures  to  the  Page.

ABSOLUTION,  the  form  of  that  used  by
father  Tetzel  in  Germany,  iv.  14,  n.

Adorni,  the  faction  of,  assists  the  im-
perial general  Colonna  in  the  reduction
of  Genoa,  iv.  80.

Adrian  of  Utrecht  made  preceptor  to
Charles  V.  under  William  de  Croy,  lord
Of  Chievres,  iii.  336.  His  character,  ib.
Sent  by  Charles  with  power  to  assume
the  regency  of  Castile  on  the  death  of  his
grandfather,  341.  His  claim  admitted  by
cardinal  Ximenes,  and  executed  in  con-
junction, ib.  Authorized  by  Charles  to
hold  the  cortes  of  Valencia,  which  re-
fuses to  assemble  before  him,  377.  Made
viceroy  of  Castile  on  the  departure  of
Charles  for  Germany,  379.  His  election
remonstrated  against  by  the  Castilians,
380.  Is  chosen  pope,  iv.  77.  Retrospect
of  his  conduct  in  Spain  during  the  ab-
sence of  Charles,  87.  Sends  Uonquillo
to  reduce  the  Segovians,  who  repulse  him,
ib.  Sends  Fonseca  to  besiege  the  city,
•who  is  repulsed  by  the  inhabitants  of
Medina  del  Campo,  88.  Apologizes  for
Fonseca's  conduct  to  the  people,  89.  Re-
calls Fonseca,  and  dismisses  his  troops,  ib.
His  authority  disclaimed  by  the  holy
junta,  91.  Deprived  of  power  by  them,
93.  His  ill  reception  on  his  arrival  at
Rome  on  being  chosen  to  the  papacy,  116.
Restores  the  territories  acquired  by  his
predecessor,  ib.  Labours  to  unite  the  con-
tending powers  of  Europe,  117.  Pub-
lishes a  bull  for  three  years'  truce  among
them,  118.  Accedes  to  the  league  against
the  French  king,  ib.  His  death,  124.
The  sentiments  and  behaviour  of  the  peo-

ple on  that  occasion,  125.  A  retrospect
of  his  conduct  towards  the  reformers,
134.  His  brief  to  the  diet  at  Nuremberg,
ib.  Receives  a  list  of  grievances  from  the
diet,  136.  His  conduct  to  the  reformers,
how  esteemed  at  Rome,  138.

Africa,  the  shocking  devastations  made
there  by  the  Vandals,  iii.  187.  The
Spanish  troops  sent  by  cardinal  Ximenes
against  Barbarossa,  defeated  there,  350.

Aigues-raortes,  interview  between  the
emperor  Charles  and  Francis,  there,  iv.
327.

Aix-la-Chapelle,  the  emperor  Charles
crowned  there,  iv.  10.  Ferdinand,  his
brother,  crowned  king  of  the  Romans
there,  253.

Alanus,  his  character  of  the  clergy  in
his  time,  iii.  209.

Alarcon,  Don  Ferdinand,  Francis  I.  of
France,  taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of
Pavia,  committed  to  his  custody,  iv.  154.
Conducts  Francis  to  Spain,  163.  Delivers
up  Francis  in  pursuance  of  the  treaty  of
Madrid,  177.  Is  sent  ambassador  to
Francis  to  require  the  fulfilment  of  his
treaty,  191.  Pope  Clement  VII.  taken
prisoner  by  the  Imperialists, is  committed
to  his  custody,  209.

Albany,  John  Stuart,  duke  of,  com-
mands the  French  army  sent  by  Francis
I.  to  invade  Naples,  iv.  150.

Albert  of  Brandenburgh,  grand-master
of  the  Teutonic  Order,  becomes  a  convert
to  the  doctrines  of  Luther,  iv.  187.  Ob-
tains of  Sigisraund  king  of  Poland,  the
investiture  of  Prussia,  erected  into  a
duchy,  ib.  Is  put  under  the  ban  of  the

424

INDEX.

empire,  ib.  His  family  fixed  in  the  in-  Amerstorff,  a  nobleman  of  Holland,  as-
heritance  of  Prussia,  ib.  Commands  a  sociated  by  Charles  V.  with  cardinal  Xi-
body  of  troops  in  behalf  of  Maurice  of  inenes,  in  the  regency  of  Castile,  iii.  349.
Saxony,  but  endeavours  to  assert  an  inde-  Ammianus,  his  character  of  the  Huns,
pendency,  v.  230.  Defeats  and  takes  the  iii.  189. 192.

duke  d'Aumale  prisoner,  and  joins  the  Amurath,  sultan,  the  body  of  Jauiza-
emperor  at  Metz,  250.  Is  condemned  ries,  formed  by  him,  iii.  181.
by  the  Imperial  chamberfor  his  demands  Anabaptists,  the  origin  of  that  sect
on  the  bishops  of  Bamberg  and  Wnrts-  deduced,  iv.  266.  Their  principal  tenets,
burg,  258.  A  league  formed  against  him,  267.  Their  settlement  at  Munster,  268.
259.  Is  defeated  by  Maurice,  260.  Is  Character  of  their  principal  leaders,  ib.
again  defeated  by  Henry  of  Brunswick,  They  seize  the  city  of  Munster,  269.
262.  Is  driven  out  of  Germany,  and  dies  They  establish  a  new  form  of  govern-
in  exile,  ib.  His  territories  restored  to  rnent  there,  ib.  Choose  Boccold  king,  272.
his  collateral  heirs,  ib.  Their  licentious  practices,  ib.  A  confe-

A I  bert,  elector  ofMentz,  the  publica-  deracy  of  the  German  princes  formed
tion  of  indulgences  in  Germany  com-  against  them,  274.  Are  blockaded  in
milled  to  him,  iv.  14.  Munster  by  the  bishop,  ib.  The  city

Alexander  VI.  Pope,  remarks  on  the  taken,  and  great  slaughter  made  of  them,
pontificate  of.iv.  35.  275.  Their  king  put  to  death,  276.  Cha-

Alexander  di  Medici. See  Medici. racter  of  the  sect  since  that  period,  ib.
Alfred  the  Great,  his  complaint  of  the See  Matthias  and  Boccold.
ignorance  of  the  clergy,  iii.  209.  Anathema, form  of  that  denounced

Algiers,  how  it  was  seized  by  Barba-  against  robbers  during  the  middle  ages,
rossa,  iv.  282.  Is  seized  by  the  brother  iii.  273.

of  the  same  name,  on  the  death  of  the Angleria,  bis  authority  cited  in  proof  of
former,  283.  Is  taken  under  the  protec- the  extortions  of  the  Flemish  ministers
tion  of  the  Porte,  ib. Is  governed by of  Charles  V.,  iii.  359.
Hascen-Aga  in  the  absence  of  Barbarossa, Anhalt,  prince  of,  avows  the  opinions
379.  Is  besieged  by  the  emperor  Charles of  Martin  Luther,  iv.  133.
V.,  382.  Charles  forced  to  re-embark  by Annats  to  the  court  of  Rome,  what,  iv.
bad  weather,  384.  46.

Allodial,  possession  of  land,  explained, Arabia,  the  ancient  Greek  philosophy
iii.  198.  How  such  possession became cultivated  there,  while  lost  in  Europe,  iii.
subject  to  military service,  ib. Distin- 268,  note  xxviii.  The  progress  of  philoso-
guished  from  beneficiary  tenures,  ib.  How phy  from  thence  to  Europe,  ib.
converted  into  feudal  tenures,  202.  Aragon,  rise  of  the  kingdom  of,  Hi.  141.

Allodium,  the  etymology  of  that  word,  Its  union  with  Castile,  142.  The  consti-
iii.  205.  tution  and  form  of  its  government,  145.

Alraschid,  brother  of  Muley-Hascen,  The  privileges  of  its  cortes,  146.  Office
king  of  Tunis,  solicits  the  protection  of  and  jurisdiction  of  ihe  justiza,  147.  The
Barbarossa  against  him,  iv.  284.  His  regal  power  very  confined,  ib.  Form  of
treacherous  treatment  by  Barbarossa,  the  allegiance  sworn  to  the  kings  of,  148.
285.  The  power  of  the  uobility  to  control  the

Alra,  duke  of,  adheres  to  Ferdinand  regal  power,  283.  Their  privilege  of
of  Aragon,  in  his  dispute  with  the  arch-  union  taken  away  by  Peter  IV.,  ib.  The
duke  Philip  concerning  the  regency  of  establishment  of  the  Inquisition  opposed
Castile,  iii.  324.  Forces  the  dauphin  to  there,  285.  How  Ferdinand  became  pos-
abandon  the  siege  of  Perpignan,  v.  7.  sessed  of  that  kingdom,  318.  The  cortes
Presides  at  the  court-martial,  which  con-  of,  acknowledge  the  archduke  Philip's
derails  the  elector  of  Saxony  to  death,  title  to  the  crown,  319.  Ancient  enmity
132.  Detains  the  Landgrave  prisoner  by  between  this  kingdom  and  Castile,  322.
the  emperor's  order,  141.  Commands  Navarre  added  to  this  crown  by  the  arts
under  the  emperor  the  army  destined  of  Ferdinand,  333.  Arrival  of  Charles
against  France,  249.  Is  appointed  com-  V.,  359.  The  cortes  not  allowed  to  as-
ruander-in-chief,  in  Piedmont,  294.  En-  semble  in  his  name,  360.  The  refractory
ters  the  ecclesiastical  territories  and  behaviour  of  the  Aragonians,  ib.  They  re-
seizes  the  Campagna  Romana,  339.  Con-  fuse  restitution  of  the  kingdom  of  Na-
cludcs  a  truce  with  the  pope,  340.  Ne-  varre,  361.  Don  John  Lanuza  appointed
gotiates  a  peace  between  Philip  and  the  regent,  on  the  departure  of  Charles  for
pope,  with  cardinal  Caraffa,  361.  Goes  Germany,  379.  Who  composes  the  dis-
to  Rome  to  ask  pardon  of  the  pope  for  turbances  there,  iv.  113.  The  moderation
his  hostilities,  362.  Is  sent  to  Paris  in  of  Charles  towards  the  insurgents  on  his
the  name  of  Philip  to  espouse  the  prin-  arrival  in  Spain,  115.  See  Spain.
cess  Eliiabcth,  396.  Ardres,  an  interview  there  between

INDEX.

425

Francis  I.  and  Henry  VIII.  of  England,
ir.  9.

Armies,  standing,  the  rise  of,  traced,
iii.  93.  By  what  means  they  became  more
general  in  Europe,  111.

Arms,  the  profession  of,  the  most  ho-
nourable in  uncivilized  nations, iii.  70.

Ass,  an  account  of  the  ancient  Romish
feast  of,  iii,  212.

Assemblies,  legislative,  how  formed,
iii.  41.

,  general,  of  France,  their

power  under  the  first  race  of  kings,  iii.
158.  Under  the  second  and  third,  159.
At  what  period  they  lost  their  legislative
authority,  160.

Asturias,  Charles  son  of  Philip  and
Joanna,  acknowledged  prince  of,  by  the
cortes  of  Castile,  iii.  329.

Attila,  king  of  the  Huns,  account  of
his  reception  of  the  Roman  ambassadors,
iii.  186.  note  iii.  Some  account  of  his
conquests,  190.

Augsburg,  a  diet  called  there  by
Charles  V..iv.  248.  His  public  entry  into
that  city,  ib.  The  confession  of  faith
named  from  this  city,  drawn  up  by  Me-
lancthon,  ib.  Resolute  behaviour  of  the
Protestant  princes  at,  249.  The  diet  again
assembled  there,  v.  148.  Is  intimidated
by  being  surrounded  by  the  emperor's
Spanish  troops,  ib.  The  emperor  re-
establishes the  Roman  worship  in  the
churches  of,  ib.  The  diet,  by  the  empe-
ror's order,  petitions  the  pope  for  the  re-
turn of  the  council  to  Trent,  155.  A  sys-
tem of  theology  laid  before  the  diet  oy
the  emperor,  159.  The  archbishop  of
Mentz  declares,  without  authority,  the
diet's  acceptance  of  it,  ib.  Its  form  of
government  violently  altered  and  render-
ed submissive  to  the  emperor,  166.  The
diet  re-assembled  there,  177.  The  diet
takes  part  with  the  emperor  against  the
city  of  Magdeburgh,  1 83.  Is  seized  by
Maurice  of  Saxony,  220.  Another  diet
at,  opened  by  Ferdinand,  300.  Cardinal
Morone  attends  the  diet  as  the  pope's  nua-
cio,  301.  Morone  departs  on  the  pope's
death,  303.  Recess  of  the  diet  on  the  sub-
ject of  religion,  306.  Remarks  on  this  re-
cess, 310.

Avila,  trial  and  deposition  of  Henry
IV.  there,  by  the  Castilian  nobles,  iii.
145.  A  convention  of  the  malecontents
in  Spain  held  there,  iv.  91.  A  confede-
racy termed  the  holy  junta,  formed  there,
ib.  Which  disclaims  the  authority  of
Adrian,  ib.  The  holy  junta  removed  to
Tordesillas,  92.  See  Junta.

Austria,  the  house  of,  by  whom  found-
ed, iii.  4-70.  By  what  means  it  became
so  formidable  in  Germany,  iv.  211.  The
extraordinary  acquisitions  of  the  house  of,
in  the  person  of  the  emperor  Charles  V.,
v,  399—403.

BAILLIS,  in  the  old  French  law,  their
office  explained,  iii.  259.

Balance  of  power,  the  first  rise  of,  in
Europe,  iii.  110.  The  progress  of,  111.

Baltic,  the  first  source  of  wealth  to  the
towns  situated  on  that  sea,  iii.  277.

Barbarossa,  Home,  his  rise  to  the  king-
dom of  Algiers  and  Tunis,  iii.  349.  Defeats
the  Spanish  troops  sent  against  him  by
cardinal  Ximenes,  350.  His  parentage,  iv.
281.  Commences  pirate  with  his  brother
Hayradin,  ib.  How  he  acquired  posses-
sion of  Algiers,  282.  Infests  the  coasts  of
Spain,  ib.  Is  reduced  and  killed  by  Co-
mares  the  Spanish  governor  of  Oran,283.

,  Hayradin ,  brother  to  the

former  of  the  same  name,  takes  possession
of  Algiers  on  his  brother's  death,  iv.  283.
Puts  his  dominions  under  the  protection
of  the  grand  seignior,  ib.  Obtains  the
command  of  the  Turkish  fleet,  ib.  His
treacherous  treatment  of  Alraschid,  bro-
ther to  the  king  of  Tunis,  285.  Seizes
Tunis,  ib.  Extends  his  depredations  by
sea,  286.  Prepares  to  resist  the  emperor's
armament  against  him,  287.  Goletta  and
his  fleet  taken,  289.  Is  defeated  by
Charles,  290.  Tunis  taken,  291.  Makes
a  descent  on  Italy,  v.  16.  Burns  Rbeg-
gio,  ib.  Besieges  Nice  in  conjunction
with  the  French,  but  is  forced  to  retire,
17.  Is  dismissed  by  Francis,  27.

Barbary,  a  summary  review  of  the  re-
volutions of,  iv.  280.  Its  division  into  in-
dependent kingdoms,  ib.  Rise  of  the  pi-
ratical states,  281.  See  Barbarossa.

Barcelona,  its  trade,  riches,  and  pri-
vileges, at  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury, iii.  287.  The  public  entry  of  the
emperor  Charles  V.  into  that  city  as  its
count,  iv.  240.

Barons,  their  independence  and  mu-
tual hostilities  under 'the  feudal  system,
iii.  22.  How  affected  by  the  enfranchise-
ment of  cities,  39.  Acquire  a  participa-
tion in  legislative  government,  41.  Their
private  wars  for  redress  of  personal  in-
juries, 48.  Methods  employed  to  abolish
these  contentions,  49.  Origin  of  their  su-
preme and  independent  jurisdiction,  60.
The  bad  effects  resulting  from  these  pri-
vileges, 62.  The  steps  taken  by  princes
to  reduce  their  courts,  63.  How  obliged
to  relinquish  their  judicial  prerogatives,
70.  Of  Italy,  subjected  to  municipal  laws,
219,  note  xv.  Their  right  of  territorial
jurisdiction  explained,  255.  Their  emo-
lument from  causes  decided  in  their
courts,  256.

Bayard,  chevalier,  his  character,  iv.
67.  His  gallant  defence  of  Mezieis  be-
sieged by  the  Imperialists,  ib.  Obliges
them  to  raise  the  siege,  ib.  His  noble
behaviour  at  his  death,  130.  His  respect-
ful funeral,  131.-

426

INDEX.

Bcllay,  M.,  his  erroneous  account  of
the  education  of  Charles  V.  corrected,
iii.  336.  His  account  of  the  disastrous
retreat  of  the  emperor  Charles  V.  from
his  invasion  of  Provence,  iv.  317.

Benefices,  under  the  feudal  system,  a
history  of,  iii.  200.  When  they  became
hereditary,  201.

Bible,  a  translation  of,  undertaken  by
Martin  Luther,  and  its  effects  in  opening
the  eyes  of  the  people,  iv.  132.

Bicocca,  battle  of,  between  Colonna
and  mareschal  Lautrec,  iv.  78.

Boccold  or  Beukels,  John,  a  journey-
man tailor,  becomes  a  leader  of  the  Ana-
baptists at  Munster,  iv.  268.  Succeeds
Matthias  in  the  direction  of  their  affairs,
271.  His  enthusiastic  extravagancies,  ib.
Is  chosen  king,  272.  Marries  fourteen
wives,  273.  Beheads  one  of  them,  275.
Is  put  to  a  cruel  death  at  the  taking  of
Munster,  276.  See  Anabaptists.

Bohemia,  the  archduke  Ferdinand  cho-
sen king  of,  iv.  211.  Ferdinand  en-
croaches on  the  liberties  of  the  Bohe-
mians, v.  146.  The  Reformation  intro-
duced by  John  Huss  and  Jerome  of
Prague,  ib.  Raise  an  army  to  no  pur-
pose, 147.

Bologna,  an  interview  between  the  em-
peror Charles  V.  and  pope  Clement  VII.
there,  iv.  241.  Another  meeting  between
them  there,  257.  The  treaties  of  Charles
with  the  Italian  states,  published  there,
242.

Bonnivet,  admiral  of  France,  appointed
to  command  the  invasion  of  Milan,  iv.
123.  His  character,  ib.  Enables  Co-
lonna to  defend  the  city  of  Milan  bj  his
imprudent  delay,  124.  Forced  to  aban-
don the  Milanese,  130.  Is  wounded,  and
his  army  defeated  by  the  Imperialists,  ib.
Stimulates  Francis  to  an  invasion  of  the
Milanese,  145.  Advises  Francis  to  be-
siege Pavia,  147.  Advises  him  to  give
battle  to  Bourbon,  who  advanced  to  the
relief  of  Pavia,  151.  Is  killed  at  the  bat-
tle of  Pavia,  153.

Books,  an  inquiry  into  the  materials
of  the  ancient  ones,  iii.  210.  The  loss  of
old  manuscripts  accounted  for,  ib.  The
great  prices  they  sold  for  in  ancient
times,  ib.

Boroughs,  representatives  of,  how  in-
troduced into  national  councils,  iii.  41.

Bouillon,  Robert  de  la  Mark,  lord  of,
declares  war  against  the  emperor  Charles,
at  the  instigation  of  Francis  11.,  iv.  65.
Is  ordered  by  Francis  to  disband  his
troops,  66.  His  territories  reduced  by
the  emperor,  ib.

Boulogne,  besieged  by  Henry  VIII.  of
England,  v.  32.  Taken,  40.

Bourbon,  Charles,  duke  of,  his  cha-
racter, iv.  119.  The  causes  of  his  discon-

tent with  Francis  I.,  ib.  His  duchess
dies,  120.  Rejects  the  advances  of  Lou-
isa the  king's  mother,  ib.  His  estate  se-
questered by  her  intrigues,  121.  Nego-
tiates secretly  with  the  emperor,  ib.  Is
included  in  a  treaty  between  the  emperor
and  Henry  VIII.  of  England,  ib.  Is
taxed  by  the  king  with  betraying  him,
which  he  denies,  122.  Escapes  to  Italy,
123.  Directs  the  measures  of  the  impe-
rial army  under  Lannoy,  129.  Defeats
the  French  on  the  banks  of  the  Sessia,
130.  Instigates  Charles  to  an  invasion  of
France,  141.  Advances  to  the  relief  of
Pavia,  150.  Defeats  Francis,  and  takes
him  prisoner,  153.  Hastens  to  Madrid  to
secure  his  own  interests  in  the  interview
between  Charles  and  Francis,  165.  His
kind  reception  by  Charles,  171.  Obtains
a  grant  of  the  duchy  of  Milan,  and  is
made  general  of  the  imperial  army,  172.
Obliges  Sforza  to  surrender  Milan,  194.
Is  forced  to  oppress  the  Milanese  to
satisfy  his  troops  mutinying  for  pay,  198.
Sets  Morone  at  liberty,  and  makes  him
his  confidant,  199.  Appoints  Leyva  go-
vernor of  Milan,  and  advances  to  invade
the  pope's  territories,  200.  His  disap-
pointed troops  mutiny,  201.  He  deter-
mines to  plunder  Rome,  203.  Arrives  at
Rome,  and  assaults  it,  205,  206.  Is
killed,  207.

Brandenburg,  elector  of,  avows  the
opinions  of  Luther,  iv.  133.

.Albert  of. See  Albert.

Britons,  ancient,  their  distress  and  de-
jection when  deserted  by  the  Romans
and  harassed  by  the  Picts  and  Cale-
donians, iii.  185,  note  i.

Brotherhood  of  God,  an  account  of
that  association  for  extinguishing  private
wars,  iii.  241.

Bruges,  how  it  became  the  chief  mart
for  Italian  commodities  during  the  mid-
dle ages,  iii.  276.  A  league  concluded
there  between  the  emperor  and  Henry
VIII.  of  England,  against  France,  iv.
69.

Brunswick,  duke  of,  avows  the  opi-
nions of  Luther,  iv.  133.

— — ,  Henry  duke  of,  driven

from  his  dominions  by  the  Protestant
princes  of  the  league  of  Smalkalde,  v.  21.
Raises  men  for  Francis,  but  employs
them  to  recover  his  own  dominions,  50.
Is  taken  prisoner,  ib.

Buda,  siege  of,  by  Ferdinand  king
of  the  Romans,  iv.  376.  Is  treacherously
seized  by  sultan  Solyman,  377.

Burgundy,  Mary,  heiress  of,  the  im-
portance with  which  her  choice  in  a
husband  was  considered  by  all  Europe,
iii.  103.  The  treacherous  views  of  Lewis
XI.  of  France  towards  her,  104.  Is
married  to  the  archduke  Maximilian,

INDEX.

427

106. The  influence  of  this  match  on  the
state  of  Europe,  ib.

CJESAR,  his  account  of  the  ancient  Ger-
mans, compared  with  that  of  Tacitus,
iii.  1 92.

Cajetan,  cardinal,  the  pope's  legate
in  Germany,  appointed  to  examine  the
doctrines  of  Martin  Luther,  iv.  21.  Re-
quires Luther  peremptorily  to  retract  his
errors,  2  2.  Requires  the  elector  of  Saxony
to  surrender  or  banish  Luther,  23.  His
conduct  justified,  24.

Calais,  an  ineffectual  congress  there,
between  the  emperor  and  Francis,  under
the  mediation  of  Henry  VIII.,  iv.  67.
The  careless  manner  in  which  it  was
guarded  in  the  reign  of  Mary  queen  of
England,  v.  367.  Ineffectual  remon-
strances of  Philip,  and  lord  Wentworth
the  governor,  concerning  its  defenceless
state,  368.  Is  invested  and  taken  by  the
duke  of  Guise,  ib.  The  English  inha-
bitants turned  out,  370.  Stipulations
concerning,  in  the  treaty  ef  Chateau
Cambresis,  392.

Calatrava,  military  order  of,  in  Spain,
zealous  to  employ  Iheir  prowess  in  de-
fence of  the  honours  of  the  Virgin  Mary,
iii.  289.  The  vow  used  by  these  knights,
ib.

Cambray,  treaty  of,  its  object,  iii.  115.
The  confederacy  dissolved,  117.  Arti-
cles of  the  peace  concluded  there,  be-
tween the  emperor  Charles  and  Francis
of  France,  iv.  235.  Remarks  on  this
treaty,  236.

Campe,  peace  of,  between  Henry
VIII.  and  Francis,  v.  76.

Campeggio,  cardinal,  made  legate
from  pope  Clement  VII.  to  the  second
diet  at  Nuremburg,  iv.  139.  Publishes
articles  for  reforming  the  inferior  clergy,
140.  Advises  Charles  to  rigorous  mea-
sures against  the  Protestants,  250.

Canon  law,  an  inquiry  into,  iii.  65.
Progress  of  ecclesiastical  usurpations,  66.
The  maxims  of,  more  equitable  than  the
civil  courts  of  the  middle  ages,  ib.

Capitulation  of  the  Germanic  body
signed  by  Charles  V.  and  prescribed  to
all  his  successors,  iii.  373.

Caraffa,  cardinal,  his  precipitate  elec-
tion, v.  315.  Is  appointed  legate  to  Bo-
logna, ib.  Reasons  of  his  disgust  with  the
emperor,  316.  Persuades  the  pope  to
solicit  an  alliance  with  France  against
the  emperor,  317.  321.  His  insidious
commission  to  the  court  of  France,  334.
His  public  entry  into  Paris,  ib.  Exhorts
Henry  to  break  his  truce  with  the  em-
peror, 335.  Absolves  Henry  from  his
oath,  337.  Negotiates  a  peace  between
the  pope  and  Philip,  with  the  duke
d'Alva,  361.  The  fate  of  him  and  his

brother  on  the  death  of  pope  Paul,
396.

Carlostadius,  imbibes  the  opinions  of
Martin  Luther,  at  Wittemberg,  iv.  SO.
His  intemperate  zeal,  131.  Awed  by  the
reproofs  of  Luther,  132.

Carignan,  besieged  by  the  count  d'En-
guien,  and  defended  by  the  marquis  de
Guasto,  v.  27.  Guasto  defeated  in  a
pitched  battle,  29.  The  town  taken,  30.

Castaldo,  marquis  of  Piadeno.  See
Piadeno.

Castile,  rise  of  the  kingdom  of,  iii.  141.
Its  union  with  Aragon,  142.  Its  king,
Henry  IV.,  solemnly  tried  and  deposed
in  an  assembly  of  the  nobles,  145.  The
constitution  and  government  of  that  king-
dom, 148.  A  history  of  the  cortes  of,
and  its  privileges,  149.  The  kingdom
originally  elective,  285;  note  xxxiii.
How  Isabella  became  possessed  of  that
kingdom,  318.  The  archduke  Philip's
title  acknowledged  by  the  cortes  of  that
kingdom,  319.  Isabella  dies,  and  leaves
her  husband  Ferdinand  of  Aragon  regent,

321.  Ferdinand resigns  the  crown  of,

322.  Ferdinand acknowledged regent
by  the  cortes,  ib. Enmity  between  this
kingdom  and  Aragon,  ib.  The  particular
dislike  of  the  Castilians  to  Ferdinand,  ib.
The  regency  of,  jointly  vested  in  Ferdi-
nand, Philip,  and  Joanna,  by  the  treaty
of  Salamanca,  326. Declares  against
Ferdinand,  327. The  regency  of,  re-
signed by  Ferdinand to Philip, 328.
Philip  and  Joanna  acknowledged king
and  queen  by  the  cortes,  ib. Death  of
Philip, 329. The perplexity of  the
Castilians  on  Joanna's  incapacity  for  go-
vernment, 330. Ferdinand  gains  the  re-
gency and  the  good-will  of  the  Castilians
by  his  prudent  administration,  332.  Oran
and  other  places  in  Barbary  annexed  to
this kingdom  by Ximenes, 333. Xi-
menes  appointed  regent  by  Ferdinand's
will  until  the  arrival  of  Charles  V.,  339.
Charles  assumes the regal title, 342.
Ximenes  procures  its acknowledgment,

343.  The  nobility  depressed  by  Ximenes,

344.  The  grandees  mutiny  against  Xi-
menes,  346. The  mutiny  suppressed,
ib. Xiraenes  resumes  the  grants  made
by  Ferdinand  to  the  nobles,  347. The
bold  reply  of  Ximenes  to  the  discontented
nobles,  348. Other  associates  in  the  re-
gency  appointed  with  Ximenes  at  the
instigation  of  the  Flemish  courtiers,  349.
Ximenes  dies,  357. Charles  acknow-
ledged king  by  the  cortes,  on  his  arrival,
with  a  reservation  in  favour  of  his  mother
Joanna,  ib. The  Castilians  receive  un-
favourable impressions  of  him,  358. Dis-
gusted by  his  partiality  to  bis  Flemish
ministers,  ib. Sauvage  made  chancellor,
359. William  de  Croy  appointed  arch-

428

INDEX.

bishop  of  Toledo,  ib.  The  principal
cities  confederate,  and  complain  of  their
grievances,  361.  The  clergy  of,  refuse
to  levy  the  tenth  of  benefices  granted  by
the  pope  to  Charles  V.,  375.  Interdicted,
but  the  interdict  taken  olf,  by  Charles's
application,  ib.  An  insurrection  there,
378.  Increase  the  disaffection,  379.
Cardinal  Adrian  appointed  regent,  on
the  departure  of  Charles  for  Germany,  ib.
The  views  and  pretensions  of  the  com-
mons, in  their  insurrections,  iv.  89.  The
confederacy  called  the  holy  junta  formed,
91.  The  proceedings  of  which  are  car-
ried on  in  the  name  of  queen  Joanna,  93.
Receives  circulatory  letters  from  Charles
for  the  insurgents  to  lay  down  their  arms,
•with  promises  of  pardon,  94.  The  nobles
undertake  to  suppress  the  insurgents,  98.
Raise  an  army  against  them  under  the
conde  de  Haro,  101.  Haro  gets  posses-
sion of  Joanna,  ib.  Expedients  by  which
they  raise  money  for  their  troops,  102.
Unwilling  to  proceed  to  extremities  with
the  junta,  103.  The  army  of  the  junta
routed,  and  Padilla  executed,  106, 107.
Dissolution  of  the  junta,  108.  The  mo-
deration of  Charles  towards  the  insur-
gents on  his  arrival  in  Spain,  115.  He
acquires  the  love  of  the  Castilians,  116.
See  Spain.

Catalonia,  the  spirited  behaviour  of  the
people  there  in  defence  of  their  rights,
against  their  king,  John  II.  of  Aragon,
iii.  144.

Catharine  of  Aragon,  is  divorced  from
Henry  VIII.  of  England,  iv.  264.  Dies,
333.

Catharine  a  Boria,  a  nun ,  flies  from  her
cloister,  and  marries  Martin  Luther,  iv.
186.

Catharine  di  Medici. See  Medici.

Cavi,  peace  concluded  there  between
pope  Paul  IV.  and  Philip  II.  of  Spain,
v.  361.

Censuales,  a  species  of  the  Oblati,  or
•voluntary  slaves,  the  obligations  they  en-
tered into,  described,  iii.  235.

Centenarii,  or  inferior  judges  in  the
middle  ages,  the  extraordinary  oath  re-
quired from  them,  iii.  273.

Cercainp,  negotiations  for  peace  en-
tered into  there,  between  Philip  II.  of
Spain  and  Henry  II.  of  France,  v.  380.
387.  The  negotiations  removed  to  Cha-
teau Cambresis.  See  Chateau  Cara-
bresis.

Champ  de  Mars,  and  de  Mai,  account
of  those  assemblies  of  the  ancient  Gauls,
iii.  292.

Characters  of  men,  rules  for  forming  a
proper  estimate  of  them,  v.  61.  Applied
to  the  case  of  Luther,  ib.

Charlemagne,  his  law  to  prevent  pri-
vate wars  for  redress  of  personal  injuries,

iii.  50.  239.  State  of  Germany  under  hit
descendants,  165.

Charles  IV.  emperor  of  Germany,  dis-
sipates the  imperial  domains,  iii.  305.
His  observations  on  the  manners  of  the
clergy,  in  his  letter  to  the  archbishop  of
Mentz,  iv.  37.

Charles  V.,  emperor,  an  emulator  of  the
heroic  conduct  of  his  rival,  Francis  I.  iii. 74.
His  future  grandeur  founded  on  the  mar-
riage of  the  archduke  Maximilian  with  the
heiress  of  Burgundy,  106.  His  descent
and  birth,  317.  How  he  came  to  inherit
such  extensive  dominions,  ib.  Acknow-
ledged prince  of  Asturias  by  the  cortesof
Castile,  329.  His  father  P"hilip  dies,  ib.
Jealousy  and  hatred  of  his  grandfather
Ferdinand  towards  him,  333.  Left  heir
to  his  dominions,  335.  Death  of  Fer-
dinand, ib.  His  education  committed  to
William  de  Croy,  lord  of  Chievres,  336.
Adrian  of  Ulrecht  appointed  to  be  his
preceptor,  ib.  The  first  opening  of  his
character,  337.  Assumes  the  government
of  Flanders,  and  attends  to  business,  ib.
Sends  cardinal  Adrian  to  be  regent  of
Castile,  who  executes  it  jointly  with  Xi-
menes,  341 .  Assumes  the  regal  title,  342.
His  title  admitted  with  difficulty  by  the
Castilian  nobility,  343.  Persuaded  to
add  associate  regents  to  Ximeues,  349.
His  Flemish  court  corrupted  by  the  ava-
rice of  Chievres,  351.  Persuaded  by
Ximenes  to  visit  Spain,  but  how  that
journey  is  retarded,  352.  The  present
state  of  his  affairs,  ib.  Concludes  a  peace
at  Noyen  with  Francis  I.  of  France,  and
the  conditions  of  the  treaty,  353.  Ar-
rives in  Spain,  355.  His  ungrateful  treat-
ment of  Ximenes,  356.  His  public  en-
try into  Valladolid,  357.  Is  acknow-
ledged king  by  the  cortes,  who  vote  him
a  free  gift,  ib.  The  Castilians  receive  un-
favourable impressions  of  him,  358.  Dis-
gusts them  by  his  partiality  to  his  Fle-
mish ministers,  ib.  Sets  out  for  Aragon,
359.  Sends  his  brother  Ferdinand  to  visit
their  grandfather  Maximilian,  ib.  Can-
not assemble  the  cortes  of  Aragon  in  his
own  name,  360.  The  opposition  made
by  that  assembly  to  his  desires,  ib.  Re-
fuses the  application  of  Francis  I.  for  re-
stitution of  the  kingdom  of  Navarre,  361.
Neglects  the  remonstrances  of  the  Casti-
lians, ib.  Death  of  the  emperor  Maximi-
Han,362.  How  Maximilian  was  obstructed
in  securing  the  empire  to  him,  363.  Fran-
cis I.  aspires  to  the  imperial  crown,  ib.
Circumstances  favourable  to  the  preten-
sions of  Charles,  364.  View  of  the  pre-
sent state  of  Europe,  366.  The  Swiss
cantonsespouse  his  cause,  367.  Appre-
hensions and  conduct  of  pope  Leo  X.  on
the  occasion,  368.  Assembling  of  thr
diet  at  Frankfort,  369.  Frederic  duk«  of

INDEX.

Saxony  refuses  the  offer  of  the  empire,
and  votes  for  him,  370.  And  refuses  the
presents  offered  by  his  ambassadors,  371.
Concurring  circumstances  which  favoured
his  election,  372.  His  election,  373.
Signs  and  confirms  the  capitulation  of  the
Germanic  body,ib.  The  election  notified
to  him,  ib.  Assumes  the  title  of  majesty,
374.  Accepts  the  imperial  dignity  of-
fered by  the  count  Palatine,  ambassador
from  the  elector,  375.  The  clergy  of  Cas-
tile refuse  the  tenth  of  benefices  granted
him  by  the  pope,  ib.  Procures  the  inter-
dict the  kingdom  is  laid  under  for  re-
fusal, to  be  taken  off,  ib.  Empowers
cardinal  Adrian  to  hold;the  cortes  of  Va-
lencia, 377.  The  nobles  refuse  to  assem-
ble without  his  presence,  ib.  Authorizes
the  insurgents  there  to  continue  in  arms,
ib.  Summons  the.  cortes  of  Castile  to
meet  in  Galicia,  ib.  Narrowly  escapes
with  his  Flemish  ministers  from  an  insur-
rection on  that  account,  378.  Obtains  a
donative  from  the  cortes,  379.  Prepares
to  leave  Spain,  and  appoints  regents,  ib.
Embarks,  380.  Motives  of  this  journey,
iv.  1.  Rise  of  the  rivalship  between  him
and  Francis  I.,  2.  Courts  the  favour  of
Henry  VIII.  of  England  and  his  minister
cardinal  Wolsey,  7.  Visits  Henry  at
Dover,  8.  Promises  Wolsey  his  interest
for  the  papacy,  9.  Has  a  second  inter-
view with  Henry  at  Gravelines,  10.
Offers  to  submit  his  differences  with
Francis  to  Henry's  arbitration,  ib.  His
magnificent  coronation  at  Aix-la-Cha-
pelle,  ib.  Calls  a  diet  at  Worms,  to
check  the  reformers,  11.  Causes  which
hindered  his  espousing  the  party  of  Mar-
tin Luther,  53.  Grants  Luther  a  safe-
conduct  to  the  diet  of  Worms,  54.  An
edict  published  against  him,  55.  His
embarrassment  at  this  time,  58.  Con-
cludes an  alliance  with  the  pope,  61.
The  conditions  of  the  treaty,  62.  Death
of  his  minister  Chievres,  and  its  advan-
tages to  him,  62,  63.  Invasion  of  Na-
varre by  Francis,  63.  The  French  driven
out,  and  their  general  L'Esparre  taken
prisoner,  65.  War  declared  against  him
by  Robert  de  la  Mark,  lord  of  Bouillon,
who  ravages  Luxemburg,  65,  66.  Re-
duces Bouillon,  and  invades  France,  66.
His  demands  at  the  congress  at  Calais,
68.  Has  an  interview  with  cardinal  Wol-
sey at  Bruges,  and  concludes  a  league
with  Henry  VIII.  against  France,  69.
Pope  Leo  declares  for  him  against
France,  72.  The  French  driven  out  of
Milan,  75.  Visits  England  in  his  passage
to  Spain,  81.  Cultivates  the  good-will
of  cardinal  Wolsey,  and  creates  the  earl
of  Surrey  his  high-admiral,  ib.  Grants
the  island  of  Malta  to  the  knights  of  St.
John,  expelled  from  Rhodes  by  Solyman

the  Magnificent,  84.  Arrives  in  Spain,
85.  A  retrospect  of  his  proceedings  in
relation  to  the  insurrections  in  Spain,  94.
Issues  circulatory  letters  for  the  insur-
gents to  lay  down  their  arms,  with  pro-
mises of  pardon,  ib.  His  prudent  mode-
ration towards  the  insurgents,  on  his
arrival  in  Spain,  115.  Acquires  the  love
of  the  Castilians,  116.  Enters  into  a
league  with  Charles  duke  of  Bourbon,
121.  Why  he  did  not  endeavour  to  get
Wolsey  elected  pope,  126.  Invades
Guienne  and  Burgundy,  but  without  suc-
cess, 128.  His  troops  in  Milan  mutiny
for  want  of  pay,  but  are  pacified  by  Mo-
roni, 129.  Undertakes  an  invasion  of
Provence,  141.  Orders  Pescara  to  be-
siege Marseilles,  142.  Pescara  obliged
to  retire,  143.  Disconcerted  by  the
French  overrunning  the  Milanese  again,
146.  The  revenues  of  Naples  mortgaged
to  raise  money,  147.  His  troops  defeat
Francis,  and  take  him  prisoner  at  the
battle  of  Pavia,  153.  His  affected  mo-
deration at  receiving  the  news,  155.
Avails  himself  of  a  treaty  concluded  be-
tween Lannoy  and  pope  Clement,  but
refuses  to  ratify  it,  160.  His  army  in
Pavia  mutiny,  and  are  obliged  to  be  dis-
banded, ib.  His  deliberations  on  the  pro-
per improvement  of  his  advantages,  161.
His  propositions  to  Francis,  162.  After
many  delays  grants  Sforza  the  investiture
of  Milan,  164.  Morone's  intrigues  be-
trayed to  him  by  Pescara,  168.  Order*
Pescara  to  continue  bis  negotiations  with
Morone,  ib.  His  rigorous  treatment  of
Francis,  170.  Visits  Francis,  171.  Hi*
kind  reception  of  the  duke  of  Bourbon,
ib.  Grants  Bourbon  the  duchy  of  Milan,
and  appoints  him  general-in-chief  of  the
imperial  army  there,  172.  Fruitless  nego-
tiations for  the  delivery  of  Francis,  173.
Treaty  of  Madrid  with  Francis,  174.
Delivers  up  Francis,  177.  Marries  Isa-
bella of  Portugal,  178.  An  alliance
formed  against  him  at  Cognac,  179.
Sends  ambassadors  to  Francis  to  require
the  fulfilment  of  the  treatyof  Madrid,  191.
Prepares  for  war  against  Francis,  193.
The  pope  reduced  to  an  accommodation
with  him,  197.  The  exhausted  state  of
his  finances,  198.  His  troops  under
Bourbon  distressed  and  mutinous  for
want  of  pay,  199.  Bourbon  assaults
Rome  and  is  slain,  but  the  city  taken,
206.  The  prince  of  Orange,  general  on
Bourbon's  death,  takes  the  castle  of  St.
Angelo,  and  the  pope  prisoner,  208.
The  emperor's  conduct  on  that  occasion,
209.  His  dissensions  with  the  pope,  how
far  favourable  to  the  Reformation,  212.
His  instructions  to  the  diet  at  Spires,  ib.
His  manifesto  against  the  pope,  and  letter
to  the  cardinals,  ib.  France  and  Eng-

430

INDEX.

land  league  against  him,  215.  Is  refused
supplies  by  the  cortes  of  Castile,  220.
DeliTers  the  pope  for  a  ransom,  ib.  His
overtures  to  Henry  and  Francis,  ib.  Their
declaration  of  war  against  him,  223.  Is
challenged  by  Francis  to  single  combat,
ib.  Andrew  Doria  revolts  from  Francis
to  him,  228.  His  forces  defeat  the
French  in  Italy,  230.  232.  His  motives
for  desiring  an  accommodation,  233.
Concludes  a  separate  treaty  with  the
pope,  234.  Terms  of  the  peace  of  Cam-
bray,  concluded  with  Francis  by  the
mediation  of  Margaret  of  Austria  and
Louise  of  France,  235.  Remarks  on  the
advantages  gained  by  him  in  this  treaty,
and  on  his  conduct  of  the  war,  236.
Visits  Italy,  240.  His  policy  on  his  pub-
lic entry  into  Barcelona,  ib.  Has  an  in-
terview with  the  pope  at  Bologna,  241.
Motives  for  his  moderation  in  Italy,  ib.
His  treaties  with  the  states  of,  242.  Is
crowned  king  of  Lorubardy  and  emperor
of  the  Romans,  243.  Summons  a  diet  at
Spires  to  consider  the  state  of  religion,
245.  His  deliberations  with  the  pope  re-
specting the  expediency  of  calling  a  ge-
neral council,  247.  Appoints  a  diet  at
Augsburg,  248.  Makes  a  public  entry
into  that  city,  ib.  His  endeavours  to
check  the  Reformation,  ib.  Resolute
behaviour  of  the  Protestant  princes  to-
wards him,  249.  His  severe  decree
against  the  Protestants,  250.  Proposes
his  brother  Ferdinand  to  be  elected  king
of  the  Romans,  251.  Is  opposed  by  the
Protestants,  252.  Obtains  his  election,
253.  Is  desirous  of  an  accommodation
with  the  Protestants,  255.  Concludes  a
treaty  with  them  at  Nuremberg,  ib.
Raises  an  army  to  oppose  the  Turks
under  Solyman,  and  obliges  him  to  retire,
257.  Has  another  interview  with  the
pope,  and  presses  him  to  call  a  general
council,  258.  Procures  a  league  of  the
Italian  states  to  secure  the  peace  of  Italy,
259.  Arrives  at  Barcelona,  260.  His
endeavours  to  prevent  the  negotiations
and  meeting  between  the  pope  and  Fran-
cis, 262.  Undertakes  to  expel  Barba-
rossa  from  Tunis,  and  restore  Muley-
Hascen,  286.  Lands  in  Africa,  and  be-
sieges Goletta,  288.  Takes  Goletta,  and
seizes  Barbarossa's  fleet,  289.  Defeats
Barbarossa,  and  takes  Tunis,  290.  Re-
stores Muley-Hascen,  and  the  treaty  be-
tween them,  291,  292.  The  glory  ac-
quired by  this  enterprise,  and  the  delivery
of  the  Christian  captives,  293.  Seizes
the  duchy  of  Milan  on  the  death  of
Francis  Sforza,  304.  His  policy  with
regard  to  it,  ib.  Prepares  for  war  with
Francis,  305.  His  invective  against
Francis  at  Rome  before  the  pope  in  coun-
cil, 306.  Remarks  on  this  transaction,

308.  Invades  France,  S10.  Enten
Provence,  and  finds  it  desolated,  314.
Besieges  Marseilles  and  Aries,  315.  His
miserable  retreat  from  Provence,  317.
His  invasion  of  Picardy  defeated,  318.  Is
accused  of  poisoning  the  Dauphin,  319.
Improbability  of  its  truth,  ib.  Conjecture
concerning  the  Dauphin's  death,  320.
Flandeis  invaded  by  Francis,  321.  A
suspension  of  arms  in  Flanders,  how  ne-
gotiated, 322.  A  truce  in  Piedmont,  320.
Motives  to  these  truces,  323.  Negotia-
tions for  peace  with  Francis,  325.  Con-
cludes a  truce  for  ten  years  at  Nice,
326.  Remarks  on  the  war,  327.  An
interview  with  Francis,  ib  Courts  the
friendship  of  Henry  VIII.  of  England,

333.  Indulges the  Protestant  princes,

334.  Quiets  their  apprehensions  of  the
Catholic  league,  337.  His  troops  mutiny,
339.  Assembles  the  cortes  of  Castile,  340.
Destroys  the  ancient  constitution  of  the
cortes,  341.  Instance  of  the  haughty  spirit
of  the  Spanish  grandees,  342.  Desires  per-
mission of  Francis  to  pass  through  France
to  the  Netherlands,  349.  His  reception  in
France, 350.  His  rigorous  treatment  of
Ghent,  352. Refuses  to  fulfil  bis  engage-
ments to  Francis,  353.  Appoints  a  friend-
ly conference  between  a  deputation  of  Ca-
tholic and  Protestant  divines  before  the
diet  at  Ratisbon,370.  Result  of  this  con-
ference, 372.  Grants  a  private  exemption
from  oppression  to  the  Protestants,  373.
Undertakes  to  reduce  Algiers,  379. Is
near  being  cast  away  by  a  violent  storm,
381. Lands  near  Algiers,  382. His  sol-
diers exposed  to  a  violent  tempest  and
rain,  ib. His  fleet  shattered,  383.  His
fortitude under these disasters, 384.
Leaves  his  enterprise,  and  embarks  again,
38o» Is  distressed  with  another  storm  at
sea,  ib. Takes  advantage  of  the  French
invasion  of  Spain  to  obtain  subsidies  from
the  cortes,  v.  8.  His  treaty  with  Portu-
gal, ib. Concludes  a  league  with  Henry
VIII.,  10. Particulars  of  the  treaty,  11.
Overruns  Cleves,  and  his  barbarous  treat-
ment of  the  town  of  Duren,  14.  His  be-
haviour to  the  duke  of  Cleves,  ib. Be-
sieges Landrecy, 15. Is  joined  by  an
English  detachment,  ib. Is  forced  to  re-
tire, ib.  Courts  the  favour  of  the  Protes-
tants, 21.  His  negotiations  with  the  Pro-
testants at  the  diet  of  Spires,  22.  Procures
the concurrence of  the  diet  in  a war
against  Francis,  25. Negotiates  a  sepa-
rate peace  with  the  king  of  Denmark,  ib.
Invades  Champagne,  and  invests  St.Di-
siere,  31. Want  of  concert  between  his
operations  and  those  of  Henry,  who  now
invades  France,  32. Obtains  St.  Disiere
by  artifice,  3.5.  His  distresses  and  happy
movements,  34. Concludes a separate
peace  with  Francis,  36.  His  motives  to

this  peace,  37.  His  advantages  by  this
treaty,  39.  Obliges  himself  by  a  private
article  to  exterminate  the  Protestant  he-
resy, ib.  Is  cruelly  afflicted  with  the
gout,  41.  Diet  at  Worms,  42.  Arrives  at
Worms,  and  alters  his  conduct  towards
the  Protestants,  45.  His  conduct  on  the
death  of  the  duke  of  Orleans,  48.  His
dissimulation  to  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse,
62.  Concludes  a  truce  with  Solyman,
66.  Holds  a  diet  at  Ratisbon,  67.  His
declaration  to  the  Protestant  deputies,  70.
His  treaty  with  the  pope,  concluded  by
the  cardinal  of  Trent,  ib.  His  circular
letter  to  the  Protestant  members  of  tbe
Germanic  body,  71.  The  Protestants  levy
an  array  against  him,  77.  Is  unprepared
against  them,  78.  Puts  them  under  the
ban  of  the  empire,  80.  The  Protestants
declare  war  against  him,  81.  Marches  to
join  the  troops  sent  by  the  pope,  84.
Famese,  the  pope's  legate,  returns  in  dis-
gust, 85.  His  prudent  declension  of  an
action  with  the  Protestants,  87.  Is  joined
by  his  Flemish  troops,  88.  Proposals  of
peace  made  by  the  Protestants,  96.  Their
army  disperse,  97.  His  rigorous  treat-
ment of  the  Protestant  princes,  99.  Dis-
misses  part  of  his  army,  101.  The  pope
recalls  his  troops,  102.  His  reflection  on
Fiesco's  insurrection  at  Genoa,  114.  Is
alarmed  at  the  hostile  preparations  of
Francis,  118  .Deathof  Francis,  120.  A  pa-
rallel drawn  between  him  and  Francis,  ib.
Consequences  of  Francis's  death  to  him,
124.  Marches  against  the  elector  of  Saxo-
ny, ib.  Passes  the  Elbe,  126.  Defeats  the
Saxon  army,  129.  Takes  the  elector
prisoner,  ib.  His  harsh  reception  of  him,
130.  Invests  Wittemberg,  131.  Con-
demns the  elector  to  death  by  a  court-
martial,  133.  The  elector  by  treaty  sur-
renders the  electorate,  135.  The  harsh
terms  imposed  by  him  on  the  Landgrave
of  Hesse,  137.  His  haughty  reception  of
the  Landgrave,  140.  Detains  him  priso-
ner, 141.  Seizes  the  warlike  stores  of  the
league,  145.  His  cruel  exactions,  ib.  As-
sembles a  diet  at  Augsburg,  148.  Inti-
midates the  diet  by  his  Spanish  troops,  ib.
Re-establishes  the  Romish  worship  in  the
churches  of  Augsburg,  149.  Seizes  Pla-
centia,  153.  Orders  the  diet  to  petition  the
pope  for  the  return  of  the  council  to
Trent,  155.  Protests  against  the  council
of  Bologna,  157.  Causes  a  system  of
faith  to  be  prepared  for  Germany,  158.
Lays  it  before  the  diet,  159.  The  inte-
rim opposed,  163.  And  rejected  by  the
imperial  cities,  164.  Reduces  the  city  of
Augsburg  to  submission,  166.  Repeats
the  same  violence  at  Ulna,  ib.  Carries  the
elector  and  Landgrave  with  him  into  the
Low  Countries,  167.  Procures  his  son  Phi-
lip to  be- recognised  by  the  states  of  the

INDEX.  431

Netherlands,  168.  Establishes  the  inte-
rim there,  170.  Re-assembles  the  diet
at  Augsburg,  under  the  influence  of  his
Spanish  troops,  177-  The  city  of  Magde-
burg refuses  to  admit  the  interim,  and
prepares  for  resistance,  183.  Appoints
Maurice  elector  of  Saxony  to  reduce  it,
184.  Promises  to  protect  the  Protestants
at  the  council  of  Trent,  1 85.  Arbitrarily
releases  Maurice  and  the  elector  of  Bran-
denburg from  their  engagements  to  the
Landgrave  for  the  recovery  of  his  liberty,
186.  Endeavours  to  secure  the  empire  for
his  son  Philip,  188.  His  brother  Ferdi-
nand refuses  to  resign  his  pretensions,  ib.
Besieges  Parma,  but  is  repulsed,  194.
Proceeds  rigorously  against  the  Protes-
tants,. 196.  Endeavours  to  support  the
council  of  Trent,  197.  Puts  Magdeburg
under  the  ban  of  the  empire,  ib.  Absolves
the  city,  201.  Js  involved  in  disputes  be-
tween the  council  and  the  Protestant  de-
puties concerning  their  safe-conduct,  203.
Begins  to  suspect  Maurice  of  Saxony,
215.  Circumstances  which  contributed  to
deceive  him  with  regard  to  Maurice,  216.
Maurice  takes  the  field  against  him,  217.
Maurice  seconded  by  Henry  II.  of
France,  219.  His  distress  and  consterna-
tion, 220.  An  ineffectual  negotiation
with  Maurice,  221.  Flies  from  Inspruck,
224.  Releases  the  elector  of  Saxony,  225.
Is  solicited  to  satisfy  the  demands  of
Maurice,  232.  His  present  difficulties,
233.  Refuses  any  direct  compliance  with
the  demands  of  Maurice,  236.  Is  dis-
posed to  yield  by  the  progress  of  Mau-
rice's operations,  237.  Makes  a  peace
with  Maurice  at  Passau,  239.  Reflections
on  this  treaty,  240.  Turns  his  arms
against  France,  246.  Lays  siege  to  Metz,

249.  Is  joined  by  Albert  of  Brandenburg,

250.  His  army  distressed  by  the  vigilance
of  the  duke  of  Guise,  251, Raises  the
siege,  and  retires  in  a  shattered  condition,
253.  Cosmo  di  Medici  asserts  his  indepen-
dency against him,  254. Siena  revolts
against  him,  ib. Is  dejected  at  his  bad
success,  257.  Takes  Terrouane,  and  de-
molishes  it, 264.  Takes Hesden, ib.
Proposes  his  son  Philip  as  a  husband  to
Mary  queen  of  England,  275.  The  ar-
ticles of  the  marriage,  277.  Marches  to
oppose the French operations, 284.
Is  defeated  by  Henry,  ib. Invades  Pi-
cardy,  285. Grants Siena,  subdued  by
Cosmo  di  Medici,  to  his  son  Philip,  293.
A  diet  at  Augsburg,  opened  by Ferdi-
nand, 300.  Leaves  the  interior  adminis-
tration of  Germany  to  Ferdinand,  303.
Applies  again  to  Ferdinand  to  resign  his
pretensions  of  succession  to  Philip,  but
is refused,  ib. Recess of  the diet  of
Augsburg  on  the  subject  of  religion,  306.
A  treaty  concluded  between  pope  Paul

432

INDEX.

IV.  and  Henry  II.  of  France  against
him,  321.  Resigns  his  hereditary  do-
minions to  his  son  Philip,  ib.  His  motives
for  retirement,  322.  Had  long  meditated
this  resignation,  324.  The  ceremony  of
this  deed,  326.  His  speech  on  this  oc-
casion, 327.  Hesigns  also  the  dominions
of  Spain,  329.  His  intended  retirement
into  Spain  retarded,  330.  A  truce  for
five  years  concluded  with  France,  331.
Endeavours  in  vain  to  secure  the  impe-
rial crown  for  Philip,  341.  Resigns  the
imperial  crown  to  Ferdinand,  342.  Sets
ont  for  Spain,  ib.  His  arrival  and  recep-
tion in  Spain,  343.  Is  distressed  by  his
son's  ungrateful  neglect  in  paying  his
pension,  344.  Fixes  his  retreat  in  the  mo-
nastery of  St.  Justus  in  PJacentia,  ib.  The
situation  of  this  monastery,  and  his  apart-
ments described,  345.  Contrast  between
the  conduct  of  Charles  and  the  pope,  346.
His  manner  of  life  in  his  retreat,  380.
His  death  precipitated  by  his  monastic
severities,  382.  Celebrates  his  own  fune-
ral, 383.  Dies,  384.  His  character,  ib.
A  review  of  the  state  of  Europe  during
his  reign,  398.  His  acquisitions  to  the
ciown  of  Spain,  401.

Charles  VII.  of  France,  the  first  who
introduced  standing  armies  in  Europe,  iii.
93.  His  successful  extension  of  the  re-
gal prerogative,  96.

VIII.  of  France,  his  character,

iii.  107.  How  induced  to  invade  Italy,  ib.
His  resources  and  preparations  for  this
enterprise,  108.  His  rapid  success,  ib.  A
combination  of  the  Italian  states  formed
against  him,  ib.  Is  forced  to  return  back
to  France,  110.  The  distressed  state  of
his  revenues  bj  this  expedition,  115.

Charlevoix,  his  account  of  the  North
American  Indians,  made  use  of  in  a  com-
parison between  them  and  the  ancient
Germans,  iii.  194.

Charters,  of  immunity  or  franchise,  an
inquiry  into  the  nature  of  those  granted
by  the  barons  of  France  to  the  towns  un-
der their  jurisdiction,  iii.  221,  note  xvi.
Of  communities,  granted  by  the  kings  of
France,  how  they  tended  to  establish  re-
gular government,  222.

Chateau-Cambresis,  the  conferences
for  peace  between  Philip  II.  of  Spain,
and  Henry  II.  of  France,  removed
thither  from  Cercamp,  v.  391.  The  peace
retarded  by  the  demand  of  Elizabeth  of
England  for  restitution  of  Calais,  ib.  Par-
ticulars of  the  treaty  signed  there  between
England  and  France,  392.  Terms  of  the
pacification  between  Philip  and  Henry,
S94.

Cheregato,  nuncio  from  the  pope  to
the  diet  at  Nuremberg,  his  instructions,
iv.  134.  Opposes  the  assembling  a  ge-
neral council,  135.

Chievres,  William  de  Croy,  lord  of,
appointed  by  Maximilian  to  superintend
the  education  of  his  grandson  Charles,
iii.  336.  Adrian  of  Utrecht  made  pre-
ceptor under  him,  ib.  His  direction  of
the  studies  of  Charles,  337.  His  avarice
corrupts  the  Flemish  court  of  Charles,

351.  Negotiates  a  peace  with France,

352,  353. Endeavours  to prevent  an
interview  between  Charles  and  Xiraenes,
354. Attends  Charles  to  Spain,  ib. His
ascendancy  over  Charles,  358. His  ex-
tortions, 359. His  death,  and  the  sup-
posed causes  of  it,  iv.  62.

Chivalry,  the  origin  of,  iii.  72.  Its
beneficial  effects  on  human  manners,  73.
The  enthusiasm  of,  distinguished  from  its
salutary  consequences,  ib.

Christianity,  corrupted  when  first
brought  into  Europe,  iii.  76.  Its  influ-
ence in  freeing  mankind  from  the  bond-
age of  the  feudal  policy,  232,  note  xx.

Christians,  primitive,  why  averse  to
the  principles  of  toleration,  v.  307.

Circles  of  Germany,  the  occasion  of
their  being  formed,  iii.  171.

Cities,  the  ancient  state  of,  under  the
feudal  policy,  iii.  36.  The  freedom  of,
where  first  established,  37.  Charters  of
community,  why  granted  in  France  by
Louis  le  Gros,  38.  Obtain  the  like  all
over  Europe,  39.  Acquire  political  con-
sideration, 41.

Clement  VII.,  pope,  his  election,  iv.
125.  His  character,  ib.  Grants  cardinal
Wolsey  a  legatine  commission  in  Eng-
land for  life,  126.  Refuses  to  accede  to
the  league  against  Francis,  129.  Labours
to  accommodate  the  differences  between
the  contending  parties,  ib.  His  pro-
ceedings with  regard  to  the  reformers,
139.  Concludes  a  treaty  of  neutrality
with  Francis,  149.  Enters  into  a  sepa-
rate treaty  with  Charles  after  the  battle  of
Pavia,  and  the  consequences  of  it,  160.
Joins  in  an  alliance  with  Francis  Sforza
and  the  Venetians  against  the  emperor,
189.  Absolves  Francis  from  his  oath  to
observe  the  treaty  of  Madrid,  190.  Car-
dinal Colonna  seizes  Rome,  and  invests
him  in  the  castle  of  St.  Angelo,  196.  Is
forced  to  an  accommodation  with  the
Imperialists,  197.  His  revenge  against
the  Colonna  family,  200.  Invades  Na
pies,  ib.  His  territories  invaded  by  Bour-
bon, and  his  perplexity  on  the  occa-
sion, 202.  Concludes  a  treaty  with  Lan-
noy,  viceroy  of  Naples,  ib.  His  conster-
nation on  Bourbon's  motions  towards
Rome,  205.  Rome  taken,  and  himself
besieged  in  the  castle  of  St.  Angelo,  207.
Surrenders  himself  prisoner,  209.  The
Florentines  revolt  against  him,  216.  Pays
Charles  a  ransom  for  his  liberty,  with
other  stipulations,  220.  Makes  his  escape

INDEX.

433

from  confinement,  221.  Writes  a  letter
of  thanks  to  Lautrec,  ib.  Is  jealous  of
the  intentions  of  Francis,  and  negotiates
with  Charles,  226.  His  motives  and  steps
towards  an  accommodation,  233.  Con-
cludes a  separate  treaty  with  Charles,
234.  His  interview  with  the  emperor  at
Bologna,  240.  Crowns  Charles  king  of
Loinbardy  and  emperor  of  the  Romans,
243.  His  representations  to  the  emperor
against  calling  a  general  council,  247.
Has  another  interview  with  Charles  at
Bologna,  and  the  difficulties  raised  by  him
to  the  calling  a  general  council,  258.
Agrees  to  a  league  of  the  Italian  states
for  the  peace  of  Italy,  259.  His  interview
and  treaty  with  Francis,  263.  Marries
Catherine  di  Medici  to  the  duke  of  Or-
leans, ib.  His  protraction  of  the  affair  of
the  divorce  solicited  by  Henry  VIII.,  ib.
Reverses  Cranmer's  sentence  of  divorce,
under  penalty  of  excommunication,  264.
Henry  renounces  his  supremacy,  ib.  His
death,  265.  Reflections  on  his  pontifi-
cate, ib.

Clergy,  Romish,  the  progress  of  their
usurpations,  iii.  66.  Their  plan  of  juris-
prudence more  perfect  than  that  of  the
civil  courts  in  the  middle  ages,  ib.  The
great  ignorance  of,  in  the  early  feudal  times
of  Europe,  209.  Remarks  on  the  immo-
ral lives  of,  and  how  they  contributed  to
the  progress  of  the  Reformation,  iv.  35.
The  facility  with  which  they  obtained  par-
dons, 37.  Their  usurpations  in  Germany
during  the  disputes  concerning  investi-
tures, 39.  Their  other  opportunities  of
aggrandising  themselves  there,  ib.  Their
personal  immunities,  40.  Their  encroach-
ments on  the  laity,  41.  The  dreadful  ef-
fects of  spiritual  censures,  42.  Their  de-
vices to  secure  their  usurpations,  ib.  The
united  effect  of  all  these  circumstances,
46.  Oppose  the  advancement  of  learning
in  Germany,  50.

Cleriza,  slave  to  Willa,  widow  of  duke
Hugo,  extract  from  the  charter  of  manu-
mission granted  to  her,  iii.  233.

Clermont,  council  of,  resolves  on  the
holy  war,  iii.  30. — See  Peter  the  Hermit,
and  Crusades.

Cleves,  invaded  and  overrun  by  the
emperor  Charles  V.,  v.  14.  Cruel  treat-
ment of  Duren,  ib.  Humiliating  submis-
sion of  the  duke,  ib.

Clotaire  I.,  instance  of  the  small  autho-
rity he  had  over  his  army,  iii.  291.

Clotharius  II.,  his  account  of  the  po-
pular assemblies  among  the  ancient  Gauls,
iii.  292.

Glovis,  the  founder  of  the  French  mo-
narchy, unable  to  retain  a  sacred  vase
taken  by  his  army  from  being  distributed
by  Jot  among  the  rest  of  the  plunder,  iii.
196,  note  vii.

Cnipperdoling,  a  leader  of  the  Anabap-
tists at  Munster,  an  account  of,  iv.  269,
&c.  See  Anabaptists.

Cognac,  an  alliance  formed  there
against  Charles  V.  by  the  pope,  the  Ve-
netians, the  duke  of  Milan,  and  Francis
I.,  iv.  190.

Coligny,  admiral,  governor  of  Picar-
dy,  defends  St.  Quintin  against  the
Spanish  general  Emmanuel  Philibert
duke  of  Savoy,  v.  353.  His  brother
D'Andelot  defeated  in  an  endeavour  to
join  the  garrison,  354.  But  D'Andelot
enters  the  town,  ib.  His  character,  358.
The  town  taken  by  assault,  and  himself
taken  prisoner,  359.

Colleges,  the  first  establishment  of,  in
Europe,  iii.  268.

Cologne,  Ferdinand  king  of  Hungary
and  Bohemia,  brother  to  the  emperor
Charles  V.,  elected  king  of  the  Romans
by  the  college  of  electors  there,  iv.  253.

Herman,  count  de  Wied,

archbishop  and  elector  of,  inclines  to  the
reformation,  and  is  opposed  by  his'ca-
nons,  who  appeal  to  the  emperor  and
pope,  v.  46.  Is  deprived  and  excommu-
nicated, 64.  Resigns,  100.

Colonna,  cardinal  Pompeo,  his  cha-
racter and  rivalship  with  pope  Clement
VII.,  iv.  195.  Seizes  Rome,  and  invests
the  pope  in  the  castle  of  St.  Augelo,  196,
197.  Is  degraded,  and  the  rest  of  the  fa-
mily excommunicated  by  the  pope,  200.
Is  prevailed  on  by  the  pope,  when  pri-
soner with  the  imperialists,  to  solicit  bis
delivery,  220.

— Prosper,  the  Italian  general,

his  character,  iv.  72.  Appointed  to  com-
mand the  troops  in  the  invasion  of  Mi-
lan, ib.  Drives  the  French  out  of  Milan,
75.  His  army  how  weakened  at  the  death
of  pope  Leo  X.,  76.  Defeats  mareehal
de  Lautrec  at  Bicocca,  78.  Reduces  Ge-
noa, 80.  The  bad  state  of  his  troops  when
the  French  invade  Milan,  124.  Is  en-
abled to  defend  the  city  by  the  ill  con-
duct of  Bonniet  the  French  commander,
ib.  Dies,  and  is  succeeded  by  Lannoy,
129.

Combat,  judicial,  the  prohibition  of,  an
improvement  in  the  administration  of
justice,  iii.  51.  The  foundation  and  uni-
versality of  this  mode  of  trial,  56.  The  per-
nicious effects  of,  57.  Various  expedients
for  abolishing  this  practice,  58.  The  anci-
entSwedish  law  of,  for  words  of  reproach,
247.  Positive  evidence  or  points  of  proof
rendered  ineffectual  by  it,  249.  This  mode
of  trial  authorized  by  the  ecclesiastics.
251.  The  last  instances  of,  in  the  histo-
ries of  France  and  England,  252.

Commerce,  the  spirit  of  crusading,  how
far  favourable  to,  at  that  early  period,  iii.
34.  The  first  establishment  of  free  cor-
2  r

434

INDEX.

porations,  37.  Charters  of  community,
why  granted  by  Louis  le  Gros,  S3.  The
like  practice  obtains  all  over  Europe,  S3.
The  salutary  effects  of  these  institutions,
ib.  The  low  state  of,  during  the  middle
ages,  79.  Causes  contributing  to  its  re-
vival, 80.  Promoted  by  the  Hanseatic
league,  81.  Is  cultivated  in  the  Nether-
lands, 82.  Is  introduced  into  England  by
Edward  III.,  ib.  The  beneficial  conse-
quences resulting  from  the  revival  of,
83.  The  early  cultivation  of,  in  Italy,
274.

Common  law,  the  first  compilation  of,
made  in  England  by  lord  chief-justice
Glanville,  Hi.  264.

Communities. — See  Charters,  Cities,
Commerce,  and  Corporations.

Cotnnena,  Anne,  her  character  of  the
crusaders,  iii.  217.

Compass,  mariner's,  when  invented,
and  its  influence  on  the  extension  of  com-
merce, iii.  80.

Composition  for  personal  injuries,  the
motives  for  establishing,  iii.  239.  The
custom  of  deduced  from  the  practice  of
the  ancient  Germans,  252.

Compurgators,  introduced  as  evidence
in  the  jurisprudence  of  the  middle  ages,
iii.  53.

Conhillos,an  Aragonian  gentleman,  em-
ployed by  Ferdinand  of  Aragon,  to  ob-
tain Joanna's  consent  to  his  regency  of
Castile,  iii.  324.  Thrown  into  a  dungeon
by  the  archduke  Philip,  ib.

Condottieri,  in  the  Italian  policy,  what,
iii.  130.

Confession  of  Augsburg,  drawn  up  by
Melancthon,  iv.  248.

Conrad,  count  of  Franconia,  how  he
obtained  election  to  the  empire,  iii.  166.

Conradin,  the  last  rightful  heir  to  the
crown  of  Naples  of  the  house  of  Swabia,
his  unhappy  fate,  iii.  135.

Constance,  tieaty  of,  between  the  em-
peror Frederic  Barbarossa  and  the  free
cities  of  Italy,  iii.  221.

Constance,  the  privileges  of  that  city
taken  away  by  the  emperor  Charles  V.,
for  disobedience  to  the  interim,  v.  170.

Constantinople,  its  flourishing  state  at
the  time  of  the  crusades,  iii.  32.  When
first  taken  by  the  Turks,  179.  The  cru-
saders how  looked  upon  there,  217.  The
account  given  of  this  city  by  the  Latin
writers,  218.

Constitutions,  popular,  how  formed,
iii.  40.

Cordova,  Gonsalvo  <le,  secures  the
crown  of  Naples  to  Ferdinand  of  Aragon,
iii.  136.

Corporations,  and  bodies  politic,  the
establishment  of,  how  far  favourable  to
the  improvement  of  manners,  iii.  36.  The
privileges  of,  how  first  claimed,  37.

Charters  of  community,  why  granted  by
Louis  le  Gros  in  France,  38.  The  institu-
tion of,  obtains  all  over  Europe,  39.
Their  effects,  ib.

Corsairs  of  Barbary,  an  account  of  the
rise  of,  iv.  281.  See  Algiers,  Barbarossa.

Cortes  of  Aragon,  its  constitution  and
privileges,  iii.  145,  283.  Acknowledges
the  archduke  Philip's  title  to  the  crown,
iii.  319.  Not  allowed  to  assemble  in  the
name  of  Charles  V.,  360.  Its  opposition
to  his  desires,  ib.  Is  prevailed  on  by  the
emperor  to  recognise  his  son  Philip  as
successor  to  that  V.ingdom,  v.  8.  See
Spain.

of  Castile,  a  history  of,  and

an  account  of  its  constitution  and  privi-
leges, iii.  148.  The  vigilance  with  which
it  guarded  its  privileges  against  the  en-
croachments of  the  regal  power,  149.  Ac-
knowledges the  archduke  Philip's  title  to
the  crown,  iii.  319.  Is  prevailed  on  to  ac-
knowledge Ferdinand  regent,  according
to  Isabella's  will,  32*.  Acknowledges
Philip  and  Joanna  king  and  queen  of
Castile,  and  their  son  Charles,  prince  of
Asturias,  329.  Declares  Charles  king,
and  votes  him  a  free  gift,  357.  Sum-
moned by  Charles  to  meet  at  Corapos-
tella  in  Galicia,  377.  Tumultuary  pro-
ceedings thereupon,  378.  A  donative
voted,  379.  Loses  all  its  influence  by  the
dissolution  of  die  holy  junta,  iv.  111.
Its  backwardness  to  grant  supplies  for
the  emperor's  wars  in  Italy,  198.  Refuses
his  pressing  solicitations  for  a  supply,
220.  Assembled  at  Toledo  to  grant  sup-
plies to  the  emperor,  340.  The  remon-
strances of,  341.  The  ancient  constitution
of,  subverted  by  Charles,  ib.  See  Spain.

of  Valentia,  prevailed  on  by

the  emperor  Charles  V.  to  acknowledge
his  son  Philip  successor  to  that  kingdom,
v.  8.  See  Spain.

Cortoua,  cardinal  di,  governor  of  Flo-
rence for  the  pope,  expelled  by  the  Flo-
rentines, on  the  pope's  captivity,  iv.  216.

Cosmo  di  Medici.  See  Medici.

Cranruer,  archbishop  of  Canterbury,
annuls  the  marriage  of  Henry  VIII.  with
Catharine  of  Aragon,  which  was  refused
to  Henry  by  the  pope,  iv.  263.  His  sen-
tence reversed  by  the  pope,  264.

Crespy,  peace  of,  between  the  empe-
ror and  Francis,  v.  36.

Croy,  William  de,  nephew  to  Chievres,
made  archbishop  of  Toledo,  by  Charles
V.,  iii.  359.  Dies,  iv.  110.

Crusades,  the  first  motives  of  under-
taking, iii.  28.  The  enthusiastic  zeal
with  which  they  were  undertaken,  ib.
First  promoted  by  Peter  the  Hermit,  30.
The  success  of  them,  31.  The  conse-
quences resulting  from  them,  ib.  Their
effects  on  manners,  S2.  On  property,  33.

INDEX.

435

How  advantageous  to  the  enlargement  of
the  regal  power  of  the  European  princes,
34.  The  commercial  effects  of,  ib.  79.
The  universal  frenzy  for  engaging  in  these
expeditions  accounted  for,  213,  note  xiii.
The  privileges  granted  to  those  who  en-
gaged in  them,  214.  Stephen,  earl  of
Chartres  and  Blois,  his  account  of  them,
215.  The  expense  of  conducting  them,
how  raised,  ib.  Character  given  of  the
crusaders  by  the  Greek  writers,  216.

D'ALBERT,  John,  expelled  from  his
kingdom  of  Navarre,  by  Ferdinand  of
Aragon,  iii.  333.  Invades  Navarre,  but
is  defeated  by  cardinal  Ximenes,  349.

D'Alembert,  M.,  his  observation  on
the  order  of  Jesuits,  iv.  365.

D'Andelot,  brother  to  Coligni,  is  de-
feated by  the  duke  of  Saxony  in  an  en-
deavour to  succour  St.  Quintin,  v.  354.
But  enters  the  town  with  the  fugitives,  ib.
The  town  taken  by  assault,  359.

Dauphin  of  France,  eldest  son  of  Fran-
cis I.,  is  delivered  up  with  the  duke  of
Orleans  to  the  emperor  Charles  V.  in
exchange  for  his  father,  as  hostages  for
the  performance  of  the  treaty  of  Madrid,
iv.  178.  His  death  imputed  to  poison,
319.  The  most  probable  cause  of  it,  320.

,  late  duke  of  Orleans,  second

son  of  Francis  I.,  commands  an  army,
and  invades  Spain,  v.  6.  Is  forced  to
abandon  the  siege  of  Perpignan,  7.  Is
dissatisfied  at  the  peace  of  Crespy,  40.
Makes  a  secret  protestation  against  it,  ib.

of  France,  son  of  Henry  II.,

contracted  to  Mary  the  young  queen  of
Scotland ,  v .  1 54.  Is  married  to  her,  373.

Debt,  the  first  hint  of  attaching  move-
ables  for  the  recovery  of,  derived  from
the  canon  law,  iii.  263.

Debtors,  how  considered  in  the  rude
and  simple  state  of  society,  iii.  223.

Denmark,  a  summary  view  of  the  revo-
lutions in,  during  the  16th  century,  v.  420.

,  king  of,  joins  the  Protestant

league  at  Smalkalde,  iv.  337.

De  Retz,  cardinal,  writes  a  history  of
Fiesco's  conspiracy  while  a  youth,  v.
114.

Diana  of  Poitiers,  mistress  to  Henry
II.,  of  France,  assists  the  Guises  in  per-
snading  Henry  to  an  alliance  with  pope
Paul  IV.  against  the  emperor,  v.  319.
Induces  Henry  to  break  the  treaty  of
Vancelles,  336.  Marries  her  grand-
daughter to  one  of  Montmorency's  sons,
379.  Joins  Mohtmorency  against  the
Guises,  ib.

Diets  of  Germany,  some  account  ef,
iii.  308.

Doctors,  in  the  different  faculties,  dis-
pute precedence  -with  knights,  iii.  *69.

Doria,  Andrew,  assists  Lautrec  in  sub-

duing Genoa,  iv.  2J8.  Conquer*  and
kills  Moncada  in  a  sea-engagement  be-
fore the  harbour  of  Naples,  226.  His
character,  227.  Is  disgusted  with  the
behaviour  of  the  French,  228.  Revolts
to  the  emperor,  ib.  Opens  to  Naples  a
communication  by  sea,  229.  Rescues
Genoa  from  the  French,  230.  Restores
the  government  of,  to  the  citizens,  231.
The  respect  paid  to  his  memory,  232.
Attends  the  emperor  Charles  in  his  dis-
astrous expedition  against  Algiers,  381.
His  partia)  fondness  for  his  kinsman
Giannetino,  v.  104.  His  narrow  escape
in  Lavagna's  insurrection,  112.  Returns
on  Lavagna's  death,  and  the  dispersion  of
his  party,  114.  See  Genoa  and  Lavagna.

Doria,  Giannetino,  his  character,  v.
104.  Is  murdered  by  Lavagna's  con-
spirators, 111.

Dover,  an  interview  there  between
Henry  VIII,  and  the  emperorCharlesV.,
iv.  8.

Dragut,  a  corsair,  commands  the  Turk-
ish fleet  which  ravages  the  coast  of  Na-
ples, v.  257.

Du  Prat,  chancellor  of  France,  his
character,  iv.  121.  Commences  a  law-
suit against  Charles  duke  of  Bourbon,
for  his  estate,  at  the  instigation  of  Louise
the  king's  mother,  ib.

Duelling,  the  custom  of,  how  rendered
general,  iv,  223.  Its  influence  on  man-
ners, 224.

Dtiren  in  Cleves,  taken  by  the  empe-
ror Charles  V.,  the  inhabitants  put  to  th«
sword,  and  the  town  burnt,  v.  14.

ECCTUS,  an  adversary  of  Luther's,  holds
a  public  disputation  with  him  at  Leipsic,
on  the  validity  of  the  papal  authority,
iv.  27.

Ecclesiastical  censures  of  the  Romish
church,  the  dreadful  effects  of,  iv.  42.

— : . jurisprudence,  more  per-
fect in  its  plan  than  the  civtf  courts  of  the
middle  ages,  iii.  67.

•— reservation,  in  the  recess

of  the  diet  of  Augsburg,,  remarks  on,
v.  311.

: ,  when,  and  by  what  de-
grees, they  claimed  exemption  from  civil
jurisdiction,  iii.  261.  Military  talents
cultivated  and  exercised  by  those  of  the
middle  ages,  266.

Edinburgh  plundered  and  bnmt  by  the
earl  of  Hertford,  v.  32.

Edward  III.  of  England,  his  endea-
vours to  introduce  commerce  into  hi«
kingdom,  iii.  82.

Edward  VI.,  of  England,  his  charac-
ter, v.  274.

Egmont,  count  of,  commands  tn«  ca-
valry at  the  battle  of  St.  Quintin,  and  puts
Montmorency's  troops  to  flight,  v.  355.
2  F  *

436

INDEX.

Engages  marshal  de  Termes,  and  defeats
him  by  the  casual  arrival  of  an  English
squadron,  374.

Egypt,  how  and  by  whom  added  to
the  Ottoman  empire,  iii.  364.

Ehrenberg,  the  castle  of,  taken  by
Maurice  of  Saxony,  v.  223.

Eignotz,  a  faction  in  Geneva  so  termed,
an  account  of,  iv.  301 .

Electors  of  Germany,  the  rise  of  their
privileges,  iii.  175.

Elizabeth,  sister  of  Mary,  her  accession
to  the  crown  of  England,  v.  387.  Her
character,  388.  Is  addressed  by  Philip
of  Spain  and  Henry  of  France,  for  mar-
riage, ib.  Her  prudent  conduct  between
them,  389.  How  determined  against
Henry,  ib.  Her  motives  for  rejecting
Philip,  390.  Returns  Philip  an  evasive
answer,  ib.  Demands  restitution  of  Ca-
lais at  the  conferences  at  Chateau-Cam-
bresis,  391.  Establishes  the  Protestant
religion  in  England,  392.  Treaty  be-
tween her  and  Henry  signed  at  Chateau*
Cambresis,  ib.

Eloy,  St.,  his  definition  or  description
of  a  good  Christian,  iii.  211,  note  xi.

Emmanuel  Philibert,  duke  of  Savoy.
See  Savoy.

Emperors  of  Germany,  an  inquiry  into
their  power,  jurisdiction,  and  revenue,
iii.  304,  note  xlii.  The  ancient  mode  of
electing  them,  306.

England,  a  summary  view  of  the  con-
tests between,  and  France,  hi.  89.  The
consequences  of  its  losing  its  continental
possessions,  91.  The  power  of  the  crown,
how  extended,  101.  See  Henry  VII.
Why  so  many  marks  of  Saxon  usuages
and  language,  in  comparison  with  those
of  the  Normans,  to  be  found  in,  186,
note  iv.  When  corporations  began  to  be
established  in,  229.  Instances  of  the
long  continuance  of  personal  servitude
there,  236.  Inquiry  into  the  Saxon  laws
for  putting  an  end  to  private  wars,  243.
The  causes  of  the  speedy  decline  of  pri-
vate wars  there,  proposed  to  the  re-
searches of  antiquarians,  244.  The  last
instances  of  judicial  combat  recorded  in
the  history  of,  251.  The  territorial  juris-
diction of  the  barons  how  abolished,  260.
Cause  of  the  slow  progress  of  commerce
there,  278.  The  first  commercial  treaty
entered  into  by,  279.  By  what  means
that  kingdom  was  freed  from  the  papal
supremacy,  and  received  the  doctrines
of  the  reformation,  iv.  264.  Mary,  queen
of,  married  to  prince  Philip,  son  of  the
emperor  Charles  V.,  contrary  to  the  sense
of  the  nation,  v.  276.  The  marriage  ra-
tified by  parliament,  279.  Is  reluctantly
engaged  by  Philip,  now  king  of  Spain,
in  the  war  against  France,  351.  Mary
levies  money  by  her  prerogative  to  carry

on  the  war,  ib.  Calais  taken  by  the
duke  of  Guise,  369.  Guisnes  and  Hames
taken,  ib.  Death  of  Mary,  and  ncccssion
of  Elizabeth, 387,  The  Protestant  religion
established  by  Elizabeth,  392.  Treaty
with  France  signed  at  Chateau-Cambresis,
ib.  Its  interior  strength  how  increased
by  the  conduct  of  Henry  VIII.,  406.
Its  power  no  longer  fruitlessly  wasted  on
the  continent,  408.  Alteration  of  its  con-
duct towards  Scotland,  ib.

Enguien,  the  count  de,  besieges  Carig-
nan,  v.  27.  Desires  of  Francis  permission
to  engage  Guasto,  28.  Defeats  Guasto
in  a  pitched  battle,  29.

Erard  de  la  Mark,  ambassador  of
Charles  V.  to  the  diet  of  Frankfort,  his
private  motives  for  thwarting  the  preten-
sions of  Francis  I.  of  France  to  the  im-
perial crown,  iii.  372.  Signs  the  capi-
tulation of  the  Germanic  body  on  behalf
of  Charles,  373.

Erasmus,  some  account  of,  iv.  50.
Preceded  Luther  in  his  censures  against
the  Romish  church,  ib.  Concurs  with
him  in  his  intentions  of  reformation,  51.
Motives  which  checked  him  in  this,  ib.

Escurial,  palace  of,  built  by  Philip  II.
in  memory  of  the  battle  of  St.  Quintiu,
v.  360.

Evidence,  the  imperfect  nature  of  that
admitted  in  law  proceedings  during  the
middle  ages,  iii.  52.  Rendered  ineffec-
tual by  the  judicial  combat,  250.

Europe,  the  alterations  in,  by  the  con-
quest of  the  Romans,  iii.  9.  The  im-
provements the  nations  of,  received  in
exchange  for  their  liberties,  10.  Its  dis-
advantages under  this  change  of  circum-
stances, ib.  Inquiry  into  the  supposed
populousness  of  the  ancient  northern  na-
tions, 12.  The  savage  desolations  ex-
ercised by  the  Goths,  Vandals,  and  Huns,
16.  The  universal  change  occasioned  by
their  irruptions  and  conquests,  17.  The
first  rudiments  of  the  present  policy  of,
to  be  deduced  from  this  period,  18.  Ori-
gin of  the  feudal  system,  19.  See  Feudal
System.  The  general  barbarism  intro-
duced with  this  policy,  24.  At  what
time  government  and  manners  began  to
improve,  27.  The  causes  and  events
which  contributed  to  this  improvement,
28.  See  Crusades,  Corporations,  People.
The  miseries  occasioned  by  private  wars
in,  48.  Methods  taken  to  suppress  them,
49.  Judicial  combats  prohibited,  51.  The
defects  of  judicial  proceedings  in  the
middle  ages,  ib.  The  influence  of  super-
stition in  these  proceedings,  54.  The
origin  of  the  independent  territorial  juris-
dictions of  the  barons,  60.  The  bad  con-
sequences of  their  judicial  power,  62.
The  steps  taken  by  princes  to  abolish
their  courts,  63.  An  inquiry  into  the

INDEX.

437

canon  law,  65,  Revival  of  the  Roman  attacked  by  the  iraperialiits,  but  saccess-
law,  68.  Effects  of  the  spirit  of  chivalry,  fully  -protected  by  the  French,  194.
72.  How  improved  by  the  progress  of  Placentia,  restored  to  him  by  Philip  II.
science  and  cultivation  of  literature,  73.  of  Spain,  363.

Christianity  corrupted  when  first  received  Farnese,  Peter  Lewis,  natural  son  of
in,  76.  Scholastic  theology  the  first  ob-  pope  Paul  III.,  obtains  of  his  father
ject  of  learning  in,  77.  Low  state  of  com-  the  duchies  of  Parma  and  Placentia,
merce  in,  during  the  middle  ages,  79.  v.  49.  His  character,  151.  Is  assassi-
Commerce  revives  in  Italy,  80.  Is  pro-  nated,  152.  Feodum,  the  etymology  of
moted  by  the  Hanseatic  league,  81.  Is  that  word,  Hi.  204.

cultivated  in  the  Netherlands,  82. The Ferdinand,  king  of  Aragon,  unites  the
effects  of  the  progress  of  commerce  on Spanish  monarchy  by  his  marriage  with
the  polishing  of  manners,  83.  The  effects Isabella  of  Castile,  iii.  143. His  schemes
of  the  marriage  of  the  heiress  of  Bur- to  exalt  the  regal  power,  153. Resumes-
gundy  with  the  archduke  Maximilian  on former  grants  of  lands  from  his  barons,
the  state  of,  106. By  what  means  stand- 154. Unites  to  the  crown  the  grand-
ing  forces  became  general  in,  109. Con- masterships of the three military or-
sequences  of  the  league  of  Cambray  to, ders, ib. Why  he  patronised  the  as-
115.  A  view  of  the  political  constitution sociation called the holy  brotherhood
of  the  several  states  of,  at  the  commence- against  the  barons,  157. How  he  ac-
ment  of  the  sixteeth  century,  120.  Italy, quired  his  kingdoms,  iii.  318. Invites
121. The  papacy, 122. Venice,  129. his  daughter  Joanna,  and  her  husband,
Florence,  132. Naples, 133. Milan, Philip,  archduke  of  Austria,  to  Spain,
136. Spain,  139. France,  158. Ger- ib. Becomes  jealous of  Philip,  319.
many,  165. Turkey,  178. Instances  of Carries  on  his  war with  France  v'igo-
tfae  small  intercourse  among  nations  in rously, notwithstanding  Philip's treaty
the  middle  ages,  270. A  short  view  of with Lewis  320. His  queen Isabella
the  state  of,  at  the  death  of  the  emperor dies,  and  leaves  him  regent  of  Castile,
Maximilian,  iii.  362. The  contemporary under restrictions, 321. -Resigns the
monarchs  of  all,  illustrious  at  the  time  of kingdom  of  Castile,  and  is  acknowledged
Charles  V.,  iv.  11.  The  method  of  carry- regent by  the cortes,  322. His cha-
ing  on  war  in,  how  improved  beyond  the racter,  ib. His  maxims  of  government
practice  of  earlier  ages,  127. The  sen- odious  to  the  Castilians,  ib. Required
timents  of,  on  Charles's  treatment  of  the by Philip to  resign  his  regency,  323.
pope,  214. A  review  of  the  state  of,  dur- Joanna's  letter  of  consent  procured  by
ing  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Charles  V., him,  intercepted  by  Philip,  and  herself
v.  397. The  remarkable  change  in,  at confined,  324. Is  deserted  by  the  Cas-
this  period,  398. How  affected  by  the tilian  nobility,  ib. Determines  to  exclude
revolt  of  Luther  against  the  church  of his  daughter  from  the  succession  by  mar-
Rome,  410.  rying,  325. Marries  Germane  de  Foix,
Eutemi,  king  of  Algiers,  engages  Bar- niece  to  Lewis  XII.  of  France,  ib. A
barossa  in his  service,  and  is  murdered treaty  between  him  and  Philip  at  Sala-
by  him,  iv.  282. manca,  by  which  the  regency  of  Castile,
Excommunication in the Romish is  jointly  vested  in  them  and  Joanna,
church,  the  original  institution  of,  and 326. Prevails  on  Henry  VII. of  Eng-
the  use  made  of  it,  iv.  42. land to detain  Philip  for  three  months

when  driven  on  that  coast,  327. The

FARNESE,  Alexander,  his  unanimous  Castilians  declare  against  him,  ib.  Re-
election to  the  papacy,  iv.  265.  See  iigns  the  regency  of  Castile  by  treaty,
Paul  III.  328.  Interview  between  him  and  Phi-

, cardinal, accompanies the lip, ib. Is absent at Naples when

troops  sent  by  the  pope  to  the  emperor,  Philip  died,  331.  Returns  and  gams,
against  the  army  of  the  Protestant  league,  with  the  regency  of  Castile,  the  good-
v.  85.  Returns  disgusted,  ib.  Contri-  will  of  the  natives  by  his  prudent  ad-
butes  to  the  election  of  cardinal  di  Monte  ministration,  333.  Acquires  by  disho-
to  the  papacy,  174.  nourable  means  the  kingdom  of  JNa-
-— ,  Octavio,  grandson  of  pope  varre,  ib.  How  he  destroyed  his  con-
Paul  HI.  commands  the  Italian  auxil-  stitution,  334.  Endeavours  to  diminish
aries  against  the  army  of  the  Protestant  his  grandson  Charles  s  power  by  a  will
league,  v.  84.  Leads  the  troops  home  in  favour  of  Ferdmand.ib.  Alters  nu
again  by  the  pope's  order,  102.  Endea-  will  in  favour  of  Charles,  Ma.  JJies,
vours  to  surprise  Parma,  and  enters  into  ib.  Review  of  his  administration,  o39.
treaty  with  the  emperor,  172.  Is  con-  Xiraenes  appointed, by  his  will,  regent,
firmed  in  Parma  by  Julius,  174.  Pro-  Castile  until  the  arrival  of  Charlei  V.,ib.
curei  an  alliance  with  France,  193.  Ii  Ferdinand,  second  son  of  Philip  arcb.

438  INDEX.

duke  of  Au»tri^,  born,  iii.  320.  Left  re-  discords  among  the  barons  under,  S3. —
gent  of  Aragon  by  his  grandfather  Ferdi-  The  servile  state  of  the  people,  ib.  The
nand,  334.  This  revoked  by  a  subse-  weak  authority  of  the  king,  ib.  Its  in-
quent  will,  by  which  he  obtains  only  a  fluence  on  the  external  operations  of  war,
pension,  333.  Discontented  with  his  ib.  The  general  extinction  of  all  arts  and
disappointment,  he  is  taken  to  Madrid  sciences  effected  by,  24.  Its  operation
under  the  eye  of  Cardinal  Ximenes,  312.  on  religion,  25.  Its  influence  on  the  cha-
Sent  by  Charles  V.  to  visit  their  grand-  racter  of  the  human  mind,  26.  At  what
father  Maximilian,  359.  Is  elected  King  time  government  and  manners  began  to
of  Hungary  and  Bohemia,  iv.  211.  Signs  be  improved,  27.  The  causes  and  events
a  deed  called  the  Reverse,  ib.  The  em-  which  contributed  to  this  improvement,
peror  endeavours  to  get  him  elected  king  28. — See  Crusades.  The  ancient  state  of
of  the  Romans,  251.  He  is  opposed  by  cities  under,  36.  The  frame  of  national
the  Protestants,  252.  Is  crowned  king  of  councils  under  this  policy,  41.  How  al-
the  Romans,  253.  Forms  a  confederacy  tered  by  the  progress  of  civil  liberty,  43.
against  the  Anabaptists  at  Munster,  274.  An  inquiry  into  the  administration  of  jus-
Opposes  the  restoration  of  Ulric  duke  of  tice  under,  46.  Private  war,  47.  Judi-
Wurtemburg,  277.  Recognises  his  title,  cial  combat,  51.  The  independent  juris-
and  concludes  a  treaty  with  him,  278.  His  diction  of  the  barons,  61.  The  distinction
kingdom  of  Hungary  wrested  from  him  between  freemen  and  vassals  under,  199.
by  John  Zapol  Screpius,  374.  Besieges  How  strangers  were  considered  and  treat-
the  young  king  Stephen  and  his  mother  ed  under,  271.

in  Buda,  but  is  defeated  by  the  Turks,  Fiefs,  under  the  feudal  system,  a  his-
376.  His  mean  offers  of  submission  to  tory  of,  iii.  199.  When  they  became
the  Porte,  ib.  Which  are  rejected,  378.  hereditary,  201.

Courts  the  favour  of  the  Protestants,  T.  Fiesco,  count  of  Lavagna. — See  La-
21.  -  Opens  the  diet  at  Worms,  43.  vagna.

Requires  it  to  submit  to  the  decisions  of Jerome,  engages  in  his  brother's

the  council  of  Trent,  ib.  Agrees  to  pay  conspiracy,  and  fails  in  securing  Andrew
a  tribute  to  Solyman  for  Hungary,  66.  Doria,  v.  111.  His  imprudent  vanity  on
Encroaches  on  the  liberties  of  Bohemia,  his  brother's  death,  113.  Shuts  himself

146.  His  rigorous  treatment  of  Prague, up  in  a  fort  on  his  estate,  114. Is  re-

147.  Disarms the Bohemians, 148. duced  and  put  to  death,  120.

Obtains  the  sovereignty  of  the  city  of  Fitzstephens,  observations  on  his  ac-
Constance,  170.  Invades  Transylvania  count  of  the  state  of  London  at  the  time
by  invitation  of  Martinuzzi,  205.  Ob-  of  Henry  II.  iii.  250.
tains  the  resignation  of  Transylvania  from  Flanders. — See  Netherlands,
queen  Isabella,  207.  Orders  Martinuzzi  Florence,  a  view  of  the  constitution  of,
to  be  assassinated,  209.  Enters  into  tie-  at  the  commencement  of  the  sixteenth
gotiation  with  Maurice  on  behalf  of  the  century,  iii,  132.  The  influence  acquired
emperor,  231.  Hi»  motives  for  pro-  by  Cosmo  di  Medici  in,  ib.  The  inha-
moting  the  emperor's  agreeing  with  Mau-  bitants  of,  revolt  against  pope  Clement
rice,  235.  Isabella  and  her  son  Stephen  VII.  on  the  news  of  his  captivity,  and
recover  possession  of  Transylvania,  266.  recover  their  liberty,  iv.  216.  Are  re-
Opens  a  diet  at  Augsburg,  and  excites  duced  to  subjection  to  Alexander  di
suspicions  in  the  Protestants,  300.  The  Medici,  by  the  emperor,  243.  Alexan-
emperor  leaves  the  internal  admiuistra-  der  di  Medici,  duke  of,  assassinated  by
tion  of  German  affairs  to  him,  303.  Is  his  kinsman  Lorenzo,  329.  Cosmo  di
again  applied  to  by  the  emperor  to  re-  Medici  advanced  to  the  sovereignty,  330.
sign  his  pretensions  of  succession  to  Phi-  Cosmo,  supported  by  the  emperor,  de-
lip,  but  refuses,  ib.  Endeavours  therefore  feats  the  partisans  of  Lorenato,  331.
to  gain  the  friendship  of  the  diet,  305.  Cosmo  asserts  his  independency  on  the
Again  refuses  the  emperor's  solicitations,  emperor,  v.  254.

542. Charles  resigns  the  imperial  crown  Fonseca,  Antonio  de,  commander  in

to  him,  ib. Assembles  the college  of  chief  of  the  forces  in  Spain,  ordered  by

electors  at Frankfort, which acknow-  cardinal  Adrian  to  besiege  the  insurgents

ledges  him  emperor of  Germany,  370.  in  Segovia,  iv.  88. Is  denied  liberty  of

The  pope  refuses  toacknowledge  him,37l.  taking  military  stores,  by  the  inhabitants

Feudal  Government,  a  view  of,  as  it  ex-  of  Medina  del  Campo,  ib. Attacks  and

isted  in  Spain,  iv.  90.  almost  burns  the  whole  town,  ib. Is  repul-

>M  — —  System,  the  origin  of,  deduced,  sed,  ib.  His  house  at  Valladolidburnt,  89.

iii.  20.  The  primary  object  of  this  policy,  France,  by  what  means  the  towns  in,

ib. Its  deficiencies  for  interior  govern-  first  obtained  charters  of  community,  iii.

ment,  11. Tenures  of  land,  how  csta-  38. Ordinances  of  Louis  X.  and  his  bro-

blished  under,  22. The  rise  of  intestine  ther  Philip  in  favour  of  civil  liberty,  45.

INDEX.

439

Methods  employed  lo  suppress  private
wars,  49.  St.  Louis  attempts  to  discoun-
tenance judicial  combat,  58.  A  view  of
the  contests  between,  and  England,  89.
The  consequences  of  its  recovering  its
provinces  from  England,  91.  The  mo-
narchy of,  how  strengthened  by  this
event,  92.  The  rise  of  standing  forces  in,
ib.  The  regal  prerogative  strengthened
by  this  measure,  94.  The  extension  of
the  regal  prerogative  vigorously  pursued
by  Louis  XL,  97.— See  Louis  XL  The
effects  of  the  invasion  of  Italy  by  Charles
VIII.  106.— See  Charles  VIII.  Nati-
onal infantry  established  in,  113.  League
of  Cambray  formed  against  the  Venetians,
115.  Battle  of  Ghiarradadda,  117.  Au
inquiry  into  its  ancient  government  and
laws,  158.  The  power  of  the  general  as-
semblies under  the  first  race  of  kings,  ib.
Under  the  second  and  third,  159.  The
regal  power  confined  to  the  king's  own
domains,  160.  When  the  general  assem-
bly or  states-general  lost  their  legislative
authority,  ib.  When  the  kings  began  to
assert  their  legislative  power,  1 61.  When
the  government  of,  became  purely  mo-
narchical, 162.  The  regal  power  never-
theless restrained  by  the  privileges  of  the
nobility,  ib.  An  inquiry  into  the  juris-
diction of  its  parliaments,  particularly
that  of  Paris,  164.  How  the  allodial
property  of  land  there  was  altered  into
feudal,  203.  The  progress  of  liberty  in
that  kingdom  traced,  230,  note  six.  The
attempts  to  establish  liberty  there  unsuc-
cessful, 231.  The  last  instance  of  judi-
cial combat  recorded  in  the  history  of,
252.  The  present  government  of,  com-
pared with  that  of  ancient  Gaul,  291,
note  xxxviii.  The  states-general  when
first  assembled,  299.  The  acquisitions  of
that  kingdom,  during  the  reign  of  the
emperor  Charles  V.,  v.  403.  The  cha-
racter of  the  people  of,  404.  -The  good
consequences  of  the  civil  wars  in  that
kingdom  to  the  rest  of  Europe,  405.

Francis  I.,  king  of  France,  his  charac-
ter influenced  by  the  spirit  of  chivalry,
111.74.  Is  emulated  by  the  emperor
Charles  V.,  ib.  Concludes  a  peace  with
Charles  V.,  and  the  conditions  of  the
treaty,  iii.  352,  353.  Sends  a  fruitless
embassy  to  Charles  for  the  restitution  of
Navarre  to  the  young  king,  361 .  Aspires
to  the  imperial  crown  at  the  death  of
Maximilian,  363.  Reasons  by  which
he  supported  his  pretensions,  365.  Re-
marks on  the  equipages  of  his  ambassa-
dors to  the  German  States,  366.  His
pretentious  adopted  by  the  Venetians,
367,  Loses  the  election,  372.  Rise
of  the  rivalship  between  him  and  Charles,
iv.  i.  Courts  the  favour  of  cardinal  Wol-
sey,  7.  Promises  Wolsey  his  interest

for  the  papacy,  9.  Has  an  interview
with  Henry  VIII.  of  England,  ib.  Wres-
tles with  Henry  and  throws  him,  10,
note.  His  advantages  over  Charles  at
the  commencement  of  hostilities  between
them,  58.  Concludes  an  alliance  with
the  pope,  61.  Invades  and  reduces  Na-
varre, in  the  name  of  Henry  D'Albret,
son  of  John,  the  former  king,  63.  The
French  driven -out  by  the  imprudence  of
L'Esparre,  their  general,  who  is  taken
prisoner  by  the  Spaniards,  64,  65.  Re-
takes Mouson  from  the  imperialists,  67.
Invades  the  Low  Countries,  but  loses
the  opportunities  of  success  by  impru-
dence, ib.  Rejects  the  demands  of
Charles  at  the  congress  at  Calais,  68.
A  league  concluded  between  Charles  and
Henry  VIII.  against  him,  69.  His  im-
prudent appointment  of  the  marechal  de
Foix  to  the  government  of  Milan,  71.  De
Foix  attacks  Reggio,  but  is  repulsed  by
the  governor  Guicciardini  the  historian,
ib.  The  pope  declares  against  him,  72.
His  embarrassments  on  the  invasion  of
Milan,  ib.  His  mother  seizes  the  money
appointed  for  the  payment  of  the  Mi-
lanese troops,  73.  Milan  taken  and  the
French  driven  out,  75.  Levies  a  body  of
Swiss,  78.  Who  insist  on  giving  a  preci-
pitate battle  to  the  imperialists,  which  is
lost,  79.  War  declared  against  him  by
Henry  VIII.,  80.  His  expedients  to  sup-
ply his  treasury,  ib.  The  plan  pursued  by
him  to  resist  the  incursions  of  the  English,
82.  Picardy  invaded  by  Henry,  ib.  The
Venetians  league  with  the  emperor  against
him,  118.  To  which  pope  Adrian  accedes,
ib.  His  expeditious  movement  against  the
Milanese,  ib.  Disconcerted  by  the  duke
of  Bourbon's  conspiracy,  119.  Taxes  him
with  betraying  his  cause,  which  Bourbon
denies,  122.  Bourbon  escapes  to  Italy,
and  Francis  returns,  123.  Appoints  the
admiral  Bonnivet  to  command  against  the
Milanese,  ib.  Picardy  invaded  by  the
duke  of  Suffolk,  who  is  driven  back,  127.
Repulses  the  invasion  of  Guienne  and
Burgundy  by  Charles,  128.  His  successful
close  of  the  campaign,  ib.  His  prudent
care  to  disappoint  the  imperialists  in  their
invasion  of  Provence,  143.  Assembles  an
army,  which  causes  the  imperialists  to  re-
tire from  Marseilles,  ib.  Determines  to
invade  the  Milanese,  144.  Appoints  his
mother  Louise  regent  during  his  absence,
145.  Enters  Milan,  and  takes  possession
of  the  city,  146.  Advised  by  Bonnivet  to
besiege  Pavia,  147.  His  vigorous  attacks
on  Pavia,  148.  Concludes  a  treaty  of
neutrality  with  pope  Clement,  149.  His
imprudent  invasion  of  Naples,  150.  Re-
solves, by  Bonnivet's  advice,  to  attack
Bourbon's  army,  advanced  to  the  relief
of  Pavia,  152.  Is  routed  at  the  battle  of

440

INDEX.

Pavia,  153.  Is  taken  prisoner,  154.  Is
sent  to  the  castle  of  Pizzitchitone  under
the  custody  of  Don  Ferdinand  Alarcon,
ib.  Refuses  the  propositions  made  to  him
by  Charles,  162.  Is  carried  to  Spain  on
his  desire  of  a  personal  interview  with
Charles,  165.  Is  rigorously  treated  in
Spain,  169.  Falls  dangerously  ill,  170.
Is  visited  by  Charles,  171.  Resolves  to
resign  his  kingdom,  173.  Is  delivered
from  this  captivity  by  the  treaty  of  Ma-
drid, 174.  His  secret  protestations  against
the  validity  of  this  treaty,  176.  Marries
the  queen  of  Portugal,  177.  Recovers  his
liberty,  and  the  dauphin  and,  the  duke
of  Orleans  delivered  up  hostages  to
Charles  for  the  performance  of  the  treaty
of  Madrid,  178.  Writes  a  letter  of  ac-
knowledgment to  Henry  VIII.  of  Eng-
land, 188.  His  reply  to  the  imperial
ambassadors,  ib.  Enters  into  a  league
with  the  pope,  the  Venetians,  and  Sfurza,
against  Charles,  189.  Is  absolved  from
his  oath  to  observe  the  treaty  of  Madrid,
190.  His  behaviour  to  the  emperor's
second  embassy,  192.  Is  dispirited  by
his  former  ill  success,  193.  Enters  into  a
treaty  with  Henry  VIII.  of  England
against  the  emperor,  215.  Successes  of
his  general  Lautrec  in  Italy,  218.  His
reply  to  the  emperor's  overtures,  222.
Declares  war  against  him,  and  challenges
him  to  single  combat,  223.  Treats  An-
drew Doria  ill,  who  revolts  from  him  to
the  emperor,  228.  His  army,  under
Saluces,  driven  out  of  Italy,  230.  His
troops  in  Milan  routed,  232.  His  en-
deavours towards  an  accommodation,
233.  Terms  of  the  peace  at  Carabray,
concluded  by  the  mediation  of  his  mother
Louise  and  Margaret  of  Austria,  235.
Remarks  on  the  sacrifices  made  by  him
in  this  treaty,  and  on  his  conduct  of  the
war,  236*.  Leagues  secretly  with  the  Pro-
testant princes,  254.  His  measures  to
elude  the  treaty  of  Cambray,  261.  His
negotiations  with  the  pope,  ib.  His  in-
terview and  treaty  with  the  pope,  262.
Gives  the  duke  of  Orleans  in  marriage  to
Catharine  di  Medici,  263.  Negotiates  a
treaty  with  Francis  Sforza,duke  of  Milan,
294.  His  envoy  Merveilly  executed  at
Milan  for  murder,  295.  Is  disappointed
in  his  endeavours  to  negotiate  alliances
against  the  emperor,  296.  Invites  Me-
lancthon  to  Paris,  ib.  Evidences  his  zeal
for  the  Romish  religion,  297.  Causes  of
his  quarrel  with  the  duke  of  Savoy,  299.
Seizes  the  duke's  territories,  300.,  His
pretensions  to  the  duchy  of  Milan,  on
the  death  of  Francis  Sforza,  304.  The
emperor's  invective  against  him  before
the  pope  in  council,  306.  Is  invaded  by
Charles,  310.  His  prudent  plan  of  de-
fence, 313.  Joins  the  army  under  Mont-

mo  reucy,  516.  Death  of  tlic  dauphin,
319.  Obtains  a  decree  of  the  parliament
of  Paris  against  the  emperor,  320.  In-
vades the  Low  Countries,  321.  A  suspen-
sion of  arms  in  Flanders,  and  how  nego-
tiated, ib.  A  truce  in  Piedmont,  322.
Motives  to  these  truces,  323.  Concludes
an  alliance  with  Solyraan  the  Magnificent.
324.  Negotiations  for  a  peace  with  the
emperor,  ib.  Concludes  a  truce  for  ten
years  at  Nice,  326.  Reflections  on  the
war,  327.  Marries  Mary  of  Guise  to
James  V.  of  Scotland,  332.  His  interview
with  Charles,  333.  Refuses  the  offers  of
the  deputies  of  Ghent,  347.  Informs
Charles  of  the  offer  made  by  them,  ib.
Grants  the  emperor  leave  to  pass  through
France  to  the  Netherlands,  349.  His  re-
ception of  the  emperor,  350.  Is  deceived
by  the  emperor  in  respect  to  Milan,  353.
His  ambassador  to  the  Porte,  Rincon,
murdered  by  the  imperial  governor  of  the
Milanese,  v.  3.  Prepares  to  resent  the
injury,  4.  Attacks  the  emperor  with  five
armies,  5.  His  first  attempts  rendered
abortive  by  the  imprudence  of  the  duke
of  Orleans,  7.  Renews  his  negotiations
with  sultan  Solyman,  12.  Invades  the
Low  Countries,  13.  Forces  the  emperor
to  raise  the  siege  of  Landrecy,  15.  Dis-
misses Barbarossa,  27.  Gives  the  count
d'Engnien  permission  to  engage  Guasto,
28.  Relieves  Paris,  in  danger  of  being
surprised  by  the  emperor,  35.  Agrees  to  a
separate  peace  with  Charles,  36.  Henry's
haughty  return  to  his  overtures  of  peace,
40.  "  Death  of  the  duke  of  Orleans,  48.
Peace  of  Campe,  76.  Perceives  a  ne-
cessity of  checking  the  emperor's  ambi-
tious designs,  1 16.  Forms  a  general  league
against  him,  117.  Dies,  120.  His  life
and  character  summarily  compared  wilh
those  of  Charles,  121.  Consequences  of
his  death,  124.

Francis  II.,  his  accession  to  the  crown
of  France,  and  character,  v.  396.

Frankfort,  the  diet  of,  assembled  for
the  choice  of  an  emperor  at  the  death  of
Maximilian,  iii.  369.  Names  and  views
of  the  electors,  ib.  The  empire  offered
to  Frederic  of  Saxony,  370.  Who  rejects
it,  with  his  reason,  ib.  Chooses  Charles
V.  emperor,  372.  His  confirmation  of
the  Germanic  privileges  required  and
agreed  to,  373.  City  of,  embraces  the
reformed  religion,  iv.  133.  The  college
of  electors  assembled  there  by  Ferdinand,
who  is  acknowledged  emperor  of  Ger-
many, v.  370.

Frederic,  Barbarossa,  emperor,  the  free
cities  of  Italy  unite  against  him,  iii.  221.
Treaty  of  Constance  witk  there,  ib.  Was
the  first  who  granted  privileges  to  the
cities  in  Germany,  228.
Frederic  duke  of  Saxony  assembles  the

INDEX.

with  the  other  electors  at  the  diet  of
Frankfort,  to  choose  an  emperor,  Hi.  369.
The  empire  offered  to  him,  370.  Rejects
it,  and  votes  for  Charles  V.,  ib.  Refuses
the  presents  of  the  Spanish  ambassadors,
371.  This  disinterested  behaviour  con-
firmed by  the  testimony  of  historians,  ib.
note.  Chooses  Martin  Luther  philoso-
phical professor  at  his  university  of  Wit-
temburg,  iv.  16.  Encourages  Luther  in
his  opposition  to  indulgences,  18.  Pro-
tects him  against  Cajetan,  23.  Causes
Luther  to  be  seized  at  his  return  from
the  diet  at  Worms,  and  conceals  him  at
Wartburg,  56.  Dies,  186,

Fredum,  in  the  ancient  German  usages
explained,  iii.  253.

Freemen,  how  distinguished  from  vas-
sals, under  the  feudal  policy,  iii.  199.
208.  Why  often  induced  to  surrender
their  freedom,  and  become  slaves,  209.

Fregoso,  the  French  ambassador  to
Venice,  murdered  by  the  marquis  del
Guasto,  the  imperial  governor  of  the
Milanese,  v.  3.

.  Fronsperg,  George,  a  Gentian  noble-
man, some  account  of,  he  joins  the  army
of  Charles  V.,  iv.  197.

Fulcherius  Carnotensis,  his  character
of  the  city  of  Constantinople,  iii.  217.

GAUL,  how  allodial  property  of  land
•was  changed  into  feudal  there,  iii.  203.
The  government  of,  compared  with  that
of  modern  France,  291,  note  xxxviii.
The  small  authority  the  kings  of,  enjoyed
over  their  armies,  illustrated  in  an  anec-
dote of  Clotaire  I.,  ib.  Account  of  the
popular  assemblies  of,  292.  The  Salic
laws,  how  enacted,  ib.  Were  not  subject
to  taxation,  293.  See  France.

General  of  the  Jesuits,  an  inquiry  into
his  office  and  despotic  authority,  iv.  358.

Geneva,  an  account  of  its  revolt  against
the  duke  of  Savoy,  iv.  301.

Genoa,  reduced  by  Lautrec.the  French
general,  iv.  218.  The  French  endeavour
to  prejudice  its  trade  in  favour  of  Savona,
228.  Is  rescued  from  the  French  by
Andrew  Doria,  230.  The  government
of,  settled  by  the  disinterestedness  of
Doria,  231.  The  honour  paid  to  Doria's
memory,  232.  Is  visited  by  the  emperor,
240.  A  scheme  formed  to  overturn
the  constitution  of,  by  Fiegco,  count  of
Lavagna,  v.  105.  He  assembles  his  ad-
herents, 108.  The  conspirators  sally
forth  from  Lavagna's  palace,  111.  De-
puties sent  to  know  Lavagna's  terms,
112.  Lavagna  drowned,  ib.  The  in-
surrection ruined^by  the  imprudence  of
his  brother  Jerome  Fiesco,  113.  The
conspirators  disperse,  ib.  Jerome  reduced
and  put  to  death,  120.
Geoffrey  de  Villchardouin,  his  account  of

441

the  magnificence  of  Constantinople  at  the
time  when  taken  by  the  crusaders,  Hi.  218.
Germanada,  an  association  in  Valencia,
so  termed,  on  what  occasion  formed,  iv.
111.  Refuse  to  lay  down  their  arms,  ib.
Their  resentment  levelled  at  the  nobility,
who  raise  an  army  against  them,  112.
Defeat  the  nobles  in  several  actions,  113.
But  are  routed  and  dispersed  by  them,  ib.
Germans,  ancient,  an  account  of  their
usages  and  way  of  life,  Hi.  192.  Their
methods  of  engaging  in  war,  193.  A
comparison  between  them  and  the  North
American  Indians,  194.  Why  they  had
no  cities,  227,  note  xvii.  The  practice  of
compounding  for  personal  injuries  by
fines,  deduced  from  their  usages,  252.

Germany,  little  interested  in foreign
concerns  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth
century,  iii.  90. National  infantry  esta-
blished in,  113. State  of,  under  Charle-
magne and  his  descendants,  165. Con-
rad, count  of  Franconia,  chosen  emperor,
166. His  successors  in  the  imperial  dig-
nity, ib. How  the  nobility  of,  acquired
independent  sovereign  authority,  ib. The
fatal effects  of  aggrandizing  the  clergy
in,  168. The  contests  between  the  em-
peror Henry  VI.  and  pope  Gregory  VII.,
169. Rise  of  the  factions  of  Guelfs  and
Ghibelines,  ib. Decline  of  the  imperial
authority,  ib. The  house  of  Austria,  by
whom  founded,  170. A  total  change  in
the  political  constitution  of  the  empire,  ib.
The  state  of  anarchy  in  which  it  conti-
nued to  the  time  of  Maximilian,  the  im-
mediate predecessor  of  Charles  V.,  171.
Divided  into  circles,  ib. The  imperial
chamber  instituted, 172. The Aulic
council  reformed,  ib. A  view  of  its  poli-
tical constitution  at  the  commencement  of
the  ensuing  history,  ib. Its  defects  point-
ed out,  173. The  imperial  dignity  and
power  compared,  174. Election  of  the
emperors,  175. The  repugnant  forms  of
civil  policy  in  the  severa'l  states  of,  176.
The  opposition  between  the  secular  and
ecclesiastical  members  of,  ib. The  united
body  hence  incapable  of  acting  with  vi-
gour, 178. When  cities  first  began  to  be
built  in,  227,  note  xvii. When  the  cities
of,  first  acquired  municipal  privileges,  228.
The  artisans  of,  when  enfranchised,  229.
Immediate  cities  in  the  German  jurispru-
dence, what,  ib. The  great  calamities
occasioned there  by  private  wars,  245.
Origin  of  the  league  of  the  Rhine,  246.
When  private  wars  were  finally  abolished
there,  ib. Inquiry  into  the  power,  juris-
diction, and  revenue  of  it»  emperors,  304,
note  xlii. The  ancient  mode  of  electing
the  emperors,  306. Account  of  the  diets,
308. State  of,  at  the  death  of  the  em-
peror Maximilian, 362. Charles V.
of  Spain,  and  FrancU  1,  of  France,  form

442  INDEX.

pretensions  to  the  imperial  crown,  363.
Their  respective  reasons  offered  in  favour
of  their  claims,  364, 365.  Views  and  in-
terests of  the  other  European  states  in  re-
lation to  the  competitors,  366.  Henry
VIII.  of  England  advances  a  claim,  367.
But  is  discouraged  from  prosecuting  it,
ib.  How  the  papacy  was  likely  to  be
affected  in  the  choice  of  an  emperor,  368.
Advice  of  pope  Leo  X.  to  the  German
princes,  ib.  Opening  of  the  diet  at
Frankfort,  369.  In  whom  the  election  of
an  emperor  is  vested,  ib.  Views  of  the
electors,  370.  The  empire  offered  to
Frederic  of  Saxony,  ib.  Who  rejects  it,
and  his  reasons,  ib.  Charles  V.  chosen,
372.  The  capitulation  of  the  Germanic
privileges,  confirmed  by  him,  373.  Charles
sets  out  for,  380.  Charles  crowned  at
Aix-la-Chapelle,  iv.  10.  Commencement
of  the  Reformation  there,  by  Martin  Lu-
ther, 12.  Treatment  of  the  bull  of  ex-
communication published  against  Luther,
29.  The  usurpations  of  the  clergy  there,
during  the  disputes  concerning  investi-
tures, 39.  The  clergy  of,  mostly  foreign-
ers, 43.  The  benefices  of,  nominated  by
the  pope,  44.  The  expedient  of  the  em-
perors for  restraining  this  power  of  the
pope,  ineffectual,  ib.  The  great  progress
of  Luther's  doctrines  in,  131.  Grievances
of  the  peasants,  179.  Insurrection  in
Suabia,  180.  The  memorial  of  their  grie-
vances, 181.  The  insurrection  quelled,
182.  Another  insurrection  in  Thuringia,
ib.  How  the  house  of  Austria  became  so
formidable  in,  211.  Proceedings  relating
to  the  Reformation  there,  212.  Great
progress  of  the  Reformation  there,  244.
Ferdinand  king  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia,
brother  to  Charles  V.,  elected  king  of  the
Romans,  253.  The  Protestant  religion
established  in  Saxony,  338.  The  Pro-
testant religion  established  in  the  Pala-
tinate, v.  51.  The  league  of  Smalkalde
raise  an  army  against  the  emperor,  77.
Are  put  under  the  ban  of  the  empire,  80.
The  Protestant  army  dispersed,  97.  The
Interim  enforced  by  the  emperor,  166.
Maurice  of  Saxony  raises  an  army  and
declares  in  favour  of  the  Protestants,  218.
Maurice  favoured  even  by  the  Catholic
princes,  and  why,  232.  Treaty  of  Pas-
sau,  between  the  emperor  and  Maurice  of
Saxony,  239.  Truce  between  the  emperor
and  Henry  of  France,  332.  Charles  re-
signs the  imperial  crown  to  bis  brother
Ferdinand,  342.

Ghent,  an  insurrection  there,  iv.  343.
The  pretensions  of  the  citizens,  ib.  Form
a  confederacy  against  the  queen-dowager
of  Hungary,  their  governess,  344.  Their
deputies  to  the  emperor,  how  treated  by
him,  345.  Offer  to  submit  to  France,  ib.
Is  reduced  by  Charles,  352.

Ghibeline  faction  in  Italy,  a  view  of,
iv.  195.

Ghibelines — See  Guelfs.

Ghiarradadda,  the  battle  of,  fatal  to
the  Venetians,  iii.  117.

Giron,  Don  Pedro  de,  appointed  to  the
command  of  the  army  of  the  holy  junta,
iv.  100.  Resigns  his  commission,  and
Padilla  replaced,  102.

Glanville,  lord  chief-justice,  the  first
who  compiled  a  body  of  common  law,  in
all  Europe,  iii.  264.

Goletta  in  Africa,  taken  by  the  em-
peror Charles  V.,  iv.  288.
Gonzago,  the  imperial  governor  of  Milan,
procures  cardinal  Farnese  to  be  assassi-
nated, and  takes  possession  of  Placentia
for  the  emperor,  v.  152.  Prepares  to  seize
Parma,  1 92.  Is  repulsed  by  the  French,
194.

Goths,  Vandals,  and  Huns,  overrun  the
Roman  empire,  and  precipitate  its  down-
fall, iii.  11.  The  state  of  the  countries
from  whence  they  issued,  12.  The  mo-
tives of  the  first  excursions,  13.  How  they
came  to  settle  in  the  countries  they  con-
quered, ib.  A  comparison  drawn  between
them  and  the  Romans,  at  the  peiiod  of
their  irruptions,  14,  et  seq.  Compared
with  the  native  Americans,  16.  The  de-
solations they  occasioned  in  Europe,  ib.
The  universal  change  made  by  them  in
the  state  of  Europe,  17.  The  principles
on  which  they  made  their  settlements,  19.
Origin  of  the  feudal  system,  ib. — See
Feudal  System.  An  inquiry  into  the  ad-
ministration of  justice  among,  47.  Their
private  wars,  48.  Destroy  the  monuments
of  the  Roman  arts,  75.  Their  contempt
of  the  Romans,  and  hatred  of  their  arts,
185,  note  ii.  Their  aversion  to  literature,
ib.  No  authentic  account  of  their  origin
or  ancient  history  existing,  186.

Government,  how  limited  by  the  feudal
policy,  iii.  22.  The  effects  of  the  cru-
sades on,  33.  How  affected  by  the  en-
franchisement of  cities,  39.  Legislative
assemblies  how  formed,  41.  Private  wars
destructive  to  the  authority  of,  49.  Me-
thods employed  to  abolish  this  hostile
mode  of  redressing  injuries,  ib.  How  af-
fected by  the  supreme  independent  juris-
dictions of  the  barons,  60.  The  steps  to-
wards abolishing  them,  63.  The  origin
and  growth  of  royal  courts  of  justice,  ib.
How  influenced  by  the  revival  of  science
and  literature,  78.  A  view  of ,  at  the  be-
ginning of  the  fifteenth  century,  85.  The
power  of  monarchs  then  very  limited,  ib.
Their  revenues  small,  86.  Their  armies
unfit  for  conquest,  ib.  The  princes  hence
incapable  of  extensive  plans  of  operation,
88.  The  kingdoms  very  little  connected
with  each  other,  ib.  How  the  efforts  of,
from  this  period,  became  more  powerful

INDEX.

443

and  extensive,  90.  The  consequences  of  of  the  publication  of  indulgences  oon-
Englaud  losing  its  provinces  in  France,  tradicted,  iv.  19.  note.  Defends  Reggie
91.  The  schemes  of  Louis  XI.  of  France  against  the  French,  71.  Repulses  an
to  extend  the  regal  power,  97. — See  Louis  attack  upon  Parma  by  the  French,  76.
XI.  The  power  of  the  English  crown  en-  His  sentiments  of  the  pope's  treaty  with
larged,  101. — See  Henry  VII.  As  also  Lannoy,  viceroy  of  Naples,  203.
that  of  Spain,  102.  How  the  use  of  Guise,  Francis  of  Lor  rain,  duke  of,  is
standing  armies  became  general,  110.  A  made  governor  of  Metz  by  Henry  II,  of
view  of  the  political  constitution  of  the  France,  v.  247.  His  character,  ib.  Pre-
several  states  of  Europe,  at  the  com-  pares  to  defend  it  against  the  emperor,  ib.
mencement  of  the  sixteenth  century,  121.  His  brother  D'Aumale  taken  prisoner  by
In  what  respects  the  charters  of  com-  the  imperialists,  250.  The  emperor  raises
munities  granted  by  the  kings  of  France,  the  siege,  253.  His  humane  treatment
tended  to  introduce  a  regular  form  of,  222.  of  the  distressed  and  sick  Germans  left
Gouffer,  sent  by  Francis  I.  king  of  behind,  ib.  Persuades  Henry  to  an  alli-
France,  to  negotiate  a  peace  with  Charles  ance  with  pope  Paul  IV.,  318.  Marches
V.,  iii.  352.  with  troops  into  Italy,  346.  Is  unable

Granvelle,  cardinal,  his  artifice  to  pre-  to  effect  any  thing,  348.  Is  recalled  from
vail  on  the  count  de  Sancerre  to  surrender  Italy  after  the  defeat  of  St.  Quintin,  361.
St.  Disier  to  the  emperor,  v.  33.  Endea-  His  reception  in  France,  365.  Takes
vours  to  lull  the  Protestants  into  security  the  field  against  Philip,  366.  Invests
with  regard  to  the  emperor's  conduct  to-  and  takes  Calais  from  the  English,  368.
wards  them,  57.  Is  commissioned  by  Takes  also  Guisnes  and  Hames,  369.
Philip  to  address  the  assembly  at  the  Takes  Thionville  in  Luxembourg,  374.
emperor's  resignation  of  his  hereditary  Guise,  Mary  of,  married  to  James  V.
dominions,  329.  of  Scotland,  iv.  332.  Frustrates  the  in-

Gravelines,  an  interview  there  between  tended  marriage  between  her  daughter
the  emperor  Charles  V.  and  Henry  VIII.  Mary  and  princeEdward  of  England, v.26.
of  England,  iv.  10.  Guntherus,  a  monk,  his  character  of

Granada,  archbishop  of,  president  of Constantinople  at  the  time  when  taken
the  council  of  Castile,  his  imprudent  ad- by  the  crusaders,  iii.  218,
vice,  to  cardinal  Adrian,  relating  to  the Gurk,  cardinal  de,  why  he  favoured
insurrection  in  Segovia,  iv.  87.  the  election  of  Charles  V.  to  the  imperial

Gropper,  canon  of  Cologne,  is  ap«  crown,  iii.  372.  Signs  the  capitulation
pointed  a  manager  of  the  Protestant  and  of  the  Germanic  body  on  behalf  of
Catholic  conferences  before  the  diet  at  Charles,  373.

Ratisbon,  iv.  370.  Writes  a  treatise  to  Gusman,  chancellor  to  the  emperor
compose  the  differences  between  them,  Ferdinand,  is  sent  to  pope  Paal  IV.  to
371.  The  sentiments  of  both  parties  on  notify  the  election,  who  refuses  to  see
this  work,ib.  him,  v.  370.

Greece,  the breeding of  silkworms,

when  introduced  there,  iii.  274.  HAMBURGH,  city  of,  embraces  the  re-

Greek  emperors,  their  magnificence  at formed  religion,  iv.  133.
Constantinople,  iii.  217.  Hanseatic  league, when  formed,  and

Gregory  of  Tours,  remarks  on  the  state its  influence  on  the extension  of  com-
of  Europe  during  the  period  of  which  he merce,  iii.  81.  277.
wrote  the  history,  iii.  27.  Haro,  the  conde  de,  appointed  to  com-

the  Great, pope,  his  reason mand  the  army  of  the  Castilian  noble»

for  granting  liberty  to  his  slaves,  iii.  233. against  the  holy  junta,  iv.  101. Attacks

-VII.  pope,  the  foundation  of Tordesillas,  and  gets  possession  of  queen

his  contests  with  Henry  IV.  emperor  of  Joanna,  ib.  Routs  the  array  of  the  junta,
Germany,  iii.  168.  The  mean  submission  and  takes  Pad  ilia  prisoner,  who  is  exe-
he  extorted  from  Henry,  169.  His  own  cuted,  106.

account  of  this  affair,  303.  Hascen  Aga,  deputy- governor  of  Al-

Guasto,  the  marquis  del,  appointed  giers,  his  piracies  against  the  Christian
governor  of  Milan  by  the  emperor,  iv.  states,  iv.  379.  Is  besieged  in  Algiers
318.  Procures  Rincon,  the  French  am-  by  the  emperor  Charles  V.,  382.  Makes
bassadpr  to  the  Porte,  to  be  murdered  on  a  successful  sally,  383.  The  emperor
his  journey  thither,  v.  3.  Defends  Ca-  forced  by  bad  weather  to  return  back
rignan  against  the  French,  27.  Defeated  again,  385.

by  D'Enguien  in  a  pitched  battle,  29.  Hayradin,  a  potter's  son  of  Lesbos,

Guelfs  and  Ghibelines,  rise  of  those  commences  pirate,  iv.  281.  See  Bar-
factions  in  Germany,  iii.  169.  barossa.

Guicciardini,  the  historian,  instance  of  Heathens,  ancient,  why  the  principles
lib  superstitious  reverence  for  pope  Cle-  of  mutual  toleration  we  re_  generally  ad-
ment  VII.  iii  129.  note.  His  account  roitted  among  them,  v.  307.

444

INDEX.

-  Heldo,  vice-chancellor  to  Charles  V.
attends  the  pope's  nuncio  to  Smalkalde,
ir.  335. Forms  a  Catholic  league  in
opposition  to  the  Protestant  one,  337.

•  Henry II.  king  of  France,  his  mo-
tives for  declining  an  alliance  with  pope
Paul  III. against  the  emperor,  v.  154.
Procures  for  Scotland  a  peace  with  Eng-
land, 193. The young  queen Mary
contracted  to  the  dauphin, and  sent  to
France  for  education,  ib. Enters  into
an  alliance  with  Octavio  Farnese  duke
of  Parma,  194.  Protests  against  the  coun-
cil of  Trent,  195. Makes  alliance  with
•Maurice  elector  of  Saxony,  210.  Seconds
the operations of  Maurice, 219. His
army marches and seizes Metz, 221.
Attempts to surprise Strasburgh,  228.
Is  strongly solicited to spare  it,  229.
Returns, 230. The  emperor  prepares
for  war  against  him,  246. Instigates  the
Turks  to  invade  Naples,  256.  Terouanne
taken,  and  demolished  by  Charles,  264.
Hesdin  taken,  ib. Leads  an  army  into
the  Low  Conntries  against  Charles,  265.
Endeavours  to  obstruct  the  marriage  of
Mary  of  England  with  Philip  of  Spain,
282. The  progress  of  his  arms  against
the  emperor, 283. Engages Charles,
284. Retires,  285. Cosmo  di  Medici,
duke  of  Florence,  makes  war  against  him,
286.  Appoints  Peter  Strozzi  commander
of  his  anny  in  Italy,  288. Strozzi  de-
feated, 289. Siena  taken,  291. Pope
Paul  IV.  makes  overtures  to  an  alliance
with him against the emperor, 317.
Montmorency's  arguments  against  this
alliance,  318.  Is  persuaded  by  the  Guises
to  accept  it,  ib. Sends  the  cardinal of
Lorrain  with  powers  to  conclude  it,  319.
The  pope  signs  the  treaty,  321.  A  truce
for  five  years  concluded  with  the  empe-
ror, 332. Is  exhorted by  cardinal  Ca-
raffa  to  break  the  truce,  334. Is  ab-
solved from  his  oath,  and  concludes  a
new  treaty  with  the  pope,  337. Sends
the  duke  of  Guise  into  Italy,  346. The
constable Moutmorency defeated and
taken prisoner at St.  Quintin, 355.
Henry  prepares  for  the  defence  of  Paris,
356. St.  Quintin  taken  by  assault,  358.
Collects  his  troops,  and  negotiates  for
assistance,  359. His  kind  reception  of
the  duke  of  Guise,  365. Calais  taken
by Guise, 368. Empowers Montmo-
rency  to  negotiate  a  peace  with  Philip,
379. Honours  him  highly  on  his  return
to  France,  380. Writes  to  queen  Eliza-
beth with  proposals  of  marriage,  388.
How  he  failed  in  his suit, 389. His
daughter  married  to  Philip,  and  his  sister
to  the  duke  of  Savoy,  394. Terms  of  the
treaty  of  Chateau-Cambresis,  ib. The
marriage  of  his  sister  and  daughter  cele-
brated with great pomp, 396. His
death,  ib.

Henry  IV.  of  Castile,  solemnly  tried
and  deposed  by  an  assembly  of  Castilian
nobles,  iii.  145.

IV.  emperor  of  Germany,  the

humiliating  state  to  which  he  was  reduced
by  pope  Gregory  VII.,  note  xli.  iii.  168.
303.

VII.  of  England,  his  situation

at  his  accession  to  the  crown,  iii.  101.
Enables  his  barons  to  break  their  entails
and  sell  their  estates,  102.  Prohibits  his
barons  keeping  retainers,  ib.  Encourages
agriculture  and  commerce,  ib.  Detains
the  archduke  Philip  and  his  duchess
when  driven  on  his  coast,  three  months,
at  the  instigation  of  Ferdinand,  327.

Henry  VIII.  of  England,  sends  an
ambassador  to  Germany  to  propose  his
claims  to  the  imperial  crown,  iii.  367.
Is  discouraged  from  his  pretensions,  and
takes  no  part  with  the  other  competitors,
ib.  His  personal  character  and  political
influence  in  Europe,  iv.  4.  Entirely
guided  by  cardinal  Wolsey,  6.  Receives
a  visit  from  the  emperor  Charles  V.,  8.
Goes  over  to  France  to  visit  Francis,  9.
Wrestles  with  Francis,  and  is  thrown  by
him,  10.  note.  Has  another  interview
with  Charles  at  Gravelines,  ib.  Charles
offers  to  submit  his  differences  with
Francis  to  his  arbitration,  ib.  Publishes
a  treatise  on  the  Seven  Sacraments,
against  Martin  Luther,  57.  Obtains  of
the  pope  the  title  of  Defender  of  the
Faith,  ib.  Takes  part  with  Charles
against  Francis,  59.  Sends  Wolsey  to
negotiate  an  accommodation  between  the
emperor  and  Francis,  67.  Concludes  a
league  with  Charles  against  Francis,  69.
His  avowed  reasons  for  this  treaty,  ib.
His  private  motives,  ib.  Declares  war
against  Francis,  80.  Is  visited  by  Charles,
81.  Makes  descents  upon  the  coast  of
France,  82.  Advances  with  an  army
into  Picardy,  ib.  Obliged  to  retire  by
the  duke  de  Vendome,  ib.  Enters  into
a  treaty  with  the  emperor  and  Charles
duke  of  Bourbon,  121.  How  he  raised
supplies  for  his  wars  beyond  the  grants
of  his  parliament,  127.  Sends  the  duke
of  Suffolk  to  invade  Picardy,  who  pene-
trates almost  to  Paris,  but  is  driven  back,
ib.  Engages  to  assist  Charles  in  an  in-
vasion of  Provence,  142.  Causes  of
his  not  supporting  the  imperialists,  144.
Effects  of  the  battle  of  Pavia,  and  cap-
tivity of  Francis,  on  him,  157.  Particu-
lars of  his  embassy  to  Charles,  158.
Concludes  a  defensive  alliance  with
France,  164.  Is  declared  protector  of
the  league  of  Cognac  against  the  em-
peror, 190.  His  motives  for  assisting  the
pope  against  the  emperor,  215.  Enters
into  a  league  with  Francis,  and  renounces
the  English  claim  to  the  crown  of  France,
216.  Declares  war  against  the  emperor.

INDEX.

445

423.  Concludes  a  truce  with  the  gover-
ness of  the  Low  Countries,  227.  Projects
his  divorce  from  Catharine  of  Aragon,
238.  Motives  which  withheld  the  pope
from  granting  it,  239.  Acquiesces  in
the  peace  of  Cambray,  ib.  Sends  a  sup-
ply of  money  to  the  Protestant  league  in
Germany,  254.  Procures  his  marriage
to  be  annulled  by  Cranmer,  archbishop
of  Canterbury,  263.  The  divorce  re-
versed by  the  pope  under  penalty  of
excommunication,  264.  Renounces  the
papal  supremacy,  ib.  Refuses  to  acknow-
ledge any  council  called  by  the  pope,
279.  Opposes  James  V.  of  Scotland
marrying  Mary  of  Guise,  332.  His  dis-
gusts with  Francis,  and  intercourse  with
file  emperor,  333.  Concludes  a  league
with  Charles,  v.  10.  Makes  war  with
Scotland,  ib.  Particulars  of  his  treaty
with  Charles,  11.  Invades  France,  and
invests  Boulogne,  32.  Refuses  the  em-
peror's plan  of  operations,  35.  Is  de-
serted by  the  emperor,  39.  Takes  Bou-
logne, 40.  His  haughty  proposals  to
Francis,  ib.  Peace  of  Campe,  76.  Is
succeeded  by  his  son  Edward  VI.,  118.
A  review  of  his  policy,  406.

Herebannum,  the  nature  of  this  fine
under  the  feudal  policy  explained,  iij.  199.

Hermandad,  Santa,  account  of  that  in-
stitution, iii.  290.

Hertford,  earl  of,  plunders  and  burns
Edinburgh,  v.  32.  Joins  Henry  after,  in
his  invasion  of  France,  ib.

Hesse,  the  landgrave  of,  procures  the
restoration  of  his  kinsman,  Ulric  duke  of
Wurtemberg,  iv.  277.  His  views  com-
pared with  those  of  the  elector  of  Saxony,
v.  55.  The  emperor's  deceitful  profes-
sions to  him,  62.  Quiets  the  apprehen-
sions of  the  Protestant  league  with  regard
to  the  emperor,  63.  Is  appointed  joint
commander  of,the  army  of  the  league
with  the  elector  of  Saxony,  83.  Their
characters  compared,  ib.  Urges  an  at-
tack of  the  emperor,  but  is  opposed  by
the  elector,  87.  His  letter  to  Maurice
duke  of  Saxony,  94.  The  army  of  the
league  disperse,  97.  Is  reduced  to  ac-
cept harsh  terms  from  Charles,  138.  His
humiliating  reception  by  the  emperor,
140.  Is  detained  in  confinement,  141.
His  offers  of  submission  slighted  by  the
emperor,  164.  Is  carried  by  the  empe-
ror with  him  into  the  Netherlands,  167.
Renews  his  endeavours  for  liberty,  186.
Charles  releases  arbitrarily  the  elector  of
Brandenburgh,  and  Maurice,  from  their
engagements  to  him,  ib.  Obtains  his  li-
berty by  the  treaty  of  Passau,  239.  Is
arrested  by  the  queen  of  Hungary,  bat
freed  by  the  emperor,  244.  The 'effects
of  his  confinement  on  him,  ib.

Heuterus,  his  account  of  Lewis  XII.
shewn  to  contradict  the  relations  given

by  Bellay  and  other  French  hutorians  of
the  education  of  Charles  V.,  iii.  336,
note.

History,  the  most  calamitous  period  of,
pointed  out,  iii.  17.

Holy  Brotherhood,  an  association  in
Spain  under  that  name,  on  what  occa-
sion' formed,  iii.  156.

Holy  Junta. See  Junta.

Land,  the  original  inducements

of  the  Christians  to  rescue  it  from  the
hands  of  the  infidels,  iii.  28.  See  Cru-
sades and  Peter  the  Hermit.

League, against the emperor

Charles  V.,  formed  at  Cognac,  under  the
protection  of  Henry  VIII.  of  England,
iv.  189.

Honour,  points  of,  the  ancient  Swedish
law  for  determining,  iii.  247.

Horuc,  a  potter's  son  of  Lesbos,  com-
mences pirate,  with  his  brother  Hayradin,
iv.  281.  See  Barbarossa.

Hospitality,  enforced  by  statutes  dur-
ing the  middle  ages,  iii.  271.

Hungary,  is  invaded  by  Solyraan  the
Magnificent,  and  its  king,  Lewis  II.
killed,  iv.  210.  His  successes,  and  the
number  of  prisoners  carried  away,  ib.
The  archduke  Ferdinand  elected  king  of,
together  with  Bohemia,  211.  John  Zapol
Scajpius  wrests  it  from  Ferdinand,  374.
Stephen  succeeds  on  the  death  of  his
father  John,  375.  Is  treacherously  seized
by  Solyman,  377.  See  Isabella  and
Martinuzzi.

Huns,  instance  of  their  enthusiastic
passion  for  war,  iii.  186.  note  iii.  Some
account  of  their  policy  and  manners,  189.
192.  See  Goths.

IMPERIAL  chamber  of  Germany  insti-
tuted, iii.  172.  The  occasion  of  its  in-
stitution, 309.

Indians,  North  American,  a  comparison
drawn  between  them  and  the  ancient  Ger-
mans, iii.  194.

Indulgences,  in  the  Romish  Church,
the  doctrine  of,  explained  iv.  13.  By
whom  first  invented,  ib.  Martin  Luther
preaches  against  them,  17.  Writes
against  them  to  Albert  Elector  of  Mentz,
ib.  A  bull  issued  in  favour  of,  25.  The
sale  of,  opposed  in  Switzerland  by  Zuin-
glius,  27.

Industry,  the  spirit  of,  how  excited  by
the  enfranchisements  of  cities,  iii.  40.

Infantado,  duke  of,  his  haughty  re-
sentment of  a  casual  blow  on  his  horse,
iv.  342.  Is  protected  by  the  constable
of  Castile,  ib.

Infantry,  the  advantages  of,  beyond
cavalry,  taught  to  the  rest  of  Europe  by<
the  Swiss,  iii.  112.  National  bodies  of,
established  in  Germany,  113.  In  France
and  Spain,  ib.

Inheritaoce,  and  right  of  repreienta-

446

INDEX.

tion,  between  orphan  grandsons  and  their
uncles,  how  decided  in  the  tenth  century,
iii.  248.

.  Innocent,  a  young  domestic  of  car-
dinal di  Monte,  obtains  his  cardi-
nal's hat  on  his  election  to  the  Papacy,
T.  174.

Interest  of  money,  the  necessity  of  ad-
mitting, in  a  commercial  view,  iii.  275.
Preposterously  condemned  by  the  church-
men of  the  middle  ages,  ib.  The  cause
hence,  of  the  exhorbitant  exactions  of  the
Lombard  bankers,  ib.

Interim, a  system  of  theology  so  called,
prepared  by  order  of  the  emperor  Charles
V.  for  the  use  of  Germany,  v.  159.  Is
disapproved  of,  both  by  Protestants  and
Papists,  161.

Investitures,  usurpations  of  the  Romish
clergy  in  Germany,  during  the  disputes
between  the  emperors  and  popes,  con-
cerning, iv.  39.

Isabella,  daughter  of  John  II.  of  Cas-
tile, and  wife  of  Ferdinand  king  of  Ara-
gon,  her  history,  iii.  317.  Her  concern
at  the  archduke  Philip's  treatment  of  her
daughter  Joanna,  319.  Her  death  and
character,  321.  Appoints  Ferdinand
regent  of  Castile,  under  restrictions,
ib.

daughter  to  Sigismund  King

of  Poland,  married  to  John  king  of  Hun-
gary, iv.  375.  Her  character,  ib.  Is
treacherously  carried  with  her  infant  son
into  Transylvania  by  sultan  Solyman,
377.  The  government  of  this  province
•nd  the  education  of  her  son  committed
to  her  jointly  with  Martinuzzi,  v.  205.
Is  jealous  of  Martinuzzi's  influence,  and
courts  the  Turks,  ib.  Is  prevailed  on  to
resign  Transylvania  to  Ferdinand,  206.
Retires  to  Silesia,  207.  Recovers  pos-
session of  Transylvania,  266.

of  Portugal,  married  to  the

emperor  Charles  V.  iv.  178.

Italy,  when  the  cities  of,  began  to  form
themselves  into  bodies  politic,  iii.  37.
Commerce  first  improved  there,  and  the
reasons  of  it,  81.  The  revolutions  in  Eu-
rope occasioned  by  the  invasion  of,  by
Charles  VIII.  of  France,  106.  The  state
of,  at  the  time  of  this  invasion,  108.  The
rapid  success  of  Charles,  ib.  A  combi-
nation of  the  states  of,  drives  Charles  out
of,  and  gives  birth  to  the  balance  of  power
in  Europe,  110.  The  political  situation
of,  at  the  commencement  of  the  sixteenth
century,  121.  The  papacy,  122.  Venice,
189.  Florence,  132.  Naples,  133.  Mi-
lan, 136.  Evidences  of  the  desolation
made  there  by  the  northern  invaders  of
the  Roman  empire,  190.  How  the  cities
of,  obtained  their  municipal  privileges,
219.  note  xv.  State  of,  under  Frederic
I.,  ib.  Treaty  of  Constance  between  the
free  cities  of,  and  the  emperor  Frederic

Barbarossa,  221.  Consequences  of  the
league  between  pope  Leo  X.  and  the  em-
peror Charles  V.,  iv. 70.  The  characters
of  the  Italians,  Spaniards,  and  French  con-
trasted, ib.  State  of,  at  the  accession  of
Clement  VII.  to  the  papacy,  128.  Views
of  the  Italian  states  with  respect  to  the
emperor  and  Francis  on  the  expulsion  of
the  French  from  Genoa  and  the  Milanese,
141.  Their  apprehensions  on  the  battle
of  Pavia  and  captivity  of  Francis,  159.
The  principal  stales  join  in  the  holy
league  against  the  emperor,  189.  Are
disgusted  at  the  tardiness  of  Francis,  195.
A  view  of  the  Ghibeline  faction, ib.  Sen-
timents of  the  states  of,  on  the  peace  of
Cambray,  237.  Is  visited  by  the  em-
peror Charles  V.,  240.  The  motives  of
his  moderation  towards  the  states  of,  241.
A  league  among  the  states  of,  formed
by  Charles,  260.  Placentia  granted
to  Octavio  Farnese  by  Philip  II.  of
Spain,  v.  363.  The  investiture  of  Siena
given  by  Philip  to  Cosmo  di  Medici,
364.  The  consequence  of  these  grants,
365.

James  V.  of  Scotland  levies  troops  to
assist  Francis  in  Provence,  but  his  inten-
tion frustrated,  iv.  332.  His  negotiations
for  marriage  with  Francis's  daughter,  ib.
Marries  Mary  of  Guise,  ib.  Dies,  and
leaves  Mary  his  infant  daughter  to  suc-
ceed him,  v.  11.  See  Mary.

Janizaries,  origin  and  formidable  na-
ture of  those  troops,  iii.  181.

Jesuits,  the  order  of,  by  whom  founded,
iv.  64.  Character  of  that  order,  ib.  Cha-
racter of  Ignatio  Loyola  their  founder,

355.  The  order  confirmed  by  the  pope,

356.  An  examination  into  the  constitu-
tion of  the  order,  357. Office  and  power
of  their  general,  358. The  rapid  progress
of  the  order,  361. Engage  in  trade,  and
establish  an  empire  in  South  America,
362. Bad  tendency  of  the  order,  ib.
Are  responsible  for  most  of  the  pernicious
effects  of  Popery  since  their  institution,
364. Advantages resulting  from their
institution,  ib. Civilize  the  natives  of
Paraguay, 365. Their  precautions  for
the  independency  of  their  empire  there,

367.  How  the  particulars  of  their  govern-
ment and  institution  came  to  be  disclosed,

368.  Summary  of  their  character,  369.
Joanna,  daughter  of  Ferdinand,  and

mother  of  Charles  V.,  visits  Spain  with
her  husband  Philip  archduke  of  Austria,
iii.318.  Is  slighted  by  her  husband,  319.
Her  character,  ib.  Is  abruptly  left  in
Spain  by  her  husband,  320.  Sinks  into
melancholy  on  the  occasion,  and  is  de-
livered of  her  second  son  Ferdinand,  ib.
Her  letter  of  consent  to  her  father's  re-
gency of  Castile  intercepted,  and  herself
confined,  324.  Made  joint  regent  of
Castile  with  Ferdinand  and  Philip,  by  the

INDEX.

447

treaty  of  Salamanca,  326.  Sets  out  for
Spain  with  Philip,  are  driven  on  the  coast
of  England,  and  detained  three  months
by  Henry  VII.,  327.  Acknowledged
queen  by  the  cortes,  329.  Her  tender-
ness to  her  husband  in  his  sickness,  and
extraordinary  attachment  to  his  body
when  dead,  ib.  Is  incapable  of  govern-
ment, 330.  Her  son  Charles  assumes  the
crown,  342.  The  cortes  acknowledge
her  son  king,  with  a  reservation  in  her
favour,  357.  Her  reception  of  Padilla,
the  chief  of  the  Spanish  roalecontents,
iv.  92.  The  holy  junta  removed  to
Tordesillas,  the  place  of  her  residence,
ib.  Relapses  into  her  former  melancholy,
93.  The  proceedings  of  the  holy  junta
carried  on  in  her  name,  ib.  Is  seized  by
the  conde  de  Haro,  101.  Dies  after  near
fifty  years'  confinement,  v.  325.

John  Zapol  Scaepius,  by  the  assistance
of  sultan  Solyman,  establishes  himself
in  the  kingdom  of  Hungary,  iv.  374.
Leaves  the  kingdom  to  his  son  Stephen,
375.  See  Hungary,  Isabella,  and  Mar-
tinuzzi.

Judgment  of  God,  modes  of  acquittal
by,  in  the  law  proceedings  during  the
middle  ages,  iii.  54.  246,  note  xxii.

Indicium  Crucis,  method  of  trial  by,
iii.  246.

Julius  II.  pope,  forms  a  confederacy
against  the  Venetians  at  Cambray,  iii
116.  Seizes  part  of  the  Venetian  terri-
tories,117.  The  confederacy  dissolved,  ib.
Turns  his  schemes  against  France,  118.
Observations  on  the  pontificate  of,  iv.  35.

III.,  pope,  his  character,  v.

174.  Bestows  his  cardinal's  hat  infa-
mously, ib.  Is  averse  to  the  calling  a
council,  175.  Summons  one  at  Trent,
176.  Asserts  his  supreme  authority  pe-
remptorily in  the  bull  for  it,  185.  Re-
pents confirming  Octavio  Farnese  in
Parma,  192.  Requires  Octavio  to  relin-
quish his  alliance  with  France,  194.  The
manner  of  his  death,  302.

Junta,  Holy,  a  view  of  the  confederacy
in  Spain,  so  termed,  iv.  90.  The  au-
thority of  Adrian  disclaimed  by,  91.  Re-
moved to  Tordesillas  where  queen  Joanna
resided,  92.  Their  proceedings  carried  on
in  the  name  of  Joanna,  93.  Receive  let-
ters from  Charles  to  lay  down  their  arms,
with  promises  of  pardon,  94.  Remon-
strance of  grievances  drawn  up  by,  95.
.The  particulars  of  this  remonstrance,  ib.
Remarks  on  the  spirit  of  it,  98.  Are  in-
timidated from  presenting  it  to  Charles,
99.  Propose  to  deprive  Charles  of  his
loyalty  during  the  life  of  Joanna,  ib.
Take  the  field,  100.  Character  of  their
army,  ib.  The  queen  seized  by  the
conde  de  Haro,  101.  How  they  obtained
money  to  support  their  army,  102.  Lose
time  in  negotiating  with  the  nobler,  103.

Propose  to  make  their  peace  with  Charles
at  the  expense  of  the  nobles,  104.  Their
irresolute  conduct,  105.  Their  army  de-
feated by  Haro,  and  Padilla  taken  pri-
soner, 106.  Padilla  executed,  107.  His
letters  to  his  wife,  and  the  city  of  Toledo,
ib.note.  The  ruin  of  theconfederacy,108.

Jurisprudence,  ecclesiastical,  more  per-
fect in  its  plan  than  the  civil  courts  of  the
middle  ages,  iii.  50.  See  Law.

Justice,  an  inquiry  into  the  adminis-
tration of,  under  the  feudal  policy,  iii.  46.
The  steps  towards  the  improvement  of,
as  civil  liberty  advanced,  47.  Redress
chiefly  pursued  by  private  wars,  48.
Methods,  taken  to  suppress  private  wars,
49.  Judicial  combats  prohibited,  51.
The  defects  of  judicial  proceedings  in  the
middle  ages,  52.  Compurgators,  the  na-
ture of  that  kind  of  evidence,  53.  Me-
thods of  trial  by  ordeal,  or  acquittal  by
judgment  of  God,  54.  Origin  of  the  su-
preme independent  jurisdictions  of  the
feudal  barons,  60.  The  extent  and  bad
effects  of  their  privileges,  62.  The  steps
taken  by  monarchs  to  reduce  the  barons'
courts,  63.  The  growth  of  royal  courts
of  justice,  64.  Inquiry  into  the  eanort
law,  65.  How  improved  by  the  revival
of  the  Roman  law,  68.  When  the  admi-
nistration of,  became  a  distinct  profes-
sion, 70.

Justiza,  or  supreme  judge  of  Aragon,
his  office  and  privileges,  iii.  147.  An  in-
quiry by  whom  this  officer  was  elected,
279.  Who  was  eligible  to  this  office,  280.
Nature  of  the  tribunal  appointed  to  con-
trot  his  administration,  281.  Instance
of  his  extensive  power,  ib.

KING,  his  power  how  circumscribed  by
the  barons,  under  the  feudal  system,  iii.
23.  By  what  means  the  crusades  tended
to  enlarge  the  regal  authority,  34.

Koran,  its  influence  in  checking  the
sultans  of  the  Ottoman  empire,  iii.  181.

LA  CHAU,  a  Flemish  gentleman,  asso-
ciated by  Charles  V.  with  cardinal
Xirnenes  in  the  regency  of  Castile,  iii.  349.

Land, how  held  at  the  establishment  of
the  feudal  system,  iii.  21.  See  Feudal
System.

,  the  property  of,  how  considered

by  the  ancient  barbarous  nations,  iii.  197.
note  viii.  Allodial  possession  of,  ex-
plained, 198.  The  proprietors  how  sub-
jected to  military  service,  ib.  Allodial
and  beneficiary  possession  distinguished,
ib.  Allodial  property  why  generally  con-
verted into  feudal,  203.

Landrecy,  siege  of,  bj  the  emperor
Charles  V.,  v.  15.  Is  abandoned  by  him,  ib.

Lannoy,  mortgages  the  revenues  of
Naples  to  supply  the  exigencies  of  the
emperor,  iv.  147.  Francis  surrenders

448  INDEX.

himself  prisoner  to  him  at  the  battle  of
Pavia,  iv.  154.  His  cautious  disposal  of
him,  ib.  Delivers  him  op  in  pursuance
of  the  treaty  of  Madrid,  and  receives  the
duke  of  Orleans  and  the  dauphin,  as
hostages  in  exchange,  178.  Is  sent  am-
bassador to  Francis  to  require  his  fulfil-
ment of  the  treaty  of,  191.  Concludes
a  treaty  with  the  pope,  202.  Marches
to  join  the  imperialists  at  Rome,  where
the  troops  refuse  to  obey  .him,  217.

Lanuza,  Don  John  de,  made  viceroy
of  Aragon,  on  the  departure  of  Charles
V.  for  Germany,  iii.  379.  Composes
the  disturbances  there,  iv.  113.

Lavagna,  John  Lewis  Fiesco,  count  of,
his  character,  v.  105.  Meditates  sub-
verting the  government  of  Genoa,  106.
His  preparations,  107.  His  artful  method
of  assembling  his  adherents,  108.  His
exhortation  to  them,  109.  His  interview
with  his  wife,  110.  Sallies  forth,  111.
Andrew  Doria  escapes,  112.  Deputies
sent  to  know  his  terms,  ib.  Is  drowned,
ib.  His  brother's  vanity  ruins  their  de-
sign, 113.  See  Fiesco.

Lautrec,  Odet  de  Foix,  raarechal  de,
the  French  governor  of  Milan,  his  charac-
ter, iv.  71.  Alienates  the  affection  of
the  Milanese  from  the  French,  ib.  In-
vests Reggio,  but  is  repulsed  by  Guic-
ciardini  the  historian,  then  governor,  ib.
Is  excommunicated  by  the  pope,  72.
The  money  for  paying  his  troops  seized
by  Louise  of  Savoy,  73.  Is  left  by
his  Swiss  troops,  74.  Is  driven  out
of  the  Milanese  territories,  75.  A  new
body  of  Swiss  under  him  insist  on  giving
battle  to  the  imperialists,  who  defeat  him,
78.  The  Swiss  leave  him,  79.  Retires
into  France  with  the  residue  of  his  troops,
ib.  Delivers  up  the  dauphin  and  duke
of  Orleans,  in  exchange  for  Francis  I.,  as
hostages  for  the  performance  of  the  treaty
of  Madrid,  178.  Is  appointed  generalis-
simo of  the  league  against  the  emperor,
218.  His  successes  in  Italy,  ib.  Mo-
tives which  withheld  him  from  subduing
the  Milanese,  219.  Obliges  the  prince
of  Orange  to  retire  to  Naples,  225.  Block-
ades Naples,  ib.  His  army  wasted,  and
himself  killed  by  the  pestilence,  229.

Law,  when  the  study  of  it  became  a
distinct  employment,  iii.  71.

,  canon,  an  inquiry  into,  iii.  65.

The  maxims  of,  more  equitable  than  the
civil  courts  of  the  middle  ages,  66.
When  first  compiled,  263.

,  Roman,  how  it  sunk  into  obli-
vion, iii.  68.  Circumstances  which  fa-
voured the  revival  of  it,  69.  Its  effects
in  improving  the  administration  of  jus-
tice, ib.  Its  rapid  progress  over  Europe,
264.,  note  xxv.

Lawburrows,  in  the  Scottish  law,  ex«
plained,  iii.  223.

Learning,  the  revival  of,  favourable  to
the  reformation  of  religion,  iv.  48.

Leipsic,  a  public  disputation  held
there  by  Martin  Luther  and  Eckius,  on
the  validity  of  the  papal  authority,  iv.  27.

Leo  X.  pope  of  Rome,  his  character,
iii.  368.  His  apprehensions  on  the  elec-
tion of  an  emperor  of  Germany,  at  the
death  of  Maximilian,  ib.  His  counsel  to
the  German  princes,  ib.  Grants  Charles
Y.  a  tenth  of  all  ecclesiastical  benefices  in
Castile,  375.  Lays  Castile  under  an  in-
terdict, but  takes  it  off  at  the  instance  of
Charles,  ib.  His  conduct  on  the  prospect
of  war  between  Charles  and  Francis,  iv.  3.
Situation  of  the  papacy,  at  his  accession,
and  his  views  of  policy,  13.  His  inat-
tention to  Martin  Luther's  controversy
with  the  Dominicans  concerning  indul-
gences, 20.  Is  instigated  against  him,
and  summons  him  to  Rome,  ib.  Desires
the  elector  of  Saxony  not  to  protect  him,
ib.  Is  prevailed  on  to  permit  Luther's
doctrines  to  be  examined  in  Germany,  2l.
Cardinal  Cajetan  appointed  to  try  him,
ib.  Issues  a  bull  in  favour  of  indulgen-
ces, 25.  A  suspension  of  proceedings
against  Luther,  and  why,  26.  Publishes
a  bull  of  excommunication  against  him,
28.  The  political  views  of  his  conduct
between  Charles  and  Francis,  60.  Con-
cludes a  treaty  with  Francis,  61.  Con-
cludes a  treaty  also  with  Charles,  ib.
The  conditions  of  the  treaty  with  Charles,
62.  Its  consequences  to  Italy,  70.  Is
disappointed  in  a  scheme  formed  by
Morone,  chancellor  of  Milan,  for  attack-
ing that  duchy,  71.  Excommunicates
marechal  de  Foix  for  his  attack  of  Reggio,
and  declares  against  France,  72.  Takes
a  body  of  Swiss  into  pay,  ib.  The
French  driven  out  of  the  Milanese,  7.5.
He  dies,  76.  The  spirit  of  the  confede-
racy broken  by  his  death,  ib.

L'Asparre,  Foix  de,  commands  the
French  troops  in  Navarre,  for  Henry
d'Albret,  iv.  63.  Reduces  that  kingdom,
64.  His  imprudent  progress  into  Castile,
ib.  Is  taken  prisoner  by  the  Spaniards,
and  the  French  driven  out  of  Navarre,  65.

Leonard,  Father,  forms  a  scheme  of
betraying  Metz  to  the  Imperialists,  v.  295.
Introduced  soldiers  clad  like  friars,  296.
Is  detected,  297.  Is  murdered  by  his
monks,  298.

Levesque,  Don,  his  account  of  the  mo-
tives which  induced  the  emperor  Charles-
V.  to  resign  his  hereditary  dominions,
v.  324,  note.

•  Lewis  II.  king  of  Hungary  and  Bohe-
mia, his  character,  iv.  210.  Is  iuvaded
and  killed  by  Soly  man  the  Magnificent,  ib.

— : XII.  king  of  France,  receives

homage  of  the  archduke  Philip,  for  the
earldom  of  Flanders,  iii.  318.  Concludes
a  treaty  with  him,  while  at  war  with  Fer-

i  N  D  E  X.

44i)

viiaanu  of  Aragon,  320.  Bestows  his
niece  Germain  de  Foix,  on  Ferdinand,
and  concludes  a  peace  with  him,  325.
Loses  the  confidence  of  Philip  on  that
occasion,  336.  note.  Bestows  his  eldest
daughter  already  betrothed  to  Charles  V.
on  the  count  of  Angoul^rae,  ib.

Leyva,  Antonio  de,  defends  Pavia  for
the  emperor  against  Francis,  iv.  147.
His  vigorous  defence,  148.  Sallies  out
at  the  battle  of  Pavia,  and  contributes  to
the  defeat  of  Francis,  153.  Is  left  go-
vernor of  Milan  by  the  duke  of  Bourbon,
200.  Defeats  the  forces  there,  232.  Is
appointed  generalissimo  of  the  Italian
league,  260.  Directs  the  operations  of
the  invasion  of  France,  under  the  empe-
ror, 310.  Dies,  317.

Liberty,  civil,  the  rise  and  progress  of,
traced,  iii.  37.  How  favoured  by  the
ordonnances  of  Louis  X.  of  France,  and
his  brother  Philip,  45.  The  spirit  of,
how  excited  in  France,  230,  note  xix.
The  particulars  included  in  the  charters
of,  granted  to  husbandmen,  232,  note  xx.
The  influence  of  the  Christian  religion  in
extending,  233.  The  several  opportuni-
ties of  obtaining,  234.

Limoges,  council  of,  its  endeavours  to
extinguish  private  wars,  iii.  240.

Literature,  the  cultivation  of,  greatly
instrumental  in  civilizing  the  nations  of
Europe,  iii.  74.  Why  the  first  efforts  of
ill  directed,  75.  The  good  effects  never-
theless of  the  spirit  of  inquiry  exerted,
77.  How  checked  in  its  progress,  78.
Its  influence  on  manners  and  government,
ib.  Its  obligations  to  the  order  of  Je-
suits, iv.  364.

Liturgy,  the  preference  between  the
Musarabic  and  Romish,  how  ascertained
in  Spain,  iii.  249.

Lombards,  the  first  bankers  in  Europe,
iii.  275.  The  motive  of  their  exacting
exorbitant  interest,  ib.

London,  its  flourishing  state  at  the
time  of  Henry  II.  iii.  230.

Lorenzo  di  Medici. See  Medici.

Louis  le  Gros  of  France,  his  induce-
ment to  grant  privileges  to  towns  within
his  own  domains,  iii.  38. — See  Charters.

,  St.  the  great  attention  he  paid  to

the  administration  of  justice,  in  appeals
•which  came  before  him,  iii.  253.

X.  of  France,  his  ordinances  in

favour  of  civil  liberty,  iii.  45.

XI.  of  France,  his  character,  iii.

97.  His  schemes  for  depressing  the  no-
bility, ib. Sows  divisions  among  them,

98.  Increases  the  standing  forces,  99.
Enlarges  Ihe  revenues  of  the  crown,,  ib.
His  address  in  overruling  the  assembly  of
states,  ib. Extends  the  bounds  of  the
French  monarchy,  100. The  activity  of
his  external  operations,  101. His  treach-

erous baseness  towards  the  heiress  of
Burgundy,  105.  The  effects  of  his  con-
duct, 106.

Louis  XII.,  his  hesitation  in  carry  ing  on
war  against  the  pope,  129,  note.  Asserts
his  right  to  the  duchy  of  Milan,  and  re-
tains Ludovico  Sforza  in  priion,  139.

Louise  of  Savoy,  mother  of  Francis  I.
of  France,  her  character,  iv.  73.  Her
motives  for  seizing  the  money  appointed
for  payment  of  marechal  Lautrec's  troops,
ib.  Cause  of  her  aversion  to  the  House
of  Bourbon,  119.  Her  advances  towards
a  marriage  with  Charles  duke  of  Bour-
bon, rejected  by  him,  120.  Determines
to  ruin  him,  121.  Instigates  a  lawsuit
against  him  for  his  estates,  ib.  Goes  to
dissuade  Francis  from  his  intended  inva-
sion of  the  Milanese,  who  will  not  wait
for  her,  145.  Is  appointed  regent  dur-
ing his  absence,  ib.  Her  prudent  con-
duct on  the  defeat  of  Pavia,  and  captivity
of  her  son  Francis,  156.  Concludes  a
defensive  alliance  with  Henry  VIII.,
164.  Ratifies  the  treaty  of  Madrid  for
the  recovery  of  her  son's  liberty,  177.
Undertakes  with  Margaret  of  Savoy,  to
accommodate  the  differences  between  the
Emperor  and  Francis,  234.  Articles  of
the  peace  of  Carabray,  235.

Loyola,  Ignatio,  commands  the  castlr
of  Pampeluna  in  Navarre,  and  is  wound-
ed in  its  defence,  iv.  64.  His  enthusias-
tic turn  of  mind,  ib.  The  founder  of  the
society  of  Jesuits,  ib.  Prevails  on  the
pope  to  establish  the  order,  vi.  356.  An
examination  into  the  constitution  of  the
order,  357.  Office  and  power  of  the  Ge-
neral, 358.  The  rapid  progress  of  the
order,  361.  See  Jusuits.

Lorrain,  cardinal  of,  persuades  Henry
II.  of  France  to  accept  the  offered  alli-
ance with  pope  Paul  IV.,  and  is  sent  to
Rome  to  negotiate  it,  v.  319.  His  im-
prudent behaviour  towards  the  duchy  of
Valentinois,  378.

Lunenburg,  duke  of,  avows  the  opi-
nions of  Luther,  iv.  133.

Luther,  Martin,  the  happy  conse-
quences of  the  opinions  propagated  by
him,  iv.  12.  Attacks  indulgences,  15.
His  birth  and  education,  ib.  Chosen
philosophical  professor  at  the  university
of  Wittemberg,  16.  Inveighs  against  the
publishers  of  indulgences,  17.  Writes  to
Albert  elector  of  Mentz  against  them,  ib.
Composes  these  against  indulgences,  ib.
Is  supported  by  the  Augustinians,  and  en-
couraged by  Frederic  elector  of  Saxony,
18.  Is  summoned  to  Rome  by  pope  Leo,
20.  Obtains  of  the  pope  leave  to  have
his  doctrines  examined  in  Germany,  21.
Appears  before  cardinal  Cajetan  at  Augs-
burg, ib.  His  resolute  reply  to  the  pe-
remptory order  of  Cajetan,  to  retract  hit
2o

450

INDEX.

principles,  22.  Withdraws  from  Augs-
burg, and  appeals  from  the  pope  ill  in-
formed, to  the  pope  when  better  informed,
concerning  liim,  23.  Appeals  to  a  gene-
ral council,  25.  The  death  of  Maximi-
lian, how  of  service  to  him,  26.  Ques-
tions the  papal  authority  in  a  public  dis-
putation, 27.  His  opinions  condemned
by  the  universities  of  Cologne  and  Lou-
vain,  28.  A  bull  of  excommunication
published  against  him,  ib.  Pronounces
the  pope  to  be  antichrist,  and  burns  the
bull,  29.  Reflections  on  the  conduct  of
the  court  of  Rome  toward  him,  30.  Re-
flections on  his  conduct,  32.  Causes
which  contributed  to  favour  his  opposi-
tion to  the  church  of  Rome,  34.  Par-
ticularly the  art  of  printing,  48,  and  the
revival  of  learning,  ib.  He  is  summoned
to  appear  at  the  diet  of  Worms,  54.  A
safe  conduct  granted  him  thither,  ib.  His
reception  there,  ib.  Refuses  to  retract
his  opinions,  55.  Departs,  ib.  An  edict
published  against  him,  ib.  He  is  seized
and  concealed  at  Wartburg,  ib.  Pro-
gress of  his  doctrines,  56.  The  univer-
sity of  Paris  publishes  a  decree  against
him,  ib.  Wrote  against  by  Henry  VIII.
of  England,  57.  Answers  both,  58.  With-
draws from  his  retreat  to  check  the  incon-
siderate zeal  of  Carlostadius,  132.  Un-
dertakes a  translation  of  the  Bible,  ib.
His  doctrines  avowed  by  several  of  the
German  princes,  133.  His  moderate
and  prudent  conduct,  186.  Marries  Ca-
therine a  Bora,  a  nun,  ib.  The  great
progress  of  his  doctrines  among  the  Ger-
manic states,  244.  Encourages  the  Pro-
testants, dispirited  by  the  emperor's  de-
cree against  him,  250.  His  concern  at
the  practices  of  the  Anabaptists  at  Mun-
ster,  '.274.  Is  invited  to  Leipsic,  by  Henry
duke  of  Saxony,  339.  His  opinion  of
Cropper's  treatise  to  unite  the  Protestants
and  Catholics,  372.  Dies,  v.  58.  Sum-
mary of  his  character,  59.  Extract  from
his  last  will,  61,  note.  See  Protestants.
A  view  of  the  extraordinary  effects  of  his
revolt  from  the  church  of  Rome,  on  that
court,  and  on  Europe  in  general,  410.

Luxemburg,  invaded  by  Robert  de  la
Mark,  lord  of  Bouillon,  iv.  66.  Invaded
and  overruu  by  the  duke  of  Orleans,  v.  7.
Is  again  invaded  by  Francis,  IS.

MADRID,  treaty  of,  between  the
emperor  Charles  V.  and  his  prisoner
Francis  I.,  king  of  France,  iv.  174,175.
Sentiments  of  the  public  with  regard  to
this  treaty,  176.

Magdeburg,  the  city  of,  refuses  to  ad-
mit the  Interim  enforced  by  Charles  V.,
and  prepares  for  defence,  v.  183.  Maurice
elector  of  Saxony  appointed  to  reduce  it,
184.  Is  put  under  the  ban  of  the  empire,

197.  The  territories  of,  invaded  by  George
of  Mecklenburg,  ib.  The  inhabitants  de-
feated in  a  sally,  198.  Maurice  of  Saxony
arrives  and  besieges  the  city,  ib.  Sur-
renders, 199.  The  senate  elects  Maurice
their  burg  rave,  200.

Mabmed,  king  of  Tunis,  history  of  his
sons,  iv.  284.

Majorca,  an  insurrection  there, iv.  113.
Which  is  quelled  with  difficulty,  114.
The  moderation  of  Charles  toward  the
insurgents  on  his  arrival  in  Spain,  115.

Majesty,  the  appellation  of,  assumed
by  Charles  V.  on  his  election  to  the  im-
perial crown,  and  taken  by  all  the  other
monarchs  of  Europe,  iii.  374.

Malines,  council  of,  an  account  of,  iv.
345.

Malta,  the  island  of,  granted  by  the
emperor  Charles  V.  to  the  knights  of  St.
John,  expelled  from  Rhodes  by  the  Turks,
iv.  84.

Mamalukes,  extirpated  by  sultan  Se-
lim  II.,  iii.  364.

,  a  faction  in  Geneva,  so

termed,  some  account  of,  iv.  301.

Manfred,  his  struggles  for  the  crown  of
Naples,  iii.  134.

Mankind,  the  most  calamitous  period
in  the  history  of,  pointed  out,  iii.  17.

Manners,  the  barbarity  of,  under  the
feudal  establishments,  after  the  overthrow
of  the  Roman  empire,  iii.  24.  When  they
began  to  improve,  27.  Effects  of  the
crusades  on,  31.  How  improved  by  the
enfranchisement  of  cities,  40.  How  im-
proved by  the  erection  of  royal  courts  of
justice,  in  opposition  to  the  baron's  court,
64.  Effects  of  the  revival  of  the  Roman
law  on,  68.  The  beneficial  tendency  of
the  spirit  of  chivalry  on,  72.  How  in-
fluenced by  the  progress  of  science,  74.
78.  How  polished  by  the  revival  of  com-
merce, 83.

Manuel,  Don  John,  Ferdinand's  am-
bassador at  the  imperial  court,  pays  his
court  to  the  archduke  Philip  on  queen
Isabella's  death,  iii.  323.  Intercepts
Joanna's  letter  of  consent  to  Ferdinand's
regency  of  Castile,  324.  Negotiates  a
treaty  between  Ferdinand  and  Philip,
326.  Declares  for  Maximilian's  regency
on  Philip's  death,  331.  Is  made  imperial
ambassador  at  Rome,  and  concludes  an
alliance  between  Charles  V.  and  Leo  X.,
iv.  61.  The  conditions  of  the  treaty,  62.
Procures  Adrian  of  Utrecht  to  be  elected
pope,  77.

Manumission,  particulars  included  in
the  charters  of,  granted  to  husbandmen
or  slaves,  iii.  232,  note  xx.  The  form
of,  233.

Marcelhis  II.,  pope,  his  character,
v.  311.  Dies,  312.

Marciano, battle  of, between Ptter

INDEX.

451

Strozzi  and  the  marquis  de  Marignano,
v.  289.

Margaret  of  Austria,  and  dowager  of
Savoy,  aunt  to  Charles  V.,  undertakes
with  Louise,  mother  of  Francis  I.  of
France,  to  accommodate  the  differences
between  those  two  monarchs,  iv.  234.
Articles  of  the  peace  of  Cambray,  235.

Marignano,  marquis  of,  appointed  com-
mander of  the  Florentine  army,  acting
against  the  French,  v.  287.  Defeats  the
French  army  under  Peter  Strozzi,  289.
Lays  siege  to  Siena,  290.  Converts  the
siege  into  a  blockade,  291.  Siena  sur-
renders, ib.  Reduces  Porto  Ercole,'  293.
His  troops  ordered  into  Piedmont  by  the
emperor,  294.

Mark,  Robert  de  la,  lord  of  Bouillon,
declares  war  against  the  emperor  Charles
V.,  iv.  65.  Ravages  Luxemburg  with
French  troops,  66.  Is  commanded  to
disband  his  troops  by  Francis,  ib.  His
territories  reduced  by  the  emperor,  ib.

Marseilles  besieged  by  the  imperialists,
iv.  142.  Rescued  by  Francis,  143.  In-
terview and  treaty  there  between  the
pope  and  Francis,  263.

Martinuzzi,  bishop  of  Waradin,  is  ap-
pointed guardian  to  Stephen,  king  of
Hungary,  iv.  375.  His  character,  ib.
Solicits  the  assistance  of  sultan  Solyman
against  Ferdinand,  376.  Solyman  seizes
the  kingdom,  377.  Is  appointed  to  the
government  of  Transylvania,  and  the  edu-
cation of  the  young  king,  jointly  with  the
queen,  v.  205.  Negotiates  with  Fer-
dinand, ib.  Prevails  with  the  queen  to
resign  Transylvania,  to  Ferdinand,  206.
Is  appointed  governor  of  Transylvania,
and  made  a  cardinal,  207.  Is  assassinated
by  Ferdinand's  order,  209.

Martyr,  Peter,  his  authority  cited  in
proof  of  the  extortions  of  the  Flemish
ministers  of  Charles  V.,  Hi.  359.

Mary  of  Burgundy,  contracted  to
Lewis  XII.  of  France,  but  married  to  the
emperor  Maximilian,  iii.  317.

Mary  of  England,  her  accession,  v.  275.
Receives  proposals  from  the  emperor
Charles  V.  of  marrying  bis  son  Philip,  ib.
The  English  averse  to  this  union,  276.
The  House  of  Commons  remonstrates
against  the  match,  ib.  The  articles  of
marriage,  277.  The  marriage  ratified  by
parliament,  and  completed,  279.  Re-
establishes the  Romish  religion,  ib.
Persecutes  the  reformers,  280.  Invites
Charles  to  England  on  his  resignation  and
passage  to  Spain,  which  he  declines,  343.
Is  engaged  by  Philip  to  assist  him  in  bis
war  against  France,  351.  Levies  money
by  her  prerogative  to  carry  on  the  war,  ib.
Her  neglect  in  the  security  of  Calais,  367.
Calais  invested  and  taken  by  the  duke  of
Guise,  368.  Dies,  387.

Mary,  daughter  of  James  V.  of  Scot-
land, succeeds  to  the  crown  an  infant,
v.  11.  Is  contracted  to  the  dauphin  of
France,  154.  Is  educated  at  the  court  of
France,  193.  373.  The  marriage  com-
pleted, 373.  Assumes  the  title  and  arras
of  England  on  the  death  of  Mary,  389.

Matthias,  John,  a  baker,  becomes  a
leader  of  the  Anabaptists  at  Munster,
iv.  268.  Seizes  the  city,  and  establishes
a  new  form  of  government  there,  269.
Repulses  the  bishop  of  Munster,  270.
Is  killed,  271.  See  Boccold  and  Ana-
baptists.

Maurice^  duke  of  Saxony,  his  motives
for  not  acceding  to  the  Protestant  league
of  Smalkalde,  v.  18.  Marches  to  the  as-
sistance of  Ferdinand  in  Hungary,  ib.
His  difference  with  his  cousin  the  elector,
19.  His  conduct  at  the  diet  of  worms,  46.
Joins  the  emperor  against  the  Protestants,
78.  His  motives,  90.  His  insidious  con-
duct towards  the  elector,  91.  Seizes  the
electorate  of  Saxony,  94.  Saxony  reco-
vered by  the  elector,  100.  His  ineffectual
endeavours  to  reduce  Wittemberg  for  the
emperor,  132.  Obtains  possession  of  the
electorate,  136.  Is  formally  invested  at
the  diet  of  Augsburg,  161.  Becomes  dis-
satisfied with  the  emperor,  178.  His
motives  to  discontent  explained,  ib.  His
address  and  caution  in  his  conduct,  180.
Enforces  the  Interim  in  his  territories,  ib.
Makes,  nevertheless,  professions  of  his
attachment  to  the  reformation,  181.  Un-
dertakes to  reduce  Magdeburg  to  submit
to  the  Interim,  182.  Protests  against  the
council  of  Trent,  ib.  Is  commissioned  by
the  emperor  to  reduce  Magdeburg,  184.
Joins  George  of  Mecklenburg  before
Magdeburg,  198.  The  city  capitulates,
199.  Begins  to  intrigue  with  count  Mans-
feldt,  200.  Is  elected  burgrave  of  Mag-
deburg, ib.  Dismisses  his  troops,  20J.
His  address  in  amusing  the  emperor,  203.
Makes  an  alliance  with  Henry  II.  of
France,  to  make  war  on  the  emperor,  210.
Makes  a  formal  requisition  of  the  land-
grave's liberty,  213.  Joins  his  troops,  and
publishes  a  manifesto,  218.  Takes  pos-
session of  Augsburg  and  other  cities,  220.
An  ineffectual  negotiation  with  Charles,
221.  Defeats  a.  body  of  the  emperor's
troops,  223.  Takes  the  castle  of  Ehren-
burg,  ib.  Is  retarded  by  a  mutiny  in  his
troops,  224.  Enters  Inspruck,  and  nar-
rowly misses  taking  Charles,  225.  A  ne-
gotiation between  him  and  Ferdinand,
231.  Besieges  Frankfort  on  the  main,
237.  His  inducements  to  an  accommo-
dation, 238.  Signs  a  t/eaty  with  the  em-
peror at  Passau,  239.  Reflections  on  his
conduct  in  this  war,  240.  Marches  into
Hungary  to  oppose  the  Turks,  243.  Is
olaced  at  the  head  of  the  league  against

452  INDEX.

Albert  of  Brandenburg,  259.  Defeats
Albert,  but  is  killed  in  the  battle,  260.
His  character,  261.  Is  succeeded  by  his
brother  Augustus,  263.

Maximilian,  archduke  of  Austria,  mar-
ried to  Mary  heiress  of  Burgundy,  iii.
106.  The  influence  of  this  match  on  the
state  of  Europe,  ib.

,  emperor,  institutes  the  impe-
rial chamber,  iii.  172.  Reforms  the  Aulic
council,  ib.  Claims  the  regency  of  Castile
on  his  son  Philip's  death,  330.  Is  sup-
ported in  his  claim  by  Don  John  Manuel,
331.  Loses  it,  332.  Obtains  the  govern-
ment of  the  Low  Countries  by  the  death
of  Philip,  336.  Appoints  William  deCroy,
lord  of  Chievres,  to  superintend  the  edu-
cation of  his  grandson  Charles,  ib.  Con-
cludes a  peace  with  France  and  Venice,
353.  Dies,  362.  State  of  Europe  at  this
period,  ib.  His  endeavours  to  secure  the
imperial  crown  to  his  grandson  Charles,
363.  How  obstructed,  ib.

Mecklenburg,  George  of,  invades  the
territories  of  Magdeburg  for  the  emperor,
v.  197.  Defeats  the  Magdeburgers,  who
sally  out  on  him,  198.  Is  joined  by
Maurice  of  Saxony,  who  assumes  the  su-
preme command,  ib.

Medici,  Cosmo  di,  the  first  of  the  name,
the  influence  he  acquired  in  Florence,
iii.  132.

,  Alexander,  restored  to  the  do-
minions of  Florence  by  the  emperor
Charles,  iv.  243.  Is  assassinated,  329.

,  cardinal  de,  elected  pope,  and

assumes  the  title  of  Clement  VII.,  iv.  125.
See  Clement  VII.

,  Catharine  di,  is  married  to  the

duke  of  Orleans,  iv.  263.  Is  conjectured
by  the  emperor  Charles  V.  to  have  poi-
soned the  Dauphin,  320.

,  Cosmo  di,  made  duke  of  Flo-
rence, iv.  330.  Is  supported  by  the  em-
peror, and  defeats  the  partisans  of  Loren-
zo, 331.  Asserts  his  independency  against
the  emperor,  v.  254.  Offers  to  reduce  Si-
ena for  the  emperor,  286.  Enters  into  a
war  with  France,  287.  See  Marignano.
His  address  in  procuring  the  investiture  of
Siena  from  Philip  II.  of  Spain,  363.  It  is
granted  to  him,  364.

,  Lorenzo  de,  assassinates  his

kinsman  Alexander,  iv.  329.  Flies,  330.
Attempts  to  oppose  Cosmo,  but  is  de-
feated, 331.

Medicino,  John  James.  See  Marignano.

Medina  del  Campo,the  inhabitants  of,
refuse  to  let  Fonseca  take  the  military
stores  there  for  the  siege  of  the  insur-
gents in  Segovia,  iv.  88.  The  town  al-
most burnt  by  Fonseca,  ib.  The  inhabit-
ants repulse  him,  ib.  Surrenders  after  the
battle  of  Viilalur,  and  dissolution  of  the
holy  junta,  108.

Melanctiion,  imbibes  the  opinions  of
Martin  Luther,  iv.  30.  Is  employed  to
draw  up  a  confession  of  faith  by  the  Pro-
testant princes  at  the  diet  of  Augsburgh,
248.  Is  dejected  by  the  emperor's  de-
cree against  the  Protestants,  but  com-
forted by  Luther,  250.  Is  invited  to  Paris
by  Francis,  296.  His  conference  with
Eckius,  370.  Is  prevailed  on  to  favour
the  Interim  enforced  by  the  emperor,
v.  180.

Melito,  conde  de,  made  viceroy  of  Va-
lencia on  the  departure  of  Charles  V.  for
Germany,  iii.  379.  Appointed  to  com-
mand the  troops  of  the  nobles  against  the
Germanada,  iv.  112.  Defeated  by  them
in  several  actions,  113.  Destroys  the
association,  ib.

Mentz,  archbishop  of,  artfully  declares
before  the  emperor,  the  diet  of  Augs-
burg's acceptance  of  the  Interim,  without
being  authorised  by  it,  v.  159.

Merville,  a  Milanese  gentleman,  em-
ployed as  envoy  from  Francis  I.  to
Francis  Sforza,  duke  of  Milan,  his  fate,
iv.  295.

Melz,  seized  by  Montmorency  the
French  general,  v.  221.  The  duke  of  Guise
made  governor  of,  247.  Is  besieged  by
the  emperor,  249.  The  emperor  desists,
and  retires  in  a  distressed  condition,  252.
A  scheme  formed  by  Father  Leonard  to
betray  the  city  to  the  imperialists,  295.
The  conspiracy  detected  by  the  governor,
297.  Leonard  murdered  by  his  monks,
and  his  associates  executed,  298.

Mezieres,  in  France,  besieged  by  the
imperialists,  iv.  66.  Gallant  defence  of,
by  the  chevalier  Bayard,  67.  The  siege
raised,  ib.

Milan,  the  state  of  the  duchy  of,  at  the
commencement  of  the  sixteenth  century,
iii.  136.  Rise  and  progress  of  the  dis-
putes concerning  the  succession  to,  137.
Marechal  de  Foix,  appointed  to  be  the
French  governor  of,  iv.  71.  His  charac-
ter, ib.  The  Milanese  alienated  from  the
French  by  his  oppressions,  ib.  Invaded
by  the  ecclesiastical  troops  under  Prosper
Colonna,  72.  The  French  driven  out,  75.
Oppressed  by  the  imperial  troops,  117.
Invaded  by  the  French,  123.  Who  are
driven  out  by  Colonna,  124.  The  impe-
rial troops  there  mutiny  for  pay,  but  are
appeased  by  Morone,  129.  Abandoned
by  the  French,  130.  Overrun  again  by
Francis,  who  seizes  the  city,  146.  The
French  retire  on  the  news  of  the  battle  of
Pavia,  154.  The  investiture  of,  granted
to  Sforza,  165.  Taken  from  him  and
granted  to  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  172.
Disorders  committed  by  the  imperial
troops  there,  189.  Oppressive  measures
of  Bourbon  to  supply  his  mutinous  troops,
198.  The  French  forces  there  defeated

INDEX.

453

by  Antonio  de  Leyva,  232.  Ii  again
granted  by  the  emperor  to  Sforza,  242.
Death  of  Sforza,  303.  The  pretensions
of  Francis  to  that  duchy,  304.  Is  seized
by  the  emperor,  ib.  The  marquis  del
Guasto  appointed  governor,  318.

Mind,  the  human,  a  view  of,  under  the
first  establishment  of  the  feudal  policy  in
Europe,  iii.  26.  The  era  of  .its  ultimate
depression,  and  commencement  of  its  im-
provement, 27.  The  progress  of  its  ope-
rations, before  the  full  exertion  of  it, 75.

Ministeriales,  a  class  of  the  oblati,  or
voluntary  slaves,  the  pious  motives  of  the
obligations  they  entered  into,  iii.  234.

Mohacz,  battle  of.between  Solyman  the
Magnificent,  and  the  Hungarians,  iv.  2 1 0.

Monastic  orders,  inquiry  into  the  fun-
damental principles  of,  iv.  355.  Peculiar
constitution  of  the  order  of  Jesuits,  357.

Moncado,  Don  Hugo  de,  the  imperial
ambassador  at  Rome,  his  intrigues  with
cardinal  Colonna,  against  pope  Clement,
iv.  196.  Reduces  the  pope  to  an  accom-
modation, 197.  Is  defeated  and  killed  by
Andrew  Doria  in  a  naval  engagement,  be-
fore the  harbour  of  Naples,  226.

Monluc,  is  sent  by  the  count  d'Engaien
to  Francis  for  permission  to  give  battle  to
the  marquis  del  Guasto,  v.  28.  Obtains  his
suit  by  his  spirited  arguments,  ib.  Com-
mands in  Siena  when  besieged  by  the
marquis  de  Marignano,  290.  His  vigo-
rous defence,  ib.  Is  reduced  by  famine
and  capitulates,  291.

Monte  Alcino,  numbers  of  the  citizens
of  Siena  retire  thither  after  the  reduction
of  that  city  by  the  Florentines,  and  esta-
blish a  free  government  there,  v.  292.

Montecuculi,  count  of,  accused  and  tor-
tured for  poisoning  the  dauphin,  charges
the.  emperor  wilh  instigating  it,  iv.  319.

Montmorency,  marechal,  his  character,
iv.  313.  Francis  adopts  his  plan  for  re-
sisting the  emperor,  and  commits  the  ex-
ecution to  him,  ib.  His  precautions,  314.
His  troops  despise  his  conduct,  316.  Ob-
servations on  his  operations,  317.  Is  dis-
? raced,  v.  5.  Conducts  the  army  of  Henry
I.  to  join  Maurice  of  Saxony,  and  seizes
Metz,  221.  Dissuades  Henry  from  ac-
cepting the  offered  alliance  with  pope
Paul  IV.,  317.  Commands  the  French
army  against  the  duke  of  Savoy,  354.
Detaches  D'Andelot  to  relieve  St.  Quin-
tin,  ib.  Exposes  himself  imprudently  to
an  action,  and  is  defeated,  355.  Is  taken
prisoner,  356.  Negotiates  a  peace  be-
tween Philip  and  Henry,  379.  Returns
to  France  and  is  highly  honoured  by
Henry,  380.  His  assiduity  in  forwarding
the  negotiations,  391.  His  expedient  for
promoting  the  treaty  of  Chateau  Cambre-
sis,  394.

Montpelicr,  a  fruitless  conference  held
there  for  the  restitution  of  the  kingdom
of  Navarre,  iii.  361.

Moors,  make  a  conquest  of  Spain,  iii.
140.  By  what  means  weakened  during
their  establishment  there,  141.  Remarks
on  their  conduct  in  Spain,  142.

Morone,  Jerome,  chancellor  of  Milan,
his  character,  iv.  71.  Retires  from  the
French  exactions  in  Milan  to  Francis
Sforza,  ib.  His  intrigues,  how  rendered
abortive,  ib.  Quiets  the  mutiny  of  the
imperial  troops  in  Milan,  129.  Is  dis-
gusted with  the  behaviour  of  Charles,  164.
Intrigues  against  the  emperor  with  Pes-
cara,  166.  Is  betrayed  to  the  emperor  by
Pescara,168.  Is  arrested  at  his  visit  to  Pes-
cara,  169.  Is  set  at  liberty  by  the  duke  of
Bourbon,  and  becomes  his  confidant,  1 99.

Mouson  in  France  taken  by  the  impe-
rialists, iv.  66.  Retaken  by  Francis,  67.

Mulhausen,  battle  of,  between  the  em-
peror Charles  V.  and  the  elector  of  Sax-
ony, v.  129.

Muley-Hascen,  king  of  Tunis,  his  in-
human treatment  of  his  father  and  bro-
thers, iv.  284.  Is  expelled  by  Barbarossa,
285.  Engages  the  emperor  Charles  V.  to
restore  him,  286.  Is  established  again  by
the  surrender  of  Tunis,  291.  His  treaty
with  Charles,  292.

Muncer,  Thomas,  a  disci  pie  of  Luther,
opposes  him  with  fanatical  notions,  ir.
183.  Heads  the  insurrection  of  the  pea-
sants in  Thuringia,  184.  His  extravagant
schemes,  ib.  Is  defeated  and  put  to  death,
185.

Municipal  privileges,  how  obtained  by
the  cities  of  Italy,  iii.  219.  note  xv.  Se-
cured to  them  by  the  treaty  of  Constance,
221.  The  favourable  state  of,  under  the
Roman  government,  226.

Munster,  the  first  settlement  of  the  Ana-
baptists in  that  city,  iv.  268.  The  city
seized  by  them,  269.  They  establish  a
new  form  of  government  there,  ib.  Is
called  Mount  Sion,  270.  The  bishop  of,
repulsed  by  them,  ib.  Is  blockaded  by
the  bishop,  274.  The  city  taken,  275.
See  Anabaptists.

Murder,  the  prices  of  composition  for,
by  the  Romish  clergy,  iv.  38.

Mustapha,  the  declared  hair  to  Sultan
Solyman  the  Magnificent,  is  invested  with
the'administration  of  Diarbequir,  v.  269.
His  father  rendered  jealous  of  his  popu-
larity, by  the  arts  of  Roxalana,  270.
Is  strangled  by  his  father's  order,  273.
His  only  son  murdered,  274.

NAPLES,  a  view  of  the  constitution  of
that  kingdom,  at  the  commencement  of
the  sixteenth  century,  iii.  133.  The  tur-
bulent unsettled  state  of  that  kingdom,

454

INDEX.

134.  State  of  the  disputes  concerning  the
succession  of  the  crown  of,  ib.  The  pre-
tensions of  the  French  and  Spanish  mo-
narchs  to  the  crown  of,  135.  The  reve-
nues of,  mortgaged  by  Lannoy  to  supply
the  emperor  in  his  exigencies,  iv.  147.
Invaded  by  the  French  under  the  duke
of  Albany,  150.  Invaded  by  pope  Cle-
ment VII.,  200.  Treaty  between  the  pope
and  Lannoy,  viceroy  of,  202.  The  prince
of  Orange  retreats  thither  before  Lautrec,
225.  Is  blockaded  by  Lautrec,  ib.  Sea-
engagement  in  the  harbour  of,  between
Andrew  Doria  and  Moncada,  226.
Causes  which  disappointed  the  French
operations  against,  ib.  Doria  revolts,  and
opens  the  communication  by  sea  again,
229.  Oppressed  by  the  Spanish  viceroy,
Don  Pedro  de  Toledo,  becomes  disaf-
fected to  the  emperor  Charles  V.,  v.  256.
Is  harassed  by  a  Turkish  fleet,  257.

Narbonne,  community  of,  preamble  to
the  writ  of  summons  of  Philip  the  Long
to,  iii.  231,  notexix.

Nassau,  count  of,  invades  Bouillon  at
the  head  of  the  imperialists,  iv.  66.  In-
vades France,  takes  Mouson,  and  be-
sieges Mezieres,  but  is  repulsed,  ib.

Navarre,  the  kingdom  of,  unjustly  ac-
quired by  Ferdinand  of  Aragon,  iii.  333.
D' Albert's  invasion  of,  defeated  by  car-
dinal Xiraenes,  349.  Its  castles  disman-
tled, except  Pampeluna,  which  Ximenes
strengthens,  350.  Invaded  by  Francis  I.
in  the  name  of  Henry  d' Albert,  iv.  63.
Reduced  by  L'Esparre,  the  French  ge-
neral, 64.  The  French  driven  out  by  the
Spaniards,  and  L'Esparre  taken  pri-
soner, 65.

Navigation,  proof  of  the  imperfect
state  of,  during  the  middle  ages,  iii.
276.

Netherlands,  vigorous  prosecution  of
the  manufactures  of  hemp  and  flax  there,
on  the  revival  of  commerce  in  Europe,
iii.  82.  The  government  of,  first  assumed
by  Charles  V.,  337.  The  Flemings
averse  to  Charles's  going  to  Spain,  353.
Invaded  by  Francis  I.  king  of  France,  iv.
67.  A  truce  concluded  with,  by  Henry
VIII.  of  England,  227.  Invaded  by  Fran-
cis again,  .>.  i .  A  suspension  of  arms
there,  322.  An  insurrection  at  Ghent,
343.  See  Ghent  Is  once  more  invaded
by  Francis,  v.  13.  Resigned  by  the  em-
peror to  his  sou  Philip,  326.  A  review  of
the  alterations  in,  during  the  sixteenth
century,  418.

Nice,  a  truce  for  ten  years  concluded
there  between  the  emperor  and  Francis,
iv.  326.  Besieged  by  the  French  and
Turks,  v.  16.

Normans,  why  so  few  traces  of  their
usages  and  language  to  be  found  in  Eng-

land, in  comparison  with  those  of  the
Saxons,  186,  note  iv.

Noyon,  treaty  of,  between  Charles  V.
and  Francis  I.  of  France,  iii.  353.  The
terms  of,  neglected  by  Charles,  iv.  2.

Nuremburg,  the  city  of,  embraces  the
reformed  religion,  iv.  133.  Diet  of,  par-
ticulars of  pope  Adrian's  brief  to,  respect-
ing the  refortners,  134.  The  reply  to,  135.
Proposes  a  general  council,  ib. 'Presents
a  list  of  grievances  to  the  pope,  136.  The
recess  or  edict  of,  137.  This  diet  of  great
advantage  to  the  reformers,  ib.  Proceed-
ings of  a  second  diet  there,  139.  Recess
of  the  diet,  140.  An  accommodation
agreed  to  there,  between  the  emperor
Charles  V.  and  the  Protestants,  255.

OBLATI,  or  voluntary  slaves,  the  classes
of,  specified,  iii.  234.

Oran,  and  other  places  in  Barbary,
annexed  to  the  crown  of  Castile  by  Xi-
menes, iii.  334.

Orange,  Philibertde  Chalons,  prince  of,
general  of  the  imperial  army  on  the  death
of  the  duke  of  Bourbon,  takes  the  castle  of
St.  Angelo,  and  pope  Clement  VII.  pri-
soner, iv.  209.  Retires  to  Naples  on  the
approach  of  Lautrec,  2?5.  Takes  his  suc-
cessor, the  marquis  de  Saluces,  prisoner
at  Aversa,  230.

Ordeal,  methods  of  trial  by,  during
the  middle  ages,  iii.  54.  The  influence  of
superstition  in  dictating  these  means,  ib.

Orleans,  duke  of,  delivered  up  to  the
emperor  Charles  V.,  with  the  dauphin,
as  hostages  for  the  performance  of  the
treaty  of  Madrid,  iv.  178.  Is  married  to
Catharine  di  Medici,  263.  Becomes
dauphin  by  the  death  of  his  brother,
321.  See  Dauphin.

duke  of,  brother  to  the  for-
mer, commands  the  army  appointed  by
Francis  I.  for  the  invasion  of  Luxemburg,
v.  5.  Is  prompted  by  envy  to  abandon
his  conquests,  and  join  his  brother  the
dauphin  in  Rousillon,  7.  Dies,  48.

Otto,  Frisingensis,  his  account  of  the
state  of  Italy  under  Frederic  I.,  iii.  219.

Ottoman  empire,  the  origin,  and  des-
potic nature  of,  iii.  179.  Becomes  for-
midable to  the  Christian  powers,  183.

Pacheco,  Donna  Maria,  wife  to  Don
John  de  Padilla,  her  artful  scheme  to
raise  money  to  supply  the  army  of  the
holy  junta,  iv.  103.  Her  husband  taken
prisoner  aiid  executed,  107.  His  letter  to
her,  ib.  note.  Raises  forces  to  revenge
his  death,  109.  Is  reduced,  and  retires  to
Portugal,  111.

Padilla,  Don  John  de,  his  family  and
character,  iv.  86.  Heads  the  insurrection
at  Toledo,  ib.  Routs  the  troops  under

INDEX.

455

Ronquillo,  88.  Calls  a  convention  of  the
tualecontents  at  Avila,  91.  Forms  the
confederacy  called  the  holy  junta,  ib.
Disclaims  Adrian's  authority,  ib.  Gets
possession  of  queen  Joanna,  92.  Removes
the  holy  junta  to  Tordesillas,  the  place
of  her  residence,  ib.  Sent  with  troops  to
Valladolid,  and  deprives  Adrian  of  all
power  of  government,  93.  Is  superseded
in  the  command  of  the  army  of  the  junta,
by  Don  Pedro  de  Giron,  100.  Is  ap-
pointed commander  at  the  resignation  of
Giron,  102.  His  army  supplied  with
money  by  an  expedient  of  his  wife,  103.
Besieges  Torrelobatou,  105.  Takes  and
plunders  it,  ib.  Concludes  a  truce  with
the  nobles,  ib.  Is  wounded  and  taken
prisoner  in  an  action  with  the  Conde  de
Haro,  106.  Is  put  to  death,  107.  His
letter  to  his  wife,  ib.  note.  His  letter  to
the  city  of  Toledo,  108,  note.

Palatinate,  the  reformation  established
there,  by  the  elector  Frederic,  v.  51.

Palatine,  count,  ambassador  from  the
diet  at  Frankfort,  brings  Charles  V.  the
offer  of  the  imperial  crown,  which  he
accepts,  iii.  375.

Pampeluna,  castle  of,  in  Navarre,  its
fortifications  strengthened  by  cardinal
Ximenes,  iii.  3oO.  Taken  by  L'Esparre,
the  French  general,  for  Henry  d'Albert,
v.  64.  Retaken  by  the  French,  65.

Papacy,  how  liable  to  be  affected  by
the  disposal  of  the  imperial  crown,  iii.
368.  See  Popedom.

Paper,  when  first  made  of  the  present
materials,  iii.  211.

Paraguay,  a  sovereignty  established
there  by  theorder  of  Jesuits,  iv.  365.  The
inhabitants  of,  civilized  by  them,  366.
Precautions  used  by  the  Jesuits  to  pre-
serve the  independency  of  their  empire
there,  367.

Paris,  an  inquiry  into  the  pre-eminent
jurisdiction  of  its  parliament  over  the
other  parliaments  of  France,  iii.  164.  Its
origin  traced,  300,  note  xl.  The  royal
edicts  registered  by,  before  admitted  to
be  laws,  302.  A  decree  published  by  the
university  of,  against  Luther,  iv.  57.  A
decree  of  the  parliament  of,  published
against  the  erapero?  Charles  V.,  320.

Parliaments,  or  legislative  assemblies,
how  formed  under  the  feudal  policy,  iii.
41.  How  altered  by  the  progress  of  civil
liberty,  42.

Parma,  the  duchy  of,  confirmed  to  Oc-
tavio  Farnese,  by  pope  Julius  III.,  v.
192.  Is  attacked  by  the  imperialists,  and
successfully  protected  by  the  French,  194.

Passau,  a  treaty  concluded  there  be-
tween the  emperor  Charles  V.  and  Mau-
rice of  Saxony,  v.  239.  Reflections  on  this
peace,  and  the  conduct  of  Maurice,  240.

Pavia,  besieged  by  Francis  I.  of
France,  iv.  147.  Vigorously  defended
by  Antonio  de  Ley  va,  148.  Battle  of,  be-
tween Francis  and  the  duke  of  Bourbon,
152.  The  imperial  troops  in  that  city
mutiny,  160.

Paul  III.,  pope,  elected,  iv.  266.  His
character,  ib.  Proposes  a  general  council
to  beheld  at  Mantua,  279.  Netotiates  per-
sonally between  the  emperor  and  Francis,
325.  Issues  a  bull  for  a  council  at  Man-
tua, 334.  Prorogues  and  transfers  it  to
Vicenza,  335.  A  partial  reformation  of
abuses  by,  336.  Summons  the  council  of
Trent,  v.  20.  Prorogues  it,  21.  Summons
it  again,  42.  Grants  the  duchies  of  Par-
ma and  Placentia  to  his  illegitimate  son,
49.  Deprives  and  excommunicates  the
electoral  bishop  of  Cologne,  64.  Presses
the  emperor  to  declare  against  the  Pro-
testants, 65.  Concludes  an  alliance  with
him  against  the  Protestants,  70.  Indis-
creetly publishes  this  treaty,  73.  His
troops  join  the  emperor,  84  Recalls  them,
102.  Removes  the  council  from  Trent  to
Bologna,  150.  Refuses  the  emperor's  re-
quest to  carry  the  council  back  to  Trent,  ib.
His  resentment  against  the  emperor  for  the
murder  of  his  son  cardinal  Farnese,  153.
Is  petitioned  by  the  diet  of  Augsburg  for
the  return  of  the  council  to  Trent,  155.
Eludes  the  complying  with  this  request,
156.  His  sentiments  of  the  Interim,  pub-
lished by  Charles,  162.  Dismisses  the
council  of  Bologna,  167.  Annexes  Parma
and  Placentia  to  the  holysee,  172.  Dies,  ib.
The  manner  of  his  death  inquired  into,l73.

Paul  IV.  pope,  elected,  v.  312.  His
character  and  history,  313.  Founds  the
order  of  Theatines,  ib.  Is  the  principal
occasion  of  establishing  the  inquisition  in
the  papal  territories,  314.  Lays  aside  his
austerity  on  his  election,  ib.  His  par-
tiality to  his  nephews,  315.  Is  alienated
from  the  emperor  by  his  nephews,  316.
Makes  overtures  to  an  alliance  with
France,  317.  Is  enraged  by  the  recess
of  the  diet  of  Augsburg,  319.  Signs  a
treaty  with  France,  321.  Is  included  in
the  truce  for  five  years,  concluded  be-
tween the  emperor  and  Henry,  332.  His
insidious  artifices  to  defeat  this  truce;
333.  Absolves  Henry  from  his  oath,  and
concludes  a  new  treaty  with  him,  336.
His  violent  proceedings  against  Philip,
now  king  of  Spain,  337.  The  Compagna
Romana  seized  by  the  duke  d'Alva,  339.
Concludes  a  truce  with  Alva,  340.  Con-
trast between  his  conduct  and  that  of
Charles,  346.  Renews  his  hostilities
against  Philip,  347.  Is  unprovided  for
military  operations,  348.  Is  reduced
to  make  peace  with  Philip,  by  the  recall
of  the  duke  of  jGuise  after  the  defeat  of

456

INDEX.

St.  Quintiii,  361.  Receives  an  ambas-
sador from  the  emperor  Ferdinand  to
notify  his  election, but  refuses  tosee  him,
or  to  acknowledge  the  emperor,  371.
Dies,  396.

Paulin,  a  French  officer,  sent  ambassa-
dor from  Francis  I.  to  Sultan  Solyraan,
v.  12.  His  successful  negotiations  at  the
Porte,  13.

Pembroke,  earl  of,  sent  by  queen
Alary  of  England  with  a  body  of  men  to
join  the  Spanish  array  in  the  Low  Coun-
tries, v.  352.

People,  their  wretched  servile  state
under  the  feudal  system,  23.  44.  Re-
leased from  their  slavish  state  by  the
enfranchisement  of  cities,  39.  How  they
obtained  a  representation  in  national
councils,  42.  Those  who  lived  in  the
country  and  cultivated  the  ground,  an
inquiry  into  their  condition  under  the
feudal  policy,  206,  note  is.

Perpignan,  the  capital  of  Rousillon,
besieged  by  the  dauphin  of  France,  v.  6.
The  siege  raised,  7.

Persia,  murder  in, how  punished  there,
iii.  254.

Pescara,  marquis  de,  takes  Milan  by
assault,  iv.  75.  Drives  Eonnivet  back  to
France,  130.  His  generous  care  of  the
chevalier  Bayard,  131.  Commands  in
the  invasion  of  Provence,  142.  Besieges
Marseiles,  ib.  His  array  retires  to-
wards Italy,  on  the  appearance  of  the
French  troops,  143.  Resigns  Milan
to  the  French,  146.  Prevails  on  the
Spanish  troops  not  to  murmur  at  present
for  their  pay,  147.  Contributes  to  the
defeat  of  Francis  at  the  battle  of  Pavia,
153.  Is  disgusted  at  Francis  being  taken
to  Spain  without  his  concurrence,  165.
His  resentment  inflamed  by  Morone,  166.
Betrays  Marone's  designs  to  the  empe-
ror, 168.  Arrests  Morone,  169.  Dies,172.

Peter  the  Hermit,  excites  the  European
princes  to  undertake  the  holy  war,  iii.  30.

IV.,  king  of  Aragon,  defeats  the

leaders  of  the  Aragonese  union,  and  de-
stroys the  privilege  of  these  associations,
iii.  283.

Philip  the  Long,  preamble  to  his  writ
of  summons  to  the  community  of  Nar-
bonne,  note  six.,  iii.  231.

— — ,  archduke  of  Austria,  and  father
of  Charles  V.,  visits  Spain  with  his  wife
Joanna,  iii.  318.  Does  homage  by  the
way  to  Lewis  XII.  of  France  for  the
earldom  of  Flanders,  ib.  His  title  to  the
crown  acknowledged  by  the  cortes,  319.
Is  disgusted  with  the  formality  of  the
Spanish  court,  ib.  Ferdinand  becomes
jealous  of  his  power,  ib.  Slights  his
wife,  ib.  His  abrupt  departure  from
Spain,  320.  Passes  through  France,  and

enters  into  a  treaty  with  Lewis,  ib.  Hi*
sentiments  on  Ferdinand's  obtaining  the
regency  of  Castile,  323.  Requires  Fer-
dinand to  retire  to  Aragon,  and  resign
his  regency  of  Castile,  ib.  The  regency
of  Castile  vested  jointly  in  him,  Ferdi-
nand, and  Joanna,  by  the  treaty  of  Sala-
manca, 326.  Sets  out  for  Spain,  and  is
driven  on  the  coast  of  England,  where  he
is  detained  three  months  by  Henry  VII.,
327.  Arrives  at  Corunna,  ib.The  Castilian
nobility  declare  openly  for  him,  ib.  Fer-
dinand resigns  the  regency  of  Castile  to
him,  328.  Interview  between  them,  ib.
Acknowledged  king  of  Castile  by  the
cortes,  329.  Dies,  ib.  Joanna's  extra-
ordinary conduct  in  regard  to  his  body,
ib.  See  Joanna.

Philip,  prince,  sou  to  the  emperor
Charles  V.,  his  right  of  succession  recog-
nised by  the  cortes  of  Aragon  and  Va-
lencia, v.  8.  Is  acknowledged  by  the
states  of  the  Netherlands,  169.  His  de-
portment disgusts  the  Flemings,  ib.  His
character  190.  Is  married  to  Mary  queeu
of  England,  277.  279.  The  English  parlia-
ment jealous  of  him,  281.  His  father
resigns  his  hereditary  dominious  to  him,
321.  Is  called  by  his  father  out  of  Eng-
land, 326.  The  ceremony  of  investing
him,  ib.  His  father's  address  to  him,  328.
Commissions  cardinal  Granville  to  ad-
dress the  assembly  in  his  name,  329.
Mary  queeu  dowager  of  Hungary  resigns
her  regency,  ib.  The  dominions  of  Spain
resigned  to  him,  ib.  His  unpolitene.ss  to
the  French  ambassador  Coligni,  332, note.
The  pope's  violent  proceedings  againsl
him,  337.  His  scruples  concerning  com-
mencing hostilities  against  the  pope,  338.
His  ungrateful  neglect  in  paying  hb
father's  pension,  344.  The  pope  renews
hostilities  against  him,  347.  Assembles
an  army  in  the  Low  Countries  against
France,  350.  Goes  over  to  England  to
engage  that  kingdom  in  the  war,  351.
Visits  the  camp  at  St.  Quintin,  after  the
victory,  357.  Opposes  the  scheme  of
penetrating  to  Paris,  and  orders  the  siege
of  St.  Quintin  to  be  prosecuted,  o.io1.
St.  Quintin  taken  by  assault,  359.  The
small  advantages  he  reaped  by  these
successes,  360.  Builds  the  Escurial  in
memory  of  the  battle  of  St.  Quiutin,  ib.
Concludes  a  peace  with  the  pope,  361.
Restores  Placentia  to  Octavio  Farnese,
363.  Grants  (lie  investiture  of  Siena  to
Cosmo  di  Medici,  364.  Enters  into  ne-
gotiations for  peace  with  his  prisoner
Montmorency,  379.  Death  of  queen
Mary,  387.  Addresses  her  successor  Eli-
zabeth fur  marriage,  388.  Elizabeth's
motives  for  rejecting  him,  390.  Her
evasive  answer  to  him,  ib.  Supplants  his

INDEX.

457

son  Don  Carlos,  and  marries  Henry's
daughter  Elizabeth,  394.  Articles  of  the
treaty  of  Chateau  Cambresis,  ih.

Philibert,  Emanuel,  duke  of  Savoy.
See  Savoy.

Phillipino,  nephew  to  Andrew  Doria,
defeats  IMoncada  in  a  sea-engagement
before  the  harbour  of  Naples,  iv.  226.

Philosophy,  cultivated  by  the  Arabians,
when  lost  in  Europe,  iii.  288,  note  xxviii.
Its  progress  from  them  into  Europe,  ib.

Piadena,  marquis  de,  invades  Tran-
sylvar.ia  for  Ferdinand,  v.  206.  Misre-
presents cardinal  Martinuzai  to  Ferdi-
nand, and  obtains  a  commission  to  assas-
sinate him,  209.  Is  forced  to  abandon
Transylvania,  266.

Picardy,  invaded  by  Henry  VIII.,  iv.
82.  Henry  forced  by  the  duke  de  Ven-
dome  to  retire,  ib.  Invaded  again  under
the  duke  of  Suffolk,  127.  Who  pene-
trates almost  to  Paris,  but  is  driven  back,
128.  Ineffectual  invasion  by  the  im-
perialists, 318.

Pilgrimages  to  the  Holy  Land,  when
first  undertaken,  iii.  28.  See  Crusades,
and  Peter  the  Hermit.

Placeutia,  council  of,  the  holy  war  re-
solved on  by,  iii.  30.  See  Peter  the
Hermit,  and  Crusades.

Placentia,  the  duchy  of,  granted,
together  with  that  of  Parma,  by  pope
Paul  III.  to  his  natural  son,  cardinal
Farnese,  v.  49.  Farnese  assassinated
there,  152.  Is  taken  possession  of  by  the
imperial  troops,  153.  Restored  to  Oc-
tavio  Farnese, by  Phil. II.  ofSpain,  363.

Plunder,  how  divided  among  the  an-
cient northern  nations,  iii.  20.  Illustrated
iu  an  anecdote  of  Clovis,  196,  note  vii.

Pole,  cardinal,  arrives  in  England  with
a  legatine  commission,  v.  280.  Endea-
vours to  mediate  a  peace  between  the
emperor  and  the  king  of  France,  without
success,  299.  Is  recalled  from  the  court
of  England  by  pope  Paul  IV.,  347.

Popedom,  the  highest  dignity  in  Eu-
rope at  the  commencement  of  the  six-
teenth century,  iii.  122.  Origin  and  pro-
gress of  the  papal  power,  ib.  The  terri-
tories of  the  popes  unequal  to  the  support
of  their  spiritual  jurisdiction,  123.  Their
authority  in  their  own  territories  ex-
tremely limited,  ib.  The  check  they
received  from  the  Roman  barons,  124.
Nicholas  Rienzo  attempts  to  establish  a
democratical  government  in  Rome,  and  to
destroy  the  papal  jurisdiction,  125.  The
papal  authority  considerably  strength-
ened by  the  popes  Alexander  VI.  and
Julius  II.,  126.  See  Julius  II.  The
permanent  nature  of  ecclesiastical  domi-
nion, ib.  The  civil  administration  of,  not
uniform  or  consistent,  127.  Rome  the
school  of  political  intrigue  during  the  six-

teenth century,  ib.  The  advantages  de-
rived from  the  union  of  spiritual  and  tem-
poral authority,  128.  A  view  of  the
contests  between  the  popes  and  the  em-
perors of  Germany,  168.

Populousness,  of  the  ancient  northern
nations,  an  inquiry  into,  iii.  12.

Prague,  its  privileges  abridged  by  Fer-
dinand king  of  Bohemia,  v.  147.

Printing,  its  effects  on  the  progress  of
the  Reformation,  iv.  48.

Priscus,  extract  from  his  account  of  the
Roman  embassy  to  Attila,  king  of  the
Huns,  iii.  186,  note  iii.

Procopius,  his  account  of  the  cruel
devastations  made  by  the  irruption  of
the  northern  nations,  iii.  187,  note  v.
188,  189.

Property ,  the  possession  of,  how  se-
cured by  the  French  charters  of  commu-
nities, iii.  223.

Protestants,  the  derivation  of  the  name,
iv.  246.  Of  whom  they  originally  consist-
ed, ib.  A  severe  decree  published  against
them  by  the  emperor,  250.  They  enter
into  a  league,  ib.  See  Smalkalde.  Re-
new their  league  and  apply  to  Francis
king  of  France,  and  Henry  VIII.  of  Eng-
land, for  protection,  253.  Are  secretly
encouraged  by  Francis,  254.  Receive  a
supply  of  money  from  Henry,  ib.  Terras
of  the  pacification  agreed  to  between
them  and  the  emperor  ar  Nuremburg,
255.  Assist  the  emperor  against  the
Turks,  256.  Their  negotiations  with  the
pope  relative  to  a  general  council,  258.
Renew  the  league  of  Smalkalde  for  ten
years,  279.  The  motives  for  refusing
to  assist  the  king  of  France  against  the
emperor,  298.  Refuse  to  acknowledge
the  council  summoned  by  the  pope  at
Mantua,  335.  A  conference  between
their  principal  divines  and  a  deputation
of  catholics  at  Ratisbon,  570.  This
conference  how  rendered  fruitless,  371.
Obtain  a  private  grant  from  Charles  in
their  favour,  373.  Drive  the  duke  of
Brunswick  from  his  dominions,  v.  21.
All  rigorous  edicts  against  them  suspended
by  a  recess  of  the  diet  of  Spires,  25.
Their  remonstrances  to  Ferdinand  at  the
diet  of  Worms,  44.  Their  inflexible  ad-
herence to  the  recess  of  Spires,  ib.  Dis-
claim all  connexion  with  the  council  of
Trent,  45.  Are  strengthened  by  the  ac-
cession of  Frederick  electcr  palatine,  51.
Are  alarmed  at  the  proceedings  of  the
emperor,  54.  69.  The  emperor  leagues
with  the  pope  against  them,  70.  Pre-
pares to  resist  the  emperor,  74.  Levy  an
army,  77.  The  operations  of  the  army
distracted  by  the  joint  commanders,  83.
The  arinv  dispersed,  97.  The  elector  of
Saxony  "reduced,  129.  The  landgrave
deceived  by  treaty,  and  confined,  137 —

458

INDEX.

142.  The  emperor's  cruel  treatmeat  of
him,  144.  The  Interim,  a  system  of  the-
ology recommended  by  the  emperor  to  the
diet  at  Augsburg,  159.  Are  promised
protection  by  the  emperor  at  the  council
of  Trentj  185.  The  emperor  proceeds
rigorously  against  them,  196.  Their  de-
puties obtain  a  safe  conduct  from  the  em-
peror, but  are  refused  by  the  council,  204.
Maurice  of  Saxony  raises  anarmy  in  their
cause,  217.  See  Maurice.  Treaty  of
Passau,  239.  The  protestant  princes  again
unite  to  strengthen  the  protestant  inte-
rest, 304.  Recess  of  the  diet  of  Augs-
burg on  the  subject  of  religion,  306.
Why  originally  averse  to  the  principles  of
toleration,  309.

Proveditori,  in  the  Venetian  policy,
their  office,  iii.  130.

Provence  is  laid  waste  by  the  marechal
Montmorency,  on  the  approach  of  the
emperor  Charles  V.,  iv.  313.  Is  entered
by  the  emperor,  314.  The  disastrous
retreat  of  the  emperor  from,  317.

Prnssia,  when  conquered  by  the  Teu-
tonic order,  iv.  187.  Is  erected  into  a
duchy,  and  finally  into  a  kingdom,  and
enjoyed  by  the  house  of  Brandenburg,  ib.

conference  between  a  de-
putation of  protestant  and  catholic  di-
vines, before  the  emperor  and  diet  there,
iv.  370.  This  conference  how  rendered
fruitless,  371.  A  diet  opened  there  by
the  emperor,  v.  67.  The  catholic  mem-
bers of,  assert  the  authority  of  the  council
of  Trent,  68.  The  protestants  present  a
memorial  against  it,  ib.  The  protestant
deputies  retire,  70.

Reformation  in  religion,  the  diet  at
Worms  called  by  Charles  V.  to  check  the
progress  of,  iv.  11.  The  rise  of,  explained,
ib.  Account  of  Martin  Luther  the  re-
former, 15.  Beginning  of,  in  Switzerland,
by  Zuinglius,  27.  State  of,  in  Germany,
at  the  arrival  of  Charles  V.,  30.  Reflec-
tions on  the  conduct  of  the  court  of  Rome
towards  Lather,  31.  And  on  Luther's
conduct,  32.  Inquiry  into  the  causes
which  contributed  to  the  progress  of,  34.
Observations  on  the  pontificate  of  Alex-
ander VI.  and  Julius  II.,  35.  The  im-
moral lives  of  the  Romish  clergy,  36.
The  progress  of,  favoured  by  the  inven-
tion of  printing,  48.  And  the  revival  of
learning,  ib.  The  great  progress  of,  in
Germany,  133.  Advantages  derived
to,  from  the  diet  at  Nurernburg,  137.  Its
tendency  in  favour  of  civil  liberty,  182.
The  dissensions  between  the  emperor  and
the  pope,  favourable  to,  212.  The  great
spread  of,  among  the  German  princes,
244.  The  confession  of  Augsburg  drawn
up  by  Melanchthon,  248.  Causes  which
led  to  that  of  England,  263.  The  ex-

cesses it  gave  rue  to,  266.  See  Protest-
ant, Maurice,  and  Smalkalde.  Is  es-
tablished in  Saxony,  338.  The  great  al-
teration occasioned  by,  in  the  courtof
Rome,  v.  409.  Contributed  to  improve
both  the  morals  and  learning  of  the  Ro-
mish church,  414.

Reggio,  invested  by  the  French,  who
are  repulsed  by  the  governor  Guicciardini
the  historian,  iv.  71.

Religion,  how  corrupted  by  the  nor-
thern nations  established  in  Europe  under
the  feudal  policy,  iii.  25.  Its  influence  in
freeing  mankind  from  the  feudal  servi-
tude, iii.  232.

Remonstrance  of  grievances  drawn  up
by  the  holy  junta,  the  particulars  of,
iv.  95.

Repledging,  the  right  of,  in  the  law  of
Scotland,  explained,  iii.  257.

Reproach,  words  of,  the  ancient  Swe-
dish law  of  satisfaction  for,  iii.  247.

Revenues,  royal,  very  small  under  the
feudal  policy,  iii.  86.  By  what  means
increased,  114.

Reverse,  a  deed  so  called,  signed  by
the  archduke  Ferdinand  on  being  elected
king  of  Bohemia,  iv.  211.

Rheggio  plundered  and  burnt  by  Bar-
barossa,  v.  16.

Rhine,  origin  and  intention  of  die
league  of,  iii.  246.

Rhodes,  the  island  of,  besieged  by  So-
lyman  the  Magnificent,  iv.  83.  Taken
by  him,  84.  The  island  of  Malta  grant-
ed to  the  knights  of,  by  the  emperor
Charles  V.,  ib.

Richlieu,  cardinal,  his  remarks  on  De
Retz's  History  of  Fiesco's  Conspiracy,
v.  1 14,  note.

Rienzo,  Nicholas,  endeavours  to  res-
cue Rome  from  the  papal  authority,  and
establish  a  democratical  form  of  govern-
ment there,  iii.  125.

Rincon,  the  French  ambassador  at  the
Porte,  the  motives  of  his  return  to  France,
v.  2.  Is  murdered  in  his  journey  back
to  Constantinople,  by  order  of  the  impe-
rial governor  of  the  Milanese,  3.

Robbers,  the  anathema  pronounced
against  them  during  the  middle  ages,
iii.  273.

Rodolph  of  Hapsburgh,  how  he  attain-
ed election  to  the  empire  of  Germany,
iii.  171.

Romans,  an  inquiry  into  those  advan-
tages which  enabled  them  to  conquer  the
rest  of  Europe,  iii.  9.  The  improvements
they  communicated  in  return  for  their
conquests,  10.  The  disadvantages  the
provinces  laboured  under  from  their  do-
minion, ib.  Their  empire  overturned  by
the  irruption  of  the  barbarous  nations,  11.
The  concurrent  causes  of  their  ruin,  14.
A  comparison  drawn  between  them  and

INDEX.

459

the  northern  nations,  15.  All  the  civil
arts  established  by  them  obliterated,  25.
The  monuments  of  their  arts  industriously
destroyed  by  their  barbarous  invaders, 75.

Rome,  papal. See  Popedorn.

,  reflections  on  the  conduct  of

the  court  of,  respecting  the  proceedings
against  Martin  Luther,  iv.  31.  The  ex-
orbitant wealth  of  the  church  of,  previous
to  the  Reformation,  38.  Venality  of,
45.  How  it  drained  other  countries  of
their  wealth,  46.  The  city  seized  by
cardinal  Colonna,  and  pope  Clement
VII.  besieged  in  the  castle  of  St.  Angelo,
196.  The  city  taken  by  the  imperialists,
and  Bourbon  killed,  207.  Is  plundered,
208.  The  great  revolution  in  the  court
of,  during  the  sixteenth  century,  v.  409.
How  affected  by  the  revolt  of  Luther,
410.  The  spirit  of  its  government
changed  by,  412.

Ronquillo,  sent  by  cardinal  Adrian
with  troops  to  suppress  the  insurrection
in  Segovia,  iv.  87.  Is  routed  by  the  in-
surgents, 88.

Rovere,  Francesco  Maria  de,  restored
to  his  duchy  of  Urbino  by  pope  Adrian,
iv.  116.

Roxalana,  a  Russian  captive,  becomes
the  favourite  mistress  of  sultan  Solyman
the  Magnificent,  v.  267.  Her  only
daughter  married  to  Rustan  the  grand
vizier,  268.  Procures  herself  to  be  de-
clared a  free  woman  by  the  sultan,  ib.
Is  formally  married  to  him,  269.  Ren-
ders Solyman  jealous  of  the  virtues  of  his
son  Mustapha,  270.  Mustapha  strangled,
273.

Royal  truce,  an  account  of,  iii.  241.

Rustan,  grand  vizier  to  Solyman  the
Magnificent,  is  married  to  his  daughter
by  Roxalana,  v.  268.  Enters  into  Roxa-
lana's  scheme  to  ruin  Solyman's  son
Mustapha,  ib.  Is  sent  with  an  army  to
destroy  him,  271.  Draws  Solyman  to
the  army  by  false  reports,  272.

SALAMANCA,  treaty  of,  between  Fer-
dinand of  Aragon,  and  his  sou-in-law
Philip,  iii.  326.

Salerno,  prince  of,  heads  the  disaffect-
ed Neapolitans,  against  the  oppressions
of  the  viceroy  don  Pedro  de  Toledo,  v.
256.  Solicits  aid  from  Henry  II.  of
France,  who  instigates  the  Turks  to  in-
vade Naples,  ib.

Salic  laws,  the  manner  in  which  they
were  enacted,  iii.  292.

Saluces,  marquis  de,  succeeds  Lautrec
in  the  command  of  the  French  army  be-
fore Naples,  iv.  230.  Retires  to  Ave'rsa,
where  he  is  taken  prisoner  by  the  prince
of  Orange,  ib.  Betrays  his  charge  in
Piedmont,  312.

Sancerre,  count  d.c,  defends  St.  Disiere

against  the  emperor  Charles,  v.  31.  Is
deceived  into  a  surrender  by  the  cardinal
Granvelle,  202.

Sauvage,  a  Fleming,  made  chancellor
of  Castile  by  Charles,  on  the  death  of
Ximenes,  iii.  359.  His  extortions,  ib.

Savona,  is  fortified,  and  its  harbour
cleared  by  the  French,  to  favourits  rival-
ship  with  Genoa,  iv.  228.

Savoy,  Charles  duke  of,  marries  Bea-
trix of  Portugal,  sister  to  the  emperor
Charles  V.,  iv.  299.  The  cause  of
Francis's  displeasure  against  him,  300.
His  territories  overrun  by  the  French
troops,  301  Geneva  recovers  its  liberty,
ib.  His  situation  by  the  truce  at  Nice,
between  the  emperor  and  Francis,  327.
Is  besieged  at  Nice  by  the  French  and
Turks,  v.  16.

,  Emanuel  Philibert,  duke  of,

appointed  by  Philip  of  Spain  to  command
his  army  in  the  Low  Countries,  v.  352.
Invests  St.  Quintin,  ib.  Defeats  D'An-
delot  in  an  endeavour  to  join  the  garrison,
354.  But  does  not  hinder  him  from  en-
tering the  town,  ib.  Defeats  the  consta-
ble Montmorency,  and  takes  him  prisoner,
353.  Is  graciously  visited  in  the  camp
by  Philip,  357.  Takes  St.  Quintin  by
assault,  358.  Assists  Montmorency  in
negotiating  peace  between  Philip  and
Henry,  379.  Marries  Henry's  sister,
Elizabeth,  394.

Saxons,  why  so  many  traces  of  their
laws,  language,  and  customs,  to  be  found
in  England,  iii.  186,  note  iv.  Inquiry
into  their  laws  for  putting  an  end  to  pri-
vate wars,  244.

Saxony,  elector  of,  appointed  joint
commander  of  the  army  of  the  Protestant
league,  with  the  landgrave  of  Hesse,
v.  83.  Their  characters  compared,  ib.
Opposes  the  landgrave's  intention  of
giving  battle  to  the  emperor,  87.  His
electorate  seized  by  Maurice,  94.  The
army  of  the  league  disperse,  97.  Recovers
Saxony,  100.  Is  amused  by  Maurice
with  a  negotiation,  101.  Raises  an
army  to  defend  himself  against  the  em-
peror, 125.  Is  irresolute  in  his  mea-
sures, ib.  Charles  passes  the  Elbe,  127.
Is  attacked  by  the  imperialists,  128.  Is
taken  prisoner  and  harshly  received  by
the  emperor,  129.  Is  condemned  to
death  by  a  court-martial,  132.  His  reso-
lution on  the  occasion,  133.  Is  induced
by  regard  to  his  family  to  surrender  his
electorate,  135.  Refuses  the  emperor's
desire  of  his  approving  the  Interim,  163.
The  rigour  of  his  confinement  increased,
164.  Is  carried  by  the  emperor  with
him  into  the  Netherlands,  167.  Is  re-
leased by  the  emperor  on  Maurice's
taking  arms  against  him,  chooses  to  con-
tinue with  the  emperor,  225.  Obtains

4I>0

INDEX

his  liberty  after  the  treaty  of  Passau,
244.

Saxony,  George,  duke  of,  an  enemy
to  the  Reformation,  iv.  338.  His  death
an  advantage  to  the  Reformation,  ib.
The  Protestant  religion  established  by
Henry  duke  of,  ib.  Henry  is  succeeded
by  his  son  Maurice,  v.  18.  His  motives
for  not  acceding  to  the  league  of  Smal-
kalde,  ib.  Marches  to  the  assistance  of
Ferdinand  in  Hungary,  ib.  Joins  the
emperor  against  the  protestants,  90,  91.
See  Maurice.

Schertel,  Sebastian,  a  commander  in
the  army  of  the  protestant  league,  his
vigorous  commencement  of  hostilities,  v.
82.  Is  injudiciously  recalled,  ib.  Is  ex-
pelled from  Augsburg  on  the  dispersion
of  the  Protestant  array,  98.

Science,  the  revival  and  progress  of,
how  far  instrumental  in  civilizing  the  na-
tions of  Europe,  iii.  74.  A  summary
view  of  the  revival  and  progress  of,  in
Europe,  iii.  267,  note  xxviii.

Scotland,  James  V.  of,  married  to
Mary  of  Guise,  duchess-dowager  of
Longueville,  iv.  332.  Death  of  James
and  accession  of  his  infant  daughter
Mary,  v.  11.  Mary  contracted  to  the
dauphin  of  France,  154.  The  marriage
celebrated,  373.  Mary  assumes  the  title
and  arms  of  England  on  the  death  of
Mary  of  England,  389.  Included  in  the
treaty  of  Chateau  Cambresis,  393.  Al-
teration in  the  conduct  of  England  to-
wards, 408.

Sects  in  religion,  reflections  on  the
origin  of,  iv.  266.

Segovia,  an  insurrection  there,  on  ac-
count of  their  representative  Tordesillas
voting  for  the  donative  to  Charles  V.,  iv.
86.  Is  killed  by  the  populace,  ib.  The
insurgents  there  defeat  Ronquillo,  sent  to
suppress  them  by  cardinal  Adrian,  88.
Surrenders  after  the  battle  of  Villalar,  108.

Selirn  II.  sultan,  extirpates  the  Mame-
lukes, and  adds  Egypt  and  Syria  to  his
empire,  iii.  364.  Considered  as  formi-
dable to  the  European  powers,  ib.

Sforza,  Francis,  the  foundation  of  his
pretensions  to  the  duchy  of  Milan,  iii.
138.  Is  murdered  by  his  uncle  Ludovico,
ib.

• — ,  Ludovico,  his  private  views  in

engaging  Charles  VIII.  of  France  to  in-
vade Italy,  iii.  107.  See  Charles  VIII.
Alurders  his  nephew  Francis,  and  seizes
Milan,  138.  Is  stripped  of  his  dominions
by  Louis  XII.  of  France,  and  dies  in  pri-
son, 139.

,  obtains  of  Charles  V.  the  in-
vestiture of  Milan,  iv.  164.  Forfeits  the
duchy  by  his  intrigues  withMorone,  169.
Joins  in  a  league  against  Charles  for  the
recovery  of  Milan,  189.  Is  forced  to

surrender  Milan  to  the  imperialists,  194.
Obtains  again  of  the  emperor  the  investi-
ture of  Milan,  242.  Enters  into  a  pri-
vate treaty  with  Francis,  295.  Dies,  303.

Shipwrecks,  the  right,  lords  of  manors
claim  to,  whence  derived,  iii.  27".

Siena,  the  inhabitants  of,  implore  the
assistance  of  the  emperor  Charles  V.  to
defend  them  against  their  nobles,  v.  255.
The  imperial  troops  endeavour  to  enslave
them,  ib.  Regain  possession  of  their
city,  256.  Repulse  an  attack  of  the
Germans,  265.  Are  besieged  by  the
marquis  de  Marignano,  290.  The  com-
mander Monluc  repulses  the  assaults  vi-
gorously, ib.  The  town  reduced  by
famine,  291.  Numbers  of  the  citizens
retire,  and  establish  a  free  government  at
Monte  Alcino,  292.  The  remaining  ci-
tizens oppressed,  ib.  And  flock  to  Monte
Alcino,  293.  Is  granted  by  the  emperor
to  his  son  Philip,  ib.  The  investiture
given  by  Philip  to  Cosmo  di  Medici,  365.

Sieverhausen,  battle  of,  between  Mau-
rice of  Saxony  and  Albert  of  Branden-
burg, v.  260.

Silk,  the  rarity  of,  and  tbe  high  price
it  bore  in  ancient  Rome,  remarked,  iii.
274.  The  breeding  of  silkworms,  when
introduced  into  Greece,  ib.

Sion,  cardinal  of,  his  scheme  for  weak-
ening the  French  array  in  the  Milanese,
iv.  74.  Leaves  the  imperial  army  to  at-
tend the  conclave  on  the  death  of  Leo  X.,
76.

Slanes,  letters  of,  in  the  law  of  Scot-
land, what,  iii.  254.

Slaves,  under  the.  feudal  policy,  their
wretched  state,  iii.  206.  Oblati,  or  vo-
luntary slaves,  the  several  classes  of,  234.

Smalkalde,  the  Protestants  enter  into
a  league  there  for  their  mutual  support,
iv.  251.  The  league  renewed  at  a  second
meeting  there,  253.  The  league  of,  re-
newed for  ten  years,  279.  A  manifesto,
refusing  to  acknowledge  a  council  called
by  the  pope,  335.  The  king  of  Den-
mark joins  the  league,  337.  The  princes
of,  protest  against  the  authority  of  the
imperial  chamber,  and  the  recess  of  the
diet  at  Nuremburg,  v.  22.  Publish  a
manifesto  against  the  proceedings  of  the
council  at  Trent,  53.  Are  alarmed  at
the  proceedings  of  the  emperor,  54.  A
want  of  unity  among  the  members,  55.
The  views  of  the  elector  of  Saxony,  and
the  landgrave,  explained,  ib.  Appear  at
the  diet  of  Ralisbon  by  deputies,  67.
Their  deputies  protest  against  the  council
of  Trent,  68.  Their  deputies,  alarmed
at  the  emperor's  proceedings  and  decla-
rations, leave  the  diet,  70.  The  emperor
leagues  with  the  pope  against  them,  il>.
Prepare  to  resist  the  emperor,  74.  Are
disappointed  in  their  applications  to  the

INDEX.

Venetians  and  Swiss,  75.  As  also  with
Henry  VIII.  and  Francis,  76.  Assemble
a  large  army,  77.  Are  put  under  the
ban  of  the  empire,  80.  Declare  war
against  the  emperor,  81.  Hostilities  be-
gun by  Schertel,  82.  They  recall  him,  ib.
The  elector  of  Saxony  and  landgrave  of
Hesse  appointed  joint  commanders  of
their  army,  83.  The  characters  of  the
two  commanders  compared,  ib.  Their
operations  distracted  by  this  joint  com-
mand, 84.  Cannonade  the  emperor's
camp,  87.  Make  overtures  of  peace  to
the  emperor,  96.  Their  army  disperse,
97.  The  elector  of  Saxony  reduced,
129.  The  landgrave  deceived  and  con-
fined, 141.  Their  warlike  stores  seized
by  the  emperor,  145.  See  Maurice.

Society,  civil,  the  rude  state  of,  under
the  feudal  establishments  after  the  down-
fal  of  the  Roman  empire,  iii.  24.  The
influence  of  the  crusades  on,  31.  How
improved  by  the  establishment  of  muni-
cipal communities,  36.  The  effects  the
enfranchisements  of  the  people  had  on,
45.  Private  wars,  how  destructive  to,
48.  These  intestine  hostilities,  how  sup-
pressed, 49.  The  administration  of  jus-
tice improved  by  the  prohibition  of  judi-
cial combats,  51.  The  growth  of  royal
courts  of  justice,  in  opposition  to  the
barons'  courts,  63.  How  advanced  by
the  revival  of  the  Roman  law,  68.  The
effects  of  the  spirit  of  chivalry  in  im-
proving, 71.  The  revival  of  commerce
and  its  influences,  80.

Solyman  the  Magnificent,  his  character,
iii.  182.  Ascends  the  Ottoman  throne,
iv.  11.  Invades  Hungary,  and  takes
Belgrade,  83.  Takes  the  island  of
Rhodes,  ib.  Defeats  the  Hungarians  at
Mohacz,  210.  His  successes,  and  the
number  of  prisoners  he  carried  away,  ib.
Besieges  Vienna,  241.  Enters  Hungary
again  with  a  vast  army,  but  is  forced  to
retire  by  the  emperor  Charles,  256.
Takes  Barbarossa  the  pirate  under  his
protection,  283.  Concludes  an  alliance
with  Francis,  king  of  France,  323.  Pre-
pares to  invade  Naples,  324.  Protects
Stephen,  king  of  Hungary,  and  defeats
Ferdinand,  376.  Seizes  Hungary  for
himself,  377.  Overruns  Hungary  again,
in  fulfilment  of  his  treaty  with  Francis,
v.  15.  Concludes  a  truce  with  the  em-
peror, 66.  Loses  Transylvania,  206.
Ravages  the  coasts  of  Italy,  235.  257.
Carries  a  mighty  army  into  Hungary,
235.  Re-establishes  Isabella  and  her
son  in  Transylvania,  266.  His  violent
attachment  to  his  concubine  Roxalana,
267.  Is  prevailed  on  to  declare  her  a
free  woman,  269.  Formally  marries  her,
ib.  Is  rendered  jealous  of  the  virtues
of  his  son  Mustapha,  by  the  aits  of  Roxa-

lana, 270.  Orders  him  to  be  strangled,
273.  Orders  the  murder  of  Mustapha's
son,  274.

Spain,  a  summary  view  of  its  situation,
at  the  commencement  of  the  fifteenth
century,  iii.  89.  The  power  of  the  crown
of,  how  extended  by  Ferdinand,  102.
National  infantry  established  in,  113.  Is
conquered  by  the  Vandals,  140,  and
after  by  the  Moors,  ib.  The  empire  of
the  Moors  in,  how  weakened,  141.  Rise
of  the  kingdoms  of  Castile  and  Aragon,
ib.  Their  union  into  the  Spanish  mo-
narchy, 142.  The  ancient  customs  still
retained  amidst  all  its  revolutions,  ib.
Peculiarities  in  its  constitution  and  laws
remarked,  143.  See  Aragon  and  Cas-
tile. Various  causes  which  contribute  to
limit  the  regal  power  in,  150.  The  cities
of,  how  they  attained  their  consideration
and  power,  151.  The  schemes  of  Ferdi-
nand and  Isabella,  to  exalt  the  regal
power,  153.  The  grand-masterships  of
the  three  orders,  annexed  to  the  crown,
154.  The  association  of  the  Holy  Bro-
therhood, on  what  occasion  formed,  156.
The  tendency  of  this  association  to
abridge  the  territorial  jurisdictions  of  the
barons,  157.  The  cruel  devastations
made  by  the  Vandals,  in  the  invasion  of
that  province,  187.  When  the  cities  of,
acquired  municipal  privileges,  229,  note
xviii.  The  long  continuance  of  the  prac-
tice of  private  wars  there,  245.  The
total  annual  revenue  of  the  nobility,  in
the  time  of  Charles  V.,  286.  An  inquiry
into  the  origin  of  communities  of  free
cities  in,  287.  The  state  of,  at  the  death
of  Ferdinand  of  Aragon,  iii.  338.  Charles
king  of,  aspires  to  the  imperial  crown  on
the  death  of  Maximilian,  363.  Is  elected
emperor,  372.  Reflections  of  the  Spa-
niards on  that  event,  374.  Charles  ap-
points viceroys,  and  departs  for  Germany,
380.  Insurrections  there,  iv.  85.  A
view  of  the  feudal  system  in,  90.  An
account  of  the  confederacy  termed  the
Holy  Junta,  91.  Causes  which  prevented
a  union  of  the  malecontents  in  the  re-
spective provinces,  114.  The  modera-
tion of  Charles  towards  them  on  his
arrival,  115.  Instance  of  the  haughty
spirit  of  the  grandees,  342.  Is  invaded
by  the  dauphin,  v.  6.  The  dominions  of,
resigned  by  Charles  to  his  son  Philip,
325.  The  arrival  of  Charles,  and  his  re-
ception there,  343.  The  place  of  his
retreat  described,  344.  The  regal  power
in,  how  enlarged  by  Charles,  400.  The
foreign  acquisitions  added  to,  401.  See
Aragon,  Castile,  Galicia,  Valencia,  Cor-
tes, Germanada,  and  Holy  Junta.

Spires,  diet  of,  its  proceedings  relative
to  the  Reformation,  iv.  212.  Another
diet  called  there  by  the  emperor,  245.

462

INDEX.

Another  diet  at,  v.  22. Recess  of,  in
favour  of  the  Protestants,  25.

Spiritual  censures  of  the  Romish
church,  the  dreadful  effects  of,  iv.  42.

St.  Disier,  in  Champagne,  invested  by
the  emperor,  v.  31.  Is  obtained  by  the
artifice  of  cardinal  Granvelle,  S3.

St.  Jago,  the  military  order  of,  when
and  on  what  occasion  instituted,  iii.  288,
note  xxxvi.

St.  Justus,  monastery  of,  in  Plazentia,
is  chosen  by  the  emperor  Charles  V.  for
his  retreat  after  his  resignation,  v.  344.
Its  situation  described,  315.  His  apart-
ments, ib,

St.  Quintin,  invested  by  the  Spanish
troops,  and  defended  by  admiral  Co-
ligni,  v.  352.  D'Andelot  defeated  in  an
endeavour  to  join  the  garrison,  354.  Bat
enters  the  town,  ib.  Montmorency  de-
feated by  the  duke  of  Savoy,  355.  The
town  taken  by  assault,  S58.

Standing  armies. See  Armies.

States-general  of  France,  causes  which
rendered  their  authority  imperfect,  iii.
160.  When  they  lost  their  legislative
authority,  161.  When  first  assembled,
299.  The  form  of  proceeding  in  them,
300.

Stephen,  earl  of  Chartres  and  Blois,
his  account  of  the  progress  of  the  cru-
saders, iii.  215.

Stiernhob'k,  his  account  of  the  ancient
Swedish  law  of  satisfaction  for  words  of
reproach,  iii.  247.

Strangers,  in  what  light  considered,
and  how  treated  during  the  middle  ages,
and  during  the  feudal  policy,  ill.  270.

Strozzi,  Peter,  some  account  of,  v.
288.  Ts  intrusted  with  the  command  of
the  French  army  in  Italy,  ib.  Is  de-
feated by  the  marquis  de  Mnrignano,
289.

Suabia.  an  insurrection  of  the  peasants
against  the  nobles  there,  iv.  180.  They
publish  a  memorial  of  their  grievances,
181.  The  insurgents  dispersed,  18i!.
The  Protestant  religion  suppressed  theie
by  the  emperor  Charles  V.,  v.  196.

Suffolk,  duke  of,  invades  Picardy,  pe-
netrates almost  to  Paris,  but  is  driven
back,  iv.  127.

Sugar-canes,  when  first  brought  from
Asia  into  Europe,  and  thence  carried  to
America,  iii.  274.

Sultans, Turkish,  their  despotic  power,
iii.  179.  How  nevertheless  limited,  180.

Superstition,  its  influence  in  the  legal
proceedings  during  the  middle  ages,  iii.
54.

Surrey,  earl  of,  created  high  admiral  to
the  emperor  Charles  V.,  iv. 81.  Obliged
to  retire  out  of  Picardy  by  the  duke  de
Vcndome,  82.

Sweden,  a  summary  view  of  the  revo-

lutions in,  during  the  sixteenth  century,
v.  419.

Swiss,  the  superior  discipline  of  their
troops,  in  the  fifteenth  century,  iii.  112.
Teach  other  nations  the  advantages  of
infantry  over  cavalry,  113.

Switzerland,  the  cantons  of,  espouse
the  pretensions  of  Charles  V.  to  the  im-
perial crown,  iii.  367.  Commencement
of  the  Reformation  there  by  Zuinglius,  iv.
27.  The  regulation  under  which  they
hire  out  their  troops,  74.  The  precipitate
battle  insisted  on  by  their  troops  under
Lautrec,  lost,  78.

Syria,  how  and  by  whom  added  to  the
Ottoman  empire,  iii.  364.

TACITUS,  his  account  of  the  ancient
Germans  compared  with  that  of  Caesar,
iii.  192.

Tenures,  feudal,  the  original  of,  iii.  21.
See  Feudal  System,  and  Land.

Termes,  mareschal  de,  governor  of
Calais,  takes  Dunkirk  by  storm,  v.  374.
Engages  the  count  of  Egmont,  and  is  de-
feated by  the  accidental  arrival  of  an
English  squadron  on  the  coast,  375.  Is
taken  prisoner,  ib.

Terouane,  taken  and  demolished  by
the  emperor  Charles  V.,  v.  264.

Tetzel,  a  Dominican  friar,  his  shameful
conduct  in  the  sale  of  indulgences  in
Germany,  iv.  14.  His  form  of  absolu-
tion, and  recommendation  of  the  virtues
of  indulgences,  ib.  note.  His  debauch-
ed course  of  life,  15.  Publishes  these
against  Luther,  18.

Teutonic  order,  a  character  of,  iv.  186.
Conquer  the  province  of  Prussia,  187.
Their  grand-master  Albert  made  duke  of
Prussia,  ib.

Theatines,  the  order  of,  by  whom
founded,  v.  313.

Theology,  scholastic,  the  first  literary
pursuits  at  the  revival  of  learning  in  Eu-
rope, iii.  76.

Thionville,  in  Luxembourg,  taken  by
the  duke  of  Guise,  v.  374.

Thuringia,  an  insurrection  of  the  pea-
sants there,  against  the  nobility,  iv.  182.
The  fanatical  notions  inspired  into  them
by  Thomas  Muncer,  1 84.  Their  disorder-
ly army  defeated,  185.

Toledo,  insurrection  in,  at  the  departure
of  Charles  V.  for  Germany,  iii.  380. — iv.
85.  The  cathedral  of,  stripped  of  its
riches  to  support  the  army  of  the  holy
junta,  103.  Padilla's  letter  to,  at  bis  exe-
cution, 107,  note.  Is  instigated  to  con-
tinue in  arms  by  Padilla's  wife,  109.  Is
reduced,  110.

Toledo,  Ludovico  de,  nephew  to  Cosmo
di  Medici,  sent  by  his  uncle  to  negotiate
with  Philip  II.  of  Spain,  for  the  investiture
of  Siena,  v.  364.

INDEX

4G3

Toledo,  Don  Pedro  de,  viceroy  of  Na-
ples, oppresses  the  Neapolitans,  v.  256.
And  occasions  the  Turks  to  ravage  the
coast  of  Naples,  257-

Toleration,  reflections  on  the  progress
of  in  Germany,  v.  307.  Why  mutually
allowed  among  the  ancient  heathens,  ib.
How  the  primitive  Christians  became
averse  to,  308.

Tomorri,  Paul,  a  Franciscan  monk,
archbishop  of  Golocza,  is  made  general
of  the  Hungarian  army  against  Solyman
the  Magnificent,  and  is  defeated  by  him,
iv.  210.

Tordesillas,  the  residence  of  queen
Joanna,  the  confederacy  of  malecontents
called  the  holy  junta,  removed  thither,  iv.
92.  The  queen  taken  there  by  the  conde
de  Haro,  101.

,  one  of  the  representatives  of

Segovia,  killed  by  the  populace,  for  vot-
ing the  donative  to  Charles  V.,  at  the
cortes  assembled  in  Galicia,  iv.  86.

Transylvania  is  surrendered  to  Ferdi-
nand, king  of  the  Romans,  by  queen  Isa-
bella, v.  207.

Tremouille,  La,  drives  the  English,  un-
der the  duke  of  Suffolk,  out  of  Picardy,
iv.  128.

Trent, the  council  of, summoned,  v. 20.
Prorogued,  ib.  Again  summoned,  42.  Is
opened,  51.  Declares  the  apocryphal
Scriptures  canonical,  63.  Establishes  the
authority  of  the  church  traditions,  64.  The
council,  on  rumours  of  an  infection  in  the
city,  is  translated  to  Bologna,  150.  Henry
II.  of  France  protests  against  the  council,
195.  The  council  breaks  up  on  the  ap-
proach of  Maurice  of  Saxony,  226.  His-
torical remarks  on  this  council,  227.  Cha-
racters of  its  historians,  ib.

,  cardinal  of,  sent  by  the  emperor

Charles  V.  to  conclude  an  alliance  with
the  pope,  v.  69.  The  nature  of  this
treaty,  70.

Truce  of  God,  an  account  of,  iii.  240.

Tunis,  the  means  of  its  coming  under
the  power  of  Barbarossa  traced,  iv.  284.
The  emperor  and  other  Christian  powers
unite  to  expel  Barbarossa,  and  restore
Muley  Hascen,  286.  Is  taken  by  the
emperor,  291.  Muley  Hascen  restored,
and  his  treaty  with  Charles,  292.

Turkey,  origin  of  its  government,  iii.
179.  The  despotic  genius  of  this  govern-
ment, ib.  No  hereditary  nobility  in,  180.
The  authority  of  the  sultans,  how  checked,
ib.  Origin  of  the  Janizaries,  181.  Be-
comes formidable  to  the  Christian  princes,
183.

Tuscany,  a  review  of  the  slate  of,  dur-
ing the  sixteenth  century,  v.  417.

ULM,  the  government  of  that  city  vio-
lently altered,  and  its  reformed  ministers

carried  away  in  chains,  by  the  emperor
Charles  V.,  v.  166.

Union  of  the  Aragonese  nobles  to  con-
trol the  undue  exercise  of  regal  power
explained,  iii.  282.  This  privilege  abro-
gated by  Peter  IV.,  283.

United  Provinces  of  the  Netherlands,
a  brief  view  of  their  revolt  against  the
dominions  of  Spain,  v.  420.

Universities,  the  first  establishment  of,
in  Europe,  iii.  268.

Urbino,  restored  by  pope  Adrian  to
Francesco  Maria  de  Rovere,  iv.  116.

VALENCIA,  an  insurrection  in,  iii.  376.
The  people  there  greatly  oppressed  by
the  nobles,  ib.  The  nobles  refuse  to  as-
semble the  cortes  except  the  king  is  pre-
sent, 377.  Charles  authorizes  the  people
to  continue  in  arms,  ib.  They  expel  the
nobles,  ib.  Associate  under  the  Ger-
manada,  and  appoint  their  own  magis-
trates, ib.  Don  Diego  de  Mendoza,  conde
de  Melito,  appointed  regent,  on  the  de-
parture of  Charles  for  Germany ,  379.  The
Germanada  refuse  to  lay  down  their  arms,
iv.  111.  Defeat  the  nobles  in  several
actions,  113.  Are  at  length  routed  by
the  conde  de  Melito,  ib.  The  moderation
of  Charles  toward  the  insurgents  on  his
arrival,  115.

Valentinois,  duchess  of.  See  Diana  of
Poitiers.

Valladolid,  the  first  public  entry  of
Charles  V.  to  that  city,  iii.  357.  The  in-
habitants rise,  burn  Fonseca's  house,  and
fortify  the  town,  iv.  89.  Surrenders  after
the  battle  of  Villalar,  and  dissolution  of
the  holy  junta,  108.

Vandals,  their  cruel  devastations  in  the
invasion  of  Spain,  iii.  187.  The  havoc
madeby  them  in  Africa,  188.  See  Goths.

Vassals,  under  the  feudal  system,  a
view  of  their  slavish  condition,  iii.  23.  44.
How  they  obtained  enfranchisement,  44.
How  anciently  distinguished  from  free-
men, 199.  Their  wretched  state  under
their  feudal  masters,  206,  note  ix.

Vaucelles,  treaty  of,  between  Charles
V.  and  Henry  II.  of  France,  v.  331.

Vendome,  duke  of,  his  plan  of  opera-
tions in  opposing  the  progress  of  the  in-
vasion of  Picardy  by  Henry  VIII.,  iv.  82.
Obliges  him  to  retire,  ib.

Venice,  the  long  duration  of  its  civil
constitution,  and  its  flourishing  state  at
the  time  of  the  league  of  Cambray,  iii.
115.  Its  possessions  dismembered  by  the
confederates,  117.  Dissolves  the  con-
federacy, ib.  Its  rise  and  progress,  129.
Defects  in  its  constitution,  130.  The
excellency  of  its  naval  institutions,  131.
Its  extensive  commerce,  ib.  The  repub-
lic of,  incline  in  favour  of  the  pretensions
of  Francis  I.  of  France,  to  the  imperial

4(54

INDEX.

crown,  367.  Their  views  and  apprehen-
sions on  the  approaching  rupture  between
the  emperor  Charles  V.  and  Francis,  iv.  3.
Leagues  with  the  emperor  against  Francis,
118.  A  final  accommodation  between,
and  the  emperor,  "242.  Refuses  to' enter
into  the  league  of  the  Italian  states,  formed
by  the  emperor,  260.  A  review  of  the
state  of  that  republic  during  the  sixteenth
century,  v.  416.

Verrina,  the  confidant  of  the  count  of
Lavagno,  encourages  him  in  his  scheme
of  overturning  the  government  of  Genoa,
T.  10.5.  Is  protected  by  Francis  on  the
ruin  of  that  conspiracy,  119.

Vielleville,  the  French  governor  of
Metz,  detects  father  Leonard's  conspiracy
to  betray  the  city  to  the  imperialists,  v.
297.  Executes  the  conspirators,  298

Vienna,  is  besieged  by  sultan  Solyman
the  Magnificent,  iv.  241.

Villalar,  battle  of,  between  Padilla  and
the  conde  de  Haro,  iv.  106.

Villena,  marquis  de,  his  spirited  reply
to  the  request  of  the  emperor  to  lodge
Bourbon  in  his  palace,  iv.  171.

Visconti,  rise  of  the  family  of,  in  Milan,
iii.  137.

WALLOP,  sir  John,  joins  the  empe-
ror, Charles  V.,  at  the  siege  of  Laudrecy,
with  a  body  of  English  troops,  v.  15.

War,  a  comparison  between  the  man-
ner of  carrying  on,  by  barbarous  and  by
civilized  nations,  iii.  16.  How  rendered
feeble  in  its  operations  by  the  feudal  po-
licy, 23.  The  profession  of  arms,  the
most  honourable  in  uncivilized  nations,
70.  The  rise  of  standing  armies  traced,
93.  By  what  means  standing  forces
became  general,  111.  The  superiority  of
infantry  in,  hosv  taught,  112.  The  me-
thod of  carrying  on,  in  Europe,  how  im-
proved at  this  period  from  the  practice  of
earlier  ages,  iv.  127.  General  reflection
'«  the  vicissitudes  of,  v.  397.

Wars,  private,  for  the  redressing  per-
sonal injuries,  under  the  feudal  policy,
an  inquiry  into,  iii.  47.  Methods  taken
to  abolish  this  hostile  practice,  49.  Ju-
dicial combat  prohibited,  51.  Inquiry
into  the  sources  of  these  customs,  '236,
note  xxi.  Who  entitled  to  the  privileges
of  exercising,  ib.  On  what  occasions  un-
dertaken, 237.  Who  included,  or  bound
to  engage  in  these  disputes,  ib.  Who  ex-
cluded from  undertaking,  238.  The  cruel
manner  of  prosecuting  them,  ib.  A  chro-
nological account  of  the  expedients  made
use  of  to  suppress  them,  239.  Truce  of
God,  an  account  of,  240.  Brotherhood  of
God,  an  account  of,  241.  Royal  truce,
what,  ib.  Saxon  laws  of  England,  for
putting  an  end  to  them,  243.  The  ob-
stinate attachment  of  the  Spaniards  to

this  practice,  245. TLe  calamities  occa-
sioned in  Germany  by,  ib.

Wartburg,  Martin  Luther  concealed
there  by  the  elector  of  Saxony,  iv.  56.

Welsh,  ancient,  strangers  killed  with
impunity  by  them,  iii.  272.

Wentworth,  lord,  governor  of  Calais,
remonstrates  in  vain  with  the  English
privy-council  to  provide  for  its  security,
v.  368.  Is  attacked  by  the  duke  of
Guise,  and  forced  to  capitulate,  369.

Willa,  widow  of  duke  Hugo,  extract
from  her  charter  of  manumission  granted
to  Cleriza,  one  of  her  slaves,  iii.  233.

Willermus,  archbishop  of  Tyre,  his
account  of  Constantinople,  iii.  218.

Wittemberg,  invested  by  the  emperor
Charles  V.,  and  defended  by  Sybilla  of
Cleves,  wife  to  the  elector  of  Saxony,
v.  131.

Wittikindus,  abbot,  his  testimony  in
favour  of  the  judicial  combat,  iii.  251.

Wolsey,  cardinal,  his  rise,  character,
and  influence  over  Henry  VIII.,  of  Eng-
land, iv.  6.  Receives  a  pension  from
Francis  I.  of  France,  7.  And  from  the
emperor  Charles  V.,  ib.  Detached  from
the  French  interest  by  the  latter,  9.  In-
clines Henry  to  join  the  emperor  against
Francis,  59.  Sent  by  Henry  to  Calais,  to
negotiate  an  accommodation  between  the
emperor  and  Francis,  67.  Has  an  interview
with  Charles  at  Bruges,  and  concludes  a
league  with  him  on  the  part  of  Henry,
against  France,  69.  Meditates  revenge
against  Charles  on  his  second  disappoint-
ment of  the  papacy  by  the  election  of
Clement  VII.,  125.  Obtains  of  Clement
a  legantine  commission  in  England  for
life,  126.  Negotiates  a  league  with  Francis
against  the  emperor,  215.

Worms,  a  diet  called  there  by  Charles
V.,  to  check  the  progress  of  the  refor-
mers, iv.  11.  Proceedings  of,  53.  Martin
Luther  cited  before  it,  54.  Refuses  to
retract  his  opinions,  55.  An  edict  pub-
lished against  him,  ib.  Diet  at,  opened,
v.  42.

Wurtemburgh,  Ulric  duke  of,  why  ex-
pelled his  dominions,  iv.  277.  Recovers
his  dominions  by  the  assistance  of  Francis
king  of  France,  and  receives  the  Protes-
tant religion,  ib.

Wyat,  sir  Thomas,  raises  an  insurrec-
tion in  Kent  against  queen  Mary  of  Eng-
land, on  account  of  the  Spanish  match,
v.  278.  Is  subdued  and  punished,  279.

XIMENES,  archbishop  of  Toledo,  ad-
heres to  Ferdinand  of  Aragon,  in  his  dis-
pute with  the  archduke  Philip  concern-
ing the  regency  of  Castile,  iii.  324.  Es-
pouses Ferdinand's  claim  to  the  regency
of  Castile,  on  Philip's  death,  332.  Con-
quers Oran,  and  other  places  inBarbary,

INDEX.

465

for  the  crown  of  Castile,  333.  Appointed
regent  of  Castile,  by  Ferdinand's  will  until
the  arrival  of  \Dharles  V.  in  Spain,  339.
His  rise  and  character,  ib.  Admits  the
claim  to  the  regency  of  cardinal  Adrian,
sent  with  that  commission  by  Charles,
and  executes  it  jointly  with  him,  341.
Takes  the  infant  Don  Ferdinand  to  Ma-
drid under  his  own  eye,  342.  Procures
Charles,  who  assumed  the  regal  title,  to  be
acknowledged  by  the  Castilian  nobility,
343.  Schemes  to  extend  the  regal  pre-
rogative, 344.  Depresses  the  nobility,  ib.
Frees  the  king  from  the  feudal  limitations,
and  establishes  a  regal  army  to  check  the
barons,  345.  Suppresses  a  mutiny  headed
by  the  grandees,  346.  Resumes  the  grants
of  Ferdinand  to  his  nobles,  ib.  His  pru-
dent application  of  the  revenue,  347.  His
bold  assertion  of  his  authority  to  the  dis-
contented nobles,  348.  Other  associates
in  the  regency  appointed  at  the  instiga-
tion of  the  Flemish  courtiers,  349.  Re-

tains the  superior  management,  ib.  De-
feats John  D'Albert's  invasion  of  Navarre,
350.  Dismantles  all  the  castles  there,  ex-
cept Pampeluna,  which  he  strengthens,  ib.
The  troops  sent  by  him  against  Barba-
rossa  defeated,  and  his  equanimity  on
that  occasion,  ib.  Alarmed  at  the  cor-
ruption of  the  Flemish  court,  he  per-
suades Charles  to  visit  Spain,  351.  Falls
sick  on  his  journey  to  meet  Charles  at  his
arrival,  355.  His  letter  of  counsel  to
Charles,  356.  Requests  an  interview,  ib.
The  ingratitude  of  Charles  to  him,  ib.
His  death,  357.  His  character,  ib.  Re-
verence paid  to  his  memory  by  the
Spaniards,  ib.

ZAMORA,  bishop  of,  raises  a  regiment
of  priests  to  defend  Tordesillas,  for  the
holy  junta,  which  is  forced  by  the  conde
de  Haro,  iv.  101.

Zuinglius  attacks  the  sale  of  indulgen-
ces at  Zurich  in  Switzerland,  iv.  27.

BND OF VOL. V.

Printed  by  J.  F.  DOVE,  St.  John's  Square.

TV

Robertson,  William
Works

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
